THE    LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  U    IVERSITY 

rPOVO,  UTAH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet23newy 


THE   PREACHER'S   COMMENTARY 


ON 


ST.   MARK 


THE 


ixtufyxB  Complete  Pmmletital 

COMMENTARY 


ON     THE 


NEW    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN  J 

tijr  Critical  atttr  (S^plattatorg  ftotes,  ^vfoim,  &t.r  #t. 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS 


FUNK   &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toronto 
1896 


£29 


A 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


GOSPEL  ACCORDING  TO 

ST.  MARK 


BY 

REV.    JOHN    HENRY    BURN,    B.D. 

HECTOR  OP  ST.  DBOSTAN'S,  DEER  ;  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  BISHOP  OP  ABERDEEN  AND  ORKNEY 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


RIGHa-         ng  u  IVERSITV 
«*OVuf  UTAH      "~     Y 


PREFACE. 


Throughout  this  volume  the  needs  of  the  preacher  have  been  constantly 
kept  in  view,  and  the  main  thing  aimed  at  has  been  not  originality  so 
much  as  usefulness. 

Besides  a  considerable  quantity  of  homiletic  material  specially  prepared 
by  the  author  for  this  work,  there  will  be  found  here  a  great  variety  of 
choice  thoughts  by  different  writers,  carefully  condensed,  but  for  the  most 
part  in  their  own  words.  These  extracts  have  been  culled  from  a  very 
wide  field  of  literature,  both  ancient  and  modern.  Many  days  were  spent 
in  the  Reading  Eoom  of  the  British  Museum  ransacking  old  and  rare 
tomes.  Vast  numbers  of  scarce  periodicals  also  were  searched  and  made 
to  deliver  up  their  treasures. 

The  Illustrations  and  Anecdotes  placed  at  the  end  of  each  chapter  may 
help  sometimes  to  relieve  the  monotony  of  a  close  argument,  or  may 
perchance  brighten  up  a  sermon  to  the  young. 

It  is  not  pretended  that  the  Critical  and  Exegetical  Notes  are  com- 
plete in  themselves,  or  anything  like  it :  the  plan  of  the  work  precluded 
the  attempt.  Being  restricted  to  an  average  of  a  page  per  chapter  for 
this  department,  the  writer  was  obliged  to  confine  himself  to  the  brief 
elucidation  of  a  few  salient  points,  adding  references  here  and  there  to 
reliable  sources  of  information.  In  cases  of  serious  difficulty  and  con- 
troversy, a  preference  for  one  interpretation  has  generally  been  indicated, 
and  reasons  offered  therefor.  See,  e.g.,  the  notes  on  chaps,  ii.  26,  vii.  19, 
xiii.  14,  xiv.  72.  But  it  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  the  reader 
is  supposed  to  be  provided  with  other  commentaries  of  a  more  critical 
kind,  which  may  supplement  the  slight  treatment  given  here  to  the  hard 
texts  in  the  Gospel  according  to  St.  Mark. 


Benedictus  benedicat. 


.  >. 
m 


THE 

PREACHER'S    HOIILETIOAL    COMMENTARY. 


ST.     MARK. 


INTKODUCTION. 

The  Author. — There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  writer  of  the  Second 
Gospel  is  the  person  associated  in  the  Acts  (xii.  25,  xiii.  5,  13,  xv.  37-39) 
with  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  spoken  of  by  Peter  (1  Pet.  v.  13)  as  his  "son." 
To  his  Jewish  name  "  John  "  (Johanan,  "  the  gift  of  God  ")  was  added,  according 
to  the  custom  of  the  time,  the  Latin  surname  "  Mark"  (Marcus,  "a  hammer"). 
Of  his  father  nothing  is  known ;  but  his  mother,  Mary,  was  evidently  a  woman 
of  some  note  among  the  early  disciples  at  Jerusalem  (Acts  xii.  12).  He  was 
also  cousin  to  Barnabas,  and  therefore  a  member  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.  When 
or  how  he  first  came  under  Christian  influences  we  have  no  means  of  determin- 
ing, but  his  conversion  was  probably  due  in  some  way  to  St.  Peter.  If,  as  has 
been  conjectured,  he  recounts  in  chap.  xiv.  51,  52,  an  incident  that  happened 
to  himself,  we  may  think  of  him  as  a  young  man  who  had  been  impressed  by 
what  he  saw  and  heard  of  the  Saviour's  teaching  and  bearing,  but  too  timid 
to  make  a  determined  stand  for  his  convictions  in  the  face  of  danger.  In 
A.D.  45  we  find  him  (Acts  xii.  25)  accompanying  Paul  and  Barnabas  on  their 
return  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch.  Three  years  later  he  visited  Cyprus  with 
them  (Acts  xiii.  5) ;  and  he  might  thenceforth  have  been  their  constant  com- 
panion, but  that  at  Perga  (Acts  xiii.  13)  he  left  them  and  returned  to  Jerusalem. 
His  reason  for  so  doing  cannot  now  be  determined.  Being  a  convert  of 
St.  Peter,  he  may  not  have  been  prepared  for  a  mission  to  the  Gentiles,  but  felt 
more  fitted  for  work  among  the  Jews  nearer  home;  or  he  may  have  shrunk 
from  the  unknown  perils  of  the  Asiatic  mountains;  or,  perhaps,  the  novelty 
of  the  expedition  having  worn  off,  he  became  homesick,  and  yearned  for  the 
society  of  his  mother.  In  any  case  it  was  not  long  before  he  was  ready  to 
enter  again  upon  the  mission  field  with  Paul  and  Barnabas,  the  latter  of  whom 

B  1 


introduction.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 

took  a  more  lenient  view  of  his  defection  than  the  former,  who  indeed  refused 
his  consent  to  the  proposal  (Acts  xv.  36-40).  Neither  of  them  being  willing 
to  give  way,  "  they  departed  asunder,  the  one  from  the  other ;  and  so  Barnabas 
took  Mark,  and  sailed  into  Cyprus,"  and  "Paul  chose  Silas,  and  departed." 
Thus  this  dissension  between  the  two  apostles  resulted  in  God's  good  providence 
in  the  still  wider  diffusion  of  the  gospel  of  peace.  Moreover,  the  estrangement 
proved  but  a  temporary  cloud,  for  we  afterwards  find  Mark  restored  to  the  full 
confidence  of  St.  Paul,  standing  by  his  side  during  his  first  imprisonment  at 
Rome,  and  recognised  by  him  as  one  of  the  few  "  fellow- workers  unto  the 
kingdom  of  God  "  who  had  been  "  a  comfort "  to  him  at  that  trying  period  of 
his  life  (Col.  iv.  10,  11 ;  Philem.  24).  Mark  was  at  that  time  about  to  make 
a  journey  to  the  very  region  he  formerly  refused  to  visit,  and  the  Colossians 
might  have  felt  a  little  suspicious  of  him  had  not  the  apostle  added,  "If  he 
come  unto  you,  receive  him."  The  next  time  we  hear  of  Mark  he  is  at  Babylon, 
in  attendance  on  his  spiritual  father,  St.  Peter  (1  Pet.  v.  13).  There  is  one 
more  notice  of  him  in  the  New  Testament,  and  that  is  contained  in  the  last 
Epistle  we  possess  from  the  pen  of  St.  Paul.  The  great  apostle  is  in  prison 
once  more  at  Rome,  and  the  hour  of  his  martyrdom  is  at  hand.  Mark  is  in 
Asia  Minor  again,  near  or  in  Ephesus,  where  Timothy  is  stationed.  St.  Paul 
longs  for  the  society  of  them  both.  "  Do  thy  diligence  to  come  shortly  unto  me," 
he  writes  to  Timothy.  "  Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee  :  for  he  is  profit- 
able to  me  for  the  ministry"  (2  Tim.  iv.  10,  11).  The  weakness  of  his  early 
manhood  had  been  nobly  redeemed  by  a  lif  ework  of  sterling  fidelity  to  the  truth. 
In  all  likelihood  he  did,  on  receiving  this  message,  return  to  Rome,  and  there 
cheer  the  last  days,  not  only  of  St.  Paul,  but  also  of  St.  Peter,  for  it  is  believed 
that  these  two  champions  of  the  faith  suffered  martyrdom  together.  Eccle- 
siastical tradition  asserts  that  Mark  afterwards  undertook  a  mission  to  Egypt, 
where  he  founded  the  Church  of  Alexandria  and  the  famous  Catechetical 
School  which  produced  such  a  succession  of  learned  teachers.  He  is  said  also 
to  have  suffered  martyrdom  there.  According  to  later  legends,  his  body  was 
in  a.d.  827  removed  to  Venice,  a  city  where  he  was  greatly  honoured,  and 
which  has  ever  since  considered  itself  under  his  special  protection. 

The  Gospel.— In  the  foregoing  notice  of  St.  Mark's  life  a  great  deal  more 
has  necessarily  been  said  of  the  Evangelist's  association  with  St.  Paul  than  of 
his  relation  to  St.  Peter.  But  when  we  proceed  to  speak  of  his  Gospel,  it  is 
St.  Peter  who  comes  into  prominence.  The  early  Christian  Fathers  are  unanimous 
in  testifying  that  Mark  wrote  under  Peter's  superintendence  and  by  his 
authority.  Justin  Martyr  goes  so  far,  indeed,  as  to  call  the  Second  Gospel 
" Peter's  memoirs."  Tertullian  tays  that  it  "may  be  affirmed  to  be  Peter's, 
whose  interpreter  Mark  was";  Origen,  that  Mark  "composed  it  as  Peter  guided 
him";  and  Eusebius,  "that  all  the  contents  of  Mark's  Gospel  are  regarded  as 
memoirs  of  Peter's  discourses."  Perhaps  the  most  important  patristic  state- 
ment is  the  following,  which  Papias  makes  on  the  authority  of  John,  a 
contemporary  of  the  apostles,  if  not  the  Fourth  Evangelist  himself:  "And  this 
the   Presbyter   said:    Mark   having   become   the  interpreter   of   Peter,  wrote. 

2  __      _ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK.      introduction. 


accurately  whatever  he  recorded.  He  did  not  present,  however,  in  regular 
order  the  things  that  were  either  spoken  or  done  by  Christ,  for  he  had  not  been 
a  personal  auditor  or  follower  of  the  Lord.  But  afterwards,  as  I  said,  he 
attached  himself  to  Peter,  who  gave  instructions  according  to  the  necessities  of 
his  hearers,  but  not  in  the  way  of  making  an  orderly  arrangement  of  the  Lord's 
words.  So  that  Mark  committed  no  error  in  writing  such  details  of  things  as 
he  recorded ;  for  he  made  conscience  of  one  thing,  not  to  omit  on  the  one  hand, 
and  not  to  misrepresent  on  the  other,  any  of  the  details  which  he  heard." 
This  testimony  of  the  ancients  is  distinctly  confirmed  by  the  contents  of  the 
Gospel  itself.  The  whole  tone  and  character  of  the  book  is  in  complete  accord- 
ance with  what  we  know  of  St.  Peter  and  his  manner  of  preaching.  See 
Acts  i.  22,  x.  36-42.  The  latter  of  these  passages  has  been  called  "the 
Gospel  of  Mark  in  a  nutshell."  Short  as  it  is,  this  Gospel  supplies  several 
details  connected  with  St.  Peter  recorded  by  no  other  Evangelist  (i.  36,  xi.  21, 
xiii.  3,  xvi.  7),  and  lays  special  stress  on  things  fitted  to  humble  him  (viii.  33, 
xiv.  30,  68-72);  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  omits  various  circumstances 
tending  to  his  honour  (comp.  vii.  17  with  Matt.  xv.  15;  vi.  50,  51,  with 
Matt.  xiv.  28-31 ;  ix.  33  with  Matt.  xvii.  24-27 ;  viii.  29,  30,  with  Matt.  xvi. 
17-19;  xiv.  13  with  Luke  xxii.  8).  Bishop  Chris.  Wordsworth  sees  in  the 
fact  that  this  Gospel  bears  the  name  of  Mark,  and  not  of  Peter,  another  "  silent 
token  of  the  humility  of  the  apostle,  not  ambitious  for  the  exhibition  of  his 
own  name  in  the  eye  of  the  world."  The  human  teacher  is  content  to  sink  his 
personality  and  veil  his  identity,  while  he  sets  forth  with  graphic  pen  the  words 
and  deeds  of  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God. 

Date  and  place  of  publication. — Here  there  is  plenty  of  scope  for  speculation, 
based  on  the  statement  of  Irenseus,  that,  "after  the  departure  of  Peter  and 
Paul,  Mark,  the  disciple  and  interpreter  of  Peter,  even  he  delivered  to  us 
in  writing  the  things  which  were  preached  by  Peter."  The  time  of  "  the 
departure"  or  decease  of  the  two  apostles  being  quite  uncertain — every  year 
from  a.d.  64  to  a.d.  68  having  been  assigned  by  one  critic  or  another — it  would 
be  rash  to  attempt  to  draw  the  line  closer  than  somewhere  between  these  two 
dates.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  believe,  at  any  rate,  that  the  Gospel  left  its 
author's  hands  later  than  a.d.  70,  as  it  contains  no  mention  of  the  signal  fulfil- 
ment of  our  Lord's  prediction  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  which  occurred 
in  that  year.  As  to  the  place  of  publication,  one  ancient  father  (Chrysostom) 
mentions  Alexandria;  while  of  moderns  one  (Storr)  fixes  on  Antioch,  and 
another  (Birks)  on  Csesarea;  but  they  give  no  sufficient  reasons  for  rejecting 
the  otherwise  uniform  testimony  in  favour  of  Borne.  This  tradition  receives 
confirmation  from  the  contents  of  the  Gospel,  throughout  which  words  unfamiliar 
to  Gentile  readers  are  interpreted  (iii.  17,  v.  41,  vii.  11,  x.  46,  xiv.  36, 
xv.  34 ;  see  also  xii.  42,  ix.  43) ;  Jewish  customs  are  explained  (vii.  3,  4,  xiii.  3, 
xv.  42) ;  matters  chiefly  interesting  to  Jews  (such  as  genealogies,  references 
to  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  Old  Testament  citations)  are  conspicuous  by  their 
almost  total  absence;  Latin  words  and  idioms  are  more  freely  used  than  in 
any  of  the  other  Gospels  (vi.  27,  vii.  4,  8,  xii.  42,  xv.  15,  39,  44,  45).     Other 

3 


introduction.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


grains  of  confirmatory  evidence  may  be  drawn  from  the  mention  of  Alexander 
and  Rufus  (xv.  21),  the  latter  being  probably  the  person  referred  to  by 
St.  Paul  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans  (xvi.  13) ;  from  our  knowledge  that  Mark 
certainly  spent  some  part  of  his  life  at  Rome,  coupled  with  the  fact  of  his 
Roman  surname  "  Marcus"  gradually  superseding  the  Hebrew  "John";  and 
from  the  conciseness  of  his  narrative,  which  made  it  so  suitable  for  the  vigorous 
intelligence  of  Roman  hearers. 

Characteristics.— The  fourfold  Gospel,  according  to  a  happy  illustration  of 
the  early  Church,  may  be  compared  to  the  river  which  "  went  out  of  Eden  to 
water  the  garden  "  ;  for  in  like  manner  do  these  separate  records  of  the  life  and 
ministry  of  Jesus  water  the  garden  of  the  Catholic  Church,  and  send  their 
refreshing  streams  to  every  nation  and  every  age.  Each  of  the  Evangelists 
had  his  own  distinct  design  and  object,  which  must  ever  be  kept  in  view. 
St.  Matthew  points  the  Jews  to  their  Messiah ;  St.  Mark  portrays  for  Gentile 
readers  the  King  of  men ;  St.  Luke  depicts  the  Divine  Physician  and  Saviour 
of  sinners;  St.  John  declares  the  eternal  pre-existence  and  Godhead  of  Him 
who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh.  The  first  Evangelist  may  be  said  to  adopt  the 
form  of  narrative,  the  second  of  memoirs,  the  third  of  history,  and  the  fourth 
of  dramatic  portraiture.  The  subject-matter  of  the  first  three  Gospels  is  to  a 
certain  extent  very  similar,  though  in  each  the  peculiarities  are  striking  enough 
to  preclude  the  theory  of  one  being  copied  from  another.  The  most  natural 
explanation  is  that  all  three  drew  from  a  common  source,  that  source  being 
the  oral  teaching  of  the  apostles,  which  doubtless  received  a  fixed  form  at  a 
very  early  date.  St.  Mark  omits  many  of  the  discourses  and  parables  which 
occupy  so  prominent  a  place  in  the  narratives  of  St.  Matthew  and  St.  Luke, 
but  enters  into  more  minute  details  than  either  of  them  as  regards  persons 
(i.  29,  36,  iii.  6,  22,  xi.  11,  21,  xiii.  3,  xiv.  65,  xv.  21,  xvi.  7),  numbers 
(v.  13,  vi.  7,  40,  xiv.  30),  times  (i.  35,  ii.  1,  iv.  35,  vi.  2,  xi.  11,  19,  xv.  25, 
xvi.  2),  and  places  (ii.  13,  iii.  7,  iv.  1,  v.  20,  vii.  31,  xii.  41,  xiii.  3,  xiv.  68, 
xv.  39,  xvi.  5).  He  also  takes  particular  notice  of  the  emotions,  looks,  gestures, 
and  actions  of  our  Lord  and  others  (iii.  5,  34,  vii.  33,  viii.  33,  ix.  36,  x.  32). 
We  have  to  thank  him,  too,  for  often  preserving  the  identical  Aramaic  words 
that  fell  from  the  Saviour's  lips  (iii.  17,  v.  41,  vii.  11,  34,  xiv.  36).  His  main 
characteristic  may  be  said  to  be  vividness.  "  He  sees  history,  as  it  were,  by 
flashes  of  lightning."  For  him  the  past  lives  again  in  the  present,  and  his  life- 
like narrative  helps  us  to  conjure  up  the  scene  as  if  it  were  now  enacting  and 
we  were  ourselves  among  the  bystanders.  "Nor  is  this  vividness  merely  the 
product  of  an  opulent  fancy.  It  is  the  consistency  in  details  of  a  picture  whose 
central  figure  is  drawn  in  lines  of  fire.  Those  rapid  and  decided  touches  are 
inspired  by  a  conviction  of  the  love,  the  glory,  and  the  strength  of  Jesus,  the 
Son  of  God."  He  is  so  full  of  his  great  subject,  so  wrapped  up  in  the  con- 
templation of  his  Divine  Hero,  that  he  hurries  from  point  to  point  with  his 
favourite  kcu  cvtfccos,  as  if  in  breathless  haste  to  reach  the  vantage-ground  of 
the  resurrection  morn,  followed  by  the  triumphant  ascension  into  heaven  and 
the  session  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
4 


CHAPTER  I. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Beginning. — For  best  commentary  on  this  see  Luke  xvi.  16.  Law  and  prophets 
ended  with  John,  who  heralded  new  regime.  Gospel. — Good  tidings,  from  God  to  man,  of 
redemption  and  peace  ;  purposed  from  before  foundation  of  world ;  proclaimed  from  Fall 
onwards,  as  man  could  receive  it ;  now  fully  unveiled  and  offered  to  all  by  Jesus  Christ. 
The  Son  of  God. — Probably  genuine,  although  omitted  by  N  and  some  Fathers. 

Ver.  2.  In  the  prophets. — Bead,  In  Isaiah  the  prophet.  Remainder  of  verse,  quoted  from 
Mai.  iii.  1,  must  be  regarded  as  a  parenthesis.  "  The  Evangelist's  mind  went  rapidly  through 
it,  and  fixed  its  attention  on  the  contents  of  the  earlier  and  more  remarkable  oracle  lying 
behind."  Only  here,  and  in  chap.  xv.  28  (the  genuineness  of  which  is  doubtful)  does  Mark 
himself  cite  from  Old  Testament.  In  chaps,  iv.  12,  vii.  6,  xi.  17,  xiv.  27,  he  places  on  record 
quotations  made  by  Jesus. 

Ver.  7.  One  mightier. — He  who  is  mightier ;  the  Sovereign  whose  ambassador  I  am,  the 
Potentate  whose  orders  I  carry  out. 

Ver.  10.  Straightway. — evdtws.  Mark's  constant  use  of  this  word  of  transition  shows  how 
full  his  heart  was  of  his  subject.  It  would  appeal  to  the  prompt,  energetic  spirit  of  his 
Roman  readers.  He  (i.e.  Jesus)  saw. — The  Baptism  over,  He  was  engaged  in  prayer 
(Luke  iii.  21),  and  then  the  vision  was  vouchsafed.  The  heavens  opened. — Rending.  Same 
word  used  of  rending  of  veil  of  temple  and  rocks  at  the  Crucifixion  (Matt,  xxvii.  51). 
The  Spirit  like  a  dove  descending. — This  was  seen  also  by  the  Baptist  (John  i.  32,  33),  and 
was  the  sign  by  which  he  recognised  in  Jesus  the  Lamb  of  God.  It  was  His  solemn 
inauguration  as  the  Messiah  (Acts  x.  38).     A  dove. — Fit  emblem  of  His  gentle  rule. 

Ver.  11.  A  voice  from  heaven. — Heard  again  at  the  Transfiguration  (Mark  ix.  7),  and  in 
the  temple  court  (John  xii.  28).  In  whom  I  am  well  pleased. —  In  whom  I  decreed  for  good, 
the  "  good  "  being  man's  redemption  purposed  by  God  in  Christ  from  all  eternity.  In 
vers.  10,  11,  we  behold  all  Three  Persons  of  the  Blessed  Trinity  working  together  to  accom- 
plish man's  salvation. 

Ver.  12.  The  Spirit  driveth  Him. — The  human  soul  of  Jesus,  which  shrank  from  the  cup  in 
Gethsemane,  would  naturally  shrink  also  from  close  contact  with  the  prince  of  evil.  But, 
abhorrent  as  such  an  encounter  was  to  His  pure  and  holy  nature,  it  could  not  be  avoided. 
Nay,  it  must  needs  be  the  first  act  of  His  official  life.  The  Second  Adam  must  triumph 
where  the  first  Adam  fell. 

Ver.  13.  With  the  wild  beasts.  —Far  from  human  habitation  and  companionship.  Nothing 
was  wanting  to  complete  the  loneliness  of  our  Divine  Champion  in  His  first  combat  with  the 
enemy  of  souls.  The  angels  ministered. — Doubtless  both  to  His  bodily  and  spiritual  wants. 
"  He  who  would  not  turn  stones  into  bread  was  now  fed  ;  He  who  would  not  call  upon 
angels  to  uphold  Him  in  rash  confidence  was  now  sustained  by  them ;  He  who  demanded 
worship  for  God  alone  received  homage  from  these  servants  of  God." 

Ver.  14.  John  was  put  in  prison. — Delivered  up.  Same  word  used  of  our  Lord's  betrayal 
by  Judas.  "  Such  honour  have  all  His  saints."  Jesus  came  into  Galilee. — From  Jerusalem, 
where  He  had  been  teaching  most  of  the  time  since  His  baptism  (John  ii.  13 — iv.  3). 

Ver.  15.  Repent  ye,  and  believe. — We  have  an  echo  of  this  Divine  keynote  in  the  first 
sermon  preached  by  Peter  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  38). 

Ver.  16.  As  He  walked. — As  He  was  passing  along  by  the  seashore  towards  Capernaum, 
He  encountered  four  disciples  of  the  Baptist  whom  He  had  previously  met  and  impressed 
(John  i.  35-42:  cf.  Luke  v.  1-11).  Casting  a  net. — Casting  about  (a  hand-net)  in  the  sea. 
Here  is  one  of  the  many  graphic  touches  in  this  Gospel  which  betray  the  source  of  Mark's 
inspiration.  Who  but  one  of  the  two  men  engaged  in  the  business  would  have  thought  of 
putting  it  in  this  way  1 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  21.  Capernaum  was  at  that  time  a  flourishing  commercial  town  on  north-western 
shore  of  lake.  A  customs  station,  with  military  quarters.  Its  synagogue  was  the  gift  of  a 
centurion  (Luke  vii.  5).  Here  Jesus  healed  Simon's  wife's  mother,  the  centurion's  servant, 
and  a  paralytic ;  called  Levi  from  the  toll-house ;  and  discoursed  on  humility,  and  on  the 
bread  of  life. 

Ver.  22.  Not  as  the  scribes. — They  could  only  insist  on  the  observance  of  petty  rules 
invented  by  men  like  themselves ;  whereas  He  dived  deep  down  to  eternal  principles,  which 
bore  the  manifest  impress  of  the  Divine  approval.  Moreover,  His  teaching — unlike  theirs — 
was  exemplified  to  the  letter  in  His  pure  and  holy  life. 

Ver.  23.  With  an  unclean  spirit. — In,  i.e.  in  the  power  of — subject  to— influenced  or 
possessed  by.  The  demon  had  apparently  obtained  complete  ascendency  over  the  wretched 
man,  whose  whole  mind  was  now  given  up  to  uncleanness.  But,  as  to  this,  see  note  by 
Dr.  Maitland  on  pp.  32,  33. 

Ver.  24.  Let  us  alone. — This  exclamation  was  probably  imported  here  from  Luke  iv.  34, 
where  it  signifies  the  demon's  resentment  at  Christ's  interference.  What  have  we  to  do 
with  Thee  % — What  common  ground  is  there  between  us?  Truly,  none  whatever.  They  were 
far  as  the  poles  asunder — the  "  unclean  spirit,"  and  the  "  Holy  One  of  God." 

Ver.  25.  Jesus  rebuked. — The  Saviour  endorses  the  demon's  admission  of  the  infinite 
distance  which  separated  them  morally  the  one  from  the  other,  and  refuses  to  accept  at  his 
mouth  even  so  much  as  an  acknowledgment  of  His  own  Divine  claims.  Throughout  His 
ministiyj  Christ  never  for  a  moment  countenances  anything  that  might  be  construed  into 
a  truce  with  Satan  or  his  emissaries — anything  that  could  give  colour  to  the  sneer  of  the 
Pharisees  that  by  the  prince  of  demons  He  cast  out  demons. 

Ver.  27.  What  thing  is  this  1 —  What  is  this  ?  New  teaching  with  authority  !  He  com- 
mandeth  even  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  obey  Him  ! 

Ver.  30.  Lay  sick  of  a  fever. —  Was  prostrated  with  a  burning  fever.  Intermittent  fever 
and  dysentery,  the  latter  often  fatal,  are  common  Arabian  diseases. 

Ver.  32.  At  even. — When  the  disappearance  of  the  natural  sun  announced  the  close  of 
the  Sabbath,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  arose  with  healing  in  His  wings. 

Ver.  33.  All  the  city  was  gathered. — What  a  picture  would  linger  in  Peter's  memory  of 
this  unwonted  assemblage  in  front  of  his  own  house  1 

Ver.  35.  A  great  while  before  day.— How  Mark  loves  to  emphasise  the  ceaseless  activity 
and  devotion  of  our  Blessed  Lord  ! 

Ver.  44.  Say  nothing  to  any  man.— Our  Lord  desired  to  check,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
tendency  on  the  part  of  the  populace  to  regard  Him  as  a  mere  wonder-worker,  because  such 
a  reputation  would  inevitably  blind  men  to  the  primary  object  of  His  Divine  mission,  which 
was  not  the  healing  of  the  body,  but  the  salvation  of  the  soul.  For  a  testimony  unto 
them.— He  would  afford  the  Jewish  authorities  no  pretext  for  asserting  that  He  set  Himself 
above  the  law. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.-Verses  1—8. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  iii.  1-12;  Luke  iii.  1-20;  John  i.  19-28.) 

The  preparation  for  the  gospel. — With  trumpet-blast — short,  sharp,  triumphant 
— St.  Mark  introduces  his  Divine  Hero,  "the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah." 
Wasting  no  time  on  preliminaries,  he  at  once  strikes  the  keynote  of  his  theme 
— "  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God."  Well  is  he  called  "  Marcus," 
a  hammer,  who  begins  by  aiming  such  a  powerful  blow  at  the  inherent  scepticism 
of  the  human  heart,  and  then  follows  it  up  with  the  workmanlike  skill  observ- 
able throughout  this  book!  Determined  to  leave  no  room  for  mistake  con- 
cerning the  person  of  his  Master,  he  at  once  accords  to  Him  His  full  title, 
"  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  God."  Jesus— the  Saviour ;  Christ— the  Divinely  appointed 
Prophet,  Priest,  and  King  of  men ;  Son  of  God,  Kevealer  of  the  Father,  Incarnate 
Deity.     Peter's  great  confession  was  in  almost  the  same  words  (Matt.  xvi.  16). 

I.  The  origin  of  the  gospel  in  heaven.— 1.  Not  man's  thought,  but  God's. 
To  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  devise  means  that  His  banished  ones 
should  be  restored  to  Him,  was  far  beyond  the  conception  of  any  but  the 
Creator.  2.  The  mode  of  carrying  out  this  grand  scheme  was  equally  Godlike. 
The  Creator  became  Himself  a  creature— God  came  to  us  in  man— hiding  His 
6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  i. 


glory  under  the  tabernacle  of  human  flesh,  which  He  assumed,  in  order  that  we 
might  realise  His  nearness,  believe  in  His  goodwill  towards  us,  and  be  incorpo- 
rated into  Him. 

II.  The  preparation  for  the  gospel  on  earth. — 1.  This  began  in  the  first 
promise  to  Adam  and  Eve,  in  their  sacrificial  offerings,  in  the  bleeding  lambs 
of  Abel's  altar,  and  in  the  simple  worship  of  the  patriarchs.  2.  It  began  afresh 
in  the  Mosaic  legislation,  in  the  ceremonial  law,  etc.  3.  It  began  once  more  in 
the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  who  declared  in  words  the  gospel  which  the  law 
shadowed  forth  in  acts.  And  the  last  of  these  prophets  was  John,  the  greatest 
of  them  all,  and  the  nearest  to  the  kingdom. 

III.  The  Forerunner  of  the  gospel  and  his  ministry. — 1.  The  Baptist's 
mission  had  been  foretold.  The  herald  of  Jesus  had  himself  been  heralded  long 
before;  and  the  appearance  of  one  vinswering  to  the  prophetic  announcements 
was  to  be  the  sign  that  a  Greater  than  he  was  at  hand.  2.  The  Baptist's 
preaching  was  suitable  for  the  time-  -positive,  straightforward,  unmistakable. 
It  could  never  be  said  of  him,  as  was  said  of  a  certain  modern  minister,  that 
he  spent  six  days  in  the  week  asking  himself,  "  What  on  earth  shall  I  preach 
about  ? "  and  sent  the  people  home  on  Sunday  asking  themselves,  "  What  on 
earth  did  he  preach  about  ? "  John  stood  boldly  forth  as  a  preacher  of 
righteousness,  in  the  midst  of  a  perverse  and  crooked  generation.  (1)  In  his 
stern,  weird  cry,  "  Repent  ye,"  he  made  a  personal  appeal  for  personal  action, 
and  a  particular  line  of  conduct — not  simply  general  good  behaviour.  What- 
ever sin  has  hitherto  reigned  in  the  heart,  the  opposite  virtue  must  now  take 
its  place;  otherwise,  the  kingdom  cannot  be  received.  (2)  By  baptism  he 
pledged  men  to  carry  out  in  their  life  the  discipline  necessary  to  make  them 
ready  for  the  kingdom.  This  rite  served  to  prepare  them  to  accept  a  system  in 
which  sacramental  means  of  grace  were  to  hold  a  prominent  place.  (3)  Besides 
repentance  and  baptism,  particular  confession  of  sins  was  exacted  by  John. 
And  this  was  doubtless  private  confession;  for  it  is  highly  improbable  that 
they  publicly  confessed  sins,  the  knowledge  of  which  would  instruct  others 
in  all  sorts  of  evil,  pollute  their  minds  with  all  sorts  of  filthiness,  and  in 
very  many  cases  give  the  enemies  of  those  so  confessing  the  power  of 
accusing  them  before  the  law  as  long  as  they  lived.  3.  The  Baptist's 
preaching  proved  a  great  success.  Never  before  had  the  souls  of  the  people 
been  so  stirred.  And  although  comparatively  few  took  the  further  step  of 
enrolling  themselves  under  Christ's  banner  during  His  lifetime,  yet  amongst 
those  few  were  several  of  the  apostles;  and  we  know  not  how  much  of  the 
Church's  growth  after  Pentecost  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  Baptist's  faithful 
ministry.  4.  The  personal  appearance  of  the  Baptist  was  in  perfect  harmony 
with  the  truths  he  proclaimed.  Bede  says  he  used  a  dress  more  austere  than 
was  usual,  because  he  did  not  encourage  the  life  of  sinners  by  flattery,  but  chid 
them  by  the  vigour  of  his  rough  rebuke ;  he  had  a  girdle  of  a  skin  round  his 
loins,  for  he  was  one  who  crucified  his  flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts. 
5.  The  self-abnegation  of  the  Baptist  is  the  greatest  proof  of  his  real  nobility. 
Such  was  his  popularity,  that  he  might  easily  have  become  the  founder  of  a  new 
religious  sect ;  for  his  disciples  could  not  bear  to  think  of  his  ministry  as  merely 
the  preface  or  introduction  to  that  of  Another.  But  John  himself  never 
wavered  in  his  testimony,  never  dreamt  of  arrogating  to  himself  any  honour ; 
but  maintained,  with  unswerving  fidelity,  that  he — though  he  could  claim  high 
rank  among  his  countrymen,  as  the  son  of  one  of  the  heads  of  the  courses  of  the 
priests — was  but  the  messenger  of  One  for  whom  he  did  not  think  himself 
worthy  to  perform  the  most  menial  service,  One  who  would  baptise  not  merely 
in  the  waters  of  Jordan,  but  in  the  fire  of  the  Life-giving  Spirit. 

Lessons. — 1.  Thank  God  for  His  mercy  in  the  gospel.     2.  Attend  to  God's 

7 


chap.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


message  by  the  lips  of  men.  3.  Make  diligent  and  reverent  use  of  the  means 
of  grace.  4.  Illustrate  and  exalt  the  gospel  by  your  life.  So  you  may  be  the 
means  of  preparing  others  to  welcome  Christ. 

Vers.  4-8.  John's  baptism,  and  Christ's. — The  question  which  perplexed  the 
chief  priests  and  scribes  and  elders  (Mark  xi.  30-33)  need  cause  us  no  difficulty, 
because  Christ  Himself  acknowledged  and  sanctioned  His  forerunner,  and  set 
His  seal  on  the  legitimacy  of  John's  baptism,  by  submitting  to  it  Himself. 
We  find,  moreover,  in  the  preaching  of  John  a  strong  circumstance  in  his 
favour.  For  who  ever  heard  of  an  enthusiast,  a  self -inspired  prophet,  studiously 
disparaging  himself,  and  seeking  to  fix  the  attention  of  the  world  on  some 
greater  Person  who  should  come  after  him  ? 

I.  John's  account  of  his  own  baptism.— 1.  He  baptised  "with  water" — a 
well-understood  sign  of  moral  purification  (Isa.  i.  16;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25; 
Ps.  li.  2,  7).  2.  He  baptised  with  water  "  unto  repentance "  (ver.  4  :  cf. 
Matt.  iii.  11),  i.e.  to  the  end  that  men  should  repent,  amend  their  lives,  and 
"  bring  forth,"  etc.  (Matt.  iii.  8).  3.  Was  there  any  inward  and  spiritual  grace 
in  the  baptism  of  John,  of  which  the  washing  with  water  might  be  considered 
as  a  sign  ?  We  are  obliged  to  answer  in  the  negative.  The  ceremony  itself 
was  well  calculated  to  make  an  impression  upon  those  who  submitted  to  it; 
but  the  same  may  be  said  of  many  other  rites,  which  have  nothing  spiritual 
or  supernatural  about  them.  Such  impressions  may  easily  be  accounted  for, 
and  furnish  no  proof  that  there  has  been  any  extraordinary  exertion  of  Divine 
influence.  4.  The  baptism  of  John,  though  (like  the  law  of  Moses)  it  "  made 
nothing  perfect,"  yet  prepared  the  way  for  "  the  bringing  in  of  a  better  hope," 
and  of  a  more  efficacious  baptism. 

II.  John's  prophecy  concerning  Christ's  baptism. — 1.  He  states  the  manner 
of  Christ's  baptism — "  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  Not  that  "  water  "  should  not 
also  be  employed  in  this  greater  baptism ;  without  this  there  can  be  no  baptism 
at  all.  But  here  is  the  difference.  John  baptised  with  water  only  :  Christ 
should  baptise  with  water  and  the  Spirit  (John  iii.  5).  The  Holy  Ghost  is 
unsubstantial  and  invisible ;  we  can  no  more  be  baptised  with  the  Spirit  alone 
than  we  can  with  "  the  wind,  which  bloweth  where  it  listeth."  If  this  operation 
is  to  be  visibly  performed  on  us,  there  must  be  some  vehicle  through  which  the 
Holy  Ghost  is  communicated  to  our  souls ;  and  water,  the  emblem  of  purity, 
is  the  most  convenient  and  natural  sign  of  that  spiritual  grace  which  cleanses 
and  purifies  the  heart.  2.  Consider  now  the  effects  of  Christ's  baptism.  (1)  It 
washes  away  all  past  sins  and  defilements  in  him  who  is  baptised  (Acts  xxii.  16). 
This  is  the  first  grace  of  baptism ;  and  even  if  it  were  the  only  one,  who  would 
not  be  astonished  at  the  powerful  operation  of  so  simple  a  rite !  Who  would 
not  confess  that  He  in  whose  name,  and  by  faith  in  whose  name,  water  is  made 
to  wash  away  sins,  must  indeed  be  mightier  than  John  or  any  other  mere 
human  interpreter  of  the  will  of  God !  Above  all,  since  the  effect  is  as  beneficial 
as  it  is  astonishing,  who  would  not  wish  to  partake  of  this  inestimable  gift  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus !  (2)  It  not  only  washes  away  all  former  pollutions,  but 
it  cleanses  the  heart  itself,  and  purifies  that  turbid  fountain  out  of  which  flow 
all  the  issues  of  life.  A  physician  turns  his  attention,  in  the  first  place,  to  the 
immediate  relief  of  his  patient,  and  endeavours  by  suitable  remedies  to  check 
the  progress  of  the  disorder ;  but  when  that  is  done,  then  comes  the  glory  of 
his  art,  which  is,  to  improve  the  general  state  of  the  patient's  health,  and  get 
rid  of  those  causes  and  tendencies  which  might  bring  on  the  complaint  afresh. 
Even  so  has  Jesus  Christ,  the  Great  Physician  of  the  soul,  invented  this  remedy 
of  baptism,  by  which  He  not  only  cures  the  present  disease,  but  renews,  as  it 
were,  the  moral  constitution  of  man.     By  the  "  washing  of  regeneration "  we 

8 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  I. 


are  "born  again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  23).  (3)  What  baptism 
necessarily  confers  on  all  who  are  the  subjects  of  it — whether  old  or  young, 
hackneyed  in  the  ways  of  sin  or  as  yet  innocent  of  it — is  not  actual  holiness, 
but  only  the  capacity  of  becoming  holy.  The  man  who  is  thus  regenerated 
may,  if  so  disposed,  return  to  his  former  courses  and  become  as  dead  in  sin  as 
before.  But  now  it  is  no  longer  the  fault  of  his  nature.  He  can  no  longer 
exclaim  with  the  unregenerate,  "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  !  who  shall  deliver 
me,"  etc.  (Rom.  vii.  24).  He  has  been  delivered.  Before  baptism  he  was 
incapable  of  pleasing  God ;  now  he  is  not  incapable.  Before  baptism  there  was 
"  a  law  in  his  members,  warring  against  the  law  of  his  mind,  and  bringing  him 
into  captivity  to  the  law  of  sin,  which  was  in  his  members."  Now  there  is  no 
such  law,  and  no  such  captivity.  In  short,  before  baptism,  whatever  evil  he 
may  have  done,  he  had  this  excuse  to  plead :  "It  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but 
sin  which  dwelleth  in  me."  Now  he  has  no  such  excuse.  (4)  If  any  one  be 
disposed  to  think  that  it  is  a  small  thing  to  be  made  capable  of  becoming  holy 
unless  we  be  actually  established  in  holiness,  let  him  consider  this :  What  must 
it  be  to  labour  under  a  positive  incapacity  of  working  out  our  salvation;  to 
know  that  if  we  should  exert  ourselves  ever  so  much  we  could  never,  by  any 
possibility,  please  God ;  that  our  best  actions  and  intentions  would  be  infected 
with  the  taint  of  our  nature,  and,  instead  of  being  acceptable  to  God,  must 
necessarily  be  offensive  to  Him,  as  partaking  of  the  nature  of  sin  ?  3.  From 
all  this  there  arise  two  inducements  to  holiness  and  righteousness  of  life. 
(1)  The  former  things  are  forgiven  thee;  go,  and  sin  no  more.  What  does  it 
profit  a  man  to  have  his  debts  cancelled,  if  he  begin  immediately  to  run  up  a 
fresh  score,  and  to  involve  himself  in  heavier  liabilities  than  those  from  which 
he  has  been  delivered?  Shall  not  the  last  state  of  that  man  be  worse  than 
the  first?  See  Ezek.  xxiv.  13.  (2)  When  thou  art  baptised,  thou  art  "born 
again "  of  the  Spirit :  see  that  the  rest  of  thy  life  be  answerable  to  this 
beginning.  The  old  man  is  put  off  :  put  off  his  deeds  also.  Thou  hast  purified 
thy  soul  through  the  Spirit ;  ask  thyself,  therefore,  what  qualities  should  spring 
out  of  a  cleansed  and  renewed  heart.  The  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest ;  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  should  be  so  also. 


OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  TEE   VERSES. 

Ver.  1.  Beginnings. — I.  Human  life  A    wonderful    beginning. — What    a 

is  full   of  beginnings. — St.    Mark   is  wonderful  beginning  of  things  is  here ! 

constantly  drawing  attention  to  this.  The    gospel !      Had    he   recorded   the 

See   chap.   i.  45,  iv.   1,  v.   17,   vi.    7,  beginning  of  the  work  of  justice  and 

xiv.  65,  xv.  18.  wrath  to  make  an  end  of  sinners,  we 

II.  All  beginnings  are  full  of  in-  should  not  have  been  surprised,  after 
terest. — They  afford  great  scope  for  reading  the  story  of  sin  and  ingrati- 
speculation  as  to  the  progress  and  end.  tude  recorded  in  the  Old  Testament ; 

III.  The  gospel  is  the  greatest  be-  but  instead  we  have  the  beginning  of 
ginning  the  world  has  ever  seen. — It  the  dispensation  of  love  and  mercy  to 
is  God's  crowning  work  and  supreme  sinners — a  beginning  which  was  the 
revelation.  end   of   the   old    dispensation  of   law, 

IV.  The  gospel  is  a  beginning  with-  types,  and  shadows,  and  the  bringing 
out  an  end. — The  "  Sun  of  Righteous-  in  of  the  substance  of  all  that  God 
ness"  will  never  set.  But  though  had  promised  man  in  grace  from  the 
without  end,  the  gospel  is  not  with-  foundation  of  the  world.  What  a 
out  completion.  See  Isa.  liii.  1 1 ;  humble  beginning  it  was !  One  man, 
1  Cor.  xv.  28.  one  voice — and   both  man  and   voice 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


in  the  wilderness.  Not  a  mighty 
prince,  but  a  prophet-man,  clad  in 
camel's  hair,  with  a  leathern  girdle 
about  him.  How  differently  from  the 
coming  of  an  earthly  prince  did  Jesus 
appear  to  take  up  His  ministry !  Yet 
as  we  proceed  we  shall  see  the  reason 
for  this  strange  and  simple  "beginning 
of  the  gospel."  It  was  because  it  was 
the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  not  of  the 
kingdom;  the  beginning  of  the  grace 
of  God,  not  of  the  ceremonial  pomp 
of  a  formal  worship ;  the  beginning  of 
a  dispensation  which  was  to  reign  in 
the  hearts  of  men,  not  in  external 
paraphernalia  of  worship. — G.  F. 
Pentecost,  D.D. 

The  strong  Son  of  God. — The  first 
words  of  In  Memoriam  might  be  taken 
to  describe  the  theme  of  Mark's  Gospel. 
It  is  the  "  strong  Son  of  God  "  whom 
he  sets  forth  in  his  rapid,  impetuous 
narrative,  which  is  full  of  fiery  energy ; 
he  delights  to  paint  the  unresting 
continuity  of  Christ's  filial  service. — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  title  " Son  of  God"  besides  here, 
is  given — 1.  By  Gabriel  (Luke  i.  35). 

2.  By  the    devil    (Matt.    iv.    3,    6). 

3.  By  demons  (Matt.  viii.  29).  4.  By 
apostles  (Matt.  xiv.  33).  5.  By  Peter 
(Matt.  xvi.  16).  By  John  (John  xx.  31 ; 
1  John  hi.  8 ;  Kev.  ii.  18).  6.  By  Paul 
(Bom.  i.  4;  2  Cor.  i.  19;  Gal.  ii.  20; 
Eph.  iv.  13).  7.  By  author  of  Hebrews 
(chap.  iv.  14,  and  whole  argument  of 
chap.  i.).  8.  By  the  Ethiopian  eunuch 
(Acts  viii.  37).  A  fair  deduction  from 
Philip's  teaching,  even  if  the  words  are 
spurious.  9.  By  Christ  Himself  (John 
x.  36  ;  Luke  xxii.  70). 

Vers.  2,  3.  Preparation  for  Divine 
visitation. — I.  The  two  dispensations 
are  in  reality  one. — John  is  the  con- 
necting link  between  them. 

II.  The  Divinity  of  Messiah  was 
plainly  foretold.— See  Isa.  xl.  3; 
Mai.  iii.   1. 

III.  The  function  of  a  prophet  is 
here  clearly  stated. — "A  voice" — 
God's  messenger  and  mouthpiece,  going 
only  where  God  sends  him,  saying  only 
what  God  bids  him.      Dedicate  your 

10 


lips  to  God,  and  He  will  fill  them  with 
grace  and  truth. 

IV.  The  willingness  of  God  to  visit 
man  is  evident. — He  only  waits  for 
the  obstacles  to  be  removed — hardness 
of  heart,  and  contempt  of  His  word 
and  commandment  (Rev.  iii.  20).  A 
readiness  to  have  Him  come  into  our 
lives  and  straighten  them  is  the  pre- 
paration of  heart  needed  to  receive 
Him 

Ver.  3.  John  a  voice,  not  an  echo. — 
Goethe  has  said  in  one  of  his  pregnant 
sentences,  "There  are  many  echoes  in 
the  world,  but  few  voices."  John 
Baptist's  power  lay  in  this — that  he 
was  a  voice,  and  not  an  echo.  The 
people  of  Israel  had  long  been  accus- 
tomed to  religious  teachers  who  were 
only  echoes — echoes  of  the  more  distant 
past  when  Moses  and  the  prophets 
spake  the  word  of  the  Lord  with  living 
voice,  and  yet  more  frequently  echoes 
of  the  teaching  of  some  recent  rabbi, 
himself  an  echo  and  unreal.  Their 
temple  courts  in  which  they  disputed 
the  law,  their  synagogue  in  which 
Moses  was  expounded,  were  but  as 
whispering-galleries  in  which  men, 
surrounded  with  shadows,  listen  to 
sounds  that  belong  not  to  the  living 
world  at  all.  But  at  length  the  ac- 
cents of  a  living  voice  fell  upon  the 
nation's  ear.  A  religious  teacher  ap- 
peared who  dealt  with  realities,  and 
not  with  semblances.  He  spoke  as  a 
living  man  to  living  men  in  an  actual 
world. — Jas.  Brown,  D.D. 

The  need  of  our  time  is  for  voices, 
— voices  which  are  not  echoes,  living 
voices  speaking  the  living  truth,  out 
of  the  depths  of  a  living  experience, 
and  in  the  living  language  of  living 
men ;  voices  preaching  mercy  and  not 
sacrifice,  righteousness  and  not  burnt 
offerings,  faith  and  not  outward  cleans- 
ing; voices  bringing  good  tidings  of 
blessed  possibilities  for  a  sin-stricken 
world,  of  the  coming  of  a  kingdom  in 
mercy  and  in  judgment,  which  are  not 
two,  but  eternally  and  for  ever  one; 
voices  bearing  witness  for  the  Christ — 
the  Incarnation  of  divinest  righteous* 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap,  i* 


ness     and    divinest    compassion,    the  Christian    labour    has    cast    up    the 

Redeemer  of  the  fallen,  the  Helper  of  saving  message  of  God's  love,  and  so, 

the  helpless,   the  Brother  of   us  all;  by  steadfast  conquest  of  all  sin  and 

voices  whose  accents  are  not  hard  and  ignorance,  to  open  wide  the  gates  for 

dogmatic  and  pitiless,  but  as  of  men  His  enduring  sunshine ! — Bishop  H.  C. 

who  have  wrestled,  nay,  who  perchance  Potter. 

are  wrestling   still,  with   sorrow  and  The  Lord's  pathway. — If  I  can  only 

doubt  and  fear. — Ibid.  place  one  little  brick  in  the  pavement 

The  voice  of  the  Baptist  was  a  voice  of  the  Lord's  pathway,  I  will  place  it 

of  severity. — His  doctrine  was  as  stern  there,   that   coming   generations   may 

as  his  raiment  was  rough.     He   pro-  walk  thereon  to  the  heavenly  city. — 

claimed   repentance — the   axe   to   the  Bishop  Phillips  Brooks. 
root,  the  fan  to  the  corn,  the  chaff  to 

fire.     He  must,  by  plainness  and  bold-  Yer.  4.  Repentance. — To  sum  up  the 

ness  of   speech,  level   mountains  and  business  of  repentance  in  a  word,  the 

exalt  valleys,  and  so  prepare   a  way  wise  man  (Prov.  xxviii.  13)  has  reduced 

for  the  approach  of  the  Messiah.     The  it  to  two  heads — to  confess  and  forsake 

corruption   of    human    nature   was   a  our  sins.     St.  Bernard  almost  as  short 

wound  of  long  standing,  that  must  be  and  not  much  unlike,  Dolere  prwterita, 

lanced  before  it  could  be  healed.    Sharp-  Cavere  futura ;   to  grieve  and  be  dis- 

ness   of    speech,   like    a   ploughshare,  pleased  with  ourselves  for  what  is  past, 

must  cleave  deep   and   break  up  the  and  to  take  better  heed  for  the  time 

stubborn  ground  of  human  pride,  and  to   come.      It  must   be   a  repentance 

make   the   heart   soft   and   tender   to  from  sin  as  well  as  for  sin;  it  must 

receive    the   blessed    seed    of    Divine  be  of  thoughts   as  well   as  deeds,   of 

love.  errors   in   judgment   as  well   as   mis- 

Highvmys  through  the  hearts  of  men.  carriages  of  life ;  finally,  it  must  bring 
— Crossing  this  mighty  continent  of  forth  fruits,  and  be  accompanied  with 
ours  not  long  ago,  by  means  of  that  works  meet  for  repentance.  To  repent, 
last  marvel  of  our  American  engineer-  to  cry  peccavi,  and  go  on  still  in  the 
ing,  whose  daily  track-laying,  as  I  same  sin,  to  be  always  craving  God's 
have  been  told,  was  wont  to  beat  the  mercy,  and  never  stand  in  fear  of  His 
slow-moving  waggon-trains  of  emi-  justice,  is  in  short  but  to  mock  God 
grants  that  marched  beside  it,  I  found  and  our  own  souls  to  boot.  Further, 
myself  again  and  again  exclaiming  our  repentance  must  be  proportionable 
"  What  grander  calling  could  there  be  to  our  offences.  Greater  sins  must  be 
than  thus  to  write  one's  name  in  iron  taken  to  heart  with  greater  regrets, 
across  the  unsullied  page  of  those  virgin  The  more  scandalous  and  notorious 
western  prairies,  as  part-builder  of  the  any  one's  faults  have  been,  the  more 
highway  that  shall  bind  together  Pekin  signal  must  his  conversion  be,  and  the 
and  Paris,  London  and  San  Francisco,  more  exemplary  his  conversation.  The 
the  commerce  of  Calcutta  and  the  longer  we  have  continued  in  any  ill 
manufactures  of  Manchester,  in  one  practice,  the  more  lasting  must  our 
bright  zone,  whose  central  gem  shall  exercise  of  repentance  be.  Chronical 
be  our  own  American  metropolis!"  And  and  habitual  distempers  must  be  put 
yet  there  is  a  grander  calling.  May  into  a  course  of  spiritual  physic.  To 
it  be  yours  and  mine  to  braid  it  in  shut  up  all :  repentance,  as  'tis  a 
with  whatsoever  toil  or  study  is  ours  ;  necessary  duty,  so  'tis  a  great  privilege, 
to  build  those  other  highways  through  None  so  perfect  but  need  it ;  none  so 
the  stony  hearts  and  desert  lives  of  bad  but  may  attain  it :  witness  the 
men,  over  which  the  Master  Builder  penitent  thief,  the  publican,  the  pro- 
shall  at  last  come  back  again,  to  claim  digal. — A.  Littleton,  D.D. 
this  world  and  all  its  treasures  for  His 
own ;    to   bear  along  the  paths  that  Vers.  4,  5.  A  rite,  message,  and  re- 

11 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


ception.—I.  A  great  message.— 1.  The  awakening,  and  it  would  be  to  mis- 
duty  urged:  repentance.  2.  The  mo-  represent  the  whole  situation  if  we 
tive  :  the  nearness  of  the  kingdom,  did  not  go  on  to  say  that  the  greatest 
with  righteous  laws  and  heavy  penal-  religious  movement  that  the  world 
ties.  3.  The  privilege  proclaimed:  has  seen  turned,  as  its  first  hinge, 
setting  free  from  sin.  upon  this  same   religions   awakening. 

II.  A  novel  rite. — 1.  John's  baptism  There  have  been  repetitions  of  it  all 

far  superior  to  the  ritual  lustrations  the  way  along.     Whether  it  is  Peter 

of  the  Jews foretold  the  purification  the  Hermit,  or  Francis  of  Assisi,  or 

of  heart  and  mind  which  would  result  Savonarola,    or   John  Huss,   or   John 

from  the  washing  away  of  sin  in  the  Wesley,   the  thing  is  too  familiar  to 

blood  of   Christ  (cp.   1    Pet.    iii.    21).  be  ignored  or  wholly  disesteemed ;  and 

2.    It  expressed  a   backward  look   at  no  effort  to  distinguish  between  great 

guilt,  and  a  forward  look  to  mercy.  national   or   ecclesiastical   movements, 

III.  A  striking  reception.— There  occurring  at  long  intervals,  and  an 
was  that  about  him  which  attracted  agency  to  be  employed  in  connection 
the  attention  not  merely  of  the  common  with  the  ordinary  on-going  of  parish 
people,  but  also  of  the  political  and  life,  though  such  a  distinction  is  one 
religious  leaders  (Matt.  iii.  7).  1.  His  which  we  are  bound  to  recognise,  can 
prophetic  voice  broke  a  silence  of  three  dismiss  from  our  rightful  consideration 
hundred  years.  2.  His  announcement  such  agencies  as  the  latter.  In  one 
of  the  kingdom  kindled  Messianic  ex-  sense  the  case  of  a  parish  and  the 
pectations.  3.  His  manifest  sincerity  case  of  a  Church  or  a  nation  are  widely 
induced  searchings  of  heart.  If,  like  different;  but  in  another  they  are 
John,  we  would  "  reach  the  masses,"  identical.  The  same  slumbrous  torpor, 
we  must  first  have  something  worthy  the  same  deadness  to  spiritual  truths, 
to  say,  and  then  say  it  straight  out.  the  same  triumph  of  the  spirit  of 
4.  We  must  recollect  that  this  was  worldliness  over  the  Spirit  of  Christ, 
the  great  Sabbatical  year  of  the  Jews ;  exist  in  the  one  as  in  the  other.  It 
the  people  were  less  busy  than  usual ;  is,  after  all,  only  a  question  of  extent 
the  whole  land  was  at  rest ;  a  religious  or  degree ;  and  the  exigencies  of  paro- 
atmosphere  was  breathing  around  chial  life  in  particular  communities 
them  ;  and  so  the  awakened  multitudes  often  make  that  necessary,  in  some 
swept  forth  from  their  homes  on  every  single  congregation,  which,  under  other 
hand.  Bethabara,  the  little  fording-  circumstances,  may  widely,  if  not 
place  north  of  Jericho,  was  thronged  universally,  be  necessary. — Bishop  H. 
with  excited  listeners  out  of  all  classes  C.  Potter, 

and  social  conditions,  eagerly  jostling 

each    other  in    defence    of    truth    or         Yer.  5.  Confession  of  sin. — There  is 

tradition.  a  twofold  confession  of  sins  necessary 

The  character  of  the  Baptist's  minis-  in  the  practice  of  repentance. 
try. — There  can  be  no  doubt  concerning  I.  To  God. — 1.  It  must  come  from 

the  general  character  of  the  Baptist's  a  feeling  heart,  touched  with  sense  of 

ministry.     It  departed  in  every  par-  sin  and  grieved  for  it;  not  verbal,  or 

ticular  from  the  ordinary  and  orderly  from  the  teeth  outward.     2.  It  must 

ministries  of  the  time.     Judged  by  our  come  from  a  hatred  and  loathing  of 

standards,  or  by  those  then  prevailing,  the  sins  confessed,  not   from  fear   of 

it  was  distinctly  sensational.    It  aimed  punishment   merely :    Saul,    Pharaoh, 

to   arouse,    alarm,  denounce,   scourge.  3.  From  hope  of  mercy,  else  we  witness 

And    its    effects   were    in   accordance  against  ourselves :  Judas.    4.  Free  and 

with  its  aims.     If  we  should  describe  voluntary,  not  forced  from  us  ;  else  it 

them  in  the  phraseology  of  our  own  is  not  pleasing  to  God.     5.  It  must  not 

time,  we  should  say  that  there  was  in  be  only  in  general  terms,  but  there 

that  part  of   Syria  a  great  religious  must  be  a  laying  open  of  our  particular 
12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  I. 


known  sins,  so  far  as  we  can  remember 
them. 

II.  To  men. — Not  always  necessary, 
but  in  some  cases  only.  1.  When  by 
our  sins  we  have  offended  and  scandal- 
ised men — either  the  Church  in  general, 
or  some  particular  persons.  2.  When 
any  sin  lies  heavy  on  our  conscience, 
so  that  we  cannot  find  ease  or  comfort. 
In  this  case  it  is  necessary  to  open  our 
hearts,  and  to  acknowledge  that  sin 
which  troubles  us,  to  some  faithful 
pastor,  or  other  Christian  brother,  who 
may  minister  spiritual  advice  and  com- 
fort to  us. — G.  Fetter. 

Confession  of  sin  hindered  by  Satan. 
— God  knoweth  all,  saith  Ambrose,  but 
yet  He  looketh  for  thy  confession. 
God  is  never  more  ready  to  cover  than 
when  we  lay  open.  The  fox,  say  our 
books,  taketh  his  prey  by  the  throat, 
so  to  stop  all  noise ;  and  the  devil,  that 
fox,  by  all  means  hindereth  holy  con- 
fession, and  bringeth  men  to  deal  with 
their  souls  as  men  use  to  deal  with 
old  rusty  armour,  either  never  or  once 
in  a  year  or  two  formally  and  super- 
ficially to  scour  it  over.  But  as  a 
thorn  in  your  finger  will  grieve  you 
still  till  it  be  had  out,  so  will  sin  in 
your  conscience  still  vex  till  it  be  ac- 
knowledged and  confessed.  If  we  have 
offended  man,  reconciliation  to  him  is 
necessary.  But  to  thy  God  speak  all, 
saith  Chrysostom,  even  whatsoever 
thou  art  ashamed  to  speak  unto  man, 
for  He  expecteth  thy  voice,  although 
He  knew  it  before,  and  He  will  never 
upbraid  thee  as  man  will. — Bishop 
Babington. 

Ver.  6.  The  habits  of  the  Baptist. — 
1.  The  Baptist's  habits  were  thoroughly 
in  harmony  with  his  surroundings  in 
the  wilderness,  also  with  the  absorption 
of  a  man  with  such  a  mission.  2.  His 
unusual  style  of  dress  was  probably 
adopted  with  the  deliberate  intention 
of  sending  men's  thoughts  back  to 
Elijah  (2  Kings  i.  8  :  cp.  Zech.  xiii.  4). 
3.  His  manner  of  living  was  a  protest 
against  the  prevalent  worldliness  and 
luxury,  especially  of  the  religious  leaders 
(Mark  xii.  38 ;  Luke  vii.  25).     4.  One 


inured  to  such  a  life  could  afford  to 
be  perfectly  fearless  and  independent, 
having  little  to  lose  by  opposition  of 
the  great,  or  to  gain  from  their  favour. 
5.  John's  outward  appearance  fitly 
symbolised  the  rigour  and  austerity  of 
the  old  dispensation.  Jesus,  the  Media- 
tor of  the  new  and  better  covenant,  as 
fitly  "  came  eating  and  drinking,"  etc. 

Ver.  7.  The  humility  of  the  Baptist. — 
The  highest  buildings  have  the  lowest 
foundations.  As  the  roots  of  a  tree 
descend,  so  the  branches  ascend.  The 
lower  the  ebb,  the  higher  the  tide. 
Those  upon  the  mountains  see  only 
the  fog  beneath  them,  whilst  those  in 
deep  pits  see  the  stars  above  them. 
The  most  fruitful  branches  bow  the 
lowest. — John  Trapp. 

Christ  is  "  mightier "  than  John. — 
I.  In  essential  being. — Son  of  God, 
and  God  the  Son,  as  well  as  Son  of 
Man. 

II.  In  word. — John  was  but  "a 
voice " :  Christ  is  the  Eternal  Word 
(John  i.  1). 

III.  In  works. — John  x.  41. 

IV.  In  spiritual  efficiency. — The 
Baptist's  success  was  all  due  to  Christ's 
power  working  with  and  in  him 
(John  i.  16,  iii.  27). 

V.  In  ministerial  rites. — The  bap- 
tism in  water  was  but  a  faint  fore- 
shadowing of  the  cleansing  fire  of  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Ver.  8.  A  symbol  of  moral  puri- 
fication.— The  Baptist  started  from  the 
Messianic  hope  as  the  one  thing  remain- 
ing to  the  nation  promising  a  better 
future ;  but  he  perceived  what  had  to  be 
immediately  done  in  connection  with 
it,  according  to  the  requirements  of  the 
true  religion,  and  he  was  the  first  man 
consistent  and  daring  enough  actually 
to  do  it.  .  .  .  Every  individual  had 
to  prepare  himself  for  the  true  kingdom, 
and  as  a  regenerate  man,  receptive 
simply  for  everything  that  is  pure  and 
good — as  a  man  who  will  not  start 
back  from  the  Highest  One  should  He 
come — look  for  the  mysterious  but 
certain  coming  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .  The 

13 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


submersion  in  the  depth  of  the  flowing  admitting  into  a  state  of  grace,  but 
water  by  the  hand  of  the  Baptist  that,  and  something  much  more,  even 
became  the  most  effective,  visible,  and  a  sacrament,  a  medium  or  vehicle  of 
sensible  symbol  of  the  moral  purifica-  conveying  Divine  grace  itself.  At 
tion  of  this  generation.  .  .  .  And  this  "  the  font  of  regeneration  "  the  person 
deep  submersion,  by  the  hand  of  a  con-  baptised  is  made  a  member  of  Christ, 
fessor,  with  this  strict  confession  of  and  by  virtue  of  that  membership  a 
sin,  this  vow  and  this  absolution,  of  child  of  God,  and  by  virtue  of  that 
which  it  was  meant  to  be  the  symbol,  adoption  into  Divine  sonship  an  in- 
and  this  whole  preparation  for  the  heritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Messiah,  was  something  which  had  III.  The  results  that  should  follow 
never  before  existed,  and  was  the  most  the  Spirit's  baptism. — 1.  Careful  in- 
striking  sign  of  that  mighty  change  of  struction  of  the  neophyte.  "  Disciple 
mind  which  was  now  about  to  be  all  the  nations."  How?  "Baptising 
wrought  in  Israel  more  fully  than  them."  What  next  ?  "  Teaching  them 
before. — H.  G.  A.  Ewald.  to   observe    all    things   whatsoever    I 

The     Holy     Spirit's    baptism. — The  have  commanded  you"  (Matt,  xxviii. 

nature  of  the  Spirit's  baptism.— 1.  As  19,     20).      Human     agency    in    the 

the  Spirit  of  truth,  He  enlightens  the  Church    must    develop   and   translate 

soul  (John  xvi.  13  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  10,  11).  into  life  the  Divine  energy  implanted 

2.  As  the  Spirit  of  holiness,  He  puri-  in   baptism.     2.    Perseverance  in   the 

fies  the  soul  (2  Thess.  ii.  13;   1  Cor.  faith.    This  includes — (1)  Diligent  and 

vi.  11;  Tit.  iii.  5).     3.  As  the  Spirit  continuous  effort  to  attain  "  the  know- 

of  life  and  power,  He  imparts  spiritual  ledge   of   God   in   the    face    of    Jesus 

life,  and  animates  the  soul  with  strength  Christ."      (2)   Earnest    endeavour    to 

to  resist  temptation.  correct  and  abandon  all  that  is  wrong 

II.    How   the   Spirit's   baptism    is  in  action,   word,   and    thought.      (3) 

communicated   to   US. — "  Except    one  Ready   compliance   with   the   will    of 

be  born  of  water  and  the  Spirit,"  says  God  in   all   things,    with  vigour  and 

Christ,    "  he   cannot    enter    into    the  resolution   of    mind   to   speak,    work, 

kingdom    of    God."     Thus    He    links  and   suffer   for  the  truth.     (4)  Com- 

together  the  outward  visible  sign  and  plete   reliance   on   Christ    alone — and 

the    inward    spiritual    grace.       Holy  not    on    any   external    apparatus    or 

baptism,    then,    as    practised    in    the  means  of  grace — for  all  that  we  need 

Christian  Church,  is  not  a  mere  rite  to  make  us  "  meet  for  the  inheritance 

or   ordinance,!  a    door,    so    to    speak,  of  the  saints  in  light." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—13. 
(Parallels:  Matt.  iii.  13 — iv.  11;  Luke  iii.  21 — iv.  13;  John  i.  29-42.) 

Christ's  preparation  for  ministry — "  The  beginning  of  the  gospel "  advances 
here  another  stage.  "  The  Coming  One  "  has  come.  The  Son  of  God  takes  His 
place  in  history  as  Son  of  Man,  and  proceeds  to  "fulfil  all  righteousness," 
identifying  Himself  in  every  possible  way  with  the  race  He  has  come  to  redeem 
and  save. 

I.  Christ  is  prepared  for  ministry  by  baptism. — 1.  He  was  about  thirty 
years  of  age  at  the  time  (Luke  iii.  23) — the  age  at  which  the  Levites  entered 
upon  their  work  (Num.  iv.  3).  Hitherto — with  the  exception  of  an  occasional 
visit  to  the  capital — His  life  had  been  passed  in  seclusion  at  Nazareth,  the 
Scriptures  His  daily  study,  the  deep  problems  of  human  sin  and  misery  His 
constant  thought.  Now  He  prepares  to  stand  forth  as  the  Champion  of  humanity 
by  confessing  their  sins  and  expressing  their  repentance,     2.  The  place — on  the 

14 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  i. 


eastern  bank  of  the  Jordan,  near  Jericho — to  which  Jesus  came  from  Nazareth 
to  be  baptised  was  full  of  historic  memories,  carrying  the  mind  back  to  the 
greatest  of  the  judges,  and  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  prophets.  There  the 
Israelites  crossed  the  Jordan  dryshod,  and  entered  with  Joshua  the  promised 
land  (Josh,  iii.) ;  there  Elijah,  accompanied  by  Elisha,  smote  the  stream  with 
his  mantle  and  opened  a  passage  through  its  rapid  waters  (2  Kings  ii.  8). 
3.  But  why  should  Jesus  submit  to  the  baptism  of  John  ?  If  we  could  answer 
this  question  fully,  we  should  be  well  on  the  way  to  solve  the  mystery  of  the 
Incarnation.  We  can  only  dimly  perceive  some  of  the  motives  for  this  amazing 
condescension.  (1)  Although  the  Sinless  One,  Christ  was  baptised  with  the 
baptism  of  repentance,  because  He  chose — for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation — to 
be  reckoned  amongst  sinners  as  if  He  were  one  Himself,  and  to  receive  the  out- 
ward sign  of  the  cleansing  away  of  that  evil  and  defiling  thing  in  which  He  had 
no  part.  (2)  Although  John's  superior  in  nature,  Christ  received  baptism  from 
him  as  if  He  had  been  inferior  in  office,  for  He  was  now  dedicating  Himself  to 
His  great  work  as  the  Second  Adam  and  New  Head  of  the  race.  (3)  Although 
King,  Messiah,  and  not  merely  a  subject  in  the  heavenly  kingdom,  it  was  yet  fit 
that  He  should  be  anointed  for  His  own  place  in  that  kingdom ;  and  who  was 
so  fit  to  perform  that  office  as  he  who  had  prepared  the  way  before  Him  ? 
(4)  Moreover,  by  Himself  receiving  baptism,  He  "  sanctified  water  to  the  mystical 
washing  away  of  sin."  This  was  the  beginning  of  that  sacramental  system 
which  naturally  flows  from,  and  is  the  extension  of,  the  Incarnation.  Hitherto 
baptism  had  been  but  a  sign,  a  figure,  an  emblem ;  henceforth  it  was  to  be  a 
means,  a  channel,  for  the  conveyance  of  Divine  grace  :  hitherto  God  had  been 
conceived  of  as  far  away  in  heaven ;  now  He  was  to  be  regarded  as  having  come 
down  to  make  His  abode  amongst  men.  4.  Here,  for  a  brief  moment,  the  veil 
was  drawn  aside  which  shrouds  the  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity.  The  voice  of 
God  the  Father  is  heard  from  heaven,  God  the  Holy  Spirit  is  seen  descending 
through  the  opened  heaven  to  earth,  and  God  the  Son  is  incarnate  on  earth  in 
the  likeness  of  our  humanity,  as  the  link  between  it  and  heaven. 

II.  Christ  is  prepared  for  ministry  by  temptation.— 1.  A  special  interest 
belongs  to  this  chapter  of  Christ's  life,  because  the  narrative  can  only  have  been 
derived  from  His  own  lips,  no  human  eye  having  witnessed  His  contest  with  the 
powers  of  evil.  2.  From  the  waters  of  baptism  He  proceeds  at  once  into  the 
fires  of  temptation.  This  was  no  accident  in  His  life,  but  part  of  the  Divine 
plan  for  His  equipment  as  our  Representative  and  Head.  Just  when  Satan's  fury 
was  at  its  height — the  heavenly  attestation  of  Christ's  Sonship  ringing  in  his 
ears — the  Holy  Spirit  urges  Jesus  forward  to  the  battle.  Both  the  combatants 
realise  that  it  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death — that  if  Satan  be  worsted  now,  it  is 
the  beginning  of  the  end  of  his  rule  over  men.  He  lays  his  plans  accordingly, 
with  the  utmost  skill  and  craft.  3.  The  scene  of  the  encounter,  if  tradition 
may  be  trusted,  was  the  wilderness  of  Jericho,  the  Quarantania  of  later  days ; 
a  region  full  of  rocks  and  caverns,  to  which  hermits  have  often  resorted, 
and  whither  pious  pilgrims  still  wend  their  way,  believing  that  a  vivid  realisa- 
tion of  their  Saviour's  victory  will  be  helpful  to  themselves.  Some  suppose, 
however,  that  Christ  was  carried  by  the  Spirit  into  the  more  distant  desert  of 
Arabia,  to  the  place  where  Moses  and  Elijah  had  fasted  and  held  com- 
munion with  God  (Exod.  xxxiv.  28  ;  1  Kings  xix.  8-18),  and  where  afterwards 
St.  Paul  passed  a  season  of  seclusion  and  prayer  (Gal.  i.  17).  4.  How 
far  was  it  possible  for  Christ  to  be  tempted?  The  following  answer,  con- 
densed mainly  from  Dr.  Liddon's  Divinity  of  our  Lord,  may  help  to  place  this 
matter  in  a  true  light.  (1)  We  must  here  distinguish  between  (a)  direct 
temptation  to  moral  evil,  i.e.  an  appeal  to  a  capacity  of  self-will  which  might 
be  quickened  into  active  disobedience  to  the  will  of  God;  and  (b)  what  may 

15 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


be  termed  indirect  temptation,  i.e.  an  appeal  to  instincts  per  se  innocent,  as 
belonging  to  man  in  his  unfallen  state,  which  can  make  obedience  wear  the 
form  of  a  painful  effort  or  sacrifice.     (2)  Jesus  was — (a)  Emmanuel  (Matt, 
i.  23),   Himself  God  the  Saviour ;   (b)  Son  of  God  (Luke  i.  35),  implying  a 
pre-existent  superhuman  personality  in  Him.     (3)  This  union  of  the  Divine 
and  human  natures  in  Christ  was  not  fatal  to  the  perfection  of  either.     But 
it  was  inconsistent  with  the  presence  of  anything  in  Christ's  manhood  that 
could  contradict  the  essence  of  the  perfect  moral  Being,  i.e.  the  holiness  of  God. 
If  He  could  have  sinned,  the  Incarnation  would  have  been  a  phantom.     The 
sharpest  arrows  of  the  tempter  struck  Him,  but,  like  darts  lighting  upon  a  hard 
polished  surface,  they  glanced  aside.     Moreover,  as  it  would  seem,  the  personal 
union  of  the  two  natures  in  Christ  involved,  at  least,  the  sight  of  the  Beatific 
Vision  by  His  humanity ;  and  if  we  cannot  conceive  of  the  blessed  as  sinning 
while  they  worship  around  the  throne,  much  less  can  we  conceive  it  in  One  in 
whom   "  dwelt  all  the  fulness   of   the   Godhead  bodily."     (4)  But   the   union 
of    Christ's    manhood   with    His    Godhead    did    not    exempt    it   from   simple 
human  instincts,  such  as,  e.g.,   a  shrinking  from   bodily  pain.     See   Hooker, 
E.  P.,  v.  48.     Upon  Christ's  human  will  in  its  inchoate  or  rudimentary  stage 
of  desire,  uninformed  by  reason,  an  approaching  trial  might  so  far  act  as  a 
temptation,  as,  e.g.,  to  produce  a  wish  that  obedience  might  be  compatible  with 
escape  from  suffering.     But  it  could  not  produce,  even  for  one  moment,  any 
wish  to  be  free  from  the  law  of   obedience  itself.     (5)  Questions :  (a)  Is  this 
statement  consistent  with  Heb.  ii.  17,  iv.  15,  v.  7?     Yes:  see  Heb.  vii.  26; 
1  John  iii.  5.     Scripture  denies  the  existence,  not  merely  of  any  sinful  thinking 
or  acting,  but  of  any  ultimate  roots  and  sources  of  sin,  of  ai.y  propensities  or 
inclinations,  however  latent  and  rudimentary,  towards  sin,  in  Christ.     When 
therefore  Scripture  speaks  of  His  perfect  assimilation  to  us,  it  must  be  under- 
stood  of   physical   and   mental   pain   in    all   their   forms,    not   of   any   moral 
assimilation,     (b)  Is  this  account  consistent  with   the  exigencies   of   Christ's 
redemptive  work  ?     Certainly.     He  is  not  less  truly  representative  of  our  race, 
because  in  Him  it  has  recovered  its  perfection.     His  victory  is  none  the  less 
real  and  precious,    because,  morally   speaking,    it   was   inevitable.     Nay,    He 
could   not   have   been   the   Sinless   Victim,    offered  freely  for   a  sinful  world 
(1  Pet.  iii.  18),  unless  He  had  been  thus  superior  to  the  moral  infirmities  of  His 
brethren,     (c)    Does   not   such    an   account   impair   the  full  form    of    Christ's 
example  ?     We  gain  in  the  perfection  of  the  moral  Ideal  thus  placed  before  us, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  perfection  of  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  more 
than  we  can  lose  in  moral  vigour,  upon  discovering  that  His  obedience  was 
wrought  out  in  a  nature  unlike  our  own  in  the  one  point  of  absolute  purity. 
(d)  But  does  not  such  an  account  reflect  upon  Christ's  moral  greatness,   and 
practically  deny  His  moral  liberty  ?     No.     The  highest  liberty  does  not  imply 
the  moral  capacity  of  doing  wrong.     God  is  the  one  perfectly  free  Being ;  yet 
God  cannot  sin.     The  real  temptation  of  a  sinless  Christ  is  not  less  precious  to 
us  than  the  temptation  of  a  Christ  who  could  have  sinned  would  be.     It  forms 
a  much  truer  and  more  perfect  contrast  to  the  failure  of  our  first  parent.     It 
occupies  a  chief  place  in  that  long  series  of  acts  of  condescension  which  begins 
with  the  Nativity  and  ends  on  the  Cross.     It  is  a  lesson  for  all  times  as  to  the 
true  method  of  resisting  the  tempter.     Finally,  it  is  the  source  of  that  strength 
whereby  all  later  victories  over  Satan  have  been  won  :  Christ,  the  Sinless  One, 
has  conquered  the  enemy  in  His  sin-stained  members. 

Lessons. — 1.  Seasons  of  special  grace  are  often  succeeded  by  seasons  of 
special  difficulty  and  trial ;  therefore,  "  be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  2.  Soli- 
tude and  separation  from  the  world  are  no  more  free  from  spiritual  danger  than 
a  state  of  intercourse  with  one's  fellow-men.     3.  While  ever  praying,  "  Lead 

16 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap  I. 


us  not  into  temptation,"  and  being  careful  not  to  run  into  it  of  one's  own 
accord,  the  Christian  must  remember  that  when  he  is  tempted  it  is  his  duty  to 
fight,  and  by  God's  grace  overcome.  4.  Christ  fought  the  battle,  and  gained 
the  victory,  with  the  very  weapons  that  are  in  the  hands  of  all  Christians ;  and 
He  now  waits  to  succour  all  them  that  are  tempted. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  9.  The  Jordan,  says  Dr.  Otts,  His   own   submission    to    baptism    at 

has  so  many  peculiarities  that  it  can-  the   commencement   of   His  ministry, 

not  be  compared  with  any  other  river  He  teaches  us  that  this  is  the  manner 

on  the  face  of  the  globe.     It  is  the  one  in  which  we  also  must  begin  to  be  His 

sacred  river  of  Scripture — the  only  one.  disciples.     3.  As  it  was  on  His  coming 

It  has  never  been  navigated,  and  it  up  out  of  the   water   that  the   Holy 

empties  itself    into  a    sea    that    has  Spirit   descended    upon   Him,   so    He 

never  had  a  port.     It  springs  out  of  teaches    us    to    believe    that    in    the 

the  snows  that  rest  upon  the  lofty  tops  sacrament   of    regeneration   the   babe 

of  the  heaven-aspiring  mountains,  and  baptised   with   water  is  baptised  also 

it   rushes   madly   through   its  narrow  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  then  cleanses 

and   ever-descending    valley    until    it  the  soul  and  makes  it  partaker  of  a 

empties  itself  in  a  sea  that  is  far  below  new,  even  a  Divine  nature,  by  incor- 

the  level  of  all  other  seas.     It  is  full  poration  in  the  body  of  which  Christ 

of   life,    but   after   running   its    short  is  the  Head. 

career  it  suddenly  dies  away  in  the  lap  Christ's  baptism  an  epoch  in  His  own 

of  death.     At  its  sources,   and  for  a  consciousness. — We  must  not  imagine 

long  way  down  its  course,  its  waters  that  every  day  was  the  same  to  Christ, 

are  as  clear  as  crystal ;  and  flashing  in  or  Christ  the  same  on  every  day.     He 

the  sunbeams,  they  look  like  a  flowing  had  His  great  moments,  as  we  have.  We 

stream   of   molten   silver ;   but   before  call  the  supreme  moment  when  the  soul 

losing  itself  in  the  sea  of  death,    its  awakens  to  God,  and  the  man  realises 

waters  become  muddy,  as  if  filled  with  manhood,  conversion.   What  this  experi- 

the  filth  of  earth.     Flowing  into  a  sea  ence  signifies  to  us,  the  moment  sym- 

in  which  no  life  can  live,   and  which  bolised  by  the  baptism  signified  to  Jesus, 

its  unceasing  flow  never  fills,  it  is  a  fit  only  with  a  difference  in  degree  which 

symbol  of   human  life,   ever  descend-  His  pre-eminence  alone  can  measure, 

ing  and  becoming  corrupt,  and  finally  It  marked  His  awakening  to  all  that 

plunging  into  the  gulf  of  death  which  was  involved  in  Messiahship ;  and  such 

swallows  up  all  streams  flowing  into  it,  an  awakening  could  not  come  without 

and  is  never  filled.     In  this  stream  was  utmost  tumult  of  spirit — tumult  that 

Jesus  baptised,  symbolising  the  glorious  only  the  solitude  and  struggle  of  tht 

fact  that  He  has  entered  the  stream  of  wilderness  could  calm.     The  outward 

our  human  life   to  redeem  our   souls  expresses  the  inward  change.     Before 

from  the  sea  of  death  into  which  all  this  moment  no  miracle;  after  it  the 

human  life  flows.  miracles  begin  and  go  on  multiplying. 

Before  it  no  speech,  no  claim  of  extra - 

Vers.    9,    10.    The   baptism   of   our  ordinary    mission,    only    Divine    and 

Lord. — 1.  By   His   own   conduct   and  golden  silence;   after  it  the  teaching 

example    Christ    here    teaches   us   to  with  authority,  the   founding   of  the 

"fulfil  all  righteousness."     He  would  kingdom,  the  creating  of  the  world's 

have  us  ready  and  eager  in  our  work  light.    Before  it  the  carpenter  of  Naza- 

for  God — doing   not  as   little   but   as  reth,    the   son   of   Joseph   and  Mary, 

much  as  we  possibly  can,  determined  doing,  in  beautiful  meekness,  the  com- 

to  exceed  rather  than  fall  short.    2.  By  mon  duties  of  the  common  day  ;  after 

C  17 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


it  the  Christ  of  God,  the  Revealer  of 
the  Father,  the  Life  and  the  Light  of 
men.  Now  He  who  became  so  differ- 
ent to  others  had  first  become  as 
different  to  Himself.  What  was  soon 
to  be  revealed  to  the  world  was  then 
made  manifest  to  His  own  soul. — A.  M. 
Fairbaim,  D.D. 

Yer.  10.  The  Holy  Ghost  at  the 
baptism  of  our  Lord. — In  pictures 
of  Christ's  baptism  one  sees  Jesus 
standing  in  the  shallow  water  of 
the  river,  John  from  a  shell  or  vessel 
pouring  water  on  His  head,  and  the 
Dove  hovering  over  Him.  The  im- 
pression conveyed  is  that  the  Holy 
Ghost  descended  from  heaven  and 
lighted  upon  Christ  during  the  per- 
formance of  the  rite,  corresponding  to, 
and  a  visible  token  of,  the  regenerating 
influence  of  the  Spirit  in  Christian 
baptism.  Yet  the  language  of  the 
Gospels  gives  no  support  to  this  idea. 
They  all  agree  that  the  descent  of  the 
Spirit  occurred  after  Jesus  had  been 
baptised,  and  when  He  had  come  up 
out  of  the  river.  St.  Luke  adds  that 
the  Holy  Ghost  assumed  a  bodily  form, 
and  that  it  was  while  Christ  prayed 
that  the  descent  took  place.  We  may 
account  for  the  general  mistake  in  the 
artistic  representation  of  this  trans- 
action by  the  prevailing  notion  which 
from  primitive  times  has  connected  the 
Holy  Spirit  with  the  grace  of  baptism, 
and  which  saw  in  the  details  of  the 
baptism  of  Christ  a  plain  proof  of  this 
connexion.  Of  course  there  is  a  great 
truth  in  this  idea,  but  it  is  not  neces- 
sarily conveyed  by  the  fact  of  Christ's 
baptism  ;  and  if  we  hold  this  truth,  we 
derive  our  belief  from  other  sources, 
and  not  from  this  incident  properly 
regarded.  The  general  opinion  is  given, 
e.g.,  by  Hilary :  the  Dove  settles  on  the 
head  of  Jesus,  in  order  that  we  might 
know  that  at  our  own  baptism  the 
Holy  Spirit  descends  on  us,  and  that 
we  are  bedewed  with  the  unction  of 
celestial  glory,  and  are  made  the  sons 
of  God  by  adoption  in  Christ.  But 
Jesus  did  not  come  to  John's  baptism 
that  He  might  receive  the  gift  of  the 

18 


Holy  Spirit.  John's  baptism  did  not 
impart  grace.  It  was  merely  a  formal 
ceremony,  witnessing  to  the  inward 
desire  and  striving  of  the  heart.  "The 
water  was  a  sign,  and  nothing  more ; 
it  carried  no  inward  and  spiritual  grace. 
Had  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  as 
is  represented  in  popular  pictures,  it 
would  have  indicated  that  what  is  true 
of  Christian  baptism  was  also  true  of 
John's  rite  ;  and  this  we  know  is  not  the 
case.  The  baptism  of  John  was  from 
heaven ;  it  was  a  preparation  for  en- 
trance into  the  new  kingdom  ;  emptying 
Himself  of,  or  voluntarily  obscuring, 
His  Divinity,  Jesus  constrained  John 
to  perform  the  initiatory  rite,  thus 
fulfilling  all  righteousness.  His  private 
life,  so  to  speak,  ended  in  Jordan ;  the 
consecration  to  His  mission  was  to 
follow.  So  issuing  from  the  river,  He 
stopped  upon  its  bank,  and  prayed, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  from 
heaven  in  a  bodily  shape,  and  rested 
upon  Him,  and  the  heavenly  voice  pro- 
claimed Him  Son  of  God,  in  whom  the 
Father  was  well  pleased.  Thus  was 
He  announced  as  Messiah  ;  thus  did  He 
receive  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  for  His 
Messianic  work ;  thus  by  the  unction 
of  the  Spirit  was  He  consecrated 
Messiah-King.  One  naturally  sees 
here  a  lesson  concerning  the  Christian 
ministry.  Not  natural  endowments, 
not  the  ordinary  grace  that  accom- 
panies baptism,  equip  a  man  to  exercise 
the  office  of  minister  in  the  Church  of 
God,  but  the  special  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  bestowed  and  received  for  this 
end.  I  would  submit  a  further  thought 
concerning  the  spiritual  life  and  well- 
being  of  individual  Christians.  As 
Christ  was  not  prepared  and  commis- 
sioned for  His  work  without  the  addi- 
tional effusion  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so 
the  Christian  needs  the  added  gifts  of 
the  Spirit  to  fit  him  for  his  duty  as  the 
servant  of  Christ.  If  we  look  to  the 
early  records  of  the  Church,  we  find 
that  apostolic  teachers  were  not  satisfied 
with  leaving  to  their  converts  only 
the  grace  which  they  obtained  by 
baptism;  they  supplemented  this  by 
conferring    upon    them    further    good 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  I. 


things.     A  practical  comment  on  our  office.     He  retreated  from  the  world, 

passage  in  the  Gospel  is   afforded  by  and  by  that  retreat  He  virtually  de- 

a  transaction  mentioned  in  Acts  xix.  2-6.  clared    that   He   had    nothing   to    do 

Surely  they  are  not  to  be  contemned  with  the  world.     Those  therefore  who 

who  see  here  a  cogent  argument  for  are   called   to   the    preaching   of    the 

the   practice  of   confirmation.     To  fit  gospel,  or  to  any  other  the  like  duty, 

the  neophyte  for  the  battle  of  life,  to  are  by  this  example  taught  to  wean 

enable  him  to  play  his  part  as  Christ's  themselves    from   the   things   of    this 

faithful  soldier  and  servant,  he  needs  a  world,  and  to  renounce  whatever  may 

fresh  outpouring  of  the  Spirit  with  His  hinder  them  from  the  performance  of 

sevenfold  gifts. — W.  J.  Deane,  M.A.  that  duty,   to  which   they  are  called. 

Christ  comes  in  the  strength  of  gentle-  2.  Christ  willingly  follows  whither 
ness.  —  Through  the  ages  Christ's  the  Spirit  leads  Him  ;  and  what  His 
strength  has  been  the  strength  of  Father  commands  Him  that  He  under- 
gentleness,  and  His  coming  has  been  takes  with  all  alacrity :  we  in  the  like 
like  that  of  Noah's  dove  with  the  olive  manner  ought  cheerfully  in  all  things 
branch  in  its  beak,  and  the  tidings  of  to  comply  with  God's  will  and  pleasure ; 
an  abated  flood  and  of  a  safe  home  on  nothing  ought  to  deter  us  from  a  steady 
its  return.  The  ascetic  preacher  of  performance  of  our  duty ;  nor  hunger, 
repentance  was  strong  to  shake  and  nor  thirst,  nor  deserts,  nor  devils  ought 
purge  men's  hearts  by  terror  ;  but  the  to  be  terrible  to  us,  whilst  we  are  safe 
stronger  Son  comes  to  conquer  by  under  the  conduct  of  Christ  and  His 
meekness,  and  reign  by  the  omnipo-  Spirit.  3.  Christ  soon  after  He  was 
tence  of  love.  The  beginning  of  the  baptised  was  led  into  the  wilderness  to 
gospel  was  the  anticipation  and  the  be  tempted.  After  we  have  listed  our- 
proclamation  of  strength  like  the  selves  amongst  Christ's  soldiers,  we 
eagle's,  swift  of  flight,  and  powerful  to  must  not  expect  to  be  idle,  but  must 
strike  and  destroy.  The  gospel,  when  prepare  ourselves  for  battle.  Christ 
it  became  a  fact,  and  not  a  hope,  was  armed  Himself  against  the  assaults  of 
found  in  the  meek  Jesus,  with  the  the  devil  by  fasting  ;  this  armour  He 
Dove  of  God,  the  gentle  Spirit,  which  is  Himself  did  not  want,  but  He  there- 
mightier  than  all,  nestling  in  His  heart,  fore  put  it  on,  that  we  might  learn 
and  uttering  soft  notes  of  invitation  how  to  arm  ourselves  against  our 
through  His  lips. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  spritual  enemies. — Bishop  Smalridge. 

The  Holy  Spirit  came  as  a  dove, — a 
gentle,  joyous  creature,  with  no  bitter-  Ver.     13.     Jesus    was    tempted. — I. 

ness    of    gall,   no    fierceness    of   bite,  That  He  might  sympathise  with  us  in 

no  violence  of  rending  claws ;  loving  our  trials,  and  assist  us  in  our  times 

human  houses,  associating  within  one  of  need. — The  mariner  who  has  once 

home ;  nurturing  their  young  together  ;  been   cast    on   an    inhospitable   shore 

when  they  fly  abroad,  hanging  in  their  hastens   with   greater    ardour   to   the 

flight  side  by  side  ;  leading  their  life  in  relief  of  a  shipwrecked  crew  than  the 

mutual  intercourse ;  giving  in  concord  callous   inhabitant    of    the   land   who 

the   kiss   of   peace   with    the  bill ;  in  has  never  known  the  dangers  of  the 

every  way  fulfilling  the  law  of  unani-  deep.     The   orphan   knows   best   how 

mity.     This  is  the  singleness  of  heart  to  mourn  with  his  friend  the  loss  of 

that  ought  to  be  in  the  Church  ;  this  is  a  parent ;    the  bereaved  parent  most 

the  habit  of  love  that  must  be  obtained.  tenderly  sympathises  in  the  death  of 

— Cyprian.  a  brother's  child.     As  we  feel  in  our- 
selves, so  we  judge  of  others ;  and  it  is 

Vers.    12,    13.   Lessons. — 1.   We  in  a  consolation  to  us,  not  only  that  our 

entering  upon  our  Christian  vocation  Saviour  was  of  the  same  nature  and 

ought  so  to  behave  ourselves  as  Christ  constitution    as    ourselves,    but    that 

did  in  entering  upon  His  mediatorial  hardships,   miseries,   and  temptations 

19 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  the  same  kind  were  suffered  by  Him, 
and  in  a  manner  more  severe  than 
human  nature  is  generally  called  to 
endure.  We  trust  that  He  has  learned 
to  sympathise  with  us,  and  that 
His  sympathy  will  teach  Him  to 
relieve. 

II.  That  we  might  learn  from  His 
example  how  to  resist  temptation  and 
to  conquer. — The  only  weapon  that  He 
used  was  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  the 
word  of  God,  which  is  equally  avail- 
able for  us  to  wield.  It  furnishes  us 
with  the  plainest  directions  for  holiness 
of  life,  and  the  most  powerful  motives 
to  obey  them  ;  it  shows  us  clearly  the 
pitfalls  in  our  path,  and  how  to  avoid 
them  ;  it  animates  us  with  visions  of 
heavenly  things,  and  wondrous  promises 
to  such  as  overcome. 

III.  That  we  might  be  convinced 
that  this  is  God's  appointed  path  to 
perfection. — God  has  had  one  Son 
without  sin,  but  no  son  without  tempta- 
tion. Christ's  trial  consisted  in  the 
invitation  to  accept  a  lower  ideal  than 
the  highest,  to  be  content  with  a 
dazzling  carnal  glory  instead  of  winning 
His  way  through  divinely  appointed 
sufferings  to  eternal  renown.  He  was 
shown  how  He  might  turn  out  of  the 
steep  and  stony  path  of  sacrifice  into 
the  smooth  and  easy  road  of  earthly 
pomp  and  grandeur — how  with  the 
world's  weapons  He  might  win  the 
victory.  But  He  sternly  and  empha- 
tically refused  to  entertain  the  tempter's 
suggestion  ;  and  His  refusal  is  a  clarion 
call  to  us  to  remain  loyal  to  our  better 
selves,  to  trust  implicitly  the  high  con- 
victions of  our  souls,  to  take  up  the 
cross  and  in  it  find  the  crown.  It  is 
not  he  that  shirks  the  battle,  but 
"he  that  endureth  to  the  end,"  who 
shall  be  "  saved " :  i.e.  completely 
emancipated  from  all  evil  around  and 
within,  and  presented  faultless — unim- 
peached — before  the  throne. 

Three  prominent  points  in  our  Lord's 
temptation. — 1.  The  relation  of  the 
supernatural  to  the  natural  in  Himself ; 


or,  on  the  other  side,  His  relation  to 
God  as  His  ideal  human  Son.  2.  The 
relation  of  God  to  the  supernatural  in 
His  person,  and  the  official  in  His 
mission.  3.  The  nature  of  the  kingdom 
He  had  come  to  found,  and  the  agencies 
by  which  it  was  to  live  and  extend. — 
A.  M.  Fairbairn,  D.D. 

Jesus  the  representative  Man. — Jesus 
is  here  the  representative  Man,  the 
Source  and  Head  of  the  new  humanity, 
the  Founder  of  the  kingdom  that  is  to 
be.  When  He  triumphs,  it  triumphs. 
When  He  is  victorious,  all  are  victori- 
ous that  live  in  and  by  Him.  And 
His  victory,  as  it  was  for  humanity, 
was  by  humanity.  The  supernatural 
energies  that  were  in  Him  He  did  not 
use  for  Himself.  In  our  nature,  as  in 
our  name,  He  stood,  fought,  conquered. 
How  perfectly,  then,  is  He  qualified  to 
be  at  once  our  Saviour  and  Example ! 
—Ibid. 

Christ  with  wild  beasts  and  angels. 
— I.  The  companionship  of  the  wild 
beasts. — 1.  Not  only  a  graphic  indi- 
cation that  the  place  was  wild  and 
desolate,  but  also  a  reminder  of  the 
dominion  over  the  lower  creatures  given 
originally  to  man,  and  doubtless  exer- 
cised by  our  first  parents  unfearing 
and  unfeared.  2.  Nor  can  we  doubt 
that  the  fiercest  denizens  of  the  wilds 
would  become  tame  and  gentle  in  the 
presence  of  "the  Second  Adam,  the 
Lord  from  heaven  " — the  dumb  animals 
rebuking  the  madness  of  all  who  recog- 
nise Him  not ! 

II.  The  ministrations  of  the  angels. 
— 1.  The  connexion  between  the  three 
worlds — Earth,  Heaven,  Hell — is  closer 
than  we  think.  2.  Let  the  thought 
of  our  invisible  friends  banish  all  fear 
of  our  spiritual  foes. 

Christ  manifested  as  Monarch  of  all. 
— 1.  Of  hell's  minions,  whose  assaults 
He  triumphantly  repels.  2.  Of  earth's 
fiercest  inhabitants,  whose  wild  pas- 
sions are  subdued  in  His  presence. 
3.  Of  heaven's  angels,  whose  delight  it 
is  to  minister  to  Him, 


20 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap,  l 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—20. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  iv.  17-22  ;  Luke  iv.  14,  15,  v.  1-11.) 

Christ's  early  Galilean  preaching  and  first  disciples. — What  St.  Mark  here 
records  is  not  the  beginning  of  Christ's  ministerial  work,  but  His  first  preaching 
in  Galilee.  St.  John  alone  fills  up  the  gap  between  our  Lord's  temptation  and 
the  imprisonment  of  the  Baptist.  From  him  we  know  of  the  Baptist's  testimony 
to  Jesus  at  Bethabara  (Bethany,  R.V.)  beyond  Jordan,  and  the  impression  it  made 
on  some  of  his  disciples ;  of  the  marriage  feast  at  Oana  of  Galilee  ;  of  Christ's 
first  passover  at  Jerusalem,  cleansing  of  temple,  and  discourse  with  Nicodemus ; 
of  His  continued  ministry  in  Judea,  baptising  by  His  disciples,  and  receiving 
further  testimony  from  the  Baptist  (chaps,  i.-iii.).  Then  St.  John  mentions, 
in  common  with  the  other  Evangelists,  Christ's  departure  from  Judea  into 
Galilee  after  the  Baptist's  imprisonment ;  but  he  supplements  their  narrative  by 
telling  us  of  the  incident  on  the  way  at  Jacob's  well  near  Sychar,  the  discourse 
with  the  woman  of  Samaria,  and  the  gaining  of  many  believers  among  the 
Samaritans  ;  stating  also  as  an  incidental  reason  for  Christ's  going  to  Galilee, 
that  the  Pharisees  had  heard  that  "  Jesus  made  and  baptised  more  disciples 
than  John  "  (iv.  1-42). 

I.  The  Forerunner's  public  ministry  is  closed. — 1.  The  last  time  we  heard  of 
the  Baptist,  he  occupied  a  position  of  peculiar  honour.  His  popularity  was 
great,  his  influence  permeating  all  classes  of  society.  It  looked  as  if  the  nation 
had  come  to  its  senses,  and  was  ready  to  welcome  its  King.  But,  alas !  the 
impression  proved  but  transitory ;  the  King,  when  they  saw  Him,  proved  very 
different  from  what  their  carnal  fancy  had  painted  ;  and  so  in  bitter  disappoint- 
ment they  turned  from  the  Forerunner  who  (as  they  deemed  it)  had  misled  them, 
and  took  no  heed  when  Herod  seized  and  shut  him  in  prison.  2.  But  the 
Baptist,  although  imprisoned,  is  not  silenced.  If  he  has  been  stopped  working 
for  God,  he  can  still  suffer  in  His  cause.  Moreover,  even  in  prison  he  is  able 
to  direct  his  disciples  to  "  Him  who  should  come  "  for  the  solution  of  their 
difficulties  (Matt.  xi.  2,  3).  And  in  the  conscience  of  Herod  (and  doubtless  of 
many  others)  his  faithful  testimony  continued  to  ring  long  after  his  death 
(Mark  vi.  14,  16). 

II.  The  One  mightier  than  he  takes  the  Forerunner's  place. — 1.  No  man's 
service  is  essential  to  God.  Though  the  workman  be  buried — whether  in  prison 
or  the  grave — He  can  and  will  find  means  to  carry  on  the  work.  What  we 
often  regard  as  hindrances  to  the  Lord's  cause  are  really  its  greatest  helps.  It 
is  not  possible  for  a  man  to  be  "  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  his  usefulness,"  as  we 
term  it.  He  cannot  be  cut  off  till  his  work  is  done,  and  it  is  time  for  him  to 
make  way  for  his  successor.  God  never  makes  a  mistake  in  these  matters,  and 
He  is  never  off  guard.  2.  The  world  will  never  succeed  in  suppressing  the 
truth.  The  gospel  has  come  here  to  stay ;  and  no  power  on  earth — or  in  hell — 
can  dislodge  or  muffle  it.  Every  religious  persecution  since  the  world  began  has 
resulted  in  the  overthrow  of  the  assailants  and  the  firmer  establishment  of  those 
assailed.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  has  in  every  case  become  the  seed-plot  of  the 
Church,  for  its  further  development  and  ultimate  triumph. 

III.  The  message  of  Jesus  is  a  distinct  advance  upon  that  of  the  Baptist. — 
1.  While  still  enforcing  repentance,  He  announces  further  that  the  time  which 
was  formerly  said  to  be  at  hand  has  how  arrived,  and  the  gospel  which  He 
preaches  must  not  only  be  believed,  but  believed  in — relied  upon  as  the  panacea 
for  every  human  ill.  Faith  is  the  hand  on  earth  which  grasps  and  holds  on  to 
the  Divine  hand  reached  down  from  heaven  to  strengthen  and  to  aid.     2.  He 

21 


chap,  t  BOMILETIC  COMMENT AttY ,:   ST.  MARK. 


takes  steps  for  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  Few  things  are  more 
striking,  as  a  revelation  of  God's  method,  than  the  measured  tread  with  which 
Christ  went  forward  to  this  grand  enterprise.  The  Jews  in  general  were 
eagerly  desiring  a  liberator,  who  should  gird  his  sword  upon  his  thigh,  and 
through  bloodshed  restore  to  them  something  of  their  ancient  prestige.  But 
Jesus  is  a  Man  of  peace  ;  His  rallying  cry  bids  them  turn  their  weapons  against 
no  extraneous  foe,  but  against  their  own  darling  lusts  and  passions.  He  calls 
upon  them  to  repent  ;  to  change  their  minds,  hearts,  hopes,  ambitions  ;  to  put 
off  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt  according  to  the  deceitful  lusts,  and  to  put  on 
the  new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness  ;  to 
accept  the  truth,  which  alone  can  make  them  free.  For  this  purpose  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  at  hand ;  and  in  Him  who  speaks  (though  He  does  not  tell 
them  so)  they  behold  its  King.  Such  doctrine  could  only  be  received  by  a  few 
here  and  there  in  the  nation,  and  to  them  alone  does  He  make  His  revelation 
in  its  fulness.  3.  What  is  the  kingdom  of  God?  (1)  This  inquiry  is  most 
important ;  for  the  kingdom — (a)  is  revealed  to  us  by  God ;  (b)  is  the 
principal  subject  of  Christ's  teaching  throughout  His  entire  ministry,  most  of 
His  parables  being  illustrative  of  it;  (c)  is  specially  emphasised  after  His 
resurrection  (Acts  i.  3).     (2)  The  origin  of  this  kingdom  may  be  clearly  traced. 

(a)  The  Mosaic  economy  was  the  kingdom  of  God  in  embryo.  See  Matt.  viii. 
12;  Acts.  iv.  11,  vii.  38;  Rom.  ix.  4,  xi.  17;  Heb.  xii.  22-24.  That  which 
existed  Christ  came  to  expand,  extend,  and  perfect  (Matt.  v.  17).  But  this 
work  was  like  a  new  creation,  a  new  birth  of  the  kingdom  (Luke  xvi.  16). 

(b)  The  kingdom  of  God  is  therefore  spoken  of  as  "  to  come "  by  the  Baptist 
(Matt.  iii.  2),  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  iv.  17,  xvi.  18),  by  the  apostles  during  their 
first  mission  (Matt.  x.  7),  and  just  before  the  Ascension  (Acts  i.  6).  (c)  Imme- 
diately after  Pentecost  the  kingdom  is  spoken  of  as  now  come  (Acts  ii.  16-47), 
and  henceforth  it  is  generally  called  "  the  Church."  (3)  The  nature  of  this 
kingdom  may  be  ascertained  from  the  figures  under  which  it  is  represented  in 
Scripture,  (a)  A  state  (civitas)  (Matt.  v.  14).  (b)  A  family,  of  which  God 
is  the  Father  (Eph.  iii.  14,  15).  (c)  The  vineyard  of  God  (Isa.  v.  1,  etc.; 
Matt.  xxi.  33,  etc.).  (d)  A  vine  (Ps.  lxxx.  8,  etc.  :  cp.  John  xv.  1,  2).  (e)  A 
flock  and  a  fold  (Isa.  xl.  11  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  11,  etc.  ;  John  x.).  (/)  A  body,  the 
Head  of  which  is  Christ  (Eph.  i.  22  ;  Col.  i.  18),  and  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
inhabits  (John  xiv.  17  :  cp.  1  Cor.  xii.  13).  (g)  The  fulness  of  God  (Eph.  i.  22). 
From  all  this  it  clearly  follows  that  the  claims  and  rights  of  the  Church  are 
the  claims  and  rights  of  Christ  through  His  body  :  what  is  done  to  the  Church 
is  done  to  Christ.  While  she  may  suffer  persecution  (John  xvi.  2),  and  men 
may  reject  her  to  their  own  hurt  (Isa.  Ix.  12),  or  may  be  deprived  of  her  on 
account  of  their  sins  (Matt.  xxi.  43),  yet  she  cannot  be  destroyed,  for  Christ  is 
always  with  her  (Matt,  xxviii.  20),  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against  her  (Matt.  xvi.  18). 

IV.  The  calling  and  training  of  disciples  are  marked  features  in  the 
ministry  of  Jesus. — 1.  The  manner  of  their  calling  is  deeply  instructive.  (1)  He 
honours  diligence  in  lowly  occupations.  He  thinks,  not  of  the  work,  but  of 
the  spirit  in  which  it  is  done.  (2)  He  chooses  the  weak  things  of  the  world 
to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty,  .  .  .  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  His 
presence.  (3)  He  demands  self-sacrifice  from  the  very  beginning.  If  any  one 
be  inclined  to  urge  that  it  was  not  much  these  men  left,  let  him  remember  it 
was  their  all.  And  there  is  no  tempting  bait  dangled  before  their  eyes  to  lure 
them  on.  The  promise  of  "  twelve  thrones  "  was  not  made  till  long  afterwards. 
All  they  are  offered  is,  that  if  they  follow  Jesus  He  will  make  them  fishers  of 
men,  like  Himself.  2.  As  to  their  training,  let  these  facts  be  noted.  (1)  Christ 
deliberately  makes  provision,  from  the  first,  for  the  perpetuity  of  His  kingdom. 
22 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   I. 


(2)  He  bestows  personal  attention  on  the  spiritual  education  of  those  who  are 
hereafter  to  be  His  earthly  representatives  and  vicegerents.  (3)  He  puts  them 
in  a  position  to  testify  as  to  His  words  and  works. 

Lessons. — 1.  Trust  in  God,  who  is  all-sufficient  for  any  and  every  emergency. 
2.  Use  every  possible  means  and  occasion  for  furthering  God's  work.  3.  Despise 
none  of  the  ordinances  of  Christ's  Church.  4.  The  following  of  Christ  is  to  be 
preferred  to  the  business  of  the  world. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  14.  The  audience  first  addressed 
by  our  Lord. — Did  Jesus,  it  has  been 
asked,  first  address  Himself  to  a  small 
circle  of  acquaintances,  or  did  He 
teach  in  public  from  the  beginning  of 
His  ministry?  The  latter  is  more 
likely.  It  does  not  seem  probable  that 
He  began  to  work  in  secret  amongst 
a  few  individuals;  for  although  He 
would  at  any  time  gladly  go  out  of 
His  way  to  restore  a  single  wanderer 
to  the  path  of  virtue,  yet,  after  all, 
His  message  was  designed  primarily 
for  the  whole  nation.  Moreover, 
publicity  was  as  much  in  keeping  with 
the  character  of  the  age  as  with  our 
Lord's  intention ;  and  He  could  not 
fail  to  find  abundant  opportunities  of 
speaking  to  the  populace. 

The  kingdom  a  gospel. — Jesus  Christ 
preached  the  kingdom  of  God  as  a 
gospel',  rightly  understood  it  is  not 
a  despotism,  it  is  not  a  terror ;  it  is 
the  supremacy  of  light,  of  truth,  of 
love. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Yer.  15.  The  kingdom  of  God. — 
I.  The  nature  of  true  religion,  here 
termed  "  the  kingdom  of  God."  St. 
Paul  defines  it  in  Rom.  xiv.  17.  1.  It 
is  well  known,  that  not  only  the  un- 
converted Jews,  but  many  who  had 
received  the  faith  of  Christ,  were,  not- 
withstanding, zealous  of  the  ceremonial 
law  (Acts  xxi.  20).  2.  In  opposition 
to  these,  the  apostle  declares,  that  true 
religion  does  not  consist  in  any  out- 
ward thing  whatever  ;  that  although 
it  naturally  leads  to  every  good  word 
and  work,  yet  its  real  nature  lies 
deeper  still,  even  in  "the  hidden  man 
of  the  heart."  (1)  "  Righteousness  "  : 
see  Mark  xii.  30,  31.     (2)  "The  peace 


of  God,"  which  God  only  can  give,  and 
the  world  cannot  take  away ;  the 
peace  which  "  passeth  all  under- 
standing," all  barely  rational  concep- 
tion ;  being  a  supernatural  sensation, 
a  divine  taste,  of  "  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  come " ;  such  as  the  natural 
man  knoweth  not,  how  wise  soever  in 
the  things  of  this  world ;  nor  indeed 
can  he  know  it,  in  his  present  state, 
"  because  it  is  spiritually  discerned." 
It  is  a  peace  that  banishes  all  doubt, 
uncertainty,  fear.  (3)  "  Joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost " —  joy  wrought  in  the 
heart  by  the  ever- blessed  Spirit.  He 
it  is  who  works  in  us  that  calm, 
humble  rejoicing  in  God,  through  Christ 
Jesus,  "  by  whom  we  have  now  re- 
ceived the  atonement,"  and  who  en- 
ables us  boldly  to  confirm  the  truth  of 
the  declaration  (Ps.  xxxii.  1).  3.  This 
holiness  and  happiness,  joined  in  one, 
are  sometimes  styled  "  the  kingdom  of 
God,"  and  sometimes  "  the  kingdom 
of  heaven."  (1)  It  is  termed  "the 
kingdom  of  God,"  because  it  is  the 
immediate  fruit  of  God's  reigning  in 
the  soul.  (2)  It  is  called  "the  king- 
dom of  heaven,"  because  it  is  (in 
a  degree)  heaven  opened  in  the  soul 
(see  1  John  v.  11,  12  ;  John  xvii.  3). 
4.  And  this  kingdom  is  "at  hand." 
These  words,  as  originally  spoken,  im- 
plied that  "  the  time  "  was  then  ful- 
filled, God  being  "  made  manifest  in 
the  flesh,"  when  He  would  set  up  His 
kingdom  among  men,  and  reign  in  the 
hearts  of  His  people.  And  is  not  the 
time  now  fulfilled  ?  The  kingdom  is 
not  far  from  every  one  of  you. 

II.  The  way  to  the  kingdom. — 
1.  "  Repent  "  :  that  is,  know  thyself — 
the  inbred  corruption  of  thy  heart — 

23 


chap.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


the  bitter  streams  of  vanity,  ambition,  The  distinctive  qualities,  aspects,  and 

covetousness,    and   all   kinds   of   lusts  relations  of  the  kingdom  are  thus  stated 

flowing   from   it — the   actual    sins   of  by   Dr.   A.   M.   Fairbairn : — 1.   It   is 

which  thou  art  continually  guilty — and  present,    an    already  existing  reality, 

the  just   reward   of   thy  inward   and  none  the  less  real  that  it  was  unseen, 

outward  wickedness.     If  to  this  lively  undiscovered    by  the   very   men   who 

conviction  of  thy  utter  guiltiness  and  professed  to  be  looking  for  it   (Luke 

helplessness   there   be   added   suitable  vi.  20,  xvii.  20,  21  ;  Matt.  xx.  1).     2.  It 

affections — sorrow  of  heart,  for  having  is    expansive,    has    an    extensive   and 

despised    thy   own    mercies — remorse,  intensive  growth,  can  have  its  dominion 

and     self-condemnation,     having    thy  extended  and  its  authority  more  per- 

mouth  stopped — shame  to  lift  up  thine  fectly  recognised   and   obeyed   (Matt, 

eyes  to  heaven — fear  of  the  wrath  of  vi.  10,  xiii.    3-8,  19-23.)      3.  It  does 

God   abiding   on  thee — earnest  desire  its  work  silently  and  unseen ;   grows 

to  cease  from  evil,   and   learn   to   do  without   noise,   like   the   seed  in   the 

well, — then  "  thou   art  not   far  from  ground.     And  its  intensive  is  as  silent 

the  kingdom  of  God."     One  step  more,  as  its  expansive  action.     It  penetrates 

and  thou  shalt  enter  in.     2.  "  Believe  and  transforms  the  man  who  enters  it 

the   gospel."     (1)  The   gospel,  in   the  (Matt,   xviii.    1-3 ;    Luke   xviii.    17 ; 

widest  sense,  means  the  whole  re  vela-  John  iii.  3-5).     4.  It  creates  and  re- 

tion  made   to   men   by   Jesus  Christ,  quires  righteousness  in  all  its  subjects 

and  sometimes  the  whole  account  of  (Matt.   vi.   33,   v.    19,   20).      5.   It  is 

what  He  did  and  suffered.     The  sub-  the   possession  and   reward   of    those 

stance  of  all  is  (1   Tim.  i.  15  ;  John  who   have   certain   spiritual   qualities 

iii.    16;   Isa.   liii.    5):    (2)   "Believe"  (Matt.  v.  3,   10,   xviii.    4).      6.   It  is 

this,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  thine.  without   local   or   national   character, 

By  faith  thou  attainest  the  promise,  can  have  subjects  anywhere,  has  none 

Only  beware  thou  do  not  deceive  thy  for  simply  formal  or  hereditary  reasons 

own  soul,  with  regard  to  the  nature  (Matt.  viii.  11,  xxi.  31  ;  Luke  xiii.  29). 

of  this  faith.     It  is  not  merely  a  bare  7.   It  is  at  once  universal  and  indi- 

assent  to  the  truth  of  the  Bible  and  vidual,  meant  to  be  preached   every- 

Creeds,  but,    over   and   above  this,   a  where  and  to  every  one,  to  compre- 

sure   trust    in   God's   mercy    through  hend   the   race   by   pervading   all    its 

Christ. — John  Wesley.  units  (Matt.  xxiv.  14).     8.  It  is  to  be 

The  requirements  of  the  kingdom  of  an    everlasting    kingdom,    to    endure 

God. — 1.  An  assertion:  "The  time  is  throughout  all  generations, 
fulfilled" — the  time  of  patriarchs,  pro-  Faith    and    repentance. — Faith   and 

phets,  types   and   figures,   etc.     2.    A  repentance  keep  up  a  Christian's  life, 

prediction  :  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  as  the  natural  heat  and  radical  mois- 

at   hand."      (1)    Foretold   by   Daniel.  ture    do    the   natural   life.     Faith   is 

(2)  Not  in  word,  but  in  power ;  sub-  like  the  innate  heat ;  repentance  like 

duing  passions  of  men,  and  enmity  of  the  natural   moisture.      And     as  the 

demons.       (3)     Righteousness,    peace,  philosopher  saith,  if  the  innate   heat 

and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghust.     (4)  Of  devour  too  much  the  radical  moisture,  or, 

this  kingdom  there  is  no  end.     3.  A  on  the  contrary,  there  breed  presently 

twofold    duty.     (1)    "Repent."     This  diseases,  so,  if  believing  make  a  man 

includes — (a)  sorrow  for,  confession  of,  repent  less,  or  repenting  make  a  man 

and   fleeing    from    sin ;    (b)    striving  believe    less,    this    turneth    to    a    dis- 

after  holiness.     (2)  "  Believe  the  gos-  temper.     Lord,  cast  me  down  (said  a 

pel."     God's  free  gift,  in  spite  of  man's  holy  man  upon  his  death-bed)  as  low 

ill  desert.     Embodied  in  Christ.     Look  as   hell   in    repentance,    and    lift   me 

to  Him  for — (a)  pardon,  (b)  renewal,  up  by  faith  into  the  highest  heavens, 

(c)   heavenward  impulses.     And   give  in  confidence  of  Thy  salvation. — John 

God  the  glory.  Trapp. 

24  .        .    . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  L 


Ver.  16.  The  Sea  of  Galilee  fills  a 
large  place  in  the  life  of  Jesus  ;  on  its 
waters  and  around  its  shores  most  of 
His  mighty  works  were  done.  1.  It 
was  originally  called  the  Sea  of  Chin- 
nereth,  either  from  its  shape  resembling 
a  harp,  or  from  a  town  of  that  name 
near  by  (Num.  xxxiv.  1 1 ;  Josh.  xii.  3  : 
cp.  Josh.  xix.  35).  2.  It  was  after- 
wards called  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret 
(Luke  v.  1),  which  some  consider  a 
corruption  of  the  earlier  name ;  but  it 
is  more  likely  to  have  been  so  called 
from  the  Plain  of  Gennesar,  so  rich  in 
beauty  and  fertility,  on  its  western 
shore.  3.  The  name  Sea  of  Galilee 
was  derived  from  the  province  which 
bordered  on  its  western  side  (Matt.  iv. 
18 ;  Mark  vii.  31).  4.  Another  name 
was  the  Sea  of  Tiberias  (John  xxi.  1), 
from  Tiberias,  which,  although  only 
recently  founded  by  Herod  Antipas  in 
the  time  of  our  Lord,  had  become  a 
large  and  flourishing  town  by  the  time 
St.  John  wrote.  5.  The  name  given 
it  at  the  present  day,  by  Jews  and 
Christians  alike,  is  the  Sea  of  the 
Messiah.  To  Christians  it  is  the  Sea 
of  the  Messiah  who  has  come,  to  Jews 
the  Sea  of  the  Messiah  for  whom  they 
still  vainly  look.  6.  The  industries 
engaged  in  were  "agriculture  and 
fruit-growing,  dyeing  and  tanning, 
with  every  department  of  a  large 
carrying  trade ;  but  chiefly  fishing, 
boat-building,  and  fish-curing.  Of  the 
last,  which  spread  the  lake's  fame 
over  the  Roman  world,  before  its 
fishermen  and  their  habits  became 
familiar  through  the  gospel,  there  is 
no  trace  in  the  Evangelists.  The 
fisheries  themselves  were  pursued  by 
thousands  of  families.  They  were  no 
monopoly;  but  the  fishing-grounds, 
best  at  the  north  end  where  the  streams 
entered,  were  free  to  all.  And  the 
trade  was  very  profitable."  See  article 
by  Prof.  G.  A.  Smith,  in  Expositor, 
May  1893. 

The  chosen  lake. — The  Jewish  Rabbis 
had  a  tradition  which  they  expressed 
thus :  "  Seven  lakes  have  I  created, 
saith  the  Lord;  but  out  of  them  all 
I  have  chosen  none  but  the  Lake  of 


Gennesaret."  How  have  these  words 
been  fulfilled,  in  ways  of  which  the 
Rabbis  never  dreamed !  It  is  the 
chosen  lake  of  Providence.  Its  dimen- 
sions are  not  large.  It  measures  only 
thirteen  miles  by  six.  It  does  not  lie 
high  up  above  the  ordinary  homes  of 
men.  Nay,  it  is  in  a  strange  depression 
on  the  globe — more  than  six  hundred 
feet  below  the  level  of  the  sea.  Yet 
it  is  the  fountain-head  of  a  living 
water  that  has  flowed  equally  to 
palaces  and  huts,  and  that  has  quenched 
a  thirst  in  souls  of  all  conditions  beyond 
the  power  of  this  world's  wine. — 
T.  Starr  King. 

Christ's  activity  in  doing  good. — 
Walking  was  His  constant  exercise,  to 
find  out  objects  of  spiritual  and  cor- 
poral mercy.  This  account  St.  Peter 
gives  of  Him,  that  "  He  went  about," 
walked  over  all  the  country  ere  He 
had  done,  beginning  from  Galilee  ? 
but  He  did  not  walk  only  for  the  walk's 
sake.  "  He  went  about,"  says  he, 
"  doing  good,  and  healing  all  manner 
of  diseases."  He  "  went  about,"  as  the 
sun  goes  his  round,  to  dispense  light 
and  warmth,  to  communicate  life  and 
vigour  to  everything  his  active  beams 
light  upon.  All  His  steps,  whither 
ever  He  went,  dropt  fatness.  Oh,  may 
every  pious  soul  not  miss  to  meet  Him 
in  His  walks  !  And  sure  enough  it  may, 
it  shall  do  so,  if  itself  continue  to  keep 
in  His  ways.  So  unwearied  was  His 
love,  that,  even  to  His  bodily  weariness, 
with  indefatigable  pains  He  walked  up 
and  down,  to  scatter  health  to  the  sick 
and  salvation  to  sinners.  He  took  a 
survey  of  the  whole  country,  measured 
it  with  His  own  paces,  and  streamed 
forth  blessings  wherever  He  came.  It 
fared  with  all  places,  with  all  persons, 
that  touched  Him,  or  He  them,  that 
came  near  Him,  or  that  He  came  near, 
as  it  did  with  the  woman  that  had 
the  issue  of  blood,  that  they  found 
virtue  come  from  Him.  And  so  it  was 
here. — A.  Littleton,  D.D. 

Vers.  16-20.  The  Master's  call  an- 
swered.— I.  The  Master's  call 1.  It  is 

a  call  first  to  discipleship,  and  then  to 

25 


CHAP.  I. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


apostleship.  Personal  holiness  must 
precede  Christian  usefulness.  Faith 
must  go  before  works.  Let  the  heart 
first  be  given  to  Christ,  and  the  dedi- 
cation of  hands,  feet,  tongue,  and 
brain  will  naturally  follow.  To  reverse 
this  order  is  to  mistake  root  for  fruit, 
cause  for  effect.  2.  It  is  a  call  to  cast 
in  one's  lot  with  Christ,  and  receive 
the  impress  of  His  life.  How  could 
we  talk  of  self-sacrifice  in  connexion 
with  Christ's  service,  if  we  realised 
that  He  only  asks  us  to  relinquish 
what  is  ruinous  to  our  souls,  in  order 
that  He  may  fill  us  with  the  riches  of 
His  heavenly  storehouse  ? 

II.  The  servants'  answer. — What 
these  men  replied  in  words  we  know 
not ;  but  their  action  was  full  of  the 
best  eloquence.  1.  It  was  a  prompt 
decision.  Ready  obedience  is  at  the 
same  time  the  easiest  and  the  most 
valuable.  2.  It  was  a  lasting  decision. 
These  men  had  then  little  idea  of  all 
that  was  involved  in  following  Christ 
and  becoming  fishers  of  men.  Yet, 
when  the  full  import  of  their  choice 
became  known  to  them,  they  never 
flinched,  or  looked  back  with  regret  to 
the  things  they  had  given  up  ;  for  in 
Christ  they  found  every  satisfaction  of 
life  intensified  a  thousandfold — nay, 
they  learnt  that  without  Christ  earth's 
fairest  scenes  and  chief  delights  are  as 
a  howling  wilderness  or  as  a  never- 
resting,  shoreless  sea.  Let  us,  like 
them,  hear  when  Christ  speaks,  obey 
when  Christ  commands,  believe  when 
Christ  promises,  and  follow  whither 
Christ  leads. 

Christ  and  Sis  servants. — 1.  Christ  is 
the  preparer  of  His  servants  :  "I  will 
make  you  " — how  much  was  involved  in 
that  promise !  ( 1 )  Authority ;  ( 2 )  Quali- 
fication. 2.  Small  beginnings  com- 
patible with  sublime  results.  3.  The 
claims  of  God  override  all  other  claims 
— the  sons  left  their  father.  4.  The 
discharge  of  common  duties  the  best 
preparation  for  higher  calls — two  were 
casting  the  net  into  the  sea,  and  two 
were  mending  their  nets.  The  transi- 
tion from  one  duty  to  another  need  not 
be  abrupt.  The  humblest  duty  may  be 
2o 


very  near  the  highest  honour.  5.  The 
place  of  the  servant  is  after  the  Master 
— "Come  ye  after  Me"  ;  they  are  not 
invited  to  equal  terms — they  must  walk 
in  the  King's  shadow. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Jesus  and  John. — Jesus,  in  the  silent 
conflicts  of  the  wilderness,  prepares  for 
the  open  conflicts  of  life — takes  the 
place  of  John,  delivered  to  death  by 
the  carnal  mind.  1.  The  history  :  a 
testimony — (1)  that  He  honoured  the 
Baptist ;  (2)  did  not  fear  the  enemy ; 
(3)  was  faithful  to  His  people  and 
vocation.  2.  The  doctrine:  (1)  The 
witnesses  of  the  kingdom  cannot  be 
destroyed;  (2)  After  every  seeming 
triumph  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness 
still  stronger  heroes  of  God  come  for- 
ward. 3.  Christ  is  always  Himself 
victorious  at  last  in  every  scene. — J.  P. 
Lange,  D.D. 

The  mighty   calling   of  the   Lord. — 

1.  Gentler  than  any  human  request. 

2.  Mightier  than  any  human  com- 
mand. 3.  Unique  as  the  victorious 
wooing  of  heavenly  love. — Ibid. 

The  calling  of  Jesus. — 1.  To  one 
thing— into  His  discipleship  and  the 
fellowship  of  His  Spirit,  or  to  the 
Father.  2.  To  many  things — to  dis- 
cipleship and  mastership,  to  co-opera- 
tion, to  fellowship  in  suffering,  and 
community  in  triumph. — Ibid. 

The  spiritual  and  the  worldly  vocations 
of  Christians. — 1.  Opposition.  2.  Kin- 
dredness.     3.  Union. — Ibid. 

The  twofold  earthly  companionship  of 
the  disciples  a  foundation  for  the  higher. — 
1.  Companions  in  fishing — companions 
in  fishing  for  men.  2.  Brethren  after 
the  flesh — spiritual  brethren. — Ibid. 

The  Christian  and  ecclesiastical  voca- 
tions in  harmony  with  the  sacred 
natural  obligations  of  life. — Ibid. 

Christ's  glance. — One  glance  of  the 
Lord,  and  He  knows  the  heart  under  its 
rough  garment. — Bauer. 

The  brotherhoods  of  life. — The  world 
is  covered  with  a  network  of  brother- 
hoods. The  first  and  simplest  relation- 
ships run  on  and  out  in  every  direction, 
and  multiply  themselves  till  hardly 
any  man  stands  entirely  alone.  1.  The 
cause  of  this  interwoven  network,  this 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap,  i. 


reticulation   of   life   with   life,   is   the  by  God :  as  they  who  being  unworthy 

whole  system  of  nature  by  which  each  both  in  respect  of  their  bad  learning 

human    being    takes    its    start    from  and  worse  living,  yet  crowd  into  the 

another  human  being,  and  is  kept,  for  ministry,  by  alliance,  favour,  or  simony, 

a  time  at  least,  in  associations  of  com-  3.  Others  are  neither  chosen  of  God, 

pany  and  dependence  with  the  being  nor  called  by  men :  as  the  false  pro- 

from  whom  it   sprang  and  with  the  phets    (Jer.    xxiii.    21  ;    John    x.     1). 

other  beings  who  have  the  same  source  4.  Others  are  both  chosen  by  God  and 

with   it.      2.    Such   relationships   are  called  by  men  (Acts  xx.  28,  xiv.  23). 
full  of  mutual  helpfulness  and  pleasure.  Jesus  calls  us. — 1.  O'er  the  tumult  of 

3.  One  final  cause  or  purpose  of  this  our  life's  wild,  restless  sea.     2.  From 

interlacing  of  life  with  life,  by  natural  the  worship  of  the  vain  world's  golden 

and  indissoluble  kinships,  may  be  just  store.     3.  From  each  idol.     4.  In  our 

this — the  providing,  as  it  were,  of  open  joys   and    sorrows,   days   of   toil,    and 

communications,  of  a  system  of  shafts  hours  of  ease. 

or  channels  piercing  this  human  mass  Fraternity. — Christ  loves  not  singu- 
la every  direction,  crossing  and  re-  larity ;  He  called  not  one  alone.  He 
crossing  one  another,  through  which  loves  not  schism  either  between  them 
those  higher  influences,  which  ought  whom  He  calls ;  and  therefore  He  calls 
to  reach  every  corner,  and  every  indi-  persons  likely  to  agree — "  two  brethren." 
vidual  of  the  great  structural  humanity,  So  He  began  to  build  the  synagogues, 
may  be  freely  carried  everywhere,  and  to  establish  that  first  government  in 
no  most  remote  or  insignificant  atom  Moses  and  Aaron — "brethren";  so  He 
of  the  mass  be  totally  and  necessarily  begins  to  build  the  Church  in  Peter 
untouched. — Bishop  Phillips  Brooks.  and  Andrew — "  brethren."  The  prin- 
cipal fraternity  and  brotherhood  that. 
Ver.  17.  Four  hinds  of  apostles. —  God  respects  is  spiritual  brethren  in 
There  are  four  sorts  of  apostles,  accord-  the  profession  of  the  same  true  religion 
ing  to  Jerome.  1.  Some  are  sent  only  (Exod.  iv.  14  ;  Eccles.  iv.  9,  10).—  John 
from  God,  and  not  by  men.     (1)  Im-  Donne,  B.J). 

mediately  from  God  the  Father,  as  the  Association  in  work.—  Single  endea- 

prophets  under  the  law  (2  Pet.  i.  21),  vours    seldom    prosper:    many    hands 

Jesus  Christ   (John  xx.   21),  and  the  make  the  work  both  quick  and  sure. 

Baptist  (John  i.  6)  in  the  beginning  They  can  be  no  friends  to  the  happy 

of  the  gospel.     (2)  Immediately  from  estate  of  a  family  or  Church  that  labour 

God  the  Son,  in  His  state  mortal,  as  to  cause  distractions.     Division  makes 

the  twelve  (Matt.  x.  5) :  in  His  state  certain  way  to  ruin  (Luke  x.  1 ;  Acts 

glorious,    as   St.    Paul   (Acts   ix.   15).  xi.  30,  xiii.  2,  xv.  2,  39,  40). — Bishop 

2.  Others  are  sent  by  men,  and  not  Joseph  Hall. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—34. 

(Parallels  :  Luke  iv.  31-41 ;  Matt.  viii.  14-17.) 

A  Sabbath  in  Capernaum. — I.  Two  places  compete  for  the  honour  or  shame 
of  being  the  site  of  Capernaum — Tell  Hum  at  the  northern  extremity,  and 
Khan  Minyeh  at  the  north-western  corner.  1.  At  the  former  there  have  been 
found  the  remains  of  a  synagogue  built  of  white  marble,  the  style  of  which 
belongs  to  the  Herodian  period ;  and  the  following  circumstance  respecting  it 
may  be  worthy  of  consideration.  It  appears  to  have  been  usual  to  carve  over 
the  doorway  of  these  buildings  an  emblem,  which,  in  every  case  known  save  one, 
was  "  the  seven-branched   candlestick,"   signifying  that  they  were   set   apart 

27 


chap.  i.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


chiefly  for  illumination  or  instruction.  The  one  exception  is  at  Tell  Hum, 
where  the  carving  represents  "  the  pot  of  manna  "  surrounded  by  a  vine  and 
cluster  of  grapes.  Now  it  was  in  the  synagogue  at  Capernaum  that  Christ 
delivered  His  discourse  about  the  "  manna  "  and  the  "  living  bread  which  came 
down  from  heaven  " ;  and  it  has  been  conjectured,  with  some  show  of  reason,  that 
He  who  so  frequently  based  His  teaching  on  some  object  in  sight  at  the  time, 
may  have  brought  the  conversation  round  to  this  point  on  purpose,  because  the 
unusual  emblem  formed  so  happy  an  illustration  of  His  subject.  See  John  vi. 
24-59.  2.  Dr.  Otts,  a  recent  American  traveller,  writes  as  follows,  in  support 
of  the  claim  of  Khan  Minyeh  : — Without  entering  into  the  controversy,  or 
presuming  to  dogmatise,  we  settle  down  on  Khan  Minyeh  as  the  site  of  "His 
own  city,"  in  which  was  the  Jesus-house,  contemptuously  called,  in  His  day, 
by  the  unbelieving  Jews,  "  the  house  of  the  heretic,"  and  ever  since  known  as 
such  in  tradition.  In  this  city  Jesus  had  a  house.  It  is  spoken  of  in  the 
Gospels  as  "  the  house,"  and  was  doubtless  known  by  His  friends  and  foes  as 
"  the  Jesus-house."  It  may  have  been  a  hired  house,  like  that  in  which  Paul 
lived  and  preached  at  Rome,  engaged  and  maintained  by  His  friends  and 
followers  as  the  place  where  He  met  with  His  disciples,  and  received  all  who 
sought  the  benedictions  of  His  holy  ministry.  It  seems  that  when  He  first 
went  to  Capernaum  to  make  His  home  there,  He  lodged  with  Peter  while  this 
house  was  being  procured  and  prepared  for  His  use ;  and  while  staying  in 
Peter's  house,  He  healed  his  wife's  mother  of  a  fever,  etc. 

II.  The  synagogue  was  a  term  applied  both  to  the  congregation  of  Jews  in 
a  provincial  town,  and  to  the  place  where  it  assembled — on  the  Sabbath  for 
worship,  and  during  the  week  for  instruction,  discussion,  and  administration  of 
justice.  The  origin  of  this  institution  is  lost  in  obscurity.  As  far  back  as  the 
time  of  Samuel  there  were  meetings  of  bands  of  prophets  for  praise  and  pro- 
phesyings  (1  Sam.  x.  5,  xix.  20),  which  pious  Israelites  would  doubtless  attend. 
In  the  days  of  the  kings  people  resorted  to  the  prophet  of  the  time  for  instruction 
at  certain  seasons  (2  Kings  iv.  23).  The  only  Old  Testament  mention  of  re- 
ligious meeting-places  other  than  places  of  sacrifice — if,  indeed,  the  reference  be 
not  to  religious  feasts  rather  than  religious  houses — is  in  a  Psalm  (lxxiv.  8)  of 
Maccabean  date.  Jewish  tradition  ascribes  the  establishment  of  synagogues 
to  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  After  the  return  from  captivity  they  assumed  a 
prominent  place  in  the  Jewish  ecclesiastical  system.  The  order  of  service 
was  far  less  conventional  than  that  of  the  Temple,  distinguished  strangers  being 
frequently  invited  to  read  and  expound  (Acts  xiii.  15).  Thus  the  synagogue 
was  a  notable  exception  to  the  rigid  formality  which  was  sapping  the  life  out  of 
Judaism,  and  formed  a  rallying-point  for  the  propagation  of  the  Christian  faith. 
Christ  made  constant  use  of  the  synagogue  both  for  private  devotion  and  for 
teaching  purposes  (Luke  iv.  16). 

III.  The  teaching  of  Christ  in  the  synagogue  at  Capernaum  struck  His 
auditors  with  amazement,  as  it  had  done  before  at  Nazareth  (Luke  iv.  14-30). 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  He  repeated  now  the  substance  of  what  He  said  then  : 
declaring  that  His  mission  was  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  to  heal  the 
broken-hearted,  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives,  and  recovering  of  sight 
to  the  blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised,  to  preach  the  acceptable 
year  of  the  Lord — the  jubilee,  in  which  God  offers  forgiveness  of  sins  and 
deliverance  to  sinners  ;  and  that  this  blessing  was  for  all,  of  whatever  nation, 
who  would  turn  from  their  sins  and  trust  in  God.  To  all  this  He  may  have 
added  some  of  those  imperishable  sentences  which  were  afterwards  gathered  up 
in  the  grand  charter  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth  which  we  call  the  Sermon 
on  the  Mount.  Such  teaching  as  this — at  once  so  simple,  so  gracious,  so  com- 
prehensive, so  Divine — could  not  fail  to  create  a  sensation  in  the  hearts  of  people 

28 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  i. 


accustomed  only  to  the  pedantries  and  quibbles  of  the  scribes,  who  only  darkened 
counsel  by  words  without  knowledge.  How  had  the  commandment  of  God  been 
emptied  of  all  meaning  by  their  puerile  hair-splittings  on  every  conceivable  sub- 
ject that  bordered  on  religion  without  touching  its  inner  essence  !  how  had  they 
bewildered  the  minds  of  the  simple  by  their  endless  arguments  and  speculations 
and  refinements,  and  by  their  wearisome  appeals  to  this  authority  as  against 
that !  With  Jesus  it  is  altogether  different.  He  moves  on  a  plane  as  far 
above  theirs  as  the  heaven  is  higher  than  the  earth.  When  He  speaks,  it  is  to 
utter  truths  that  find  their  unmistakable  echo  in  every  human  soul ;  when  He 
teaches,  it  is  to  quote  the  opinion  of  no  earthly  authority,  but  to  lay  down  the 
eternal  law  of  right  and  wrong  as  Himself  the  Word  of  God.  And  what  He 
preaches  to  others,  He  practises  Himself ;  while  He  points,  He  also  leads.  Not 
so  the  scribes  :  they  said  "  Go,"  but  went  not  themselves. 

IV.  A  striking  result  of  Christ's  preaching  manifests  itself  immediately. 
The  hush  of  awe  which  testified  to  the  strong  impression  made  by  Christ's 
discourse  in  the  synagogue,  is  abruptly  disturbed  by  shrieks  of  rage  and  fear 
proceeding  from  one  of  the  auditors  who  is  manifestly  under  the  dominion  of 
the  powers  of  evil.  Here  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  the  profound  and 
solemn  problem  of  demoniacal  possession.  The  phenomenon  cannot  be  explained 
away  by  saying  that  our  Lord  merely  accommodated  His  language  to  the 
mistaken  ideas  of  the  time,  for  we  find  that  He  deliberately  made  it  part  of  His 
disciples'  commission  to  "cast  out  demons"  (Matt.  x.  8),  and  afterwards  gave 
thanks  to  the  Father  for  their  success  in  this  part  of  their  work  (Luke  x.  17,  18),  ^ 
while  on  another  occasion  He  reproved  them  for  having  failed  to  expel  an  evil  y  v 
spirit  (Matt.  xvii.  21).  We  must,  then,  decline  to  identify  these  demons  withj 
mere  physical  and  mental  diseases — a  theory  which  in  any  case  would  be 
insufficient  to  account  for  the  double  personality  so  manifest  in  nearly  every 
instance  on  record,  and  conspicuously  in  the  text,  where  at  one  moment  the 
man,  at  another  the  demon,  gains  the  ascendency.  In  one  of  his  better 
moments  the  poor  wretch  made  his  way  to  the  synagogue,  the  very  last  place 
that  the  demon  would  willingly  have  permitted  him  to  enter  ;  but  when  there  the 
demon,  goaded  to  fury  by  the  presence  of  Christ,  asserts  his  supremacy  over  his 
victim,  even  while  he  fears  that  it  will  be  to  his  own  undoing.     "  Involuntarily, 

in  his  confessed  inability  of  disguise  or  resistance,  he  owns  defeat,  even  before 
the  contest.  l  What  have  we  to  do  with  Thee,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  ?  Thou  art 
come  to  destroy  us !  I  know  Thee  who  Thou  art,  the  Holy  One  of  God.'  And 
yet  there  seems  already  an  emergence  of  the  consciousness  of  the  demonised, 
at  least  in  so  far  that  there  is  no  longer  confusion  between  him  and  his  tormentor, 
and  the  latter  speaks  in  his  own  name.  One  stronger  than  the  demon  had 
affected  the  higher  part  in  the  demonised.  It  was  the  Holy  One  of  God,  in 
whose  presence  the  powers  of  moral  destruction  cannot  be  silent,  but  must 
speak,  and  own  their  subjection  and  doom.  The  Christ  needs  not  to  contend ; 
that  He  is  the  Christ  is  itself  victory.  But  this  was  not  all.  He  had  come 
not  only  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil.  His  Incarnation  meant  this — and 
more :  to  set  the  prisoners  free.  By  a  word  of  command  He  gagged  the  con- 
fessions of  the  demon,  unwillingly  made,  and  even  so  with  hostile  intent.  It 
was  not  by  such  voices  that  He  would  have  His  Messiahship  ever  proclaimed. 
Such  testimony  was  wholly  unfitting  and  incongruous;  it  would  have  been 
a  strange  discord  on  the  witness  of  the  Baptist  and  the  Voice  which  had  pro- 
claimed Him  from  heaven.  The  same  power  which  gagged  the  confession  also 
bade  the  demon  relinquish  his  prey.  One  wild  paroxysm — and  the  sufferer  was 
for  ever  free."  See  Edersheim,  Life  and  Times  of  Jesus,  book  iii.,  chap,  xiv.,  for 
a  thoroughly  reverent  and  learned  discussion  of  this  difficult  subject. 

V.  The  house  of  Simon  and  Andrew  is  the  next  scene  of  our  Lord's  ceaseless 

29 


chap.  i.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


activity.  On  this  memorable  Sabbath  a  sudden  attack  of  violent  burning  fever, 
such  as  is  still  common  in  that  neighbourhood,  had  prostrated  Simon's  mother-in- 
law.  That  St.  Peter  was  a  married  man,  who  continued  to  live  with  his  wife 
after  his  call  to  the  apostolic  office,  has  been  made  the  occasion  of  many  a  bitter 
gibe  at  the  Roman  See.  But  surely  with  great  want  of  fairness,  for  the  celibacy 
of  the  clergy  is  nothing  more  than  a  matter  of  discipline,  one  of  those  minor 
points  which  any  branch  of  the  Church  has  a  right  to  exact  from  its  ministers 
if  there  be  reason  to  think  God's  work  may  thus  be  done  more  effectively.  It  is 
evident  from  1  Cor.  vii.  that  St.  Paul  was  strongly  in  favour  of  celibacy,  when- 
ever and  wherever  possible,  in  the  then  condition  of  society ;  and  the  Roman 
See  has  simply  applied  to  a  particular  class  the  general  principle  approved  of 
by  the  apostle.  In  thus  doing  the  Roman  See  may  be  acting  wisely  or  unwisely 
— that  is  a  question  which  must  be  decided  entirely  on  its  own  merits ;  but  the 
fact  that  St.  Peter  happened  to  be  a  married  man  has  nothing  whatever  to  do 
with  it.  St.  Peter's  wife  is  said  to  have  been  named  Perpetua  or  Concordia,  to 
have  been  a  faithful  convert,  to  have  accompanied  Peter  in  his  apostolical 
journeys,  and  to  have  died  a  martyr  for  the  faith  of  Christ  during  the  persecu- 
tion of  Nero,  her  husband  supporting  her  in  the  last  struggle,  and  comforting 
her  with  the  words,  "  O  my  wife,  remember  thy  Lord  who  died  for  thee,  that 
thou  mightest  gratefully  shed  thy  blood  for  Him."  Now  to  return  to  Peter's 
wife's  mother.  Our  Lord,  as  soon  as  He  is  told  of  her  illness,  restores  her  by 
a  touch.  "  He  held  the  woman's  hand  to  give  life,"  says  Petrus  Chrysologus, 
"  because  Adam  from  a  woman's  hand  had  received  death.  He  held  her  hand 
in  order  that  what  the  hand  of  the  presumer  had  lost,  the  hand  of  the  Author 
might  restore.  He  held  her  hand,  that  the  hand  might  receive  pardon  which 
had  plucked  the  sentence  of  death."  And  the  cure  is  perfect.  The  woman 
who  an  instant  before  lay  in  a  consuming  fever  rises  as  if  from  refreshing  and 
invigorating  sleep,  and  at  once  goes  about  her  usual  household  duties,  making 
the  best  possible  use  of  her  recovered  health  by  ministering  to  the  wants  of 
Him  who  gave  it. 

VI.  The  day's  work  is  not  yet  over  ;  for  the  news  of  the  Divine  Benefactor's 
marvellous  power  has  rapidly  spread  throughout  the  town,  and  there  is  a 
universal  desire  to  profit  by  His  presence  among  them.  True,  the  Blessed 
Physician  has  a  short  respite,  since  it  is  the  Sabbath,  on  which  day  journeys 
must  not  be  taken  and  burdens  must  not  be  carried.  But  no  sooner  does  the 
sinking  sun  proclaim  the  close  of  the  Sabbath,  than  Christ's  privacy  is  invaded 
by  a  surging  mass  of  anxious  people  who  have  brought  their  sick  and  demonised 
friends  to  seek  His  aid,  and  of  course  their  number  is  soon  swelled  by  crowds  of 
onlookers  full  of  curiosity  to  witness  the  unwonted  spectacle.  "And  all  the 
city,"  says  St.  Mark,  "  was  gathered  together  at  the  door  "  :  can  we  doubt  that 
in  this  exclamation  we  have  the  very  words  of  St.  Peter,  the  master  of  the 
house,  who  at  the  time  must  have  been  puzzled  to  think  what  was  best  to  do  or 
how  the  multitude  was  to  be  got  rid  of  ?  But  it  matters  not  to  the  Saviour — 
so  utterly  regardless  of  His  own  comfort  and  ease  is  He — how  many  there  may 
be  ;  for  every  emergency  He  is  equally  ready,  to  every  cry  for  succour  He  makes 
the  same  response.  "  He  cast  out  the  spirits,"  St.  Matthew  tells  us,  "  with  His 
word,  and  healed  all  that  were  sick  ;  that  it  might  be  fulfilled  which  was  spoken 
by  Esaias  the  prophet,  saying,  Himself  took  our  infirmities,  and  bare  our  sick- 
nesses." What  encouragement  j  is  here  for  all:  for  those  "who  are  any  ways 
afflicted  or  distressed  in  mind,  body,  or  estate,"  to  bring  to  Jesus  all  their  woes ; 
and  for  those  who  have  friends  or  neighbours  ignorant  or  heedless  of  the  Saviour, 
to  proclaim  to  them  the  blessed  tidings  of  His  pity  and  His  love !  But,  alas  ! 
how  little  do  we  realise  that  Jesus  can  cure,  and  wishes  to  cure,  every  infirmity 
of  our  fallen  nature — from  the  great  fever  of  our  sin-sick  souls,  down  to  the 

30 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  i. 


hasty  tempers  and  uncharitable  thoughts  which  mar  the  characters  of  so  many- 
professing  Christians,  and  yet  cause  them  so  little  concern ! 

Vers.  23-26.  The  plea  of  evil,  and  its  rejection. — I.  The  plea  of  evil  (ver.  24). — 
1.  It  is  the  plea  of  personal  evil.  The  carnal  mind  asserts  its  right  to  be, 
and  insolently  rages  when"  confronted  with  the  claims  of  truth  and  love  and 
righteousness — rages  most  of  all  when  confronted  with  the  beauty  of  Jesus 
Christ.  2.  It  is  the  plea  of  ptibjic  evil.  The  moment  reformers  attempt  to  deal 
with  any  social  wrong,  any  pernicious  institution,  custom,  trade,  or  law,  they 
are  attacked  after  this  fashion.  (1)  Idolatry;  (2)  Slavery;  (3)  Intemperance; 
(4)  Impurity.  3.  And  when  evil  dare  not  claim  absolute  immunity,  it  pleads 
for  toleration  and  delay.  "  What  have  we,"  etc.  The  last  thing  to  be  expected 
from  evil  is  that  it  will  tamely  abdicate.  Let  us  be  sure  that  it  never  quits 
its  hold  until  after  struggles  which  shake  to  their  foundations  personal,  social, 
and  national  life. 

II.  Some  characteristics  of  this  plea. — 1.  It  is  specious.  The  demon  has 
closely  identified  himself  with  the  human,  and  it  is  cleverly  represented  that  the 
devil  is  the  man's  friend,  Christ  his  enemy,  and  whatsoever  is  done  against  the 
demon  is  done  against  the  man.  So  blinded  are  the  minds  of  them  that  believe 
not,  that  they  regard  an  attack  on  the  devil's  kingdom  as  an  invasion  of  their 
own  rights,  a  confiscation  of  their  own  riches.  Wickedness  is  never  friendly  to 
anything  that  concerns  the  rights,  safety,  or  enrichment  of  humanity,  and  when 
the  devil  becomes  an  advocate  it  is  the  wolf  pleading  for  the  lamb.  2.  It  is 
impudent.  (1)  This  world  is  not  the  devil's  world,  but  God's.  The  desert  must 
apologise  for  itself,  not  the  garden  of  spices  ;  the  black  weed,  not  the  lily  or  the 
rose  ;  the  cesspool,  not  the  crystal  river  or  the  sea  of  glass.  (2)  In  the  develop- 
ment of  this  world  the  devil  plays  no  essential  part.  Evil  has  no  rights. 
3.  It  is  cruel  (ver.  26).  Can  we  let  evil  alone  in  ourselves — that  which  dims 
our  eye,  enervates  our  resolution,  sears  our  conscience,  destroys  our  affections, 
shatters  our  wing,  blasts  our  hope  ?  Can  we  for  any  consideration  whatever 
let  sin  alone  in  our  children  ?  Sensitive  as  we  are  to  their  welfare,  we  cannot 
leave  them  a  prey  to  the  dark  passions  which  destroy  body  and  soul  in  hell. 
Can  we  let  the  heathen  nations  alone  ?  Idolatry,  infanticide,  sutteeism,  hook- 
swinging,  slavery,  cannibalism,  are  sufficiently  terrible  customs  to  let  alone,  and 
yet  they  are  but  a  few  red  bubbles  on  a  vast  sea  of  sorrow  whose  depths  God 
alone  can  sound.  Are  we  to  let  alone  the  evils  which  afflict  our  own  community  ? 
Intemperance,  lust,  war,  tyranny,  and  other  vices  are  filling  our  land  with  woes 
too  deep  for  tears. 

III.  Christ's  rejection  of  this  plea. — 1.  "  Hold  thy  peace"  (ver.  25).  Here  is 
the  voice  of  contempt.  Christ  speaks  to  principalities  and  powers  as  to  a  dog. 
Where  a  spark  of  reality,  sincerity,  promise,  existed,  Christ  was  infinitely  patient 
and  sympathetic ;  but  there  was  no  place  for  argument  here,  because  in  pure 
wickedness  there  is  no  truth,  no  reason,  no  hope.  2.  "Come  out  of  him." 
Here  is  the  voice  of  authority. 

Lessons. — 1.  Evil  is  to  be  cast  out  of  humanity.  The  whisper  of  Christ  pre- 
vails against  all  the  wrath  and  rage  and  roar  of  hell.  2.  Evil  is  to  be  wholly 
cast  out.  Nothing  is  rational  in  dealing  with  evil  but  the  severity  that  breaks 
it  off  suddenly,  that  condemns  it  utterly,  that  pursues  it  to  the  death.  3.  Evil 
is  cast  out  in  Christ. — W.  L.  Watkinson. 


31 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST  MARK. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS  ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  21,  22.  An  authoritative 
Teacher  and  His  audience. — I.  An 
authoritative  Teacher. — 1.  Dignified 
in  manner.  2.  Original  in  matter.  3. 
Convincing  in  argument.  4.  Consistent 
in  practice. 

II.  An  astonished  audience. — They 
might  well  be  astonished  at — 1.  The 
range  of  His  intellectual  gifts.  2.  The 
wealth  and  force  of  His  illustrations. 
3.  His  acquaintance  with  the  human 
heart  and  conscience.  4.  His  deep 
knowledge  of  the  Divine  law. 

Christ  stood  distinguished  in  these 
points  among  others  from  all  the  Rabbis 
who  had  been,  or  then  were,  in  Israel. 
1.  The  relation  between  His  person  and 
His  word.  The  Teacher  made  the  truth 
He  taught.  His  teaching  was  His  arti- 
culate person,  His  person  His  incor- 
porated teaching.  2.  The  consciousness 
He  had  of  Himself  and  His  truth  ;  its 
authority  and  creative  energy.  He 
was,  at  the  first  as  at  the  last,  at  the 
last  as  at  the  first,  certain  of  the 
reality  of  His  words  and  claims,  of 
their  endurance  and  triumph.  3.  His 
knowledge  of  His  truth  and  mission 
was  throughout  perfect  and  self-con- 
sistent. His  progress  was  not  a  series 
of  tentative  efforts,  of  mended  mistakes, 
but  an  orderly  movement  to  a  con- 
sciously conceived  end. 

Yer.  22.  Christ's  independence  of 
thought. — It  was  as  if  an  English 
judge,  instead  of  implicitly  following 
precedents  in  all  his  decisions,  were  to 
discard  any  reference  to  even  the  most 
weighty,  and  speak,  it  might  be,  in  direct 
opposition  to  them.  No  judicial  lumi- 
nary dares  or  dreams  of  such  a  thing, 
his  greatest  audacity  leading  him  no 
further  than  to  venture  on  some  timid 
advance  in  a  new  deduction  from 
earlier  "  Cases." — C.  Geikie,  D.D. 

The  failure  of  the  scribes  as  teachers. 
— The  scribes  failed,  first,  in  the 
matter ;  they  delivered  not  the  doctrine 
of  God  :  secondly,  in  the  manner ;  they 
taught  coldly  and  .  without  zeal : 
thirdly,   in   the   end;   they  taught  in 

32 


pride  and  ambition,  seeking  their  own 
and  not  God's  glory. — E.  Leigh. 

Teaching  enforced  by  personal  religious 
character. — While  the  scribes  leaned 
upon  the  authority  of  others,  and 
quoted  chapter  and  verse  for  all  they 
taught,  Jesus  spoke  straight  out  from 
Himself  the  truth  that  was  embodied 
in  His  own  life,  leaving  it  to  find 
an  echo  in  the  hearts  of  the  truth - 
loving  and  God-revering.  His  teaching 
impressed  itself  upon  the  populace, 
mainly  because  it  was  backed  up  by 
a  personal  religious  character ;  the 
teaching  of  the  scribes  failed  mainly 
because  it  lacked  this — because  they 
did  not  in  their  own  lives  act  out  what 
they  taught.  The  one  thing  essential 
above  all  else  is  to  be  ourselves  living 
the  truth  that  we  desire  others  to 
embrace.  It  has  been  reserved  for 
Christianity  to  present  to  the  world 
an  ideal  character,  which,  through  all 
the  changes  of  eighteen  centuries,  has 
filled  the  hearts  of  men  with  an  im- 
passioned love ;  has  shewn  itself  capable 
of  acting  on  all  ages,  nations,  tempera- 
ments, and  conditions  ;  has  not  only 
been  the  highest  pattern  of  virtue, 
but  the  highest  incentive  to  its  practice ; 
and  has  exercised  so  deep  an  influence 
that  it  may  truly  be  said  that  the 
simple  record  of  three  short  years  of 
active  life  has  done  more  to  regenerate 
mankind  than  all  the  disquisitions  of 
philosophers,  and  all  the  exhortations 
of  moralists. — W.  E.  H.  Lecky. 

Teaching  with  authority. — 1.  Men 
will  teach  well  only  as  they  teach 
under  Christ.  2.  Authority  is  impos- 
sible apart  from  association  with  the 
Master.  3.  Authority  of  tone  must 
come    from    intensity    of    conviction. 

4.  Hearers  know  the  voice  of  authority. 

5.  The  Christian  teacher  is  to  show 
his  supremacy  over  all  other  teachers. 
— J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Ver.  23.  Unclean  spirits. — I  do  not 
see  anything  in  the  history  of  those 
spirits,  or  of  the  persons  possessed  by 
them,  which  should  lead  to   the   use 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  i. 

of  the  epithet  "  unclean  "  in  any  such      over  him,  suspends  or  fetters  his  liberty, 
sense  as  we  should  think  of  assigning      deprives  him  of  the  normal  control  of 
to  the  word.     If  we  could  imagine  the      his  body  and  limbs,  speaks  by  his  mouth 
evil  spirits  or  demons  thus  represented      and  deranges   his  feelings.      The   ab- 
as wandering  on  earth  to  be  the  im-      normal  state  of  his  faculties  is  not  due 
pure  spirits  who  left  their  own  habita-  to  an  unhealthy  condition  of  the  brain 
tions,  we  might  perhaps  suppose  that  or  to  organic  disturbances ;  it  is  born  of 
they  were  characterised  and  described,  the  violent  and  disturbing  action  of  a 
not    by    the    acts    of    their    vagrant  superior  will ;  it  is  a  result  and  not  a 
humiliation,  but  by  the  sin  that  had  cause.     Hence  the  healing  of  one  pos- 
ted  to   it.      This,    however,    does   not  sessed  is  beyond  the  power  of  medicine ; 
seem  to  be  consistent  with  the   idea  it  can  only  be  effected  by  the  moral 
of  their  custody;  and  I  am  more  in-  influence  of  one  spirit  on  another.     It 
clined  to  believe  that  the  uncleanness,  is  true  that  actual  illness,  as  a  rule, 
or   impurity,    relates   to    their   mixed  accompanied  demoniac  possession.    Cer- 
nature ;  not  purely  human,  or  angelic,  tain  senses  were  often  paralysed ;  the 
— S.  R.  Maitland,  D.D.  man  possessed  of  a  demon  could  not 
"  In  an   unclean  spirit." — There   is  see,  could  not  speak ;  he  was  subject  to 
dreadful   meaning   in  the   preposition  convulsions  or  epileptic  fits;    but  we 
here    used — "a    man   in   an   unclean  have  no  authority  to  confound  these 
spirit,"    as    if    his    human    self    was  maladies   with    the    possession    itself, 
immersed   in   that   filthy  flood.      The  All  that  we  can  say,  after  the  closest 
words  embody  three  thoughts :  the  fierce  examination  of  the  texts,  is  that  the 
hatred   which    disowns   all   connexion  mischief   introduced  into  the  organic 
with    Jesus;    the   wild    terror   which  life    of    the   victim    may   have    been 
asks    or    affirms    Christ's    destructive  originated  by  the  violent  action  of  the 
might  over  all  foul  spirits ;    and  the  spirit  which  tormented   him :    so  in- 
recognition  of  Christ's  holiness,  which  timate  is  the  connexion  between  mind 
lashes  unholiness  into  a  paroxysm  of  and   body,  that   organic   disturbances 
mingled  despair  and   hate. — A.  Mac-  lead  to  mental  troubles,  just  as  mental 
laren,  D.D.  troubles  engender  organic  disorders. — 

Demoniac  possession  is  not  an  organic  Father  Didon. 
or  bodily  disorder,  a  kind  of  hallucina- 
tion or   mental  alienation,  or  one  of  Ver.    24.    The  spiritually  disturbed 

the   nervous  affections,  as   rationalist  consciousness  a  figure  of  the  curse  of 

critics   have   pretended  in  defiance  of  sin — 1.    In   its   destruction   and   con- 

the  Scripture ;  it  is  a  particular  con-  tradictions.     2.  In  its  restraint.    3.  In 

dition   of    the   mind,    a   psychological  its  despair.     4.    But  also   in  its  dim 

disorder.     The  presence   of   a   demon  feeling  of  its  misery  and  of  the  coming 

in   certain    men    neither  absorbs   nor  of  its  Saviour. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 
yet   destroys   their   personality.      The  The  characteristics  of  the  wicked. — 

individuality     is     indestructible     and  1.  Knowledge  without  love.    2.  Hatred 

inviolable.      God  Himself,  who   could  to  Christ,  and  withal  flattering  acknow- 

destroy  everything,  as  He  has  created  ledgment.     3.  Pride  even  to  madness, 

everything,  destroys  nothing  and  does  and   yet  impotent  fear   and  flight. — 

not    allow     destruction.       The    most  Ibid. 

violent    Satanic    action    only    affects  The  antithesis  of  heaven  and  hell. — 

the  organic  and   lower  faculties,    the  1.  Peace  of  soul,  and  passion  (the  devil 

imagination  and  the  senses  of  the  un-  assaults  first).     2.    Collectedness,  and 

fortunate  victims;  their  freewill  may  distraction.     3.    The  spirit  of  mercy, 

be  enchained  for  a  moment,  but  only  and  the  spirit  of  torment      4.  Dignity, 

when   voluntarily   surrendered.      The  and    degradation.       5.    Victory,    and 

man  possessed  of  a  demon  is  under  the  prostration. — Ibid. 
dominion  of  a  spirit  which  tyrannises  The  name  "Jesus  of  Nazareth"  given 

D  33 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


to  Christ— 1.  By  early  disciples  (John 
i.  45).  2.  By  the  demons.  3.  By  the 
multitude  (Mark  x.  47).  4.  By  the 
soldiers  (John  xviii.  5,  7).  5.  By  the 
high-priest's  servant  (Mark  xiv.  67). 
6.  By  Pilate  (John  xix.  19).  7.  By 
the  angel  at  the  sepulchre  (Mark  xvi.  6). 
8.  By  the  two  disciples  on  the  way 
to  Emmaus  (Luke  xxiv.  19).  9.  By 
Peter  (Acts  ii.  22,  iii.  6,  iv.  10,  x.  38). 
10.  By  Christ  Himself  after  the  Ascen- 
sion (Acts  xxii.  8). 

Vers.  25,  26.  The  unclean  spirit 
tilenced. — 1,  An  evidence  of  Christ's 
Divine  commission.  2.  A  proof  of 
Christ's  goodwill  to  men.  3.  A  declara- 
tion of  the  great  object  of  Christ's 
incarnation — to  destroy  the  works  of 
the  devil.  4.  An  indication  of  Christ's 
determination  to  refuse  all  quarter  to 
the  minions  of  hell.  One  cannot  be- 
lieve that  His  rejection  of  their  testi- 
mony was  prudential  only,  whatever 
possibility  there  may  have  been  of 
that  charge  of  complicity  which  was 
afterwards  formulated.  The  thought 
of  allowing  Himself  to  be  indebted  to 
them  for  help  of  any  kind  would  be 
most  abhorrent  to  Him.  And  must 
He  not  still  regard  as  contamination 
every  truce  with  evil  of  whatever  kind 
— every  gain  accruing  to  His  cause  by 
fraud,  injustice,  or  suppression  of  the 
truth  ? 

Yer.  27.  Cured  by  a  word. — What 
caused  such  astonishment  was  not  so 
much  the  fact  itself,  as  the  way  in 
which  it  was  performed.  Such  cures, 
it  seems,  were  not  unknown  to  the 
Jews,  but  they  were  due  to  the  virtue 
of  the  prayers,  sacred  formula-,  incan- 
tations, and  invocations  of  their  exor- 
cists, and,  probably,  more  often  to  the 
accommodation  of  the  spirits  them- 
selves. Jesus  did  not  appeal  to  any 
extraneous  force,  He  only  had  to  speak 
one  word;  He  commanded,  and  the 
unclean  spirit  passed  out  subdued, 
ejected  by  a  superior  will.— Father 
Dixlon, 

Vers.    30,    31.    Christ    wrought 
34 


miracle  to  relieve  Himself  from  the 
common  burdens  of  humanity. — These 
indeed  pressed  the  heavier  upon  Him 
because  He  uplifted  their  weight  from 
other  men  ;  and  it  is  in  his  narrative 
of  this  very  day's  events  that  St. 
Matthew  applies  this  principle  to  His 
mastery  over  disease  (viii.  17).  All 
the  more,  He  relieved  with  especial 
promptness  the  distresses  of  those  who 
were  near  to  Him — of  His  hosts  when 
their  wine  failed,  of  His  followers 
threatened  by  hunger,  of  His  disciples 
alone  upon  the  waters,  of  those  whom 
He  loved  in  Bethany.  Thus  He  was, 
in  temporal  as  in  spiritual  trouble,  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  yet  especially  of 
them  who  believe.  And  therefore  He 
is  prompt  to  respond  to  this  appeal 
for  one  whom  He  must  have  known, 
and  whom  His  disciples  evidently 
loved — an  appeal  at  once  so  fervent  and 
so  delicate,  so  free  from  dictation,  that 
it  was  equally  well  characterised  as 
"  beseeching  Him "  and  as  "  telling 
Him  of  her." — Dean  Chadwick. 

Personal  compassion.  —  The  same 
character  is  to  be  recognised  in  the 
spiritual  work  of  Jesus,  even  to  this 
day.  It  is  still  a  personal  compassion 
which  cools  the  worse  and  deadlier 
fevers  of  the  soul ;  still  when  invoked 
He  bends  over  us,  and  our  healing  is 
due  to  no  mechanical  grace,  but  to  His 
own  direct  act  of  love  ;  and  still  it  is 
ours,  when  healed,  to  minister  to  Him 
and  to  His  people. — Ibid. 

Contact  with  the  individual. — 1.  The 
individual  case  as  well  as  the  case  of 
the  multitude  should  be  regarded  as 
worthy  of  attention.  2.  Bodily  dis- 
eases as  well  as  spiritual  ailments  are 
within  the  sphere  of  our  solicitude; 
we  are  to  be  philanthropic  as  well  as 
spiritually-minded.  3.  We  are  to  put 
ourselves  in  personal  contact  with  those 
who  suffer.— J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Yer.  34.  Christ's  miracles  of  healing 
may  be  regarded— 1.  As  proofs  of 
His  Divine  mission,  Messiahship,  and 
Godhead.  (1)  They  were  such  as  no 
man  could  have  wrought  without 
direct  aid  from  heaven.     (2)  They  were 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


chap.  I. 


such  as  the  prophets  had  predicted 
would  be  wrought  by  the  Messiah 
(Isa.  liii.  4,  xxxv.  5,  6,  etc.).  (3)  They 
were  wrought  with  an  air  of  authority 
such  as  no  mere  man  would  dare 
arrogate  to  himself.  2.  As  a  means 
of  overcoming  prejudice,  and  so  securing 
a  favourable  reception  for  His  message. 
His  attention  to  their  bodily  interests, 
and  His  success  in  dealing  with  physical 
maladies,  induced  men  to  believe  in 
His  solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  the 
soul,  and  to  have  confidence  in  the 
spiritual  treatment  He  prescribed. 
3.  As  an  encouragement  to  believing 
prayer.  Christ  is  as  really  in  our 
midst  to-day,  as  He  was  that  Sabbath 
in  Capernaum  ;  and  He  is  every  whit 
as  ready  to  sympathise  and  as  able  to 
succour.     But  He  cannot  work  for  us 


and  with  us  and  in  us,  unless  we  trust 
Him  implicitly  and  without  reservation 
of  any  kind.  "  Lord,  increase  our 
faith  !  "  4.  As  examples  for  our  imi- 
tation. The  whole  apparatus  now  at 
work  for  the  relief  of  suffering  and 
for  the  care  of  sufferers — hospitals 
and  infirmaries,  asylums  and  homes — 
is  the  direct  fruit  of  Christianity. 
Does  it  not  become  us,  according  to 
our  ability  and  opportunity,  to  give 
such  institutions  our  cordial  support  ? 
Innumerable  cases  of  suffering  and 
disease  come  constantly  before  us. 
While  we  carry  the  sufferers  in  the 
arms  of  faith  and  prayer  to  God,  let 
us  do  what  we  can  to  alleviate  their 
pains  by  self-denying  effort,  and  so 
prove  that  our  prayers  are  the  out- 
pouring of  tender,  sympathising  hearts. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.  -  Verses    35—39. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  viii.  16,  17,  iv.  23-25  ;  Luke  iv.  40-44.) 

The  mutual  relations  of  prayer  and  work. — Hitherto  St.  Mark  has  depicted  in 
glowing  colours  the  untiring  activity  of  Him  who  "went  about  doing  good" 
among»men,  instructing  their  ignorance,  removing  their  woes,  and  infusing  new 
hope  into  their  burdened  hearts.  Now  he  fills  up  the  picture  with  a  view  of 
Jesus  in  solitary  communion  with  His  Father,  lifting  up  His  eyes  unto  the 
heavenly  hills  from  whence  came  His  daily  inspiration  and  motive-power. 

I.  Christ's  prayers  in  general. — Eighteen  times  our  Lord's  own  prayers  are 
spoken  of  in  the  Gospels,  bringing  out  the  following  facts  respecting  them. 
1.  His  habit  of  prayer  (Matt.  xiv.  23  ;  Mark  i.  35,  vi.  46  ;  Luke  iii.  21,  v.  16, 
vi.  12,  ix.  28,  xi.  1).  2.  His  blending  of  thanksgiving  with  prayer  (Matt, 
xi.  25  ;  Luke  x.  21  ;  John  xi.  41).  3.  His  use  of  intercession  in  prayer.  (1)  For 
friends  (Luke  xxii.  32).  (2)  For  enemies  (Luke  xxiii.  34).  (3)  For  Himself  and 
His  disciples  as  one  with  Him  (John  xvii.).  (4)  His  complete  submission  to  the 
Father's  will  (Matt.  xxvi.  39  ;  Mark  xv.  34  ;  Luke  xxii.  42  ;  John  xii.  27). 

II.  Christ's  prayer  on  this  occasion. — 1.  The  time  selected — "  the  morning, 
a  great  while  before  day."  No  time  could  be  more  favourable  for  private 
communion  with  God — the  body  refreshed  by  its  recent  repose,  the  mind  in  its 
vigour,  the  passions  at  rest,  the  whole  surroundings  so  calm  and  tranquil  The 
saints  in  every  age  have  loved  to  give  their  freshest  thoughts  to  God,  and  to  seek 
His  aid  before  the  duties  of  the  day  begin.  2.  The  scene — "  a  solitary  place." 
Besides  taking  delight  in  the  common  prayers  of  the  Church,  and  lifting  up  the 
heart  secretly  even  in  the  most  public  thoroughfares,  the  man  of  God  has  his 
private  oratory,  into  which  he  enters  and  shuts  the  door,  and  pours  forth  his 
soul  in  the  presence  of  his  Heavenly  Father,  laying  bare  his  most  secret  feelings, 
confessing  his  inmost  faults,  making  known  his  every  trouble  and  desire.  3.  Our 
Lord  sets  us  here  a  notable  example  of  prayer  in  spite  of  hindrances.  After  so 
laborious  a  day  as  that  just  closed,  and  with  the  prospect  of  another  equally 
trying,  the  Saviour  must  have  sorely  needed  rest.     But  aching  limbs  and  weary 

35 


CHAP.   L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MARK. 


mind  are  to  Him  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  longing  of  His  pure  and  holy 
S  for  the  refreshing  streams  of  heavenly  grace.  And  so,  giving  but  few 
hours  to  sleep,  He  rises  long  before  daybreak  to  pray. 

Ill    Prayer  and  work.-With  Christ  these  two  things  were  always  closely 
associated      Prayer  was  to  Him  the  sequel  of  one  day's  work,  and  the  prelude  of 
another.     He  will  not  on  any  account  forego  His  daily  devotions ;  but  on  the 
other  hand,  He  will  not  let  them  interfere  with  His  work  for  God.     There  are 
some  who  think  they  may  be  excused  from  prayer  because  they  are  so  busy  ;  and 
others  who  think  that  God  will  be  pleased  with  prayer  in  lieu  of  work  as  the 
sole  business  of  their  lives  ;  but  the  example  of  Christ  rebukes  all  such  trifling. 
It  is  only  in  combination  that  either  prayer  or  work  will  gam  the  Divine 
approval,  and  draw  down  a  blessing  on  ourselves  and  others.     It  is  related  oi 
Colonel  Gardiner  that  he  used  constantly  to  rise  at  four  in  the  morning,  and 
spend  his  time  till  six  in  private  meditation  and  prayer,  in  which  he  acquired 
such  fervency   of  spirit   as,    says   his  biographer,  "  I   believe  few  men  hying 
ever  attained.     This  certainly  very  much  contributed  to  strengthen  that  firm 
faith  in  God,  and  reverent,  animating  sense  of  His  presence,  for  which  he  was 
so  eminently  remarkable,  and  which  carried  him  through  the  trials  and  services 
of  life  with  such  readiness  and  with  such  activity ;  for  he  indeed  endured  and 
acted  as  if  always  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible.     If  at  any  time  he  was  obliged 
to  go  out  before  six  in  the  morning,  he  rose  proportionally  sooner  ;  so  that,  when 
a  journey  or  a  march  has  required  him  to  be  on  horseback  by  four,  he  would 
be   at  his  devotions  by  two."     There  is  a  sentimentalism  abroad  which  says, 
"  Work  is  prayer."     So  it  is.     And  yet  if  we  work  without  secret  and  constant 
prayer  our  work  will  be  powerless.     Work  is  only  prayer  in  so  far  as  it  is  done 
in  a  prayerful  spirit.     There  must  be  distinct  work  and  distinct  prayer.     We 
must  pray  in  order  to  work,  and  work  because  we  pray. 

Yers.  36-38.  Jesus  in  request.— I.  Though  Jesus  had  withdrawn,  the  interest 
and  excitement  created  by  His  miracles  continued  in  Capernaum  (ver.  37). — 
1.  His  miracles  had  taken  the  form  of  temporal  benefits.  They  might  look  for 
more  of  these.  2.  His  miracles  might  prompt  them  to  take  Him  by  force,  and 
make  Him  a  king.  3.  Erroneous  notions  of  Christ  still  lead  many  to  follow 
Him.  (1)  Some,  like  the  Jews,  seek  temporal  advantages.  (2)  Some  come  for  the 
pardon  of  retained  sins.  (3)  Some  come  to  purchase  salvation  by  the  performance 
of  ceremonies.     (4)  Some  come  to  accompany  others. 

II.  Such  interest  seems  to  have  gratified  the  apostles  (ver.  36). — 1.  They 
loved  their  Master,  and  rejoiced  in  His  praise.  2.  They  shared  in  the  reputation 
of  their  Master.  3.  They  went  to  Christ,  thinking  to  gratify  Him.  4.  They 
went  to  Christ,  perhaps  supposing  that  He  would  take  advantage  of  His 
popularity  to  set  up  His  kingdom.  5.  They  seem  to  have  gone  to  induce  Him 
to  return  to  Capernaum.  6.  Gratification  with  the  world's  favour  indicates  a 
low  standard  in  a  believer  or  a  Church. 

III.  Christ  refused  to  return  to  Capernaum,  on  the  ground  that  He  had  to 
preach  elsewhere  (ver.  38).— 1.  In  so  far  as  the  people  of  Capernaum  were 
concerned  ;  (1)  He  had  preached  to  them  the  gospel.  (2)  He  had  confirmed  His 
doctrine  by  miracles.  (3)  He  would  not  gratify  a  vain  curiosity.  (4)  He  would 
not  work  miracles  merely  to  confer  a  temporal  good.  (5)  Let  us  examine  our 
motives  for  asking  Christ's  presence.  2.  He  had  to  preach  the  gospel  to  others. 
(1)  He  was  the  King  of  the  Jews,  not  the  ruler  of  a  city.  (2)  He  was  the 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls,  not  the  pastor  of  a  congregation.  (3)  The  Jews 
were  to  be  dealt  with  nationally  in  judgment,  and  therefore  nationally  in 
mercy.  (4)  Let  Christ  still  preach  everywhere.  (5)  Let  us  not  limit  Christ's 
presence. — Jas.  Stewart 

36 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  i. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  35.  Christ's  habit  of  prayer. —  Ver.  37.  All  wen  seek  for  Christ. — 
Some  have  stumbled  at  the  Saviour's  All  ages  and  all  lives  have  sought  for 
habit  of  prayer,  as  though  it  derogated  Christ.  The  prophecy  that  bespeaks 
from  His  Divine  character  that  He  Him  is  no  mere  feature  of  the  Jewish 
should  make  petitions  to  God :  they  Scriptures.  It  is  part  of  the  equip- 
have  explained  it  by  saying  that  He  ment  of  the  human  heart.  Messianic 
prayed  not  from  want,  but  for  example's  prophecy  is  the  deepest  department  of 
sake.  But  away  with  such  explana-  psychology.  The  search  for  Christ  is 
tions :  let  us  embrace  the  mystery ;  let  us  the  prof oundest  fact  of  human  life, 
not  care  to  explain  it ;  and  let  us  say,  as  Every  life  that  has  any  moral  value 
we  may  say  without  passing  the  bounds  seeks  for  something  by  the  aid  of 
of  truth  and  without  detracting  an  which  it  can  rise  above  itself,  of  some- 
iota  from  our  Saviour's  glory,  that  thing  which  shall  redeem  it  from  its 
being  perfect  man  He  did  that  which  littleness,  heal  its  sicknesses,  answer 
perfect  man  ever  ought  to  do — namely,  its  prophecies,  and  take  its  unrest  away, 
find  His  chief  joy  and  His  chief  source  In  every  human  heart  there  is  beneath 
of  support  in  communion  with  His  all  the  carelessness  and  indifference 
Father  in  heaven. — Bishop  H.  Goodwin,  the  Christ -want — a  want  which  men 

Prayer  before  work. — Our  Lord  in  seek  to  satisfy  in  a  thousand  ways,  or 
all  His  great  works  commenced  with  to  forget  in  the  whirl  of  life  and  the 
prayer.  The  same  religious  habit  was  dissipation  of  trifles.  Deep  down  in 
common  with  the  heathen.  In  all  un-  our  mystic  life — no  matter  how  care- 
dertakings  of  moment  they  began  with  less,  or  shallow,  or  slight  we  be — there 
consulting  or  propitiating  the  gods  :  not  is  an  unfulfilled  prophecy  for  Jesus 
only  if  they  were  about  to  engage  in  any  Christ.  No  man  is  so  shallow,  super- 
expedition,  or  to  encounter  an  enemy,  or  ficial,  or  bad  as  never  to  have  felt  in 
to  form  a  treaty ;  but  scarcely  is  there  his  heart  of  hearts,  in  those  solemn 
to  be  found  a  poem  of  any  length  in  hours  that  come  to  every  man,  the 
which  the  aid  or  inspiration  of  some  re-  impulse  of  this  prophecy.  What  else 
puted  divinity  is  not  invoked.  It  was  is  the  meaning  of  the  hero-worship  of 
reserved  for  the  Christian — the  disciple  bygone  days  but  the  declaration  that 
of  Jesus,  the  decrier  and  improver  of  man  seeks  a  strength  without,  that 
Gentile  fashions — to  discard  prayer  *  each  life  is  not  self-sufficient,  that  it 
from  his  breast  and  home.  It  is  the  seeks  for  something  perfectly  holy, 
Christian  by  name  that  enters  on  yet  perfectly  human,  to  which  it  can 
matters  of  the  first  importance  to  his  give  itself  up  ?  The  shrines  of  heroes 
country,  his  neighbour,  or  himself,  and  martyrs  at  which  men  and  women 
that  ventures  upon  the  thousand  perils  have  prayed — what  are  these  but  wit- 
and  hazards  which  threaten  his  health,  nesses  to  the  fact  that  human  nature 
fortune,  and  comfort  by  day,  and  the  seeks  its  Christ,  seeks  by  its  worship 
secret  evils  which  walk  by  night,  and  of  goodness  or  power  to  get  back  the 
all  without  prayer ;  often,  without  a  goodness  or  the  power  it  lacks  ?  The 
single  aspiration  to  Him  whose  provi-  whole  travail  of  human  life  is  its  search 
dence  noteth  even  a  sparrow's  fall,  and  for  Christ ;  the  pathos  of  life  is  the 
in  whose  hands  are  the  issues  of  our  pursuit  of  the  false  Christs  ;  the  equa- 
weal  and  woe.  What  wonder  if  God  tion  of  life  is  solved,  the  prophecies  of 
forsake  those  who  never  acknowledge  life  fulfilled,  when  the  soul  finds  its 
their  dependence  on  Him,  but  on  the  Christ — when  the  soul  of  man  returns 
contrary  habitually  demean  themselves  to  its  rest  in  God. 
as  if  they  were  the  sole  or  chief  con-  The  true  disciple  always  knows  where 
trivers  and  builders  of  their  fortunes ! —  to  find  the  Master. — The  disciples  knew 
A.  Williams,  M.A.  the  habits  of  their  Lord:  they  knew 

37 


chap.  i.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


that  in  some  hidden  place  He  could  be  spirit  and  truth.     Within  these  limits 

found  in  the  early  hours  of  the  day;  it   was   His   vocation   to  spread  that 

at  all  events,  they  knew   that  Jesus  kingdom    as    far    as    He    could. — F. 

Christ  would  be  found  in  the  path  of  Schleiermacher. 

usefulness   or  preparation  for  useful-  "Therefore    came   I  forth." — Christ 

ness.     Do  men  know  where  they  can  does  not  mean  that  for  this  end  He  had 

find  us  ?     Are  our  Christian  habits  so  come  into  the  world,  but  that  for  this 

distinct   and   unchangeable    that    our  end  He  had  come  during  the  night  from 

friends  can  with  certainty  explain  our  His  house  to  the  spot  where  He  had 

position  ? — J.  Parker,  D.D.  been  composed  and  tranquillised  ;  and 

not  that  such  was  the  intention  with 

Ver.  38.  Christ's  eagerness  to  reach  which  He  had  come  hither,  but  that 
as  many  souls  as  possible. — He  will  not  such  was  the  Divine  purpose  in  His  corn- 
wait  for  people  to  come  to  Him,  but  ing — that  He  had  been  brought  hither 
hastens  to  carry  the  gospel  to  them.  to  be  composed  and  tranquillised,  not 
Thus  He  teaches  us  to  make  the  most  for  Himself,  not  for  His  personal  bene- 
of  our  lives  and  opportunities,  to  scatter  diction,  but  to  be  prepared  and  equipped 
the  seed  of  grace  as  widely  as  we  can,  for  further  ministry ;  that  He  had 
to  press  forward  with  the  tidings  of  found  comfort  in  the  solitude,  only  to 
God's  love  with  unflagging  zeal.  enable  Him  to  be  a  Comforter.     This 

The  preaching  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  the  true  Christ- spirit,  the  feeling  that 

was   Christ's  vocation. — 1.  Concerning  nothing  is  given  to  us  for   ourselves, 

Himself,    as    He    who    was   come    to  but  for  our  helpful  effluence  thereof; 

save    men.     2.    Concerning    the    true  that  the  raison  d'etre  for  all  we  have 

righteousness  which  avails  before  God.  and   are   is    service,   sacrifice. — S.   A. 

3.  Concerning  the  worship  of  God  in  Tipple. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  40-45. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  viii.  2-4;  Luke  v.  12-16.) 

A  parable  in  a  miracle. — Christ's  miracles  are  called  wonders — that  is,  deeds 
which,    by  their  exceptional   character,   arrest   attention   and  excite  surprise. 
Farther,  they  are  called  "  mighty  works  " — that  is,  exhibitions  of  superhuman 
power.     They  are  still  further  called   "  signs  "—that  is,  tokens  of  His  Divine 
mission.    But  they  are  signs  in  another  sense,  being,  as  it  were,  parables  as  well 
as  miracles,  and  representing  on  the  lower  plane  of  material  things  the  effects  of 
His  working  on  men's  spirits.    This  parabolic  aspect  of  the  miracles  is  obvious  in 
the  case  before  us.     Leprosy  received  exceptional  treatment  under  the  Mosaic 
Law,  and  the  peculiar  restrictions  to  which  the  sufferer  was  subjected,  as  well  as 
the  ritual  of  his  cleansing,  in  the  rare  cases  where  the  disease  wore  itself  out, 
are  best  explained  by  being  considered  as  symbolical  rather  than  as  sanitary! 
It  was  taken  as  an  emblem  of  sin.     Its  hideous  symptoms,  its  rotting  sores,  its 
slow,  stealthy,  steady  progress,  its  defiance  of  all  known  means  of  cure,  made  its 
victim  only  too  faithful  a  walking  image  of  that  worse  disease. 
±i  L  T.he*ePers  cry.— Mark  connects  the  story  with  our  Lord's  first  journey 
through  Galilee   which  was  signalised  by  many  miracles,  and  had  excited  much 
star  and  talk      The  news  of  the  Healer  had  reached  the  isolated  huts  where  the 
lepers  hated,  and  had  kindled  a  spark  of  hope  in  one  poor  wretch,  which 
einbo  dened   him  to  break  through  all  regulations  and  thrust  his  tainted  and 
unwelcome  presence  into  the  shrinking  crowd.     Mark's  vivid  narrative  shows 
him  to  us,    flinging  himself  down  before  the  Lord,  and,  without  waiting  for 
question  or  pause,  interrupting  whatever  was  going  on  with   his  piteous  cry. 
38 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.  chap.  I. 


Misery  and  wretchedness  make  short  work  of  conventional  politenesses.  Note 
the  keen  sense  of  misery  that  impels  to  the  passionate  desire  for  relief.  A  leper 
with  the  flesh  dropping  off  his  bones  could  not  suppose  that  there  was  nothing 
the  matter  with  him.  The  parallel  fails  us  there.  The  emblem  is  all  insufficient, 
for  here  is  the  very  misery  of  our  deepest  misery,  that  we  are  unconscious  of  it, 
and  sometimes  even  come  to  love  it.  The  worse  we  are,  the  less  we  know  that 
there  is  anything  the  matter  with  us ;  and  the  deeper  the  leprosy  has  struck  its 
filthy  fangs  into  us,  the  more  ready  we  are  to  say  that  we  are  sound.  Oh  !  if 
the  best  of  us  could  see  himself  for  once,  in  the  light  of  God,  as  the  worst  of  us 
will  see  himself  one  day,  the  cry  would  come  from  the  purest  lips,  "  O  wretched 
man  that  I  am !  who  will  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  this  life 
in  death  that  I  carry,  rotting  and  smelling  foul  to  heaven,  about  with  me, 
wheresoever  I  go.  Note,  further,  this  man's  confidence  in  Christ's  power. 
"  Thou  canst  make  me  (dean."  He  had  heard  all  about  the  miracles  that  were 
being  wrought  up  and  down  over  the  country,  and  he  came  to  the  Worker,  with 
nothing  of  the  nature  of  religious  faith  in  him,  but  with  entire  confidence,  based 
upon  the  report  of  previous  miracles,  in  Christ's  ability  to  heal.  If  we  turn 
from  the  emblem  to  the  thing  signified,  from  the  leprosy  of  the  body  to  that  of 
the  spirit,  we  may  be  sure  of  Christ's  omnipotent  ability  to  cleanse  from  the 
extremest  severity  of  the  disease,  however  inveterate  and  chronic  it  may  have 
become.  Sin  dominates  men  by  two  opposite  lies.  I  have  been  saying  how  hard 
it  is  to  get  people's  consciences  awakened  to  see  the  facts  of  their  moral  and 
religious  condition ;  but  then,  when  they  are  awoke  up,  it  is  almost  as  hard  to 
keep  them  from  the  other  extreme.  The  devil,  first  of  all,  says  to  a  man,  "  It  is 
only  a  little  one.  Do  it ;  you  will  be  none  the  worse.  You  can  give  it  up  when 
you  like,  you  know."  That  is  the  language  before  the  act.  Afterwards,  his 
language  is,  first,  "  You  have  done  no  harm ;  never  mind  what  people  say  about 
sin.  Make  yourself  comfortable."  And  then,  when  that  lie  wears  itself  out, 
the  mask  is  dropped,  and  this  is  what  is  said  :  "I  have  got  you  now,  and  you 
cannot  get  away.  Done  is  done  !  What  thou  hast  written  thou  hast  written  ; 
and  neither  thou  nor  anybody  else  can  blot  it  out."  Hence  the  despair  into 
which  awakened  consciences  are  apt  to  drop,  and  the  feeling,  which  dogs  the 
sense  of  evil  like  a  spectre,  of  the  hopelessness  of  all  attempts  to  make  oneself 
better.  Brethren,  they  are  both  lies  :  the  lie  that  we  are  pure  is  the  first ;  the 
lie  that  we  are  too  black  to  be  purified  is  the  second.  Christ's  blood  atones  for 
all  past  sin,  and  has  power  to  bring  forgiveness  to  every  one.  Christ's  vital 
Spirit  will  enter  into  any  heart,  and,  abiding  there,  has  power  to  make  the 
foulest  clean.  Note,  again,  the  leper's  hesitation  :  "If  Thou  wilt."  He  had  no 
right  to  presume  on  Christ's  goodwill.  He  knew  nothing  about  the  principles 
upon  which  His  miracles  were  wrought  and  His  mercy  extended.  But  his 
hesitation  is  quite  as  much  entreaty  as  hesitation.  He,  as  it  were,  throws  the 
responsibility  for  his  health  or  disease  upon  Christ's  shoulders,  and  thereby 
makes  the  strongest  appeal  to  that  loving  heart.  We  stand  on  another  level. 
The  leper's  hesitation  is  our  certainty.  We  know  that  if  any  men  are  not  healed 
it  is  not  because  Christ  will  not,  but  because  they  will  not. 

II.  The  Lord's  answer. — Mark  puts  the  miracle  in  very  small  compass,  and 
dilates  rather  upon  the  attitude  and  mind  of  Christ  preparatory  to  it.  Note 
three  things — the  compassion,  the  touch,  the  word.  As  to  the  first,  is  it  not  a 
precious  gift  for  us,  in  the  midst  of  our  many  wearinesses  and  sorrows  and 
sicknesses,  to  have  that  picture  of  Jesus  Christ  bending  over  the  leper,  and 
sending,  as  it  were,  a  gush  of  pitying  love  from  His  heart  to  flood  away  all  his 
miseries  ?  Show  Him  sorrow,  and  He  answers  it  by  a  pity  of  such  a  sort  that  it 
is  restless  till  it  helps  and  assuages.  We  may  rise  higher  than  even  this,  for 
the  pity  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  summit  of  His  revelation  of  the  Father.     The 

39 


chap.  i.  ttOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MARK. 


Christian's  God  is  no  impassive  Being,  indifferent  to  mankind,  but  One  who  in 
all  our  afflictions  is  afflicted,  and,  in  His  love  and  in  His  pity,  redeems  and 
bears  and  carries.  Note,  still  further,  the  Lord's  touch.  With  swift  obedience 
to  the  impulse  of  His  pity,  Christ  thrusts  forth  His  hand  and  touches  the  leper. 
There  was  much  in  that ;  but  whatever  more  we  may  see  in  it,  we  should  not  be 
blind  to  the  loving  humanity  of  the  act.  All  men  that  help  their  fellows  must 
be  contented  thus  to  identify  themselves  with  them  and  to  take  them  by  the 
hand,  if  they  would  deliver  them  from  their  evils.  Remember,  too,  that 
according  to  the  Mosaic  Law  it  was  forbidden  to  any  but  the  priest  to  touch  a 
leper.  '  Therefore  in  this  act,  beautiful  as  it  is  in  its  uncalculated  humanity, 
there  may  have  been  something  intended  of  a  deeper  kind.  Our  Lord  thereby 
does  one  of  two  things — either  He  asserts  His  authority  as  overriding  that  of 
Moses  and  all  his  regulations,  or  He  asserts  His  sacerdotal  character.  Either 
way  there  is  a  great  claim  in  the  act.  Still  further,  we  may  take  that  touch  of 
Christ's  as  being  a  parable  of  His  whole  work.  It  symbolises  His  identifying 
of  Himself  with  mankind,  the  foulest  and  the  most  degraded ;  and  in  this 
connexion  there  is  a  profound  meaning  in  one  of  the  ordinarily  trivial  legends 
of  the  Rabbis,  who,  founding  upon  a  word  of  Isa.  liii.,  tell  us  that  when 
Messias  comes  He  will  be  found  sitting  amongst  the  lepers  at  the  gate  of  the 
city.  So  He  was  numbered  amongst  the  transgressors  in  His  life,  and  "with 
the  wicked  in  His  death."  He  touches,  and,  touching,  contracts  no  impurity, 
cleansing  as  the  sunlight  or  the  fire  does,  by  burning  up  the  impurity,  and  not  by 
receiving  it  into  Himself.  Note  the  Lord's  word  :  "I  will ;  be  thou  clean."  It 
is  shaped,  convolution  for  convolution,  so  to  speak,  to  match  the  man's  prayer. 
He  ever  moulds  His  response  according  to  the  feebleness  and  imperfection  of 
the  petitioner's  faith.  But,  at  the  same  time,  what  a  ring  of  autocratic 
authority  and  conscious  sovereignty  there  is  in  the  brief,  calm,  imperative 
word,  "  I  will ;  be  thou  clean  "  !  He  accepts  the  leper's  description  of  power  ; 
He  claims  to  work  the  miracle  by  His  own  will,  and  therein  He  is  either  guilty 
of  what  comes  very  near  arrogant  blasphemy,  or  He  is  rightly  claiming  for 
Himself  a  Divine  prerogative.  If  His  word  can  tell  as  a  force  on  material 
things,  what  is  the  conclusion  ?  He  who  "  speaks  and  it  is  done"  is  Almighty 
and  Divine. 

III.  The  immediate  cure. — Mark  tells,  with  his  favourite  word,  "  straightway, ' 
how,  as  soon  as  Christ  had  spoken,  the  leprosy  departed  from  him.  And  to 
turn  from  the  symbol  to  the  fact,  the  same  sudden  and  complete  cleansing  is 
possible  for  us.  On  account  of  Christ's  sacrifice,  whose  efficacy  is  eternal  and 
lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  our  blessedness  and  our  purity  until  the  heavens 
shall  be  no  more,  we  are  forgiven  our  sins,  and  our  guilt  is  taken  away.  By 
the  present  indwelling  of  that  cleansing  Spirit  of  the  ever-living  Christ,  which 
will  be  given  to  us  each  if  we  seek  it,  we  are  cleansed  day  by  day  from  our  evil. 
We  must  come  to  Christ,  and  there  must  be  a  real  living  contact  between  us 
and  Him  through  our  faith,  if  we  are  to  possess  either  the  forgiveness  or  the 
cleansing  which  is  wrapped  up  inseparable  in  His  gift.  Further,  the  sudden- 
ness of  this  cure  and  its  completeness  may  be  reproduced  in  us.  Trust  Him  and 
He  will  do  it.  Only  remember,  it  was  of  no  use  to  the  leper  that  crowds  had 
been  healed,  that  floods  of  blessing  had  been  poured  over  the  land.  What  he 
wanted  was  that  a  rill  should  come  into  his  own  garden  and  flow  past  his  own 
door  and  refresh  his  own  lips.  And  if  you  want  to  have  Christ's  cleansing  you 
must  make  personal  work  of  it,  and  come  with  this  prayer,  "  Unto  me  be  all 
that  cleansing  shown  ! "  Or  rather  you  do  not  need  to  go  to  Him  with  an  "If  " 
nor  a  prayer,  for  His  gift  has  not  waited  for  our  asking,  and  He  has  anticipated 
us  by  coming  with  healing  in  His  wings.  The  parts  are  reversed,  and  He  prays 
you  to  receive  the  gift,  and  stands  before  each  of  us  with  the  gentle  remon- 

40 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  I. 


strance  upon  His  lips,  "  Why  will  ye  die  when  I  am  here  ready  to  cure  you  ?  " 
Take  Him  at  His  word,  for  He  offers  to  us  all,  whether  we  desire  it  or  no,  the 
cleansing  which  we  need. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  40-45.  Christ's  healing  touch. — What  purpose  did  the  touch  of  Christ 
serve  ?  Perhaps  we  shall  be  helped  in  replying,  if  we  think  of  how  much  tender- 
ness and  pathos  the  Gospel  narratives  would  be  deprived  if  this  small  feature 
were  taken  from  them.  The  touch  of  Christ  seems  still  to  bring  Him  into 
contact  with  humanity;  it  falls  into  harmony  with  the  whole  story  of  His 
condescending  sympathy. 

I.  In  touching  the  sick  Christ  fixes  and  confirms  faith  in  Himself  as  the 
Healer. — It  is  in  condescension  to  a  human  weakness  that  He  lays  His  hands  on 
diseased  folk.  We  believe  in  little  that  we  cannot  see.  •  Pain  and  sickness  are 
so  sensible  that  we  look  for  equally  sensible  tokens  of  the  energy  of  the  restorer. 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  heal  sicknesses  ;  and  faith  in  Him,  as  Healer,  was 
essential  to  the  cure.  By  His  touch  He  fixed  men's  thoughts  upon  Himself ; 
this  was  the  pledge  of  healing  by  which  He  stimulated  and  confirmed  their  faith. 
Christ's  touching  the  sick  is  then  a  symbol  of  that  condescension  to  our  weak- 
ness in  which  He  still  appeals  to  us,  fixing  our  thoughts  upon  Himself,  revealing 
His  infinite  power  and  ever-gracious  purpose,  arousing  us  by  some  special  mode 
to  contemplate  what  virtue  is  in  Him,  but  which,  without  these  special  revela- 
tions, we  should  fail  to  see.  Miracles  themselves  are  such  a  condescension  ;  in 
the  miracle  Christ  "  touches  "  us,  that  we  may  see  how  entirely  and  blessedly  the 
universe  is  under  His  control.  We  may  see  this,  too,  as  one  among  the  reasons 
of  Christ's  incarnation — "  the  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,"  that 
"  touched"  into  attention  we  might  behold  "  the  glory  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of 
the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  Christ  was  in  God,  before  God  was  incar- 
nated in  Jesus  Christ.  The  love  and  sympathy,  the  reverence  and  righteousness, 
the  trustiness  and  truth — in  one  word,  the  grace  that  so  moves  and  wins  us  in 
Jesus,  dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  from  before  all  worlds.  But  how  could 
we  have  ascended  up  on  high  to  bring  Christ  down  from  above  ?  how  could  our 
world-dulled  eyes  have  beheld,  or  our  carnal  hearts  have  trusted,  the  grace  that 
is  in  our  God?  It  needed  to  be  not  simply  revealed  to  us  as  a  heavenly 
doctrine,  but  embodied  in  an  earthly  form.  And  so  it  "  drew  from  out  the  vast, 
and  struck  its  being  into  bounds."  Christian  experience,  again,  will  furnish  us 
with  many  illustrations  of  the  mode  in  which  Christ  condescends  to  our  weak- 
ness in  pursuing  His  purpose  to  save  us.  We  none  of  us  believe  that  there  are 
times  and  seasons  with  Him.  He  is  as  ready  to  save  us  the  first  hour  we  hear 
of  Him  as  He  can  be  at  any  subsequent  time  ;  He  "  waiteth  "  to  be  gracious  unto 
us,  with  hand  ever  stretched  out,  and  with  voice  ever  pleading,  "  Behold,  now  is 
the  accepted  time ;  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation."  And  yet  how  full  is 
Christian  biography  of  instances  of  Christ's  falling  in  with  our  expectation  and 
using  special  events,  special  times,  as  the  mode  in  which  to  heal  us.  The  cares 
of  life,  the  responsibilities  of  early  manhood,  the  solemnity  of  parentage,  the 
softening  influences  of  bereavement,  the  terrors  of  pestilence,  the  fear  of  death 
— He  makes  all  these  the  means  of  extending  His  grace  to  souls.  He  gives 
us  tho  very  sign  we  wish  for,  that  we  may  believe  that  He  is  Himself  making 
us  whole. 

II.  See  in  Christ's  touch  of  the  sick  His  answer  to  our  craving  for  sympathy. 
— Those  who  have  had  much  to  do  with  the  sick — who  have  seen  how,  in  their 
tossings  to  and  fro,  a  hand  laid  on  theirs  can  quiet  them  — who  have  heard  them 
say,  "  Sit  there  in  the  light,  where  I  can  see  you  " — who  remember  their  restless 
craving  for  some  token  that  they  are  being  cared  for,  how  they  ask  to  be  turned 
from  side  to  side,  that  their  pillow  be  smoothed,  or  the  curtains  drawn,  or  some 

41 


CHAP.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


little  attention  paid  which  makes  their  bed  really  no  easier,  but  soothes  them — 
will  see  in  the  touch  of  Christ  a  virtue  beyond  what  it  has  as  the  appropriate 
sign  of  healing.  They  will  understand  that  this  token  of  sympathy  had  much 
to  do  with  the  faith  in  Himself  as  Healer,  which  Christ  sought  to  cherish ;  for 
th  e  sick  have  very  little  confidence  in  the  power  to  help  them  of  those  who  are  not 
tender  in  their  help.  Some  of  us  would  do  well  to  visit  the  sick,  that  we  might 
learn  what  possibilities  of  suffering  are  in  man,  and  be  made  more  thoughtf ul,  more 
tender-hearted.  There  was  no  need  of  Christ's  learning  such  a  lesson,  no  need  of 
awakening  His  sympathy.  But  we  did  need  to  have  that  sympathy  revealed  to 
us.  And  here,  again,  we  are  met  by  the  wondrous  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation. 
Christ  is  with  us,  not  only  helping  us,  but  feeling  with  us  ;  knowing  exactly  how 
to  succour,  because  He  knows  exactly  how  the  burden  presses  on  us.  How  the 
gospel  lights  up  and  fills  with  meaning  such  passages  as  these  :  "  Like  as  a 
father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  Him.  For  He 
knoweth  our  frame  ;  He  remember eth  that  we  are  but  dust."  "  He  that  toucheth 
you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."  Man's  craving  for  God's  sympathy  is  here 
met,  the  very  craving  we  are  sometimes  ready  to  stigmatise  as  a  weakness. 
"  They  brought  unto  Christ  infants,  that  He  should  touch  them  ;  but  when  His 
disciples  saw  it,  they  rebuked  them."  "  What  good  can  a  touch  do  them  ?  Silly 
mothers  to  long  for,  to  find  any  satisfaction  in  a  touch  ! "  But  Jesus  rebuked 
His  disciples,  and  took  the  children  in  His  arms  and  blessed  them.  There  are 
very  many  things  that,  like  the  touch  of  the  children,  do  not  seem  to  us  of  much 
use,  but  still  we  are  weak  enough  to  long  for  them.  And  we  have  a  Father  in 
heaven  who  is  good  enough  to  meet  that  weakness.  Christ  has  made  us  under- 
stand the  Fatherhood  of  God.  He  would  have  us  not  stiffly,  severely  good,  but 
frank  and  natural  with  Him.  The  touch  was  not  needed  for  healing,  but  it  was 
a  comfort  to  be  touched  by  Christ ;  and  "  Jesus  put  forth  His  hand,  and  touched 
him,  and  said,  I  will ;  be  thou  clean." 

III.  See  in  Christ's  touch  the  symbol  of  Christ's  bearing  our  infirmities  and 
carrying  our  sins. — This  is,  after  all,  the  sublimest  meaning  of  our  text.  He 
"  touched  "  our  nature  in  all  its  pollution  ;  He  shrank  not  from  it,  but  took  it 
upon  Himself,  and  bore  its  shame  and  suffering.  A  thousand  will  subscribe  to 
a  hospital  for  one  who  will  live  with  the  idiot  or  deformed ;  a  thousand  will  pay 
the  doctor  and  the  nurse  for  one  who  will  enter  the  cottage  of  the  squalid  sick 
and  spend  one  night  there.  It  needs  much  schooling  of  self  to  suppress  the 
instinct  of  revolt  at  sickness  hideously  before  us.  Turn  now  and  read  of  Christ, 
that  He  "  touched  "  the  sick  and  healed  them.  You  will  see  that  in  His  dealing 
with  bodily  disease  He  did  but  symbolise  how  entirely  He  had  taken  human 
sinfulness  to  Himself. — A.  Mackennal,  D.D. 

Vers.  43-45.  Be  silent. — I.  This  is  not  at  all  the  command  we  should  have 
expected ;  and  we  cannot  but  ask,  therefore,  for  the  reason  of  it.  Can  it  be 
that  a  very  common  conception  of  Christian  duty  is  after  all  inaccurate  and 
misleading,  and  that  it  is  not  every  convert's  first  and  great  duty  to  bear  verbal 
witness  to  the  Saviour  who  has  redeemed  him?  It  may  be  that  this  is  an 
inaccurate  and  a  misleading  conception  of  Christian  duty ;  and  for  myself  I  think 
it  is.  But,  assuredly,  there  were  other  reasons  for  our  Lord's  prohibition ;  and 
it  may  be  well  to  look  at  these  first.  1.  Doubtless  one  reason  why  Christ 
enjoined  silence  on  many  of  those  whom  He  had  healed  was,  that  He  did  not 
as  yet  wish  to  draw  on  Himself  the  public  attention.  He  came  not  to  strive, 
and  cry,  and  make  His  voice  heard  in  the  streets.  He  desired  to  go  quietly 
about  His  work,  sowing  seeds  of  truth  and  grace  which  might  hereafter  bring 
forth  fair  fruit  abundantly.  2.  Another  and  more  special  reason  in  this  case 
was,   that  He  wished  the  leper  to  discharge  a  special  duty,    viz.  to  bear  a 

42 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  I. 


"testimony   to   the  priests."     As   yet  they  were  prejudiced  against  Jesus  of 

Nazareth.     They  thought  of  Him  as  a  zealot,  a  fanatic,  who  had  swept  away 

corruptions  at  which  they  had  connived,  by  which  they  had  profited.     Probably 

they  feared  that  He  might  set  Himself  to  destroy,  rather  than  to  fulfil,  the 

Mosaic  Law,  or  that  He  might  undermine  their  authority  with  the  people. 

Now  if  the  leper  had  done  as  he  was  bid,  if  he  had  held  his  peace,  if  he  had 

gone  straight  to  Jerusalem  and  told  the  priests  that  Jesus  had  sent  him  to  them 

in  order  that  they  might  examine  him  by  the  Mosaic  tests  and  say  whether  he 

was  clean,  and  if  he  had  taken  them  the  offerings  which  Moses  had  commanded 

the  cleansed  leper  to  present  before  the  Lord,  he  would  have  carried  them 

"  a  testimony  "  which  could  hardly  have  failed  to  produce  a  happy  effect  on  their 

minds.     First,  his  very  healing  would  have  testified  that  Jesus  wielded  a  Divine 

power,  and  then  the  deference  of  Jesus  to  the  law  and  to  the  priesthood  would 

have  predisposed  them  in  His  favour.     3.  But  besides  these,  we  cannot  but  feel 

that  there  must  be  some  reason  in  our  common  human  nature  for  this  constant 

injunction  to  silence,  that  our  Lord  must  have  been  thinking  of  the  spiritual 

welfare  of  men  when  He  forbad  them  to  bear  public  witness  to  His  marvellous 

works.     One  such  reason  is  to  be  found,  I  think,  in  the  very  different  estimate 

put  on  miracles  by  Christ  and  by  the  Church.     It  is  only  of  late  years  that 

the  more  thoughtful  students  of  the  Word  have  come  to  suspect  that  miracles 

are  a  burden  which  the  gospel  has  to  carry  rather  than  wings  of  proof  which 

bear  it  up.     But  however  we  may  regard  them,  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  laid 

very  little  stress  upon  them.     To  the  leper,  possibly,  nothing  was  so  grand, 

nothing  so  desirable,  as  the  power  to  work  miracles ;  but  Jesus  knew  "  a  more 

excellent  way,"  and  held  not  love  alone,  but  almost  any  ethical  and  spiritual 

virtue,  to  be  worth  far  more  than  tongues,  or  prophecy,  or  the  faith  that  can 

only  remove  a  mountain.     For  this  reason,  therefore,  among  many  others,  He 

bade  the  leper  "  say  nothing  "  of  the  miracle  "  to  any  man."     Consider,  too,  how 

religious  emotion  evaporates  in  talk,  how  virtue  goes  out  of  us  in  the  words  we 

utter.     Is  it  not  always  better  to  obey  than  to  talk  about  obedience,  to  show 

love  than  to  profess  love  ?     Obviously,  though  no  doubt  he  thought  to  honour 

Christ  by  "much  publishing"  what  He  had  done,   this  man  was  not  strong 

enough  for  that  form  of  service.     To  what  good  end  did  he  honour  Christ  with 

his  tongue,  while  he  dishonoured,  by  disobeying,  Him  in  his  life  %     See  what 

harm  this  leper  did,  though  doubtless  he  had  none  but  a  good  intention,  what 

an  ill  return  he  made  for  the  grace  of  Christ.     By  touching  the  leper  Christ 

had  become  a  leper,  in  the  eye  of  the  law.     The  kind  hand  laid  upon  him  not 

only  healed  him,  but  drew  him  from  the  desert  into  the  city,  and  readmitted 

him  to  the  society  of  men.     And  the  leper  rewarded  his  Healer  by  driving  Him 

out  of  the  city  into  the  desert.     Simply  because  his  foolish  tongue  would  wag, 

"  Jesus  could  no  more  openly  enter  into  a  city,  but  was "  compelled  to  remain 

"without  in  desert  places."     Could  we  have  a  more  convincing  illustration  of 

the  danger  of  disobedience,  however  pure  and  generous  its  motive  may  seem  % 

Yes,  for  it  is  a  still  more  bitter  proof  when  we  find  that  by  our  own  fluent 

religious  talk,  and  the  easy  but  eager  profession  by  which  we  honestly  meant 

to  serve  Christ,  we  have  alienated  from  Him  those  who  stand  nearest  to  us  and 

know  us  best. 

II.  How  came  this  leper  to  disobey  the  word  of  the  Lord  ? — This  ought  not 
to  be  a  puzzle  to  you,  and  could  not  be  if  you  were  thoughtful  students  of  your 
own  hearts.  Have  you  yet  to  learn  that  it  is  much  easier  to  brace  oneself  for 
great  endeavours  than  to  maintain  a  faithful  discharge  of  simple  and  lesser 
duties  ?  easier  to  suffer  death,  for  example,  in  some  great  cause  than  to  set  such 
a  watch  over  the  lips  as  never  to  offend  ?  easier  to  make  a  great  sacrifice  for 
some  worthy  end  than  to  keep  one's  temper  under  the  slight  frets  and  provo- 

43 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


cations  which  every  day  brings  with  it  ?  A  great  faith  is  not  always  a  patient 
and  submissive  faith.  We  should  also  remember  into  what  fatal  languors  great 
spiritual  excitement  is  apt  to  react.  The  leper  who,  face  to  face  with  Christ, 
could  live  or  die  for  Him,  but  no  sooner  quits  His  presence  than  he  cannot  even 
hold  his  tongue  for  Him,  is  but  a  glass  in  which  we  may  see  ourselves  and  read 
a  warning  against  our  own  peril. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 


Yer.  40.  Various  attitudes  of  men 
towards  Christ. — In  ver.  27  we  found 
men  putting  questions  regarding 
Christ's  power;  in  ver.  40  we  find  a 
poor  sufferer  seeking  to  avail  himself 
of  Christ's  curative  energy.  This  marks 
the  great  difference  between  various 
classes  of  society  in  relation  to  the 
work  of  the  Saviour.  One  class  is 
content  with  looking,  wondering,  and 
perhaps  admiring ;  another  class  must 
test  His  power  in  direct  personal 
experience. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Christ  inspires  trust. — This  incident 
shows  the  trust  which  the  ministry  of 
the  Saviour  had  inspired  in  the  minds 
of  sufferers,  specially  so  in  the  case  of 
the  leper;  the  leper  lived  under  the 
most  terrible  restrictions,  yet  his  heart 
rose  to  the  point  of  trust  and  love  when 
he  heard  of  the  wonderful  works  of  this 
new  Man. — Ibid. 

Personal  faith  in  Christ. — This  man 
did  not  merely  believe  that  Jesus  Christ 
could  cleanse  a  leper,  but  that  He  could 
cleanse  him  !  It  is  very  easy  to  believe 
for  other  people.  There  is  really  no 
faith  in  such  impersonal,  proxy  con- 
fidence. The  true  faith  believes  for 
itself  first,  and  then  for  others. 

Sickness  and  the  soul. — Sicknesses 
and  diseases,  says  an  old  writer,  are 
often  necessary  to  the  soul's  health. 
God  knows  this  better  than  we ;  where- 
fore we  ought  to  resign  ourselves  into 
His  hands,  and  not  to  ask  for  health 
and  relief  absolutely,  but  conditionally, 
as  it  shall  please  God,  and  as  it  shall 
conduce  to  our  spiritual  good. 

Vers.  40-42.  Leprosy. — Leprosy  was 
regarded  as  the  symbol  of  sin  and  of 
judgment  (Num.  xii.  10 ;  2  Bangs  v.  26, 
xv.    5;    2    Chron.   xxvi.    20-23);    also 

44 


of   inscrutable  visitations  (Job  ii.  7). 

2.  Recovery  from  leprosy  was  regarded 
as  a  symbol  of  salvation,  as  in  the 
case  of  Naaman  (2  Kings  v.  2  :  cp. 
Ps.  Ii.  9,  with  Lev.  vi.  7).  3.  The 
uncleanness,  the  gradual  destruction 
of  the  system,  the  disgusting  appear- 
ance, and  the  unexpected  recovery  by 
a  full  outbreak  of  the  eruption — and, 
again,  the  slow  but  sure  progress  of 
the  disease,  the  isolation  of  those  who 
were  affected  by  it  from  the  society  of 
the  clean,  the  infectious  nature  of  the 
trouble,  its  long  duration  and  hope- 
lessness— presented  a  variety  of  views 
under  which  sin  and  guilt  with  its 
consequences  and  effects,  even  upon 
innocent  individuals,  might  be  sym- 
bolised.— J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

A  signal  instance  of  faith  in  Christ. 
— 1.  In  the  cures  wrought  by  Christ 
faith  was  ever  the  connecting  link 
between  cause  and  effect — the  channel 
which  conveyed  the  healing  balm  to 
the  festering  sore — the  medium  which 
brought  the  saving  power  of  God  to 
bear  upon  the  suffering  weakness  of 
man.  2.  Faith  in  the  heart  was  ever 
accompanied  by  confession  with  the 
mouth  and  expression  in  the  life.  As 
men  believed,  so  they  spoke  and  acted. 

3.  This  leper  came  to  Jesus,  besought 
Jesus,  and  confessed  his  faith  in  Jesus. 
So  far,  he  acted  like  the  blind  men 
at  Jericho  (Matt.  xx.  29-34),  and  the 
father  of  the  child  with  a  dumb  spirit 
(Mark  ix.  17-27).  But  this  leper's 
confession,  unlike  theirs,  was  made 
not  in  reply  to  any  question  put  by 
Christ,  but  of  his  own  voluntary 
motion.  His  soul  was  as  full  of  faith 
as  his  body  of  leprosy.  He  had  no 
doubt  whatever  as  to  Christ's  power 
to  heal;    yet  in   his    great   humility 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   I. 


he  would  not  dictate  to  the  Divine 
Physician,  but  leave  himself  entirely 
in  His  hands :  "If  Thou  art  willing, 
Thou  art  able  to  cleanse  me."  4.  To 
such  an  appeal  the  Saviour  had  but 
one  answer — the  echo  of  the  suppliant's 
cry :  "  I  will ;  be  thou  clean."  And 
as  He  uttered  these  gracious  words,  to 
show  that  He  could  do  what  He  would, 
and  would  do  what  He  could,  He  "  put 
forth  His  hand,  and  touched  him,"  and 
"immediately  the  leprosy  departed," 
etc.  5.  Behold  that  leper — as  he  was, 
and  as  he  is !  The  disease,  how  hope- 
less :  the  remedy,  how  sure  :  the  appli- 
cation of  that  remedy,  how  simple : 
the  cure,  how  speedy  and  complete ! 
That  hopeless  disease  was  leprosy : 
that  sure  remedy,  the  power  of  Christ : 
that  simple  application,  faith  in  Jesus  : 
that  swift  and  effectual  cure,  a  new 
creation ! 

Ver.  41.  Christ's  touch. — The  word 
"  be  clean "  was  sufficient  for  His 
healing  :  why  then  the  touch  ?  What 
an  illustration  of  Divinity!  1.  That 
He  could  touch  pollution  and  be  unde- 
fined. The  water  of  life  is  not  fouled 
by  the  corruption  of  those  who  come 
to  drink.  2.  This  was  Divine  sympathy. 
We  can  almost  hear  this  leper  say, 
"  Lord,  I  am  unclean,  vile,  sinful,  and 
separated  ;  no  one  can  even  touch  me, 
for  fear  of  pollution ;  oh,  heal  me ! " 
We  can  almost  feel  the  thrill  as  the 
healing  tide  responded  to  the  word  of 
Jesus,  and  the  new  love,  like  an  electric 
current,  came  at  His  touch.  3.  In  all 
Christian  work  the  loving  hand  should 
accompany  the  loving  word.  John  B. 
Gough  says  of  the  man  who  was  per- 
mitted to  reach  him,  "After  twenty 
years,  I  can  feel  the  power  and  love 
of  the  hand  that  was  laid  upon  my 
shoulder  that  night."  And  the  world 
has  felt  the  touch,  just  as  the  multi- 
tudes who  came  to  be  healed  felt  the 
word  and  touch  Jesus  gave  to  the 
leper. 

Christ's  helping  hand. — Like  a  sun- 
beam passing  through  foul  water  un- 
tarnished and  unstained,  or  like  some 
sweet  spring  such  as  travellers  tell  us 


rises  sometimes  in  the  midst;  of  the  salt 
sea  and  retains  its  freshness  and  pours 
it  over  the  surrounding  bitterness,  so 
Christ  takes  upon  Himself  our  nature, 
and  lays  hold  of  our  stained  hands  with 
the  hand  that  continues  pure  while  it 
grasps  us,  and  will  make  us  purer  if 
we  grasp  it. 

The  symbolic  teaching  of  this  miracle 
is  thus  expressed  by  Bede :  Typically, 
the  leper  represents  the  whole  race 
of  man  languishing  with  sins,  as  this 
sufferer,  full  of  leprosy,  for  "  all  have 
sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of 
God."  By  the  hand  of  the  Saviour 
put  forth — that  is,  by  the  Word  of  God 
become  incarnate  and  touching  human 
nature — they  are  cleansed  from  their 
old  transgression,  and  are  enabled  to 
hear  with  the  apostles  the  cheering 
words,  "  Now  ye  are  clean,  because  of 
the  word  which  I  have  spoken  unto 
you  "  ;  and  they  who  once,  as  abomin- 
able, were  excluded  from  the  city  of 
God,  are  now  brought  within  the 
Temple,  and  are  presented  unto  Him 
who  is  a  priest  for  ever,  and  offer  for 
their  cleansing  their  bodies  as  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God. 

Christ  touching  the  leprosies  of 
humanity. — How  often,  in  His  human 
life,  Christ  repeated  in  the  spirit  what 
He  here  did  in  the  body  !  When  He 
ate  with  the  publicans  and  sinners, 
endured  the  kiss  of  the  fallen,  sent  away 
uncondemned  the  penitent  adulteress, 
opened  paradise  to  .  the  dying  male- 
factor, He  was  again  and  again  touch- 
ing the  leprosies  of  humanity,  touching 
them  that  He  might  make  them  clean. 
And  when  His  Church  went  forth  from 
the  upper  chamber,  in  the  strength  of 
His  unseen  presence  and  His  Spirit's 
guidance,  and  stood  before  the  dying 
pagan  world ;  when  it  confronted  the 
hideous  profligacy  of  Corinth  or  Antioch, 
and  the  frivolous  scepticism  of  Athens, 
and  the  dark  devil-worship  of  Ephesus, 
and  the  coarse  brutality  of  Philippi,  and 
the  wild  fanaticism  of  Galatia,  and  the 
pitiless  cruelties  of  Rome, — then  over 
and  over  again  Christ  touched  the  leper 
and  made  him  clean  ;  and  through  the 
tainted  views  of  that  polluted  world 

45 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SI.   MARK. 


there  flowed  out  straight  from  Christ 
the  resistless  current  of  a  new  and 
purer  life.  The  history  of  the  first 
Christian  centuries  is  the  fulfilment  of 
that  of  which  this  miracle  was  the 
shadow  and  promise. — John  Ellerton. 

The  leprosies  of  modern  society. — 
Think  of  the  leprosies  of  modern 
English  society,  which  some  are  afraid 
to  touch,  which  too  many  have  touched 
to  their  sorrow  and  ruin.  Look  at  that 
great  subject  of  popular  amusements. 
There  is  plenty  of  corruption  and 
disease  there.  But  it  is  not  copying 
Christ  to  stand  aloof  from  it  all  and 
say,  "  Oh  !  these  things  are  all  so  bad, 
so  dangerous — the  vice  of  the  drama, 
the  frivolity  of  fashionable  pleasure, 
the  immorality  of  popular  fiction — 
these  are  so  great,  so  corrupting,  that 
we  must  ignore  them  ;  they  are  too 
bad  for  us  to  try  to  mend  them." 
And  it  is  pitiful  when  the  reaction 
from  this  moral  cowardice  comes,  and 
bright  young  lives  are  carried  along  by 
pleasure ;  when  with  a  sort  of  feeling 
that  they  are  defying  and  separating 
themselves  from  the  good  and  the 
serious,  they  touch  that  which  defiles, 
and  lose  their  purity  of  heart,  their 
faith  in  Christ,  their  longings  to  be 
His  for  ever.  We  want  men  and 
women  to  deal  with  this  question  of 
amusement  in  a  spirit  of  courageous 
faith — to  say,  "  These  things  need  not 
be  bad,  and  ought  not  to  be  bad ;  and 
if  we  bring  Christ's  touch  upon  them, 
we  can  and  will  purify  them — purify 
our  social  life,  our  politics,  our  business, 
our  commerce,  our  amusements,  aye, 
and  our  Churches  and  our  religious  life 
too,  for  they  too  need  the  outstretched 
hand  of  Christ  to  make  them  clean." — 
Ibid. 

Dogmatic  teaching  of  verse. — This 
verse  was  regarded  by  the  early 
Church  as  a  mine  of  dogmatic  teach- 
ing, specially  suitable  for  the  confu- 
tation of  heresy.  To  Photinus,  who 
taught  that  Jesus  was  a  mere  man 
and  in  no  sense  God,  was  objected  the 
word,  "  I  will,"  as  indicating  His  claim 
to  possess  an  almighty  will,  the  power 
to  heal  at  His  own  will.     To  Arius, 

46 


who  taught  the  inferiority  of  the  Son 
to  the  Father,  were  objected  the  words, 
"  I  will ;  be  thou  clean,"  as  claiming 
equality  of  power.  To  Manichseus, 
who  taught  that  Jesus  did  not  possess 
a  body  in  reality,  but  only  in  appear- 
ance, were  objected  the  words,  "  Jesus 
put  forth  His  hand,  and  touched  him." 

Yer.  42.  The  healing  of  the  leper  a 
sign  of  hope  to  the  world. — 1.  The  Lord 
can  restore,  even  where  a  case  seems 
desperate.     2.  He  is  willing  to  do  it. 

3.  He  does  it  by  entering  into  fellow- 
ship with  the  sufferings  of  the  world. 

4.  By  His  suffering  He  takes  away 
ours.  5.  He  separates  between  sin 
and  its  counterpart,  misery ;  thus 
taking  away  the  strength  of  sin. — 
J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  44.  The  use  and  abuse  of  testi- 
mony.— There  is  no  doubt  real  power 
in  personal  testimony,  but  it  is  quite 
possible  we  may  lay  too  much  stress 
upon  it;  and  that  is  the  danger  in 
the  present  day.  The  young  convert, 
before  he  has  had  any  experience,  is 
encouraged  to  tell  forth  his  story,  until 
there  is  this  danger — that  when  the 
devil  of  unbelief  is  driven  out,  the  devil 
of  pride  shall  enter  in,  and  the  man 
begins  to  think  that  he  has  done  some- 
thing very  great  in  trusting  in  Jesus. 
There  is  very  great  danger  of  pressing 
personal  testimony  too  far.  But  there 
is  real  use  of  testimony.  Our  Lord 
seems  to  indicate  it  here :  "  Tell  no 
man  ;  but  go  thy  way,  shew  thyself  to 
the  priest,  and  offer,"  etc.  It  would  be 
far  better  for  you  to  go  to  your  house 
in  solitude,  to  think  over  in  silence 
what  God  has  done  for  you,  and  there 
in  your  solitary  chamber  to  pour  out 
your  thanksgiving  to  God.  There  is 
more  real  true  work  done  in  the  still- 
ness of  solitude  than  if  you  go  and 
publish  abroad  what  Christ  has  done 
for  you.  But  there  is  a  testimony  you 
must  bring :  "Go  thy  way,  and  shew 
thyself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  the  gift 
that  Moses  commanded."  Not  so  much 
go  and  speak,  but  go  and  live ;  go  and 
shew,  not  so  much  go  and  tell  them 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.  I. 


I  am  a  cleansed  man,  but  let  them  see 
the  anointed  hand,  the  purified  ear. 
Let  them  see  the  life-blood  coursing 
through  your  veins,  and  that  you  have 
become  as  a  little  child,  humble  and 
faithful.  Go  and  shew  yourself  to  the 
priests.  And  who  are  they  ?  Those 
most  opposed  to  My  claims,  those  who 
hate  Me,  as  the  Messiah.  Go  and 
shew  thyself  to  My  enemies ;  they  will 
not  care  for  your  speaking,  but  it  will 
be  your  life  that  will  be  a  testimony 
to  them.  Then  go  and  offer  as  a  gift 
what  Moses  commanded.  If  Moses 
has  told  you  to  sprinkle  your  hand, 
your  ear,  your  feet — your  ear,  your 
hand,  and  your  foot,  and  every  part 
of  your  body  must  be  sanctified  not 
now  in  obedience  to  some  iron  law,  but 
as  expressive  of  your  heart's  gratitude 
for  what  Christ  has  done  for  you. — 
E.  A.  Stuart. 

Christ's  command. — What  our  Pro- 
phet commands  is  no  costly  offering, 
no  painful  penance — a  delightful  ser- 
vice, a  surrender  which  is  a  relief. 
That  we  offer  and  present  our  souls 
and  bodies  to  Him — that  we  trust 
our  way  to  Him  and  say,  "  I  will 
follow  Thee  " — that  we  snatch  ourselves 
away  from  the  old  tyrants,  from  whose 
hands  He  has  rescued  us,  and  watch 
against  any  hint  of  a  return  to  them — 
that  we  be  His  who  has  bought  us 
with  His  blood. 

Ver.  45.  A  fault  to  be  guarded 
against. — The  healed  leper  was  like 
those  who,  out  of  thankfulness  of  heart 
indeed,  but  yet  inconsiderately,  neglect 
the  inward  commandment  of  the  Holy 


Spirit,  and  make  too  much  talk  about 
the  grace  of  God,  to  their  own  and 
others'  hurt. — Von  Gerlach. 

Imprudence  better  than  apathy. — 
The  case  of  those  who  in  our  own 
days  are  led  to  do  things  of  which 
Christian  prudence  cannot  approve  is 
nearly  parallel ;  they  do  what  is  not 
right,  but  yet  it  may  be  easily  believed 
that  their  fault  is  in  some  cases  more 
easily  pardoned  than  the  coldness  and 
apathy  of  those  who  undertake  to  con- 
demn them. — Bishop  H.  Goodwin. 

Christ's  withdrawal.  —  Some  have 
thought  of  this  withdrawal  as  a  kind 
of  Levitical  quarantine,  in  acknow- 
ledgment of  the  ceremonial  uncleanness 
acquired  by  touching  the  leper,  which 
became  generally  known  from  the 
report  of  the  latter.  Certainly  the 
multitude  had  no  scruples  arising  from 
this  consideration,  and  it  is  more 
natural  to  suppose  that  Christ  refrained 
from  openly  entering  any  city  in  order 
to  avoid  the  applause  of  men,  and  the 
commotion  which,  at  this  moment,  His 
presence  would  have  excited.  Those 
who  really  desired  to  be  with  Him  for 
any  high  and  sufficient  reason  would 
follow  Him  even  into  the  wilderness ; 
but  He  would  not  thrust  Himself 
voluntarily  into  the  idle  throng,  which, 
for  any  or  no  cause,  is  collected  with 
little  notice  in  a  populous  town. — 
W.  J.  Deane. 

Retirement  from  the  world. — The 
more  a  servant  of  God  withdraws  him- 
self from  the  world,  the  more  highly 
does  the  world  esteem  him,  and  the 
more  likely  is  it  to  heed  his  admoni- 
tions. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    I. 


Ver.  1.  The  beginning  of  the  gospel. — In 
the  old  days  of  the  South,  a  negro  slave  and 
preacher  had  an  infidel  master.  The  master 
said  to  the  slave  one  day,  "  You  are  a 
preacher,  Sam  ? "  "  Wellj  I  tells  about  Jesus 
some,  massa."  "  Well,  if  you  are  a  preacher 
you  ought  to  understand  the  Bible.  Now 
tell  me  what  does  this  mean?"  And  he 
opened  the  Bible  and  read,  "  And  whom  He 
did  foreknow,  them  He  did  predestinate  " — 
words  that  have  puzzled  wiser  heads  than 
the  poor  slave.      "  Well,"  said    the   slave, 


"  massa,  where  is  it  ? "  "  It's  in  Romans," 
said  the  master.  "  Oh,  my  dear  massa !  I 
will  explain  dis  'ole  business  to  you.  It  is 
very  simple.  You  begin  with  Matthew,  and 
do  all  the  dear  Lord  tells  you  to  do  there  ; 
and  then  you  go  on  to  Mark,  and  Luke,  and 
John ;  and  when  you  get  to  that  place  it  is 
easy  enough,  but  you  can't  begin  there." 

The  gospel  seen,  though  never  heard. — A 
poor  Chinaman  came  to  a  missionary  to  ask 
for  baptism.  When  asked  where  he  had 
heard  the  gospel,  he  answered  he  had  never 

47 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


heard  the  gospel,  but  he  had  seen  it.  He 
then  told  of  a  poor  man  at  Ning-po  who  had 
once  been  a  confirmed  opium-smoker,  and 
a  man  of  violent  temper.  This  man  had 
learned  about  the  Christian  religion,  and  his 
whole  life  was  altered  ;  he  gave  up  the  opium, 
and  became  loving  and  amiable.  "Oh," 
said  the  candidate  for  baptism,  "  I  have  not 
heard  the  gospel,  but  1  have  seen  it." 

Ver.  2.  Eastern  roads. — The  Western  travel- 
ler who  first  sees  the  wretched,  difficult, 
dangerous  tracts  which  answer  for  Eastern 
roads,  will  wonder,  first,  that  they  are  pass- 
able at  all,  and,  second,  that  they  can  be  as 
frequently  travelled  as  they  are,  and  yet 
show  so  little  trace  of  the  animal's  feet. 
Long  after  he  has  ceased  to  think  that  he 
must  dismount  at  any  passage  seemingly 
impassable  on  the  back  of  his  animal,  long 
after  he  has  become  accustomed  to  mounting 
and  descending  places  far  more  difficult  and 
dangerous  than  going  up  and  down  stairs 
on  horseback,  he  will  wonder  whether  he 
can  be  really  on  the  road,  since  t  ere  are 
so  few  signs  of  travel.  Loose  stones  which 
certainly  ought  to  be  thrust  out  of  the  way 
persistently  keep  their  impertinent  place; 
larger  stones  are  wedged  in  for  a  few  feet, 
just  as  if  a  brook  had  made  its  way  along 
and  washed  away  the  earth,  so  that  a  suc- 
cession of  slips  and  stumblings  meet  the 
traveller  for  ages,  where  a  half-hour's  work 
would  have  left  a  good  passage  for  ever.  It 
is  only  when  going  over  smooth  rocks,  where 
the  horses'  feet  have  worn  an  actual  gutter, 
scarcely  twice  the  width  of  a  hoof,  and  that 
often  by  just  sliding,  that  one  realises  that 
he  is  on  the  beaten  road.  Beaten  :  the  very 
Oriental  word  for  a  road  means  just  that 
very  thing — something  beaten ;  and  the  word 
has  just  about  as  exact  a  coincidence  with 
the  English  word  as  can  be  in  all  its  other 
uses.    The  horses  know  it. 

Vers.  4-8.  John  Baptist  the  model  prophet 
and  ambassador. — Of  timidity  he  knew  no 
thing.  He  had  the  fear  of  God  within  him 
and  no  other  fear:  the  Divine  honour  and 
glory,  with  a  singular  abnegation  of  all  self- 
honour  and  self -glory.  Stranger  and  enemy 
to  all  tortuous  ways  and  sinister  policy  : 
loyal  to  principle,  without  deflection  or  com- 
promise. He  said  what  he  meant,  and 
meant  what  he  said — undeterred  by  frowns 
and  sneers,  false  etiquette  and  conventional- 
isms :  his  one  thought  and  aim  to  unmask 
hypocrisy,  and  vindicate  the  cause  and  claims 
of  righteousness.  He  felt  it  hi*  special 
mission  to  expose  the  degenerate  and  effete 
forms  of  religious  life.  In  doing  so  he 
spared  neither  regal  purple,  nor  hierarchal 
robe,  nor  rabbinical  phylactery,  if  under- 
neath these  lurked  iniquity  and  vice.  It 
was  like  the  reveille  which  wakes  up  at 
sunrise    the   sleeping    camp ;    or    like    the 

48 


trumpet-blast  or  beat  of  drum  preparatory 
to  the  battle-charge. — J.  R  Macduff,  D.D. 

The  Baptist  in  advance  of  his  age. — John 
was  in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  like  those 
gifted  men  in  the  world  of  thought,  or  in 
the  world  of  practical  life,  who  are  always 
ahead  of  the  mass  of  people  around  them ; 
they  have  the  inspiration  not  of  supernatural 
grace,  but  of  natural  genius,  itself  a  gift  of 
God,  but  of  a  different  order  of  value  and  of 
power.  They  are  like  lofty  mountains  whose 
summits  the  sun  has  already  lit  up,  while 
he  has  not  yet  risen  to  shine  upon  the  plain 
beneath.  Truth  has  come  to  them  before 
it  has  come  to  the  mass  of  men  around 
them.  It  has  come  to  them  as  to  its  pre- 
destined forerunners.  The  speculative  truth 
which  everybody  will  recognise  ten  years 
hence  they  see  now;  but  then  they  are 
alone  on  their  watchtower,  and  if  they  say 
what  they  think,  it  is  only  to  be  smiled 
down  as  enthusiasts.  The  practical  dis- 
coveries of  which  everybody  will  proclaim 
the  high  importance  in  another  generation 
these  men  advocate  now  amid  the  dis- 
couraging criticisms  of  friends  who  advise 
them  not  to  risk  capital  upon  a  wild  venture. 
The  social  improvement  or  the  public  re- 
form which  nobody  will  think  of  challenging 
when  it  has  become  at  no  distant  date  law 
or  custom  they  plead  for  now,  when  it  is 
denounced  either  as  reaction  or  revolution, 
when  it  is  generally  unpopular. —  Canon 
Liddon. 

Artistic  representations  of  the  Baptist. 
— Artists  who  have  attempted  to  paint  a 
picture  of  the  Baptist,  getting  their  idea 
of  his  appearance  from  a  profound  study 
of  his  character,  have  represented  him  as 
a  man  having  a  supernatural  look  on  his 
face,  with  eyes  that  seem  as  if  they  saw 
far  away,  and  the  countenance  of  one  who 
carries  at  the  same  time  a  great  burden  and 
a  great  joy.  Perhaps  more  nearly  than  any 
other  who  has  ever  lived  he  answers  our 
ideal  of  a  messenger  of  God. 

Socrates  preparing  the  way  for  Christ. 
— Marsilius  Fiscinus  bestowed  on  Socrates 
the  title  of  the  John  the  Baptist  of  the  Old 
World.  To  go  still  further,  as  some  have 
done,  and  compare  the  Greek  philosopher 
to  the  great  Ensample  of  perfect  love  and 
perfect  holiness,  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Son 
of  Man,  seems  to  us,  to  say  the  least,  scarcely 
reverential  or  Christian.  But  the  mission  of 
Socrates,  like  the  mission  of  the  greatest 
of  prophets,  was  to  prepare  the  way,  to 
make  straight  the  paths  for  Him  who  brought 
life  and  immortality  to  light  through  the 
gospel. 

Twofold  aspect  of  repentance. — Like  Janus 
Bifrons,  the  Roman  god  looking  two  ways, 
a  true  repentance  not  only  bemoans  the 
past  but  takes  heed  to  the  future.  Re- 
pentance, like  the  lights  of  a  ship  at  her 
bow  and  her  stern,  not  only  looks  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   I. 


track  she  has  made,  but  to  the  path  before 
her. 

A  startling  message. — The  message  "  re- 
pent," in  the  state  in  which  he  found  men, 
was  like  a  peal  of  thunder  at  midnight. 
The  nation  was  like  a  suddenly  awakened 
city,  in  fixed  terror  gazing  upon  black 
window-spaces  fitfully  and  incessantly  ablaze 
with  lightning-bursts,  awaiting  in  quivering 
dread  each  frightful  following  peal.  It  was 
midnight.  The  light  was  coming ;  but  John 
was  not  that  light.  He  came  to  waken  men. 
To  awaken  he  was  a  voice. 
,  Repentance  implies  change  of  mind  and 
^v  life. — One  of  Luther's  happiest  moments  was 
when,  reading  in  his  Greek  Testament,  he 
found  that  repentance  meant  a  change  of 
mind  rather  than  penance-doing.  A  captain 
at  sea  discovers  that  by  some  mistake  the 
steersman  is  steering  the  ship  directly  for 
the  rocks.  How  is  the  danger  to  be  avoided  ? 
By  scrubbing  the  decks  or  setting  the  men 
to  the  pumps  1  No  !  these  things  are  good 
enough  in  their  own  time  ;  but  if  the  ship  is 
to  be  saved,  one  thing  must  be  done — her 
course  must  be  changed.  So  the  captain 
utters  a  few  quick  words,  and  the  ship  turns 
and  speeds  away  from  the  danger.  John's 
preaching  was  in  like  manner  a  call  to  men 
to  turn  from  the  dangerous  rocks  of  sin,  and 
to  make  for  the  only  safe  haven.  Repent- 
ance  results  in  change  of  action.  Just  as  the 
whole  ship  turns  in  obedience  to  the  helm, 
so  the  change  of  mind  produces  a  change  of 
life.  Here  comes  in  the  well-known  story 
of  the  storekeeper  who  could  not  recollect 
the  sermon  ;  she  only  knew  that  after  it  she 
went  straight  home  and  destroyed  all  her 
light  weights.  A  Hindu  candidate  for 
Christian  baptism  was  asked  what  evidence 
he  had  to  offer  of  his  conversion.  "  For- 
merly," he  said,  "  I  was  proud  and  delighted 
in  evil,  but  since  I  heard  the  words  of  Jesus 
I  delight  in  these  things  no  more.' 

Repentance  the  way  to  heaven. — In  the 
neighbourhood  of  Hoddam  Castle,  Dum- 
friesshire, Scotland,  there  was  once  a  tower 
called  the  "  Tower  of  Repentance."  What 
gave  the  tower  its  name  we  are  not  told, 
but  it  is  said  that  an  English  baronet, 
walking  near  the  castle,  saw  a  shepherd  lad 
lying  upon  the  ground,  reading  attentively. 
"  What  are  you  reading,  lad  ?  "  "  The  Bible, 
sir."  "  The  Bible,  indeed  !  "  laughed  the 
gentleman ;  "  then  you  must  be  wiser  than 
the  parson.  Can  you  tell  me  the  way  to 
heaven  ? "  "  Yes,  sir,  I  can,"  replied  the 
boy,  in  no  way  embarrassed  by  the  mocking 
tone  of  the  other ;  "  you  must  go  by  way  of 
yonder  tower."  The  gentleman  saw  that  the 
boy  had  learned  right  well  the  lesson  of  his 
book,  and,  being  rebuked,  he  walked  away 
in  silence. 

Ver.  6.  The  girdle. — The  girdle  was  use- 
ful in  many  ways.    The  soldier  carried  his 


scimitar,  his  dagger,  and  in  later  days  his 
pistols — the  merchant  his  money — the  scribe 
his  writing  implements,  in  his  girdle.  It 
served  to  keep  the  garment  together,  and 
enabled  the  wearer  to  tuck  it  up  short  when 
engaged  in  any  active  operation ;  so  we 
read  of  Elijah  that  he  girded  up  his  loins 
before  he  ran  (1  Kings  xviii.  46),  and  our 
Lord  impressed  it  upon  His  disciples  that 
they  should  be  always  girded,  i.e.  active, 
ready,  and  prepared  for  any  emergency 
(Luke  xii.  35 :  cp.  Eph.  vi.  14 ;  1  Pet.  i.  13). 
—  W.F.Shaw. 

Power  of  self-denial. — John  came  to  de- 
nounce luxury,  and  soft  clothing,  and  sump- 
tuous fare,  and  he  was  a  living  example 
of  the  austerity  which  he  called  for.  And 
how  many  preachers  have  been  prompted  to 
imitate  him !  SS.  Martin  and  Dominic, 
Anselm  and  Borromeo,  and  a  host  of  others, 
have  themselves  worn  the  same  externals  of 
severity,  as  the  surest  way  of  recommending 
the  self-denial  they  sought  to  inculcate. 
And  though  such  asceticism  is  deprecated 
in  the  nineteenth  century,  history  bears 
abundant  witness  to  its  power  in  the  past. 
It  was  from  a  hard  life  in  the  desert  that 
SS.  Gregory  Nazianzen  and  Basil  came  forth 
to  preach  with  such  success  ;  and  Simon 
Stylites  was  by  no  means  a  solitary  instance 
to  show  men  of  active  lives  and  varied  occu- 
pations, how  even  kings,  burdened  with 
imperial  cares,  were  eager  to  seek  counsel 
and  direction  from  a  lonely  and  austere 
ascetic. — Dean  Luclwck. 

Ver.  7.  John's  inferiority  to  Jesus. — We 
have  seen  on  some  beautiful  morning  the  sun 
rising  in  glory  out  of  the  east,  and  the  moon 
still  fair  and  bright  in  the  west.  This  is 
what  I  think  of  when  I  think  of  Jesus  and 
the  Baptist.  The  rising  sun,  the  setting 
moon.  One  increaseth,  the  other  decreaseth. 
Not  because  they  antagonise  each  other,  but 
because  the  inferior  fades  before  the  superior 
splendour.  One  closes  the  dispensation  to 
which  it  belongs — the  night.  The  other 
opens  the  dispensation  which  belongs  to  it — 
the  day.  One  has  the  beauty  of  a  recluse  ; 
the  other  comes  to  mingle  with  the  activi- 
ties and  sorrows  and  joys  of  men.  One  gives 
borrowed  light  ;  the  other  is  light  in  its 
essence.  One  gives  light  that  is  transient ; 
the  other  stores  light  and  heat  in  everything 
that  it  touches.  The  one  is  negative — 
preaching  repentance ;  the  other  is  con- 
structive and  productive — founding  a  king- 
dom. 

Ver.  8.  The  soul  without  the  Spirit. — A 
modern  writer  compares  the  Church,  or  the 
soul,  without  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  to — 1.  Iron 
wire  laid  for  a  telegraph.  It  is  powerful 
only  when  attached  to  the  battery.  The 
later  invention  of  the  electric  light  would 
make  the  comparison  still  stronger.     The 

E  49 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


points,  or  the  fine  wire  of  the  lamp,  are  dark 
and  cold  till  the  connected  battery  makes 
them  give  forth  a  light  which  suggests  the 
sun  itself.  2.  He  compares  them  also  to 
water,  which,  when  cold,  is  solid,  brittle  ice  : 
"gently  warmed,  it  flows;  further  heated, 
it  mounts  to  the  sky  " ;  and  he  might  have 
added  that,  with  still  greater  heat,  it  becomes 
steam — the  greatest  working  force  known. 
3.  So,  "an  organ  filled  with  the  ordinary 
degree  of  air  which  exists  everywhere  is 
dumb.  Throw  in,  not  another  air,  but  an 
unsteady  current  of  the  same  air,  and  sweet, 
but  imperfect  and  uncertain,  notes  imme- 
diately respond  to  the  player's  touch;  in- 
crease the  current  to  a  full  supply,  and  every 
pipe  swells  with  music." 

Need  of  the  Spirit. — Here  is  a  noble 
ship.  .  .  .  The  forests  have  masted  her;  in 
many  a  broad  yard  of  canvas  a  hundred 
looms  have  given  her  wings.  Her  anchor 
has  been  weighed  to  the  rude  sea-chant; 
the  needle  trembles  on  her  deck ;  with  his 
eye  on  that  Friend,  unlike  worldly  friends, 
true  in  storm  as  in  calm,  the  helmsman 
stands  impatient  by  the  wheel.  And  when, 
as  men  bound  to  a  distant  shore,  the  crew 
have  said  farewell  to  wives  and  children, 
why,  then,  lies  she  there  over  the  self-same 
ground,  rising  with  the,  flowing  and  falling 
with  the  ebbing  tide?  The  cause  is  plain. 
They  want  a  wind  to  raise  that  drooping 
pennon  and  fill  these  empty  sails.  They 
look  to  heaven ;  and  so  they  may ;  out  of 
the  skies  their  help  must  come.  At  length 
their  prayer  is  heard.  .  .  .  And  now,  like  a 
steed  touched  by  the  rider's  spur,  she  starts, 
bounds  forward,  plunges  through  the  waves, 
and,  heaven's  wind  her  moving  power,  is  off 
and  away,  amid  blessings  and  prayers,  to 
the  land  she  is  chartered  for.  Even  so, 
though  heaven-born,  heaven-called,  heaven- 
bound,  though  endowed  with  a  new  heart 
and  new  mind,  we  stand  in  the  same  need  of 
celestial  influences. — T.  Guthrie,  JD.D. 

Vers.  9-11.  Christ  the  rainbow  of  the  new 
covenant. — The  baptism  of  our  Saviour  stands 
us  under  the  gospel,  instead  of  the  same 
comfort,  which  the  rainbow  afforded  unto 
the  old  world.  The  rainbow  is  a  reflexion 
of  the  sunbeams  in  a  watery  cloud,  and  was 
ordained  as  a  sign  of  pacification  (Gen.  ix.  13) 
that  God's  anger  should  no  more  strive  with 
man.  Such  a  rainbow  was  Jesus  Christ 
(Rev.  iv.  3).  Look  upon  Him,  not  standing 
majestically  in  a  cloud  above,  but  wading, 
like  a  humble  servant,  into  the  waters  of 
Jordan  beneath ;  look  upon  Him,  how  He 
sanctifies  that  element,  which  was  once  a 
means  to  drown  the  world,  and  now  is  made 
a  means  to  save  it ;  look  upon  Him  in  that 
posture,  as  a  rainbow  in  the  water,  and  you 
may  read  God's  sure  covenant  with  His 
whole  Church,  that  His  anger  is  pacified  in 
His  well-beloved  Son,  and  that  He  will  be 

50 


gracious  with  His  inheritance  (John  i.  29; 
Eph.  ii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21). — Bishop  Hacket. 

A  further  revelation  of  the  Godhead. — 
There  are  some  of  our  ancient  cathedrals, 
such  as  York  and  Lincoln,  crowned  with 
triple  towers ;  yet  when  seen  afar  off  in  the 
blue  distance,  only  a  single  mass  of  building 
can  be  discerned;  but  when  advancing  on 
our  journey  nearer,  we  perceive  that  there 
are  towers,  though  perhaps  we  cannot  clearly 
trace  their  form  or  number — but  when  we 
arrive  yet  closer,  we  can  see  and  admire  the 
grand  central  tower,  and  the  two  western 
campaniles  in  all  their  grace  and  majesty. 
So  the  old  world  was  taught  first  to  recognise 
the  Unity  of  God  ;  then  as  the  ages  passed 
away  the  Second  and  the  Third  Persons  of 
the  Trinitj7  were  revealed ;  and  at  last  in 
the  fulness  of  time  we  behold  the  glory  of  the 
Most  Sacred  Trinity  made  manifest  to  men  1 
When  the  Incarnate  Redeemer  went  down 
into  Jordan,  the  heavenly  light  of  the  Divine 
Spirit  descended  "as  a  dove,"  whilst  the 
Father's  voice  proclaimed  His  almighty 
sanction  I 

Ver.  9.  The  fellowship  of  penitence. — A 
strange  thing  happened  a  few  years  ago  in 
an  American  court  of  justice.  A  young  man 
Was  asked  if  he  had  aught  to  say  why  the 
extreme  penalty  should  not  be  passed  upon 
him.  At  that  moment  a  grey-haired  man, 
his  face  furrowed  with  sorrow,  stepped  into 
the  prisoner's  box  unhindered,  placed  his 
hand  affectionately  upon  the  culprit's 
shoulder,  and  said,  "  Your  honour,  we  have 
nothing  to  say.  The  verdict  which  has 
been  found  against  us  is  just.  We  have 
only  to  ask  for  mercy."  "  We  "  ! — there  was 
nothing  against  the  old  father  ;  yet  in  that 
moment  he  lost  himself,  and  identified  his 
very  being  with  that  of  his  wayward  boy. 
So  in  His  baptism  Christ  pushes  His  way  to 
a  place  beside  us,  lays  His  hand  upon  the 
sinner's  shoulder,  and  bears  the  shame  and 
sorrow  with  him. 

Vers.  12,  13.  Quarantania. — This  wilder- 
ness has  been  identified,  by  the  voice  of 
tradition,  in  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches, 
as  that  wild  and  lonely  region  between 
Jerusalem  and  the  Dead  Sea,  called  in 
modern  geography  Quarantania.  It  is  an 
extensive  plateau,  elevated  to  a  considerable 
height  above  the  plain  of  Jericho  and  the 
west  bank  of  the  Jordan  ;  and  hence  the 
literal  accuracy  of  the  expression  in  St. 
Matthew,  that  Jesus  was  "  led  up  "  into  the 
wilderness.  Travellers  have  described  it  as 
a  barren,  sterile  waste  of  painful  whiteness, 
shut  in  on  the  west  by  a  ridge  of  grey  lime- 
stone hills,  moulded  into  every  conceivable 
shape  ;  while  on  the  east  the  view  is  closed 
by  the  gigantic  wall  of  the  Moab  mountains, 
appearing  very  near  at  hand,  but  in  reality 
a  long  way  off,  the  deception  being  caused  by 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


chap.  I. 


the  nature  of  the  intervening  ground,  which 
possesses  no  marked  features,  no  difference 
of  colour  on  which  to  fix  the  eye  for  the 
purpose  of  forming  an  estimate  of  distance. 
Over  this  vast  expanse  of  upland  country 
there  are  signs  of  vegetation  only  in  two 
or  three  places,  where  winter  torrents  have 
scooped  out  a  channel  for  themselves,  and 
stimulate  year  after  year  into  brief  existence 
narrow  strips  of  verdure  along  their  banks. 
The  monotony  of  the  landscape  and  the 
uniformity  of  its  colouring  are  varied  only 
when  the  glaring  afternoon  sun  projects  the 
shadows  of  the  ghostly  rocks  across  the 
plain,  or,  at  rare  intervals,  when  a  snowy 
cloud,  that  seems  as  if  born  of  the  hills 
themselves,  sails  across  the  deep-blue  sky 
and  casts  down  on  the  desolate  scene  the 
cool,  dark  mantle  of  its  shade.  A  more 
dreary  and  lonely  scene  it  is  impossible  to 
imagine. — H.  Maemillany  D.D. 

Great  temptations. — The  story  of  the 
Temptation  is  peculiar,  but  not  wholly 
unique.  It  is  not  without  its  parallel  in 
human  experience,  not  without  its  analogue 
in  literature  and  history.  The  great  heroes 
whom  the  world  reveres  have  passed  through 
similar  experiences  of  test  and  trial.  Thus, 
in  the  legends  of  the  East,  there  is  brought 
to  us  the  story  of  the  temptation  of  Buddha 
on  that  night  when  all  the  powers  of  evil 
gathered  around  about  him  to  assail  him  by 
violence  or  to  entice  him  by  wiles. 

"  Nor  knoweth  one, 
Not  even  the  wisest,  how  those  fiends  of  hell 
Battled  that  night  to  keep  the  truth  from 

Buddh : 
Sometimes  with    terrors    of    the    tempest, 

blasts 
Of  demon-armies  clouding  all  the  wind 
With  thunder,  and  with  blinding  lightning 

flung 
In  jagged  javelins  of  purple  wrath 
From  splitting  skies ;  sometimes  with  wiles 

and  words 
Fair-sounding,     'mid     hushed     leaves    and 

softened  airs 
From   shapes  of  witching  beauty ;  wanton 

songs, 
Whispers  of    love;    sometimes    with  royal 

allures 
Of  proffered  rule  ;  sometimes  with  mocking 

doubts, 
Making  truth  vain." 

So,  in  the  mythology  of  Greece,  we  have 
the  story  of  the  temptation  of  Hercules. 
Pleasure  comes  to  him  in  wanton  but  be- 
witching form,  and  bids  him  follow  her,  and 
promises  him  the  cup  of  pleasure  and  that 
he  shall  drink  of  it.  She  will  strew  his  path 
with  flowers  all  the  way,  and  accompany 
him  with  song  and  dancing.  Wisdom  comes 
to  him  with  sterner  voice — with  beauty, 
indeed,  but  with  solemn  and  almost  for- 
bidding beauty— and  calls  him  to  combat 


and  to  battle  that  he  may  win  manhood. 
So  in  the  later  history  of  the  Church  is  the 
strange,  mystical  story  of  the  temptation  of 
St.  Anthony,  with  its  wiles  and  its  entice- 
ments, with  its  demons  inviting  to  sin  by 
smiles,  and  its  demons  tormenting  with 
red-hot  pincers.  In  human  history  we  find 
the  same  or  like  record.  We  have  like 
temptations  in  the  lives  of  John  Wesley,  of 
Luther,  of  Xavier,  of  Loyola.  Open  the  page 
of  history  where  you  will,  and  you  can  hardly 
find  the  story  of  any  great,  noble,  prophetic 
soul  that  has  not  had  its  hour  of  battle  with 
the  powers  of  darkness.  As  in  the  story  of 
Napoleon  the  Great,  concerning  whom  history 
tells  us  that  for  two  long  months  he  struggled 
over  the  question  whether  he  should  divorce 
his  faithful  wife  and  take  another  that  he 
might  build  up  a  European  dynasty,  and 
came  out  from  his  chamber  after  the  last 
night  of  battle  with  a  face  so  pallid,  so 
wrought  upon  by  the  struggle,  that  it  was  as 
no  face  he  ever  shewed  after  the  hottest 
battlefield  of  Europe.  But  love  went  down 
before  the  hope  of  ambition  in  that  battle ; 
and  the  devil  won. 

Tempted  like  as  we  are.—  It  is  recorded 
of  the  great  soldier,  the  gallant  Montrose, 
that  finding  his  followers  ill  provided  with 
armour,  he  stripped  off  breastplate,  and 
steel  cap,  with  his  stout  leathern  coat, 
and  rode  into  battle  in  his  bared  shirt- 
sleeves, at  the  head  of  his  men,  to  show 
them  that  he  scorned  to  use  defences  of 
which  they  could  not  avail  themselves. 
Even  so  our  Great  Captain  laid  aside  the 
panoply  of  heaven,  and  as  a  man  entered 
into  the  conflict. 

Temptation  following  on  privileges. — 
Pirates,  when  they  see  a  ship  set  sail  for 
a  rich  cargo  to  foreign  parts,  keep  away, 
and  take  no  notice  of  her ;  they  let  her  go 
by  in  peace ;  but  when  she  is  coming  back 
from  that  foreign  port,  laden  with  rich 
goods,  the  case  is  very  different.  Then  the 
pirate  uses  all  his  efforts  to  take  that  ship, 
and  leaves  no  means  untried.  So  with  us  ; 
after  Holy  Communion  the  devil  knows  that 
we  are  very  dear  to  God,  and  have  received 
Christ. 

Satan  vanquished. — There  is  in  Tintern 
churchyard,  not  far  from  the  grand  ruins  of 
the  abbey,  a  defaced  and  broken  tombstone, 
grass-grown,  and  whereon  only  one  sentence 
can  be  read  ;  it  consists  of  these  striking 
words — "  I  tread  Satan  under  my  feet,"  not 
a  word  more ;  it  is  the  record  of  an  unknown 
fight,  and  a  nameless  victory  over  the  wiles 
of  the  devil.  Such  may,  through  Christ's 
help,  be  one  day  the  triumphant  exclamation 
of  us  all. 

Ver.  14.  Eastern  prisons. — In  the  East 
imprisonment  means  a  far  harder  fate,  as  a 
rule,  than  we  can  realise.  At  Gaza  I  saw 
a  crowd  of  men  caged  up  in  a  small  barred 

51 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


space,  with  no  room  to  move,  and  no  means 
of  attending  to  they  personal  cleanliness; 
and  at  Rome,  the  Tullianum,  below  the 
Capitol,  still  shews,  in  its  subterranean 
horrors,  the  dire  misery  inflicted  in  antiquity, 
on  persons  accused,  whether  innocent  or 
guilty.  John,  however,  must,  at  times,  have 
been  allowed  to  sit— perhaps  in  another 
Gaza  cage— where  he  could  see  and  be  seen, 
for  his  disciples  could  converse  with  him. — 
C.  Geihie,  D.D. 

Ver.  15.  After  John  comes  Christ. — The 
human  heart  is  a  castle ;  repentance  is  the 
gate  that  opens  to  admit  the  gospel.  If  that 
gate  is  not  opened,  heaven's  artillery  must 
flame  forth  against  it.  Christ  comes  to  the 
loyal  heart  as  a  welcome  guest,  to  the  re- 
bellions as  a  conquering  king.  What  the 
water  cannot  purify,  the  fire  must  burn. 

The  longer  repentance  is  delayed,  the 
li-  '  harder  it  becomes. — Blot  a  copy-book  all 
over,  and  you  will  find  it  a  hard  matter  to 
erase  the  marks.  Twist  the  growing  sapling, 
and  you  will  never  be  able  to  straighten  it, 
when  it  is  grown.  Here  comes  in  the  story 
of  the  boy  whose  father  drove  a  nail  into 
a  post  for  every  fault,  and  took  one  out 
for  every  good  action.  Once  it  happened 
that  the  post  was  entirely  cleared.  "  Ah, 
father,"  said  the  boy  in  tears,  "  the  marks 
are  left  1 " 

Low  in  repentance,  but  high  in  faith. — 
An  old  saint,  on  his  death-bed,  once  used 
this  remarkable  expression :  "  Lord,  sink  me 
low  as  hell  in  repentance  ;  but " — and  here 
is  the  beauty  of  it — "  lift  me  high  as  heaven 
in  faith."  The  repentance  that  sinks  a  man 
low  as  hell  is  of  no  use  except  there  is  the 
faith  that  lifts  him  as  high  as  heaven,  and 
the  two  are  perfectly  consistent  with  each 
other.  Ob,  how  blessed  it  is  to  know  where 
these  two  lines  meet — the  stripping  of  re- 
pentance, and  the  clothing  of  faith  1 

Clirisfs  watchword  :  Repent  /—  In  His  re- 
corded career  the  close  student  can  find 
every  modern  character  met  by  Christ  and 
instructed.  In  these  cures  of  sick  souls 
is  there  a  common  base-line  of  operations  ? 
If  you  look  in  at  a  watchmaker's  window,  you 
find  the  repairer  doing  a  different  thing  to 
almost  every  watch.  One  wants  a  new 
mainspring,  but  otherwise  is  in  good  order ; 
another  has  no  fault  with  the  mainspring, 
but  wants  new  jewels.  Another  has  neither 
of  these  faults,  but  a  broken  crystal.  At 
least  we  may  say  there  is  no  one  fault 
which  in  every  watch  demands  repairing. 
The  souls  of  men  which  Christ  repaired,  are 
they  like  the  watches,  each  righted  in  differ- 
ent ways,  and  only  casually  presenting  the 
same  defect  ?  Is  Zaccheus  repaired  as  to 
avarice,  and  otherwise  not  touched  ;  Paul  as 
to  intense  bigotry,  a  very  different  fault  you 
gee  ;  the  outcast  as  to  chastity  ;  Nicodemus 
as  to  his  opinions,  but  otherwise  not,  and 

52 


not  needing  1  Is  Christ's  salvation  patch- 
work ?  Or  is  there  in  every  soul  which  the 
Restorer  set  right  one  and  the  same  radical 
fault,  treated  in  reality  in  the  same  way, 
though  with  different  outward  methods  of 
approach  ?  To  every  man  He  said,  "  Re- 
pent." It  is  the  common  base-line  of  cure. 
It  is  as  if  the  mainspring  was  broken  in  us 
all. — E.  J.  Haynes. 

"  Repent." — Christ  began  His  ministry 
with  that  word,  preaching  it.  Think  what 
it  is  to  preach  "  Repent "  to  a  promiscuous 
audience.  Are  there  none  who  need  not 
the  message?  You  are  a  physician,  and 
before  you  stand  three  men.  You  preach 
a  cure  to  them,  feeling  no  man's  pulse, 
nor  taking  other  diagnosis.  "  Diet,  gentle- 
men. Be  careful  of  your  food,  that's  the 
cure."  "  But,  doctor,"  objects  the  first  man, 
"  that  applies  to  the  next  man,  for  he 
has  gout ;  I,  however,  have  a  broken  leg, 
and  the  third  man  a  cataract  on  the  eye." 
Multiply  the  three  men  by  one  hundred.  It 
is  the  city  hospital.  How  absurd  this  curing 
at  arm's-length,  standing  at  one  end  of  the 
ward,  with  one  word.  Not  a  specific 
hospital,  not  if  all  its  sufferers  had  trouble 
of  the  eye,  could  be  so  treated.  Yet  Christ 
stood  and  preached  to  hundreds  of  sick 
souls,  and  sent  His  ministers  to  do  likewise, 
with  one  word, "  Repent."  Every  man  needs 
then  to  repent;  it  is  the  beginning  of  the 
cure,  if  the  Physician  is  to  be  believed. — 
Ibid. 

The  salvation  of  man  depends  upon  his 
subjection  to  the  rule  of  God. — To  a  ship's 
company  who  have  mutinied  and  deposed 
their  captain,  who  alone  knows  how  to  steer 
the  vessel,  there  can  be  no  deliverance  from 
tempest  or  from  rocks,  except  by  their  sub- 
mission and  renewed  allegiance.  To  a  world 
fallen  into  disbelief  and  disobedience,  there 
can  be  no  hope  except  through  the  obedi- 
ence of  faith.  To  a  revolted  world  groaning 
and  travailing  under  the  usurper's  heel, 
there  can  be  no  gospel  but  the  glad  tidings 
of  the  reign  of  God. 

The  gospel  call. — There  is  a  touching 
poem  by  Felicia  Hemans,  in  which  she 
describes  a  Crusader  who  has  been  taken 
captive  by  the  Saracens,  and  who,  whilst 
chained  in  the  dungeons  of  some  fortress  in 
Palestine,  hears  the  sound  of  a  Crusading 
squadron  passing  through  the  valley  beneath 
the  towers  of  the  castle  where  he  lies  in 
fetters.  He  listens  to  the  tramp  of  the 
horsemen,  the  murmur  of  their  words,  and 
the  high,  clear  notes  of  the  trumpets,  as 
they  ring  out  with  a  challenge  as  they  pass 
along,  and  then  those  notes  grow  fainter 
and  weaker  and  pass  away  altogether.  Not 
so,  however,  with  the  trumpet  voice  of  the 
gospel's  call.  Again  and  again  it  summons 
the  sinner  to  repent  and  believe — to  escape 
by  God's  grace  from  the  dungeon  of  evil 
habits,  and  to  obey  the  call  of  God. 


B0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   I. 


God  demands  belief. — "  What  does  that 
mean  ?  "  said  a  Christian  disciple  to  an  elder 
brother,  as  he  referred  to  a  certain  passage 
of  Scripture.  "  What  does  it  say  1 "  was  the 
answer.  He  read  the  passage  over.  "  It 
says  so  and  so."  "  Well,  then,  it  means 
what  it  says."  This  first  lesson  in  Scriptural 
exposition  is  one  of  the  most  important  that 
can  be  learned.  A  preacher  of  the  gospel 
once  addressed  a  note  to  another  minister, 
inquiring,  "  How  do  you  interpret  such  and 
such  passages  ?  "  The  answer  was  about  as 
follows :  "  Dear  sir,  I  do  not  interpret  God's 
Word  ;  I  believe  it,  and  I  advise  you  to  do 
the  same." 

Ver.  16.  The  Sea  of  Galilee.— Dr.  Tristram, 
describing  his  approach  to  the  Sea  of  Galilee 
from    Nazareth,    says :    "  For    nearly   three 
hours  we  had  ridden  on,  with  Hermon   in 
front,   sparkling   through    its    light    cloud- 
mantle,   but  still  no  sight   of  the   Sea  of 
Galilee.    One  ridge  after  another  had  been 
surmounted,  when   on  a   sudden  the   calm 
blue  basin,  slumbering  in  placid  sweetness 
beneath  its  surrounding  wall  of  hills,  burst 
upon  us,  and  we  were  looking  down  on  the 
hallowed   scenes    of    our    Lord's    ministry. 
We  were  on  the  brow  of  a  very  steep  hill. 
Below  us  was  a  narrow  plain,  sloping  to  the 
sea,  the  beach  of  which  we  could  trace  to 
its  northern  extremity.    At  our  feet  lay  the 
city  of  Tiberias,  the  only  remaining  town  on 
its  shores,  enclosed  by  crumbling  fortifica- 
tions,   with    shattered    but    once    massive 
round   bastions.     Along  that   fringe,  could 
we  have  known  where  to  find  them,  lay  the 
remains  of  Cborazin,  Bethsaida,  and  Caper- 
naum.   Opposite  to  us  were  the  heights  of 
the  country  of  the  Gadarenes,  and  the  scene 
of  the  feeding  of  the  five  thousand.     On 
some   one  of  the  slopes    beneath    us    the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  was  delivered.     The 
first  gaze  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  lighted  up 
with  the  bright  sunshine  of  a  spring  after- 
noon, was  one  of  the  moments  of  life  not 
soon  or  easily  forgotten.     It  was  different 
from  my  expectations ;    our  view   was   so 
commanding.     In  some  respect  it  recalled  in 
miniature  the   first  view  of   the   Lake    of 
Geneva,  from  the  crest  of  the  Jura,  as  it  is 
approached  by  the  old  Besancon  road — Her- 
mon taking  the  place  of  Mont  Blanc,  the 
Plain  of  Gennesaret  recalling  the  Pays  de 
Vaud,  and  the  steep  banks  opposite  the  bold 
coast  of  Savoy.    All  looked  small  for  the 
theatre   of  such  great  events,  but  all  the 
incidents  seemed  brought  together  as  in  a 
diorama.    There  was  a  calm  peacefulness  in 
the  look  of  these  shores  on  the  west,  with  the 
paths  by  the  water's  edge,  which  made  them 
the  fitting  theatre  for  the  delivery  of  the 
message  of  peace  and  reconciliation." 

Fishermen  make  ready  converts. — It  is  a 
singular  fact  that  the  fisher  caste  have 
been  in  every  country  in  India  the  earliest 


converts  to  the  Koman  Catholic  Church,  so 
much  so  as  to  render  it  worthy  of  inquiry, 
whether  it  be  only  a  coincidence,  or  the  re- 
sult of  some  permanent  and  predisposing 
cause.  Is  it  that  there  is  an  habitual  ten- 
dency to  veneration  of  the  Supreme  Being 
in  "  those  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships, 
and  see  His  power  in  the  great  deep  "  ?  Or 
is  it  that,  being  a  low  caste  themselves,  the 
fishers  of  India  and  Ceylon  acquire  a.  higher 
status  by  espousing  Christianity?  Or  have 
they  some  sympathy  with  a  religion  whose 
first  apostles  and  teachers  were  the  fishermen 
of  Galilee  ? — Sir  J.  E.  Tennant.  ■ 

The  casting-net  is  a  fine  web  of  strong 
material,  generally  beautiful  in  every  work- 
manlike respect.  When  open,  it  is  either 
circular  or  more  or  less  conical.  Its  rim 
carries  leaden  weights,  to  sink  it  to  the 
bottom  when  thrown.  It  is  often  used  from 
boats,  and  that  even  when  a  seine  is  used 
at  the  same  time ;  but  still  oftener  from  the 
rocky  shore.  The  fisherman  runs  along  the 
rocks  with  his  net  on  his  arm,  drawn  up  into 
a  rope-like  bundle,  and  wound  about  above 
his  wrist.  His  motions  are  very  stealthy  as 
he  nears  the  place  to  throw ;  his  net  is  taken 
into  his  hand,  with  the  slack  so  disposed  as 
to  work  just  as  he  wants  it ;  sometimes  using 
one  hand,  sometimes  two  hands,  for  the 
throw.  As  he  comes  to  the  spot,  instantly 
the  net  Hies  off,  expanding  from  a  lean,  wet 
swab  to  a  circle,  and  thus  goes  down  upon 
and  into  the  water,  with  little  splash ;  per- 
haps close  by,  perhaps  thirty  feet  away. 
Scarcely  has  the  net  touched  the  water  before 
the  thrower  is  in  after  it ;  for  if  he  was  not 
already  naked  his  garment  is  off  in  a  twink- 
ling. He  dives  down,  gathers  up  the  net 
by  its  edge,  and  then  comes  back,  to  take 
out  the  fish  and  wrap  them  up  in  the  bosom 
of  his  garment. — Prof.  I.  H.  Hall. 

Ver.  17.  Ministers  are  fishers. — A  busy 
profession,  a  toilsome  calling,  no  idle  man's 
occupation,  as  the  vulgar  conceive  it,  nor 
needless  trade,  taken  up  at  last  to  pick  a 
living  out  of.  Let  God's  fishermen  busy 
themselves  as  they  must,  sometimes  in  pre- 
paring, sometimes  in  mending,  sometimes  in 
casting  abroad,  sometimes  in  drawing  in  the 
net,  that  they  may  "  separate  the  precious 
from  the  vile,"  etc.  (Jer.  xv.  19;  Matt.  xiii.  48) ; 
and  no  man  shall  have  just  cause  to  twit 
them  with  idleness,  or  to  say  they  have  an 
easy  life. — John  Trapp. 

The  minister  as  a  fisherman  must  fit  him- 
self for  his  employment. — If  some  fish  will 
bite  only  by  day,  he  must  fish  by  day;  if 
others  will  bite  only  by  moonlight,  he  must 
fish  for  them  by  moonlight. — Richard  Cecil. 

Fishers  of  men. — I  have  known  a  con- 
gregation so  full  of  kindly  Christian  workers 
that  in  the  low  neighbourhood  in  which  they 
worked  they  got  the  nickname  of  "  Grippers." 
Some,  hearing  the  name,  thought  it  must 

53 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


be  a  new  sect,  but  it  only  marked  the  old 
apostolic  quality.  All  Christians  ought  to 
pray  for  this  power  of  catching  souls.  It  is 
not  violence,  loudness,  or  terror  that  gives 
it ;  but  love,  goodness,  the  clear  and  strong 
convictions  that  come  from  following  Christ. 
— R.  Glover. 

Christ 's  power  to  shape  men. — In  a  rough 
stone,  a  cunning  lapidary  will  easily  foresee 
what  his  cuttiDg,  and  his  polishing,  and  his 
art  will  bring  that  stone  to.  A  cunning 
statuary  discerns  in  a  marble  stone  under 
his  feet,  where  there  will  arise  an  eye,  and 
an  ear,  and  a  hand,  and  other  lineaments 
to  make  it  a  perfect  statue.  Much  more  did 
our  Saviour  Christ,  who  was  Himself  the 
author  of  that  disposition  in  them,  foresee 
in  these  fishermen  an  inclinableness  to  be- 
come useful  in  that  great  service  of  His 
Church.  Therefore  He  took  them  from  their 
own  ship,  but  He  sent  them  from  His  Cross ; 
He  took  them  weatherbeaten  with  north 
and  south  winds,  and  rough-cast  with  foam 
and  mud ;  but  He  sent  them  back  soupled, 
and  smoothed,  and  levigated,  quickened,  and 
inanimated  with  that  spirit  which  He  had 
breathed  into  them ;  He  took  fishermen,  and 
He  sent  fishers  of  men. — J.  Bonne,  D.D. 

Ver.  18.  Following  Christ  at  cost  to  self. — 
In  1695  Madame  Guy  on  was  imprisoned  in 
the  Castle  of  Vincennes,  on  her  refusal  to 
abandon  her  religious  convictions,  and  cease 
to  preach  Christ  to  her  friends.  To  her 
brother,  who  besought  her  to  throw  off  her 
religion,  she  wrote,  "  If  your  house,  my  dear 
brother,  had  been  made  of  precious  stones, 
and  if  I  could  have  been  treated  and  honoured 
in  it  as  a  queen,  yet  I  should  have  for- 
saken all  to  follow  after  God."  It  is  said  of 
Nebridius  that  he  left  his  native  country, 
where  he  lived  in  great  luxury,  forsook 
friends  and  kindred,  to  go  into  a  foreign 
city  to  live,  in  the  most  ardent  search  after 
truth  and  wisdom.  He  forsook  all  to  become 
a  disciple  of  wisdom.  So  must  we  make 
everything  else  of  a  secondary  nature,  and 
give  Christ  the  firstfruits  of  our  hands,  hearts, 
hopes. 

Ver.  23.  An  unclean  spirit  the  essence  of 
pollution. — It  is  not  every  unclean  thing  that 
offends  the  sight,  while  the  slightest  stain 
upon  some  things  will  excite  in  us  deep 
dislike;  the  feeling  depends  entirely  upon 
the  nature  of  the  thing,  and  the  purpose  to 
which  it  is  applied.  We  pass  by  an  unclean 
stone  unnoticed.  .  .  .  But  rising  a  step  higher 
in  the  scale  of  creation,  to  an  unclean  plant, 
we  become  conscious  of  a  slight  emotion  of 
dislike,  because  we  see  that  which  might 
have  pleased  the  eye  and  have  beautified  a 
spot  in  creation  disfigured  and  useless.  An 
unclean  animal  creates  our  dislike  still  more, 
for  instead  of  proving  useful  in  any  way 
it  is  merely  a  moving  pollution.     But  an 

54 


unclean  human  being  excites  our  loathing 
more  than  all;  it  presents  our  nature  in  a 
light  so  disgusting  that  it  lessens  our  pity 
for  him  if  he  be  miserable,  and  excites  in  us 
ideas  of  disease,  contamination,  and  pain. 
But  an  unclean  spirit — it  is  loathsome  above 
all  things.  It  is  the  soul  and  essence  of 
pollution ;  it  is  the  spectacle  which  excites 
the  deep  dislike  of  God  Himself. — F.  F, 
Trench. 

Vers.  25,  26.  Restored  harmony.  —  The 
legend  runs  that  there  once  stood  in  an  old 
baronial  castle  a  musical  instrument  upon 
which  nobody  could  play.  It  was  compli- 
cated in  its  mechanism,  and  during  years 
of  misuse  the  dust  had  gathered  and  clogged 
it,  while  dampness  and  variations  of  tem- 
perature had  robbed  the  strings  of  their 
tone.  Various  experts  had  tried  to  repair 
it,  but  without  success,  and  when  the  band 
of  a  player  swept  over  the  chords  it  woke 
only  harsh  discords  and  unlovely  sounds. 
But  there  came  one  day  to  the  castle  a  man 
of  another  sort.  He  was  the  maker  of  the 
instrument,  and  saw  what  was  amiss,  and 
what  was  needed  for  its  repair,  and  with 
loving  care  and  skill  he  freed  the  wires  from 
dust,  and  adjusted  those  which  were  awry, 
and  brought  the  jangling  strings  into  tune, 
and  then  the  hall  rang  with  bursts  of  ex- 
quisite music.  So  with  these  souls  of  ours, 
so  disordered  by  sin,  that  everything  is  con- 
fusion and  at  cross-purposes :  it  is  not  until 
their  Divine  Maker  comes  and  attempts  the 
task  of  repair  and  readjustment  that  they 
can  be  set  right  and  be  made  capable  of  the 
harmonies  for  which  they  were  originally 
constructed. 

Ver.  27.  God  is  against  disease. — Remember 
that  the  men  who  said  this  did  not  look 
then,  as  we  look  now,  on  Jesus  as  Son  of 
God.  What  they  saw  was  a  son  of  man 
with  power  over  the  subtlest  form  of  disease ; 
and  from  that  day  man  began  to  realise 
that  God  had  "  given  this  power  unto  men," 
and  that  the  disease  that  walketh  in  dark- 
ness or  destroyeth  at  noonday  should  by 
man  be  met  and  conquered.  Nor  was  this 
all  the  glad  tidings  of  the  new  gospel  of 
the  Great  Physician.  Men  saw  Him  who 
claimed  to  be  one  with  the  Father,  going 
about  doing  good,  and  healing  all  manner 
of  diseases  among  the  people.  Then,  thought 
they,  God  is  against  disease ;  it  is  a  Godlike 
thing  to  destroy  it.  And  when  the  Christian 
world  awoke  to  a  further  consciousness  of 
the  cause — viz.  that  these  bodies  of  ours 
are  made  in  God's  fair  image,  and  built  to 
be  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  not 
our  own,  but  are  bought  with  a  price,  and 
belong  unto  the  God  who  hath  redeemed  us 
— then  the  Christian  world  arose  in  enthu- 
siasm, and  determined  to  seek  and  save  not 
only  the  dying  souls,  but  the  dying  bodies' 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   U 


of  men  also.  Hospitals  for  victory  over 
death  arose,  where  before  had  only  been 
public  buildings  to  victory  in  battle  over 
fellow-men. — H.  D.  Rawnsley. 

Ver.  32-34.  Christ's  care  for  humanity. — If 
we  may  reverently  compare  this  scene  with 
its  modern  analogies,  it  bears  less  a  re- 
semblance to  anything  that  occurs  in  the 
life  of  a  clergyman  than  to  the  occupation 
of  a  physician  to  a  hospital  on  the  day  of 
his  seeing  his  out-patients.  There  is,  indeed, 
all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  the 
best  professional  advice,  and  the  summary 
cure  such  as  was  our  Lord's.  But  we  are, 
for  the  moment,  looking  at  the  outward 
aspects  of  the  scene;  and  it  shows  very 
vividly  how  largely  Christ's  attention  was 
directed  to  the  well-being  of  the  bodily 
frame  of  man.  Now  it  would  be  a  great 
mistake  to  suppose  that  this  feature  of  our 
Saviour's  ministry  was  accidental  or  inevit- 
able. Nothing  in  His  work  was  accidental : 
all  was  deliberate,  all  had  an  object.  We 
may  infer  with  reverence  and  with  certainty 
that  His  first  object  was  to  shew  Himself 
as  the  Deliverer  and  Restorer  of  human 
nature  as  a  whole  :  not  of  the  reason  and 
conscience  merely  without  the  imagination 
and  the  affections — not  of  the  spiritual  side 
of  men's  nature,  without  the  bodily  ;  and, 
therefore,  He  was  not  merely  Teacher,  but 
also  Physician  ;  and  therefore  and  thus  He 
has  shed  upon  the  medical  profession  to  the 
end  of  time  a  radiance  and  a  consecration 
which  are  ultimately  due  to  the  conditions 
of  that  redemptive  work,  to  achieve  which 
He  came  down  from  heaven  teaching  and 
healing. — Canon  Liddon. 

Godlike  works. — When  one  of  the  greatest 
of  God's  heroes,  one  of  the  most  illus- 
trious saints  of  Christendom,  made  an  ora- 
tion— preached,  as  we  should  say,  a  funeral 
sermon — concerning  a  brother,  holy  and 
heroic,  whose  soul  was  in  paradise — when 
Gregory  of  Nazianzum  would  show  unto 
the  people  how,  though  Basil  rested  from 
his  labours,  his  works  did  follow,  and  he 
being  dead  yet  spoke — he  pointed  towards 
the  hospital  which  Basil  had  built,  and 
said,  "Go  forth  a  little  out  of  the  city, 
and  see  the  new  city,  his  treasure  of  godli- 
ness, the  storehouse  of  alms  which  he 
collected ;  see  the  place  where  disease  is 
relieved  by  charity  and  by  skill,  where  the 
poor  leper  finds  at  last  a  home !  It  was 
Basil  who  persuaded  men  to  care  for  others ; 
it  was  Basil  who  taught  them  thus  to 
honour  Christ." — Dean  Hole. 

Christ  the  centre  of  attraction. — Leaving 
the  Paris  Exhibition  as  the  sun  went  down, 
I  noted  an  electric  light  that,  revolving 
round  and  round,  shot  its  ethereal  pencilled 
rays  far  across  the  sky,  touching  with  a 
momentary  radiance  the  vegetation  or  the 
buildings  across  which  they  passed  ;  and 


looking  up  I  noted  innumerable  sparks 
wavering,  vibrating  in  the  illumination. 
For  a  moment  I  could  not  think  what  this 
meant,  for  there  is  scarcely  any  scintillation, 
and  certainly  no  sparks,  thrown  off  from  the 
electric  light.  Then  in  an  instant  it  occurred 
to  me  that  these  bright  lights  were  myriads 
of  insects  attracted  from  the  dark  ocean  of 
air  round,  and  which,  protected  from  the 
burning  luminary  by  the  strong  glass,  were 
safely  rejoicing  in  the  ecstasy  of  those  beams. 
So  here,  around  the  beams  of  spiritual  light 
and  love  that  radiate  from  the  Saviour,  the 
innumerable  hosts  of  suffering,  struggling 
men  and  women  of  that  day  come  within 
the  field  of  our  vision. — J.  A.  Picton. 

Ver.  35.  The  early  morning. — If  you  would 
see  a  likeness  of  heaven  on  earth,  you  must 
look  for  it  in  the  early  morning.  The  day 
then  seems  new-born  ;  there  are  all  sorts  of 
beauteous  sights  and  sounds ;  the  air  is 
balmy,  the  dew  glistening  on  the  open 
flowers  like  diamonds.  Birds  are  singing 
their  matin  praises ;  cattle  lowing,  etc. 
Men,  too,  are  scarce  astir,  and  no  evil 
passions  exciting  your  peaceful  contempla- 
tions. It  is,  indeed,  a  time  for  communing 
with  God.  The  spiritual  analogy  or  corre- 
spondence of  the  morning  is  also  striking. 
It  denotes  a  new  state  in  the  regenerate  life, 
and  this  is  a  direct  gift  from  the  Lord,  who 
is  called  in  God's  Word  the  "  Morning  Star" 
and  "  a  morning  without  clouds."  All  great 
workers  have  been  early  risers.  Dr.  Dod- 
dridge ascribed  the  preparation  of  most 
of  his  works  to  the  circumstance  of  his 
rising  at  five  o'clock  every  morning,  saying 
that  this  course  pursued  for  forty  years 
would  add  ten  years  to  man's  life.  Dr. 
Homer  observes  that  "  there  is  a  certain 
loveliness  and  a  salutary  or  even  curative 
influence  in  the  morning  atmosphere  beyond 
that  of  any  other  portion  of  the  day."  Those 
who  habitually  lie  late  in  bed  are  generally 
the  drones  and  dawdlers  of  society.  This 
kind  of  self-indulgence  is  enervating  to  both 
body  and  mind,  and  we  ought  to  watch  and 
pray  against  it,  as  against  a  deadly  sin. — 
O.  P.  Hiller. 

Morning  praises. — When  St.  Francis  of 
Assisi  used  to  hear  the  birds  sing  in  the 
morning,  he  would  say  to  his  brethren,  "  Our 
little  winged  brothers  are  already  praising 
their  Creator,  and  are  singing  Him  a  song 
of  gratitude  for  the  new  day  that  is  shining 
above  them.  Shall  we  allow  ourselves  to  be 
put  to  shame  by  the  birds  ?  " 

Morning  is  the  golden  hour  for  prayer 
and  praise. — The  mind  is  fresh ;  the  mercies 
of  the  night  and  the  new  resurrection 
of  the  dawn  both  prompt  a  devout  soul 
io  thankfulness.  The  buoyant  heart  takes 
its  earliest  flight,  like  the  lark,  toward  the 
gates  of  heaven.  One  of  the  finest  touches 
in  Bunyan's  immortal  allegory  is   his   de- 

55 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  i   ST.  MARK. 


scription  of  Christian  in  the  chamber  of 
Peace,  "who  awoke  and  sang,"  while  his 
window  looked  out  to  the  sun  rising.  If 
even  the  stony  statue  of  heathen  Memnon 
made  music  when  the  first  rays  of  the 
dawn  kindled  on  its  flinty  brow,  surely  no 
Christian  heart  should  be  dumb  when  God 
causes  the  outgoings  of  the  morning  to  rejoice. 

Prayer  should  be  the  key  of  the  day  and 
the  lock  of  the  night.— At  night  it  is  our 
covering ;  in  the  morning  it  is  our  armour : 
so  at  all  times  it  defends  us  from  the  malice 
of  Satan,  our  own  subordinations  and  betray- 
ings,  the  unequal  weather  the  world  assaults 
us  with,  and  preserves  us  in  the  favour  and 
esteem  of  Heaven  (Ps.  cxxxii.  1-5,  cxix.  148, 
cxliii.  8-12  ;  1  Sam.  xiii.  12).—  O.  Feltham. 

Retirement  with  God  is  the  only  prepara- 
tion for  success,  and  the  only  medicine  for 
failure.  The  secret  of  all  strong  souls  lies 
in  those  times  of  loneliness  when  they  were 
bound  hand  and  foot  as  captives  to  the 
Everlasting  Will.  We  deride  such  nowa- 
days ;  call  them  mystic,  contemplationist, 
fanatic.  But  if  it  were  anything  but  religion, 
people  would  not  laugh.  Tell  them  of 
Demosthenes  living  in  a  cellar,  with  head 
half  shaved  to  prevent  his  appearing  -in 
public,  and  there  will  be  admiration  :  was  it 
any  wonder  that  he  became  an  orator  1  But 
let  a  man  be  as  bent  on  becoming  a  saint, 
let  him  give  up  one  hour's  frivolous  talk  in 
order  to  commune  with  his  Father  in  secret, 
then  we  suspect  that  such  an  one  is  becoming 
righteous  overmuch.  Mind,  no  one  complains 
of  a  man  being  anxious  to  be  wise  over- 
much, rich  overmuch,  healthy  overmuch ; 
he  may  burn  the  midnight  oil  and  study, 
watch  the  markets  and  scheme,  frequent 
the  gymnasium  and  develop  his  muscle,  and 
no  one  will  find  fault ;  but  to  spend  time  on 
what  is  at  least  as  important  as  wisdom, 
wealth,  and  health,  and  in  a  sense  involves 
them  all — this  is  fanatical,  and  not  to  be 
encouraged  or  approved.  We  miss  much 
through  our  want  of  separation  from  the 
world,  and  through  our  deficiency  in  insula- 
tion, or,  which  is  the  same  word,  in  isolation. 
If  we  go  into  a  science  laboratory  and 
examine  the  great  brass  machines  for  holding 
electrical  charges,  we  find  that  they  are  all 
mounted  on  glass  feet.  These  are  the  insu- 
lators; and  if  it  were  not  for  them,  no 
electricity  would  remain  on  the  surface  ;  as 
it  is,  electricity  is  hard  enough  to  keep  in 
charge,  even  with  the  best  insulators.  And 
we  know  sometimes  what  it  is  to  have  life 
and  power  pass  into  us  from  above,  but  we 
do  not  know  how  to  retain  it,  because  we  have 
never  learnt  true  retirement  of  heart  and 
insulation  of  life.  Some  one  spoke  to  John 
Nelson,  making  unfavourable  comparison  of 
John  Wesley  with  a  prominent  religious 
teacher  of  the  day;  and  Nelson  replied, 
"  He  has  not  stayed  in  the  upper  room  like 
John  Wesley."—/.  Rendel  Harris. 

56 


Ver.  38.  Opportunities. — Cromwell  said 
that  it  was  his  aim  not  only  to  strike  while 
the  iron  was  hot,  but  to  "  make  the  iron  hot 
by  striking  I"  Some  men  wait  for  oppor- 
tunities, and  others  make  opportunities  and 
circumstances  wait  upon  them. 

Vers.  40-45.  Leprosy. — As  to  this  disease 
observe :  heat,  dryness,  and  dust  predispose 
to  diseases  of  the  skin  everywhere,  and  all 
these  causes  are  especially  operative  in 
Syria.  Insufficient  food  assists  their  action ; 
and  boils  and  sores  are  apt  to  fester  and 
poison  the  system.  Leprosy  is  a  disease 
found  over  a  large  tract  of  the  world's 
surface ;  it  is  found  all  round  the  shores  of 
the  Mediterranean,  from  Syria  to  Spain,  in 
a  virulent  form,  and  in  North  and  South 
Africa.  It  was  carried  to  various  countries 
in  Europe  by  those  who  returned  from  the 
Crusades,  and  became  prevalent  even  in 
England,  in  the  times  when  our  forefathers 
had  no  butcher  meat  in  winter  but  what  was 
salted,  and  little  vegetable  diet  with  it.  In 
a  form  less  virulent  than  in  Palestine  it 
exists  in  Norway,  where  the  government 
supports  several  hospitals  for  lepers,  and 
seeks  to  prevent  the  spread  of  the  disease  by 
requiring  all  afflicted  with  it  to  live — un- 
married— in  one  or  other  of  these.  Probably 
salt  fish  in  Norway  forms  the  too  exclusive 
food  of  the  poor,  as  it  also  probably  did 
in  Palestine  in  the  time  of  Christ.  Mrs. 
Brassey  found  it  in  the  islands  of  the  Pacific. 
It  is  so  common  in  India  that  when  Lord 
Lawrence  took  formal  possession  of  Oude, 
he  made  the  people  promise  not  to  burn  their 
widows,  nor  slay  their  children  (the  girls), 
nor  bury  alive  their  lepers. — R.  Glover. 

Leprosy. — You  remember  the  story  of  the 
leper  which  Swinburne  has  woven  into  one 
of  his  most  beautiful,  most  painfully  realistic, 
poems.  He  tells  about  a  lady  at  the  French 
Court  in  the  Middle  Ages  who  was  stricken 
with  leprosy.  She  had  been  courted,  flattered, 
idolised,  and  almost  worshipped  for  her  wit 
and  beauty  by  the  king,  princes,  and  all 
the  royal  train,  until  she  was  smitten  with 
leprosy.  Then  her  very  lovers  hunted  her 
forth  as  a  banned  and  God-forsaken  thing ; 
every  door  in  the  great  city  of  Paris  was 
slammed  in  her  face ;  no  one  would  give 
her  a  drop  of  water  or  piece  of  bread ;  the 
very  children  spat  in  her  face,  and  fled  from 
her  as  a  pestilential  thing,  until  a  poor  clerk, 
who  had  loved  the  great  lady  a  long  way  off, 
and  had  never  spoken  to  her  until  then,  took 
her  to  his  house  for  pity's  sake,  and  nursed 
her  until  she  died,  and  he  was  cast  out  and 
cursed  himself  by  all  the  religious  world  for 
doing  it. — J.  G.  Greenhough. 

Ver.  40.  Growth  of  sin. — The  Jews  have 
a  tradition  about  the  growth  of  leprosy,  that 
it  began  with  the  walls  of  a  man's  house ; 
then,  if  he  did  not  repent,  it  entered  his 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  II 


clothes,  till  at  last  it  affected  his  body.  So 
it  is  with  the  growth  of  sin.  It  begins  with 
neglect  of  duty,  it  may  be  of  prayer,  or  the 
warning  voice  of  conscience  is  unheeded. 
Habits  of  sin  are  formed,  till  at  last  the 
soul  that  lets  God  alone  is  let  alone  by 
God. 

No  "if"  in  Jesus. — A  little  girl  was 
awakened  to  anxiety  about  her  soul  at  a 
meeting  where  the  story  of  the  leper  was 
told.  Well,  this  dear  little  girl,  who  was 
anxious,  said,  "  I  noticed  that  there  was  an 
lif  in  what  the  man  said;  but  there  was  no 
'if  in  what  Jesus  said.  So  I  went  home 
and  took  out  the  'if,'  by  my  granny's  fire- 
side, and  I  knelt  down,  and  I  said,  'Lord 
Jesus,  Thou  canst,  Thou  wilt  make  me  clean. 
I  give  myself  to  Thee.' " 

Ver.  41.  Hand-help. — You  know  what  it 
is  to  feel  a  man's  hand  warm  within  your 
own ;  the  cheer  that  comes  from  a  good 
hand-shake  of  an  honest  heart  is  what  ? — 
why,  it  is  this :  that  you  feel  the  friend 
understands  you  and  gives  you  hope ;  the 
spirit  of  your  friend  touches  your  spirit  in 
the  hand-grasp,  and  that  hand-shaking  is 
instinct  with  life.  He  might  write  and  say 
good  things,  and  true  and  helpful  to  you, 
but  they  did  not  seem  to  be  half  as  good 
and  true  till  he  took  your  hand  into  his  own. 
Or,  again,  you  have  need  of  a  physician,  and 
he  writes  you  a  prescription.  The  medicine 
does  not  do  half  so  much  good  as  the  visit 
in  which  he  took  your  weak  hand  in  his  own 
strong  one,  and  shewed  you  by  the  way 
he  held  it  that  he  meant  to  bring  you 
through,   God  helping  him.    Yes,  hope  in 


the  touch  of  a  human  hand  of  love,  faith  in 
the  touch  of  a  human  hand  of  pity,  cheer 
in  the  touch  of  a  human  hand  of  power — 
this  is  the  doctor's  gift  to  his  patient,  and 
this  was  God's  gift  in  Christ  to  a  poor,  sin- 
weary,  leprous  world  that  felt  there  was 
need  of  healthier,  happier  life,  and  knew  not 
where  to  turn  for  it. — H.  D.  Rawnsley. 

Christ's  answer  an  exact  echo  of  the  request. 
— The  echo  which  the  mountain  gives  back 
to  our  cry  is,  as  you  must  often  have  noticed, 
calm  and  pure  and  musical,  however  harsh 
or  dissonant  or  strained  our  voice  may  be. 
Your  cry  or  shout  may  rise  to  a  piercing 
scream ;  but  if  you  wait  and  listen,  it  comes 
back  to  you  with  all  the  discord  and  ex- 
citement strained  out  of  it — comes  back  at 
times  with  a  mystical  force  and  sweetness 
and  purity.  And  when  the  leper  heard  his 
passionate  cry  come  back  from  the  lips  of 
Christ,  must  there  not  have  been  a  heavenly 
sweetness  and  power  in  that  gracious  echo  ? 
Must  he  not  have  wondered  how  his  poor 
words  should  have  suddenly  grown  in- 
stinct with  a  celestial  music  and  energy  ? — 
8.  Cox,  B.B. 

Ver.  45.  Talkativeness  a  great  evil. — He 
that  cannot  refrain  from  much  speaking  is 
like  a  city  without  walls  ;  and  less  pains  in 
the  world  a  man  cannot  take  than  to  hold 
his  tongue.  Therefore  if  thou  observest 
this  rule  in  all  assemblies,  thou  shalt  seldom 
err :  restrain  thy  choler ;  hearken  much, 
and  speak  little ;  for  the  tongue  is  the  in- 
strument of  the  greatest  good  and  greatest 
evil  that  is  done  in  the  world  (Job  ii.  10 ; 
James  i.  19,  26). — Sir  W.  Raleigh. 


CHAPTER  II. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  It  was  noised. — It  was  heard,  He  is  in  the  house,  or  at  home.  Perhaps  the  house 
already  mentioned,  viz.  Simon's  (i.  29)  ;  but  more  probably  His  own  homestead. 

Ver.  4.  Come  nigh  unto  Him. — Bring  (him)  to  Him. 

Ver.  5.  Thy  sins  be. — Have  been  forgiven  thee.  Doubtless  the  man  himself  was  more 
anxious  about  his  state  in  the  sight  of  God  than  about  his  bodily  ailments. 

Ver.  7.  Blasphemies. —  Why  doth  this  man  talk  thus?  He  blasphemeth!  They  had  yet 
to  learn  the  truth  revealed  in  John  v.  19. 

Ver.  10.  Power. — Authority,  i.e.  a  moral  right.  The  use  of  the  term  "  Son  of  Man  " 
implies  a  claim  on  the  part  of  our  Lord  to  forgive  sins  rather  in  His  mediatorial  than  in 
His  Divine  capacity.  And  as  the  Father  sent  Him  vested  with  this  authority,  so  does 
He  in  due  time  hand  it  on  to  His  earthly  representatives  and  vicegerents  (John  xx.  21-23). 

Ver.  14.  Receipt  of  custom. — Toll-house.  "  Capernaum  was  the  landing-place  for  the  many 
ships  which  traversed  the  lake  or  coasted  from  town  to  town  ;  and  this  not  only  for  those 
who  had  business  in  Capernaum,  but  for  those  who  would  there  strike  the  great  road  of 
eastern  commerce  from  Damascus  to  the  harbours  of  the  West." 

Ver.  15.  Publicans. — Tax-collectors,  the  local  agents  of  the  Eoman  "publicani"  or 
revenue  officers,  who  farmed  the  taxes  from  the  government.    Everywhere  throughout 

57 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


the  Empire  they  were  hated  for  their  rapacity  and  dishonesty;  but  among  the   Jews 
especially  were  they  abhorred,  as  being  the  representatives  of  a  heathen,  hostile,  and 

victorious  power. 

Ver.  17.  To  repentance.— Omit  these  words,  imported  from  Luke  v.  SI. 

Ver.  18.  Used  to  fast.—  Were  fasting,  on  that  very  day. 

Ver.  20.  Taken  away.— There  lurks  in  the  original  expression  a  hint  of  the  violence  and 
pain  with  which  the  separation  would  be  fraught. 

Ver.  21.  A  piece  of  new  cloth.—  A  patch  of  undressed  cloth.  "The  patch  supposed  is  an 
unfulled  piece  of  cloth.  It  is  the  business  of  the  fuller  to  make  the  cloth  full  and  compact 
by  precipitating  the  process  of  contraction." 

Ver.  23.  Began,  as  they  went,  to  pluck.— A  very  good  rendering,  though  free.  Cp.  Latin 
"  iter  facere"  French  "/aire  chemin."  From  LXX.  in  Judg.  xvii.  8,  it  is  clear  that  the 
classical  distinction  between  68bv  iroulv,  "  to  make  a  road,"  68bv  voieiadat,  "  to  make  a 
journey,"  must  not  be  pressed  in  Hellenistic  Greek.  Such  a  piece  of  wanton  mischief  as 
"  to  make  a  road  "  through  the  corn  by  plucking  the  ears  would  never  have  been  tolerated 
on  any  day,  let  alone  the  Sabbath.  Nor  would  the  action  attributed  to  the  disciples  have 
sufficed  "  to  make  a  road "  :  for  that,  they  would  have  had  not  to  break  off  the  ears, 
but  to  break  down  the  stalks. 

Ver.  26.  In  the  days  of  Abiathar  the  high  priest. — This  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  con- 
tradict 1  Sam.  xxi.  1-6,  where  Ahimelech,  the  father  of  Abiathar,  is  mentioned  as  the 
high  priest  who  gave  the  loaves  to  David.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  reconcile 
the  two  passages  ;  the  most  successful  is,  perhaps,  that  of  Bede  :  "  There  is  no  discrepancy, 
for  both  were  there,  when  David  came  to  ask  for  bread,  and  received  it :  that  is  to  say, 
Ahimelech,  the  high  priest,  and  Abiathar,  his  son  ;  but  Ahimelech  having  been  slain  by 
Saul  (very  shortly  after),  Abiathar  fled  to  David,  and  became  the  companion  of  all  his 
exile  afterwards.  When  he  came  to  the  throne,  Abiathar  himself  also  received  the  rank 
of  high  priest,  and  the  son  became  of  much  greater  excellence  than  the  father,  and 
therefore  was  worthy  to  be  mentioned  as  the  high  priest,  even  during  his  father's  lifetime." 
An  elaborate  and  ably  expressed  argument  in  favour  of  another  explanation  will  be  found 
in  McClellan's  New  Testament,  vol.  i.,  pp.  671,  672. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—12. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  ix.  1-8;  Luke  v.  17-26.) 

The  paralytic  borne  of  four. — What,  it  has  been  asked,  was  the  real  purpose 
of  Christ,  in  those  mighty  works  of  healing  which  consumed  so  much  of  His 
time  and  strength  on  earth  ?  What  was  their  relation  to  His  great  plan  for 
the  world's  redemption  ?  Evidently  they  were  not  intended  to  reduce,  by  direct 
interference,  the  sum-total  of  the  world's  suffering.  Had  that  been  their  object, 
we  should  have  been  forced  to  admit  they  have  quite  failed  to  attain  it,  for  the 
difference  they  have  made  in  the  amount  of  human  woe  is  infinitesimal.  More- 
over, we  can  see  for  ourselves  that  that  would  not  have  been  a  worthy  object. 
Pain  and  misery  are  not  here  for  nothing  ;  they  are  sent  here  by  God  Himself, 
to  accomplish  a  definite  work  in  the  world — a  good,  merciful,  and  Divine  work  ; 
and  they  cannot  be  spared  until  that  work  is  completed.  We  must  therefore 
look  elsewhere  for  the  key  to  our  Lord's  ministry  of  healing.  And  we  find  it 
in  the  incident  now  before  us.  "  That  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  of  Man  hath 
authority  on  earth  to  forgive  sins  "—for  this  purpose  it  is  that  Jesus  saith  to 
the  paralytic,  "  Arise  and  walk."  Possessing  this  key  to  the  meaning  of  Christ's 
works  of  mercy,  we  can  follow  Him  through  the  long  succession  of  them,  as 
He  goes  about  doing  good  and  healing  all  that  are  oppressed  of  the  devil,  and 
can  find  in  them  all,  not  only  the  sign  and  proof  of  His  power  to  save  from  sin, 
but  the  example  and  illustration  of  His  way  of  saving.  Here  we  see  the  two 
antagonists  confronted.  In  Jesus  Christ  we  see  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  and 
in  the  maladies  and  visible  infirmities  of  men  we  see  sin  manifest  in  the  flesh. 
In  the  infinite  diversity  of  these— palsies,  blindness,  leprosies,  epileptic  con- 
58 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  II. 


vulsions,  demoniac  madness — we  have  set  before  us,  in  no  dark  parable,  the 
Protean  phases  of  human  sin.  We  hear  the  authoritative  word  of  absolution, 
cleansing,  healing ;  we  witness  the  act  of  faith  by  which  he  who  asks  receives. 
These  mighty  works  are  a  continual  parable,  in  which  the  whole  life  of  Christ 
sets  before  us  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  its  infinite  mercy  and  all- victorious 
power. 

I.  The  faith  exhibited  by  the  paralytic's  friends. — It  was  quite  a  common 
occurrence  for  sick  persons  seeking  help  from  Christ  to  be  brought  into  His 
presence  by  those  who  had  the  care  of  them  (Matt.  iv.  24,  ix.  32,  xiv.  35,  36, 
xv.  30,  xvii.  14-18)  ;  and  after  His  ascension  the  same  thing  was  experienced 
by  the  apostles  (Acts  v.  16).  In  the  present  instance  the  sick  man  was  so 
utterly  helpless  that  he  could  only  be  moved  by  four  persons  carrying  him  on 
his  pallet.  But  when  they  reached  the  house  where  Jesus  was  a  new  difficulty 
arose,  the  crowd  before  the  door  being  too  great  to  admit  of  their  entrance. 
What  was  to  be  done  ?  An  ordinary  degree  of  faith  would  have  given  up  the 
attempt,  and  the  mournful  procession  would  have  returned  home  as  it  came.  But 
these  men  were  not  so  easily  daunted.  They  had  the  faith  which  can  "  remove 
mountains "  ;  and  a  mountain  of  difficulties  and  o'lscouragements  it  did  indeed 
remove.  "  When  they  could  not  come  nigh  unto  Him  for  the  press,"  they  went 
up  on  the  housetop,  carrying  their  burden  with  them;  and  being  come  just  over 
the  place  where  Jesus  was,  they  actually  stripped  off  the  roof,  perhaps  at  the 
risk  of  causing  danger  or  inconvenience  to  those  below,  and  let  the  paralytic 
down  with  his  pallet  into  the  midst  before  Jesus.  They  adopted  an  expedient 
which  few  would  have  thought  of,  and  still  fewer  attempted,  so  earnest  was 
their  desire  for  their  friend's  recovery,  and  so  strong  their  confidence  in  Christ's  ^ 
power  and  willingness  to  satisfy  that  desire.  Unbelief  would  have  raised  \ 
countless  objections.  "  What  is  there  peculiar  in  your  case,  that  you  should 
take  such  an  extraordinary  method  of  making  it  known  ?  Others,  besides  you, 
have  suffering  friends.  Wait,  and  take  your  turn  with  the  rest.  Have  patience 
till  the  crowd  disperses,  and  Jesus  is  free  to  attend  to  you.  Or  go  home  now, 
and  return  to-morrow.  Such  behaviour  as  this  makes  you  look  more  like 
housebreakers  than  humble  petitioners.  What  will  the  owner  of  the  house 
say  to  such  wanton  destruction  of  his  property  ?  What  will  the  Lord  Himself 
say  to  this  forcible  intrusion  into  His  presence  ?  "  To  every  objection  urged 
these  men  turned  a  deaf  ear  ;  and  at  length  they  received  their  reward  for 
thus  taking  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (as  it  were)  by  storm.  Jesus  recognised 
in  their  action,  not  an  outrage  upon  decency  and  propriety,  but  an  exceptional 
expedient  to  meet  exceptional  difficulties ;  not  presumptuous  forwardness 
requiring  to  be  checked,  but  energetic  perseverance  deserving  every  encourage- 
ment. "  Seeing  their  faith,  He  said  " — what  ?  nothing  to  them,  they  needed 
no  commendation,  they  were  sufficiently  rewarded  by  hearing  His  gracious 
words  addressed  to  their  friend ;  and  to  him  Jesus  said,  not,  "  Son,  thou  art 
healed  of  thine  infirmity,"  but,  "  Son,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee." 

II.  The  power  claimed  by  the  Divine  Physician. — To  cleanse  the  soul  as  well 
as  to  heal  the  body.  It  was  in  the  latter  capacity  only — as  the  Healer  of 
physical  maladies — that  Jesus  was  usually  resorted  to.  There  is  but  one 
instance  on  record  of  His  being  sought  exclusively  for  the  pardon  of  sins 
(Luke  vii.  37-50).  So  corrupt  had  the  whole  nation  of  the  Jews  become,  so 
self-satisfied  and  unspiritual,  that  it  was  the  rarest  thing  possible  for  any  of 
them  to  realise  that  the  true  mission  of ,  Jesus  was  not  to  restore  the  body,  but 
the  soul — to  save  His  people  from  their  sins.  Now  what  could  bring  this  truth 
before  them  more  emphatically  than  the  course  He  pursued  with  respect  to  this 
paralytic  ?  To  another  impotent  person,  whom  He  had  restored,  He  said,  "  Sin 
no  more,  lest  a  worse  thing  come  unto  thee"  (John  v.  14) — implying  that  his 

59 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


affliction  was  the  result  of  his  sin.  Here  the  same  truth—that  spiritual 
disorders  lie  at  the  root  of  bodily  ones— is  not  only  declared,  but  proved ;  for 
instead  of  saying,  "  Son,  thou  art  loosed  from  thine  infirmity,"  Jesus  says, 
"  Son,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  As  much  as  to  say, — What  you  really  want 
is  not' so  much  bodily  health  as  spiritual  soundness.  The  faculties  of  your  soul 
are  in  direr  need  than  the  limbs  of  your  body.  It  would  be  of  little  use  for 
Me  to  raise  your  physical  frame  from  that  pallet,  unless  I  were  at  the  same 
time  to  free  your  higher  nature  from  the  bonds  that  hold  it  down.  The  true 
physician  is  he  who  goes  to  the  root  of  the  disorder,  who  renovates  the  con- 
stitution and  makes  the  patient  a  new  man.  That  is  what  I  profess  to  do. 
You  come  to  me,  craving  health,  and  I  offer  you  in  addition  salvation :  "  Son, 
thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  So  spake  the  Saviour,  and  doubtless  no  sooner  had 
He  spoken  than  the  plague  of  the  man's  heart  was  healed.  Still  no  visible  effect 
followed.  There  he  lay,  stretched  on  his  pallet,  while  the  scribes  were  reasoning 
among  themselves  upon  the  astounding  claim  implied  in  the  words  Jesus  had 
just  used.  But  the  matter  was  not  to  end  there.  As  far  as  the  efficacy  of 
the  word  spoken  was  concerned,  it  was  immaterial  whether  Christ  adopted  the 
form,  "Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,"  or,  "Arise  and  walk."  If  He  intended  to 
bestow  health  of  body  as  well  as  forgiveness  of  sins,  then  both  would  certainly 
accrue  in  any  case.  But  it  was  not  immaterial  whether  the  truth  expressed  in 
the  words,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,"  should  be  only  taught,  or  proved  as  well 
as  taught.  It  was  of  the  most  supreme  importance  that  all  men  should  know 
that  "  the  Son  of  Man  hath  authority  on  earth  to  forgive  sins,"  and  not  merely 
to  remit  the  punishment  of  them.  Turning,  therefore,  again  to  the  paralytic, 
but  intending  His  words  more  for  the  objectors  than  for  him,  Jesus  said, 
"Arise,  and  take  up  thy  pallet,  and  go  thy  way  into  thy  house."  In  these 
words  the  Saviour  deliberately  staked  His  claim  to  forgive  sins,  which  the 
scribes  could  not  test,  upon  His  ability  to  heal,  which  they  could  test.  The 
bodily  disorder  obeyed  the  mandate  as  promptly  as  the  spiritual  malady  had 
already  done  (ver.  12).  Thus  was  manifested,  in  the  most  striking  manner, 
the  close  connection  between  sin  and  suffering ;  and  thus  was  proved  the 
supreme  authority  of  Jesus  Christ,  not  only  in  the  world  of  nature,  but  also 
in  the  realm  of  grace. 

III.  The  parabolic  teaching  of  this  miracle. — While  the  restoration  of  fallen 
humanity  must  be  at  the  outset  an  inward  and  a  spiritual  thing,  it  is  not  com- 
plete until  the  entire  man  has  been  renewed  by  the  power  of  the  Incarnate  God, 
who  shall  transfigure  even  our  body  of  humiliation  unto  conformity  with  His 
body  of  glory  (Phil.  iii.  21). 

The  penances  of  life. — Penance  is  the  necessary  consequence,  the  inseparable 
accompaniment  of  sin ;  and  though  God's  mercy  may  pardon  and  absolve  the 
penitent  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  and  so  remit  its  eternal  punishment,  yet  there  is 
a  temporal  punishment  which  remains,  and  must  remain,  as  a  witness  to  the 
essential  evil  of  sin.  When  we  gaze  upon  the  Cross  we  see  there,  in  the  Passion 
of  Jesus,  the  great  penance  of  sin  which  He  bore  for  us ;  but  He  has  left  us 
a  cross  to  bear,  He  has  called  us,  as  members  of  His  body,  to  share  in  His 
work  :  and  in  nothing  is  this  more  manifest  than  in  the  penance  which  follows 
forgiven  sin. 

I.  We  have  to  bear  as  a  penance  the  consequences  of  the  sins  of  the  Church 

(Col.  i.  2-4). — 1.  In  the  sorrows  which  come  to  us  from  the  lack  of  zeal,  and 
therefore  lack  of  power  in  the  Church.  2.  In  the  difficulties  with  which  the 
Church  has  to  contend  in  restoring  primitive  doctrine  and  practice.  3.  In  the 
poverty  of  the  sacramental  and  spiritual  life  of  the  Church  in  so  many  of  our 
parishes. 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :l  ST.  MARK.  chap.  ii. 


II.  We  must  expect  penance  to  follow  even  on  forgiven  sins. — 1.  The 
penitent  drunkard  or  roue,  who  has  injured  his  health  by  dissipation,  has  still 
to  bear  the  consequences  of  his  sins  in  this  life,  in  physical  weakness  and 
disability.  2.  The  gambler  or  spendthrift,  who  has  squandered  his  patrimony 
in  pleasure  and  excess,  has  to  endure  poverty.  3.  The  criminal,  who  has  lost 
his  character  and  reputation  by  legal  exposure,  though  the  guilt  of  his  sin 
be  pardoned,  has  to  satisfy  the  law's  demands,  and  even  after  that  to  put  up 
with  many  a  humiliation  as  the  fruit  of  his  sin. 

III.  This  law  holds  good  in  every  class  of  sin — that  which  is  known  only 
to  God,  as  well  as  that  which  is  manifest  also  before  man.  And  part  of  our 
repentance  must  consist  in  our  willingness,  lovingly,  cheerfully,  and  patiently, 
to  bear  the  penance  of  forgiven  sin.  When  our  Lord  absolved  this  man,  He 
imposed  a  penance :  "  Take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  unto  thy  house " — possibly 
bringing  on  him  (as  it  did  on  another,  John  v.  10)  the  criticism  and  con- 
demnation of  his  neighbours  for  his  apparent  violation  of  the  Sabbath.  So  with 
us;  when  sin  is  absolved,  its  temporal  results  are  often  left  as  a  penance. 
1.  In  moral  weakness,  and  therefore  the  necessary  surrender  of  much  that 
is  lawful,  but  for  us  not  expedient,  in  the  avoidance  of  occasions  of  temptation, 
in  the  giving  up  of  dangerous  companions.  2.  In  the  return  of  the  old 
temptations  to  worry  and  distress  us,  but  by  God's  grace  to  develop  in  us  the 
opposite  virtue.  3.  In  having  to  bear  the  immediate  consequences  of  our  sin, 
perhaps  in  poverty,  pain,  or  humiliation. — A.  G.  Mortimer,  D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  1.  When  Christ  is  in  the  house  Ver.  3-12.   Palsy  is  not  so  painful 

— 1.  Good  men  will  be  attracted  to  it ;  as  cancer,  nor  so  loathsome  as  leprosy, 

2.  Bad  men  will   be   benefited  in  it;  nor   so  fatal  as  cholera;  but  it  is  a 

3.  Divine  benediction  will  rest  upon  disease  which  renders  the  patient 
it ;  4.  Beneficent  ministries  will  flow  eminently  helpless.  There  are  persons 
from  it.  Those  who  have  Christ  in  affected  with  spiritual  palsy  who  never 
their  home  do  not  act  like  other  people ;  fall  into  glaring  sins,  and  yet  remain 
their  motives  are  purer,  their  charities  inert  and  without  the  power  of  religious 
more  disinterested ;  they  carry  with  decision.  It  is  vain  to  expect  such 
them  a  radiance  which  tells  of  an  people  to  "  turn  to  Christ."  It  is  the 
unworldly  source  of  joy,  and  proclaims  mission  of  the  Church  to  bring  to 
the  blessedness  of  dwelling  under  the  Christ  those  who  are  too  helpless  in 
shadow  of  the  Almighty.  spiritual  indifference  to  seek  Him  of 

Fragrant  flowers  cannot  be  concealed,  their  own   accord  (Luke  xiv.  21-23). 

and  there  is  a  fragrance  about  Jesus  — W.  F.  Adeney. 

that    always    reveals    His    presence.  Mystical  sense  of  the  incident. — In 

Light  cannot  be  hidden,  and  there  is  one    of    the    allegories  attributed   to 

so  much  light  in  Him  that  it  shines  Hugo  de  S.  Victor  the  following  view 

out  at  every  window  and  through  every  is  given  of  the  whole  history  :   "  The 

chink  and  crevice  of  the  house  where  house  in  which  Jesus  was  entertained 

He  abides.     Love  itself  is  invisible,  but  stands  for   the  Holy  Scripture.     The 

wherever   it   dwells   it   produces  such  crowd  who  would  not  let  the  paralytic 

effects  that  its  presence  soon  becomes  be  introduced  sets  forth  the  multitude 

known.      It     makes    people     gentle,  of  empty  thoughts  which  hide  the  sight 

kindly,  thoughtful,  unselfish,  and  fills  of  God  from  the  sinful  soul.     The  roof 

them   with   new   desires   to   do  good,  is   uncovered  when   the   sublime   and 

and  to  serve  and  bless  others. — J.  R.  mystical  sense  of  Scripture  is  laid  open. 

Miller,  D.D,  Jlere  the  paralytic  is  brought  into  the 

61 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


presence  of  Jesus  :  there  his  sin  is  for- 
given him,  he  is  called  son,  and  com- 
manded to  take  up  his  bed  and  walk  ; 
for  when  a  man  truly  comes  to  the 
knowledge  of  God,  God  heals  him  by 
His  grace  from  all  that  he  has  done 
amiss,  and  calls  him  a  son  by  adoption, 
and  commands  him  to  take  up  his  bed 
by  subduing  the  flesh,  and  to  walk  by 
means  of  good  works." 

Lessons. — 1.  Those  who  would  be 
healed  by  Christ  must  come  to  Him. 
It  is  not  enough  either  (1)  to  hear 
\  much  of  Christ,  or  (2)  to  seek  help  of 
i  those  who  are  near  Christ.  2.  There 
(are  some  who  could  never  reach  Christ 
unless  helped  by  others.  3.  The  selfish- 
ness of  some  who  are  enjoying  Christian 
privileges  is  one  of  the  greatest  impedi- 
ments to  the  spread  of  the  blessings  of 
the  gospel  among  those  who  are  as  yet 
without  them.  (1)  There  are  some  so 
eager  to  seek  consolation  and  peace  for 
their  own  souls,  that  they  leave  no 
room  for  such  as  are  palsied  and  blind 
and  leprous  with  sin  to  receive  needful 
care  and  help.  (2)  The  sinners  and 
the  sick,  not  the  whole  and  the  right- 
eous, have  the  first  claim  on  Christ's 
care.  The  Church  should  be  more 
solicitous  for  the  salvation  of  the  world, 
and  less  absorbed  with  the  desire  for 
her  own  comfort.  4.  Earnest  perse- 
verance in  seeking  Christ  will  overcome 
the  greatest  difficulties.  (1)  We  must 
expect  difficulties — (a)  In  bringing 
others  to  Christ.  (6)  Possibly  in  coming 
to  Christ  ourselves.  (2)  Difficulties  are 
sent — (a)  To  test  our  earnestness. 
(b)  To  awaken  our  intelligence,  (c)  To 
arouse  our  energy.  (3)  Christ  is  always 
accessible,  though  not  always  with 
ease. 

Ver.  5.  Soul- healing  fir st. — Here  we 
notice  a  remarkable  advance  on  the 
teaching  accompanying  the  miracles 
hitherto  recorded  by  St.  Mark.  1.  The 
Saviour,  before  giving  relief  to  the  body, 
attends  to  the  needs  of  the  soul.  We 
cannot  doubt  that  this  paralytic  was  a 
conscience- stricken  man — that  he  knew 
his  sufferings  were  owing  to  his  own 
misconduct — his   loss  of   vital   energy 

62 


having  been  brought  about  by  a  course 
of    enfeebling     self-indulgence.      The 
Saviour  read  the  mute  confession  of  his 
penitent  heart,  and  hastened  to  assure 
him  of  its  acceptance  in  the  sight  of 
Him  who  pardoneth  and  absolveth  all 
them  that  truly  repent  and  unfeignedly 
believe.     We  are  not  told  what  amount 
of   faith   he   possessed ;    but   however 
undefined  it  may  have  been,  it  would 
at  any  rate  include  some  real  convic- 
tion of  Christ's  right  to  speak  in  the 
name  of  God.     2.  The  faith  of  the  four 
bearers  is  specially  emphasised.     It  is, 
as  Dean  Luckock  says,  a  fact  full  of 
mystery,  but  full  also  of  consolation, 
that  not  a  few  of  the  gifts  of  healing 
and  restoration  were  obtained  through 
the  faith  and  prayers,  not  so  much  of 
the  sick  and  afflicted  themselves,  as  of 
their  relations  and  friends.     See  Matt, 
viii.    13,  xv.   28;    Mark  v.  36;  John 
iv.  50.     Surely  this  dependence  of  man 
upon  his  fellow- creatures  was  intended 
to  foreshadow   the   great   mystery   of 
redemption   through  Another's   blood. 
And   what  can  be  more  encouraging 
for  us  to  know  than  this :  that  when- 
ever  we   bring   others   to  the  feet  of 
Jesus  to  be  healed  of  their  soul- sickness 
— whenever  we  offer  up  "  the  prayer  of 
faith "  which  we  are  assured    "  shall 
save  the  sick,"  we  are  associating  our- 
selves in  deeds  of  mercy  and  acts  of 
intercession  with  the  Great  High  Priest? 
Dr.  Edersheim  well  draws  attention  to 
the  fact,  that  by  first  speaking  forgive- 
ness  Christ    not   only   presented    the 
deeper  moral  aspect  of  His  miracles, 
as  against  their  ascription  to  magic  or 
Satanic   agency,    but  also   established 
that  very  claim,  as  regarded  His  person 
and  authority,  which  it  was  sought  to 
invalidate.     In  this  forgiveness  of  sins 
He  presented  His  person  and  authority 
as  Divine,  and  He  proved  it  such  by 
the  miracle   of   healing  which  imme- 
diately followed.     Had  the  two  been 
inverted,     there     would     have     been 
evidence,   indeed,    of   His   power,    but 
not  of  His  Divine  personality,  nor  of 
His  having  authority  to  forgive  sins; 
and  this,  not  the   doing  of   miracles, 
was  the  real  object  of  His  mission, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  II. 


The  souVs  need  met  by  Christ. — For  by  some  means  to  pervert  and  wrest 

most   of    us   the   wounds   of   life   are  his  words, 
seldom   wholly   clean.     Evermore  the 

self-reproach   or    the   inevitable   self-  Ver.  8.  The  scribes  had  accepted  the 

accusation  mingles  with  our  trouble.  dogma    that    access    to    other    men's 

There  is  poison  in  most  of  the  wounds  thoughts  was  a  mark  of  the  Messiah, 

from    which   we    suffer.     We   cannot  This  sign  the  Saviour  will  supply  by 

always  tell  others  of  the  poison  which  disclosing   to    them    their    unfriendly 

yet  we  know  is  lodged  in  the  wound  ;  suspicions.     In  this  way  their  unbelief 

and  yet   here   we  need,  perhaps,    the  and  malice  were  left  without  excuse, 

greatest  sympathy  ;    and  here   we   lie  An  auspicious  opportunity  now  opened, 

outside     our     brother's    reach.      But  by  which  they  might  enter  the  realm 

here   the    Divine    wisdom    meets    our  of  truth,  but  they  missed  it.     At  least 

needs :   "  Thy  sins  be   forgiven  thee."  one  sign  of  the  Messiah  Jesus  had  ; 

It   is  like   a  healing  touch,    cleaning  but    they   muzzled    reason,    that    she 

the  edges  of  the  wound. — Bishop  Boyd  should    not    speak — they    blindfolded 

Carpenter.  understanding,  that  she  might  not  see. 

y  A  door  of  escape  from  perplexing  doubt 

y      Ver.  7.  Forgiveness  of  sin. — 1.  The  was   opened,   but   they   would   rather 

fact  that  God  forgives  sin.     (1)  Stated  dwell  among  the  tangled  thorns  than 

(Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7  ;  2  Ohron.  vii.  14 ;  enter   the  Eden  of  light  and  rest. — 

Ps.  lxxxvi.  5,  cxxx.  4).     (2)  Illustrated  J.  T.  Davies. 

(Ps.  xxxii.  5 ;  Matt.  ix.  2 ;  Luke  vii.  48).  Christ's    delicate    sensibility.  —  This 

2.  The  meritorious  ground   on  which  fine  quality  of  mind,  this  delicacy,  this 

God  forgives.     (1)  Christ  Jesus  (Col.  sensitiveness  which  unconsciously  photo- 

i.    14  ;     1   John  ii.    12;    Acts   x.  43;  graphs  character  with  a  look,  usually 

Rom.  iii.  24,  25).     (2)  What  has  Christ  belongs  to  the  more  subtile  minds  of 

done  that  God  forgives  for  His  sake  ?  women.    It  is  a  Divine  quality.     Some 

(Heb.  ix.   22-26  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18  ;  Isa.  men  have  it  to  a  high  degree.      The 

liii.    5,    6).     3.  The   conditions   in   us  Saviour    had    it    to    an    unspeakable 

necessary   to   forgiveness.      (1)    Faith  degree.      His  delicate  sensibility,  His 

(Acts  xiii.  38).     (2)  Repentance  (Acts  perfectly  sympathetic  heart  and  mind, 

iii.  19).     (3)  Confession  (1  John  i.  9).  are  as  impressive  as  the  conscious  quick- 

(4)  Forsaking   sin  (Prov.    xxviii.   13).  silver   to   catch   a   faultless   image  of 

4.  The  perfection  of  this  forgiveness  our  life,  our  troubles,  our  fears  and 
of  God.  (1)  Sins  are  blotted  out  doubts.  His  being  in  heaven  does 
(Isa.  xliii.  35).  (2)  Totally  removed  not  impair  His  power  to  know  us  and 
from  sight  (Isa.  i.  18).  (3)  Forgotten  sympathise  with  us.  Therefore  He 
for  ever  (Jer.  xxxi.  34  ;    Heb.  x.   17).  is  the  true  father  confessor,  the  great 

5.  The  consequences  of  forgiveness.  priest,  to  whom  we  can  go  with  assur- 
We  have— (1)  Life  (Col.  ii.   13).     (2)  ance.— R.  JS.  Barrett. 

Blessedness  in  the  soul  (Ps.  xxxii.  1,2; 

1  John  v.  10).     (3)  Praise  in  the  heart  Ver.  10.  Present  pardon  for  sin  taught 

(Isa.   xii.    1).      (4)  The   fear   of  God  by  Christ. — 1.  Christ  here  enforces  a 

(Ps.  cxxx.  4  ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  8,  9).    (5)  Re-  doctrine  that  had  been  lost  sight  of 

conciliation   with   God  (Luke  xv.   12,  by  the  Jews — the  doctrine  of  present 

32).     (6)  Peace  with  God  and  joy  in  pardon   for  sin.     They  relegated  for- 

the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  (Rom.  giveness  to  the  next  world  and  the  day 

v.  1,  2). — J.  A.  R.  Dickson.  of  judgment :    He  insists  that  it  may 

The  ungodly  change  the  best  medi-  be  enjoyed  now,  even  while  the  chas- 

cines  into  poison,  and  pervert  the  holiest  tisement    is    in    progress  ;     nay,    the 

truths.  chastisement  itself  may  be  the  means 

The  slanderer's  custom  is,  not  to  try  of  preparing  the  heart  to  receive  it. 

to  ascertain  the  speaker's  meaning,  but  2.  This  grace   of  pardon  is  dispensed 

<?3 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


by  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  Man —  Walk   sincerely  in    thy  calling,   and 

as  the  Head  of  the  new  creation  of  thou  shalt  hear  thy  Saviour  say,  "  Non 

redeemed  humanity.     It  is  the  virtue  est  infirmitas  hcec  ad  mortem  " ;  these 

that   necessarily  flows  from   Him,   to  affections — nay,    these    concupiscences 

all  His  members,  cleansing  the  soul,  — shall  not  destroy  thee  (Matt.  xxi.  8 ; 

instilling  peace,  and  establishing  fellow-  Tit.  ii.  14). — John  Bonne,  D.D. 
ship    with    God.       3.    The    ordinary 

channels  for  the   conveyance  of  this  Yer.    12.   A    new  experience. — That 

Divine  gift  are  the  ministry  and  the  argument  was  perfectly  logical ;  it  was 

sacraments  of  the  Church  "  which  is  an   induction,   yet   it   led   them   to  a 

His   body."      See   John   xx.    22,    23 ;  result  curiously  the  reverse  of  theirs 

1  Cor.  v.  3-5;  2  Cor.  ii.  10,  11.  who  reject  miracles  for  being  contrary 

to  experience.  "  Yes,"  they  said,  "  we 
Yer.  11.  Christ's  message  to  sick  appeal  to  experience,  but  the  conclusion 
souls. — To  every  sick  soul,  whose  cure  is  that  good  deeds  which  it  cannot 
He  undertakes,  He  says,  Surge,  tolle,  parallel  must  come  directly  from  the 
ambula.  Our  beds  are  our  natural  Giver  of  all  good."  Such  good  deeds 
affections.  These  He  does  not  bid  us  continue.  The  creed  of  Christ  has 
cast  away,  nor  burn,  nor  destroy,  reformed  Europe,  is  awakening  Asia, 
Since  Christ  vouchsafed  induere  homi-  has  transformed  morality,  and  im- 
nem,  we  must  not  exuere  hominem.  posed  new  virtues  on  the  conscience. 
Since  Christ  invested  the  nature  of  It  is  the  one  religion  for  the  masses, 
man  and  became  man,  we  must  not  the  lapsed,  and  indeed  the  sick  in  body 
pretend  to  divest  it  and  become  angels,  as  truly  as  in  soul ;  for  while  science 
or  flatter  ourselves  in  the  merit  of  discourses  with  enthusiasm  upon  pro- 
mortifications,  not  enjoined,  or  of  a  gress  by  the  rejection  of  the  less  fit, 
retiredness,  and  departing  out  of  the  our  faith  cherishes  these  in  hospitals, 
world,  in  the  world,  by  the  withdraw-  asylums,  and  retreats,  and  prospers  by 
ing  of  ourselves  from  the  offices  of  lavishing  care  upon  the  outcast  and 
mutual  society,  or  an  extinguishing  of  rejected  of  the  world.  Now  this  tran- 
natural  affections.  But  "  Surge,"  says  scends  experience  :  we  never  saw  it 
our  Saviour — Arise  from  this  bed,  on  this  fashion  ;  it  is  supernatural. — 
sleep  not  lazily  in  an  over-indulgence  Dean  Chadwick. 
to  these  affections;  but  "Ambula" — 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 
(Parallels:   Matt.  ix.  9-13;   Luke  v.  27-32.) 

The^  call  and  feast  of  Levi. — I.  A  seaside  walk  hallowed  by  sacred  in- 
struction.— Christ  never  wasted  His  time  or  opportunities  in  idle  reverie  or 
sentimental  contemplation  of  the  beauties  of  nature.  He  made  every  scene 
yield  food  for  mind  and  soul.  And,  asks  Mr.  Spurgeon,  can  we  not  do  some- 
thing for  Jesus  on  the  sands  ?  If  so,  let  us  not  miss  such  a  happiness.  What 
situation  and  surroundings  can  do  better  for  earnest,  loving  conversation  with 
our  friends  concerning  the  welfare  of  the  soul  ?  A  few  words  about  the  sea 
of  eternity  and  its  great  deeps,  a  sentence  or  two  upon  the  broken  shells  and 
our  frailty,  upon  the  Rock  of  Ages  and  the  sands  of  time,  may  never  be 
forgotten. 

II.  A  gracious  call  met  by  unquestioning  obedience.— It  is  said  that  the 
publicans  had  tenements  or  booths  erected  for  them  at  the  foot  of  bridges,  at 
the  mouths  of  rivers,  and  by  the  seashore,  where  they  plied  their  detested 
craft— levying  from  their  countrymen  the  dues  of  the  conqueror,  and  adding 

U 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ii. 


insult  to  injury  by  the  extortions  they  commonly  practised.  Doubtless  the 
tax-office  by  the  seashore  of  Capernaum  was  a  very  important  one,  and  Levi 
by  this  time  a  wealthy  man  adding  daily  to  his  gains.  We  need  not  suppose 
this  was  his  first  encounter  with  Christ ;  he  may  already  have  been  a  disciple 
in  a  general  sense.  But  now  the  time  has  come  for  him  to  break  away  from 
his  old  life  altogether,  to  abandon  his  business  and  his  riches,  and  to  adopt 
voluntary  poverty  for  the  rest  of  his  life.  It  was  a  great  sacrifice  that  was 
demanded  of  him,  and  few  who  heard  the  call  given  would  be  prepared  to 
witness  his  ready  obedience.  From  his  case  we  may  well  learn  to  be  very  slow 
in  passing  judgment  on  others :  however  unlikely  their  character  and  position 
in  life  may  appear  to  us,  we  know  not  what  methods  Christ  may  be  employing 
to  lead  them  to  Himself.  From  the  example  of  Levi  we  learn  also,  that  we 
must  be  prepared  to  find  our  religion  a  costly  thing.  Had  Levi  replied,  "  Lord, 
let  me  continue  my  profitable  business  for  a  while ;  be  satisfied  with  the  homage 
of  my  heart,"  surely  Christ  would  have  answered,  "  Whosoever  there  be  of 
you  that  forsaketh  not  all  that  he  hath,  and  followeth  after  Me,  he  cannot 
be  My  disciple."  Now  what  was  required  of  Levi  is  required,  in  a  certain 
very  real  sense,  of  all.  In  every  heart  of  man  there  is  by  nature  the  love  of 
riches,  or  of  what  riches  will  purchase  :  covetous  desires ;  love  of  self-indulgence 
in  some  shape  or  other;  longings  after  something  which  is  just  beyond  our 
reach ;  allowing  our  minds  to  run  upon  schemes  which  we  would  carry  out  if 
greater  means  were  allowed,  rather  than  reflecting  what  sort  of  use  we  make 
of  what  we  have  already.  These  are  the  things  we  are  required  to  renounce 
(as  Levi  to  give  up  his  rich  profession)  for  Christ's  sake. 

III.  A  social  meal  marred  by  ignoble  objections. — Levi's  first  act  is  a 
manifestation  of  gratitude.  He  is  eager  to  extend  to  others  a  share  of  the 
blessedness  that  has  befallen  himself.  Accordingly  he  makes  a  great  feast,  and 
invites  his  old  associates  and  friends  to  meet  the  Master  at  his  house,  earnestly 
desiring  that  they  also  may  become  followers  of  Christ.  And  the  Master 
understood  and  appreciated  his  motive.  As  the  physician  is  found  where 
pain  and  sickness  are,  so  Christ  came  to  the  dark,  dull,  ignorant,  lost  corners 
of  the  earth.  Anywhere  would  He  sit  down,  in  any  company  eat  and  drink, 
especially  in  that  of  the  most  despised,  because  there  He  found  those  very  souls, 
the  lost  and  the  rejected  of  men,  whom  He  came  expressly  to  seek,  and,  if  they 
would,  to  save  from  themselves,  and  their  own  corrupt  and  miserable  condition. 
But  certain  "  scribes  of  the  Pharisees,"  who,  intent  to  pry  into  Christ's  private 
life,  had  followed  the  guests  into  the  dining-room  (a  common  custom  in  the 
East),  were  filled  with  indignation  at  His  sitting  down  to  meat  with  a  whole 
company  of  publicans,  and  that  too  (see  ver.  18)  on  one  of  the  fast  days  of  the 
week.  They  must  needs  interpose  with  their  crude  criticisms.  What  cared 
they  that  His  very  presence  was  medicinal — banishing  foul  words  and  thoughts 
from  all  breasts  save  their  own — bringing  pure  air  and  sunshine  into  the  fetid 
atmosphere — an  outward  and  visible  sign  of  Divine  grace  and  love  ?  All  they 
concerned  themselves  with  was  the  maintenance  of  the  barriers  erected  by  their 
narrow-minded,  self-satisfied  exclusiveness.  They  could  not  conceive  of  any  one 
sitting  at  meat  with  publicans  and  sinners  from  higher  motives  than  the  mere 
enjoyment  of  social  intercourse;  it  never  occurred  to  them  that  what  Christ 
sought  was  not  viands,  but  hearts — not  to  receive  the  meat  that  perisheth,  but 
to  bestow  the  true  bread  from  heaven  which  endureth  unto  eternal  life.  Crafty 
cowards  that  they  were,  they  uttered  their  cavil  to  the  disciples  rather  than 
to  the  Master  Himself ;  but  Christ  at  once  accepted  the  challenge  and  set  the 
matter  in  the  right  light.  Where  else  should  the  physician  be  found  but  in 
the  hospital?  what  else  should  he  be  doing  but  attending  to  the  ailments  of 
his  patients? 

F  65 


chap.  il.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


TV.  A  great  claim  advanced  by  the  criticised  Teacher. — "  In  calling  Him- 
self the  Physician  of  sick  souls,"  says^Dean  Chadwick,  "Jesus  made  a  startling 
claim,  which  becomes  more  emphatic"* when  we  observe  that  He  also  quoted  the 
words  of  Hosea,  '  I  will  have  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice '  (Matt.  ix.  13 ;  Hos.  vi.  6). 
For  this  expression  occurs  in  that  chapter  which  tells  how  the  Lord  Himself 
hath  smitten  and  will  bind  us  up.  And  the  complaint  is  just  before  it,  that 
*  when  Ephraim  saw  his  sickness,  and  Judah  saw  his  wound,  then  went  Ephraim 
to  Assyria,  and  sent  to  King  Jareb  :  but  he  is  not  able  to  heal  you,  neither  shall 
he  cure  you  of  your  wound '  (Hos.  v.  13 — vi.  1).  As  the  Lord  Himself  hath  torn, 
so  He  must  heal.  Now  Jesus  comes  to  that  part  of  Israel  which  the  Pharisees 
despise  for  being  wounded  and  diseased,  and  justifies  Himself  by  words  which 
must,  from  their  context,  have  reminded  every  Jew  of  the  declaration  that  God 
is  the  Physician,  and  it  is  vain  to  seek  healing  elsewhere.  And  immediately 
afterwards  He  claims  to  be  the  Bridegroom,  whom  also  Hosea  spoke  of  as 
Divine.  Yet  men  profess  that  only  in  St.  John  does  He  advance  such  claims 
that  we  should  ask,  'Whom  makest  Thou  Thyself?'  Let  them  try  the 
experiment,  then,  of  putting  such  words  into  the  lips  of  any  mortal." 

Y.  A  pertinent  question  raised  by  puzzled  friends. — It  was  a  very  different 
spirit  from  that  of  the  scribes  which  prompted  John's  disciples  (Matt.  ix.  14) 
to  ask,  "  Why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  oft,  but  Thy  disciples  fast  not  ?  " 
They  were  perplexed  to  find  Jesus,  whom  their  master  had  taught  them  to 
regard  with  the  deepest  reverence,  feasting  on  a  fast  day.  They  remembered, 
perhaps,  that  in  the  Law  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  the  only  fast  prescribed  ; 
and  it  may  have  begun  to  dawn  upon  them  that  there  was  more  genuine 
religion  in  the  non-observance,  on  the  part  of  Christ  and  His  disciples,  of  the 
elaborate  system  which  had  by  this  time  degenerated  into  a  pure  formality, 
than  in  their  own  strict  adherence  to  it.  In  reply  Jesus  takes  the  opportunity 
to  lay  down  the  principle  which  should  regulate  all  religious  life  and  its 
expression — the  principle  of  naturalness,  and  not  artificiality.  "  There  is  a  time 
to  every  purpose  under  heaven  :  a  time  to  weep,  and  a  time  to  laugh ;  a  time 
to  mourn,  and  a  time  to  dance."  The  Baptist  himself  had  said,  with  reference 
to  Him,  that  "the  friend  of  the  Bridegroom,  which  standeth  and  heareth 
Him,  rejoiceth  greatly  because  of  the  Bridegroom's  voice."  To  make  that  a 
time  of  fasting — when  they  were  basking  in  the  sunshine  of  the  Bridegroom's 
presence — would  have  been  quite  incongruous,  if  not  hypocritical.  And  after  all 
no  one  need  grudge  them  their  day  of  gladness,  for  it  would  soon  be  succeeded  by 
the  night  of  bereavement — "  and  then  shall  they  fast."  So,  we  know,  it  happened 
in  the  Church's  earliest  and  purest  time.  When,  e.g.,  Paul  and  Barnabas  were 
separated  for  the  work  to  which  the  Holy  Spirit  had  called  them,  the  word 
came  to  those  who  were  "  ministering  to  the  Lord  and  fasting  "  (Acts  xiii.  2). 
St.  Paul  ordained  presbyters,  after  prayer  with  fasting  (Acts  xiv.  23) ;  speaks 
of  himself  as  being  "  in  fastings  often  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  27) ;  and  speaks  of  ministers 
commending  themselves  to  God  "  in  labours,  in  watchings,  and  in  fastings " 
(2  Cor.  vi.  5).  And  ever  since  fasting  has  been  enjoined  by  the  Church  as  the 
natural  expression  of  heartfelt  contrition  for  sin,  and  a  fit  instrument  for  the 
subjection  of  the  lower  to  the  higher  nature  ;  but  not  as  a  meritorious  act 
entitling  him  who  practises  it  to  the  favour  of  God.  This  latter  was  the  idea 
with  which  fasting  had  become  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  Jews  ;  and  in 
order  to  stamp  it  with  His  disapproval  Christ  adds  the  parables  or  similitudes 
of  the  piece  of  new  cloth,  and  of  the  new  wine  that  must  not  be  poured  into  old 
bottles.  Christians  were  indeed  to  fast,  as  Jews  had  fasted  ;  but  with  them 
the  ordinance  was  to  have  a  different  and  far  higher  significance.  It  was  no 
longer  to  be  regarded  as  part  of  a  law  of  works,  part  of  a  servile  duty  rendered 
to  a  despot ;  it  was  now  to  be  a  spiritual  sacrifice  offered  by  spiritual  men  to 
66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ii. 


a  spiritual  Father,  capable  with  His  blessing  to  be  the  means  of  strengthening 
and  purifying  the  soul.  Fitly,  therefore,  do  we  pray  in  the  Collect  for  the  First 
Sunday  in  Lent,  that  God  would  give  us  grace  to  use  such  abstinence,  that, 
our  flesh  being  subdued  to  the  Spirit,  we  may  ever  obey  His  godly  motions  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness,  to  His  honour  and  glory. 

Ver.  17.  Not  the  righteous,  but  sinners. — A  motley  crowd  met  at  Levi's  feast. 
There  were  men  of  his  own  class — "  publicans  "  :  the  small  district  officers  who 
collected  the  tolls  and  customs  for  the  great  officials  over  them,  who  farmed  the 
taxes  from  the  Roman  Government;  a  greedy,  extortionate  set,  whose  main 
object  in  life  was  to  fill  their  own  pockets  by  cheating  those  above  and  below 
them  alike.  There  were  others  present  even  less  savoury  than  these  to  the 
nostrils  of  the  elite  of  Capernaum — "  sinners  " :  open  transgressors  who  made 
no  pretence  of  virtue,  but  sinned  as  it  were  "with  a  cart-rope."  With  such 
companions,  we  are  told,  "  Jesus  sat  at  meat."  It  was,  then,  we  may  be  sure, 
no  riotous  feast.  Jesus  was  not  lending  His  countenance  to  their  sinful  ways. 
They  had  been  induced  to  come  to  see  and  to  hear  this  wonderful  Teacher,  and 
in  His  presence  (depend  upon  it)  they  were  subdued,  restrained,  softened.  No 
one  would  take  a  liberty  or  say  a  vile  word  before  Him.  Christian  charity  would 
have  rejoiced  to  see  these  people  so  changed,  even  if  but  for  the  time.  Yet 
there  were  some  near  by  who  were  terribly  shocked  at  the  sight.  Instead  of 
feeling  glad  that  so  many  sinners  were  on  the  road  to  amendment  through 
intercourse  with  Christ,  they  could  only  wonder  that  One  so  excellent  would 
adventure  Himself  into  such  evil  company,  and  run  the  risk  of  legal  pollution 
in  consequence.  The  great  aim  of  most  of  these  scribes  and  Pharisees,  in 
passing  through  the  world,  was  to  hold  aloof  from  everything  and  everybody 
that  could  contaminate  them  and  render  them  ceremonially  unclean.  No 
wonder  they  were  scandalised  at  the  scene  in  Levi's  house,  and  exclaimed, 
"  How  is  it  that  He  eateth  and  drinketh  with  publicans  and  sinners  ?  "  They 
put  their  angry  question  to  the  disciples,  but  the  Lord  Himself  took  up  the 
challenge  and  gave  them  their  answer.  "  They  that  are  whole  have  no 
need,"  etc.  They  were  silent.  What  could  they  reply?  He  whose  conduct 
they  presumed  to  criticise  had  come  as  a  Physician  of  souls  :  the  idea  was  quite 
new  to  them ;  they  had  never  looked  on  publicans  and  sinners  as  people  who 
could  be  cured :  of  course  it  was  just  such  depraved  persons  that  were  most  in 
need  of  a  Physician.  He  had  "  come  to  call  sinners  to  repentance  "  :  certainly 
it  was  just  people  like  those  around  Him  that  were  most  in  need  of  such  a  call. 
They,  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  were  "the  whole,"  "the  righteous":  the 
Physician  and  the  call  were  useless  to  them ! 

I.  Who  are  the  "righteous"  whom  Christ  did  not  come  to  call? — 1.  The 
expression  has  been  taken  to  denote  those  who  had  truly  reformed  their  lives, 
and  who  carefully  endeavoured  to  abstain  from  all  known  sin.  But  though 
this  may  be  a  very  correct  definition  of  righteousness  in  general,  it  scarcely 
applies  here.  Our  Lord  cannot  have  meant  that  there  were  persons  living  at 
that  time  to  whom  the  call  to  repentance — the  very  watchword  of  Christianity 
— was  altogether  unnecessary ;  for  we  know  that  "  the  baptism  of  repentance 
for  the  remission  of  sins"  was  ordained  to  be  preached  to  all  men  without 
exception.  2.  There  are  two  meanings  which  may  be  attached  to  the  word 
"righteous."  (1)  It  may  have  been  used  by  Christ  in  a  figurative  sense, 
without  any  reference  to  the  actual  state  of  the  world,  and  without  even  the 
supposition  of  there  being  any  such  persons  as  "the  righteous"  really  in 
existence.  Thus  His  meaning  may  have  been :  "  You  ask  Me  why  I  associate 
with  sinners.  I  answer,  that  My  commission  is  to  sinners.  To  them,  and  for 
them,  I  am  sent.     Righteousness  is  not  the  qualification  required  in  those  to 

67 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


whom  I  am  carrying  relief.  The  righteous,  therefore,  if  such  there  be,  are  not 
included  in  My  charge."  (2)  It  may  have  been  intended  to  carry  a  reproachful 
admonition  to  the  hearts  of  the  self -justifying  Pharisees.  "  Yes,  I  do  eat  with 
publicans  and  sinners.  Amongst  them,  whose  guilt  is  confessed,  and  who  make 
no  pretence  of  sanctity,  I  may  perhaps  find  the  willing  hearer,  the  patient 
learner,  and  the  penitent  disciple.  But  upon  you  whose  hearts  are  blinded  by 
conceit— upon  you  whose  minds  are  so  fully  occupied  with  admiration  of  your 
own  perfections  that  there  is  no  room  for  anything  else,— upon  you  My  calls 
to  repentance  would  be  lost ;  and  therefore  to  you  they  need  not  be  addressed." 
Such  an  interpretation  may  seem  inconsistent  with  the  usual  mildness  of  our 
Lord's  discourse;  but  it  corresponds  with  the  style  which  He  seems  to  have 
invariably  adopted  in  addressing  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  whose  duplicity  of 
character  and  affectation  of  sanctity  excited  His  constant  displeasure  and  drew 
down  upon  them  His  severest  reprobation. 

II.  What  is  the  "repentance"  to  which  Christ  came  to  call  sinners?— 

1.  Repentance  is  sorrow  for  sin.  The  true  servant  of  Christ  must  ever  feel 
a  regret,  a  deep,  abiding  regret,  that  by  his  transgressions  he  has  offended 
a  God  to  whom  he  is  so  greatly  indebted.  This  feeling  will  accompany  him 
through  life.  He  will  never  be  found  feeding  his  imagination  with  the  fancied 
virtues  of  his  heart,  or  the  supposed  graces  of  his  conduct.  If  he  does  well, 
he  thanks  the  God  who  enabled  him  to  do  it,  and  leaves  it  to  that  God  to 
accept  his  humble  service — never  forgetting  that  he  has  been,  and  is,  a  sinner. 

2.  Repentance  is  also  amendment  of  life.  He  who  regrets  that  he  has  sinned 
will  follow  up  that  regret  with  endeavours  to  sin  no  more.  Fixing  his  gaze 
on  the  Divine  standard  of  purity,  he  will  strive  unceasingly  to  attain  to  it.  By 
that  standard  he  will  repress  his  passions,  model  his  desires,  guide  his  judgment, 
and  correct  his  practice.  3.  Repentance  is,  in  short,  a  change  of  heart.  The 
whole  tide  of  the  penitent's  affections  is  reversed.  He  loves  what  he  formerly 
hated,  and  abhors  that  which  was  formerly  his  delight.  Was  he  but  lately 
captivated  with  the  charm  of  sinful  pleasures  ?  They  are  now  his  abomination. 
Did  he  dislike  and  loathe  the  reasonable  service  of  his  Maker  and  Redeemer  ? 
He  now  finds  in  it  his  solace,  his  hope,  and  his  ground  of  rejoicing.  4.  But 
is  repentance  the  same  in  all  minds  ?  Far  from  it.  To  him  who  has  long  held 
out  against  the  kindly  warnings  of  conscience,  and  resisted  the  gentle  solicita- 
tions of  the  Spirit  of  grace,  which  would  have  led  him  into  the  path  of  peace — 
to  him,  in  truth,  repentance  is  a  contest,  a  trial  hard  and  sore,  which  may  more 
appropriately  be  called  a  "  conversion."  His  very  principles  of  action,  and  the 
whole  temper  of  his  mind,  must  undergo  a  complete  transformation.  But  to 
the  avowed  and  sincere  servant  of  Christ,  who  has  never  broken  loose  from  the 
hallowed  circle  in  which  he  was  placed  at  baptism,  repentance  is  not  a  work 
of  so  violent  a  nature ;  it  rather  proceeds  with  the  quiet  tenor  of  a  gentle 
stream,  ruffled  by  an  occasional  unevenness.  The  mind  of  the  faithful  Christian 
needs  not  the  severe  penance  of  the  hackneyed  sinner ;  yet  has  it  reason  to 
be  often  looking  back,  confessing  its  errors,  rectifying  its  conduct,  and  taking 
refuge  in  the  "  Fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness." 

III.  Consider  the  necessity  and  reasonableness  of  repentance  as  a  condition 
affixed  to  salvation. — 1.  God  could  not,  consistently  with  every  part  of  His 
Divine  character,  bestow  eternal  life  on  sinners  without  repentance.  Wisdom, 
justice,  compassion,  holiness — all  the  attributes  of  Deity — are  equally  concerned 
in  this  work.  No  measure,  therefore,  however  gracious  in  its  tendency,  must 
be  adopted  at  the  suggestion  of  one  of  these  attributes  which  may  by  any 
possibility  interfere  with  the  free  exercise  of  another.  A  God  of  mercy  may 
forgive ;  but  a  God  of  wisdom,  justice,  holiness,  must  (so  to  speak)  deliberate 
as  to  the  manner  and  measure  of  His  forgiveness.     Scripture,  therefore,  in 

68 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  CHAP.  II. 


declaring  repentance  to  be  indispensably  necessary  to  salvation,  declares  that 
which  we  can  ourselves  see  to  be  alone  worthy  of  the  Great  God,  the  Giver  of 
all  law,  and  the  Just  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  2.  Could  we  conceive  the  Son  of 
God,  in  His  capacity  of  Mediator,  interposing  His  merciful  intercession  between 
offended  Majesty  and  unrepentant  sinners  ?  A  mediator  is  bound  as  much 
to  protect  the  honour  of  one  party  as  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  other. 
How  then  could  Jesus,  with  due  regard  for  His  Father's  dignity,  plead  for 
creatures  who  still  persisted  in  their  rebellion  against  Him  ?  How  could  He 
present  His  own  blood  and  His  own  righteousness  in  behalf  of  those  who  still 
delighted  in  the  enormities  which  brought  Him  to  the  Cross  ?  What  would  this 
be  but  to  betray  the  honour  of  the  Eternal  Father,  to  prostitute  the  merits 
of  His  own  death,  and  to  defeat  the  whole  end  and  purpose  of  His  atonement  ? 
3.  The  same  truth  is  equally  manifest  with  reference  to  the  sinner  himself. 
For  without  that  alteration  and  improvement  in  temper  and  habits,  which  by 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  wrought  in  us  through  repentance,  heaven  itself  would  possess 
no  attraction  for  fallen  man.  There  would  be  an  absolute  contradiction  between 
the  nature  of  the  happiness  and  the  person  to  be  admitted  to  it.  The  future 
life  of  glory  is  no  scene  of  carnal  or  corporeal  delights — no  place  of  enjoyment 
for  the  senses.  Its  beauties  are  all  of  the  moral  kind ;  its  pleasures  such  as 
the  spiritually-minded,  and  none  others,  can  appreciate.  The  objects  of  those 
pleasures  are  God,  ourselves,  and  our  fellow-creatures  made  perfect  with  us. 
The  state  of  the  soul  will  then  be  such  as  results  from  a  virtuous  and  well- 
governed  will,  and  a  noble  command  of  all  the  inclinations  and  affections — from 
an  exalted  understanding,  an  enlarged  knowledge  of  God,  His  attributes  and 
works,  and  a  perfect  perception  of  His  wonderful  dispensations  of  wisdom  and 
mercy  towards  His  creatures — from  the  love  of  Him,  and  the  ever-pleasing 
sense  of  being  beloved  by  Him.  This  is  to  be  happy,  because  this  is  to  be  good. 
The  contrary  state — the  state  of  unrepented  sin — is  misery,  be  one's  outward 
circumstances  what  they  may.  Heaven  itself  could  not  remedy  the  evil.  The 
one  and  only  source  of  relief  is  a  change  of  disposition,  of  principles,  of  practices 
— in  one  word,  repentance. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    14.    Levi  —  Matthew. — There  tion  and  discipline  of  the  Baptist,  and 

can  be  no  question  that  the  "  Levi  "  so  was  not  by  any  means  indifferent 

of  the  Second  and  Third  Gospels  is  the  to  religion.     For  indications  that  there 

"  Matthew  "  whom  the  First  Evangel-  had  been  some  unusual  religious  move- 

ist  mentions  so  modestly  (Matt.  ix.  9).  ment  among  the  publicans  as  a  class, 

The  previous  occupation  is  the  same;  see  Matt.  xxi.  31;    Luke  iii.   12,   13, 

the  call  is  the  same,   in  time,  place,  vii.  29. 

manner,  and  result ;  the  feast  is  the  "  Sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom." — 

same,  the   guests  and   spectators,  the  1.  In  business.    (1)  Exacting  more  than 

questions    and    answers.       That    our  is  fair  from  employees.     (2)  Bestowing 

Lord  should  have  bestowed  upon  Levi  too  great   assiduity  on   the   amassing, 

the  additional  name  Matthew — "gift  of   wealth,   to   the  detriment  oKboth 

of  God  " — is  in  accordance  with  what  body  and  soul.    2.  In  general  behaviour, 

we   are   told    of    most    of    the    other  Pride  and  ambition — demanding  obeis- 

apostles.       Respecting     his     previous  ance  and  deference,  instead  of  practising 

history  we  know  nothing  ;    but   it  is  the  virtues  of  humility  and  meekness, 

reasonable   enough   to    suppose    that,  3.    In  domestic  concerns.      Expecting 

like  Peter,  Andrew,  James,  John,  and  all  household   arrangements  to  fit  in 

Philip,  he  had  been  under  the  instruc-  exactly  with  one's    own   convenience 

69 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


or  caprice.  4.  In  pleasure.  Greedily 
pursuing  things  that  cannot  bestow- 
fasting  happiness. 

Incidental  services  to  men. — There 
is  here  a  lesson  to  us,  that  we  are 
to  be  always  on  the  outlook  for  the 
good  of  men  whom  we  are  passing  by 
in  the  various  ways  of  life.  Where- 
ever  we  see  a  man  we  see  an  oppor- 
tunity of  speaking  a  word  for  Christ, 
and  of  calling  men  to  a  higher  life. 
Courage  and  prudence  are  equally 
required  in  the  discharge  of  these 
incidental  services.  There  is  a  modesty 
that  is  immodest,  and  there  is  a  for- 
wardness which  is  but  the  courage  of 
humility. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

The  greatness  of  Divine  grace,  which 
can  make   of   a  publican  an  apostle. 

1.  According  to  Jewish  traditionalism, 
the  publican  was  an  excommunicated 
person  ;  but  he  is  now  called  to  assist 
in  founding  the  communion  of  Christ. 

2.  He  was  an  apostate  from  the  people 
of  God ;  but  called  to  be  one  of  the 
pillars  of  the  Church  of  God.  3.  He 
was  an  instrument  of  oppression ;  but 
becomes  an  instrument  of  glorious 
liberty.  4.  He  was  a  stumbling-block 
and  a  byword  ;  but  becomes  a  burning 
and  a  shining  light. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Christ's  diligence  an  incentive  to  us. — 
Gracious  Lord,  how  diligent  art  Thou 
in  doing  good  !  how  negligent  are  we 
in  receiving  it ! — who  art  fain  to  look 
us  out,  and  often  makest  that  which 
seems  mere  chance  to  be  a  blessed 
occasion  to  us  of  spiritual  improvement 
and  of  eternal  assurance,  and  turnest 
accidents  into  special  instances  of  love 
and  intimacy,  if  we  do  but  as  we 
should  do,  regard  Thy  goings,  observe 
Thy  looks,  and  obey  Thy  calls. — 
A.  Littleton,  D.D. 

The  Divine  call. — God  has  created 
us  by  His  power,  and  designed  us  by 
His  wisdom,  and  preserves  us  by  His 
mercy  for  greater  and  nobler  ends  than 
to  serve  the  wicked  world  and  sinful 
flesh  ;  nor  is  He  wanting  by  His  grace 
to  afford  every  one  sufficient  means  for 
his  spiritual  conduct.  He  passeth  by 
us  often  when  we  are  not  aware  of 
Him  ;    He  looks  upon  us  and  we  see 

70 


Him  not ;  and  He  calls  us  by  checks 
of  our  own  conscience,  by  motions  of 
His  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  the  preaching 
of  His  Word :  but  we  stop  our  ears 
against  Him,  and  will  not  hear;  and 
when  He  cries  to  us,  "  Follow  Me,"  we 
sit  still  and  mind  Him  not.  Oh,  let  us 
open  our  eyes  to  behold  Him,  our  ears 
to  hear  Him,  and  our  hearts  to  receive 
Him  \—Ibid. 

Ver.  15.  Levi's  feast. — 1.  The  grati- 
tude of  the  believing  heart  for  the  bless- 
ings of  salvation  will  manifest  itself  in 
gifts  to  the  Lord  : — Zaccheus ;  Mary 
of  Bethany;  the  woman  that  was  a 
sinner ;  Lydia ;  the  converts  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost.  2.  The  earnest 
believer  will  not  be  ashamed  to  confess 
Christ  before  his  former  associates 
and  fellow-workmen.  The  Church  has 
great  need  of  men  like  Hedley  Vicars, 
who  laid  down  his  Bible  on  the  mess 
room  table  in  thepresenceof  his  brother- 
officers,  as  an  unmistakable  token  of 
the  change  that  had  come  over  him. 

3.  The  converted  man  will  be  anxious 
about  the  conversion  of  others.  He 
goes  forth  as  Christ's  soldier  to  win 
captives  from  the  enemy.  Naturally 
he  begins  the  campaign  nearest  home. 

4.  The  Christian  religion,  in  order  to 
accomplish  its  glorious  mission,  must 
descend  to  the  most  degraded,  and  by 
its  own  inherent  power  raise  them  up. 

Ver.  17.  Who  are  "  the  righteous"  ? — 
A  glance  at  a  concordance  will  prove 
that  both  Old  and  New  Testaments 
constantly  speak  of  men  as  "  righteous." 
God  loves  to  give  us  credit  for  being 
that  which  He  foresees  us  capable  of 
becoming,  even  though  we  have  got 
only  a  few  steps  on  the  road  as  yet. 
"The  righteous"  are  simply  those 
whose  intention  is  pure.  Sinners  we 
all  are,  and  must  be ;  but  wilful  sinners 
we  need  not  be.  We  may  have  been 
thoughtless  many  a  time,  and,  in  con- 
sequence, surprised  into  folly  and  sin ; 
but  if  we  at  once  own  and  lament  our 
frailty,  He  is  not  extreme  to  mark 
what  is  done  amiss ;  and  whilst  by  His 
grace  we    keep    ourselves    from    pre- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  II. 


sumptuous  sin  (Ps.  xix.  13)  our  names  begin   at   the   very   deepest    point   of 

are  enrolled  among  the  righteous,  and  human   apostasy  and   work   our  way 

He  imputes  not  our  iniquities  to  us.  steadily  upward ;  there  is  a  temptation 

The  Divine    Physician. — 1.    Sin    is  even  in  Christian  work  to  stop  short 

sickness  of  the  most  dangerous  kind,  of  the  lowest  depth  of  human  necessity. 

2.  Repentance  is  the  first  step  towards  3.    Jesus   Christ   shows   it  to  be  our 

the  healing  of  the  soul.     3.  Christ  is  duty  to  associate  with  those  whom  we 

the  soul's  Physician,  for  whose  skill  no  seek  to  save :  He  sat  with  them,  He 

case  is  too  hard.     4.  The  more  grave  talked  to  them,  He  asked  them  ques- 

our  state,  the  more  anxious  is  Christ  tions,  He  made  Himself  their  personal 

to  restore  us  to  spiritual  health.  friend,    and    so    attained    over    them 

How  to  do  good. — From  this  answer  personal    supremacy.      This    practice 

we  may  see — 1.  Duty  of   doing  good  levels  a  deadly  blow  at  the  theory  of 

avowedly — not  going   about   it  in   an  doing  good  by  proxy.     It  is  compara- 

indirect  manner,  as  if  we  were  making  tively  easy  to  send  other  men  on  errands 

an   experiment,    but    boldly   and   dis-  of  mercy,  but  we  are  only  working  in 

tinctly,  approaching  it  with  a  set  pur-  Christ's   spirit   in   so   far   as   we    are 

pose  of  spending  our  best  energy  upon  prepared  to  go  ourselves  and  openly 

it.     2.  We  may  see  it  to  be  our  duty  identify  our  whole  influence  with  the 

to   go   to   those  who    are   least   cared  cause  of  fallen  men.     Where  there  is 

for.     We  are  only  working  in  the  line  this  intense  personal  consecration,  there 

of  the  Saviour's  mission  as  we  begin  will,   of    course,    be   a    disposition    to 

at  the  very  lowest  point  in  the  social  engage  as  much  co-operation  as  pos- 

scale.      We    cannot    do    fundamental  sible;    our  duty  is  to  see  that  we  do 

and  permanent  good  by  beginning  at  not  find  in  co-operation  an  excuse  for 

the  top  or  in  the  middle ;  we  must  get  personal  negligence. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 
down  to  springs  and  causes,  we  must 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—22. 
(Parallels:  Matt.  ix.  14-17;  Luke  v.  33-39.) 

"  The  children  of  the  bridechamber." — Marriage,  if  any  time,  is  a  season  of 
festivity  and  joy.  To  promote  these  purposes  is  the  object  of  inviting  certain 
friends  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom  to  attend  its  celebration.  To  fast  or  assume 
a  stern  aspect  on  such  an  occasion  would  be  little  short  of  an  insult.  Now 
Christ  here  compares  Himself  to  the  bridegroom,  and  His  disciples  to  these 
companions  or  friends.  The  Baptist  had  suggested  the  same  comparison*before 
(John  iii.  29).  His  disciples  stood  and  heard  Him  all  the  time  of  His  sojourning 
upon  earth,  and  rejoiced  greatly  because  of  His  voice.  That  was  their  holiday- 
time.  If  it  was  not  so  to  the  world  at  large,  to  the  Pharisees,  etc.,  it  was 
because  they  were  not  of  the  Bridegroom's  party. 

I.  The  character  of  Christians,  as  "children  of  the  bridechamber." — This 
implies — 1.  Dignity.  This  is  an  honourable  office.  Those  whom  a  man  invites 
to  his  wedding  are  not  merely  his  friends,  but  such  friends  as  he  specially  delights 
to  honour.  And  are  not  Christians  highly  honoured  by  being  chosen  out  of 
the  rest  of  mankind  to  receive  "the  light  of  the  knowledge,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  iv.  6)? 
See  also  1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  John  xv.  16.  "  This  honour  have  all  His  saints,"  by  the 
mere  circumstance  of  their  election  ;  but  this  is  greatly  enhanced  if  we  consider 
what  it  is  they  are  elected  to  (Rom.  viii.  17).  The  "children  of  the  bride- 
chamber," though  they  performed  many  personal  offices  for  the  bridegroom, 
were  yet  far  from  being  considered  in  the  light  of  menials,  but  rather  of  equals 
and  companions ;  and  so  says  the  Saviour  to  His  disciples  (John  xv.  14,  15). 

71 


chap.  II.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


2.  Subordination  to  and  entire  dependence  upon  Christ.  The  "  children  of  the 
bridechamber  "  have  no  existence  but  in  relation  to  the  bridegroom  (John  iii.  29). 
Even  so  Christians  are  absolutely  nothing  without  Christ  (John  xv.  5).  What 
a  ridiculous  character  is  a  friend  of  the  bridegroom  thrusting  himself  forward 
as  a  principal  person,  acting  an  independent  part,  pretending  to  be  something 
when  he  is  nothing,  instead  of  taking  every  opportunity  of  exalting  and  magni- 
fying the  bridegroom,  even  at  his  own  expense !  And  such  is  the  Christian  who 
glories  in  himself,  or  fails  to  refer  everything  to  his  Lord  and  Master.  3.  Duties 
and  responsibilities.  The  "  children  of  the  bridechamber "  must  be  always  in 
waiting.  While  the  term  of  their  service  lasts  they  are  a  part  of  the  family, 
and  the  bridegroom's  house  is  their  home.  So  Christians  attend  continually 
upon  the  Saviour  ;  "  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth "  ;  wait  on  Him 
in  the  way  of  His  judgments,  ordinances,  sacraments ;  ever  "  looking  unto 
Jesus,"  and  conforming  their  life  and  temper  to  the  example  set  by  Him. 

II.  The  general  temper  of  Christians,  as  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  always 
(ver.  19). — 1.  The  presence  of  the  Divine  Bridegroom,  the  converse  of  Him  who 
spake  as  never  man  spake,  was  to  our  Lord's  immediate  followers  as  a  continual 
feast.  2.  The  same  should  now  be  true  of  Christians  in  general ;  for  although, 
in  one  sense,  the  Bridegroom  is  taken  away  from  us,  where  is  He  ?  See  1  Pet. 
iii.  22.  This  cannot  be  the  "taking  away"  to  which  He  refers,  as  an  occasion 
of  mourning  to  His  friends ;  since  He  Himself  said,  at  another  time  (John 
xiv.  28).  Not  only  if  we  love  Him,  but  if  we  love  ourselves,  we  shall  rejoice  at 
this  temporary  separation.  Whatever  accession  of  dignity  or  influence  accrues 
to  the  Bridegroom,  His  friends  are  sure  to  reap  the  benefit  of  it.  Nor,  because 
He  is  in  heaven,  is  He  the  less  present  with  us  on  earth.  This  is  a  great 
mystery,  but  an  infallible  and  most  comfortable  truth.  See  John  xiv.  18,  19; 
Matt,  xxviii.  20. 

III.  The  occasional  seasons  when  Christians  mourn  and  fast. — 1.  This 
cannot  refer  to  any  temporal  afflictions  ;  for  we  are  expressly  told  that  no 
worldly  tribulation  or  distress  is  able  to  separate  us  from  the  Saviour  ;  but  that 
it  is  in  the  nature  of  such  things  rather  to  endear  Him  to  us  the  more,  and  to 
make  us  the  more  worthy  of  His  love.  2.  We  must  therefore  understand  by 
these  words  times  of  spiritual  trouble  and  heaviness,  such  as  will  occasionally 
happen,  in  this  imperfect  state,  even  to  those  who  have  the  best  reason,  to 
"abound  in  hope  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  Bridegroom 
Himself  had  such  seasons.  See  Matt.  iv.  1,  2  ;  Mark  xiv.  33-36.  It  is  evident, 
then,  that  our  spiritual  garments  will  not  be  always  white,  and  that  tears  may 
be  shed  in  a  bridal  chamber.  Let  us,  at  such  seasons,  have  recourse  to  the 
divinely  appointed  means  of  grace,  in  the  assured  confidence  that,  if  rightly 
improved,  these  occasional  interruptions  of  our  wonted  cheerfulness  will  minister 
to  our  more  abundant  consolation  in  the  end.  3.  Hitherto  we  have  had  in 
view  those  dark  and  distressing  times  of  the  soul  which  come  unsought,  of  which 
we  cannot  give  a  satisfactory  account,  and  which  it  is  our  duty  as  much  as 
possible  to  bear  up  against.  Other  times  there  are  when  we  should  rather 
invite  than  resist  the  entrance  of  sad  thoughts  into  our  hearts.  The  solemn 
season  of  Lent  is  one  of  these,  and  especially  the  Holy  Week  with  which  it 
ends,  when  we  commemorate  the  Passion  and  Death  of  our  Redeemer. 

Fasting --It  is  quite  clear,  to  start  with,  that  no  practice  of  this  kind  can 
be  an  end  in  itself ;  it  must  be  a  means :  equally  clear  that  it  must  be  a 
spiritual  means  to  a  spiritual  end— a  means  by  which  the  spirit  may  control 
the  body,  so  as  to  fashion  it  into  its  noble  destiny  of  being  a  spiritual  body; 
that  so  the  whole  man  may  be  moulded  for  the  service,  and,  in  some  sense, 
into  the  likeness,  of  God,  who  is  a  Spirit. 
72 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  II. 


I.  It  is  a  method  of  bodily  discipline. — It  aims  at  making  us  like  God,  who 
is  a  Spirit,  and  who,  as  such,  is  superior  to  and  able  to  control  material  things. 
It  trains  us  in  the  power  of  detachment,  in  the  power  of  saying  "  No,"  not  only 
to  the  sins  of  the  flesh,  but  to  its  indulgences ;  it  recalls  the  command,  "  Seek 
ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  the  example,  "  My  meat  is  to  do  the  will 
of  Him  that  sent  Me " ;  it  keeps  the  body  braced  for  action,  and  prevents 
luxuries  from  growing  into  necessities.  It  is  in  St.  Leo's  favourite  phrase 
a  "  presidium,"  a  protection  to  the  spirit  against  the  encroachments  of  the 
body — asking  us,  with  importunate  persistency,  whether  we  have  our  body  well 
in  hand,  whether  we  should  be  ready  for  a  call  to  do  missionary  work  in  some 
part  of  the  Master's  kingdom  which  is  not  yet  civilised.  We  need  this  protection 
for  our  own  sakes,  with  its  reminder  of  the  need  of  fasting  from  all  sin ;  and 
we  need  it  also  for  the  sake  of  the  poor  and  of  the  Church,  that  we  may  have 
the  means  and  the  will  to  help  their  necessities.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that, 
in  the  recently  discovered  Apology  of  Aristides,  one  of  the  characteristics 
attributed  to  the  early  Christians  is  that,  if  they  have  not  enough  money  to  help 
a  poor  brother,  they  fast  two  or  three  days,  that  they  may  supply  the  needy  with 
their  necessary  food ;  and  St.  Leo  constantly  insists  on  the  duty  of  a  liberal 
benevolence  being  the  accompaniment  of  fasting.  Detachment,  bodily  discipline, 
sympathy  with  the  poor,  liberality — these  are  virtues  which  spring  from  fasting  ; 
yet  most  assuredly  fasting  did  not  spring  from  the  desire  for  them.  We  shall 
miss  its  true  Value  if  we  stop  at  these.     We  must  go  deeper  still. 

II.  It  is  also  the  expression  of  sorrow — and,  for  the  Christian,  of  sorrow  for 
sin :  it  becomes  thus  a  great  training  in  the  true  nature  of  penitence  and  the 
right  purposes  of  sorrow.  Why  was  it  that  our  Lord  expected  His  apostles  to 
fast  ?  It  was  because  He  was  to  be  taken  away  from  them.  And  why  was  He 
taken  away  ?  Because  of  sin.  The  Incarnation,  which  might  have  been  like 
a  perpetual  joyous  intercourse  of  Bridegroom  and  bride,  was  marred  and  checked 
by  sin.  And  in  what  sense  can  the  Bridegroom  be  said  to  be  taken  away  from 
us  now,  so  that  we  should  mourn  ?  He  is  gone  wherever  our  sin  has  grieved 
His  Spirit  and  driven  Him  from  our  hearts.  The  Christian  life  should  be  one 
of  joyous  service,  of  conscious  spiritual  communion  with  the  Master ;  and  who 
can  say  how  different  it  is  for  many  of  us,  with  selfishness  and  ill-will  marring 
its  beauty,  so  that  we  get  only  now  and  then  faint  glimpses  of  what  a  loyal  and 
loving  service  of  the  Master  might  be  ?  Now  the  reason  of  this  is  sin,  our  own 
sin,  our  past  sin,  our  present  sin,  whereby  we  have  crucified  the  Son  of  God 
afresh.  Friday  has  to  be  a  Good  Friday  in  every  week,  giving  us  time  and 
quiet  to  learn  "that  individual  and  detailed  knowledge  of  our  own  personal 
sinfulness,  whence  the  real  love  of  our  Redeemer  can  alone  flow."  The  most 
fatal  enemy  of  the  spiritual  life  is  self-complacency,  and  the  recurring  fast  day 
is  our  protection  against  this  ;  "  the  wound  of  our  just  remorse  needeth  touching  " 
very  often.  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  nothing  less  than  the  Death  of  the 
Son  of  God  was  sufficient  to  redeem  us  from  our  sins,  that  those  sins  were  real 
acts  of  our  own  will  affecting  our  whole  nature,  so  that  we  can  never  be  as 
though  we  had  not  sinned,  but  must  always  be  penitent  before  God,  always  on 
our  guard  against  the  temptations  which  have  proved  fatal  to  us,  prepared 
beforehand  for  any  suffering  which  God  may  send  us  in  consequence  of  our  sins, 
and  willing  to  welcome  it  as  His  means  of  purifying  our  souls.  It  is  not — God 
forbid ! — that  the  atonement  on  the  Cross  was  insufficient ;  but  it  is  that  we 
ought  to  feel  and  act  as  those  whom  He  has  redeemed,  to  share  His  hatred 
for  sin,  to  war  against  it  actively  in  our  own  persons — to  be  like  our  God, 
who  is  a  consuming  fire. 

III.  The  reason  for  common  Church  fasts  on  fixed  days. — George  Herbert 
has  tersely  put  it,  "The  Scriptures  bid  us  fast,  the  Church  says  now" ;  and  the 

73 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


reason  for  this  is  not  only  that  so  brother  helps  brother  to  keep  up  his  spiritual 
life,  and  that  the  common  action  of  the  Church  is  more  prevailing  with  God, 
like  its  common  prayer,  but  it  is  also  a  reminder  that  we  have  to  be  not  self- 
centred  in  our  penitence,  but  to  fast  and  sorrow  for  the  sins  and  shortcomings 
of  the  whole  Church. 

IV.  Fasting  does  not  end  in  itself;  it  is  always  in  the  Church's  system 
a  preparation.  It  was  the  preparation  for  baptism  as  early  as  the  second 
century.  An  almost  universal  instinct  has  regarded  it  as  the  fit  approach  to 
the  Holy  Communion.  After  Friday  comes  Sunday  with  its  worship  and 
Communion.  After  Lent  comes  Easter.  This  fact  seems  to  say :  grief,  weak- 
ness, sin — these  are  not  the  end.  We  sorrow  that  we  may  know  the  power  of 
the  Resurrection ;  we  feel  the  touch  of  human  weakness  that  we  may  rest  on 
spiritual  strength,  and  know  that  power  is  perfected  in  weakness  ;  we  recall  our 
sinfulness  that  we  may  realise  the  love  of  the  Atonement.  Fasting  does  for  us 
the  work  which  that  good  man,  the  clergyman,  did  for  the  simple  maiden  in 
Tennyson's  poem  :  "  He  showed  me  all  the  mercy,  for  he  showed  me  all  the  sin." 
And  it  keeps  joy  Christian.  Christian  joy  has  to  stand  in  relation  to  Chris- 
tian grief.  If  we  have  learnt  to  grieve  for  sin,  we  shall  rejoice  for  the  triumph 
of  righteousness.  If  we  have  mourned  for  the  failures  of  the  Church,  our  joy 
will  rise  above  selfish  family  prosperity  into  delight  in  the  progress  of  the 
Church. 

V.  Two  words  of  caution. — 1.  Remember  Mr.  Keble's  advice,  "Keep  a 
medical  conscience,  either  in  your  own  bosom  or  in  that  of  some  friend  who  may 
be  trusted."  "  Fasting  sometimes  causes  a  distressing  reaction :  if  you  have 
reason  to  fear  that,  you  had  better  use  hard  and  unpleasant  diet  than  actually 
going  without."  2.  It  was  especially  in  connexion  with  fasting  that  our  Lord 
insisted  on  the  break  with  the  old  spirit  of  Judaism.  Our  fasting  may  not  be 
a  mere  form — a  desire  to  win  God's  favour — a  trust  in  ourselves.  It  must  be 
done  in  love  and  gratitude,  with  desire  to  imitate  our  Lord,  with  prayer  to  Him 
that  it  may  be  united  with  His  fasting,  and  get  all  its  virtue  from  Him. — 
W.  Lock. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS  ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    18.    A  common   evil. — It  is  a  posed   persons    observe   such   days   of 

Pharisaic  and  very  common  evil  that  abstinence  in  a  right  manner,  and  to 

men   are   very   much    more    troubled  a   right   end ;    when    they   look    upon 

about   setting   others   right    in    their  fasting    not   as   an    essential    part    of 

living    than    about    correcting    their  natural  or  revealed  religion,  but  only 

own. — Starke.  as  an  auxiliary  or  instrumental  duty ; 

The  busybody  begins  by  talking  about  when  they  do  not  rest  in  it  as  abso- 

others,  and  comes  afterwards  to  him-  lutely  and   in   itself  good,    but   make 

self,  but  makes  the  best  of    his   own  use   of   it   as   a   proper   help   for  the 

case  (1  Tim.  iv.  8). — P.  Quesnel.  better   performance    of    those    duties, 

All  men  not   alike. — It  is  spiritual  which  are  strictly  and   properly  acts 

pride  when,  in  matters  which  God  has  of  religious   worship ;    when    they   do 

left  to  our  freedom,  people  try  to  make  not   acquiesce  in   the    bare     outward 

others   regulate   themselves    by   their  performance   of   this    duty,    or    think 

rules.     What  benefits  one  man's  soul  they  have  discharged  it  as  they  ought, 

may  harm  another's.  till   by  the   use   of  these  means,  and 

God's  blessing  upon  them,  they  have 

Ver.  20.  The  right  use  and  end  of  attained  those  graces,  to  which  these 

fasting. — When  godly  and  well-dis-  means  ought  to  be  subservient ;  when 
74 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  n. 


they  strive  thereby  to  mortify  the  tions,  such  an  observance  cannot  be 
flesh,  and  to  subdue  the  lusts  thereof,  justly  accused  of  superstition,  cannot 
to  spiritualise  the  soul,  and  to  dispose  indeed  be  condemned  without  super- 
it  for  more  exalted  acts  of  devotion  ;  stition.  Such  an  abstinence  as  this 
when  to  these  ends  they  choose  to  set  our  Church  recommends ;  such,  if  we 
apart  those  days  which  they  find  have  shall  practise  with  the  same  intentions, 
been  set  apart  to  the  same  ends  by  the  with  the  same  piety  and  moderation, 
generality  of  Christians  in  all  ages ;  as  she  recommends  it,  we  shall  thereby 
when  they  are  willing  to  keep  up  a  reap  great  benefit  to  our  souls,  and  the 
custom  which  they  find  hath  been  better  prepare  and  dispose  them  for 
kept  up  by  all  or  by  most  of  the  the  reception  of  God's  grace  here,  and 
Churches  of  God ;  when  they  dutifully  the  communication  of  His  glory  in  the 
comply  with  the  usages  of  that  Church  world  to  come. — Bishop  Smalridge. 
in  which  they  live,  and  are  afraid  of 

despising  the  lawful  commands  of  their  Ver.  21.  Consequences   of  false  con- 

superiors;    when,    how    strict    soever  servatism    in    the    Church. — 1.    These 

they  are  towards  themselves,  they  are  attempts     at     tailoring     in    spiritual 

not  rigorous  in  their  censures  of  others  matters  are  opposed  even  to  common 

who  do  not  think  themselves  bound  to  sense  and  every-day  practice.     2.  The 

the  same  observances ;  when  they  do  old   forms   are  destroyed  by  the  new 

not  hope  by  abstinence  at  some  times  life,  and  the  new  life  by  the  old  forms, 

of  the  year  to  compound  for  criminal  3.  The  work  of  destruction  is  continued 

excesses  at  other  times,  but  are  tern-  while  they  clamour  against  destruction, 

perate  and  sober  through   the   whole  until  the  new  and  the  old  are  finally 

course   of   their    lives,    and    at    some  separated. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

stated    periods    sequester    themselves  The  threefold  mark  of  the  new  life. — 

more  than  usually   from  the  business  1.  It  assumes  a  definite  outward  form, 

and  from  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  2.  It  cannot  continue  in  the  false  and 

that   they   may   more  freely  and  un-  antiquated  forms.     3.  It  must  create 

interruptedly  attend   to  the  concerns  for  itself  corresponding  forms. — Ibid. 
of  the  next;  when  they  are  in  their 

consciences  fully  persuaded  that  one  Ver.  22.  Form  and  spirit. — As  the 
day  or  one  meat  of  itself  is  not  more  wineskin  retains  the  wine,  so  are  feel- 
holy,  more  pure,  or  more  clean  than  ings  and  aspirations  aided,  and  even 
another,  but  that  all  days  and  all  preserved,  by  suitable  external  forms, 
meats  be  of  their  own  nature  of  one  Without  these  emotion  would  lose 
equal  purity,  cleanness,  and  holiness,  itself  for  want  of  restraint,  wasted, 
and  yet  on  some  days  abstain  from  like  spilt  wine,  by  diffuseness.  And 
some  meats  not  as  in  themselves  un-  if  the  forms  are  unsuitable  and  out- 
lawful,  but  as  less  subservient  to  the  worn,  the  same  calamity  happens — the 
keeping  under  the  body  and  bringing  strong,  new  feelings  break  through 
it  into  subjection ;  when  they  do  not  them,  "  and  the  wine  perisheth,  and 
rigorously  tie  themselves  up  to  fixed  the  skins."  In  this  respect  how  many 
and  unchangeable  rules,  from  which  a  sad  experience  of  the  Church  attests 
they  may  in  no  case  swerve,  to  the  the  wisdom  of  her  Lord ;  what  losses 
ensnaring  and  perplexing  of  their  con-  have  been  suffered  in  the  struggle 
sciences,  but  in  things  of  themselves  between  forms  that  had  stiffened  into 
indifferent  use  such  a  latitude  as  may  archaic  ceremonialism  and  new  zeal  de- 
neither  entrench  too  much  on  Christian  manding  scope  for  its  energy — between 
liberty,  nor  on  the  other  side  open  a  the  antiquated  phrases  of  a  bygone  age 
gap  to  licentiousness, — when,  I  say,  and  the  new  experience,  knowledge, 
sober,  judicious,  and  devout  Christians  and  requirements  of  the  next — between 
observe  the  fasts  of  the  Church  with  the  frosty  precisions  of  unsympathetic 
these  cautions,  restrictions,  and  limita-  age   and    the    innocent   warmth    and 

75 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


freshness  of  the  young,  too  often,  alas !  thoughts  respecting  locomotion  .re- 
lost  to  their  Master  in  passionate  quired  new  machinery.  So  did  the 
revolt  against  restraints  which  He  thoughts  of  Christ  require  new  habits 
neither  imposed  nor  smiled  upon. —  and  practices.  These  were  not  fully 
Dean  Chadwick.  initiated  by  Christ,  but  He  laid  down 
Christian  development. — The  old  the  basis  of  all  subsequent  Christian 
stage-coaches  could  not  have  been  development, 
utilised  for   steam-engines ;    the  new 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  23—28. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xii.  1-8  ;  Luke  vi.  1-5.) 

The  Sabbath  and  its  Lord. — The  malignity  of  the  Pharisees  being  now  fully 
aroused  by  Christ's  disregard  of  their  scrupulosities  and  conventionalities,  they 
are  henceforth  to  be  found  constantly  dogging  His  steps,  watching  His  every 
action,  catching  up  His  every  word,  in  order  that  His  influence  with  the  people 
may  be  neutralised,  or  at  least  lessened.  Especially  on  the  Sabbath  were  they 
careful  to  shadow  Him  wherever  He  went,  for  there  was  no  clearer  proof  of 
His  divergence  from  current  tradition  than  as  regards  the  observance  of  the 
rest-day.  "On  no  other  subject,"  says  Dr.  Edersheim,  "is  Rabbinic  teaching 
more  painfully  minute  and  more  manifestly  incongruous  to  its  professed  object. 
For  if  we  rightly  apprehend  what  underlay  the  complicated  and  intolerably 
burdensome  laws  of  Pharisaic  Sabbath  observance,  it  was  to  secure,  negatively, 
absolute  rest  from  all  labour,  and,  positively,  to  make  the  Sabbath  a  delight. 
The  Mishnah  includes  Sabbath  desecration  among  those  most  heinous  crimes 
for  which  a  man  was  to  be  stoned.  This,  then,  was  their  first  care  :  by  a  series 
of  complicated  ordinances  to  make  a  breach  of  the  Sabbath  rest  impossible. 
The  next  object  was,  in  a  similarly  external  manner,  to  make  the  Sabbath 
a  delight.  A  special  Sabbath  dress,  the  best  that  could  be  procured ;  the 
choicest  food,  even  though  a  man  had  to  work  for  it  all  the  week,  or  public 
charity  were  to  supply  it, — such  were  some  of  the  means  by  which  the  day  was 
to  be  honoured,  and  men  were  to  find  pleasure  therein.  The  strangest  stories 
are  told  how,  by  the  purchase  of  the  most  expensive  dishes,  the  pious  poor  had 
gained  unspeakable  merit,  and  obtained,  even  on  earth,  Heaven's  manifest 
reward.  And  yet,  by  the  side  of  these  and  similar  strange  and  sad  misdirections 
of  piety,  we  come  also  upon  that  which  is  touching,  beautiful,  and  even 
spiritual.  On  the  Sabbath  there  must  be  no  mourning,  for  to  the  Sabbath 
applies  this  saying  :  "  The  blessing  of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,  and  He  addeth 
no  sorrow  with  it"  (Prov.  x.  22).  The  object  which  Rabbinism  vainly  strove 
to  attain  by  the  multiplication  of  restrictions,  Christ  set  Himself  to  accomplish 
by  a  totally  different  method.  Brushing  aside  all  later  accretions  of  tradi- 
tionalism, He  provoked  the  inquiry,  What  was  the  original  law  and  design 
of  the  Sabbath? 

I.  The  accusation  by  the  Pharisees. — Right  gladly  would  they  have  accused 
the  disciples  of  theft,  had  there  been  the  slightest  vestige  of  excuse  for  doing  so ; 
but  the  law  made  express  provision  for  the  satisfying  of  hunger  when  passing 
through  corn-fields  (Deut.  xxiii.  25).  But  that  any  one  should  take  advantage 
of  this  merciful  provision  on  the  Sabbath  horrified  them— or  they  pretended 
it  did.  According  to  them,  such  an  action  involved  at  least  two  sins  :  the 
plucking  the  ears  was  equivalent  to  reaping,  the  rubbing  in  the  hands  to  sifting 
or  winnowing  !  And  yet,  had  the  owner  of  the  field  wanted,  in  harvest-time, 
to  shift  any  of  his  sheaves,  he  had  only  to  lay  on  each  a  spoon  in  common 
76 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ii. 


use,  when,  in  order  to  remove  the  spoon,  he  might  also  remove  the  sheaf  on 
which  it  lay !  To  men  who  spent  their  time  in  the  invention  and  study  of 
puerilities  of  this  kind,  it  mattered  nothing  that  the  disciples  were  really  hungry, 
and  that  abstinence  would  occasion  far  greater  unrest  of  body  and  mind  than 
the  infinitesimal  exertion  of  plucking  and  rubbing  a  few  ears  of  corn.  "  Sabbath 
means  rest — rest  of  spirit  as  well  as  of  body — rest  from  all  that  is  carnal 
and  selfish,  and  the  surrender  of  the  whole  being  to  God  in  spiritual  worship. 
But  these  zealots  were  restless  in  their  endeavours  to  overcome  One  whom  they 
hated,  and  their  hearts  were  rankling  with  jealousy  and  envy,  instead  of 
swelling  with  praise  and  prayer."  How  pitiful  it  is  when  men  seek  to  substitute 
elaborate  ceremonial  for  the  sacrifice  of  the  inner  being ! 

II.  The   answer   of  our  Lord. — Christ  meets  the  objectors  on   their   own 

ground,  and  shows  how,  even  if  it  were  admitted  that  the  disciples  had  broken 

the  letter  of  the  law  (which  they  had  not  done,  but  only  the  Rabbinic  gloss), 

they  were  amply  justified  in  doing  so.     An  eminent  scholar,  on  being  asked  his 

opinion  of  certain  classical  editors,  once  replied,  "  They  know  the  rules ;  but 

they  do  not  know  when  the  rules  are  right,  and  when  they  are  wrong."     So 

it  was  with  these  Pharisees.     They  had  every  minutest  detail  of  the  Mosaic  Law 

at  their  fingers'  ends,  so  far  as  the  mere  letter  was  concerned ;  and  even  their 

excessive  zeal  in  interpreting  and  expanding  its  provisions  need  not  have  led 

to  any  serious  harm,  had  they  only  exercised  the  same  care  with  respect  to 

its  spiritual  side.     But   this  they  had  now  lost  sight  of   altogether.     Christ, 

therefore,  in  His  reply,  ignoring  all  minor  issues,  insistence  upon  which  would 

only  have  been  certain  to  prejudice  and   embitter   them  still  further,  brings 

them  face  to  face  with  the  great  principle  which  they  themselves  admitted — that 

when  two  laws  clash,  the  higher  one  overrides  the  lower.     "  A  single  Rabbinic 

prohibition  is  not   to   be   heeded,"  they  said,   "  where  a  graver  matter  is  in 

question."     Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  can  see  how  impregnable  was  the  position 

that  Christ  took  up  on  behalf  of  His  disciples.     David  and  his  followers,  when 

at  extremity,  had  eaten  the  shewbread,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to 

eat,  but  only  for  the  priests,  and  yet  they  were  held  blameless,  Jewish  tradition 

vindicating  their  conduct  on  the  plea  that  "  danger  of  life  superseded  the  law." 

From  St.  Matthew  (xii.   5)  we   learn  that   our   Lord  followed   this  up  with 

another  argument  drawn  from  the  Temple  usages.     "What,"  He  asks,  "were 

the   multiplied   sacrifices,  and   incense-burnings,   and  washings,  but   so   many 

breaches  of  the  letter  of  the  law  ?     Had  they  not  given  birth  to  the  proverb, 

4  There  is  no  Sabbatical   rest  observed  in   the  sanctuary '  ? — and  yet   no  one 

ever   thought  of   blaming   the   priests."     Nor  does  any   blame  attach   to   the 

disciples,  who  were  but   acting   upon   the   same   principle — that   the   greater 

obligation  overrules  the  lesser,  that  all  ceremonial  observance  is  subordinate 

to  human  necessity,  that  God  prefers  mercy  to  sacrifice. 

III.  The  true  law  of  Sabbath  observance. — 1.  "The  Sabbath  was  made." 
The  setting  apart  of  one  day  in  seven  for  rest  from  labour  and  special  religious 
effort  is  no  haphazard  arrangement  of  human  invention,  but  God's  own 
beneficent  gift  to  His  weary  creatures.  It  is  stamped  with  Divine  sanctity 
and  authority.  2.  "  The  Sabbath  was  made  for  man  " — to  subserve  his  highest 
interests  and  promote  his  spiritual  welfare.  Now  since  man  is  a  complex 
creature,  with  a  tripartite  nature  (1  Thess.  v.  23),  it  is  necessary  to  provide 
for  him  as  such,  not  ignoring  either  his  physical  or  his  social  or  his  religious 
needs,  otherwise  the  end  for  which  the  Sabbath  was  made  will  be  frustrated. 
It  is  related  in  the  life  of  a  pious  Presbyterian  minister  of  this  generation, 
how  his  home  looked  upon  a  public  park  in  the  suburbs  of  a  crowded  city, 
and  how,  when  he  saw  some  of  his  fellow- citizens  taking  a  quiet  walk  for  the 
sake  of  fresh  air  and  innocent  relaxation  on  a  Sunday  afternoon,  he  wondered 

77 


chap.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


that  the  earth  did  not  open  her  mouth  and  swallow  them  up  !  The  same 
spirit  was  manifested  by  the  inhabitants  of  St.  Kilda  a  few  years  ago,  when 
they  subjected  some  shipwrecked  people  to  agonies  of  hunger  rather  than 
permit  a  ship,  with  provisions  on  board,  to  land  on  what  they  called  "the 
Sabbath,"  i.e.  the  Lord's  Day !  Well  might  they  have  been  asked,  "  Have  ye 
never  read  what  the  Lord's  disciples  did,  when  they  had  need  and  were  hungry ; 
how,  going  through  the  corn-fields  on  the  Sabbath,  they  plucked  the  ears  of 
corn,  and  rubbed  them  in  their  hands,  and  ate ;  and  how  the  Lord  defended 
them  for  so  doing,  and  declared  that  the  Sabbath  is  not  man's  master,  but 
his  servant  ?  "  And  as  to  the  other  instance  mentioned  of  Sabbatic  intolerance, 
may  we  not  say,  with  Dean  Luckock,  that  it  is  not  only  permissible  but  a 
manifest  duty  to  furnish  the  masses  with  the  means  of  bodily  recreation,  and 
to  draw  them  from  their  squalid  homes  into  pure  air  which  will  invigorate 
the  frame;  and  no  less  a  duty  to  elevate  their  tastes,  to  offer  them,  as  far  as 
possible,  variety  of  scene  and  relief  from  the  monotony  of  their  daily  drudgery  ? 
IY.  The  supremacy  of  the  Son  of  Man  over  the  Sabbath. — "The  Son  of 
Man  is  Lord  even  of  the  Sabbath " ;  and  as  its  Lord  He  exercises  the  right 
to  eliminate  from  it  all  that  is  merely  Judaic,  and  to  re-establish  it  in  its 
original  simplicity  and  benignity.  During  His  earthly  ministry  He  makes 
it  the  day  not  of  idle  self-contemplation,  but  of  gracious  words  and  blessed 
deeds.  Then  after  death — His  mission  to  the  spirits  in  Hades  having  been 
accomplished  on  the  Sabbath  (1  Pet.  iii.  18-20,  iv.  6) — He  chooses  the  first 
day  of  the  week  for  His  resurrection ;  and  that  day  has  ever  since  been 
observed  by  His  followers  as  the  Lord's  Day — His  peculiar  possession,  and 
their  peculiar  privilege — a  day  which  is  a  thousand  times  more  precious  and 
sacred  to  them  than  the  Sabbath  could  ever  be  to  a  Jew.  The  Sabbath  was 
but  the  shadow  of  good  things  yet  to  come  ;  on  the  Lord's  Day  especially 
(though  far  from  exclusively)  the  believer  realises  that  these  good  things  have 
now  come,  and  that  he  is  already  a  partaker  of  them  in  Christ.  He  therefore 
regards  the  weekly  rest-day  as  a  boon  of  unspeakable  value,  for  which  he  is 
indebted  to  his  Saviour.  To  him,  indeed,  all  days  are  equally  holy :  he  does 
not  imagine  for  a  moment  that  God  requires  of  him  a  better  service  or  a  purer 
soul  on  one  than  on  another ;  but  while  striving  to  serve  God  truly  all  the 
days  of  his  life,  he  thanks  God  particularly  for  every  opportunity  afforded 
him  of  withdrawing  for  a  season  from  the  turmoil  of  worldly  business,  and 
devoting  himself  without  distraction  to  the  things  of  the  Lord. 

Yers.  23-28.  The  Sabbath  and  the  LordJs  Bay. — I.  The  first  principle  embodied 
in  the  Lord's  Day  is  the  duty  of  consecrating  a  certain  proportion  of  time,  at 
least  one-seventh,  to  the  especial  service  of  God.  This  principle  is  common  to  the 
Jewish  Sabbath  and  to  the  Christian  Lord's  Day.  "  Remember  that  thou  keep 
holy  the  Sabbath  Day  "  means  for  us  Christians,  "  Remember  that  thou  keep 
holy  one  day  in  seven."  Keep  the  day  holy  ;  consecrate  it.  Such  consecration 
implies  two  things :  a  separation  of  the  thing  consecrated  from  all  others,  and 
the  communication  to  it  of  a  quality  of  holiness  or  purity.  To  this  idea  of  the 
especial  consecration  of  a  section  of  time,  it  is  objected  that  in  a  true  Christian 
life  all  time  is  consecrated.  The  answer  is  that  the  larger  obligation  of  love  is 
not  ignored  because  the  smaller  one  of  duty  is  insisted  on.  All  a  Christian's 
time  is  properly  consecrated  time ;  but  practically,  in  many  cases,  none  would 
be  consecrated  unless  an  effort  were  made  to  mark  a  certain  proportion  of  it 
by  a  special  consecration.  The  case  is  parallel  to  that  of  prayer.  Our  Lord 
says  that  men  ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint.  The  apostle  says,  "  Pray 
without  ceasing."  And  the  life  of  a  good  Christian  is,  no  doubt,  a  continuous 
prayer :    the  spirit  of  prayer  penetrates  and  hallows  it ;    each  duty  is  inter- 

78 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  ii. 


twined  with  acts  of  the  soul  which  raise  it  above  this  earthly  scene  to  the 
throne  and  presence  of  Christ.  But,  for  all  that,  in  all  Christian  lives  stated 
times  of  prayer,  private  as  well  as  public,  are  practically  necessary,  if  the 
practice  of  prayer  is  to  be  consistently  maintained.  And  in  like  manner  the 
especial  consecration  of  one  day  in  seven  does  not  involve  an  implied  rejection 
of  the  rights  of  Jesus  Christ  over  all  Christian  time.  It  is  like  those  small 
payments  known  to  the  law,  which  do  not  profess  to  give  an  equivalent  for  that 
which  they  represent,  but  only  technically  to  acknowledge  a  much  larger  claim ; 
it  implies  that  all  our  time  belongs  to  God,  although,  considering  our  weakness, 
He  graciously  accepts  a  prescribed  instalment  or  section  of  it.  And  apart 
from  its  importance  in  the  life  of  the  servants  of  God,  the  public  setting  apart 
of  a  certain  measure  of  time  to  God's  service  is  a  witness  to  His  claims  borne 
before  the  world,  and  calculated  to  strike  the  imaginations  of  men.  From  this 
point  of  view,  our  English  Sunday,  whatever  may  be  said  about  mistakes  in  the 
detail  of  its  observance,  is  a  national  blessing.  It  brings  the  existence  and  claims 
of  God  before  the  minds  even  of  those  who  do  not  make  a  good  use  of  it.  And 
religious  foreigners  have  not  seldom  told  us  that  it  fills  them  with  envy  and 
admiration  ;  and  that  we  shall  do  well  to  guard  that  which,  once  lost,  is  certain 
to  be  well-nigh,  if  not  altogether,  irrecoverable. 

II.  A  second  principle  represented  in  the  Lord's  Day  is  the  periodical  sus- 
pension of  human  toil.  This  is  closely  connected  with  that  of  the  consecration 
of  time.  In  order  to  make  the  day,  by  this  prohibition,  unlike  other  days,  in 
order  to  make  room  for  the  acknowledgment  of  God  on  it,  ordinary  occupa- 
tions are  suspended.  Here  again  we  have  a  second  principle  common  to  the 
Jewish  Sabbath  and  to  the  Christian  Lord's  Day.  In  the  Old  Testament  a 
variety  of  particular  occupations  are  explicitly  forbidden  on  the  Sabbath : 
sowing  and  reaping,  gathering  wood  and  kindling  a  fire  for  cooking,  holding 
markets,  every  kind  of  trade,  pressing  grapes,  carrying  any  sort  of  burden.  In 
a  later  age  the  Pharisees  added  largely  to  these  prohibitions.  They  held  it 
unlawful  to  pluck  an  ear  of  corn  in  passing  through  a  corn-field,  or  to  assist 
and  relieve  the  sick  ;  although  they  ruled  that  an  animal  which  had  fallen  into 
a  ditch  might  be  helped  out,  that  guests  might  be  invited  to  an  entertainment, 
and  that  a  child  of  eight  days  old  might  be  circumcised.  There  were  thirty- 
nine  Rabbinical  prohibitions  on  the  Sabbath,  of  which  one  limited  a  Sabbath- 
day's  journey  to  two  thousand  cubits,  and  another  forbade  killing  even  the  most 
dangerous  vermin,  while  a  third  proscribed  the  use  of  a  wooden  leg,  or  a  crutch, 
or  a  purse.  These  and  other  prohibitions  illustrate  the  tendency  of  mere  law 
to  become,  sooner  or  later,  through  excessive  technicality,  the  caricature  and 
the  ruin  of  moral  principle.  And  it  was  against  these  Pharisaic  perversions  of 
the  Sabbath  that  our  Lord  protested  by  act  and  word,  reminding  His  country- 
men that  the  Sabbath  was  made  for  the  moral  good  of  man,  and  not  man  for 
the  later  legal  theory  of  the  Sabbath.  But  the  broad  principle  of  abstinence 
from  labour,  however  misrepresented  in  the  later  Jewish  practice,  was  itself 
sacred ;  and  it  passed  into  the  Christian  observance  of  the  Lord's  Day.  We  see 
this  plainly  in  notices  of  the  observance  in  the  early  times  of  the  Christian 
Church.  Thus  Tertullian,  writing  at  the  end  of  the  second  century,  calls  the 
day  both  Sunday  and  the  Lord's  Day  ;  says  that  it  is  a  day  of  joy,  and  that  to 
fast  on  it  is  wrong ;  yet  adds  that  "  business  is  put  off  on  it,  lest  we  give  place 
to  the  devil."  And  thus  when,  under  Constantino,  the  Imperial  Government 
had  acknowledged  the  faith  of  Christ,  and  Christianity  made  itself  felt  in  the 
principles  of  legislation,  provision  was  very  soon  made  for  the  observance  of  the 
Lord's  Day.  Even  four  years  before  the  Council  of  Nicaea,  Constantine  issued 
an  edict  ordering  the  judges,  the  town  populations,  the  artists  and  tradesmen 
of  all  kinds,  to  cease  from  labour  on  the  Lord's  Day.     He  allows  agricultural 

79 


chap.  ii.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


labour  to  go  on,  if  the  safety  of  crops  or  the  health  of  cattle  depends  on  it. 
And  when  we  examine  the  Codes  of  the  Emperors  Theodosius  and  Justinian, 
in  which  the  experience  and  traditions  of  the  great  Roman  lawyers  are  combined 
with  and  modified  by  the  softening  influences  of  Christianity,  we  find  that  the 
observance  of  the  Lord's  Day  is  carefully  provided  for.  Works  of  necessity, 
whether  civil  or  agricultural,  are  allowed;  others  are  forbidden.  Public, 
spectacles  of  all  kinds  and  the  games  of  the  circus  are  suppressed.  And  the 
great  teachers  of  the  Church  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  did  what  they 
could  to  second  the  imperial  legislation  by  exhorting  the  faithful  to  abstain 
from  works  or  sights  which  profaned  the  Holy  Day  of  the  Christian  week. 
This  insistence  on  a  day  of  freedom  from  earthly  labour  is  not  inconsistent  with 
a  recognition  of  the  dignity  and  the  claims  of  labour.  On  the  contrary,  it 
protects  labour,  by  arresting  the  excessive  expenditure  of  human  strength ;  and 
it  raises  and  consecrates  labour  by  leading  the  workman's  mind  to  acknowledge 
the  Source  and  Support  of  his  exertions.  It  is  sometimes  asked  why  this 
abstinence  from  labour  should  be  dictated  to  us ;  why  each  man  cannot  make  a 
Sunday  for  himself,  when  his  strength  or  health  demands  it.  The  answer  is, 
Because,  in  a  busy,  highly  worked  community,  unless  all  are  to  abstain  from  work, 
none  will  abstain  ;  since,  in  point  of  fact,  none  can  afford  to  abstain.  This  is 
the  principle  of  the  Bank  holidays :  the  State  comes  in  to  do  for  labour  four 
times  a  year,  on  a  small  scale,  what  the  Church  does  on  a  large  scale  every 
week ;  it  essays  to  make  a  general  rest  from  work  possible  by  an  external 
sanction.  If  the  sanction  of  the  Sunday  rest  from  toil  were  to  be  withdrawn, 
it  would,  in  a  civilisation  like  ours,  go  hard,  first  with  labour,  and  then,  at  no 
distant  interval,  with  capital.  The  dignity  and  obligation  of  labour  are  suffi- 
ciently recognised  in  the  precept,  "  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour,  and  do  all  that 
thou  hast  to  do "  ;  and  the  health  and  happiness  and  moral  well-being  of  the 
labourer  are  secured  by  a  seventh  day,  in  which  the  labourer  is  to  "  do  no  manner 
of  work." 

III.  Thus  the  Sabbath  and  the  Lord's  Day  agree  in  affirming  two  principles  : 
the  hallowing  a  seventh  part  of  time,  and  the  obligation  of  abstinence  from  servile 
work  on  one  day  in  seven.  But  are  the  days  identical  ?  May  we  rightly  call 
the  Lord's  Day  the  Sabbath  ?  These  questions  must  be  answered  in  the  nega- 
tive. Observe  that  the  Jewish  Sabbath  and  the  Christian  Lord's  Day,  while 
agreeing  in  affirming  two  principles,  differ  in  two  noteworthy  respects.  First, 
they  differ,  as  has  already  been  implied,  in  being  kept  on  distinct  days.  The 
Sabbath  was  kept  on  the  last  day  of  the  week  :  the  Lord's  Day  is  kept  on  the 
first.  The  change  was  made  because  there  was  an  imperative  reason  for  making 
it.  For  the  Lord's  Day  and  the  Sabbath  Day  differ,  secondly,  in  the  reason  or 
motive  for  observing  them.  The  Sabbath  was  the  weekly  commemoration  of 
the  finished  work  of  God.  It  brought  before  the  mind  of  the  Jew  the  ineffable 
majesty  of  the  Great  Creator,  between  whom  and  the  noblest  work  of  His 
hands  there  yawns  an  impassable  abyss.  Thus  the  Sabbath  observance,  apart 
from  its  directly  sanctifying  effect  upon  individual  life,  was  the  great  protection 
to  the  Jews  against  the  idolatry  with  which  they  came  in  contact  in  Egypt,  in 
Phoenicia,  in  Babylon,  and  against  the  Greek  modes  of  thought  which  tried 
them  so  sorely  at  Alexandria  and  in  Palestine  under  the  Macedonian  kings  of 
a  later  time.  The  Christian  motive  for  observing  the  Lord's  Day  is  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead.  That  truth  is  to  the  Christian  Creed 
what  the  creation  of  the  world  out  of  nothing  is  to  the  Jewish.  The  Lord's 
Day  marks  the  completed  Redemption,  as  the  Sabbath  had  marked  the  com- 
pleted Creation.  The  Resurrection  is  also  the  fundamental  truth  on  which 
Christianity  rests ;  and  thus  it  is  as  much  insisted  on  by  the  Christian  apostles 
as  is  God's  creation  of  all  things  by  the  Jewish  prophets.  Not,  of  course,  that 
80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ii. 


the  creation  of  all  things  by  God  is  less  precious  to  the  Christian  than  to  the 
Jew ;  but  it  is  more  taken  for  granted.  In  Christian  eyes  the  creation  of  the 
world  of  nature  is  eclipsed  by  the  creation  of  the  world  of  grace ;  and  of  this 
last  creation  the  Resurrection  is  the  warrant.  The  Jewish  Sabbath  stands  in 
the  same  relation  to  the  Lord's  Day  as  does  Circumcision  to  Christian  Baptism, 
as  does  the  Paschal  Lamb  to  the  Holy  Communion,  as  does  the  Law  to  the 
Gospel.  It  is  a  shadow  of  a  good  thing  to  come.  It  is  only  perpetuated  by 
being  transfigured,  or  rather  it  is  so  transfigured  as  to  have  parted  with  its 
identity.  Christians  stand  no  longer  at  the  foot  of  Sinai,  but  by  the  empty  tomb 
in  the  garden  outside  Jerusalem. 

IV.  The  cessation  of  ordinary  work  is  not  enjoined  upon  Christians  only  that 
they  may  while  away  the  time,  or  spend  it  in  aimless  self- pleasing,  or  in  some- 
thing worse.  The  Lord's  Day  is  the  day  upon  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has 
a  first  claim.  On  this  great  day  every  instructed  Christian  thinks  of  Him  as 
completing  the  work  of  our  redemption  ;  as  vindicating  His  character  as  a 
Teacher  of  absolute  truth  ;  as  triumphing  over  His  enemies  ;  as  conquering 
death  in  that  nature  which  had  hitherto  always  been  subject  to  its  empire  ;  as 
designing,  now  that  He  has  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death,  to  open  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers.  It  is  unlike  any  other  in  the  week ;  and 
the  sense  of  this  finds  its  natural  expression  in  prayer  and' praise.  A  well-spent 
Lord's  Day  should  always  begin  with  that  supreme  act  of  Christian  worship  in 
which  we  meet  Jesus  verily  and  indeed,  the  only  public  service  known  to  the 
early  and  Apostolic  Church — the  Sacrament  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  our 
Redeemer.  What  the  practice  of  our  fathers  in  the  faith  was  within  a  few 
years  after  the  apostles  had  gone  to  their  rest,  we  learn  from  the  celebrated 
letter  of  Pliny  to  Trajan.  "  The  Christians,"  he  says,  "  are  accustomed  to  meet 
together  on  a  stated  day,  before  it  is  light,  and  to  sing  hymns  to  Christ  as  God, 
and  to  bind  themselves  by  a  Sacrament,  not  for  any  wicked  purpose ;  but  never 
to  commit  fraud,  theft,  or  adultery — never  to  break  their  word,  nor  to  refuse, 
when  called  upon,  to  deliver  up  any  trust."  This  was  his  impression  as  a 
heathen,  looking  at  the  sacred  service  from  without,  and  gathering  its  nature 
from  Christian  language  about  it  which  he  imperfectly  understood.  How 
Sunday  was  kept  by  Christians  about  the  year  140  is  very  fully  described  by 
Justin  Martyr.  He  says  that  on  that  day  there  was  an  assembly  of  all 
Christians  who  lived  either  in  town  or  country ;  that  the  writings  of  the 
apostles  and  prophets  were  read ;  and  that  prayer  was  offered,  and  alms  were 
collected,  and  the  Holy  Sacrament  of  our  Lord's  Body  and  Blood  was  celebrated. 
As  we  descend  the  stream  of  time,  illustrations  become  more  numerous.  But  in 
the  early  Church  of  Christ  it  was  taken  for  granted  that  a  Christian  would 
observe  the  Lord's  Day,  first  of  all,  by  taking  part  in  that  solemn  Sacrament 
and  Service  which  the  Lord  had  Himself  ordained.  Those  who  begin  their 
Sundays  with  the  Holy  Communion  know  one  of  the  deepest  meanings  of  that 
promise,  "They  that  seek  Me  early  shall  find  Me."  Not  that  it  is  wise  or 
reverent  to  suppose  that  all  the  religious  duties  of  a  Sunday  can  be  properly 
discharged  before  breakfast,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  day  may  be  spent  as  we 
like.  No  Christian  whose  heart  is  in  the  right  place  will  think  this.  Later 
opportunities  of  public  prayer  and  of  instruction  in  the  faith  and  duty  of 
a  Christian  will  be  made  the  most  of,  as  may  be  possible  for  each.  Especially 
should  an  effort  be  made  on  every  Sunday  in  the  year  to  learn  some  portion  of 
the  will  of  God  more  perfectly  than  before  ;  some  truth  or  aspect  of  His 
revelation  of  Himself  in  the  Gospel ;  some  Christian  duty,  as  taught  by  the 
example  or  the  words  of  Christ.  Without  a  positive  effort  of  this  kind  a 
Sunday  is  a  lost  Sunday  :  we  shall  think  of  it  thus  in  eternity.  Where  there 
is  the  will  to  seek  truth  and  wisdom  there  is  no  difficulty  about  the  way :  books, 

Q  81 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


friends,  sermons,  are  at  hand.  We  have  but  to  be  in  earnest,  and  all  will 
follow.  When  the  religious  obligations  of  Sunday  have  been  complied  with, 
there  are  duties  of  human  brotherhood  which  may  well  find  a  place  in  it :  kind 
deeds  and  words  to  friends,  visits  to  the  sick,  acts  of  consideration  for  the  poor, 
are  in  keeping  with  the  spirit  of  the  day.  Above  all,  it  should  be  made  a  bright 
as  well  as  a  solemn  day  for  children :  first  solemn,  but  then  and  always  bright, 
so  that  in  their  after-life  they  may  look  back  on  the  Sundays  of  childhood 
as  its  happiest  days.  And  in  itself  there  would  be  no  harm  if,  for  those  who 
live  in  towns,  museums  and  picture-galleries  could  be  open  on  Sundays,  just  as 
the  fields  and  the  gardens  are  open  to  those  who  live  in  the  country ;  for  Art, 
like  Nature,  is  to  each  one  of  us  what  we  bring  to  it.  The  danger  of  such 
proposals  is  that,  to  realise  them,  Sunday  labour  must  be  employed,  in  some 
cases  on  a  very  considerable  scale ;  and  this  would  too  easily  lead  the  way  to  its 
employment  for  other  and  general  purposes,  and  so  to  the  abandonment  of  an 
essential  characteristic  of  the  Lord's  Day. — Canon  Liddon. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  23.  Lessons. — 1.  Christ  never 
bribes  men  to  become  His  disciples. 
Although  when  occasion  arose,  He 
would  work  a  miracle  to  feed  a  multi- 
tude, He  here  leaves  His  followers  to 
stay  their  hunger  as  best  they  may. 
2.  It  is  not  said  that  Christ  Himself 
partook  of  this  frugal  meal.  Probably 
He  refrained  from  doing  so,  at  the 
cost  of  personal  discomfort,  rather 
than  give  offence  to  His  enemies.  3. 
But  while  thus  declining  to  use  His 
own  right  to  the  full,  He  will  not 
hinder  others  from  the  enjoyment  of 
theirs.  On  this  principle  St.  Paul 
afterwards  acted  (1  Cor.  x.). 

The  disciples  were  poor ;  but  they 
preferred  to  suffer  hunger  with  Christ 
rather  than  enjoy  affluence  without 
Him. — Heubner. 

Ver.  24.  Lessons. — He  who  has  only 
the  knowledge  without  the  spirit  of 
the  law  very  often  opposes  when  he 
thinks  he  is  defending  it.  2.  Phari- 
saical pride  makes  men  set  themselves 
up  for  judges  of  everything,  and  re- 
quire an  account  of  everything  to  be 
given  them.  3.  When  a  man  is  once 
full  of  himself,  he  decides  confidently, 
especially  when  it  is  to  condemn  others. 
4.  Those  who  love  to  domineer  are  not 
content  to  exercise  their  authority 
upon   their   own  disciples,  but   would 

82 


fain  bring  those  of  others  under  their 
dominion. — P.  Quesnel. 

Why  did  not  these  Pharisees  give 
them  bread,  and  so  prevent  their  doing 
that  to  which  they  objected?  We 
might  also  fairly  ask,  How  came  they 
to  see  the  disciples  ?  Did  they  not 
break  the  Sabbath  by  setting  a  watch 
over  them  ? 

Yer.  25.  Superficial  reading  preju- 
dicial.— An  old  preacher  was  once 
heard  to  say,  "The  Word  has  mighty 
free  course  among  many  nowadays,  for 
it  goes  in  at  one  of  their  ears  and  out 
at  the  other."  So  it  seems  to  be  with 
some  readers — they  read  a  very  great 
deal,  and  yet  they  do  not  read  any- 
thing. Their  eye  glances,  but  their 
mind  never  rests.  The  soul  does  not 
light  upon  the  truth  and  stay  there. 
It  flits  over  the  landscape  as  a  bird 
might  do,  but  builds  no  nest.  Such 
reading  is  worse  than  useless;  it  is 
positively  prejudicial  to  the  mind. 

Yer.  27.  "  The  Sabbath  was  made 
for  man" — 1.  For  man  as  man — 
whether  Jew  or  Gentile.  It  was  set 
apart  by  Divine  sanction  from  the 
beginning,  not  merely  from  the  time 
of  Moses,  when  God  only  reminded 
His  people  of  that  which  had  existed 
long   before.      The   law   of   six    days' 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK.  chap.  ii. 


work   and   one   day's  rest  is  wrought  in  missionary  enterprise,  and  in  social 

into  the  very  constitution  of  humanity,  advancement,  belong  to   that   Anglo- 

and  cannot  be  ignored  with  impunity.  Saxon    people    whose     observance    of 

2.  For  man  as  he  is — not  for  man  in  Sunday  is  to-day  the  wonder  and  the 

a   fancied    state    of    perfection.       To  admiration  of  every  intelligent  traveller, 

worship  God  every  day  in  spirit   and  — Bishop  H.  C.  Potter. 
truth,  to  raise  each  day  to  the  level  The  Continental  Sunday  a  failure. — 

of  a  Sabbath,  is  no  doubt  the  goal  to  It    is    one   of    the   most    remarkable 

be  aimed  at ;  but  if  such  a  command-  facts   of   our    time   that    those    older 

ment  had  been  given  to  the  Jews,  and  nations  from  which  some  of  us  propose 

no  day  specially  separated   from   the  to  borrow  our  habit  of  disregard   for 

others,    they    would    have    ended    by  the  Lord's  Day   are  striving   at   this 

reducing  all  to  a  dead  level  of  worldli-  very   moment    with    most    impressive 

ness.     They  needed  the  Sabbath  as  a  earnestness     to     restore     the     earlier 

help   to    their    devotion,    and    we    in  sacredness  of  that  day.     In  Germany, 

this  busy  age  need  it  too.     From  the  in    Switzerland,    and  in  France  there 

consecration   of   one   day   to  God,   we  are   already   organisations    of    serious 

learn  by  degrees  to  consecrate  to  Him  and  thoughtful  men  who  are  seeking 

every  day,  every  hour.  to   banish    the    Continental     Sunday. 

Reasons  for  Sabbath  observance. —  They  have  seen,  on  the  one  hand,  as 
The  following  are  the  reasons  given  any  one  may  see  in  France  to-day, 
in  the  Old  Testament  for  the  observ-  that  the  removal  of  the  sacred  sanctions, 
ance  of  the  Sabbath  :  1.  In  memory  which  with  us  hold  the  first  day  of 
of  the  Creation,  and  of  God's  rest  from  the  week  in  a  kind  of  chaste  reserve, 
His  work  (Exod.  xx.  11).  2.  To  pro-  have  eventuated  not  merely  in  de- 
tect those  whose  time  is  at  the  dis-  grading  it  to  the  level  of  a  vulgar 
posal  of  others  (Deut.  v.  14).  3.  In  holiday,  but  also  of  degrading  and 
memory  of  the  deliverance  of  God's  enslaving  him  for  whom  its  privileges 
people  (Deut.  v.  15).  4.  As  a  sign  were,  most  of  all,  designed — the 
between  God  and  His  people  of  their  wearied,  over-worked,  and  poorly-paid 
sanctification  by  Him  (Ezek.  xx.  12).  labouring  man.  He  is  a  person  out 
So  now  the  weekly  Lord's  Day,  with  of  whom  the  most  is  to  be  got,  and 
its  Eucharistic  celebration,  is  the  if  he  can  work  six  days  he  may  as 
great  testimony  to  the  Church's  per-  well  work  the  seventh  also,  so  long  as* 
petual  union  with  her  once  crucified  there  is  nothing  to  forbid  it.  Such  a 
but  now  reigning  Head.  condition   of  things  may  not   directly 

The  consecration  of  one  day  in  seven  threaten  those  of  us  who  are  protected 

to   uses  other  and   more   sacred  than  by  wealth  from  the  necessities  of  daily 

those  of  the  rest,  is  ordained  by  a  law  labour  ;  but  if  ours  is  this  more  favoured 

which    lies  a  long  way  behind  either  condition,  all  the  more  do  we  owe  it  to 

the     religion    of    Christ    or    the    re-  our   brother-man  who  is  less  favoured 

ligion  of  Moses.    That  law  is  embedded  to  see  to  it  that  he  shall  have  every 

in    the     very    constitution,    physical,  sanction  with  which  the  law  can  furnish 

mental,  and  moral,  of  human  nature  ;  him    to   guard   his   day   of   rest  from 

and   as  human  nature  has   awakened  being    perverted     and     revolutionised 

to  its  consciousness  and  its  significance,  into  a    day   of  toil.      And  if  he  him- 

j  ust  in  that  proportion  has  it  ennobled  self  does   not   see   that   the  more   we 

and  advanced  itself.     The  first  nations  assimilate   Sunday   to   other   days   by 

in   the   family   of   nations  to-day  are  the  amusements,  the  occupations,  the 

those  who,  whether  early  and  quickly,  teaching   and    reading    and    thinking 

or   slowly  and   late,   have   learned   to  with  which   we  fill  it,    the  greater  is 

hallow   one  day   and   keep  it  sacred;  the  danger  that   ultimately  we   shall 

and  the  loftiest  achievements  in  arms,  lose  it  altogether,  the  more  earnestly 

in  literature,  in  science,  in  philanthropy,  are  we  bound  to  strive  to  disseminate 

83 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


those  sounder  ideas  which  shall  set 
this  first  day  of  the  week  and  its 
devout  observance  before  our  fellow- 
men  and  women  of  the  labouring 
classes  in  its  true  light,  and  so  help 
and  teach  them  how  not  to  lose  but 
to  keep  it.  We  may  declaim  as  we 
please  in  behalf  of  a  philosophy  which 
makes  all  days  holy  to  the  universal 
worship  of  humanity  by  making  no 
day  holy  to  the  worship  of  a  personal 
God;  but  the  decay  of  stated  times 
and  seasons  for  the  offering  of  that 
worship  presages  a  day  when  neither 
God  nor  man,  neither  lif e  nor  property, 
neither  human  weakness  nor  human 
needs,  have  any  rights  nor  any  scantiest 
respect.  To  learn  that  fact  we  need 
go  back  no  further  than  the  history  of 
France  in  1788. — Ibid. 

Ver.  28.  Son  of  Man. — 1.  Glorious 
name  that,  which  Jesus  Himself  loved 
most — indeed,  we  may  say  to  the 
exclusion  of  all  others — "  Son  of  Man  "  ; 
thus  identified  with  the  whole  race 
in  its  joys  and  sorrows  and  manifold 
experiences :  a  sympathetic  bond  of 
union  Unking  to  Himself  each  member 
of  the  wide  human  family.  2.  Christ 
— the  Incarnate  God — had  not  only 
assumed  the  form  and  designation  of 
the  "  Son  of  Man,"  but,  as  such,  He 
belonged  to  no  exclusive  or  distinctive 
nationality.  He  claimed  and  asserted 
a  worldwide  brotherhood.  The  sun 
in  the  material  heavens  is  the  illu- 
minator of  no  one  specific  region  or 
section,  but  of  the  entire  earth : 
every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  people, 
and  tongue  are  served  heirs  to  his 
radiance — "  nothing  hid  from  the  heat 
thereof."  So  was  Christ  "the  true 
Light  which  lighteth  every  man  that 
cometh  into  the  world."  He  took  in 
all  climes,  all  blood,  all  ages,  all 
civilisations. — J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D. 

Christ's  lordship  over  the  Sabbath. — 
Nothing  can  show  the  Divine  nature 
of  our  Lord  more  clearly  than  that 
He  is  above  such  a  law  of  God,  so 
that  He  should  modify  it,  relax  it, 
change  it  at  His  pleasure.  He  exer- 
cised but  a  small  part  of  this  authority 


when  He  freed  His  disciples  from  the 
yoke  of  its  burdensome  Pharisaic  ob- 
servance. He  exercised  His  lordship 
over  the  day  far  more  royally  when 
He  by  His  Spirit  made  the  day  of  His 
resurrection  the  weekly  religious  festi- 
val of  His  Church.  By  this  He  gave 
it  altogether  a  new  character.  Hence- 
forth it  is  a  day  not  of  mere  rest,  but 
of  renewed  life — the  life  of  His  own 
resurrection ;  and  so  its  characteristic 
ordinance  is  not  the  slaying  of  beasts, 
but  the  life-giving  celebration  of  the 
Sacrament  of  His  own  Risen  Body. — 
M.  F.  Sadler. 

The  freedom  of  Christ's  service. — 
The  service  of  God,  and  the  service 
of  the  Temple,  by  universal  consent, 
superseded  the  Sabbath  law.  But 
Christ  was  greater  than  the  Temple, 
and  His  service  more  truly  that  of 
God,  and  higher  than  that  of  the  out- 
ward Temple — and  the  Sabbath  was 
intended  for  man,  to  serve  God  :  there- 
fore Christ  and  His  service  were 
superior  to  the  Sabbath  law.  Thus 
much  would  be  intelligible  to  these 
Pharisees,  although  they  would  not 
receive  it,  because  they  believed  not 
on  Him  as  the  Sent  of  God.  But  to 
us  the  words  mean  more  than  this. 
They  preach  not  only  that  the  service 
of  Christ  is  that  of  God,  but  that,  even 
more  than  in  the  Temple,  all  of  work 
or  of  liberty  is  lawful  which  this 
service  requires.  We  are  free  while 
we  are  doing  anything  for  Christ : 
God  loves  mercy,  and  demands  not 
sacrifice ;  His  sacrifice  is  the  service  of 
Christ,  in  heart,  and  life,  and  work. 
We  are  not  free  to  do  anything  we 
please  ;  but  we  are  free  to  do  anything 
needful  or  helpful,  while  we  are  doing 
any  service  to  Christ.  He  is  the  Lord 
of  the  Sabbath,  whom  we  serve  in  and 
through  the  Sabbath.  And  even  this 
is  significant,  that,  when  designating 
Himself  Lord  of  the  Sabbath,  it  is  as 
"  the  Son  of  Man."  It  shows  that  the 
narrow  Judaistic  form  regarding  the 
day  and  the  manner  of  observance  is 
enlarged  into  the  wider  Law,  which 
applies  to  all  humanity.  Under  the 
New  Testament  the  Sabbath  has,  as 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   II. 


the  Church,  become  Catholic,  and  its 
Lord  is  Christ  as  the  Son  of  Man,  to 
whom  the  Body  Catholic  offers  the 
acceptable  service  of  heart  and  life. — 
A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Christians  are  lords  of  the  Sabbath. — 
We  also  are,  in  our  measure,  "  lords 
of  the  Sabbath,"  which  was  made 
for  man  ;  we  have  a  Christian  liberty, 
which,  remember,  implies  a  deep  Chris- 
tian responsibility,  to  regulate  our 
method  of  observing  the  Sabbath, 
under  God's  general  laws,  so  as  to 
make  it  to  ourselves  not  a  burden, 
but  an  exceeding  spiritual  blessing. 
This  liberty  indeed  is  ours,  only  in 
proportion  as  we  are  living  as  real 
members  of  Christ,  having  His  mind, 
and  in  our  deeds  being  like  Him.     So 


far  as  we  are  sinful  we  forfeit  our 
privileges,  even  as  a  life  of  slavery 
makes  men  unfit  for  freedom  ;  we  may 
require  the  constraints  of  a  law,  and 
lose  the  full  enjoyment,  the  perfect 
blessing,  of  the  Lord's  Day.  But  still 
Christ's  words  show  us  what  we  should 
aim  at  and  desire  ;  they  teach  us  how 
to  look  on  our  Sundays,  as  blessings 
for  which  we  may  thank  God;  and 
stir  us  up  to  use  them,  not  by  any 
formal  rules,  still  less  by  any  gloom  or 
compulsion,  but  freely  and  thankfully, 
for  our  blessing  and  happiness  both  of 
body  and  soul.  They  were  made  for 
us  ;  and  we,  by  God's  grace,  are  lords 
over  them,  only  under  Him  who  is 
God  and  Lord  of  all. — Bishop  Barry. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER   II. 


Ver.  1.  Christ s  presence  cannot  be  kept 
seeret. — We  cannot  give  lodging  and  enter- 
tainment to  such  a  personage  as  He  is 
without  it  being  seen  of  others.  He  is  not 
an  ordinary  visitor;  and  though  no  state 
ceremonies  accompany  Him,  there  is  that 
about  His  whole  customs  which  arrests 
attention.  We  may  have  occasional  visitors 
whose  amiable  dispositions  and  influences 
refine  and  improve  us ;  but  they  cannot  do 
for  us  what  a  visit  from  Christ  does.  They 
cannot,  by  their  own  strength  and  love,  con- 
fer on  us  spiritual  blessings.  His  company 
is  the  best ;  it  not  only  makes  time  pass 
pleasantly,  but  it  makes  us  ready  for  eternity. 
His  songs  not  only  make  the  heart  merry, 
but  they  make  it  new.  Now  this  cannot  be, 
and  nothing  of  it  be  seen  or  known  outside. 
We  soon  tell  upon  ourselves;  we  soon  let 
out  the  secret ;  and  it  is  then  " noised  abroad" 
that  we  have  Him  beneath  our  roof- tree. 
Oh,  happy  is  that  house  in  which  He  lodges ! 
— John  Macfarlane,  LL.D. 

Christ s  presence  manifest. — "Travelling  on 
the  Lake  Lugano,"  says  one,  "we  heard  one 
morning  the  swell  of  the  nightingale's  song, 
and  the  oars  were  stilled  on  the  blue  lake 
as  we  listened  to  the  silver  sounds.  We 
could  not  see  a  single  bird,  nor  do  I  know 
that  we  wished  to  see — we  were  so  content 
with  the  sweetness  of  the  music."  Even  so 
it  is  with  our  Lord ;  we  may  enter  a  house 
where  He  is  loved,  and  we  may  hear  nothing 
concerning  Christ,  and  yet  we  may  perceive 
clearly  enough  that  He  is  there ;  a  holy  in- 
fluence streaming  through  their  actions  per- 
vades the  household,  so  that  if  Jesus  be 


unseen,  it  is  clear  that  He  is  not  unknown. 
So  anywhere  that  Jesus  is,  and  though  you 
do  not  actually  hear  His  name,  yet  the  sweet 
influence  which  flows  from  His  love  will  be 
plainly  enough  discernible. 

Ver.  3.  Moral  paralysis. — In  one  of  our 
city  hospitals  a  young  woman  of  beautiful 
face  and  form  had  lain  motionless  for  many 
months.  Except  for  the  brightness  of  her 
face  and  the  action  of  the  hands,  her  body 
was  apparently  dead.  Yet  she  spoke  with 
great  confidence  of  her  restoration  to  health 
at  some  future  time,  and  was  enthusiastic  in 
planning  good  works  then  to  be  executed. 
A  physician  remarked  that  it  was  the  saddest 
case  he  had  ever  witnessed.  It  was  a 
paralysis,  not  of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  mind : 
it  was  a  moral  paralysis.  The  will  itself  had 
lost  its  power  of  action.  She  could  plan 
for  the  future,  but  not  will  anything  at  the 
present  moment.  After  a  few  months  the 
inactivity  bred  fatal  disorder,  and  she  passed 
away.  This  a  picture  of  the  moral  paralysis 
of  many. 

Man's  helplessness. — How  helpless  man  is 
to  save  himself  from  the  disease  of  sin  may 
be  illustrated  by  ^Eschylus'  Prometheus 
Bound ;  by  Virgil's  Laocoon  with  his  sons 
in  the  coils  of  the  great  serpent ;  by  the 
young  man  in  Paris,  who  was  examining 
a  guillotine,  and,  from  curiosity,  lay  down 
on  the  plank  under  the  knife,  and  found 
himself  fastened  there,  unable  to  escape 
without  aid  from  others. 

Ver.  4.  Eastern  roofs. — "  When  I  lived  at 

85 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


.Egina,"  says  Hartley,  in  his  Travels,  "  I  used 
to  look  up  not  infrequently  at  the  roof  above 
my  head,  and  contemplate  how  easily  the 
whole  transaction  of  the  paralytic  might 
take  place.  The  roof  was  made  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner :— A  layer  of  reeds,  of  a  large 
species,  was  placed  upon  the  rafters;  on 
these  a  quantity  of  heather  was  strewed; 
on  the  heather  earth  was  deposited,  and 
beaten  down  into  a  solid  mass.  Now  what 
difficulty  would  there  be  in  removing  first 
the  earth,  next  the  heather,  and  then  the 
reeds  ?  Nor  would  the  difficulty  be  increased 
if  the  earth  had  a  pavement  of  tiling  laid 
upon  it.  No  inconvenience  could  result  to 
the  persons  in  the  house  from  the  removal 
of  the  tiles  and  earth ;  for  the  heather  and 
reeds  would  stop  anything  that  might  other- 
wise fall  down,  and  would  be  removed  last 
of  all." 

Ths  power  of  faith. — Faith  can  make  a 
passage  through  the  sea,  level  martial  ram- 
parts, make  iron  swim,  trample  on  fire 
unhurt.  It  will  find  a  key  to  open  every 
lock,  a  saw  that  can  cut  through  every  iron 
bar.  As  water  will,  in  some  way,  find  its 
proper  level,  so  true  faith  will  find  its  way 
to  its  source — even  to  Christ. 

Ver.  5.  Progression  in  Christ's  miracles. — 
The  day  begins  softly,  beautifully,  progress- 
ively. In  the  early  morn  it  peeps  from 
behind  the  hills,  tinges  the  sky  and  the  sea 
with  its  rosy  colours,  and  advances  until 
there  is  cloudless  splendour,  so  that  the  day, 
when  at  its  meridian,  may  be  said  to  be 
perfect.  Thus  softly,  beautifully,  and  pro- 
gressively rose  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
on  the  dark  world  of  humanity.  His  first 
miracle  was  one  of  quiet  and  gentle  benefi- 
cence :  He  turned  water  into  wine ;  and  thus 
He  brightened  domestic  joys  before  He  went 
forth  to  mitigate  human  sorrows.  After 
this  He  went  about  all  Galilee,  healing  all 
manner  of  bodily  disease  among  the  people. 
Then  He  rose  higher  in  miracle-working — 
He  re-throned  prostrated  reason,  and  set 
demoniacs  in  their  right  mind.  At  last  He 
manifested  forth  His  glory  as  God  by  par- 
doning the  soul.  Indeed,  just  as  every 
human  disease  was  a  symbol  of  the  moral 
condition  of  the  soul,  so  every  miracle  He 
wrought  on  the  body  was  a  token  of  what 
He  would  do  for  the  soul,  and  what,  in  fact, 
He  did  in  the  majority  of  instances :  hence 
His  miracles  were  double— body  and  soul 
were  healed  at  the  same  time,  as  in  this 
case. 

The  good  news  of  pardon.— When  Bishop 
Tatteson  was  quite  young,  he  used  to  say 
that  he  wished  to  be  ordained,  because 
he  longed  to  say  the  Absolution,  and  thus 
"make  people  so  happy."  The  son  of  one, 
and  the  nephew  of  another,  of  England's 
most  eminent  judges,  he  knew  well  what  a 
verdict  of  "  not  guilty  "  implied  to  a  prisoner 

86 


on  his  trial ;  and  this  knowledge  he  had  been 
taught  to  apply  to  spiritual  matters. 


/   Vers, 
/of   our 


10,  11.— ChrisjLthe  Pardoner. — One 
modern  novelists  has  written  the 
i  story  of  a  man  who  was  haunted  with  re- 
j  morse  for  a  particular  sin ;  and  though 
I  sometimes  weeks  would  pass  without  the 
thought  of  it,  yet  every  now  and  then  the 
ghost  of  the  old  transgression  would  rise 
before  him  to  his  infinite  discomfort.  It  is 
the  story  of  almost  every  human  life.  Sin 
is  not  something  which  a  man  commits  and 
has  done  with  it.  It  becomes  a  part  of  his 
being.  His  moral  fibre  is  changed  ;  his  moral 
stamina  is  weakened.  A  traveller  soon  drives 
through  the  malarious  air  of  the  Roman  Cam- 
pagna,  and  is  out  of  the  poisonous  atmosphere ; 
but  during  his  brief  transit  disease  has  found 
its  way  into  his  blood  ;  and  even  though  he 
sits  under  the  cool  shadow  of  the  Alps, 
or  on  the  shore  of  the  blue  Mediterranean, 
the  inward  fever  rages  and  burns.  A  man 
sins,  and  in  sinning  introduces  disease  into 
his  moral  nature;  and  even  though  he 
abandons  his  evil  courses  the  old  malady 
works  on.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  which  is 
so  thorough  and  central  that  it  rids  a  man 
of  the  power  and  guilt  of  sin — who  is  com- 
petent to  give  us  that  ?  No  specific  of  man's 
devising,  no  course  of  moral  treatment,  can 
effect  that.  There  is  only  One,  Jesus  Christ, 
who  has  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sin  in 
that  complete  and  efficient  fashion.  And 
that  is  His  chief  glory,  and  constitutes  His 
principal  claim  upon  us. 

Ver.  14.  Attractive  power  of  Christ. — If 
steel  filings  be  mixed  with  dirt  and  a  magnet 
be  applied,  it  will  attract  the  steel  to  itself, 
and  draw  it  away  from  the  grosser  particles. 
Thus  does  Christ  draw  men  from  that  which 
is  earthly  and  polluting.  . 

Christ  our  Guide. — With  my  brother  I 
was  once  climbing  the  Cima  di  Jazi,  one  of 
the  mountains  in  the  chain  of  Monta  Rosa. 
When  nearly  at  the  top,  we  entered  a  dense 
fog.  Presently  our  guides  faced  right  about 
and  grounded  their  axes  on  the  frozen 
snowed  slope.  My  brother,  seeing  the  slope 
still  beyond,  and  not  knowing  it  was  merely 
the  cornice  overhanging  a  precipice  of 
several  thousand  feet,  rushed  onward.  I 
shall  never  forget  their  cry  of  agonised 
warning.  He  stood  a  moment  on  the  very 
summit,  and  then,  the  snow  yielding,  he 
began  to  fall  through.  One  of  the  guides, 
at  great  risk,  had  rushed  after  him,  and 
seizing  him  by  the  coat,  drew  him  down  to 
a  place  of  safety.  So  Christ  is  our  Guide 
amid  the  mists  and  the  difficult  places  of 
life.  It  is  not  ours  to  go  before  Him. 
Where  He  leads  we  may  go.  When  He  stops, 
we  should  stop.  It  is  at  our  peril  if  we  go  a 
step  beyond. — Newman  Hall. 

God  often  calls  men  in  strange  places, — 


lb-' 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    ST.  MARX. 


CHAP.   It 


Not  in  the  house  of  prayer,  not  under 
the  preaching  of  the  Word ;  but  when 
all  these  things  have  been  absent,  and  all 
surrounding  circumstances  have  seemed 
most  adverse  to  the  work  of  grace,  that  grace 
has  put  forth  its  power.  The  tavern,  the 
theatre,  the  ball-room,  the  gaming-house, 
the  race-course,  and  other  similar  haunts  of 
worldliness  and  sin,  have  sometimes  been 
the  scenes  of  God's  converting  grace.  As  an 
old  writer  says :  "  Our  calling  is  uncertain 
in  respect  of  place,  for  God  calls  some  from 
their  ships,  and  some  from  their  shops; 
some  from  under  the  hedges,  and  others 
from  the  market ;  so  that  if  a  man  can  but 
make  out  unto  his  own  soul  that  he  is 
certainly  called,  the  time  when  and  the 
place  where  matter  little." 

Christ's  effectual  call. — We  read  in  classic 
story  how  the  lyre  of  Orpheus  enchanted 
with  its  music  not  only  the  wild  beasts,  but 
the  very  trees  and  rocks  upon  Olympus, 
so  that  they  moved  from  their  places  to 
follow  him  ;  so  Christ,  our  heavenly  Orpheus, 
with  the  music  of  His  gracious  speech, 
draws  after  Him  those  less  susceptible  to 
benign  influences  than  beasts  and  trees  and 
stones,  even  poor,  hardened,  senseless,  sinful 
souls.  Let  Him  but  strike  His  golden  harp, 
and  whisper  in  thy  heart,  "  Come,  follow 
Me,"  and  thou,  like  another  Matthew,  shalt 
be  won. 

"Follow   Me." — Aulus  Gellius  tells  us   a 
story  of   one  Protagoras,  who,  being  poor, 
was  forced  for  a  livelihood  to  carry  burdens. 
f  One  day  he  had  got  some  chumps  on  his 
I     back,  which   he   was  bringing  to  town  for 
\  fuel.      Pemocritus,    a    famed    philosopher, 
}  meets  him ;  admiring  his  contrivance,  how 
(  he  got  that  rude  parcel  of  stuff  together  in 
\  that  order,  for  his  further  satisfaction  bids 
him  lay  down  his  bundle,  untie  it,  and  do  it 
\up  again.      He  does  so,  and  that  with  such 
/method  and  artifice,  that  the   philosopher 
/perceiving  by  this  essay  he  had  a  logical 
head  and  an  ingeny  fit  for  science,  told  him, 
"  Come,  young  man,  you  must  along  with  me  ; 
you  are  fit  for  greater  and  better  things  than 
this  you  are   about."     He  takes  him  along 
with  him,  maintains  him,  breeds  him  up  in 
philosophy,  wherein  he  proved  subtle,  and  in 
some  degree  eminent.    It  was  the  same  case 
with   Matthew  here,  if  I  may  make  com- 
parison.     He    was    puzzling    and     pelting 
himself  in  a  sorry  employment.     Our  Saviour 
comes  by  and  finds  him  sitting  at  it ;  He 
fetches  him  off  with  a  gracious  call,  as  if  He 
had  said,  "  Come,  leave  this  sordid  and  scan- 
dalous employ ;  I  have  greater  and  nobler 
service  for  thee.     Follow  Me." — A.   Little- 
ton, D.D. 

Ver.  15.  Sinners  drawn  to  Christ. — Travel- 
ling along  a  country  road  on  a  hot  summer's 
day,  you  may  have  noticed  the  people  before 
you  turn  aside  at  a  certain  point  and  gather 


around  something  that  was  yet  hidden  from 
you.  You  knew  at  once  that  it  was  a  clear, 
cold  spring  that  drew  them  all  together 
there.  Each  of  them  wanted  something 
which  that  spring  could  supply.  Or  you 
have  seen  iron  filings  leap  up  and  cling  to 
the  poles  of  a  magnet  when  it  was  brought 
near  to  them.  The  attraction  of  the  magnet 
drew  them  to  itself.  So  sinners  were  drawn 
to  Jesus  ;  they  felt  that  in  Him  was  all 
fulness,  and  that  He  could  supply  their 
need. 

The  converted  seeking  to  convert  others. — 
It  is  thought  that  Matthew  wished  to  in- 
troduce his  friends  and  old  companions  to 
Christ.  Colonel  Gardiner,  after  his  conver- 
sion, finding  that  his  former  friends  con- 
sidered him  mad,  invited  them  to  meet  him, 
and  pleaded  the  cause  of  religion  with  such 
force  and  strength  of  reasoning,  that  one 
cut  short  the  argument  with  saying,  "  We 
thought  this  man  mad,  and  he  is  in  good 
earnest  proving  us  to  be  so." 

Ver.  16.  Religious  prejudice. — Happily, 
in  our  age  and  country,  though  prejudice  of 
class  is  not  yet  done  away  with,  there  is  not 
much  left  to  give  an  idea  of  the  intensity  of 
the  religious  prejudices  and  sectarian  divi- 
sions of  the  ancient  East.  Giant  Prejudice 
now  can  do  little  more  than  sit  grinning  at 
the  pilgrims  and  biting  his  nails  at  them 
because  he  cannot  come  at  them  ;  and  it  is 
hard  for  modern  occidental  imagination  to 
conceive  of  him  as  he  moved  and  acted  in  full 
social  and  political  power.  But  one  example 
will  do.  Bead  Leger's  Histoire  de  Pie- 
monty  and  learn  the  cruelty,  brutality,  and 
obscenity  practised  on  the  poor  Waldenses  ; 
and  then  imagine  how  the  Pharisees  felt 
toward  Jesus,  who  received  sinners  and  ate 
with  them.  The  lower  the  grade  of  know- 
ledge and  culture  (and  most  of  the  Pharisees 
were  probably  illiterate),  so  much  the  more 
savage  were  the  feelings  and  actions  of  the 
persecutors,  though  their  cruelty  was  not 
refined  in  proportion  to  their  savageness. 
In  modern  times  this  religious  prejudice 
exists,  and  strongly  too.  There  are  certain 
sects  still  in  Palestine  and  Syria  who  will 
buy  and  sell  with  you,  but  not  eat  with  you, 
drink  with  you,  nor  pray  with  you.  They 
are  often  the  dirtiest  of  the  dirty,  but  they 
hold  your  clean  touch  defilement.  As  when, 
in  certain  parts  of  India,  one  ventures  to 
clear  his  throat  in  the  street,  all  the  shops 
near  by  are  immediately  shut  up;  so,  in 
some  places,  an  unlucky  touch  by  a  Christian 
will  defile  a  handful  of  figs,  a  bunch  of 
grapes,  a  melon  ;  or  perhaps  even  a  whole 
basket  of  fruit. 

Ver.  17.  God  welcomes  sinners. — As  the 
story  goes,  a  certain  generous  but  eccentric 
nobleman    sometimes    asked  not  only  the 

87 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK, 


high-born  and  wealthy  but  the  squalid  and 
poor  to  his  feasts.  Previous  to  one  of  these 
occasions,  a  courtier  had  the  misfortune  to 
tear  or  to  stain  his  dress.  How  was  he  to 
appear  now  at  his  benefactors  table  ?  After 
some  thought  he  came  to  a  wise  conclusion. 
These  were  his  words,  "  If  I  cannot  go  as 
a  nobleman  I  will  go  as  a  beggar."  Say  the 
same  to  Him  who  spreads  the  gospel  feast. 
Never  mind  though  you  cannot  go  as  a  saint ; 
go  as  a  sinner.     You  will  be  welcome. 

Christ  saves  sinners. — Luther  says :  "  Once 
upon  a  time  the  devil  said  to  me,  'Martin 
Luther,  you  are  a  great  sinner,  and  you 
will  be  damned  ! '  «  Stop  !  stop  1 '  said  I ; 
1  one  thing  at  a  time.  I  am  a  great  sinner, 
it  is  true,  though  you  have  no  right  to 
tell  me  of  it.  I  confess  it.  What  next  ? ' 
'  Therefore  you  will  be  damned.'  '  That  is 
not  good  reasoning.  It  is  true  I  am  a  great 
sinner,  but  it  is  written,  "  Jesus  Chribt  came 
to  save  sinners  "  ;  therefore  I  shall  be  saved  ! 
Now  go  your  way.'  So  I  cut  the  devil  off 
with  his  own  sword,  and  he  went  away 
mourning  because  he  could  not  cast  me 
down  by  calling  me  a  sinner." 

All  are  sinners. — I  remember  a  gentle- 
man taking  exception  to  an  address  based 
upon  the  words  of  God  concerning  Jew 
and  Gentile,  that  both  are  guilty  before 
God.  I  remarked,  "But  the  Word  of  God 
distinctly  says,  '  There  is  no  difference  :  for 
all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory 
of  God ' "  (Rom.  iii.  22,  23).  My  friend  re- 
plied, "  Do  you  mean  to  say  that  there  is 
no  difference  between  an  honest  man  and  a 
dishonest  one,  between  an  intemperate  man 
and  a  sober  man  ?  "  "  No,"  I  remarked  ;  "  I 
did  not  affirm  that  there  was  no  room  for 
comparison  between  such  cases ;  but  my 
position  is,  that  if  two  men  were  standing 
here  together,  one  an  intemperate  man  and 
the  other  a  sober  man,  I  should  say  of  the 
one,  '  This  man  is  an  intemperate  sinner, 
the  other  is  a  sober  sinner.' "  My  friend  did 
not  know  how  to  meet  the  difficulty,  but 
answered,  "  Well,  I  don't  like  such  teaching." 
Very  quietly  I  replied,  "  Then  I  will  make 
some  concession,  and  meet  your  difficulty. 
I  will  admit  that  many  are  '  superior  sinners,' 
and  that  you  are  a  superior  sinner."  I  shall 
not  soon  forget  my  friend's  expression  of 
countenance  when  he  had  taken  stock  of 
the  argument. — Henry  Varley. 

Ver.  21.  External  reform  insufficient. — 
We  may  try  from  without  to  make  human 
character  lovely  ;  but  there  is  sin  in  its  very 
fibre,  and  the  blemishes  will  ever  work  out 
and  mar  all.  The  only  way  is  to  have  a 
new  heart,  and  then  the  beauty  will  be  real 
and  will  endure.  A  mother  lost  by  death 
a  lovely  and  precious  child — her  only  child. 
To  occupy  her  heart  and  hand  in  some  way 
about  her  vanished  treasure,  and  thus  fill 
the  empty  hours,  she  took  up  a  photograph 

88 


of  her  child  and  began  to  touch  it  with  her 
skilful  fingers.  Soon,  as  she  wrought,  the 
features  became  almost  lifelike.  The  picture 
was  then  laid  away  for  a  few  days,  and 
when  she  sought  it  again  the  eyes  were 
dimmed,  and  the  face  was  marred  with  ugly 
blotches.  Patiently  she  went  over  it  a 
second  time,  and  the  bewitching  beauty 
came  again.  A  second  time  it  was  laid 
away,  and  again  the  blotches  appeared. 
There  was  something  wrong  in  the  paper 
on  which  the  photograph  had  been  taken. 
There  were  chemicals  lurking  in  it  which 
in  some  way  marred  the  delicate  colours, 
and  no  amount  of  repainting  could  correct 
the  faults.  So  is  it  in  human  lives.  No 
outside  reform  is  enough,  for  all  the  while 
the  heart  is  evil  within,  and  it  sends  up  its 
pollution,  staining  the  fairest  beauty.  The 
change  that  is  permanent  must  be  wrought 
in  the  heart.—  J.  R.  Miller,  JD.D. 

Ver.  27.  Benefit  of  the  rest-day. — Man  ! 
man !  this  is  the  great  creator  of  wealth. 
The  difference  between  the  soil  of  Campania 
and  Spitzbergen  is  insignificant  compared 
with  the  difference  presented  by  two  coun- 
tries— the  one  inhabited  by  men  full  of 
moral  and  physical  vigour,  the  other  by 
beings  plunged  in  an  intellectual  decrepi- 
tude. Hence  it  is  that  we  are  not  im- 
poverished, but  on  the  contrary  enriched  by 
this  seventh  day,  which  we  have  for  so 
many  years  devoted  to  rest.  This  day  is 
not  lost.  While  the  machinery  is  stopped, 
while  the  car  rests  on  the  road,  while  the 
treasury  is  silent,  while  the  smoke  ceases 
to  rise  from  the  chimney  of  the  factory,  the 
nation  enriches  itself  none  the  less  than 
during  the  working  days  of  the  week. 
Man,  the  machine  of  all  machines,  the  one 
by  the  side  of  which  all  the  inventions  of 
the  Watts  and  the  Arkwrights  are  as  nothing, 
is  recuperating  and  gaining  strength  so  well, 
that  on  Monday  he  returns  to  his  work  with 
his  mind  clearer,  with  more  courage  for  his 
work,  and  with  renewed  vigour.  I  will 
never  believe  that  that  which  renders  a 
people  stronger,  wiser,  and  better  can  ever 

turn  to  its  impoverishment. In  The  Life 

of  Frank  Buckland,  the  eminent  naturalist, 
who  devoted  himself  so  thoroughly  to  the 
scientific  and  practical  study  of  the  river  and 
sea- fisheries  of  .Great  Britain,  there  is  the 
following  testimony  to  the  value  of  Sabbath 
rest:  "March  1866. — I  am  now  working 
from  8  a.m.  to  6  p.m.,  and  then  a  bit  in  the 
evening— fourteen  hours  a  day  ;  but,  thank 
God,  it  does  not  hurt  me.  I  should,  how- 
ever, collapse  if  it  were  not  for  Sunday. 
The  machinery  has  time  to  get  cool,  the 
mill-wheel  ceases  to  patter  the  water,  the 
mill-head  is  ponded  up,  and  the  superfluous 
water    let   off    by  an   easy,   quiet    current, 

which  leads  to  things  above." In  one  of 

the  most  densely  populated  parts  of  the  city 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  III. 


a  gentleman  lately  visited  the  house  of  a 
poor,  hard-working,  infidel  cobbler.  The 
man  was  busy  at  his  last,  and  had  scarce 
time  to  look  up  at  his  unwelcome  visitor. 
"  That  is  hard  work."  "  It  is,  sir."  "  For 
how  many  hours  a  day  have  you  to  labour 
here — twelve  1 "  "  Yes,  and  more,  sir.  I 
am  never  off  this  seat  under  a  fourteen  or 
fifteen  hours'  spell  of  it."  "That  is  sore 
toil  for  a  bit  of  bread."  "  Indeed  it  is,  sir  ; 
and  very  thankful  am  I  when  the  week's 
end  comes.  What  ivould  become  of  me,  and 
the  likes  of  me,  without  that  rest  ?"  "  And 
who,  friend,  think  you,  gave  you  that  rest  ? 
Came  it  by  accident,  or  arrangement,  or 
how  ?  "  There  came  no  answer  to  that :  the 
cobbler  hung  his  head ;  the  man  was  honest ; 

the  sceptic  was  ashamed. An  agricultural 

labourer  named  Alegre,  about  sixty  years 
of  age,  was  arrested  during  the  French 
Revolution,  and  put  in  prison  for  not  having 
worked  on  a  Sunday.  A  week  after  his 
release  he  presented  himself,  dressed  in 
his  Sunday  clothes,  before  the  Committee. 
On  being  asked  what  he  wanted,  he  replied 
that  he  was  getting  old,  and  that  when  he 
had  worked  all  the  week  he  was  tired  out  and 
wanted  rest,  so  that  if  he  went  to  labour  on 
Sunday  he  should  rob  his  employer,  and 
that  therefore  he  preferred  to  come  and  be 
put  in  prison.  The  Committee,  who  no 
doubt  thought  the  man  had  come  to  make 


a  denunciation,  were  nonplussed  at  the 
strange  humour  of  this  singular  request, 
shrugged  their   shoulders,   and  bade   their 

petitioner  go  about  his  business. William 

Wilberforce  said,  "  I  can  truly  declare  that 
to  me  the  Sabbath  has  been  invaluable." 
When  Sir  Samuel  Romilly,  Solicitor-General 
during  Fox's  administration,  committed 
suicide,  Mr.  Wilberforce  said,  "  If  he  had 
suffered  his  mind  to  enjoy  such  occasional 
remission,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the 
strings  of  life  would  never  have  snapped 
from  over-tension."  The  celebrated  Castle- 
reagh,  who  was  Foreign  Secretary  in  1812, 
committed  suicide  in  1822.  Wilberforce 
said,  "  Poor  fellow !  he  was  certainly  de- 
ranged— the  effect  probably  of  continual  wear 
of  the  mind  and  the  non-observance  of  the 

Sabbath." After  all,  the  question  is  not 

so  much  one  of  the  safety  and  well-being  of 
life  and  property  as  of  the  higher  well-being 
of  the  personal  soul.  A  great  statesman 
is  reported  to  have  said  to  one  who  sought 
of  him  an  interview  concerning  secular 
matters  on  the  Lord's  Day  :  "  I  must  keep 
one  day  in  which  to  realise  what  I  am  and 

where  I  am  going  /" Anworld  without  a 

Sabbath,  says  Mr.  Beecher,  would  be  like  a 
man  without  a  smile,  like  a  summer  without 
flowers,  like  a  homestead  without  a  garden. 
It  is  the  joyous  day  of  the  whole  week. 


CHAPTER    III. 
CRITICAL   AND    EXEGETICAL    NOTES. 


Ver.  5.  With  anger,  being  grieved.— His  anger  would  be  roused  as  He  thought  of  the 
evil  resulting  to  others  from  the  bigotry  and  tyranny  of  their  spirit ;  His  pity,  as  He  thought 
of  the  moral  loss  suffered  by  themselves  in  consequence  thereof.  Hardness. — Dulness. 
u  Not  the  obduracy  which  cannot  be  impressed,  but  the  obtuseness  which  cannot  perceive." 
They  were  blind  to  their  own  blindness,  deaf  to  their  own  deafness ;  and  also  blind  and 
deaf  to  the  needs  and  woes  of  others.  Compassion  and  kindness  of  heart  were  as  much 
dried  up  in  them  as  this  man's  hand  was  in  him. 

Ver.  7.  Mark  several  times  notes  the  Saviour's  seasons  of  retirement  from  public  notice, 
either  (as  in  this  instance)  to  escape  the  pursuit  of  enemies,  or  for  rest,  or  to  pray,  or  for 
conference  with  His  disciples.     See  vi.  31,  46,  vii.  24,  ix.  2,  xiv.  32-35. 

Ver.  14.  Ordained. — Made,  or  set  apart.  The  twelve  were  now  singled  out  for  closer 
attendance  upon  Him,  and  special  instruction  in  His  method  of  work.  Their  solemn 
"ordination"  came  afterwards  (John  xx.  21,  22).  Twelve.— "The  number  twelve  sym- 
bolises perfection  and  universality.  Three  indicates  what  is  Divine ;  four,  created  things. 
Three  multiplied  by  four  gives  twelve,  the  number  of  those  who  were  to  go  forth  as  apostles 
into  the  four  quarters  of  the  world — called  to  the  faith  of  the  Holy  Trinity." 

Ver.  17.  Boanerges. — It  is  uncertain  whether  each  of  them  bore  the  name  "  Son  of 
thunder,"  or  whether  "  Boanerges "  was  a  dual  name  given  to  the  pair,  as  the  name 
"  Dioscuri "  was  given  to  Castor  and  Pollux.  It  is  also  uncertain  why  the  brothers  were 
thus  named  ;  but  we  may  be  sure  it  was  not  in  any  case  intended  as  a  term  of  reproach. 
Perhaps  it  was  suggested  by  some  peculiarity  in  voice  or  manner  of  delivery  which  arrested 
attention  and  lent  conviction  to  their  preaching. 

89 


chap   in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


Ver  18  Simon  the  Canaanite.— Cananite,  or  Canancean.  An  Aramaic  word,  signifying 
zealot.  See  Matt.  x.  4 ;  Luke  vi.  15 ;  Acts  i.  13.  Jerome  says  that  his  name  preserves 
a  reference  to  the  place  of  his  birth  (Cana)  as  well  as  to  his  zeal.  "No  name  is  more 
striking  in  the  list  than  that  of  Simon  the  Zealot,  for  to  none  of  the  twelve  could  the  con- 
trast be  so  vivid  between  their  former  and  their  new  position.  What  revolution  of  thought 
and  heart  could  be  greater  than  that  which  had  thus  changed  into  a  follower  of  Jesus  one 
of  the  fierce  war-party  of  the  day,  which  looked  on  the  presence  of  Rome  in  the  Holy  Land 
as  treason  against  the  majesty  of  Jehovah,  a  party  fanatical  in  their  Jewish  strictures  and 
exclusiveness  ^ " 

Ver.  19.  Betrayed.—  Delivered,  or  surrendered.  Same  word  used  in  Rom.  viii.  32  of  the 
Father's  surrender  of  the  Son,  whom  He  "  delivered  "  into  the  power  of  men,  in  order  that 
He  might  "  deliver  "  mankind  from  the  power  of  Satan. 

Ver.  21.  His  friends.— His  kinsfolk  or  near  relatives.  Beside  Himself.— In  an  ecstatic 
state.     They  thought  He  was  carried  away  by  His  zeal  and  devotion  beyond  all  self-control. 

Ver.  22.  Beelzebub.  —Beelzebul,  meaning  either  "  lord  of  the  dwelling,"  or  "  lord  of  filth  " 
—the  title  of  a  heathen  deity,  to  whom  the  Jews  ascribed  lordship  over  evil  spirits.  "  He 
hath  Beelzebul  "  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "He  is  possessed  not  merely  by  a  demon,  but  by 
Satan  himself." 

Ver.  27.  Spoil  his  goods.— Snatch  and  carry  off  his  vessels,  or  household  treasures. 

Ver.  29.  Hath  never  forgiveness.— Hat h  not  forgiveness  unto  the  age  or  aeon  of  Messiah's 
reign.  In  danger  of  eternal  damnation.—  In  the  grip  of  an  age-long  sin.  None  of  the 
agencies  employed  by  God  for  the  conversion  of  sinners  up  to  the  time  of  the  Second 
Advent  are  powerful  enough  to  rescue  such  an  one  from  the  awful  state  to  which  he  has 
reduced  himself  by  his  own  deliberate  choice.  Here  the  Saviour  leaves  the  matter,  without 
revealing  anything  as  to  the  man's  ultimate  fate  or  the  ministries  of  the  future  world. 

Ver.  31.  His  brethren.— The  word  means  nothing  more  than  His  "nearest  male  rela- 
tives." Probably  either  the  sons  of  Joseph  by  a  previous  marriage,  or  of  the  Mary 
mentioned  in  Mark  xv.  40.  It  is  inconceivable  that  our  Lord  should  have  assigned  His 
mother  to  the  care  of  John,  if  she  was  the  mother  of  four  other  sons. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—6. 
(Parallels:  Matt.  xii.  9-14;  Luke  vi.  6-11.) 

A  withered  hand  restored. — Again  it  is  Sabbath — the  day  on  which  the  Divine 
Son  of  Man  specially  delighted  to  bring  joy  to  the  souls  and  healing  to  the 
bodies  of  His  suffering  brethren.  Again,  too,  the  sleuth-hounds  are  on  His 
track,  thirsting  for  His  blood  ;  and  this  time  the  trap  is  so  skilfully  baited 
that  they  feel  sure  of  securing  their  prey.  Had  the  ingenuity  of  these  religionists 
only  been  directed  aright — had  they  thought  half  as  much  of  the  salvation  of 
sinners  as  they  did  of  the  safeguarding  of  their  wire-drawn  casuistries — what 
a  mighty  work  for  God  could  have  been  accomplished !  But,  alas !  religion 
meant  to  them  nothing  but  a  round  of  outward  observances  ;  they  were  "  blind 
as  owls  to  the  light  of  God  and  true  goodness,  keen-sighted  as  hawks  for  trivial 
breaches  of  their  cobweb  regulations,  and  cruel  as  vultures  to  tear  with  beak 
and  claw."  Here  they  stand  now  in  the  synagogue,  gloating  over  the  spectacle  of 
affliction  that  meets  their  eye,  for  they  are  convinced  that  Jesus  will  set  at 
nought  any  number  of  Sabbath  traditions,  rather  than  fail  to  relieve  misery. 

LA  pitiable  object. — The  man's  right  hand  was  not  only  paralysed  in  the 
sinews,  but  withered  up  and  hopeless.  An  old  tradition  recorded  in  the  Gospel 
of  the  Nazarenes  and  Ebionites  adds,  that  he  was  a  stonemason  by  trade,  and  that 
he  besought  Jesus  to  heal  him  and  relieve  him  from  having  to  beg  for  his  bread. 
Let  us  hope,  for  the  credit  of  human  nature,  that  those  are  mistaken  who  believe 
the  Pharisees  themselves  had  bribed  the  man  to  come  there  and  place  himself 
in  the  Saviour's  way. 

II.  A  fearless  challenge.— Jesus,  fully  aware  of  their  hostile  thoughts,  as  if 
to  anticipate  any  action  on  their  part,  and  make  the  matter  as  public  as  pos- 
sible, bids  the  man—"  Stand  forth."     All  is  now  excitement  and  expectation 
90 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  hi. 


The  looks  of  the  audience  pass  rapidly  from  Jesus  to  the  man,  and  from  the 
man  to  the  Pharisees,  in  the  consciousness  that  a  crisis  is  near.  Then  Jesus 
propounds  a  question,  which  in  the  nature  of  things  admits  of  but  one  answer — 
a  question  which  completely  cuts  the  ground  from  under  His  enemies'  feet : 
"  Is  it  lawful  to  do  good  on  the  Sabbath  days,  or  to  do  evil  ?  to  save  life,  or  to 
kill  ?  "  According  to  them,  only  actual  danger  to  life  warranted  a  breach  of 
the  Sabbath  law.  Jesus  meets  them,  therefore,  on  their  own  terms,  and  shows 
how  their  own  principles  lead  logically  to  the  kind  of  Sabbath  work  that  they 
condemn  :  "  All  good-doing  to  men's  bodies  lies  on  the  line  of  life ;  all  with- 
holding of  good-doing  lies  on  the  line  of  killing,  or  of  death.  If  it  would  be 
wrong,  in  the  absence  of  higher  claims,  to  withhold  the  good-doing  that  would 
save  life,  it  must  also  be  wrong,  when  the  higher  claims  are  still  absent,  to 
withhold  the  good-doing  that  may  be  needed  to  develop  life  into  its  fulness  of 
vigour  and  beauty."  Such  reasoning  was  unanswerable,  and  could  only  be  met 
by  silence  on  the  part  of  those  who  were  not  prepared  to  endorse  and  commend 
it.  If  there  was  still  a  soft  spot  in  the  heart  of  any  one  of  them,  surely  Christ's 
words  must  have  suggested  the  contrast  between  their  murderous  designs  on 
Him,  and  His  zeal  for  the  life  and  health  of  all  men.  But  no  such  thought 
seems  to  have  entered  their  minds.  They  are  speechless — not  with  conviction, 
but  with  conscious  defeat. 

III.  A  Divine  look. — St.  Mark,  who,  more  than  any  other  Evangelist,  records 
the  lights  and  shadows  that  swept  over  the  Saviour's  countenance,  tells  us  that 
"  He  looked  round  about  upon  them  with  anger,  being  grieved  at  the  hardening 
of  their  hearts."  They  had  set  themselves  to  prove  Him  guilty  at  all  hazards, 
and  the  result  was  a  gradual  hardening  of  the  heart,  rendering  them  impervious 
to  all  spiritual  impressions  and  impulses.  The  anger  of  Christ  is  directed  against 
their  sinful  opposition  to  the  truth,  which  was  quite  inexcusable  ;  but  His  loving 
heart  is  full  of  commiseration  for  the  men  themselves,  whose  state  of  insensibility 
to  goodness  and  compassion  was  truly  perilous  and  pitiable. 

IT.  A  life-giving  command. — "  Stretch  forth  thine  hand."  There  is  no 
manipulation  of  the  stricken  member,  no  touch,  no  word  of  healing  even  ;  nothing 
but  a  simple  direction  to  the  man  to  do  what  was  forbidden  to  none,  but  what 
had  been  up  to  that  moment  impossible  to  him  ;  and  in  doing  as  he  was  bid, 
in  making  the  effort  to  obey,  the  vitality  returned,  "  and  his  hand  was  restored 
whole  as  the  other."  Thus  calmly  and  quietly  does  Jesus  show  His  enemies 
how  easy  it  is  for  Him  to  evade  their  best- laid  plots  ;  thus  incontrovertibly  does 
He  prove  His  superiority  to  all  the  powers  of  evil.  Observe,  too,  "  that  no 
offence  to  hypocrites,  no  danger  to  Himself,  prevented  Jesus  from  removing 
human  suffering.  Also  that  He  expects  from  the  man  a  certain  co-operation 
involving  faith ;  he  must  stand  forth  in  the  midst ;  every  one  must  see  his 
unhappiness  ;  he  is  to  assume  a  position  which  will  become  ridiculous  unless 
a  miracle  is  wrought.  Then  he  must  make  an  effort.  In  the  act  of  stretching 
forth  his  hand,  the  strength  to  stretch  it  forth  is  given  ;  but  he  would  not  have 
tried  the  experiment  unless  he  trusted  before  he  discovered  the  power.  Such  is 
the  faith  demanded  of  our  sin- stricken  and  helpless  souls — a  faith  which  confesses 
its  wretchedness,  believes  in  the  goodwill  of  God  and  the  promises  of  Christ,  and 
receives  the  experience  of  blessing  through  having  acted  on  the  belief  that 
already  the  blessing  is  a  fact  in  the  Divine  volition." 

V.  An  unnatural  alliance. — The  Pharisees — their  pride  humbled,  their  hopes 
disappointed,  their  hearts  full  of  futile  rage — first  commune  one  with  another 
as  to  what  course  they  should  now  pursue,  and  then,  calling  together  the 
Herodians,  "  took  counsel  against  Him,  how  they  might  destroy  Him."  Mis- 
fortune, according  to  an  old  saw,  often  brings  men  into  strange  company,  and 
certainly  it  was  so  in  this  case.     "  In  theology  the  Herodians,  so  far  as  they 

91 


CHAP.  III.  B0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


held  any  theological  opinions,  fraternised  with  the  Sadducees,  the  latitudinarians 
of  that  day ;  in  politics  they  were  adherents  of  Herod  Antipas,  and  so  advocates 
of  the  Roman  domination.  To  both  these  the  Pharisees  were  diametrically 
opposed.  Yet  now  they  enter  into  an  unholy  alliance  with  those  who  were  at 
once  their  political  opponents  and  religious  antagonists."  Lifelong  hatreds  are 
put  aside  for  the  nonce,  in  order  that  they  may  make  common  cause  "  against 
the  Lord,  and  against  His  Anointed." 

Lessons. — 1.  As  Christ's  actions  and  words  were  watched,  so  are  ours.  2.  As 
this  man  found  Christ  in  the  sanctuary,  so  may  we.  3.  As  this  man  took 
Christ  at  His  word,  and  did  exactly  what  He  bade  him,  so  let  us.  4.  Let  us 
learn  further — (1)  For  our  warning — that  not  to  do  good  is  to  do  evil ;  and 
(2)  For  our  encouragement — that  whatever  good  we  attempt  to  do,  Christ's  power 
will  work  with  us  and  in  us. 

Yer.  5.  Hardness  of  heart. — It  is  a  true  rule  and  maxim  in  divinity  that  sins 
against  the  gospel  are  most  heinous  and  of  greatest  provocation.  As  the  sweetest 
and  strongest  wine  makes  the  sourest  and  sharpest  vinegar,  so  the  choicest 
favours,  if  they  be  despised,  provoke  in  God  the  greatest  displeasure.  Now  the 
main  sin  against  the  gospel  and  grace  of  God  is  obstinate  impenitency 
and  unbelief — when  we  repel  and  put  off  from  us  the  offers  of  God's  grace. 
And  the  root  of  that  is  the  spirit  of  obduration  and  hardness  of  heart,  when 
our  hearts  stand  it  out  with  God,  and  will  not  give  way  to  the  work  of  His 
grace.  And  this  evil,  more  or  less,  in  some  degree  or  other,  is  in  all  men 
naturally  ;  and  this  is  that  which  our  Saviour  here  discovers  and  reproves  in 
His  present  auditors. 

I.  The  parties  affected  with  this  great  evil. — 1.  Look  upon  them  as  men 
in  the  state  of  nature,  and  then  the  observation  is  thus  much — that  naturally 
every  man's  heart  is  full  of  hardness  and  obstinacy.  God  created  us  in  a  far 
different  condition  :  our  spirits  were  tender ;  our  hearts,  hearts  of  flesh  ;  the 
whole  frame  and  disposition  of  our  souls  pliant  and  yielding  to  every  good 
motion.  But  now,  as  sin  hath  depraved  and  corrupted  us,  our  hearts  are  not 
stirred  or  affected  with  any  of  these.  Doth  God  appear  to  us,  we  take  no 
notice  of  Him  :  doth  He  send  His  Word  to  us,  we  give  no  credit  to  it,  it 
seems  a  fable  to  us  :  doth  He  command  us,  we  will  not  obey  Him  :  doth  He 
promise  us,  we  will  not  be  persuaded  :  doth  He  threaten  us,  we  slight  and 
contemn  it.  A  hard  heart  is  like  a  brazen  wall — shoot  never  so  many  arrows 
against  it,  it  beats  them  all  back  again,  they  cannot  enter  :  such  is  a  hard 
heart ;  neither  God's  Word  nor  His  works,  neither  judgments  nor  mercies,  can 
enter  into  it  to  make  any  impression.  See  how  the  Scripture  describes  and 
sets  forth  this  hardness  of  heart  (Ezek.  xi.  19  ;  Zech.  vii.  12;  Jer.  vi.  28; 
Isa.  xlviii.  4).  As  they  say  of  the  disease  of  the  stone,  'tis  oftentimes  hereditary ; 
some  children  have  drawn  it  from  their  parents,  and  been  born  with  it :  so 
this  stone  in  the  heart,  'tis  an  original  evil ;  we  are  born  in  hardness  of  heart ; 
'tis  our  natural  temper.  Indeed,  for  natural  and  human  affections  we  have 
flesh  and  tenderness.  Self-love,  'tis  quick  of  feeling,  and  so  parents  have 
their  bowels  to  the  fruit  of  their  body ;  and,  in  point  of  humanity  to  others 
in  misery,  all  are  not  hard-hearted ;  some  are  tender  and  pitiful :  but  in 
matters  of  God  and  spiritual  duties,  for  the  entertainments  of  grace,  and  the 
work  of  conversion,  no  stone,  no  adamant,  exceeds  us  in  hardness.  2.  Look 
upon  them  as  men  living  under  the  law.  These  men,  whom  the  text  speaks 
of,  were  not  wild  men  and  savages,  but  civil  and  orderly  :  yea,  more  than  so, 
for  their  outward  state,  members  of  the  visible  Church,  acquainted  with  the 
doctrine  and  discipline  of  Moses,  they  had  the  circumcision  of  the  flesh, 
instructed  in  the  law ;  and  yet  how  doth  Christ  find  them  ?    Nothing  changed 

92  .  _ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  hi. 


or  altered,  not  mollified  or  made  tender;  but  dull,  dead- hearted  sinners  for 
all  that.  See  the  state  of  the  Jews  (Jer.  ix.  26).  Observe,  'tis  not  in  the 
power  of  the  law  to  alter  or  change  us,  to  soften  and  mollify  our  hard  hearts ; 
that  work  belongs  to  Christ  and  His  gospel,  to  His  grace  and  Spirit.  We 
see  this  work  restrained  to  the  new  covenant ;  'tis  proper  to  the  gospel 
(Jer.  xxxi.  31).  The  law  teaches  us,  but  the  gospel  enables  us;  that  gives  and 
works  in  us  what  the  law  requires  of  us  (John  i.  17).  The  law  hath  power 
of  conviction,  but  'tis  the  gospel  only  hath  a  power  of  conversion.  The  law, 
that's  the  hammer  that  knocks  at  the  door  of  our  hearts  ;  but  the  gospel,  that's 
the  key  that  opens  it,  puts  back  the  bar  of  obduration,  and  lets  in  grace  and 
the  Spirit  into  it.  3.  These  men  were  very  forward  in  outward  devotion, 
frequenters  of  the  synagogues,  great  Sabbatarians,  and  yet  under  all  this 
seeming  sanctity  Christ  espies  a  dead,  hard,  wicked  heart  lurking.  Observe, 
seeming  and  outside  sanctity  may  go  together,  and  consist  with  inward  and 
spiritual  hardness  and  obstinacy.  'Tis  the  true  constitution  of  a  hypocrite ; 
he  is  all  for  the  outside  of  religion — there  he  is  excellent ;  he  will  outgo  and 
exceed  all  others  in  show  :  but  look  upon  his  heart ;  he  wholly  neglects  it ;  that's 
full  of  hardness  and  stubborn  impiety.  (1)  'Tis  the  easiest  work.  Outward 
observances  in  matter  of  religion,  they  cost  but  little  pains ;  but  to  work 
upon  the  heart,  and  to  bring  that  in  order,  that's  painful  and  laborious.  As 
in  the  practice  of  physic  or  chirurgery,  'tis  more  easy  to  cure  an  outward 
hurt  of  the  body,  that  is  ill-affected  or  wounded  ;  but  an  inward  distemper, 
when  a  vein  is  broken,  and  it  bleeds  inward,  the  curing  of  this  is  a  great  deal  more 
difficult.  (2)  'Tis  natural  for  hypocrisy  to  leave  the  heart  in  hardness,  because 
it  employs  all  its  care  in  dressing  and  trimming  and  adorning  the  outside. 
As  those  distempers  that  send  all  the  heat  of  the  body  outward,  and  cause 
great  flushings  in  the  face,  they  hinder  the  inward  concoction,  cool,  and  dead 
the  stomach  and  vital  parts,  that  they  cannot  perform  their  functions :  so 
hypocrisy  sends  out  all  the  heat  of  their  piety  to  the  outside,  causes  great 
flushings  of  piety  in  the  outward  man,  but  chills  and  cools  and  deadens  the 
lif e  of  religion  in  the  heart. 

II.  Their  sinful  disposition. —Hardness  of  heart.  1.  The  subject  of  this  evil 
quality  is  the  heart.  By  heart  we  are  not  to  understand  that  particular  vital 
member  of  the  body  as  in  common  speech  we  use  to  take  it,  but  in  the 
Scripture  language  :  so  it  signifies  the  soul  and  spirit  of  a  man.  Thus  Gen.  vi.  5  ; 
Jer.  xix.  9  ;  Matt.  xv.  19.  The  whole  soul,  and  all  the  faculties  of  it,  are  per- 
verted and  hardened,  dead  and  dull  to  any  goodness,  froward  and  obstinate  to 
any  good  motion  or  holy  action.  As  in  a  distempered  clock,  wherein  both  the 
spring  and  the  wheels  are  out  of  frame,  it  cannot  strike  one  stroke  right. 
(1)  The  mind  and  understanding,  that's  over-grown  with  hardness  and  blindness. 
Eagle-eyed  in  worldly  things,  mole-eyed  in  spiritual.  (2)  Our  memory  in 
matters  of  religion,  how  is  that  dulled  and  benumbed !  how  fluid  !  No  reten- 
tive power  in  it  for  that  which  is  spiritual.  Let  the  seed  of  the  Word  be 
sown  in  it ;  yet  the  devil  comes  and  takes  it  out,  that  it  can  have  no  abiding 
in  us.  (3)  The  will,  of  all  others,  how  is  that  hardened,  brawned,  steeled  !  We 
may  as  easily  remove  mountains,  pierce  the  rocks,  melt  the  flint,  as  persuade 
and  prevail  with  a  hard,  obdurate  will.  (4)  Our  affections,  which  are  quick 
and  stirring  in  other  matters,  how  dead  and  dull  are  they  to  spiritual 
duties !  2.  The  quality  itself  is  called  "  hardness."  Now  there  is  a  threefold 
hardness  of  heart.  (1)  There  is,  natural  and  inbred  in  us,  a  hardness  of  heart 
which  we  all  bring  with  us  into  this  world,  which  makes  us  so  unteachable  and 
untractable  to  any  good.  (2)  There  is  an  acquired  and  a  contracted  hardness 
of  heart,  which  increases  that  inbred  and  natural  hardness — when  custom  in 
sinning  begets  in  us  a  firm  resolution  to  continue  and  persist  and  go  on  in  sinning 

93 


chap,  in.'  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  1IATU. 


(Bom.  ii.  5  ;  Heb.  iii.  13).  (3)  There  is  a  hardness  inflicted  by  God,  a  penal  and 
punishing  hardness — when  God  punishes  a  wicked  man  with  this  spiritual  judg- 
ment of  a  hard  heart.  The  inquiry  then  would  be,  Wherein  doth  this  hardness 
of  heart  consist  ?  how  shall  we  discern  it  ?  what  are  the  properties  and  effects 
of  it  %  Take  these  four  following :  (i)  Durum  non  cedit.  Those  things  that 
are  hard,  they  are  unyielding  and  impenetrable ;  whereas  that  which  is  soft 
will  easily  admit  of  any  impression.  But  a  stone,  touch  it,  nay  offer  more 
force  to  it,  and  strike  it,  there  is  yet  no  yielding  in  it.  And  such  is  the 
condition  of  a  hard  heart,  stubborn  and  impenetrable.  Till  this  hardness 
be  removed  by  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  there  is  no  working  upon  it ;  it  will 
not  give  place  to  any  means  of  grace  that  God  hath  appointed,  though  never 
so  powerful,  (ii)  A  second  property  and  effect  of  a  hard  heart  is,  Durum  non 
sentit ;  that  which  is  hard  and  brawny  is  void  of  sense  and  apprehension. 
The  tenderest  flesh,  'tis  of  quickest  apprehension  ;  but  a  brawny  heart  is  dull 
and  insensible.  Will  you  see  the  stupor  and  lethargy  of  a  hard  heart  ?  Such 
a  heart,  no  suggestions  of  Satan,  though  never  so  dreadful,  affrights  them — they 
startle  not  at  them  ;  no  inspirations  of  God's  Spirit  doth  at  all  affect  them — 
they  perceive  them  not ;  the  checks  of  conscience  never  move  them ;  the  guilt 
of  sin  doth  not  dare  them  or  perplex  them.  They  are  like  Solomon's  drunkard 
(Prov.  xxiii.  24).  (iii)  Another  property  of  a  hard  heart  is,  Durum  non  Jiectitur ; 
that  which  is  hard  is  inflexible.  A  stone  may  sooner  be  broken  than  bent : 
and  such  is  the  temper  of  a  hard  heart,  no  art  or  endeavour  can  bow  or  bend 
it.  (iv)  Durum  repercutit.  There  is  not  only  a  not  yielding  in  that  which  is 
hard,  but  there  is  a  resistance,  a  contrary  action  repelling  and  driving  back 
any  action  upon  it.  Smite  a  stone,  and  it  will  not  only  not  yield,  but  it 
enforces  the  stroke  back  again.  There  is  a  redaction  and  repercussion  in 
resistance ;  it  will  drive  back  the  strength  upon  him  that  smote  it.  And  this 
is  the  disposition  of  a  hard  heart ;  it  will  resist  and  oppose  itself  against 
any  action  of  God,  and  strive  against  it.  And  this  resistance  will  show  itself 
in  three  particulars,  (a)  In  stiffness,  and  pertinacy,  and  wilfulness  of  opinion. 
(b)  In  obstinate  continuance  in  wicked  courses,  (c)  In  quarrelling  and  cavil- 
ling at  any  evidence  of  truth,  if  it  makes  against  us ;  it  will  not  suffer  us  to 
yield  to  the  obedience  of  faith,  or  captivate  ourselves  to  Divine  truth,  but  will 
exalt  itself  against  the  knowledge  of  God. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Is  every  man's  heart  by  nature  thus  hard  ?  It  gives  us  the 
reason  why  so  few  men  are  effectually  wrought  upon  by  the  means  of  grace, 
why  so  few  are  converted.  'Tis  more  wonder  to  see  any  to  yield  and  turn  to 
God.  'Tis  easier  to  get  oil  out  of  a  flint  than  a  good  thought  out  of  a  stony 
heart.  2.  Is  the  heart  of  man  so  overgrown  with  hardness  ?  It  shows  the 
reason  why  the  work  of  conversion,  even  where  'tis  begun,  goes  so  slowly 
forward,  why  such  small  progress  is  made  in  the  work  of  grace.  Engravers 
upon  stone  cannot  rid  much  work :  they  that  point  and  polish  diamonds  use 
much  grinding  to  wear  away  a  little  unevenness.  The  heart  of  man,  'tis  like 
metal,  not  melted  but  with  much  fire  and  heat ;  and  take  it  off  the  fire,  it  will 
soon  harden  of  itself.  Grace  in  the  heart,  'tis  not  like  heat  in  the  fire,  but 
like  heat  in  the  water :  as  long  as  there  is  fire  under  it,  so  long  it  retains  heat ; 
but  take  it  off  the  fire,  it  will  soon  grow  cold  again.  3.  Is  every  man's  heart 
overgrown  with  this  callous  obduration  ?  (1)  Take  heed  of  increasing  it. 
(i)  Be  careful  to  avoid  and  abstain  even  from  small  sins ;  they  may  make  up 
this  evil  of  obduration.  (ii)  Especially  be  careful  not  to  fall  into  more  gross 
and  notorious  sins ;  they  have  a  special  force  to  harden  the  heart.  Such  sins 
waste  the  conscience,  make  havoc  of  grace,  sear  the  conscience  with  a  hot 
iron,  (iii)  Wouldst  thou  not  increase  this  hardness  of  heart  ?  Above  all  take 
heed   of   sinning  against  the  light   and   evidence  and   dictates  of  conscience, 

94 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   III. 


(2)  Use  all  good  means  to  remove  it,  and  to  get  tender  and  feeling  and 
softened  hearts,  (i)  Complain  to  God,  as  to  the  Great  Physician  of  thy  soul, 
who  alone  is  able  to  cure  this  malady,  (ii)  Then  lay  thine  heart  under  the 
dint  and  stroke  of  the  Word.  That  Word,  enlivened  by  His  Spirit,  is  a  mighty 
instrument  to  bruise  and  soften  and  mollify  the  heart  (Jer.  xxiii.  29). 
(iii)  The  daily  practice  of  repentance  is  of  great  force  to  soften  our  hearts.  A 
mournful  heart  will  prove  a  mollified  heart.  There  be  two  names  given  to 
repentance,  which  show  the  virtue  of  it  to  work  upon  the  heart,  (a)  Com- 
punction, that  enters  indeed,  and  goes  to  the  quick,  (b)  Contrition,  that 
bruises  and  breaks  the  hardness  of  heart,  and  makes  capable  of  any  good 
impression.  A  daily  dropping  upon  a  hard  stone  will  pierce  into  it  and  wear 
it  away :  and  so  the  daily  distillations  of  penitential  tears  are  of  great  force 
to  wear  away  this  spiritual  hardness  of  an  obdurate  heart. — Bishop  Brownrigg. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Yers.  1-3.  The  hand  was  made  for 
work,  but  there  are  many  withered 
hands  in  society.  A  celebrated  German 
economist  divides  industrial  history 
into  three  periods.  In  the  first,  nature 
was  chiefly  productive ;  in  the  second, 
human  toil ;  in  the  third,  capital. 
Inventions  have  changed  the  hand's 
labour  ;  there  has  been  a  withering  of 
the  hand  before  the  onward  march  of 
inventive  genius.  The  hand  is  still 
required  to  guide  the  machine,  but 
there  are  many  who  consider  toil  a 
disgrace.  Fathers  once  humble  in  life, 
but  now  rich,  make  the  mistake  of  not 
training  their  children  in  the  same 
industrial  habits  of  life,  and  in  a  spirit 
of  self-reliance.  Children  of  the  rich 
scorn  toil  by  reason  of  their  inherit- 
ance ;  while  the  poor,  through  envy 
of  the  rich,  lose  consciousness  of  the 
inherent  dignity  of  labour.  Unto  all 
such  Christ  says,  "  Stretch  forth  thy 
hand."  "  Six  days  shalt  thou  labour," 
etc. — A.  C.  Ludlow. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ's  detection  of 
human  incompleteness.  He  instantly 
discovered  that  there  was  a  man  in 
the  synagogue  with  a  withered  hand. 
The  musician  instantly  detects  a  false 
note ;  the  painter  instantly  detects  an 
inartistic  line ;  the  complete  Christ 
instantly  detects  the  incomplete  man. 
2.  Jesus  Christ's  power  over  partial 
disease.  The  man  had  only  a 
withered  hand.  In  some  cases  Christ 
had  to  heal  thoroughly  diseased  men; 


in  this  case  the  disease  was  local ;  yet 
in  both  instances  His  power  was  the 
same. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Yer.  1.  Power  of  usefulness  de- 
stroyed.— This  man's  disease  was  not 
like  the  palsy,  a  type  of  universal 
inaction ;  nor  like  some  consuming 
fever,  a  type  of  the  way  in  which  sin 
and  vice  pervert  all  the  faculties  of 
the  soul ;  but  there  was  a  vivid  picture 
of  that  infirmity  which  destroys  a 
man's  power  of  doing  anything  well. 
The  hand  of  man  is  one  of  those  noble 
physical  features  which  distinguish 
him  from  the  brute.  "The  hand"  is 
but  another  name  for  human  skill, 
power,  and  usefulness,  and  for  the 
studied  adaptation  of  means  to  ends. 
1.  The  bigotry  of  these  Pharisees 
rendered  them  useless  in  the  great 
kingdom  of  God,  and  destroyed  their 
power  of  serving  Christ.  2.  Prejudices 
wither  up  some  of  the  energies  of  men. 
3.  Past  inconsistencies  often  wither 
up  the  power  of  service.  4.  Easily  be- 
setting sins  will  paralyse  the  usefulness 
of  any  man  who  does  not  earnestly  wage 
war  against  them. — H.  R.  Reynolds. 

Withered  hearts  and  hands. — If  there 
were  no  withered  hearts,  there  would 
be  no  withered  hands ;  make  the 
fountain  clear,  and  the  stream  will  be 
pure.  A  miser,  an  unfruitful  Christian, 
a  negligent  ruler,  a  strong  man  who 
will  not  help  in  any  good  work — these 
are  all  mere  withered  hands. 

95 


CHAP.   III. 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  2.  Hollow  profession. — Where 
religion  has  become  a  body  of  maxims 
and  doctrines,  without  life  or  warmth 
or  motion — where  it  is  traditional 
observance  handed  down  from  father 
to  son,  "  devotion's  every  grace,  except 
the  heart" — where  it  is  all  intellect 
and  no  affection,  all  logic  without  love 
— its  professors  are  always  strict  to 
"  mark  iniquities,"  and  mere  trivial 
breaches  of  religious  etiquette  may 
reap  worse  punishment  than  gross 
sins. — G.  Walker. 

Ver.  5.  Lessons. — 1.  It  is  the  duty 
of  a  Christian  to  sorrow  not  only  for 
his  own  sins,  but  also  to  be  grieved  for 
the  sins  of  others.  2.  All  anger  is  not 
to  be  considered  sinful.  3.  He  does 
not  bear  the  image  of  Christ,  but 
rather  that  of  Satan,  who  can  either 
behold  with  indifference  the  wickedness 
of  others,  or  rejoice  in  it.  4.  Nothing 
is  more  wretched  than  an  obdurate 
heart,  since  it  caused  Him  who  is  the 
source  of  all  true  joy  to  be  filled  with 
grief  in  beholding  it.  5.  Our  indig- 
nation against  wickedness  must  be 
tempered  by  compassion  for  the  persons 
of  the  wicked. — T.  H.  Home. 

Christ s  look. — In  that  look  there 
were  two  things — there  were  anger 
and  grief,  indignation  and  inward 
sorrow.  His  was  not  anger  which 
desired  evil  to  its  object ;  no  touch 
of  malevolence  was  in  it :  it  was 
simply  love  on  fire,  love  burning  with 
indignation  against  that  which  is  un- 
lovely. Mingled  with  this  anger  there 
was  grief.  He  was  heart-broken  be- 
cause their  hearts  were  so  hard.  As 
Manton  puts  it,  aHe  was  softened 
because  of  their  hardness."  His  was 
not  the  pitiless  flame  of  wrath  which 
burns  in  a  dry  eye ;  He  had  tears 
as  well  as  anger.  His  thunder-storm 
brought  a  shower  of  pity  with  it. 

The  only  legitimate  anger  is  a  holy 
emotion  directed  against  an  unholy 
thing.  Sin,  not  our  neighbour,  must 
be  its  object ;  zeal  for  righteousness, 
not  our  pride,  must  be  its  distin- 
guishing character. — Dr.   Arnot. 

Christ's  feelings. — Everything    that 

96 


He  touched  burned  that  pure  nature, 
which  was  sensitive  to  evil  like  an 
infant's  hand  to  hot  iron.  His  sorrow 
and  His  anger  were  the  two  sides  of 
the  medal.  His  feelings  on  looking 
on  sin  were  like  a  piece  of  woven 
stuff  with  a  pattern  on  either  side  : 
on  one  the  fiery  threads — the  wrath ; 
on  the  other  the  silvery  tints  of 
sympathetic  pity.  A  warp  of  wrath, 
a  woof  of  sorrow,  and  a  dew  of  flame 
married  and  knit  together. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

What  was  hardening  their  hearts  ? — 
It  was  He !  Why  were  their  hearts 
being  hardened  ?  Because  they  were 
looking  at  Him,  His  graciousness,  His 
goodness,  and  His  power,  and  were 
steeling  themselves  against  Him,  oppos- 
ing to  His  grace  and  tenderness  their 
obstinate  determination.  Some  little 
gleams  of  light  were  coming  into  their 
houses,  and  they  clapped  the  shutters 
up.  Some  tones  of  His  voice  were 
coming  into  their  ears,  and  they  stuffed 
their  fingers  into  them.  They  half  felt 
that  if  they  let  themselves  be  influenced 
by  Him  it  was  all  over,  and  so  they 
set  their  teeth  and  steadied  themselves 
in  their  antagonism. — Ibid. 

Health  by  obedience. — The  way  of 
health  lay  in  obedience.  Had  the 
man  said,  "  No,  I  cannot  " — had  he  de- 
bated, argued,  "  My  arm  is  withered  " 
— surely  the  power  of  Christ  had  been 
restrained  and  the  man  had  gone  to 
his  grave  a  cripple.  Christ  speaks 
to  us.  He  tells  us  to  do  what  seems 
impossible — to  repent,  believe,  love, 
pray,  trust.  If  we  will  be  saved, 
if  we  will  have  soul-health,  it  must 
come  to  us  in  the  way  of  obedience. — 
G.  Walker. 

As  we  vjork  God  works. — If  we 
pass  the  clear  fight  of  day  through 
a  prism,  we  get  many  coloured 
rays.  Our  scientific  men  tell  us  that 
these  rays  have  different  properties. 
Some  carry  more  heat  than  others ; 
some  are  full  of  chemical  force,  and 
others  have  special  electric  properties. 
Now  if  a  man  should  say,  "  I  will 
glaze  my  conservatory  with  different 
coloured  glass  ;  one  compartment  shall 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   III. 


be  red,  another  green,  another  blue, 
and  so  on  ;  and  I  will  pass  my  plants 
from  one  compartment  to  another,  and 
play  experiments  upon  them ;  and 
I  will  take  the  arrangement  of  light 
and  shade  into  my  own  hands," — you 
may  imagine  the  result.  He  would 
make  good  scientific  experiments,  but 
he  would  have  poor  success  as  a  gar- 
dener. He  would  not  get  flower  or 
fruit  in  perfection.  The  "Light  of 
Men "  is  full-orbed  and  many-rayed. 
To  the  healthy  soul  His  light  appears 
clear  as  the  daylight.  I  fear  we  have 
sometimes  too  much  spectral  analysis 
in  our  heavenly  things.  We  seek  for 
sharp  lines  of  demarcation.  So  one 
man  will  like  the  faith -producing  ray, 
another  the  work-power,  another  the 
hope-power,  another  the  will- producing 
influence.  We  seem  to  think,  if  we 
could  but  tinker  up  and  amend  the 
weak  parts  of  our  nature  we  might 
be  saved.  These  works  of  mercy, 
these  acted  parables,  all  bring  home 
to  the  heart  one  great  truth,  clear 
and  pure  as  daylight.  They  present 
differences,  but,  amid  all  the  difference, 
the  one  truth.  They  are  full  of  the 
entire  appeal  of  Jesus  Christ  to  men. 
No  matter  what  be  our  complaint,  or 
special  weakness,  or  sin ;  if  all  be 
diseased,  be  it  ours  to  take  Him  in 
full  reliance  on  His  power  and  will- 
ingness to  heal. — Ibid. 

Instant  action. — All  that  saved  this 
man  was  that  he  did  not  stop  to 
think.  He  proceeded  as  though  there 
were  no  difficulties,  and  forthwith  for 
him  there  were  none.  All  Christ's 
commands  to  unconverted  men  are  in 
the  present  tense,  which  means  that 
the  command  is  issued  without  any 
allowance  of  time  for  comprehending 
the  mysteries  of  salvation  or  for  ac- 
quiring power  to  become  a  saved  man. 
It  is  simply  levelled  to  the  range  of 
the  instant ;  not  because  thought  is 
not    advantageous    in    some    circum- 


stances, but  because  it  is  not  in  point 
here.  Giving  ourselves  to  Christ  is 
not  a  matter  of  understanding  what  we 
are  doing,  but  a  matter  of  doing  some- 
thing, as  when  you  tell  your  boy  to 
raise  his  hand  ;  he  does  not  know  how 
he  raises  his  hand,  and  you  know  no 
more  about  it  than  he  as  regards  the 
physiological  intricacies  of  the  act. 
And  if  he  were  to  decline  raising  it 
until  he  understood  the  matter,  you 
would  tell  him  to  do  it  first  and  under- 
stand at  his  leisure ;  your  command 
was  aimed  at  his  will,  and  his  resort  to 
the  intricacies  of  physiology  only  a  side 
issue  raised  to  divert  your  attention 
from  his  insubordination.  God's  com- 
mands stand  out  of  all  relation  to  human 
power  to  grasp  the  problems;  moral  or 
theological,  associated  with  obedience 
to  those  commands.  God's  commands 
are  like  the  pole-star,  which  with 
swift  intuition  finds  out  the  magnetic 
needle  as  easily  by  night-light  as  by 
daylight,  and  beats  upon  it  with  relent- 
less compulsion  equally  in  the  darkness 
and  the  sunshine.  They  are  not  a 
question  of  can,  but  of  will ;  and  with 
the  will  once  trembling  obediently  on 
the  verge  of  action,  all  needed  resource 
of  power  is  at  its  instant  service. — 
C.  H.  Parhhurst,  D.D. 

Ver.  6.  The  working  of  three  deter- 
mined and  most  mischievous  powers. — 
1.  The  power  of  prejudice.  2.  The 
power  of  technicality.  3.  The  power 
of  ignorance.  Prejudice  as  against 
Christ :  technicality  as  opposed  to 
humanity :  ignorance  as  forgetful  of 
the  fact  that  in  morals  as  well  as  in 
physics  the  greater  includes  the  less. 
Sabbath-keeping  is  less  than  man- 
healing. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

The  madness  of  enmity. — 1.  It  thinks 
that  it  can  destroy  Jesus.  2.  It  does 
not  see  how  deeply  it  condemns  itself. 
— J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D. 


97 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—12. 

(Parallel  :  Matt.  xii.  15-21.) 

Christ  and  His  disciples. — While  Pharisees  and  Herodians  are  hatching  their 
plots  against  Him  in  Capernaum  or  the  neighbouring  Sepphoris,  Jesus  with- 
draws with  His  disciples  to  the  purer  atmosphere  on  the  borders  of  the  Galilean 
Lake.  "  It  is  His  first  retreat  before  opposition ;  and  careful  readers  of  the 
Gospels  must  observe  that  whenever  the  pressure  of  His  enemies  became 
extreme,  He  turned  for  safety  to  the  simple  fishermen,  among  whom  they  had 
no  party,  since  they  had  preached  no  gospel  to  the  poor,  and  that  He  was 
frequently  conveyed  by  water  from  point  to  point,  easily  reached  by  followers, 
who  sometimes  indeed  outran  Him  upon  foot,  but  where  treason  had  to  begin 
its  wiles  afresh." 

I.  The  popularity  of  Jesus. — 1.  Though  rejected  by  the  leaders  both  in 
Church  and  State,  people  flock  to  Him  from  all  quarters  :  from  North  ("  Tyre 
and  Sidon"),  South  ("  Judea,"  "Jerusalem,"  "  Idumea "),  East  ("beyond 
Jordan"),  and  West  ("  Galilee").  "  Even  the  Gentiles  were  beginning  to  rejoice 
in  Him.  In  this  following  multitude  we  see  a  prophecy  of  the  great  truth  that 
He  should  draw  all  men  unto  Him.  There  is  that  about  Jesus  which  compels 
attention,  and  causes  men  to  seek  after  Him.  He  is  the  real  magnet  of  men." 
2.  The  motives  of  those  who  followed  Him  were  doubtless  very  mixed.  Many 
came  out  of  sheer  curiosity  to  witness  His  miracles  ;  others  were  attracted 
by  self-interest,  hoping  that  they  or  their  friends  would  participate  in  the 
blessings  flowing  from  Him  ;  but  some  few,  we  may  hope,  were  drawn  by 
higher  considerations — because  His  teaching  had  found  an  echo  in  their  hearts, 
and  they  thirsted  for  deeper  draughts  of  the  water  of  life. 

II.  The  adaptability  of  Jesus. — He  is  equally  at  home  everywhere,  and 
never  at  a  loss  for  expedients  to  meet  exceptional  circumstances.  It  is  all  onQ 
to  Him  whether  He  preaches  from  a  ship  or  in  the  synagogue,  so  long  as  the 
great  work  of  His  ministry  is  not  retarded.  It  would  have  been  better  for  the 
Church  in  days  not  long  gone  by  if  she  had  shown  more  elasticity  and  adapt- 
ability to  the  needs  of  the  times,  if  she  had  striven  rather  for  unity  of  faith  than 
for  uniformity  of  practice. 

III.  Demoniac  testimony  refused  by  Jesus. — 1.  He  would  not  have  men 
believe  on  Him  on  the  testimony  of  evil  spirits,  but  on  that  of  God  in  Scripture, 
by  His  own  words  and  works,  and  by  the  Spirit  revealing  this  knowledge  from 
the  Father  (Matt.  xvi.  17  ;  John  xiv.  11).  2.  The  time  had  not  yet  come  for 
a  full  revelation  of  Himself,  even  to  His  most  intimate  friends.  Nothing  is 
more  noticeable  in  our  Lord's  teaching  than  that  Divine  reserve  by  which  the 
truth  is  kept  in  abeyance  until  men  are  ready  to  receive  it.  "  This  action  of 
His  may  teach  His  followers  to  be  discreet.  Falsehood  indeed  is  always  evil, 
but  at  times  reticence  is  a  duty,  because  certain  truths  are  a  medicine  too 
powerful  for  some  stages  of  spiritual  disease.  The  strong  sun  which  ripens  the 
grain  in  autumn  would  burn  up  the  tender  germs  of  spring." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christian  effort,  if  rejected  by  some,  will  find  acceptance  from 
others.  2.  No  service,  however  trivial,  is  disdained  by  Christ,  if  the  heart  be 
pure.  3.  How  sad  that,  while  unclean  spirits  acknowledge  the  supremacy  of 
Christ,  men  deny  and  blaspheme  His  name. 


98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  in. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  7.  Jesus  did  not  court  martyr-  now  that  He  is  removed  from  the 
dom. — He  had  one  great  purpose  in  earth  to  heaven,  He  is  where  we  may- 
view,  and  He  faced  His  enemies  or  all  see  Him  by  faith,  even  from  the 
withdrew  from  them,  according  as  He  ends  of  the  earth,  and  "  His  word  is 
could  best  accomplish  His  work.  He  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth  and  in 
was  not  afraid  to  go  away,  nor  afraid  thy  heart,"  and  all  who  hear  His  words 
to  remain  if  need  be.  In  many  cases  and  believe  on  Him  are  saved.  In  fact, 
it  is  better  quietly  to  withdraw  from  just  as  Jesus  was  practically  nearer  to 
a  hostile  crowd,  and  do  one's  work  the  multitude,  both  for  sight  and  hear- 
elsewhere. — F.  N.  Peloubet,  D.D.  ing,  in  that  little  boat  than  on  land, 

so  He  is  nearer  to  us  now  than  if  He 

Ver.    8.    Crowds  are  not  proofs  but  had   remained   on   earth — as   near   to, 

means   of  success. — The   fame   of   the  the  man  in  China,  in  India,  or  Africa 

teaching   and   the    miracles   of   Jesus  as    to   us;    and    "all   who    call   upon 

brought  great  multitudes  within  reach  Him "   are   heard   and   saved. — G.   F. 

of  His  influence.     He  could  not  go  to  Pentecost,  D.D. 
them  all,  but  they  could  come  to  Him. 

There  is  a  legitimate  popularity  from  Ver.   10.    These    miracles — 1.   Illus- 

earnest  words  and  noble  deeds. — Ibid,  trate  and  express  in  visible,  tangible 

How    did    Christ    exercise    His  in-  forms  the  lovingkindness  of  God,  His 

fluence    over    great    throngs  ? — 1.    He  goodwill  toward   men,  His   desire  for 

never  lowered  the  moral  tone  of  His  their  happiness,  and  His  care  to  make 

teaching.     2.   He  was  never  unequal  them   free   from   every   evil.     2.   The 

to  the  increasing  demands  made  upon  blessed  effects  of  Christ's  mission  proved 

His   power.      3.  He   never   requested  it  to  be   Divine.     And  to-day,  as  in 

the   multitude   to   help    Him   in   any  those   days,    the    convincing  proof   of 

selfish  endeavours. — J.  Parker,  D.D.  Christianity  is  found  in  its  beneficent 

Power  of  the  gospel. — 1.  No  subject  effects.      It   makes    everybody   better 

can    draw   such   great   multitudes    as  who  accepts  it.    The  drunkard  becomes 

the    gospel.      2.   No   subject    can    so  sober,  the  selfish  becomes  generous,  the 

deeply  affect  great  multitudes   as   the  vile  becomes  pure.      Schools,  colleges, 

gospel.       3.    No   subject   can   so   pro-  education,  hospitals,  missions,  all  forms 

foundly     and     lastingly     bless     great  of    benevolence,   spring    up    wherever 

multitudes  as  the  gospel. — Ibid.  Christ  is  believed.     Wherever  there  is 

the  most  Christianity,  there  is  the  most 

"Ver.  9.  Christ  nearer  by  removal. —  of  all  the   things  that  raise  and  bless 

This  putting  off  from  the  shore  and  men.     The   map   of  the  world  is  the 

separating    Himself    from   the   crowd  proof  of  the  Christian  religion.   3.  They 

suggests  to  us  a  larger  fact  in  the  life  manifest   the   power   and   presence  of 

of  Jesus.       He   has   gone  away  from  God  in  nature,  and  in  His  daily  provi- 

the  earth  now  to  heaven,  but  He  did  dence.     Wherever  any  one  act  shews 

so  that  He  might  the  better  save  us.  God's   presence,   He  is  wholly  present 

We  know  that  in  a  vast  throng  only  with  all  His  power  and  all  His  love. — 

a  few  could  even  see  Him,  much  less  F.  N.  Peloubet,  D.D. 
get   at   Him  to  touch   Him.      So  we 

cannot   help  thinking   how   disadvan-  Vers.    11,    12.   The  testimony  of  the 

tageous  it  would  be  for  us  had  Jesus  demons. — The    publication    of    Jesus' 

remained  on  the  earth.     How  many  of  real   character   and  office  by  demons' 

the  poor,  plague-stricken  men  of  earth  lips  was  only  an  act  of  spite.     Their 

could  have  gone  to  Him,  or  rather  how  intention  was  to  force  on  the  antagonism 

few  could  have   gone  to   Him !     But  between    truth    and    error,    between 

99 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


holiness  and  sin,  and   prematurely  to  has  discovered  a  more  excellent  way. 

bring  this  Divine  history  to  a  tragic  The    will    which    Divine    power    has 

close.      Therefore   Jesus   declined  this  created,    Divine    power    can    destroy, 

testimony.   By  the  force  of  His  mighty  Better  that  Christ  should  not  be  made 

will   He  silenced    these    evil    spirits ;  known  than  that  He  should  be  made 

and  hereby  He  demonstrates  that   it  known  by  unclean  spirits.     To   be   a 

is   possible    to    crush    all    hostility —  true  servant   or  preacher  of  Christ  I 

human   or    Satanic — by   the    exercise  must  be  clean. — J.  D.  Davies, 
of  superior  power.     But  His  wisdom 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—19. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  x.  1-8  ;  Luke  vi.  12-16.) 

Choice  and  commission  of  the  twelve. — It  is  recorded  of  Israel's  first  king, 
while  still  in  the  zenith  of  his  royal  estate,  that  when  he  saw  any  strong  man 
or  any  valiant  man  he  took  him  unto  himself,  and  thus  recruited  the  ranks  of 
the  Lord's  host  (1  Sam.  xiv.  52).  So  here  does  the  true  King  of  Israel  and  of 
all  men  call  to  Himself  twelve  choice  spirits — the  best  material  to  be  found  in 
His  band  of  followers — in  order  that  they  may  be  trained  under  His  personal 
supervision  in  the  true  principles  of  spiritual  warfare,  and  form  the  nucleus  of 
the  heavenly  kingdom  which  He  has  come  to  set  up  on  earth.  "  The  appoint- 
ment of  the  twelve  apostles  was  in  an  especial  sense  an  act  which  marked  the 
inauguration  of  that  kingdom,  an  act  by  which  our  Lord  represented  the 
assumption  of  the  powers  which  belonged  to  Him  as  the  true  Sovereign  of 
the  theocracy,  for  which  all  the  institutions  of  Judaism  were  understood  by 
the  people  of  Israel  themselves  to  have  been  but  preparatory."  As  at  other 
critical  times  in  His  ministry,  so  now,  the  Pattern  Man  consecrates  Himself 
to  this  great  work  by  prayer  (Luke  v.  12).  He  also  directs  the  whole  body 
of  the  disciples  to  pray  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest  that  He  would  send  forth 
labourers  into  His  harvest  (Matt.  ix.  38) ;  and  ever  since,  from  the  ordination 
of  Matthias  to  the  present  time,  the  Church  has  sought  the  special  guidance  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  by  prayer  and  fasting,  before  proceeding  to  the  laying  on 
of  hands. 

I.  The  choice  of  the  twelve. — The  ministry  in  the  apostles  derived  its  origin 
and  commission,  not  from  the  Church  or  from  the  people,  but  from  Christ. 
It  was  in  the  power  of  Christ  to  have  called  all  His  people  together,  and  bid 
them  choose  their  future  rulers  from  amongst  themselves  ;  but  He  did  not  do 
so — they  were  chosen  by  Christ  alone,  who  Himself  designated  them,  and 
afterwards  breathed  upon  them  when  He  ordained  them  with  full  apostolic 
power.  And  when  it  pleased  Christ  to  raise  up  two  other  apostles,  it  was  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  saying,  "Separate  Me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work 
whereunto  I  have  called  them " ;  and  the  latter  expressly  disclaims  any 
commission  from  the  people  (Gal.  i.  1). 

II.  The  men  chosen. — 1.  The  most  noticeable  thing  is  the  disproportion 
between  their  natural  abilities  and  the  work  they  were  set  to  do.  All  other 
great  leaders  of  thought  have  striven  first  to  secure  the  adherence  of  men 
"  whose  vigorous  character  or  commanding  position  would  give  them  a  certain 
influence  over  the  men  of  their  time."  It  was  not  so  with  Christ.  "The 
channels  through  which  His  influence  was  to  be  conveyed  were  such  as  could 
contribute  nought  to  its  fulness  ;  the  fibres  along  which  the  electric  current 
of  His  own  impulsive  energy  was  to  run  were  to  be  simply  passive  in  the 
transmission."     Passing  by  the  courtier  and  the  soldier,  the  noble  and  the  sage, 

100 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  CHAP.  III. 


He  selected  His  first  ministers  from  classes  not  indeed  oppressed  by  want,  but 
lowly  and  unsophisticated  and  of  little  account  in  the  world's  eyes.  2.  Yet 
among  the  twelve,  all  drawn  from  the  lower  ranks  of  society,  there  was 
evidently  great  diversity  of  character.  Each  was  a  man  of  marked  individuality. 
Notes  on  their  personal  characteristics  will  be  found  in  the  Outlines  and 
Comments  on  the  Yerses. 

III.  Their  commission. — 1.  "That  they  should  be  with  Him" — observing 
His  demeanour,  and  His  manner  of  conveying  instruction  both  by  word  and 
act ;  treasuring  up  in  their  minds  the  heavenly  principles  by  which  He  was 
ever  actuated  ;  drinking  in,  little  by  little,  some  portion  of  the  Divine  Spirit 
which  was  given  to  Him  without  measure.  2.  "  That  He  might  send  them 
forth  to  preach  " — to  proclaim  to  all,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  the  glad 
tidings  of  salvation  through  faith  in  Him.  3.  "  To  have  power  to  heal 
sicknesses,  and  to  cast  out  demons  " — thus  carrying  on  the  war  begun  by  Him 
against  the  devil  and  all  his  works,  a  war  in  which  "  there  is  no  discharge  "  until 
the  kingdom  of  darkness  is  utterly  destroyed,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  and  of 
His  Christ  is  universally  established  in  its  place. 

Ver.  14.  Unrecorded  workers  and  heroes. — Half  of  these  twelve  are  never  heard 
of  again  as  doing  any  work  for  Christ. 

I.  This  peculiar  and  unexpected  silence  suggests  the  true  worker  in  the 
Church's  progress — not  man,  but  Christ. — Men  are  nothing  except  as  instru- 
ments and  organs  of  God.  He  is  all.  1.  How  this  should  deliver  us  from  all 
over-estimate  of  men,  to  which  our  human  affections  and  our  feeble  faith  tempt 
us  so  sorely !  2.  What  confidence  it  ought  to  give  us  as  we  think  of  the  tasks 
and  fortunes  of  the  Church !  One  man  with  Christ  to  back  him  is  always  in 
the  majority. 

II.  This  silence  of  Scripture  as  to  so  many  of  the  apostles  may  be  taken 
as  suggesting  what  the  real  work  of  these  delegated  workers  was. — The  one 
thing  that  must  be  found  in  an  apostle  was  that  he  should  have  been  in  familiar 
intercourse  with  Christ  during  His  earthly  life,  both  before  and  after  His 
resurrection,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to  say,  "  I  knew  Him  well ;  I  know 
that  He  died ;  I  know  that  He  rose  again ;  I  saw  Him  go  up  to  heaven."  For 
such  a  work  there  was  no  need  for  men  of  commanding  power.  Plain,  simple, 
honest  men  who  had  the  requisite  eyewitness  were  sufficient.  The  sharpest 
weapon  which  any  can  wield  for  Christ  is  the  simple  adducing  of  his  own 
personal  experience.  Christ  is  the  true  worker,  and  all  our  work  is  but  to 
proclaim  Him,  and  what  He  has  done  and  is  doing  for  ourselves  and  for  all  men. 

III.  We  may  gather  the  lesson  of  how  often  faithful  work  is  unrecorded  and 
forgotten. — 1.  For  most  of  us,  our  service  has  to  be  unnoticed  and  unknown. 
The  earnestness  and  the  accuracy  with  which  we  strike  our  blow  are  all  im- 
portant ;  but  it  matters  nothing  how  far  it  echoes.  2.  The  magnitude  of  our 
work  in  men's  eyes  is  as  little  important  as  the  noise  of  it.  Were  the  Peters  and 
the  Johns  more  highly  favoured  than  the  others  ?  Was  their  work  greater  in 
His  sight  ?  Not  so.  To  Him  all  service  done  from  the  same  motive  is  the  same, 
and  His  measure  of  excellence  is  quantity  of  love  and  spiritual  force  in  our 
deeds,  not  the  width  of  the  area  over  which  they  spread.  3.  All  service  done 
for  the  same  motive  in  the  same  force  is  of  the  same  worth  in  His  eyes.  "  Small 
service  is  true  service  while  it  lasts." 

IV.  Forgotten  work  is  remembered,  and  unrecorded  names  are  recorded 
above. — 1.  The  forgotten  work  and  workers  are  remembered  by  Christ.  2.  The 
forgotten  and  unrecorded  work  lives,  too,  in  the  great  whole.  The  fruit  of  our 
labour  may  perhaps  not  be  separable  from  that  of  others,  any  more  than  the 
sowers  can  go  into  the  reaped  harvest-field  and  identify  the  gathered  ears  which 

101 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


have  sprung  from  the  seed  that  they  sowed,  but  it  is  there  all  the  same ;  and 
whosoever  may  be  unable  to  pick  out  each  man's  share  in  the  blessed  total 
outcome,  the  Lord  of  the  Harvest  knows,  and  His  accurate  proportionment  of 
individual  reward  to  individual  service  will  not  mar  the  companionship  in  the 
general  gladness,  when  "he  that  soweth  and  he  that  reapeth  shall  rejoice 
together."  3.  The  forgotten  work  will  live,  too,  in  the  blessed  results  to  the 
doers.  Habits  are  formed,  emotions  deepened,  principles  confirmed,  capacities 
enlarged,  by  every  deed  done  for  Christ,  which  make  an  over-measure  of  reward 
here,  and  in  their  perfect  form  hereafter  are  heaven.  Nothing  done  for  Him 
is  ever  wasted.     "  Thou  shalt  find  it  after  many  days." — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  13,  14.   Christ's  call  and  man's  made.      The    whole    transaction    lies 

response. — I.   Christ's    call   here    is —  between  the  plant  and  the  rich  earth 

1.  Addressed  to  those  whom  He  has  that  feeds  it  through  its  open  roots, 

already   tested.     2.  A   call   to  higher  All  is  silent,  private,  restricted.     But 

service     and     heavier     responsibility.  some  day  the  world  looks,  and,  lo  !  the 

Hitherto   they    have    been    learners ;  process   has   burst   open.      Upon   the 

henceforth  they  are  to  be  teachers  and  long -fed  plant  is  burning  a  gorgeous 

healers  as  well.  flower  for  the  world  to  see.     The  earth 

II.  Those  called   responded — 1.  Of  has  sent  its  richness  through  the  plant 

their  own   free  will.     The   only   con-  to  enlighten  and  to  bless  the  world, 

straint    Christ    ever    uses    is   that   of  The  disciple  has  turned  to  an  apostle, 

love.     2.  Promptly.     They  answer  to  2.  Notice,  when  Jesus  took  this  great 

their  names  like  soldiers  at  roll-call —  step  forward,  He  did  not  leave  behind 

only  waiting  for  orders — ready  to  do  His  old  life  with    His  disciples.     He 

or  die.     3.  Openly.    Secret  discipleship,  chose  out  of  the  number  of  His  disciples 

besides    being    cowardly    and    mean,  twelve,  whom  also  He  named  apostles, 

thwarts  the  very  object  Christ  has  in  They  were  to  be  disciples  still.     They 

view — which  is,  the  transformation  of  did  not  cease  to  be  learners  when  He 

mere  followers  into  apostles,  the  con-  made  them   missionaries.      The  plant 

version  of  the  world  by  the  instrument-  does   not   cease   to   feed  itself  out   of 

ality  of  men.  the  ground  when  it  opens  its  glorious 

Apostleship  from  discipleship. — Out  flowers  for  the  world  to  see.  All  the 
of  the  heart  of  the  discipleship  came  the  more  it  needs  supply,  now  that  it  has 
apostleship.  1 .  Disciple  means  learner,  fulfilled  its  life.  And  so  this  great 
The  idea  rests  entirely  between  two  epoch  in  the  Christian  Church  was 
persons,  the  teacher  and  the  scholar.  an  addition,  not  a  substitution.  3.  It 
It  involves  nothing  but  the  receiving  of  is  out  of  the  very  heart  of  the  disciple- 
knowledge  by  some  one  docile  mind.  ship  that  the  apostleship  proceeds.  It 
But  apostle  means  missionary.  Its  idea  is  the  very  best,  the  choicest,  as  we 
is  utterance  or  sending  forth.  What  say,  of  the  disciples  that  are  chosen 
the  disciple  has  drunk  into  his  own  satis-  to  be  apostles.  Always  it  is  the  best 
fied  soul,  the  apostle  is  to  carry  abroad,  of  the  inward  life  of  anything,  that 
wherever  there  are  men  to  hear  it.  which  lies  the  closest  to  its  heart  and 
When,  then,  Jesus  turned  His  disciples  is  the  fullest  of  its  spirit,  which  flowers 
into  apostles,  you  see  what  an  event  it  into  the  outward  impulse  which  comes 
was.  It  was  really  the  flowering  of  to  complete  its  life.  It  is  the  most 
that  gospel  which  He  had  been  pouring  truly  thorough  learning  which  by-and- 
into  them  through  all  their  disciple-  by  begins  to  be  dissatisfied  with  its 
ship.  The  plant  fills  itself  with  the  own  learned  luxury,  and  to  desire  that 
richness  of  the  earth.  No  noise  is  all  men  should  have  the  chance  of 
102 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  in. 


knowledge.     It  is  the  most  true  refine-  of  our  Church  ?     Of  all  human  quali- 

ment  that  believes  in  the  possible  re-  fications    for    a    missionary's    Divine 

finement   even   of    the   coarsest  man.  work,  I  should  say  that  the  knowledge 

The  heart  of  any  good  thing  is  catholic  of  medicine  was  the  most  likely,  under 

and  expansive.     It  longs  to  give  itself  God's  blessing,  to  prove  useful  "  to  the 

away,  and  believes  in  the  capacity  of  furtherance  of  that  gospel"  which  is 

all  men  to  receive  it. — Bishop  Phillips  the  healing  of  men's  souls  (Col.  iv.  14  ; 

Brooks.  2  Cor.  viii.  18). — J.  Ford. 

Vers.  14,  15.  Christian  privilege  and  Vers.  16-19.  The  apostles. — 1.  Points 

power. — I.  The  Christian's  privilege —  in    which    the    apostles    were    alike. 

1.    To   preach,   filling    Christ's    place,  (1)  Social  position :  neither  very  poor 

doing  Christ's  work,   obeying  Christ's  nor    very   rich.       Wealth,    rank,   high 

word.     2.  The  subject  of  this  preach-  worldly  position,  are  not  necessary  in 

ing.     Proclaiming  the  advent  of  God's  order   to   employment   and   usefulness 

kingdom  on  earth.  in  the  cause  of  God ;  and  vice  versd. 

II.  The  Christian's  power— 1.  In  the  (2)  Mental  attainments :  neither  very 
manifestation  of  Christian  sympathy  learned  nor  very  ignorant.  Scholar- 
for  the  afflicted.  2.  In  the  uplifting  of  ship,  the  very  highest,  may  be  con- 
earnest  prayer  and  supplication  for  the  secrated  to  the  service  of  Christ ;  but 
souls  of  men.  3.  In  the  possession  and  is  not  indispensable  to  Christian 
disposal  of  his  substance  to  compass  usefulness.  (3)  Religious  characters : 
both  these  objects,  and  exhibit  by  his  in  the  main,  sincere,  yet  defective, 
works  his  faith.  (4)  Business  aptitudes.     So  far  as  we 

The  best  endowment. — We  need  not  know,  they  were  all  called  from  real 

regret  that  we  have  not  the  power  to  business  life.     2.  Points  in  which  they 

work    miracles :    we    have   something  were  manifestly  different.     There  was 

better.      We    have    the    living,   life-  no  one  distinct  mental  type,  and  no 

giving  Word  of   God.     We  have   the  one  special  mental  characteristic  is  of 

promise  of  the  Spirit ;  and  by  the  Word  exclusive   or   predominant  importance 

and    the    Spirit    moral    miracles    are  for  Christian  service.      All   ministers 

being  wrought  every  day.     Preach  and  are  not  of  the  same   order   of   mind, 

pray ;  plant  and  water  :  God  will  give  Some  are  noted  for  the  predominance 

the  increase.  of  the  imaginative  ;  some  of  the  logical ; 

Sufficient  equipment  for  every  emer-  some  of  the  metaphysical ;  some  of  the 

gency. — At   first   the    apostles    had   a  emotional ;  some,  we  might  almost  say, 

smaller  gospel  (they  had  not  got  the  of  the  intuitional  propensity  or  power. 

Cross  to  preach)  and  a  larger  power  Souls    are    saved,   instrumentally,    by 

of  miracles ;  afterwards  less  miracles,  men  as  men,  and  not  by  men  just  as 

but  more  gospel ;  but  always  a  sufn-  reasoners,  scholars,  poets,  orators,  etc. — 

cient   equipment.      You   have   not   to  G.  J.  Adeney. 

make   bricks    without   straw  ;    Christ  The  apostles  were  plain  men  who  had 

gives  you  "  power  "  for  every  duty. —  not  been  perverted  by  the  false  philo- 

R.  Glover.  sophies,  traditions,  and  morals  of  the 

day.     They  were  mostly  working  men, 

Ver.  15.  From  temporal  to  spiritual. —  business  men,   practical   men,  but   of 

How   is    it    that    the    common-sense  great  variety  of  early  training,  and  of 

view  of  Christian  Missions,  on  the  prin-  business  lif  e.     Some  were  poor ;  some 

ciple  of  acting  first  on  men's  secondary  were  comparatively  well  off  ;  some  be- 

motives   by   relieving    their   temporal  longed  to  country  villages,  some  to  the 

distresses,    and    as    that    principle    is  city  ;  several  were  fishermen  ;  one  was 

sanctioned   by  the  practice  of  Christ  a  publican,  one  a  zealot.     They  were 

and  His  apostles,  has  so  much   been  men  of  ability ;  there  were  great  pos- 

lost  sight  of  in  the  foreign  operations  sibilities  in  them.     Christ  transformed 

103 


y 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


common  men  into  apostles,  the  founda- 
tion stones  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  the 
leaders  of  the  kingdom  that  was  to 
transform  the  world.  The  charcoal 
was  changed  into  diamonds.  They  were 
far  from  faultless,  but  the  faults  were 
flaws  in  a  jewel,  not  the  crudeness  of 
the  charcoal. — F.  N".  Peloubet,  D.D. 

Relationships  among  the  apostles. — 
The  difficulties  connected  with  tracing 
the  family  descent  or  possible  relation- 
ship between  the  apostles  are  so  great 
that  we  must  forego  all  hope  of  arriving 
at  any  certain  conclusion.  But  these 
points  seem  clear.  First,  it  appears 
that  only  the  calling  of  those  to  the 
apostolate  is  related,  which  in  some 
sense  is  typical,  viz.  that  of  Peter  and 
Andrew,  of  James  and  John,  of  Philip 
and  Bartholomew  (Nathanael),  and  of 
Matthew  the  publican.  Yet,  secondly, 
there  is  something  which  attaches  to 
each  of  the  others.  Thomas,  called 
Didymus  ("  twin  "),  is  closely  connected 
with  Matthew.  James  is  expressly 
named  as  the  son  of  Alphseus  or 
Clopas.  This  we  know  to  have  been 
also  the  name  of  Matthew-Levi's 
father.  But,  as  the  name  was  a 
common  one,  no  inference  can  be 
drawn  from  it,  and  it  does  not  seem 
likely  that  the  father  of  Matthew 
was  also  that  of  James,  Judas,  and 
Simon,  for  these  three  seem  to  have 
been  brothers.  James  is  designated 
by  St.  Matthew  as  Lebbseus,  from 
Lebht  a  heart,  and  is  also  named 
Thaddseus,  a  term  which  we  would 
derive  from  Thodah,  praise.  In  that 
case  both  Lebbseus  and  Thaddseus 
would  point  to  the  heartiness  and  the 
thanksgiving  of  the  apostle,  and  hence 
to  his  character.  St.  Luke  simply 
designates  him  Judas  of  James,  i.e. 
the  brother  (less  probably,  son)  of 
James.  Thus  his  real  name  would 
have  been  Judas  Lebbseus,  and  his 
surname  Thaddseus.  Closely  connected 
with  these  two  is  Simon,  surnamed 
Zelotes  or  Canansean,  both  terms 
indicating  his  original  connection 
with  the  Galilean  Zealot  party.  His 
position  in  the  Apostolic  Catalogue, 
and    the     testimony     of     Hegesippus 

104 


(Euseb.,  H.  E.,  iii.  11,  iv.  22),  seem  to 
point  him  out  as  the  son  of  Clopas, 
and  brother  of  James,  and  of  Judas 
Lebbseus.       These    three    were,   in   a 
sense,  cousins  of  Christ,  since,  accord- 
ing   to   Hegesippus,   Clopas   was   the 
brother  of  Joseph,  while  the  sons  of 
Zebedee  were  real  cousins,  their  mother 
Salome  being  a  sister  of  the  Virgin. 
Lastly,    we   have    Judas    Iscariot,    or 
Ish  Kerioth,  "  a  man  of   Kerioth,"   a 
town  in  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  25).     Thus 
the  betrayer  alone  would  be  of  Judean 
origin,  the  others  all  of  Galilean  ;  and 
this  may  throw  light  on  not  a  little  in 
his  after- history. — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 
Three    groups  of   apostles. — It    can 
hardly  be  without  significance  that  in 
all  the  apostolic  lists  they  are  divided 
into  the   same  three  groups.      1.  In 
the   first   group  we   should   naturally 
expect  to  find  the  men  of  the  largest 
and     strongest     make — those     whose 
capacity  and  force  of  character  would 
fit  them  to  lead  the  rest.     And  this 
expectation    is    justified.     Peter    and 
Andrew,    James    and    John,    are    the 
natural  leaders  of  the  apostolic  com- 
pany.    We   might   almost    call   them 
the  Boanergic  group,  so  marked  and 
emphatic    is    the    strain    of    passion 
in   their   service.      2.    In    the   second 
group  are  the  reflective  men.     Philip 
is  the  leader,  and  he  was  a  man  who 
would  rather  see  than  believe.     They 
are  excellent  and  thoughtful  men,  but 
they  will  not  do  much  for  the  world 
apart  from   men   of   a   more  forward 
and  adventurous  spirit  than  their  own. 
3.    The   third  we  may  call    the    He- 
braistic or  practical  group.     (1)  They 
held  stoutly  to  the  old  Hebrew  forms 
of  truth  and  righteousness,  and  were 
at  least  as  much  Hebrew  as  Christian 
to  the  end.     (2)  They  were  also  men 
of  practical  gifts.     This  is  especially 
seen  in  Judas — a  man  chosen  to  carry 
the     bag    because    he     was    careful, 
prudent,    busy,    good    at   buying   and 
selling,   conversant  with  the  world. — 
T.  T.  Lynch. 

Ver.     16.     Simon,     son    of    Jonas 
(Matt.  xvi.  17;  John  xxi.  15,  16,  17), 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   III. 


was  surnamed  Peter  =  a  rock,  by  our 
Lord  (Luke  vi.  14 ;  John  i.  42 ; 
Matt.  xvi.  18  i.),  was  a  fisherman  by- 
occupation  (Matt.  iv.  18,  19  ;  Luke 
v.  3-12  ;  Matt.  xvii.  27  ;  John  xxi.  3) ; 
originally  of  Bethsaida  (John  i.  44, 
xii.  21),  afterwards  of  Capernaum 
(Mark  i.  21,  29) ;  a  married  man 
(Mark  i.  30  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  5) ;  eager  and 
impetuous,  and  with  feelings  easily 
roused  (Luke.  v.  8 ;  Matt.  xiv.  28, 
xvi.  16,  xxvi.  33;  Luke  xxii.  61,  62;' 
John  xiii.  6,  9,  37,  xxi.  7) ;  one  of  the 
three  with  our  Lord  at  the  raising 
of  Jairus'  daughter  (Mark  v.  37),  at 
the  Transfiguration  (Matt.  xvii.  1 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  16-19),  and  in  the  Garden 
of  Gethsemane  (Matt.  xxvi.  37).  He 
denied  our  Lord  with  oaths  and  curses 
(Matt.  xxvi.  69-75),  but  was  pardoned 
and  restored  (Mark.  xvi.  7 ;  Luke 
xxii.  31,  32 ;  John  xxi.  15-18) ; 
preached  on  the  day  of  Pentecost 
(Acts  ii.  14,  38)  ;  healed  the  lame  man 
(Acts  iii.  4,  6,  7) ;  spoke  before  the 
Sanhedrin  (Acts  iv.  8,  19,  v.  29); 
reproved  Ananias  and  Sapphira  (Acts 
v.  3,  4,  8,  9)  ;  was  followed  by  multi- 
tudes (Acts  v.  15,  16) ;  confirmed  in 
Samaria  (Acts  viii.  14,  17) ;  healed 
a  man  long  sick  (Acts  ix.  33,  34)  ; 
raised  a  dead  woman  to  life  (Acts 
ix.  40,  41) ;  had  a  vision,  declaring 
God's  will  concerning  the  admission  of 
the  Gentiles  (Acts  x.  9,  17);  admitted 
Cornelius  and  his  company  into  the 
Church  (Acts  x.  46-48) ;  was  reproved 
by  St.  Paul  (Gal.  ii.  11-15).  His 
death  was  foretold  by  our  Lord  (John 
xxi.  18,  19),  and  he  is  said  to  have 
been  crucified  at  Rome  with  his  head 
downwards.  He  is  known  in  Christian 
Art  by  the  key  or  keys  (Matt.  xvi.  1 9). 
— W.  F.  Shaw. 

Simon  Peter. — In  a  Continental  pic- 
ture-gallery there  are  to  be  seen,  side 
by  side,  the  first  and  the  last  works  of 
a  great  artist.  The  first  is  very  crude 
and  faulty ;  the  last  is  a  masterpiece. 
The  contrast  shows  the  result  of  long 
culture  and  practice.  So  in  this  verse 
we  have  two  pictures.  "  Simon " 
shows  us  the  rough  fisherman  of 
Galilee — ignorant,    rash,    blundering. 


"  Peter "  shows  us  the  apostle  in  his 
Pentecostal  strength — the  courageous 
leader,  powerful  speaker,  brave  martyr. 
It  is  not  hard,  remarks  an  American 
writer,  to  take  roses,  lilies,  fuchsias, 
and  all  the  rarest  flowers,  and  with 
them  make  forms  of  exquisite  beauty  ; 
but  to  take  weeds,  dead  grasses,  dried 
leaves,  trampled  and  torn,  and  faded 
flowers,  and  make  lovely  things  out  of 
such  materials,  is  the  severest  test 
of  skill.  Yet  that  is  what  Christ  is 
always  doing.  He  takes  the  poorest 
stuff — despised  and  worthless,  outcast 
of  men  ofttimes  ;  and  when  He  has 
finished  His  gracious  work  we  behold 
a  saint  whiter  than  snow. 

Yer.  17.  James  and  John,  like  Simon, 
were  fishermen  (Matt.  iv.  21,  22 ; 
John  xxi.  2,  3),  in  somewhat  better 
circumstances,  possibly,  than  some  of 
the  apostles  (Mark  i.  20) ;  surnamed 
Boanerges,  or  "  sons  of  thunder " 
(Mark  iii.  17),  on  account  of  their 
fiery  zeal  (Luke  ix.  52-55) ;  were  with 
our  Blessed  Lord  at  the  house  of 
Jairus,  on  the  Mount  of  Transfigura- 
tion, in  the  Garden ;  were  ambitious 
(Matt.  xx.  20-24),  but  did  drink  of, 
Christ's  cup  of  suffering,  and  were 
baptised  with  His  baptism  of  blood, 
James  being  a  martyr  in  deed,  John 
a  martyr  in  will,  James  being  the 
first  of  the  apostles  who  was  put 
to  death  for  Christ's  sake  and  the 
gospel's  (Acts  xii.  2),  John  dying  in 
extreme  old  age,  the  last  of  all  the 
apostles,  after  having  suffered  per- 
secution and  exile  to  Patmos  (Rev.  i.  9), 
after  having  been  cast  into  a  cauldron 
of  boiling  oil  and  escaping  unhurt,  and 
after  having  drunk  of  a  poisoned  cup 
and  felt  no  harm  (cf.  Mark  xvi.  18). 
John  lived  on  at  Ephesus  unto  extreme 
old  age,  until  men  even  began  to  say 
that  he  should  not  die  (John  xxi.  23), 
and  until  he  was  so  feeble  that  he  was 
obliged  to  be  carried  through  the  streets 
in  a  litter,  when,  as  the  Christians 
crowded  round  him  to  receive  his  bless- 
ing, his  one  constant  word  of  exhorta- 
tion to  them  was,  "  Little  children, 
love  one  another." — W.  F.  Shaw. 

105 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Yer.  18.  Andrew,  one  of  the  first 
two  to  follow  Christ  (the  other  was 
probably  John),  has  been  called  u  the 
usher"  of  the  Apostolic  College.  It 
seems  as  if  his  strong  point  was  a 
certain  tact  for  bringing  people  together 
(John  i.  42,  vi.  8,  xii.  22).  Probably 
he  was  of  an  unobtrusive  and  a  practi- 
cal turn  of  mind,  ready  at  all  times  to 
perform  those  little  offices  of  kindness 
and  love  on  which  the  happiness  of 
life  so  much  depends.  He  is  said  to 
have  preached  in  Scythia  and  Sarmatia 
(i.e.  Poland  and  Southern  Russia),  and 
to  have  suffered  martyrdom  by  cruci- 
fixion at  Patrse,  in  the  north  of  the 
Peloponnese  of  Greece. 

Philip  was  a  sincere  but  timid  seeker 
of  the  truth  :  one  of  those  who  can 
hardly  walk  alone  in  the  world,  and 
need  the  support  and  sympathy  of  a 
friend,  in  good  report  and  evil  report. 
The  moment  he  has  been  found  by 
Jesus,  he  goes  and  confers  with  a 
friend,  and  brings  him  to  judge 
whether  or  no  He  be  the  Christ 
(John  i.  45,  46).  He  can  hardly  dare 
approach  our  Lord  in  behalf  of  some 
strangers  without  getting  one  of  his 
brethren  to  go  with  him  (John  xii.  22). 
It  is  said  that  he  preached  the  gospel 
in  Asia  Minor  more  particularly,  and 
suffered  martyrdom  at  Hierapolis  in 
Phrygia. 

Bartholomew  is  generally  supposed 
to  have  been  the  same  person  as 
Nathanael,  who  was  a  friend  of  Philip 
before  they  both  became  followers  of 
Christ  (John  i.  45,  46).  St.  John 
always  couples  Nathanael,  as  the  other 
Evangelists  do  Bartholomew,  with 
Philip;  and  while  they  never  mention 
Nathanael,  he  never  mentions  Bartholo- 
mew, but  speaks  of  Nathanael  instead. 
He  belonged  to  Cana  of  Galilee 
(John  xxi.  2) ;  was  highly  commended 
by  Christ  (John  i.  47) ;  and  was  one 
of  the  seven  who  saw  the  Lord  by  the 
Sea  of  Tiberias  (John  xxi.  1,  2).  He 
is  said  to  have  preached  the  gospel 
in  Armenia,  converted  the  Lycaonians, 
afterwards  visited  the  extreme  confines 
of  India,  and  finally  to  have  been  flayed 
alive    by  order  of  Astyages,  King  of 

106 


Armenia ;  for  this  reason  he  is  repre 
sented  in  Christian  Art  with  a  flaying 
knife,   and  often  also  as  holding  the 
gospel  in  his  hands. 

Obscure  Christians.  —  Bartholomew 
was  one  of  the  obscure,  unknown  Chris- 
tians. Yet  these  men  make  up  the 
army  of  God.  It  is  the  aggregate  of 
small  things  that  makes  life.  It  is  the 
stream  of  pennies  that  fills  the  treasury 
of  God.  The  numberless  leaves  make 
the  forest ;  the  innumerable  sands 
bound  the  sea.  Not  brilliant  efforts, 
but  repeated  efforts,  carry  on  the 
world's  progress.  Thread  by  thread 
the  cloth  is  woven;  rail  by  rail  the 
bands  of  steel  encircle  the  earth  ;  brick 
by  brick  the  city  is  built.  The  one- 
talented  men,  like  Bartholomew,  make 
the  world  and  the  Church.  The  impor- 
tant people  are  the  privates  rather 
than  the  generals,  the  machinists  rather 
than  the  mechanics,  the  ploughmen 
rather  than  the  agriculturists,  the 
pioneers  rather  than  the  emigrant 
agents,  the  loomsmen  rather  than  the 
overseers,  the  faithful  men  of  medio- 
crity rather  than  the  brilliant  men  of 
genius. 

Matthew. — The  choice  of  Matthew, 
the  man  of  business,  is  chiefly  explained 
by  the  nature  of  his  Gospel,  so  explicit, 
orderly,  and  methodical,  and,  until  it 
approaches  the  Crucifixion,  so  devoid 
of  fire. — Dean  Chadwick. 

Thomas  is  mentioned  four  times  in 
the  Gospels,  apart  from  the  record  in 
the  lists  of  apostles.  These  notices 
show  us — 1.  His  great  love  for  Christ 
(John  xi.  16).  2.  His  inquiring  spirit 
(John  xiv.  5).  3.  That  he,  like  the 
rest,  would  not  believe  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ  until  he  had  actually 
seen  Him  (John  xx.  24,  25).  4.  That 
the  sight  of  the  Risen  Lord  not  only 
restored  his  faith,  but  brought  absolute 
conviction  of  Christ's  Godhead  (John 
xx.  28). 

James  the  son  of  Alphceus  or  Clopas 
(John  xix.  25),  and  Mary  the  sister 
of  the  blessed  Yirgin  Mary,  hence 
called  "  the  brother,"  i.e.  cousin  of  the 
Lord  (Matt.  xiii.  55;  Mark  vi.  3; 
Gal.   i.    19),  called  also   "the  little" 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ill. 


(Mark.  xv.  40).      We  know  little  of  were  understood,  in  the  deadly  estrange- 

him  till  after  the  Resurrection,  when  ment  and  hostility  which  were  kindled 

our  Lord  vouchsafed  to  appear  specially  by  the  gentle  and  self-effacing  ways  of 

to  him  (1  Cor.  xv.  7),  doubtless  to  in-  Jesus,  in  the  treachery  of  Judas  in  the 

struct  him  in  the  things  pertaining  to  garden  and  the  unscrupulous  wiliness 

the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to  the  office  of  the  priests  accusing  Christ  before 

of  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  to  which  he  was  the  governor,  in  the  fierce  intensity  of 

about  to  be  chosen.     For  we  find  him  rage  which  turned  his  hands  against 

occupying  this  position  (cp.  Acts  ix.  27,  himself  and  which  destroyed  the  nation 

with    Gal.   i.    18,    19;    Acts   xii.    17,  under  Titus.     Nay,  the  very  sordidness 

xv.  13,  19  ;  Gal.  ii.  9,  12  ;  Acts  xxi.  18),  which  made  a  bargain  for  thirty  pieces 

and  indeed  held  in  such  esteem  by  the  of  silver  has  ever  since  been  a  part  of 

people  of  Jerusalem  that  he  was  called  the   popular   conception   of   the   race. 

11  James  the  Just."     He  is  the  author  We  are  apt  to  think  of  a  gross  love 

of  the  Epistle  which  bears  his  name —  of  money  as  inconsistent  with  intense 

was  martyred  by  being  cast  down  from  passion  ;  but  in  Shylock,  the  compatriot 

the  battlement  of  the  Temple,  stoned,  of   Judas,    Shakespeare   combines   the 

and  finally  despatched  with  a  fuller's  two. — Dean  Chadwick. 

club,  as  he  was  praying  for  his  mur-  Judas  among  the  twelve  a  sign  of — 

derers. — W.  F.  Shaw.  1.  The  all- endeavouring  love  of  Christ. 

2.  The  greatness  of  human  depravity. 

Ver.    19.    Judas. — In    the    life    of  3.  The  dangers  of  the  spiritual  office 

Judas  there  was  a  mysterious  imper-  (or  of  a  mere  external  connexion  with 

sonation  of  all  the  tendencies  of  godless  the  Lord)  without  perfect  fidelity  in 

Judaism,  and  his  dreadful  personality  the  spiritual   life   (an  internal   union 

seems  to  express  the  whole  movement  with  Him).     4.  The  aim   and  end  of 

of  the  nation  which  rejected   Christ,  the  Church — not  a  community  of  per- 

We  see  this  in  the  powerful  attraction  feet  saints,  but  of   redeemed   men. — 

felt  toward  Messiah  before  His  aims  J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20—30. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xii.  22-37  ;  Luke  xi.  14-23.) 

Christ  misunderstood  and  misrepresented. — The  paragraph  begins  properly 
with  the  last  clause  of  ver.  19:  "And  they  went  into  an  house"  [see  R.V. 
for  variations  in  reading  and  rendering].  Robert  Stephens,  who  first  divided 
the  Bible  into  verses,  began  a  verse  with  these  words,  as  was  right ;  but  Beza 
set  the  fashion  of  adding  them  to  ver.  19,  which  was  unfortunately  followed 
by  the  A.Y.  translators.  They  really  begin  the  account  of  Christ's  fourth 
sojourn  in  Capernaum,  some  weeks  after  His  selection  of  the  apostles. 

I.  Misunderstood  by  friends. — They  judged  Him,  observes  Dean  Chadwick, 
as  men  who  profess  to  have  learned  the  lesson  of  His  life  still  judge,  too  often, 
all  whose  devotion  carries  them  beyond  the  boundaries  of  convention  and 
convenience.  There  is  a  curious  betrayal  of  the  popular  estimate  of  this  world 
and  the  world  to  come,  in  the  honour  paid  to  those  who  cast  away  life  in  battle, 
or  sap  it  slowly  in  pursuit  of  wealth  or  honour,  and  the  contempt  expressed  for 
those  who  compromise  it  on  behalf  of  souls,  for  which  Christ  died.  Whenever 
by  exertion  in  any  unselfish  cause  health  is  broken,  or  fortune  impaired,  or 
influential  friends  estranged,  the  follower  of  Christ  is  called  an  enthusiast,  a 
fanatic,  or  a  man  of  unsettled  mind.  He  may  take  comfort  from  the  thought 
that  his  Master  was  said  to  be  beside  Himself — and  that,  too,  by  His  own 

107 


chap.  III.  H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


friends — when  zeal  for  God  and  love  for  souls  kept  Him  too  busy  to  think  of 
bodily  sustenance  and  rest. 

II.  Misrepresented  by  foes. — The  scribes  are  quick  to  turn  to  their  own 
advantage  the  admission  of  Christ's  friends  that  He  is  "beside  Himself." 
Unable  to  deny  the  reality,  or  the  miraculous  nature,  of  the  cures  He  wrought 
(see  Matt.  xii.  22),  they  insidiously  suggest  that  while  His  own  reason  is 
dislodged  Satan  himself  is  in  possession  of  its  throne.  As  much  as  to  say : 
"  He  is  an  incarnation  of  the  Evil  One,  and  by  Satan's  own  power  He  expels 
the  subordinate  demons."  No  doubt  that  was  possible.  If  Satan,  at  that 
particular  period,  was  permitted  to  exercise,  through  his  emissaries,  a  certain 
power  over  men's  bodies  and  minds,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  might 
still  retain  authority  over  those  emissaries,  and  be  able  to  recall  them  at  any 
time  he  chose.  The  only  question  is,  Would  he  be  likely  to  do  so  ?  Would 
such  a  policy  serve  his  purpose  ?  To  the  elucidation  of  this  problem  Christ 
addresses  Himself. 

III.  The  scribes  triumphantly  confuted. — Whether  the  powers  of  darkness, 
presided  over  by  Satan,  be  compared  to  a  "kingdom,"  from  the  wide  extent 
of  their  influence,  and  the  completeness  of  their  organisation  ;  or  to  a  "  house," 
from  the  closeness  of  their  intimacy,  and  the  identity  of  their  interests, — in 
either  case  division  is  fatal  to  them — subversive  of  their  design,  and  destructive 
of  their  power.  The  kingdom  is  brought  to  desolation,  the  house  falls  to  pieces, 
by  the  mutual  jealousies  and  aggressions  of  their  component  members.  Such 
would  be  the  effect  of  Satan  casting  out  Satan — of  the  chief  of  the  devils 
co-operating  with  one  who  went  about  dispossessing  and  healing  his  victims.  The 
conclusion  was  inevitable :  that  not  Beelzebub,  but  God,  was  with  Him  who  did 
these  things ;  that  the  kingdom  of  Satan  was  being  brought  to  nought,  not  by 
internal  dissensions,  but  by  external  force — by  the  supervening  of  a  stronger 
influence  and  more  powerful  Monarch. 

IY.  The  true  state  of  the  case  explained. — Still  speaking  under  the  veil 
of  parable  or  allegory,  Christ  now  draws  a  picture  of  a  strong  man  living  in 
the  peaceful  enjoyment  of  his  possessions.  The  illustration  reminds  us  of  the 
turbulent  times  of  our  own  country  a  few  centuries  ago,  when  the  knights 
and  barons  with  their  retainers,  each  in  his  stronghold,  maintained  an  armed 
neutrality  against  all  comers.  But  peace  which  is  merely  preserved  by  strength 
is  liable  at  any  moment  to  be  disturbed  and  overthrown  by  greater  strength. 
So  here  :  the  strong  man  is  bound,  his  house  invaded  and  plundered.  In 
attempting  to  expound  the  inner  meaning  of  this,  it  may  be  well  to  include 
the  further  details  added  in  Luke  xi.  21,  22.  1.  The  "strong  man  armed" 
is  Beelzebub  or  Satan :.  strong  by  natural  endowments,  a  powerful  spirit,  who 
had  already  even  dared  to  defy  the  Most  High  ;  strong  also  in  "  his  armour 
wherein  he  trusted,"  to  enable  him  still  to  wage  war,  and  after  each  defeat 
to  reappear,  if  possible,  stronger  than  before.  2.  By  "his  armour"  we  may 
understand  his  agents,  other  wicked  spirits,  who,  like  himself,  kept  not  their 
first  estate ;  but,  not  being  so  strong  and  ambitious  as  he,  naturally  fell  into 
a  sort  of  dependence  on  him.  3.  With  the  aid  of  these  his  active  instruments 
Satan  is  enabled  to  "keep  his  palace,"  i.e.  to  maintain  his  dominion  over  the 
souls  and  bodies  of  those  unhappy  men  who  have  once  been  "taken  captive 
by  him  at  his  will."  Every  sinner  may  truly  be  said  to  be  "  possessed  with 
a  demon,"  and  sometimes  with  more  than  one,  as  Mary  Magdalene  (Luke  viii.  2) 
and  the  Gadarene  (Mark  viii.  30).  So  some  are  possessed  by  many  sins, 
"  serving  divers  lusts  and  passions " — divers,  as  directed  towards  different 
objects,  but  all  having  a  common  source  and  parentage — all  "  of  their  father 
the  devil,"  and  ever  ready  to  "do  the  lusts  of  their  father,"  as  well  as  to 
co-operate  with  and  inflame  each  other.     4.  And  who  is  he  who  proves  himself 

108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ii. 


stronger  than  this  strong  man,  able  to  bind  him  and  spoil  his  house  ?  Not  one 
of  the  same  kind,  another  passion,  a  stronger  devil ;  but  an  antagonist  in  nature 
and  principle,  as  well  as  in  act.  Such  was  He  who  spoke  these  words.  His 
great  mission  was  to  "  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil " ;  and  His  nature  was 
Divine  (see  Isa.  xlix.  24,  25,  lxiii.  5).  Throughout  His  ministry  Christ  invari- 
ably acted  as  a  Victor  in  His  dealings  with  the  demons :  commanding  them 
with  authority  ;  rebuking  them  ;  not  suffering  them  to  speak  ;  permitting  them, 
as  an  indulgence,  to  enter  into  the  lower  animals,  and  wreak  their  impotent 
spite  on  those  who  had  no  souls  to  be  destroyed  or  saved.  He  also  enabled 
His  servants  to  do  the  same  (Mark  iii.  15  ;  Luke  x.  17).  And  ever  since,  though 
Satan  is  still  permitted  to  "go  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,"  he  has 
been  restrained  from  exercising  his  power  in  the  way  of  bodily  possession ;  and 
with  respect  to  the  influence  which  he  may  still  exert  over  the  spiritual  part 
of  us,  he  finds  that  he  has  to  deal  with  One  stronger  than  himself — even  with 
Him  who,  having  grappled  with  and  overcome  him  once  for  all  upon  the  Cross, 
is  ever  ready  to  renew  on  behalf  of  every  individual  soul  the  battle  that  He  then 
fought  for  the  whole  human  race.  By  virtue  of  that  victory  we  are  now  His 
"  goods,"  His  lawful  "  spoil,"  His  purchased  possession  ;  and  so  long  as  we  fight 
under  His  banner  we  are  secure.  Satan  cannot  lay  a  finger  on  the  man  who 
is  alive  to  the  responsibilities  of  his  Christian  calling,  who  is  diligent  in  the 
use  of  the  means  of  grace,  who  lives  in  the  atmosphere  of  prayer,  who  "  takes 
unto  him  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  "  and  fights  the  good  fight  of  faith." 

V.  The  scribes  solemnly  warned. — Christ  has  submitted  His  claim,  in 
an  argument  full  of  sweet  reasonableness  and  touching  forbearance,  to  the 
better  judgment  of  His  foes ;  but  now  He  declares,  with  solemn  emphasis,  as 
being  in  possession  of  the  secrets  of  the  Almighty,  the  principles  upon  which 
the  world  of  spirits  is  administered.  He  asserts  that  sin  has  its  scale,  its 
climax.  There  are  sins  of  instinct,  and  of  passion,  and  of  ignorance.  Where 
there  is  little  light  to  be  guided  by,  there  is  little  light  to  sin  against.  The  next 
step  is  where  there  is  deliberation  before  the  sin  is  committed.  The  last  and 
worse  stage  is  where  not  only  the  deliberate  judgment  is  gone  against,  but  the 
attempt  is  made  to  deny  the  principle  of  judgment  in  the  soul  itself.  The  hands 
of  the  watch  move  backwards  ;  the  lamp  flags  with  the  very  abundance  of  oil ; 
the  man's  soul  dies.  Over  against  the  words,  "  Repent !  Be  ye  forgiven  ! "  stand 
these — "  Irreclaimable !  Unforgivable  !  "  These  scribes  had  now  wrought 
themselves  up  to  such  a  pitch  of  hatred  against  Jesus,  that  they  were  standing, 
as  it  were,  on  the  very  brink  of  the  precipice  ;  and  in  the  extremity  of  His  love 
the  Saviour  utters  this  tremendous  warning,  to  keep  them  from  taking  the 
fatal  plunge.  [In  the  Homilies  that  follow,  this  difficult  subject  is  discussed  from 
various  points  of  view.] 

The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — I.  The  dignity  of  the  person  of  the  Holy 
Ghost. — This  is  implied  in  the  assertion,  that  whoso  speaketh  against  the  Son 
of  Man  may  be  forgiven,  while  he  that  speaketh  against  the  Holy  Ghost 
cannot.  The  power  of  Deity  was  inherent  in  the  Incarnate  Saviour ;  and  He 
told  the  Jews  expressly  that  it  was  by  the  Spirit  of  God  that  He  cast  out 
devils.  Had  He  been  a  created  Intelligence,  would  our  Saviour  have  spoken 
as  He  does  in  the  text  ?  Had  the  Holy  Spirit  been  inferior,  in  essential  dignity, 
to  the  Father  and  the  Son,  would  He  have  been  joined  with  them  in  one  name 
in  the  sacred  form  of  Christian  baptism?  And  would  the  new  creation,  the 
spiritual  resurrection  in  the  sinner's  soul,  have  been  ascribed  to  His  sacred 
agency  ? 

II.  The  nature  and  design  of  the  Spirit's  influence. — The  Pharisees  had 
sufficient  light  to  remove  their  errors  ;  and  they  had  conviction  enough  to  lead 

109 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


to  a  change  of  heart ;  but  unhappily  they  resisted  both  light  and  conviction  : 
pride  and  sensuality  combined  to  close  their  eyes,  and  led  them  to  spurn  the 
offered  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Their  dreadful  sin  lay  in  the  act  of  not  being 
convinced,  when  a  heavenly  influence  was  offered  them,  and  in  the  blasphemy 
of  attributing  the  works  of  Christ  to  diabolical  agency. 

III.  The  precise  nature,  and  the  accompanying  evidences  of  the  sin  against 
the  Holy  Ghost. — Some  have  imagined  that  the  words  of  blasphemy  to  which 
our  Saviour  refers  constitute  the  essence  of  the  unpardonable  sin.  But  words, 
considered  abstractedly,  possess  no  moral  quality  whatsoever  :  it  is  only  as 
symbols  or  indices  of  the  mind  that  our  expressions  are  criminal  or  otherwise. 
Again — It  has  been  supposed  that  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  was  confined 
to  the  period  of  our  Saviour's  miracles ;  and  that  when  the  direct  evidence 
arising  from  these  was  withdrawn,  this  sin  could  no  longer  be  committed.  The 
reverse,  however,  of  this  would  rather  appear  to  be  the  case  :  for  our  Lord  does 
not  tell  the  Pharisees  that  they  were  already  involved  in  the  guilt  and  doom 
attaching  to  the  commission  of  the  unpardonable  sin  :  He  rather  cautions  them 
to  beware  of  plunging  themselves  into  so  dreadful  a  situation.  In  order,  then, 
to  guide  us  in  endeavouring  to  ascertain  in  what  cases  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  may  have  been  committed,  we  may  lay  down  the  two  following  positions  : 
first,  that  the  sin  itself  is  a  wilful  resistance  offered  to  the  Spirit's  invitations 
and  influence  ;  and,  secondly,  that  its  tendency  is  to  shut  up  the  soul  in  judicial 
hardness  and  final  impenitence.  Both  these  positions  are  recognised  in  Heb. 
vi.  4-6,  a  memorable  passage,  bearing,  I  apprehend,  upon  the  subject.  1.  The 
Spirit  offers  to  draw  men,  but  they  will  not  follow  Him  :  He  repeats  His  friendly 
solicitations  again  and  again ;  but  sensual  passions  or  earthly  affections  absorb 
the  accents  of  His  monitory  voice,  until  at  length  it  dies  away  and  is  heard  no 
more !  It  is  not,  I  apprehend,  because  a  man  is  too  slothful,  or  too  negligent, 
or  even,  in  a  certain  sense,  too  earthly-minded,  that  he  is  in  danger  of  fatally 
sinning  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is  because  he  hates  the  renovating  power 
of  that  Divine  Agent.  It  is  because  he  rebels  against  the  reign  of  grace  and 
holiness  in  the  heart.  It  is  because  he  cannot  endure  the  unrivalled  supremacy 
of  a  spiritual  principle  bearing  down  the  carnal  propensities  of  the  soul,  and 
bringing  into  subjection  every  thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  2.  I  now  go 
on  to  remark  on  that  judicial  hardness  and  final  impenitence,  the  latter  of  which 
invariably,  and  the  former  with  few  if  any  exceptions,  follows  the  commission  of 
it.  There  is  only  one  way  in  which  a  sinner  can  effectually  close  the  avenues 
of  reconciliation  against  himself,  and  secure  his  place  beforehand  in  the  regions 
of  eternal  woe  :  that  way  is  by  putting  himself  out  of  the  reach  of  repentance — 
by  resisting  the  motions  of  the  Spirit,  till  they  are  finally  withdrawn — by 
tampering  with  conscience,  till  her  energies  are  paralysed,  and  he  sinks,  under 
a  load  of  unpardoned  guilt,  into  a  profound  lethargy. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Every  sin  is  fatal  in  its  tendency.  If  you  are  grasping  the 
wages  of  unrighteousness — if  you  are  the  slaves  of  lust  or  intemperance — if 
the  world,  with  its  winning  allurements,  is  enthroned  in  your  hearts — or,  in 
short,  if  you  are  neglecting  the  great  salvation  of  Christ, — you  are  in  danger 
of  perishing  everlastingly.  Let  your  self-examination,  then,  be  general,  and 
not  confined  to  one  point.  2.  This  subject  is  replete  vrith  salutary  caution. 
Many  judicious  persons  have  supposed  that  a  degree  of  obscurity  is  permitted 
to  hang  around  it,  in  order  to  put  Christians  upon  their  guard,  and  to  lead  them 
to  beware  of  everything  which  might  appear,  in  the  slightest  degree,  to  savour 
of  the  unpardonable  sin.  3.  Lastly,  I  speak  to  you  in  the  language  of  encourage- 
ment. The  darkest  clouds  are  sometimes  tinged  with  a  bright  and  beautiful 
radiance.  The  contemplation  of  a  sin  which  is  pronounced  to  be  unpardonable 
is  certainly  solemn,   peculiarly  solemn;    but  still,  when  taken  in  its   proper 

110 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  hi. 


connexions,  it  needs  to  alarm  none  but  the  wilful  and  determined  transgressor. 
On  the  contrary,  the  subject  forms  an  occasion  of  exhibiting,  in  the  strongest 
light,  the  rich  and  abounding  mercy  of  God.  It  shews  us  an  Almighty  Sove- 
reign holding  out  a  sceptre  of  peace,  till  the  revolting  rebel  will  no  longer  deign 
even  to  cast  a  look  upon  it.  It  discloses  to  us  a  Parent  pleading  with  His 
undutiful  children,  till  His  voice  dies  away  in  the  distance  of  their  determined 
and  fatal  wanderings.  What  inexpressible  consolation,  then,  the  subject,  rightly 
understood,  affords  to  every  anxious  inquirer  after  mercy  ! — Wm.  Knight. 

Blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — I.  What  the  sin  or  blasphemy  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  means,  and  wherein  precisely  it  consists. — I  said  sin  or 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  because  some  call  it  the  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost,  though  Scripture  itself  never  calls  it  anything  else  but  blasphemy, 
which  is  worth  the  observing.  It  lies  in  words,  is  committed  by  speaking,  and 
particularly  by  evil-speaking,  by  reviling  and  defaming  the  Holyr  Spirit  of  God. 
There  may  be,  and  there  have  been,  several  offences  committed  against  the 
Holy  Ghost  which  yet  do  not  amount  to  the  blasphemy  against  Him  specified 
in  the  text.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  grieving  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  quenching 
the  Spirit,  when  men  refuse  to  hearken  to  His  counsels,  to  follow  His  motions, 
or  to  obey  His  calls.  But  this  is  not  blaspheming  Him.  There  is  also  what 
St.  Stephen  calls  resisting  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  is  opposing  Him  with  a 
high  hand  and  rebelling  against  Him,  and  is  a  very  heinous  sin  ;  and  yet 
neither  is  that  the  same  with  blaspheming  and  slandering  Him,  which  is  what 
those  Pharisees  were  guilty  of.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  grievously  affronted 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  telling  Him  a  lie,  either  presuming  upon  His  ignorance  as 
not  knowing  it,  or  upon  His  patience  as  if  He  should  have  connived  at  it. 
But  yet  that  was  not  so  bad  as  what  the  Pharisees  did  in  ascribing  His 
works  to  the  devil.  The  malicious  telling  a  lie  of  Him,  to  defame  and  slander 
Him,  was  a  more  heinous  offence  than  the  telling  a  lie  to  Him  under  a  weak 
and  foolish  persuasion.  There  is  also  another  way  of  affronting  the  Holy 
Ghost,  by  vilifying  His  operations,  which  yet  comes  not  up  to  the  sin  of  the 
text.  Upon  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  disciples,  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance,  there 
were  some  standing  by  who  mocking  said,  "  These  men  are  full  of  new  wine," 
vilifying  the  operations  of  the  Spirit  as  the  effects  of  drunkenness.  But  the 
men  who  said  it,  said  it  perhaps  wantonly  or  ignorantly,  rather  than  spite- 
fully or  maliciously.  But  the  Pharisees  who  are  charged  with  being  guilty  of 
blaspheming  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  very  well  knew  that  what  they  had  seen 
done  could  not  be  accounted  for  in  a  natural  way ;  and  yet  such  was  their 
spleen  and  rage  against  the  gospel,  that  they  chose  rather  to  impute  the 
miracles  of  our  Lord  to  the  devil  than  to  acknowledge  the  Divine  hand, 
which  was  so  visible  in  them  that  they  themselves  could  not  but  see  it,  had 
they  been  at  all  disposed  to  it.  I  may  here  also  mention  Simon  Magus  as  a 
person  who  very  highly  affronted  the  Holy  Ghost,  when  he  offered  money  for 
the  purchasing  His  miraculous  gifts.  But  neither  was  that  any  such  direct 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  as  what  the  text  mentions  ;  for  he  had 
some  respect  and  veneration  for  the  miracles  he  saw  wrought  and  for  the 
author  of  them,  and  was  very  far  from  imputing  them  to  the  assistance  of 
the  devil.  The  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  was  something  worse  still 
than  anything  I  have  yet  mentioned :  it  was  defaming  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
God,  and  God  Himself,  under  the  execrable  name  of  Beelzebub  ;  it  was  reviling, 
and  that  knowingly  and  desperately,  the  Divine  works  as  diabolical  operations. 

II.  The  heinousness  of  that  sin. — It  was  a  most  wicked  and  impudent  he 
and  slander  upon  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  was  flying,  as  it  were,  in  the  face  of 

111 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


God.  One  would  think,  when  God  Himself  interposes,  giving  the  Divine  signal 
in  plain  uncontested  miracles,  that  it  might  become  all  men  to  be  mute,  and 
to  lay  aside  their  otherwise  unconquerable  rancour  and  prejudice.  But  the 
Pharisees  were  so  resolute  and  so  outrageous  in  reviling  everything  that  gave 
any  countenance  to  Christ  and  His  gospel,  that  they  would  not  spare  even 
God  Himself,  but  called  Him  Beelzebub,  spitefully  defaming  His  most  Divine 
works  as  being  nothing  else  but  diabolical  impostures.  They  saw  the  miracles 
of  our  Blessed  Lord,  and  were  very  sensible  that  they  were  real  and  true 
miracles  :  they  knew  also  that  they  were  wrought  in  direct  opposition  to  the 
devil  and  his  kingdom,  having  all  the  fair  appearances  possible  of  being  Divine  : 
nor  would  they  have  scrupled  to  have  received  them  as  Divine,  had  they  been 
wrought  by  any  one  else  excepting  Christ  or  His  disciples.  But  such  was  their 
envenomed  hatred  and  inveteracy  against  Him  and  His,  that,  at  all  adventures, 
contrary  to  all  candour  or  equity,  and  in  contradiction  to  reason  and  common 
sense,  they  resolved  to  say,  however  scarce  to  believe  (for  they  hardly  could 
be  so  stupid),  that  He  was  in  league  with  the  devil,  and  that  all  His  mighty 
works  which  He  wrought  in  the  name  of  God  were  the  works  only  of  Beelzebub, 
the  prince  of  the  devils.  There  could  not  be  a  more  insolent  slander,  or  a  more 
provoking  outrage  against  the  Divine  Majesty,  than  this.  It  was  sacrificing 
the  honour  of  Almighty  God,  and  both  the  present  and  future  happines  of  men, 
to  their  own  private  humours  and  party  passions  ;  being  resolved  to  take  up 
with  any  wretched  cavil,  any  improbable  and  self-contradictory  lies  and 
slanders  against  God,  rather  than  permit  the  honest  and  well-meaning  people 
to  believe  in  Christ  Jesus  upon  the  brightest  evidence  of  His  miracles. 

III.  Whether  any  sins  committed  at  this  day  are  the  same  thing  with 
it,  or  which  of  them  come  the  nearest  to  it. — 1.  For  the  sake  of  the  over- 
tender  and  scrupulous  consciences,  I  would  observe,  that  roving,  and  which 
some  call  blasphemous  thoughts,  which  rise  up  accidentally,  and  as  accidentally 
go  off  again,  are  nothing  akin  to  the  sin  which  I  have  been  speaking  of,  which 
consisted  in  premeditated  lies  and  slanders  against  God,  formed  with  design 
to  obstruct  or  darken  the  evidences  of  the  true  religion,  and  to  prevent  others 
from  looking  into  them  or  being  convinced  by  them.  2.  Even  the  atheists 
or  infidels  of  these  times  can  scarce  come  up  to  the  same  degree  of  guilt  with 
the  Pharisees  of  old,  because  they  have  not  seen  the  miracles  of  Christ  with 
their  own  eyes.  Rational  and  historical  evidence  may  be  as  convincing  as  the 
other,  when  duly  considered  ;  but  as  it  strikes  not  upon  the  senses,  it  does  not 
awaken  the  attention,  and  alarm  every  passion  of  the  soul,  in  such  a  degree 
as  the  other  does.  For  which  reason  the  unbelievers  of  our  times,  though 
abandoned  and  profligate  men,  are  not  altogether  so  blamable  in  the  opposition 
they  make  to  Christianity  as  the  unbelievers  of  old  time  were.  Nevertheless, 
it  must  be  said,  that  the  obstinate  rejecting  the  miracles  of  our  Lord  and  of  His 
disciples  (which  have  been  so  fully  attested),  and  much  more  the  ridiculing  and 
bantering  them,  and  the  endeavouring  to  run  them  down  by  lies  and  slander, 
is  a  very  high  and  heinous  crime,  as  well  as  horrid  blasphemy;  especially  if 
committed  in  a  Christian  country,  and  in  a  knowing  age,  and  where  men  have 
all  desirable  opportunities  of  learning  the  truth,  as  well  as  the  strongest  motives 
offered  for  submitting  to  it. — Archdeacon  Waterland. 

Blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — I.  The  blasphemy  of  speaking  against 
the  Holy  Ghost  appears  to  have  been  the  sin  which  those  scribes  and  Pharisees 
committed ;  for  St.  Mark  expressly  tells  us  that  our  Lord  pronounced  these 
words,  "  because  they  said,  He  hath  an  unclean  spirit "  ;  and  He  Himself  declared 
(Matt.  xii.  28)  that  He  had  "  cast  out  the  devil  by  the  Spirit  of  God,"  i.e.  by 
the  Holy  Ghost ;  so  that  if  He  exercised  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  this 

112 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MARK.  chap.  hi. 


miracle  which  He  wrought  on  the  blind  and  dumb  man,  the  scribes  and  the 
Pharisees,  who  spake  against  this  miracle,  by  ascribing  it  to  an  unclean  spirit, 
or  to  the  prince  of  the  devils,  did  most  certainly  blaspheme  or  speak  against 
the  Holy  Ghost.  1.  It  was  a  wilful  and  presumptuous  sin;  for  though  those 
scribes  and  Pharisees  had  not  seen  the  miracle  wrought  by  our  Blessed  Lord, 
yet  they  allowed  and  acknowledged  it  to  have  been  wrought  by  Him,  and  not 
withstanding  this  they  perversely  ascribed  it  to  the  power  of  Beelzebub.  2.  It 
was  committed  against  God  Himself,  whether  we  consider  the  Holy  Ghost  as 
one  person  in  the  Divine  Trinity,  or  even  if  we  consider  the  Spirit  of  God  as 
that  whereby  God  the  Father  acted  in  such  wonderful  operations  (Matt.  xii.  28). 
3.  It  consisted  in  despising  the  word  of  God,  and  rejecting  His  gracious  message 
of  peace  and  pardon  to  mankind  :  for  this  miracle  was  performed,  and  wrought 
in  evidence  of  our  Blessed  Lord's  Divine  mission,  in  proof  that  the  doctrine  which 
He  taught  was  from  God,  and  that  He  Himself  was  the  Messias  who  was 
to  appear  amongst  the  Jews,  and  was  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of 
all  such  as  believed  in  Him,  and  qualified  themselves  for  pardon  by  faith  and 
repentance. 

II.  Why,  and  in  what  sense,  this  sin  hath  never  forgiveness. — 1.  For  the 
explaining  of  this  aright  let  it  be  considered  that  our  Saviour  spake  this  to 
Jews,  and  therefore  probably  suited  His  expressions  to  their  law,  and  to  the 
opinions  then  prevailing  among  them.  And  we  find  that  the  law  of  Moses 
appointed  sacrifices  for  legal  defilements,  and  for  sins  of  ignorance  against 
God,  and  appointed  sacrifices  in  some  cases  and  penalties  in  others  for  wilful 
sins  against  men  (Lev.  iv.,  v.,  and  vi.) ;  but  for  the  greater  sins  against  God, 
such  as  wilful  and  presumptuous  ones,  the  sentence  of  death  was  pronounced 
by  God  against  all  offenders  of  this  sort,  and  there  was  no  sacrifice  or  other 
means  by  which  the  punishment  incurred  might  be  taken  off  or  suspended 
(Num.  xv.  30,  31,  35 ;  Lev.  xx.  10).  And  this  is  the  very  thing  which 
St.  Paul  means  when  he  says  to  the  Jews,  that  by  Christ  all  that  believe 
are  justified  from  all  things,  from  which  they  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law 
of  Moses.  Where  he  plainly  asserts  that  under  the  Jewish  law  there  were 
crimes  which  could  not  be  atoned  for  and  forgiven ;  and  if  not  under  the  Jewish 
law,  then  not  under  natural  religion,  because  the  Jewish  law  had  that  and 
all  its  advantages  included  in  it.  As  to  the  first  sort  of  sins  taken  notice  of 
by  Moses  in  his  body  of  laws,  viz.  those  of  ignorance  committed  against  God, 
and  those  of  wilfulness  against  men,  when  the  sacrifices  appointed  in  such  cases 
are  commanded  to  be  offered  by  an  offender,  the  usual  phrase  is,  "  The  priest 
shall  make  an  atonement  for  him,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him."  So  that  such 
sins  might  well  be  called  pardonable  ones,  there  being  a  method  prescribed 
for  the  atonement  of  them.  But  as  to  the  other  sort,  that  of  wilful  and 
presumptuous  sins  against  God,  by  which  His  word  was  despised,  such  sins  were 
properly  unpardonable  ones,  because  the  Jewish  laws  had  provided  no  sacrifice 
by  way  of  atonement  for  them.  And  that  the  unpardonableness  of  this  heinous 
sort  of  sins  against  God  depends  upon  their  having  no  sacrifice  appointed  for 
them  appears  from  Heb.  x.  28.  Now,  to  bring  these  observations  home  to  the 
case  before  us,  the  blaspheming  or  speaking  against  the  Son  of  Man,  or  against 
the  Holy  Jesus,  in  His  personal  capacity,  and  as  man  only,  might  be  forgiven 
to  these  scribes  and  Pharisees,  because  by  the  Jewish  law  a  provision  was  made 
for  its  expiation.  But  the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  the  Spirit 
of  God,  when  it  was  a  presumptuous  sin,  as  this  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees 
was,  had  no  pardon  under  the  Jewish  law.  God  was  reproached,  and  His  word 
was  despised,  and  therefore  the  soul  that  thus  offended  was  to  be  cut  off  from 
among  His  people.  Nor  was  there  any  pardon  provided  for  it  under  the  gospel 
dispensation,  because,  when  they  thus  blasphemed  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  by 

I  113 


chap.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


which  Christ  wrought  His  miracles,  the  only  means  which  could  redeem  the 
adversaries  of  the  truth  from  the  Divine  vengeance  was  the  merit  of  Christ's 
death  applied  to  them  by  faith ;  and  that  benefit  they  wholly  excluded  them- 
selves from  in  the  very  act  of  their  sinning,  which  consisted  in  their  rejecting 
the  evidence  which  the  Spirit  of  God  gave  of  Christ  being  the  Messias  and 
Saviour  of  mankind.  This  was,  as  things  then  stood  with  them,  an  unpardon- 
able sin,  either  in  this  age,  the  age  of  the  Jewish  law,  or  in  the  age  to 
come,  that  is,  the  age  of  the  gospel.  But  were  the  gates  of  mercy  for  ever 
shut  against  these  blasphemers  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  Was  the  sentence  here 
passed  upon  them  unalterable  and  irreversible  in  all  cases  ?  No,  surely :  for, 
as  Athanasius  observes,  "  Our  Blessed  Lord  does  not  say  that  it  shall  not 
be  forgiven  to  him  that  blasphemeth  and  repenteth,  but  only  to  him  that 
blasphemeth ;  and  therefore  He  must  have  meant  this  of  one  that  continued 
in  a  state  of  impenitence ;  for  with  God  no  sin  is  unpardonable."  If  such 
blasphemers  could  repent  of  that  their  heinous  sin,  no  doubt  but  they  might 
be  forgiven  it  under  the  Christian  covenant :  and  who  can  say  of  any  man 
that  all  means  of  repentance  are  cut  off  from  him  ?  Our  Lord  said  in  as  strong 
words  as  these  are,  "  Whosoever  shall  deny  Me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny 
before  My  Father "  ;  and  yet  but  a  little  while  afterwards,  when  Peter  denied 
Him  before  men  three  times,  and  in  the  most  obstinate  manner,  Christ  was  so 
far  from  rejecting  him,  that  upon  his  weeping  bitterly  and  repenting  he  was 
continued  even  in  his  apostleship,  and  was  ever  after  one  of  the  leaders  in  that 
blessed  work  of  propagating  the  Christian  faith.  And  it  is  highly  probable  that 
some  of  the  three  thousand  whom  St.  Peter  at  his  first  preaching  converted  to 
the  Christian  faith  had  thus  blasphemed  the  Holy  Ghost  in  our  Saviour's  days ; 
for  he  describes  them  as  those  who  "  knew  the  miracles  and  signs  "  which  God 
wrought  by  His  Son,  and  notwithstanding  this  "  with  wicked  hands  had  crucified 
Him."  And  yet  he  calls  upon  them  to  "  repent  and  be  baptised  for  the  remission 
of  their  sins,"  and  even  encourages  them  to  hope  that  upon  so  doing  they 
"  should  receive  that  Holy  Ghost "  whom  they  had  so  often  blasphemed  in 
our  Saviour's  miracles.  We  are  certain,  likewise,  that  among  those  who  reviled 
Christ  while  He  was  hanging  upon  the  Cross  there  were  scribes  who  said,  "  He 
saved  others,  Himself  He  cannot  save "  ;  thereby  acknowledging  that  He  had 
wrought  miracles  in  healing  diseases,  this  perhaps  before  us  in  particular,  and 
yet  denying  that  He  could  "  save  Himself,"  and  consequently  denying  that  what 
He  wrought  was  by  a  Divine  power.  And  yet  we  find  that  our  Saviour  prayed 
even  for  these  scribes,  saying,  "  Father,  forgive  them."  And  surely  that  sin 
of  theirs  was  not  unpardonable  upon  their  repentance,  when  Christ  with  His 
dying  breath  prayed  for  their  forgiveness. — Bishop  Zachary  Pearce. 

The  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost. — I  shall  never  forget  the  chill  that  struck 
into  my  childish  heart  so  often  as  I  heard  of  this  mysterious  sin  which  carried 
men,  and  for  aught  I  knew  might  have  carried  even  me,  beyond  all  reach  of 
pardon  ;  or  the  wonder  and  perplexity  with  which  I  used  to  ask  myself  why, 
if  this  sin  were  possible — if,  as  the  words  of  our  Lord  seem  to  imply,  it  was 
probable  even  and  by  no  means  infrequent — it  was  not  clearly  defined,  so  that 
we  might  at  least  know,  and  know  beyond  all  doubt,  whether  it  had  been 
committed  or  had  not. 

I.  The  two  phrases  "  this  [present]  age  "  and  "  the  coming  age,"  which  our 
Lord  here  adopts,  were  perfectly  familiar  to  the  Jews,  and  had  a  clear  and 
definite  meaning  on  their  lips.  "  This  present  age,"  or  "  the  age  that  now  is," 
was  the  age  in  which  they  lived,  with  all  its  apparatus  of  religious  teaching 
and  worship,  the  age  of  the  Law  and  the  Temple ;  while  "  the  coming  age,"  or 
"  the  age  to  come,"  was  that  happier  time  of  which  the  advent  of  the  long- 

114 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  hi. 


promised  Messiah  was  to  be  the  sign  and  the  commencement,  although  it  could 
not  fully  come  until  Jesus  the  Christ  ascended  into  heaven  and  poured  out  His 
Spirit  from  on  high.  So  that  what  He  really  affirmed  was,  that  there  is  a  sin 
which  is  just  as  unpardonable  under  the  Christian  dispensation  as  it  was  under 
the  Mosaic  dispensation. 

II.  But  what  is  this  sin  for  which,  at  least  in  the  present  world,  there  is  no 
forgiveness,  or  no  provision  for  forgiveness  ?  It  is  that  wilful  and  invincible 
ignorance  which  refuses  to  be  taught,  that  love  of  darkness  which  refuses  to 
admit  the  light  even  when  the  sun  is  shining  in  the  sky.  They  saw  the  light, 
and  knew  that  it  was  light ;  and  yet  they  loved  darkness  more  than  light, 
because  their  deeds  were  evil.  Like  the  servants  in  the  parable,  they  said, 
"  This  is  the  Heir,"  only  to  add,  "  Let  us  kill  Him,  that  the  inheritance  may  be 
ours  " — ours,  and  not  His.  Jesus  "  knowing  their  thoughts,"  knowing  too  the 
desperate  moral  condition  from  which  their  thoughts  sprang,  simply  warned 
them  that  it  was  desperate.  They  were  deliberately  sinning  against  light, 
against  conscience,  against  all  that  was  true  and  right  and  good ;  in  a  word, 
they  were  "  speaking  against  the  Holy  Ghost,"  the  Spirit  of  all  truth  and 
goodness ;  and  so  long  as  they  did  that  there  was  no  hope  for  them. 

III.  So  far,  then,  from  giving  us  a  dark  mystical  saying  in  which  our  thoughts 
are  lost,  our  Lord  simply  states  a  moral  truism,  as  we  might  have  inferred  from 
the  casual  and  unemphatic  manner  of  His  speech.  And  the  truism  is  that,  since 
salvation  is  necessarily  of  the  will,  if  men  will  not  be  saved,  they  cannot  be 
saved  ;  if  they  will  not  yield  to  the  Divine  Spirit  when  it  moves  and  stirs  within 
them,  they  cannot  be  redeemed  and  renewed  by  that  gracious  Spirit.  Under 
whatever  dispensation  they  live,  they  are  self-excluded  from  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  by  the  one  sin  which  is  therefore  called  an  "  eternal "  or  "  seonial "  sin. 

IV.  That  this  unpardonable  sin  might  be  pardoned,  that  it  was  the  sin,  and 
not  the  men  who  committed  it,  which  could  never  be  forgiven,  is  clear :  for 
many  of  the  Pharisees  who  had  long  resisted  the  Spirit  of  God  in  Christ — and 
be  it  remembered  that  even  Saul  of  Tarsus  had  long  "  kicked  against  the 
goads"  which  urged  him  toward  the  kingdom — afterwards  repented  of  their 
sin,  received  His  words,  believed  His  works,  and  were  welcomed  into  the  fellowship 
of  the  Church.  And  even  of  those  who  never  knew  an  earthly  repentance,  and 
of  their  doom  in  "  the  world  to  come,"  this  passage  says  absolutely  nothing.  It 
leaves  us  to  our  own  conjectures,  our  own  hopes ;  and  neither  approves  nor 
condemns  those  who  trust  that  in  the  world  to  come  even  those  who  leave  this 
world  impenitent  may  be  taught  "  even  against  their  will,  and  by  means  of  a 
larger  experience,  the  lessons  they  would  not  learn  here ;  and  so  be  brought  to 
confess  their  guilt  and  folly,  and  be  taken  at  last — so  as  by  fire — into  the  arms  " 
of  the  Divine  Compassion  and  Love. 

V.  But  where  lies  our  danger  of  committing  this  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost, 
our  need  therefore  of  the  warning  that,  so  long  as  we  persist  in  this  sin,  pardon 
and  salvation  are  impossible  to  us  ?  We  fall  into  this  sin,  must  be  my  reply, 
whenever  we  consciously  and  wilfully  resist  the  Spirit  of  truth  and  goodness — 
whenever,  i.e.,  we  see  a  truth  and  do  not  accept  it,  because  it  cuts  our  prejudices 
against  the  grain — whenever  we  know  what  is  good,  and  yet  do  it  not,  because 
we  love  some  evil  way  too  well  to  leave  it.  To  speak  against  any  form  of 
truth  or  any  form  of  goodness  which  we  inwardly  recognise  as  good  and  true, 
or  even  suspect  to  be  true  and  good,  is  "to  speak  against  the  Holy  Ghost "  : 
and,  be  it  remembered,  "  deeds  speak  louder  than  words."  In  our  religious  life 
we  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  if,  as  we  read  the  gospel,  we  learn  that  in  Christ 
Jesus  we  have  precisely  such  a  Saviour  from  all  sin  and  uncleanness  as  we  need — 
if,  as  we  read,  I  say,  conscience  leaps  up  in  approval  of  what  we  read  and  urges 
us  to  accept  the  offered  salvation,  and  we  refuse  to  listen  because  we  are  too 

115 


chap.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


engrossed  with  the  outward  affairs  of  life,  or  too  attached  to  some  of  the  forms 
of  sin  from  which  Christ  would  save  us  to  part  with  them  yet,  we  commit  the 
sin  which  cannot  be  pardoned,  and  from  which  we  cannot  be  saved  so  long  as 
we  cleave  to  it.  Or,  again,  if  after  we  have  accepted,  or  professed  to  accept, 
His  salvation,  we  catch  glimpses  of  new  and  higher  truths,  and  shut  our  eyes 
against  them  because  we  do  not  want  to  be  at  the  trouble  of  revising  and 
recasting  our  theological  formulas — or  if  we  are  inwardly  called  to  new  and 
difficult  duties,  and  turn  away  from  them  because  they  would  impose  a  strain 
upon  us  or  a  sacrifice  which  we  are  not  willing  to  bear, — in  thus  sinning  against 
conscience  we  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  Nor  is  there  any  one  respect  in 
which  we  refuse  to  recognise  truth  as  true  or  duty  as  binding  upon  us,  whether  in 
the  formation  of  our  political  views  or  the  discharge  of  our  political  functions, 
or  in  the  principles  on  which  we  conduct  our  business,  or  even  in  the  spirit  in 
which  we  conduct  our  literary  or  scientific  investigations,  in  which  we  do  not 
or  may  not  fall  into  this  very  sin.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  from  whom 
all  true  thoughts  and  all  forms  of  goodness  do  proceed.  To  close  our  eyes  to 
any  truth,  to  neglect  any  duty,  is  not  only  to  shut  that  truth  out  of  our  minds, 
and  not  only  to  lower  and  impoverish  the  tone  of  our  life ;  it  is  also  to  grieve 
and  resist  that  pure  and  gracious  Spirit  by  whom  we  are  made  one  with  the 
Father  and  the  Son  ;  it  is  to  impair  the  very  organ  by  which  truth  comes  to  us, 
and  to  cripple  the  very  faculty  by  which  we  are  enabled  for  all  dutiful  and  noble 
enterprise. 

VI.  There  is  still,  however,  one  difficulty  which  must  be  met,  and  which  I 
meet  the  more  cheerfully  because  it  will  give  an  opportunity  of  noticing  what 
is  peculiar  in  St.  Mark's  report  of  this  great  saying,  viz.  the  phrase,  "  Whosoever 
shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  never  forgiveness,  but  is  guilty  of 
eternal  sin."  The  difficulty  I  am  told  is  this :  "  When  we  read  of  a  sin  that 
cannot  be  forgiven  whether  in  the  Mosaic  age  or  the  Christian,  we  naturally 
assume  our  Lord  to  mean  that  it  cannot  be  forgiven  even  when  it  is  repented  of; 
for  no  sin  can  be  forgiven  men  until  they  repent ;  and  our  Lord  is  here  drawing 
a  distinction  between  one  sin  and  all  others.  What,  then,  can  this  distinction 
be  but  this  :  that,  though  all  other  sins  may  be  forgiven  when  men  repent  of 
them,  this  sin  cannot  be  forgiven,  let  them  repent  of  it  how  they  may  ?  "  But 
we  may  ask  those  who  urge  this  objection :  How  do  you  know  that  there  are 
no  sins  which  God  will  not  forgive  men  even  before  they  repent,  and  even  though 
they  should  never  repent,  at  least  in  this  present  life  ?  We  may  suggest  that 
our  Lord  is  here  drawing  a  distinction  between  outward  overt  transgressions 
which  may  be  forgiven  us  on,  or  even  perhaps  apart  from,  repentance,  and  the 
inward  sinful  principle  which  can  never  be  forgiven,  but  must  be  renounced  and 
cast  out.  What  is  the  sin  which  our  Lord  Himself  compares,  or  contrasts,  with 
the  unpardonable  sin  ?  It  is  the  sin  of  speaking  against  Himself,  the  gracious 
Son  of  Man.  It  is  to  deny  that  there  was  any  manifestation  of  God  in  the  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh  ;  in  more  modern  phraseology,  it  is  to  deny  that  there  is 
anything  Divine  in  the  Christian  dispensation  and  faith.  That,  alas !  is  a  sin 
only  too  common  in  our  own  days.  There  are  intelligent  and  learned  men  only 
too  many,  and  men  whom,  judged  by  any  other  standard,  we  should  all  pronounce 
to  be  honest  and  good  men,  who  deny  that  God  has  ever  given  any  immediate 
revelation  of  His  will  to  mankind,  who  even  doubt  both  whether  any  such 
revelation  be  possible  and  whether  there  be  any  God  to  make  it.  They  may 
have  been  blinded  by  intellectual  prepossessions  or  an  inherited  bent  of  mind  : 
but  are  we  to  blame  blind  men  because  they  do  not  see,  and  to  accuse  them  of  a 
wilful  rejection  of  the  light  that  shines  from  heaven  ?  And  if  we  do  not,  will 
God  ?  The  fault  may  be  ours,  rather  than  theirs.  We  may  have  turnea  the 
very  light  into  a  darkness.     We  may  so  have  misrepresented  our  Master  to 

116 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ill. 


them,  that,  instead  of  seeing  Him  as  He  is,  they  may  have  seen  only  that 
imperfect  and  misleading  image  of  Him  which  we  have  made  in  our  own  like- 
ness. If  a  man  has  honestly  doubted,  if  he  has  followed  the  inward  light  and 
been  true  to  the  inward  voice,  and  he  should  die  before  discovering  that  Christ 
is  other  and  better  than  he  knew,  that  He  is  indeed  the  true  light  of  every  man 
and  the  very  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory — if,  that  is,  he  should  never 
repent  in  this  world  of  his  sin  in  speaking  against  and  rejecting  the  Son  of 
Man, — will  his  sin  never  be  forgiven  him,  or  will  it  not,  rather,  never  be  counted 
against  him,  however  heavily  he  may  reckon  it  against  himself  ?  On  the  other 
hand,  if  a  man  has  not  been  honest  in  his  doubts  and  denials — if,  besides  sinning 
against  the  God  without  him  who  sought  to  reveal  Himself  to  him,  he  has  also 
sinned  against  the  God  within  him  ;  if  when  reason  or  conscience  said,  That 
is  true  and  you  ought  to  believe  it,  or,  That  is  duty  and  you  ought  to  do  it,  he 
has  refused  to  accept  the  truth,  or  do  the  duty  which  he  felt  to  be  clothed  with 
Divine  sanctions  ;  if  he  has  consciously  shut  out  the  light  and  refused  to  walk 
in  it ;  if,  in  the  language  of  our  passage,  he  has  added  the  sin  against  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  the  sin  against  the  Son  of  Man,  and  if  he  should  leave  the  world 
without  repenting  of  his  sin, — how  can  we  deny  that  he  has  put  himself  outside 
the  pale  of  forgiveness  by  making  forgiveness  impossible  ?  What  may  become 
of  him  in  that  other,  future,  world  we  cannot  say,  we  are  not  told,  though  we 
are  still  allowed  to  cherish  the  hope  that  new  moral  forces  may  be  brought  to 
bear  upon  him  and  may  take  effect  upon  him  ;  all  we  can  be  sure  of  is  that  so 
long  as  he  deliberately  shuts  out  the  light,  the  light  cannot  reach  him — that 
so  long  as  he  refuses  to  part  with  his  sin,  he  cannot  be  saved  from  his  sin. — 
8.  Cox,  D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    20.     The    strain    of  constant  fanatic,  to  be  sneered  at  and  scorned. 

publicity. — In  the  crowd  there  is   no  To    human    nature    such     treatment 

moderation.     They  can  go  to  a  pitch  gives  keenest  pain ;    yet   God's   grace 

of  enthusiasm  in  one  direction,  or  of  is  sufficient  to  triumph  in  us.     When 

animosity    in    another  ;    but    in    the  we  are  sorely  tried,  let  us  not  think  of 

presence   of    Christ    they   cannot   act  the  discouragements,  but  of  Jesus,  who 

with  calmness.     Nothing  is  so  wearing  bore  a  shame  and  obloquy  for  us  far 

as  the  excitement  of  constant  publicity,  deeper 'than  we  can  ever  bear  for  Him. 
Unless  quiet  alternate  with  the  excite-  Opposition    from    friends    is     very 

ment  of   great   gatherings,    the   body  common   in   the   career   of    reformers 

wastes,   the  nerve  frets,   the   mind  is  and   of    those   who    depart   from   the 

jaded,  and  the   soul   itself   goes   stale  ordinary   course.       History   is   full  of 

and  flat.     Popularity  has,  accordingly,  instances.     It   is    very   frequent,    too, 

often  a  cruel  kindness,   which  claims  in  the  case  of  those  who,  in  irreligious 

untimely  and  exhausting  service  from  families   or   societies,   seek  to   become 

him  whom  it  natters  with   its  appro-  Christians.     (See  Matt.  x.  24,  35-37.) 

bation. — R.  Glover.  Here  is  a  severe  test.     But  the  only 

way    in    which    this    world    can    be 

Ver.  21.  The  taunts  of  unbelievers. —  improved  and  saved  is  by  that  faith, 

It  is  very  hard  for  the  Christian  to  and  character,  and  truth  which   will 

bear  the  taunts  of  unbelievers.     It  is  do    right,    no    matter    who    opposes, 

difficult  to  work  bravely  on,  without  They  who  when  "  at  Rome  do  as  the 

the    sympathy    of    one's    fellows ;    it  Romans  do "  in  matters  of  conscience, 

requires    great  grace   not   utterly   to  will  never  change  Rome  into  the  city 

lose  heart,   to    bear    being    called    a  of  God. 

117 


chap.  ill.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Friendship's  shortcomings. — 1.  Un-  Satan  versus  Satan. — Would  God 
able  to  follow  the  highest  moods  of  the  that  we  might  hear  of  strife  and 
soul.  2.  Unable  to  see  the  spiritual  contentions  in  the  ranks  of  the  king- 
meaning  of  outward  circumstances,  dom  of  darkness  !  If  the  public-  house 
3.  Seeking  to  interfere  with  spiritual  keepers  might  rise  up  against  the 
usefulness.  4.  Seeking  to  reduce  life  gamblers ;  if  thieves  and  swindlers 
to  commonplace  order.  The  sincere  might  but  take  each  other  by  the 
servant  of  Jesus  Christ  will  take  his  throat ;  if  the  managers  of  the  horse- 
law  from  the  Master  and  not  from  races  might  but  begin  to  make  war 
public  opinion. — J.  Parker,  D.D.  upon   the    organisers    of    the   lottery 

The  zealous  spirit. — A  zealous  spirit  schemes ;    if   drunkards   and   seducers 

is    essential    to    eminent    success    in  would   but   fall    out ;    if    only   Satan 

anything.     Perhaps  there  is  the  more  might   fight   against   Satan,    and    his 

need    to    insist    upon    this     because  kingdom   fall    into    bitter,    relentless, 

enthusiasm  is  out   of   fashion.     It   is  and  uncompromising  internecine  strife, 

bad   form   nowadays   to   admire  any-  asking  and  giving  no  quarter, — then 

thing  very  warmly.    To  be  strenuously  would  it  be  a  good  day  for  this  poor 

in  earnest  is  almost  vulgar.    Especially  devil-ridden  world.     But  no  such  good 

is  this  so  in  regard  to  religion.     "  Our  thing  as   this  is   happening,   or   ever 

Joe  is  a  very  good  young  man,"  said  will  happen. — G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D. 

an  old  nurse  the  other  day;  "but  he  Lessons. — 1.     Every     argument     of 

do  go  so  mad  on  religion."     That  was  truth   and   evidence   of   Divinity  can 

the  fly  in  the  ointment — which  spoilt  be   explained   away,   if   only   you  are 

all.      Did    not    Pope   say    long    ago,  bad   enough   to   do  it.     2.  Falsehood, 

"  The  worst  of  madness  is  a  saint  run  if  indulged,    may   lead  you   to   lie  in 

mad "  ?      And   he   only   put  in  terse  the   most   sacred   matters,   and   utter 

and   pithy   speech  what   other  people  the  most  depraved  blasphemy.    3.  Man 

say  more  clumsily.     1.  And  yet  how  has  ultimately  only  the  single  alter- 

can  one  be  a  Christian  without  being  native — to  be  devout  or  superstitious  ; 

an     enthusiast  ?        Indifferent,     half-  you  must  be  a  believer  in  God,  or  in 

hearted  Christians  are  not  true  Chris-  a  devil.      4.   There  is  no  knave  who 

tians  at  all.    The  author  of  Ecce  Homo  is  not  a  fool ;  for  if  he  were  not  a  fool, 

cannot  be  said  to   exaggerate   in   his  he  would  not  be  a  knave. — R.  Glover. 
declaration  that    "  Christianity   is  an 

enthusiasm,  or  it  is  nothing."     2.  And  Ver.    23.    Christ's    question. — Jesus 

what  good  work  has  ever  been  wrought  has  questions  to  ask  as  well  as  His 

without   enthusiasm?     Said    a    great  opponents.       Too    much    attention   is 

preacher  :    "If  you   want   to  drive  a  given  to  the  answering  of   questions, 

pointed  piece  of  iron  through  a  thick  We  listen  to  the   "  How  ?  "    and  the 

board,  the  surest  way  is  to  heat  your  "  Why  ? "  of  the  sceptic ;  but  are  we 

skewer.     It  is  always  easier  to   burn  alive  to  the  advantage  that  we  should 

our  way  than  to  bore  it."     Only  "  a  gain  if  we  were  to  propose  questions 

soul  all  flame  "  is  likely  to  accomplish  for  ourselves  ? 
much  in  the  teeth  of  the  difficulties 

which  beset  every   lofty  enterprise. —  Vers.  28,  29.  Blasphemy  against  the 

G.  H.  James.  Holy     Ghost. — Blasphemy,     that     is, 

speaking    against.       But    thought   is 

Ver.  22.  Zeal  in  opposing  Christ. —  speech  to  God.     "  Heard  melodies  are 

These  scribes  came  all  the  way  from  sweet,  but  those  unheard  are  sweeter," 

Jerusalem  to  oppose  Christ.    Had  there  says  Keats.  Heard  blasphemy  is  bitter  : 

been  as  much  earnestness  in  propagating  is  unheard  blasphemy  less  bitter  to  the 

the  truth  as  there  has  been  in  trying  ear  of  the  Holy  One  ?     And  speech  is 

to  check  it,  the  whole  world  might  by  deed.     Therefore,  "  by  thy  words  thou 

this  time  have  been  regenerated.  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words 

118 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   III. 


thou  shalt  be  condemned."  The  blas- 
phemy against  the  Holy  Spirit  does 
not  demand  audible  speech.  At  the 
very  time  Christ  used  this  unparalleled 
language,  He  was  replying  to  the  in- 
audible speech  of  the  Pharisees : 
"Knowing  their  thoughts,  He  said 
unto  them."  So  the  essential  thing 
is  not  in  the  speech,  but  in  the  object 
of  it.  "  No  man  can  do  these  miracles 
except  God  be  with  him  " — that  was 
the  witness  of  the  truth  they  knew. 
"  He  casteth  out  devils  by  Beelzebub, 
the  prince  of  the  devils " — that  was 
the  he  to  their  own  sense  of  right. 
And  it  was  because  of  that  deliberate 
lie  against  the  light  within  them  that 
Jesus  told  them  of  the  sin  that  hath 
never  forgiveness.  Since  the  departure 
of  Jesus  from  the  earth,  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  been  to  men  the  inner 
light.  Magnificent  gift !  Momentous 
responsibility  !  He  takes  the  place  of 
it  within  us.  We  no  longer  obey  it, 
resist  it,  quench  it :  we  obey,  resist, 
quench  >Him.  He  is  the  Advocate, 
come  to  plead  the  cause  of  right 
within  us,  the  cause  of  righteousness 
and  judgment  against  us.  He  convicts 
the  world  of  sin  and  of  righteousness 
and  of  judgment. — Expository  Times. 

Ver.  29.  The  soul  incapacitated  for 
repentance. — Strength,  Purity,  Light, 
Life,  and  Love, — are  not  these  the 
foundation  pillars  of  the  throne  of 
God  ?    And  these  are  the  words  under 


which  the  nature  and  work  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  revealed  to  us.  Now 
suppose  a  man  by  an  act  of  deliberate 
and  conscious  choice  renounces  this 
God  of  Holiness,  this  Spirit  of  Light, 
and  Life,  and  Love, — saying,  "  These 
are  things  that  I  hate.  Death  and 
corruption  are  better  than  the  life  of 
God.  His  love  I  trample  on  and 
despise."  Imagine  a  man  speaking 
to  himself  after  this  fashion,  and 
proceeding  to  shape  his  life  accordingly. 
Would  not  that  be  a  kind  of  blasphemy 
which  might  well  incapacitate  the  soul 
for  repentance,  and  so,  as  a  necessary 
consequence,  for  forgiveness  ? — W.  R. 
Huntington,  D.D. 

The  man  who  blasphemes  against 
the  God  within  him — who  calls  that 
right  which  he  knows  and  feels  to 
be  wrong,  and  who,  knowing  the  good, 
deliberately  says  to  evil,  "Be  thou  my 
good," — is  not  to  be  forgiven  in  this 
age.  No,  verily :  for  this  age  has 
brought  him  all  that  it  has  to  bring, 
and  he  has  rejected  it :  the  most 
penetrating  and  intimate  ministries 
of  Divine  Grace  have  been  vouchsafed 
him,  and  he  has  resisted  them :  let 
him  feel  the  judgments  of  this  age, 
since  he  will  not  accept  its  choicest 
gifts ;  let  him  pass  out  of  this  age 
only  to  enter  into  the  discipline  of 
the  next :  and  as  he  suffers  these 
seonial  judgments,  let  him  consider 
and  reconsider  himself,  lest  he  also 
lose  the  ages  beyond. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  31—35. 


(Parallels:  Matt.  xii.  46-50;  Luke  viii.  19-21.) 

Kinship  to  Christ. — Notwithstanding  the  organised  opposition  of  the  religious 
leaders,  crowds  continue  to  surround  Christ,  eagerly  listening  to  His  gracious 
words.  But  His  friends  and  relatives,  already  convinced  that  "  He  is  beside 
Himself"  (ver.  21),  now  induce  His  mother  to  accompany  them  into  His  presence. 
The  reason  must  have  been,  observes  Calvin,  "  either  that  they  were  anxious 
about  Him,  or  that  they  were  desirous  of  instruction ;  for  it  is  not  without  some 
good  reason  that  they  endeavour  to  approach  Him,  and  it  is  not  probable  that 
those  who  accompanied  the  Holy  Mother  were  unbelievers.  The  warmth  of 
natural  affection  may  have  carried  them  beyond  the  bounds  of  propriety  ;  but 
I  have  no  doubt  that  they  were  led  by  pious  zeal  to  seek  His  society."     One 

119 


chap.  in.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


would  fain  believe  that  this  estimate  of  their  conduct  is  the  true  one,  rather 
than  the  harsher  judgment  of  Chrysostom,  that  the  Blessed  Virgin  wanted  to 
make  a  public  display  of  her  maternal  authority.  But,  whatever  the  motive 
may  have  been,  whether  wholly  innocent  or  partly  blameworthy,  Christ  seizes 
the  opportunity  to  set  forth  eternal  truths  of  far-reaching  import. 

I.  A  sad  fact. — "  So  far  from  blood  relations  being,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
helpers  and  promoters  of  spiritual  duty  or  lofty  sacrifice  in  the  home  of  which 
they  are  inmates,  the  history  of  all  times  goes  to  prove  the  very  contrary ;  in 
the  persecutions  endured  for  the  faith's  sake  the  daughter  has  risen  against  her 
mother,  and  the  father  against  his  son,  and  the  house  has  been  divided  against 
itself ;  and  the  sword  (not  of  the  Spirit)  has  invaded  it.  We  may  have  to 
choose  between  Christ  and  some  one  who,  after  the  flesh,  is  as  dear  to  us  as 
our  own  soul.  Which  shall  we  go  with  ?  (Matt.  x.  37.)  A  call  to  the  mission 
field,  or  the  preference  of  a  quiet  Christian  life  to  a  career  of  splendour  and 
fashion,  or  a  profession  which  implies  the  reproach  of  Christ  rather  than  the 
riches  of  Egypt,  has  often  disturbed  families  and  parted  kinsfolk"  (Bishop 
Thorold). 

II.  A  great  principle. — Christ  here  declares  most  emphatically,  that  obedience, 
not  privilege,  constitutes  true  kinship  to  Him — that  the  spiritual  fellowship 
which  He  came  from  heaven  to  establish,  and  which  all  may  equally  participate 
in,  is  a  far  higher  and  more  precious  thing  than  any  mere  earthly  tie.  So  far, 
however,  from  in  any  way  depreciating  the  natural  relationships  of  brother, 
sister,  mother,  He  adds  to  them  fresh  dignity  and  interest,  by  adopting  them 
as  fit  terms  for  the  description  of  His  closest  union  and  communion  with  believers. 
"  It  was  not  that  He  denied  the  claims  of  the  flesh,  but  that  He  was  sensitive 
to  other,  subtler,  profounder  claims  of  the  spirit  and  spiritual  kinship.  He 
would  not  carelessly  wound  a  mother's  or  a  brother's  heart,  but  the  life  Divine 
had  also  its  fellowships  and  affinities,  and  still  less  could  He  throw  these  aside  " 
(Dean  Chadwick).  As  Bengel  puts  it :  He  contemns  not  the  mother,  but  He 
places  the  Father  first. 

III.  An  abiding  law. — "  There  is  no  tie  so  close,  so  holy,  so  blessed,  so 
exquisitely  tender,  as  that  which  joins  one  regenerate  soul  to  another  in  the 
mystical  body  of  Christ.  The  joy  of  the  common  salvation,  the  inheritance  of 
the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  the  fellowship  in  the  gospel,  the  inex- 
plicable experience  of  the  love  which  passeth  knowledge,  the  hope  laid  up  in 
heaven,  the  sympathy  and  zeal  and  ardour  for  the  honour  of  the  Saviour — these 
constitute  an  unity  closer,  surer,  fonder,  deeper,  than  the  dearest  earthly  tie 
which  human  souls  can  know  "  (Bishop  Thorold).  The  tender  bonds  of  family 
affection  can  find  stability  nowhere  but  in  Christ,  the  "  Elder  Brother,"  who 
is  the  Only  Begotten  Son  of  the  Eternal  Father,  from  whom  every  family  both 
in  heaven  and  earth  is  named. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.     31.    The   family    visit. — We  some  kind   of   interference  with  His 

place  this   visit   of    the    mother    and  mission,  whether  prompted  by  fear  or 

brethren  of   Jesus   immediately   after  affection,  would  Jesus  have  so  disowned 

His   return   to    Capernaum,    and   we  their  relationship. — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

attribute   it   to   Pharisaic    opposition,  Christ's  outside  kindred. — They  were 

which  either  filled  those  relatives   of  without — that    is,    not   in   the   inner 

Jesus   with    fear   for    His   safety,    or  circle  of  the  crowd  standing  by  Him 

made  them  sincerely  concerned  about  and  with  Him,  but  on  the  outside  of 

His   proceedings.      Only  if  it   meant  the  crowd,  loving  Him,  but  wanting 

120 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  hi. 


to  get   Him  away  from   His  present  as  that   highly  favoured   and   blessed 

surroundings.     They  no  doubt  thought  among  women,  bear   Him,  again  and 

Him    unwisely     carried     away     with  again,    to    a    perishing   world    which 

enthusiasm,  and  that  He  was  spoiling  needs    Him, — can,    I   say,    be   as  she 

or  hurting  His  cause  as  well  as  imperil-  was,  but  is  not,  because  lofty  purity 

ling  His  life.     Jesus  has  many  outside  and   lowly  submission    to    God's   will 

kindred — those  who  admire  Him,  and  are  lacking.     2.   Or   the  Church  can 

appreciate  to  some  extent  His  sublime  be  as   those   "  brothers "   were — those 

teaching  on  ethical  points ;  but   they  who   tenderly   cared    for   Him — those 

do  not  understand  Him  as  the  world's  who  misunderstood   Him,    and   would 

Saviour ;  especially  they  do  not  under-  fain  protect  Him  from  Himself — those 

stand  the  significance  of  His  death  and  who  at  length   learned  to   believe  in 

His  relations  to  all  men  irrespective  of  Him,  and   to   suffer   with    Him,    and 

persons,  and  the  nature  of  that  new  to  stand  witness  before  kings  for  His 

kingdom  of  men  and  women  "  born  not  sake  :  thus  can  the  Church  be,  when 

of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  it  gets  the  brotherly  heart,  and  thinks 

.  .  .  but  of  God." — G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D.  more  of  Christ  than  of  self.     3.  Notice 

Weigh  the  calls. — This  was  a  call  to  that   Christ   did   not    say,   when    He 

give  up  His  work.     We  must  be  care-  spoke   of   the    relationship    man    can 

ful  to  weigh  the  calls  that  come  to  us.  hold  to  Him,    "  Behold   My   Father." 

Even  the  calls  of  kindly  consideration  That  is  a  position  no  man  by  himself,* 

may  need  to  be  resisted.  nor  all  men   put  together,   can    hold 

to  Him.      For    the    father's   position 

Vers.  33-35.  Lessons. — 1.  The  power  (and  half  the  world's  evils,  domestic, 

of  interfering  with  others  in  such   a  political,    and    religious,    have    arisen 

way   as  to   do  good   is    a   very   rare  from     forgetfulness    of    this)    is    the 

possession.       2.    Sometimes   it   is   our  originating    and    governing     position, 

duty  to  take  a  course  that  grieves  dear  The  true   son   only   then   lives   when 

friends.      In  such  cases  aim  at  doing  he  does  the  will  of  his  father.     And 

as  Jesus  did — blending  perfect  gentle-  the     Christ,    who    saves,    admits    no 

ness  with  perfect  firmness.   3.  Nearness  man's  right  to  stand  in  this  governing, 

to  Christ  is  a  matter  not  of  race,  or  regulative  position    to    Him. — J.    W. 

place,  or  time,  but  of  heart.     4.  Let  Owen. 
all  seek  this  essential  grace  that  was 

the  root  grace  of  Christ's  character —  Yer.   35.  Christ's  spiritual  kindred. 

and  live  daily,  hourly,  doing  the  will  — Wonderful  words  !     1.  Think  of  it, 

of  our  Father  in  heaven. — R.  Glover.  busy  toiler,  far  away,  perhaps,  from 

The  false  and  the  true  family  of  the  home  of  your  youth;  a  young 
Jesus. — 1.  The  one  would  watch  over  man  here  in  this  city,  it  may  be, 
Him  and  His  cause ;  the  other  will  with  few  friends.  Here  is  an  assur- 
be  watched  over  by  Him.  2.  The  one  ance  of  the  Saviour's  brotherly  kind- 
would  lead  Him  ;  the  other  will  be  led  ness.  2.  Or  you  may  be  a  daughter 
by  Him.  3.  The  one  would  save  trying  to  lift  a  mother's  burden  or 
Him ;  the  other  will  be  saved  by  a  father's  care.  No  matter  how  poor 
Him.  4.  The  one  would  restrain  and  or  needy,  if  you  are  doing  God's  will, 
bring  Him  into  danger  ;  the  other  Christ  calls  you  His  sister.  3.  You  may 
will  be  restrained  and  bound  by  His  be  a  wearied,  perplexed  mother,  with 
Word  and  Spirit. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.  many  little  ones,  and  disheartened  with 

the  work  and  burden  of  home,  where 

Ver.    34.   The  Church's  relationship  the  bitter  and  sweet  mingle.  Jesus  calls 

to  Christ. — Christ  here  speaks  of   the  you    "  Mother,"    and  makes   Himself 

relationship    which    the    Church    on  your  "  Son "  ! — E.  P.  Parker,  D.D. 

earth  can  hold  to  Him.     1.  It  can  be,  The  gospel  of  the  family  of  God. — 

as  it  were,  a  "  mother "  to  Him — can,  We    have    had    the    gospel    of    the, 

121 


CHAP.  III. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


kingdom  of  God,  and  glad  tidings  it 
has  been  indeed ;  but  have  we  not 
here  something  even  better  ?  It  is 
much  to  be  permitted  to  hail  the  Son 
of  God  as  our  King  :  is  it  not  better 
still  to  be  encouraged  to  hail  Him  as 
a  Brother,  to  know  that  all  that  is 
sweetest  and  tenderest  in  the  dear 
words  "  brother,"  "  sister,"  "  mother," 
can  be  imported  into  our  relation  to 
Him?  How  it  endears  the  heavenly- 
relationship,  and  hallows  the  earthly ! 
—J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 

The  family  of  love  and  service. — All 
those  who  have  been  impelled  by  a 
higher  inspiration,  and  these  who,  sub- 
jugated by  God's  call,  have  dedicated 
their  whole  life  to  His  service,  will 
understand  without  difficulty  these 
words  of  Jesus.  Every  strong  con- 
viction ends  by  taking  possession  of 
us ;  it  overcomes  and  absorbs  us,  and 


tears  us  ruthlessly  from  everything 
else;  it  becomes  our  sole  object,  and 
outside  it  nothing  seems  to  touch  us : 
those  who  do  not  understand  it  are 
strangers  to  us  ;  those  who  attack  it 
are  our  enemies  ;  those  who  love  and 
serve  it  with  us  are  our  true,  our  only 
family. — Father  Didon. 

All  to  each.— He  does  not  say  that 
one  of  us  is  to  Him  as  a  "brother," 
and  another  is  to  Him  as  a  "  sister," 
and  another  is  to  Him  as  a"  mother," 
according  to  the  several  features  of 
our  different  characters ;  but  the  man 
who  "  does  the  will  of  God,"  the  same 
occupies,  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
all  those  endearing  relationships.  He 
stands  in  the  confidence  of  the  "brother," 
in  the  fondness  of  the  "  sister,"  and  in 
all  the  holy  and  respectful  attachment 
even  of  a"  mother." — Jas.  Vaughan. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    III. 


Ver.  2.  The  world  watches  Christians. — 
"  Now  lads,"  said  the  late  Duncan  Matheson, 
the  Scottish  evangelist,  to  a  lot  of  boys  who 
had  been  converted  at  his  meetings,  "the 
people  here  are  not  in  the  habit  of  reading 
their  Bible  to  learn  what  God  says  to  them, 
but  I'll  tell  you  what  they'll  read.  They'll 
read  your  lives  and  ways  very  carefully  to 
see  if  you  are  really  what  you  profess  to  be. 
And  mind  you  this,  if  they  find  your  lives 
to  be  inconsistent  with  your  profession,  the 
devil  will  give  them  this  for  an  excuse  in 
rejecting  Christ."  Very  true  indeed  are 
these  words.  Would  that  we  could  lay  them 
more  constantly  to  heart !  The  life  of  the 
professing  Christian  is  the  only  book  of 
evidences  that  many  people  ever  read  in 
reference  to  Christianity.  The  Christian 
professor's  life  is  thus  the  world's  Bible. 
When  there  are  inconsistencies  and  flaws  in 
it,  then  the  world  makes  these  a  plea  against 
religion.  Let  us  remember  that  the  world's 
eyes  are  upon  us.  Let  us  keep  our  book  of 
evidences  clear  and  pure. 

Ver.  5.  Anger  checks  wrongdoing. — It 
might  at  first  appear  well  for  mankind  if 
the  bee  were  without  its  sting  ;  but  upon 
recollection  it  will  be  found  that  the  little 
animal  would  then  have  too  many  rivals 
in  sharing  its  labours.  A  hundred  other 
lazy  animals,  fond  of  honey  and  hating 
labour,  would  intrude  upon  the  sweets  of 
the  hive,  and  the  treasure  would  be  carried 

122 


off  for  want  of  armed  guardians  to  protect 
it.  And  it  might  at  first  appear  well  for 
mankind  if  the  principle  of  anger  were  not 
a  part  of  our  constitution.  But  then  we 
should  be  overrun  with  rogues.  The  presence 
of  anger,  always  ready  to  start  forth  when 
an  injury  is  done  or  intended,  has  the  effect 
of  suppressing  much  gross  impudence  and 
intolerable  oppression.  The  sting  of  noble 
anger  applied  to  a  dastard  who  has  bullied 
the  weak  or  injured  the  unoffending  has  a 
most  -salutary  influence  in  restraining  him 
for  the  future,  and  in  warning  his  fraternity 
of  the  like  punishment  which  is  all  ready  for 
them.  But  man  should  control  his  anger  as 
the  bee  does  her  sting.  It  is  not  to  be  per- 
petually projected  on  every  possible  occasion, 
but  to  be  used  only  when  impertinence, 
laziness,  injustice,  or  fraud  requires. — 
Scientific  Illustrations. 

Ver.  9.  Waiting  is  a  harder  duty  than 
doing. — In  a  certain  battle  a  detachment  of 
cavalry  was  kept  inactive.  It  was  hard  for 
the  men  to  do  nothing  but  wait,  while  the 
fight  was  going  on  before  them.  At  last, 
in  the  crisis  of  the  battle,  the  command  was 
given  them  to  charge,  and  that  body  of  fresh 
men,  sweeping  down  like  a  torrent,  turned 
the  tide  of  battle.  So,  in  the  battle  of  life, 
waiting  is  often  the  surest  means  to  victory. 
And  it  is  comforting  to  know  that  where  we 
see  only  the  unsightly  bud,  God  sees  the  per- 
fect flower  ;  where  we  see  the  rough  pebble 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   III. 


He  sees  the  flashing  diamond.  Patient  wait- 
ing and  patient  doing  have  at  last  their 
reward.  The  traveller  who  has  patiently 
toiled  up  the  weary  passes  of  the  Alps  looks 
down  at  last  with  triumph  on  glorious  Italy. 
Those  who  have  sat  by  the  bedside  of  a 
sick  friend  by  night  will  know  how  gladly 
they  welcomed  the  morning.  The  laurel 
crown  which  the  victor  at  Olympia  received 
was  in  itself  of  little  value  ;  it  was  prized  as 
a  sign  of  the  victory  that  had  come  through 
hard  strife.  There  is  a  great  battle  going  on 
in  the  world— the  strife  between  good  and 
evil.  In  that  strife  we  are  engaged ;  and 
the  harder  the  battle  is,  the  sweeter  will  be 
the  victory.  During  the  battle  of  Waterloo, 
Wellington,  it  is  said,  took  out  his  watch, 
and  said,  "  I  can  hold  out  for  so  long. 
Blucher  will  be  here  within  an  hour,  so 
victory  is  sure."  The  Christian  can  in  like 
manner  dismiss  all  fear  as  to  the  result  of 
the  conflict  in  which  he  is  engaged.  Though 
the  conflict  be  sore,  though  the  sword 
pierce  the  soul,  he  knows  that  the  Captain 
of  salvation  will  not  fail  him. 

Ver.  14.  Preaching. — The  more  lax,  the 
less  laboured  the  style,  the  nearer  it  comes 
to  colloquial  language,  the  better.  I  am 
convinced  that  one  of  the  things  which 
make  my  ordinary  sermons  tell  from  the 
pulpit  is  this  very  circumstance — that  I  write 
precisely  as  I  would  talk,  and  that  my 
sermons  are  as  nearly  as  possible  extempo- 
raneous effusions.  .  .  .  When  the  Archdeacon 
and  Mr.  Watson  say  the  sermon  will  (d.g.) 
do  good,  though  not  add  to  my  character  as 
an  author,  I  hesitate  not  for  one  moment  to 
publish  :  for  what  does  my  character  signify  ? 
and  how  gladly  would  I  sacrifice  all  its  re- 
spectability as  a  writer,  to  do  good  to  a  single 
soul ! — From  a  letter  of  Dean  Hook. 

Solemnity  of  preaching. — Dr.  John  Brown, 
speaking  of  a  minister's  leaving  his  people 
for  another  pastorate,  says  that  he  mentally 
exclaims,  "There  they  gol  when  next  we 
meet  it  will  be  at  the  Judgment !  " 

Qualifications  of  a  good  preacher. — Ten 
qualifications  are  given  of  a  good  preacher 
by  Luther.  He  should  be  able  to  preach 
plainly  and  in  order.  He  should  have  a 
good  head.  Good  power  of  speech;  a  good 
voice ;  and  a  good  memory.  He  should  be 
sure  of  what  he  means  to  say,  and  be  ready 
to  stake  body  and  life,  goods  and  glory,  on 
its  truth.  He  should  know  when  to  stop. 
He  should  study  diligently,  and  suffer  him- 
self to  be  vexed  and  criticised  by  every  one. 

Ver.  18.  St.  Matthew* s  example  led  to  one 
of  the  holiest  lives  recorded  in  the  annals  of 
the  early  Church.  One  of  the  most  able  and 
useful  men  in  the  North  African  Church  was 
the  Bishop  Nulgertius.  He  had  been  a  re- 
ceiver of  taxes,  but  one  day  it  occurred  to 
him,  "May  not  I,  like   Matthew,  become 


from  a  tax-gatherer  a  preacher  of  the  gos- 
pel ?  "  Accordingly  he  renounced  his  worldly 
employment,  sought  Holy  Orders,  and  was 
ultimately  a  most  useful  bishop. 

■ 

Ver.  19.  Judas  an  evidence  to  the  worth  of 
Christianity. — That  which  is  most  valuable 
and  excellent  in  itself  is  most  liable  to  be 
counterfeited.  And  it  is  no  disparagement 
to  a  real  diamond,  a  pure  piece  of  gold,  or  a 
genuine  bank-note,  that  they  are  liable  to  be 
imitated.  We  should  act  in  the  one  case  as 
we  do  in  the  other — be  upon  our  guard 
against  deception,  learn  to  distinguish  be- 
tween the  precious  and  the  vile,  and  set  a 
greater  value  upon  that  which  we  find  pure 
and  genuine. 

Ver.  21.  The  world's  estimate  of  Christian 
zeal. — The  Rev.  Rowland  Hill,  on  one  occa- 
sion, strained  his  voice,  raising  it  to  the 
highest  pitch,  in  order  to  warn  some  persons 
of  impending  danger,  and  so  rescued  them 
from  peril.  For  this  he  was  warmly 
applauded.  But  when  he  elevated  his  voice 
to  a  similar  pitch  in  warning  sinners  of  the 
error  and  evil  of  their  ways,  and  in  order  to 
save  their  souls  from  a  still  greater  peril,  the 
same  friends  who  before  had  praised  him 
now  pronounced  him  fool  and  fanatic. 

Zeal. — When  some  one  expostulated  with 
Duncan  Matheson,  the  evangelist,  that  he 
was  killing  himself  with  his  labours,  and 
ought  to  have  rest,  he  replied,  "  I  cannot 
rest  whilst  souls  are  being  lost :  there  is  all 
eternity  in  which  to  rest  after  life  is  done." 

Earnestness  in  work. — Soon  after  Dr.  John 
Morison's  ordination,  a  neighbouring  minis- 
ter called  on  him,  and  said,  "  You  are  doing 
too  much ;  you  must  take  care  that  you  do 
not  overwork  yourself."  "  Depend  upon  it," 
replied  Morison,  "  the  lazy  minister  dies 
first."  Six  months  later  he  was  called  to  the 
death-bed  of  this  same  minister.  "  Do  you 
remember  what  you  once  said  to  me  ? " 
asked  the  dying  man.  Morison  could  only 
reply  falteringly,  "  Oh,  don't  speak  of  that !  " 
"  Yes,  but  I  must  speak  of  it,"  said  his  friend  ; 
"  it  was  the  truth.  Work,  work  while  it  is 
called  day,  for  now  the  night  is  coming  when 
I  cannot  work." 

Vers.  23-26.  Christ's  actions  prove  His 
Divine  mission. — When  the  Netherlander 
broke  away  from  the  bondage  of  Spain,  they 
still  professed  to  be  loyal  subjects  of  King 
Philip,  and  in  the  king's  name  went  out  to 
fight  against  the  king's  armies.  That  was 
a  kind  of  loyalty  which  Philip  refused  to 
recognise.  The  scribes  professed  to  believe 
that  the  devil  was  content  with  loyalty  like 
this — that,  in  fact,  he  hugely  enjoyed  the 
destruction  of  his  own  works  by  Jesus,  and 
supplied  Him  with  all  the  help  He  wanted 
in  that  line.  A  sane  man  does  not  burn  his 
insurance  policy,  and  then  set  fire  to  his 

123 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


house  as  a  means  of  providing  for  his  family. 
A  loyal  soldier  will  not  undermine  his  own 
camp,  and  blow  it  into  the  air,  as  a  means 
of  increasing  the  strength  of  that  camp. 
The  captain  who  is  anxious  for  the  safety  of 
his  ship  will  not  step  down  into  the  hold  and 
bore  a  hole  through  the  ship's  bottom.  Nor 
will  Satan  join  in  destroying  his  own  king- 
dom. That  Christ  came  and  destroyed  the 
works  of  the  devil  shows  that  He  is  Satan's 
enemy  and  Satan's  conqueror. 

Ver.  29.  Penal  element  in  punishment. — 
Punishment  has  surely  an  element  which  is 
purely  penal — vindictive,  if  the  word  must 
be  used,  but  with  a  Divine  vindictiveness. 
And  this  seems  to  be  the  confession  of  the 
human  heart  in  the  most  differing  states  of 
society.  An  Indian  judge  tells  of  the  im- 
pression produced  by  a  thief  who  cut  off  a 
child's  wrists  merely  to  get  some  -tightly 
fastened  bracelets.  As  the  maimed  stumps 
were  held  up  in  court,  a  hundred  voices  cried, 
"  Death  is  not  enough."  In  the  south  of 
France  a  monster  amused  herself  with  her 
paramour  at  the  theatre,  while  her  little  boy 
was  found  slowly  starved  to  death,  with  his 
cheek  laid  against  a  little  dog  which  nestled 
close  to  him.  Many  cried,  "  The  priests  are 
right ;  there  must  be  a  hell." — Bishop  Wm. 
Alexander. 

Unpardonable  sin  as  to  the  body. — There 
is  an  unpardonable  sin  that  may  be  com- 
mitted in  connexion  with  the  lungs,  or  with 
the  heart,  or  with  the  head.  They  are  strung 
with  nerves  as  thick  as  beads  on  a  string; 
and  up  to  a  certain  point  of  excess  or  abuse 
of  the  nervous  system,  if  you  rebound  there 
will  be  remission,  and  you  will  be  put  back, 
or  nearly  back,  where  you  were  before  you 
transgressed  nature's  laws  ;  but  beyond  that 
point — it  differs  in  different  men,  and  in 
different  parts  of  the  same  man — if  you  go 
on  transgressing,  and  persist  in  transgres- 
sion, you  will  never  get  over  the  effect  of  it 
as  long  as  you  live. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

No  hope  for  those  past  feeling. — A  man  may 
misuse  his  eyes  and  yet  see  ;  but  whosoever 
puts  them  out  can  never  see  again.  One 
may  misdirect  his  mariner's  compass,  and 
turn  it  aside  from  the  north  pole  by  a  magnet 
or  piece  of  iron,  and  it  may  recover  and  point 
right  again ;  but  whosoever  destroys  the 
compass  itself  has  lost  his  guide  at  sea.  So 
it  is  possible  for  us  to  sin  and  be  forgiven  : 
recovery  through  God's  Spirit  is  not  impos- 
sible. But  if  we  so  harden  our  hearts  that 
they  cannot  feel  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  if 
we  are  past  feeling,  then  there  is  no  hope. 

A  terrible  text. — In  my  first  charge,  when 
I  was  young  and  inexperienced,  the  very 
first  grave  task  set  me  was  to  carry  what 
comfort  I  could  to  my  predecessor's  widow, 
a  singularly  devout  and  devoted  woman, 
who,  in  the  depths  of  her  grief,  had  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  she  had  committed  "  the 

124 


unpardonable  sin,"  or  "God  would  never 
have  been  so  hard  with  her."  No  reason- 
ings, no  prayers,  had  the  slightest  effect 
upon  her.  or  seemed  so  much  as  to  touch 
the  fixed  idea  she  had  taken  to  her  heart. 
With  an  almost  incredible  ingenuity,  she 
turned  all  grounds  for  hope  into  food  for  her 
despair.  And  in  a  few  weeks  she  passed 
from  my  care  into  an  asylum,  only  to  be 
carried  from  the  asylum  to  the  grave.  For 
years  after  I  shrank  from  this  text  as  if  it 
had  been  guilty  of  murder.  Such  experiences 
bite  deep. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Shrinking  from  the  commission  of  this  sin. 
— A  striking  testimony  to  the  power  which 
these  solemn  words  have  had  over  the  minds 
of  men  is  afforded  by  the  absence  of  this 
one  sacred  name,  "the  Holy  Ghost,"  from 
all  the  vocabularies  of  profaneness.  It 
shows  how  men  whom  we  are  accustomed 
to  call  bad  men  have  often,  after  all,  more 
reverence  for  what  is  holy  than  we  give 
them  credit  for  having — nay,  more  than 
they  credit  themselves  with  having.  They 
may  have  committed  crimes  innumerable, 
and  may  have  boasted  of  them ;  still,  not- 
withstanding this,  they  shrink  from  the 
commission  of  what  is  worse  than  any 
crime — the  unpardonable  sin.  The  shrinking 
is  to  their  credit. —  W.  R.  Huntington,  D.D. 
This  sin  consists  not  in  words  only. — 
I  remember  the  case  of  a  young  man  in 
college,  who,  having  fallen  into  a  morbid 
state  of  mind  under  the  pressure  of  religious 
excitement,  went  out  upon  a  lonely  bridge 
at  midnight,  and  shouted  out  into  the  dark- 
ness words  which  he  supposed  to  be  the 
blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is 
not  easy  to  believe  that  for  doing  this  he 
fell  under  the  fearful  condemnation  of  which 
Christ  speaks.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not 
difficult  to  believe  that  the  sin  against  the 
Holy  Ghost  may  have  been  committed  by 
persons  who  have  never  in  any  spoken 
utterance  blasphemously  used  that  awful 
name. — Ibid. 

Paralysis  of  the  soul. — It  is  told  of  some 
of  the  Hindoo  ascetics,  that  they  will  at 
times,  in  compliance  with  a  vow,  keep  a 
limb  in  a  constrained  position  until  the 
natural  use  of  it  is  wholly  lost  and  gone. 
May  not  the  habitual  putting  of  evil  for 
good  and  good  for  evil  bring  on  a  similar 
paralysis  of  the  soul  ?  May  not  the  devotees 
of  the  god  of  this  world  so  keep  the  vows 
they  make  to  him,  as  to  rob  themselves  of 
the  power  to  take  the  postures  of  a  holier 
devotion  ? — Ibid. 

Eternal  sin. — 
"  A  sin  that  passes  I "  Lo,  one  sad  and  high, 

Bearing  a  taper  stately  like  a  queen, 

Talks    in    her    sleep — "Will  these  hands 
ne'er  be  clean  ? " 
"What's    done    cannot   be   undone."      She 

walks  by 
As  she  must  walk  through  her  eternity, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  IV. 


Bearing  within  her  that  which  she  hath 

been. 
"  The  sin  that  I  have  sinn'd  is  but  one 
scene, 
Life  is  a  manifold  drama,"  so  men  cry. 
Alas  !  the  shadow  follows  thee  too  well. 
The  interlude  outgrows  its  single  part, 
And   every  other   voice    is    stricken 
dumb. 
That  which  thou  earnest  to  the  silent  dell 
Is  the  eternal  sin  thou  hast  become. 
The  everlasting  tragedy  thou  art ! 

Bishop  Wm.  Alexander. 

Ver.  35.  The  test  of  relationship  is  life. — 
If  you  go  out  into  the  woods  in  summer, 
you  may  see,  high  up  on  some  tree,  a  branch 
with  dry  twigs  and  withered  leaves.  It 
seems  to  be  a  part  of  the  tree.  Yet,  when 
you  look  closer,  you  find  it  has  been  broken 
away,  and  now  it  is  only  a  piece  of  dead 
wood  encumbering  a  living  tree.  The  test 
of  relationship  with  the  tree  is  life — fruit- 
bearing.  That  is  also  the  test  of  relationship 
with  Christ.  The  power  which  binds  the  iron 
to    the    magnet    is  unseen,   but  real;   the 


iron  so  bound  becomes  itself  a  magnet :  the 
power  that  binds  believers  to  Christ,  and 
makes  them  members  of  Him,  is  as  real, 
though  also  unseen. 

All  love  in  Christ. — Light  is  one  thing, 
though  comprising  in  itself  'Several  hues. 
All  the  fair  hues  of  nature  inhere  in  the 
light — so  that  where  there  is  no  light,  there 
is  no  colour.  Wherever  the  light  travels,  it 
disparts  its  colours  to  natural  objects — to 
one  after  this  manner,  to  another  after  that 
— the  emerald  green  to  the  leaves — to  the 
flowers  violet,  and  yellow,  and  crimson. 
And  in  the  same  manner  all  love  is  in  Christ, 
and  is  from  Him,  as  its  Fountain-head  and 
Centre,  disparted  among  the  various  rela- 
tions of  human  life.  A  ray  from  His  light 
struggles  forth  in  the  care  of  the  father,  in 
the  tenderness  of  the  mother,  in  the  active 
support  of  the  brother  or  friend,  in  the 
sister's  refined  sympathy — nay,  in  the  affec- 
tionate homage  of  the  son.  And  this  whole 
love,  in  all  its  manifold  elements,  is  brought 
to  converge,  with  unshorn  beams,  upon  that 
thrice  happy  man  or  boy  who  does  the  will 
of  God. — Dean  Goulbourn. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  For  a  description  of  the  surrounding  scenery,  which  doubtless  furnished  many 
of  the  illustrations  used  in  the  following  parables,  see  Stanley's  Sinai  and  Palestine, 
pp.  425-427 ;   Thomson's  Land  and  the  Book,  p.  402  ;  Tristram's  Land  of  Israel,  p.  431. 

Ver.  11.  Unto  you,  who  possess  the  hearing  ear  and  inquiring  heart,  is  given  the  mystery 
or  inner  secret  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  but  unto  them  that  are  without,  who  listen  only  from 
curiosity  or  some  even  less  worthy  motive,  all  the  things  concerning  that  kingdom  are  done 
in  (i.e.  take  the  form  of)  parables. 

Ver.  12.  This  veiling  of  spiritual  truth  is  in  mercy  to  those  at  present  unable  to  receive 
it.  The  time  may  come  when,  with  softened  hearts,  they  will  recall  the  teaching  unheeded 
now ;  and  then  by  the  help  of  the  parables  embedded  in  their  memory,  they  may  rise  to 
an  appreciation  of  the  things  of  the  kingdom. 

Ver.  21.  "  We  lose  much  of  the  significance,  if  we  think  of  the  modern  candle  and  candle- 
stick carried  about  in  the  hand.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  lamp  of  the  house  put  upon  the 
lamp-stand,  or  candelabrum,  which  is  so  elevated  that  any  lamp  upon  it  can  lighten  up  all 
the  interior." 

Ver.  22.  Which  shall  not  be  manifested. — But  that  it  should  be  manifested.  To  be  read 
in  close  connexion  with  vers.  11,  12,  on  which  these  words  shed  a  flood  of  light.  God's 
purposes  are  always  merciful ;   His  hidings  are  revealings  in  disguise. 

Ver.  24.  Take  heed  what  ye  hear. — There  is  a  discipline  of  ear,  as  well  as  of  tongue, 
hand,  etc.  Men  are  held  responsible  for  the  opportunities  to  hear  good  that  they  neglect, 
and  for  the  voluntary  exposure  of  their  minds  to  evil  influences.  With  what  measure  ye 
mete. — According  to  the  attention  bestowed  in  hearing  the  truth,  and  the  diligence  used 
in  obeying  its  behests,  will  be  the  profit  derived  from  it.  Or  there  may  be  a  special 
reference  to  the  duty  of  handing  on  to  others  the  spiritual  knowledge  we  have  acquired 
ourselves,  and  the  clearer  insight  that  the  instructor  himself  gains  while  so  doing.  The 
last  clause  of  the  verse  should  probably  read  simply,  And  more  shall  be  given  to  you  :  God 
is  ever  a  liberal  paymaster.  "  If  ye  diligently  endeavour  to  do  all  the  good  you  can,  and 
teach  it  to  others,  the  mercy  of  God  will  come  in  to  give  you  both  in  the  present  life 
a  sense  to  take  in  higher  things  and  a  will  to  do  better  things,  and  will  add  for  the  future 
an  everlasting  reward." 

125 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  25.  The  principle  enunciated  here  is  one  that  apples  to  every  department  of  life. 
Nothing  succeeds  like  success,  or  fails  like  failure.  One  thing  leads  the  way  to  another  of 
the  same  kind,  whether  it  be  triumph  or  defeat,  gain  or  loss,  etc.  In  the  spiritual  sphere, 
in  particular,  he  who  possesses  the  hearing  ear  and  the  understanding  heart,  will  find  them 
improve  by  use  ;  while  he  who  does  not  cultivate  them  is  in  danger  of  losing  them  altogether. 

Ver.  29.  But  as  soon  as  the  fruit  is  mature,  straightway  he  putteth  forth  the  sickle,  etc. 
Cp.  Joel  iii.  13  (LXX.).     See  also  1  Pet.  i.  23-25 ;'  Rev.  xiv.  14,  15. 

Ver.  39.  Arose. — Awoke.  Peace,  be  still. — Be  silent!  Be  muzzled/  Mark  alone  preserves 
these  words,  which  were  doubtless  addressed  to  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  by 
whose  agency  the  storm  had  arisen. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—20. 

Popular  teaching  of  Jestis  Christ. — Good  teaching  is  always  seasonable.  It 
is  the  first  step  to  the  attainment  of  larger  blessing.  Real  knowledge  enlarges 
the  soul's  capacity,  and  awakens  new  desire. 

I.  The  particular  occasion. — The  multitude  was  great:  universal  eagerness 
was  aroused  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  this  strange  Teacher.  No  private  dwelling 
sufficed  to  accommodate  the  crowd.  By  common  instinct  they  withdrew  to  the 
shore  of  the  lake.  1.  Outward  circumstances  are  made  tributary  to  the  wise 
designs  of  Jesus.  If  the  artificial  temples  reared  by  men  are  too  narrow  for  the 
Divine  purpose,  material  nature  will  provide  a  temple  of  the  sublimest  kind. 
Nor  is  this  all.  There  is  no  reason  why  we  should  not  conclude  that,  at  the 
creation  of  Gennesaret's  blue  lake,  this  event  was  foreseen.  That  shelving, 
sandy  beach  had  been,  for  long  ages,  intended  as  an  auditorium  for  that  human 
assemblage;  and  never  had  its  capacity  been  put  to  its  noblest  use  till  then. 
Still,  human  art  is  not  flung  away  in  contempt.  The  Gracious  King  deigns  to 
employ  human  helpers,  and  to  work  through  human  agencies,  so  far  as  He  can. 

2.  Initial  stages  of  Divine  illumination.  "  He  began  to  teach."  As  a  human 
parent,  dealing  with  children,  begins  with  pictures  and  object-lessons,  so  deals 
Jesus  Christ  with  men.  He  began  with  parables.  To  speak  of  things  in  the 
heavenly  world  as  they  really  are  would  be  to  speak  a  language  unintelligible 
to  human  auditors.  In  nature  God's  thoughts  are  projected  before  human 
eyes  in  material  objects,  and  these  the  Son  of  God  makes  His  starting-point. 

3.  A  renewed  endeavour  to  do  men  good.  "  Again  He  began."  Full  well  He 
knew  the  dulness  of  men  to  apprehend  spiritual  truth.  If  He  had  depended 
upon  immediate  and  visible  results  for  inspiration  of  energy  to  continue  His 
undertaking,  hope  would  soon  have  expired.  But  His  Divine  patience  is 
inexhaustible.  "  Line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,"  is  His  sketch-plan. 
No  apparent  miscarriage  daunts  Him. 

II.  The  form  of  the  Saviour's  teaching. — "In  parables."  1.  This  form  of 
teaching  readily  impresses  the  imagination.  Interest  is  awakened.  Attention 
is  excited.  It  becomes  evident  that  spiritual  truth  has  vital  connexion  with 
visible  things.  This  life  is  seen  to  be  the  groundwork  of  a  nobler.  2.  This 
form  of  teaching  serves  as  a  test  of  men's  honesty.  Some  men  will  yield  to  the 
momentary  gratification  of  hearing  the  parable,  but  will  take  no  pains  to  solve 
its  meaning.  Or,  as  soon  as  they  get  a  glimpse  that  it  implies  an  unpleasant 
duty,  they  dismiss  the  matter  unceremoniously.  Herein  is  a  test  of  their 
honesty  and  earnestness.  If  they  will  not  take  the  pains  to  thrash  the  straw, 
grind  the  grain,  they  must  starve.  The  sweet  kernel  of  truth  lies  within,  but 
the  hard  shell  must  first  be  broken.  3.  Infinite  issues  hang  on  receiving  aright 
parabolical  teaching.  Light  comes  to  men  in  this  form — a  from  the  most 
suitable :  if  they  reject  the  light,  their  darkness  becomes  their  chosen  doom. 
The  Emancipator  comes  in  a  shape  and  dress  they  do  not  recognise :  refusing 
his  offices,  their  bondage  becomes  confirmed,     A  moment  of  heavenly  oppor- 

126 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


•tunity  occurs,  which,  if  improved,  leads  on  to  spiritual  fortune;  unimproved, 
ends  in  curse. 

III.  The  revelation  provided  for  the  many :  exoteric  doctrine. — The  destiny 
of  the  seed  was  various.  1.  One  portion  fell  on  the  beaten  track,  and  was 
at  once  doomed  to  fruitlessness.  In  Palestine  pasture  and  corn-lands  are 
unenclosed.  Camels  and  pedestrians  soon  make  a  beaten  path  from  village  to 
village.  The  greatest  expert  could  not  prevent  some  seeds  from  falling  on  this 
camel  track,  which  lay  right  across  his  field.  Wild  birds  soon  learnt  from 
experience  where  to  find  unburied  seed,  and  were  always  on  the  alert  to  find 
a  meal.  In  prospect  of  a  harvest  such  seeds  were  lost.  2.  A  second  portion 
fell  on  stony  ground,  i.e.  on  shallow  soil.  Only  the  thinnest  crust  of  earth 
covered  the  rock.  In  the  first  stage  of  growth  all  seed  finds  its  nutriment 
within  itself  ;  therefore  the  first  aspect  of  the  young  crop  is  quite  as  promising 
in  a  poor  soil  as  in  fattest  loam.  But  the  test  of  a  scorching  sun  soon  brings 
to  light  good  rootage,  or  slender.  The  moisture  exuding  through  the  pores  of 
the  leaf  found  no  continuous  supply  from  the  root -source.  Hence  the  green 
blades  soon  became  languid,  faint,  shrivelled,  sere.  3.  A  third  portion  fell 
among  the  old  roots  of  former  wild  growths.  As  soon  as  spring,  with  its 
revivifying  influence,  appeared,  the  old  stumps  of  thorns  broke  forth  into  new 
life.  Vigorous  shoots  and  branches  from  these  old  roots  monopolised  space  and 
air  and  light, — the  young  blades  of  corn  were  attenuated  and  sickly.  The  power 
to  appropriate  the  nutritious  elements  of  the  soil  was  lacking ;  the  young  corn 
could  not  even  stand  erect.  The  processes  of  life  were  checked.  The  force 
needed  for  kernelling  was  spent.  The  hostility  was  too  severe ;  life  could  not 
survive.  4.  The  fortunes  of  the  fourth  portion  of  the  seed  were  prosperous. 
The  seed  fell  into  good  ground.  Nursed  in  the  warm  bosom  of  mother  earth, 
it  soon  gave  signs  of  life.  The  hidden  germ  swelled,  burst  the  swathing  bands 
of  hard  membrane,  and  sent  its  living  rootlets  in  search  of  proper  food.  Day 
by  day  it  obtained  a  larger  hold  on  life.  Duly  the  green  stalks  pierced  the 
surface,  and  found  nutrition  from  dew  and  air  and  sunlight.  They  grew, 
acquired  strength,  flowered,  kernelled  into  grain,  and  when  the  stalks  at 
length  fell  before  the  sickle,  they  yielded  large  increase.  Yet  the  fruitfulness 
was  not  uniform.  In  part,  proportionate  to  the  fatness  of  the  soil ;  in  part, 
proportionate  to  the  skill  of  the  sower  :  thirty  grains  were  found  where  one  had 
been  sown — a  hundred  for  one  in  some  instances  were  gained. 

IV.  The  higher  revelation  for  the  few:  esoteric  doctrine. — Comparatively 
few  in  every  age  care  for  spiritual  enlightenment.  The  many  are  absorbed  in 
the  care  for  bread,  or  in  the  care  for  riches.  To  them  the  visible  is  everything ; 
the  invisible,  nothing.  Yet  a  few  everywhere — the  true  elect — examine,  ponder, 
and  reverently  ask.  To  such  the  deeper  meanings  of  the  parable  appear. 
1.  There  is  failure  in  a  man's  life  through  an  unprepared  condition  of  the  soil. 
Secular  traffic  hardens  all  the  better  feelings  of  the  heart.  A  man's  soul,  which 
should  be  penetrable,  plastic,  accessible  to  the  light  and  love  from  heaven, 
becomes  callous,  repellent,  indurated — until  it  has  reached  the  final  stage — 
"  past  feeling."  In  the  proper  condition  of  the  mind,  it  is  exquisitely  suited  to 
the  reception  of  living  seed ;  it  is  the  seed's  home  and  rest.  Inquiry  after  truth 
is  natural.  But  if  the  emotional  nature  become  hardened  by  worldly  pursuits, 
the  seed  is  lost ;  it  remains  on  the  surface,  and  our  sleepless  foe  removes  it  at 
once  from  the  memory.  The  man  wantonly  allows  himself  to  be  despoiled  of 
his  choicest  treasure.  In  harvest  time  he  reaps  confusion  and  shame.  2.  There 
is  failure  also  in  man's  best  life  through  shallow  feeling.  To  have  sin  pardoned 
is  a  joyous  sensation — to  be  received  as  an  adopted  child  is  a  rich  privilege — 
to  be  assured  of  heaven  is  rapture.  But  presently  the  sun's  face  suffers  eclipse 
— clouds  gather.     Friends  scowl  and  load  us  with  opprobrium.     The  cold  sleet 

127 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


of  the  world's  hatred  is  showered  upon  us.  Snares  are  laid  for  our  feet.  Our 
occupation  is  gone.  Poverty  and  shame  have  to  be  faced.  We  cannot  tread 
this  rugged  path.  What?  give  up  comfort,  and  riches,  and  prospects,  and 
friends,  and  health  for  the  sake  of  a  slender  hope  of  future  joy  ?  It  is  too  much 
to  ask.  Men  stumble  at  the  terms ;  they  go  back  to  animal  enjoyments. 
Alas !  the  seed  is  unfruitful.  3.  Failure,  too,  may  come  about  through 
attempted  compromise  of  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly.  The  convictions  of 
truth  have  taken  a  deeper  hold  than  in  the  foregoing  case.  The  man  cannot 
afford  to  forego  religion — that  would  be  ruinous !  But  he  will  relegate  it  to 
a  corner.  His  feverish  pursuit  of  riches  need  not  destroy  his  faith.  He  will, 
he  must,  be  rich.  But  his  riches  shall  not  extinguish  his  piety.  So  he  reasons  ; 
and  all  the  while  the  green  withes  of  evil  habit  are  becoming  tough  as  steel. 
Still  dreaming  of  freedom,  he  is  suddenly  cast  out  of  the  kingdom  as  the  veriest 
slave  of  mammon.  Again  the  seed  is  fruitless.  4.  Success  comes  only  through 
acting  in  concert  with  God.  The  honest  mind  says,  "Let  the  truth  come 
in  !  Welcome  light,  come  from  what  quarter  it  may  ln  He  can  afford  to  wait 
for  blessed  fruit  till  harvest  time.  Truth  cannot  injure  a  man  :  error  or  indolence 
must.  "  He  receives  the  Word."  He  reflects  on  what  he  hears,  until  it  has  an 
abiding- place  in  the  understanding.  From  the  understanding  it  passes  into  the 
conscience,  and  becomes  conviction  of  duty.  Thence  it  goes  down  into  the  affec- 
tions— roots  itself  there — and  becomes  new  and  holy  experience. — J.  D.  Davies. 

The  parable  of  the  sower. — Unlike  all  other  teachers,  this  Divine  Teacher,  in 
this  His  first  parable,  displays  the  same  perfection  of  method,  the  same  mastery 
of  this  life  in  its  highest  relations  to  spiritual  truth,  as  in  His  latest  utterances. 
Very  notable,  also,  is  the  framework  of  this  parable,  in  its  adaptation  to  the 
Master's  mission  and  that  of  all  His  followers.  Seed-sowing  was  His  work — 
first  for  its  own  immediate  usefulness,  then  for  our  imitation. 
«.*L  The  spiritual  husbandman's  chief  work  is  to  sow  the  Word. — He  is  to 
multiply  what  God  hath  revealed,  not  human  speculations,  not  current  news, 
not  scientific  discoveries,  however  true  or  helpful  in  their  sphere,  not  ingenious 
theories  about  the  Word.  That  Word  finds  illustration  in  every  phase  of  the 
universe  ;  but  fatal  the  error  that  abandons  the  spirit  and  work  of  reverent 
interpretation  for  that  of  substitution. 

II.  He  who  sows  the  true  seed  may  count  upon  a  sure  and  large  harvest  — 
A  single  sentence,  often  only  a  word,  implanted  within  the  soul,  reconstructs 
the  whole  life,  and  builds  the  world  anew  and  for  all  the  future. 

III.  Every  one,  of  moderate  intelligence  even,  is  a  sower  of  seed  in  the 
world's  broad  field  of  spiritual  harvests. — Every  life,  however  circumstanced, 
repeats  itself,  or  in  some  way  enters  into  other  lives,  with  a  multiplying  power 
for  good  or  evil,  of  which  the  world's  grain -harvests  are  a  fit  and  vivid,  though 
inadequate,  illustration. 

TV.  The  emphasis  of  our  Lord's  teaching  refers  to  the  seed's  fruitfulness 
according  to  the  condition  of  the  hearts  receiving  it. — Unlike  the  ground, 
hearts  are  under  self-control.  Not  passively  inert,  they  can  take  condition 
favourable  to  the  Word,  and  become  fruitful  beyond  any  chance  or  doubt. 
1.  It  is  safe  to  say  that  our  care  in  hearing  the  Word  is  not  proportioned  to  its 
importance.  All  religious  life  is  antagonised  by  the  adversary,  but  his  best 
energies  are  centred  upon  keeping  the  truth  from  finding  lodgment.  It  easily 
sets  its  roots  if  it  have  opportunity,  but  no  seed  will  fruit  if  at  once  caught 
away.  Wayside  hearers  leave  the  Word,  however  faithfully  presented,  to  such 
speedy  (Jestruction.  Jesus  describes  such  as  those  who  hearing  the  Word 
understand  it  not.  In  epitome  this  includes  every  condition  of  mind  and  heart 
barred  against  the  truth.     The  vital  truth  is  the  helplessness  of  seed  in  hearts 

128 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


so  preoccupied  as  to  be  steeled  against  its  lodgment.  This  truth  is  reinforced 
by  the  revealed  agency  of  Satan.  He  catches  away  the  Word  by  coinciding  with 
the  heart's  pre-existing  hostility.  To  the  sensualist  he  heightens  the  promise 
of  forbidden  pleasures,  lest  a  better  life  may  get  his  attention  and  choice.  The 
worldling  he  points  to  heights  of  power  or  gain  or  fame  not  yet  reached,  and 
with  which  nothing  must  be  permitted  to  interfere.  To  the  scoffing  sceptic  he 
paints  the  conquests  of  controversy,  the  sweets  of  destructive  onslaught  upon 
received  and  time-honoured  doctrines.  2.  The  next  part  of  the  figure  refers  to 
an  underlying  rock  formation  covered  with  a  light  layer  of  soil.  This  is  a  fitting 
type  of  natures  quick  to  respond  in  feelings  warm  and  sympathetic,  but  lacking 
in  the  underlying  virtues  of  reason,  will,  and  conscience.  With  these  a  man 
has  "  root  in  himself  "  ;  without  them  he  is  carried  about  by  the  enthusiasm  of 
the  hour  or  moment.  The  quick  sensibilities  have  their  uses.  Any  soul  devoid 
of  them  is  seriously  lacking  in  equipment  for  life's  best  enjoyment  and  work. 
But  with  them  there  should  be  fixed  convictions  of  one's  own,  the  combined 
product  of  clear  reason,  a  sensitive  conscience,  and  persistent  will.  This  is  the 
sub-soil  into  which  the  roots  of  principles  thrust  themselves,  as  do  those  of  the 
wind-beaten  oak,  under  all  the  blasts  of  tribulation  or  persecution.  3.  Here  we 
are  to  think  not  so  much  of  a  visible  growth  of  thorns  as  of  a  root-infested  soil, 
the  roots  long  and  deeply  planted  and  holding  their  places  with  stubborn 
thoroughness.  The  soil  is  deep  enough  and  of  ample  strength  ;  but  its  resources 
are  absorbed  by  these  preoccupying  thorns,  whose  roots  hold  the  field  and 
promptly  spring  up,  starving  the  good  seed.  Worldly  anxieties,  the  deceitful 
promises  of  wealth,  mere  self-indulgence,  called  pleasure,  have  a  firm  anchorage 
in  the  natural  heart.  The  renewed  heart  must  enthrone  service  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  the  building  of  His  universal  kingdom.  This  may  be  only  in  germ,  but 
if  genuine  it  will  have  a  growing  mastery  and  final  supremacy,  the  thorn-roots 
all  eradicated.  The  best  eradication,  because  easiest  and  quickest,  is  a  trans- 
formation of  "  cares,  riches,  and  pleasures  "  into  reinforcements  of  the  Lord's 
work.  These  pre-existing  roots  become  fertilisers  and  feeders  of  good  soil. 
The  Queen's  broad  arrow  marks  and  secures  England's  possessions.  The  soul 
converted  to  Christ  may  put  the  Cross  upon  all  riches  or  proper  pursuits  and 
pleasures,  the  Master's  kingdom  supreme  in  its  rounded  life.  4.  Two  points  of 
profitable  inquiry  concerning  the  good-ground  hearers  :  How  can  any  unrenewed 
heart  be  called  "good  ground,"  and  what  determines  the  differing  degrees  of 
fruitage  ?  While  no  natural  heart  is  holy,  it  may  have  moral  qualities  favour- 
able to  receiving  good  seed  and  for  an  easy  incorporation  of  its  life.  A  heart 
tender  and  true,  a  knowledge  of  truth  broad  and  deep,  a  conscience  sensitive 
and  controlling,  pursuits  honourable  and  useful — these  furnish  conditions  of  ready 
and  vigorous  growth  when  the  seed  finds  lodgment.  Great  the  encouragement 
to  persistent  effort  in  the  moral  training  of  children  and  youth  !  When  conver- 
sion occurs  a  rich  fruitage  follows,  because  of  the  good  ground  thus  carefully 
and  continuously  prepared.  The  fruitage  is  measured  by  such  antecedent 
preparation.  Towering  corn  and  wheat  cover  the  prairie  once  burdened  with 
flowers  and  waving  grass.  We  must  not  omit,  in  closing,  some  thought  of  the 
momentous  responsibility  of  hearing  the  Word.  How  vital  its  relation  to  present 
life  and  future  destiny!  And  yet  what  is  done  with  less  deliberation  or 
thoroughness  ? — &  L.  B.  Speare. 

The  Sower  and  the  seed. — This  parable  may  be  regarded  as  introductory  to  all 
the  rest,  and  preparatory  to  that  method  of  teaching  which  Christ  in  His  Divine 
wisdom  saw  fit  to  adopt.  Unless  the  drift  of  this,  the  first  and  plainest  of  the 
parables,  be  understood,  it  is  useless  to  proceed  to  more  difficult  ones,  which 
presuppose  an  acquaintance  with  the  ordinary  rules  of  parabolic  instruction. 

K  129 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


In  the  parables  afterwards  delivered  that  was  actually  done  which  is  here  only 
described  :  the  Sower  sowed  the  Word,  with  the  different  results  that  He  Himself 
foretells  in  this  parable.  Or  we  may  say  that  this  very  parable  is  a  portion  of 
that  Divine  seed  which  then  began  to  be  sown.  This  doctrine  of  the  preparation 
of  the  heart  to  receive  the  gospel  may  itself  be  as  variously  received  as  any 
other  portion  of  evangelical  truth. 

I.  The  free  grace  of  God,  which  is  the  corner-stone  of  the  whole  fabric  of 
revealed  truth,  is  the  foundation  on  which  this  parable  is  constructed. — 
1.  Moved  by  His  own  infinite  goodness — the  same  goodness  which  originally 
prompted  Him  to  call  man  into  existence — God  "  went  forth,"  as  it  were,  came 
out  of  His  place,  to  sow  the  seed  of  Divine  truth  in  the  hearts  of  His  creatures. 
Whatever  revelations  of  Himself  He  has  been  pleased  to  make,  from  the  time 
when  He  talked  with  our  first  parents  until  the  present  day,  the  Sower  has  never 
ceased  to  scatter  over  the  wide  field  of  the  human  family  the  seeds  of  that 
knowledge  which  "maketh  wise  unto  salvation."  2.  This  grand  operation  of 
sowing  the  Word,  as  it  proceeded  from  unbounded  goodness,  so  has  it  always  been 
conducted  with  unerring  wisdom — with  that  wisdom  which  looks  to  the  end, 
which  contemplates  great  results,  comprehensive  benefits  (Luke  ii.  14).  3.  As 
we  survey  the  world's  history,  we  see  the  Great  Sower  marking  out,  and  as  it 
were  enclosing,  certain  portions  of  the  common  field  to  be  cultivated  with 
particular  care,  while  the  rest  was  to  all  appearance  left  in  a  state  of  nature. 
So  it  was,  avowedly,  under  the  Jewish  dispensation ;  so  it  is  now,  actually  at 
least,  under  the  Christian.  Actually,  but  not  designedly.  The  design  of  the 
dispensation  of  grace  is,  to  make  known  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  all 
nations  for  the  obedience  of  faith  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20;  Mark  xvi.  15  ;  Luke 
xxiv.  47).  4.  The  Sower  still  goes  forth,  by  His  agents  and  ministers,  to  sow 
the  Word  of  Life  (Eph.  iv.  11-13).  The  commission  is  unlimited,  the  supply  of 
grace  and  strength  unbounded  ;  the  deficiency  is  in  the  human  instruments  alone. 

II.  The  various  receptions  which  are  accorded  by  men  to  the  free  grace 
of  God. — 1.  Here  are  three  descriptions  of  persons  whom  "  the  Word  preached 
does  not  profit,"  etc.  (Heb.  iv.  2).  Their  characters  are  exactly  discriminated  in 
vers.  15-19.  Any  hearer  who  desires  to  know  the  cause  of  his  own  unprofitable- 
ness may  sit  down  before  this  faithful  mirror,  and  in  one  or  other  of  the  three 
reflexions  presented  by  it  he  will  be  sure  to  find  his  own.  2.  Note  the  points 
of  agreement  between  the  three  classes  of  unprofitable  hearers.  (1)  They  all 
hear  the  Word.  This  is  partly  the  gracious  provision  of  the  Sower,  who  sows 
plentifully  (James  i.  5).  But,  besides,  there  is  a  natural  disposition  in  men  to 
"  hear  the  Word,"  independent  of  the  reception  they  may  eventually  give  it. 
(2)  They  all,  in  a  certain  sense,  receive  the  Word.  So  it  is  with  hearers  in 
general.  They  "  receive  the  Word  with  joy."  They  like  to  hear.  They  go 
away  with  the  intention  of  coming  again.  They  do  come  again.  They  become 
regular  hearers.  Hearing  the  Word  becomes  a  habit  with  them.  They  feel 
a  certain  gratification  in  the  mere  act  of  hearing,  and  so  they  fancy  they  have 
derived  benefit  from  it.  Vain  delusion  !  (3)  They  all  "  bring  no  fruit  to  per- 
fection." The  first  sort  never  believe  the  Word  at  all ;  the  second  have  faith, 
but  such  faith  as  will  not  abide  the  test  of  tribulation  or  persecution  because  of 
the  Word  ;  the  third  might  endure  afflictions,  but  yield  to  temptations  of  a 
different  kind  (ver.  19).  Thus  the  end  of  all  is  the  same.  Some  may  advance 
further  towards  maturity  than  others ;  some  may  exhibit  the  blade,  others  the 
ear,  but  none  "  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  At  the  best  they  are  "  double-minded 
men,"  "  halting  between  two  opinions,"  "  unstable  in  all  their  ways."  3.  There 
is  yet  another  class  of  hearers,  standing  entirely  by  itself.  It  consists  of  those 
who  "  hear  the  Word,  and  receive  it,  and  bring  forth  fruit."  The  seed  that  is 
sown  here,  finding  a  soil  congenial  to  it — "an  honest  and  good  heart" — and 

130 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  IV. 


watered  by  the  dews  of  heaven,  "  takes  root  downward,  and  bears  fruit 
upward."  Such  an  one,  "nourished  up  in  the  words  of  faith  and  of  good 
doctrine,"  "grows  in  grace,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).  The  "fruit  of  the  Spirit" 
manifests  itself  in  his  words  and  deeds.  By  the  grace  of  God,  he  "  keepeth 
himself ;  and  that  wicked  one,"  who  is  always  at  hand  to  catch  away  the  Word 
sown  in  the  heart,  "  toucheth  him  not."  Afflictions  and  temptations,  however 
they  may  unsettle  him  for  a  time,  "  nevertheless  afterward  yield  the  peaceable 
fruits  of  righteousness."  Even  "  the  cares  of  this  world,  and  the  lusts  of  other 
things,"  from  which  no  one  is  altogether  exempt,  although  they  may  check  the 
growth  of  the  good  seed  in  the  heart,  do  not  choke  it ;  they  may  make  it  less 
fruitful,  but  not  "  barren  or  unfruitful  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ." 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

"Ver.  1.  Christ   teaching  in  the  ship  Rules  for  the  interpretation  of  para- 

a   parable   itself    of   the   kingdom   of  bles. — 1.     Careful    attention    to     the 

heaven.      1.   A    figure    of    its    form.  occasion  of  them.     2.  Close  adherence 

(1)  The  evangelical  ministry.  (2)  The  to  the  one  truth  or  duty  meant  to  be 
Church.  (3)  Missions.  2.  A  figure  of  enforced.  It  is  much  the  same  here  as 
its   condition.     (1)    Small   beginnings.  in  considering  a  fine  painting;  a  com- 

(2)  Poverty.  (3)  Mobility.  (4)  Free-  prehensive  view  of  the  whole  will  have 
dom. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.  a  happy  and  striking  effect,  but  that 

An  imperfect  Church,  an  unworthy  effect  will  not  be  felt  if  the  eye  is  held 

pulpit,   and  poor  hearers  may  never-  to  detached  parts  of  the  picture  with- 

theless  form  a  true  Church,  accepted  out  regarding  the  relation  they  bear  to 

of  God. — P.  Quesnel.  the  rest.     3.  Great  care  in  reasoning 

from    the    parables    to    the    peculiar 

Ver.  2.  Why  Christ  spoke  in  parables.  doctrines  of  Christianity.  (1)  An  in- 
— 1.  That  the  Scripture  might  be  ful-  temperate  use  of  figures  tends  to 
filled  (Ps.  lxxviii.  2).  2.  That  we  might  sensualise  the  mind  and  deprave  the 
know  that  Christ  spake  with  the  same  taste.  (2)  By  the  misapplication  of 
spirit  with  which  all  God's  prophets  figures  false  ideas  are  given  to  the 
in  the  old  time  spake,  whose  writings  hearer  of  the  things  they  stand  for. 
are  full  of  parables.  3.  That  He  might  (3)  The  reasoning  injudiciously  from 
descend  to  the  capacity  of  the  most  types  and  figures  begets  a  kind  of 
simple,  who  best  understand  and  re-  faith  that  is  precarious  and  ineffectual, 
member  homely  illustrations.  4.  That  An  enthusiast,  struck  with  appear- 
His  auditors  might  take  occasion  to  ask  ances,  hastily  yields  his  assent  to  a 
questions  (ver.  10).  5.  That  the  mys-  proposition,  without  considering  the 
teries  of  God's  heavenly  kingdom  might  evidence  carefully.  But  as  soon  as  his 
be  hidden  from  the  scornful  (vers.  passions  cool,  and  the  false  glare  upon 
11,  12).  6.  That  every  man,  in  his  his  imagination  subsides,  his  faith  dies 
occupation  and  ordinary  vocation,  away,  and  the  fruit  expected  from  it 
might  be  taught  those  things  which  proves  utterly  abortive.  "  Parables 
concern  his  soul's  health :  as  this  are  more  ancient  than  arguments" 
parable  may  be  termed  the  plough-  says  Lord  Bacon :  and  it  is  not 
man's  gospel ;  he  that  meditates  on  it,  difficult  to  see  why.  A  parable  is 
when  he  ploughs  his  ground,  may  have  winning  and  attractive,  because  it  is 
a  sermon  always  before  him,  every  a  narrative  or  story :  it  is  easy  to 
furrow  being  a  line,  every  grain  of  be  understood,  since  it  deals  with 
corn  a  lesson  bringing  forth  some  familiar  events  and  actions,  with  say- 
fruit,  ings  and  doings  of  common  life,  which 

131 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   STt  MARK. 


are  well  known  to  all  its  hearers : 
lastly,  it  is  acceptable  and  effective, 
because  it  does  not  arouse  antagonism 
and  opposition  in  the  mind  of  the 
hearer,  as  argument  frequently  does. 
Christ's  thought  for  the  multitude. — 
It  is  easy  to  have  tender  regard  and 
helpful  disposition  towards  the  few 
kindred  spirits,  but  Jesus  thought  of 
the  needs  of  any  and  all  of  His  fellow- 
men  to  which  He  could  minister.  But 
this  spirit  of  beneficence  was  always 
guided  by  unerring  wisdom  as  to 
methods.  We  may  blindly  yield  to 
benevolent  impulses  in  ways  self- 
defeating  and  often  harmful.  He 
thoroughly  measured  the  situation  of 
His  opening  ministry,  and  taught  by 
parable  which  should  both  reveal  and 
conceal.  Idle  curiosity,  much  less  per- 
sonal prejudice  or  selfish  scheming,  is 
never  the  condition  of  helpful  hearing. 
Concealment  by  parable  was  a  favour 
to  all  who  would  have  wrested  the 
truth  to  their  own  hurt. — &  L.  B. 
Speare. 

"Ver.  3.  The  sower  is  now  any  and 
every  one  who  rehearses  and  enforces 
the  same  doctrines  as  our  Lord.  It 
matters  little  who  or  what  he  is,  so 
long  as  he  has  full  store  of  the  good 
seed  and  is  faithful  in  scattering  it. 
The  harvest  tells  nothing  as  to  the 
husbandman — whether  a  master  or 
slave — save  his  wise  and  trustful 
labour.  Results  are  the  same  in  either 
case,  and  these  are  the  objects  in  all 
sowing. 

Analogies. — 1.  Between  the  sowing 
of    seed   and   the   teaching   of   truth. 

2.  Between  the  earth's  reception  of  the 
seed  and  man's  reception  of  the  truth. 

3.  Between  the  earth's  response  to  the 
seed  sown  and  man's  response  to  the 
truth  taught.  So  too  it  is  the  same 
God — 1.  Who  gives  man  seed  to  sow 
and  truth  to  learn.  2.  Who  prepares 
the  earth  for  the  reception  of  the  seed 
and  the  heart  of  man  for  the  reception 
of  the  truth.  3.  Who  causes  the  seed 
to  grow  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  who 
guides  and  helps  man  to  carry  into 
practice  the  truth  which  he  learns. 

132 


Yers.  5,  6.  No  depth  of  earth. — At 
first,  when  the  wheat  sprouts,  the  blade 
which  it  sends  up  to  the  surface  is 
green  and  beautiful.  But  after  a 
while  the  field  of  emerald  loveliness 
looks  suddenly  sere  and  yellow ;  the 
blades  seem  to  droop  and  languish  as 
if  a  worm  were  at  the  root.  This 
remarkable  change  is  caused  by  what 
the  farmers  call  the  "  spearin'  brash  " 
(Scotch  for  "  weaning  brash ").  The 
corn  is  weaned  from  its  mother's  milk, 
as  it  were;  for  the  supply  of  food 
which  was  stored  up  for  it  in  the  seed 
is  now  exhausted,  and  it  has  to  seek 
food  for  itself  in  the  soil  and  air.  It 
has  not  yet  strength  to  do  so,  and 
therefore  fades  and  becomes  sickly. 
It  falls  off,  just  as  a  human  child  falls 
off  when  weaned.  If,  in  such  circum- 
stances, there  is  soil  enough,  it  soon 
recovers ;  if,  however,  there  is  no  room 
beneath  and  fierce  sun  above,  then 
because  it  has  no  root  it  withers. — 
H.  Macmillan,  D.D. 

Yer.  9L  Eloquent  hearing  is  indis- 
pensable to  effective  preaching  :  it  is 
as  necessary  that  listeners  should  be 
taught  how  to  hear,  as  it  is  that 
preachers  should  be  taught  what  or 
how  to  speak. — W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. 

Qualities  to  be  cultivated  by  gospel 
hearers.  —  1.  Attention.  The  good 
hearer  stirs  himself  up  to  listen.  He 
trains  himself  to  follow  the  speaker. 
His  hearing  is  an  opportunity,  and  he 
takes  care  to  make  the  most  of  it. 
2.  Meditation.  What  he  "hears"  he 
11  keeps "  by  reflecting  upon  it,  and 
assimilating  it  for  his  own  edification 
and  growth  in  grace.  Says  Willmott : 
"  Proportion  an  hour's  reflexion  to  an 
hour's  reading,  and  so  dispirit  the  book 
into  the  student."  So  I  would  say  : 
Let  every  time  of  hearing  be  followed 
by  a  time  of  meditation,  that  the  seed 
which  has  fallen  on  the  soil  may,  as 
it  were,  be  "  harrowed  "  into  it  by  the 
process.  3.  Obedience.  To  hear  with- 
out obeying  is  to  harden  the  heart ; 
for,  as  Bishop  Butler  says,  "passive 
impressions  grow  weaker  by  being 
repeated."     But  the   acting  on  what 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


we  hear  prepares  us  for  being  better  of  hearing,  and  their  eyes  are  closed, 

hearers   next  time,   and  quickens  the  lest  at  any  time,  seeing  with  their  eyes, 

receptivity  of  the  soul.     Even  among  and  hearing  with  their  ears,  they  should 

good  hearers,    however,  there  will   be  understand    with    their    hearts,    and 

differences  ;  some  will  make  more   of  should  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal 

their  opportunities  than  others. — Ibid,  them."      "  Lest   they  should   be   con- 

Divine  truth  needs  attention. — Per-  verted,  and  I  should  heal  them."    That 

haps  our  Saviour  used   so  frequently  is  the  dreadful  thing  that  would  happen; 

to  conclude  His  Divine  discourses  with,  that  is  the  dreadful  thing  that  they 

"  He   that  hath   ears   to  hear,  let  him  are  bent  on  postponing.     That  is  the 

hear"  to   teach   us   that   there  is  no  irony  of  love  picturing  the  postpone- 

employment  of  our  faculties,  that  more  ment  of  the  good  it  brings  ;  and  since 

deserves  their  utmost  attention,  than  the  facts  are  so,  since  men  have  deter- 

the  scrutiny  of  Divine  truths  (Isa.  iv.  3  ;  mined  that  the  process  of  their  salvation 

Rom.  x.  17). — R.  Boyle.  shall  be  slow,  and  difficult  and  gradual, 

therefore  Christ  has  conformed  to  their 

Vers.   10-12.  Parables  necessary  for  ways;  He  has  qualified  the  blinding 

outsiders. — Parables  are,  so  to  speak,  light,    He   has   shadowed   it  down   to 

forced  upon  the  Lord.     They  are  His  the  dusk  in  which  men  abide,  He  has 

only  method  of  dealing  with  this  loose  divided  His  teaching  into  stages,  so  as 

mob  that  is  following  Him.    He  cannot  to  protect  these  obstinate  hearts  against 

venture  to  confide   to  them   His  full  their   own   prejudices,  He   has   fallen 

mind,   for  it  would   but   confuse  and  back  on  these  parables.     Even  those 

repel   them.     So   long   as  it  was  His  who   most   vehemently  repudiate   the 

disciples  He  could  address  them  openly,  more   emphatic    message,   even    those 

as  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  with  who   might    in    indignation    take    up 

plain,   strong   directions.      So  it   had  stones  to  kill  Him  if  they  heard  the 

been,  apparently,  at  the  first ;  but  now  full   claim,    will   stand   and    listen   to 

that  His  fame  had  spread — now  that  these  parables ;  and  if  they  listen  and 

a  mixed  multitude  is  swarming  around  are    pleased    to    walk    away   without 

Him — He   is    driven    to    protect   His  further  question  no  irremediable  harm 

doctrine  from  degradation,   misunder-  will  be  done,  only  they  will  be  much 

standing,  confusion.     It  is  not  enough  as   they   were   before,    only  they  will 

that  He  has  in  His  hands  pearls  to  give;  postpone  the  day  of  possibility,  they 

He  must  see  to  it,  also,  that  He  distri-  will  not  have  been  brought  up  near 

butes  them  aright  to  those  that  will  enough  to  the  fire  to  be  scorched  by 

profit  by  them.     So  the  parables  ex-  it,    they  will    have    been    saved    the 

press  the  guarded  caution  with  which  uppermost  disaster.     But,  on  the  other 

the  great  revelation  of  the  Father  must  hand,  if  there  are  any  there  who  have 

be  made.     It  is  not  enough  that  God  ears  to  hear  and  eyes  to  see,  then  the 

should  reveal  His  love  for  fallen  man  ;  parable   will   work    its    perfect    work 

but  more  than  that,   He  must  do  it  upon  them,  they  will  never  be  satisfied 

in  a  way  of  condescension  to  all  the  by  its  mere  beauty,  they  will  feel  the 

gradations  of  darkness  into  which  men  prickings    of    a    Diviner    secret,    the 

have  fallen.     Here  is  the  irony  of  the  parables    will    quicken    and    animate 

terrible  passage  quoted  by  our   Lord  them    into    more    eager    expectation; 

from  Isaiah  in  answer  to  the  wondering  something  in  them  will  provoke  them, 

question  of  the  disciples  why  He  should  they  will  be  restless  until  they  have 

speak  in  parables.     Why  in  parables  ?  gone  further,  they  will  press  in  with 

Because  so  many,  though  they  willingly  the  other  disciples  into  the  house  with 

listen,  are  in  such  a  state  that,  hearing  the  Master,  they  will  insist  on  being 

they  hear  not,  and  seeing  they  see  not ;  told  what   it   all   means.     And  it  is 

it  is   because   "  this  people's  heart  is  these  persistent,  clamouring  questioners 

waxed  gross,  and  their  ears  are  dull  to  whom   it    is    given    to  know  the 

133 


chap.  IV.  HOMILMTIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


mysteries  of  heaven.     These  will  ask  either  the  lecture  of  the  law  is  read, 

and  knock,    and   asking  will  receive,  or  sermon  on  the  gospel  ended,  it  is 

and  knocking  it  will  be  opened  unto  your  part  to  reason  among  yourselves, 

them. — Canon  Scott  Holland.  as  you  walk   abroad  in   the  fields  or 

Double  aspect  of  parables. — Inasmuch  talk  at  home  in  your  house,  how  this 
as  a  parable  is  the  presentation  of  and  that  may  be  construed ;  and  when 
some  spiritual  truth  under  the  guise  you  cannot  resolve  one  another,  with 
of  an  incident  belonging  to  the  material  the  men  of  Berea,  to  search  the 
sphere,  it  follows,  from  its  very  nature,  Scripture  daily,  whether  those  things 
that  it  may  either  reveal  or  hide  the  are  so,  to  try  the  spirits  of  men  by- 
truth,  and  that  it  will  do  the  former  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  the  Bible  is  our 
to  susceptible  and  the  latter  to  un-  divinity  grammar,  according  to  which 
susceptible  souls.  The  eye  may  either  all  our  lessons  ought  to  be  parsed  and 
dwell  upon  the  coloured  glass  or  on  construed.  And  if  ye  meet  with  a 
the  light  that  streams  through  it ;  and,  difficult  place,  repair  to  God's  usher, 
as  is  the  case  with  all  revelations  of  the  priest,  whose  lips  should  preserve 
spiritual  realities  through  sensuous  knowledge ;  demand  of  your  pastor,  as 
mediums,  gross  and  earthly  hearts  will  the  disciples  of  Christ  here. — Dean  Boys. 
not  rise  above  the  medium,  which  to 

them,  by. their  own  fault,  becomes  a  Ver.  11.  "  The  mystery  of  the  king- 
medium,  of  obscuration,  not  of  revela-  domofGod." — Religious  knowledge,  and 
tion.  This  double  aspect  belongs  to  especially  that  Christian  and  saving 
all  revelation,  which  is  both  a  savour  knowledge  which  the  gospel  brought 
of  life  unto  life  and  of  death  unto  to  light,  is  what  our  Lord  means  by 
death. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  "  the  mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God." 

The  veil  of  allegory. — The  ideas  of  A  "mystery"  is  something  dark  and 
the  Christ  of  God  are  thinly  veiled  in  incomprehensible ;  which  may  happen 
parables,  so  as  to  conceal  them  from  in  two  ways — either  through  the  want 
idle  and  corrupt  minds,  who  hate  the  of  a  clear  revelation,  or  through  the 
Cross,  and  do  not  think  truth  worth  natural  and  incurable  imperfection  of 
their  steady  attention.  But  this  slight  our  faculties.  "  The  kingdom"  con- 
veil  of  allegory  enhances  their  beauty  tains  mysteries  of  both  kinds  :  some 
for  those  who  are  worthy  of  initiation  sublime  secrets  which  are  altogether 
into  the  "mysteries  of  the  kingdom,"  too  high  for  us,  which  no  revelation 
just  as  the  sun  and  moon  appear  more  could  impart  to  us,  and  which  are 
beautiful  for  the  thin  luminous  mists  therefore  properly  said  to  "  belong 
through  which  they  rise  above  the  unto  the  Lord  our  God";  others,  again, 
horizon,  as  they  turn  the  vapours  into  which  in  former  ages  were  not  made 
gold. — E.  White.  known  unto  the  sons  of  men,  as  they 

are  now  revealed  unto  the  holy  apostles 

Yer.   10.  Explanation  of  difficulties  and   prophets,  and   through   them   to 

to   be  sought. — As    in   the   schools   of  mankind    in   general,    by   the    Spirit, 

human  knowledge,  so  soon  as  the  lecture  In  the  latter  there  is  no  mystery  as 

is  read,  it  is  the  scholars'  duty  to  ques-  soon   as   the   revelation   is    made,    no 

tion  among  themselves  how  to  parse  difficulty  which  may  not  be  removed 

and  construe  it,  and  when  they  doubt  by  the  instructions   and  explanations 

to   have  recourse   to    their    grammar  of  a  discreet,  patient,  and  condescend- 

rules,   by   which    all    construction    is  ing  teacher.     Such  a  teacher  was  our 

examined ;    and    when    they    do    not  Blessed  Lord.    He  had  to  teach  things, 

understand  a   hard   rule  to  come  for  not  unintelligible  in  their  nature,  but 

a  resolution    unto   their   master,  who  yet  strange  and  hard  sayings  to  His 

is   as  it  were  a  living  grammar  and  poor,  ignorant,  carnal-minded  hearers ; 

a  walking  book, — so  likewise  in  God's  such  as  required  to  be  helped  out  by 

academy,  in  the  divinity  school,  when  comparisons    and    illustrations    from 

134 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


things  which  they  did  understand. 
He  did  not  attempt  to  show  to  such 
persons  what  the  kingdom  of  God 
was,  but  only  what  it  was  like ;  that 
by  the  help  of  these  patterns  and 
representations  of  things  in  the  heavens 
He  might  at  last  lead  up  their  minds 
to  the  heavenly  things  themselves. 

£    Yer.  14.  The  emblem  of  seed  for  God's 
/  Word  needs  no  explanation.     The  tiny, 
]  living  nucleus  of  force,  which  is  thrown 
I  broadcast,  and  must  sink  underground 
j  in  order  to  grow,  which  does  grow,  and 
I  comes  to  light  again  in  a  form  which 
I  fills  the  whole  field  where  it  is  sown, 
/  and  nourishes  life  as  well  as  supplies 
material   for   another  sowing,   is    the 
truest  symbol  of  the  truth  in  its  work- 
ing on  the  spirit. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Sowing  broadcast  is  the  only  right 
husbandry  in  Christ's  field  with  Christ's 
seed.  "  Thou  canst  not  tell  which  shall 
prosper,  whether  this  or  that."  The 
character  of  the  soil  is  not  irrevocably 
fixed ;  but  the  trodden  path  may  be 
broken  up  to  softness,  and  the  stony 
heart  changed,  and  the  soul  filled  with 
cares  and  lusts  be  cleared,  and  any  soil 
may  become  good  ground. — Ibid. 

The  seed  must  be  genuine  :  wheat, 
not  bastard  wheat ;  the  wheat  that 
makes  bread  and  sustains  life — the  seed 
of  the  Word  of  God.  Not  all  seed  sown 
in  Sunday  schools,  just  as  not  all  seed 
scattered  from  Christian  pulpits,  is  un- 
adulterated truth  of  God.  While  there 
must  always  be  the  human  element  in 
the  teaching  of  the  inspired  Word,  it 
must  not  be  all  the  human  element, 
which  it  is  too  often  found  to  be,  whereby 
much  of  the  teaching  given  is,  for  all 
higher  and  Divine  purposes,  not  bread, 
but  sawdust. — Bishop  Thorold. 

Twofold  sowing.  — According  to  Jew- 
ish authorities  there  was  twofold  sow- 
ing, as  the  seed  was  either  cast  by  the 
hand  or  by  means  of  cattle.  In  the 
latter  case  a  sack  with  holes  was  filled 
with  corn,  and  laid  on  the  back  of  the 
animal,  so  that,  as  it  moved  onwards, 
the  seed  was  thickly  scattered.  Thus 
it  might  well  be  that  it  would  fall 
indiscriminately  on  beaten  roadway,  or 


on  stony  places  but  thinly  covered  with 
soil,  or  where  the  thorns  had  not  been 
cleared  away,  or  undergrowth  from 
this  thorn  hedge  crept  into  the  field, 
as  well  as  on  good  ground. — A.  Eder- 
sheim,  D.D. 

The  sowing  of  the  seed  of  goodness, 
even  among  the  rank  growths  of  evil, 
will  do  in  the  spiritual  world  what  the 
growth  of  the  wild  flowers  of  England 
is  doing  at  this  moment  among  the 
rank  vegetation  of  New  Zealand,  and 
what  the  fire  and  hoe  of  the  settler 
have  failed  to  do.  We  are  told  that 
the  common  clover  of  our  fields,  tender 
as  it  looks,  is  actually  rooting  out 
the  formidable  New  Zealand  flax,  with 
its  fibrous  leaves  and  strong  woody 
roots.  By  the  law  of  natural  selection, 
as  it  were,  in  the  spiritual  world,  the 
stronger  growth  of  heaven  will  extir- 
pate the  feebler  growth  of  earth. — 
H.  Macmillan,  D.D. 

Yer.  15.  By  the  wayside. — These  are 
they  who,  when  the  Baptist  came  with 
austere  severity,  said  he  was  mad  ;  and 
when  Christ  conversed  and  taught  with 
mild  condescension,  said  He  was  a 
drunkard,  a  glutton,  and  a  keeper  of 
bad  company.  They  hated  the  doctrines, 
and  so  found  fault  with  the  teachers. 
Such  are  those  who  have  entered  be- 
times, and  continued  long,  in  the  service 
of  the  devil ;  who  are  slaves  to  vices 
and  bad  habits  ;  who  have  extinguished 
all  reason,  reflexion,  and  natural  con- 
science, and  whom  no  ordinary  methods 
can  reclaim.  The  Word  is  preached  to 
them,  and  they  trample  it  underfoot, 
and  ridicule  those  who  offer  them  good 
advice.  They  lie  out  of  the  reach  of 
persuasion  and  instruction,  and  nothing 
short  of  some  grievous  calamity  can 
rouse  them.  But  from  their  deplor- 
able condition  others  may  take  due 
warning,  lest,  by  departing  from  their 
duty  and  neglecting  a  timely  reforma- 
tion, they  should,  through  the  deceit- 
fulness  of  sin,  arrive  at  such  a  hardened 
state.  And  this  seems  to  be  the  only 
use  these  incorrigible  offenders  serve  in 
this  world :  they  stand  forth,  not  as 
marks   and    friendly  lights    to  tguide 

135 


CHAP.  IV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


and  direct  the  passenger,  but  as  signals 
of  danger  and  death  to  be  avoided. — 
J.  Jortin,  D.D. 

The  devil's  activity. —  "  Wherever 
there  is  a  preacher  in  the  pulpit,  there 
is  a  devil  in  the  pew,"  to  carry  off  the 
good  seed  if  it  be  neglected. 

Satan  hinders  men  in  sundry  ways 
from  profiting  by  the  Word.  1.  By 
keeping  them  from  hearing  it,  stirring 
up  occasions  of  worldly  business  or  some 
other  impediments  on  the  Lord's  Day 
to  keep  them  away  from  church.  2.  By 
keeping  them  from  attending  to  it 
when  they  do  hear  it.  3.  By  blinding 
their  minds,  that  they  may  not  under- 
stand it.  4.  By  labouring  to  hold  them 
in  infidelity,  that  they  may  not  believe 
and  apply  the  Word  to  themselves. 
5.  By  using  means  to  thrust  the  Word 
heard  out  of  their  minds,  that  they 
may  not  remember  it.  6.  By  keeping 
them  from  yielding  obedience  to  the 
Word.— G.  Fetter. 

Vers.  16,  17.  No  root. — These  are 
persons  who  have  conscience,  reason, 
and  reflexion ;  who  can  discern  the 
amiable  and  profitable  nature  of  re- 
ligion, and  the  folly  and  danger  of  vice ; 
who  can  sometimes  give  attention  to  the 
Word  of  God,  approve  it  as  right  and 
fit,  speak  and  think  honourably  of  it, 
and  of  those  who  practise  it,  and  even 
entertain  purposes  of  acting  suitably 
to  it :  but  they  have  no  steadiness, 
resolution,  and  perseverance ;  and  so 
are  not  proof  against  trials  and  tempta- 
tions. They  are  such  as  are  described 
in  Ezek.  xxxiii.  31,  32.  Moral  precepts 
and  religious  arguments  appear  fair 
and  lovely  in  idea,  but  are  found 
grievous  in  practice  and  execution ; 
and  the  paths  of  righteousness,  which 
make  a  fine  landscape  in  description, 
are  rough,  steep,  and  tedious  to  ascend. 
Such  is  the  effect  of  religion  upon 
those  who  have  some  taste  and  natural 
discernment,  but  no  steady  love  of 
goodness. — J.  Jortin,  D.D, 

Many  mistake  feeling  for  faith, 
admiration  of  Christ  for  attachment 
to  Him,  the  appreciation  of  the  beauty 
of  holiness  for  the  use  and  practice  of 

136 


it,  the  power  of  emotion  for  depth  of 
piety.  Such  are  as  quickly  offended 
as  they  are  impressed. 

Quick  maturity  means  brief  life  and 
speedy  decay.  "  Gladness"  although 
certainly  a  result  of  true  conversion, 
is  not  the  immediate  result,  but  sorrow 
for  sin  and  repentance  in  dust  and 
ashes. 

A  forgotten  truth. — Much  more  of 
true  religion  consists  in  deep  humility, 
brokenness  of  heart,  and  an  abasing 
sense  of  barrenness,  and  want  of  grace, 
and  holiness,  than  most  who  are  called 
Christians  imagine ;  especially  those 
who  have  been  esteemed  the  converts 
of  the  late  day,  many  of  whom  seem 
to  know  of  no  other  religion  but 
elevated  joys  and  affections,  arising 
only  from  some  flights  of  imagination, 
or  some  suggestion  made  to  their  mind 
of  Christ's  being  theirs,  God's  loving 
them,  and  the  like  (John  v.  35 ; 
Mark  vi.  20;  Luke  iv.  23,  29).— 
D.  Brainerd. 

Revival  converts. — The  short  and 
pathetic  history  of  some  who  are  called 
revival  converts.  They  are  charmed, 
but  not  changed ;  much  excited,  but 
not  truly  converted.  Their  root  is  in 
the  crowd,  the  fine  music,  the  lively 
stir,  the  hearty  companionships  of  the 
gospel  meeting.  The  Moravians  every 
Sabbath  offer  up  this  prayer :  "  From 
light-minded  swarming  deliver  us, 
good  God." 

Vers.  18,  19,  The  Word  choked.— To 
this  class  of  people  religion  is  presented 
and  propounded ;  and  they  assent  to 
it  and  receive  it,  and  call  themselves 
Christians ;  but  many  things  arise 
between  them  and  their  duty,  many 
avocations  and  impediments  which 
prevent  the  Word  from  having  a  due 
effect  upon  their  hearts.  1.  "The 
Cares  of  this  world,"  when  admitted 
and  nourished  and  encouraged,  seize 
upon  the  whole  man,  and  so  fill  the 
head  and  occupy  the  hours  that  the 
attention  is  entirely  fixed  on  worldly 
affairs,  and  no  leisure  is  allowed  for 
spiritual  concerns.  And  as  no  person 
can  bear  the  toil  and  fatigue  of  being 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  IV. 


always  contriving,  projecting,  labour- 
ing, plodding,  and  some  amusement 
must  intervene,  the  times  for  recreation 
are,  for  such  persons,  the  times  when 
other  Christians  are  attending  the 
public  worship  of  God,  or  meditating 
on  things  sacred  and  serious  at  home. 
Thus  religious  considerations  are  totally 
banished;  and  the  man  may  be  said 
to  be  dead  to  God  and  Christ,  and  alive 
only  to  the  world.  2.  "  The  deceitful- 
ness  of  riches"  has  the  sameibad  effect. 
When  the  love  of  wealth  is  predominant 
and  engrosses  the  affections,  it  produces 
an  eagerness  to  acquire  it;  a  proud 
trust  and  confidence  in  it ;  a  settled 
resolution  to  preserve  and  increase  it 
by  any  methods,  and  in  defiance  of 
honesty  and  humanity  ;  and  an  esteem 
or  contempt  of  other  persons,  according 
as  they  are  rich  or  poor  :  and  then 
mammon  alone  is  worshipped,  and  the 
love  of  God  is  expelled  from  the  heart. 
3.  "The  lusts  of  other  things"— viz. 
desires  of  magnificence  and  splendour, 
of  flattery  and  popular  applause,  of 
power  and  pre-eminence,  and,  in  a 
word,  immoderate  affections  for  any- 
thing that  is  temporal  and  transitory. 
— J.  Jortin,  D.D. 

Disheartening  influences. — The  ridi- 
cule of  companions,  the  polite  surprise 
or  cold  sneer  of  former  friends  at  their 
earnestness,  the  tyranny  of  fashion, 
the  seductions  of  pleasure,  the  force 
of  habit  and  inclination,  unexpected 
sorrows  and  difficulties,  which  would 
drive  an  earnest  spirit  nearer  to  God, 
dishearten  those  whose  religion  is 
founded  on  emotion  rather  than  on 
principle. 

Ver.  20.  Ground  which  disap- 
pointeth  not  the  sower,  and  bringeth 
forth  fruit  in  its  season,  is  naturally 
good,  and  is  improved  by  culture. 
The  heart  of  every  well-disposed  person 
is  such.  God  has  given  to  all  of  us 
abilities,   and   power   to  exert   them ; 


He  has  also  given  to  us  Christians 
superadded  His  revealed  will  in  the 
gospel ;  and  what  aid  is  necessary  He 
is  ever  ready  to  bestow  :  but  a  man 
must  put  forth  his  own  strength,  and 
seek  out  and  work  out  his  own  salva- 
tion. The  persons,  therefore,  here 
described  act  like  rational  creatures ; 
they  have  a  love  of  knowledge  and 
goodness,  and  a  desire  to  make  im- 
provements in  both.  Thence  they  are 
disposed  to  inquire  into  themselves 
and  their  duty;  and  opportunities  for 
this  are  never  wanting :  morality  and 
revealed  religion  lie  within  their  reach, 
and  they  may  read  or  hear  what  God 
requires  from  them.  "They  hear  the 
Word,  and  receive  it "  ;  they  lay  it  to 
heart,  and  call  it  to  mind;  they 
meditate  upon  the  benefits  arising  from 
it,  the  danger  of  neglecting  it,  the 
reasonable  and  lovable  nature  of 
it,  the  dangers,  inconveniences,  and 
temptations  which  may  arise  and 
assault  them,  the  proper  methods  of 
shunning  or  resisting  them,  and  the 
wisdom  of  preferring  eternal  life  to  all 
other  considerations. — J.  Jortin,  D.D. 

Varying  yields. — Every  one  has  ob- 
served the  difference  between  those 
who  may  be  called  good  Christians,  in 
the  matter  of  their  good  works — how 
some  seem  to  produce  twice  or  thrice 
the  fruit  that  others  do.  Some  are, 
compared  with  others,  three  times 
more  careful  in  all  the  trifling  matters 
which  make  up  so  much  of  life  ;  three 
times  more  self-denying,  three  times 
more  liberal,  three  times  more  humble, 
subdued,  and  thankful.  Does  not  the 
Lord  recognise  this  difference  in  the 
parable  of  the  pounds,  when  the  noble- 
man, in  leaving,  gives  a  pound  to  each 
of  his  servants ;  and  one  servant  makes 
it  ten  pounds,  and  another  five  ;  and 
he  commends  both,  but  gives  to  the 
more  industrious  worker  twice  the 
reward  ? — M.  F.  Sadler. 


137 


chap.  iv.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—25. 

(Parallel:  Luke  viii.  16-18.) 

Ver.  22.  The  manifestation  of  hidden  things. — This  is  a  proverbial  saying, 
applied  in  various  senses,  according  to  the  occasion.  Before  treating  it  in  a 
general  way,  we  may  glance  at  it  in  connexion  with  the  particular  occasions 
on  which  we  find  it  employed  in  Scripture.  1.  Matt.  x.  26.  Our  Lord  is  there 
warning  His  apostles  of  the  enmity  and  persecution  which  they  must  expect  to 
encounter  in  the  discharge  of  their  duty.  "  My  doctrine,"  He  seems  to  say, 
"  must  by  all  means,  and  in  spite  of  all  attempts  to  suppress  it,  be  proclaimed 
abroad.  There  is  nothing  now  hid  which  shall  not  be  revealed ;  nor  has  there 
anything  passed  in  secret  between  us  which  shall  not  be  generally  made  known. 
Fear  not,  therefore,  but  proceed  to  execute  the  task  assigned  you,  not  by  the 
method  of  private  communication,  which  is  suited  only  to  the  instruction  of  a 
few  confidential  disciples,  but  in  whatever  way  may  best  serve  to  spread  the 
gospel  abroad."  2.  Luke  xii.  2.  A  warning  against  dissimulation.  There  will 
come  a  day  when  all  hypocrisy  will  be  laid  bare,  and  every  man  will  appear 
in  his  true  character.  3.  The  text.  As  a  candle  is  meant  to  be  elevated  on  a 
candlestick,  so  Christians  should  not  lead  a  life  of  seclusion  and  retirement,  but 
rather  let  their  light  shine  before  men. 

I.  Perhaps  the  first  case  which  occurs  to  one,  on  hearing  this,  saving,  is  that 
of  great  and  atrocious  crimes,  of  which  the  perpetrators  are  unknown ;  acts 
of  violence  or  wanton  mischief,  committed  under  cover  of  night  or  remote  from 
observation.  A  short  time  usually  brings  to  light  the  deed ;  but  the  author 
and  the  circumstances  remain  a  mystery.  Such  is  the  case  of  "an  uncertain 
murder,"  for  which  the  Mosaic  Law  made  a  remarkable  provision  (Deut.  xxi.  1-9). 
Even  in  this  world  it  is  wonderful  how  things  come  to  light,  often  with  the 
result  of  bringing  the  guilt  home  to  the  right  door.  But  for  the  complete 
fulfilment  of  the  text  we  must  wait  till  the  Day  of  Judgment,  when  no  darkness 
will  hide  the  evil-doer,  and  there  will  be  no  need  of  pursuers  to  track  him  to 
his  hiding-place ;  "  his  own  iniquities,"  etc.  (Prov.  v.  22).  Then  it  will  be 
useless  for  one  of  the  party  to  come  forward  and  betray  his  accomplices ;  for 
whatsoever  the  conspirators  of  mischief  "have  spoken  in  darkness,"  etc. 
(Luke  xii.  3).  A  necessary  consequence  of  the  exposure  of  guilt  will  be  the 
manifestation  of  innocence.  Now,  in  our  ignorance  of  the  real  offender, 
suspicions  fall  upon  many  innocent  persons,  who,  if  they  cannot  perfectly  clear 
themselves,  continue  under  a  cloud  all  their  lives.  This  is  a  sore  trial ;  but  the 
Day  of  Judgment  will  set  it  right.     See  Isa.  lviii.  8  ;  Ps.  xxxvii.  6. 

II.  Another  great  heap  of  hidden  things,  one  day  to  be  revealed,  are  the 
thoughts  of  men's  hearts,  and  the  secret  springs  of  their  actions.  At  present 
everything  connected  with  the  inner  working  of  the  mind  is  a  mystery.  Of  all 
covered  things  none  is  so  close  and  impenetrable  as  the  heart  of  man  ( Jer.  xvii.  9). 
But,  happily,  "all  things  are  naked,"  etc.  (Heb.  iv.  13).  God  is  able  to  unlock 
the  doors  of  this  cabinet,  and  expose  all  the  secret  drawers,  recesses,  and  hiding- 
places  contained  in  it.  And  when  we  see  the  multifarious  furniture  of  a  single 
heart — thoughts,  desires,  motives,  passions,  and  affections — ransacked  and  sifted 
before  the  eyes  of  the  universe,  we  shall  perceive  an  additional  propriety  in  the 
text.  What  a  disclosure  !  Who  could  have  imagined  that  those  who  preserved 
so  amiable  and  sanctified  an  exterior  should  in  their  hearts  be  proud,  covetous, 
sensual,  devilish  ?  But  where  gross  hypocrisy  is  not  chargeable,  yet  what  a 
miserable  figure  will  the  very  best  and  purest  exertions  of  human  virtue  make, 
when  manifested,  with  all   their  blemishes,  in  the  searching   light   of   God's 

138 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK  chap.  iv. 


countenance !  Which  of  us  will  then  appear  to  have  "  walked  before  Him  and 
been  perfect "  ?  to  have  loved  Him  "  with  all  our  heart,"  etc.  ?  to  have  set  up 
no  idols,  no  rebellious  wills,  no  carnal  affections? 

Ver.  24.  How  to  hear  sermons. — "  Take  heed  what  ye  hear "  really  means 
"  Take  heed  how  ye  hear,"  in  what  spirit  ye  hear,  with  what  attention,  with 
what  profit,  as  appears  from  the  words  which  follow. 

I.  Ways  in  which  men  bring  upon  themselves  spiritual  hurt  and  loss  by 
their  manner  of  hearing  God's  Word. — 1.  If  they  hear  without  attention  or 
feeling  or  desire,  then  they  become  so  used  to  the  words  by  hearing  them 
often,  they  so  harden  their  hearts  by  their  careless,  godless  practice,  that  they 
become  like  the  hard-beaten  road  from  which  the  devil  catches  away  the  seed 
directly  it  has  fallen.  They  have  this  of  not  attending,  that  they  cannot 
attend ;  of  closing  their  ears,  that  they  lose  the  power  of  hearing  even  when 
they  would  listen  ;  and  often  they  go  down  to  the  grave  deaf  to  God's  warnings, 
deaf  to  the  sound  of  preacher  or  angel  or  the  voice  of  Christ,  to  be  awakened 
from  that  deafness  by  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  by  the  trump  of  God 
calling  to  judgment.  2.  Men  hear  and  pay  attention ;  they  are  moved  by 
what  is  said  or  by  what  they  read  :  but  they  rise  up  and  forget ;  or  they  begin 
to  act  and  leave  off  with  failing  zeal  and  sinking  interest ;  or  their  sins  or  the 
world  choke  the  seed,  and  it  becometh  unfruitful.  3.  God  withdraws  His  Spirit 
from  those  who  neglect  His  grace ;  and  without  that  Spirit  no  man  can  draw 
near  to  Him. 

II.  The  great  danger  of  not  heeding  how  we  hear  in  respect  to  sermons. — 
1.  It  will  avail  a  man  nothing  to  listen  in  a  judging,  criticising  spirit.  On  the 
contrary,  it  will  make  the  service  an  exercise  of  pride  to  him  instead  of  humility  : 
he  will  learn  nothing,  because  he  has  not  the  spirit  of  a  learner,  but  the  feeling 
of  a  teacher,  a  judge,  and  a  superior.  2.  It  will  serve  a  man  nothing  if  he  listens 
to  a  sermon  without  applying  it  to  himself.  3.  If  any  person  delights  in 
the  manner  or  words  of  a  sermon,  or  in  the  preacher  of  it,  rather  than  in  the 
matter,  the  thing  preached  will  profit  him  nothing.  Such  an  one  loses  the 
kernel  in  admiring  the  shell.  4.  A  man  who  talks  much  about  a  sermon  after 
it  is  over  is  not  one  most  likely  to  profit  by  it.  It  has  been  well  said  that  the 
best  sermon  is  that  which  sends  a  congregation  away  not  talking,  but  thinking. 
Those  who  feel  most  speak  least.  St.  Augustine  went  to  preach  to  some 
barbarous  people  in  order  to  persuade  them  to  abandon  a  cruel  custom  to  which 
they  were  used.  "  I  preached  mightily,"  he  says,  "  to  the  best  of  my  power  to 
pluck  out  so  cruel  and  unchristian  a  custom  from  their  hearts  and  minds,  and  to 
banish  it  by  my  exhorting.  I  did  not  think,  however,  that  I  had  accomplished 
anything  when  I  heard  them  applauding,  but  when  I  saw  them  weeping.  For 
they  shewed  by  their  applause  that  they  were  instructed  and  pleased,  but  by 
their  tears  that  they  were  turned."  5.  Many  people  think  that  they  require  a 
sermon  several  times  a  week  to  keep  them  in  the  right  way,  and  to  fill  them 
with  heavenly  thoughts.  They  are  mistaken  ;  they  require  no  more  preaching 
than  they  can  hear  upon  the  Lord's  Day,  except  at  particular  seasons  and  for 
particular  instruction.  But  what  they  do  require  is  thought.  It  is  want  of 
thought  that  makes  sermons  useless,  and  afflictions  useless,  and  warnings 
useless. — W.  E.  Hey  gate,. 

Ver.  25.  How  progress  is  possible. — The  law  laid  down  is  this  :  that  when  we 
use  powers  and  faculties,  we  gain  more  power  and  more  faculty ;  that  when  we 
neglect  to  use  them,  they  decrease,  and  at  last  perish.  Such  is  the  case  with 
bodily  organs,  but  such  is  still  more  the  case  with  mental  organs.  Practice 
makes  perfect,  it  is  said.     But  notice  this  :  it  is  not  undirected  practice,  or  the 

139 


chap.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 

random  use  of  any  power,  but  it  is  the  carefully  arranged  practice  which 
improves  it.  In  other  words,  it  is  practice  directed  towards  an  end.  Robert 
Houdon,  the  celebrated  French  juggler,  tells  us  how  he  acquired  one  element  of 
his  power,  an  extreme  quickness  and  accuracy  of  observation.  His  father  took 
him  through  one  of  the  boulevards  of  Paris,  crowded  with  people,  and  led  him 
slowly  past  a  shop  window,  in  which  were  exhibited  a  great  multitude  of  different 
articles,  and  then  made  him  tell  how  many  he  had  been  able  to  notice  and 
recollect.  This  practice  so  strengthened  and  quickened  the  perceptive  powers, 
that  at  last  he  became  able  to  recollect  every  article  in  a  large  shop  window 
by  only  walking  past  it  a  single  time.  The  more  he  exercised  the  faculty,  the 
easier  it  became.  The  more  he  had  of  this  quickness  of  observation,  the  more 
was  given  to  him.  In  the  same  way  acrobats  and  gymnasts,  by  careful  and 
systematic  training,  develop  herculean  strength  of  limb  and  power  of  equipoise. 
As  one  improves  any  power  by  careful  training,  he  gets  more.  He  has  much, 
and  more  is  given  him.  But  if  we  neglect  to  exercise  our  powers,  they 
degenerate,  and  at  last  disappear.  The  fishes  in  the  Mammoth  Cave  have  lost 
their  eyes  by  not  using  them  in  that  Egyptian  darkness.  So  if  men  do  not 
employ  any  power,  they  at  last  become  incapable  of  using  it.  The  gland  which 
does  not  secrete  diminishes  in  bulk ;  the  nerve  that  does  not  transmit  impres- 
sions wastes  away  ;  the  muscle  which  does  not  contract  withers.  The  intellectual 
and  moral  organs,  like  the  physical,  are  liable  to  atrophy,  from  disease.  If  a 
person  does  not  take  pains  to  observe,  and  to  remember  what  he  observes,  the 
power  of  seeing  and  remembering  gradually  decays.  He  who  does  not  think 
seriously  on  anything  will  become  frivolous,  and  not  be  able  to  apply  his  mind 
at  all.  To  him  who  hath  knowledge  more  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have 
abundance.  Knowledge  in  the  mind  is  such  a  vital  and  vitalising  power,  that 
it  makes  the  intellect  active  to  see,  to  learn,  to  remember.  Whoever  travels 
with  an  empty,  untaught  mind  comes  back  nearly  as  ignorant  as  he  went ;  but 
the  geologist,  the  artist,  the  man  who  has  read  geography  and  history,  or  who 
knows  well  any  industry  or  manufacture  or  art,  is  able  to  see  something  new 
wherever  he  goes.  Just  as  the  merchant  must  send  out  some  freight  in  his 
vessel  in  order  to  bring  back  a  cargo,  the  traveller  must  take  some  knowledge 
with  him  abroad  if  he  wishes  to  bring  any  with  him  home.  We  have  heard  of 
persons  who  have  stayed  in  their  house  and  avoided  society  until  it  became 
impossible  for  them  to  leave  their  home  or  the  room.  We  owe  something  to 
society ;  we  all  can  be  of  use  to  others  by  some  kindly,  cheerful  companion 
ship  ;  but  these  people  have  buried  their  talent  in  the  earth,  until  at  last  it  is 
taken  from  them.  Solitary  confinement,  when  inflicted  as  a  punishment,  is 
considered  a  very  severe  one ;  but  these  persons  inflict  it  on  themselves — living 
for  years  alone,  and  at  last  unable  to  go  out,  even  if  they  wish  to  do  so.  So 
people  who  do  not  give  lose  at  last  the  power  of  giving.  Let  us  never  forget 
the  epitaph  on  a  tombstone,  which  teaches  the  true  law  on  this  subject :  "  What 
I  spent,  I  had ;  what  I  kept,  I  lost ;  what  I  gave,  I  have  still."  So  likewise 
those  who  do  not  care  to  see  the  truth  lose  at  last  the  power  of  seeing  it.  I 
have  known  lawyers  to  whom  justice  and  truth  were  supreme — honourable, 
high-minded  men,  who  never  condescended  to  any  low  cunning,  but  only  used 
those  arguments  to  convince  others  which  were  convincing  to  themselves.  Such 
men,  as  they  grow  older,  grow  wiser,  stronger,  greater.  They  love  truth,  and 
truth  is  given  to  them,  and  they  have  abundance.  But  we  have  known  others, 
members  of  this  same  grand  profession,  whose  only  object  was  to  win  their 
cause,  and  that  in  any  way.  They  said,  not  what  they  believed  true,  but  what 
they  thought  they  might  make  seem  true  to  others.  Their  object  was,  not  to 
convince ;  but  to  deceive,  to  confuse,  to  bewilder,  to  mislead,  to  win  their  cause  by 
appeals  to  prejudice,  to  ignorance,  to  passion.     And  so  at  last  they  confuse  their 

140  ~  .  . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


own  sense,  and  lose  the  power  of  distinguishing  between  truth  and  falsehood,  right 
and  wrong.  They  have  buried  their  talent  in  the  earth,  and  it  is  taken  from 
them.  We  may  state  the  law  thus  :  "  Any  habitual  course  of  conduct  changes 
voluntary  actions  into  automatic  or  involuntary  actions."  This  can  be  illustrated 
by  the  physical  constitution  of  man.  Some  of  our  bodily  acts  are  voluntary, 
some  involuntary ;  some,  partly  one  and  partly  the  other.  The  heart  beats 
seventy  or  eighty  times  a  minute  all  our  life  long,  without  any  will  of  ours. 
The  lungs,  in  the  same  way,  perpetually  inhale  and  exhale  breath,  whether  we 
intend  it  or  not ;  and  if  the  lungs  should  suspend  their  action,  we  should  die. 
But  we  can  exercise  a  little  volition  over  the  action  of  the  lungs  ;  we  can  breathe 
voluntarily,  taking  long  breaths.  Thus  the  action  of  the  lungs  is  partly 
automatic  and  partly  voluntary,  while  the  mechanical  action  of  the  heart  is 
wholly  automatic,  and  the  chemical  action  of  the  digestive  organs  is  the  same. 
But  some  acts,  voluntary  at  first,  become,  by  habit,  automatic.  A  child  begin- 
ning to  walk  takes  every  single  step  by  a  separate  act  of  will ;  beginning  to 
read,  he  looks  at  every  single  letter.  After  a  while  he  walks  and  reads  by  a 
habit,  which  has  become  involuntary.  So  also  it  is  with  man's  moral  and 
spiritual  nature.  By  practice  he  forms  habits,  and  habitual  action  is  automatic 
action,  requiring  no  exercise  of  will  except  at  the  beginning  of  the  series  of  acts, 
The  law  of  association  does  the  rest.  So  to  him  who  hath  shall  be  given.  As 
voluntary  acts  are  transformed  into  automatic,  the  will  is  set  free  to  devote 
itself  to  higher  efforts  and  larger  attainments.  If  it  were  not  for  some  such 
law  of  accumulation  as  this,  the  work  of  life  would  have  to  be  begun  for  ever 
anew.  Formation  of  character  would  be  impossible.  We  should  be  incapable 
of  progress,  our  whole  strength  being  always  employed  in  battling  with  our  first 
enemies,  learning  evermore  anew  our  earliest  lessons.  But,  by  our  present 
constitution,  he  who  has  taken  one  step  can  take  another,  and  life  may  become 
a  perpetual  advance  from  good  to  better.  This  is  the  one  and  sufficient  reward 
of  all  virtue,  the  one  sufficient  punishment  of  all  wrongdoing,  that  right  actions 
and  wrong  actions  gradually  harden  into  character.  The  reward  of  the  good 
man  is,  that  having  chosen  truth  and  pursued  it,  it  becomes  at  last  a  part  of  his 
own  nature,  a  happy  companion  of  all  his  life.  The  condemnation  of  the  bad 
man  is,  that  when  light  has  come  into  the  world  he  has  chosen  darkness,  and  so 
the  light  within  him  becomes  darkness.  Do  not  envy  the  bad  man's  triumphs 
and  worldly  successes.  Every  one  of  them  is  a  rivet  fastening  him  to  evil, 
making  it  more  difficult  for  him  to  return  to  good,  making  it  impossible  but  for 
the  redeeming  power  of  God,  which  has  become  incarnate  in  Christ,  in  order  to 
seek  and  save  the  lost.  The  highest  graces  of  all — faith,  hope,  and  love — obey 
the  same  law.  By  trusting  in  God  when  we  hardly  see  Him  at  all,  we  come  at 
last  to  realise,  as  by  another  sense,  His  Divine  presence  in  all  things.  Faith 
in  God,  at  first  an  effort,  at  last  becomes  automatic  and  instinctive.  Thus, 
too,  faith  in  immortality  solidifies  into  an  instinct.  As  we  live  from  and  for 
infinite,  Divine,  eternal  realities,  these  become  a  part  of  our  knowledge.  Socrates 
did  not  convince  himself  of  his  immortality  much  by  his  arguments.  But  by 
spending  a  long  life  in  intimate  converse  with  the  highest  truths  and  noblest 
ends,  he  at  last  reached  the  point  where  he  could  not  help  believing  in  immor- 
tality. The  moral  of  all  this  is  evident.  Every  man,  every  woman,  every  child, 
has  some  talent,  some  power,  some  opportunity,  of  getting  good  and  doing  good. 
Each  day  offers  us  some  occasion  of  using  this  talent.  As  we  use  it,  it  gradually 
increases,  improves,  becomes  native  to  the  character.  As  we  neglect  it,  it 
dwindles,  withers,  and  disappears.  This  is  the  stern  but  benign  law  by  which 
we  live.  This  makes  character  real  and  enduring  ;  this  makes  progress  possible ; 
this  turns  men  into  angels  and  virtue  into  goodness. — J,  F,  Clarke. 

141 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS    ON   TEE    VERSES. 


Vers.  21,  22.  Christian  life. — I.  As 
a  revelation. — 1.  It  is  to  be  luminous. 
2.  It  is  to  be  properly  placed  in  the 
midst  of  society.  The  gospel  is  a  great 
revealing  power.  In  all  truth  there  is 
power  of  exposure  and  judgment ;  how 
much  more  in  the  highest  truth  of  all ! 

II.  As  a  responsibility. — 1.  Stew- 
ardship in  doctrine.  2.  Stewardship 
in  action. 

III.  As  a  law. — 1.  Usefulness  is  pro- 
ductiveness. 2.  Indolence  is  ruin. 
The  kingdom  of  Christ  is  thus  shewn 
to  be  founded  on  law.  Man  never 
becomes  more  than  a  subject :  Christ 
never  less  than  a  king. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Yer.  21.  Usefulness. — The  duty  which 
no  one  can  disclaim,  the  test  which  no 
one  may  evade,  and  the  praise  which 
no  one  will  despise  are  all  included  in 
the  homely  word  "  usefulness." 

I.  The  inevitableness  of  usefulness 
for  every  one  who  is  in  spirit,  as  well 
as  profession,  a  true  disciple  of  Christ. 
The  use  of  light,  as  well  as  its  function, 
is  to  shine.  So  a  Christian  is  a  Chris- 
tian, not  merely  for  the  personal  object 
of  his  individual  salvation,  but  that  he 
may  glorify  God  in  saving  others. 
True,  he  must  divest  himself  of  self- 
consciousness.  Also,  he  must  be  con- 
stantly on  his  guard  against  religious 
priggishness.  But  he  is  to  shine  as  a 
light  in  the  world,  if  he  would  not  be 
missing  one  of  the  chief  ends  of  his 
salvation. 

II.  The  scope  of  a  Christian's  use- 
fulness is  very  wide.  "  Before  men," 
Christ  said,  His  disciples  were  to  make 
their  light  shine.  But  there  are 
several  spheres  of  usefulness,  in  their 
order  of  importance  and  necessity,  more 
or  less  open  to  us  all.  1.  Wherever 
else  we  may  or  may  not  be  useful,  let 
us,  above  all  things,  endeavour  to  be 
useful  at  home.  Our  first  duties  are 
with  those  who  are  nearest  and  dearest 
to  us.  2.  In  society  we  can  be  very 
useful,  if  we  are  only  earnestly  bent 

142 


on  it,  and  cultivate  tact,  modesty,  and 
self-effacement. 

III.  The  method  of  usefulness. — 1. 
All  our  usefulness,  whatever  it  may  be, 
must  depend  on  our  character.  Christ 
in  the  heart  must  precede  Christ  on  the 
lips.  2.  The  discharge  of  our  daily 
duty  will  immensely  affect  our  influ- 
ence with  others.  3.  Friendship  gives 
another  scope  for  usefulness.  4.  For 
each  one,  if  he  cares  to  trust  it  and  to 
use  it,  Christ  offers  some  special  service, 
according  to  capacity,  age,  and  gift. — 
Bishop  Thorold. 

Christ's  methods  in  revelation. — He 
is  the  person  that  lights  the  candle  or 
the  lamp ;  and  in  explanation  of  His 
teaching  by  parables  He  says  in 
effect :  "  Do  not  think  that  I  would  be 
so  foolish  as  to  defeat  and  counterwork 
My  own  purpose,  by  bringing  any 
arbitrary  or  needless  obscurities  into 
My  teaching.  I  do  not  light  My  lamp 
of  revelation,  and  then  put  it  away 
under  a  bushel  of  dark  sayings,  which 
might  have  been  made  light  and  clear." 
But  the  parable,  which  is  a  veiling  of 
the  light — which  is,  if  not  a  putting 
it  under  a  bushel,  at  least  putting  a 
bit  of  coloured  glass  between  you  and 
it — the  parable  is  given  for  the  dis- 
tinct purpose,  not  that  the  light  that 
streams  through  it  may  be  hidden,  but 
that  the  light  may  be  manifested.  If 
there  is  any  darkness,  be  sure  that  it 
is  darkness  which  is  intended  to  help 
the  spread  of  the  light.  And  if  there 
be  obscurities,  they  are  meant,  by 
stimulating  thought  to  search,  by  ar- 
resting attention,  and  by  a  hundred 
other  effects  on  us  to  whom  the 
revelation  comes,  to  make  us  more 
vigorous  in  our  pursuit  after  the 
truth  ;  and  on  God's  side  are  adopted, 
not  in  order  that  He  may  ensnare  us 
and  give  Himself  excuses  for  punish- 
ing, but  that  He  may  temper  the 
light  to  the  weak  eye,  and  so  make  it 
capable  of  becoming  strong  enough  to 
bear  more  light. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


The  guiding  light. — What  does  a  fearfully  avenged.  Then  shall  the 
man  light  a  candle  for  ?  That  it  reckoning  be.  Then  shall  it  be  clearly 
may  give  light.  What  has  God  given  seen  and  brought  to  light  how  the 
me  my  conscience  and  my  power  of  good  seed  has  been  plenteously  and 
spiritual  perception  for,  but  in  order  continually  sown  in  many  a  heart, 
that  it  may  be  the  guiding  light  of  my  and  scarcely  sown  before  lost  for  ever, 
whole  nature,  not  that  it  may  be  put  how  opportunities  and  calls  have  been 
under  a  bushel  or  under  a  bed  ?  The  neglected,  graces  and  mercies  slighted, 
light  which  is  in  us  falls  under  the  warnings  and  examples  lightly  put 
same  laws  as  the  light  without  us  in  aside ;  in  a  word,  the  man's  struggle 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  Nay,  against  grace  through  a  whole  life- 
more,  the  light  which  is  in  the  Chris-  time  shall  be  laid  bare,  step  by  step, 
tian  soul  is  Christ.  For  it  is  the  and  feature  by  feature,  then,  when 
conscience  illuminated  by  His  indwell-  the  time  of  grace  shall  be  no  more. — 
ing,  and  the  spirit  made  capable  of  Dean  Butler. 
perceiving  the  truth  because  it  pos- 
sesses Christ  within,  of  which  He  is  Yer.  24.  "  Take  heed  what  ye  hear." 
here  speaking.  And  what  He  says  — Never  was  this  warning  more  needed 
is  this  :  "I  kindled  the  light  in  your  than  now.  Men  think  themselves  free 
heart  and  mind  and  conscience,  not  that  to  follow  any  teacher,  especially  if  he 
it  might  be  quenched  and  darkened,  be  eloquent,  to  read  any  book,  if  only 
but  that  it  might  be  your  guiding  star  it  be  in  demand,  and  to  discuss  any 
and  perpetual  inspiration."  And  you  theory,  provided  it  be  fashionable, 
falsify  and  contradict  the  very  purpose  while  perfectly  well  aware  that  they 
for  which  Christ  has  come  to  you,  are  neither  earnest  inquirers  after 
unless  you  let  the  light  of  His  will  truth,  nor  qualified  champions  against 
burning  in  your  will,  and  the  light  of  its  assailants.  For  what,  then,  do 
His  truth  flaming  in  your  understand-  they  read  and  hear  ?  For  the  pleasure 
ing,  and  the  light  of  his  righteousness  of  a  rounded  phrase,  or  to  augment 
illuminating  your  conscience,  be  your  the  prattle  of  conceited  ignorance  in 
supreme  and  sovereign  guides. — Ibid.  a  drawing-room.     Do  we  wonder  when 

Hidden  lights. — Some  Christian  men  these  players  with  edged  tools  injure 

darken  and  obscure  the  light  of  Christ  themselves,    and   become    perverts    or 

within  them  by  their  carefulness  about  agnostics  ?     A  rash  and  uninstructed 

earthly    necessities,    possessions,     and  exposure  of   our  intellects  to   evil  in- 

treasures,    which   are   represented    by  fluences    is    meting   to   God   with   an 

the  bushel  of  commerce  ;  and  some  of  unjust  measure,  as  really  as  a  wilful 

them    do   the    same    thing    by   sheer  plunge    into    any    other    temptation, 

slothf  ulness    and    indifference   in    the  since  we  are  bidden  to  cleanse  ourselves 

religious  life,  which  are  represented  by  from  all  defilement  of  the  spirit  as  well 

the  bed  on  which  men  stretch  them-  as  of  the  flesh. — Dean  Chadwick. 

selves  at  ease  for  sleep. — Ibid.  Unprofitable  hearers. — Some  can  be 

content  to  hear  all  pleasant  things,  as 

Ver.  22.  The  day  of  manifestation. —  the  promises  and  mercies  of  God;  but 

Though  now  it  is  often  hard  or  im-  judgments  and   reproofs,   threats   and 

possible  to  distinguish  between  those  checks,  these  they  cannot  brook  ;  like 

in  whom   the  good   seed  is  springing  unto  those  who,  in  medicine,  care  only 

up  freely  and  healthfully,  and  those  for   a   pleasant    smell    or   appearance 

in   whom  its  growth   is   checked   and  in  the  remedy,  as  pills  rolled  in  gold, 

stunted,  or  trodden  out ;  yet  remember  but  have  no  regard  for  the  efficacy  of 

a  time  is   coming  when  all   shall   be  the  physic.     Some  can  willingly  hear 

made  plain  and  manifest,  when  man's  that  which  concerns   other   men   and 

responsibility   shall   be   fully  acknow-  their  sins,  their  lives  and  manners,  but 

ledged,  and  his  shortcomings  shall  be  nothing  touching  themselves  or  their 

143 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


own  sins ;  as  men  can  willingly  abide 
to  hear  of  other  men's  deaths,  but 
cannot  abide  to  think  of  their  own  — 
R.  Stock. 

"  With  what  measure  ye  mete" — His 
hearers  would  at  once  understand  the 
allusion.  When  grain  is  brought  in 
quantities,  it  is  brought  in  bags  which 
are  always  measured  again  by  a  person 
whose  trade  it  is  to  do  this.  Squatting 
cross-legged  on  the  ground,  he  fills  the 
grain  with  his  hands  into  a  "  tinneh," 
which  he  shakes  when  it  is  full,  to 
make  the  contents  solid.  He  then 
refills  it,  twists  it  round  scientifically, 
and  makes  a  second  settling  of  the 
grain,  afterwards  refilling  it.  He  then 
presses  down  the  whole  with  his  hands, 
and  at  last,  when  he  cannot  make  it 
hold  more,  raises  as  high  a  cone  as 
possible  on  the  top  ;  only  this  being 
thought  "good  measure." — C.  Geikie, 
D.D. 

The  law  of  compensation. — At  present 
you  have,  as  men  say,  the  law  in  your 
own  hands.     You  can  do  nearly  as  you 
will.    There  is  no  compulsion  laid  upon 
you.     You   can  measure   out   to   God 
what  measure  you  will.     If  you  choose 
to  profit,  to  let  His  words  sink  into 
your   hearts,    to   bring   forth  fruit  to 
His   glory,   it  is,  through   His   grace, 
in  your  power  to  do  so.     Under   the 
influence  of  that  life-giving  Word  the 
rocky    soil    may    become    deep,    rich, 
staple;  the  roadside  shall  no  more  be 
trodden ;   the  thorns  shall   be   rooted 
out.     Not  even  deep  sin  can  hinder  it. 
"  The  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom 
as  the  rose :  it  shall  blossom  abundantly, 
and    rejoice    with    joy   and    singing." 
Such  is  its  marvellous  efficacy  within 
the  heart  that  gives  itself  to  its  control, 
that  the  publican  becomes  an  apostle, 
the   shameless   sinner  a  deeply-loving 
penitent.     Therefore  you  are  now  the 
meters.     You  may,  as  you  will,  refuse 
or  accept,  i.e.  develop  or  utterly  stifle 
the    results   of   the   heavenly   sowing. 
Only  remember,  that  as  you  deal  now 
with  God,  in  this  measure  will  you  be 
dealt  with  hereafter. — Dean  Butler. 

The  nature  of  Christ's  teaching  is  such 
as  that,  if  a  man,  with  sharpened  ear 

144 


and  attentive  spirit,  listens  and  takes 
into  his  heart  what  he  does  understand, 
and  lives  thereby,  the  amount  of  what 
he  understands  is  sure  to  grow,  and 
endless  progress  in  the  apprehension 
of  the  light  that  lives  in  the  thickest 
apparent  darkness  will  be  his.  Just 
as  when  we  step  out  of  a  gaudily  lighted 
room,  and  look  up  into  the  depths  of 
the  heavens  above  us,  all  seems  ob- 
scured. But,  as  we  gaze,  the  focus 
of  the  eye  changes,  and  we  see  sparkling 
points  which  we  shall  one  day  know 
to  be  magnificent  suns  in  the  far-off 
vault,  which  at  first  seemed  unrelieved 
darkness.  So,  because  the  lamp  is  not 
hid  under  the  bushel,  take  heed  what 
you  hear,  and  recognise  in  the  very 
form  of  the  revelation  of  God's  love 
and  will  in  Jesus  Christ  a  provision 
for  the  certain  progress  in  knowledge 
and  perception  of  every  faithful,  listen- 
ing soul,  and  a  provision  for  the  ai' 
certain  darkening  into  unreliev 
blackness  and  midnight  obscurity1 
the  glimmering  light  neglected.—' 
Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  25.  Christian  attainment.  — P* 
According  to  the  interest,  the  atten- 
tion, the  practical  purpose,  the  sym- 
pathy with  truth  which  you  bring 
to  the  hearing  will  be  the  gifts  which 
your  Teacher  will  bestow,  and  the 
accessions  which  you  will  carry  away  ; 
and  every  such  accession  will  be  itself  a 
foundation  for  higher  attainment,  for 
"  he  that  hath  to  him  shall  be  given, 
and  he  shall  have  more  abundance." 
What  importance  is  thus  added  to 
every  measure  of  Christian  attain- 
ment !  It  is  no  longer  to  be  estimated 
by  itself,  but  in  relation  to  ulterior 
progress,  as  a  qualification  for  the 
further  steps  by  which  we  may  "  grow 
up  into  Him  in  all  things  who  is  our 
Head,  even  Christ."  Valuable  and 
blessed  as  every  such  attainment  is  in 
itself,  that  value  and  blessedness  will 
be  largely  increased  by  what  we  may- 
call  the  tendencies  and  potentialities 
which  belong  to  it,  and  which  show 
themselves  as  new  opportunities  arise. 
A  man  has  a  certain  interest  in  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.    IV. 


things  of  God  :  it  is  well ;  but  we  are 
chiefly  thankful  for  it  because  it  will 
dispose  him  to  hear,  to  inquire,  to 
consider,  and  so  to  profit  by  the  teach- 
ing which  the  providence  of  God  may 
present  to  him.  He  has  certain  con- 
victions :  we  rejoice,  but  most  because 
these  convictions  decide  him  to  break 
with  things  that  were  hurtful,  and  to 
throw  himself  among  things  that  are 
profitable  to  his  salvation,  taking  his 
place  among  those  who  would  learn  of 
the  heavenly  wisdom,  "  watching  daily 
at  her  gates,  waiting  at  the  posts  of 
her  doors."  He  has  a  certain  know- 
ledge of  Divine  truth,  and  what  he 
knows  will  interpret  to  him  what 
he  knows  not,  enabling  him,  when  he 
hears  a  higher  teaching,  to  apprehend 
and  appreciate  instructions  which,  to 
those  less  advanced,  are  "  done  in 
^arables."  He  has  a  certain  expen- 
se in  the  spiritual  life,  and  that 
Tience  qualifies  him  to  pass  with 
•.sing  profit  through  subsequent 
nsations  which  might  else  have 
axed  or  offended  or  crushed  him. 
the  time  shall  come  which  will 
jdghten  the  obscure  histories  of 
Luman  life,  none  can  say  to  what  a 
degree  this  system  of  sequence  is 
maintained  and  administered  in  the 
kingdom  of  God.  Enough  of  it  is 
declared,    and    enough    is    visible,    to 


solemnise  our  view  of  passing  things, 
and  to  make  us  feel  how  neglect  or 
refusal  of  what  is  offered  us  at  one 
period  may  propagate  its  fatal  in- 
fluence through  successive  stages  of 
spiritual  loss,  or  how  a  firm  hold  laid 
upon  some  gift  of  grace  may  prove  to 
have  put  us  in  possession  of  ever- accu- 
mulating treasures. — J.  D.  Burns. 

The  earnest  find  that  they  grow ; 
the  triflers  find  that  their  powers  rust 
and  fade. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

God's  benefits  come  not  alone,  but 
one  is  the  pledge  of  another.  The 
grant  of  a  mite  is  the  assignment  of  a 
talent.  A  drop  of  dew  from  heaven 
is  a  prognostic  of  a  gracious  shower, 
of  a  flood,  which  nothing  can  draw 
dry,  but  ingratitude  (James  i.  5, 
iv.  6). — A.  Farindon,  D.D. 

God's  dealings. — This  verse  repre- 
sents God's  dealings  in  a  very  encour- 
aging light.  Many  who  wish  to  be  true 
Christians  despair  of  ever  reaching 
such  a  lofty  attainment ;  the  distance 
seems  too  great,  the  path  too  difficult. 
Let  them  remember,  for  their  comfort, 
that,  no  matter  how  far,  it  is  only  one 
step  at  a  time,  and,  no  matter  how 
difficult,  "  to  him  that  hath  "  the  will 
"  shall  be  given  "  the  power  ;  he  shall 
go  from  strength  to  strength,  and  from 
grace  to  grace,  till  before  the  God  of 
gods  he  appears  in  Zion. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  26—29. 


The  parable  of  the  growing  corn. — It  is  remarkable  that  St.  Mark  alone  should 
report  this  parable,  and  it  is  more  than  remarkable  because  it  is  the  only  parable 
which  he  alone  has  reported.  It  is  very  brief,  has  no  interpretation  attached  to 
it,  and  looks  at  first  sight  not  unlike  some  of  the  other  parables.  Yet  it  appears 
to  me  to  supply  an  essential  link  in  the  chain  of  parabolic  teaching.  The  side 
or  aspect  of  the  kingdom  of  God  to  which  it  refers  is  one  which  could  not 
be  passed  over.  If  I  understand  it  aright,  it  forms  a  needful  companion  or 
counterpart  to  the  parable  of  the  tares  (Matt.  xiii.  24-30).  Each  of  them  lays 
stress  upon  a  different  part  of  the  common  process  of  husbandry.  In  the  one 
the  end  operations  of  sowing  and  reaping,  into  which  enters  the  personal  action 
of  the  Son  of  Man,  are  made  conspicuous  and  insisted  on  at  length,  while  the 
intervening  months  of  growth  are  referred  to  only  to  add  that  then  the  crop 
must  be  "let  alone."  In  the  other  the  contrary  occurs.  The  initial  and 
terminal  operations  of  the  husbandman  constitute  no  more  than  a  frame  to  the 
picture.  They  are  named  merely  to  shew  us  the  better  how  the  farmer  did 
nothing  for  the  remainder  of  the  time  ;  while  the  process  described  at  length  is 

h  145 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


the  slow,  gradual  growth  and  ripening  of  the  plants  under  the  spontaneous 
action  of  the  fruit-bearing  earth.  Thus  the  two  parables  are  seen  to  complete 
each  other.  The  one  in  Matthew  brings  out  how  voluntary  extra-natural  agents 
act  upon  the  kingdom  of  Christ  from  above  or  from  beneath,  but  chiefly  at  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  its  career.  This  one  in  Mark  brings  out  the  natural 
agencies  whose  unhindered  action  determines  the  advance  of  the  kingdom  from 
its  beginning  to  its  end.  Let  us  now  examine  our  parable  in  detail.  Its  central 
words  form  a  key  to  the  whole  :  "  The  earth  bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself."  In 
other  words,  what  is  here  taught  is  not  the  vitality  of  the  seed,  nor  the  activity 
of  the  two  sowers,  but  the  productiveness  of  the  soil.  Only  commit  a  seed  to 
the  earth,  and  "  the  earth  will  bring  forth  fruit  of  herself."  The  growth  of 
a  wheat-field  is  a  long  and  tedious  process.  Grain  has  its  own  laws,  according  to 
which  it  must  germinate  and  shoot :  you  cannot  make  it  grow  otherwise  than 
God  appoints.  It  has  its  successive  stages  through  which  it  is  bound  to  pass  : 
you  cannot  have  an  ear  before  its  stalk  is  tall.  It  lies  exposed  to  atmospheric 
influences,  both  bad  and  good :  you  cannot,  with  all  your  husbandry,  hinder  the 
wind  from  causing  it  to  strike  deeper  root,  or  the  frost  from  nipping  its  too 
tender  shoots.  In  fact,  the  farmer  can  do  very  little  in  the  matter.  Only  the 
great  earth,  stored  by  God  with  the  chemical  conditions  of  fruitfulness,  and 
lying  ever  open  by  day  and  night  to  God's  atmospheric  influences — to  rain  and 
dew,  to  sun  and  wind,  to  frost  and  electricity — only  this  wonderful  earth  carries 
on  the  process.  In  spite  of  so  much  that  appears  to  war  against  the  plant, 
damping  the  farmer's  hope,  somehow  the  earth  never  fails  after  all  to  "  bring 
forth  fruit  of  herself."  In  all  this  may  be  discerned,  I  think,  three  leading 
features  of  resemblance  to  the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  world. 

I.  The  kingdom  of  Christ  has  had  to  pass  through  those  stages  of  imperfect 
growth  which  are  common  to  other  systems  existing  in  human  society. — It 
need  hardly  be  said  that  the  Church  did  not  burst  upon  the  world  a  finished 
organisation — perfect  when  it  was  first  set  up.  Our  Lord  did  no  more  than  sow 
a  few  men  into  Palestine  society  with  a  few  religious  truths  in  their  hearts. 
These  truths,  being  alive  with  a  Divine  force,  made  the  men  live.  Life  proved 
contagious,  and  spread.  It  sought  expression  through  common  forms,  and  the 
multitude  became  a  community — a  Church.  It  has  been  really  growing  on  ever 
since.  There  has  been  progress.  Christendom  has  not  passed  through  so  many 
changes  in  vain.  Was  it  no  progress  when  the  seed  Christ  scattered  in  the 
early  sowing-day  struck  its  roots  through  the  old  dying  Greco-Roman  world, 
and  out  of  it  drew  whatever  it  could  find  of  nutriment  in  its  philosophy,  its  law, 
or  its  literature  ?  That  fat  soil  of  classic  civilisation  was  the  prepared  ground 
in  which,  beneath  the  hot  sun  of  ten  persecutions,  Christianity  was  designed  to 
grow  deep-rooted  and  full-bladed.  Was  it  no  further  progress  when  out  of  this 
rich  growth  a  new  world  shot  up,  and  through  the  Middle  Ages  modern  Europe 
was  formed  like  a  tall  flowering  stalk  held  aloft  upon  the  base  of  the  older 
world  ?  Has  there  been  no  progress  since  then  ?  The  religion  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxon  race  is  the  most  promising  ear  on  the  Church  Catholic,  and  it  has  been 
rapidly  filling  for  the  last  three  centuries.  It  has  drunk  in  contributions  from 
every  quarter  :  from  the  growth  of  municipal  and  national  freedom  ;  from  the 
resuscitation  of  letters  ;  from  the  discovery  of  America  and  India  ;  from  modern 
widening  of  knowledge  and  stimulation  of  the  inventive  arts.  Perhaps  we  are 
standing  already  on  the  border  of  the  world's  ripening  age — if  not  actually 
within  it.  Already  we  see  enough  to  surmise  that  by-and-by  the  kingdom  will 
have  run  its  course  and  the  harvest  of  the  earth  be  ripe.  These  two  will 
synchronise.  This  world  cannot  last  a  day  longer  nor  end  a  day  sooner  than 
the  close  of  the  Church's  development.  "  When  the  fruit  is  brought  forth, 
immediately  He  putteth  in  the  sickle/' 

HO 


B0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


II.  Throughout  all  its  stages  the  Christian  community  is  affected  by  every 
secular  influence  at  work  beside  it,  just  as  anything  else  would  be. — What  is 
this  but  to  say  that  "  the  field  is  the  world  "  ?  Human  society  as  it  exists  in  the 
world  forms  the  soil  into  which  Christianity  has  been  cast.  The  current  modes 
of  thought  form  the  atmosphere  it  has  to  breathe.  The  forces  which  in  each 
land  or  age  have  told  on  ordinary  history  have  told  upon  the  Church.  At  one 
time  it  has  been  crushed  by  violence,  and  at  another  fanned  to  slumber  in  the 
lap  of  luxury.  False  philosophies  have  tainted  its  doctrine,  and  lax  manners 
affected  its  discipline.  The  passion  or  the  pride  that  inflames  rival  parties  has 
often  rent  its  unity ;  often,  too,  have  political  alliances  essayed  to  cement  the 
fragments.  It  has  borrowed  much  from  other  forces  in  social  history,  as  well  as 
lent  much  to  others.  Rude  in  rude  ages ;  learned  among  the  learned ;  it  has 
become  all  things  to  all  men.  Yet  in  this  common  soil  and  atmosphere  of  earth 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  has,  on  the  whole,  thriven.  Propagated  by  human 
hands,  it  has  drunk  of  the  rain  of  heaven.  Wealth  has  served  its  ends,  and 
literature  fought  its  battles,  and  adventure  run  its  errands.  Civilisation  has 
organised  its  strength,  and  commerce  pioneered  its  way.  Whatever  good  gifts 
God  gave  to  earth  have  in  some  measure  aided  the  advance  of  His  kingdom  ; 
and  the  history  of  the  nations  has  been  at  the  same  time  in  great  part  the 
history  of  Christianity.  Thus  on  the  whole  the  kingdom  grows.  It  may  be 
hard  to  see  how  at  any  given  moment.  Stand  beside  a  field  of  springing  corn 
on  a  blustery  March  morning  ;  you  fail  to  see  how  such  tender  sprouts  are  to  be 
brought  nearer  harvest  by  the  blasts  that  beat  them.  So  at  few  moments  of 
the  Church's  progress  could  the  saints  of  the  day  trace  the  tendency  of  all  the 
forces  at  work  upon  the  cause  of  Christ.  Yet  let  the  short-sighted  and  faint- 
hearted Christian  take  courage.  It  is  a  fruitful  earth  after  all.  As  surely  as 
the  weeks  of  spring  and  summer  do  on  the  whole  ripen  our  fields,  so  surely  will 
all  the  ages  contribute  to  fill  the  garners  of  heaven. 

III.  The  parable  implies  not  merely  that  natural  forces  act  on  the  kingdom 
of  Christ,  but  that  they  are  allowed  to  act  themselves  out  freely  without 
personal  or  supernatural  interference  on  the  part  of  the  Great  Husbandman. 
When  it  is  said,  "  The  kingdom  is  as  if  a  man  .  .  .  should  sleep  and  rise,  night 
and  day,  and  the  seed  should  spring  and  grow  up,  he  knoweth  not  how,"  it  is 
just  the  ordinary  life  of  the  farmer  as  he  goes  about  his  other  tasks  which  is 
described.  The  point  is  that  that  ordinary  life  of  the  farmer  between  sowing 
and  reaping  is,  speaking  roughly,  one  of  entire  cessation  from  all  direct  action 
upon  the  field.  Sowing  and  reaping  are  human  interferences  with  the  processes 
of  nature.  As  compared  with  the  self-sown  wilderness,  where  each  seed  is 
allowed  to  shell  itself  out  upon  the  untilled  ground,  a  field  is  an  artificial  thing. 
Now  these  two  artificial  interferences  of  man  symbolise  the  supernatural  acts  of 
God  which  mark  the  opening  and  the  close  of  the  Christian  history.  He  did 
interfere  with  the  sterility  of  the  world  to  clear  a  space  and  sow  a  new  crop  of 
spiritual  men  and  women.  The  advent  of  Christ  with  all  that  He  accomplished 
personally  or  through  His  messengers  to  found  His  Church  constituted  one 
stupendous  miracle.  Supernatural  interposition  of  God  to  work  in  the  human 
field  is  the  true  description  of  the  life  of  Christ.  What  wonder  if  accessory 
miracles  hung  about  His  steps  and  lingered  round  the  feet  of  His  immediate 
ministers  ?  By  such  signs  and  portents  was  he  who  had  long  ruled  in  open  day 
with  his  possessions  and  sorceries  and  oracles  driven  to  sow  mimic  seed  secretly 
by  night.  But  when  that  first  great  operation  of  the  Sower  from  heaven  was 
ended  miracle  ceased.  The  higher  and  the  lower  agents  alike  retired  for  a  long 
while  behind  the  screen  of  natural  instrumentality.  The  field  of  Christian 
history  was  left  to  the  sun  and  the  wind  and  the  rain.  Henceforth — till  we 
near  the  end,  when  again  Divine  hands  interpose — everything  in  the  development 

147 


chap.  iv.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


of  the  faith  progresses  in  obedience  to  those  orderly  laws  which  regulate  the 
progress  of  truth  from  mind  to  mind  or  from  age  to  age.  It  may  be  said,  "  How 
can  we  speak  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  quitting  charge  or  activity  within  His  field  ? 
Nay,  as  even  asleep  and  ignorant  how  it  grows  ?  Is  it  not  He  who  is  always 
at  work  within  every  Christian  heart,  sustaining  by  His  Spirit  the  life  of  His 
saints,  and  guiding  to  His  own  issues  the  destinies  of  His  Church  ?  "  Unquestion- 
ably. Only  He  does  so  very  much  as  He  causes  corn  to  grow  in  the  field.  He 
is  as  full  of  care  and  as  rich  in  effort  for  His  own  cause  as  ever.  Yet  He  never 
reaches  a  hand  out  of  the  cloud  to  dispel  the  tempest  of  persecution  or  kill  the 
worm  of  heresy.  He  works,  it  is  true ;  but  it  is  along  the  lines  of  nature,  and 
through  the  complex  mechanism  by  which  the  world  is  guided.  On  the  one 
hand,  the  informing  Spirit  of  the  Church  operates  through  ordinary  channels  of 
intelligence  and  moral  influence  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  common  providence 
of  God  overrules,  but  nowhere  overrides,  contingencies.  And  to  these  two  factors 
He  has  left  His  Church.  So  far,  therefore,  as  any  direct  or  personal  inter- 
position to  modify  the  action  of  natural  forces  is  concerned,  He  is  like  the 
farmer  who,  from  seedtime  to  harvest,  lets  his  field  alone.  "  Till  harvest,"  I 
say.  For  there  is  a  second  advent  before  us,  when  the  order  of  the  world  is 
again  to  be  broken  through — this  time  with  a  view  to  be  broken  up.  When 
the  ripe  fruit  of  the  kingdom  shall  offer  itself  to  the  sickle,  then  will  the  Sower 
reappear. — J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D, 

Spiritual  growth. — This  parable  is  a  brilliant  example  of  the  perfect  natural- 
ness of  our  Lord's  teachings  and  the  way  in  which  He  shews  the  underlying 
connexion  between  the  two  worlds,  natural  and  spiritual.  At  first  sight  it 
might  seem  as  if  there  were  but  few  points  of  comparison  between  these  two — 
between  the  work  going  on,  for  example,  in  the  corn-field  and  the  work  going 
on  in  the  human  soul ;  for  while  trees  and  shooting  corns  have  power  of  growth, 
they  have  no  power  of  will ;  whereas  man  has  both.  And  it  is  this  power 
of  will  which  is  the  determining  factor  in  character  and  destiny.  And  yet, 
though  these  worlds  are  so  dissimilar,  there  is  an  underlying  unity ;  and  it  is 
this  unity  our  Lord  brings  out  in  this  parable.  The  central  thought  seems  to 
be  that  God's  Divine  power  is  at  work  in  God's  own  kingdom.  "  The  earth 
bringeth  forth  fruit  of  herself  " —  not  of  herself  apart  from  God,  but  of  herself 
apart  from  the  man  who  sows  the  seed.  He  does  his  work,  he  sows  the  seed, 
and  he  goes  on  his  way ;  and  after  he  has  done  his  part  he  sleeps  by  night  and 
rises  by  day,  and  the  seed  springs  up  and  grows,  he  knows  not  how. 

I.  The  kingdom  of  God. — It  is  not  that  rule  over  the  creatures  which  God 
as  the  Creator  exercises,  but  that  which  is  based  on  the  mediatorial  kingdom 
of  Christ.  It  is  the  kingdom  into  which  the  poor  in  spirit  enter,  which  is 
reserved  for  them  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake  ;  it  is  the  kingdom 
which  is  for  those  who  are  pure  in  heart,  who  are  born  again  of  the  Spirit 
of  God ;  it  is  the  kingdom  which  comes  not  by  observation ;  it  is  a  kingdom 
into  which  all  men  pass  by  repentance  and  faith ;  it  is  mysterious  in  its 
beginnings,  silent  in  its  growth,  like  the  seed  springing  up  from  very  small 
beginnings  and  growing  to  great  things  ;  and  it  is  potent  in  its  action,  like  the 
leaven  in  the  meal.  We  are  to  pray  for  its  coming,  and  yet  it  is  always  coming. 
Wherever  there  is  a  just  thing  taking  the  place  of  an  unjust,  wherever  righteous- 
ness prevails  over  unrighteousness,  wherever  men  are  growing  more  kindly  and 
true,  wherever  legislation  is  becoming  more  Christian,  where  commerce  is 
baptised  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  where  literature  is  guided  by  a  Holy  Spirit 
of  God,  when  family  life  becomes  ennobled  and  purified,  when  men  come  into 
holier  and  truer  relations  with  one  another  and  with  their  God  in  heaven,  this 
kingdom  is  coming.     We  may  well  pray  for  its  coming,  for  when  it  comes  the 

148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY.    ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


old  trouble  and  sorrow  and  conflict  of  the  centuries  will  vanish  like  an  idle 
dream.  Then,  what  hope  have  we  that  this  kingdom  will  come  ?  What  is  our 
consolation  in  regard  to  it  amidst  all  discouragements  of  the  time  ?  Our  Lord 
says,  The  same  hope  and  the  same  encouragement  that  the  man  has  who  casts 
his  seed  into  the  ground.  Everywhere  men  are  dependent  upon  a  great  power 
which  is  working  behind  them  ;  every  day  God  brings  the  succession  of  day  and 
night,  so  that  men  may  carry  on  the  work  of  their  life.  Every  year  comes  the 
stately  march  of  the  seasons,  or  else  there  would  be  no  harvest  fer  men.  Why, 
there  is  a  standing  miracle  which  would  overwhelm  us  if  we  were  not  used 
to  it  every  year — of  that  shooting  of  life  in  field  and  forest  which  the  spring-time 
brings  !  So  even  in  regions  nearer  to  ourselves.  Your  very  children  spring  up 
and  grow  you  know  not  how.  So  we  are  to  take  this  thought  into  the  activities 
of  the  Christian  Church.  In  this  day  of  material  progress  and  triumph  we  are 
apt  to  look  rather  at  the  organisations  than  at  the  Spirit  which  breathes  through 
them ;  at  what  men  do  rather  than  at  what  God  does  behind ;  and  our  Lord 
here  puts  to  us  this  great  central  fact.  John  Wesley's  dying  words  are  words 
of  comfort  for  the  Church  in  all  the  centuries  :  "  The  best  of  all  is,  God  is  with 
us.  If  He  were  not,  our  hope  would  be  scant  indeed."  But  He  is.  He  is, 
in  history,  bringing  new  and  strange  and  wondrous  movements,  developing  a 
nation's  life.  He  is  in  the  Church  of  God  convincing  men  of  sin,  carrying  on 
the  great  work  of  building  up  men  in  the  image  of  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  The  need  of  patience. — In  carrying  on  this  great  work  of  bettering  the 
world,  elevating  it  higher,  there  is  the  element  of  time  which  must  be  taken 
into  account.  "  The  husbandman  waiteth  long  and  is  patient."  The  earth  says 
to  him,  "  Give  me  seed,  give  me  time,  and  I  will  give  you  fruit."  And  so  it  is 
in  regard  to  the  great  things  of  the  spiritual  life.  Everywhere  we  find  that 
what  is  done  is  the  result  of  long  and  complex  forces.  The  more  important  a 
thing  is,  the  longer  time  does  it  take.  A  man  may  be  converted  in  a  moment 
of  time  ;  but  after  he  has  turned  right  round  the  development  of  that  life  must 
needs  take  many  long  years  of  discipline  before  it  reaches  the  height  for  which 
God  intended  it.  Salvation  means  not  merely  delivering  a  man  from  sin,  from 
every  evil  thing,  but  building  him  up  to  all  nobleness ;  not  merely  the  putting 
aside  of  what  is  weak  and  sinful,  but  the  attainment  of  all  that  is  noble  and 
true  ;  and  is  always  the  work  of  time.  You  can  make  a  man  a  present  of  some 
material  things  in  a  moment,  but  you  cannot  give  him  patience,  you  cannot 
give  him  purity,  you  cannot  give  him  humility,  in  a  moment  of  time.  Faith 
gets  grip  and  strength  through  stress  of  suffering ;  wisdom  is  the  child  of 
experience. 

III.  Spiritual  continuity. — Our  Lord  says  there  is  a  natural  law  of  continuity 
in  the  spiritual  life  as  there  is  in  other  things.  "  First  the  blade."  We  can 
never  do  without  any  of  the  intervening  stages — never  expedite  the  processes 
of  God  either  in  nature  or  in  grace.  Men  are  coming  to  see  that  everywhere 
this  law  prevails ;  history  is  coming  to  be  regarded  not  as  a  mere  set  of  isolated 
facts  chronicled  together  in  the  manner  of  annals,  but  that  the  thought  and  the 
life  of  the  past  generations  are  living  in  the  present,  and  shaping  its  thought 
and  purposes,  that  the  growth  of  opinion  and  the  influence  of  thought  are  felt 
over  and  over  again  in  succeeding  generations.  So  it  is  in  regard  to  the 
spiritual  life  ;  perfectly  natural,  perfectly  simple  and  beautiful  in  its  action 
is  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul.  1.  There  is  the  green  blade  trembling  in  the  breeze, 
the  type  of  spiritual  life  in  the  young  disciple.  There  seems  at  first  very  little 
in  the  way  of  positive  Christian  life.  It  is  but  a  green  blade  touched  by  the 
wandering  breeze ;  it  seems  very  little  ;  but  if  God's  Spirit  is  in  it,  it  will  grow 
to  greater  things.  2.  There  is  another  stage,  and  it  seems  sometimes  as  if  very 
little  value  could  be  attached  to  it  except  for  what  comes  afterwards.     Some- 

149 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


times  a  man  thinks  he  is  losing  ground,  going  back,  when  in  point  of  fact  God 
is  training  him  for  higher  services  and  leading  him  to  the  heights  of  the 
Christian  life.  It  is  through  the  depths  that  we  go  to  the  heights.  3.  There 
is  another  time  yet.  The  time  of  the  full  ripe  corn  in  the  ear — the  time  which 
Bunyan  sets  before  us  in  the  picture  of  the  land  of  Beulah,  where  the  birds  are 
for  ever  singing,  the  angels  come  and  go,  and  you  can  see  the  city  far  away, 
its  heights  gleaming  in  the  sunshine.  There  is  a  time  when  we  think  not  so 
much  of  doctrines,  though  they  have  their  importance,  as  we  think  of  that 
which  is  behind  the  teaching — the  living  God  ;  when  we  have  not  so  much 
many  motives  as  one  motive — love  to  Christ ;  when  we  feel  more  and  more  that 
He  has  been  with  us  leading  and  guiding  us  ;  when  we  come  out  of  the  struggle 
not  merely  talking  of  the  trouble  but  of  the  mercy  which  has  been  shown  to  us 
while  we  passed  through  it ;  when  some  things  have  fallen  off  from  us  that 
we  thought  important  for  us,  and  we  get  more  and  more  to  the  central  verities 
of  eternal  truth ;  when  Christ  becomes  to  the  trusting  soul  all  in  all ! — John 
Brown,  D.D. 

Harvest  lessons. — Our  Lord  was  very  fond  of  drawing  His  parallels  and 
illustrations  from  the  garden  and  the  field.  This  will  be  found  a  great  help  to 
those  whose  occupations  lead  them  to  be  much  abroad,  and  to  take  notice  of 
the  various  appearances  of  nature  as  she  works  out  the  processes  of  vegetation. 

I.  The  harvest  suggests  grateful  thoughts  of  the  good  providence  of  God. — 
1.  We  almost  see  Him  "  opening  His  hand  and  filling  all  things  living  with 
plenteousness."  What  a  family  has  He  to  provide  for !  Not  only  mankind, 
but  "  all  sheep  and  oxen,"  etc.  (Ps.  viii.  7,  8).  "  These  wait  all  upon  Him," 
etc.  (Ps.  civ.  27).  Nor  wait  in  vain  (Ps.  cxlv.  15,  16).  Well,  therefore,  does 
the  psalmist  call  upon  "beasts  and  all  cattle,"  etc.,  to  "praise  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  (Ps.  cxlviii.  10,  13).  2.  But  the  lower  animals  have  neither 
understanding  to  know  God,  nor  yet  voice  to  praise  Him.  Man  has  both.  Man 
is  placed  in  this  magnificent  world,  to  be  the  interpreter  of  the  whole  creation. 
He  is  the  priest  of  the  temple,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  unto 
God.  3.  Man  is  not  only  most  capable  of  praising  God,  but  he  has  also  most 
cause  to  do  so.     Of  all  living  things,  he  is  maintained  at  the  greatest  cost. 

II.  The  harvest  reminds  us  of  the  faithfulness  of  God. — Once  He  brought 
a  flood  upon  the  earth ;  and  for  that  year  no  sower  went  forth  to  sow,  and  no 
reaper  put  in  his  sickle.  But  after  that  He  declared  that  it  should  never  be  so 
again  (Gen.  ix.  9-17).  2.  Such  is  God's  promise;  and  those  who  have  little 
respect  for  anything  else  He  has  said  place  entire  reliance  on  this.  They 
plough  and  they  sow  in  perfect  confidence  that  God  will  send  heat  and  cold, 
sun  and  rain,  everything  that  is  necessary  to  produce  a  harvest.  3.  Some  years 
may  be  less  favourable  than  others ;  some  countries  may  be  visited  with  a 
partial  or  even  entire  failure  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth ;  but  the  promise  never 
fails.  After  a  year  of  scarcity  comes  a  year  of  extraordinary  abundance,  or 
the  deficiency  of  one  country  is  supplied  by  the  excess  of  another.  4.  There  is 
only  just  enough  uncertainty  in  these  things  to  make  serious  people  sensible 
of  their  absolute  dependence  upon  Him  who  giveth  all  (Jer.  v.  24  ;  Deut.  xi.  17). 

III.  The  harvest  reminds  us  of  the  instability  of  man. — 1.  "  One  generation 
passeth  away,"  etc.  (Eccles.  i.  4).  We  know,  indeed,  that  the  earth  itself  has  its 
appointed  time,  and  that  the  end  of  one  harvest  will  be,  to  be  burned  up  by  that 
fire  which  shall  consume  the  earth  and  all  that  is  therein  (2  Pet.  iii.  10). 
Still,  as  compared  with  the  rapid  succession  of  its  inhabitants,  the  earth  may  be 
said  to  "  abide  for  ever,"  yielding  its  fruit  to  the  different  generations  of  men, 
which  quickly  come  and  as  quickly  disappear.  What  a  mortifying  reflexion — 
that  the  very  ground  we  tread  on,  even  the  dust  we  shake  off  our  feet,  is  in  this 

150 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  IV. 


respect  better  than  ourselves  !  2.  Harvests  measure  our  lives.  Thousands  will 
not  live  to  see  another  harvest ;  nay,  thousands  are  going  out  of  the  world,  at 
this  very  season,  while  the  provision  of  another  year  is  being  gathered  in.  They 
sowed,  and  others  are  reaping ;  or  they  reaped,  and  others  have  entered  into  the 
fruits  of  their  labours. 

IV.  The  harvest  makes  us  think  about  death. — 1.  Death  is  the  great  reaper. 
When  he  "  putteth  in  his  sickle,"  all  heads  bow  down.  His  harvest  is  confined 
to  no  particular  season.  His  are  the  only  crops  that  never  fail.  2.  To  the 
Christian  death  is  no  longer  the  "  king  of  terrors."  He  is  cut  down  because 
he  is  ripe.  He  has  passed  through  all  the  stages  of  spiritual  growth  and 
godliness — "first  the  blade,"  etc.  Then,  when  God  judges  that  the  fruit  is 
perfectly  formed  in  him — "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  in  all  goodness, 
righteousness,  and  truth  " — immediately  He  Himself  "  putteth  in  the  sickle, 
because  the  harvest  is  come."  3.  When  the  corn  is  fit  to  cut,  it  is  a  pity  to  let 
it  stand  any  longer;  and  when  a  soul  is  ripe,  it  is  equally  desirable  that  it 
should  be  "  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come,"  and  lodged  in  a  place  of  safety 
beyond  the  changes  and  chances  of  this  mortal  life. 

V.  The  harvest  speaks  to  us  of  the  resurrection  and  judgment. — 1.  The 
resurrection  parallel  is  developed  by  St.  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  35-49.  2.  The 
judgment  may  be  considered  in  two  lights.  (1)  It  is  God's  harvest  (Matt.  xiii.  30  ; 
Rev.  xiv.  14-19).  (2)  It  is  man's  harvest  also  (Gal.  vi.  7  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10).  This  life 
is  the  seed-time  of  our  whole  existence.  "  The  harvest  is  the  end  of  the  world  "  ; 
and  then  shall  every  man  "  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  way,"  etc.  (Pro v.  i.  31). 
"He  that  soweth  to  his  flesh,"  etc.  (Gal.  vi.  8).  Let  the  censorious  and 
uncharitable  hear  this  (Matt.  vii.  2).  Let  the  unmerciful  and  unrelenting 
hear  this  (James  ii.  13).  Let  the  covetous  hear  this  (James  v.  2,  3).  Let  the 
despisers  of  the  gospel  hear  this  (Prov.  i.  24-28).  But  as  to  those  who  are 
sowing,  not  to  the  flesh,  but  to  the  spirit,  all  that  they  have  need  of  is  that 
which  every  sower  must  possess — patience;  that,  "after  they  have  done  the 
will  of  God,  they  may  receive  the  promises." 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   TEE    VERSES. 

Vers.  26-29.   Rise  and  progress  of  rate  soul  are  directed  towards  heaven. 

religion    in    the    heart. — 1.    Religious  Its   hopes   and   wishes  rise  gradually 

impressions  sometimes  take  their  rise  above  the  earth  :  under  the  fostering 

in  the  heart  from  small  and  apparently  warmth  of  Divine  grace  holy  disposi- 

accidental  circumstances.     An  observa-  tions  spring  and  grow  up  in  the  man's 

tion   casually   made    in   conversation,  heart,  he  knoweth  not  how  :  his  leaf 

the  perusal  of  a  book,   one  of   those  withereth  not :  it  is  protected  against 

occurrences   which  we  call   accidents,  the   storms   and   blight   which   might 

or   some   serious   misfortune,    may  be  infest  it  in  its  tender  condition,  so  that 

the  means  of  either  giving  a  man  the  the   sun   shall   not   burn   it    by   day, 

first  instruction  in  practical  piety,  or  neither  the  moon  by  night.     3.  There 

of  causing  him  seriously  to   feel   the  remains  one  final  labour  of  the  hus- 

importance  of  religion.     2.   By  what-  bandman  before  he  can  enjoy  the  full 

ever  means  the  good  seed  is  first  sown  reward  of  all  his  anxieties  and  toils, 

in  the  heart,  if  it  there  meets  with  a  "  When  the  fruit   is  brought   forth," 

congenial  soil,  a  very  short  time  will  and    fully   ripened,   the    stem    which 

elapse  before  its  existence  and  power  unites  it  to  the  earth  must  be  severed 

begin  to  be  perceived.     As  the  tend-  before  it  can  be  laid  up  in  his  barns, 

ency  of  natural  vegetation  is  upwards,  "  Immediately,"  therefore,  "  he  putteth 

so  the  first  aspirations  of  the  regene-  in  the  sickle,  because   the  harvest  is 

151 


CHAP.   IV. 


MOMIlETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


come."  Maturity  in  spiritual  growth 
is  not  always  measured  by  length  of 
years.  Whenever  the  truly  religious 
man  is  cut  oft',  apparently  in  the 
flower  of  his  age,  we  must  regard  the 
event  as  one  of  the  mysteries  which 
we  understand  not,  as  a  dispensation, 
afflicting  indeed  to  those  who  are  left 
to  mourn  his  loss,  but  not  so  to  him,  to 
whom  "  to  die  is  gain."  Conclusion  : 
1.  This  parable  gives  no  excuse  for 
slothfulness  or  negligence  to  the 
spiritual  husbandman,  but  rather  a 
season  for  constant  exertion.  2.  This 
parable  instructs  us  all  to  be  ready  to 
receive  religious  instruction,  as  well  as 
to  impart  it. — Prof.  T.  Chevallier. 

The  development  of  good  and  evil. — 
This  parable  is  frequently  explained 
of  the  silent  and  secret  growth  of 
grace  in  the  individual  character  of 
God's  servants,  and  of  the  final  storing 
up  of  the  wheat  of  earth  in  the  garner 
of  heaven.  But  surely  the  parable 
embraces  a  far  wider  horizon  of 
thought,  and  concerns  the  method 
of  God's  procedure  in  the  kingdom  of 
Christ  to  the  end  of  time — namely, 
the  principle  of  allowing  the  full  de- 
velopment of  both  evil  and  good  until 
the  hour  strikes  for  judgment.  In 
illustration  of  this  our  Lord  sets  forth 
the  general  laws  of  vegetable  life  on 
earth,  which  are  analogous  to  the  laws 
of  spiritual  development :  (1)  the  law 
of  growth  or  full  development  from 
germs  ;  (2)  the  law  of  silent,  gradual, 
unperceived  increase  ;  and  (3)  the  law 
of  crisis  or  ripeness,  followed  by  the 
sickle  and  the  harvest,  the  cutting 
down,  either  for  storage  or  burning. 
The  practical  use,  then,  of  this  parable 
is  to  meet  men's  incredulity  or  doubt 
as  to  the  reality  of  God's  government 
on  earth  ;  which  may  arise,  and  often 
does  arise,  in  the  minds  of  Christ's 
followers  from  taking  too  short  views, 
from  looking  at  the  world  as  already 
a  finished  thing,  and  therefore  as  an 
unintelligible  chaos,  a  field  where  good 
and  bad  grow  hopelessly  together;  to 
meet  this  incredulity  and  doubt  by  the 
assurance  that  the  fixed  method  of  the 
Divine  government   is  not  hasty  and 

152  .       .    . 


sudden  harvesting  and  uprooting,  but 
to  allow  all  germs  of  both  good  and 
evil  to  develop  and  mature ;  and  then, 
when  the  time  of  full  ripeness  arrives, 
to  put  in  the  sickle — to  postpone  the 
crisis  till  "iniquity  is  full,"  and  heroic 
righteousness  in  resistance  is  also  at 
the  full — and  then  to  bring  in  sudden 
judgment  and  retribution. — E.  White. 

Lessons. — 1.  Though  the  sower  sleep 
after  his  labour,  yet  the  process  of 
germination   goes   on  night   and  day. 

2.  Simple  beginnings  and  practical 
results  may  be  connected  by  mysterious 
processes :  "he  knoweth  not  how." 
There  is  a  point  in  Christian  work 
where  knowledge  must  yield  to  mystery. 

3.  As  the  work  of  the  sower  is  assisted 
by  natural  processes  ("  the  earth 
bringeth  forth  of  itself,"  etc.),  so  the 
seed  of  truth  is  aided  by  the  natural 
conscience  and  aspiration  which  God 
has  given  to  all  men.  4.  The  mys- 
teriousness  of  processes  ought  not  to 
deter  from  reaping  the  harvest.  The 
spiritual  labourer  may  learn  from  the 
husbandman. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

The  Word  of  life  in  the  figure  of  a 
grain  of  wheat. — 1.  Its  internal  energy 
of  life.  2.  Its  growth  according  to 
laws.  3.  Its  gradualness.  4.  Its 
progressive  stages.  5.  The  certainty  of 
its  development. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Divine  surprises. — The  little  green 
growth,  as  it  forces  its  way  through 
the  soil,  is  not  prepared  for  the  great 
surprises  of  its  own  development ;  it  is 
not  prepared  for  the  beautiful  verdure 
of  the  green  field  caused  by  its  own 
shooting  up,  nor  even  then  for  a  still 
further  development ;  for  now  comes 
the  ear  with  its  promises  of  even 
farther  development — with  its  promises 
of  great  usefulness,  of  some  time  fur- 
nishing food  for  the  eater.  And  even 
then  greater  surprises  are  still  in  store  ; 
for  the  ear  can  scarcely  guess — this 
little  ear  of  wheat  not  yet  developed, 
just  heavy  enough  to  bend  the  stem 
on  which  it  is  growing — it  is  scarcely 
prepared  for  the  still  further  surprises 
of  the  full  wheat,  or  corn,  in  the  ear  ; 
and  men  and  women,  following  this 
same  thought,   begin  to  realise  that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.    IV. 


there  is  within  them  something  of 
Divine,  God-like  possibility. — S.  R. 
Fuller. 

Growth. — If  you,  as  an  individual 
soul,  are  not  bigger,  fuller  of  Divine 
power  and  inspiration,  than  you  were 
five  or  ten  years  ago,  it  is  because  this 
process  of  growth  has  been  hindered  or 
thwarted  by  your  own  rebellious  inter- 
ference— as  if  the  farmer  who  has 
sown  the  seed  should  untimely  scratch 
away  the  earth  and  hinder  the  germ's 
expansion,  or  later  on,  heedless  of  law, 
should  walk  rough- shod  over  this  early 
verdure  and  thwart  its  development. — 
Ibid. 

Gradual  progress  towards  perfection. 
— Like  those  wondrous  insects  of  the 
branching  coral,  who,  beneath  the 
waters  of  the  vast  Southern  Ocean, 
lay  their  slight  foundation,  ever  add- 
ing a  little,  and  still  a  little  more, 
while,  as  years  pass  on,  the  work  goes 
on  increasing,  till  the  little  unper- 
ceived  atom  stands  forth  a  fair  island, 
bursting  with  tropical  luxuriance  of 
fruit  and  foliage — so  should  it  be  with 
us.  The  seed  is  sown  within  our 
hearts.  The  Heavenly  Husbandman 
— the  Builder  also — is  at  work  within. 
Leave  Him  who  sowed  to  do  His  holy 
will.  And  it  shall  work  mightily 
within  you  —  moulding,  leavening, 
forming,  building,  spreading,  spring- 
ing up  and  growing,  as  none  "  knoweth 
how,"  till  there  loom  forth  within  the 
chaos  of  the  natural  heart  the  glorious 
form  and  lineaments  of  "the  Perfect 
Man,  the  measure  of  the  stature  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ "  Himself. — Dean 
Butler. 

Ver.  26.  "The  kingdom  of  God"  is 
a  phrase  more  easy  to  understand  than 
to  explain.  It  is  God's  government 
over  the  world  ;  the  Church  chosen  out 
of  the  world ;  the  authority  exercised 
over  each  soul ;  the  spiritual  progress 
of  the  community,  of  the  truth,  of  any 
special  member.  It  is  God's  dealings 
with  men  as  seen  from  above.  In  it 
all  outward  things  are  included.  But 
it  is  still  an  inward  thing.  Its  hidden 
nature  is  illustrated  here  by  comparisons 


taken  from  the  growth  of  seeds.  The 
grain  is  lost  to  our  sight,  and  the 
growth  is  too  gradual  to  be  seen.  But 
we  need  only  fresh  senses  to  which  the 
earth  shall  be  transparent,  and  the 
smallest  increase  visible,  in  order  to 
see  them.  And  so  the  effects  of  God's 
Word  and  Providence  are  only  invisible 
because  of  our  infirmity.  We  know 
very  little  about  the  soil ;  one  is  good, 
another  bad ;  one  will  grow  such  things, 
another  such;  and  wise  men  know  a 
little  about  its  parts,  and  how  they 
act.  And  just  such  a  knowledge  it  is 
that  we  have  of  men.  We  distinguish 
them  roughly,  and  know  practically 
what  to  expect  from  them,  and  our 
philosophers  have  analysed  characters 
and  mental  processes.  It  is  upon  such 
soil  that  the  facts  of  the  gospel  are 
cast  as  seed  out  of  which  is  to  grow 
the  plant  of  holiness.  But  God  does 
not  leave  the  soul  alone.  Just  as 
Providence  works  in  the  natural  soil, 
bringing  it  into  a  fit  composition,  pro- 
viding vegetable  and  animal  growths, 
and  checking  each  when  it  has  done 
its  work,  so  that  the  soil  when  left 
alone  grows  more  and  more  fertile,  so 
is  Providence  working  with  the  souls 
of  men,  and  by  the  myriad  accidents 
of  life  moulding  and  forming  them. 
We  cannot  tell,  when  we  speak,  how 
our  words  may  be  taken.  We  cannot 
tell,  from  the  way  they  are  taken, 
what  their  ultimate  effect  may  be. 
Now  this  may  operate  to  discourage 
and  chill.  We  all  like  to  see  how  our 
work  is  getting  on ;  we  all  strive  to 
help  on  our  own  purposes.  But  this 
parable  is  meant  to  encourage  us  all. 
We  must  leave  much  to  other  powers, 
and  cannot  order  all  things  as  we 
would :  other  men  will  not  obey  us ; 
we  cannot  make  them  listen  ;  we  cannot 
order  our  own  circumstances  or  theirs  ; 
and  yet  they  are  ordered.  We  must 
leave  them  to  Him  that  ordereth,  i.e, 
God. — Bishop  Steere. 

Ver.  28.  Blade,  ear,  and  full  corn. — 
1.  "  The  blade  "  begins  in  a  small  shoot. 
That  shoot  is  but  the  elongation  or 
enlargement    of    the   germ   which    is 

153 


CHAP.  IV. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


found  at  the  rough  end  of  a  grain  of 
wheat.     This  is  elongated  by  the  addi- 
tion of   fresh   cells,   which    continues 
until  the  blade  is  fully  formed.     Now 
the  idea  of  Jesus,  sown  in  a  suitable 
mind,  develops  in   the  same  way  by 
growing  first  into  enlarged  knowledge, 
idea  after  idea  being  added  until  a  new 
form   of   thinking   is   unfolded.     New 
ideas  of  God,  of  ourselves,  of  our  fellow- 
men,   arise.     We  think  differently  of 
life's  duties,  experiences,  and  purposes. 
2.  "  The  ear  "  is  the  case  in  which  the 
corn  is   formed;  it   is  preparatory  to 
the  fruit,  and  determines  it.     The  ear 
is  thus  the  purposes  of  good  in  the  will. 
The  new  thought  and  knowledge,  under 
the  warm  love  of  the  soul,  begins  to 
form  purposes,  to  propose  ends,  which 
are  but  Christian  thinking  passing  into 
Christian  aims.     At  first  these  plans 
will  give  little  promise  of  being  realised ; 
they  will  be  rather  suggestions  of  what 
might  possibly  be.    But  the  sun  of  love 
in   the   soul   shines    upon  them   with 
glowing  warmth,  and  the  ear  puts  forth 
its  modest  blossom.     That  blossom  is 
the  joy  that  comes  of  such  purposes ; 
there  is  a  pleasure  in  contemplating 
the  possibility  of  bringing  a  practical 
result  out   of   our   new  thoughts  and 
plans.     When  the  blossom,  or  joy,  has 
fully  developed,  then  is  the  time  for 
the  fruit  to  begin  to  form.     The  vital 
principle  of  good  which  is  in  the  joy, 
as  the  pollen  is  in  the  blossom,  finds 
its   way  into   the   will,    and   there  it 
grows  into  action — the  plans  for  mend- 
ing our  life  and  the  world  take  practical 
shape — at  first,  however,  only  imper- 
fectly.     3.    "The  full    corn"   is   the 
reproduction   of   that   which   came  to 
us  as  seed — that  is,  our  lives  yield  a 
result  which  is  the  reproduction  of  the 
character  of  Jesus.     This  third  stage 
is  only  partially  reproduced  in  the  best 
of   men   in   this   life ;    but   it  will  be 
perfectly  attained.    There  is  no  Christ- 
given    thought    which   shall   not   also 
become    Christ -like    endeavour ;     and 
there  is  no  Christ-like  endeavour  which 
shall    fail     to    become    an     attained 
practical  result. — R.  Vaughan. 

Encouragement  for  Christian  workers, 

154 


— 1.  We  should  never  be  discouraged 
in  Christian  work,  of  whatever  kind, 
by  what  seems  a  slow  growth.  2.  We 
should  never  be  discouraged  in  our 
efforts  for  Christ's  kingdom  by  ad- 
verse circumstances ;  nor  by  any 
unexpected  combination  of  them,  and 
their  prolonged  operation.  3.  Good 
influences  are  linked  to  good  issues  in 
this  world,  as  the  seed  to  its  fruitage. 
4.  God  is  within  and  behind  all  forces 
that  tend  to  enlarge  and  perfect  His 
kingdom,  as  He  is  beneath  the  physical 
forces  which  bring  harvest  in  its  season, 
and  set  on  the  springing  seed  its 
coronal.  5.  Finally,  let  us  remember 
what  the  glory  of  the  harvest  shall 
be,  when  it  is  reached,  in  this  develop- 
ing kingdom  of  God ;  and  in  view  of 
that  let  us  constantly  labour,  with  more 
than  fidelity,  with  an  eager  enthusiasm 
that  surpasses  all  obstacles,  makes  duty 
a  privilege,  and  transmutes  toil  into  joy. 
— R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D. 

Growth  in   the    spiritual  world,   as 
in  the  natural,  is  spontaneous,  in  the 
sense  that  it  is  subject  to  definite  laws 
of  the  spirit  over  which  man's  will  has 
small  control.     The  fact  is  one  to  be 
recognised  with  humility  and  thank- 
fulness.    With  humility,  for  it  teaches 
dependence  on  God — a  habit  of  mind 
which   brings   along   with    it   prayer- 
fulness,    and   which,    as  honouring  to 
God,  is  more  likely  to  ensure  ultimate 
success  than  a  self-reliant  zeal.     With 
thankfulness,  for  it  relieves  the  heart 
of  the  too   heavy   burden   of   an   un- 
defined,   unlimited   responsibility,  and 
makes  it  possible  for  the  minister  of 
the  Word  to  do  his  work  cheerfully, 
in  the  morning  sowing  the  seed,  in  the 
evening   withholding    not    his    hand ; 
then    retiring    to    rest  to    enjoy  the 
sound    sleep    of    the  labouring    man, 
while  the  seed  sown  springs  and  grows 
apace,  he  knoweth  not  how.     Growth 
in    the    spiritual    world,    as    in    the 
natural,  is,  further,  a  process,  which 
demands  time  and  gives  ample  occasion 
for  the  exercise  of   patience.      Time 
must  elapse  even  between  the  sowing 
and  the  brairding — a  fact  to  be  laid 
to  heart  by  parents  and  teachers,  lest 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


they  commit  the  folly  of  insisting  on 
seeing  the  blade  at  once,  to  the  pro- 
bable spiritual  hurt  of  the  young 
intrusted  to  their  care.  Much  longer 
time  must  elapse  between  the  braird- 
ing and  the  ripening.  That  a  speedy 
sanctification  is  impossible  we  do  not 
affirm ;  but  it  is,  we  believe,  so  ex- 
ceptional that  it  may  be  left  altogether 
out  of  account  in  discussing  the  theory 
of  Christian  experience.  Once  more, 
growth  in  the  spiritual  world,  as  in 
the  natural,  is  graduated;  in  that 
region  as  in  this  there  is  a  blade,  a 
green  ear,  and  a  ripe  ear. — A.  B. 
Bruce,  D.D. 

Order  of  growth. — Not  only  does  the 
corn  always  go  on  growing,  but  it 
always  observes  the  same  order  and 
succession  in  its  growth — "  first  the 
blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full 
corn  in  the  ear."  This  is  an  order 
which  is  never  reversed  or  altered ;  it 
is  always  the  full  corn  in  the  ear  which 
is  the  last  to  shew  itself.  And  so  it  is 
with  the  heart.  First,  it  is  always 
repentance  and  sorrow  for  sin ;  then, 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ;  then,  without 
losing  these,  any  more  than  the  grain 
loses  the  protection  of  the  blade  and  the 
ear,  it  goes  on  to  holiness  of  life,  and 
a  sure  hope  in  God's  promises  ;  and  last 
of  all  to  love — love  the  ripened  corn, 
the  fulfilling  of  the  ear. — H.  Harris. 

The  beauty  of  early  piety. — How  re- 
freshing to  the  eye  is  the  garb  of  green 
with  which  the  field  is  clothed,  when 
the  tender  blade  has  first  sprung  up  ! 
But  a  short  time  back  all  lay  in  a 
state  of  ruggedness  and  an  unseemly 
mass  of  clods.  And  not  less  grateful 
to  the  eye  of  those  interested  in  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  others  are  the 
first  dawnings  and  buddings  of  faith 
and  love  in  the  Christian's  heart,  when 
the  "good  seed"  puts  forth  its  first 
increase  in  those  around  us.  How 
pleasing  to  witness  the  young  and 
tender  plant  of  righteousness  putting 
forth  the  buds  and  leaves  of  Christian 
advancement !  How  pleasing  to  ob- 
serve the  gradual  increase  of  piety,  of 
Christian  feeling,  of  prayer,  of  love, 
and  of  joy,  bursting  forth  and  ripening 


into   full   experience   for    the   coming 
harvest. — J.  L.  F.  Russell. 

Ver.  29.  GooVs  sickle. — The  physical 
world  contains  evidence  of  such  periods 
of  catastrophe  and  new  creation.  The 
ages  of  universal  fire  and  molten 
elements  were  ended  by  the  creation 
of  life  on  the  globe,  at  some  time  in 
the  past  eternity,  as  Prof.  Bonney 
demonstrates  in  his  Hulsean  Lecture. 
And  many  times  since,  locally  if  not 
universally,  there  have  been  epochs  of 
change,  of  "  new  heavens  and  new 
earth,"  of  new  forms  of  life,  vegetable 
and  animal,  of  vast  destruction  and 
wholly  new  formation  of  land  and  sea, 
with  their  inhabitants.  The  history 
of  the  world  of  mankind  during  the 
historic  period  furnishes  many  ex- 
amples of  this  law  of  the  kingdom  of 
God.  When  the  harvest  is  come,  He 
putteth  in  the  sickle.  The  old  world 
grew  up  from  a  single  pair,  and  de- 
veloped its  good  and  evil.  At  length 
evil  prevailed,  "and  the  flood  came 
and  took  them  all  away."  Again  the 
world  started  with  a  single  family, 
and  again  evil  and  apostasy  prevailed. 
Then  God  added  a  fresh  element  to 
human  history  in  the  family  of  Abra- 
ham. When  evil  increased  judgment 
descended  on  them,  as  also  on  Egypt, 
Assyria,  Edom,  Babylon,  Tyre,  Persia, 
Greece,  Rome.  Jerusalem  itself  was 
destroyed,  and  the  Jews  were  scattered. 
The  Jewish  vintage  of  evil  was  ripe 
for  the  wine- press.  The  same  law  has 
ruled  in  the  Gentile  modern  world. 
The  bloody  vintage  came  for  the 
Roman  Empire  in  the  fifth  century,  for 
Eastern  Christendom  in  the  seventh, 
by  the  hand  of  the  Mohammedans, 
and  later  by  the  Turkish  Power.  It 
came  later  on  for  European  wickedness 
in  the  French  Revolution.  And  it  is 
coming  again  in  the  great  battles  and 
tribulations  of  the  last  days,  when 
the  clusters  of  the  Vine  of  the  Earth 
shall  "  be  cast  into  the  wine-press  of 
the  wrath  and  fury  of  Almighty  God." 
Right-doing  and  Wrong-doing  are 
ripening  on  every  side.  Every  nation 
on  earth,  every  soul  on  earth,  is  ripen- 

155 


chap.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


ing  as  wheat  for  the  harvest  in  the  lifetime  to  demonstrate  fully  the  real 
garner  of  God,  or  as  a  cluster  of  the  characters  of  men.  The  evolution  re- 
vine  of  the  earth  for  the  wine-press  of  quires  space  for  development  in  relation 
His  wrath.  This  "sharp  sickle  "hovers  to  individual  character.  St.  Paul  sums 
in  the  sky  suspended  by  an  Almighty  up  all  these  facts  in  1  Tim.  v.  24,  25. 
Hand.  But  it  is  there,  and  it  is  visible  — E.  White. 
to  the  spiritual  eye ;  often  it  takes  a 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  30—34. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xiii.  31,  32  ;  Luke  xiii.  18,  19.) 

The  rise  and  progress  of  Christianity. — I.  Christianity  is  insignificant  in  its 
beginning. — 1.  Its  Founder  assumed  a  humble  form.  2.  Its  first  advocates 
were  obscure.  3.  Its  sphere  of  action  was  confined.  4.  Its  first  converts  were 
few.    5.  Its  mode  of  operation  was  unassuming.     6.  Its  reception  was  unpopular. 

II.  Christianity  is  gradual  in  its  progress. — 1.  The  difficulties  with  which 
it  has  to  contend  are  tremendous.  2.  The  means  which  it  adopts  are  moral. 
3.  The  change  which  it  attempts  is  radical.  4.  The  field  in  which  it  works  is 
extensive.  5.  The  time  at  its  disposal  is  long.  6.  The  results  which  it  contem- 
plates are  eternal. 

III.  Christianity  will  be  great  in  its  consummation. — 1.  It  will  be  the 
mightiest  display  of  God's  energy.  2.  It  will  be  the  holiest  manifestation  of 
God's  character.  3.  It  will  be  the  truest  exhibition  of  God's  faithfulness.  4.  It 
will  be  the  wisest  revelation  of  God's  intelligence.  5.  It  will  be  the  most 
benevolent  expression  of  God's  love.  6.  It  will  be  the  sublimest  source  of  God's 
glory.  (1)  It  will  be  the  acknowledged  instrument  of  His  complete  overthrow 
of  sin.  (2)  It  will  be  time's  sole  surviving  wonder  for  the  admiration  of  the 
spiritual  universe.  (3)  It  will  be  the  redeemed's  theme  of  sweetest  song  of 
gratitude  to  God.  (4)  It  will  be  the  climax  of  Christ.  Then  God  will  be 
all  in  all. 

Lessons. — 1.  Despise  not  the  day  of  small  things.  2.  Exercise  patience. 
3.  Be  active.     4.  Draw  upon  the  glorious  future. — B.  D.  Johns. 

I.  The  comparative  insignificance  of  Christianity  at  the  first. — 1.  Contrast 
the  gorgeous  ritual  of  the  Temple  with  the  unostentatious  worship  inculcated 
by  Christ.  2.  Contrast  the  elaborate  systems  of  philosophers  with  the  simple 
teaching  of  our  Lord.  3.  Contrast  the  social  position  of  the  priests  with  that 
of  the  apostles.  4.  Contrast  the  multitudes  who  followed  priests  and  philosophers 
with  the  few  who  were  the  disciples  of  Jesus. 

II.  The  careful  implantation  of  Christianity. — 1.  Not  a  handful,  but  a  solitary 
seed  (Acts  iv.  12).  2.  Not  accidentally  but  designedly  sown.  Christ  personally 
performed  the  work.     3.  In  a  chosen  and  appropriate  spot. 

III.  The  rapid  growth  of  Christianity. — 1.  In  three  or  four  centuries  it  had 
spread  so  far  and  wide  that  Christians  were  found  in  Home,  Asia  Minor,  Greece, 
Syria,  Russia,  Germany,  Gaul,  Persia,  Armenia,  Egypt,  Arabia,  Abyssinia,  and 
indeed  in  almost  every  known  land.  2.  It  became  so  great  a  tree,  that  persecu- 
tion could  not  uproot  or  even  injure  it ;  so  great,  that  the  eyes  of  three  continents 
looked  on  in  amazement ;  so  great,  that  the  trees  of  idolatry  and  superstition 
had  no  room  for  growth.  3.  Every  obstacle  malice  could  throw  in  its  way 
had  been  employed.  All  classes  laid  their  axe  to  its  root.  Philosophers  brought 
their  satire,  priests  their  anathemas,  kings  their  laws.  All  in  vain.  The  tree 
not  only  resisted  every  blow,  but  shattered  to  atoms  every  axe  which  assailed  it, 

156 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


Its  devotees  were  nailed  to  crosses,  and,  dying,  cried,  "  It  must  grow."   Thousands 
at  the  stake  exulted  as  they  said,  "  We  burn,  but  it  cannot  wither." 

IV.  The  natural  phenomenon  resulting. — Ver.  32  ult.  Observe,  the  very 
same  class  of  men  who  sought  to  destroy  Christianity  at  its  introduction  after- 
ward gladly  espoused  it  for  their  own  personal  ends.  The  tree  was  planted  by 
God  to  give  shelter  to  the  weary  and  sad ;  it  was  not  designed  for  such  birds 
of  prey  ;  and  sooner  or  later  all  the  mercenary  ones  shall  be  driven  away  by 
the  power  of  Him  who  planted  it. — R.  A .  Griffin. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  30-32.  Christianity  a  living  bound  by  a  common  life,  sprung  from 
organism.  —  Hitherto  the  Christian  small  beginnings,  and  lasting  through 
kingdom  has  been  represented  by  a  many  generations — the  figure  of  a  tree 
crowd  of  distinct  though  similar  corn-  — was  not  a  new  one  in  the  hands  of 
plants — contiguous  yet  individual.  Jesus.  He  found  it  in  the  literature 
Now  the  deeper  truth  is  hinted  at  of  His  people.  As  far  back  as  the  age 
that  all  Christian  men  and  women  of  the  Captivity  it  had  become  usual 
make  up  in  some  sense  a  single  living  with  the  great  prophets  to  compare 
organism,  with  its  root  deep  hid  in  the  the  kingdom  of  Judah  to  a  vine,  and 
earth,  of  whose  fatness  we  all  partake,  the  mighty  empire  which  threatened 
It  enters  into  the  very  idea  of  a  tree  it  to  a  cedar  tree.  But  the  figure  had 
that  its  various  parts  are  the  outcome  disappeared  from  Hebrew  literature  till 
of  the  same  life- force,  which  originally  our  Lord  revived  it  in  the  words  before 
was  shut  up  in  a  tiny  unpromising  us.  With  characteristic  homeliness, 
seed,  which  yet  before  it  has  spent  He  selects  from  the  vegetable  creation 
itself  creates  that  umbrageous  fruitful  a  plant  whose  lowly  appearance  con- 
whole,  from  gnarled  root  to  topmost,  trasts  strangely  with  the  vine  of  Isaiah, 
outmost  twig.  The  glories  of  mid-  the  cedar  of  Ezekiel,  or  the  olive  of 
summer  leafage,  on  which  the  breezes  St.  Paul.  It  was  not  for  its  homeliness, 
play  low  airs,  while  the  sunbeams  however,  that  He  chose  it,  although 
dance  a  dance  of  green  and  gold ;  riches  conspicuously  His  emblems  are  all 
of  autumn  berry  dropping  to  the  taken  from  the  most  familiar  objects 
gatherer's  hand ;  subtle  harmony  of  of  common  life.  It  was  because,  for 
curve  as  the  boughs  lean  to  balance  another  reason,  it  suited  His  purpose 
one  another ;  mystic  new  birth  as  often  best.  We  measure  roughly  with  the 
as  the  spring  sends  a  reviving  tide  of  eye  the  power  of  growth  which  resides 
sap  through  every  branch ;  unwearied  in  a  plant,  by  the  disproportion  we 
effort  to  put  forth  fresh  lines  of  growth  discover  betwixt  the  smallness  of  the 
from  each  budding  point ;  while  the  seed  and  the  largeness  of  the  perfect 
records  of  a  hundred  seasons  of  storm  plant.  When  a  comparatively  minute 
and  contest  and  victorious  life  are  seed  develops  into  a  comparatively 
graven  on  its  furrowed  sides  and  big  tree,  you  are  much  struck  by  the 
stubborn  limbs, — how  wonderful,  how  force  of  life  there  was  in  it.  Now  of 
endless  in  delight  and  mystery,  is  the  this  the  mustard  formed  an  excellent 
world  of  life  to  be  found  within  a  single  familiar  instance.  It  was,  in  fact,  the 
tree ;  and  yet  its  age-long  growth  least  of  the  seeds  usually  sown  by 
and  all  its  splendours  come  from  the  people  in  Palestine,  and  therefore 
forces  hid  in  one  smooth  brown  rind  passed  in  the  proverbial  speech  of  the 
over  which  a  boy's  fingers  could  be  country-folk  for  the  least  thing  in  the 
clasped  in  sport !  This  beautiful  figure  world.  Yet,  strange  to  add,  the  full- 
for  an   organised  community  of   men  grown  mustard  plant  was  "the  largest 

157 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  garden  herbs  "  :  nay,  "  greater  than 
all  herbs,"  since  sometimes  it  shot  out 
branches  so  as  to  pass  fairly  beyond 
the  rank  of  a  "  herb "  and  become 
quite  a  "tree,"  under  whose  shadow 
the  field  birds  could  perch.  Precisely 
so  is  it  found  growing  wild  to  this  day 
by  the  Lake  of  Galilee — a  tall  shrub, 
or  dwarf  tree,  some  ten  feet  in  height. 
On  this  point  of  comparison  rests  the 
stress  of  the  parable.  Christianity  is 
not  only  a  creation  of  the  Saviour's 
own  life  ;  it  is  the  work  and  monument 
of  the  most  extraordinary  spiritual 
force  we  know.  The  kingdoms  of  the 
world  were  round  Him  where  He  sat — 
relics  of  ancient  empires,  which,  in  their 
day,  Ezekiel  had  likened  to  the  grand 
mountain  cedar,  with  a  "  shadowing 
shroud  "  and  a  lofty  stature.  Yet  now 
these  all  lay  "  fallen  "  and  "  broken  " 
and  "  left,"  as  Ezekiel  had  foretold  ; 
while  over  them  towered  one  world- 
empire  huger  than  any  of  its  fore- 
runners, whose  very  fragments  con- 
stitute our  modern  empires.  Rome 
filled  the  wide  earth  with  its  shade  as 
He  spoke.  Tiny  beside  the  mighty 
bulk  of  overshadowing  Rome,  as  a 
very  mustard  seed,  was  this  carpenter's 
Son  and  the  handful  of  followers  He 
left  behind  Him.  Yet  who  does  not 
know  how  unexpectedly  the  little 
spiritual  kingdom  of  Jesus  grew  up 
out  of  His  own  grave  to  develop  the 
mightiest  force  which  history  has  to 
tell  of ;  how  speedily  it  thrust  out  its 
branches  into  every  land,  and  sent  its 
roots  along  every  water- course  ;  how 
it  reckons  at  this  hour  a  larger  census 
of  citizens  than  the  most  populous  of 
secular  sovereignties  ?  By  its  own 
inward  force  of  Divine  life  did  it  grow 
so  large.  And  still  it  grows,  and  sees 
the  old  poison  plants  of  heathendom, 
beneath  whose  deadly  boughs  the 
people  sat,  droop  and  die  around  its 
feet,  and  welcomes  to  its  grateful 
shade  the  wandering  souls  of  men  who 
crave  for  rest  and  for  refreshing.     It 


yields  its  fruit  every  month,  and  its 
leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations. — J.  0.  Dykes,  D.D. 

A  parable  of  promise. — This  is  a 
parable  of  promise,  speaking  to  the 
heart  and  to  the  community.  It  says, 
"  Hope  for  much,  but  expect  it  only 
little  by  little."  When  Livingstone 
had  measured  his  work  and  his  powers, 
he  said  this  as  his  last  word :  "It  is 
but  little  we  can  do,  but  we  lodge  a 
protest  in  the  heart  against  a  vile 
system,  and  time  may  ripen  it."  And 
whenever  we  do  our  best,  and  trust 
and  pray  our  best,  though  that  best 
be  but  little,  still  we  also  may  hope 
that  God  will  favour  it,  and  that  time 
will  ripen  it.  For  the  little  of  our  day 
is  often  the  seed  of  much  in  a  day  to 
come ;  and  no  one  who  works  in  his 
place  can  tell  what  his  work  will  grow 
to,  or  how  much  God  may  make  of 
it.— T.  F.  Crosse,  D.C.L. 

Yers.  33,  34.  The  duties  of  the  Chris- 
tian teacher. — 1.  He  must  adapt  him- 
self to  his  hearers*.  Are  they  young  ? 
are  they  educated  ?  are  they  courage- 
ous? are  they  surrounded  by  any 
peculiar  circumstances?  2.  He  must 
consider  his  hearers  rather  than  him- 
self. This  was  Jesus  Christ's  method. 
The  question  should  be,  not  what  pleases 
the  preacher's  taste,  but  what  is  most 
required  by  the  spiritual  condition  of 
the  people.  3.  He  must  increase  his 
communication  of  truth  and  light 
according  to  the  progress  of  his  scholars. 
Reticence  is  power.  In  teaching  chil- 
dren the  teacher  should  not  dazzle  them 
by  the  splendour  of  his  attainments ; 
he  adapts  the  light  to  the  strength  of 
their  mental  vision.  The  preacher 
should  always  know  more  of  Divine 
truth  than  the  hearer.  Christ's  method 
of  imparting  knowledge  is,  so  far  as 
we  can  infer,  unchanged.  He  has  yet 
more  light  to  shed  upon  His  Word. 
f.  Parker,  D.D. 


158 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  35—41. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  viii.  18,  23-27  ;  Luke  viii.  22-25.) 

The  storm  on  the  lake. — How  pleasant  it  is  to  stand  upon  the  beach,  when 
there  is  a  glorious  sunset,  to  look  upon  the  vast  expanse,  to  gaze  upon  the 
splendid  colours  of  the  clouds!  Only  a  gentle  ripple  disturbs  the  surface  of 
the  water.  All  nature  is  preparing  for  its  evening  rest.  But  observe  ;  a  vessel 
is  approaching,  and  others  are  following.  A  great  Personage  is  about  to  embark  : 
the  Prophet  of  Galilee.  He  has  brought  consolation  to  many  hearts  during 
the  day  ;  for  He  has  been  teaching  in  the  neighbouring  towns  and  healing  the 
sick.  And  now,  having  dismissed  the  multitude,  He  desires  to  pass  over  to  the 
other  side  of  the  sea  or  lake.  But  as  we  stand  watching  the  departing  ships 
a  breeze  springs  up.  And  mark  yonder  clouds.  Observe,  Christ's  attendants  are 
taking  the  necessary  precautions,  for  they  know  how  rapidly  a  storm  gathers 
on  the  lake.  It  is  the  same  to-day.  Sir  Charles  Wilson,  when  in  Galilee  some 
time  ago,  encountered  a  violent  storm.  He  says  :  "  The  morning  was  delightful. 
A  gentle  easterly  breeze,  and  not  a  cloud  in  the  sky  to  give  warning  of  what 
was  coming.  Suddenly,  about  midday,  there  was  a  sound  of  distant  thunder, 
and  a  small  cloud,  *  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand,'  was  seen  rising  over  the 
heights.  The  cloud  appeared  to  spread,  and  heavy  black  masses  came  rolling 
down  the  hills.  At  the  moment  the  breeze  died  away,  there  were  a  few  minutes 
of  perfect  calm.  But  soon  the  thunder-gust,  advancing  across  the  lake,  lifted 
the  placid  water  into  a  bright  sheet  of  foam.  For  more  than  an  hour  .  .  .  peals 
of  thunder  and  torrents  of  rain."  It  was  just  such  a  storm  as  this  that  over- 
whelmed Christ's  ship,  and  yet  we  read  that  the  Redeemer  was  asleep  in  the 
hinder  part  of  the  ship — asleep,  tired,  fatigued.  I  like  to  think  of  Christ 
sleeping.  It  shews  that  He  had  our  nature.  We  have  a  Saviour  who  has 
ascended  into  the  highest  heaven,  and  yet  who  sympathises  with  our  infirmities 
because  He  is  man.  "  Without  one  sign  of  confusion,  without  one  feeling  of 
alarm,  Jesus  raised  Himself  from  the  dripping  stern  of  the  labouring  and  half- 
sinking  vessel,  and  without  further  movement  stilled  the  tempest  of  their  souls 
by  the  quiet  words,  "  Why  so  cowardly,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?  '  "  And  then  rising 
up,  standing  in  all  the  calm  of  a  natural  majesty,  He  gazed  forth  into  the 
darkness,  and  His  voice  was  heard  amid  the  roaring  of  the  troubled  elements, 
saying,  "  Peace,  be  still !  "  and  instantly  the  wind  dropped,  and  there  was  a  great 
calm. 

I.  To  succeed  and  be  safe  in  our  passage  through  life  we  must  have  Christ 
with  us. — There  are  men  who  commenced  life,  so  to  speak,  in  a  very  small  ship, 
and  they  felt  how  helpless  they  would  be  if  any  storm  should  arise.  Night  after 
night,  and  day  by  day,  they  implored  Christ  to  be  with  them,  to  give  them 
health,  prosperity,  and  success.  Those  men  reached  their  harbour,  sold  their 
goods,  built  a  large  ship,  Christ  again  with  them.  No  storm  ever  overwhelmed 
them.  To-day  they  give  Him  all  the  honour.  But  there  are  men  who  believe 
they  can  dispense  with  the  Divine  Presence.  Have  they  not  wealth  ?  Have  they 
not  excellent  investments?  Why,  they  could  get  through  any  storm.  And 
then  they  are  put  to  the  test.  Slowly  the  clouds  gather,  the  wind  rises,  and 
then  secretly  they  begin  to  feel  matters  are  getting  serious.  But  still  they  hope 
to  weather  the  storm.  Something  will  happen ;  they  must  be  more  careful  in 
future.  I  knew  just  such  a  man.  He  rose  from  a  humble  position  to  one  of 
great  wealth ;  but  he  refused  to  give  God  the  honour.  He  boasted  openly 
of  his  own  good  management,  whereby  he  had  succeeded  so  well ;  and  first  one 
loss  came,  and  then  another,  until  at  last  he  was  overwhelmed.     No  Christ  in 

159 


chap.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


the  ship.  Oh,  my  brethren,  if  you  desire  lasting  success,  if  you  would  have  help 
in  trouble,  if  you  hope  to  reach  the  other  side  in  safety,  ask  Christ  to  accompany 
you  in  the  ship  ! 

II.  It  was  a  difficult  matter  to  follow  Christ's  ship  because  of  the  boisterous 
waves. — The  vessels  that  followed  Christ's  ship  must  have  encountered  the  same 
storm.  No  one  ever  yet  found  it  an  easy  matter  to  follow  Christ  because  of  the 
forces  against  us.  There  is  the  flesh  to  contend  with,  the  World  and  the  Evil 
One  to  encounter.  In  your  own  strength  you  will  not  be  able  to  follow  Christ, 
to  obey  His  commandments ;  so  frail  is  human  nature,  what  are  you  to  do  ? 
Christ  has  promised  to  give  you  such  help  that  you  can  always  be  victorious. 
This  help  is  called  grace.  But  if  you  do  not  ask  Him  for  what  He  has  promised 
to  give,  and  as  a  result  are  unable  to  resist  the  storm  of  the  flesh  or  the  powers 
of  darkness — if  you  lose  paradise,  it  will  be  your  own  fault;  you  can  blame 
no  one  but  yourself. 

III.  Divine  aid  interposing  when  all  human  power  has  failed. — God  permits 
"  human  affairs  to  proceed  to  a  given  point,  and  at  the  vital  moment  outstretches 
His  arm."  Have  you  never  seen  Him  do  that  ?  Have  you  never  observed  some 
illness  suddenly  take  a  favourable  turn,  or  a  perplexity  vanish,  or  the  prodigal 
repent,  at  the  request  of  some  praying  one  ?  Some  time  ago  a  vessel  was  sailing 
through  Lake  Erie.  It  was  early  in  the  season,  and  great  blocks  of  ice  were 
floating  about.  All  at  once  the  captain  saw  that  the  ice  was  closing  the  ship 
in  on  all  sides.  He  summoned  the  passengers,  and  informed  them  of  the  position. 
He  said  nothing  but  the  direct  interference  of  Almighty  God  could  save  the 
ship.  Immediately  all  knelt  down  and  asked  for  help,  and  after  a  few  minutes 
the  man  at  the  wheel  shouted  that  it  was  all  right  now ;  the  wind  was  changing, 
and  blowing  the  ice  out  of  the  way.  Divine  aid  comes  when  human  power  fails. 
Ah !  there  is  a  moment  coming  for  us  all  when  no  earthly  friend  will  be  able  to 
assist  us,  when  the  words  are  heard,  "  Pass  over  to  the  other  side."  Then  if  we 
have  not  Divine  aid,  what  shall  we  do  ?  But  if  we  have  Christ  with  us,  we 
shall  possess  His  peace,  we  shall  be  safe  for  eternity. — E.  R.  Sill. 

The  Church  in  peril. — I.  The  Church  is  like  a  ship. — Noah's  Ark  was  a  type 
of  Christ's  Church,  in  that  as  he  and  his  family  were  saved  in  the  ark  from 
perishing  by  water,  so  we,  by  being  admitted  into  the  Church,  are  by  baptismal 
water  saved  from  perishing.  So  the  Church  tells  us  in  her  office  of  baptism, 
where  she  drives  on  the  allegory  throughout,  praying  that  God  would  sanctify 
the  child  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  he,  being  delivered  from  wrath,  may  be 
received  into  the  ark  of  Christ's  Church,  and,  being  steadfast  in  faith,  may  so  pass 
the  waves  of  this  troublesome  world,  that  finally  he  may  come  to  the  land  of 
everlasting  life.  Nor  is  the  ark  alone  so  appropriate  a  resemblance  of  the  Church, 
as  that  any  ordinary  ship  may  not,  in  some  kind  or  other,  represent  it,  whether 
it  be  for  passage,  for  merchandise,  or  for  war.  Look  we  on  the  make  and  build  of 
it ;  'tis  fitly  compacted  and  framed  together,  both  for  strength  and  beauty.  If  we 
consider  it  in  its  furniture  and  tackle,  it  has  its  compass  to  sail  by,  the  Word  of 
God  ;  its  sails  of  devout  affections,  to  be  filled  with  the  breathings  of  His  Spirit ; 
and  its  anchor  of  hope  to  stay  itself  upon,  the  merits  of  His  Son.  If  we  regard 
the  design  of  a  ship  to  go  from  port  to  port,  ours  is  bound  heavenward ;  for 
we  seek  a  country,  even  the  land  of  everlasting  life,  as  ye  heard  before.  The 
Church  entertains  passengers  to  waft  them  into  the  regions  of  bliss ;  it  has  her 
cargo  of  Divine  truths  ;  and  as  a  man-of-war,  too,  she  is  all  along  throughout  her 
whole  voyage  militant.  As  to  her  manage  and  conduct,  she  has  Christ  for 
her  Pilot,  and  under  Him  the  Chief  Magistrate  to  steer  the  vessel  and  to  govern 
the  ship's  crew.  But  in  no  one  thing  is  the  Church  more  like  to  a  ship  than  in 
those  frequent  dangers  and  jeopardies  she  is  to  undergo, — dangers  from  without  \ 

100 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


all  the  elements  as  it  were  conspiring  her  ruin  ;  rocks  and  shelves  to  split  her ; 
flats  and  quicksands  to  founder  her ;  tempests  and  storms  of  persecutions,  to  over- 
whelm her ;  corsairs  and  pirates,  all  her  ghostly  foes,  to  attack  her, — dangers 
from  within,  by  leaks  of  schism  and  division,  and  many  other  casualties  through 
negligence  or  ill  government. 

II.  Distress  is  a  very  fit  season  for  devotion. — The  sense  of  present  danger 
awakens  the  worst  of  men  to  the  practice  of  this  duty  of  prayer,  and  our  earnest 
prayer  awakens  God  to  our  relief.  The  psalmist  tells  us  that  at  God's  word  or 
command  the  stormy  wind  arises  which  lifteth  up  the  waves.  And  probably 
for  this  very  reason  God  sometimes  causes,  or  at  least  most  times  permits,  storms 
and  troubles  to  arise  upon  His  Church,  that  His  people,  who,  when  they  are  safe 
and  see  all  things  quiet  about  them,  are  too  apt  to  forget  God,  and  refuse  to 
hearken  to  the  still  voice  of  His  Word  and  to  obey  His  commandments,  may 
from  such  terrible  dismal  instances  of  danger  learn  to  fear  Him,  to  adore  His 
majesty,  to  acknowledge  His  power,  to  implore  His  goodness,  and  in  their  great 
distress  to  cry  unto  Him  for  help  :  "  Save,  Lord,  or  else  we  perish." 

III.  Our  extremity  is  God's  opportunity. — I  have  read  a  dismal  description 
of  a  shipwreck  in  a  Greek  romance — when  all  the  passengers,  and  seamen  too, 
with  hands  and  eyes  and  hearts  lifted  up  to  heaven,  fetched  the  last  shriek, 
expecting  with  their  tattered  vessel  immediately  to  go  down  quick  to  the  bottom 
of  the  sea.  And  when  men  are  in  such  a  posture  of  danger,  how  is  God's  mercy 
signalised  at  such  a  time  in  their  preservation?  This,  I  say,  is  business  in 
ordinary  providence ;  but  when  the  ship,  which  Himself  with  His  almighty  care 
and  skill  has  undertaken  to  steer  and  bring  to  her  desired  port,  when  the  safety 
and  interest  of  His  Church  and  people,  is  reduced  to  extremity,  how  much  more 
reason  have  we  to  expect  the  extraordinary  effects  of  His  power  and  goodness, 
who  both  can  and  will  provide  for  His,  when  they  are  destitute  of  all  other  help  ? 
When  a  Church  or  nation  is,  to  the  eye  of  man,  in  all  human  probability,  given 
up  for  lost,  when  all  other  helps  and  means  fail,  then  is  God's  time  to  come  in 
at  a  dead  lift,  who  is  already  help  in  the  needful  time  of  trouble.  There  is 
nothing  so  secret  which  He  cannot  bring  to  light,  nothing  so  strong  which  can 
resist  His  power,  nothing  so  cunningly  contrived  which  He  cannot  disappoint. 

IV.  Christ,  as  He  is  the  Founder  of  our  religion,  so  He  is  the  sole  Author  of 
our  deliverances. — To  Thee,  0  holy  Jesu,  who  wast  the  Founder  of  our  faith  and 
holy  profession,  we  fly  in  all  our  distresses,  as  to  our  only  Deliverer.  In  Thy 
merits  and  satisfaction,  in  Thy  mediation  and  intercessions,  alone  we  fix  the 
anchor  of  our  hope.  In  Thy  saving  health  we  repose  all  our  trust  and  ground 
our  assurance.  To  Thee  alone  it  is  that  we  address  our  requests.  Thy  patronage 
alone  is  all-sufficient  for  our  direction  in  life,  for  our  protection  in  danger.  Thou 
art  the  way  and  the  truth  and  the  life — the  way  in  Thy  holy  example,  the 
truth  in  Thy  heavenly  doctrine,  and  the  life  in  the  application  of  Thy  merit. — 
Adam  Littleton,  D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.    35.  "  Unto   the   other  side." —  to  us,  though  with  varying  meaning  in 

1.  A    watchword    of    faith,    breaking  His  words.     He  is  ever  calling  us  to 

through  all  narrow  boundaries.     2.  A  pass   over  some   line   into   new  fields, 

watchword    of    love,    overcoming    all  with  their  new  experiences,  privileges, 

selfishness.     3.  A  watchword  of  cour-  duties,  conflicts,  joys.     1.  He  says  it  to 

age,    overcoming    all   dangers. — J.   P.  the   impenitent,    when   He   graciously 

Lange,  D.D.  invites  them  to  become  His  disciples. 

Christ  is  continually  saying  the  same  He  wants  them  to  cut  loose  from  this 

M  161 


CHAP.   IV 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST    MARK. 


world,  from  sin  and  all  their  old  dead 
past,  and  rise  up  and  go  with  Him  to 
the  better  life  which  lies  beyond. 
2.  He  gives  the  same  call  and  invita- 
tion to  His  people,  when  they  reach 
the  end  of  earthly  life,  and  He  comes 
to  take  them  home.  Before  them  rolls 
the  sea  of  death,  dark  and  full  of 
terrors  to  the  natural  sense.  But  on 
"  the  other  side  "  glory  waits. — J.  R. 
Miller,  D.D. 

Yer.  36.  Christ  on  board. — Christ 
will  come  on  board  your  boat.  Life 
has  often  been  described  as  a  voyage, 
and  it  is  an  appropriate  description. 
He  will  come,  I  say,  on  board  the 
barque  in  which  your  destiny  is  being 
carried  forward.  He  will  start  with 
you  if  you  want  Him.  He  will  identify 
Himself  with  the  poorest  if  only  you 
are  a  disciple,  if  you  are  willing  to  sit 
at  His  feet  and  learn  of  Him.  Will 
you  take  Him  then  as  He  is  ?  will  you 
make  common  cause  with  Him  ?  Evi- 
dently this  manner  of  man  will  sail 
the  seas  of  time  with  anybody  who 
will  simply  be  friends  with  Him,  who 
will  lie  down  and  be  at  peace  with 
Him.  Are  you  of  that  disposition 
towards   Him  ? — J.  McNeill. 

Where  the  Lord  is  there  should  His 
servants  and  apostles  be, — in  danger 
as  well  as  in  peace ;  as  feeding  the 
multitude,  so  sharing  in  His  troubled 
and  evening  voyage  :  not  only  treading 
in  His  footsteps,  but  partaking  in 
the  holy  confidence  of  their  Master's 
faith,  who  committed  Himself  with  all 
confidence  to  the  winds  and  waves. — 
W.  Scott. 

These  "  other  little  ships  "  doubtless 
enjoyed  a  share  in  the  blessing  of  calm 
obtained  by  the  ship  that  bare  Jesus. 
I  have  sometimes  thought  that  they 
picture  vividly  the  fortunes  of  these 
societies,  that,  in  these  later  ages,  have 
moved  in  the  wake  of  the  ancient 
Apostolic  Church,  that  with  it  are 
forced  to  endure  the  storms  of  a  world 
impartially  hostile  to  every  form  of 
religious  effort,  and  that  are  not  with- 
out participating  in  the  blessings  of 
the   Holy   Presence,   abiding  in   that 

162 


Church  as  long  as  in  sincerity  of  heart 
they  endeavour  to  keep  up  with  the 
Master  in  His  course  (Mark  ix.  38  ; 
Exod.  xii.  38;  1  Cor.  i.  2  ;  Eph.  vi.  24). 
— W.  A.  Butler. 

Vers.  37-40.  Christ's  victory  over 
feeble-minded  unbelief. — 1.  He  leads 
little  faith  into  danger.  2.  He  lets 
it  wrestle  with  the  peril  to  the  utmost 
point.  3.  He  convicts,  humbles,  and 
heals  it. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Here  Christ  exhibits  Himself  as — 
1.  The  true  and  holy  Man.  2.  The 
wise  and  gracious  Master.  3.  The 
almighty  and  adorable  Son  of  God. — 
Ibid. 

An  image  of  the  Christian  life. — 
1.  The  threatening  danger.  2.  The 
growing  anxiety.  3.  The  delivering 
might.     4.  The  rising  thanks. — Ibid. 

Trial  and  deliverance  work  together. — 
1.  To  reveal  the  Lord.  2.  To  train 
His  people.  3.  To  advance  the  coming 
of  His  kingdom. — Ibid. 

The  Sea  of  Galilee  is  an  inland  lake 
surrounded  by  hills,  save  at  each  of 
its  extremities,  where  are  narrow  pass- 
ages, affording  an  entrance  and  outlet 
to  the  Jordan.  The  river,  flowing 
through  the  lake,  creates  a  current, 
which  is  felt  even  to  the  very  shores. 
Like  all  other  inland  seas  surrounded 
by  mountains,  the  lake,  though  usually 
placid,  is  subject  to  sudden  gusts  from 
the  hollows  of  the  mountains,  and  to 
violent  eddies  and  storms,  short  in 
duration,  but  violent  in  their  effects. 
Especially  when  the  storm -gusts  sweep 
down  upon  the  lake  from  the  south 
(the  direction  in  which  the  boat  was 
to  proceed),  the  wind  meeting  and 
opposing  the  current  of  the  Jordan, 
soon  lashes  the  surface  into  fury. 

Christ's  presence  causes  storms. — 
Until  Christ  was  in  the  ship,  there 
was  no  storm.  While  men  have  pillows 
sewn  under  their  elbows,  all  is  peace ; 
but  so  soon  as  Christ  rebukes  the  world 
of  sin,  the  wicked  are  like  the  raging 
sea,  that  cannot  rest,  whose  waters 
cast  up  dirt  and  mire. — Dean  Boys. 

Suddenness  of  life's  storms. — Thus 
many  of  life's  storms  come.     Tempta- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  iv. 


tions  come  when  we  are  not  looking  out  the  spirit  and  power  of  His  truth, 

for   them.      So   disasters   come.      We  — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

are  at   peace  in  a  happy  home.     At  Unbelief. — I.    Some   of  the   circum- 

an  hour  when  we  think  not,  without  stances    in    which    this    question   of 

warning,  the  darling  child  we  love  so  unbelief  arises  in  the  mind. — In  rela- 

much   lies   dead  in    our   arms.      The  tion  to — 1.  Temporal  things  :  poverty, 

friend  we  trusted,  and  who  we  thought  adversity,  distress,    sickness,    bereave- 

could  never  fail  us,  proves  false.     The  ment,    danger.       2.    Spiritual  things : 

hopes  cherished  for  years  wither  in  our  darkness,    loneliness,    temptation.       3. 

hands  in  a  night,  like  flowers  when  the  Others  :  sunk  in  ignorance  and  sin. 

frost  comes.     The  storms  of  life  are  II.   How    Christ  rebukes   our  un- 

nearly    all    sudden    surprises.      They  belief;  and  the  proofs  which  God  has 

do  not  hang  out  danger-signals  days  given  that  He  cares  for  us. — 1.  The 

before  to  warn  us.     The  only  way  to  instincts  which  God  has  implanted  in 

be  ready   for  them   is   to   be   always  the    human    heart.       2.     The    ample 

ready.— J.  R.  Miller,  D.D.  provision    He  has   made    for   all   our 

necessities.      3.   The  fact   that  others 

Yer.    38.    Christ    asleep. — He    who  care    for    us.      4.    Even    the    storms 

"  never   slumbereth   nor   sleepeth "   is  through  which  we  pass  are  often  the 

asleep !     Not  that  He  seemed  to  sleep,  result  of  God's  care  for  us  :    "  Whom 

as  has  been  said,  but  "  He  was  asleep."  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten." 

Now,  as  God,  of  course  our  Lord  could  Conclusion. — If  God  so  cares  for  us, 

not,  did  not,  sleep,  it  was  only  in  His  we   ought  to — 1.    Care  for   ourselves, 

humanity  that  "  His  eyes  were  heavy  2.  Care  for  those  around  us.     3.  Cast 

to  sleep."      But   more  than  this  may  all  our  cares  upon  Him. — A.  Clark. 

be    said.     He    slept,   it   may   be,    for  Signs  of  a  weak  faith. — 1.  Fear  in 

a   purpose,   i.e.   to   shew  the  apostles  danger.     2.  Doubt  of  the  Lord's  power 

that  where  He  was  there  was  no  real  in  danger.    3.  Anxious  solicitude  about 

danger,  and  to  teach  Christian   souls  earthly  things.     4.   Impatience  under 

calmly    and    faithfully   to    repose    on  trouble  (Isa.  xxviii.   16). 

Him,  while  all  outward   things  seem  Fear    and    faith.  —  Though     fear 

most  distressing. — W.  Scott.  caused   self-abandonment,    faith    pro- 

Asleep  amid  storms. — What  are  the  vided   guidance  to  the   right   person, 

world's   angry   storms — the   miserable  Fear   commanded,    "Drop  your   oar." 

uncertainties    and    chances     of     this  Faith  directed,  "  Go  to  Jesus."     Fear 

mortal  life — the  malice  of  evil  angels  said,  "Your  case  is  hopeless."     Faith 

— the  tossing  about  of  mingled  hopes  said,   "  Seek  safety  in  Christ."     Fear 

and  fears :  nay,  what  is  the  nearness  made  them  ready  to  go.     Faith  led  in 

of  death  itself,  what  is  danger,  what  is  the    right   way.       Fear    cried,    "  We 

fear,  to  the  faithful  Christian  ?     Like  perish  !    we  perish  !  "      Faith  prayed, 

his  Lord,  he  may  sleep  calmly  through  "  Master,    carest    Thou    not  ?      Lord, 

all  the  wild  commotions  of  the  world,  save  !  save  !  " 

in  prayer  it  must  have  been,  and  A  model  prayer. — It  was  short,  appro- 
converse  with  His  and  our  Heavenly  p'riate,  fervent.  The  disciples  knew 
Father. — Ibid.  what  they  wanted,  and  they  asked  for 

Salvation  spiritual. — The   spirit    of  it.     Our  prayers  often  fail  to  gain  us 

Christ,  not  the  body  of  Christ,  must  a  blessing  because  they  lack  definite- 

save  the   Church  in   all   peril.      The  ness.      In    a    long    prayer   we   have 

sleeping  body  was  in  the  vessel,  but  sometimes   been   prayed    into   a   good 

it    exercised    no    influence    upon    the  frame   of   mind   and   out   of   it.     Dr. 

storm.     It  is  possible  to  have  an  em-  Talmage  suggests  that,  in  the  case  of 

balmed   Christ,    and   yet   to   have   no  most   of   our  prayers,  they  would   be 

Christianity.     It    is    also    possible   to  better  and  more  helpful  if  we  were  to 

have  the  letter  of  Christ's  Word  with-  cut  off  a  bit  from  each  end  and  set 

163 


CHAP.   IV. 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


fire  to  the  middle.  The  prayer  of  the 
disciples  did  what  the  storm  had  failed 
to  do.  There  is  an  instinctive  tend- 
ency in  the  human  heart  to  pray  when 
confronted  suddenly  by  imminent  peril, 
e.g.  Jonah  i.  13,  14:  Ps.  cvii.  5,  6, 
11-13,  17-19,  28.  "Some  will  never 
pray  until  they  are  half  starved." 

Yer.   39.  Trials  not  always  calami- 
ties.— Had  the  apostles  been  inquired 
of  before  the  storm  ceased,  they  would 
have  replied  that  the  tempest  was  a 
great  misfortune,  that  they  were  much 
to  be  pitied,  that  they  were  in  the  very 
greatest  peril.     But  was  it  so?     Was 
the  storm  such  a  calamity  ?     It  was 
a  trial,  and  for  the  time  a  bitter  one ; 
but  it  wrought  good,  unalloyed  good, 
in  the  end.     And  is  not  this  a  parable 
of  life?     1.  The   ancients   were   wont 
constantly  to  use  the  figure  of  a  ship 
as  a  similitude  of  the  Church  of  Christ ; 
and  our  Baptismal  Office  preserves  this 
ancient  usage,  when  we  pray  that  the 
newly  baptised  may  be  received  into 
the  Ark  of  Christ's  Church,  and  may 
so  pass  the  waves  of  this  troublesome 
world   as   finally   to   attain   the   land 
of   life.     The   Church,   then,  is   as   a 
ship,  often  tossed  by   tempest,  some- 
times seeming  to  the  eye  of  man  as  if 
it  were   now   full  of  water,  ready  to 
sink,  but  yet   never   sinking,  because 
Christ  is   in   her.      She   has  been  in 
great  danger,  so  that  her  crew  have 
been  compelled  to  cast  out  with  their 
own  hands  the  lading  of  the  ship,  her 
possessions  and  her  dignities  ;  but  yet, 
at  the  hour  of  greatest  need,  has  she 
been  rescued  by  Him  who  never  left 
her — who    seemed  to    sleep,    but    yet 
who  suffered  the  storm  to  arise — even 
by  Him  who  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps 
in  His  providential  government.     As 
the  infant  Church,  represented  by  the 
apostles,  was  tossed  upon  the  Sea  of 
Galilee,  so  is  the  Christian  Church  by 
the  waves  of  the  world,  the  machina- 
tions of  evil  spirits,  the  pride  and  the 
passion  of  men  ;  and  as  the  apostles 
rose   up  after  their  trial   stronger  in 
the  faith,  so  even  now  does  tribulation 
better  than    prosperity   develop    that 

164 


which  is  good.     And  herein  all  faith- 
ful members  of  the  Church  may  thank 
God  and  take  courage,  even  in  troublous 
times.     Her  ministers  may  not   fear, 
though  it  may  seem  as  if  Jesus  was 
asleep,  as  if  He  hid  His  face  and  would' 
not  behold  ;    they  may  take   courage 
when   they  see  the   wicked  in   great 
prosperity,  and  Satan  ruling  over  the 
hearts  of  many,  and  holding  them  in 
ignorance  and  sin.     Yet  still  the  storm 
has  its  lessons  specially  for  them.     It 
teaches  them  to  be  up  and  doing,  to 
ply  the  oars,  to  trim  the  sails,  to  take 
good  heed  to  the  rudder,  to  cry  aloud 
to  the  Captain  of  their  salvation,  and 
thus   to   do   their   part   to   make   the 
vessel  weather  the  storm.     But  when 
they  have  done  all  that  they  can,  it 
teaches  them  to  leave  the  result  in  the 
hands  of  God ;  it  teaches  them  to  ex- 
pect a  favourable  issue — an  issue  which 
will  make  the  glory  of  God  apparent. 
2.  We,  the  members  of  the  Church  of 
Christ,  are  also  sailing  over  the  stormy 
main.     We  have  our  peculiar  difficul- 
ties   and    trials,    each    one    his   own : 
sometimes    secular    trials,    sometimes 
spiritual   trials.      In   either    case   we 
find  that  the  ocean  of  our  life  is  not 
always  calm  :    there   are   storms   and 
tempests   in   it,    there   are  fierce  and 
sudden  gusts,  and  sometimes  we  may 
almost   have    despaired   and    thought 
that   our   vessel   was   ready   to    sink. 
Have  we  in  such  a  case  been  tempted 
to  cry,  "  Lord,  carest  Thou  not  that  we 
perish  ?  "     The  earnest  Christian  will 
have   ever  found,  sooner   or  later,  an 
answer  of  peace. — W.  S.  Simpson,  M.A. 
Safety   in  Christ. — Whether   sinner 
or  saint,  unbeliever  or  believer,  we  are 
alike  voyaging  upon   the  sea  of   life. 
Perils    abound    in    shoal     and    reef. 
Dangers  gather  and  threaten  in  tem- 
pest and  billow.    The  storm  is  stronger, 
the   sea   is   mightier,  than  we.      Our 
open    boat — a    frail    craft — will     be 
crushed  and  sunken  in  the  dark  night 
and  black  waters,  unless  the  Master 
speaks  the  word  of  peace  and  brings 
the  calm.     In  Him  is  safety.     In  Him 
only  is  life.      He   cares  for  us  with 
infinite  mercy.     We  will  go  to  Him 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


reposing  on  His  might  and  trusting  in 
His  love. 

Christ  yields  to  the  cry  of  an  im- 
perfect faith,  and  so  strengthens  it. 
If  He  did  not,  what  would  become  of 
any  of  us  ?  He  does  not  quench  the 
dimly  burning  wick,  but  tends  it  and 
feeds  it  with  oil — by  His  inward  gifts 
and  by  His  answers  to  prayer — till  it 
burns  up  clear  and  smokeless,  a  faith 
without  fear.  Even  smoke  needs  but  a 
higher  temperature  to  flame  ;  and  fear 
which  is  mingled  with  faith  needs  but 
a  little  more  heat  to  be  converted  into 
radiance  of  trust. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Self-possession.  —  Well  were  it  for 
men  if,  in  life's  trials,  larger  measures 
of  the  mastery  of  self-possession  were 
enjoyed.  It  can  be  cultivated.  The 
conscious  resting  of  the  soul  on  God 
inspires  and  strengthens  it.  That  helps 
it  to  possess  and  guide  instead  of  being 
possessed  and  driven.  It  converts 
tyrants  into  useful  servants.  Self- 
possessed  utterance  and  action  nerve. 
The  disjointed  ones  of  despair  spread 
paralysis.  The  former  would  thus 
greatly  help  people  either  to  act  more 
efficiently  or  endure  more  heroically. — 
W.  M.  Campbell. 

The  duty  of  resistance. — Some  pious 
people  resign  themselves  much  too  pas- 
sively to  the  mischiefs  of  the  material 
universe,  supposing  that  troubles  which 
are  not  of  their  own  making  must 
needs  be  a  Divine  infliction,  calling 
only  for  submission.  But  God  sends 
oppositions  to  be  conquered  as  well  as 
burdens  to  be  borne  ;  and  even  before 
the  Fall  the  world  had  to  be  subdued. 
And  our  final  mastery  over  the  sur- 
rounding universe  was  expressed  when 
Jesus  our  Head  rebuked  the  winds 
and  stilled  the  waves. — Dean  Chadwick. 
Christ  in  the  storm. — St.  Augustine, 
who  knew  as  well  as  most  men  what 
the  storms  of  temptation  are,  and 
better  than  most  men  what  the  deliver- 
ance is,  and  by  whom  the  victory 
comes,  often  in  his  writings  refers  to 
this  passage  of  the  Evangelist,  and 
those  Psalms  like  the  46th  and  93rd 
and  107th,  where  we  almost  seem  to 
hear  the  roaring  of  the  waters  and  the 


voice  of  God  above  them.  In  one  of 
these  he  sums  up  the  practical  appli- 
cation of  the  miracle  in  language  that 
cannot  be  bettered :  "  We  are  sailing 
in  this  life  as  through  a  sea,  and  the 
wind  rises  and  storms  of  temptations 
are  not  wanting.  Whence  is  this,  save 
because  Jesus  is  sleeping  in  thee  ?  If 
He  were  not  sleeping  in  thee  thou 
wouldst  have  calm  within.  But  what 
means  this,  that  Jesus  is  sleeping  in 
thee,  save  that  thy  faith,  which  is 
from  Jesus,  is  slumbering  in  thine 
heart?  What  shalt  thou  do  to  be 
delivered  ?  Arouse  Him  and  say, 
Master,  we  perish.  He  will  awaken — 
that  is,  thy  faith  will  return  to  thee 
and  abide  with  thee  always.  When 
Christ  is  awakened,  though  the  tempest 
beat  into  yet  it  will  not  fill  thy  ship  ;  thy 
faith  will  now  command  the  winds  and 
the  waves,  and  the  danger  will  be  over." 

Yer.  40.  Responsible  for  faith. — 
Christ  treats  the  disciples  as  respon- 
sible for  the  defectiveness  of  their 
faith.  Christians  may  live  on  so  low 
a  level  as  to  be  affected  by  influences 
which  depress  their  energies,  and 
render  them  liable  to  many  faults 
and  shortcomings,  which,  although  not 
fastening  guilt  upon  the  conscience, 
are  in  the  aggregate  a  serious  evil. 
The  kindness  of  Christ  does  not  degene- 
rate into  indulgence,  by  shielding  His 
delinquent  disciples  from  the  reproof 
they  merited.  The  reproach  which 
they  alleged  against  Him  of  not  caring 
for  them  was  groundless  and  irreverent. 
He  reproaches  them  in  return,  but  in 
a  different  spirit,  not  by  way  of  retalia- 
tion, but  because  the  necessities  of  the 
case  required  it.  He  chides  them,  not 
for  disturbing  His  rest,  but  for  har- 
bouring fears  that  disturbed  their  own 
souls. — J.  H.  Morgan. 

The  faithless  reproved. — Consider  this 
reproof  as  addressed  to — 1.  Men  com- 
manded to  receive  Christ,  which  is  the 
case  of  all  who  hear  the  gospel.  If 
He  had  not  told  you  to  go  over  to  the 
other  side,  away  from  this  world,  as 
your  home  and  portion,  then  there 
might  be  ground  of  fear  that  attempt- 

165 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


ing  to  do  so  you  might  fail  and  perish 
in  the  storm  of  this  world's  opposition ; 
but  He  has  said,  "  Go  over  to  the  other 
side,"  yea,  "Come  over,"  for  He  will 
be  with  you,  and  hence  to  tremble  and 
hesitate  and  doubt  is  wicked  distrust 
of  Him.  2.  Those  who  shrink  from 
Christian  duty.  (1)  They  who  with- 
hold themselves  from  open  profession. 
(2)  They  who  lag  behind  in  the  path 
of  spiritual  progress,  and  who,  instead 
of  stirring  themselves  up,  groan  and 
despond.  (3)  They  who  take  a  dark 
view  of  the  prospects  of  the  Ark  of  God 
and  of  Christian  work.  3.  Such  as 
are  disposed  to  faint  in  time  of  trial. 
— D.  Merson. 

Ver.  41.  "  What  manner  of  man  is 
this  ?  " — This  is  the  question  for  every 
individual,  for  every  age,  to  consider. 
Christ  is  the  great  problem  of  history, 
of  theology,  of  life.  What  is  He  ?  He 
is  man ;  but  what  manner  of  man  ? 
He  is  more  than  mature,  more  than 
the  sum -total  of  its  powers.  We  do 
not  exhaust  Him  when  we  say  He  is 
a  man,  nor  when  we  say  He  is  the 
man,  standing  at  the  head  of  the  race 
by  virtue  of  pre-eminent  gifts.  He  is 
the  God-man,  who  stands  equal  with 
God  on  the  high  level  of  Deity,  and  equal 
with  man  on  the  low  level  of  humanity. 
— J.  Hughes. 


The  Ruler  of  the  storm. — Dr.  Liddon, 
speaking  of  political  opposition  to 
Christianity,  says :  "  During  the  first 
three  centuries,  and  finally  under 
Julian,  the  heathen  state  made  re- 
peated and  desperate  attempts  to  sup- 
press it  by  force.  Statesmen  and 
philosophers  undertook  the  task  of 
eradicating  it.  .  .  .  More  than  once 
they  drove  it  from  the  army,  from  the 
professions,  from  the  public  thorough- 
fares, into  secrecy ;  they  pursued  it 
into  the  vaults  beneath  the  palaces  of 
Rome,  into  the  catacombs,  into  the 
deserts.  .  .  .  The  hordes  which  shat- 
tered the  work  of  the  Caesars  learnt  to 
repeat  the  Catholic  creed,  and  a  new 
order  of  things  had  formed  itself  when 
the  tempest  of  Mohammedanism  broke 
upon  Christendom.  Politically  speak- 
ing, this  was  perhaps  the  most  threaten- 
ing storm  through  which  the  Christian 
Church  passed.  .  .  .  The  last  trial  of 
the  Church  was  the  first  French  Revo- 
lution .  .  .  which  for  a  while  seemed 
to  threaten  its  total  suppression.  Yet 
the  men  of  the  Terror  have  passed,  as 
the  Caesars  had  passed  before  them ; 
and,  like  the  Caesars,  they  have  only 
proved  to  the  world  that  the  Church 
carries  within  her  One  who  rules  the 
fierce  tempests  in  which  human  insti- 
tutions are  wont  to  perish." 


ILLUSTRATION'S   TO    CHAPTER   IV. 


Ver.  2.  Christ's  parables  differ  from  all 
others  in  this,  that  in  their  application  they 
seem  inexhaustible.  Just  as  one  may,  from 
Geneva,  watch  the  sun  setting  on  Mont 
Elanc,  and  while  the  sunny  peak  in  its 
gigantic  outlines  remains  ever  the  same,  yet 
the  rays  of  the  sun,  as  they  fall  upon  it  at 
different  angles,  so  change  its  marvellous 
tints  that  at  one  moment  it  sparkles  like 
burnished  gold,  at  another  it  is  bathed  in 
roseate  hues,  and  then  again,  as  the  sun 
sinks  beneath  the  western  hills,  it  stands  out 
in  cold,  grey  tones,  in  grand  relief  against 
the  glories  of  the  azure  sky, — so  with  our 
Lord's  parables,  while  the  outline  of  the 
familiar  story  remains  always  the  same,  yet 
every  time  we  come  to  its  contemplation  in 
the  light  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  not  only  do  we  see 
new  beauties,  but  new  lessons,  I  had  almost 
said  new  truths  ! — A.  O.  Mortimer,  D.D. 

166 


The  parables  of  Jesus  are  simple  in  structure 
and  for  the  most  part  easily  understood. 
And  yet  they  are  deep  as  His  Divine  Spirit. 
Their  inimitable  perfections  appear  as  often 
as  any  one  tries  to  parallel  them.  Meeting 
with  Dr.  Robert  Breckinridge,  "  Tom " 
Marshall,  the  Kentucky  orator,  asked,  "  Why 
do  you  not  imitate  your  Model,  and  preach  in 
parables  ?  "  "  Because  I  cannot  make  them." 
"  Why,"  said  the  politician,  "  they  are  per- 
fectly simple ;  I  could  write  parables." 
"  Then,"  answered  Dr.  Breckinridge,  "  bring 
one  of  your  own  at  our  next  meeting." 
When  next  they  met,  and  Mr.  Marshall  was 
reminded  of  the  parable,  he  said,  "I  am 
beaten.  No  man  can  make  a  parable  any 
more  than  he  can  make  a  speech  like 
Jesus." 

The  spirit  in  which  to  study  nature. — By 
studying  nature  in  the  spirit  of  meek  devo- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IV 


tion  and  solemn  love,  a  good  man  may 
indeed  "  walk  up  and  down  the  world  as  in 
a  garden  of  spices,  and  draw  a  Divine  sweet- 
ness out  of  every  flower." — J.  Keble. 

What  we  can  see  in  nature. — There  is  in 
nature  just  as  much,  or  as  little,  as  the  soul 
of  each  beholder  can  see  in  her. — J.  G. 
Shairp,  LL.D. 

Nature  leads  to  God. — Nature  represents 
the  Soul  from  which  all  souls  come,  and  by 
its  beautif  ulness  helps  us  to  delight  ourselves 
in  God.  He  leads  us  to  no  dead  museum  or 
stony  cathedral,  but  under  the  dome  of  the 
sky.  He  says,  "  The  whole  is  alive,  full  of 
God's  life." — John  Pulsford. 

Nature  a  mirror. — To  a  man  under  the 
influence  of  emotion,  nature  is  ever  a  great 
mirror  full  of  emotions.  To  the  satiated 
and  quiescent  alone,  she  is  a  cold,  dead 
window  for  the  outward  world. — J.  P. 
Richter. 

Nature  a  print  of  God. — The  heavens  are 
a  print  from  the  pen  of  God's  perfection ;  the 
world  is  a  bud  from  the  flower  of  His  beauty  ; 
the  sun  is  a  spark  from  the  light  of  His 
wisdom,  and  the  ocean  is  a  bubble  on  the 
sea  of  His  power. — From,  the  Persian. 

A  story  helps  the  truth. — "  The  story,"  as 
Dr.  Guthrie  says,  "like  a  float,  keeps  the 
truth  from  sinking ;  like  a  nail,  fastens  it 
in  the  mind  ;  like  the  feathers  of  an  arrow, 
makes  it  strike  ;  and,  like  the  barb,  makes  it 
stick." 

Parable  a  mode  of  conveying  truth. — A 
parable  is  Christ's  mode  of  conveying  His 
mind  into  ours — the  waggon  in  which  He 
puts  deep  thoughts,  not  apparent  or  neces- 
sary at  the  time,  but  useful  for  the  Christian 
Church  when  out  of  its  infancy. 

Ver.  9.  Ears  to  hear. — All  men  for  the 
most  part  have  both  their  ears,  but  not  to 
hear.  The  man  sick  of  the  gout  hath  both 
his  feet,  but  not  to  walk.  He  that  is  pur- 
blind hath  both  his  eyes,  but  not  to  see 
clearly.  He  that  is  manacled  by  the  magis- 
trate for  some  fault  hath  both  his  hands ; 
but  so  long  as  they  are  bound  they  cannot 
do  their  office.  So  most  men  have  ears ;  but 
few  men  have  ears  to  hear — namely,  to  hear 
that  which  is  good,  and  to  hear  that  which 
is  good  well. — Dean  Boys. 

Best  to  have  no  left  ear. — In  listening  to 
God  it  is  as  well  that  we  have  no  left  ear. 
True,  we  are  commanded  to  use  both  ears — 
"  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  "  ; 
but  this  takes  it  for  granted  that  both  ears 
are  right  ones.  Now,  morally  speaking,  there 
is  a  right  ear  and  there  is  a  left  ear ;  and  he 
has  both  who,  in  listening  to  the  gospel, 
takes  it  in  by  the  one  ear  and  lets  it  out 
again  by  the  other.  It  is  right  to  admit  the 
sound,  but  it  is  left,  or  wrong,  to  allow  it  to 
escape  so  soon.  In  this  sense  it  is  best  to 
have  no  left  ear.  The  most  profitable  way 
is  to  put  the  right  ear  to  the  gospel  trumpet, 


and,  as  the  joyful  sound  enters,  to  let  it  drop 
at  once  down  into  the  heart,  from  whence  it 
will  not  arise  to  depart.  This  right  ear  is 
just  faith  in  the  Word;  and  he  who  believes 
what  God  says,  not  only  hears  rightly,  but 
never  loses  what  is  heard.  In  such  an  one 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  abideth  for  ever. 

The  gospel  to  be  heard. — In  the  reign  of 
James  II.  that  king  commanded  an  Act 
of  Parliament,  called  the  "Liberty  of  Con- 
science Act,"  to  be  read  in  all  the  churches. 
The  clergy  were  very  unwilling  to  read  it, 
and  some  of  their  congregations  did  not  wish 
to  hear  it.  One  Sunday  a  clergyman,  when 
the  time  came  for  reading  the  document, 
said  to  his  congregation :  "  Though  I  am 
compelled  to  read  this,  you  are  not  com- 
pelled to  hear  it,"  upon  which  the  people 
rose  up  and  left  the  church,  and  the  clergy- 
man read  the  Act  of  Parliament  to  the  pews, 
hassocks,  and  walls.  But  we  may  not  thus 
treat  the  gospel.  This  is  God's  message  to 
our  souls ;  and  while  true  ministers  are  indeed 
compelled  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  speak  the 
Word  to  us,  we  too  should  feel  that  we  are 
compelled  to  listen  to  it  with  reverence  and 
attention  because  it  is  a  message  from  God. 

Worthless  hearing. — One  day  a  very  clever 
countryman,  named  Jedediah  Buxton,  who 
could  multiply  nine  figures  by  nine  figures 
without  a  slate  or  paper,  went  to  see  Garrick, 
a  famous  actor,  perform  upon  the  stage  of  a 
theatre.  When  he  went  home  from  London 
to  his  native  village,  and  was  asked  what  he 
thought  of  the  acting  of  Garrick,  he  replied, 
"  Oh,  I  don't  know ;  I  only  saw  a  little  man 
strut  about  the  stage  and  repeat  seven  thou- 
sand nine  hundred  and  fifty-six  words." 
Instead  of  listening  to  what  was  said,  he  had 
been  counting  the  speaker's  words.  More 
foolish  is  it  for  us  to  come  to  hear  the  Word 
of  God  and  then  amuse  ourselves  by  noticing 
something  that  is  beside  the  mark. 

Hearing. — Give  but  interest  in  the  theme, 
and  the  listener's  ear  fulfils  its  natural 
function,  that  of  hearing.  "  Mine  ears  hast 
Thou  opened."  Intensify  the  interest,  and 
the  listener  is  all  ears,  all  ear.  Webster's 
ill-starred  Duchess  of  Malfi  assures  her 
brother,  "  I  will  plant  my  soul  in  my  ears  to 
hear  you."  "  Alarmed  nature  starts  up  in  my 
heart,  and  opens  a  thousand  ears  to  listen," 
cries  Colonel  Talbot  in  an  old  play.  Per- 
plexed in  the  extreme,  and  cut  to  the  heart, 
by  a  revelation  of  household  treachery  and 
wrong,  an  incredulous  husband  is  described 
in  a  modern  romance,  with  his  hands  clasped 
together,  and  with  his  head  bent  to  catch 
eveiy  syllable  of  the  harrowing  news — 
listening  "as  if  his  whole  being  were  resolved 
into  that  one  sense  of  hearing."  It  is  with 
hearing  as  with  seeing.  The  eye  is  not 
satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  filled  with 
hearing.  Mendelssohn,  in  one  of  his  letters 
from  abroad,  rapturous  with  gazing  on  his 
favourite  Titian,  declares  that  "one  might 

167 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


well  wish  for  a  dozen  more  eyes  to  look  one's 
fill  at  such  a  picture."  "  Had  I  three  ears 
I'd  hear  thee,"  exclaims  Macbeth,  when  sum- 
moned to  attend  by  the  apparition  of  an 
Armed  Head,  in  the  witches'  cave.  D'Artag- 
nan,  in  the  ante-chamber  of  M.  de  Treville, 
is  described  as  looking  with  all  his  eyes  and 
listening  with  all  his  ears,  stretching  his  five 
senses  so  as  to  lose  nothing.  The  same 
author  tells  how  Mazarin  listened,  dying  as 
he  was,  to  Anne  of  Austria,  as  ten  living  men 
could  not  have  listened.  "  Will  you  listen  ? " 
asks  a  prince  in  the  same  story ;  and  is 
answered,  "  Can  you  ask  me  ?  You  speak  of 
a  matter  of  life  or  death  to  me,  and  then 
ask  if  I  will  listen  ! " 

Vers.  11, 12.  The  door  kept  open. — In  Mrs. 
Whitney's  story  Odd  or  Even  ?  she  gives 
the  following  ingenious  interpretation  of  a 
declaration  which  has  puzzled  many  people 
(Matt.  xiii.  13-16).  It  is  given  in  a  conversa- 
tion between  Mr.  Kings  worth,  her  ideal 
minister,  and  Philip  Merri weather,  a  young 
man  of  sceptical  tendencies.  "  Therefore 
speak  I  to  them  in  parables:  because  they 
seeing  see  not ;  and  hearing  they  hear  not, 
neither  do  they  understand.  .  .  .  Lest  at 
any  time  they  should  see  with  their  eyes, 
and  hear  with  their  ears,  and  should  under- 
stand with  their  heart,  and  should  be  con- 
verted, and  I  should  heal  them,"  quoted  Mr. 
Kingsworth  again.  "That  is  the  heart  of 
the  Healer,  waiting  for  them  that  shall  fall 
down  from  their  mountain."  But  Flip  was 
still  only  climbing  his  mountain.  He  was 
pleased  at  every  clutch  and  foothold  he  got, 
that  seemed  to  lift  him  higher.  "  And  yet 
the  fog  is  put  there  on  purpose !  it  says  so." 
The  boy  did  not  dare  to  say  "  He,"—"  ■ lest ' 
they  should  see,  and  understand — and  the 
rest  of  it!  That's  just  the  way.  Why 
couldn't  it  be  plain,  if  it  meant  to  be  ? " 
"  Suppose  you  fasten  the  door,  at  night, 
•  lest '  anv  unauthorised  person  should  come 
in  ?  "  "  Well,  I  do  exactly  that,"  said  Flip, 
wondering  what  it  justified  in  respect  of  a 
door  that  he  was  contending  should  be  freely 
open.  "  And  suppose  you  leave  it  unlocked, 
4  lest '  your  brother  should  come  home  at 
midnight?"  Whether  he  was  puzzled,  or 
whether  he  began  to  see,  Flip  made  no 
answer.  "  Don't  you  see  there  are  two '  lests ' 
— a  providing  against,  and  a  providing  for  ? " 
asked  the  minister.  "  Take  those  words  with 
the  second  'lest.'  'I  speak  these  things  to 
them  in  parables  ;  I  put  them  away,  in  their 
memory,  as  in  My  creation;  so  that  they 
may  see,  even  without  perceiving,  and  hear, 
even  if  they  cannot  understand  :  in  case  that 
at  any  time  they  should  see  with  their 
spiritual  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  spiritual 
ears,  and  understand  with  the  very  heart  of 
them,  and  be  converted,  and  I  should  heal 
them.'  Isn't  the  waiting  there,  in  those 
words  ?  "    "  You  have  altered  a  good  many 

168 


of  them."  "I  have  chosen  between  those 
two  'lests,'"  said  Mr.  Kingsworth.  "That 
interpreted  all  the  sentence,  which  I  tried 
to  translate,  not  change.  Because,  other- 
wise, how  do  they  agree  with  those  different 
words :  •  I  am  come  unto  you,  that  you 
might  have  life ' ;  and,  '  I  came  to  call  the 
sinners '  ?  " 

No  spiritual  impression. — In  a  room  glazed 
with  yellow  glass  the  photographer  would 
get  heat  and  light  from  the  sunshine,  but 
he  could  not  produce  a  photograph,  because 
yellow  glass,  while  it  lets  in  the  light  and 
heat  of  the  sun,  keeps  out  the  chemical  or 
actinic  ray  necessary  to  produce  a  portrait. 
And  so  it  is  true  of  many  that,  while  they 
live  in  the  free  light  and  warmth  of  the 
gospel  day,  while  the  true  Light  which 
lighteth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the 
world  shines  upon  and  all  around  them, 
they  are  not  savingly  changed,  they  are  not 
transformed  by  the  light  into  the  image  of 
God.  And  the  reason  of  this  is  that  they 
have  a  yellow  spot  in  their  spiritual  eye, 
and  live,  as  it  were,  in  a  house  of  yellow 
glass.  They  get  the  light  and  the  heat  of 
the  gospel,  but  not  its  renewing  power. 
Their  eye  is  not  single,  and  therefore  their 
whole  body  is  not  full  of  light.  The  medium 
in  which  they  live  and  move  and  have  their 
being  is  unfavourable  to  spiritual  impres- 
sions, and  therefore  they  are  not  spiritually 
impressed. 

Ver.  12.  Does  God  harden  hearts  ? — 
Suppose  two  merchant  vessels  out  on  the 
same  sea,  sailing  before  the  same  wind, 
which  comes  prosperously  on  their  quarter. 
Suddenly  upon  one  of  them  a  mutiny  is 
organised ;  the  captain  is  murdered,  and 
the  crew  put  in  irons  ;  then  the  captors  turn 
on  their  course  exactly,  face  in  the  opposite 
direction,  and  start  for  some  desolate  pirates' 
isle,  where  they  may  beach  their  stolen 
cargo  in  safety.  The  same  wind  which 
drives  the  honest  ship  along  now  drives  the 
wicked  one  too,  and  so  it  helps  in  the  crime. 
But  all  it  really  does  to  help  it  is — to  keep 
blowing  on.  God  never  does  anything  to 
harden  a  heart  which  would  not  soften  it  if 
properly  received. 

Ver.  14.  Sowing  the  Word. — Doubt  not, 
but  earnestly  believe,  that  if  "long  sleeps 
the  summer  in  the  seed,"  the  summer  is  in 
the  seed,  if  the  seed  sown  by  you  is  indeed 
the  Word  of  God ;  and  even  now  it  may  be 
shining  and  ripening  in  many  a  changed 
heart  passed  far  out  of  your  reach  and  ken. 
The  sailor  keeping  watch  on  the  midnight 
sea,  praying  as  he  watches  ;  the  miner 
toiling  for  gold  in  some  Queensland  gully, 
and  thinking  of  the  better  treasure  in  the 
heavenly  country  towards  which,  by  words 
of  yours,  his  feet  are  moving  ;  the  shepherd 
among  the  wooded  valleys  of  New  Zealand, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


saying  over  to  himself  the  Shepherd's  Psalm 
taught  him  by  you ;  the  settler's  wife  in 
some  rude  cabin  on  the  Pacific  slope,  train- 
ing her  children  as  you  trained  her,  may, 
without  your  knowing  it,  have  found  the 
Pearl  of  great  price,  which,  but  for  you, 
they  would  never  have  found  ;  through  you, 
also,  may  be  helping  others  to  find  it. — 
Bishop  Thorold. 

Vitality  of  the  Word. — The  Word  has  all 
the  hidden  vitality  of  a  seed.  Take  up  a 
grain  of  wheat  and  examine  it  ;  ask  yourself 
where  its  life  lies.  Certainly  not  on  the 
surface  ;  nor  yet  in  its  inner  compartments, 
so  far  as  our  senses  can  detect.  Chemistry 
will  inform  you  as  to  every  material  element 
it  contains,  and  leave  you  as  far  as  ever  from 
knowing  or  seeing  the  very  thing  that  makes 
it  a  seed — that  mysterious  something  we 
call  its  life.  Within  that  little  mass  of 
matter  there  lies  a  force  which  sun,  rain, 
and  soil  shall  call  forth  with  voices  it  will 
hear  and  obey.  God  hath  given  it  a  body, 
and  to  every  seed  a  body  of  its  own.  The 
hidden  life  and  unwearied  force  of  the  wheat- 
grain  furnish  analogies  to  the  Word  of  God. 
Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever.  It 
is  an  eternal  seed,  to  which  God  has  given 
eternal  form  ;  but  its  vitality  is  not  lodged 
where  we  can  see  and  analyse  it. 

Vers.  15-19.  Three  kinds  of  unprofitable 
hearers. — There  are  three  different  kinds  of 
hearers  of  the  Word, — those  like  a  sponge, 
that  suck  up  good  and  bad  together,  and  let 
both  run  out  immediately ;  those  like  a  sand- 
glass, that  let  what  enters  in  at  one  ear  pass 
out  at  the  other,  hearing  without  thinking ; 
those  like  a  strainer,  letting  go  the  good 
and  retaining  the  bad. 

Thought  dissipated. — Have  you  ever  seen 
grain  scattered  on  the  road  ?  The  sparrow 
from  the  housetop  and  the  chickens  from 
the  barn  rush  in,  and  within  a  minute  after 
it  has  been  scattered  not  the  shadow  of  a 
grain  is  left.  This  is  the  picture,  not  of 
thought  crushed  by  degrees,  but  of  thought 
dissipated,  and  no  man  can  tell  how  or  when 
it  went.  Swiftly  do  these  winged  thoughts 
come  when  we  pray,  or  read,  or  listen  ;  in 
our  inattentive,  sauntering,  wayside  hours; 
and,  before  we  can  be  upon  guard,  the  very 
trace  of  holier  purposes  has  disappeared.  In 
/  our  purest  moods,  when  we  kneel  to  pray,  or 
gather  round  the  altar,  down  into  the  very 
Holy  of  Holies  sweep  these  foul  birds  of  the 
air,  villain  fancies,  demon  thoughts.  The 
germ  of  life,  the  small  seed  of  impression,  is 
gone — where,  you  know  not.  But  it  is  gone. 
Inattentiveness  of  spirit,  produced  by  want 
of  spiritual  interest,  is  the  first  cause  of 
disappointment. — F.  W.  Robertson. 

The  trodden  heart. — There  was  an  old 
legend  of  a  goblin  horseman  that  galloped 
over  men's  fields  at  night ;  and  wherever  his 


foot  struck,  the  soil  was  so  blasted  that 
nothing  would  ever  grow  on  it  again.  So  is 
it  with  the  heart  over  which  the  beastly  feet 
of  lust,  sensuality,  greed,  selfishness,  passion, 
are  allowed  to  tread.  The  heart  is  never  the 
same  again. 

Hardened  by  evangelical  teaching. — Speak- 
ing of  a  certain  place  in  which  he  conducted 
a  mission,  the  Rev.  W.  Haslam  says :  "  It 
was  certainly  a  very  difficult  place,  for  the 
congregation  had  been  hardened  with  over- 
much evangelical  teaching  of  a  general  kind. 
Seed  had  been  abundantly  sown  without 
any  due  preparation  of  the  ground.  It  was 
amazing  to  witness  the  hardness  of  the 
people,  and  their  unwillingness  to  yield." 

No  refuge  from  the  storm. — Some  years 
ago  two  undergraduates  went  up  one  of  the 
highest  mountains  in  Switzerland.  They 
would  not  have  a  guide.  They  said  they  had 
been  there  before,  and  they  feared  nothing. 
Their  friends  watched  them  with  their  tele- 
scopes, and  saw  them  reach  the  top,  and 
then  came  a  storm  of  snow  which  lasted  a 
week.  Nobody  could  reach  them,  and  they 
never  came  down  alive.  When  found,  they 
were  close  to  a  track  by  which,  if  they  had 
had  a  guide,  they  could  have  come  down  in 
safety  when  the  snow  first  fell.  So  it  is 
that  many  a  proud  philosopher  of  our  time, 
resting  on  reason  and  Lis  own  conceit,  climbs 
the  highest  steeps  of  learning  ;  then  comes 
the  storm,  the  icy  hand  of  Death  is  on  his 
shoulder,  and  he  knows  not  where  to  turn, 
because  he  has  forsaken  the  Guide  of  his 
youth,  the  Light  and  Life  of  men ! 

Unpromising,  but  not  hopeless. — Many  years 
ago  my  friend  Colonel  Boyd,  of  Wytheville, 
Virginia,  gave  to  a  Frenchman,  by  the  name 
of  Hartmann,  a  rocky  hillside.  Everywhere 
the  hard,  blue  limestone  protruded.  A  more 
unpromising  garden  could  not  be  imagined. 
In  the  spring  the  warmth  and  moisture  made 
the  hillside  green  for  a  little  while,  but  the 
first  drought  scorched  it  dry  and  brown,  y'  ' 
But  Hartmann  worked  away,  patiently,  per- 
severingly,  systematically.  He  dug  out  the 
rocks,  he  deepened  the  soil,  he  irrigated 
from  the  neighbouring  brook.  Years  passed, 
and  the  "  Frenchman's  Garden,"  as  every- 
body called  it,  was  the  most  beautiful,  the 
most  picturesque,  the  most  fruitful,  the  most 
profitable  garden  in  all  that  part  of  Virginia. 
So,  after  all,  that  peculiar  kind  of  human 
hearts  which  the  Lord  described  as  "  stony 
places  "  are  not  absolutely  hopeless.  These 
shallow  hearts  may  be  deepened.  This  senti- 
mental religion  may  be  enriched.  The  Word 
of  God  may  be  cultivated  until  it  grows  to 
be  a  fruitful  plant  in  even  these  unpromising 
lives.  From  being  a  mere  enthusiasm,  or 
a  dead  orthodoxy,  religion  may  become  a 
life,  a  deep-rooted  life,  a  life  hid  with  Christ 
in  God.— J?.  S.  Barrett. 

Fugitive  impressions. — When  Daguerre  was 
working  at  his  sun-pictures  his  great  difii« 

169 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


culty  was  to  fix  them.  The  light  came  and 
imprinted  the  image ;  but  when  the  tablet 
was  drawn  from  the  camera,  the  image  had 
vanished.  Our  lamentation  is  like  this  ;  our 
want  the  same — a  fixing  solution  which  shall 
arrest  and  detain  the  fugitive  impressions. 
He  discovered  the  chemical  power  which 
turned  the  evanescent  into  the  durable. 
There  is  a  Divine  agency  at  hand  that  can 
fix  the  truth  upon  the  heart  of  man — God's 
Holy  Spirit. 

Ver.  17.  Want  of  root. — Men  have  no  root 
in  themselves.  That  is  the  best  account  that 
I  can  give  of  the  vast  failure  of  our  systems 
of  general  education.  I  am  not  thinking  of 
elementary  schools  merely,  but  of  all  schools. 
They  are  able  to  produce  a  certain  measure 
of  success.  In  the  fairly  good  schools  boys 
and  girls  learn  something,  and  sometimes  a 
good  deal.  Eighty,  ninety,  and  ninety-five 
per  cent,  of  the  scholars  in  our  common 
schools,  under  energetic  and  able  teachers, 
read  fairly,  write  fairly,  become  fairly  suc- 
cessful in  arithmetic.  In  schools  of  a  higher 
class  they  will  learn  something  of  Greek 
and  Latin  grammar,  and  they  can  make  a 
fair  show  in  arithmetic.  But  though  the 
teaching  may  not  be  mechanical,  there  is 
something  mechanical  in  the  result,  and  in 
a  few  years  after  they  have  left  school  it  is 
quite  clear  that  the  mind  of  an  immense 
proportion  of  those  who  have  been  taught 
is  dead ;  it  does  not  grow.  We  discover 
that  large  numbers  of  those  who  have  passed 
through  the  schools  have  never  grasped  for 
themselves,  as  the  roots  of  a  tree  grasp  the 
soil,  any  subject  that  sustains  intellectual 
activity.  The  mischief  is  not  merely  that 
they  have  forgotten  milch  that  they  learned ; 
that  cannot  be  helped.  I  am  not  sure  that 
we  ought  to  cherish  any  wish  that  it  should 
be  helped.  I  remember  meeting  an  eminent 
man  not  long  ago  who  was  a  high  Wrangler 
at  Cambridge,  and  he  said  he  was  thankful 
that  he  had  forgotten  most  of  the  mathe- 
matics he  knew  when  he  took  his  degree.  I  do 
not  complain  that  what  was  learned  has  been 
forgotten,  but  that  there  is  nothing,  no 
science,  no  history,  no  province  of  speculation 
or  of  art  in  which  large  numbers  of  those 
who  have  received  an  early  education  have 
a  real,  personal,  enduring  interest.  One  of 
the  first  objects  of  every  wise  teacher  should 
be  to  get  the  mind  of  his  pupils  to  strike 
root  into  something,  it  does  not  much  matter 
what,  but  something  that  will  stimulate  and 
maintain  intellectual  activity.  When  once 
that  miracle  is  wrought,  and  the  mind  has 
a  root  of  its  own,  the  great  work  of  the  edu- 
cationist is  done.  Take  another  illustration. 
How  many  men  succeed  in  maintaining  a 
fairly  excellent  character,  because  they  are 
sheltered  from  moral  peril  by  the  circum- 
stances that  environ  them,  and  supported  in 
well-doing  by  the  general  opinion  of  those 

170 


with  whom  they  are  most  intimately  asso- 
ciated !  Let  the  circumstances  change,  place 
them  among  men  with  a  lower  sense  of 
honour,  with  less  ideas  of  honesty  and  of 
truthfulness,  place  them  in  circumstances  in 
which  it  will  look  safe  to  violate  some  of  the 
laws  which  they  now  honour,  and  what  will 
become  of  them  then  1  If  the  moral  opinion 
of  society  is  to  be  sound,  there  must  be  men 
who  give  an  ethical  law  to  others,  and  do  not 
merely  receive  it  from  others— men  with  an 
ethical  idea  of  their  own,  to  which  they  are 
loyal  at  all  costs,  men  who  have  discovered 
eternal  laws  which  they  must  obey  whatever 
comes  of  their  obedience.  Such  men  have  a 
root  in  themselves;  they  are  not  to  be  bribed 
into  wrong-doing  by  the  promise  of  wealth 
or  of  honour  ;  they  are  not  to  be  terrified  into 
virtue  by  the  penalties  of  law  or  by  the  fear 
of  loss  of  property  or  of  social  position.  They 
are  faithful  because  the  law  that  has  been 
revealed  to  them  is  too  august  to  be  broken. 
— R.  W.  Dale,  D.D. 

Vers.  18,  19.  The  Word  choked.— What  an 
illustration  of  this  the  speech  which  a  dying, 
despairing  man  addressed  to  one  under  whose 
ministry  he  had  sat  for  twenty  years  !  "  I 
have  never,"  he  cried,  "  heard  a  single  ser- 
mon !  "  The  minister,  to  whom  his  face  was 
quite  familiar,  who  had  known  him  for  years 
as  a  regular  attendant  at  church,  looked 
astonished,  fancied  he  was  raving  under  the 
delirium  of  his  approaching  end.  No,  not  at 
all !  The  man  was  in  his  sad  and  sober 
senses.  "  I  attended  church,"  he  exclaimed, 
"  but  my  habit  was,  so  soon  as  you  began  the 
sermon,  to  begin  a  review  of  last  week's 
trade,  and  to  anticipate  and  arrange  the 
business  of  the  next."  Now,  in  like  manner, 
to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  Satan  deals  with 
thousands  who  occupy  pews  in  the  church. 

Good  impressions  destroyed. — Robert  Burns 
— Who  had  times  of  serious  reflexion,  in  one 
of  which,  as  recorded  by  his  own  pen,  he 
beautifully  compares  himself,  in  the  review 
of  his  past  life,  to  a  lonely  man  walking  amid 
the  ruins  of  a  noble  temple,  where  pillars 
stand  dismantled  of  their  capitals,  and 
elaborate  works  of  purest  marble  lie  on  the 
ground,  overgrown  by  tall,  foul,  rank  weeds — 
was  once  brought,  as  I  have  heard,  under 
deep  convictions.  He  was  in  great  alarm. 
The  seed  of  the  Word  had  begun  to  grow. 
He  sought  counsel  from  one  called  a  minister 
of  the  gospel.  Alas  that  in  that  crisis  of 
his  history  he  should  have  trusted  the  helm 
to  the  hands  of  such  a  pilot !  This  so-called 
minister  laughed  at  the  poet's  fears — bade 
him  dance  them  away  at  balls,  drown  them 
in  bowls  of  wine,  fly  from  these  phantoms 
to  the  arms  of  pleasure.  Fatal,  too  pleasant 
advice  !  He  followed  it :  and  "  the  lusts  of 
other  things  "  entering  in,  choked  the  Word. 

Strangled. — In  the  gardens  of  Hampton 
Court  you  will  see  many  trees  entirely  van- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


quished  and  well-nigh  strangled  by  huge 
coils  of  ivy,  which  are  wound  about  them 
like  the  snakes  around  the  unhappy  Laocoon  ; 
there  is  no  untwisting  the  folds,  they  are  too 
giant-like,  and  fast  fixed,  and  every  hour  the 
rootlets  of  the  climber  are  sucking  the  life 
out  of  the  unhappy  tree.  Yet  there  was  a 
day  when  the  ivy  was  a  tiny  aspirant,  only 
asking  a  little  aid  in  climbing ;  had  it  been 
denied  then  the  tree  had  never  become  its 
victim  ;  but  by  degrees  the  humble  weakling 
grew  in  strength  and  arrogance,  and  at  last 
it  assumed  the  mastery,  and  the  tall  tree 
became  the  prey  of  the  creeping,  insinuating 
destroyer.  The  moral  is  too  obvious.  Sor- 
rowfully do  we  remember  many  noble 
characters  which  have  been  ruined  little  by 
little  by  insinuating  habits.  Covetousness, 
drink,  the  love  of  pleasure,  and  pride,  have 
often  been  the  ivy  that  has  wrought  the 
ruin. 

Blinded  by  self-interest. — Many  a  man  of 
influence  and  position  is  blinded  by  the 
interests  that  absorb  his  thought.  From  the 
summit  of  East  Rock  in  New  Haven  there 
is  a  magnificent  view.  The  city  has  wisely 
taken  the  place  as  a  public  park,  and  now 
its  paths  are  daily  thronged  with  pilgrims  to 
that  shrine  of  beauty.  But  on  that  rock  has 
been  found  a  counterfeiter's  cave.  The  time 
was  when  those  were  on  the  hill  who  cared 
nothing  for  the  wondrous  view,  but  whose 
only  desire  was  to  hide  themselves  in  the 
cave  to  pursue  a  nefarious  business.  So 
long  as  they  were  there  the  glories  of  the 
out-stretching  valley  and  the  distant  sea 
were  unseen  by  them.  It  is  just  such  a 
difficulty  that  hinders  men  from  seeing  the 
loveliness  of  Christ.  They  are  busy  in  caves 
of  worldliness.  They  see  nothing  because 
they  keep  themselves  where  they  cannot  see. 

Ver.  20.  Receptiveness. — "  Receive  "  is  the 
one  word  that  describes  the  healthful  con- 
duct of  human  life.  We  receive  being  at 
birth ;  we  do  nothing  but  receive  for  the 
months  that  follow — receive  mother-milk, 
clothing,  warmth,  care.  The  lad  receives 
protection,  advice,  and  wisdom,  if  indeed  he 
does  receive  ;  for,  rejecting  these,  he  rejects 
his  destiny,  to  find  out  his  own  way,  which 
is  death.  We  receive  pickaxe  and  pen,  and 
our  place  in  the  world.  Old  men  smile,  as 
they  hear  proud  youth  talk  of  "  hewing  a 
way "  or  "  winning  a  way  "  through  life  to 
fortune,  as  if  there  could  be  any  path  dis- 
covered or  cut  out  that  was  not  hard-beaten 
like  a  Broadway  by  the  thousands  who  have 
trodden  it  before  us.  In  all  honourable 
vocations  the  road  is  Patience,  Industry, 
Frugality,  Knowledge.  And,  if  one  go 
higher,  Repentance,  the  New  Heart  through 
Christ,  and  the  common  gate  to  heaven. 
The  youth  makes  his  experiment.  At  times 
he  seems  to  be  hewing,  winning,  and  invent- 
ing ;  but  afterwards  reviewing,  he  perceives 


he  was  but  lifting  up  a  hewing  hand  to  cut 
away  the  obstacles  to  his  receiving.  As 
when  one  bursts  a  prison  wall,  or  emerges 
toil  fully  from  a  wood,  he  has  but  to  receive 
the  down-pouring  sun.  Old  age  testifies, 
"All  my  battles  have  in  fact  been  against 
Self,  that  I  might  not  reject,  against  Others 
that  I  might  not  be  defrauded  of,  the  good 
which  God  meant  me  to  receive.'' — E.  J. 
Haynes. 

Vers.  21,  22.  The  Christian's  light.— This 
statement  of  Christ's  is  well  illustrated  by 
the  story  of  the  Calais  lighthouse  keeper, 
who,  when  boasting  of  the  brilliancy  of  his 
lamp,  was  asked  what  would  happen  if  it 
were  allowed  to  go  out,  or  if  the  reflectors 
became  dim.  "  Impossible,"  he  replied,  "  for 
yonder,  where  nothing  can  be  seen  by  us, 
there  are  ships  sailing  to  every  harbour  of 
the  sea ;  if  to-night  I  failed  in  my  duty, 
some  one  might  be  shipwrecked.  No  ;  1  like 
to  think  that  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world 
are  fixed  on  my  light."  This  man  could 
appreciate  what  Christ  taught  His  disciples 
when  He  said  that  they  were  to  be  like 
Safed,  the  city  set  upon  a  hill  which  could 
not  be  hid,  and  to  remember  that,  inasmuch 
as  they  were  the  light  of  the  world,  they 
must  shine  before  men. 

Influence . — A  man  once  said,  "  I  have  no 
more  influence  than  a  farthing  rushlight." 
"  Well,"  was  the  reply,  "  a  farthing  rushlight 
can  do  a  good  deal :  it  can  set  a  haystack 
on  fire ;  it  can  burn  down  a  house — yea, 
more,  it  will  enable  a  poor  creature  to  read 
a  chapter  out  of  God's  Book.  Go  your  way, 
friend ;  let  your  farthing  rushlight  so  shine 
before  men,  that  others,  seeing  your  good 
works,  may  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in 
heaven." 

A  good  life. — Julius  Drusus,  a  Roman 
tribune,  had  a  house  so  situated  that  several 
of  its  apartments  lay  exposed  to  the  view  of 
the  neighbourhood.  A  person  came  to  him, 
and  offered  for  five  talents  so  to  alter  it  as 
that  it  should  not  be  liable  to  that  incon- 
venience. "  I  will  give  thee  ten  talents," 
said  Drusus,  "  if  thou  canst  make  my  house 
conspicuous  in  every  room  of  it,  so  that  all 
the  city  may  behold  in  what  manner  I  lead 
my  life." 

Ver.  22.  Hidden,  to  he  revealed.—  Many 
things  are  concealed,  both  in  nature  and  by 
art,  though  the  concealment  is  by  no  means 
designed  to  be  permanent.  Look,  e.g.,  at  the 
almost  measureless  beds  of  coal,  hidden  for 
ages  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  but  designed 
by  Providence  to  be  revealed  when  necessity 
should  arise.  The  precise  time  for  the  un- 
veiling it  is  not  always  easy  to  decide,  because 
man's  knowledge  is  finite,  but  we  rest  assured 
that  it  will  coincide  with  the  need  for  its 
use.  It  is  a  principle  worth  bearing  in  mind 
when  human  efforts  fail ;  for  it  is  encourag- 

171 


CHAP.  IV. 

! 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MARK. 


irlg  to  know  that  such  a  result  may  be  due 
simply  to  the  fact  that  we  have  tried  un- 
consciously to  anticipate  the  fore-appointed 
time. — Dean  Luckock. 

Ver.  24.  No  loss  by  giving  away. — During 
the  summer  a  clergyman  called  on  a  lady 
who  had  a  very  fine  collection  of  roses.  She 
took  him  out  to  see  them  and  began  pluck- 
ing right  and  left.  Some  bushes  with  but  a 
single  flower  she  despoiled.  The  clergyman 
remonstrated.  "  You  are  robbing  yourself, 
dear  madam."  "  Ah,"  she  said,  "  do  you  not 
know  that  the  way  to  make  the  rosebush 
bear  is  to  pluck  its  flowers  freely  ?  I  lose 
nothing  by  what  I  give  away."  This  is  a 
universal  law.  We  never  lose  anything  by 
what  we  give  away. 

Influences  of  evil. — Sir  Peter  Lely  made  it 
a  rule  never  to  look  at  a  bad  picture,  having 
found  by  experience  that,  whenever  he  did 
so,  his  pencil  took  a  taint  from  it.  "  Apply 
this,"  adds  Bishop  Home,  "to  bad  books 
and  bad  company."  Lord  Collingwood, 
writing  to  a  young  friend,  said,  "  Hold  it  as 
a  maxim  that  you  had  better  be  alone  than 
in  mean  company,  for  the  worth  of  a  man 
will  always  be  ruled  by  that  of  his  com- 
pany." The  converse  of  course  is  only  true, 
for  nothing  is  of  greater  value  than  the  in- 
fluence of  good  surroundings  and  noble 
friends.  The  Persian  poet  Saadi  has  a  lyric 
in  which  a  clod  of  clay  is  asked  how  it  has 
come  to  smell  so  sweet.  The  clay  replies, 
"  The  sweetness  is  not  in  myself,  but  I  have 
been  lying  in  contact  with  a  rose." 

Ver.  25.  The  law  of  compensation. — We 
see  in  some  office  two  or  three  young  men. 
They  seem  to  be  of  equal  abilities,  but  one 
has  a  small  fortune  bequeathed  him.  On 
this  account,  when  a  partnership  is  vacant, 
the  opening  is  offered  to  him.  By-and-by 
some  public  appointment  is  vacant;  because 
this  man  is  possessed  of  some  wealth  he  is 
thought  to  be  a  responsible  man,  and  so  is 
chosen.  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given." 
This  is  the  ordinary  way  in  which  things 
work  in  the  world  around  us.  But  observe 
that  the  same  rule  exhibits  its  sway  in  the 
spiritual  world.  Here  is  a  man  with  a  very 
little  knowledge  of  religion,  who  has  been, 
perhaps,  much  neglected  in  his  youth,  but 
he  has  some  idea  of  God's  greatness  and 
power,  and  that  it  is  his  duty  to  go  to 
church.  In  the  house  of  God  he  comes 
under  good  influences,  and  his  conscience  is 
enlightened.  He  becomes  a  regular  attend- 
ant, and  then  a  communicant.  "  To  him 
that  hath  shall  be  given."  Or  let  the  other 
part  of  the  saying  be  taken  up.  There  is  a 
child  who  gets  some  slight  knowledge  of 
the  facts  of  Christianity  in  a  Sunday-school 
class,  but  that  knowledge  is  very  slight,  for 
the  child  is  restless  and  careless,  and  dis- 
inclined to  listen  to  anything  which  requires 

172 


attention.  Soon  the  lad  goes  to  work  for 
his  bread,  and  thinks  himself  too  much  of 
a  man  to  go  any  longer  to  Sunday  school. 
The  little  learning  he  received  soon  fades 
away,  and  from  want  of  practice  even  the 
half-learnt  art  of  reading  is  lost.  He  goes 
now  and  then  to  church,  but  is  ashamed  to 
be  unable  to  read  as  others  do  around.  And 
so  at  length,  though  living  in  a  Christian 
land,  he  becomes  as  ignorant  and  indifferent 
as  a  heathen.  "  From  him  that  hath  not," 
etc.  A  young  man  begins  to  feel,  as  he 
grows  up,  the  Divine  life  stirring  within 
him.  He  wants  to  do  something  to  help  in 
efforts  for  good  around  him,  to  take  his 
share  in  bearing  burdens.  But  he  goes  into 
business  or  enters  a  profession  or  devotes 
himself  to  society,  and  by  degrees  all  the 
pulses  of  Divine  life  beat  more  slowly;  he 
loses  an  aspiration  here — he  loses  a  scruple 
there — he  makes  an  excuse  about  that ;  and 
his  life  begins  to  dwindle,  and,  after  a  bit, 
he  becomes  like  a  bicycle  going  downhill — 
the  law  of  accelerated  motion  asserts  itself, 
and  in  the  day  of  trial  or  of  opportunity  he 
is  found  wanting  and  useless.  "  From  him 
that  hath  not,"  etc.  If  only  he  had  taken 
up  some  little  bit  of  self-denying  work,  if 
only  he  had  given  himself  to  one  thing  in 
which  he  could  help  others,  if  only  he  had 
had  the  self-forgetting  element  within  him, 
then  in  him  too  the  law  "  to  him  that  hath 
shall  be  given  "  would  have  asserted  itself — 
he  would  have  been  saved  in  the  truest 
sense. — R.  Eyton. 

Service  no  loss. — An  eminent  merchant  of 
St.  Petersburg  supported,  at  his  own  expense, 
a  number  of  missionaries  in  India.  Some  one 
asked  him  how  he  could  afford  to  do  so,  to 
which  he  replied,  "  Before  my  conversion, 
when  I  served  the  world  and  self,  I  did  it 
on  a  grand  scale  and  at  the  most  lavish 
expense ;  and  when  Christ  called  me  out 
of  darkness,  I  resolved  that  He  should  have 
more  than  I  had  ever  given  the  world.  At 
my  conversion  I  promised  I  would  give 
a  certain  per  cent,  of  what  my  business 
brought  me.  Since  t^iat  time  it  yields 
double  as  much."  So  it  is  in  our  service  for 
Christ.  God  never  allows  any  capital  to  lay 
idle,  and,  if  we  do  not  use  the  talent  given 
us,  He  takes  it,  and  gives  it  to  him  who  will 
use  it.  How  often  do  we  see  poor,  lean 
Christians  fretting  and  fuming  and  praying 
for  more  faith  and  more  strength,  when 
they  sit  still  and  will  not  use  what  they 
have! 

The  treasure  only  for  the  pure. — There  is 
an  old  church  in  Germany  with  which  a 
singular  legend  is  connected.  In  this 
church,  at  certain  times,  a  mighty  treasure 
is  said  to  become  visible  to  mortal  eyes. 
Gold  and  silver  vessels,  of  great  magnificence 
and  in  great  abundance,  are  disclosed ;  but 
only  he  who  is  free  from  sin  can  hope  to 
secure  the  precious  vessels.      This  legend 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


shadows  a  great  truth.  In  the  temple  of 
God,  in  the  Word  of  God,  are  riches  beyond 
gem  or  gold ;  but  only  the  sincere,  the  pure 
in  purpose,  can  hope  to  realise  the  Divine 
treasure.  There  must  be  in  the  truth -seeker  a 
moral  susceptibility  and  passion  for  the  light. 
Moral  increase. — There  is  an  Eastern  alle- 
gory which  teaches  the  same  lesson  as  this 
parable.  A  merchant,  going  abroad  for  a 
time,  gave  respectively  to  two  of  his  friends 
two  sacks  of  wheat  each,  to  take  care  of 
against  his  return.  Years  passed  ;  he  came 
back,  and  applied  for  them  again.  The  first 
took  him  into  his  storehouse,  and  shewed 
them  to  him ;  but  they  were  mildewed  and 
worthless.  The  other  led  him  out  into  the 
open  country,  and  pointed  out  field  after 
field  of  waving  corn,  the  produce  of  the  two 
sacks  given  him.  Said  the  merchant,  "  You 
have  been  a  faithful  friend;  give  me  two 
sacks  of  that  wheat  ;  the  rest  shall  be 
thine." 

Vers.  26,  27.  Fruit  in  after-days. — An  old 
man  was  once  at  work  in  the  field,  his  mind 
occupied  only  with  things  of  this  world. 
Suddenly  his  thoughts  wandered  back  to  his 
early  days,  and  he  remembered  how  on  one 
occasion  the  minister,  before  pronouncing 
the  parting  blessing,  had  paused,  and  re- 
minded the  ungodly  that  upon  them  no 
blessing  would  rest,  but  the  wrath  of  God 
instead.  The  remembrance  of  that  solemn 
warning — uttered  seventy  years  before — filled 
the  old  man's  heart  with  terror,  and  led  him 
to  seek  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart.  Thus 
the  words  disregarded  at  fifteen  saved  at 
eighty-five,  long  after  the  speaker  had  passed 
away  from  the  ministry  of  earth. 
^      Christian  growth  imperceptible. — It  is  the 

/    work  of  a  long  life  to  become  a  Christian. 

/''Many,  oh  !  many  a  time  are  we  tempted  to 
say,  "  I  make  no  progress  at  all.  'Tis  only 
failure  after  failure  ;  nothing  grows."  Now 
look  at  the  sea  when  the  flood  is  coming  in. 
Go  and  stand  by  the  sea-beach,  and  you 
will  think  that  the  ceaseless  flux  and  reflux 
.  is  but  retrogression  equal  to  the  advance. 
But  look  again  in  an  hour's  time,  and  the 
whole  ocean  has  advanced.  Every  advance 
has  been  beyond  the  last,  and  every  re- 
trograde movement  has  been  an  impercep- 
tible trifle  less  than  the  last.  This  is 
progress,  to  be  estimated  at  the  end  of  hours, 
not  minutes.  And  this  is  Christian  progress. 
Many  a  fluctuation,  many  a  backward  motion, 
with  a  rush  at  times  so  vehement  that  all 
seems  lost.  But  if  the  eternal  work  be  real, 
every  failure  has  been  a  real  gain,  and  the 
next  does  not  carry  us  so  far  back  as  we 
were  before.  Every  advance  is  a  real  gain, 
and  part  of  it  is  never  lost.  Both  when  we 
advance  and  when  we  fail,  we  gain.  We 
are  nearer  to  God  than  we  were. 

Ver.  28.  Slumbering  seeds. — A  gentleman 


tore  down  an  outbuilding  that  had  stood  foiO 
many  years  in  his  yard.  He  smoothed  over 
the  ground,  and  left  it.  The  warm  spring 
rains  fell  upon  it,  and  the  sunshine  flooded 
it ;  and  soon  there  sprang  up  multitudes  of 
little  flowers,  unlike  any  growing  in  the 
neighbourhood.  Where  the  building  had 
stood  was  once  a  garden,  and  the  seeds  had 
lain  in  the  soil  without  moisture,  light,  or 
warmth  all  the  years.  So  soon  as  the 
sunshine  and  the  rain  touched  them,  they 
sprang  up  into  life  and  beauty.  So  ofttimes 
the  seeds  of  truth  lie  long  in  a  human  heart, 
growing  not,  because  the  light  and  warmth 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  shut  away  from 
them  by  sin  and  unbelief;  but  after  long 
years  the  heart  is  opened  in  some  way  to 
the  heavenly  influences,  and  the  seeds,  living 
still,  shoot  up  into  beauty.  The  instructions 
of  a  pious  mother  may  lie  in  a  heart,  fruit- 
less, from  childhood  to  old  age,  and  yet  at 
last  be  the  means  of  saving  the  soul. 

The  law  of  gradual  advance. — No  nation 
comes  to  eminence  in  character,  and  to  a 
corresponding  supremacy  in  position,  with 
out  many  and  painful  preparatory  processes. 
There  is  "  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear ;  after 
that,  the  full  corn  in  the  ear."  First,  natur- 
ally, come  the  means  of  subsistence;  then, 
conveniences  ;  then,  elegancies  ;  and  only 
after  long  and  still-advancing  struggle  the 
great  achievement  of  a  perfected  civilisa- 
tion. The  cavern,  or  the  cabin;  then,  the 
house  ;  then,  the  village  ;  and  afterward 
the  city,  with  palaces  and  piers,  and  con- 
secrating temples.  The  spoken  word,  and 
the  spontaneous  song ;  then,  literature  in  its 
permanence  ;  and  not  till  long  afterward 
that  literature  in  its  various  and  copious 
departments,  of  eloquence,  science,  philo- 
sophy, poetry,  and  the  history  which  in- 
cludes and  perpetuates  all  these.  First, 
industry  ;  then,  art.  First,  hollow  logs,  and 
timorous  barks ;  and  afterward  great  ships, 
that  spread  their  wings  on  every  wind,  or 
made  the  seas  to  pause  and  throb  as  the 
pulsating  energy  thunders  above  them.  First, 
a  tribe  ;  and  then — when  years  and  genera- 
tions have  passed,  when  soldiers  have 
fought,  and  statesmen  have  planned,  when 
religions  have  diffused  their  spirit  through 
society,  and  reciprocating  industries  have 
knit  together,  when  homes  have  been  estab- 
lished, and  families  have  been  organised, 
and  parents  have  transmitted  their  qualities 
to  their  children — then  a  great,  enlightened, 
and  peaceful  commonwealth,  rich  in  all 
manhood,  replete  with  resources,  and  in- 
wardly compacted  in  vital  union:  this  is 
the  method  of  all  civilisation  ;  this  is  the 
history  of  nations. 

Vers.  31,  32.  Great  things  from  small. — 
Many  great  histories  of  blessing  may  be 
traced  back  to  a  very  small  seed.  A  woman 
whose  name  is  forgotten  dropped  a  tract  or 

178 


1 

)      CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


little  book  in  the  way  of  a  man  named 
Richard  Baxter.  He  picked  it  up  and  read 
it,  and  it  led  him  to  Christ.  He  became  a 
man  of  saintly  life,  and  wrote  a  book  entitled 
A  Call  to  the  Unconverted,  which  brought 
many  persons  to  the  Saviour,  and  among 
others  Philip  Doddridge.  Philip  Doddridge 
in  his  turn  wrote  The  Rise  and  Progress 
of  Religion,  which  led  many  into  the  king- 
dom of  God,  among  them  the  great  Wilber- 
force.  Wilberforce  wrote  A  Practical  View 
of  Christianity,  which  was  the  means  of 
saving  a  multitude,  including  Legh  Rich- 
mond. In  his  turn  Richmond  wrote  The 
Dairyman's  Daughter,  which  has  been  in- 
strumental in  the  conversion  of  thousands. 
The  dropping  of  that  one  little  tract  seemed 
a  very  small  thing  to  do;  but  see  what  a 
wonderful,  many-branched  tree  has  sprung 
from  it ! 

Faith  in  the  power  of  truth. — When  Charles 
Darwin   wrote   his    Origin   of  Species,   did 
he  believe  it  would    be    received    by    the 
scientific  world?      Most   certainly  he  did. 
But  the  scientific  world,  with  rare  exceptions, 
received  it  with  a  storm  of  derision  and 
opposition.    To  others  it  was  the  height  of 
unreason.     But  to  him  it  was  not  unreason- 
able.    Where  was  the  difference  ?    He  knew 
it  best,  saw  its  truth,  and  therefore  had 
faith  in  its  acceptance,  and  in  some  thirty 
years  the  scientific  world  has,  in  the  main, 
come  round  to  his  belief.     They  who  know 
Christianity  best  have  most    faith    in   its 
power  to  upheave  the  world.     It  still  re- 
quires a  great  deal  of  faith  to  believe  that 
the  world  will  actually  become  a  Christian 
world.     This  is  partly  because  the  world  has 
always  been  a  stiff  soil  for  any  kind  of  noble 
husbandry.     It  is  slow  to  yield  its  produce, 
and  there  are  some  terribly  tough  roots  to  be 
stubbed  up.     It  is  partly  because  of  imper- 
fection in  the  means  employed.     But  God 
works  by  imperfect  means,  or  how  would  He 
use  men  at  all  ?     He  wins  His  victories  with 
maimed  soldiers.      The   workmen  have  all 
manner  of  crotchets  of  their  own,  and  all 
manner  of  ridiculous  notions  of  the  shape 
of  the  building,  and  a  nice  piece  of  archi- 
tecture it  would  be  if  all  their  structures 
were  to  stand ;  but  the  Divine  Architect  has 
His  plan  matured  in  heavenly  wisdom,  and 
He  will  look  to  it  with  sleepless  eye  that  the 
New  Jerusalem  keeps  its  symmetry.     What 
one  man  with  a  crotchet  has  built  awry  or 
with  perishable  material,  He  sends  another 
man  with  an  opposite  crotchet  to  pull  down, 
and,  as  there  is  a  little  bit  of  right  work  in 
every  worker,  He  takes  that  out  of  him  too, 
and  the  fair  structure  rises  in  impregnable 
righteousness. —  G.  T.  Candlin. 

Seed  served  by  the  tempests. — Poly  carp, 
Bishop  of  Smyrna,  when  obliged  to  quit 
the  city  in  consequence  of  increasing  per- 
secutions, went  with  one  of  his  disciples 
to  a  region  in  the  vicinity.    In  the  cool  of 

174 


the  evening  the  bishop  was  walking  under 
the  shade  of  the  magnificent  trees  which 
stood  in  front  of  his  rural  abode  ;  here  he 
found  his  disciple  sitting  under  an  oak  tree, 
leaning  his  head  upon  his  hand,  and  weep- 
ing. Then  the  old  man  said,  "  My  son,  why 
weepest  thou  ?  "  The  disciple  replied,  "  Shall 
I  not  mourn  and  weep  when  I  think  of  the 
kingdom  of  truth  upon  earth  ?  Tempests 
are  gathering  round  it,  and  will  destroy  it. 
Many  of  its  adherents  have  become  apostates, 
and  have  denied  and  abused  the  truth, 
proving  that  unworthy  men  may  confess  it 
with  their  lips,  though  their  hearts  are  far 
from  it.  This  fills  my  heart  with  sorrow  and 
my  eyes  with  tears."  Then  Polycarp  smiled 
and  answered,  "  My  son,  the  kingdom  of 
Divine  truth  is  like  unto  a  tree  which  a 
man  reared  in  his  garden.  He  set  the  seed 
secretly  and  quietly  in  the  ground  and  left 
it ;  the  seed  put  forth  leaves,  and  the  young 
tree  grew  up  among  weeds  and  thorns. 
Soon  the  tree  reared  itself  above  them,  and 
the  weeds  died,  because  the  shadow  of  the 
branches  overcame  them.  The  tree  grew, 
and  the  wind  blew  on  it  and  shook  it,  but 
its  roots  clung  firmer  and  firmer  to  the 
ground,  taking  hold  of  the  rocks  downward, 
and  its  branches  reached  unto  heaven.  Thus 
the  tempest  served  to  increase  the  firmness 
and  strength  of  the  tree.  When  it  grew 
higher,  and  its  shadow  spread  farther,  then 
the  thorns  and  weeds  grew  again  round  the 
tree,  but  it  heeded  them  not  in  its  loftiness. 
There  it  stood,  in  calm,  peaceful  grandeur — 
a  tree  of  God  I  " 

Triumph  of  the  gospel. — Far  out  in  the 
western  main  is  a  little  island  round  which 
for  nearly  half  the  year  the  Atlantic  clangs 
his  angry  billows,  keeping  the  handful  of 
inhabitants  close  prisoners.  Most  of  it  is 
bleak  and  barre*h ;  but  there  is  one  little  bay 
rimmed  round  with  silvery  sand,  and  reflect- 
ing in  its  waters  a  slope  of  verdure.  Towards 
this  bay  one  autumn  evening,  thirteen  hundred 
years  ago,  a  rude  vessel  steered  its  course. 
It  was  a  flimsy  bark,  no  better  than  a  huge 
basket  of  osiers  covered  over  with  the  skins 
of  beasts ;  but  the  tide  was  tranquil,  and  as 
the  boatmen  plied  their  oars  they  raised  the 
voice  of  psalms.  Skimming  across  the  bay, 
they  beached  their  coracle  and  stepped  on 
shore — about  thirteen  in  number.  On  the 
green  slope  they  built  a  few  hasty  huts  and 
a  tiny  Christian  temple.  The  freight  of  that 
little  ship  was  the  gospel,  and  the  errand  of 
the  saintly  strangers  was  to  tell  benighted 
heathen  about  Jesus  and  His  love.  From 
the  favoured  soil  of  Ireland  they  had  brought 
a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  now  they 
sowed  it  in  Iona.  In  the  conservatory  of 
their  little  church  it  throve,  till  it  was  fit 
to  be  planted  out  on  the  neighbouring  main- 
land. To  the  Picts  with  their  tattooed 
faces,  to  the  Druids  peeping  and  muttering 
in  their   dismal    groves,    the    missionaries 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   IV. 


u 


preached  the  gospel.  That  gospel  triumphed. 
The  groves  were  felled,  and  where  once 
they  stood  rose  the  house  of  prayer.  Planted 
out  on  the  bleak  moorland,  the  little  seed 
became  a  mighty  tree,  so  that  the  hills  of 
Caledonia  were  covered  with  the  shade  ;  nor 
must  Scotland  ever  forget  the  seedling  of 
Iona,  and  the  labours  of  Columba  with  his 
meek  Culdees. 

The  Church's  expansion. — There  is  a  fairy 
tale  which  speaks  of  a  magic  tent,  no  bigger 
than  a  walnut  shell,  whose  powers  were  very 
wonderful.  Placed  in  the  king's  audience 
chamber,  it  expanded  into  a  gorgeous  canopy 
over  his  throne.  Placed  in  the  courtyard,  it 
became  a  spacious  tent,  which  provided 
accommodation  for  the  royal  household. 
Placed  without  the  gates,  it  widened  its 
borders  until  the  plain  was  covered  by 
a  glistening  encampment,  beneath  whose 
shelter  a  great  army  might  find  ample  room. 
And  so  it  was  capable  of  infinite  expansion 
according  to  the  requirements  of  its  owner. 
Well,  that  magic  tent  may  serve  as  an 
emblem  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  At  first 
it  was  only  a  little  one,  but  with  every  year 
it  has  expanded,  and  widened  its  borders, 
and  become  more  ample  and  majestic.  Mul- 
titudes whom  no  man  can  number,  from 
every  nation  under  heaven,  have  sought  its 
shelter.  And  it  shall  continue  to  grow  until 
all  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  have  become 
the  kingdoms  of  God  and  of  His  Christ. 

Ver.  38.  Christ  sometimes  seems  to  sleep 
in  our  hearts,  as  He  did  in  the  ship,  when 
temptation  assails.  It  is  but  to  try  our 
faith,  for  if  He  be  there  we  are  safe.  It  is 
recorded  of  St.  Catherine  of  Siena  that,  on 
one  occasion,  after  being  subjected  to  most 
horrible  temptation  in  thought  for  several 
days,  during  which  God  seemed  to  have 
hidden  His  face  from  her,  when  the  tempta- 
tion, to  which  she  had  never  consented,  had 
passed  away,  and  she  felt  again  her  Lord's 
presence  within  her,  she  said  to  Him,  *'  O 
Lord,  where  wast  Thou  when  I  was  so 
tempted  ?  "  "  In  thy  heart,  My  child,"  was 
the  reply ;  "  if  I  had  not  been  there,  thou 
wouldst  have  yielded." 

Safety  where  Christ  is. — The  greatest  hero 
of  antiquity,  once  exposed  to  the  dangers  of 
shipwreck,  roused  the  sinking  spirits  of  his 
crew  by  crying  aloud  amidst  the  din  of  the 
winds  and  waves,  and  exclaiming  to  the 
helmsman  of  the  vessel,  almost  ready  to 
desert  his  charge,  "  The  vessel  which  carries 
Cassar  and  his  fortunes  can  never  sink ! " 
Might  not  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  have 
learnt  a  lesson  even  from  the  heathen  con- 
queror, and  applied  his  words  in  their  truest 
and  highest  form  ? — "  The  vessel  that  carries 
Jesus  can  never  perish  !  " 

The  world  in  God's  hands. — In  the  Fiji 
Islands  a  man-of-war  was  overtaken  by  a 
storm.    The  commander,  instead  of  trusting 


to  the  anchor,  got  up  steam  and  plunged 
right  into  the  hell  of  waters  that  seethed 
around  him.  The  vessel,  after  moments  of 
suspense,  began  to  make  headway,  and  soon 
rose  and  fell  on  the  waves  of  the  open  sea. 
We,  too,  are  going  ahead.  We  have  a  tre- 
mendous propelling  power,  not  the  gates  of 
hell  will  prevail  against  it.  When  a  man 
gets  into  a  moody  state  about  the  outlook  in 
the  world,  he  should  go  and  take  a  night's 
sleep,  and  let  God  look  after  His  own  world. 
What  did  these  fishermen  take  our  Lord 
for  ?  They  forgot ;  they  should  have  remem- 
bered their  sailing  orders,  which  were  bound 
to  be  carried  out. 

The  winds  in  God's  hands. — A  coasting 
vessel  was  caught  in  a  trap  on  the  east 
coast  of  Scotland.  That  is  a  bay,  crescent- 
shaped,  in  which  vessels,  in  the  stress  of 
a  storm,  take  refuge,  and  are  sometimes 
caught  in  it.  This  vessel  was  beating  to 
get  out  of  the  trap.  The  chances  were  all 
against  her.  As  the  captain  kicked  off  his 
sea-boots  preparatory  to  doing  battle  with 
the  waves,  when  the  boat  would  founder  on 
the  rocks,  he  thought  of  his  wife,  in  a 
neighbouring  town,  and  his  little  girl.  Be- 
fore the  vessel  struck  he  thought  of  Him 
who  stilled  the  waves  on  the  Lake  of  Galilee. 
He  went  to  his  cabin,  and  he  was  heard  to 
say,  "  O  God,  give  us  but  two  points,  just 
two  points!"  He  came  on  deck,  and  the 
wind  had  shifted  just  two  points.  They 
weathered  that  strip  of  land  and  escaped 
from  the  trap  into  the  open  sea.  Do  you 
believe  that?  Do  you  believe  that  it  is 
God's  world,  that  He  holds  the  winds  in  His 
fists,  and  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  His 
hands  ? 

Ver.  41.  "  What  manner  of  man  ?  " — Be 
it  legend  or  history,  the  story  of  royal  Cnut 
on  the  seashore,  forbidding,  at  his  flatterers' 
instigation,  or  by  his  own  desire  to  rebuke 
their  folly,  forbidding  the  farther  approach 
of  the  incoming  tide,  is  pregnant  with  in- 
struction. The  royal  Dane  might  be  a  man 
of  men,  but  the  surging  waves  were  not 
obedient  unto  his  voice.  King  though  he 
was,  the  tide  was  responseless  as  the  deaf 
adder  to  any  charming  of  his,  charmed  he 
never  so  wisely,  enjoined  he  never  so 
sternly.  What  manner  of  man,  then,  but 
the  Son  of  Man  ?  What  manner  of  king  but 
the  King  of  kings  ?  An  older  king  than 
Cnut,  and  not  a  wiser,  not  only  lashed  the 
winds  that  blew  contrary  to  his  will,  but 
bound  the  sea  with  fetters,  after  a  sort : 
"  Ipsum  compedibus  qui  vinxerat  Enno- 
sigaeum."  Much  good  it  did  him :  witness  his 
return  from  his  great  expedition,  in  a  poor 
skiff,  wind-tossed  across  waves  red  with  the 
blood  of  his  slaughtered  host.  The  stars  in 
their  courses  once  fought  against  Sisera, 
and  the  fettered  waves  were  little  more 
propitious  to  speed  the  fortunes  of  Xerxes. 

175 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


He  might  have  spared  his  chains.  At  any 
rate  he  lost  his  army.  Archdeacon  Hare 
practically  applied  the  extravagance  of  the 
Great  King,  as  they  of  Persia  were  styled,  in 
designating  the  present  (or,  rather,  what 
was  then  the  present)  as  an  age  when  men 
will  scoff  at  the  madness  of  Xerxes,  yet 
themselves  try  to  fling  their  chains  over  the 
ever-rolling,  irrepressible  ocean  of  thought ; 
nay,  they  will  scoop  out  a  mimic  sea  in 
their  pleasure  ground,  he  goes  on  to  say, 
and  make  it  ripple  and  bubble,  and  spout 
up  prettily  into  the  air,  and  then  fancy  they 
are  taming  the  Atlantic,  which,  however, 
keeps  advancing  upon  them,  until  it  sweeps 
them  away  with  their  toys. — F.  Jacox. 

Mr.  Carlyle  made  a  picturesque  applica- 
tion of  the  royal  Dane's  injunction  to  the 
waves,  in  his  survey  of  the  advancing  tide 
of  the  French  Revolution — grim  host  march- 
ing on,  the  black-browed  Marseillese  in  the 
van,  with  hum  and  murmur,  far  heard  ;  like 
the  ocean  tide,  "  drawn  up,  as  if  by  Luna 
and   Influences,  from    the    great    deep    of 


waters,  they  roll  gleaming  on ;  no  king, 
Cnut  or  Louis,  can  bid  them  roll  back.'' 
To  quite  another  effect  is  Judge  Haliburton's 
application  of  the  incident,  in  his  panegyric 
on  the  capabilities  of  the  Southampton 
docks.  It  was  here,  he  says,  that  Cnut  sat 
in  his  armchair,  to  show  his  courtiers  (after 
he  gave  up  drinking  and  murder)  that, 
though  he  was  a  mighty  prince,  he  could 
not  control  the  sea.  "  Well,  what  Cnut 
could  not  do,  your  dock  company  has  ac- 
complished. It  has  actually  said  to  the  sea, 
'Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther'; 
and  the  waves  have  obeyed  the  mandate." — 
Ibid. 

Some  dream,  says  Cowper,  that 
..."  they  can  silence  when  they  will 
The  storm  of  passion,  and  say,  '  Peace,  be 

still': 
But  '  Thus  far  and  no  farther,'  when  ad- 
dressed 
To  the  wild  wave,  or  wilder  human  breast, 
Implies  authority  that  never  can, 
That  never  ought  to  be  the  lot  of  man." 


CHAPTER  V. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Gadarenes. — Gerasenes  is  undoubtedly  the  true  reading  here,  and  in  Origen's  time  it 
was  the  prevalent  one  ;  "  but  the  copyists,  thinking  this  referred  to  the  well-known  Gerasa  in 
Gilead,  and  knowing  that  the  miracle  could  not  have  occurred  there,  at  a  distance  of  twenty 
miles  from  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  altered  it  to  ■  Gadarenes,'  since  at  Gadara  there  were  the 
1  tombs,'  and  other  particulars  of  the  miracle,  and  it  might  easily  be  supposed  that  the 
whole  district  took  its  name  from  this  chief  city.  Gadara  is  a  little  over  six  miles  from 
the  lake.  As  for  the  reading  *  Gergesenes,'  we  owe  it  either  to  Origen's  own  conjecture, 
or  else  Gergesa  was  a  dialectic  variety  of  the  name  Gerasa."  To  Dr.  Thomson  we  owe  the 
discovery  of  the  real  site.  "  It  is,"  he  says,  "  within  a  few  rods  of  the  shore,  and  an  immense 
mountain  rises  directly  above  it,  in  which  are  ancient  tombs.  .  .  .  The  lake  is  so  near  the  base 
of  the  mountain,  that  the  swine  rushing  madly  down  it  could  not  stop,  but  would  be  hurried 
on  into  the  water.  .  .  .  The  name,  pronounced  by  Bedouin  Arabs,  is  so  similar  to  Gergesa, 
that,  to  all  my  inquiries  for  the  place,  they  invariably  said  it  was  at  Chersa ;  and  they 
insisted  that  they  were  identical."     See  The  Land  and  the  Book,  pp.  375-378. 

Ver.  2.  A  man. — Matthew  (viii.  28)  mentions  two  men.  Mark  and  Luke  speak  only  of 
the  better  known  or  fiercer  of  the  two,  who  probably  acted  as  spokesman  for  both. 

Ver.  5.  Cutting. — Or,  beating. 

Ver.  7. — See  note  on  chap  i.  24. 

Ver.  9.  Legion. — Cp.  Matt.  xii.  45  ;  Luke  viii.  2. 

Ver.  15.  Clothed. — He  had  been  wont  to  wear  no  upper  garment  (Luke  viii.  27),  and 
doubtless  such  clothes  as  he  had  were  very  ragged. 

Ver.  20.  Decapolis. — The  district  of  the  ten  cities,  lying  for  the  most  part  east  of  the 
Jordan,  and  east  and  south-east  of  the  Sea  of  Tiberias.  Its  ten  cities  were  Scythopolis  (the 
only  one  on  the  west  of  Jordan),  Hippos,  Gadara,  Pella,  Philadelphia,  Geresa,  Dion,  Canatha, 
Raphana,  Damascus. 

Ver.  22.  Balers  of  the  synagogue. — The  synagogues  had  no  clergy,  but  were  managed  by 
laymen,  who  conducted  or  superintended  the  services,  and  administered  discipline.  The 
rulers  of  Capernaum  had  already  (Luke  vii.  3)  approached  our  Lord  on  behalf  of  the 
centurion  who  built  their  synagogue.  Now  one  of  them  comes  to  prefer  a  petition  on  his 
own  account. 

176 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK.  chap.  v. 


Ver.  25.  An  issue  of  blood. — Hemorrhage.     See  Lev.  xv.  19-30. 

Ver.  36.  As  soon  as  Jesus  heard. — For  another  reading  see  R.V.  It  is  not  easy  to  deter- 
mine the  exact  shade  of  meaning  which  irapaKo^aas  bears  here.  Dr.  F.  Field  renders, 
"  Jesus,  making  as  though  He  heareth  not  the  word  spoken,"  etc. 

Ver.  41.  Talitha  cumi. — St.  Peter,  who  was  present,  would  treasure  in  his  memory  the  very 
words  used. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—20. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  viii.  28-34;  Luke  viii.  26-39.) 

Christ  and  the  Gadarenes. — I.  The  Gadarene  demoniac. — 1.  What  was  the 

nature  of  the  so-called  "  demonism  "  of  the  New  Testament  ?     It  is  nowhere 

said  there  concerning  any  one  that  he  was   possessed  of   the  devil.     In   one 

passage  only  (Acts  x.  38)  mention  is  made  of  the  healing  of    "all  that  were 

oppressed  of  the  devil."     But  in  all  other  like  passages  there  is  no  mention  made 

of  "  the  devil,"  but  of  "  unclean  spirits  "  or  "  demons."     2.  A  second  point  of 

difficulty  that  troubles  some  people  is  that  this  describing  of  a  malady  as  if  it 

were  the  infestation  of  some  living  thing  that  had  entered  into  the  person  seems 

so  like  the  relic  of  a  barbarous  and  superstitious  pathology,  which  ascribes  all 

sicknesses  to  such  a  cause.     To  which  we  may  make  either  of  two  answers  : 

(1)  That  if  this  description  of  certain  maladies  as  wrought  by  evil  spirits  is  a 

survival  of  the  superstitious  notion  that  all  maladies  were  so  caused,  it  may  be 

a  survival  of  just  so  much  in  that  notion  as  was  true  and  ought  to  survive. 

Or,    (2)   That  if   barbarism  and   superstition   used  to  allege  that  all   human 

diseases  are  produced  by  the  agency  of  living  beings  invisible  to  the  ordinary 

sight  entering  into  the  patient,  then  barbarism  and  superstition  are  in  pretty 

good  company,  considering  that  the  very  latest  word  of   the  most   advanced 

pathological  science  comes  out  at  precisely  the  same  point.     3.  Why  are  there 

no  cases  of  demonism  in  our  own  times?     (1)  It  is  not  certain  that  there  are 

no  such  cases  now.     There  are  many  who  insist,  with  a  very  formidable  array  of 

evidence  in  favour  of  their  claim,  that  cases  of  possession  by  spirits,  clean  or 

unclean,  are  peculiarly  frequent  in  these  days.     (2)  If  no  cases  just  like  what 

are  described  in  the  Gospels  are  recognised  in  modern  pathology,  this  is  no  more 

than  might  be  expected  from  analogy.     It  is  one  of  the  commonest  maxims  of 

medical  science  that  the  type  of  diseases  changes  from  age  to  age.     For  my 

part,  I  find  it  nothing  unlikely  that  in  an  age  like  that  of  the  coming  of  our 

Lord,  when  a  decisive  conflict  was  impending  between  the  kingdom  of  evil  and 

the  kingdom  of  heaven,  those  maladies  that  involve  the  mind  and  soul,  and 

indicate  the  presence  of  some  mischievous  spiritual  agency,  should  be  found  to 

take  on  a  character  of  pecular  malignity.     4.  Taking  the  Gospels  as  an  honest 

and  not  unintelligent  record  of  the  phenomena,  we  make  out  twTo  points  very 

clearly  concerning  this  demonism  :  (1)  It  was  not  mere  lunacy  or  epilepsy,  for 

these  diseases  are  recognised  and  clearly  distinguished  from  the  work  of  the  evil 

spirits.     (2)  As  this  demonism  was  not  mere  disease,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  it 

was  not  mere  wickedness — the  wilful  giving  up  one's  self  to  the  instigation  of 

the  devil.     It  is  always  spoken  of  and  dealt  with  as  an  involuntary  afl  iction, 

looked  upon  by  the  Lord  with  pity  rather  than  censure.     Neither  is  it  treated 

as  if  it  were,  in  any  special  sense,  a  visitation  for  sin.     5.  The  truth  seems  to 

be  this :  that  sin,  unbelief,  ungodliness,  opened  the  way  for  this  awful  curse, 

and  that,  when  the  alien  spirit  had  taken  hold  of  body  and  mind  and  will, 

it   had   the   power   of    plaguing   with   various   disorders — with   wild,    moping, 

melancholic  madness,  or  with  epileptic  convulsions,  or  blindness,  or  dumbness. 

6,  The  startling  and  unearthly  fact,  in  the  words  and  actions  of  the  demoniac, 

N  177 


chap.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


is  the  presence  in  him  of  a  double  consciousness  and  will.  He  is  torn  with 
discordant  desires,  and  tossed  to  and  fro  between  conflicting  passions.  Physicians 
who  have  studied  the  horrible  symptoms  of  delirium  tremens  describe  the  sort 
of  double  consciousness  that  sometimes  characterises  its  wretched  victims,  in 
terms  which  remind  us  of  this  demonism  described  by  the  Evangelists.  7.  As 
to  the  spirits  themselves,  we  get  some  hints  of  their  ways. here  and  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament.  They  are  represented  as  wandering  uneasy  and  restless 
until  they  can  find  lodgment  in  some  human  body  and  soul,  if  may  be ;  if  not 
there,  then  anywhere,  even  in  a  swine's  carcass — some  living  organism  of  which 
they  can  take  possession,  and  there  work  their  malignant  will.  The  unclean 
spirit  beds  itself  luxuriously  in  the  consciousness  and  thoughts  and  members 
of  its  victims,  and  loathes  to  be  dispossessed.  Like  certain  noxious  tropical 
insects,  it  sinks  its  feelers  and  tentacles  into  the  flesh,  so  that  to  tear  it  away 
is  like  tearing  the  flesh  away  from  itself.  To  leave  it  there  is  torture,  and  to 
remove  it  is  worse  torture  ;  so  that  the  patient  rushes  to  the  surgeon,  and,  when 
the  surgeon  puts  forth  his  hand  to  heal  him,  it  is  as  if  victim  and  tormentor 
shrank  away  together,  crying  :  "  Let  me  alone  !  I  beseech  thee,  torment  me 
not !  "  Now  is  it  any  dark  parable  to  you,  that  I  should  need  explain  how  like 
this  is  to  the  possession  which  sin  takes  of  the  mind  ? — how  evil  thoughts  and 
passions  and  purposes,  for  which  the  soul  was  not  made,  but  which  are  alien 
to  its  Divine  constitution  in  God's  image,  do  root  themselves  like  a  morbid 
growth  into  its  very  substance,  till  the  soul,  bewildered  at  the  unnatural  conflict 
within  itself,  cries  out  against  the  power  of  sin,  craving  to  be  delivered,  and 
then,  when  the  Deliverer  comes  near,  cries  out  again,  with  a  loud  voice : 
"  What  have  I  to  do  with  Thee,  Jesus,  Son  of  God  most  high  ?  I  beseech  Thee, 
torment  me  not ! "  8.  What  help  is  there  for  the  soul  that  is  in  such  a  plight — 
the  will,  the  motives,  the  desires,  the  active  faculties,  all  that  should  co-operate 
in  the  effort  of  self-healing,  themselves  implicated  in  the  disease,  so  that  even 
when  deliverance  is  brought  nigh  it  will  none  of  it,  but  warns  the  Saviour 
away  ?  It  will,  and  yet  it  will  not.  The  consciousness  of  need  and  danger 
are  of  no  avail ;  even  faith  and  prayer  bring  no  help,  for  there  is  no  prayer 
but  with  a  reservation — let  not  the  double-minded  man  think  that  he  shall 
receive  anything  from  the  Lord.  So  Augustine  prayed,  "  Save  me,  O  Lord, 
save  me, — but  not  now."  O  helpless  man,  the  hope  for  you  is  that  God  will  be 
to  you  better  than  your  prayers,  will  do  for  you  exceeding  abundantly  above 
that  you  ask, — that  when  you  pray,  "  Save  me,  but  not  now,"  He  will  answer, 
"  Now  is  the  accepted  time ;  now  is  the  day  of  salvation  :  look  unto  Me  now  and 
be  saved."  Be  not  afraid  to  come  near  your  Lord  and  Saviour,  even  though 
the  sin  that  is  in  you,  the  evil  thoughts,  the  demoniac  passions,  cry  out  against 
your  prayers  and  say,  "  Let  us  alone !  torment  us  not !  depart  from  us  !  what 
have  we  do  with  Thee,  Jesus,  Son  of  the  most  high  God  ?  "  Doubt  not  that 
the  compassionate  Lord  will  be  more  ready  to  hear  this  craving  of  your  better 
nature  than  the  clamour  of  a  legion  of  evil  spirits,  and  that,  if  you  will  but  suffer 
Him,  He  will  deliver  you  from  your  worse  self ;  He  will  command  the  inward 
discord  of  your  mind  to  cease,  and  make  the  storm  a  calm ;  and  you,  even 
though  it  be  not  without  sore  rendings  from  the  retreating  fiend,  shall  at  last 
sit  peaceful  at  the  feet  of  your  Redeemer,  clothed  and  in  your  right  mind. 

II.  The  gospel  among  the  Gadarenes. — 1.  You  may  be  at  a  loss,  perhaps,  to 
see  any  good  reason  why  the  healing  of  the  wretched  man  possessed  of  demons 
should  have  been  an  occasion  of  terror  to  the  people  of  the  neighbourhood.  It 
might  seem  more  reasonable  that  they  should  have  found  it  rather  an  immense 
relief  to  their  fears,  when  the  frightful  creature  that  had  been  the  terror  of 
that  part  of  the  country,  whose  horrible  frenzies  had  made  the  road  that  led 
by  his  cave  impassable,  so  that  they  took  long  circuits  to  avoid  him,  was  found 

178 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  v. 


by  them  sitting  as  quiet  as  a  good  child,  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  trying  to  learn 
something  of  God  and  truth  and  duty,  and  of  who  this  wonderful  Saviour  was — 
this  destroyer  of  the  works  of  the  devil.     What  good  reason  could  they  find, 
in  all  that  they  had  heard,  for  sending  Jesus  out  from  their  borders  ?     What 
good  reason  ?     Ah  !  but  this  is  asking  too  much — to  look  for  a  good  reason  for 
a  wrong  action.     It  is  the  very  nature  of  sin  to  be  unreasonable.     Its  reasons 
are  no  reasons.     We  may  look  for  the  motives  of  it,  and  for  the  excuses  for  it. 
But  in  giving  reasons  for  wrong  conduct,  we  cannot  go  much  further  than  to 
shew  that  it  is  like  the  conduct  of  human  nature  in  general  under  like  circum- 
stances.    And  we  do  not  pretend  to  justify  human  nature.     Why  should  Adam 
and  Eve  be  afraid  when  they  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God  in  the  garden  ? 
Why  should  Moses  be  afraid  and  hide  his  face  when  the  Lord  spoke  to  him  out 
of  the  burning  bush,  and  said,  "  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father  "  ?     Why  should 
Isaiah,  when  he  saw  the  Lord  sitting  on  a  throne  high  and  lifted  up,  cry  out, 
"  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am  undone,  for  my  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of 
hosts  "  ?     It  is  in  human  nature,  somehow,  account  for  it  as  you  may,  that  men 
do  not  like  to  come  quite  so  near  to  God.     It  is  not  only  that  they  shrink  from 
the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  anger — that  would  be  intelligible  enough  ;  but 
men  do  not  like  such  close  dealings  with  God  anyway.     In  fact,  anything  that 
brings   them  close,  face   to   face   with  the  powers  of   the   unseen  world  is   a 
thing  that  men  in  general  shrink  from.     It  is  the  one  labour  of  the  ministry 
of  the  gospel  to  persuade  men  to  come  near  enough  to  God  to  know  Him — 
to  look  Christ  in  the  face  long  enough  to  know  Him.     Dr.  H.  A.  Boardman 
wrote  a  little  book  entitled  The  Great  Question ;  and  when  you  looked  within 
to   see   what    "  the   great   question "   was,   you   found   it   nothing  but   this — 
"  Will  you  consider  the  subject  of  personal  religion  ?  "     And  why  should  not 
any  man — every  man — say  yes  to  this  Great  Question  ?     But  they  will  not. 
The  complaint  of  the  old  prophet  is  the  complaint  of  the  modern  preacher — 
"  My  people  will  not  consider."     Our  lips  frame  words  of  welcome  and  praise; 
but  our  hearts  are  all  the  time  silently  pleading  with  Him  to  "  let  us  alone," 
and  depart  out  of  our  coasts,  even  though  we  would  shrink  from  putting  such 
a  thought  into  words.     We  feel  easier  with  a  legion  of  malignant  demons  near 
us,  than  with  one  faithful  and  merciful  and  holy  Saviour.     2.  The  second  topic 
of  consultation  among  the  Gadarenes  was  this  :    "  concerning   the   swine."     I 
do  believe  (to  do  these  people  justice)  that  if  we  could  have  been  there,  and 
could  have  charged  them  to  the  face  with  having  deliberately  rejected  Christ, 
wilfully  driven  away  the  Great  Healer,  simply  on  account  of  their  interest  in 
pork-raising,  they  would  indignantly  and  sincerely  have  repelled  the  imputation, 
and  have  suggested  a  number  of  other  reasons  by  which  they  supposed  they 
were  actuated,  instead  of  the  one  which  really  affected  and  decided  their  minds. 
I  do  not  believe  they  said  explicitly  to  each  other,  "  This  is  a  great  and  Divine 
work  of  mercy.     God  Himself  is  manifest  here  destroying  the  works  of  the  devil, 
and  delivering  our  fellow-man  from  bondage   to  unclean  spirits.     Surely  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  come  nigh  unto  us  !     But  then,  on  the  other  hand,  see  what 
it  costs ;  two  thousand  head  of  pork  is  a  great  deal  to  lose,  and  we  will  not 
have  God's  kingdom."     I  do  not  bejieve  they  said  this ;  I  do  not  believe  they 
distinctly  thought  it ;  but  they  did  it.     And  you,  beware  how  you  put  yourself 
under  the  same  condemnation.     For  you  need  not  expect  that  the  gospel  of 
salvation  will  ever  come  to  you  without  bringing  along  with  it  some  conditions 
of   loss   and   self-denial.     It  will   interfere  with   your   plans,    break   up   your 
arrangements,  frustrate  your  schemes,  in  business,  in  politics,  in  society,  in  the 
conduct   of   life.      That  petty  fraud — that   adulteration  or  misrepresentation, 
so  common  that   no  one   thinks  of  it — that  smart,  lying  advertisement  that 
you  have  got  in  your  desk  ready  for  the  press — those  keen  little  tricks  or 

179 


chap.  v.  IOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


disingenuous  compliances  in  politics  that  are  to  carry  the  caucus  or  the  election 
and  put  you  into  office  and  keep  you  there — those  shams  and  deceits,  that  neglect 
of  homely  duties  and  of  wearying  charities,  by  which  you  are  studying  to  gain 
social  position  and  pleasure, — how  these  herds  of  unclean  things,  the  soilure 
and  blemish  of  your  lives,  will  have  to  rush  off  into  the  sea,  if  the  Holy  Christ 
is  to  come  to  you  and  live  with  you  !  Are  you  ready  to  let  them  go,  or  will 
you  rather  come  and  pray  the  Lord  to  depart  out  of  your  neighbourhood  ? 

III.  The  apostle  to  tie  Gadarenes. — There,  away  up  the  hillside,  the  angry 
crowd  are  lingering  yet.     They  have  carried  their  point,  and  the  Saviour  whom 
they  have  rejected  has  turned  to  leave  them  ; — it  is  so  easy  to  be  rid  of  Jesus  if 
you  will.     Downward  He  goes  in  sorrow  to  the  beach  where  the  little  shallop 
lies  rocking  in  the  sands,  and  timidly  in  the  rear  comes  this  new  disciple  with 
only  one  humble  petition — "  that  he  might  be  with  Him."     "  Go  home  to  thy 
friends ! "     "  But,  Lord,  I  have  no  friend  but  Thee.     I  have  been  an  outcast 
now  these  many  years,    a   dweller   in   unclean  sepulchres,  abhorred   of   men. 
What  have  men  done  for  me  but  bind  me  in  chains  and  fetters  of  iron  ?     But 
1  Thy  hand  hath  loosed  my  bonds  of  pain,  and  bound  me  with  Thy  love  ! '     Let 
me  be  with  Thee  where  Thou  art ! "     But  still  from  that  Most  Gracious  One 
comes  the  inexorable,   "  Go  back — back  to  thy  friends  and  thy  father's  house 
— go  tell   them  what  the   Lord  hath   done   for   thee  ! "     "  What  ?     I,    Lord  ? 
I,  so  disused  to  rational  speech  ?   whose  lips  and   tongue  were   but   now  the 
organs   of   demoniac  blasphemy?     I,  just   rallying    from   the   rending  of   the 
exorcised  fiends  ?     I,  surrounded  by  a  hostile  people,    that  have  just  warned 
away  my  Lord  and  Saviour  from  their  coasts  ?     And  can  I  hope  that  they  will 
hear  my  words,  who  turn  a  deaf  and  rebellious  ear  to  Thee?     Nay,  Lord,  I 
entreat  Thee  let  me  be  with  Thee,  there  sitting  at  Thy  feet  clothed  and  in  my 
right  mind,   that  men  may  look  and  point  at  me  and  glorify  my  Lord,  my 
Saviour !     Let  them  go,  whose  zeal  to  tell  of  Thee  even  Thy  interdict  cannot 
repress, — there  be  many  such — send  them  !     But  let  me  be  near  Thee,  be  with 
Thee,  and  gaze,  and  love,  and  be  silent,  and  adore ! "     Was  ever  a  stronger 
argument  of  prayer  ?     And  yet   Christ  departs,  and  the  grateful  believer   is 
left  alone  to  do  the  work  for  which  he  seems  so  insufficient  and  unfit !     To 
translate  the  story  into  the  terms  of  our  daily  lif e,  it  shews  us :  1 .  That  the 
path  of  duty  which  Christ  has  marked  out  for  us  may  be  the  opposite  of  that 
which  we  naturally  •  think  and  ardently  desire.     You  say  to   yourself  that  a 
man  must  be  willing  to  leave  father  and  mother  and  children  and  business  for 
the  gospel's  sake :  but  God  finds  some  way  of   admonishing  you  that  a  man 
must  also  be  willing  to  stay  by  them  for  the  gospel's  sake,  when  he  is  called 
thereto,  and  answers  the  fine  texts  with  which  you  try  to  excuse  yourself  from 
humble  and  irksome  duty  with  other  texts, — how  he  that  provideth  not  for  his 
own  household  is  worse  than  an  infidel, — and  how  he  makes  void  the  law  of  God 
who  says  to  his  father  or  mother  Corban — I  have  consecrated  to  religious  uses 
the  time  and  labour  that  might  have  gone  to  your  support ; — and  so  God  shuts 
up  your  favourite  path  of  service,  and  makes  plain  before  your  feet  a  very 
humble  and  obscure  little  by-way  for  you  to  walk  in.     2.  That  when  religious 
privilege  and  religious  duty  seem  to  conflict,  the  duty  is  to  be  preferred  above 
the  privilege.     It  would  seem  as  if  the  case  of  this  lunatic  had  been  set  before 
us  here  as  an  a  fortiori  case  for  all  generations  to  the  end  of  time.     What  one 
of  us  can  ever  be  called  to  surrender  that  supreme  religious  privilege — the 
personal,  visible  companionship,  the  personal,  audible  teaching   of   Jesus   the 
Lord?     And   if   he  might   not   choose,   but   must   needs   go   away,    untaught, 
untrained,  to  be  alone  from  his  Saviour,  and  be  himself  a  teacher  of  others,  can 
there  ever  be  imagined  a  case  between  duty  and  privilege  when  you  or  I  should 
be   at  liberty  to  hesitate?     3.  That  duty,  preferred  and  followed  instead  of 

ISO 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  v. 


privilege,  becomes  itself  the  supreme  privilege.  See  to  what  honour  came  this 
nameless  man  at  last.  Having  given  up  the  infinite  delight  of  the  personal 
companionship  of  Jesus,  behold  him  now  promoted  to  this  dignity,  that  he 
should  be  the  first  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  trained  disciples,  that  had 
left  all  to  follow  the  Lord,  are  passed  over,  and  this  highest  honour,  that  he 
should  be  the  first  commissioned  preacher  of  the  gospel,  is  given  to  him  who 
left  the  Lord  Himself,  at  His  command,  to  do  the  Lord's  work.  And  no  man 
knoweth  his  name  unto  this  day.  But  in  the  resurrection  those  unknown 
syllables  shall  be  spoken  again  with  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant," 
and  shall  shine  above  those  of  prophets  and  apostles,  like  the  sun,  and  like 
the  brightness  of  the  firmament,  for  ever  and  ever. — L.  W.  Bacon. 

Yer.  17.  Christ  rejected  by  the  Gadarenes. — We  are  not  surprised  to  learn,  that 
those  "  in  the  city  and  in  the  country,"  when  such  strange  tidings  reached  them, 
"  went  out  to  see  what  it  was  that  was  done."  We  should  have  so  acted  our- 
selves in  similar  circumstances.  Perhaps  we  think  that  here  the  likeness  ends  ; 
and  that,  instead  of  beseeching  One  who  had  given  such  proofs  of  power  and 
goodness  to  "depart  out  of  our  coasts,"  we  should  rather  have  imitated  the 
conduct  of  the  people  of  Sychar  (John  iv.  40).  In  both  cases  Jesus  granted 
the  request  made.  What  the  Gadarenes  lost  by  their  rejection  of  Him  we 
may  never  know  ;  but  that  their  loss  may  be  our  gain,  let  us  try  to  discover 
the  feelings  which  influenced  these  persons,  and  which  may  still  actuate  any 
possessed  of  the  same  depraved  and  disordered  moral  constitution. 

I.  Vexation  at  pecuniary  loss  sustained. — We  may  partly  excuse  this  feeling 
on  the  ground  of  its  naturalness,  but  we  may  not  allow  it  to  be  a  just  and  right 
one.  We  may  not  admit  that  ever  so  large  an  amount  of  this  world's  goods  is 
to  be  weighed  in  the  balance  against  one  immortal  soul,  "  turned  from  darkness 
to  light,"  etc.  Moreover,  the  Gadarenes  had  ample  evidence  that  He  who 
permitted  this  destruction  of  property  was  no  ordinary  man,  for  "  with  authority 
He  commanded  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  obeyed  Him."  He  belonged, 
evidently,  to  another  world.  He  had  passed  the  boundary  which  separates 
things  visible  from  invisible.  He  must  have  much  to  tell,  therefore,  which  is 
most  important  for  all  to  know,  who  are  conscious  that  they  possess  a  spiritual 
nature.  Compared  with  the  benefits  which  all  might  expect  to  reap  from  His 
"  wisdom  and  mighty  works,"  what  was  the  injury  which  a  few  had  sustained 
from  the  loss  of  a  portion  of  their  worldly  wealth  ? 

II.  The  dread  of  preternatural  agency. — "They  were  afraid"  (ver.  15). 
Why,  and  when  ?  Not  when  they  beheld  the  traces  of  the  destructive  energy 
which  had  been  at  work ;  but  when  they  saw  "  him  that  was  possessed  .  .  . 
sitting,  and  clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind."  Not  because  they  thought  he 
would  do  them  an  injury — he  was  now  as  harmless  as  he  had  heretofore  been 
dangerous ;  but  because  they  saw  in  him  one  who  had  just  been  the  subject  of 
i  preternatural  agency,  and  because  the  Agent  Himself  was  close  at  hand.  So 
Peter  (Luke  v.  8).  So  all  the  disciples  (Luke  viii.  25).  These  Gadarenes  had 
hitherto  been  living  according  to  the  course  of  this  world.  Perhaps  they 
professed  some  form  of  religion ;  but  it  exercised  no  regenerating  influence  over 
their  hearts  :  of  the  "  power  of  godliness  "  they  knew  nothing  at  all.  Probably 
they  had  heard  a  rumour  of  the  "  Great  Prophet  who  had  risen  up  "  amongst 
their  neighbours ;  but  it  had  made  no  particular  impression  upon  them  ;  not  one 
of  them  thought  more  of  making  provision  for  another  life,  or  less  of  getting 
and  enjoying  the  good  things  of  this.  Suddenly  their  carnal  ease  is  broken 
in  upon  by  the  report  of  the  arrival  of  the  new  Teacher  in  their  own  country, 
and  of  the  awful  display  of  supernatural  power  which  ensued.  The  effect  was 
instantaneous.     It  was   like  the  first  warnings  of   an  earthquake — the  slight 

181 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


trembling  which  precedes  the  more  powerful  shock  which  is  to  bury  the  city  in 
its  own  ruins.  Not  more  hastily  do  the  inhabitants,  on  the  first  premonitory 
vibration,  rush  out  of  their  houses  and  take  refuge  in  the  open  country,  than  did 
the  Gadarenes,  with  one  accord,  "  pray  Jesus  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts." 
They  desired  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  Him.  He  had  already  seriously 
disturbed  them  ;  and  if  He  were  allowed  to  go  on,  who  could  tell  whereunto 
these  things  would  grow  ? 

III.  Consciousness  of  guilt,  and  fear  of  punishment. — Yes,  "  guilt "  is  the 
word,  as  implying  not  only  wrong,  but  wrong  which  must  be  answered  for, 
wrong  which  subjects  to  the  penalty  of  the  law.  This  is  what  all  mankind 
are  alike  implicated  in.  God  had  not  left  these  Gadarenes  without  a  witness 
to  Him  in  their  own  breasts,  for  He  had  given  them  a  conscience,  and  thoughts 
which  accused  or  excused  according  to  the  bidding  of  that  inward  monitor. 
But  they,  being  ignorant  of  God's  ways,  and  knowing  only  that  they  were  "  the 
enemies  of  God  by  wicked  works,"  supposed  that  He  must  be  their  enemy  also, 
and  could  think  of  no  other  way  of  fleeing  from  His  wrath  but  by  fleeing  from 
Him  and  from  every  one  who  came  in  His  name.  What  could  be  more 
natural  ?  All  that  they  had  as  yet  heard  or  seen  of  Jesus  only  confirmed  them 
in  the  impression  that  He  was  come  to  torment  them  before  their  time,  and  to 
bring  upon  them  or  their  families  such  swift  destruction  as  had  already  befallen 
their  swine.  We  cannot  doubt  that  abject  personal  fear  had  the  largest  share 
in  prompting  them  to  "  pray  Him  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts." 

Lessons. — 1 .  Was  it  the  loss  of  worldly  substance  which  induced  the  Gadarenes 
to  wish  to  be  rid  of  Christ's  presence  ?  In  this,  even  knowing  no  more  of  Him 
than  they  did,  they  acted  foolishly  and  wickedly.  But  what  must  be  said  of 
those  who  know  Him  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world — "  the  Way,  and  the 
Truth,  and  the  Life  " — and  yet  allow  worldly  considerations  to  prevent  them 
from  reaping  the  full  benefit  of  His  Mission  ?  2.  Did  the  carnal-minded 
Gadarenes  see  in  Jesus  a  messenger  from  the  invisible  world,  who  was  come 
to  turn  their  thoughts  from  things  temporal  to  things  eternal  ?  and  did  they 
therefore  desire  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  Him  ?  This  also  was  inexcusable 
even  in  them  ;  but  how  much  more  so  in  us  !  We  cannot  plead  that  it  was 
well  with  us  before  this  Man  of  God  came  among  us,  and  that  we  desire  to 
"let  well  alone."  There  never  was  a  time  when  He  was  not  among  us  — 
never  a  time  when  the  name  of  Jesus,  His  work  and  His  doctrine,  were 
not  familiar  to  us  as  household  words.  "  In  the  light  are  we,  that  in  us  the 
light  may  be."  Let  us,  then,  go  out  to  meet  "  Him  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord,"  and  pray  Him  not  to  depart  from  us,  not  to  let  us  alone,  but 
to  come  unto  us,  and  make  His  abode  with  us,  for  time  and  for  eternity. 
3.  Did  the  Gadarenes  reject  Christ  because  they  saw  in  Him  a  swift  Minister 
of  that  Divine  vengeance  which  was  due  to  them  for  their  sins  ?  We  cannot 
blame  them  for  this.  But  what  if  they  had  been  better  instructed  in  the  nature 
of  His  Person  and  Mission?  What  if  they  had  known  that  (1  Tim.  ii.  5)? 
What  if  they  had  heard  those  charming  words  (John  hi.  16,  17  ;  1  John  iv.  9)  ? 
Why,  then  the  whole  population  would  surely  have  gone  out  to  meet  Him,  and 
to  escort  Him  in  triumph  into  their  city.  While  they  accepted  Him  as  their 
Priest  to  make  atonement  for  them,  they  would  have  sat  at  His  feet  as  their 
Prophet,  and  sworn  allegiance  to  Him  as  their  King.  What  they  did  not  know 
we  do ;  therefore  the  reception  which,  had  they  known,  they  would  have  given 
Him  let  us  give,  and  the  homage  which  they  would  have  rendered  to  Him 
let  us  render,  saying,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb,"  etc. 

Vers.  17-19.  The  two  prayers. — No  contrast  could  be  more  striking  than  that 
presented  by  these  verses.     Under  what  circumstances  was  it,  and  with  what 

182 


HOMILEfiC  COMMtitiTAM:   St.  MARM.  chap.  v\ 


motives,  that  these  two  prayers,  most  opposite  in  their  purport,  were  offered  to 
Christ  ?  The  answer  to  this  question  will  shew  us  that  these  two  contrary- 
prayers  are  in  fact  offered  up  to  Him  now  and  daily, — one  or  other  of  them  by 
every  one  of  us ;  both,  at  different  times,  by  many. 

I.  The  prayer  of  the  Gadarenes. — They  might  have  known  that  One  who 
gave  signs  so  infallible  of  a  Divine  Mission  must  have  a  message  for  them  from 
God.  That  that  message  was  on  the  whole  a  gracious  message  they  might  have 
inferred  from  the  sight  of  one  out  of  whom  demons  were  departed  sitting 
at  His  feet  clothed  and  in  his  right  mind.  But  no  :  their  fears  and  their 
displeasure  prevailed,  and  they  prayed  Him  only  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts. 
These  Gadarenes  were  a  type  of  thousands  now.  To  us  also  Christ  has  come. 
We  hear  His  Word.  We  see  those  miracles  of  His  grace  by  which  the 
thoughtless,  selfish,  sinful,  are  changed  into  a  new  image  by  the  transforming 
power  of  faith  in  Christ.  These  things  we  see  ; — and,  if  our  own  heart  condemns 
us  as  being  still  ourselves  dead  in  sin,  we  may  well  tremble  as  we  behold.  But 
what  further  effect  have  these  things  had  upon  us  ?  Have  we  drawn  near  to 
Him  whose  works  are  thus  mighty,  whose  words  are  thus  gracious  ?  Have  we 
sought  to  know  more  of  Him  than  we  could  by  the  mere  hearing  of  the  ear  ? 
Being  assured,  by  His  own  promise,  that  He  hears  prayers,  have  we  prayed,  are 
we  daily  praying,  to  Him  ?  Do  we  bring  to  Him  our  daily  wants  and  sins  and 
weaknesses,  our  daily  duties,  snares,  and  temptations,  and  ask  in  each  for  the  ever- 
present  help  of  His  Holy  Spirit  ?  Or  do  we  neglect  all  these  things,  and  live 
much  as  we  should  if  Christ  had  never  died  for  us,  and  try  to  keep  as  far  from  Him 
as  possible,  lest  we  should  be  obliged  to  part  with  those  things  which  we  love 
better  ?  Then,  it  is  with  us  just  as  if  we  every  day  uttered  the  prayer  of  these 
Gadarenes,  and  besought  Christ  to  depart  from  us  !  And  this  is  a  prayer  which 
is  soon  answered.  In  that  heart  which  refuses  to  believe  Christ  does  no  mighty 
works,  because  of  its  unbelief.  He  who  desires  to  forget  Christ  may  easily 
succeed  in  doing  so.  The  Lord's  Spirit  will  not  alway  strive  with  man.  So 
long  as  by  our  carelessness  or  our  sins  we  are  praying  Christ  to  depart  from  us, 
and  not  to  torment  us  before  the  time,  so  long  we  may  too  reasonably  fear  that 
that  prayer  will  be  heard — that  He  who  has  come  out  of  His  place  with  offers 
of  mercy,  He  who  is  calling  to  us  from  heaven,  and  bidding  us  hear  and  live, 
will  go  and  return  unto  His  place,  till  we  acknowledge  our  offence  and  seek  His  face. 

II.  The  prayer  of  the  man  delivered  from  demons. — Knowing  his  own 
weakness,  and  the  subtlety  of  his  great  enemy  ;  knowing  that  till  he  heard  the 
voice  of  Christ  he  had  been  in  bondage,  and  that  only  by  His  strength  is  he 
free ;  fearing  lest  the  departure  of  his  Deliverer  should  be  the  signal  for  the 
return  of  the  unclean  spirit  to  his  now  deserted  habitation, — he  prays  that  he 
may  remain  with  Christ,  contented  to  be  the  companion  of  Him  who  has  not 
where  to  lay  His  head,  if  he  may  but  still  hear  the  sound  of  that  gracious  voice, 
and  be  still  within  the  reach  of  that  compassionate  arm.  But  as  the  prayer  of 
unbelief  and  of  carelessness,  which  beseeches  Christ  to  depart,  is  but  too  surely 
fulfilled  in  His  withdrawal,  so  this,  though  it  be  the  prayer  of  faith  and  love, 
is  yet  no  less  surely  refused.  The  time  for  uninterrupted  converse  with  the 
Lord  is  hereafter,  not  now.  A  life  of  rapturous  meditation,  of  ecstatic  com- 
munion with  a  world  unseen,  is  not  that  which  will  best  glorify  Christ,  or  shine 
most  brightly  before  men.  He  who  has  been  first  healed  by  Christ  must  go 
back  into  the  world  to  shew  forth  His  praise.  By  pureness,  by  meekness,  by 
kindness,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  love  unfeigned,  he  must  be  Christ's  witness  ; 
men  must  take  knowledge  of  him,  by  these  signs,  that  he  has  been  with  Jesus. 
This  is  his  work  : — the  other  his  refreshment,  his  recreation,  his  invigoration  for 
future  service.  Seasons  indeed  are  allowed  him — and  happy  is  he  who  cares  for 
them — of  visiting  Christ,  of  communing  with  Him,  of  receiving  from  Him  new 

183 


CHAP.  V. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


supplies  of  mercy  and  grace.  Such  opportunities  are  prayer,  the  study  of 
Scripture,  and  above  all  the  Holy  Communion  ;  opportunities  of  being  with  Christ, 
of  seeking  from  Him  the  restoration  and  revival  of  our  souls — the  casting  out 
of  those  evil  spirits  of  pride  and  sensuality  and  worldliness,  which  are  ever 
regaining,  in  some  new  form,  the  possession  of  our  hearts,  and  which  no  power 
but  Christ's  can  enable  us  to  overcome.  But  every  such  approach  to  Him 
implies  and  looks  forward  to  a  subsequent  return  to  the  duties  of  daily  life.  We 
come  to  renew  our  strength,  that  again  we  may  run  and  not  be  weary.  We 
come  to  eat  of  that  living  bread,  that  so  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  we 
may  enter  upon  another  stage  of  our  pilgrimage  towards  the  heavenly  city. — 
Dean  Vaughan. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1-15.  The  greatness  and  the 
weakness  of  man.—  -1.  His  greatness 
— seen  in  the  fact  that  many  demons 
can  enter  into  him.  Shew  how  men 
may  be  great  in  evil  as  well  as  in 
good — tyrants,  warriors,  conspirators, 
hypocrites,  etc.  2.  His  weakness — 
seen  in  his  yielding  where  he  ought  to 
have  resisted,  in  his  helplessness  when 
he  had  once  admitted  the  power  of  evil 
into  his  heart — seen  also  in  his  fear  of 
the  only  power  that  could  redeem  him 
from  its  bondage. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

A  revelation  of  the  Saviour's  glory. — 
1.  As  the  Son  of  the  living  God.  2.  As 
the  King  of  the  world  of  spirits.  3.  As 
the  Deliverer  of  the  wretched.  4.  As  the 
Holy  One,  who  does  not  suffer  Himself 
to  be  entreated  in  vain  to  depart. — 
J.  J.   Van  Oosterzee,  D.D. 

Ver.  3.  An  inveterate  habit  of  un- 
cleanness  frequently  extinguishes  all 
the  principles  of  the  Christian  life ; 
and  an  unchaste  soul  dwells  in  its 
body  as  in  a  loathsome  sepulchre, 
where  there  is  nothing  but  the  remains 
of  worms  and  corruption.  This  is  but 
too  often  literally  true.  An  unchaste 
person  is  a  madman,  whom  everything 
provokes,  whom  nothing  stops,  and 
who  will  not  bear  the  least  restraint. 
— P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  4.  Spiritual  strength. — That 
poor  man,  possessed  by  that  unclean 
spirit,  was  able  to  burst  the  fetters 
and  chains  which  bound  his  limbs,  and 
to  break  through  all  opposition  of  the 

184 


arms  of  men  ;  how  much  more  power- 
ful is  he  who  is  possessed  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  his  will  wholly  given  to  obey 
His  call,  powerful  to  break  away 
through  any  bonds  with  which  the 
world  would  bind  him,  and  to  follow 
on  the  heavenly  path,  defying  all 
opposition  of  an  ungodly  world  ! 

Ver.  5.  The  desolate  places  of  the 
earth. — The  gloomy  waste,  the  sterile 
desert,  are  the  contrast  of  Eden,  and 
shewed  themselves  contemporaneously 
with  man's  trangression ;  death  and 
the  grave  are  the  result  of  sin — what 
fitter  habitation  than  these  could  Satan 
and  his  myrmidons  find  ?  The  de- 
moniac, in  the  midst  of  his  mental 
confusion,  retains  his  old  notions  of 
the  habits  of  demons,  and  yields 
readily  to  the  impulse  that  sends  him 
to  solitude  and  graves,  wherein  he 
supposed  they  specially  delight.  How 
far  he  is  a  free  agent,  how  far  under 
the  control  of  an  alien  force,  we  cannot 
accurately  define.  This  is  one  of  those 
mysterious  matters  of  which  we  are 
greatly  ignorant ;  but  we  have  glimpses 
of  an  identification  of  man  and  devil 
which  is  inexpressibly  awful.  Mean- 
time, whatever  opinion  we  may  form 
concerning  the  notion  of  evil  spirits 
being  especially  attached  to  certain 
localities  (and  if  we  localise  holiness 
we  may  equally  localise  wickedness), 
we  may  at  any  rate  learn  this  lesson, 
that  it  is  in  souls  dry  of  grace  that 
Satan  takes  up  his  abode,  in  hearts 
not  filled  with  love  and  faith  that  he 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  V. 


finds  entrance.  Solitude  does  not  bar 
him  out.  People  have  fled  to  the 
desert,  living  a  life  of  want  and  pain 
far  away  from  the  busy  haunts  of 
men,  that  there,  alone  with  God,  as 
they  thought,  they  might  wrestle  out 
their  soul's  salvation  ;  but  the  tempter 
has  found  them  there.  Wherever  a 
soul  is  to  be  lost  or  won,  as  surely  as 
this  present  life  is  our  trial-time,  as 
surely  as  this  present  world  is  our 
battle-field,  so  surely  in  this  time  and 
place  are  we  exposed  to  the  assaults 
of  evil ;  and  nothing  can  keep  us  safe 
but  watchfulness  and  prayer. — W.  J. 
Deane. 

The  madness  of  sin. — Having  gone 
through  some  fearful  scenes  with 
madmen,  I  have  a  vivid  idea  of  what 
this  savage  was.  How  strong,  how 
rampant,  how  brutal !  I  have  seen  one 
leap  from  a  third -storey  window  at  a 
bound,  and  another  crimson  with  his 
own  blood  from  broken  glass,  and  yet 
another  defying  five  police-officers  to 
touch  a  hair  of  his  head.  And  what 
lessons  have  I  then  and  there  learned 
about  the  dreadfulness  of  being  given 
up  to  Satan,  and  having  such  frenzied 
beings  for  everlasting  associates — 
lessons,  too,  of  thankfulness  to  God 
for  sparing  our  reason,  and  warding 
off  those  accidents  which  might  have 
robbed  us  of  it.  A  fall  on  the  ice,  a 
fright,  a  blow  from  a  stick,  and  you 
and  I  might  now  be  even  such  out- 
casts.— Jas.  Bolton. 

Yers.  6,  7.  A  double  nature. — That 
the  man  worshipped  Jesus,  and  yet  a 
moment  after  the  evil  spirit  within 
him  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  one 
who  was  not  in  the  kingdom  of  Jesus 
— this  is  like  our  daily  case.  There 
is  within  us  a  double  nature — a  good 
spirit  and  an  evil  spirit ;  one  minute 
one  prevails,  another  minute  the  other 
governs.  Even  the  best  man  is  not 
free  from  sin.  Good  people  have  said 
they  are  surprised  at  the  wickedness 
within  them.  On  the  other  hand, 
even  the  worst  man  is  hardly  a  devil 
yet.  But  most  of  us  are  between  the 
two.     We  change,  not  perhaps  quite 


so  quickly  as  he  whom  the  Gospel 
describes,  and  yet  very  quickly.  In 
the  morning  we  worship  Jesus  with 
our  prayer  and  make  good  resolutions. 
But  perhaps  the  same  day,  not  long 
after,  we  lose  our  temper,  and  say 
spiteful  things  that  have  nothing  in 
common  with  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God. 
Or  perhaps  he  who  said  a  prayer  the 
same  day  is  drunken,  or  does  some 
dishonest  action,  or  tells  a  lie.  Thus 
we  pass  from  Jesus  to  Satan. — Jas, 
Lonsdale. 

Yer.  7.  The  struggle  to  get  rid  of  sin. 
— A  man  can  never  leave  sin  without 
violence ;  he  can  never  root  up  an 
evil  habit  but  nature  must  suffer 
deeply.  She  fights  against  grace  ;  she 
causes  the  flesh  to  strive  against  the 
Spirit,  and  will  against  will.  Who- 
ever loves  impurity  dreads  to  be  de- 
livered from  it,  and  omits  nothing  to 
continue  himself  under  that  miserable 
possession. — P.  Quesnel. 

Yer.  9.  Legion. — It  may  be  that  the 
fiends  within  him  dictated  his  reply, 
or  that  he  himself,  conscious  of  their 
tyranny,  cried  out  in  agony,  We  are 
many — a  regiment  like  those  of  con- 
quering Borne,  drilled  and  armed  to 
trample  and  destroy,  a  legion.  This 
answer  distinctly  contravened  what 
Christ  had  just  implied,  that  he  was 
one,  an  individual,  and  precious  in  his 
Maker's  eyes.  But  there  are  men  and 
women  in  every  Christian  land  whom 
it  might  startle  to  look  within,  and 
see  how  far  their  individuality  is 
oppressed  and  overlaid  by  a  legion  of 
impulses,  appetites,  and  conventionali- 
ties, which  leave  them  nothing  personal, 
nothing  essential  and  characteristic, 
nothing  that  deserves  a  name. — Lean 
Chadvrick. 

Troops  of  temptations. — Oar  enemies 
come  upon  us  like  a  torrent.  How 
much  does  it  concern  us  to  band  our 
hearts  together  in  a  communion  of 
saints !  The  number  of  our  enemies 
adds  to  the  praise  of  our  victory.  To 
overcome  single  temptations  is  com- 
mendable ;    but    to  subdue   troops  of 

185 


CHAP.  V. 


BOMtLETiC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK, 


temptations  is  glorious  (Matt.  xii.  45  ; 
Isa.  lix.  19  ;  Phil.  i.  27).— Bishop  Hall. 
The  Legion  of  sin. — Truly  the  name 
of  sin  is  Legion.  It  is  anger,  malice, 
intemperance,  murder,  impurity,  un- 
faithfulness, dishonesty,  equivocation, 
dissimulation,  falsehood,  hypocrisy,  in- 
gratitude, disobedience,  impatience, 
discontentment,  envy,  covetousness  ;  it 
is  profanity,  formality,  superstition, 
idolatry,  blasphemy,  and  atheism.  It 
is  a  repudiation  of  the  authority,  a 
defiance  of  the  power,  a  slight  to  the 
wisdom,  a  contempt  of  the  holiness,  and 
unthankfulness  for  the  goodness  of 
God.  It  is  the  cause  of  all  the  error, 
conflict,  cruelty,  suffering,  weeping,  and 
woe  that  exist  in  this  world.  Like  a 
foul  demon,  it  has  poisoned  and  pol- 
luted, blighted  and  cursed,  everything 
it  has  touched.  It  has  caused  man,  the 
noblest  work  of  God,  to  become  the 
destroyer  of  his  own  soul,  the  murderer 
of  his  brother,  the  enemy  of  his  God. — 
A.  Thompson. 

Yer.  12.  The  prayer  of  the  demons. — 
1.  The  language  of  conscious  degrada- 
tion. The  demons  knew  there  was 
an  inexorable  necessity  carrying  them 
downwards ;  the  lake  of  unutterable 
woe  would  receive  them  at  length  ;  but 
they  felt  as  if  it  would  be  a  breaking 
of  their  fall,  a  something  less  than  their 
ultimate  misery,  to  take  up  their  abode 
even  in  the  vilest  and  most  loathsome 
of  the  brute  creation.  Think  not  that 
you  can  indulge  your  vicious  propensi- 
ties without  debasing  your  moral 
nature,  or  that  you  can  tempt  others 
to  moral  depravity  without  yourself 
becoming  more  depraved.  2.  The  lan- 
guage of  conscious  terror  and  alarm. 
That  wof  ul  and  degrading  punishment 
they  would  acquiesce  in,  nay,  acknow- 
ledge as  a  mark  of  condescension  and 
favour,  hoping  thereby  to  effect  at  least 
a  temporary  delay  of  their  ultimate 
sentence  to  the  lake  of  endless  perdi- 
tion. They  gain  their  wish ;  their 
prayer  is  answered  ;  and  with  it  in- 
creasing debasement,  and  the  consum- 
mation of  woe.  Yerily,  it  is  a  dangerous 
thing  to  tamper  with  our  moral  nature, 

186 


and  to  take  even  a  single  step  that 
leads  down  the  terrible  declivity. — 
J.  Cochrane. 

Yer.  13.  Jesus  gave  them  leave. — 
Thus  His  power  over  the  world  of 
spirits  was  shown  to  be  absolute ;  they 
could  not  operate  even  on  the  lower 
animals  without  His  permission,  much 
less  could  they  dominate  men,  the  sheep 
of  His  pasture.  And  at  the  same  time 
this  hidden  world  was  demonstrated  to 
be  very  real  and  very  formidable, 
encompassing  our  path,  restlessly  seek- 
ing to  mar,  and  to  deface,  and  to 
destroy.  Hereby  too  the  sufferer  was 
assured  of  his  cure,  and  realised  from 
what  a  tremendous  evil  he  had  been 
delivered ;  he  was  afforded  a  visible 
proof  of  that  supernatural  region  ;  he 
was  allowed  a  glimpse  behind  that  veil 
which  mortal  eye  cannot  penetrate. — 
W.  J.  Deane. 

Why  such  destruction  ? — Some  think 
that  the  herd  belonged  to  Jews,  who 
were  thus  justly  punished  for  dealing 
with  animals  forbidden  by  the  law. 
But  if  the  owners  were  Gentiles,  another 
reason  may  be  given.  The  heathen 
may  have  needed  to  be  taught  the 
reality  of  demoniacal  possession,  and 
that  it  was  the  providence  of  God  alone 
that  preserved  them  from  evils  worse 
than  those  which  they  saw  exemplified 
in  the  demoniacs  and  the  swine ;  or 
they  might  thus  learn  that  salvation  is 
of  the  Jews,  and  that  it  was  the  same 
God  who  gave  to  them  their  laws  who 
shewed  His  authority  over  evil  spirits 
by  the  demolition  of  the  herd. — Ibid. 

The  drowning  of  the  herd  does  not 
appear  to  have  entered  into  the  calcu- 
lations of  the  unclean  spirits.  They 
desired  houses  to  live  in  after  their 
expulsion,  and  for  them  to  plunge  the 
swine  into  the  lake  would  have  defeated 
their  purpose.  The  stampede  was  an 
unexpected  effect  of  the  commingling 
of  the  demoniac  with  the  animal 
nature,  and  outwitted  the  demons. 
"  The  devil  is  an  ass."  There  is  a 
lower  depth  than  the  animal  nature ; 
and  even  swine  feel  uncomfortable 
when   the  demon  is  in  them,  and  in 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   V 


their  panic  rush  anywhere  to  get  rid 
of  the  incubus,  and,  before  they  know, 
find  themselve  struggling  in  the  lake. 
"Which  things  are  an  allegory." — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  14,  15.  Miracles  not  necessarily 
convincing. — No  miracle  could  be  more 
decisive,  or  more  directed  to  the  hearts 
of  men,  than  that  which  Christ  worked 
on  this  occasion,  and  yet  it  produced  no 
good  effect  whatever  on  the  Gadarenes. 
The  fact  is,  that  much  previous  educa- 
tion and  preparation  are  necessary  in 
order  to  make  a  miracle  effectual ;  in 
certain  cases  it  may  be  wholesome  or 
even  necessary,  but  it  is  of  the  nature 
of  a  very  violent  medicine,  which  if 
administered  indiscriminately  may  do 
much  more  harm  than  good.  Might 
not  one  of  the  purposes  of  our  Lord 
in  working  this  miracle,  which  in  some 
respects  is  of  so  exceptional  a  kind, 
have  been  to  shew  how  impracticable 
it  would  have  been  for  Him  to  establish 
His  kingdom  in  the  world  by  mere 
force  of  miracles  ? — Bishop  H.  Goodwin. 

Yer.  15.^4.  reformed  character. — W  hen 
the  formerly  careless  and  mad  wanderer 
after  this  world's  vain  bubbles  is 
under  the  salutary  influence  of  Divine 
grace,  where  is  he  to  be  found,  and 
what  is  he  doing  ?  He  is  to  be  found 
"  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,"  receiv- 
ing the  instruction  which  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  imparts,  watching  daily  at 
wisdom's  gates,  and  waiting  at  the 
posts  of  wisdom's  doors.  He  is  to  be 
found  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house, 
waiting  to  hear  what  God  the  Lord 
will  say  unto  him  by  the  Divine  Word. 
He  becomes  a  companion  of  all  those 
that  fear  God  and  keep  His  command- 
ments. He  now  delights  in  the  society 
of  those  as  the  excellent  of  the  earth, 
whom  he  formerly  hated  and  reviled 
as  needlessly  precise  or  superstitiously 
religious. — E.  Edwards. 

Lessons. — 1.  How  one  spirit  may 
disturb  a  whole  household  —  make 
every  means  of  happiness  vain — render 
all  the  resources  for  enjoyment  of  no 
worth  !     All  these  resources  only  say, 


How  happy  we  might  be  !  There  is 
a  relief  when  our  sorrow  comes  from 
sickness,  accident,  the  visitation  of  God ; 
but  when  it  comes  from  moral  insanity, 
the  arrow  is  barbed  indeed,  and  strikes 
and  rankles  deep.  How  much  there 
is  of  this — from  intemperance,  dis- 
honesty, passion,  selfishness,  sensuality, 
and  meanness !  2.  Jesus  can  trans- 
form this  wild  spirit  and  send  him 
home  a  blessing.  The  moral  maniac 
has  been  tamed !  The  ferocious  tiger 
has  departed,  and  the  serenity  of  a 
true,  manly  soul  has  appeared — like 
the  passing  of  the  thunderous  clouds 
that  made  night  awful,  and  the  coming 
forth  of  the  morn,  pouring  her  baptism 
of  light  on  hill  and  tower  and  on  the 
rolling  river  and  the  home.  3.  Do 
not  let  us  shake  all  this  off  with  the 
passiug  hour,  because  we  are  not 
maniacs  and  cannot  go  home  as  such. 
But  let  this  be  our  question  :  Where 
do  we  stand  between  this  extreme,  and 
what  we  should  be  ?  Here  is  the 
terrible  maniac,  and  there  is  Jesus — 
where  are  we  ?  With  which  have  we 
the  most  features  of  character  in  com- 
mon ? — Henry  Bacon. 

Ver.  17.  Sins  of  communities. — 1.  It 
is  possible  for  communities  as  com- 
munities to  sin,  to  transgress  the  law 
of  righteousness,  to  incur  guilt.  2. 
When  a  town  as  a  town,  or  a  parish 
as  a  parish,  by  its  own  vote  and  deter- 
mination, does  what  is  wrong,  the 
bad  consequences  of  the  evil  act  are 
very  likely  to  involve  those  who  dis- 
approved of  the  unrighteousness  along 
with  those  who  favoured  it.  3.  The 
duty  which  attaches  to  all  right-minded 
people  of  trying  to  prevent  this  thing. 
By  the  words  we  speak,  the  opinions 
we  express,  the  preferences  we  hint, 
the  disapprovals  we  venture,  the  judg- 
ments we  utter,  the  votes  we  cast,  we 
do  all  of  us  and  every  one  help  to  give 
character  to  the  aggregate  of  public 
opinion.  How  are  we  to  exercise  this 
power  of  influence  as  we  ought  ?  By 
always  seeking,  as  God  gives  us  grace 
to  do  so,  to  take  the  worthiest  and 
highest  view    of    every  question  that 

187 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


comes  before  us. — W.  R.  Huntington, 
D.D. 

Entreating  Christ  to  depart. — It  is 
an  entreating  of  Christ  to  depart  out 
of  our  coasts,  whenever  we  allow  our- 
selves in  ever  so  little  a  matter  to  put 
profit  before  principle,  to  prefer  gain 
to  godliness.  The  permanence  and 
stability  of  all  we  value  most  in  social 
life,  the  maintenance  of  mutual  con- 
fidence, the  preservation  of  the  purity 
of  home — these  and  many  other  such 
precious  possessions  depend  on  being 
able  to  keep  Christ  within  our  borders. 
—Ibid 

A  Christless  world. — That  will  be 
indeed  a  fatal  day  for  society  if  ever 
the  voices  of  those  who  would  have 
Christ  depart  should  so  far  prevail  as 
to  secure  the  accomplishment  of  the 
wish.  Picture  the  Christless  world 
rolling  on  its  dismal  course  through 
space,  no  homes  of  prayer  anywhere 
upon  its  surface,  no  gathered  con- 
gregations lifting  the  voice  of  worship, 
no  kneeling  suppliants  interceding  for 
the  sick  and  sorrowing,  no  bread  of 
life,  no  cup  of  blessing,  no  tender 
ministries  of  loving  care  and  sym- 
pathy, no  children  taught  to  say 
"  Our  Father,"  no  holy  benediction  for 
man  and  wife,  no  word  of  trustful 
hope  for  the  dying,  no  utterance  of 
faith  in  a  joyful  resurrection  over  the 
dead — nothing  of  all  this,  but,  instead, 
only  one  long,  hard,  selfish  struggle  to 
see  who  shall  be  richest  and  who  shall 
be  strongest  in  a  life  of  which  the 
grave  is  the  acknowledged  end. — Ibid. 

The  difficulty  of  saving  work. — Those 
who  are  acquainted  with  missionary 
exertions,  either  of  ancient  or  modern 
times,  to  plant  the  gospel  in  heathen 
countries,  know  with  what  extreme 
difficulty  any  saving  effect  is  wrought. 
In  most  instances,  perhaps,  the  Word 
of  life  has  been  rejected,  and  Christ 
desired  to  depart  out  of  their  coasts, 
as  an  unwelcome  guest,  who  was  come 
to  torment  them  before  the  time. 
But  need  we  go  far  from  home  to  see 
this  ?  When  any  attempt  is  made  to 
revive  practical  religion  in  our  days, 
and  to  call  the  attention  of  nominal 

188 


Christians  to  those  grand  truths  which 
they  profess  in  words,  how  is  the 
attempt  received  ?  When  Christ  is 
faithfully  preached,  and  the  doctrines 
of  His  religion  explained  and  pressed 
upon  men's  consciences,  how  do  they 
behave  ?  When  any  among  them  are 
persuaded  to  receive  Christ  into  their 
hearts  by  faith,  to  come  out  from  the 
world  which  lieth  in  wickedness,  and 
to  devote  themselves  to  His  service, 
how  are  they  treated  by  their  unbe- 
lieving friends?  Is  there  not  still 
something  in  the  presence  of  Christ, 
and  the  close  application  of  His  doc- 
trines to  the  mind  and  conscience,  that 
is  tormenting?  Is  not  a  life  formed 
upon  the  principles  of  the  gospel 
offensive  to  those  who  will  not  receive 
nor  act  upon  those  principles  ? — 
W.  Richardson. 

Yers.  18,  19.  Lessons. — 1.  This 
shews  how  dear  the  presence  of  Christ 
is  to  those  who  have  seen  and  felt  His 
grace.  2.  Let  us  submit  readily  to 
our  Lord's  will  in  all  His  denials  of 
our  requests.  3.  Let  us  reflect  on  the 
experience  we  have  had  of  the  power 
and  compassion  of  Christ.  4.  What 
noble  subjects  religion  furnishes  for 
domestic  converse!  5.  How  graciously 
Christ  adapts  our  sphere  of  labour  to 
the  state  of  the  body  and  mind  !  6.  Be 
content  to  labour  in  the  humblest  and 
most  private  sphere. — H.  Bel/rage,  D.D. 

Yer.  1 9.  Home. — A  man  may  be  said 
to  have  two  lives  in  one — his  public 
and  his  home  life.  Those  who  work 
with  him  through  the  week  can  tell 
you  his  outward  character,  his  habits, 
his  appearance ;  but  there  may  be  a 
great  deal,  whether  of  good  or  bad, 
that  they  do  not  know  because  they 
do  not  know  his  home.  If  they  did, 
they  might  respect  him  more  than 
they  do  already,  or  despise  him  more 
than  they  do  already,  but  probably 
their  opinion  of  him  would  not  remain 
the  same.  1.  Home  is  the  refuge  of 
affections.  Among  strangers  we  might 
be  misunderstood  or  condemned ;  at 
home  we  are  believed  in ;  they  who 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   V. 


know  us  best,  know  that,  with  all  our 
faults,  there  is  something  to  care  about. 
2.  Home  is  a  place  of  memories.  In 
your  own  household  pleasures  need 
never  be  far  to  seek  while  you  recall 
together  things  which  happened  years 
ago.  3.  The  best  homes  are  also 
centres  of  personal  religion.  "Go 
home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them " 
all  that  God  teaches  you,  all  that  God 
has  given  you  to  know  of  His  dealings  : 
tell  those  at  home  in  the  best  of  all 
speech,  that  of  your  daily  example. — 
W.  R.  Hutton. 

The  Lord's  doings. — 1.  Christ  is  ready 
to  do  all  for  His  people  that  He  con- 
sistently can  do.  2.  Christians  are 
bound  to  tell  all  that  Christ  has  done 
for  them.  3.  Why  does  Christ  not 
do  more  for  many  of  His  disciples  ? 
Chiefly  because  they  do  not  make  an 
honest  surrender  of  themselves  and  all 
they  possess  to  Him.  4.  Christians 
should  seek  to  know  more,  experi- 
mentally, that  they  may  have  more 
to  tell.  5.  If  Christians  had  more  to 
tell  of  the  Saviour's  wonderful  works 
in  them,  and  were  more  faithful  in 
telling  it,  our  country  would  soon  be 
brought  to  Christ. — J.  B.  Shaw,  D.D. 

How  the  gospel  is  to  be  propagated. — 
1.  It  is  to  be  declared  at  home.  2.  It 
is  to  be  founded  on  personal  experi- 
ences. 3.  It  is  to  acknowledge  the 
power  and  goodness  of  God  alone. — 
J.  Parker,  D.D. 

What  has  Christ  done  for  us  ? — What 
is  our  present  state  as  compared  with 
our  former  condition  ?  What  is  our 
moral  tone  ?  What  is  our  attitude  in 
relation  to  the  future?  If  we  can 
answer  these  questions  satisfactorily, 
we  have  a  sufficient  reply  to  all  con- 
troversial difficulties  and  to  all  specu- 
lative scepticism. — Ibid. 

Be  fruitful. — The  first  act  God  re- 
quires of  a  convert  is,  "  Be  fruitful." 
The  good  man's  goodness  lies  not  hidden 
in  himself  alone ;  he  is  still  strengthen- 
ing his  weaker  brother.  How  soon 
would  the  world  and  Christianity  fail, 


if  there  were  not  propagation  both  of 
it  and  man !  Good  works  and  good 
instructions  are  the  generative  acts  of 
the  soul,  out  of  which  spring  new 
prosperity  to  the  Church  and  gospel 
(Luke  xxii.  32;  John  i.  40,  41,  45, 
xv.  16 ;  Rom.  i.  11 ;  James  v.  19,  20). 
— 0.  Feltham. 

Ver.  20.  A  thankful  heart  can 
not  easily  confine  itself  within  the 
narrow  bounds  of  gratitude  prescribed 
to  it.  There  are  some  graces  which 
are  proper  to  be  published ;  and  there 
are  others  which  ought  to  be  concealed. 
It  is  just  to  publish  those  which,  being 
preceded  by  heinous  sins,  cannot  be 
ascribed  to  anything  but  the  pure 
mercy  of  God,  and  which  are  visibly 
counterbalanced  by  our  demerits.  It 
is  the  safer  way  to  conceal  such  as 
may  be  looked  on  as  the  reward  of 
great  fidelity  in  making  a  good  use  of 
those  which  a  man  has  received  before. 
The  glory  of  God  and  the  advantage 
of  our  neighbour  are  the  rules  to  be 
observed  on  this  occasion.  He  who 
does  not  publish  them  of  his  own 
accord,  when  they  are  extraordinary 
in  their  kind,  and  the  example  may 
be  dangerous  to  the  weak,  shelters  his 
neighbour's  weakness  under  the  veil  of 
silence,  and  his  own  under  that  of 
obedience. — P.  Quesnel. 

Marvelling. — The  demoniac's  narra- 
tive would  shew  these  people  that  it 
was  not  Jesus  whom  they  had  to  fear, 
but  evil  spiritual  powers  to  whose  in- 
vasions their  lives  and  habits  exposed 
them,  and  would  thus  prepare  them  to 
receive  with  favour  the  preaching  of 
the  apostles  after  Christ's  ascension 
and  the  Pentecostal  effusion  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  The  immediate  effect  of 
the  missionary's  story  is  related  alone 
by  Mark :  "  and  all  men  did  marvel." 
Such  marvelling  is  the  beginning  of 
faith  ;  it  leads  to  consideration  of  the 
claims  of  the  Wonder-worker,  and 
acknowledgment  of  His  Divine  power, 
— W.  J.  Dearie. 


189 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—43. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  ix.  1,  18-26 ;  Luke  viii.  40-56.) 

Vers.  21-24,  35-43.  Jairus1  daughter. — I.  The  faith  of  a  father. — 1.  It  was 
Christward.  "  Behold,  there  cometh,"  etc.  He  came  to  Christ  when  all  human 
power  was  useless.  He  had  confidence  in  the  superhuman  power  of  Christ. 
He  had  seen  Christ  cast  out  the  fiend  in  the  synagogue.  He  knew  of  the 
recovery  of  the  centurion's  servant.  These  mighty  deeds  planted  the  seed  of 
faith  in  his  heart.  Personal  trial  was  needed  to  make  it  grow  and  bring  forth 
fruit.  Afflictions  are  blessings  if  they  bring  us  to  Christ.  2.  It  was  humble. 
"  Fell  at  His  feet."  Jairus  saw  beyond  the  outward  poverty  of  Christ.  He,  a 
man  of  rank  and  position,  prostrate  before  Christ,  conscious  of  his  own  inferiority. 
No  place  on  earth  higher  than  the  feet  of  Jesus.  To  fall  is  to  rise.  Those 
who  lie  at  His  feet  shall  hereafter  sit  on  His  right  hand.  3.  It  was  earnest. 
"Besought  Him  greatly."  He  knew,  felt,  begged,  one  thing.  The  blessing 
sought  was  precious.  Only  Christ  could  give  it.  Jesus  delights  to  hear  passionate 
prayer.  Each  tear  is  a  jewel,  each  cry  an  oration.  Csesar  said,  "  The  voices 
of  the  distressed  crying  for  my  help  make  sweetest  music  in  my  ears."  A  father 
delays  granting  the  request  of  his  darling  child,  not  that  he  is  heedless  of  its 
appeals,  but  he  likes  to  hear  its  little  voice.  Jesus  often  delayed  to  answer, 
not  that  He  disliked  giving,  but  because  He  liked  the  asking.  4.  It  was 
imperfect.  "  Come,  and  lay  Thy  hands,"  etc.  His  faith  was  inferior  to  that 
of  the  centurion.  "  Say  the  word  only,"  etc.  Healing  while  being  absent  a 
mystery  to  Jairus.  Instrumentality  not  essential  to  Christ.  The  secret  of 
success  was  in  Himself.  Distance  no  disadvantage.  Now  that  He  has  exchanged 
worlds  He  is  still  the  same. 

II.  The  death  of  a  daughter. — She  was  twelve  years  old,  and  dying.  A  very 
trying  age  in  which  to  lose  her.  There  was  mutual  entwining  of  affections. 
They  had  arranged  for  her  future.  They  had  promised  to  themselves  much 
comfort  from  her.  How  insecure  are  the  most  promising  earthly  objects  ! 
Jairus'  daughter,  like  a  beautiful  flower,  fades  in  its  budding.  Her  day  closed 
early — night  before  noon.  Her  death  full  of  pathos.  1.  The  death  of  a 
young  daughter.  2.  The  death  of  an  only  daughter.  3.  The  death  of  a  loved 
daughter.  4.  The  death  of  a  good  daughter.  The  fact  that  she  was  so  beloved 
implies  that  she  was  all  that  could  be  desired. 

III.  The  sympathy  of  the  Saviour. — 1.  It  was  prompt  in  its  action.  Jesus 
was  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  personal  enjoyment  for  the  good  of  others.  2.  It 
was  new  in  its  sphere  (ver.  35).  It  is  implied  that  death  is  incurable.  Jesus, 
the  Infallible  Physician,  can  cure  the  disease  of  death.  His  power  reiches  to 
both  sides  of  mortality — this  and  other  side.  3.  It  was  contemptuously  treated. 
"  Laughed  Him  to  scorn."  What  others  called  death  Jesus  called  sleep  ;  and 
as  we  with  ease  awake  the  sleeper,  so  Christ  can  awake  the  dead.  Hitherto 
this  power  of  Christ  was  unrevealed,  hence  the  mockery.  Their  laughter  was 
serviceable  to  Christ,  for  it  proved  the  reality  of  her  death.  So  Christ  was  no 
impostor.  They  unconsciously  reared  a  platform  on  which  He  displayed  His 
Divine  power.  4.  It  was  blessed  in  its  results.  (1)  Resurrection  of  the  dead. 
(2)  Joy  to  the  household.  (3)  Impetus  to  the  truth.  (4)  Glory  to  Christ. — r 
B.  D.  Johns. 

Vers.  25-34.  The  timid  woman's  touch. — I.  Salvation  is  through  Christ,  not  in 
human  endeavours. — Here  was  a  woman  who  had  been  an  invalid  for  twelve 
years.     In  that  time  she  had  faithfully  sought  the  best  medical  advice  to  be 

190 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  v. 


had,  had  done  her  utmost  to  obtain  a  cure,  had  spent  all  that  she  had  in  her 
endeavour  to  find  relief.  But  it  had  done  no  good.  It  is  not  strange,  indeed, 
when  we  consider  the  empiricism  of  medicine  in  that  day,  that  this  was  so. 
To  cure  the  disease  of  this  woman  there  was  a  great  variety  of  remedies. 
Among  other  things,  she  was  to  be  set  in  a  place  where  two  ways  met,  with  a 
glass  of  wine  in  her  hand,  and  some  one  was  to  come  up  behind  her  and  frighten 
her.  Or  seven  ditches  were  to  be  dug,  in  which  the  shoots  of  grape-vines  were 
to  be  burned,  and  then  with  a  cup  of  wine  in  her  hand  she  was  to  sit  down  in 
each.  No  wonder  the  poor  woman  "  was  nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grew 
worse."  This  is  the  great  lesson  here  :  Men  try  to  heal  themselves  of  their  sins 
by  their  own  devices.  They  go  to  human  advisers  in  their  sense  of  need.  One 
tells  the  sin-sick  man,  as  Burns  was  told,  to  drive  away  his  melancholy  by 
gay  company  ;  another,  as  Theodore  Parker  did  in  Boston  years  ago,  sneers  at 
the  idea  of  sin  ;  another,  as  did  Comte,  tells  men  to  worship  humanity.  Others 
hope  by  a  pretty  good  sort  of  a  life,  as  the  phrase  goes,  to  come  out  right, 
though  without  any  very  definite  idea  of  how  it  is  to  be.  Now,  in  opposition  to 
all  this,  nothing  is  more  plainly  taught  in  Scripture  than  that  salvation  must  be 
through  Christ. 

II.  Salvation  is  through  personal  effort,  and  does  not  come  by  waiting. — 
There  is  danger  of  swinging  from  the  error  just  considered  to  the  opposite 
extreme,  and  doing  nothing.  Men  sometimes  make  a  wrong  use  of  the  doctrine 
of  election,  and  persist  in  waiting  for  religious  influences  instead  of  coming  to 
Christ  without  delay.  They  are  practically  fatalists.  It  was  not  so  with  this 
woman.  She  kept  saying,  "  If  I  touch  but  His  garments,  I  shall  be  made 
whole."  She  evinced  determination  and  perseverance.  No  one  will  fail  to-day 
who  comes  to  Christ  in  a  similar  spirit.  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  Me,  I  will  in 
no  wise  cast  out."  God  appoints  us  something  to  do  in  receiving  salvation. 
We  must  at  least  reach  out  our  hand  for  it  and  accept  it.  We  must  shew 
such  a  desire  for  it  as  to  seek  it.  God  does  not  want  heaven  filled  with  puppets, 
to  move  only  as  He  pulls  the  string.  He  wants  Godlike  men,  men  to  be  holy 
as  He  is  holy,  and  this  can  be  only  as  each  man  in  the  sovereignty  of  his  own 
free-will  decides  for  himself  whether  or  not  he  will  accept  the  salvation  of 
Christ.  But  further  than  this,  as  man  is  made,  God  could  not  force  salvation 
on  us  against  our  will.  Salvation  would  be  impossible  without  an  acceptance  on 
our  part.  It  would  not  be  salvation,  but  punishment,  to  be  forced  into  heaven 
if  we  did  not  wish  it  or  enjoy  it. 

III.  Salvation  is  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  not  by  mere  contact  with  Him. 
— Many  are  at  church  from  Sunday  to  Sunday  listening  to  the  truths  taught 
by  the  Saviour,  without  any  personal  interest  in  them  or  purpose  to  apply  them. 
They  are  there  from  curiosity  or  habit,  or  because  others  are,  and  have  no 
thought  or  wish  to  accept  Christ  for  themselves.  They  cannot  receive  salvation 
in  such  a  frame  of  mind.  They  must  put  forth  the  hand  and  touch  Him. 
Contact  is  not  enough.  There  was  a  spring  in  California  where  many  came  and 
drank.  All  admired  its  clear  water  and  sought  it  in  turn  to  slake  their  thirst. 
But  one  who  knelt  there  with  the  rest  saw  what  the  others  did  not,  recognised 
a  vein  of  glittering  gold  lying  beneath  the  water,  put  forth  his  hand,  and  made 
his  fortune.  The  difference  between  the  throngs  in  Christian  lands,  who  do  not 
accept  Christ  and  those  who  do  is  a  similar  difference.  The  one  fail  to  take 
Christ  to  themselves,  though  perhaps  gathering  around  Him  in  admiration. 
The  others  see  His  infinite  worth  and  eagerly  take  the  treasure  offered  them. 

IV.  Salvation  is  by  simple  faith,  and  not  by  elaborate  works. — We  trust 
Jesus — that  is  all.  The  mode  of  expressing  our  trust  is  an  insignificant 
matter.  There  was  a  certain  young  people's  society  which  had  a  warm  dis- 
cussion as  to  whether  in  their  meetings  the  voting  should  be  done  by  word  of 

191 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


mouth  or  by  a  shew  of  hands.  It  was  a  question  of  absolute  insignificance. 
The  things  of  importance  were  that  they  should  have  a  definite  mind  on  the 
subjects  considered,  should  make  up  their  minds  aright,  and  then  should  express 
their  wills  clearly.  The  method  by  which  their  will  was  expressed  was  immaterial, 
so  long  as  it  was  expressed.  So  is  it  in  regard  to  faith  in  Christ.  It  is  of  the 
utmost  importance  that  we  commit  ourselves  to  Christ,  but  how  that  committal 
shall  express  itself  is  a  matter  of  comparative  indifference.  We  are  like  a  party 
under  guidance  through  a  country  infested  by  hostile  Indians.  Such  a  party  is 
bound  to  follow  its  guide  implicitly.  It  is  its  only  hope.  We  must  trust 
ourselves  implicitly  to  the  guidance  of  Christ.  He  alone  knows  what  is  best 
for  us  to  do.  He  alone  can  guide  us  through  the  dangers  of  life,  so  that  we 
shall  come  out  safely  at  the  last. 

V.  Salvation  is  through  Divine  love,  and  not  by  any  mystical  virtue. — The 
woman  touched  the  border  of  Christ's  garment,  that  white  fringe  attached  to 
the  blue  ribbon  which  bound  His  robe.  She  went  to  Christ  very  much  as  many, 
two  centuries  ago,  went  to  King  Charles  of  England  to  be  healed  of  the  king's 
evil  by  his  touch.  But  Christ  called  the  woman  out  of  the  crowd  and  forced 
her  to  acknowledge  her  dependence  upon  Him,  partly  to  teach  her  and  us  that 
He  was  personally  concerned  in  her  healing.  It  was  not  something  with  which 
His  will  had  nothing  to  do.  It  was  a  result  brought  about  by  His  knowledge 
of  her  need  and  her  faith.  She  must  see  that  Christ's  aid  was  His  free  gift, 
and  not  to  be  surreptitiously  taken  from  Him ;  that  He  knew  her  desire  and 
freely  and  lovingly  gave  her  help. 

VI.  Salvation  comes  through  confession,  and  not  in  secret. — It  was  a  sore 
trial  for  the  poor  woman  to  be  called  to  make  an  acknowledgment  of  Christ 
before  that  unsympathetic  company.  Why,  <then,  was  this  sacrifice  required  of 
her?  1.  It  was  for  the  good  of  others.  It  is  important  that  the  world  know 
that  we  are  saved  by  Christ.  Sometimes  Christ  did  not  allow  His  healings  to  be 
heralded,  because  it  was  not  safe  for  Him  to  excite  too  much  publicity ;  but 
generally  He  did.  There  is  no  reason  now  why  we  should  not  confess  Him,  and 
every  reason  why  we  should.  I  have  somewhere  read  a  narrative  of  the  escape 
of  a  large  company  from  Malay  pirates  in  the  South  Seas.  A  boat  was  dis- 
covered by  two  or  three  of  the  captives.  They  could  easily  step  on  board  by 
themselves,  silently  drop  down  the  river,  and  so  escape.  But  they  could  not 
bear  to  leave  behind  the  large  company  of  their  friends  held  in  torture  and 
danger  of  death.  So  they  went  back,  told  their  friends  their  discovery  and  the 
possibility  of  escape  it  opened,  and  urged  all  to  undertake  it.  At  night  the 
whole  company,  including  babes  in  arms,  slipped  out,  passing  sleeping  guards, 
tiptoed  their  way  to  the  river,  and  so  escaped.  We  honour  the  few  who  risked 
all  their  hopes  rather  than  leave  the  rest  behind.  There  are  striking  points  of 
similarity  in  our  duty  to-day.  To  be  sure,  we  risk  nothing  in  helping  others  to 
escape  from  their  sins ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  to  find  the  way  of  escape  our- 
selves, and  to  be  unwilling  to  tell  others  of  the  way  when  we  have  found  it,  is 
such  ungenerous  conduct  that  we  can  scarcely  conceive  it  possible  in  a  Christian. 
2.  But  this  confession  of  Christ  is  required,  not  only  for  the  good  of  others,  but 
for  our  own  good  quite  as  much.  How  much  this  woman  would  have  lost  had 
not  Christ  obliged  her  to  confess  Him  !  She  needed  just  this  to  be  confirmed  in. 
her  assurance  of  permanent  healing.  She  needed  spiritual  blessing  as  well  as 
physical  aid.  She  needed  to  take  a  stand  on  Christ's  side  for  the  sake  of 
developing  her  character.  She  was  thus  brought  nearer  to  her  Lord.  Many 
a  despondent  one,  questioning  his  salvation,  has  instantly  found  peace  when  he 
came  forward  and  confessed  Christ  by  joining  the  Church, — A>  P>  Foster, 

m 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP    V. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 


Yers.  22-24,  35-43.  Various  phases 
of  faith. — 1.  Supplicating  faith  heard 
by  Jesus.  2.  Eager  faith  tried  by- 
Jesus.  3.  Sinking  faith  strengthened 
by  Jesus.  4.  Thankful  faith  perfected 
by  Jesus.  —J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D. 

Christ  in  His  offices. — View  Christ 
here  as — 1.  The  Consoler  (ver.  36). 
2.  The  Kevealer  (ver.  39).  3.  The 
Conqueror  of  death  (ver.  42).  4.  The 
True  Man  (ver.  43).  5.  The  Divine 
Physician,  ready  to  apply  to  each 
applicant  the  remedy  required. 

Ver.  23.  "  The  point  of  death."— 
I.  The  point  of  death  is  a  point  of 
mark.  The  sound  mind  contemplates 
it,  not  as  at  a  distance,  but  as  at  hand. 
The  believer  keeps  it  in  his  eye.  He 
knows  it  is  not  the  goal,  but  only  the 
starting-point  into  eternity. 

II.  The  point  of  death  is  a  point  of 
moment — a  momentous  point  indeed. 
It  is  such  when  a  man-child  is  born 
into  the  world,  and  still  more  so  when 
he  is  born  a  second  time.  Surely  it  is 
not  less  so  when  the  moment  strikes 
that  fixes  his  eternal  destiny ! 

III.  The  point  of  death  is  a  point 
of  interest.  Life  is  the  seed-time ; 
when  death  comes,  it  is  harvest — the 
time  of  reaping,  and  of  reaping  that 
very  kind  of  grain  which  we  have 
sown. 

IV.  The  point  of  death  is  a  point  of 
reference.  It  refers  man  to  the  future 
— to  the  hell  from  which  he  is  to  flee, 
to  the  heaven  for  which  he  is  to  pre- 
pare, and  within  the  one  or  other  of 
which  his  eternity  is  to  be  passed. 
When,  therefore,  you  are  reading  the 
folio  pages  of  truth  and  duty,  study 
also  the  marginal  references,  and  be 
ready  to  meet  thy  God. 

V.  The  point  of  death  is  a  point  of 
fact.  The  disease  which  is  to  carry  us 
off  may  now  be  in  our  veins,  the  place 
where  we  are  to  die  is  mapped  off,  the 
machinery  of  the  providence  is  all  set 
up,  and  known  unto  God  is  the  moment 
in  which  the  wheels  are  to  go  round; 


so  that  man  is  as  good  as  dead.  It 
is  only  a  question  of  a  little  time — so 
very  little,  that  we  may  almost  sup- 
pose it  traversed. 

VI.  The  point  of  death  is  the  final 
point,  the  closing  period  in  the  last 
paragraph  of  the  last  chapter  of  life. 
It  is  the  "  finis  "  indeed.  Does  it  not 
therefore  become  us  to  ascertain  what 
kind  of  death  we  are  all  dying  ? 

VII.  In  a  word,  the  point  of  death 
ought  to  be  the  point  of  preference. 
There  is  no  sin  in  Paul's  estimate,  that 
departing  to  be  with  Christ  is  "far 
better."  Only  we  would  need  to  see 
that  our  hope  is  on  the  right  founda- 
tion ;  if  not,  departing  must  be  far 
worse  than  to  live,  vexing  and  soul- 
harrowing  as  life  often  is.  Your  pre- 
ference will  not  be  unsafe,  and  unsound 
it  cannot  be,  if  you  have  by  faith  seen 
Jesus  at  the  point  of  death,  yea,  dead 
for  you.  In  that  moment  you  have 
reached  the  point  of  life. — John  Mac- 
farlane,  LL.D. 

"  The  point  of  death." — This  is  one 
point  to  which  every  one  must  come. 
The  paths  of  earth  run  in  very  diverse 
ways,  but  they  all  pass  at  last  "  the 
point  of  death."  It  is  a  point  that  lies 
hidden  from  view ;  no  one  knows  the 
day  or  the  hour  when  he  will  come  to 
it,  and  yet  somewhere  along  the  sunny 
years  it  waits  for  every  one.  Some- 
times this  point  is  struck  in  early 
youth.  Even  the  children  should  think 
about  dying,  not  as  a  sad  and  terrible 
thing,  but  as  a  point  to  which  they 
must  come,  and  for  which  they  should 
prepare. — J.  R.  Miller,  D.D. 

The  beginning  of  eternity. — O  most 
dreadful  point,  which  art  the  end  of 
time  and  beginning  of  eternity !  O 
last  moment  of  life  !  O  first  of  eter- 
nity !  How  terrible  is  the  thought  of 
thee,  since  not  only  life  is  to  be  lost 
in  thee,  but  to  be  accounted  for !  .  .  . 
Admirable  is  the  high  wisdom  of  God, 
which  hath  placed  a  point,  in  the 
midst,  betwixt  time  and  eternity,  unto 
which  all  the   time  of   this  life  is  to 

>  193 


chap.  v.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


relate,  and  upon  which  the  whole  eter-  Christ  misses  the  train  which  was  to 

nity  of   the   other   is   to   depend !     O  convey   him   to   his   destination.      He 

moment,  which   art  neither  time  nor  frets  a  little,  but  sets  out  to  walk  the 

eternity,  but  art  the  horizon  of  both,  ten  miles  as  best  he  may.    He  is  picked 

and    dividest    things    temporal    from  up  by  a  kind  stranger  in  a  carriage, 

eternal !  .  .  .    O    moment,    in    which  a  man  of  the  world,  who  has  not  been 

the  just  shall  forget   all  his  labours,  in  the  house   of  God   for   years.     He 

and  shall  rest  assured  of  all  his  virtues !  speaks  a  word,  gives  a  book,   thanks 

0  moment,  which  art  certain  to  be ;  the  stranger  in  the  Master's  name  for 
uncertain,  when  to  be ;  and  most  cer-  his  kindness,  and  joys  to  learn  some 
tain,  never  to  be  again !  I  will  there-  years  after  that  he  missed  the  train 
fore  now  fix  thee  in  my  memory,  that  in  order  to  be  the  messenger  of  eternal 

1  may  not  hereafter  meet  thee  in  my  life  to  a  heedless  sinner. — H.  Bonar, 
eternal   ruin    and   perdition  ! — Bishop  D.D. 

J.  Taylor. 

Yer.  25.  Long  affliction. — It  pleases 

Vers.  25-34.  The  faith  of  this  woman  God  to  lay  long  and  tedious  afflictions 

was — 1.  Secretly  nourished.     2.  Cour-  on  some  of  His  servants  in  this  life, 

ageously  shown.     3.  Immediately  dis-  1.    To     manifest    His     great     power, 

covered.       4.    Humbly    acknowledged,  strengthening  them  to  bear  such  long 

5.  Nobly  crowned. — J.  J.  Van  Ooster-  afflictions.     2.  To  magnify  His  mercy 

zee,  D.D.  in   delivering   them   at  length  out  of 

By-errands  in  GooVs  service. — In  His  them.    3.  That  He  may  make  thorough 

blessed  path  as  the  Healer  He  is  ever  proof  and  trial  of  their  faith,  patience, 

willing  to  be  arrested  by  the  sons  of  and  other  graces  of  His  Spirit  in  them, 

men,    counting  this   no   detention,  no  4.  To  wean  them  from  this  world,  and 

trouble,    no    hindrance,    but    the   true  to  stir  up  in  them  a  longing  for  heaven, 

fulfilment    of    His    heavenly    mission.  5.  To    make    them   more    earnest   in 

Opportunities     such     as     these     were  prayer  to  Him  for  deliverance.     It  is 

welcome  to  Him ;  nor  was  He  at  any  therefore  no  evidence  of  God's  wrath, 

time  too  busy,  too  much  in  haste,  to  nor  any  sufficient  reason  to  prove  such 

take  up  the  case  of  the   needy,  how-  an  one  to  be  out  of  His  favour,  whom 

ever  suddenly  brought  before  Him.     To  He  so  holds  for  a  long  time  under  the 

Him   no  interruption   was  unwelcome  cross.     Be  well  content,  then,  to  bear 

which  appealed  to  His  love  or  power,  afflictions,  though  of  long  continuance, 

I  know  not  whether  we  prize  our  own  submitting  in  this  matter  to  the  will 

by -errands     sufficiently,     our     "  acci-  of  God,  who  knows  it  to  be  good  and 

dental"   opportunities   of    working   or  profitable  for   some   to   be   kept   long 

speaking  for  God.     We  like  to  plan,  under  discipline.  —  G.  Petter. 
and  carry  out  our  plans  to  the  end ; 

and  we  do  not  quite  like  interruptions  Yer.  26.  God  often  the  last  resource 
or  detentions.  Yet  these  may  be,  of  sorrow. — It  is  a  great  piece  of  in- 
after  all,  our  real  work.  Little  can  fidelity  for  men  not  to  think  of  God  in 
we  guess,  when  forming  our  plans  for  afflictions  until  they  have  experienced 
the  day,  on  what  errands  God  may  the  insufficiency  of  human  remedies, 
send  us  ;  and  as  little  can  we  foresee,  What  a  mercy  is  it  to  be  forced  to 
when  setting  out  even  on  the  shortest  have  recourse  to  God,  by  misfortunes, 
journey,  what  opportunity  may  cross  diseases,  or  the  ill-usage  of  men  !  See 
our  path  of  serving  the  Master  and  here  a  representation  of  those  phy- 
blessing  our  fellow-men.  Whitefield,  sicians  of  souls  who,  not  acting  in  the 
on  his  way  to  Glasgow,  is  drawn  aside  name  and  in  the  spirit  of  Christ,  do 
unexpectedly  to  tarry  a  night  in  the  nothing  else  but  feed  and  increase  their 
house  of  strangers.  To  that  family  maladies.  Men  are  very  far  from 
be   brings  salvation.      A  minister   of  doing  as  much  for  the  health  of  the 

194 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   V. 


soul  as  for  that  of  the  body,  and  from 
giving  all  for  eternal  salvation,  as  they 
willingly  spend  all  they  have  for 
temporal  life.  They  are  apt  to  seek 
out  such  physicians  from  whom  they 
may  suffer  little  or  nothing,  such  as 
are  likely  to  be  most  easy  and  gentle  ; 
and  scarce  will  they  hear  speak  of 
bestowing  some  slight  alms.  What 
wonder  then,  if  such  persons  are 
nothing  bettered,  but  rather  grow 
worse  ! — P.  Quesnel. 

Vers.  27-29.  The  means  of  grace. — 
It  was  not  the  hem  of  His  garment 
that  stanched  her  sickness.  No;  but 
it  was  the  Divine  power  and  the 
Divine  love  which  lay  beneath  the 
garment.  So  with  the  means  of  grace  ; 
they  are  blessed  to  our  souls  because 
they  are  the  channels  through  which 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  Jesus  comes 
to  us  to  cleanse  and  to  heal.  The  out- 
ward words  of  prayer  cannot  profit  a 
man  unless  the  heart  rises  with  them. 
To  say  prayers  without  thought  of  God 
is  to  trust  to  an  outward  sign,  not  to 
the  love  and  power  of  the  Saviour. 
So  also  of  the  sacraments.  The  out- 
ward elements  in  the  Eucharist  are  as 
the  hem  of  His  garment ;  we  receive 
them  in  the  hand  and  in  the  mouth : 
even  as  the  woman  touched  His  skirts. 
They  are  blessed  to  the  soul,  not  because 
they  are  outward  elements,  but  because 
through  them  there  flows  to  us  the  virtue 
and  the  strength  of  that  body  and  blood 
of  which  the  elements  are  the  Divinely 
appointed  pledges  and  tokens  and 
vehicles.  And  to  this  blessing  two 
things  are  needful :  the  assured  pre- 
sence of  Christ  on  His  part ;  faith  in 
His  presence  and  in  His  love  upon  our 
part. 

Soul-sickness. — By  how  much  the 
soul  is  of  more  value  than  the  body, 
by  how  much  eternity  outweighs  time, 
by  how  much  deliverance  from  ever- 
lasting misery  and  a  title  to  eternal  life 
transcend  the  comforts  and  pleasures 
of  this  world,  by  how  much  the  favour 
and  lovingkindness  of  the  Lord  are 
to  be  esteemed  more  than  all  that  this 
earth  can  supply,  just  by  so  much  is  it 


more  the  part  of  a  rational  and  im- 
mortal being  to  be  in  earnest  about 
the  prosperity  of  his  soul  than  about 
the  health  of  his  body. 

The  distress  of  sin. — Our  sins  and 
troubles  are  not  so  grievous  to  us  as 
was  this  woman's  infirmity  to  her ; 
and  yet  they  are  greater  evils.  Our 
untempered,  coarse,  rude  nature,  our 
hard  pride,  our  foolish  running  after 
men's  smiles  and  praises,  our  vanity  in 
all  things,  our  misconception  of  our- 
selves, our  mistakes  and  foibles,  our 
foolish  faults  and  sins — do  they  dis- 
tress us  much  ? — H.  W.  Beecher. 

Ver.  29.  The  grace  of  Christ  is  the 
only  remedy  for  all  the  most  inveterate 
diseases  of  the  soul.  This  will  dry  up 
the  very  fountain  itself  of  sin,  which  is 
concupiscence,  when  the  time  of  the 
perfect  reign  of  charity  shall  come. 
It  at  present  stops  the  course,  the 
reign,  and  the  dominion  of  concu- 
piscence. The  healing  operation  of 
grace  alone  can  do  all  in  a  moment : 
the  delays  of  it  do  not  proceed  from 
inability  and  necessity,  but  from  dis- 
pensation and  wisdom.  When  will  it 
be,  O  my  Saviour,  that  it  shall  drain  ' 
in  me  the  source  of  all  sin,  that  it 
shall  dry  up  that  fountain  of  corrup- 
tion and  iniquity  which  I  carry  in  my 
flesh  and  in  my  heart  ? — P.  Quesnel. 

Vers.  30-34.  Love  in  detection. — It 
was  love,  not  harshness,  which  made 
the  Lord  detect  this  woman,  who  had, 
as  it  were,  stolen  from  Him  a  blessing. 
Her  faith  was  weak,  and  He  would 
strengthen  it.  He  would  not  suffer 
her  to  go  away  to  her  home  without 
confessing  Him  as  her  Healer,  and 
rendering  Him  thanks.  He  wished  to 
give  her  His  best  blessing ;  she  had 
only  received  a  foretaste.  Her  humility 
might  seem  cowardice,  and  He  would 
make  her  brave.  Her  silence  might 
be  want  of  gratitude,  and  He  would 
teach  her  thankfulness.  Not  yet  had 
she  heard  His  voice  or  fully  known  all 
His  love.  But  now  that  He  has  seen 
her  and  called  her  to  Him,  she  is  no 
longer  timid,  for  she  has  "  told  before 

195 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


all  the  multitude  for  what  cause  she 
had  touched  Him,  and  how  she  was 
healed  immediately "  ;  and  then  the 
words  are  spoken  which  bring  her  His 
fullest  blessing  :  "  daughter,"  etc. — 
Bishop  Blunt. 

Sought  out. — Not  because  He  did 
not  know  her  did  He  seek  her  out, 
but  because  those  who  were  with  Him 
did  not  know  her,  and  because  He 
would  not  have  her  lose  the  honour, 
nor  them  the  benefit,  which  the  mani- 
festation of  her  faith  and  its  success 
might  yield.  This  detection  and  mani- 
festation were  not  designed  to  make 
her  a  gazing-stock,  but  to  set  her 
forth  as  an  example  and  pattern,  which 
might  encourage  others  to  come  to 
the  same  almighty  and  exhaustless 
Fountain  of  strength  and  love  for 
higher  benefits  and  more  spiritual 
gifts. 

Ver.  31.  Two  kinds  of  touch. — It  is 
not  because  we  surround  and  follow 
after  Christ,  in  frequenting  the  services 
and  even  the  sacraments  of  the  Church, 
thronging  to  its  teaching,  interesting 
ourselves  and  taking  our  part  in  its 
works  of  piety  and  charity,  sharing 
loudly  and  warmly  in  its  controversies, 
watching  closely  its  movements,  re- 
joicing in  its  progress,  and  lamenting 
over  its  checks  and  hindrances — it  is 
not  because  we  do  all  this,  and  even 
more,  that  we  are  justified  in  taking 
ourselves  out  of  the  class  of  mere 
spectators  of  the  redemptive  work. 
As  it  must  be  a  particular  kind  of 
wire  to  draw  down  the  electric  current 
from  the  thunder-cloud,  so  it  is  only 
a  special  kind  of  touch — the  touch 
of  faith — which  draws  forth  healing 
virtue  from  Christ. 

Yer.  34.  Not  superstition,  but  faith. 
— What  some  of  us  would  have  sneered 
at  as  superstition  Christ  here  dignifies 
by  the  name  of  faith.  We  pity  the 
poor  deluded  devotees  who  crowd  to 
Lourdes,  or  eagerly  touch  a  relic  or 
bow  before  a  sacred  image — we  pity 
them  and  laugh  at  them  ;  but  perhaps 
God  sees  more  that  is  worthy  of  love 

196 


and  Divine  approbation  in  that  faulty, 
superstitious  worship  than  in  our  cold 
intellectual  belief  and  our  well-balanced 
creeds. 

Faith  is  essentially  a  personal  alle- 
giance to  Jesus  Christ.  Whoever  is 
drawn  to  Him  from  any  motive,  who- 
ever reverences  and  trusts  Him  in  any 
way,  touches  the  heart  of  Christian 
faith. 

Imperfect  faith. — Where  this  woman's 
faith  was  imperfect  ours  may  be  com- 
plete. She  came  secretly,  distrusting 
His  willingness,  believing  only  in  His 
power  to  help.  It  is  our  privilege  to 
come  -boldly  to  the  throne  of  His  grace, 
knowing  that  He  is  far  more  anxious 
than  we  to  heal  every  sickness  of  our 
soul,  and  that  He  has  provided  in  the 
Holy  Communion  a  blessed  means  of 
spiritual  contact  with  Himself. 

Vers.  35,  36.  Two  views  taken  of  the 
same  case. — 1.  There  is  the  human 
view — the  child  is  dead,  trouble  not 
the  Master.  Men  see  the  outside ; 
they  deal  with  facts  rather  than  with 
principles  ;  they  see  the  circumference, 
not  the  centre.  2.  There  is  Christ's 
view — only  believe ;  man  is  called 
beyond  facts,  he  is  called  into  the 
sanctuary  of  God's  secret.  We  often 
put  the  period  where  God  Himself 
puts  only  a  comma :  we  say  "  dead," 
when  God  Himself  says  "  sleepeth." 
— J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Vers.  36-43.  Christ's  simplicity  in 
miracle-working. — Our  Lord  in  this 
miracle  did  His  utmost  to  lower  in  the 
minds  of  the  parents  any  sense  of  their 
obligation  to  Him  for  the  kindness 
which  He  designed  to  shew  them.  He 
prepared  it  by  a  kind  of  Divine  equi- 
voque :  "  The  maid  is  not  dead,  but 
sleepeth."  He  would  have  it  appear 
that  He  was  doing  nothing  more  than 
banishing  sleep  from  the  eyes  of  the 
slumbering  damsel ;  that  by  this  means 
He  might,  I  think,  put  to  shame  those 
persons  who  arrogate  to  themselves  so 
much  praise  for  their  insignificant 
services ;  whereas  He  lessened  the 
immensity    of    His    benefits    by    His 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


chap.  V. 


modest    way    of    conferring    them. — 
Segneri. 

Ver.  37.  Secret  work. — Let  us  thus 
learn  from  Christ  not  to  impart,  ex- 
cept only  to  a  few  chosen  persons,  those 
works  of  God  which  we  propose  to 
undertake,  for  fear  lest  they  should 
be  obstructed.  The  Spirit  of  God  would 
have  us  labour  in  secret  as  much  as 
possible ;  whereas  the  spirit  of  the 
world  continually  affects  noise  and 
applause. — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  39.  Sleep  the  image  of  death. — 
Both  are — 1.  Preceded  by  weariness. 
2.  Accompanied  by  a  rest.  3.  Fol- 
lowed by  a  wakening. — ./.  J.  Van 
Oosterzee,  D.D. 

Why  did  He  thus  speak  ? — Because 
so  soon  would  He  recall  her  spirit 
from  the  other  world  that  it  would  be 
like  an  awakening  from  sleep — a  sleep 
shorter  than  that  of  an  ordinary  night's 
repose.  Yes ;  but  the  Lord  meant 
more  than  that  by  these  words.  He 
meant  that  the  death  of  the  body  was 
not  death,  but  only  sleep.  The  word 
"death"  He  reserved  for  something  more 
terrible — the  death  of  the  higher,  truer 
life,  the  death  of  the  spirit.  That  alone 
was  death  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  of 
life.  He  would  have  men  think  little 
of  the  decay  of  bodily  powers,  or  of  the 
corruption  which  followed  on  the  disso- 
lution of  the  outward  frame,  in  com- 
parison with  the  decay  and  death  and 
corruption  of  the  spiritual  life.  Death 
spiritual  alone,  in  His  sight,  was  worthy 
of  the  name  of  death,  because  life 
spiritual  alone  was  worthy  of  the  name 
of  life. — Bishop  Blunt. 

Ver.  40.  Jesus  with  the  dead. — 
1.  Notice,  first,  the  solitude  of  Jesus 
in  the  midst  of  those  men  and  women. 
He  was  the  only  man  who  had  that 
great  faith  so  that  He  could  declare  it. 
And  how  hard  it  is  to  be  hopeful  alone  ! 
A  gloomy  atmosphere  depresses  a  man  ; 
the  surroundings  of  mourning  break 
the  most  courageous  spirits.  It  was 
what  Christ  was  which  made  Him  able 
to  stand  alone ;  it  was  what  He  was 


that  made  Him  the  Leader  of  the  human 
race.  In  the  world  disciples  were  faith- 
less, in  the  garden  disciples  slept,  on 
the  Cross  His  friends  deserted  Him.  Let 
us  not  be  too  indignant  as  we  read  of 
those  facts.  It  was  the  condition  of 
His  success  that  it  should  be  so.  It 
was  by  that  that  He  shewed  Himself 
the  Saviour  of  men,  the  Incarnate  Son 
of  God.  It  was  that  which  put  Him 
in  advance  of  every  position  which  any 
son  of  man  had  ever  taken.  Separat- 
ing Him  from  all  others,  it  placed  Him 
where  all  others  could  come  up  to  Him. 
2.  Notice,  next,  that  though  Christ  felt 
His  power,  and  asserted  it  only  more 
boldly  in  the  presence  of  those  hopeless 
men  and  women,  that  power  could  not 
or  did  not  work  until  they  had  all  been 
put  forth  from  the  room.  It  shews  us 
the  distinction  between  two  things  that 
we  often  confuse.  Unfavourable  cir- 
cumstances may  hinder,  but  they  cannot 
kill,  true  power.  We  cannot  do  in  one 
moment  what  Jesus  did — turn  out  all 
adverse  influences — and  so  we  let  them 
tell  us  that  they  are  all-powerful.  The 
actions  of  Christ  among  those  men  were 
tokens  of  all  His  action  everywhere. 
When  He  prepared  the  way  for  that 
miracle,  quickly  as  it  may  have  been 
done,  it  told  the  story  that  His  power 
is  never  more  truly  present  than  when 
it  is  preparing  the  way  for  its  own 
perfect  working.  It  is  not  what  we 
accomplish,  but  what  we  persist  in  for 
our  God,  which  saves  us.  However 
unfavourable  your  circumstances,  hin- 
dering great  accomplishments,  however 
hard  the  battle  full  of  stubborn  enemies 
and  hard  reverses,  however  small  the 
gleanings  of  our  poor  sterile  fields,  the 
faith  that  fought  on  the  one  and 
worked  on  the  other  shall  work  salva- 
tion, and  restore  to  the  life  of  God  its 
Father  the  soul  that  was  dead  in  sin. 
That  is  a  gospel  to  carry  to  the  dis- 
couraged millions  of  the  earth,  and  by 
it  to  nerve  them  to  new  effort.  3.  After 
turning  out  all  the  other  mourners  and 
the  minstrels,  Jesus  took  the  parents 
of  the  child,  and  entered  into  the  room, 
and  brought  the  child  to  life.  Those 
parents  by   their  presence  seemed   to 

197 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


form  the  connexion  between  the  faith- 
ful Christ  and  the  unbelieving  world, 
for  they  had  a  relation  to  both.  Doubt- 
less to  them  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  She 
is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth,"  must  have 
seemed  very  strange  ;  they  could  not 
have  meant  all  to  them  that  they  did 
to  Him.  And  yet  their  parental  love 
must  have  fastened  on  them  with  a 
hope  which  did  not  allow  them  to  join 
in  the  scornful  laughter  with  which 
others  greeted  them.  They  found  a 
response  in  the  deepest  feelings  of  their 
hearts,  which  no  others  there  appre- 
ciated ;  and  so  their  presence  was  no 
hindrance  to  that  miracle-working 
power  of  Christ.  And,  doubtless,  in 
those  wailings  a  hope  kept  alive  by  a 
parent's  love  had  yearned  for  something 
more,  and  was  ready  for  it  when  it 
came. — A.  Brooks. 

Christ's  attitude  towards  earthly  rela- 
tionships.— Such  a  deed  as  He  proposed 
to  do  must  be  done  in  silence,  and 
yet  not  in  loneliness.  The  parents 
were  there  ;  He  regarded  their  claim  to 
be  present.  Parents  are  the  natural 
guardians  of  youth  and  infancy.  This 
act  is  not  at  variance  with  what  He 
elsewhere  says  about  leaving  father 
and  mother  for  His  sake,  nor  does  it 
contradict  what  He  says  about  the 
division  and  conflict  which  He  intro- 
duces into  family  life.  Divisions  can 
only  exist,  or  at  least  be  permanent, 
where  the  presence  and  authority  of 
Christ  are  disregarded  by  the  parents 
on  the  one  hand,  or  the  child  on  the 
other.  Where  His  presence  is  desired, 
though  at  first  sight  He  may  seem  to 
disparage  or  lightly  esteem  blood  rela- 
tionship, yet  in  the  end  we  shall  find 
He  has  cemented  earthly  relationship, 
and  bound  father  to  child  or  child 
to  father  by  closer  ties,  not  of  earth 
only,  but  of  heaven  too. — G.  Walker. 

Ver.  41.  "  Talitha  cumi"  was  a 
common  term  of  endearment,  used  by 
loving  mothers  to  wake  their  children. 
The  old  familiar  words  were  what  Jesus 
used.  They  seem  to  tell  that  in  the 
glad  waking,  after  the  sleep  of  death, 
there  will   be   nothing   startling.      It 

198 


will  all  be  just  as  natural  as  waking 
now.  The  old  familiar  love  which  has 
blessed  us  here  will  greet  us  there. 

In  the  hand  of  God. — If  God  vouch- 
safe not  to  take  our  heart  in  His  hand, 
it  will  never  recover  from  its  sin.  The 
sacred  humanity  is  as  it  were  the  hand 
and  instrument  of  the  Divinity,  to 
which  it  is  united  in  the  person  of  the 
Word.  It  is  from  this  humanity  that 
our  life  proceeds,  because  it  was  in  this 
that  Christ  died  and  rose  again,  and 
completed  His  sacrifice.  He  is  man, 
since  He  takes  this  dead  person  by  the 
hand ;  He  is  God,  since  He  commands 
her  to  live  and  to  arise,  and  is  imme- 
diately obeyed. — P.  Quesnel. 

Vers.  42,  43.  The  order  of  conversion. 
— 1.  To  rise,  by  forsaking  sin,  its  habits 
and  occasions.  2.  To  walk  a  long  time 
in  good  works.  3.  To  retire  from  the 
world,  and  to  keep  silence  for  some 
time.  4.  To  eat  the  living  bread  of 
the  Eucharist.  One  ought  to  take  great 
care  not  to  give  this  bread  to  a  dead 
person.  That  which  ought  to  precede 
this  Divine  food,  according  to  the  order 
here  intimated  by  Christ,  is,  that  a 
man  should  rise,  leave  the  bed  wherein 
he  was  dead,  and  walk  in  the  practice 
of  virtue,  with  such  edification  as  even 
to  cause  admiration  in  those  whom  he 
had  before  offended  and  scandalised  by 
his  sins. — Ibid. 

Silence  enjoined. — 1.  It  was  better  for 
the  parents  and  better  for  the  child 
to  think,  and  not  to  talk,  about  this 
great  blessing.  It  is  seldom  good,  even 
for  rulers  and  their  families,  to  be  the 
objects  of  interest,  curiosity,  and  gossip. 
2.  The  Lord  did  not  want  men  to  re- 
gard Him  merely  as  One  who  wrought 
signs  and  wonders,  healed  the  sick  and 
raised  the  dead,  but  wished  the  report 
of  His  Divine  teaching  to  precede  or 
accompany  the  fame  of  His  wonderful 
works.  3.  The  Lord  would  not  need- 
lessly multiply  His  marvellous  works. 
Though  the  child's  life  had  been  mira- 
culously restored,  it  was  not  to  be 
miraculously  sustained. — Bishop  Blunt. 

The  injunction  as  to  food. — It  is 
often  said  that  this  is  a  proof  of  Christ's 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.  V. 


moderation  and  reason  in  the  use  of 
His  miraculous  powers.  He  who  raised 
from  the  dead  gave  no  miraculous 
supply  of  food.  The  lesson  goes  still 
further,  as  it  shews  how  the  miraculous 
power  goes  on,  after  its  first  exhibition, 
to  affect  all  other  methods  of  work. 
They  who  before  mourned  her  as  dead 
were  now  to  give  her  food  as  living. 
Jesus  had  conquered  those  who  laughed 
Him  to  scorn  ;  and  now  those  who,  by 
their  faithlessness,  seemed  to  shut  the 
poor  girl  away  from  life,  were,  because 
His  power  had  intervened,  to  do  all  in 


their  power  to  help  her  life.  She  was 
to  walk  through  the  world,  meeting 
friends  who  once  had  mourned  her, 
demanding  and  obtaining  the  tribute 
of  their  friendship  in  a  better  and 
richer  way.  So  Jesus  changes  the 
world  from  a  hopeless  to  a  hopeful 
place. — A.  Brooks. 

Eternal  life. — Faith  itself  and  the 
new  birth  conduct  us  to  eternal  life, 
not  merely,  as  once  received,  but  as 
preserved  (Luke  xxii.  32  ;  Acts  xiii.  43  ; 
Heb.  iii.  14). — J.  Milner. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    V. 


r      Vers.  2-5.  A  man  in  ruins.— Can  anything 
be  more  sad  than  the  wreck  of  a  man  ?     We 
mourn  over  the  destruction  of  many  noble 
things  that  have  existed  in  the  world.     Men, 
when  they  hear  of  the  old  Phidian  Jupiter — 
that  sat  forty  feet  high,  carved  of  ivory  and 
gold,  and  that  was  so  magnificent,  so  tran- 
scendent, that  all  the  ancient  world  counted 
1  im    unhappy    that    died    without    having 
seen  this  most  memorable  statue  that  ever 
existed  in  the  world — often  mourn  to  think 
that  its  exceeding  value  led  to  its  destruc- 
tion, and  that  it  perished.     It  was  a  great 
loss  to  art  that  such  a  thing  should  perish. 
Can    any   man  look   upon  the  Acropolis — 
shattered  with  balls,  crumbled  by  the  various 
influences    of    the     elements,    and    utterly 
destroyed — and  not    mourn  to  think    that 
such   a  stately   temple,   a    temple    so    un- 
paralleled in    its   exquisite   symmetry  and 
beauty,  should  be  desolate  and  scattered  ? 
Can  there   be   anything    more   melancholy 
than    the    destruction,    not    only   of    such 
temples  as  the  Acropolis  and  the  Parthenon, 
but  of  a  whole  city  of  temples  and  statues  ? 
More  melancholy  than  the  destruction  of  a 
statue,  or  a  temple,  or  a  city,  or  a  nation,  in 
its  physical  aspects,  is  the  destruction  of  a 
man,  the  wreck  of  the  understanding,  the 
ruin  of  the  moral  feelings,  the  scattering  all 
abroad   of   those   elements   of  power  that, 
united  together,  make  man  fitly  the  noblest 
creature  that  walks  on  the  earth.    Thousands 
and  thousands  of   men  make  foreign  pil- 
grimages to  visit  and  mourn  over  fallen  and 
destroyed   cities   of    former    grandeur  and 
beauty  ;  and  yet,  all  round  about  every  one 
of  us,  in  every  street,  and  in  almost  every 
neighbourhood,  there  are  ruins  more  stupen- 
dous, more  pitiful,  and  more  heart-touching 
than  that   of  any  city.     And  how  strange 
would  be  the  wonder  if,  as  men  wandered 
in  the  Orient,  there  should  come  some  one 
that  should  call  from  the  mounds  all  the 


scattered  ruins  of  Babylon,  or  build  again 
Tadmor  of  the  desert  !  How  strange  it 
would  be  to  see  a  city,  that  at  night  was 
a  waste  heap,  so  restored  that  in  the  morn- 
ing the  light  of  the  sun  should  flash  from 
pinnacle,  and  tower,  and  wall,  and  roof  I 
How  marvellous  would  be  that  creative 
miracle  !  But  more  marvellous,  ten  thousand 
times,  is  that  Divine  touch  by  which  a  man, 
broken  down  and  shattered,  is  raised  up  in 
his  right  mind,  and  made  to  sit,  clothed,  at 
the  feet  of  Jesus. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

Ver.  3.  The  tombs. — In  the  East  the  recep- 
tacles of  the  dead  are  always  situated  at  some 
distance  from  the  abodes  of  the  living ;  and 
if  belonging  to  kings  or  men  of  rank,  are 
spacious  vaults  and  magnificent  structures, 
containing,  besides  the  crypt  that  holds 
the  ashes  of  their  solitary  tenants,  several 
chambers  or  recesses  which  are  open  and 
accessible  at  the  sides.  In  these  the  be- 
nighted traveller  often  finds  a  welcome 
asylum ;  in  these  the  dervishes  and  santons, 
wandering  mendicants  that  infest  the  towns 
of  Persia  and  other  Eastern  countries,  gener- 
ally establish  themselves,  and  they  are  often, 
too,  made  the  haunts  of  robbers  and  lawless 
people,  who  hide  themselves  there  to  avoid 
the  consequences  of  their  crimes.  Nor  are 
they  occupied  only  by  such  casual  and 
dangerous  tenants.  When  passing  through 
a  desolate  village  near  the  Lake  of  Tiberias, 
Giovanni  Finati  saw  the  few  inhabitants 
living  in  the  tombs  as  their  usual  place  of 
residence  ;  and  at  Thebes  the  same  traveller, 
when  he  was  introduced  to  Mr.  Beechy,  the 
British  Consul,  found  that  gentleman  had 
established  himself,  while  prosecuting  his 
researches  among  the  ruins  of  that  celebrated 
place,  in  the  vestibule  of  one  of  the  tombs 
of  the  ancient  kings.  Captain  Light,  who 
travelled  over  the  scene  of  our  Lord's  inter- 
view with  the  demoniac,  describes  the  tombs 

199 


CHAP.  V. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


as  still  existing  in  the  form  of  caverns  cut 
in  the  live  rock,  like  those  at  Petra — as  wild 
and  sequestered  solitudes,  divided  into  a 
number  of  bare  and  open  niches,  well  suited 
to  be  places  of  refuge  to  those  unhappy 
lunatics  for  whom  the  benevolence  of  anti- 
quity had  not  provided  a  better  asylum. 

V  Vers.  11-15.  The  demoniac's  restoration. — 
A  victim  of  intemperance  was  dashing  him- 
self hither  and  thither  at  risk  of  life,  in  vain 
attempts  to  elude  the  monstrous  phantom 
serpent  he  saw  assailing  him.  Nurses  and 
physicians  were  baffled.  Opiates  had  no 
effect.  The  man  must  sleep,  or  he  must  die. 
A  new  physician  was  summoned.  He  entered 
the  room  with  a  huge  bare  knife,  attacked 
the  phantom  serpent,  fought  it,  drove  it 
under  the  bed,  while  the  cowering  wretch 
watched  every  motion  in  an  agony  of  alter- 
nating hopes  and  fears ;  stabbed  it  again 
and  again,  slew  it,  dragged  it  across  the 
floor,  threw  it  from  the  door,  locked  the 
door  again ;  and  the  sufferer,  with  a  great 
sigh  of  relief,  sank  into  a  slumber  which 
saved  his  reason  and  his  life.  May  not  such 
an  experience  throw  light  upon  the  fact  that 
Jesus  allowed  the  demons  to  enter  into  the 
swine  and  drive  them  down  a  steep  place 
into  the  sea,  where  they  were  choked  ?  Cer- 
tainly not  until  he  had  seen  that  did  the 
demoniac  sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  "  clothed,  and  in 
his  right  mind." 

Ver.  13.  The  destructive  character  of  sin. — 
S  atan's  work  is  a  work  of  destruction.  Nearly 
seven  hundred  years  ago  Jenghis  Khan 
swept  over  Central  Asia,  and  it  is  said  that, 
for  centuries  after,  his  course  could  be 
traced  by  the  pyramids  of  human  bones — the 
bones  of  slaughtered  captives — which  his 
armies  left  behind  them.  If  the  bones  of 
Satan's  slain  captives  could  be  piled  up  in 
our  sight,  what  a  pyramid  that  would  be  ! 
Self-mutilation  has  always  been  common 
among  the  worshippers  of  false  gods  ;  to  this 
day  the  fakirs  of  India  cut  and  gnash  them- 
selves with  knives.  The  devil  sets  his 
servants  at  the  same  unprofitable  task.  Alo- 
ed-Din,  the  chief  of  the  Assassins,  succeeded 
in  persuading  his  men  that  whoever  would 
fall  in  his  service  was  sure  of  paradise  ;  and 
so,  at  a  nod  of  their  chief,  the  poor  dupes 
would  stab  themselves  to  the  heart,  or  fling 
themselves  over  precipices.  Satan's  one  aim 
is  to  blind  his  captives,  and  lead  them  to 
self-destruction. 

Vers.  15,  16.  Transforming  influence  of 
Christianity. — A  young  man,  an  apprentice 
in  an  extensive  tin  factory  in  Massachusetts, 
who  had  formerly  been  very  profligate, 
having  applied  for  admission  into  a  Church, 
the  minister  called  on  his  master  to  inquire 
whether  any  change  had  been  wrought  in 
his  conduct,  and  whether  he  had  any  objec- 

200 


tion  to  his  reception.  When  the  minister 
had  made  the  customary  inquiries,  his 
master,  with  evident  emotion,  though  he 
was  not  a  professor  of  religion,  replied  in 
substance  as  follows :  Pointing  to  an  iron 
chain  hanging  up  in  the  room,  "  Do  you  see 
that   chain  ?  "   said  he.     "  That  chain  was 

forged  for  W .    I  was  obliged  to  chain 

him  to  the  bench  by  the  week  together,  to 
keep  him  at  work.  He  was  the  worst  boy  I 
had  in  the  whole  establishment.  No  punish- 
ment seemed  to  have  any  salutary  influence 
upon  him.  I  could  not  trust  him  out  of 
my  sight.  But  now,  sir,  he  is  completely 
changed — he  has  really  become  like  a  lamb. 
He  is  one  of  my  best  apprentices.  I  would 
trust  him  with  untold  gold.  I  have  no 
objection  to  his  being  received  into  com- 
munion.    I  wish  all  my  boys  were  prepared 

to  go  with  him." In  a  manuscript  by  an  old 

Scotch  minister,  in  the  early  part  of  the 
eighteenth  century,  there  is  a  remarkable 
account  of  the  conversion  of  Lord  Jeddart, 
who  had  been  famous  for  his  recklessness  in 
sin,  and  of  the  astonishment  it  caused  among 
Christian  people.  A  little  after  his  conver- 
sion, and  before  the  thing  was  known,  he 
came  to  the  Lord's  table.  He  sat  next  a 
lady  who  had  her  hands  over  her  face,  and 
did  not  see  him  till  he  delivered  the  cup  out 
of  his  hand.  When  she  saw  that  it  was 
Lord  Jeddart,  who  had  been  so  renowned 
for  sin,  she  fell  a-trembling  terribly  for  very 
amazement  that  such  a  man  should  be  there. 
He  noticed  it,  and  said,  "  Madam,  be  not 
troubled  :  the  grace  of  God  is  free  1 "  This 
calmed  the  lady;  but  when  we  consider 
what  sort  of  man  Lord  Jeddart  had  been, 

we  can  account  for  her  surprise. Guthrie, 

of  Fenwick,  a  Scotch  minister,  once  visited 
a  dying  woman.  He  found  her  anxious 
about  her  state,  but  very  ignorant.  His 
explanation  of  the  gospel  was  joyfully  re- 
ceived by  her,  and  soon  after  she  died.  On 
his  return  home,  Guthrie  said,  "  I  have  seen 
a  strange  thing  to-day — a  woman  whom  1 
found  in  a  state  of  nature  I  saw  in  a  state 

of  grace,  and  left  in  a  state  of  glory." 

"  When  I  get  to  heaven,"  said  John  Newton, 
"  I  shall  see  three  wonders  there :  the  first 
wonder  will  be  to  see  many  people  there 
whom  I  did  not  expect  to  see ;  the  second 
wonder  will  be  to  miss  many  people  whom 
I  did  expect  to  see;  and  the  third  and 
greatest  wonder  of  all  will  be  to  find 
myself  there." 

Ver.  17.  Rejection  of  Christ. — Even  so 
do  men  now  deal  with  their  Saviour.  He 
draws  nigh  to  us  in  His  Word  and  Sacra- 
ments. He  is  close  to  us  in  blessings  and 
in  the  discipline  of  life ;  but  we  will  not 
have  Him  to  teach  us.  We  fear  it  may 
interfere  with  our  plans  and  ways  of  life 
if  we  should  become  really  religious  I  In 
many  ways  we  "  beseech  Him  to  depart " — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK 


CHAP.  V. 


some  by  wilful  sins,  which  cannot  be  enjoyed 
in  the  presence  of  Christ.  The  busy,  active 
man,  who  lives  for  this  world  only,  has  no 
time  "  to  waste "  on  religion,  so  he  bids 
the  Redeemer  "depart."  The  thoughtless, 
careless  lover  of  pleasure,  looking  upon 
spiritual  claims  as  an  interruption  to  his 
amusements,  feels  no  need  for  a  Saviour 
and  hears  with  unconcern  His  retreating 
footsteps.  Alas !  how  many  will,  when  too 
late,  regret  their  neglect  of,  or  contempt 
for,  religion  !  A  few  years  ago,  the  Prime 
Minister  of  England  stepped  across  Downing 
Street  with  a  friend,  who  wanted  some 
information  from  one  of  the  Government 
officials.  They  entered  the  particular  office, 
and  on  inquiring  for  the  Head  of  the  Depart- 
ment were  curtly  told  to  "  wait "  by  an 
insolent  young  clerk,  who  did  not  even  look 
up  from  his  newspaper,  and  presently  added 
an  order  to  "  wait  outside."  When  the 
principal  official  returned,  he  was  thunder- 
struck to  find  the  Head  of  the  Government 
sitting  with  his  friend  on  the  steps  of  the 
stone  staircase.  Equally  surprised  was  the 
clerk  when,  to  his  dismay,  he  learned  by 
his  dismissal  the  result  of  his  careless  inso- 
lence. In  earthly  things  men  bitterly  regret 
"  chances  "  lost  or  thrown  away,  and  yet  we 
treat  with  indifference  our  opportunities  in 
the  spiritual  life  ! — Br.  Hardman. 

Folly  of  communities. — Bishop  Butler  had 
a  very  poor  opinion  of  the  wisdom  of  com- 
munities. His  chaplain,  Dean  Tucker,  tells 
that  he  one  day  asked  him  "  why  whole 
communities  of  public  bodies  might  not 
be  seized  with  fits  of  insanity,  as  well  as 
individuals,"  and  on  the  chaplain  declaring 
that  he  had  not  considered  the  subject,  the 
bishop  added :  "  Nothing  but  this  principle, 
that  they  are  liable  to  insanity  equally  at 
least  with  private  persons,  can  account  for 
the  major  part  of  those  transactions  of 
which  we  read  in  history." 

Ver.  19.  "  Tell  what  the  Lord  hath  done 
for  thee." — A  young  lady  sat  in  her  room  one 
day  reading  her  Bible,  and  came  to  this 
verse.  The  words  rang  in  her  ears,  and 
refused  to  leave  her,  until  she  resolved  she 
would  speak  to  the  first  person  she  met  on 
her  way  down  town.  Closing  her  book,  she 
donned  her  wraps,  and  stepped  into  the 
street  just  as  a  young  man,  who  was  one  of 
her  particular  friends,  was  passing.  As  they 
walked  along  together  she  tried  hard  to  find 
courage  to  speak  to  him  ;  but  each  time 
Satan  would  say,  Wait.  When  they  came 
to  the  place  of  separation,  they  lingered 
a  moment,  and  she  said,  "  George,  I  want 
to  tell  you  about  my  Friend,  one  that  has 
been  so  kind  and  good  to  me,  and  one  whom 
you  would  enjoy  to  know,  and  whose  influ- 
ence you  so  much  need."  Her  companion 
listened  with  unusual  earnestness.  "  George, 
I  want  to  see  you  under  the  care  and  influence 


of  my  Saviour.  Won't  you,  now,  just  give 
up  all,  and  take  hold  on  Him  ?  "  The  young 
man  was  deeply  impressed,  and  promised 
to  seriously  meditate  on  such  a  step,  at  the 
same  time  informing  his  friend  that  he 
would  leave  town  next  day  to  be  gone  some 
time  in  the  interest  of  his  employer.  The 
young  lady  passed  on  down  the  street  to 
attend  some  business,  thinking  little  more 
about  the  young  man,  until,  a  few  days 
after,  when  a  small  note  was  handed  her, 
bearing  these  words :  "  Mamie,  I  accepted 
your  Great  Friend  as  my  Friend  too:  am 
saved.  Oh,  how  glad  that  you  told  me  of 
Him !  Your  friend,  George."  The  words 
were  written  as  he  lay  dying  in  a  railroad 
wreck. 

Ver.  20.  Zeal  in  spreading  the  gospel. — 
A  remarkable  case  occurred  in  the  Batticaloa 
District.  It  was  that  of  a  heathen  who  was 
employed  in  one  of  the  mission  schools, 
not  to  teach  Christianity,  but  to  assist 
the  Christian  teacher  in  teaching  secular 
subjects.  Being  thus  brought  under  the 
influence  of  the  gospel,  his  mind  gradually 
opened  to  receive  the  truth ;  and  as  soon 
as  he  had  made  a  profession  of  Christ,  he 
had  a  desire  to  make  known  to  others  the 
glad  news  of  salvation.  Week  after  week, 
and  month  after  month,  he  walked  six  or 
eight  miles  to  a  distant  village,  without  pay, 
to  preach  Christ  to  the  people.  The  love  of 
Christ  constrained  him  to  the  work,  and  the 
result  was  that  nearly  all  the  people  of  that 
village  received  the  truth,  and  a  short  time 
after  the  missionary  there  baptised  on  one 
occasion  thirty-two  persons. 

Vers.  25-34.  A  testimony  to  Jesus. — At 
Caesarea  Paneas  there  might  been  seen,  as  late 
as  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century,  a  house, 
in  the  courtyard  or  garden  of  which  was  a 
group  in  bronze,  consisting  of  a  standing 
figure  and  a  woman  prostrate  at  its  feet. 
Julian,  the  Apostate  Emperor  of  Rome,  com- 
manded this  memorial  to  be  overthrown  by 
his  soldiers  and  destroyed.  It  was  a  monu- 
ment that  bore  testimony  to  the  faith  he 
had  renounced.  The  house  was  believed 
to  be  that  in  which  this  woman,  cured  of 
the  bloody  issue,  ended  her  days,  and  the 
group  represented  the  Divine  Healer  and 
His  fearing  and  trembling  patient. 

Ver.  27.  No  going  hack. — When  sinners 
sweep  away  every  other  delusion,  and  view 
Jesus  as  the  only  Saviour,  they  will  persevere 
till  they  find.  When  Cortez  went  to  conquer 
Mexico,  he  found  that  the  soldiers  were  few 
and  dispirited.  The  Mexicans  were  many, 
and  the  enterprise  hazardous.  The  soldiers 
would  have  gone  back  to  Spain,  but  Cortez 
took  two  or  three  chosen  heroes  with  him, 
and  went  down  to  the  seaside  and  broke  up 
all  the  ships ;  and  "  now,"  he  said,  "  we  must 

201 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


conquer  or  die.  We  cannot  go  back."  When 
it  is  death  or  life,  heaven  or  hell,  pardon  or 
condemnation,  the  sinner  will  be  as  deter- 
mined and  courageous  as  these  poor  Spaniards 
or  as  this  poor  woman. 

Ver.  28.  TJie  ordinances  of  the  Church 
may  be  compared  to  telephone  wires,  through 
which  messages  are  all  the  while  passing. 
You  may  climb  up  and  put  your  ear  to  the 
wire,  or  hold  it  in  your  hand,  but  you  will 
not  hear  a  word  of  all  the  important  messages 
that  are  flashing  through  it.  But  let  an 
operator  come  with  his  instrument,  and 
attach  it,  and  he  hears  every  word.  So  in 
the  ordinances  we  touch  the  invisible  wires 
that  bind  heaven  and  earth  together.  Along 
these  wires  messages  are  flying, — up  from 
earth  to  heaven,  prayers,  praises,  heart-cries, 
faith-filled  desires ;  down  from  heaven  to 
earth,  answers  of  comfort,  cheer,  joy,  and 
help,  blessings  of  pardon,  healing,  life,  peace. 

Ver.  34.  Faith  and  omnipotence. — Here  is 
an  exhaustless  reservoir  of  power,  the  power 
of  omnipotence,  and  the  means  by  which  it 
may  all  be  made  available  to  feed  our  lives. 
The  mill-owner  stores  up  in  a  reservoir  on 
the  heights  the  water  that  shall  run  his  mill. 
Then  he  needs  only  a  channel  or  sluice-way 
that  shall  bring  the  water  to  his  wheels.  If 
it  were  an  exhaustless  reservoir,  like  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  for  extent,  he  would  have  no 
fear  that  his  mill  would  run  dry.  These 
miracles  and  this  text  teach  the  Christian 
that  omnipotence  and  omniscience  alone 
bound  the  reservoir  of  his  spiritual  graces, 
and  that  he  has  under  his  own  control  the 
width  and  depth  of  the  channel  called  "  faith," 
which  brings  them  into  his  life.  When 
Franklin  grasped  the  principle  of  electricity, 
he  could  not  only  draw  the  lightning  from  a 
single  cloud — all  the  electricity  in  the  earth 
and  in  all  the  clouds  was  at  his  command, 
and  he  could  send  it  upon  his  errands.  When 
James  Watt  mastered  the  principle  of  the 
expansive  power  of  steam,  not  only  the  little 
cloud  of  vapour  that  issued  from  his  mother's 
tea-kettle  was  under  his  control,  but  all  the 
steam  that  could  be  generated  by  the  stored- 
up  combustibles  of  the  world  was  really  his. 
When  the  Christian  can  grasp  this  truth  of 
the  power  of  faith,  the  infinite  spiritual 
resources  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Ghost  are  his.  u  All  power  is  given 
unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth."  There  is 
the  reservoir.  "  All  things,  whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive." 
There  is  the  channel  that  conveys  the  power 
into  our  lives  and  makes  it  available. 

Ver.  36.  God  seeking  to  save. — God  be- 
seeches men  to  be  reconciled.  He  stands 
knocking — not  we.  Dr.  Munhall  in  an 
address  said  there  is  not  even  a  command  to 
any  sinner  to  pray  before  believing.    A  chal- 

202 


lenge  came  from  a  clergyman  in  the  audience, 
who  quoted  Kom.  x.  13  :  "  Whosoever  shall 
call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
saved."  "  Yes,"  says  Dr.  Munhall,  "  but 
read  the  next  verse  :  '  How  then  shall  they 
call  on  Him  on  whom  they  have  not 
believed?'" 

The  seeking  Saviour. — Mr.  Moody  was  one 
night  preaching  in  Philadelphia ;  near  the 
pulpit  sat  a  young  lady,  who  listened  with 
eager  attention,  drinking  in  every  word. 
After  he  had  done  talking,  he  went  to  her. 
"  Are  you  a  Christian  ?  "  "  No,"  she  replied, 
"  I  wish  I  were ;  I've  been  seeking  Jesus  for 
three  years."  Mr.  Moody  replied,  "  There 
must  be  some  mistake."  "  Don't  you  believe 
me  ?  "  said  the  distressed  girl.  "  Well,  no 
doubt  you  think  you  have  been  seeking  Jesus ; 
but,  believe  me,  it  don't  take  three  years  for 
a  seeking  soul  to  meet  a  seeking  Saviour." 
"  What  am  I  to  do,  then  ?  "  "  You  have  been 
trying  to  do  long  enough  ;  you  must  just 
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  Oh  1 " 
said  the  young  lady,  "  I  am  so  tired  of  that 
word,  '  Believe,'  '  believe,'  '  believe ! '  I 
don't  know  what  it  means."  "  Then  we'll 
change  the  word,  and  say,  'trust.'  "  "If  I 
say,  ' I'll  trust  Him,'  will  He  save  me  1  "  "I 
don't  say  that,  for  you  may  say  ten  thousand 
things  ;  but  if  you  do  trust  Him,  He  certainlv 
will."  "  Well,"  said  she,  "  I  do  trust  Him*; 
but  I  don't  feel  any  better !  "  "  Ah  ! "  said 
Mr.  Moody,  "  I  see  ;  you've  been  looking  for 
feelings  for  three  years,  instead  of  looking 
to  Jesus."  If  the  translators  of  the  Bible 
had  everywhere  inserted  "  feelings  "  instead 
of  "  faith,"  what  a  run  there  would  be  upon 
the  Book !  But  God  does  not  say  a  word 
about  feelings  from  Genesis  to  Kevelation. 
With  men  "  seeing  is  believing,"  but  with 
the  believer  "  believing  is  seeing."  An 
orphan  child  was  once  asked  by  her  little 
friend,  "  What  do  you  do  without  a  mother 
to  tell  your  troubles  to  ?  "  "  Mother  told  me 
to  go  to  Jesus;  He  was  mother's  Friend,  and 
He's  my  Friend  too,"  was  the  simple  reply. 
"  But  He  is  a  long  way  off  ;  He  won't  stop  to 
mind  you."  Her  face  brightened,  as  she 
said,  "  I  don't  know  about  that,  but  I  know 
He  says  He  will,  and  that's  enough  for 
me."  And  should  not  that  be  enough  for 
us  all  ? 

Ver.  39.  Only  sleeping. — Is  it  no  comfort 
to  be  told  that  the  friend  you  thought  to  be 
dead  only  sleeps  ?  There  was  a  time  when 
Christians  took  great  consolation  from  this 
very  truth — when  it  made  them  ready  to  die, 
and  resigned  to  see  those  near  to  them  die 
at  the  call  of  God.  Go  look  at  the  catacombs 
of  Kome,  and  see,  in  the  records  which  those 
faithful  caverns  have  preserved  of  the  creed 
and  life  of  our  Christian  forefathers,  how 
the  early  Christians  thought  of  death.  The 
inscriptions  are  full  of  faith.  Here  a  mother 
"sleeps  in  Jesus" ;  there  a  child  "sleeps  in 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.  chap.  vi. 


Jesus  "  ;  husband,  wife,  and  friend — they  all 
" sleep" — there  is  no  sign  of  death  in  the 
catacombs.  And  I  would  rather  visit  now 
their  grim  and  unadorned  recesses,  with  the 
feelings  suggested  by  the  simple  stones 
which  tell  how  faithful  Christians  died  as 
well  as  lived  in  the  comfort  of  their  faith, 
than  go  into  our  gay  modern  cemeteries,  with 
their  costly  classic,  not  Christian,  ornaments, 
telling  of  the  unrest  of  broken-hearted 
survivors,  rather  than  of  the  peaceful  sleep 
of  the  dead  in  Christ.  Our  martyred  fore- 
fathers of  the  early  Church  may  teach  us 
how  to  live,  to  die,  to  bury,  and  to  mourn  for 
our  dead.  "She  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth." 
The  sleep  is  long — it  is  too  deep  for  us  to 
break — our  loved  one  may  not  be  awakened 
by  the  call  of  affection  or  the  cry  of  anguish ; 
but  still  she  only  sleeps — she  is  not  dead. 

Sleep — and  death. — There  is  in  the  German 
a  beautiful  fable  which  represents  the  angel 
of  slumber  wandering  over  the  earth  in 
company  with  the  angel  of  death.  As  the 
evening  draws  near  they  approach  a  village 
and  encamp  upon  one  of  its  hills,  listening 
to  the  curfew  as  it  "  tolls  the  knell  of  parting 
day."  At  last  the  sounds  cease,  profound 
silence  reigns  round  about,  and  the  dark 
mantle  of  night  covers  the  earth.  Now  the 
angel  of  sleep  rises  from  her  bed  of  moss, 
and,  stepping  forward  to  the  brink  of  the 
height,  silently  scatters  the  unseen  seeds 
of  slumber.  The  evening  wind  noiselessly 
wafts  them  out  over  the  habitations  of  weary 
men.  Sweet  sleep  settles  down  upon  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  village,  and  over- 
comes them  all,  from  the  old  man  who  nods 
in  his  chair  to  the  infant  resting  in  its 
cradle.  The  sick  forget  their  pain  ;  the 
afflicted,  their  anguish ;  even  poverty  is  ob- 
livious of  its  wants.  All  eyes  are  closed. 
After  her  task  has  been  performed,  the  angel 
of  slumber  turns  to  her  sister  and  says : 
"  When  the  morning  sun  appears,  all  these 
people  will  praise  me  as  their  benefactor  and 
friend.  How  delightful  it  is  to  go  about 
doing  good    so    silently  and    all    unseen ! 


What  a  beautiful  calling  we  have  !  "  Thus 
spoke  the  angel  of  sleep ;  but  the  angel  of 
death  gazed  upon  her  in  silent  sorrow,  and 
a  tear,  such  as  the  undying  shed,  stood 
in  her  earnest  eye.  "  Alas  1  "  said  she,  "  I 
cannot  rejoice,  like  you,  in  the  gratitude 
of  men.  The  earth  calls  me  its  enemy,  and 
the  destroyer  of  its  peace."  "  O  my  sister  !  " 
replied  the  angel  of  slumber,  "  at  the  great 
awaking  of  the  resurrection  morning  the 
souls  of  the  blessed  will  recognise  you  as 
their  friend  and  benefactor.  Are  we  not 
sisters,  and  the  messengers  of  our  common 
Father  ?  "  They  ceased  to  speak,  but  the 
eyes  of  the  death-angel  glistened  with  tears 
as  they  both  fled  out  into  the  darkness  of 
the  night. 

Ver.  41.  Make  for  the  higher. — Nineteen 
centuries  have  passed  since  the  Saviour  spoke 
these  words,  but  they  are  as  full  of  meaning 
now  as  they  were  then  to  every  girl  who 
hath  ears  to  hear.  "  Talitha  cumi," — My 
child,  arise  ;  get  up  from  any  slothful  habit, 
from  any  frivolous,  idle,  selfish  habit  you 
have  formed.  My  little  lamb,  mount  up,  be 
better  this  year  than  you  were  last  year. 
Let  His  voice  reach  your  innermost  heart 
and  awake  you  from  the  sleep  of  indiffer- 
ence. Not  long  ago  an  interesting  memoir 
was  written  of  one  who  heard  words  very 
similar  to  those  which  the  Saviour  spoke  to 
the  daughter  of  Jairus,  and  who  acted  upon 
them.  An  early  friend  of  Catherine  Spooner, 
who  became  Mrs.  Tait,  wife  of  the  late 
Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  remembers  that 
in  the  flush  of  her  bright  girlhood,  when 
every  innocent  delight  was  poured  into  her 
cup,  she  once  told  her  how  she  had  heard  in 
her  inmost  heart,  amidst  all  these  joys  and 
pleasures,  a  hidden  voice  saying,  "  Make  for 
the  higher."  This  aspiration  and  consecra- 
tion of  her  life  was  never  lowered.  In  the 
sphere  of  activity  and  social  intercourse, 
where  the  providence  of  God  placed  her, 
"  Make  for  the  higher  "  hallowed  and  sweet- 
ened all  lower  things  for  her. 


CHAPTER    VI. 
CRITICAL    AND    EXEGETICAL    NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  His  own  country. — Native  place,  or  town:  Nazareth,  the  home  of  His  youth. 
Rejected  at  an  earlier  stage  in  His  ministry  (Luke  iv.  14-30),  He  now  returns  in  the 
character  of  a  Rabbi  followed  by  disciples,  and  makes  one  more  attempt  to  gain  an 
attentive  and  intelligent  hearing. 

Ver.  3.  They  were  offended. — Scandalised,  a  graphic  word.  Christ  was  to  them  like  a 
scandal,  i.e.  a  "  trap-spring,"  or  **  baited  stick  in  a  trap."  Their  familiarity  with  His  earthly 
antecedents  blinded  them  to  His  Divine  character,  and  hindered  them  from  rejoicing  in  the 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God,  which  He  came  to  proclaim  and  to  bestow  on  all  who  would 
receive  Him. 

203 


CHAP.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  5.  He  could  there  do  no  mighty  work. — The  door  was  barred  by  their  unbelief  and 
moral  insensibility,  for  God  never  forces  an  entrance,  but  always  respects  man's  free-will. 

Ver.  6.  He  marvelled. — For  besides  being  *'  Perfect  God,"  He  is  also  **  Perfect  Man,  of  a 
reasonable  soul  and  human  flesh  subsisting  "  (Athanasian  Symbol). 

Ver.  7.  By  two  and  two. — At  detail  peculiar  to  Mark,  who  in  his  list  of  names  does  not 
group  the  apostles  in  pairs  as  the  other  Synoptists  do — an  undesigned  coincidence  worthy 
of  notice. 

Ver.  11.  Verily  .  .  .  that  city. — Omit  this  sentence,  probably  imported  from  Matt.  x.  15. 

Ver.  13.  Anointed  with  oil. — This  unction  was  clearly  sacramental — "  an  outward  and 
visible  sign  of  an  inward  and  spiritual  grace  given."  It  was  both  the  symbol  and  the 
vehicle  of  blessings  for  body  and  soul.     See  James  v.  14. 

Ver.  19.  Had  a  quarrel. — Fostered  a  grudge.  Her  inward  enmity  only  waited  for  an 
opportunity  to  break  forth  in  open  hostilities. 

Ver.  20.  Observed.— Or  preserved,  i.e.  guarded  him.  Did  many  things. — X,  B,  L,  and 
Coptic  read,  he  was  much  perplexed,  which,  however,  hardly  seems  to  harmonise  with  the 
next  words,  and  heard  Him  gladly. 

Ver.  21. — Mark  alone  mentions  the  three  classes  of  guests  :  (1)  Herod's  political  magnates  ; 
(2)  the  military  dignitaries — "  chiliarchs,"  i.e.  commanders  of  a  thousand  men ;  (3)  the 
grandees  of  Galilee — persons  of  substance  and  distinction. 

Ver.  22. — The  reading  best  supported  by  MS.  authority  (K,  B,  D,  L,  A)  is  that  of  E.V. 
margin — "  his  daughter  Herodias,  thus  making  mother  and  daughter  bear  the  same  name. 
It  would  not  be  a  conclusive  argument  against  this  that  this  child  of  shame  is  not  otherwise 
mentioned  in  history.  The  circumstances  of  her  birth  would  condemn  her  to  obscurity, 
and  she  may  have  died  young.  Against  the  common  reading  it  may  be  urged  that  in 
A.D.  29  Salome,  who  was  left  a  widow  in  A.D.  34,  might  perhaps  barely  (but  not  more  than 
barely)  be  described  as  Kopdaiov  ;  while  the  other  reading  would  throw  back  the  beginning 
of  Herod's  connexion  with  Herodias  to  the  year  20  or  21.  This  would  then  have  to  be 
reconciled  with  the  history  of  his  relations  to  the  daughter  of  Aretas.  Josephus  says  that 
at  the  time  when  Herodias  joined  him  (which  may,  indeed,  have  been  some  little  time  after 
his  first  connexion  with  her)  he  had  then  been  married  to  the  daughter  of  Aretas  for  a 
considerable  time  (Antiq.  Jud.,  XVIII.  v.  1,  4).  He  also  speaks  of  the  repudiation  of  Aretas' 
daughter  as  the  beginning  (be  it  observed)  of  the  quarrel  which  led  to  the  war  between 
Antipas  and  the  Arabian  King  in  A.D.  36." 

Ver.  25.  By-and-by. — Instantly.  Same  word,  i^avrijs,  in  Matt.  xiii.  21 ;  Luke  xviii.  7, 
xxi.  9. 

Ver.  26.  Reject. — Disappoint,  or  break  faith  with. 

Ver.  27.  Executioner. — The  speculator  was  originally  one  whose  duty  it  was  to  act  as  a 
spy  or  scout ;  then  it  came  to  be  applied  generally  to  any  member  of  the  armed  body-guard 
of  the  Roman  Emperor.  Herod,  who  loved  to  imitate  the  customs  of  the  Imperial  Court, 
kept  about  him  a  company  of  speculatores  to  carry  out  his  orders. 

Ver.  49.  A  spirit. — A  phantasm  or  apparition. 

Ver.  52.  Hardened. — Become  dull — insusceptible  and  irresponsible  to  spiritual  impressions. 
See  chaps,  iii.  5,  viii.  17. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—13. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xiii.  54-58,  ix.  35-38,  x.  5-42 ;  Luke  ix.  1-6.) 

The  Master  rejected :  the  servants  sent  forth. — An  easy  day's  journey  would 
carry  Jesus  and  His  followers  from  Capernaum  to  Nazareth.  What  took  our 
Lord  back  there  ?  Mark  seems  to  wish  us  to  observe  the  connexion  between 
this  visit  and  the  great  group  of  miracles  just  recorded ;  and  possibly  the  link 
may  be  Christ's  hope  that  the  report  of  these  might  have  preceded  Him  and 
prepared  His  way.  In  His  patient  longsuffering  He  will  give  His  fellow-villagers 
another  chance.  His  heart  yearns  for  "  His  own  country,"  and  "  His  own  kin," 
and  "  His  own  house." 

I.  We  have  here  unbelief  born  of  familiarity,  and  its  effects  on  Christ. — 
1.  They  own  Christ's  wisdom  in  His  teaching,  and  the  reality  of  His  miracles ; 
but  the  fact  that  He  was  one  of  themselves  made  them  angry  that  He  should 
have  such  gifts,  and  suspicious  of  where  He  had  got  them.  (1)  We  note  in 
their  questions,  first,  the  glimpse  of  Christ's  early  life.     They  bring  before  us  the 

f  204 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.  chap   yi. 


quiet,  undistinguished  home  and  the  long  years  of  monotonous  labour.  (2)  These 
questions  bring  out  strongly  what  we  too  often  forget  in  estimating  Christ's 
contemporaries,  viz.  that  His  presence  among  them,  in  the  simplicity  of  His 
human  life,  was  a  positive  hindrance  to  their  seeing  His  true  character.  (3)  The 
facts  on  which  the  Nazarenes  grounded  their  unbelief  are  really  irrefragable 
proofs  of  Christ's  Divinity.  His  character  and  work,  compared  with  the 
circumstances  of  His  origin  and  environment,  are  an  insoluble  riddle,  except 
on  the  supposition  that  He  was  the  Word  and  Power  of  God.  2.  The  effects  of 
this  unbelief  on  Christ.  (1)  It  limited  His  power.  The  atmosphere  of  chill 
unbelief  froze  the  stream.  He  "  would  have  gathered,"  but  "  ye  would  not," 
and  therefore  He  "  could  not."  (2)  He  marvelled.  All  sin  is  a  wonder  to  eyes 
that  see  into  the  realities  of  things  and  read  the  end ;  for  it  is  all  utterly 
unreasonable  (though  it  is,  alas !  not  unaccountable)  and  suicidal.  To  one  who 
lives  ever  in  the  Father's  bosom,  what  can  seem  so  strange  as  that  men  should 
prefer  homeless  exposedness  and  dreary  loneliness  ? 

II.  The  new  instrument  which  Christ  fashions  to  cope  with  unbelief. — What 
does  Jesus  do  when  thus  wounded  in  the  house  of  His  friends  ?  Give  way  to 
despondency  ?  No  ;  but  meekly  betakes  Himself  to  yet  obscurer  fields  of  service, 
and  sends  out  the  twelve  to  prepare  His  way.  1.  The  gift  of  power.  Christ 
gives  before  He  commands,  and  sends  no  man  into  the  field  without  filling 
his  basket  with  seed-corn.  2.  Their  equipment.  The  minimum  of  outward 
provision  is  likeliest  to  call  out  the  maximum  of  faith.  3.  The  disposition  of  the 
messengers.  It  is  not  to  be  self-indulgent.  If  ever  a  herald  of  Christ  falls 
under  suspicion  of  caring  more  about  life's  comforts  than  about  his  work,  good- 
bye to  his  usefulness.  4.  The  messengers'  demeanour  to  rejecters.  Shaking 
the  dust  off  the  sandal  is  an  emblem  of  solemn  renunciation  of  participation,  and 
perhaps  of  disclaimer  of  responsibility. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Yer.  3,  a.  Does  labour  block  the  way  to  manhood  ? — I.  "  Is  not  this  mighty  worker 
and  wise  teacher  a  carpenter  ?  "  Well !  and  what  then  ?  Skill  in  handling  the 
plane  and  driving  the  saw  does  not  expel  wisdom  from  the  speech,  love  from  the 
heart,  and  beauty  from  the  life.  The  artisan  may  be  the  conqueror  of  himself 
and  of  his  circumstances,  a  man  of  clear  vision,  high  and  enduring  motive,  and 
chivalrous  philanthropy,  as  the  sun  may  warm  and  fertilise  the  earth  with  one 
set  of  rays,  and  paint  the  "  human  face  Divine  "  with  another.  It  is  undeniable 
that  the  Nazareth  artisan  is  the  true  King  of  the  ages  and  the  rightful  Lord 
of  the  souls  of  men. 

II.  But  apart  from  the  obvious  and  proved  compatibility  of  even  menial  and 
monotonous  toil  with  kindly  feeling,  generous  impulse,  strict  integrity,  and  large 
usefulness,  these  disaffected  Nazarenes  might  have  dispelled  their  passion-fed 
prejudice  by  simply  recalling  the  leading  names  of  their  typical  history.  "  In 
the  beginning  "  God  had  set  the  stamp  of  His  approval  on  human  labour,  and  all 
along  had  chosen  as  the  chief  toilers  for  the  higher  and  spiritual  welfare  of 
Israel  and  the  world  those  who  were  devoted  to  useful  handicrafts  or  pastoral 
pursuits. 

III.  But  it  would  be  unfair  to  treat  this  jaundiced  jeer,  the  outburst  of  the 
lowest  and  rudest  thought  of  Galilee,  as  though  it  expressed  the  prevalent  Jewish 
idea  of  labour.  Far  from  it.  Handicrafts  were  specially  honoured  amongst  the 
Jews,  and  the  occupants  of  the  highest  posts  of  learning  and  tuition  were  most 
familiar  with  the  lower  forms  of  human  toil.  The  teacher  of  that  Rabbi  Hillel 
who  died  only  a  few  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ  was  in  the  habit  of  saying, 
"Love  labour."  Another  Rabbi  said,  "Great  is  labour,  for  she  honours  the 
Master."  A  third,  "  When  a  man  teaches  his  son  no  trade,  it  is  as  if  he  taught 
him  highway  robbery."    And  we  owe  to  the  family  of  the  far-famed  Gamaliel  the 

205 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST  MARK. 


penetrating  saying,  "  Beautiful  is  the  union  of  the  study  of  the  law  with  some 
honest  calling,  for  by  the  diligent  pursuit  of  both  a  man  is  weaned  from  sin,  but 
all  study  unaccompanied  by  work  ends  in  vanity  and  draws  sin  in  its  train." 

IV.  Now  the  strange  and  inexplicable  thing  is  that  this  insane  prejudice 
against  handicrafts  requiring  hard  muscular  work  as  blocking  the  way  to  the 
higher  grades  of  goodness  exists  and  operates  amongst  us  in  this  year  with 
a  force  it  never  had  in  Palestine,  and  produces  mischiefs  that  are  positively 
incalculable.  Only  lately  it  was  seriously  contended  that  men  in  the  East  End 
of  London  with  a  scant  cupboard  and  a  life  of  forced  daily  toil  could  not  be 
expected  to  be  Christians,  and  echoes  follow  echoes  which  report  nothing  but  the 
deeply  rooted  falsehood  that  so  long  as  men  have  to  toil  to  live  they  cannot  live 
to  and  for  and  in  God.  I  do  not  deny  the  heart-ache  of  many  a  labouring  life, 
the  fierce  struggle  to  exist  continued  in  many  a  home,  the  unbroken  dulness, 
the  leaden  monotony,  killing  aspiration  and  deadening  faith,  the  brutalising 
conditions  often  associated  with  toil.  I  know  the  workshop  is  infested  with 
corruption,  the  atmosphere  charged  with  falseness  and  impurity,  and  that  often 
the  work  itself  is  hard  and  rough  and  ill-paid.  I  admit  the  worse,  but  I  cannot 
close  my  eyes  to  the  evidence  of  facts,  and  I  dare  not  be  false  to  God's  revelation 
of  the  sublime  conquests  possible  to  every  man  in  and  through  Christ  over  the 
dullest  circumstance  or  the  most  violently  antagonistic  lot.  I  am  sure  that 
labour  is  in  the  main  wholesome  and  helpful,  a  defence  from  myriad  temptations, 
a  goad  to  usefulness,  a  contribution  to  the  progress  of  the  world,  and  perfectly 
compatible  with  the  manliest  life. 

V.  We  might  learn  this  from  the  long  and  thrilling  history  of  toil  at  the 
back  of  us,  for  we  have  had  apostles  of  labour  like  the  brave  Hollanders,  who 
built  their  own  country  out  of  the  sands  of  the  sea,  and  created  themselves  into 
the  manliest  of  men,  and  the  most  compact  and  independent  of  states  by  the 
act ;  martyrs  to  trade  like  Palissy  the  Potter  ;  confessors  and  reformers  like 
Richard  Cobden,  the  manufacturer  of  calicoes  ;  model  men  of  business  like  the 
bookseller,  Daniel  Macmillan,  and  the  "  commercial "  George  Moore ;  and 
myriads  more  amongst  the  labouring  poor,  some  of  whom,  I  rejoice  to  say, 
I  have  intimately  known  and  warmly  loved,  who,  though  they  never  gained  any 
"  social  standing,"  "  wrought  righteousness,  subdued  the  kingdoms  "  of  self  and 
of  home,  "  stopped  the  mouths  of  the  lions  "  of  vice  and  impurity,  "  quenched  the 
power  of  the  fires  "  of  intemperance,  "  from  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed 
mighty  in  power  "  against  domestic  and  social  evils,  and  helped  in  turning  to 
flight  armies  of  aliens.  Besides,  does  not  everybody  think  Goethe  is  right  when 
he  says  "  an  idle  life  is  an  anticipated  death  "  ?  And  must  we  not  in  our  best 
moments  admit  that  in  spite  of  many  drawbacks  we  owe  lasting  thanks  to  God 
for  putting  us  where  work  is  a  necessity  and  a  vocation  the  condition  not  only 
of  a  prolonged  existence,  but  of  a  prolonged  happiness  ?  Labour  is  a  benediction 
from  God.  Delitzsch,  writing  on  Jewish  Artisan  Life,  says  :  "All  work  worthy 
of  the  name  is  Godlike,  for  the  world  is  one  great  whole  in  which  everything  acts 
and  reacts.  Each  separate  thing  is  but  a  stepping-stone  to  some  higher  end, 
and  all  things  work  out  together  the  grand  purpose  of  the  whole." 

VI.  But  it  is  in  the  fullest  life  ever  lived — a  life  unequalled  in  its  sweet  dignity 
and  attractive  familiarity,  tender  strength  and  daring  meekness — a  life  from 
which  moral  grandeur  never  departs — it  is  from  it  we  get  the  strongest  witness 
that  "  labour  "  does  not  block  the  way  to  manhood.  That  life  is  set  deep  in  the 
forests  of  human  toil.  The  pattern  character  is  in  the  pattern  condition,  to  use 
it,  to  redeem  it,  to  glorify  it,  to  adjust  it  to  Himself,  to  exhibit  the  spirit  in 
which  a  man  may  convert  his  surroundings  into  a  set  of  "  angels  on  the  way  of 
life,"  ministers  inspiring  and  educating  him,  forces  enabling  him  to  partake 
more  largely  of  the  Divine  nature. 

206 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  VI. 


VII.  So  far  as  we  know  Christ  left  the  bench  of  the  carpenter  for  the  post 
of  teacher  and  reformer.  His  work  was  His  college.  "  He  learnt  obedience 
by  the  things  He  did  and  suffered,"  and  acquired  fitness  for  His  ministry  of 
brief  but  measureless  energy,  tender  pathos,  broad  sympathies,  and  heroic  self- 
sacrifice.  The  lowliest  tasks  well  done  are  the  best  preparations  for  helpful 
ministries  to  the  world.  "  Labour  "  is  not  only  not  a  block  to  manhood,  but 
it  is  the  best  drill  for  some  of  its  finest  services.  1.  Read,  I  beseech  you,  the 
handwriting  of  God  on  your  daily  toil.  "  In  all  your  ways  acknowledge  God, 
and  He  will  direct  you  in  your  goings  "  for  a  subsistence.  2.  Breathe  into  your 
work  the  spirit  of  beneficence.  Do  not  stop  your  vision  at  its  details,  but  range 
in  thought  over  its  large  issues ;  and  as  Daniel  Macmillan,  when  a  bookseller's 
clerk,  found  solace  from  the  conviction  that  he  was  aiding  in  the  fight  against 
ignorance  and  falsehood,  and  thus  promoting  the  welfare  of  the  world,  so  take 
care  you  never  lose  sight  of  the  really  helpful  results  of  even  the  smallest  honest 
and  true  work.  3.  Be  thorough  in  to-day's  work.  Do  the  thing  well  that  is 
near  you.  Carlyle,  after  he  met  Arnold  at  Rugby,  said  of  this  model  teacher, 
"  He  is  a  hero — a  man  who  knows  his  work  and  does  it."  4.  Give  a  definite 
place  to,  and  find  special  time  and  spheres  for,  the  cultivation  of  your  spiritual 
nature.  Receive  into  your  nature  the  power  of  Christ,  and  He  will  make  the 
work  of  the  bench  a  discipline  for  the  consolation  of  the  weary,  the  guidance  of 
the  perplexed,  the  assistance  of  the  needy,  and  the  helping  of  the  world. 

VIII.  And  is  it  from  this  religion  founded  by  an  artisan,  lorn  in  poverty, 
whose  apostles  were  fishermen  and  tax-gatherers,  whom  the  "common  people 
heard  gladly"— is  it  from  it  and  Him  the  toiling  millions  are  turning  away  in 
indifference  or  despair  ?  Do  you  blame  the  architect  for  the  blunders  of  the 
builder  ?  Will  you  censure  the  directors  for  the  unknown  intemperance  of 
the  "  guard  "  that  wrecks  a  train  ?  Nor  ought  we  to  blame  Christ  Jesus  for 
the  faults  of  the  Churches.  It  is  not  from  Him  you  hear  the  cry  that  the 
weakest  must  be  driven  to  the  wall,  the  "  fittest  only  must  survive."  It  is  not 
from  Christ  you  hear  approval  of  the  tyranny  of  capital  over  labour  or  of  the 
selfishness  of  masters  in  their  dealings  with  men.  He  bids  masters  and  servants 
alike  be  fair  and  just,  and  commands  a  mutual  recognition  of  brotherhood  in 
the  kingdoms  of  toil,  and  breathes  into  men  the  spirit  that  ameliorates  the 
lot  of  the  wretched,  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  widest  and  most  enduring 
prosperity. 

IX.  Above  all,  beware  of  the  strong  illusion  which  resides  in  the  common- 
place. Familiarity  with  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  Mary  and  brother  of  Joses,  as 
playmate  and  fellow- workmen,  closed  the  eyes  of  the  Kazarenes  to  the  spiritual 
meaning  of  His  life,  and  barred  their  hearts  to  the  entrance  of  His  saving  power. 
A  similar  danger  is  before  us.  Goaded  by  Strauss  and  others,  men  like  Robertson 
of  Brighton  have  compelled  us  to  sit  with  fixed  and  profitable  gaze  on  the  man 
Christ  Jesus.  The  pulpits  and  the  literature  of  the  Church  are  full  of  the 
blessed  reality  of  Christ's  humanness.  Never  was  He  more  fully  the  Brother 
of  men  since  He  left  the  slopes  of  Olivet.  But  let  us  take  "  large  views."  God 
was  in  Christ,  transfiguring  menial  toil  by  faithfulness,  obedience,  and  worship  ; 
educing  from  smallest  seeds  large  harvests,  and  from  lowliest  deeds  grandest 
issues  ;  reconciling  all  things  in  our  world  to  Himself,  and  to  us,  by  reconciling 
us  to  Himself ;  adjusting  all  human  relations,  revealing  the  brotherhood  of  all 
men,  penetrating  our  social  life  with  the  spirit  of  thoroughness  and  unselfishness, 
and  so  making  possible  a  world  in  which  every  man  does  a  full  man's  work  with 
a  clear  spiritual  aim,  and  so  helps  to  establish  a  kingdom  of  righteousness  and 
truth  upon  the  earth. — J.  Clifford,  D.D. 

Ver.  3,  b.  Offended  in  Him.— I.  The  astonishment  of  prejudice  aroused. — 

207 


chap.  vi.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST    MARK. 


1.  The  prejudice  of  calling.     2.  The  prejudice  of  birth.     3.  The  prejudice  of 
relationship.     4.  The  prejudice  of  familiarity. 

II.  The  astonishment  culminating  in  bitter  jealousy  and  dislike. — Why- 
should  one  occupying  such  a  humble  position  and  surroundings  claim  any  pre- 
eminence over  them  ?  They  could  not  deny^the  majesty  of  the  life,  the  greatness 
of  the  deed,  and  the  sublimity  of  the  utterance  ;  yet  the  ever-recurring  question 
was,  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter  ?  " 

III.  The  protest  which  their  astonishment  and  unbelief  called  forth  (ver.  4). 
— This  was  an  old  proverb  with  a  new  application. 

IY.  The  evil  wrought  by  this  blind  prejudice  in  limiting  the  possibilities 
of  Christ's  ministry  among  them. — Human  receptivity  is  one  of  the  essential 
conditions  of  Divine  working  among  men. 

Y.  The  painful  surprise  awakened  in  Christ  by  their  astonishment  and 
unbelief. 

YI.  The  good  accomplished  in  spite  of  prejudice  and  unbelief. — 1.  Healing 
a  few  sick  folk.  Poor  sufferers  were  not  shut  out  of  His  great  sympathy,  nor 
placed  beyond  the  reach  of  His  tender  healing,  by  the  unbelief  of  their  neighbours. 

2.  Teaching  in  the  villages.     All  that  prejudice  could  do  was  to  exclude  its 
owners  from  the  sphere  of  Divine  operations. — D.  Davies. 

Yer.  11.  Punishments  proportionable  to  sins. — In  these  words  Christ  doth  not 
wholly  excuse  those  wicked  Gentiles ;  but  neither  doth  He  charge  them  with  so 
great  a  degree  of  guilt  as  He  doth  the  unbelieving  Jews.  The  Gentiles'  gross 
ignorance  of  their  duty  might  in  some  measure  have  been  avoided  by  them, 
and  was  therefore  justly  to  be  imputed  to  them  ;  but  they  had  not  the  same 
opportunities  and  advantages  of  improving  their  knowledge,  they  had  not  the 
same  means  of  conviction,  they  had  not  the  same  motives  to  reformation  and 
amendment  of  life,  as  those  men  unto  whom  the  gospel  had  been  preached ;  and 
therefore,  upon  this  account,  our  Lord  is  graciously  pleased  to  make  them 
as  it  were  some  sort  of  allowance  and  abatement.  They  are  here  represented 
not  indeed  as  entirely  blameless,  but  still  as  less  blamable  than  others :  they 
are  not  exempted  from  those  sufferings  that  were  due  unto  their  sins ;  but  these 
sufferings,  we  are  told,  shall  be  less  severe  than  those  which  will  be  inflicted 
upon  greater  sinners. 

I.  In  the  next  world  some  sinners  will  be  more  severely  punished  than 
Others. — 1.  Though  this  doctrine  had  not  been  expressly  revealed  to  us  in  the 
Word  of  God,  yet  our  own  reason  alone  would  have  inclined  us  to  have  believed 
it ;  for  the  same  arguments  that  are  brought  to  prove  that  any  punishments 
shall  hereafter  be  inflicted  upon  any  sinners,  may  also  be  urged  to  shew  that 
some  sinners  shall  have  a  greater  share  in  those  punishments  than  others  :  the 
same  vindictive  justice  of  God  which  inclines  Him  to  punish  the  sins  of  the 
impenitent  disposes  Him  likewise  to  observe  some  proportion  in  His  punishments, 
and  to  allot  the  greatest  degrees  of  misery  to  the  greatest  degrees  of  guilt.  And 
even  if  the  justice  of  God  were  not  so  clearly  interested  in  this  matter,  yet  these 
future  punishments  do  themselves  suggest  to  us  this  doctrine ;  and  from  the 
nature  of  them  we  may.  very  reasonably  infer  their  inequality.  One  great  part 
of  the  punishment  of  hell  consists  in  the  remorse  of  conscience  arising  from 
the  sense  of  guilt ;  and  therefore,  where  the  greatest  guilt  is,  there  must  be 
the  greatest  remorse,  that  is  the  greatest  punishment,  from  the  sense  of  it. 
Another  argument  to  prove  the  inequality  of  future  torments  may  be  this — 
namely,  that  envy,  malice,  and  other  vices  are  not  only  by  the  order  of  God 
attended  with  punishments,  but  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  necessarily  create 
torment ;  and  therefore,  where  these  are  in  the  most  eminent  degree,  they  must 
necessarily  create  the  greatest  torment.     2.  This  truth  will  appear  still  more 

208 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  VI. 


evident  if  we  consider  the  declarations  God  has  been  pleased  to  make  concerning 
it  in  His  Word.  In  the  Levitical  law  God  commands  the  magistrate  to  give  the 
offender  a  certain  number  of  stripes,  according  to  his  fault ;  and  our  Saviour 
hath  taught  us  that  He  will  observe  the  same  method  in  the  distribution  and 
execution  of  His  future  punishments  (Luke  v.  47,  48). 

II.  What  those  sins  are  which  will  expose  men  to  the  greatest  suffering. — , 
1.  These  are,  first,  such  sins  as  are  in  their  kind  most  heinous — such  as] 
blasphemy,  hypocrisy,  murder,  bloody  persecution  of  God's  saints,  unnatural 
lusts,  and  the  like.  These  sins  are,  in  the  kind  of  them,  so  open  and  so 
provoking  an  affront  to  the  great  God  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  are  besides 
so  shocking  to  human  nature  and  to  the  first  conceptions  we  are  used  to  form 
of  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil,  that  a  man  must  have  perfectly  rooted 
out  of  his  mind  all  awe  of  God,  all  sense  of  religion,  all  regard  to  goodness, 
before  he  can  harbour  or  encourage  the  least  thoughts  of  them.  2.  Those  sins 
also  will  be  most  severely  punished  which  are  committed  against  the  greatest 
light.  The  sins  of  Christians,  of  reformed  Christians,  of  those  of  the  best 
reformed  Church,  the  sins  of  such  who  attend  continually  upon  the  ordinances 
of  God,  and  come  constantly  to  be  partakers  of  the  Supper  of  the  Lord — such 
men  as  these  have  no  pretence  for  their  iniquity,  no  colour  or  excuse  for  their 
sins.  3.  Those  men  also  have  just  reason  to  dread  the  severest  judgments  of 
God  who  allow  themselves  in  such  sins  as  shew  the  greatest  depravity  of  will — 
habitual,  deliberate,  presumptuous  sins — sins  which  they  take  pleasure  in,  and 
love  to  see  practised  by  others. — Bishop  Smalridge. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.   1.  Meaning  of  the  word  "dis-  (Job  xxii.  22 ;  Ps.  xxv.  9 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  3; 

ciple." — I.  The   school. — 1.   They    are  John  xxi.  22). — E.  Hopkins. 
in  the  kingdom  of  God  (John  iii.    5). 

2.  At  the  feet  of  Jesus  (Luke  x.  39;  Ver.  2.  Christian  doctrine. — 1.  Chris- 
Deut.  xxxiii.  3).  3.  The  law  brings  us  tian  doctrine  applicable  to  all  classes 
to  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  24).  4.  To  be  in  of  men.  2.  Christian  doctrine  calcu- 
schoolistobe  "in Christ"  (Eph.  iv.  21).  lated  to  excite  the  profoundest   sur- 

5.  It  is  in  the  school  that  the  instruc-  prise.  3.  Christian  doctrine  always 
tion,  training,  and  discipline  take  place,  conveying   the    impression   of    unique 

6.  "Come  unto  Me"  precedes  "  Learn  power.  4.  Christian  doctrine  shewing 
of  Me  "  (Matt.  xi.  28,  29).  the  insignificance  of    the   personality 

II.  The  lesson. — 1.  The  truth  to  be  of  its  teachers.  Even  Christ  Himself, 
understood  (John  xvi.  13-15).  2.  The  according  to  the  flesh,  seemed  poor  and 
Person  to  be  appropriated  (Eph.  iv.  20  ;  inadequate  when  viewed  in  the  light 
Heb.  iii.  14 ;  2  Pet.  i.  4).  3.  The  of  the  wondrous  revelations  which  He 
example  to  be  followed  (1  Pet.  ii.  21 ;  made  to  the  world. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 
Phil.  ii.  5  ;  Matt.  xi.  29  ;  John  xiii.  Individuality  of  spirit,  claim,  man- 
12-17  ;  Luke  xiv.  27).  ner,  always   provokes   criticism.     The 

III.  The  Teacher. — The  Lord  Him-  glory  of  the  highest  revelation  of  Chris- 
self  (John  vi.  45).  1.  His  wisdom  tianity  is,  that  personality  is  superseded 
(Col.  ii.  3).    2.  His  power  (1  Cor.  i.  24).  by  spirituality.     The  speaker  is  to  be 

3.  His  skill  (Ps.  lxxviii.  72,  xxxii.  8).  forgotten  in  the  speech.     When  both 

4.  He  can  teach  the  heart  (Heb.  personality  and  doctrine  are  to  be  con- 
viii.  10,  x.  16).  5.  He  teaches  us  to  sidered,  the  danger  is  that  the  former 
profit  (Isa.  xlviii.  17).  6.  What  He  may  be  made  to  assume  undue  promi- 
requires  of  those  whom   He   teaches  nence.     Instead  of  inquiring  What  is 

p  209 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


said  ?  the  inquiry  will  be  Who  said 
it  ?  Personality  is  a  mere  question  of 
detail  in  comparison  with  the  truths 
which  nourish  and  save  the  soul. — Ibid. 

Lessons. — 1.  Men  may  acknowledge 
and  wonder  at  the  spiritual  gifts  and 
graces  which  they  see  to  be  in  others, 
and  yet  themselves  have  never  the 
more  grace,  but  be  utterly  void  of  all 
sanctifying  and  saving  gifts  of  the 
spirit.  2.  It  is  the  property  of  carnal 
men  to  tie  the  gifts  and  graces  of  God's 
Spirit  unto  outward  helps  and  means, 
as  if  the  Lord  could  not  bestow  such 
gifts,  or  work  such  graces  by  His  Spirit, 
without  such  outward  helps.  3.  So 
long  as  any  remain  hardened  in  their 
natural  blindness  and  infidelity,  no 
means  will  prevail  to  work  faith  or 
repentance  in  them,  and  to  bring  them 
to  God,  though  the  means  used  be 
in  themselves  never  so  powerful  and 
excellent. — G.  Fetter. 

Unbelief. — In  our  modern  cant 
phraseology  theirs  might  have  been 
designated  agnosticism  and  philosophic 
doubt.  But  philosophic  it  certainly 
was  not,  any  more  than  much  that 
now  passes,  because  it  bears  that 
name ;  at  least,  if  according  to  modern 
negative  criticism,  the  inexplicable  is 
also  the  unthinkable.  Nor  was  it 
really  doubt  or  agnosticism,  any  more 
than  much  that  now  covers  itself  with 
that  garb.  It  was  what  Christ  desig- 
nated it — unbelief,  since  the  questions 
would  have  been  easily  answered — 
indeed,  never  have  arisen — had  they 
believed  that  He  was  the  Christ.  And 
the  same  alternative  still  holds  true. 
If  "  this  One  "  is  what  negative  criti- 
cism declares  Him,  which  is  all  that 
it  can  know  of  Him  by  the  outside — 
the  Son  of  Mary,  the  Carpenter  and 
Son  of  the  carpenter  of  Nazareth, 
whose  family  occupied  the  humblest 
position  among  Galileans — then  whence 
this  wisdom  which,  say  of  it  what  you 
will,  underlies  all  modern  thinking,  and 
these  mighty  works,  which  have  mould- 
ed all  modern  history? — A.  Edersheim, 
D.D. 

Ver.  3.  "Is  not  this  the  carpenter  ? " 
210 


— Certainly ;  yet  that  refutes  nothing. 
It  only  helps  to  prove  the  claims  of 
Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  If  He 
had  been  a  learned  rabbi  or  philosopher, 
it  might  have  been  said  He  had  received 
His  wisdom  from  men ;  but  as  He 
was  only  a  poor  village  carpenter,  He 
must  have  been  taught  of  God.  1.  This 
tells  us  how  wisely  Jesus  spent  His 
youth  and  early  manhood — not  in 
idleness,  but  in  useful  toil.  2.  It 
teaches  us  that  there  is  no  disgrace 
in  working  at  a  trade.  Marks  of  toil 
are  brighter  insignia  of  honour  than 
jewelled  rings  and  delicate  whiteness. 
3.  It  shows  also  the  condescension  of 
Christ.  Though  rich,  He  became  poor, 
and  even  toiled  for  His  daily  bread. 
It  assures  us,  therefore,  of  His  sympathy 
now  with  those  who  toil.  It  is  a  plea- 
sant thought  that  the  hands  that  now 
hold  the  sceptre  once  wielded  the  ham- 
mer and  the  saw. — J.  R.  Miller,  D.D. 

The  history  of  Nazareth  has  been  re- 
peated on  a  large  scale  in  the  history  of 
Israel. — Israel,  as  a  whole,  also  made 
the  nearness  of  Jesus,  His  "not  being 
afar  off,"  an  occasion  of  unbelief  and 
fall.  This  temptation,  resulting  from 
the  constant  beholding  of  the  Holy 
One  with  common  eyes,  was  pointed  to 
in  Deut.  xxx.  14  (cp.  Rom.  x.  8).  It 
is  the  temptation  which  besets  the 
intimates  and  fellow- citizens  of  chosen 
spirits  and  great  geniuses ;  which 
besets  theologians  in  the  daily  study 
and  service  of  the  truths  of  revelation, 
ministers  in  their  commerce  with  the 
ordinances  of  grace,  and  all  the  lesser 
officers  of  the  house  of  God  in  their 
habitual  contact  with  the  externals  of 
Divine  things.  It  is  the  temptation 
also  of  ancient  towns  and  Churches, 
which  have  enjoyed  exalted  privileges, 
and  indeed  of  the  whole  Church  itself 
(Luke  xviii.  8). — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

The  offence  of  the  Nazarenes  on 
account  of  Christ's  humble  origin  a 
picture  of  all  other  offences  in   Him. 

1.  An  offence — (1)  In  His  terrestrial 
state  and  existence.  (2)  In  His  human 
lowliness.  (3)  In  His  brothers  and 
sisters   with    their    human   weakness. 

2,  Yet  an  offence  which  will  leave  us 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  VI. 


self- condemned,  since  it  implies  an 
admission  of  His  wisdom  and  of  His 
deeds.  3.  A  most  fatal  offence,  since 
unbelief  deprives  us  of  the  blessings 
of  Christ's  wondrous  works. — Ibid. 

Lessons. — 1.  This  should  teach  us  to 
be  well  content  to  be  abased  in  this 
world  for  Christ's  sake,  seeing  He,  for 
our  sakes,  and  to  do  us  good,  refused  not 
to  take  upon  Him  so  mean  and  low  a 
condition.  2.  It  should  move  us  to 
shew  all  humility  towards  our  brethren 
in  and  for  Christ's  sake.  3.  It  should 
restrain  in  us  all  ambitions  and  covet- 
ous desires  of  worldly  greatness,  honour, 
wealth,  etc. — G.  Fetter. 

The  message  more  than  the  messenger. 
— If  a  message  be  sent  to  us  from 
some  great  person,  we  look  not  so  much 
at  the  person  that  brings  it  as  at 
the  message  itself.  So  when  ministers 
preach  the  Word  of  God  to  us,  we 
must  not  so  much  have  an  eye  to  the 
outward  quality  of  the  persons  that 
preach  as  to  the  doctrine  itself  which 
they  deliver,  the  excellency  and  Divine 
authority  whereof  must  move  us  to 
embrace  and  yield  obedience  to  it. — Ibid. 

Vers.  4-6.  How  Christ  victoriously 
contends  with  the  unbelief  of  prejudice 
among  His  own  countrymen. — 1.  Pre- 
j  udice  everywhere  opposes  Him.  ( 1 )  In 
an  impure  and  a  gross  apprehension 
of  His  dignity,  as  of  a  magical  secret 
doctrine  and  art.  (2)  In  the  reckon- 
ing up  of  all  His  earthly  relationships, 
in  order  to  urge  them  to  the  dis- 
paragement of  His  heavenly  dignity. 
(3)  In  a  slavish  community  of  envious 
and  low  judgment  upon  His  life.  2. 
How  the  Lord  lays  hold  of  and  over- 
comes this  prejudice.  (1)  He  refers  it 
all  to  a  universal  fact,  which  they 
might  afterwards  reflect  upon.  (2)  He 
does  not  forget,  but  heals,  the  few 
who  needed  and  were  susceptible  of 
help  among  His  scorners.  (3)  He 
gathers  up  His  influences,  and  with- 
draws. (4)  He  causes  the  light  of  His 
presence  to  shine  brightly  throughout 
the  whole  district. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.    4.    Lessons. —  1.      Good    and 


faithful  ministers  of  God  are  usually 
most  subject  to  contempt  and  dis- 
honour in  the  places  where  they  are 
most  familiarly  known.  (1)  Envy  and 
emulation  cause  men  often  to  repine 
at  the  honour  and  preferment  of  such 
as  are  and  have  been  familiarly  known 
to  them,  and  perhaps  also  have  been 
heretofore  their  inferiors  or  equals. 
(2)  Where  ministers  daily  live  and 
converse,  they  cannot  but  through 
human  frailty  discover  some  infirmities ; 
and  so  their  infirmities  being  most 
known  in  such  places,  hence  it  is  that 
they  are  the  more  apt  there  to  be 
despised.  (3)  The  daily  presence  and 
commonness  of  a  benefit  are  apt  to 
breathe  a  contempt  and  loathing  of  it. 
2.  Honour  and  good  respect  are  due 
unto  God's  faithful  ministers  wherever 
they  live.  (1)  They  are  spiritual 
fathers  (1  Cor.  iv.  15) ;  therefore  to 
be  honoured.  (2)  They  are  God's 
messengers  and  ambassadors  (2  Cor. 
v.  20) ;  therefore  to  be  respected  for  the 
Lord's  sake  who  sends  them.  (3)  This 
wins  reverence  and  authority  to  their 
ministry,  causing  it  to  be  the  more 
regarded,  and  become  more  profitable 
and  effectual. — G.  Fetter. 

Yer.  5.  The  right  atmosphere  is  want- 
ing. — Fire  cannot  burn  in  a  vacuum. 
His  hands,  indeed,  were  laid  upon  a 
few  sick  folk,  and  He  healed  them  ;  but 
the  mightier  work  of  healing  diseased 
minds  and  troubled  hearts  could  not 
there  be  accomplished — that  required 
stronger  faith. 

Ver.  6.  Jesus  wonders  at  that  at 
which  He  would  have  us  wonder  ;  and 
He  takes  notice  of  our  faults,  to  the 
end  that  we  may  reflect  upon  our- 
selves. How  much  more  strange  and 
surprising  are  our  own  infidelity  or 
unsuitable  returns,  after  the  instruc- 
tion and  miracles  of  so  many  ages ! — 
P.  Quesnel. 

Nature,  causes,  and  effects  of  un- 
belief.— I.   The  nature  of  unbelief. — 

1.  Practical  disregard  of  God's  Word 
and  Commandments  is  really  infidelity. 

2.  Afraid  to  receive  the  promises  of 

211 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


God.  3.  Fearing  to  take  comfort  from 
the  Word  of  God. 

II.  The    causes    of    unbelief. — 

1.  Voluntary  ignorance  (Rom.  i.  19-21). 

2.  Wilful  resistance  of  conscience 
(2  Thess.  ii.  10-12).  3.  A  deliberate 
preference  for  sins  (John  iii.  19). 

III.  The  effects  of  unbelief. — 
1.  It  rejects  Christ,  the  Lord  of  Glory, 
and  therefore  deserves  eternal  punish- 
ment. 2.  It  leads  the  sinner  further 
and  further  away  from  God. — H.  M. 
Villiers. 

The  unbelief  which  comes  between  us 
and  Christ  is  that  state  of  heart  and 
feeling  which  dislikes  the  strain  and 
trouble  of  thinking  of  things  out  of 
this  present  world  ;  which  looks  away 
from  what  is  out  of  sight  and  to  come, 
and  is  moved  and  impressed  only  by 
what  is  just  before  it  —  immediate 
interests,  immediate  pleasures,  common 
customs.  It  is  the  unbelief  of  care- 
lessness, deadness  of  soul,  lazy,  selfish 
indifference  ;  which  cannot  understand 
how  any  one  can  be  in  earnest,  so  as 
to  take  pains  and  suffer  trouble  for 
the  sake  of  things  unseen ;  which 
cannot  bring  itself  to  think  that  God 
is  in  earnest  and  the  work  of  serving 
and  pleasing  Him  a  real  thing.  It  is 
the  unbelief  which  comes  of  wishing  to 
save  ourselves  trouble,  of  not  thinking 
it  worth  while  to  force  ourselves  to 
attend,  to  think,  to  remember,  to  lay 
to  heart.  This  is  the  unbelief  which 
comes  between  us  and  the  power  of 
Christ  to  improve  us,  to  strengthen  us, 
to  comfort  us.  What  we  will  not 
have  done  for  us  that  He  cannot  do. — 
Dean  Church. 

Vers.  7-11.  The  sending  forth  of  the 
twelve  apostles,  formally  commissioned 
to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  reminds  us  of  that  noble 
and  wonderful  stream  which  Ezekiel 
saw  in  vision  proceeding  from  under 
the  threshold  of  the  Temple,  at  first 
but  a  small  rivulet  not  more  than 
ankle-deep,  but  which,  as  it  went  on 
its  way,  increased  to  a  stream  knee- 
deep,  then  up  to  the  thighs,  and  after- 
ward to  a  great  river  for  a  man  to 

212 


swim  in,  and  carrying  healing  in  its 
blessed  waters  whithersoever  it  flowed. 
Jesus  is  the  True  Temple  of  God,  and 
in  Him  this  stream  of  life  rises,  and 
through  His  apostles  and  disciples  it 
flowed  forth,  at  first  a  very  small 
stream,  but  it  has  gone  on  widening 
and  deepening  until  its  waters  have 
filled  the  whole  earth,  and  whitherso- 
ever it  has  flowed  it  has  carried  life 
and  healing  (Ezek.  xlvii.  1-9;  Rev. 
xxii.  1-7;  John  vii.  37-39).  To-day 
it  is  the  mightiest  moral  force  in  the 
world,  and  there  are  none  to  sneer  at 
it  except  fools  and  knaves  (though 
many  still  oppose  its  onward  flow), 
while  millions  all  over  the  world  and 
among  all  peoples  live  to  bless  God  for 
His  love  and  for  His  unspeakable  gift 
in  Christ  Jesus. — G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D. 
A  beginning  only. — Mark  signifi- 
cantly says,  "Then  Jesus  began  to 
send  them  forth  "  :  for  ever  since  that 
day  He  has  been  giving  similar  work, 
and  qualifying  similar  representatives. 
1.  To  go  forth  from  the  presence  of 
Jesus.  2.  To  be  willing  to  work  to- 
gether. 3.  To  be  content  with  the  use 
of  moral  influence.  Men  are  to  be 
urged,  not  forced.  4.  To  exercise  self- 
denial  and  cheerful  trust  in  God. — 
A.  Rowland. 

Yer.  7.  Two  and  two  is  a  wise  rule 
for  all  Christian  workers.  It  checks 
individual  peculiarities  and  self-will, 
helps  to  keep  off  faults,  wholesomely 
stimulates,  strengthens  faith  by  giving 
another  to  hear  it  and  to  speak  it, 
brings  companionship,  and  admits  of 
division  of  labour.  One  and  one  are 
more  than  twice  one. — A.Maclaren,D.D, 

Jesus  sends  out  His  disciples  by  twos. 
— In  the  line  of  this  need,  and  for 
its  supply,  woman,  with  her  blessed 
ministries,  is  granted  as  a  help-meet 
to  man.  He  is  made  stronger  and 
enters  a  larger  and  better  life  by  her 
pure  companionship.  And  this,  too, 
outside  of  the  sacred  relation  of  husband 
and  wife.  They  need  each  other's 
mutual  help,  and  are  uplifted  in  the 
relation  simply  of  man  and  woman. 
They  complement  and  help  each  other 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  VI. 


to  attain  and  enjoy  higher  good.  In 
all  this  man's  need  of  going  out  of 
himself  and  the  healthfulness  of  the 
mutual  impact  of  true  natures  are 
recognised. — W.  M.  Campbell. 

Christian  friendship. — I.  The  power 
of  Christian  friendship. — 1.  Sympathy : 
its  immense  help  in  enabling  one  to 
meet  the  difficulties,  bear  the  trials, 
and   do   the   work   of    Christian   life. 

2.  Counsel :  the  advice  of  a  wise  friend, 
how     valuable    when    in    perplexity ! 

3.  Love  :    its  stimulating  power. 

II.  The  beauty  of  Christian  friend- 
ship.— 1.  Its  unselfishness,  eachstriving 
to  help  and  make  sacrifices  for  the  other. 

2.  The  common  pursuit  of  noble  aims, 
the  common  interest  of  Christian  life. 

3.  The  exchange  of  helpful  thoughts 
on  great  subjects,  the  intercourse  of 
minds  enlightened  by  the  knowledge 
of  Christ. 

III.  The  responsibility  of  Christian 
friendship. — Like  all  blessings,  it  has 
its  dangers.  It  can  be  misused — 1.  By 
weakly  yielding  to  please  a  friend, 
instead  of  using  the  privilege  of  friend- 
ship to  try  to  put  him  right.  2.  By 
flattering  a  friend's  weakness,  instead 
of  pointing  out  and  helping  him  to 
eradicate  his  faults.  3.  By  that  ab- 
sorption in  one  another  which  becomes 
a  hindrance  to  the  real  work  of  life. — 
A.  G.  Mortimer,  D.D. 

Yer.  8.  God's  messengers. — 1.  Such 
as  are  called  of  God  to  performance 
of  great  and  weighty  duties  must 
free  themselves  from  such  impediments 
as  will  hinder  them  in  those  duties. 
2.  The  best  Christians  may  sometimes 
be  called  to  a  mean  and  poor  estate,  in 
which  they  may  be  destitute  of  neces- 
saries for  maintenance  of  this  life. 
(1)  That  God's  special  providence  and 
fatherly  care  may  more  appear  in 
providing  for  them  when  outward 
means  fail  them.  (2)  To  try  and  exer- 
cise their  faith  in  depending  on  His 
fatherly  providence  in  their  wants. 
(3)  To  wean  their  hearts  from  love  of 
earthly  things,  and  to  stir  up  in  them 
the  greater  love  and  desire  of  spiritual 
and  heavenly  riches. — G,  Fetter, 


Maintenance  for  ministers. — 1.  It  is 
not  fit  for  ministers  of  the  Word  to  be 
cumbered  and  troubled  with  the  affairs 
of  this  life.  2.  It  is  the  ordinance  of 
God  that  ministers  should  receive  a 
sufficient  maintenance  from  the  people 
whom  they  are  called  to  teach. — Ibid. 

Ver.  11.  Lessons. — When  we  see 
God  dishonoured  by  great  and  heinous 
sins,  we  ought  to  testify  our  utter  dis- 
like and  detestation  of  them,  some  way 
or  other.  (1)  By  an  outward  gesture 
and  carriage  (Acts  xiii.  51,  xviii.  6  ; 
Neh.  v.  13  ;  2  Kings  xix.  1).  (2)  By 
our  words,  plainly  and  sharply  reprov- 
ing such  sins,  and  denouncing  God's 
judgments  against  them  (Eph.  v.  11). 
2.  The  contempt  of  God's  ministers, 
especially  of  their  ministry  and  doctrine, 
is  an  execrable  and  odious  sin  in  the 
sight  of  God.  3.  The  sins  of  wicked 
men  pollute  the  very  ground  on  which 
they  tread. — Ibid. 

Severity  or  patience  ? — The  whole 
conditions  of  work  now  are  different. 
Sometimes,  perhaps,  a  Christian  is 
warranted  in  solemnly  declaring  to 
those  who  receive  not  his  message  that 
he  will  have  no  more  to  say  to  them. 
That  may  do  more  than  all  his  other 
words.  But  such  cases  are  rare ;  and 
the  rule  that  is  safest  to  follow  is  rather 
that  of  love,  which  despairs  of  none, 
and,  though  often  repelled,  returns 
with  pleading,  and,  if  it  have  told  often 
in  vain,  now  tells  with  tears,  the  story 
of  the  love  that  never  abandons  the 
most  obstinate. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Yer.  12.  Trite  repentance. — 1.  Its 
nature.  (1)  It  is  represented  in  Scrip- 
ture both  as  the  gift  of  God  and  as  the 
duty  of  the  sinner.  (2)  It  is  insepar- 
ably connected  with  faith  in  Christ. 
It  includes — (a)  A  genuine  sorrow  for 
sin.  (b)  An  unreserved  and  ingenious 
confession  of  sin.  (c)  A  firm  purpose, 
through  Divine  grace,  to  walk  in  new- 
ness of  life — a  purpose  that  is  proved 
to  be  sincere  by  the  fruits  it  produces. 
2.  Its  indispensable  necessity.  This 
is  proved  by — (1)  The  universality  of 
sin.    (2)  The  express  command  of  God, 

213 


CHAP.  VI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


and  the  awful  threatenings  He  has 
denounced  against  the  finally  impeni- 
tent. 3.  Motives  and  encouragements 
to  the  performance  of  this  duty. 
(1)  The  very  call  and  command  to 
repent  may  afford  encouragement  to 
returning  sinners.  (2)  The  Word  of 
God  is  full  of  the  most  encouraging 
and  express  promises  to  penitent  sin- 
ners. (3)  The  examples  recorded  in 
Scripture  of  sinners  who  obtained 
mercy,  notwithstanding  the  peculiar 
greatness  of  their  guilt.  (4)  The  un- 
speakable happiness  which  awaits  the 
true  penitent  in  a  future  and  eternal 
world. — D.  Black, 

Yer.  13.  Miracles. — It  was  not  magic 
that  conquered  disease  and  death.  We 
must  not  assume  that,  because  powers 
are  beyond  our  own  knowledge  and 
control,  they  are  therefore  lawless 
and  irregular.  Order  is  heaven's  first 
law.  Jesus  violates  no  principle  in 
restoring  the  dead  to  life,  but  works 
according  to  some  higher,  unknown, 
and  more  heavenly  principle.  It  is 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  overcoming  the 
kingdom  of  darkness.  The  apostles, 
after  Christ's  ascension,  preached  One 
who  had  all  power  in  heaven  and  on 
earth,  who  had  come  to  deliver  men 
from  the  plagues  and  adversaries  tor- 
menting them. 

Power  in  common  things. — There  is 
a  potency  in  the  commonest  things. 
God  has  ordered  it  so.  He  certainly 
will  not  ignore  His  own  arrangement. 
Every  cure  wrought  without  the  aid 
of    magical    art    or    imposition    and 


quackery,  wrought  with  the  aid  of 
remedies  provided  in  the  earth  and  air, 
wrought  wisely,  honestly,  scientifically, 
is  a  new  proof  that  One  who  in  other 
times  healed  the  bodies  and  souls  of 
men  is  still  at  work,  that  He  still 
gives  knowledge  and  insight  to  those 
who  seek  it,  enables  them  to  look  into 
the  condition  of  their  fellow-men,  and 
to  be  the  ministers  to  them  of  His  own 
blessed,  healing,  life-giving  power. 

The  healing  art  the  gift  of  God. — We 
may  claim  all  true  powers  of  the  heal- 
ing art  and  all  honest  studies  in 
physical  science  as  the  gifts  of  God, 
ever  intended  to  be  the  instruments 
of  extending  and  proclaiming  the  Re- 
deemer's kingdom  over  the  earth. 

Credentials  of  authority. — Through- 
out all  the  centuries  Christians  have 
been  following  in  the  footsteps  of  Christ 
in  their  ministry  to  the  sick,  the 
diseased,  the  devil-ridden,  and  the 
dying  :  thousands  of  hospitals  for  every 
manner  of  disease  and  affliction  ;  nurses 
everywhere  to  care  for  the  suffering ; 
the  white  cross  on  the  battle-fields; 
remorseless  warfare  against  every  form 
of  evil,  and  successful  warfare  too. 
A  Christlike  life,  sympathy,  active  and 
tender,  with  the  suffering  poor  under 
all  conditions,  are  the  credentials  of 
authority  which  Christ  gives  to  us  all 
now. — G.  F.  Pentecost,  D.D. 

The  duties  of  a  pastor. — Here  is  an 
emblem  of  the  several  duties  of  a 
pastor — namely,  courageously  to  prose- 
cute incorrigible  sinners,  to  treat  the 
weak  with  mildness,  and  to  apply  him- 
self to  all  with  zeal. — P.  Quesnel. 


MAIN  H0M1LETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—29. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xiv.  1,  2,  6-12 ;  Luke  ix.  7-9.) 

Death  and  burial  of  the  Baptist. — John  the  Forerunner,  like  the  Master  whose 
way  he  came  to  prepare,  died  by  violence.  Both  died  in  the  prime  of  life  ;  both 
were  slain  by  cruel  hands.  John  had  precedence  of  Jesus  both  in  the  time  and 
the  manner  of  his  death  ;  for  while  Jesus  died  as  a  malefactor  on  the  Cross  of 
shame,  John  died  the  death  of  a  Roman  citizen  by  decapitation.  Moreover, 
while  mocking  crowds  insulted  Jesus  as  He  hung  in  the  agonies  of  torture, 
John's  death  was  instantaneous  and  in  the  privacy  of  a  dungeon. 

I.  Faithful  goodness  on  the  part  of  the  Baptist. — 1.  John  was  pre-eminently 
a  good  man.     The  light  of  personal  holiness  shone  in  all  he  said  and  did  (John 

214  _      — 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap,  Ti 


v.  35).  When  Christ  challenged  the  Jews  concerning  him,  no  man  durst  speak 
disparagingly  of  him.  The  verdict  of  the  whole  land  was  in  his  favour  (Mark 
xi.  30-32).  2.  John's  goodness  was  essentially  faithful  goodness.  He  had  the 
courage  of  his  convictions.  He  dared  to  press  goodness  upon  a  corrupt  land, 
and  to  enforce  holiness  among  a  degenerate  people.  Wherever  he  saw  sin  he 
denounced  it  unsparingly,  without  respect  of  persons  or  consideration  of  self- 
interest  (Luke  iii.  7-14  ;  Matt.  iii.  7-10).  Even  the  palace  did  not  escape 
his  faithful  testimony  to  the  truth  ;  and  as  the  truth  was  unpalatable,  his 
adherence  to  it  brought  him  at  length  to  prison  and  to  death.  Ease,  honour,  and 
pleasure  might  all  have  been  his,  if  he  would  but  abstain  from  interfering  with 
the  guilty  Herod  ;  but  these  he  regarded  as  but  dross  in  comparison  with  a  good 
conscience  and  a  holy  life — nay,  life  itself  he  gladly  relinquished  rather  than 
swerve  a  hair's-breadth  from  his  loyalty  to  God. 

II.  Cruel  sin  on  the  part  of  his  enemies. — 1.  In  Herod  sin  gained  power  day  by 
day.  Though  all  history  brands  him  as  vile  and  despicable  in  his  iniquity  to  an 
unusual  degree,  yet  sin  was  not  always  so  strong  in  him  as  it  became  at  last. 
By  self-indulgence  it  gradually  mastered  him,  in  spite  of  checks  and  warnings, 
and  even  of  convictions.  2.  Bad  as  Herod  was,  Herodias  was  infinitely  worse. 
Terrible  as  it  is  to  be  a  great  sinner,  what  is  that  to  being  a  great  tempter  ? 
We  may,  from  the  force  of  temptation,  be  led  wrong  ourselves  ;  but  calmly, 
persistently,  and  in  cold  blood  to  say  and  do  and  plan  things  destructive  to  the 
welfare  of  others  is  diabolical.  3.  Sin  is  always  a  cruel  thing.  See  here  how 
it  so  steeled  the  heart  of  what  was  once  a  woman  that  she  counselled  murder 
in  the  gay  moments  of  a  birthday  feast,  There  had  been  days  of  innocence 
now  long  gone  by,  when  Herodias  was  a  girl,  a  child,  an  infant.  As  she  played 
by  her  mother's  knee,  who  could  have  foretold  that  those  prattling,  laughing  lips 
would  one  day  frame  such  a  demand  as  this  (ver.  24)  ?  The  various  stages 
which  led  her  step  by  step  to  such  an  abyss  of  inhuman  cruelty  it  is  not  now 
possible  to  trace ;  nor  is  that  necessary,  for  the  course  of  sin  never  varies  in  its 
main  features,  but  is  ever  the  same, — as  it  flows  on,  it  gradually  carries  all 
before  it ;  it  ever  deepens,  increases,  hardens,  and  pollutes,  until  all  high 
principle  vanishes,  every  tender  feeling  is  eradicated,  all  self-rule  is  destroyed, 
and  the  wretched  victim  is  henceforth  the  slave  of  Satan,  bound  and  tied  by  the 
chain  of  sin  with  which  he  once  thought  he  was  only  amusing  himself.  4.  The 
hideous  nature  of  sin  is  still  more  evident  in  the  case  of  Herodias.  For  not  only 
had  she  herself  arrived  at  a  fearful  stage  of  cruelty,  but  she  had  brought  herself 
to  teach  her  own  daughter  the  same.  Can  there  be  conceived  a  lower  depth  of 
depravity  than  that  ? 

III.  Swift  retribution  on  the  part  of  conscience. — The  tragedy  was  soon 
6nded ;  but  its  consequences  were  not  so  easily  got  rid  of.  "  No  matter  that 
Herod  was  by  profession  a  Sadducee,  with  no  faith  in  the  resurrection  ;  his  creed 
was  forgotten  in  the  superstitious  dread  which  the  memory  of  his  crime  fostered. 
The  shade  of  the  murdered  prophet  haunted  him  wherever  he  went ;  it  followed 
him  even  beyond  the  seas ;  and  the  fear  it  engendered  became  a  by- word  and 
a  proverb  in  Boman  society,  and  furnished  material  for  the  biting  satire  of 
Persius, — 

'But  when  the  feast  of  Herod's  birthday  comes, 


Thou  mov'st  thy  lips,  yet  speak'st  not  in  fear, 
Thou  keep'st  the  Sabbath  of  the  circumcised, 
And  then  there  rise  dark  spectres  of  the  dead.' 

IV.  Last  offices  of  love  on  the  part  of  John's  disciples. — "  Whether  or  not 
there  be  any  truth  in  the  tradition  that  Herod  threw  the  head  over  the  walls  of 
the  black  fortress  of  Machserus,  where  the  bloody  deed  was  done,  we  may  be 

215 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


certain  that  his  cruel  paramour,  when  she  had  once  got  into  her  possession  her 
strange  plaything,  on  its  golden  charger,  would  never  think  of  gratifying  his 
disciples  by  giving  it  to  them  for  decent  burial.  So  that  we  may,  with  perfect 
certainty,  conclude,  in  thinking  of  that  funeral  somewhere  among  the  lonely 
wilds,  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Dead  Sea,  that  it  was  a  mutilated  corpse  that 
these  men  took  up,  and  that,  wrapping  it  in  the  garment  of  camel's  hair,  with 
which  they  were  so  familiar,  they  tenderly  and  sadly  placed  in  some  cave  of  the 
desert.  But  we  can  well  believe  that,  though  in  one  sense  not  before  them,  that 
noble  head  was  ever  present  to  their  mind's  eye,  with  the  flowing  locks  that  had 
never  been  cut,  with  its  tongue  that  had  never  faltered  in  its  holy  message,  and 
its  eyes  that  had  never  flinched  before  tyrant  mob  or  tyrant  king.  The  very 
fact  that  they  were  close  at  hand  when  those  services  were  required  of  them,  in 
this  distant  place,  shews  the  depth  of  their  attachment  to  him.  If  they  could 
not  share  his  prison,  they  could  at  least  keep  near  it,  and  shew  their  devotion 
and  their  love  by  ministering  to  him  even  when  he  was  in  the  clutches  of  the 
cruel  Herod  ;  and  now,  when  the  end  had  come,  they  were  there,  ready  to  do  their 
part,  tenderly  and  courageously.  They  took  his  body — his  poor,  headless  body — 
and  buried  it.  It  may  be  that  before  they  left,  when  they  had  carefully  closed 
the  cave  in  which  their  dead  was  placed,  they  rudely  scratched  upon  the  rock 
some  epitaph  in  his  honour.  What  was  it  ?  Methinks  it  might  well  be  the 
words  in  which  His  Master  bore  testimony  to  him  :  i  Among  them  that  are  born  of 
women,  there  hath  not  risen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist. '  " 

Herod  and  John. — General  history  is  at  once  an  entertaining  and  an  edifying 
study.  It  brings  before  us  human  agents  with  their  passions  and  pursuits,  and 
arrests  our  attention,  and  promotes  our  advantage  by  the  virtues  and  vices  which 
it  exhibits,  with  their  opposite  consequences.  Biography,  or  the  history  of 
particular  persons,  is  in  a  high  degree  interesting  and  improving.  It  is  like 
turning  the  attention  from  a  general  group  in  painting,  and  directing  it  to 
a  single  portrait,  where  we  not  only  mark  how  the  colours  swell  from  the 
canvas,  but  study  the  turn  and  expression  of  every  feature,  and  arrive  at  a 
knowledge  of  the  character  and  disposition. 

I.  The  weakness  and  degeneracy  of  human  nature,  by  which  we  can  be 
led  to  commit  deeds  which  we  regard  as  in  the  last  degree  heinous. — In 
speculation,  and  when  left  to  the  unbiassed  dictates  of  our  own  hearts,  guilt 
is  always  the  object  of  our  abhorrence.  In  a  particular  manner  inhumanity 
and  cruelty  strike  us  as  crimes  of  a  most  odious  description,  and  we  shrink  from 
them  as  disgraceful  to  our  nature.  But  the  cool  convictions  of  the  moral 
principle  weighing  the  merit  of  actions  in  abstract  theory,  and  the  inflamed 
suggestions  of  passion  rushing  to  its  object  in  real  life,  are  widely  different  from 
each  other  ;  and  though  perfectly  friendly  to  virtue  in  speculation,  we  may  be 
led  in  practice  to  the  perpetration  of  deeds  fearful  for  atrocity.  Watch  and 
pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation.  Be  not  high  minded,  but  fear.  Strive, 
according  to  His  working  who  worketh  within  you  mightily.  Draw  nigh  to 
God,  and  He  will  draw  nigh  to  you. 

II.  The  danger  of  bad  counsel  and  bad  company. — Herodias  was  the  evident 
means  of  Herod's  great  guilt.  Of  himself,  it  would  appear  that  he  was  far 
from  being  an  utterly  depraved  character.  Though  reproved  by  the  Baptist,  he 
had  no  wish  to  cast  him  into  prison,  nor  would  his  anger  ever  have  proceeded 
so  far  against  him  as  to  have  taken  away  his  life.  But  the  artifices  of  her  with 
whom  he  had  connected  himself  in  unlawful  intercourse  triumphed  over  his  more 
amiable  feelings,  and  in  the  end  rendered  him  deaf  to  the  remonstrances  of 
conscience.  Such  is  the  usual  effect  of  bad  associates.  If  you  have  companions 
of  this  description,  they  will,  how  innocent  soever  or  well  disposed  you  may  at 

216  .    . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  vi. 


present  be,  accomplish  your  destruction  by  availing  themselves  of  all  your  weak 
and  unguarded  moments.  They  will  not  desist  from  their  importunities  till 
they  have  estranged  you  from  God,  and  made  you  instruments  of  their 
unhallowed  desires  and  passions.  What  have  they  to  give  that  can  be  equivalent 
for  such  a  sacrifice  ?  The  pleasures  of  guilt  which  awaken  a  foreboding  that 
is  never  laid,  though  the  pleasures  themselves  perish  in  the  using. 

III.  The  rapid  progress  of  the  sinner  from  guilt  to  guilt. — Herod  not  only 
continued  in  unlawful  connexion  with  Herodias,  but  seized  John  for  remon- 
strating with  them,  and  cast  him  into  prison.  With  this  despotical  stretch  of 
his  authority  he  was  not  long  contented.  The  servant  of  God  and  the  reprover 
of  sin  must  not  only  be  deprived  of  his  liberty,  he  must  be  bereaved  of  his  life. 
Do  not  suppose  that  the  complicated  guilt  of  this  monster  of  iniquity  can  never 
become  yours.  Look  into  life,  both  low  and  high,  and  tremble  for  yourselves. 
In  the  humblest  ranks  of  society  you  have  repeated  proofs  of  the  progress  of 
iniquity.  There  you  see  the  artificer  and  the  day-labourer,  in  their  aversion  to 
toil,  ceasing  to  work  with  their  accustomed  regularity.  Idleness  involves  them 
in  want,  and  impels  them  to  fraud  and  rapine,  and  every  unlawful  means  of 
getting  money.  At  length  they  lay  hold  of  their  neighbour's  person  on  the 
highway,  and  rob  and  plunder  him,  and  murder  him  to  escape  detection. 
Ascend  the  scale,  and  you  see  similar  results  from  similar  beginnings.  The 
libertine  of  fashion  becomes  at  last  fearless  of  God,  and  regardless  of  the  rights 
and  callous  to  the  sufferings  of  his  acquaintance.  He  contracts  debts  which  he 
never  intends  to  pay,  ruins  characters  whom  he  promised  to  protect,  seduces 
the  unsuspecting  from  kindred  and  parents  and  home  ;  and  after  being  satiated 
with  the  pleasures  of  guilt,  he  abandons  them  without  a  scruple  to  poverty  and 
misery.  Extend  your  observations  to  the  course  of  all  the  wicked,  and  you  will 
see  that  when  once  men  enter  into  the  path  of  sin  they  seldom  or  never  stop. 
But  the  vices  not  only  spring  out  of  each  other,  they  increase  perpetually  in 
enormity.  Herod  began  with  an  act  of  wrongful  imprisonment ;  next  he  was 
guilty  of  a  bloody  murder ;  and,  at  an  after-period,  he  surpassed  even  this  com- 
plication of  iniquity  by  insulting  the  last  moments  of  Christ,  and  delivering  Him 
into  the  hands  of  His  enemies  to  be  crucified  as  a  traitor  and  blasphemer. 
Guard  your  heart ;  guard  and  fence  your  conduct ;  and  beware  of  the  repetition 
of  any  heinous  act  as  certain  to  lead  you  to  another  still  more  heinous,  till  it 
end  you  in  the  extremity  of  guilt. 

IY.  The  unspeakable  terrors  of  an  awakened  conscience. — Impelled  by 
passion  and  appetite,  you  may  despise  the  monitor  within,  and  rush  on  fearless 
of  consequences.  But  all  this  obstinacy  and  intrepidity  neither  alters  the 
nature  of  guilt  nor  ends  the  supremacy  of  conscience.  The  power  of  this  moral 
ruler  is  suspended,  not  destroyed  ;  and  the  recovery  of  its  ascendency  will  prove 
to  you  most  terrible.  Then  it  will  bring  up  your  crimes,  and  marshal  them  in 
battle-array  against  you  ;  and  as  the  supposed  return  of  the  beheaded  Baptist 
into  life  disturbed  the  heart  of  the  king  who  murdered  him,  so  shall  they  rack 
your  soul  with  unspeakable  horrors,  and  distract  and  drive  you  mad,  with  the 
prospect  of  final  damnation. — W.  Thorbum. 

Imperfect  reformation  insufficient. — Herod's  proficiency  in  matter  of  religion. 
— 1.  Herod's  preservation  of  John  Baptist's  life,  and  sheltering  and  protecting 
him  against  Herodias'  malice.  Wicked  and  unregenerate  men  may  take  such  a 
liking  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  be  so  affected  with  it,  as  to  become  maintainers 
and  protectors  and  defenders  of  the  servants  of  God  that  minister  it  to  them. 
2.  The  Word  of  God  may  so  far  prevail  upon  an  unregenerate  man  as  to  work 
in  him  a  fear  and  an  awful  regard,  and  to  captivate  him  to  the  authority  of 
religion  in  the  servants  of  God.     (1)  Did  Herod  stand  in  fear  of  John  ?     'Tis 

217 


chap.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST  MARK. 


then  no  evidence  of  piety  and  goodness  not  to  do  evil  for  fear  of  others.  (2)  Did 
Herod  fear  John,  and  keep  within  some  compass  and  bounds  of  moderation 
because  of  John  ?  In  what  case  are  they  that  are  of  his  temper  in  the  gospel, 
that  could  boast  and  profess  that  he  neither  feared  God  nor  reverenced  man  ? 
Licentious,  audacious,  profane  wretches,  such  as  those  graceless  Jews  were, 
that,  when  they  saw  Stephen's  face  shine  like  an  angel,  yet  durst  oppose  him 
and  offer  violence  to  him.  3.  A  third  effect  that  was  wrought  in  Herod  towards 
John  Baptist  is  a  worthy  esteem  and  acknowledgment  of  John's  piety  and 
sanctity,  and  those  graces  that  were  in  him  ;  he  accounted  him  a  just  man 
and  holy.  Carnal  and  unconverted  and  sensual  men  yet  can  come  thus  far, 
as  to  have  the  virtues  and  graces  that  shine  in  others  in  a  fair  esteem  and 
in  some  admiration.  4.  There  is  a  fourth  effect  wrought  in  Herod  towards 
John  Baptist — that  is  a  reverent  behaviour  towards  him.  He  observed  him, 
had  a  care  to  please  him  in  his  demeanour  ;  he  would  be  loath  to  offend  him  as 
little  as  he  could.  A  carnal,  unconverted  man  may  be  so  affected  towards 
religion  as  to  be  willing  to  accommodate  his  carriage  to  the  best  content  of  the 
servants  of  God.  5.  A  fifth  effect  of  John's  ministry  in  Herod  is  a  willing 
attention  to  his  preaching.  "  He  heard  him  gladly."  Even  an  unregenerate  man, 
living  in  a  state  of  sensuality,  may  be  a  diligent,  and  constant,  and  willing,  and 
ready  frequenter  of  the  preaching  of  the  Word.  6.  There  is  yet  a  further  step 
of  proficiency  in  Herod  that  was  a  very  specious  conformity  to  St.  John's 
doctrine.  "  He  did  many  things  " — yielded  obedience  to  many  instructions.  An 
unregenerate  man  may  come  thus  far,  as  to  be  won  and  persuaded  by  the  Word 
to  the  performance  of  many  good  duties.  Herod,  it  seems,  yielded  obedience 
to  John's  preaching  in  many  particulars.  (1)  In  his  private  conversation  'tis 
like  he  abstained  from  some  vicious  courses.  (2)  In  his  public  administration 
and  government  he  listened  to  John  in  reforming  of  abuses,  made  many  good 
laws  for  the  well- ordering  of  his  kingdom  and  repressing  of  vices.  (3)  Was 
not  wanting  in  ecclesiastical  affairs.  He  countenanced  John's  preaching,  and 
assisted  him  against  gainsayers  and  opposers.  He  did  not  only  hear  him  gladly, 
but  was  persuaded  by  him  to  do,  yea  to  do  many  things  in  conformity  to  his 
doctrine.  'Tis  much  to  come  thus  far,  not  only  to  afford  him  audience,  but 
to  perform  obedience  :  not  to  rest  in  the  notional  part,  but  to  make  some 
progress  in  the  practical  part  of  religion.  Yet  so  did  Herod  and  many  others 
that  never  attained  to  true  conversion,  and  so  fell  short  of  life  and  salvation. 

II.  The  insufficiency  of  this  his  progress,  and  wherein  it  failed  and  came 
short. — 1.  For  his  esteem  and  regard  of  John's  person  and  piety.  'Tis  very 
questionable,  as  unsound,  upon  the  suspicion  of  those  false  grounds,  from  which 
it  did  arise;  and  we  may  see  three  suspicious  grounds  of  it.  (1)  The  first 
suspicious  ground  of  this  high  esteem  of  John  we  may  justly  conceive  was 
popularity.  When  religion  is  in  request  and  grown  into  fashion,  and  becomes 
e  matter  of  reputation,  'tis  no  great  matter  then  to  become  an  admirer  and 
honourer  of  it.  (2)  A  second  suspicious  ground  of  Herod's  respect  to  John  that 
makes  it  insufficient  is  policy.  Herod  was  a  fox,  as  our  Saviour  terms  him. 
i  He  thought  it  safe  to  hold  in  with  John,  to  get  him  to  the  court,  and  to  put 
countenance  upon  him  ;  it  would  satisfy  the  people  well.  (3)  To  make  the  best 
of  it,  a  third  ground  of  Herod's  good  respect  to  John,  that  makes  his  pro- 
ficiency to  be  insufficient,  might  be  a  natural  ingenuity,  a  remainder  of  right 
reason  and  common  honesty,  which  might  be  in  Herod,  and  might  move  him  to 
think  well  of  John  Baptist,  and  esteem  worthily  of  him.  Besides  those  things 
that  are  truly  and  properly  spiritual,  there  are  some  excellences  that  do 
accompany  piety  and  religion,  that  may  be  apprehended  and  well  esteemed  by 
mere  natural  men  ;  and  accordingly  their  natural  ingenuity  will  affect  and 
approve  them,  though  they  have  no  true  relish  of  that  which  is  indeed  spiritual 

218 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.  chap.  VI. 


in  piety  and  religion :  thus  deceiving  their  own  hearts  as  if  they  loved 
religion  for  the  sanctity  of  it.  St.  Gregory  speaks  excellently  to  this  purpose  : 
"  Many  a  man  deceives  himself,  and  thinks  he  loves  that  in  religion  which 
indeed  he  loves  not,  but  some  other  thing  for  it."  (a)  Natural  ingenuity 
will  see  and  discern  a  great  deal  of  innocence  in  religion.  True  piety  and 
Christianity  will  make  Christians  unblamable,  inoffensive,  and  of  a  harmless 
conversation,  so  that  they  gain  a  good  report  of  them  that  are  without,  (b)  Inge- 
nuity observes  a  great  deal  of  utility  and  profitableness  in  religion.  Good 
Christians  are  not  only  harmless  and  inoffensive,  but  they  are  useful  and 
helpful,  and  beneficial  to  the  times  and  places  wherein  they  live,  (c)  Ingenuity 
can  observe  a  great  deal  of  beauty  and  comeliness  in  religion.  Piety,  when 
it  appears  in  the  life  of  a  Christian,  is  exceedingly  lovely  ;  as  Solomon  speaks,  it 
makes  the  face  to  shine.  It  was  not  John's  piety  that  relished  with  Herod, 
but  these  condimenta  pietatis  which  were  as  sauces  and  sweetenings  unto  it. 
2.  His  diligent  attention  to  John's  preaching  and  ministry :  he  heard  him 
gladly.  But  even  this  forwardness  falls  short  and  will  appear  insufficient  upon 
two  suspicions.  (1)  We  have  just  cause  to  suspect  his  disposition  out  of  which 
he  did  it.  (a)  All  this  his  forwardness  in  hearing,  it  was  but  a  passion,  a 
pleasure,  and  a  delight  that  he  took,  and  that  brought  him  on  to  give  John  the 
hearing,  (b)  His  delight  and  joy  was  too  forward.  Some  other  motion  and 
affection  should  have  been  stirred  up  in  him.  No  question,  John's  preaching, 
had  it  been  suffered  to  work  kindly,  would  have  stirred  up  fear,  and  care, 
and  sorrow,  and  repentance,  and  humiliation  :  we  hear  of  none  of  these ;  but 
only  Herod's  fancy  was  taken,  and  begat  delight  in  him.  The  matter  of  salva- 
tion, 'tis  not  a  jocund  and  a  sporting  work ;  it  must  be  wrought  out  with  fear 
and  trembling,  (c)  He  delighted  in  John's  preaching  with  the  same  affection 
that  he  shewed  in  other  things.  John  preaches,  and  he  pleases  him  ;  Herodias 
dances,  and  she  pleases  him, — no  difference.  A  religious  man,  even  in  outward 
delights,  rejoices  spiritually  ;  a  carnal  man,  even  in  spiritual  things,  rejoices 
carnally,  (d)  It  was  a  passion  of  joy  in  hearing  the  Word ;  but  it  was  yet 
controllable,  and  easily  overcome  by  another  delight.  His  birthday  joy,  and  his 
delight  he  takes  in  the  damsel's  dancing,  hath  exceeded  and  overcome  all  the 
delight  he  took  in  John.  Was  Herod  ever  so  much  taken  with  John's  preaching 
as  to  yield  to  him  so  great  a  suit  as  he  granted  to  his  minstrel  ?  (2)  The  motives 
that  made  him  thus  attentive  are  very  suspicious,  (a)  Was  it  not  the  novelty 
of  John's  teaching  that  did  thus  delight  him  ?  Let  John  hold  on  for  some  time, 
all  this  forwardness  will  cool  again.  'Tis  but  the  crackling  of  thorns  in  the 
fire ;  a  sudden  blaze  for  a  time,  and  soon  out  again,  (b)  Was  it  not  some 
generality  of  truth  that  might  give  Herod  content  ?  No  doubt  John  had  many 
deep  discourses  in  matters  of  divinity  about  the  nature  of  God  and  the  con- 
troversies of  the  times.  And  Herod  can  hear  these  discourses  gladly.  There  is 
in  many  men  a  kind  of  spiritual  lust  in  their  understanding,  that  is  much 
pleased  with  such  high  strains  and  contemplative  discourses,  (c)  'Tis  like 
John's  preaching  cleared  a  great  doubt  and  scruple  in  Herod's  mind  concerning 
the  Messiah  that  had  much  troubled  him.  That  Christ's  kingdom  was  not  of 
this  world,  that  Christianity  teaches  obedience  to  worldly  powers  and  poten- 
tates, doth  not  disturb  them,  much  less  destroy  them — this  doctrine  was 
welcome  to  Herod  ;  he  heard  it  gladly,  (d)  John  had  his  thunderings  against 
the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  and  the  priests,  and  scribes,  and  doctors  of  the 
law ;  he  was  a  sharp  reprover  of  vice  and  disorders ;  he  taught  the  soldiers  to 
be  content  with  their  wages,  and  not  to  mutiny.  And  Herod  could  hear  other 
men's  faults  taxed  and  reproved ;  it  was  music  to  him.  (e)  Were  there  not  some 
personal  excellences  in  John's  preaching  that  Herod  delighted  in — his  wit,  or 
elocution,   or  some  graceful   delivery  ?      3.   The  third  thing  considerable  is 

219 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Herod's  conformity  to  John's  preaching;  he  yielded  to  his  doctrine  in  many 
things,  and  submitted  to  it.  He  was  not  a  bare  auditor,  gave  John  the  hearing 
only,  but  made  some  progress  in  practice  too.  John's  preaching  prevailed 
with  him,  and  made  him  do  many  things.  Now,  surely,  a  very  specious 
conformity,  had  it  not  some  suspicions  and  failings  in  it.  (1)  This  conformity 
is  suspicious,  because — (a)  These  many  things  which  Herod  did,  they  were 
some  light,  easy  performances.  He  put  himself  to  no  great  pain  in  this  doing 
or  forbearing.  Canst  thou  mortify  thy  dearest  sins,  cross  thy  lusts,  and  strive 
against  them  ?  work  thyself  to  the  practice  of  those  good  duties  that  are 
painful  and  laborious  ?  Such  a  conformity  argues  truth  of  grace  in  thee. 
(b)  These  many  things  which  Herod  did,  'tis  like  they  were  some  plausible 
performances  that  the  world  will  take  notice  of  and  speak  well  of ;  such  make 
for  Herod's  reputation  in  the  world,  and  you  may  win  him  unto  them.  But  try 
Herod  with  the  more  inward  and  private  and  secret  parts  of  piety,  that  men 
cannot  discern  or  take  notice  of  ;  thy  secret  devotion  and  prayer  to  God,  thy 
daily  bewailing  thy  sins  'twixt  God  and  thine  own  conscience,  and  the  strivings 
of  thy  soul  against  sinful  inclinations,  thine  alms  in  secret,  as  Christ  directs, — 
oh  !  these  make  no  noise,  they  are  not  matter  of  ostentation  ;  and  so  Herod 
forbears  them,  (c)  These  many  things  that  Herod  did  might  be  some  civil 
and  public  and  outward  administrations,  the  redress  of  public  abuses,  some 
good  orders  published  and  enjoyed.  No  doubt  many  an  honest  cause  sped  the 
better  for  John,  the  course  of  justice  went  on  more  speedily.  These  good  duties 
put  Herod  to  no  great  trouble  or  pain.  'Tis  more  hard  to  mortify  one  bosom 
sin  that  thy  soul  delights  in,  than  to  bring  thyself  to  the  outward  performance 
of  the  whole  law  of  God.  (2)  As  the  obedience  of  Herod  was  suspicious,  so  we 
find  it  to  be  failing  and  defective.  He  did  many  things,  but  yet  fell  short ;  he 
failed  in  other  things  ;  he  dispensed  with  himself  for  some  sins  which  he  would 
not  part  with.  This  he  would  do,  but  that  he  would  not  do.  'Twas  like 
Naaman's  conversion  ;  he  promises  some  duties  in  religion,  but  sues  for  a 
dispensation  in  others.  "  Herein  God  be  merciful  to  me  :  this  sin  I  cannot  part 
with."  Whereas  entire  and  universal  obedience  is  only  acceptable  and  of 
account  with  God  (Ps.  cxix.  6).  Satan  knows  this  so  well  that  he  can  be 
content  to  have  us  yield  to  God  in  many  things,  only  be  true  to  Satan  in  some 
one  thing.  He  knows  one  dram  of  poison  may  spoil  all  the  wholesome 
ingredients,  and  make  them  deadly.  One  dead  fly  may  taint  the  most  precious 
ointment,  saith  Solomon.  One  sin  unrepented  of  and  retained  in  practice,  the 
cherishing  of  one  lust,  will  corrupt  all  other  laudable  and  commendable  duties. 
"  As  a  bird,"  saith  Chrysostom,  "  if  the  snare  catch  but  one  of  her  feet,  though 
her  wings  be  free  and  ready  for  flight,  yet  she  is  taken,  and  becomes  a  prey  to 
the  fowler."  Or  as  Augustine  compares  it,  "  Though  all  the  parts  of  our  body 
be  sound,  save  only  one,  that  one  diseased  and  ulcerous  part  may  be  deadly  to 
thee.  All  the  sound  members  cannot  preserve  life ;  but  even  one  diseased 
member  shall  hasten  thy  death."  («)  See  John's  fidelity.  For  all  Herod's 
forwardness,  he  will  not  abate  him  the  commission  of  one  gross  sin.  (6)  See 
John's  simplicity.  A  politic  man  would  have  winked  at  this  one  fault  of  Herod, 
thought  it  wisdom  to  preserve  his  interest  with  Herod.  "  I  may  prevail  much 
with  him,  if  I  hold  good  terms  with  him ;  many  good  causes  may  speed  the 
better,  if  I  hold  fair  with  Herod ;  but  to  deal  roughly  with  him,  and  affront 
him  in  his  sin,  may  set  him  farther  off — no  good  shall  be  done  with  him."  No ; 
John's  piety  abhors  this  policy.  God  allows  no  such  compliances  upon  any  such 
pretences,  (c)  See  John's  importunity  in  admonishing  of  Herod.  He  tells  him 
plainly  of  his  sin.  John  must  do  his  duty,  though  it  cost  him  the  loss  of 
Herod's  favour — ay,  and  his  life  too.  And  so  it  did  ;  and  that  will  give  you  to 
see  Herod's  deficiency,  to  what  he  falls,  even  to  open  persecution. 

220 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  vi. 


Lessons. — 1.  Bare  formality  in  matters  of  religion  is  not  lasting.  It  will 
wear  off — like  some  waterish  colours  that  are  lightly  laid  on,  will  fade  and 
vanish,  are  of  no  continuance.  2.  One  unmortified  sin  wilfully  retained  will 
eat  out  all  appearances  of  virtue  and  piety.  3.  An  unmortified  sin,  rather  than 
be  crossed,  will  fall  to  persecution.  Reigning  sins  will  at  last  prove  raging  sins, 
and  grow  impatient  of  any  reproof.  Cast  pearls  and  precious  truths  before 
fierce  dogs,  they  will  not  only  trample  them  under  their  feet,  but  will  rend  and 
worry  you  (Matt.  vii.  6).  This  is  the  dreadful  downfall  of  unsoundness  in 
religion.  A  false  friend  to  religion  will  at  last  prove  an  open  enemy  to  it. — 
Bishop  Brownrigg. 

OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  14.  Lessons. — 1.  The  innocence  critical  about  sermons  is  to  be  con- 

and  uprightness  of  God's  faithful  ser-  cerned  about  truth. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 
vants  are  of  great  power  to  strike  terror  The  judgment  of  the  world  is  very 

into   their  wicked   enemies,  and  that  uncertain  in  all  things,  but  extremely 

not  only  while  living,  but  even  after  blind  in   those  which  relate  to  God. 

their   death.      (1)  The   best  way   for  There    are   no    conjectures  so  extra  - 

God's  servants  to  dismay  their  enemies  vagant  but  men  will  have  recourse  to 

is  to  walk  in  holiness  and  innocence  of  them  rather  than  believe  the  Word  of 

life.     (2)  Beware  of  offering  wrong  to  God  :  so  corrupt  is  the  heart  of  man, 

any  innocent  and  holy  servant  of  God,  so  true  is  it,  that  blindness  is  the  just 

lest  thy  conscience  terrify  thee  for  it.  punishment  of  incredulity.   These  Jews, 

2.  This  is  one  effect  and  property  of  a  in  their  several  judgments,  afford  us  a 

guilty  conscience  :  to  disquiet  and  vex  lively  representation  of  those  pretended 

the  heart  with  great  terrors  and  fears —  masters  of  reason  who   affect  always 

yea,  often  with  vain  fears  for  which  singularity  in  their  opinions,  and  who 

there  is   no  cause  (Job  xv.  21  ;   Isa.  believe     everything     except    truth. — 

lvii.  20;  Deut.  xxviii.  65;  Lev.  xxvi.  36  ;  P.   Quesnel. 
Prov.  xxviii.  1).    3.  Sin  once  committed 

lies  heavy  on  the  conscience,  accusing  Yer.  16.  Conscience. — 1.  Conscience 
and  troubling  it  long  afterwards  will  not  be  silenced  by  wealth  or  earthly 
(Gen.  xlii.  21 ;  Ps.  xxv.  7).  4.  Murder,  surroundings.  2.  A  guilty  conscience 
or  shedding  of  innocent  blood,  is  such  is  troubled  with  not  only  real  but 
a  sin  as  will  lie  heavy  on  the  con-  imaginary  troubles.  3.  A  guilty  con- 
science of  those  guilty  of  it,  breeding  science  will  torment  a  man  in  spite  of  (\rzuL 
great  terror  to  them  (Gen.  iv.  13;  his  avowed  religious  belief . — T.Kelly. 
Ps.  li.  14). — G.  Petter.  Conscience  bribed. — We  all  of  us  do 

evil  things  that  it  is  not  hard  for  us 

Yer.  15.  The  speculators  of  society. —  to  seem  to  forget,  and  with  regard  to 

Conscience  is  hardly  concerned  in  their  which  it  is  not  hard  for  us  to  bribe 

case.    They  give  themselves  to  the  con-  or   to   silence  our   memories   and   our 

sideration  of  mere  problems  or  puzzles,  consciences.     The  hurry  and  bustle  of 

They  represent,  too,  the  persons  who  can  daily  life,  the   very   weakness  of  our 

talk   about   religious  subjects   without  characters,  the  rush  of  sensuous  delights, 

having  any  religious  feeling.     Religion  may  make  us  blind  and  deaf  to  the 

is  to  them  only  a  topic  of  the  day.     It  voice  of  conscience  ;  and  we  think  that 

is  something  to  be  remarked  upon,  and  all  chance  of  the  evil  deed  rising  again 

then  dropped  in  favour  of  something  to  harm  us  is  past.     But  some  trifle 

else.     There  are  men  around  ourselves  touches   the    hidden   spring   by    mere 

who  suppose  that  to  admire  a  preacher  accident.     As  in  the  old  story  of  the 

is  to  admire  Christ,  and  that  to  be  man  groping  along  a  wall,  till  his  finger 

221 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


happened  to  fall  upon  one  inch  of  it, 
and  immediately  the  hidden  door  flies 
open  and  there  is  the  skeleton,  so 
with  any  of  us  some  merely  fortuitous 
association  may  freshen  faded  memories 
and  wake  a  dormant  conscience.  An 
apparently  trivial  circumstance,  like 
some  hooked  pole  pushed  at  random 
into  the  sea,  may  bring  up  by  the  locks 
some  pale  and  drowned  memory  long 
plunged  in  an  ocean  of  oblivion. — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Unbelief  and  superstition. — There  is 
a  very  close  connexion,  as  all  history 
proves,  between  theoretical  disbelief  in 
a  future  life  and  spiritual  existence 
and  superstition.  So  strong  is  the 
bond  that  unites  men  with  the  unseen 
world,  that  if  they  do  not  link  them- 
selves with  that  world  in  the  legitimate 
and  true  fashion,  it  is  almost  certain 
to  avenge  itself  upon  them  by  leading 
them  to  all  manner  of  low  and  ab- 
ject superstitions.  Spiritualism  is  the 
disease  of  a  generation  that  disbelieves 
in  another  life.  The  French  Revolu- 
tion with  its  infidelities  was  also  the 
very  seed-field  for  all  manner  of  quacks 
and  impostors  such  as  Cagliostro  and 
the  like.  The  time  when  Christ  lived 
presented  precisely  the  same  pheno- 
mena. If  Herod  was  a  Sadducee, 
Herod's  Sadduceeism,  like  the  frost  upon 
the  window-panes,  was  such  a  thin 
layer  shutting  out  the  invisible  world 
that  the  least  warmth  of  conscience 
melted  it,  and  the  clear  daylight  glared 
in  upon  him.  And  I  am  afraid  that 
there  are  a  great  many  of  us  who  may 
be  half  inclined  to  regret  supernatural 
religion  and  the  thought  of  another 
life  who  would  find  precisely  the  same 
thing  happening  to  them. — Ibid. 

Ver.  17.  Persecution  of  the  good. — 
1.  Think  it  no  new  or  strange  thing  if 
in  our  times  we  see  good  and  faithful 
ministers  unjustly  troubled  and  perse- 
cuted by  those  in  authority,  and  that 
even  for  the  faithful  discharge  of  their 
ministry.  Pray  for  them,  and  use  all 
good  means  to  help  them.  2.  Let  all 
faithful  ministers  prepare  and  arm 
themselves  for  troubles  and  persecutions 

222 


in  the  world  (Matt.  x.  24).  3.  It  should 
comfort  and  encourage  faithful  ministers 
to  bear  such  troubles  patiently,  and  not 
be  dismayed  at  them,  seeing  they  suffer 
no  other  but  what  the  most  excellent 
prophets  and  ministers  of  God  have 
gone  through  before  them.  4.  See  the 
wretched  blindness  and  corruption  of 
our  nature,  causing  us  to  hate  and 
persecute  such  as  are  called  and  sent 
of  God  to  do  us  good — yea,  the  greatest 
good. — G.  Fetter. 

2  he  propensity  of  the  heart  to  self- 
delusion. — It  is  not  improbable  that 
Herod,  conscious  as  he  was  that  he 
most  unjustly  detained  John  the  Bap- 
tist in  prison,  applauded  himself  with 
complacency,  and  assumed  in  his  own 
estimation  great  credit  for  virtue,  be- 
cause he  had  withstood  the  solicitations 
of  Herodias  for  his  death.  Have  you 
not  also,  while  aware  that  you  have 
lived  under  the  habitual  influence  of 
some  unchristian  temper,  in  the  habitual 
indulgence  of  some  unchristian  practice, 
proudly  congratulated  yourself  on  your 
goodness,  because  you  have  abstained 
from  other  crimes  to  which  you  were 
tempted  ?  Have  you  not  satisfied  your- 
self for  yielding  to  the  one  temptation 
by  reminding  your  conscience  that  you 
did  not  yield  to  the  other  ?  Have  not 
you  hankered  after  a  compromise  with 
Divine  justice,  and  meditated  with 
complacent  self -righteousness  the  pro- 
duction of  a  balance  of  imaginary  merit 
to  countervail  the  penalty  of  guilt  ?  See 
Hag.  i.  5;  Isa.  xliv.  20;  Rev.  hi.  17; 
Gal.  iii.  10.  If  example  can  affect 
you,  look  to  that  of  Herod.  Behold 
in  him  an  illustration  of  the  conse- 
quences entailed  on  perseverance  in  a 
single  sin.  In  him  behold  a  picture 
of  that  abandoned  depravity  of  which 
perseverance  in  a  single  sin  is  naturally 
the  forerunner.  Is  there  an  Herodias 
whom  you  will  not  put  away  ?  Let 
suitable  temptations  arise,  and  guilt 
equal  to  that  of  Herod  may  become 
yours. — T.  Gisborne,  D.D. 

Ver.  18.  Tim  duty  of  reproving  sin. — 
1.  Ministers  ought  not  to  wink  at  sin 
in  those  of  their  charge,   not  to  be 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  vi. 


silent   at  the  committing  of  it ;   but  of  a  diamond,  on  the  page  of  your  own 

to  admonish  and  reprove  the  same  as  heart  ? — C.  A .  Bartol. 

occasion  offers,  in  public  and  private  Religion  too  costly  for  Herod. — Think 

(2  Tim.  iv.  2  ;  Tit.  ii.  15).     2.  Minis-  of   all  the  weary  steps  which    Herod 

ters  must  deal  impartially  in  admonish-  must  retrace  before  he  could  be  even 

ing   and    reproving    sin,    not  only  in  on  a  moral  level  to  start  on  St.  John's 

mean  persons,  but  in  the  great  ones,  principles  of  religion.     Perhaps  in  in- 

3.  Such  as  have  a  call  to  reprove  sin  tense  moments,  when  martyrdom  was 

in   others    should    do    it   plainly    and  the  consequence,   it  would  have  been 

directly,  shewing  them  their  sin,   and  in  some  ways  easier  to  make  a  pro- 

the  danger  of  it  by  the  Word  of  God,  f ession — to  stand  forth  from  the  parody 

in  such  sort  as  they  may  be  in  con-  of  baptism  on  the  stage,   and  to  own 

science  convinced  of  it. — G.  Fetter.  oneself  converted  and  be  torn  to  death — 

to  jump  down  into  the  amphitheatre 

Ver.   19.    Hatred   against  reprovers.  where   men    were    fighting,    and   say, 

— It   is    very    shocking,  but   is  there  "  You  shall  not  do  it,"  and  be  cut  to 

nothing  in  our   own  hearts  that  can  pieces — to  be  carried  away  by  the  im- 

interpret  to  us  this  woman's  hate?    Has  pulse  of  a  great  movement,  and  die  in 

the  reproof  of  some  cherished  sin  never  the  heat  of  enthusiasm.     But  in  the 

stirred  within  us  a  feeling   of   bitter  quiet  of  a  great  lull,  among  people  who 

enmity  towards  the  reprover  ?     Doubt-  are  not  intensely  committed  one  way 

less  we  should  shrink  back  in  horror  or  another,  to  alter  the  mode  of  life, 

from   the   mere  thought    of   murder ;  to  cut  away  with  their  own  hands  the 

but,  remember,  the  spirit  of  hatred,  of  hindrances  and  barriers,  to  be  known 

revenge,  whether  it  lead  to  murder  or  to  have  plucked  out  a  right  eye  or  to 

stop  short  at  some  lesser  vengeance,  is  have  cut  off  a  right  foot,  to  be  earnestly 

essentially  the  same  (Matt.  v.  21,  22).  preaching   renunciation   instead  of   a 

— W.  T.  Wilson.  faint  disapproval  of  things  which  we 

do  not  think   are   quite  right,  to   be 

"Ver.  20.  Vice  respects  virtue. — Feared  practising  faith  instead  of  an  eclectic 

John  there  in  prison  ? — feared  the  help-  appreciation,    an   earnest    practice   of 

less   captive,    bound   and  confined  far  true   religion    instead   of   being    "  an 

from  the  sight  of  a  friend?     A  trait  honorary    member    of    all    forms    of 

how  deeply  true  to  the  human  soul !  belief  " — it  costs  a  good  deal,  it  means 

Yes,  vice  must  respect  virtue  all  the  a  good  deal.     Herod  shrinks  from  it ; 

time  :  ever  putting  it  to  shame,  counter-  giving    up   that    bad    connexion    was 

mining  and  insulting  it,  banishing  it,  not  so  much  in  itself,  but  it  meant  a 

loading  it  with  chains,  it  must  fearfully  good  deal,  and  there  was  more  than 

respect  it.     Is  it  not  so  ?     Whenever  one   person  to  be  considered. — Canon 

you  have  been  the  aggressor  in  any  Newbolt. 

difference  or  quarrel  with  a  fellow- man,  "  Did   many   things." — What    those 

though  you  may  have  added  defence  "many   things"    were    which    Herod 

to  defence,    and   piled   vindication  on  amended   at  the  bidding  of  John  we 

vindication,  have  you  been  able,  after  vainly  surmise.     A  few  of  the  grosser 

all,  to  uproot  a  deep-seated  regard  even  corruptions  of  his  foul  court  were  per- 

for  him  you  differed  with  ?     When  the  chance  removed,  or  it   may  be   John 

passion  and  turbid  commotion  of   the  could  hold  back  the  stubborn  king  in 

hour   have   passed   by,    has   not   that  some  one  occasional  act  of  cruelty,  or 

solemn    regard   subsided  to   the    very  persuade   him  to   pay  some  attention 

bottom  of  your  mind,  and,  in  the  light  to  the  -outward  worship  of  God ;    but 

of    transparent    reflexion,    made    you  he  could  not,   did  not,   win  him  to  a 

ashamed  of  yourself,  if  not  caused  you  thorough  reformation  of  his  own  life, 

to  stand  aghast  at  the  wrong  you  see  It   was  all   surface  work.     The  deep, 

scored  against  you,  as  with  the  point  ingrained   depravity   was   not   shaken 

223 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


off.  There  was  pleasure  in  hearing 
truth — a  partial  obedience  to  truth — 
but  not  a  thorough  casting  away  of 
impurity  and  cruelty  and  fraud. 
And  we  know  the  result.  The  evil 
spirit,  driven  out  in  a  measure,  re- 
turned again.  One  day  of  excess,  one 
hour  of  ungoverned  passion,  swept 
away  the  edifice  of  sand,  and  a  crime 
which  stamps  him  for  ever  in  the  ranks 
of  the  Pilates  and  Judases,  the  unjust 
judges  and  false  friends,  plunged  his 
soul  again  into  unutterable  darkness. 
The  only  voice  which  had  ever  stirred 
the  better  spirit  within  him  was 
quenched  in  blood,  and  the  last  state 
became  worse  than  the  first. — Bishop 
Woodford. 

Herod  and  John. — Here  are  two 
men,  each  swayed  by  his  past,  each 
working  out  a  future ;  living  in  the 
same  age,  within  touch,  as  it  were,  of 
the  same  wonderful  crisis  of  history — 
with  the  same  God,  the  same  nature, 
the  same  heaven  to  win,  the  same  hell 
to  avoid.  And  now  under  the  same 
roof,  and  yet  how  separated  in  every 
possible  way !  With  a  value  to  the 
world  which  varied  with  terrible  irony 
in  inverse  ratio  to  their  outward  cir- 
cumstances !  The  one  pledged  up  to 
the  hilt  to  the  service  of  God,  the  main- 
tenance of  principle,  and  the  integrity 
of  his  life  ;  the  other  a  mere  plaything 
of  the  world,  tossed  up  and  down  like 
a  cork  upon  its  turbulent  waters,  the 
victim  of  every  whim,  the  slave  of 
every  pleasure,  hounded  along  by  his 
lusts,  his  very  principle  of  morality 
given  in  pawn  to  an  adulteress ;  and 
yet  with  a  lingering  appreciation  still 
left  of  a  noble  character  when  he  saw 
one ;  the  power  of  still  snatching  at 
an  ornament  which  he  had  sense  enough 
left  to  know  was  precious,  as  it  was 
swept  by  on  the  waves.  It  was  politic 
to  shut  up  the  open-mouthed  prophet. 
Yes  ;  but  that  was  not  all — he  had 
liked  to  keep  him  by  him.  His  stern 
words  roused  a  delightf ul  thrill  of  self- 
distrust  ;  gave  him,  if  we  follow  one 
reading  of  the  passage,  deep  perplexity  ; 
perhaps  even  led  him  to  do  certain 
things,  to   take  certain   steps  in   the 

224 


direction  of  right ;  and,  at  all  events, 
it  was  a  real  pleasure  to  him  to  hear 
him  speak  on  great  and  deep  subjects. 
It  might  be  just  a  link  with  a  better 
past  to  have  a  prophet  on  the  premises, 
albeit  in  the  dungeon. — Canon  Newbolt. 
Tim  downward  path. — In  our  own 
days,  amidst  our  own  homes,  there  are 
souls  taking  the  downward  path,  be- 
cause they,  like  Herod,  will  not  give 
up  their  besetting  sin.  Perhaps  it  is 
the  seductive  wine-cup,  perhaps  the 
perilous  friendship  of  some  sceptic. 
Perhaps  it  is  the  strange  delusion 
which  makes  the  happiness  of  some  men 
— adding  bid  to  bit  of  shining  metal, 
of  which  they  make  no  use  ;  or  that 
sin  in  disguise,  the  idolatry  of  self, 
making  everything  and  everybody  bow 
down  to  one's  own  ease  and  comfort ! 
One  is  reminded  of  the  account  given 
of  the  way  in  which  old  Westminster 
Bridge  came  to  ruin.  The  stone- work 
piers  on  which  the  arches  rested  were 
built  on  piles  of  wood  firmly  driven 
into  the  river's  bed ;  but  the  scour  of 
the  ebbing  tides,  and  the  force  of  the 
currents,  swept  away  the  earth  and 
gravel  from  around  the  piles,  till  they 
were  no  longer  secure.  So  with  the 
soul.  We  make  firm  resolutions,  as  we 
think,  and  for  a  time  they  last ;  but 
the  powerful  stream  of  temptation 
gradually  loosens  them,  and  the  whole 
superstructure  of  the  Christian  life  is 
ready  to  fall  in  pieces.  Many  a  gallant 
ship  has  been  wrecked  by  a  simple 
leak ;  so  one  sin  worked  the  ruin  of 
Herod  Antipas. — Dr.  Hardman. 

Yer.  21.  A  convenient  day. — A  crime 
is  more  than  half  committed  when  it 
is  once  resolved  on  ;  a  convenient  day 
cannot  be  long  wanting  to  a  passion 
so  violent  and  vigilant  as  revenge 
animated  by  an  infamous  love.  The 
feasts  of  the  world  are  days  very  con- 
venient for  sin,  as  the  feasts  of  the 
Church  are  for  piety.  It  is  a  great 
misfortune  to  be  engaged  to  be  at 
the  former  ;  a  great  imprudence  not  to 
provide  against  the  infectious  air  which 
is  there  breathed  ;  a  great  piece  of 
unfaithfulness  not  to  excuse  ourselves 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  vi. 


from  going  when  we  can  ;  and  a  very  the  Lord  Omnipotent,  not  man.     Resist 

great  folly  to  appear  there  without  any  the  assaults  of  the  devil,  whatever  be 

manner  of  obligation. — P.  Quesnel.  the   instruments    which    he    employs. 

Away  with  fear,  with  irresolution,  with 

Yer.  22.  Lessons. — 1.  How  danger-  false  shame.  Be  strong  in  the  grace 
ous  it  is  to  make  rash  and  unadvised  of  Christ. — T.  Gisborne,  D.D. 
promises !  2.  How  much  wicked  men  Callousness  in  youth. — This  is  a 
are  addicted  to  their  sinful  lusts,  and  picture  of  human  sin  more  loathsome, 
what  great  account  they  make  of  them  it  seems  to  me,  than  the  other.  For 
in  that  they  are  content,  for  the  this  damsel  could  have  had  no  re- 
satisfying  of  them,  to  be  at  great  cost  vengeful  hate,  no  vindictive  passion, 
and  charge !  3.  The  cursed  fruit  and  rankling  in  her  heart.  The  prophet 
effect  of  sin  and  sinful  lusts  in  such  had  not  rebuked  her.  Hers  was  a  cool, 
as  are  given  over  to  them ;  that  they  deliberate,  passionless  cruelty — cruelty 
even  besot  them  and  make  them  foolish,  at  which  one  shudders  when  associated 
depriving  them  of  sound  reason  and  with  her  age  and  sex ;  for  if  not  with 
judgment  (Hos.  iv.  11  ;  Rom.  i.  21,  28 ;  youth  and  girlhood,  where  should  pity 
Prov.  vii.  22,  xxiii.  35). — G.  Fetter.  and    compassion    dwell  ?       Doubtless 

Salome  had  a  motive.      Perhaps  she 

Yer.  25.  Resist  solicitation  to  sin. —  feared   the   loss   of   her    position   and 

Allow   not  yourself  to   be   entrapped  her  pleasures,  and  fear  can  be  quite 

into  sin  by  the  solicitations  and  impor-  as  powerful  an  incentive  to  crime  as 

tunities  of  others,   not   even  of  your  revenge  or   hate.      The  prophet   had 

friends    and    your    nearest    relations,  unwittingly  laid  his   hand   upon  this 

should  you  be  unhappy  enough  to  per-  young   girl's    world,    and    she  turned 

ceive  tempters  among  them.     You  will  again   and  stung    him.     Ah !   believe 

not  be  urged,  it  may  be  presumed,  to  me ;  youth,  apparently  so  bright  and 

procure  the  imprisonment  or  the  murder  fresh  and  winning,  if  you  venture  to 

of  another.     But  were  tempters  ever  touch  its  pleasures,  can  show  a  callous- 

at  a  loss  for  grounds  of  temptation  ?  ness,  a  steely  hardness  of  the   heart, 

If  you  are  in  poverty,  may  they  not  which   you    would    have    deemed    in- 

impel  you  to  meliorate  your  condition  credible. — W.  T.   Wilson. 

by  depredations  on  the  property  of  a  Lessons. — 1.   How  apt  children  are 

neighbour,    or    to    excite    charity    by  by  nature  to  follow  wicked  counsel  and 

exaggerated    representations    of    your  advice  given  them  by  their  parents ! 

distress  ?     Are  you  moving  in  a  higher  2.  The  wicked  make  but  a  light  matter 

sphere  ?     May  they  not   ensnare  you  of  sin — yea,  of  great  and  grievous  sins, 

into  captivity  to  ambition,  or  seduce  such  as  murder. — G.  Fetter. 
you  into  the  habit  of  squandering  in 

dissipation  that  sacred  talent,  time,  Yer.  26.  Herod's  dilemma. — The 
entrusted  to  your  charge  ?  And  dilemma  of  Herod  was  the  dilemma 
whether  you  occupy  a  lower  or  a  higher  of  a  man  whose  conduct  was  governed 
station,  may  they  not  encourage  you  not  by  the  principles  of  an  immutable 
to  over-reach  an  ignorant  or  a  careless  morality,  the  eternal  distinctions  of 
man  in  a  contract ;  to  revenge  yourself  right  and  wrong,  but  by  a  vague 
on  some  person  who  has  offended  you,  superstition  and  a  miserable  conven- 
or whom  you  envy,  by  spreading  a  tionalism.  The  petty  rules  and  obliga- 
slanderous  tale  to  his  disadvantage ;  tions  which  he  recognised  were  below 
to  withhold  reparation  from  those  the  requirements  and  emergencies  of 
whom  you  have  wronged  ;  to  surrender  life,  and  therefore  only  served  to  be- 
your  heart  to  things  temporal ;  to  live  tray  him  into  sin.  1.  Is  it  not  strange 
not  unto  God  and  Christ,  but  unto  to  hear  this  man,  face  to  face  with 
the  world  and  yourself?  Stand  pre-  crime,  pleading  the  sanctity  of  an 
pared  upon  the  watch-tower.      Obey  oath  to  justify  his  commission  of  it  ? 

q  225 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


What  a  moral  bewilderment  was  that ! 
Had  Herod  been  a  man  of  pure  life 
and  clear  conscience,  how  long  would 
such  a  monstrous  sophism  have  en- 
tangled him  ?  The  guilt  of  such  oaths 
consists  in  making  and  keeping  them, 
not  in  breaking  them.  If  they  are 
registered  at  all,  it  is  not  in  heaven, 
but  in  hell.  2.  Reference  to  the 
opinion  of  the  world,  and  deference  to 
it,  and  conference  with  it,  and  pre- 
ference of  it  above  every  principle  and 
rule  and  law,  human  or  Divine — is  not 
this  a  tendency  that  grows  upon  us 
very,  very  fast  ?  3.  Is  idle  sorrow  ever 
availing  ?  It  did  not  save  John.  Will 
it  save  Herod  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment %—W.  T.  Wilson. 

Conscience  darkened  by  sin. — The 
pleasures  which  chiefly  affect  or  rather 
bewitch  the  body,  and  by  so  doing  be- 
come the  pest  and  poison  of  the  nobler 
and  intellectual  part  of  man,  are  those 
false  and  fallacious  pleasures  of  lust 
and  intemperance.  .  .  .  Nothing  does 
or  can  darken  the  mind  or  conscience 
of  man  more.  .  .  .  Could  Herod  have 
ever  thought  himself  obliged  by  the 
religion  of  an  oath  to  murder  the  Bap- 
tist, had  not  his  lust  and  his  Herodias 
imprisoned  and  murdered  his  conscience 
first  ?  ...  It  seems  his  besotted  con- 
science, having  broken  through  the 
seventh  commandment,  the  sixth 
stood  too  near  it  to  be  safe  long. — 
R.  South,  D.D. 

Herod's  duty  plain. — The  case  cannot 
be  supposed  wherein  a  man  should  be 
so  straitened  as  he  could  not  come 
off  fairly  without  sinning.  Say  a 
man  through  heat  of  blood  made  a 
wicked  vow  to  kill  his  brother  :  here 
he  hath,  by  his  own  rashness,  brought 
himself  into  a  seeming  strait,  that 
either  he  must  commit  a  murder  or 
break  a  vow — either  of  which  seemeth 
to  be  a  great  sin,  the  one  against  the 
sixth,  the  other  against  the  third  com- 
mandment. But  here  is  in  very  deed 
no  strait  nor  perplexity  at  all.  Here 
is  a  fair,  open  course  to  him  without 
sin.  He  may  break  his  vow,  and 
there  is  an  end.  Neither  is  this  the 
choice  of  the  lesser  sin ;  but  only  the 

22G 


loosening  of  the  lesser  bond — the  bond 
of  charity  being  greater  than  the  bond 
of  a  promise,  and  there  being  good 
reason  that  (in  terms  of  inconsistency, 
when  both  cannot  stand)  the  lesser 
bond  should  yield  to  the  greater.  But 
is  it  not  a  sin  for  a  man  to  break  a 
vow  ?  Yes,  where  it  may  be  kept  salvia 
charitate  et  justitid;  then  the  breach 
is  a  sin;  but  in  the  case  proposed  it 
is  no  sin  (Exod.  i.  16,  etc. ;  Judg. 
xi.  30,  31 ;  Acts  xxiii.  12). — Bishop 
/Sanderson. 

Ver.  27.  Guilty  compliance. — Thus 
it  has  often  been  :  what  is  noblest  and 
best  sacrificed,  not  to  policy  or  neces- 
sity, or  in  the  hot,  fierce  conflict  of 
opposing  issues,  but  in  a  mood  of 
dalliance,  and  in  compliance  with  what 
appeals  to  the  baser  part  of  our  nature. 
There  is  cruelty  in  the  brutal  fury  of 
a  mob ;  there  is  cruelty  in  the  vin- 
dictive apprehension  of  an  imperilled 
order ;  but  there  is  no  cruelty  equal  to 
the  cruelty  of  thorough  worldliness— 
the  light,  careless  gaiety  which  sends 
a  prophet  to  the  block  because  the 
wine  flows,  and  the  jest  goes  round, 
and  the  thrilling  mazes  of  a  voluptuous 
dance  have  fired  the  heart  of  King 
Herod.—  W.  T.  Wilson. 

Ver.  29.  Lessons. — 1.  Such  as  have 
reaped  spiritual  good  and  profit  by 
others  do  owe  special  thankfulness  to 
them ;  and  this  thankfulness  they  ought 
to  shew  toward  them  by  the  fruits  of 
it,  in  doing  duties  of  love  to  them ; 
and  that  not  only  in  their  lifetime,  but 
even  after  they  are  dead.  2.  It  is  a 
duty  of  love  and  mercy  which  we  owe 
to  our  Christian  friends  departed  this 
life,  to  be  careful  to  bury  them  in  good 
and  decent  manner,  and  with  such 
honour  and  respect  as  is  fitting  to  their 
persons.  3.  God  takes  special  care  of 
the  good  name  and  credit  of  His  faith- 
ful servants,  even  after  they  are  dead 
and  gone  (Ps.  cxii.  6 ;  Pro  v.  x.  7). — 
G.  Fetter. 

John's  mission  fulfilled. — So  ended 
to  human  eyes  the  life  and  ministry 
of  St.  John  the  Baptist.     But  if  we 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  vi. 


regard  this  as  the  real  end  of  all,  we  of  Christ's  gospel  lose  their  lives  in  the 

manifestly  make  an  infinite  mistake  :  work,  have  their  heads  cut  off,  it  may 

St.  John  had  made  preparation  for  the  be,  by  savages,  and  when  their  bodies 

coming  of  Christ,  and  now  Christ  was  are  buried  in  the  tomb,  the  end  is  not 

come,  and  so  St.  John  was  called  to  yet;  they  have  prepared  the  way  for 

his  rest,  and  his  works  followed  him.  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  their  work 

And  we  may  draw  from  his   history  will  not  be  useless  in  the  eye  of  Him 

this  conclusion,  applicable  to  our  own  whom  appearances  can  never  deceive, 

times — namely,  that  when  missionaries  — Bishop  H.  Goodwin, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  30—32. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  xiv.  13;  Luke  ix.  10.) 

Rest  after  work. — The  disciples  had  just  returned  from  the  missionary  journey 

through  Galilee  and  Judea.      Their  Master  had  sent  them  out,  by  two  and  two 

together,  six  parties  of  them  in  all,  to  preach  repentance  and  remission  of  sins. 

1.  You  can  fancy  how  they  must  have  gone  forth,  all  of  them  novices,  and  some 

of  them  young  men.     Imagine  it,  you  who  have  not  yet  survived  the  memory 

of  your  own  younger  days :  the  new-born  sense  of  our  own  importance,  which 

accompanies  our  first  attempt  at  responsible  action;    the  childlike  hopefulness 

to  which  no  miracle  of  success  seems  impossible  ;  all  the  bright  illusions,  all  the 

golden  dreams  of  youth — that  time  of  life  when  every  subject  possesses  so  fresh 

an  interest,  when  every  effort  seems  so  certain  to  succeed,  when  the  sensation 

of  failure  is  yet  a  thing  unknown.     And  such  a  doctrine  as  they  had  to  preach, 

and  such  a  Master  as  they  had  to  proclaim  as  the  coming  King  !     What  could 

there  be  before  them  but  rapid  and  complete  victory  ?     2.  They  came  back,  we 

may  imagine,  with  an  immense  deal  to  tell.     No  child  that  returns  to  its  mother 

from  a  visit  more  overflowing  with  talk  than  they.      "  They  told  Him  all  things, 

both  what  they  had  done  and  what  they  had  taught."     Here  they  had  met  an 

open  and  truthful  mind ;  and  what  a  pleasure  it  had  been  to  instruct   and 

encourage  him  !      Here  they  had  found  a  repentant  yet   desponding  sinner ; 

and  how  they  had  delighted  to  bind  up  his  broken  heart  and  to  send  him  on  his 

way  rejoicing  !     And  here  they  had  encountered  a  captious  gainsayer ;  and  with 

what  a  clever  repartee  they  had  answered  and  silenced  his  objections  !-     And 

what  a  ready   hearing   and  how   much   success  their   words   and   efforts   had 

obtained  !     They  can  hardly  have  failed  to  have  told  their  Master  another  thing, 

which  the  seventy,  who  were  sent  out  afterwards,  reported,   when  they   too 

returned — what  mighty  works  they  had  done  in  His  name.     Nor  would  they 

fail  to  receive  some  such  reply,  half  encouragement  and  half  caution,  as  that 

which  the  seventy  received  (Luke  x.   18,  20).      You  can  imagine  much  being 

said  like  this  by  that  Master,  still  young  Himself,  and  therefore  naturally,  as 

well  as  supernaturally,  sympathising  with  the  hopefulness  of  youth,  cautious  not 

to  depress  zeal,  even  while  correcting  its  extravagance.     "  Yes,"  He  said,  "  the 

Spirit  of  good  is  stronger  than  the  spirit  of  evil.     Yes,  Satan  is  falling  from  his 

high  place  of  power,  and  he  will  fall.     But  do  not  boast  of  spiritual  power ;  do 

not  be  exalted  by  spiritual  success ;  rejoice,  rather,  that  there  is  a  place  for  all 

faithful  labourers,  the  unsuccessful  as  well  as  the  successful,  in  the  dwelling  of 

their  Lord.     When  bright  hopes  are  all   faded,    when  success  has  turned  to 

failure,  when  high  gifts  have  deserted  their  former  possessors,  there  will  still 

remain  for  you  a  refuge  and  a  home."     At  the  same  time  there  came  those 

words  of  kindly  invitation,  "  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert  place,  and 

rest  a  while."    They  were,  in  fact,  to  go  with  their  Master  and  enjoy  a  well- 

227 


chap.  vi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


earned  holiday.  3.  And  so  they  embarked  on  the  calm  bosom  of  the  Sea  of 
Galilee,  and  raised  their  sail ;  and  the  light  airs  began  to  draw  them  off  the  land, 
slowly  and  dreamily,  towards  the  lonelier  country  of  the  eastern  side.  There, 
let  us  think,  are  the  thirteen  upon  the  lake — the  crew  of  twelve,  each  one  of 
whom  is  an  apostle,  and  the  Captain,  whom  almost  all  now  admit  to  have  been 
the  Ideal  Man,  whom  we  believe  to  have  been  God  manifest  in  the  flesh.  Fresh 
airs  are  breathing  on  the  weary  brows ;  bright  waters  are  rippling  under  the 
vessel's  floor ;  an  open  sky  is  bending  over  them,  boundless  as  that  love  of  God 
which  they  have  been  proclaiming ;  no  shadow  of  approaching  horrors  has  yet 
fallen  on  them,  and  all  hearts  are  free  and  joyous,  for  not  even  Judas  is 
a  traitor  yet.  4.  It  was  from  diligent  labours  for  the  good  of  souls  that  those 
disciples  were  invited  to  seek  a  temporary  refuge.  How  much  more  needful 
must  it  be  to  seek  such  occasional  retirements  from  the  present  hurrying  world ! 
God  made  the  world — the  world  of  society  as  well  as  the  world  of  nature.  Even 
this  rapid  world  of  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  has  come  into  existence 
through  His  providence.  The  Great  Steersman  has  not  abandoned  the  helm,  but 
is  guiding  it,  through  all  the  cross-currents  and  changing  winds,  to  noble  objects 
of  His  own.  The  evil  in  it  is  not  original,  and  (happier  still)  it  is  not  inseparable. 
It  is  of  His  ordering  that  we  live  our  lives,  in  close  and  frequent  communion 
with  those  fellow- creatures  of  ours  who  form  our  world  for  their  good  and  for 
our  own.  In  the  world,  though  not  of  the  world,  our  Lord  bade  His  disciples  be. 
Nevertheless  in  the  world  certain  evils  happen  to  us  for  which  occasional 
retirement  is  the  cure.  Let  us  look  at  one  or  two  of  these,  for  which  we  seek 
a  remedy. 

I.  The  world  confuses  our  self-knowledge. — The  source  of  self-knowledge  is 
reflexion;  and  little  reflexion  is  possible  amid  the  bustle  of  the  world.  It 
happens  to  us,  as  to  the  disciples  in  the  gospel — there  are  many  coming  and 
going — employers,  customers,  clients,  patients,  parishioners,  as  the  case  may  be. 
The  trade,  or  business,  or  profession  occupies  nearly  all  our  time.  Family  affairs 
often  cause  anxiety.  Public  business,  politics,  religion,  charity,  all  solicit 
attention,  which  must  be  given  from  time  to  time.  A  hundred  persons  have 
to  be  spoken  to,  a  hundred  subjects  considered.  As  soon  as  one  business  is 
despatched  another  comes  to  be  transacted.  Well  for  us  if  we  can  keep  them 
distinct  and  separate,  and  not  mix  and  muddle  them  all.  All  these  are  outside 
of  our  real  selves,  so  that  the  mind  engaged  in  them  acquires  an  outward  leaning, 
and  seldom  collects  itself  inwardly  at  all.  So  reflexion  perishes,  and  with  it  self- 
knowledge.     The  cure  of  this  is  retirement. 

II.  During  our  intercourse  with  the  world  our  wishes  and  objects  grow 
more  and  more  worldly — that  is,  they  become  confined  and  bounded  by  this 
present  world.  We  cease  to  feel  our  own  immortality,  we  cease  to  have  inter- 
course with  God,  and  then  all  our  aims  insensibly  decline.  Conscience  and  duty 
become  less  and  less  our  rule.  We  are  more  and  more  guided  by  self-interest 
or  personal  inclination ;  and  by  even  worse  things,  covetousness,  ambition, 
revenge,  our  motives  sinking  gradually,  so  that  we  cannot  tell  when  or  how  they 
change.     It  is  in  retirement  that  we  must  resist  and  repair  declines  like  these. 

III.  The  last  evil  I  will  name,  whose  proper  remedy  is  retirement,  is  irrita- 
tion.— Many  things  occur  to  ruffle  and  disturb.  We  become  vexed  and  displeased, 
perhaps  with  actual  enemies,  perhaps  with  indifferent  people,  perhaps  with  our 
best  friends.  This  is  sure  to  be  so.  For  all  are  sinful ;  and  our  respective  faults 
and  failings  jar  against  each.  Besides,  all  are  short-sighted  and  imperfectly 
informed,  and  therefore  we  often  mistake  and  misunderstand.  For  all  these 
inward  disturbances  the  remedy  is  retirement  and  reflexion.  Enter  into  your 
closet  and  shut  to  the  door,  and  pray  to  your  Father  which  is  in  secret.  Lay 
yourselves  in  the  arms  of  Jesus ;  throw  yourselves  open  to  the  eye  of  the  All-seeing 

228 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  VI. 


God.  There  breathe  forth  the  wish,  "  That  which  I  see  not  teach  Thou  me ;  if 
I  have  done  iniquity,  I  would  do  so  no  more."  Your  Father  will  teach  you ;  He 
will  guide  your  feet  into  the  way  of  peace. — Archdeacon  Rawstorne. 

Lenten  retirement. — We  are  most  of  us  living,  as  many  almost  necessarily 
must  live,  in  all  the  busy,  anxious  cares  of  a  busy,  anxious  age,  our  duties  or 
our  business  laying  claim  to  every  moment  of  our  time,  till  the  throng  and 
crush  of  earthly  things  prevent  us  from  coming  near  to  touch  the  Saviour's  robe. 
Then  it  is  that  our  solemn  Lenten  fast  bids  us  come  into  our  chambers  and  shut 
our  doors,  offers  to  the  jaded,  wearied  soul  a  little  rest,  a  short  breathing-space 
in  which  we  may  gather  strength  to  wrestle  on,  a  moment's  retirement  from 
that  unceasing  "  coming  and  going "  which  makes  up  the  greatness  and  the 
littleness  of  our  life  in  the  world. 

I.  Lent  is  a  time  of  retirement — a  special  opportunity  for  being  alone  with 
God.  As  a  nation  we  are  becoming  increasingly  alive  to  the  economic  dangers, 
physical  and  moral,  of  a  life  without  leisure.  The  deadening  of  spiritual  energy, 
the  choking  of  spiritual  life  and  aspirations — these  are  the  parallel  dangers  to 
the  religious  life  which  knows  not  the  blessing  of  retirement.  You  will  see, 
then,  that  by  the  rest  of  religious  retirement  we  mean  something  different 
from  that  rest  which  belongs  at  all  times  to  those  who  are  living  with  God. 
For  that  is  an  abiding  thing ;  this  is  occasional.  Religious  retirement  means 
a  withdrawing  ourselves  for  a  special  purpose  and  at  a  special  time,  just  as  he 
whose  life  is  the  life  of  one  who  is  praying  always  has  yet  his  special  time  of 
prayer,  or  as  He  whose  life  was  lived  in  the  full  consciousness  of  God  yet  loved 
to  withdraw  Himself  to  the  lonely  mountain-top  and  spend  whole  nights  in 
prayer  to  God. 

II.  The  time  that  is  to  be  dedicated  to  Lenten  retirement  must  be  "  redeemed  " 
time — time  won,  not  from  duties,  but  from  pleasures.  Just  as  fasting  may 
not  trench  on  that  which  is  necessary  to  health,  but  may  simply  limit  us  in 
what  we  might  do  without,  so  in  redeeming  some  special  time  for  prayer  and 
self-examination  we  must  make  up  our  mind  to  give  up  some  luxuries  Those 
few  minutes  we  give,  perhaps,  to  our  social  chat ;  the  comfortable  half- hour  that 
we  spend  over  our  daily  paper ;  the  time  we  spend  in  unnecessary  letter- writing, 
or  the  odd  times  we  pass  we  hardly  know  how  in  mere  do-nothingness — all 
these  might  be  spared,  or  limited,  and  dedicated  to  God. 

III.  How  will  this  help  us  in  running  our  daily  race? — 1.  It  will  teach  us 
self-knowledge.  As  we  stand  alone  in  the  presence  of  God,  every  act  stripped 
of  the  colouring  which  human  praise  and  blame  can  give,  without  any  of  those 
secondary  helps  which  the  love  of  approbation  and  the  desire  to  please  so  often 
lend  us  in  the  world,  putting  on  one  side  those  false  standards  by  which  we 
judge,  the  waxen  wings  which  have  borne  us  aloft  hitherto  melted  in  the  rays 
of  the  sun — then  we  begin  to  know  ourselves.  And  as  we  review  our  past 
spiritual  life  we  see  the  shadows  of  selfish  and  interested  motives  darkening  what 
once  seemed  clear  and  fair ;  our  fancied  love  of  God  in  that  new  light  was  but 
an  aesthetic  or  poetical  devotion  to  an  ideal,  our  humility  a  skilfully  concealed 
but  now  discovered  pride ;  the  very  bright  ones  which  seemed  to  guard  our  way 
are  but  as  evil  spirits  in  the  form  of  an  angel  of  light.  2.  It  is  the  great  means 
of  knowing  God.  For  knowledge  is  born  of  intercourse  and  communion  with  its 
object.  He  who  made  man  his  study  sought  to  learn  his  subject  in  the  crowded 
market-place.  And  if  we  are  to  know  God  it  must  be  by  losing  no  opportunity 
of  being  with  Him :  with  Him  in  those  places  where  He  has  set  His  Name, — 
in  His  Church,  and  His  Sacrament,  and  His  Word ;  above  all,  in  prayer. 

IV.  This  knowledge  of  God  and  of  ourselves  which  comes  from  retirement 
with  God  brings  with  it  a  new  power  for  doing  our  duties  in  the  world.    The 

229 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


presence  by  which  you  seemed  in  your  retirement  to  be  flooded  is  the  presence 
which  shall  go  with  you  into  the  world.  It  is  the  ark  of  God  which  shall  carry 
victory  over  the  enemies,  the  real  presence  which  transforms  your  very  bodies 
into  the  temples  of  the  Living  God,  the  light  which  will  brighten  and  make  clear 
your  earthly  path,  the  continual  source  of  strength  and  nourishment,  preparing 
you  a  table  in  the  very  midst  of  your  enemies,  a  fountain  of  living  water 
springing  up  within  you  to  quench  the  battle-thirst.  In  retirement  and  private 
prayer  you  have  learnt  what  it  is  to  be  alone  with  God,  and  now  in  the  roar 
and  din  of  conflict  you  realise  what  it  is  to  have  God  with  you. — A.  L.  Moore. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 


"Ver.  30.  Duties  of  ministers. — 1. 
Ministers  ought  so  to  carry  themselves 
in  discharge  of  their  calling,  that  they 
may  approve  their  diligence  and  faith- 
fulness unto  Christ,  who  hath  called 
them  to  that  office.  2.  Ministers  ought 
so  faithfully  and  conscionably  to  do  the 
duties  of  their  calling,  that  they  may 
be  able  to  give  a  good  and  comfortable 
account  thereof  unto  Christ,  who  hath 
enjoined  them  those  duties. — G.  Fetter. 

"Ver.    31.      The     use     of    leisure. — 

1.  "Come."  This  is  the  first  principle 
in  every  time  of  leisure,  such  as  it 
is  fit  for  a  Christian  to  take,  that 
we  should  spend  it  in  the  presence 
and   under    the   eye    of    the   Master. 

2.  "  Apart  into  a  desert  place."  Leisure 
for  the  overworked  had  better  be  sought 
among  the  works  of  God  in  nature  than 
among  the  works  of  man.  3.  "A 
while."  Such  seasons  of  rest  are  only 
temporary,  and  are  meant  to  nerve 
and  brace  us  for  work — our  work,  God's 
work,  Christ's  work.  If  it  does  not  fit 
us  for  this,  if  it  leaves  us  only  discon- 
tented, selfish,  and  indolent,  we  have 
made  a  curse  to  ourselves  out  of  a 
blessing. — John  Ellerton. 

Seclusion  with  Christ. — How  much 
better  would  our  work  be  done,  how 
much  more  thoroughly  our  duty,  how 
much  healthier  and  more  satisfactory 
would  our  worldly  business  be,  if  we 
could  realise  that  that  which  is  earthly 
can  only  bear  beautiful  blossom  or  rich 
fruit,  when  watered  by  the  rains  that 
fall  from  heaven  ;  that  the  life  must 
grow  hard  and  barren  which  is  cut  off 
from  its  spiritual  root ;  that  Christ  is 

230 


ever  calling  us,  amidst  all  our  cares 
and  engrossments  to  keep  ourselves 
from  being  carried  away  on  the  flood 
of  these,  by  preserving  our  personal 
fellowship  with  Him,  and  to  come  apart 
from  the  bustle  of  the  world,  into  the 
silence  and  seclusion,  where  we  may 
meet  Him,  and  in  the  consciousness 
of  His  presence  "  rest  a  while." — R.  H, 
Story,  D.D. 

"Rest"  for  "a  while"  only.  —  This 
lesson  is  gladly  learned,  and  too  much 
practised.  Requiescite  pleaseth  every 
man.  The  truth  is,  that  the  body  and 
mind  of  man  must  after  labour  be 
refreshed  with  rest.  But  he  which 
laboureth  not  is  altogether  as  unworthy 
to  rest  as  to  eat.  Again,  such  as  will 
take  rest  and  ease  after  labours  must 
learn  of  Christ  as  well  to  measure  their 
ease  as  their  pains.  He  permitteth 
His  disciples  to  take  their  rest ;  but  He 
limiteth  and  restraineth  His  permission, 
saying,  "  Rest  a  while."  For  by  too 
much  rest  men  are  not  made  the  more 
fit  but  the  less  willing  to  take  pain. — 
Archbishop  Sandys. 

Leisure  for  communion  with  God.  — I 
know  how  hard  it  seems  to  many  to 
get  room  in  their  lives  for  a  quiet  hour. 
They  are  so  compassed  about  with 
imperious  demands  and  fretting  details. 
"Would  we  could  have  it,"  they  say, 
"but  it  is  impossible."  Well,  it  is 
often  a  great  mercy  when  God  takes 
such  an  one  and  lays  him  aside  by  sick- 
ness, where  he  must  wait  and  be  still, 
and  is  no  longer  oppressed  with  the 
feeling  that  he  ought  to  be  doing 
something.  In  that  strange  watch- 
tower  of  trouble  his  life  rolls  itself  out 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  VI. 


before  him,  and  he  sees  how  brief  it  is,  ere  we  will  find  leisure  to  talk  with 

with  the   mystery  behind  it  and   the  Him  and  mourn  for  our  shortcomings  ? 

mystery  before  it,  and  God  alone  above  — D.  W.  Forrest. 

all  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  Solitude,  says  one,  is  the  mother- 
Why  should  we  compel  the  great  country  of  the  strong ;  silence  is  their 
Father  thus  to  visit  us  with  affliction  prayer. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—Verses  33—44. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  xiv.  13-21  ;  Luke  ix.  10-17;  John  vi.  1-13.) 

The  multitude  fed. — When  Jesus  came  forth  from  a  brief  rest,  He  was  con- 
fronted in  the  desert  place  by  the  familiar  sight  of  sinful,  weary,  sick  humanity. 
That  they  should  come  there  was  almost  a  miracle  of  His  attractive  power.  At 
once,  we  are  told,  the  streams  of  His  mercy  began  to  flow. 

I.  The  compassion  of  Jesus. — A  great  multitude  is  always  a  moving  spectacle. 
The  pathos  of  life  comes  out  before  our  imaginations,  as  we  behold  in  it  so 
many  broken,  disordered,  disappointing,  wrecked  lives  ;  so  much  that  begins  with 
gladness  and  ends  in  grief  ;  so  much  sin,  and  the  countless  victories  of  death. 
Even  the  withered  heart  of  Xerxes  was  touched,  when  he  sat  on  a  throne  at 
Salamis  and  looked  down  on  his  army  of  a  million  slaves,  all  of  whom,  he  said, 
would  soon  pass  away.  Then  we  must  remember  that  the  company  gathered 
around  Jesus  was  at  that  time  peculiarly  a  sad  one.  They  were  there  because 
they  were  in  need  and  they  felt  the  need.  Weary  with  a  long  journey,  pressing 
their  claims  on  His  attention,  stretching  out  "  lame  hands  "  of  questioning  and 
doubt,  lifting  imploring  eyes  to  meet  His — what  could  quicker  touch  the  fountain 
of  His  compassion  ?  He  was  deeply  moved.  His  face  changed  with  mingled 
sorrow  and  love.  Now,  who  were  they  ?  He  had  compassion  on  them  because 
they  were  as  sheep  that  had  been  over-driven  and  were  fainting  on  the  road. 
And  He  stood  before  them  as  the  Good  Shepherd,  who  was  soon  to  lay  down  His 
life  for  the  sheep.  This  brings  us  to  dwell  upon  the  attitude  of  the  Holy  One 
towards  sin  and  towards  sinners  separately  and  in  masses.  That  whole  company, 
men,  women,  and  children,  were  sinners.  Because  they  were  such,  He  had  come 
into  the  world  to  save  them  ;  and  we  might  presume  that  the  supreme  fact 
about  them  in  His  mind  was  their  sinfulness  and  guilt.  But  this  compassion  at 
the  sight  of  the  crowd  speaks  to  us  of  that  other  relation  in  which  He  could  look 
at  them,  even  as  objects  of  pity,  while  they  were  objects  of  condemnation. 
They  were  offenders  against  the  holy  law,  but  at  the  same  time  they  were  lost 
sheep  to  be  called  home.  But  this  pity,  we  observe  next,  took  shape  in  forms 
of  real  helpfulness.  It  was  not  wasted  in  the  heart,  like  the  emotions  that  come 
and  go  as  we  read  a  novel  or  see  a  play  at  the  theatre,  and  think  our  feelings 
are  tender  because  they  are  moved  by  imaginary  griefs.  The  compassion  of  our 
Lord  took  on  a  twofold  form  :  one,  that  of  setting  in  motion  far-reaching  works 
in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  among  the  nations  and  the  seed-sowing  of  distant 
harvests  ;  the  other,  a  nearer,  simpler  attention  to  immediate  wants. 

II.  The  power  of  Jesus. — "  He  bowed  the  heavens  and  came  down  "  to  the 
measure  of  commonest  human  need.  The  fact  about  this  power  that  touches  us 
most  is  that  it  is  power  to  bless  the  world,  and  to  bring  salvation  to  the  lost. 
Each  miracle  of  our  Lord's  was  a  sign  of  something  farther,  something  more 
lasting  and  blessed.  How  soon  all  that  desert  multitude  passed  away  from 
earth  !  How  quickly  the  bread  created  by  miracle  perished  !  And  yet  it  stood 
for  that  which  is  imperishable,  and  on  which,  if  we  feed  as  we  all  may,  we  shall 
never  hunger  again.     Christ  Himself  is  the  Bread  of  God  that  cometh  down 

231 


chap.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


from  heaven  and  giveth  life  to  the  world.  We  may  feed  on  it  each  moment  and 
never  exhaust  the  supply.  He  is  not  a  luxury,  but  bread  to  be  eaten  freely  and 
without  satiety.  The  whole  lesson  is  that  of  the  Divine  helpfulness  for  all  our 
needs,  and  of  the  Divine  fulness  of  supply. 

III.  The  command  of  Jesus  to  His  disciples  in  all  ages. — Each  step  in  the 
supply  of  the  crowd  with  food  is  interesting  to  all  who  preach  or  teach  the 
everlasting  Word,  because  it  reveals  the  natural  unbelief  and  distrust  with  which 
we  have  to  contend  when  many  are  to  be  fed  by  us  and  we  are  sure  that  our 
stock  is  not  sufficient.  Many  a  time,  if  you  preach,  when  you  look  upon 
a  company  of  men  seated  in  God's  house  to  hear  your  voice,  you  will  feel  like 
Philip,  and  wonder  whence  provision  is  coming  for  so  many.  But  if  you  bring 
your  scanty  loaves  and  fishes — if  you  bid  the  men  sit  down  to  receive,  not  your 
fancies  nor  wisdom,  your  eloquence  nor  knowledge,  but  heaven's  bread,  and  that 
only — you  will  find  the  old  miracle  repeated.  You  will  take  what  Christ  hands 
over  to  you  and  pass  it  on  to  others.  You  will  be  fed  by  what  feeds  them.  You 
will  say  with  them,  when  the  feast  is  over,  "  Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread." 
For,  after  all,  this  and  this  only  is  our  work — to  give  what  is  given  unto  us. 
We  are  not  to  despise  hard  labour  in  winning  our  supplies.  They  will  not  come 
to  the  lazy  nor  to  the  ignorant.  We  are  called  to  seek  a  chastened  spirit  that 
discerns  the  true  intent  of  the  heavenly  messages.  We  are  to  meditate  on  the 
Word  and  grow  into  its  spirit  and  life.  We  surely  must  obey  it,  and  so  prove 
what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God.  But  for  the  real 
conveyance  of  food  from  God  to  a  soul  we  must  rely  on  God  Himself. — Edward 
N.  Packard. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  33.  Christ's  followers  dravm  by  perience  that  the  body  is  more  cared 

various  motives. — 1.  Some  were  drawn  for    than    the    soul,    the    flesh    than 

with  the  strangeness  of  those  things  the  spirit,  the  carcase  than  the  mind, 

which  He  wrought  and  taught  amongst  4.  The  last  and  best  sort  of  followers 

them.      To   whom  in  these  our   days  were  such  as  followed  Christ  to  hear 

we  may  compare  them   which  haunt  His  Word.     This  is  that  travail  that 

sermons  for  no  other  end  but  either  chiefly   is    required    of    a    Christian  : 

vainly  to  hearken  for  news,  or  curiously  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God."    This 

to  note  what  order  and  eloquence  they  declareth  us  to  be  His  children,  to  be 

may  find  in  the  preacher,  or  maliciously  His  flock.    "  He  that  is  of  God  heareth 

to  take  hold  of  things  spoken,   when  God's  Word." — Archbishop  Sandys. 
they  may  by  froward  construction  be  The  importunity  of  the  crowd. — The 

drawn  to  an  offensive  meaning.    These  fact  thus  revealed  is  worthy  of  obser- 

labour  to  their  own  loss  :  they  are  un-  vation,    as    a   commentary   upon    the 

profitable  followers.    2.  Others  followed  weary  life   of  our  Lord.     He  wished 

Christ  for  bread.     Such  followers  our  His  disciples  to  retire  to  the  desert  to 

times   have   brought    out    too    many,  take  some  rest,  but  the  people  would 

So  long  as  the  gospel  can  feed,  cherish,  let  them  have  none.     If   the  reasons 

and  maintain  them,  they  are  willing  which  prompted  them  to  follow  Christ 

and  glad  to  be  professors  of  it ;  but  were  really  the  love  of  His  doctrine, 

when  persecution  cometh  they  shrink,  then  we  may  gain  a  lesson  from  their 

3.  Sundry  there  were  which  followed  importunity,  and  we  may  be  sure  that, 

for  a  desire  which  they  had  of  bodily  however  much  it  might  increase  His 

health.     For  Christ  "  went  about  heal-  labours,   Christ  would   be  pleased  by 

ing  every  malady  and  every  infirmity  such    importunity.     What    displeases 

in  the  people."     We  see  by  daily  ex-  Christ  is  the  quiet,  easy  indifference  of 

232 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  VI. 


those  who  care  not  for  His  presence, 
and  will  not  put  themselves  out  of 
the  way  to  hear  His  words. — Bishop 
H.  Goodwin. 

"Ver.  34.  The  Church  and  social  ques- 
tions.— The  virtue  of  compassion  is 
the  great  discovery  of  Christ.  The 
world's  pain  and  weakness  were  to  the 
heathen  a  definite  loss  to  society.  It 
was  only  so  much  human  waste.  Christ 
believed  in  the  usefulness  of  things, 
and  utilised  the  rejected  refuse  of 
society.  It  was  in  this  refuse  that 
Jesus  reared  the  tender  plant  of 
compassion.  Fed  upon  sorrow  and 
sickness,  and  watered  with  tears,  com- 
passion has  redeemed  the  waste  places, 
and  made  them  blossom  as  the  rose. 
Yet  Christian  compassion  has  been 
slow  to  overtake  the  whole  field  that 
claimed  its  energy  and  its  labour. 
Compassion  towards  individuals  was 
early  developed  as  one  of  the  first  and 
finest  of  the  Christian  graces.  Com- 
passion towards  the  multitudes  was, 
till  lately,  left  uncultivated.  This,  no 
doubt,  is  partly  to  be  accounted  for  by 
the  fact  that  in  Greece  and  in  the 
Roman  Empire  the  claims  and  interests 
of  the  State  were  paramount.  The 
individual  was  sacrificed  to  society — so 
much  so,  that  in  Sparta  sickness  was 
regarded  more  as  a  crime  than  a  mis- 
fortune. Weak  children  were  quietly 
put  out  of  the  way,  lest  they  should 
become  a  burden.  In  Rome  the  in- 
dividual gave  himself  up  in  the  arena 
of  the  Colosseum  that  the  emperor  and 
the  people  might  enjoy  the  luxury  of  a 
fierce  laugh  or  cry.  As  a  rebound  from 
this  contempt  for  the  sacredness  of  the 
individual,  Christianity  long  confined 
itself  to  the  salvation  of  the  units  of 
society.  The  masses,  the  multitudes, 
have  to  a  great  extent  been  neglected. 
But  everywhere  around  us  there  are 
signs  that  the  social  conscience  is  being 
deeply  moved.  The  trend  of  present- 
day  activity  is  distinctly  in  the  direc- 
tion of  redressing  the  wrongs  and 
securing  the  rights  of  society.  Now 
the  question  requires  to  be  raised, 
What  is  to  be  the  attitude  of  the  Church 


towards  the  great  problems  relating  to 
the  social  weal  with  which  we  are 
brought  face  to  face  ?  The  answer  is 
sometimes  returned  that  the  Church 
should  confine  itself  to  the  duty  of 
saving  the  souls  of  men  ;  that  she 
should  only  deal  with  men  as  indi- 
viduals, and  not  with  human  society. 
Now  this  reply,  which  limits  the 
sphere  of  Christian  activity,  requires 
to  be  looked  at  in  order  to  see  the  poor 
conception  of  humanity  and  the  paltry 
faith  in  Christ's  power  which  are  at 
the  root  of  it.  1.  When  we  are  told 
to  confine  ourselves  to  the  care  and 
salvation  of  the  souls  of  men,  we 
wonder  how  this  can  fit  in  with  Christ's 
idea  of  man.  A  great  deal  of  His  time 
was  occupied  in  ministering  to  men's 
bodies.  To  tell  me  that  I  am  to  save 
the  soul  of  a  man  who  is  starving, 
or  living  in  a  filthy  hovel,  or  almost 
worked  to  death,  raises  in  my  mind 
the  query,  "  How  is  it  to  be  done  ? M 
The  physical  and  mental  conditions 
under  which  a  man  exists  have  such 
an  influence  upon  his  spiritual  con- 
dition that  we  must  treat  them  all 
concurrently.  Hence  the  justification 
for  social  work  alongside  of  our  evan- 
gelistic agencies.  2.  Again,  we  are 
warned  that  the  Church  should  confine 
itself  to  operating  upon  the  individual, 
and  leave  social  questions  alone.  What 
would  you  think  of  a  man  who  advised 
a  gardener  to  confine  his  attention  to 
cultivating  his  plants,  but  not  to  heed 
the  soil  in  which  the  plants  had  to 
grow?  Society  is  to  the  individual 
what  soil  is  to  the  plant.  In  order  to 
save  a  man  we  must  preach  the  gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ  to  him  as  an  individual, 
but  we  must  see  that  his  Christian  life 
is  not  next  to  impossible  in  the  social 
surroundings  in  which  he  is  compelled 
to  live.  The  salvation  of  the  individual 
and  the  salvation  of  society  must  go 
hand  in  hand.  Now,  if  this  be  the 
case,  the  relation  of  the  gospel  to 
human  life  becomes  more  extensive  and 
more  complex  than  is  generally  sup- 
posed. Everything  that  affects  the 
well-being  of  man  is  a  proper  subject 
of    Christian  inquiry.      3.   But  it   is 

233 


chap.  VI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


sometimes  objected  that  the  Church 
should  have  nothing  to  do  with  subjects 
that  are  under  dispute,  and  upon  which 
men,  from  interest  or  conviction,  are 
divided.  It  is  sufficient  to  reply  that 
if  the  Church  of  Christ  is  only  to  deal 
with  those  things  upon  which  men  are 
agreed,  her  mission  is  useless,  and  her 
influence  effete.  The  religious,  social, 
and  political  life  of  the  people  is 
complex.  The  one  shades  into  the 
other.  Many  of  our  social  reforms 
cannot  be  secured  without  the  aid  of 
laws  enacted  by  Parliament.  Is  the 
Church  to  be  dumb  because  temperance, 
religious  equality,  sanitation,  etc.,  have 
a  political  bearing  ?  These  social 
reforms  affect  the  religious  welfare  of 
the  country ;  and  to  stand  still  would 
be  to  betray  the  spiritual  rights  of  the 
people.  4.  Yet,  when  all  this  is  said, 
we  cannot  but  revert  to  the  great 
truth  that  the  chief  aim  of  the  gospel 
is  to  secure  an  inner  change  of  heart. 
External  changes  are  only  enjoyed  and 
secured  after  the  great  internal  change, 
which  is  the  crowning  work  of  Christ's 
mi ssion. — Wm.  Dickie. 

A  shepherd  needed  in  all  human 
societies. — Men  must  be  organised, 
taught,  disciplined.  There  are  men 
Divinely  qualified  to  interpret  truth  ; 
they  have  insight,  sympathy,  and 
faculty  of  delicate  and  forcible  expres- 
sion. There  are  other  men  who  can 
only  receive  what  is  given  to  them  by 
God's  ministry.  They  are  as  sheep  ; 
they  need  a  shepherd. — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Vers.  39,  40.  Order  in  God's  work. 
— If  we  regard  the  feeding  of  the 
multitude  as  a  parable  concerning  the 
work  which  the  apostles  were  to  do 
in  the  world  afterwards,  a  parable  of 
the  spiritual  feeding  of  mankind  with 
the  bread  from  heaven  which  Christ 
should  supply  them  withal,  then  these 
orderly  arrangements  made  by  the 
command  of  our  Lord  are  very  full 
of  instruction  :  the  tendency  of  men, 
when  they  once  realise  the  fact  that 
they  are  surrounded  by  a  hungry 
multitude,  is  to  throw  a  piece  of  bread 
here    and    a    piece    there,    to    make 

234 


irregular  efforts  to  supply  the  wants 
which  they  perceive  to  exist ;  but  this 
is  not  Christ's  way,  and  therefore  it  is 
not  the  wise  way ;  order  must  in  this, 
as  in  every  other  work  of  God,  be  the 
root  of  all  success. — Bishop  H.  Goodwin, 

Vers.  41-43.  This  miracle  illustrates 
— 1.  The  dealings  of  God  in  providence. 

(1)  Think  of  the  number  to  be  fed, 
and  then  look  upon  the  corn- seed,  cast 
into  the  ground,  to  supply  bread  for 
any  one  year,  and  you  might  well  ask, 
"  What  are  they  among  so  many  ?  " 
But  God  manipulates  the  seed  in  the 
soil,  and  then  sends  it  forth  as  from  His 
own  hand,  bread  enough  and  to  spare. 
The  annual  miracle  is  as  great  a  wonder 
as  the   miracle  wrought  in  an   hour. 

(2)  God  seldom  works  miracles  when 
ordinary  means  will  suffice  ;  but  when 
you  have  tried  all,  and  men  have 
given  you  up  as  a  hopeless  case,  it 
is  still  right  to  go  to  God,  the  Great 
Physician.  God  sometimes  sends  food 
to  the  poor  and  needy  in  most  unusual 
ways.  It  seems  to  them  almost  a 
miracle,  but  it  would  be  a  great  mis- 
take, if  any  were  to  infer  from  that, 
that  if  they  only  have  faith  they  may 
neglect  to  plough,  and  to  sow,  and  to 
work  for  their  daily  bread.  2.  The 
way  in  which  the  world  is  to  be  fed 
with  the  Bread  of  Life.  (1)  In  the 
heart  and  soul  of  each  man  who  re- 
ceives this  Bread  it  grows,  so  that 
there  is  not  only  enough  for  yourself, 
but  also  enough  to  distribute  among 
your  neighbours,  and  the  more  you  dis- 
tribute it  the  more  it  grows.  (2)  This 
bread  also  resembles  the  Bread  of 
Life  in  its  overflowing  abundance. 
There  is  room  for  all  in  the  love  of 
God.  Lessons :  1.  Christ  commands 
nothing  that  He  does  not  give  us  the 
power  to  perform.  2.  Our  resources 
will  increase,  if  we  make  a  diligent 
use  of  what  we  have.  3.  The  more 
ycu  distribute,  the  more  you  yourself 
will  possess.  Every  soul  you  bring  to 
the  gospel  feast  will  enhance  your 
own  joy.  4.  Jesus  does  not  approve 
of  waste. — A.  Clark. 

Christ  the  Restorer, — In  no  miracle 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   VI. 


of  the  gospel  did  Jesus  actually  create. 
He  makes  no  new  members  of  the  body, 
but  restores  old  useless  ones.  "  And  so, 
without  a  substratum  to  work  upon, 
He  creates  neither  bread  nor  wine." 
To  do  this  would  not  have  been  a  whit 
more  difficult,  but  it  would  have 
expressed  less  aptly  His  mission,  which 
was  not  to  create  a  new  system  of 
things,  but  to  renew  the  old,  to  recover 
the  lost  sheep,  and  to  heal  the  sick  at 
heart. — Dean  Chadwick. 

Vers.  41,  42.  Works  out  of  the  ordi- 
nary course. — The  miracles  which  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  wrought  are  in  truth 
Divine  works,  and,  from  the  things 
that  are  seen,  awaken  the  human 
mind  to  contemplate  and  understand 
the  invisible  God.  For  He  is  such  a 
Being  as  cannot  be  seen  by  human 
sight,  and  because  the  miracles  by 
which  He  governeth  the  whole  world 
and  ruleth  every  creature  are,  by  their 
frequency,  little  regarded,  so  that 
scarce  any  one  thinks  it  worth  his 
while  to  attend  to  and  remark  the 
wonderful  and  astonishing  works  of 
God,  manifested  in  every  seed  and  grain 
upon  the  earth.  But  of  His  mercy  He 
reserved  some  things  which  He  would 
do  otherwise  than  in  the  usual  course 
of  nature,  that  they  by  whom  His  daily 
wonders  were  unobserved  might  have 
an  occasion  to  admire,  not  when  they 
saw  greater,  but  more  unusual  works. 
For  it  is  a  greater  miracle  to  govern 
and  provide  for  the  whole  world  than 
to  feed  five  thousand  men  with  but 
five  loaves;  yet  while  men  pay  little 
regard  to  the  former,  they  are  as- 
tonished at  the  latter,  not  because  it 
is  greater,  but  more  unusual ;  for  who 
is  it  that  now  feeds  the  whole  world 
but  He  from  whom  a  few  seeds  sown 
produce  the  plentiful  sheaves  ;  and  the 
same  power  which  gives  that  mar- 
vellous increase  multiplied  the  loaves 
in  the  hand  of  Christ,  who  was  Himself 
endued  with  all  power.  Those  five 
loaves  were  a  kind  of  seed,  not  indeed 
delivered  to  the  earth  for  increase,  but 
increased  by  Him  who  made  the  earth. 
The  same  Divine  power  which  wrought 


the  miracle  with  loaves  and  fishes 
instantaneously,  works  the  greater 
miracles  of  nature  gradually  and  with 
regularly  appointed  means. — A  ugustine. 

Yer.  41.  "Blessed." — There  can  be 
little  doubt  that  the  words  which  Jesus 
spake  were  those  so  well  known : 
"  Blessed  art  Thou,  Jehovah  our  God, 
King  of  the  world,  who  causes  to  come 
forth  bread  from  the  earth."  Assuredly 
it  was  this  threefold  thought :  the 
upward  thought  (sursum  corda),  the 
recognition  of  the  creative  act  as  re- 
gards every  piece  of  bread  we  eat,  and 
the  thanksgiving,  which  was  realised 
anew  in  all  its  fulness  when,  as  He 
distributed  to  the  disciples,  the  pro- 
vision miraculously  multiplied  in  His 
hands. — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Yer.  43.  The  fragments  that  remained 
were  greater  in  amount  than  the 
original  loaves.  This  is  true  in  relation 
even  to  temporal  things,  that  the  man 
who  is  reasonably  liberal  has  more 
than  the  man  who  keeps  all  to  himself. 
He  may  not  have  more  wealth  than 
the  miser,  though  often  he  has  that, 
but  he  enjoys  more  that  which  he  has 
when  he  has  given  a  portion  to  others  : 
that  which  is  left  becomes  more  to 
him,  and  affords  him  more  enjoyment 
than  the  whole  would  have  done  if  he 
had  retained  it.  But  this  is  especially 
true  in  spiritual  things. — A.  Clark. 

Gather  up  the  fragments — 1.  Of 
truth.  Many  a  time,  when  a  man  has 
been  really  hungering  after  righteous- 
ness, he  has  found  in  some  one  truth 
which  has  fallen  from  his  Master's 
table  exactly  that  portion  which  was 
required  to  satisfy  his  longings.  As 
was  once  said  by  a  dying  man,  great 
in  human  learning  :  "Give  me  now  a 
single  promise  of  Scripture,  that  I  may 
hold  it  as  an  ear  of  corn,  and  rub*  it 
out  in  the  hand  of  faith,  and  it  is 
worth  to  me  all  my  other  knowledge." 
2.  Of  time.  Who  has  not  to  weep  for 
time  which  has  not  been  used  for  its 
true  purposes — for  mercies  little  noted, 
for  gifts  abused,  for  vows  forgotten, 
for  sorrow  that  has  not  chastened  and 

235 


CHAP.  VI.  EOMILETIC  COMMEATARY:   ST.  MARK. 


joy  that  has  not  sanctified,  for  number-  prayer.     (3)   Holy   Eucharist.     4.   Of 

less  visitations  of  God  that  have  passed  duty.      We  are  often   apt  to   despise 

over  us  and  left  no  blessing  behind  ?  common  things   because   they  are   so 

(1)  We  have  need  to  treasure  up  its  common,  forgetting  that  we  might  lift 

very  minutes,  for  they  are  fragments  them  to  a  much  higher  dignity  if  we 

of  a  gift  which  God  bestows.     (2)  In  but  infused  into  them  a  nobler  prin- 

course  of  time  we  become  the  result  of  ciple,  doing  them   as  in  God's  sight, 

the  time  we  live.     3.  Of  the  means  of  by  God's  help,  and  to  God's  glory. — 

grace.     (1)  Lord's   Day.     (2)   Private  Canon  Nisbet. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.  -Verses  45—56. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  xiv.  22-36;  John  vi.  15-21.) 

Christ  walking  on  the  sea. — This  incident  stands  alone,  among  the  recorded 
acts  of  Jesus,  as  a  peculiar  manifestation  of  His  character  and  dealings.  In 
general  Christ's  miracles  were  founded  on  the  principle  of  relieving  human 
want  and  misery,  while  also  displaying  Divine  power.  But  here  the  object  was 
different,  as  will  appear  from  a  careful  consideration  of  the  circumstances. 

I.  It  had  been  a  day  of  self-revelation  on  the  part  of  Jesus. — The  privacy 
which  He  had  sought  for  the  apostles  and  Himself  having  been  invaded  by  the 
multitude,  He  had  devoted  Himself  to  teaching  them  "  concerning  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  healing  them  that  had  need  of  cure"  (Luke  ix.  11).  He  had  also 
relieved,  by  a  miraculous  increase  of  food,  the  hunger  of  five  thousand  men, — 
thus  demonstrating  to  the  people  at  large  that  He  was  at  least  a  Messenger 
come  from  God ;  and  as  such  they  acknowledged  Him.  To  His  more  immediate 
disciples,  however,  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  now  manifest  Himself  in  a 
character  of  more  unquestionable  greatness ;  it  was  important  that  they  should 
regard  Him,  not  merely  as  One  come  from  God,  but  as  a  Being  closely  connected 
with  the  Deity,  in  a  union  incomprehensible  indeed,  but  undeniable.  In  this 
character,  therefore,  He  determined  to  exhibit  Himself  to  them.  Accordingly 
"He  constrained  His  disciples  to  get  into  the  ship,"  etc.  The  unenlightened 
multitude  whom  He  had  instructed  and  miraculously  fed  sought  forsooth  to 
make  Him  a  King,  in  acknowledgment  of  the  benefits  He  had  conferred  upon 
them  (John  vi.  15) ;  but  He  who  afterwards  freely  offered  Himself  to  those  who 
came  to  compass  His  death  shrank  from  the  proffered  glories  of  the  world,  and 
sent  away  those  who  would  have  forced  them  on  Him. 

II.  When  evening  came,  Jesus  was  alone. — Mark  how  He  employs  the 
solitude  thus  sought  and  obtained.  "  He  departed  into  a  mountain  to  pray." 
His  life  on  earth  was  a  mixture  of  contemplation  and  action,  of  austerity  and 
freedom  :  we  find  Him  often  where  the  greatest  concourse  was  to  be  found — in 
market-places,  synagogues,  etc. ;  and  we  find  Him  also  retiring  from  the  crowd 
into  a  desert  or  a  garden,  and  there  employing  Himself  in  all  kinds  of  religious 
exercise  and  intercourse  with  His  Father,  in  fasting,  meditation,  and  prayer. 
Following  His  example  we  may  doubtless  lead  public  lives  innocently  and 
usefully,  conversing  with  men  and  doing  them  good,  mutually  sowing  and 
reaping  the  various  comforts  and  advantages  of  human  society.  But  since  the 
pleasures  of  conversation  when  too  freely  tasted  are  intoxicating  and  dangerous, 
since  the  temptations  which  we  thereby  meet  with  are  many  and  great  (and 
even  where  the  spirit  is  willing  to  resist,  yet  the  flesh  is  often  weak),  we  ought 
therefore  to  regulate  and  restrain  ourselves  in  the  indulgence  of  such  enjoy- 
ments by  periodical  intermissions  of  them,  to  strengthen  ourselves  for  such 
public  encounters   by  our  religious   privacies,   to  retire  from  the  world  and 

-236 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  vi. 


converse  with  God  and  our  own  conscience,  examining  the  state  and  fortifying 
the  power  of  our  soul  in  secrecy  and  silence. 

III.  Next  morning  Jesus  joined  His  disciples. — Some  three  hours  after 
midnight  "  He  cometh  unto  them,  walking  upon  the  sea."  The  fact  surprises 
us  :  yet  why  should  it  ?  All  elements  are  surely  alike  to  Him  who  made  them ! 
"  The  progress  of  Divinity,  within  His  own  dominions,  cannot  be  confined  to 
humanly  constructed  roads  or  solid  ground."  What  wonder,  then,  that  He  who 
had  so  amply  demonstrated  His  power  upon  the  land  should  display  it  upon  the 
waters  also  ?  Our  surprise  is  but  a  result  and  an  evidence  of  the  weakness  of 
our  faith.  The  disciples  during  Christ's  absence  had  been  "  toiling  in  rowing, 
for  the  wind  was  contrary."  Doubtless  that  conflict  of  the  elements  had  been 
stirred  by  Christ  Himself,  for  the  clearer  display  of  His  power,  and  the  deeper 
conviction  of  His  disciples.  From  the  mountain  where  He  prayed  He  had 
witnessed  their  distress  ;  but  for  the  benefit  of  their  souls  He  delayed  their 
rescue.  So  with  ourselves.  Often  does  the  providence  of  God  surround  us  with 
so  dark  a  tempest  of  calamity  that  the  prospect  of  relief  would  seem  almost 
hopeless.  Yet  even  in  the  darkest  hour  the  eye  of  faith  will  pierce  through  the 
gloom  to  the  regions  of  joy  and  peace  beyond.  Nay,  are  we  not,  through  the 
whole  of  our  present  existence,  in  the  situation  of  those  wave-tossed  disciples, 
sailing  upon  a  sea  of  anxiety  at  the  best,  and  of  peril  for  the  most  part,  in  the 
hope  of  the  appearance  of  our  Lord  ?  Is  not  that  hope  the  only  source  of  our 
light,  the  only  anchor  of  our  soul  ? 

IY.  The  appearance  of  Jesus  first  terrifies  and  then  consoles. — 1.  The 
confession  of  weakness  so  faithfully  recorded  in  ver.  49  is  a  sample  of  the 
candour  which  distinguishes  Holy  Writ.  Had  Jesus  approached  the  ship  in 
any  ordinary  manner,  it  would  have  been  unaccountable  that  His  disciples 
should  not  instantly  have  recognised  Him ;  but  the  way  in  which  He  came  of 
itself  explains  their  misapprehension.  They  had  never  seen  Him  hold  in  abey- 
ance the  laws  of  nature  with  respect  to  His  own  body.  The  idea  of  His  walking 
over  the  sea  had  never  entered  their  minds ;  and  consequently,  in  the  absence  of 
any  rational  explanation,  they  readily  fell  a  prey  to  the  weak  suggestions  of 
superstitious  credulity.  And  if  through  that  mere  delusion  of  the  imagination 
they  were  thrilled  with  horror  and  cried  out  in  an  agony  of  fear,  though  free 
from  crime,  what  must  the  guilty  conscience  suffer  in  self-inflicted  tortures 
even  here,  and  what  must  be  its  torment  of  remorse  hereafter  !  2.  The  con- 
soling voice  of  Jesus  calms  the  storm — both  stilling  the  waves  of  the  sea 
and  dispelling  the  tumult  in  the  hearts  of  the  disciples  (vers.  50,  51).  And 
in  similar  accents  does  He  address  Himself  to  all  who  turn  to  Him  believing 
(Matt.  xi.  28 ;  John  iii.  16).  3.  As  to  the  degree  in  which  we  may,  indeed  must, 
repose  our  confidence  in  Him,  the  example  of  St.  Peter  on  this  occasion  amply 
instructs  us  (Matt.  xiv.  28-32).  We  are  invited,  nay  bidden,  to  come  to  Jesus ; 
and  no  sooner  do  we  make  the  attempt  than  we  are  endowed  with  strength  to 
enable  us  to  come  ;  and  under  the  support  of  that  celestial  aid,  without  which 
we  could  do  nothing,  we  advance  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  Eternal  Source  of 
light  and  life. 

V.  How  far  was  Christ's  object  accomplished  by  this  miracle? — St.  Mark 
tells  us  that  they  were  struck  with  amazement  at  the  moment,  and  then,  "  after 
that  sudden  *  ecstasy '  was  past,  they  continued  more  collectedly  and  thoughtfully 
in  a  wondering  mood."  St.  Matthew  adds  (xiv.  33)  that  they  "  came  and 
worshipped  Him,  saying,  Of  a  truth  Thou  art  the  Son  of  God."  This  was 
the  impression  which  Jesus  had  wished  to  produce  upon  their  minds,  and  the 
acknowledgment  which  He  had  sought  to  draw  from  their  lips.  In  forming 
and  in  expressing  such  an  opinion  they  were  supported  by  the  authority  of 
Scripture  (Job  ix.  8). 

237 


CHAP.  vi.  E0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


Ver.  56.  Touching  the  Lord. — Wonderful  scenes  must  these  have  been, — the 
rumour  of  His  coming ;  the  preparations  for  it ;  the  eagerness  to  be  first ;  the 
gestures  and  cries  to  excite  notice  and  pity ;  the  gracious  touch ;  the  joyful 
exclamations ;  the  thankful  returning  home.  And  we  sing,  "  Thy  touch  has 
still  its  ancient  power."  Let  us  ask  some  simple  questions  as  to  the  meaning 
of  that. 

I.  What  is  the  virtue  now? — 1.  Not  bodily  healing — that  is  to  say,  not  as 
it  was  given  then.  May  I  not  then  ask  the  Lord  to  heal  me  of  my  sickness, 
or  my  brother  of  his  ?  I  cannot  do  better.  Let  me  seek  the  Lord  through 
the  physicians.  The  prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick,  and  the  Lord  shall 
raise  him  up.  But  the  healing  shall  neither  be  instant  nor  quite  certainly 
given.  2.  The  virtue  now  is  soul-healing.  The  miracles  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
seem  to  have  had  two  ends.  (1)  They  were  demonstrative ;  by  them  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  was  approved  of  God.  (2)  They  were  also  illustrative.  When 
prophets  foretold  that  the  lame  should  walk  and  the  dumb  sing,  they  foretold 
what  was  literally  done ;  but  their  language  was  also  a  figurative  description 
of  what  Jesus  would  do  for  men's  souls. 

II.  What  is  the  border  of  the  garment  ? — In  Rev.  i.  St.  John  records  his  vision 
of  the  Son  of  Man.  It  is  a  vision  of  our  High  Priest  clothed  with  a  garment 
down  to  the  foot.  He  is  our  Aaron — our  Melchizedek  rather.  The  unction 
of  the  Spirit  flows  down  to  the  skirts  of  His  garment.  Is  there  not  a  threefold 
hem  ?  1.  Prayer :  "  Lord,  be  merciful  to  me,  heal  my  soul,  for  I  have  sinned 
against  Thee."  He  who  touches  thus  shall  be  made  whole.  2.  The  Word  of 
God  :  "  Almighty  God,  who  calledst  Luke  the  physician  to  be  an  evangelist 
and  physician  of  the  soul,  may  it  please  Thee  that  by  the  wholesome  medicines 
of  the  doctrine  delivered  by  him  all  the  diseases  of  our  souls  may  be  healed." 
3.  The  Holy  Sacraments  :  We  pray  to  the  Lord,  who  laid  His  hands  upon  little 
children  and  blessed  them,  to  wash  and  sanctify  our  children  with  the  Holy 
Ghost.  And  just  as  it  is  most  important  for  recovery  and  health  that  whole- 
some food  in  plenty  be  given  to  the  sick,  so  He  has  provided  that  in  the 
Eucharist  we  eat  His  Flesh  and  live  by  Him :  "  The  strengthening  and 
refreshing  of  our  souls  by  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ." 

III.  What  is  the  touch  now? — 1.  Not  the  mere  use  of  means.  It  is  the 
touch  of  faith  and  prayer  which  is  blest.  No  means  of  grace  should  be  used 
without  prayer.  The  Lord,  at  His  baptism,  was  praying  (Luke  iii.  21). 
Apostles  did  not  confirm  or  ordain  without  prayer  (Acts  viii.  15,  xiv.  23). 
Not  a  superstitious  but  a  believing  use  of  the  means  of  grace  brings  healing. 
The  difficulty  of  faith  when  Jesus  was  among  men  lay  in  believing  that  He 
who  seemed  to  be  man  only  was  God.  Its  difficulty  now  is  that  the  Lord  is 
withdrawn  by  the  cloud  of  His  ascension.  But  faith  triumphs  now  as  it  did 
then.  2.  The  touch  is  a  personal  application.  "  I  will  yet  for  this  be  inquired 
of  to  do  it  for  them."  Heaven  for  the  asking ;  but  we  must  ask ;  and,  God 
knows  why,  how  many,  alas,  stop  short  of  the  asking  !  (1)  Jesus  has  entered 
here  ;  we  were  born  in  a  Christian  country.  How  shall  we  answer  for  it  ?  We 
have  owned  Bibles  all  our  lives ;  the  house  of  God  has  stood  open  for  us ;  the 
Lord's  Day  has  proclaimed  to  us  that  Jesus  passeth  by.  What  if  after  all  we 
are  not  healed  ?  (2)  The  touch  of  these  sick  needed  not  to  be  repeated ;  the 
soul's  touch  does.  Where  first  we  knew  health,  there  it  is  our  delight  to  resort 
continually.  (3)  May  we  see  the  force  of  example  here  ?  Did  the  woman 
(Mark  v.  27)  set  this  happy  fashion,  and  these  follow  her  ?  Do  not  let  us 
leave  others  without  the  help  of  our  example,  openly  making  application  to  the 
Lord  that  healeth  us.  (4)  See  the  power  of  intercession.  It  was  friends  here 
who  laid  the  sick  in  the  Lord's  way  and  besought  Him.  Effectual  fervent 
prayer  availeth  much, — H%  Thompson, 

238 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  vi. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  45.  Changes  in  life. — How  un-  going  up  into  His  mountain  of  devo- 

expected  and  disheartening  a  change  !  tion   and   bringing    down   power   and 

A  calm  sunset ;  a  sober  livery  of  even-  encouragement.     It  mattered  not  how 

ing  clothing  the  quiet  vales ;  the  rose  clamant  appeared  the  demands  for  out- 

and    purple    transfiguration    of     the  ward  service,  He  allowed  nothing  to  rob 

mountain-tops ;  the   peaceful   rocking  Him  of  that  frequent  solitary  fellow- 

of  the  slumberous  waves ;  the  joy  of  ship.     He  was  never  so  busy  that  He 

feeding  the  five  thousand  with  loaves  had  no  time  for  retirement.     Without 

and  fishes  multiplying  in  their  hands ;  it  His  Mission  had  never  been  accom- 

and  now,  behold,  disappointed  hearts  plished.    And  without  it  our  life  in  Him 

and    a    stern    struggle   in    gathering  will  never  be  strong  or  deep. — Ibid. 

darkness    against    threatening    winds  Foundations   out    of  sight. — Some- 

and  waves !     What  a  picture  of   life  times,   perhaps,   you    have    been   im- 

it    is!      Improbable   and    unexpected  pressed  by  the  courage  with  which  a 

changes  come,  bringing  unrest,  tempt-  man  stood  forth  for  truth  and  justice 

ing   us   to   be    unsubmissive   or   even  against  a  gainsaying  multitude,  or  by 

disobedient.      The    loom   of    life   has  the   patience   and    submission    shewn 

been  arranged  to  produce  a  pattern  to  by    one    whose    earthly    hopes    were 

our  liking ;  the  swift  shuttle  of  time,  blasted.     You   marvelled ;    but   these 

flying  through  the  warp  of  our  human  men   had    in    many   an    hour    taken 

affairs,  weaves  awhile  a  fabric  pleas-  counsel  of   themselves,  they  had  seen 

ing  to  us   and  others,  and   then,   an  visions  of  God,  and  were  sure  how  He 

unseen  hand  silently  shifting   all  the  would   have   them   go,    and   that   He 

machinery  of  life,  strange  threads  and  would    go    with    them.      They   knew 

sombre  colours  begin  to  weave  upon  a  whom  they  had  believed.    The  founda- 

pattern  not  yet  disclosed.  tions  of  Divine  faith  and  life  are,  like 

all  foundations,  out  of  sight ;  but  the 

Ver.      46.      Christ's     prayer. — The  character  that  you  see  and  admire  is 

prayer   here   referred   to   was   not   so  based  on  them,  and  draws  its  strength 

much  a  series  of  requests  or  petitions,  from  them.      Therefore  to   rest   even 

as  a    state   of   rapt   contemplation  of  from    good    works   may   be    a    duty. 

God's  presence   and  a   profound  com-  There    are   some    sweet   souls    whose 

munion  with  Him.     He   spent   those  devotion  is  such  that  they  never  can 

quiet   hours  in   a   Divine  meditation,  think  it  right  to  pause  in  their  service, 

drinking  afresh  at  the  Eternal  Springs,  who    are    always    finding    some   new 

listening   to   the    inspirations   of    the  claim  on   their   sympathy,  until  they 

Father's  voice.     The  claims  of  honour  exhaust    themselves.      This    ceaseless 

and   ambition   which   men    made   for  energy   is   not   good   either   for   their 

Him   were  put  aside   and   clean  for-  sake  or  for  the  work's  sake.     Christ 

gotten,  as  He  entered  into  the  secret  rested,  simply  sent  the  crowds  away, 

place   of   the    Most    High   and  dwelt  many  of  them  unhelped,  and  went  up 

under  the   shadow  of   the   Almighty,  into   His    mountain ;    but   when    He 

He   saw   then   with  clear   vision  His  reappeared     it    was    with    a    double 

work  stretch  out  before  Him  as  the  blessing. — Ibid. 
Redeemer  of  men,  and  knew  that  He 

must  be  made  perfect  through  suffer-  Ver.  48.   Unable  to  come  to  Christ. — 

ing  ere  God  or  man  could  crown  Him.  We  are  sometimes  in  a  like  position 

— D.  W.  Forrest.  with  the  disciples.     In  spite  of  all  our 

Christ  lived  by  faith. — As  the  Son  of  efforts  we  cannot  succeed  in  fighting 

Man,  made  like   unto   His   brethren,  our  way  to   Him.     In  the  midst   of 

He  too  lived  by  faith.     He  was  ever  temptation,    when    our    spirit    seems 

239 


CHAP.  VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


held  down  and  cannot  soar  to  the  joy 
of  faith,  or  in  severe  bodily  suffering, 
which  envelops  the  soul  with  the 
black  veil  of  spiritual  darkness,  there 
is  still  indeed  deep  down  in  the  heart 
a  believing  desire  for  the  Lord's  help, 
but  dark  thoughts  of  temptations  rise 
like  black  and  heavy  waves  between 
Him  and  ourselves.  The  soul  cannot 
come  to  Christ :  this  sometimes  lasts 
a  long  while,  and  even  till  the  hour  of 
death.  Relatives  may  then  be  stand- 
ing in  deep  grief  round  the  death-bed, 
and  anxiously  asking  :  "  Is  it  possible 
that  this  soul  is  to  die  in  the  darkness 
of  doubt?  Is  this  disciple  to  be  for- 
saken by  the  Lord  in  his  last  hour  ?  " 
Oh  no  ;  beloved,  learn  here  that  when 
disciples,  in  spite  of  all  their  efforts, 
cannot  come  to  their  Lord,  He  comes 
to  them. — E.  Lehmann. 

Hindrances  turned  into  helps. — The 
stormy  sea  has  been  used  far  too  often 
as  a  symbol  of  a  troubled  life  for  us 
to  hesitate  a  moment  about  making 
application  of  that  scene  to  those 
times  in  our  lives  when  events  seem 
lawless,  uncontrollable  by  ourselves, 
like  that  shifting,  fluid,  restless  sea. 
Those  waves  seemed  to  present  an 
insuperable  barrier  to  Christ's  advance, 
but  by  the  power  of  the  life  that  is 
in  Him  He  transformed  them  into  a 
means  of  progress.  Every  billow  was 
made  by  Him  a  stepping-stone  towards 
His  disciples.  It  is  not  a  fanciful 
dream,  but  a  sober  fact,  that  many  of 
His  people,  by  the  power  of  that  self- 
same life,  have  triumphed  over  their 
troubles,  and  have  found  them  helps 
heavenward.  The  spirit  is  mightier 
than  the  body,  the  living  stronger  than 
the  dead.  The  Christly  spirit  is  the 
conqueror  of  materialism  in  thought 
and  in  fact  here  and  hereafter,  and 
your  Lord  can  make  your  very  hind- 
rances, as  you  call  them,  your  stepping- 
stones  heavenward. — A.  Rowland. 

Ver.  49.  Christ  not  recognised. — 
They  did  not  recognise  Him,  because 
He  came  to  them  in  another  manner 
from  that  to  which  they  were  accus- 
tomed.    They  took  Him  for  a  spirit 

240 


announcing  to  them,  according  to  the 
popular  superstition,  death  and  de- 
struction, and  they  cried  out  for  fear. 
So  greatly  may  Christ  be  misunder- 
stood by  His  people.  We  always 
think  of  Him  after  one  fashion,  and 
picture  His  coming  according  to  our 
thoughts.  If  He  comes  otherwise, 
and  approaches  us,  not  in  the  way  of 
prosperity,  but  upon  the  storm- tossed 
sea,  we  do  not  recognise  Him  and  are 
afraid.  When  He  draws  nigh  with 
hands  full  of  blessings,  He  is  welcome  ; 
but  when  He  comes  upon  the  waves  of 
tribulation,  we  think  it  cannot  be  the 
Saviour.  And  yet  it  is  He.  What 
seems  to  us  unmixed  misfortune  is 
often  our  greatest  blessing.  When 
we  are  afraid  of  perishing,  He  is 
just  upon  His  way  to  preserve  us. — 
E.  Lehmann. 

Ver.  50.  Christ's  ivords  of  cheer. — 
These  words  of  Christ's,  once  uttered  on 
the  earth,  are  blent  henceforth  with 
heaven's  eternal  echoes.  When  the 
storms  of  affliction  are  raging  ;  when 
the  blasts  of  adversity  blow  ;  when  the 
bolts  of  bereavement  are  falling,  in 
dark  and  dreary  days ;  when  strength 
and  pride  are  prostrate,  and  the  lamp 
of  life  burns  low ;  when  dear  delights 
and  darling  dreams  are  vanishing  away ; 
when  the  light  of  hope  is  dim,  and  the 
heart  is  sick  with  sorrow, — then  for  a 
time  it  seems  as  though  our  sky  were 
for  ever  overcast,  and  the  waters  of 
grief  were  closing  for  aye  above  our 
heads.  But  there  is  One  who  rules 
the  tempest ;  there  is  guidance  in  the 
waste  of  woe ;  there  is  deliverance 
deeper  than  disaster ;  there  is  a  voice 
commanding,  "  Peace  !  be  still."  Anon 
the  clouds  shall  clear,  the  day  shall 
dawn,  the  countenance  of  God  shall 
beam ;  for  sadness,  loss,  and  dire 
dismay  are  sent  to  man  for  discipline, 
not  for  destruction.  Yet  a  little  while, 
and  the  anguish  that  has  pierced  the 
breast  shall  purify  the  soul ;  the  help- 
lessness of  self- despair  shall  change  to 
the  rest  of  reliance  ;  all  the  solitude 
shall  smile,  all  the  shadows  be  bright, 
and  all  the  sounds  of  frantic  fear  and 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   VI. 


desolating  doubt  be  whelmed  in  the 
sweet  whisper  of  the  Voice  Divine, 
"It  is  I;  be  not  afraid."— #.  M. 
Geldart. 

Yer.  51.  Lessons. — Litis  commend- 
able that  they  were  affected  with 
admiration  and  reverent  fear  of  these 
great  and  miraculous  works  of  Christ. 
2.  It  is  discommendable  that  they 
exceeded  due  measure  in  this  astonish- 
ment and  admiration  of  the  miracles 
themselves,  without  due  consideration 
of  Christ's  Divine  power  by  which 
they  were  wrought. — G.  Fetter. 

Ver.  52.  Want  of  consideration. — 
They  failed  in  this  consideration  to 
the  very  end,  and  it  was  not  until  after 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  them  that 
their  faith  became  equal  to  the  demands 
upon  it.  And  so  it  seems  to  be  with 
disciples  always.  Our  trouble  is  the 
dull  heart,  the  slow  apprehension,  the 
little  faith.  We  do  not  consider 
the  providence  which  has  its  witness 
in  our  past  experience.  We  fail  to 
apprehend  our  Lord's  meaning  in  the 
questions  which  our  circumstances,  our 
work  in  the  world,  our  obligations  and 
duties,  are  continually  putting  to  us. 
We  miss  the  Divine  purpose  in  the 
emergencies,  the  exigencies,  which  from 
time  to  time  confront  us.  Least  of  all 
do  we  suspect  that  they  are  oppor- 
tunities of  faith — occasions  for  the 
exercise  of  spiritual  power.  Missions, 
charities,  social  reformations,  and  all 
the  various  forms  of  Christian  enter- 
prise— these  things  languish  or  fail 
chiefly  because  we,  the  disciples,  cannot 
seem  to  get  rid  of  the  idea  that  man 
lives  and  must  live  by  bread  alone. — 
W.  T.  Wilson. 

Christ's  training. — It  is  one  purpose 
of  the  training  of  the  school  of  Christ 
to  beget  confidence  in  His  power  and 
grace  ;  and  often  this  is  done  by  bring- 
ing to  light  our  lurking  unbelief.  And 
that  is  an  hour  of  blessing  for  us  when 
fateful  events  put  before  our  eyes,  in 
unmistakable  ways,  our  lack  of  con- 
fidence in  the  Lord,  and  shame  us  into 
higher  faith. 


Hardness  of  heart. — 1.  Hardness  of 
heart  is  a  main  cause  hindering  the 
fruit  and  profit  which  we  should  reap 
by  the  means  of  grace.  2.  There  may 
be  and  is  even  in  good  Christians  (yea, 
in  the  best)  some  degree  of  hardness  of 
heart. — G.  Fetter. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  regenerate  do  in 
some  measure  see  and  feel  their  own 
hardness  of  heart,  whereas  the  un- 
regenerate  have  little  or  no  f eeling  of 
it  for  the  most  part  (Eph.  iv.  19 ; 
Tim.  iv.  2).  2.  The  godly  not  only 
feel  but  are  unfeignedly  grieved  and 
humbled  for  their  own  hardness  of 
heart ;  so  are  not  the  wicked.  3.  The 
godly  hate  and  constantly  strive  against 
it,  using  all  good  means  to  be  rid  of 
it,  and  to  have  their  hearts  softened 
more  and  more ;  not  so  the  wicked,  who 
bear  with  themselves,  and  willingly  go 
on  in  hardness  of  heart  (Rom.  ii.  5). 
4.  Hardness  of  heart  in  the  godly  is 
a  sin  of  infirmity  ;  but  in  the  wicked 
it  is  a  reigning  sin,  bearing  away,  and 
prevailing  in  them. — Ibid. 

"Ver.  53.  Gennesaret  —  the  modern 
elrGhuweir — is  that  fine  rich  level  tract 
of  country  which  was  the  principal 
scene  of  our  Lord's  earthly  career.  "  Its 
nature  is  wonderful,"  says  Josephus, 
"  as  well  as  its  beauty.  Its  soil  is  so 
fruitful  that  all  sorts  of  trees  can  grow 
upon  it ;  and  the  inhabitants  accord- 
ingly plant  on  it  all  kinds.  The 
temperature  of  the  air  is  so  well  mixed 
that  it  agrees  with  the  different  kinds. 
Walnuts,  which  require  cold  air, 
flourish  there  in  the  greatest  abund- 
ance ;  palm  trees  also,  which  grow  best 
in  heat ;  fig  trees  likewise,  and  olives, 
which  require  an  air  that  is  more 
temperate.  One  may  call  this  place 
the  Ambition  of  nature,  where  it  con- 
strains those  plants  which  are  naturally 
enemies  to  one  another  to  agree  to- 
gether. It  is  a  happy  strife  of  the 
seasons,  as  if  every  one  of  them  laid 
claim  to  this  country,  for  it  not  only 
nourishes  different  sorts  of  autumnal 
fruit  beyond  men's  expectation,  it 
preserves  them  a  great  while.  It  sup- 
plies  men   with  the   principal  fruits, 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


with  grapes  and  figs,  continually 
during  ten  months  of  the  year,  and  the 
rest  of  the  fruits,  as  they  become  ripe 
together,  throughout  the  whole  year." 

Yer.  55.  Helping  others. — 1.  In  that 
this  people  shew  their  love  by  bringing 
the  sick  to  Christ  to  be  healed,  we  learn 
that  it  is  a  duty  of  love  and  mercy 
which  we  owe  to  such  as  are  in  misery 
and  affliction,  to  afford  them  our  best 
help  and  succour.  (1)  We  profess  to 
be  fellow- members  of  the  same  mystical 
body  of  Christ,  the  Church.  (2)  We 
ourselves  are  subject  to  like  afflictions. 
2.  How  are  we  to  help  such  as  are 
in  misery  and  affliction?  (1)  By  our 
prayers  to  God  to  give  them  strength, 
patience,  deliverance,  to  sanctify  to 
them  all  their  troubles,  etc.     (2)   By 


comforting  and  strengthening  them  in 
all  their  troubles,  that  they  may  be 
better  able  to  bear  them  with  patience. 
(3)  By  our  best  advice,  counsel,  and 
instruction.  (4)  By  providing  for  them 
the  best  outward  means  of  comfort  and 
help  in  our  power.  3.  True  Christian 
love  is  diligent  and  painful  in  doing 
duties  and  services  of  love  to  others  as 
occasion  offers.  4.  We  ought  wisely 
to  observe  and  take  the  best  oppor- 
tunities of  helping  and  doing  good  to 
such  as  are  in  misery  and  distress. — 
G.  Petter. 

Yer.  56.  Touching  Christ. — The' 
touch  was — 1.  Needy.  2.  Wise.  3. 
Prompt.  4.  Believing.  5.  Personal. 
6.  Unrestricted.  7.  Efficacious. — John 
Smith. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    VI. 


Vers.  3,  4.  Ignorant  prejudices. — The  same 
blindness  and  folly  appears  on  a  smaller 
scale  in  our  own  day.  Some  years  ago 
Professor  Wilson  wrote  that  "as  the  northern 
Highlanders  do  not  admire  Waverley,  so,  I 
presume,  the  south  Highlanders  despise  Guy 
Mannering.  The  Westmoreland  peasants 
think  Wordsworth  a  fool.  In  Borrowdale 
Southey  is  not  known  to  exist.  I  met  ten 
men  in  Hawick  who  do  not  think  Hogg  a 
poet,  and  the  whole  city  of  Glasgow  think 
me  a  madman." 

Ver.  7.  The  Divine  call. — The  apostles  are 
the  Lord's  "  sent  ones,"  models  of  Christ's 
servants  who  do  His  bidding  in  all  the  ages. 
Still,  the  supreme  need  of  all  who  engage 
in  Christian  work  is  a  sense  of  the  Divine 
call.  We  may,  therefore,  ask  how  such  calls 
are  likely  to  come  to  us  in  these  our  times. 
They  often  come  in  providential  circum- 
stances, which  bring  altogether  unsought 
work  into  a  man's  hands.  In  one  of  his 
letters  Dr.  Norman  McLeod  wrote  in  this 
way  :  "  I  have  tried,  at  least  for  the  last 
twenty-five  years,  to  accept  of  whatever 
work  is  offered  to  me  in  God's  providence. 
I  have,  rightly  or  wrongly,  always  believed 
that  a  man's  work  is  given  to  him,  that  it  is 
not  so  much  sought  as  accepted,  that  it 
is  floated  to  one's  feet  like  the  infant  Moses 
to  Pharaoh's  daughter."  No  man  will  want 
work  who  waits  on  Divine  providence  with  a 
full  purpose  of  heart  to  do  what  is  shewn 
to  be  God's  will  for  him.  They  come  in 
the  consciousness  of  possessing  gifts,  and  such 
c  msciousness  often  comes  suddenly  to  men. 

242 


A  good  man,  called  to  reside  in  a  fresh 
city,  visited  a  Sunday  school,  and  was 
asked  to  take  charge  of  the  infant  class 
in  the  absence  of  the  usual  teacher.  As 
he  had  the  little  folk  before  him,  the 
thought  came  to  him  and  possessed  him, 
"Here  is  your  life-work.  This  is  what 
you  have  to  do."  It  was  an  inward  impulse 
by  the  Spirit.  In  that  work  he  has  won 
good  success.  We  limit  our  realisation  of 
Divine  calls  by  limiting  our  ideas  of  Chris- 
tian work.  When  an  army  is  going  forth  to 
war,  what  a  multitude  of  great  and  small 
preparations  are  necessary !  and  how  much 
the  success  of  the  expedition  will  depend  on 
careful  attention  to  the  minute  details  1  The 
credit  of  the  triumph  won  does  not  belong 
to  the  soldier  only ;  it  is  in  part  his  who 
made  the  soldiers'  weapons  and  the  soldiers' 
clothes.  In  the  Arctic  Expeditions  every- 
thing depended  on  the  thorough  faithfulness 
of  each  member  in  the  things  that  were 
least.  The  cabin-boy  had  his  part  in  the 
work  as  truly  as  the  leader.  David  acted 
on  this  view  of  the  claims  of  all  who  take 
any  place  in  an  enterprise,  however  lowly 
the  place  may  be,  when  he  insisted  on 
having  the  spoil  divided  among  those  who 
"  tarried  by  the  stuff,"  as  well  as  among  those 
who  "  went  forth  to  battle."  We  all  need  to 
recognise  more  fully  than  we  have  ever  done, 
that  the  Divine  call  to  work,  and  the  Divine 
inspiration  and  grace  for  workers,  come  to 
givers,  and  collectors,  and  sympathisers, 
and  those  who  pray,  quite  as  truly  as  to 
those  who  preach  and  teach. 

Support  by  companionship. — A  father  was 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   VI. 


walking  one  day  in  the  fields  with  his  two 
children.  The  wind  was  blowing  over  a  fine 
field  of  ripe  corn,  and  making  the  beautiful 
golden  ears  wave  like  the  waves  of  the  sea. 
"  Is  it  not  surprising,"  said  one  of  the 
children,  "  that  the  wind  does  not  break  the 
slender  stalks  of  the  corn?"  "My  child," 
said  the  father,  "  see  how  flexible  the  stalks 
are  1  They  bend  before  the  wind,  and  rise 
again  when  the  wind  has  passed  over  them. 
See,  too,  how  they  help  to  support  each  other. 
A  single  stalk  would  be  soon  bent  to  the 
ground,  but  so  many  growing  close  together 
help  to  keep  each  other  up.  If  we  keep 
together  when  the  troubles  of  life  come  upon 
us  like  a  stormy  wind,  we  shall  keep  each 
other  up,  when  one  trying  to  stand  alone 
would  fall." 

Ver.  8.  Impediments. — Armies  most  amply 
furnished  with  stores  and  comforts  are  most 
inefficient.  The  Zulu  hordes,  with  but  spear 
and  shield,  held  long  at  bay  the  well-pro- 
visioned and  disciplined  troops  of  England. 
Baggage  is  well  termed  "  impedimenta."  It 
checks  by  just  so  much  the  quickness,  and 
fosters  by  hardness.  The  soul  heavily 
freighted  with  the  luxuries  and  appliances 
of  this  life  is  at  a  disadvantage  for  the 
sudden  movements  and  missions  on  which 
the  Great  Captain  would  send  it. 

Ver.  16.  Herod's  thoughts. — What  were 
Herod's  thoughts  1  Not  long  before  a  re- 
markable poem  had  been  written  in  which 
the  hero  is  represented  as  having  entered 
by  the  Sybil's  agency  the  dark  regions  of 
Tartarus,  the  abode  of  the  spirits  of  the 
departed  dead.  There,  crowding  around  him, 
are  multitudes  of  shadowy  forms,  wearing 
the  semblance  of  what  they  bore  whilst 
on  earth.  Flitting  in  restless  disquietude 
are  the  unburied  dead  ;  there,  too,  are 
parricides,  dishonest  trustees  who  have 
wronged  widows  and  orphans,  betrayers  of 
the  honour  of  wife  and  country,  all  showing 
in  phantom  face  and  visage  that  they  are 
enduring  the  righteous  retribution  of  the 
gods.  And  there,  likewise,  in  more  blissful 
regions  are  the  ghosts  who,  when  alive  on 
earth,  did  good  and  honourable  deeds. 
Amidst  the  throng  he  recognises  his  honoured 
father,  whom,  indeed,  he  had  come  to  see, 
and  he  receives  from  him  sundry  admonitions 
as  to  the  future  of  his  race  and  country,  and 
the  duties  thereby  required.  He  inquires  if 
the  shades  of  the  dead  wish  or  are  allowed 
to  revisit  the  upper  world,  and  the  answer 
he  receives  seems  to  leave  the  question  some- 
what open,  and  is  followed  by  a  philosophical 
disquisition  on  the  nature  and  origin  of  the 
creation.  That  poem  was  dedicated  to 
Augustus,  the  immediate  predecessor  of 
Tiberius,  the  then  wearer  of  the  imperial 
purple,  and  had  been  rehearsed  before  him 
in  the  presence  of  his  court.    The  poem,  like 


all  great  poems,  reflected  not  only  the 
thoughts  of  the  age,  but  the  thoughts  of 
human  nature  itself.  Had  Herod  heard  it 
or  read  it?  Most  likely  he  had.  Was  he 
acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  Sybil, 
and  the  Sybilline  Oracles  I  If  so,  there 
would  be  no  antecedent  improbability  in  the 
reappearance  of  John  the  Baptist.  Nay, 
similar  apparitions  were  reported  to  have 
been  actually  seen.  Thus  the  ghost  of  the 
mighty  Caesar  was  said  to  have  appeared  to 
his  murderer,  and  to  have  summoned  him  to 
a  meeting  after  the  fateful  field  at  Philippi. 
Jewish  traditions  told,  too,  of  the  apparition 
of  the  prophet  Samuel  to  Saul  with  the 
awful  message,  "  To-day  shalt  thou  and  thy 
sons  be  with  me."  If,  then,  the  Baptist 
were  risen  from  the  dead,  no  wonder  that 
mighty  works  should  shew  forth  themselves 
in  him.  But  to  whom  should  his  first  visit 
be  more  likely  paid  than  to  his  murderer  ? 
and  what  would  be  the  terrible  nature  of  his 
message  ?  In  vain  the  licentious  dances 
of  voluptuous  women,  the  flattery  of  his 
courtiers,  the  luxuries  of  his  table !  They 
could  not  stifle  the  whispers  of  the  inward 
monitor;  adultery  and  murder  were  ugly 
facts,  and  so  Herod  might  have  said  with 
Juvenal, — 

"  If  the  anger  of  the  gods   be  great,   yet 
certainly  it  is  slow; 
If,  therefore,  they  take  care  to  punish  all 

the  guilty, 
When  will  they  come  to  me  ?  " 

Sat.  xiii.,  I.  100. 

Stings  of  conscience. — Henry  of  Essex, 
struck  down  in  a  duel,  attributed  his  defeat 
to  the  imagined  appearance  of  a  knight 
whom  he  had  murdered  standing  by  the 
side  of  his  adversary.  Speaking  of  the 
man  who  planned  the  massacre  of  Glencoe, 
Macaulay  tells  us  that  Breadalbane  felt  the 
stings  of  conscience.  He  went  to  the  most 
fashionable  coffee-house  in  Edinburgh,  and 
talked  loudly  about  what  he  had  done  among 
the  mountains ;  but  some  of  his  soldiers 
observed  that  all  this  was  put  on.  He  was 
not  the  same  man  that  he  had  been  before. 
In  all  places,  at  all  hours,  working  or  sleeping, 
Glencoe  was  for  ever  before  him. 

Rustled  by  a  breeze. — There  is  a  species  of 
poplar  whose  leaves  are  often  rustled  by  a 
breeze  too  faint  to  stir  the  foliage  of  other 
trees.  NoticiDg  the  fact  one  day  when  there 
was  scarce  a  breath  of  air,  Gotthold  thought 
within  himself,  "  This  tree  is  the  emblem  of 
a  man  with  a  wounded  and  uneasy  conscience, 
which  takes  alarm  at  the  most  trifling  cause, 
and  agitates  him  so  that  he  knows  not 
whither  to  fly." 

A  guilty  conscience. — King  Theodoric  could 
not  endure  the  senator  Symmachus,  a  good 
and  virtuous  man,  so  he  caused  him  to  be 
put  to  death.  But  after  this  proceeding  he 
lost  his  accustomed  high  spirits,  and  took  to 

243 


CHAP.  VI. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


looking  gloomy  and  soliloquising  apart.  One 
day  while  at  dinner,  on  a  fish  being  served, 
he  thought  he  saw  the  head  of  Symmachus 
attached    to    the    body,    and    this    optical 

illusion  caused  his  death. Bessus,  while 

surrounded  by  his  courtiers,  suddenly  drew 
his  sword,  and  rushing  at  a  nest  of  swallows, 
hacked  the  whole  family  to  death.  Having 
been  allowed  time  to  recover  himself  after 
this  unwonted  exertion,  he  was  asked  the 
reason  for  his  sudden  outbreak,  when,  in  a 
virtuously  indignant  tone,  he  replied,  u  Did 
you  not  hear  them  reproach  me  with  the 
murder  of  my  father  ? "  It  afterwards 
transpired  that  he  was  really  guilty  of  this 
crime. 

Ver.  18.  Testimony  before  kings. — On  one 
occasion  St.  Hugh  is  reported  to  have  said  to 
King  John,  "  I  trust  you  mean  what  you  say  ; 
you  know  I  dislike  lies."  He  warned  him 
also  against  trusting  to  a  stone  amulet  which 
he  wore  round  his  neck,  saying,  "  Trust  not 
in  that  senseless  stone,  but  in  the  Living 
Stone,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  And  at 
Fontevrault  he  pointed  out  to  John  a 
sculpture  of  the  Day  of  Judgment,  with  a 
group  of  crowned  kings  being  led  away  by 
demons  to  the  smoking  pit. 

Ver.  20.  Reverence  for  the  good. — We  may 
be  reminded  perhaps  of  our  own  monarch 
Charles  II.,  who  certainly  reverenced  Bishop 
Ken  and  several  others  like  him,  and 
reverenced  them  because  they  were  just 
men,  but  who  could  not  shake  himself  free 
from  his  lusts  and  submit  himself  to  their 
teaching. 

Royal  inability. — Palissy,  the  famous 
French  potter,  was  imprisoned  in  the 
Bastille,  when  nearly  eighty  years  old,  on 
account  of  his  religious  opinions.  The  King 
of  France  visited  him,  and  strove  to  make 
him  recant.  "  My  good  man,"  said  the  King, 
"  you  have  been  forty-five  years  in  the  service 
of  my  mother,  or  in  mine,  and  we  have 
suffered  you  to  live  in  your  own  religion, 
amidst  all  the  executions  and  the  massacres. 
Now,  however,  I  am  so  pressed  that  I  have 
been  compelled  in  spite  of  myself  to  imprison 
you  ;  you  will  be  burnt,  if  you  will  not  be 
converted."  "  Sire,"  answered  Palissy,  "  you 
have  said  several  times  that  you  feel  pity  for 
me  ;  but  it  is  I  who  pity  you,  who  have  said, 
I  am  compelled.  That  is  not  speaking  like  a 
king.  I  will  teach  you  to  talk  royally.  All 
your  people  and  yourself  cannot  compel  a 
potter  to  bow  down  to  images  of  clay." 

Ver.  25.  Unwomanly  women. — There  is  a 
similar  instance  in  Roman  history  of  a  woman 
requiring  the  head  of  an  enemy  to  be  brought 
to  her.  Agrippina,  the  mother  of  Nero,  who 
was  afterwards  emperor,  sent  an  officer  to 
put  to  death  Lollia  Paulina,  who  had  been 
her  rival  for  the  imperial  dignity.    When 

244 


Lollia's  head  was  brought  to  her,  not  know- 
ing it  at  first,  she  examined  it  with  her 
own  hands,  till  she  perceived  some  particular 
feature  by  which  that  lady  was  distinguished. 

Ver.  29.  Relics  of  the  Baptist. — At  Sebaste 
(Samaria)  a  dungeon  is  pointed  out  as  the 
place  where  the  Baptist  was  beheaded, 
though  Josephus  says  it  took  place  in  the 
castle  of  Machasrus.  At  any  rate  he  seems 
to  have  been  buried  at  Samaria,  "  between 
two  prophets,"  Mandeville  declares,  "  Elisha 
and  Abdias."  In  the  time  of  Julian  some 
pagans  broke  into  the  tomb,  burnt  the  bones, 
and  scattered  the  ashes  to  the  winds.  Some 
small  portions  were  collected  by  the  Chris- 
tians, and  sent  to  St.  Athanasius  at  Alex- 
andria, where  the  Emperor  Theodosius,  in 
396  A.D.,  built  a  magnificent  church  for 
their  reception. 

Ver.  31.  Labour  and  patience. — Activity 
and  the  growth  which  comes  by  passive 
suffering  ought  always  to  make  one  single 
total  life.  Some  of  you  will  remember  how 
in  the  old  church  at  Innsbruck,  among  the 
magnificent  bronze  people  who  stand  about 
the  tomb  of  the  Emperor  Maximilian,  is  the 
great  Godfrey  of  Boulogne,  the  illustrious 
Crusader.  Upon  his  head  he  wears  his 
helmet,  and  on  the  helmet  rests  a  crown  of 
thorns.  The  strange  conjunction  may  mean 
many  things.  No  doubt  the  crown  of  thorns 
is  meant  to  represent  the  sacred  cause,  the 
rescue  of  the  place  of  the  Lord's  crucifixion 
and  burial,  for  which  the  soldier  fought. 
But  is  not  such  a  union  of  symbols  a 
perpetual  picture  ?  The  helmet  and  the 
crown  of  thorns — activity  and  suffering, 
fighting  and  growing,  the  putting  forth  of 
energy  and  the  drinking  in  of  strength — 
these  two  were  represented,  not  as  coming 
in  by  turns,  not  as  chasing  one  another  into 
and  out  of  the  life,  but  as  abiding  together, 
making  one  temper,  filling  one  character. 
It  is  the  helmet  and  the  crown  of  thorns 
worn  together  on  the  consecrated  head  that 
makes  the  noble,  useful,  growing  life. — 
Bishop  Phillips  Brooks. 

No  leisure. — If  a  stranger  enters  a  busy 
factory,  he  cannot  help  being  struck  with 
the  bustle  and  activity  that  pervade  the 
whole  establishment.  Here  a  powerful 
engine  throbs  and  works  ;  there  are  glowing 
furnaces  and  red  caverns  of  fire.  Here  are 
wheels  and  spindles  and  revolving  bands ; 
there,  hurrying  to  and  fro  with  rapid  steps 
and  skilful  hands,  the  workpeople,  all 
hastening  to  accomplish  their  respective 
tasks.  And  there  is  much  similarity  in  the 
condition  of  our  ever-active  modern  life — 
when  every  day,  and  every  hour,  seems  filled 
with  business,  and  the  seasons  of  relaxation 
are  equally  crowded  with  pleasures  and  ex- 
citements, so  that  we  seem  to  exist  under 
a  system  of  "  high  pressure."    Ruskin's  blunt 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   VI. 


language  calls  it,  "a  machine-ridden  and 
devil-driven  age."  The  rough  sarcasm  of 
the  man  who  said  to  his  fellow-labourer, 
who  was  longing  for  rest,  "  You'll  have  time 
to  rest  when  you  are  dead ! "  seems  to  give 
some  idea  of  the  business  and  activity  of 
life  in  our  great  cities  in  this  age.  But 
there  are  many  disadvantages  that  follow, 
for  "  he  who  lacks  time  to  think  lacks  time 
to  mend." — Br.  Hardman. 

Periods  of  repose. — For  all  organic  life 
God  has  provided  periods  of  repose,  during 
which  repair  goes  on  in  order  to  counteract 
the  waste  caused  by  activity.  In  the  spring- 
time we  see  movement  and  stir  in  gardens, 
fields,  and  hedgerows,  which  continues  till 
the  fruits  are  gathered  in  and  the  leaves 
fall;  but  then  winter's  quiet  again  settles 
down  over  all,  and  nature  is  at  rest.  Even 
the  flowers  have  their  time  for  closing  their 
petals,  and  their  sleeping  hours  come  so 
regularly,  and  yet  are  so  varied  in  distribu- 
tion among  them,  that  botanists  can  con- 
struct a  floral  clock  out  of  our  English 
wild  flowers,  and  tell  the  hour  of  night  or 
day  by  their  opening  or  closing.  The  same 
God  who  created  the  flowers  and  appointed 
the  seasons  ordained  the  laws  of  Israel, 
and  by  these  definite  seasons  of  rest  were 
set  apart  for  the  people — the  Sabbath,  the 
jubilee  year,  and  the  annual  festivals.  In- 
deed, in  every  age  and  in  every  land,  the 
coming  of  night  and  the  victory  of  sleep 
are  hints  of  what  God  has  ordained  for 
man. — A.  Rowland. 

Human  claims  paramount. — An  old  hea- 
then philosopher  bade  his  pupils  beware  of 
saying  there  was  no  time  if  a  human  claim 
was  made  upon  their  services.  Never  say 
"  there  is  no  time,"  if  there  is  a  ministry  of 
mercy  to  be  rendered  to  your  race.  If  you 
want  to  see  how  active  men  may  become 
under  the  urgency  of  necessity,  stand  on 
Ludgate  Hill,  and  see  how  human  life  is 
being  exhausted,  how  the  energies  of  many 
are  being  worn  out.  Amid  the  activities  of 
a  London  commercial  life,  and  with  all  the 
incentive  that  the  promise  of  wealth  and 
greatness  and  aught  else  may  give,  you  will 
find  no  man  who  can  give  such  a  record  of 
a  day's  work  as  we  find  in  the  Gospels 
concerning  our  Saviour. — B.  Davies. 

Ver.  34.  Sympathy  with  the  multitude. — 
In  the  troublous  times  of  the  French  Kevo- 
lution  a  speaker  in  the  Corps  Legislatif 
asked,  "Why  do  not  our  great  men,  our 
priests  and  philosophers,  move  and  save 
the  people  ? "  A  solemn  voice  replied,  "  Be- 
cause they  are  cast  in  bronze."  We  who 
profess  the  service  of  Christ  can  never  win 
the  multitude  until  our  hearts  are  clearly 
responsive  to  all  their  appeals  for  better- 
ment of  body  and  soul. 

Ver.  41.  Qod  the  Provider. — A  boy  was 


once  saying  a  grace  before  meat,  which  his 
Sunday-school  teacher  had  taught  him, 
when  his  mother,  who  was  not  accustomed 
to  such  things,  said  to  him,  "  Why  do  you 
thank  God  for  it  ?  does  not  your  father  work 
for  it  ? "  But  if  the  father  had  worked  a 
thousand  years  he  could  not  have  made  a 
grain  of  wheat,  and  it  would  have  been  an 
easy  thing  for  God  to  deprive  the  father  of 
the  health  and  strength  which  enabled  him 
to  work,  or  to  close  the  door  through  which 
he  obtained  employment  and  wages  to 
purchase  food ;  so  that  the  boy  was  right, 
and  we  are  all  right  when  we  pray  to  God 
and  thank  Him  for  our  daily  bread. 

Ver.  43.  Wise  economy. — Two  men  set  out 
for  a  ten  days'  journey  across  the  desert. 
They  each  took  ten  loaves,  a  loaf  for  each 
day.  The  first  day  the  younger  man  ate  all 
he  could,  and  then  tossed  the  rest  on  the 
sand  ;  but  the  elder  man,  having  eaten  spar- 
ingly, brought  out  two  bags,  into  one  of 
which  he  put  all  the  crusts,  and  into  the 
other  all  the  crumbs.  Day  after  day  he  did 
the  same,  and  the  younger  man  marvelled 
and  smiled.  But  on  the  tenth  day  they 
discovered  that  they  were  still  two  days 
short  of  their  journey's  end.  And  now  the 
younger  man  had  nothing  whatever  to  eat ! 
But  the  elder  now  brought  out  his  two  well- 
filled  bags,  and  both  of  them  were  very 
thankful  to  eat  the  crusts  that  day,  and  the 
crumbs  the  next. 

Vers.  45-51.  The  direction  of  the  wind  when 
Jesus  walked  on  the  sea. — During  a  recent 
visit  to  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  I  naturally  spent 
some  time  over  the  Gospel  narratives  con- 
nected with  this  historic  piece  of  water, 
studying  them  with  the  panorama  of  moun- 
tain, shore,  ravine,  and  lake  spread  before 
me.  It  seemed  to  me  that  in  one  connexion 
at  least — that  of  Christ's  walking  on  the 
water — most  of  the  commentaries  I  had  read 
were  at  fault.  Almost  without  exception 
they  assume  that  the  "  contrary  wind  "  which 
beset  the  disciples  was  a  westerly  wind, 
preventing  them  from  reaching  Capernaum 
on  the  west  side.  Now  I  believe  that  a 
study  of  the  three  narratives  (Matthew, 
Mark,  and  John)  bears  out  that  the  wind  was 
actually  from  the  east,  and  that  the  disciples 
were  really  pulling  away  from  Capernaum, 
trying  to  get  back  to  Bethsaida.  In  the  first 
place,  where  was  the  Bethsaida  spoken  of 
in  Mark?  Most  take  it  as  the  Bethsaida 
on  the  western  shore,  and  translate  irpbs 
Bydaa'Cdav  as  "  towards  Bethsaida  "  ;  but  irpbs 
may  mean,  as  in  the  margin,  "  over  against," 
in  which  case  the  town  must  be  sought  for 
on  the  eastern  side.  Mr.  Haskett  Smith,  in 
his  latest  edition  of  Porter's  admirable  Hand- 
book, p.  253,  says  that  the  true  site  of  this 
Bethsaida  is  a  village  named  Ms'aidieh — a 
name  virtually  identical  in  meaning— situ- 

245 


CHAP.   VI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


ated  on  the  fertile  plain  of  el-Batiheh,  exactly- 
opposite  to  Tell  Hum,  which  he  identifies 
with    Capernaum.     The    hills    immediately 
behind  this  ruin  are  generally  admitted  to 
have  been  the   most    likely  scene    of    the 
miraculous  feeding  of  the  five  thousand.     If 
this  be  the  true  site,  as  there  is  every  reason 
to  believe,  then  the  narrative  becomes  quite 
clear.     At   the    conclusion  of  the   feeding 
of  the  five  thousand,  then,  Christ  sent  His 
disciples  on  board  the  ship  with  the  intention 
of  crossing  with  them  to  the  other  side.     It 
is  said,    He  "constrained  them"  to  go  on 
board.     Why  did  He  need  to  do  so  1     Many 
say  they  too    were   carried   away    by    the 
enthusiasm  of  the  crowd,  and  would  have 
liked  to  make  Him  a  king  (John  vi.  15),  and 
the  supposition  is  probable ;  but  it  may  further 
be  that,  experienced  fishermen  as  they  were, 
they  knew  the    signs    of    an    approaching 
storm,    and    marvelled    that    their    Master 
should  compel  them  to  go  on  board  at  such 
a  time.     Before  a  tempest  on  the  lake  there 
is  usually  a  great  sultriness  in  the  air,  the 
sky  is  murky  and  filled  with  misty,  indefi- 
nitely shaped  clouds,  while  the  sun  loses  its 
brilliancy  and  appears  of  a  pale  sickly  yellow. 
But   Christ   gave    no    reasons    beyond    the 
directions  to  pick  Him  up  farther  along  the 
shore.     Their  ship  (rb  irXdiov)  was  anchored 
a  little  off  the  shore,  and  communication  was 
kept  up  by  means   of  a  single  "  punt "  or 
"  skiff,"  irXoi&piov  (John  vi.  22).     Having  got 
on  board,  the  disciples  sent  back  the  skiff, 
and  waited  for  their  Master.     But  the  storm 
burst  upon  them,  and  blew  them  far  out 
across  the  lake  towards  the  west.     It  was 
my  good  fortune  while  in  Galilee  to  witness 
one  of  the  most  violent  tempests  seen  for 
many  years.     I  am  aware  that  the  majority 
of  squalls  come  down  the  Wady  Hammdm 
and  are  westerly  in  character ;  but  the  storm 
I  witnessed  came  from  the  south,  and  after 
blowing  for  half  an  hour  in  that  direction 
changed  to  the  north-east.     I  was  assured 
by  the  boatmen  on  the  lake  who  had  been 
in  this  tempest  that  the  only  resource  for 
a  boat  caught  in  such  a  squall  is  to  let  her 
drift,  till  the  first  violence  is   spent,  when 
rowing  may  be  attempted.      Such  was,  no 
doubt,  the   case  with  the  disciples.      They 
simply  had  to  "scud"  before  the  seas  and 
furious  wind,  till  the  initial  fury  had  some- 
what spent  itself,  when  they  took  to  the  oars 
and  began  the  weary  work  of  rowing  back 
to  Bethsaida.    This  they  continued  till  the 
fourth  watch  of  the  night,  toiling  against  the 
heavy  breakers  and,  perhaps,  dashing  rain. 
But  their  toil    was   in  vain ;   they   drifted 
more    than   they   rowed.    Christ   saw  them 
(3a<ravi?ofA&ovs  Iv  r<£  iXaijpeiv,  and  came  walk- 
ing on  the  water  to  meet  them.     Why  did 
they  not  see  Jesus  till  He  was  "passing  them 
by  "  ?  (Mark  vi.  48).     Simply  because,  if  our 
supposition    is    correct,    their    backs    were 
turned  towards  Him  as  He  was  coming  with 

246 


the  wind,  while  they  were  toiling  at  the  oars 
against  the  wind.  Immediately  on  receiving 
Jesus  into  the  boat,  John  tells  us,  "  the  ship 
was  at  the  land  whither  they  went "  (vi.  21). 
The  Evangelist  gives  no  indication  that  the 
incident  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  miracle,  nor 
need  we  necessarily  suppose  it  to  have  been 
one.  John  says  they  had  rowed  twenty-five 
or  thirty  furlongs  when  they  were  met  by 
Jesus.  But  as  they  were  drifting  more  than 
they  rowed,  they  were  close  on  the  other 
side  when  Christ  appeared.  From  Ms'aidieh 
to  Capernaum  is  just  about  twenty-eight 
furlongs,  so  that  when  they  took  Jesus  into 
the  boat,  and  the  storm  was  hushed,  it  was 
straightway  that  their  ship  was  iirl  tt}s  777s, 
i.e.  touching  the  shelving,  gravelly  beach. 
The  shore  had  been  obscured  before,  partly 
by  the  gloom  of  night  and  partly  by  the 
spray  and  spindrift,  which  is  such  a  feature 
of  these  Galilean  storms.  In  conclusion,  I 
may  say  that  the  homiletic  value  of  this 
exegesis  appears  to  me  greater  than  on  the 
common  view.  The  disciples  in  this  case 
were  not  rowing  away  from  Christ,  but, 
filled  with  a  strong  love  for  their  Master, 
and  in  apprehension  at  leaving  Him  alone  on 
the  desolate  shore,  were  doing  all  they  could 
to  pull  back  to  Jesus,  even  though  at  the 
expense  of  enormous  labour  to  themselves. 
It  is  a  splendid  instance  of  devotion,  and 
shews  that  the  fishermen  had  risen  much  in 
moral  courage  since  the  time  of  their  former 
craven  fear  when  Jesus  was  on  board,  and 
when  He  stilled  the  tempest. — G.  A.  Frank 
Knight. 

Vers.  47-51.  Two  aspects  of  life. — In  a 
gallery  in  Italy  there  are  two  pictures  side 
by  side  by  different  artists.  One  represents 
a  sea  tossed  by  storms.  Dark  clouds  hang 
over  it,  and  the  lightning-bolts  pierce  the 
sky,  and  the  wrathful  waves  roll  in  fury.  In 
the  seething  waters  a  dead  human  face  is 
seen.  The  other  represents  a  sea  similarly 
storm-tossed  ;  but  in  the  midst  of  the  angry 
waters  is  a  rock,  and  in  the  rock  a  cleft  with 
green  herbage  and  flowers,  and  amid  these 
a  dove  quietly  sitting  on  her  nest.  These 
two  pictures  tell  the  whole  story  of  human 
life  in  this  world.  The  first  is  a  story  of 
life  without  Christ,  unblessed  by  His  presence 
and  peace.  There  is  storm  everywhere,  with 
no  quiet  shelter.  The  other  shews  the  peace 
which  Christ  gives.  There  is  no  less  storm. 
The  waves  roll  as  high.  But  there  is  peace. 
The  rock  represents  Christ ;  it  is  in  the  cleft 
of  the  rock  that  the  peace  is  found. 

Man's  impotence. — The  howling  wind,  the 
raging  waves,  and  the  tossing,  tremulous 
ship  taught  them  what  they  needed  to  feel 
— their  impotence.  Ah !  man  in  his  season 
of  prosperity  and  peace  is  prone  to  pride, 
disposed  to  cherish  an  overweening  estimate 
of  his  character  and  position.  It  is  a  blessing 
when,  even  by  a  terrible  tempest  of  adversity, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  Vt 


this  insuperable  bar  to  improvement  is  re- 
moved, and  the  man  knows  himself.  On 
one  occasion  the  great  Napoleon  arranged 
to  review  his  fleet  off  Boulogne.  Seeing  that 
a  severe  storm  was  impending,  the  admiral 
in  command  sent  word  to  the  Emperor,  ad- 
vising that  the  position  of  the  ships  should 
be  altered.  Napoleon  demanded  obedience 
to  his  first  directions,  and  the  vice-admiral 
obeyed.  The  storm  burst  in  terrific  violence. 
Several  gun-sloops  were  wrecked,  and  over 
two  hundred  soldiers  and  sailors  were 
obliged  to  battle  with  the  angry  sea  for  life, 
and  few  escaped.  The  Emperor  at  once 
ordered  the  boats  out  to  rescue  the  drowning 
men,  but  he  was  told  that  no  boat  could  live 
in  such  a  sea.  Then,  in  the  strength  of  his 
determination,  he  ordered  a  company  of 
grenadiers  to  man  his  boat,  and  springing 
into  it,  he  exclaimed :  "  Follow  me,  my 
brave  fellows  !  Push  on  !  Push  on  !  "  In 
vain  the  poor  soldiers  struggled  at  the  oars. 
"  Push  on  I  "  cried  Napoleon.  "  Do  you  not 
hear  their  cries  ?  Oh,  this  sea  !  this  sea  ! 
It  rebels  against  our  power,  but  it  may 
be  conquered ! "  Scarcely  had  the  words 
escaped  his  lips  when  a  mighty  billow  struck 
the  boat,  and  sent  it  and  its  occupants  with 
terrible  force  high  up  the  shore,  leaving  them 
like  a  stranded  waif.  Thus  was  the  proud 
monarch  taught  his  impotence.  Thus  also 
is  self-confident,  self-important,  self-con- 
ceited man  often  driven  back  by  life's  storms 
— driven  back  upon  the  very  first  principles  of 
a  truly  religious  life — conscious  weakness  and 
necessary  dependence. — J.  H.  Hitchens,  D.D. 

Divine  help. — A  lifeboat,  with  its  precious 
cargo,  was  pitching  and  rolling  in  a  fearful 
storm,  when  the  old  captain  cried  aloud  to 
all,  "  Hold  on  !  hold  on  1 "  The  response 
came,  "  Ay,  ay  !  "  But  there  was  one  little 
voice  which,  in  the  sadness  of  despair,  ex- 
claimed, "  I  can't  hold  on  !  "  Instantly  the 
strong  arm  of  the  captain  was  thrown  around 
that  trembling  child,  and  he  was  safe.  So 
when  Jesus  sees  and  hears  that,  notwith- 
standing our  utmost  efforts,  we  feel  we  need 
Him,  and  crave  His  Divine  help,  He  hastens 
to  our  relief. — Ibid. 

Thought  for  sailors. — As  Christ  went  to  the 
relief  of  His  distressed  disciples,  so  we  who 
profess  to  value  the  religion  of  Jesus  should 
be  willing  to  do  all  we  can  for  our  sons  of 
the  sea.  They  are  a  noble  race,  our  sailors. 
They  are  ever  ready  to  do  a  kindness  to  a 
distressed  fellow- voyager ;  they  have  extra- 
ordinary opportunities  for  spreading  the 
truth ;  and  they  are  called  to  exercise  an 
untold  amount  of  self-denial.  A  ship  was 
once  in  distress.  Though  the  angry  sea 
dashed  and  foamed  with  terrible  fury,  yet 
some  noble  sailors  put  off  to  rescue  the  ship's 
crew.  After  prolonged  effort  and  peculiar 
danger,  they  succeeded  in  bringing  the  whole 
company  safely  to  shore.  A  man  of  wealth, 
standing  by  the  water's  side,  as  spectator  of 


the  men's  heroism,  was  moved  by  the  way 
they  risked  their  lives.  Pulling  out  his 
purse,  he  offered  all  the  gold  it  contained 
to  the  coxswain  and  his  men.  The  gift, 
however,  was  respectfully  declined,  the  boat- 
swain saying,  "No,  sir ;  we  would  save  a 
man  for  nothing  any  day."  Brethren,  shall 
we  be  backward  when  the  souls  of  such  brave 
men  are  to  be  saved  ? — Ibid. 

Difficulty  melting  before  endeavour. — How 
often  hast  thou  found  thyself,  at  the  entrance 
into  a  duty,  becalmed  as  a  ship,  which,  at 
first  setting  sail,  hath  hardly  wind  to  swell 
its  sails,  while  under  the  shore  and  shadow 
of  the  trees,  but  meets  a  fresh  gale  of  wind 
when  got  into  the  open  sea  1  Yea,  didst 
thou  never  launch  out  to  duty,  as  the  apostles 
did  to  sea,  with  the  wind  in  thy  face,  as  if 
the  Spirit  of  God,  instead  of  helping  thee 
on,  meant  to  drive  thee  back,  and  yet  hast 
found  Christ  walking  to  thee  before  the 
duty  was  done,  and  a  prosperous  voyage 
made  of  it  at  last? — W.  Gurnall. 

Ver.  48.  Toil. — Half  the  ingenuity  of  man- 
kind is  expended  in  the  attempt  to  avoid 
toil.  The  Lord's  constraint,  then,  which 
sometimes  snatches  us  away  from  pleasant 
ease  and  compels  us  to  endure  some  hardness 
of  toil,  is  a  thing  to  be  thankful  for.  No 
doubt  Eobert  and  Mary  Moffat,  among  the 
idolatrous  and  warlike  Bechuanas  of  South 
Africa,  needed  the  stern  discipline  of  toiling 
and  fruitless  years  as  a  preparation  for  the 
larger  successes  of  later  times.  The  ten 
long  years  of  darkness,  without  a  glimmer 
of  the  dawn,  tried  and  proved  a  faith  which 
was  imperishable.  Before  one  convert  re- 
warded their  labours,  a  friend  wrote  to  Mary- 
Moffat  to  ask  what  thing  of  use  she  could  send 
to  her,  and  was  answered,  "  Send  us  a  com- 
munion service ;  we  shall  want  it  some  day." 

Toilers. — It  is  an  interesting  thing  to  look 
out  from*  a  suburban  railway  train,  which 
enters  London  or  any  other  large  town  on 
a  high  level,  and  as  one  rapidly  passes  along 
to  catch  a  flying  glimpse  at  the  busy  life 
beneath.  Here  one  gazes  down  into  a 
crowded  street  with  its  bustling  throng — 
there  one  sees  a  factory  with  the  spindles 
and  machinery  revolving  behind  the  win- 
dows ;  or  it  may  be  we  catch  sight  of  the 
roaring  fires  of  a  foundry,  or  the  humble 
toil  of  a  washerwoman.  But  one  general 
characteristic  strikes  the  mind.  It  is  a  sense 
of  the  busy  activity  of  men's  lives — that  they 
are  "  toiling."  Now  there  is  no  reason  why 
the  idea  of  work  should  be  an  unhappy 
one.  God  in  mercy  has  given  mankind  work 
to  do,  to  make  us  useful  and  happy,  and  keep 
us  out  of  harm ;  but  the  word  "  toil "  implies 
the  idea  of  over-work,  of  too  much  pressure, 
of  too  little  time  for  rest  and  leisure;  and 
many  an  excellent  and  hard-working  man 
is  in  these  days  pressed  beyond  his  powers, 
which  is  a  great  evil. — Dr.  Hardman. 

247 


Chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 

CHAPTER  VII. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  3.  Oft. — Literally,  with  the  fist,  hence  vigorously.  The  idea  is,  that  the  Pharisees 
had  inaugurated  an  elaborate  and  painstaking  ceremonial,  which  was  now  adopted  by  the 
whole  body  of  the  Jews.  The  Evangelist  may  possible  mean,  that  it  was  actually  a  part 
of  the  prescribed  ritual  to  keep  the  one  hand  closed  while  the  other  was  being  rubbed 
with  it. 

Ver.  4.  Wash. — Either  pairTLvwvTai,  take  a  bath,  or  pavriauvTcu,  sprinlile  water  over  them- 
selves.     Have  received  to  hold. — Accepted  as  suitable  or  worthy  to  retain  (or  hold  fast). 

Vers.  11-13.  For  true  reading  and  rendering  see  R.V.  When  an  unnatural  son  wished, 
either  in  a  temporary  fit  of  passion,  or  under  the  goad  of  an  abiding  selfishness,  to  get 
quit  of  the  importunity  of  a  destitute  father  or  mother,  he  had  just  to  say,  in  reference 
to  whatever  was  craved,  Corban  !  and  then  not  only  was  he  released  from  obligation  to 
assist  his  needy  parent,  but  was  actually  bound,  as  by  the  highest  authority,  to  withhold 
the  desired  relief.  Nor  was  it  necessary  that  he  should  actually  make  the  offering  to  the 
service  of  God ;  he  might  keep  it  himself,  or  do  anything  he  chose  with  it,  save  only  that 
he  must  not  give  it  to  his  parent !  Could  human  ingenuity  go  further  in  the  direction  of 
annulling  the  Word  of  God  1 

Ver.  18.  Are  ye  so,  etc. — Or,  What  I  are  ye  also  void  of  understanding  ? 

Ver.  19.  It  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  the  words  purging  (or  cleansing)  all  meats 
are  a  part  of  our  Lord's  discourse,  or  an  explanatory  addition  by  the  Evangelist.  The 
R.V.,  following  Origen,  Chrysostom,  and  Gregory  Thaumaturgus,  adopts  the  latter  inter- 
pretation, reading  Kadapifav  for  the  Kadapi^ov  of  the  Textus  Receptus ;  and  certainly  the 
ZKeye  34  which  immediately  follows  looks  like  an  indication  that  the  quotation  of  Christ's 
words,  after  being  broken  off  for  a  moment,  is  now  resumed.  "He  saith  .  .  .  (and  in 
so  saying  He  cleanseth  all  meats).  And  He  said  further  .  .  ." — Dr.  Jas.  Morison, 
however,  while  defending  KadapLfav  as  the  true  reading,  thinks  that  it  "  must  apparently 
refer  to  the  draught,  which,  by  receiving  the  refuse,  draws  off  as  it  were  the  impurities 
of  the  food,  or  those  elements  that  remain  after  the  nutritive  ingredients  have  been 
eliminated  and  assimilated." — Mr.  J.  B.  McCleilan,  on  the  other  hand,  decides  against 
icadaplfav,  on  the  ground  that  although  it  has  far  the  greatest  external  support,  yet  "as 
Wordsworth  has  noted,  the  itacism  of  w  and  o  is  so  common  in  MSS.  that  this  fact  'is  of 
little  weight  against  the  ordinary  rules  of  grammatical  construction,'  and,  he  might  have 
added,  against  the  certain  requirements  of  the  sense.  It  was  not  by  the  appeal  and 
explanation  to  the  disciples  in  our  present  verse,  but  by  the  original  declaration  to  the 
multitude  in  ver.  15,  that  our  Lord  made  all  meats  clean.  Hence  in  the  verse  before  us  the 
masc.  Kadaplfav  is  out  of  place  in  regard  to  our  Lord.  In  every  other  reference  it  is  gram- 
matically untenable.  With  all  confidence  therefore  we  retain  the  neut.  Kadaplfov,  and 
construct  it  in  apposition  with  the  sentence." 

Ver.  22.  Covetousness. — The  word  is  in  the  plural — irkeoveQau. :  "  for  this  greedy  lust  of 
lawless  having  runs  out  on  more  lines  than  one :  it  is  a  moral  monster  of  several  tentacles : 
like  the  cuttle-fish,  it  puts  forth  many  feelers  armed  with  suckers.  Avarice  is  a  branch 
only  of  the  root  covetousness.  Sometimes  this  pleonexy,  or  "amor  sceleratus  habendi" 
is  associated  with  adultery :  but  in  that  case  it  less  denotes  the  lust  of  impurity  than 
connotes  a  lawless  desire  to  overreach  one's  neighbour  ;  for  the  adulterer  defrauds  the 
husband  in  seizing  what  is  the  husband's  property.  In  short,  love  of  pleasure,  and  love  of 
money,  and  love  of  power  are  but  so  many  forms  of  this  "  unbridled  and  unhallowed 
possessiveness."  Wickedness. — Also  in  plural:  villainies — active  wrongdoing  of  all  sorts. 
Jeremy  Taylor  explains  it  as  "  an  aptness  to  do  shrewd  turns,  to  delight  in  mischief  and 
tragedies ;  a  love  to  trouble  our  neighbour  and  to  do  him  ill  offices  ;  crossness,  perverseness, 
and  peevishness  of  action  in  our  intercourse."  An  evil  eye. — Niggardliness  as  to  one's  own 
possessions,  and  envy  as  to  those  of  others.  See  Deut.  xv.  9,  xxviii.  54;  Sirach  xiv.  8-10; 
Tobit  iv.  7-9;  Matt.  vi.  23,  xx.  15.  Blasphemy. — Reviling  either  of  God  or  man.  Pride. — 
An  overbearing  attitude.  Folly. — Senselessness  or  infatuation.  Such  is  the  true  nature  of 
all  sin. 

Ver.  24.  Tyre  and  Sidon. — Great  commercial  cities  in  Phoenicia.  Tyre  is  mentioned  in 
2  Sam.  v.  11 ;  1  Kings  ix.  11-14,  x.  22,  xvi.  31 :  Sidon  in  Gen.  x.  19 ;  Josh.  xi.  8 ; 
Judg.  i.  31.  Apparently  Christ  did  not  actually  go  into  Phoenicia,  but  into  the  adjacent 
district,  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Asher.     See  R.V. 

Ver.  26.  Syrophoenician. — So  called  by  way  of  distinction  from  the  Libyophcenicians  of 
Africa,  the  Carthaginians. 

248  ... 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  VII. 


Ver.  27.  Dogs. — A  diminutive,  indicating  the  household  pets. 

Ver.  28.  Crumbs. — Another  diminutive.     Wondrous  humility ! 

Ver.  31.  For  true  reading  see  R.V.  Through  Sidon — not  necessarily  the  city.  The 
object  of  this  long  detour  was  to  obtain  much-needed  retirement  and  rest. 

Ver.  32.  This  man's  deafness  had  rendered  him  hard-of -speech,  scarcely  able  to  articulate 
intelligibly. 

Ver.  34.  Ephphatha. — The  actual  Aramaic  word  used.  "  Be  thou  opened — it  is  the  man 
who  is  addressed  ;  it  was  he  who  needed  to  be  corporeally  opened  to  the  ingress  of  sounds, 
and  to  the  ready  egress  of  words." 

Ver.  35.  String. — The  bond  holding  his  tongue  and  impeding  his  speech. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1— ?3. 
(Parallel  :  Matt.  xv.  1-20.) 

The  tradition  of  men. — I.  Traditionalists  conspiring  against  Christ. — ■ 
1.  Their  evil  design.  See  John  vii.  1.  2.  Their  cunning  method.  They  sought 
to  bring  in  our  Lord  guilty  of  impiety  by  teaching  His  disciples  to  transgress 
the  tradition  of  the  elders. 

II.  Traditionalists  confounded  by  Christ. — 1.  By  shewing  that  they  taught 
for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men  which  were  in  opposition  to  the 
commandments  of  God.     2.  By  shewing  the  folly  of  these  human  traditions. 

Lessons. — 1.  A  sad  tendency  of  human  nature — to  honour  God  with  the  lips 
while  the  heart  is  far  from  Him.  2.  The  manifestation  of  this  tendency 
(vers.  8,  9).  3.  The  real  source  of  evil — the  human  heart.  4.  The  manifesta- 
tions of  the  controlling  power  of  the  sinful  heart  (vers.  21,  22).  5.  Real 
defilement  before  God — that  of  the  inner  source  of  evil. — D.  C.  Hughes. 

Christian  controversy. — Christ,  when  on  earth,  maintained  two  descriptions  of 
intercourse  with  the  people :  the  one  was  of  a  friendly  and  social  nature,  such 
as  a  friend  maintains  with  his  friend,  when  a  congeniality  of  mind,  combined 
with  a  similarity  of  habit,  is  found  to  subsist  between  them ;  the  other  was 
controversial,  when  proclaiming  the  true  character,  mind,  and  will  of  His 
Heavenly  Father  in  opposition  to  the  false  opinions  entertained  respecting  Him 
by  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who,  while  altogether  uninfluenced  by  the  spiritu- 
ality of  what  they  taught,  nevertheless  maintained  such  strictness  in  the  form 
and  selfish  regard  for  the  moral  requirements  of  religion,  that,  being  irre- 
proachable in  the  sight  of  men,  they  vainly  conceived  they  must  be  equally  so  in 
the  sight  of  God,  forgetting  or  being  wilfully  ignorant  that,  whilst  men  judged 
from  the  appearance  only,  His  all-seeing  eye  penetrated  within  the  veil, 
discerning  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Bespecting  the  first  of  these 
two,  namely,  our  Lord's  social  and  friendly  intercourse  with  men,  we  may  well 
conceive  the  meek,  the  gentle,  yet  dignified  Jesus  a  guest  within  the  house  of 
one  of  His  disciples,  unfolding  the  nature  of  God  to  those  in  company  with  Him, 
announcing  Him  a  Spirit  who  cannot  be  deceived,  and  who  claims  from  His 
creatures  a  "  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  which,  when  rendered,  He 
willingly  accepts,  and  mercifully  pardons  their  transgressions.  But  though 
there  were  some  who  gladly  received  Him,  and  listened  with  the  purest  joy  to 
His  holy  conversation,  they  were  comparatively  but  few,  and  for  the  most  part 
humble  in  their  circumstances ;  whilst  the  great  majority — the  wealthy,  the 
noble,  and  the  learned — stood  opposed  to  Him,  ever  on  the  watch  to  entangle 
Him  in  His  talk,  and  find  something  whereof  they  might  accuse  Him  to  their 
rulers,  and  so  be  rid  of  One  whose  arguments  they  could  not  meet,  and  whose 
positions  they  could  not  controvert ;  yet  with  the  most  uncompromising  integrity 
did  the  Saviour  stand  His  ground,  exposing  the  falsehood,  the  fraud,  the  errors, 

249 


chap.  vil.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


or  the  hypocrisy  of  those  who  from  their  superior  education  ought  to  have  been 
the  first  to  recognise  Him  as  Messiah  and  submit  to  His  authority,  combating 
wrong   notions,    rectifying   mistaken   principles,  whenever  or   by   whomsoever 
advanced.     This  controversial  intercourse  in  no  small  degree  characterised  our 
Lord's  ministry ;  nor  could  it  be  maintained  without  incurring  all  that  hatred 
and  opposition  which  the  exposure  of  falsehood  and  error  is  sure  to  draw  down 
on  the  person  whose  sense  of  moral  responsibility  would  prevail  to  incite  to  it ; 
still,  disagreeable  as  is  the  office  of  setting  those  right  who  have  been  all  their 
lives  wrong,  it  becomes  a  solemn  obligation,  because  involving  the  exercise  of 
that  charity  or  love  which  will  not  suffer  us  to  see  an  immortal  being  persisting 
in  a  course  obviously  opposed  to  the  will  of  God  without  warning  him  of  his 
danger.     With  the  psalmist  the  true  and  faithful  servant  of  Christ  can  say, 
"  All  false  ways  I  utterly  abhor."     Receiving  his  instructions  from  that  Divine 
Master,  he  learns   "  to  contend   earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints,"  and  "asa  good  soldier,"  serving  a  good  Master,  to  "  endure  hardness  " 
in  the  contention,  when  others  "  oppose  themselves  "  and  "  would  pervert  the 
right  ways  of   the  Lord,"  knowing  as  he  does  that  "  there  is  no  other  name 
under  heaven  given  among  men  [but  Jesus  Christ],  whereby  we  must  be  saved  " 
(Acts  iv.  12) ;  nor  can  any  man  lay  any  other  foundation  on  which  to  build  his 
hopes  for  admission  into  heaven  hereafter   "than  that  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus 
Christ"  (1  Cor.  iii.  11).     Thus  does  the  Bible  furnish  one  great  saving  truth, 
and  one  only,  which  men  are  called  upon  to  receive,  and  which,  if  they  reject, 
they  reject  at  their  peril.     To  proclaim   God's  eternal  and  unalterable  truth, 
whether  men  will  hear  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  is  charity — love  unfeigned. 
Would  it  be  charity  to  suffer  some  dear  friend  or  relative  to  languish  from  day 
to  day  upon  the  bed  of  sickness  and  not  administer  the  medicine  which  the 
physician's  skill   had  prescribed  for  a  cure,  lest  it  might  prove  nauseous  and 
unpalatable  ?     Would  it  be  charity  if,  passing  through  a  town  at  dead  of  night, 
and  seeing  a  house  on  fire,  we  should  refrain    from   rousing  its  inhabitants, 
through  fear  of  disturbing  their  slumbers  ?     Or  would  it  be  charity  if,  observing 
a  blind  man  fearlessly  to  approach  a  precipice,  we  should  be  silent,  suffer  him  to 
advance  on  his  destruction,  and  not  tell  him  of  his  danger  ?     We  protest  against 
such  charity  as  this.     We  prefer  the  discharge  of  our  duty,  as  faithful  ambas- 
sadors of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  commissioned  to  preach  "repentance  towards 
God,  and  faith  in  Him  who  has  sent  us " ;  we  are  ready,  in  maintaining  the 
Lord's  controversy  with   His  people,  to  endure  the  world's  misrepresentation. 
Nevertheless  we  do  maintain  that  "our  labour  is  labour  of  love,"  "the  work  of 
faith,"  the  fruit  whereof  "  is  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart."     Our  Lord  did  not 
shrink  from  the  work  which  the  Father  had  given  Him  to  do  because  of  the 
misconstruction  put  upon  His  conduct  by  the  enemies  of  righteousness,  nor  was 
He  restrained  by  the  rude  rebuffs  of  an  insolent  world ;  no,  He  loved  even  His 
cruel  persecutors  too  well  to  suffer  them  to  run  upon  their  ruin  without  telling 
them  the  consequences  which  would  inevitably  result,  should  they  pass  from 
time  to  eternity  without  effecting  their  reconciliation  with  God,  through  Him, 
the  only  Mediator.     In  what  moral  darkness  would  the  world  now  be  plunged 
had  error  and  falsehood  been  progressing  for  the  last  eighteen  hundred  years  in 
a  ratio  similar  to  what  it  had  been  up  to  the  period  of  the  Saviour's  manifesta- 
tion in  the  flesh,  to  detect  and  dissipate  the  fearful  gloom  by  the  shining  of  the 
glorious  gospel  of  truth  into  the  hearts  of  His  people !     An  accumulation  of 
falsehood  such  as  dissolved  the  tie  of  filial  affection  and  filial  duty,  on  the  child's 
telling  his  aged  and  perhaps  destitute  parent  that  it  was  "  Corban,  that  is  to 
say  a  gift,  by  whatsoever  "  that  parent  might  be  profited  by  him,  suffering  the 
son  "  no  more  to  do  ought  for  his  father  or  his  mother " — thus  permitting  a 
corrupt  and  unnatural  tradition,  derived  from  sinful  and  selfish  men,  virtually 

250 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


to  repeal  the  fifth  commandment,  given  by  God  Himself,  and  the  unwritten 
expedient  of  human  policy  to  supersede  the  unalterable  will  of  Jehovah,  pro- 
claimed with  a  trumpet's  tongue  amidst  thunderings  and  lightnings  and  smoke, 
which,  the  people  seeing,  removed  and  stood  afar  off.  Had  falsehood  thus 
audaciously  advanced,  what  bonds  would  have  proved  strong  enough  for  uniting 
the  relative  positions  of  society,  what  barriers  have  restrained  the  overflowings 
of  ungodliness,  or  checked  the  violation  of  natural  affection,  when  thus  sanc- 
tioned by  uninspired  and  lawless  traditions,  usurping  the  sacred  authority  of 
God's  Holy  Word  ?  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  ranked  the  foremost  in  opposing 
our  Lord  in  all  His  teaching  ;  their  principal  error  consisted  in  a  superstitious 
regard  for  "  the  traditions  of  the  elders  " ;  and  to  such  a  length  did  they  carry 
their  veneration  for  this  description  of  authority  that  there  was  scarcely  a 
passage  of  any  moment  in  the  sacred  records  that  was  not  frittered  away,  and 
its  plain  and  obvious  meaning  lost  in  the  false  glosses  put  upon  it  by  these 
unauthorised  means,  "  making  the  Word  of  God  of  none  effect "  through  their 
traditions :  their  scrupulous  exactness  regarding  external  cleanliness  made 
them  unconcerned  respecting  that  which  was  of  higher  importance,  though  hidden 
and  unseen — the  heart — and  for  the  cleansing  of  which  one  (who,  had  they 
remembered  him  as  an  elder,  it  would  have  been  well)  evinced  such  anxiety  that  he 
prayed,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God ;  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me." 
Their  spring  of  action,  however,  arising  from  a  desire  to  be  seen  of  men  rendered 
them  totally  indifferent  about  any  and  everything  not  having  human  applause 
for  its  object,  so  that  the  heart,  the  inward  part,  where  God  requires  truth 
to  dwell,  was  overlooked  and  unattended  to  by  them.  Such  were  the  practices 
and  such  the  doctrine  which  our  Lord  on  the  present  occasion  set  Himself 
to  refute,  shewing  how  injurious  in  its  effect  was  every  deviation  from  the 
written  Word ;  for  however  useful  the  tradition  of  the  elders  might  be  for 
the  well -regulating  of  society  or  establishing  habits  of  personal  cleanliness,  yet 
it  would  be  infinitely  better  to  forego  it  altogether,  than  by  adopting  it  cast 
a  slight  upon  a  much  higher  authority.  To  teach  for  doctrines  the  command- 
ments of  men  was  a  most  grievous  error,  and  fraught  with  the  most  dangerous 
consequences,  for  which  reason  our  Lord  fearlessly  condemns  it,  and  nobly 
reproves  those  who,  whilst  professing  an  honour  for  God's  Word,  would  sanction 
a  system  which  directly  insulted  it.  "  Well  hath  Esaias  prophesied  of  you,  hypo- 
crites," etc.  Then  instancing  the  case  of  the  fifth  commandment,  Jesus  proceeds 
to  shew  that  it  was  not  external  cleanliness,  or  the  neglect  of  it — washing  the 
hands  on  certain  occasions,  or  omitting  it — not  one  sort  of  meat  or  another; 
in  fact,  "  nothing  from  without  a  man,  entering  into  him  can  defile  him  :  but 
the  things  which  come  out  of  him,  those  are  they  that  defile  the  man."  What 
is  in  the  heart  the  heart  will,  like  a  fountain,  be  sending  up,  until  changed 
by  Divine  grace;  for  by  nature  it  is  a  corrupt  fountain,  and  consequently 
"  from  within,  out  of  the  heart  of  men,  proceed  evil  thoughts,"  etc.  Let  us 
take  any  of  these  evil  things  which  abide  in  the  heart  of  the  unconverted  and 
natural  man,  and  observe  its  process  of  defilement.  1.  Look  at  covetousness, 
e.g.  the  love  of  money,  justly  called  "the  root  of  all  evil."  What  can  debase 
the  soul  more  than  this  all-absorbing  lust? — hours,  days,  weeks,  months,  and 
years,  nay,  a  man's  entire  life,  passed  in  contrivances  whereby  to  increase 
his  store  of  gold,  involving  too  often  falsehood  and  deceit  in  order  to  attain 
his  object;  and  when  attained,  with  what  complacency  does  he  regard  his 
success  !  Nor  does  moderate  success  satisfy  him,  verifying  the  proverb,  "  Much 
must  have  more," — religion  discarded,  its  ordinances  contemned,  the  Lord's 
Day  itself  polluted,  that  nothing  may  impede  his  unhallowed  pursuit  of  gain. 
Whence  come  the  murders,  the  thefts,  of  which  our  Lord  speaks  ?  Come  they 
not  from  covetousness  ?     While  other  evils  are  partial  in  their  operation,  this 

251 


chap.  vii.         EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


takes  no  rest,  knows  no  intermission,  will  have  no  repose.  If  the  laws  of 
the  land  protect  the  property  of  the  owner  from  the  aggression  of  the  violent, 
and  the  penalty  attached  to  the  violation  of  the  law  restrains  the  covetous 
man  from  unlawfully  attacking  that  which  is  another's,  yet  how  near  will 
he  approach  the  forbidden  limit !  If  he  is  honest,  he  is  hardly  so ;  if  he  does 
bear  restraint,  'tis  with  a  bad  grace :  the  evil  lust  of  covetousness  withers  every 
generous  sentiment ;  the  sons  and  daughters  of  adversity  may  pine  and  die 
ere  the  sordid  mind  of  covetousness  would  be  moved  to  commiserate  or  relieve ; 
nought  is  known  but  self ;  gold  is  the  idol  to  whose  service  not  only  the  bodily 
energies  but  the  affections  of  the  heart  and  all  the  faculties  of  the  mind  are 
devoted.  2.  Consider,  also,  the  countless  impurities  contained  under  the  head 
"evil  thoughts."  You  are  quite  conscious  of  the  vain  ideas  which  run  to 
and  fro  in  the  mind  throughout  the  four-and-twenty  hours  of  the  day,  so  vain 
and  evil  that  we  should  feel  ashamed  to  speak  of  them  to  our  nearest  or  dearest 
friend,  and  would  be  glad  were  they  blotted  from  our  memory  the  moment  they 
recur  to  us ;  yet  God  searches  and  knows  us,  etc.  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1-4).  3.  Look, 
again,  at  the  insidious  working  of  pride,  often  at  the  very  moment  when  we 
think  ourselves  most  humble, — at  one  time  piquing  ourselves  upon  the  elegance 
or  beauty  of  our  persons;  at  another  regarding  ourselves  with  the  utmost 
satisfaction  on  a  comparison  with  some  one  whom  we  look  down  upon  as  an 
inferior,  either  in  birth,  or  fortune,  or  education,  or  mental  capacity.  Examine 
one  or  all,  or  which  you  will,  of  "  these  evil  things,"  and,  oh  !  what  an  abyss 
of  defilement  forms  itself,  fed  by  that  corrupt  stream  which  ever  flows  from  that 
polluted  source,  an  unconverted  heart,  u  deceitful "  as  it  is  "  above  all  things, 
and  desperately  wicked."  Well  might  Abraham  call  himself  "  sinful  dust 
and  ashes,"  or  Job  exclaim,  "  Behold,  I  am  vile,"  or  Isaiah,  "  I  am  a  man  of 
unclean  lips " :  for  who  can  know  the  depths  of  its  depravity  ?  Jesus  knew 
them,  and  in  our  text  declares  them.  And  yet  there  is  nothing  over  which  we 
can  exercise  less  control  than  our  thoughts :  a  thought,  a  foolish  or  a  corrupt 
thought,  rises  in  the  heart,  and,  like  the  blood  in  the  natural  system,  is  in 
an  instant  propelled  through  every  inlet  of  the  mind,  and  has  fastened  itself 
on  us  ere  we  are  aware;  and  such  is  the  strength  and  subtlety  of  that  fiend 
who  suggests  the  evil  thought,  that  it  not  infrequently  happens  that  what 
we  desire  to  think  least  about  is  that  which,  through  his  agency,  we  think  most 
of.  I  see  from  this  review  of  my  natural  corrupt  heart,  says  the  newly  awakened 
sinner,  that  it  requires  cleansing,  must  have  renewing,  must  be  fully  converted, 
before  I  should  either  like  heaven  or  be  received  in  thither.  But  what  can 
I  do  ?  It  is  not  in  my  power  to  change  my  heart,  and  so  produce  a  new  current 
of  thought,  which  would  make  me  relish  the  pure  and  holy  enjoyments  of 
the  redeemed, — the  work  is  superhuman.  Beloved,  you  are  quite  right ;  the 
work  is  superhuman.  But  though  powerless  in  ourselves,  though  the  work 
of  converting  the  sinner's  heart  is  superhuman,  yet  it  is  not  impossible  that 
Christ,  by  whom  God  the  Father  works,  having  put  all  things  in  subjection 
to  Him,  having  given  Him  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  power  even  to 
bend  the  stubborn  and  rebellious  heart  of  His  sinful  creatures,  He  can  cleanse 
and  purify  the  fountain,  so  that  the  stream  of  thought  shall  run  pure  and  holy. 
What  says  St.  Paul,  after  confessing  himself  a  wretched  being,  unable  to  deliver 
himself  from  the  body  of  death,  a  naturally  wicked  heart ?  "I  can  do  all 
things  through  Christ  strengthening  me."  Christ  has  changed  and  renewed 
the  hearts  of  millions.  The  way  in  which  He  accomplishes  this  important  change 
is  worthy  of  attention.  First  He  sends  His  Holy  Spirit  into  the  heart,  whereby 
the  sinner  is  enabled  to  take  a  view  of  that  corrupt  stream  which  flows  from 
it,  and  upon  an  examination  of  the  "  evil  things "  spoken  of  in  our  text  to 
feel  its  sinfulness,  then  acknowledge  in  prostrate  humility  those  particulars 

252 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  vii. 


which  offend  us  most  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  not  in  the  least  palliating  them, 
but  laying  them  open  to  Him  in  all  their  fearful  aggravations,  till  we  abhor 
ourselves,  and  cry,  Unclean !  unclean !  His  next  influence  upon  the  heart 
is  to  make  the  sinner  renounce  himself  as  bankrupt  in  righteousness,  and 
desire  above  all  things  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness  as  his  only 
hope.  From  thence  he  is  led  to  recognise  Christ  as  greater  in  his  behalf  than 
he  who  seeks  his  destruction.  These  feelings  grow  with  his  growth  and 
strengthen  with  his  strength,  until  sin  is  hated  and  shunned ;  and  though 
the  remains  of  indwelling  sin  may  tease  and  harass  the  Christian,  yet  it  has 
altogether  lost  its  supremacy  in  his  heart.  Thus  is  the  poor  sinner  changed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  from  the  power  of  Satan  to  the  power  of  God,  and  from 
rejoicing  in  the  perishing  things  of  time  and  sense  to  rejoice  in  God  his  Saviour, 
who  has  done  such  great  things  for  him  :  from  that  time,  also  his  conversation 
is  in  heaven,  from  whence  he  also  looks  for  the  Saviour. — M .  J.  Taylor, 

Insincerity  in  worship. — The  great  sin  of  hypocrisy,  laid  by  our  Saviour  to 
the  charge  of  the  Jews  in  His  time,  had  been  charged,  long  before,  upon  the 
same  people  by  Isaiah.  A  sin  thus  chargeable  upon  the  same  people  at 
various  periods  of  their  history  may  justly  be  considered  as  a  national  sin. 
But  then  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  that  it  was  a  sin  on  account  of  which  it 
was  not  competent  to  the  Gentile  world,  that  is,  to  the  great  bulk  of  mankind, 
to  reproach  the  Jewish  nation,  or,  on  account  of  their  own  exemption  from 
it,  to  flatter  or  felicitate  themselves.  If  the  Jew  satisfied  himself  with  the 
outward  confession  of  God  and  the  lip- honour  he  paid  Him,  the  Gentile  world 
did  not  pay  even  that,  but  offered  a  debasing  worship  to  idols.  So  far  from 
being  in  a  condition  to  look  down  upon  the  Jew,  the  Gentile  had  a  great  step 
to  take  to  be  even  upon  a  level  with  him.  The  Jew  was  so  far  right  that  he 
believed  in  "  one  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth."  The 
Jews'  worship  was,  in  form  and  externals,  such  as  God  Himself  had  appointed, 
and  their  notions  of  Himself  such  as  He  had  taught  them.  How  then  is  it 
spoken  of  with  disapprobation  instead  of  praise,  both  by  Isaiah  in  his  time 
and  our  Saviour  in  His  ?  There  was  the  outward  shew,  not  the  inward  feeling  ; 
great  professions,  but  little  practice ;  long  prayers,  and  cold  hearts.  A  question 
then  arises  whether  we  of  these  times  and  this  nation  are  concerned  in  our 
Lord's  remark.  Now  I  hope  there  is  neither  flattery  nor  self-deceit  in  saying 
that  it  is  not  true  of  us  in  the  same  sense  and  degree  as  it  was  of  the  Jews. 
I  find  what  I  think  to  be  error,  wrongheadedness,  an  uncharitable  and  angry 
spirit,  in  the  language  and  writings  of  men,  on  religious  subjects,  but  little 
that  I  can  presume  to  call  insincerity.  Then,  again,  the  endeavour  to  make 
up  by  high  professions  and  scrupulosity  in  little  things  for  laxity  in  great 
things  is  a  vain  endeavour  now.  Men  are  disgusted  by  such  attempts.  They 
look  with  a  more  indulgent  eye  upon  the  open  and  avowed  violator  of  God's 
laws,  than  upon  him  who,  by  a  shew  of  piety,  would  cover  or  make  up  for  a 
selfish  and  licentious  life.  But  although  the  sin  of  hypocrisy  should  not  be 
chargeable,  as  a  national  sin,  upon  us  at  this  time,  in  the  same  degree  that 
it  was  upon  the  Jews  in  our  Saviour's  time  and  in  the  time  of  Isaiah,  it  still 
remains  for  each  man  to  ask  himself  whether  it  be  chargeable  upon  him  as  an 
individual  in  any  degree  or  sense.  I  fear  we  shall  find  that  there  is  a  sense 
in  which  it  is  chargeable  upon  us  all.  1.  I  lay  the  case  of  the  blasphemer 
out  of  consideration,  as  one  that  can  consist  only  with  an  estranged  state  of 
the  heart  from  God,  and  as  one  not  falling  within  the  range  of  our  Lord's 
observation,  and  I  would  ask  whether  we  are  not  oftentimes  forgetful  of  God, 
when  engaged,  not  in  things  which  He  has  forbidden,  but  even  in  things  which 
He  has  commanded,     When  we  pray,  for  example,  are  we  then  all  of  us,  are 

253 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


we  any  of  us,  so  attentive  as  we  ought  to  be  to  the  work  we  are  about  ?  It 
is  the  mind,  the  serious  and  attentive  mind,  that  gives  life  to  forms  and  effect 
to  prayer.  It  is,  no  doubt,  a  difficult  thing  to  keep  the  attention  fixed  upon 
the  proper  object  of  worship,  and  to  prevent  the  intrusion  of  idle  thoughts. 
(1)  One  reason  of  this  may  be,  that  that  object  is  invisible,  and  "  no  man  hath 
seen  God  at  any  time."  It  was,  I  presume,  as  an  expedient  to  help  attention, 
and  as  a  resource  against  the  difficulty  we  speak  of,  that  image-worship  came 
to  be  so  much  practised.  (2)  Another  reason  is,  that  when  we  are  engaged 
in  our  ordinary  work-day  business,  we  are  wont,  without  ceasing  from  that 
business  or  neglecting  it  at  all,  to  give  the  mind  leave  to  range  and  wander 
through  a  variety  of  subjects.  Practice  has  made  us  so  perfect  in  those 
operations  whereby  we  have  long  earned  our  bread,  that  we  can  perform  them 
correctly  with  a  degree  of  attention  so  slight  that  we  are  hardly  conscious  of 
exerting  it.  Now  this  is  not  only  pleasant,  but  innocent,  if  the  thoughts  be 
employed  upon  things  innocent.  But  this  will  not  do  in  worship.  If  the  mind 
is  not  in  this  work  it  cannot  prosper.  We  can  say  our  prayers,  no  doubt,  as 
we  can  do  other  familiar  things,  with  little  exertion  of  attention,  and  give  the 
thoughts  leave  to  settle  on  other  subjects  ;  but  when  we  do  so  we  pray  in  vain, 
or,  more  properly  speaking,  do  not  pray  at  all.  That  is  wanting  which  is 
essential  to  prayer — an  attentive  mind  and  an  awakened  heart.  It  has  been 
recommended  to  those  who  lament  their  proneness  to  this  wandering  inattention 
in  prayer  not  to  clothe  their  private  addresses  to  God  with  any  words — not 
to  say,  but  as  it  were  to  think  their  prayers  to  God.  This  advice  proceeds 
upon  the  supposition  that  the  method  of  using  thought  alone,  unclothed  in 
words,  may  prevent  self-deceit,  and  make  us  at  once  perceive  that  if  we  are 
not  praying  internally,  with  the  understanding  and  the  feelings,  we  are  doing 
nothing.  2.  Again,  we  may  be  said  to  worship  God  in  vain,  and  to  draw  nigh 
to  Him  with  our  lips  while  our  hearts  are  far  from  Him,  if  we  continue  in  sin, 
or  intend  so  to  do.  The  principal  subject  of  a  good  man's  prayers  is  grace — 
the  grace  of  God,  and  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  his  naturally  infirm 
endeavours  to  resist  temptation.  But  such  prayer  is  poisoned  at  its  source,  if 
it  be  not  faithful,  if  it  be  not  accompanied  with  a  faithful  and  unreserved 
intention  and  willingness  on  the  part  of  him  who  prays  to  part  with  his  sins 
and  with  whatever  causes  him  to  sin.  3.  These  things  make  worship  vain,  and 
they  spring  from  a  defect  in  the  heart,  that  is,  in  the  disposition  with  respect 
to  God,  which  it  concerns  us  before  all  things  to  remove.  It  is  to  be  removed 
by  more  positive  and  earnest  endeavours  than  have  yet  been  used  to  keep  the 
mind  intent  upon  its  work,  and  by  cries  for  the  help  of  that  Holy  Spirit  which 
is  said  to  "  help  our  infirmities,"  especially  in  that  work. — A.  Gibson. 

Zeal  and  diligence  in  false  worship  no  ground  of  comfort. — I.  It  is  a  vain  and 
unprofitable  sign  to  support  and  comfort  ourselves  by,  that  we  are  diligent  in 
the  worship  of  God,  if  not  commanded  by  Him. — 1.  It  lieth  as  a  necessary  duty 
upon  all  to  worship  and  serve  God.  Now  this  worship  and  service  may  be  either 
internal,  or  external,  or  mixed,  compounded  of  both  :  internal  consists  in  our  love 
of  God  above  all  things,  faith  and  hope  in  Him,  obedience  to  His  commands, 
which  Scripture  preferreth  before  all  external  worship;  external  is  that 
of  adoration  and  inclination  of  the  body,  kissing  the  hand,  bowing  the  knee, 
dedicating  temples,  altars,  and  offering  of  sacrifices ;  mixed  is  compounded  of 
both  these,  such  as  calling  upon  God's  name  by  petition  and  thanksgiving. 
2.  This  worship  and  service  of  God  is  not  given  to  God  because  He  needs  it  or 
is  made  more  happy  thereby.  God  is  no  more  better  by  our  worship  than  the 
fountain  is  because  a  man  drinks  of  it,  or  the  sun  because  a  man  seeth  by  the 
light  of  it.    Such  do  not  advantage  the  fountain  or  the  sun,  but  their  own  selves. 

254 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


So  God  hath  appointed  this  worship,  not  that  He  might  receive  good  from  us, 
but  communicate  good  to  us.  3.  Such  is  the  infinite  excellency  and  majesty  of 
God,  that  we  are  to  tremble  and  greatly  to  be  ashamed  of  any  worship  or  service 
we  tender  to  Him.  The  angels,  that  are  not  conscious  to  the  least  sin  in 
themselves,  but  are  pure  above  the  sun,  that  cannot  call  themselves  dust  and 
ashes,  yet  cover  their  faces  before  God.  4.  God  only  may  appoint  that  worship 
which  He  will  accept  of.  The  deformity  of  an  ape  lieth  in  being  so  like  a  man, 
and  yet  not  a  man  ;  so  doth  the  loathsomeness  of  all  false  worship  lie  in  this, 
that  it  imitateth  the  worship  of  God,  but  indeed  it  is  not  so.  5.  Our  Lord 
briefly  lays  down  what  is  acceptable  worship  unto  Him  (John  iv.  22).  To 
worship  God  in  the  spirit  is  to  have  a  spiritual  and  holy  inward  frame  of  heart 
in  all  our  addresses  to  Him.  This  is  worshipping  of  God  in  a  way  the  most  of 
men  are  not  acquainted  with.  Oh,  it  is  a  hard  matter  to  have  a  spiritual  man 
in  prayer,  hearing,  and  other  worship  !  And  indeed  this  is  the  soul  and  life  of 
the  service  of  God.  The  other  way  of  worship  is  in  truth,  which  by  some  is 
explained  against  hypocrisy  and  guile  of  spirit ;  for  this  God  complaineth  of, 
that  they  drew  nigh  with  their  mouths,  but  their  hearts  were  far  from  God. 
Lastly,  as  a  Father,  they  must  worship,  though  humbly,  yet  not  slavishly  and 
servilely.  Seneca  speaketh  of  the  superstitious,  intimidated  person,  that  while 
he  worships  God  he  provoketh  Him.  6.  Howsoever  Worship  of  God  be  com- 
manded by  Him,  yet  such  is  the  nature  of  all  moral  duties  that  the  obedience  to 
them  is  required  before  any  instituted  worship.  "I  will  have  mercy,  and  not 
sacrifice  "  ;  go  and  learn  what  that  meaneth,  saith  our  Saviour :  insomuch  that 
comparatively  to  obedience  God  is  said  not  to  command  these  at  all.  7.  The 
heart  of  man  is  exceeding  subtle  and  ingenious  to  palliate  over  all  false  worship  : 
insomuch  that  there  never  were  superstitious  abuses  of  God's  worship,  but  that 
there  have  been  learned  men  and  wise  men  to  plead  for  them. 

II.  Why  men  addicted  to  false  worship,  though  they  much  admire  themselves, 
yet  are  indeed  vain  men,  and  lean  upon  vain  props. — 1.  Because  always  such 
persons  have  the  bitterest  enmity  against  true  godliness.  2.  Here  is  no  ground 
of  confidence  in  these,  because  they  are  consistent  with  the  ordinary  practice  of 
gross  and  sinful  courses.  3.  If  a  man  may  not  rely  or  trust  on  the  instituted 
worship  of  God,  yea,  nor  on  the  graces  wrought  by  God's  Spirit  in  us,  then  much 
less  in  a  worship  of  his  own.  If  thy  own  graces  are  not  helmet  strong  enough 
to  repel  God's  wrath,  then  thy  own  voluntary  worship  is  but  as  so  many  cobwebs, 
when  a  furious  tempest  bloweth  upon  them.  4.  These  are  not  to  be  relied  upon, 
which  are  vain  and  unprofitable,  and  so  frustrate  of  that  end  we  expect.  Now 
the  text  saith,  "  In  vain  do  they  worship  Me  "  ;  other  duties  commanded  by  God, 
though  they  are  not  pillars  to  be  leaned  on,  yet  they  are  not  vain.  God  saith 
not  to  Jacob,  to  seek  His  face  in  vain,  but  all  this  service  is  lost  labour  :  "  Who 
hath  required  all  these  things  at  your  hands  ?  "  Now  of  all  things  to  labour  in 
vain  in  religious  matters  is  the  saddest  expense  of  all.  After  all  that  zeal  thou 
art  never  a  whit  the  nearer  heaven,  thou  art  no  more  endeared  to  God.  Thy 
state  is  noways  spiritually  advantaged  :  yea,  though  it  be  a  fruitless  labour  one 
way,  yet  it  is  not  another  way  ;  for  there  is  a,  fruit  of  these  labours,  but  it  is 
bitterness  and  wormwood — God  is  more  provoked  by  thee.  5.  That  which  is 
a  sad  curse  and  fruit  of  former  sins,  that  can  be  little  comfort  to  any  man  that 
rightly  considereth  of  things.  Thus  we  say  it  is  an  absurd  thing  to  be  proud  of 
clothes,  for  in  that  thou  needest  clothing  it  is  an  argument  thou  art  fallen  from 
integrity  and  innocency.  But  in  this  matter  the  curse  of  God  is  more  wonderful 
upon  thee,  for  all  that  admiration  and  applause  of  false  worship  is  inflicted  upon 
thee  as  a  punishment,  because  thou  hast  not  received  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it. 
6.  These  of  all  men  are  in  a  most  unsafe  estate  (notwithstanding  their  security), 
because  they  are  in  a  most  absolute  contrariety  and  indisposition  for  receiving  of 

255 


CHAP.   VII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


Christ,  in  whom  only  our  souls  have  rest.  Publicans  and  harlots  went  to 
heaven  before  the  Pharisees.  Why  so  ?  Because  the  former  were  sooner  convinced 
of  their  sin,  their  undone  estate,  and  so  more  willingly  flying  unto  Christ. — 
A.  Burgess. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS   ON  THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  1,  2.  Fault-finding . — Those 
see  most  faults  in  others  who  have 
most  themselves.  None  are  such  critics 
of  small  faults  as  those  guilty  of  grave 
ones.  Beware  of  fault-finding.  He 
that  censures  others  cures  not  himself. 
— R.  Glover. 

We  must  not  always  follow  great 
men. — Those  who  for  their  place  and 
calling  should  be  greatest  friends  and 
favourers  of  Christ  and  His  followers 
are  often  greatest  enemies  and  readiest 
to  oppose  them.  1.  See  how  unfit  it 
is  to  tie  ourselves  to  the  example  of 
great  men  in  the  Church  in  matters 
of  religion — not  safe  always  to  follow 
them,  for  so  we  may  with  them  become 
the  worst  enemies  of  Christ  and  His 
Church.  2.  Admonition  to  great  men 
in  high  place  in  the  Church  to  use 
their  dignity,  place,  and  office  to  the 
honour  of  Christ  and  good  of  His 
Church.—*?.  Petter. 

Vers.  3,  4.  Lessons. — 1.  It  is  the 
manner  of  hypocrites  to  tie  others  to 
their  own  practice  and  example  in 
matters  of  religion,  and  to  censure  all 
uncharitably  who  do  not  conform  to 
them  even  in  trifles.  2.  Hypocrites 
put  religion  and  holiness  in  outward 
rites,  ceremonies,  and  superstitious 
observances,  and  think  that  by  per- 
formance of  these  they  become  holy 
and  acceptable  before  God.  3.  Super- 
stition makes  wise  men  become  foolish, 
absurd,  and  childish,  in  busying  and 
troubling  themselves  about  trifles  and 
toys. — Ibid. 

Rabbinical  washings.  —  The  legal 
washing  of  the  hands  before  eating 
was  especially  sacred  to  the  Rabbinist ; 
not  to  do  so  was  a  crime  as  great 
as  to  eat  the  flesh  of  swine.  "  He 
who  neglects  hand-washing,"  says 
the    book    Sohar,    "  deserves    to     be 

250 


punished  here  and  hereafter."  "  He  is 
to  be  destroyed  out  of  the  world,  for  in 
hand-washing  is  contained  the  secret 
of  the  Ten  Commandments."  "  He  is 
guilty  of  death."  It  was  laid  down 
that  the  hands  were  first  to  be  washed 
clean.  The  tips  of  the  ten  fingers 
were  then  joined  and  lifted  up,  so  that 
the  water  ran  down  to  the  elbows,  then 
turned  down  so  that  it  might  run  off 
to  the  ground.  Fresh  water  was 
poured  on  them  as  they  were  lifted  up, 
and  twice  again  as  they  hung  down. 
The  washing  itself  was  to  be  done  by 
rubbing  the  fist  of  one  hand  in  the 
hollow  of  the  other.  When  the  hands 
were  washed  before  eating,  they  must 
be  held  upwards  ;  when  after  it,  down- 
wards, but  so  that  the  water  should 
not  run  beyond  the  knuckles.  The 
vessel  used  must  be  held  first  in  the 
right,  then  in  the  left  hand ;  the  water 
was  to  be  poured  first  on  the  right,  then 
on  the  left  hand ;  and  at  every  third 
time  the  words  repeated,  "Blessed  art 
Thou  who  hast  given  us  the  command 
to  wash  the  hands." — C.  Geikie,  D.D. 

The  "  tradition  of  the  elders "  was 
an  after-growth  of  the  Captivity, 
originating  not  improbably  with  the 
Great  Synagogue,  out  of  which  the 
.  Sanhedrin  was  developed.  The  rever- 
ence and  care  for  Holy  Scripture, 
revived  by  Ezra,  and  fostered  by 
later  scribes,  were  handed  down  from 
generation  to  generation,  and  treated 
with  so  much  honour  that  the  highest 
authority  was  sought  for  their  origin. 
Some  Rabbi,  bolder  than  his  pre- 
decessors, put  forward  the  theory  that 
God  had  given  to  Moses  not  only  the 
Ten  Commandments,  but  also  at  the 
same  time  a  full  explanation,  even  in 
the  minutest  detail,  of  all  their  ap- 
plications. This  Oral  Law,  he  said, 
had  been  revealed  by  Moses  to  Aaron 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  vii. 


and  his  sons,  and  the  memory  of  it 
was  cherished  and  handed  on  without 
any  loss  or  diminution  in  the  progress 
of  transmission.  As  soon  as  such  a 
view  of  its  origin  had  gained  acceptance 
with  the  people,  its  authority  became 
equally  binding  upon  the  conscience 
with  that  of  the  Written  Law,  and 
the  estimation  in  which  it  was  held 
even  higher.  In  lapse  of  time  it  re- 
ceived its  interpretation  at  the  hands 
of  the  Rabbis,  and  the  disquisitions, 
illustrations,  and  additions  grew  into 
a  great  body  of  doctrine  ;  and  after 
the  Jewish  motto  "  Commit  nothing 
to  writing  "  had  been  forgotten,  these 
were  all  combined  in  a  vast  collection, 
under  the  title  of  Gemara,  or  Talmud. 
The  publication  in  writing  of  the 
Mishnah  itself,  as  the  Oral  Law  was 
called,  had  preceded  it  by  two  hundred 
years.  It  was  issued  authoritatively 
by  Rabbi  Judah,  the  Holy,  at  the 
close  of  the  second  century  of  the 
Christian  era. — Dean  Luckock. 

There  were  two  familiar  sayings 
among  the  later  Jews  which  enable 
us  to  understand  how  widely  tradi- 
tionalism must  have  conflicted  with  the 
teaching  of  Christ.  "  The  words  of  the 
elders,"  they  said,  "are  of  more  weight 
than  the  words  of  the  prophets " ; 
and,  even  more  startling  than  this, 
"The  Mosaic  Law  is  as  water,  the 
Mishnah  as  wine,  and  the  Gemara  as 
hippocras  "  (a  richly  spiced  drink,  most 
highly  esteemed). — Ibid. 

The  traditions  of  the  elders  were  all, 
without  exception,  the  product  of  the 
later  ages  of  the  Jewish  dispensation 
in  the  time  of  its  decay  and  fall,  when 
it  was  at  its  worst ;  whereas  the 
opinions  and  practices  which  are 
invidiously  called  "  traditions  "  in  these 
days,  i.e.  the  opinions  and  practices  of 
the  earliest  Fathers  of  the  Christian 
Church,  are  the  products  of  the  earliest 
ages  of  the  Christian  religion,  when  it 
was  at  its  best,  and  was  least  con- 
taminated with  the  influence  of  the 
world  from  without,  and  kept  most 
pure  by  godly  discipline  from  within. 
The  opinions  of  the  Fathers  on  the 
interpretation  of  Scripture,  when  they 


can  be  ascertained,  are  far  more  likely 
to  be  in  accord  with  its  real  meaning 
than  any  opinions  or  practices  of  later 
ages. — M.  F.  Sadler. 

Vers.  6-9.  The  external  preferred. — 
It  may  seem  almost  incredible  that 
men  should  leave  the  simple  principles 
of  righteousness  for  a  region  so  barren 
and  burdensome  as  that  of  external 
observances.  But  the  secret  is  not 
difficult  to  find.  1.  External  acts  can 
be  seen  and  felt  by  oneself,  and  so 
can  give  complacency.  2.  They  can 
be  seen  by  others,  and  thus  can  gain 
credit.  3.  They  are  easier  than  walk- 
ing with  God.  To  approach  Him  needs 
the  courage  of  purity  and  penitence ; 
and  to  take  His  guidance  requires 
perpetually  the  self-denial  and  con- 
secration of  faith. — R.  Glover. 

The  abuse  of  ceremonies. — It  cannot 
be  too  carefully  noticed  that  no  con- 
demnation is  passed  upon  these  rites  of 
purification  in  themselves.  Had  the 
Pharisees  recognised  their  symbolism 
and  deep  moral  significance,  had  Jesus 
been  certain  that  when  they  washed 
their  hands  they  thought  of  or  prayed 
for  purity  of  heart  and  life,  He  would 
have  been  the  last  person  to  rebuke 
them,  however  much  they  multiplied 
external  forms  and  ceremonies.  These 
are  useful  as  stepping-stones  to  higher 
things  ;  but  the  moment  they  begin 
to  satisfy  in  themselves  they  become 
snares  and  lead  to  superstition. — Dean 
Luckock. 

Vers.  6,7.  The  whole  Old  Testament 
history  was  prophetic  of  Christ  and 
of  those  around  Him  in  this  respect, 
that  everywhere  in  the  continually 
recurring  contest  between  light  and 
darkness,  between  truth  and  error, 
there  were  displayed  the  types  of  that 
which,  in  its  highest  energy,  developed 
itself  in  and  around  Christ.  —  H.  Ols- 
hausen,  D.D. 

Ver.  9.  Irony  sometimes  lawful. — In 
that  Christ  here,  by  this  sharp  irony  or 
taunting  speech,  derides  the  gross  super- 
stition of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees, 

»  257 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


we  may  gather  that  it  is  lawful  to  for  the  second  the  sustaining  and  re- 
deride  and  scoff  at  the  sins  and  unlaw-  straining  grace  of  God.  True  morality 
f ul  practices  of  others,  especially  at  the  needs  a  supernatural  foundation  and 
gross  and  notorious  sins  of  the  wicked  continuously  bestowed  Divine  energy, 
and  ungodly.  See  1  Kings  xviii.  27  ;  The  very  idea  of  inward  purity  points 
Isa.  xliv.  Yet  some  cautions  are  to  us  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  new 
be  observed  for  the  lawful  use  of  such  birth. — J.  R.  Gregory. 
ironical  reproofs  of  sin.     1.  They  must 

proceed    from    a    holy    and    upright  Ver.  16.  An   important  rule. — This 

affection   in   such    as   use   them,    viz.  rule    must    needs   be    of    very    great 

from  zeal  for  God's  glory,  and  hatred  importance   to    Christians.      For   our 

o:  sin,  and  not  from  private  malice  or  Great  Master — 1.  Calls  the  people  unto 

revenge.     2.  They  must   tend   to   the  Him  on  purpose  to  tell  them  only  this, 

right  end,  viz.    God's   glory,    and   the  2.  He   requires  of   them  a  particular 

good   of   the  party  reproved,  that   by  attention.     3.  He  requires  it  of  every 

such  a  sharp  and  taunting  reproof  he  one  of  them  without  exception.    4.  He 

may,    if   possible,    be   brought    to    be  exhorts  them  to  endeavour  thoroughly 

ashamed  of  his  sin,  and  to  be  touched  to   understand   it.     5.    He    lets   them 

with  remorse  for   it,  as  also   to  grow  know  that  in  order  to  do  it  they  have 

in   dislike  and   hatred  of   it  :  not  the  need  of  a  singular  grace  and  a  particular 

disgrace  of  the  person  is  to  be  sought,  gift   of    understanding.      It   was    for 

but  the  disgrace   of  the  sin  reproved,  want  of  understanding  this  rule  that 

and    the   reformation   of    the   person,  the  Jews  still  remained  Jews,  adhering 

3.  Such  taunts  and  ironies  are  to  be  to  a  mere  external  way  of  worship, 
used  against  sin  in  due  manner,  i.e.  It  is  for  the  very  same  reason  that 
after  a  grave  and  serious  manner,  not  numbers  of  Christians,  even  to  this 
with  shew  of  lightness  or  vanity. —  day,  serve  God  more  like  Jews  than 
G.  Fetter.  Christians. — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  15.  The  heart  the  seat  of  defile-  Ver.  17.  Dulness  in  spiritual  matters, 

ment. — 1.    Material    processes   cannot  — 1.  See  here  how  great  dulness  and 

produce  spiritual  effects.     2.  The  true  slowness  of  capacity  there  is,  even  in 

source  of  spiritual  pollution  is  the  heart,  the  best  Christians,  to  conceive  spiri- 

The  internal  translates  itself  into  the  tual  and  heavenly  matters  when  they 

external.     3.    But  the   principle  itself  are  taught  them.     2.  The  best  should 

implies  that  the  body  may  be  denied.  not  be  ashamed  to  acknowledge  their 

See    1     Cor.    iii.     16,    17.      The    sins  own  ignorance  in  spiritual  matters  to 

enumerated  by  our  Lord  (vers.  21-23)  such  as  are  able  to  teach  them,  that 

shew  themselves  in  words  and  deeds,  so  they  may  be  better  informed  and 

and   defile   the   tongue,    the   eye,   the  instructed.     3.  It  is   commendable  in 

hand,    etc.     They   who   commit   them  Christians  to  move  profitable  questions 

yield  their  members  as  servants  of  unto  their  teachers  or  others. — G.  Fetter. 
iniquity  unto  iniquity  (Rom.  vi.   19). 

4.  Our  Lord  did  not  sanction  indif-  Ver.  18.  The  Saviour  refers  to  the 
ference  to  the  use  and  abuse  of  food  material  things  that  enter  into  a  man 
and  drink,  to  habits  of  personal  cleanli-  through  his  mouth.  His  principle, 
ness  and  filthiness.  The  principle  He  however,  is  applicable,  on  a  higher 
lays  down  witnesses  to  the  contrary,  plane  of  reference,  to  spiritual  things 
These  matters  are  under  our  control,  too  which  come  in  from  without.  These, 
and  indicate  our  tastes  and  tendencies,  however  noxious,  cannot  of  themselves 
our  desires,  choice,  will — in  one  word,  defile  a  man.  "  The  man  within  the 
our  character.  5.  No  man,  however,  breast "  must  act  in  reference  to  them 
can  put  his  heart  right,  or  keep  it  right,  before  guilt  can  be  contracted. — 
For  the  first  is  needed  the  converting,  J.  Morisonf  D.D. 

258 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


Ver.    19.   Lessons.— 1.  The    wisdom  it,   and  purging  it  from  this  natural 

of  God  shewn  in  the  frame  of  man's  filthiness   and   corruption   of   sin.     1. 

body,  ordaining  every  part  for  neces-  Labour  to  see  and  bewail  this  great 

sary  ends  and  uses.     See  how  it  should  corruption    of    our    own    heart.      To 

be  in  the  body  of  the  Church :  there  this  end  examine  and  view  our  own 

should  be  no  unprofitable  member,  but  heart  often  in  the  glass  of  God's  law. 

even  the  meanest  should  so  live  as  to  And    we    must    deal    thoroughly    in 

further  the  good  of  the  whole  (1  Cor.  searching  out  the  corruptions  of  the 

xii.  25).     2.  Howsoever  the  belly  serves  heart,  remembering  how  deceitful  it  is, 

for  necessary  use  in  man's  body,  yet  it  and   how   hard   to    know   it.     2.   See 

is  for  such  use  as  is  base  and  vile  in  what   need   for   us   to   get  our  heart 

comparison  of  most  of  the  other  parts  purged   and   cleansed   from  this   sink 

of  the  body.     See  then  the  sin  of  those  and    puddle    of   sin   which   is   in    it. 

who  serve  and  worship  their  belly,  as  (1)  By  the  power  and  efficacy  of  God's 

if  they  were  born  for  no  other  end  but  sanctifying  Spirit.     (2)  By  the  minis- 

to  eat  and  drink. — G.  Petter.  try  of  the  Word.     (3)  Get  true  faith, 

apprehending   God's   saving   love  and  , 

Vers.  20-23.  Heart-defilement — This  mercy  in  Christ.     3.  See  by  this  how 

is  a  hard  saying,   but  our  conscience  great  a  work  is  the  work  of  regenera- 

acknowledges  the  truth  of  it.     We  are  tion  and   sanctification,   whereby  the 

not  the  toy  of  circumstances,  but  such  heart   must   be   purged   from   such  a 

as  we  have  made  ourselves  ;  and  our  world  of  wickedness  and  sea  of  filthi- 

lives   would   have    been    pure   if    the  ness.     Such  a  work  is  not  easily  done, 

stream  had  flowed  from  a  pure  foun-  or  soon.     The  whole  time  of  our  life 

tain.    However  modern  sentiment  may  is  too  little  for  doing  it  thoroughly. — 

rejoice  in  highly  coloured  pictures  of  G.  Petter. 

the    noble    profligate   and    his    pure-  The  thoughts. — Nothing  seems  of  less 

minded   and   elegant   victim  ;   of    the  consequence  than  a  thought — so  silent, 

brigand  or  the  border  ruffian  full   of  swift,  subtle,  is   it,   and   yet   in   that 

kindness,  with  a  heart  as  gentle  as  his  lightning-flash   of   the  brain,  in   that 

hands  are  red  ;  and  however  true  we  throb  of  the  heart,  in  that  fiat  of  the 

may  feel  it  to  be  that  the  worst  heart  will,  in  that  airy  nothing,  all  the  vast 

may  never  have  betrayed  itself  by  the  things  of  man's  history,  its  grandeur 

worst  actions,  but  many  that  are  first  and  its  grief,  have  their   birth.     The 

shall  be  last, — it  still  continues  to  be  heart  of  man  is  the  gateway  of  strange 

the  fact,  and  undeniable  when  we  do  worlds,  and  through  it  are  ever  gliding 

not   sophisticate   our   judgment,    that  thoughts   fraught   with    infinite   con- 

"  all  these   evil   things   proceed   from  sequence  to  the  individual  and  to  the 

within."      It  is   also   true   that   they  race.     Let    not   the    Church    of    God 

further "  defile  the  man."     Thecorrup-  abandon    that    appeal    to    reason,    to 

tion    which    already    existed   in    the  conscience,  to  the  hearts  of  men,  which 

heart  is  made  worse  by  passing  into  is  the  true  preaching  of  the  gospel  of 

action  ;  shame  and  fear  are  weakened  ;  Christ. —  W.  L.  Watkinson. 
the  will  is  confirmed  in  evil ;  a  gap  is  Imagination. — Says  Jacob  Boehme  in 

opened  and  widened  between  the  man  a  deep  passage,  "  All  now  depends  on 

who  commits  a  new  sin  and  the  virtue  what   I    set    my  imagination    upon." 

on  which  he  has  turned  his  back. —  Setting  his  imagination  upon  the  king- 

Dean  Chadwick.  dom  of  God,  upon  the  highest  objects, 

,  patterns,  and  callings  of  the  spiritual 

Yer.  20.  Inward  corruption. — That  universe,  the  believer  conquers  succes- 

which  St.  James  saith  of  the  tongue  sively    all    selfishness   and   sensuality, 

(iii.   6)  is  much  more   true  of  man's  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God. 

corrupt  heart,  without  the  sanctifying  All   depends   upon   what   we   set   our 

grace  of  God  renewing  and  changing  imagination — upon  the  ideals  we  choose, 

259 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


upon    the   vivid    realisation   of   those  ing   our   character   and   deciding  our 

ideals,  upon  the  daily  striving  toward  eternal    state, — we    cannot   afford    to 

those  ideals,  upon  the  faithful,  confiding  make   light   of   these   enemies  of   our 

surrender  of  the  soul  to  those  ideals. —  peace.   A  constant  watchfulness  against 

Ibid.  their  approach,  promptitude  in  repress- 

Inward  renewal  needed. — We   need  ing  their  incursion  ;  the  diligent  study, 

all  the   faculties   and   powers   of   our  the    conscientious    practice    of    every 

inward  being  renewing.     We  need  our  method  that   may  help  against  their 

conscience  to   bear  us  witness  in  the  power, — this  is   the  bounden   duty  of 

Holy  Ghost;  our  imagination  to  eye  every  Christian  who  sincerely  desires 

supremest  ideals  of  light  and  beauty,  to   keep   himself  unspotted  from   the 

and   urge   its   flight   thitherto  as   the  world,  or  to  recover  himself  from  the 

eagle  seeks  the  sun ;  our  will  by  virtue  dominion  of  past  sin.     St.  Paul  speaks 

of   a   Divine  strengthening  to  become  of  God  as  "  a  discerner  of  the  thoughts 

imperative  and   invincible  ;  our   affec-  and  intents  of  the  heart,"  and  declares 

tions  to   be   filled,  dominated,  by  the  that  "  all  things  are  naked  and  open 

.  sovereign  love   of   God.     Nothing  but  to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  we  have 

this  new  heart   and   right   spirit  will  to  do."     In  the  prophet  we  have  God 

meet  the  case.     Let  us  begin  here,  and  asserting  this  prerogative  (Ezek.  xi.  5). 

all   will   be   well.     Out   of  the   heart  And   so  the   psalmist  appeals   to  His 

shall  proceed  good  thoughts,  and   out  omniscience  (Ps.  cxxxix.  1).     And  thus 

of   them   all   fair   and   noble    charac-  we  are  told  on  the  eve  of  the  Deluge, 

teristics  and  actions. — Ibid.  Gen.    vi.    5,    6.      The    indulgence   of 

an  evil  thought  is  as  much  an  offence 

Vers.  21-23.  The  things  that  defile. —  against  God  as  an  injurious  speech  or 

At  the  head  of  the  list  Christ  places  a  blow  is  an  offence  against  our  neigh- 

the  "evil  disputings  "  so  fresh  in  His  bour.     Even  under  the  Old  Testament 

memory  from  His  encounter  with  the  we  have  the  wise  man  declaring,  Prov. 

Pharisees ;  then  adulteries  and  fornica-  xxiv.  9.     And  in  the  New  Testament, 

tions,  the  outcome  of  a  corrupt  imagina-  in   the    Sermon   on    the    Mount,'  our 

tion;    murders,    which    proceed    from  Saviour   still   more   expressly  declares 

anger;  thefts   and   covetousness,  from  that   the   gospel   law   reaches   to   the 

secret  promptings  to  overreach  others  thoughts    and    intents    of    the    heart 

and  gain  more  than   one  has  a  right  (Matt.  v.  22,  28).     And  by  this  law 

to ;   knaveries   and   fraud ;   lascivious-  shall  we  give  account  in  the  end.     And 

ness  or  reckless  insolence,  which  out-  it   is  just  that  it  should  be  so.     The 

rages  the  decencies  of  life ;  the  malicious  prevailing  character   of   our  thoughts 

glance    and    slanderous    tongue  ;    the  is  the  best  index  of  our  spiritual  state, 

proud  and  haughty  bearing  which  be-  For  it  is  not  always  what  we  actually 

speaks  the  self-centred  man  ;  and  last  do,  but  what  we  would  do,  if  we  could, 

in  the   list,  the   comprehensive  sin  of  what   we   wish  for,  and  think  about, 

foolishness,  which  embraces  every  sense-  and  take  delight  in — this  it  is  which 

less,  wicked  act, — Dean  Luckock.  constitutes    our    moral    character    for 

good   or   evil,   and    decides   our   state 

"Ver.  21.  Evil  thoughts. — Evil  thoughts  before  God.      Evil   thoughts   are  the 

in  the  heart  are  like  internal  diseases  beginning  and  source  of  all  iniquities, 

of  the  body,  very  dangerous  and  very  We  think  we  are  safe.     We  mean  to 

difficult  of  cure.     Stealthy  in  effecting  draw  back  in  time.     But  some  sudden 

a    lodgment,    but    most    tenacious    in  impulse  takes  us  ;  our  resolution  gives 

maintaining  their  hold  ;  singly  appear-  way,    and    we    fall    headlong.       And 

ing  of  little  consequence,  mere  specks  though,  by   mercy  above  our  deserts, 

of  human  infirmity  upon  the  soul,  but  we  do  stop  short  of  any  flagrant  act 

soon  spreading  and  leavening  the  whole  of  sin,  yet  the  mere  indulgence  of  evil 

being  with  their  corruption,  constitut-  thoughts    imprints   a    character    and 

260 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  vii. 


stamp  upon  the  heart  which  years  of  thoughts  we  must  place  discontented 
sorrow  and  conscientious  striving  will  thoughts.  By  overrating  his  ability, 
often  fail  to  obliterate.  The  soul  be-  and  by  dreaming  of  the  future,  a  man 
comes  engrained  with  evil,  and  evil  gets  dissatisfied  with  his  present  lowly 
becomes  connatural  to  the  soul.  It  position,  and  thinks  himself  equal  to 
acquires  a  sad  facility  for  uncharitable  something  much  more  trying  and 
suppositions.  It  becomes  wonderfully  important.  3.  Next  I  may  name  un- 
apt at  finding  fuel  for  its  vanity  in  the  charitable  thoughts.  We  are  all  too 
most  indifferent  circumstances.  It  will  apt  to  take  dislikes,  to  impute  motives, 
contract  fresh  stains  from  objects  upon  to  rehearse  over  to  ourselves  the  affronts 
which  a  purer  mind  would  rest  with-  we  have  received,  to  take  pains  to  make 
out  experiencing  any  affection  of  evil ;  out  that  we  have  been  ill  used,  and  be 
while  grosser  suggestions  will  fall  upon  glad  when  we  have  fixed  upon  some 
such  a  diseased  soul  like  sparks  upon  reasonable  ground  for  being  angry, 
tinder,  and  inflame  it  into  evil  passions  4.  But  I  have  yet  to  name  the  most 
at  once.  And  this  will  last  on,  when  evil  of  all  those  evil  thoughts  which 
those  sins  have  been  utterly  renounced,  proceed  out  of  the  heart  and  defile  a 
when  the  soul  has  checked  itself  in  its  man  ;  I  mean  impure  thoughts — the 
wilfulness,  and  has  turned  sincerely  to  most  dangerous  and  the  most  difficult 
God,  and  is  striving  to  walk  daily  in  to  conquer  of  all  our  inward  corrup- 
His  fear,  and  to  cleanse  itself  from  tions ;  and  yet  one,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
iniquity ;  still  will  the  shadows  of  his  in  which  too  many  indulge  without 
past  life  darken  the  repentant  sinner's  much  compunction,  thinking  it  enough 
path,  and  embarrass  his  efforts  in  reli-  so  long  as  they  abstain  from  grosser 
gion  ;  and  in  his  holiest  moments,  even  acts  of  shame.  It  is  to  this  sort  of 
upon  his  knees,  before  the  altar,  will  evil  thoughts  that  Bishop  Beveridge's 
some  train  of  evil  thought  start  up  words  seem  particularly  to  belong, 
suddenly,  and  take  possession  of  that  when  he  recalls  the  experience  he  had 
soul  which  has  been  used  formerly  to  had  of  the  devil's  temptations,  and  the 
delight  in  them.  1.  The  most  general,  working  of  his  own  corruptions  ;  by 
perhaps,  are  vain  thoughts.  Young  which  he  says :  "  I  find  that  there  is 
people  are  most  open  to  them,  but  no  sin  I  am  betrayed  into  but  what 
they  are  congenial  enough  to  all.  takes  it  rise  from  my  froward  thoughts. 
We  are  all  too  apt  to  dwell  with  These  are  the  tempters  that  first  present 
complacency  upon  the  thing  we  excel  some  pleasing  objects  to  my  view,  and 
in  ;  we  long  for  an  opportunity  of  then  bias  my  understanding  and  pervert 
displaying  our  abilities ;  we  please  my  will  to  comply  with  the  suggestions, 
ourselves  by  imagining  how  much  better  So  that  though  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
we  could  have  acquitted  ourselves  than  pleased  to  dart  a  beam  into  my  heart 
a  neighbour  has  done;  we  plan  all  at  the  same  time,  and  shew  me  the 
sorts  of  schemes  for  the  future,  abandon  odious  and  dangerous  effect  of  such 
ourselves  to  the  most  extravagant  re-  thoughts,  yet,  I  know  not  how  or 
veries,  picture  imaginary  scenes  and  why,  I  find  a  prevailing  suggestion 
positions,  and  fancy  how  we  should  act  within  that  tells  me  it  is  but  a  thought, 
in  them.  The  habit  of  indulging  such  and  that  so  long  as  it  goes  no  further 
thoughts  is  weak  and  foolish  indeed,  it  cannot  do  me  much  hurt.  Under 
but  it  is  more,  it  is  sinful.  It  is  an  this  specious  colour  and  pretence  I 
artifice  for  gaining  food  for  our  vanity  secretly  persuade  myself  to  dwell  a 
out  of  an  imaginary  future,  when  the  little  longer  upon  it ;  and  finding  my 
ordinary  tenor  of  our  daily  life  yields  heart  pleased  and  delighted  with  its 
too  humble  materials  to  please  us.  It  natural  issue,  I  give  it  a  little  further 
dissipates  our  energies,  it  injures  our  indulgence,  till  at  last  my  desire  breaks 
religion,  and  estranges  us  from  God.  out  into  a  flame,  and  will  be  satisfied 
2.    In     close    connexion     with     vain  with  nothing  less  than  the  enjoyment 

261 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  the  object  it    is   exercised   upon."  shall  so  succeed  in  foiling  the  enemy  of 

5.  There  are  other  evil  thoughts  less  souls.     And  when  we  have  sinned  in 

under  our  control.     We  are  liable  to  be  thought,  we  should  take  notice  of  it  in 

afflicted  by  blasphemous  thoughts,  by  our  nightly  examination,  and  humble 

unbelieving  thoughts,  and  by  despond-  ourselves  for  it  before  God.     We  must 

ing  thoughts,  which  may  indeed   owe  strive,    we   must   hope,  and   we   shall 

their   origin   to   past   sins,  but  which  overcome.     We  have  the  Spirit  of  God 

may  be  injected  by  Satan,  or  induced  pledged  to  us  to  transform  our  affections 

by    bodily    weakness,    or    arise    from  and   desires,   to   make   us  new  hearts 

ignorance   or   misapprehension   of   re-  and     new    spirits,    and    bring    every 

vealed   truth.     When   our  minds   are  thought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience 

thus  disordered,  we  are  not  fit  judges  of  Christ. — C.  F.  Secretan. 
of  our  own  estate,  and  our  remedy  is 

to  have  recourse  to  some  discreet  and  Yer.  22.  An  evil  eye. — Oh,  how  can 
learned  minister  of  God's  Word,  and  to  we  hope  with  Job  to  "see  our 
open  our  grief.  6.  Against  the  other  Redeemer,"  with  these  eyes  so  vain,  so 
evil  thoughts  I  mentioned  our  remedy  proud,  so  wanton,  so  polluted,  so  pro- 
lies  more  within  our  reach,  and  various  stitute  !  They  had  need  be  well 
rules  may  be  given  for  resisting  them.  washed  with  the  eye-water  of  penitent 
The  first  and  most  obvious  is  prayer —  tears,  and  then  with  the  blood  of 
painstaking,  earnest  prayer.  Avoid  all  Christ  (Matt.  v.  8 ;  Ps.  cxix.  37  • 
occasions  of  sinning.  Avoid  the  great  1  John  iii.  3;  Job  xxxi.  1). — Bishop 
snare  of   having  time  on  your  hands.  Gauden. 

Avoid  vicious  books.     Forbear  to  read  The  eye  the  window  of  the  souL — The 

the  details  of  crime  in  the  public  prints  :  mind  looks  through  the  eye  ;   so  does 

they  can  do  you  no  good ;  they  may  the     heart.      Lactantius     beautifully 

corrupt  your  mind  with  suggestions  of  compares  the  eyes  to  glazed  windows, 

evil.     And  when  evil  thoughts  assail  through    which     the     mind     beholds, 

you,    flee   them   at    once.      I   do   not  "  And  therefore,"  adds  he,  "  the  mind 

advise  any  one  to  argue  against  them.  and  will  are  often  discerned  from  the 

Your  plan  is  to  turn  your  attention  eyes."     Salvianus  uses  the  same  com- 

at  once  to  something  else;  to  go  and  parison    of    windows,   but    adds    that 

do   something,  to  think  of  something,  hence   "all  wicked  desires  enter  into 

different.     And   accordingly  we   must  the  heart  through  the  eyes,  as  through 

store     our    minds     with    subjects    of  their     natural     avenues."      But     the 

meditation  ;  we   must  get  hymns  and  Saviour  unfolds  here  a  far  profounder 

psalms  by  heart,  or  favourite  pieces  of  philosophy,    when    He   says   that   the 

Scripture ;  and  directly  an  evil  thought  evil  desires  arise  in  the  heart,  and  come 

assails  us,  we  must  begin  and  say  to  looking   out   wistfully  at   the   eyes. — 

ourselves  one  or  other  of  these,  and  we  J.  Morison,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  24—30. 

(Parallel:  Matt.  xv.  21-28.) 

The  Syrophoenician  woman. — What  a  powerful  principle  faith  is,  and  how 
great  its  success,  we  have  a  striking  example  here.  It  shews  itself  to  be  of 
Divine  original,  and  that  there  is  no  discouragement  which  it  will  not  overcome. 

I.  The  excellence  of  this  woman's  faith. — 1.  The  disadvantages  under  which 
she  laboured.  She  was  a  Syrophoenician,  an  alien  to  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  and  had  been  born  and  educated  amongst  idolaters.  It  discovered  great 
liberality  of  mind  in  her  to  acknowledge  Jesus  of  Nazareth  and  to  apply  to 
Him  for  a  cure.     She  had  got  over  the  prejudices  of  her  education  and  country, 

262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap,  vii. 


and  entertained  the  grandest  apprehensions  of  His  ability ;  nay,  she  acknow- 
ledged Him  as  the  true  Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  and  presented  her  petition 
to  Him  in  that  character.  This  shews  how  sovereign  and  free  the  grace  of 
God  is,  and  that  it  is  not  confined  to  any  one  nation  under  heaven  !  This 
Divine  seed  is  sometimes  sowed  in  a  seemingly  neglected  soil,  and  carefully 
cultivated  by  the  Heavenly  Husbandman,  to  teach  us  that  He  can  plant  it 
anywhere  and  bring  it  to  great  perfection.  It  is  not  where  He  taketh  the 
greatest  pains  that  He  receiveth  the  largest  returns,  but  where  the  children 
of  men  are  diligent  in  improving  the  advantages  they  enjoy.  2.  The  severe 
trial  to  which  it  was  put.  Our  Lord  knew  well  what  virtue  was  in  her,  for  He 
was  the  author  of  it ;  and  He  proved  it,  for  His  own  honour  and  her  consolation. 
He  concealed  His  regard  under  the  appearance  of  displeasure.  One  would  have 
thought  that,  when  she  first  applied  to  Him,  He  would  have  taken  some  notice 
of  her,  and  have  given  her  a  hearty  welcome  ;  she  was  a  stranger,  and  who 
would  not  be  kind  to  strangers  ?  Yet  we  are  told  He  answered  her  not  a  word. 
This  was  so  unlike  His  common  manner,  which  was  all  condescension  and 
sympathy,  that  the  disciples  were  surprised  at  it,  and  interceded  in  her  behalf. 
This  application  of  the  discipjes  probably  encouraged  the  poor  woman,  and 
her  heart  would  bless  them  for  it.  But  it  drew  from  Christ  a  reply  more 
forbidding  than  His  silence,  and  which  plainly  indicated  that  she  had  no  reason 
to  expect  any  favour  from  Him.  "  I  am  not  sent  save  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the 
house  of  Israel."  What  a  disheartening  reply  was  this  !  Was  it  not  enough  to 
drive  her  to  despair  ?  Methinks  we  may  suppose  her  reasoning  thus  with 
herself  :  "  What  an  unhappy  creature  am  I,  to  be  born  a  Greek,  and  con- 
sequently to  be  excluded  from  the  mercy  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth !  Can  it  be 
that  His  heart  is  so  contracted  as  to  be  confined  to  the  house  of  Jacob,  and 
must  all  the  rest  of  mankind  perish  ?  I  will  not,  I  cannot  entertain  so  mean 
an  opinion  of  Him ;  I  will  go  and  prostrate  myself  at  His  feet,  and  implore 
His  compassion  ;  if  He  will  not  hear  me,  I  can  be  no  worse  ;  but  perhaps  His 
bowels  may  be  moved,  and  He  will  vouchsafe  me  His  blessing."  Could  any- 
thing be  more  melting  than  an  address  of  this  nature  ?  Yet  our  Lord  resisted, 
and  would  not  be  importuned  ;  He  told  her  the  great  impropriety,  nay,  the 
injustice,  of  complying  with  her  petition  :  "  For  that  He  would  not  starve  the 
children  to  feed  the  dogs."  One  would  think  that  an  epithet  of  this  nature 
would  have  roused  her  pride  and  inflamed  her  anger.  But  she  had  a  better 
spirit,  and  had  learned  humility.  "  Truth,  Lord :  yet  the  dogs  eat  of  the 
children's  crumbs."  I  confess  I  am  no  better  than  a  dog  ;  but  may  I  not 
have  the  portion  of  a  dog  ?  The  argument  was  irresistible.  The  compassionate 
Jesus  felt  the  force  of  it,  and  yielded  immediately.  3.  The  greatness  of  the 
reward  conferred  upon  it.  There  is  no  grace  which  our  Lord  hath  distinguished 
with  such  marks  of  approbation  as  faith,  because  there  is  none  which  confers 
such  honour  upon  Himself. 

II.  Why  our  Lord  delays  granting  those  petitions  which  are  pleasing  to 
Him,  and  which  He  is  determined  to  grant. — 1.  To  make  us  prize  the  blessings 
He  hath  already  bestowed.  Mankind,  in  general,  put  a  much  greater  value 
upon  something  which  they  want  than  upon  all  that  they  possess.  Nay, 
such  is  the  perversion  of  our  natures,  that  we  will  not  allow  ourselves  to  enjoy 
the  blessings  which  Providence  hath  conferred  upon  us,  but  torture  ourselves 
in  seeking  after  what  it  hath  denied.  Ought  not  so  perverse  and  unreasonable 
a  disposition  to  receive  a  severe  check  ?  May  not  God  justly  contract  His  hand, 
and  restrain  His  bounty,  when  we  prove  insensible  to  His  former  beneficence  ? 
2.  To  teach  us  patience  and  submission.  In  the  pride  of  our  hearts  we  are 
apt  to  think  ourselves  neglected,  if  we  do  not  receive  a  speedy  answer  to  our 
prayers  ;  hence  sullenness  and  discontent  are  ready  to  spring  up  in  our  minds, 

263 


chap.  vil.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


and  we  are  apt  to  accuse  Him  of  coldness  and  disaffection.  But  are  these 
becoming  dispositions  in  dependent,  guilty,  necessitous  creatures  ?  Is  it  not 
our  duty  to  wait  with  patience  the  event  of  the  Divine  counsel,  and  to  acquiesce 
cheerfully  in  its  proceedings  ?  Is  it  not  more  for  the  honour  of  God,  and  for 
our  own  interest,  that  His  will  be  obeyed,  and  the  purposes  of  His  providence 
accomplished,  than  that  we  should  immediately  obtain  what  we  ask  ?  I 
acknowledge  that  chastisement  is  unpleasant  and  cross  to  corrupt  nature ;  but 
is  not  corrupt  nature  what  we  wish  to  have  subdued  ?  Must  not  our  Father 
in  heaven  use  the  most  effectual  means  for  extinguishing  it  ?  3.  To  make  us 
more  fervent  and  importunate.  Do  not  our  prayers  too  often  resemble  rain 
in  the  time  of  frost,  which  freezes  before  it  reaches  the  ground  ?  A  cold 
petitioner  in  some  measure  begs  a  denial.  We  provoke  the  Almighty  to  detain 
us  at  His  throne,  or  to  send  us  empty  away,  to  arouse  us  from  our  lethargy,  and 
to  excite  in  us  greater  fervour.  4.  That  we  may  be  examples  to  others  of 
faith  and  patience.  Who  would  grudge  to  be  held  a  little  longer  in  doubt,  if 
to  be  the  means  of  exciting  in  some  humble  fellow- Christian  a  holy  boldness  and 
patient  perseverance  ?  Is  it  not  enough  to  satisfy  us  that  "  in  due  season  we 
shall  reap,  if  we  faint  not  "  ?  Therefore  let  us  go  with  boldness  to  a  throne  of 
grace,  that  we  may  find  mercy  and  grace  to  help  us  in  every  time  of  need. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  great  advantage  of  affliction.  It  was  the  distress  of  this 
poor  woman's  family  which  brought  her  to  Jesus,  and  she  had  reason  to  be 
thankful  for  it  all  her  life.  When  adversity  hath  this  happy  effect,  we  should 
make  it  welcome,  and  kiss  the  hand  which  dispenseth  it.  2.  Though  this 
poor  woman's  faith  was  very  urgent,  it  was  not  presumptuous.  Oh  that  all  of 
us  may  be  actuated  with  a  similar  spirit !  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  there  are 
some  so  full  of  themselves,  and  have  so  high  an  opinion  of  their  own  importance, 
that  in  their  addresses  to  God  they  resemble  creditors  who  have  a  demand  to 
make  upon  Him,  rather  than  debtors  who  owe  Him  every  obligation.  3.  Genuine 
Christians  need  not  be  discouraged,  though  an  immediate  return  is  not  given  to 
their  prayers.  God  may  treasure  up  their  petitions,  as  He  does  their  tears,  in 
a  bottle,  reserving  the  answer  to  some  future  occasion.  Let  me  add,  that  we 
sometimes  blame  our  Father  in  heaven  unjustly,  and  may  actually  receive  a 
blessing  without  knowing  it.  It  is  one  thing  to  obtain  a  favour,  and  another 
to  have  a  lively  sense  of  it.  God  frequently  dispenseth  His  richest  gifts  whilst 
He  conceals  the  hand  which  bestoweth  them.  May  He  graciously  condescend 
to  hear  our  prayers  and  send  us  an  answer  of  peace  ! — D.  Johnston,  D.D. 

The  Canaanitish  mother. — In  all  the  parts  of  this  narrative  we  may  read  that 
which  concerns  ourselves  most  closely.  For  what  else  are  our  lives,  with  all 
their  varying  accidents  and  issues,  than,  as  it  were,  the  shadows  cast  forward 
into  all  time  by  these  dealings  of  the  Son  of  God  with  man  whilst  He  stood 
amongst  us  in  the  flesh  ?  Have  we  not  each  one  our  own  burden  ?  Whether 
it  be  some  outward  or  some  inward  trial ;  some  family  sorrow  or  some  heart- 
ache ;  the  secret  wasting  of  some  spirit-wound,  some  pang  of  conscience,  or  some 
besetting  temptation ;  or  whether  it  be  the  world's  hollowness  and  the  thirst 
of  the  soul  for  truth, — have  we  not  each  our  need  of  Him  amid  evils  of  which 
He  can  be  the  only  Healer  ?  And  further :  do  not  characters  now  divide  off 
and  part  asunder  even  as  they  did  then  ?  Are  there  not  those  who,  like  the 
Jews,  know  not  the  office  of  this  Healer ;  who  hear  all  His  words,  and  see  all 
His  signs,  and  languidly  let  Him  pass,  or  angrily  murmur  at  Him  or  blasphem- 
ously drive  Him  from  them ;  from  whom  He  passes,  even  to  the  coasts  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon,  to  pour  on  others  the  blessing  they  refuse  ?  But  then  there  are  also 
those  who  do  seek  Him  with  their  whole  heart, — opening  to  Him  their  hidden 
affliction ;  bearing  seeming  refusals  in  the  strength  of  faith  and  the  patience  of. 

264 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


an  unfeigned  humility ;  and  still  looking  for  crumbs,  if  they  may  not  eat  the 
children's  bread ;  daring  to  hope  against  hope ;  ready  to  take  up  with  any 
portion  He  shall  give  them;  and  waiting  still  on  Him,  because  they  cannot 
turn  to  any  other. 

I.  There  is  the  lesson  taught  us  by  the  Jews,  that  He  does  pass  away  from 
those  who  will  not  stay  Him  with  them;  that  He  goes  on  and  heals  others; 
and  that  they  die  unhealed,  because  they  knew  not  "  the  time  of  their  visitation." 
And  the  root  of  this  evil  is  here  pointed  out  to  us :  it  is  a  want  of  faith,  and, 
from  this,  a  lack  of  the  power  of  spiritual  discernment. 

II.  But  there  is  also  here  the  lesson  of  the  woman  of  Canaan ;  and  this  has 
many  aspects^  of  which  the  first,  perhaps,  is  this,  that  by  every  mark  and 
token  which  the  stricken  soul  can  read  He  to  whom  she  sought  is  the  only 
Healer  of  humanity,  the  true  portion  and  rest  of  every  heart, — that  He  would 
teach  us  this  by  all  the  discipline  of  outward  things ;  that  the  ties  of  family 
life  are  meant  thus  to  train  up  our  weak  affections  till  they  are  fitted  to  lay 
hold  on  Him  ;  that  the  eddies  and  sorrows  of  life  are  meant  to  sweep  us  from 
its  flowery  banks,  that  in  its  deep  strong  currents  we  may  cry  to  Him. 

III.  And,  once  more,  there  is  this  further  lesson,  that  He  will  most  surely 
be  found  by  those  who  do  seek  after  Him.  And  this  is  taught  us  here,  not  by 
a  mere  general  assurance  that  we  shall  be  heard,  but  in  a  way  which  enters  far 
more  practically  into  those  difficulties  with  which  every  one  who  has  striven  to 
pray  earnestly  finds  earnest  prayer  beset.  For  here  we  see  why  it  often  happens 
that  really  earnest  and  sincere  men  seem,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  pray  in  vain — 
why  their  "  Lord,  help  me  ! "  is  not  answered  by  a  word.  He  has  a  double 
purpose  herein  :  He  would  bless  by  it  both  us  and  all  His  Church.  1.  How 
could  His  Church  have  been  taught  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint,  better  than 
by  such  a  narrative  as  this  ?  2.  For  ourselves,  too,  there  is  a  special  mercy  in 
these  long-delayed  blessings.  For  it  is  only  by  degrees  that  the  work  within  us 
can  be  perfected  ;  it  is  only  by  steps,  small  and  almost  imperceptible  as  we  are 
taking  them,  yet  one  by  one  leading  us  to  unknown  heights,  that  we  can  mount 
up  to  the  golden  gate  before  us.  Much  are  we  taught  by  these  delayed  answers 
to  our  prayers.  By  them  the  treasure  of  our  hearts  is  cleared  from  dross,  as 
in  the  furnace-heat ;  our  earthly  will  is  purified  and  bowed ;  the  passionate 
fervency  of  unchastened  .prayer  is  deepened  into  the  strong  breath  of  humble 
supplication ;  patience  has  her  perfect  work  ;  we  are  kept  looking  up  to  Christ ; 
and  by  His  grace,  even  as  we  hang  upon  Him,  we  grow  like  unto  Him ;  we 
dwell  in  Him,  and  He  in  us. — Bishop  S.   Wilberforce. 

Christ's  mercy. — The  unusual  conduct  of  our  Lord,  as  seen  in  this  story,  has 
been  often  attributed  to  an  intention  of  calling  into  full  consciousness  the  faith 
which  He  knew  to  exist  in  the  woman's  heart,  and  thus  at  once  to  deepen  it  in 
Himself,  and  to  elicit  an  example  which  should  serve,  as  it  has  served,  for  the 
instruction  and  support  of  all  Christian  souls.  But,  without  excluding  this 
consideration,  there  are  some  circumstances  in  the  case  which  seem  to  give  a 
more  obvious  explanation  of  the  first  motive  of  our  Lord's  conduct,  and  may 
give  the  story  a  still  closer  application  to  ourselves. 

I.  The  people  had  just  been  raised  to  the  highest  point  of  enthusiasm  for 
Christ,  and,  as  a  double  consequence,  His  disciples  were  ready  to  make  Him 
a  king  by  force,  and  the  Pharisaic  party  were  moving  into  active  hostility.  On 
account  of  this  twofold  excitement,  then,  He  withdrew  into  the  coasts  of  Tyre 
and  Sidon.  He  was  therefore  specially  concerned  to  abstain  from  using  His 
miraculous  powers;  and  had  He  at  once  healed  the  woman's  daughter,  the 
purpose  of  His  retirement  might  have  been  at  once  frustrated. 

II.  But  there  is  a  further  consideration  which  shews  that  His  repellent 

265 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


answers  were  more  than  formal  excuses. — "I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost 
sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  That  was  a  definite  principle  of  His  ministry. 
Consequently  when  this  woman  appealed  to  Him,  she  was  asking  Him  to 
depart. from  an  important  principle  of  His  ordinary  conduct.  His  ministry  was 
governed  by  certain  laws  which  had  been  determined  for  purposes  of  the  highest 
import,  and  it  was  no  easy  matter  for  Him  to  depart  from  them. 

III.  This  aspect  of  the  narrative  adds  a  great  attraction  and  force  to  the 
bearing  of  the  story  upon  ourselves. — We  too  are  living  under  certain  definite 
laws  of  God ;  and  if  we  transgress  them,  then  under  all  ordinary  circumstances 
we  must  expect  the  consequences,  and  we  make  a  grievous  mistake  in  appeal- 
ing lightly  to  the  mercy  of  God.  Doubtless  His  mercy  is  infinite  ;  but  so  are 
His  truth  and  justice,  and  His  determination  to  uphold  the  laws  He  has  laid 
down.  Our  Lord  longed  to  help  the  woman,  but  it  was  hard  for  Him  to  infringe 
the  rule  which  He  had  laid  down  for  His  own  guidance. 

IV.  Thus  our  Lord's  conduct  is  first  a  warning. — It  illustrates  what  must 
often  be  the  feeling  of  God  towards  us  when  we  have  violated  our  covenant  with 
Him,  and  expect  Him  to  have  pity  on  us  simply  because  of  the  misery  we  have 
brought  upon  ourselves. 

Y.  But  the  example  of  this  woman  is  also  given  for  infinite  encourage- 
ment.— By  the  side  of  these  rules  of  His  ordinary  government  there  is  ever 
present  a  higher  principle  or  a  higher  law — that  of  the  response  of  perfect  love 
to  genuine  and  entire  faith. — H.    Wace,   D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.    24.    Christ's    departure  from  desolated     Israel.       Apparently    only 

Galilee. — Take  warning  from  Christ's  twice  was    Syrian   contact  wholesome 

departure  from  the  active  ministry  in  to  the  Holy  Land  and  people.     These 

Galilee.    His  own  rejected  Him.    They  were  when  Hiram  the  king  and  Hiram 

were  deeply  moved;  conscience  told  them  the  architect,  with  Phoenician  timber 

to  yield  their  hearts  to  Him  in  meek  and  Phoenician  art,  contributed  to  the 

obedience,    and   they   would   not.     So  glory  of  Solomon's  Temple,  and  again 

He  left  them.     Christ  is  near  each  one  when  Elisha  won  trophies  of  grace  in 

of  us,  far  nearer  to  us  than  He  was  Naaman   and  his   company.      Except 

to  those   scribes    and   Pharisees ;    He  one  or  two  bright  lines  of  association, 

demands,  therefore,  more   of  us   than  the   whole   spectrum   of   memory  was 

He  did  of  them ;    and  if  we  will   not  that  of  darkness.     Added   to  all   else 

give  Him  our  hearts,  He  will  leave  us  was    the    thought   of    Phoenicia,   the 

to  our  worst  enemy — our  own  miserable  slave-land   to  which  Judah's   children 

selves.  had  been  sold  in  the  days  of  Joel. 

Jesus  in  Phoenicia. — To  the   Jeru-  Christ  not  hidden  from   the   seeking 

salem     Jews     this     north -land     was  soul. — It  is  easy  to  hide  Christ  from 

a   sink   of  idolatry.     Even   the   Gali-  those  who  do  not  want  Him.     But  the 

leans   spoke    of    their    frontagers    as  heart  which  feels  its  need   of  Christ, 

"  dogs,"  "heathen,"  "unclean,"  "out-  and  cannot  do  without  Him,  will  find 

casts."       Uncircumcised     aliens,     left  Him  wherever  He  is  hidden, 
unextirpated  by  Joshua  and  his  con- 
quering soldiers,  were  these   Gentiles.  Yers.  25-30.  Persistent  effort  is  not  in 

Out   of   this   ill-omened    quarter   had  itself  true  faith,  but  it  always  accom- 

come   Ethbaal   and   Jezebel,    and   the  panies    true    faith.       Thunder    never 

priests  of  Astarte,  border-ruffians   in  split  the  heart  of  the   oak   tree,  but 

the  age  of  the  judges,  and  the  raiders  it  always  accompanies  the  lightning's 

who  in  the   days   of    the   kings   had  flash,  and  tells  to  all  about  of  the  light- 

266 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         CHAP.  VII. 


ning's  presence.  The  farmer  does  not 
shew  his  faith  by  lying  in  his  bed  and 
waiting  for  God  to  plough  and  harrow 
his  field  and  sow  his  seed.  He  ploughs 
and  harrows  and  sows,  and  shews  his 
faith  in  then  waiting  for  God  to  give 
the  increase.  God's  winds  are  always 
blowing ;  the  man  of  faith  spreads  his 
sail  before  God  can  fill  it.  Does  not 
this  story  shew — 1.  That  the  Lord  is 
humane  enough,  tender  enough,  to 
satisfy  all  mankind.  2.  That  even  if 
He  seems  silent  at  first,  and  does  not 
grant  our  prayers,  yet  still  He  may  be 
keeping  us  waiting  only  that  He  may 
be  gracious  to  us  at  last.  3.  That  He 
can  feel  for  mothers  and  with  mothers  ; 
that  He  actually  allowed  Himself  to 
be  won  over — if  such  a  word  may  be 
used  reverently — by  the  wit  and  grace 
of  a  mother  pleading  for  a  child. — 
C.  Kingsley. 

Lessons. — 1.  Any  trouble,  however 
grievous,  is  a  blessing,  if  it  brings  us 
to  seek  Christ  and  His  help.  2.  There 
are  none  who  may  not  come  to  Christ 
for  help.  3.  No  true  blessing  is  too 
great  for  Christ  to  grant.  4.  Men 
ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to 
faint. — J.  R.  Bailey. 

Christ's  dealings  with  His  people. — 1. 
Remember  how  various  are  the  dealings 
of  the  Lord  with  His  people  who  pray 
to  Him,  answering  at  once  with  some, 
answering  after  long  delay  with  others, 
and  not  answering  at  all  with  a  third 
class.  2.  Examine  into  the  causes  of 
delay  so  far  as  we  can,  or  of  failure  in 
prayer.  Is  it  that  we  ask  for  what  is 
contrary  to  His  will  and  providence, 
and  not  that  His  will  be  fulfilled  ?  Is 
it  that  we  seek  temporal  things  first, 
and  not  spiritual — not  "first  the 
kingdom  of  God "  ?  Is  it  that  we 
are|  indulging  some  known  sin,  and  so 
our  prayers  are  not  acceptable  ?  Or  is 
it  that  we  have  not  the  dispositions 
which  the  heathen  mother  had — of 
faith  and  fervour,  of  lowliness  and 
perseverance?  3.  Let  us  imitate  her, 
and  wait  upon  God  until  He  is  gracious 
to  us.  Take  especially  her  perseverance 
in  prayer,  and  copy  it.  "  Ask,  and  ye 
shall  receive  ;  seek,  and  ye  shall  find ; 


knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto 
you."  Let  delay  enlarge  the  desire 
of  the  soul.  Ward  off  impatience 
and  despair.  "  The  kingdom  of  God 
suffereth  violence ;  and  the  violent  take 
it  by  force."  Let  us  struggle  on  till 
we  gain  the  grace  we  are  seeking,  and 
say,  with  the  patriarch  of  old,  "  I  will 
not  let  Thee  go,  except  Thou  bless  me." 
— W.  H.  Hutching s. 

Bringing  others  to  Christ. — This  case 
is  one  out  of  a  multitude  in  which  the 
immediate  sufferer  is  brought  to  Christ 
not  by  his  own  prayer,  but  by  the 
prayer  of  others.  Have  you  ever  seen 
anything  like  this  in  the  symptoms  of 
this  raging  pestilence  of  sin?  Have 
you  ever  known  the  patient  fascinated 
by  its  illusions,  or  crazed  with  its  mad 
delirium,  or  hardened  into  apathetic 
indifference,  or  inactive  in  the  helpless 
torpor  of  despair,  so  that  if  anything 
is  to  be  done  in  his  behalf,  it  must 
needs  be  done  by  others  ?  And  do  you 
find  no  encouragement,  in  such  stories 
as  this,  to  believe  that  those  who  seem 
to  be  past  the  power  of  praying  for 
themselves  may  be  taken  up  in  the 
arms  of  natural  affection  and  brought 
to  where  the  Lord  may  lay  His  hands 
upon  them  and  heal  them?  Each 
bond  of  social  influence,  each  tie  of 
natural  affection,  may  be  a  means 
that  God  shall  use  to  bring  them 
within  the  circle  of  the  attractions  of 
the  Cross,  "  drawing  them  with  the 
cords  of  love,  with  the  bands  of  a 
man."  Oh,  doubly  blessed  such  an 
affliction  which  brings  to  Christ  not 
one  alone  but  two — preparing  the 
sufferer  to  receive  the  grace,  and 
teaching  the  sympathiser  how  to  pray 
for  it ! — L.  W.  Bacon. 

Prayer  for  others. — It  is  said  truly, 
that  necessity  makes  a  man  pray  for 
himself,  but  charity  for  another ;  and 
in  charity  the  rule  is  good,  the  nearer 
the  dearer :  and  therefore,  seeing  our 
children  next  unto  ourselves,  and  our 
wives  our  other  selves,  are  nearest 
unto  us,  it  is  good  reason  we  should 
wish  them  all  good,  especially  that 
they  may  be  dispossessed  of  the  devil. 
— Dean  Boys. 

267 


chap.  vn.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  27.  Christ's  reluctance  to  depart 
from  His  plan  of  wwk. — Jesus'  work 
was  proceeding  in  a  certain  method. 
He  could  depart  from  that  method, 
but  He  must  depart  for  a  reason. 
When  a  departure  was  suggested,  the 
first  thing  that  came  up  to  Him  was 
the  great  law  and  purpose  of  His  life. 
It  was  only  when  the  reason  became 
very  strong  that  He  was  willing  to 
depart.  It  would  seem  that  there 
was  a  necessity  for  adhering  to  the 
ordinary  course  of  His  work,  yet  not 
an  absolute  but  a  relative  necessity, 
which  could  be  surpassed,  but  had  first 
to  be  moved  aside  by  reason. — Bishop 
Phillips  Brooks. 

Words  with  tender  tone. — Hard  words. 
Yes  :  but  all  depends  on  how  they  were 
spoken — on  Christ's  look,  and  the  tone 
of  His  voice.  Did  He  speak  with  a 
frown,  or  with  something  like  a  smile  ? 
There  must  have  been  some  tenderness, 
meaningness,  pity,  in  His  voice  which 
the  quick  woman's  wit  caught  instantly, 
and  the  quick  mother's  heart  inter- 
preted as  a  sign  of  hope. — C.  Kingsley. 

Ver.  28.  This  verse  contains  three 
important  principles  for  our  guidance 
in  the  spiritual  life.  1.  Agree  with 
the  Lord,  no  matter  what  He  says. 
"  Yes,  Lord."  2.  Think  of  another 
truth,  and  urge  it  with  Him  as  a  plea. 
"  Yet."  3.  Whatever  happens,  have 
faith  in  the  Lord,  and  possess  thy  soul 
in  patience.  His  dealings  may  be 
inscrutable,  but  the  foundation  of  them 
all  is  love. 

Encouragement  from  a  severe  word. 
— Instead  of  "  Yes,  Lord  :  yet,"  the 
R.V.  gives  "  Yea,  Lord  :  even  "  ;  and 
the  more  exact  rendering  brings  to 
light  a  valuable  truth.  The  old  trans- 
lation, it  has  been  truly  said,  expresses 
the  way  in  which  our  mind  too 
generally  looks  at  things.  We  fancy 
that  we  set  one  truth  over  against 
another,  whereas  all  truths  are  agreed, 
and  cannot  be  in  conflict.  Out  of  the 
very  truth  which  looks  darkest  we 
may  gain  consolation.  This  woman 
did  not  draw  comfort  from  another 
truth  which  seemed  to  neutralise  the 

268 


first ;  but  as  the  bee  sucks  honey 
from  the  nettle,  so  did  she  gather 
encouragement  from  the  severe  word 
of  the  Lord :  "  It  is  not  meet  to  take 
the  children's  bread,  and  to  cast  it  to 
dogs."  She  said,  "  That  is  true,  Lord, 
for  even  the  dogs  eat  of  the  children's 
crumbs."  She  had  not  to  turn' what 
Christ  said  upside-down;  she  took  it 
as  it  stood,  and  spied  out  comfort  in  it. 

Are  we  pleading  the  better  covenant  ? 
— This  woman  had  God's  old  covenant 
against  her;  we  have  His  new  and 
better  covenant  on  our  side.  Are  we 
pleading  it  with  anything  like  the 
earnestness  she  shewed  ?  Do  we  pray 
for  others  with  such  pertinacity  and 
importunity  ? 

Reading  between  the  lines. — Like  a 
skilful  musician,  she  caught  the  strain 
and  finished  the  strophe.  To  the 
Jewish  ear  the  Master  had  begun  to 
tell  the  parable  of  elect  and  reprobate, 
covenant  and  aliens,  of  the  home  and 
the  outcasts,  of  the  children  and  the 
curs.  She,  with  faith's  power  and  in 
the  light  of  that  eye,  read  between  the 
lines  the  tiny  parable  of  the  children 
and  their  pets,  even  the  parable  of 
humanity  and  its  Saviour.  Her  gen- 
tleness made  her  great ;  her  trust  made 
her  mighty.  No  longer  Canaanitish 
or  Syrophoenician,  she  is  for  ever  in 
sacred  story  as  the  woman  great  of 
faith,  on  whose  will  was  laid  answer 
to  prayer  from  the  Holy  One  of  God. 

In  the  love  of  God  there  is  ample 
room,  if  only  men  will  enter  in  at  the 
right  door,  and  pursue  it  in  the  lawful 
way.  What  Esau  imputed  to  an 
earthly  father,  when  he  said,  "Bless 
me,  even  me  also,  O  my  father,"  the 
same  fulness  of  bounty  do  the  hearts 
of  "  such  as  shall  be  saved  "  impute  to 
their  Heavenly  Father,  and  to  His 
express  image,  Jesus  Christ."  And  so 
did  this  woman's  heart  impute  it  to 
Him,  when  she  replied,  "  Truth,  Lord," 
etc.  It  is  clear  she  caught  glimpses, 
at  least,  of  the  true  and  living  God, 
who  "  giveth  to  all  men  liberally,  and 
upbraideth  not."  It  is  clear  she  had 
a  lively  notion  what  kind  of  "  Master  " 
God  was.     She  had  also  a  notion  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  vn. 


the  necessities  and  dependence  of  man 
upon  God.  What  she  calls  "the 
master's  table "  is,  in  the  enlarged 
application  of  the  parable,  the  com- 
mon order  of  Providence.  She  herein 
silently  acknowledges,  at  the  same 
time,  the  justice  of  God  in  giving 
different  gifts  to  men, — to  some  abun- 
dance, whether  of  wealth  or  health  ;  to 
others  poverty  and  sickness.  She  does 
not  dispute  the  order  of  Providence, 
but  acquiesces  in  it. 

Yer.  29.  Perseverance  rewarded. — 
There  is  no  withheld  mercy  that  the 
soul  requires  which  is  not  waiting 
simply  for  the  opportunity  to  abandon 
itself  in  the  utter  bestowal  of  its  grace 
upon  the  needy  soul.  Persevere,  even 
if  you  have  pleaded  for  years  and 
seemed  to  get  no  entrance  into  the  ear 
of  God.  The  man,  wrestling  with  the 
burden  of  this  life  and  finding  it  too 
heavy,  who  by-and-by  kills  himself 
because  he  thinks  there  is  no  salvation 
at  the  hands  of  God,  how  cowardly 
his  conduct  is,  and  how  poor  it  is, 
beside  the  impetuous  faith  with  which 
this  poor  woman  wrestles  with  the 
stone  athwart  the  torrent  of  the  mercy 
of  her  God,  until  by-and-by  it  is 
turned  away  and  the  torrent  pours 
itself  into  the  help  of  her  need ! — Bishop 
Phillips  Brooks. 

The  limitations  of  mercy. — All 
through  the  record  of  mercies  and  the 
miracles  of  Jesus  there  runs  a  certain 
subtle  tone  which  puzzles  us.  I  seem 
to  hear,  as  I  read,  the  sound  of  a 
great  sea  of  might  and  mercy  shut  in 
behind  necessities  which  it  cannot  dis- 
obey ;  I  seem  to  hear  it  clamouring 
to  escape  and  give  itself  away  along 
long  stretches  of  the  wall  which  shuts 
it  in ;  and  then  I  seem  to  see  it 
bursting  forth  rejoicingly  where  some 
great  gate  is  flung  wide  open,  and  it 
may  go  forth  unhindered  to  its  work 
of  blessing.  So  seems  to  me  the  story 
of  the  power  and  love  of  Jesus  held 
fast  under  the  conditions  of  the  faith 
of  men. — Ibid. 

The  outside  and  inside  healing. — The 
child  was  healed;  but  no  more  than 


the  mother.  The  demon  was  cast  out 
of  the  child  ;  but  no  more  than  it  was 
out  of  the  mother.  The  child  was 
brought  back  to  the  mother.  Yes, 
and  the  mother  was  brought  back  to 
God.  It  was  a  double  miracle  that 
was  performed.  There  was  an  inside 
one  and  an  outside  one;  and  the 
inside  one  was  the  more  resplendent 
and  glorious.  God's  mercies  are  to  be 
counted  not  on  the  outside,  but  on  the 
inside.  If  they  make  you  selfish,  and 
hard-hearted,  and  unsympathetic,  and 
you  grow  close,  and  you  separate  your- 
self from  your  fellow-men,  and  you 
are  ungodlike  in  the  proportion  in 
which  you  are  prospered,  woe  be  unto 
you  !  If  God's  external  mercies  make 
you  better,  they  are  tolerable.  If 
God's  chastisements  make  you  better, 
thank  God  for  them.  Those  unfeeling 
words,  that  cold  look,  and  that  in- 
different way  of  Christ — what  a  gush 
of  feeling  they  brought  out  from  this 
woman's  soul !  That  pushing  away — 
how  it  brought  the  pleading  hands 
out,  as  it  were  !  how  it  caused  every 
tendril  and  fibre  of  her  heart  to  clasp 
and  cling  to  the  Saviour,  and  made 
her  refuse  to  let  Him  go  !  It  was  out 
of  the  apparent  winter  of  His  face 
that  her  summer  came.  It  was  out 
of  this  repulsion  that  her  blessing  came. 
Any  dealing  that  makes  you  better 
inside  is  beneficent.  And  do  not  feel, 
when  God  is  dealing  with  you  severely, 
that  He  has  forgotten  you.  It  takes 
a  great  while  to  answer  some  prayers. 
You  cannot  be  transformed  in  an 
instant.  You  cannot  be  changed  be- 
tween twilight  and  sunrise.  When, 
therefore,  you  pray  that  God  will 
regenerate  your  nature,  will  you  not 
give  Him  time  to  do  such  a  work  ? 
When  you  pray  for  the  reconstruction 
of  your  character,  will  you  not  wait  till 
God  can  perform  such  an  act. of  mercy  ? 
If,  looking  at  the  interior,  He  sees 
that  the  work  can  be  expedited,  He 
will  expedite  it ;  but  you  must  be 
patient. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

Bring  your  wants  to  Christ. — Bring 
all  your  wants  to  Christ,  and  always 
bring  them  with  a  consciousness  that 

269 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


for  the  answering  of  your  prayer  the  It   may   be   that   you   stand   between 

best  of  all  persuasions  and  arguments  your  desires  and  God's  mercies.     Seek 

is  a  heart  that  will  be  made  better  by  to  keep  the  way  clear  between  your 

having  its  petitions  answered  of  God.  soul  and  His. — Ibid. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  31-37. 

The  deaf-mute  healed. — I.  The  journey  of  Christ,  and  the  place  where  the 
miracle  was  performed  (ver.  31). — From  His  short  and  necessary  excursion  unto 
a  foreign  territory  Christ  speedily  returned  to  the  land  of  Judea,  the  proper 
scene  of  the  ministry  of  Him  who  was  sent  unto  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of 
Israel.  With  a  view,  probably,  both  of  allowing  time  for  the  resentment  of  His 
enemies  to  be  moderated,  and  of  instructing  numbers  whom  He  had  not  visited 
in  the  regular  course  of  His  journeys,  He  makes  a  circuit  through  the  rich  and 
fertile  district  of  Decapolis,  or  "  the  Ten  Cities,"  the  most  populous  part  of  the 
well -inhabited  province  of  Galilee.  His  stay  seems  to  have  been  short,  for  none 
of  the  Evangelists  mention  any  remarkable  event  to  have  taken  place  there.  He 
hastens  to  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  the  birthplace  and  residence  of  many 
of  His  disciples — the  country  of  a  numerous  people  who  listened  to  Him  with 
more  attention  and  respect  than  the  proud  and  bigoted  inhabitants  of  the  capital 
and  its  neighbourhood. 

II.  The  nature  of  the  disease  to  be  cured  (ver.  32). — This  man  had  not  power 
in  those  organs  which  are  necessary  for  the  reciprocal  communication  of  ideas 
and  sentiments.  We  are  little  accustomed  to  consider  the  vast  importance  of 
the  gift  of  speech — a  gift,  I  believe,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term,  from  our 
Supreme  Benefactor ;  for  articulate  language,  an  art  so  complicated  and  yet  so 
necessary  in  the  earliest  infancy  of  society,  can  scarcely  be  considered  as  a  matter 
of  human  invention.  No  theory  has  proved  satisfactory,  or  thrown  light  on  the 
subject,  but  that  one  which  ascribes  it  to  "the  Father  of  lights,  from  whom 
cometh  every  good  and  perfect  gift."  It  is  indeed  a  good  gift,  on  which  all  the 
other  improvements  of  society  depend.  Without  it  man  must  be  still  almost  a 
solitary  individual.  In  the  midst  of  society  he  were  alone — guided  in  his  diffi- 
culties by  no  kind  instruction,  soothed  in  his  calamities  by  no  soft  voice  of 
sympathy,  gladdened  in  the  day  of  strength  by  no  cheering  note  of  joy,  comforted 
in  the  hour  of  darkness  and  sorrow  by  no  kindred  spirit  to  tell  him  of  another 
and  a  better  life,  of  the  high  destiny  of  man,  and  of  the  grace  of  a  merciful  God. 

III.  The  request  of  the  people  (ver.  32). — There  is  a  modesty  in  the  request 
which  gives  a  favourable  idea  of  the  character  of  the  petitioners.  They  were 
evidently  humane ;  for  they  bring  their  distressed  neighbour  for  a  cure.  They 
were  humble  ;  they  present  the  opportunity  of  working  a  miracle  to  Him  whom 
they  believed  to  be  possessed  of  the  power  ;  but  they  did  not  demand  nor  even 
solicit  the  exertion  of  His  Divine  energy.  They  believed  in  the  compassion  of 
Christ ;  and  they  present  to  Him  an  object  of  pity,  and  pray  that  He  will  bless 
him.  To  lay  the  hand  on  one  is  the  natural  and  significant  action  of  goodwill, 
of  a  benevolent  wish  and  friendly  inclination.  The  people  expected  that  by  this 
action  Christ  would  communicate  the  particular  blessing  which  the  case  required. 
They  did  not  suppose  that  He  was  to  use  any  vain  arts,  like  the  false  pretenders 
to  miraculous  power ;  but  that  by  His  own  inherent  energy  He  would  effect  the 
cure  of  which  the  laying  on  of  His  hand  marked,  according  to  the  usual  significant 
form,  the  wish  and  the  accomplishment.  The  people  knew  that  Christ  was  raised 
far  above  all  vainglory,  and  that  by  a  simple  indication  of  His  will  He  could 
produce  a  miraculous  cure, 

270 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


IV.  The  manner  in  which  our  Lord  proceeded  in  performing  this  miracle 

(vers.  33,  34). — He  would  not  expose  the  man,  while  He  is  communicating  with 

him  by  the  necessary  signs,  to  the  idle  gaze  of  the  indifferent,  or  the  impertinent 

observations  of  those  wicked  companions  who  followed  Him  everywhere,  and 

might  now  be  mixed  among  the  friendly  observers,  and  who  might  alarm  the 

patient,  who  could  not  hear  nor  understand  their  words,  but  might  comprehend 

their  gestures  so  far  as  to  produce  in  him  uneasiness  and  fear.     Retiring  a  little 

from  the  crowd,  "  He  put  His  fingers  into  his  ears,  and  He  spit,  and  touched 

his  tongue."     You  are  aware  that  from  the  situation  of  this  man,  precluded  from 

all  conversation  with  his  neighbours,  from  all  the  means  of  knowledge  which 

depend  on  spoken  language,  he  must  therefore  have  had  a  very  imperfect  notion 

of  our  Lord's  character  and  power.     There  was  no  way  by  which  Christ  could 

excite  his  attention  or  communicate  His  own  views  or  purpose  but  by  appropriate 

signs,  to  the  use  of  which  he  was  probably  accustomed.     As  the  ears  of  the  deaf 

seem  to  be  closed,  He  puts  His  fingers  on  them  ;  and  as  the  tongue  is  supposed 

to  be  fastened,  He  touched  it  with  a  wet  finger,  to  intimate,  perhaps,  to  the 

wondering  patient  and  his  friends  the  nature  of  the  relief  He  was  about  to 

convey.     Then  observe  our  Lord's  sympathy — "He  sighed."      He  felt  for  the 

degraded  situation  of  the  man  before  Him,  excluded  from  society,  whose  converse 

cheers  us  amid  the  calamities  of  life — from  that  moral  instruction  which  elevates 

us  above  them,  from  the  knowledge  of   God  and  that  religious  truth  which 

prepares  us  for  the  enjoyment  of  Him  ;  and  by  a  sigh,  the  frequent  attendant 

of  inward  and  silent  prayer,  especially  when  the  mind  is  oppressed  by  grief,  He 

shewed  how  much  His  heart  was  affected,  and  how  ardent  His  wish  to  grant 

relief.     It  might  be  that  there  were  some  circumstances  unknown  to  us  which 

made  this  man  a  peculiar  object  of  pity.     But  whether  general  or  particular,  it 

was  evidently  His  sympathy  with  human    wretchedness   which   agitated   His 

bosom,  that  tender  feeling  for  all  our  sorrows  which  renders  Him  so  fit  a  High 

Priest  for  men  compassed  about  with  infirmity.     Observe  our  Lord's  piety  in 

this  action  :  "  Looking  up  to  heaven."     Through  all  His  life,  from  His  earliest 

years  till  it  was  finished  on  the  Cross,  His  reverence  for  His  Heavenly  Father  is 

conspicuous.     His  will  was  the  guide  of  His  actions,  His  honour  the  end  and 

aim  of  them.     From  Him  He  asked  for  power,  and  to  Him  ascribed  the  glory. 

In  this  case  He  raised  His  eyes  to  the  heavens  and  to  Him  who  made  them,  as 

a  mark  of  His  own  trust  in  the  Divine  blessing  on  this  work  of  kindness,  as  an 

intimation  to  the  person  to  be  cured,  who  could  see,  though  he  could  not  speak 

nor  hear,  that  from  thence  was  to  come  his  aid,  and  as  a  warning  to  all  the 

witnesses  of  the  transaction  that  they  should  glorify  the  God  of  their  fathers  for 

His  wondrous  works.     In  this  action  observe  the  power  and  authority  of  Christ ; 

He  saith,  "  Ephphatha,  that  is,  Be  thou  opened."     He  speaks  in  the  Syriac,  the 

common  language  of  the  country,  that  the  audience  might  all  know  what  was 

passing.     Assured  of  His  power,  He  commands,  and  it  is  done.     The  authority 

of  Heaven  accompanying  His  words,  sanctions  the  high  claims  of  the  Carpenter 

of  Nazareth  to  the  office  and  character  of  the  Messiah. 

V.  The  account  of  the  miracle  (ver.  35). — The  miracle  was  accomplished 
"  straightway,"  instantly,  on  the  command — not  gradually,  as  if  it  were  the 
effect  of  external  application.  Although  Christ,  as  the  Messiah,  "  was  not  to 
cry  nor  lift  up  nor  cause  His  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets  "  as  a  vain  boaster 
or  a  deceiver  of  the  people,  yet  He  possessed  within  Him  a  mighty  energy  which 
gave  its  proper  effect  to  every  word  which  He  spake,  which  made  the  deaf  to 
hear  His  voice,  and  gave  to  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  a  power  unknown  and 
unconceived  before.  He  spake  with  the  voice  of  power ;  but  as  it  broke  on  the 
delighted  ear  of  the  patient,  it  sounded  soft  as  the  voice  of  mercy  speaking  in 
its  sweetest  tones ;  gentle  and  kind,  it  diffused  joy  over  his  frame,  mixed  with 

271 


chap.  vii.         H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


that  astonishment  which  he  could  not  help  feeling  when  all  the  knowledge  of 
manhood  was  at  once  bestowed  on  such  a  weak  and  imperfect  being. 

VI.  The  charge  of  concealment  (ver.  36). — Without  waiting  to  receive  the 
expressions  of  astonishment,  joy,  and  gratitude  which  were  ready  to  break  forth 
from  every  tongue,  and  which  would  have  been  so  pleasant  to  an  ordinary  mind, 
He  enjoins  silence  and  secrecy  with  regard  to  this  humane  action.  He  laid  the 
foundation  for  a  complete  proof  of  His  Divinity,  but  He  was  not  anxious  to 
receive  the  direct  testimony  or  honour  of  men.  He  formed  the  strongest  claims 
to  the  gratitude  of  mankind,  but  He  declined,  with  the  genuine  modesty  of  a 
superior  mind,  the  applause  which  they  were  ready  to  bestow.  It  has  been 
often  observed,  that  true  greatness  is  always  adorned  with  this  lovely  quality, 
and  that  the  highest  attainments  have  ever  been  accompanied  with  humility. 
Possessing  qualities  far  above  those  of  humanity,  the  humility  of  Christ  reflects 
a  peculiar  beauty  on  His  character,  and  renders  His  virtues  and  His  works  most 
engaging  and  attractive.  We  are  astonished  at  the  Divine  power  in  this  miracle. 
We  admire  the  Divine  goodness  and  condescension.  We  adore  and  love  the  lowly 
spirit  which  shrank  from  the  noisy  praises  of  the  wondering  multitude,  and 
avoided  the  ostentation  of  a  public  testimony  to  His  merits. 

VII.  The  effect  on  the  beholders  (vers.  36,  37). — In  His  journey  through  life 
Christ  was  much  oftener  harassed  by  envy  and  malice  than  consoled  by  the 
soft  voice  of  sympathy  or  cheered  by  the  sweet  notes  of  praise.  The  people 
among  whom  He  now  was  felt  and  spake  of  His  good  deeds  as  it  became  them. 
There  is  often  a  zeal  without  knowledge  which  appears  in  the  writings  of  pious 
men.  Hence  these  Galileans  have  been  blamed  because  they  published  this 
miracle  "  so  much  the  more  "  that  the  Worker  of  it  charged  them  to  conceal  it. 
Christ,  they  say,  was  a  Lawgiver  entitled  to  the  obedience  of  all  whom  He  had 
addressed,  and  had  peculiar  reasons,  involving  His  comfort  and  His  safety,  for 
wishing  that  this  command  should  be  carefully  observed.  All  this  is  certainly 
true.  But  it  was  not  yet  known  to  these  men  of  Galilee  :  they  viewed  Him 
merely  as  an  illustrious  prophet,  whose  modesty  would  keep  secret  what  tended 
to  His  great  honour,  and,  moved  by  wonder  and  gratitude,  they  feel  themselves 
bound  to  proclaim  the  virtue  which  they  admired,  and  the  good  deeds  which 
they  experienced.  Far  from  entertaining  any  enmity  to  Christ,  or  a  malicious 
disregard  of  His  request,  they  are  anxious  to  promote  His  credit  among  men, 
and  use  only  the  language  of  commendation. — L.  Adamson. 

Ver.  34.  Ephphatha. — A  serious  and  philosophical  mind,  contemplating  the 
innumerable  evils,  physical  and  moral,  to  which  men  are  exposed  during  their  short 
continuance  in  this  world,  would  very  naturally  conclude  that  the  present  state 
could  not  be  that  for  which  the  Almighty  originally  intended  them.  Divine 
revelation  alone  can  carry  us  back  to  the  origin  of  things,  and  give  us  the  true 
information  with  respect  to  their  present  appearances.  By  this  we  learn,  that 
the  beautiful  order  and  harmony  of  creation  were  marred  by  the  creature's  trans- 
gression, who,  turning  his  will  from  the  source  of  infinite  goodness,  lost  that  first 
state  in  which  his  Maker  had  placed  him,  and  wherein  all  was  light  and  joy, 
and  found  himself  in  subjection  to  an  evil  nature  within  and  a  world  of  darkness 
and  distress  without.  By  this  too  we  are  informed,  that  nothing  less  than 
a  return  to  his  original  source  could  reinstate  him  in  his  original  bliss ;  that 
this  return  could  be  rendered  possible  in  no  other  way  than  by  a  ray,  a  spark, 
a  seed,  an  earnest,  a  taste,  or  a  touch  of  his  first  life,  imparted  or  inspoken  into 
his  fallen  nature  by  the  God  of  love,  to  be  gradually  opened  and  unfolded  by 
such  a  redeeming  process  as,  with  the  co-operation  of  his  own  will,  would 
effectually  restore  him  to  his  primeval  felicity  ;  and  that  this  was  undertaken, 
and  only  could  be  undertaken  and  accomplished,  by  that  Eternal  Son  of  the 

272 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


Father  in  and  by  whom  man  was  originally  created,  and  in  and  by  whom  alone 
he  could  be  redeemed. 

I.  The  looking  up  to  heaven  was  beautifully  expressive  of  the  real  situation 
in  which  this  Great  Restorer  of  human  nature  stood  before  His  Heavenly  Father. 
It  was  intended,  no  doubt,  to  communicate  to  every  attentive  observer  this 
great  lesson  of  instruction  :  that  all  the  powers  and  virtues  of  which  He  was 
possessed  came  down  from  above ;  that  they  were  communicated  to  Him 
"  without  measure  " ;  and  that  He  could  have  no  authority  over  the  evils  of 
human  life,  so  as  either  to  mitigate  or  remove  them,  but  by  standing  continually 
in  the  heavenly  world,  inspiring  its  air,  receiving  its  beams  of  light  and  love, 
and  sending  them  forth  into  every  human  heart  that  was  truly  desirous  of 
receiving  them ;  and  that  it  was  by  such  a  communication  alone  that  He  should 
be  enabled  to  restore  hearing  and  speech  to  the  unhappy  patient  they  had 
brought  before  Him. 

II.  This  look  was  accompanied  with  a  sigh. — A  sigh  seems  to  indicate 
distress.  An  anxious,  oppressed,  and  afflicted  heart  is  sometimes  so  full  as  to 
deprive  the  tongue  of  the  power  of  utterance ;  it  vents  itself,  therefore,  in  a  sigh. 
But  what  could  oppress  or  afflict  the  heart  of  the  meek  and  innocent  Jesus  ? 
As  the  Second  Adam,  the  Father  and  Regenerator  of  our  whole  lapsed  race,  He 
voluntarily  assumed  our  nature,  and  became  as  intimately  united  to  it  as  the 
head  to  the  members  of  the  body.  His  sympathetic  heart  is  sensible  of  every 
want  and  distress  of  every  son  and  daughter  of  Adam.  He  is  persecuted  with 
the  Church  that  Saul  persecuteth  ;  and  "  whoso  toucheth  His  children,  toucheth 
the  apple  of  His  eye."  Yea,  He  feels  for  those  who  feel  not  for  themselves, 
and  sighs  over  the  sad  estate  of  those  who  are  blind  to  their  true  happiness — 
"  who  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil ;  who  put  darkness  for  light,  and  light  for 
darkness." 

III.  "  And  He  saith  unto  him,  Ephphatha,  that  is,  Be  opened." — Whatever 
salutary  efficacy  there  may  be  in  medicine,  it  must  proceed  from  that  heavenly 
virtue  which  rises  from  the  reunion  of  divided  properties.  This  reunion  is  the 
source  of  health,  and  the  restoration  of  aught  that  may  be  impaired  in  any  of 
our  outward  organs  or  inward  faculties.  To  Him  who  had  all  nature  under 
His  control,  who  knew  how  to  bring  together  and  unite  in  an  instant  those 
properties  which  have  been  separated,  a  single  word,  the  mere  motion  of  His 
will,  was  sufficient  to  produce  the  desired  effect. 

IV.  The  same  supernatural  powers  which  Jesus  displayed  upon  this 
occasion  He  still  continues  to  exercise  in  the  hearts  of  His  redeemed  offspring. 
— Deaf  and  dumb  with  respect  to  our  inward  and  spiritual  senses  we  all  are  by 
nature.  We  can  hear  and  speak,  indeed,  of  worldly  things  with  a  quickness 
and  facility  which  manifests  in  innumerable  instances  the  strong  attraction 
by  which  they  hold  our  attention  and  affections  :  the  calls  of  business  and  of 
pleasure  we  are  ever  ready  to  answer.  Our  earthly  senses  are  continually  open ; 
but  our  heavenly  faculties  are  closed  by  a  thousand  obstructions  which  we  suffer 
the  devil,  the  world,  and  the  flesh  to  form  in  our  hearts.  The  Great  Shepherd 
of  Israel,  who  is  perpetually  employed  in  "  seeking  and  saving  that  which  was 
lost,"  makes  use  of  a  variety  of  means  and  methods  to  bring  the  soul  to  a 
conviction  of  its  loss.  The  efficacy  of  these  depends,  indeed,  upon  the  concurrence 
of  the  human  will,  because  nothing  can  come  into  the  soul  but  what  itself  wills 
or  desires.  The  different  dispensations  of  Providence  are  wisely  and  affectionately 
adapted  to  the  different  circumstances  of  individuals  :  the  end  and  design  of 
them  all  is  one  and  the  same,  viz.  to  bring  the  wandering  creature  to  a  sense 
of  his  deviations,  and  "  to  guide  his  feet  into  the  way  of  peace."  By  whatever 
means  this  conviction  is  wrought,  the  soul'  soon  becomes  sensible  of  its  mistaken 
choice,  and  soon  determines  to  withhold  its  attention  from  the  calls  of  earthly 

T  273 


chap.  vir.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


objects.  In  vain  does  the  siren  sing  her  delusive  song — it  ceases  now  to  charm ; 
for  the  finger  of  God  stops  the  outward  ear,  that  the  inward  ear  may  be  opened 
to  a  sweeter  note.  The  sigh  of  a  contrite  sinner  brings  down  heaven  into  his 
heart.  Jesus  often  sighed.  He  loves  a  sigh — it  invites  Him  into  His  own 
temple ;  and  "  Ephphatha,  Be  opened,"  is  the  blessed  voice  that  precedes  His 
salutary  entrance.  Be  opened !  Opened  to  what  ?  To  the  harmony  of  heaven, 
to  the  symphonies  of  angels,  to  "  the  voice  of  the  Bridegroom."  "  The  marriage 
of  the  Lamb  "  is  come  ;  the  bride  is  prepared  ;  the  silver  cord  is  tied  ;  the  blessed 
union  is  completed  !  The  soul  is  now  all  eye,  all  ear,  all  heart,  all  tongue  ;  and 
eye,  and  ear,  and  heart,  and  tongue  are  all  employed  in  receiving  the  gifts  and 
graces  and  celebrating  the  beauties  and  perfections  of  Him  who  is  "  fairest 
among  ten  thousand,  who  is  altogether  lovely." — J.  Dioche,  M.A. 

Yer.  37.  "  He  hath  done  all  things  well" — I.  The  people's  testimony  or  verdict 
concerning  our  Saviour. — "He  hath  done  all  things  well."     1.  No  doubt  but 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  had  been  witnesses  of  Christ's  miracles  as  well  as  the 
people  ;  but  vainglory,  envy,   and  other  by-respects  had  jostled  out  the  belief 
of  them,  so  that  by  means  of  them  they  were  rather  hardened  than  converted. 
We  owe  the  growth  of  Christian  religion  to  plain,  honest  men,  who  received  the 
gospel  with  free  and  unprejudiced  affections,  and  closed  with  it  when  they  saw 
it  consonant  to  right  reason.     Oh,  how  blessed  would  this  nation  be  if  it  had 
people  of  the  like  temper,  who,  without  prejudice  and  prepossession,  without 
siding  and  faction,  would  embrace  sound  doctrine,  and  bear  testimony  to  it  by 
their  peaceable  and  holy  lives  !     2.  From  the  persons  testifying  I  proceed  to  the 
Person  of  whom  they  testify — He,  a  mere  man,  for  so  they  express  Him,  and 
not  as  believers  in  after-times  did,  who  never  mentioned  Him  as  mere  man,  but 
either  as  God  or  as  the  Eternal  Son  of  God.      However,  this  denomination  of 
the  people  was  at  present  accepted  and  registered  as  a  proof  of  their  ingenuity, 
that  they  gave  Christ  the  glory  of  His  actions,  though  their  appellation  of  Him 
was  not  sufficiently  honourable.      God  opens  the  eyes  of  men's  understanding 
and  cures  the  infirmities  of  their  souls  by  degrees.     'Twas  enough,  at  our  Lord's 
first  entrance  upon  His  prophetic  office  and  preaching  to  the  world,  that  the 
people  received  His  doctrine  and  conceived  rightly  of  His  miracles,  though  .not 
of  His  Divine  nature ;  that  they  acknowledged  Him  to  be  a  good  man,  though 
not  the  Son  of  God  Incarnate,  which  at  that  time  was  not  understood  by  the 
apostles   themselves.      This   their   ignorance   God   then   winked   at ;    but   how 
injurious,  how  derogatory  to  His  honour  would  it  now  be  so  far  to  debase  Him 
as  to  strip  Him  of  His  Divine  nature  and  to  degrade  Him  to  mere  humanity  ! 
'Tis  necessary  to  believe  not  only  all  that  is  delivered  by  Him,  but  also  all  that 
is  delivered  of  Him,  and  to  acknowledge  Him  to  be  our  God  as  well  as  our 
Saviour.     To  say  in  these  days,  with  the  Jewish  multitude,  He,  or  this  man, 
were  no  less  than  sacrilege,  when  our  style  ought  to  be,  the  Eternal  Son,  God 
blessed  for  evermore.     3.  I  pass  to  the  third  particular — the  people's  verdict  or 
approbation  of  Him,  "  He  hath  done  well."    This  testimony  was  rightly  grounded  : 
they  concluded,  with  good  reason,  that  He  who  had  made  "  both  the  deaf  to  hear 
and  the  dumb  to  speak  "  was  no  deceiver,  but  a  man  approved  of  God  ;  that  He 
whose   works   were   so   mighty   must   Himself   be  holy  and   His   words   true. 
Miracles,  says  St.  Austin,  have  a  tongue,  and  speak  ;  they  are  not  only  works, 
but  arguments.     To  give  speech  to  a  man  that  was  from  his  birth  without  it  is 
even  of  itself  a  kind  of  speech,  the  speech  no  less  than  of  the  Almighty ;  for  God 
not  appearing  personally  to  converse  with  men,  such  as  these  are  the  expressions 
of  Himself  to  the  world.     Neither  did  the  voices  which  broke  from  the  clouds  at 
the  baptism  and  transfiguration  of  our  Lord,  saying,  "  This  is  My  Beloved  Son," 
more  plainly  and  intelligibly  declare  to  hearers  who  Christ  was,  than  the  voice 

274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  vii. 


of  God  in  every  miracle  that  Christ  wrought  pronounced  the  same  thing  :  on 
all  His  works  were  these  Divine  words  engraved,  in  bright  and  shining 
characters,  "  This  is  My  Beloved  Son ;  hear  Him."  4.  I  told  you  before  that 
when  the  people  gave  Him  this  approbation,  they  did  not  understand  Him  to  be 
that  great  prophet  that  was  to  come  into  the  world,  the  Messias,  and  Son 
of  God  ;  though  a  true  prophet  they  apprehended  Him  to  be,  for  this  He  had 
made  apparent  to  the  most  scrupulous.  But  how  then  could  they  give  Him  so 
large  a  testimony  as  they  did,  when  even  true  prophets  sent  by  God  did  not 
do  all  things  well,  but  had  all  of  them  their  infirmities,  and  were  not  without 
sin  ?  I  confess,  indeed,  that,  acknowledging  Him  no  more  than  a  man,  their 
approbation  of  Him  was  not  without  exception ;  for  though  they  pronounced 
a  right  sentence,  'twas  not  with  a  right  knowledge ;  they  overshot  themselves 
in  their  testimony  (though  true)  when  they  said,  "  He  hath  done  all  things 
well."  This  is  no  trifling  or  insignificant  observation ;  for  we  may  build  on  it 
this  important  truth,  that  we  may  not  from  a  few  instances  of  goodness  conclude 
a  universal  probity,  nor  from  a  few  specious  or  astonishing  actions  allow  a 
Divine  approbation  :  for  thus  a  Theudas  or  a  Judas  Gaulonites  may  pass  for  the 
Messiah,  and  Simon  Magus  might  pretend  to  the  Godhead  that  was  given  him 
at  Borne  for  his  skill  in  magic ;  and  the  heathen  demons,  who  were  all  deified 
for  some  uncommon  and  extraordinary  performances,  might  challenge  their  deities. 
II.  The  application  of  this  testimony  to  the  present  miracle. — "  He  maketh 
both  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the  dumb  to  speak."  1.  He  touched  him  with  His 
fingers — (1)  That  the  standers-by  might  see  and  testify  that  the  cure  came  from 
Him,  not  from  any  confederacy  with  spirits,  nor  from  any  other  external  power;  and 
this  could  not  but  oblige  them  to  have  a  greater  veneration  both  for  His  person 
and  doctrine  ;  it  could  not  but  persuade  them  that  what  proceeded  from  His 
mouth  must  needs  be  true,  when  they  saw  that  the  operations  of  His  hands  were 
supernatural  and  Divine.  (2)  That  the  miracle  might  make  a  deeper  impression, 
and  be  longer  remembered  both  by  the  beholders  and  by  the  person  recovered. 
For  the  like  reason  our  Saviour  instituted  the  two  great  sacraments.  He 
could  have  conveyed  to  us  the  pardon  of  our  sins  and  the  grace  of  His  Holy 
Spirit  without  the  ceremonies  of  washing  and  breaking  of  bread  ;  but  He  thought 
fit  to  add  these  outward  actions  not  only  to  make  spiritual  things  more  plain 
and  conceivable,  but  to  make  transient  things  more  permanent,  that  His  benefits 
might  be  more  remarkable  and  better  fixed  in  our  minds.  2.  By  casting  up 
His  eyes  to  heaven  and  sighing,  He  made  intercession  with  God,  from  whom 
cometh  salvation,  in  such  strains  as  cannot  be  uttered  or  distinctly  expressed ; 
not  that  the  Father  did  not  hear  Him  readily  and  at  all  times,  but  that  the 
people  might  see  that  the  miracle  which  He  wrought  was  the  return  of  His 
prayer — that  as  His  finger  touched  the  tongue  and  ear  of  the  man,  so  His  request 
touched  the  throne  of  God.  3.  The  last  circumstance  which  Christ  used  was  the 
word  "  Ephphatha,  Be  opened  " — a  word  like  that  which  God  spoke  at  creation 
(Gen.  i.  3).  The  poets  tell  us  of  a  famous  enchantress  whose  spells  were  so 
prevalent  that  the  celestial  orbs  yielded  obedience  to  her.  This  was  either 
a  fiction  or  a  juggle.  But  it  is  certain  that  all  creatures,  without  any  demur, 
speedily  obeyed  the  commands  of  our  Lord,  without  expecting  a  second  fiat. — 
E.  Lake,  D.D. 


275 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   TEE    VERSES. 

Ver.  31.   Why  did  Christ  now  leave  as  He  did,  because  of  the  many  sad- 

Tyre  and  Sidon  and  go  again  to  Galilee  ?  nesses   of    this    world — its    blindness, 

— 1.  Because  He  was  called  and  ap-  deaf ness,  dumbness ;  but  looking  up  to 

pointed  by  God  to  be  the  minister  of  that  heaven  where  none  will  be  blind, 

the  circumcision.     2.  That  by  His  de-  but  all  shall  see  God — none  deaf,  but 

parture,  depriving  them  of  all  further  all  shall  hear  His  voice,  and,  hearing, 

benefit  of  His  presence  and  ministry,  understand — none  dumb,  but  all  shall 

He  might  punish  the  unthankfulness  praise   God   in   the  home   of    "  halle- 

of  the   people   of    those   coasts,    who  lujah "  for  ever. — Jas.  Lonsdale. 
apparently  did  not   esteem  and  make 

use  of  His  presence  and  ministry  while  Ver.    35.    Ears    opened    before    the 

He  was  with  them. — G.  Fetter.  tongue  untied. — It   has  been  well  ob- 
served that   Christ   first    opened   the 

Ver.  34.  Christ 's  look,  sigh,  and  word,  man's  ears,  and  then  untied  his  tongue, 

— 1.  The  upward  look.     Not  so  much  because  we  must  hear  well  before  we 

an  appeal  as  a  testimony  (John  xi.  41,  can  speak  well. 
42),    indicating — (1)  Devout   faith   in 

Heaven.     (2)  Conscious  harmony  with  Yer.  36.  Ostentation  to  be  avoided  by 

Heaven.     (3)  Undoubting  confidence  in  ministers. — 1.  In  doing  good  duties  of 

Heaven.     2.  The  sigh.     (1)  Holy  grief,  our  callings,  we  must  be  far  from  the 

(2)  Brotherly  sympathy.     (3)  Anxious  very  shew  of  ambition  and  vainglory, 

solicitude.     Says     Henry :    "  He    had  2.  Ministers   must   be  very  wise   and 

better  be  tongue-tied   still,  unless  he  careful  to   prevent  all  occasions   and 

have  grace  to  keep  his  mouth  as  with  impediments  that  may  any  way  hinder 

a    bridle."     3.  The    word.     (1)  Love,  or  interrupt  them  in  their  ministerial 

(2)   Power.     (3)    Prophetic    meaning,  duties.     3.  In  that  Christ  forbade  this 

Learn  :    1.  Adoring   gratitude  (Exod.  miracle   to   be  made   known,  because 

iv.  1).    2.  Humble  patience.    What  use  the  time  was  not  yet  come  in  which 

are  we  making  of  speech  ?  ( Jer.  viii.  6  ;  the  glory  of  His  Godhead  proved  by 

Isa.    vi.    5).     3.    Practical  brotherly-  His   miracles   should    be   clearly   and 

kindness.     Some     sigh,     but    nothing  fully  manifested,  hereby  He  teaches  us 

more.     Idle   sentiment.     Others   sigh,  to  be  far  from  desiring  or  seeking  any 

but  do  not  look  up.     No  faith  in  God.  honour   or  glory   to    ourselves   which 

If  they  | pity  and  strive  to  help,  it  is  does  not  belong  to  us,  or  which  does 

only   of   themselves.     They   give    not  not  as  yet  belong  to  us,  or  is  not  meet 

God  the  glory.     Let  us  seek  the  Spirit  and  fit  for  us  at  this  or  that  time. — 

of  Christ.— W.  Forsyth.  G.  Fetter. 

A    compassionate    Saviour. — 1.    See 

how  great  hardness  of  heart  possesses  Yer.  37.  God  has  done  all  things  well. 

us   by   nature   in    that    we    are    not  — This  is  one  of  the  most  momentous 

touched  with  feelings  of  our  own  sins  principles  of  all  wisdom  and  religion, 

and  miseries,  which  caused  Christ  to  one   of    the   main    pillars   of   human 

grieve  and  sigh,    etc.     2.  Comfort  to  virtue     and     happiness — a     principle 

God's    children    in    all    miseries    and  essentially    inherent   in    Christianity, 

afflictions.     Christ   is   a  merciful  and  and  which  should  be  always  present  to 

compassionate  Saviour.     3.  Learn   by  our  thoughts,  the  soul  and  guide  of  all 

Christ's   example  to  be  affected  with  our  judgments,    dispositions,    actions, 

grief     and     compassion     for     others'  hopes,  and  views.     1.  "God  has  done 

miseries. — G.  Fetter.  all  things  well"   is   applicable  to  the 

The    heavenward   look. — Let   us    be  arrangements  and  institutions  which 

like  our  Lord,  lifting  up  our  eyes  and  God  has  established  in  nature,  to  the 

'*  looking  up  to  heaven  " ;  sighing,  too,  laws  which  He  has  prescribed  to  the 

276 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  VII. 


innumerable  host  of  His  inanimate  and  hostile    they    are    to    our    lusts    and 

animate    creatures.     All   is   one    im-  passions,     whatever    attention,     care, 

mense,     close-compacted     whole,    the  self-denial,  exertion  of  our  faculties  it 

several  parts  whereof  in  various  ways  may  cost  us,   whenever   they  deprive 

insinuate  together,  confine  each  other,  us   of   some  present  advantage,  some 

advance,   retard,   impel,   uphold,    pro-  transient    pleasure.      Never    without 

duce,   enliven  one   another :  a  whole,  danger    can    we    exceed    the    bounds 

where  no  power  extrudes  another,  no  which   He  has  set  us,  never  without 

part   militates  with   another,  no  aim  detriment  neglect  the  duties  which  He 

defeats  another,  no  cause  is  dispropor-  has  enjoined  us,  never  without  injury 

tionate  to  its  effect,  no  effect  without  omit  the  exercises  which  He  has  pre- 

cause  ;    where    is   neither    want    nor  scribed  us.    4.  "  God  has  done  and  does 

superfluity,  nor  chasm  ;  where  nothing  all  things  well  "   is  applicable  to   the 

is  indeterminate,  nothing  casual,   no-  providence  and  government  which  He 

thing  detached  and  separate  from  the  extends  over  all.     Let  the  ways  of  His 

rest ;  where   absolute,    exquisite    con-  providence    seem    ever    so    dark    and 

nexion  and  order  and  harmony  exist.  intricate    to    us,    before    Him    all    is 

2.  "  God  has    done   all   things   well "  unclouded     light,    all    perfect    order, 

holds  in  regard  to  the  arrangements  The    association    of   means   and   ends 

and   provisions  which    He   has   made  may  appear  to  us  ever  so  incompre- 

in  the  moral  world  and  for  promoting  hensible,    ever     so    incongruous ;   the 

moral  ends.    Is  it  expedient  that  thou,  coherence     and    combination    of    the 

O  man,  from  a  sensual,  animal  creature,  whole    and    its    parts    ever    so    em- 

shouldst  be  formed  and  educated  into  barrassed :  His  ends  will  be  infallibly 

a   rational,  wise,  good,  happy  intelli-  attained,  the   means  He  employs  are 

gent  agent ;  is  it  expedient  that  thy  always   the  surest   and  best,  and   all 

faculties    should    be    exerted,    drawn  evolve     and     disentangle     themselves 

forth,     exercised,    strengthened,    per-  agreeably   to    the   laws   of    sovereign 

fected ;    is    it    expedient     that    thou  perfection.    5.  "  God  has  done  and  does 

shouldst  act  not   from  blind  instinct,  all    things   well"   applies    to    all   the 

but  by  just  perceptions  and  freely ;  is  dispensations  which  He  is  pleased  to 

it    expedient    for    thee    to    shun    the  vouchsafe  to  each  of  us  in  particular, 

deceitful  paths  of  folly  and  vice,  and  Riches  and  poverty,  health  and  sick- 

pursue    the     career    of    virtue    with  ness,  majesty  and  meanness,  prosperity 

courage  and  resolution  ;  is  it  expedient  and   adversity,  thraldom  and  liberty, 

for   thee   to   know,    to  seek,  to  enjoy  life   and   death,    are    equally  in    His 

substantial,     lasting    happiness,     and  hand,  and  are  severally  by  Him  distri- 

learn   to   look   rather   at   the   unseen  buted,  ascertained,  decreed,  balanced, 

than  at  the  visible,  at  the  future  than  and  combined  together  in  such  manner 

at   the  present ;  is   it  expedient  that  as  may  best  consist  with  the  greatest 

thou  shouldst  prepare  and  fit  thyself  possible   welfare   of   all   living   beings 

for    a    superior   life, — then    all   these  in  general,  and  of  each  in  particular, 

institutions    and   arrangements    could  No   one  is  postponed  or   preferred  to 

be  no  other  than  they  are  ;  they  are  another  from  partial  or  self-interested 

the    properest   means    for    promoting  views  ;  no  one  needs  suffer  on  account 

thy  perfection  and  forwarding  thee  to  of  another,  without  being  indemnified 

thy  appointment.     3.  "  God  has  done  for  it ;  no  one  will  for  ever  forego  or 

all  things  well "  holds  in  regard  to  the  bear  what  at  present  by  means  of  the 

particular  laws   which    He   has   pre-  combination  of  things  he  is  obliged  to 

scribed  to  us  as  moral  creatures.    They  forego  or  to  bear  ;  no  one  will  fail  of 

are  all  just  and  expedient,   so  many  his  appointment  to  happiness ;  but  one 

means  and  methods  to  perfection  and  sooner,  another  later,  one  in  this,  the 

happiness,  how  numerous   soever  the  other  in  another  method   will  arrive 

restraints  they  put  upon  us,  however  at  it.     6.  "  God  has  done  and  does  all 

277 


chap.  vil.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


things  well"  is  applied  by  the  wor- 
shipper of  God  to  all  the  vicissitudes, 
accidents,  events,  little  or  great,  that 
betide  him,  and  thereby  keeps  his 
mind  in  continual  serenity,  even 
though  in  every  other  respect  he  is 
surrounded  by  darkness.  He  considers 
everything  in  its  dependence  on  the 
will  of  the  Sovereign  Ruler  of  the 
world,  and  finds  all  that  is  agreeable 
to  His  will  to  be  just  and  expedient. 
This    idea    gives    a    totally   different 


aspect  to  all  that  we  see  and  hear  and 
learn,  sheds  light  and  joy  on  all, 
preserves  us  from  a  thousand  fallacies 
of  sophistry  and  artifices  of  imposture 
along  the  dubious  journey  of  life, 
enucleates  and  unravels  to  us  many 
things  both  in  the  natural  and  the 
moral  world,  pacifies  us  concerning 
all  that  we  cannot  comprehend  and 
explain,  and  is  inexhaustible  in  power 
and  consolation. — G.  J.  Zollikofer. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    VII. 


Vers.  6,  7.  Externalism  in  religion. — How 
many  striking  examples  might  be  cited 
where  men  have  united  the  form  of  godli- 
ness with  the  mystery  of  iniquity,  under 
the  manifest  impression  that  their  great 
zeal  for  religious  observances  atoned  for 
their  moral  delinquencies,  or  that  the  latter 
were  entirely  overlooked  on  account  of  the 
approbation  they  earned  by  the  former ! 
We  are  told  that  Ivan  the  Terrible  retired 
sometimes  to  a  monastery  which  he  had 
built,  for  his  religious  improvement.  He 
rang  the  bell  for  matins  himself  at  three 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  "  During  the 
services,  which  lasted  many  hours,  he  read, 
chanted,  and  prayed  with  such  fervour  that 
the  marks  of  his  prostrations  remained  on 
his  forehead.  But  at  intervals  he  went  to 
the  dungeons  to  see  with  his  own  eyes  his 
prisoners  tortured,  and  always  returned,  it 
was  observed,  with  a  face  beaming  with 
delight."  What  a  mingling  it  was  of 
diabolical  cruelty  with  religious  service ! 
Christianity,  in  its  corrupt  branches,  abounds 
in  such  absurdities.  That  is  the  way  they 
became  corrupt — by  setting  up  a  false 
standard  of  righteousness,  by  accepting  zeal 
and  fidelity  in  the  observance  of  the  forms 
of  worship  as  a  substitute  for  genuine  piety. 

Lip-service. — Panchcowrie,  a  Hindoo  con- 
vert, thus  spoke  one  day  in  the  market : 
"  Some  think  they  will  avert  God's  dis- 
pleasure by  frequently  taking  His  name  on 
their  lips,  and  saying,  '  O  Excellent  God!' 
*  O  Ocean  of  Wisdom  1 '  ■  O  Sea  of  Love  ! ' 
and  so  on.  To  be  sure,  God  is  all  this ;  but 
whoever  heard  of  a  debt  being  paid  in  words 
instead  of  rupees  !  God  says  to  such  people, 
4  Ye  hypocrites,  why  do  you  honour  Me  with 
your  lips  when  your  heart  is  far  from  Me  ? ' " 

Routine  service. — Go  out  with  me  into  the 
woods,  where  the  white  oak  is,  and  where 
the  beech  is.  Their  leaves  died  last 
November,  but  they  all  hang  on  the  trees 
yet.  The  trees  have  not  strength  enough 
to  slough  them.  They  always  make  me 
think  of  a  great  many  people.    Sap  does 

278 


not  run  in  them  any  more,  but  their  duties 
hang  on  them  like  dead  leaves  all  over. 
They  would  not  like  to  drop  their  duties — 
they  are  not  quite  in  that  state  yet ;  but 
those  duties  are  dry,  sapless,  and  enforced. 

Ver.  9.  God's  commandments  and  human 
rules. — The  experience  is  a  universal  one, 
that  God's  commandments  suffer  from  the 
competition  of  human  rules.  The  great 
precepts  of  God  have  only  an  unseen  God 
behind  them,  but  behind  the  human  rules 
there  is  generally  a  class  whose  pride  is 
gratified  by  their  observance  and  incensed 
by  their  neglect.  Accordingly,  whenever 
small  rules  of  outward  conduct  begin  to 
flourish,  the  great  principles  of  religion — 
faith,  love,  honour — fall  into  the  background. 
It  is  so  to-day.  The  Thug  in  India  who  con- 
fessed to  having  killed  three  hundred  and 
twenty  people  had  no  pangs  of  conscience 
for  killing  them,  but  was  somewhat  dis- 
tressed on  account  of  having  killed  a  few 
of  them  after  a  hare  had  crossed  his  path 
or  a  bird  whistled  in  a  certain  direction. 
Murder  was  no  crime  in  his  opinion,  but  the 
neglect  of  an  omen  from  Bowany  was  a 
grave  one.  In  Hindooism,  which  is  ceremonial 
throughout,  a  man  may  be  a  most  religious 
man,  and  yet  very  wicked.  Many  in  our 
own  country  would  unscrupulously  commit 
great  crimes,  and  yet  be  very  careful  to 
avoid  eating  flesh  on  Good  Friday.  It  seems 
as  if  we  only  had  a  certain  amount  of  power 
of  attention  in  us,  and,  if  it  goes  to  little 
rules,  there  is  none  left  for  great  principles. 

A  hypocritical  regard  for  ceremonial. — 
A  traveller  in  Russia  tells  the  following  of 
a  lady  who,  leaving  a  party  of  companions 
in  St.  Petersburg,  called  a  hack  and  directed 
the  driver  to  take  her  home.  Instead  of 
following  her  directions,  he  drove  her  to  a 
deserted  part  of  the  city,  murdered  her,  and, 
taking  her  jewels,  threw  her  body  into  the 
canal.  As  he  returned  to  the  city  he  was 
arrested.  The  murdered  lady  had  with  her 
a  basket  of  pie ;  when  asked  why  he  did  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  vn. 


eat  that,  the  murderer  replied,  V  It  was  Lent. 
How  could  I  think  of  eating  that — it  may 
contain  meat ;  and  I  am,  thank  God,  a  good 
Christian."  We  sometimes  express  an  abhor- 
rence of  insignificant  things  when  our  hearts 
are  set  on  the  vilest  of  sins. 

"Ver.  10.  Honouring  parents. — We  call  the 
Chinese  heathen,  and  yet  they  have  some 
customs  that  would  do  credit  to  a  Christian 
people.  On  every  New  Year  morning  each 
man  and  boy,  from  the  emperor  to  the 
lowest  peasant,  pays  a  visit  to  his  mother. 
He  carries  her  a  present,  varying  in  value 
according  to  his  station,  thanks  her  for  all 
she  has  done  for  him,  and  asks  a  continuance 
of  her  favour  another  year.  They  are  taught 
to  believe  that  mothers  have  an  influence  for 
good  over  their  sons  all  through  life. 

Ver.  15.  A  self-evident  truth. — Christ  does 
not  stop  to  prove  that  these  things  come  out 
of  the  heart.  He  asserts  it,  and  asserts  it 
because  it  is  self-evident.  When  you  see 
a  thing  coming  forth,  you  are  clear  it  was 
there  first.  One  summer  I  noticed  hornets 
continually  flying  from  a  number  of  decayed 
logs  in  my  garden.  I  saw  them  constantly 
flying  in  and  out,  and  I  did  not  think  myself 
at  all  unreasonable  in  concluding  that  there 
was  a  hornets'  nest  there.  And  so,  if  we  see 
the  hornets  of  sin  flying  out  of  a  man,  we 
suppose  at  once  there  is  sin  within  him. 

Ver.  20.  Concupiscence. — A  gentleman  was 
once  extolling  loudly  the  virtue  of  honesty, 
saying  what  a  dignity  it  imparted  to  our 
nature,  and  how  it  recommended  us  to  the 
favour  of  God.  "  Sir,"  replied  his  friend, 
"  however  excellent  the  virtue  of  honesty 
may  be,  I  fear  there  are  very  few  men  in 
the  world  who  really  possess  it."  "  You 
surprise  me."  said  a  stranger.  "Ignorant 
as  I  am  of  your  character,"  was  the  reply, 
"  I  fancy  it  would  be  no  difficult  matter  to 
prove  even  you  to  be  a  dishonest  man."  "  I 
defy  you."  "  Will  you  give  me  leave,  then, 
to  ask  you  a  question  or  two,  and  promise 
not  to  be  offended  ?  "  "  Certainly."  "  Have 
you  never  met  with  an  opportunity  of  getting 
gains  by  unfair  means  ?  I  don't  say,  Have 
you  taken  advantage  of  it  ?  but,  Have  you 
ever  met  with  such  an  opportunity  ?  I,  for 
my  part,  have  ;  and  I  believe  everybody  else 
has."  "  Very  probably  I  may."  "  How  did 
you  feel  your  mind  affected  on  such  an 
occasion  ?  Had  you  no  secret  desire,  not 
the  least  inclination,  to  seize  the  advantage 
which  offered  ?  Tell  me  without  any  evasion, 
and  consistently  with  the  character  you 
admire."  "  I  must  acknowledge  I  have  not 
always    been    absolutely    free   from    every 

irregular    inclination;    but "       "Hold! 

sir,  none  of  your  salvos ;  you  have  confessed 
enough.  If  you  had  the  desire,  though  you 
never  proceeded  to  the  act,  you  were  dis- 


honest in  heart.  This  is  what  the  Scriptures 
call  concupiscence.  It  defiles  the  soul ;  it 
is  a  breach  of  that  law  which  requireth 
truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and,  unless  you 
are  pardoned  through  the  blood  of  Christ* 
it  will  be  a  just  ground  for  your  condemna- 
tion, when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of 
men." 

Ver.  21.  Origin  of  sin, — When  a  young 
man  consulted  John  Newton  touching  the 
origin  of  evil,  the  divine  replied  that  he 
was  more  anxious  to  get  sin  out  of  the  world 
than  to  know  how  it  came  into  the  World. 
But  really  this  saying  is  not  so  wise  as  it 
seems,  for  to  know  where  sin  takes  its  rise 
is  of  first  consequence  in  attempting  its 
extirpation.  In  the  soul  Christ  declared  that 
it  took  its  origin,  and  in  the  soul  Christ 
sought  to  deal  with  it,  supplying  a  spiritual 
antidote  for  a  spiritual  plague. 

Sin  has  its  source  in,  the  heart. — At  present 
there  are  two  theories  in  the   field  to  ex- 
plain the  origin  of  contagious  diseases — the 
parasitic  theory,  and  the  theory  of  the  innate 
character  of  diseases.    The  parasitic  theory 
assumes    that    diseases    are    originated  by 
microbes  first  diffused  in   the  atmosphere, 
and  then  taken  into  the  system  by  the  air 
we  breathe,  the  water  we  drink,  the  things 
we  touch.      The  advocates   of    the    innate 
character  of  diseases  hold,  on  the  contrary, 
that  the  disease  is  spontaneously  developed 
in  the  patient ;  the  first  cause  is  in  morbid 
changes  which  are  purely  chemical,  changes 
produced  in    the  actual  substance  of    the 
tissues  and  secretions  without  any  external 
intervention    of    microbes — the    microbes, 
where    they    really    exist,    being    only    a 
secondary  phenomenon,  a  complication,  and 
not  the  scientific  cause  which  actually  de- 
termines the  disease.     Now,  whatever  may 
be  the  exact  truth  in  this  biological  con- 
troversy, it  is  evident  that  the  first  cause  of 
such  disease  must  be  sought  in  a  defect  of 
life,  a  feebleness,  a  certain  untoward  dis- 
position  and   receptivity  in    the    organism 
itself.    The  phylloxera  devastates  the  French 
vineyards  because  the  vines  have  been  ex- 
hausted by  excessive  cultivation ;  tuberculosis 
fastens  upon  man  because  of  obscure  con- 
ditions of  bodily  weakness  and  susceptibility ; 
vigorous    plants    and    robust    constitutions 
defying  the  foreign  destructive  bodies  which 
may   fill   the    air — extrinsic    influence    and 
excitement  counting    for  little  where    the 
intrinsic  tendency  does  not  exist.    Revelation 
assumes  that  the  man  morally  occupies  much 
the  same  position.     Environment  brings  the 
opportunity    for    evil,     the    solicitation    or 
provocation  to  evil,  so  far  do  evil  communi- 
cations corrupt  good  manners  ;  but  the  first 
cause  of  all  must  be  found  in   the  heart 
itself,  in  its  lack  of  right  direction,  sympathy, 
and  force ;  in  a  word,  the  scientific  cause  of 
sin  is  the  spiritual  cause. 

279 


chap.  vii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


Evil  thoughts. — A  quaint  preacher  says, 
"Beware  how  ye  tarry  in  the  painting- 
chamber  of  the  devil,"  by  which  he  warns 
the  young  Christian  to  be  on  his  watch 
against  the  way  in  which  Satan  seduces  the 
imagination.  When  evil  thoughts  and  un- 
holy desires  intrude  into  the  soul,  it  is  like 
a  fiery  dart  finding  its  way  into  a  powder 
magazine.  The  only  safety  is  to  stamp  it  out 
at  once.  If  we  let  the  spark  of  fire  smoulder 
on,  soon  all  will  be  wrapped  iu  flames. 

The  commencements  of  evil  to  be  rejected. — 
It  is  true  that  no  man  can  determine  who 
shall  knock  at  his  door,  but  every  man  can 
determine  who  shall  come  in  through  his 
door.  It  is  true  that  no  man  can  say, 
"  I  will  not  have  wrong  thoughts " ;  such 
thoughts  will  come  into  a  man's  mind  with- 
out his  permission ;  but  it  is  within  the 
power  of  every  man  to  say  whether  or 
not  he  will  entertain  them.  If,  however,  a 
man  entertains  evil  thoughts,  he  cannot  tell 
whether  the  conflagration  will  or  will  not 
spread.  A  man  sits  down  upon  a  prairie 
upon  an  autumnal  day,  when  everything  is 
dry  and  parched,  and  sets  fire  to  the  leaves 
and  grass,  saying,  "  I  will  stamp  it  out ;  1 
merely  want  a  little  blaze  here  for  my  own 
use  " ;  but  when  he  attempts  to  stamp  it  out, 
the  fire  is  quicker-footed  than  he.  Though 
he  rushes  from  side  to  side  and  does  the  best 
he  can  to  extinguish  it,  it  is  not  stamped 
out,  but  gains  on  him  right  and  left,  and 
by-and-by  it  opens  its  wings  and  flies  all 
over  the  prairie,  destroying  insects,  and 
beasts,  and  human  beings,  and  property  of 
every  kind,  travelling  like  a  whirlwind. 

Bias  of  the  heart. — The  bowl  runs  as  the 
bias  inclines  it ;  the  ship  moves  as  the  rudder 
steers  it ;  and  the  mind  thinks  according  to 
the  predominancy  of  vice  or  virtue  in  it.  The 
heart  of  man  is  like  the  spring  of  the  clock, 
which  causes  the  wheels  to  move  right  or 
wrong,  well  or  ill.  If  the  heart  once  set 
forward  for  God,  all  the  members  will  follow 
after  ;  all  the  parts,  like  dutiful  handmaids, 
in  their  places,  will  wait  on  their  mistress. 
The  heart  is  the  great  workhouse  where  all 
sin  is  wrought  before  it  is  exposed  to  open 
view.  It  is  the  mint  where  evil  thoughts 
are  coined,  before  they  are  current  in  our 
words  or  actions.  It  is  the  forge  where  all 
our  evil  works  as  well  as  words  are  hammered 
out.  There  is  no  sin  but  is  dressed  in  the 
withdrawing-room  of  the  heart,  before  it 
appears  on  the  stage  of  life.  It  is  vain  to 
go  about  a  holy  life  till  the  heart  be  made 
holy.  The  pulse  of  the  hand  beats  well  or 
ill,  according  to  the  state  of  the  heart.  If 
the  chinks  of  the  ship  are  unstopped,  it  will 
be  to  no  purpose  to  labour  at  the  pump. 
When  the  water  is  foul  at  the  bottom,  no 
wonder  that  scum  and  filth  appear  at  the 
top.  There  is  no  way  to  stop  the  issue  of 
sin  but  by  drying  up  the  matter  that  feeds 
it. — G.  Swinnock. 

280  .       .    . 


A  tad  heart. — A  certain  little  boy  in 
Kansas,  only  eleven  years  old,  strove  hard 
to  be  a  Christian.  Once  he  stood  watching 
his  sister  paring  the  potatoes  for  dinner. 
Soon  she  pared  an  extra  large  one,  which 
was  very  white  and  very  nice  on  the  outside, 
but  when  cut  into  pieces  it  shewed  itself  to 
be  hollow  and  black  inside  with  dry-rot. 
Instantly  Willie  exclaimed,  "  Why,  Maggie, 
that  potato  isn't  a  Christian  1 "  "  What  do 
you  mean?"  asked  Maggie.  "Don't  you 
see  it  has  a  bad  heart  ? "  was  the  child's 
reply.  This  little  Kansas  boy  had  learned 
enough  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  to  know 
that,  however  fair  the  outside  may  be,  the 
natural  heart  is  corrupt. 

Ver.  22.  Beware  of  covetousness,  for,  under 
the  guise  of  being  a  mere  harmless  indulg- 
ence of  natural  feeling,  it  is  really  the 
imbibing  a  dangerous  gas,  which  will 
eventually  choke  our  spiritual  life.  Whilst 
we  revel  in  the  chambers  of  our  covetous 
imagery,  and  paint  the  fond  desires  of  our 
evil  hearts  in  every  detail,  we  accustom  our- 
selves to  the  growth  of  sinful  longings, 
we  construct  an  easy  gradient,  down  which 
we  may  pass  from  unholy  wishes  to  wicked 
deeds.  The  serpent's  egg  may  become  the 
venomous  reptile. — Br.  Hardman. 

Covetous  men  are  condemned  to  dig  in 
the  mines  for  they  know  not  whom.  The 
spirit  of  covetousness,  which  leads  to  an 
overvalue  and  overlove  of  money,  is  inde- 
pendent of  amount.  A  poor  man  may  make 
an  idol  of  his  little,  just  as  much  as  the 
rich  man  makes  an  idol  of  his  much.  The 
Duke  of  Marlborough,  when  he  was  in  the 
last  stage  of  life  and  very  infirm,  would 
walk  from  the  public  room,  in  Bath,  to  his 
lodgings  on  a  cold,  dark  night  to  save  a 
sixpence  in  chair  hire.  At  his  death  he 
left  more  than  a  million  and  a  half  sterling, 
which  was  inherited  by  one  of  his  greatest 
enemies. 

Avarice. — It  was  a  true  instinct  which  led 
Dante  to  picture  avarice  as  an  invincible 
foe.  In  his  pilgrimage  he  passed  safely  by 
the  leopard  of  pleasure  ;  he  feared,  yet  was 
not  vanquished  by,  the  lion  of  ambition  ; 
but  the  lean  wolf  of  avarice  drove  him  step 
by  step  back  to  the  darkness.  Such  is  the 
power  of  covetousness.  It  is  a  vice  which 
renews  its  strength  and  is  tenacious  and 
remorseless. 

Evil  eye. — There  are  evidences  of  the 
prevalence  in  Ceylon  of  that  most  ancient 
of  all  superstitions,  the  belief  in  the  "  evil 
eye,"  which  exists  in  all  countries  in  the 
universe  from  China  to  Peru.  Is  there  any 
mysterious  connexion  between  the  prohibi- 
tion to  "  covet "  contained  in  the  Decalogue 
and  the  horror  of  the  "  evil  eye "  so  often 
alluded  to  in  the  Bible  2— Sir  J.  E.  Tennant. 

Ver.  24.    Tyre  and    Sidon. — Toward  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap.  vh. 


north,  where  the  cliffs  of  Lebanon  rise 
bolder  and  loftier,  and  crowd  closer  down 
upon  the  sea,  is  the  narrow  strip  of  sea- 
coast  memorable  in  history  as  the  earliest 
home  of  maritime  commerce,  and  of  the 
splendid  wealth  that  resulted,  from  it,  as 
well  as  of  the  luxury  and  corruption,  the 
disasters  and  overthrows,  that  followed  in 
their  turn — the  land  of  Tyre  and  Sidon, 
otherwise  called  Phoenicia.  Fifteen  hundred 
years  before  Christ,  Tyre  was  a  great  and 
famous  town — mentioned  in  the  book  of 
Joshua — and  Sidon,  a  day's  walk  to  the 
north  of  it,  was  older  yet.  Six  hundred 
years  before  Christ,  following  hard  after 
the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel  to  fulfil  them, 
Nebuchadnezzar  the  Great  came  marching 
down  the  coast  with  his  Chaldeans,  and 
destroyed  it  after  a  siege  of  thirteen  years' 
duration.  It  would  not  stay  destroyed. 
That  little  rocky  island  lying  off  the  cliffs 
of  the  inhospitable  coast  has  been  one  of 
the  points  of  earth  predestinated  for  the 
abode  of  man.  Three  hundred  years  before 
Christ,  Alexander  the  Great,  marching  his 
Macedonian  phalanxes  down  this  narrow 
coast-line,  found  Tyre  lying  across  his  path 
to  India.  On  its  island  of  rock  it  seemed 
to  defy  him,  until,  after  seven  months  of 
vain  siege,  he  gathered  up  the  ruins  of  the 
former  city  that  cumbered  the  shore  and 
tumbled  them  into  the  sea,  and  over  that 
isthmus  marched  over  and  took  the  town 
and  destroyed  it  again.  Since  that,  to  this 
day,  Tyre  is  a  peninsula,  and  no  more  an 
island.  But  now,  in  the  days  of  Christ,  the 
city  was  growing  up  a  third  time.  And  the 
relics  of  its  splendour  at  the  period  in 
question  are  visible  to  the  traveller  to-day. 
You  see  the  traces  of  that  magnificent  enter- 
prise that  marked  the  palmy  days  of  the 
Roman  Empire.  They  sent  to  Egypt  for  the 
numberless  granite  columns  that  decorated 
the  quays  and  breakwaters — you  can  see 
them  now  lying  in  piles  under  the  blue, 
tideless  Mediterranean  waters.  They  sent  to 
the  Grecian  islands  for  sculptured  marbles. 
They  decorated  the  neighbouring  hillsides 
with  the  villas  of  Greek  and  Roman  mer- 
chants, with  statues  and  fountains  and  tesse- 
lated  pavements.  And  not  least,  "  on  every 
high  hill  and  under  every  green  tree  "  they 
set  up  again  the  shrines  and  temples  of  that 
utterly  corrupt  and  licentious  idolatry  that 
had  polluted  not  only  this  Canaanitish  race 
itself  from  the  beginning,  but  all  the  races 
that  came  into  relation  with  it.  The  glory 
of  Tyre  is  departed  now.  The  hovels  of 
poor  fishermen  occupy  the  sites  of  palaces 
and  temples,  and  the  munitions  of  her 
rocks  are  a  place  for  the  drying  of  nets. — , 
L.  W.  Bacon. 

Ver.  26.  A  rich  heritage. — There  is  no 
heritage  so  rich  as  the  heritage  of  a  mother's 
pious    example    and    godly     counsels — no 


patrimony  so  valuable  and  profitable  as  a 
mother's  prayers.  Upon  a  tombstone  erected 
by  a  family  of  children  was  the  inscription, 
"  Our  mother.  She  always  made  home 
happy."  Cecil,  though  once  full  of  sceptical 
notions,  said  afterwards,  "  There  was  one 
argument  I  never  could  get  over — the 
influence  and  life  of  a  godly  mother."  Oh, 
mothers,  take  your  daughters  to  Jesus,  and 
be  determined  to  plead  and  persevere  until 
He  shall  speak  the  healing  word  and  cause 
them  to  sit  at  His  feet,  "  clothed  and  in  their 
right  mind  "  1 

Vers.  27,  28.  "  Feed  me  as  a  dog."— The 
Talmud  contains  a  story  so  singularly 
parallel  to  this  that  it  is  worth  reproducing. 
"  There  was  a  famine  in  the  land,  and 
stores  of  corn  were  placed  under  the  care 
of  Rabbi  Jehudah  the  Holy,  to  be  dis- 
tributed to  those  only  who  were  skilled  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  law.  And,  behold, 
a  man  came,  Jonathan,  the  son  of  Amram, 
and  clamorously  asked  for  his  portion.  The 
Rabbi  asked  him  whether  he  knew  the  con- 
dition and  had  fulfilled  it,  and  then  the 
suppliant  changed  his  tone  and  said,  '  Nay, 
but  feed  me  as  a  dcg  is  fed,  who  eats  of 
the  crumbs  of  the  feast';  and  the  Rabbi 
hearkened  to  his  words,  and  gave  him  of 
the  corn." 

The  gospel  for  the  outcast. — Duff,  the  mis- 
sionary, was  about  to  begin  service  in  a 
Boer  farmer's  house,  when  he  noticed  that 
none  of  the  Kaffir  servants  were  present. 
To  his  request  that  they  should  be  brought 
in,  the  Boer  replied  roughly,  "  What  have 
Kaffirs  to  do  with  the  gospel  ?  Kaffirs,  sir, 
are  dogs."  Duff  made  no  reply,  but  opened 
his  Bible  and  read,  "  Yes,  Lord  ;  yet  the 
dogs  under  the  table  eat  of  the  children's 
crumbs."  "  Stop,"  cried  the  farmer,  "you've 
broken  my  head.     Let  the  Kaffirs  come  in." 

Ver.  32.  Incapacity  removed  in  heaven. — 
At  a  deaf-and-dumb  institution  for  children 
a  boy  was  once  dying,  and,  when  his  teacher 
signified  to  him  that  there  was  no  hope  of 
recovery,  his  face  lighted  up,  and  in  his  own 
language  he  said,  "  Oh,  sir,  I  shall  soon  be 
singing  God's  praises,  and  won't  you  be 
surprised  and  delighted  to  hear  me  when 
you  come  ?  "  The  boy  had  so  grieved  over 
his  incapacity  for  thus  honouring  God  on 
earth,  that  the  prospect  of  death  was  one 
of  unqualified  joy,  as  setting  him  free  to  use 
the  best  member  that  he  had  in  the  glorifi- 
cation of  God. 

Ver.  33.  "Aside  from  the  multitude." — 
There  is  too  much  noise  around  us,  and  we 
cannot  hear  the  voice  of  God  as  long  as  all 
is  well  with  us  and  we  have  the  enjoyment 
of  life.  Every  affliction  is  a  wilderness  in 
which  a  man  is  in  solitude  and  stillness,  so 
that  he  understands  better  the  Word  of  God. 

281 


chap.  viii.        BO  MILE TIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK, 


When  human  voices  are  silent,  the  voice  of 
God  begins  to  speak. — Dr.  Tholuck. 

Ver.  34.  Christ  saddened  by  the  sight  of 
human  misery. — How  it  must  have  saddened 
the  heart  of  Jesus  to  walk  through  this 
world  and  see  so  much  human  misery ! 
There  is  a  story  of  a  sculptor  who  wept  as 
he  saw  at  his  feet  the  shattered  fragments 
of  his  breathing  marble,  on  which  he  had 
spent  years  of  patient,  loving  toil.  Jesus 
walked  through  this  world  amid  the  ruin  of 
the  noblest  work  of  His  own  hands.  Every- 
where He  saw  the  destruction  wrought  by 
sin.  So  His  grief  was  twofold — tender 
sympathy  with  human  suffering,  and  sorrow" 
over  the  ruinous  work  of  sin. 

Ephphatha. — The  Ephphatha  of  Christ  is 
heard  also  in  history.  He  sighed  "Ephphatha," 
and  the  conflict  of  His  Church  was  revealed 
to  His  Evangelist.  He  sighed  "  Ephphatha," 
and  the  tongue  of  Galileo  and  Kepler  told 
of  the  wondrous  order  of  the  heavens.  He 
sighed  "  Ephphatha,"  and  buried  monuments 
gave  up  their  records  of  the  past,  and  threw 
sidelights  on  higher  truths.  He  spoke 
"  Ephphatha,"  and  Caxton  gave  new  powers 
to  the  world  ;  knowledge  stepped  forth 
from  her  dust- covered  shrine,  and  carried 
her  rich  bounties  into  every  city  and  house  ; 
history  unlocked  her  long-hidden  lore; 
science  painted  in  noble  colours  the  half- 
veiled  face  of  nature  ;  the  tongue  of  Europe 
was  loosed.  But  well  might  a  sigh  have 
been  heaved  as  the  Ephphatha  was  spoken. 
It  is  not  truth  alone,  or  holiness  alone, 
which  has  been  unlocked.  It  is  not  Chaucer's 
"  well  of  English  undefiled,"  the  pure  song 
of  Spenser,  the  heart-rousing  vision  of  Dante, 
the  chivalrous  epic  of  Tasso,  the  stately  and 
magnanimous  verse  of  Milton,  alone  which 
have  been  given  to  the  world.  A  fouler 
current  mingles  with  the  pure,  bright  stream, 
and  darkens  the  flood  of  knowledge— the 


unredeemed  filth  of  Boccaccio,  the  unbridled 
licentiousness  of  Scarron,  the  stupid  sensu- 
ality of  Dancourt,  the  open  indecency  of 
Wycherley,  the  more  fatal  suggestiveness 
of  Sterne.  The  press  became  indeed  the 
voice  of  nations  ;  but  when  it  was  loosed  a 
sigh  drawn  from  the  pure  heart  of  Christ, 
wounded  by  the  misuse  of  a  glorious  oppor- 
tunity, might  have  been  heard  by  the  Church 
of  God.  Yet  Christ  did  not  withhold  the 
boon.  Freely,  ungrudgingly,  were  His 
miracles  of  love  performed.  To  deny  powers 
or  privileges,  or  the  free  exercise  of  rights 
and  faculties,  on  the  ground  that  they 
may  be  abused,  is  to  act  according  to  the 
dictates  of  expediency,  not  of  right.  But 
there  is  a  remedy  for  the  evils  which  ac- 
company this  freedom.  It  is  by  conferring 
an  additional  and  guiding  gift.  There  is 
another  "  Ephphatha."  He  speaks,  "  Be 
opened,"  and  the  tongue  is  loosed ;  but  the 
ear  is  unstopped  also.  While  He  bestows 
the  faculty  of  speech,  He  bestows  also  the 
opportunity  of  hearing  those  glad  and  soul- 
elevating  principles  of  righteousness  and 
forgiveness  and  love  which  will  fill  the 
loosened  tongue  with  joy  and  put  a  new 
song  of  praise  in  that  long-silent  mouth. — 
Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

Ver.  35.  Tongue  loosed. — Dr.  Carey  found 
a  man  in  Calcutta  who  had  not  spoken  a 
loud  word  for  four  years,  under  a  vow  of 
perpetual  silence.  Nothing  could  open  his 
mouth,  till  happening  to  meet  with  a  religious 
tract,  he  read  it,  and  his  tongue  was  loosed. 
He  soon  threw  away  his  paras  and  other 
badges  of  superstition,  and  became  a  par- 
taker of  the  grace  of  God.  Many  a  profess- 
ing Christian,  who  is  as  dumb  in  religious 
subjects  as  if  under  a  vow  of  silence,  would 
find  a  tongue  to  speak  if  religion  were  really 
to  touch  and  warm  his  heart. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  The  multitude  being  very  great. — The  MS.  authority  is  pretty  evenly  divided 
between  Tra/nirSWov  as  above,  and  vdXiv  vdXKov,  there  being  again  a  great  multitude.  The 
latter  seems  preferable  on  the  whole,  irafiirbWov  being  found  nowhere  else  in  the  New 
Testament,  nor  yet  in  LXX. 

Ver.  3.  For  divers,  etc. — And  some  of  them  are  (or,  are  come)  from  afar.  Our  Lord's 
words  :  not  an  addition  by  the  Evangelist. 

Ver.  8.  Broken  meat. — Fragments,  as  in  chap.  vi.  43.  Baskets. — Not  the  little  wicker- 
baskets  of  chap.  vi.  43,  but  panniers  of  sufficient  size  and  strength  to  hold  a  man 
(Acts  ix.  25). 

Ver.  9.  We  may  note  the  following  points  of  difference  between  this  feeding  and  the 
former  (chap,  vi  35-44).     1.  On  this  occasion  the  people  had  been  with  our  Lord  upwards 

282  r 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK,       chap,  vnt 


of  three  days,  a  circumstance  not  mentioned  before.  2.  Seven  loaves  are  now  distributed 
and  a  few  fishes ;  then,  five  loaves  and  two  fishes.  3.  Five  thousand  were  fed  then ;  four 
thousand  now.  4.  Seven  large  rope-baskets  are  employed  here  to  hold  the  fragments; 
twelve  small  wicker-baskets  there.  5.  The  more  excitable  inhabitants  of  the  coast-villages 
of  the  north  would  have  taken  and  made  Him  a  king  (John  vi.  15)  ;  whereas  the  men  of 
Decapolis  and  the  eastern  shores  permit  Him  to  depart  without  any  demonstration. 

Ver.  10.  Dalmanutha. — "  Has  been  identified  with  the  modern  Ain-el-Barideh,  the  ■  cold 
fountain,'  a  glen  which  opens  upon  the  lake  about  a  mile  from  Magdala."    Cp.  Matt.  xv.  39. 

Ver.  17.  Hardened. — Dulled.     See  on  chaps,  iii.  5,  vi.  52. 

Ver.  22-26.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  Bethsaida  (=  Fish-town). — There  were  two  places  of  this 
name  :  (1)  the  landing-port  for  Capernaum,  on  the  western  side  of  the  lake ;  (2)  a  village 
to  the  north-east,  on  which  Herod  Philip  conferred  the  status  of  a  city,  naming  it  Julias,  after 
the  emperor's  daughter.  That  this  latter  was  the  Bethsaida  to  which  our  Lord  now  with- 
drew may  be  inferred  from  the  indications  of  locality  in  vers.  10,  13,  27. 

Ver.  24.  See  R.V.  "  I  see  something  confusedly  and  obscurely ;  for  I  see  what  I  think 
must  be  men,  and  yet  so  dimly  that  they  look  to  me  like  trees,  only  that  I  know  that  men 
move  from  their  places,  whereas  trees  do  not." 

Vers.  25,  26.  See  R.V.  for  readings  and  renderings. 

Ver.  27.  Caesarea  Fhilippi. — This  picturesquely  situated  town,  originally  called  Paneas, 
after  a  cavern  dedicated  to  Pan  in  its  neighbourhood,  was  enlarged  and  fortified  by  Herod 
Philip,  who  also  renamed  it  in  honour  of  the  emperor.  Then,  to  distinguish  it  from  the 
Caesarea  on  the  Mediterranean  coast — the  seat  of  the  Roman  government,  where  Cornelius 
lived  and  Paul  suffered  imprisonment — it  was  styled  "  Caesarea  Philippi."  The  name  was 
again  changed  to  Neronias  by  Agrippa  II.,  as  a  compliment  to  his  imperial  patron  ;  but  the 
original  appellation  still  survives  in  the  modern  Banias. 

Ver.  31.  After  three  days. — Only  another  form  for  "  on  the  third  day  " — one  complete 
day,  with  a  portion  of  another  day  (no  matter  how  small  a  portion)  on  either  side.  Cf.  Gen. 
xlii.  17,  18,  LXX. ;  also  Matt,  xxvii.  63,  64. 

Ver.  32.  Openly. — Explicitly ,  and  not  by  dark  hints  as  heretofore  (John  ii.  19,  iii.  14; 
Mark  ii.  20 ;  John  vi.  51). 

Ver.  34.  Whosoever  will  come. — If  any  one  wishes  to  come. 

Ver.  35.  Will  save. — May  wish  to  save. 

Vers.  36,  37.  Soul. — Life :  same  word  as  in  ver.  35. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—9. 

(Parallel  :  Matt.  xv.  32-39.) 

The  feeding  of  the  four  thousand. — It  could  hardly  have  been  without  some 
special  reason  that  the  miracle  should  have  been  also  worked  on  another  occasion 
by  our  Lord  with  scarcely  any  variation  of  detail,  or  that  in  each  case  the 
miracle  should  have  been  recorded  with  so  very  great  attention  to  detail. 

I.  The  compassion  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  origin  and  source  of  help. — 1.  He 
had  compassion  on  mankind  as,  looking  down  from  heaven,  He  saw  the  whole 
human  race,  a  vast  multitude  of  souls,  helpless,  in  the  wilderness  of  sin,  starving, 
away  from  all  supplies  of  spiritual  food,  with  death  before  them ;  and  having 
compassion  on  them,  He  came  from  heaven  to  earth  to  bring  them  the  bread 
of  life.  2.  He  sees  the  multitude  to-day,  and  has  compassion  on  us;  and  so 
He  sends  to  us  His  Church,  by  and  through  the  ministry  of  which  He  gives  us 
all  the  means  of  grace.  3.  And  remember  this,  that  Jesus  our  Lord,  looking 
upon  the  multitude  now  as  of  old,  looks  at  us  not  in  the  mass,  but  one  by  one. 
He  sees  me ;  He  knows  my  needs ;  He  has  compassion  on  me. 

II.  Our  Lord  draws  out  from  the  disciples  a  declaration  of  their  own 
inability  to  meet  the  difficulty  and  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  multitude. — And 
it  was  then,  when  they  had  realised  the  difficulty,  when  they  had  come  to  see 
their  own  insufficiency,  that  our  Lord  worked  the  miracle.  And  is  it  not  just 
so  with  us  and  the  difficulties  of  life?  "Whence  can  a  man  satisfy  these  men 
with  bread  here  in  the  wilderness  ?  "  The  question  is  a  natural  one  It  is  also 
an  admission  of  entire  helplessness,  and  it  is  often  the  first  step  to  obtaining  help. 

283 


CHAP.  viil.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


III.  He  makes  them  see  that,  after  all,  they  have  something  through  which 
help  is  to  be  obtained,  and  that  they  must  do  what  they  can. — That  "  God 
helps  those  who  help  themselves  "  is  a  saying  which  is  true  in  material  as  in 
spiritual  matters;  and  we  very  often  forget  that  God  helps  us  through  those 
very  things  which  we  already  possess,  and  which  we  overlook  as  insufficient  for 
our  needs.  The  world  around  seems  hard  and  cold ;  there  seems  no  chance  of 
help.  It  is  well  at  such  times  to  put  to  ourselves  the  question,  "  How  many 
loaves  have  ye  ?  "  Then,  if  we  think,  we  find  that,  after  all,  we  have  something 
— life,  health,  strength,  intelligence,  opportunities  of  one  kind  or  another ;  and 
these  gifts  of  God  already  given  to  us,  if  used  diligently  according  to  His  laws, 
will,  under  His  blessing,  prove  more  than  sufficient  for  our  need.  So,  also, 
in  spiritual  matters.  There  are  times  when  the  temptations  and  the  trials  of 
life,  when  old  habits  of  evil,  the  downward  tendencies  so  often  yielded  to,  seem 
altogether  too  great  for  us  to  overcome — and  they  are  too  great  for  us  to  over- 
come in  our  own  strength ;  and  though  we  would  thankfully  overcome  if  we 
could,  yet  it  all  seems  so  hopeless ;  we  so  fully  realise  our  own  weakness  that 
we  are  tempted  to  give  it  all  up  as  hopeless.  Ah  !  then  listen  to  the  Saviour's 
searching  question,  "  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ?  "  "  Have  you  nothing  already 
given  you  that  may  help  ?  No  strength  ?  No  grace  ?  Look  well  and  see." 
1.  The  gift  of  baptismal  grace — and  therein  the  germ  of  all  graces.  2.  The 
sevenfold  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  given  you  in  confirmation — the  spirit  of 
wisdom  and  understanding,  counsel  and  strength,  knowledge  and  true  godliness 
and  holy  fear.  3.  The  Holy  Communion.  4.  All  the  means  of  grace.  The 
Word  of  God.  Opportunities  of  public  worship.  5.  The  power  of  repentance. 
6.  The  gift  of  prayer.  7.  The  ministry  of  the  Church.  If  we  will  but  use 
these  gifts  faithfully,  then  by  God's  blessing  they  will  more  than  suffice  for  all 
the  wants  of  our  souls,  and  we  shall  be  "  more  than  conquerors  "  in  that  battle 
that  seemed  so  hopeless. 

IV.  His  was  the  power  that  was  to  make  this  small  amount  of  food  more 
than  enough  to  satisfy  the  needs  of  this  vast  multitude ;  but  before  He  exercised 
that  power  He  commanded  them  to  sit  down.  There  is  here  a  lesson  of  the 
utmost  value  to  us  all  in  this  busy,  energetic  age.  We  need  more  repose  of 
mind  and  character,  more  quiet,  steady,  humble  work  of  all  kinds.  Jesus 
commands  us,  as  He  did  the  multitude  of  old,  to  "sit  down  on  the  ground," 
if  we  would  receive  His  gifts  aright  and  benefit  by  them.  They  are  to  be 
received  in  an  orderly,  quiet,  composed,  and  humble  spirit.  The  life  most  free 
from  feverish  excitement  is  the  life  that  profits  most  by  His  gifts.  In  the 
spiritual  life,  above  all,  there  must  be  not  only  energetic  activity,  but  also  the 
quiet  sitting  down  and  waiting  humbly  for  God's  blessing.  "  Sit  down  "  before 
you  say  your  prayers,  if  you  would  really  have  them  answered.  Recall  your 
thoughts,  be  patient  and  quiet  and  humble,  try  to  remember  to  whom  you  are 
about  to  speak,  and  what  it  is  you  are  going  to  ask,  what  you  really  need. 
"Sit  down"  before  your  acts  of  public  worship.  Let  there  be  more  restfulness 
about  your  worship,  more  repose  of  thought,  more  concentration  of  thought 
on  what  you  are  about  to  do.  "  Sit  down,"  above  all,  before  each  Communion. 
"  Let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of 
that  cup."  1.  Let  me  calmly,  honestly,  and  thoughtfully  look  into  my  past 
life,  especially  since  my  last  Communion.  2.  Let  me  see  where  I  am  and  what 
I  am.  3.  Let  me  try  my  best  to  see  my  sins  as  they  really  are,  and  as  they 
are  recorded  in  God's  Book.  4.  Let  me  "  sit  down "  and  truly  repent  of  past 
sins,  and  make  my  humble  confession  to  Almighty  God,  honestly  purposing 
amendment  of  life. 

Y.  God's  gifts,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual,  are  never  to  be  wasted. — He 
gives,  indeed,  with  a  splendid  liberality,  but  He  gives  that  His  gifts  may  be 

284 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


used  and  not  wasted.  "Waste  not,  want  not,"  applies  to  the  matters  of  the 
soul  quite  as  truly  as  it  does  to  those  of  the  body.  Gather  up,  then,  the 
fragments  of  time  that  may  yet  remain  to  you,  and  make  the  most  of  them, 
living  daily  nearer  God.  Gather  up  the  fragments  of  the  opportunities  of 
showing  sympathy  and  kindness  and  winning  the  hearts  of  others.  Gather  up 
the  fragments  that  yet  remain  to  you  of  all  the  opportunities  of  helping  others 
by  precept  or  example  or  moral  support.  Gather  up  all  the  fragments  of  the 
grace  given  you.  Store  it  up  for  use ;  by  use  it  grows  and  increases ;  by  use 
grace  is  turned  into  virtue. — Dean  W.  C.  Ingram. 

Christ's  presence  in  ordinances. — If  we  are  following  Christ,  we  may  not 
doubt  His  protection ;  we  may  not  think  (however  dark  our  prospect)  that 
His  support  and  comfort  will  be  withdrawn ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  we  shall 
find  that  means  are  at  hand  (though  overlooked  for  a  time)  which,  with  His 
blessing,  will  suffice  for  our  wants.  If  we  are  following  in  the  flock  of  Christ, 
and  do  not,  by  our  sin  or  our  distrust,  forfeit  our  privilege,  we  shall  find  indeed 
that  "  the  Lord  is  our  Shepherd,  and  therefore  we  can  lack  nothing  " ;  and  we 
have  His  assurance  that  He  will  be  with  us,  to  support,  protect,  and  save,  even 
unto  the  end  of  the  world. 

I.  There  is  much  in  the  Church  at  the  present  day  which  resembles  the 
position  of  those  who  upon  this  occasion  followed  our  Lord  into  the  wilderness. — 
1.  First,  inwardly,  in  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  their  minds,  there  is  the  same 
strong  tendency  in  the  present  generation  of  Christians  to  walk  by  sight,  not  by 
faith.  They  see  themselves  surrounded  by  sin  on  every  side,  and  they  fail  to 
discern  the  presence  of  Christ  among  them.  They  are  following  Christ,  it  is 
true ;  they  are  hearing  His  Word  in  public  and  at  home ;  they  are  hungering 
for  the  bread  of  life;  yet  when  they  think  of  the  position  of  Christ's  Church 
on  earth  they  are  ready  to  ask,  "  Whence  can  a  man,"  etc.  The  answer  to  this 
is  ready.  The  bread  is  within  our  reach,  if  we  will  take  our  eyes  off  from  man 
and  fix  them  upon  God ;  if  we  regard  the  Church  as  the  institution  not  of  man 
but  of  God,  if  we  avail  ourselves  of  her  sacraments  and  other  ordinances  in 
faith,  "  all,"  "  men,  women,  and  children,"  "  will  be  filled,"  and  there  will  be  more 
than  enough.  2.  Yet  men  in  general  do  not  receive  the  blessing;  they  are 
starving  for  the  bread  of  life,  and  cannot  find  it.  Why  ?  Because  they  have  no 
faith  in  the  ordinance  which  is  to  convey  it.  If  they  fail  to  discern  the  presence 
of  Christ  in  any  ordinance  of  the  Church,  no  blessing  can  reasonably  be 
expected.  Thus  in  respect  to  public  prayer  our  Lord  has  promised,  "  Where 
two  or  three  are  gathered  together,"  etc.  Is  it  reasonable  to  suppose  that  a 
person  who,  after  such  plain  declarations,  fails  to  discern  Christ's  presence  in 
the  worship  of  the  Church  should  receive  a  blessing  from  it  ?  Again,  with 
regard  to  the  Holy  Communion,  the  necessity  is  admitted  of  "feeding  upon 
Christ "  and  eating  "  the  bread  of  life."  But  do  men  seek  this  food  when  it  is  to 
be  had  in  the  Blessed  Sacrament  ?  And  do  they  believe  that  it  is  Christ  on 
whom  they  feed  ?  So  again,  if  after  our  Lord's  plain  words,  "  Suffer  little 
children  to  come  to  Me,  and  forbid  them  not,"  we  neglect  to  bring  them  to  that 
sacrament  by  which  they  are  made  members  of  Christ's  Church,  can  we  wonder 
if  they  are  not  blessed  ?  or  if,  notwithstanding  His  plain  declaration,  "  He  that 
believeth,  and  is  baptised,  shall  be  saved,"  we  yet  consider  that  the  child  is  not 
"  by  baptism  regenerate,"  and  thus  in  state  of  salvation, — if  we  prefer  thus  to 
"  walk  by  sight,  and  not  by  faith,"  can  we  wonder  if  we  suffer  ?  Again,  if  after 
the  express  assertion  of  St.  Peter,  "  Baptism  doth  now  save  us — not  the  putting 
away  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God,"  no 
care  is  taken  to  train  up  those  who  have  been  baptised  in  the  paths  of 
righteousness ;    if  we  fail  to  discharge  the  obligation  which  it  entailed  upon 

285 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


us,  to  bring  up  those  children  as  no  longer  our  own,  but  Christ's,  bought 
with  His  own  blood  and  resigned  to  Him,  only  that  they  are  lent  us  back  for 
a  time ;  if  we  fail  to  discern  the  presence  of  -Christ  as  it  were  leading 
His  youthful  converts  by  the  hand,  and  on  the  contrary  distract  their  atten- 
tion or  suffer  them  to  wander  away  from  Him, — can  we  be  surprised  that 
they  should  run  into  grievous  sin,  and  that  the  Word  of  God  should  seem 
to  fail? 

II.  What  is  the  course  which  all  Christians  whose  eyes  are  open  to  their 
position  ought  to  pursue  ? — 1.  How  was  it  of  old  ?  See  Ps.  cvii.  4-6.  Now,  as 
then,  if  we  pray  "in  the  faith,  we  shall  receive";  if  we  trustfully  "stand  still 
and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,"  if  we  believe  that  "  He  is  able  to  save  to 
the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him,"  our  faith  will  be  confirmed, 
our  grace  increased,  and  a  new  light  will  break  in  upon  us.  We  shall  see  that, 
however  dark  the  prospect,  however  seemingly  impossible  that  good  should  come 
from  it,  yet  to  doubt  is  sinful ;  Christ  will  ever  be  true  to  His  own  ordinance. 
2.  The  Christian  who  has  been  tried  will  admit  that  the  cares  and  sorrows 
of  life  (the  very  rocks  and  thorns  of  his  wilderness)  are  productive  of  good : 
losses  and  poverty  will  keep  his  soul  humble,  dead  to  the  world,  sober ;  so  will 
mean  or  low  station ;  reproach  will  exercise  his  patience ;  pain  and  bodily 
affliction,  though  for  the  present  not  joyous,  but  grievous,  nevertheless  after- 
wards "yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness  to  them  that  are  exercised 
thereby."  3.  Every  Christian  will  admit  that  he  has  at  times  received  support 
and  consolation  from  the  prayers  and  the  advice  of  his  brethren  in  the  Lord. 
The  conversation  of  the  pious,  their  consolation  in  time  of  trouble,  their  advice 
and  support  in  cases  of  difficulty,  and  their  piety  and  earnestness  at  other  times, 
are  admitted  to  afford  a  degree  of  peace  and  happiness  ;  they  are  admitted  to  be 
channels  through  which  God  is  sending  us  support,  and  we  feel  the  good  they 
have  done  us,  and  are  thankful  for  it. 

III.  The  consequence  of  our  failing  to  recognise  Christ's  presence  in  His 
ordinances  is  very  apparent. — 1.  We  perceive  it  in  the  want  of  reverence  too 
often  manifested  in  the  house  of  God,  or  in  unfrequent  attendance  there — in 
the  listless  prayer,  the  faint  praise,  the  wandering  thought,  the  neglected 
Communion,  or  the  carelessness  with  which  the  altar  is  approached.  2.  We 
perceive  it  in  the  neglected  training  of  Christian  children,  who  are  seldom 
regarded  as  regenerate — as  the  lambs  of  Christ's  flock,  led  by  Him  and  blessed 
by  Him,  unless  through  our  indifference  Satan  is  permitted  to  obtain  the 
advantage  over  them.  3.  We  perceive  it  in  the  evil  life  of  youths  who,  though 
children  of  godly  parents,  through  the  error  of  those  parents  in  not  regarding 
the  Church's  ordinances  as  the  means  of  grace,  have  become  mere  hypocrites  in 
religion,  and  oftentimes  are  bringing  down  their  parents'  grey  hairs  with  sorrow 
to  the  grave.  4.  We  perceive  it  in  the  neglect  of  confirmation,  or  the  careless 
receiving  of  that  holy  rite.  5.  We  perceive  it  in  unhappy  marriages,  or  the 
breach  of  the  marriage  vow.  6.  We  perceive  it  in  the  relapse  into  sin  of  those 
who,  when  they  had  thought  themselves  dying,  made  to  the  priest  the  most 
earnest  professions  of  repentance. — C.  C.  Spencer. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS  ON    THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  2.  Waiting  on  Christ. — 1.  If  we  3.  Christ  watches  just  as  lovingly  over 

have   real  spiritual  hunger,  we  shall  our  physical  needs  as  over  the  welfare 

not  soon  weary  of  waiting  on  Christ.  of  the  soul. 

2.  Christ  will  take  good  care  of  those  Christ's     compassion.  —  How     con- 

who    are    earnestly    following    Him,  fidently,  then,  may  the  believer  reckon 

280 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


upon  the  compassion  of  his  Lord !    How  pray  for  that  ripeness  of  faith  and  that 

should  the  knowledge  of  it  lead  him  to  clearness     of     spiritual     discernment 

cast  all  his  care  upon  Him.     In  every  which  would  enable  us  under  sudden 

circumstance  of  his  life  Jesus  feels  for  dangers    to    rely   undoubtingly    upon 

him,  and  is  watching  over  him,  and  is  Him  who  has  so  often  saved  us,  and  in 

ordering  all  things  for  his  good.     Only  the  midst  of  temptations  to  rest  with 

let  faith   be   in    active    exercise,   and  confidence  upon  that  Divine  grace  the 

realise  this  truth.     Distrust  will  only  power  of  which  has  so  often  been  dis- 

cause  us  to  err. — H.  Caddell.  played   to   ourselves   and   others,    and 

which   never  faileth  those  who  trust 

Yer.  3.  Christ's  knowledge  of  human  to  it. 
nature. — Why   did    these    people   not 

faint  now  ?     Simply  because  there  was  Yers.  6,  7.  The  law  of  increase. — It  is 

something   to   absorb    their   thoughts  written,  "  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread 

now,  and   thus   make   them  forgetful  alone"  (Deut.  viii.  3).    The  true  bread  is 

of  their  hunger.     We   have  travelled  Christ,  who  was  given  to  us  at  baptism, 

before    now    with   a   companion,    and  that  He  might  live  in  us  and  bring 

have  been  charmed  by  his  personality  forth  fruit.     On  this  grace  we  depend 

and   utterances.     We    became   almost  for  all  good.     Would  we  have  Him  to 

unconscious  of   time  or   space.     Then  increase,  we  must  note  and  imitate  His 

the  hour  came  when  we  had  to  say  action  in  this  miracle.     1.  He  had  faith 

"  Good-bye,"  and  to  walk  home  with-  in  His  own  Divine  power.    So  have  we 

out   the    inspiration    of   his   presence,  in  grace.     Did  we  look  at  difficulties, 

Oh,  how  weak  and  wearied  we  then  our  hearts  would  fail.     We  must  look 

felt !     Everything  told  us  that  we  had  only   to   Him  ;    believe   that    He   has 

exhausted  our  body  under  the  continu-  called  us  ;  believe   that    He   gives   us 

ous  strain.     But  we  did  not  realise  all  power  to  obey.     2.  He  used  ordinary 

that  while  our  friend  was  near.     Now  means  :  so  we  ;  no  special  calls  needed  ; 

Christ,  who  knows  our  nature,  knew  in  the  midst  of  daily  life  we  may  become 

all  this.     Oh,  we  rejoice  to  know  that  perfect.    For  example,  there  are  duty, 

Jesus   enters  into   these  little   details  temptations,    sacrifices,    trials.     3.  He 

of   human   experience,  that  His   pity  gave  thanks :  so  let  us  even  for  small 

covers  all  possibilities  of  failure  arising  mercies ;    we    must   not   let    blessings 

from    the   weakness    of    our   flesh   or  ravel  out.     4.  Liberality  toward  others. 

aught  else! — D.  Davies.  Grace  is  meant  to  be  used.     If  its  fire 

has  really  kindled  in  our  hearts,  we 

Yer.     4.    Forgetfulness    of   former  must    diffuse  the   warmth.     But   the 

mercies. — Do  we  act  more  consistently  very  act  of  imparting  blessing  brings  an 

even  now,  with  all  our  increase  of  light  increase   to    ourselves   (Prov.   xi.    25  ; 

and  of  spiritual  experience  ?     Is  it  not  Job  xlii.  10). — A.  G.  Jackson. 

too  often  true  of  us,  even  now,  that,  No  waste  in  God's  work. — When  God 

though  we  have  heard  with  our  ears  interrupts  the  ordinary  course  of  His 

and  have  ourselves  witnessed  the  noble  providence,  it  is  not  for  the  purpose  of 

and    merciful   works   which    God   has  surprising  and  astounding  men's  minds, 

done,  we  still  cry  with  only  a  faltering  but  in  order  to  bring  about  His  own 

faith,   "Oh,  Lord,  arise,  help  us  and  designs.      Hence   it  is  that  we  never 

deliver  us "  ?     It  is  so  with  regard  to  see    any   waste    either   of    energy   or 

His  providential  dealings ;  it  is  so  with  material  in  His  works.    And  thus  does 

regard  to    His  gifts   of   grace.     Each  He  proceed  in  supplying  the  wants  of 

new  difficulty  appears  too  great  for  us  ;  His  people.     He  does  it  so  as  to  make 

at  each  recurring  necessity  we  feel  as  it  plainly  appear  that  the   supply  is 

if  we  should  be  overpowered  by  Satan  God's  work,  and  yet  not  so  as  to  be 

and  by  the   many  perplexities  which  altogether  out  of  the  course  of  natural 

surround  us.     We   all   have  need   to  things. — H.  Caddell. 

287 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


Our    wants    Christ's    care.  —  Jesus  wilderness,   if    for   His   sake  we  are 

created   a    supply    out    of  what    the  content  to   give   up   much  which  the 

disciples  had,  and  not  out  of  nothing,  world   holds  valuable,  to  forego  some 

In  like   manner,  if   His  people  daily  of  its  lawful  pleasures,  if  in  His  service 

follow  Him  in  faith,  if  this  is  the  first  we  forget  to   make  provision  for  the 

and  prominent   object  of   their  lives,  flesh,  He  will  not  fail  us  in  our  hour 

and  if,  in  subordination  to  this,  they  of  necessity,  but  will   supply  all   our 

are    diligent   and   laborious    in    their  needs  according  to  His  riches  in  glory, 

callings  in  life,  and  seek  His  blessing  feed  our  souls  with  the  hidden  manna 

on   all   their   earnings,   He  will   take  of   His   sweetness,   and   give   us   such 

care  that  they  never  want.    His  hand,  temporal  blessings  as  may  best  minister 

though  unseen,  except  by  the  eye  of  to  our  eternal  good. — S.  W.  Skeffington. 
faith,  shall  break  and  bless  their  daily 

meal.     They  shall  ever  have  enough.  Ver.  8.  Religious  frugality. — There 

And  the  secret  of  it  will  be  that  "  Christ  is  a  wide  difference  between  a  penurious 

dwelling    in    their    hearts   by   faith  "  spirit  and  a  spirit  of  religious  frugality, 

presides  also   over   all  their    temporal  The  former  grudges  what  is  used  in 

concerns,  makes  their  wants  His  care,  order  that  it  may  hoard  up  the  more 

becomes  a  daily  guest  at  their  table,  for   itself.     The  latter  unites  a  large 

and  draws  out  to  the  extent  of  their  hospitality  with  a  due  sense  of  responsi- 

wants  the  slender  meal  which,  by  His  bility  to  God  in  the  use  of  His  bountiful 

blessing,    their  faithful    diligence   has  gifts.    The  former  is  mere  covetousness ; 

already  provided. — Ibid.  the  latter  is  wise  and  godly  prudence. 

Christ  will  not  fail  us  in  the  hour  of  — H.  Caddell. 
need. — If  we  follow  the  Lord  into  the 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10—12. 

(Parallel:  Matt.  xvi.  1-4.) 

The  "  sign  "  refused. — It  was,  we  may  be  sure,  no  mere  intellectual  deficiency 
in  His  hearers  which  drew  this  sigh  from"  the  Gracious  Saviour.  In  the  request 
that  He  would  give  them  a  sign  there  was  some  secret  spiritual  wrongness 
over  which  Christ  grieved. 

I.  What  did  they  mean  by  asking  a  sign? — Had  they  not  His  wonderful 
works  ?  And  why  did  He  say  that  no  sign  should  be  given  when  in  fact  He 
was  giving  signs  innumerable  and  conclusive  ?  It  is  quite  plain  that  Christ's 
works  did  not  convince  them.  It  is  therefore  also  plain  that  we  greatly  over- 
rate the  force  of  miracles  as  an  evidence  of  Christianity.  In  those  times  few, 
if  any,  followed  Christ  because  of  the  miracles.  They  followed  Him  because  of 
that  all- prevailing  power  which  accompanied  the  simple  words  "  Follow  Me," 
because  never  man"  spake  as  He  spake,  because  the  message  of  Divine  love 
carried  with  it  its  own  overwhelming  evidence.  And  then  we  know  that 
vast  multitudes  witnessed  the  miracles  and  yet  persistently  refused  to  believe. 
Some  other  sign  they  wanted,  something  besides  curing  the  blind  and  cleansing 
the  leper  and  raising  the  dead.  They  asked  for  some  imposing  display  in  the 
heavens,  some  disclosure  of  the  Messiah  magnificently  seated  on  a  material 
throne,  which  would  confound,  amaze,  and  convince  all  beholders.  Now  that 
the  Saviour  would  not  give.  He  refused,  first,  because  they  had  no  right  to 
dictate  how  much  evidence  must  needs  be  forthcoming.  Part  of  our  trial  here 
consists,  in  fact,  in  God's  so  adjusting  the  evidence  to  our  moral  condition  that, 
while  there  is  amply  enough  to  determine  the  acceptance  of  the  honest  and 
good  heart,  there  is  no  lavishing  of  proof. 

288 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


II.  Suppose  the  "  sign  from  heaven  "  given. — Suppose  that  in  the  sky  above 
Jerusalem  had  been  disclosed  the  form  of  the  Son  of  Man  as  the  sun  in  his 
strength,  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  the  heavenly  hosts  on  the  right 
hand  and  the  left,  the  first  effect  would  doubtless  have  been  unspeakable  and 
overwhelming  awe.  But  remember,  belief  in  the  Christ  meant  trust  in  the 
Christ,  the  homage  of  heart  and  soul.  Do  you  think  that  the  most  magnificent 
display  in  the  heavens  would  secure  that  ? 

III.  No  outward  proof  alone  can  determine  belief  in  truths  moral  and 
spiritual. — Every  kind  of  truth  has  its  proper  evidence.  Mathematical  truth 
has  its  evidence  ;  but  to  crave  mathematical  proof  outside  its  own  proper  region 
is  unphilosophical,  and  may  lead  us  to  suspect  that  the  absorbing  study  of 
mathematics  disqualifies  for,  rather  than  aids,  the  search  after  truth  of  other 
kinds.  Historical  truth  again  is  reached  through  its  own  proper  evidence  ;  but 
it  is  here  that  we  touch  upon  the  very  point  before  us.  Christianity  rests  on  an 
historical  basis,  and  because  it  does  so  sceptics  are  apt  to  assume  that  its  truth 
or  falsehood  is  merely  matter  of  historical  evidence.  Doubtless  the  historical 
evidence  must  be  sound ;  but  is  every  one  qualified  to  judge  of  its  soundness  ? 
And  so  we  have  to  point  out  that  Christianity  has  a  moral  and  spiritual  basis 
also.  Suppose  there  has  appeared  on  the  page  of  history  One  whom  our  own 
hearts  and  the  universal  consent  of  the  civilised  world  pronounce  to  be  perfect 
goodness,  unrivalled  purity,  Divine  dignity,  love  unequalled.  Will  not  good 
men  yield  their  love  and  devotion  to  Him  who  is  perfect  goodness  ?  Will  not 
bad  men  shrink  from  Christ  and  from  His  perfect  purity,  and  be  predisposed 
to  question  the  historical  evidence,  because  they  hope  thereby  to  free  them- 
selves from  His  claim  upon  their  allegiance?  For  such  men  there  are  no 
signs  from  heaven.  They  are  not  given,  simply  because  they  would  be  useless 
(Luke  xvi.  31). 

IV.  Obedience  is  the  condition  of  faith. — Obedience  to  what  we  know  leads 
to  faith  in  what  is  yet  to  be  revealed.  The  good  ground  in  the  parable  of  the 
sower,  the  only  ground  that  brought  forth  fruit,  is  explained  to  be  "  the  honest 
and  good  heart," — honest,  and  therefore  receptive  of  everything  true  ;  good,  and 
therefore  in  closest  sympathy  with  the  noble,  the  loving,  and  the  pure.  But 
this  is  alone  of  Him  from  whom  comes  every  good  and  perfect  gift. — Canon  Jacob. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  11,  12.  Neglect  not  the  signs  from  one  who  is  determined  to  find 
given  already. — When  we  long  for  fault  ?  The  old  Greek  fable-writer 
miracles,  neglecting  those  standing  was  very  wise.  The  stories  of  "  The 
miracles  of  our  faith,  the  gospel  and  Wolf  and  the  Lamb,"  and  of  "The 
the  Church ;  when  our  reason  is  satis-  Old  Man  and  his  Ass,"  bear  a  moral 
fied  of  a  doctrine  or  a  duty,  and  yet  for  all  time.  Jesus  Christ  told  men 
we  remain  irresolute,  sighing  for  the  that  they  were  not  to  give  that  which 
impulse  of  some  rare  spiritual  en-  was  "  holy  to  the  dogs,"  or  to  cast 
lightenment  or  excitement,  for  a  re-  their  "  pearls  before  swine."  Life  is 
vival  or  a  mission  or  an  oration  to  lift  too  short,  time  and  strength  are  too 
us  above  ourselves, — we  are  virtually  precious,  to  be  wasted  in  vain  en- 
asking  to  be  shewn  what  we  already  deavour. — D.  J.  Hamer. 
confess,  to  behold  a  sign,  while  we  Sight  more  needed  than  signs. — Per- 
possess  the  evidence. — Dean  Chadwick.  sons    who,     after    looking     at    what 

You  cannot  convince  some  men. — Did  Christianity  has  wrought  in  the  world, 

you  ever  try  to  satisfy  an  impracticable  and  the  kind  of  influence  it  has  on  the 

man,  or  to  remove  all  ground  of  offence  souls  of  men,  still  ask  for  evidences  of 

u  289 


chap.  viit.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


Christianity,  are  of  the  same  sort  as  Mr.  Darwin  for  a  striking  illustration 

these.     They  forget  that  demonstration  of  this.      In  his  life  there  is  an  in- 

is  only  possible  of  the  visible  or  the  teresting  correspondence  with  Professor 

tangible,  and  that  there  cannot  be  any  Asa  Gray,   the   great   botanist,    who, 

scientific  demonstration  of  such  a  thing  wondering  how  Darwin  could  remain 

as  the  Godhead  of  Christ.       What  all  unconvinced  by  the  innumerable  evi- 

such  persons  want  is  sight,  not  signs —  dences  of  design  in  nature,  asked  him 

the  power  of  seeing  and  appreciating  if  he  could  think  of  any  possible  proof 

the  Saviour's  moral  glory,  not  evidences  which    he    would    consider    sufficient, 

of  Christianity. — R.  Glover.  Mr.  Darwin  replied  :  "  Your  question 

is  a  poser.     If  I  saw  an  angel  come 

Yer.  12.  The  Lord's  deep  sigh  in  its  down  to  teach  us  so,  and  I  was  con- 
great  significance — 1.  A  silent  and  vinced,  from  others  seeing  him,  that 
yet  decisive  sign  of  His  conflict  and  I  was  not  mad,  I  should  believe."  If 
of  His  victory.  2.  An  unuttered  word,  he  had  left  it  there,  it  might  have 
containing  a  world  of  Divine  words.  been  pertinent  to  ask  him  whether 
3.  A  fulfilment  of  the  primitive  Christ  is  not  just  such  an  angel  come 
prophecy  concerning  the  breach  be-  down  from  heaven  to  teach  us,  and 
tween  the  external  and  the  spiritual  whether  a  sufficient  number  of  per- 
Israel.  4.  A  prophecy  which  stretches  sons  did  not  see  Him  in  the  flesh,  to 
forward  to  the  Cross  and  the  Judgment.  say  nothing  of  the  multitudes  who 
— J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.  know  Him  in  the  spirit,  to  convince 

The  infinite  meaning  of  this  sigh  of  us  that  we  are  not  mad  in  believing 

Christ. — 1.    As   a   breathing   forth   of  it.     But  he  went  on  to  say  :  "If  man 

the  Divine   patience   over  the   visible  were  made  of  brass  and  iron,  and  in 

world.      2.  A  collective  expression   of  no    way    connected    with    any    other 

all  the  sufferings  and  all  the  patience  organism    which    had    ever    lived,    I 

of  Christ.     3.  A  declaration  of  all  the  should  perhaps  be  convinced."    Nothing 

incarnate  sorrow  and  endurance  of  the  could   be    more    candid,    or    more    in 

Lord  in  His  Church. — Ibid.  keeping  with  the  transparent  honesty 

An  unreasonable  demand. — In  many  of   the  man.     But  what  an  acknow- 

cases  of  unbelief  the  individual  is  not  ledgment !      Man    must   cease    to   be 

so  much  to  blame  as  the  spirit  of  the  man,    and   become   a   metal   machine, 

age  of  which  he  is  the  representative.  and  the  universe  must  cease  to  be  a 

See  2   Cor.  iv.  4.      Such  persons  not  harmonious   whole,   before    there    can 

only  cannot  recognise  the  signs  of  the  be  evidence  enough  for  so  simple  and 

kingdom  of  heaven,  but  are  in  a  state  elementary  a  principle  as  design  in  the 

of  heart  and  mind  to  which  no  sign  universe ;  and  then  only  a  "  perhaps  "  ! 

can   possibly  be  given.      We   are   in-  Is  Christ's  answer  to  the  seekers  after 

debted  to  the  fine  candour  of  the  late  a  sign  out  of  date  ? — J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—21. 
(Parallel:  Matt.  xvi.  5-12.) 

A  warning  against  formality  and  indifference. — I.  What  the  caution  refers  to. 
— 1.  A  formal,  hypocritical  religion.  2.  An  indifference  about  all  religion. 
The  rich,  the  gay,  the  men  of  learning  and  philosophy,  are  too  generally  of  this 
description. 

II.  Some  reasons  for  this  caution. — 1.  Because  of  our  proneness  to  these 
e/ils.  2.  Because  of  their  fatal  tendency.  Do  they  not  work  incessantly  till 
they  vitiate  the  whole  man — blinding  the  understanding,  perverting  the  will, 
sensualising  the  affections,  and  causing  every  part  of  one's  conduct  to  savour 

290 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


of  ungodliness?     3.  Because  of  their  ultimate  effect.     Eternal  happiness  and 
eternal  misery  are  too  important  to  be  trifled  with. 

III.  The  means  whereby  it  may  be  rendered  effectual  for  our  preservation — 
1.  Get  your  soul  deeply  impressed  with  the  principles  of  the  gospel.  2.  Be 
careful  whom  you  choose  as  your  associates.  3.  Endeavour  to  realise  the 
thought  of  the  Judgment. — C.  Simeon. 


OUTLINES  AND  COMMENTS  ON  THE   VERSES. 

Ver.   15.  Of    leaven  in  the   Gospel  mistake  than  to  the  character  of  their 

I  find   three   sorts  interpreted  to  our  mental  preoccupation,  when  we  reflect 

hands,  that  we  cannot  mistake.    1.  The  on  the  wonderful  facility  with  which 

Pharisees— of    the    leaven    of    super-  the  mind  discolours  and  distorts  things 

stition,     consisting     in     phylacteries,  in  the  atmosphere  of  its  own  broodings, 

phrases,   and   observances,    and    little  and  the  illusions  it  creates  in  so  doing, 

else.      2.  The  Sadducees—of  a  leaven  Only  think,  for  instance,  of  the  irre- 

that   smelt  strong  of   profaneness,  in  sistible  tendency  of  the  self-conscious, 

their  liberty  of  prophesying,  calling  in  self -regarding     young     gentleman    in 

question   angels   and   spirits   and   the  society    to    suspect    that    people    are 

resurrection   itself.      3.  The  leaven   of  either   laughing  at   or   admiring  him 

Herod — beware  that  too ;  many  times  when  there  is  not  the  slightest  ground 

it  is  the  bane  of  true  religion,  when  for   the   suspicion,  when   perhaps  not 

God's    truth    and    worship    must    be  an  eye   in   the  room  notices  him;  or 

moulded  up  with  Jeroboam's  and  with  of  our  haste  to  read  in  the  words  and 

Herod's  ends,  squared  to  them,  just  as  gestures  of  another   a  covert  allusion 

it  is  fittest  to  do  their  turns.     Let  all  to  that  secret  wrongdoing  of  ours  with 

be  abandoned— Pharisees',  Sadducees',  the  memory  of  which  we  are  burdened, 

Herod's— and  the  truth  take  their  place  when  no  such  allusion  is  intended  or 

(1   Thess.  ii.   3-6  ;  2  Oor.  xi.  3 ;  Rev.  could  be.—  N.  R.  Wood. 
xxii.  15). — Bishop  Andrewes. 

Erroneous  doctrine  is  like  leaven —  yer.    21.    Why  it    is   that  we   "do 

1.  In  regard  of  the  commonness.    2.  In  not   understand  "—whether   it   be   the 

regard  of  the  quantity— little  (1  Cor.  principles  of  the  Divine  government, 

v.    6).     3.   In    regard   of   the   quality  Gr  the  direction  of  the  Divine  purpose, 

(Matt.  xiii.  29).     4.  In  regard   of  its  0r  the  meaning  of  the  Divine  oracles, 

spreading  property  (Acts  xx.  30).  5.  In  1.  We  do  not  always  care  enough  to 

regard  of   its  effects— leaven  soureth,  understand,  and  so  will  not  be  at  the 

heateth,   swelleth  (Matt.   vi.   16;  Col.  pains  to  discover.     2.  We  are  too  apt 

ii.  21  ;  Acts  vii.  54,  57  ;  Col.  ii.  18).—  to  discover   and   adopt   only   what  is 

E.  Leigh.  in  sufficient   harmony  with   our   own 

preconceived  opinions.     3.  We  do  not 

Ver.    16.    The    disciples'  misconcep-  use   the   right   helps   to  enable  us  to 

tion.— In  wondering  at  the   disciples'  understand;    or,    having     the     right 

curious    misconception    we    ought    to  helps,  we  do  not  use  them  in  the  right 

remember   at   least,    as   serving   in   a  way.      Reflexion,    conversation,    min- 

measure  to  account  for  it,  how  accus-  gling  with  those  who  differ  from  us, 

tomed   they   were   to   hear   our   Lord  etc.    4.  We  so  seldom  go  to  Scripture 

speak  in  riddles,  to  have  Him  address  as  the  final  tribunal  of  revealed  truth, 

them  on  many  subjects  in  a  mysterious  or   place  ourselves   in  the  keeping  of 

and  enigmatical  way.      Yet  need  we  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  our  Counsellor 

after  all  look  further  for  an  explana-  and  Guide.— Bishop  Thorold. 
tion  of  what  seems  to  us  a  remarkable 

291 


chap.  viii.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  22—26. 

The  blind  man  at  Bethsaida. — This  incident,  recorded  only  by  St.  Mark,  may 
be  considered  both  in  a  natural  and  a  spiritual  view,  under  which  twofold 
aspect  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  all  our  Lord's  miracles  of  healing  were 
intended  to  be  viewed.  He  adopted  this  method  to  make  Himself  known  as 
the  Great  Physician  of  the  soul,  who  "forgiveth  all  our  sins  and  healeth 
all  our  infirmities";  who,  by  the  virtue  which  resides  in  Him,  and  which  is 
called  forth  by  the  application  of  faith,  removes  the  blindness  of  our  under- 
standing, the  raging  fever  of  our  passions,  the  palsy  of  our  spiritual  affections, 
the  lameness  of  our  halting  obedience;  commands  Satan  and  his  unclean 
spirits  to  come  out  of  us,  and  raises  us  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the  life  of 
righteousness. 

I.  A  blind  man  is  brought  to  Jesus  to  be  cured. — 1.  The  restoring  of  sight 
to  the  blind  was  one  of  the  signs  to  be  looked  for  in  the  promised  Messiah 
(Isa.  xxxv.  5) ;  and  to  this  evidence  Christ  appealed,  in  the  first  place,  in  His 
answer  to  the  Baptist's  messengers  (Matt.  xi.  5).  2.  Many  remarkable  instances 
of  this  kind  of  miracle  might  be  referred  to  (see  especially  John  ix.).  The 
present  example  contains  some  peculiarities  not  found  elsewhere.  3.  There 
is  a  moral  as  well  as  a  natural  blindness,  to  which  not  merely  a  few  unfortunate 
persons  but  all  mankind  by  nature  are  subject  (Isa.  xliii.  8).  (1)  Such  were 
the  Gentiles  (Eph.  iv.  18).  (2)  Such  were  the  Jews  also,  who,  though  they  had 
not  the  same  excuse  of  ignorance  or  want  of  light,  yet  were  blinded  by  obstinate 
and  invincible  prejudice  (Mark  iv.  12).  (3)  Such  are  all  of  us  by  nature  :  born 
blind,  and  continuing  so  by  our  own  fault;  having  no  light  in  ourselves,  and 
hating  it  when  it  is  brought  to  us.  Perhaps,  like  the  Pharisees,  we  say  we  see ; 
but  this  is  our  blindness.  We  see  nothing  as  we  ought  to  see,  nothing  as  it 
really  is.  We  see  no  deformity  in  sin,  no  beauty  in  holiness ;  no  terrors  in  the 
law,  no  charms  or  attractions  in  the  gospel ;  no  weakness  in  ourselves,  no  all- 
sufiiciency  in  Christ  (Rev.  iii.  17,  18).  4.  It  was  to  free  all  mankind  from  these 
spiritual  infirmities,  and  not  to  relieve  a  few  miserable  objects  from  their  bodily 
pains,  that  the  Saviour  appeared  (Luke  iv.  18). 

II.  Our  Lord,  before  beginning  the  cure,  takes  His  patient  to  a  private 
place,  apart  from  the  multitude. — 1.  No  reason  is  given  why  He  did  this, 
or  why,  after  the  cure  was  complete,  He  told  him  not  to  go  back  into  the 
town,  etc.  (ver.  26).  Perhaps  the  people  of  Bethsaida,  like  those  of  Nazareth 
(Matt.  xiii.  57,  58),  had  resisted  the  evidence  of  former  miracles  performed 
amongst  them,  and  therefore  did  not  deserve  another.  At  any  rate,  when  we 
read  this,  and  when  we  observe  His  disinclination  on  other  occasions  to  have 
His  fame  blazed  abroad,  we  are  reminded  of  the  character  given  Him  by  the 
prophet  (Isa.  xlii.  2).  2.  "  We  also  are  oftentimes  spiritually  blind  while  we 
are  in  the  town,  i.e.  this  world ;  afterwards,  being  led  out  of  the  town,  i.e.  out 
of  the  world  and  its  concerns,  by  Jesus  Christ,  we  are  healed."  He  does  this 
in  a  variety  of  ways :  by  afflictions,  by  disappointments,  by  the  loss  of  friends, 
by  a  change  in  our  situation,  etc.  Anything,  in  short,  which  disentangles  us 
from  the  world,  detaches  us  from  our  former  associates  and  pursuits,  affords 
an  opening  for  serious  reflexion,  and  a  closer  acquaintance  with  our  own  hearts 
— anything  which  has  this  effect  may  be  considered  as  a  merciful  dispensation 
of  Christ  to  our  souls,  a  taking  us  by  the  hand  and  leading  us  out  of  the  town, 
preparatory  to  a  perfect  restoration. 

III.  On  a  first  exertion  of  His  healing  virtue  our  Lord  cures  the  blind  man 
only  in  part. — He  saw  objects,  but  not  distinctly.  Men  and  trees  waved 
to  and  fro  before  his  eyes,  so  that  he  could  not  distinguish  one  object  from 

292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  Viil. 


another.  1.  This  is  always  the  case  when  a  blind  man  is  restored  to  sight 
by  natural  means ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  obviate  it  by  not  allowing  him  the 
free  use  of  his  eyes  at  first,  and  by  the  gradual  admission  of  light  into  the  room. 
2.  Such  was  not  our  Lord's  usual  manner.  He  did  all  things  well.  Those  who 
witnessed  His  cures  were  beyond  measure  astonished  when  they  saw  His 
patients  restored  to  the  immediate  and  full  use  of  their  senses,  without  the 
necessity  of  any  precautions.  3.  Here,  however,  He  departs  from  His  usual 
course,  and  as  it  were  puts  a  restraint  upon  the  virtue  which  resided  in  Him, 
so  as  to  make  its  effect  incomplete.  Perhaps,  according  to  the  faith  of  this  poor 
man,  so  was  it  done  to  him,  which,  being  weak  at  first,  required  nursing  and 
rearing  by  a  partial  exhibition  of  the  Saviour's  power.  4.  At  any  rate  the 
application  to  the  spiritual  recovery  of  sinners  is  much  more  exact  than  if  the 
cure  had  been  completed  at  once.  When  the  eyes  of  our  understanding  are 
enlightened  by  the  revelation  of  Christ,  the  first  effect  is  not  unlike  what  is 
here  described.  Our  views  of  Divine  things  are  very  imperfect  and  confused. 
We  are  not  all  at  once  turned  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of 
Satan  unto  God.  We  experience  at  first  a  kind  of  twilight  illumination,  which 
"  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  Nor  is  this  gradual  conversion 
in  any  way  derogatory  to  the  great  power  of  God.  Was  the  cure  of  this  blind 
man  less  perfect  or-less  astonishing  because  it  was  not  effected  all  at  once  ?  The 
material  circumstance  which  constituted  the  miracle  was  this ;  he  came,  seeing 
no  man ;  he  went  away,  "  seeing  every  man  clearly."  And  so  with  respect  to 
our  souls ;  the  great  point  to  be  considered  is,  what  we  were,  and  what  we  are 
(Eph.  v.  8).  It  is  not  necessary  that  we  should  be  able  to  refer  to  the  time 
or  place  when  light  first  flashed  in  upon  our  mind ;  it  is  enough  if  we  can  say, 
"One  thing  I  know,"  etc.  (John  ix.  25). 

IV.  The  same  process  being  repeated,  the  patient  is  perfectly  restored. — 
1.  The  former  trial,  however  unsuccessful  apparently  in  part,  had  had  the 
intended  effect  of  raising  the  man's  expectations  and  confidence  in  his  Physician 
to  a  proper  pitch.  And  Jesus,  seeing  that  he  had  now  faith  to  be  healed,  delays 
no  longer  to  complete  the  cure.  2.  It  is  the  same  with  those  whom  He  calls 
out  of  spiritual  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light.  The  imperfect  illumination 
vouchsafed  them  at  first  is  designed  only  to  exercise  their  faith,  to  make  them 
love  the  light  and  desire  more  of  it.  Having  once  tasted  of  the  heavenly  gift, 
they  feel  an  insatiable  desire  to  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  to  be 
filled  with  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding.  To  them  shall  more  be 
given  as  they  are  able  to  receive  it,  until  they  are  "  stablished,  strengthened, 
settled,"  and  "  made  perfect  in  every  good  work  to  do  His  will." 

V.  The  remarkable  injunction  with  which  the  man  is  dismissed. — 1.  There 
was  the  same  reason  (whatever  that  might  be)  for  desiring  him  not  to  go  into 
the  town  after  his  cure  as  for  taking  him  out  in  order  to  cure  him.  2.  The 
eyes  of  our  understanding  being  enlightened  to  see  our  lost  condition  as  sinners 
and  the  great  power  of  God  our  Saviour,  we  are  commanded  not  to  go  back 
into  the  town,  nor  to  tell  it  to  any  one  in  the  town,  but  to  go  to  our  house. 
(1)  Since  it  was  the  god  of  this  world  that  first  blinded  our  minds,  the  folly  and 
danger  of  going  back  into  the  world  after  conversion  is  evident  to  common 
sense.  If  we  do,  we  run  the  most  serious  risk  of  being  again  entangled  therein 
and  overcome.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  we  should  merely  abstain  from  returning 
to  the  world ;  we  must  not  even  wish  to  do  so,  or  indulge  longing  desires  after 
what  we  have  renounced.  They  are  objects  altogether,  at  variance  with  our 
newly  acquired  sense  (1  John  ii.  15,  16  ;  Luke  ix.  62).  (2)  Still  further  to 
preserve  us  from  worldly  contamination,  Christ  forbids  us  even  to  tell  or  talk 
of  what  has  happened  to  us,  to  the  unspiritual.  By  such  communications  we 
are  likely  to  do  harm  to  ourselves,  and  no  good  to  them.     We  may  begin  by 

293 


CHAP.  viii.        BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK 


inviting  them  out  of  the  town  ;  we  may  end  by  going  back  into  the  town  with 
them.  (3)  But  although  we  are  dissuaded  from  talking  of  these  matters  to  the 
world  in  general,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  we  are  to  keep  them  to  ourselves. 
On  the  contrary,  having  received  such  great  mercies,  we  are  to  give  glory  to 
God,  and  at  the  same  time  be  doing  an  inestimable  service  to  those  most  dear  to 
us,  by  endeavouring  to  open  their  eyes  and  to  bring  them  to  the  knowledge  and 
obedience  of  the  faith.  In  the  bosom  of  our  own  family,  where  we  may  count 
upon  at  least  some  measure  of  sympathy  and  attention,  we  are  to  do  the  work 
of  a  true  friend  for  them  and  of  an  evangelist  for  Christ. 

The  clearing  of  the  sight. — As  in  other  cases,  Jesus  led  this  sufferer  apart ; 
as  in  other  cases,  He  made  use  of  certain  means  as  well  as  of  His  word, 
teaching  us  the  method  and  the  secret  of  sacramental  working;  but,  not  as 
in  other  miracles,  the  cure  is  gradually  wrought. 

I.  It  was  intended  to  teach  us  how  God  deals  differently  with  different 
souls. — It  is  a  rebuke  to  those  who  demand  proofs  of  instantaneous  conversion  ; 
it  should  be  read  with  that  passage  which  describes  the  growth  of  grace  as 
gradual,  like  the  growth  of  the  grain  of  corn,  "  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear, 
then  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,"  which,  while  the  man  rises  and  sleeps  night  and 
day,  grows  he  knoweth  not  how. 

II.  As  to  the  particular  words  in  which  the  man  describes  his  growth. — 
"  I  see  men  walking,  but  they  look  like  trees."  Large,  indistinct,  crowded,  and 
hazy,  like  the  mingled  mass  of  the  distant  woods  waving  and  bending  in  the 
breeze,  or  as  when  passing  rapidly  along  we  see  the  trees  flit  quickly  by  us 
in  copse  and  hedgerow.  The  man  had  either  never  seen,  or  had  long  been 
unaccustomed  to,  the  form  of  either  man  or  tree  ;  his  was  therefore  an  utterance 
doubly  obscured,  his  eyes  only  partially  transmitting  objects  which  his  mind 
only  partially  recognised.  The  man  having  thus  truly  described  his  half- 
restored  condition,  Jesus  speaks  to  him  a  word  of  command  :  He  bids  him  look 
up,  and  then  he  sees  all  men  clearly. 

III.  Looking  at  the  spiritual  meaning  of  this  description,  it  has  been  urged 
that  it  is  often  the  case  when  the  work  of  grace  is  beginning  that  people 
mistake  the  nature  and  proportion  of  things  around  them.  Spiritual  things 
and  living  truths  still  have  much  of  the  earthly  clinging  to  them  :  and  if  life  and 
movement  be  recognised  at  all,  it  is  the  dull  vegetative  life  of  mere  existence, 
still  rooted  in  the  soil  of  this  world,  or  spreading  itself  out  in  a  hazy  form 
of  general  indefinite  goodness,  not  the  active,  personal,  organic  life  of  the 
regenerate  man,  which  is  part  of  the  very  life  of  God. 

IV.  We  notice  a  lesson  of  honesty  and  humility  in  the  man's  description. — 
H3  does  not  claim  an  insight  which  he  has  not  attained  to.  He  speaks  a  lesson, 
gentle  but  severe,  to  those  who,  after  hearing  a  sermon,  or  reading  a  treatise,  or 
attending  a  service,  or  feeling  an  awakening  of  conscience,  suddenly  consider 
that  they  are  converted,  that  they  "  can  read  their  title  clear,"  that  they  have 
clear  views,  and  so  forth.  The  precocious  child,  who  lectures  its  parents  or 
strangers  on  religion ;  the  converted  prize-fighter,  who  suddenly  turns  from 
indulging  in  all  kinds  of  brutal  passions  and  lectures  his  neighbours  who  have 
been  walking  for  years  in  the  light  on  which  he  has  persistently  turned  his 
back;  the  uneducated  convert,  who  has  picked  up  one  text  of  Scripture,  and 
on  the  strength  of  that  ignores  all  that  others  have  learned  of  the  whole  counsel 
of  God, — all  these  may  lay  to  heart  the  humility  and  truthfulness  of  this  man. 

V.  And  in  this  gradual  development  of  the  spiritual  powers  there  is  also 
a  strong  and  abiding  word  of  comfort  for  many  a  struggling  Christian.  Often- 
times we  find  those  who,  though  they  are  interested  and  anxious,  cannot  obtain 
the  steadfast  gaze  that  they  desire.     Clouds  drive  across  their  spiritual  firma- 

294 


TOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


ment ;  now  all  is  clear  and  bright  for  a  moment ;  now  the  fierce  storm  or  the 
blinding  mist  sweeps  over  them,  and  their  light  is  turned  to  darkness.  They 
are  not,  as  they  were  once,  either  blind  or  careless ;  the  truth  has  shone  in 
upon  their  souls,  but  they  cannot  retain  it ;  their  conscience  is  tender,  but  their 
understanding  is  dim.  Let  such  take  courage ;  they  are  just  in  the  condition 
indicated  by  the  text — they  see  men  walking  as  it  were  trees.  You  who  have 
been  not  •  only  baptised  and  confirmed,  but  have  earnestly  worshipped  and 
reverently  communicated,  you  are  different,  widely  different,  from  what  you 
were  once  ;  but  widely  different  also  from  what  hereafter  you  shall  be.  Christ 
has  led  you  to  self-examination  :  the  result  is  at  once  to  excite  your  thankful- 
ness for  His  marvellous  work,  and  your  humiliation  for  your  own  shortcoming. 
But  He  still  is  standing  by  you, — still  in  His  house  apart  from  the  city's  noise 
He  is  bending  over  you  as  you  kneel ;  still  to  your  soul  His  voice  is  speaking ; 
still  on  His  altar  He  waits  for  you,  that  again  He  may  lay  His  hands  upon 
you,  again  He  may  bid  you  lift  up  your  hearts.  And  in  His  house,  and 
through  His  Word,  by  the  voice  of  His  Church  and  the  power  of  His  sacraments, 
He  will  free  you  from  the  bondage  and  the  blinding  power  of  sin,  and  quicken 
all  those  faculties  which  have  so  long  been  paralysed  or  misused. — G.  C.  Harris, 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  23.  Christ's  freedom  in  the  use  of   subordination,  and  remember  that 

of  rnecms. — This  case  and  that  of  the  in  Him,  not  in  them,  lies  the  healing 

deaf  and  stammering  man  in  Decapolis  power. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 
have  many  points  of  resemblance.     In  Led   into   solitude. — As    Israel   was 

both  those  who  brought  the  diseased  led  into  the  wilderness  that  God  might 

to  Jesus  prescribed  to  Him  the  mode  "  speak  to  her  heart,"  so  often  Christ 

of   cure.     Was   it  for  the  purpose   of  draws   us    aside, v  if    not    by   outward 

reproving  and  counteracting  the  pre-  providences     such    as    these,    yet    by 

judice  which  connected  the  cure  with  awaking  in   us  that   solemn   sense   of 

a  certain  kind  of  manipulation  on  the  personal  responsibility  and  making  us 

part  of  the  curer  that  Jesus  in  both  feel  our  solitude,  that  He  may  lead  us 

instances  went  so  far  out  of  His  usual  to  feel  His  all-sufficient  companionship, 

course,    varying   the    manner   of    His  — Ibid. 
action  so  singularly  that,  out  of  all  His 

miracles  of   healing,  these  two   stand         "Vers.  24,  25.  The  man's  answer  is  in 

distinguished  by  the  unique   mode   of  accord  with  later   scientific  discovery, 

their  performance  ?     It  is  certain  that,  What  we  call  the  act  of  vision  is  really 

had  Jesus  observed  one  uniform  method  a  twofold  process ;    there  is  in  it  the 

of  healing,  the  spirit  of  formalism  and  report  of  the  nerves  to  the  brain,  and 

superstition,  which  lies  so  deep  in  our  also  an  inference,  drawn  by  the  mind, 

nature,  would  have  seized  upon  it,  and  which  previous  experience  has  educated 

linked  it  inseparably  with  the  Divine  to  understand  what  that  report  implies, 

virtue  that  went  out  of  Him,  confound-  In  want  of  such  experience  an  infant 

ing  the  channel  with  the  blessing  it  thinks  the  moon  as  near  him  as  the 

conveyed. — Dr.  Hanna.  lamp,  and   reaches   out   for   it.     And 

Christ,  not  means,  the  source  of  healing,  when  Christian  science  does  its  Master's 

— If  Christ's  touch  and  Christ's  saliva  work  by  opening  the  eyes  of  men  who 

healed,  it  was  not  because  of  anything  have  been  born  blind,  they  do  not  know 

in  them,  but  because  He  willed  it  so ;  at   first   what  appearances   belong  to 

and  He  Himself  is  the  source  of  all  the  globes   and  what  to   flat   and   square 

healing  energy.     Therefore  let  us  keep  objects.     It  is  certain  that  every  image 

these  externals  in  their  proper  place  conveyed  to  the  brain  reaches  it  upside- 

295 


cfiAP.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


down,  and  is  corrected  there.     When  flocks  and  herds  " — but  still  more,  what 

Jesus  then  restored  a  blind  man  to  the  he  adds  last,  that  they  cannot  see  the 

perfect  enjoyment  of  effective,  intelli-  "  human  face  Divine."    Were  it  possible 

gent    vision,    He    wrought   a    double  for  a  blind  person  to  be  restored  to 

miracle,    one    which     instructed    the  the  faculty  of  seeing  persons,  though  he 

intelligence  of  the  blind  man  as  well  remained  blind  to  everything  else,  much 

as  opened  his  eyes.     This  was  utterly  more  than  half  his  deprivation  would 

unknown  to  that  age. — Dean  Chadwick.  be   removed.      Now   a   great   deal   of 

that    moral    blindness    of   which    the 

Yer.  24.  Different  conditions  of  the  blindness  of   this  man   was  the   type 

spiritual  life. — 1.  It  is  a  happy  state,  consists  in  just  this — that  we  do  not 

if  it  is  the  first  stage  towards  clearly  see  our  fellow-men.     We  only  see  our- 

seeing   in   perfect    knowledge.     2.    It  selves  ;  we  are  sharp-sighted  enough  to 

is   a  gloomy   and   uncertain   state,    if  our  own  interests,  but  blind  to  the  wants 

the    Christian    should   remain    in    it.  and  wishes  of  others.     The  love  of  self 

3.  Worst  of  all,  if  through  his  own  guilt  brings  a  gradual  film  over  the  moral 

he  should  return  to  this  stage,  falling  vision,  so  that,  reversing  the  process 

into  the  new  blindness   of   despair. —  of  the  miracle,  though  at  first  we  see 

J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.  every  man  clearly,  by-and-by  they  are 

Man  and  tree. — A  large  part  of  the  no  more  to  us  than   vague  shadows, 

battle   of   life   has    been   fought    and  as   trees   walking,    and    presently   we 

gained    when    one    has    learned    the  cease    to    see    them    at    all. — Bishop 

difference  between  a  man  and  a  tree.  A.  Blomfield. 
For  that  is  the  difference  between  the 

great  and  the  small,  between  mind  and  Yer.  26.  ^1  view  of  the  miraculous. — - 

matter,   between  the  eternal  and  the  This  fact,  of  a  miracle  done  in  intended 

transitory,  between  earth  and  heaven.  secrecy  and  shrouded  in  deep  darkness, 

— G.  Hodges.  suggests  to  us  the  true  point  of  view 

Christian  progress. — How   dim   and  from  which  to  look  at  the  whole  subject 

partial   a  glimmer  of   light   comes   to  of  miracles.     1.  People  say  they  were 

many   a    soul   at   the    outset   of    the  meant  to  be  attestations  of  His  Divine 

Christian    life !       How    little    a    new  mission.     Yes,  no  doubt  that  is   true 

convert  knows  about  God  and  self  and  partially ;  but  that  was  never  the  sole 

the  starry  truths  of  His  great  reve-  or  even  the   main  purpose  for  which 

lation  !      Christian   progress  does   not  they  were  wrought ;  and  when  anybody 

consist   in   seeing  new  things,  but   in  asked  Jesus  Christ  to  work  a  miracle 

seeing  the  old  things  more  clearly — the  for  that  purpose  only,  He  rebuked  the 

same  Christ,  the  same  Cross,  only  more  desire   and  refused  to  gratify  it.     He 

distinctly  and  deeply  apprehended,  and  wrought    the   miracle    not   coldly,   in 

more  closely  incorporated  into  my  very  order  to  witness  to  His   mission,  but 

being.     We   do   not   grow  away  from  every  one  of  them  was  the  token  be- 

Him,  but  we  grow  into  knowledge  of  cause  it  was  the  outcome  of  His  own 

Him. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  sympathetic  heart   brought  into   con- 
tact with  human   need.     And  instead 

Yer.  25.  The  restoration  of  sight. —  of  the  miracles  of  Jesus  Christ  being 
In  this  verse  the  Evangelist  just  touches  cold,  logical  proofs  of  His  mission,  they 
that  which  is  the  salient  point  in  the  were  all  glowing  with  the  earnestness 
blessing  of  the  restoration  of  sight,  of  a  loving  sympathy,  and  came  from 
For  what  is  the  great  deprivation  in  Him  as  naturally  as  rays  from  the  sun- 
blindness  ?  It  is  a  loss,  doubtless,  as  shine  at  sight  of  sorrow.  2.  The  same 
the  blind  poet  Milton  sang,  that  not  fact  carries  with  it,  too,  a  lesson  about 
to  them  return,  "  Day,  or  the  sweet  His  character.  Is  not  He  here  doing 
approach  of  -even  or  morn,  or  sight  what  He  tells  us  to  do  ? — "  Let  not  thy 
of  vernal  bloom,  or  summer's  rose,  or  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand 

296 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


doeth."     All  goodness  "  does  good  by  the  narrow  path  between  ostentation 

stealth,"  even  if  it  does  not  "  blush  to  of  powers  and   selfish  concealment   of 

find  it  fame" — and  that  universal  mark  faculty ;  and  He  solved  it  thus  :  "  Leav- 

of  true  benevolence  marked  His.     He  ing   us   an   example    that   we   should 

had  to  solve  in  His  human  life  what  we  follow  in  His  steps." — A.  Maclaren,D.D. 
have  to  solve — the  problem  of  keeping 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  27—38, 

and  Chap.  ix.  1. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  xvi.  13-28;  Luke  ix.  18-27.) 

Christ's  catechism. — I.  Christ  is  such  as  to  cause  the  world  to  think  of  Him. — 

1.  Because  He  professes  to  be  the  Saviour  whom  the  world  had  long  expected. 

2.  Because  His  appearance  did  not  correspond  with  the  world's  expectations. 

3.  Because  the  advent  of  a  Saviour  was  the  world's  great  need. 

II.  Christ  is  interested  in  what  the  world  thinks  of  Him. — 1.  He  recognised 
the  world's  ability  to  form  an  idea  of  Him.  2.  He  had  laboured  to  impart  (to 
the  world  a  correct  idea  of  Him.  3.  He  was  conscious  that  the  world  had  formed 
an  idea  of  Him.  4.  He  seeks  information  of  the  result  of  His  own  teaching  and 
the  world's  learning  from  the  most  reliable  source. 

III.  Christ  is  differently  thought  of  by  the  world. — 1.  He  had  imparted  to 
the  world  an  impression  of  superiority.  "  A  great  prophet."  2.  The  world  had 
failed  to  perceive  the  unique  character  of  His  greatness.  Only  a  great  man. 
3.  This  failure  had  its  source  in  the  union  of  Godhead  with  manhood. 

IY.  Christ  is  wishful  that  right  ideas  of  Himself  should  exist  in  the  world. — 
1.  He  had  been  qualifying  His  followers  to  teach  them.  2.  He  opportunely 
tests  their  mastery  of  them.  3.  He  ascertains  the  successful  implantation  of 
them. — B.  D.  Johns. 

Ver.  34.  The  necessity  of  self-denial. — We  ought  to  attach  more  than  ordinary 
importance  to  this  saying  of  our  Lord,  because  it  is  evident  that  He  Himself 
laid  great  stress  on  it.  He  had  been  conversing  apart  with  His  disciples,  and 
particularly  with  Peter;  and  something  that  Peter  said  gave  Him  occasion 
to  insist  on  this  truth.  He  would  not,  however,  address  it  privately  to  him 
or  to  the  small  band  of  His  immediate  followers,  but  He  summoned  the 
multitude  to  attend  to  Him,  marking  by  this  circumstance  as  strongly  as 
possible  the  importance  of  what  He  was  about  to  say  :  "  Whosoever  will  come 
after  Me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  Me."  He 
enforced  the  same  truth  again  and  again  (Matt.  x.  38;  Luke  xiv.  27).  And 
is  not  the  declaration  in  itself  calculated  to  arouse  our  attention  ?  If  we  know 
that  there  is  anything  without  which  we  cannot  be  true  followers  of  Christ, 
it  surely  ought  to  be  well  considered  by  us,  because  the  very  life  and  salvation 
of  our  souls  must  depend  on  it.  Let  us  then  take  earnest  heed  to  what  Christ 
here  says  to  us :  let  us  consider  well  what  that  is  which  He  declares  to  be 
necessary  in  order  to  prove  our  claim  to  be  His  disciples ;  nor  let  us  rest  till 
we  have  this  evidence  that  we  belong  to  Him — till  this  seal,  as  it  were,  is 
visibly  set  upon  us  to  mark  us  out  as  His  disciples  indeed.  The  text  requires 
but  few  words  by  way  of  explanation.  To  "  deny  oneself "  is  to  refuse 
indulgence  to  our  desires,  not  to  do  what  we  would  naturally  wish  to  do — to 
put  a  restraint  upon  ourselves,  to  withhold  from  any  of  our  appetites  that 
which  would  gratify  them,  and  to  act  differently  in  any  case  to  what  nature 
would  incline  us. 

297 


chap.  vni.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


I.  Self-denial  is  necessary  in  order  that  we  may  prove  our  love  and  fidelity  to 
Christ. — 1.  A  service  which  costs  us  nothing  affords  no  very  certain  evidence 
of  our  attachment  to  any  one.  Now  Christ  would  have  us  give  proof  of  our 
loyalty  and  attachment  to  Him.  He  requires  it  of  us  as  a  positive  duty  to 
give  up  something,  to  make  some  sacrifice  for  Him,  to  oppose  our  inclinations 
in  some  way  or  other,  in  order  that  we  may  ascertain  whether  indeed  love 
to  His  name  is  a  strong  and  ruling  principle  within  us.  2.  There  are  many 
who  are  well  enough  disposed  to  the  religion  of  Christ  till  it  prescribes  this 
duty.  They  appear  willingly  to  hear  the  Scripture,  to  join  in  prayer,  and  to 
observe  holy  ordinances  ;  and  they  will  do  many  things  which  would  seem  to 
indicate  an  earnestness  and  zeal  in  the  cause  of  Christ ;  but  they  draw  back 
when  called  to  the  difficult  exercise  of  self-denial.  But  what  is  the  value  of 
a  service  which  cautiously  avoids  all  toil  and  difficulty?  Where  is  the  proof 
of  our  being  sincere  in  the  love  of  an  object  if  we  will  encounter  no  hardship 
to  attain  it?  We  see  men  ready  to  practise  much  self-denial  and  to  think 
little  of  it  in  any  matter  in  which  their  hearts  are  engaged.  Look,  for  example, 
at  the  man  whose  ambition  it  is  to  prosper  in  business.  What  a  life  of  self- 
denial  is  his  !  He  labours  even  to  weariness,  rises  early,  late  takes  rest,  eats 
the,  bread  of  carefulness,  denies  his  nature  the  rest  that  it  needs,  and  refuses 
many  enjoyments  which  he  would  be  glad  to  partake  but  that  they  would 
hinder  him  in  the  object  that  he  has  in  view.  Even  the  man  of  pleasure  must 
in  the  pursuit  of  his  object  often  use  self-denial :  he  must  put  a  restraint  on 
himself  at  times,  and  refuse  a  less  pleasure  for  the  present,  however  strongly 
his  wishes  may  incline  to  it,  in  order  to  obtain  a  greater  one  in  prospect.  Nay, 
even  the  customary  civilities  of  society  impose  on  us  frequent  self-denial.  A 
man  will  often  deny  himself,  will  often  refrain  from  doing  what  he  would 
otherwise  wish  to  do,  in  order  to  observe  the  rules  of  good  breeding  and  courtesy. 
If  then  we  are  content  in  the  pursuit  of  business  or  of  pleasure  to  deny 
ourselves,  if  we  are  willing  and  able  to  practise  it  in  order  that  we  may 
observe  the  decent  courtesies  of  life  and  be  esteemed  well  mannered  in  society, 
what  must  be  said  of  us  if  we  refuse  to  practise  it  for  Christ's  sake,  if  we 
can  use  self-denial  on  other  occasions  and  for  other  purposes  readily,  and  only 
feel  it  too  irksome  when  called  on  to  use  it  for  the  purpose  of  pleasing  Him  ? 
What  must  be  said  of  us  but  that  the  love  of  God  is  not  in  us  ? 

II.  Self-denial  is  necessary  to  the  due  discharge  of  our  duties. — For  many 
of  these  we  cannot  perform  except  at  the  expense  of  denying  ourselves.  1 .  How 
can  the  rich  relieve  the  poor  as  they  ought,  or  how  can  the  poor  as  they  ought 
befriend  each  other,  except  they  deny  themselves  for  each  other's  sake  ?  We 
must  in  part  sacrifice  our  own  ease,  we  must  give  up  our  own  way,  we  must 
abridge  our  own  enjoyments,  if  we  would  do  good  to  others  according  to  the 
will  of  Christ.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens."  This  is  His  law ;  and  it  is 
evident  that  we  cannot  pretend  to  fulfil  it  except  we  deny  ourselves.  "  Look 
not,"  saith  the  apostle,  "  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also 
on  the  things  of  others  "  ;  and  then  he  adds,  "  let  this  mind  be  in  you  which 
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,"  inasmuch  as  His  Divine  conduct  furnishes  the  best 
example  of  self-denying  charity.  Not  a  single  day  passes  which  will  not 
furnish  many  occasions  for  this  :  nay,  not  an  hour's  intercourse  with  our  fellow- 
men  but  will  afford  us  opportunities  of  denying  ourselves, — by  giving  up,  for 
instance,  our  own  wishes,  and  yielding  to  the  wishes  of  another ;  by  "  taking 
the  lowest  room,"  or  choosing  the  least  desirable  lot ;  by  securing  the  comfort 
or  ease  or  honour  of  those  about  us  at  some  sacrifice  on  our  own  part ;  by 
putting  a  restraint  upon  our  feelings ;  by  imposing  silence  on  our  tongue, 
refusing  it  the  licence  which  it  loves,  not  allowing  it  to  utter  words  *  that  may 
do  hurt,"  not  answering  again,  nor  resenting  wrong,  nor  resisting  evil.      In 

298 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.       chap.  viii. 


a  thousand  ways  which  only  a  watchful  conscience  can  discover,  and  which 
no  one  may  be  privy  to  but  God  Himself,  we  may  do  what  our  Lord  hero 
commands  us.  Our  daily  course,  under  the  most  ordinary  circumstances,  may 
become  a  course  of  virtuous  self-renunciation — a  course  of  habitual  obedience 
to  the  injunction  in  the  text,  "  Whosoever  will  come  after  Me,  let  him  deny 
himself,  and  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  Me."  2.  There  are  at  the  present 
day  great  efforts  made  by  the  Church  for  the  extension  of  the  Lord's  kingdom 
among  men,  for  propagating  both  at  home  and  abroad  the  gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God.  These  efforts  cannot  be  sustained  except  by  the  free-will  offerings  of 
Christians — they  must  be  given  up  unless  the  members  of  the  Church  liberally 
give  of  their  substance  for  their  support.  These  multiplying  demands  on 
Christians  cannot  possibly  be  answered  unless  they  contrive  in  some  way  to 
lessen  their  personal  expenses,  to  spend  less  on  self-indulgence,  to  save  somewhat 
more  by  self-denial.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  will  the  resources  of  the  Church 
be  adequately  replenished,  and  means  be  supplied  her  sufficient  for  carrying 
on  her  great  designs  of  training  her  own  children  in  the  service  and  worship  of 
God,  and  of  "  preaching  among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ." 

III.  Self-denial  is  necessary  for  the  purification  of  our  minds. — 1.  As  we 
were  born  in  sin,  and  our  nature  is  consequently  corrupt,  it  must  be  watched 
over,  restrained,  and  subdued.  Our  innate  propensities  are  all  on  the  side 
of  evil,  and  if  any  of  them  gain  the  mastery  over  us  we  are  thereby  brought 
into  bondage  to  sin.  Now  the  only  way  to  prevent  this  is  to  mortify  these 
propensities,  to  deny  them  indulgence,  to  oppose  them  at  their  first  rising, 
however  earnest  and  importunate  they  may  be,  and  by  an  act  of  self-denial 
to  put  a  restraint  upon  them.  The  will  grows  unruly  if  it  be  not  crossed; 
the  soul  is  weakened  by  self-indulgence  ;  faith  languishes  when  the  senses  are 
unceasingly  gratified  ;  the  affections  will  not  rise  to  things  above  if  we  grant 
them  unrestricted  enjoyment  of  things  on  earth.  Therefore  it  is  that  a 
Christian  should  be  watchful  for  opportunities  of  exercising  self-control,  and 
not  wait  till  his  desires  point  to  something  absolutely  unlawful.  He  should, 
for  instance,  make  his  ordinary  meals  occasions  for  doing  so,  learning  to  keep 
in  check  the  lower  appetites  of  his  nature  in  the  common  matter  of  meat  and 
drink.  He  should  observe  the  same  in  reference  to  dress,  refusing  indulgence 
to  himself  in  things  which  might  awaken  vanity  and  stimulate  strongly  the 
lust  of  the  eye.  In  many  ways,  from  which  he  will  not  receive  the  least  taint 
of  asceticism,  nor  do  any  rude  violence  to  nature,  or  obscure  to  himself  the 
blessed  truth  that  God  "  giveth  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy,"  he  may  deny 
himself  and  bring  his  desires  under  control.  2.  Whenever  the  exercise  of  self- 
denial  is  spoken  of,  there  naturally  arises  in  the  mind  a  repugnance  to  it,  on 
account  of  the  difficulty  of  it  and  the  pain  which  attends  it.  But  let  us  not 
give  way  to  this  repugnance,  seeing  the  necessity  of  self-denial  is  so  absolute. 
(1)  The  exercise  is  difficult  doubtless — very  difficult ;  but  think  not  that  we  are 
left  to  encounter  the  difficulty  alone,  to  meet  it  in  the  feebleness  of  our  own 
nature.  No,  God  will  give  us  His  Holy  Spirit  if  we  ask  Him,  and  with  His 
Divine  co-operation  we  shall  be  able  to  do  what  otherwise  would  not  only  be 
difficult  but  impossible.  (2)  With  regard  to  the  pain  of  it,  it  is  granted  that 
it  must  be  painful,  more  or  less  so,  always.  The  very  word  implies  it.  But 
is  not  pain  suffered  for  Christ  and  in  His  service  better  than  ease  secured 
by  deserting  Him  ?  Is  not  pain  met  with  in  the  performance  of  duty  more  to 
be  prized  than  the  ease  which  is  sought  in  the  neglect  of  it?  Is  not  pain 
endured  in  seeking  the  purification  of  our  nature  better  a  thousandfold  than 
the  indulgence  which  must  complete  its  debasement  ?  Besides,  the  pain  is  but 
momentary,  the  advantage  that  flows  from  it  lasting.  See  Rom.  viii.  13. 
The   faithful   soldier   and   servant   of   Christ   who  manfully   engages   in   this 

299 


chap,  viil        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


warfare   shall   hereafter    share   his  Lord's  triumph  and  enter  into   His   rest 
(Rev.  iii.  21).— G.  Bellett. 

Vers.  27-30.  Chrises  Cross,  and  ours. — This  section  has  the  announcement  of 
the  Cross  as  its  centre,  prepared  for  on  the  one  hand  by  a  question,  and  followed 
on  the  other  by  a  warning  that  His  followers  must  travel  the  same  road. 

I.  The  preparation  for  the  announcement  of  the  Cross  (vers.  27-30). — 1.  Why 
did  Christ  begin  by  asking  about  the  popular  judgment  of  His  personality  ? 
Apparently  in  order  to  bring  clearly  home  to  the  disciples  that,  as  far  as  the 
masses  were  concerned,  His  work  and  theirs  had  failed,  and  had  for  net  result 
total  misconception.  Who  that  had  the  faintest  glimmer  of  what  He  was  could 
suppose  that  the  stern,  fiery  spirits  of  Elijah  or  John  had  come  to  life  again  in 
Him  ?  2.  The  second  question,  "  But  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?  "  with  its  sharp 
transition,  is  meant  to  force  home  the  conviction  of  the  gulf  between  His  disciples 
and  the  whole  nation.  Mark,  too,  that  this  is  the  all-important  question  for 
every  man.  Our  own  individual  "  thought "  of  Him  determines  our  whole  worth 
and  fate.  3.  How  did  these  questions  and  their  answers  serve  as  introduction 
to  the  announcement  of  the  Cross  ?  (1)  They  brought  clearly  before  the  disciples 
the  hard  fact  of  Christ's  rejection  by  the  popular  voice,  and  defined  their  position 
as  sharply  antagonistic.  A  rejected  Messiah  could  not  fail  to  be,  sooner  or  later, 
a  slain  Messiah.  (2)  Then  clear,  firm  faith  in  His  Messiahship  was  needed  to 
enable  them  to  stand  the  ordeal  to  which  the  announcement,  and  still  more  its 
fulfilment,  would  subject  them.  (3)  Again,  the  significance  and  worth  of  the 
Cross  could  only  be  understood  when  seen  in  the  light  of  that  great  confession. 
4.  The  charge  of  silence  contrasts  singularly  with  the  former  employment  of 
the  apostles  as  heralds  of  Jesus.  The  silence  was  partly  punitive  and  partly 
prudential.  (1)  It  was  punitive,  inasmuch  as  the  people  had  already  had 
abundantly  the  proclamation  of  His  gospel,  and  had  cast  it  away.  (2)  It  was 
prudential,  in  order  to  avoid  hastening  on  the  inevitable  collision ;  not  because 
Christ  desired  escape,  but  because  He  would  first  fulfil  His  day. 

II.  The  announcement  of  the  Cross  (vers.  31-33). — There  had  been  many 
hints  before  this ;  for  Christ  saw  the  end  from  the  beginning.  His  death  was 
before  Him,  all  through  His  days,  as  the  great  purpose  for  which  He  had  come. 
How  much  more  gracious  and  wonderful  His  quick  sympathy,  His  patient  self- 
forgetfulness,  His  unwearied  toil,  shew  against  that  dark  background  !  1.  Mark 
here  the  solemn  necessity.  Why  "  must "  He  suffer  ?  The  cords  which  bind  this 
sacrifice  to  the  horns  of  the  altar  were  not  spun  by  men's  hands.  The  great 
"  must "  which  ruled  His  life  was  a  cable  of  two  strands — obedience  to  the  Father, 
and  love  to  men.  He  would  save ;  therefore  He  "  must "  die.  The  same 
"  must "  stretches  beyond  death.  "  Christ  that  died  "  is  no  gospel  until  you  go 
on  to  say,  "  Yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again."  2.  Peter's  rash  "  rebuke,"  like 
most  of  his  appearances  in  the  Gospel,  is  strangely  compounded  of  warm-hearted, 
impulsive  love  and  presumptuous  self-confidence.  He  found  fault  with  Christ. 
For  what  ?  Probably  for  not  trusting  to  His  followers'  arms,  or  for  letting  Him- 
self become  a  victim  to  the  "  must  "  which  Peter  thought  of  as  depending  only 
on  the  power  of  the  ecclesiastics  in  Jerusalem.  He  blames  Christ  for  not  hoisting 
the  flag  of  a  revolt.  This  blind  love  was  the  nearest  approach  to  sympathy 
which  Christ  received  ;  and  it  was  repugnant  to  Him,  so  as  to  draw  the  sharpest 
words  from  Him  that  He  ever  spoke  to  a  loving  heart.  Not  thus  was  He  wont 
to  repel  ignorant  love,  nor  to  tell  out  faults  in  public  ;  but  the  act  witnessed  to 
the  recoil  of  His  fixed  spirit  from  the  temptation  which  addressed  His  natural 
human  shrinking  from  death,  as  well  as  to  His  desire  that,  once  for  all,  every 
dream  of  resistance  by  force  should  be  shattered.  Note  tfrat  it  may  be  the  work 
of  "  Satan  "  to  appeal  to  the  things  "  that  be  of  men,"  however  innocent,  if  by 

300 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


so  doing  obedience  to  God's  will  is  hindered.     Note,  too,  that  Simon  may  be 
"  Peter  "  at  one  moment  and  "  Satan  "  at  the  next. 

III.  The  announcement  of  the  Cross  as  the  law  for  the  disciples  too  (vers. 
34-38). — Christ's  followers  must  follow,  but  men  can  choose  whether  they  will 
be  His  followers  or  not.  So  the  "  must "  is  changed  into  "  let  him,"  and  the  "  if 
any  man  will "  is  put  in  the  forefront.  The  conditions  are  fixed,  but  the  choice 
of  accepting  the  position  is  free.  1.  The  law  for  every  disciple  is  self-denial  and 
taking  up  his  cross.  This  does  not  merely  mean  accepting  meekly  God-sent  or 
men-inflicted  sorrows,  but  persistently  carrying  on  the  special  form  of  self-denial 
which  my  special  type  of  character  requires.  It  will  include  these  other  meanings, 
but  it  goes  deeper  than  they.  2.  The  first  of  the  reasons  for  the  law  in  ver.  35 
is  a  paradox,  and  a  truth  with  two  sides.  To  wish  to  save  is  to  lose  life ;  to  lose 
it  for  Christ's  sake  is  to  save  it.  Flagrant  vice  is  not  needed  to  kill  the  real  life. 
Clean,  respectable  selfishness  does  the  work  effectually.  The  deadly  gas  is 
invisible  and  has  no  smell.  But  while  all  selfishness  is  fatal,  it  is  self-surrender 
and  sacrifice,  "for  My  sake  and  the  gospel's,"  which  is  life-giving.  3.  The 
"  for  "  of  ver.  36  seems  to  refer  back  to  the  law  in  ver.  34,  and  the  verse  enforces 
the  command  by  an  appeal  to  self-interest,  which  in  the  highest  sense  of  the 
word  dictates  self-sacrifice.  The  men  who  live  for  self  are  dead,  as  Christ  has 
been  saying.  A  man  gets  rich,  and  in  the  process  has  dropped  generous 
impulses,  affections,  interest  in  noble  things,  perhaps  principle  and  religion. 
He  has  shrivelled  and  hardened  into  a  mere  fragment  of  himself ;  and  so,  when 
success  comes,  he  cannot  much  enjoy  it,  and  was  happier,  poor  and  sympathetic, 
and  enthusiastic  and  generous,  than  he  is  now,  rich  and  dwindled.  He  who 
loses  himself  in  gaining  the  world  does  not  win  it,  but  is  mastered  by  it.  4.  A 
wholesome  contempt  for  the  world's  cackle  is  needed  for  following  Christ.  The 
geese  on  the  common  hiss  at  the  passer-by  who  goes  steadily  through  the  flock. 
How  grave  and  awful  is  that  irony,  if  we  may  call  it  so,  which  casts  the 
retribution  in  the  mould  of  the  sin !  The  Judge  shall  be  "  ashamed  "  of  such 
unworthy  disciples — shall  blush  to  own  such  as  His.  May  we  venture  to  put 
stress  on  the  fact  that  He  does  not  say  that  He  will  reject  them  ?  5.  How 
marvellous  the  transition  from  the  prediction  of  the  Cross  to  this  of  the  Throne  ! 
We  do  not  know  Jesus  unless  we  know  Him  as  the  crucified  Sacrifice  for  the 
world's  sins,  and  as  the  exalted  Judge  of  the  world's  deeds.  6.  He  adds  a  weighty 
word  of  enigmatical  meaning,  lest  any  should  think  that  He  was  speaking  only 
of  some  far-off  judgment.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  seems  to  be  the  event 
intended.  It  was  a  kind  of  rehearsal,  or  picture  in  little,  of  that  coming  and 
ultimate  great  day  of  the  Lord,  and  was  meant  to  be  a  "  sign  "  that  it  should 
surely  come. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Yers.  36-37.  The  loss  of  the  soul. — I.  The  character  of  some  of  those  who  may 
be  said  to  pursue  the  present  world  at  the  expense  of  their  souls. — 1.  Consider, 
first,  the  case  of  those  intensely  occupied  with  the  pursuit  of  the  pleasures  and 
indulgences  of  the  world.  It  is  no  crime  to  be  happy  in  this  state  of  being 
(Phil.  iv.  4).  The  crime  is  either  in  seeking  happiness  from  wrong  sources,  or  in 
so  eagerly  drinking  at  the  streams  of  earthly  joy  which  the  bounty  of  God  has 
opened  to  us,  as  to  forget  or  neglect  the  Fountain  where  alone  the  soul  can  be 
satisfied.  2.  Consider,  next,  the  case  of  those  who  are  pursuing,  with  the  like 
intenseness,  the  interests  of  this  life.  Here  also  a  reasonable  regard  to  our  own 
worldly  interest,  and  that  of  others  connected  with  us,  is  not  condemned  in  Scrip- 
ture (Prov.  xxii.  29  ;  1  Cor.  iv.  12  ;  1  Tim.  v.  8).  But  if  these  worldly  interests 
are  pursued  with  feverish  anxiety,  from  wrong  motives  or  by  wrong  means; 
if  they  are  the  main  objects  for^which  we  labour ;  if  their  pursuit  is  connected 
with  disobedience  to  the  will  of  God, — then  the  supposition   of   the   text   is 

301 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


realised  :  the  world  is  gained,  but  the  soul  is  lost.  3.  In  like  manner  Scripture 
does  not  demand  the  austere  rejection  of  worldly  honours.  Rank  and  natural 
influence,  if  it  be  the  pleasure  of  the  Most  High  to  bestow  them,  are  to  be 
received  with  gratitude,  and  consecrated  to  the  glory  of  the  Giver,  and  to  the 
benefit,  temporal  and  spiritual,  of  His  creatures.  If,  however,  mistaking  the 
means  for  the  end,  we  sit  down  satisfied  with  the  possession  of  reputation  or 
influence,  without  considering  the  objects  to  which  they  are  to  be  dedicated ;  if 
worldly  honours  are  the  main  objects  of  desire  ;  if  the  pursuit  of  them  be 
connected  with  envy,  fretfulness,  or  ambition,  with  the  commission  of  sin,  or  the 
neglect  of  duty ;  if,  in  struggling  for  the  corruptible  crown,  the  love  of  God, 
of  the  Redeemer,  of  heavenly  things,  and  of  one  another  is  suffered  to  decline, 
and  in  wearing  it  the  lowliness  of  the  gospel  spirit  is  sacrificed, — this,  again, 
is  to  incur  the  condemnation  of  the  text. 

II.  What  is  included  in  the  loss  of  the  soul. — 1.  The  nature  and  value  of 
the  soul  of  man.  (1)  Its  intrinsic  excellence  and  dignity.  (2)  The  price  paid, 
and  that  by  Divine  appointment,  for  the  redemption  of  the  soul.  (3)  The 
description  given  of  the  soul  in  Scripture,  as  the  grand  object  of  contention 
between  the  powers  of  heaven  and  hell.  (4)  The  mighty  apparatus  of  means 
and  instruments  which  it  has  pleased  God  to  put  into  action  for  the  recovery  of 
the  soul.  (5)  And  finally  its  capacity  for  the  pursuits  and  enjoyments  of  another 
state  of  existence.  With  what  faculties  must  that  creature  be  endowed  who, 
day  and  night  and  without  ceasing,  sings  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  who  sees  God 
as  He  is  and  knows  Him  as  he  himself  is  known !  2.  What  is  more  distinctly 
implied  in  the  term  "  lost."  (1)  To  "  lose  "  the  soul  is  not,  as  some,  without  the 
smallest  warrant  either  from  reason  or  Scripture,  have  ventured  to  affirm,  to  be 
annihilated.  (2)  The  loss  of  the  soul  is  represented  in  Scripture  as  a  penalty 
inflicted  by  the  hand  of  God  Himself.  (3)  The  loss  of  the  soul  is  represented  in 
Scripture  as  involving  a  species  of  suffering  altogether  without  alleviation.  We 
have  perhaps  witnessed  the  misery  which  the  unrestrained  dominion  even  of  a 
single  passion  is  able  to  inflict  upon  the  sinner  :  conceive,  then,  all  the  faculties 
employed,  and  all  the  bad  passions  let  loose,  for  the  torment  of  the  sufferer. 
Imagine,  for  instance,  the  discernment  of  truth  employed  only  to  assure  the 
lost  creature  of  the  awful  fact  of  his  own  eternal  ruin.  Conceive  the  powers  of 
calculation,  perhaps  infinitely  enlarged,  and  altogether  engaged  in  familiarising 
the  mind  with  ages  of  interminable  woe.  Conceive  memory  converted  into  a 
mere  storehouse  for  the  materials  of  anguish,  recalling  every  neglected  opportunity, 
every  wasted  warning,  every  lesson  of  truth  forgotten,  and  every  invitation  of 
love  refused.  Imagine  the  conscience,  which  perhaps  has  slumbered  through  the 
whole  period  of  our  human  existence,  awaking  from  its  temporary  slumber,  and 
scaring  the  mind  with  images  of  deeper  woe  and  more  insufferable  torment. 

III.  The  folly  of  thus  sacrificing  the  soul  to  gain  the  world. — On  this  subject 
it  is  not  necessary  to  enlarge,  because  every  line  in  the  preceding  argument 
leads  decisively  to  this  conclusion.  One  observation,  however,  I  may  make. 
It  has,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  been  taken  for  granted  that  it  is  possible 
to  gain  the  world  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  soul.  But  how  infinitely  far  is 
such  a  supposition  from  the  fact !  How  few  attain  even  a  small  part  of 
the  worldly  objects  at  which  they  aim  !  How  rarely  are  the  hopes  of  the 
ambitious,  or  the  covetous,  or  the  sensual  in  the  smallest  degree  realised  ! 
How  difficult  is  it  to  obtain  the  prizes  of  life !  how  impossible  to  keep  them  ! 
But  to  return  to  the  point  more  immediately  insisted  upon  in  the  text  : 
suppose  every  object  accomplished,  every  interest  secured,  and  honour  won,  and 
pleasure  enjoyed,  what  can  they  "  profit "  the  man  rolling  on  the  gulf  we  have, 
been  contemplating,  and  shut  out  for  ever  from  hope,  from  heaven,  and  from 
God  ? — J.   IF.  Cunningliam, 

302 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  28.  The  world's  estimate  of 
Christ — 1.  Even  an  unbelieving  world 
never  gives  a  small  name  to  Christ ; 
for  the  names  here  suggested  are  those 
of  the  greatest  of  men.  2.  The  pecu- 
liarity of  unbelief,  that  it  can  believe 
in  old  prophets  brought  back  more 
easily  than  in  new  prophets  raised  up. 
Be  a  believer  in  a  living  God,  who  not 
only  has  given  in  the  past,  but  in  the 
present  is  giving  heroes,  sages,  saints, 
and  prophets.  Happy  those  who  see 
God  at  work  around  them !  3.  A 
certain  grudging  spirit  marks  their 
estimates,  reluctant  to  ascribe  more 
dignity  to  Jesus  than  they  can  help. 
Beware  of  that  spirit. — R.  Glover. 

Ver.  29.  Christ's  questions. — Christ 
asks,  "  Whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ? " 
in  no  doubtful  and  apologetic  tone. 
He  demands  and  expects  an  answer. 
It  is  His  right.  It  is  obedience  to  the 
plainest  duty.  Neglect  on  our  part 
is  an  insult  to  our  Lord,  whose  we 
are  and  whom  we  are  bound  to  serve. 
It  is  treason  to  a  lost  world,  which 
needs  to  be  helped  to  an  acceptance 
of  its  Redeemer,  and  which  is  hindered 
by  any  reluctance  to  confess  Him  on 
the  part  of  His  disciples.  If  Christians 
hide  the  faith  which  is  in  them,  or  if 
they  veil  it  by  silence  or  the  neglect 
of  appropriate  action,  they  are  doing  a 
grievous  wrong  as  well  as  immeasurable 
mischief. 

Loyalty  to  Christ. — The  power  and 
reach  of  genuine  loyalty  to  Christ 
cannot  be  over-estimated.  It  is  so 
spontaneous  that  it  is  unquestioned. 
When  the  sun  is  riding  in  unclouded 
splendour  in  mid-heaven,  there  is  no 
occasion  for  asking  from  what  fountain 
of  light  the  glory  of  the  noontide  is 
pouring.  And  when  Jesus  Christ  is 
so  heartily  owned  and  accepted  and 
loved  by  a  man  that  all  which  he  is 
or  does  is  in  a  measure  transfigured 
by  his  affection  for  his  adorable  Lord, 
there  is  no  dispute  as  to  who  and  what 
Christ  is  to  that  man.      Nothing  so 


blesses  the  world,  nothing  so  helps  on 
the  advance  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
as  the  testimony  which  consecrated 
lives  bear  to  the  truth  and  worth  of 
the  faith  of  the  gospel. 

Peter's  reply. — 1.  The  reply  of  Peter 
is  more  marvellous  in  the  lips  of  a 
Jew,  whose  great  creed  was  the  Unity 
of  God,  than  in  the  lips  of  any  other. 

2.  In  all  ages,  in  some  form  or  other, 
men  have  expressed  their  faith  in  the 
Divinity  of  Christ.  3.  The  more  re- 
fined the  soul,  the  more  adoring  is  its 
estimate  of  Christ.  4.  They  who  truly 
honour  God  will  very  readily  believe 
that  He  has  love  enough  to  become 
incarnate  and  save  men. 

Ver  30.  "  Tell  no  man  of  Him." — ■ 
This  is  partly  a  temporary  precept, 
postponing  the  disciples'  testimony 
until  after  Calvary,  on  the  ground 
that  already  the  curiosity  of  the  nation 
was  over-roused,  and  interfered  with 
the  Saviour's  teaching;  and  is  partly 
a  precept  of  perpetual  guidance.  Tell 
people  what  Christ  has  done,  and 
only  assist  them  to  find  out  for  them- 
selves who  He  is.  A  ready-made 
definition  of  the  Saviour,  saving  people 
the  trouble  of  thinking,  is  not  a  real 
service  to  any  soul. — R.  Glover. 

Vers.  32,  33.  Spiritual  exaltation. — > 
Moments  of  spiritual  exaltation  are 
often  followed  by  moments  of  spiritual 
exhaustion,  and  a  good  man  is  never 
more  perilously  open  to  temptation 
than  after  a  long  and  high  strain  of 
devotion.  So  Peter  falls  from  the 
height  of  his  good  confession  to  the 
depth  of  Christ's  displeasure,  and  from 
being  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  all 
truth  and  goodness  to  being  the  mouth- 
piece of  the  spirit  of  all  evil  and 
error. — &  Cox,  D.D. 

Learn — 1.  In  the  best  of  men  there 
is  weakness  and  liability  to  err.  2. 
Through  mistaken  kindness  we  may 
become  the  tempters  of  our  brethren. 

3.  We  must  never  lower  our  standard 

303 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  duty  because  friends  seek  to  spare  Christ. — 1.    Christ    and    self    cannot 

us.  reign  together  (Gal.  ii.   20 ;  Rom.  vi. 

11).     2.  Only  Christ  can  dethrone  self 

Vers.    34-38.    The  fundamentals    of  (1  Pet.  iii.  15;  2  Cor.  vi.  16,  xiii.  5). 

the  Christian  fellowship. — 1.  Its  laws.  — E.  H.  Hopkins. 

(1)  The  true  denier  of  himself  is  the  Self-denial. — 1.    Abnegation   is   not 

true   confessor.     (2)    The   true   cross-  itself  the  good,  but  the  most  universal 

bearer  is  the  true  knight  of  the  Cross,  condition  for   the   human  attainment 

(3)  The  true  follower  after  Christ  in  of   the  good.     2.  Christ  promises  not 

obedience  is  the  true  conqueror.    2.  Its  happiness  but  life  :  yet  sometimes  life 

grounds.      (1)    He  who  will  save   his  through  death  :   the  right  hand  may 

life   in  self-seeking   shall  lose   it;    he  have  to  be  cut  off   or  the  right  eye 

who  loses  it  in  devotion  to  Christ  shall  plucked    out.       3.    We    are   slow    to 

gain  it.     (2)   He  who  lays  down  his  believe  that  the  cross  of  anguish  can 

soul  to  win  the  world  loses  with  his  be  a  tree  of  life. — Prof  F.  J.  A.  Hort. 

soul  the  world  also;  he  who  has  gained  The  life  of  religion. — 1.  The  exercise 

his  soul  has  with  his  soul  gained  the  of  self-denial  infers  the  possession  and 

world  also.     (3)  To  seek  honour  in  the  display  of  all  the  milder  virtues.  Where 

world  while  ashamed  of  Christ  leads  this   exists,   there   must   be  humility, 

to  infamy  before  the  throne  of  Christ ;  diffidence,    self-command,    respect    for 

but  shame  in  the  world  leads  to  honour  authority,  meekness,  gentleness,  good- 

with  Him.     (4)  Readiness  to  die  with  ness,    temperance,    charity.       2.    The 

Christ  leads  through  death  to  eternal  exercise    of    mortification    infers    the 

glory. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.     .  presence  and  exercise  of  all  the  stronger 

virtues.     Where  this  is,  there  must  be 

Ver.  34.  Words  addressed  to  disciples.  truth,  integrity,  justice,  fortitude,  con- 

— We  must  come  to  Christ  in  order  to  tempt  of  pain,  fearlessness  of   death, 

come  after  Him.     To   wish   to   go   to  3.  The  imitation  of  Christ  requires  the 

heaven  when  we  die  is  not  the  same  exercise   of   all   those   amiable   graces 

thing  as  to  wish  to  follow  Christ  while  which  constitute  the  life  and  spirit  of 

we  live.    Following  Christ  means  walk-  religion  in  the  soul.     Where  that  is, 

ing  in  the  path  that  He  trod.  there  must  be  faith,  hope,  love,  piety, 

I.  To  follow  Christ  we  must  take  purity,  peace,  heavenly-mindedness, 
up  the  cross. — 1.  What  is  the  cross?  devotion.  In  short,  these  duties  corn- 
Trial,  suffering,  difficulty,  etc.  Divinely  prehend  all  the  duties  of  morality  and 
appointed — not  self-imposed.  The  re-  religion ;  and  the  exercise  of  them  is 
proach  of  Christ  (John  xv.  20 ;  Phil,  only  the  discharge  of  some  religious  or 
i.  29;  1  Pet.  iv.  16).  2.  What  is  it  moral  duty — of  something  that  is  wise, 
to  "  take  it  up  "  ?  Voluntary  accept-  dignified,  good,  and  which  could  not 
ance  (John  iv.  34,  xviii.  11  ;  Matt.  be  exhibited  in  the  same  spirit  with- 
xi.  29).  Not  to  be  dragged  by  us —  out  their  presence  and  power. — T.  S. 
nor  forced  upon  us.  Jones,  D.D. 

II.  To  take  up  the  cross  we  must  Self-sacrifice. — That  which  especially 
deny  self. — 1.  What  is  "self"?  It  distinguishes  a  high  order  of  man 
is  the  personality  taking  the  throne,  from  a  low  order  of  man,  that  which 
claiming,  possessing,  and  managing  the  constitutes  human  goodness,  human 
whole  being.  This  is  a  condition  of  greatness,  human  nobleness,  is  surely 
"  selfness."  There  is  imrighteous  self  not  the  degree  of  enlightenment  with 
and  se^-righteous  self  (John  v.  30,  which  men  pursue  their  own  advan- 
viii.  28 ;  Phil.  ii.  7).  2.  What  is  it  tage ;  but  it  is  self-forgetfulness,  self- 
to  "  deny "  self  ?  Notice  the  difference  sacrifice,  the  disregard  of  personal 
between  denying  to  yourself  certain  pleasure,  personal  indulgence,  personal 
things  and  denying  self  (Luke  xxii.  57).  advantage  remote  or  present,  because 

III.  To  deny  self  we  must  enthrone  some  other  line  of  conduct  is  more  right. 

304 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  ST.  MARK.       chap,  viil 


Note  the  order  of  the  three  things. —  his   cross,   and   does  not  fly  from  it ; 
Deny  self — take  up  cross — follow  Me.  who  bears  it  silently,  cheerfully,  joy- 
Perplexity    and    spiritual    difficulties  fully,  and  hastens  not  to  be  rid  of  it, 
often  arise  from  a  wrong  order  of  right  but  patiently  tarries  the  Lord's  leisure. 
things.     Thus  we  may  read  the  words  To  that  man  that  "  cross  "  is  his  soul's 
as  if  our  Lord  had   said,   "  Let   him  cure ;   it   is   the  Spirit's   school ;  it  is 
take  up  his  cross  and  deny  himself,"  the  badge  of  his  discipleship,  the  token 
etc.      Taking    up   the  cross   may   be  of    his    Heavenly   Father's    love,   the 
understood  as  meaning  much  the  same  road    to    glory,    the    opportunity   for 
thing   as   denying   self,  which   is   not  all   the   promises,   the    earnest  of   an 
correct,  or  we  may  be  putting  follow-  eternal  crown. — J.   Vaughan. 
ing  Christ  first.     But  this  is  to  miss  The  cross  the  way  to  life. — 
the  chief  point  in  this  lesson.     "  Let  Wouldst  thou  inherit  life  with  Christ 
him  deny  himself  " — that  is  the  main  on  high  ? 
said  first  direction  that  must  be  under-  Then  count  the  cost,  and  know 
stood   and   obeyed.      We   shall   never  That  here  on  earth  below 
take  up  the  cross — consent  to  it,  and  Thou  needs  must  suffer  with  thy  Lord, 
do  it  willingly — until  we  have  reached  and  die. 

the  point  of  denying  self.     The  mind,  We  reach  that  gain,  to  which  all  else 

of  which  self  is  the  centre,  will  never  is  loss, 

take    up   the   cross ;    it   may   sullenly  But  through  the  Cross  ! 

endure  to  have  it  laid  upon  it,  it  may  Not  e'en  the  sharpest  sorrows  we  can 

put  up  with  it  as  that  which  is  in-  feel, 

evitable,  but  it  will  never  take  it  up  Nor  keenest  pangs,  we  dare 

as  an  act  of  willing  submission.     But  With  that  great  bliss  compare, 

the  mind  of  Christ  is  the  mind  that  When  God  His  glory  shall  in  us  reveal, 

cheerfully  yields  to  all  that  the  Father  That  shall  endure  when  our  brief  woes 

appoints. — E.  H.  Hopkins.  are  o'er, 

A  cross  is  an  instrument  on  which  For  evermore. — Dach. 

something    is    to    be    put   to    death.  "  Follow     Me." — This     implies     not 

Taking    it    up    is    not    wearing    an  merely   to  believe   His  doctrine,  obey 

ornament,   nor   even  just   carrying   a  His  commandments,  and  trust  in  Him 

burden,  but  putting  something  to  death,  for  salvation,  but  also  to  imitate  Him 

What  ?     Sin.     Not  some  incarnate  sin  in  His  spirit  and  conduct — in  the  holi- 

that  we  can  catch  and  bind  as  they  ness,   activity,  and   usefulness  of   His 

took  Jesus,  not  some  other  personality,  life — in   that  love   to   God   and   man, 

but  the  sin  that  is  in  us — the  love  of  that  zeal  for   the  Divine  glory,    that 

self,  the  love  of  the  world,  the  lust  of  humility,   patience,    meekness,    perse- 

the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life.     Sin  is  verance,  and   resignation  with   which 

a  desperate  enemy.    And  to  be  rid  of  it  He   did   and    suffered   His    Heavenly 

means  thorough  work,  not  coaxing  it,  Father's     will, — in      consequence     of 

not   hiding  it,   not  forgetting  it,  but  which    He    was    exposed    to    hunger, 

putting  it  to  death. — C.  M.  Southgate.  thirst,  poverty,  and  privations,  to  the 

Consider  your  cross. — You  may  try,  contradiction  of  sinners,  scorn  of  men, 

if  you  like,  to  go  through  life  and  not  stripes,     imprisonment,     to     all     the 

see  a  "  cross  " ;  or,  if  you  like,  you  may  horrors  of   Gethsemane  and  torments 

consider  it ;  you  may  avoid  it,  or  you  of  Golgotha. — T.  S.  Jones,  D.D. 
may  meet  it ;  you  may  resist,  or  you 

may  acquiesce  in  it ;  you  may  murmur  ,       Ver.   35.  The  selfish,  sinful  life  and 

under  it,  or  you  may  be  still ;  you  may  the  true,  spiritual  life  hang  at  opposite 

drag  it,    or   you   may   carry  it ;    you  ends  of  the  scale-beam. — The  dip  of  the 

may  be  in  a  hurry  to  lay  it  down,  or  one   means   the   ascent  of   the   other, 

you  may  wish  to  wait  God's  time  : —  Self-denial  is  but  choosing  the  better ; 

but  blessed  is  that  man  who  considers  denying   the  lower    is  accepting  the 

x  305 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


higher.     The  soul  cannot  live  in  both  day-dreams.     4.  I  argue  the  worth  of 

at  once ;  indeed,  can  truly  live  in  the  the  soul  still  more  emphatically  from 

higher  alone.     We  need  only  to  keep  the  fact  that  it  was  redeemed  at  an 

this  compensation  in  mind  to  see  the  untold  price  :  it   was   ransomed   with 

excelling  charm  of   self-denial.     It  is  the  blood  of  God.     5.  But  if  the  worth 

not  the  bare  going  without  something  of   the   soul  be   so  immense,   the  loss 

pleasant,  but  giving  up  one  attraction  of  the  soul  must  be  tremendous.     We 

for  a  greater. — C.  M.  Southgate.  therefore  argue  the  fearfulness  of  that 

loss,  because  it  involves  the  sacrifice 
Ver.  36.  The  worth  of  the  soul,  and  the  shipwreck  of  all  for  which 
— We  cannot  overrate  our  nature,  man  was  first  created,  and  which 
as  we  cannot  underrate  our  merit ;  Christ  has  redeemed  to  Him  by  His 
we  cannot  think  too  highly  of  atoning  blood — all  that  God  can 
ourselves  as  immortals,  or  too  humbly  bestow  or  man  receive.  Neither  is 
of  ourselves  as  transgressors.  There  this  all :  there  is  not  only  privation  of 
is  quite  as  much  danger  in  our  under-  all  that  is  good  and  glorious — there  is 
valuing  our  immortality,  as  there  is  also  the  endurance  of  God's  everlasting 
in  our  exaggerating  our  merit.  In  anger,  whose  frown  is  death  and  whose 
very  deed  we  are  more  prone  to  the  smile  is  life ;  there  is  the  perpetual 
one  than  we  are  to  the  other  ;  for  if  gnawing  despair  of  one  that  has  made 
self -righteousness  slays  its  thousands,  shipwreck  of  his  all ;  there  is  the 
self -neglect  slays  its  tens  of  thousands.  smouldering  remorse,  the  worm  that 
1.  The  soul  !  that  thinking,  conscious,  never  dieth. — H.  Stowell. 
deathless  essence,  which  thrills  and  World  and  soul. — 1.  It  is  impossible 
throbs  in  every  tenement  of  clay  to  gain  the  whole  world,  even  at  the 
before  me  and  around  me, — that  soul !  sacrifice  of  our  soul.  None  but  Christ 
invisible,  yet  perceptible ;  wrapped  up  was  ever  tempted  with  such  a  huge 
in  the  mortal,  yet  itself  immortal ;  bait.  2.  The  soul  may  be  lost  for  the 
passing  away,  yet  never  to  end  : —  sake  of  securing  a  very  infinitesimal 
that  soul !  we  argue  that  its  worth  is  portion  of  the  world  :  Esau,  Ahab, 
immense,  because  its  origin  was  most  Judas.  3.  In  the  ordinary  course  of 
exalted.  2.  We  argue  the  worth  of  things  such  a  part  of  the  world  as 
the  soul  from  the  vast  capacities  and  is  sufficient  for  our  happiness  may 
powers  with  which  it  is  endowed.  be  easily  gained  without  exposing  the 
What  a  wonderful  thing  is  the  mind  soul  to  loss  (Prov.  viii.  21,  iii.  16, 
of  man  !  How  wondrous  is  his  power  x.  4,  xxii.  29) ;  but  even  were  this 
of  love  !  how  deep  the  bitterness  of  his  not  so,  nothing  could  compensate  for 
hate  !  how  dark  his  desperation  of  the  loss  of  the  soul.  4.  By  endeavour- 
revenge  !  how  insatiable  and  yearning  ing  to  gain  the  whole  world  or  any 
his  desires  !  how  high  the  inspirations  part  of  it  at  the  expense  of  the  soul, 
of  his  soul !  how  all  the  drops  he  we  do  not  only  disclaim  the  greatest 
gathers  from  the  cisterns  of  created  good  or  happiness,  but  incur  and  invite 
good  can  never  slake  or  satisfy  the  the  greatest  evil  and  misery,  which 
yearnings  of  his  immortal  mind  !  how  is  not  the  losing  the  soul  absolutely, 
he  still  craves  and  longs  after  some-  however  grievous  and  shocking  to 
thing  higher  and  more  pure  than  nature,  but  the  keeping  it,  together 
earth  can  furnish !  And,  then,  what  with  the  gains  and  wages  of  sin,  so  as 
a  capability  it  has  of  enjoyment !  to  wish  it  were  lost.  5.  Whereas  by 
what  a  capability  of  endurance  !  3.  I  endeavouring  to  gain  the  whole  world, 
argue  the  value  of  the  soul  still  though  with  the  loss  of  our  souls,  it  is 
more  emphatically  from  its  dread  impossible  for  us  to  gain  the  whole,  and 
immortality.  There  is  the  mysterious  we  are  not  so  certain  to  gain  any  corn- 
attribute,  compared  with  which  all  petent  part  of  it ;  on  the  other  hand, 
things  temporal  are  but  shadows  and  by   endeavouring   to  save   our    souls, 

306 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


though  with  the  loss  of  the  world,  we  Their  final  decision   we  know.     They 

may  not  only  be  sure  to  save  them,  concluded    their     soul    was    valuable 

but  to  save  them  with  advantage,  or  enough  to  justify  them  in  giving  up 

to   purchase    for   ourselves   a  greater  their  affairs  to  save  it ;  in  giving  up 

salvation. — B.  Kennet,  D.D.  their  time,  ease,  and  indulgence  to  save 

The  world  as   a  law  of  life. — You  it ;  in  surrendering  their  repute,  home, 

may   be   as  ignorant  and  as  rude  in  and  country  to  save  it ;  and,  finally,  in 

your  life  as  a  Hottentot,  and  as  poor  laying   down   their   life   to  save  it. — 

as  Lazarus,  and  yet  have  gained  the  T,  F.  Crosse,  D.C.L. 
world  and  lost  your  life.     For  this  is 

not  merely  a  question  of  the  things  Ver.     38.     Confessing    or    denying 

which  you  acquire  by  your  exchange,  Christ. — 1.     Confessing     or     denying 

it  is  a  question  of  the  law  under  which  Christ   is  certainly  no  mere  affair  of 

you  put  yourself,  of  the  moral  quality  words.     Yet  words,  though  weak,  are 

of  the   end   which  you  seek. — M.  R.  not  worthless.     Whatever  worthy  wit- 

Vincent,  D.D.  ness  words  can  bear,  they  will  not  fail 

The  soul  that  may  be  lost. — A  to  utter  in  any  loving  and  thorough- 
German  commentator  who  is  usually  going  confession  of  our  loving  Lord, 
very  diffuse  tersely  and  truly  observes  2.  Confessing  Christ  and  being  con- 
with  respect  to  this  passage,  "  He  who  fessed  by  Christ  are  not  to  be  sepa- 
will  understand  it  does  understand  it."  rated  in  our  thought,  like  work-day 
There  is  no  real  room  for  doubt  as  and  pay-day,  as  if  the  confessing  were 
to  the  meaning  of  our  Lord's  words,  all  here  and  the  being  confessed  all 
The  soul  which  may  be  lost  is  the  there.  What  comes  out  there  is  simply 
very  inmost  seat  of  being  ;  that  which  the  flash  of  an  awakened  consciousness 
thinks  in  each  one  of  us,  but  is  not  of  a  judgment  of  Christ  which  has 
thought;  that  which  feels,  but  is  not  been  going  on  here  every  day  under 
feeling ;  that  which  remembers  and  is  the  eyes  of  the  invisible  witnesses  of 
conscious,  but  is  neither  consciousness  many  a  negligent  life.  3.  Confessing 
nor  memory ;  that  depth,  that  abyss  or  denying  Christ  here  is  not  a  ques- 
of  life  which  we  so  rarely  explore,  yet  tion  solely  as  to  the  totality  or  average 
which  is  within  each  one  of  us,  which  of  character,  but  quite  as  much  a 
we  carry  everywhere  with  us, — the  question  as  to  the  particulars  of 
one  mystery  of  which  perhaps  we  know  character.  Point  by  point  the  world 
less  than  any  other,  and  yet  our  very  compares  the  professed  copy  with  its 
inmost  self. — Canon  Liddon.  model,   and  recognises   agreements   or 

"  If" — What   a   world   of  meaning  contradictions  in  detail.     No  otherwise 

there  is  in  that  little  word  "if  "  !     It  can  it  be  in  presence  of  the  angels  of 

suggests   the   fact   that  few,  perhaps  God. — J.  M.  Whiton. 

not    one    in  ten    thousand,   do    gain  Conduct   and  character. — How  does 

that  portion  of  the  world  on  which  they  a   son  of  a  wise  and  virtuous  father 

have  set  their  heart.     Many  run  in  the  confess  or  deny  him  most  expressively  ? 

race,  but   only  one   gains   the   prize ;  Certainly    not    by    the    word    which 

and  not  seldom  he  who  bids  fair  to  win  declares  the   eternal  relationship,  not 

fails  through  something  which  we  call  by  saying  "  Father,"  though  he  ought 

chance  or  accident. — J.  W.  King.  to   say  it.     Rather    by    conduct    and 

character ;    either    by    the    wise    and 

Ver.  37.  A  business  question. — The  virtuous  following  of  parental  example, 

apostles   had   been   men   of   business ;  which   bespeaks   him    as   his   father's 

here  was  a  business  question  indeed,  own   son,  heir  of  his  spirit  as  of  his 

They  were    decidedly    practical,    and  name,   or  else   by  the  course  of  folly 

they  were  met  on  their  own  ground,  and    vice,    which    denies    all    moral 

Their  answer   is  not  recorded.     They  affinity  with  him.     So  on  the  father's 

doubtless  thought  long  and  often  on  it.  part ;  let   father   and  son   be   in  the 

307 


chap.  viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


same  society,  how  does  the  wise  and 
virtuous  father  most  effectively  own 
or  disown  the  son  before  intelligent 
observers?  Certainly  not  by  saying, 
or  omitting  to  say,  "  My  son  " ;  rather 
by  being  in  the  same  circle  with  him 
as  an  object  of  comparison  before 
observant  witnesses,  by  the  light 
which  the  father's  character  reflects 
upon  the  son,'  to  the  son's  honour  or 
dishonour  as  the  imitator  or  neglecter 
of  a  noble  model. — Ibid. 

On  being  ashamed  of  Jesus. — Those 
who  would  willingly  follow  Jesus 
where  the  road  is  smooth  and  easy, 
but  leave  Him  where  it  is  rugged  and 
hard;  who  inwardly  approve  of  His 
doctrine,  but  from  the  ridicule  of  the 
profane  are  ashamed  to  avow  it ;  who 
punctually  attend  the  routine  of  wor- 
ship, but  dispense  with  the  observance 
of  duties  to  which  they  are  not  com- 
pelled by  human  laws  ;  who  can  occa- 
sionally associate  with  the  drunkard 
and  hear  the  name  of  God  profaned 
without  concern  ;  who  have  no  objection 
to  do  wrong  when  the  multitude  give 
their  sanction ;  who,  when  unnoticed 
or  secure  of  escaping  censure,  can  lift 
the  rod  of  oppression  or  receive  the 
wages  of  iniquity;  who  can  cherish 
pride,  vanity,  avarice,  and  ambition, 
and  yet  by  nice  dissimulation  affect 
the    opposite    virtues ;    who    can    be 


tender  and  partial  to  themselves,  but 
austere  and  cruel  to  others  ;  who 
perform  no  duty  on  which  human 
applause  is  not  bestowed,  and  are 
deterred  from  no  vice  which  fashion 
or  common  practice  countenances  ; — 
men  of  this  character,  and  all  who 
resemble  them — all  false  Christians, 
in  short,  who  in  public  and  private 
life  have  not  the  fear  and  love  of 
God  before  their  eyes,  whatever  may 
be  their  reception  from  the  world — 
of  them  shall  Jesus  Christ  be  ashamed 
when  in  transcendent  glory  He  shall 
come  to  judge  the  world.  It  is  obvious, 
then,  from  this  climax  of  vice  and  folly, 
that  nothing  under  a  sincere,  uniform, 
and  universal  obedience  to  the  moral 
law  which  Jesus  came  to  fulfil  will 
be  accepted  from  His  followers;  and 
that  no  pretences,  excuses,  and  pallia- 
tions will  avail,  if  this  essential  and 
absolutely  necessary  condition  be  not 
complied  with. — A.  Stirling,  LL.D. 

Adulterous  generation — not  because 
the  particular  sin  of  adultery  was  so 
frequent  in  that  age,  but  because  by 
every  kind  of  sin  a  man  under  the 
contract  of  religion  runs  into  that 
character  wherewith  Solomon  describes 
the  adulteress,  who  "forsaketh  the 
guide  of  her  youth,  and  forgetteth  the 
covenant  of  her  God  "  ( Jas.  iv.  4). — 
Dean  Young. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    VIII. 


Ver.  2.  Compassion  for  the  needy. — King 
Oswald  of  Northumbria  accompanied  the 
monk  Aidan  in  his  long  missionary  journeys 
as  interpreter.  One  day,  as  he  feasted  with 
the  monk  by  his  side,  the  thane,  or  noble  of 
his  war-band,  whom  he  had  set  to  give  alms 
to  the  poor  at  his  gate,  told  him  of  a 
multitude  that  still  waited  fasting  without. 
The  king  at  once  bade  the  untasted  meat 
before  him  be  carried  to  the  poor,  and  his 
silver  dish  be  divided  piecemeal  among 
them.  Aidan  seized  the  royal  hand  and 
blessed  it.  "May  this  hand,"  he  cried, 
•f  never  grow  old  1 " 

Ver.  4.  "From  whence?" — That  question 
may  be  asked  of  us.  Who  can  do  this  ?  Not 
the  cleverest  or  most  powerful  man  living. 
The  man  of  science  can  do  much.  He  can 
open  the  fields  of  sky  to  our  gaze  with  a 

303 


telescope,  and  shew  us  other  worlds  than 
ours.  He  can  make  steam  his  slave,  and 
compel  it  to  bear  the  ship  from  one  side  of 
the  world  to  the  other.  He  can  seize  upon 
electricity  and  make  it  carry  a  message  at  his 
bidding.  But  the  greatest  man  of  science 
cannot  make  an  ear  of  corn  grow,  nor  an 
apple  blossom  swell  into  fruit.  Kings  can 
make  laws  to  take  away  life,  but  they  cannot 
give  life,  nor  cause  it  to  rain  upon  the  earth, 
nor  make  the  fields  bring  forth  their  in- 
crease. "  From  whence  can  a  man  satisfy 
these  men  with  bread  ?  "  From  whence  ? 
From  heaven.  And  the  one  Man  who  can 
do  this  is  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  the  God 
Christ  Jesus. — H.  J.  Wilmot  Buxton. 

Ver.  11.  Ashing  a  sign. — Two  striking 
instances  from  Kabbinic  literature  will  shew 
that  this  demand  of  the  Pharisees  was  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  vm. 


accordance  with  their  notions  and  practice. 
We  read  that,  when  a  certain  Rabbi  was 
asked  by  his  disciples  about  the  time  of 
Messiah's  coming,  he  replied,  "  I  am  afraid 
that  you  will  also  ask  me  for  a  sign."  When 
they  promised  they  would  not  do  so,  he  told 
them  that  the  gate  of  Rome  would  fall  and 
be  rebuilt,  and  fall  again,  when  there  would 
not  be  time  to  restore  it  ere  the  Son  of 
David  came.  On  this  they  pressed  him, 
despite  his  remonstrance,  for  "a  sign," 
when  this  was  given  them — that  the  waters 
which  issued  from  the  cave  of  Paneias  were 
turned  into  blood.  Again,  as  regards  "a 
sign  from  heaven,"  it  is  said  that  Rabbi 
Eliezer,  when  his  teaching  was  challenged, 
successively  appealed  to  certain  "signs." 
First,  a  locust  tree  moved  at  his  bidding 
one  hundred,  or,  according  to  some,  four 
hundred,  cubits.  Next,  the  channels  of 
water  were  made  to  flow  backwards ;  then 
the  walls  of  the  Academy  leaned  forward, 
and  were  only  arrested  at  the  bidding  of 
another  Rabbi.  Lastly,  Eliezer  exclaimed, 
"  If  the  law  is  as  I  teach,  let  it  be  proved 
from  heaven !  "  when  a  voice  fell  from  the 
sky,  "What  have  ye  to  do  with  Rabbi 
Eliezer  ?  for  the  Halakhah  is  as  he  teaches." 

Ver.  12.  Difficult  to  explain  truth  to  un- 
spiritual  people. — If  a  man  paints  a  picture 
on  canvas,  gorgeous  in  colour  as  Titian 
could  make  it,  and  then  gathers  together 
a  multitude  of  spectators,  it  is  useless  for 
him  to  undertake  to  explain  to  them  that 
the  colours  are  exquisite,  and  the  reasons 
why  they  are  so.  If,  as  they  stand  and  look 
at  it,  one,  in  behalf  of  the  others,  should 
ask,  "  Will  you  be  kind  enough  to  prove  to 
us  that  those  are  exquisite  colours  ? "  he 
would  say,  probably  with  expletives,  "  If 
you  cannot  yourselves  see  what  they  are, 
I  cannot  explain  it  to  you."  If  you  play 
a  magnificent  overture  to  an  audience,  some 
of  them  say,  "  I  would  rather  hear  a  ballad 
than  that  thing."  Others  have  an  apprecia- 
tion of  it.  Men  only  hear  what  they  are 
capable  of  hearing.  Some  men's  ears  enable 
them  to  appreciate  only  the  lowest  elements 
of  music ;  and  when  the  better  parts  are 
developed,  these  are  nothing  to  them.  If 
they  do  not  like  a  beautiful  symphony,  they 
do  not,  and  that  is  all  yon  can  say  about  it. 
It  is  not  in  them  to  like  it.  The  eye 
cannot  see  anything  which  it  is  not  organised 
to  see.  Tyndall  shewed  us  that  light, 
besides  containing  all  those  qualities  which 
we  supposed  it  contained,  also  had  in  it 
chemical  qualities  which  no  sense  of  ours 
could  trace  or  comprehend.  It  was  the 
first  intimation  I  had  that  the  universe  is 
full  of  things  which  we  are  not  organised  to 
appreciate.  Precisely  this  was  implied  by 
Christ  when  He  said,  substantially,  to  His 
adversaries,  the  educated  people  of  His  day 
who  denied  that  He  was  Divine :  "  If  you 


were  spiritually  enlightened,  you  would  recog- 
nise My  high  claim  ;  you  would  perceive  in 
My  life  and  disposition  the  qualities  of 
Divinity ;  and  if  you  do  not  perceive  them, 
it  is  because  you  have  not  the  requisite 
perceiving  power.  The  proof  must  always 
lie  in  the  person  who  is  reasoned  with ;  and 
you  have  not  the  moral  faculty  which  is 
necessary  to  enable  you  to  discern  it." — 
H.   W.  Beecher. 

Vers.  22-25.  Sight  obscured  by  the  trivial. 
— A  silk  thread  stretched  across  the  glass 
of  the  telescope  will  entirely  cover  a  star, 
although  as  large  as  our  sun.  So  there  are 
some  whose  sight  of  the  heavenly  world  is 
entirely  obscured  by  what  is  infinitely  little 
compared  with  the  life  of  the  world  to 
come.  Richardson,  the  blind  man,  used  to 
say  of  his  conversion,  "I  could  never  see 
till  I  was  blind."  The  great  Earl  of  Chatham 
once  went  with  a  friend  to  hear  Mr.  Cecil 
preach.  The  sermon  was  on  the  Spirit's 
agency  in  the  hearts  of  believers.  As  they 
were  coming  from  church,  the  great  states- 
man confessed  that  he  could  not  understand 
it  at  all,  and  asked  his  friend  if  he  supposed 
that  any  one  present  did.  "  Why,  yes,"  said 
he,  "  there  were  many  plain,  unlettered 
women,  and  some  children  there,  who  un- 
derstood every  word  of  it,  and  heard  it 
with  joy." 

Ver.  27.  A  striking  coincidence. — If  we 
are  right  in  identifying  the  little  bay — 
Dalmanutha — with  the  neighbourhood  of 
Tarichaea,  yet  another  link  of  strange  co- 
incidence connects  the  prophetic  warning 
spoken  there  with  its  fulfilment.  From 
Dalmanutha  our  Lord  passed  across  the 
lake  to  Caesarea  Philippi.  From  Caesarea 
Philippi  did  Vespasian  pass  through  Tiberias 
to  Tarichaea,  when  the  town  and  people  were 
destroyed,  and  the  blood  of  the  fugitives 
reddened  the  lake,  and  their  bodies  choked 
its  waters.  Even  amidst  the  horrors  of  the 
last  Jewish  war  few  spectacles  could  have 
been  so  sickening  as  that  of  the  wild  stand 
at  Tarichaea,  ending  with  the  butchery  of 
6,500  on  land  and  sea,  and  lastly  the  vile 
treachery  by  which  they  to  whom  mercy 
had  been  promised  were  lured  into  the 
circus  at  Tiberias,  when  the  weak  and  old,  to 
the  number  of  about  1,200,  were  slaughtered, 
and  the  rest — upwards  of  30,400 — sold  into 
slavery.  Well  might  He  who  foresaw  and 
foretold  that  terrible  end,  standing  on  that 
spot,  deeply  sigh  in  spirit  as  He  spake  to 
them  who  asked  "  a  sign,"  and  yet  saw  not 
what  even  ordinary  discernment  might  have 
perceived  of  the  red  and  lowering  sky  over- 
head.— A.  Edersheim,  B.B. 

Ver.  29.  Comprehensive  news  of  Christ. — 
Many  have  at  one  time  or  other  felt  the 
charm  of  a  Christ  who  is  purely  human,  but 

309 


chap.  Viii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


not  Divine.  Our  literature  abounds  at  present 
with  such  pictures,  and  some  of  them  are 
very  fascinating.  The  Peasant  of  Nazareth, 
growing  up  beneath  His  mother's  roof  and 
in  the  carpenter's  workshop ;  the  enthusiastic 
Lover  of  the  poor  and  oppressed,  who  went 
about  continually  doing  good ;  the  pure  and 
fearless  Reformer,  who  blasted  with  the 
lightning  of  His  eloquence  the  Pharisee  and 
the  priest;  the  Martyr,  who  died  for  the 
truth,  and  lies  buried  beneath  the  Syrian 
blue, — this  picture  is  being  sketched  by 
clever  litterateurs  ;  it  is  impossible  not  to 
enjoy  it ;  and  you  ask,  Why  does  this  win 
me  more  than  the  Christ  I  hear  of  in 
church  ?  The  latter  perplexes  me  with 
mystery,  but  this  is  simple,  human,  lovable. 
It  is  not,  I  think,  difficult  to  explain  this. 
If  you  know  music,  and  have  ever  endea- 
voured to  follow  and  grasp  a  long  and 
classical  composition  of  a  great  master,  say, 
an  oratorio  of  Handel  or  Haydn,  I  am  sure 
you  can  remember  in  it  a  few  airs  and 
choruses  which,  if  separated  from  the  whole 
and  executed  by  themselves,  would  produce 
far  more  immediate  pleasure  than  the  whole 
elaborate  composition.  Indeed,  there  are 
audiences  which  could  not  tolerate  the 
oratorio  as  a  whole,  but  would  be  delighted 
with  its  selected  beauties.  Yet,  though  these 
lovely  morsels  are  enchanting,  they  are  not 
Handel.  Or,  do  you  know  literature  ?  If 
you  know  your  Browning,  you  must  be  aware 
how  charming  it  is,  after  struggling  through 
his  more  difficult  pages,  to  light  on  a  lyric 
here  and  there  which  is  perfectly  easy  read- 
ing. Selections  of  these  find  their  way  even 
into  school  books,  and  many  readers  can 
enjoy  selections  from  this  great  author  who 
recoil  from  his  longer  and  more  difficult 
works.  But  though  these  elegant  extracts 
are  delightful,  they  are  not  Browning.  In 
the  same  way  these  pictures  of  a  merely 
human  Christ  are  true  as  far  as  they  go; 
they  are  the  simpler  traits  selected  from 
that  great  character  and  life ;  they  are  easy 
to  comprehend,  and  they  touch  the  feelings  ; 
but  they  are  not  Christ.  At  first  sight  that 
way  of  thinking  of  Christ  as  a  great  and 
good  man  appears  to  make  everything 
simple;  but  it  really  involves  you  in  con- 
fusion and  contradiction.  For  what  is  it 
you  hold  Him  to  be  1  He  is,  you  say,  the 
ideal  man — the  model  of  modesty,  wisdom, 
and  truth.  If  He  was  merely  a  link  in  the 
chain  of  humanity,  then,  as  a  weak  and 
fallible  man,  He  ought  to  have  confessed 
His  own  sins,  and  He  was  a  blasphemer 
when  He  spoke  of  giving  His  life  a  ransom 
for  many.  When  He  said,  "All  power  is 
given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  on  earth," 
and  promised  to  be  with  His  people  always, 
even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  He  was  not 
a  wise  man,  but  the  victim  of  a  madman's 
delusions.  When  He,  a  finite  creature,  spoke 
of  Himself  as  seated  on  God's  throne  and 

310 


judging  the  assembled  world,  He  was  no 
model  of  goodness  and  modesty,  but  a  man 
rendered  insane  with  pride,  who  was  pre- 
suming to  pluck  the  sceptre  from  the  hands 
of  the  Eternal.  If  He  who  said,  "  Come 
unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,'  had  not 
the  peace  and  joy  of  salvation  to  give  to 
those  who  come  to  hide  their  guilty  heads 
in  His  bosom,  then  He  was  cruelly  deceiving 
us  all. — Jas.  Stalker,  D.D. 

A  large  Christ  experienced. — Payson,  when 
he  lay  on  his  bed  dying,  said :  "  All  my  life 
Christ  has  seemed  to  me  as  a  star  afar  off ; 
but  little  by  little  He  has  been  advancing 
and  growing  larger  and  larger,  till  now  His 
beams  seem  to  fill  the  whole  hemisphere, 
and  I  am  floating  in  the  glory  of  God, 
wondering  with  unutterable  wonder  how 
such  a  mote  as  I  should  be  glorified  in  His 
light."  But  he  came  to  that  after  a  long 
life. 

Ver.  33.  We  all  have  owi  Satans — each 
one  of  us  a  different  Satan.  Satan  comes  to 
one  man  in  the  form  of  idleness,  and  makes 
him  waste  day  after  day,  year  after  year, 
until  he  has  wasted  his  whole  life  doing 
nothing.  Satan  comes  to  another  man  as 
work,  and  makes  him  destroy  himself  in  the 
opposite  way  by  wearing  out  prematurely 
his  brain  and  his  body.  He  comes  to 
another  as  Christian  zeal,  and  the  man  be- 
comes a  bigot,  full  of  fire  for  the  Lord ;  but 
the  Lord  whom  he  serves  is  a  God  of  wrath, 
a  God  who  cares  for  trifles,  a  God  who  pre- 
fers sacrifice  to  mercy.  He  comes  to  another 
as  charity,  but  it  is  a  charity  which  tolerates 
evil,  and  lets  it  alone,  which  has  no  edge  to 
it,  no  courage — an  indolent  charity  which 
is  not  love  at  all,  but  only  easy  good-nature. 
So  he  disguises  himself  as  an  angel  of  light, 
calling  himself  Patriotism  when  he  wishes 
to  make  nations  hate  each  other ;  calling 
himself  Christianity  when  he  wishes  to  make 
men  persecute  each  other;  calling  himself 
Honesty  when  he  wishes  to  encourage  a  man 
in  his  rude  and  overbearing  ways;  and  so 
on,  changing  himself  into  every  virtue  and 
every  grace. — J.  F.  Clarke. 

Ver.  34.  To  take  up  one's  cross  was  a  pro- 
verbial expression,  both  with  the  Jews  and 
Romans,  for  any  extraordinary  sufferings, 
and  it  is  probable  they  had  it  •  from  the 
Persians,  who  made  use  of  that  form  of 
punishment. — T.  J.  Montefiore. 

The  symbol  of  the  cross. — It  is  strange,  yet 
well  authenticated,  and  has  given  rise  to 
many  speculations,  that  the  symbol  of  the 
cross  was  already  know  nto  the  Indians  before 
the  arrival  of  Cortez.  Among  the  Egyptians 
a  cross  was  the  emblem  of  a  future  life.  In 
O'Brien's  Round  Towers  of  Ireland  there  are 
some  curious  remarks  on  the  cross.  The  use 
of  it  in  some  way  by  the  Druids  is  noticed. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viii. 


To  take,  not  make,  our  cross. — We  are  bid 
to  take,  not  to  make,  our  cross.  God  in  His 
providence  will  provide  one  for  us.  And  we 
are  bid  to  take  it  up;  we  hear  nothing  of 
laying  it  down.  Our  troubles  and  our  lives 
live  and  die  together. —  W.  Gurnall. 

The  spirit  of  the  Christian  soldier. — When 
Garibaldi  entered  on  one  of  his  campaigns, 
he  told  his  troops  what  he  wanted  of  them. 
They  replied,  "  Well,  General,  and  what  are 
you  going  to  give  us  for  all  this  ? "  He 
replied,  "  I  don't  know  what  also  you  will 
get,  but  you  will  get  hunger,  cold,  wounds, 
and  perhaps  death."  They  stood  awhile 
considering,  and  then,  throwing  up  their 
arms,  exclaimed,  "  We  are  the  men  ! "  This 
is  the  spirit  Christ  looks  for  in  His  soldiers. 
The  spell  of  example. — There  is,  we  know, 
a  wonderful  spell  in  the  cry,  "  Come  after 
Me,"  "Follow  Me."  All  history,  profane 
as  well  as  sacred,  has  shewn  this.  The  great 
Koman  general  realised  its  force  when  he 
called  to  his  soldiers,  who  shrank  from  the 
hardships  of  the  Libyan  desert,  and  pro- 
mised to  go  before  them,  and  to  command 
them  nothing  which  he  would  not  first  do 
himself.  Even  so  Christ  designed  to  help 
His  followers  by  the  assurance  that  He 
should  first  suffer  that  which  they  would  be 
called  to  bear. 

Predominance  of  the  cross. — Describing 
the  artistic  glories  of  the  Church  of  St. 
Mark  at  Venice,  Mr.  Rnskin  says :  "  Here 
are  all  the  successions  of  crowded  imagery, 
shewing  the  passions  and  the  pleasures  of 
human  life  symbolised  together,  and  the 
mystery  of  its  redemption :  for  the  maze  of 
interwoven  lines  and  changeful  pictures 
lead  always  at  last  to  the  cross,  lifted  and 
carved  in  every  place  and  upon  every  stone  ; 
sometimes  with  the  serpent  of  eternity 
wrapped  round  it,  sometimes  with  doves 
beneath  its  arms,  and  sweet  herbage  growing 
forth  from  its  feet ;  but  conspicuous  most 
of  all  on  the  great  rood  that  crosses  the 
church  before  the  altar,  raised  in  bright 
blazonry  against  the  shadow  of  the  apse.  It 
is  the  cross  that  is  first  seen  and  always 
burning  in  the  centre  of  the  temple ;  and 
every  dome  and  hollow  of  its  roof  has  the 
figure  of  Christ  in  the  utmost  height  of  it, 
raised  in  power,  or  returning  in  judgment." 

Christ's  cross  is  the  sweetest  burden  that 
ever  I  bore ;  it  is  such  a  burden  as  wings 
are  to  a  bird,  or  sails  to  a  ship,  to  carry  me 
forward  to  my  harbour. — &  Rutherford. 

The  figure  of  the  cross. — My  will  is  repre- 
sented  well    by   a  straight    line thus, 

running  from  birth  to  death  in  unbroken 
current  through  the  flesh  and  the  world  in 
all  manner  of  self-indulgence  unto  the  hidden 
abyss.  God's  will  is  represented  by  a  per- 
pendicular |  thus,  falling  from  heaven  like 
a  bolt  of  thunder.  The  two  wills  meet,  and 
form  the  figure  of  the  +  thus.  It  cuts  me, 
severs  me,  hinders  me,  clogs  me,  compels 


me ;  but  Thy  will,  O  God,  saves  me.  That 
cross  means  the  life  and  death  of  the  Son 
of  God.  "For  me,"  therefore,  "to  live  is 
Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain." 

Christ  the  Leader. — When  Hedley  Vicars 
fell  at  the  head  of  his  regiment  during  a 
night  attack  of  the  Russians,  his  voice  was 
heard  ringing  out  on  the  night  air  over  the 
din  of  the  conflict  with  the  cry,  "  This  way, 
Ninety-seventh."  A  hundred  "  goes  "  would 
be  weak  in  comparison  with  the  "  come " 
involved  in  that  battle-cry.  In  all  the  cross* 
bearing  of  life  the  voice  of  the  Captain  of 
our  salvation  is  still  heard  in  the  van,  saying, 
"  This  way,  My  disciple." 

Following  Christ  in  self-denial. — A  little 
girl  was  instructed  by  her  parents  in  what 
Christ  had  taught,  and  how  He  lived,  and 
that  through  Him  we  must  enter  into  eternal 
life.  When  she  heard  these  things,  she 
became  dissatisfied  with  her  native  land, 
and  pressed  her  parents  to  be  taken  to  that 
land  where  men  lived  as  Christ  had  taught 
them,  and  as  He  lived.  Her  parents  replied 
that  she  was  then  in  a  Christian  land,  and 
that  those  around  her  were  Christians, 
and  were  living  so.  She  shook  her  head 
and  said,  "  That  I  cannot  believe,  for  those 
I  see  around  me  neither  live  as  Christ 
taught  nor  as  Christ  lived ;  for  Christ  was 
voluntarily  poor,  we  love  gold  and  silver ; 
He  was  humble  and  lowly,  but  we  affect 
dominion  and  greatness ;  He  was  always  in 
affliction,  we  hunt  for  carnal  pleasures." 
What  cutting  truths  from  infant  lips  1 

Ver.  35.  Gain  oy  loss. — The  most  impor- 
tant use  of  a  seed  is  that  which  results  in  the 
reproduction  of  its  species  ;  but  in  order  that 
it  may  serve  this  high  purpose,  it  must  lose 
itself  as  a  seed,  must  suffer  the  disintegration 
of  its  structure,  and  give  up  its  elements 
for  the  production  of  new  forms  of  life. 
The  seed  must,  as  it  were,  lose  all  thought  of 
itself,  must  give  up  its  own  life,  its  own  separ- 
ate existence,  and  allow  itself  to  be  converted 
into  new  and  productive  forms  of  vegetation. 
A  grain  of  corn  stored  away  in  the  granary 
is  of  small  account.  To  be  of  any  use  in 
the  world  it  must  be  either  ground  to  powder 
and  made  into  bread  for  the  eater,  or  be 
planted  in  the  ground  and  transmuted  by 
the  joint  action  of  the  wonderful  forces 
locked  up  within  itself  and  those  lodged 
in  the  soil  around  it,  into  a  green  and  grow- 
ing stalk  which  shall  in  due  time  bear  fruit 
to  nourish  human  life  and  bless  the  world. 
It  is  only  one  illustration  of  a  great  law 
prevalent  in  all  the  universe  of  God.  Help- 
fulness to  others  is  attained  through  sacrifice 
of  self. 

The  reward  of  self-sacrifice. — A  group  of 
firemen  sat  in  their  engine  house  to  hold 
their  anniversary.  They  have  invited  in  the 
"veterans."  They  eat — they  remember. 
Which  is  the  keenest  delight,  the  memory 

311 


chap.  Viil.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  the  terrible  eight-and-forty  hours  in 
which  you  played  the  hero,  carrying  the 
nozzle  through  the  doorway  from  which  a 
hundred  citizens  had  shrunk  dismayed,  or 
the  present  banquet  ?  The  pleasure  of  heroic 
deeds,  or — a  piece  of  pie  ?  Yet  here  is  all  the 
difference  between  noble  and  ignoble  men. 
When  we  come  to  think  of  it,  self-sacrifice 
has  its  own  high  reward.  But  observe  how 
slow  we  are  to  win  it  with  the  denial  of  an 
appetite.  The  cross  of  Christ  is  no  esoteric 
secret.  It  inheres  in  the  constitution  of 
things,  even  the  commonest  things. — E.  J. 
Haynes. 

Lost. — I  remember  being  one  winter's 
night  in  a  little  town  on  the  coast  of  Wales. 
We  were  sitting  by  the  fire,  cheerful,  when 
we  heard  a  sudden  noise.  We  looked  out 
into  the  night.  The  wind  was  very  high, 
and  suddenly  we  heard  the  scream  of  voices, 
then  the  boom  of  guns  over  the  water  ;  then 
the  clatter  of  feet  along  the  street,  the  life- 
boat, and  the  lifebuoy.  Human  life  in 
danger.  We  thought  we  descried  a  dark 
mass  heaving  over  the  black  billows,  but 
the  breakers  carried  her  away.  That  night 
she  struck  on  the  rocks.  I  walked  down  in 
the  morning  to  look  at  her  lying  on  the 
beach.  I  could  not  help  saying,  "  How 
human  this  is !  how  lifelike  !  "  There  she 
lay,  the  pride  and  hope  of  her  owners — 
stripped ;  masts,  sails,  shrouds,  broken, 
ragged,  torn — gone.  And  yet  much  had 
depended  on  her.  She  had  been  launched 
with  many  hopes  and  expectations.  All 
gone,  a  melancholy  wreck.  The  winds 
howled  through  as  they  lifted  her  ragged 
shrouds.  She  could  not,  as  once  she  might 
have  done,  repel  them,  and  make  them  her 
ministers.  She  was  a  lost  ship.  Melancholy 
type  of  a  lost  soul. — E.  Paxton  Hood. 

Ver.  36.  Gained,  but  not  possessed. — A 
people  may  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose 
all  those  qualities  of  the  head  and  heart 
which  entitle  them  to  possess  it.  May  we 
not  say  of  ancient  Rome  that  she  gained 
the  whole  world  and  lost  her  soul?  Just 
as  the  tale  of  her  conquests  was  almost 
complete,  yet  ere  the  Roman  eagles  were 
firmly  planted  on  the  Euphrates  and  on  the 
Danube  the  soul  of  the  old  republic  had 
departed.  The  temperance,  courage,  justice, 
patriotism,  of  the  earlier  Romans  had  died 
out ;  and  while,  in  the  intoxication  of  her 
victories,  Rome  grasped  with  one  hand  the 
sceptre  of  the  world,  she  surrendered  the 
liberties  and  lives  of  her  citizens  to  the 
lusts  and  tyranny  of  the  Caesars  with 
the  other.  A  people  may  have  been  civil- 
ised, in  the  material  sense  of  the  word,  for 
centuries,  while  it  remains  at  heart  and  for 
ever  barbarian.  In  ages  when  our  ancestors 
were  mere  savages  Chinese  society  was  as 
highly  organised,  Chinese  life  as  highly 
embellished,   as  at  the  present   day.     Yet 

312 


no  primitive  race  was  ever  capable  of  the 
extraordinary  cruelties  which  are  now  of 
daily  occurrence  in  China  ;  and  the  dignity 
and  the  rights  of  man  are  nowhere  treated 
with  such  lofty  scorn  as  in  those  tribunals 
which  are  presided  over  by  the  passionless 
scepticism  of  a  Chinese  mandarin.  Without 
a  ray  of  moral  life,  without  a  soul,  that 
vast  and  ancient  empire  exists  as  if  that  it 
may  exhibit  to  Christendom  the  worthless- 
ness  and  feebleness  of  mere  material  pro- 
gress. Yet  Pagan  empires  are  no  measure 
of  the  degradation  of  which  Christian 
peoples  are  capable  when  they  sacrifice 
truth  and  goodness  in  an  attempt  to  gain 
the  world.  When  during  the  first  French 
Revolution  divine  honours  were  paid  to  one 
of  the  daughters  of  shame,  throned  on  the 
high  altar  of  the  cathedral  church  of  Paris, 
while  the  streets  of  that  brilliant  capital 
were  deluged  with  the  best  blood  of  its 
citizens,  men  read  God's  doom  upon  a  noble 
people,  bent  fiercely  for  the  moment  upon 
spiritual  suicide  and  upon  material  aggran- 
disement. And  when  we  hear  daily  of  the 
gigantic  miseries  inflicted  and  endured  by 
a  nation  which  but  yesterday  was  a  British 
colony,  we  may  reflect  that  there  are  dangers 
against  which  no  institutions  or  races  can 
be  guaranteed,  and  that  we  ourselves  have 
our  weaknesses  and  our  temptations.  My 
countrymen,  I  do  not  dispute  your  pre- 
eminence ;  you  are  unquestionably  the 
princes  of  commerce,  you  reign  without  a 
rival  over  the  realm  of  matter  :  but  have 
you  lost,  or  are  you  losing,  that  which  is 
more  precious  than  any  acquisitions  of  your 
industry  or  of  your  genius — are  you  be- 
coming the  slaves  of  matter  instead  of  its 
masters  ?  Beneath  the  surface  of  many 
an  advanced  civilisation  the  human  brute 
crouches,  he  scarcely  slumbers,  with  the  old 
untamed  ferocity  of  his  savage  nature ;  and 
not  merely  the  accumulations  of  your  capital, 
but  the  creations  of  your  science,  your  new 
projectiles,  your  rifled  cannon,  and  your  iron- 
clad steam  vessels,  may  but  enable  the 
nation  which  has  gained  the  world  to  prove 
one  day  how  much  she  has  really  lost  in 
gaining  it. —  Canon  Liddon.  ,S 

The  world  unsatisfying. — Alexander  ther 
Great  overran  the  whole  earth,  and  subdued 
every  nation ;  and  at  the  conclusion  of 
universal  victory  he  sat  down  and  wept  like 
a  child  because  he  had  not  another  world  to 
conquer.  We  read  also  of  a  Roman  emperor 
who  had  run  the  round  of  all  the  pleasures 
in  the  world  offering  a  rich  reward  to  any 
one  who  should  discover  a  new  pleasure. 
Cyrus  the  conqueror  thought  that  for  a 
little  time  he  was  making  a  fine  thing  out 
of  this  world;  yet  before  he  came  to  his 
grave  he  wrote  out  this  pitiful  epitaph  for 
his  monument :  "  I  am  Cyrus.  I  occupied  the 
Persian  Empire.  I  was  King  over  Asia.  Be- 
grudge me  not  this  monument."  But  theworld 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  viiI. 


in  after-years  ploughed  up  his  sepulchre. 
Pope  Adrian  VI.  had  this  inscription  on  his 
monument :  "  Here  lies  Adrian  VI.,  who  was 
never  so  unhappy  in  any  period  of  his  life 
as  at  that  in  which  he  was  a  prince."  "  I, 
sinful  wretch,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of 
England  and  of  France,  and  Lord  of  Ireland, 
bequeath  to  Almighty  God  my  sinful  soul 
and  the  life  I  have  misspent,  whereof  I  put 
myself  wholly  at  His  grace  and  mercy  " — so 
wrote  Henry  IV.  in  his  last  will,  when  the 
frightful  reality  of  leprosy  had  disenchanted 
the  rapturous  dream  of  usurpation.  Queen 
Elizabeth,  dying,  cried  :  "  Millions  of  money 
for  an  inch  of  time  1  "  Was  the  gay  queen 
happy  ?  The  history  of  kings  and  queens 
proves  that  though  their  crowns  may  be 
"  set  with  diamonds  or  Indian  stones,"  the 
kings  and  queens  themselves  but  seldom 
enjoy  the  crown  of  content  which  is  worn 
upon  the  heart.  The  world  clapped  its 
hands  and  stamped  its  feet  in  honour  of 
Charles  Lamb.  Was  he  happy  ?  He  says  : 
"  I  walk  up  and  down,  thinking  I  am  happy, 
but  feeling  I  am  not."  Samuel  Johnson, 
happy  ?  "  No.  I  am  afraid  I  shall  some 
,day  get  crazy."  Buchanan,  the  world-re- 
nowned writer,  exiled  from  his  own  country, 
appealing  to  Henry  VIII.  for  protection, 
happy  ?  "  No.  Over  mountains  covered  with 
snow,  and  through  valleys  flooded  with  rain, 
I  come  a  fugitive."  "  Indeed,  my  lord," 
wrote  famous  Edmund  Burke,  "  I  doubt 
whether,  in  these  hard  times,  I  would  give 
a  peck  of  refuse  wheat  for  all  that  is  called 
fame  in  the  world."  "  Sweet,"  says  the 
poet,  "  sweet  were  the  days  when  I  was  all 
unknown ; 

But  when  my  name  was  lifted  up,  the 
storm 

Broke  on  the  mountain,  and  I  cared  not 
for  it." 
Man's  soul  thirsts  and  longs  for  some- 
thing nobler,  brighter,  greater,  and  better 
than  the  world  itself.  As  Macduff  says : 
"  As  well  try  to  fill  the  yawning  chasm  with 
a  few  grains  of  sand  as  satisfy  the  gulf  of 
the  soul's  desires  with  the  pleasures  of  an 
empty  world."  Nothing  can  satisfy  the  soul 
but  God. 

A  revealing  light. — A  traveller  who  crosses 
the  Alps  -by  night  sees  only  a  foot  or  two 
before  him ;  and  he  is  as  little  alive  to  the 
extraordinary  scene  through  which  he  is 
passing,  to  the  beauties  which  encompass 
and  to  .the  risks  which  beset  his  path,  as  if 
he  were  walking  quietly  along  the  turnpike 
road  from  London  to  Cambridge.  But  as 
the  early  dawn  breaks  upon  him,  he  becomes 
aware  of  those  mountain  pinnacles  which 
tower  above  him  till  they  hide  their  snow- 
capped summits  in  the  very  clouds  of  heaven ; 
he  sees  the  precipice  which  yawns  at  his 
very  feet ;  he  becomes  conscious  of  dangers 
of  which  he  had  previously  no  idea ;  and  he 
is  grateful  to  the  morning  light  which  cer- 


tainly has  discovered  to  him  a  vision  of 
unsuspected  beauty,  and  which  probably  has 
saved  him  from  an  untimely  death.  And 
what  is  the  question  of  our  Blessed  Lord  in 
the  text,  but  the  very  light  of  heaven  itself, 
bringing  out  into  sharp  relief  the  real  con- 
ditions of  our  personal  existence  ! 

The  worth  of  a  soul. — We  know  the  force 
and  majesty  of  the  thoughts  of  Pascal.  The 
realms  of  space  and  the  worlds  in  them  are 
full  of  grandeur  in  his  philosophy ;  but  there 
is  one  thing  compared  with  which  all  this 
vast  material  universe  is  nothing.  "  All  the 
bodies,  the  stars,  the  firmament,  the  earth 
and  all  its  kingdoms,  are  not  worth  one 
soul;  for  that  soul  knows  both  itself  and 
them,  and  they  know  nothing." 

The  soul  the  chief  concern. — When  the 
steamer  London  was  lost  some  years  ago 
on  the  English  coast,  among  the  many  sad 
tales  told  in  connexion  with  the  shipwreck, 
I  recollect  reading  of  one  in  some  respects 
the  saddest  of  all.  When  the  condition  of 
the  ship  was  hopeless,  one  of  the  passengers 
had  gone  down  to  his  cabin,  which  was 
already  under  water,  and  had  with  some 
difficulty  found  his  trunk,  which  he  had 
carried  up  to  the  deck.  The  captain,  who 
was  standing  by,  waiting  in  silence  for  the 
inevitable  catastrophe,  shook  his  head  as  he 
saw  what  the  poor  man  had  done.  He  had 
saved  his  trunk;  his  life  would  be  gone  in 
a  moment. 

What  then?— An  aged  Christian  once  "^ 
asked  a  young  man  who  was  just  entering 
business  and  laying  out  his  plans  for  life, 
"  What  are  you  going  to  do  ?  You  are  about 
to  settle  in  business,  I  understand."  "  Yes." 
"  And  what  do  you  intend  then ? "  "I  shall 
marry."  "And  what  then?"  "I  hope  to 
make  a  fortune."  "  And  what  then  ? "  "I 
shall  enter  public  life."  "  And  what  then  ?  " 
"  I  hope  that  I  may  make  a  family  reputa- 
tion." "And  what  then?"  "Well,  1  sup- 
pose I  shall  grow  old  and  die."  "  And  what 
then  1 "  The  young  man  was  silent.  He 
had  never  looked  so  far  ahead. 

The  legend  of  Ninus. — There  is  a  legend 
of  Ninus,  the  monarch  of  Assyria,  that  he 
had  an  ocean  of  gold  and  riches  more  than 
the  sand  of  the  Caspian  Sea,  but  that  he 
never  offered  sacrifice,  nor  worshipped  God, 
nor  administered  justice — in  a  word,  he  spent 
a  life  of  selfishness  and  indulgence  with 
no  sense  of  accountability  to  God  or  man. 
"  This  man  is  dead,"  says  the  old  chronicler. 
"  Behold  his  sepulchre ;  and  now  hear  where 
Ninus  is"  (he  is  supposed  to  be  speaking 
from  his  tomb).  "  Sometime  I  was  Ninus 
and  drew  the  breath  of  a  living  man,  but 
now  I  am  nothing  but  clay ;  I  have  nothing 
but  what  I  served  to  myself  in  lust — that 
was  and  is  all  my  portion.  The  wealth  with 
which  I  was  blessed  mine  enemies  shall 
bear  away.  I  am  gone  to  Tartarus,  and 
when  I  went  thither  I  neither  carried  gold 

313 


CHAP.  vm.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


nor  horse  nor  chariot.    I  that  wore  a  crown 
am  now  a  little  heap  of  dust." 

#  Not  much  left. — It  is  said  of  Saladin,  also 
called  the  Great,  that  just  before  he  gave 
his  last  sigh  he  called  the  herald  who  had 
carried  his  banner  before  him  in  all  his 
battles,  and  commanded  him  to  fasten  to 
the  top  of  a  lance  the  shroud  in  which  he 
was  so  soon  to  be  buried.  "  Go,"  said  he, 
"  unfurl  the  banner,  and  whilst  you  lift  up 
this  standard  proclaim,  '  Saladin  the  mighty 
monarch  is  gone,  and  has  taken  no  more 
with  him  than  what  you  see.'" 

As  in  life,  so  in  death. — There  is  a  story 
of  one  that,  being  often  reproved  for  his 
ungodly  and  vicious  life,  and  exhorted  to  re- 
pentance, would  still  answer  that  it  was  but 
saying  three  words  at  his  death,  and  he  was 
sure  to  be  saved.  Perhaps  the  three  words 
he  meant  were,  Miserere  inei  Dens  ("God, 
have  mercy  on  me").  But  one  day  riding 
over  a  bridge,  his  horse  stumbled,  and  both 
were  falling  into  the  river,  when  in  the 
moment  of  that  precipitation  he  only  cried, 
Capiat  omnia  diaoolus  ("Horse  and  man 
and  all  to  the  devil ").  Three  words  he  had, 
but  not  such  as  he  should  have  had.  He 
had  been  so  familiar  with  the  devil  all  his 
life  that  he  thinks  of  none  else  at  his  death. 
Thus  it  usually  is,  that  a  wicked  life  hath 
a  wicked  end.  He  that  travels  the  way  of 
hell  all  his  lifetime,  it  is  impossible  in  the 
end  of  the  journey  he  should  arrive  at  heaven. 
A  worldly  man  dies  rather  thinking  of  his 
gold  than  his  God  Some  die  jeering,  some 
raging;  some  in  one  distemper,  some  in 
another  way.     They  lived  so,  and  so  they  die. 

yj  Crushed  by  gold. — When  Rome  was  be- 
sieged, it  is  said  of  the  daughter  of  its  ruler 
that  she  saw  the  golden  bracelets  on  the 
arm:-  of  the  enemy,  and  sent  word  to  them 
thai  she  would  betray  her  city  and  deliver 
t  into  their  hands  if  they  would  give  her 
'.heir  bracelets.  They  readily  accepted  her 
proposition,  and  before  sunset  the  daughter 
had  secretly  opened  one  of  the  gates  to  the 
city,  and  as  the  enemy  entered  they  threw 
upon  her  their  golden  bracelets,  and  also 
their  shields,  until  the  great  weight  crushed 
her  to  death.  How  many  poor  souls  to-day 
are  striving  to  gain  that  which  will  in  the  end 
prove  the  means  of  their  soul's  destruction  1 
Much  lost  for  little. — When  Lysimachus 
was  engaged  in  a  war  with  the  Getae,  he 
was  so  tormented  by  thirst  that  he  offered 
his  kingdom  to  his  enemies  for  permission 
to  quench  it.  His  exclamation,  when  he 
bad  drunk  the  water  with  which  they  fur- 
nished him,  is  striking.  "  Ah,  wretched  me, 
who  for  such  a  momentary  gratification 
have  lost  so  great  a  kingdom  !  "  How  ap- 
plicable is  this  to  the  case  of  those  who  for 
the  momentary  pleasures  of  sin  part  with 
the  kingdom  of  heaven ! 

The  folly  of  sacrificing  eternity  to  time. — 
When  Sir  Thomas  More  was  in  prison,  his 

314 


wife  and  children  entreated  him  to  yield  to 
the  king.  "For  so  many  years,"  said  his 
wife,  "  we  might  yet  live  together :  why  then 
can  you,  in  the  flower  of  your  age,  bring 
yourself  and  our  family  to  the  worst  mis- 
fortunes ? "  "  How  many  years,"  said  he, 
"  do  you  suppose  I  can  yet  live  ?  "  "  At  least 
twenty,"  said  she.  "What  a  foolish  ex- 
change," exclaimed  the  Chancellor,  "for 
twenty  years  of  life  here  below,  and  very 
likely  not  so  much,  that  I  should  give  up 
life  eternal  and  condemn  myself  to  endless 
torments  1  Better  lose  all  than  my  soul :  '  for 
what  does  it  profit  a  man  to  gain  the  whole 
world  and  lose  his  soul  ? ' " 

Ver.  37.  The  value  of  a  soul. — It  was  doubt- 
less when  standing  in  full  view  of  the  niched 
rock  cut  by  Greeks  for  the  idol  Pan,  face 
to  face  with  the  lustrous  marble  temple  to 
"  divine  Augustus  "  of  the  Romans  at  Caesarea 
Philippi,  that  Christ  said,  "  What  shall  a 
man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul?"  To 
Him  belonged  this  costly  adoration,  squan- 
dered at  the  feet  of  idols;  and  He  is  a 
jealous  God.  There  before  His  very  eyes 
were  the  tokens  of  a  false  love.  Jealousy 
in  the  purest  woman's  heart,  at  sight  of  love- 
tokens  bestowed  upon  another  which  were 
rightfully  her  own,  is  a  severe,  a  biting 
thing,  killing  the  one,  or  the  two,  or  the 
three.  Observe  how  poor  and  inadequate  a 
thing  is  our  English  word  "jealousy"  with 
which  to  portray  the  Divine  emotion.  Oar 
Blessed  Lord  laments  over  the  value  of  a 
soul  whose  devotion  is  snatched  from  Him- 
self ;  loves  it  all  the  more ;  condemns  it  with 
the  unspeakable  condemnation  of  wounded 
love  ;  asks,  "  Once  lost,  what  shall  man  give 
in  exchange,  to  get  it  back  again?"  His 
"jealousy"  drives  Him  to  the  Cross,  that 
He  may  win  His  own  again — the  love  of  a 
priceless  human  soul.  Let  human  jealousy 
learn  a  lesson.  Lift  yourself  up  on  a  cross, 
that  you  may  draw  unto  yourself  the  heart 
you  think  you  have  lost. — E.  J.  Haynes. 

Ver.  38.  Confession  of  Christ. — In  his 
Confessions  St.  Augustine  relates  a  story 
of  Victorinus,  an  eminent  man  at  Rome, 
who  had  won  the  respect  of  a  large  number 
of  his  countrymen,  among  whom  were  many 
heathen.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  dawned 
upon  his  heart,  and  the  light  of  Christ  therein 
shone,  he  went  direct  to  one  of  his  friends, 
and  told  him  that  he  was  a  Christian.  The 
friend  replied,  "  I  will  never  believe  it  until 
I  see  you  openly  profess  your  new  faith  in 
the  church."  This  text  came  to  him  with 
such  force  that  he  went  back  with  his  friend, 
and  bold]y  and  openly  confessed  Christ  as 
his  Saviour. 

Confession  of  Christ. — A  Roman  emperor 
said  to  a  Greek  architect,  "Build  me  a 
colosseum,  a  grand  colosseum,  and  if  it  suits 
me  I  will  crown  you  in  the  presence  of  all 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  IX. 


the  people,  and  I  will  make  a  great  day  of 
festival  on  your  account."  The  architect 
did  his  work — did  it  magnificently,  planned 
the  building,  and  looked  after  its  construc- 
tion. The  building  was  finished,  the  opening 
day  arrived,  the  emperor  and  the  architect 
were  in  the  colosseum.  Amid  loud  cheers  the 
emperor  arose  and  announced  that  the  day 
was  set  apart  in  honour  of  the  Greek  architect, 
and  everything  must  be  done  to  his  honour. 
11  Let  us  make  merry  and  enjoy  ourselves ; 
bring  out  those  Christians,  and  let  us  see 
the  lions  destroy  them."  A  group  of  im- 
prisoned Christians  were  led  forth,  and  a 
number  of  half-starved  lions  turned  loose 
among  them.  They  were  soon  devoured, 
and  the  architect  slowly  arose,  and  in  a 
firm  though  gentle  voice  said,  "  I  too  am  a 
Christian."  The  howling  mob  seized  him 
and  flung  him  to  the  fierce  beasts,  who  soon 
tore  his  limbs  from  his  body.  This  is  con- 
fession, true  and  undefiled.  It  is  easy  enough 
to  confess  Christ  before  our  own  Church  and 
friends,  but  do  we  confess  Him  among  those 
that  revile  Him?  Do  we  go  among  men 
that  despise  His  precepts,  and  by  our  very 
life  tell  of  Him  ?  If  we  do  not,  we  do  not 
do  our  duty  as  His  followers. 

Confession  of  Christ  unknown  to  nominal 
Christians. — A  Hindoo  of  rank  was  troubled 
in  his  conscience  on  the  subject  of  a  future 
state.  He  had  heard  of  Christians,  and 
longed  to  converse  with  them  about  their 
religion,  and  to  know  who  Christ  was.  So 
he  visited  England,  the  Christians'  land, 
supplied  with  introductions  to  some  leading 
people.  Being  asked  to  a  great  dinner,  he 
turned  to  his  neighbour  in  the  course  of 
conversation,  and  said,  "  Can  you  tell  me 
something  about  Christ,  the  founder  of  your 
religion  1 "      "  Hush,"   replied  his   new  ac- 


quaintance, "  we  do  not  speak  of  such  things 
at  dinner-parties."  Subsequently  he  was 
invited  to  a  large  ball.  Dancing  with  a 
young  and  fashionable  lady,  he  took  an 
opportunity  of  asking  her  who  the  founder 
of  her  religion,  Jesus  Christ,  was.  And  again 
he  was  warned  that  a  ball  was  no  place  to 
introduce  such  subjects.  Strange,  thought 
the  Hindoo,  are  these  Christians  in  England. 
They  will  not  speak  of  their  religion,  nor 
inform  me  about  Christ,  its  founder. 

No  silent  partners. — "  I  come,  sir,"  said  a 
business  man  to  a  minister  of  the  gospel, 
"to  ask  if  Jesus  Christ  will  take  me  into 
the  firm  as  a  silent  partner."  The  reply 
was,  "  Jesus  Christ  takes  no  silent  partners ; 
the  firm  must  be  'Jesus  Christ  &  Co.,'  and 
the  names  of  the  ■  Co.,'  though  they  may 
occupy  a  subordinate  place,  must  all  be 
written  out  on  the  signboard." 

Power  of  confession. — In  relating  his  ex- 
perience during  the  Peninsular  War,  Captain 
Watson  says :  "  I  was  nominated  to  sit  on  a 
garrison  court-martial.  A  number  of  officers 
of  different  ranks  and  regiments  were  present 
on  the  occasion,  and  before  the  proceedings 
commenced  some  of  them  indulged  in  loose 
and  sceptical  observations.  'Alas,'  thought 
I,  'here  are  many  not  ashamed  to  speak 
openly  for  their  master,  and  shall  I  hold  my 
peace  and  refrain  when  the  honour  and 
cause  of  Him  who  has  had  mercy  on  me  are 
called  in  question  ? '  I  looked  for  wisdom 
and  assistance  from  on  high,  and  I  was 
enabled  to  speak  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
in  a  way  that  astonished  my  hearers  and 
myself.  The  Lord  was  pleased  to  give  what 
I  said  a  favourable  reception,  and  not  an- 
other improper  word  was  uttered  by  them 
during  my  stay  in  that  room." 


CHAPTER  IX. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  2.  Transfigured. — A  strong  word,  implying  that  the  change  was  not  due  to  any 
external  influence,  but  proceeded  from  Christ's  own  inner  being.  "  While  the  form  of  our 
Lord  remained  the  same,  the  fashion  of  that  form  underwent  a  change.  His  whole  sacred 
Person  seemed  to  be  living  with  light — light  flashing  outward  from  within,  and  rendering 
luminous  and  bright  in  unspeakable  glory  His  face  and  form  and  dress." 

Ver.  3.  Omit  as  snow.  The  Evangelists  seem  to  vie  with  one  another  in  their  efforts  to 
depict  the  splendour  and  brilliancy  of  this  "  golden  link  in  the  iron  chain  that  bound  our 
Lord's  career."  Cp.  Matt.  xvii.  2 ;  Luke  ix.  29 :  see  also  John  i.  14  ;  1  John  i.  1 ; 
2  Pet.  i.  16. 

Ver.  12.  See  R.V.  for  punctuation.     Set  at  nought. — Treated  as  a  nonentity. 

Ver.  31.  Is  delivered. — Is  being  delivered.  The  last  stage  of  His  ministry,  which  was 
to  culminate  in  His  threefold  "  delivery  "—the  Father's  surrender  of  the  Son,  the  Son's 
surrender  of  Himself,  and  His  betrayal  by  Judas — had  now  set  in. 

315 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  35.  If  any  man  desire. — If  any  one  wishes,  as  chap.  viii.  34. 

Vers.  42-47.  Offend. — Lay  a  trap  for.     See  on  chap.  vi.  3. 

Ver.  42.  It  is  better  for  him. — A  happy  thing  it  is  for  him  rather.    Cp.  1  Cor.  ix.  15. 

Vers.  44,  46.  Probably  spurious. 

Ver.  47.  Hell  fire.— The  Gehenna.  "  The  Ravine  of  Hinnom,"  also  called  "  Topheth  " 
(2  Kings  xxiii.  10 ;  Isa.  xxx.  33),  is  described  in  Josh,  xviii.  16  as  on  the  south  of  Mount 
Zion.  Total  length  a  mile  and  a  half.  A  deep  retired  glen,  shut  in  by  rugged  cliffs,  bleak 
mountain-sides  rising  over  all.  Scene  of  barbarous  rites  of  Molech  and  Chemosh  in  times 
of  Ahaz  and  Manasseh  (2  Kings  xvi.  3  ;  2  Chron.  xxviii.  3 ;  Jer.  vii.  31)  ;  in  consequence  of 
which  it  was  polluted  by  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  10,  13,  14) ;  from  which  time  it  seems  to 
have  become  the  common  cesspool  of  the  city.  These  inhuman  rites  and  subsequent  cere- 
monial defilements  caused  the  later  Jews  to  regard  it  with  horror  and  detestation,  and  they 
applied  the  name  given  to  the  valley  to  the  place  of  torment. —  G.  F.  Maclear,  D.D. 

Ver.  48.  Quoted  from  Isa.  lxvi.  24.  The  words  are  not  to  be  taken  to  mean  more  here 
than  they  do  there. 

Ver.  49.  Salted  with  fire. — Explanatory  of  the  words  immediately  preceding.  Either 
here  on  earth,  or  else  hereafter  in  the  Gehenna,  all  the  impurities  and  imperfections  of  our 
fallen  nature  must  be  burnt  out  by  the  cleansing  fires  of  discipline  and  chastisement,  in 
order  that  we  may  become  an  acceptable  sacrifice  unto  God.  Salted  with  salt.— It  is  Divine 
grace  alone — and  not  in  any  sense  our  own  merits — that  makes  us  "a  reasonable,  holy, 
and  lively  sacrifice."    This  second  clause  of  ver.  49  is  probably  an  early  marginal  gloss. 

Ver.  50.  Here  there  seems  to  be  a  transition  of  thought  from  the  Divine  Source  to  the 
human  receptacles  of  grace.  Our  Lord  is  speaking  to  "  the  twelve  "  (ver.  35),  whom  He 
has  already  styled,  as  His  disciples,  "the  salt  of  the  earth"  (Matt.  v.  13).  He  now  warns 
them  against  the  tendency  to  factiousness  and  self-seeking,  which,  if  indulged,  will  thwart 
all  their  efforts  to  purify  the  world.  And  then  He  winds  up,  "  Entertain  among  yourselves 
the  spiritual  salt  of  self-repression  and  self-discipline,  and  be  at  peace  with  one  another." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  2—13. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xvii.  1-13 ;  Luke  ix.  28-36.) 

The  Transfiguration. — Unlike  other  prominent  events  in  Christ's  life,  the 
Transfiguration  finds  no  place  in  the  ordinary  cycle  of  art  representations  in  the 
early  Church.  It  is  represented  emblematically  in  mosaics  of  the  sixth  and 
eight  centuries,  but  it  was  reserved  for  Raphael's  genius  to  portray  it  in  a 
worthy  manner.  His  noble  picture  in  the  Vatican  was  the  apotheosis  of  his 
art ;  but  death  snatched  the  brush  from  his  hand  before  it  was  finished,  as  if 
Providence  would  teach  us  that  no  human  art  or  genius,  tongue  or  pen,  can 
sufficiently  and  completely  portray  that  sublime  spectacle. 

I.  The  scene. — It  was  when  the  Master  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Csesarea 
Philippi,  far  away  in  the  north  of  Palestine,  that  the  event  occurred.  To  any 
one  visiting  the  spot,  and  seeing  the  stupendous  form  of  snowy  Hermon  rising 
before  him,  till  its  summit  has  left  the  valley  eleven  thousand  feet  below,  it 
appears  almost  certain,  it  is  said,  that  this  was  the  high  mountain  to  which  the 
Saviour  led  His  chosen  disciples.  Through  a  scene  of  surpassing  loveliness 
they  wend  their  way.  At  every  step  the  prospect  expands,  till  at  length  a 
glorious  panorama  opens  before  them,  "  embracing  a  great  part  of  Syria,  from 
the  sea  to  Damascus,  from  the  Lebanon  and  the  gorge  of  the  Litany  to  the 
mountains  of  Moab ;  or  down  the  Jordan  valley  to  the  Dead  Sea ;  or  over 
Galilee  and  Samaria,  and  on  to  Jerusalem,"  all  bathed  in  the  splendours  of  the 
setting  sun.  But  these  sunset  glories  presently  fade.  Night  falls.  The  stars 
one  by  one  shine  forth.  The  moon  rises  in  silvery  radiance,  reflected  back  in 
dazzling  beauty  from  the  broad  patches  of  snow  on  the  mountain-side.  And 
now  we  see  Jesus  bowed  in  prayer  in  the  moonlight,  His  disciples  praying  with 
Him  a  short  distance  apart,  till,  overcome  by  fatigue,  they  sink  in  slumber. 
But  what  sudden  light  is  that  which  bursts  forth  upon  the  scene,  hiding  by  its 
dazzling   brilliancy  all   the  glories  of  the  moonlit  night  ?     The   disciples  are 

316 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


wakened  by  the  splendour,  and  their  astonished  eyes  behold  a  marvellous  sight. 
Jesus  is  transfigured  before  them.  His  face  shines  with  the  brightness  of  the 
noonday  sun ;  His  raiment  is  white  and  glistering  ;  and  as  they  gaze  in  a 
transport  of  awe,  behold  !  two  shining  forms  appear  with  Him  in  glory,  whom 
they,  by  the  intuition  which  is  given  to  the  spirit  in  moments  of  ecstasy, 
recognise  to  be  none  other  than  Moses  and  Elias.  The  apostles  gaze  in  wonder 
and  adoration,  till  presently  there  comes  a  bright  cloud,  which  enwraps  in  its 
folds  of  light  the  three  figures.  It  is  the  Shechinah,  and  the  apostles  fear  as 
they  see  the  face  of  Christ  and  the  faces  of  Moses  and  Elias  disappearing  within 
it.  And  now  from  out  that  cloud  of  awful  glory  comes  a  voice,  saying,  "  This 
is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  :  hear  ye  Him." 

II.  Its  purpose. — 1.  It  was  intended  to  strengthen  and  brace  the  spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  solemn  and  awful  work  which  lay  before  Him,  culminating 
in  Gethsemane  and  Calvary.  2.  As  regards  the  purpose  of  the  Transfiguration 
with  reference  to  Moses  and  Elias,  it  is  difficult  to  speak  with  any  degree  of 
positiveness.  Remembering,  however,  what  St.  Peter  tells  us,  that  the  angels 
bend  over  the  mystery  of  redemption  as  the  cherubim  bent  over  the  mercy- seat 
on  the  ark,  desiring  "  to  look  into "  its  secret  meaning,  we  may  infer  that 
glorified  saints,  such  as  Moses  and  Elias,  must  have  felt  the  most  earnest  and 
absorbing  desire  to  understand  the  mystery  of  the  atonement  which  Christ  was 
about  to  make  for  their  sins  and  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  For  them 
the  Transfiguration  must  have  been  a  new  revelation  of  the  wisdom  and  glory 
of  God,  in  the  consummation  of  His  eternal  purpose  to  redeem  a  ruined  world. 
3.  So  far  as  the  three  apostolic  witnesses  of  the  Transforation  were  concerned, 
its  intent  is  perfectly  clear.  They  could  not  grasp  the  conception  of  a  suffering 
Messiah.  It  was  an  offence  to  them.  So  they  are  taken  up  into  the  Holy 
Mount,  and  shewn  the  great  lawgiver  and  the  great  prophet  of  Israel  engaged 
in  ecstatic  converse  with  their  glorified  Master  concerning  the  decease  which  He 
was  to  accomplish  at  Jerusalem.  The  lesson  was  plain ;  they  had  misread  the 
prophecies :  the  Messiah  of  Moses  and  the  prophets  must  be  a  suffering,  dying 
Messiah.  And  this  Jesus,  whom  they  are  almost  ready  to  forsake,  because  He 
tells  them  He  is  to  die  the  shameful  death  of  the  Cross,  God  the  Father,  on  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration,  crowns  with  honour  and  glory. 

III.  Its  significance. — 1.  It  marks  the  topmost  step  in  the  progressive 
glorification  of  the  manhood  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  rose  to  that  height  of  glory 
because  of  the  inner  power  of  His  holy  life,  because  of  the  transfiguring  virtue 
of  His  consecrated  soul.  The  doors  of  eternal  glory  open  before  the  Son  of 
Man  :  He  has  only  to  enter  in,  to  step  up  from  the  summit  of  Hermon  into  the 
presence  of  God  Himself,  and  to  sit  down  in  glory  for  ever  !  But  He  puts  aside 
this  possible  glorification ;  He  leaves  all  that  glory  which  He  might  have  had 
with  the  angels  of  God  and  the  glorified  saints,  and  descends  into  the  valley  of 
humiliation,  into  this  desert  of  sin  and  sorrow  and  suffering,  into  the  dark  and 
gloomy  depths  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary,  in  order  to  redeem  a  world  !  2.  It 
may  be  looked  upon  as  the  inauguration  of  the  New  Covenant.  As  on  rugged 
Sinai  was  inaugurated  the  law  which  proved  a  ministration  of  death,  so  on 
snowy  Hermon,  amid  a  scene  of  exquisite  natural  beauty,  was  inaugurated  the 
gospel  by  that  voice  from  the  excellent  glory.  God  proclaims  Him  the  Head 
and  Lord  of  all.  "  Hear  ye  Him."  You  have  heard  and  obeyed  Moses,  you 
have  heard  and  obeyed  the  prophets  :  now  hear  and  obey  Christ  the  Son  of  God. 
3.  It  represents  to  us  the  investiture  of  Jesus  Christ  as  High  Priest.  From 
this  point  on  to  the  end  Christ's  prophetical  office  appears  to  recede  more  and 
more,  while  His  priestly  office  comes  into  prominence.  From  Hermon  He 
descended  into  the  valley  of  humiliation,  and  moved  right  on  to  the  altar  of 
sacrifice,  even  His  Cross  on  Calvary.     4.  It  is  above  all  designed  to  exhibit  to  us 

317 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


the  transcendent  value  of  the  sufferings  and  death  of  Christ.  In  the  Basilica  at 
Ravenna  there  is  a  mosaic  of  the  sixth  century  representing  in  emblematical 
form  the  Transfiguration  of  Christ, — a  jewelled  cross  set  in  a  circle  of  blue 
studded  with  golden  stars,  in  the  midst  of  which  appears  the  face  of  Christ,  the 
Saviour  of  the  world  ;  while  from  the  cloud  close  by  is  thrust  forth  a  Divine 
hand  that  points  to  the  Cross.  Those  early  artists  were  right  in  their  reading 
of  this  sublime  event.  The  Transfiguration  sets  the  Cross  of  Christ  in  the  centre, 
surrounds  it  with  a  radiant  firmament  of  God's  promises  and  of  the  prophecies 
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  shews  us  the  hand  of  God  Himself  emerging  from 
the  cloud  of  glory  and  pointing  to  the  Cross,  as  though  God  the  Father  would 
say  to  man  what  John  the  Baptist  said :  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  5.  Its  prophetic  significance.  Standing  on 
Hermon  with  these  three  apostles,  a  long  vista  stretches  out  before  us  into  the 
distant  future,  including  in  its  scope  that  great  day  when  the  Son  of  God  shall 
take  to  Himself  His  power,  His  mighty  power,  in  order  to  reign.  His  kingdom 
has  come  at  last ;  and  what  is  the  manner  of  it  ?  It  is  a  kingdom  of  redeemed 
men — of  men  who  stand  like  Moses  and  Elias  with  Christ  in  glory,  not  only 
redeemed,  not  only  delivered  from  sin  and  suffering  and  sorrow  and  trial  and 
pain,  but  transformed  and  transfigured  with  that  same  glory  by  which  the 
person  of  Jesus  is  enwrapped.  6.  It  symbolises  the  transformation  and  trans- 
figuration of  our  spirits,  our  whole  reasonable,  moral,  and  spiritual  nature,  into 
the  image  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Lessons. — 1.  If  we  desire  to  behold  the  glory  of  the  transfigured  Redeemer, 
we  must  climb  with  Him  the  mount  of  prayer.  2.  The  metamorphic,  trans- 
figuring power  of  a  life  of  prayer.  I  have  seen  the  face  of  a  dying  servant  of 
Christ  lit  up,  whether  by  a  light  from  the  unseen  world,  or  by  a  radiance 
shining  out  from  within,  I  could  not  tell ;  but  in  either  case  it  was  a  kind  of 
transfiguration  which  only  those  attain  who  have  been  often  with  Jesus  on  the 
mountain-top  of  prayer.  3.  Consecration  to  the  path  of  suffering  is  the 
preparation  for  transfiguration.  4.  The  true  relation  of  the  contemplative  to 
the  active  life.  We  cannot  spend  our  lives  on  the  mountain-top  of  vision, 
or  of  ecstasy,  or  of  contemplation.  The  voice  of  God  calls  us  down  to  grapple 
with  the  problems  and  the  duties  which  wait  on  every  side.  Sin  is  here; 
sorrow  is  here  ;  darkness  is  here ;  unbelief  is  here.  If  God  has  revealed  to 
us  the  glory  of  His  Son,  it  is  not  that  we  should  give  our  lives  up  to  its 
contemplation,  but  that  we  should  gain  thereby  inspiration  and  strength  to 
tread  the  path  of  duty  or  of  suffering — that  we  should  consecrate  ourselves 
to  the  work  of  lightening  the  darkness,  and  lessening  the  suffering,  and 
cleansing  the  defilement  of  the  world  in  which  we  live. — R.  H.  McKim,  D.D. 

Ver.  5.  "  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here." — We  need  not  inquire  too  closely  what 
thoughts  were  uppermost  in  the  apostle's  mind  when  he  said  this.  If  asked,  he 
could  not  perhaps  have  told  himself.  He  was  not  himself.  Suddenly  waking 
out  of  sleep  (Luke  ix.  32),  he  and  his  fellow-disciples  found  themselves  the 
amazed  spectators  of  a  vision  of  glory  for  the  contemplation  of  which  neither 
their  minds  nor  their  bodily  organs  were  framed.  All  that  we  can  certainly 
infer  from  this  involuntary  exclamation  of  Peter's  is  that  his  mind  was  cast 
into  a  pleasurable  frame,  so  blissful  that  he  longed  for  its  continuance. 

I.  The  state  of  mind  which  gave  rise  to  this  exclamation. — 1.  It  was  the 
acknowledgment  of  a  present  good.  Peter  felt  himself  happy,  and  at  once 
avowed  it.  He  looked  neither  backwards  nor  forwards ;  he  saw  no  more  than 
what  was  before  his  eyes.  The  narrow  plot  of  ground  on  which  he  and  His 
companions  lay,  and  so  much  more  as  would  suffice  to  erect  three  tabernacles 
upon,  was  then  all  the  world  to  him.     Such  moments  and  such  feelings  were 

318 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


rarely  granted  to  those  who  shared  the  human  condition  of  the  Son  of  God. 
At  other  times  they  said  not,  "It  is  good,"  but  "When  will  it  be  good?" 
(Matt.  xix.  27).     When  the  past  supplies  nothing  but  painful  recollections,  and 
the  present  nothing   but  painful  experiences,  it  is  our  duty  to  look  forward 
and  to  inquire,  When  will  our  happiness  begin  ?     But  when  we  are  happy,  it 
is  equally  our  duty  to  be  sensible  of  it — to  feel  it,  enjoy  it,  dwell  upon  it. 
Let  us  cherish  such  moments  as  the  oases  of  this  life.     This  applies  especially 
to  things  spiritual.     As  "the  elect  of  God,  holy  and  beloved,"  possessing  "the 
firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,"  we  ought  to  "abound  in  hope,"   "with  all  joy  and 
peace  in  believing."      2.    Happiness   depends  upon   the  state  of   the   feelings. 
"  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,"  says  Peter.     What !  good  to  have  nowhere  to 
lay  one's  head  ?  good  to  be  out  all  night  in  a  bleak  desert  place,  without  shelter 
or  food  ?  good  to  be  far  from  home,  lost  to  the  world  and  to  the  endearing 
relations  of  family  life  ?     This  is  all  true,  would  Peter  have  replied,  but  it  is  all 
beside  the  mark.     Happiness  or  wretchedness  is  in  the  mind  (Prov.  xiv.   10). 
Outward  circumstances  can  only  influence  our  happiness  by  acting  upon  our 
feelings.     Let  us  look  well,  then,  to  our  inward  frames,  and  watch  over  the 
thoughts  which  arise  in  our  minds  (Prov.  iv.  23).     3.  Peter  here  mistook  a 
mere  transitory  frame  for  a  permanent  state  of  mind.     He  said,  "  It  is  good 
for  us  to  be  here,"  and  so  far  he  was  right ;  but  his  thoughts  went  further  than 
this ;  he  said  in  his  heart,  It  would  be  good  for  us  to  be  always  here — to  gaze 
for  ever  on  "  the  King  in  His  beauty."     The  same  feeling  made  the  apostles 
dread  our  Lord's  departure  ;  but  He  shews  them  that  there  is  a  higher  "  good  " 
dependent  on  it  (John  xvi.  6,  7).     So  we  too  have  our  short-lived  and  occasional 
frames  as  well  as  our  general  and  permanent  states  of  mind  ;  and  we  are  in 
danger  of  mistaking  one  for  the  other.     (1)  In  regard  to  temporal  gratifications. 
When  we  find  ourselves  in  some  unusually  agreeable  and  enjoyable  situation, 
does  not  our  vain  heart  unconsciously  suggest  to  us,  Would  that  I  were  always 
so !     Oh  that  to-morrow  might  be  as  this  day,   and  still  more  abundant ! — 
forgetting  that  it  is  the  nature  of  such  delicious  moments  to  be  but  moments  ; 
that  these  pleasures  would  lose  half  their  sweetness  if  they  did  not  come  and 
go — just  shew  themselves  and  disappear.     (2)  In  respect  to  spiritual  delights. 
If  you  possess  any  religious  sensibility,  if  you  ever  commune  with  your  own 
heart,  if  you  have  any  experience  of  prayer,  if  you  ever  long  to  see  the  Divine 
power  and  glory  as  you  have  seen  them  in  the  sanctuary, — if  in  any  of  these 
ways  you  have  "  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,"  you  will  understand.     At 
such  moments  has  not  the  thought  of  your  heart  been — Vain  world,  adieu  ! 
It  is  good  for  us  to  be  always  so  !     Such  is  the  language  of  nature ;  but  let  us 
beware  how  we  listen  to  it.     Cherish  such  moments ;  acknowledge  them ;  be 
grateful  for  them  ;  enjoy  them  while  they  last ;  but  do  not  think  of  "  building 
tabernacles  for  them."     They  were  never  meant  to  dwell  with  the  tumult  of 
the  world  or  the  sober  realities  of  life.     Even  as  spiritual  refreshments  they 
are  not  so  good  for  us  as  many  other  fruits  which  hang  from  the  less  elevated 
branches  of  the  tree  of  life.     The  true  "  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing "  is  not  that  which  goes  out  of  the  heart,  but  that  which  stays  in  it, 
and  "  keeps  as  with  a  garrison  the  heart  and  mind  of  its  possessor,  through 
Christ  Jesus"  (Phil.  iv.  7). 

II.  Some  common  occasions  in  life  to  which  the  words  of  the  text  apply. — 
1.  "It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here" — in  the  house  of  God.  Here  we  may  by 
faith  "  behold  His  glory."  Moses  and  Elias,  the  law  and  the  prophets,  those 
lesser  lights  and  glories  of  which  the  meridian  is  past,  still  appear,  as  tributary 
to  His  brightness,  like  stars  lingering  after  the  sun  is  risen.  And  although 
"no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  yet  in  His  Word  and  Sacraments  we 
behold,  if  not  the  Divinity  itself,  at  least  the  bright  overshadowing  cloud  which 

319 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


at  once  veils  and  indicates  the  Divine  Presence.  2.  "It  is  good  for  us  to  be" 
in  the  house  of  affliction  (Eccles.  vii.  2,  3).  Who  that  believes  this  would  not 
take  the  wings  of  a  dove  and  fly  from  that  mirth  whose  end  is  heaviness  to  that 
heaviness  whose  fruit  is  holiness  ?  3.  "  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  "  in  this  mixed 
and  chequered  world.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from  conceiving  a  world 
without  pain,  or  a  world  without  sorrow,  or  a  world  without  sin  ;  nor  from 
wishing  that  our  own  lot  were  cast  there.  But  however  such  imaginary  systems 
might  be  suited  to  their  respective  inhabitants,  let  us  be  assured  of  this,  that 
it  is  good  for  us  to  be  where  we  are.  Only  consider  what  we  are  :  men,  sinful 
men,  mortal  men — each  undergoing  his  separate  trial — all  moving  on  to 
eternity.  To  place  such  beings,  with  such  a  design,  in  a  perfect  and  unmixed 
state  of  existence  would  be  absurd.  The  longer  we  live  in  the  world,  the  firmer 
shall  we  hold  by  this  principle,  that  "  whatever  is,  is  best."  What  a  blessing 
it  is,  e.g.,  that  we  are  not  all  rich,  or  all  poor,  or  all  midway  between  the  two. 
Such  a  dead  level  would  extinguish  some  of  the  noblest  and  holiest  feelings  of 
the  human  heart,  besides  annihilating  half  the  duties  and  all  the  charities  of 
life.  Or  would  you  banish  pain  and  sorrow  from  the  world  ?  But  that,  were 
it  possible,  would  be  the  reverse  of  a  boon,  since  "sweet  are  the  uses  of 
adversity,"  etc.  The  same  line  of  argument  applies  to  differences  in  age, 
temperament,  knowledge,  etc. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  2.  "  After  six  days." — Why  did  it.      In  all  His  promises  He  is  better 

Christ  defer  the  performance  of  His  and  fuller  and  speedier  than  His  word, 

promise  for  six  days  ?     He  deferred  it  — Bishop  Broumrigg. 

to  increase  their  desires  before  it  came,  The  first  week  of  suffering  on  the  part 

their  joys  when  it  came.     To  inflame  of  the  disciples,  previous  to  the  suffer- 

their  desires ;  for  things  easily  come  by  ings   of    the    Lord    Himself.     1.    Its 

are  little   set   by.     To  increase   their  beginning :    the    confession    of    Peter 

joys  ;  for  that  which  hath  been  long  and  the  announcement  of   the  Lord's 

detained  is  at  last  more  sweetly  ob-  sufferings.  2.  Its  employment :  familiar- 

tained.     Moreover,  if  Christ  after  the  ising  their  minds  with  thoughts  of  the 

promise  of  this  vision  had  immediately  Cross.    3.  Its  close  :  a  glorious  Sabbath 

singled  out  some  to  the  participation  on  the  Holy  Mount. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

of  it,  this  would  have  bred  envy  and  The  three  chosen  apostles. — 1.    Peter 

grudging  in  the  rest. — Thos.  Adams.  was  the  forward,  zealous  disciple,  who 

Chr'ist  always  better  than  His  word,  led  the  way  to  the  rest  in  that  noble 
— It  was  after  six  days.  He  stayed  no  confession  of  Christ ;  therefore  he  is 
longer.  Why  ?  He  might  have  deferred  singled  out  to  be  partaker  of  this 
longer.  It  was  in  these  terms  that  He  vision.  Again,  Peter  is  now  overtaken 
promised — before  they  die.  Time  enough  with  an  error,  is  sorry  to  hear  of  Christ's 
therefore  hereafter.  Indeed  for  us,  if  death,  dissuades  Him  from  it ;  by  this 
we  promise  anything  to  God  before  we  vision  therefore  he  is  comforted,  re- 
die,  we  must  do  it  presently,  because  formed,  instructed  in  the  mystery  of 
we  know  not  the  time  of  our  death.  Christ's  death  and  passion.  2.  James 
As  the  Rabbins  say,  if  a  man  vowed  was  appointed  to  be  the  first  apostle 
to  be  a  Nazarite  one  day  before  his  that  should  die  for  Christ :  Herod 
death,  he  was  to  be  so  presently,  sucked  his  blood  first.  As  they  who 
because  this  day  may  be  the  last  day.  must  be  in  the  front  of  the  battle  have 
But  God  knows  these  times  and  seasons,  the  choicest  armour  because  they  are 
and  the  number  of  our  days.  What  to  undertake  desperate  services,  so 
then  %  Yet  after  six  days  He  performs  because  James  was    to    be  the  first 

320 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


in  the  army  royal  therefore   he   was  of  nature  the   hoary   mountain,  grey 

admitted  to   view   the    glory  of   this  with  years  and  white  with  the  snows 

Transfiguration.     3.    John   was    fore-  of  many  ages,  ever  commands  respect 

appointed  to  be  the  publisher  and  pen-  among  its  fellows,  rising  high  overhead 

man  of  Christ's  Divinity ;  and  so  above  — a  Saul  among  the  people — its  wreath 

all   he   soared    highest    into    heaven,  of  perpetual  snow  being  at  once  a  proof 

Therefore   was   this   manifestation   of  of  its  great  age  and  great  height  among 

Christ's  glory   and   Divinity  made  to  the  neighbouring  hills. — W.  F.  Low. 

him.      He   urges   it    (John   i.    14). —  Consecration    to    the    Lord    changes 

Bishop  Brownrigg.  man. — 1 .  Internally ;  he  is  elevated  into 

Why   these  three  ? — We    cannot    for  the  spiritual  world  and  surrounded  by 

a  moment    imagine     that   there  was  blessed   spirits.     2.  Externally ;  he   is 

favouritism  in  the  selection  of  certain  renewed,  adorned,  transfigured.—,/.  P. 

apostles  to  share  in  what  the   others  Lange,  D.D. 

might  not  witness.    It  was  not  because  Transfiguration. — If     our     previous 

these  were  better  loved,  but  because  investigations  have  rightly  led  us  up 

they  were  better  prepared — more  fully  to  this  result,  that  Jesus  was  the  Very 

receptive,    more    readily    acquiescing,  Christ   of   God,   then    this   event    can 

more     entirely    self- surrendering. — A.  scarcely  be  described  as  miraculous — 

Edersheim,  D.D.  at   least   in   such   a   history.      If  we 

What  mountain  ? — 1.    According   to  would   not   expect   it,   it   is   certainly 

an    old     tradition    Christ     had    left  that  which  might  have  been  expected. 

Csesarea   Philippi,    and   the   scene    of  1.    It   was,    and    at    that    particular 

the  Transfiguration  was  Mount  Tabor,  period,  a  necessary  stage  in  the  Lord's 

But   (1)   there   is    no    notice    of   His  history,  viewed  in  the  light  in  which 

departure,  such  as  is  generally  made  the  Gospels  present  Him.     2.  It  was 

by   Mark ;  (2)  on  the  contrary,  it  is  needful   for   His    own    strengthening, 

mentioned  by  him  as  after  the  Trans-  even   as   the   ministry   of   the    angels 

figuration  (ix.  30) ;  (3)  Tabor  was  at  after    the   Temptation.       3.    It    was 

that  time  crowned  by  a  fortified  city,  "good"   for   these  three    disciples    to 

which  would  render  it  unsuitable  for  be  there — not  only  for  future  witness, 

such  a  scene.     2.  Modern  opinion  fixes  but   for   present   help,    and  also  with 

upon   one   of   the    southern   peaks   of  special    reference    to    Peter's    remon- 

Hermon — the  only  "  high  mountain  "  strance  against  Christ's  death -message, 

in  Palestine — as  the  place.  4.  The  Voice  from  heaven,  coming  after 

Mountains. — The   devil  took  Christ  the  announcement  of  His  Death  and 

into  a  mountain  when  he  shewed  Him  Passion,    sealed    that   testimony,    and 

the  kingdoms   of   the  world   and   the  in  view  of  it  proclaimed  Him  as  the 

glory  of  them.     So  our  Saviour  took  Prophet   to  whom   Moses  had  bidden 

His    apostles     up    into    a     mountain  Israel  hearken,  while  it  repeated  the 

when  He  shewed  them  the  kingdom  heavenly    utterance    concerning    Him 

of  heaven  and  glory  of  the   world  to  made  at  His  Baptism.     5.  For  us  all 

come.     Moses  went  up  to  a  mountain  the   interest   of   this   history  lies   not 

to    speak   with    the    Lord  ;    now   the  only  in  the  past ;  it  is  in  the  present 

Lord  goes  up  to  a  mountain  to  speak  also,  and  in  the  future.     To  all  ages 

with  Moses. — Thos.  Adams.  it  is  like  the  vision  of  the  bush  burn- 

Hermon. — It  was  meet  that  Hermon  ing,  in  which  was  the  Presence  of  God. 

should  be  chosen  for  this  high  honour,  And  it  points  us  forward  to  that  trans- 

whose   hoary   head    rose    among    the  formation,  of  which  that  of  Christ  was 

other  hills,  wreathed  with   the  white  the    pledge,    when    "  this    corruptible 

shroud  of  eternal   snow.     Just   as  in  shall  put  on  incorruption."     As  of  old 

human  life  snow-white  locks  are  ever  the  beacon  fires,  lighted  from  hill  to 

a     mark     of    honour    and    command  hill,  announced  to  them  far  away  from 

respect  and  reverence,  so  in  the  world  Jerusalem  the  advent  of  solemn  feast, 

Y  321 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


so  does  the  glory  kindled  on  the  Mount  and  Elias  were  witness  that  He  was 

of  Transfiguration  shine  through  the  obedient  to   the  law.      4.  They   meet 

darkness  of  the  world  and  tell  of  the  that    brought    the    law   with    Christ 

Resurrection  Day. — A.Edersheim,D.D.  who  brought  the  gospel,  to  shew  that 

Prayer  accompanied  by  glory. — Luke  law   and   gospel   must    be  joined   to- 

gives  a  pregnant   hint   in   connecting  gether.      We    must    still    serve    God 

it  with  Christ's  praying,  as  if  the  calm  according  to  His  law,  or  He  will  not 

ecstasy  of  communion  with  the  Father  save  us  according  to  His  gospel.    5.  To 

brought  to  the  surface  the  hidden  glory  shew  that  this  was  the  true  Messiah, 

of  the  Son.     Can  it  be  that  such  glory  to  whom  both  law  and  prophets  bare 

always  accompanied  His  prayers,  and  witness.     6.  Christ  proposed  two  such 

that  its  presence  may  have  been  one  famous  men  as  Moses  and  Elias  to  His 

reason  for  the  sedulous  privacy  of  these,  apostles  for  patterns,  that  their  spirits 

except  on  this  one  occasion,  when  He  might  be  well  tempered  in  them.    Moses, 

desired  that  His  faithful  three  should  a  man  most  meek  on  the  earth  ;  Elias,  a 

be  "  eye-witnesses  of  His  majesty  "  ?  man  exceeding  zealous.    These  two  are 

— A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  brought  hither,  that  the  apostles  may 

learn   to    mix   Moses'   meekness   with 

Ver.  3.  Christ  in  glory. — Look  upon  Elias'  ferventness. —  Thos.  Adams. 

all  the  beauties  that  are  in  the  world,  Christ  the  centre. — All  true  teachers 

the     most    glorious    and    resplendent  of  duty  and  all  inspired  witnesses  for 

creatures,  and  unite   all   their   excel-  God  are  found  at  last  commending  and 

lences,  and  raise  up  thy  thoughts  by  adoring  Christ.     And  all  that  is  good 

them,  and  from  them  to  the  contempla-  fits  into  the  gospel  and  helps  to  pre- 

tion  of  that  glory  which  is  in  heaven,  pare  its  way.     1.  Man,  like  the  Son 

View   the   curious  rarities  of  art  and  of   Man,  has   latent  glory  which   the 

nature.     Is    the    snow,    a    vanishing  presence  of  God  brings  out.     2.  Obey 

meteor,     so     white  ?      the      material  God,    and   the   glorified  befriend  you. 

heavens  so   pure  ?   the  lily  so  beauti-  3.  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  not  the  weak 

f ul  ?    Oh  !  our  Solomon  in  His  glory  is  point  in  the  gospel,  but  its  grandest 

clothed  more  richly  than  any  of  these,  feature — that  into  which  the  glorified 

Eye  hath  not  seen,  ear  hath  not  heard,  desire  to  look. — R.  Glover. 

the  heart  cannot  conceive  the  great-  The  consecration    of  Jesus    to    His 

ness  of  His  glory. — Bishop  Brownrigg.  suffering  and  dying  by  a   visit  from 

the  dwellers  of  heaven.     1.  Necessary, 

Ver.  4.  Why  did  Moses  and  Elias  on  account  of  His  true  humanity. 
appear,  rather  than  David  and  2.  Fitting,  on  account  of  the  high 
Abraham,  from  whose  loins  Jesus  momentousness  of  the  event.  3.  Of 
came,  and  who  were  so  famous  among  great  value  for  the  disciples,  as 
the  people  ?  1.  To  manifest  a  differ-  well  then  as  afterwards.  4.  Con- 
ence  between  the  Lord  and  the  tinually  important  for  the  Christian 
servants.  Moses  and  Elias  were  of  world  of  following  centuries. — J.  J. 
high  esteem  with  the  Jews,  Christ  not  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D. 
regarded,  a  man  of  no  repute  among  ihe  meeting  of  the  Lord  with  Moses 
them;  therefore  He  would  now  shew  and  Elijah  shews — 1.  The  bearing  of 
that  He  was  the  Lord  and  they  but  the  future  upon  the  present  world.  (1) 
His  servants.  2.  If  it  be  granted  that  The  dead  are  waiting  the  appearance 
Moses  was  dead  and  that  Elias  died  of  Christ.  (2)  The  most  exalted  of 
not,  this  declares  that  Christ  is  the  the  departed  spirits  here  do  homage  to 
Saviour  of  both  quick  and  dead.  3.  Him.  2.  The  bearing  of  the  visible 
Moses  was  called  the  law-giver,  and  upon  the  invisible  world.  This  may 
Elias  was  (after  a  sort)  the  law-  be  regarded  as  the  earnest  and  corn- 
restorer  ;  now  the  Jews  traduced  mencement  of  Christ's  preaching  to  the 
Christ    for     a     law-breaker.      Moses  spirits  in  prison  (1  Pet.  iii.  19,  iv.  6), 

322 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP    IX. 


3.  How  this  world  and  the  next  meet 
and  coalesce  in  the  resurrection  of  Jesus. 
— J.  P.  Langey  D.D. 

The  Sun  makes  the  stars  more 
glorious. — The  Jews  thought  if  Christ 
were  advanced  Moses  must  down. 
Whosoever  preached  Christ  spake 
against  Moses.  No,  Moses  was  never 
so  glorious  as  in  this  attendance.  It 
is  otherwise  with  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness and  the  saints.  Then  with  the 
body  of  the  sun  and  the  stars  :  these 
do,  occidere  heliace,  not  appear  when 
they  come  nearer  to  the  sun.  But  our 
Sun  of  Glory  makes  these  stars,  the 
nearer  they  be,  to  be  the  more  glorious. 
As  in  Joseph's  dream,  the  sun,  moon, 
and  stars  were  all  shining  together. — 
Bishop  Browrvrigg. 

Communion  with  Christ  now  and 
hereafter. — Moses  and  Elias  were  men 
of  much  communion  with  God  upon 
earth ;  many  heavenly  intercourses 
passed  between  them ;  and  now  they 
are  admitted  into  a  near  and  sweet 
and  familiar  communication.  Men  of 
communion  with  God  here  shall  be 
received  with  more  free  access  and 
familiar  conversation  with  Christ  in 
heaven.  They  who  never  maintain 
speech  with  God  here,  how  can  they 
look  to  have  access  in  heaven  ?  They 
who  love  to  come  into  His  presence, 
delight  in  hearing  Him  speak  to  them, 
and  they  to  Him  by  prayer  and 
meditation — they  shall  have  nearest 
and  freest  and  sweetest  communion 
hereafter. — Ibid. 

Christ  seen  with  His  foreannouncers. 
— What  could  so  befit  the  Creator's 
Christ  as  to  manifest  Him  in  the 
company  of  His  own  foreannouncers  ? 
to  let  Him  be  seen  with  those  to  whom 
He  had  appeared  in  revelations  ?  to 
let  Him  be  speaking  to  those  who  had 
spoken  of  Him?  to  share  His  glory 
with  those  by  whom  He  used  to  be 
called  the  Lord  of  Glory,  even  with 
those  chief  servants  of  His,  one  of 
whom  was  once  the  moulder  of  His 
people,  the  other  afterwards  the 
reformer  thereof  ? — Tertullian. 

Ver.  5.  The  good  intention  and  the 


error  of  Peter. — 1.  He  was  anxious 
to  display  the  agreement  between  the 
Old  and  New  Covenants ;  but  by  an 
outward  amalgamation,  not  by  their 
internal  connexion.  2.  He  was  ready 
to  renounce  the  world ;  but  by  an 
outward  institution  (such  as  monas- 
ticism  and  anchor etism),  not  by  an 
inward  act.  3.  He  wished  to  per- 
petuate this  season  of-  spiritual  fellow- 
ship ;  but  by  giving  it  an  outward  and 
fixed  form,  not  by  converting  it  into  a 
spring  of  hidden  life. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Heaven  on  earth. — 1.  Where  it  may 
be  found.  (1)  In  secret  fellowship 
with  God.  (2)  In  a  life  of  spiritual 
love  and  friendship.  (3)  In  the  courts 
and  at  the  altar  of  the  Lord.  2.  How 
it  should  be  sought.  (1)  By  preserving 
purity  of  heart  (or  by  perseverance  in 
the  faith).  (2)  By  constant  increase 
of  spirituality  in  our  wishes  and  in- 
clinations (or  sanctification).  (3)  By 
ever  keeping  before  our  minds  and 
hearts  our  eternal  calling  (or  watching 
and  prayer). — Rambach. 

Good  to  be  with  Jesus. — If  we  find 
it  as  impossible  as  Peter  did  to  live 
retired  from  all  conflict  and  intercourse 
with  all  kinds  of  men ;  if,  like  Peter, 
we  have  to  descend  into  a  valley 
ringing  with  demoniac's  cries ;  if  we 
are  called  upon  to  deal  with  the  world 
as  it  actually  is — deformed,  dehu- 
manised by  sin :  is  it  nothing  that  we 
can  assure  ourselves  of  the  society  and 
friendship  of  One  who  means  to  remove 
all  suffering  and  all  sin,  and  who  does 
so  not  by  a  violent  act  of  authority, 
but  by  sympathy  and  patient  love,  so 
that  we  can  be  His  brighter  instru- 
ments, and  in  healing  and  helping 
others  help  and  heal  ourselves ! — 
M.  Dods,  D.D. 

Calvary  or  not  Calvary  ? — That  was 
the  issue.  It  was  the  alternative 
that  comes  to  each  one  of  us  at  some 
time  or  other  in  life.  Ease  and  safety, 
or  duty  and  sacrifice  ?  Retire  from 
the  conflict  and  live  in  glorious  peace  ? 
or  fight  on  and  fall  ? — J.  Halsey. 

Danger  of  saint-worship. — The  same 
feeling  which  induced  Peter  to  utter 
these  words    has    probably  been  the 

323 


CHAP.  IX. 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


foundation  of  the  errors  of  the  Church 
of  Rome  with  respect  to  the  worship 
of  saints.  If  his  desire  had  been 
permitted,  and  three  tabernacles  had 
been  erected,  these  would  have  become 
three  temples  of  worship,  and  that 
homage  which  was  due  to  Christ  alone 
would  have  been  divided  with  His 
saints.  Such  practically  has  been  the 
case  in  the  Church  of  Rome.  Men 
have  been  attracted  by  the  glory  of  the 
saints,  and,  forgetting  that  it  was  all 
derived  from  Christ,  have  treated  them 
as  if  they  were  each  alone  and  by 
themselves  worthy  of  their  homage. 
The  tabernacle  of  the  saints  has  been 
preferred  too  often  to  that  of  the 
King  of  saints,  on  the  supposition  that, 
because  they  have  themselves  suffered 
all  the  trials  which  we  suffer,  they  are 
better  able  to  sympathise  with  human 
weakness,  and  therefore  will  become 
intercessors  for  men  with  Christ.  But 
need  we  any  intercessor  with  Him  ? 

There  are  mountains  in  the  kingdom 
of  God. — The  soul  can  withdraw  from 
the  multiplied  cares  and  distractions 
of  the  work-a-day  world  life  to  find 
restful  influence  and  inspiring  com- 
panionship on  their  quiet  heights. 
On  the  hill-tops  of  gracious  ordinances, 
in  special  seasons  of  fellowship  with 
the  Eternal  Father,  through  the  re- 
vealing Son,  by  the  blessed  whisperings 
of  the  Spirit,  the  soul  will  feel  and 
manifest  the  reality  and  blessedness  of 
upper-world  revelations  and  voices  in 
a  way  not  otherwise  attainable.  En- 
joying these  things  in  heavenly  places, 
with  Peter  it  will  say,  "It  is  good  to 
be  here."  In  that  clear  upper  air  the 
eye  will  behold,  as  never  before,  the 
beauties  of  holiness  and  the  deformities 
of  sin.  The  soul  shall  put  on  a 
radiancy  born  of  an  atmosphere  puri- 
fied from  the  influences  of  malarial 
levels.  But  it  is  not  the  will  of  God 
that  the  soul  should  seek  selfishly  to 
abide  there.  It  is  not  to  be  drawn 
away  from  and  raised  uninfluentially 
above  the  crying  needs  of  fallen  men. 
The  healing  power  of  its  contact  with 
Divine  things  is  needed  in  the  plain 
below.     The  attractions  of  a  contem- 

324 


plative  life  must  not  therefore  lead  to 
f  orgetf  ulness  or  neglect  of  the  demands 
for  practical  toil  and  self-denial. 
Neither,  on  the  other  hand,  must 
those  quiet  seasons  of  withdrawal  from 
earthly  distractions  be  forgotten  or 
neglected.  The  soul  then  puts  on  new 
strength  by  nearer  fellowship  with 
God.  All  this  must  not  be  defeated 
by  the  despotic  tendencies  and  im- 
perious claims  of  practical  work.  If 
so,  the  soul  will  suffer  loss,  power  be 
paralysed,  and  blessings  withheld  from 
men.  It  is  the  union  of  both  that 
will  make  the  well-balanced,  healthy, 
Christlike  soul.  —  Wm.  M.  Campbell. 

Ver.  7.  The  overshadowing  cloud. — 
The  outer  skirts  of  the  central  glory 
began  to  advance — to  enlarge  their 
borders  and  to  encompass  the  chosen 
three.  Peter  and  James  and  John 
stand  for  a  while  in  the  golden  suburbs 
of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  "  A  bright 
cloud  overshadowed  them."  He  who 
"  tempers  the  wind  to  the  shorn  lamb  " 
softened  the  dazzling  brightness  with 
a  luminous  curtain.  Nevertheless, 
even  in  the  haze  of  the  cloud  that 
relieved  the  blaze,  they  were  affrighted. 
The  majesty  was  veiled  to  them,  yet 
they  were  afraid.  The  glory  was 
tempered  to  them,  yet  they  trembled. 
But  if  the  subdued  flashing  of  the 
clouded  splendour  alarmed  them,  the 
thunder  of  the  voice  that  came  out  of 
the  cloud  appalled  them.  It  was  the 
voice  of  God  ! — Prof.  T.  S.  Evans. 

That  overshadowing  cloud  warns  u% 
as  it  warned  St.  Peter,  that  this  world 
is  a  battle-field,  not  a  vision  of  peace  *, 
a  working  time,  not  the  rest  that 
remaineth  ;  the  Mount  of  Crucifixion, 
not  the  Mount  of  Glory.  To  our 
Blessed  Lord  Himself  that  overshadow- 
ing cloud  was  a  type  of  what  His 
earthly  life  was  to  be.  Says  Jeremy 
Taylor  :  "  His  transfiguration  was  a 
bright  ray  of  glory;  but  then,  also, 
He  entered  into  a  cloud,  and  was  told 
a  sad  story  of  what  He  was  to  suffer 
at  Jerusalem.  For  this  Jesus  was  like 
the  rainbow,  which  God  set  in  the 
clouds  as  a  sacrament,  to  confirm  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  IX. 


promise   and    establish   a   grace.     He  The  gospel  cloud. — The  law,  that  is 

was   half   made  of  the  glories  of  the  a   cloud,   dark   and  obscure  ;  but  the 

light,  and  half  of   the  moisture  of  a  gospel,   that  is   a   clear   cloud.     Still, 

cloud."  indeed,  the  gospel  is  a  cloud,  it  gives 

Divine  secrets. — There  is  no  manner  no  full  evident  view ;  but  yet  it  is  a 

of   absurdity  in  supposing  a   veil   on  clear   cloud,   it   hath  many  rays   and 

purpose   drawn   over   some   scenes    of  beams  of  light  in  it.     The  law  had  a 

Infinite  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  dark  cloud,  we  could  not  see  through 

the  sight  of  which  might  some  way  or  it ;   their   shadows   were    remote   and 

other  strike  us  too  strongly ;  or  that  obscure.     Their    circumcision    was    a 

better  ends  are  designed  and  served  by  dark    cloud,     immediately    signifying 

their   being   concealed   than  could  be  God's   covenant  with  Abraham.     Our 

by  their  being  exposed  to  our  know-  baptism  is  a  cloud,  a  bodily,  material 

ledge.     The  Almighty  may  cast  clouds  type,  an  outward  element ;  but  it  is  a 

and   darkness   round   about   Him  for  clear  cloud,  representing  distinctly  the 

reasons    and    purposes    of   which   we  washing  away  the  filth  of  the  flesh  by 

have  not  the  least  glimpse  or  concep-  the  blood  of   Christ.     Their  Passover 

tion  (Rom.  xi.  33  ;  Ecclus.  xvi.  21,  22;  was  a  dark  cloud,  representing  their 

John  xx.  29). — Bishop  Butler.  delivery   out    of    Egypt   immediately, 

GooVs  glory  veiled  in  mercy. — When  but  darkly  the  Messias.     Our  Lord's 

the  eye  gazes  on  the  sun,  it  is  more  Supper  is  a  cloud,  a  veil  of  bread  and 

tormented   with   the   brightness   than  wine  is  over  it ;  but  yet  it  is  a  clear 

pleased   with   the   beauty   of   it ;    but  cloud,     immediately    shewing     Christ 

when     the     beams     are     transmitted  and  all  His  benefits.     Their  covenant 

through  a  coloured  medium,  they  are  was  a  cloud,  covered  with  temporary 

more  temperate  and  sweetened  to  the  promises,  with  the  promise  of  Canaan, 

sight.     The  Eternal  Word  shining  in  Ours  is  a  cloud  indeed,  we  cannot  see 

His  full   glory,  the   more  bright   the  those  things  that  it  promises  ;  but  yet 

less  visible  is  He  to  mortal  eyes  ;  but  a  clear  cloud,  immediately  presenting 

the   Incarnate   Word   is   eclipsed  and  to  us  immediate   promises  of  heaven, 

allayed  by  a  veil  of  flesh  (Heb.  x.  20),  The   light   of   the   law   was   like    the 

and   so   made  accessible  to  us.     God,  light  of  a  candle  ;  ours,  as  the  day-star, 

out  of  a  tender  respect  to  our  frailty  — Bishop  Brownrigg. 

and    fears,    promised    to   raise    up   a  "Hear    Him." — 1.    He    has    truth 

Prophet  clothed  in  our  nature  (Exod.  which  can  never  deceive  you,  a  wis- 

xx.   18,   19  ;  Deut.  xviii.  15-19),  that  dom  which  knows  what  you  need,   a 

we    might    comfortably    and    quietly  goodness  which  will  command  nothing 

receive   His  instructions   (Job   xxxiii.  but  what  will  bless.     2.  If  you  hear 

6,  7;  John  i.  18;  Luke  iv.  20-22). —  Him,  He  has   promised  to   hear   you 

Dr.  Bates.  (John  xvi.   7).     3.  He  speaks  to  you 

The    vision    withdrawn.  — A    Chris-  on  the  subject  of  greatest  importance, 

tian's   highest   enjoyments   are   some-  and  speaks  with  a  clearness,  emphasis, 

times  put  an  end  to  by  God  Himself,  authority,    decision,  which  scatter  all 

He   may   think   that    he   has   sinned  doubts     and     solve     all     perplexities, 

away  his  previous  privilege,  or  trifled  4.  God  has  declared  what  will  be  the 

it  away,  or  by  some  means  driven  it  consequence  of  refusing  to  hear  Him 

away ;  and  this  is  perhaps  very  gene-  (Deut.  xviii.  1 9).     5.  If  you  hear  Him 

rally  the  truth.     But  it  is  not  always  not,  and  keep  not  His  words,  you  are 

so.     The  intercepting  cloud,  like  that  building   your  hopes  upon   the  sand ; 

which    we    are    now    considering,    is  and  when  the  tempest  comes,  as  come 

sometimes     of     God's    sending.      The  it  will,  your  fabric  of  happiness  must 

vision  has  done  its  work — its  appointed,  fall,  and  great  will  be  the  fall  of  it. — 

strengthening,  comforting  work  ;  and  J.  Sanderson,  D.D. 

that  done,  the  vision  is  withdrawn.  "Hear   Him" — 1.    Reverently.      2, 

325 


CHAP.  IX. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


With  docility.  3.  With  personal, 
special,  and  practical  application.  4. 
With  a  deep,  solemn  sense  of  your 
responsibility.  — Ibid. 

Ver.  8.  "Jesus  only." — 1.  Moses 
and  Elias,  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
have  but  a  temporary  station  and 
abode  in  the  Church.  Christ  being 
brought  into  the  world,  they  are  with- 
drawn. 2.  Christ's  office  and  glory 
and  government  in  His  Church,  'tis 
lasting  and  perpetual.  3.  The  eye 
and  observation  and  faith  of  the 
Church  is  fixed  upon  Christ  only. — 
Bishop  Brownrigg. 

The  eye  of  the  Church  fixed  on  Christ. 
— The  eye  of  the  Church  looks  only 
upon  Christ,  fixes  upon  Him,  and 
expects  no  other.  This  is  the  main 
difference  betwixt  the  Jewish  Church 
and  ours.  They  were  all  in  expecta- 
tion, and  were  waiters  for  better  times. 
But  our  faith  hath  Him  exhibited 
and  presented,  and  rests  upon  Him. 
Hence  Christ  forewarns  them  not  to 
listen  to  or  look  after  any  other. 
The  sun  arising,  darkens  all  the 
stars ;  so  all  the  former  saints  are 
obscured  to  the  eye  of  the  Church,  and 
He  alone  must  shine  in  His  full  glory. 
As  when  the  king  enters  into  any  city 
all  authority  is  resigned  up  to  him, 
all  viceroys  and  lieutenants  must 
resign  up  to  him,  so  Moses  and  the 
prophets  all  yield  up  their  place  in 
the  Church  to  Christ. — Ibid. 

Christ  the  Sum  of  revelation. — It  is 
the  summing  up  of  revelation ;  all 
others  vanish,  He  abides.  It  is  the 
summing  up  of  the  world's  history. 
Thickening  folds  of  oblivion  wrap 
the  past,  and  all  its  mighty  names  be- 
come forgotten  ;  but  His  figure  stands 
out,  solitary  against  the  background 
of  the  past,  as  some  great  mountain, 
which  is  seen  long  after  the  lower 
summits  are  sunk  below  the  horizon. 
Let  us  make  this  the  summing  up  of 
our  lives.  We  can  venture  to  take 
Him  for  our  sole  Helper,  Pattern, 
Love,  and  Aim,  because  He,  in  His 
singleness,  is  enough  for  our  hearts. — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

326 


"Ver.  9.  Reasons  for  concealment. — 
This  vision  of  Christ's  Divinity  and 
glory  must  be  concealed  till  after  His 
resurrection.  1.  Till  then  Christ  is 
in  statu  humiliationis,  and  so  He  will 
have  His  majesty  and  glory  to  be 
covered.  Now  He  terms  Himself  the 
Son  of  Man.  He  was  declared  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  by  the  resurrection 
from  the  dead  (Rom.  i.).  Thus  He 
was  pleased  to  veil  His  glory,  and 
to  become  vile,  and  of  no  reputation. 
2.  It  is  documentum  modestiai.  His 
glory,  He  is  not  ambitious  to  publish 
it — as  St.  Paul  fourteen  years  con- 
cealed his  revelations.  He  glories  in 
his  infirmities  and  weaknesses ;  but 
till  he  was  constrained  he  kept  his 
rapture  concealed.  3.  Till  His  resur- 
rection these  apostles  were  inepti, 
weak  and  carnal,  not  sufficiently 
grounded  in  this  doctrine  of  Christ's 
Divinity.  After  His  resurrection, 
then  they  were  endued  with  strength 
from  above,  and  then  those  mysteries 
that  they  could  not  bear  the  Comforter 
revealed  to  them.  4.  Quia  incredibile. 
The  infidelity  of  the  world  was  not 
yet  to  be  removed  ;  it  would  not  believe 
there  had  been  such  a  vision.  In- 
fidelity deprives  us  of  many  truths 
that  God  would  otherwise  reveal  to 
us.  5.  Ne  impediret  passionem.  It 
troubled  Pilate  to  hear  it  mentioned 
that  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God.  And 
St.  Paul  saith,  had  they  known  it, 
they  would  not  have  crucified  the 
Lord  of  Life  and  Glory.  He  purposely 
concealed  His  Deity  to  give  way  to 
His  passion.  And  hence  it  is  that 
He  spake  of  His  Divinity  very 
reservedly.  He  charged  they  should 
tell  no  men  who  He  was  (Mark  viii. 
20),  but  (ver.  32)  He  spake  plainly 
of  His  passion. — Bishop  Brownrigg. 

Reasons  for  silence. — 1.  Because  the 
Jews  were  to  have  no  sign,  but  the 
sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas  :  they  had 
seen  enough  to  leave  their  unbelief 
without  excuse.  2.  Because  among 
the  rude,  after  the  publication  of 
such  a  glory,  the  following  Cross  would 
have  bred  scandal.  If  He  were 
invested  with  such  glory,  why  could 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  IX. 


He  not  keep  Himself  in  it?  3. 
Because  till  His  resurrection  had 
made  way  for  it,  the  world  would 
never  have  given  credit  to  this  wonder. 
4.  According  to  that  (Ecclus.  xi.  28), 
judge  no  man  blessed  before  his  death. 
Then  they  witnessed  it,  preached  it, 
wrote  it :  we  hear  it,  let  us  all  believe 
it,  that  we  may  one  day  enjoy  it  in  the 
everlasting  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ. — 
Thos.  Adams. 

The  silence  enjoined  was  the  first 
step  into  the  Valley  of  Humiliation. 
It  was  also  a  test  whether  they  had 
understood  the  spiritual  teaching  of 
the  vision.  And  their  strict  obedience, 
not  questioning  even  the  grounds  of 
the  injunction,  proved  that  they  had 
learned  it. — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Transfigurations  not  to  be  talked  about. 
— 1.  Transfigurations  are  not  themes 
for  common  gossip.  Those  bitter  con- 
flicts that  turn  to  raptures  are  things 
we  had  rather  not  speak  of.  The 
common,  prosaic,  worldly  mind  would 
not  understand  them — would,  indeed, 
only  find  food  for  ridicule  in  them. 
2.  Besides,  our  transfigurations  do 
not  need  to  be  talked  about.  They 
proclaim  themselves.  If  we  have 
experienced  a  great  spiritual  uplifting, 
the  thrill  of  an  inward  illumination, 
the  world  will  know  it  without  our 
saying  anything  about  it. — J.  Halsey. 

Even  to  His  fellow-disciples  the 
believer   cannot    relate    all   that    the 


Saviour  has  often    let   him    taste. — » 
J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D. 

How  some  Christians  are  perpetually 
tormented  with  a  notion  that  they 
must  testify  to  whatever  manifesta- 
tion of  God  is  granted  to  themselves, 
at  the  risk  of  bringing  shallowness 
and  weakness  upon  their  own  ex- 
perience ! — C.  C.  Starbuck. 

Ver.  10.  Submissive  silence. — So 
entire  was  their  submission  that  they 
dared  nor  even  ask  the  Master  about 
a  new  and  seemingly  greater  mystery 
than  they  had  yet  heard — the  meaning 
of  the  Son  of  Man  rising  from  the 
dead.  Did  it  refer  to  the  general 
resurrection  ?  was  the  Messiah  to  be  the 
first  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and  to  waken 
the  other  sleepers — or  was  it  only  a 
figurative  expression  for  His  triumph 
and  vindication? — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Learn — 1.  Even  the  best  Chris- 
tians are  by  nature  and  of  themselves 
slow  to  conceive  and  understand  the 
mysteries  of  faith  and  doctrines  of 
Christ  taught  in  the  gospel.  2.  True 
faith  and  sanctifying  grace  in  this 
life  may  stand  with  ignorance  in  some 
points  of  Christian  faith,  at  least  for 
a  time.  3.  It  is  a  good  and  profitable 
cause  for  Christians  to  confer  and 
reason  together  by  mutual  questioning 
one  with  another  about  those  points 
of  Christian  religion  whereof  they  are 
yet  ignorant  or  doubtful. — G.  Fetter, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—29. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xvii.  14-21  ;  Luke  ix.  37-43.) 

The  afflicted  child. — Moses,  when  he  descended  from  the  mount,  found  that 
the  people  in  his  absence  had  lapsed  into  idolatry  ;  and  our  Lord,  in  descending 
from  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  found  that  His  followers  had  been  surprised 
into  spiritual  impotence  and  failure.  The  swift  transition  from  the  glories  of 
the  Mount  to  the  trials  and  toils  that  awaited  Him  below  may  be  regarded 
as  typical  of  the  life  of  all  Christians,— the  mount  (ver.  9)  and  the  multitude 
(ver.  14) ;  the  supreme  festival  and  the  fiery  trial ;  to-day,  ecstasies  and  glories 
that  tell  of  heaven  ;  to-morrow,  conflicts  with  demoniacal  degradation  and  fury 
that  disclose  the  depths  of  hell.  The  appearance  of  our  Lord  on  the  scene 
wrought  an  immediate  transformation  ;  it  was  like  the  arrival  of  a  general  on 
the  field  of  battle  in  time  to  retrieve  the  fortunes  of  his  army  when  wellnigh 

327 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


defeated.     He  always  comes  to  succour  His  own  at  the  right  time  and  with  the 
right  blessing  :  He  is  "  a  very  present  help  in  trouble." 

I.  A  distressed  child. — The  ground  of  the  disorder  was  natural;  the  child 
suffered  from  a  physical  complaint,  perhaps  the  most  severe  form  of  epileptic 
lunacy  that  was  brought  to  Christ  for  healing.  But  on  this  ground  a  worse 
spiritual  disorder  was  superinduced.  The  disorder  of  the  child  is  a  picture  of 
sin  as  a  spiritual  evil.  The  child  was  deaf ;  so  a  sinner  refuses  to  hear  the 
voices  of  God  and  conscience.  The  child  was  dumb  ;  so  the  sinner's  tongue  is 
not  used  for  God  in  testimony  and  song.  The  child  was  mad;  so  the  sinner, 
under  the  influence  of  that  "  spirit  that  now  worketh  [lit.  energiseth]  in  the 
children  of  disobedience,"  is  a  maniac. 

II.  An  anxious  father. — The  colloquy  our  Lord  had  with  him  is  a  type  of  the 
method  by  which  a  seeker  is  led  into  stronger  faith.  "  The  man  had  said  to 
Him,  *  If  Thou  canst  do ' ;  Jesus  retorts  upon  him,  c  If  thou  canst  believe.' 
The  man  had  said,  *  If  Thou  canst  do  anything ' ;  Jesus  replies,  *  All  things  are 
possible '  to  faith  :  *  My  doing  all  depends  on  thy  believing.'  To  impress  this 
still  more  He  redoubles  upon  the  believing  :  i  If  thou  canst  believe,  all  things  are 
possible  to  him  that  believeth.'  .  .  .  Two  things  are  very  remarkable  here : 
(1)  The  felt  and  owned  presence  of  unbelief,  which  only  the  strength  of  the 
man's  faith  could  have  so  revealed  to  his  own  consciousness.  (2)  His  appeal 
to  Christ  for  help  against  his  past  unbelief — a  feature  in  the  case  quite 
unparalleled,  and  shewing  more  than  all  protestations  could  have  done  the  insight 
he  had  attained  of  a  power  in  Christ  more  glorious  than  any  he  had  besought 
for  his  poor  child." 

III.  The  baffled  apostles. — In  their  worshipping  exercises  on  the  Mount 
some  of  the  disciples  had  to  contend  with  infirmity  and  sleep  ;  whilst  in  the 
activities  of  public  life  in  the  valley  others  had  to  contend  with  impotence  and 
the  shame  of  failure.  Possibly  the  disciples,  deprived  of  the  presence  of  the 
Master,  and  the  chief  apostles,  in  whom  dwelt  most  of  His  spirit,  had  neglected 
fasting  and  prayer  ;  the  sad  prophecy  of  His  death  may  have  damped  the  spirits 
of  the  weakest  of  them,  or  they  yielded  to  fear  in  view  of  the  special  virulence 
of  the  disorder.  The  kind  of  demon  that  tortured  the  child  required  more  than 
ordinary  spiritual  vigour  to  expel  him — a  faith  braced  up  by  intense  devotion, 
and  such  rigorous  self-denial  as  would  weaken  the  hold  of  the  lower  nature  upon 
the  higher,  and  aid  in  spiritual  meditation  and  fellowship. 

TV.  An  effectual  Healer. — In  the  exercises  of  devotion  on  the  Mount  He  was 
declared  to  be  the  Master  ;  and  in  the  exercises  of  active  zeal  below  He  asserts 
His  absolute  power  and  dominion — not  only  over  the  minds  of  men,  as  illustrated 
in  the  scribes,  the  multitude,  the  father,  and  the  disciples,  but  also  over  the 
rage  and  malice  of  demons.  Impotence,  in  some  form  or  other,  prevailed  in  all 
the  actors  in  the  scene  except  Himself ;  but  "  power  belonged  unto  Him  " — a 
power  that  fell  in  anger  on  a  malicious  demon  and  in  blessing  on  a  helpless 
child. — J.  H.  Morgan. 

The  power  and  the  difficulties  of  faith. — This  story  is  strikingly  illustrative 
both  of  the  difficulties  and  the  power  of  faith, — the  power  of  faith,  which  caused 
the  ultimate  healing ;  the  difficulties  of  faith,  which  caused  the  previous  failure 
of  that  power. 

I.  The  difficulty  of  believing  is  very  great  and  very  strong. — 1.  The  disciples 
of  Jesus  frequently  and  very  keenly  felt  this  difficulty.  Their  faith  was  con- 
stantly breaking  down ;  at  almost  every  great  crisis  it  completely  failed  them : 
the  falsehood  and  treachery  in  Pilate's  hall,  the  desertion  at  the  Cross.  Their 
impotency  to  heal  this  epileptic  child  is  an  illustration  of  this.  From  the  context 
of  the  narrative  it  would  appear  that  it  was  the  three  most  conspicuous  of  our 

328 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  IX. 


Lord's  disciples  to  whom  the  sorrowing  father  brought  his  epileptic  child,  and 
that  at  a  time  when  we  should  naturally  suppose  their  faith  would  have  been 
in  a  condition  of  the  greatest  and  most  triumphant  vigour.  For  they  had  just 
descended  from  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  they  had  just  been  enveloped 
in  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  and  had  heard  celestial  voices  testifying  to  the  Divinity 
of  their  Master.  2.  When  we  turn  away  from  the  disciples  to  the  distressed 
and  sorrowing  father,  we  find  an  illustration  of  the  difficulties  of  believing 
under  changed  and  opposite  circumstances.  The  disciples  were  in  a  state  of 
joy  and  gladness  after  the  Transfiguration ;  the  father  of  the  epileptic  child  was 
in  a  state  of  grief  and  sore  affliction.  They  were  in  the  light  on  the  mountain- 
top  ;  he  was  amid  the  darkness  down  in  the  valley.  Yet  he  found  the  difficulties 
of  believing  not  less  hard  than  they.  "  If  Thou  canst  do  anything."  "  Lord  ! 
I  believe ;  help  Thou  mine  unbelief."  3.  Faith  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  of 
Christian  exercises.  A  little  faith  is  more  or  less  common ;  but  much  faith 
is  very  rare.  We  all,  I  suppose,  believe  in  a  greater  or  less  degree — a  degree 
at  least  large  enough  to  justify  our  repetition  of  the  Church's  creeds.  But  the 
faith  which  statedly  recites  the  creeds  is  not  commonly  great  faith ;  it  is  the 
ordinary  faith  of  the  ordinary  Christian — the  minimum,  without  which  we  could 
not  decently  profess  to  be  Christians  at  all.  4.  The  difficulty  of  miracles, 
according  to  Christ's  declaration,  is  not  the  difficulty  of  God's  doing,  but  the 
difficulty  of  man's  believing.  Not  material  laws,  but  spiritual  unfaith — this 
is  the  insuperable  hindrance  to  miracles.  5.  The  experience  of  all  the  ages 
fully  attests  the  truth  of  the  explanation  of  Christ.  Extraordinary  faith  is 
pre- essential  to  extraordinary  action ;  the  miracle  of  believing  precedes  the 
miracle  of  doing.  It  is  as  impossible  to  think  living  thoughts  with  a  dead 
brain,  or  to  raise  heavy  weights  with  a  palsied  arm,  as  to  do  wonders  with 
a  doubting  soul  or  a  dead  faith.  Failure,  even  in  miracle,  is  practically 
synonymous  with  faithlessness. 

II.  In  every  age  power  has  been  given  to  men  in  proportion  to  their  faith. — 
1.  Seldom,  indeed,  has  the  power  of  faith  extended  to  the  control  of  the  material 
universe,  though  in  the  instance  of  Christ  frequently,  and  of  others  occasionally, 
even  matter  has  been  visibly  subjugated  to  the  influences  of  faith  ;  and  modern 
psychical  researches  are  ever  tending  more  and  more  clearly  to  demonstrate  the 
possibility  of  the  interpenetration  of  matter  by  will,  and  therefore  a  fortiori 
by  faith,  which  as  a  spiritual  energy  is  often  more  powerful  than  will.  But 
outside  the  material  universe  and  in  the  realm  of  purpose  and  religion  we  see 
the  power  of  faith  perpetually  exemplified.  According  to  the  measure  of  our 
faith  it  is  daily  done  unto  us.  According  to  the  measure  of  our  faith  it  is 
also  daily  done  by  us.  Great  deeds  are  great  faith  made  visible;  great 
faith  is  great  deeds  made  possible.  2.  Seeing,  then,  that  the  experience  of  the 
ages  attests  the  truth  of  Christ's  explanation  concerning  the  rarity  of  miracles, 
and  also  His  declaration  of  the  potency  of  faith,  the  possibility  of  believing  is 
for  each  of  us  a  very  momentous  possibility.  "  Canst  thou,"  is  it  possible  for 
thee,  to  "believe"?  That  is  the  great  question,  upon  the  answer  to  which 
everything  of  real  importance  in  life  depends.  If  thou  canst  believe,  there 
is  possible  to  thee — everything ;  but  if  thou  canst  not  believe,  there  is  possible 
to  thee — nothing !  3.  The  difficulties  of  belief  in  our  age  are  without  denial 
peculiarly  great.  It  is  not  merely  that  doubt  is  in  the  air ;  that  the  intellectual 
and  academic  atmosphere  is  charged  with  currents  of  dubitation ;  that  physical 
science,  which  depends  for  its  existence  upon  experiment  and  demonstration,  and 
has  achieved  such  striking  successes  in  the  department  of  matter  by  the  diligent 
use  of  its  own  methods,  should  have  been  emboldened  to  try  those  methods  upon 
religion, — it  is  not  these  things  which  make  the  difficulties  of  belief  so  peculiarly 
great  in  the  present  age.     (1)  The  moral  and  spiritual  characteristics  of  our 

329 


CHAP.   IX 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


age  are  not  favourable  to  faith.  Our  age  is  an  age  of  great  wealth ;  and  an 
age  of  great  wealth  is  never  an  age  of  great  faith,  the  tendency  of  wealth  being 
always  towards  luxury  and  great  comfortableness,  and  neither  luxury  nor  great 
comfortableness  being  a  good  soil  for  religious  growth.  Moreover  the  effect 
of  spiritual  drowsiness  among  the  rich  is  to  produce  a  similar  drowsiness  among 
the  poor.  The  poor  perceive  that  the  profession  of  Christianity  by  the  rich 
seldom  produces  anything  great  or  striking  in  the  way  of  sympathy  or  self- 
sacrifice,  and  they  therefore  grow  largely  indifferent  to  the  profession  of  it 
among  themselves.  (2)  But  far  greater  than  all  other  difficulties  are  the 
difficulties  inherent  in  our  own  moral  and  spiritual  constitution.  The  visible 
over-masters  us;  the  invisible  is  less  than  half  real.  Our  occupations  and 
employments,  the  urgency  of  earning  our  daily  bread,  the  need  for  concentrating 
our  thoughts  upon  worldly  things  in  order  to  gain  subsistence  and  make 
progress  in  our  trade  or  profession — all  unite  in  giving  prominence  to  temporal 
realities,  and  in  hiding  from  view  the  realities  which  are  eternal.  Above  all, 
the  natural  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart  revolts  against  the  constraining 
power  of  faith.  4.  Yet  great  as  these  difficulties  are,  they  are  by  no  means 
insuperable.  Far  from  it.  All  things  are  possible  to  God;  and  to  that  man 
whose  mind  is  ever  dwelling  upon  the  Eternal,  the  Infinite,  the  Invisible — whose 
spirit  is  thoroughly  interpenetrated  with  the  Spirit  of  God — to  that  man  also 
most  things  are  possible  likewise. — Canon  Diggle. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Yer.  14.  The  scribes  questioning. — 
The  scribes  probably  argued  that  failure 
in  one  case  proved  deception  in  all. 
How  true  to  nature  is  this  picture  !  If 
they  had  encouraged  the  disciples  to  try 
again  with  prayer,  and  had  knelt  with 
the  father  of  the  boy  asking  God  to 
give  the  disciples  power,  they  could 
have  prevented  the  failure  which  they 
denounce  !  It  is  like  the  world — to 
withhold  help,  and  then  give  blame  for 
what  it  might  have  prevented.  Pity 
the  woes  of  men,  so  often  intensified 
and  perpetuated  by  men  disputing  as 
to  who  is  to  blame  for  them,  instead  of 
uniting  in  the  effort  to  cure. — R.  Glover' 

He  came — as  always,  and  to  us  also 
— unexpectedly,  most  opportunely,  and 
for  the  real  decision  of  the  question  in 
hand.  There  was  immediate  calm, 
preceding  victory. — A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

The  world  wants  us. — However  good 
it  may  be  to  be  in  nature's  silent 
retreats  for  a  season,  the  world  wants 
us ;  for  it  is  full  of  evils  to  be  remedied, 
full  of  work  to  be  done,  full  of  demons 
to  be  cast  out.  There  are  calls  down 
as  well  as  up.  And  we  must  be  as 
alert  to  the  one  call  as  to  the  other. — 
J.  Halsey. 

330 


Yers.  16-18.  Lessons. — 1.  When 
Jesus  Christ  absents  Himself  from  us 
we  are  nothing.  2.  A  minister  must 
not  expect  to  have  always  success  in 
the  conversion  of  sinners.  3.  Some- 
times the  greatest  care,  application, 
and  talents  signify  nothing,  because 
God  designs  to  effect  the  thing  by  Him- 
self, and  to  make  His  ministers  more 
fit  for  His  work  by  making  them  more 
humble.  4.  Children  diseased  and  pos- 
sessed are  an  evident  proof  of  original 
sin,  because  under  a  just  God  none 
are  miserable  unless  they  deserve  it. 
5.  Bodily  possession  is  a  consequence 
and  emblem  of  that  of  the  soul,  and 
of  the  dominion  which  the  devil  exer- 
cises over  the  heart  by  means  of  the 
passions. — P.  Quesnel. 

Yer.  17.  "A  dumb  spirit." — The 
poor  lad  was  a  demoniac,  and  the 
demon  had  deprived  him  of  the  use 
of  the  affiliated  organs  of  speech  and 
hearing  (see  ver.  25).  There  is  nothing 
incredible  in  such  power,  if  evil  spirits 
there  be  at  all.  Even  some  men  have 
power  to  deprive,  for  the  time  being, 
some  of  their  fellow-men  of  speech, 
hearing,  feeling,  seeing.    What  marvel, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  IX. 


then,  that  unincarnated  spirits  should 
have  a  corresponding  power  ?  There 
are  assuredly  in  existence,  as  W.  G. 
Palgrave  says,  "  malignant  cosmical 
influences,  be  they  what  they  may." 
"  The  spirit  world,"  says  Delitzsch, 
"  good  as  well  as  bad,  has  been  in 
all  times  the  background  of  the 
events  that  transpire  on  earth." — 
J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Yer.  19.  Christ's  forbearance  to  be 
imitated. — Let  us  imitate  on  occasion 
the  obedience  and  charity  of  Christ, 
which  detained  Him  in  the  world, 
though  the  incredulity  and  contradic- 
tion thereof  were  a  continual  trouble 
to  Him.  How  intolerable  soever  some 
ministers  and  pastors,  by  reason  of 
their  want  of  faith  and  their  other 
defects,  may  possible  be,  yet  Christ 
ceases  not  mildly  to  bear  with  them, 
to  continue  with  them,  according  to 
His  promise,  to  work  by  their  ministry, 
and  even  to  produce  by  them  extra- 
ordinary effects.  Whoever  finds  his 
endeavours  ineffectual  on  souls  enslaved 
to  sin  and  the  devil  ought  to  conduct 
them  to  Christ,  by  addressing  himself 
to  Him  in  more  fervent  prayers,  or  by 
procuring  them  the  assistance  of  some 
others  of  His  servants. — P.  Quesnel. 

Yer.  23.  Faith  is  in  its  essence  the 
power  by  which  we  grasp  the  future, 
the  unseen,  the  infinite,  the  eternal ; 
and  in  its  application  it  is  a  principle 
of  knowledge,  a  principle  of  power,  a 
principle  of  action.  It  is  then  on  man's 
side  the  condition  and  the  measure  of 
Divine  blessing.  By  faith  we  lift  up 
the  sightless  eye,  and  it  is  opened  :  by 
faith  we  stretch  out  the  withered  arm, 
and  it  is  made  whole  :  by  faith,  bound 
hand  and  foot  with  gravecloths,  we 
come  forth  from  the  tomb  of  custom 
which  lies  upon  us 

"  With  a  weight 
Heavy  as  frost  and  deep  almost  as  life." 

In  the  Creed  I  do  not  simply 
acknowledge  the  existence  of  these 
Divine  Persons  of  the  One  Godhead, 
but  I  throw  myself  wholly  upon  their 
power  and  love.     I  have  found  and  I 


trust  without  reserve  Him  who  made, 
redeemed,  sanctifies  me.  I  have  gained 
not  a  certain  conclusion,  but  an  un- 
failing, an  all-powerful  Friend.  "I 
believe  in  Him !  He  can  help  me ; 
and  He  will  help  me." — Bishop  Westcott. 
There  is  in  faith  a  power  to  make 
God's  resources  our  own  tributaries  and 
auxiliaries. — The  great  reason  why  we 
make  such  slow  gains  in  our  own 
religious  life  in  the  warfare  with  in- 
ward sin,  selfishness,  and  pride,  is  that 
we  make  no  calculation  for  any  strength 
but  our  own,  and  do  not  muster  in 
our  reserves.  We  are  in  this  respect 
where  manufacturing  was  in  mechani- 
cal life  a  hundred  years  ago,  when 
everything  was  done  by  hand ;  where 
travelling  was  fifty  years  ago,  when 
everything  was  done  by  stage ;  where 
communication  was  twenty-five  years 
ago,  when  all  messages  were  sent  by 
post.  We  do  not  calculate  on  a 
margin.  We  are  doing  all  by  a  dead 
lift.— C.  H.  Parkhurst,  D.D. 

Yer.  24.  Prayer  for  faith. — He  who 
implores  faith  with  tears  has  it  already 
in  his  heart. — Canstein. 

Doubt  and  faith. — 1.  Doubt  and  faith 
can  coexist  in  the  heart,  and  actually 
do.  As  creatures  of  God  we  must 
believe;  as  fallen,  disordered,  and  dis- 
organised creatures  we  must  doubt. 
2.  The  will  can  choose  between  doubt- 
ing and  believing.  It  can  control  and 
shape  the  thoughts ;  it  can  throw  its 
weight  on  one  side  or  the  other  when 
the  battle  rages  in  the  soul.  And 
because  it  can  do  this  we  are  respon- 
sible for  the  strength  or  weakness  of 
our  faith.  3.  If  we  choose  to  believe, 
God  will  help.— M.  Dix,  D.D. 

Faith's  progress. — We  have  here — 
1.  The  birth  of  faith.  (1)  Eager 
desire.  (2)  A  sense  of  utter  helpless- 
ness. (3)  The  acceptance  of  Christ's 
calm  assurances.  2.  The  infancy  of 
faith.  The  sense  of  possessing  some 
feeble  degree  of  any  virtue  or  excel- 
lence, and  the  effort  to  put  it  forth,  is 
the  surest  way  of  discovering  how  little 
of  it  we  have.  On  the  other  side 
sorrow  for  the  lack  of  some  form  of 

331 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


goodness  is  itself  a  proof  of  the  partial 
possession,  in  some  rudimentary  and 
incipient  form,  of  that  goodness. 
3.  The  cry  of  infant  faith.  "Help 
Thou  mine  unbelief "  may  have  either 
of  two  meanings.  The  man's  desire 
was  either  that  his  faith  should  be 
increased  and  his  unbelief  "  helped " 
by  being  removed  by  Christ's  operation 
upon  his  spirit,  or  that  Christ  would 
"  help "  him  and  his  boy  by  healing 
the  child,  though  the  faith  which  asked 
the  blessing  was  so  feeble  that  it  might 
be  called  unbelief.  "  Heal  my  child, 
though  it  is  unbelief  as  much  as  faith 
that  asks  Thee  to  do  it."  4.  The 
education  of  faith.  Christ  paid  no 
heed  in  words  to  the  man's  confession 
of  unbelief,  but  proceeded  to  do  the 
work  which  answered  his  prayer  in 
both  its  possible  meanings.  He  re- 
sponded to  imperfect  confidence  by 
His  perfect  work  of  cure  ;  and  by  that 
perfect  work  of  cure  He  strengthened 
the  imperfect  confidence  which  it  had 
confessed.  Thus  He  educates  us  by 
His  answers — His  over-answers — to 
our  poor  desires ;  and  the  abundance 
of  His  gifts  rebukes  the  poverty  of  our 
petitions  more  emphatically  than  any 
words  of  remonstrance  beforehand 
could  have  done.  He  does  not  lecture 
us  into  faith,  but  He  blesses  us  into 
it. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Unbelief  helped. — Beautiful  to  the  eye 
of  the  father  was  the  lad  brought  to 
Jesus,  when  the  spasm  was  not  on  him. 
So  is  a  true  faith  in  Christ.  It  is  the 
child  of  the  heart.  It  is  the  image  of 
all  that  is  parental  and  Divine  in  the 
human  soul.  The  affections  so  naturally 
fasten  upon  it  as  upon  the  child  given 
to  the  arms  and  the  bosom — to  the 
kiss  and  fondnesses  of  maternal  and 
paternal  love.  We  so  speak  of  a 
favourite  idea  of  an  author,  an  artist, 
a  schemer — we  say,  It  is  the  child  of 
his  heart.  It  stands  out,  as  it  were, 
to  his  eye  as  a  child  born  to  him,  in 
whom  he  has  garnered  up  great  hopes, 
and  with  whom  is  linked  all  the  happi- 
ness of  life.  More  justly  may  this  be 
regarded  the  Christian's  faith  in  im- 
mortality, with  the  light  it  sheds  on 

332 


present  duty,  joy,  and  sorrow.     So  did 
Socrates   regard   his   fainter  and   less 
beautiful  hope  of  life   beyond   death. 
When  Socrates  held  his  last  conversa- 
tion with  his  scholars,  it  seemed  at  one 
time  that  all  the  arguments  for   the 
immortality  of  the  soul  had  been  over- 
thrown ;  and  as  it  was  a  custom  for  the 
Greeks  to  cut  off  their  hair  and  throw 
it  into  the  tomb  at  the  time   of  the 
burial  of  a  friend,  Socrates  took  hold 
of  the  long  drooping  locks  of  one  of  his 
disciples,  and  asked  if  that  pretty  hair 
would  not  be  cut  off   on  the  morrow 
— the  time  he  should  be  dead.     He  was 
answered  "  Yes  " ;  and  then  he  added, 
"  If  you  take  my  advice,  you  will  not 
stay  so  long  ! "  and  explained  his  mean- 
ing that  it  was  more  fit  that  the  death 
of  a  great  hope  be  mourned  than  the 
death  of  a  friend.     But  the  beautiful 
faith   of  many   a   heart   does   not   so 
much   die   as  it   may  be   said   to   be 
affected  with  spasms.     It  is  tortured. 
Its  harmonies  are  untuned,  and  it  is  a 
mournful  thing.     It  is  as   uncontrol- 
lable  as   the   poor   lad  to   whom   the 
apostles  could  bring  no  help,  so  that 
the   sorrow   of  that   father   is   but   a 
picture  of  the  troubles  of  him  whose 
faith  is  not  healthy,  strong,  and  happy. 
There  is   just  enough  of  life  in  their 
faith  for  them   to  say,   "  I   believe !  " 
but  there  is  weakness  enough  to  make 
them  add,  with  tears,  the  confession, 
"  Help  my  unbelief  !  "     To  Christ  must 
the  heart  come ;  and  the  result  of  patient 
waiting  upon  Him  shall  be,  the  languid 
pulse  of  faith  shall  be  quickened — the 
"  veins  shall  feel  the  rosy  tide,"  and  as 
Christ  lifted  up  the  lad  and  he  arose  to 
tremble  and  to  fall  no  more,  so  shall 
belief  be  released  of  all  the  spasms  of 
unbelief  and  the  fire  and  the  flood  be 
feared  no  more.     Take  to  Christ  thy 
faith.     Its  weakness  will  not   be   de- 
spised.    Thy  tears  will  be  pearls  in  the 
treasury  of  Christ.     Bring  to  Him  thy 
soul  by  adopting  the  simple  rule,  to  try 
by  the  spirit  of  His  life  all  doctrines 
and  theories,  all  creeds  and  articles. — 
Henry  Bacon, 

Ver.  25.   Lessons. — 1 .  Those  who  love 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IX, 


not  either  to  speak  or  to  hear  of  God 
are  possessed  with  a  dumb  and  deaf 
spirit,  from  which  Christ  alone  can 
deliver  them.  Happy  are  they  into 
whom  he  never  enters  any  more ! 
2.  What  would  not  God  grant  to  a 
faith  which  is  perfect,  since  even  to  an 
imperfect  one  He  grants  much  more 
than  it  asks?  3.  Jesus  Christ  never 
speaks  to  the  devil  but  with  threats, 
as  to  a  slave.  There  are  no  measures 
to  be  kept  where  there  is  no  longer 
the  least  hope  of  reconciliation  or 
charity. — P.  Quesnel. 

Vers.  26,  27.  Man's  extremity,  God's 
opportunity.  —  It  is  generally  when 
things  have  come  to  the  worst  that 
God  interposes  and  delivers — and  not 
until  then.  1.  Because  then  the  need 
of  help  is  the  greatest.  2.  Because 
then  there  is  the  clearest  evidence  of  the 
failure  of  all  human  help.  3.  Because 
then  deliverance  is  seen  to  be  of  God 
only.  4  Because  then  the  omnipo- 
tence of  God  is  displayed  in  accomplish- 
ing what  none  other  can  effect. 

Ver.  27.  "  Took  him  by  the  hand" — 
I.  Look  at  the  hand,  as  the  helping  or- 
gan and  instrument  of  a  man. — "  Jesus 
took  him  by  the  hand."  "  Very  well," 
some  of  you  say,  "  how  common,  how 
natural !  Men  take  each  other  by  the 
hand  every  day."  And  therefore,  my 
friends,  be  sure,  since  it  is  so  common 
and  so  natural,  that  it  is  most  beauti- 
ful and  most  significant,  when  we  con- 
sider it  closely.  Our  most  common 
and  familiar  actions  are  the  richest  in 
beauty  and  in  meaning.  The  most 
precious  thoughts  lie  hid  in  the  most 
homely  things. 

II.  This  action  of  the  Lord  appears 
to  be  most  characteristic  of  His  whole 
ministry  to  man. — In  Christ  the  hand 
of  God  touched  the  sick  and  tormented 
world  and  lifted  it  up ;  for  in  Christ 
God  brought  Himself  into  living,  lov- 
ing, and  helpful  contact  with  the  mass 
of  sin,  misery,  and  corruption  where- 
with the  devil  had  filled  His  world. 

III.  The  true  form  of  Christian 
activity  is  indicated  to  us  in  this 


hand-helping  of  our  Lord. — The  touch 
of  a  Christian's  hand,  the  tones  of  a 
Christian's  voice,  the  strong  sympathies 
of  a  Christian's  heart,  have  a  magic 
potency.  This  is  God's  own  appointed 
instrument  for  healing  and  blessing 
the  world.  You  are  not  following  His 
footsteps  if  you  are  not  entering  your- 
self into  some  chambers  of  sickness, 
some  homes  of  sorrow,  some  dens  of 
vice  and  crime ;  if  sinners  are  not 
feeling  that  you  are  not  afraid  of  them ; 
that  like  your  Master  you  have  come 
to  seek  them,  and  would  rather  have 
it  said  that  you  kept  company  with 
publicans  and  sinners  than  hear  your 
name  rung  from  the  trumpet  of  fame. 
— J.  B.  Brown. 

Christ's  humanity. — Christ  proves 
His  Divinity  by  His  humanity.  I 
know  He  is  Divine  because  He  was 
so  humane. 

The  helping  hand. — What  a  happi- 
ness is  it  when,  amidst  the  pangs  and 
struggles  of  conversion,  a  sinner  meets 
with  an  enlightened  guide,  a  charitable 
hand  to  lift  him  up  in  his  dejection,  to 
comfort  him  under  his  pains,  and  to 
lead  him  into  the  ways  of  God  !  But 
what  docility,  what  respect,  what  grati- 
tude, does  not  the  invincible  hand  of 
Christ,  which  is  concealed  under  this 
visible  one,  deserve  ? — P.  Quesnel, 

Ver.  28.  Dissatisfaction  with  failure 
a  hopeful  sign. — There  was  hopefulness 
in  the  fact  that  they  were  dissatisfied 
with  their  own  failing.  As  long  as  the 
Christian  Church  is  keenly  alive  to  the 
humiliation  which  it  brings  upon  itself 
and  the  dishonour  upon  its  Master  by 
its  failures  there  is  hope  of  it.  It  is 
when  the  Church  is  utterly  indifferent 
to  its  failures  in  casting  out  demons 
that  it  subsides  into  a  hopeless  con- 
dition. But  whenever  the  Church  of 
Christ  after  failing  to  do  its  work  feels 
keenly  the  disgrace  of  failure  and  will 
not  tolerate  it  until  at  least  the  secret 
is  explained,  but  goes  to  the  Master 
and  asks  Him  in  the  agony  of  a  keen 
disappointment,  "Why  could  not  we 
cast  him  out  ?  "  then  the  very  failure 
will   lead   up   to   nobler    attainments. 

333 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


The  Master  will  give  the  secret  of  sue-  ciation  and  its  counterpart  of  close  and 

cessful  work,  and  sooner  or  later  the  unbroken    intercommunion   with    the 

Church   will   arouse   itself  again  and  Father — -in  His  absolute  oneness  with 

rise  into  the  dignity  of  its  calling  and  the   Father — Jesus   went    up   to   His 

its  position. — D.  Davies.  struggles  with  evil  in  its  many  forms ; 

and   before   this  consecrated  and  en- 

Ver.  29.  Prayer  and  fasting. — It  is  godded  life   the    evil    invariably  fell, 

not  meant  that  faith  might  be  omitted  Demoniacal     possessions — no     matter 

(Matt.  xvii.  20);  nor  that  faith  must  what  their  form  or  how  great  their 

be  merged  in  prayer  and  fasting  :  but  intensity — could  not  live  in  the  white 

that  faith  must  be  in  maximum  degree,  light   that  flashed  from   perfect   self- 

and  that  consequently  those  spiritual  oblation  and  unbroken  intercourse  with 

exercises   which   condition   its  highest  Heaven.     Then  why  did  the  disciples 

attainable  exaltation  must  be  realised.  fail  ?     Because  they  fell  immeasurably 

There  must  be  prayer,  the  uplifting  of  short  of  the  Master's  character.     They 

desire  till  it  settle  in  the  will  of  God.  were  not  nearly  as  close  to  God  as  He 

There  must  be  fasting,  the  denying  of  was.     There  was  a  great  gulf  between 

all  in  the  periphery  of  self  that  would  their  puny  and  imbecile  faith  and  His 

hinder  the   uprising   of   the  desire  to  grand  hold  of  God. — R.  H.  Starr,  D.D. 

God,  or  its  absolute  repose  in  His  will. —  The  power    of  prayer. — It    is    not 

J.  Morison,  D.D.  enough  to  have  seen  the  vision  on  the 

Prayer  and  fasting,  in   the   life   of  mountain.    We  must  foster  the  memory 

Christ,  were  the  human  expression  of  of   it  by  our  prayers ;    for  prayer   is 

two  deeper  and  Diviner  things.     His  the  secret  of  holiness.     It  is  the  wit-  j 

prayers,  whether  on  mountain-slopes  or  ness  of  our  spirituality.     It  is  the  pro- 

at  open  grave-sides — whether  for  the  mise  of  the  victory  which  shall  be  ours, 

renewal  of  His  own  strength   or   for  We  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves — that 

the  benefit  of  others — were  the  outcome  is  the  law  of  the  spiritual  life.     But 

and   expression   of    a    personal   inter-  we   can  do  all  things   by  leaning   on 

communion  with  God,  of  which  His  life  a  higher  Power.     When  the  faith  of 

was  the  highest  exemplification  which  men  and  of  Churches  has  proved  impo- 

the  world  has  ever  seen.     His  fastings  tent  to  cope  with  the  evil  which  has 

were  the  expression — the  manifestation  vitiated  the  heart  of   society,  then  a 

to   man — of   a   self-denial   which   can  Divine  voice  is  heard  above  the  tumult, 

only  be  adequately  expressed  as  abso-  saying   only,    "  Bring   him    hither    to 

lute   and    unselfish    self-forgetfulness.  Me."     It  is  Thy  voice,  O  Lord  Jesus, 

In  this  utter  and  complete  self-renun-  and  we  will  obey  it. — J.  E.  G.  Wettdon. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  30—32. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xvii.  22,  23 ;  Luke  ix.  43-45.) 

More  explicit  prediction  of  sufferings. — After  His  transfiguration,  and  the 
performance  of  the  above  miracle,  Christ  proceeded  through  Galilee  towards 
Jerusalem.  He  travels  unknown,  in  order  that  He  might  instruct  His  disciples. 
An  example  of  how  we  may  spend  time  by  the  way. 

I.  He  explained  to  them  His  present  state :  "  The  Son  of  Man  is  delivered." — 
1.  He  had  already  been  delivered  by  the  Father — in  purpose,  promise,  and 
deed — to  stand  in  our  room!  2.  He  had  delivered  Himself  to  law  and  justice, 
to  be  a  curse  for  us.  3.  He  was  about  to  be  delivered  by  a  traitorous  disciple. 
Among  the  twelve  He  seems  to  have  for  a  while  a  retreat ;  but  He  is  betrayed. 
4.  The  Father  and  Himself,  in  thus  acting,  shewed  love — Judas,  avarice. 

II.  He  told  them  the  parties  into  whose  power  He  had  been  given :  "  Into 

334 


H0M1LETIG  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


the  hands  of  men."-^—l.  To  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  men  is  to  be  put  into 
their  power — to  do  to  Him  and  with  Him  as  they  chose.  2.  They  could  have 
this  power  only  by  special  permission — from  the  Father  and  Himself.  3.  It  is 
marvellous  that  He  should  have  been  delivered  into  the  hands  of  men.  God  in 
humanity.  (1)  It  tested  their  character,  and  brought  out  their  desperate 
wickedness.  (2)  It  proved  the  voluntariness  of  His  obedience.  (3)  It  shewed 
how  blind  sin  is  in  its  supposed  triumphs — how  God  brings  glory  out  of 
rebellion. 

III.  He  told  them  what  must  befall  Him  at  the  hands  of  men :  "  They  shall 
kill  Him." — 1.  That  Christ  was  to  die  was  not  now  foretold  for  the  first  time. 
(1)  In  sacrifice  He  had  been  slain  since  the  beginning  of  the  world.  (2)  His 
sufferings  had  been  predicted.  (3)  He  had  been  hated  in  His  law.  (4)  Killed 
in  His  people.  (5)  His  life  had  been  sought  already.  (6)  The  death  of  Christ 
was  no  singular  event  in  the  display  of  human  character  involved.  2.  Conscience 
bells  man  that  death  is  penal,  and  he  uses  it  as  such,  and  as  the  height  of 
punishment.  Man  proclaimed  Christ  guilty.  3.  Intensity  of  revenge  leads  him 
sometimes  to  add  torture  to  death.  Man  proclaimed  his  own  hatred  to  Christ. 
4.  This  death  of  Christ  was  necessary.  5.  Did  take  place — religion — law — 
power — people . 

IV.  He  revealed  to  them  the  future  by  telling  them  of  His  resurrection. — 

1.  Man's  power  and  agency  ended  with  His  death.  2.  Christ's  resurrection 
was  the  result  of  an  agency  neither  human  nor  satanic,  but  Divine. 
(1)  Scripture  prophecy  called  for  it.  (2)  His  office  and  undertaking  called  for 
it.  (3)  Divine  justice  called  for  it.  (4)  The  exalted  connexion  of  His  humanity 
called  for  it.  (5)  The  defeat  of  him  who  had  the  power  of  death  led  to  it. 
3.  Christ  followed  man  to  death.     Man  follows  Christ  to  life. 

Y.  We  see  that  Christ  had  His  sufferings  ever  in  view. — 1.  He  knew  Judas' 
part,  and  the  priests'  and  the  people's.     He  saw  in  their  bosoms  the  fire,  etc. 

2.  He  anticipates  the  Father's.  He  knew  His  ire.  3.  The  feelings  with  which 
He  approached  these  are  mentioned,  Luke  xii.  50;  John  xii.  27. 

VI.  He  also  kept  in  view  that  which  was  to  follow. — 1.  He  contemplated 
the  whole  truth,  and  the  one  part  balanced  with  the  other.  2.  "  For  the  joy 
that  was  set  before  Him,"  etc. — Jas.  Stewart. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE  -VERSES. 

Ver.    31.    Sufferings  and   glory  in-  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace."     As 

timately    connected. — Jesus    knew    be-  we  hold  a  candle  to  the  flame  until 

forehand   the   whole    amount    of    His  it  is  fully  lighted,  so  we   must   hold 

sufferings,  in  all  their  connexions  and  ourselves  to  this  subject  with  affecting 

bearings ;  and  therefore  never  foretold  meditation  (Luke  xxiv.  26 ;  1  Pet.  v.  1 ; 

them  without  likewise  foretelling  His  2  Cor.  xiii.  4). — J.  A.  Bengel. 
resurrection ;    neither  did  He  foretell 

this  without  foretelling  His  sufferings.  Ver.    32.    Lessons. — 1.    The    spirit 

Thus  doth  true  faith  apprehend   the  cannot  understand  what  the  flesh  is 

latter  and   the  former   as  one  entire  unwilling  to  suffer.    2.  This  seed  which 

matter,    and    makes    very    much    of  Christ  seems  unprofitably  to  cast  into 

everything  pertaining  to  either.     Here  a  barren  soil  will  bring  forth  fruit  in 

is  something  for  exercising  the  heart —  due  time.     3.  We  must  not  give  over 

something  which   must  never  be  lost  instructing,  how  dull  soever  the  under- 

sight  of,  in  the  darkest  night  of  afflic-  standings  of  men  are  as  to  heavenly 

tion,   or  in  the  clearest   blaze  of   the  truths :    the  Spirit  of   God  can  open 

terrestrial  noon ;   for  it  is  to   "  guide  them,    as    He    opened    those    of    the 

335 


chap.  ix.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  ST.  MARK. 


apostles.     4.  We  ought  to  be  ashamed  thrown   away,   but    will    bring    forth 

of  that  unreasonable  bashfulness  which  fruit.      If  you  confine   your   teacher, 

makes   us   choose   rather  to   continue  you  hinder  your  learning ;  if  you  limit 

ignorant  than  to  discover  our  ignorance.  his  discourses  to  your  present  appre- 

Nothing  but  humility  can  secure  us  hensions,  how  shall  he  raise  your  under  - 

from  it. — P.  Quesnel.  standings?      If    he    accommodate   all 

Understanding  must  precede  speech.  things  to  your  present  weakness,  you 

— It   is   not  to  no  purpose  to  speak  will  never  be  the  wiser  than  you  are 

things  that  are  not  presently  under-  now ;  you  will  be  always  in  swaddling 

stood.      Seed,   though    it   lies   in  the  clothes    (John   ii.    22,    xiv.    26). — Dr. 

ground  awhile  unseen,  is  not  lost  or  Whichcote. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  33—41. 

(Parallels  :  Matt,  xviii.  1-5  ;  Luke  ix.  46-50.) 

Receiving  and  forbidding. — Surely  the  disciples  might  have  found  something 
better  to  talk  about  on  the  road  from  Csesarea,  where  they  had  heard  from  Jesus 
of  His  sufferings,  than  this  miserable  wrangle  about  rank!  Probably  they 
understood  little  of  His  meaning,  but  hazily  thought  that  the  crisis  was  at  hand 
when  He  should  establish  the  kingdom  ;  and  so  their  ambition,  rather  than  their 
affection,  was  stirred.  Perhaps,  too,  the  dignity  bestowed  on  Peter  after  his 
confession,  and  the  favour  shewn  to  the  three  witnesses  of  the  Transfiguration, 
may  have  created  jealousy.  Matthew  makes  the  quarrel  to  have  been  about 
future  precedence ;  Mark,  about  present.  The  one  was  striven  for  with  a  view 
to  the  other. 

I.  Note  the  law  of  service  as  the  true  greatness  (vers.  33-35). — "  When  He 
was  in  the  house,  He  asked  them."  The  tongues  that  had  been  so  loud  on  the 
road  were  dumb  in  the  house — silenced  by  conscience.  His  servants  still  do  and 
say  many  things  on  the  road  which  they  would  not  do  if  they  saw  Him  close 
beside  them,  and  sometimes  fancy  that  these  escape  Him.  But  when  they  are 
"in  the  house"  with  Him,  they  will  find  that  He  knew  all  that  was  going  on; 
and  when  He  asks  the  account  of  it,  they  too  will  be  speechless.  "  If  any  man 
would  be  first,"  he  is  to  be  the  least  and  servant,  and  thereby  he  will  reach  his 
aim.  Of  course  that  involves  the  conception  of  the  nature  of  true  greatness  as 
service,  but  still  the  distinction  is  to  be  kept  in  view.  Farther,  "last  of  all"  is 
not  the  same  as  "  servant  of  all."  The  one  expresses  humility ;  the  other, 
ministry.  There  are  two  paradoxes  here.  The  lowest  is  the  highest — the  servant 
is  the  chief  ;  and  they  may  be  turned  round  with  equal  truth — the  highest  is  the 
lowest,  and  the  chief  is  the  servant.  The  former  tells  us  how  things  really  are, 
and  what  they  look  like,  when  seen  from  the  centre  by  His  eye.  The  latter 
prescribes  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  high  position.  In  fact  and  truth,  to 
sink  is  the  way  to  rise,  and  to  serve  is  the  way  to  rule — only  the  rise  and  the 
rule  are  of  another  sort  than  content  worldly  ambition,  and  the  Christian  must 
rectify  his  notions  of  what  loftiness  and  greatness  are.  On  the  other  hand, 
distinguishing  gifts  of  mind,  heart,  leisure,  position,  possessions,  or  anything 
else,  are  given  us  for  others,  and  bind  us  to  serve.  Both  things  follow  from  the 
nature  of  Christ's  kingdom,  which  is  a  kingdom  of  love ;  for  in  love  the  vulgar 
distinctions  of  higher  and  lower  are  abolished,  and  service  is  delight. 

II.  Note  the  exhibition  of  the  law  in  a  life. — Children  are  quick  at  finding 
out  who  loves  them,  and  there  would  always  be  some  hovering  near  for  a  smile 
from  Christ.  With  what  eyes  of  innocent  wonder  the  child  would  look  up  at 
Him,  as  He  gently  set  him  there,  in  the  open  space  in  front  of  Himself  !     Mark 

336 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


does  not  record  any  accompanying  words,  and  none  were  needed.  The  uncon- 
sciousness of  rank,  the  spontaneous  acceptance  of  inferiority,  the  absence  of 
claims  to  consideration  and  respect,  which  naturally  belong  to  childhood,  as  it 
ought  to  be,  and  give  it  winningness  and  grace,  are  the  marks  of  a  true  disciple, 
and  are  the  more  winning  in  such  because  they  are  not  of  nature,  but  regained 
by  self-abnegation.  What  the  child  is,  we  have  to  become.  This  child  was  the 
example  of  one  half  of  the  law,  being  "  least  of  all,"  and  perfectly  contented  to 
be  so ;  but  the  other  half  was  not  shewn  in  him,  for  his  little  hands  could  do 
but  small  service.  Was  there,  then,  no  example  in  this  scene  of  that  other 
requirement  ?  Surely  there  was  ;  for  the  child  was  not  left  standing,  shy  in  the 
middle,  but,  before  embarrassment  became  weeping,  was  caught  up  in  Christ's 
arms  and  folded  to  His  heart.  He  had  been  taken  as  the  instance  of  humility, 
and  he  then  became  the  subject  of  tender  ministry.  Christ  and  he  divided  the 
illustration  of  the  whole  law  between  them,  and  the  very  inmost  nature  of  true 
service  was  shewn  in  our  Lord's  loving  clasp  and  soothing  pressure  to  His  heart. 
Christ  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  child  not  as  the  example  of  service,  but  of  being 
served.  The  deep  words  carry  us  into  blessed  mysteries  which  recompense  the 
lowly  servants  and  lift  them  high  in  the  kingdom.  "  One  of  such  little  children  " 
means  those  who  are  thus  lowly,  unambitious,  and  unexacting.  "  In  My  name  " 
defines  the  motive  as  not  being  simple  humanity  or  benevolence,  but  the  distinct 
recognition  of  Christ's  command  and  loving  obedience  to  His  revealed  character. 
Unselfish  deeds  in  His  name  open  the  heart  for  more  of  Christ  and  God, 
and  bring  on  the  doer  the  blessing  of  fuller  insight,  closer  communion,  more 
complete  assimilation  to  his  Lord.  Therefore  such  service  is  the  road  to  the 
true  superiority  in  His  kingdom,  which  depends  altogether  on  the  measure 
of  His  own  nature  which  has  flowed  into  our  emptiness. 

III.  The  apostles'  conscience-stricken  confession  of  their  breach  of  the  law 
(vers.  38-40). — Peter  is  not  spokesman  this  time,  but  John,  whose  conscience 
was  more  quickly  pricked.  He  begins  to  think  that  perhaps  the  man  whom 
they  had  silenced  was  "  one  such  little  child,"  and  had  deserved  more  sympathetic 
treatment.  Pity  that  so  many  listen  to  the  law,  and  do  not,  like  John, 
feel  it  prick  them !  Christ  forbids  such  "  forbidding."  They  are  only  to 
forbid  those  who  do  speak  evil  of  Christ ;  to  all  others,  even  if  they  have 
not  reached  the  full  perception  of  truth,  they  are  to  extend  patient  forbearance 
and  guidance.  "  The  mouth  of  them  that  speak  lies  shall  be  stopped  " ;  but  the 
mouth  that  begins  to  stammer  His  name  is  to  be  taught  and  cherished. 

IV.  We  have  the  reward  of  receiving  Christ's  little  ones  set  over  against  the 
retribution  that  seizes  those  who  cause  them  to  stumble  (vers.  41,  42). — These 
verses  seem  to  resume  the  broken  thread  of  ver.  37,  whilst  they  also  link  on  to 
the  great  principle  laid  down  in  ver.  40.  He  that  is  not  against  is  for,  even  if 
he  only  gives  a  cup  of  water  because  they  are  Christ's.  'That  shews  that  there 
is  some  regard  for  Jesus  in  him.  It  is  a  germ  which  may  grow.  Such  a  one 
shall  certainly  have  his  reward.  That  does  not  mean  that  he  will  receive  it  in  a 
future  life,  but  that  here  his  deed  shall  bring  after  it  blessed  consequences  to 
himself.  Of  these  none  can  be  more  blessed  than  the  growing  regard  for  the  Name, 
which  already  is  in  some  degree  precious  to  him.  The  faintest  perception  of  Christ's 
beauty,  honestly  lived  out,  will  be  increased.  Note,  too,  the  person  spoken  of 
belongs  to  the  same  class  as  the  silenced  exorcist,  thus  reading  the  disciples  a 
farther  lesson.  Jesus  will  look  with  love  on  the  acts  which  even  a  John  wished 
to  forbid.  Note,  also,  that  the  disciples  here  are  the  recipients  of  the  kindness. 
They  are  no  longer  being  taught  to  receive  the  little  ones,  but  are  taught 
that  they  themselves  belong  to  that  class,  and  need  kindly  succour  from  these 
outsiders,  whom  they  had  proudly  thought  to  silence. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

0> 
z  337 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  33,  34.  Ambition  a  universal 
fault. — How  subtile  is  the  poison  of 
ambition !  how  difficult  for  a  man  to 
preserve  himself  from  it !  Few  people 
are  heartily  willing  to  be  below  others  ; 
they  find  as  much  difficulty  almost 
to  bear  an  equality  ;  and  much  the 
greatest  number  think  of  nothing  but 
gaining  a  superiority.  Who  would 
imagine  that  ambition  could  take  hold 
of  persons  who  had  forsaken  all,  and 
that  the  apostolical  college  should  not 
be  exempt  from  it  ?  In  short,  every- 
body is  subject  to  it,  and  nobody  is 
willing  to  own  it. — P.  Quesnel. 

Our  Lord's  question  brings  His 
hearers  back  to  their  higher  selves, 
and  they  can  again  see  that  to  be 
permitted  to  work  at  all  in  bringing 
God's  kingdom  to  pass  is  a  great 
blessing,  in  comparison  with  which 
all  petty  distinctions  between  this 
kind  of  work  and  that  disappear  out 
of  view.  We  see  in  this  instance 
how  the  mere  question  operates.  Could 
any  rebuke  have  met  the  purpose 
better  ?  Do  we  not  find  that  an 
accusation  commonly  provokes  a  de- 
fence, and  that  the  temper  which  is 
bent  on  finding  excuse  is  not  that 
which  leads  a  man  to  amend?  Our 
Lord  causes  men's  hearts  to  condemn 
them ;  and  when  so  condemned  they 
turn  in  their  trouble  to  Him,  and  find 
that  He  is  "  greater  than  their  hearts 
and  will  forgive  them  "  :  whereupon  a 
great  light  comes  into  their  minds.  This 
is  what  happened  here. — H.  Latham. 

Ver.  35.  Service  the  road  to  prefer- 
ment and  rule. — To  lord  it  over  men 
is  not  the  way  to  win  the  first  place 
in  their  hearts.  The  men  whom  we 
all  know,  admire,  praise,  whom  we 
cheerfully  acknowledge  as  our  superiors, 
are  those  who  live  for  others  rather 
than  for  themselves.  Men  will  resist 
mere  power,  but  they  bow  to  love. — 
S.  Cox,  D.D. 

True  greatness  consists  in  renouncing 
greatness   itself.     A   man   becomes   a 

338 


slave  to  it  when  once  he  desires  it  ; 
he  is  above  it  whenever  he  despises 
it.  The  primacy  or  first  place  in 
humility  is  the  only  one  to  which  we 
are  permitted  to  aspire.  To  dispute 
with  secular  persons,  which  should  be 
the  greatest,  is  a  thing  very  opposite 
to  an  ecclesiastical  spirit.  The  only 
thing  of  which  a  minister  of  Christ 
ought  to  be  ambitious  is  to  be  the  last 
of  all.  Humility  must  not  be  an  idle 
virtue,  but  a  virtue  useful  to  our 
neighbour.  It  places  its  chief  joy 
not  only  in  being  below  all,  but  even 
in  serving  all.  For  true  charity  is 
humble,  and  true  humility  is  charitable. 
— P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  36.  Look  at  the  children. — Look 
at  the  children  set  by  God  in  our 
midst.  Christ's  parable  to  His  disciples 
can  never  grow  stale,  for  always  there 
are  fresh  young  children  in  our  midst 
to  repeat  it.  They  are  there,  and 
when  we  are  sick  with  self-reflexion 
and  self- preoccupation  turn  and  look 
at  the  children.  How  simply  they 
take  their  days !  how  gaily  they  face 
them !  how  fresh  and  natural  the 
development  of  their  life !  how  un- 
trammelled by  questionings  about 
whether  they  are  properly  appreciated 
or  no !  They  go,  in  tears  perhaps  as 
well  as  laughter,  but  always  in  all- 
circumstances  trusting  to  be  just  what 
they  are,  trusting  to  their  own  native 
reality,  to  the  natural  self  as  it  acts 
in  its  spontaneous  freedom.  Love  is 
trust — trust  in  God,  the  trust  of  a 
child  that  he  was  made  to  be  what 
he  is.  We  take  our  being  on  trust. 
No  growth  in  self- direction  diminishes 
in  the  least  degree  the  absolute  necessity 
of  continuing  to  act  in  the  child's  trust. 
God's  creative  impulse  abides  from 
hour  to  hour  within  us,  feeding, 
moulding,  upholding,  making  us  what 
we  are ;  and  the  child  in  us  alone 
enables  us  to  respond  to  His  impulse, 
to  live  in  His  breath,  to  move  in  His 
iwill.       Oh,   what  sweet    and   tender 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


peace  would  spring  up  within  our  have  been  so  lovingly  commended  by 
secret  souls  if  deep  within,  below,  her  Lord ;  they,  in  outward  shew, 
and  beyond  all  the  self- questionings  poor,  helpless,  weak,  ignorant,  having 
we  could  just  quietly  lie  back  in  God  everything  to  learn — to  the  eye  of 
like  a  child  in  the  arms  of  Jesus!  faith,  cleansed  in  their  Redeemer's 
There  is  a  great  picture  by  Watts,  blood,  waited  upon  and  guarded  by 
charged  with  his  mystic  passion,  in  the  highest  angels,  clad  in  the  white 
which  an  old  man,  worn  and  feeble,  robes  of  their  baptismal  purity,  rich  in 
lies  back  in  his  chair,  dying,  and  invisible  treasures,  insensible  to  our 
round  him,  dropped  from  his  nerveless  poor  outward  world,  and  wrapped  in 
hands,  lie  all  the  gifts  of  his  culture,  a  world  unseen,  and  set  forth  as  our 
the  tools  and  signs  of  all  that  has  example  that  we  should  become  such 
been  his  in  philosophy,  in  science  and  as  they.  Of  a  truth,  whether  we  con- 
art.  Wearily  he  fades  away,  amid  template  them  in  their  purity,  or  our 
the  wreck  of  his  highest  human  ex-  Saviour's  "  woe  on  such  as  cause  them 
periences  ;  and  then  up  above  a  great  to  offend,"  one  would  alike  shrink  from 
angel,  benignant  and  strong,  bears  off  the  duty  of  forming  what  is  of  so  great 
his  soul,  new-born  through  death  in  price  and  yet  so  frail,  but  that  a  duty 
the  shape  of  a  baby  child,  soft,  white,  is  laid  upon  us,  yea,  "  woe  is  on  us,  if 
and  warm.  A  child-soul — that  is  what  we  do  it  not  "  ;  and  it  is  not  we  alone 
a  man  should  have  within  him  at  the  who  do  it,  but  He  who  saith,  "  Whoso 
last,  still  living  within  him  to  surrender  receiveth  one  such  little  child  in  My 
at  death  to  his  God.  It  is  as  a  little  name  receiveth  Me  " ;  He  whose  face 
child  that  he  shall  enter  that  new  their  angels  in  heaven  do  always 
kingdom  of  love,  as  a  little  child  that  behold. — E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 
he  should  be  taken  up  into  the  arms  "Such  children"  —The  term  includes 
of  Jesus  and  set  there  in  the  midst. —  all  who  are  in  any  way  like  such 
Canon  Scott- Holland.  children  :  as,  for  instance,  all  who  are 

Childhood  our  model. — Was  it  the  helpless,  as  children  are;  all  who  are 
boy  Ignatius  or  the  little  son  of  Peter  ?  simple-minded,  or  even  weak  in  mind  ; 
We  know  not.  It  was  childhood,  and  or,  particularly,  all  who  are  young  in 
not  the  particular  child,  which  Jesus  the  faith,  who,  like  children,  require 
commended  as  the  model  of  the  Chris-  the  "  milk  "  of  the  Word,  and  not  its 
tian  life.  In  the  condensed  report  of  "  strong  meat."— M.  F.  Sadler. 
the  talk  of  Jesus  at  this  time,  Matthew  "  In  My  name." — That  is,  for  My 
tells  us  about  " turning"  from  the  sake;  not  only  because  they  are  bap- 
natural  or  selfish  mind  to  that  of  tised  or  belong  to  Christian  parents, 
the  child's,  or  about  being  "  con-  though  these  are  good  reasons  indeed, 
verted."  Luke  emphasises  the  fact  but  because  they  partake  of  the  nature 
that  Jesus  read  the  hearts  of  His  which  Christ  took  upon  Him,  because 
disciples  and  spoke  directly  to  these,  they  belong  to  the  race  which  Christ 
Mark  selects  the  blessedness  of  lowly  redeemed — because  like  Him  they  are 
service  as  the  theme  most  urged  upon  poor,  and  have  no  settled  homes,  or 
His  followers  by  Him  who  emptied  because  He  may  be  honoured  in  their 
Himself  of  His  glory.  In  all  three  after-life.  Such  children  are  received 
the  main  purpose  of  Jesus  was  to  shew  in  Christ's  name  not  only  in  orphanages 
that  the  Christian  life  is  but  a  glorified  or  in  Sunday-schools,  but  by  many  of 
childhood.  ,  the  Christ-loving  poor  who  have  chil- 
dren of  their  own,  and  yet  take  into 

Vers.  37.  The  Church  the  guardian  of  their  homes  some  poor  waif  or  stray, 

the  children. — The  care  taken  of  these  and  cherish  it  as  their  own  flesh  and 

little  ones  may  be  regarded  as  among  blood  for  no  reward  except  the  Lord's 

the  tests  of   the  sound  state   of   any  approval. — Ibid. 

branch  of  the  Church  to  which  they  "Receiveth  Me." — The  grace  of  this 

339 


CUAP.    IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


promise  seems  almost  incredible.  What 
an  honour  would  any  Christian  have 
esteemed  it  if  he  had  been  permitted 
to  receive  Christ  under  his  roof  for 
a  single  hour,  and  yet  that  receiv- 
ing might  have  been  external  and 
transitory;  but  the  Lord  here  un- 
doubtedly promises  that  to  receive  a 
little  one  in  His  name  is  to  receive 
Him  effectually. — Ibid. 

Yers.  38-40.  Christian  usefulness. — 
1.  The  great  principle  of  Christian 
usefulness.  He  whose  first  concern 
it  is  to  be  faithful  to  Christ,  as  the 
Almighty  Saviour  of  the  human  race 
and  the  Lord  of  the  dead  and  of  the 
living,  will  be  equally  faithful  and 
pure  in  his  conduct  to  the  world  around 
him :  earnest  in  selecting  the  means 
and  opportunities  of  usefulness ;  active 
and  conscientious  in  applying  them  ; 
firm  in  his  purpose,  in  opposition  both 
to  foreseen  and  to  unexpected  difficulties, 
where  he  sees  the  good  which  may  be 
done.  2.  The  obstructions  to  con- 
scientious usefulness  which  in  every 
age  of  the  world  arise  from  false 
conceptions  or  from  a  deliberate  per- 
version of  the  genuine  spirit  of  the 
gospel.  3.  The  indulgence  which  is 
due  from  sincere  believers  to  the  pure 
intentions  of  useful  and  upright  men. 
Though  the  means  employed  should 
not  embrace  every  instrument  of  use- 
fulness which  our  peculiar  views  or 
habits  might  suggest  to  ourselves, 
when  the  general  effect  is  visible  and 
the  means  selected  are  in  themselves 
beyond  all  exception,  we  are  bound  to 
regard  the  labours  of  the  men  who  are 
employed  together  in  conducting  them 
as  genuine  service  to  our  Blessed 
Master,  and  to  respect  them  as 
fellow-workers  together  with  Him. — 
H.  M.  Wellwood. 

Ver.  38.  Indiscreet  zeal. — The  most 
holy  persons  have  sometimes  occasion 
to  secure  themselves  from  secret 
emulations.  We  very  easily  mingle 
our  own  interests  with  those  of  God ; 
and  our  vanity  uses  the  glory  of  His 
name  only  as  a  veil.    A  preacher  some- 

340 


times  imagines  that  his  only  desire  is 
that  men  should  follow  Christ  and 
adhere  to  His  Word  ;  and  it  is  himself 
whom  he  desires  they  should  follow, 
and  to  whom  he  is  very  glad  to  find 
them  adhere.  John  has  fewer  imita- 
tors of  that  perfect  freedom  from  self- 
interest  which  he  had  after  the  descent 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  than  he  has  of  this 
defect  in  his  state  of  imperfection.  A 
man  willingly  approves  the  good  which 
is  done  by  others,  when  he  loves  good 
for  its  own  sake  and  God  for  His. — 
P.  Quesnel. 

The  confidence  between  Master  and 
disciple  evidenced  by  this  free  avowal 
is  to  be  marked :  if  the  disciples  had 
been  set  right  whenever  they  were 
wrong,  or  had  frequently  met  with 
reproach,  such  confidence  might  not 
have  grown  up.  It  was  much  helped 
on  by  their  being  sure  that  their 
Master  would  understand  them  :  what 
often  keeps  young  people  from  opening 
their  hearts  to  their  elders  is  that  they 
are  afraid  of  not  being  understood. 
But  though  our  Lord  is  very  gentle  in 
His  treatment  of  the  particular  case, 
yet  He  speaks  strongly  of  the  distemper 
of  which  a  symptom  had  appeared — of 
the  evil  humour  which  vents  itself  in 
rebuffs. — H.  Latham. 

Yer.  39.  The  ChurcKs  duty  as  to 
irregular  preachers. — There  are  great 
numbers  of  persons  amongst  us  who 
are  preaching  Christ  after  their  fashion 
who  have  had  not  only  no  commission 
from  the  Church,  but  no  training  even 
in  the  Scriptures  from  any  professedly 
religious  body  whatsoever.  Are  we 
of  the  Church  to  forbid  them,  i.e.  to 
denounce  them  as  necessarily  schis- 
matic and  anti- Christian  ?  I  think 
that  this  place,  together  with  such 
words  as  those  in  Phil.  i.  18,  settles 
the  matter  that  we  are  not.  But  then 
we  are  bound  to  do  that  which  will 
entail  upon  ourselves  far  more  trouble 
and  odium.  We  are  bound  to  witness 
to  such  preachers  and  their  followers 
that  Christ  desires  the  absolute  Unity 
of  His  Church,  and  exhibited  His  desire 
by    very    earnestly    praying    for    it 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  IX. 


(John  xvii.  20,  21);  so  that  if  they 
preach  such  things  as  conversion  and 
present  acceptance  of  Christ  without 
regard  to  the  truth  that  there  is  not 
only  "  one  Spirit "  but  "one  Body,"  they 
may  destroy  with  one  hand  what  they 
think  they  build  up  with  the  other. 
We  are  bound  also  to  tell  them  that 
in  all  probability  they  hold  an  imper- 
fect, indeed  a  very  mutilated  Chris- 
tianity ;  for  all  such  persons  are,  by 
the  necessity  of  their  position  as  ex- 
ternal to  the  Catholic  Church,  unable 
to  comprehend  the  truths  which  relate 
to  the  Mystical  Body,  and  in  con- 
sequence they  ignore  the  leading  truths 
of  the  apostolic  writings  (Rom.  vi., 
xii.  1-4;  1  Cor.  vi.  18-20,  x.  16-18, 
xii.  12-30;  Eph.  i.  22,  23,  iii.  6,  iv. 
4-6) ;  they  in  consequence  disparage 
altogether  the  grace  of  Sacraments, 
have  most  imperfect  views  of  the  holi- 
ness of  the  Christian's  body,  and  of  set 
purpose  absolve  their  followers  from 
all  need  of  preparation  for  the  judg- 
ment of  Christ.  The  loss  of  these 
truths  we  should  bring  before  them 
very  prayerfully  and  very  humbly, 
knowing  that  the  Church  herself  has 
in  time  past  through  her  ministers 
imperfectly  taught  them  ;  but  still  we 
should  set  them  before  them  very 
decidedly,  for  they  are  not  our  truths, 
but  the  Lord's,  and  in  so  doing  we 
shall  not  be  without  success. — M.  F, 
Sadler. 

"Forbid  him  not." — We  can  con- 
ceive what  such  an  utterance  as  this 
of  Jesus  was  to  the  disciples  as  they 
listened  to  Him.  Was  it  a  disappoint- 
ment that  came  to  them?  I  think 
not.  I  think  they  were  too  great  and 
noble  men  for  that.  I  can  almost  see 
the  face  of  John  glowing  with  satisfac- 
tion and  delight,  and  a  certain  release 
and  freedom  coming  to  his  soul.  I  can 
almost  hear  him  say :  "  Then  I  need 
not  have  rebuked  that  man.  Then 
my  Master  will  let  me  rejoice  in  every 
work  that  is  being  done  in  His  name, 
no  matter  how  imperfectly  and  ir- 
regularly it  may  be  done."  Oh,  let 
that  release  come  to  your  souls  out  of 
the  words  of  Jesus!     Do  not  think 


yourselves  ever  bound  to  be  narrow 
and  exclusive  in  jealousy  for  your 
Lord.  Believe  He  wants  you  to  go 
through  the  world  as  He  went  through 
the  world,  seeking  out  what  men  are 
doing  of  good  and  rejoicing  in  that 
good. — Bishop  Phillips  Brooks. 

Christ  suffers  many  things  in  His 
Church  which  are  done  without  His 
mission;  but  He  makes  them  con- 
tribute to  the  establishment  of  His 
kingdom.  Whatever  reason  we  may 
have  to  fear  that  some  persons  will 
not  persevere  in  goodness,  we  must 
notwithstanding  suffer  them  to  con- 
tinue their  endeavours,  when  they 
appear  to  be  anyways  useful.  God 
Himself  authorises  such  persons,  since 
it  is  He  who  performs  the  good  in  them. 
It  is  to  make  the  world  promote  and 
carry  on  God's  work,  for  a  man  to 
engage  worldly  people  to  do  good,  or 
to  favour  the  Church.  And  this  is 
sometimes  even  a  beginning  of  their 
salvation. — P.  Quesnel. 

"Ver.  40.  On  Christ's  side. — Not  in 
the  truth  we  believe,  although  it  is 
good  to  believe  all  truth,  lies  the  real 
sanction  and  warrant  of  our  belonging 
to  our  Master,  Christ.  It  is  not  in 
the  regularity  of  our  association  with 
the  Church,  although  it  is  good  to 
be  associated  with  that  Church  which 
He  founded,  and  which  has  come 
down  through  the  ages  from  Him. 
Ultimately  there  is  only  this  test.  We 
are  on  His  side  if  we  are  not  against 
Him.  If  our  work  in  the  world  is 
helping  men  to  be  wicked  instead  of 
good,  then,  whatever  may  be  our  saying 
or  our  creed  or  our  part  in  the  as- 
semblies of  the  Church,  we  are  none 
of  Jesus  Christ's. — Bishop  Phillips 
Brooks. 

Ver.  41.  Sympathy  with  Christ's 
ministers. — I.  The  need  of  sympathy 
with  ministers  of  the  gospel  is  im- 
plied.— 1.  Destitution  may  arise  from 
thoroughness  of  devotion  to  their  work. 
Care  for  the  spiritual  may  trespass 
upon  the  temporal.  History  of  Jesus ; 
Paul.     2.  Destitution  may  arise  from 

341 


chap.  IX.  EOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


the  opposition  of  the  world  to  their  ship.      We  are  all  Christ's — (1)  By 

work.     Spoiling  of  goods.     3.   Desti-  creation.    (2)  By  redemption.    (3)  By 

tution    may   arise   from   Divine   pro-  baptism.      2.    Privilege.      (1)    Special 

vidence,  in  order  to  test  their  sincerity  care.        (2)     Identity     of     interests, 

in  the  work.  (3)  High   dignity.     3.  Responsibility. 

II.  The  nature  of  sympathy  with  (1)  To  live  for  Christ.  (2)  To  live 
ministers  of  the  gospel  is  described. —  like  Christ.  (3)  To  confess  Christ. — 
2.  It  may  be  small  in  quantity.     2.  It  R.  Roberts. 

may  be  exhibited  by  any  one.     3.  It  The  reward  for  Christian  service. — 

must  be  from  regard  to  Christ.  The  action  is  worthy  and  rewardable, 

III.  The  reward  of  sympathy  with  and  shall  therefore  obtain  reward. 
gospel  ministers  is  pledged. — 1.  It  Not  that  there  is  anything  in  it  that 
will  be  substantial  acknowledgment,  should  or  could  be  erected  on  a  high 
2.  It  will  be  personally  enjoyed.  3.  It  pedestal  of  merit.  But,  being  right 
is  Divinely  assured. — B.  D.  Johns.  and    good,   God   will    smile  on    it. — 

"  Ye  belong  to  Christ. — 1.  Proprietor-  J.  Morison,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verm  42—50. 

(Parallel:  Matt,  xviii.  6-9.) 

Vers.  42-48.  Offences. — "The  law  was  given  by  Moses ;  grace  and  truth  came 
by  Jesus  Christ."  It  seems  as  though  the  contrast  was  suggested.  I  think  it  was. 
But  men  make  a  tremendous  mistake  if  they  imagine  that  gentleness  means  weak- 
ness, or  that  only  in  obtrusive  terribleness  comes  a  revelation  of  strength.  The 
speech  of  Jesus  is  the  mightiest  utterance  the  world  has  ever  heard.  The  law 
of  life  and  love,  the  call  to  righteousness  which  He  delivered,  is  the  most  awfully 
soul-searching,  all-encompassing,  fiery  word  which  has  ever  reached  the  listening 
ears  and  beating  hearts  of  men.  The  only  salvation  worth  the  having  is  a 
salvation  unto  God.  A  purpose  which  alone  satisfies  Him  as  being  worthy  of 
the  Infinite  Father  is  to  renew  His  own  image  in  His  children,  and  make  us 
like  unto  Himself. 

I.  Christian  life  is  a  thorough  consecration. — Anything  less  than  this  turns 
religion  into  a  dismal  burden.  But  this  makes  its  face  to  shine  with  the 
very  glory  of  God,  and  its  power  comes  to  us  as  an  uplifting  joy,  a  thrilling 
inspiration;  thy  whole  self,  body,  mind,  heart,  soul,  hallowed,  consecrated, 
dedicated.  What  do  you  think  of  it  ?  This  is  to  be,  this  is  the  fulness  of  the 
blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  High,  great,  difficult,  beyond  our  capacity. 
Yes,  and  therefore  comes  the  salvation  from  the  everlasting,  Almighty  One. 
He  is  able  and  He  is  patient.  What  He  begins  He  can  complete.  Our  world 
of  weak,  erring,  human  life  has  known  one  Being  who  maintained  a  complete, 
supreme,  unswerving  consecration.  He  is  the  Saviour  of  men.  He  inbreathes 
His  life ;  His  mind,  His  spirit,  may  be  in  us.  Men  have  felt  His  spell  and 
realised  His  power.  His  promise  has  been  so  far  known  to  be  a  great  reality 
that  it  brought  faith  enough  to  a  disciple  to  say,  "We  shall  be  like  Him." 

II.  Now  it  will  be  evident,  if  we  pause  to  think,  that,  as  the  sphere  of  our 
being  rises,  dangers  and  hindrances  will  come,  which  lower  down  may  not  be 
SO  obtrusive.  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  desires,  passions,  activities,  words, 
deeds,  thoughts,  which  are  wrong  in  themselves.  The  Christian  has  no  business 
with  them.  The  right  eye,  the  right  hand,  are  not  wrong  things.  They  are 
good  faculties,  good  energies,  which  are  a  splendid  gift  for  consecrated  use.  The 
advice  of  the  fanatic  or  the  coward  is,  "  Destroy  the  sense,  blind  it,  muffle  it, 

342  '  '      ' 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


for  in  it  lies  a  danger";  and  out  of  that  have  come  all  the  austerities  of  the 
ascetic,  all  the  inhumanity  of  the  Stoic,  but  with  no  real  redemption.  The 
advice  of  the  presumptuous  fatalist  is,  "  Withhold  not  thy  heart  from  any  joy ; 
you  are  not  responsible  for  your  weakness  or  your  passion " ;  and  out  of  that 
have  come  the  degradation  of  men,  the  fierce  and  terrible  lines  which  sensual 
sin  brands  upon  the  sinner's  face.  In  the  one  extreme  a  man  tries  to  have 
nothing  to  pray  for ;  in  the  other  he  dares  to  pray  for  the  working  of  a  miracle 
in  aid  of  wrong.  We  must  avoid  both  presumption  and  distrust.  Broadly 
speaking,  I  suppose  the  eye  may  stand  for  that  which  is  beautiful,  pleasurable, 
and  the  hand  for  that  which  is  active  and  energetic ;  in  a  word,  occupation  and 
recreation,  labour  and  luxury.  These  are  wholesome,  natural,  essential,  to  our 
due  being.  Without  them  a  man  is  manifestly  maimed.  But,  says  Jesus,  it 
is  better  to  be  maimed  than  slain.  The  limb  or  the  body,  the  organ  or  the 
whole  self :  can  there  be  any  question  as  to  which  ?  I  have  known  men  on 
what  was  said  to  be  the  way  to  fortune,  who  seemed  to  me  to  be  stumbling 
on  a  footway  like  that  outside  Jerusalem,  where  the  precipice  overhung  Gehenna. 
I  have  known  men,  said  to  be  ruined,  from  whom  God  had  mercifully  cut  away 
the  peril  of  their  soul. 

III.  But  Jesus  here,  as  always,  lays  His  appeal  upon  conscience. — This  alone 
would  have  made  Him  solitary  among  all  leaders  and  teachers.  He  clears 
conscience  from  its  shadow,  and  says,  "  Look  to  its  light " — your  own  conscience, 
not  another  man's.  You  have  no  business  with  the  hands  and  eyes  of  others; 
you  have  great  business  with  your  own.  Looking  unto  Jesus,  you  will  not  be 
led  astray.  Maintaining  communion  with  Him,  conscience  will  be  lustrous 
and  clear.  Cling  to  Him,  your  Saviour.  Obey  His  voice,  your  Lord. — 
D.  J.  Hamer. 

Ver.  50.  The  salt  of  Christian  profession. — "Salt  is  good."  The  wise  son  of 
Sirach  says,  "  The  principal  things  for  the  whole  of  a  man's  life  are  water,  fire, 
iron,  and  salt " ;  after  which  follow  in  their  turn  "  flour  of  wheat,  honey,  milk 
and  the  blood  of  the  grape,  and  oil,  and  clothing."  Amongst  the  good  things  of 
this  present  life — the  natural  productions  which  the  Giver  of  all  good  has  caused 
to  exist  for  the  use  and  benefit  of  His  creatures — we  may  surely  reckon  a 
condiment  so  indispensable  to  health  and  enjoyment.  Yes,  "salt  is  good"; 
and  it  cannot  lose  its  goodness  or  usefulness  so  long  as  it  is  salt. 

I.  In  the  symbolical  language  of  Scripture,  salt  is  applied  in  several  ways, 
according  to  its  various  uses  and  properties. — 1.  The  first  and  most  obvious 
of  all  is  derived  from  its  seasoning  property.  Salt  makes  savoury  and  palatable 
that  which  has  no  taste  of  its  own  (Job  vi.  6).  Divine  grace  communicates  a 
similar  relish  to  everything  in  which  it  may  be  said  to  form  an  ingredient — 
to  every  part  of  the  life  and  conversation  of  him  who  is  under  its  influence,  but 
especially  to  his  familiar  discourse.  Hence  the  apostolic  admonition  (Col.  iv.  6). 
And  to  this  same  seasoning  virtue  our  Lord  Himself  alludes  when  He  says  to 
His  disciples,  "Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth" — as  if  all  that  is  in  the  world 
were  utterly  tasteless  and  unpalatable  in  the  judgment  of  truth  until  seasoned 
and  as  it  were  leavened  with  the  holy  doctrines  and  pure  principles  of  Chris- 
tianity. "  But  if  the  salt  have  lost  its  saltness,  wherewith  will  ye  season  it  ?  " 
What  other  more  powerful  or  more  salutary  religion  remains  behind  to  renovate 
the  enfeebled  energies  of  a  corrupt  and  degenerate  Christianity  ?  2.  This  article 
entering  so  largely  into  the  arrangements  of  the  table,  especially  in  the  more 
simple  forms  of  society,  we  need  not  be  surprised  to  find  it  sometimes  put  for 
food  in  general.  To  "  eat  a  person's  salt "  carries  with  it  among  Eastern  nations 
the  same  idea  as  with  us  "  to  eat  a  person's  bread,"  i.e.  to  be  in  his  domestic 
service  or  otherwise  employed  by  him  at  a  salary  (a  term  which  derived  its 

.  343 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


origin  from  the  Latin  word  for  salt).  See  Ezra  iv.  14,  text  and  margin.  Hence 
also  salt  became  a  symbol  of  hospitality  and  friendship;  and  an  Arab  of  the 
present  day  regards  every  one  who  has  eaten  salt  with  him  as  his  sworn  friend 
and  brother,  whom  he  is  bound  on  all  occasions  to  protect.  Connected  with  this 
idea  is  the  custom  of  eating  a  few  grains  of  salt  at  the  ratification  of  covenants. 
See  Num.  xviii.  19 ;  Lev.  ii.  13.  3.  But  that  which  is  ever  so  good  in  modera- 
tion and  in  its  proper  place  may  without  those  conditions  be  turned  into  the 
sorest  of  evils.  "  Salt  is  good " ;  but  when  it  covers  the  whole  face  of  the 
country,  and  the  husbandman  sees  nothing  around  him  but  "  brimstone  and  salt 
and  burning"  (Deut.  xxix.  23),  this  most  useful  commodity  becomes  another 
word  for  barrenness  and  desolation.  See  Jer.  xvii.  6 ;  Ps.  cvii.  34,  margin.  To 
this  head  may  probably  be  referred  the  custom  of  sowing  salt  (Judg.  ix.  45)  in 
a  place  which  was  intended  to  be  devoted  to  perpetual  desolation. 

II.  Whereas  this  substance  is  used  to  season  others,  we  know  of  no  other 
which  can  be  made  use  of  to  impart  a  savour  to  salt. — Insipid  salt  may 
therefore  be  regarded  as  another  name  for  whatever  is  useless  and  valueless, 
not  in  its  own  nature,  but  as  being  devoid  of  those  very  properties  in  which 
its  excellence  consists.  1.  Salt  that  has  lost  its  saltness  may  fitly  represent  a 
religious  profession  which  does  not  influence  the  conduct.  The  profession  of 
religion  is  good.  It  is  good  to  see  a  man  framing  his  life,  arranging  his  habits, 
ordering  his  family,  on  the  supposition  that  "  God  is,  and  that  He  is  a  rewarder 
of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him."  It  is  good  to  see  him  entering  into  his 
closet,  and  shutting  the  door  and  praying  to  his  Father  which  seeth  in  secret. 
It  is  good  to  see  him  coming  forth  from  his  private  devotions,  and  summoning 
his  family  to  join  with  him  in  domestic  worship.  It  is  good  to  see  him  and 
them  in  the  Lord's  house  on  the  Lord's  Day,  and  especially  at  the  altar  to 
receive  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Body  and  Blood.  All  these  things  are  good, 
for  the  same  reason  that  salt  is  good — because  of  their  aptitude  to  impregnate 
and  season  other  things,  all  things,  in  fact,  with  which  they  are  mixed  up. 
This  is  the  proper  virtue  and  natural  operation  of  a  man's  religious  profession ; 
the  whole  life  ought  to  taste  of  it.  But,  alas,  how  seldom  is  this  so !  How  few 
are  there  amongst  the  multitude  of  professing  Christians  who  in  the  common 
concerns  of  life  think  and  speak  and  act  differently  from  those  who  are  openly 
living  without  God  in  the  world !  2.  Salt  that  has  lost  its  saltness  may  also 
fitly  represent  a  Christian  who  does  no  good  to  others.  Just  as  the  use  of  salt 
is  to  season  not  itself  but  other  things  which  either  have  no  savour  of  their  own 
or  an  unpleasant  one,  so  the  use  of  Christianity  is  to  season  an  ungodly  and 
unbelieving  world  with  the  truths  and  principles  of  pure  and  undefiled  religion. 
This  can  only  be  accomplished  by  the  exertions  of  individual  Christians,  each 
seeking  the  good  and  promoting  the  eternal  salvation  of  all  who  come  within 
the  circle  of  his  influence.  "  This,"  says  Chrysostom,  "  is  the  definition  of 
Christianity — to  care  for  the  salvation  of  others.  Nothing  is  so  frivolous  and 
insipid  as  a  Christian  who  does  not  save  others."  And  yet  there  are  many  who 
seem  to  understand  that  text,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation,"  in  the  same 
way  as  if  they  had  been  told  to  mind  their  own  business  and  not  to  trouble 
themselves  about  the  religious  state  of  others.  They  do  work  out  their  own 
salvation,  at  least  according  to  their  views  of  the  method  of  working  it.  They 
are  zealous  towards  God,  diligent  in  the  performance  of  religious  duties,  strict 
moralists,  and  blameless  in  all  the  common  duties  and  relations  of  life.  Thus 
they  may  be  said  to  "  have  salt  in  themselves."  But  how  do  they  realise  that 
other  and  higher  requirement,  to  be  "  the  salt  of  the  earth  "  ?  Where  are  their 
seasoning  qualities  ?  Wherein  does  such  a  man  "  please  his  neighbour  for  his 
good  to  edification"?  Does  he  "command  his  children  and  his  household  after 
him  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord  "  ?     Does  he  seek  the  good  of  the  city  where 

344 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  ix. 


he  dwells,  doing  all  in  his  power  to  discountenance  wickedness  and  vice,  and  to 
season  that  locality  with  which  he  is  more  immediately  connected,  with  the 
salt  of  true  religion  and  virtue  ?  Do  his  efforts  reach  forth  beyond  the  narrow 
limits  and  petty  concerns  of  a  single  locality  ?  and  does  he  cast  in  his  mite  of 
salt  to  the  general  stock  which  is  employed  in  seasoning,  converting,  and  evan- 
gelising the  world?  3.  What  has  been  said  of  the  duty  of  all  Christians  to 
seek  the  spiritual  good  of  others  applies  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  priesthood 
of  the  Church.  Insipid  salt  is  but  a  feeble  illustration  of  the  character  of  a 
careless  and  unfaithful  "minister  of  Christ  and  steward  of  the  mysteries  of 
God  " — as  to  be  "  cast  out  and  trodden  underfoot  of  men  "  but  faintly  shadows 
forth  his  inevitable  doom. 

III.  Improvement  under  religions  advantages  depends  in  a  great  measure 
upon  ourselves. — "  The  Word  preached,"  be  it  ever  so  highly  seasoned,  will  not 
profit  unless  it  be  "mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  hear  it."  "Salt  is  good"; 
but  there  are  some  substances  so  utterly  corrupt  and  stinking  as  to  bid  defiance 
to  its  correcting  and  preserving  power.  We  Christian  preachers  are,  according 
to  St.  Paul,  "a  sweet  savour  of  Christ,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  ii.  15,  16).  The  salt  is  the 
same ;  its  natural  properties  are  the  same ;  but,  being  applied  to  one,  it  preserves 
him  from  corruption  and  seasons  him  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  while,  being 
sprinkled  on  another,  it  salts  him  as  a  sacrifice  to  be  offered  up  to  the  Divine 
vengeance,  and  makes  him  indestructible  only  for  the  worm  that  dieth  not,  and 
the  fire  that  cannot  be  quenched,  until  the  man's  heart  is  humbled  to  the  dust 
and  he  cries  aloud  for  mercy  to  the  God  whose  grace  he  has  heretofore  spurned 
If  therefore  ye  would  escape  the  agonies  of  hell,  "take  heed  what  ye  hear" 
and  "  how  ye  hear."  "  Receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted  Word,"  etc.  "  Give 
no  place  to  the  devil,"  who  is  ever  watching  his  opportunity  to  "take  away  the 
Word  out  of  your  hearts,"  etc.  "  Keep  yourselves  unspotted  from  the  world," 
which  is  always  at  hand  with  its  contaminating  influence,  "  the  cares  and  riches 
and  pleasures  of  this  life,"  to  choke  the  Word  and  make  it  unfruitful.  And 
finally,  pray  constantly  to  God  to  give  you  more  and  more  of  that  "  honest  and 
good  heart,"  which  "  having  heard  the  Word  keeps  it  and  brings  forth  fruit  with 
patience." 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES, 

Vers.  42-48.  Self-control   and   self-  not  by  mutilating  the  body,  but  only 

denial. — The  whole  passage  is  steeped  by  a  wise  and  resolute  self-control,  a 

in  metaphor.     No  one  is  expected  to  wise  and  resolute  rule  of  our  own  spirit, 

take  the  scandal  or  trap  of  vers.  42,  that  we  can  maintain  our  loyalty  to 

43,  45  literally,  or  the  ass-millstone  or  Him,  and  walk  with  even  and  steadfast 

thejlinging  into  the  sea,  or  the  Gehenna,  foot  in  His  ways.     And  if  we  find  that 

Why,  then,  should  we  insist  on  taking  in  ourselves  which  hinders  or  makes 

literally  either  the  hand  or  the  foot  of  us  stumble  in  these  ways,  He  would 

these  verses,  or  even  the  inextinguish-  have  us  know  that,  unless  we  freely 

able  fire  ?     The  principle  which  under-  renounce  it,  there  is  that  both  in  the 

lies  them  is,  that  a  man  had  far  better  righteousness  and  in  the  love  of  God 

part  with,  lose,  sacrifice,  anything  and  which  will  kindle  on  it  like  a  fire,  and 

everything  else,  however  good  it  may  burn  it  out  of  us ;  yes,  and  burn  us 

be  in  itself  or  however  dear,  than  suffer  until  we  let  it  go. — S.   Cox,  D.D. 
himself  to  be  hindered  in  that  service  Destruction   of  evil. — The    point   to 

of  truth  and  goodness  in  which  he  finds  which    our    Lord   really    directs    our 

his  true  life,  or  that  fidelity  to  Christ  thoughts  is,  that  all  that  is  evil  in  us, 

in  which  eternal  life  consists.     It  is  however  closely  it   sits  to  the   heart, 

345 


chap.  ix.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


must  be  destroyed ;  that  not  only  in  a  is  to  set  one  of  these  traps  in  motion, 

future  world  of  woe — which  we  might  To  lie  in  wait  on  any  honest  path,  to 

just  as  truly  depict   as  all   millstone  forbid   or  condemn   any   good   action, 

and  sea,   as   all   worm   and   fire — but  movement,  teaching,   to   hinder   men, 

here  and  now,   as   well   as   then   and  to  trip  them  up,  to  hold  them  back, 

there,  the   righteousness   and   love   of  when  they  are  bent  on  the  service  of 

God  will  burn  against  all  unrighteous-  truth  or  going  on  any  errand  of  mercy, 

ness  of   men,    burn  more  keenly  and  is  to  be  such  a  trap  :  it  is  to  scandalise 

inwardly  and  consumingly   than   any  or  set  them  stumbling.     Better  to  die, 

fire  ;  that  all  in  us  which  exalts  itself  better   even   to    be    hanged,   than    to 

against  Him  or  stands  in  the  way  of  become  a  trap,  a  drag,  in  the  service 

our  own  perfection,  or  militates  against  of  truth  and  goodness  :  a  defender  of 

the  welfare  of  the  world,  will  infallibly  the  faith,  for  example,  who,  honestly 

expose  us  to  a  discipline  more  dread-  intending     its     defence,     nevertheless 

ful  and  agonising  than  metaphor  can  opposes   its   growth,    retards,  or  even 

convey  or  imagination  conceive.     The  blights,  its  springing   and   germinant 

severity  is  part  of  the  goodness  of  God.  powers.     The  most  capable  and  eminent 

— Ibid.  servants  of  the  truth  in  all  ages  have 

Something    better   than    acrimony. —  had  to   waste   half   their  strength  in 

Instead  of  acrimony  against  those  who  breaking    through    these    traps    and 

follow  not  with  us,  let  us  bend  all  our  snares.     Don't   you    be   one   of   these 

anger  and  resentment,  all  our  bitter-  traps,  or  even  the  tongue  of  a  trap. — 

ness   and   hostility,    against   our   own  S.  Cox,  D.D. 

lusts  and  sinful  propensities,  not  sparing  We  offend   Christ's   little  ones  every 

one  of  them,  though  they  be  as  dear  time  we  give  them,  in  place  of  gospel 

to  us  as  the  members  of  our  bodies,  as  bread,  the  stones  of  human  philosophy  ; 

our  hands,  our  feet,  or  our  eyes,  and  or,   in   place   of    the    nourishment   of 

however    painful   the    amputation   or  simple   faith   in   Christ,   the   sting  of 

mortification   of  them  may  be  to  us.  some  abstraction  about  which  sectaries 

— C.  Seymour.  quarrel. 

Where  in  our  Lord's  teachings  do  you 

Yer.  42.  Skandala. — When  we  learn  find  stronger   words   than    these  ? — He 

that  it  was  John's  repulse  of  the  man  never  denounced  murder  or  unchastity 

who  had   cast  out   demons  which  set  or  malice  of  any  kind  in  stronger  terms, 

our   Lord   on   this   theme,   a   light  is  and  the  reason  is  not  far  to  seek.     He 

thrown  on  the  particular  meaning  of  who  deliberately  puts  the  occasion  of 

the  word  "  skandala,"  which  I  think  falling  in  the  way  of  Christ's  little  ones 

was   in  our   Lord's   mind — that,   viz.,  is  really  committing  a  heinous  sin ;  it 

of  the  checking  others  on   their  way  is   murder   and  suicide   combined,   for 

to  good,  the  throwing  back  on  itself  while  he  injures  the  soul  of  him  who  is 

of   the  enthusiasm  or  warm  affection  weak  and  helpless,  he  is  really  destroy  - 

which  was  beginning  to  flow,  and  the  ing  all  that  is  pure  and  Christ  like  in 

choking  up  of  the  heartsprings  thereby,  his  own  nature. 
The   man  who  had  been  casting  out 

demons  and  was  turned  back  because  Vers.  43-48.  The  awfulness  of  hell. 

he  did   not   follow   with  the  apostles  — In  this  and  other  passages  Christ 

might  have  asked,  "  Would  the  scribes  speaks  of  hell  in  terms  far  more  solemn 

and  Pharisees  have  treated  me  worse  ?  "  and  terrible  than  any  other  prophet 

The  revulsion  might  deaden  his  spiritual  or  messenger  of  God  has  done.     Why 

life. — H.  Latham.  is  this  ?     1.  Because  He  is  emphatically 

Stumbling-blocks. — To  go  where  we  the  teacher  of  God's  truth  in  its  fullest 
should  not  go,  to  do  what  we  should  form,  without  reservation  or  conceal- 
not  do,  to  touch  what  we  should  not  ment.  2.  Because  He  alone  has  per- 
touch  with  hand  or  eye,  tongue  or  foot,  feet  knowledge  on  the  subject  of  the 

346 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CEtAl*.  IX. 


eternal  world.  3.  Because  of  His 
infinite  love.  He  paints  hell  in  all 
its  awfulness,  to  induce  men  to  flee 
from  the  wrath  to  come  and  to  seek 
refuge  in  Him. 

Precautions  against  evil. — What  pre- 
cautions do  we  not  take  to  avoid  an 
infectious  air,  and  to  prevent  a  con- 
tagious distemper  from  spreading? 
How  much  greater  reason  have  we  to 
shun  those  persons  who  are  to  us  an 
occasion  of  sin,  were  they,  on  the 
account  of  their  advice,  protection,  and 
assistance,  as  dear  to  us  as  our  hands, 
our  feet,  and  our  eyes?  How  much 
more  still  ought  we  to  cut  off  all 
criminal,  unprofitable,  and  dangerous 
use  of  our  senses,  our  mind,  and  our 
body? — P.  Quesnel. 

Yer.  44.  The  worm  of  remorse. — 
Who  can  conceive  the  torment  of  this 
gnawing  worm,  namely,  of  the  eternal 
reproach  of  conscience,  when  a  man 
shall  reflect  upon  the  graces  and  mercies 
of  God  which  he  has  despised,  and  on 
the  preference  he  has  made  of  the 
shadow  of  a  momentary  happiness, 
before  a  substantial  and  eternal  good, 
which  is  God  Himself? — Ibid. 

Ver.  45.  The  cutting  off  of  the  foot 
is  the  breaking  off  all  commerce  with 
the  world  by  a  holy  retirement,  when- 
ever it  becomes  necessary  to  salvation. 
To  quit  the  occasions  of  falling  is  not 
a  counsel  of  perfection,  but  a  neces- 
sary duty,  since  salvation  depends 
upon  it. — Ibid. 

Yer.  49.  The  true  sacrificial  fire  of 
self-denial  and  self- mortification  in 
relation  to  the  fiery  flame  of  hell. 
1.  The  relation  :  all  must  be  salted 
with  fire.  2.  The  contrast :  to  be 
prepared  for  the  fire  by  salt,  or  to  be 
salted  with  fire. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

The  two  fires. — We  cannot  escape 
the  fire ;  but  we  have  the  choice  be- 
tween the  fire  of  life  and  the  fire  of 
death. — Ibid. 

Learn — 1.  Christians  ought  to  be 
as  spiritual  sacrifices  or  oblations 
offered  up  to  God  in  this  life.     2.  The 


ministry  of  the  Word  ought  to  be  as 
salt  to  season  men  for  God,  and  fit  for 
His  use  and  service.  3.  As  salt,  being 
of  a  hot  and  dry  nature,  is  apt  to  bite 
and  fret  the  raw  skin  or  flesh,  so  the 
Word  of  God,  preached  and  applied  to 
men's  consciences,  is  apt  to  cause  pain 
and  grief. — G.  Petter. 

Yer.  50.  Saltless  salt. — Three  times, 
in  different  connexions,  this  proverb  is 
recorded  in  Christ's  teaching,  in  each 
case  in  reference  to  the  failure  of  that 
which  was  excellent  and  hopeful.  In 
St.  Matthew  it  is  applied  generally 
to  the  influence  of  His  new  people  on 
the  world ;  in  St.  Mark  to  the  danger 
to  ourselves  of  the  careless  or  selfish 
use  of  our  personal  influence ;  in  St. 
Luke  to  the  conditions  of  sincere  dis- 
cipleship.  But  in  all  cases  it  contem- 
plates the  possible  failure  of  religion 
to  do  its  perfect  work. — Dean  Church. 

Deterioration. — There  is  such  a  thing 
as  moral  and  spiritual  decay — in  stan- 
dard, motive,  devotion,  sacrifice,  good- 
ness. What  are  the  signs  of  it  ?  1.  A 
lowered  and  attenuated  ideal.  Christ 
has  little  by  little  become  almost 
a  personal  stranger.  We  have  not 
consciously  renounced  Him,  but  have 
lagged  so  far  behind  in  the  journey 
that  He  is  quite  out  of  our  sight  and 
reach.  2.  A  growing  indifference  to 
all  great  enterprise  for  Christ.  3.  A 
deepening  indifference  to  truth  for  its 
own  sake,  though  not  infrequently 
accompanied  with  an  augmenting 
fierceness  of  controversy  and  a  spirit 
of  partisanship  in  contending  with 
those  on  the  other  side.  Few  forms 
of  self-deceit  are  more  treacherous  or 
more  hardening  than  that  which  thinks 
to  contend  for  the  truth  without  love. 
4.  Inconsistency  in  the  use  and  enjoy- 
ment of  what  we  understand  by  earthly 
and  worldly  things.  To  aim  at  both 
worlds  is  usually  to  end  in  enjoying 
neither. — Bishop  Thorold. 

True  savour. — If  we  merely  have 
the  salt  of  good  doctrine,  without 
having  the  true  savour  and  seasoning 
of  personal  godliness,  we  may  become 
utterly  worthless — like  the  waters  of 

347 


chap.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


the  "  Dead  Sea,"  so  called,  whose  and  to  His  cause.  Are  they  not  the 
waters  receive  a  large  quantity  of  salt,  liker  to  the  salt  which  perishes  in  the 
but  which,  by  remaining  stagnant,  very  using,  and  is  crushed  into  extinc- 
become  so  dense  that  nothing  can  live  tion  simply  by  doing  its  work  in  the 
or  grow  in  them. — &  Jenner.  world  ?  Let  them  be  scattered  abroad, 
Christians  the  salt  of  the  earth. — It  is  therefore,  come  of  them  what  may  ; 
for  the  best  welfare  of  every  nation  and  then,  when  the  gospel  shall  have 
and  city  on  the  face  of  the  earth  that  been  preached  in  all  the  nations  of  the 
the  children  of  God  should  be  in  it,  not  world,  when  there  is  something  of  this 
merely  for  its  spiritual  welfare,  but  salt  of  the  earth  scattered  everywhere, 
even  that  the  blessing  of  God  may  then  we  are  told  the  end  shall  come, 
descend  upon  it  in  earthly  matters,  the  the  world  shall  be  ready  for  its  bless- 
hand  of  God  guiding  and  directing  it.  ing,  ready  for  the  presence  of  its  God, 
It  is  for  the  best  interests  both  of  this  ready  to  become  the  new  heavens  and 
life  and  of  the  life  to  come  that  the  the  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  right- 
children  of  God  should  pervade  the  eousness. — A.  Melvill,  D.D. 
earth  from  one  end  to  another,  and  Peace  without,  from  purity  within. — 
that  the  blessing  of  God  should  rest  The  meaning  of  the  last  clause  in  this 
upon  all  men  for  their  sakes.  No  verse  is,  that  the  strongest  personal 
doubt  in  the  process  of  thus  spreading  character  is  quite  consistent  with  the 
through  the  earth  the  children  of  God  gentlest  Christian  temper  and  be- 
may  be  persecuted  and  harassed  and  haviour.  Christ  intends  to  say,  that 
vexed ;  death  may  be  their  portion ;  His  disciples  not  only  may  be  calm 
their  earthly  goods  may  be  spoiled  at  and  decided  too  ;  but  that,  if  they  are 
the  hands  of  ungodly  men ;  they  may  true  ones,  that  is  just  what  they  will 
suffer  for  their  faithfulness  to  Christ  be. — S.  Richards. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER   IX. 

Ver.  2.  Boxologies  to  God  for  the  moun-  Christ's  transfiguration. — I  have  stood  by 
tains. — In  their  mineral  treasures,  in  the  the  side  of  the  tall  mast  in  Madison  Square, 
liberal  toll  taken  from  the  clouds  and  dis-  New  York,  at  early  evening,  wondering  at 
bursed  in  channels  of  blessing,  in  their  the  unique  and  surprising  structure,  re- 
worldwide  sanatory  influence,  felt  where  cognising  it  as  something  extraordinary, 
unseen,  what  a  boon  are  they  to  men  !  and  yet  not  knowing  exactly  what  it  meant 
Often  have  they  given  friendly  shelter  to  or  what  was  its  effect,  when  suddenly  the 
the  hunted  spirit  of  liberty.  They  have  rushing  of  an  unseen  force  was  heard,  there 
made  a  higher  civilisation  possible.  They  was  a  flash,  and  a  circle  of  fire  surrounded 
have  quickened  desire  for  the  same  by  the  top  of  the  mast  and  cast  its  weird 
furnishing  so  largely  the  needed  instru-  light  far  out  into  the  surrounding  dark- 
ments  of  agriculture,  manufacture,  com-  ness.  So  to  the  disciples  on  the  mount  came 
merce,  and  the  arts.  How  vivifying  and  the  transfiguration  of  Christ.  He  stood 
ennobling  the  influence  which  their  beauty,  before  them  in  the  impressiveness  of  a  rare 
variety,  sublimity,  repose,  and  strength  and  wonderful  Manhood,  when  suddenly 
exercise  upon  the  minds  and  hearts  of  that  Manhood  glowed  with  an  internal  fire, 
men !  Rich  and  varied  is  the  inheritance  God  was  within  the  Man,  and  the  moun- 
of  the  high  and  holy  in  intellectual,  moral,  tain  summit  became  on  the  instant  resplen- 
and  spiritual  things  which  but  for  the  dent  with  the  Divine  glory  flashing  forth. — 
mountains  would  be  unenjoyed  by  men.  A.  P.  Foster. 
In  a  thousand  ways  how  the  M  everlasting 

hills  "  help  men  upward  nearer  heaven  and  Ver.  3.  The  beauty  of  the  snow. — The 
God  !  They  are  the  cathedral  spires  of  the  white  wonder  of  the  snow  is  spread  so  often 
world  for  ever  pointing  the  nations  to  the  before  our  eyes  every  winter  that  many  of 
things  above.  Streams  of  physical,  in-  us  forget  how  wonderful  and  how  beautiful 
tellectual,  political,  moral,  and  spiritual  good  it  is.  With  impatience  and  fretful  corn- 
have  enriched  human  life  through  its  plainings  we  look  up  at  the  threatening 
relations  with  the  everlasting  hills. —  W.  M.  sky,  where  the  grey  clouds  drive  before 
Campbell.  the   wind   thick  with  the    coming    snow. 

348 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IX. 


Presently  the  delicate  crystals,  star-shaped, 
feather -soft,  white  and  sparkling,  begin  to 
fall  as  silently  as  the  slippered  foot  of 
Time ;  at  first  coming  down  slowly  and 
timidly,  then  gathering  courage,  and  whirl- 
ing down  as  if  in  delight  at  their  own 
beauty.  No  fewer  than  ninety-six  separate 
exquisite  forms  have  been  discerned  among 
the  flakes  of  the  snow,  every  form  as  perfect 
as  geometry  can  imagine  or  the  sculptor's 
art  devise. — Dr.  Talmage. 

Vers.  5,  6.  Religious  enthusiasm  cannot 
be  detained. — I  have  seen  in  the  little 
English  city  of  Salisbury  the  great  cathedral. 
It  was  built  when  a  flood-tide  of  religious 
enthusiasm  was  sweeping  over  the  world. 
Thousands  might  worship,  thousands  have 
worshipped,  within  that  splendid  fane,  and 
its  walls  were  not  able  to  contain  the  great 
flood  of  devotion.  But  the  tide  has  ebbed ; 
the  ecstatic  vision  has  faded.  The  mighty 
cathedral  stands ;  but  a  handful  of  wor- 
shippers can  scarcely  keep  a  sleepy  rivulet 
of  praise  flowing  in  a  corner  of  the  building. 
No  tabernacle  can  detain  a  moment  of 
religious  enthusiasm ;  and  if  Peter  and  his 
friends  had  built  the  grandest  cathedral  in 
the  world  on  the  ridge  of  Mount  Hermon, 
it  might  have  been  empty  and  bare  to-day. 
— H.  Van  Dyke,  D.D. 

Ver.  8.  Jesus  only. — When  Bishop  Beve- 
ridge  was  on  his  death-bed,  his  memory  so 
failed  that  he  did  not  know  even  his  nearest 
relative.  His  chaplain  said,  "  Do  you  know 
me  ? "  "  Who  are  you  ? "  was  the  answer. 
His  own  wife  asked  him,  "Do  you  know 
me  ? "  "  Who  are  you  ? "  was  the  only 
answer.  On  being  told  that  it  was  his  wife 
he  said  that  he  did  not  know  her.  Then 
one  standing  by  said,  "  Do  you  know  Jesus 
Christ  1 "  "  Jesus  Christ  1 "  he  replied,  re- 
viving as  if  the  name  acted  on  him  like  a 
cordial  ;  "  yes,  I  have  known  Him  these 
forty  years ;  He  is  my  only  hope." 

Ver.  19.  Lack  of  faith. — Admiral  Dupont 
was  once  explaining  to  Farragut  the  reason 
why  he  failed  to  enter  Charlestown  harbour 
with  his  fleet  of  ironclads.  He  gave  this 
reason,  and  that  reason,  and  the  other 
reason ;  and  Farragut  remained  silent  until 
he  had  got  through,  and  then  said,  "  Ah, 
Dupont,  there  was  one  more  reason." 
"  What  is  that  ?  "  "  You  didn't  believe  you 
could  do  it !  " 

Vers.  23,  24.  The  use  of  weak  faith. — 
When  the  suspension  bridge  across  Niagara 
was  erected,  a  kite  took  a  string  over  to  the 
other  side ;  to  this  string  a  cord  was  at- 
tached and  was  drawn  over,  then  a  rope 
which  drew  a  larger  rope,  and  then  a  cable 
strong  enough  to  sustain  the  iron  cable 
which  supported   the    bridge,  over    which 


heavily  laden  trains  now  pass  in  safety. 
This  could  never  have  been  done  but  for  the 
small  kite,  which  may  represent  a  faith 
which,  though  weak,  yet  reaches  to  Christ 
and  heaven. 

Little  faith  in  a  great  God. — There  was 
once  a  woman  who  was  well  known  for  her 
simple  faith  and  great  calmness  in  the 
midst  of  many  trials.  Another  woman  hear- 
ing of  her,  went  to  learn  the  secret  of  her 
holy,  happy  life.  She  accosted  her  by  say- 
ing, "  Are  you  the  woman  with  the  great 
faith  ? "  "  No,"  she  replied,  "  I  am  not  the 
woman  with  the  great  faith ;  but  I  am  the 
woman  with  a  little  faith  in  the  great  God." 

Ver.  24.  Obedience  has  a  firm  basis. — The 
same  state  of  mind,  looked  at  from  its  two 
opposite  ends,  as  it  were,  may  be  designated 
faith  or  unbelief ;  just  as  a  piece  of  shot 
silk,  according  to  the  angle  at  which  you 
hold  it,  may  shew  you  only  the  bright 
colours  of  its  warp  or  the  dark  ones  of  its 
weft.  When  you  are  travelling  in  a  railway 
train  with  the  sun  streaming  in  at  the 
windows,  if  you  look  out  on  the  one  hand 
you  will  see  the  illumined  face  of  every  tree 
and  blade  of  grass  and  house,  and  if  you 
look  out  on  the  other  you  will  see  the  dark 
side.  And  so  the  same  landscape  may  seem 
to  be  all  lit  up  by  the  sunshine  of  belief,  or 
to  be  darkened  by  the  gloom  of  distrust.  If 
we  consider  how  great  and  how  perfect 
ought  to  be  our  obedience,  to  bear  any  due 
proportion  to  the  firmness  of  that  upon 
which  it  is  built,  we  shall  not  be  slow  to 
believe  that  through  life  there  will  always 
be  the  presence,  more  or  less,  of  these  two 
elements.  There  will  be  all  degrees  of  pro- 
gress between  the  two  extremes  of  infantile 
and  mature  faith. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Fluctuations  of  faith. — Travelling  on  the 
plain,  which,  notwithstanding,  has  its  risings 
and  fallings,  I  discovered  Salisbury  steeple 
many  miles  off ;  coming  to  a  declivity,  I  lost 
the  sight  thereof,  but,  climbing  up  the  next 
hill,  the  steeple  grew  out  of  the  ground 
again.  Yea,  I  often  found  it  and  lost  it,  till 
at  last  I  came  safely  to  it,  and  took  my 
lodgings  near  it.  It  fareth  thus  with  us 
while  we  are  wayfaring  to  heaven.  Mounted 
on  the  Pisgah  top  of  some  good  meditation, 
we  get  a  glimpse  of  our  celestial  Canaan  ; 
but  when  either  on  the  flat  of  an  ordinary 
temper,  or  in  the  fall  of  an  extraordinary 
temptation,  we  lose  the  view  thereof.  Thus, 
in  the  sight  of  our  soul,  heaven  is  discovered, 
covered,  and  recovered ;  till,  though  late,  at 
last,  though  slowly,  surely,  we  arrive  at 
the  haven  of  our  happiness. — Thomas  Fuller. 

Ver.  29.  Prayer. — I  once  went  to  see 
Channing  at  Newport,  and  he  told  me  that 
a  minister  had  been  to  see  him  that  day, 
and  had  told  how  he  had  once  been  called 
ill  to  exorcise  a  madman.    The  man  was  in 

349 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


a  paroxysm;  but  his  friends  had  an  idea 
that  it  could  be  relieved  by  prayer.  The 
minister,  himself  a  man  of  simple  faith, 
could  not  refuse  the  request,  and  went  into 
the  room  where  the  maniac  was,  took  him 
by  the  hand,  and  said,  "  Let  us  kneel  down 
and  pray."  He  said  that  he  never  prayed 
so  sincerely  in  all  his  life.  When  he  began, 
the  man's  muscles  were  like  iron ;  as  he 
went  on,  they  gradually  relaxed,  and  when 
he  finished  the  maniac  was  quiet  and  peace- 
ful. Channing  thought,  and  I  think,  that 
the  strong  faith  of  the  minister  acted  on 
the  patient's  body,  through  his  mind. — J.  F. 
Clarke. 

Fasting. — Some  years  ago,  an  excellent, 
well-meaning  clergyman  preached  during 
Lent  on  the  duty  of  fasting,  which  he 
clearly  proved  from  Scripture.  But  having 
done  this,  he  proceeded  to  discount  all  he 
had  said  by  making  a  series  of  exceptions. 
The  working-man,  for  instance,  could  not 
be  expected  to  fast,  for  he  had  his  work  to 
do ;  the  weak  and  sickly  were  excepted 
because  of  their  health,  the  children  on 
account  of  their  tender  years,  the  old  on  ac- 
count of  their  age,  the  brain-worker  because 
of  the  severity  of  intellectual  labour,  etc. 
Doubtless  there  is  some  truth  in  all  this,  but 
the  answer  lies  in  the  word  "abstinence." 
Many  who  are  unable  to  fast  literally  can 
do  so  spiritually  by  taking  plain  food  and 
avoiding  luxuries  and  self-indulgence.  And 
we  should  ever  look  beyond  ourselves,  and 
make  our  self-denial  of  benefit  to  others.  A 
good  old  lady  used  to  have  her  plateful  of 
meat,  cut  off  from  the  joint  at  dinner-time, 
set  aside  whilst  she  ate  her  dry  bread,  and 
then  putting  it  in  her  basket  she  would 
hurry  off  with  it  to  some  poor,  sick  person 
in  the  neighbourhood. 

Ver.  31.  Christ's  knowledge  of  His  future. 
— Christ  deals  with  His  future  as  men  deal 
with  their  past.  This  is  entirely  different 
from  these  mere  presentiments  of  death  which 
are  sometimes,  no  doubt,  as  extraordinary  as 
they  are  pathetic.  A  brave  officer  is  ordered 
abroad  for  a  campaign.  On  his  voyage  out 
his  heart  turns  to  his  family,  to  his  wife 
and  children.  After  he  lands,  before  going 
into  action,  he  writes  tender  words  in  the 
light  of  an  eternal  world.  They  reach  us 
when  the  hand  is  cold  that  traced  the  lines, 
when  the  eyes  are  closed  that  were  half 
blinded  with  the  salt  mist  of  love.  We  read 
the  presentiment  into  a  prophecy,  the  felt 
probability  into  a  certainty.  Yet,  in  truth, 
such  anticipations  are  generally  vague 
enough.  Hundreds  have  written  such  let- 
ters for  whom  they  have  not  been  fulfilled. 
It  was  not  so  with  Christ.  In  the  army  of 
the  greatest  of  all  human  captains  there  was 
a  regiment,  at  the  head  of  whose  list  was 
the  name  of  one  brave  soldier,  called  first 
whenever  the  roll  was  called,  with  the  ad- 

35Q 


dition  of  "killed  upon  the  field  of  battle." 
So  stood  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God  in  His 
own  hearing  every  day  of  His  life. — Bishop 
Wm.  Alexander. 

Ver.  35.  Humility. — St.  Augustine  being 
asked,  "  What  is  the  first  thing  in  religion  ?  " 
replied,  "  Humility."  "  And  what  is  the 
second  ?  "  "  Humilitv."  "  And  what  the 
third  1 "  "  Humility."  Benjamin  Franklin, 
when  young,  received  this  advice,  when,  on 
going  out  of  a  house  by  a  shorter  way,  he 
hit  his  head  against  a  beam :  "  You  are 
young,  and  have  the  world  before  you; 
stoop  as  you  go  through  it,  and  you  will 
miss  many  hard  thumps." 

Ver.  36.  Oar  blessed  religion  looks  upon 
children  as  immortal  creatures,  full  of 
beauty.  It  is  by  no  means  a  matter  of  course 
that  children  are  respected.  Look  at  the 
social  contempt  in  which  Mahometan  chil- 
dren are  held.  Look  at  the  random  influ- 
ence of  the  infidel's  child.  The  atheist  may 
indeed  treat  his  child  after  the  Christian 
custom  of  the  land  he  lives  in  ;  but  at  the 
bottom  of  his  creed  the  child  is  a  mere 
perishing  brute.  Listen  to  the  shrill  shriek 
that  comes  from  the  fiery  altar  of  Moloch, 
and  the  splash  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges. 
Look  at  China's  infanticide,  and  the  blood 
on  the  Juggernaut's  wheel.  Then  look  at 
Christendom's  child  enthroned — enthroned 
in  the  church,  in  the  home,  in  the  school,  in 
Christian  art,  and  in  the  Christmas  festival. 

Ver.  37.  Christ  in  His  little  ones. — The 
legend  of  St.  Christopher  is  told  in  vari- 
ous ways,  but  one  version  is  that,  being 
a  humble  ferryman  on  the  banks  of  a 
turbulent  river,  he  heard  one  dark  and 
stormy  night  a  child's  voice  outside  his  hut, 
asking  to  be  carried  across  the  river.  Simply 
doing  his  duty,  he  took  the  wailing  little 
one  in  his  arms  and  breasted  the  swollen 
torrent ;  but  before  he  had  gone  far  his 
burden  was  surrounded  with  a  halo  of  light, 
and  he  found  that  it  was  no  ordinary  child 
but  the  Christ-child,  and  that  in  performing 
his  humble  duty  he  had  the  unspeakable 
honour  of  carrying  the  Lord  of  Glory,  and 
on  this  account  his  name  was  changed  to 
Christopher,  "  the  Christ-bearer."  This  is 
no  mere  legend.  It  embodies  an  experience 
possible  to  every  Christian.  Whoever  lov- 
ingly and  patiently  cares  for  one  of  Christ's 
little  ones  will  find  his  burden  growing 
blessedly  light,  and  he  will  realise  the  joy 
not  only  of  rescuing  the  perishing,  but  of 
bearing  the  Christ  perpetually  in  his  heart. 

Reverence  to  childhood.  —  John  Locke 
drank  into  the  spirit  of  our  Lord's  teaching 
when  he  wrote  this  maxim :  "  Maxima  de- 
betur  pueris  reverentia "  ("  The  greatest 
reverence  is  owed  to  children  ").  At  Eisen- 
ach a  famous  master,  John  Trebonius,  was 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   IX. 


rector  of  the  convent  of   the    Barefooted 
Carmelites  ;  and  when  he  taught  his  classes 
of  boys  there,  he  always  did  so  with  his 
head  uncovered,  to  honour,  as  he  said,  the 
consuls,  chancellors,   doctors,  and   masters 
who  would  one  day  proceed  from  his  school. 
There  was  reverence  to  youth  !    And  not  in 
vain  was  it  shewn,  for  among  his  scholars 
was  that  highly  honoured  servant  of  God 
Martin  Luther,  who  was  greater  than  all  the 
consuls,  chancellors,  and  doctors  of  his  time. 
When  Edward  Irving  was  at  the  height  of 
his   power   as  an  orator  in   London,  some 
ladies,  who  had  established  an  infant  school 
in  the  district  of  Billingsgate,  and  were  un- 
successful in  persuading  the  people  to  send 
their  children  to  it,  applied  to  him  to  help 
them.    He  immediately  consented,  and  went 
with  them  through  the  district.    In  the  first 
house  he  allowed  the  ladies  to  explain  their 
errand,  and  they  did  it  very  offensively  to 
the    poor,    so    full    of    condescension    and 
patronage  was  their  manner.     In  the  second 
house  Irving  took  the  place  of  spokesman 
upon  himself.     When  the  door  was  opened, 
he  spoke  in  the  kindest  tone  to  the  woman 
who  opened  it,  and  asked  permission  to  go 
in.     He  then   explained  the   intentions   of 
the  ladies,  asked  how  many  children   she 
had,  and  whether  she  would  send  them.    A 
ready   consent    was    the    result ;    and    the 
mother's  heart  was  completely  won  when 
the  visitor  took  one  of  her  little  ones  on  his 
knee,   and   blessed  her.      The    ladies    who 
were  engaged  in  this  work  were  horrified. 
11  Whv.  Mr.  Irving,"  exclaimed   one  of  the 
ladies,  when  they  got  to  the  street,  "  you 
spoke  to  that  woman  as  if  she  were  doing 
you  a  favour,  and  not  you  conferring  one  on 
her  !     How  could  you  speak  so  1  and  how 
could  you  take  up  that  child  on  your  knee  1 " 
"  The  woman,"  he  replied,  "does  not  as  yet 
know  the  advantages  which   her  children 
will  derive  from  your  school ;  by-and-by  she 
will  know  them,  and  own  her  obligations  to 
you  ;  and  in  so  speaking  and  in  blessing  her 
child  I  do  but  follow  the  example  of  our 
Lord,  who  blessed  the  little  ones,  the  lambs 
of  His  flock."     Edward  Irving's  conception 
of  a  child  is   given    in  these   words :    "  a 
glorious  bud  of  being."     He  had  a  high  ap- 
preciation of  a  child.     He  saw  grand  possi- 
bilities  hidden    away    in    its    undeveloped 
capacities.     He  saw  the  promise  of  a  new 
world  in  its  being   devoted    to  God,   and 
blessed  by  Christ.     But  we  must  not  forget 
this :   Irving,   like    Trebonius,  was    a  seer. 
And  might  not  all  be  seers  if  they  would 
only  do  as  he  did,  accept  Christ's  estimate 
of  children  ? 

Begin  with  the  children. — Dr.  Duff,  the 
missionary  to  India,  began  his  work  there 
on  a  principle  altogether  new  in  missionary 
enterprise.  He  began  with  the  children. 
With  the  eye  and  heart  of  a  philosopher,  as 
be  was — a  Christian    philosopher — he  saw 


that,  if  he  could  gain  the  children,  the 
coming  generations  would  be  gained.  In 
the  words  of  Sir  Charles  Trevelyan  :  "  Up  to 
that  time  preaching  had  been  considered 
the  orthodox  regular  mode  of  missionary 
action ;  but  Dr.  Duff  held  that  the  receptive, 
plastic  minds  of  children  might  be  moulded 
from  the  first  according  to  the  Christian 
system,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  heathen 
teaching,  and  that  the  best  preaching  to  the 
rising  generation,  which  soon  becomes  the 
entire  people,  is  the  '  line  upon  line,  precept 
upon  precept '  of  the  schoolroom."  This 
action  of  Dr.  Duff's  recalls  the  action  of 
the  Spartans,  who,  when  Antipater  demanded 
fifty  children  as  hostages,  offered  him  in 
their  stead  a  hundred  men  of  distinction. 
One  would  have  thought  this  by  far  the 
noblest  offer,  but  there  was  a  far-seeing 
wisdom  in  it.  In  the  children  there  was 
hope  of  retrieving  their  loss,  and  wiping  out 
their  dishonour.  Their  fathers  had  lost  the 
day,  the  children  might  regain  it.  In  them 
Sparta  would  flourish  anew. 

Ver.  40.  Friends  'mistaken  for  enemies. — 
A  sailor  once  told  me  that  the  most  terrible 
engagement  he  had  ever  been  in  was  one 
between  the  ship  to  which  he  belonged  and 
another  English  vessel,  when,  on  meeting  in 
the  night,  they  mistook  each  other  for 
enemies.  Several  persons  were  wounded, 
and  both  vessels  were  much  damaged  by 
the  firing.  When  the  day  broke,  great  and 
painful  was  the  surprise  to  find  the  English 
flag  hoisted  from  both  ships.  They  saluted 
each  other,  and  wept  bitterly  together  over 
their  mistake.  Christians,  sometimes,  com- 
mit the  same  error.  One  denomination 
mistakes  another  for  an  enemy ;  it  is  night, 
and  they  do  not  recognise  one  another. 
What  will  be  their  surprise  when  they  see 
each  other  in  heaven's  light !  How  will 
they  salute  each  other  when  better  known 
and  understood  ! — W.  Williams. 

Ver.  41.  Common  life  sublime. — In  the 
universe  filled  with  Christ,  the  falling 
sparrow  is  to  the  thoughtful  Christian  as 
impressive  as  the  stars  fighting  in  their 
courses.  Grandly  does  that  profound  Chris- 
tian thinker  and  poet,  Sidney  Lanier,  in  his 
development  of  the  English  novel,  show 
how  Christ  has  made  even  common  life 
sublime.  Maggie  Tulliver,  amid  the  details 
of  humble  routine,  now  wins  our  sympathies 
as  much  as  does  (Edipus.  We  have  learned 
the  gospel  of  details.  What  need  have  we 
of  all  the  complex  machinery  of  Greek 
tragedy  when  we  know  that  God  sees, 
knows,  pities,  and  Christ  has  blessed  even 
the  cup  of  cold  water?  Like  the  Divine 
flood  in  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  ankle-deep 
rill  swelling  into  the  lordly  river,  so  this 
beatitude  of  refreshment  to  the  needy  has 
made  increase  of  the  cup  to  a  flood  that 

3SI 


CHAP.   IX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


has  quenched  the  thirst  of  millions  through 
eighteen  centuries.  The  well  and  the  foun- 
tain built  in  Christ's  name,  the  medicine  to 
assuage  fever,  the  kindly  ministrations  of 
the  nurse  and  the  hospital,  the  reforms  of 
the  Christian  ages,  are  but  the  magnified 
results  of  the  truth  taught  by  our  Lord 
and  made  vital  in  the  lives  of  His  people. 

Cup  of  cold  water. — When  Sir  Philip 
Sidney,  after  being  wounded  at  the  battle 
of  Zutphen,  was  retiring  to  the  camp,  he 
was  almost  overcome  by  the  oppressive  heat. 
Calling  for  a  drink  of  water,  a  soldier  with 
great  difficulty  procured  him  one.  Just  as 
he  was  raising  it  to  his  lips,  a  wounded 
soldier  was  borne  by,  who  turned  his  eyes 
wistfully  towards  the  cooling  draught. 
Instantly  passing  the  bottle  down  to  him 
he  said,  "Thy  necessity  is  greater  than 
mine." 

Ver.  42.  Wrong  done  to  a  child. — One  of 
the  most  pathetic  stories  of  the  wrong  done 
to  children  is,  to  my  mind,  that  which  a 
good  man  tells  of  his  own  childhood  more 
than  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago.  It  was 
a  Scotch  Communion  Sunday,  and  amidst 
the  crowd  who  thronged  to  that  solemn 
ordinance  there  came  a  boy  of  eight  who 
managed  to  pass  unnoticed  into  the  church. 
He  heard  a  part  of  the  minister's  address, 
and  tells  us  that  he  commended  Christ  in 
so  sweet  and  delightful  a  manner  that  his 
heart  was  captivated.  But  just  then  a  stern 
official  caught  sight  of  the  young  intruder, 
and  indignantly  bade  him  go  out  of  the 
sanctuary,  as  though  he  had  been  some 
leprous  Uzziah,  instead  of  one  of  the  lambs 
of  Christ's  flock.  The  Church  has  not 
thought  it  worth  while  to  preserve  in  grate- 
ful memory  the  name  of  that  austere  up- 
holder of  ecclesiastical  discipline,  but  the 
boy  he  excommunicated  lived  to  ennoble 
one  of  the  commonest  of  common  names, 
for  he  is  known  to  us  and  to  many  as  the 
saintly  John  Brown,  of  Haddington. 

Ver.  44.  Future  punishment. — Men  in 
these  times  seem  unwilling  to  hear  of  future 
punishment.  They  talk  as  if  "a  certain 
class  of  preachers  "  invented  hell  and  kept 
it  burning  to  enforce  their  precepts.  I  was 
in  Naples  in  1884,  the  year  that  cholera 
was  epidemic.  The  Neapolitans  accused 
the  physicians  of  bringing  the  cholera. 
The  physicians  predicted  it;  they  told  the 
people  that  unless  they  cleaned  up  their 
city  the  scourge  would  come.  They  laid 
down  rules  and  gave  warning.  So  when 
the  cholera  came,  the  people  thought  the 
physicians  brought  it  to  intimidate  them 
into  washing  themselves  and  keeping  their 
back  yards  clean,  so  they  threw  stones  at 
the  physicians  and  drove  them  out  of  the 
city.  These  physicians  had  come  to  risk 
their  lives  for  the  ungrateful  people  who 

352 


rejected  them.  Thus  when  preachers  begin 
to  talk  of  the  scourge  which  will  follow 
sin,  the  people — that  is,  some  of  them — 
begin  to  think  the  preachers  are  in  some 
way  responsible  for  this  scourge.  The 
preachers  are  assailed  as  cruel,  fanatical, 
behind  the  times,  and  all  that.  Our  Lord 
is  a  physician.  He  came  and  found  the 
disease  of  sin  and  its  fatal  consequences 
here  already.  He  did  not  bring  them.  He 
left  His  home  to  improve  the  sanitary  con- 
dition of  this  world,  to  cleanse  its  filth. 
And  in  order  to  induce  men  to  submit  to  His 
treatment,  He  warns  them  to  flee  from  the 
wrath  to  come. — R.  S.  Barrett. 

"  Worm  that  dieth  not." — It  has  been  dis- 
covered that  there  are  worms  which  eat  and 
live  upon  stone.  Many  such  have  been 
found  in  a  freestone  wall  in  Normandy.  So 
there  is  a  worm  in  hell — conscience — which 
lives  upon  the  stony  heart  of  the  condemned 
sinners. 

Hell  in  the  present  life. — A  man  may  be 
in  hell  here  as  well  as  hereafter.  No  more 
striking  illustration  can  be  supplied  than 
that  of  Lady  Macbeth.  After  the  murder 
of  Banquo  she  cannot  rest.  She  rises  from 
her  bed  and  walks  about.  She  rubs  and 
rubs,  as  if  washing  her  hands,  and  continues 
it  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  She  fancies 
she  sees  a  spot  of  blood  on  them.  She  can- 
not take  it  out ;  her  hands  will  not  be  clean, 
and  she  cries,  "Here's  the  smell  of  the 
blood  still ;  all  the  perfumes  of  Arabia  will 
not  sweeten  this  little  hand.    Oh  1  oh !  oh  !  " 

Ver.  47.  Banger  prevented. — A  blind  man 
was  once  asked  whether  he  had  no  desire 
that  his  sight  should  be  restored  to  him ; 
he  answered  boldly,  "  No ;  because  Jesus 
says,  'If  thine  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it 
out.'  God  probably  saw  that  mine  eyes 
would  offend  me,  so  as  to  endanger  my 
soul,  and  so  He  has  prevented  this  great 
evil  by  plucking  them  out  Himself;  and  I 
thank  Him  for  it." 

Ver.  50.  Salt  losing  its  savour. — A  merchant 
of  Sidon,  having  farmed  of  the  government 
the  revenue  from  the  importation  of  salt, 
brought  over  an  immense  quantity  from  the 
marshes  of  Cyprus— enough,  in  fact,  to 
supply  the  whole  province  for  at  least 
twenty  years.  This  he  transferred  to  the 
mountains,  to  cheat  the  government  out  of 
some  small  percentage.  Sixty-five  houses 
were  rented  and  filled  with  salt.  These 
houses  had  merely  earthrn  floors,  and  the 
salt  next  the  ground  in  a  few  years  entirely 
spoiled.  I  saw  large  quantities  of  it  literally 
thrown  into  the  street,  to  be  trodden  under- 
foot of  men  and  beasts.  It  was  "  good  for 
nothing." — Wm.  Thomson,  B.B. 

Salt  and  peace. — Every  one  who  has 
sojourned  in  the  East  has  some  story  to 
tell  of  the   sacredness  attached  by  Arabs 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


to  a  compact  which  has  been  ratified  by  held  their  peace ;  for  by  the  way  they  had 

salt ;  how  the  man  who  one  day  would  have  disputed  among  themselves  who  should  be 

plundered  you   of    all  will  the   next   day  greatest."    The  very  children  of  the  desert 

sacrifice  everything  he  values,  if  need  be,  teach    the  disciples   a    lesson.     They  had 

if  in  the  meantime  you  have  tasted  his  salt.  been    brought     "  into    the     bond    of    the 

Some  think  that   in  this    verse  our  Lord  covenant " ;  they  had  eaten  of  the  "  king's 

refers  to  this  well-known  fact.    An  unseemly  salt";  had  been  "salted  with  the  salt  of 

quarrel  had  taken  place  amongst  His  dis-  the  palace"  (Ezra  iv.  14).    How  can  they 

ciples  :    "  What   was    it    that   ye   disputed  dispute  who  are  bound  by  the  most  solemn 

among  yourselves  by  the  way  ?    But  they  obligations  to  perpetual  amity  and  love  ? 


CHAPTER   X. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  He  arose  from  thence. — Between  the  events  just  recorded  and  those  of  which  the 
Evangelist  now  proceeds  to  treat  many  others  had  occurred,  which  he  passes  over.  The 
most  important  of  these  were:  1.  The  visit  of  Christ  to  Jerusalem  at  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles (John  vii.  8-10),  which  was  marked  by — (1)  The  rebuke  to  the  "  Sons  of  Thunder  "  at 
the  churlish  conduct  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  Samaritan  village  on  their  way  to  the  Holy  City 
(Luke  ix.  51-56)  ;  (2)  Solemn  discourses  during  the  feast,  and  an  attempt  of  the  Sanhedrin 
to  apprehend  Him  (John  vii.  11-52,  viii.  12-59) ;  (3)  The  opening  of  the  eyes  of  one  born 
blind  (John  ix.  1-41),  the  revelation  of  Himself  as  the  Good  Shepherd  (John  x.  1-18). 
2.  Ministrations  in  Judea  and  mission  of  the  seventy  (Luke  x.-xiii.  17).  3.  Visit  to 
Jerusalem  at  the  Feast  of  Dedication  (John  x.  22-39).  4.  Tour  in  Persea  (Luke  xiii.  22- 
xvii.  10).  5.  The  raising  of  Lazarus  (John  xi.  1-46).  6.  Resolve  of  the  Sanhedrin  to  put 
Him  to  death,  and  His  retirement  to  Ephraim  (John  xi.  47-54).  The  coasts  of  Judea. — The 
place  whither  He  now  retired  has  been  identified  with  Ophrah,  and  was  situated  in  the 
wide  desert  country  north-east  of  Jerusalem,  not  far  from  Bethel,  and  on  the  confines  of 
Samaria.  Caspari  would  identify  it  with  a  place  now  called  El-Faria,  or  El-Farrah,  about 
two  hours  north-east  of  Nablous. — O.  F.  Maclear,  JD.D. 

Ver.  5.  For  the  hardness. — To  meet — in  the  way  of  concession  or  compromise. 

Ver.  18.  No  one  is  good  except  God. 

Ver.  21.  Loved. — Possibly  caressed.  It  is  said  to  have  been  customary  with  Jewish 
Rabbis  to  kiss  the  head  of  such  pupils  as  answered  well.  Take  up  the  cross. — Omitted 
by  x,  B,  C,  D,  A,  and  Vulg. 

Ver.  22.  "Was  sad. — Turning  gloomy — his  bright  countenance  becoming  overshadowed  as 
by  a  thunder-cloud — he  went  away  sorrowful :  for  he  was  in  possession  of  many  acquisitions, 
which  he  could  not  bear  to  think  of  giving  up. 

Ver.  24.  See  R.V.  text  and  margin. 

Ver.  25.  It  is  easier  for  a  camel. — This  is  (as  Dr.  J.  Morison  aptly  remarks)  a  fine,  bold, 
hieroglyphic,  hyperbolical  way  of  speaking,  that  need  impose  on  no  one  with  a  spark  of 
poetry  in  his  soul.  The  key  to  its  import  is  hung  at  the  girdle  of  common  sense.  Southey 
caught  its  spirit : — 

"I  would  ride  the  camel, 
Yea,  leap  him  flying,  through  the  needle's  eye,  i 

As  easily  as  such  a  pampered  soul 
Could  pass  the  narrow  gate." 

11  The  text,"  he  says,  "  is  gospel- wisdom."  The  Saviour  intended  to  represent  vividly  and 
memorably  the  extraordinary  difficulty  of  discharging  the  responsibilities  and  overcoming 
the  temptations  of  riches. 

Ver.  30.  The  world  to  come. — The  age  which  is  coming — the  Messianic  or  Christian  era, 
which  was  inaugurated  by  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit — the  Life-giver — on  the  Day  of 
Pentecost.    Eternal  life  begins  now,  in  this  present  world  of  sense  and  time. 

Ver.  40.  See  R.V.  for  last  clause,  which,  however,  may  also  be  rendered  save  to  them  for 
whom  it  is  prepared  (made  ready).  "  The  throne  is  the  prize  of  toils,  not  a  grace  granted 
to  ambition." 

Ver.  45.  "  The  human  blood  of  the  Eternal  Son  was  the  ransom  paid  to  God  for  our  eternal 

A  A  353 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


redemption  from  the  curse  of  the  law  and  from  the  wrath  of  God,  and  from  the  claims  of 
Satan  and  from  the  power  of  sin."  This  "  one  offering,  single  and  complete,"  when  put  in 
the  balance  t/ver  against  the  transgressions  of  many,  proved  sufficient  to  atone  for  all. 

Vers.  46-52.  See  R.V.  for  several  graphic  touches  obscured  by  A.V. 

Ver.  51.  Rabboni. — The  highest  title  he  could  give,  the  gradations  being  Rab,  Rabbi, 
Rabban,  Rabboni.     See  John  xx.  16. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

(Parallel  :  Matt.  xix.  1-12.) 

Lessons  for  preachers. — This  passage,  which  will  hardly  ever  be  required 
for  public  use,  suggests  some  points  which  ought  not  to  be  neglected  by  the 
preacher. 

I.  Jesus  Christ  taught. — Ignorance  was  never  approved  by  the  Saviour.  He 
saved  through  light,  never  through  darkness.  He  conducted  specific  intellectual 
processes  as  well  as  processes  distinctively  moral.  It  was  His  delight  to 
simplify  truth. 

II.  Jesus  Christ  taught  the  people. — Not  a  particular  class,  but  the  people 
as  a  whole.  His  teaching  was  as  impartial  as  the  sunshine.  This  is  the  glory 
of  Christian  truth.  It  challenges  all  hearts  in  all  ages  and  in  all  lands.  It 
is  a  heavenly  rain,  not  a  local  fountain. 

III.  Jesus  Christ  honoured  the  holy  teachers  who  had  gone  before  Him 
(ver.  3). — Truth  is  one.  We  find  new  phases,  new  applications,  and  the  like; 
but  truth  is  one,  because  God  is  one.  This  is  our  security  amid  all  changes  of 
ministers  and  teachers.  In  so  far  as  the  men  have  been  true  to  God  each  can 
say,  "  What  did  my  predecessor  tell  you  ?  " 

IV.  Jesus  Christ  honoured  the  tenderest  relations  of  the  present  life 
(vers.  7-9). — He  did  not  ignore  the  present  because  of  the  future.  He  treated 
no  vow  with  levity.  He  taught  the  whole  law — the  law  of  home,  the  law  of 
society,  the  law  of  the  Church  :  "  There  is  one  Lawgiver." — J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Marriage. — 1.  That  society  is  necessary  to  the  happiness  of  human  nature, 
that  the  gloom  of  solitude  and  the  stillness  of  retirement,  however  they  may 
flatter  at  a  distance  with  pleasing  views  of  independence  and  serenity,  neither 
extinguish  the  passions  nor  enlighten  the  understanding,  that  discontent  will 
intrude  upon  privacy  and  temptations  follow  us  to  the  desert,  every  one  may 
be  easily  convinced,  either  by  his  own  experience  or  that  of  others.  2.  It  is  a 
proof  of  the  regard  of  God  for  the  happiness  of  mankind  that  the  means  by 
which  it  must  be  attained  are  obvious  and  evident ;  that  we  are  not  left  to 
discover  them  by  difficult  speculations,  intricate  disquisitions,  or  long  experience, 
but  are  led  to  them  equally  by  our  passions  and  our  reason,  in  prosperity  and 
distress.  3.  As  a  general  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  species  is  not  sufficient  to 
procure  gratifications  for  the  private  desires  of  particular  persons,  as  closer  ties 
of  union  are  necessary  to  promote  the  separate  interests  of  individuals,  the  great 
society  of  the  world  is  divided  into  different  communities,  which  are  again 
subdivided  into  smaller  bodies  and  more  contracted  associations,  which  pursue, 
or  ought  to  pursue,  a  particular  interest,  in  subordination  to  the  public  good,  and 
consistently  with  the  general  happiness  of  mankind.  4.  The  lowest  subdivision 
of  society  is  that  by  which  it  is  broken  into  private  families ;  nor  do  any  duties 
demand  more  to  be  explained  and  enforced  than  those  which  this  relation 
produces,  because  none  is  more  universally  obligatory,  and  perhaps  very  few 
are  more  frequently  neglected.  5.  That  marriage  itself,  an  institution  designed 
only  for  the  promotion  of  happiness,  and  for  the  relief  of  the  disappointments, 

354 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  X. 


anxieties,  and  distresses,  to  which  we  are  subject  in  our  present  state,  does 
not  always  produce  the  effects  for  which  it  was  appointed,  that  it  sometimes 
condenses  the  gloom  which  it  was  intended  to  dispel,  and  increases  the  weight 
which  was  expected  to  be  made  lighter  by  it,  must,  however  unwillingly,  be  yet 
acknowledged.  6.  It  is  to  be  considered  to  what  causes  effects  so  unexpected 
and  unpleasing,  so  contrary  to  the  end  of  the  institution,  and  so  unlikely  to 
arise  from  it,  are  to  be  attributed ;  it  is  necessary  to  inquire  whether  those 
that  are  thus  unhappy  are  to  impute  their  misery  to  any  other  cause  than  their 
own  folly,  and  to  the  neglect  of  those  duties  which  prudence  and  religion  equally 
require. 

I.  The  nature  and  end  of  marriage. — The  vow  of  marriage,  which  the  wisdom 
of  most  civilised  nations  has  enjoined,  and  which  the  rules  of  the  Christian 
Church  enjoin,  may  be  properly  considered  as  a  vow  of  perpetual  and  indissoluble 
friendship — friendship  which  no  change  of  fortune  nor  any  alteration  of  external 
circumstances  can  be  allowed  to  interrupt  or  weaken.  After  the  commencement 
of  this  state  there  remain  no  longer  any  separate  interests  ;  the  two  individuals 
become  united,  and  are  therefore  to  enjoy  the  same  felicity  and  suffer  the  same 
misfortunes — to  have  the  same  friends  and  the  same  enemies,  the  same  success 
and  the  same  disappointments.  1.  It  is  remarked  that  "friendship  amongst 
equals  is  the  most  lasting,"  and  perhaps  there  are  few  causes  to  which  more 
unhappy  marriages  are  to  be  ascribed  than  a  disproportion  between  the  original 
condition  of  the  two  persons.  Difference  of  condition  makes  difference  of 
education,  and  difference  of  education  produces  differences  of  habits,  sentiments, 
and  inclinations.  2.  Strict  friendship  is  "to  have  the  same  desires  and  the  same 
aversions."  Whoever  is  to  choose  a  friend  is  to  consider  first  the  resemblance 
or  the  dissimilitude  of  tempers.  How  necessary  this  caution  is  to  be  urged  as 
preparatory  to  marriage  the  misery  of  those  who  neglect  it  sufficiently  evinces. 
To  enumerate  all  the  varieties  of  disposition  to  which  it  may  on  this  occasion 
be  convenient  to  attend  would  be  a  tedious  task ;  but  it  is  at  least  proper  to 
enforce  one  precept  on  this  head — a  precept  which  was  never  yet  broken  without 
fatal  consequences  :  "  Let  the  religion  of  the  man  and  woman  be  the  same." 
3.  "  Friends,"  says  the  proverbial  observation,  "  have  everything  in  common/  This 
is  likewise  implied  in  the  marriage  covenant.  Matrimony  admits  of  no  separate 
possessions,  no  incommunicable  interests.  4.  There  is  yet  another  precept  equally 
relating  to  friendship  and  to  marriage — a  precept  which  in  either  case  can  never 
be  too  strongly  inculcated  or  too  scrupulously  observed  :  "  Contract  friendship 
only  with  the  good."  Virtue  is  the  first  quality  to  be  considered  in  the  choice 
of  a  friend,  and  yet  more  in  a  fixed  and  irrevocable  choice.  This  maxim  surely 
requires  no  comment  nor  any  vindication ;  it  is  equally  clear  and  certain, 
obvious  to  the  superficial,  and  incontestable  by  the  most  accurate  examiner. 
To  dwell  upon  it  is  therefore  superfluous ;  for  though  often  neglected,  it  never 
was  denied. 

II.  By  what  means  the  end  of  marriage  is  to  be  attained. — As  it  appears  by 
examining  the  natural  system  of  the  universe  that  the  greatest  and  smallest 
bodies  are  invested  with  the  same  properties  and  moved  by  the  same  laws,  so 
a  survey  of  the  moral  world  will  inform  us  that  greater  or  less  societies  are  to 
be  made  happy  by  the  same  means,  and  that,  however  relations  may  be  varied 
or  circumstances  changed,  virtue,  and  virtue  alone,  is  the  parent  of  felicity. 
If  passion  be  suffered  to  prevail  over  right,  and  the  duties  of  our  state  be  broken 
through  or  neglected  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  our  anger,  our  pride,  or  our 
revenge,  the  union  of  hearts  will  quickly  be  dissolved,  and  kindness  will  give 
way  to  resentment  and  aversion.  1.  The  duties  by  the  practice  of  which  a 
married  life  is  to  be  made  happy  are  the  same  with  those  of  friendship,  but 
exalted  to  higher  perfection.     Love  must  be  more  ardent,  and  confidence  without 

355 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


limits.  It  is  therefore  necessary  on  each  part  to  deserve  that  confidence  by  the 
most  unshaken  fidelity,  and  to  preserve  their  love  unextinguished  by  continual 
acts  of  tenderness,  not  only  to  detest  all  real  but  seeming  offences,  and  to 
avoid  suspicion  and  guilt  with  almost  equal  solicitude.  2t  But  since  the  frailty 
of  our  nature  is  such  that  we  cannot  hope  from  each  other  an  unvaried  rectitude 
of  conduct  or  an  uninterrupted  course  of  wisdom  or  virtue,  as  folly  will  some- 
times intrude  upon  an  unguarded  hour,  and  temptations  by  frequent  attacks 
will  sometimes  prevail,  one  of  the  chief  acts  of  love  is  readily  to  forgive  errors 
and  overlook  defects.  Neglect  is  to  be  reclaimed  by  kindness,  and  perverseness 
softened  by  complaisance.  3.  Marriage,  however  in  general  it  resembles  friend- 
ship, differs  from  it  in  this  :  that  all  its  duties  are  not  reciprocal.  Friends  are 
equal  in  every  respect,  but  the  relation  of  marriage  produces  authority  on  one 
side  and  exacts  obedience  on  the  other.  But  though  obedience  may  be  justly 
required,  servility  is  not  to  be  exacted ;  and  though  it  may  be  lawful  to  exert 
authority,  it  must  be  remembered  that  to  govern  and  to  tyrannise  are  very 
different,  and  that  oppression  will  naturally  provoke  rebellion.  4.  The  great 
rule  both  of  authority  and  obedience  is  the  law  of  God — a  law  which  is  not  to 
be  broken  for  the  promotion  of  any  ends  or  in  compliance  with  any  commands, 
and  which  indeed  never  can  be  violated  without  destroying  that  confidence 
which  is  the  great  source  of  mutual  happiness  :  for  how  can  that  person  be 
trusted  whom  no  principle  obliges  to  fidelity  ? — S.  Johnson,  LL.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

~Ver.  1.  A  true  pastor  is  never  weary  Vers.    5-9.    The  doctrine   of   Christ 

of  instructing  his  people. — He  is  always  concerning  marriage. — 1.    Its   binding 

ready  to  communicate  himself,  because  character  as  instituted  by  God.    2.  Its 

the   treasure  of   his   heart  is   always  decay  in  the  progress  of  history.    3.  Its 

full  of  the  truths  of  salvation.     His  prepared   restoration    under   the  law. 

known  charity  causes  people  to  seek  4.  Its  transformation  by  the  gospel. — . 

and  apply  themselves  to  him,  and  this  — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 
search  and  concourse  invite  and  solicit 

his    charity.      Kindle,   O    Lord,   this  Yer.  5.  God  does  by  no  means  author- 

double  zeal,  both  in  the  pastors  and  ise  everything  which  He  tolerates ;  and 

in  the  sheep ! — P.  Quesnel.  He  frequently  permits  a  less  evil  that 

a  greater  may  be  avoided.     It  is  abso- 

Yer.  4.  A  loose  casuist  generally  wants  lutely  necessary  to  distinguish  in  the 

either  knowledge  or  sincerity. — This  con-  Scripture  that  which  God  commands, 

duct  of  the  Pharisees  is  but  too  fre-  that   which   He  counsels,  that  which 

quently    imitated,    who,    being    called  He  expressly  permits,  and  that  which, 

upon   to    produce    the   primitive    law  out  of  His  infinite  patience,  He  only 

published  by  Moses,  "  He  shall  cleave  tolerates  or  suffers. — P.  Quesnel. 
to  his  wife,"  suppress  it,  to  insist  upon 

a  doctrine  which  was  only  tolerated,  Yers.  7,  8.  Marriage  may  be  regarded 

and  to  fix  upon  a  dispensation  of  this  in   three   lights.      1.  It   is   a   natural 

law   which   had   been   extorted,  as  it  contract,  designed  for  "the  propaga- 

were,  by  force.     Men  often  substitute,  tion  and  perpetuation  "  of  the  human 

in  the  room  of  the  holy  law  of  the  race.     2.  It  is  a  civil  contract,  entered 

gospel,   a    toleration   of    some   things  into  according  to  the  laws  of  the  state, 

which  corruption  of  manners  has  in-  for  the  preservation  of  peace  and  pros- 

troduced  contrary  to  the  gospel  itself,  perity   in   the  kingdom.      3.  It  is   a 

— Ibid.  sacred  contract,  raised  by  the  new  law 

356 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  X. 


of  Christ  into  something  higher  than 
the  natural  sphere — a  rite  through 
which  grace  is  conferred  upon  two 
human  beings  for  the  fulfilment  of  the 
duties  of  the  married  state,  an  image 
of  the  union  between  Christ  and  His 
Church. 

Ner.  7.  Husband  and  wife  com- 
plete and  strengthen  each  other.  A 
husband's  love  will  not  deaden  but 
develop  what  is  strong  and  individual 
in  a  wife's  character;  and  a  wife's 
love  will  give  edge  to  her  husband's 
individuality  and  heighten  the  worth 
of'  his  work.  This  is  not  bondage, 
unless  it  be  bondage  for  a  child  to  be 
moulded  by  a  mother's  love,  or  for  a 
friend  to  be  influenced  by  the  nobler 
character  of  his  friend.  That  is  the 
true  freedom  when  what  is  best  in  me 
is  free  to  grow  because  it  is  surrounded 
by  the  conditions  of  growth.  And 
that  is  the  freedom  of  marriage  where 
two  souls  are  joined  in  a  life-union  by 
love  and  reverence,  and  help  each  other 
to  be  their  true  selves,  enhance  each 
other's  moral  influence,  and  heighten 
each  other's  joys. — D.  M.  Ross. 

Ver.  9.  Marriage  in  the  time  of 
Christ. — If  we  bear  in  mind  that  great 
laxity  existed  with  regard  to  marriage 
even  amongst  the  Jews  in  the  time 
of  our  Lord,  we  shall  see  that  His 
purpose  was  to  bring  marriage  back 
to  its  original  foundation,  and  so  "  give 


perpetual  security  to  His  followers  for 
the  sanctity  of  home."  There  were 
two  schools  amongst  the  Jews,  those  of 
Hillel  andShammai;  the  former  allowed 
divorce  for  slight  reasons,  the  latter 
only  for  grave  offences.  Both,  though 
in  very  different  degrees,  fell  short  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  permanency  which, 
according  to  Divine  appointment,  be- 
longed to  the  marriage  bond.  When 
the  Pharisees  twitted  Christ  with  the 
Mosaic  "  command  to  give  a  writing 
of  divorcement,"  He  reminded  them 
that  it  was  not  a  "  a  command,"  but 
a  matter  of  sufferance,  because  the 
standard  of  their  fathers  was  so  low ; 
and  that  it  was  not  so  from  the  begin- 
ning, but  that  He  came  to  restore  the 
institution  of  marriage  to  its  original 
condition,  and  to  add  to  it  new  grace. 

The  marriage  bond. — Not  only  our 
religious  but  our  social  and  national 
well-being  demands  the  permanency 
of  the  marriage  bond.  Without  it, 
marriage  degenerates  into  a  form  of 
selfish  and  sensual  gratification;  with 
it,  it  is  a  state  of  complete  and  un- 
reserved mutual  self- surrender.  With- 
out it,  home  rests  upon  the  sands ; 
with  it,  it  is  founded  on  a  rock.  If 
marriages  and  homes  are  to  be  ruled 
by  mere  selfishness,  and  not  by  pure 
love,  we  know  from  history  that 
national  greatness  is  too  closely  bound 
up  with  home  life  to  continue  when 
domestic  happiness  is  gone. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—16. 


(Parallels  :  Matt.  xix.  13-15;  Luke  xviii.  15-17.) 

Children  welcomed  to  Christ. — Infant  baptism  was  assuredly  in  the  mind,  in 
the  will,  and  in  the  intention  of  Christ  at  that  moment.  In  fact,  was  it  not 
baptism,  only  without  the  water  ?  Where  He  stood  visibly  in  all  His  grace  and 
power,  the  emblem  and  the  instrument  were  not  needed.  We  now  want  the  help 
and  assurance  of  the  external  symbol.  But  if  some  say,  "  Is  not  the  base  too 
small  for  the  superstructure  ?  The  record  is  so  very  simple  here,  and  we  only  read 
of  it  but  once,"  I  answer,  Every  incident  in  Christ's  life  was  intended  to  be  a 
germ  of  great  thought,  of  deep  principle,  and  of  extensive  duty.  And  if  it  were 
only  once  that  Jesus  blessed  the  little  children,  as  often  as  the  children  were 
brought  to  Him  so  often  He  blessed  them. 

357 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


I.  The  danger  and  sin  of  standing  in  the  way  of  children  coming  to  Christ. — 
1.  I  do  not  speak  now  of  those  who,  upon  a  principle  in  their  own  minds,  do  not 
bring  infants  to  holy  baptism  :  they  are  acting  conscientiously ;  and  doubtless 
their  sin  of  ignorance  is  pardoned,  and  their  children  may  not  be  suffered  by  a 
loving  Father  to  miss  the  grace  which  He  had  willed  to  give  them.  2.  There 
are  persons  who,  believing  the  baptism  of  infants  to  be  according  to  the  mind 
of  God,  nevertheless,  from  idolence  or  thoughtlessness,  neglect  that  holy  rite. 
3.  Perhaps  few  persons  are  aware  of  the  extent  to  which  children,  even  very  young 
children's  minds,  are  capable  of  being  affected,  prejudiced,  distorted,  injured,  by 
the  conversation  which  they  hear.  You  talk  before  a  child  lightly  and  falsely 
upon  religious  and  moral  subjects.  You  mean  no  harm.  You  do  not  remember 
a  little  child  is  present ;  and  you  do  not  recollect  how  that  little  child  is  listening 
to  and  drinking  in  all  you  say.  But  that  child  cannot  balance  or  direct  or 
dismiss  a  subject  as  you  do.  It  has  fallen  with  a  fearful  impression.  It  has 
left  a  stamp  and  an  irreverence  perhaps,  a  doubt  perhaps,  a  wicked  imagination 
perhaps,  which  will  never,  never  be  obliterated!  4.  Some  cast  obstacles  less 
offensively,  but  perhaps 'more  dangerously.  Whoever  considers  the  subject  must 
become  aware  how  exceedingly  uninviting,  nay,  how  repulsive,  religion  is 
generally  made  to  children.  Where  is  that  cheerfulness  and  that  gladsomeness 
which  a  child  loves,  and  in  which  real  religion  always  consists  ? 

II.  The  duty  of  bringing  children  to  Christ. — If  you  wish  a  child  to  be  really 
religious,  you  must  begin  with  the  distinctive  features  of  Christianity,  and  imbue 
it  with  the  gospel.  I  will  illustrate  my  meaning  by  three  examples.  You  desire 
to  lay  in  your  child's  mind  the  foundation  of  right  conduct,  and  of  a  good, 
upright  life.  Tell  him  at  once  about  Jesus.  Tell  him,  "  Jesus  died  for  you,  and 
therefore,  though  you  are  a  very  sinful  child,  God  has  forgiven  you,  and  God 
loves  you.  For  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  you  are  His  own  dear  child."  Or  take 
another  instance.  Your  child  has  told  a  lie.  W^hat  shall  you  do  to  him  ?  Tell 
him,  "  Jesus  is  truth.  Try  to  be  true,  that  you  may  be  like  Jesus.  Heaven  is 
all  truth,  because  heaven  is  all  like  Jesus.  Go,  and  never  be  unlike  Jesus 
again."  Or  your  child  has  fallen  into  any  sin.  Do  not  be  afraid  to  say  to 
that  child  at  once  Jesus  died  to  wash  away  that  sin.  Go  and  ask  Him  to 
do  it.  And  He  will  do  it.  He  will  do  it  instantly.  He  will  do  it  perfectly, 
if  you  ask  Him. 

III.  We  ourselves  must  be  like  little  children. — If  it  were  only  that  we 
might  influence  children,  we  should  cultivate  a  childlike  spirit;  for  none  can 
do  good,  especially  to  the  young,  but  those  who  are  very  simple  in  their  thoughts 
and  very  lowly  in  their  ways.  But  in  what  are  we  to  become  like  a  little  child  ? 
1.  When  those  little  children  lay  in  Jesus'  arms,  His  act  came  before  any  of  their 
acts.  It  was  anticipatory  of  what  was  to  follow.  They  received  what  He  gave 
them  as  a  free  gift  of  His.  They  could  have  no  sense  whatever  that  they 
deserved  it.  But  freely  as  He  bestowed  the  grace,  so  freely  the  little  children 
took  it.  This  is  just  the  way  to  get  to  the  kingdom.  2.  A  very  little  child 
never  doubts  where  it  has  learned  to  love.  It  believes  everything,  and  questions 
nothing.  The  credulity  of  the  child  is  the  faith  of  the  Christian.  My ,  Saviour, 
my  Lord,  has  said  it.  I  will  believe  it,  and  ask  no  questions.  3.  A  very  little 
child  is  necessarily  led.  It  knows  it  cannot  go  alone.  And  we  must  be  content 
all  of  us  to  be  borne  and  carried  every  step.  Those  who  get  to  heaven  do  not 
march  in,  they  do  not  walk  there  :  they  are  carried  there. — J.   Vaughan,  M.A. 


358 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  X. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   TEE    VERSES. 


Vers.  13-16.  The  Son  of  Man  among 
the  children  of  men. — 1 .  As  the  heavenly- 
new  and  fresh  related  to  the  earthly- 
new  and  fresh.  2.  As  the  humble  One 
to  the  artless.  3.  As  the  Prince  of 
faith  to  the  confiding.  4.  As  the  great 
Warrior  to  the  strivers.  5.  As  the 
great  Hope  to  the  hoping.  6.  As 
the  Blessed  with  the  happy. — J.  P. 
Lang e ,  D.D. 

Children  are  specially  susceptible  of 
spiritual  influences. — In  their  case  there 
is  still — 1.  Confidence  instead  of 
scepticism.  2.  Self-surrender  instead 
of  distrust.  3.  Truth  instead  of 
hypocrisy.  4.  Modesty  and  humility 
instead  of  pride. — Lisco. 

Vers.  13,  14.  Infant  baptism. — We 
have  been  accustomed  to  allege  these 
words  in  behalf  of  the  Catholic  practice 
of  infant  baptism ;  and  rightly,  for 
they  have  been  always  so  understood 
by  the  Church, — and  the  voice  of  the 
Church  Universal  is  that  of  the  Lord. 
"  Baptise  also  your  infants,"  says  an 
ancient  writing,  speaking  the  sense  of 
the  Greek  Church,  "  and  bring  them 
up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of 
God.  For  He  saith,  '  Suffer  the  little 
children  to  come  unto  Me,  and  forbid 
them  not.' "  And  in  the  Latin  Church 
of  old  times  (as  in  our  own),  in  the 
Baptismal  Service  for  Infants,  they 
read  this  history  out  of  one  of  the  three 
Gospels,  as  their  Lord's  sanction  of 
their  act  of  charity. — E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  The  kingdom  of  heaven, 
or  sovereignty  of  the  Messiah,  is 
constituted  of  such  as  the  children 
presented  to  Christ.  He  does  not  say, 
observe,  that  this  kingdom  consists  of 
children,  but  of  such  as  children.  It 
is  therefore  some  similarity  to  that 
class  of  persons  which  indicates  member- 
ship of  the  community  of  the  faithful. 
In  what,  then,  does  that  similarity  lie  ? 
It  cannot  refer  to  age,  for  it  is  not 
true  that  infants  alone  are  members 
of  the  Church ;  nor  can  it  refer  specially 


to  the  physical  or  external  charac- 
teristics of  childhood ;  but  it  refers 
to  the  following  peculiarities.  1.  The 
only  prominent  circumstance  about  an 
infant's  history  is  its  birth.  Nothing 
else  has  happened  to  it.  No  other 
event  relating  to  it  deserves  notice. 
The  grand,  the  sole  feature  to  be  noted 
is,  that  it  was  born.  Of  suchlike 
persons  is  the  kingdom  of  God.  What 
designates  and  marks  out  the  subjects 
of  this  kingdom  is  a  new  birth,  a 
regeneration.  A  new  heart,  a  new 
spirit,  a  new  nature,  a  new  man — 
such  are  the  expressions  employed  to 
represent  their  character.  2.  Infants 
are  helpless;  and  of  suchlike  persons 
is  the~Tnhgdom  of  heaven,  because  all 
who  enter  therein  must  feel  their 
inability  to  do  anything  of  themselves. 
Their  sufficiency  must  be  of  God.  They 
must,  "  as  new-born  babes,  desire  the 
sincere  milk  of  the  Word,  that  they 
may  grow  thereby."  3.  Infants  are 
humble,  unconscious  of  all  pride  and 
self -righteousness ;  and  of  suchlike 
persons  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
because  the  followers  of  Jesus  must, 
like  their  Master,  be  humble  and  lowly 
of  heart.  4.  Infants  are  teachable, 
gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated ;  and 
of  suchlike  persons  is  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  because  all  its  subjects  are 
brought  to  submit  every  high  thought 
and  lofty  imagination  to  the  obedience 
of  Christ.  5.  Infants  are  without 
moral  obligation,  and  therefore  un- 
tainted by  the  guilt  of  actual  sin, 
unworldly  and  uncarnal ;  and  of  such 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  inasmuch 
as  those  who  enter  therein  have  been 
crucified  to  all  sinful  lusts — have  put 
off  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt — been 
renewed  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds — 
and  put  on  the  new  man,  which,  after 
God,  is  created  in  righteousness  and 
true  holiness.  6.  Infants  are  void  of 
offence  towards  man ;  and  of  suchlike 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  because 
those  who  enter  therein  are  "in  malice 
children,"  and  have  "laid  aside  guile, 

359 


chap,  x,  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


and   hypocrisies,  and   envies,   and   all  gifts    abundantly   upon   His   Church, 

evil-speakings,"  striving  to  be  harmless  not  lays  only  His   hands  upon  them, 

as  little  children. — A.  Nisbet.  but  makes  them  members  of  Himself, 

"  members  of  His  body,  of  His  flesh,  of 

Ver.  15.  To  receive  the  kingdom  as  a  His  bones,"  members  of  "His  Church, 

little  child  implies  that  we  receive  it —  which  is  His  body,  the  fulness  of  Him 

1.  Humbly,  as  the  provision  of  Sove-  which  filleth  all  in  all."    We  know  still 

reignty.     2.  Trustfully,  as  the   device  less  of  the  ineffable  greatness  of  that  we 

of  Fatherly  Wisdom.    3.  Gratefully,  as  seek  for  than  did  these  poor  parents 

the  gift  of  Saving  Love. — J.  E.  Henry,  who  sought  for  His  bodily  touch  and 

Christian  childhood  consists  in  having  His  prayers  ;    and  the  wish  of  those 

no  more   pride,  impurity,  resentment,  who  seek   for  baptism  for  the  bodily 

craft,  ambition,  covetousness,  and  know-  health  of  their  children  is  not  so  far 

ledge  of  evil  than  children.     It  is  this  below  their  belief  whose  belief  is  most 

which   renders   us   conformable,   gives  enlightened,    as   is   theirs    below    the 

us  admission,  and  unites  us   to  Jesus  inexpressible  reality ;  and   so,  for  the 

Christ  in  His  kingdom.     What  is  here  comfort  of  us  all,  our  Saviour  herein 

said  is  not  by  way  of  counsel,  but  it  shewed    that    He    regarded    not    our 

shews  the  absolute  necessity  of  being  merits,    but    His     mercies — not    our 

such,  at  least  in  some  degree,  in  order  ignorance,  but  His  own  omniscience — 

to  be  saved. — P.  Quesnel.  not  our  faint  wish  for   a  blessing  we 

know  not  what,  but  our  trust  in  Him, 

Ver.  16.  Christ   blessing  infants. —  our  wish  to  have  a  blessing  from  Him, 

What  parent  of  us  would  not  wish,  if  the    inexhaustible     Fountain     of     all 

he  might,  that  our  Saviour  should  lay  blessedness ;  and  grants  not  according 

His  hand  upon  his  child  and  bless  it  ?  to    the   poverty    of   our   desires,   but 

And  if  His  visible  touch  was  such  a  according  to  the  overflowing  riches  of 

source   of   comfort  and   of   hope,  how  His  goodness,  takes  our   infants  even 

not   and   much   more   when   He,   the  now  invisibly  up   in   His   everlasting 

risen,  the  ascended  Saviour,  who  from  arms,  and  returns  them  to  us — blessed, 

the  right  hand  of  God  sheds  forth  His  — E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses   17—22. 
(Parallels:  Matt.  xix.  16-22;  Luke  xviii.  48-23.) 

The  rich  young  ruler.— 1.  The  hopeful  inquiry. — 1.  Who  is  he?  Vaguely 
introduced  as  "one" — Luke  says  "a  certain  ruler,"  Matthew  calls  him  "the 
young  man  " — all  agree  in  saying  that  he  was  rich  :  combining  these  points, 
we  get  his  usual  title — "  the  rich  young  ruler."  2.  How  does  he  act  ?  Mark 
pictures  the  scene.  His  eagerness — expressed  by  his  running;  fearless  dis- 
regard of  opinion  of  others,  by  his  public  appeal  to  Christ  (no  Nicodemus) ;  his 
respect  for  One  without  rank  or  office,  by  his  kneeling.  3.  What  does  he  say  ? 
"  Good  Master,  what,"  etc.  How  to  obtain  eternal  life,  that  he  would  know. 
No  quibble  here,  no  playing  on  the  surface  of  things.  Life's  solemn  responsi- 
bility has  sobered  him.     Much  here  to  make  us  hopeful. 

II.  The  startling  reply. — Few  things  more  remarkable  than  the  way  Jesus 
dealt  with  men.  Each  was  to  Him  an  open  book.  He  replies  to  the  thought 
more  than  to  the  word.  1.  "Why  callest  thou  Me  good  ?  "  This  was  intended 
to  make  him  see  how  shallow  was  his  conception  of  goodness.  The  light,  careless, 
possibly  patronising  use  of  this  word,  a  word  dropped  thoughtlessly,  betrayed 
him.  Our  very  approach  to  Christ  tests  us,  and  either  convicts  us  of  lack  of 
spiritual  insight  and  desire,  or  it  will  call  out  all  that  is  deepest  and  truest. 

360  ,       ,  .. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  X. 


2.  Christ  meets  him  on  his  own  ground,  refers  him  to  the  six  commandments 
which  regulate  man's  conduct  towards  his  fellows.  Thou  knowest  them — keep 
them.  "All  these  have  I  observed."  Could  you  have  stood  up  before  the 
pitiful  but  piercing  gaze  of  Jesus  and  said  so  much  ?  Truly  he  knew  not  the 
deep  spiritual  reach  of  the  commandments ;  yet  "  Jesus,  looking  upon  him,  loved 
him."  O  heart  of  infinite  love !  3.  There  was  a  fatal  flaw,  and  Christ  applied 
a  stern  test  to  lay  it  bare  :  "  Go,  sell  " — then,  "  Come,  follow  Me."  All  is  tested 
by  devotion  to  Christ's  own  person.  Here  is  the  very  essence  of  Christianity. 
Not  correct  belief,  not  blameless  living,  not  human  goodness — though  all  this  is 
helpful  and  lovable ;  but  the  self  given  up,  fully  surrendered.  All  else  parted 
with,  and  then  following  Jesus. 

III.  The  disappointing  refusal. — 1.  "  He  went  away."  To  throw  away 
position,  prospects,  wealth,  it  seemed  a  harsh  demand.  For  there  was  a  flaw 
within.  Something,  perhaps  a  great  deal,  he  was  willing  to  do  to  obtain 
eternal  life,  but  to  fling  this  life  away  was  too  great  a  price.  So  you  see  his 
original  question  meant,  "  What  shall  I  do,  and  still  retain  my  position  ?  "  2.  Yet 
he  went  away  "  sorrowful,"  for  that  we  will  be  glad  :  not  scornful,  or  indignant, 
or  with  a  light  flippancy.  He  carried  the  arrow  within.  Did  he  ever  return  ? 
Who  shall  say  ?  But  he  missed  his  golden  opportunity ;  he  could  not  rise  to 
the  rank  of  hero. — T.  Puddicombe. 

The  great  refusal. — The  young  man  in  this-  narrative  was  worth  looking  at. 
To  begin  with,  he  was  young ;  and  youth  is  always  interesting.  Then  he  was 
rich,  "  very  rich,"  and  "  a  ruler  "  besides.  Better  still,  he  was  of  upright  cha- 
racter, claiming  a  due  respect  for  the  Divine  law.  He  was  amiable  also,  for  when 
the  Lord  looked  upon  him  He  loved  him.  But  the  best  of  all  was  his  earnest- 
ness. A  young  man  in  earnest,  and  in  earnest  with  respect  to  spiritual  things ! 
When  Caesar  saw  Brutus  for  the  first  time  and  heard  him  pleading  in  the  Forum, 
he  said,  "  Yon  youth  is  destined  to  make  his  mark,  because  he  intends  strongly." 
The  youth  who  here  prostrated  himself  before  Jesus  intended  strongly.  But, 
alas  !  there  were  grave  difficulties  in  the  way.  The  heavenward  path  is  ever  steep 
and  rugged.  Three  serious  mistakes  he  made,  any  one  of  which  would  have 
nullified  his  pursuit  of  spiritual  things. 

I.  With  respect  to  Christ. — At  this  point  he  was  an  Arian.  He  addressed 
Jesus  as  "  Good  Rabbi,"  and  would  prcbably  have  been  willing  to  pronounce  Him 
the  most  excellent  of  men.  But  Jesus  would  have  none  of  it.  "  Why  callest 
thou  Me  good  ?  "  said  He ;  "  there  is  none  good  but  One,  that  is,  God."  The 
alternative,  put  in  syllogistic  form,  was  like  this  : — 

God  alone  is  good : 
Thou  dost  not  believe  Me  to  be  God ; 
Ergo,  Call  Me  not  good. 
Or— 

God  alone  is  good : 

Thou  callest  Me  good ; 

Ergo,  Go  farther  and  pronounce  Me  God. 

In  any  case,  as  merely  a  "  Good  Rabbi,"  He  could  not  receive  it.  The  compli- 
ments of  those  who  esteem  Him  anything  else  or  lower  than  He  claimed  to  be 
are,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  an  affront  to  Him.  All  through  His  ministry  He 
insisted  that  He  was  the  long-looked-for  Christ,  and  as  such  the  very  Son  of 
God.  He  arrogated  to  Himself  all  the  Divine  attributes  and  distinctly  made 
Himself  equal  with  God.  For  this  He  suffered  death.  He  was  either  what  He 
claimed  to  be  or  He  was  an  impostor.  '•  Good  Rabbi "  He  certainly  was  not. 
There  is  no  middle  ground.  Was  Voltaire  right  when  he  cried,  "  Ecrasez 
l'infame  ! "  or  Peter  when  he  said,  "  Thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Living 
God"? 

361 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


II.  With  reference  to  himself. — At  this  point  he  was  a  Pelagian.  He  had 
no  comprehension  of  his  own  moral  character.  In  one  of  Hogarth's  cartoons  a 
demented  prisoner  sits  in  the  straw,  chained  like  a  beast  to  his  dungeon  wall ; 
but  he  smiles  and  sings  as  if  he  were  the  happiest  of  mortals.  The  straw  is  his 
throne,  his  jailors  are  his  courtiers ;  he  deems  himself  the  envy  of  crowned 
kings.  Not  greater  is  his  self-deception  than  that  of  the  self-righteous  man 
who  deems  himself  worthy  to  appear  in  judgment  before  God. 

III.  With  respect  to  salvation. — At  this  point  he  was  a  Legalist.  "  What 
shall  I  do,"  said  he,  "that  I  may  inherit  eternal  life?"  There  was  indeed 
nothing  for  him  to  do.  Had  he  but  known  it,  life  is  a  gracious  gift.  If  we  are 
ever  saved,  it  will  not  be  on  account  of  our  doing,  but  by  God's  giving.  He  is 
not  a  merchant  that  He  should  sell  his  precious  wares ;  He  is  a  king  and  gives 
right  royally.  But  while  salvation  is  free  it  is  conditioned.  God  who  gives  it 
has  been  pleased — as  was  His  obvious  right — to  affix  a  condition  upon  its 
bestowal,  to  wit,  He  that  believeth  shall  live.  To  believe  is  to  accept.  Faith  is 
the  hand  stretched  out  to  grasp  God's  grace.  Salvation  is  free — free  as  air,  as 
water,  as  the  manna  which  lay  like  hoar-frost  on  the  ground.  But  if  the 
Israelites  had  not  gathered  up  the  manna  they  would  have  died  of  hunger. 
And  though  a  man  stood  on  the  bank  of  the  Amazon,  were  he  to  refuse  to  drink 
he  would  perish  of  thirst.  There  is  an  atmosphere  fifty  miles  deep  around  this 
earth  of  ours,  but  a  man  who  will  not  breathe  must  strangle.  So  I  say 
salvation  is  free ;  but  it  saves  only  the  man  who  reaches  forth  and  takes  it. 
The  word  of  the  Master  comes  to  you  as  to  this  young  man,  "  Go,  sell  all  that 
thou  hast :  put  away  everything — gold,  pleasure,  unholy  ambition,  everything 
that  separates  between  thee  and  holiness — and  come  and  follow  Me." — 
D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D. 

Ver.  18.  The  goodness  of  God. — I.  God  is  a  good  Being. — 1.  Creation  is 
evidently  an  effect  of  goodness,  and  thoroughout  displays  the  goodness  of  God. 
(1)  Life  is  felt  by  all  sentient  creatures  to  be  a  blessing ;  they  seek  to 
preserve  it.  (2)  No  creature  is  made  without  a  capacity  for  enjoyment  and  a 
susceptibility  of  pleasure  of  some  kind.  (3)  The  arrangement  and  order  of  the 
universe  and  its  various  parts,  the  curious  organisation  of  creatures,  the 
manner  in  which  one  thing  is  adapted  to  another,  and  the  principle  of  utility 
which  pervades  the  whole,  exhibit  abundant  proof  of  the  goodness  of  the  Maker 
of  all  things.  2.  Divine  providence  furnishes  further  proof  that  God  is  good. 
(1)  God  hath  made  ample  provision  for  the  wants  of  all  His  creatures,  and 
furnished  them  with  abundant  means  of  enjoyment.  (2)  Provision  is  not  only 
made  for  the  preservation  and  comfort  of  individuals,  of  all  who  at  present 
exist,  but  also  for  perpetuating  the  various  orders  of  creatures  by  successive 
generations ;  and  the  means  necessary  to  these  ends  are  sources  of  pleasure. 
(3)  The  kindness  of  Divine  providence  is  everywhere  manifested.  He  openeth 
His  hand  and  supplieth  the  wants  of  all  living.  He  crowneth  the  year  with 
His  goodness.  3.  The  moral  system  which  God  hath  established  exhibits  clear 
proofs  that  He  is  a  good  Being.  (1)  Such  a  system  is  established  in  the  moral 
world,  that  man  must  be  the  artificer  of  his  own  happiness,  he  must  erect  the 
superstructure  of  his  own  intellectual  and  moral  attainments.  (2)  Such  a 
connexion  is  established  between  causes  and  effects  in  the  moral  system,  that 
no  man  can  be  vicious  with  impunity,  nor  virtuous  without  receiving  a  reward. 
Every  evil  passion  is  in  some  degree  a  tormenter.  Virtue  is  productive  of  peace 
of  mind  and  intellectual  pleasure,  and  is  conducive  to  health,  cheerfulness, 
reputation,  and  even  worldly  comfort  and  advantage.  The  Being  who  hath 
thus  arranged  causes  and  effects  must  be  good.  (3)  The  moral  system  is  so 
constituted  that  true  self-love  will  lead  us  to  do  good  to  our  fellow-creatures. 

362 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


The  more  good  a  man  does,  the  more  happiness  he  gains.  This  order  of  things 
could  arise  from  nothing  but  goodness.  (4)  The  laws  established  in  the  moral 
system  have  a  constant  tendency  to  intellectual  and  moral  improvement.  To 
judge  properly  of  this,  we  should  compare  the  present  state  of  knowledge  and 
improvement,  both  as  to  its  degree  and  extent,  with  what  it  was  in  former 
times.  A  system  which  ever  tends  to  greater  perfection  must  have  originated 
with  a  Being  who  is  perfectly  good.  4.  Divine  revelation  is  a  testimony  of  the 
goodness  of  God.  (1)  In  the  Scriptures  the  goodness  of  God  is  proclaimed.  It 
is  declared  that  He  is  good,  good  unto  all,  and  that  His  goodness  abideth 
continually.  (2)  Divine  revelation  not  only  declares  that  God  is  good,  it 
exhibits  the  most  astonishing  proofs  of  His  goodness.  It  makes  known  the 
greatness  of  His  love,  and  opens  the  riches  of  His  grace  to  the  children  of  men. 
It  contains  a  provision  for  all  our  moral  and  spiritual  wants.  5.  The  goodness 
of  God  is  so  evident  from  His  works,  and  so  plainly  declared  in  His  Word,  as 
to  compel  universal  assent  among  all  who  profess  faith  in  Him.  It  may  be 
objected  that  there  is  much  evil  in  the  world,  and  asked  how  its  existence 
is  to  be  reconciled  with  the  belief  that  all  things  were  made  and  are  governed 
by  a  Being  who  is  perfectly  good.  (1)  Evil  is  relative,  and  may  be  made 
subservient  to  good ;  there  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  evil :  consequently  its 
existence  is  not  incompatible  with  the  absolute  goodness  of  God.  (2)  Evil  is 
partial  and  temporary ;  good  or  enjoyment  everywhere  preponderates,  and 
will  be  eternal ;  evil  is  merely  an  infraction  of  the  established  order  of  things, 
throughout  which  goodness  appears.  (3)  We  see  evil  in  many  instances  made 
subservient  to  and  productive  of  good  :  hence  it  is  reasonable  to  conclude  all 
evil  will  be  made  to  issue  in  good.  (4)  Constituted  as  the  present  world  is, 
and  formed  as  man  is,  to  be  instructed  by  experience,  it  does  not  appear  that 
all  evil  could  be  excluded  in  the  present  state.  (5)  It  cannot  be  shewn  that 
more  evil  is  permitted  than  is  necessary  to  produce  the  greatest  ultimate  good ; 
and  unless  this  could  be  shewn,  its  existence  cannot  be  proved  inconsistent  with 
Divine  goodness. 

II.  Under  what  views  God  only  is  good. — 1.  The  goodness  of  God  is 
underived,  uncaused,  unoriginated.  Goodness  is  His  essential  and  eternal  nature. 
This  cannot  be  said  of  any  other  being.  The  goodness  of  all  others  is  originated 
and  derived.  2.  God  alone  is  the  primary  Source  of  all  that  is  good  in  the 
universe.  It  is  either  the  work  of  His  hand  or  a  communication  from  His  fulness. 
3.  The  goodness  of  God  is  pure  and  absolute.  There  is  nothing  in  God  but 
what  is  good,  nor  that  can  operate  but  for  good.  His  goodness  is  without  the 
least  alloy.  It  is  not  diminished  by  ignorance,  nor  by  weakness,  nor  by  the 
slightest  possible  limitation  of  powers  ;  nor  is  it  capable  of  being  bounded  in 
its  operations  by  any  power  in  the  universe  :  for  it  is  the  pure  goodness  of  an 
infinitely  wise  and  almighty  Being,  who  is  the  supreme,  universal,  and  eternal 
Sovereign.  4.  The  goodness  of  God  is  most  perfect.  It  is  all  that  goodness 
can  be.  It  comprehends  all  His  attributes  and  perfections :  they  are  all 
modifications  of  goodness,  which  is  His  general  excellence ;  and  only  differently 
characterised  according  to  its  various  manifestations.  5.  God  being  only  and 
perfectly  good,  His  goodness  must  be  infinite.  It  can  have  no  bound  nor  limit. 
It  must  extend  to  all  creatures,  and  fill  the  universe ;  for  it  is  the  supreme 
excellence,  infinite  nature,  and  fulness  of  Him  who  filleth  heaven  and  earth, 
whom  heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain. 

Lessons. — 1.  If  God  be  infinitely  good,  how  comprehensive  must  be  His 
designs  and  plans  of  goodness  respecting  His  creatures  !  2.  If  God  be  infinitely 
good,  He  must  necessarily  have  made  all  men  for  happiness ;  it  is  impossible 
He  should  give  existence  to  a  single  individual  without  intending  his  happi- 
ness ;  or  that  He  should  cause  him  to  exist,  if  He  knew  his  existence,  on  th« 

363 


CHAP.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


whole,  would  not  be  to  him  a  blessing.  3.  If  God  be  good,  He  cannot  require 
impossibilities  of  His  creatures ;  He  cannot  call  them  to  perform  what  is  above 
their  strength  ;  He  cannot  require  they  should  be  more  perfect  than  He  hath 
formed  them  capable  of  being ;  He  will  not  severely  mark  their  frailties  and 
imperfections  ;  He  will  not  reject  the  well-meant  endeavours  of  His  feeble  and 
erring  offspring  to  please  Him,  though  mixed  with  ignorance  and  imperfection ; 
because  to  do  these  things  would  be  contrary  to  goodness.  4.  If  God  be  purely 
good,  He  must  be  naturally  merciful,  ready  to  forgive,  and  to  dispense  salvation 
and  eternal  life  of  His  free  favour.  5.  If  God  be  absolutely  good,  He  must 
always  allot  to  His  creatures  what  He  sees  to  be  wisest  and  best  for  them ; 
nor  can  He  suffer  anything  painful  to  befall  them,  but  what  is  necessary  for 
their  benefit.  6.  If  God  be  infinitely  good,  He  cannot  be  partial :  He  cannot 
have  limited  His  love,  and  His  gracious  and  merciful  provision  of  salvation  and 
eternal  life,  to  a  part  of  the  great  family  He  hath  created ;  for  such  partiality 
would  be  inconsistent  with  unbounded  goodness.  7.  If  God  be  perfectly  good, 
He  cannot  be  the  subject  of  revenge,  for  revenge  is  inconsistent  with  perfect 
goodness.  8.  The  goodness  of  God  should  lead  sinners  to  repentance.  9.  The 
infinite  goodness  of  God  establishes  the  firmest  ground  of  confidence  in  Him. 
10.  The  infinite  goodness  of  God  is  a  sufficient  reason  why  we  should  love  Him 
with  all  our  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength.  11.  As  God  alone  is 
absolutely  good,  He  alone  is  the  proper  object  of  Divine  worship  and  of  the 
highest  adoration.  12.  As  goodness  is  the  supreme  excellence,  it  is  most  worthy 
of  imitation ;  and  it  is  our  highest  interest,  so  far  as  we  are  capable,  to  imitate 
the  goodness  of  God.  13.  Our  hopes,  founded  upon  the  infinite  goodness  of 
God,  cannot  be  raised  too  high  respecting  our  final  portion  and  the  final 
portion  of  our  fellow-creatures.  What  may  we  not  expect  from  such  a  God  ? — 
J.  Smith. 

Ver.  22.  Worldly -mindedness. — This  young  man  was  not  the  slave  or  lover  of 
vice,  but  he  was  not  ready  to  become  the  ardent  and  devoted  lover  of  virtue.  It 
is  so  with  many  of  us.  We  are  not  ready  to  yield  ourselves  the  slaves  of  sin, 
but  neither  are  we  ready  to  give  ourselves  to  the  pursuit  of  great  excellence. 
And  we  compound  the  matter  by  observing  the  forms  of  religion,  but  giving 
the  heart  and  every  warm  and  devoted  feeling  to  the  world.  In  a  word,  very 
many  who  would  revolt  at  the  idea  of  vice  are  willing  to  be  worldly-minded. 
A  determination  of  this  kind  is  full  of  treason  against  the  nature  which  God 
has  given  us  and  against  His  will.  He  wills  our  moral  exaltation  and  per- 
fection, our  transformation  into  His  image.  The  worldly-minded  choose  to  retain 
their  likeness  to  that  which  is  of  the  earth,  and  thus  as  effectually  as  the 
vicious,  though  in  another  way,  cross  and  defeat  the  purposes  of  God.  The 
love  of  the  world  is  exclusive  and  engrossing.  If  it  takes  possession  of  the 
heart,  the  saying  of  the  apostle  is  infallibly  verified :  the  love  of  the  Father 
cannot  exist  or  thrive  there;  it  is  extruded  or  overlaid.  The  worldly-minded 
are  bent  upon  some  project  or  pursuit  or  pleasure  which  absorbs  and  fills  the 
mind  and  for  the  time  satisfies  the  desires.  The  soul  does  not  crave  any- 
thing more  or  better;  and  if  it  be  occasionally  sad  and  discontented,  the 
recurrence  of  its  customary  resources  and  objects  of  satisfaction  restores  its 
tranquillity.  It  is  not  necessary  in  order  to  constitute  a  worldly  mind  that 
it  derives  all  its  happiness  from  the  sources  of  this  world ;  it  is  sufficient  that 
it  relies  on  them  principally  and  most  firmly.  He  is  a  bad  man  whose  bad 
deeds  outnumber  his  good  ones ;  he  is  a  covetous  man  whose  mean  and  narrow 
actions  are  more  than  his  generous  and  just  ones ;  he  is  an  ill-tempered  man 
whose  prevalent  humour  is  pettish  or  surly ;  he  is  a  sensual  man  who  thinks 
more  of  the  indulgence  of  appetite  than  of  the  culture  of  the  mind  and  heart ; 

364 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST,  MARK.  chap.  X. 


and  he  too  is  a  worldly  man  who  loves  the  world  better  and  more  than  those 
things  that  are  better  than  and  above  the  world,  whose  thoughts  dwell  more 
upon  it,  whose  affections  fasten  more  upon  it,  than  upon  those  things  which  in 
his  heart  he  still  knows  to  be  infinitely  more  worth  loving. 

I.  In  what  way  then,  if  it  is  so  dangerous,  does  it  obtain  its  bad  supre- 
macy ? — The  encroachments  of  a  worldly  mind  are  gradual ;  its  growth  is  slow, 
but  sure  and  regular ;  its  dominion  is  established  through  plausible  appearances 
and  pretences.  1.  A  devotion  to  business,  the  pursuit  of  one  profession  by 
which  a  livelihood  is  to  be  secured  or  a  reputation  to  be  gained,  is  a  broad 
avenue  for  the  entrance  of  worldly- mindedness.  It  is  strictly  true,  though  it 
may  sound  paradoxical,  that  the  most  faithful  discharge  of  the  duties  of  our 
callings  is  attended  with  peculiar  danger  as  it  respects  the  religious  affections 
and  a  right  state  of  the  soul.  For  it  is  apt  to  beget  in  time  a  total  neglect 
of  and  indifference  to  any  considerations  but  such  as  relate  to  worldly  pros- 
perity and  promotion.  Let  me  not  be  misunderstood.  We  are  doubtless  to 
love  the  world,  its  duties  and  callings ;  but  it  is  equally  plain  that  we  are  not 
to  love  them  too  much  or  too  long.  It  is  our  particular  business  to  ascertain 
where  the  virtue  of  loving  rightly  ends  and  the  vice  of  loving  too  well  begins. 
It  can  form  no  apology  for  worldliness  that  we  were  occupied  industriously 
with  the  regular  business  of  our  station.  For  the  soul,  though  made  for  earth, 
was  made  for  heaven  too ;  and  those  duties  are  equally  demanded  of  it  which 
fit  it  for  the  one  as  for  the  other.  He  does  but  half  his  work  who  lives  but 
for  this  world,  though  he  lives  well  and  honourably  for  it.  2.  Again,  worldly- 
mindedness  comes  upon  us  through  the  avenue  of  social  feelings  and  enjoyments. 
In  this  case  too,  as  in  the  one  already  mentioned,  we  are  led  to  it  by  the 
virtues.  It  is  a  virtue  of  high  order  to  love  those  by  whom  we  are  surrounded, 
and  with  whom  we  are  obliged  to  come  in  contact.  It  is  a  virtue  to  do  them 
favours,  and  to  receive  in  a  good  spirit  favour  from  them.  But  how  easily 
do  these  virtues  run  into  an  excess  that  is  rightly  denominated  a  vice  !  How 
short  and  direct  the  transition  from  a  social  to  a  worldly  temper.  The  duty 
of  mingling  to  a  reasonable  and  proper  degree  with  our  fellow-men  becomes 
in  many  instances  so  agreeable  as  to  lead  to  the  neglect  of  other  and  more 
important  duties.  The  love  of  society  grows  into  a  passion.  The  mind  that 
once  gave  itself  to  it  timidly  and  reservedly,  through  fear  of  forgetting  higher 
concerns,  comes  at  last  to  be  wholly  dependent  on  it  for  its  most  valued  and 
exciting  pleasures.  The  sources  of  moral  and  intellectual  pleasure  have  at 
length  been  so  long  forsaken  that  they  cease  to  yield  anything  that  the  mind 
relishes.  It  listens  perhaps  with  a  faint  and  weary  attention  to  the  truths 
which  once  in  seven  days  it  thinks  it  right  and  decent  to  respect  and  believe, 
but  all  its  ardour  and  enthusiasm  and  strong  interest  are  for  other  scenes  and 
other  thoughts.  The  limit  up  to  which  all  these  things  are  either  virtuous 
or  at  least  innocent  is  soon  and  unconsciously  passed.  The  world  has  intruded 
upon  the  soul  and  the  love  of  God  has  departed  almost  before  it  has  been 
perceived  that  any  important  change  was  going  on.  In  this  way  has  the  mind 
of  many  a  one  grown  to  be  so  wedded  to  the  enjoyments  of  society  as 
absolutely  to  reject  and  despise  any  other  source  of  occupation  and  pleasure, 
and  at  length  indeed  to  be  incapable  of  relishing  any  other.  3.  Worldliness 
comes  again  through  education.  Education,  which  should  be  sacred  to  those 
interests  of  the  human  soul  which  are  ultimately  of  the  highest  value,  is 
but  too  often  the  direct  and  mischievous  agent  in  debasing  the  desires  and 
corrupting  the  mind.  It  is  often  occupied  about  those  things  which  are  wholly 
secondary  or  frivolous,  or  at  least  the  highest  and  best  and  most  useful 
topics  of  instruction  are  not  touched  upon  or  enforced.  Moral  and  religious 
education  on  the  part  of  parents  is  far  too  little  attended  to, — I  mean  the 

365 


CHAP.  x.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


education  which  lies  in  the  moral  habits,  pure  principles,  timely  counsels, 
affectionate  warnings,  good  examples,  religious  lives,  of  father  and  mother. 
Of  this  close  domestic  education  there  is  too  little ;  but  of  it  there  cannot  be 
too  much.  But  not  only  is  this  too  much  neglected,  an  opposite  education 
in  too  many  instances  takes  its  place — one  of  the  chief  objects  of  which  would 
seem  not  to  be  the  culture  of  a  moral  and  intellectual  being,  but  how  best  to 
prepare  for  a  striking  entrance  upon  the  world,  how  best  to  secure  its  favours 
and  rewards.  The  standard  of  action  proposed  is  not  what  is  right,  what 
is  moral,  what  becoming  our  nature  and  conformable  to  the  demands  of 
religion ;  but  what  will  the  world  think,  what  will  it  say,  how  will  it  regard 
you,  what  will  best  enable  you  to  make  your  way  in  it  ?  And  the  young  are 
made  to  learn,  to  study,  to  think,  to  act,  with  reference  not  primarily  to  be 
useful  and  good,  but  to  the  sovereign  opinion  of  the  world.  What  wonder 
then  if  the  world,  for  which  youth  has  been  thus  made  the  season  of  training 
and  preparation,  should  in  the  end  engage  that  respect  and  reverence  which 
are  due  to  a  higher  authority  ? 

II.  If  in  these  and  similar  ways  a  worldly  mind  is  created  and  takes  posses- 
sion of  us,  we  learn  whence  to  expect  its  approach  and  where  to  place  our 
guard. — If  we  consider  it  rightly,  we  shall  feel  that  it  is  a  mind  most  hostile 
to  religion  and  most  dangerous  to  ourselves,  and  calling  for  our  strong  and 
untiring  efforts  to  change  and  to  conquer.  In  order  to  do  this  we  have 
simply  to  remember  the  quarters  whence  it  comes,  and  to  feel  the  importance 
of  guarding  against  its  approach.  This  is  the  only  just  and  meritorious  way 
of  resisting  it.  We  have  no  right  to  take  ourselves  out  of  that  world  in 
which  we  have  been  placed  and  our  station  has  been  appointed.  God  alone 
may  take  off  the  burden  of  our  trial  and  separate  us  from  this  scene  of  duty 
and  temptation.  In  the  meantime  we  must  live  on  as  we  are,  and  resist 
as  we  may,  and  overcome  if  we  can.  We  must  mingle  in  the  world's  crowd, 
we  must  expose  ourselves  to  its  temptations,  we  must  venture  within  the 
magic  circle  of  its  attractions ;  but  we  must  shew  by  our  conduct  that  we 
are  above  it,  superior  to  its  enchantments.  We  must  coolly  compare  its 
rewards  and  pleasures  with  those  which  religion  offers,  and  prefer  the  latter 
from  real  conviction  of  their  higher  value. 

III.  If  we  giance  at  the  unhappy  effect  which  the  love  of  the  world  has 
upon  those  who  are  its  slaves,  we  shall  deeply  feel  the  wisdom  and  prudence, 
as  well  as  the  duty,  of  resisting  its  power.  When  a  worldly  disposition  has 
taken  entire  possession  of  the  soul,  so  that  the  world  and  its  scenes  of  pleasure 
or  occupation  are  all  for  which  life  is  valued,  I  need  not  say  that  it  is  wholly 
incompatible  with  the  existence  of  religion  in  the  soul  that  the  love  of 
the  Father  cannot  dwell  there.  But  where  the  love  of  the  world  has  not 
proceeded  to  this  extreme,  its  effects  are  still  deplorable  and  sad.  It  disorders 
the  mind — unsettles  it — incapacitates  it  for  reflexion — alienates  it  from  quiet 
and  sober  pleasures — creates  a  restless  and  uneasy  longing  for  excitements 
which  ordinary  life,  and  still  more  religion,  fails  to  afford.  In  the  same  way 
that  the  intemperate  man  has  created  by  indulgence  an  appetite  which 
continued  indulgence  can  alone  allay  and  satisfy,  the  lover  of  pleasure  has 
nourished  desires  and  cultivated  tastes  whose  wants  a  life  of  idleness  and 
pleasure  can  alone  meet.  With  others,  again,  the  love  of  the  world  is  a  mixed 
emotion.  God  and  the  world  rule  by  turns.  The  empire  of  the  mind  is  a 
contested  region.  The  heart  is  divided.  It  would  fain  love  God  and  lift  its 
affections  to  Him,  and  yet  it  cannot  bring  itself  to  renounce  so  much  of  the 
world  as  to  enable  it  to  do  so.  Worldliness  is  in  this  way  the  successful  and 
potent  enemy  of  religion.  It  does  not  succeed  in  banishing  it  wholly  from 
the   soul ;  but  it   does  succeed  in  diminishing  and  alloying  its  comforts.     It 

366 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.  chap.  x. 


does  not  take  the  mind  wholly  from  God  and  the  contemplation  of  its  great 
destiny ;  but  it  takes  it  away  so  much  and  so  often  that  it  returns  to  them 
unwillingly  and  derives  from  them  little  satisfaction.  It  is  in  Christians 
of  this  frame  that  worldly- mindedness  produces  the  most  mental  sorrow  and 
disquiet.  It  poisons  all  their  sources  of  religious  pleasure,  and  substitutes 
none  in  their  place.  In  the  world  they  are  without  peace,  for  their  consciences 
upbraid  them.  In  religion  they  are  restless,  for  their  thoughts  still  wander 
to  the  world.  If  it  were  only  for  these  sad  effects  upon  our  minds  and  hearts, 
which  would  otherwise  find  their  joy  in  the  best  and  holiest  things,  we  see 
reason  enough  to  detest  the  disposition  of  which  we  speak,  as  one  mischievously 
productive  of  the  acutest  pains  and  most  desponding  sensations  of  which  the 
human  heart  is  susceptible. 

IV.  I  have  urged  the  importance  of  resisting  the  influence  of  the  world,  its 
occupations  and  pleasures ;  but  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  an  easy  duty.  It  is 
a  hard  one.  To  those  who  live  and  move  in  the  better  walks  of  life,  into 
whose  lap  fortune  has  poured  her  full  horn,  who  enjoy  the  honours  and 
praise  of  the  world,  there  is  a  brilliant  lustre  spread  over  the  face  of  society, 
a  joy  and  excitement  in  its  dazzling  intercourse,  a  deep  interest  in  its  scenes 
of  pleasure,  that  occupy  and  absorb  the  whole  heart,  that  tie  it  down  to  earth 
by  a  bond  strong  as  death,  but  invisible  and  unfelt.  It  is  not  easy  to  break 
this  bond,  to  conquer  the  strong  love  which  has  been  thus  created.  It  is  not 
easy  thus  to  take  the  heart  away  from  such  scenes  and  pleasures,  to  teach  it 
to  find  its  happiness  in  scenes  and  pleasures  the  very  opposite.  It  is  not  easy 
for  one  all  whose  thoughts  have  been  of  the  earth  to  fix  them  on  the  things 
that  are  above.  This  change  involves  as  entire  a  revolution  of  character  and 
feeling  as  when  the  slave  of  notorious  sin  is  converted  and  finds  in  virtue  the 
peace  and  joy  he  once  found  only  in  vice.  It  demands,  therefore,  great  effort 
on  the  part  of  those  who  are  interested  in  the  work  of  their  own  conversion 
in  order  thoroughly  to  accomplish  it.  They  who  linger  in  the  haunts  of 
pleasure,  in  the  resolve  that  by-and-by,  at  whatever  time  they  shall  desire, 
they  will  break  from  the  world  and  shut  it  wholly  out  of  their  hearts,  but 
in  the  meantime  they  will  love  it  as  they  have  ever  done,  are  precisely  those 
who  will  always  love  it,  and  the  more  passionately  and  exclusively  as  the 
mind  becomes  weakened  by  age.- — W.  Ware. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.   17.  "Good  Master" — There  is  fashion  as  some  in  our  day,  as  a  good 

more  in  this  epithet  "  good,"  as  here  man,  as  the  good  man,  the  perfect  man, 

applied,   than   at   first   sight   appears,  the  ideal  man,  the  personification  of 

It  betrays  his  self-righteous  spirit.     He  virtue,  the  incarnation  of  moral  excel  - 

is  doing  more  than  paying  a  compli-  lence,  the  pattern  and  perfection  of  all 

ment   to    the    Saviour   here.      He    is  goodness,    who    had    attained   to   this 

indirectly  paying  a  compliment  to  him-  goodness  in  the  way  he  himself   had 

self — to  his  own  goodness,  or  at  any  attained  to  his.     He  was  thus  conceiv- 

rate    to    human    goodness,    that    idol  ing  of  the  Saviour  as  one  very  much 

which  he  worshipped  with   his  whole  like  himself;  he  was  transferring  his 

soul.     He  looks  up  to  Him  as  possessed  own  views  and  feelings  to  Him.    "  Good 

of  this  goodness,  in  a  far  higher  measure  Master,  what  good  thing  shall  I  do  ?  " 

than   himself  indeed,   but  still  of  the  — A.  L.  R.  Eoote. 

same  kind   of  goodness.     He   regards  An  excellent  question. — How  advan- 

and  reveres  Him,  much  in  the  same  tageous  is  it  frequently  to  ask  at  the 

367 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


feet  of  Christ  what  we  must  do  in  order 
to  our  salvation !  It  is  an  excellent 
practice,  provided  we  perform  it  as  we 
ought.  He  alone  is  capable  of  shewing 
us  the  way  to  heaven,  being  Himself 
the  way ;  He  alone  is  incapable  of 
deceiving  us,  since  He  is  the  truth ; 
and  He  alone  is  worthy  to  conduct  us 
to  eternal  life,  being  Himself  that  very 
life. — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  18.  A  sound  foundation  for 
religious  belief — This  question  appears 
to  spring  out  of  a  general  method  of 
dealing  with  men  in  quest  of  salvation. 
Christ  was  in  no  haste  to  get  men  to 
make  correct  religious  affirmations,  but 
rather  took  pains  to  lay  sound  moral 
foundations  of  religious  belief.  To 
persons  seeking  eternal  life  He  did  not 
say,  "Call  Me  good,  call  Me  Christ, 
call  Me  God,  call  Me  Saviour"— all 
things  which  may  be  truly  affirmed, 
and  which  it  is  most  desirable  all  should 
affirm  eventually — but,  Reflect  what 
goodness  is,  what  it  is  to  be  a  Christ, 
what  God  is,  commands,  and  loves, 
what  salvation  implies,  what  true  life 
consists  in.  The  attainment  of  true 
conceptions  on  these  subjects  is  the 
business  of  discipleship.  —  A.  B. 
Bruce j  D.D. 

The  goodness  of  God. — The  epithet 
dyaflos,  "good,"  applied  by  the  young 
man  to  Jesus,  signifies  generous,  large- 
hearted.  In  speaking  of  God  as  the 
only  good,  then,  our  Lord  meant  to 
represent  the  Divine  Being  as  generous 
more  than  just — as  benignant,  gracious. 
And  if  we  would  know  how  benignant, 
we  must  look  to  His  own  life  on  earth — 
see  Him  associating  with  publicans  and 
sinners,  see  Him  dying  on  the  Cross. — 
Ibid. 

Ver.  19.  Christ's  use  of  the  Decalogue. 
— 1.  Our  Lord  enumerates  the  com- 
mandments not  in  the  order  in  which 
they  occur  in  the  Old  Testament,  but 
as  they  occur  to  His  memory.  2.  If 
Mark's  report  be  accurate,  He  quotes 
them  freely,  using  His  own  words 
instead  of  those  of  Moses,  and  caring 
for  the  sense  rather  than  the  letter, 

368 


so  freely  that  it  is  still  matter  of 
dispute  which  of  the  commandments 
He  referred  to  in  defraud  not.  The 
better  opinion  seems  to  be  that  it  was 
the  tenth  commandment,  beginning 
with  "Thou  shalt  not  covet";  for  to 
covet  anything  which  is  our  neighbour's 
is,  so  far  as  we  are  able,  to  defraud  or 
deprive  him  of  it.  If  we  assume  this  to 
be  the  reference,  every  commandment, 
from  five  to  ten,  of  the  second  table 
is  quoted  in  this  verse. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

The  commandments  sufficient. — The 
commandments  of  God  afford  us  suffi- 
cient instruction  :  it  is  often  nothing 
but  curiosity  which  desires  other  lights. 
The  law  of  God  makes  known  His 
will ;  and  it  is  by  conforming  our- 
selves thereto  that  we  partake  of  His 
goodness  and  holiness.  Let  Thy  law, 
O  my  God,  be  continually  the  rule  of 
my  behaviour  and  actions  ! — P.  Quzsnel. 

Yer.  20.  Self-deception  as  to  one's 
character. — To  us  His  answer  seems 
proud  and  presumptuous,  and  yet  how 
frequently  are  like  words  used  by  us  ! 
And  are  not  similar  thoughts  to  be 
found  in  our  hearts?  How  we  boast 
of  our  irreproachable  character  !  Be- 
cause we  do  not  indulge  in  gross  sins, 
at  which  even  the  world  takes  offence, 
we  think  ourselves  righteous  ;  but  how 
far  are  we  from  being  so  when  we  view 
the  matter  aright !  There  is  nothing 
about  T/hich  we  so  greatly  deceive  our- 
selves as  our  own  condition.  The  same 
eye  which  can  plainly  see  the  smallest 
mote  in  a  brother's  eye  cannot  perceive 
the  beam  in  its  own. — E.  Lehmann. 

Ver.  21.  Christ's  look  of  love. — The 
Son  of  God,  upon  the  assumption  of 
human  nature,  had  His  soul  touched 
with  all  our  passions,  yet  so  as  to  be 
sinless  and  innocent  emotions  of  His 
Diviner  mind  ;  and,  as  we  cannot  but 
do,  unless  we  be  very  well  versed  in  the 
art  of  dissimulation,  He  also  made  dis- 
coveries of  them  in  His  very  looks  and 
eyes.  These  are  the  windows  of  the 
heart,  through  which  it  sees  and  is 
itself  seen,  and  shews  all  its  pleasures 
and  discontents  to  others  :  hence  mutual 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


sight    proves   such    entertainment  to  ballast  is  thrown  out,  the  balloon  shoots 

friends  and  breeds   no  less  regret  to  up.     A  general  unlading  of  the  "  thick 

foes.     Our  Blessed  Lord,  who  was  all  clay  "  which  weighs  down  the  Christian 

made  of  compassion   and   love,  being  life  of  England  and  of  America  would 

freed  from  all  those  rugged,  boisterous  let   thousands  soar   to   heights   which 

distempers  which  we,  whilst  we  seek  they  will  never  reach  as  long  as  they 

to  trouble  others  with,  labour  under  love  money  and  what  it  buys  as  much 

ourselves,  feeling  the  worst  effects  of  as  they  do. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

our  heats  and  animosities  within  our  "  Follow    Me" — The    life   of  Jesus 

own  breasts — He,  I  say,  had  all  the  Christ   always    illustrated    the    truth 

lines  of  goodness  drawn  in  His  heavenly  which  He  taught  and  the  principles  of 

face,  and  above  all  His  eyes  sparkling  His  kingdom.     He  did  not  lay  on  the 

with  seraphic  love,  and  darting  forth  young  man  a  burden  which  He  Him- 

rays  of  it  to  warm  and  fire  the  hearts  self  did  not  bear.     It  was  His  own  life 

of  all  that  either  beheld  Him  or  He  that  He  recommended  him  to  follow, 

beheld.      Fortunate    man    whom    He  Christ's  poverty  and  the  fact  that  He 

who  is  now  for  ever  to  be  thy  Lord  possessed  nothing  were  not   probably 

hath  cast  and  fixed  His  gracious  eye  in  order   to  shew  .sympathy  with  the 

upon,  to  mark  thee  for  His  friendship  poor,  at  least  not  specially,  but  in  order 

and  the  choicest    dignations   of    His  to  shew  the  nature   of  His  kingdom, 

love! — A.  Littleton,  D.D.  which  is  just  men  and  God  together — 

Christ  loves  the  virtuous. — There  are  men  with  nothing,  men  destitute  of  all 

those  whose  lives  have  been  pure,  who  but  themselves,   possessing   nothing — 

have  been  generous  and  cherished  no  casting  themselves  just  as  men  upon 

ill-will  to  others,  who  have  been  truth-  God. — A .  B.  Davidson,  D.D. 
ful,   and   who  have  been   pitiful  and 

considerate  to  the  weak  and  the  aged,  Ver.  22.  "  Sad." — Observe  that  the 
those  whose  youthful  brows  are  bound  word  is  "  sad,"  not  "  angry."  The 
with  a  crown  of  the  natural  virtues,  young  man  went  away  grieved,  not 
Now  this  passage  says  to  all  of  that  shocked  nor  indignant.  These  distinc- 
sort  that  Jesus  Christ  when  He  looks  tions  are  of  some  value,  as  shewing 
upon  you  loves  you ;  He  loves  you  that  the  young  man  had  no  complaint 
with  a  special  love,  and  desires  you  for  against  the  reasonableness  or  fitness  of 
His  kingdom,  for  you  are  nearer  to  Christ's  demand.  'He  approved  and 
Him,  liker  to  Him,  than  others  are.  admired  more  than  he  felt  able  to  adopt 
Though  possessing  only  what  we  may  and  to  obey.  And  because  he  was  an 
call  the  natural  virtues  and  moral  honest  man  he  did  not  fling  epithets  at 
excellences,  you  are  loved  in  His  sight  the  Teacher  or  the  truth  which  had 
before  you  go  further,  and  are  not  so  unexpectedly  disturbed  him.  He  paid 
strictly  what  are  called  His  disciples,  respect  to  both,  and  practically  judged 
When  you  live  a  pure  life  and  are  himself  in  fault  in  the  grief  and  sad- 
dutiful,  when  you  shun  uncleanness  and  ness  with  which  he  went  away. — C.  A. 
vice,  when  you  are  truthful  and  upright,  Berry. 

then  the  Lord  Jesus,  looking  upon  you,  Sorrow   apart  from    Christ. — There 

loves  you. — A.  B.  Davidson,  D.D.  are  thousands  who  do  not  follow  Christ 

A    hard    requirement.— More   of   us  who  are  sorrowful  because  of  it.     They 

than  we  are  willing  to  believe  are  kept  would  give  much  that  they  were  His 

from  entire  surrender  to  Jesus  Christ  followers.       They    can    conceive   how 

by  money  and  worldly  possessions  ;  and  joyful  it  would  be  to  be  His.     Their 

many  professing   Christians   are  kept  aimless,  broken  life  would  be  reunited 

shrivelled  and  weak  and  joyless  because  and   made  one  if  dedicated   to  Him. 

they  love  their  wealth  more  than  their  They  have  powers  and  influence — they 

Lord,  and  would  think  it  madness  to  do  feel  them.     They  would  be  glad  if  they 

as  this  man  was  bidden  to  do.     When  could  devote  the  powers  and  influence 

bb  369 


chap,  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


they   have   to   Him.     It   would,  they  selves  the  true  comfort.     But  why  not  t 

are  sure,   fill  and  satisfy  their  empty,  Why   not  ?      Why  go   away  ?      Why 

unsatisfied  hearts  to  be  His  followers,  add  another  sorrow  to  the  sorrows  that 

They  are  of  all  men  the  most  miserable,  already  accumulate  upon  them  ? — A.  B. 

To  the  natural  sorrows  of  life  they  add  Davidson,  D.D. 
this  sorrow,  that  they  cannot  give  them- 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  23—27. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xix.  23-26 ;  Luke  xviii.  24-27.) 

Mundane  trust  a  barrier. — Men  are  ever  astonished  when  taken  out  of  their 
own  little  grooves.  Enlarge  a  man's  world  and  wonderment  is  the  result. 
Jesus  never  wondered  at  His  own  sayings  :  it  is  impossible  that  He  should 
have  so  done  ;  and  when,  as  here,  He  uses  the  word  "  impossible,"  He  simply 
accommodates  Himself  to  the  finite  capacity  of  His  auditory.  There  is  no  such 
word  as  "  impossible  "  in  heaven's  vocabulary.  The  interpretation  often  given 
to  this  passage  is  too  limited  in  its  application  ;   because — 

•I.  Sometimes  it  is  regarded  as  a  reflexion  by  Jesus  Christ  upon  worldly 
wealth. — The  rich,  the  poor,  the  high,  the  low,  the  old,  the  young,  were  all  alike 
to  Him.  He  looked  not  to  condition,  but  to  character.  Jesus  is  not  here 
talking  against  wealth,  but  against  trust  in  riches,  a  thing  altogether  different. 

II.  Jesus  is  often  regarded  as  referring  here  only  to  very  rich  men. — This 
is  one  reason  why  all  men  pass  the  text  on  to  their  more  wealthy  neighbours,  as 
being  more  applicable  to  them  than  to  themselves.  They  forget  that  wealth  is 
relative — forget  that  it  is  as  possible  to  be  purse-proud  of  five  pounds  as 
of  fifty,  and  of  fifty  as  of  fifty  thousand.  Trustfulness  in  riches  is  a  question  of 
disposition  and  not  of  length  of  purse. 

III.  Jesus  Christ  is  sometimes  thought  to  be  referring  here  only  to  the 
realm  of  the  objective. — No  doubt  the  text  was  suggested  to  the  mind  of  our 
Lord  by  His  conversation  with  the  rich  young  man,  the  weak  point  in  whose 
character  was  love  of  money.  But  we  should  be  careful  not  to  mistake  parts 
for  wholes. — careful  lest  we  conclude  that  the  sayings  of  Jesus  contain  no  more 
than  what  lies  upon  their  surface.  So  that  between  the  lines  we  may  thus 
read  :  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  learning, 
or  physical  strength,  or  intellectual  power,  or  are  socially  high,  or  outwardly 
circumspect,  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God !  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  go 
through  the  eye  of  a  needle  than  for  those  who  place  their  chief  trust  in  these 
things  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." — J.  S.  Swan. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    23-25.    Money. — The   subject  right   to  every   penny  we  may  think 

of  "  money "  is  largely  dealt  with  in  our  own,  and  considers  Himself  robbed 

the   Bible — as   much   so   in   the  New  if  we  do   not   honour  Him  with   our 

Testament   as    in    the    Old  ;    and   no  substance  (Mai.  iii.  8).     3.  That  we  are 

unprejudiced    mind   will  easily  escape  in  danger  of  putting  money  in  God's 

from  the  following  conclusions  about  place,  and  thereby  becoming  idolatrous 

it :  1.  That  all  moneys  belong  to  God,  (Exod.  xxxii.  31).     We  are  all  prone  to 

as  their  Creator  and  Proprietor  (Hag.  the  same  sin.     4.  That,  as  a  counter- 

ii.   8  ;  Ps.  1.  10 ;    1    Cor.   x.    26,   28).  active,   God  commands   us   to  give  it 

2.    That    He    has    consequently    the  away  to  Him ;  or,  what  is  equivalent, 

370 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


to  good  and  charitable  objects.     Thus  to    be    plainly   told — that    they   who 

the  Jews  were  from  the  very  beginning  have  riches  (literally,  "  things  they  can 

habituated  to  pay  tithes ;  and  Chris-  make  use  of  ")  with  difficulty  enter  into 

tians  are  under  similar  orders  to  give  the  kingdom  of  God.     He  says  not  a 

liberally  of  their  means  for  the  support  syllable  about  "  excess  "  of  riches.     He 

and   extension   of   the  gospel  (2   Cor.  says  nothing  about  "  the  life  to  come." 

viii.   7,  ix.   7).     5.  That  covetousness  There  is  nothing  said  about  its  being 

is   a   great   evil,   and   leads  to   many  impossible  for  the  man  with  riches  to 

others  (1  Tim.  vi.  10 ;  Prov.  xi.  28).  enter,  but  there  is  the  definite  state- 

6.  That  to  be  rich  is  to  be  in  great  ment    that    those    who    have   affairs, 

spiritual  difficulties.     The  young  man  businesses,  and  the  results  which  come 

became  sad  when  Christ  bade  him  sell  from  such,  shall  find  it  hard  to  enter, 

off  and  give  to  the  poor.     7.  That,  in  This  applies  quite  as  much  to  the  poor 

this  view  of  it,  it  is  surely  better  to  as  to  the  well-to-do,  and  it  is  concerned 

be   poor.     8.   That   under   the   Chris-  with    the   life    that    now    is.       "The 

tian   dispensation   the   amount   to   be  kingdom  of   God"   means   those  over 

given  is  left  to   conscience.     It   is   a  whom  God  reigns  with  undivided  rule, 

duty,   however,   that   those   to   whom  where  His  laws  are  His  subjects'  law, 

God  has  given  most  should  give  Him  His   will  their   will,   His  ways   their 

most.      9.  That   to   give   liberally   to  ways.     With  all  of  us — whatever  our 

God    entails   no    loss — not   even    loss  riches   may   be,    whether   the  weekly 

in  kind.     Given  from  proper  motives,  wage  which  just  provides  the  things 

many   a   subscription    of    one    pound  honest,  or  the  wealth  of  some  merchant 

sterling   has   filled  a   man's  barns  or  prince — it  is  "  with  difficulty  "  that  we 

brought  him  a  hundred  per  cent.     It  keep  ourselves    from   being   "of    the 

does  not  follow  that  you  have  really  world";  it  is  "hardly"  that  we  enter 

saved  your   money   though   you  have  into  the  kingdom  of  God;  it  is  with 

withheld  it  (2  Cor.  ix.  6  ;  Prov.  xi.  24).  difficulty  that  we  subserve  its  advance. 

10.  That  the  miser  may  live  and  die  — J.  W.  Owen. 
in   poverty.      Judas   hanged    himself. 

Many  a  rich  but  illiberal  man  has  Yer.  24.  Disentangled  from  posses- 
died  a  pauper ;  and  many  a  poor  but  sions. — The  poor  are  sooner  astonished 
liberal  man  has  lived  to  be  opulent  at  these  words  than  the  rich  are  so 
and  a  blessing.  I  admired  the  reply  much  as  moved  by  them :  the  reason 
that  I  once  got  from  a  liberal  lady  to  is,  because  men  see  the  danger  of  others 
a  remark  that  she  was  too  generous  better  than  their  own.  It  is  much 
with  her  means.  "  No,  no,"  she  said ;  easier  for  a  man  to  be  contented  with- 
"  I  am  generous  only  to  myself.  I  out  those  things  which  he  has  not 
wish  to  keep  my  money ;  therefore  I  than  to  disengage  himself  from  those 
clip  its  wings,  lest  it  fly  away  ;  for  you  which  he  possesses  and  not  to  trust  in 
know  it  is  written,  '  Riches  certainly  them.  The  poor  may  find  a  sufficient 
make  themselves  wings ;  they  fly  away  ground  of  trust  and  confidence  in  their 
as  an  eagle  toward  heaven.' "  11.  That  poverty,  since  the  kingdom  of  God  is 
to  be  rich  in  grace  is  far  better  than  theirs ;  but  the  rich  have  reason  te 
to  be  rich  in  gold.  Devils  shall  knock  tremble  in  the  midst  of  their  riches, 
in  vain  at  heaven's  gate,  but  Lazarus  Whoever  finds  in  them  his  rest,  his 
enters.  1 2.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  joy,  and  his  happiness,  never  thinks 
is  the  only  one  to  whom  money  can  of  seeking  for  these  things  in  Co  J. 
be  safely  entrusted.  "  Worthy  is  the  And  there  lies  the  greatest  misery. — 
Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  riches."  P.  Quesnel. 
— John  Macfarlane,  LL.D. 

Ver.  25.  Camel  and  needle's  eye. — 

Yer.  23.  Riches  a  hindrance. — Christ  The  illustration  is  drawn  from  one  of 

plainly  says — because  the  world  needed  the  common,   popular  stories    in  the 

371 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


East,  which  would  be  recognised  by 
all.  There  were  far-spread  tales  and 
legends  of  some  enchanted  city,  with 
a  gate  of  entrance  which  was  a  needle's 
eye.  Among  the  applicants  for  admis- 
sion was  a  rich  merchant,  riding  on  a 
camel,  with  its  long  neck  and  humped 
back,  packed  with  precious  wares. 
The  rich  man,  who  trusts  in  riches, 
fares  like  the  merchant  of  the  story. 
He  cannot  pass  through  the  magic  gate 
into  the  radiant  city  without  the  Divine 
spell  which  makes  him  free  of  the  land 
of  the  spirit. — Bishop  Wm.  Aleocander. 

Ver.  27.  Salvation  in  the  hands  of 
God. — It  is  the  comfort  of  the  humble 
that  their  salvation  is  in  the  hands  of 
God;  and  it  is  the  blindness  of  the 
proud  that  they  would  have  theirs  in 
their  own.  A  true  Christian  is  not  at 
all  alarmed  to  find  here  that  without 
grace  his  salvation  is  impossible,  be- 
cause he  knows  that  God  can  do  every- 
thing for  him,  and  that  he  himself  can 
do  all  things  in  God  through  Jesus 
Christ. — P.  Quesnel. 


"  With  God  all  things  are  possible" 
— Thus  God  saved  Zaccheus,  and  in 
this  our  day  some  rich  and  noble  men 
seem  to  abound  in  every  Christian 
grace;  but  though  it  be  possible 
with  God,  we  may  be  sure  that  the 
Lord  did  not  intend  by  these  words 
to  cancel  the  warnings  He  had  just 
uttered.  Does  the  Lord  here  mean 
that  all  things  are  equally  easy  to 
God  ?  By  no  means.  All  things  may 
be  equally  easy  to  Him  as  looked  at 
from  the  side  of  mere  power — mere 
physical  force ;  but  God  does  not  deal 
with  intelligent  creatures  in  the  way 
of  overwhelming  power.  So  far  as 
their  will  is  concerned  He  deals  with 
them,  then,  after  such  sort  that  they 
should  co-operate  with  Him  and  yield 
willingly  to  Him  ;  and  the  Lord,  if  He 
teaches  us  anything  by  the  whole 
matter,  teaches  us  this,  that  it  requires 
more  spiritual  effort  on  God's  part  to 
deliver  a  man  from  the  love  of  the 
world  when  the  man's  wealth  enables 
him  to  enjoy  all  that  the  world  has  to 
offer.— M.  F.  Sadler. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  28—31. 
(Parallels:  Matt.  xix.  27-30;  Luke  xviii.  28,  29.) 

The  all-forsaking  spirit  and  its  reward. — The  apostles,  on  witnessing  the 
incident  of  vers.  17-27,  could  not  fail  to  make  a  personal  application  of  it  to 
themselves.  They  remembered  the  time — not  long  before — when  each  of  them 
had  been  placed  in  a  similar  predicament :  their  own  deceitful  hearts  soliciting 
them  to  remain  as  they  were ;  and  the  imperious  voice  of  One  greater  than  their 
hearts  saying,  "  Forsake  all,  and  follow  Me."  And  so  they  did.  Will  any  say 
that  these  were  poor  men  possessed  of  nothing  worth  mentioning,  and  that 
it  required  no  great  sacrifice  to  renounce  a  world  which  smiles  not  on  such  as 
they  ?  Not  so.  A  man  can  but  give  up  his  all.  It  costs  a  poor  man  as  much 
to  give  up  his  daily  labour,  his  mean  abode,  his  little  substance,  as  it  does  a  rich 
man  to  part  with  his  great  possessions.  The  world  is  as  dear  and  the  ties  of 
home  are  as  strong  to  one  as  to  the  other. 

I.  The  sense  in  which  this  declaration  was  first  made. — The  circumstances 
of  the  calling  of  these  disciples  were  not,  then,  so  different  after  all  from  those 
of  the  young  man.  But  the  result  was  exactly  opposite.  The  one  went  away 
sorrowful;  the  others  followed,  and  patiently  continued  with  Him  who  called 
them.  They  not  only  acquiesced  in  their  forlorn  and  destitute  condition,  but 
actually  gloried  in  it,  when  they  had  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward. 
It  was  no  dissatisfaction  with  their  present  mode  of  life,  no  hankering  after 
the  ease  and  comfort  of  former  days,  that  prompted  the  exclamation,  "  Lo,  we 

372 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


have  left  all,  and  have  followed  Thee ! "  We  learn  from  Matt.  xix.  27  that 
Peter  added  the  question,  "  What  shall  we  have  therefore  ? "  We  cannot 
suppose  that  he  was  ignorant  of  the  nature  and  magnitude  of  that  compensation, 
in  consideration  of  which  he  and  all  of  them  had  made  so  great  a  sacrifice.  But 
in  an  affair  of  such  importance,  where  so  much  present  benefit  is  surrendered, 
the  mind  naturally  seeks  all  the  satisfaction  it  can  procure  in  regard  to  the 
security  of  the  investment.  As  the  miser  is  not  content  to  know  that  he 
possesses  so  much  gold,  but  opens  his  bags  and  gloats  over  the  glittering  hoard 
day  after  day,  so  those  who  have  staked  their  all  for  a  future  and  distant  good 
may  be  excused  a  little  anxiety  on  the  score  of  the  anticipated  return. 

II.  The  sense  in  which  we  may  make  the  same  renunciation. — To  "  follow 
Christ "  is  a  common  expression  to  denote  almost  any  relation  to  or  reception 
of  Him.  But  we  cannot  properly  lay  claim  to  a  part  of  Peter's  profession 
without  accepting  the  whole.  We  may  forsake  all  and  follow  Christ,  or  we 
may  refuse  to  forsake  all  and  decline  to  follow  Christ ;  but  to  assent  to  the  one 
and  reject  the  other  is  impossible  and  absurd.  Strange  that  men  should  ever 
dream  of  such  a  contradiction  !  The  mistake  arises,  doubtless,  from  confounding 
the  mere  act  of  forsaking  all  for  Christ  with  the  mind  and  spirit  which  alone 
gives  any  value  to  the  act,  and  which  may  exist  equally  without  the  act.  The 
act  may  or  may  not  be  required ;  but  no  condition  of  life  or  change  of  circum- 
stances can  dispense  with  the  all-forsaking  spirit.  The  letter  of  this  principle — 
"  We  have  left  all,"  etc. — if  universally  acted  upon,  would  make  the  world  a 
desert,  and  involve  laws,  morals,  and  religion  itself  in  one  universal  chaos :  the 
spirit  of  it  is  a  spirit  of  peace,  order,  harmony,  supports  laws,  perfects  morals, 
and  is  the  life  and  soul  of  religion. 

III.  Wherein  the  all-forsaking  spirit  consists,  and  how  it  acts. — 1.  We  may 
discern  it  in  a  Christian's  use  of  this  world's  good.  Instead  of  literally  forsaking 
all  for  Christ,  it  may  be  his  duty  to  hold  all  for  Christ,  "  ready  to  distribute, 
willing  to  communicate,"  "  giving  not  grudgingly  or  of  necessity,  but  cheerfully." 
This  spirit  is  entirely  opposed  to  that  cool  and  calculating  charity  which  is 
always  saying,  "  Let  the  children  first  be  fed ;  let  us  wait  till  the  end  of  the  year, 
and  see  what  remains  after  all  expenses  are  met,  and  all  claims  provided  for." 
That  is  charity  also  :  that  has  its  praise ;  but  not  the  praise  of  those  who  "  seek 
first  the  kingdom,"  etc.  That  would  have  listened  complacently  to  the  command- 
ment, "  Give  alms  of  thy  goods  "  ;  but  would  have  gone  away  sorrowful  on  being 
told,  "  If  thou  wilt  be  perfect,  give  all  that  thou  hast."  That  may  be  called  the 
giving-up-something  spirit,  not  the  giving -wp- all.  The  Pharisee  who  gave  tithes 
of  all  he  possessed  is  an  example  of  the  one ;  the  poor  widow  who  cast  into  the 
treasury  all  that  she  had  is  the  best  illustration  of  the  other.  2.  Not  in 
pecuniary  sacrifices  only,  or  even  chiefly,  is  the  all-forsaking  spirit  shewn. 
Ancient  history  tells  of  a  king  who  enjoyed  such  uniform  prosperity  that  he 
began  to  fear  his  good  fortune  might  excite  the  envy  of  the  gods,  and  end  in 
some  dreadful  disaster.  To  prevent  this  he  was  advised  to  part  voluntarily  with 
the  most  valued  possession  he  had,  and  that  one  the  loss  of  which  he  would  feel 
most.  So  he  bethought  himself  which  among  all  his  treasures  answered  best  to 
this  description;  and  having  found  it  (a  gold  ring  or  some  such  trifle),  with 
his  own  hand  he  cast  it  into  the  sea.  So  the  Christian  manifests  his  readiness 
to  give  up  all  for  Christ  by  giving  up  that  which  is  most  precious  to  him, 
whatever  it  be.  To  some  persons  their  time  is  the  most  valuable  of  all  their 
possessions  ;  and  a  portion  of  every  day,  redeemed  from  the  engrossing  cares  of 
business,  and  devoted  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  improvement  and  benefit  of 
the  world,  is  the  best  proof  of  their  willingness  (if  need  be)  to  forsake  all  and 
follow  Christ.  Others,  who  are  not  selfish  persons,  nor  wanting  in  sympathy 
with  the  conperns  of  their  neighbours,  are  yet  fond  of  ease  and  quiet,  and  averse 

373 


chap.  x.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST  MARK, 


to  everything  likely  to  involve  them  in  the  strife  and  tumult  of  the  world. 
These  shew  a  disposition  to  forsake  all  for  Christ  when,  from  love  for  Him  and 
His  brethren,  they  give  up  their  cherished  retirement,  and  "go  about"  doing 
that  good  which  the  mere  "  liberal  giver  "  can  never  accomplish.  3.  So  far  we 
have  thought  of  things  which  must  be  voluntarily  renounced  and  cast  behind 
us.  Other  things  there  are  which,  while  we  have  them,  we  are  permitted  to 
enjoy,  but  which  we  may  at  any  time  be  called  on  to  resign.  Indeed  this  is 
the  tenure  on  which  we  hold  all  our  precious  things  :  riches  make  themselves 
wings,  and  fly  away ;  the  faces  of  beloved  friends  fade  as  we  gaze  on  them ;  life 
itself  is  but  a  transitory  vapour.  Now  with  respect  to  such  things  as  these  the 
all -forsaking  spirit  has  a  twofold  operation :  when  deprived  of  them,  it  meekly 
resigns ;  while  enjoying  them,  it  prepares  to  resign.  Both  are  hard,  especially 
the  latter.  It  is  hard  to  give  up — harder  still  to  procure  and  preserve  that 
state  of  mind  which  is  always  ready  to  give  up,  always  prepared  to  "  hear  the 
rod  and  who  hath  appointed  it."  This  is  the  disposition  for  all  to  cultivate 
who  profess  and  call  themselves  Christians.  It  is  not  the  short,  sharp  conflict 
of  a  day,  or  even  the  protracted  battle  of  many  days,  but  the  continual  warfare 
of  life,  which  ends  only  with  all  human  affections  and  all  earthly  objects.  For 
the  Pauline  conception  of  this  disposition,  see  1  Cor.  vii.  29-31  ;  and  for  the 
Johannine,  1  John  ii.  15-17.  4.  We  should  perhaps  never  think  of  reckoning 
among  our  treasures  the  lusts  and  appetites,  human  passions  and  natural 
affections,  which  belong  to  us  as  men.  Yet  are  there  no  possessions  which  we 
can  so  strictly  call  our  own,  or  which  we  are  so  unwilling  to  part  with,  as  these. 
Do  they  not  reside  in  and  proceed  out  of  the  heart  ?  And  if  a  man's  heart 
is  not  his  own,  what  else,  whether  within  or  without  the  body,  can  be  so 
called  ?  As,  on  the  other  hand,  if  a  man  is  able  at  the  word  of  Christ  to  tear 
out  his  own  heart  and  cast  it  from  him,  will  he  not  much  more  forsake  all 
that  he  hath  besides  ?  This  is  our  Lord's  meaning  in  Matt.  v.  29,  30.  In  the 
extirpation  of  every  thought,  desire,  and  affection  contrary  to  the  will  of  God  the 
all-forsaking  spirit  has  ample  scope  for  all  its  energies. 

IV.  The  reward  of  the  all-forsaking  spirit. — 1.  Even  the  temporal  condition 
of  one  whose  heart  and  affections  have  been  trained  in  the  self-denying  school 
of  Christ  is  far  better  than  that  of  those  who  use  this  world  to  the  full,  who 
say  to  their  soul,  Luke  xii.  19.  What  is  the  great  secret  of  human  happiness  ? 
Is  it  not  to  be  "  without  carefulness  " — to  enjoy  our  present  comforts  and  to 
have  no  disquieting  apprehensions  of  ills  to  come — to  lie  down  at  night  with 
peace  in  our  heart  ?  ]STow  this  state  of  mind  is  the  assured  possession  of  him 
who  has  forsaken  all  for  Christ.  He,  and  none  but  he,  can  say,  "  I  shall  never 
be  moved."  The  changes  and  chances — even  the  persecutions — of  the  world 
are  nothing  to  him.  He  is  "  satisfied  from  himself."  He  brings  forth  his 
happiness  from  "  the  good  treasure  of  his  heart,"  and  therefore  it  never  fails. 
He  receives  a  hundredfold  more — in  the  testimony  of  his  conscience,  in  the 
love  of  God,  and  in  the  patient  waiting  for  Christ — than  if  he  had  grasped  these 
things  which  crumble  at  a  touch,  or  clung  to  these  "  bruised  reeds,  on  which," 
etc.  (2  Kings  xviii.  21).  2.  "And  in  the  world  to  come — eternal  life." 
There  the  Christian  will  meet  again  all  those  good  things  which  he  has,  in 
heart  and  will  at  least,  if  not  in  deed,  forsaken  here.  There  he  will  find  the 
worldly  wealth  which  he  scattered  in  Christ's  name ;  the  much-loved  ease 
which,  to  promote  Christ's  interests,  he  was  content  to  be  without ;  the  dear 
earthly  delights  which  it  was  lawful  for  him  to  enjoy,  yet  more  for  Christ's 
glory  that  he  should  give  up.  There  he  "  rests  from  his  labours,"  etc.  (Rev. 
xiv.  13).  There,  finally,  whatever  he  enjoys,  it  is  with  the  delightful  con- 
sciousness, never  felt  on  earth,  that  "  his  joy  no  man  taketh  from  him,"  that 
his  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and  can  neither  fade  nor  fail. 

374 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  X. 


The  trials  and  reward  of  the  missionary. — God,  in  order  to  determine  His 
people  to  a  cordial  and  zealous  fulfilment  of  His  will  in  all  things,  even  in  those 
things  which  are  most  trying  to  faith  and  repulsive  to  flesh  and  blood,  employs 
every  kind  of  influence  which  is  suited  to  His  character  and  adapted  to  their 
nature.  He  employs  the  influence  of  His  authority  to  command  them,  of  His 
displeasure  to  warn  them,  of  His  love  to  constrain  them,  of  His  ability  and 
willingness  to  recompense,  in  order  to  induce  and  to  win  them.  And  there  are 
in  all  genuine  disciples  principles  powerfully  susceptible  of  all  these  influences — 
meek  obedience  to  His  will,  awe  of  His  displeasure,  constraint  by  His  love,  and 
a  holy  ambition  to  acquire  the  rewards  of  grace. 

I.  The  call  of  the  missionary  to  make  the  sacrifices  which  our  Lord  here 
specifies. — 1.  His  call  originates  in  the  gracious  purposes  of  God  to  have  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  turned  unto  Himself  by  the  power  of  the  gospel.  2.  This 
call  flows  from  the  commandment  which  the  Redeemer  has  laid  upon  His  Church 
to  proceed  in  carrying  this  purpose  into  effect  without  delay  (Mark  xvi.  15; 
Acts  i.  8).  The  faithful  missionary  hears  the  commandment,  and  hastens  to 
the  fulfilment  of  it,  both  in  his  labours  and  his  prayers.  3.  The  missionary 
hears  himself  specially  called  by  God  to  the  service  of  His  gospel  in  distant 
lands.  He  sees  the  purpose  of  God,  and  longs  to  have  it  fulfilled  ;  he  hears  the 
command  of  God,  and  is  moved  to  obey  it ;  he  perceives  the  promises  of  God  to 
this  work,  and  desires  to  seek  the  benefit  of  them  ;  he  feels  the  love  of  souls,  and 
cannot  be  at  rest  while  they  are  perishing  ;  he  sees  the  sacrifices  and  the  dangers, 
but  is  not  dismayed  by  them  ;  he  understands  the  nature  of  the  work  required, 
and  believes  that  he  may  by  grace  be  made  instrumental  in  fulfilling  it.  And 
what  is  all  this  but  the  witness  in  himself  that  he  is  called  of  God  to  go  far 
hence  to  the  Gentiles,  as  if  he  heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  to  him,  "  I 
have  made  thee  a  minister,"  etc.  (Acts  xxvi.  16-18).  4.  He  feels  called  by  the 
imploring  cry  of  a  perishing  world,  "  Come  over,  and  help  us."  He  is  not 
insensible  to  their  sorrows  because  they  are  (thousands  of  miles  distant  from  him, 
and  seas  roll  between,  and  his  eye  has  never  looked  upon  their  wretchedness. 

IL  The  sacrifices  which  are  required  of  the  Christian  missionary. — 1.  As 
the  Church  must  enlighten  the  world  by  the  instituted  means  of  grace,  some 
must  go  forth  from  it  to  carry  these  means  and  apply  them  to  the  heathen 
nations.  2.  The  missionary  presents  himself  to  the  Church  as  ready  to  undertake 
all  the  labours,  privations,  and  sacrifices  in  the  work,  and  encounter  all  its 
difficulties  and  perils,  if  they  at  home  will  only  support  him  with  their  habitual 
prayers,  aiding  and  encouraging  him  under  his  trials,  and  ministering  to  his 
wants  as  far  as  his  circumstances  in  providence  may  require.  3.  Missionaries, 
in  going  forth  to  the  heathen,  must  leave  behind  them  not  only  their  country, 
but  relatives,  and  houses,  and  lands,  and  whatever  nature  esteems  dear;  and 
they  have  the  feelings  of  nature  in  common  with  others.  4.  They  have 
unnumbered  and  unknown  perils,  privations,  and  sufferings  to  expect.  They 
are  exposed  to  the  perils  of  the  traveller  both  by  sea  and  by  land.  The  hazards 
to  which  they  are  exposed  from  climate  are  none  of  the  least  appalling  to  those 
who  have  the  same  love  of  life  with  other  men.  They  are  exposed  to  perils 
from  those  among  whom  they  labour — from  the  barbarity  of  savage  tribes,  and 
the  more  monstrous  enmity  and  persecution  of  civilised  and  nominally  Christian 
colonists.  Though  they  should  escape  all  these  evils,  they  have  still  difficulties 
and  vexations  to  encounter  in  their  work  itself  which  are  none  of  the  least 
trying  to  the  spirits  of  men — difficulties  from  language,  from  the  inveterate 
ignorance  of  those  whom  they  seek  to  enlighten,  their  incurable  superstitions, 
or  their  confirmed  habits  of  vice  and  ungodliness ;  while  open  resistance  will 
usually  be  raised  up  by  Satan  from  quarters  whence  it  was  least  expected  and 
where  it  proves  the  most  effectual. 

375 


chap.  X.  HOMI'LETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MARK. 


III.  The  motives  which  determine  and  encourage  the  missionary  to  embrace 
these  sacrifices. — 1.  Love  to  the  Eedeemer,  and  desire  that  He  may  be  glorified. 
2.  Admiration  of  the  gospel  as  the  "  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God," 
"  unto  the  salvation  of  men."  3.  Compassion  and  love  to  mankind  for  Christ's 
sake.  He  is  impelled  by  some  portion  of  the  Spirit  of  Him  who,  moved  by  love 
for  our  race,  left  His  Father's  bosom,  and  tabernacled  for  a  season  in  our  sinful 
and  wretched  world,  partaking  of  its  sorrows — whose  "  compassion  was  moved  " 
to  intensity  "  when  He  beheld  the  multitudes,  because  they  fainted,"  and  were 
scattered  abroad  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd.  This  compassion  may  be  felt 
strongly  by  the  missionary  even  at  home,  but  far  more  powerfully  when  he  is 
set  down  in  the  midst  of  the  objects  of  his  sympathy  and  his  eye  has  looked 
upon  their  miseries. 

IV.  Their  reward. — 1.  They  are  "chosen  vessels"  to  the  most  arduous  and 
honourable  part  of  the  work  of  Christ  on  earth.  To  be  occupied  in  this  work 
is  the  highest  glory  of  man,  the  chief  happiness  of  the  renewed  mind.  It 
assimilates  to  Christ,  who  came  not  to  do  His  own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Him.  It  assimilates  them  to  angels,  who  are  occupied  in  "doing  His 
commandments,  hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word."  2.  The  honour  of 
eminent  suffering  for  Christ.  Paul  rejoiced  in  his  sufferings  for  the  Church 
(Col.  i.  24),  and  spake  of  suffering  for  Christ  as  an  honour  peculiarly  "  given  " 
to  such  of  the  saints  as  were  called  to  it  (Phil.  i.  29).  And  truly  these 
sufferings  cannot  appear  a  small  honour  to  any  who  behold  in  them  "a 
manifest  token"  that  they  "shall  reign  with  Him"  (2  Tim.  ii.  12),  and  know 
that  they  are  "  working  "  for  them  "  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory." — Joseph  Hay,  M.A. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS  ON  THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  29.   Sacrifice    of  all. — Let  no  for  the   love  of   Christ:    "For    My 

man  say  that  this  sacrifice  of  theirs  sake." — F.  Harper. 
was   a  trifling  one.     True  it  is  they 

were   poor  men   and   had  nothing  to  Ver.  30.  "An  hundredfold  now." — 

part  with  but  their  boats   and   their  What  shall  we  say  to  this  bountiful 

nets ;   but   let  us  remember  that  the  promise  ?     Shall  we  say  it  is  merely 

little  that  a  poor  man  hath  is  as  much  a  flourish  of  words  from  the  lips   of 

to  him  as  are  riches  to  the  wealthy.  Eternal  Truth  ?     God  forbid !     These 

If  a  man  be  thirsty,  it  is  as  hard  to  are  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness, 

persuade  him  to  pour  on  the  ground  Looking  back  on  the  first  disciples,  we 

a  single  cup   of  water  as   to  prevail  see  this  promise  fulfilled  :    but   how  ? 

upon  another  to  cast   away   a   whole  1.  Though  the  disciples  had  but  little 

barrel.    It  is  a  triumph  of  grace,  then,  left,  or  afterwards  received  but  little 

when  the  poor  forsakes  his  little,   as  in  the  stead  of  what  they  had  lost,  yet 

well    as   when    the    rich    counts    his  had  they  a  good  title  to  that  little,  and 

abundance  as  dross  for  Christ's  sake. —  you  can  without  difficulty  conceive  a 

H.  Verschoyle.  man  having  greater  enjoyment  in  the 

"  For  My  sake." — These  three  words  possession  of  one  acre  of  land  on   a 

make  secular  things  sacred.     You  may  good  title  than  ten  acres  on  a  disputed 

go  to  your  farm,  or  to  your  merchan-  one.     The  child  of  God  holds  what  he 

dise,   you  may   sing    songs,   or   paint  possesses  as  a  gift  conferred  upon  him 

pictures,   or    build    houses,    or   make  in  virtue  of  Christ's  propitiatory  sacri- 

shoes,   or   heal   bodies,   and   all   these  fice ;  the  ungodly  holds  his  possessions 

things  become  sacred  if  they  are  done  as  things  already  forfeited  by  his  sin ; 

376  .... 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


hence    it  is   written,  Ps.   xxxvii.    16.  dim  the  glory  of  these  things. — J,  P. 

2.  They  had,  besides,  the  capacity  given  Langt,  D.D. 
them  of  enjoying  their  little,  which  is 

often  denied  to  the  most  affluent.   Con-  Ver.   31.  First  and  last. — On  occa- 

tentment  is^the  handmaid  of  real  godli-  sions    that   call   for    a   great   prompt 

ness ;   when  it  is   joined   to  godliness  sacrifice  in  the  interests  of  a  worthy 

there  is  great  gain,  because  it  gives  a  cause,  or  upon  the  altar  of  truth  and 

sweet  relish  to  the  most  slender  pro-  principle,  have  you  not  seen,  now  and 

vision,   it    transforms    straitness   into  again,  some  very  religious  and  virtuous 

abundance. — H.  Verschoyle.  people   wonderfully   outdone  by   some 

The  Christians  gain  in  this  world. —  who    had    had   but    little    credit    for 

The  Christian  gains  back  again  already  conscientiousness  or  moral  seriousness, 

in   this  world,  in  the  higher  form  of  men  to  whom  you  would  never  have 

real  spiritual  essence,  whatever  in  the  looked  for  anything  like  the  magnani- 

physical   and   symbolical   form   of  his  mous  spirit  and  conduct  that  distinguish 

life  he  has  forfeited  :  houses  enough,  them  ?     The   very  greatest   are  often 

in  the  entertainment  afforded  him  by  behind  others  for  a  while,   like  your 

his  spiritual  associates  who  receive  him  ;  dull,    slow   schoolboy,    who  turns   out 

brothers  and  sisters,  in  the  highest  sense  afterwards  a  brilliant  man,  while  his 

of  the  term ;  mothers,  who  bless  and  more  brilliant  schoolmate,  who  got  all 

tend  the  life  of  his  soul ;  children,  of  the  praise  and  prizes,  dims  and  fades 

his  spirit ;  lands,  of  his  activity,  of  his  beside   him,   the    tortoise   in   the   end 

higher   enjoyment   of   nature,   of   his  beating  the  hare.     The  best  are  often 

delights ;  and  all  this  ever  purer,  ever  the  tortoise  in  development,   just  be- 

richer,  as  an  unfolding  of  that  eternal  cause  they  are  the  best,  and  have  so 

inheritance  of  which  it  is  said,  "All  much   more    in    them    to    develop. — 

things  are  yours,"  in  spite   of  what-  S.  A.  Tipple. 
ever  persecutions  of  the  world  which 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  32—34. 

(Parallels  :   Matt.  xx.  17-19 ;   Luke  xviii.  31-34 ;  John  xi.  53-57.) 

On  the  way  to  Jerusalem. — Every  act  of  Christ  relates  not  only  to  those 
disciples  who  were  the  immediate  witnesses  of  it,  and  to  events  which  then  and 
there  transpired,  but  also  to  His  whole  Church  through  all  future  ages,  and  to 
events  bearing  upon  the  interests  of  that  Church,  till  her  probation  on  earth  is 
finished,  her  numbers  are  made  up,  and  she  stands  complete  in  Him  before  the 
throne  above.  The  circumstances  recorded  in  the  text  therefore  bear  a  striking 
analogy  to  the  spiritual  circumstances  of  all  believers  in  Christ. 

I.  The  course  they  pursued. — The  "  way  "  here  meant  was  the  highway  to 
Jerusalem,  a  type  of  the  way  which  leads  to  heaven,  along  which  all  must  pass 
who  wish  at  last  to  reach  that  glorious  world.  1.  As  there  was  a  public, 
appointed,  and  common  way  to  Jerusalem,  so  there  is  an  appointed  and  common 
way  to  heaven.  (1)  The  way  of  regeneration.  (2)  The  way  of  repentance. 
(3)  The  way  of  holiness.  (4)  The  way  of  faith  in  Christ.  (5)  The  way  of  holy 
obedience.  (6)  The  way  of  atonement.  2.  They  were  in  the  way.  It  is  not 
sufficient  for  us  to  know  that  there  is  a  way,  but  we  must  see  to  it  that  we  are 
in  it.  3.  They  made  advances  in  the  way.  It  is  not  sufficient  that  we  know  the 
way  to  heaven,  and  be  in  the  way  to  heaven  ;  but  we  must  make  progress  in  it, 
and  be  like  the  disciples,  ever  going  up.  The  new  life  within  must  grow  and  be 
constantly  giving  forth  new  fruits  and  beauties. 

II.  The  place  of  their  destination. — "  Jerusalem."    It  was  called  tho  Holy 

377 


chap.  X.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


City,  because  there  stood  the  temple,  there  dwelt  the  sublime  symbol  of  the 
Divine  Presence,  there  Divine  worship  was  carried  on,  and  there  all  God's  people 
met  to  pay  their  Divine  honours  to  His  name.  Its  peace,  its  glory,  its  religious 
services,  its  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  Presence,  and  the  security  of  its  inhabitants 
caused  it  to  be  selected  as  a  type  of  heaven,  and  hence  John  calls  it  the  New 
Jerusalem  and  the  City  of  God.  There  the  weary  pilgrim  is  at  rest;  the 
weather-beaten  mariner  has  anchored  for  ever  in  the  fair  haven  of  peace ;  the 
worn-out  warrior  doffs  his  helmet  and  puts  on  his  crown ;  the  heavenly  runner 
has  reached  the  goal  and  enwreaths  his  brow  with  the  garland  of  immortal 
honour  ;  and  all  ascribe  their  glory  to  free  and  sovereign  grace. 

III.  The  Leader  they  followed. — "  Jesus  went  before  them."  This  act  of  Christ 
was  typical  of  glorious  truths — truths  which  apply  not  only  to  those  who  imme- 
diately followed  Him,  but  also  to  all  His  followers  down  to  the  end  of  time. 
1.  He  went  before  them  as  their  Mediator,  to  break  down  the  impregnable 
barriers  which  sin  had  reared  in  their  way  to  happiness,  to  God,  and  to  heaven, 
and  to  give  them  free  access  to  glory  by  His  precious  blood.  2.  He  went  before 
them  as  their  Glorious  General,  to  subdue  all  their  enemies,  to  lead  them  in  the 
good  fight  of  faith,  to  instruct  and  arm  them  for  the  holy  war,  to  conduct  them 
from  conquest  to  conquest,  and  to  bring  them  to  final  victory  and  immortal 
triumph.  3.  He  went  before  them  as  their  Great  Pattern  of  submission  to  the 
Divine  will,  of  patience  under  suffering,  of  self-denial  in  the  Divine  service,  of 
love  to  God  and  man,  of  a  pure  benevolence,  of  intense  desire  for  the  glory  of 
God.  4.  He  went  before  them  as  their  Infallible  Guide  in  doctrinal  truth,  in 
practical  holiness,  and  in  the  way  to  glory,  honour,  and  immortality.  5.  He 
went  before  them  through  death  and  the  grave,  to  take  away  their  terrors, 
and  bring  life  and  immortality  to  light.  6.  He  went  before  them  in  the  first 
resurrection,  to  demonstrate  to  them  His  own  almighty  power  and  the  acceptance 
of  His  great  atonement  on  their  behalf  by  the  Father,  and  to  teach  them  to  rest 
in  hope  of  that  glorious  day  when  He  will  change  their  vile  bodies  and  fashion 
them  like  unto  His  glorious  body,  according  to  the  power  whereby  He  is  able  to 
subdue  all  things  unto  Himself.  7.  He  went  before  them  to  heaven,  to  take 
possession  of  it  in  their  name,  to  prepare  it  for  them  and  them  for  it,  and  to 
supply  them  with  all  needed  grace,  till  they  abide  in  His  presence  and  see  Him 
as  He  is. 

IY.  The  feelings  they  experienced. — 1.  They  were  amazed.  This  appears  to 
have  been  an  impression  made  up  of  the  mental  elements  of  reverence,  awe, 
admiration,  and  wonder,  thrown  over  the  disciples'  minds  by  the  sublime  spirit 
and  conduct  of  Jesus  on  this  occasion.  As  you  follow  the  Lamb  to  eternal  glory, 
have  you  not  often  felt  amazed  ?  Have  you  not  often  felt  amazed  at  the 
benevolence  which  led  Him  to  become  poor  that  you  might  be  eternally  rich  ? — 
amazed  that  He  should  have  loved  sinners  so  as  to  become  for  them  a  Man  of 
Sorrows,  that  they  might  become  participants  of  eternal  joys  ? — amazed  that  He 
should  have  chosen,  predestinated,  called,  renewed,  sanctified,  and  preserved  you, 
when,  had  you  been  left  to  yourself,  you  had  now  been  in  the  road  to  eternal 
ruin  ? — amazed  that  you  do  not  love  Him  more  and  serve  Him  better,  who  has 
done,  is  doing,  and  will  do  so  much  for  you  ? — and  amazed  that  the  glories  which 
He  has  revealed  as  the  eternal  portion  of  His  faithful  people  do  not  produce 
upon  you  a  more  heavenly  influence  in  this  world  of  sin  and  woe  ?  2.  "  As 
they  followed,  they  were  afraid."  Such  were  their  weakness,  their  timidity,  their 
imperfect  knowledge,  their  erroneous  views  of  His  glorious  mission  and  the  true 
nature  of  His  spiritual  kingdom,  that  all  the  glorious  majesty  which  He  here 
displayed  was  not  sufficient  to  preserve  them  from  fear — fear  for  themselves,  fear 
for  Him,  and  fear  for  His  cause.  Believers  fear  for  Christ — fear  for  His  cause, 
fear  for  themselves — fear  persecutions,  dangers,  afflictions,  and  death — because 

378 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 

their  knowledge  of  Christ  is  defective,  or  because  they  do  not  look  sufficiently  to 
Him. — W.  Gregory, 

The  intensity  of  Jesus. — What  a  wonderful  picture  is  here  !  There  are  only 
a  few  words,  only  a  few  touches  of  the  painter's  brush,  but  they  are  the  words 
of  a  loving  heart,  the  touches  of  a  skilful  hand ;  and  as  we  look  at  the  picture 
we  seem  to  realise  what  it  means,  Jesus  is  going  up  to  Jerusalem  with  His 
disciples  ;  it  is  the  last  time  they  will  tread  that  road  together ;  and  on  the  way, 
instead  of  keeping  close  to  Him,  and  hanging  on  His  every  word,  they  linger 
behind,  wrapped  up  in  their  own  petty  trifling  interests,  disputing  with  one 
another  as  to  which  of  them  shall  have  the  pre-eminence  when  the  rewards  of 
the  kingdom  are  distributed.  And  Jesus  goes  before  them,  and  they  know  it 
not ;  talking  of  the  kingdom  they  have  forgotten  the  King,  and  on  a  sudden  they 
look  up  and  see  Him  alone,  sad,  silent,  grave,  awful  in  the  majesty  of  that  sad 
face  and  eager  on-looking  eyes,  and  are  amazed.  Amazed,  why  ?  Because  they 
see  and  read  in  all  this  what  you  and  I  can  see  and  read  there  yet  more  clearly 
than  they,  a  wondrous  intensity.  "  Intense."  This  is  one  of  the  words  adopted 
by  a  modern  sect  of  fashion — a  fashion  which  delights  in  making  men  look 
effeminate  and  women  masculine,  which  puts  mere  mawkish  sentiment  in  the 
place  of  noble  deeds,  mistakes  a  rhapsody  of  words  for  great  realities,  and  has 
learned  the  art  of  taking  the  meaning  out  of  grandest  words.  But  while  the 
word  has  been  taken  and  spoilt  by  some,  remember  what  a  depth  of  meaning 
there  is  in  this  word  "  intensity."  Would  you  know  what  it  means  ?  Then 
look  at  Jesus  and  you  will  learn. 

I.  You  will  see,  first  of  all,  in  Him  an  intensity  of  purpose.  Those  fixed 
eyes,  that  set  mouth,  those  firm  steps,  that  grave  face,  they  tell  us  of  a  Man  who 
has  set  before  Himself  a  great  aim,  who  means  by  the  help  of  God  to  accomplish 
it.  It  is  the  will  of  God,  it  is  His  Father's  business,  which  He  had  set  before 
Him  from  the  first.  And  because  His  aim  is  so  high,  His  purpose  so  simple  and 
grand,  therefore  the  life  of  Jesus  is  not  like  ours,  a  zigzag,  crooked  path,  but  a 
straight,  onward,  undeviating  path. 

II.  But  in  His  intensity  we  see  also  the  intensity  of  humility.  The  conscious- 
ness of  a  great  aim  in  life,  the  recognition  of  a  great  purpose,  sometimes,  because 
of  our  innate  weakness,  makes  us  conceited ;  it  gives  a  man  self-consciousness, 
and  so  spoils  his  aim.  But  as  we  look  into  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  so  sorrowful 
and  sad,  as  we  look  onward  to  the  object  on  which  His  eyes  are  fixed,  as  we  listen 
to  the  words  wherein  He  explains  what  all  this  means,  we  learn  what  intensity 
of  purpose  needs  to  control  and  guide  it  aright.  The  intensity  of  Jesus  is  one 
that  stooped,  that  bowed  itself — ay,  it  is  an  intensity  which  was  "  obedient  even 
to  the  death  upon  the  Cross." 

III.  But  there  is  more  than  this ;  look  again  into  His  eyes  and  you  will  see 
what  it  is.  Something  more  is  wanted,  something  that  shall  join  together  the 
intensity  of  purpose  with  the  intensity  of  humility.  What  is  it  that  will  make 
a  man's  life  straight  as  the  flight  of  an  arrow,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  lowliness 
itself  ?  Nothing,  I  think,  but  the  intensity  of  love.  This  intensity  of  Jesus, 
remember,  is  for  us.  1.  For  us,  because  all  this  intensity  was  expended  on  our 
behalf.  He  goes  up  to  Jerusalem  before  us  as  our  Sacrifice.  "  Christ  also  hath 
once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us  to  God." 
2.  For  us,  because  this  intensity  may  be  ours.  He  goes  up  to  Jerusalem  before 
us  as  our  Example  (1  Pet.  ii.  21).  And  hence  you  and  I  may  go  forward  on  the 
path  God  hath  marked  out  for  us,  in  some  of  this  intensity  of  purpose,  of 
humility,  of  love,  which  marked  the  life  of  Jesus.  This  intensity  may  be  ours, 
for  He  was  Perfect  Man  as  well  as  Perfect  God.  His  intensity  was  human 
intensity,  made  up  of  human  purpose,   human   humility,   human   love.     This 

379 


chap.  X.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST,  MARK, 


intensity  may  be  ours,  for  we  see  something  of  this  intensity  in  the  lives  of 
others.  Other  men  have  attracted  us  or  shamed  us  as  we  have  looked  upon 
their  intensity  and  compared  it  with  our  lack  of  it. — G.  J.  Ridgeway. 

Following  Jesus  fearingly. — Notice  the  singular  combination,  the  compatibility 
and  the  union  of  two  apparently  contradictory  things :  though  they  "  feared  " 
they  "  followed,"  and  though  they  "  followed  "  they  "  feared."  The  fear  was  not 
enough  to  stop  the  following,  nor  the  following  sufficient  to  arrest  the  fear. 
There  was  a  love  in  the  fear  which  kept  them  following ;  and  yet  a  nature  in 
the  following  which  still  left  them  fearing.  And  I  should  not  be  wrong  if 
I  carried  the  connexion  of  these  two  thoughts  a  little  further.  They  feared 
because  they  followed,  and  they  followed  because  they  were  afraid.  Fear  is  the 
strongest  fascination.  There  is  always  a  tendency  to  go  to  what  we  greatly  fear. 
So  the  following  led  up  to  the  fear,  and  the  fear  led  up  to  the  following.  That 
walk  up  to  Jerusalem  appears  to  me  strangely  illustrative  of  the  path  by  which 
many  of  you  are  going  to  heaven.  This  strange  and,  but  for  experience,  this 
incredible  condition  of  a  man's  heart — the  fear  that  follows,  and  the  following 
that  fears — whence  is  it  ? 

I.  Certainly,  if  you  were  not  a  follower,  you  would  not  be  a  fearer. — I  never 
knew  any  one  in  my  life  begin  to  fear  till  God  had  begun  to  love  him  and  he 
had  begun  to  love  God.  The  fear  is  an  index  that  you  are  on  the  road.  Because 
you  are  His  the  Spirit  works  those  tender,  awe-stricken  feelings  in  your  mind  ; 
because  you  are  His  men  hate  you ;  because  you  are  His  the  devil  harasses 
you ;  because  you  are  His  you  know  that  "  through  much  tribulation  you  must 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God." 

II.  But  is  this,  then,  right  ? — Have  you  ever  known  what  it  is,  in  any  sense,  to 
have  undertaken — absolutely  to  have  undertaken  for  anybody  ?  And  then  have 
you  felt  the  mortification  of  finding  that  person,  for  whom  you  had  undertaken 
in  everything,  afraid,  mistrusting  ?  It  is  good  to  follow  fearingly ;  but  it  is 
much  better  to  follow  trustingly. 

III.  How  is  it  that  a  real  follower  may  be  a  real  fearer  ? — I  will  find  the 
answer  on  that  road  up  to  Jerusalem.  Why  did  the  disciples  fear?  1.  They 
had  not  adequate  ideas  of  Him  whom  they  followed.  So  it  is  with  you.  If  you 
knew  the  character  of  Christ,  if  you  knew  the  work  of  Christ,  you  would  be 
rid  of  that  fear.  2.  Though  they  loved  Christ,  they  did  not  love  Him  as  He 
deserved.  If  they  had,  the  love  would  have  absorbed  the  fear  ;  they  would  have 
rejoiced  to  endure  with  Him,  even  to  the  death ;  the  dignity,  the  happiness  of 
partnership  with  Him  would  have  swallowed  up  every  other  consideration. 
3.  They  had  not  what  their  Master  had — one,  great,  fixed,  sustaining  aim. 
There  is  nothing  so  ennobling,  there  is  nothing  which  makes  a  hero,  a  martyr, 
a  saint,  like  an  object,  distinct,  lofty,  worthy.  Usefulness  is  such  an  object ; 
the  extension  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  such  an  object ;  the  glory  of  God  is  such  an 
object.  4.  They  had  their  fears  undefined.  It  was  the  indefinite  which  terrified 
them.  I  should  hardly  say  too  much  if  I  said  that  fear  is  indefiniteness.  The 
terror  is  the  mist  which  enwraps  it. 

IV.  Take,  then,  four  rules. — 1.  Fortify  yourself  in  the  thought  of  what  Christ 
is — His  person,  His  work,  His  covenant ;  and  what  He  is  to  you.  2.  Love 
Him  very  much,  and  realise  your  union  with  Him — the  preciousness,  the 
grandeur  of  that  union,  especially  in  sorrow,  persecution,  and  death.  3.  Set 
a  high  mark,  and  carry  your  life  in  your  hand,  so  you  may  reach  that  mark, 
and  do  something  for  God.  4.  Often  stop  and  say  deliberately  to  yourself, 
"  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul  ?  "  and  do  not  go  on  till  you  have  got  an 
answer. 

V.  But  are  you  still  afraid? — Let  me  offer  you  this  counsel.    Do  not  care 

380 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


about  it ;  do  not  care  for  your  fears  ;  do  not  fear  because  you  fear.  Only  follow 
on,  follow  on.  The  disciples  came  in  all  right  to  Jerusalem  at  last,  though  they 
did  follow  fearingly. — J.  Vaughan. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  32.  The  way  of  the  Cross. — All  of  the  next.  Every  sudden  transition 
nature  trembles  in  a  man,  when  God  awakens  strange  feelings.  The  change 
obliges  him  to  take  the  way  of  the  from  one  experience  to  another,  when 
Cross.  Christ  goes  forward  therein,  it  appears  to  come  with  any  measure  of 
with  a  firm  and  even  pace,  and  with  suddenness,  comes  to  us  with  pathetic 
a  true  courage.  He  who  hazards  his  interest.  This  must  have  affected 
life  in  hopes  of  a  better  fortune  exposes  the  disciples  with  exceptional  power. 
it  only  because  he  hopes  not  to  lose  it,  2.  The  feeling  that  an  important 
and  is  but  the  more  fond  of  it  on  this  experience  has  come  to  an  end  without 
account ;  as  a  covetous  person  is  really  our  having  made  the  best  use  of  it, 
the  fonder  of  riches  the  more  he  exposes  adds  to  our  sense  of  loss  and  our  feel- 
to  the  hazard  of  gaming,  on  the  pro-  ing  of  regret  at  the  thought  of  parting 
spect  of  greater  gain.  True  courage  company  with  such  an  experience, 
consists  in  the  contempt  of  this  present  Christ  knew  nothing  of  that  sadness, 
life  through  the  hopes  of  that  which  In  His  experience  everything  had  led 
is  eternal ;  and  this  contempt  is  so  up  to  the  Cross ;  and  although  there 
much  the  greater  the  more  sure  a  man  was  a  natural  recoil  on  His  part  as 
is  of  losing  it,  as  Jesus  Christ  and  the  the  Son  of  Man  from  the  agony  of  the 
martyrs  were. — P.  Quesnel.  Cross,   and   the    dread    experience   of 

deadly  contact  with   the  world's  sin, 

Vers.  33,  34.  Going  up  to  Jerusalem,  yet  He  had  nothing  on  his  own  part 

— 1.  They  were  very  near  the  end  of  to  dread  as  He  entered  the  conflict. — 

one  experience,  and  on  the  threshold  D.  Davies. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.-- Verses  34—45. 
(Parallel:  Matt.  xx.  20-28.) 

The  petition  of  Zebedee's  sons. — It  was  our  Lord's  custom,  when  any  indefinite 
request  was  preferred  to  Him,  to  draw  forth  from  the  petitioner  a  more  exact 
statement  of  his  wants  and  desires.  Of  this  we  have  one  instance  here 
(vers.  35,  36),  and  another  in  ver.  51.  Can  we  have  a  stronger  argument  than 
this  for  the  exercise  of  special  prayer  ?  And  can  we  have  a  plainer  testimony 
to  the  need  of  self-examination  before  we  venture  to  approach  the  throne 
of  grace  ? 

I.  The  request  of  the  two  brothers. — "Grant  unto  us,"  etc.  1.  This  petition 
displayed  their  ignorance  of  Christ's  plans.  They  looked  for  a  kingdom  of  this 
world  and  a  temporal  Messiah.  They  were  waiting  with  impatience  for  the 
moment  when  Christ  should  throw  aside  the  mean  disguise  under  which  He  now 
walked,  and  proclaim  Himself  in  His  true  character,  as  the  lawful  inheritor  of 
the  throne  of  David.  All  enemies  being  subdued,  and  the  whole  world  reduced 
to  a  state  of  peaceful  subjection  under  His  sceptre,  then  (they  imagined)  would 
begin  such  an  earthly  kingdom  as  would  swallow  up  the  splendour  and  the 
remembrance  of  all  former  ones.  And  they,  the  chosen  companions  and  faithful 
followers  of  His  low  estate — what  should  they  not  have,  what  honours  and 

381 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


dignities  might  they  not  aspire  to  in  His  exaltation  ?  2.  This  petition  was 
marked  by  forwardness  and  presumption.  To  ask  that  they  might  "  sit,  the  one 
on  His  right  hand,  and  the  other  on  His  left,  in  His  kingdom,"  was  to  seek  for 
themselves  a  pre-eminence  in  that  kingdom  above  their  fellows  ;  for  these  were 
the  two  most  honourable  seats  in  an  Eastern  court,  and  always  reserved  for  those 
whose  rank  was  only  inferior  to  him  who  sat  upon  the  throne.  It  is  dangerous 
to  say,  "  What  wilt  thou  ? "  to  persons  whose  requests  are  not  likely  to  be  guided 
by  modesty  or  discretion.  3.  Observe,  also,  the  worldliness  of  this  petition. 
It  looks  no  farther,  apparently,  than  the  present  life.  (1)  How  many  still 
follow  Christ,  knowing  and  caring  nothing  about  the  riches  of  His  redeeming 
grace,  but  desiring  to  eat  of  the  loaves  and  be  filled !  How  many  make  a  pro- 
fession of  religion  for  the  sake  of  certain  worldly  advantages  which  they  expect 
to  gain  by  it !  Not  so  gross,  but  equally  dangerous,  is  the  delusion  of  those 
who  look  for  any  part  of  the  reward  of  godliness  in  this  world.  If  we  entered 
thoroughly  into  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  saw  eye  to  eye  with  Him  the  end  He 
has  in  view,  we  should  never  think  of  asking  of  Him  such  mere  temporal 
advantages  as  a  good  name,  a  quiet  mind,  a  comfortable  enjoyment  of  life,  or 
even  a  peaceful  and  happy  death.  These  are  consolation  certainly,  but  not  the 
consolation  of  Christ;  these  are  blessings,  but  not  the  blessing  of  Him  who 
"  came  to  bless  us  by  turning,"  etc.  (Acts  iii.  26).  (2)  How  many  religious 
parents,  like  "  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  children  "  (Matt.  xx.  20),  display  a  much 
greater  anxiety  about  the  worldly  prospects  of  their  offspring  than  about  the 
welfare  of  their  souls  !  Judging  by  their  conduct,  they  think  more  of  seeing 
them  now  "riding  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,"  than  of  meeting  them 
hereafter  at  the  right  hand  of  power  in  heaven. 

II.  The  Saviour's  reply. — "Ye  know  not,"  etc.  1.  It  may  be  said  to  all  who 
pray  for  any  temporal  advantages,  "  Ye  know  not  whether  the  issue  of  your 
prayer,  if  granted,  will  be  for  good  or  evil."  We  do  not,  however,  bid  you  not 
ask  at  all  fpr  the  things  of  this  life ;  but  when  you  do,  ask  discreetly,  modestly, 
without  importunity,  with  an  entire  submission  to  the  will  and  wisdom  of  God, 
confident  that  He  will  not  only  give  good  things,  but  also  refuse  evil  and  hurtful 
things,  to  them  that  ask  Him.  2.  But  Christ's  answer  to  these  petitioners 
seems  to  insist  chiefly  on  their  ignorance  of  the  manner  in  which  the  great  prizes 
(so  to  speak)  in  the  distribution  of  heavenly  honours  were  to  be  sought  and 
won.  Would  they  have  preferred  their  request  in  this  form  had  they  realised 
that  "  through  much  tribulation,"  etc.  ?  "  My  own  exaltation,"  says  the  Saviour, 
"  will  be  the  reward  of  My  previous  sufferings  and  humiliation.  If  you  desire 
to  share  in  My  Crown,  you  must  expect  to  bear  your  part  in  My  Cross.  Are 
you  able  to  do  this  ? "  Those  who  are  contented  to  be  called  the  least  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  may  perhaps  escape  with  just  the  ordinary  afflictions  that 
fall  to  every  man's  lot.  But  those  who  aspire  (as  who  would  not  ?)  to  a  place 
near  the  throne  must  expect  to  be  called  upon  to  resist  unto  blood,  striving 
against  sin,  to  go  through  fire  and  water,  and  to  be  baptised  in  the  furnace  of 
affliction,  "  that  the  trial  of  their  faith,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  i.  7). 

III.  The  decision  of  the  two  brothers. — "We  can."  1.  Here  we  have  a 
striking  instance  of  the  levity  and  rashness  with  which  men  undertake  they 
know  not  what.  Amongst  Christ's  followers,  as  indeed  in  the  outset  of  any 
enterprise  whatever,  there  was  no  lack  of  zealous  promisers  and  hasty  undertakers 
(Mark  xiv.  29-31).  But  "  pride  goeth  before  destruction."  When  the  hour  of 
trial  came,  "  all  the  disciples  forsook  Him  and  fled."  2.  If  you  are  wise,  you 
will  before  beginning  to  build  "  sit  down  first  and  count  the  cost,"  etc. 
(Luke  xiv.  28-30),  duly  sensible  of  your  own  weakness,  relying  only  upon  the 
ability  and  sufficiency  which  cometh  from  God.  Then  you  may  adopt  as  your 
own  the  golden  maxim  of  the  apostle  (Phil.  iv.  13). 

382 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


IY.  The  Saviour's  concluding  observation. — 1.  "Ye  shall  indeed  drink, "  etc. 
This  is  generally  supposed  to  be  an  intimation  of  what  should  happen  to  these 
two  brothers  in  the  prosecution  of  their  apostolic  ministry.  (1)  James  was  the 
foremost  in  time  of  all  the  apostles  to  follow  his  Master  to  death  (Acts  xii.  2). 
(2)  John  was  preserved  alive  the  longest  of  all  the  apostles,  and  for  that  very 
reason  doubtless  endured  and  suffered  the  most.  2.  "But  to  sit  on  My  right 
hand,"  etc.  The  power  of  Christ,  whether  to  reward  or  punish,  is  a  judicial 
power,  not  to  be  exercised  in  a  partial  or  capricious  manner  (if  we  could  suppose 
Him  capable  of  such  weakness),  but  by  certain  fixed  rules  and  principles.  It 
is  of  the  very  essence  of  a  judge  to  judge  according  to  law.  Surely  we  do  not 
need  to  be  told  that  in  the  distribution  of  heavenly  honours  there  is  no  room 
either  for  partiality  on  the  part  of  the  dispensers  or  solicitation  on  the  part  of 
the  candidates.  Nor  does  it  diminish  aught  from  the  dignity  of  the  Son  that 
He  should  assign  the  high  places  of  His  kingdom  to  those  who  are  the  blessed 
and  approved  of  His  Father.  And  who  are  they  ?  "  Not  every  one  that  saith," 
etc.  (Matt.  vii.  21).  "Holy  and  humble  men  of  heart";  "Israelites  indeed"; 
"  the  true  circumcision  "  ;  they  that  "  worship  God  in  the  spirit,"  etc.  (Phil.  hi.  3). 
They  who  "strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate";  and,  being  entered,  strive 
to  advance  farther  and  farther,  always  "pressing  toward,  the  mark,"  etc. 
(Phil.  iii.  14).  Above  all,  they  who  in  this  life  have  "  received  their  evil  things," 
and  counted  them  as  good  ;  who  have  been  great  and  patient  sufferers,  whether 
"  in  mind,  body,  or  estate " ;  who  have  "  come  out  of  great  tribulation,"  etc. 
(Rev.  vii.  14).  3.  If  we  would  know  these  assessors  of  the  Saviour,  these  right- 
hand  and  left-hand  men,  while  they  are  upon  earth,  or  if  we  would  determine 
whether  we  ourselves  are  of  the  number,  we  must  attend  to  the  signs  which  He 
has  given  us  (vers.  42-45). 

The  request  of  James  and  John. — I.  The  request. — This  request  is  a  remark- 
able instance  of  that  slowness  and  dulness  of  heart  with  which  our  Lord  had 
to  deal,  even  among  those  who  understood  Him  most.  For  you  observe  that  it 
was  made  immediately  after  a  very  clear  prediction  of  His  Cross  and  Passion. 
You  may  judge  how  great  was  the  solitude  of  heart,  the  isolation  in  which  the 
Incarnate  Son  abode  on  earth,  when  even  His  intimates  and  closest  followers 
could  so  little  sympathise  with  His  purposes  or  enter  into  His  thoughts. 

II.  Our  Lord's  answer. — He  does  not  deny  that  there  are  high  places  in  His 
kingdom,  but  He  unveils  the  terms  on  which  only  they  may  be  won.  Nearest 
to  Him  they  might  be,  but  then  it  must  be  a  nearness  in  self-abasement,  self- 
sacrifice,  and  suffering.  The  very  terms  Christ  uses  spoke  of  suffering  :  the 
poison-cup  was  not  seldom  used  of  old  as  a  mode  of  execution — you  remember 
the  hemlock  of  Socrates ;  and  water  was  sometimes  the  instrument  of  death — 
we  read  of  being  drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea.  They  were  terms,  moreover, 
which  the  Old  Testament  connected  with  suffering ;  "  the  cup  of  trembling," 
"  the  cup  of  the  Lord's  fury,"  express  some  discipline  very  terrible  to  flesh  and 
blood  :  "I  will  take  the  cup  of  salvation "  is  by  some  interpreted,  " I  am  ready 
to  undergo  even  the  pains  of  martyrdom  " ;  and  the  mention  of  the  baptism  also 
would  recall  such  expressions  as  these,  "  All  Thy  waves  and  storms  are  gone 
over  me."  And  the  sharp  searching  trial  implied  in  these  words  would  only  be 
intensified  when,  at  a  later  period,  they  heard  their  Master  speak  of  that  terrible 
agony  which  they  were  called  to  witness  as  His  cup — "  Let  this  cup  pass  from 
Me  " ;  when  they  stood  before  His  Cross,  and  saw  His  life-blood  streaming  from 
His  head,  and  hands,  and  feet,  and  side,  a  very  baptism  of  blood.  Were  they  able 
to  face  such  things  as  these  ?  to  go  through  those  trials,  that  anguish,  coming 
in  various  shapes,  which  were  necessary  to  prepare  in  them  those  graces,  only 
as  possessing  which  they  could  stand  high  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Man  of  Sorrows, 

383 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  the  Lamb  slain?  In  short,  in  these  words  our  Lord  intimates  the  use  of 
suffering  as  a  preparation  for  glory,  for  the  presence  of  God.  Not  that  suffering 
necessarily  does  this.  It  can  act  on  us  only  according  to  the  state  we  ourselves 
are  in,  and  a  corrupt  heart  it  is  likely  only  to  embitter  and  harden.  Suffering 
can  bless  but  those  who  receive  it  meekly  and  in  the  love  of  God. 

III.  What  a  bearing  has  all  this  upon  ourselves. — 1.  Have  we  not  often 
asked  our  Blessed  Lord  to  place  us  near  Him,  to  shew  us  Hi3  truth,  to 
open  our  eyes  to  enable  us  to  cast  in  our  lot  with  Him,  to  give  us  a  throne 
among  His  saints,  to  set  us  on  His  right  hand  at  least,  if  not  upon  His  left  ? 
What  do  such  prayers  imply  ?  (1)  To  cast  in  your  lot  with  Christ,  what  is  that  ? 
To  share  the  portion  of  One  whom  the  world  rejected,  whose  goodness  those 
about  Him  could  not  appreciate.  Are  you  ready  to  do  that '(  to  be  called  an 
enthusiast  ?  to  lose  the  support  of  the  many  who  stand  by  that  which  is  popular 
and  moderate  and  safe  ?  to  become  in  their  estimation  "  a  fool  for  Christ's 
sake  "  ?  (2)  To  know  Christ's  very  truth  ;  do  you  understand  that  to  wish  this 
is  to  draw  down  on  yourself  the  agony  of  seeing  truths  which  the  world  will  not 
accept,  while  you  see  also  that  she  is  suffering  for  not  accepting — the  agony 
which  prophets  of  old  knew,  of  having  a  message,  a  revelation,  which  men  will 
not  hear  from  you,  which  is  the  only  panacea  for  the  ills  of  society,  of 
nations,  of  homes,  and  yet  to  which  they  will  not  listen  ?  (3)  To  be  like  our 
Lord,  you  have  asked  that.  But  have  you  considered  through  what  you  must 
pass,  that  you  may  have  opportunities  of  exercising  longsuffering,  forgiveness, 
calmness,  like  His  ?  Have  you  thought  what  a  discipline  it  requires,  what  self- 
denials  you  must  exercise  to  prepare  in  you  a  mind  like  that  of  Jesus  ?  2.  And 
yet  do  we  withdraw  you  from  these  high  aspirations  because  there  is  a  price 
to  pay  for  their  fulfilment  ?  Ah,  no :  those  are  indeed  your  most  blessed 
moments,  your  most  blessed  thoughts,  when  you  long  the  most  to  be  like  your 
Incarnate  Lord,  feel  most  the  attracting  influence  of  His  purity.  Cleave  to 
them,  part  not  with  them,  cost  you  what  they  will.  Whatever  the  price  you 
must  pay  for  the  fulfilment  of  those  wishes,  however  bitter  the  cup  or  the 
baptism,  there  are  some  thoughts  which  will  strengthen  you  to  bear  them. 
(1)  You  may  think  of  them  as  His  baptism  and  His  cup ;  as  sufferings  and  trials 
which  He  has  sanctified  for  you  by  first  bearing  them  Himself,  taking  His  own 
deep  draught  before  the  cup  is  handed  on  to  us.  (2)  You  may  think  of  the 
sympathy  of  Christ ;  for  there  is  that  close  oneness  of  life  between  Christ  and 
His  people  that  their  afflictions  become  His.  (3)  There  is  the  strength  supplied 
to,  you  in  sacramental  grace.  The  very  terms  our  Lord  uses  to  denote  His 
sufferings,  and  His  people's,  are  borrowed  from  those  two  great  means  of  grace, 
whereby  our  union  with  Him  is  begun  and  perfected.  We  have  our  baptism 
into  Him,  as  the  guarantee  that  our  souls  have  been  brought  into  a  relation  of 
grace  to  Him,  into  a  capacity  of  receiving  life  from  Him,  which  nothing  but 
our  own  sinfulness  can  render  nugatory.  We  have  that  other  Sacrament  of 
His  Body  and  Blood,  the  cup  of  blessing  and  the  bread  of  life,  wherein  we  can 
again  and  again  draw  nigh  to  Him,  and  unite  ourselves  with  Him,  and  rein- 
vigorate,  as  it  were,  the  wasting  frame  of  spiritual  strength.  This  baptism  and 
this  cup,  since  they  bring  the  faithful  soul  into  such  direct  connexion  with 
Him  through  whom  we  may  do  all  things,  are  able  to  equip  us  for  all  the 
demands  of  patience,  of  sweetness,  of  strength,  which  that  other  baptism,  that 
other  cup,  may  make  upon  us. — Canwi  Turnoek. 


384 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Yer.  37.  Is  ambition  wrong? — What  ties,  as  it  were  with  a  flood  of  waters, 

is  ambition  ?     Ambition  is  an  instinct  The  "  cup,"  then,  which  Jesus  was  to 

of  nature,  a  desire  to  rise ;  and,  like  drink   of  was   one   of   affliction ;    the 

all  other  instincts,  capable  of  good  and  "  baptism  "  with  which  He  was  to  be 

evil.     Satan  took  hold  of  it,  and  said,  baptised    was    that   of    a    cruel    and 

"Ye   shall   be   as    gods."     Jesus    en-  ignominious    death.     And    they    who 

shrined  it,  "  Ye  shall  sit  on  thrones  "  ;  should  follow  Him  in  His  career  were 

"  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father,  to  drink  deep  of  that  cup  of  suffering 

who  is  in  heaven,  is  perfect."     When  and  be  immersed  in  the  darkest  horrors 

a  man  wishes  to  go  out  of  his  own  line  of  human  barbarity, 
into  another,  to  which  evidently  God 

has   not   called   him,  his   ambition   is  Yer-  39-  The  ambitious  person  finds 

wrong.     When  a  man  tries  to  get  to  nothing  difficult,  provided  he  can  but 

the  very  top  of  his  own  line,  his  ambi-  raise    himself— Ke    easily    presumes 

tion  is  right.    When  a  man  seeks  great  uPon  that  whlch  he  cannot  perform, 

things  for  himself,  only  for  himself,  it  to  obtam  that  which  he  cannot  deserve, 

is  a  worldly  ambition.     When  a  man  It  was  but  a  moment  ago,  and  these 

pursues  great  things  for  usefulness,  for  men  were  seized  Wlth  fear  and  amaze- 

the  Church,  for  Christ,  it  is  the  same  ment  at  the  bare  slSht  of  the  way  to 

principle,  but  it  is  consecrated,  pious,  Jerusalem;  but  one   passion   weakens 

and  good.— J".   Vaughan.  another,   and,   like   a    burning   fever, 

supplies   a   man   with   fresh   strength 

Yer.  38.  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask."  and  courage.— P.  Quesnel. 

—Often  we  offer  large  petitions  with  yer  40<  No  trm  honours  are  UgMy 

small  meanings  or  motives,  and  would  won  in  either  eaHh  or  heOrnn.-^None 

be  overwhelmed  if  they  were  granted.  are    arbitrarily    given;    for    to    give 

When  they  ask  for  thrones,  they  ask  honours  for  which  we  are  unfit  would 

the  path  leading  thither— the  discipline  ^    no    kindness.      Besides,   the    true 

fitting    for    them,   the   service    which  crown  is  a  flowering  of  our  nature,  not 

wins  such  influence.-^.  Glover.  a  garland  lifted  and  put  on>     Accord- 

_    Cup  and  baptism.— The .word "cup  {     j      the   right.hand   and    left-hand 

is  often    used   by  sacred    and    other  thrones          to   those    fullest    of    the 

writers  to  signify  the  portion  of  good  Saviour>s  spirit)  and  who>  of  all  meUf 

and  evil  which  is  assigned  to  men  in  have  been  mogt  like  Him  in  their  work 

this  hfe.     It  probably  arose  from  the  and  sacrifice.—^.  Glover. 

custom  in  ancient  times  of  the  master  Zessons.—On  the  whole  incident  note 

of  the  household  distributing   to   his  _h  How  noble  these  men  are  in  their 

children  and  servants  a  certain  sepa-  faultg  .  th     geek  not  m           f 

rate  allowance  of  meat  and  drink  each  or  eage>  but  the  honour  that  comeg  from 

by   himself,  differing   in   quality   and  God#     %  How  graciously  Christ  deals 

quantity    according    to    their    desert.  with  what  ig  fault     ^  ug>     3    How> 

The  same  custom  was  also  observed  in  in  answerin.g  0ur  prayers,  He  has  to 

entertaining  guests  (see  Gen.  xlni.  34)  angwer  not  the          t  WQrd     but  the 

In  allusion  to  which  custom  the  word  gmall  meaning  legt  we  ghould  be  over. 

"cup      is   used   for    the    dispensation  whelmecL      4>    In    the    other    world 

of  Providence-the  Almighty,  as  our  there  wiU  be  nQ  une     al  distribution 

common  Master  and  Father,  appoint-  of  rewardg  but  each  ^j  receive  what 

mg  to  each  one  his  respective  share  ot      g^.g  ym ibid 

suffering  and  enjoyment.     "  Baptism," 

which  signifies  immersion,  is  also  fami-  Yer.  41.  Ambition  of  the  clergy. — 

liarly  used  in  Scripture   to   denote  a  The  ambition  of  clergymen  is  a  great 

person  being  overwhelmed  with  calami-  scandal  in  the  Church,  and  is  frequently 

ic  c  385 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


an  occasion  of  emulations,  enmities, 
divisions,  schisms,  and  wars — of  all 
which  the  displeasure  and  indignation 
of  the  apostles  give  us  an  imperfect 
shadow  and  resemblance.  If  apostles, 
trained  up  with  so  much  care  in  the 
school  of  charity  and  humility,  not- 
withstanding are  not  free  from  this 
vice,  what  effects  will  not  ambition 
produce  in  souls,  wholly  immersed  in 
flesh  and  blood,  which  have  no  motion 
but  from  their  passions,  no  law  but 
that  of  their  own  desires  ! — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  42.  The  principle  of  scramble. 
— There  is  a  strange  ambition  ruling 
in  the  hearts  of  multitudes — to  be 
ministered  to  instead  of  ministering. 
Men  wish  to  get  rather  than  to  give. 
Hence  the  universal  scramble  in  com- 
merce. Hence  the  worldwide  diffusion 
of  the  spirit  of  selfishness — a  spirit 
whose  tendency  is  to  turn  every  man 
into  an  Ishmaelite,  with  his  hands  and 
heart  against  all  other  men,  and  all 
other  men's  against  him.  One  might 
have  expected  men  would  see  that  the 
plan  of  seeking  to  receive  ministry 
rather  than  to  give  it  is  short-sighted 
and  suicidal.  Suppose  you  were  one  of 
an  association  of  a  hundred  persons,  all 
jealous  of  one  another,  each  seeking 
to  take  advantage  of  all  the  rest,  and 
trying  to  get  them  all  to  minister  to 
him.  What  is  likely  to  be  the  result  ? 
Each  will  shut  himself  up  as  in  his 
own  castle  to  defend  himself  against 
all  the  rest.  All  the  energy  that  each 
possesses  will  be  expended  on  promoting 
his  own  particular  advantage ;  and  not 
one  will  get  from  any  of  his  neighbours 
a  really  helping  hand,  if  the  circum- 
stances will  admit  of  the  help  being 
withheld.  This  is  the  principle  of 
scramble — every  one  for  himself  and 
for  himself  alone.  It  has  been  tried 
in  every  country  and  in  every  coterie 
under  heaven,  and  everywhere  with 
lamentable  results.  All  tyrannies  have 
sprung  from  it.  All  wars  have  been 
begotten  by  it.  All  poverty  is  its 
child.  All  household  feuds  and  family 
alienations  are  to  be  traced  to  its 
baleful  influence. — </.  Morison,  D.D. 

386 


Vers.  43,  44.  Mutual  service  is 
something  very  practical.  Do  not  put 
it  aside  as  one  of  the  counsels  of  perfec- 
tion, or  as  a  theory  that  will  not  work  ^ 
on  weekdays.  Mutual  service  may 
be  the  abiding  principle  of  every-day 
life  in  any  station  of  domestic  or  public 
or  mercantile  life.  Think,  first,  how 
much  is  done  for  us — what  service  we 
receive  and  absorb.  Let  our  imagina- 
tion travel  for  a  moment  over  the 
scenes  where  toil  is  even  now  going  on 
for  us,  to  the  far  countries  whence 
come  our  food-supplies — all  the  world 
laid  under  tribute  ;  think  of  our  sailors 
in  their  hard  and  dangerous  work ; 
visit  in  fancy  our  miners,  our  labourers, 
our  factory -workers,  our  clerks,  the 
myriad-handed,  myriad-headed  service 
of  a  great  city.  Think  what  has  been 
the  labour  of  creating  the  civilisa- 
tion, the  conquest  over  nature,  even 
the  delicate  organisation  of  faculties 
that  we  unconsciously  inherit.  Which 
of  us  can  repay  to  the  existing  genera- 
tion, still  more  to  the  world,  the  vast 
debt  we  owe  ?  Are  we  not  indeed 
under  a  sort  of  spell  that  forces  us  to 
sit,  and  be  clothed,  and  carried  about, 
and  amused  by  the  labours  of  others  ? 
No,  it  is  not  so.  You  may  break  the 
spell.  It  is  open  to  all  of  us  to  render 
service  to  others  over  and  above  our 
business  in  life.  We  may  render 
bodily  service  ;  and  we  know  how  high 
a  value  our  Lord  puts  on  the  service 
of  our  bodily  needs.  We  may  diminish 
the  scale  of  our  own  comfort,  that  we 
may  raise  the  standard  of  the  comfort 
of  those  who  work  for  us ;  we  may 
thus  serve  our  own  generation  even 
in  its  physical  needs,  and  this  is  an 
absolute  duty.  But  there  is  other 
service  than  this.  When  material 
nature  is  conquered,  its  wastes  tilled, 
its  wild  beasts  slain,  there  remains  the 
harder  problem  of  conquering  human 
nature,  reclaiming  its  waste  places, 
casting  out  its  evil  spirits.  There  is 
the  noblest  service  of  all,  the  spiritual 
service  of  lifting  the  ignorant  and 
degraded,  of  supplying  "the  spirit- 
ually indispensable — the  bread  of  life." 
Here  are  our  worlds  to  conquer,  our 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  X. 


unknown  seas  to  traverse.  Men  have 
toiled  for  us  in  body,  and  are  toiling, 
that  we  in  our  turn  may  toil  for  them 
and  give  them  light,  and  life,  and  hope, 
and  heaven.  This  is  the  true  mutual 
service,  and  this  we  may  all  render. — 
J,  M.  Wilson,  D.D. 

Ver.  45.  Christ's  ministry  and  self- 
sacrifice. — I.  The  negative  side — "  the 
Son  of  Man  came  not  to  be  ministered 
unto."  This  clears  the  ground.  The 
Son  of  Man  is  not  a  self-seeker.  That 
is  the  meaning  of  the  manger  in  little 
Bethlehem,  the  want  of  a  place  to  lay 
His  head,  the  departure  into  a  moun- 
tain alone  when  they  would  make  Him 
a  king. 

II.  The  positive  and  general  side 
— "  but  to  minister."  This  is  the 
character  of  His  life — the  Son  of  Man 
ministers  to  the  sons  of  men.  He 
restores  health,  brings  back  the  dead, 
speaks  and  there  is  a  great  calm. 
Then  after  a  hard  day's  ministering 
He  rises  a  great  while  before  day  to 
pray — to  pray  for  strength  to  minister 
more.  And  it  was  all  of  His  own  free 
choice.  He  came  to  minister,  and  He 
ministers  still. 

III.  The  positive  and  precise  side 
— "  and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for 
many."  The  first  two  clauses  point  to 
His  life ;  this  points  to  His  death. 
And  it  rises  to  a  climax — this  is  His 
greatest  deed.  He  gave  His  life  for 
many.  So  He  places  a  great  value  on 
His  life.  His  single  life  is  an  equiva- 
lent for  many  lives.  I  am  in  the  circle 
of  the  many.  Like  Paul  I  say,  "He 
loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me." 
— A.  Scott. 

Service  and  sacrifice. — 1.  The  great- 
ness of  God  is,  in  one  point  of  view, 
service.  Every  power  in  nature  is  a 
power  of  God,  so  that  in  steam,  electri- 
city, and  the  like  we  are  in  different 
ways  taking  advantage  of  God's  good- 
ness as  a  servant.  2.  In  all  nature 
God  is  a  servant,  and  finds  joy  in  the 
service.  But  in  redemption  it  is  other- 
wise. This  is  the  highest  service 
God  has  rendered  man,  and  it  has  the 
element  of  sacrifice  in  it.     3.  Thus  the 


death  of  Christ  is  an  example  of  service 
and  sacrifice — of  the  highest  form  of 
service,  service  which  demands  what 
it  is  hard  to  give.  But  there  is  more 
in  it  than  that.  There  is  substitution. 
His  death  was  the  climax  and  consum- 
mation of  a  life  of  ministering ;  but 
it  was  a  death  in  the  sinner's  room, 
without  which  the  sinner  could  not 
have  been  saved. — W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. 

"Even  the  Son  of  Man."— The 
Saviour  was  perfectly  conscious  of  His 
own  intrinsic  elevation  and  dignity. 
It  was  not  because  He  could  do  no 
better  that  He  came  into  the  world 
amid  poverty  and  lived  among  the 
poor.  Of  His  own  free-will,  and 
although  He  was  infinitely  rich,  He 
stooped  into  the  valley  of  humiliation. 
But  He  never  forgot  the  height  from 
which  He  had  descended,  and  back 
to  which  He  was  by-and-by  to  re- 
ascend,  leading  captivity  captive. — 
J.  M orison,  D.D. 

Gifts  to  the  ministering  Christ. — 
He  came  not  to  get,  but  to  give. 
Such  was  His  aim.  But  He  got, 
nevertheless,  and  still  gets,  and  will 
continue  to  get,  through  all  time  and 
through  eternity.  He  cannot  help 
getting.  He  gets  gratitude.  Oh,  how 
much  of  it  !  and  yet  not  one  atom 
more  than  He  deserves.  He  gets 
devotion  of  hearts,  such  as  no  other 
being  ever  gets  or  got.  All  the  noblest 
souls  that  are  either  in  the  higher 
places  of  society  or  in  the  lower  places 
and  the  hidden  nooks  and  corners 
count  it  their  joy  to  do  service  to 
Jesus.  They  do  minister  to  Him,  even 
as  also,  though  on  a  lower  plane,  they 
minister  to  their  fellow-men. — Ibid. 

Christ's  life  the  ransom  for  our  life. — 
The  suggestions  of  this  statement  are 
very  grave.  1.  Our  life  is  forfeit. 
2.  Sin  is  so  great  an  evil  that  even 
God  cannot,  without  sacrifice,  free  us 
from  it.  3.  To  let  us  off  without 
penalty  or  atonement  would  make  us 
indifferent  to  doing  wrong.  4.  In  love 
to  man  God  punishes  sin.  5.  And  to 
save  thoroughly  Christ  shares  with  us 
that  punishment.  Are  we  thankful 
for  the  great  redemption  ?  humbled  by 

387 


chap,  x  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


the  Cross?  saved  by  it?    Be  grave  with  with  the  great  moral  government  of 

the  Saviour's  gravity  in  your  thoughts  the    Father,     something    incalculably 

of  sin  and  of  salvation. — R.  Glover.  better,  and  more   glorious   and   more 

The  needed  ransom. — The  surrender  glorifying   to  the   law,   than   a  mere 

of  the  life  of  Christ  unto  death  was  equivalent  for  all  the  penalties   that 

the  needed  ransom.     No  wonder  !     A  could  have  been  inflicted  on  the  guilty, 

ransom  is  something  valuable.     It  may  — J.  Morison,  D.D. 
be  all  but  invaluable.     Certainly  the  The  ransom  paid  for  all. — The  word 

life  of  Christ  was  inestimably  valuable,  "  many  "  is  not  used  to  suggest  that 

more  valuable  by  far  than  myriads  of  the  ransom  was  paid  for  fewer  than 

other   lives — the    lives    of   nobles,   or  all.     It  is  another  idea  altogether  that 

princes,  or  kings,  or  queens.     Yet  He  is  intended.     All  are  not  always  many. 

came   into    the   world,   and  into   our  All  the  queens  of  Europe  are  not  many. 

nature,  that  He  might  give  His  life  a  All  the  great  poets  of  the  world  are 

ransom  for  many.     Oh,  the  incalculable  not  many.     All  the  inhabitants  of  a 

value  of  a  life  such  as  Christ's — a  life  hamlet  are  not  many.     But  the  persons 

so  rich  in  possibilities   of   enjoyment,  for  the  salvation  of  whose  souls  the 

and  so  rich  in  goodness,  unselfishness,  Son  of  Man  gave  His  life  as  a  ran- 

and  every  kind  of  moral  beauty  and  som  were  and  are  many — incalculably 

excellency  !     Thus  valuable  and  invalu-  numerous.     Yet  not  one  was  left  out 

able  was  the  life  of  Jesus ;  and  yet  it  of  His  regard  and  interest  and  sym- 

was  that   very  value  that   made  the  pa  thy. — Ibid. 
surrender   of   His    life,   in   connexion 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  46—52. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xx.  29-34 ;  Luke  xviii.  35-43,  xix.  1-28.) 

Bartimeus. — There  are  three  powers  which,  interacting  upon  one  another, 
work  out  the  drama  of  life.  There  is  the  power  within  us,  the  power  of  self. 
There  is  the  power  without  us,  the  power  of  the  world.  In  proportion  as  we 
can  make  the  power  within  operative  on  the  power  without  we  are  successful. 
But  above  these  two  powers  there  is  a  third — the  power  of  God  over  all.  If  the 
power  of  self,  working  in  conjunction  with  the  power  of  the  world,  brings  about 
success  or  failure,  the  realisation  of  the  power  of  God  is  the  way  to  that  best 
success — the  success  over  ourselves  and  the  world,  the  victory  of  character.  The 
story  of  Bartimeus  shews  us  a  man  in  difficulties,  and  exhibits  his  conduct  when 
face  to  face  with  these  three  powers  of  life. 

I.  The  world  is  the  first  power  we  shall  think  of  in  this  case. — 1.  The 
world  has  its  power.  There  is  something  which  the  world  can  do,  and  that 
something  is  what  the  world  on  the  whole  very  readily  does.  Bartimeus  found 
that  this  was  the  case.  The  world  gave  pity,  also  practical  evidence  of  its  pity. 
The  world  gave  its  alms.  2.  But  the  world  has  its  limitations.  The  one  thing 
which  the  man  most  needed  was  the  one  thing  which  the  world  could  not  give. 
The  world  could  not  supply  his  real  need,  for  his  real  need  was  sight.  The  world 
seldom  can  reach  the  real  needs  of  men.  She  can  bestow  honour,  she  can 
alleviate  suffering,  but  she  cannot  heal  or  satisfy  the  soul.  The  gifts  which 
the  world  gave  to  Bartimeus,  kind  and  well  intentioned  as  they  were,  were  just 
those  gifts  which  reminded  him  most  keenly  of  his  misfortune.  In  receiving 
the  alms  of  men  he  felt  his  dependence.  Men  in  all  ages  have  found  out  the 
world  and  its  limitations.  Like  Severus,  who  had  reached  the  supreme  height 
of  power,  they  have  tried  everything  and  found  that  everything  was  naught. 
Like  Augustine,  they  have  found  that  the  heart  which  is  made  for  greater  things 

388 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  x. 


cannot  rest  in  the  lesser.  Like  Lacordaire,  they  have  exclaimed  with  indignation 
and  loathing,  "  I  cannot  leave  my  heart  in  this  heap  of  mud."  The  world,  great, 
kindly,  and  generous  as  it  is,  cannot  satisfy  the  desire  of  the  soul.  3.  The  world, 
too,  has  its  moods.  The  society  in  which  we  live  is  kindly  and  well  disposed. 
It  is  not  hard-hearted,  but  it  likes  to  help  in  its  own  way,  and  it  is  relentless 
in  its  opposition  to  those  who  strike  out  their  own  line.  Society  has  its  moods 
as  well  as  its  limitations.  The  story  of  Bartimeus  illustrates  this,  for  it  not 
only  shews  us  what  the  world  could  do  and  what  it  could  not  do,  but  it  also 
shews  us  what  it  did  do.  The  action  of  the  world  in  this  respect  may  be  described 
in  one  word — hindrance.  It  hindered  the  man  in  his  attempt  to  realise  his  most 
cherished  dreams.  He  desired  to  be  no  longer  a  profitless  and  dependent  creature, 
but  to  be  restored  to  the  possession  of  sight,  and  with  it  to  that  capacity  for 
self -direction  which  is  requisite  for  true  life.  The  moment  came  when  it  was 
within  his  grasp.  The  Healer,  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  endowed  with  the 
powers  of  restoration,  was  near.  Bartimeus  lifted  up  his  voice  in  earnest  appeal. 
Society  chided  Bartimeus  for  his  cry.  "  They  rebuked  him  that  he  should  hold 
his  peace."  The  picture  is  true  to  life.  The  world  is  intolerant  of  the  best 
aspirations  of  men ;  it  resents  the  attitude  of  those  who  take  a  line  of  their  own. 
The  world  has  a  way  of  stifling  the  utterance  of  the  great  and  unexpected  voices 
which  are  lifted  up  in  earnest  desire  or  noble  appeal.  Genius  has  found  it  so. 
The  world  has  hindered,  frowned  upon,  and  too  often  clamoured  down  the  man 
whose  intellectual  range  was  beyond  the  grasp  of  average  dulness.  Philanthropy 
has  found  the  same.  Even  a  Howard  and  a  Wilberforce  cannot  escape  detrac- 
tion ;  and  society  has  shouted  against  those  who  have  cried  aloud  in  the  cause 
of  humanity,  and  has  bidden  them  to  hold  their  peace.  The  reformer  has  fared 
no  better.  There  are  always  Eliabs  to  be  found  who  chide  the  aspirations 
of  young  faith.  And  even  apostles  proclaiming  a  nobler  life  and  spiritual 
emancipation  to  society  will  be  clamoured  against  as  those  "  who  turn  the 
world  upside-down." 

II.  What  the  man  Bartimeus  did  for  himself. — There  are  two  principles  which 
are  essential  to  independent  success.  One  is  the  principle  of  self-dependence, 
the  other  is  that  of  single-mindedness.  Bartimeus  illustrates  both  these 
principles  in  his  action.  1.  He  was  self-reliant.  He  took  his  own  course.  He 
did  not  abandon  his  purpose  because  of  the  clamour  of  the  crowd.  This  is  a 
lesson  which  life  soon  teaches  us.  Men  begin  life  by  hoping  much  from  their 
patrons.  They  know  men  who  have  influence ;  they  look  forward  to  an  easy 
grasp  upon  the  object  of  their  desires.  But  they  soon  unlearn  this  delusion. 
Like  Dr.  Johnson,  they  discover  that  too  often  the  office  of  patron  is  to  leave 
the  struggling  man  unassisted,  and  to  encumber  him  with  help  when  he  no 
longer  stands  in  need  of  it.  Men  soon  discover  that  their  own  best  patron  is 
their  self-reliance.  It  is  this  quality  which  Bartimeus  displays.  He  is  heedless 
of  the  crowd ;  but  it  is  not  the  heedlessness  of  a  coarse  and  indifferent  nature. 
It  is  the  heedlessness  of  a  man  who  knows  what  he  wants,  and  who  has  the 
courage  to  dare  all  to  secure  it.  It  is  the  quality  of  soul  which  Wellington 
displayed  when  he  planted  himself  on  the  heights  of  Torres  Vedras,  and  held 
to  his  choice  in  spite  of  the  clamour,  abuse,  and  accusations  of  home  ignorance. 
He  knew  what  he  was  doing,  and  he  was  in  earnest.  He  was  not  to  be  turned 
aside  from  his  purpose  because  of  the  empty  chatter  of  impatient  and  inexperi- 
enced criticism.  2.  The  companion  virtue  of  self-reliance  ought  to  be  single- 
mindedness.  Single-mindedness  seeks,  by  concentration  of  all  the  attention 
and  all  the  powers  upon  one  thing,  to  secure  the  end  in  view.  It  is  the  spirit 
which  will  not  be  turned  aside  or  seduced.  It  knows  that  some  sacrifice  is 
needed,  and  it  is  ready  to  pay  the  price.  It  compels  the  attention  of  the  whole 
mind  to  the  thing  in  hand.     It  will  cast  overboard  the  most  precious  freightage 

389 


chap.  x.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


in  order  to  reach  its  harbour  successfully.  This  spirit  also  Bartimeus  displays. 
It  is  necessary  for  him  to  reach  Christ.  He  must  run  no  risk  of  failure.  The 
long  robe  about  him  was  useful  enough  as  he  sat  by  the  gate  of  the  city  the 
whole  day  through.  But  it  might  prove  a  hindrance  to  his  advancing  footsteps. 
There  is  no  hesitation  in  his  action.  If  there  is  any  chance  of  its  being  in 
his  way,  it  must  be  sacrificed.  He  flings  aside  his  robe,  and  so,  unimpeded, 
advances  towards  the  Lord.  Greatness  possesses  the  courage  which  can  sacrifice 
what  may  be  useful,  when  it  may  also  prove  a  temptation  or  an  encumbrance 
to  its  advancing  march.  Csesar  knows  when  to  burn  his  boats.  Industry  knows 
that  many  a  social  pleasure  and  many  an  hour  of  relaxation  must  ruthlessly 
be  sacrificed  if  ultimate  victory  is  to  be  achieved.  Like  Lord  Eldon,  it  knows 
that  the  way  to  success  is  to  live  like  a  hermit  and  work  like  a  horse  !  The 
message  of  successful  lives  is  the  lesson  of  a  single-minded  devotion  to  the  object 
in  view.  That  which  is  the  counsel  of  successful  lives  is  the  command  of  religion. 
For  the  sake  of  the  higher  life  the  encumbrances  of  the  lower  must  be  laid 
aside.  The  garments  of  the  old  life  must  be  left  behind.  When  the  soul  is 
filled  with  one  strong  passion,  such  single-mindedness  becomes  easy.  To 
Bartimeus  it  was  as  nothing  to  cast  aside  his  robe.  He  thirsted  for  sight. 
What  was  raiment  compared  with  such  a  dowry  ?  To  those  who  thirst  for 
the  vision  of  God  no  sacrifice  seems  too  great.  Indeed,  it  is  only  those  who 
are  possessed  of  a  spirit  ready  to  sacrifice  all  who  can  behold  that  light. 

III.  What  Christ  did  for  him.— When  we  have  spoken  of  self-reliance  and 
single-mindedness,  we  have  not  said  the  last  word  about  success.  As  far  as 
temporal  life  is  a  conflict  with  the  world  these  two  are  indispensable  factors 
of  success.  But  there  are  ranges  of  life  which  lie  outside  the  compelling  forces 
of  energy  and  self-denial.  Life  is  not  merely  energy,  industry,  achievement. 
There  is  place  for  repose  and  worship  as  well  as  for  zealous  activity.  Man  is 
not  merely  a  busy,  achieving  sort  of  creature;  he  is  a  receptive  being  also. 
Self-assertion  works  well  against  the  world;  but  in  the  presence  of  Him  who 
is  greater  than  the  world,  the  spirit  of  self-assertion  drops  away.  As  Bartimeus 
stands  before  Christ  his  whole  demeanour  is  changed.  He  is  no  longer  the 
strong  and  stout  pleader  of  his  own  cause  and  his  own  need.  Jesus  commanded 
him  to  be  brought ;  and  when  he  stands  before  Christ  he  is  silent  till  Christ 
speaks.  He  stands  as  one  who  waits.  It  is  right  that  it  should  be  so.  There 
are  gifts  which  come  only  to  waiting  souls.  There  are  utterances  which  are 
open  to  all  the  world,  which  only  they  hear  who  wait  to  hear — 

"Celestial  harmonies  then  only  heard 
When  the  heart  listens." 

This  calm  and  trustful  attitude  of  mind  has  a  kind  of  natural  devoutness  in  it. 
It  recognises  a  source  of  inspiration  greater  than  itself.  Great  men  of  different 
faiths  and  different  ages  have  realised  this.  Avicenna  found  his  subtlest 
syllogisms  given  him  after  meditation  and  worship.  Haydn  prayed  before 
he  composed.  Many  a  man  of  genius  can  truly  say  of  some  of  his  best  works, 
"They  were  given  to  me."  Inspirations  are  for  men  who  can  and  will  wait 
upon  God.  In  the  Albert  Memorial  Chapel  at  Windsor  one  of  the  most  sug- 
gestive pictures  on  the  walls  exhibits  this  aspect  of  the  soul  waiting  for  God's 
gift.  David  and  the  harpists  of  Israel  are  represented  with  their  instruments 
in  their  hands.  Their  fingers  hang  listless  upon  ithe  strings.  Their  heads 
are  bowed.  All  the  appliances  of  their  art  are  in  their  grasp,  but  the  Divine 
gift  is  not  yet.  They  are  waiting  for  the  inspiration  from  on  high.  So  Barti- 
meus, the  man  of  energy  and  self-assertion,  waits  before  Christ  for  the  gift 
which  his  force  and  his  determination  cannot  seize,  which  must  be  given  as 
love's  free  gift.  He  waits  till  Christ  asks,  "What  wilt  thou  that  I  should 
do  unto  thee  ? "    To  say  that  our  Lord  shewed  love  to  the  blind  man  is  to 

390 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  €Bap.  X. 


say  what  is  true  enough  and  obvious  enough ;  but  it  does  not  help  us  to  the 
full  appreciation  of  Christ's  personal  dealing  with  Bartimeus.  His  action 
shewed  much  more  than  a  vague  and  limp  benevolence.  His  love  was  ever 
exerted  with  an  everlasting  moral  influence  upon  those  whom  He  helped. 
1.  There  was  sensibility.  Here,  amid  the  clamour  of  the  crowd,  He  detects 
the  voice  of  want,  just  as  at  another  time  He  knew  at  once  when  the  weary 
and  suffering  woman  laid  a  trembling  finger  on  His  robe.  His  love  was  of  that 
delicate  and  responsive  order  which  makes  kindness  twice  welcome  in  being  so 
obviously  the  outcome  of  a  sympathetic  and  ready  heart.  2.  There  was  decision. 
No  clamour  or  noise  of  discountenancing  crowds  could  stay  the  march  of  His 
love.  Jesus,  in  the  midst  of  the  outcry  against  Bartimeus,  stood  and  commanded 
him  to  be  brought.  In  one  moment  the  clamouring  crowd  changes  its  demeanour. 
"  Be  of  good  cheer.  Rise :  He  calleth  thee."  Nothing  succeeds  like  success. 
A  little  firmness,  and  the  strong  man  brings  the  whole  multitude  over  to  his 
side.  The  man  who  knows  what  he  means,  and  has  the  requisite  firmness 
to  pursue  it  regardless  of  noise,  is  like  a  solid  mass  floating  on  the  surface  of 
the  water  which  draws  the  purposeless  jetsam  to  its  side.  3.  There  was 
judgment.  He  does  not  heal  the  blind  man  all  at  once.  There  is  a  pause ; 
there  is  a  question.  "  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  ?  "  The 
need  was  obvious,  but  it  was  well  the  man  should  express  it.  The  interchange 
of  speech  created  a  feeling  of  confidence;  the  bond  between  him  and  Christ 
became  one  through  which  moral  sympathy  might  flow.  It  was  no  cold  exercise 
of  power ;  it  was  no  heartless  magic  which  restored  the  sight.  It  was  power 
exercised  by  wise  and  loving  sympathy.  Here  we  touch  a  principle  which  may 
shed  light  upon  the  mystery  of  prayer.  Why  go  through  the  form  of  asking 
God  to  help  us,  when  God,  if  He  be  all-knowing,  knows  all  about  our  needs  ? 
If  all-powerful,  He  can  help  us.  If  all-good,  He  will.  What  need  is  there, 
then,  of  prayer  ?  But  is  prayer  only  so  to  be  measured  ?  Is  the  establishment 
of  sympathetic  confidence  between  the  soul  of  man  and  the  love  of  God  to 
count  as  nothing?  4.  There  was  capability.  With  Christ,  love  and  power 
were  one.  "  Receive  thy  sight."  The  words  are  spoken,  and  Bartimeus  looks 
up.  The  restoration  of  sight  is  restoration  to  his  true  and  complete  manhood. 
He  can  see  things  as  they  are.  It  is  this  which  Christ  can  bestow  on  all. 
It  is  the  power  to  see  in  their  true  relationship  the  great  forces  of  life — the 
world,  self,  God — the  force  without  us,  the  force  within  us,  and  the  power 
above  us.  It  is  the  power  to  see  God  as  He  is — in  His  purity  and  lovingness 
as  well  as  in  His  might.  It  is  the  power  to  see  ourselves  as  we  are  in  our 
weakness  and  dependence,  in  our  sinfulness  and  foolishness.  It  is  the  power 
to  see  the  world  and  life  as  they  are,  and  therefore  to  see  life  not  as  the 
opportunity  of  accumulating  the  things  which  perish,  but  as  the  opportunity 
of  being  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  of  doing  what  we  ought  to  do. — Bishop 
Boyd  Carpenter. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  46.  The  uncomfortable  situation  I.  The   uncomfortable   situation  Of 

of  the  blind. — In  what  uncomfortable  the  blind. — 1.  They  are  deprived  of  the 

circumstances  are  some  of  the  children  benefit  of  light,  which  is  so  cheerful 

of  men  placed  !     One  is  deprived  of  his  and  animating.     2.  They  are  deprived 

eyes,  another  of  his  ears,  a  third  of  his  of  the  advantages  of  reading,  either  for 

legs,  and  a  fourth  of  his  judgment.     Of  instruction  or  entertainment.     3.  They 

all  these  there  are  none  more  pitiable  are  incapable  of  following  the  common 

and  helpless  than  the  blind.  occupations  of  life,  by  which  to  earn 

391 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


their  bread.  4.  They  are  in  a  great 
measure  dependent  upon  others. 

II.  Some  means  by  which  to  alle- 
viate the  miseries  of  the  blind. — 1.  To 

furnish  them  with  some  employment, 
which  may  prevent  them  from  being  a 
burden  to  the  public.  2.  That  the  occu- 
pation be  of  such  a  nature  as  gently  to 
engage  the  mind  without  fatiguing  it, 
and  by  diverting  their  attention  to 
make  them  less  a  burden  to  themselves. 
3.  That  they  be  taught  the  principles 
of  the  religion  of  Jesus,  which  are 
so  nobly  suited  to  afford  consolation 
under  the  hardest  lot,  and  to  render 
them  contented  and  happy. — D.  John- 
ston, D.D. 

Ver.  47.  In  the  Nazarene  Barti- 
meus  saw  the  Messiah.  Why  did  he 
so  ?  Why  more  than  the  rest  of  the 
crowd  that  followed?  Can  we  doubt 
the  reason  ?  Can  we  be  in  a  difficulty 
about  it?  He  was  blind  now.  But 
there  had  been  a  time,  perhaps,  when 
he  was  able  to  see.  If  so,  he  had  used 
his  eyesight  for  a  heavenly  purpose. 
He  had  read  and  marked  and  inwardly 
digested  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
Happy  Bartimeus!  He  can  see 
clearer  than  the  most  keen-eyed.  The 
penetration  of  philosophy  is  nothing 
to  his ;  he  understands  all  mysteries ; 
he  pierces  the  thick  palpable  darkness ; 
he  sees  through  the  veil  of  the  out- 
ward sense  the  glory  and  the  majesty 
of  Him  who  is  the  Light  of  the  world. 
What  an  example  for  us  to  follow ! 
We  may  not  be  dark-visioned,  like 
Bartimeus,  but  we  shall  have  our 
hours  of  the  heart's  darkness,  or  of 
moral  twilight.  How  shall  we  prepare 
for  them?  Most  surely  in  the  way 
that  he  prepared — by  reading  God's 
Holy  Word,  by  diving  into  its  hidden 
depths,  by  praying  for  enlightenment, 
by  committing  to  our  memories,  and 
by  treasuring  up  in  them  the  holy 
texts  of  promise  or  of  prophecy  which 
lie  like  jewels  within  that  great  sea  of 
wonder. 

"Ver.  48.  Want  and  faith  not  to  be 
silenced. — Could  their  hands  stop  the 

392 


mouth  of  him  who  spoke  and  felt  as 
Bartimeus  did  ?  Nay ;  for  he  had  a 
double  tongue.  His  faith  and  his 
misery  alike  were  speaking.  You  may 
stifle  almost  anything  else ;  but  there 
is  a  life  and  an  energy  in  want  and  in 
faith  which  nothing  can  overpower. 
Did  the  winds  and  the  waves  ever 
prevent  the  seaman  that  has  been 
washed  overboard  from  crying  for  the 
cable  to  be  thrown  him  ?  Is  not  his 
cry  the  mightier  for  their  tempestuous 
riot  ?  It  is  the  cry  of  nature,  the 
cry  of  that  voice  which  God  has  im- 
planted in  all.  But  the  cry  of  the 
new  nature  is  in  this  case  added  to 
that  of  the  old ;  it  is  the  cry  of  grace 
and  of  nature  too.  It  is  nature  that 
feels  the  want ;  it  is  grace  that  believes 
the  remedy. 

Ver.  49.  "  Commanded  him  to  be 
called." — By  this  circumstance  Christ 
administered  reproof  and  instruction  : 
reproof,  by  ordering  those  to  help  the 
poor  man  who  had  endeavoured  to 
check  him ;  instruction,  by  teaching 
us  that,  though  He  does  not  stand  in 
need  of  our  help,  He  will  not  dispense 
with  our  services,  that  we  are  to  aid 
each  other,  that  though  we  cannot 
recover  our  fellow-creatures  we  may 
frequently  bring  them  to  the  place  and 
means  of  cure. — W.  Jay. 

Ver.  50.  Renunciation. — The  action 
of  the  blind  man  in  casting  aside  his 
garment  in  order  to  come  to  Jesus 
means  to  us  much  more  than  a  mere 
revelation  of  personal  character — a 
disclosure  of  the  faith  and  zeal  of  the 
blind  beggar.  It  may  be  taken  as 
a  type  of  the  removal  of  the  hin- 
drances of  whatever  kind  that  prevent 
a  soul  from  coming  to  Jesus  as  its 
Saviour.  1.  The  necessity  of  casting 
away  our  garment  of  self -righteousness 
in  order  to  come  to  Jesus.  Every  man 
thinks  that  he  has  whereof  to  boast — 
his  acts  of  worship  or  kindness,  his 
upright  character  and  goodness  of 
heart.  We  are  slow  to  believe  that 
God  does  not  ask  some  valuable  con- 
sideration at  our  hands,  and  that  if 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  X. 


we  would  seek  His  blessing  it  is  not 
necessary  for  us  to  be  furnished  with 
some  price  or  equivalent  to  give.  We 
have  our  formularies,  our  ordinances, 
our  offerings,  which  we  think  will  open 
our  way ;  and  we  exact  from  ourselves 
certain  spiritual  qualifications  as  a 
preparation.  But  if  we  are  to  be 
cured  of  our  blindness  and  poverty,  we 
must  fling  this  garment  aside.  If  we 
would  get  near  enough  to  Jesus  to  get 
personal  benefit  from  Him,  we  must 
have  the  conviction  inwrought  in  us 
of  our  utter  destitution  of  true  religion. 
We  must  be  brought  to  believe  that 
we  do  not  believe.  We  must  hide  our 
poverty  no  longer  from  ourselves.  We 
must  honestly  and  humbly  take  the 
beggar's  place  and  raise  the  beggar's 
cry,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 
2.  The  necessity  of  casting  away  the 
garment  of  effete  forms  and  methods 
in  order  to  grow  in  knowledge  and 
grace.  Religion  itself  is  often  made 
a  hindrance  in  the  way  of  coming 
nearer  to  Christ.  What  would  happen 
if,  when  the  warm,  quickening  sun  of 
spring  is  calling  every  living  thing  to 
new  growth  and  development,  the 
buds  of  the  trees  persisted  in  retaining 
the  scales  in  which  they  were  wrapped 
up,  merely  because  they  had  been 
indispensable  in  preserving  the  vitality 
of  their  buds  during  the  winter's  frosts 
and  storms  ?  There  would  be  no 
foliage,  no  blossom  or  fruit,  no  forma- 
tion of  new  wood  for  man's  use,  no 
shade  for  the  earth  and  its  creatures. 
The  whole  economy  of  nature  would 
suffer  grievous  loss  and  be  deranged. 
Nay,  more,  the  arrested  buds  them- 
selves would  either  die  into  hard  knotty 
excrescences,  or  would  be  transformed 
into  formidable  thorns.  And  so,  if 
we  persist  in  retaining  the  old  effete 
wrappings  of  religion  merely  because 
they  were  formerly,  at  an  earlier  stage 
of  growth,  indispensable,  when  the 
summer  sun  of  a  higher  faith  is 
quickening  us  and  calling  us  to  a  fuller 
Christian  life,  we  shall  become  mere 
dry  sticks  in  the  vineyard  of  the 
Lord,  providing  no  shade  or  fruit  or 
beauty  for   ourselves   or  others;    we 


shall  derange  the  whole  economy  of  the 
Church  by  our  deadness  and  conserva- 
tion, and  our  arrested  growth  will  be 
transformed  into  a  wounding  thorn. 
3.  The  necessity  of  casting  away  in 
the  end  the  garment  of  the  body  by 
death  in  order  to  be  present  with  the 
Lord,  and  to  be  effectually  cured  of 
all  our  poverty  and  blindness.  All 
nature  is  deciduous.  The  bud  casts  off 
its  scales  in  order  to  produce  its 
foliage;  the  flower  casts  off  its  petals 
in  order  to  produce  the  fruit;  the 
fruit  decays  in  order  to  liberate  the 
seed;  the  seed  dies  in  order  that 
the  germ  may  grow.  The  worm  leaves 
behind  its  silken  tomb  in  order  to 
emerge  a  butterfly.  And  at  every 
stage  of  advancing  life  some  old  gar- 
ment that  suited  an  old  purpose  is 
cast  away.  So  we  cast  away  our  body 
every  seventh  year  in  order  to  grow 
and  mature  our  physical  nature.  And 
in  the  end  we  must  cast  away  our 
body  itself  in  order  to  finish  our 
development  and  emerge  into  ampler 
life.  As  the  growth  of  the  young 
foliage  of  spring  from  the  cast-off 
husks  of  autumn  is  a  process  of  life 
and  not  of  death,  so  in  the  expansion 
of  the  soul  through  the  casting  off  of 
the  body  death  loses  all  the  elements 
which  make  it  death.  It  is  a  process 
of  life  and  development — in  the  har- 
mony, and  not  out  of  the  harmony,  of 
the  Divine  order.  A  higher  miracle 
than  that  wrought  upon  Bartimeus 
will  be  performed  upon  us ;  and  what 
this  world  under  the  bright  sunshine 
was  to  him  when  his  eyes  were  couched 
of  their  films,  and  he  saw  the  glory 
of  nature  for  the  first  time,  this  in 
a  far  grander  form  will  be  the  heavenly 
world  that  shall  burst  upon  our  purified 
vision,  and  we  shall  see  the  glorious 
form  of  Jesus  in  the  light  in  which  He 
dwells.  We  shall  see  Him  as  He  is, 
and  we  shall  be  changed  into  the  same 
image.  Surely  it  is  worth  casting 
away  the  garment  of  the  body  ;  surely 
what  things  are  gain  to  us  in  this 
world  we  may  well  count  loss,  to  have 
such  a  revelation  and  experience  as 
that ! — H.  Macmillarty  D.D. 

393 


CHAP.   X. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  52.  "  Thy  faith  hath  made  thee 
whole." — Ask  for  this  faith,  if  you  have 
it  not.  Exercise  it  if  you  have  it.  It 
is  the  appropriator  of  every  blessing ; 
it  is  the  hand  which  lays  hold  of  every 
blessing,  yea,  which  puts  on  Christ  Him- 
self. Grace  stands,  so  to  speak,  above 
us,  holding  out  the  mantle  of  blessed- 
ness ;  faith  raises  its  hand,  takes  the 
mantle,  and  puts  it  on.  Poor,  blind, 
naked,  ignorant,  wretched,  as  we  may 
be,  yet  come  we  in  faith,  come  we  in 
tears,  in  penitence,  in  deep  contrition, 
and  yet  in  faith  to  the  Friend  of  peni- 
tents ;  and  there  is  not  a  stain  we 
lament  which  shall  not  be  wiped  out, 
nor  a  heart- wound  which  shall  not  be 
healed. 

Following  Jesus. — So  with  us,  when 
our  eyes  are  opened  we  follow  Jesus  in 
the  way.  Before  that  we  walk  in  our 
own  way,  in  the  way  of  the  world ; 
we  follow  the  multitude  to  do  evil,  we 
follow  our  own  sinful  lusts  and  passions ; 


we  choose  our  own  way  instead  of  God's 
way  ;  we  prefer  the  path  which  is  most 
pleasant,  most  easy,  most  profitable  ; 
but  when  our  eyes  are  opened  all  is 
changed,  we  learn  to  say,  "  I  loved  to 
choose  and  see  my  path ;  but  now — 
lead  Thou  me  on."  Thus  we  come  to 
follow  Jesus  in  the  way ;  and  that  way 
is  the  way  of  holiness,  the  narrow  way 
which  leads  to  life.  It  is  not  always 
a  smooth  way ;  it  climbs  up  the  Hill 
Difficulty,  and  anon  winds  down  into 
the  Valley  of  Humiliation ;  it  passes 
through  a  garden  of  Gethsemane,  a 
place  of  agonised  prayer  ;  it  leads  to 
a  cross,  a  lifelong  cross  sometimes  ;  it 
carries  us  to  a  grave,  but,  thank  God, 
a  grave  from  which  the  stone  is  rolled 
away,  and  which  is  bright  with  the 
light  of  a  glorious  resurrection.  And 
withal  it  is  a  way  of  pleasantness,  and 
a  path  of  peace,  of  peace  such  as  the 
world  cannot  give,  and  it  ends  in 
heaven. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    X 


Ver.  1.  "As  He  was  wont" — Wondrously 
expressive  words.  Like  a  tiny  straw,  they 
shew  the  steady  movement  of  a  mighty 
current.  Constancy  is  there,  never-failing 
and  inseparably  allied  to  the  good.  Christ's 
whole  being  was  but  one  great  undivided 
habit  of  holiness.  We  have  to  "grow  up 
unto  Him  in  all  things."  In  this  upward 
growth  we  are  forming  habits  which  make 
for  righteousness  and  holiness  with  in- 
creasing certainty.  They  have  a  mutual 
influence.  Habits  make  acts  surer.  Acts 
confirm  habit.  Our  Christlikeness  is  not 
to  be  measured  by  the  goodness  of  a  par- 
ticular act ;  neither  by  that  of  a  series 
fitfully  performed.  It  is  rather  to  be  gauged 
by  such  a  steady  trend  of  spirit  and  deed 
toward  all  goodness  as  will  lead  men 
abidingly  to  expect  and  confidently  to  affirm 
that  we  are  acting  thus  and  so  wherever  we 
are.  A  young  man  was  leaving  for  a  distant 
part  of  the  country.  A  friend  in  bidding 
him  good-bye  remarked,  "  We  need  not 
tell  you  to  work  for  God  wherever  your  lot 
may  be.  We  know  you  will."  A  mother 
was  being  told  of  a  certain  notable  example 
of  resistance  to  temptation  on  the  part  of 
a  young  officer  in  the  army.  While  ex- 
pressing her  admiration  thereat,  she  was 
informed  that  he  who  thus  nobly  lived  was 
her   boy.      Amid   grateful    tears    she    ex- 

894 


claimed,  "  Is  that  my  boy  ?  Is  that  my 
Will  ?  It's  just  like  him.  I  knew  he  would 
do  so — as  he  was  wont." 

Ver.  8.  "  They  twain  shall  be  one  flesh." — 
The  parting  of  man  and  wife  in  the  sight 
of  God  is  like  the  rending  of  limb  from 
limb.  Imagine  some  dungeon :  the  smoking 
torch  gives  a  fitful  flame ;  the  air  is  foul ; 
the  prisoner  is  brought.  Tie  his  feet  and 
hands  ;  stretch  him  on  the  rack.  Turn  your 
wheels,  ye  unfeeling  executioners,  until  the 
great  beads  stand  on  his  forehead,  until  the 
eyeballs  seem  ready  to  start  from  their 
sockets ;  turn  them ;  what  matter  though 
he  yell  and  scream  ;  turn  them  ;  turn  them 
till  the  cracking  bones  and  quivering  sinews 
can  hold  no  longer  !  Turn  them  till  limb 
from  limb  the  poor,  quivering,  feeling  mass 
settles  still  in  death.  Horrible !  Yet  it  is 
only  rending  "one  flesh."  That  ghastly, 
terrible,  soul-revolting  tragedy  is  a  parable. 
It,  in  the  physical  world,  is  like  divorce 
in  the  spiritual.  Some  sickening  accident, 
when  groans  and  shrieks  and  cries  tell  of 
anguish,  shadows  forth  for  us  what  divorce 
is  like  in  God's  sight.  God's  Word  thus 
likens  divorce  and  murder — murder  cruel 
and  barbarous. 

Ver.  14.  Brought  to  Christ  in  childhood. — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   X. 


Many  of  the  ablest  and  noblest  of  Christian 
teachers  were  brought  to  the  Saviour  in 
childhood.  The  martyr  Polycarp  was  only 
nine  years  old.  when  he  gave  himself  to 
Christ.  Matthew  Henry  and  Isaac  Watts 
were  no  older.  Archbishop  Fenelon  was  a 
mere  child  when  his  heart  awoke  to  the 
love  of  God  ;  William  Channing  could  not 
remember  the  time  when  he  first  turned  to 
Christ ;  Robert  Hall  was  a  sincere  Christian 
when  eleven  years  old,  and  became  a  student 
for  the  ministry  when  but  fourteen.  Baxter 
was  only  a  child  when  he  sought  the 
Saviour ;  Jonathan  Edwards  sat  at  the  feet 
of  Jesus,  Coleridge  Patteson  was  devout 
and  prayerful,  Fletcher  of  Madeley  "  began 
to  feel  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in 
his  heart " — each  at  seven  years  of  age. 
Frederick  W.  Robertson  became  a  decided 
and  courageous  soldier  of  Christ  in  boyhood  ; 
Thomas  J.  Comber,  the  heroic  pioneer  of 
the  Congo,  gave  his  heart  to  Jesus  and 
devoted  himself  to  mission  work  ere  he  was 
thirteen ;  and  John  Foster  was  not  four- 
teen when  he  found  peace  with  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  It  would  be  easy  to 
enlarge  the  list ;  but  surely  enough  has  been 
said  to  encourage  us  to  lead  the  children  to 
immediate  decision  for  Christ.  Let  us  seek 
to  enrol  them  now.  Let  us  encourage  them 
to  come,  with  their  toys  in  their  hands, 
to  be  blessed  by  Christ.  The  kingdom  of 
heaven,  which  is  open  to  publicans  and 
sinners,  is  not  closed  to  the  little  ones  He 
loves. 

Ver.  15.  Total  renunciation. — A  high- 
caste  Brahmin  came  to  receive  holy  baptism. 
He  approached  the  font  wearing  the  sacred 
thread  which,  among  his  Hindoo  co- 
religionists, was  the  badge  of  his  belonging 
to  the  "twice  born,"  and  entitled  him  to 
little  short  of  religious  worship  from  those 
of  a  lower  caste.  But  at  the  moment  when 
he  answered,  "  1  renounce  them  all,"  he 
stripped  off  the  sign  of  idolatrous  pre- 
eminence and  trampled  it  under  his  feet. 

Ver.  16.  Blessed  by  the  good. — Says  Dr. 
Samuel  Cox :  "  When  I  was  a  boy,  I  was 
taken  into  my  father's  library  to  be 
1  blessed '  by  those  two  great  missionaries 
John  Williams  and  William  Knibb ;  and  to 
this  moment  I  remember  how  proud  and 
happy  it  made  me  to  have  their  hands  laid 
on  my  head,  and  to  hear  the  kind  words 
they  said.  It  made  me  feel  very  'good,' 
at  least  for  a  little  while  ;  and  I  think  that 
somehow,  though  I  don't  at  all  know  how 
that  should  be,  I  am  the  better  for  it  to  this 
day." 

"He  loved  little  children." — An  earnest 
and  successful  minister  of  the  gospel  who 
died  a  few  years  ago  was  possessed  of  a 


beautiful  ambition.  Expressed  in  words  at 
fitting  times,  it  had  also  constant  expression 
in  his  life.  This  is  what  he  often  said :  "  I 
should  like  my  epitaph  to  be,  '  He  loved 
little  children,  and  tried  to  do  them  good.'  " 
This  single  sentence  sheds  a  flood  of  light 
on  the  character  of  the  man  who  uttered  it. 
Our  loves  determine  what  we  are.  Little 
children  belong  to  the  heavenly  kingdom, 
and  are  therefore  in  the  Lord's  love.  A 
real  love  for  little  children,  then,  denotes 
a  love  for  heavenly  things.  A  real  love  is 
not  simply  a  fondness  for  bright,  pretty 
ways  and  winning  graces,  but  a  love  that 
takes  in  childhood  as  a  whole,  that  can 
bear  patiently  with  perversity  and  naughti- 
ness, that  forgets  self  in  love  for  the  child 
and  in  desire  to  bring  it  to  the  best  and 
highest  place  possible.  A  real  love  for 
children  leads  to  just  such  an  ambition  as 
possessed  this  servant  of  the  Lord,  "who 
tried  to  do  them  good." 

Care  for  children. — A  lady  missionary  in 
the  East  tells  that  one  day  a  woman  came 
to  her  with  a  baby,  whom  she  had  found  in 
a  ditch.  The  poor  child  had  been  cast  out 
by  its  own  father — as  thousands  of  others 
in  heathen  countries  have  been — because  it 
was  "  only  a  girl."  In  begging  the  lady  to 
take  charge  of  the  very  unattractive  object 
that  was  presented  to  her  (it  was  naked  and 
covered  with  mud),  the  woman  said,  "  Please 
do  take  this  little  thing;  your  God  is  the 
only  God  that  teaches  to  be  good  to  little 
children." 

Ver.  19.  A  classical  parallel. — The  resem- 
blance which  a  passage  of  Menander,  in 
Hirelius,  bears  to  the  Scriptural  command- 
ments, is  remarkable,  and  is  certainly  not  to 
be  ascribed  to  imitation,  but  to  the  breadth, 
compass,  and  universality  of  the  thought,  as 
well  as  the  home  appeal  they  make  to  the 
moral  sense  and  our  general  nature.  "  If 
any  one,  O  Pamphilius,  think  that  by  merely 
offering  a  sacrifice  he  can  arrive  at  the 
favour  of  God,  he  has  an  unworthy  opinion 
of  Him,  and  will  find  himself  mistaken.  He 
must  become  a  man  of  virtue,  beneficial  to 
society ;  must  not  pollute  virgins,  nor  com- 
mit adultery,  nor  steal,  nor  murder ;  and  the 
wife,  house,  horse,  youths,  and  maids  of 
another  he  must  not  covet.  Sacrifice  there- 
fore to  God  with  justice  and  benevolence  ; 
let  your  purity  be  in  your  hearts  rather  than 
in  your  garments." 

Ver.  21.  Altogether  wrong.  —  The  rich 
young  ruler  came  to  hear  what  little  deco- 
rations might  now  be  added  to  the  super- 
structure that  he  has  laboriously  built, 
and  he  is  made  to  feel  that  he  is  wrong 
to  the  foundation.  He  is  in  the  position 
of  a  man  who  comes  to  his  medical  adviser 
complaining  of  a  slight  uneasiness  which 

395 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


he  supposes  a  tonic  or  a  change  of  air  may 
remove,  and  is  told  that  he  has  heart 
disease  or  cancer.  Or  he  is  in  the  position 
of  a  sanguine  inventor,  who  has  spent  the 
best  years  of  his  life  on  a  machine,  and  at 
last  puts  it  into  the  hands  of  a  practical 
man  merely  to  get  the  fittings  adjusted  and 
steam  applied,  and  is  told  that  the  whole 
thing  is  wrong  in  conception  and  can  never 
by  any  possibility  be  made  to  work. — 
M.  Bods,  B.D. 

One  error  fatal. — The  boy  goes  through  a 
long  sum  with  great  accuracy  and  despatch, 
but  one  mistake  in  the  first  line  makes  his 
whole  calculation  useless.  It  only  takes 
one  disease  to  kill  a  man.  His  brain  may 
be  sound,  his  lungs  untouched,  all  his  organs 
but  one  may  be  in  a  healthy  condition  ;  but 
if  one  vital  organ  be  attacked  all  the  other 
healthy  organs  will  not  save  him.  So  it  is 
in  character.  One  vice  is  sufficient  to  destroy 
the  whole  man. — Ibid. 

"  One  thing  "  may  keep  a  soul  from  eternal 
life. — But  is  it  right  to  make  such  destinies 
turn  upon  a  single  point  ?  That  depends  on 
the  point.  In  other  relations  one  thing  may 
bring  ruin.  At  a  crisis  in  worldly  interests, 
one  wrong  step  may  lead  to  remediless 
disaster.  One  error  in  trade  may  make  you 
bankrupt ;  one  medicine  in  sickness  may 
give  the  turn  to  your  life ;  for  the  lack  of 
one  anchor  a  vessel  is  lost.  In  religion,  how 
may  "  one  thing  "  keep  a  soul  from  heaven  ? 
If  there  is  a  determined,  persistent  unwill- 
ingness to  be  saved,  that  would  seem  suffi- 
cient, would  it  not  ?  Well,  that  is  the  "  one 
thing  "  referred  to  by  Christ.  And,  further- 
more, it  is  some  "  one  thing "  which  makes 
the  unwillingness.  The  ruler  loved  his  great 
possessions  more  than  he  loved  his  soul. 
But  the  "  one  thing  "  may  take  many  forms. 
It  may  be  one  appetite,  one  ambition,  one 
companionship,  one  pleasure.  Every  one  is 
called  to  choose  between  one  set  of  influences 
that  helps  religion  and  some  other  set  which 
hinders.     He  cannot  bend  in  both  directions. 

One  thing  needful. — One  jewel  only  was 
needed  to  complete  the  circlet;  one  link 
only  to  perfect  the  chain ;  one  step  only  to 
touch  the  goal ;  one  movement  only,  and  the 
beautiful  gate  opens  into  the  temple  of  God. 
But  the  one  thing  lacking  may  be  of  all 
others  the  most  essential — the  one  thing 
needful.  He  who  is  dying  of  thirst  lacks 
only  a  cup  of  cold  water ;  he  who  is  perish- 
ing of  hunger  lacks  only  a  morsel  of  bread. 
A  corpse  lacks  only  life. 

The  broken  bridge. — Hossein  said  to  his 
aged  grandfather  Abbas,  "Oh,  grandfather, 
why  are  you  reading  the  gospel  ? "  Abbas 
made  answer,  "I  read  it,  oh,  my  son,  to 
find  the  way  to  heaven  !  "  Hossein,  who  had 
received  some  instruction  in  an  English 
school,  smiling,  said,  "  The  way  is  plain 
enough ;  worship  but  the  one  true  God, 
and  keep  the  commandments."    The  man, 

396 


whose  hair  was  silver  with  age,  replied, 
"Hossein,  the  commandments  of  God  are 
as  a  bridge  of  ten  arches,  by  means  of 
which  the  soul  might  once  have  passed  to 
heaven.  But,  alas !  the  bridge  has  been 
broken.  There  is  not  one  among  us  who 
has  not  broken  the  commands  again  and 
again."  "  My  conscience  is  clear,"  cried 
Hossein  proudly  ;  "  I  have  kept  all  the  com- 
mandments— at  least,  almost  all,"  he  added, 
for  he  felt  that  he  had  said  too  much. 
"  And  if  one  arch  of  the  bridge  give  way 
under  the  traveller,  doth  he  not  surely 
perish  in  the  flood,  though  the  nine  other 
arches  be  firm  and  strong  ?  " 

False  and  true  power. — I  once  asked  a 
rich  man,  says  an  American  writer,  by  what 
motive  he  had  been  prompted  in  accu- 
mulating his  wealth.  "  Power,"  said  he, 
"  power  "  ;  and  then,  clenching  his  hands 
and  teeth,  and  contracting  all  his  muscles 
to  their  highest  tension,  he  added,  "  1 
wanted  power,  and  I  have  got  it."  "  Yes," 
said  I ;  u  you  have  power  over  any  quantity 
of  water  or  steam,  and  over  any  number 
of  wheels.  You  have  power  too  over  the 
bodies  of  certain  classes  of  men ;  but  do 
good  with  your  wealth,  and  you  will  become 
a  ruler  over  all  men's  hearts  ;  nor  will  your 
reign  cease  when  you  die,  but  will  last  as 
long  as  you  are  remembered ;  and  the  love  of 
men  will  not  suffer  your  memory  to  perish." 

Amiability  among  the  worldly. — Father 
Taylor  being  once  asked  if  a  certain  re- 
lative of  his  had  been  converted,  replied, 
"  No !  he  is  not  a  saint,  but  he  is  a  very 
sweet  sinner  1 " 

Ver.  22.  A  way  from  Jesus. — He  went 
away ;  he  went  away  sorrowing — sorrow- 
ing to  go,  and  yet  he  went.  It  is  like 
what  you  may  see  sometimes  when  you 
wander  in  the  night-time  by  the  side  of 
some  sleeping  sea.  You  may  see  the  path 
of  the  moonbeam  bright  and  silvery  upon 
the  darkened  water.  You  may  see  some 
ship  pass  out  of  the  darkness  into  that  path- 
way of  the  moonlight ;  and  as  the  light 
falls  upon  it,  every  sail,  every  spar,  almost 
every  rope,  gleams  in  the  moonshine,  and 
you  may  then  see  it  pass  out  of  that  path 
into  the  night  which  hides  it  evermore  from 
our  view.  Is  not  this  the*  history  of  this 
soul,  passing  for  a  moment  under  this  light 
from  the  face  of  Jesus,  but  passing  sorrow- 
ing from  it  into  the  darkness  of  an  endless 
night — the  very  sorrow  shewing  that  he 
knew  what  a  sacrifice  he  was  making, 
sorrowing  because  he  knew  that  he  was 
leaving  Jesus,  sorrowing  because  he  did  not 
wish  to  leave  Him,  sorrowing  because  if 
he  could  only  have  had  the  world  with  Him 
he  would  have  had  Him,  but  sorrowing 
because  he  could  not  give  up  the  world 
that  he  might  have  Him,  sorrowing  the 
sorrow  of  the  world  which  worketh  death  1 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  X. 


Looking  back  after  insight. — One  hour  of 
supreme  insight,  one  hour  of  clear,  sur- 
passing vision,  and  life  is  never  the  same 
again,  and  cannot  be  the  same  again.  A 
man  who  has  dwelt  from  his  childhood 
without  passing  beyond  the  mountainous 
bounds  of  the  valley  in  which  he  was  born, 
who  sees  only  so  much  of  God's  work  as 
lies  within  the  mountain-range,  who  has 
judged  man  and  judged  God  by  the  little 
life  of  that  little  plain,  can  be  happy,  and 
in  a  sense  can  be  large.  But  once  let  him 
climb  one  of  those  mountain-crests,  let  him 
see  the  undulating  plains  of  Life  stretching 
away  to  the  distant  horizon,  let  him  feel 
the  larger  argument  of  God's  Spirit,  and 
understand  that  God  is  not  conditioned  and 
determined  by  a  few  families  in  a  little 
plain,  and  he  cannot  go  back  and  be  as 
happy  and  as  strong  as  he  was.  This 
youth  was  in  such  a  plight.  The  old  life 
of  piety  and  benevolence  had  been  suffi- 
cient in  its  time ;  it  gave  him  as  large  an 
environment  as  his  soul  desired  or  could 
conceive  of,  and  in  the  perfect  harmony  of 
himself  and  his  environment  he  was  happy 
and  strong.  But  Christ  had  just  lifted  him 
to  a  new  height,  had  shewn  him  a  nobler 
heritage,  had  touched  his  soul  and  brought 
it  for  a  moment  up  to  the  high  pitch  of 
real  Christlike  heroism.  And  the  young 
man  saw,  but  felt  he  had  not  courage  to 
cut  his  old  moorings  and  take  the  new 
inheritance,  and  so,  as  he  looked  back,  the 
vision  he  had  seen  belittled  and  shadowed 
his  past  inheritance.  There  was  the  cause 
of  his  sadness ;  he  was  not  ready  to  go  on, 
and  there  was  nothing  to  go  back  to  except  a 
squeezed  and  exhausted  past. — C.  A.  Berry. 

The  Hamlet  of  the  New  Testament. — What 
was  it  that  drove  Hamlet  mad?  It  seems  to  me 
his  madness  arose  out  of  the  breach  between 
his  perceptions  and  his  aptitudes,  between  his 
enlarged  and  haunting  sense  of  duty  and 
his  faltering  ability  to  face  and  fulfil  it. 
Hamlet  could  have  been  happy  under  any 
one  of  three  conditions, — had  he  never  been 
forced  out  of  the  quiet  retreat  of  a  simple 
and  placid  life ;  or,  being  so  forced,  had  he 
possessed  a  rougher  nature,  not  sensitive  to 
moral  appeal,  seared  and  hardened  by  coarse 
contact  with  the  world  ;  or,  having  a  healthy 
conscience  and  recognising  sacred  obliga- 
tions, had  he  boldly  obeyed  the  vision  which 
called  to  duty.  It  was  because  he  saw  and 
felt  more  than  he  had  nerve  to  execute  that 
a  discord  arose  which  destroyed  the  sym- 
metry and  sanity  or  his  mind.  And  so  it  was 
with  this  youth. — Ibid. 

Vers.  23-27.  Tlie  peril  of  property. — No 
wonder  that  Anthony,  the  father  of  monas- 
ticism  in  Egypt,  went  out  from  the  church 
in  Thebes  where  this  passage  had  been  read, 
to  give  away  his  ancestral  estates,  to  put  his 
sister  into  the  fellowship  and  care  of  pious 


virgins,  and  to  go  himself  poor  and  alone 
into  the  solitude  of  the  cliffs  1  No  wonder 
that  in  the  early  centuries  the  vow  of  poverty 
became  the  threshold  article  of  every  Chris- 
tian life,  and,  with  its  twin  principle  of 
celibacy,  became  the  foundation  of  the  great 
monastic  orders  in  the  Church  !  But  surely 
a  rich  man  can  be  a  Christian,  and  a  poor 
man  may  be  a  sinner !  For  a  ragged  coat 
and  a  diamond  ring  have  no  moral  quality 
or  spiritual  character  in  themselves.  Ah, 
no!  It  is  not  money,  but  the  love  of  it, 
that  keeps  men  out  of  the  Father's  house. 
And  so,  as  we  strike  the  bell  or  fire  the  gun 
to  arouse  the  sleeping  village,  or  dash  cold 
water  in  the  face  of  the  fainting,  the  Son  of 
God  would  bestir  men  to  the  possibilities 
of  peril  which  lurk  in  the  possession  of 
property. 

Covetous  to  the  last. — We  read  not  long 
ago  the  experience  of  an  English  clergy- 
man called  to  the  death-bed  of  a  wealthy 
parishioner.  As  he  kneeled  at  his  bedside, 
his  pastor  twice  requested  him  to  take  his 
hand  as  he  prayed  for  his  upholding  in  that 
solemn  hour;  but  the  dying  man  declined 
to  give  it.  After  the  end  had  come,  and 
they  had  turned  down  the  coverlet,  his  rigid 
hands  were  found  holding  the  safe-key  in 
their  death-grip.  No  hand  of  fellowship  for 
his  minister,  because  he  could  not  loose  his 
hold  upon  the  key  to  the  safe-vault  1  The 
power  of  hands  which  hold  in  their  palms 
such  possibilities  of  help  and  service  is 
beyond  our  arithmetic  to  compute.  The 
peril,  here  and  hereafter,  which  waits  upon 
the  misuse  of  such  a  power  is  infinite. 

Impedimenta. — Lord  Bacon,  who  was  a 
prince  of  modern  worldly  philosophers,  and 
who  never  spoke  merely  from  a  spiritual 
plane  in  his  treatment  of  practical  themes 
of  thought,  says  emphatically  :  "  I  cannot 
call  riches  better  than  the  baggage  of  virtue. 
The  Roman  word  is  better,  impedimenta ;  for 
as  the  baggage  is  to  an  army,  so  is  riches  to 
virtue  :  it  cannot  be  spared,  nor  left  behind, 
but  it  hindereth  the  march;  yea,  and  the 
care  of  it  sometimes  loseth  or  disturbeth 
the  victory."  Then,  in  commenting  on  the 
suggestion  that  riches  will  enable  men  to 
purchase  themselves  successes,  Bacon  adds 
that  "  certainly  great  riches  have  sold  more 
men  than  they  have  bought  out." 

The  weight  of  riches. — An  opulent  merchant 
having  received  a  sum  of  money,  was  putting 
the  ducats  one  by  one  into  a  pair  of  scales, 
in  order  to  ascertain  that  they  were  not  too 
light.  "For  my  part,"  said  Gotthold,  who 
was  present,  "  I  should  be  more  afraid  of 
their  being  too  heavy."  "  How  so  ?  "  inquired 
the  merchant.  "  Do  you  not  think,"  re- 
joined Gotthold,  "  that  money  is  too  heavy 
when  bedewed  with  the  blood  of  the  poor,  the 
sweat  of  the  laborious,  and  the  tears  of  the 
widow  and  the  orphan,  or  when  loaded  with 
the  curses  of  those  who,  by  fraud  or  violence, 

397 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


have  been  robbed  of  it.  I  will  hope,  how- 
ever, that  there  are  no  pieces  of  this  descrip- 
tion in  that  heap  of  yours,  or  rather  I  will 
not  fear  that  there  are  any.  Suffer  me, 
however,  without  offence,  to  express  the  wish 
that  you  will  always  make  your  conscience 
your  scales,  and  weigh  in  it  your  dollars  and 
ducats  to  ascertain  that  they  are  of  proper 
weight,  and  have  been  honestly  acquired. 
Many  a  man  never  learns,  until  he  is  strug- 
gling with  death,  how  difficult,  or  rather 
impossible,  it  is  to  force  a  soul  burdened 
with  unrighteous  gain  through  the  strait  gate 
which  leadeth  unto  life.  Take  heed,  then, 
that  no  such  gain  ever  burdens  yours.  The 
more  he  carries,  the  more  the  pilgrim  sweats 
and  pants  as  he  climbs  the  steep ;  and  the 
more  the  conscience  is  oppressed  with  dis- 
honesty and  fraud,  the  harder  will  the 
struggle  of  a  death-bed  be." 

Ver.  23.  The  giver  of  wealth  forgotten. — 
Among  the  legends  of  Hindostan  is  one  that 
illustrates  these  words  of  our  Saviour.  One 
Kawana,  a  Brahmin,  was  offered  by  his  god 
anything  that  he  might  name.  Eawana 
prayed  his  god  to  bestow  upon  him  the 
government  of  the  world.  His  god  immedi- 
ately granted  his  wish.  Then  he  prayed  for 
ten  heads,  with  which  to  see  and  rule  the 
world.  After  Rawana  had  well  fortified 
himself,  and  was  surrounded  by  riches, 
honours,  and  praise,  he  forgot  his  god 
Ixora,  and  bade  all  the  people  worship  him, 
an  act  which  greatly  angered  the  god  Ixora, 
and  he  destroyed  Rawana.  How  true  to 
human  nature  was  the  course  of  Rawana  ! 
And  how  many  we  find  to-day  that  have 
forgotten  the  God  that  gave  them  all  they 
possess  ! 

Ver.  24.  Peril  of  riches. — When  Alex- 
ander the  Great  sent  a  rich  present  to 
Phocian  the  Athenian,  the  latter  asked  why 
he  had  been  the  object  of  so  splendid  a 
gift.  On  hearing  that  it  was  because  the 
king  considered  him  the  most  virtuous  man 
in  Athens,  he  replied,  "  If  he  wishes  me 
to  preserve  my  virtue,  let  him  keep  his 
riches,"  and  forthwith  sent  back  the  pre- 
sent to  Alexander. 

Hard  to  leave. — When  Garrick  shewed 
Dr.  Johnson  his  fine  house,  gardens,  statues, 
pictures,  etc.,  at  Hampton  Court,  what 
ideas  did  they  awaken  in  the  mind  of  that 
great  man  ?  Instead  of  a  flattering  com- 
pliment, which  was  expected,  "  Ah  !  David, 
David,"  said  the  doctor,  "these  are  the 
things  which  make  a  death-bed  terrible  !  " 

Ver.  25.  Rich  men  like  camels. — It  were 
no  bad  comparison  to  liken  mere  rich  men 
to  camels  and  mules ;  for  they  often  pursue 
their  devious  way  over  hills  and  mountains, 
laden  with  Indian  purple,  with  gems, 
aromas,    and    generous    wines    upon    their 

398 


backs,  attended,  too,  by  a  long  line  of 
servants  as  a  safeguard  on  their  way.  Soon, 
however,  they  come  to  their  evening  halting- 
place,  and  forthwith  their  precious  burdens 
are  taken  from  their  backs  ;  and  they,  now 
wearied  and  stripped  of  their  lading  and 
their  retinue  of  slaves,  shew  nothing  but 
livid  marks  of  stripes.  So,  also,  those  who 
glitter  in  gold  and  purple  raiment,  when 
the  evening  of  life  comes  rushing  on  them, 
have  naught  to  shew  but  marks  and  wounds 
of  sin  impressed  upon  them  by  their  evil 
use  of  riches. — St.  Augustine. 

Ver.  27.  All  things  possible  to  God. — I 
was  pacing  to  and  fro,  awaiting  a  train 
within  a  railway  station.  There  were  others 
in  the  great  room,  and  it  was  singular  none 
of  them  had  observed  it  before — a  sparrow 
imprisoned  within  the  sliding  window 
sashes.  He  had  thought  he  saw  a  way,  but 
it  was  a  glass  wall.  He  had  beaten  his 
wings  to  tatters,  and  his  fair  plumage  into 
rags.  The  glass  was  opaque  with  the  stains 
of  his  denuded  cuticle,  and  streaked  with 
blood.  He  may  have  been  in  this  crystal 
dungeon  for  hours,  and  fighting  till  he  sank 
into  quiet  from  exhaustion,  from  which 
reviving  again  to  fight  as  when  I  first  heard 
him.  Could  I  be  denied  it,  as  I  sprang  to 
that  heavy  frame  and  sent  it  with  a  bang 
to  the  ceiling,  letting  the  oppressed  go  free  ? 
Does  not  Christ,  the  Sent  to  open  prison 
doors,  feel  a  grander  propulsion  to  liberate 
unhappy  men,  who  thought  they  saw  a  way, 
but  found  themselves  in  dreadful  bonds  of 
poverty,  or  pain,  or  dishonour,  or  conscious 
sin  1  Suppose  the  sparrow  had  piped  out 
to  me,  in  shrill  treble,  that  he  wanted  no 
mercy,  but  justice ;  that  he  could  conduct 
his  own  life ;  that  he  scorned  to  be  beholden 
unto  any  one.  It  is  an  analogue  of  many 
human  souls,  who  are  whipping  their  wings 
to  shreds  against  the  impossible,  while  to 
God  all  things  are  possible,  even  their 
setting  free. — E.  J.  Haynes. 

Ver.  28.  Choosing  Clirist .—  The  poet 
George  Herbert  was  so  highly  connected, 
and  in  such  favour  at  court,  that  at  one 
time  a  secretaryship  of  state  seemed  to  him 
not  unattainable.  But  he  gave  up  all  such 
prospects  for  the  work  of  a  humble  clergy- 
man, and  in  looking  back  upon  the  time 
when  he  made  his  choice,  he  could  say : 
"  I  think  myself  more  happy  than  if  I  had 
attained  what  then  I  so  ambitiously  thirsted 
for.  And  I  can  now  behold  the  court  with 
an  impartial  eye,  and  see  plainly  that  it  is 
made  up  of  frauds  and  bitters  and  flattery, 
and  many  other  such  empty,  imaginary, 
and  painted  pleasures — pleasures  which  are 
so  empty  as  not  to  satisfy  when  they  are 
enjoyed.  But  in  God  and  His  service  is  a 
fulness  of  all  joy  and  pleasure,  and  no 
satiety." 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   X 


Ver.  29.  "  For  My  sake." — George  Miiller, 
the  founder  of  the  Ashley  Down  Orphan- 
age,  once    said  that  more  than    £800,000 
had  been  given  him  towards  the  support  of 
more  than  eight  thousand  orphans — a  work  of 
which  a  sceptic  once  remarked  that  it  came 
nearer   proving    the    truth   of    Christianity 
than  anything  he    had  ever    seen    before. 
But  the  history  of  it  all  may  be  written  in 
three   words — "  For  My   sake."     And   how 
many  hospitals  too  have  been  built  because 
Christ  healed  the  sick  !     You  may  grave 
"  For  My  sake "   on  a  good  many  of  the 
foundation  stones.     Again,  Christian  people 
are  found  to  live  and  work  in  the  East  End 
of  London — Christian  people  who  have  the 
means  to  live  in  comfort  and  luxury  else- 
where, but  who  choose  to  live  where  they 
do    in  order  that  they  may   "  rescue   the 
perishing  and  care  for  the  dying."    Why  ? 
" For  My  sake"      How    is  it   that  loving 
bands  all  over  England  are  willing  to  sew 
and  make  garments  in  order  that  the  gospel 
may   reach  the   zenanas    of  India?      Here 
again  (and  the  list    might   be    multiplied 
indefinitely)  it    is    done   "  For    My  sake" 
Young  men    of    wealth  or    talent   forsake 
home    and    friends  and    all    in    order    to 
preach  Jesus  Christ  in  India,  China,  Japan, 
or  Africa.     Henry  Martyn  leaves  his  books, 
David  Livingstone   his  loom,   Mackay  the 
engineering  shed,   Charles   Studd   the  bar, 
and  Stanley  Smith  fresh  from  the  University 
crew — all  these  and  myriads  more  of  whom 
the   world  is   not  worthy  have   gone  forth 
for  life  or  death,  and  here  again  the  only 
explanation  is,  "  For  My  sake." 

Vers.  32-34.  Will-power. — There  is  nothing 
to  be  done  in  life  without  an  inflexible  will. 
"To  be  weak  is  to  be  miserable,  doing  or 
suffering."  And  our  Master  has  set  us  the 
example  of  this,  that  unless  there  run 
through  a  man's  life,  like  the  iron  frame- 
work on  the  top  of  the  spire  of  Antwerp 
Cathedral,  on  which  graceful  fancies  are 
strung  in  stone,  unless  there  run  through  a 
man's  life  the  rigid  bar  of  an  iron  purpose 
that  nothing  can  bend,  the  life  will  be 
naught  and  the  man  will  be  a  failure. 
Christ  is  the  pattern  of  heroic  endurance, 
and  reads  to  us  the  lesson,  resist  and  per- 
sist, whatever  stands  between  us  and  our 
goal. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Invincible  courage. — It  was  as  if,  in  the 
old  days,  some  excommunicated  man  with 
the  decree  of  the  Inquisition  pronounced 
against  him  had  gone  into  Rome  and  planted 
himself  in  the  front  of  the  piazza  before  the 
buildings  of  the  Holy  Office,  and  lifted  up 
his  testimony  there. — Ibid. 

The  way,  of  the  Cross. — An  old  ecclesi- 
astical legend  tells  how  an  emperor  won 
the  true  Cross  in  battle  from  a  pagan  king, 
and  brought  it  back,  with  great  pomp,  to 
Jerusalem,  but  found   the   gate  wallecl  up, 


and  an  angel  standing  before  it,  who  said, 
11  Thou  bringest  back  the  Cross  with  pomp 
and  splendour ;  He  that  died  upon  it  had 
shame  for  His  companion ;  and  carried  it  on 
His  back,  barefooted,  to  Calvary."  Then, 
says  the  chronicler,  the  emperor  dis- 
mounted from  his  steed,  cast  off  his  robes, 
lifted  the  sacred  Rood  on  his  shoulders,  and 
with  bare  feet  advanced  to  the  gate,  which 
opened  of  itself,  and  he  entered  in.  We 
have  to  go  up  the  steep  rocky  road  that 
leads  from  the  plain  where  the  Dead  Sea  is 
to  Jerusalem.  Let  us  follow  the  Master, 
as  He  strides  before  us,  the  Forerunner  and 
the  Captain  of  our  salvation. — Ibid. 

Stern  resolution  in  face  of  danger. — With 
unshaken  resolution  Jesus  pressed  forward 
to  receive  the  crown  of  thorns,  and  to  pass 
through  the  terrible  crisis  that  awaited  Him. 
We  may  remember,  by  way  of  illustration, 
the  words  of  Julius  Cassar,  when  he  em- 
barked in  a  raging  storm  to  obtain  the  sooner 
aid  for  the  famine-stricken  people  of  Rome  : 
"  It  is  necessary  that  I  should  go,  but  it  is 
not  necessary  that  I  should  live  !  "  Thus  a 
brave  man  is  inspired  by  the  circumstances, 
and  supported  by  the  enthusiasm  of  those 
around ;  but  in  our  Lord's  case,  in  the 
solitariness  of  His  mysterious  life,  He  "  treads 
the  winepress  alone." 

The  loneliness  of  the  great.—  Great  men,  as 
a  rule,  are  not  club  men.  The  thinkers  of 
the  world  have  not  been  society  fractions. 
In  their  isolation  they  remind  us  of  the  oak, 
which  is  never  seen  in  a  crowd,  forming 
what  may  be  properly  termed  a  wood.  An 
oak  forest  is  nothing  more  than  a  poetical 
figure  ;  for  the  oak  stands  alone,  or  mingled 
with  other  trees  of  different  foliage,  which 
it  dominates  with  venerable  feudal  sove- 
reignty. We  have  one  Dr.  Johnson  and  a 
number  of  Boswells  round  about  him. 

Ver.  38.  Ambition. — A  boy  at  play  hit  a 
ball  so  that  it  fell  on  the  roof  of  a  high  barn. 
He  climbed  up  the  rugged  door,  and,  cling- 
ing by  a  hole  in  the  brickwork,  reached  the 
top  of  the  barn,  rubbing  off  the  skin  from 
his  fingers,  tearing  his  clothes,  and  run- 
ning great  risk  of  breaking  his  neck.  He 
gained  the  ball ;  but  was  it  worth  climbing 
for? 

Ver.  39.  Use  of  suffering. — In  the  manu- 
facture of  paper  the  filthy  rags  are  torn  to 
pieces,  reduced  to  pulp,  bleached  and  washed 
till  it  is  white  as  snow,  then  shaken  to  and 
fro  till  fibre  crosses  fibre  and  gives  firmness 
to  the  sheet,  and  ironed  by  hot  cylinders  till 
made  smooth,  and  even.  Such  is  the  effect 
of  tribulation. 

Ver.  44.  Life  as  service. — Confucius  being 
asked  if  he  could  in  one  word  express  the 
whole  duty  of  life,  said,  "  Will  not  the  word 
serve  do  ?  " 

399 


CHAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Ver.   45.  The  law  of  service. — 
Not  to  be  served,  0  Lord,  but  to  serve  man 

All  that  I  can, 
And  as  I  minister  unto  his  need, 

Serve  Thee  indeed ; 
So  runs  the  law  of  love  that  hath  been  given 

To  make  earth  heaven. 

What  if  the  task  appointed  me  be  mean ! 

Wert  Thou  not  seen 
To  gird  Thee  with  the  towel,  as  was  meet, 

To  wash  the  feet 
Of  Thy  disciples,  whom  Thou  wouldst  be- 
friend 

Until  the  end  ? 
For  meanest  work  becomes  the  noblest  part, 

When  a  great  heart, 
Pitiful,  stoops  to  comfort  our  distress, 

Or  to  impress 
A  sealing  kiss  on  penitence  fresh  clad 

In  raiment  sad. 

And  if  the  wanderer's  feet  be  soiled  and  sore, 

So  much  the  more 
He  needs  a  tender  hand  to  cleanse  and  heal, 

And  make  him  feel 
There  is  no  task  that  love  will  shrink  to  do 

Life  to  renew. 

Walter  C.  Smith,  B.D. 
A  throne  for  the  ministering  Christ. — The 
other  day  I  sat  in  St.  Paul's,  and  by  my  left 
was  Nelson's  monument.  Why  was  that 
monument  erected?  Nelson  told  his  men 
that  England  expected  every  man  to  do  his 
duty,  and  he  did  what  he  felt  was  his  duty. 
And  because  he  served  his  country,  his 
country  honours  his  memory.  I  have  in  my 
heart  a  throne,  and  on  that  throne — Christ. 
Why  ?  Because  He  came  to  minister,  and 
has  ministered  to  me. — A.  Scott. 

Ver.  46.  The  Mind  beggar  and  the  multi- 
titude. — Origen  gives  a  very  pretty  alle- 
gorical turn  to  this  narrative.  He  makes 
the  blind  man,  who  calls  on  Jesus,  an  Ebion- 
ite  ;  and  the  multitudes  around,  who  com- 
manded him  to  hold  his  peace,  believers  from 
among  the  heathen  converts,  who  generally 
held  the  more  exalted  views  in  regard  to  the 
Passion  of  the  Messiah ;  and  then  he  con- 
tinues thus :  But  although  the  multitudes 
commanded  him  to  be  silent,  yet  he  said  the 
more  because  he  believed  in  Jesus,  although 
his  faith  was  of  a  human  kind ;  and  he 
cried  out  aloud,  and  said  to  Him,  "  Son  of 
David,  have  mercy  on  me  !  "  How  different 
would  many  things  have  been  if  men,  in  this 
spirit  of  love  and  freedom,  had  always 
allowed  the  grace  of  the  Redeemer  to  fall  on 
all  who  call  upon  Him  !  if  they  had  always 
taken  into  account  the  various  stages  in  the 
Christian  progress  up  to  the  ripeness  of 
manhood  in  the  faith,  and  had  not  wished 
to  force  different  spirits  all  at  once  into  the 
same  measure  and  degrees ! 

Treatment  of  the  poor. — The  Jews  had  a 
law  that  there   should    be    no   beggar    in 

400 


Israel.  England  has  statutes  also  to  cor- 
rect impudent  poor  and  to  provide  for 
impotent  poor;  but,  as  it  is  observed,  our 
laws  have  a  better  prologue  than  epilogue ; 
they  be  well  penned,  but  ill  kept ;  and  so 
this  good  order  is  neglected  among  us,  as  it 
was  about  Jericho,  to  the  great  scandal  of 
Christian  religion  and  dishonour  of  our  Eng- 
lish nation.  It  is  written  of  the  Athenians 
that  they  punished  idle  persons  as  heinous 
offenders.  And  the  Egyptians  had  a  law 
that  every  man  should  bring  his  name  to  the 
chief  ruler  of  the  province  and  show  what 
trade  he  followed.  The  Romans  enacted 
severe  statutes  against  such  as  negligently 
left  their  ground  untilled.  Among  the 
Chinese  every  man  is  set  about  some- 
what, according  to  his  strength  and  years ; 
one  labours  with  his  hand,  another  with 
his  foot,  etc. ;  and  (which  is  most  admir- 
able) they  keep  in  Canton  four  thousand 
blind  men,  unfit  for  other  service,  to  grind 
corn  and  rice  for  the  people.  If  either  the 
law  were  believed  as  gospel,  or  the  gospel  kept 
as  law,  such  as  would  not  labour  should  not 
eat.  Loiterers  and  sturdy  rogues  should  be 
sent  to  prison,  or  some  place  where  they 
might  work  well ;  and  as  for  such  as  cannot 
labour,  it  is  fit,  we  that  are  strong,  should 
help  to  bear  the  burdens  of  the  weak,  being 
eyes  to  the  blind  and  feet  to  the  lame. — 
Dean  Boys. 

"Ver.  47.  Soul  sight. — One  day  a  cry  went 
down  the  street,  every  one  fled,  as  a  runaway 
horse  came  tearing  along  the  road.  A  little 
blind  girl,  left  all  alone,  stood  in  the  road, 
not  knowing  which  way  to  turn  to  escape 
from  death.  She  could  not  see,  and  no 
human  hand  was  there  to  guide.  She  did 
not  try  to  run,  but  sinking  down  on  her 
knees  just  where  she  was,  with  upturned 
face  to  the  heaven  the  bodily  eye  could  not 
see,  she  commended  herself  to  the  Father  of 
all.  The  horse  dashed  on — it  was  upon  her ! 
It  swerved  and  thundered  past,  leaving  the 
lonely  kneeling  child  unhurt.  That  little 
one's  bodily  eye  could  not  see,  but  the  soul 
eye,  looking  out  beyond  all,  saw  the  Maker 
and  Creator  of  all.  So  sometimes  blind 
folk  see  more  than  those  who  think  they  see. 

Ver.  50.  "  And  he,  casting  away  his  gar- 
ment, rose,  and  came  to  Jesus." — I  remember 
once  reading  these  words  on  a  memorial 
tablet  in  a  country  church.  Inscriptions  on 
tombstones  are  often  unsatisfactory,  and 
Scriptural  quotations  upon  them  most  inap- 
propriate ;  but  this  one  was  as  suitable  as  it 
was  singular.  The  squire  of  the  village  had 
late  in  life  come  under  the  influence  of 
Christian  friends,  who  brought  him  to  a 
knowledge  of  the  gospel ;  and  to  him  the 
words  of  the  Evangelist  were  applied.  They 
were  very  suggestive.  They  told  of  pride, 
and  worldly  pursuits,  and  self -righteousness, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


of  all   to  which  the  man  had  clung  for  a  Be  Thou  my  strength  and  righteousness, 

lifetime,  cast  away  that  he  might  come  to  My  Jesus,  and  my  all." 

the  Saviour.    For  a  sinner  saved  in  life's  jyfrat  is  your  want?— We  complain    of 

last  hours  a  better  epitaph  could  hardly  wandering  thoughts ;  we  kneel  at  our  devo- 

have  been  chosen.    I  admired  the  piety  that  tions>  and  our  thoughts  go  fluttering  away 

compared  the  rich  man  lying  there  to  the  from  us  like  the  sparrows    that    flit    and 

poor  blind  beggar  of  the  gospel  story,  the  twitter  in  the  trees.    The  remedy  for  this 

once  highly  esteemed  garment  of  personal  ig  to  have  a  want     Let  us  pause  at  the 

righteousness  to  the  beggar's  worthless  robe,  threshold  of  prayer  as  Jeanie  Deans  did  at 

and  that  expressed  the  one  hope  and  refuge  the  door  of  the  audience-room,  laying  her 

of  the  soul  in  Christ  by  the  words   "he  hand  upon  her  heart     Let  us,  if  we  would 

came  to  Jesus.      It  reminded  me  of  the  present  a  petition  at  the  throne  of  heavenly 

lines  on  William  Carey  s  tomb:  grace>  feel  the  parchment  to  make  sure  it  is 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm,  there. 
On  Thy  kind  arms  I  fall ; 


CHAPTER  XI. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

It  may  be  well  to  trace  out,  approximately,  the  order  of  events  here.  Leaving  Jericho  on 
the  Friday  morning,  after  a  fatiguing  journey  of  six  or  seven  hours,  they  reach  Bethany, 
where  they  spend  the  Sabbath.  On  Saturday  evening  Christ  sups  in  the  house  of  Simon 
the  leper,  His  disciples  and  Lazarus  and  his  sisters  being  present ;  and  at  this  feast  He  is 
anointed  by  Mary.  During  that  night  the  chief  priests — irritated  on  hearing  that  many  of 
the  Jews  have  been  to  see  Jesus  and  Lazarus — hold  a  meeting  to  consult  as  to  the  advis- 
ability of  putting  them  both  to  death.  Next  morning — Palm  Sunday — the  triumphal  entry 
into  Jerusalem  takes  place. 

Ver.  1.  Bethphage  and  Bethany. — Bethphage  ("  House-of -unripe-figs  ")  being  mentioned 
first  both  here  and  in  Luke  xix.  29,  would  seem  to  indicate  that  it  lay  on  the  road  from 
Jericho  to  the  east  of  Bethany  ("  House-of -dates  ")  ;  but  the  traditional  site  is  to  the  west. 
Porter  surmises  that  the  two  names  may  have  been  applied  to  different  quarters  of  the  one 
straggling  village,  the  one  part  called  Bethphage  from  the  fig  orchards  adjoining  it,  and  the 
other  Bethany  from  its  palm  trees.  See  his  Syria  and  Palestine,  p.  180.  At  the  mount  of 
Olives. — Looking  towards — irpds. 

Ver.  3.  And  straightway  he  will  send  him  hither.— The  insertion  of  ir&kiv  before  <S5e  in  K, 
B,  C,  D,  L,  A,  has  led  many  to  regard  this  clause  as  a  part  of  the  answer  which  the  disciples 
were  to  give  if  any  difficulty  arose  as  to  the  borrowing  of  the  colt.  But  Dr.  F.  Field  urges 
in  defence  of  the  generally  received  interpretation  :  (1)  that  etidim  is  far  more  properly  said 
of  the  promptness  of  the  owners  in  giving  up  the  colt  than  of  the  expedition  of  the  borrower 
in  returning,  which  could  only  take  place  after  a  certain  interval  of  time  ;  and  (2)  that  the 
effect  of  the  authoritative  requisition,  "  The  Lord  hath  need  of  him,"  upon  the  mind  of  the 
owners  would  be  weakened  rather  than  strengthened  by  the  addition,  "  and  will  be  sure  to 
return  him." 

Ver.  4.  A  very  circumstantial  account,  such  as  none  but  an  eyewitness  would  have  thought 
of  giving — a  strong  indication  that  Peter  was  one  of  the  two  disciples.  They  found  the  colt 
tied  beside  the  door,  outside  (the  yard  or  court),  on  the  roundabout  road  (i.e.  the  road  that 
went  round  the  house). 

Ver.  8.  Branches  .  .  .  the  way.— See  R.V. 

Vers.  9,  10.  See  R.V. 

Ver.  13.  If  haply. — If,  after  all — although  not  the  proper  time  for  fruit. 

Ver.  17.  The  marginal  rendering  is  preferable. 

Ver.  19.  See  R.V. 

Vers.  23,  24.  See  R.V. 

Ver.  26.  MS.  authority  for  retention  or  omission  is  about  equally  divided. 

Ver.  27.  The  elders. — "  The  ancient  senators  or  representatives  of  the  people.  With  the 
chief  priests  and  scribes  they  constituted  on  this  occasion  a  formal  deputation  from  the 

DD  401 


chap,  xi  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Sanhedrin.  We  find  the  earliest  notice  of  the  elders  acting  in  concert  as  a  political  body 
in  the  time  of  the  Exodus  (Exod.  xix.  7 ;  Deut.  xxxi.  9).  Their  authority,  which  extended  to 
all  matters  of  the  common  weal,  they  exercised  under  (a)  the  Judges  (Judg.  ii.  17 ; 
1  Sam.  iv.  3)  ;  under  (b)  the  Kings  (1  Sam.  xxx.  26  ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  16  ;  2  Sam.  xvii.  4) ; 
during  (c)  the  Captivity  (Jer.  xxix.  1 ;  Ezek.  viii.  1)  ;  after  (d)  the  Return  (Ezra  v.  5, 
vi.  7,  14,  x.  8,  14) ;  under  (<?)  the  Maccabees  (1  Mace.  xii.  6 ;  2  Mace.  i.  10) ;  in  (/)  the  time 
of  our  Lord,  when  they  denoted  a  distinct  body  in  the  Sanhedrin,  amongst  whom  they 
obtained  their  seat  by  election,  or  nomination  from  the  executive  authority." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—11. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  xxi.  1-11,  14-17;  Luke  xix.  29-44;  John  xii.  12-19.) 

The  final  entry  into  Jerusalem. — I.  Here  was  a  token  which  Jesus  gave  to 
these  two  disciples,  and  to  the  twelve  by  them. — It  was  an  example  of  His 
superhuman  knowledge.  A  similar  case  occurred  in  the  preparation  for  the 
Paschal  Supper  (Luke  xxii.  10).  These  manifestations  of  supernatural  knowledge, 
though  less  illustrious  than  His  publicly  wrought  miracles,  were  of  the  same 
general  order.  And  they  were  of  great  interest  as  tokens  given  by  our  Lord 
to  individual  disciples.  In  the  present  instance  we  are  not  told  who  these  two 
disciples  were.  Our  Lord  appointed  at  His  pleasure  when  He  was  on  earth,  and 
He  does  so  now  that  He  is  in  heaven,  those  of  His  servants  who  shall  do  special 
work  and  receive  special  manifestations  from  Himself  in  the  discharge  of  it. 
Multitudes  saw  the  greater,  or  at  least  the  more  conspicuous,  miracles ;  but 
these  two  disciples  had  this  at  first  all  to  themselves.  And  thus  it  often  is  still 
in  the  Christian  life.  In  addition  to  all  the  more  patent  evidences  of  the  Divine 
reality  of  the  Gospel,  there  will  be  manifestations,  arising  out  of  personal 
transactions  with  God  and  the  Redeemer,  which  are  gloriously  confirming  to 
faith  and  hope ;  bright  beamings  of  truth  from  the  Word  on  the  mind  ;  a 
realised  nearness  of  access  into  the  Divine  presence ;  marked  answers  to  prayer 
of  Providence  ;  spiritual  results  following  upon  efforts  for  others  and  endeavours 
for  the  Divine  glory;  and  suchlike  experimental  evidences,  things  full  of 
emphasis  to  the  soul  which  meets  with  them — still  quiet  voices,  which  those 
who  are  near  the  Master  sometimes  hear ! 

II.  An  interesting  case  of  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  is  presented  to  us 
here. — Nearly  five  hundred  years  before  it  had  been  written  by  Zechariah  the 
prophet  (ix.  9).  The  disciples  of  our  Lord  themselves,  we  are  informed  by 
St.  John  (xii.  16),  did  not  at  the  time  think  of  this  prediction,  or  view  what  was 
occurring  as  the  fulfilling  of  it ;  but  "  when  Jesus  was  glorified,  then  remembered 
they  that  these  things  were  written  of  Him,  and  that  they  had  done  such  things 
unto  Him."  And  thus  it  is  that  events  best- explain  the  prophetic  Word.  We 
have,  like  the  disciples,  to  "  company  with  "  Christ,  and  stand  by  the  interests 
of  His  kingdom,  whatever  measure  of  development  they  may  have  attained, 
working,  watching,  and  praying,  and  that  measure  will  assuredly  go  on  to 
increase  till  the  world  shall  be  bright  with  Messiah's  glory.  The  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  in  the  case  before  us  strikingly  confirms  our  believing  expectations  of 
the  future.  For  this  prediction,  as  it  stands  in  Zechariah,  is  directly  connected 
with  references  to  the  ultimate  triumphs  of  the  Saviour.  And  certainly  as  the 
former  part  of  the  prediction  was  accomplished,  so  certainly  "  His  dominion  shall 
be  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  river  even  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

III.  An  illustration  is  here  furnished  of  the  control  of  Christ  over  minds 
and  events,  and  of  the  manner  in  which,  when  the  time  for  the  execution 
of  the  Divine  purposes  is  come,  the  means  and  agencies  at  once  appear. — 
Jesus  was  to  make  a  public  entry  into  Jerusalem.     It  must  needs  be  so,  that 

402 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  XI. 


Scripture  might  be  fulfilled.  And  see  how  all  things  conspire  for  this  end.  Oui 
Lord  sends  into  the  village  over  against  Him  and  near  the  city,  knowing 
precisely  where  the  animal  He  was  to  ride  on  would  be  found  ;  and  there  it  was 
at  the  very  hour  at  which  it  was  needed,  as  though  waiting  for  the  honour  now 
to  be  put  upon  it,  after  having  been  spoken  of  in  prophecy  five  hundred  years 
before  1  But  will  it  be  given  up  for  the  purpose  ?  Yes.  The  owners  have  only 
to  be  told  that  the  Great  Teacher  had  need  of  it,  and  it  was  at  once  placed  at  His 
disposal.  Have  we  not  here  a  specimen  of  what  may  be  looked  for  in  the  future 
unfolding  of  the  purposes  of  Heaven  ?  As  the  periods  come  for  the  successive 
fulfilment  of  God's  designs  in  connexion  with  the  kingdom  of  His  Son,  the 
fitting  means  and  instrumentalities  will  not  be  wanting.  Who  can  foresee, 
moreover,  what  events  in  Providence  may  arise  to  impress  men's  minds,  as  the 
raising  of  Lazarus  did  at  this  time,  both  to  facilitate  the  diffusion  of  the  gospel, 
and  to  awaken,  by  the  accompanying  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  a  sense  of  the 
need  of  the  blessings  it  offers  ?  One  may  well  be  awed  in  viewing  the  progress 
of  events,  even  in  our  own  day, — in  the  consolidation,  to  a  great  extent,  of 
religious  liberty  in  our  own  land,  and  in  many  of  those  of  the  Continent ;  in  the 
opening  of  India  and  China  to  the  preaching  of  Christ ;  in  the  triumphs  of  the 
gospel  in  Madagascar,  long  the  scene  of  bloody  persecution ;  in  the  advance  of 
evangelisation  in  Burmah,  Polynesia,  Africa,  and  other  parts  of  the  field  of 
missions ;  in  the  unbarring  of  Italy,  in  which  the  Beformation  was  once  crushed 
by  persecution,  and  to  which  till  lately  there  was  no  access  through  its  length 
and  breadth  to  free  Christian  exertion.  Everywhere  a  multitude  of  obstacles 
have  yet  to  be  overcome;  but  all  things  are  pointing  onward  to  great  and 
grand  issues  in  the  not  very  distant  future. 

TV.  The  joyous  acclamations  of  the  disciples  as  they  attended  their  Master 
into  Jerusalem  may  well  remind  us  of  what  should  be  the  attitude  and  feeling 
of  the  Church  of  Christ  with  reference  to  the  triumphs  of  its  Lord. — No  doubt 
there  were  many  voices  raised  that  day  under  the  influence  of  mere  passing 
excitement.  But  it  was  not  so  with  the  real  disciples  with  whom  the  demon- 
stration probably  originated.  Even  they  had  then  no  enlarged  acquaintance 
with  the  truth  of  Christ ;  but  they  had  that  which  is  the  rudiment  of  all 
preparation  for  Christian  service,  sacrifice,  and  suffering — a  loving  devotedness 
to  their  Lord.  And  He  approved  and  encouraged  their  ardour.  Amid  all  the 
occupations  of  earth,  and  all  the  distractions  of  time,  what  a  psalm  of  praise 
to  the  exalted  Saviour  should  the  Christian  life  of  a  redeemed  sinner  be  ! — 
E.  T.  Prust. 

An  Advent  Sunday  discourse. — The  history  of  Christ's  triumphal  entry  into 
Jerusalem  is  selected  as  the  Holy  Gospel  for  Advent  Sunday,  because  it  is 
typical  of  the  manner  in  which  He  makes  His  Advent  throughout  the  centuries 
to  the  Church  at  large. 

I.  It  is  the  same  Person  who  comes,  and  in  the  same  character — Jesus  0/ 
Nazareth,  the  Christ  of  God. — His  very  name  should  ensure  Him  a  welcome 
in  every  heart.  He  is  "  Jesus  " — our  Saviour ;  and  "  Christ  " — the  Anointed  of 
God  :  anointed  as  Prophet,  to  teach  the  way  of  God  in  truth ;  anointed  as  Priest, 
to  make  atonement  for  our  sinsv  and  by  one  offering  to  perfect  for  ever  them 
that  are  sanctified ;  anointed  as  King,  to  set  up  His  throne  in  our  hearts,  and 
reduce  every  thought  and  affection  to  the  obedience  of  faith.  Thus  has  He  ever 
presented  Himself  to  the  reception  of  every  individual  who  is  acquainted  with 
what  is  written  in  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  and  the  Psalms  concerning  Him, 
whether  Jews  then  or  Christians  since.  Any  difference  there  may  be  is 
clearly  in  our  favour.  Those  who  hailed  Him  as  the  Son  of  David,  and  rent 
the  air  with  hosannas  to  Kim  that  came  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  had  after 

403 


chap.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


all  very  low,  imperfect,  and  even  false  ideas  of  His  character  and  mission. 
Their  thoughts  all  ran  upon  carnal  enemies  and  temporal  deliverances.  We 
know  better  than  that ;  we  have  learnt  that  the  most  cruel  tyrants  are  Satan 
and  Sin,  and  that  a  man's  worst  foes  are  of  his  own  household,  even  within 
his  own  breast.  Knowing  our  danger  and  weakness,  we  are  the  better  able  to 
appreciate  the  greatness  of  our  deliverance,  and  to  hail  with  joy  and  gratitude 
Him  who  comes  to  "  heal  the  broken-hearted,"  etc. 

II.  As  it  is  the  same  Great  Person  who  comes,  so  He  comes  in  a  spiritual 
sense  to  the  same.  Of  His  First  Advent  in  general  it  is  said,  "  He  came  unto 
His  own."  But  especially  when,  as  now,  He  visited  Jerusalem,  the  city  of 
David  who  was  His  father  according  to  the  flesh,  and  the  Temple  of  God  which 
was  His  Heavenly  Father's  house,  might  He  be  said  in  a  more  particular  manner 
to  be  coming  unto  His  own.  And  is  not  this  the  case  with  the  Saviour  of 
mankind,  whensoever  and  to  whomsoever  He  comes  ?  Are  we  not  doubly  His 
— His  by  creation  and  His  by  redemption  ?  But  we  know  by  experience  that  the 
most  unquestionable  title  does  not  ensure  peaceful  possession.  Thus  in  the  days 
of  His  flesh  (John  i.  10,  11).  And  still,  when  He  asserts  His  claim  to  universal 
empire,  or  knocks  at  the  door  of  the  heart  of  individual  sinners,  the  greater 
number,  like  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  are  moved  only  with  wonder  and 
surprise  at  the  demand  made  upon  them  (Matt.  xxi.  10).  They  ask,  "  Who 
is  this  ? " — some,  indeed,  with  an  honest  desire  for  information  and  enlightenment 
(John  ix.  36) ;  but  too  many  in  the  bad,  bold  spirit  of  the  Jewish  rulers 
(Matt.  xxi.  23). 

III.  We  may  see  another  point  of  resemblance  in  the  manner  of  our  Lord's 
Advent.  How  did  He  approach  Jerusalem  ?  As  a  mighty  conqueror,  at  the 
head  of  an  army,  to  destroy  His  enemies  and  burn  up  their  city  ?  Far  different. 
See  Matt.  xxi.  5.  His  attendants  a  few  simple  men  and  feeble  women,  who  had 
followed  Him  from  His  native  place.  What  could  be  more  typical  of  the  Saviour's 
Mission  to  this  earth?  See  John  iii.  17;  Matt.  xii.  20.  What  an  irresistible 
appeal  is  that  of  St.  Paul !  (2  Cor.  x.  1).  Force  is  met  by  force.  He  who  assails 
with  violence  is  by  violence  repelled.  Against  the  crash  of  thunder  we  stop 
our  ears.  But  to  gentleness  we  yield.  To  him  who  entreats  we  show  ourselves 
easy  to  be  entreated.  The  still,  small  voice  is  the  most  certain  to  gain  our 
attention.  Be  it  so  now.  Receive  with  meekness  Him  who  comes  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness.  Wait  not  till  He  comes  in  another  fashion  (Matt.  xxiv.  30 ; 
Rev.  i.  7). 

IV.  Another  point  of  comparison  that  we  may  draw  relates  to  the  reception 
of  Christ.  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  not  content  to  await  His  arrival,  went 
out  to  meet  Him  on  the  road  (John  xii.  13).  Even  so  the  Church,  in  Advent; 
goes  forth  to  meet  her  Lord.  His  Incarnation,  or  actual  coming  in  the  flesh, 
she  celebrates  at  Christmas;  but  long  before  that  time  we  may  imagine  her 
to  be  standing  on  the  watch-tower,  eagerly  looking  for  the  signs  of  His  approach. 
At  last,  as  on  this  day,  she  espies  Him  afar  off,  and  gives  notice  to  all  her 
children — "Behold,  the  Bridegroom  cometh;  go  ye  out  to  meet  Him."  But 
in  another  sense  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  "  not  with  observation,"  and 
not  at  any  particular  season.  To  the  heart  of  the  sinner  Christ  often  comes  "  on 
a  day  that  he  looks  not  for  Him,  and  in  an  hour  that  he  'is  not  aware  " ;  and  so; 
finding  nobody  come  out  to  meet  Him,  He  turns  round  and  departs  as  silently 
as  He  came.  We  must  meet  Him  on  the  road.  We  must  be  in  attendance 
where  He  is  likely  to  be  found.  We  must  wait  for  Him  in  the  way  of  His 
judgments,  providences,  ordinances.  Prayer  especially  is  like  a  place  where 
roads  from  all  directions  meet.  Whenever  and  however  He  comes,  He  must 
pass  that  way ;  and  if  we  are  there,  waiting  for  Him,  it  is  impossible  for  us  to 
miss  Him. 

404. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  XI. 


V.  Those  who  went  to  meet  Him  on  His  approach  to  Jerusalem  received 
Him  with  the  most  significant  tokens  of  honour  and  respect  (ver.  8). — So 
let  us  welcome  "  Him  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  Let  us  put  off 
the  old  man  with  his  deeds  of  darkness,  lay  aside  every  weight  and  the  sin 
that  doth  so  easily  beset  us,  and  so  make  a  way  for  the  Redeemer  to  enter 
and  take  possession  of  our  souls. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1-11.  The  significance  of  Christ's  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness  and 

royal  entry  into  Jerusalem. — It  is  surely  of  judgment."     But  now  the  fulfilment 

a  strange  mistake,  as  Dr.  Edersheim  of  the  work  entrusted  to  an  agent,  in 

remarks,  to  regard  this  entry  as  imply-  harmony  with  the  desire  of  the  sender, 

ing  that,  fired  by  enthusiasm,  Christ  will  not  only  depend,  under  God,   on 

for  the  moment   expected   the   people  the  intelligence  and  faithfulness  of  the 

would   receive   Him    as   the   Messiah,  one  sent,  but  also  on  the  nature  of  the 

Nor  is  it  much  better  to  describe  it  as  instructions  given  by  the  sender.     The 

a  concession  to  the  fevered  expectations  less  we  take  for  granted  in  this  respect 

of  His  disciples  and  the  multitude.     It  the  better.     And  this  the  more  so  in 

was,  on  the  contrary,  an  integral  part  proportion  to  the  deficiencies  of  the  sent, 

of  Christ's  Mission,  which  would  not  be  In  giving  orders  Jesus  left  no  room  for 

complete  without  it.    "  It  behoved  Him  mistake.      His    directions   were    very 

so  to  enter  Jerusalem,  because  He  was  specific :    they  were    no    doubt   given 

a  King ;  and  as  King  to  enter  it  in  clearly ;    they    could    be    heard    dis- 

such  manner,  because  He  was  such  a  tinctly.       Because    He    Himself    was 

King  :  and  both  the  one  and  the  other  perfectly  familiar  with  the  requisites 

were  in  accordance  with  the  prophecy  of    any   work,    He   did   not   therefore 

of  old."  think,  or  act  as  if  He  thought,  that  a 

few  hurried  hints  would  be  sufficient 

Vers.    2-6.  Humble  service. — 1.  We  for  others.     It  was  said  of  Christ  that 

should  always  attempt  that  for  which  He   "  shall   not   fail."      He   was  pre- 

we   have    Christ's   warrant.       2.    We  eminently  successful  in  all  He  under- 

should  not  attempt  that  for  which  we  took.     One  of  the  characteristics  that 

have  not  Christ's  warrant.    3.  In  look-  prevented  failure  was  His  thoroughness, 

ing  for  that  for  which  we  have  Christ's  He  did  not  despise  details.     Confusion, 

warrant,  we   must   expect   opposition,  vexation,  failure,    were   thus   avoided. 

From — (1)  The  weakness  of  the  flesh.  Note  His  care  in  telling  His  disciples 

(2)  The    unbelieving    amongst    men.  where  to  find  the  colt,  what  kind  of 

(3)  The  spiritual  hosts  of  wickedness,  a  colt,  in  what  condition  it  would  be, 

(4)  If  we  attempt  that  for  which  we  whether  tied  or  loose,  how  to  answer 
have  Christ's  warrant,  in  the  manner  objections  to  their  bringing  him,  etc. 
He  directs,  we  shall  accomplish  it. —  Then  again  in  regard  to  the  prepara- 
J.  S.  Swan.  tion  for  the  Passover  the  same  particu- 

Particularity  in  giving  directions. —  larity  is  observed.    The  result  was  that 

The  closer  the  personal  oversight  given  all  moved  on  smoothly.      All  was  in 

to  one's  business  the  better.     But  after  harmony   with   the    injunction,    "  Let 

all  is  said  and  done  a  great  part  of  the  everything   be   done   decently   and  in 

work  of  life  depends  on  delegated  labour,  order." — Wm.  M.  Campbell. 
Men  cannot  do  everything  at  first-hand. 

Neither  does  God.     He  has  His  angels  Ver.   3.    "  The   Lord  hath  need    of 

or  messengers.     They  do  His  bidding,  him." — This  is  the   only  time  in  the 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  sent  to  "  convince  Bible  where  the  Lord  is  said  to  have 

405 


chap.  xi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


need  of  any  creature ;  and  here  it  is  but  by  inward  allurement  and  persua- 

said  of  a  despised  creature — of  an  ass,  sion  (Rev.  v.  13,  xix.  16). — Dr.  Isaac 

as  if  to  rebuke  the  pride  of  creature  Barrow. 
superiority,   and  at  the  same  time  to 

exalt  the  dignity  of  creature  instrumen-  Yer.  11.  The  evening  can  become  the 

tality.     These  words  are  spoken  of  an  sweetest  and   most   sacred  portion  of 

ass,  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  any  the  day.     It  is  profound,  it  is  serene ; 

one  saying,  "I  am  too  mean  to  be  of  tender  as  solemn,  tranquil  as  pensive; 

any  service  to  so  glorious  a  Master ;  full  of  permission  fraught  with  privi- 

my  abilities  are  too  small,  my  position  lege  ;  free  and  fresh  and  fragrant  with 

is  too  obscure."    Perhaps  at  the  moment  repose.    Evening  completes  the  day,  as 

of   such   a   temptation   there  may  be  its   coronation   and  benediction.      The 

some  blessed  service  for   such  a  one,  morrow  is  at  hand ;  evening  awaits  the 

which,  instrumentally  speaking,  could  morrow,   as  its  herald  and  its  pledge, 

only  be  performed  by  that  one.     Yes,  The  west  horizon   claims   its   kindred 

it  may  be  to  bear  Jesus  in  His  mem-  with  the  east,  looking  so  like  it  that 

bers  to  His  triumph  or  His  Cross. —  you  know  them  to  be  twins.     The  sun- 

J.  T.  Baylee,  D.D.  down  on  the  west  glows  like  the  sunrise 

on  the  east.     Both  alike  tip  the  hill- 

Yers.  5,  6.  1  power  of  Christ's  tops  with  gold.  Pause  now  and  lay 
Word. — Nothing  resists  the  Word  of  the  down  the  tool,  the  spade;  there  is 
God-man,  nor  the  faith  and  obedience  something  else  than  toil — there  is 
of  a  faithful  disciple.  Let  us  learn  to  reverie,  rest.  Glad  evenings  guarantee 
avoid  all  arguing  and  disputing  when-  and  glorify  the  days,  replenish  wear 
ever  God  commands  us  something  above  and  tear,  stanch  wounds.  But  when 
our  strength,  and  to  put  our  whole  shadows  wrap  you,  when  curtains  close, 
confidence  in  the  power  of  His  will,  birds  to  their  nests,  cattle  to  their 
which  can  do  all  things.  He  accustoms  stalls,  man  to  his  home — soul,  whither 
His  apostles  to  see  that  the  wills  of  thou  ?  Whither  else  but  to  thy  God  ? 
men  are  less  in  their  own  power  than  Oh,  house  thee  in  His  peace  !  Life's 
in  that  of  God,  and  that  His  Word  is  eventide  evinces  much  in  the  soft  de- 
almighty  even  in  the  mouth  of  His  clensions  of  late  lingering  years.  The 
ministers,  to  the  end  that  men  may  old  man's  heart  sees  shadows  lengthen 
believe  them. — P.  Quesnel.  and  dusk  deepen,  until  familiar  spots 

wear  a  weird  beauty,  as  the  places  that 

Yers.  8-10.  How  Christ  must  be  enter-  knew  him  begin  to  know  him  no  more 

tained. — 1.  We  must   believe  Him   to  for  ever,  and  the  fellowships  that  used 

be   that   Great   Prophet   who   is    the  to  greet  and  cheer  him  seem  in  their 

Messiah    and   Saviour   of    the   world,  dimness   to  forget  that   he  was  ever 

2.  We  must  profess  and  confess  this  young  like  them  or  still  has  his  share 
faith,  having  "  Hosanna "  in  our  on  the  earth.  The  eventide  of  life  is 
mouths,    and   crying,    "  Blessed,"   etc.  death,  and  the  evening  and  the  morning 

3.  We  must  spread  our  garments  in  make  the  first  day.  Nigher  now  the 
the  way,  etc.,  i.e.  forsake  all  and  follow  morning,  and  death  is  only  eventide  at 
Christ,  proffering  and  offering  ourselves  last.  Life  begins  like  the  light — it 
wholly  to  His  service. — Dean  Boys.  comes  out  of  the  dark  of  an  oblivion 

The  nature  of  Christ's  kingdom. — A  that  seems  to  itself  a  nonentity,  full  of 

King,  not  of  this  world,  though  over  pangs  to  the  mother  and  as  full  of  pain 

it ;  ruling,  not  in  external  pomp  and  to  the  infant,  if  the  infant  were  alike 

state,    but   by   secret   providence   and  sensitive   and  sentient.      But   playful 

power ;  not  so   much   over  the  bodies  infancy,  sportive  childhood,  take  slight 

and  temporal  estates,  as  in  the  hearts  notice  of  the  struggle,  the  transition, 

and  consciences   of  men;   not   chiefly  and  the  change.      When  at  length  it 

by  outward   compulsion  and  violence,  has  reached  its  close,  it  settles  back  to 

406 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


the  same  fostering  conditions.     Death  it  for  night  hours  and  cradling  it  for 

hides  it  in  the  oblivion  and  the  shadow  infantile  and  ineffable  repose.     These 

once  again.     And  what  conclusion  can  are  inklings  of  the  understanding,  but 

there  be  but  that,  as  its  morning  had  they  become  the  intuitions  of  the  soul, 

an  evening,  its  evening  is  to  have  a  The  promise  becomes  the  prospect ;  the^ 

morning  too,   a  fresher,  fuller,   freer  prospect    becomes     the     possession. — 

morning  next,  because  as  tenderly  the  H.  S,  Carpenter. 
Infinite  disrobes  the  life  slumber,  lulling 


'MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—26. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxi.  12-22  ;  Luke  xix.  45-48.) 

Vers.  12-14.  The  useless  tree. — Dangers  were  closing  round  the  Saviour,  and 
He  prudently  spent  His  nights,  except  the  last  fatal  one,  not  at  Jerusalem, 
but  the  neighbouring  village  of  Bethany.  This  miracle  was  wrought  on  Monday, 
the  second  day  of  Holy  Week.  Perhaps  the  reason  of  His  being  hungry  so 
early  in  the  day  was  that  He  had  spent  a  portion  of  the  night  or  early 
morning  in  prayer.  His  early  departure  probably  arose  from  a  holy  haste  to 
enter  upon  the  work  of  the  day.  He  inherited  the  physical  weaknesses  of  our 
nature,  and  so  qualified  Himself  to  sympathise  with  His  people  in  all  physical 
trials  (Heb.  ii.  14,  iv.  15). 

I.  The  miracles  of  our  Lord  generally  contained  a  symbolic  element ;  but  this 
miracle  is  a  symbol  in  itself. — In  this  He  was  following  the  examples  of  the 
prophets,  who  often  acted  out  their  parables.  It  was  a  mode  of  teaching 
that  excited  livelier  attention  than  an  oral  statement,  and  produced  a  deeper 
impression  upon  the  mind.  Indeed  the  Jewish  Temple,  with  its  outer  court, 
high  priests,  offerings  and  ordinances,  was  a  stupendous  parable  uttered  in 
the  form  of  sign  and  symbol.  It  is  objected  that  our  Lord,  knowing,  as  from 
His  omniscience  He  must  have  done,  that  there  was  no  fruit  upon  the  fig  tree, 
went  to  it  as  though  expecting  to  find  fruit.  In  His  action  there  was  no 
insincerity.  The  language  used  is  a  mode  of  speech  often  used,  especially  in 
figurative  teaching. 

II.  But  is  not  this  miracle  at  variance  with  the  ordinary  operations  of  Him 
who  came  "not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil"? — Other  miracles  were  exercises  of 
love,  acts  of  giving  and  creation ;  this  is  an  act  of  destruction.  Here  He 
appears  as  a  punishing  God.  Solitary  as  it  is,  it  shews  that,  while  our  Lord 
"  delighteth  in  mercy,"  He  does  not  shrink  from  executing  judgment  when 
required.  Its  solitariness  as  an  act  of  judgment  exhibits  in  impressive  lights 
the  exceeding  greatness  and  bountifulness  of  His  love.  But  why  should  He  put 
forth  His  anger  upon  a  tree,  which,  not  being  a  moral  agent,  could  not  be 
conscious  of  guilt  ?  A  tree  has  no  sentient  existence,  much  less  intelligent  and 
moral  consciousness,  and  therefore  could  not  be  a  fit  subject  for  praise  or  blame. 
That  the  fig  tree  was  an  inanimate  existence  is  a  sufficient  reply  to  the  objection. 
It  was  not  capable  of  suffering,  and  could  therefore  be  lawfully  used  as  a  means 
for  ends  lying  beyond  itself.  Our  Lord  did  not  attribute  any  moral  responsi- 
bilities to  the  fig  tree ;  He  simply  used  it  to  represent  moral  qualities.  Other 
considerations  may  be  advanced  which  bear  upon  the  justice  of  this  act.  The 
situation  of  the  tree  was  very  favourable  for  fruit -bearing.  Being  planted  on 
the  roadside,  it  was  not  private  property.  It  was  not  a  sound  tree  that  our 
Lord  caused  to  wither.  Its  life  had  begun  to  decay,  and  our  Saviour's  sentence 
only  hastened  a  process  that  would  have  advanced  in  the  course  of  nature. 

,       ,  407 


chap.  xi.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


III.  But  why  should  Christ  vent  His  indignation  upon  the  fig  tree  if  the 
usual  season  for  fruit-bearing  had  not  arrived  ? — Was  this  consistent  with  the 
justice  and  reasonableness  which  ruled  Him  in  all  His  dealings  ?  It  was  :  for 
the  fruit  usually  appeared  before  the  leaves ;  and  if  the  fig  tree  could  produce 
leaves,  what  excuse  had  it  for  being  fruitless  ?  "  Where  is  the  propriety,"  says 
Dr.  Thomas,  "  of  allowing  it  to  occupy  a  position,  and  to  appropriate  nourish- 
ment, which,  if  granted  to  another  tree,  would  result  in  abundant  f ruitf ulness  ? 
Let  it  die.  Why  should  its  roots  steal  the  nutriment  of  the  soil,  its  leafy 
branches  obstruct  the  genial  rays  of  heaven,  and  prevent  their  falling  on  better 
plants  ?  Usefulness  is  the  grand  end  of  all  created  existence,  and  the  function 
of  justice  is  to  remove  out  of  the  way  whatever  answers  not  its  original  design. 
Justice  clears  the  universe  of  the  worthless.  The  fruitless  tree  it  burns;  the 
salt  that  has  lost  its  savour  it  casts  forth  as  rubbish ;  the  spirit  that  perverts  its 
powers  it  divests  of  its  freedom  and  its  influence,  its  privileges  and  enjoyments. 
Justice  weeds  the  garden  of  the  universe." 

Lessons. — 1.  It  teaches  that  to  our  existence  God  has  set  a  specific  purpose. 
The  fruit  we  are  expected  to  bear  is  goodness — in  other  words,  holy  and  useful 
living  (Rom.  vi.  22;  Jas.  hi.  18;  Gal.  iii.  22;  Eph.  v.  5;  Ps.  cxxvi.  5,  6; 
Jas.  v.  20).  2.  Like  the  fruitless  fig  tree,  we  are  surrounded  by  conditions  and 
means  favourable  to  fruit-bearing.  If  no  fruit  appears,  no  fault  can  be  found 
with  the  soil,  air,  clouds,  sun,  or  with  the  culturing  methods  and  appliances  of 
the  vine-dresser;  the  evil  is  in  the  tree  (Jas.  i.  13-15).  3.  The  appearance  of 
goodness  without  the  reality  only  aggravates  our  guilt.  Standing  beside  the 
fruitless  tree,  the  Master  did  not  say,  "This  tree  is  an  ornament  to  the 
surrounding  landscape,  a  grateful  shelter  to  the  weary  traveller  ;  choirs  of  birds 
now  and  then  make  the  branches  quiver  with  delightful  music."  Its  leaves  and 
blossoms  could  not  be  accepted  as  substitutes  for  fruit.  4.  The  evil  of  our 
spiritual  barrenness  is  not  confined  to  ourselves.  We  occupy  space  in  the 
community  that  might  be  occupied  with  greater  advantage  by  others.  5.  When 
the  sentence  goes  forth,  ruin  follows — complete,  final,  and  irretrievable. — 
J,  H.  Morgan. 

Vers.  15-17.  Reverence  for  God's  house. — On  two  very  different  occasions  our 
Lord  shewed  His  zeal  for  the  honour  of  the  Temple  of  God.  At  the  commence- 
ment of  His  public  ministry,  when  He  went  up  to  the  Feast  of  the  Passover, 
He  found  the  sale  of  oxen  and  sheep  and  doves  going  on  within  the  court  of 
the  Temple.  And  He  drove  them  out  and  said,  "  Take  these  things  hence ; 
make  not  My  Father's  house  a  house  of  merchandise."  And  now  again,  at  the 
close  of  His  ministry,  He  went  up  to  the  Passover,  and  He  found  the  same 
abomination  going  on.  And  once  more  He  drove  out  the  prof aners,  and  claimed 
for  God's  house  the  reverence  and  respect  which  is  due  to  the  house  of  prayer. 

I.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  decay  of  religious  feeling  among  the 
people,  the  loss  of  reverence  for  holy  things  and  places,  the  weakening  of 
their  belief  in  God's  actual  and  immediate  presence  with  them,  was  very 
closely  connected  and  bound  up  with  the  coming  destruction  of  the  Jewish 
nation.  1.  This  faith  in  the  presence  of  God  in  the  Temple,  and  among  the 
people  whom  He  had  chosen  for  Himself,  was  impressed  on  them  by  the  law 
perhaps  more  distinctly  and  solemnly  than  any  other  truth.  2.  And  while 
their  trust  in  God's  presence  was  firm  and  unshaken,  so  long  it  was  well  with 
them.  God  did  protect  them  from  their  enemies,  and  raised  them  to  prosperity, 
and  gave  them  abundance  and  peace  and  power.  But  when  their  faith  failed, 
and  they  forgot  God,  and  they  lost  their  reverence  and  fell  into  sin,  then  He 
caused  suffering  to  come  upon  them.  Their  sin  found  them  out.  3.  Is  there 
not  a  lesson  for  us  in  this  age  ?     Are  not  the  two  besetting  sins  of  the  time,  on 

408 


t     *  i    • 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  XL 


the  one  hand,  a  craving  after  money,  a  spirit  of  merchandise,  which  takes  up 
our  thoughts  and  occupies  our  time,  and  sorely  interferes  with  our  higher 
interests ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  a  want  of  reverence,  a  slowness  to  see  and 
confess  the  presence  of  God,  that  all  we  do  and  say  is  in  His  sight :  that  He  is 
about  our  path  and  about  our  bed,  and  spieth  out  all  our  ways.  Our  longing 
for  money,  what  is  it  but  a  want  of  faith  ?  We  cannot  trust  God,  that  He  will 
provide  for  us.  We  will  make  provision  for  ourselves  and  for  our  children's 
wants.  We  are  slow  to  believe  that  it  is  really  required  that  we  should  make 
sacrifice  for  Christ's  sake.  And  therefore  the  love  of  the  world  is  in  danger  of 
eating  more  and  more  into  our  hearts  and  chiving  out  our  religion,  our  trust, 
and  our  love,  and  our  faith  in  a  heavenly  reward  and  coming  glory.  And  if  so, 
if  this  is  a  real  evil,  and  if  it  be  not  timely  checked,  then  assuredly  the  glory 
will  be  departing  from  us. 

II.  Besides  this  larger  and  more  general  lesson,  there  is  also  a  thought  which 
may  come  closer  and  more  personally  to  ourselves.  Our  Lord  teaches  us  very 
plainly,  by  cleansing  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  that  a  reverence  is  due  to  holy 
places ;  that  where  the  presence  of  God  ought  to  be  recognised  and  felt  the 
common  affairs  of  life  ought  not  to  find  entrance.  1.  When  we  come  to 
approach  God  in  prayer,  and  when  we  enter  into  the  house  which  has  been 
dedicated  to  the  Lord,  the  charge  given  to  Moses  may  still  have  its  meaning  for 
us  :  "  Put  off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou  standest  is 
holy  ground."  2.  And  does  not  this  condemn  very  strongly  the  lightness  and 
irreverence  with  which  so  many  will  come  to  church  ?  When  we  kneel  upon 
our  knees,  it  is  not  to  go  through  an  unmeaning  form,  but  to  pray  for  pardon 
and  for  grace.  When  we  listen,  we  must  try  to  apply  to  our  hearts  the  lessons 
which  God's  Word  would  teach.  Our  carelessness,  our  littleness,  our  vanity, 
our  worldly  thoughts,  all  these  must  be  put  away.  We  are  drawing  near  to 
our  God,  and  we  desire  to  be  drawn  yet  closer  towards  Him  in  faith  and  love. 
And  He  will  draw  nigh  to  us.  He  is  present  with  us  when  we  seek  His 
pardon — present  with  us  when  we  sing  His  praise — present  with  us  when 
we  hear  His  message — present  with  us  when  we  kneel  to  receive  the  Blessed 
Sacrament  of  His  Body  and  Blood. — Canon  Nevill. 

Ver.  17.  God's  house  "an  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations.11 — The  Temple  at 
Jerusalem,  while  it  stood,  might  well  be  classed  amongst  "  the  wonders  of  the 
world " :  not  merely  on  account  of  the  magnificence  of  its  conception,  the 
splendour  of  its  ornaments,  or  the  costliness  of  its  worship ;  but,  even  more,  for 
the  anomalous  character  of  the  principle  on  which  it  was  founded,  and  of  the 
religious  system  to  which  it  belonged.  In  the  Jewish  creed  it  was  regarded  as 
the  habitation  of  Him  who,  according  to  another  article  of  the  same  belief, 
"  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands."  Dedicated  to  the  service  of  the 
God  of  the  whole  earth,  who  "  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men,"  it  was  yet 
strictly  exclusive.  It  was  surrounded  by  spacious  courts.  Of  these  the  first  or 
outer  court,  which  encompassed  all  the  rest,  was  called  "  the  Court  of  the 
Gentiles,"  because  Gentiles  were  allowed  to  enter  into  but  not  beyond  it.  This 
court  was  separated  from  the  next — that  of  the  Israelites — by  a  low  stone  wall, 
on  which  stood  pillars  at  equal  distances,  with  inscriptions  signifying  to  all  not 
of  the  seed  of  Abraham  that  that  was  their  place  and  they  must  proceed  no 
farther.  Now,  it  is  the  removal  of  this  particular  disability,  which  is  predicted 
in  the  words  quoted  by  our  Lord  from  Isaiah.  There  was  at  all  times  a 
prescribed  method  by  which  "  the  son  of  the  stranger "  might  join  himself  to 
the  Lord's  people,  and  become  a  member  of  "  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,"  and 
entitled  to  all  the  privileges  of  a  born  Jew.  But  this  method  was  so  little 
adopted  in  practice  that  it  entirely  fails  to  meet  the  language  here  used,  even 

_._  409 


chap.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


if  the  words  did  not  plainly  refer  to  something  to  take  place  at  a  future  time, 
and  not  to  a  provision  already  existing.  And  we  know  in  fact  that  the  Temple 
at  Jerusalem  never  was,  and  could  at  no  time  be  called,  "  an  house  of  prayer 
for  all  nations."  We  must  therefore  understand  the  prophecy  in  a  wider 
sense,  as  foretelling  "  the  opening  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  " — much  more, 
therefore,  the  doors  of  the  sanctuary — "  to  all  believers."  See  Mai.  i.  1 1 ; 
John  iv.  21-24. 

I.  The  perfect  freedom  and  openness  of  Divine  ordinances  in  the  Church  of 
Christ. — The  Gentiles  having  long  since  been   admitted  into  the  Church — or 
rather,  the  Church  as  it  now  exists  being  composed  for  the  most  part  of  Gentiles 
— we  may  pass  over  that  distinction  as  obsolete,  and  proceed  to  others.     1.  There 
is  no  distinction  of  rich  and  poor  in  our  Churches.     In  early  times,  indeed,  some 
abuse  of  this  kind  appears  to  have  crept  in.      See  Jas.  ii.  1-4.     But  we  may 
fearlessly  say  that  our  assemblies  are  not  liable  to  this  charge.      None  is  excluded 
or  insulted  because  he  is  poor  or  meanly  clad.     Many,  it  is  true,  exclude  them- 
selves, on  the  ground  that  they  have  no  clothes  fit  to  come  in,  and  they  are 
ashamed  to  exhibit  their  "  vile  raiment "  among  the  "  gay  clothing  "  of  their 
neighbours.      This   is,    in   most   cases,   only    a   miserable    subterfuge.      2.  We 
acknowledge  no  distinction  between  learned  and  unlearned  in  Church.     Neither 
class  is  shut  out  by  any  custom  or  practice  calculated  to  repel.     Everything  said 
or  done  in  the  sanctuary  has  for  its  object  the  general  edification,  "  that  all  may 
learn,  and  all  may  be  comforted."     (1)  The  Anglican  Liturgy  is  a  "Book  of 
Common  Prayer  " — suited  "  for  all  people."     Its  greatest  admirers  are,  no  doubt, 
its  most  refined  and  intelligent  ones,  as  an  exquisite  picture  or  statue  or  other 
work  of  art  is  best  appreciated  by  those  who  have  studied  the  principles  of  art. 
But  "  the  common  people  "  also  are  great  admirers  of  the  Prayer  Book,  and  find 
therein — besides  such  plainness  and  simplicity  as  enables  the  most  unlearned  to 
say  "  Amen "  to  every  sentence — a  savour  and  spirit  of  devotion  which  is  not 
perceptible,  or  in  far  less  degree,  in  other  compositions.     (2)  And  with  respect 
to  the  public  instructions  of  the  Church,  here  also  the  profit  of  all  alike  is  kept 
in  view.     A  minister,  in  preparing  his  sermon,  remembers  that  there  will  be 
among  his  hearers  persons  of  very  different  degrees  of  intelligence  and  cultivation. 
That  he  may  not  leave  the  unlearned  entirely  behind  him,  he  has  to  use  great 
plainness   of  speech,   a  good  deal  of  repetition,  and  a  certain  homeliness  and 
familiarity  of  illustration.     On  the  other  hand,  the  minds  of  the  better  educated 
demand  correctness  of  style,   closeness  of  reasoning,  and  general  propriety  of 
manner.     He  endeavours,  therefore,  not  simply  to  descend  to  the  level  of  the 
former  class,  but  so  to  descend  as  to  carry  the  others  with  him,  so  to  adapt  his 
instructions  to  both  that  the  adaptation  shall  not  be  offensively  perceptible  to 
either.     3.  Our  churches  are  open  to  all  characters  of  people — to  good  and  bad, 
righteous  and  sinner,   him  that   feareth  God  and  him  that  feareth  Him  not. 
How  could  it  be  otherwise  ?     Should  we  exclude  the  righteous  ?     But  these  are 
the   very  persons   whom   God   would  have  to  worship  Him,  and  whose  godly 
supplications  and  "  pure  offerings "  give  a  savour  and  seasoning  to  the  whole 
sacrifice.     Or  should  we  refuse  admission  to  the  sinner  ?     How,  then,  could  we 
be  the  ministers  of  Him  who  "  came  to  call,"  etc.  ?     How  could  we,  with  any 
consistency,  come  into  the  house  of  God  ourselves,  seeing  we  are  all  "  miserable 
sinners  "  ?      Only  one  class  of  persons  there  is  whom  we  do  not  invite,  and  would 
rather  not  see,  within  the  walls  of  the  sanctuary,  viz.  those  who  are  living  in 
the  open,  shameless,  and  defiant  practice  of  iniquity.     These  we  would  exclude, 
not  permanently,  but  for  a  time,   until  they  shew  so  much  regard  to  decency 
and  public   morality  as  constitutes  the  lowest  qualification  for  one  who  seeks 
admission  into  a  religious  assembly.     We  would,  by  this  temporary  exclusion, 
shame  them  and  bring  them  to  a  better  mind ;  or,  if  not,  lighten  their  damnation 

410 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


by  just  so  much  guilt  as  they  would  have  incurred  by  offering  to  the  Lord  an 
abomination  instead  of  a  sacrifice. 

II.  The  true  nature  of  the  Christian  sanctuary — it  is  a  house  of  prayer. — In 
thus   setting   aside  not  only  a  part,  but  the  emphatic  part,   of  the   sentence 
as  originally  uttered — "  for  all  nations  " — we  are  justified  by  our  Lord  Himself, 
who    here  refers  the  quotation  to   a    question,   not   of   the   admissibility  or 
inadmissibility  of  others  than  Jews  to  the  privileges  of  the  Temple,  but  of  the 
use  and  abuse  of  the  Temple  itself.     Whether  open  to  all  people,  or  reserved 
for   a  privileged  tribe ;   whether  appropriated  to  the   imposing  ceremonies   of 
the  Jewish  ritual,  or  to  the  less  sensuous  solemnities  of  Christian  worships, — 
the  Lord's  house  still  maintains  its  character  of  "an  house  of  prayer."     From 
this  expression  we  may  learn — 1.  What  is  the  proper  business  of  this  place — 
prayer  ;  i.e.  prayer  in  its  widest  sense,  including  every  act  of  devotion  in  which 
a  Christian  congregation   may  appropriately  unite.      Besides  prayer,  properly 
so  called,  by  which  we  make  our  joint  requests  known  unto  God,  "  the  voice  of 
joy  and  praise  "  enters  largely  into  those  common  supplications  which  we  make 
with  one  accord  in  the  Lord's  house.     But  let  us  ever  remember  that,  being  thus 
explained,    prayer,    and   prayer   alone,   is    our   proper   business   there.      It   is 
necessary  to  lay  great  stress  upon  this,  for  it  is  a   matter  which  is  greatly 
misapprehended  by   many.      They  will  tell  one  they  go  to  Church  to  hear. 
They  listen  to  the  prayers,  and  that  is  all.     It  is  only  when  these  are  concluded 
that   they  rouse  themselves,  and   begin  to  give  their  best   attention  to   the 
discourse  which  is  expected  to  follow,  in  the  hope  of  hearing,  if  not  something 
new,  at  least  something  not  quite  so  stale  and  antiquated  as  that  "  form  of 
sound  words  "  in  which  the  Church  has  for  centuries  poured  forth  her  devotions 
before  God.     Such  persons  are  fond  of  talking  of  the  more  or  less  "  good  "  that 
they  get  from  their   attendance   at   public   worship ;    and   they  estimate   the 
amount  of  "  good  "  by  the  manner  and  degree  in  which  their  feelings  are  excited 
by  the  sermon.     There  is  a  better  test  than  that.     Shew  me  the  man  who  has 
prayed  the  best,  and  I  will  shew  you  the  man  who  has  got  the  most  "  good  " ; 
for  he   has   got — whatever   he  asked.       But  if  any  man   who  has   not   truly 
joined  in  the  prayers  imagines  that  he  has  received  any  real  benefit  from  the 
sermon,  he  deceives  himself.     The  thing  is  impossible.     It  is  opposed  to  the 
clearest   rule   of    the   dispensation  of  grace.      See    Luke   viii.    18.      2.  What 
is  the  proper  behaviour  of  this  place.     Whatever  deportment,  in  look,  gesture, 
or  manner,  is  suited  to  the  act  of  prayer,  the  same  is  becoming  demeanour  in 
"  the  house  of  prayer  " ;  and  whatever  is  foreign  to  the  business  of  the  place 
is  also  inappropriate  to  the  place  itself.     Now  what  is  prayer,  and  what  are  the 
manner  and  behaviour  of  a  person  engaged  in  prayer  ?     Prayer  is  the  most 
serious — I  had  almost  said  awful — transaction  in  which  a  human  being  can  be 
employed.     A   man   who  is   truly   praying,    whether   in   public    or   private — 
praying  effectually,  fervently,  and  with  all  his  soul — is  a  sight  which  cannot  be 
mistaken  for  anything  but  what  it  really  is.     And  when  a  number  of  persons 
are  so  engaged,  praying  with  one  accord  in  one  place,  striving,  together  in  their 
fervent  addresses  to  the  "  Father  of  mercies  and  God  of  all  comfort,"  we  should 
expect  to  see   still  more   legibly   stamped  on   every   feature  and  gesture   the 
characteristic   marks  of  their  employment,   the  outward  and   visible  signs  of 
heartfelt  devotion.      Is  it  so  in  our  churches  ?      Would  a   stranger   entering 
while   service    is  going    on    perceive  at   once  that   it  was   a   place    in   which 
prayer  was  wont  to  be  made,  and  that  the  congregation  was  so  engaged  at 
that  moment  ?     Would  he  be  carried  away  by  the  contagion  of  so  many  bended 
knees  and  blended  voices,  so  many  eyes  cast  down  to  the  ground  and  hands 
lifted  up  to  heaven ;  and  so,  falling  down  on  bis  face,  would  he  worship  God, 
and  report  that  God  was  in  us  of  a  truth  ? 

,       .      ,  411 


chap.  xi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


Ver.  17.  The  advantage  of  a  liturgy  in  public  worship. — One  of  the  most  inter- 
esting objects  to  the  eye  of  the  contemplative  man  must  ever  be  an  assembly  of 
Christians  engaged  in  public  worship.  The  literary  mind  may  revert  on  such 
an  occasion,  to  those  sad  spectacles  of  superstition  and  cruelty  which  disgraced 
even  the  most  enlightened  periods  of  heathen  history ;  and  the  observer  of  human 
character  will  call  to  mind  and  compare  the  infinite  variety  of  follies  and  delusions 
which  to  this  day  mar  the  religious  observances  of  all  uncivilised  nations.  The 
purity  of  Christian  worship  will  be  well  illustrated  by  the  contrast.  There  are 
differences,  however,  among  the  professors  of  Christianity  with  regard  to  the 
public  worship  of  God.  These  may  be  considered  to  resolve  themselves,  in  some 
degree,  into  one  great  question — that  of  the  use  of  a  liturgy  or  set  form  of 
prayer. 

I.  The  great  criterion,  by  which  we  may  judge  of  the  advantage  of  a  liturgy 
in  public  worship,  is  its  effect  on  the  minds  of  the  worshippers,  and  its  suitable- 
ness to  the  object  for  which  they  are  assembled. — God's  house  is  "the  house  of 
prayer."  How,  then,  is  a  congregation  assembled  there  to  address  itself  to  the 
throne  of  grace  ?  How  is  it  to  speak,  with  only  one  voice,  the  language  of  all, 
so  that  each  individual  may  thoroughly  enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  supplication 
without  perplexity  a  distraction  ?  This  result  can  only  be  secured,  we  apprehend, 
by  the  use  of  a  regular  "form  of  sound  words"  (2  Tim.  i.  13),  known,  understood, 
and  approved  by  all,  which  shall  be  a  guarantee  to  them  that  they  are  not 
going  to  utter  collectively  what  they  dissent  from  as  individuals,  and  that  they 
are  not  going  to  insult  the  Majesty  of  Heaven  with  what  is  unintelligible,  offen- 
sive, or  unscriptural ;  so  that  the  understanding  not  being  now  employed  in 
comprehending  or  the  judgment  in  approving  it,  the  heart  may  be  at  full  liberty 
to  feel  its  effect,  and  every  prayer  uttered  by  the  minister  may  ascend  at  once 
to  heaven  as  the  united  offering  of  the  congregation.  Thus  the  object  of  the 
assembly  is  fully  answered.  Though  but  one  for  the  most  part  spoke,  they  all 
prayed ;  and  having  thus  poured  forth  their  collective  petitions,  they  retire  to 
their  homes,  where,  at  their  accustomed  seasons,  and  according  to  their  individual 
methods,  each  may  address  his  particular  prayer  to  the  Father  which  seeth  in 
secret. 

II.  Another  advantage  of  a  liturgy  is  its  efficacy  as  a  source  of  union — a 
rallying-point  around  which,  as  a  centre,  a  whole  nation  may  assemble  with  that 
harmony  of  religious  intercourse  which  should  distinguish  all  who  profess  and 
call  themselves  Christians.  A  liturgy  protects  a  Church  against  needless 
innovations — against  the  effects  of  misguided  zeal  or  internal  faction,  which  would 
disturb  or  rend  it  asunder — against  the  caprice,  the  errors,  and  the  passions  of 
the  human  mind.  It  is  also  most  useful  as  a  standard  of  purity  in  doctrine, 
through  which,  as  an  untainted  channel,  the  great  truths  of  Christianity  having 
been  crystallised,  may  be  transmitted,  unaltered  and  uncorrupted,  to  future 
generations.  If  these  truths  were  left  to  be  explained  only  through  the  uncertain 
and  variable  medium  of  preaching,  they  would  soon  be  wrested  and  tortured  by 
the  injudicious  or  the  enthusiastic  minister,  and  the  people  would  be  lost  in  a 
labyrinth  of  unintelligible  or  contradictory  doctrine  ;  but  when  they  are  embodied 
and  illustrated  in  a  well -modelled  form  of  public  worship,  the  perversion  of  them 
becomes  more  difficult,  and  the  minds  of  the  people  are  less  likely  to  be  led  astray. 

III.  A  liturgy  is  a  constant  reminder  that  the  great  object  of  our  meeting 
in  church  is  prayer. — The  importance  of  this  point  being  kept  prominently  in  view 
will  be  evident  if  we  glance  for  a  moment  at  the  appearance  which  the  religious 
world  at  this  day  exhibits.  It  is  notorious  that  amongst  the  adherents  of  the 
numerous  Christian  societies  which  have  sprung  up  during  the  last  three 
centuries  a  spirit  of  preaching  has  superseded  the  spirit  of  prayer.  They  assemble 
together  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  listening  to  the  discourse  of  a  minister,  which 

412 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


is  the  main  feature  of  their  meeting.  Some  of  them,  indeed,  sensible  that  this  is 
not  as  it  should  be,  have  introduced  the  Anglican  Liturgy,  or  selections  from  it, 
into  their  religious  services.  Others  have  attempted  to  defend  their  disuse  of  a 
Prayer  Book  by  the  authority  of  the  Primitive  Church,  asserting  that  in  so 
doing  they  are  only  laying  aside  the  unnecessary  accretions  which  time  has 
attached  to  public  worship,  and  returning  to  the  purity  and  simplicity  of  original 
usage.  But  there  is  little  force  in  this  argument.  The  worship  of  the  early 
Christians,  who  were  scattered  abroad  in  small  numbers,  and  who  had  moreover 
been  just  converted  to  Christianity,  was  necessarily  imperfect  in  various  respects. 
They  had  not  yet  had  time  to  arrange  for  themselves  a  regular  form  of  service 
to  take  the  place  of  the  old  Jewish  ritual,  although  there  are  traces  in  the  New 
Testament  that  they  had  already  begun  to  do  so.  They  existed  also  in  a  state  of 
constant  alarm,  from  persecution  either  impending  or  actually  raging,  which 
forced  them  to  be  content  to  assemble  when  they  could  and  how  they  could. 
No  comparison  can  be  instituted  between  their  case  and  that  of  Christians  in  this 
present  age,  who  enjoy  leisure,  liberty,  and  all  means  of  organisation  in  abun- 
dance. The  Church  is  never  likely  to  consent  to  such  a  retrograde  step  as  the 
abandonment  of  what  has  been  found  so  practically  beneficial.  To  do  this  would 
be  to  exchange  system  and  order  for  confusion  and  chaos. 

Vers.  22,  23.  The  power  of  faith. — Our  Lord's  grand  earthly  work  was  the 
work  of  atonement.  But  there  were  other  designs  of  great  importance  which  He 
accomplished  whilst  He  sojourned  among  men.  Not  the  least  of  these  was  to  fit 
and  prepare  His  disciples  for  carrying  on  the  work  of  the  kingdom  after  His 
departure.  And,  in  reference  to  this  matter,  His  anxiety  manifestly  deepens, 
and  His  efforts  become  more  urgent,  as  the  time  of  His  offering-up  draws 
near.  At  this  period  how  earnest  and  how  oft  repeated  were  His  warnings  to  the 
disciples  regarding  the  dangers  and  sufferings  and  disappointments  of  their 
carnal  expectations  which  awaited  them  !  how  earnest  and  oft  repeated  His 
efforts  to  lead  them  to  their  true  source  of  strength  and  victory  in  God !  "  Have 
faith  in  God"  is  the  burden  of  many  a  discourse,  the  peculiar  lesson  of 
many  a  parable  and  many  a  wondrous  work.  This  was  the  lesson  which  the 
miracle  of  the  cursing  and  withering  of  the  fig  tree  was  designed  to  illustrate. 
He  would  thus  prepare  the  mind  of  His  disciples  to  meet  many  and  great 
difficulties  in  the  prosecution  of  their  work,  and  would  teach  them  also  that 
they  must  not  be  downcast  and  discouraged,  since  their  faith  in  God  endowed 
them  with  an  irresistible  strength,  before  which  every  difficulty  must  vanish. 

I.  Who  are  those  to  whom  these  cheering  words  are  addressed  ? — Primarily, 
they  were  addressed  by  our  Lord  to  His  personal  friends  and  followers  whom 
He  had  chosen  as  apostles.  The  promise  was  given  to  them  in  their  character 
of  labourers  in  the  Lord's  vineyard,  servants  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  it 
is  equally  valid  for  all  who  labour  and  strive  for  the  advancement  of  Christ's 
kingdom.  The  work  of  the  world's  salvation  from  sin  and  Satan  was  begun 
by  the  Lord  in  person,  and  by  His  death  on  the  Cross  and  His  resurrection 
from  the  dead  He  ensured  its  successful  issue.  But  it  was  ordained  by  Divine 
Wisdom  that  the  prosecution  of  the  work  in  detail  should  be  accomplished  by 
the  instrumentality  of  human  agents.  Every  Christian  is  entitled  to  appropriate 
the  gracious  language  of  our  text  as  addressed  to  him;  for  he  is  one  whom 
the  Lord  hath  found  in  the  market-place,  and  hired,  and  sent  to  work  in  His 
vineyard.  Every  preacher  of  the  gospel  can  claim  the  promises  as  specially 
made  to  him;  for  is  he  not  sent  expressly  on  the  Lord's  business?  Every 
congregation  of  the  Lord's  people  is  entitled  to  rest  upon  it;  for  have  they 
not  banded  themselves  together  in  the  Lord's  name,  for  the  very  purpose  of 
advancing  His  work  and  His  kingdom  in  the  world  ? 

413 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


II.  What  is  the  promise  made  to  those  who  are  doing  the  Lord's  work  and 
seeking  the  advancement  of  His  kingdom  ?  (ver.  23  :  see  also  Matt.  xvii.  20). — 
There  is  no  enemy  so  mighty,  no  difficulty  so  great,  that  may  not  be  conquered 
in  the  might  of  that  Divine  strength  with  which  the  Christian  is  endowed. 
1.  Look  at  the  individual  Christian,  even  if  he  be  one  of  the  lowliest  and  feeblest 
of  the  children  of  the  kingdom — one  of  those  hidden  ones  whom  the  world 
notices  not.  Mark  well  his  history,  and  you  will  find  that  his  whole  life  has 
been,  at  every  step,  the  march  of  a  mighty,  resistless  power,  going  forth  conquer- 
ing and  to  conquer.  He  has  waged  a  warfare  with  no  mere  power  of  flesh 
and  blood,  but  with  principalities  and  powers,  with  the  rulers  of  the  darkness 
of  this  world,  with  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places  ;  and  he  has  triumphed. 
Sin  and  Satan  still  abide  with  him  indeed,  ever  striving  to  foment  rebellion 
among  the  members  of  his  mortal  body  ;  but  they  no  longer  reign — their  hour 
of  power  is  gone.  And  in  the  exercise  of  that  same  power  by  which  he  has 
subjected  them,  he  shall  at  length  shake  himself  fully  and  for  ever  clear  of 
their  polluting  touch.  Nor  is  this  all  the  victory  that  every  humblest  Christian 
has  gained.  He  has  triumphed  over  a  condemning  law.  The  mountain  of 
guilt  and  the  sentence  of  death  are  powerless  to  arrest  his  progress,  as  he  presses 
forward  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  in  Christ.  2.  Look 
also  at  the  Church  in  general,  in  its  progress  from  age  to  age.  The  work  given 
her  to  do  is  nothing  less  than  the  salvation  of  the  world  from  the  dominion 
of  Satan,  and  the  subjection  of  it,  in  all  its  nations,  to  the  holy  and  righteous 
rule  of  the  Prince  of  Peace.  In  the  barren  fig  tree,  with  its  large  promise 
and  total  lack  of  fruit,  the  disciples  were  called  on  to  recognise  a  symbol  of 
the  enemies  of  the  gospel — a  striking  symbol  especially  of  the  Church's  mightiest 
and  most  malignant  foe,  Antichrist — the  service  of  the  devil,  under  the  name 
and  profession  of  the  truth.  Always  is  the  Lord's  vineyard  preoccupied  by  the 
deceitful  plants  of  the  devil's  sowing.  Before  the  seed  of  life  can  grow  these 
must  be  hewn  down  and  rooted  out.  But  who  shall  venture  to  touch  them, 
guarded  as  they  are  by  a  banded  world  and  by  the  hosts  of  hell?  What 
weapon  do  the  feeble  followers  of  the  Crucified  wield,  with  which  to  strike  down 
the  deep-rooted,  wide -spreading  evil  power?  Their  Lord  reveals  to  them  the 
secret  of  their  strength  in  that  mighty  word  of  faith  before  which  the  barren 
fig  tree  withered  and  died  in  a  day.  But  that  tree  which  sucked  the  strength 
of  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  and  covered  it  with  its  deadly  shade,  withered  at  a 
word.  And  so  is  it  with  all  the  Church's  enemies.  The  Church  is  as  yet  in 
the  agony  of  the  contest.  She  sees  with  trembling  heart  the  tide  of  victory 
sway  continually  backwards  and  forwards.  Her  battle  is  not  fought,  her 
warfare  is  not  accomplished,  until  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  covers  the  earth 
as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  The  Church  is  a  tree  which  must  still  grow  on, 
until  she  fills  the  earth  with  her  branches.  But,  all  imperfect  as  she  is,  what 
marvellous  growth  has  she  made  since  her  beginning,  when  she  was  small  as 
a  mustard  seed  ! 

III.  What  is  the  secret  of  the  Church's  marvellous  strength  ? — It  is  revealed 
in  the  words,  "  Have  faith  in  God."  Have  faith  in  God,  and  then  shall  follow 
the  wonderful  triumphs  indicated.  1.  God's  people  work  their  work  and  fight 
their  foes  in  the  strength  of  the  Almighty.  Have  faith,  not  in  yourself,  but 
in  God  :  expect  success,  not  in  your  own  strength,  but  in  God's.  Not  only 
is  He  with  us  amid  the  mountains,  the*  grand  towering  difficulties  of  the 
Christian  life;  even  in  the  performance  of  duties  apparently  the  most  simple 
and  easy  man  could  do  nothing  in  the  strength  of  the  flesh.  And,  blessed  be 
God,  the  Christian  does  not  need  to  try.  Though  we  are  not  sufficient  of 
ourselves,  we  are  sufficient,  ay,  even  to  work  wonders,  if  the  Christian  work 
should  require  them,  and  our  Lord  should  command,     In  all  things,  externa} 

414 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


or  internal,  great  or  small,  ft  is  ever  God  that  worketh  in  us  to  will  and  to  do 
of  His  good  pleasure.  2.  God  interposes  on  behalf  of  His  people  to  work  with 
them  and  fight  for  them  on  occasion  of  their  faith.  Their  faith  is  the  measure 
and  condition  of  their  victory.  So  that  in  a  sense  their  strength  lies  in  their 
faith.  There  is  indeed  no  true  efficacy  in  faith  itself ;  but  only  on  occasion  of 
faith  does  the  Almighty  work  for  His  people.  To  remove  the  mountains  of 
our  difficulties,  then,  we  must  apply  ourselves  to  our  work  in  faith, — not  in 
the  spirit  of  presumptuous  self-confidence,  but  in  faith;  not  in  the  spirit  of 
doubt  and  fear,  but  in  faith. — Jas.  Hamilton. 

Ver.  23.  The  weakness  and  difficulties  of  doubt. — I  wish  to  speak  of  doubt 
rather  than  of  doubtfulness.  Doubtfulness  is  a  chronic,  sensitive  condition  of 
soul ;  doubt,  an  acute,  sensitive  condition  of  mind.  Doubt,  in  the  end,  may 
degenerate  into  spiritual  doubtfulness — spiritual  doubtfulness  amounting,  in 
extreme  instances,  to  spiritual  death ;  but,  in  the  beginning,  doubt,  at  least  in 
its  higher  forms,  is  less  often  spiritual  than  intellectual.  Without  contradiction 
there  are  many  low  and  base  forms  of  doubt — doubt  supervening  on  spiritual 
neglect,  and  moral  transgressions,  and  sensual  indulgences.  But  without  con- 
tradiction also  there  are  high  and  noble  forms  of  doubt — unwilling  doubt,  which 
is  most  painfully  miserable  at  its  incapacity  to  believe. 

I.  Nor  is  this  species  of  doubt  altogether  an  evil. — For  there  is  a  strong 
tendency  in  human  nature  to  acquiesce  in  authority,  most  of  all  in  spiritual 
authority.  Spiritual  truths  are  often  so  difficult  to  discern,  there  is  such  a 
chaos  of  religious  opinion  weltering  in  Christendom,  that  for  peace  and  certainty's 
sake  men  are  inclined  to  bow  beneath  any  dominion  which  professes  to  hold  the 
keys  of  truth  and  light.  And  the  more  subjugate  men  are,  the  more  autocratic 
and  unreasoning  this  dominion  becomes,  until  at  length,  in  order  completely 
to  enslave  human  reason,  the  dominion  utterly  violates  it,  ever  encroaching 
upon  and  narrowing  the  limits  of  free,  religion's  intelligence.  And  if  it  were 
not  for  the  resistances  and  reformations  of  doubt,  this  tyrannous  dominion 
of  authority  would  assuredly  usurp  the  throne  of  all  religious  life.  Even  in 
Christian  Churches  which  boast  of  their  liberties,  and  profess  to  abhor  all  manner 
of  ecclesiastical  despotism,  the  prevalence  of  doubt  is  rapidly  expanding  those 
liberties,  and  imparting  greater  health  and  vigour  to  the  general  religious  tone. 
It  is  making  the  Bible  a  more  real,  more  intelligible,  more  living  book.  It  is 
stripping  prayer  of  its  spurious  attributes,  and  clothing  it  with  vast  and  most 
heavenly  power.  It  is  insisting,  with  St.  James,  that  faith  is  more  than  con- 
fessions and  creeds — it  is  life  and  work.  It  is  making  manifest  that  the  essence 
of  Christianity  is  sacrifice,  and  that  without  sacrifice  no  one  can  be  a  Christian. 
By  taking  away  the  false,  doubt  is  making  conspicuous  the  true  elements  in  religion. 

II.  Yet  there  are  obvious  dangers  attending  the  practice  of  doubt. — Doubt 
is  apt  to  run  into  excess,  and  the  excess  of  anything  is  evil.  If  the  excess  of 
faith  be  superstition,  the  excess  of  doubt  is  feebleness.  The  tendency  of  doubt  is 
always  to  cripple  men,  to  make  them  hesitate  and  do  nothing.  In  every 
department  of  life  it  is  impossible  to  succeed  without  believing;  if  we  do  not 
believe  in  what  we  are  doing,  we  cannot  do  it  well.  We  are  like  trees  whose 
roots  are  all  on  the  surface ;  the  first  winds  of  obstacle  uproot  and  blow  us  down. 
Our  strength  is  as  the  strengthlessness  of  a  fractured  arm,  dangling  down  in 
impotence  and  pain ;  no  one  can  lean  upon  us  for  support,  and  we  ourselves  are 
maimed  and  powerless.  Most  of  all  is  this  true  of  religion.  In  religion  the 
stern  necessity  for  occasional  doubt  may  be  wholesome  ;  but  the  easy  indulgence 
in  continuous  doubt  is  deadly.  Doubt  starves  the  soul ;  it  makes  lean  and 
feeble  the  inner  man.  The  pre-essential  of  all  success  in  religion  is  mighty, 
living  faith,     Without  faith  even  Christianity  itself  is  feebleness. 

415 


chap.  xi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


III.  There  are  doubters  and  doubters. — There  are  those  who  scarcely  care 
whether  they  believe  or  not ;  to  them  doubting  is  at  least  painless,  if  not 
absolutely  welcome.  But  there  are  others  who  earnestly  desire  to  believe,  to 
whom  doubting  is  misery,  and  yet  who  seem  unable  to  preserve  themselves  from 
doubt.  These  yearning  souls  long  for  that  eye  which  sees  the  Invisible,  that 
hand  which  touches  the  Eternal,  that  spirit  which  can  commune  with  the 
Infinite  and  be  inspired  with  the  All-Holy ;  yet,  amid  all  the  wonders  and 
loveliness  of  nature,  all  the  solaces  and  promises  of  the  gospel,  all  the  experiences 
and  mercies  of  daily  life,  they  are  unable  to  believe ;  or,  if  they  believe  at  all, 
their  faith  is  like  the  dimness  of  the  twilight,  and  not  like  the  splendour  of  the 
meridian  sun.  To  such  persons,  I  say,  doubt  is  misery — the  misery  of  the  caged 
bird,  the  misery  of  the  shorn  and  blinded  Samson,  the  misery  of  the  discrowned 
king.  What  are  they  to  do  ?  Is  there  no  relief  or  way  of  escape  ?  Will  the 
darkness  never  turn  to  light,  and  the  weakness  of  doubt  be  exchanged  for  the 
power  of  faith  ? 

IV.  There  is  one  method  of  strengthening  faith  which  we  all  may  wisely 
practise. — It  is  the  method  of  fairly  confronting  doubt  with  its  own  difficulties. 
It  is  when  we  throw  ourselves  out  of  ourselves,  and  project  our  thoughts  upon 
the  universe,  that  the  difficulties  of  doubt  present  themselves  with  huge  force 
and  emphasis.  For  what  is  the  nature  of  the  universe  in  which  we  live  ?  It  is 
boundless  in  extent,  yet  perfect  in  harmony.  Whence  then,  I  ask,  comes  this 
perfection,  this  punctuality,  this  absolute  order  and  precision  of  the  universe — 
an  order  compared  with  which  the  highest  human  regulations  are  chaos,  a 
precision  than  which  the  keenest  human  intelligence  cannot  conceive  anything 
more  precise  ?  You  answer  it  is  all  the  result  of  law.  But  what  is  law  ?  I 
reply.  Whence  came  the  law  ?  An  effect  without  a  cause  is,  to  my  mind,  an 
inconceivable  idea.  So  also  is  an  effect  higher  than  its  cause.  If  the  effect  be 
reasonable  and  intelligible,  the  cause  must  be  Intelligence  and  Reason  ;  for  you 
cannot  deduce  reasonableness  from  non-reason,  or  intelligibleness  from  non- 
intelligence.  I  am  thus  compelled  by  the  sublimities  and  the  harmonies  of  the 
universe  to  assign  their  origin  to  an  intelligent  Creator.  And  when  we  ascend 
the  scale  of  being  until  we  reach  the  kingdom  of  man  (man,  with  all  his  little- 
ness and  sin,  but  with  all  his  greatness  too — his  powers  to  think,  to  love,  to 
remember,  to  aspire),  we  ask  again,  Whence  spring  all  this  intelligence,  these 
emotions,  these  longings  of  our  human  nature  ?  Water  will  not  rise  higher 
than  its  source ;  and  man  cannot  soar  beyond  his  original.  The  original  of  man 
therefore  must  be  higher  and  greater  than  man  himself.  And  when  to  all  this 
you  add  the  teachings  of  history,  the  character  of  the  world's  moral  government, 
the  voice  of  conscience,  the  imaginations  and  inspirations  of  the  human  soul, 
and  ask  from  what  beginning  did  they  come,  the  simplest  and  the  most  satisfying 
of  all  answers  is,  "  Their  builder  and  maker  is  God." — Canon  Diggle. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    13,    14.  Pretension  and  per-  a  loud  one,  for  no  one  can  easily  speak 

formance. — 1.  There  is  apt  to  be  most  about  himself  without  self -laudation, 

pretension  where   there   is   least  per-  openly  or  covertly,   coming  in ;  criti- 

formance  (Rev.  iii.  17).     2.  There  are  cism,  assumptions  of   being   all  right, 

many    ways    of    making    profession.  and  fault-finding  are  professions,  loud 

Observance  of  the  forms  of  Christian  professions,  for  to  censure  others'  faults 

life  is  profession ;  Church  membership  is  tantamount  to  declaring  our  freedom 

is  profession ;  statement  of  our  habit  from  them ;  and  self-defence  is  some- 

and  ways  is  a  profession,  and  generally  times  a  form   of  profession.     3.  The 

416 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  XI 


only  ground  on  which  men  or  things 
are  spared  by  the  judgment  of  God 
is  that  they  yield  good  fruit.  Where 
love  is,  and  the  likeness  to  Christ  is, 
there  is  endurance  and  reward.  Where 
only  profession  is  there  is  judgment. 
4.  The  stroke  of  judgment  is  swift. 
Fearfulness  surprises  the  hypocrites. 
It  is  striking  by  what  slow  pro- 
cesses reputations  are  built  up,  and 
by  what  swift  judgments  they  are 
brought  down.  5.  The  angerless  judg- 
ment of  Christ  is  very  solemn. — R. 
Glover. 

The  mission  of  the  Church — to  feed 
hungry  souls. — As  Jesus  turned  to 
that  fig  tree,  drawn  thereto  by  the 
tree's  profession  of  fruitfulness,  so 
hungry  souls  turn  to  the  Church  and 
to  God's  professed  people  to  find  spiri- 
tual food.  What  that  tree  with  leaves 
and  no  fruit  was  to  Jesus,  the  Jewish 
Church  was  to  people  in  their  soul- 
hunger.  With  their  burden  of  sin, 
with  their  deep  heart -questionings, 
with  their  sorrows,  with  their  un- 
satisfied longings,  with  their  yearnings 
for  help  and  sympathy,  they  turned 
to  the  priests,  the  professed  spiritual 
guides,  if  haply  they  might  get  from 
them  what  they  wanted.  So  the 
mission  of  the  Church  is  to  feed  hungry 
souls.  In  the  hour  of  penitence, 
when  the  soul  is  conscious  of  guilt; 
in  the  day  of  trouble,  when  the  world 
has  no  more  to  give  ;  in  the  shadow 
of  death  ;  in  all  the  great  crises  of 
life, — even  the  most  worldly  turn  to 
the  Church  for  what  they  need. — J.  R. 
Miller,  D.D. 

The  cursing  of  the  fig  tree. — This  is 
Christ's  first  and  only  miracle  of 
judgment.  It  is  wrought  as  an  acted 
dramatised  parable,  not  for  any  phy- 
sical advantage,  but  wholly  for  the 
instruction  which  it  conveys.  1.  It 
is  complained  that  by  this  act  Jesus 
deprived  some  one  of  his  property. 
But  the  same  retributive  justice  of 
which  this  was  an  expression  was 
preparing  to  blight  presently  all  the 
possessions  of  all  the  nation.  Was 
this  unjust?  And  of  the  numberless 
trees  that  are  blasted  year  by  year, 


why  should  the  loss  of  this  one  only 
be  resented?  Every  physical  injury 
must  be  intended  to  further  some 
spiritual  end;  but  it  is  not  often  that 
the  purpose  is  so  clear,  and  the  lesson 
so  distinctly  learned.  2.  Others  blame 
our  Lord's  word  of  sentence,  because 
a  tree,  not  being  a  moral  agent,  ought 
not  to  be  punished.  It  is  an  obvious 
rejoinder  that  neither  could  it  suffer 
pain ;  that  the  whole  action  is  sym- 
bolic ;  and  that  we  ourselves  justify 
the  Saviour's  method  of  expression  as 
often  as  we  call  one  tree  "  good "  and 
another  "bad,"  and  say  that  a  third 
"  ought "  to  bear  fruit,  while  not  much 
could  be  "expected  of"  a  fourth. 
3.  In  this  word  of  sentence  Jesus 
revealed  His  tenderness.  It  would 
have  been  a  false  and  cruel  kindness 
never  to  work  any  miracle  except  of 
compassion,  and  thus  to  suggest  the 
inference  that  He  could  never  strike, 
whereas  indeed,  before  that  genera- 
tion passed  away,  He  would  break 
His  enemies  in  pieces  like  a  potter's 
vessel. — Dean  Chadwick. 

Ver.  14.  That  which  does  no  service 
to  Christ  is  found  unworthy  to  render 
service  to  man  (Luke  iii.  9). — J,  A. 
Bengel. 

Usefulness  the  sole  test. — This  fig  tree 
was  in  some  respects  a  good  one.  Its 
timber  probably  was  sound;  and  as 
for  its  leaves,  they  were  abundant. 
But  a  fruit  tree  is  valued  neither  for 
its  timber  nor  its  foliage,  but  for  its 
fruit.  As  with  trees,  so  with  every- 
thing else :  the  important  question 
is,  "  What  is  their  obvious  purpose 
or  final  cause  ?  "  A  building  may  be 
a  very  good  thing  in  its  way ;  it  may 
be  at  once  durable  and  ornamental. 
But  if  it  is  not  subserving  the  purpose 
for  which  it  was  erected  nor  any  pur- 
pose, what  then?  Simply  this — Let 
it  be  "  improved  from  off  the  face 
of  the  earth."  This  is,  I  think,  the 
dictum  of  common  sense,  as  it  cer- 
tainly is  the  principle  to  which  Jesus 
Christ  gives  a  practical  and  concrete 
Amen  !  "  No  man  eat  fruit  of  thee 
hereafter  for  ever  " ;  for  thou  art  not 

ee  417 


chap.  XL  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


meeting  "  the   wants  of  the  time." —  devil,  and  been  made  the  free  sons  of 

J.  S.  Swan.  God  ;  where,  in  short,  the  utterly  lost 

and   ruined   were   reinstated  in   their 

Vers.  15-17.  Cleansing  of  the  Temple,  heritage,  and  again  placed  in  their 
— From  this  narrative  we  learn —  native  home  ?  2.  Here,  when  our 
1.  The  blinding  force  of  self-interest,  reason  and  understanding  are  in  some 
for  doubtless  they  were  no  more  degree  developed,  we  approach  the 
sensible  of  their  iniquity  than  many  sacred  fount  of  inspiration,  and  drink 
a  modern  slave-dealer.  And  we  must  in  knowledge  from  the  oracles  of  God. 
never  rest  content  because  our  own  Ought  we  not  to  listen  with  reverence, 
conscience  acquits  us,  unless  we  have  when  although  we  behold  nothing  with 
by  thought  and  prayer  supplied  it  our  outward  senses,  but  men  like 
with  light  and  guiding.  2.  Reverence  ourselves,  and  the  ambassador  is  weak 
for  sacred  places,  since  the  one  and  unworthy  to  do  his  office,  yet  the 
exercise  of  His  royal  authority  which  King  of  kings  is  here  by  his  side,  and 
J  esus  publicly  displayed  was  to  cleanse  by  so  worthless  an  instrument  speaks 
the  Temple,  even  though  upon  the  His  commandment  ?  3.  Here  we  pro- 
morrow  He  would  relinquish  it  for  fess  to  do  Him  homage,  and  to  fall 
ever,  to  be  "your  house" — and  deso-  low  on  our  knees  before  His  footstool, 
late.  3.  How  much  apparent  sanctity,  We  are  to  feel  our  dependence,  we  are 
what  dignity  of  worship,  splendour  of  to  lean  on  His  arm,  we  are  to  confide 
offerings,  and  pomp  of  architecture,  in  His  love,  we  are  to  be  pierced  with 
may  go  along  with  corruption  and  the  conviction  of  our  helplessness  and 
unreality !  4.  The  might  of  holy  His  power,  and  our  distress  and  long- 
indignation,  and  the  awakening  power  ings  are  to  find  utterance  in  prayer, 
of  a  bold  appeal  to  conscience. — Dean  And  then  to  such  prayers  and  such 
Chadwick.  convictions,  to  such  sincerity  and  such 

Reverence  due  to  Churches. — Man  has  earnestness,  He  represents  Himself 
two  employments  in  the  present  scene  :  as  listening  eagerly.  How  should  you 
the  one  earthly,  the  other  of  heaven ;  be  careful  and  reverent  when  here, 
the  one  pertaining  to  the  body,  the  and  "  keep  thy  foot  when  thou  goest 
other  to  the  soul.  And  as  the  world  to  the  house  of  God  " !  "  My  house 
generally  is  the  place  where  He  treats  is  a  house  of  prayer."  "  There  am 
with  man,  and  makes  provision  for  I  in  the  midst  of  them."  4.  Here  is 
the  well-being  of  the  body,  so  is  this  offered  up  that  feast  and  sacrifice 
the  chief  appointed  place  for  the  peculiar  to  Christians,  which  corn- 
business  of  heaven,  and  for  securing  memorate  the  sacrifice  made  on  the 
those  advantages  which  are  great,  but  Cross.  We  have  temples  erected,  we 
unspeakable.  1.  Here,  to  take  the  have  altars  set  up,  we  have  priests 
first  point  in  our  spiritual  history,  we  ordained,  in  succession,  from  age  to 
are  baptised.  Born  into  the  world  in  age,  that  this  great  rite,  the  crown 
a  state  of  sin,  born  mere  worldly  and  sum  of  our  solemnities,  may  be 
beings,  only  fitted  for  and  having  no  duly  administered,  and  never  cease 
heritage  but  the  earth :  hither  we  whilst  the  world  stands.  Here,  then, 
are  brought  by  our  believing  parents  is  another  reason  for  exceeding  rever- 
and  pious  sponsors,  and  are  made  the  ence,  that  here  "  we  spiritually  eat 
children  of  grace.  Ought  we  not,  then,  the  flesh  of  Christ  and  drink  His 
to  feel  an  awful  and  deep  interest  in  blood,  we  dwell  in  Christ  and  Christ  in 
the  place  where  we  have  been  set  us,  we  are  one  with  Christ  and  Christ 
free  from  Adam's  stain,  and  admitted  with  us."  Here  is  the  Divine  Victim, 
to  the  light ;  where  we  have  been  here  the  health  and  life  of  man,  here 
delivered  from  the  original  curse,  and  the  precious  blood,  here  the  strength- 
obtained  a  blessing  ;  where  we  have  ening  and  refreshing  of  souls.  Oh,  how 
been   saved  from  the  bondage  of  the  reverently  should   we   deal   with   and 

418 


HOMIL&TIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.  chap.  XL 


approach  that  house   where   the   Son  Christ  wielded  was  the  power  inherent 

of  God  comes !     5.  And  shall  I  not  add  in  sinlessness.     That  made  cravens  of 

one  other  reason  for  affectionate  yet  these   worldlings.     The   voice  of    His 

solemn  feeling  towards  the  Churches  holy  zeal,  entering  with  the  paramount 

of  God  ? — that  here  the  dead  are  lying,  influence  of  purity  and  truth,  awoke 

and  that  here  are  treasured  up  unto  long- slumbering  echoes  in  souls  case- 

the  dawn  of  the  resurrection   all  the  hardened  with  unholy  commerce,  and 

earthly  remains  of  those  you  loved.  drove  them  from  the  scene  of  profane 

II.  The  methods  by  which  we  can  gain. — S.  D.  F.  Salmond. 
shew  that  we  have  a  becoming  sense 

of  God's  presence  and  majesty. — 1.  If  Ver.     15.     Christ   resorting    to    the 

we  have  that  respectful  feeling  which  Temple. — Being  come  to  the  city,  He 

I  have  desired  to  inculcate,  and  which  straightway  entered  into  the  Temple, 

is  pleasant  to  God,  our  hearts  will  be  either,  as  Gregory  noteth,  to  declare 

in  a  state  of  adoration  and  worship.  "  that  the  fault  of  the  priests  is  the 

We  shall  not  permit,  at  least  willingly,  ruin  of  the  people,"  and  therefore  His 

and  if   they  intrude  we   shall   strive  principal    care    was    to    correct    and 

against  them,  vain  and  idle  thoughts  reform  them ;  or  else  to  give  all  men 

or  dreams  from  the  world.     2.  If  the  an  example  of   diligence  in  repairing 

spirit  of  devotion  fill  the  soul,  it  will  to    the     house     of    God. — Archbishop 

make  itself  manifest  in  the  outward  Sandys. 
gesture ;    for   the   body   is  the  soul's 

instrument,    and    complies    with    the  Yer.  16.  A    great  principle    vindi- 

biddings  of  that  which  dwells  within,  cated. — It    seems    to   have   become   a 

even  the  immortal  part  of  us,  whether  common  practice  for  the  Jews  to  take 

it  be  for  evil  or  for  good.     3.  When  the  implements  of  their  daily  toil  with 

a   man    considers  that    this   is   God's  them  into  the  Temple  at  the  hours  of 

house;    when   he   considers   who   God  devotion,   and   make    the    sacred   in- 

is ;  when  he  reflects  on  the  purposes  closure  a  thoroughfare  from  one  part 

for   which  it  is  set  apart,  to  be  the  of  the  city  to  another.     There  was  no 

audience    chamber    of    the    Almighty  express  ordinance  interdicting  such  a 

when  He  treats  with  man  ;  that  here  practice,  and  in  ordinary  circumstances 

he  was  reconciled  to  the  Father,  made  it  might  have  seemed  innocent  enough 

a  member  of  Christ,  and  sanctified  by  to  avail  oneself  of  the  short  cut  there 

the  Spirit ;    that  here  God  speaks  to  provided.    But  it  was  at  variance  with 

him,    as   from   His   heavenly  throne  ;  the  spirit  in  which  the  place  was  to  be 

that  he  may  lay  before  Him  Lei  e  his  used,  and  Jesus  could  give  it  no  licence, 

supplications;    that  here  our  Saviour  So     uncompromising   was     the    Son's 

Jesus   Christ   comes  by   a  mysterious  jealousy  for  the  Father's  honour  even 

presence ;  and  that  here  are  deposited  in  trivial  circumstances  and  seemingly 

the  ashes  of  the  dead, — he  will  desire  indifferent   incidents !      The   principle 

the  house  of  God  to  be  in  some  degree  here  again  illustrated  is  of  the  highest 

worthy   of    its   Divine    Possessor.     If  consequence.    It  means  that  in  order  to 

an  earthly  prince  choose  to  honour  a  keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world 

subject,  what  expense  is  spared  ?    What  it  is  necessary  to  cast  off  along  with 

a  cost  of  silver  and  gold,  of  gems  and  the  evil  itself  everything  auxiliary  to  it 

of   raiment,  of   furniture  and  attend-  or  connected  with  it.     Innocence  from 

ants.     Ought  the  Almighty  to  be  less  the  great  transgression  implies  practised 

honoured  when  He  comes  ?    Should  His  self-restraint,  not   merely  against  the 

royal  palace  be  less  glorious  ? — J.  M.  profanity  which  is  seen,  but  against  its 

Chanter.  appliances,  occasions,  accompaniments 

— against  all  that  looks  like  it,  conduces 

Vers.   15,  16.    The  force  oj  a  Holy  to  it,  is  in  sympathy  with  it. — S.  D.  F. 

Personality. — The    instrument    which  Salmond. 

419 


CHAP.  XL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


Yer.  18.  The  Indestructible  Jesus. —  cheering  of  hardened  spectators,  and 
"  Destroy  Jesus."  How  incredibly  to  the  ineffable  delight  of  those  who 
astounding  these  words  sound  in  the  had  contrived  the  plot  which  ended 
ears  of  men  who  are  accustomed  to  here.  (1)  In  that  it  was  possible  for 
survey  the  world  after  it  has  been  Jesus  to  die  lies  the  very  basis  of  our 
subjected  for  upwards  of  eighteen  redemption.  (2)  In  the  death  of  Jesus 
centuries  to  the  uninterrupted  presence  promises  of  the  deepest  import  to  our 
of  Jesus  and  the  accumulating  in-  race  were  accomplished.  (3)  In  the 
fluences  of  Christianity !  Yet  they  are  stooping  of  Jesus  to  death  He  knew 
words  of  a  definite  import :  they  are  our  degradation  in  its  farthest  depth, 
exact  and  significant  enough ;  they  (4)  In  the  death  of  Jesus  lay  His  most 
announced  a  determination  on  the  part  sublime  victory  for  men, 
of  certain  men,  to  which  they  were  II.  Some  of  the  grand  points  in 
ready  to  give  effect,  and  for  the  failure  which  the  purpose  of  Jesus'  assailants 
of  which  neither  their  wills  nor  their  was  an  entire  and  egregious  failure. — 
zeal  may  be  held  responsible.  1.  The  very  body  of  Jesus  recovers  its 

I.  To  what   extent   could  the  pur-      vitality.    2.  The  Deity  that  was  within 
pose  of  the  foes  of  Jesus  succeed  ? —  the  destructible  Temple  they  could  not 
1.  They  might  succeed  in  disparaging  touch.    3.  The  violence  of  men  against 
His  character  and  station  before  men.  the  person  of  Jesus  could  not  frustrate 
Their  object   is   to  prove    that   He  is  or  retard  His  designs.     4.  The  violent 
a  blasphemer,  a  godless  man,  a  rebel,  death    of   Jesus    did   not    secure   the 
an  impostor.    2.  Maliciously  assaulting  permanence  of  the  old  Jewish  establish- 
the  person  of  Jesus  was  another  step  ment.     Jesus  was  destroyed  after  the 
in  the  attainment  of  their  merciless  end.  flesh,   but   lives    again   and   lives   for 
3.  Restraining  His    personal   freedom  evermore ;  Judaism,  in  the  very  death 
was  another  step  towards  accomplishing  of  Jesus,  expired,  and  has  never  since 
their  purpose.     4.   A  farther  element  revived ;  it  has  vanished  away,  whilst 
in  this  series  is  the  silencing  of  His  Jesus  abide th  ever.     5.  The  success  of 
tongue.     They    will   hear   its   accusa-  the  ungodly  did  not  lead  to  the  destruc- 
tions no  more ;  its   severe  utterances  tion  of   the   new  kingdom,  or   to  the 
will  grate  on  their  feelings  no  more ;  dethronement  of  Jesus, 
no   more  will   it   publish   before   God  In  conclusion,  to   render  the  topic 
and  man  their  gross  and  wanton  in-  practically  useful,  we  shall  briefly  indi- 
fidelity.     5.  Another  advance  towards  cate  who  they  are  that  now  sympathise 
their  full  achievement   is  the  torture  with  the  unholy  purpose  we  have  been 
they    applied    to    His    feelings.     The  discussing,  and  also  who  they  are  who 
arraigning,  the  accusation,  the  fearful  are  in  a  living  and  sanctifying  sympathy 
perjury,   the   corrupt   and   vacillating  with  the  Indestructible  Jesus.     1.  To 
judge,  how  must  all  these  have  wounded  the  first  class  belong — (1)  All  such  as 
the  spirit  of  the  falsely  accused !     The  are   unbelievers   in  Jesus.     (2)  Those 
barbarity,  however,  has  not  yet  reached  who,  however   upright  their   outward 
its   height.     Jesus  heard  them  shout  life   may   be,   yet,   in    spite   of    God's 
away   His   life,    and   shout   out   their  commending  His  Son  to  them,  remain 
preference   of    Barabbas   to    Himself,  utter  worldlings.    (3)  Where  too  must 
6.  Our    next    step    takes    us   to    the  they  rank  who   but   partially  receive 
climax  of  this  wicked  purpose.     They  the  record  that  God  gave  of  His  Son  ? 
who  had  secured  His  condemnation  felt  2.  But  there  are  some  that  belong  to 
that  but  one  act  was  now  wanting  to  the   latter    class   whom   we    have   no 
perfect   their    design,   and   that    they  difficulty  in  identifying.     (1)  Such  as 
hasten    to    effect.      As    soon    as   the  labour  and  pray  daily  to  purify  them- 
semblance  and  perversion  of  law  per-  selves  as  Christ  is  pure.     (2)  The  peni- 
mitted,  they  led  Him  away  to  crucify  tent,  who  in  his  grief  and  humiliation 
Him.     They  did  crucify  Him  amid  the  comes  to  Jesus  Christ  for  pardon  and 

420 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  XI. 


peace.  (3)  The  Christian  who  leaves 
all  and  follows  Jesus,  who  is  content 
with  deprivations,  bereavements,  and 
shame,  that  he  may  follow  and  serve 
Jesus,  gives  a  most  convincing  proof  of 
where  his  sympathies  lie. 

Truth  divides  men. — Truth  always 
makes  a  division  among  men.  Some 
think  of  nothing  but  to  persecute  and 
suppress  it,  while  others  admire,  love, 
embrace,  and  practise  it.  It  is  a 
dreadful  thing  to  see  here  who  they 
are  who  take  the  resolution  to  destroy 
it,  without  doubt  not  imagining  they 
were  doing  it,  but  really  believing 
themselves  on  its  side.  There  are  some 
particular  seasons  in  which  it  is  almost 
necessary  for  a  man  to  lie  concealed  in 
the  crowd  of  people,  to  prevent  his 
having  any  hand  in  the  persecution  of 
truth.  That  which  a  man  is  hindered 
from  doing  against  it  by  nothing  but 
fear  alone  is  already  done  in  the 
heart. — P.  Quesnel. 

Yer.  19.  The  conservation  of  human 
energy. — In  these  days  of  high  pressure, 
when  the  capital  as  well  as  the  interest 
of  life  has  often  to  be  drawn  upon, 
when  we  have  to  make  such  unnatural 
and  excessive  drains  upon  our  energies, 
and  when  as  a  consequence  our  ail- 
ments are  not  specific  diseases,  nor 
organic  maladies,  but  simply  nervous 
exhaustion,  loss  of  tone  throughout  the 
fibre  of  our  constitution,  the  example 
of  our  Lord  even  in  a  purely  physical 
way  inculcates  a  most  salutary  lesson, 
urges  upon  us  the  solemn  obligation  to 
maintain  the  fabric  of  our  energies  in 
good  repair.  To  preserve  the  con- 
ditions and  to  obey  the  commands  of 
the  laws  of  health,  to  exercise  our 
force  so  as  best  to  conserve  it,  to 
regard  life  as  an  inviolable  unity, 
where  hurt  or  loss  to  one  member 
entails  lack  of  energy  or  good  condition 
on  the  rest,  where  such  is  the  quick 
and  constant  sympathy  of  the  various 
parts  that  disregard  of  the  meanest 
involves  the  derangement  and  dese- 
cration of  the  whole — these  simple 
intimations  of  common  sense,  little  as 
at   times   we    may   wot,   are   yet   the 


prime,  the   paramount   obligations  of 
Christianity. — D.  Dickie, 

Yer.  20.  The  withered  Jig  tree. — The 
real  fig  tree  is  the  chosen  people, 
planted  by  God  in  a  chosen  land.  At 
the  appointed  time  Jesus,  the  Mes- 
senger of  the  Father,  has  come  to  urge 
upon  them  penitence  and  faith.  These 
are  the  fruits  for  which  He  hungered, 
and  which  He  longed  to  gather.  God 
strikes  with  death  whatsoever  of  His 
favoured  creatures  has  received  His 
bounty  and  His  care,  His  waiting  and 
His  love,  in  vain.  All  history  is 
strewn  with  the  remains  of  those  works 
of  man  which  the  living  Spirit  of  God 
has  not  builded,  lying  shattered  under 
the  blows  of  time.  All  history  is 
cumbered  with  the  dead  bodies  of  those 
sterile  beings  who,  though  born  of  the 
breath  of  God,  have  not  responded  to 
His  call,  but  have  falsified  His  hopes 
for  them.  The  very  type  of  their 
decay  is  found  in  Judaism,  withered 
to  the  roots.  Incapable  of  producing 
any  fruits  of  religion,  it  yet  remains 
standing,  shewing  even  in  its  barren- 
ness the  terrible  malediction  with 
which  Jesus  has  weighed  it  down. — 
Father  Didon. 

Yers.  22-24.  The  source  of  super- 
natural power. — All  supernatural  power 
has  its  source  in  absolute  faith  in  God. 
He  who  is  endued  with  perfect  faith 
enters  into  communion  with  the  Divine 
Being,  and  God  makes  him  the  instru- 
ment of  His  goodness  and  His  power. 
If  omnipotence  has  been  granted  to 
Jesus,  it  is  because  His  humanity  is 
permeated  with  the  fulness  of  the 
Divine  Spirit ;  in  subordination  to  its 
sovereign  control  He  executes  unfail- 
ingly its  wishes,  its  motions,  and  its 
works.  What  He  Himself  was,  Jesus 
required  of  His  disciples  to  become. 
"  Then,"  He  said,  "  nothing  will  with- 
stand you."  We  should  strangely  mis- 
interpret His  words  if  we  were  to 
believe  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  at  the 
beck  and  call  of  the  caprice  and  vain 
desires  of  men.  We  must  ask  of  God 
only  His  holy  will ;   and  in   order  to 

421 


chap.  XI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


thoroughly  enter  into  it  we  must  pray  natives   of   New    Guinea  ;    pride   and 

— that  is,  we  must  make  ourselves  one  secularity,  like  that  which  seemed  to 

with  it  in  absolute  self-denial.     Then  make   the   conversion   of   the   Roman 

and  then  only  will  the  Spirit  of  God  Empire  impossible.      There  is  no  im- 

inspire    us   with    a    good   desire,   the  possibility  to  those  who  can  lay  hold 

desire  which  is  always  listened  to  by  on  God. — R.  Glover. 
God,  for  it  comes  from  Him. — Ibid.  The  spirit  of  doubt  is  the  spirit  of 

weakness. — It  cripples  the  will,  so  that 

Yer.  22.  Faith  in  God  is  a  living,  no  life  of  high  resolve  is  possible  to  it ; 
dominant  conviction  concerning  God,  it  produces  unrest  and  discontent ;  it 
His  being,  His  character  and  govern-  looks  always  at  the  dark  side  of  the 
ment.  It  is  that  act  and  habit  of  the  picture ;  and  its  prevalence  in  this  age 
soul  by  which  the  truth  concerning  largely  accounts  for  that  pessimism 
God  is  drawn  in  from  the  distant  which,  like  a  shadow,  follows  it  into 
regions  of  speculation  and  enthroned  all  its  dreary  and  desolate  places, 
over  the  character  and  the  life.  It  is  Trace  the  social  discontent,  the  de- 
an act  of  the  whole  mind  :  of  the  intel-  structive  tendency  of  much  of  our 
lect,  which  sees ;  but  also  of  the  con-  literature,  especially  in  the  sphere  of 
science,  which  responds;  of  the  will,  philosophy — the  socialism,  anarchism, 
which  chooses ;  of  the  heart,  which  and  all  the  grumbling  and  rebelling 
fears  and  reveres,  which  loves  and  against  constitutional  order  and  the 
trusts.  It  is  that  act  and  habit  of  the  law  of  the  land, — trace  these  tendencies 
soul  by  which  the  notion  concerning  of  our  modern  life  to  their  source,  and 
God  becomes  a  reality,  the  chief  of  you  will  find  there  religious  doubt,  as 
realities,  ever  present,  all  controlling,  one  of  the  essential  preconditions 
the  perfect  object  of  fear,  of  service,  accounting  to  a  large  extent  for  what 
and  of  love. — E.  G.  Andrews.  we   see   amongst  a  vast  class  of  our 

Faith  in  God  means  faith  in  the  population.  For  I  maintain  that  when 
supremacy  of  good. — By  this  faith  a  nation  or  any  large  community 
Christianity  accomplished  its  successes  forming  part  of  its  organic  life  loses 
at  first ;  by  this  faith  all  great  reforms  faith  in  the  verities  of  religion,  when 
have  been  carried  on.  It  is  faith,  not  it  is  given  over  to  the  service  of  selfish- 
only  in  God,  but  in  man,  as  the  child  ness  or  halts  between  faith  and  unbelief, 
of  God.  It  is  the  faith  that  man  is  and  when  this  tendency  continues 
capable  of  seeing  truth  and  obeying  it —  for  any  lengthened  period,  then  there 
capable  of  seeing  the  right  and  doing  has  begun  the  downward  movement 
it.  Thus,  and  thus  alone,  is  evil  over-  of  national  dismemberment  and  decay, 
come  by  good.  We  can  only  overcome  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  spirit  of 
the  evil  in  ourselves  in  the  same  way —  faith  is  the  spirit  of  strength,  so  that 
by  faith  that  Jesus  is  really  the  Christ ;  all  things  are  possible  to  him  who 
therefore  that  goodness  will  at  last  believeth. — M.  McLellan. 
rule  in  our  souls,  mould  our  con- 
sciences, lift  us  above  temptation  and  Yer.  24.  The  conditions  of  effectual 
evil. — J.  F.  Clarke.  prayer. — 1.  We  must  pray  in  truth — 

that  is,   we  must   ask  for   what  we 

Yer.  23.  Faith  removing  mountains,  really  wish.    We  must  pray  in  spirit — 

— The  only  mountains  faith  desires  to  that   is,  we   must   ask   for   the  right 

remove  are  such  as  are  substantial  ob-  thing.      3.   We   must  pray  in  faith, 

stacles  in  the  path  of  mercy.     It   is  believing    that    our    prayers    will    be 

marvellous  how  many  such  have  been  heard  and  answered. — J.  F.  Clarke. 
removed, — enormous    evils,     like    the  Prayer  and  its  answer. — "  All  things 

slave-trade  of  seventy  years  ago,  like  whatsoever    ye    pray    and    ask    for, 

slavery  in  America  ;  degradation  and  believe " — not   that  ye  receive  them, 

superstition,    like    those    holding    the  but  "  that  ye  have  received  them,"  or, 

422 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


still   more   closely,   "that  ye   received  O  glorious  prerogative  of  the  faith  of 

them,"    "  and   ye    shall   have    them."  the  simple   peasant,   ignorant  of   this 

The  answer  to  the  prayer  is  thus  de-  world's  knowledge,  but  having  access 

clared  to  be  coincident  with  the  prayer  to   Divine  !      O  glorious   compendium 

itself.     The  petition  is  granted  at  the  of  Divine  illumining,  whereby,  not  as 

very  moment  when  it  is  framed ;  the  in  a  mirror  nor  by  laborious  process, 

blessing  for  which  we  look  does   not  the  soul  shall  have  all  knowledge,  and 

follow  at   some   distant  time  through  shall  see  the  secret  cause  of  all  created 

any  outward  events,  but   is  given  at  things,  in  the  light  of  God,  in  God ! 

once,   when,   with    absolute,    childlike  Even   gifts  of   God  could   not  satisfy 

trust,  we  lay  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  that  vast  soul  of  man — no  wisdom,  no 

open  before   our   Father.     Prayer,  in  intelligence,    nothing   which    has   any 

a   word,    is   the    conscious    and    glad  bound  or  end.     Prayer  fills  this  void, 

acceptance  of  God's  will  for  us  when  which  all  creation,  out  of  God,  could 

we  have  first  endeavoured  to  estimate  not  fill.     Prayer  is  "  the  ascent  of  the 

our  own  wants. — Bishop  Westcott.  soul  to  God  " ;  it  is  the  beginning  of 

Confidence    in   prayer. — It   is    only  that  blessed  converse  which    shall  be 

when  the  heart  is  very  childlike  that  the  exhaustless  fulness  of  eternal  bliss ; 

its  desires  are  pure  and  wise  enough  it   is   the   continuance   or  renewal   of 

to  be  left  with  God,  and  faith  strong  union  with  God. — E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 
enough  to  leave  them.     If  there  seem 

but    few    prayers    answered,    it    only  Yers.    25,  26.   Prayer  and  forgive- 

proves    that    there    are    few    prayers  ness. — To   His   promise  Jesus  adds  a 

offered.     For  it  is  only  good  prayers  precept,  the   admirable   suitability  of 

that  can  be  really  prayed.     Many  that  which  is  not  at  first  apparent.     Most 

we  "  say  "  do  not  lift   our  desires  to  sins  are  made  evident  to  the  conscience 

God   and   lodge    them   in   His   heart,  in  the  act  of  prayer.     Drawing  nigh 

Let   this  word  shew  us  how  great  a  to   God,  we   feel   our  unfitness   to  be 

thing  is  prayer,  and  how  great  are  its  there ;  we  are  made  conscious  of  what 

issues.     The   time  for   the   answer   is  He  frowns  upon ;  arid  if  we  have  such 

not  pledged,  and  the  manner  of  it  may  faith  as   Jesus   spoke  of,  we   at  once 

differ  from  what  we  expected ;  but  if  resign  what  would  grieve   the   Spirit 

we  really  pray  we  shall  be  heard. —  of  adoption.     No  saint  is  ignorant  of 

R.  Glover.  the  convicting  power  of  prayer.     But 

Faith  the  substance  of  things  hoped  it  is  not  of  necessity  so  with  resentment 
for. — He  doth  not  say,  "believe  that  for  real  grievances.  We  may  think 
ye  shall  receive  them,"  but  that  you  we  do  well  to  be  angry.  We  may 
do  receive  them,  which  plainly  shews  confound  our  selfish  fire  with  the  pure 
what  kind  of  faith  it  is  that  He  flame  of  holy  zeal,  and  begin,  with 
requires  of  us,  even  such  a  faith  as  confidence  enough,  yet  not  with  the 
is  the  very  "  substance  of  the  things  mind  of  Christ,  to  remove  mountains, 
we  hope  for"  (Heb.  xi.  1),  and  gives  not  because  they  impede  a  holy  cause, 
a  present  being  and  substance  to  them.  but  because  they  throw  a  shadow  upon 
Faith  is  also  "  the  evidence  of  things  our  own  field.  And  therefore  Jesus 
not  seen."  As  by  it  we  enjoy  what  reminds  us  that  not  only  wonder- 
God  hath  promised,  so  by  it  we  behold  working  faith  but  even  the  forgive- 
what  He  hath  revealed  to  us,  though  ness  of  our  sins  requires  from  us 
never  so  much  above  our  reason  or  the  forgiveness  of  our  brother. — Dean 
beyond  our  sight. — Bishop  Beveridge.  Chadwick. 

The    power    of   believing    prayer. —  God  forgives  us  as  we  forgive  others.— r- 

Prayer  obtains  grace,  wisdom,  strength,  We   know  that  when   rain   falls   not 

self-mastery,  peace,  all  which  the  soul  upon    hard    rock    but    upon    broken 

dares  wish  for,  for  time  or  eternity ;  ground,  in  due  time   a   mist   ascends 

but  it  obtains   more — it    gains   God.  from  the  ground  and  clothes  itself  in 

423 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


the  shape  of  clouds  and  returns  in  the  your  soul,  as  it  recedes  from  the  desire 

form  of  showers,  so  that  there  is  an  to  shew  mercy,  will  precisely  in  the 

action  and  reaction  between  the  rich  same  degree  recede  from  the  power  to 

rain  of  heaven  and  the  thin  mists  of  receive  mercy.  See  Matt,  xviii.  21-35. 
earth.     And  in  like   manner  there  is 

a  mutual  interaction  between  God's  Yer.  26.  Anger  a  bar  to  forgiveness. 
mercy  to  man  and  man's  mercy  to  his  — What  an  inconsistency,  to  seek  re- 
fellow  :  the  first  kindles  the  second,  conciliation  with  God  while  we  ourselves 
and  the  second  rekindles  the  first ;  are  unreconciled  to  our  neighbours ! 
they  produce  and  reproduce  each  other.  to  seek  to  have  our  own  sins  remitted 
This  is  an  immutable  moral  law ;  while  we  retain  the  sins  of  others ! 
therefore  we  pray,  "  Forgive  us  our  How  can  he  who  is  "  angry  with  his 
trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  brother"  hope  to  please  God,  since 
trespass  against  us,"  i.e.  in  the  like  from  the  very  beginning  all  such  anger 
spirit  of  forgiving  love.  But  if  the  is  prohibited  ?  (Gen.iv.  6;  Isa.  i.  10-15). 
sense   of   Divine  forgiveness   produces  — Tertullian. 

in  the  contrite  heart   a  readiness   to  Anger  drives  away  the  Spirit. — Anger 

forgive,     remember    that    it    is    this  is   a    passion    which,    if    it    be    long 

readiness  to  forgive  in  you,  this  tender-  cherished,  drives  away  the  Spirit.    For 

ness  of  heart  in  you,  this  spirit  of  love  how  canst  thou  think  that  the  dove- 

in  you,  which  keeps  ever  flowing  full  like  Spirit   of  God   will  reside   where 

and  free  the  current  of  God's  forgive-  the   heart    remains   full   of    gall  ?   or 

ness.      That    current    may    languish,  that  the  celestial  flame  of  Divine  love 

dwindle,  cease  to  flow  ;  nay,  from  the  should   burn   bright   and  clear  where 

sweet  running  water  of   love  it  may  there   are   so  many  thick  fumes  and 

turn  into  a  sullen  pool  of  hate  :  it  is,  vapours  rising  up  to  damp  and  choke 

indeed,  sure  to  stagnate  in  the  stag-  it?      Canst    thou   in    faith    pray   for 

nation  of  your  faith  and  love.     If  you  forgiveness     who     dost     not     thyself 

grow  indifferent   to   your   neighbour's  forgive  ?    (Eph.  iv.  26 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  8). — 

welfare,  envious,  malicious,  vindictive,  Bishop  Hopkins. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  27—33. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxi.  23-32  ;  Luke  xx.  1-8.) 

Christ's  authority  challenged. — I.  The  challenge  by  the  chief  priests  and 
scribes  and  elders. — 1.  The  occasion.  Christ's  teaching  in  the  Temple. 
Observe — (1)  His  constant  and  unwearied  pains  and  diligence  in  the  duties  of 
His  public  ministry.  (2)  Though  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  sought  His  life 
(ver.  18),  yet  He  doth  not  refrain  or  forbear  coming  to  Jerusalem,  and  into  the 
Temple,  and  teaching  the  people  there,  and  that  daily.  Hence  learn  that  we 
ought  not  to  forsake  our  calling,  or  give  over  the  duties  of  it  which  God  calls 
us  to  perform,  for  fear  of  outward  dangers  which  may  happen  to  us.  God  is 
able  to  protect  us  from  all  our  enemies.  2.  The  persons  that  questioned  with 
Christ  about  His  calling  and  authority.  (1)  Such  as  for  their  high  place  and 
calling  in  the  Church  should  be  the  greatest  friends  and  favourers  of  Christ 
and  the  gospel,  are  often  the  greatest  enemies  to  both.  (2)  Seeing  there  is 
such  unity  and  consent  amongst  the  wicked  enemies  of  Christ,  as  here  we  see, 
this  should  teach  us  much  more  to  labour  for  true  unity  and  consent,  whereby 
to  join  together  for  Christ,  as  these  did  against  Him.  3.  Their  questioning. 
(1)  There  is  something  good  and  commendable  here,  (a)  That  they  suppose, 
and  take  it  for  granted,  that  no  man  ought  to  take  upon  him  any  public  office 
or  function  in  the  Church  without  a  lawful  calling  and  authority  committed 

424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.  chap.  xi. 


to  him.  (b)  That  they  themselves,  being  public  officers  and  governors  in  the 
Church,  do  think  it  their  duty  to  take  care  that  none  intrude  or  usurp  any 
public  office  in  the  Church  without  a  calling.  (2)  But  there  is  also  that  which 
is  evil  and  wicked,  (a)  Their  malicious  purpose  against  Christ,  (b)  Their 
gross  hypocrisy  and  dissimulation,  (c)  Their  wilful  ignorance  and  blindness,  in 
that  being  formerly  convinced  of  His  lawful  calling  and  authority  by  so  many 
evident  signs  and  testimonies  of  it  as  they  had  seen  and  heard — viz.  by  the 
testimony  of  the  Baptist,  the  excellence  of  His  doctrine,  and  Divine  power  of 
His  miracles — yet  for  all  this  they  cannot,  or  rather  will  not,  see  what  authority 
He  had,  but  do  now  question  Him  about  the  same. 

II.  The  vindication  of  Himself  by  our  Lord. — 1.  The  preface  or  preparation 
to  the  answer,  wherein  Christ  tells  them  that  He  would  also  ask  of  them  one 
question,  which,  if  they  could  and  would  answer,  then  He  would  answer  them. 
(1)  In  that  our  Saviour,  knowing  them  to  come  with  malicious  purpose,  doth 
not  directly  answer  their  question,  we  may  learn  that  it  is  not  always  necessary 
or  fit  to  give  a  direct  answer  to  those  demands  or  questions  put  to  us  by  others, 
especially  by  malicious  enemies  of  the  truth,  who  come  to  cavil  and  entrap  us 
with  captious  questions,  and  not  with  a  mind  to  learn  or  receive  satisfaction 
from  us.  (2)  Though  He  does  not  directly  answer  their  malicious  question,  yet 
He  makes  a  kind  of  answer  indirectly,  by  putting  another  question  to  them, 
and  such  a  one  as  was  sufficient  (if  they  would  have  understood  it)  to  resolve 
the  matter,  and  to  convince  them :  hence  gather,  that  although  it  be  not 
always  necessary  or  fit  to  give  a  direct  answer,  nor  yet  any  answer  at  all  some- 
times, to  the  questions  of  malicious  cavillers,  yet  it  is  also  fit  sometimes  to  make 
some  kind  of  answer  to  such  captious  questions,  viz.  so  far  forth  as  is  neces- 
sary for  the  clearing  of  the  truth  and  for  the  convincing  of  such  cavillers 
(Prov.  xxvi.  5  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  15).  2.  The  answer  itself .  (1)  In  that  Christ  alleges 
the  authority  of  John's  ministry,  to  justify  His  own  calling  and  authority, 
hence  gather,  that  one  main  end  of  the  calling  and  ministry  of  the  Baptist 
was  to  declare  and  manifest  the  calling  and  authority  of  Christ  Himself,  by 
giving  testimony  to  Him  that  He  was  the  true  Messiah  promised  and  sent  from 
God  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  (2)  In  that  Christ  here  implies  that 
John's  ministry  and  doctrine  concerning  Him  was  from  God,  and  therefore  to 
be  believed  and  embraced,  which  otherwise  it  should  not  have  been :  hence 
gather,  that  no  doctrine  or  ministry  is  to  be  received  and  embraced  in  the 
Church  but  that  which  is  from  God,  that  is,  of  Divine  authority,  and  not  from 
men  only.  (3)  In  that  Christ's  asking  here  whether  John's  baptism  or 
ministry  was  from  heaven  or  of  men  doth  thereby  imply  that  it  was  indeed 
from  heaven,  and  not  from  men  :  hence  gather,  the  dignity  and  excellence  of 
the  doctrine  and  ministry  of  John,  that  it  was  the  doctrine  of  God,  and  was 
preached  and  taught  by  authority  from  God  Himself.  (4)  The  dignity  and 
excellence  of  the  sacrament  of  baptism. 

III.  The  effects  or  consequents  which  followed. — 1.  Their  reasoning  together 
about  the  matter,  and  consulting  about  the  answer  they  should  make.  (1)  Though 
they  came  very  cunningly  and  politicly  to  examine  and  question  with  our 
Lord  about  His  authority,  to  entrap  Him  and  bring  Him  into  trouble  and 
danger,  yet  here  we  see  they  could  not  prevail  against  Him  by  their  policy. 
See  Prov.  xxi.  30;  Isa.  viii.  10;  Ps.  ii.  1-4;  Job  v.  13;  Ps.  vii.  15.  (2)  See 
here  one  point  of  carnal  wisdom  in  these  enemies  of  our  Lord,  in  that  they,  being 
now  in  a  perplexity,  do  not  rashly  or  suddenly  proceed  to  make  answer,  but  first 
reason  and  consult  together.  See  Luke  xvi.  8  ;  Jer.  iv.  22.  2.  Now  followeth 
the  matter  of  their  private  reasoning  or  consultation  together.  (1)  They  cast 
what  inconveniences  or  dangers  to  themselves  are  like  to  follow,  if  they  answer 
thus  or  thus ;  but  regard  not  the  offence  of  God,  and  dishonour  like  to  come  to 

425 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


Him,  by  their  denying  or  concealing  the  truth,  and  that  against  their  own 
knowledge.  (2)  They  presuppose  that  if  they  should  acknowledge  John's  ministry 
to  be  from  heaven,  then  they  were  bound  to  believe  his  doctrine,  and  that  Christ 
might  justly  reprove  them  for  not  doing  so.  (3)  They  feared  the  people's 
displeasure,  and  lest  they  should  stone  them  for  speaking  against  John  and  his 
ministry  ;  but  they  were  not  moved  with  any  fear  of  God  to  confess  the  truth, 
neither  are  they  afraid  of  offending  God  by  denying  or  concealing  the  truth. 
(4)  The  common  and  meaner  sort  of  people  are  often  more  forward  to  embrace 
the  gospel,  and  to  esteem  the  ministers  of  it,  than  men  of  great  place  and  dignity 
in  the  Church.  3.  Their  answer  :  "  We  cannot  tell."  This  must  needs  be  false ; 
yea,  it  is  a  lying  answer,  containing  an  untruth  uttered  against  their  own 
knowledge.  (1)  God  often  takes  and  confounds  the  crafty  and  subtle  enemies 
of  the  truth  in  their  own  policy  (1  Cor.  iii.  19).  (2)  It  is  the  property  and 
practice  of  wicked  and  profane  men  to  lie  and  dissemble  for  their  own  benefit 
and  advantage,  as  for  their  profit  and  gain,  or  to  save  their  credit  with  men, 
or  to  help  themselves  out  of  trouble,  or  to  prevent  some  inconvenience  or  danger 
like  to  come  upon  them.  (3)  How  fearful  a  thing  it  is  for  any  to  be  given  up 
to  wilful  blindness  and  infidelity  I  4.  Christ's  reply.  Because  they  denied  and 
opposed  the  truth  against  their  own  knowledge,  He  refuses  to  give  them  any 
further  answer.  Take  heed  of  this  wilful  contempt  and  opposition  of  the  known 
truth,  lest  for  it  God  do  justly  leave  us  in  ignorance ;  yea,  give  us  up  to  further 
blindness,  to  be  hardened  in  it,  as  He  may  justly  do.  On  the  contrary,  labour 
not  only  to  know  the  truth  and  doctrine  of  God  out  of  His  Word,  but  especially 
to  entertain  the  love  of  it  in  our  hearts,  that  we  may  embrace  it  and  yield 
obedience  to  it. — G.  Fetter. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.   27-33.  Christ  and  the  Temple  He  did  not  deem  it  a  duty  to  always 

authorities. — 1.    Where  the   action  is  answer  questions  directly  and  without 

unquestionably  right  some  will  censure  reserve.     The   gates   were   not   to   be 

the    agent.       2.    They    who    require  thrown  wide  open  at  the  beck  of  every 

reasons  should  be  ready  to  give  reasons.  foe.     Source,  motive,  and  result  were 

3.  Truth  should  be  the  first  question  considered,  and  the  nature  of  His  replies 

with  men,  not  consequences.      4.  In-  gauged  accordingly.     In  this  instance 

competency     may     be    exposed     and  He  defeated  their  purpose  in  seeking 

assumption  resisted   for    the   sake  of  whereof  they  might  accuse  Him.     But 

truth. — J.  H.  Godwin.  He   at  the  same  time  let  them  know 

The  mutual  bearing  of  Christ  and  His  that  both  the  fact  and  source  of  what 

enemies. — With  evil  intent  they  open  they  sought  were  good  and  true.     His 

fire.     A    brief    "  yes  or  no  "    style   of  refusal  to  respond  to  their  liking  arose 

reply  may  do  great  injustice  to  righte-  not  from  fear  of  frank  statement  or  of 

ousness.    They  would  be  greatly  pleased  maintaining  it.      Let  them  answer  a 

therewith.    But  they  were  dealing  with  plain  question  and   He   would.     Fair 

One  who  had  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  play.     They   would  thus  shew  them- 

as  well  as  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove,  selves  worthy  of  an  explicit  reply  by 

And    so   without    needlessly    rousing  their   own  readiness  to  do  the  same, 

wrath,  impeding  work,  or  compromis-  But   whether  answered   or   not,   they 

ing  truth,  God's  glory  and  the  welfare  found  themselves  handicapped  by  their 

of  men  in  all  ages  are  subserved  by  insincerity  as  well  as  moral  and  physi- 

the  replies  which  came  promptly  and  cal   cowardice.     Had   they   been  true 

steadily  back  to  their  astonished  ears,  men  they  would  not  have  gotten  there. 

426 


B0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  XI. 


Their  capacity  to  decide  on  His  creden- 
tials, their  honesty,  their  courage,  were 
all  at  stake.  It  was  the  presentation 
of  a  dilemma,  the  grasping  of  either 
horn  of  which  would  defeat  them. 
Among  the  evils  they  made  a  lame 
effort  to  select  the  least.  By  avoiding 
a  blunt  refusal  He  prevented  the  need- 
lessly premature  loss  of  temper  and 
its  consequences.  Without  this  self- 
command  and  wisdom,  by  undue  exas- 
peration, a  crisis  might  be  hastened. 
"  His  hour  was  not  yet  come."  But 
how  could  they  help  realising  that,  by 
such  a  question,  He  knew  what  was  in 
them  ?  How  could  they  help  knowing 
that  the  knowledge  implied  by  His 
questions  had  Divinity  back  of  it  ?  How 
could  they  help  concluding  that  Divinity 
carried  with  it  that  authority  which 
they  were  insincerely  seeking  to  find 
out  ?  It  is  His  turn  now.  He  ques- 
tions. They  soon  stand  self- condemned 
in  the  light  of  their  own  admissions. — 
Wm.  M.  Campbell. 

Wilful  blindness  and  its  retributive 
judgment. — Had  they  been  true  to  their 
office  or  to  themselves,  they  needed  not 
to  have  asked  this  question.  They  had 
possessed  long  since  abundant  means 
of  knowing  the  Divine  authority  both 
of  the  Lord's  ministry  and  of  John's 
baptism.  But  their  carnal  passions 
prevented  them  from  acknowledging 
the  first ;  while  their  cowardly  fears, 
the  offspring  of  a  bad  conscience, 
brought  them  into  a  dilemma  respect- 
ing the  last.  Do  we  see  nothing  like 
this  among  ourselves?  Received 
truths  are  disputed ;  things  certain 
are  treated  as  uncertainties  ;  old  objec- 
tions, often  refuted,  are  revived  ;  ques- 
tions are  raised  where  the  clearest 
light  and  evidence  have  long  supplied 
an  answer  adequate  to  the  conviction 
of  every  honest  mind  :  but  men  refuse 
to  be  convinced  ;  they  harden  them- 
selves in  error  ;  because  of  their  lusts 
they  "  love  to  have  it  so  "  ;  while  some 
even  venture  to  hope  that  their  sup- 
posed inability  to  believe,  which  is 
their  condemnation,  will  serve  as  an 
extenuation  of  their  general  guilt  at 
the  Last  Day.     How  awful  in  these 


respects  are  the  warnings  of  the  Lord ! 
See  John  xii.  35 ;  Matt.  xiii.  12 ; 
Luke  xi.  35.—  J.  Ford. 

The  rejection  of  authority. — Those 
who  find  themselves  vanquished  by 
truth  generally  endeavour  to  reject 
authority.  There  are  no  persons 
more  forward  to  demand  of  others  a 
reason  for  their  actions  than  those  who 
think  they  may  do  everything  them- 
selves without  control.  Blind  priests ! 
who  see  not  the  finger  of  God  nor  His 
Divine  authority  in  the  visible  and 
innumerable  miracles  of  Christ,  which 
plainly  authorise  His  mission  and  His 
conduct,  and  evidently  prove  His 
Divinity.  Ignorant  scribes  !  who  talk 
of  nothing  but  the  Scriptures  and  the 
law,  and  yet  do  not  perceive  in  Christ 
the  author  and  the  perfection,  the  end 
and  accomplishment,  the  spirit  and 
the  truth  of  the  law,  as  all  the  Scrip- 
tures declare  Him  to  be. — P.  Quesnel. 

Yer.  28.  The  calling  of  ministers  in 
the  Church. — 1.  Reasons  why  none 
ought  to  take  upon  him  this  public 
office  or  function  in  the  Church  without 
a  lawful  calling.  (1)  Because  without 
such  a  calling  he  cannot  be  assured 
that  God  will  assist  him  and 
strengthen  him  to  do  the  duties  of 
his  calling.  (2)  He  cannot  expect  or 
look  for  the  blessing  of  God  upon  that 
which  he  doth  in  execution  of  his 
office,  and  so  he  cannot  with  comfort 
go  on  in  it.  (3)  Neither  can  he  be 
assured  of  God's  protection  in  his 
calling,  that  God  will  maintain  and 
keep  him  against  all  enemies  and 
dangers.  2.  There  is  a  twofold  calling 
of  every  one  who  takes  upon  him  this 
public  office  in  the  Church.  (1)  An 
inward  calling  from  God  and  in  his 
own  conscience,  whereby  he  must 
know  and  be  assured  in  himself  that 
God  has  endued  him  in  some  measure 
with  such  gifts  and  graces  as  are 
requisite  to  make  him  able  and  fit 
to  execute  that  office  and  function, 
together  with  a  willing  and  ready  mind 
and  conscience  to  use  those  gifts  to  the 
glory  of  God  and  good  of  the  Church. 
(2)    An    outward   calling    from    men 

427 


chap.  xi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


also,    being   approved  and  allowed   of  own  higher  spirit,  unto  which,  as  to, 

by  such   as   are  in   authority  in   the  an  observatory   of    heavenly    visions, 

Church,  to  execute  the  office  he  takes  his  life  for  a  season  withdraws  itself, 

upon  him. — G.  Fetter.  and  where,  shrinking  from  all  contact 

with  externals,  it  becomes  "a  seeing 

Vers.  29,  30.  Christ's  appeal  to  the  eye,  a  hearing  ear,  a  perceiving  sense  " 
testimony  of  the  Baptist. — As  His  for  the  things  of  eternity  or  of  the 
words  are  generally  understood,  they  future.  What  the  prophet  thus  re- 
would  have  amounted  only  to  silenc-  ceives  in  the  sanctuary  of  his  spirit 
ing  His  questioners,  and  that  in  a  or  meeting-place  of  the  two  worlds 
manner  which  would,  under  ordinary  that  he  announces  through  the  medium 
circumstances,  be  scarcely  regarded  as  of  the  subordinate  mind  and  its 
either  fair  or  ingenuous.  It  would  outflowing  speech :  for  in  the  prophetic 
have  been  simply  to  turn  the  question  ecstasy  the  three  constituents  of  the 
against  themselves,  and  so  in  turn  spirit- nature,  vovs  and  Aoyos  and 
to  raise  popular  prejudice.  But  the  7rvcufta,  continue  in  unbroken  corn- 
Lord's  words  meant  quite  other.  He  munication  with  each  other.  If  he 
did  answer  their  question,  though  He  be  a  seer,  he  contemplates  that  which 
also  exposed  the  cunning  and  cowar-  is  seen,  not  as  it  is  in  itself,  but  as  it 
dice  which  prompted  it.  To  the  comes  to  view  in  a  symbol :  this  symbol 
challenge  for  His  authority,  and  the  is  Divinely  formed  for  the  purpose, 
dark  hint  about  Satanic  agency,  He  and  often  accommodated  to  the  man's 
replied  by  an  appeal  to  the  Baptist,  natural  bent  or  educational  mode  of 
He  had  borne  full  witness  to  the  thought,  being  chiefly  framed  out  of 
mission  of  Christ  from  the  Father,  materials  found  in  his  subjectivity, 
and  "all  men  counted  John,  that  he  The  prophet  is  not,  indeed,  like  the 
was  a  prophet  indeed."  Were  they  subject  of  the  mystic  ecstasy,  rapt  or 
satisfied  ?  What  was  their  view  of  caught  up  to  the  confines  of  the  third 
the  Baptism  in  preparation  for  the  heaven  or  blissfully  translated  into 
Coming  of  Christ?  They  would  not,  the  paradise  of  God;  but  from  the 
or  could  not,  answer !  If  they  said  reciprocal  immanence  of  the  human 
the  Baptist  was  a  prophet,  this  implied  spirit  and  of  the  Divine  there  arise 
not  only  the  authorisation  of  the  manifestations  to  his  mind  in  a 
mission  of  Jesus,  but  the  call  to  clothing  or  colouring  borrowed  from 
believe  on  Him.  On  the  other  hand,  his  individual  nature.  The  super- 
they  were  afraid  publicly  to  disown  sensuous,  which  he  is  permitted  to 
John !  And  so  their  cunning  and  behold,  passes  immediately  through 
cowardice  stood  out  self- condemned,  his  own  vovs  into  Aoyos,  and  thus 
when  they  pleaded  ignorance — a  plea  in  the  form  of  speech  travelling 
so  grossly  and  manifestly  dishonest,  through  his  mouth  out  of  himself 
that  Christ,  having  given  what  all  enters  the  ears  and  the  vovs  of  the 
must  have  felt  to  be  a  complete  listening  congregation,  and  so  becomes 
answer,  could  refuse  further  discus-  intelligible  and  therefore  profitable  to  the 
sion  with  them  on  this  point. —  assembled  Church. — Prof.  T.  S.  Evans. 
A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Ver.  33.  Christ  discovers  not  Himself 

Ver.  32.  A  prophet  is  one  who,  to  hypocrites. — That  man  is  altogether 
standing  in  the  foreground  of  God,  unworthy  of  the  truth  who  seeks  it 
announces  on  Divine  impulse  and  with  only  to  oppose  it.  It  is  to  no  manner 
Divine  power  truths  unveiled  to  his  of  purpose  to  dispute  and  reason  with 
spiritual  perception.  These  truths,  those  who  study  only  how  to  ensnare 
often  significant  of  salvation,  it  is  his  in  their  discourse,  and  to  take  ad- 
office  to  report  for  the  welfare  of  the  vantage  of  everything  against  truth. 
community.     He  receives  them  in  his  Such  persons  shew  plainly  what  con- 

428 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  XI. 


cern  they  have  for  truth  when  they  all   times,   nor    in   all    circumstances, 

make  use    of    lies   and    forgeries    to  but  only  to  be  ready  to  do  it  whenever 

oppress  it.     Humility  does  not  oblige  the  glory  of  God  and  the  benefit  of  his 

any  one   to   give   an   account   of   his  neighbour  require  it. — P.  Quesnel. 
conduct  to  all  sorts  of  persons,  nor  at 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    XL 


Ver.  3.  God's  need  of  all. — In  a  strange 
place,  where  few  travellers  ever  go,  there  is  a 
wonderful  bridge,  underneath  which  the  trains 
stop  for  the  collection  of  passenger-tickets. 
There  may  be  nothing  remarkable  in  this; 
but  as  the  traveller  looks  up  he  sees  that 
which  strikes  him  as  indeed  a  peculiarity,  if 
nothing  more ;  it  is  that  the  granite  stones 
of  which  this  long  and  massive  bridge  is 
built  have  each  one  of  them  been  numbered. 
The  large  blocks  that  lay  at  the  bottom 
supporting  the  whole  structure  have  their 
number.  The  medium-sized  ones  that  hold 
the  great  work  together  have  theirs,  and 
the  very  smallest  have  theirs — all  to  fill 
their  parts  in  the  great  structure  which  so 
truly  completes  the  perfect  work.  There 
was  need  for  all  of  them.  So  we  are  taught 
by  this  earthly  monument  of  man's  genius 
the  spiritual  lessons  of  life.  God,  the  Great 
Architect  of  the  universe,  the  Master  Builder 
of  all  things,  and  the  Creator  of  all  life,  has 
need  of  every  creature  here  below,  that  it 
may  have  its  use  for  God's  glory.  All  crea- 
tures bow  before  God  as  He  comes  to  them  to 
draw  them  to  their  use  for  His  purposes  in 
the  world,  and,  in  their  willingness  to  be  so 
dealt  with,  teach  us  the  very  first  lesson 
of  life — submission  to  His  holy  will  in  all 
things. 

Ver.  8.  A  triumphal  procession. — At  the 
conclusion  of  the  Franco-German  War,  in  the 
course  of  which  Napoleon  III.  became  a  cap- 
tive and  was  dethroned,  the  victorious  German 
troops  made  their  triumphal  entry  into  Berlin 
on  June  16th,  1871,  which  is  thus  described 
in  a  newspaper  of  the  time :  "  On  each  side 
of  the  way  were  placed  gilt  pedestals,  and 
between  each  pedestal  hung  a  festoon  of 
laurel  and  fir.  After  the  flags  come  the 
Guards.  They  are  covered  with  laurel  and 
fir.  The  altars  and  cannons  are  covered 
with  leaves  and  with  branches  of  fir  trees." 

Vers.  9,  10.  A  deliverer  hailed. — Perhaps 
there  is  no  episode  recorded  in  history  more 
interesting  than  that  of  Charles  V.  when  he 
landed  at  Tunis.  Ten  thousand  men  and 
women  who  were  slaves  within  the  city, 
when  they  heard  the  approach  of  their 
deliverer,  rose  and  broke  their  chains,  and 
rushed  towards  the  gate  as  the  emperor  was 
entering  the  town ;  and  this  mighty  proces- 
sion knelt  down,  hailed  him  as  their  deliverer, 
and  prayed  God  to  bless  him. 


Slight  value  of  popular  demonstrations. — 
When  Napoleon  was  returning  from  his 
successful  wars  in  Austria  and  Italy,  amid 
the  huzzas  of  the  people,  Bourrienne  re- 
marked to  him  that  "  it  must  be  delightful 
to  be  greeted  with  such  demonstrations  of 
enthusiastic  admiration."  "  Bah !  "  replied 
Napoleon,  "this  same  unthinking  crowd, 
under  a  slight  change  of  circumstances, 
would  follow  me  just  as  eagerly  to  the 
scaffold." 

Vers.  13,  14.  Christ's  search  for  fruit. — 
When  He  comes  He  will  turn  up  our  leaves ; 
and  look  that,  like  the  tree  of  life  (Kev.  xxii. 
21),  we  bear  fruit  every  month,  or  that  we 
be  like  the  lemon  tree,  which  ever  and  anon 
sendeth  forth  new  lemons  as  soon  as  the 
former  are  fallen  down  with  ripeness;  or 
the  Egyptian  fig  tree,  which,  saith  Solinus, 
beareth  fruit  seven  times  a  year — pull  off 
a  fig  and  another  breaks  forth  in  the  place 
shortly  after. — J.  Trapp. 

Vers.  15-17.  Traffic  in  holy  places. — Descrip- 
tions left  us  of  what  used  to  take  place  in 
the  great  cathedrals  of  Europe — the  com- 
mercial bustle,  the  exchange  and  barter, 
the  hiring  of  servants,  the  transit  of  heavy 
market-produce,  which  went  on  familiarly  in 
our  own  St.  Paul's  less  than  three  centuries 
ago — may  help  us  to  realise  the  state  of 
matters  suggested  by  these  pregnant  words. 

Rebuke  of  irreverence. — When  Walter  Hook 
(Dean)  was  vicar  of  Coventry,  he  was  once 
presiding  at  a  vestry  meeting  which  was  so 
largely  attended  as  to  necessitate  an  adjourn- 
ment to  the  church.  Several  persons  kept 
their  hats  on.  The  vicar  requested  them  to 
take  them  off,  but  they  refused.  "  Very 
well,  gentlemen,"  he  replied ;  "  but  remember 
that  in  this  house  the  insult  is  not  done  to 
me,  but  to  your  God."  And  the  hats  were 
immediately  taken  off. 

Ver.  22.  "  Have  faith  in  God."— There  is 
something  very  interesting  in  looking  at  one 
of  those  triumphs  of  human  ingenuity  like 
the  clock  in  Strasburg  Cathedral,  which  tells 
not  only  the  hours  of  the  day,  but  shews  all 
the  motions  of  the  moon  and  planets,  fore- 
tells the  eclipses,  takes  account  of  "  leap 
year,"  and  performs  a  multitude  of  other 
curious  manifestations  of  thought  and  con- 
trivance. Could  any  one  be  so  foolish  as  to 
doubt  the  power  of  its  maker  to  alter  some 

429 


CHAP.  XI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


particular  portion  of  its  works?  And  yet 
why  will  men  doubt  the  power  of  God,  or 
refuse  to  permit  Him  to  act  as  He  sees  fit  ? 
The  laws  of  nature  are  His  servants,  and 
God  is  not  the  slave  of  His  own  rules. 

Filial  confidence. — The  celebrated  preacher 
Cecil  once  bade  his  little  daughter  cast  a 
favourite  necklace  into  the  fire  at  his  simple 
request.  With  tears  in  her  eyes  the  child 
obeyed,  and  the  next  day  her  father  brought 
her  a  jewel  of  far  more  value,  and  explained 
to  her  how  God  rewards  the  faith  of  those 
who  trust  in  His  wisdom  and  love. 

Ver.  23.  "  This  mountain" — We  find  in 
the  prophetic  writings  the  expressions,  "  The 
Mountain  of  the  House  of  the  Lord,"  "  The 
Mountain  of  the  Lord's  House,"  "  The  Holy 
Mountain " ;  and  thus  we  may  apply  the 
epithet  to  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  with  its 
noble  buildings  and  golden  roof,  standing 
on  the  rocky  heights  of  Mount  Moriah. 
Perhaps  our  Lord,  by  some  glance  or  gesture, 
made  this  meaning  plain.  The  Mountain  of 
the  Lord's  House,  the  grand  Sanctuary  of 
ancient  Israel,  was  the  very  sign  and  figure 
of  the  Old  Dispensation,  which  was  in  its 
character  concentrated,  local,  and  central- 
ised— one  God,  one  nation,  one  Temple,  one 
law.  But  Jesus  Christ  came  to  alter  and 
change,  to  widen  and  enlarge  the  Covenant 
of  Grace,  to  unlock  the  gates  of  mercy,  to 
welcome  in  the  wanderers,  to  stretch  out 
the  cords  of  the  Heavenly  Tabernacle,  so 
that  all  nations  might  enter  in,  to  break 
down  the  wall  of  partition,  and  to  make  His 
organisation,  the  Catholic  Church,  embrace 
all  nations  and  kindreds  and  people.  This 
great  change  He  declares  in  prophetic 
words.  This  Mountain  was  to  be  removed, 
this  Jewish  religion  was  to  be  transferred 
from  its  local  home  on  the  rocky  height  of 
Jerusalem,  and  it  was  to  be  cast  "  into  the 
sea."  "  The  sea,"  in  the  language  of  pro- 
phetic symbols,  means  the  nations,  the 
Gentiles,  the  various  races  of  men.  Our 
Lord's  words  were  fulfilled  when,  under 
Divine  inspiration,  St.  Peter  baptised  the 
Roman  Cornelius  and  his  family ;  when  St. 
Paul  said,  "  Lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles  " ; 
when  St.  James  gave  sentence,  "  Trouble  not 
the  Gentiles  which  believe,  with  the  Mosaic 
restrictions." — Dr.  Hardman. 

Stages  of  faith. — We  are  told  that  a  piece 
of  iron  probably  becomes  a  magnet  by  a  sort 
of  polarised  arrangement  of  its  molecules, 
but  that  this  polarised  or  magnetised  con- 
dition cannot  be  maintained  at  very  high 
temperatures.  Now  it  is  observed  that  if  a 
magnet  is  put  into  the  fire  it  heats  to  red- 
ness like  any  other  piece  of  iron,  but  that 
when  it  has  reached  a  certain  temperature, 
though  still  in  the  fire,  it  grows  almost 
suddenly  less  red  and  less  hot,  after  which 
it  gradually  regains  its  heat  and  redness, 
and  goes  forward  to  whiteness,  and  melting 

430 


like  any  other  piece  of  iron;  but  it  is  no 
longer  a  magnet.  An  internal  and  invisible 
alteration  in  its  own  structure  has  taken 
place,  and  the  expenditure  of  energy  upon 
the  change  in  its  own  molecular  constitu- 
tion, in  the  process  of  being  demagnetised, 
has  been  such  as  not  merely  to  arrest  its 
progressive  heating,  but  more  or  less  to  chill 
it  in  the  midst  of  the  fire.  Yet  it  is  true 
that  the  magnet  could  not  have  become 
white  hot  without  passing  through  this 
constitutional  change,  and  what  appeared 
like  retrogression  was  really  a  necessary 
stage  of  progress.  Is  not  this  in  very 
striking  analogy  with  what  happens  in  the 
history  of  many  a  soul  ?  and  if  so,  is  not 
doubt  in  those  souls  a  stage  in  the  growth 
of  faith  ? 

Prayer  and  the  laws  of  nature. — Our  faith 
is,  that  God  hears  His  creatures'  prayers,  as 
to  everything  which  concerns  their  well- 
being,  and  specifically  as  to  those  changes, 
upon  which  even  life  so  often  depends,  as 
it  is  good  for  us.  Now  neither  science  nor 
theology  has  any  right  to  set  these  two 
beliefs  in  contradiction  to  each  other.  They 
can  be  harmonised.  Professor  Tyndall's 
argument,  that  the  fixity  of  laws  precludes 
God's  hearing  our  prayers  in  this  respect, 
would,  if  pressed  (as  he  doubtless  would  not 
press  it)  equally  militate  against  any  belief 
in  God's  providence.  For  those  who  believe 
in  God's  providence  must  believe  that  those 
fixed  laws  (if  they  exist)  were  adapted  in 
their  marvellous  variations,  or  at  least  in  some 
of  their  more  striking  coincidences,  to  the 
moral  condition  of  moral  agents.  All  Europe 
was  electrified  by  the  shock  of  that  terrific 
Russian  winter  which  destroyed  the  great 
army  of  Napoleon  I.  If  the  laws  upon 
which  that  extreme  cold  depended  were 
laws  fixed  (as  Professor  Tyndall  must  hold) 
in  all  eternity,  then,  if  we  believe  in  God's 
providence,  we  must  believe  that  God,  in  all 
eternity,  adapted  them  to  that  end  in  His 
moral  government  which  they  subserved, 
whatever  that  end  was.  And  if  those  fixed 
laws  (supposing  them  to  exist)  could  be 
adapted  to  that  act  of  Napoleon  I.  which 
they  served  to  chasten,  although  Napoleon 
was  free  to  invade  Russia  or  not  to  invade 
it,  then  equally  the  same  fixed  laws  (if  they 
exist)  may  be  so  adapted  in  all  eternity  to 
our  foreseen  moral  condition,  that  any  other 
scourges  which  (like  the  cholera,  plague, 
locusts)  are  brought  upon  man  for  his  moral 
discipline,  without  violation  of  those  laws, 
may  equally,  without  violation  of  those 
laws,  be,  on  man's  repentant  prayer,  removed 
The  adaptation  of  the  supposed  fixed  laws, 
to  our  praying  or  not  praying,  our  repenting 
or  not  repenting,  has  no  other  difficulty 
than  their  adaptation  to  any  other  part  of 
our  moral  character  which  is  equally  free. 
— E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 

God's  control  of  nature. — There  is  a  re- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   XI. 


markable  note  in  Darwin's  Botanic  Garden 
(Canto  iv.,  I.  320),  in  which  the  author 
conjectures  that  changes  of  wind  may  de- 
pend on  some  minute  chemical  cause,  which, 
if  it  were  discovered,  might  probably, 
like  other  chemical  causes,  be  governed  by 
human  agency.  Whatever  may  be  thought 
of  the  probability  of  this  anticipation  being 
realised,  it  is  at  least  sufficient  to  suggest 
one  reflexion.  If  atmospheric  changes  may 
conceivably,  without  any  violation  of  natural 
law,  be  brought  under  the  control  of  man, 
may  they  not  now,  equally  without  violation 
of  natural  law,  be  under  the  control  of  God  ? 
And  are  we  so  fully  informed  of  the  manner 
of  God's  working  with  regard  to  these  con- 
tingent phenomena  of  nature,  as  to  know  for 
certain  that  He  can  never  exercise  such  a 
control  for  purposes  connected  with  His 
moral  government  ? — Dean  Mansel. 

Vers.  25,  26.  Necessity  of  forgiving  spirit. 
— In  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  lords  and 
knights  were  always  at  war  with  each  other, 
one  of  them  resolved  to  revenge  himself  on 
a  neighbour  who  had  offended  him.  It 
chanced  that,  on  the  very  evening  when  he 
had  made  this  resolution,  he  heard  that  his 
enemy  was  to  pass  near  his  castle,  with  only 
a  very  few  men  with  him.  It  was  a  good 
opportunity  to  take  his  revenge,  and  he 
determined  not  to  let  it  pass.  He  spoke  of 
his  plan  in  the  presence  of  his  chaplain,  who 
tried  in  vain  to  persuade  him  to  give  it  up. 
The  good  man  said  a  great  deal  to  the  duke 
about  the  sin  of  what  he  was  going  to  do, 
but  in  vain.  At  length,  seeing  that  all  his 
words  had  no  effect,  he  said,  "  My  lord, 
since  I'cannot  persuade  you  to  give  up  this 
plan  of  yours,  you  will  at  least  come  with 
me  to  the  chapel,  that  we  may  pray  together 
before  you  go."  The  duke  consented,  and 
the  chaplain  and  he  kneeled  together  in 
prayer.  Then  the  mercy-loving  Christian 
said  to  the  revengeful  warrior,  "  Will  you 
repeat  after  me,  sentence  by  sentence,  the 
prayer  which  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself 
taught  to  His  disciples ? "  "I  will  do  it," 
replied  the  duke.  He  did  it  accordingly. 
The  chaplain  said  a  sentence,  and  the  duke 
repeated  it,  till  he  came  to  the  petition, 
"  Forgive  us  our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive 
them  that  trespass  against  us."  There  the 
duke  was  silent.  "  My  lord  duke,  you  are 
silent,"  said  the  chaplain.  "  Will  you  be  so 
good  as  to  continue  to  repeat  the  words 
after  me,  if  you  dare  to  do  so:  ' Forgive  us 
our  trespasses,  as  we  forgive  them  that  tres- 
pass against  us  '  ?  "  "I  cannot,"  replied  the 
duke.  "  Well,  God  cannot  forgive  you,  for 
He  has  said  so.    He  Himself  has  given  us 


this  prayer.  Therefore  you  must  either  give 
up  your  revenge  or  give  up  saying  this 
prayer;  for  to  ask  God  to  pardon  you  as 
you  pardon  others  is  to  ask  Him  to  take 
vengeance  on  you  for  all  your  sins.  Go 
now,  my  lord,  and  meet  your  victim.  God 
will  meet  you  at  the  great  day  of  judgment." 
The  iron  will  of  the  duke  was  broken.  "  No," 
said  he,  "  I  will  finish  my  prayer.  My 
God,  my  Father,  pardon  me ;  forgive  me  as 
I  desire  to  forgive  him  who  has  offended 
me ;  '  lead  me  not  into  temptation,  but  de- 
liver me  from  evil.' "  "  Amen,"  said  the 
chaplain.  "Amen,"  repeated  the  duke,  who 
now  understood  the  Lord's  Prayer  better 
than  he  had  ever  done  before,  since  he  had 
learned  to  apply  it  to  himself. 

Christian  treatment  of  enemies. — A  poor 
widow,  who  was  a  washerwoman,  partly  de- 
pended for  support  upon  the  produce  of  her 
garden.  In  it  was  a  peach  tree,  the  fruit  of 
which  was  coveted  by  some  boys  of  the 
village.  Accordingly  one  night  they  entered 
the  garden  to  rob  the  tree.  The  widow  had, 
however,  made  a  timely  gathering  of  her 
fruit  that  day.  In  revenge  for  their  dis- 
appointment the  wicked  lads  turned  some 
swine  into  the  garden,  who  by  morning  had 
wrought  havoc  among  the  poor  woman's 
vegetables,  and  made  her  suffer  in  conse- 
quence through  the  winter.  In  looking  at 
the  desolation  she  picked  up  a  knife  with 
a  name  engraved  on  the  handle.  It  was 
the  name  of  a  village  boy  whom  she  knew, 
and  whom  she  thus  recognised  as  the  cause 
of  her  loss.  However,  nothing  was  said 
about  the  matter.  During  the  ensuing 
months  a  revival  took  place  in  the  village 
in  question,  and  among  those  who  became 
convicted  of  sin  was  the  owner  of  the  knife. 
Becoming  converted,  he  obeyed  his  con- 
science by  going  to  the  widow  and  confessing 
the  wrong  he  had  done  her.  Thereupon  she 
told  him  she  had  long  known  it,  and  shewed 
him  his  knife.  "But  why  did  you  not  inform 
upon  me,  and  make  me  pay  the  damage  ?  " 
he  asked.  "  There  was  a  more  excellent 
way,"  she  said  ;  "  I  took  that."  "  What  was 
it  ? "  asked  the  lad.  "  To  pray  for  you,  in 
accordance  with  the  Master's  directions." 
So  the  widow  had  her  revenge. 

Christian  feeling  towards  enemies. — At 
Tamatave,  on  the  eve  of  the  bombardment 
(by  the  French),  all  the  natives,  from  the 
governor  downwards,  were  at  a  prayer- 
meeting,  and  "  there  were  no  prayers  for  the 
lives  of  their  enemies,  and  no  cries  for  ven- 
geance upon  them.  Prayers  for  a  righteous 
vindication,  for  guidance,  for  faith  to  trust 
where  they  could  not  see,  and  for  eventual 
peace  and  goodwill,  were  the  only  petitions." 


431 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 

CHAPTER  XII. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  A  place  for  the  winefat. — Simply  a  winepress ;  or  (more  exactly)  winevat,  i.e.  the 
receptacle  under  the  winepress  proper.  Probably  viroKfyiov  is  here  used  to  denote  the 
whole  apparatus,  which  was  often  hollowed  out  of  a  sloping  rock.  A  tower. — A  stone  build- 
ing some  twenty  feet  high,  with  a  flat  roof,  where  a  sentinel  was  posted  to  protect  the 
vineyard  from  depredators.  It  would  also  serve  as  a  residence  during  the  vintage  season. 
Into  a  far  country. — Too  strong  :  diredrjfMTiffe  is  just  went  from  home. 

Ver.  4.  See  R.V. 

Ver.  6.  Most  pathetically  put  in  the  original :  There  was  yet  one  he  possessed,  a  son 
beloved  ;  he  sent  him  last  to  visit  them,  saying,  They  will  feel  ashamed  of  themselves  in  presence 
of  my  son. 

Ver.  13.  To  catch  Him  in  His  words. — The  chief  priests  and  scribes  and  elders  having 
signally  failed  in  their  last  attempt  (chap.  xi.  27-33),  now  send  a  band  of  Pharisees  and 
Herodians,  in  the  hope  that  they  may  be  able  to  entangle  and  ensnare  Sim  in  an  argument. 

Ver.  19.  "The  statute  must  be  regarded  as  relative  to  some  exceedingly  offensive 
matrimonial  condition  which  had  prevailed,  probably  polyandry.  When  such  a  custom  has 
unhappily  got  ingrained  in  the  habits  of  a  degraded  people,  it  is  not  possible  to  induce 
them  to  leap,  at  a  bound,  to  a  lofty  pinnacle  of  marital  purity.  The  ascent  must  be  gradual ; 
the  utmost  that  can  be  achieved  by  progressive  legislators  is  to  take  one  step  at  a  time." 
See  Dr.  J.  Morison's  note  in  loco,  from  which  the  above  is  quoted. 

Ver.  24.  Do  ye  not  therefore  err. — Is  it  not  on  this  account  that  ye  wander  in  a  maze, 
because  .  .  .  Instead  of  accusing  them  point-blank  of  error,  and  so  alienating  them  still 
farther,  our  Lord  deals  with  them  as  if  they  had  come  in  good  faith  to  have  a  difficulty 
solved ;  and  He  at  once  points  them  to  the  true  source  of  their  pretended  perplexity — 
ignorance  of  the  Scriptures. 

Ver.  26.  See  R.V. 

Ver.  28.  The  scribe's  question  was — Of  what  nature  is  the  first  commandment  of  all  ?  Has 
it  to  do,  that  is,  with  Sabbath  observance,  or  with  circumcision,  or  with  sacrificial  rites — 
or  what  ? 

Ver.  30.  Note  the  prep.  e£,  before  "  heart,"  "  soul,"  "  mind,"  "  strength."  The  whole 
of  man's  complex  being  is  to  go  out  in  love  to  God.  "  The  measure  of  our  love  to  God  is  to 
love  Him  without  measure." 

Ver.  32.  Finely  (answered)  !  Teacher,  Thou  hast  spoken  from  (the  standpoint  of)  truth, 
for  He  is  one,  etc.     This  seems  to  suit  both  text  and  context  better  than  R.V.  rendering. 

Ver.  34.  Discreetly. —  With  vovs  or  discernment — "  having  his  wits  about  him,"  as  we  say. 

Ver.  35.  Jesus  answered. — For  the  earlier  part  of  the  conversation  see  Matt.  xxii.  41,  42. 

Ver.  39.  Uppermost  rooms  at  feasts. — Chief  places  in  the  suppers — the  most  important  meal 
of  the  day,  and  the  most  fashionable  entertainment. 

Ver.  40.  Greater  damnation. — A  heavier  sentence  or  doom  than  that  awaiting  other  sinners. 
Christ  always  denounces  the  hypocrite  as  a  villain  of  double  dye. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxi.  33-41 ;  Luke  xx.  9-18.) 

The  husbandmen  and  the  vineyard. — In  this  parable  our  Lord  seeks  to  con- 
vince the  Jews  of  the  sinful  state  of  the  nation,  and  to  warn  them  of  the  terrible 
judgments  they  were  bringing  on  themselves.  These  features  will  be  dwelt 
on  more  fully  in  the  next  Outline  ;  the  following  more  general  lessons  may 
be  enforced  here. 

I.  This  parable  condemns  injustice  between  man  and  man. — It  assumes  that 
a  man  has  a  right  in  that  which  belongs  to  him,  and  exposes  the  wickedness 
of  those  who  attempt  to  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands.  It  goes  dead 
against  such  teaching  as  has  led  to  bloodshed  and  misery  in  Ireland,  and  can 
only  result  in  ruin  wherever  it  is  put  in  practice. 

II.  This  parable  enforces  solemn  spiritual  lessons. — 1.  We  are  not  our  own 

432 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xii. 


(1  Cor.  vi.  10,  20).  The  soul  is  a  vineyard,  and  we  have  no  right  to  neglect 
or  misuse  it.  Every  talent  entrusted  to  us  must  be  employed  for  the  glory 
of  God,  and  in  obedience  to  His  commands.  2.  The  Lord  of  the  vineyard  has 
afforded  us  every  opportunity  for  right  cultivation,  and  He  expects  us  to  render 
a  due  return.  "  No  man  is  elected  to  any  advantage  over  his  fellows  for 
his  own  sake  or  enjoyment.  He  is  rather  in  the  position  of  one  to  whom  finer 
and  more  powerful  instruments  are  given,  that  by  their  possession  he  may 
be  the  servant  of  all  the  rest."  3.  Obedience  must  be  the  voluntary  submission 
of  our  free  choice  ;  and  God  will  not  be  satisfied  without  this. 

The  Stone  which  the  builders  rejected. — Those  whom  our  Lord  addressed  had 
not  only  "read  this  scripture,"  but  had  been  accustomed  to  apply  it  to  the 
proper  person — not  David  himself,  but  David's  Son  and  Lord,  the  Messiah. 
So  that  here,  as  elsewhere,  Christ  covertly  takes  to  Himself  that  office  and 
dignity  which,  out  of  consideration  for  their  prejudices,  He  forbore  openly 
to  assume.  After  His  ascension,  when  there  was  no  longer  any  reason  for 
reserve,  His  apostles  affirmed  the  same  truth  in  the  plainest  terms  (Acts  iv.  10,  11 ; 
1  Pet.  ii.  7). 

I.  The  rejection  of  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Jewish  nation. — They  were  "  the 
builders,"  a  people  specially  set  apart  to  preserve  the  knowledge  of  God  in  the 
world.  This  they  had  done — carried  up  the  structure  to  a  certain  height  above 
the  ground,  as  far  as  their  materials  would  go.  But  now,  on  there  being 
presented  to  them  a  Stone,  a  chief  Corner-stone,  just  what  they  required  to 
complete  the  edifice,  they  cast  it  aside  with  derision  and  contempt.  And  in 
so  doing  they  unwittingly  fulfilled  prophecy  (Acts  xiii.  27). 

II.  The  exaltation  of  Jesus  Christ,  notwithstanding  their  rejection. — We 
cannot,  like  Stephen,  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man  standing 
at  the  right  hand  of  God.  But  we  may  behold  the  visible  kingdom  and  Church 
of  Christ,  as  it  was  instituted  at  Jerusalem  immediately  after  His  ascension, 
and  continues  to  this  day.  We  may  trace  the  marvellous  progress  of  this 
institution  in  the  pages  of  the  inspired  narrative,  so  far  as  that  narrative 
extends.  Proceeding  onwards,  we  may  view  "the  kingdoms  of  this  world," 
one  after  another,  "  becoming  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ," 
and  the  religion  of  the  Crucified  firmly  established  and  consolidated  in  the 
world. 

III.  The  Divine  agency  to  which  this  is  to  be  ascribed. — From  whom,  if  not 
from  God,  could  a  work  so  truly  Divine,  so  far  surpassing  all  human  powers  and 
conceptions,  proceed?  1.  Consider  it  as  a  gift  (Jas.  i.  17;  Bom.  vi.  23; 
John  iii.  16).  2.  Consider  it  as  a  signal  defeat  and  disconcerting  of  the 
counsels  of  men  (Ps.  xxxiii.  10;  Job  v.  13 ;  Ps.  lxxvi.  10).  3.  Consider  it  as 
still  proceeding,  and  recognise  "  the  Lord's  doing  "  both  in  the  rejection  and 
the  reception  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  the  doctrine  which  He  brought  down  from 
heaven,  and  sealed  with  His  blood. — F.  Field,  LL.D. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    1.    God's    care   for    Israel. —  infectious  that  even  the  chosen  nation 

Canaan  was  a  vineyard  enclosed  (Exod.  could  not   be   trusted  to  mingle  with 

xv.  17 ;  Ps.  xliv.   2 ;  Neh.  ix.   23-25  ;  them  on  free  terms.     They  were  for- 

Ps.  lxxx.  8-11).     Lines  of  demarcation  bidden     to    intermarry     with     other 

were  laid  down  between  the  people  of  people.      Moreover  they  were  isolated 

Israel   and   the   surrounding    nations,  by   their   geographical    position  :    the 

partly  because  the  idolatries  practised  desert  of  Paran  bounded  their  southern 

by  those  nations  were  so  defiling  and  states;    the    Mediterranean   Sea,   the 

f,f  433 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


west ;     the     rugged     mountains     of  consciousness    that  we  are    speaking 

Lebanon,      the      north ;      and      their  in  figures.     In  adopting  this  form  of 

eastern  frontier  was  a  water  boundary,  presentation,  therefore.  Jesus  was  not 

A   vineyard   required    unceasing   care  so  much  speaking  in  parables  as  using 

and  attention ;    so  every  facility  was  the  recognised    authority  of    written 

furnished   the    children   of    Israel    to  prophecy   against    His    opponents,    a 

become    a    nation   of    saints. — J.    H.  most  appropriate  procedure  when  the 

Morgan.  question  at  issue  respected  His  personal' 

The  soul,  God's  vineyard. — The  soul,  authority. — A.  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 
according  to  one  figurative  sense  of  this  The    design    of   this   parable. — The 

parable,  is  the  vineyard  of  God.    When  design    is    to    signalise    the    contrast 

He  created  it,  He  planted  it ;  He  set  between  the  spirit  of  the  owner  and 

a  hedge   about   it,    which   is   that   of  that  of  the  men  to  whom  the  vineyard 

His   commandments.      The   winepress  was   entrusted.      The    owner   has   an 

is   the   representative   sacrifice   which  eye  to  fruit ;  the  details  depicting  the 

causes  the  blood  of  Christ  to  flow  into  construction  of  the  vineyard  all  point 

it.      The   tower    is    the   Church,    the  towards   fruit   as   the  chief   end,  and 

house   of   prayer,    in   which  the  soul,  they    are    enumerated    for    no    other 

being  raised  from  the  earth,  is  secure  reason       There  is  a  hedge,  that  the 

from   its   enemies,    and   finds    in    the  vines    may    not    be    spoiled    by    wild 

Word  of  God  arms  strong  enough  to  beasts;    a    press    and    vat,    that    the 

overcome  them.     Our  soul  is  not  our  grapes  may  be  squeezed  and  the  juice 

own  :  God,  who  is  the  creator,  is  like-  preserved ;  a  tower,  that  the  ripe  fruit 

wise  the  proprietor  of  it.     We  hold  it  may  not  be  stolen.     The  didactic  signi- 

of  Him,  as  it  were,  by  lease,  only  that  ficance  of  these  particulars  is  not,  as 

we   may   cultivate   it,    and   render  to  in  the  original  form  of  the   allegory 

Him  the  fruits  which  it  is  capable  of  in  Isaiah,  that  all  has  been  done  that 

producing  by  His  grace.     Let  us  take  could  be  done  for  the  vineyard,  so  as 

great  care  that  we  be  not  found,  either  to  make  the  owner  free  from  blame, 

not   having    any   at   all,    or   claiming  but  that  all  has  been  done  with  one 

the  property  of   them  to  ourselves. —  object  in  view,  viz.  the  production  of 

P.  Quesnel.  fruit.      In  keeping  with  this  empha- 
sising of  fruitfulness  as  the  reason  of 

Vers.  3-9.  The  vricked  husbandmen,  the  existence  of  the  vineyard  fully 
— 1.  Injustice  to  men  results  from  equipped  for  the  purpose,  is  the  re- 
unfaithfulness  to  God.  2.  The  wicked  iterated  persistent  demand  for  the 
expect  to  profit  by  the  removal  of  the  fruit  when  the  season  came  round, 
righteous.  3.  What  is  good  passes  as  also  the  intimation  of  the  owner's 
from  those  who  will  not  use  it  to  those  purpose,  on  conclusively  ascertaining 
who  will.  4.  Those  most  honoured  that  no  fruit  was  to  be  forthcoming, 
by  God  have  not  been  most  honoured  to  entrust  his  vineyard  to  others, 
by  men. — J.  U.  Godwin.  On   the   other    hand,    what   was    the 

The  form  of  this  parable. — At  most  temper  of  the  vinedressers  ?     Was  it 

this    parable    is    but    an    old    theme  that  of  men  who  wished  to  keep  the 

worked  up  with  new  variations.    Every  fruit  to  themselves  instead  of  giving  it 

one  who  heard  it  knew  what  the  vine-  to  the  owner  ?     No  ;  but  rather  that 

yard  with  its   hedge,    winepress,    and  of  men  who  never  thought  of   fruit, 

tower   signified,    and    who    the    vine-  but  only  of  the  honour  and  privilege 

dressers  were,  and  who  the  servants  of  being  entrusted  with  the   keeping 

sent    for   the   fruits.       These   phrases  of  the  vineyard.     They  were  triflers, 

belonged   to   the  established   religious  men  utterly  devoid  of  earnestness,  and 

dialect  of  Israel  as  much  as  the  words  the  practical  purpose  of  the  property 

pastor,  flock,  lambs  of  the  flock,  Zion,  committed  to  their  charge  they  habitu- 

etc,  do  to  ours,  used  by  us  all  without  ally  forgot.     The  hedge  and  the  press 

434 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xii. 


and  the  tower  might  as  well  not  have 
been  there.  When  the  servants  came 
for  the  fruit  they  were  simply  surprised. 
"  Fruit,  did  you  say  ?  we  have  occupied 
the  position  of  vinedressers,  and  duly 
drawn  our  wages :  what  more  do  you 
want  ?  "  Such  was  the  actual  fact  in 
regard  to  the  spiritual  heads  of  Israel. 
They  had  been  entrusted  with  a 
valuable  institution — an  elect  nation 
furnished  with  good  laws,  and  meant 
to  be  a  holy  nation,  a  people  to  God's 
praise.  And  speaking  generally,  they 
had  lost  sight  of  the  end  of  Israel's 
calling,  and  had  made  no  use  of  the 
means  provided  for  its  attainment. 
They  had  occupied  their  position  for 
their  own  glory ;  taken  pay  and  done 
no  work.  They  had  committed  the 
sin  to  which  privileged  classes  have 
ever  been  prone — that  of  thinking  only 
of  privilege,  and  forgetting  duty. — 
Ibid. 

Application  of  this  parable  to  Chris- 
tians.— A  rich  vineyard,  planted  and 
fenced,  is  let  out  to  us  by  the  Divine 
Owner.  The  Bible,  the  Church,  and 
the  ministry  have  been  provided  and 
preserved  for  us.  These  blessings  are 
not  ours  by  right ;  we  are  tenants  at 
will.  We  cannot  truly  enjoy  the 
produce  of  the  vineyard  unless  we 
reserve  a  portion  for  the  owner. 
Those  fruits  enrich  us  most  when 
returned  to  the  Giver.  They  cannot 
be  presented  directly  to  Him,  but  they 
are  made  payable  to  the  poor  and  His 
ministers.  His  Son  has  come  to  claim 
them,  and  is  now  waiting  for  our 
supreme  reverence,  trust,  and  love. 
"  See  that  ye  refuse  not  Him  that 
speaketh." — J.  H.  Morgan. 

Ver.  6.  The  treatment  due  to  Christ 
from  sinners. — It  might  have  been 
presumed  that  sinners  would  treat 
Christ  kindly,  from — 1.  The  Divinity 
and  glory  of  His  nature.  2.  The 
perfect   excellence    of    His   character. 

3.  The  reasonableness   of   His  claims. 

4.  The    goodness    of    His   intentions. 

5.  His  known  ability  to  save.  6.  His 
power  to  destroy.  7.  Their  own 
necessities,     One  might  sooner  expect 


a  beggar  to  spurn  a  palace,  or  a  dying 
man  to  refuse  the  touch  that  would 
bring  him  life  and  health. 

The  Mission  of  the  Son. — As  He 
reached  this  point  of  the  parable  we 
may  well  believe  that  a  thrill  of 
blended  joy  and  horror  shot  through 
the  heart  of  Him  who  spake  as  never 
man  spake,  and  loved  as  never  man 
loved.  For  now  He  has  to  speak  of 
Himself,  and  of  His  Father's  grace  as 
shewn  in  and  through  Him.  There 
was  yet  one,  a  well-beloved  Son;  and 
He  last  of  all  was  sent  by  the  all- 
enduring  Lord  of  all.  Must  not  His 
whole  being  have  thrilled  with  deep 
and  sacred  joy  at  the  thought  that 
His  Father  loved  Him,  loved  Him 
well  and  much,  loved  Him  most  of  all 
for  the  love  which  prompted  Him  to 
lay  down  His  life  for  the  sinful  race 
which  hated  and  rejected  Him  ?  Amid 
all  the  sorrow  and  darkness  which 
confronted  Him,  must  He  not  have 
been  consoled  and  upheld  by  the  con- 
viction that  the  God  who  had  spoken 
to  men  in  sundry  fragments  and  divers 
ways  by  the  prophets  in  times  gone 
by,  was  now  speaking  to  them  by  the 
Son  whom  He  had  "  appointed  heir 
of  all  things,"  and  was  about  to  reveal 
to  them  the  very  fulness  of  His  grace, 
His  kindness  and  philanthropy — that 
even  the  death  of  the  Cross  was 
ordained  by  His  Father,  and  was  part 
of  the  plan  by  which  He  would  yet 
draw  all  men  unto  Himself  ?  And 
yet,  as  He  turned  from  God  to  men, 
as  the  thought  of  His  rejection,  of  all 
He  had  suffered  and  was  still  to  suffer 
at  the  hands  of  these  lawless  upholders 
of  law,  must  He  not  have  been  pro- 
foundly appalled  by  the  sense  of  that 
guilt  which  He  came  to  take  away? 
He  had  long  and  often  spoken  of  His 
death  to  His  disciples,  striving  to  pre- 
pare them  for  it ;  but  now,  for  the 
first  time,  He  predicts  His  rejection 
and  death  to  the  people  at  large,  and 
in  especial  charges  the  rulers  and 
priests,  who  had  already  in  secret 
council  conspired  to  put  Him  to  death, 
with  the  guilt,  with  "  the  deep  damna^ 
tion  of  His  taking-off."     If  they  could 

435 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.' 


He  could  not,  face  that  guilt  un- 
moved ;  and  as  He  put  into  the  mouths 
of  those  wicked  husbandmen  the 
words,  "  This  is  the  heir ;  come,  and 
let  us  kill  him,  that  the  inheritance 
may  be  ours" — if  the  priestly  rulers 
(who,  to  keep  their  "  place,"  had  deter- 
mined to  murder  Him) — if  they  started 
as  at  the  voice  of  an  accusing  and 
impersonated  conscience,  to  which  all 
their  guilty  secrets  were  known,  how 
must  He,  who  loved  even  them,  have 
been  grieved  and  appalled  at  a  wicked- 
ness so  stiff-necked  and  stupendous  as 
theirs!— S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Ver.  7.  The  Son  known  and  rejected. 
— 1.  Jesus  claims  to  be  the  Heir  of 
God.  In  acting  for  God  He  acts  for 
Himself.  It  is  nature  and  relation- 
ship, not  mere  official  dignity,  that 
underlies  this  title  and  that  is  implied 
in  the  parable.  2.  Jesus  implies  that 
this  was  known  by  these  Jewish 
leaders.  Their  condemnation  was, 
that,  knowing  Him  to  be  the  Son  of 
God,  they  slew  Him.  They  had  a  con- 
viction that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  but 
they  would  not  let  their  mind  dwell 
upon  it.  There  are  thousands  who 
have  a  haunting  suspicion  that  Jesus 
deserves  a  very  different  kind  of  re- 
cognition from  that  which  they  give 
Him.— if.  Dods,  D.D. 

Denial  in  spite  of  conviction. — 
Beneath  many  an  obstinate  denial  of 
Him  lies  a  secret  confession  or  mis- 
giving, which  is  more  truly  the  man 
than  the  loud  negation.  And  such 
strange  contradictions  are  men,  that 
the  secret  conviction  is  often  the  very 
thing  which  gives  bitterness  and  eager- 
ness to  the  hostility. — A .  Maclaren,  D.D. 

"  The  inheritance  shall  be  ours." — 
Fatal  mistake  !  The  inheritance  was 
theirs,  and  in  slaying  the  Heir  they  cast 
themselves  out  of  it. — Prof.  F.  J.  A. 
Hort. 

Vers.  10,  11.  The  rejected  Stone. — 
The  psalmist,  in  these  two  verses,  is 
held  to  have  referred  to  an  incident 
in  the  building  or  in  the  rebuilding 
of  the  Temple.     A  stone  which  after 

436 


examination  the  builders  had  rejected 
and  cast  aside  as  unworthy  of  a  place 
in  the  foundation,  had  proved,  when 
re-examined,  to  be  of  such  noble  quality 
that  it  was  used  as  a  corner-stone  in 
the  cornice,  at  an  angle  where  two 
walls  met,  and  was  thus  exalted  to  a 
conspicuous  place  of  honour.  Such  a 
reversal  of  skilled  human  judgment 
was  held  to  be  the  Lord's  doing,  a 
marvel  which  called  for  admiration 
and  praise.  As  it  was  with  the  rejected 
stone,  Jesus  implies,  so  will  it  be  with 
the  rejected  Son.  "  You  priests  and 
rulers  have  rejected  Me  ;  you  are  about, 
as  you  think,  to  cover  Me  with  shame 
and  dishonour ;  but  God  is  laughing  at 
you,  and  at  the  shallow  cunning  you 
mistake  for  policy  and  wisdom :  He  will 
have  you  in  derision  ;  He  will  lift  His 
despised  and  rejected  Son  into  a  place 
so  lofty  and  honourable  as  that  all  the 
world  may  see  Him,  and  praise  the  God 
who  has  exalted  Him." — S.  Cox,  D.D. 
God's  truth  overcoming  human  oppo- 
sition.— It  is  very  remarkable  how 
often  this  has  been  repeated  in  the 
history  of  the  Church — how  great 
religious  movements  have  been  frowned 
down,  if  not  actively  opposed,  by  those 
in  high  places,  which  have  afterwards 
subdued  all  opposition.  In  our  own 
times,  in  this  very  century,  this  has 
occurred  twice.  First,  the  great  evan- 
gelical movement  in  the  Church  of 
England  was  set  at  naught  by  the 
builders,  though  it  was  the  assertion 
of  the  primary  truth  of  personal  religion 
— that  each  soul  must  have  a  personal 
apprehension  of  Christ,  and  look  to 
Him  with  the  eye  of  a  living  faith ; 
and  then  the  great  Church  movement 
was  almost  unanimously  rejected  by 
the  bishops  between  1840  and  1850, 
though  it  was  the  assertion  of  the 
truths  patent  through  all  the  New 
Testament,  that  the  Church,  though  a 
visible  organisation,  is  the  mystical 
body  of  Christ — that  it  is  a  super- 
natural system  of  grace,  and  that  its 
sacraments  are  the  signs  of  grace 
actually  given  in  and  with  the  outward 
sign.  In  neither  of  these  cases  did 
"  the  builders  "  discern  the  strength  of 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xit. 


the  principles  asserted,  and  foresee  that  Ver.  1 2.  Reproof  should  be  welcomed. 
they  must  win  their  way,  though  the  — Men  almost  instinctively  resent  re- 
formularies  of  the  Church,  of  which  proof;  they  do  not  like  plain  truths 
these  builders  were  the  exponents  and  about  themselves.  Light  hurts  weak 
guardians,  assert  very  unmistakably  eyes  ;  honey  burns  sore  throats.  Lais, 
both  these  truths  in  conjunction,  viz.  the  Corinthian  beauty,  broke  her  mirror 
spiritual  apprehension  of  Christ,  and  because  it  shewed  her  wrinkles.  This 
sacramental  union  in  His  body. —  is  foolish.  I  ought  to  be  grateful  to 
M.  F.  Sadler.  any  who  help  me  to  know  myself. 
Christ  is  to  His  Church  a  stone.  When  I  remember  how  I  shrink  from 
which  is  solid  by  His  immortality,  reproving  another,  I  ought  to  feel 
white  by  His  purity, — a  principal  one,  deeply  indebted  to  the  man  who  has 
as  being  her  Head ;  a  foundation-stone,  brought  himself  to  the  point  of  reprov- 
as  Author  and  Finisher  of  the  faith ;  ing  me.  Some  one  has  said  that  no 
and  a  corner-stone,  as  being  the  band  man  can  be  perfect  without  either  a 
and  union  of  all  His  members.  They  watchful  enemy  or  a  faithful  friend, 
whose  business  it  is  to  build  the  Let  us  value  the  faithful  friend.  He 
spiritual  edifice  are  sometimes  so  un-  may  not  tickle  our  vanity,  as  does 
happy  as  to  reject  the  most  lively  and  the  honey- tongued  flatterer,  who,  like 
excellent  stones.  But  God  will  cer-  Vitellius,  worshipped  Jehovah  at  Jeru- 
tainly  take  care  to  reserve  them  their  salem  and  Caligula  at  Rome ;  but  he 
proper  place,  and  to  put  them  into  the  will  make  us  stronger  and  purer, 
building. — P.  Quesnel. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 
(Parallels:  Matt   xxii.  15-22;  Luke  xx.  19-26.) 

Question  as  to  tribute  money. — One  part  of  the  business  of  a  teacher  of 
Divine  truth  is  to  be  ready  to  resolve  doubtful  cases  submitted  to  him  relating 
to  duty  and  conscience.  Especially  a  teacher  professing  to  come  with  a  message 
straight  from  God  to  men  would  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of  living  oracle,  at 
whose  mouth  any  one  who  had  a  question  to  propose  might  seek  a  solution  of  it. 
There  are,  however,  two  conditions  which  such  a  teacher  might  reasonably 
demand  from  those  who  came  to  consult  him :  first,  that  he  should  not  be 
appealed  to  in  mere  private  matters  and  personal  differences,  which  might  be 
settled  by  the  proper  tribunals  (Luke  xii.  13,  14)  ;  and,  secondly,  that  there 
should  be,  on  the  part  of  the  questioner,  a  sincere  desire  to  know  what  is  right 
that  he  may  choose  it,  and  to  learn  the  will  of  God  that  he  may  do  it.  It  was 
in  this  latter  qualification  that  the  inquirers  we  are  at  present  concerned  with 
were  deficient. 

I.  A  foul  plot. — "The  chief  priests,  and  the  scribes,  and  the  elders" 
(Mark  xi.  27),  being  afraid,  after  their  signal  defeat,  to  enter  the  lists  with 
Jesus  any  more,  now  "  send  unto  Him  certain  of  the  Pharisees  and  Herodians, 
to  catch  Him  in  His  words."  1.  They  doubtless  thought  this  a  very  clever 
move,  and  congratulated  one  another  upon  the  secrecy  with  which  their 
arrangements  had  been  made.  But  somebody  had  gained  admittance  into  their 
counsel  who  was  not  of  it.  Let  the  plotters  of  mischief  and  those  who  take 
counsel  together  against  the  innocent  know  this  assuredly :  that  there  is 
nothing  hidden  from  the  Lord ;  that  when  every  precaution  has  been  taken, 
and  every  possibility  of  human  treachery  guarded  against,  "  a  bird  of  the  air 
shall  carry  the  voice,"  etc.  (Eccles.  x.  20).  2.  Christ's  enemies  were  constantly 
holding  secret  meetings  to  devise  His  ruin.  It  required  many  a  midnight 
conclave,  many  a  sitting  with  closed  doors,  to  hatch  the  foul  plot  which  ended 

437 


CHAP.  xil.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


in  His  death.  But  now  all  those  things  which  were  spoken  in  the  ear  in 
closets  are  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops.  3.  The  object  of  the  present  plot 
was  "to  catch  Him  in  His  words."  They  could  not  have  employed  a  more 
likely  device.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  entrap  a  person  of  a  frank,  unsuspicious, 
straightforward  character  into  saying  something  which  may  artfully  be  turned 
to  his  prejudice.  God's  saints  in  all  ages  have  been  persecuted  in  this  way 
(Ps.  lvi.  5,  6;  Isa.  xxix.  21). 

II.  An  insidious  compliment. — 1.  "A  man  that  flattereth  his  neighbour,"  etc. 
(Prov.  xxix.  5).  So  these  hypocrites,  designing  to  entrap  Christ,  try  to  put  Him 
off  His  guard  by  a  compliment  to  His  character.  2.  With  many  persons  this 
ruse  would  have  succeeded.  There  is  a  class  of  men  who  pride  themselves  on 
speaking  the  truth,  regardless  of  consequences ;  whence  it  often  happens  that 
to  the  fear  of  being  thought  capable  of  fear  they  sacrifice  that  very  truth 
which  they  profess  to  prize  so  highly.  3.  To  attempt  to  entangle  Christ  by  so 
poor  an  artifice  only  shewed  how  far  they  were  from  knowing  Him.  He  was 
certainly  all  that  they  said :  He  did  "  teach  the  way  of  God  in  truth  "  ;  He 
did  "  care  for  no  man"  ;  He  did  "regard  not  the  person  of  men."  But  no  more 
did  He  regard  the  opinions  of  men,  or  care  for  establishing  such  a  character 
of  Himself  amongst  men.  And  as  for  those  who  offered  Him  this  incense,  He 
knew  that  they  "  did  but  flatter  Him  with  their  lips,  and  dissemble  in  their 
double  heart." 

III.  A  captious  question. — 1.  To  understand  the  entangling  nature  of  this 
question,  we  must  remember  the  ambiguous  condition  of  the  Jews,  as  a  nation, 
at  this  time.  It  was  not  independence,  because  they  were  under  the  military 
authority  of  a  Boman  governor ;  nor  was  it  a  state  of  absolute  bondage,  since 
they  were  allowed  to  retain  their  own  laws  and  customs,  and  to  exercise  a 
certain  judicial  power  through  their  high  priest  and  Sanhedrin.  It  was,  in 
fact,  a  condition  of  real  subjection,  with  just  such  concessions  as  might  soothe 
the  wounded  vanity  of  a  fierce  and  high-spirited  race.  Observe  how  sensitive 
they  were  to  any  allusion  to  their  lost  liberties  (John  viii.  33).  Now  the  most 
galling  thing  of  all,  and  that  which  reminded  them  most  painfully  of  their  real 
condition,  was  the  tribute.  Caesar  could  afford  to  leave  them  a  shew  of  liberty, 
but  not  to  forego  his  taxes.  The  Jews,  on  their  part,  looked  upon  the  payment 
of  custom  or  tribute  to  a  foreign  power  as  an  act  of  treason  against  Jehovah. 
They  did  pay  it,  but  under  protest — because  they  could  not  help  themselves. 
2.  The  question  now  proposed  to  Christ  by  His  enemies  was  one  which,  they 
judged,  must  receive  from  Him  either  an  affirmative  or  a  negative  answer.  If 
He  should  decide  in  the  affirmative,  He  would  be  placing  Himself  in  opposition 
to  the  almost  universal  feeling  of  the  Jewish  nation.  It  would  be  considered 
not  only  an  unpatriotic  but  even  a  blasphemous  decision,  and  as  such  would 
be  fatal  to  His  influence  with  the  people.  If,  on  the  contrary,  He  should 
pronounce  against  the  lawfulness  of  paying  tribute,  He  could  be  handed  over 
to  the  magistrate  on  a  charge  of  sedition. 

IV.  An  ignominious  defeat. — 1.  "  He,  knowing  their  hypocrisy" — pretending 
to  entertain  conscientious  scruples  which  they  did  not  feel,  and,  while  professing 
to  seek  advice,  having  no  other  object  but  to  turn  Christ's  answer  against  Him- 
self, whatever  it  might  be — instead  of  giving  a  direct  reply,  desires  to  see  the 
tribute  money.  And  they  bring  him  a  denarius — a  silver  coin  bearing  on  its 
face  the  head  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  the  reigning  emperor,  with  his  name  and  title. 
2.  This  proceeding  of  Christ's  was  well  calculated  to  excite  curiosity,  and  to 
keep  His  hearers  in  suspense.  We  can  fancy  we  see  the  little  circle  of  spectators 
drawing  closer  together,  looking  now  upon  the  questioners,  now  upon  the  piece 
of  money,  now  upon  the  lips  of  Him  who  was  expected  to  bi«eak  the  silence. 
And  He  does  so  in  the  memorable  words,  "  Bender  to  Caesar,"  etc.     3.  Christ 

438 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap,  xii* 


does  not  give  a  direct  answer  to  the  question  asked.  The  question  was,  "  Is  it 
lawful  ?  "  not,  Is  it  necessary  ?  or,  Is  it  expedient  ?  but,  "  Is  it  lawful  to  give 
tribute  to  Caesar,  or  not  ?  "  This  question  could  only  be  answered  by  shewing 
that  there  is  nothing  in  such  a  payment  inconsistent  with  the  law  of  God,  or 
with  that  allegiance  which,  as  the  people  of  God,  they  owed  to  a  greater  King 
than  Caesar.  Christ  neither  shews  this  nor  even  asserts  it.  And  why  ?  Because 
that  would  have  been  to  do  the  very  thing  they  wanted,  and  to  fall  into  the 
trap  they  had  laid  for  Him.  To  a  captious  question  He  returns  an  evasive 
answer.  They  sought  a  handle  against  Him,  and  He  gives  them  something 
they  cannot  lay  hold  of.  His  reply  is  so  framed  as  neither  to  injure  Him  with 
the  people  nor  to  compromise  Him  with  the  magistrate.  4.  Still  the  question 
remains — "  Is  it  lawful,"  etc.  To  which  a  sufficient,  though  not  a  direct,  answer 
may  be  gathered  from  Christ's  action  and  words.  For  it  is  a  general  maxim 
that  the  money  current  in  any  country  determines  the  power  to  which  allegiance 
is  due.  When  the  Jews  deluded  themselves  with  the  idea  that  they  still 
preserved  their  independence  as  a  nation,  this  Roman  coin  bore  witness  against 
them.  When  they  boasted  of  being  the  people  of  God,  "  a  kingdom  of  priests 
and  a  holy  nation,"  they  ought  to  have  remembered  that  by  God,  the  same  God 
whom  they  acknowledged  for  their  King,  did  other  kings  reign,  and  princes 
decree  justice.  "  He  changeth  the  times,"  etc.  (Dan.  ii.  21).  At  one  time  He 
had  brought  foreign  princes  against  this  very  people  to  oppress  them  in  their 
own  land  ;  at  another  He  had  caused  them  to  be  carried  away  captive  to  a  land 
that  was  not  theirs.  And  He  had  forewarned  them  of  a  time  when  "the 
sceptre"  should  finally  "depart  from  Judah,"  etc.  (Gen.  xlix.  10).  That  time 
was  now  come.  This  very  image  and  superscription,  to  those  who  read  it 
aright,  plainly  declared  so.  While  they  were  arguing  and  disputing  whether 
it  was  lawful  to  pay  or  not,  Caesar's  collectors  were  gathering  in  his  taxes.  This 
was  a  state  of  things  which  could  not  be  mistaken.  None  but  the  wilfully  blind 
could  fail  to  see  that  to  resist  the  power  was,  in  this  case,  to  resist  the  ordinance 
of  God.  5.  But,  lest  this  rule  of  "rendering  to  Csesar  the  things  that  are 
Caesar's,"  should  appear  to  countenance  the  smallest  violation  of  the  sacred 
rights  of  conscience,  we  must  remember  that  it  is  not  the  whole  of  Christ's 
answer.  He  goes  on  to  give  a  second  rule  which  guards  and  limits  the  first ; 
or  rather,  the  two  together  must  be  considered  as  a  single  rule,  and  so  applied 
to  every  case  of  conduct.  God  has  His  rights,  as  well  as  Caesar.  There  need 
not  be  any  opposition  or  interference  between  the  two ;  and  there  was  none 
here.  Should  it  be  otherwise,  should  the  things  of  Caesar  in  any  case  be  contrary 
to  the  things  of  God,  no  man  can  doubt  which  of  these  must  give  way.  6.  Note, 
in  conclusion,  the  comparative  urgency  with  which  these  respective  claims  are 
enforced  upon  us.  Caesar  is  pressing  and  peremptory  :  God  is  gentle  and 
persuasive.  Caesar  listens  to  no  appeal :  God  is  pitiful  and  easy  to  be  entreated. 
It  is  Caesar's  policy  to  put  down  resistance  and  disobedience  at  once,  by  the 
immediate  punishment  of  the  offender  :  it  is  God's  principle  to  forbear  and  suffer 
long,  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,"  etc.  Such  being  the  respective 
dispositions  of  these  two  powers,  it  needs  little  knowledge  of  human  nature  to 
tell  which  of  them  is  more  likely  to  obtain  his  due.  As  we  look  around,  we 
observe  that  human  laws,  strictly  enforced,  are  generally  obeyed;  while  the 
most  flagrant  violations  of  the  law  of  God,  the  most  wanton  denials  of  His 
claims,  go  unpunished,  if  not  unregarded.  Such  being  the  case,  it  is  surely 
incumbent  on  all  who  would  see  the  things  of  Caesar  rendered  to  Caesar,  and 
unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's,  to  throw  all  their  weight  into  the  lighter 
scale.  Caesar  needs  no  advocate ;  he  will  take  care  to  get  his  own :  but  God 
depends,  for  the  enforcement  of  His  claims,  upon  the  zeal  and_earnfistness  of 
those  who  advocate  them.    ' 

,       ,  439 


chap,  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


OUTLINES  AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 


Ver.  14.  Testimony  of  adversaries  to 
Christ. — That  a  man  may  speak  freely 
the  truth,  he  must  have  knowledge, 
zeal,  boldness  —  all  which  Christ's 
adversaries  ascribe  to  Him  here. 
1.  Knowledge  of  the  truth,  in  that 
He  was  a  "  master  and  taught  the 
way  of  God."  2.  Zeal  and  love  to  the 
truth,  in  that  He  was  "  true,  teaching 
truly."  3.  Boldness,  in  that  He 
"  respected  not  the  person  of  any." — 
Dean  Boys. 

The  commendable  parts  of  a  good 
pastor. — 1.  He  must  be  for  his  learning 
a  "  master " — able  to  teach,  apt  to 
teach,  a  guide  to  the  blind,  a  light  to 
them  that  are  in  darkness.  2.  He 
must  be  "true";  which  some  apply 
to  pureness  of  life,  but  others  think 
the  words  "  and  teachest  truly  the 
way  of  life  "  expound  the  clause  "  Thou 
art  true."  3.  He  must  not  utter  his 
own  dream,  or  the  vision  of  his  own 
heart,  but  "  teach  the  way  of  God " 
(1  Pet.  iv.  11).  4.  He  must  have 
certainty  of  doctrine,  teaching  the 
truth  aright  ( Jer.  xxiii.  28  ;  Rom.  xii.  6). 
5.  He  must  be  stout  in  delivering  God's 
ambassage  (Ezek.  ii.  6). — Ibid. 

Suspicious  blandishments. — The  old 
word  is,  "  Full  of  courtesy,  full  of 
craft."  When  ye  see  too  glittering 
pretences  in  unapproved  persons,  sus- 
pect the  inside  (Ps.  xxviii.  3  ;  Amos 
vii.  12,  13 ;  2  Cor.  i.  12).—^%?  Hall. 

"Ver.  15.  Hypocrisy  exposed. — Christ, 
as  God,  seeing  their  hypocritical 
humour,  and  understanding  their 
treacherous  intent,  accommodates  His 
answer  to  the  foul  malice  of  their 
mind,  not  to  the  fair  words  of  their 
mouth,  objecting  against  them  four 
faults  especially.  1.  Folly.  "Why?" 
For  if  I  am  (as  you  say)  "  true,"  then 
I  am  God,  because  every  man  is  a  liar, 
and  only  God  true,  yea  truth  itself; 
and  if  I  be  the  Son  of  God,  I  can 
easily  make  your  wisdom  foolishness. 
2.  Treachery.  "Why  tempt  ye?" 
.3.  Ingratitude.     "Why  tempt  ye  Me, 

440  .     ,       - 


who  teach  unto  you  the  way  of  God 
truly,  desiring  often  to  gather  your 
children  together  ?  "  etc.  4.  Dissimula- 
tion. "  Ye  hypocrites."  Having  thus 
in  a  trice  confounded  them,  He  pro- 
ceeds in  the  next  clause  to  confute 
them,  even  by  their  own  words  and 
deeds,  as  the  soldiers  of  Timotheus 
were  wounded  with  the  points  of  their 
own  swords  (2  Mac.  xii.  22). — Dean 
Boys. 

Vers.  16,  17.  Coinage  a  token  of 
authority. — It  has  been  ingeniously  and 
not  irrationally  suggested  that  our 
Lord's  sanction  of  the  payment  of  tri- 
bute money  to  Caesar  may  afford  a  hint 
to  Christians  of  the  point  at  which  they 
may  conscientiously  yield  obedience  to 
a  fresh  civil  authority.  If  that 
authority  is  so  recognised  that  its 
coin  is  admitted  as  the  medium  of 
exchange,  its  .  tenure  may  fairly  be 
considered  as  a,  fait  accompli. 

The  King's  image  on  the  heart. — The 
heart  of  the  believer  should  be  a  golden 
coin,  so  graven  with  loyalty  and  love 
to  the  Heavenly  King  that  there 
ought  to  be  no  hesitation  in  answering 
the  question,  "Whose  image  and 
superscription  is  it  ?  " 

Church  and  State. — Consider  the 
respective  rights  of  Church  and  State 
in  property,  and  the  duty  of  men  who 
may  at  the  same  time  be  members  of 
the  Church  and  subjects  of  the  State 
to  regard  the  rights  and  vested  in- 
terests of  both.  In  discriminating 
between  those  mutual  well-defined 
rights  and  vested  interests  in  property, 
the  question  of  our  Lord  comes  in, 
helping  us  in  the  knowledge  and  per- 
formance of  our  twofold  duty,  in  our 
twofold  capacity  as  members  of  the 
Church  and  subjects  of  the  State. 
1.  Whose  is  this  image  and  super- 
scription, we  ask  on  the  one  hand, 
of  all  temporal  things  which  belong 
unto  Caesar  ?  The  answer  is  Caesar's 
image  and  superscription.  Then  our 
duty  is   to   render  such   things   unto 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK.  chap.  xii. 


Caesar.  2.  Whose  is  this  image  and  (1  Cor.  vi.  7),  without  a  prompter, 
superscription,  we  inquire  on  the  other  because  we  pray  from  the  heart,  con- 
hand,  borne  upon  the  Church's  posses-  stantly  pray  for  all  emperors,  that 
sions  ?  The  answer  is  God's.  His  they  may  have  a  long  life,  a  secure 
sacred  superscription  is  upon  them,  empire,  a  safe  palace,  strong  armies, 
To  God  they  were  consecrated.  Their  a  faithful  senate,  a  well-moralised 
use  was  given  to  His  Church  and  her  people,  a  quiet  state  of  the  world — 
ministers  and  members,  not  for  general  whatever  Caesar  would  wish  for  him- 
purposes,  but  for  God's  honour,  glory,  self  in  his  public  and  private  capacity 
worship,  and  for  the  spiritual  and  (Jer.  xxix.  7  ;  Dan.  vi.  21  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  2  ; 
ecclesiastical  uses  of  all  subjects  of  the  1  Pet.  ii.  13-17). — Tertullian. 
kingdom,  who  will  use  them   on   the 

lines  laid  down  in  her  terms  of  com-  Ver.  17.  "They  marvelled." — His  re- 

munion   exclusively   for   and    consist-  mark    concerning    the    superscription 

ently  with  these  purposes.  and  image  on  the  coin,  as  connecting 

Religion  no  enemy  to  government. —  the  tribute  with  civil   authority,  and 

Among  all  the  stratagems  of  the  devil,  the  opposition  which  He  makes  between 

tending  to  the  undermining  of  religion  such  demands  and  the  things  belonging 

and  the  subversion  of  the  souls  of  men,  to  God,  intimate  a  new  character  in 

though    there    cannot   be   any    more  the  Messiah's  theocracy,  in  which  the 

unreasonable,  yet  there  was  never  any  ecclesiastical  should  no  more  interfere 

more  unhappily   successful,   than   the  with  the   civil  rule,  or  the  obedience 

creating  and  fomenting  an  opinion  in  of  the  subject  to  the  human  magis- 

the  world  that  religion  is  an  enemy  trate  be  inconsistent  with  the  obedience 

to  government,  and  the  bringing  sin-  of  the   believer  to  God.     Caesar's  do- 

cerity     and     zeal     in     religion     into  minion  was  to  be  one,  Christ's  another, 

jealousy   and   disgrace  with   the  civil  Jesus   was    a   king,   but  not   of   this 

powers  (Luke   xxiii.   2 ;   Acts  xvii.  6,  world. — S.  Hinds. 
xxiii.  4,  5). — Bishop  Seth  Ward.  Innocence  the  best  protection  against 

Loyalty   of  early   Christians  to   the  craft. — Craft  is  ever  one  of   the  arts 

emperor. — We  pray  for  the   safety  of  of  the  wayward ;  they  who  believe  in 

the  emperors  to  the  eternal  God,  the  it  find  it   needful  to   employ   it.     At 

true,  the  living  God,  whom  emperors  first  sight  it  seems  as  if  the  children 

themselves  would  desire   to  be  propi-  of   truth   and   simplicity  must  be   at 

tious  to  them,  "above  all  others,  who  the  mercy  of  the  unscrupulous.     What 

are  called  gods."      We.  looking  up  to  happens  here  should  reassure  us.      If 

heaven  with   outstretched  hands,    be-  we  are  true-hearted  and  transparent, 

cause  they  are  harmless,  with  naked  no   craft  will    avail   against    us. — R. 

heads,   because  we   are   not   ashamed  Glover. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  18—27. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxii.  23-33 ;  Luke  xx.  27-38.) 

Christ's  argument  against  the  Sadducees. — The  Sadducees  were  a  libertine  sect 
of  the  Jews  who,  for  the  sake  of  indulging  their  lusts,  and  to  remove  the  dread 
of  an  after-reckoning,  thought  proper  to  reject  the  belief  of  a  resurrection  and 
a  life  to  come.  But  yet,  to  save  appearances,  and  to  keep  up  an  outward  shew 
of  religion  among  their  countrymen,  they  professed  a  great  regard  to  the  same 
common  Scriptures  as  the  oracles  of  God,  and  sought  out  colours  from  those 
very  Scriptures  whereby  to  countenance  or  seemingly  to  authorise  their  wanton 
and  wicked  opinions.  They  came  to  our  Lord,  and  propounded  a  captious 
question  to  Him,  grounded  upon  Moses'  law,  artfully  insinuating  as  if  Moses 
himself  must  have  been  in  their  sentiments.     Our  Lord  in  reply  corrected  their 

441 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   STt  MARK. 


fond  mistake  in  judging  of  a  life  to  come  by  the  life  that  now  is,  when  circum- 
stances would  be  widely  different.  In  this  world,  where  mankind  go  off  and  die 
daily,  there  is  a  necessity  of  a  constant  and  regular  succession  to  supply  the 
decays  of  mortality.  But  in  a  world  to  come,  where  none  die  any  more,  the 
reason  then  ceases,  inasmuch  as  there  will  be  no  occasion  for  any  further 
supplies.  Our  Lord,  by  thus  distinguishing  upon  the  case,  defeated  the  objection ; 
but  to  shew  further  how  ill  the  Sadducees  had  contrived  in  appealing  to  Moses 
as  a  favourer  of  their  sentiments,  He  reminds  them  of  a  famous  passage  in 
Moses'  law  which  was  directly  contrary  to  their  principles,  being  indeed  a  full 
and  clear  proof  of  a  resurrection  and  future  state. 

I.  What  the  distinguishing  principles  of  the  ancient  Sadducees  really 
were. — They  denied  a  future  state  ;  they  did  not  allow  that  the  soul  survived 
the  body.  They  looked  upon  the  doctrines  of  a  resurrection  and  future  state  to 
be  so  nearly  allied,  or  so  closely  connected  with  each  other,  that  they  might 
reasonably  be  conceived  to  stand  or  fall  together.  Wherefore  they  denied  both, 
as  on  the  other  hand  the  Pharisees  admitted  both.  There  is  one  difficulty  in 
St.  Luke's  account  of  the  Sadducees  (Acts  xxiii.  8),  relating  to  their  denial  of 
the  existence  of  angels.  Other  accounts  of  Jewish  writers  are  silent  on  that 
head ;  and  it  might  seem  very  needless  for  the  Sadducees  to  clog  their  cause 
with  it,  since  it  was  sufficient  for  their  purpose  to  reject  only  the  separate 
subsistence  of  human  souls  ;  and  it  is  odd  that  they  should  run  so  flatly  counter 
to  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament  (which  is  full  of  what  concerns  angels) 
when  they  had  really  no  great  necessity  for  it,  nor  temptation  to  it,  so  far  as 
appears.  But  perhaps  they  thought  it  the  shortest  and  surest  way  to  reject 
the  whole  doctrine  of  spirits,  or  at  least  of  created  spirits,  and  so  to  settle  in 
materialism,  after  the  example  of  some  pagan  philosophers ;  and  therefore  they 
at  once  discarded  both  angels  and  separate  souls.  And  as  to  the  Old  Testament 
standing  directly  against  them  with  respect  to  angels,  there  are  so  many  various 
ways  of  playing  upon  words,  especially  in  dead  writings,  that  men  resolute  to 
maintain  a  point  (whatever  it  be)  can  never  be  at  a  loss  for  evasions.  Possibly, 
however,  St.  Luke,  knowing  that  the  word  "  angel "  had  been  used  to  mean  no 
more  than  a  human  soul,  might  mean  only  to  say  that  the  Sadducees  rejected  the 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection  and  the  other  doctrine  of  separate  souls,  whether 
called  angels,  as  by  some,  or  spirits  only,  as  by  others.  This  account  will  appear 
the  better  when  it  is  considered  that  St.  Luke  says  the  Pharisees  admitted 
both.  Both  what  ?  There  had  been  three  things  mentioned,  if  angel  makes  a 
distinct  article.  But  if  angel  there  means  no  more  than  a  human  soul,  then  the 
articles  are  reduced  to  two  only ;  and  so  it  was  very  proper  to  say  both,  namely, 
both  the  resurrection  and  the  separate  state  of  the  soul. 

II.  Inquire  why  our  Blessed  Lord  chose  to  confront  the  Sadducees  with  a 
text  out  of  Moses'  writings,  rather  than  out  of  any  other  part  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment.— Some  have  given  it  for  a  reason  of  our  Lord's  choice,  that  Moses' 
books  were  the  only  ones  which  the  Sadducees  received  as  Canonical  Scripture. 
But  the  fact  is  disputable  at  least,  if  not  certainly  false.  Others  say  that  our 
Lord  chose  to  confute  them  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Law,  as  being  of  prime  value 
and  of  greatest  authority.  And  that  indeed  is  a  consideration  not  without 
weight.  But  I  conceive  that  we  have  no  occasion  to  look  far  for  reasons,  when 
the  text  itself,  with  what  goes  along  with  it,  sufficiently  accounts  for  the  whole 
thing.  The  Sadducees  had  formed  their  objection  upon  the  books  of  Moses, 
claiming  Moses  as  a  voucher  on  their  side.  In  such  a  case  it  was  extremely 
proper  and  pertinent  (if  it  could  be  done)  to  confute  them  from  Moses  himself. 
It  was  vindicating  Moses'  writings  at  the  same  time  that  it  was  doing  justice  to 
an  important  truth.  Our  Lord  therefore  applied  Himself  entirely  to  the  clearing 
up  Moses'  sentiments  in  that  article ;  and  He  effected  it  two  ways  :  first,  by 

442 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xn. 


observing  that  what  the  Sadducees  had  cited  from  him  did  not  prove  what 
they  wished  for ;  and,  secondly,  by  shewing  that  what  he  had  taught  elsewhere 
fully  and  clearly  disproved  it. 

III.  Consider  the  force  of  our  Lord's  argument,  which  was  then  so  clearly 
apprehended  at  first  hearing  by  friends  and  adversaries,  and  admired  by  all. — 
The  words  which  the  argument  is  grounded  upon  occur  in  Exod.  iii.  6  :  "I  am 
the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob."  "  I  am," 
not,  "  I  was."  God  was  then  God  of  those  three  patriarchs,  the  latest  of  whom 
had  been  dead  above  a  hundred  and  seventy  years.  Still  He  continued  to  be 
their  God.  What  could  that  mean  ?  Is  He  a  God  of  lifeless  clay,  of  mouldered 
carcases,  of  dust  and  rottenness?  No,  sure.  Besides,  with  what  propriety  of 
speech  could  the  ashes  of  the  ground  be  yet  called  Abraham  or  Isaac  or  Jacob  ? 
Those  names  are  the  names  of  persons,  not  of  senseless  earth ;  and  person  always 
goes  where  the  intelligence  goes.  Therefore  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  were 
still  living  and  intelligent,  somewhere  or  other,  when  God  declared  He  was  still 
their  God — that  is  to  say,  they  were  alive  as  to  their  better  part,  their  souls. 
He  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living ;  therefore  the  soul  survives  the 
body.  Therefore  the  Sadducees,  who  denied  the  separate  subsistence  of  souls  or 
spirits,  were  confuted  at  once,  and  that  by  a  very  clear  and  plain  text,  produced 
even  from  the  books  of  Moses.  But  it  will  be  asked,  "  How  does  this  prove  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  which  was  the  point  in  question  ?  "  I  answer  that 
was  not  the  only  point,  nor  the  main  point,  though  it  follows  this  other,  as  I 
shall  shew  presently.  But  even  if  the  argument  really  reached  no  further  than 
what  I  have  mentioned,  yet  it  was  a  very  considerable  point  gained,  and  the 
rest  was  not  worth  disputing.  What  they  were  afraid  of  was  a  future  account. 
Now  whether  men  shall  give  an  account  in  the  body  or  without  the  body,  it 
would  come  much  to  the  same  ;  for  still  there  would  be  an  account  to  be  given, 
and  there  would  remain  the  like  dreadful  apprehension  of  a  judgment  to  come. 
Here  lay  the  main  stress  of  the  dispute  ;  and  therefore  when  our  Lord  had 
undeniably  proved  a  future  state,  He  had  gone  to  the  very  root  of  the  Sadducean 
principles,  and  if  they  once  yielded  thus  far  they  might  readily  grant  the  rest. 
For  if  it  be  considered  that  death  was  the  punishment  of  sin,  and  that  every 
person  remaining  under  that  sentence  and  under  the  dominion  of  death  still 
carries  about  him  the  badges  of  the  first  transgression  and  the  marks  of  Divine 
displeasure,  it  cannot  reasonably  be  supposed  that  the  souls  of  good  men  whom 
God  has  owned  for  His  shall  for  ever  remain  in  that  inglorious  state,  but  will 
some  time  or  other  be  restored  to  their  first  honours,  or  to  what  they  were  first 
ordained  to  in  paradise  before  sin  entered.  Wherefore  since  God  is  pleased  to 
acknowledge  Himself  still  God  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  it  is  highly 
reasonable  to  presume  that  He  will  in  due  time  restore  them  to  their  original 
privileges,  removing  from  them  the  chains  of  death  by  reuniting  soul  and  body 
together  in  a  happy  and  glorious  resurrection.  Thus  the  same  thread  of  argu- 
ment which  our  Lord  began  with,  and  which  directly  proves  the  immortality 
of  the  soul,  does  also  in  conclusion  lead  us  on  by  just  and  clear  consequences 
to  the  resurrection  of  the  body. — Archdeacon  Waterland. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    24-27.    Christ's  reply    to   the  testimony  of  Christ.     4.  They  who  are 

Sadducees. — 1.  God  is  able  to  preserve  now  dead  to  men  still  live  with  God. 

old  forms  of  life  and  to  produce  new.  — J.  H.  Godwin. 
2.  Marriage,  birth,  and  death  belong 

only    to    the    earthly    life.      3.    The  Ver.  26.  The  fulness  of  Scripture. — 

mission  of  Moses  was  confirmed  by  the  How  much  more  there  is  in  Scripture 

443 


CflAP.  xn.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


than  at  first  sight  appears !    God  spoke  The    communion    of    saints. — Long 

to  Moses  in  the  burning  bush,  and  called  before    light    and    immortality    were 

Himself  the   God   of  Abraham  ;    and  brought  to  light   by  the   gospel,  the 

Christ   tells    us   that  in    this   simple  greatest    moral     philosopher    of    the 

announcement  was  contained  the  pro-  ancient  world  discussed  this  question 

mise  that  Abraham  should  rise  again  of  the  relation  of  the  dead  to  the  living 

from  the  dead.     In  truth,  if  we  may  in  memorable  words,  and  he  came  to 

say  it  with  reverence,  the  All- wise,  All-  the  conclusion   that   to   suppose    the 

knowing   God   cannot   speak   without  departed  unmindful  of  the  friends  who 

meaning  many  things  at  once.      He  survive  them  is  too  heartless  a  notion  to 

"  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning  "  ;  be  entertained.     Truly  and  spiritually, 

He  understands  the  numberless  con-  in  all    the    essentials    of    unity,   the 

nexions  and  relations  of  all  things,  one  departed  are   with   us    and   we   with 

with  another.     Every  word  of  His  is  them :   we  are   still   members   of  the 

full  of  instruction,  looking  many  ways ;  same  family  of  God  ;  one  and  the  same 

and  though  it  is  not  often  given  to  us  roof  is   still   over  us ;  they  have  but 

to  know  these  various  senses,  and  we  passed    into    a    brighter    and    better 

are  not  at  liberty  to  attempt  lightly  to  compartment  of  the  same  great  home 

imagine  them,  yet,  as  far  as  they  are  and   house   of   Christ ;    and  whatever 

told  us,  and  as  far  as  we  may  reason-  they  are  doing,  beholding  or  enjoying, 

ably  infer  them,  we  must  thankfully  we  cannot  believe  that  they  cease  to 

accept   them   (Ps.    cxix.    96). — J.    H.  think  of  us  or  to  pray  for  us;  nay, 

Newman,  D.D.  we  cannot  but  suppose  that  they  think 

of  us  now  with  a  purer  interest  and  a 

Ver.  27.  The  Divine  estimate  of  deeper  love  than  was  ever  possible 
death. — In  the  Infinite  view  there  is  here.  Few  things  are  more  remark- 
not  a  cemetery  in  the  universe,  not  a  able  than  the  contrast  between  the 
grave  on  any  globe  that  gleams  in  the  faith  of  the  Church  and  our  practice, 
sky.  For  there  is  no  cessation  or  Many  of  us  are  far  behind  the  heathen 
interruption  of  life  caused  by  that  in  fidelity  to  our  dead.  We  profess 
which  seems  to  us  death.  The  body,  to  accept  the  glorious  consolation  which 
as  He  looks  upon  it,  is  the  spirit's  is  ours  through  the  Risen  Christ ;  we 
garment  only ;  and  however  we  are  profess  to  believe  that  they  are  all 
called  to  meet  death — whether  by  slow  living  in  God,  and  that  we  are  one 
disease  or  by  water  or  by  fire  or  by  with  them,  that  the  whole  Church  this 
tempest,  at  the  end  of  years  or  in  side  the  veil  and  beyond  it  is  one  and 
youth  or  in  the  full  powers  of  man-  the  same  household ;  and  yet  we  sink 
hood,  on  the  sick-bed  or  the  battle-  into  chill  indifference,  we  suffer  new 
field — to  His  vision  it  is  but  the  interests,  new  excitement,  new  faces, 
stripping  off  of  a  robe  and  the  libera-  to  usurp  their  place  and  to  turn  into 
tion  of  the  clothed  essence  into  higher  solemn  mockery  the  hopes  and  regrets 
forms  of  being. — T.  Starr  King.  we  once  inscribed  upon  their  grave.     I 

Effect   on  character  of  belief  as    to  suppose  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 

future  life. — The  belief  in  a  fuller  life  the  chief  cause  of  that  habit  of  mind 

beyond  the  grave  must  influence  cha-  which   has   made    the   communion   of 

racter  indefinitely.    Even  in  days  before  saints  so  unreal  is  the  modern  disuse 

Christianity,  among  heathens,  it  did  so.  of  prayers  for  the  departed.     They  are 

Herodotus  tells  us  of  a   tribe  among  all  but  banished  from  our  devotions, 

the  Thracians  who  believed  themselves  For    thousands    of    years,   let    it    be 

immortal.     "  The  men  of  this  tribe,"  remembered,  prayers  for  the  dead  were 

he  says,  "  were  the  bravest  and  the  a  part  of  the  instituted  service  of  God's 

most  honourable."    It  cannot  but  make  people ;  they  were  in  use  among  the 

a  difference   whether  our   hopes  end  Israelites    hundreds   of    years    before 

with  the  grave  or  not. — W.  R.  Sutton.  Christ ;    they    were    in    use    in    the 

444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xii. 


synagogue  and  Temple  worship  in  which  but  a  fraction  of  it :  we  forget  the  great 

He  was  wont  to  join,  and  they  are  cloud  of  witnesses  gathered  during  the 

used  by  the  Jews  to  this  day.     They  ages  growing  day  by  day,  the  unseen 

are  to  be  found  in  every  ancient  liturgy  multitude  which  no  man  can  number  : 

of   the   Christian   Church   which   has  we  think  but  seldom  of  that  paradise 

come  down  to  us.     But,  whatever  be  of  God,  that  land  of  the  living,  where 

the  decision  to  which  we  see  our  way  loyal  hearts  and  true  stand  ever  in  the 

on  this  particular  point,  let  us  realise  light.     Ah,  brethren,  it  is  we  who  are 

the     duty    and     the     blessedness     of  in  the  shadows  and  the  darkness,  not 

strengthening  by  all  legitimate  means  they.    Let  us  be  true  to  their  memories : 

our   faith   in   the  indestructible  bond  let  the  thought  of  what  they  are  and 

which   knits  in  holy  communion  and  where  they  are  be  a  continual  inspira- 

fellowship  the  whole  redeemed  family  of  tion ;  let  it  lift  us  above  the  earthhness 

God.     We  talk  and  act  as  though  we  and  littleness  of  the  present,  and  shed 

on  this  side  of  the  veil  constituted  the  more  and  more  over  mind  and  heart 

whole  Catholic  Church ;  we  forget  that  the  solemnising  powers  of  the  world  to 

the  majority  is  elsewhere,  that  we  are  come. — Canon  Duckworth. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  28—34. 
(Parallel  :  Matt.  xxii.  34-40.) 

Christ's  interview  with  a  scribe. — The  character  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees, 
as  a  body,  is  held  up  by  our  Lord  to  the  abhorrence  of  all  who  would  serve  God 
in  spirit  and  in  truth.  See  Matt.  xvi.  6-12,  xxiii.  1-36.  But  experience 
teaches  that  no  general  description  of  a  class  of  men,  however  just,  is  applicable 
to  every  individual  in  it.  We  are  not,  therefore,  surprised  to  find  here  a 
notable  exception  to  the  rule — a  scribe  who  entertains  such  worthy  notions 
of  religion  as  to  win  the  commendation  of  Christ. 

I.  The  occasion. — The  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees  had,  one  after  another, 
put  questions  to  our  Lord,  for  the  purpose  of  catching  or  ensnaring  Him  in  His 
talk.  He,  seeing  through  their  hypocrisy,  gave  them  such  answers  as  neither 
satisfied  them  nor  afforded  them  a  handle  to  use  against  Him.  Then  one  of 
the  scribes,  struck  with  the  appositeness  of  His  replies,  determined  to  put  a 
question  of  his  own,  to  try  whether  He  who  had  so  properly  silenced  the  crafty 
and  malicious  would  be  as  ready  with  a  suitable  answer  to  an  honest  and 
serious  inquirer. 

IT.  The  scribe's  question. — "  Which  is  the  first  commandment  of  all  ?  "  1.  If 
his  object  was  to  test  the  merits  and  attainments  of  this  new  Teacher,  and  to 
see  whether  He  had  a  correct  notion  of  that  law  which  He  professed  to  expound, 
he  could  not  have  put  a  more  appropriate  question.  It  would  be  a  parallel 
case  if,  in  the  present  day,  a  professing  Christian  were  to  be  called  upon  to 
state  which  is  the  greatest  and  most  distinguishing  doctrine  of  Christianity, 
or  its  most  excellent  privilege.  Those  persons  who  are  "  ever  learning,  and 
never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,"  would  either  be  unable  to 
answer  at  all,  or  would  answer  in  such  a  way  as  to  prove  that  they  were 
destitute  of  any  clear  and  comprehensive  views  of  Divine  truth.  2.  This 
question  was  one  very  frequently  discussed  in  the  schools  of  the  Rabbis ;  and 
from  many  of  them  it  received  answers  very  wide  of  the  mark.  Some  said  the 
commandment  relating  to  the  Sabbath  was  the  greatest  of  all ;  others  set  the 
highest  value  on  the  laws  relating  to  sacrifices,  or  to  purifications.  This  scribe 
appears  to  have  come  to  a  sounder  conclusion,  and  to  have  been  anxious  to 
discover  whether  this  new  Teacher  would  confirm  him  in  it. 

445 


chap.  xii.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.   MARK. 


III.  Our  Lord's  reply. — This  question  being  honestly  put,  Christ  meets  it  in 
a  very  different  manner  from  that  in  which  He  had  silenced  His  enemies. 
Without  hesitation,  and  without  ambiguity,  the  Oracle  of  Divine  truth  delivers 
His  infallible  sentence.  1.  Whereas  the  question  referred  to  one  command- 
ment only,  our  Lord  in  His  reply  brings  "forward  two.  "Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God,"  He  says,  is  the  first  commandment.  But  the  mention  of  &  first 
naturally  suggests  a  second,  without  which  the  first  might  appear  incomplete. 
It  is  true  that  the  love  of  God,  if  perfect  and  sincere,  will  constrain  us,  by  a 
moral  necessity,  to  love  our  brother  also.  Still,  in  a  matter  of  so  much  practical 
importance,  it  is  desirable  that  there  should  be  no  room  for  cavil  or  mistake. 
Therefore  He  proceeds  :  "  And  the  second  is  like,"  etc.  2.  "  There  is  none 
other  commandment  greater  than  these."  (1)  In  comprehensiveness.  What- 
ever commandments  may  be  added  to  these,  can  they  require  of  us  anything 
greater  than  is  already  required  by  these  ?  (2)  In  fundamental  importance 
(Matt.  xxii.  40).  These  are  the  two  great  principles  upon  which  all  statutes, 
ordinances,  and  judgments,  which  can  be  given  or  conceived,  are  based.  Take 
away  the  obligation  of  these  two,  and  it  will  be  impossible  to  maintain  the 
authority  of  any  others. 

IV.  The  scribe's  remark  upon  Christ's  answer. — 1.  His  language  is  that 
of  a  man  who,  having  long  considered  the  subject,  and  come  to  a  conclusion  not 
generally  accredited  among  those  of  his  own  set,  at  last  meets  with  one  whose 
opinion  agrees  with  his  own.  2.  In  declaring  his  conviction  that  the  observance 
of  these  two  commandments  "  is  more  than  all  whole  burnt  offerings  and 
sacrifices,"  he  does  not  mean  to  imply  that  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  are 
nothing.  To  him,  as  a  Jew,  they  were  much.  They  were  that  wherewith 
man  should  "  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  himself  before  the  high  God  " ; 
they  were  the  suitable  recognitions  of  the  Divine  bounty  ;  and,  what  is  still 
more  to  the  purpose,  they  were  the  means  appointed  by  God  Himself  for  the 
acknowledgment  and  atonement  of  sin.  What,  therefore,  though  God  had 
declared  that  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,"  since  He  had  also  declared  that 
sacrifice  was  necessary  to  supply  the  deficiencies  of  obedience,  and  thus  it 
became,  in  fact,  a  part  of  obedience  !  It  was  not  for  a  Jew  to  ask  how  the 
blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  could  take  away  sin,  or  how  that  Great  Being  who 
owned  "  every  beast  of  the  forest  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  "  should 
condescend  to  accept  a  bullock  out  of  his  house  or  a  he-goat  out  of  his  folds. 
It  was  enough  for  him  to  know  that  God  in  His  wisdom  had  provided  for  the 
continuance  of  these  things  till  He  came  into  the  world  who  should  provide  a 
real  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  by  one  offering  perfect  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified. 

V.  Christ's  commendation  of  the  scribe. — Here  is — 1.  An  approbation  of 
the  scribe's  remark.  It  was  a  "  discreet "  answer,  i.e.  moderate  and  judicious. 
If,  in  his  admiration  of  inward  and  spiritual  religion,  he  had  spoken  con- 
temptuously of  forms  and  ceremonies,  we  should  have  said  his  meaning  was 
good,  but  his  language  indiscreet.  As  it  was,  however,  he  hit  the  happy  mean 
of  exalting  the  one  without  degrading  the  other.  He  shewed  no  disposition  to 
disparage  the  most  literal  compliance  with  every  jot  and  tittle  of  the  ceremonial 
law ;  he  was  only  anxious  that  the  body  and  the  spirit,  the  form  and  the 
substance  of  religion,  should  be  estimated  in  their  proper  order — first  purity 
of  heart,  and  then  scrupulousness  of  obedience.  This  was  exactly  in  accordance 
with  Christ's  own  teaching  (Matt,  xxiii.  23).  2.  A  commendation  of  the 
individual  himself.  "  Thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  i.e.  thou 
art  in  a  favourable  state  of  mind  for  embracing  the  gospel.  (1)  The  honesty 
of  intention  which  distinguished  this  scribe  was  a  very  important  qualification 
for  his  reception  of  the  truth.  (2)  His  spiritual  conception  of  religion  was 
an  even  more  valuable  preparation.     A  Jew  thus  enlightened  had,  to  a  certain 

44$ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  in. 


extent,  forestalled  the  gospel ;  he  would  find  most  congenial  to  his  mind  those 
very  sayings  of  Christ  which  to  others  were  the  hardest  of  all  (Matt.  ix.  13, 
xii.  7;  Mark  ii.  27,  vii.  15-23  ;  John  iv.  21,  23). 

Love  to  God  and  one's  neighbour. — I.  The  nature  and  properties  of  love. — 1.  It 

is  a  passion  of  the  soul,  that  inclines  it  to  unite  to  the  thing  beloved.  2.  Its 
properties  are  chiefly  these  two:  (1)  A  desire  to  please,  and  (2)  A  desire  to 
enjoy. 

II.  The  double  object  of  love. — 1.  The  first  and  great  object  of  our  love  is 
God.  (1)  He  is  "  the  Lord"  ;  and  so  His  power  and  sovereignty  may  command 
our  affections.  (2)  He  is  "  our  God,"  in  covenant  and  relation  to  us ;  and  so 
His  kindness  and  nearness  to  us  may  engage  us  to  love  Him.  2.  The  other 
object  of  our  love  is  our  neighbour.  He  is  to  be  loved  by  us — (1)  Chiefly  for 
God's  sake,  whose  creature,  child,  and  servant  he  is  (1  John  iv.  20,  21).  (2)  For 
our  own  sake,  because  he  has  the  same  nature  as  ourselves  (Prov.  xxii.  2). 

III.  In  what  measure  these  two  are  to  be  loved. — 1.  The  loving  of  God  with 
all  the  heart,  etc.,  denotes  both  the  sincerity  and  integrity  of  our  love  to  Him. 
(1)  The  sincerity  is  signified  by  its  being  from  the  heart;  what  springs  from 
thence  is  commonly  sound  and  sincere.  (2)  "  With  all  thy  heart,"  etc.,  denotes  the 
integrity.  God  will  admit  of  no  rival  with  Him  in  our  affections.  Though  He 
loves  a  broken  He  hates  a  divided  heart.  2.  "  Thy  neighbour  as  thyself  " — that 
is,  with  a  like  though  not  always  with  an  equal  affection ;  for  every  one  being 
nearest  to  himself  may  be  allowed,  first,  to  consult  his  own  welfare.  Charity 
begins  at  home,  though  it  must  not  end  there,  but  must  extend  to  all  that  are 
round  about  us,  making  our  own  desires  the  measure  and  standard  of  our 
dealing  with  others,  doing  all  that  good  to  others  which  we  would  have  done 
to  us,  and  avoiding  all  that  evil  to  any  which  we  ourselves  would  be  unwilling 
to  bear. — M.  Hole,  D.D. 

Christ's  first  and  second  commandments. — I.  How  is  the  love  of  God  said  to 
be  the  first  commandment? — 1.  It  is  so  in  order  of  time,  the  love  of  God 
being  the  first  thing  to  be  taught  and  learnt  of  all  that  come  to  Him ;  for  all 
true  religion  begins  with  it  and  is  founded  upon  it :  it  is  the  first  step  we 
are  to  make  towards  our  Maker,  and  that  will  lead  us  on  to  all  the  other  parts 
of  our  duty  and  obedience  to  Him.  2.  It  is  the  first  in  order  of  nature,  as 
being  the  root  and  spring  of  all  other  virtues.  He  that  truly  loves  God  will 
fear  Him  above  all  things,  will  trust  Him  in  all  conditions,  will  honour  Him 
in  all  his  actions,  will  worship  Him  at  all  times,  and  in  a  word  will  serve  and 
depend  upon  Him  in  the  whole  course  of  his  life. 

II.  How  is  the  loving  our  neighbour  the  second  and  like  unto  the  first 
commandment? — 1.  In  respect  of  the  authority  that  commands  it,  and  our 
obligation  to  observe  it,  which  is  the  same  in  both.  2.  In  respect  of  the  ground 
and  motive  of  our  obedience,  which  are  some  Divine  perfections  residing  in 
God  and  communicated  to  His  creatures.  Our  love  to  man  is  grounded  upon 
the  love  of  God  ;  and  we  depart  not  from  the  love  of  our  Maker  by  loving 
our  neighbour,  but  rather  heighten  and  increase  it ;  for  it  is  for  God's  sake, 
and  on  His  account,  that  we  pay  this  affection  to  His  creature.  3.  In  respect 
of  the  extent  and  comprehensiveness  of  it ;  for  as  the  love  of  God  includes 
the  whole  of  that  duty  and  homage  we  owe  unto  Him,  so  the  love  of  our 
neighbour  comprises  all  the  good  offices  we  are  to  pay  unto  him.  4.  In 
respect  of  the  reward  and  punishment  that  attend  the  keeping  and  breaking 
of  it,  which  is  the  same  in  both.     See  Matt.  xxv.  31-46. — Ibid. 

Completeness  of  character  in  serving  God. — Jesus  took  this  questioner  back 

447 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


to  the  familiar  beginning  of  things — to  a  well-worn  platitude  of  the  Jewish 
system — and,  leading  this  man  to  old  -and  familiar  ground,  made  him  work 
the  old  machinery  with  a  new  leverage,  as  the  life  of  Christ  fulfilled  the 
old  command,  and  lighted  up  the  letter  of  the  Mosaic  economy  with  the  spirit 
of  the  new-found  Christian  faith. 

I.  By  loving  God  with  all  our  heart  we  mean  the  placing  of  our  affections 
upon  Him.  By  the  heart  we  mean  love,  emotion,  the  vitality  of  the  tender, 
responsive,  emotional  side  of  our  being.  But  you  say,  "  How  can  I  love  God, 
for  I  have  never  seen  Him  ?  "  A  mother  who  had  lost  an  only  child  in  her 
brooding  grief  adopted  an  unknown  child  in  a  foreign  mission  school.  The 
Arab  boy  was  at  first  an  unknown  quantity  to  her.  She  assumed  that  the 
child  was  and  the  child  became  in  time  real  to  her.  Not  her  reason  but 
her  affections  were  set  upon  the  child  who  took  the  place  of  her  own  lost  one. 
She  loved  him  with  all  her  poor  broken  heart,  and  by-and-by  they  met,  each 
having  saved  the  other.  In  the  same  way,  dear  friends,  you  must  assume 
that  God  is,  until  He  becomes  real  to  you.  You  must  love  Him  who  is 
unknown,  in  the  light  of  all  His  righteousness,  until  He  becomes  known  to 
you.  Your  affections  must  grow  towards  God ;  they  must  lead  the  way  to 
Him,  for  the  rest  of  our  nature  always  follows  the  leading  of  the  heart. 

II.  By  loving  God  with  all  the  soul  we  mean  giving  to  God  and  His 
service  that  which  is  the  very  essence  of  a  being,  the  internal,  animating 
principle  of  our  lives.  What  we  mean  by  soul  is  that  essence  or  spirit  within 
us  which  is  regardless  of  matter.  The  power  of  the  soul  is  a  very  different 
quality  from  the  power  of  the  heart.  We  may  defend  a  cause  or  a  person, 
or  throw  our  lives  into  a  certain  current,  because  the  soul  compels  us  to 
that  course  of  action,  regardless  of  the  heart.  The  power  of  the  heart  is  in 
idealising  another.  The  power  of  the  soul  is  in  idealising  some  hidden  strength 
within  ourselves.  You  love  your  darling  child  with  all  your  heart.  You 
love  the  cause  you  have  at  heart  with  all  your  soul.  This  is  what  is  meant 
by  soul — it  is  the  rising  above  all  the  hindrances  and  limitations  of  our 
physical  and  material  nature.  Brethren,  that  is  the  kind  of  strength  in  us 
which  God  wants.  It  is  that  which  we  ought  to  give  to  Him,  and  which 
is  always  a  great  and  commanding  power  when  we  find  it  ruling  a  strong 
character  in  the  religious  life. 

III.  By  loving  God  with  all  the  mind  we  mean  putting  into  exercise  our 
reasoning  faculties  with  regard  to  Him.  God  can  never  be  real  to  you  unless 
you  have  real  and  definite  thoughts  with  reference  to  Him.  Begin  with 
the  fact  of  Jesus  Christ,  study  out  the  meaning  of  the  Christian  Church,  take 
in  the  grasp  of  the  religious  instincts  and  the  moral  faculties,  study  out 
God  in  history,  believe  in  a  definite  Holy  Ghost,  and  you  will  find  that 
the  mind  will  grow  by  what  it  feeds  on,  and  that  God  will  be  a  reality  to 
your  mind,  when  your  mind  has  a  real  grasp  upon  God. 

IV.  By  loving  God  with  all  our  strength  is  meant  the  co-ordination  of  our 
powers  and  faculties  in  such  a  way  as  to  shew  the  force  of  our  character, 
the  energy  of  our  entire  nature,  the  putting  of  our  energies  into  exercise, 
and  the  command  of  our  own  personality  over  our  mere  circumstances  and 
surroundings.  We  mean  by  the  exercise  of  all  our  powers,  through  the 
unit  of  the  individual  will,  what  Frederick  the  Great  meant  when  speaking 
of  William  Pitt.  He  said,  "  England  has  been  a  long  time  in  labour,  but  she  has 
at  last  brought  forth  a  man."  In  the  same  way  heart  and  soul  and  mind,  when 
they  become  united  with  a  definite  will  and  purpose,  produce  that  strength 
which  shews  itself  in  action — that  belief  which  becomes  a  living  force  when 
it  is  translated  into  a  life  !  How  is  it,  then,  that  this  wholeness  of  service 
ensures  us  against  restlessness  and  unbelief  and  sin  ?     The  answer  is  very  plain. 

448 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK.         chap.  xii. 


Do  you  not  see  that  if  you  have  this  much  of  the  bulk  of  your  nature  on  the 
side  of  the  service  of  God,  if  God  is  real  enough  to  you  to  claim  a  real  and 
honest  portion  of  your  nature  in  every  department — in  heart,  in  soul,  in  mind, 
and  in  strength — there  will  be  no  trouble  either  in  your  .belief  in  Him  or 
in  your  service  for  Him?  You  will  have  exalted  the  spiritual  side  of  your 
nature  over  the  tyrannous  rule  of  the  body  with  its  material  demands,  and 
you  will  be  living  upward  to  God  instead  of  downward  towards  self ;  and  the 
Being  who  had  claimed  and  has  received  your  affection,  your  soul,  your  mind, 
and  your  concentrated  force  of  living  will  give  you  as  a  reward  those  returns 
of  a  spiritual  life  which  grow  to  great  results  in  our  life  in  exact  proportion  to 
our  daily  practice. — W.  W.  Newton. 

Yer.  34.  Obedience  to  God  the  way  to  faith  in  Christ. — In  these  words  we  are 
taught,  first,  that  the  Christian's  faith  and  obedience  are  not  the  same  religion 
as  that  of  natural  conscience,  as  being  some  way  beyond  it ;  secondly,  that  this 
way  is  "not  far" — not  far  in  the  case  of  those  who  try  to  act  up  to  their 
conscience ;  in  other  words,  that  obedience  to  conscience  leads  to  obedience  to 
the  gospel,  which,  instead  of  being  something  different  altogether,  is  but  the 
completion  and  perfection  of  that  religion  which  natural  conscience  teaches. 
Indeed,  it  would  have  been  strange  if  the  God  of  nature  had  said  one  thing  and 
the  God  of  grace  another,  if  the  truths  which  our  conscience  taught  us  without 
the  information  of  Scripture  were  contradicted  by  that  information  when 
obtained.  But  it  is  not  so  ;  there  are  not  two  ways  of  pleasing  God ;  what 
conscience  suggests  Christ  has  sanctioned  and  explained ;  to  love  God  and  our 
neighbour  are  the  great  duties  of  the  gospel  as  well  as  of  the  law  ;  he  who 
endeavours  to  fulfil  them  by  the  light  of  nature  is  in  the  way  towards,  is,  as  our 
Lord  said,  "  not  far  from  Christ's  kingdom  "  ;  for  to  him  that  hath  more  shall 
be  given. 

I.  Consider  how  plainly  we  are  taught  in  Scripture  that  perfect  obedience 
is  the  standard  of  gospel  holiness. — Rom.  xii.  2;  1  Cor.  vii.  19;  Phil.  iv.  8  ; 
Jas.  ii.  10;  2  Pet.  i.  5-7;  John  xiv.  21  ;  Matt.  v.  19.  These  texts,  and  a 
multitude  of  others,  shew  that  the  gospel  leaves  us  just  where  it  found  us,  as 
regards  the  necessity  of  our  obedience  to  God  ;  that  Christ  has  not  obeyed  instead 
of  us,  but  that  obedience  is  quite  as  imperative  as  if  Christ  had  never  come ; 
nay,  is  pressed  upon  us  with  additional  sanctions ;  the  difference  being,  not  that 
He  relaxes  the  strict  rule  of  keeping  His  commandments,  but  that  He  gives  us 
spiritual  aids,  which  we  have  not  except  through  Him,  to  enable  us  to  keep 
them.  Accordingly  Christ's  service  is  represented  in  Scripture,  not  as  different 
from  that  religious  obedience  which  conscience  teaches  us  naturally,  but  as  the 
perfection  of  it.  We  are  told  again  and  again  that  obedience  to  God  leads  on 
to  faith  in  Christ,  that  it  is  the  only  recognised  way  to  Christ,  and  that  therefore 
to  believe  in  Him  ordinarily  implies  that  we  are  living  in  obedience  to  God 
(John  vi.  45,  iii.  21,  vii.  17,  xv.  23,  viii.  19;  1  John  ii.  23;  2  John  9; 
2  Cor.  iv.  4). 

II.  If  we  look  to  the  history  of  the  first  propagation  of  the  gospel,  we  find 
this  view  confirmed. — The  early  Christian  Church  was  principally  composed  of 
those  who  had  long  been  in  the  habit  of  obeying  their  consciences  carefully,  and  so 
preparing  themselves  for  Christ's  religion,  that  kingdom  of  God  from  which  the 
text  says  they  were  not  far  (Luke  i.  6 ;  Matt.  i.  19  ;  Luke  ii.  25  ;  John  i.  47  ; 
Luke  xxiii.  50  ;  Acts  x.  2,  xiii.,  xvii.).  But  it  may  be  asked,  "  Did  Christ 
hold  out  no  hope  for  those  who  had  lived  in  sin  ?  "  Doubtless  He  did,  if 
they  determined  to  forsake  their  sin.  When  sinners  truly  repent,  then  indeed 
they  are  altogether  brothers  in  Christ's  kingdom  with  those  who  have  not  in  the 
same  sense  "  need  of  repentance  "  ;  but  that  they  should  repent  at  all  is,  alas  ! 

g  g  449 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


so  far  from  being  likely,  that  when  the  unexpected  event  takes  place  it  causes 
such  joy  in  heaven  (from  the  marvellousness  of  it)  as  is  not  even  excited  by  the 
niuety-and-nine  just  persons  who  need  no  such  change  of  mind.  Of  such  changes 
some  instances  are  given  us  in  the  Gospels,  for  the  encouragement  of  all  penitents, 
such  as  that  of  the  woman,  mentioned  by  St.  Luke,  who  "  loved  much."  And, 
moreover,  of  these  penitents  of  whom  I  speak,  and  whom,  when  they  become 
penitents,  we  cannot  love  too  dearly  (after  our  Saviour's  pattern),  nay,  or 
reverence  too  highly,  and  whom  the  apostles,  after  Christ's  departure,  brought 
into  the  Church  in  such  vast  multitudes,  none,  as  far  as  we  know,  had  any  sudden 
change  of  mind  from  bad  to  good  wrought  in  them,  nor  do  we  hear  of  any  of 
them  honoured  with  any  important  station  in  the  Church.  I  have  confined  myself 
to  the  time  of  Christ's  coming  ;  but  not  only  then,  but  at  all  times  and  under 
all  circumstances,  as  all  parts  of  the  Bible  inform  us,  obedience  to  the  light 
we  possess  is  the  way  to  gain  more  light  (Prov.  viii.  17-20;  Luke  xvi.  10; 
Mark  iv.  25). 

III.  Some  of  the  consequences  which  follow  from  this  great  Scripture  truth. — 
1.  First,  we  see  the  hopelessness  of  waiting  for  any  sudden  change  of  heart,  if 
we  are  at  present  living  in  sin.     To  all  those  who  live  a  self-indulgent  life, 
however  they  veil  their  self-indulgence  from  themselves  by  a  notion  of  their 
superior  religious  knowledge,  and  by  their  faculty  of  speaking  fluently  in  Scripture 
language,   to  all  such  the  Word  of  life  says,  "  Be  not  deceived ;  God  is  not 
mocked " ;  He  tries  the  heart,  and  disdains  the  mere  worship  of  the  lips.     He 
acknowledges  no  man  as  a  believer  in  His  Son  who  does  not  anxiously  struggle 
to  obey  His  commandments  to  the  utmost ;  to  none  of  those  who  seek  without 
striving,  and  who  consider  themselves  safe,  to  none  of  these  does  He  give  "  power 
to  become  sons  of  God."     2.  But,  after  all,  there  are  very  many  more  than  I 
have  as  yet  mentioned  who  wait  for  a  time  of  repentance  to  come,  while  at 
present  they  live  in  sin.     For  instance,  the  young,  who  think  it  will  be  time 
enough  to  think  of  God  when  they  grow  old,  that  religion  will  then  come  as  a 
matter  of  course,  and  that  they  will  then  like  it  naturally,  just  as  they  now  like 
their  follies  and  sins.     Or  those  who  are  much  engaged  in  worldly  business,  who 
confess  they  do  not  give  that  attention  to  religion  which  they  ought  to  give, 
who  neglect  the  ordinances  of  the  Church,  who  allow  themselves  in  various 
small  transgressions  of  their  conscience,  and  resolutely  harden  themselves  against 
the  remorse  which  such  transgressions  are  calculated  to  cause  them  ;  and  all  this 
they  do  under  the  idea  that  at  length  a  convenient  season  will  come  when  they 
may  give  themselves  to  religious  duties.     All  such  persons  do  not,  in  their  hearts, 
believe  our  Lord's  doctrine  contained  in  the  text,  that  to  obey  God  is  to  be  near 
Christ,  and  that  to  disobey  is  to  be  far  from  Him.     How  will  this  truth  be  plain 
to  us  in  that  day  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  revealed !     Now  we  do 
not  believe  that  strict  obedience  is  as  necessary  as  it  is.     We  put  something 
before  it,  in  our  doctrinal  system,  as  more  necessary  than  it ;  one  man  puts 
faith,    another  outward   devotion,   a   third   attention  to  his  temporal  calling, 
another  zeal  for  the  Church — that  is,  we  put  a  part  for  the  whole  of  our  duty, 
and  so  run  the  risk  of  losing  our  souls.      These  are  the  burnt  offerings  and 
sacrifices  which  even  the  scribe  put  aside  before  the  weightier  matters  of  the 
law.      Or,  again,   we  fancy  that  the  means  of  gaining  heaven  are  something 
stranger  and  rarer  than  the  mere  obvious  duty  of  obedience  to  God  :  we  are  loath 
to  seek  Christ  in  the  waters  of  Jordan  rather  than  in  Pharpar  and  Abana,  rivers 
of  Damascus ;  we  prefer  to  seek  Him  in  the  height  above,  or  to  descend  into  the 
deep,  rather  than  to  believe  that  the  Word  is  nigh  us,  even  in  our  mouth  and  in 
our  heart.     Hence  in  false  religions  some  men  have  even  tortured  themselves 
and  been  cruel  to  their  flesh,  thereby  to  become  as  gods,  and  to  mount  aloft ; 
and  in  our  own,  with  a  not  less  melancholy,  though  less  self-denying,  error,  men 

450 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   XII. 


fancy  that  certain  strange  effects  on  their  minds,  strong-  emotion,  restlessness, 
and  an  unmanly  excitement  and  extravagance  of  thought  and  feeling,  are  the 
tokens  of  that  inscrutable  Spirit  who  is  given  us,  not  to  make  us  something 
other  than  men,  but  to  make  us,  what  without  His  gracious  aid  we  never  shall 
be,  upright,  self-mastering  men,  humble  and  obedient  children  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.  In  that  day  of  trial  all  these  deceits  will  be  laid  aside ;  we  shall  stand 
in  our  own  real  form,  whether  it  be  of  heaven  or  of  earth,  the  wedding  garment  or 
the  old  raiment  of  sin ;  and  then  how  many,  do  we  think,  will  be  revealed  as 
the  heirs  of  light,  who  have  followed  Christ  in  His  narrow  way,  and  humbled 
themselves  after  His  manner  (though  not  in  His  perfection,  and  with  nothing 
of  His  merit)  to  the  daily  duties  of  soberness,  mercy,  gentleness,  self-denial,  and 
the  fear  of  God  ? — J.  H.  Newman,  D.D. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  28-31.  The  scribe's  question,  or 
catch,  was  a  common  one  among  the 
learned  of  that  day ;  and  this  answer  of 
Jesus  was  the  recognised  solution  of  it. 
Long  before  now  another  lawyer,  when 
asked  by  Jesus,  "  What  is  written  in  the 
law  ?  How  dost  thou  read  it  ? "  had 
replied  in  similar  terms  (Luke  x.  25-27). 
So  that  our  Lord's  answer  was  not 
original,  was  not  His  private  solution 
of  the  problem  ;  it  was  the  common  and 
accepted  solution  among  the  students 
and  masters  of  the  law,  as  indeed  this 
master  himself  confesses  in  the  next 
verse.  The  only  wonder  to  those  who 
heard  it  from  the  lips  of  Jesus  was 
how  He  came  to  know  it,  He  who  had 
"  never  learned,"  never  sat  at  the  feet 
of  any  of  their  rabbis  or  passed  through 
any  of  their  schools.  An  ordinary 
layman  would  have  been  posed  by  it. 
For  neither  "  the  first  and  great  com- 
mandment," nor  "  the  second,  which  is 
like  unto  it,"  was  contained  in  the 
Decalogue,  though  obedience  to  them 
was  far  "  more  than  all  whole  burnt 
offerings  and  sacrifices."  The  first, 
that  which  enjoins  love  to  God,  is  only 
given  incidentally,  in  a  summary  of 
human  duty  contained  in  Deut.  vi.  5 ; 
and,  again,  x.  12.  The  second,  that 
which  enjoins  love  for  our  neigh- 
bour, is  hidden  away  among  a  crowd 
of  Levitical  enactments  of  the  most 
minute  and  burdensome  kind  (Lev.  xix. 
18).  It  took  some  knowledge  of  the 
law,  therefore,  to  find  these  two  com- 
mandments at  all;  and  much  know- 
ledge,  much  spiritual  insight   and  a 


deep  sympathy  with  the  animating 
spirit  of  the  Hebrew  law,  to  discover 
that  they  were  the  first  and  best  com- 
mandments of  all.  And  it  shews,  I 
think,  what  a  real  genius  for  religion 
the  Jews  had,  that  even  the  hide-bound 
rabbis  and  scribes  had  discerned  for 
themselves  that  love — love  to  God  and 
man — is  the  end  of  the  command- 
ment and  the  fulfilling  of  the  law. 
But,  though  they  would  have  used 
the  very  words  which  Jesus  used, 
would  they  have  used  them  in  the 
same  sense  ?  They  would  have  selected 
— they  had  selected — the  same  two 
commandments  as  the  great  command- 
ments ;  but  did  they  see  in  them  the 
meaning  that  He  saw?  We  know 
they  did  not.  To  them  this  answer 
was  only  the  right  answer  to  a  legal 
catch ;  to  Him  it  was  the  supreme 
fact  of  human  life.  For  what  else  had 
He  come  into  the  world  but  just  this  ? 
— to  induce  men,  by  revealing  God's 
hearty  love  for  them,  to  love  Him 
with  all  their  hearts,  and  their  neigh- 
bours as  themselves.  — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Christ's  two  commandments  and  the 
Decalogue. — Have  the  two  command- 
ments of  Christ  superseded  the  ten 
commandments  of  Moses?  Yes  and 
No:  they  abolish  only  by  fulfilling 
them.  So  long  as  we  are  compassed 
about  with  infirmity,  and  come  short 
therefore  of  the  full  height  of  the 
charity  of  love,  it  is  very  meet,  right, 
and  our  bounden  duty  to  bear  in  mind 
the  commandments  of  the  law,  and  to 
enforce  ourselves  to  obey  them.     And 

451 


CHAP.  XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK 


yet,  if  we  could  but  keep  the  two  com- 
mandments, what  need  should  we  have 
of  the  ten,  or  of  any  other  command- 
ment ?  How  can  any  man  who  loves 
God  with  all  his  heart  have  any  other 
God  besides  Him  ?  How  can  any  man 
who  loves  God  with  the  whole  of  his 
mind,  with  full  and  clear  intelligence, 
make  unto  him  any  graven  images, 
any  idol,  and  bow  down  before  it  ? 
How  can  any  man  who  loves  God  with 
all  his  soul  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 
his  God  in  vain  ?  How  can  any  man 
who  loves  God  with  all  his  strength 
forget  to  hallow  every  day  to  His 
service,  and  not  only  the  seventh  ?  Or 
how  can  any  man  who  loves  his  neigh- 
bour as  himself  fail  to  honour  all  men, 
and  not  only  his  father  and  mother,  or 
do  any  murder,  or  commit  adultery,  or 
steal,  or  bear  false  witness,  or  covet 
anything  that  is  his  neighbour's  ? 
Within  the  compass  of  these  two  com- 
mandments the  whole  law  does  hang 
and  move  :  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the 
law  ;  and  he  that  walketh  in  love  both 
walks  at  large  (i.e.  in  liberty)  and 
keeps  all  the  commandments  of  God. — 
Ibid. 

True  religion. — 1.  True  religion  can 
be  no  disjointed,  fragmentary  affair. 
As  the  forest  tree  is  one  tree,  though 
it  have  a  myriad  branches  and  twigs 
and  leaves,  because  it  has  one  root,  so 
the  true  religious  life  must  be  one 
because  it  can  have  but  one  root — 
supreme  love  to  God.  2.  True  religion 
engages  the  whole  man,  mind  and  soul 
and  affections,  while  the  strength  and 
power  to  carry  out  its  behests  are  not 
wanting.  The  intellect  and  the  emo- 
tions, the  spiritual  nature,  and  the  will 
and  force  to  make  the  Spirit  effective 
are  all  drawn  upon.  3.  Philanthropy 
is  not  religion;  but  there  can  be  no 
true  religion  without  philanthropy. 
We  love  God  whom  we  have  not  seen 
because  we  have  learned  to  love  our 
fellow- men  whom  we  have  seen,  and 
our  love  to  our  fellow- men  is  intense 
and  pure  and  active  in  proportion  to 
the  strength  of  our  devotion  to  the 
Lord  our  God.  4.  True  religion  is  an 
active  influence,  leading  us   to   do   as 

452 


well  as  think,  to  act  as  well  as  feel. 
5.  While  true  religion  demands  our  all, 
it  demands  no  more  than  any  one  can 
give.  No  experience  that  is  beyond 
us  is  demanded.  No  angel's  love,  no 
seraph's  might,  not  the  devotion  of  the 
ripened  saint  unless  his  years  and 
experience  have  been  attained,  but 
"with  all  thy  heart  and  soul  and 
mind  and  strength,  and  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself."—^.  E.  Clark.  ' 

Guidance  in  the  religious  life. — These 
words  of  Christ  form  a  noble  guide  for 
the  religious  life.  You  are  concerned 
with  religion  in  many  of  its  varied 
aspects.  You  are  interested  in  thoughts 
about  God  and  His  relation  to  the 
world  and  man ;  you  give  expression 
to  your  spiritual  aspirations  in  one  and 
another  form  of  worship ;  you  bear 
your  share  of  the  Christian  activity  of 
the  congregation ;  and  you  can  never 
escape  from  the  demands  made  upon 
you  for  Christian  conduct.  Forget 
not  what  religion  according  to  Christ 
means.  Take  heed  lest  you  be  so 
engrossed  with  its  mere  accidents  that 
you  lose  sight  of  its  substance.  Strive 
that  you  may  grow  in  love  to  God  and 
man.  Despise  not  creeds  and  theo- 
logies, but  so  use  creed,  theology,  and 
Bible  that  you  may  gain  that  deeper 
insight  into  God  and  God's  ways  with 
men  which  will  waken  a  deeper  love. 
In  recoil  from  a  ritualism  which  sets 
more  store  by  the  means  than  by  the 
end  which  is  subserved  by  the  means, 
do  not  rashly  sit  too  loosely  to  forms 
of  worship,  but  so  use  these  forms  that 
they  may  serve  to  bring  you  nearer 
God  and  nearer  man.  In  the  sphere 
of  Christian  duty  beware  of  the  letter 
which  killeth,  rise  above  mere  obedi- 
ence to  external  law,  and  ever  seek  in 
your  relations  with  others  to  have  a 
fresh  baptism  of  that  love  by  which 
alone  the  law  of  Christ  can  be  fulfilled. 
And  in  the  work  you  undertake  in 
Christ's  Church  on  behalf  of  others  be 
not  content  with  their  acceptance  of  a 
creed,  with  their  participation  in  reli- 
gious worship,  or  with  the  observance 
of  the  respectabilities  of  social  life ; 
strive  to  lead  them  into  the   love   of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  XII. 


God  and  man ;  and  that  you  may  be  ness  in  the  small  ordinary  transactions 
successful  in  that  work  grow  yourself  of  life  as  well  as  in  the  great  move- 
in  that  love,  for  love  is  begotten  by  ments  of  my  life.  2.  The  soul  or  life 
love. — D.  M.  Ross.  means  the  sum  of  the  faculties.     There 

is  the  life  of  a  plant,  which  means  the 

Ver.  29.  The  unity  of  God. — What  sum    of    its    faculties — the   power    of 

a   massive    and    reassuring    thought !  absorbing    moisture,    developing    the 

Amid    the    debasements    of    idolatry,  leaves,     the    flower,    and    the    fruit, 

with   its   deification   of  every  impulse  There  is  the  life  or  soul  of  the  animal ; 

and  every  force,  amid  the  distractions  that  is,  in  addition  to  its  powers   of 

of   chance   and   change,  seemingly  so  assimilation,   digestion,  and  reproduc- 

capricious  and  even   discordant,  amid  tion — powers   also   of    movement   and 

the   complexities  of  the  universe  and  expression  of  sound — there  is  the  sum 

its    phenomena,    there    is    wonderful  of  faculties,  which  is   the  life   of  the 

strength  and  wisdom  in  the  reflexion  animal.     And    there   is    the   sum    of 

that   God  is  one.     All   changes   obey  the  faculties  which  belong  to  man  in 

His  hand   which   holds  the   rein  ;  by  addition   to    those   which   the   animal 

Him    the    worlds    were    made.     The  shares — those   rational   powers   which 

exiled  patriarch  was  overwhelmed  by  constitute  the   true  life  of  humanity, 

the  majesty  of  the  revelation  that  his  In   part   those   powers   belong   to  all 

fathers'  God  was  God  in  Bethel  even  men  ;  in   part   they   are  the  peculiar 

as    in   Beersheba :  it    charmed   away  endowment  of   special   individuals,  as 

the  bitter  sense  of  isolation,  it  unsealed  each  of   us   has   from  Almighty  God 

in  him   the  fountains  of  worship  and  his  special  gifts  and  powers.     To  love 

trust,   and   sent   him  forward  with  a  God,  then,  "  with  all  our  soul,"  is  to 

new  hope  of  protection  and  prosperity.  take  stock  of  the  faculties  which  God 

The  unity  of  God,  really  apprehended,  has  given  us,   and  deliberately  as  we 

is  a  basis  for  the  human  will  to  repose  realise  what  they  are  with  increasing 

upon,    and  to    become    self- consistent  assurance   as   life    goes    on  to   direct 

and  at  peace.     It  was  the  parent  of  them  one  by  one  and  altogether  to  the 

the    fruitful    doctrine    of    the    unity  service  of  God.     3.  "To  love  the  Lord 

of    nature    which    underlies    all    the  our   God   with   all    our   mind"   is   to 

scientific  victories  of  the  modern  world,  direct    our    faculties    of    intellect    to 

In  religion  St.  Paul  felt  that  it  implies  knowing  what  we  can  of  God.     Let  us 

the  equal  treatment  of  all  the  human  run  through  the  various  traits  of  the 

race  (Rom.  hi.  29). — Dean  Chadwick.  being  of  God  which  He  has  revealed 

to  us.     There  is,  first,  His  revelation 

Ver.    30.    Loving   God    with   heart,  in  nature.     It  is  a   scene  which,  by 

soul,  mind,  and  strength. — We   know  captivating  the   spiritual  imagination 

what  love  is  in  the  relation  of  husband  and  faculties  of  man,  discloses  some- 

and  wife,  of   father   and  children,  of  thing  of  the  mind  and  spiritual  being 

friend  with  friend ;  and  from  time  to  of   that  God   who   is   at   work  in  it : 

time   any   thoughtful    Christian   asks  power,    wisdom,    beauty;    and   not   so 

himself  somewhat  sadly,  "  Do  I,  with  only,  for  this  scene  is  also  a  storehouse 

the  same  reality  of  love,  love  God  ? "  of  truth.     Everywhere  God  is  appeal- 

If   we   would  endeavour  to  get   some  ing  there  to  the  mind  of  man,  inform - 

answer  to  this  question  in  regard  to  ing  it,  enlightening  it.     God  is  there 

ourselves,  let  us  examine  carefully  this  disclosed  in  His  power,  in  His  beauty, 

passage.     1.  To  love  God  with  all  my  in  His  truth.     And  yet  we  have  but 

heart   means    that   I   do   deliberately  begun  to  estimate  what  we  can  know 

direct   my  life  consciously  to  God  as  of   God.     There   is    that   other   great 

its   first  end,  and  that  not  generally  natural  witness — the  witness  of  con- 

only,  but  in  detail  also.     I  seek  first  science.     So   it   is   when   man  within 

the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteous-  himself    becomes    conscious    of     the 

453 


cttAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


altogether  new  work  of  self -revelation,  monotonous    solitude.     There   can    be 

God  is  disclosed  in  righteousness.     And  no  life,  no  knowledge,  no  will,  if  there 

then,   once  more,   there  is  the  moral  be  no    relationship,    if    there   be    no 

character    remaining,     which    is    the  fellowship.     But     as    God    has    come 

argument  of  the  psalmist :  "  He  that  nearer  to  us  in  the  person  of  His  Son, 

made  the  eye,  shall  He  not  see  ?    He  He  has  disclosed   to  us  something  of 

that   planted   the   ear,  shall    He   not  those   inner    relationships    which   ob- 

hear  ? "     And  our  great  poet   Robert  tained    eternally   in    His    being — the 

Browning  has  taught  men  to  argue —  relation  of  Father  and  Son  and  Holy 

He  that  made  love  and  righteousness  Ghost.     4.  With     all    our    strength ! 

the  character   of  man,   must  not  He  What   does   that   add  to   the   other? 

in  Himself  be  greater  than  this  moral  This     surely :     that     everything     in 

work  ?     So  it  is  with  men.     They  look  human  nature  degenerates  very  rapidly 

to  human  nature,  and  see  in  what  is  into   routine    is    an    experience    with 

best   in  man  once  more  the  order  of  which   we  are  all  only  too  unhappily 

the   uncreated   God.     And   yet  what  familiar.     Therefore  to  love  the  Lord 

a  wild   scene  this   human   nature  is !  our  God  with  all  our  strength  is  again 

How  are  we  to   discriminate  between  and  again  to   make  fresh  beginnings 

what  belongs   to   human  nature,   be-  in  the  love  of  God — again  and  again 

tween     love     and     cruelty,     between  be  as  one  who  has  not  yet  begun  at 

justice  and  tyranny  ?     How  shall  we  all  to  learn  the  lesson  of  religion,  so 

know  what  here  is  proper  to  human  that  new  force  of  vitality  may  in  each 

nature,  and  what  is  but  the  corruption  successive   epoch   of  our  life,  in  each 

of  it  ?     At  this  point  there  comes  in  successive  morning  of  our  life,  be  put 

the  rectifying    disclosure   which    God  into  the  service  which  we  offer  to  God. 

has  given  of  Himself  in  the  humanity  — Canon  Gore. 

of  our  Lord.  Jesus  Christ,  our  Master,  Love  to  God. — 1.  The  sentiments  and 
gives  us  the  true  standard  of  human  actions  wherein  love  to  God  is  chiefly 
nature.  There  we  see  what  belongs  to  exhibited.  It  implies  in  general  to 
man,  and  what  is  only  the  corruption  regard  Him  from  intimate  conviction 
of  the  gift  of  God.  And  yet  in  Jesus  as  our  sovereign  good,  as  the  source 
Christ  is  not  only  the  disclosure  of  of  all  our  happiness;  to  delight  more 
perfect  manhood — it  is  the  disclosure,  in  Him  than  in  all  things  else ;  to 
under  the  conditions  of  our  humanity,  prize  and  covet  His  favour  and  fellow- 
of  perfect  Godhood.  He  in  man  is  ship  above  all  things;  and  diligently 
very  God.  We  look  at  His  life,  His  to  make  it  our  business  to  be  well 
forbearance,  His  patience,  His  gentle-  pleasing  to  Him.  (1)  Frequent  mecli- 
ness,  His  self-sacrifice,  and  we  see  tation  on  God  is  the  first  particular 
nothing  else  than  forbearance  and  by  which  the  religious  man  evinces 
patience  and  gentleness — very  God.  his  love  to  the  Supreme  Being,  and 
So  it  is  with  point  after  point,  shews  it  to  be  operative  in  him. 
Gradually  we  sum  up  what  we  can  (2)  The  delight  with  which  the  re- 
know  of  God,  His  power,  His  beauty,  ligious  man  attends  on  public  as  well 
His  truth,  His  righteousness,  His  love,  as  private  worship  is  the  second  par- 
His  self-sacrifice — that  being  of  God  ticular  whereby  his  love  to  God  appears 
which  is  summed  up  in  St.  John's  and  shews  itself  active.  (3)  An  en- 
words  :  "  God  is  love."  And  yet  one  lightened  and  active  zeal  for  the  honour 
step  more.  In  thus  disclosing  to  us  and  glory  of  God  is  the  third  particular 
His  character  God  has  revealed  to  us  whereby  the  love  towards  God  is  mani- 
something  at  least  of  His  own  being,  fested  and  effectively  displayed.  (4)  A 
We  could  not  conceive  of  God  at  all  in  constant  and  earnest  endeavour  to 
blank,  monotonous  solitude.  We  could  please  God  by  a  willing  and  unlimited 
not  conceive  of  a  personal  God  living  obedience  to  His  commands  is  the 
in  the  enjoyment  of  spiritual  life  in  fourth    particular   whereby   the    love 

454 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xii. 


towards  God  is  displayed  and  shewn 
to  be  effective.  This,  in  fact,  forms 
the  most  essential  part  of  it.  (5)  The 
love  of  God  must  manifest  itself  by  a 
sincere  and  effective  love  of  our  neigh- 
bour. God  is  infinitely  superior  to  all 
necessities.  We  cannot  augment  His 
perfection,  or  give  Him  anything 
which  He  has  not  first  given  us.  But 
He  has  rational  creatures  who  bear 
His  likeness,  He  has  children,  He  has 
friends  and  subjects  here  on  earth, 
whom  we  may  effectually  serve,  to 
whom  we  may  be  useful  in  various 
ways,  whose  temporal  and  eternal  pros- 
perity we  may  promote.  These  He 
recommends  to  our  love,  to  our  care, 
to  our  relief.  (6)  Lastly,  the  love  of 
God  displays  itself  in  sincere  aspira- 
tions after  heaven,  where  we  shall  be 
more  intimately  united  with  Him,  and 
partake  of  His  good  pleasure  in  a 
superior  degree.  2.  How  our  love  to 
God  should  be  constituted,  or  what 
qualities  it  should  possess,  for  being 
genuine.  "With  all  thy  heart,  soul, 
mind,  strength."  These  accumulated 
expressions,  which  apparently  denote 
the  selfsame  thing,  serve  generally  to 
shew  the  sincerity  no  less  than  the 
force  and  degree  of  the  love  which  we 
owe  to  God.  They  give  us  to  under- 
stand an  undissembled,  an  ardent,  an 
effective,  and  a  constant  love,  capti- 
vating as  it  were  the  entire  soul,  setting 
all  its  capacities  and  energies  in  motion, 
and  becoming  a  ruling  affection.  (1)  It 
must  be  sincere.  (2)  We  must  love 
God  above  or  more  than  all  things 
else.  (3)  We  must  love  all  else  that 
merits  our  esteem  and  affection,  princi- 
pally in  regard  and  in  reference  to 
God  as  the  author  of  it.  (4)  Our  love 
to  God  must  be  firm  and  immutable. 
3.  The  reasons  which  oblige  us  to  such 
a  love  towards  God.  Love  is  founded 
on  the  excellency  of  its  object,  or  on 
the  close  relations  wherein  we  stand 
towards  it,  or  on  the  benefits  which 
we  receive  from  it,  or  on  the  good  we 
have  to  hope  for  from  it.  In  regard 
to  our  love  for  God  all  these  reasons 
unite  together ;  and  who  does  not  per- 
ceive how  strong  and  indissoluble  they 


render  our  obligation  to  it  ?  (1)  Where 
is  the  being  that  is  more  excellent, 
more  venerable,  more  amiable  than 
God  ?  Does  He  not  comprise  in  Him- 
self whatever  is  beautiful,  good,  per- 
fect? (2)  Consider  the  close  relation 
wherein  you  stand  towards  God,  and 
the  multitude,  the  greatness,  the  high 
value  of  the  benefits  you  have  received 
from  Him.  He  is  our  Creator;  we 
are  the  work  of  His  hands.  He  is  our 
Sovereign,  and  we  are  His  subjects. 
He  is  our  Father,  and  we  His  children. 
(3)  Add  the  intrinsic  excellency  and 
the  manifold  utility  of  this  virtue. 
(a)  What  can  more  delightfully  employ 
the  soul  of  a  reasonable  and  virtuous 
being  ;  what  is  more  adapted  to  elevate 
and  enlarge  his  capacities  and  powers ; 
what  can  procure  him  a  more  pure, 
a  more  noble,  a  more  sensible  pleasure, 
than  the  love  of  a  God  who  possesses 
all  the  prerogatives  and  attributes 
which  only  merit  love  in  the  supreme 
degree,  without  limitation  and  change ; 
who  is  the  ever-flowing  and  inex- 
haustible fountain  of  light,  of  life,  of 
joy,  of  happiness ;  whose  goodness  and 
grace  continue  for  ever  and  ever ;  and 
who  will  never  cease  to  bless  His  friends 
and  worshippers,  and  to  make  them 
happy  ?  (b)  What  is  more  adapted  to 
facilitate  to  us  the  practice  of  all  the 
virtues,  the  discharge  of  all  our  duties, 
than  the  love  of  God?  (c)  What  is 
more  adapted  to  comfort  us  in  all 
adversities,  to  render  us  firm  and  un- 
daunted in  every  danger,  and  to  give 
us  the  most  certain  hope  of  the  com- 
pletest  happiness,  than  love  towards 
God  ?— G.  J.  Zollikofer. 

The  meaning  of  this  commandment 
for  us  is  nothing  less  than  this :  that 
we  are  to  cherish  and  maintain  within 
ourselves  an  enthusiastic  devotion  to 
the  highest  vision  that  is  vouchsafed 
us  of  the  Eternal  Reality,  the  Eternal 
Love,  the  Eternal  Beauty. — R.  J. 
Fletcher. 

Ver.  31.  Duty  to  neighbour. — Christ 
sums  up  all  God's  law,  all  man's  duty, 
in  the  word  "  love."  The  love  of  God 
and  its  manifestation  in  the  love  of 

455 


chap.  Xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


man.     1.  The   strictness  of  the   com-  apparel,   or   the   humble   situation  in 

mandment   and  the   frequency  of   its  which   they   are   placed,  or  by  single 

iteration.     (1)  Here  it  is  put  forth  as  actions,  foolish  or  wicked,  which  they 

the  compendium  of  the  law,  and  again  commit.      Nothing    of    this    detracts 

Rom.    xiii.    8.       (2)    The    breach    of  from  the  inherent  worth  of  the  man, 

charity  is  a  bar  to  the  acceptance  by  his  native   grandeur  and  dignity,  his 

God  of    ourselves    and   of    our    work  essential  excellences.    3.  Wouldst  thou 

(Matt.  v.  23,24;  1  John  iii.  14).    (3)  It  awaken  and  confirm  in  thy  soul  the 

is   the   new    commandment   given  by  principle  of  love,  inward,  cordial  love 

Christ   on    the   most    solemn  occasion  towards  all  mankind,  as  towards  thy 

(John  xiii.  34,  35).    (4)  It  has  attached  neighbours,  frequently  resolve  in   thy 

to  it   the  promise  that  its  fulfilment  mind  the  various  and  generally  useful 

shall  cover  a  multitude  of  sins  (1  Pet.  connexions    in    which  they   all   stand 

iv.    8).      2.    Its    twofold    channel    of  with  thee  and  with  human  society  at 

operation.      (1)   Alms-deeds    and    the  large.     Not  one  is  entirely  useless,  or 

corporal  works  of  mercy  :  to  feed  the  absolutely  and  in  all  respects  injurious 

hungry,    give   drink    to    the    thirsty,  to  society,  and  no  one  can  or  will  be 

clothe  the  naked,  harbour  the  stranger  so  at  all  times  and  in  every  situation, 

and  needy,  visit  the  sick,  minister  to  4.  Wouldst  thou  excite  and  cherish  in 

prisoners  and  captives,  visit  the  father-  thy  heart  this  universal  charity,  judge, 

less  and  widows,  bury  the  dead.     (2)  esteem    thy   brethren,    mankind,    not 

Intercession  and   the   spiritual  works  merely   by   what  at   present,    in  this 

of   mercy  :    to   instruct   the   ignorant,  their  infant  state,  they  are  and  afford, 

correct  offenders,  counsel  the  doubtful,  but   by  what   in  all  future  times  on 

comfort   the    afflicted,   suffer    injuries  every   higher   step  of   their   existence 

with    patience,    forgive    offences    and  they  may  and   will  be  and  afford. — 

wrongs,  pray  for  others.     3.  Its  scope  G.  J.  Zollikofer. 
and  limit.      (1)  It  is  to  be  universal 

in    its   scope,   reaching    even   to    our  Vers.    32-34.    The   excellence   of  the 

enemies  (Matt.  v.  43-48 ;  Luke  x.  29-  moral    taw. — I.    The    great   practical 

38).     (2)  Its  limit :  we  are  to  love  our  duties  of  the  law  are  supremely  excel- 

neighbour   as    ourself;    not    more — a  lent. — 1.  They  are  good  for  their  own 

warning   to    those    who    neglect    the  sake ;  whereas  the  institutions  of  the 

cultivation  of  their  own  spiritual  life  ceremonial    law    were    good    only    as 

for  the  active  ministrations  of  Church  means   to    a.     end.     2.  They   can    be 

work;    but    not    less — a    warning  to  performed  only  by  a   renewed  heart; 

those  who  think  only  of  the  needs  of  whereas  the   institutions  of  the  cere- 

their  own  soul. — A.  G.  Mortimer,  D.D.  monial  law  may  be  performed  by  the 

Motives  to  universal  charity. — 1.  most  abandoned  of  mankind. 
Wouldst  thou  love  all  mankind  as  thy  II.  They  are  such  as  must  commend 
brethren,  rejoice  in  them  and  think  of  themselves  to  the  conscience  of  every 
them  with  complacency,  say  sometimes  candid  inquirer. — 1.  Are  they  reason- 
to  thyself,  "  God  loves  them ;  He  designs  able  ?  What  can  be  more  reasonable 
their  good ;  He  showers  His  benefits  than  that  we  should  love  Him  who  is 
upon  them  ;  He  rejoices  in  them  as  the  infinitely  lovely,  and  who  has  so  loved 
work  of  His  hands,  as  His  creatures,  us  as  even  to  give  His  only  dear  Son 
His  children  ;  He  beholds  them  with  to  die  for  us  ?  2.  Are  they  conducive 
complacency."  2.  Wouldst  thou  love  to  our  happiness?  Wherein  does  the 
all  mankind  as  thy  brethren,  rejoice  in  happiness  of  heaven  consist  but  in  the 
them  all,  and  think  on  them  with  exercise  of  love  ?  3.  Are  they  per- 
complacency  and  esteem  :  in  the  judg-  fective  of  our  nature  ?  The  want  of 
ment  that  thou  passest  on  them  be  love  is  that  which  debases  us  even 
not  biassed  either  by  the  homeliness  of  lower  than  the  beasts  that  perish.  No 
their  figure,  or  the  meanness  of  their  words  can  describe  the  full  malignity 

456 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST   MARK.         chap.  XII. 


of  such  a  state.  But  let  a  principle 
of  love  possess  our  souls,  and  it  instantly 
refines  all  our  feelings,  regulates  all 
our  dispositions,  and  transforms  us  into 
the  very  image  of  our  God.  4.  Are 
they  instrumental  to  the  honouring 
of  God  ?  We  know  of  no  other  way  in 
which  God  can  be  honoured,  because 
these  two  commandments  comprehend 
the  whole  of  our  duty.  But  by 
abounding  in  a  regard  to  these  we 
may  and  do  honour  Him. 

III.  An  approbation  of  them  argues 
a  state  of  mind  favourable  to  the 
reception  of  the  gospel. — When  there 
is  a  readiness  to  approve"  the  boundless 
extent  of  these  commandments,,  there 
must  of  necessity  be — 1.  An  openness 
to  be  convinced  of  our  lest  estate. 
2.  A  willingness  to  embrace  the  offers 
of  salvation.  3.  A  readiness  to  receive 
and  improve  tbe  aids  of  God's  Spirit. 
— C.  Simeon. 

Ver.  34.  Not  far  from  the  kingdom. — 

1.  What  is  it  to  be  near  the  kingdom  ? 
— There  are  habits  of  life,  traits  of  cha- 
racter which  bring  us  nigh — 1.  A  moral 
life.  2.  Interest  in  religion.  The  Holy 
Spirit  guides  all  sincere  seekers  of 
truth.  3.  Knowledge  of  Scriptures. 
This  is  a  long  step  nearer  Christ.  The 
seed  lies  ready  for  the  sun  and  rain. 

II.  What  is  it  to  be  in  the  kingdom  ? 
— 1 .  Answer  supplied  in  narr r  %\ ve.  To 
know  that  to  love  God  and  man  is 
more  than  all  mere  rites  is  to  be  near 
the  kingdom.  To  have  that  love  in 
the   heart   is   to   bo  in  the  kingdom. 

2.  To  enter  the  kingdom  love  must  be 
shed  abroad  in  the  heart.  This  love 
enters  when  we  believe  God's  love  to 
us.  The  last  step  into  the  kingdom 
is  then  faith — belief  in  God's  love  to 
me.  God's  love  enters  the  soul  like 
a  cascade,  as  we  believe  it.  Then  rises 
up  our  love  to  God,  like  the  spray,  the 
vapour-cloud  of  the  fall,  that  fills  our 
life  with  beauty,  as  the  mossy  banks 
of  the  cascade  are  full  of  flowers  and 
ferns.  Our  love  to  God  is  the  return 
of  God's  love  to  its  source.  This  love 
shews  itself  to  our  neighbour ;  if  not, 
it  does  not  exist. 


III.  Why  do  men  not  go  all  the 
way? — 1.  They  love  some  secret  evil. 
A  hidden  anchor  holds  the  vessel  when 
the  tide  is  flowing.  2.  They  are  not  in 
earnest.  It  is  necessary  to  "  strive." 
3.  They  procrastinate;  they  lack  the 
final  act  of  decision ;  they  miss  the 
flood-tide  which  would  have  led  to 
salvation. 

IV.  The  responsibility  of  stopping 
short. —  1.  It  is  full  of  danger.  To 
feel  "near  the  kingdom"  breeds  the 
presumption,  "  I  can  enter  any  time." 
Where  despair  of  salvation  slays  one 
soul,  presumption  slays  a  thousand. 
2.  The  position  cannot  be  maintained ; 
the  habits  of  life,  the  traits  of  character, 
which  bring  us  near,  will  fade,  unless 
we  ask  Christ  to  guard  them.  We 
shall  drift  farther  every  year  from 
heaven.  3.  It  is  fatal.  "  To  be  almost 
saved  is  to  be  altogether  lost." — J.  II, 
Hodson. 

Nearness  not  possession. — It  is  with 
the  kingdom  of  God  as  with  other 
kingdoms — kingdoms  both  objective 
and  subjective — to  be  almost  in  pos- 
session is  not  sufficient.  A  man  may 
be  almost  in  possession  of  a  fortune, 
but  that  adds  not  to  his  credit  at  the 
bank.  A  man  may  be  almost  honest 
or  almost  sober,  but  that  will  be  no 
recommendation  to  a  position  of  trust 
and  responsibility.  And  as  with  these, 
so  with  the  kingdoms  of  mental  force, 
health,  and  social  influence ;  nearness 
is  not  sufficient. 

I.  A  man  is  not  necessarily  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  because  an  intelligent 
inquirer. — Christ  does  not  shrink  from 
being  questioned ;  but  let  us  discrimi- 
nate between  questioning  with  a  view 
to  information  and  questioning  with 
a  view  to  disputation.  Moreover  it 
is  worthy  of  notice  that  when  Christ 
pronounces  upon  a  man's  condition  that 
man  does  not  farther  presume  upon 
his  mere  knowledge.  "  Thou  art  not 
far  from  the  kingdom  of  God."  What 
then?  "No  man'after  that  durst  ask 
Him  any  question? 

II.  A  man  is  not  necessarily  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  because  he  knows 
truth  when  he  hears  it.— Twice  over 

457 


CHAP.  XII.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


in  the  narrative  we  find  this  scribe  kingdom  of  God  because  he  can  answer 

tacitly  saying  Amen  to  the  utterances  questions  bearing  upon  Christianity. — 

of  Christ.     But  a  man  may  do  that  We  fear  that  not  a   little  confidence 

and  yet  have  no  affection  for  Christ  as  is  reposed  in  questions  having  only  a 

Saviour.     This    man   was    thoroughly  very  remote  bearing  upon  religion.     A 

orthodox.     But  it  is  quite  possible  to  man    may   know    the    creed    without 

make  a  false  god  of  orthodoxy.     At  all  knowing  the  Christ,  and  the  catechism 

events    theoretical    orthodoxy   is    not  while  yet  he  knows  nothing  of  charity, 

enough.     A   man  may  be  ready  "  to  Farther,  a  man  may  answer  according 

stand  up  for   the  truth,"   nay,  ready  to  the  letter  of  Scripture  and  yet  be 

to  die  for   it,  and  yet    be  only  "  not  only   "  not  far  from  the   kingdom  of 

far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  God."     We  must  repent,  confess,  be- 

xiii.  3).  lieve,  and  serve. — J.  S.  Swan. 
III.  A  man  is  not  necessarily  in  the 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  35—37. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxii.  41-46  ;  Luke  xx.  41-44.) 

Our  Lord' 8  question  concerning  the  Messiah. — I.  The  place  where  He  pro- 
pounded His  question. — Why  did  He  choose  such  a  public  place  as  the  Temple 
to  oppose  the  scribes'  opinion  and  doctrine  ?  That  by  putting  them  to  silence 
in  such  open  manner  He  might  bring  the  greater  shame  and  disgrace  upon 
them  and  their  doctrine,  they  being  malicious  enemies  of  the  truth ;  and  withal 
that  He  might  gain  the  more  credit  and  authority  with  the  people  to  His  own 
person  and  doctrine.  1.  In  that  Christ  used  so  much  to  frequent  the  Temple, 
being  a  public  place,  whither  all  sorts  of  people  much  resorted,  to  the  end  He 
might  there  have  occasion  of  doing  the  more  good,  both  by  His  doctrine  and 
miracles,  as  also  by  reforming  abuses  there,  and  by  opposing  and  refuting 
errors  :  hence  observe  that  we  also  ought  to  take  the  best  opportunities  of  time, 
place,  and  persons,  where  and  amongst  whom  we  may  do  most  good,  and  bring 
most  glory  to  God,  in  our  place  and  calling.  2.  In  that  Christ  was  now 
teaching  in  the  Temple,  and  so  used  to  be  much  and  often  at  other  times  to 
teach  the  people  there  publicly  :  hence  learn  whither  to  resort  if  we  would  hear 
Christ  and  be  partakers  of  His  doctrine,  viz.  to  the  public  place  of  God's 
worship.  3.  In  that  Christ  did  not  only  teach  and  deliver  sound  doctrine  in 
the  Temple  at  this  time,  but  did  also  oppose  erroneous  doctrine :  hence  gather 
that  ministers  of  the  Word  are  not  only  in  their  public  ministry  to  teach  true 
and  sound  doctrine,  but  also  to  oppose  and  confute  contrary  errors,  as  occasion 
is  offered  (Tit.  i.  9,  11). 

II.  The  manner  of  Christ's  opposing  and  confuting  the  opinion  of  the 
scribes. — 1.     He    propounds    their   opinion   and    questions    the    truth    of     it. 

(1)  That  He  might  by  this  means  take  occasion  to  confute  and  overthrow  that 
common  and  gross  error  held  not  only  by  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  but  also 
by  the  greatest  part  of  the  other  Jews,  touching  the  person  of  the  Messiah. 

(2)  That  by  this  means  He  might  have  occasion  to  confirm  the  faith  of  His 
disciples  in  the  truth  and  doctrine  of  His  Godhead.  (3)  Having  lately 
commended  one  of  the  scribes  for  answering  discreetly,  therefore  now  He 
takes  occasion  to  propound  this  question,  thereby  to  stir  up  both  that  scribe 
and  others  also  to  a  diligent  search  after  the  true  knowledge  of  the  Messiah. 
2.  He  objects  against  them  a  place  of  Scripture.  (1)  All  errors,  and  erroneous 
opinions  and  doctrines  of  men,  in  matters  of  faith  and  religion,  are  to  be  opposed 
and  confuted  by  Scripture,  and  by  grounds  and  reasons  taken  from  thence. 
(2)  The  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  spoke  of  Christ  the  true  Messiah,  and 

458 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap,  xil 


of  His  kingdom  and  glory,  and  the  manifestation  of  it,  long  before  it  was 
fulfilled.  (3)  The  writers  of  Holy  Scripture  were  extraordinarily  directed  and 
assisted  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  He  applies  those  words  of  David  to  His  purpose. 
(1)  The  Person  who  is  said  here  to  have  called  and  advanced  Christ  to  this  high 
degree  of  glory  and  authority,  viz.  God  the  Father.  (2)  The  Person  called 
and  advanced  to  this  glory — Christ  the  true  Messiah,  (a)  There  is  a  distinction 
of  Persons  in  the  Godhead,  though  but  one  God  in  nature  and  essence.  (6)  The 
truth  of  Christ's  Godhead,  in  that  David  calls  Him  his  Lord,  (c)  The  nature 
of  true  faith — to  make  particular  application  of  Christ  to  the  believer.  "  My 
Lord."  (d)  How  we  ought  to  receive  and  embrace  Christ — not  only  as  Redeemer 
and  Saviour,  but  also  as  Lord  and  Master.  (3)  The  ground  or  cause  of  Christ's 
advancement  to  this  glory,  viz.  the  eternal  purpose  and  decree  of  God  the 
Father,  ordaining  and  appointing  Him  unto  it.  (4)  The  advancement  itself. 
(a)  To  the  highest  degree  of  glory,  honour,  and  dignity,  next  unto  God  the 
Father.  (6)  To  the  full  possession  and  administration  of  His  kingdom  and 
government  over  the  world,  and  especially  over  His  true  Church. — G.  Fetter, 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  35,  36.  Faith  can  reconcile 
apparent  opposites. — Faith  alone,  which 
knows  what  Christ  is  by  His  Divine 
nature,  and  what  He  is  become  by 
His  mercy,  knows  how  to  reconcile 
the  seeming  contradictions  which  are 
in  this  Divine  compound,  God-man  : 
Son  of  David,  by  His  birth  according 
to  the  flesh ;  and  Lord  of  David,  by 
His  eternal  birth  in  God  His  Father, 
as  also  by  the  rights  of  His  third 
birth,  namely,  His  resurrection,  which 
placed  Him  at  the  right  hand  of  His 
Father. — F.  Quesnel. 

A  counter-question.  — Thus  the  Saviour 
intimates  it  is  not  robbery  to  claim 
equality  with  God,  and  intimates  that 
no  merely  human  Saviour  would  meet 
the  deep  wants  of  man. 

I.  In  all  ages  men  have  longed  for 
a  Divine  and  human  Saviour,— one 
who,  as  man,  would  be  near  and 
sympathetic ;  as  God,  omnipotent  and 
enduring.  David's  psalm  is  a  clear 
expression  of  what  all  religious  men 
have  dreamed  of.  An  incarnation  of 
a  helpful  God  is  the  hope  of  the 
Hindoo  peoples. 

II.  None  less  than  God  can  be  a 
spiritual  and  eternal  Saviour. — We 
want  a  son  of  David,  but  one  whose 
name  is  "  Lord,"  and  whose  natural  seat 
is  "  at  God's  right  hand." — R.  Glover. 

Yer.  37.  Christ's  popularity  with  the 


masses. — All  through  the  Gospels  there 
are  indications  of  Christ's  popularity 
with  the  masses  as  distinguished  from 
the  classes.  Why  ?  Where  lay  the 
charm  ?  In  the  aspect,  the  matter, 
the  spirit  of  the  Man  ?  Perhaps  in 
all  together.  It  is  difficult  to  give  a 
full  account  of  popularity,  to  explain 
why  one  man  can  do  what  he  wills 
with  an  audience,  while  another  is 
utterly  helpless.  There  may  be  subtle 
physical  causes  at  work,  as  well  as 
intellectual  and  moral  ones.  But  the 
thing  is  not  altogether  a  mystery ;  the 
teacher's  power  can  be  explained  in 
part.  Looks  count  for  something — 
the  kindling  eye,  the  play  of  thought 
and  emotion  in  the  face.  A  genial 
manner  goes  a  long  way  to  conciliate 
favour,  revealing  itself  in  a  kindly 
smile  and  a  warm,  hearty  tone  of 
utterance.  But  the  secret  of  power 
lies  mainly  in  what  a  man  says — in 
his  thoughts  as  a  revelation  of  himself, 
his  convictions  embodied  in  speech. 
Eloquence  is  not  an  affair  of  manner 
or  of  style  or  of  gesture ;  it  is  the 
whole  man — all  that  is  within — speak- 
ing out :  the  mind,  heart,  soul,  spirit, 
finding  utterance  for  itself  in  words. 
It  is  this  on  which  the  Evangelists 
remark  in  reference  to  Christ's  power 
over  His  audience  (see  Luke  iv.  22  ; 
Matt.  vii.  28,  29).—^.  B.  Bruce,  D.D. 

459 


CHAP.  xii.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses   38—40. 

(Parallels:  Matt,  xxiii.  13-39;  Luke  xx.  45-47.) 

Character  and  conduct  of  scribes  denounced. — I.  Their  loud  professions  of 
sanctity  and  their  ostentatious  devotions  are  censured. — Long  prayers  may 
sometimes  be  the  outcome  of  deep  feeling  and  many  needs;  they  may,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  scribes,  be  a  cloak  for  sin.  Long  robes,  like  long  prayers,  may 
be  a  profession  with  which  nothing  spiritual  corresponds. 

II.  Their  love  of  pre-eminence  is  blamed. — Both  in  "Church  and  State" 
they  loved  to  be  supreme,  and  in  all  social  relations  they  sought  the  honour 
which  cometh  from  man. 

III.  Their  cruel  rapacity  is  held  up  to  obloquy. — The  bereaved  and  defence- 
less were  their  victims. 

IV.  Christ  predicts  the  condemnation  of  such  sinners,  and  at  the  same  time 
puts  the  people  on  their  guard  against  them. — Against  the  wrongs  and  cruelties, 
the  assumptions  and  errors  of  such  pretenders,  the  Good  Shepherd  would  fain 
protect  His  feeble  and  defenceless  sheep. — J.  R.  Thomson. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    38-40.    Needful  cautions. — I.  wickedly.      2.   Christians    must    take 

In  that  our  Lord  warns  the  common  heed  of  being  corrupted   by  the   evil 

people,  and  His  own  disciples  too,  to  example  and  practice  of  such  as  are 

beware    of    following    the    evil    and  outwardly   called    to    the    ministerial 

corrupt  life  and  example  of  the  scribes,  office,  and  yet  are  men  of  corrupt  and 

we   may  gather   that   there   is   much  vicious  life.      Though   they  may   and 

danger  of  infection   to   the  people  of  ought   to  hear   the  doctrine  preached 

God   by  the    evil    and    corrupt   lives  by  such,  and  to  embrace  and  follow 

of    such   as   are   called    to   be   public  it,    so  far   as   they  preach   the  truth 

pastors  and   teachers  of   the  Church,  (Matt,  xxiii.  3),  yet  they  must  beware 

when  they  do  not  live  answerably  to  of    following    the    evil    example    and 

this    calling,    but    loosely,    profanely,  practice  of  such  pastors. — G.  Petter. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  41—44. 

(Parallel  :  Luke  xxi.  1-4.) 

A  celebrated  contribution. — The  "  collection "  is  generally  considered  to  be 
commonplace.  Jesus,  in  this  passage,  clothed  it  with  sublimity.  He  immortal- 
ised the  famous  farthing.  The  two  mites  are  transformed  into  two  angels, 
and  they  seem  to  watch  over  the  contribution  chest  of  the  Church  as  the 
cherubim  did  over  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant.  Jesus  was  memorable  for  seeing 
the  many  in  the  one,  the  much  in  the  little,  the  sublime  in  the  simple.  The 
smallest  act  may  embody  the  greatest  principle.  The  mites  of  the  poor  widow 
rise  to  the  transcendent  height  of  latent  martyrdom — "even  all  her  living." 
She  gave  all  that  her  life  depended  upon.  One  step  more  and  the  gift  would 
have  been  life. 

I.  True  religion  is  sometimes  under  disadvantageous  circumstances  to 
develop  itself. — 1.  True  religion  is  to  be  developed.  Piety  is  composite,  con- 
sisting of  principle  and  action.  As  rays  to  the  sun,  branches  to  the  tree,  the 
stream  to  the  fountain,  so  conduct  is  to  the  heart,  its  natural  and  necessary 
outcome.     2.  The  possessor  of  true  religion  is  sometimes  unfortunately  situated. 

460 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  xii. 


The  condition  of  woman,  and  especially  of  a  widow,  in  the  East  was  deplorable. 
Her  portion  was  oppression.  3.  Contrast  between  principles  and  position  makes 
the  development  of  religion  difficult.  The  widow  had  the  will,  but  not  the 
means,  to  give.     She  was  a  princess  in  heart,  but  a  pauper  in  hand. 

II.  True  religion  will  develop  itself  in  spite  of  adverse  circumstances. — 
This  "  poor  widow  "  displayed — 1.  Consciousness  of  ability  to  give.  God  created 
all  beings  with  the  power  to  realise  the  design  of  their  existence.  This  is 
pre-eminently  true  of  man.  He  has  soul,  will,  affections,  emotions,  conscience, 
body,  privileges,  motives,  and  example.  2.  Conviction  of  duty  to  give.  Every 
one  under  the  law  was  commanded  to  give.  None  was  exempted.  The 
principle  still  remains  under  the  new  dispensation.  Individual  effort  is  ever- 
lasting. No  proxy  in  religion.  "  Follow  thou  Me."  3.  Practical  promptitude 
to  give.  She  contributed  gloriously,  and  the  tinkling  of  her  tiny  tokens  has 
reverberated  throughout  the  universe.  The  making  power  of  the  two  mites  has 
been  felt  in  all  the  collections  of  Christendom  ever  since. 

III.  The  display  of  true  religion  in  spite  of  adverse  circumstances  wins 
the  hearty  commendation  of  Christ. — Christ  reports  a  farthing.  He  is  alone 
in  this.  The  sum  was  small,  but  it  was  an  indication  of  profound  feeling  and 
great  sacrifice.  It  was  full  of  self-denial.  The  others  of  their  much  gave  a 
little,  but  she  of  her  little  gave  all.  There  was  no  suffering  in  their  offerings. 
Religion  was  secondary  to  riches.  Gold  superseded  God.  If  there  is  no  sacrifice 
in  our  deeds,  they  are  valueless  in  a  moral  sense.  The  widow  went  her  way 
after  depositing  her  gift,  and  probably  never  knew  that  she  was  observed. 
Perhaps  it  will  be  so  with  thee.  Do  thy  best  and  thou  shalt  reap.  Do  thy 
best  in  the  family,  the  business,  the  school,  the  Church,  the  world.  Time  is 
short.     Work  is  urgent.     Recompense  is  sure. — B.  D.  Johns. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 

Ver.   41.    The    Church  treasury. —  gift  cannot   be    determined    by    its 

1.  The  Church  treasury. — 1.  Its  su-  absolute  amount;  it  can  be  truly 
preme  importance.  The  Church  can  ascertained  only  by  a  moral  standard, 
no  more  succeed  without  its  treasury  — 1.  The  first  index  on  this  moral 
than  can  a  mill,  factory,  workshop,  standard  points  to  the  ability  to  bestow, 
farm,  or  store.  (1)  Church  edifices  The  widow  had  given  more  than  the 
can  neither  be  built  nor  maintained  wealthy  in  proportion  to  her  ability, 
without  money.  (2)  The  ministry  is  Their  contributions  were  as  much 
sustained  by  the  treasury.  (3)  All  less  than  their  living  as  the  widow's 
the  benevolent  work  of  the  Church  mites,  which  were  "all  her  living," 
waits  on  the  treasury.  2.  The  treasury  were  less  than  their  gifts  of  gold, 
measures  the  love  of  Christ's  people  And,  even  while  they  stood  at  the 
for  Him.  Self-sacrifice.  Money  is  Temple,  their  servants  were  busy  in 
the  principal  representative  of  value.  their  rich  dwellings,  preparing  savoury 

II.  The    people    who    cast    money  viands  against  their  masters'  return, 

into  it. — 1.   "  The  multitude."     "None  But  the  widow's  habitation  was  deso- 

empty."      "  Every   one    lay   by,"    etc.  late  in  her  absence  ;  the  fire  had  gone 

2.  Jesus  saw  how  much,  etc.  3.  How  out  upon  her  hearth  ;  and  she  must 
rather  than  what.  "  Cheerful  giver."  return  not  to  a  luxurious  feast,  but 
"  Willing  mind."  Many  gave  from  to  an  empty  board.  In  such  circum- 
purse  only ;  she  from  heart.  Custom  stances  abundant  indeed  was  her  con- 
— love.  tribution.      2.  A    second   mark    upon 

this  standard  indicates  the  disposition 

Vers.    42-44.    The  greatness    of  the     that  prompts  the  gift.     There  may  be 

widow's  gift. — I.   The  greatness  of  a      no  generosity  in  the  most  magnificent 

461 


chap.  xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


bequest,  while  a  soul  overflowing  with  nourished.     2.  In  regard  to  our  own 

love    may    accompany    the    humblest  characters  we  may  say  the  mites  are 

present.      Here   indeed  is  a  sense  in  more  than  the  talents.     It  is  not  what 

which  her  offering  was  greater  than  we  think   and  feel  and  do  on  extra- 

those     of    the    worldlings.      It     was  ordinary    occasions    that    makes    the 

greater   in  her   own  soul.     Small  in-  bulk  of  character,  but  the  silent  and 

deed  was  their  gift  in  the  estimation  steady  accumulation  of  our  every-day 

of  their  own  secret  thought.     Inferior  desires  and  motives  and  habits  of  life, 

was  its  weight  in  the  scales  of  con-  Religion    consists    not    in    spasmodic 

science,    but   great    and   glorious    the  efforts,  but  persevering  industry — not 

integrity  and  joyfulness  of  the  widow's  in  doing  much  at  one  time,  but  all  we 

spirit.     3.  There  is  still  another  index  can  at  all  times.     Think  not  thy  little, 

on  this  moral   standard  which  deter-  if  it  be  all  thou  canst,  will  be  despised  : 

mines   the  greatness  of   a  gift.     This  think  not  thy  much,  if  it  be  less  than 

index  points  to  the  good  effect  result-  thy  ability,   will  be  accepted. — C.   A. 

ing  from  the  gift.     How  many  hearts  Bartol. 

has  this  lofty  spirit  of  the  poor  widow,  Unconscious  fame. — She  knew  not 
thus  celebrated  by  Christ,  inspired  that  any  had  seen  it :  for  the  know- 
with  the  same  self -forgetful  love  and  ledge  of  eyes  turned  on  her,  even  His, 
impelled  to  the  same  noble  conduct !  would  have  flushed  with  shame  the 
Viewed  in  its  ultimate  influence,  then,  pure  cheek  of  her  love  ;  and  any  word, 
her  gift  was  greater  than  theirs  ;  and,  conscious  notice,  or  promise  would  have 
thus  regarded,  we  may  even  say  it  marred  and  turned  aside  the  rising 
was  absolutely  greater.  For  if  we  incense  of  her  sacrifice.  But  to  all 
consider  all  the  effects  of  her  example  time  has  it  remained  in  the  Church, 
in  cherishing  a  true  benevolence  and  like  the  perfume  of  Mary's  alabaster 
leading  others  to  be  bountiful  even  that  filled  the  house,  this  deed  of  self- 
the  sum  of  the  rich  men's  benefactions  denying  sacrifice.  More,  far  more,  than 
would  dwindle  and  fade  into  nothing  the  great  gifts  of  their  "superfluity," 
before  the  greatness  and  splendour  of  which  the  rich  cast  in,  was,  and  is  to 
offerings  devoted  to  the  cause  of  all  time,  the  gift  of  absolute  self- 
religion  which  have  grown,  as  an  surrender  and  sacrifice,  tremblingly 
immense  harvest  from  invisible  seed,  out  offered  by  the  solitary  mourner.  And 
of  the  widow's  mites.  She  gave  not  though  He  spake  not  to  her,  yet  the 
only  to  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem,  but  sunshine  of  His  words  must  have  fallen 
to  every  Christian  temple  under  the  into  the  dark  desolateness  of  her  heart ; 
heaven  whose  foundations  have  since  and  though  perhaps  she  knew  not 
been  laid.  By  a  single  act  of  self-denial  why,  it  must  have  been  a  happy  day 
she  has  been  charitable  to  the  whole  of  rich  feast  in  the  heart  when  she 
world ;  and  for  what  she  did,  in  gave  up  "  her  whole  living "  unto  God. 
humility  and  sorrow  that  she  could  do  And  so  perhaps  is  every  sacrifice 
no  more,  the  whole  world  will  confess  for  God  all  the  more  blessed  when  we 
itself  under  obligations  and  be  grateful,  know  not  of  its  blessedness. — A.  Eders- 

II.  This  subject  naturally  suggests  heim,  D.D. 
an  absolute    truth,   apart    from    the  Uncoined    charity. — The     humblest 

particular  case  presented  in  the  text,  and  feeblest  among  us   may  cast  in 

—  1.  We  may  say,  generally,  it  is  not  their   mite   wherever   there   is  a  sick 

great  but  small  things,  not  imposing  bedside  to  be  prayed  by,  ignorance  to 

but  humble  deeds,  that  make  up  the  be  enlightened,  or  misery  to  be  relieved, 

great  sum  of  good  influence.     Look  at  There   are   many  widows  still  among 

all  the  great  associations  for  the  sup-  us  in  heart  like  her  who  left  her  all 

port  of  government,  education,  philan-  in   the   treasury.       May   their    useful 

thropy,  religion.     It  is  not  the  talents,  and  estimable  class   extend   and   per- 

but   the    mites,    by    which   they    are  severe !      True   to   their   principles  of 

462 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   XII. 


doing  all  unto  the  Lord,  and  of  giving 
in  secret,  may  no  apprehension  of  the 
scorn  of  the  world,  nor  any  misgiving 
of  their  doing  good  because  the  good 
they  do  seems  small  in  amount,  check 
their  hands  or  chill  their  hearts :  many 
a  midnight  prayer  ascends  for  them 
from  sleepless  but  grateful  sufferers, 
many  a  blessing  poured  forth  for  them 
by  helpless  lips  is  registered  on  high ; 
and  still,  when  the  Lord  looks  up  to 
view  how  men  are  filling  His  treasury, 
He  sees  certain  poor  widows  casting  in 
thither  their  mites ;  and  passing  by  un- 
heeded the  rich  men's  gifts,  He  fixes  on 
them  the  praise  of  real  charity. — R.  L. 
Browne. 

A  rule  of  giving  for  the  rich. — Dif- 
ferent circumstances  require  different 
management,  and  there  is  a  way  of 
coming  up  to  the  poor  widow's  attain- 
ments without  doing  exactly  as  she 
did.  If  a  rich  man  were  to  give  away 
his  whole  estate,  and  reduce  himself 
to  poverty  or  to  hard  labour,  this 
would  not  only  be  doing  as  much,  but 
a  great  deal  more  than  the  poor  widow 
did ;  for  she  did  not  make  any  such 
great  change  in  her  circumstances, 
nor  did  she  sink  her  state  or  condition 
at  all  lower  than  before.  Her  example 
therefore,  or  our  Lord's  applauding  it, 
is  of  no  force  as  to  obliging  any  one  to 
throw  himself  out  of  that  rank,  station, 
or  condition  of  life  wherein  God  has 
placed  him.  Nor  does  the  instance  of 
the  text  oblige  a  man,  when  in  a 
thriving  way,  to  dispose  of  all  the 
overplus,  all  the  clear  gains,  at  the 
year's  end :  for  how  then  could  he  go 
on  to  support  that  rank  and  station 
he  is  in,  and  to  provide  for  his  family  ? 


The  poor  widow  might,  by  what  she 
did,  straiten  herself  for  a  day  or 
two,  and  after  that  be  in  as  good  a 
condition  as  she  was  before.  But  were 
any  trading  or  thriving  men  to  give 
away  all  their  increase,  they  would 
soon  find  their  affairs  run  backwards, 
and  would  not  be  able  to  recover  them. 
Well,  then,  how  must  we  state  the  case 
with  a  rich  man  to  make  it  answer 
to  this  in  the  text  ?  The  rule  of  pro- 
portion, I  conceive,  is  this :  that  the 
richer  sort,  in  order  to  give  the  more 
away  in  charity,  should  be  content 
to  practise  some  degree  of  self-denial, 
in  like  manner  as  the  poor  widow  did. 
Let  them  retrench  unnecessary  ex- 
penses at  least,  abridge  their  pleasures, 
shorten  their  diversions,  cut  off  as 
much  as  possible  from  the  pomp  and 
pride  of  life,  to  spend  upon  the  poor. 
Besides  this,  let  them  not  be  over- 
solicitous  as  to  futurities,  providing 
handsomely  for  their  children,  or 
raising  their  families.  The  poor  widow 
trusted  God  for  her  own  necessary 
subsistence  rather  than  make  no 
offering  at  all  to  the  treasury.  And 
thus  much  at  least  may  be  expected 
of  every  man :  that  he  contribute 
according  to  his  perfect  circumstances ; 
and  that  no  anxiety,  either  for  himself 
or  his  children  after  him,  ever  hinder 
him  from  doing  in  proportion  to  what 
he  at  present  enjoys.  Be  content 
with  a  moderate  provision  rather  than 
grow  covetous  and  defraud  the  poor ; 
for,  after  all,  God's  providence  is 
the  best  security  and  His  friendship 
the  richest  treasure  we  can  have. — 
Archdeacon  Waterland. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    XII. 


Ver.  2.  "  At  the  season."— That  was  when 
the  clusters  were  ripe,  or  perhaps  it  means 
the  usually  arranged  period  when  the  tenants, 
having  gathered  their  grapes,  and  pressed 
their  clusters,  and  sold  their  casks  of  wine, 
were  able  to  pay  the  agreed  amount  of 
the  profits.  The  plan  seems  to  resemble  the 
system  called  metayer  in  France,  where  the 
landowner  supplies  the  land  and  seed,  etc., 
according  to  an  agreement,  and  the  labourer 
supplies  the  culture,  and  at   harvest-time 


receives  for  himself  two-thirds  of  the  crop, 
and  pays  over  the  other  third  to  the  land- 
owner. 

Vers.  3-9.  Insecurity  of  life  in  unsettled 
times. — The  insecurity  of  life  is  reflected  by 
the  fierce  lawlessness  of  the  peasants  who 
had  possession  of  the  vineyard ;  for  that 
must  have  been  a  wild  time  of  which  it 
could  be  said  that  they  beat,  stabbed,  or 
stoned  both  bands  of  slaves,  enrling  by  kill- 

463 


chap.. xii.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


ing  even  the  householder's  son.  Nor  is  it  a 
less  vivid  indication  of  general  social  de- 
moralisation to  find  the  injured  owner  repre- 
sented as  coming  and  destroying  the  criminals, 
without  any  reference  of  the  matter  to  a 
court  of  law.  The  parable  must  be  true  to 
possibilities,  else  it  would  have  failed  to  im- 
press, and  hence  may  be  accepted  as  imply- 
ing a  very  unsettled  state  of  society  in 
Palestine  in  those  days,  at  least  in  districts 
away  from  Roman  posts.  The  hideous  misery 
entailed  on  the  whole  land  by  the  long  civil 
wars  of  local  pretenders,  and,  still  more,  by 
the  awful  struggles  of  the  rival  claimants 
to  the  throne  of  the  world,  had  brought  over 
wide  regions,  not  in  Palestine  alone,  but  in 
every  province  of  the  all-embracing  Roman 
Empire,  a  dissolution  of  society,  and  the 
destruction  of  once  flourishing  communities, 
which  made  it  the  great  task  of  the  peaceful 
age  of  Augustus  to  rebuild  ruined  cities,  to 
bring  back  to  cultivation  provinces  once 
filled  with  a  thriving  population  and  rich 
in  all  rural  industries,  to  repress  and  ex- 
tirpate the  lawlessness  following  in  the  train 
of  such  prolonged  social  convulsions,  and  to 
restore  order  and  the  sanctities  of  a  secure 
public  and  private  life.  Over  Palestine  and 
Western  Asia,  including  Asia  Minor,  there 
was,  in  fact,  a  state  of  things  to  redress 
which  in  a  measure  anticipated  that  of  the 
civilised  world  at  large  in  the  fifth  century, 
when  the  safest  retreat  of  robbers,  or  the 
most  lonely  haunt  of  the  solitary  monk 
fleeing  from  the  evils  of  the  world,  was  in 
the  ruins  of  what  had  not  long  before  been 
a  rich  and  populous  city.  Or,  if  we  seek  a 
parallel  in  modern  history,  there  was  such 
a  state  of  things  as  remained  over  Central 
Europe  after  the  close  of  the  Thirty  Years' 
War,  the  scars  and  ruin  of  which  are  not 
even  yet  effaced,  after  nearly  two  hundred 
and  fifty  years. —  C.  Geikle,  D.D. 

Ingratitude. — At  the  battle  of  the  Alma, 
in  September  1854,  a  wounded  Russian  was 
calling  piteously  for  water.  Captain  Edding- 
ton,  whose  heart  was  kind  and  charitable, 
ran  to  him,  and,  stooping,  gave  him  a  drink. 
The  wounded  man  revived.  The  captain 
ran  forward  to  rejoin  his  regiment,  when 
the  wretch  fired  and  shot  him  who  had 
befriended  him  in  time  of  need. 

Vers.  6,  7.  God's  long  suffering. — The  axe 
carried  before  the  Roman  consuls  was  always 
bound  up  in  a  bundle  of  rods.  An  old  author 
tells  us  that  "  the  rods  were  tied  up  with 
knotted  cords,  and  that  when  an  offender 
was  condemned  to  be  punished  the  exe- 
cutioner would  untie  the  knots  one  by  one, 
and  meanwhile  the  magistrate  would  look 
the  culprit  in  the  face,  to  observe  any  signs 
of  repentance  and  watch  his  words,  to  see 
if  he  could  find  a  motive  for  mercy;  and 
thus  justice  went  to  its  work  deliberately 
and  without  passion."    The  axe  was  enclosed 

464 


in  rods  to  shew  that  the  extreme  penalty 
was  never  inflicted  till  milder  means  had 
failed ;  first  the  rod,  and  the  axe  only  as  a 
terrible  necessity. 

Divine  forbearance. — The  Macedonian  king, 
Alexander  the  Great,  who,  as  in  one  triumphal 
march,  conquered  the  world,  observed  a  very 
singular  custom  in  his  method  of  carrying 
on  war.  Whenever  he  encamped  with  his 
army  before  a  fortified  city  and  laid  siege  to 
it,  he  caused  to  be  set  up  a  great  lantern, 
which  was  kept  lighted  by  day  and  night. 
This  was  a  signal  to  the  besieged,  and  what 
it  meant  was  that  as  long  as  the  lamp  burned 
they  had  time  to  save  themselves  by  sur- 
render, but  that  when  once  the  light  should 
be  extinguished,  the  city,  and  all  that  were 
in  it,  would  be  irrevocably  given  over  to 
destruction.  And  the  conqueror  kept  his 
word  with  terrible  consistency.  When  the 
light  was  put  out,  and  the  city  was  not 
given  up,  all  hope  of  mercy  was  over.  The 
Macedonians  stormed  the  place,  and  if  it 
was  taken  all  were  cut  to  pieces  who  were 
capable  of  bearing  arms,  and  there  was  no 
quarter  or  forgiveness  possible.  Now  it  is 
the  good  pleasure  of  our  God  to  have  com- 
passion and  to  shew  mercy.  But  a  city  or  a 
people  can  arrive  at  such  a  pitch  of  moral 
corruption  that  the  moral  order  of  the  world 
can  only  be  saved  by  its  destruction.  It 
was  so  with  the  whole  race  of  men  at  the 
time  of  the  Flood,  with  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
at  a  later  period,  and  with  the  Jewish  people 
in  our  Saviour's  time.  But  before  the  im- 
pending stroke  of  judgment  fell  God  always, 
so  to  speak,  set  up  the  lamp  of  grace,  which 
was  not  only  a  signal  of  mercy,  but  also  a 
light  to  shew  men  that  they  were  in  the  way 
of  death,  and  a  power  to  turn  them  from  it. 

God's  final  effort. — I  remember  one  of  the 
poets  hath  an  ingenious  fancy  to  express  the 
Passion,  wherewith  he  found  himself  over- 
come after  a  long  resistance — that  "  the  God 
of  love  had  shot  all  His  golden  arrows  at 
him,  but  could  never  pierce  his  heart,  till 
at  length  he  put  Himself  into  the  bow,  and 
darted  Himself  straight  into  his  breast." 
Methinks  this  doth  some  way  adumbrate 
God's  method  of  dealing  with  men.  He  had 
long  contended  with  a  stubborn  world,  and 
thrown  down  many  a  blessing  upon  them; 
and  when  all  His  other  gifts  could  not 
prevail,  He  at  last  made  a  gift  of  Himself, 
to  testify  His  affections  and  to  engage  theirs 
(Isa.  v.  4 ;  Rom.  viii.  32 ;  Heb.  i.  3 ;  Tit.  ii.  14). 
— H.  Scougal. 

Christ  s  reception  from  men. — Surely  a  ser- 
vant of  the  government  may  risk  himself  in 
the  very  heart  of  a  convict  prison  alone,  if 
he  is  the  bearer  of  a  royal  pardon  for  all  the 
inmates.  In  such  a  case  it  would  not  be 
necessary  to  look  out  for  a  man  of  rare 
courage  who  might  dare  to  carry  the  pro- 
clamation to  the  convicts.  Give  him  but 
the  message  of  free  pardon,  and  he  may  go 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.         chap,  xil 


in  unarmed  with  all  safety,  like  Daniel  in 
the  den  of  lions.  When  Christ  Himself  came 
to  the  world — the  great  convict  prison  of 
the  universe — came  the  Ambassador  from 
God,  bringing  peace— they  said :  "  This  is  the 
heir;  come,  let  us  kill  Him  1 "  He  came  unto 
His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not; 
and  the  servant  is  not  greater  than  his  Lord. 

Ver.  9.  Responsibility. — Daniel  Webster 
was  once  called  upon  at  a  dinner-party  in 
his  own  house  to  specify  what  one  thing  he 
had  met  with  in  life  which  had  done  most 
for  him  or  had  contributed  most  to  his 
success.  After  a  moment  he  replied,  "  The 
most  fruitful  and  elevating  influence  I  have 
ever  seemed  to  meet  with  has  been  my  im- 
pression of  responsibility  to  God." 

Ver.  10.  "  The  headstone  of  the  corner "  is 
a  keystone.  A  keystone  is  the  wedge-shaped 
stone  which  keys  or  binds  together  the  sides 
of  an  arch  at  its  top.  There  is  an  ancient 
story  that  the  Temple-builders,  in  absence 
of  the  architect,  threw  away  a  keystone 
because  of  its  peculiar  shape.  It  would  not 
fit  anywhere  in  the  walls.  Finally  its  proper 
place  was  found,  and  it  was  raised  to  the  top 
of  the  arch.  "  The  stone  which  the  builders 
rejected  became  the  head  of  the  corner,"  the 
keystone  of  the  arch.  A  beautiful  illustra- 
tion, frequently  used,  of  the  rejection  and 
exaltation  of  Christ.  The  rejection  adds 
lustre  to  the  glory.  Every  rejection  of 
Christ  turns  out  the  same  way  :  whether 
rejected  by  Caiaphas,  or  Nero,  or  Voltaire 
or  Paris  Commune,  He  is  ever  found,  ever 
raised,  ever  placed  higher  in  the  fabric,  the 
headstone  of  the  arch.  He  has  no  other 
place.  He  fits  nowhere  else.  He  is  not 
one  fine  stone  along  with  the  rest,  Confucius, 
Buddha,  and  Mahomet.  He  is  the  keystone, 
different  in  kind  from  the  rest.  This  or 
nothing.  His  place  is  at  the  top.  The 
whole  fabric  of  history  holds  Him  up  to 
view.  He  binds  together  the  arch.  With- 
out Him  the  arch  must  fall  in.  Without 
Him  the  arch  is  an  unsolved  problem.  He 
is  the  keystone ;  He  solves  the  problem  and 
locks  the  arch.  He  is  the  keystone  of  history. 
Previous  history  comes  up  to  Him  on  one 
side,  and  subsequent  history  on  the  other 
side,  and  He  unites  them.  He  is  the  centre 
of  history.  He  is  the  keystone  of  religion. 
Religion  is  the  arch  which  bridges  the  chasm 
between  heaven  and  earth.  The  God-man 
touches  each  side  :  His  Divinity  touches  the 
heaven  side,  His  humanity  touches  the  earth 
side,  and  the  arch  is  completed,  the  bridge 
is  effected. 

Ver.  16.  God's  image  stamped  on  man. — 
We  can  often  tell  what  a  thing  is  for  by 
noticing  its  make.  The  instructed  eye  of 
an  anatomist  will,  from  a  bone,  divine  the 
sphere  in  which  the  creature  to  whom  it 
belonged  was   intended   to  live.     Just  as 


plainly  as  gills  or  lungs,  fins  or  wings,  or 
legs  and  arms  declare  the  element  in  which 
the  creature  that  possesses  them  is  intended 
to  move,  so  plainly  stamped  upon  all  our 
natures  is  this,  that  God  is  our  Lord,  since 
we  are  made  in  a  true  sense  in  His  image, 
and  that  only  in  Him  can  we  find  rest.  If 
you  take  a  coin,  and  compare  it  with  the 
die  from  which  it  has  been  struck,  you  will 
find  that  wherever  in  the  die  there  is  a 
relief,  in  the  coin  there  is  a  sunken  place, 
and  conversely.  So  there  are  not  only  resem- 
blances in  man  to  the  Divine  nature  which 
bear  upon  them  the  manifest  marks  of  his 
destiny,  but  there  are  correspondences, 
wants,  on  our  side,  being  met  by  gifts  upon 
His;  hollow  emptiness  in  us  being  filled, 
when  we  are  brought  into  contact  with 
Him,  by  the  abundance  of  His  outstanding 
supplies  and  gifts. — A.  Maclaren,  B.D. 

The  defacement  of  God's  image  in  man. — 
You  sometimes  get  into  your  hands  money 
on  which  there  has  been  stamped,  by  mis- 
chief, or  for  some  selfish  purpose,  the  name 
of  some  one  else  than  the  king's  or  queen's 
which  surrounds  the  head  upon  it.  And  in 
like  manner  our  nature  has  gone  through 
the  stamping-press  again,  and  another  like- 
ness has  been  deeply  imprinted  upon  it. 
The  image  of  God,  which  every  man  has, 
is  in  some  senses  and  aspects  ineffaceable 
by  any  course  of  conduct  of  theirs.  But  in 
another  aspect  it  is  not  like  the  permanent 
similitude  stamped  upon  the  solid  metal  of 
the  penny,  but  like  the  reflexion,  rather, 
that  falls  upon  some  polished  plate,  or  that 
is  cast  upon  the  white  sheet  from  a  lantern. 
If  the  polished  plate  be  rusty  and  stained, 
the  image  is  faint  and  indistinct;  if  it  be 
turned  away  from  the  light,  the  image  passes. 
And  that  is  what  some  of  you  are  doing. 
By  living  to  yourselves,  by  living  day  in  and 
day  out  without  ever  remembering  God,  by 
yielding  to  passions,  lusts,  ambitions,  low 
desires,  and  the  like,  you  are  doing  your 
very  best  to  scratch  out  the  likeness  which 
still  lingers  in  your  nature. — Ibid. 

Ver.  17.  Religion  and  business. — Have  you, 
a  Christian,  two  sources  of  happiness — God 
and  the  world  ?  Then  you  are  wrong,  for  to 
you  God  ought  to  be  in  all  the  world  that 
you  appropriate,  and  all  the  world  God's. 
Do  you  use  the  adjectives  " spiritual"  and 
"  secular "  in  describing  your  enjoyments  ? 
Is  prayer  spiritual,  that  is  the  Great  Spirit's 
gift,  while  an  evening  in  a  picture-gallery 
is  secular,  that  is  man's  gift?  Why,  God 
gives  the  latter  as  truly  as  the  former.  If 
you  are  living  on  the  high  plane  of  your 
privilege,  you  see  God  in  all  things  that  you 
are  permitted  to  build  into  your  life.  Have 
you  spiritual  needs,  as  for  instance  help  in 
resisting  temptation,  and  secular  needs,  such 
as  help  in  sickness?  There  is  only  One 
Helper    everywhere.      You    watch    against 


HH 


465 


CHAP.   XII. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


temptation — and  pray;  you  call  the  phy- 
sician in  sickness — and  ought  also  to  pray. 
Are  you  able  to  manage  the  mortgage  alone, 
but  unable,  as  you  think,  to  save  your  soul  ? 
In  fact  you,  without  God,  are  as  powerless 
in  the  one  case  as  the  other;  you  cannot 
cross  your  office  threshold  without  Him,  nor 
sign  a  draft.  There  are  not  two  worlds  here 
below  to  the  Christian,  one  God's  realm  and 
the  other  man's.  He  is  all  in  all.  Collo- 
quially it  is  harmless,  but  in  the  secret  heart  it 
is  wicked  to  distinguish  to  oneself  between 
spiritual  and  temporal  possessions.  Your 
faith  and  love  are  God's,  and  so  your  house, 
your  gold.  Men  say  business  is  business  and 
religion  is  religion.  No.  Business  is  religion 
and  religion  is  business. — E.  J.  Haynes. 

Vers.  18-27.  Universal  belief  in  immor- 
tality.— Almost  every  religion  which  has 
gathered  adherents  from  among  the  different 
tribes  of  men  has  not  only  affirmed  the  doc- 
trine of  a  future  life,  but  has  inculcated  it — 
if  not  as  a  basis  of  morality,  as  a  promise  of 
reward  for  virtue  and  right  living.  "  In  all 
the  leading  nations  of  the  earth  the  doctrine 
is  a  tradition  handed  down  from  immemorial 
antiquity,  embalmed  in  sacred  books  which 
are  regarded  as  infallible  revelations."  You 
will  find  it  in  some  form  as  well  in  the 
ancient  religions  as  in  those  of  later  times. 
Brahminism  teaches  it ;  so  does  Moham- 
medanism. It  forms  part  of  the  Confucian 
theology,  and  is  one  of  the  chief  features  of 
the  revelation  of  Christianity.  Amid  the 
apparent  Nihilism  and  Atheism  of  the  teach- 
ing of  Buddha  there  are  gleams  of  light  on 
the  great  problem  of  an  immortal  future. 
The  Zendavesta  unfolds  a  state  beyond  death 
in  which  man's  destiny  is  the  consequent 
result  of  character ;  and  when  the  Persians 
decorated  the  splendid  walls  of  Persepolis, 
they  embodied  in  sculpture  the  dominant 
dogma  of  their  faith — the  doctrine  of  ever- 
lastingness.  tn  the  theology  and  religious 
symbolism  of  ancient  Egypt  the  doctrine  of 
immortality  held  a  most  conspicuous  place. 
It  was  not  a  dream  of  the  Egyptian  priest- 
hood, but  a  fixed  and  firm  persuasion  of  the 
people.  And  the  natives  embalmed  their 
dead  not  merely  to  preserve  them  from 
putrefaction,  but  as  significant  of  eternal 
continuance.  When  we  come  to  Greece  and 
Home,  we  find  the  idea  so  mixed  up  with  all 
that  is  best  in  the  literature  of  these  great 
nations  that  we  cannot  help  seeing  how 
largely  it  affected  the  faith  and  hope  of:  the 
leaders  of  learning,  philosophy,  and  religion. 
The  best  of  the  Greek  poets  caught  sight  in 
imagination  of  their  favourite  heroes  trans- 
ported beyond  the  waves  of  death's  dark 
river — immortal  in  a  land  of  life.  They 
sang  of  the  Elysian  plains,  where  the  eifiwXa 
kcl/a6vtu)v — the  shadowy  images  of  the  dead 
— moved  in  a  world  of  shadows,  and  of 
••the   Islands  of  the  Blest  where  Achilles 

466 


and  Tydides  unlaced  the  helmets  from  their 
flowing  hair."  It  has  been  thought  that  the 
organisation  of  the  Greek  mysteries  was  the 
outcome  of  the  nation's  best  aspirations  for 
immortal  life.  The  conception  of  an  immortal 
future  so  possessed  the  best  of  Rome's  philo- 
sophers and  orators  that  they  declared  the 
troubles  of  life  unworthy  to  be  borne  "  unless 
man  had  within  himself  the  assurance  of  an 
after-destiny."  Cicero  represents  Cato  as 
thus  addressing  his  young  friends  Scipio 
and  Laelius ;  "  No  one  shall  persuade  me, 
Scipio,  that  your  worthy  father,  or  your 
grandfathers,  Paulus  and  Africanus,  or  many 
other  excellent  men  whom  I  need  not  name, 
performed  so  many  actions  to  be  remem- 
bered by  posterity  without  being  sensible 
that  futurity  was  their  right.  And  if  I  may 
be  allowed  an  old  man's  privilege  to  speak 
for  myself,  can  you  imagine  that  I  should 
have  submitted  to  so  much  painful  toil  by 
night  and  by  day,  in  the  forum,  in  the 
Senate,  and  in  the  field,  had  I  apprehended 
that  my  existence  and  reputation  were  to 
terminate  with  this  life  ?  But ...  I  feel  my- 
self transported  with  delight  at  the  thought 
of  again  seeing  and  joining  your  father,  whom 
on  earth  I  highly  respected  and  dearly  loved. 
...  Oh  1  glorious  day  when  I  shall  be  ad- 
mitted into  the  assembly  of  the  wise  and  the 
good,  .  .  .  when  amidst  the  happy  throng 
of  the  immortals  I  shall  find  thee  also,  my 
son,  my  Cato,  best,  most  amiable  of  men." 
Seneca — one  of  Rome's  greatest  philoso- 
phers— writing  to  Marcia  to  console  her  on 
the  loss  of  her  son,  says:  "The  sacred 
assembly  of  the  Scipios  and  Catos,  who  have 
themselves  despised  life,  and  obtained  free- 
dom by  death,  shall  welcome  the  youth  to 
the  region  of  happy  souls."  Centuries  before 
that  Cyrus,  addressing  his  sons,  as  he  lay  on 
the  bed  of  death,  had  given  utterance  to  the 
same  assurance :  "  Do  not  imagine,  oh,  my 
dear  children  1  that  when  I  leave  you  I  shall 
cease  to  exist.  For  even  when  I  was  yet 
with  you  my  spirit  you  could  not  discern ; 
but  that  it  animated  this  body  you  were 
fully  assured  by  the  actions  I  performed. 
Be  assured  that  it  will  continue  the  same, 
though  you  see  it  not.  I  can  never  suffer 
myself  to  be  persuaded  that  man  lives  only 
while  he  is  in  the  body,  and  dies  when  it  is 
dissolved,  or  that  the  soul  loses  all  intel- 
ligence on  being  separated  from  an  unin- 
telligent lump  of  clay ;  but  rather  that  on 
being  liberated  from  all  mixture  with  the 
body,  pure  and  entire,  it  enters  upon  its  true 
intellectual  existence. "  In  the  Phcedo  Plato 
describes  Socrates  as  calmly  discussing 
with  his  friends,  in  his  last  moments,  the 
conditions  of  the  immortal  state  into  which 
he  was  about  to  enter.  "Those,"  he  says, 
"  who  have  passed  through  life  with  peculiar 
sanctity  of  manners  are  received  on  high 
into  a  pure  region,  where  they  live  without 
their  bodies  to  all  eternity,  in  a  series  of 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xii. 


joys  and  delights  which  cannot  be  described." 
When  some  reference  was  made  to  the 
interment  that  was  to  follow  the  fatal 
draught,  he  replied :  "  You  may  bury  me  if 
you  can  catch  me."  And  then,  with  a  smile, 
and  with  an  intonation  of  unfathomable  ten- 
derness, he  added  :  "  Do  not  call  this  poor 
body  Socrates.  When  I  have  drunk  the 
poison  I  shall  leave  you,  and  go  to  the  joys 
of  the  blessed.  I  would  not  have  you  sorrow 
at  my  hard  lot,  or  say  at  the  interment, 
'  Thus  we  lay  out  Socrates ' ;  or,  '  Thus  we 
follow  him  to  the  grave,  or  bury  him.'  Be 
of  good  cheer ;  say  that  you  are  burying  my 
body  only." 

Ver.  27.  Heaven  the  land  of  the  living. — 
A  dying  lady  once  said  to  her  brother  who 
was  about  to  take  his  leave  of  her  without 
any  hope  of  seeing  her  again  in  this  world : 
"  Brother,  I  trust  we  shall  meet  in  the 
land  of  the  living.  We  are  now  in  the  land 
of  the  dying." 

Ver.  30.  Love,  the  most  important  thing. — 
•*  Father,"  asked  the  son  of  Bishop  Berkeley, 
u  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  words  '  cheru- 
bim '  and  'seraphim,'  which  we  meet  with  in 
the  Bible  ? "  "  Cherubim,"  replied  his  father, 
"  is  a  Hebrew  word,  signifying  knowledge  ; 
seraphim  is  another  word  of  the  same 
language,  signifying  flame.  Whence  it  is 
supposed  that  the  cherubim  are  angels  who 
excel  in  knowledge,  and  that  the  seraphim 
are  angels  likewise  who  excel  in  loving  God." 
"  I  hope,  then,"  said  the  little  boy,  u  when  I 
die  I  shall  be  a  seraph,  for  I  would  rather 
love  God  than  know  all  things." 

Ver.  31.  Loving  neighbour  as  self. — A  good 
old  clergyman,  living  on  the  borders  of 
Salisbury  Plain,  was  admired  by  his  bishop 
for  having  performed  "the  greatest  act  of 
charity  of  which  he  had  ever  heard."  It 
will  amuse  you  to  hear  what  that  act  was. 
When  the  Rev.  Samuel  Settle — for  that  was 
his  name — required  a  new  suit  of  clothes, 
he  used  to  send  for  the  parish  tailor  to 
measure  him;  and  when  the  number  of 
inches  had  been  correctly  noted  down,  he 
would  add,  "  Make  the  things  a  size  larger 
than  the  measure,  Grant."  Did  he  like  his 
clothes  very  loose,  do  you  think  ?  Not  a  bit 
of  it;  but  his  reverence  was  a  particularly 
small  man,  and  the  poor  old  parishioner  to 
whom  he  usually  gave  his  cast-off  garments 
was  a  size  larger.  Now  do  you  see  the 
reason  for  the  order  to  the  tailor,  and  do  you 
wonder  at  the  bishops  praise  ?  Which  of 
us  would  choose  our  coats  or  dresses  to  suit 
another  person  ?  Verily  good  old  Mr.  Settle 
— now  gone  to  his  rest—did  love  his  neigh- 
bour as  himself. 

Ver.  34.  "  Not  far  from  the  kingdom." — 
When,  after  safely  circumnavigating  the 
globe,  the  Royal  Charter  went  to  pieces  in 


Moelf ra  Bay,  on  the  coast  of  Wales,  it  was  my 
melancholy  duty  (says  one)  to  visit  and  seek 
to  comfort  the  wife  of  the  first  officer,  made  by 
that  calamity  a  widow.  The  ship  had  been 
telegraphed  from  Queenstown,  and  the  lady 
was  sitting  in  her  parlour  expecting  her 
husband,  with  the  table  spread  for  his  even- 
ing meal,  when  the  messenger  came  to  tell 
her  be  was  drowned.  Never  can  I  forget  the 
grief,  so  stricken  and  tearless,  with  which 
she  rung  my  hand,  as  she  said,  "  So  near 
home,  and  yet  lost  1  " 

Half  a  point  off  the  course. — Almost  is  not 
sufficient.  A  gentleman  crossing  the  English 
Channel  stood  near  the  helmsman.  It  was 
a  calm  and  pleasant  evening,  and  no  one 
dreamed  of  a  possible  danger  to  their  good 
ship.  But  a  sudden  flapping  of  a  sail,  as  if 
the  wind  had  shifted,  caught  the  ear  of  the 
officer  on  watch,  and  he  sprang  at  once  to 
the  wheel,  examining  closely  the  compass, 
"You  are  half  a  point  off  the  course,"  he 
said  sharply  to  the  man  at  the  wheel.  The 
deviation  was  corrected,  and  the  officer  re- 
turned to  his  post.  "  You  must  steer  very 
accurately,"  said  the  looker-on,  "  when  only 
half  a  point  is  so  much  thought  of."  "  Ah, 
half  a  point  in  many  places  might  bring  us 
directly  on  the  rocks,"  he  said.  What  avails 
being  almost  right,  if  destruction  is  the  end  ? 

Vers.  38,  39.  The  Synagogue  of  Ambition. 
— There  is  the  Synagogue  of  Ambition, 
whose  bond  of  union  is  the  lust  of  place 
and  of  power.  Let  Diotrephes  be  its  repre- 
sentative, who  "loved  to  have  the  pre-emi- 
nence," and  whom  St.  John  censured  for  this 
ambitious  temper,  which  tempted  him, 
though  nominally  a  member — perhaps  a 
minister — of  the  early  Church,  violently  to 
reject  the  best  Christians.  What  are  not 
men  ready  to  do  to  gratify  an  inordinate  and 
insatiate  ambition !  You  know  how  the 
old  Romans  built  their  military  roads.  They 
projected  them  in  a  mathematical  line, 
straight  to  the  point  of  termination,  and 
everything  had  to  give  way,  there  could  be 
no  deviation.  And  so  on  went  the  road, 
bridging  rivers,  filling  up  ravines,  hewing 
down  hills,  levelling  forests,  cutting  its  way 
through  every  obstacle !  Just  so  men  set 
their  lust  upon  self-emolument,  some  height 
of  ambition,  the  attainment  of  place,  rank, 
power,  and  hew  their  way  toward  it,  not 
minding  what  gives  way.  No  obstacle  is 
insurmountable ;  health,  happiness,  home- 
comfort,  honesty,  integrity,  conscience,  the 
law  of  God,  everything  is  sacrificed  to  the 
god  of  ambition. 

Ver.  40.  A  devourer  of  widows'  houses. — 

In  the  town  of  L resided  a  prosperous 

and  pious  sadler.  He  had  a  wife,  but  no 
family  ;  and  at  her  entreaty  he  took  into  his 
home  a  boy,  a  relative  of  his  own.  The 
wife  tended  him,  mothered  him,  taught  him. 

467 


; 


CHAP.  XII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


He  learned  the  business,  and  grew  up  to  his 
manhood.  Before  that  time  the  wife  became 
a  confirmed  invalid  from  rheumatism,  and 
soon  lay  helpless  in  one  room,  when  her 
husband  was  stricken  with  acute  disease 
and  lay  dying  in  another.  Under  solemn 
promise  to  the  dying  man,  and  with  great 
shew  of  piety,  the  young  man  secured  that  all 
the  property  should  be  left  to  him,  solemnly 
pledging  himself  to  care  lovingly  for  that 
invalid  wife  to  her  last  day.  No  sooner  was 
the  husband  laid  in  his  grave  than  that 
young  man  turned  the  poor  invalid  out  of 
house  and  home,  and  even  compelled  her  to 
find  money  among  her  friends  with  which 
to  purchase  the  very  furniture  she  brought 
to  the  home  at  her  marriage.  And,  broken- 
hearted, the  poor  woman  soon  died  in  a 
stranger's  shelter.  They  say  that  man 
is  prosperous  to-day.  Who  of  us  would 
change  lots  with  that  "devourer  of  widows' 
houses " ? 

Prayers  judged  by  weight,  not  length. — 
God  takes  not  men's  prayers  by  tale,  but  by 
weight.  He  respecteth  not  the  arithmetic 
of  our  prayers,  how  many  there  are ;  nor  the 
rhetoric  of  our  prayers,  how  eloquent  they 
are ;  nor  the  geometry  of  our  prayers,  how 
long  they  are  ;  nor  the  music  of  our  prayers, 
the  sweetness  of  our  voice  ;  nor  the  logic  of 
our  prayers,  nor  the  method  of  them  ;  but 
the  divinity  of  our  prayers  is  that  which  He 
so  much  esteemeth.  He  looketh  not  for  any 
James  with  horny  knees  through  assuidity 
in  prayer ;  nor  for  any  Bartholomew  with  a 
century  of  prayers  for  the  morning,  and  as 
many  for  the  evening ;  but  St.  Paul,  his 
frequency  of  praying  with  fervency  of  spirit, 
without  all  tedious  prolixities  and  vain 
babblings,  this  it  is  that  God  makes  most 
account  of.  It  is  not  a  servant's  going  to 
and  fro,  but  the  despatch  of  his  business, 
that  pleases  his  master.  It  is  not  the  loud- 
ness of  a  preacher's  voice,  but  the  holiness  of 
the  matter  and  the  spirit  of  the  preacher, 
that  moves  a  wise  and  intelligent  hearer. 
So  here,  not  gifts,  but  graces  in  prayer,  move 
the  Lord.  But  these  long  prayers  of  the 
Pharisees  were  so  much  the  worse  because 
thereby  they  sought  to  entitle  God  to  their 
sin,  yea,  they  merely  mocked  Him,  fleering  in 
His  face. — J.  Trapp. 

Vers.  41, 42.  The  widow's  mites. — In  my  pas- 
torate at  Wyoming,  Pa.,  a  brother  Pettibone, 
since  deceased,  a  man  rich  in  faith,  charity, 
and  good  works,  cast  five  dollars  into  the 
church  treasury  every  Lord's  Day  ;  a  poor 
widow  cast  into  the  same  treasury  five  cents 
each  Sunday.  She  was  very  poor,  and,  to 
provide  for  her  six  fatherless  children,  took 
in  washing  every  week.  Brother  Pattibone 
came  to  me  one  day,  and  asked  me  to  say 
to  this  widow  that  the  church  officers  felt 
she  ought  not  to  pay  anything  for  the  sup- 
port of  the  church;  and,  he  added,  "tell 

468 


her  that  I  will  pay  the  five  cents  extra  each 
week  for  her."  I  called,  and  performed  my 
errand  as  delicately  as  I  could ;  but  never 
before  or  since  did  I  learn  a  lesson  that 
taught  me,  as  I  was  then  taught,  what  it 
meant  to  give.  As  she  heard  my  story  the 
tears  came  to  her  eyes,  and  she  answered  : 
"Do  they  want  to  take  from  me  the  comfort 
I  experience  in  giving  to  the  Lord  ?  Think 
how  much  I  owe  to  Him.  My  health  is 
good,  my  children  keep  well,  and  I  receive 
so  many  blessings  I  feel  that  I  could  not 
live  if  I  did  not  make  my  little  offering  to 
Jesus  each  week."  I  left  her  humble  dwell- 
ing, feeling  that  Providence  had  ordered  the 
incident,  to  teach  me  a  never-to-be-forgotten 
lesson,  that  giving  is  absolutely  essential  to 
true  Christian  discipleship  and  worship,  and 
that  our  giving  and  all  other  acts  of  worship 
will  be  judged  not  by  the  amounts  we  give, 
nor  the  professions  we  make,  but  by  the 
spirit,  the  motive  of  our'  giving  and  doing. 
— R.  W.  Van  Schaick. 

The  gifts  of  the  poor. — Jewish  tradition, 
though  it  ever  and  painfully  thrusts  for- 
ward the  reward,  has  some  beautiful  legends, 
allegories,  and  sayings  about  the  gifts  of 
the  poor.  One  is  to  the  effect  that  if  one 
who  is  poor  doeth  charity,  God  says  of 
him  :  "  This  one  is  preventing  Me.  He  has 
kept  My  commandments  before  they  have 
come  to  him.  I  must  recompense  him." 
In  Vayyikra,  R.  3,  we  read  of  a  woman 
whose  offering  of  a  handful  of  flour  the 
priest  despised,  when  God  admonished  him 
in  a  dream  to  value  the  gift  as  highly  as  if 
she  had  offered  herself.  The  tractate  Mena- 
choth  closes  with  these  words:  Alike  as 
regards  burnt  offerings  of  beasts  and  those 
of  fowls  [those  of  the  poor]  and  the  meat 
offering,  we  find  the  expression  "  for  a  sweet 
savour,"  to  teach  us  that  to  offer  much  or 
to  offer  little  is  the  same,  provided  only  that 
a  person  direct  mind  and  heart  toward  God . 
— A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 

Vers.  43,  44.  Liberality  must  correspond 
with  means. — Sir  Thomas  Sutton,  the  founder 
of  the  Charter  House,  was  one  of  the  wealthiest 
merchants  of  his  day.  Fuller  tells  how  he 
was  overheard  one  day  praying  in  his  garden : 
"  Lord,  Thou  hast  given  me  a  large  and 
liberal  estate  ;  give  me  also  a  heart  to  make 
use  of  it." 

Oracles  are  said  to  have  more  than  once 
proclaimed  that  the  hecatombs  of  noble 
oxen  with  gilded  horns,  that  were  offered 
up  ostentatiously  by  the  rich,  were  less 
pleasing  to  the  gods  than  the  wreaths  of 
flowers  and  the  modest,  reverential  worship 
of  the  poor.  In  general,  however,  the  service 
of  the  Temple  had  little  or  no  connexion  with 
morals,  and  the  change  which  Christianity 
effected  in  this  respect  was  one  of  its  most 
important  benefits  to  mankind, —  W.  E.  J5T, 
Lecky. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.       chap.  xnt. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  8.  Beginnings  of  sorrows. — Beginning  of  travail-pangs — the  throes  that  are  to  issue 
in  the  regeneration  of  the  world. 

Ver.  9.  Render :  But  look  ye  to  yourselves ;  for  they  shall  deliver  you  unto  sanhedrins 
and  unto  synagogues;  ye  shall  be  beaten;  and  ai-the-bar-of  governors  and  kings  ye  shall 
stand  en  account  of  Me, for  a  testimony  to  them.  Meaning  of  last  clause:  an  opportunity 
will  be  given  you  of  proclaiming  the  truth  in  the  hearing  of  the  highest  in  the  land — those 
who,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  would  be  unlikely  to  come  in  contact  with  peasants 
of  Galilee. 

Ver.  11.  Take  no  thought  beforehand. — Entertain  no  solicitude  as  to  what,  etc.  Neither  do 
ye  premeditate.— Omitted  in  many  first-rate  MSS.  and  versions.  Probably  a  marginal 
explanation  of  preceding  clause,  vihich  eventually  crept  into  the  text. 

Ver.  13.  He  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end. — "  Here  is  the  cardinal  virtue  oi  fortitude,  the 
cheerful  hardihood  and  loyal  sense  of  duty,  evinced  by  Christ's  faithful  soldier  and  servant 
in  meeting  all  shocks  of  temptation  and  all  assaults  of  our  enemies;  for  {nro/xfreiv  often 
means  to  bide  the  brunt  of  encounter  in  battle." 

Ver.  14.  The  abomination  of  desolation. — Hebraism  for  the  abomination  that  makes  desolate. 
See  Dan.  ix.  27,  xi.  31,  xii.  11.  A  comparison  of  this  verse  with  the  parallel  passage  in 
Matt.  xxiv.  15,  16,  makes  it  evident  that  the  scene  of  this  was  to  be  the  Temple.  Once 
already  had  it  been  desecrated  (1  Mace.  i.  54),  when  Antiochus  Epiphanes  set  up  the  statue 
of  Jupiter  on  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice.  But  a  worse  profanation  was  yet  to  follow. 
Josephus  (Wars  of  the  Jews,  IV.  vi.  3)  mentions  an  ancient  saying  current  among  the  Jews, 
that  "  Jerusalem  would  be  taken,  and  the  Temple  be  destroyed,  when  it  had  been  defiled  by 
the  hands  of  Jews  themselves  " — a  prophecy  that  was  literally  fulfilled  when,  during  the 
first  siege  of  Jerusalem  under  Cestius  (A.D.  68),  the  Temple  was  taken  possession  of  by  a 
band  of  Zealots,  who  committed  fearful  outrages  of  lust  and  murder  within  its  sacred 
precincts.  Such,  in  the  opinion  of  the  writer,  was  the  portent  to  which  Christ  pointed  as 
the  signal  to  His  followers  to  lose  no  time  in  seeking  a  place  of  safety  beyond  Judea. 
Flee  to  the  mountains. — History  records  that  when  the  time  came  the  Christians  fled  from 
Jerusalem  and  Judea  to  Pella,  identified  with  the  ruins  of  Fahil,  among  the  hills  of  Gilead. 

Ver.  17.  Woe  to  them. — Alas !  for  them  .  .  .  Cp.  Luke  xxiii.  28,  29;  and  see  Josephus, 
Wars,  VI.  iii.  4. 

Ver.  18.  In  God's  mercy  the  prayer  which  the  Christians  doubtless  offered  in  accordance 
with  this  injunction  was  heard,  and  the  awful  calamity  of  a  winter  flight  averted.  The 
Roman  army  first  encompassed  Jerusalem  in  October,  when  the  weather  is  still  mild ;  and 
the  final  siege  took  place  in  April  or  May. 

Ver.  19.  Josephus  unconsciously  echoes  these  words  :  "  All  calamities,  from  the  beginning 
of  time,  seem  to  me  to  shrink  to  nothing  in  comparison  with  those  of  the  Jews."  He  gives 
an  awful  description  of  these  calamities  in  Wars,  VI.  iii.  3.  See  also  Tacitus,  History,  v.  13  ; 
Milman,  History  of  the  Jews,  ii.  16  ;  Merivale,  History  of  the  Romans,  vi.  59. 

Ver.  20.  The  city  which  bad  stood  the  siege  of  Nebuchadnezzar  for  sixteen  months 
(2  Kings  xxv.  1-6 ;  Jer.  xxxix.  1,  2)  was  taken  by  the  Romans  in  less  than  five.  Among 
the  providential  circumstances  which  combined  to  bring  this  about  may  be  mentioned — 

(1)  the  order  of  Claudius  forbidding  Herod  Agrippa  from  completing  the  fortifications  ; 

(2)  the  wars  of  factions  in  Jerusalem  itself ;  (3)  the  destruction  by  fire  of  large  stores  of 
provisions;  (4)  the  Jews'  abandonment  of  the  towers  on  the  approach  of  Titus;  (5)  the 
swift  and  energetic  measures  of  the  Roman  armies. 

Ver.  22.  False  Christs. — Not  necessarily  assuming  the  name  of  Christ,  but  pretending  to 
a  fuller  revelation  than  Christ's.  Theudas  ;  Simon  Magus.  False  prophets. — See  Josephus, 
Antiquities,  XX.  viii.  6;  Tacitus,  History,  v.  13.  Cp.  also  2  Thess.  ii.  1-10.  To  seduce. — 
With  a  view  to  leading  astray.  Whether  or  not  successful  in  this,  Christ  leaves  an  open 
question  for  the  future  to  decide. 

Vers.  28,  29.  See  R.V.  rendering. 

Ver.  30.  This  generation.— Always  used  by  Christ  of  persons  then  living  on  earth 
(Matt.  xi.  16,  xii.  41,  42,  45,  xxiii.  36 ;  Mark  viii.  12,  38 ;  Luke  vii.  31,  xi.  30,  31,  32,  50,  51, 
xvii.  25).  Evidently,  then,  the  terminus  ad  quern  of  "  all  these  things  "  is  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  32.  Neither  the  Son.—  He  who  as  Son  of  God  possesses  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  the  Divine  attribute  of  omniscience,  condescended  as  Son  of  Man  to  acquire  during 
His  earthly  life  only  such  instalments  of  knowledge  (Luke  ii.  52)  as  were  consistent  with 
a  creaturely  form  of  existence  (Phil.  ii.  6,  7).    The  knowledge  of  the  time  of  the  Last  Advent 

m 


CHAP.  Xiil.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


being  wholly  unnecessary  to  the  Church,  was  not  communicated  to  Him,  its  Head.  The 
main  thing  to  remember  as  to  this  limitation  is  that  it  was  voluntary  on  our  Lord's  part 
— a  Self-emptying  for  the  purposes  of  His  Mission  to  our  fallen  race. 

Ver.  35.  Watch  ye. — Be  ye  wakeful. — A  military  image.  Don't  be  caught  napping  at  your 
post.  Same  word  in  ver.  37.  At  even,  etc. — The  Koman  divisions  of  the  night.  The  four 
watches,  of  three  hours  each,  began  at  sunset  and  ended  at  sunrise. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—13. 

(Parallels:  Matt.  xxiv.  1-14;  Luke  xxi.  5-19.) 

The  destruction  of  the  Temple. — I.  The  function  of  a  prophet. — Of  the  three 
characters,  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  which  are  united  in  the  person  of  Christ, 
the  first  is  that  in  which  He  was  commonly  regarded  while  He  lived  among 
men.  The  original  authority  of  a  prophet  is  grounded,  not  on  the  truth  of 
his  declarations  concerning  future  events,  which  can  never  be  ascertained  till 
the  accomplishment  of  those  events,  but  on  the  proofs  of  his  Divine  mission 
which  he  offers  to  his  immediate  hearers — the  signs  and  wonders  which,  in 
connexion  with  the  purity  of  his  doctrine  and  the  holiness  of  his  life,  plainly 
prove  him  to  be  a  teacher  come  from  God,  a  prophet  at  least,  if  not  more 
than  a  prophet.  When,  however,  the  miracles  have  done  their  work,  and 
convinced  the  men  of  that  generation  of  the  prophetic  character  of  him  who 
performs  them,  there  still  remains  the  test  of  prophecy,  strictly  so  called — the 
predictions,  if  the  prophet  have  uttered  any  such,  relating  to  future  events,  to 
be  accomplished  in  due  season.  Many  such  predictions  might  be  gathered  out 
of  our  Lord's  discourses,  and  compared  with  the  course  of  subsequent  events, 
from  the  time  of  their  delivery  unto  this  day.  None,  however,  will  be  found 
more  interesting  or  more  convincing  than  those  which  He  delivered  relating 
to  the  destruction  of  that  very  city  and  Temple  in  or  near  which  they  were 
uttered. 

II.  The  prediction  of  Christ  concerning  the  Temple. — Jerusalem  might  be 
called,  at  that  time,  a  prosperous  and  flourishing  city,  not  indeed  independent, 
but  rather  strengthened  than  weakened  by  that  protection  which  was  extended 
over  it  by  the  Roman  power.  It  was  surrounded  with  lofty  walls,  along  which 
numerous  strong  towers  were  erected  at  certain  distances,  according  to  the  best 
methods  of  fortification  then  practised.  High  above  all  rose  the  Temple,  at 
once  temple  and  fortress,  to  the  buildings  of  which  belonged  those  immense 
stones  which  were  pointed  out  to  Christ  by  His  disciples  on  this  occasion. 
Could  a  finer  opportunity  have  been  offered  of  delivering  that  prediction  which 
He  had  always  intended  to  leave  behind  Him  of  the  approaching  destruction 
of  both  city  and  Temple  ?  Or  could  that  destruction  have  been  announced  in 
terms  better  adapted  to  sink  down  into  the  ears  of  His  disciples?  When  a 
building,  especially  one  of  the  size  and  massive  construction  of  the  Temple,  is 
suffered  to  fall  into  decay,  its  destruction  is  slow  and  gradual ;  and  long  after 
the  more  perishable  portions  have  disappeared  the  walls  remain  standing,  to 
shew  the  form  and  dimensions  of  the  structure  when  entire.  Even  when  these 
have  fallen  down  the  foundations  continue  unimpaired ;  and  no  degree  of 
dilapidation,  nothing  but  extreme  violence  and  a  deliberate  intention  to  destroy, 
can  ever  reduce  such  an  edifice  to  the  state  here  described.  It  is  manifest, 
therefore,  and  must  have  been  manifest  to  Christ's  hearers,  that  He  spoke  of 
no  ravages  of  time,  no  process  of  decay,  but  of  brute  force  and  hostile  assaults, 
when  He  used  this  image. 

III.  The  fulfilment  of  this  prediction. — Pass  over  a  period  of  forty  years, 
and  view  Jerusalem,  as  had  been  foretold  of  it,  compassed  with  armies,  the 
armies  of  the  Romans  under  Titus.     After  several  delays,  occasioned  by  the 

470 


&0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiii. 


unsettled  state  of  the  Roman  Government,  Vespasian  was  at  last  confirmed 
in  the  imperial  throne,  and  his  son  Titus  was  sent  to  command  the  armies  in 
Judea.  The  days  of  Jerusalem  were  now  numbered.  Failing  to  take  the 
city  by  assault,  Titus  proceeded  to  surround  the  entire  compass  of  it  with  a 
Wall,  thereby  fulfilling  a  part  of  our  Lord's  description  (Luke  xix.  43).  The 
inhabitants  being  thus  without  the  possibility  of  escape,  and  all  supplies  being 
cut  off,  the  accomplishment  of  the  rest  of  the  prophecy  could  not  be  far  off. 
It  was  hastened  by  the  conduct  of  the  people  themselves.  Instead  of  uniting, 
as  one  man,  in  the  defence  of  the  city,  they  weakened  themselves  by  mutual 
factions  and  divisions,  insomuch  that  within  the  short  space  of  five  months 
the  city  was  taken,  and  the  work  of  destruction  begun.  It  is  recorded  that 
Titus  himself  was  very  desirous  of  preserving  the  Temple  as  a  monument  of 
Roman  power  and  prowess,  but  was  unable  to  restrain  his  own  soldiers,  who, 
in  the  heat  and  excitement  of  victory,  set  fire  to  it,  and  resisted  all  attempts 
to  extinguish  the  conflagration.  The  preservation  of  these  great  buildings  being 
thus  rendered  impossible,  we  read  that  the  Roman  general,  foiled  in  his  first 
design,  now  gave  orders  to  complete  the  demolition  both  of  the  city  and  Temple 
by  actually  digging  up  and  levelling  the  foundations  of  them;  thus,  almost 
literally,  leaving  "not  one  stone  upon  another." 

Lessons. — 1.  How  differently  would  things  strike  us  if  we  could  only  look 
forward  a  few  years !  What  a  world  of  changes  do  we  live  in !  Desire  and 
seek  after  "  durable  riches,"  a  "  building  of  God,"  a  "  good  foundation  laid  up 
in  store  against  the  time  to  come."  2.  In  connexion  with  the  punishment 
inflicted  on  Jerusalem,  reflect  on  our  own  responsibility  as  having  succeeded  to 
those  privileges  of  which  the  Jews  were  dispossessed.  Beware  of  defiling  "  the 
temple  of  the  living  God."  3.  Where  is  this  temple  to  be  seen  in  its  perfection  ? 
Not,  will  each  of  us  be  ready  to  reply,  not  in  me,  nor  in  my  sin-stained,  blood- 
guilty  soul.  When  I  look  into  myself  I  see  a  temple  indeed,  but  a  temple  in 
ruins ;  a  shrine  from  which  the  Divinity  has  departed ;  a  perverse  will,  unruly 
passions,  wayward  and  un  sanctified  affections ;  in  a  word,  of  that  noble  fabric 
which  was  dedicated  to  God  in  baptism,  and  has  been  since  adorned  with  so 
many  "gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  not  one  stone  is  left  upon  another.  I  see,  and 
mourn;  but  I  do  not  despair.  The  tears  of  the  Christian  over  the  breaches 
and  decays  of  his  spiritual  temple  are  the  appointed  means  by  which,  under 
God,  those  breaches  are  to  be  healed,  and  the  whole  building  restored  to  its 
original  use,  and,  if  possible,  to  more  than  its  original  beauty. — F.  Field,  LL.D. 

Warning,  promise,  and  encouragement. — There  is  nothing  in  these  words  to 
encourage  speculation,  much  to  induce  and  strengthen  that  practical  temper 
and  habit,  the  habit  of  duty  and  loyal  obedience,  in  which  there  lives  far  more  real 
religion  than  in  all  the  pious  and  laborious  conjectures  good  men  have  framed, 
and  which  they  sometimes  attempt  to  palm  off  as  infallible  certainties  on  an 
astonished  Church,  or  world. 

I.  The  warning  I  take  to  be  that  we  are  to  wait  with  patience  for  the 
orderly  providential  unfolding  of  the  Divine  counsel,  instead  of  impatiently 
jumping  at  hasty  and  misleading  conclusions.  The  conceited  temper  which 
speaks  as  though  it  had  been  admitted  to  the  secret  council-chamber  of  heaven ; 
the  curious  temper  which  is  for  ever  prying  into  futurity,  and  busies  itself  with 
speculation  instead  of  with  the  rules  of  holy  living  and  the  problems  of  obedience; 
the  hasty  temper  which  is  impatient  for  results,  and  wants  to  see  trees  bearing 
fruit  as  soon  as  they  are  planted;  and  the  faithless  temper  which  is  always 
seeking  proofs  and  signs,  and  confounds  seeing  with  believing,  are  all  rebuked  by 
this  grave  and  kindly  warning. 

II.  The  promise  I  take  to  be  that  to  all  faithful  and  obedient  souls,  thus 

471 


chap.  Xin.        BOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


waiting  with  patience  on  God  amid  many  tribulations  and  disappointments,  too 
occupied  with  duty  and  service  to  let  their  hearts  grow  sick  with  hope  deferred, 
a  Divine  guidance  and  help  will  be  vouchsafed,  answering  to  every  need. 
Loyalty  to  Christ  under  hard  conditions,  and  when  we  fall  on  evil  times,  will 
expose  us  to  many  tribulations — to  loss,  contumely,  and  the  alienation  of  friends. 
But  these  very  tribulations  are  part  of  the  discipline  by  which  God  is  making 
us  constant  and  making  us  perfect,  by  which  He  is  preparing  us  for  salvation 
and  life.  And  meantime,  even  in  our  darkest  hours  and  most  dejected  moods, 
He  is  with  us  to  guide  and  sustain  us,  to  teach  us  what  to  say  and  what  to  do. 

III.  The  encouragement  I  take  to  be  that  the  tribulations  of  this  present 
time  are  designed  to  usher  in,  to  prepare  for  us  and  to  prepare  us  for,  a  better 
time,  a  golden  age,  which  shall  have  no  end.  This  regeneration  is  our  great 
hope,  our  great  encouragement,  under  the  toils,  often  unrequited,  of  time,  under 
all  its  changes  and  catastrophes,  under  the  oppressive  sense  of  its  manifold 
evils,  sorrows,  wrongs.  We  look  for  a  time,  we  believe  it  to  be  the  purpose 
of  God  that  a  time  shall  come,  in  which  evil  will  be  overcome  of  good,  and 
death  be  swallowed  up  of  life,  in  which  not  we  alone  shall  be  blessed,  but 
all  men  will  be  drawn  into  the  service,  love,  and  peace  of  God.  And  if  we 
really  believe  this  to  be  the  end  to  which  the  love  and  providence  of  God  are 
pressing  forward  through  all  the  vicissitudes  and  tribulations  of  time,  for  the 
joy  set  before  us,  we  may  well  rejoice  in  our  tribulations  and  toils,  even  though 
we  do  not  know  when  the  end  will  be  reached,  or  what  will  be  the  signs  of  its 
approach. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  spiritual  temple. —  Vers.  5-13.  This  prophecy  a  proof 
1.  The  world  admires  a  stately  and  of  Christ's  Divinity. — This  prophecy 
magnificent  temple ;  but  the  temple  is  one  of  the  clearest  and  surest  in 
which  attracts  the  eyes  and  the  heart  the  Bible,  and  has  ever  been  regarded 
of  Christ,  as  worthy  of  God  and  by  Christians  as  a  decisive  proof  of 
framed  by  His  Spirit,  is  a  heart  which  the  Divine  mission  of  their  Lord.  In 
resembles  that  of  this  poor  widow,  a  a  time  of  peace  He  predicted  war. 
heart  consecrated  by  charity,  wherein  When  there  were  only  visible  signs  of 
God  makes  His  abode,  and  in  which  prosperity,  He  foretold  speedy  destruc- 
this  virtue  worships  Him,  sacrifices  tion.  When  the  disciples  were  few, 
itself  to  Him,  mourns  continually  in  He  declared  that  the  gospel  would 
His  presence,  and  there  feeds  upon  His  soon  be  proclaimed  to  distant  nations. 
Divine  Word.  2.  Christ  bears  with  When  the  apostles  were  about  to  for- 
the  simplicity  of  His  disciples,  who  sake  Him,  seeking  safety  by  flight, 
would  have  Him  admire  a  temple  of  He  said  that  ere  long  many  would  be 
which  He  was  Himself  the  model,  and  willing  to  die  for  His  name.  When 
which  was  only  a  figure  of  His  body ;  there  were  no  outward  indications  of 
but  He  makes  use  of  this  simplicity  to  success,  He  spoke  with  perfect  con- 
instruct  them,  to  take  off  their  minds  fidence  of  the  establishment  of  His 
from  this  visible  temple,  and  to  give  kingdom.  He  taught  the  disciples 
them  a  foresight  of  that  justice  which  that  its  nature  was  different  from  their 
He  was  to  exercise  upon  this  building,  hopes,  being  more  excellent ;  and  the 
on  account  of  the  Jews.  Nothing  means  of  its  promotion  different  from 
of  that  which  is  to  be  destroyed  is  their  expectations,  being  more  effective, 
worthy  to  be  the  true  temple  of  God.  Knowing  that  after  two  days  He 
It  is  in  a  poor  and  humble  heart  that  should  be  crucified,  and  declaring  this 
He  delights  to  dwell. — P.  Quesnel.  to  the  disciples,  He  expressed  to  them 

472  •     « 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.       chap,  xilt 


the  full  assurance  of  the  triumph  of 
His  kingdom,  by  means  of  which  the 
history  of  the  world  afforded  no  ex- 
ample ;  and  of  their  salvation,  through 
sufferings  which  they  feared  to  anti- 
cipate. He  gave  them  that  knowledge, 
and  only  that,  which  was  useful  to 
them;  and  referred  to  their  coming 
trials  with  the  firmest  faith  and  the 
most  tender  sympathy.  He  announced 
the  retribution  which  would  come  on 
His  adversaries,  without  any  personal 
resentment,  stating  it  to  be  the  right- 
eous judgment  of  God,  but  manifesting 
compassion  even  for  those  whose  sins 
brought  upon  themselves  destruction. 
Such  were  the  words  of  Jesus;  and 
His  words  were  fulfilled.  Looking 
only  to  this  one  prophecy,  we  say  with 
those  who  witnessed  the  Crucifixion, 
"  Truly  this  is  the  Son  of  God."— J,  H. 
Godwin, 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  danger  of  being  led 
astray. — It  is  quite  as  important  not 
to  be  led  astray  by  false  religious 
teachers  as  by  any  other  class  of 
deceivers  or  deceived ;  and  there  is 
quite  as  much  danger  in  this  line  as 
in  any  other.  Sincerity  on  our  part 
is  no  guard  against  deception  or 
wandering ;  nor  is  sincerity  a  safe- 
guard to  a  religious  teacher.  Those 
who  are  themselves  both  honest  and 
sincere  would  lead  us  astray  if  we 
followed  them  in  their  wrong  path. 
There  is  danger  of  our  being  led  astray 
by  the  sermons  we  hear,  the  papers 
or  the  books  we  read,  the  counsel  or 
example  of  those  whom  we  have  sup- 
posed to  be  godly,  or  by  the  impulses 
or  convictions  of  our  own  minds  and 
hearts.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
conscientious  error-teaching  and  devil- 
serving.  The  warning  of  Jesus  is, 
that  ye  take  heed  that  no  man  lead 
you  astray  in  doctrine  or  morals, 
through  holding  up  a  false  standard 
of  conduct,  or  a  false  interpretation 
of  God's  Word. 

Ver.  6.  "  /  am  Christ." — Imposture 
will  always  take  its  clue  from  antece- 
dent  reality ;    its    work    is    that    of 


distortion,  not  of  invention  (Acts  xix. 
13;  2  Tim.  ii.  18 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  16).— 
J,  Miller, 

Ver.  11.  Divine  source  of  apostolic 
sufficiency. — Christ  chose  poor  fisher- 
men to  shew  that  however  insufficient 
soever  He  received  them,  yet  He 
received  them  into  such  a  school, 
such  an  university,  as  would  deliver 
them  back  into  His  Church,  made  fit 
by  Him  for  the  service  thereof.  Christ 
needed  not  man's  sufficiency  ;  He  took 
insufficient  men.  Christ  excuses  no 
man's  insufficiency ;  He  made  them 
sufficient  (Mark  xvi.  20;  Acts  iv.  13; 
Exod.  iv.  10-12  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  7).— John 
Donne,  D.D, 

Ver.  12.  Christianity  the  cause  of 
division. — As  Christianity  gives  birth 
to  and  cherishes  the  most  perfect  love, 
so  it  calls  forth  the  most  bitter  hatred. 
It  calls  forth  a  love  which  is  above 
nature,  because  it  makes  men  love 
their  enemies.  Contrariwise  it  calls 
forth  a  hatred  which  is  unnatural; 
for  it  made,  and  yet  makes,  men  hate 
and  betray,  and,  if  they  can,  destroy 
their  own  flesh  and  blood.  Thus  we 
read  that  the  Emperor  Domitian,  in 
his  hatred  of  the  Christian  name,  slew 
Flavius  Clemens  and  his  niece,  or  near 
relation  Flavia  Domitilla  ;  the  Emperor 
Maximin  martyred  Artemia,  his  own 
sister;  and  Diocletian  slew  his  own 
wife  and  other  relatives.  St.  Barbara 
also  was  killed  by  her  own  father  ;  and 
if  we  had  a  full  martyrology  of  obscure 
Christians,  we  should  find  multitudes 
of  others  similarly  betrayed  by  their 
own  flesh  and  blood.  We  are  told 
by  Indian  missionaries  that  as  soon 
as  converts  are  baptised  they  become 
objects  of  hatred  to  their  nearest 
relatives ;  even  their  wives  often  desert 
them.  Now  if  this  be  so  in  a  country 
where  Christianity  is  the  religion  of 
the  rulers,  what  would  it  be  if 
heathenism  were  unchecked  in  its 
power  of  persecution  ? — M.  F.  Sadler. 

Ver.  1 3.  Incentives  to  perseverance. — 
1.  Of  all  afflictions  and  troubles,  those 

473 


chap.  XIII.        &OMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


are  tiie  most  comfortable  to  suffer  and 
endare  which  are  suffered  for  Christ. 
2.  By  these  kinds  of  sufferings  we 
glorify  God,  and  bring  honour  to  the 
name  of  Christ,  and  credit  to  the 
gospel,  more  than  by  any  other  suffer- 
ings. 3.  It  is  a  most  honourable 
thing  unto  us,  yea,  the  greatest  glory 
that  may  be  in  this  world,  to  suffer 
anything  for  Christ.  4.  Consider  how 
much  Christ  has  suffered  for  us,  and 
for  our  salvation ;  how  great  reproach 
and  shame ;  what  bitter  pain  and 
torment  of  soul  and  body;  and  let 
this  move  us  patiently  and  willingly 
to  suffer  any  persecution  and  trouble 
for  His  sake.  5.  Consider  how  much 
wicked  men  suffer  in  the  practice  of 
sin,  and  to  satisfy  their  wicked  lusts, 
and  let  this  move  us  to  suffer  any 
persecution  for  Christ.  6.  Consider 
the  great  and  excellent  reward  pro- 
mised to  those  who  endure  for  Christ's 
sake. — G.  Fetter. 

Persecution  a  trial  to  perseverance. — 
There  are  persecutions  and  persecutions 
— great  and  bloody  persecutions  such 
as  a  Nero  or  a  Decius  could  inaugurate 
on  an  imposing  scale ;  and,  as  we 
know,  petty  persecutions,  which  are 
all  that  is  permitted  to  the  native 
ferocity  of  the  persecuting  temper  by 


the  milder  manners  of  a  more  civilised 
age.  But  persecution,  whatever  its 
scale,  is  a  trial  to  perseverance.  Per- 
secution is  in  any  case  friction;  and, 
as  we  all  know,  friction,  if  only  it  be 
continued  long  enough,  brings  move- 
ment to  a  standstill,  unless  there  be 
a  new  supply  of  the  impelling  force. 
Men  who  have  done  much  for  Christ 
have  given  up  at  the  last  under  the 
stress  of  relentless  persecution.  And 
perhaps  petty  persecutions  are  more 
trying  to  perseverance,  in  some  ways, 
than  great  ones.  Men  who  have  not 
flinched  from  the  axe  or  from  the 
stake  will  yield  to  the  incessant  worry 
of  domestic  or  local  tyranny — to  the  per- 
secutions which  make  home  wretched,  or 
the  office,  or  the  shop,  or  the  dormitory 
wellnigh  intolerable.  Why  do  we 
pray  in  the  Church  service  that  "  the 
evils  which  the  craft  and  subtlety  of 
the  devil  or  man  worketh  against  us 
be  brought  to  naught,  and,  by  the 
providence  of  God's  goodness,  may  be 
dispersed  ?  "  It  is  that  we,  His  servants, 
"being  hurt  by  no  persecutions,  may 
evermore  give  thanks  unto  Him  in 
His  holy  Church."  In  other  words,  it 
is  because  persecution  involves  a  serious 
risk  to  perseverance. — Canon  Liddon, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  FAR  AGRA  PH.— Verses  14—32. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxiv.  15-36  ;  Luke  xxi.  20-33.) 

Christ's  manifestation  in  glory. — The  manifestations  of  Christ  are  not  exhausted 
yet.  The  Infant,  the  Child,  the  Man,  the  Worker  of  miracles,  the  Teacher  by 
parables — He  has  been  revealed  to  us  as  all  these;  but  there  is  still  another 
revelation  of  Him  to  come  in  the  unknown  future.  He  came  once  to  visit  us  in 
great  humility ;  He  shall  come  again  to  judge  us  in  glorious  majesty. 

I.  There  will  be  a  manifestation  of  Christ  in  truth  and  unmistakable  reality. 
— Till  the  moment  of  His  coming  it  will  be  possible  to  deceive.  False  prophets 
were  the  bane  of  the  old  dispensation ;  false  Christs  are  the  bane  of  the  new. 
We  scarcely  wonder  that  false  Messiahs  could  command  followers  at  a  time  like 
the  siege  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  just  the  crisis  from  which  they  would  expect  a 
Messiah  to  deliver  them.  But  we  do  wonder,  and  we  ought  to  wonder,  that 
false  Christs  have  arisen  since,  and  that  they  arise  still.  That  men  who  do  not 
believe  that  Christ  has  come  yet  should  be  prepared  to  accept  a  self-styled 
Christ,  if  only  his  credentials  satisfy  them,  is  at  least  consistent,  if  not  almost 
excusable ;  but  for  men  who  believe  that  Christ  has  already  come,  and  then 
discredit  His  perfect  life  and  Divine  teaching  by  seeking  elsewhere  for  light  and 

474 


JSOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xni. 


guidance — for  these  we  have  no  excuse,  no  explanation.  Whatever  may  be  said 
of  the  results  of  Christian  effort  in  these  days,  there  can  be  no  question  as  to  its 
tendeiicies.  Give  it  full  power  and  fair  play,  and  it  would  reform  the  world. 
This  is  as  much  as  to  say  that,  so  far  forth  as  Christianity  succeeds  in  exhibiting 
Christ,  so  far  she  is  a  trusted  leader  of  society.  Where  she  has  failed  to  help 
the  world,  she  has  failed  to  represent  Christ.  Our  contention  is,  and  must  be, 
this :  that  Christianity  leads  to  Christ,  and  Christ  to  God ;  that  the  knowledge 
of  God  is  the  highest  of  all  knowledge ;  that  all  which  leads  away  from  Him 
must  end  in  nothingness,  and  can  but  be  a  loss  to  those  who  gain  it.  There 
is  an  inherent  "  deceivableness  of  unrighteousness " — an  essential  capacity  for 
"  strong  delusion  " — as  to  the  highest  of  all  truths  which  we  are  led  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  always  to  expect,  and  increasingly  till  the  end  of  time,  possibly  that  the 
contrast  at  the  end  might  be  the  more  marked.  While  they  are  all  at  their  very 
busiest,  and  the  "very  elect"  themselves  almost  dizzy  with  the  whirl  in  the 
religious  air,  He  will  stand  before  them,  true  and  unmistakable.  "  Every  eye 
shall  see  Him  "  then ;  the  mists  from  men's  minds  and  the  cobwebs  of  men's 
weaving  will  be  swept  away,  and  at  that  moment  they  shall  know,  even  as  they, 
are  known.  "  I  am  the  Truth "  will  be  condemnation  enough  for  millions  in 
that  day,  if  no  other  sentence  were  to  proceed  out  of  His  mouth. 

II.  Christ  will  be  manifested  in  universality. — At  present  it  is  here  and  there, 
as  men  carry  the  message.  Dark  corners  have  to  wait  till  they  can  be  attended 
to.  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world  and  preach"  is  the  world's  only  chance:  for 
"  how  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher  ? "  Nor  is  this  all.  It  was  not 
enough  to  light  the  lamp  of  the  Tabernacle  with  heavenly  flame ;  it  required 
daily  tending  and  replenishing  with  oil.  We  overcome  the  darkness  of  night 
with  artificial  light ;  and  we  keep  up  the  gospel  light  in  men's  hearts  by  human 
means.  If  Christ  is  our  Sun  of  Righteousness,  it  is  only  to  be  expected  that  He 
should  seem  sometimes  to  set.  The  Church  is  His  own  devised  system  for 
arresting  His  beams  and  deriving  His  rays  to  ourselves.  But  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  Man  shall  be  no  longer,  as  it  is  now,  like  the  coming  and  the  going  of 
the  sun  in  the  heavens — a  sun,  too,  whose  light  can  be  admitted  or  excluded  at 
will.  It  shall  be  rather  like  the  lightning- flash,  of  which  you  say,  "It  is 
lightening  in  the  east,"  and  yet,  at  the  selfsame  moment,  it  is  in  the  west  too — 
the  lightning  which  seems  to  follow  no  law,  but  penetrates  everywhere — awfully 
beautiful,  irresistibly  destructive,  fearfully  silent,  and  which  has  done  its  work, 
its  irreparable  work,  before  the  roar  of  the  thunder  is  heard.  The  highest 
attract  it  first,  and  yet  it  may  pass  the  highest  and  strike  the  lowest.  All  that 
we  can  say  for  certain  is,  that  whatsoever  withstands  it  in  its  course  will  utterly 
be  destroyed.  Lightning  always  appals,  though  it  leaves  us  unscathed.  Its 
downward  dart  suggests  a  doomed  mark,  and  its  rapid  zigzag  forbids  us  to 
guess  its  aim  ;  all  are  in  peril  where  any  one  may  be  struck.  It  may  well  be 
that  the  suspense  at  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man  will  be  the  first  instalment  of 
the  torments  of  the  lost. 

III.  The  awful  majesty  in  which  He  will  appear. — This  is  set  forth  in  the 
appalling  changes  that  will  come  over  the  material  heavens.  The  sun  darkened, 
so  that  the  moon  can  no  longer  shine  with  his  reflected  light — an  image,  surely, 
of  the  helplessness  of  the  blinded  followers  of  blind  leaders.  The  stars  falling 
from  heaven,  as  not  presuming  to  govern  this  night  of  no  mere  physical 
darkness,  and  in  a  dismay  corresponding  to  the  joy  with  which  they  sang 
together  when  the  corner-stone  of  the  earth  was  laid.  The  powers  of  heaven 
shaking,  as  in  anticipation  of  their  "  passing  away  with  a  great  noise."  And 
then  the  appearance  of  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man.  What  that  sign  shall  be — 
whether,  as  Christian  history  leads  us  to  suppose,  the  sign  of  the  Fiery  Cross, 
or  whether  rather  a  new  sign,  corresponding  to  the  new  heavens  and  the  new 

475 


chap.  xiii.        B0MILET2C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


earth- — we  cannot  tell.  Christian  poetry  may  weave  thoughts  into  scarcely 
understood  words,  so  that  for  a  time  we  think  that  we  picture  it ;  meditation 
may  help  us  to  forget  ourselves,  till  we  say,  "  I  feel  it,  but  I  cannot  put  it  into 
words";  we  can  approach  it  in  similes  and  illustrations;  but  when  all  is  done, 
we  shall  but  have  listened,  felt,  thought  as  men ;  and  as  men  we  still  must 
confess  at  last,  "  We  cannot  bear  it  now." 

IV.  Christ  will  be  manifested  then  as  in  search  of  His  own. — It  were  idle  to 
ask,  "  Who  would  not  be  of  the  elect  then  ?  "  It  is  more  to  the  purpose  to 
inquire,  "  What  do  men  mean  by  being  ashamed  of  Christ  now  ?  "  It  is  to  shew 
no  faith,  no  love,  no  trust ;  it  is  to  put  man  before  God,  to  put  worldly  men 
before  the  saints  ;  it  is  to  give  the  lie  to  all  our  religious  phrases,  and  falsify  all 
our  Christian  hopes;  it  is  to  tempt  God  to  take  us  at  our  word  and  say, 
"  According  to  your  faith,  so  be  it  done  unto  you." — E.  T.  Marshall. 

"Ver.  32.  The  limitations  of  our  Lord1 8  manhood. — It  has  generally  been  con- 
sidered very  difficult  to  reconcile  the  passage  before  us  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
Deity  of  Christ.  The  common  explanation,  which  refers  our  Saviour's  ignorance 
of  the  date  of  the  approaching  judgment  to  His  human  nature  only,  is  indig- 
nantly denounced  as  a  miserable  subterfuge  by  those  who  deny  His  Divinity. 
And  even  some  of  the  ablest  among  the  orthodox  have  abandoned  this  interpre- 
tation as  unsatisfactory,  if  not  evasive.  To  us,  however,  it  seems  perfectly  just 
and  Scriptural ;  while  its  supposed  difficulties  admit,  we  think,  of  solutions 
which  are  not  only  sound  in  logic,  but  are  commonly  applied  in  the  interpretation 
of  many  other  passages.  We  shall  endeavour  to  support  this  opinion  in  the 
following  argument. 

I.  Jesus  Christ,  while  truly  God,  was  also  truly  man,  and  therefore 
possessed  a  human  soul. — Innumerable  acts  and  feelings  are  attributed  to  Christ 
in  the  Scriptures,  which,  on  the  one  hand,  are  incompatible  with  the  nature  of 
God,  and,  on  the  other,  could  not  be  asserted  of  any  mere  physical  organisation. 
"  He  was  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief."  "  He  groaned  in  spirit 
and  was  troubled  "  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus.  "  He  was  in  all  points  tempted 
like  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin."  "  In  all  things  it  behoved  Him  to  be  made  like 
unto  His  brethren."  He  prayed  unto  the  Father  "  with  strong  crying  and 
tears,  and  was  heard  in  that  He  feared."  "  He  increased  in  wisdom,  and  in 
favour  with  God  and  man." 

II.  The  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  the  person  of  our  Lord 
did  not  extinguish  or  confound  the  essential  attributes  of  either. — We  can 
easily  understand  that  two  different  natures,  distinguished  by  the  most  opposite 
qualities,  may  yet  be  so  connected  as  to  constitute  one  person.  We  experience 
the  truth  of  this  in  our  own  mysterious  conformation.  But  this  implies  no 
confusion  of  their  separate  peculiarities.  Because  the  body  and  the  soul,  in 
their  present  inexplicable  conjunction,  make  up  the  individual  man,  does  it 
follow  that  matter  thinks,  or  that  mind  is  extended  in  three  dimensions  ?  And 
if  not,  why  should  we  imagine  that  the  finite  and  the  Infinite  lost  their  respective 
differences  and  were  merged  into  a  common  medium  in  the  person  of  Immanuel, 
God  with  us  ?  The  widest  possible  diversity  subsists  between  these  two  classes 
of  attributes.  And  if  we  are  justified  in  pronouncing  the  properties  of  the  circle 
and  the  square  to  be  intrinsically  incompatible,  we  may  surely  maintain  that 
the  union  of  Deity  and  manhood  in  the  person  of  the  Lord  left  the  essence  of 
each  undestroyed,  unabsorbed,  entire,  and  perfect  in  all  its  qualities. 

III.  Omniscience  is  one  of  the  incommunicable  attributes  of  God,  in  which, 
therefore,  the  reasonable  soul  of  Christ  had  no  participation. — Of  God,  and  of 
God  alone,  can  it  be  said  that  "  His  understanding  is  infinite."  When,  there- 
fore, omniscience  is  ascribed  to  the  Redeemer,  it  must  be  understood  of  His 

476 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiii. 


Divine,  not  of  His  human  nature.  We  may,  indeed,  with  good  reason  believe 
that  the  rational  soul  of  Christ  received  successive  and  great  additions  of 
knowledge  from  its  connexion  with  .the  Eternal  Word ;  but  these,  whatever 
their  amount,  did  not  exalt  the  creature  into  an  equality  with  God.  We  have 
already  quoted  the  scripture  which  declares  that  Christ  "  increased  in  wisdom." 
Now  that  which  is  susceptible  of  increase  is  clearly  at  an  infinite  distance  from 
infinity.  If,  then,  the  knowledge  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  however  extended, 
was  still  the  knowledge  of  a  creature,  and  therefore  finite,  what  inconsistency 
is  there  in  believing  that  there  were  secrets  in  the  counsels  of  God  concealed 
even  from  Him? 

IV.  Though  the  union  of  the  Divine  and  human  natures  in  the  Saviour 
involved  no  permutation  or  absorption  of  their  respective  peculiarities,  it 
constituted  Him  one  person,  of  whom,  therefore,  the  attributes  of  God  and  man 
might  be  predicated  indifferently. — The  inspired  writers  affirm  many  things  of 
Christ  which  are  true  only  of  His  Divine  nature — many  which,  in  strictness  of 
speech,  apply  only  to  His  humanity.  Yet  they  seldom  mark  the  distinction. 
They  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  say  that  "  by  Him,"  in  His  Divine  nature, 
"  were  all  things  created  " — "  by  Him  and  for  Him,"  that  is,  as  He  was  God ; 
"  and  He  is  before  all  things,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist,"  considering  Him  as 
Divine.  They  did  not  say  that,  as  God,  "  He  is  Lord  of  all " — that,  as  one  with 
the  Father,  He  is  "  the  First  and  the  Last— that  "  Thou,  Lord,  in  the  begin- 
ning," by  Thine  eternal  power  and  Godhead,  "hast  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  works  of  Thine  hands."  Nor  did  they  usually 
adopt  any  such  guarded  phraseology  in  speaking  of  Jesus  as  man.  We  do 
not  read  that,  in  His  human  nature,  "  He  was  an  hungered  " — that,  as  man, 
"  being  wearied  with  His  journey,  He  sat  thus  on  the  well " — that,  as  partaker 
of  flesh  and  blood,  "  He  was  in  the  hinder  part  of  the  ship  asleep  on  a  pillow  " — 
that,  in  His  character  as  a  creature,  He  "  increased  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and  in 
favour  with  God  and  man."  Sometimes,  it  is  true,  we  meet  with  qualifying 
expressions  in  reference  to  His  humanity — such  as,  "according  to  the  flesh," 
"the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus,"  etc.  But  these  instances  are  comparatively 
few,  and  easily  accounted  for  by  the  context ;  while,  in  the  current  phraseology 
of  the  Scriptures,  both  Divine  and  human  attributes  are  given  to  Christ  without 
any  express  limitation  of  either  to  the  one  nature  or  to  the  other.  Is  it  any 
harder  to  believe  that  the  human  soul  of  Jesus  was  left  in  ignorance  of  future 
times  and  seasons,  than  to  believe  that  it  sorrowed,  complained,  and  prayed  ? 

Y.  It  may  be  asked,  "  But  is  not  such  a  method  of  interpretation  somewhat 
unnatural?  Is  it  not  assumed  without  proof?  " — We  think  that  in  answering 
these  questions  we  can  produce  a  form  of  expression  exactly  parallel  to  that 
against  which  the  objection  is  raised,  yet  employed  in  general  conversation 
without  ever  incurring  the  charge  of  impropriety  or  any  danger  of  misconstruc- 
tion. No  one  will  deny  that,  in  the  opinion  of  an  immense  majority,  the  body 
and  the  soul  of  man  are  two  different  natures,  distinguished  by  opposite  and 
incompatible  qualities.  It  is  equally  clear,  as  we  have  already  observed,  that 
this  conjunction  involves  no  loss  and  no  confusion  of  their  characteristic 
peculiarities.  There  is  a  mutual  influence  of  the  two  natures,  we  readily  admit. 
The  feelings  and  volitions  of  the  mind  act  on  the  nerves  of  the  body ;  and 
certain  affections  of  the  nerves  produce  sensations  in  the  mind.  But  matter  is 
still  matter,  mind  is  mind ;  and  this  reciprocal  activity  of  both  occasions  no 
interchange  or  assimilation  of  their  several  powers.  And  yet  we  familiarly 
employ,  with  reference  to  man  in  general,  language  which  is  strictly  true  only 
of  one  part  of  his  nature.  We  do  this  continually  in  common  discourse,  and 
in  written  style,  without  formally  announcing  the  distinction  ;  and  we  do  it 
without  any  risk  of  misinterpretation.     We  say  of  any  individual  with  whom 

477 


chap.  xni.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


we  are  acquainted  that  he  is  tall  or  short,  light  or  heavy,  brown  or  fair.  Yet 
we  never  think  of  adding  a  prudent  parenthesis  to  inform  the  company  that  we 
are  speaking  only  of  the  body  of  the  individual  in  question.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  describe  the  same  individual,  it  may  be,  as  imaginative,  choleric,  or  timid — 
as  fond  of  reasoning,  or  deficient  in  memory,  or  conscientious  even  to  scrupu- 
losity. Yet  we  do  not  deem  it  necessary  to  restrict  the  application  of  these 
phrases  to  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  man.  The  two  classes  of  attributes  are 
too  distinct  to  be  confounded.  And  were  not  the  Divine  and  human  natures  of 
our  Lord  as  perfectly  distinct  in  all  their  powers?  Are  the  qualities  of  the 
creature  and  the  perfections  of  God  so  much  alike  as  to  be  distinguished  with 
difficulty,  and  perpetually  liable  to  be  confounded  ?  Assuredly  if  error  of  this 
kind  be  rendered  anywhere  impossible,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  it  is  so  in 
the  incarnation  of  "  the  Mighty  God."  It  has  been  observed  by  an  eminent 
writer  that  "  the  pet  texts  of  a  Socinian  are  quite  enough  for  his  confutation 
with  acute  thinkers.  If  Christ  had  been  a  mere  man,  it  would  have  been 
ridiculous  in  Him  to  call  Himself  the  Son  of  Man ;  but  being  God  and  man,  it 
then  became,  in  His  own  assumption  of  it,  a  peculiar  and  mysterious  title." 
The  same  remark  may  be  applied,  we  think,  to  the  passage  now  under  con- 
sideration. Let  the  name  of  any  of  the  prophets  or  apostles  be  substituted  for 
the  designation  of  Christ,  and  a  sentence  is  produced  at  which  even  a  Socinian 
might  stagger.  "  But  of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the 
angels  which  are  in  heaven,  neither  Moses,  but  the  Father."  It  matters  little 
what  particular  name  is  selected  for  the  experiment.  Isaiah,  Daniel,  Paul,  or 
John,  in  such  a  collocation,  would  be  alike  incongruous  with  the  whole  phraseo- 
logy and  spirit  of  the  Bible.  Why,  then,  would  such  an  announcement  have 
revolted  us,  while  the  name  of  the  Son,  in  this  identical  connexion,  awakens  no 
surprise  ?  Manifestly  because  the  human  soul  of  Christ,  from  its  conjunction 
with  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His 
person,"  was  admitted  to  a  knowledge  of  the  counsel  of  God  which  is  never 
ascribed  to  any  other  creature ;  manifestly  because  "  in  Him  dwelt  all  the 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  The  audacity  of  those  who  deny  the  possibility 
of  such  a  union  has  been  too  often  rivalled  by  the  presumption  of  others  who 
have  pretended  to  explain  it.  On  such  a  subject  our  only  wisdom  is  to  receive, 
with  the  faith  of  "  little  children,"  the  words  "  which  the  Holy  Ghost  teacheth," 
not  "  adding  to  them,  lest  we  be  reproved." — J.  M.  Mackenzie. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  14-18.  A  fruitful  warning. —  Ver.    18.  Winter  flight. — How  late 

As   they   were   not   to   linger   in  the  is   it    to   begin    our   flight   from    the 

guilty  city,  so  we  are  to  let  no  earthly  world  and  sin  in  the  winter  of  old  age 

interests  arrest  our  flight — not  to  turn  and  death !      In  the  winter  the  days 

back,  but  promptly  and  resolutely  to  are  short,    the   ways  bad,  the   season 

flee   unto   the    everlasting   hills.      As  rainy,  the   night  comes  on  before  we 

they   should    pray   that    their    flight  are  aware,  and  we  meet  with  a  thou- 

through  the  mountains  should  not  be  sand   impediments  and  hindrances   of 

in  the  winter,  so  should  we  beware  of  flight  and  travelling  :  these  are  a  lively 

needing  to  seek  salvation  in  the  winter  representation  of  those  hindrances   of 

of  the  soul,  when  the  storms  of  passion  salvation  which  men  find  at  the  end  of 

and   appetite   are   wildest,   when    evil  their  lives.    The  grace  to  prevent  them 

habits   have   made   the   road   slippery  by  a  speedy  conversion  is  obtained  only 

underfoot,  and  sophistry  and  self-will  by  prayer. — P.  Quesnel. 
have  hidden  the  gulfs  in  a  treacherous 

wreath  of  snow. — Dean  Chadwick.  Ver.  22.  False  Christs. — There  have 

478 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xra. 


been  many  of  them.  David  George,  ton,  for  instance,  who,  on  the  title- 
for  instance,  who  ultimately  settled  page  of  his  True  Interpretation  of  the 
at  Basle,  where  he  died  in  1556.  whole  Book  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John 
He  claimed,  according  to  the  account  (1746),  describes  himself  as  "one  of 
of  Dr.  Henry  More,  to  be  the  true  the  two  last  commissionated  witnesses 
Christ,  the  dear  Son  of  God,  born  not  and  prophets  of  the  only  high,  immortal, 
of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  Spirit.  He  was  glorious  God,  Christ  Jesus."  Madame 
to  restore  the  house  of  Israel,  and  Antoinette  Bourignon,  before  him,  was 
re-erect  the  tabernacle  of  God,  not  a  far  nobler  being,  yet  she  declared  to 
by  afflictions  and  death,  as  the  other  Christian  de  Cort :  "I  am  sent  from 
Messiah,  but  by  that  sweetness,  love,  God  to  bring  light  to  the  world,  and 
and  grace  that  were  given  him  of  the  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  He  has 
Father.  He  had  the  power  of  the  sent  me  to  tell  that  the  last  times  are 
remission  of  sins,  and  had  come  to  come ;  that  the  world  is  judged,  and 
administer  the  last  judgment.  He  the  sentence  is  irrevocable ;  that  the 
averred  that  "  the  Holy  Scriptures,  plagues  are  begun,  and  will  not  cease 
the  sayings  and  testimonies  of  the  till  all  evil  be  rooted  out ;  and  that 
prophets,  of  Christ,  and  of  His  apostles,  Jesus  Christ  will  come  shortly  to  the 
do  all  point,  if  rightly  understood,  in  earth  to  finish  this,  and  then  He  will 
their  true  mystery,  to  the  glorious  continue  to  reign  with  *  men  of  good- 
coming  of  David  George,  who  is  greater  will,'  who  shall  enjoy  eternal  peace, 
than  the  former  Christ,  as  being  born  I  am  sent  with  a  commission  to  declare 
of  the  Spirit,  and  not  of  the  flesh"  all  these  things  to  men,  to  the  end 
(Enthusiasmus  Triumphatus,  §  34).  that  peradventure  some  of  them  may 
This  David  George,  says  Dr.  More,  be  converted  and  repent,  that  they 
was  a  man  "  of  notable  natural  parts,  may  reign  with  Jesus  Christ  in  His 
of     comely    person,    and    a    graceful  glory." — Ibid. 

presence."      And    he   had    many   ad-  False  Christs  and  false  prophets. — 

herents,  who  believed  in  him.     In  our  In  those  days   it  was   an  adventurer 

own    day    there   are   persons — out   of  who  traded  on  the  religious  enthusiasm 

asylums — who  put  forth  corresponding  of   his   compatriots — led  them  out  to 

claims.     There     is    lying    before    the  some  desert  or  to  some  mountain-side 

writer  a  Tract  on  the   Second  Advent  to  enjoy  for  a   moment  the  delirium 

fulfilled,  in  which  it  is  said  that  "  the  of   an   impossible  delusion,   and  then, 

enrolling  of  the  saints  commenced  on  perhaps,  to  suffer  the  punishment  of 

the  anniversary  of  the  last  day  of  the  a  supposed  political   offence.     In   our 

Feast  of  Tabernacles  of  the  year  1868,  days  it  is  a  sceptical  friend,  it  is  an 

that  is,  on  the  9th  of  October,  1868.  article  in  a   review,  it  is  the   general 

The   following,"    it   is  added,   "  is  the  atmosphere  of  the  social  circle  in  which 

declaration   to   be   made   and  signed  :  we  live.     Our  faith  is  undermined  by 

*  I  believe  Jesus  of  Nazareth  to  be  the  people  who  talk  and  write  in  the  very 

Messiah  at  His  first  coming  and  the  best  English,  and  who  have  so  much 

antitypical  Paschal  Lamb  who  died  for  about  them  that  is  winning  and  agree- 

sin   in   allegory,    and   I  believe   John  able  that  we   cannot   believe  what  is 

Cochran  of  Glasgow  to  be  that  Messiah  really  going  on.     Still,  after   a  time, 

at  His  second  coming  and  the   anti-  we  find  that  we  have  less  hold  on  the 

typical    High   Priest   who   has   taken  Unseen  than  we   had,  that  prayer  is 

away   sin  in    reality.' "     Of   all   such  more  difficult,  that  conscience  is  more 

persons  it  has,  in  consequence  of  their  sluggish,  that  religious  exertion  of  all 

obscurity,  to  be  said,  "Lo,  here  !     Lo,  kinds  is  more  unwelcome;  and  this,  I 

there  ! "      "  Believe     not,"     says     our  say,  means  that  the  soul's  hold  of  the 

Saviour. — J.  Morison,  D.D.  central  realities  is,  to  say  the  very  least, 

False    prophets. — They    have     been  weakened,  if  that  is,  indeed,  anything 

legion  in  number.     Lodowick  Muggle-  like  a  full  and  true  account  of  what 

479 


chap.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK 


has  taken   place.     We  cannot   go  on  of  '  race/  should  not  pass  away  until 

breathing   a   bad   air,  and   be   as   we  all  had  been  fulfilled."     One  event  was 

were  when  we  lived  high  up  upon  the  the  end  of  the  Jewish  nationality,  the 

mountain,  unless  we  take   very  great  other   the    end   of    the   world.      The 

precautions.     Not  to  take  them  under  former  was  in  many  respects  the  type 

such   circumstances   as  these  is  to  be  of  the  latter.     The  signs,  both  in  the 

in  the  fair  way  to  forfeit  perseverance,  natural  and  moral  world,  which  pre- 

— Canon  Liddon.  ceded  and  accompanied  the  overthrow 

of  Jerusalem  are  measurably  the  same 

Vers.   25-27.  The  Second  Advent. —  as   those  which  will   characterise   the 

The  second  coming  of  Christ  will  be  last  ages  of  the  world.     And  hence  it 

even  as   the   first  coming  at  His  in-  is  not  easy  to  determine  with  precision 

carnation — an   historical    fact    taking  what  signs  are  applicable  solely  to  one 

place  on  the  world  in  which  we  live;  event,  and  what  are  applicable  solely 

not  anything  like  a  figure  of  speech,  to  the  other.     In  true  prophetic  style 

but  breaking  violently  into  the  uniform  they  are  much  intermingled.     But  we 

and  hitherto   unbroken   continuity  of  must   not    forget    that    they   are   the 

time  and  nature,  and  thus  freeing  the  words   of    "  One    whose    whole   being 

soul   and   spirit  of    man    from    those  moved  in  the  sphere  of   eternity  and 

physical   relations    on   which    man   is  not   of    time " ;    that    moral   warning 

now  dependent,  and   giving   the   soul  rather  than  chronological  indication  is 

fresh   opportunities   and    hopes    in    a  the  real  object  of  prophecy ;  and  that 

world  where  all  will  be  glorious.     Such  "  to  the  voice  of  prophecy,  as  to  the 

will  be   the  second  coming  of   Christ  eye  of  God,  all  time  is  but  one  eternal 

— the   perfecting   of   the    first.      Not  present." 
partial,  however,  and  gradual  as  His 

first  coming,  when  Christ  was  revealed  Ver.  31.  The  perishable  and  the  im- 

here  to  one   and   there   to  one ;    but  perishable. — I.  The  things  which  shall 

eeen  and  recognised  by  all  the  tribes  pass  away — the  perishable  things,  the 

of  the  earth.     Not  gradual,  for  it  has  destructible  things,  the   things  which 

taken  long  to  spread  the  Church,  and  in  this  visible  economy  seem  never  to 

the  work  is  very  far  from  being  done  continue  in  one  stay,  and  at  last  shall 

even   now;    but   sudden   and    instan-  perish   for   ever.      1.  Thus   see   what 

taneous — revealed  as  a  flash  of  light-  traces    of    instability    and    decay   are 

ning.     By  one  act  and  one  appearance  written  on  the  things  men  chiefly  love 

will  He  unite  the  greatest  terror  with  and   live   for.     Riches,   honours,  com- 

the  greatest  glory ;  He  will  transform  forts,  friends — youth,   beauty,  genius, 

the  world  and  nature  and  time ;  He  will  strength — the    prospering    enterprise, 

judge  the  living  and  the  dead,  and  carry  the  unfolding  hope,  the  fellowship  of 

the  children  of  God  to  the  inheritance  kindred     minds,    and     the     hallowed 

of  eternal  life. — Jas.  Lonsdale.  domestic  ties, — how  slight  is  our  hold 

on  the  fairest  and  best  of  these  things  ! 

Ver.    30.    Two   horizons. — In    that  2.    See  the   same  truth   inscribed  on 

landscape  of  the  future,  of  which  our  what   we  might  have   thought  would 

Lord  permitted  His  disciples  to  catch  have  a  more   enduring  life;    namely, 

a  glimpse  in   this   great  discourse   of  the    triumphs    of    man's    intellectual 

"  the    last    things,"    there    were    two  nature — the    inventions    of    art,    the 

horizons — one  near  at  hand,  the  other  applications  of   science,  the  treasures 

afar    off.       "The    boundary    line    of  of  literature,  the  profound  researches 

either    horizon    marked    the    winding  of  the  learned,  and  the  ingenious  dis- 

up    of    an    seon ;    each   was  a   great  coveries  of  the  wise  :  all  these  are  found 

ending ;  of  each  it  was  true  that  the  to  be  of  the  earth,  earthy.     3.  Again, 

then  existing   generation,  first   in   its  how  strikingly  are  we  reminded  of  this 

literal  sense,  then  in  its  wider  sense  law  of  mutability  and  decay,  as  applied 

480 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xm. 


to  all  earthly  things,  when  we  contem-  way  for  the  spiritual  application, — 
plate  the  history  of  nations.  4.  But  1.  A  lesson  of  warning,  since  we  are 
not  to  indications,  in  the  history  and  in  danger  of  attaching  too  much  im- 
moral circumstances  of  mankind  only,  portance  to  the  form,  and  too  little 
are  we  to  limit  the  application  of  our  to  the  truth,  which  the  form  embodies. 
Lord's  words.  As  the  foregoing  verses  2.  A  lesson  of  encouragement ;  opinions 
shew,  the  final  consummation  will  be  may  change  and  interpretations  differ, 
preceded  by  a  mighty  disturbance  but  the  truth  remains  always  the  same, 
among  the  elemental  powers  of  nature.  — F.  Wagstaff. 
Who   shall   say  how   soon  all   visible 

and    material    things,    consumed   and  Yer.  32.  Christ's  voluntary  limitation 

scattered,  as  it  were  by  the  springing  of   knowledge. — What    forbids    us    to 

of  some  invisible  mine,  may  be  called  believe  that  His  knowledge,  like  His 

upon  to  shed  the  light  of  their  dis-  power,  was  limited  by  a  lowliness  not 

solving   glory  on   the   day  of   Christ,  enforced,   but  for   our  sakes   chosen ; 

and    testify    to   the   imperishableness  and  that  as  He  could  have  asked  for 

of  His  words?  twelve  legions  of  angels,  yet  chose  to 

II.    Christ's  words   shall  not  pass  be  bound  and  buffeted,  so  He  could 

away. — 1.  Because  they  are  founded  have  known  that  day  and  hour,  yet 

on  eternal   truth,   and   on    the   fixed  submitted  to  ignorance,  that  He  might 

purposes  of  the  unchangeable  Jehovah,  be    made    like  in   all   points    to    His 

2.  Because  of  the  eternal  power  and  brethren  ?  Souls  there  are  for  whom 
Godhead   of    Him   who   spake   them,  this     wonderful    saying,     "The     Son 

3.  Because  of  their  connexion  with  knoweth  not,"  is  even  more  affecting 
His  own  glory  as  the  Divinely  consti-  than  the  words,  "The  Son  of  Man 
tuted  Mediator. — D.  Moore.  hath  not  where   to  lay  His  head." — 

The  permanence  of  Christ's  words. —  Dean  Chadwick. 
I.  The  words  which  Jesus  spake  while         To  me  this  means  that  He  who  was 

on  earth  are  permanently  associated  to  judge  the  world,  who  knew  what 

with  our  whole  life.  was   in    man,   and   more,   who   alone 

II.  All  our  literature  is  enriched  knew  the  Father,  was  at  that  time 
by  these  words.  content  to  have  that  hour  hidden  from 

III.  That  which  is  spiritual  must  Him — did  not  choose  to  be  above  the 
always  be  more  permanent  than  the  angels  in  knowing  it— as  He  was 
material.  afterwards  content  to  be  forsaken  of 

IV.  Yet  the  material  prepares  the  the  Father. — Dean  Church. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  33—37. 

The  command  to  watch. — In  this  brief  parable  the  Church  is  compared  to  a 
great  mansion,  with  many  offices,  duties,  servants — a  vast,  complex,  interior 
ministry,  every  function  of  which  must  be  diligently  discharged  if  the  house  is 
to  be  kept  in  order  and  the  household  are  to  live  in  comfort  and  peace. 

I.  The  authority  which  the  departing  Master  confers  on  all  His  servants. — 
We  know  that  in  a  household  where  the  father  and  master  is  served  from  love 
and  not  from  fear,  when  he  goes  away  for  a  time,  the  children  and  servants,  if 
they  are  faithful,  bestir  themselves  to  shew  that  they  are  not  unworthy  of  the 
trust  he  reposes  in  them.  A  pulse  of  quickened  affection  and  activity  spreads 
from  heart  to  heart.  A  new  and  invigorating  sense  of  responsibility  stimulates 
them  to  a  more  steadfast  and  earnest  discharge  of  duty.  If  our  ruling  motive 
and  inspiration  be  love  to  Christ,  we  shall  not  dream  of  saying  of  any  work 
which  needs  to  be  done,  "  This  is  no  business  of  mine,"  or  "  I  am  not  bound  to 
do  that " ;  we  shall  be  eager  to  do  whatever  we  can  for  the  general  good.  No 
task  will  be  too  mean  for  us,  no  detail  too  petty  or  trivial. 

ii  481 


chap.  xin.        IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.   MARK. 


II.  Besides  this  general  authority,  common  to  all,  we  have  each  of  us  a 
special  task  to  do  for  Him  and  for  the  family  named  after  Him.  "  To  each  one 
his  own  work,"  i.e.  the  work  he  is  specially  fitted  or  called  to  do.  And,  indeed, 
the  forms  of  service  are  so  many,  and  the  call  for  service  so  imperative,  that  no 
one  need  lack  suitable  employment  if  only  he  is  bent  on  finding  it.  None  is  so 
weak  or  so  poor  in  endowment  but  that  he  may  do  a  little  good,  if  only  he  be  of 
a  willing  mind.  In  the  Household  of  Faith,  as  in  the  world,  there  are  many 
forms  of  service,  many  ways  of  gaining  spiritual  food  and  strength  and  skill ; 
and  there  are  many  servants  in  it  who  do  not  feel  that  their  gifts  fit  them  for 
on*  kind  of  labour  more  than  for  another  ;  some  doubt  whether  they  have  any 
gifts,  any  calling,  worthy  of  the  name.  But  if  necessity  is  laid  upon  them, 
what  will  they  do  ?  Naturally  they  will  try  this  kind  of  work  and  that,  till 
they  find  a  work  which  they  can  do,  and  perhaps  a  work  they  can  like  as  well 
as  do ;  or  they  will  take  up  the  work  that  comes  first  to  hand,  and  gradually 
make  themselves  fit  for  it  by  doing  it.  What  we  chiefly  want,  if  at  least  we  are 
doing  little  or  nothing  for  Him,  is  more  love,  and  of  that  kind  of  love  which 
will  make  us  feel  that  we  must  do  something  for  Him  who  has  done  so  much  for 
us.  As  we  get  more  love  we  shall  do  more  work,  and  settle  down  into  our 
proper  vocation. 

III.  To  work  we  must  add  watchfulness. — The  porter  is  to  look  for  his  lord's 
return  ;  but  so  are  all  the  servants :  i.e.  they  are  to  expect  it,  to  be  ready  for 
it,  to  desire  it.  We  are  not  to  be  as  drudges  who  have  no  pleasure  in  their 
work,  nor  as  hirelings  who  care  only  for  their  wages.  Our  labour  is  to  be 
bright  with  hope,  with  the  hope  of  a  great  happiness  to  come,  and  that  may 
come  at  any  moment.  The  Lord  is  always  coming  to  those  who  look  for  His 
appearing.  We  see  His  advent  on  a  large  scale  in  every  crisis  of  the  great 
human  story.  In  revolution,  in  reformations,  when  the  thoughts  of  men's 
hearts  are  revealed,  when  they  are  summoned  to  accept  new  forms  of  truth  or 
to  enter  on  new  spheres  of  duty,  we  know  that  Christ  has  come  once  more  to 
try  their  works,  to  see  whether  they  have  been  faithful  to  Him  and  are  ready 
to  greet  Him  with  love  and  joy.  And  in  like  manner,  though  not  so  obviously, 
He  comes  to  us  in  the  crises  of  our  individual  history,  when  one  page  of  our  life 
is  closed  and  a  new  page  is  opened.  For  each  one  of  us  there  is  an  advent  of 
Christ  as  often  as  new  and  larger  views  of  truth  are  presented  to  us,  or  we  are 
called  to  leave  a  familiar  round  of  duty  and  to  take  up  new  duties  and  more 
laborious.  If  we  are  so  absorbed  in  the  mere  routine  of  our  previous  service, 
or  so  attached  to  old  forms  of  truth  and  labour,  that  we  have  no  eye  for  new 
aspects  of  truth,  and  no  ear  for  the  call  to  new  labours,  we  miss  another  happy 
chance ;  we  are  like  servants  who,  stolidly  plodding  through  a  familiar  drudgery, 
do  not  hear  when  the  Master  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks,  and  are  even 
flurried  and  vexed  should  He  bid  them  do  what  they  have  never  done  before. 
But  if,  while  going  resolutely  and  happily  about  our  accustomed  tasks,  we  look 
alertly  and  hopefully  for  the  joy  of  Christ's  return  ;  if,  because  we  know  so 
little,  we  expect  Him  to  teach  us  new  truths  ;  if,  because  our  service  is  so 
imperfect,  we  expect  to  be  called  to  new  and  better  modes  of  serving  Him,  we 
are  like  servants  who,  living  daily  in  hope  of  the  Master's  return,  catch  the  first 
signal  of  His  approach,  hurry  out  to  welcome  Him,  and  are  rewarded  for  their 
watchful  diligence  by  having  greater  authority  committed  to  them,  and 
ministries  which  bring  them  nearer  to  His  person.  And  all  these  advents  of 
Christ,  in  new  truths  and  new  duties,  are  but  preludes  of  that  great  personal 
advent  for  which  we  look  none  the  less  earnestly  because  we  know  neither  its 
day  nor  its  hour.  We  know  that  He  who  once  came  and  dwelt  among  us  in 
great  humility  will  come  again,  in  the  glory  of  the  Father,  to  complete  the 
work  He  then  began — to  finish  our  redemption,  to  reward  every  act  of  kindness 

482 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiii. 


as  though  it  had  been  done  to  Him.  And  therefore  we  are  watchful,  and 
strengthen  the  things  which  are  ready  to  die,  not  suffering  any  grace  to  perish 
out  of  our  hearts  in  this  world's  unkindly  weather,  but  guarding  and  cherishing 
it  for  the  summer  of  eternity ;  nor  permitting  any  good  enterprise  to  fail  for 
lack  of  help,  but  breathing  into  it  the  life  of  our  help  till  happier  times  arrive. — 
S.  Cox,  D.D. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  33-36.  The  duty  of  watchful-  your  afflictions  on  purpose  to  awaken 
ness  enforced. — I.  The  duty  inculcated.  you  from  your  slumbers,  and  to  stir 
— Watchfulness  and  prayer  are  often  you  up  to  heavenly  pursuits.  What 
united  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  duties  an  aggravation  will  it  be  of  your  guilt 
of  the  first  importance.  In  themselves  if  these  dispensations  pass  away  un- 
they  are  different ;  but  in  their  exercise  improved  !  4.  The  backslidden.  What 
they  are  inseparable :  neither  would  an  awful  thing  is  it  that,  instead  of 
be  of  any  avail  without  the  other  :  having  advanced  in  the  Divine  life, 
prayer  without  watchfulness  would  be  you  have  lost  in  a  good  measure  the 
hypocritical ;  and  watchfulness  without  life  which  you  once  had  !  Attend  to 
prayer  presumptuous.  1.  What  we  God's  admonition  to  the  Church  of 
should  watch  and  pray  against.  Here  Sardis,  lest  He  execute  upon  you  the 
we  must  include  everything  which  has  judgment  that  He  threatened  to  inflict 
a  tendency  to  lull  us  asleep.  We  see  on  them  (Rev.  iii.  2,  3).  5.  The  more 
how  intent  men  are  on  all  the  things  steadfast  Christian.  Experience  proves 
of  time  and  sense  :  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  that  the  exhortation  to  "  watch  "  is  not 
the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  less  necessary  for  you  than  for  others, 
life  so  occupy  them  that  they  find  no  How  many  who  are  on  the  whole 
time  nor  inclination  for  spiritual  con-  pious  grieve,  by  their  unwatchfulness, 
cerns.  2.  What  we  should  watch  and  their  Divine  Master. — C.  Simeon. 
pray  for.  To  be  found  ready,  at  what- 
ever moment  our  Lord  shall  call  for  Ver.  33.  Watch  and  pray. — Two 
us,  should  be  the  one  object  of  our  duties.  1.  The  activity  of  the  eye 
ambition.  earthward.       2.  The    emotion   of    the 

II.  The  considerations  with  which  heart  Godward.  Watchfulness  is  like 
it  is  enforced. — 1.  The  uncertainty  of  the  hands  of  the  clock  that  point ; 
the  time  when  our  Lord  shall  call  us.  prayer  is  the  weight  that  keeps  the 
There  is  not  a  moment  of  our  lives  machinery  in  motion. — T.  J.  Judkin. 
when  we  may  sit  down  secure.     2.  The 

awfulness  of  being  found  in  a  sleeping  Ver.  34.  Fidelity  and  watchfulness. 

state.      It   will   be   to   no  purpose  to  — The  whole  which  our  Blessed  Master, 

plead  that  we   were   not   engaged   in  when  He  ascended  into  heaven,  recom- 

any  wicked  projects.     We  were  "  sloth-  mended  to  the  care  of  His   servants, 

ful  servants,"  and  therefore  are  justly  consisted  in  fidelity  and  watchfulness : 

regarded  as  "  wicked."  fidelity,  in  doing  everything  well  which 

III.  Our  Lord's  concluding  admoni-  is  to  be  done  in  His  house,  in  the  heart, 
tion,  "  What  I  say  unto  you  I  say  in  the  Church,  according  to  the  full 
unto  all,  Watch,"  will  lead  us  to  ad-  extent  of  their  duty ;  watchfulness,  in 
dress  some  different  descriptions  of  suffering  no  stranger  nor  enemy  to 
persons.  1.  The  old.  Is  so  much  of  enter  by  the  senses,  which  are  the  gates 
your  time  gone,  and  will  you  not  im-  of  the  soul,  in  permitting  nothing  which 
prove  the  remainder  ?  2.  The  young,  belongs  to  the  Master  to  go  out  without 
What  security  have  you  against  death,  His  orders,  and  in  carefully  observing 
that  you  should  delay  so  necessary  a  all  commerce  and  correspondence  which 
work?      3.  The  afflicted.      God  sends  the   heart   may   have   abroad    in   the 

483 


chap.  xiil.        EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


world,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Master's 
service. — P.  Quesnel. 

Every  man  the  porter  of  his  own 
heart. — It  is  the  business  of  each 
one  of  us  to  stop,  by  God's  help,  evil 
thoughts  from  coining  in  and  good 
aspirations  from  going  out.  We  must 
watch  and  pray  that  we  enter  not  into 
temptation. 

Ver.  36.  Remissness  and  negligence, 
as  well  as  the  greater  sins,  are  often 
the  occasion  of  our  being  surprised  by 
death.  A  porter  asleep  exposes  the 
house  to  be  robbed,  and  well  deserves 
to  be  punished.  A  Christian  whose 
faith  is  not  watchful  exposes  his  own 
heart  to  the  enemy  of  his  salvation, 
and  to  those  who  are  continually 
watching,  in  order  to  steal  away  all 
the  valuable  things  which  God  has 
laid  up  there,  as  in  His  own  house. — 
Ibid. 


Ver.  37.  Reasons  for  watchfulness. — 
1.  Because  you  are  liable  to  drowsiness 
and  slumber.  2.  Because  means  are 
constantly  being  used  to  seduce  you 
from  the  ways  of  saving  peace.  3.  Be- 
cause you  have  given  yourselves  up 
as  soldiers  of  the  Cross.  4.  Because 
you  have  many  duties  to  perform. 
5.  Because  you  know  not  when  the 
Master  will  come  to  demand  an 
account. 

Watch.— 1.  To  prevent  evil.  2.  To 
further  good. 

Watching  for  Christ. — He  watches 
for  Christ  who  has  a  sensitive,  eager, 
apprehensive  mind;  who  is  awake, 
alive,  quick-sighted,  zealous  in  seeking 
and  honouring  Him ;  who  looks  out 
for  Him  in  all  that  happens ;  and  who 
would  not  be  surprised,  who  would  not 
be  overagitated  or  overwhelmed,  if  he 
found  that  He  was  coming  at  once. — 
J.  H.  Newman,  D.D. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    XIII. 


Vers.  7,  8.  The  sorrows  of  war. — The  con- 
queror of  Bonaparte  at  Waterloo  wrote,  on 
the  day  after  June  19th,  to  the  Duke  of 
Beaufort  :  "  The  losses  we  have  sustained 
have  quite  broken  me  down,  and  I  have  no 
feeling  for  the  advantages  we  have  acquired." 
On  the  same  day,  too,  he  wrote  to  Lord 
Aberdeen :  "  I  cannot  express  to  you  the 
regret  and  sorrow  with  which  I  look  round 
me  and  contemplate  the  loss  which  I  have 
sustained,  particularly  in  your  brother. 
The  glory  resulting  from  such  actions,  so 
dearly  bought,  is  no  consolation  to  me,  and 
I  cannot  suggest  it  as  any  to  you  and  his 
friends  ;  but  I  hope  that  it  may  be  expected 
that  this  last  one  has  been  so  decisive  as 
that  no  doubt  remains  that  our  exertions 
and  our  individual  losses  will  be  rewarded 
by  the  early  attainment  of  our  just  object. 
It  is  then  that  the  glory  of  the  actions  in 
which  our  friends  and  relations  have  fallen 
will  be  some  consolation  for  their  loss." 
He  who  could  write  thus  had  already 
attained  a  greater  victory  than  that  of 
Waterloo ;  and  the  less  naturally  follows 
the  greater. 

Ver.  13.  Endurance. — There  was  a  period 
during  the  battle  of  Koniggratz  when  theo 
attack  of  the  Prussians  seemed  hopeless. 
Across  the  stream  and  up  the  long  slope  the 
battalions  poured,  only  to  be  again  and 
again  repulsed  by  the  Austrian  army,  and 
yet  again  and  again  they  returned  to  the 

484 


attack.  And  what  was  the  secret  that  en- 
couraged their  persistence  ?  An  observer 
of  the  battle  from  a  tall  tower,  at  this  crisis, 
looked  eastward  along  the  range  of  elevated 
ground  which  was  the  stronghold  of  the 
Austrians,  and  in  the  distance,  from  the 
edge  of  a  wood,  his  eye  caught  the  gleaming 
of  bayonets.  A  strong  body  of  Prussians 
had  outflanked  the  Austrians,  and  was 
advancing  rapidly  on  the  rear  of  their 
position,  and  it  was  the  knowledge  of  this 
flank  movement  of  the  other  division  of 
their  army  that  gave  courage  and  endurance 
to  those  Prussians  who  attacked  in  front. 
Just  thus  the  Christian,  though  often  disap- 
pointed with  his  failures  in  the  spiritual  life, 
yet  persists  in  his  efforts,  for  he  knows  that 
the  irresistible  force  of  God's  power  will 
come  to  the  help  of  His  tried  and  tempted 
servants. 

Constancy. — Some  dyes  cannot  bear  the 
weather,  but  alter  colour  presently;  but 
there  are  others  that,  having  something  that 
gives  a  deeper  tincture,  will  hold.  The  graces 
of  a  true  Christian  hold  out  in  all  sorts  of 
weather,  in  winter  and  summer,  prosperity 
and  adversity,  when  superficial  counterfeit 
holiness  will  give  out. — R.  Sibbes. 

Perseverance. — "  I  know  the  way  to 
heaven,"  said  little  Minnie  to  little  Johnny, 
who  stood  by  her  side,  looking  at  a  picture- 
book.  "  You  do  ?  "  said  little  John.  "  Well, 
won't  you  tell  me  how  to  get  there  ?  "  "  Oh 
yes !     I'll  tell  you.     Just  commence  going 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  XIII. 


up,  and  keep  on  going  all  the  time,  and 
you'll  get  there.  But,  Johnny,  you  must  not 
turn  back." 

Vers.    15,    16.     The   danger   of  delay. — 

1.  Opportunity  is  like  a  string  of  stepping- 
stones  across  a  ford.  The  traveller,  coming 
up  to  them,  may  find  the  river  so  swollen 
with  the  rains  that  the  stones  are  all  but 
covered.  If  he  delays  though  his  home  be 
on  the  opposite  bank,  and  full  in  sight,  it 
may  be  too  late  to  cross,  and  he  may  have  a 
journey  of  several  miles  to  reach  his  home. 

2.  Opportunity  is  like  a  narrow  passage  in 
the  Arctic  Seas.  Sometimes,  in  these  north- 
ern regions,  ships  get  enclosed  in  a  narrow 
space  between  ice-islands.  The  floating 
rocks  glide  nearer  the  ship  on  every  side, 
and  the  dismayed  seamen  behold  their  only 
chance  of  escape  from  the  fatal  crash  lies  in 
a  narrow  channel,  that  every  moment  grows 
still  narrower.  How  hurriedly  they  press 
their  vessel  through  that  strip  to  reach  the 
safety  of  the  open  ocean !  j  Even  so  must 
we  press  along  the  narrow  way  that  leads  to 
eternal  life ;  for  who  knows  how  soon  that 
narrow  way  may  be  closed  against  him. 

Ver.  18.  The  horrors  of  a  winter  flight. — 
In  the  autumn  of  1812  Napoleon  entered 
Moscow  with  120,000  soldiers,  intending  to 
pass  the  winter  there  in  comfort.  On 
October  13th  (three  weeks  earlier  than  it 
had  ever  been  known  before)  snow  began  to 
fall.  The  proud  emperor  looked  out  of  his 
window  in  dismay,  and  decided  to  hasten 
back  at  once,  and  establish  his  winter 
quarters  in  the  friendly  cities  of  Poland.  It 
was  a  march  through  a  dreary  and  desolate 
region,  of  more  than  a  thousand  miles ;  but 
he  put  on  a  bold  front,  and  the  troops  began 
to  retire  in  good  order.  A  week  later,  and 
the  grand  army  was  in  full  retreat.  Bleak, 
chilly  winds  howled  through  the  leafless 
trees;  the  weary  soldiers  were  blinded  by 
the  flakes  of  snow  and  sleet ;  their  embittered 
enemies  attacked  them  in  every  unguarded 
point ;  order  and  discipline  were  forgotten  ; 
the  ranks  were  broken,  and  each  man 
struggled  on  as  best  he  could  ;  the  dead  and 
the  dying  were  trodden  down  ;  hundreds  of 
horses  were  slain  for  food  ;  all  ideas  of  con- 
quest were  banished  ;  Napoleon  himself  left 
the  army  to  its  fate ;  and  each  day's  weary 
march  was  marked  by  heaps  of  broken 
waggons,  and  abandoned  cannon,  and  white 
hillocks  of  snow,  beneath  which  the  frozen 
bodies  of  man  and  beast  were  buried.  With 
such  a  dreadful  picture  of  misery  before  you, 
it  will  be  easy  to  understand  the  tender 
compassion  which  prompted  the  Saviour  to 
say,  "  Pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the 
winter."  Especially  ought  we  to  remember 
those  who  are  suffering  the  sad  privations 
of  poverty,  and  be  glad  to  relieve  their  wants 
when  we  are  able. 


Ver.  22.  Banger  of  deception  by  false 
Christs. — In  the  frescoes  of  Signorelli  we 
have  "The  Teaching  of  Antichrist" — no 
repulsive  figure,  but  a  grand  personage  in 
flowing  robes,  and  with  a  noble  countenance, 
which  at  a  distance  might  easily  be  taken 
for  the  Saviour.  To  him  the  crowd  are 
eagerly  gathering  and  listening,  and  it  is 
only  when  you  draw  close  that  you  can  dis- 
cover in  his  harder  and  cynical  expression, 
and  from  the  evil  spirit  whispering  in  his 
ear,  that  it  is  not  Christ. 

Ver.  28.  A  sign  of  summer's  approach. — 
When  Dr.  Rees  preached  last  in  North  Wales, 
a  friend  said  to  him,  "  You  are  whitening 
fast,  Dr.  Rees."  The  old  gentleman  did  not 
say  anything  then ;  but  when  he  got  to  the 
pulpit  he  referred  to  it,  and  said,  "  There  is 
a  wee  white  flower  that  comes  up  through 
the  earth  at  this  season  of  the  year — some- 
times it  comes  up  through  the  snow  and 
frost ;  but  we  are  all  glad  to  see  the  snow- 
drop, because  it  proclaims  that  the  winter  is 
over  and  that  the  summer  is  at  hand.  A 
friend  reminded  me  last  night  that  I  was 
whitening  fast.  But  heed  not  that,  brother ; 
it  is  to  me  a  proof  that  my  winter  will  soon 
be  over,  that  I  shall  have  done  presently 
with  the  cold  east  winds  and  the  frosts  of 
earth,  and  that  my  summer — my  eternal 
summer — is  at  hand." 

Ver.  32.  Christ's  second  coming  is  to  be 
of  awful  suddenness,  overtaking  a  careless 
world  with  surprise,  and  not  wholly  expected 
even  by  the  faithful  watchman.  Of  such  a 
sudden  and  awful  change  perhaps  a  faint 
illustration  may  be  found  in  the  catastrophe 
which  took  place  about  a  century  ago,  when 
in  an  Alpine  valley  the  whole  side  of  a 
mountain  suddenly  fell  and  overwhelmed  the 
village  below,  crushing  chalets  and  houses, 
burying  the  church,  and  covering  with  earth 
and  stones  a  merry  wedding-party  that  had 
just  entered  the  doomed  valley.  To  be 
without  warning  or  preparation  is  the  cha- 
racter of  the  Second  Advent,  as  compared 
with  the  long-planned  arrangements  and  the 
deep  foundations  laid  for  the  First  Coming. 
— Br.  Hardman. 

Ver.  33.  "  Watch  and  pray.'" — The  sentinel 
picketed  to  watch  the  enemy  does  his  duty 
by  giving  the  alarm  if  the  enemy  approaches, 
not  by  advancing  single-handed  to  the  con- 
flict. So  the  duty  of  a  Christian,  watchfully 
discerning  the  approach  of  temptation,  is  to 
convey  the  case  to  God.  It  is  foolhardiness 
to  adventure  into  the  combat  unsent  and 
unprovided  for. 

Watchfulness  and  prayer. — "  I  often  re- 
call," says  an  old  sailor,  "  my  first  night  at 
sea.  A  storm  had  come  up,  and  we  had  put 
back  under  a  point  of  land  which  broke  the 
wind  a  little,  but  still  the  sea  had  a  rake  on 
us,  and  we  were  in  danger  of  drifting.    I 

485 


CHAP.  xiii.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


was  on  the  anchor  watch,  and  it  was  my 
duty  to  gi\  e  warning  in  case  the  ship  should 
drag  her  anchor.  It  was  a  long  night  to 
me.  I  was  very  anxious  whether  I  should 
know  if  the  ship  really  did  drift.  How  could 
I  tell  ?  I  found  that,  going  forward  and 
placing  my  hand  on  the  chain,  I  could  tell 
by  the  feeling  of  it  whether  the  anchor  was 
dragging  or  not ;  and  how  often  that  night 
I  went  forward  and  placed  my  hand  on  that 
chain !  And  very  often  since  then  I  have 
wondered  whether  I  am  drifting  away  from 
God,  and  then  I  go  away  and  pray.  Some- 
times during  that  long  stormy  night  I  would 
be  startled  by  a  rumbling  sound,  and  I 
would  put  my  hand  on  the  chain,  and  find 
it  was  not  the  anchor  dragging,  but  only  the 
chain  grating  against  the  rocks  on  the  bottom. 
The  anchor  was  still  firm.  And  sometimes 
now,  in  temptation  and  trial,  I  become 
afraid,  and  upon  praying  I  find  that  away 
down  deep  in  my  heart  I  do  love  God,  and 
my  hope  is  in  His  salvation.  And  I  want 
just  to  say  a  word  to  my  fellow-Christians : 
Keep  an  anchor  watch,  lest  before  you  are 
aware  you  may  be  upon  the  rocks." 

Ver.  34.  Work  for  all. — Let  us  be  thankful 
that  there  is  a  growing  and  more  universal 
recognition  of  the  Bible  teaching,  that  each 
individual  believer  has  some  apportioned 
work  in  the  Church  of  God,  some  appro- 
priate niche  assigned  him  to  fill  in  God's 
sanctuary.  Just  as  it  was  of  old  in  the 
Jewish  Temple,  extending  from  its  outer 
gates  and  outer  courts,  to  the  rites  of  the 
Most  Holy  Place.  Some  were  engaged  in 
hewing  fir  and  cedar  logs  for  altar  fuel : 
others  disposing  of  the  ashes  of  the  sacri- 
fices in  the  great  conduits  leading  to  the 
Kedron :  some  ministering  as  sacrificial 
priests;  others  occupied  in  ceremonial  lus- 
trations :  some,  more  honoured,  in  bringing 
the  golden  bowl  from  Siloam  at  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles.  Here  are  the  silver  trumpeters 
who  wake  up  the  city  at  early  morn  to  the 
duties  of  a  new  day,  or  at  similar  stated  in- 
tervals proclaim  the  appearance  of  the  new 
moon.  Here  are  the  sons  of  Korah  mingling 
their  voices  with  "  kinnor  "  and  cymbal-tones, 
chanting  psalm  and  Hallel.  Here  the  sym- 
pathetic and  beneficent  among  the  worship- 
ping throng  are  seen  as  they  retire,  aiding 
with  alms  and  deeds  the  cripples  laid  at "  the 
Gate  Beautiful."  Here  are  the  aged  Annas 
and  Simeons  coming  in  to  wait  for  the  salva- 
tion of  Israel ;  or  to  present  once  more  their 
lowly  tribute-offering,  and  sing  their  nunc 
dimittis.  Here  are  the  children  of  the 
Temple  twisting  wreaths  of  olive,  myrtle, 
and  palm,  to  greet  their  Lord  with  glad 
hosannas.  This  daily  acted  parable  of  the 
old  Temple  dispensation  needs  no  further 
interpretation.  The  Great  Master  gives  it  in 
His  own  laconic  words  :  "To  every  man  his 
work."— J.  R.  Macduff,  D.D. 

486 


The  joy  of  working  for  Christ.— &  beautiful 
incident  in  reference  to  Mr.  Townsend  is 
mentioned  in  the  Life  of  John  Campbell. 
"  Finding  him  on  Tuesday  morning,  shortly 
before  his  last  illness,  leaning  on  the  balus- 
trade of  the  staircase  that  led  to  the  com- 
mittee-room of  the  Tract  Society,  and  scarcely 
able  to  breathe,  I  remarked, '  Mr.  Townsend, 
is  this  you  1  Why  should  you  come  in  this 
state  of  body  to  our  meetings  ?  You  have 
now  attended  them  for  a  long  time,  and  you 
should  leave  the  work  to  younger  men.'  The 
reply  of  Mr.  Townsend  was  worthy  of  his 
character.  Looking  at  his  friend  with  a 
countenance  brightened  and  elevated  by  the 
thoughts  that  were  struggling  for  utterance, 
his  words  were,  ■  Oh  !  Johnny,  Johnny,  man, 
it  is  hard  to  give  up  working  in  the  service 
of  such  a  Master  1 '  " 

This  life  the  time  for  work. — "Are  you 
not  wearying  for  the  heavenly  rest  1 "  said 
Whitefield  to  an  old  minister.  "No,  cer- 
tainly not  1  "  he  replied.  "  Why  not  ?  "  was 
the  surprised  rejoinder.  "  Why,  my  good 
brother,"  said  the  aged  saint,  "  if  you  were 
to  send  your  servant  into  the  fields  to  do  a 
certain  portion  of  work  for  you,  and  promised 
to  give  him  rest  and  refreshment  in  the  even- 
ing, what  would  you  say  if  you  found  him 
languid  and  discontented  in  the  middle  of 
the  day,  and  murmuring,  *  Would  to  God  it 
were  evening '  ?  Would  you  not  bid  him  be 
up  and  doing,  and  finish  his  work,  and  then 
go  home  and  enjoy  the  promised  rest  1  Just 
so  does  God  require  of  you  and  me  that, 
instead  of  looking  for  Saturday  night,  we  do 
our  day's  work  in  the  day." 

The  importance  of  vigilance. — The  duty 
entrusted  to  the  porter  is  of  great  import- 
ance. His  negligence  lays  the  house  open 
to  every  intruder.  If  the  sentinel  falls  asleep 
at  his  post,  the  whole  army  may  be  surprised 
and  cut  off.  If  the  man  stationed  at  the 
gate  is  unfaithful,  the  fortress  may  be  taken 
without  assault,  and  the  whole  garrison  put 
to  the  sword.  A  man  ignorant  of  the 
management  of  a  ship,  when  he  sees  all 
hands  busily  at  work,  some  climbing  the 
mast,  others  hoisting  the  sails,  and  others 
plying  at  the  pump,  will  be  apt  to  look  on  the 
pilot  as  a  lazy  supernumerary  who  spends 
his  time  in  gazing  idly  at  the  stars,  and 
amusing  himself  with  turning  a  piece  of 
timber  from  side  to  side,  not  aware  that 
this  man's  services  are  of  all  others  the  most 
essential  to  the  progress  of  the  vessel  on  her 
way,  and  to  the  safety  of  all  who  are  on 
board.  In  like  manner,  though  there  are 
Christian  graces  and  duties  which  are  of 
greater  dignity,  vigilance  is  of  the  greatest 
utility.' 

Each  at  his  post. — An  Arctic  explorer  found, 
floating  helplessly  about  among  the  icebergs 
of  that  cold,  lonely  country,  a  ship.  Going 
on  board,  he  found  that  the  captain  was 
frozen,  and  sat  dead  at  his  log-book,  while 


BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK.       chap,  xiil 


the  helmsman  stood  at  his  post,  and  the  men 
on  watch  still  on  duty,  but  cold  in  death. 
What  happiness  will  it  be  when  our  Lord 
comes  to  know  we  have  done  our  duty,  and 
can  welcome  our  Saviour  as  He  bids  us 
"  come  up  higher  " ! 

Vers.  35-37.  On  the  watch. — How  many 
striking  pictures  this  word  brings  before  us  ! 
We  may  think  of  the  old  times  when  the 
first  colonists  settled  in  North  America,  when 
they  had  planted  their  log-wood  cabin  in 
the  little  clearing,  but  knew  that  the  dark 
woods  beyond  might  at  any  moment  hide  the 
fierce  Red  Indian.  Dreading  the  treachery 
of  the  savage,  how  often  the  anxious  settler 
would  listen  at  night  for  any  sound  of  danger, 
how  carefully  would  he  scan  the  shadowy 
edge  of  the  forest !  The  loaded  rifle  is  kept 
at  hand,  the  faithful  dog  unchained.  He  is 
perpetually  on  the  alert,  watchful  against 
the  unseen  but  stealthy  foe.  Or  the  word 
suggests  the  watchfulness  of  a  mother  over 
a  sick  infant :  how  unweariedly  she  hangs 
over  the  cradle,  how  quickly  she  rises  at  the 
slightest  sound  !  Or  we  may  illustrate  the 
word  by  the  mariner  who  paces  to  and  fro 
looking  forth  over  the  sea,  lest  his  vessel 
should  run  upon  some  half-hidden  and 
jagged  rock ;  or  the  fisherman's  wife  plac- 
ing her  little  taper  in  the  window  as  she 
counts  the  number  of  the  returning  boats. 

In  daily  life  how  important  is  watchfulness! 
A  sailing  yacht  was  cruising  about  the  en- 
trance of  the  English  Channel.  It  was  night, 
but  a  night  clear  from  mist  and  fog,  when 
the  crew  saw  a  huge  steamship  approaching. 
She  came  on  straight  in  their  direction  ;  but 
as  their  yacht  had  lights  hung  out  they  felt 
no  alarm,  though  the  yacht  could  not  get  out 
of  the  way.  But  still  closer  and  closer  came 
the  great  steamer.  In  terror  those  on  the 
yacht  raised  their  voices  and  shouted  with 
all  their  power.  There  was  evidently  no 
watch  kept  on  the  bow  of  the  large  vessel. 
Secure  in  her  own  strength,  she  swept 
onwards,  and  the  crew  of  the  little  pleasure- 
boat  foresaw  that  instant  death  was  immi- 
nent ;  the  monster  ship  would  crush  them 
down  and  pass  over  them  and  leave  no  trace 
behind.  But  at  the  very  last  moment,  by 
God's  mercy,  she  changed  her  course  slightly, 
and  passed  close  alongside  instead  of  over 


them,  and  they  could  note  by  the  many  lights 
in  the  cabins  how  merriment  and  occupa- 
tions had  caused  a  want  of  watchfulness 
which  nearly  destroyed  a  number  of  their 
fellow-men  ! — Dr.  Hardman. 

Watchfulness  constantly  needed. — No  num- 
ber of  false  alarms  cancels  the  duty  of 
watchfulness.  In  the  town  of  Amyclae,  in 
Italy,  false  reports  of  the  approach  of  the 
enemy  had  been  so  often  spread  that  a 
law  was  passed  forbidding  any  one  to  pay 
attention  to  them.  In  consequence  of  this, 
when  the  attack  was  really  imminent,  no 
one  felt  at  liberty  to  heed  the  warning  that 
was  given,  and  the  city  was  taken.  From 
this  circumstance  the  epithet  of  "Tacitae" 
(silent)  was  given  to  Amyclae. 

Watchfulness  —  how  important  to  the 
soldier !  In  the  Middle  Ages  a  town,  strongly 
fortified,  had  often  resisted  siege  or  capture, 
but  one  day  the  gate  was  thrown  open  to 
receive  a  train  of  waggons  loaded  with  hay 
and  corn.  One  of  them,  accidentally  as  it 
seemed,  for  some  trifling  cause,  stopped  under 
the  arch  of  the  gateway.  The  soldiers  on 
guard  observed  nothing  suspicious  in  the 
occurrence,  nor  marked  that  the  waggon 
had  so  stopped  that  neither  could  the  gate 
be  closed  nor  the  portcullis  lowered.  A 
moment  afterwards  the  loads  of  hay  were 
cast  aside,  and  bands  of  armed  men  leapt 
out  from  their  concealment  beneath  !  And 
thus  the  city  was  captured  for  lack  of 
watchfulness. 

A  Christian  asleep. — The  devil  held  a 
great  anniversary,  at  which  his  angels  and 
ministers  were  called  together  to  report  the 
result  of  their  several  missions.  "  I  let  loose 
the  wild  beasts  of  the  desert,"  said  one,  "  on 
a  caravan  of  Christians,  and  their  bones  are 
now  bleaching  on  the  sands."  "What  of 
that  1 "  said  the  arch-fiend  ;  "  their  souls  are 
all  saved."  "I  drove  the  east  wind,"  said 
another,  "against  a  ship  freighted  with 
Christians,  and  they  were  drowned  every 
one."  "  What  of  that  ? "  replied  he  again ; 
"  their  souls  were  all  saved."  Then  stood  up 
a  third,  and  he  said,  "  For  ten  years  I  tried 
to  get  a  single  Christian  asleep,  and  at  last 
I  succeeded,  and  left  him  so."  Then  the 
devil  shouted,  and  the  night  stars  of  hell 
sang  for  joy. 


487 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


CHAPTER    XIV. 
CRITICAL    AND    EXEGETICAL    NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Render :  After  two  days  was  the  Passover  and  the  Azuma  (or  Leavenless  Feast). 
The  Passover  was  the  lamb  slain  on  the  14th  Nisan  (Exod.  xii.  6-11) ;  the  Azuma  was  the 
festival  which  began  on  15th  Nisan,  and  lasted  seven  days  (Exod.  xii.  15-20). 

Vers.  3-9.  This  incident,  which  happened  on  the  evening  before  Palm  Sunday  (chap,  xi.), 
is  inserted  here  in  order  to  explain  the  circumstances  that  led  to  Christ's  betrayal.  It  is 
recorded  in  a  similar  connexion  by  both  Matthew  (xxvi.  6-13)  and  John  (xii.  1-8).  Another 
anointing  is  mentioned  in  Luke  vii.  36-50. 

Ver.  3.  A  woman.— See  John  xi.  2.  An  alabaster  box. — Omit  "  box."  Vases  or  phials  for 
holding  unguents  were  made  at  Alabastron  in  Egypt  out  of  a  stone  found  in  the  neighbouring 
mountains,  and  so  the  word  came  to  be  used  of  any  vessel  employed  for  a  purpose  of  that 
kind.  Spikenard. — Pure  nard.  Pliny  says  (Nat.  Hist.,  xii.  26)  that  the  nard  leaf,  especially 
the  best,  was  often  adulterated  with  a  very  common  herb. 

Vers.  4,  5.  This  indignant  murmuring  began  with  Judas  (John  xii.  4).  Three  hundred 
pence. — Equal  in  purchasing  power  to  £30  of  our  money — a  "  denarius  "  being  the  day's 
wage  of  a  labourer. 

Ver.  8.  Come  aforehand. — She  took  the  initiative  as  to  anointing,  etc.  The  word  occurs 
elsewhere  only  in  1  Cor.  xi.  21,  and  (passive)  Gal.  vi.  1. 

Ver.  10.  To  betray. — That  he  might  deliver  Him  to  them.  Perhaps  his  thought  was  :  "  The 
Master  Himself  declares  His  death  and  burial  are  at  hand.  He  has  said  over  and  over 
again  that  He  must  be  delivered  unto  the  chief  priests.  Why,  then,  should  not  I  win  their 
favour,  and  at  the  same  time  earn  some  money,  by  helping  them  to  apprehend  Him 
quietly  ?  " 

Ver.  12.  The  first  day,  etc. — 14th  Nisan — Thursday  in  Holy  Week.  The  previous  day  had 
been  spent  in  seclusion  at  Bethany,  which  "  was  reckoned  as  regards  religious  purposes 
part  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Rabbis,  and  the  lamb  might  be  eaten  there,  though  it  must  be 
killed  at  the  Temple  "  (Lightfoot,  Hor.  Heb.). 

Ver.  13.  Two  of  His  disciples. — Peter  and  John  (Luke  xxii.  8).  A  man  bearing,  etc. — It 
being  essential  to  Christ's  plan  that  He  should  not  be  arrested  before  His  celebration  of  the 
Passover,  He  did  not  divulge  to  His  apostles  until  the  last  moment  the  place  where  it  was 
to  be  held.  Probably  He  had  made  some  private  arrangement  with  a  trusty  disciple  living 
in  Jerusalem  to  send  a  man-servant  (instead  of  a  woman,  as  was  usual)  for  water  at  a 
particular  time  of  day.     Possibly  the  man-servant  was  also  a  disciple  and  in  the  secret. 

Ver.  14.  The  guest-chamber. — My  lodging-place  :  KaTaKv/xa,  rendered  "  inn  "  in  Luke  ii.  7. 

Ver.  15.  Furnished. — The  couches  for  reclining  on  set  in  order  and  spread  with  carpets. 
Prepared. — Ready  for  the  due  celebration  of  the  Passover,  so  far  as  the  room  was  concerned 
— every  particle  of  leaven  having  been  cleared  out.  There  make  ready. — By  procuring  the 
lamb,  the  unleavened  cakes,  the  cups  of  wine  and  water,  the  bitter  herbs,  and  the  sauce. 
Some  of  these  would  perhaps  be  provided  by  the  master  of  the  house,  but  there  is  great 
uncertainty  as  to  what  exactly  took  place. 

Ver.  16.  The  Passover.  —An  account  of  the  ritual  may  conveniently  be  inserted  here. 
(1)  Two  or  three  flat  cakes  of  unleavened  bread,  and  four  cups  of  red  wine  mixed  with  water, 
were  placed  before  the  master  of  the  house,  or  the  most  eminent  person  present,  who  was 
called  the  Celebrant  or  President.  (2)  All  present  having  reclined,  he  took  one  of  the  cups, 
known  as  the  "  Cup  of  Consecration,"  gave  thanks,  tasted  the  cup,  and  passed  it  round. 
(3)  Water  was  brought  in,  and  the  President  washed  his  hands  ceremonially.  (4)  There 
were  placed  on  the  table  the  bitter  herbs  (lettuce,  endive,  beet,  succory,  horehound),  the 
sauce  called  "Charoseth"  (made  of  dates,  raisins,  figs,  vinegar,  etc.,  pounded  and  mixed 
together),  and  the  Passover  lamb.  (5)  After  again  thanking  God  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth, 
the  President  took  a  portion  of  the  bitter  herbs  "  the  size  of  an  olive,"  dipped  it  in  the 
Charoseth  and  ate  it,  and  his  example  was  followed  by  the  rest.  (6)  The  second  cup  of  wine 
was  filled,  after  which  began  the  "  Haggadah  "  or  "  Shewing  forth  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  26).  A  child 
or  proselyte  inquired,  "  What  mean  ye  by  this  service  ?  "  (Exod.  xii.  26),  and  the  President 
answered  according  to  a  prescribed  formula.  The  first  part  of  the  "  Hallel "  (Ps.  cxiii.,  cxiv.) 
was  then  sung,  and  the  second  cup  solemnly  drunk.  (7)  The  President  again  washed  his 
hands  (the  rest  doing  so  also),  and  taking  two  of  the  unleavened  cakes,  broke  them,  gave 
thanks,  and  distributed  to  the  company.  Each,  on  receiving  his  portion,  wrapped  bitter 
herbs  round  it,  dipped  it  in  the  "  Charoseth,"  and  ate  it.  (8)  The  flesh  of  the  lamb  was 
then  eaten.  (9)  After  thanksgiving,  the  third  cup  ("  Cup  of  Blessing  ")  was  handed  round. 
(10)  Thanks  were  given  for  the  food  received  and  for  redemption  from  Egypt,  the  fourth 

488 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


cup  ("  Cup  of  Joy  ")  was  drunk,  the  second  part  of  the  "  Hallel "  (Ps.  cxv.-cxviii.)  was  sung, 
and  the  company  dispersed. 

Ver.  17.  In  the  evening.— After  sunset  on  Thursday — the  beginning  of  15th  Nisan — the 
proper  paschal  night. 

Ver.  18.  Sat. — Reclined  on  the  divans.  The  original  standing  posture  (Exod.  xii.  11)  had 
long  been  abandoned.  Render  last  part  of  verse :  One  out  of  you  (among  you,  but  not  of 
you)  will  deliver  Me — he  that  is  eating  with  Me. 

Ver.  21.  The  order  of  the  words  in  the  last  clause,  and  the  intrinsic  meaning  of  kclKov, 
incline  one  to  render  thus  :  An  excellent  thing  were  it  for  Him  (the  Son  of  Man)  if  there  had 
7iot  been  horn  that  man  (the  man  who,  while  an  apostle,  becomes  a  traitor) ;  and  the 
meaning  may  perhaps  be,  that  the  burden  pressing  on  Christ's  soul  would  have  been  infinitely 
easier  to  bear  had  His  apprehension  not  come  about  by  the  agency  of  His  own  familiar 
friend.  Earlier  in  the  verse  He  exclaims,  Alas  for  that  man  !  thinking,  apparently,  of  the 
self-reproach  that  would  overwhelm  Judas,  almost  the  moment  the  deed  was  done. 

Ver.  22.  Took  bread. — One  of  the  unleavened  cakes  lying  on  the  table.  Blessed.—  Spoke 
the  word  for  good  :  the  word  (\670s),  for  good  (e#).  So  in  the  Latin,  benedicimus  =  we  utter 
the  word  bene,  i.e.  bene  fat.  "  Cum  Deus  bene  dicit,  turn  bene  est :  cum  homo,  turn  ut  bene 
fiat"  See  the  profound  note  by  Prof.  T.  S.  Evans  on  1  Cor.  x.  16  in  the  Speaker's  Commentary. 
Eat. — Imported  from  Matt.  xxvi.  26,  where  genuine.  A  very  natural  addition,  as  of  course 
it  is  implied.  This  is  My  body. — The  copula  means  neither  "  represents  "  nor  "  symbolises," 
but  simply  is.  The  Lord  is  pleased  to  establish  the  most  intimate  relation  possible  between 
the  consecrated  elements  and  His  sacred  humanity.  The  faithful  communicant,  when  he 
receives  the  Eucharistic  bread  and  wine,  eats  the  flesh  and  drinks  the  blood  of  the  Son  of 
Man  (John  vi.  53-56).  It  ought  not  to  be  necessary  to  add  that  "  this  is  a  great  mystery," 
and  that  the  eating  and  drinking  are  purely  spiritual  acts— and,  because  spiritual,  therefore 
most  real  and  true. 

Ver.  23.  Given  thanks. — I.e.  for  etf  or  God's  good  gifts  of  bread  and  wine :  the  idea  of 
thanks  is  exhausted  in  the  x<*Pls-     So  Prof.  Evans  on  1  Cor.  xi.  24. 

Ver.  24.  Of  the  new  testament. — Omit  "  new,"  and  render :  of  the  covenant — i.e.  of  the 
arrangement  (Piad-qicri)  which  God  has  graciously  made  for  restoring  to  man  his  lost  inherit- 
ance. From  first  to  last  God  has  entertained  but  one  grand  scheme  of  mercy  to  our  fallen 
race ;  but  this  scheme,  when  our  Lord  spoke,  had  been  manifested  in  its  initial  stage  only 
(see  Exod.  xxiv.  4-8),  which  was  a  shadow  cast  before  of  the  great  reality  to  be  revealed 
in  due  time.  Since,  however,  the  Jews  had  mistaken  the  shadow  for  the  reality,  and  were 
for  the  most  part  content  to  offer  and  rest  in  material  sacrifices  which  could  never  take  away 
sins,  it  became  necessary  to  differentiate  the  true  plan  of  salvation  through  the  blood  of 
Christ  from  the  preparatory  sacrificial  system  of  Israel  which  merely  typified  it.  This  was 
done  by  terming  the  one  the  "  old  covenant,"  and  the  other  the  "  new."  See  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34  ; 
Luke  xxii.  20  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  25  ;  Heb.  ix.  15, 18-22,  xii.  24.  But  both  here  and  in  Matt.  xxvi.  28 
the  word  "new"  is  not  found.  Shed. — Being  shed:  Christ  was  there  and  then  offering  His 
orecious  blood  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  For  many.— In  behalf  of  many  :  vir{p  = 
huper,  over,  the  essential  idea  being  that  of  a  person  bending  over  another — in  New  Testa- 
ment never  in  a  physical,  always  in  a  moral  sense.  The  Redeemer  bent  His  mind  over 
many — even  the  whole  race  of  men — when  He  laid  down  His  life  to  effect  their  salvation 
(1  John  ii.  2). 

Ver.  25.  See  Rev.  xix.  9.  Kingdom  of  God. — With  the  announcement  of  the  kingdom's 
immanence  Christ's  ministry  began  (Mark  i.  15) ;  with  the  prophecy  of  that  kingdom's 
perfect  consummation  and  bliss  it  fitly  ends. 

Ver.  27.  An  hymn. — Second  part  of  Hallel  (Ps.  cxv.-cxviii.);  for  no  doubt  the  first  part 
(cxiii.,  cxiv.)  had  been  sung  in  its  usual  place  earlier  in  the  evening. 

Vers.  27-31.  See  R.V.  for  reading  and  rendering. 

Ver.  32.  Gethsemane. — I.e.  Oil-press.  The  traditional  site  is  a  garden  at  the  foot  of  the 
Mount  of  Olives  on  the  north-west,  where  still  are  to  be  seen  eight  olive  trees,  believed  to 
be  over  two  thousand  years  old. 

Ver.  33.  Sore  amazed. — Filled  with  consternation  at  the  thought  of  all  He  must  pass 
through  ere  He  reached  the  goal.  Very  he^vy. — Uncertain  whether  ddijfiovetv  is  derived 
from  Adrjfios,  "  away  from  home,"  or  &5r)u,  '  ititemily  "  :  in  either  case  it  expresses  the  yearning 
of  heart-sickness.  The  two  words  are  most  aptly  chosen  to  depict  the  feelings  of  one 
"surrounded  with  sorrow,"  as  Christ  Himself  describes  His  position  in  next  verse. 

Ver.  36.  Abba. — The  very  word  used  by  Christ.  Peculiar  to  Mark.  Take  away  this  cup 
from  Me. — His  soul  "exceeding  sorrowful  unto  death,"  Christ  feared  apparently  that  the 
agony  He  was  enduring  might  snap  asunder  the  thin  thread  of  His  life  there  and  then.  He 
therefore  prays  for  strength  to  reach  the  Cross,  there  to  complete  the  offering  of  Himself  as 
a  ransom  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  This  may  be  the  meaning  of  Heb.  v.  7.  Nevertheless 
not  what  I  will,  but  what  Thou  wilt.— The  sublime  self-sacrifice  of  the  preceding  clause 
is  intensified  by  this.    He  had  said  long  before,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  shall  draw  all  men 

489 


chap.  xiv.        B0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


unto  Me."  But  it  seemed,  in  the  garden,  as  if  He  were  not  to  be  lifted  up  on  the  Cross  after 
all — as  if  His  life-work  might  be  frustrated  at  the  very  last,  by  His  physical  strength  not 
holding  out  long  enough.  Even  to  this  He  resigns  Himself,  if  it  be  the  Father's  will.  See 
Expository  Times,  vol.  vi.,  No.  10,  pp.  433,  434. 

Ver.  41.  The  meaning  of  d7rex«  being  uncertain,  and  ihe  punctuation  being  equally 
undetermined,  Christ's  words  here  are  susceptible  of  very  different  interpretations  :  (1)  Sleep 
and  rest  for  the  time  that  remains  ;  he  (the  traitor)  is  far  away.  Then,  after  an  interval : 
The  hour  has  come,  etc.  (2)  Sleep  and  rest  for  the  time  that  remains.  Then,  after  an 
interval  :  Enough  !  the  hour  has  come,  etc.  (3)  Are  you  sleeping  and  resting  for  the  time 
that  remains  ?    Enough  !     The  hour  has  come,  etc. 

Ver.  48.  Thief — Robber,  or  bandit. 

Ver.  51.  A  linen  cloth. — A  sindon — either  a  garment  or  bed-covering  made  of  linen  or 
muslin  manufactured  in  Sind. 

Ver.  53.  With  him  were  assembled. — There  come  with  him,  or  There  come  together  unto  him. 

Ver.  54.  The  palace. — The  court  of  the  palace.     At  the  fire. — Beside  the  light  of  the  fire. 

Ver.  58.  Within  three  days. — After  three  days :  did.  For  similar  construction  see 
Mark  ii.  1  ;  Acts  xxiv.  17 ;  Gal.  ii.  1. 

Ver.  72.  When  he  thought  thereon. — A  good  rendering,  if  imfidk&v  means  having  cast  his 
mind  over  the  matter.  But,  as  this  verb  is  used  not  many  verses  back  (ver.  46)  of  a 
physical  action,  it  may  be  best  to  adopt  Theophylact's  explanation — having  cast  his  mantle 
over  his  head.  So  (of  recent  English  scholars)  Dean  Blakesley,  Prof.  Evans,  and 
Dr.  F.  Field — a  remarkable  consensus  of  independent  judgment  on  a  knotty  point. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—11. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxvi.  1-16 ;  Luke  xxii.  1-6 ;  John  xii.  1-8.) 

The  anointing  of  Christ's  body  to  the  burying. — I.  The  feast  and  the 
anointing. — "  Jesus,  six  days  before  the  Passover " — the  last  Passover  He 
was  to  celebrate  with  His  disciples  before  He  suffered — "came  to  Bethany, 
where  Lazarus  was,"  whom  He  had,  a  short  time  before,  "  raised  from 
the  dead."  "There" — "in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper" — "they  made 
Him  a  supper,"  at  which  were  present,  in  different  capacities,  all  three 
members  of  that  family  which  is  distinguished  above  all  others  as  "  the  family 
which  Jesus  loved."  "  Martha  served,"  i.e.  attended  to  the  preparation  and 
management  of  the  feast — an  employment  suited  to  her  character  and  abilities, 
and  deserving  of  praise  rather  than  blame  if  confined  within  the  bounds  of 
a  decent  hospitality,  and  a  proper  attention  to  the  comforts  of  the  guests. 
Lazarus,  the  dead-alive,  was  "  one  of  those  who  sat  at  table  with "  Jesus. 
Mary,  the  other  sister,  on  this  as  on  a  former  occasion  (Luke  x.  39),  is  found 
still  "  choosing  the  better  part "  :  for  which  she  draws  upon  herself,  as  before, 
the  censure  of  those  who  could  not  appreciate  her  conduct,  and  the  approbation 
of  her  Divine  Lord.  This  time  Mary,  "  having  an  alabaster  box  of  ointment 
of  spikenard  very  precious,  brake  the  box,  and  poured  it  on  His  head,"  anointed 
also  His  feet,  wiping  them  with  her  hair — an  action  which,  according  to  the 
habits  of  those  days,  expressed  the  highest  possible  respect  and  veneration  for 
the  Person  so  honoured.  And  not  that  Person  only,  but  the  whole  company, 
came  in  for  a  share  of  the  gratification  which  such  a  costly  preparation  of 
the  apothecary's  art  was  adapted  to  convey  to  the  senses ;  nay,  so  diffusive 
was  the  benefit,  that  "  the  house  was  filled  with  the  odour  of  the  ointment." 

II.  The  objection  made  by  Judas  and  others. — All  were  benefited ;  but  not 
all  were  pleased.  There  was  one  in  particular  whom  neither  the  honour  paid 
to  his  Master  nor  the  enjoyment  afforded  to  himself  could  restrain  from 
giving  vent  to  the  ill-humour  which  this  proceeding  had  excited  in  his  breast 
(John  xii.  4,  5) ;  and  his  specious  complaint  is  quickly  taken  up  by  others 
(Matt.  xxvi.  8,  9).  The  objection,  were  it  ever  so  valid  in  itself,  was  not  so  in 
the  mouth  of  Judas,  not  being  made  in  good  faith  (John  xii.  6).     Our  Lord 

490 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


and  His  disciples,  on  the  principle  that  "  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire," 
subsisted  on  the  contributions  of  the  charitably-disposed.  These  were  deposited 
in  a  box  like  that  described  in  2  Kings  xii.  9.  Our  Lord's  was  a  poor-box,  both 
as  receiving  the  money  contributed  for  the  support  of  such  poor  men  as 
Himself  and  His  immediate  followers,  and  also  because  distribution  was  made 
out  of  it  to  those  whose  wants  were  more  pressing  than  their  own  (John  xiii.  29). 
This  box  was  placed  in  the  custody  of  Judas,  our  Lord's  design  probably  being 
to  soothe  and  partially  gratify  his  mercenary  instincts,  and  thus  save  him  from 
falling  into  those  grosser  offences  of  dishonesty  and  treachery  which  he  afterwards 
committed.  But  so  deep-rooted  was  his  ruling  passion,  that  the  very  expedient 
which  was  intended  to  keep  him  out  of  temptation  only  served  to  lead  him 
into  it :  not  content  with  having  the  keeping  of  the  box,  he  also  purloined  its 
contents ;  and,  so  far  from  caring  for  the  poor,  actually  embezzled  the  funds 
set  apart  for  them. 

III.  The  vindication  of  Mary  by  our  Lord. — Judas,  when  he  made  this 
objection,  spoke  in  bad  faith,  and  therefore  deserved  no  answer.  But  as  there 
were  others  present,  who  may  have  sincerely  thought  that  here  was  an 
extravagant  outlay,  and  that  the  money  might  have  been  better  spent,  our 
Lord  vouchsafes  a  reply,  both  for  their  satisfaction,  and  for  the  instruction 
of  all  to  whom  this  gospel  should  come  (vers.  6-9).  1.  The  judgment  which 
had  been  passed  on  the  proceeding  was  equally  rash  and  uncharitable.  Hasty 
censure  is  always  to  be  avoided,  especially  in  the  presence  of  those  more 
competent  to  express  an  opinion.  If  Mary's  conduct  had  been  really  blamable, 
there  was  One  present  who  might  have  rebuked  her  with  authority.  But  He 
did  not.  After  that,  to  trouble  or  find  fault  with  her  was  to  cast  reflexions 
on  Him.  If  she  was  wrong  in  committing  the  act,  He  was  wrong  in  permitting 
it.  But  He  does  not  vindicate  Himself — that  was  unnecessary.  He  interferes 
solely  on  the  woman's  account.  "  Let  her  alone  ;  why  trouble  ye  her  ?  "  Muni- 
ficence like  hers,  even  if  it  were  misdirected,  should  rather  be  encouraged  than 
checked.  Such  examples  are  not  likely  to  be  generally  followed.  But  was  this 
woman's  liberality  misdirected  ?  Jesus  emphatically  declares  it  was  not.  "  She 
hath  wrought  a  good  work  on  Me."  The  cost  of  this  ointment  would  have 
procured  her  many  luxuries,  which  she  has  chosen  to  go  without,  in  order  that 
nothing  may  be  wanting  to  the  honour  and  gratification  of  her  Lord.  She  has  set 
an  example  of  self-denial  and  consecration  of  her  talents  to  the  service  of  religion, 
much  needed  in  a  world  where  "  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  which  are 
Jesus  Christ's."  2.  "  The  poor  "  having  been  mentioned,  Jesus  would  not  have 
it  supposed  for  a  moment  that  their  interests  were  with  Him  a  matter  of 
secondary  importance.  Therefore,  before  going  on  to  reveal  the  true  significance 
and  appropriateness  of  Mary's  action,  He  pauses  a  moment  to  shew  that  His 
approval  and  acceptance  of  her  offering  is  by  no  means  to  be  considered  a 
disparagement  of  the  proposed  alternative.  "  There  is  a  time,"  He  says,  "  for 
everything;  and  the  present  is  a  very  peculiar  time,  and  has  a  duty  which 
can  be  performed  at  no  other  time.  That  duty  is,  to  pay  the  last  honours  to 
the  person  of  your  dying  Master  and  Lord.  I  go ;  but  I  leave  the  poor  behind 
Me.  Do  them  good,  when  you  can  do  Me  no  more  good."  Or  rather,  "  Do  them 
good,  and  you  will  still  be  doing  Me  good"  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  3.  We  are  not 
to  understand,  by  the  words  "  She  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  My  body  to 
the  burying,"  that  Mary  was  aware  of  her  Lord's  imminent  death,  or  that  she 
entertained  any  expectation  of  it.  No  reason  can  be  assigned  why  she  alone, 
of  all  His  disciples,  should  have  been  able  to  penetrate  the  mystery  in  which 
everything  connected  with  His  death  and  passion  was,  up  to  that  time, 
enveloped.  Indeed,  had  she  foreseen  the  events  of  the  next  few  days,  she 
would  surely  have  kept  this  ointment  a  little  longer,  and  poured  it  upon  the 

491 


chap.  XIV.        H0M1LETIC  COMMENTAHY :    ST.  MARK. 


lifeless  clay,  instead  of  the  warm  flesh  and  blood,  of  her  beloved  Lord.  Jesus, 
therefore,  in  these  words  kindly  puts  a  construction  upon  her  action  of  which 
she  herself  had  no  idea,  taking  occasion,  at  the  same  time,  to  give  a  clearer 
intimation  of  coming  events  than  He  had  yet  done. 

IY.  The  purposes  for  which  this  incident  was  recorded. — 1.  First,  and 
specially,  as  a  just  tribute  of  honour  to  the  woman  herself  (ver.  9).  2.  Secondly, 
in  common  with  all  Scripture,  "for  our  learning."  (1)  Learn  hence  a  lesson 
of  generous  self-sacrifice  in  the  promotion  of  God's  honour  and  our  Master's 
cause.  In  such  a  cause  there  is  room  not  only  for  liberality,  but  also  for 
that  unstinted  profuseness  which  may,  now  and  then,  go  beyond  the  mark, 
and  require  to  be  restrained,  rather  than  stimulated,  by  those  whose  duty  it 
is  to  direct  it.  See  Exod.  xxxvi.  5,  6 ;  Acts  iv.  34-37 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  1-4. 
(2)  Remember  that  the  poor  are  Christ's  peculiar  legacy  to  His  Church.  Who 
would  not  feel  honoured  to  be  entrusted  with  such  a  charge  ?  Who  would  not 
be  anxious  to  acquit  himself,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  of  the  obligations  of 
it?  (3)  Since  we  have  not  our  Lord  Himself  always  with  us,  and  can  no 
longer  do  honour  to  His  person,  let  us  take  every  opportunity  of  shewing  our 
dutiful  respect  for  His  memory.  Mary  "  did  what  she  could."  It  was  not 
in  her  power  to  avert  the  Great  Sacrifice  which  was  foreordained  from  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  or  even  to  retard  it  for  a  single  day  ;  but  what 
she  did  was  not  the  less  "  a  good  work,"  nor  she  who  did  it  the  less  blessed 
in  her  deed.  Let  us  follow  her  example  as  best  we  may.  If  we  cannot  anoint 
our  Lord's  body  for  the  burying,  let  us  at  least  embalm  the  memory  of  His 
precious  death  and  passion  in  our  heart  of  hearts,  and  let  us  thankfully 
receive  those  holy  mysteries  in  which  He  is  pleased  to  convey  to  us  the  spiritual 
benefits  pertaining  thereto. 

Vers.  6-9.  Christ  honouring  loving  service. — Of  all  who  were  present,  no  one 
seems  to  have  taken  the  woman's  part  except  Jesus.  But  that  exception  made 
up  for  the  lack  of  all  else.  He  defended  her  from  their  attack  ;  He  vindicated 
the  wisdom  and  Tightness  of  her  deed.  But  He  did  more.  He  uttered  words 
revealing  His  appreciation,  and  securing  its  undying  honour. 

I.  Jesus  speaks  of  "  this  gospel." — Gospel  is  a  familiar  term,  but,  like  many 
other  familiar  words,  it  is  often  used  without  any  idea  as  to  what  it  means. 
To  many  the  term  expresses  the  summation  of  theology  with  all  its  abstractions 
and  metaphysics — a  subject  that,  as  regarded  by  them,  has  little  to  attract, 
and  as  little  to  profit.  To  others  the  gospel  means  religion,  and  religion,  as 
they  regard  it,  with  its  impossible  requirements  and  irksome  ordinances.  The 
gospel  is  simply  God's  spell,  i.e.  God's  story.  And  just  because  it  is  God's 
spell  it  is  a  good  spell,  the  spell  or  story  of  Him  who  is  pre-eminently  the  good. 
There  are  many  gospels — endless  varieties  of  good  tidings,  and  of  good  tidings 
of  great  joy.  Any  news  that  brings  gladness  to  the  heart,  any  intelligence 
from  near  or  far  that  relieves  from  fear  and  fills  the  mouth  with  laughter  or 
with  song  is  a  gospel — that  is,  it  is  good  news.  But  we  do  not  call  such  news  a 
gospel.  We  reserve  that  term  for  God's  news.  It  is  not  theology  or  religion, 
and  it  is  nothing  that  is  undesirable  or  hurtful ;  but  it  is  the  blissful  announce- 
ment that  Jesus  lived  and  died  and  rose  again  on  our  behalf.  It  is  the  good 
news  of  a  Divine  and  All-sufficient  Helper  for  us  who  were  without  strength. 
It  is  the  good  news  of  Christ  having  done,  in  the  grace  of  God,  on  our  behalf, 
not  only  what  we  could  not  do  for  ourselves,  but  all  that  was  needful  to  be  done 
in  order  to  our  salvation.  This  is  the  gospel  we  preach.  There  are  other  good 
things,  but  this  is  the  best. 

II.  Christ  intimates  that  this  gospel  is  to  be  preached  in  the  whole  world. — 
There  are  little  gospels  of  men,  human  inventions  sought  sometimes  to  be  put 

492 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


into  the  place  of  Cod's  gospel.  They  create  a  stir  for  a  little  while  and  within 
a  little  sphere,  but  it  is  only  for  a  little  while  and  within  a  little  sphere.  Our 
candles  burn  out,  but  the  sun  shines  on.  The  gospel,  however,  is  not  only  not 
to  die  out,  but  it  is  to  be  spread  abroad.  That  is  the  work  assigned  to  the 
redeemed  Church,  the  duty  to  which  it  is  specially  called.  Here  a  Church  may 
be  negligent ;  there  one  professing  himself  to  be  wise  may  urge  what  he  deems 
to  be  a  better  way  ;  yonder  another  may  venture  to  go  farther  and  condemn 
even  the  little  that  is  being  done  to  win  the  world  to  Christ ;  but  all  these  things 
do  not  alter  by  a  thousandth  part  the  reality  of  obligation,  do  not  recall  by  a 
shadow  the  "  marching  orders "  given  by  the  Leader  of  the  redeemed  hosts  of 
God.  Of  course  there  are  still  those  who  tell  us  that  charity  begins  at  home ; 
but  it  is  getting  to  be  discovered  that  they  very  truthfully  describe  their  own 
charity — it  begins  at  home,  and  it  stays  there,  for  it  is  a  kind  of  weak  invalid, 
not  strong  enough  by  any  means  to  venture  outside.  They  tell  us  that  zeal  for 
the  foreign  field  leads  to  neglect  of  the  home  field,  although,  from  all  Christendom, 
they  cannot  quote  one  exception  to  the  rule  that  as  the  missionary  spirit  grows 
in  any  Church  it  increases  its  home  power  and  labour.  The  early  Church 
did  not  first  do  all  that  could  be  done  at  home  before  thought  was  taken  for 
those  outside.  It  did  not  first  spend  all  that  it  needed  on  itself,  and  then  give 
the  remainder,  if  remainder  there  happened  to  be,  to  the  conquest  of  the  world. 
It  acted  in  a  different  spirit ;  for  it  acted  in  the  spirit  of  Him  who  desired  that 
this  great  gospel  of  love,  this  great  story  of  salvation,  should  be  spread  throughout 
the  whole  world. 

III.  Love  of  Christ  is  the  proof  and  test  of  discipleship. — The  religion  of 
Christ  is  distinguished  by  many  features  from  all  other  professed  religions,  but 
by  no  feature  more  than  this,  that  it  demands  love  for  its  Author.  It  is  true 
that  not  love  but  faith  is  the  condition  of  salvation.  But  then  faith  is  thus  set 
as  the  condition  only  that  love  may  be  reached.  There  cannot  be  love  till  there 
is  faith.  Christ  must  be  recognised,  seen  somewhat  as  He  is,  and  believed  in 
as  worthy  of  trust,  before  love  can  be  felt.  Hence  faith  must  precede  love — 
faith,  not  love,  must  be  the  condition  of  salvation.  But  if  faith  be  the 
condition  of  salvation,  love  is  largely  salvation  itself.  "Now  abideth  faith, 
hope,  charity,  these  three  ;  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  charity." 

IV.  The  reward  accorded  by  Christ  to  personal  devotion. — It  was  a  bold 
thing  for  any  one  to  promise.  It  shews  the  marvellous  self-consciousness  of 
Christ  that  He  pledged  remembrance  and  fame.  Such  language  on  the  lips  of 
any  mere  man  would  be  insufferable.  The  egotism  would  disgust ;  the  bombast 
would  anger.  But  Christ  was  no  mere  man.  In  the  consciousness  that  He 
was  more  than  man — that  in  Him  as  the  Divine  One  was  all  that  men  could 
need — He  bade  men  come  to  Him,  proclaimed  Himself  their  life  and  light,  and 
declared  that  without  Him  they  could  do  nothing.  And  so  here  He  pledges 
immortality  of  renown.  No  one  else  could  have  done  that.  Only  He  who  is 
Lord  of  all  and  the  Father  of  the  ages. — G.  Gladstone. 

Vers.  10,  11.  Judas  Iscariot. — There  are  three  motives  which  lead  men 
to  attach  themselves  to  a  new  movement.  Men  may  be  moved  either  by 
conviction,  or  by  contagious  enthusiasm,  or  by  self-interest.  To  this  last  class 
belonged  Judas. 

I.  In  a  double  sense  he  came  from  without. — He  came  from  a  distance ;  his 
nature  was  never  stirred  by  the  passing  sincerity  of  contagious  enthusiasm. 
He  threw  in  his  lot  with  the  followers  of  Christ  with  deliberation,  and  with 
faith,  only  so  far  as  calculation  is  faith.  He  did  believe  that  our  Lord  would 
achieve  a  great  success  ;  he  may  have  believed,  as  others  did,  though  with  more 
self-interested   speculativeness  than   others,  that    the   new   Prophet   was   the 

493 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


Messiah,  the  destined  King.  At  any  rate  the  venture  is  worth  some  risk. 
He  joins  the  society.  His  gifts  win  for  him  a  place  among  the  foremost. 
Whenever  good  fortune  smiles,  he  cannot  fail  to  share  in  it.  And  good  fortune 
seemed  to  smile.  The  great  works  of  Christ  and  His  mighty  and  enthralling 
words  drew  the  people ;  they  heard  Him  gladly.  The  impression  of  His 
greatness  deepened  and  spread.  Impression  grew  into  expectation.  Expectation 
became  impatient.  The  Prophet  Teacher  must  submit  to  the  people's  will. 
They  determined  to  take  Him  by  force  and  make  Him  a  king.  All  this  Judas 
must  have  perceived  ;  and  the  gladness  of  imminent  success  must  have  been 
his.  But  the  attitude  of  our  Lord  at  this  moment  must  have  surprised  many. 
Instead  of  courting  this  popular  movement,  He  retired  from  it.  He  withdrew 
Himself ;  and  His  withdrawal  chilled  the  growing  enthusiasm.  Changes  in 
the  popular  mood  are  readily  gauged  by  those  who  touch  the  world  on  its 
financial  side,  and  Judas'  position  gave  him  opportunity  of  noticing  the  first 
symptoms  of  waning  popularity.  He  felt  the  pulse  of  public  opinion,  and  he 
knew  when  it  began  to  beat  with  calmness  ;  he  could  calculate  that  calmness 
might  lapse  into  indifference.  A  little,  a  very  little  change  in  the  popular 
temper,  and  the  whole  situation  would  be  reversed  ;  and  Judas  would  find  that 
he  had  cast  in  his  lot  with  a  losing  and  not  with  a  winning  cause.  Now  what 
would  be  the  natural  conduct  of  a  person  without  any  moral  convictions  under 
such  circumstances  ?  He  must,  to  use  a  slang  expression,  hedge ;  so  that, 
whatever  happened,  he  would  be  safe  to  win.  And  this  is  precisely  what  Judas 
does.  Without  breaking  with  the  party  of  Christ,  he  opens  up  negotiations 
with  the  other  side.  It  is  the  precaution  of  worldly  wisdom.  Judas  is  the 
type  of  the  man  who  has  no  principle.  He  is  for  God  or  for  God's  enemies 
with  equal  readiness,  so  long  as  he  himself  is  safe. 

II.  Judas  did  not  fall  at  once  and  unwarned. — Characters  grow :  the  features 
which  attract  or  repel  us  are  products  of  will  and  circumstances  ;  for  character 
is  not  a  gift,  but  a  formation.  Judas  had  the  same  chances  of  better  things 
which  his  brother- apostles  had.  There  were  mixed  motives,  no  doubt,  in  the 
hearts  of  all.  The  comrades  of  Judas  had  weaknesses  and  worldly  desires, 
even  as  he  had ;  but  they  yielded  themselves  to  the  good  influence  which  was 
so  near  them.  But  in  Judas  the  self-interest  was  allowed  to  grow ;  he  fostered 
it  in  thought ;  he  nourished  it  by  habitual  embezzlements  of  the  funds  entrusted 
to  him.  Character  grows  from  habits  ;  and  he  adopted  bad  ones.  This  was 
not  all.  He  thrust  away  from  himself  the  helping  hand  which  Christ's  love 
extended  to  him.  From  the  earliest  time  to  the  latest  moment  Christ  sought 
to  save  the  traitor  from  himself.  Let  us  recall  Christ's  method.  He  did  not 
receive  recruits  without  caution.  He  sought  to  arm  with  weapons  against 
self-deception  those  who  volunteered  to  follow  Him.  Above  all  things,  He 
made  it  clear  that  riches  and  worldly  wealth  were  not  to  be  looked  for  by  those 
who  would  come  after  Him.  Not  unwarned  then  (we  may  well  conclude)  did 
Judas  attach  himself  to  Christ's  company.  There  were  after- warnings  also. 
Generally  the  tone  of  our  Lord's  teaching  respecting  worldliness  was  one  constant 
warning.  But  besides  this  there  were  utterances  of  our  Lord's  which,  in  the 
light  of  Judas'  character,  sound  like  direct  and  special  efforts  to  awake  him 
from  his  dream  of  self.  We  may,  for  example,  read  in  the  light  of  Judas' 
designs  the  parable  of  the  unjust  steward.  The  faithless  steward  may  secure 
for  himself  a  refuge  among  those  partners  of  his  guilt  whom  he  has  placed 
under  an  obligation — yes,  in  the  world,  in  earthly  habitations,  it  may  be  so ; 
but  such  methods  will  secure  no  welcome,  when  men  fail,  in  eternal  habitations. 
Or,  again,  the  parable  of  the  wedding  garment  had  its  message  for  the  traitor. 
It  was  one  thing  to  refuse  to  come  to  the  wedding ;  it  was  another  to  come, 
and  to  come  in  the  beggarly  array  of  one's  worldliness.     Still  more  emphatic 

494 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


is  the  warning  given  at  the  time  when  our  Lord  had  by  His  action  refused  the 
kingdom,  and  when  consequently  doubts  began  to  grow  strong  in  the  mind  of 
Judas.  "  Did  not  I  choose  you  the  twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  ? "  Must 
not  the  soul  of  Judas  have  whispered  to  itself,  "  It  is  I.  To  this  image  must 
I  come  if  I  allow  this  thing  to  gain  the  mastery  over  me  "  ?  Christ's  efforts 
to  save  His  disciple  sinking  into  such  an  abyss  of  baseness  did  not  end  here. 
As  the  crisis  draws  near,  He  puts  forth  fresh  and  final  attempts  to  save  him. 
"  Ye  are  not  all  clean,"  He  said,  at  the  time  when  it  was  not  yet  too  late  for 
the  traitor  to  cleanse  his  fault.  But  the  words  of  Christ  wake  no  softening 
thoughts  in  the  traitor's  mind.  One  more  effort  Christ  will  make.  At  the 
supper  table  He  quotes  the  words,  "  He  that  eateth  My  bread  hath  lifted  up  his 
heel  against  Me"  (John  xiii.  18).  Later  still  more  explicitly,  "One  of  you 
shall  betray  Me"  (John  xiii.  21).  Even  then  it  was  not  too  late.  The  last 
step  had  not  been  taken  by  Judas.  But,  as  with  a  man  sliding  down  a  steep 
place,  the  impetus  of  temptation  was  too  strong.  He  takes  the  food  from  the 
hand  of  Christ.  There  is  a  treachery  in  the  doing  so ;  the  Nemesis  of  base  acts 
is  further  baseness.  "  After  the  sop  Satan  entered  into  him  "  (John  xiii.  27). 
The  crisis  is  passed  at  that  moment.  He  will  not  turn  back  now.  "  That  thou 
doest,  do  quickly  "  (John  xiii.  27).  "  He  went  out  straightway ;  and  it  was 
night."  An  hour  later  his  treason  was  an  accomplished  fact.  The  inward 
story  of  Judas'  life  is  a  story  of  help  refused  and  warning  disregarded.  The 
tender  efforts  of  his  Lord  and  Master  to  save  him  are  put  away. 

III.  How  far  did  Judas  understand  these  efforts  of  Christ  on  his  behalf? — 
They  were  warnings  to  his  spirit ;  the  warnings  were  directed  primarily,  and 
at  first  exclusively,  to  the  moral  sense  of  the  man.  Christ  did  not  wish  Judas 
to  be  moved  merely  by  motives  of  personal  alarm,  and  under  their  influence 
alone  to  abandon  his  scheme.  He  sought  to  awaken  the  man's  moral  sense  against 
himself.  But  later  He  brings  to  bear  upon  Judas  the  force  of  the  less  worthy 
motive.  He  gives  the  hints  of  coming  betrayal.  But  Judas,  though  warned, 
has  dulled  his  soul  by  sin.  The  full  significance  of  all  that  our  Lord  spoke  does 
not  reach  him.  Only  at  the  very  last,  it  appears,  does  he  realise  that  he  may 
be  suspected,  and  even  to  the  moment  of  the  treacherous  kiss  he  hopes  that  it 
is  other  treachery  than  his  own  which  is  known  to  Christ.  Worldly  wisdom 
outwits  itself,  as  vaulting  ambition  overleaps  itself  and  falls  on  the  other  side. 
The  schemer  imagines  that  he  has  covered  the  whole  ground  with  his  eye  before 
he  lays  his  plans,  but  there  is  always  a  blind  spot  in  his  field  of  vision.  Indulging 
in  a  secret  sin,  and  judging  everything  by  the  standard  of  his  own  interests, 
the  sight  of  anything  which  conflicts  with  his  interests  exasperates  Judas. 
This  is  the  explanation  of  his  astonishing  and  rash  outburst  of  temper  at 
Bethany.  Although  he  veiled  his  real  meaning  by  some  words  about  the  poor, 
yet  the  irritation  which  he  displayed  might  have  provoked  suspicion.  His  speech 
was  imprudent.  It  may  be  that  he  has  aroused  suspicion.  This  being  so,  it 
is  high  time  that  he  should  secure  himself,  and  take  those  steps  which  will 
open  to  him  retreat  and  good  fortune  should  the  Prophet  of  Galilee  fail.  He 
takes  the  step  ;  he  makes  the  bargain  with  the  priests  ;  he  makes  one  fatal 
blunder — his  greedy  spirit  compels  him  to  accept  the  paltry  and  inadequate  sum 
of  money  which  was  offered.  But  it  is  not  part  of  his  policy  to  forsake  the 
discipleship  of  Christ.  It  is  still  possible  that  Christ  may  declare  Himself  with 
invincible  might,  and  seize  in  some  unexpected  way  the  crown  which  He  seems 
to  have  refused.  He  takes  his  place  with  the  rest  of  the  disciples.  He  will 
keep  up  the  appearance  of  friendliness  and  loyalty  to  the  last.  Yes,  even 
though  it  involves  the  crowning  baseness  of  the  hypocrite  kiss.  "  Judas, 
betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  Man  with  a  kiss  ?  "  (Luke  xxii.  48).  Judas  cannot 
doubt  now  that  his  treason  is  known.     And  yet,  these  other  words,  "  Friend, 

495 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


do  that  for  which  thou  art  come"  (Matt.  xxvi.  50);  what  might  they  mean? 
What  might  they  not  ?  His  Master  calls  him  friend,  and  seemingly  acquiesces 
in  what  has  been  done.  Can  it  be  that  his  Master  accepts  the  situation,  and 
sees  in  it  an  opportunity  for  some  splendid  manifestation  of  power  ?  Will  victory 
dawn  out  of  the  hour  of  disaster  ?  And  if  so,  may  not  he,  Judas,  who  devised 
this  thing,  yet  be  reckoned  as  an  instrument  of  the  triumph  ? 

IV.  All  illusions  are  soon  at  an  end. — His  Master  is  condemned.  All  worldly 
hopes  in  that  direction  have  disappeared.  He  has,  however,  the  other  side  to 
depend  on.  He  will  be  honoured  as  the  means  of  what  the  priestly  party  will 
consider  a  national  triumph.  He  visits  the  priests,  and,  with  an  affectation  of 
misgiving,  expresses  doubts  concerning  his  own  action.  Does  he  think  that 
they  will  pamper  and  coax  him,  laugh  at  his  misgivings,  and  belaud  him  as  a 
patriot  who  has  deserved  well  of  the  powers  that  be  ?  He  is  quickly  undeceived. 
In  the  eyes  of  the  priests  he  is  a  paid  spy,  and  nothing  more.  The  scales  fall 
from  his  eyes  now.  He  has  sacrificed  place,  credit,  character,  friends — and  for 
what  ?  Thirty  pieces  of  silver — of  what  possible  use  are  these  to  him  ?  He 
flings  down  the  price  of  blood.  He  goes  out  alone.  He  is  alone  indeed.  He 
has  no  way  to  turn.  He  thought  his  skill  had  kept  one  door  open  to  himself ; 
but  both  doors  are  closed  upon  him.  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  I  cannot  dig  :  to 
beg  I  am  ashamed."  Did  the  words  come  back  to  him  now  that  his  clever 
device  had  ended  so  disastrously  ?  Did  he  now  see  that  the  habitations  of 
worldly  men  were  cruel?  Did  he  see  that  worldly  policy,  however  much  it 
may  be  commended,  is  scorned  in  heaven  ?  Was  that  which  now,  by  his  own 
action,  seemed  unattainable  perceived  at  last  to  be  most  desirable  ?  Does  it 
dawn  upon  his  mind  now  that  there  is  a  nobler  victory  in  patience  and  weakness, 
even  when  it  suffers,  than  in  hard  and  unscrupulous  triumph  ?  Does  that 
spiritual  kingdom  seem  to  his  alienated  spirit  to  be  a  land  very  far  off  when 
now  at  length  he  begins  to  guess  at  the  beauty  of  its  King  ?  Struck  down 
by  the  heavy  blow  of  disappointment,  failure,  disaster,  he  realised  now  the 
measureless  spiritual  distance  which  he  had  placed  between  himself  and  his 
Lord.  He  was  as  a  man  placed  upon  a  thin  strip  of  coast,  hemmed  in  behind 
by  hard,  unscaleable  rocks,  and  fronting  the  inexorable  waves  of  the  incoming 
tide.  He  had  no  power  to  take  up  life  again  by  repentance,  and  to  seek  to 
undo  the  past  by  earnest  and  humble  work  for  others.  There  seemed  nothing 
for  it  but  to  lay  down  that  life  which  he  had  not  the  moral  earnestness  to  value 
nor  the  moral  courage  to  face. 

V.  Is  the  picture  of  Judas  an  unusual  one  ? — Is  it  only  once  in  a  century 
or  a  millennium  that  such  a  character  presents  itself  ?  A  man  possessed  of 
sagacity  and  shrewdness  learns  to  balance  probabilities  of  success  and  to  ignore 
the  consideration  of  principle.  Enthusiasm  for  right  is  inconvenient.  Fidelity 
to  conviction,  to  truth,  to  honour,  interferes  sadly  with  his  worldly  prospects. 
Conscience  is  a  troublesome  fellow-voyager.  It  is  better  that  it  should  be  put 
overboard.  The  only  purpose  of  life  is  success.  Is  the  picture  far  to  seek? 
Yet,  wherever  such  men  are  to  be  found,  they  are  the  incipient  Iscariots  of 
the  world.  Nay,  such  are  already  traitors  at  heart — traitors  to  themselves, 
to  mankind,  and  to  God.  Absorbing  devotion  to  self  disintegrates  the  character. 
In  the  flood  time  of  temptation  it  goes  to  pieces.  Absorbing  devotion  to  the 
other  One  than  self,  to  Him  who  alone  is  the  true  centre  of  life,  consolidates, 
strengthens,  invigorates  the  character.  Day  by  day  those  so  devoted  grow  to 
firmer  mould  and  nobler  stature.  They  are  in  Christ's  hands,  and  none  can 
pluck  them  thence.  They  fall  not;  they  are  founded  on  a  rock. — Bishop 
Boyd  Carpenter. 


496 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  conspiracy  of  the  lest  haply  there  should  be  a  tumult  of 
priests. — As  the  priests,  with  whatever  the  people."  But  at  the  very  time  at 
misgivings,  had  resolved  not  to  recog-  which  they  were  saying,  "  Not  till  after 
nise  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  it  was  in-  the  feast,"  Jesus  was  forewarning  His 
evitable  that  they  should  conspire  disciples  that  "  after  two  days,"  on  the 
against  Him.  Not  only  had  He  worsted  day  on  which  the  feast  began,  He 
them  in  every  controversy  in  which  would  be  delivered  up  and  crucified ! 
they  had  engaged  Him,  and  put  them  What,  then,  was  it  which  led  them  to 
to  shame  before  the  people  whom  they  abandon  their  resolution,  and  con- 
despised  but  courted — not  only  had  strained  them  to  carry  out  not  their 
He  proved  them  to  be  ignorant  of  the  own  counsel,  but  "the  determinate 
very  Scriptures  of  which  they  professed  foreknowledge  "  of  God  ?  Before  their 
to  hold  the  key :  He  had  also  de-  meeting  was  over,  as  we  learn  from 
nounced  them  as  disloyal  to  their  Luke,  an  event,  wholly  unexpected  by 
Master  in  heaven,  and  had  invoked  them,  had  happened,  which  held  out 
on  them  "  woes "  so  searching  and  to  them  the  hope  of  carrying  out  their 
scathing  as  to  pierce  even  their  hard  cruel  and  wicked  purpose  sooner  than 
hearts,  and  to  bring  a  blush  even  to  they  had  anticipated,  and  without  ex- 
their  brows  of  brass.  And  the  people  citing  the  tumult  which  they  dreaded, 
had  rallied  to  Him  ;  He  was  "  walking  Judas  Iscariot  had  at  last  made  up 
about "  in  the  Temple  as  if  it  belonged  his  mind  to  betray  the  Master  who 
to  Him  rather  than  to  them,  and  en-  had  disappointed  all  his  hopes  of  wealth 
chanting  the  ears  of  those  on  whom  and  distinction ;  and,  on  gaining  access 
they  had  always  securely  counted  to  to  them,  had  covenanted  to  deliver 
listen  with  unbounded  deference  and  Him  to  the  priests  secretly,  "  without 
admiration.  There  was  not,  in  fine,  tumult."  Providence  itself  would  seem, 
room  for  them  and  for  Him  ;  as  He  to  some  of  them,  to  have  come  to  their 
increased  they  must  decrease;  and  help,  although  in  the  questionable 
hence  they  met  with  a  common  deter-  shape  of  a  thief  and  a  traitor.  Hence 
mination  to  make  an  end  of  Him.  they  rescinded  their  former  resolution, 
Their  private  animosities  were  for-  and  entered  on  a  course  in  which  they 
gotten  in  the  presence  of  a  common  exactly  fulfilled  the  prediction  of  Jesus, 
danger ;  and  Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  After  two  days  He  was  delivered  up  to 
Herodians  and  Hebrews,  elders  and  them,  and  crucified. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 
scribes,  priests  and  laymen,  united  for 

a  time  against  Him  who  was  shaking  Vers.  3-9.  The  anointing  at  Bethany. 
the  very  foundations  of  their  authority  — 1.  In  Christ's  company  it  is  possible 
and  power.  They  met  at  the  house  to  have  the  extremes  of  character  and 
of  Caiaphas,  hard  by  the  Temple,  on  the  disposition.  The  self-denying,  loving 
evening  of  the  very  day  (Tuesday)  on  woman,  and  the  selfish  and  avaricious 
which  they  had  been  worsted  and  put  professing  disciple.  2.  Hypocrisy  will 
to  shame.  Of  the  course  of  their  dis-  always  uncloak  itself  to  sneer  at  deeds 
cussion  we  are  told  nothing ;  but  the  of  loving  sacrifice.  3.  In  Christ's  corn- 
two  decisions  at  which  they  arrived  pany  the  heart  lovingly  devoted  to 
are  recorded.  They  were  (1)  that  He  Him  must  be  prepared  for  bitter  trials, 
must  be  put  to  death  with  the  least  There  are  Judases  and  murmurers. 
possible  delay  ;  and  (2)  that  it  would  4.  Kight  doing,  based  on  simple,  loving 
not  be  safe  to  proceed  against  Him  faith  in  Jesus,  will  be  cherished  and 
until  the  immense  multitude  of  pilgrims  remembered  by  the  Master,  though 
had  left  Jerusalem  :  "  They  said  [they  despised  by  men. — J.  E.  Hargreaves. 
kept  saying],  Not  during  the  feast,         A    woman's    devotion    to    Christ — 

kk  497 


CHAP.   XIV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


I.  Displayed.—  1.  Upon  a  public  occa- 
sion. A  great  supper.  2.  In  time  of 
danger.  Near  crucifixion.  3.  After 
a  great  blessing.  Resurrection  of 
Lazarus.  4.  Beautiful  in  its  traits. 
(1)  Costly.  (2)  Modest.  (3)  Loving. 
(4)  Suitable.     (5)  Pleasant. 

II.  Condemned. — 1.  By  one  closely 
allied  to  Christ.  Profession  is  not 
piety.  2.  In  a  secular  spirit.  3.  In 
the  name  of  philanthropy.  4.  For  his 
own  benefit. 

III.  Defended. — 1.  Christ  prohibits 
interference  with  it.  2.  He  announces 
it  as  exactly  seasonable.  3.  He  accepts 
it  as  sublimely  useful.  She  did  more 
than  she  thought.  Goodness  immortal 
in  its  results. — B.  D.  Johns. 

Ver.  3.  Love  the  best  motive  for  work. 
— It  is  not  good  to  set  about  the  per- 
formance even  of  right  things  from 
second-rate  motives,  for  the  action  thus 
inspired  must  of  necessity  be  second- 
rate  also.  We  dwarf  our  best  actions, 
and  get  into  stereotyped  modes  of 
service,  which  tend  to  formalism,  simply 
because  we  do  not  work  from  personal 
love  to  the  living,  personal  Christ. 
See  how  Mary's  love  operated.  It 
would  not  let  her  be  content  with  simply 
doing  duty  and  acting  after  the  pre- 
cedent of  others.  Duty  is  very  good 
when  you  can  get  nothing  better,  but 
after  all  it  is  a  cold  and  somewhat 
stern  mistress.  He  who  works  from 
a  sense  of  duty  generally  seeks  to  get 
off  with  doing  as  little  as  he  can,  and 
will  not  undertake  anything  that  is 
not  prescribed.  But  he  who  works 
from  the  impulse  of  love  is  constantly 
trying  how  much  he  can  do  for  Jesus. 
Had  Mary  waited  for  a  precedent,  she 
had  never  done  this  action  which  so 
gladdened  the  Redeemer's  heart.  How 
much  of  the  Christian  effort  of  these 
days  is  mere  imitation !  Mary  had 
her  own  reasons  for  loving  the  Lord, 
and  she  took  her  own  way  of  shewing 
her  love.  So  it  ought  to  be  with  us. 
No  human  thing,  no  earthly  model,  no 
precedent,  should  shut  out  from  our 
view  the  Lord,  and  to  Him  everything 
ought  to  be  rendered.     This  will  give 

498 


inventiveness  and  originality  to  our 
piety,  so  that  the  offering  brought  by 
each  shall  have  as  much  individuality 
and  distinctiveness  about  it  as  there 
is  about  the  fragrance  of  the  lily 
or  the  perfume  of  the  violet. — 
W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. 

Yers.  4,  5.  Christian  liberality. — 
The  nearest  parallel  in  our  own  day 
is  where  lavish  expenditure  is  made 
upon  objects  which,  however  intimately 
connected  with  the  honour  of  religion, 
are  yet  not  strictly  necessary — such  as 
the  erection  of  new  churches  of  noble 
design  and  costly  construction,  or  the 
handsome  and  lavish  adorning  of  the  old. 
In  such  cases  there  is  always  some 
narrow-minded  person  ready  to  cry 
out,  "Why  this  waste  of  what  might 
have  been  given  to  the  poor  ? "  And 
though  we  do  not  desire  to  impute  to 
any  man  other  motives  than  those  he 
avows,  yet  this  we  may  safely  say  : 
that  such  objectors  are  not  generally 
observed  to  care  or  to  do  more  for 
the  poor  than  those  whom  they  con- 
demn. Such  an  outlay  as  Mary's 
was,  may,  it  is  true,  arise  from  mere 
ostentation ;  and  then  it  is  liable  to 
the  charge  not  only  of  extravagance, 
but  of  hypocrisy.  But  when  it  is 
prompted  by  love  unfeigned,  and  by 
a  sincere  desire  to  spare  no  expense 
in  doing  honour  to  the  Greatest  of 
Benefactors  and  the  Best  of  Priends, 
it  is  not  only  commendable  in  itself, 
but  it  will  always  be  found  united 
with  an  equally  unstinted  expenditure 
on  those  objects  which  are  strictly 
charitable.  So  true  it  is  that  "the 
liberal  man  deviseth  liberal  things " ; 
whereas  a  covetous  person  is  never 
without  an  excuse  for  saving  his  money, 
whether  the  Saviour's  person  is  to  be 
honoured  or  His  poor  to  be  fed. 

Profusion  is  not  necessarily  waste. — 
No  one  will  doubt  that  there  is  a  law 
of  utility,  a  law  of  economy,  which 
man  must  observe ;  but  we  must  also 
learn  that  there  are  spheres  of  motive 
and  duty  where  the  rigid  laws  of  utility 
will  not  apply  and  where  economy  is 
niggard.     God  teaches  this  in  creation, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


where  "Beauty  and  Utility  walked 
hand  in  hand."  He  teaches  it  in  His 
Holy  Word,  where  truth  is  unfolded 
to  us  clad  in  infinite  loveliness. — 
H.  M.  Jackson. 

All  is  not  waste  that  looks  like  waste. 
— Had  Mary  been  hindered  from  dis- 
charging herself  of  the  emotion  that 
swelled  within  her  and  panted  for  some 
escape,  then  there  would  have  been 
waste.  She  would  have  been  defrauded 
of  increase  in  love.  The  permitted 
expression  of  it  according  to  its  own 
impulse  nourished  and  fed  it,  and  left 
her  so  much  more  qualified  and  pro- 
vided to  be  a  blessing  to  the  poor.  To 
let  me  have  my  way  sometimes  in 
expending  freely  upon  a  sentiment,  a 
fine  or  tender  sentiment,  without 
reference  to  utility  or  thought  of  other 
and  more  serviceable  channels  in  which 
my  energy  might  flow — this  is  not 
waste,  inasmuch  as  it  helps  to  enlarge 
and  elevate  me,  and  thus  conduces  to 
render  me  more  capable  and  prepared 
to  do  good. — N.  R.  Wood. 

Vers.  6-9.  The  law  of  Christian 
devotion. — Our  Lord's  answer  goes  very 
deep  into  the  whole  subject  of  Christian 
consecration,  both  of  self  and  of  posses- 
sions. 1.  He  lays  down  first  the  great 
motive  of  it  all — "  she  hath  wrought 
a  good  work  on  Me."  The  absolute 
singleness  of  its  reference  to  Him  made 
it  "  good."  The  question  is  not,  "  To 
what  purpose  ? "  but  "  For  whose 
sake  ? "  Everything  done  from  the 
impulse  of  simple  love  to  Jesus  Christ 
is  "  good."  All  other  devotion  of 
powers  or  possessions  is  "waste."  2. 
Christ  next  strips  the  cavil  of  its 
disguise,  and  shews  its  insincerity. 
The  solicitude  for  the  poor  which  had 
seized  the  objectors  so  suddenly  would 
have  ample  opportunities  to  express 
itself.  That  "  whensoever  ye  will "  is 
a  sharp  prick  to  conscience,  and  is 
meant  to  disclose  the  insincerity  of  the 
care  which  is  so  occasional,  though  the 
misery  which  it  affects  to  pity  is  so 
continual.  True  benevolence  is  not  an 
intermittent  fountain,  but  a  perennial 
stream.     3.    Farther,  our  Lord  here 


lays  down  the  principle  that  circum- 
stances may  arise  when  our  supreme 
love  to  Him  not  only  warrants,  but 
demands,  the  temporary  neglect  of 
perpetual  and  ordinary  objects  of 
liberality,  in  order  to  consecrate  all 
our  resources  on  some  great  act,  which 
shall  worthily  express  our  love,  and 
can  only  be  done  once.  4.  "  She  hath 
done  what  she  could."  There  our  Lord 
lays  down  the  measure  of  acceptable 
consecration.  It  is  an  apology  or 
vindication  of  the  form  of  the  offering; 
but  it  is  a  stringent  demand  as  to  its 
amount.  If  Mary  had  had  half  a 
dozen  more  alabaster  vases,  which  she 
kept  unbroken,  would  she  have  been 
so  praised  ?  Capacity  regulates  obliga- 
tion, both  as  to  the  manner  and  the 
measure.  "  Power  to  its  last  particle 
is  duty."  5.  We  have  next  set  forth 
the  significance  which  our  Lord  puts 
into  the  service  which  He  accepts. 
"  She  is  come  aforehand  to  anoint  My 
body  to  the  burying."  Love  is  wiser 
than  it  knows,  and  the  purposes  which 
Christ  can  make  its  offerings  serve  are 
higher  and  sacreder  than  the  offerer's 
intent.  "  Lord,  when  saw  we  Thee — 
and  visited  Thee  ?  "  We — did  we  do 
that  ?  If  we  take  care  of  the  motive, 
which  is  our  end  of  the  deed,  He  will 
take  care  of  the  result,  which  is  His 
end.  6.  Finally,  we  have  Christ's 
promise  of  perpetuity  for  the  service 
which  He  accepts.  If  we  lay  our  best 
in  any  kind  at  Christ's  feet,  He  will 
take  our  poor  offerings  and  melt  them 
down  to  form  part  of  His  eternal 
crown. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  6.  God  enriched  by  man's  devo- 
tion.— Can  we,  in  reality,  add  any- 
thing to  God  ?  Can  we  ever  experience 
the  sweetness  of  doing  something  for 
Him  who  has  done  all  things  for  us  ? 
Yes ;  Jehovah  is  not  satisfied  with 
governing  men :  He  cannot  rest  until 
He  possesses  their  heart.  And  that 
heart  must  not  be  captured  :  it  can 
only  be  won  over,  and  so  bestowed. 
Thus  the  Creator  becomes  a  suitor  to 
His  creatures ;  beseeches  them  to 
understand  Him ;  is  enriched  by  their 

499 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


intelligence,  impoverished  by  their 
dulness ;  is  joyful  in  their  affection, 
saddened  at  their  refusal.  And  where 
is  this  better  witnessed  than  at  the 
supper  table  of  Bethany? — JB.  H. 
Alford. 

"Ver.  7.  The  problem  of  poverty,  and 
how  to  deal  with  it. — 1.  The  essential 
claim  which  this  class  of  mankind  has 
upon  the  common  brotherhood  is  not 
one  of  "  charity,"  but  is  founded  in 
religion  ;  it  is  not  a  humane  sentiment 
to  be  gratified,  but  a  law  of  Christianity 
to  be  obeyed.  2.  The  poor  may  be 
considered  in  the  light  of  Christ's 
legacy  to  His  Church  in  all  ages.  If 
there  were  no  poor  claiming  our 
sympathy  and  kindly  ministry,  what 
a  lack  there  had  been  in  the  training 
of  the  Christian  graces !  3.  We  are 
to  perform  this  high  and  sacred  duty 
in  testimony  of  our  love  to  Christ,  and 
in  gratitude  for  His  love  and  services 
in  our  behalf. — Homiletic  Review. 

The  poor  always  with  us. — If  we  are 

wise,  we  shall  be  thankful  for  our  own 

sakes  that  this  is  so.     The  mere  sight 

of   them   may   remind    us    that    this 

world  is  not  only  or  chiefly  for  the  rich 

and  prosperous,   that  "  the   poor  will 

never  cease  out  of  the  land,"  or  even 

cease    from    forming    the    numerical 

majority    of    those    who    are    to    be 

sustained   by   it.     The  sufferings  and 

distresses  of  the  poor,  and  even  their 

very  follies  and  vices,  may  teach  us  a 

wholesome  lesson,  if  we  remember  that 

they   are   men   of   like   passions   with 

ourselves,    and    that    we    possess   our 

rational  and  moral  nature  in  common 

with  the  most  miserable  and  degraded 

of  our   species.     But  we  shall  derive 

little    benefit   from    having   the   poor 

always   with    us   unless   we   learn   to 

consider  them  as  partakers  of  the  same 

spiritual  privileges  with  ourselves,  as 

fellow-members  of  the  body  of  Christ 

— that  body  in  which  there  is  neither 

rich  nor  poor,  bond  nor  free,  but  all 

are  one  in  Christ  Jesus.     If  we  thus 

view  our  poorer  brethren,  we  shall  feel 

an    interest    in    their    welfare,    both 


temporal  and  eternal,  which  no  other 
consideration  can  excite  in  us.  We 
shall  not  be  content  with  bestowing  a 
pittance  of  relief  upon  a  few  cases  of 
distress,  or  contributing  our  quota  to  a 
few  charitable  institutions.  "  Putting 
on,  as  the  elect  of  God,  bowels  of 
mercies,  kindness,  meekness,  long- 
suffering,"  we  shall  go  forth,  as 
ministering  angels,  into  a  world  of  sin 
and  misery,  carrying  a  healing  balm 
wherever  we  go.  We  shall  never  turn 
away  our  face  from  any  scene  of 
distress,  or  our  feet  from  the  path 
which  leads  to  it.  We  shall  never 
refuse  to  "  rejoice  with  them  that  do 
rejoice,"  or  to  "  weep  with  them  that 
weep."  Thus  soothing  and  relieving 
the  sorrows  of  others,  we  shall  forget 
our  own ;  whispering  comfort  and 
hope  to  the  wounded  spirit  of  our 
brother,  we  shall  lay  up  a  rich  store 
of  peace  and  consolation  within  our 
own  breast.  We  shall  experience  the 
truth  of  our  Lord's  saying,  "It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive  "  ; 
and  we  shall  "  know  that  we  have 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we 
love  the  brethren." 

Vers.  10,  11.  Greed  in  its  demoniac 
greatness. — 1.  A  child  of  perfected 
unbelief  as  to  Christ,  God,  and  man- 
kind. 2.  A  father  of  treachery,  which 
has  often  injured  the  saints.  3.  A 
companion  of  avarice,  envy,  anguish, 
audacity,  despair. — J.  P.  Lange,  D.D. 

Ver.  11.  The  joy  of  the  wicked  is  to 
have  success  in  their  crimes.  But 
what  joy  is  this?  It  is  the  joy  only 
of  a  moment,  which  will  be  changed 
into  everlasting  sorrow.  It  was  easy 
for  our  Blessed  Saviour  to  have  broken 
this  sacrilegious  and,  as  it  may  be 
called,  simoniacal  bargain  by  diverting 
this  opportunity,  which  depended  on 
Himself ;  but  it  was  necessary  that  sin 
should  be  instrumental  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  sin,  and  that  the  Author  of  life 
should  die  to  destroy  death  and  his 
empire. — P.  Quesnel, 


500 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.       chap.  xiv. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.  -Verses  12—31. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxvi.  17-35  ;  Luke  xxii.  7-38  ;  John  xiii.-xvii.) 

The  Christian  Passover. — It  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  of  the  sacred  times  and 
seasons  of  the  old  economy  we  have  nothing  left  but  the  Feast  of  the  Passover. 
The  perpetuation  of  that  feast  was  provided  for  and  announced  in  its  original 
institution  (Exod.  xii.  14).  On  the  night  when  Jesus  was  betrayed  He  ate  the 
Passover  with  His  disciples,  and  at  the  same  time  established  the  Holy  Communion 
as  its  successor.  He  thus  rescued  the  Passover  feast  from  among  the  vanishing 
shadows  of  the  ceremonial  economy,  and  gave  it  in  a  simpler  form  but  with 
unbroken  continuity  a  perpetual  place  among  the  ordinances  of  the  new 
dispensation. 

I.  The  original  Passover  feast  was  observed  at  night. — It  was  the  night 
of  the  14th  Nisan.  King  and  people  were  asleep,  unmindful  of  approaching 
danger.  But  the  Hebrews  were  awake ;  lights  glimmered  in  their  homes.  They 
had  been  forewarned  that  in  their  behalf  the  Lord  was  about  to  make  bare  His 
arm.  The  years  of  their  oppression  were  at  an  end.  Staff  in  hand  they  crossed 
the  threshold,  passed  along  the  streets  and  out  through  the  gates  into  the 
wilderness,  then  on  through  toil  and  danger  and  weariness  to  the  land  of  which 
the  Lord  had  said,  "  Behold,  I  will  give  it  you."  It  was  a  darker  night  than 
that  when  our  Lord  hung  dying  on  His  Cross.  At  high  noon  the  shadows 
closed  around  Him.  Earth  never  saw  so  deep  a  darkness,  nor  was  night 
ever  pierced  with  a  cry  so  dismal,  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama  sabachthani  ?  "  His  cry  of 
abandonment  was  the  signal  of  our  deliverance.  When  His  anguish  had  reached 
its  utmost,  we,  healed  by  His  stripes,  passed  forth  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God. 

II.  The  Passover  feast  was  kept  within-doors. — This  was  true  of  no  other  of 
the  great  festivals.  On  other  days  the  ties  of  kinship  might  be  ignored,  but  on 
that  day  blood  was  always  thicker  than  water.  It  was  a  time  for  praising  the 
Lord  because  He  hath  set  the  solitary  in  families.  The  father  presided ;  the 
children  hearkened  to  his  counsels  and  joined  him  in  gratitude  for  the  blessings 
of  the  roof -tree.  The  Holy  Communion  is  our  family  feast.  Here  the  Elder 
Brother  takes  our  hands  and  places  them  in  the  strong  grasp  of  the  Infinite 
One,  bidding  us  say  after  Him,  "  Abba,  Father."  We  here  commune  with  one 
another  in  the  household  of  faith  and  with  Him  who  is  the  God  and  Father  of 
us  all. 

III.  The  lamb  was  at  the  centre  of  the  paschal  feast. — It  must  be  a  lamb  of 
the  first  year  and  without  blemish.  The  four  days  previous  to  the  Passover 
were'  set  apart  for  careful  inspection.  The  lamb  was  placed  in  the  hands  of 
judicious  persons,  who  were  instructed  to  see  that  there  should  be  no  spot  nor 
blemish  in  it.  By  a  providential  coincidence  the  four  days  previous  to  our  Lord's 
crucifixion  were  days  of  peculiar  trial.  The  eyes  of  many  were  upon  Him  to 
discover  any  possible  spot  or  blemish.  And  when  the  preparation  was  over  He 
was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb, 
so  He  opened  not  His  mouth. 

IY.  The  blood  of  the  paschal  sacrifice  was  sprinkled  on  the  door-posts  and 
the  lintel. — It  was  not  enough  that  the  lamb  should  have  been  slain.  The  head 
of  the  household  must  arrange  for  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  where  the  destroying 
angel  might  see  it.  For  so  it  had  been  promised,  "  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will 
pass  over  you."  The  Rabbis  tell,  in  one  of  their  sacred  books,  of  a  sick  girl  who 
on  that  memorable  night  was  troubled  with  apprehension  lest  due  precautions 
had  not  been  taken.     She  called  her  father  to  her  couch,  saying,  "  Father,  I 

501 


chap.  xiv.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


greatly  fear  lest  the  blood  hath  not  been  sprinkled  on  the  lintels  of  the  door.  I 
pray  thee,  see  to  it."  He  laughed  at  her  fears,  but  at  her  persistent  entreaty 
he  went  and  looked,  and  lo,  his  servant  had  neglected  his  task.  The  basin 
and  the  branch  of  hyssop  were  speedily  brought,  the  blood  was  sprinkled,  and 
the  household  saved.  In  like  manner  the  merits  of  the  Saviour's  blood  are 
effective  only  for  such  as  appropriate  it.  Faith  is  the  condition  of  life.  Faith 
is  the  hyssop  branch  that  sprinkles  the  lintels  of  the  door.  The  night  is  dark, 
the  black-winged  angel  is  above  us ;  but  we  are  quite  secure  if  we  have  entrusted 
our  welfare  to  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God. 

V.  The  lamb  was  eaten  with  bitter  herbs  and  unleavened  bread. — The  bitter 
herbs  were  a  reminder  of  the  toil  and  weariness  of  Egypt.  The  unleavened 
bread  was  a  symbol  of  the  sinless  life.  The  two  together  set  forth  the  nature 
and  necessity  of  repentance.  For  repentance  is  on  the  one  side  sorrow  for  sin, 
and  on  the  other  an  abandonment  of  it.  At  the  Holy  Communion  we  remember 
with  sorrow  our  Lord's  passion  for  us  and  with  joy  His  breaking  of  our  bonds. 
In  memory  of  His  sacrifice  we  renew  in  this  sacramentwm  our  vows  of  devotion 
and  signify  our  abhorrence  of  and  departure  from  sin.  Wherefore  Paul  enjoins 
upon  us  to  purge  out  the  old  leaven  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8). 

VI.  The  children  of  Israel  ate  their  Passover  with  sandals  on  and  staff  in 
hand. — They  were  ready  for  the  signal  of  departure.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall 
thy  strength  be." — D.  J.  Burrell,  D.D. 

The  Holy  Eucharist. — It  is  part  of  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  that  His  gifts, 
in  nature  and  in  grace,  minister  to  distinct  and,  as  it  often  seems,  unconnected 
ends,  manifesting  thereby  the  more  His  own  unity  as  the  secret  cause  and 
power  of  all  things,  putting  itself  forward  in  varied  forms  and  divers  manners, 
yet  itself  the  one  cause  of  all  that  is.  The  element  which  is  the  image  of  our 
baptism  cleanses  alike  and  refreshes,  gives  health  and  nourishment  and  growth. 
And  if  in  nature,  much  more  in  the  gifts  of  grace.  For  therein  God,  not  by 
will  or  by  power  only,  but  by  Himself  and  the  effluence  of  His  Spirit,  is  the  life 
of  all  which  lives  through  Him.  It  is,  then,  according  to  the  analogy  of  His  other 
gifts  that  His  two  great  sacraments  have  in  themselves  manifold  gifts.  Baptism 
containeth  not  only  remission  of  sin,  actual  or  original,  but  maketh  members  of 
Christ,  children  of  God,  heirs  of  heaven,  hath  the  seal  and  earnest  of  the  Spirit, 
the  germ  of  spiritual  life  ;  the  Holy  Eucharist  imparteth  not  life  only,  spiritual 
strength,  and  oneness  with  Christ,  and  His  indwelling,  and  participation  of  Him, 
but,  in  its  degree,  remission  of  sins  also.  As  the  manna  is  said  to  have  "  con- 
tented every  man's  delight  and  agreed  to  every  taste,"  so  He,  the  Heavenly 
Manna,  becometh  to  every  man  what  he  needeth,  and  what  he  can  receive  ;  to 
the  penitent  perhaps  chiefly  remission  of  sins  and  continued  life,  to  those  who 
have  "  loved  Him  and  kept  His  word  "  His  own  transporting,  irradiating  presence, 
full  of  His  own  grace  and  life  and  love ;  yet  to  each  full  contentment,  because 
to  each  His  own  overflowing,  undeserved  goodness. 

I.  The  penitent's  joy,  then,  in  the  Holy  Eucharist  is  not  the  less  deep  because 
the  pardon  of  sins  is  not,  as  in  baptism,  its  direct  provision. — The  chief 
object  of  the  Holy  Eucharist,  as  conveyed  by  type  or  prophecy,  by  the  very 
elements  chosen,  or  by  the  words  of  our  Lord,  is  the  support  and  enlargement  of 
life,  and  that  in  Him.  In  type  the  tree  of  life  was  within  the  paradise  of  God, 
given  as  a  nourishment  of  immortality,  withheld  from  Adam  when  he  sinned : 
the  bread  and  wine  wherewith  Melchizedek  met  Abraham  were  to  refresh  the 
father  of  the  faithful,  the  weary  warrior  of  God  :  the  paschal  lamb  was  a 
commemorative  sacrifice ;  the  saving  blood  had  been  shed ;  it  was  to  be  eaten 
with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth,  and  with  bitter  herbs,  the  type 
of  mortification,  and  by  those  only  who  were  undefiled.     The  manna  was  given 

502 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv\ 


to  them  after  they  had  passed  the  Red  Sea,  the  image  of  cleansing  baptism,  and, 
as  He  Himself  interprets  it,  represented  Him  as  coming  down  from  heaven  to 
give  life  unto  the  world,  the  food  of  angels  and  the  holy  hosts  of  heaven ;  the 
shewbread  was  eaten  only  by  those  hallowed  to  the  priesthood  (as  the  whole 
Christian  people  has  in  this  sense  been  made  kings  and  priests),  and,  when  once 
given  to  David  and  those  that  were  with  him,  still  on  the  ground  that  the 
"vessels  of  the  young  men  were  holy"  (1  Sam.  xxi.  5).  In  verbal  prophecy 
it  is  foretold  under  the  images  of  the  very  elements,  and  so  of  strengthening  and 
overflowing  joy.  See  Prov.  ix.  5;  Ps.  xxii.  26,  xxiii.  5,  iv.  7,  civ.  15;  Isa. 
lv.  1  ;  Cant.  v.  1.  In  all  these  varied  symbols — strength,  renewed  life,  growth, 
refreshment,  gladness,  likeness  to  the  angels,  immortality — are  the  gifts  set  forth  ; 
they  are  gifts  as  to  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  placed  anew  in  the  paradise  of 
His  CJiurch,  admitted  to  His  sanctuary,  joying  in  His  presence,  growing  before 
Him,  filled  with  the  river  of  His  joy,  feasting  with  Him,  yea  Himself  feasting 
in  them,  as  in  them  He  hungereth.  Hitherto  there  is  no  allusion  to  sin  ;  it  is 
what  the  Church  should  be,  walking  in  the  brightness  of  His  light,  and  itself 
reflecting  that  brightness.  And  when  our  Lord  most  largely  and  directly  is 
setting  forth  the  fruits  of  eating  His  flesh  and  drinking  His  blood,  He  speaks 
throughout  of  one  gift — life ;  freedom  from  death,  life  through  Him,  through  His 
indwelling,  and  therefore  resurrection  from  the  dead  and  life  eternal.  See  John 
vi.  50,  51,  53,  54,  56,  57,  58.  No  one  can  observe  how  this  whole  discourse 
circleth  round  this  gift  of  life,  and  how  our  Lord,  with  unwearied  patience, 
bringeth  this  one  truth  before  us  in  so  many  different  forms,  without  feeling 
that  He  means  to  inculcate,  that  life  in  Him  is  His  chief  gift  in  His  Sacrament, 
and  to  make  a  reverent  longing  for  it  an  incentive  to  our  faith.  Yet  although 
life  in  Him  is  the  substance  of  His  whole  teaching,  the  teaching  itself  is  manifold. 
Our  Lord  inculcates  not  one  truth  only  in  varied  forms,  but  in  its  different 
bearings.  He  answers  not  the  strivings  of  the  Jews,  "  How  can  this  man  give 
us  His  flesh  to  eat  ? "  Such  an  "  How  can  these  things  be  ? "  He  never 
answereth  ;  and  we,  if  we  are  wise,  shall  never  ask  how  they  can  be  elements 
of  this  world  and  yet  His  very  body  and  blood.  But  how  they  give  life  to  us 
He  does  answer;  and  amid  this  apparent  uniformity  of  His  teaching  each 
separate  sentence  gives  us  a  portion  of  that  answer.  And  the  teaching  of  the 
whole,  as  far  as  such  as  we  may  grasp  it,  is  this :  That  He  is  the  living  bread 
because  He  came  down  from  heaven,  and  as  being  one  God  with  the  Father 
hath  life  in  Himself,  even  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  Himself ;  the  life  then 
which  He  is  He  imparted  to  that  flesh  which  He  took  into  Himself,  yea,  which 
He •  took  so  wholly  that  Holy  Scripture  says  He  became  it,  "the  Word  became 
flesh,"  and  since  it  is  thus  a  part  of  Himself,  "  Whoso  eateth  My  flesh,  and 
drinketh  My  blood  "  (He  Himself  says  the  amazing  words),  "  eateth  Me,"  and 
so  receiveth  into  Himself,  in  an  ineffable  manner,  his  Lord  Himself,  "  dwelleth  " 
(our  Lord  says)  "  in  Me,  and  I  in  Him,"  and  having  Christ  within  him,  not  only 
shall  he  have,  but  he  "hath"  already  "eternal  life,"  because  he  hath  Him  who 
is  "  the  only  true  God  and  eternal  life  " ;  and  so  Christ  "  will  raise  him  up  at 
the  last  day,"  because  he  hath  His  life  in  him.  Receiving  Him  into  this  very 
body,  they  who  are  His  receive  life,  which  shall  pass  over  to  our  very  decaying 
flesh  ;  they  have  within  them  Him  who  is  life  and  immortality  and  incorruption, 
to  cast  out  or  absorb  into  itself  our  natural  mortality  and  death  and  corruption, 
and  "  shall  live  for  ever,"  because  made  one  with  Him  who  alone  "  liveth  for 
evermore."  But  where,  one  may  feel,  is  there  here  any  place  for  the  sinner  ? 
Here  all  breathes  of  holy  life,  life  in  God,  the  life  of  God  imparted  to  man,  the 
indwelling  of  the  All-holy  and  Incarnate  Word,  the  presence  of  God  in  the  soul 
and  body,  incorruption  and  eternal  life,  through  His  holy  presence  and  union 
with  Him  who,  being  God,  is  life.     Yet  although  most  which  is  spoken  belongs 

503 


chap.  xiv.       UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


to  Christians,  as  belonging  already  to  the  household  of  saints  and  the  family  of 
heaven  and  the  communion  of  angels  and  unity  with  God,  still,  here  as  elsewhere 
in  the  New  Testament,  there  is  a  subordinate  and  subdued  notion  of  sin ;  and 
what  wraps  the  saint  already  in  the  third  heaven  may  yet  uphold  us  sinners, 
that  the  pit  shut  not  her  mouth  upon  us.  The  same  reality  of  the  Divine  gift 
makes  it  angels'  food  to  the  saint,  the  ransom  to  the  sinner.  And  both  because 
it  is  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  To  him  its  special  joy  is  that  it  is  his 
Redeemer's  very  broken  body,  it  is  His  blood,  which  was  shed  for  the  remission 
of  his  sins.  In  the  words  of  the  ancient  Church,  he  "  drinks  his  ransom,"  he 
eateth  that,  "the  very  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord,  the  only  sacrifice  for  sin," 
God  "poureth  out"  for  him  yet  "the  most  precious  blood  of  His  Only- 
Begotten  " ;  they  "  are  fed  from  the  Cross  of  the  Lord,  because  they  eat  His 
body  and  blood";  and  as  of  the  Jews  of  old,  even  those  who  had  been  the 
betrayers  and  murderers  of  their  Lord,  it  was  said,  "  The  blood,  which  in  their 
frenzy  they  shed,  believing  they  drank,"  so  of  the  true  penitent  it  may  be  said, 
whatever  may  have  been  his  sins,  so  he  could  repent,  awful  as  it  is  to  say,  the 
blood  he  indeed  despised,  and  profaned,  and  trampled  underfoot,  may  he,  when 
himself  humbled  in  the  dust,  drink,  and  therein  drink  his  salvation. 

II.  In  each  place  in  Holy  Scripture  where  the  doctrine  of  the  Eucharist  is 
taught,  there  is  at  least  some  indication  of  the  remission  of  sins. — Our  Lord, 
while  chiefly  speaking  of  Himself,  as  the  bread  of  life,  the  true  meat,  the  true 
drink,  His  indwelling,  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  life  everlasting,  still  says 
also,  "  The  bread  that  I  will  give  is  My  flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the 
world."  As  amid  the  apparent  identity  of  this  teaching  each  separate  oracle 
enounces  some  fresh  portion  of  the  whole  truth,  so  also  does  this  ;  that  His  flesh 
and  blood  in  the  Sacrament  shall  give  life,  not  only  because  they  are  the  flesh 
and  blood  of  the  Incarnate  Word,  who  is  life,  but  also  because  they  are  the 
very  flesh  and  blood  which  were  given  and  shed  for  the  life  of  the  world,  and  are 
given  to  those  for  whom  they  had  been  given.  This  is  said  yet  more  distinctly 
in  the  awful  words  whereby  He  consecrated  for  ever  elements  of  this  world  to 
be  His  body  and  blood.  "  This  is  My  body,  which  is  given  for  you  " ;  "  This  is 
My  body,  which  is  broken  for  you  "  ;  "  This  is  My  blood  of  the  new  testament, 
which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins "  ;  "  This  cup  is  the  new 
testament  in  My  blood,  which  is  shed  for  you."  He  saith  not,  "  which  shall 
be  given,"  "shall  be  broken,"  "shall  be  shed,"  but  "is  being  given,"  "being 
broken,"  "  being  shed  "  (SiSo/acvov,  kXw/xcvov,  ck^wo/x-cvov),  and  this  in  remarkable 
contrast  with  His  own  words,  when  speaking  of  that  same  gift,  as  yet  future, 
"  The  bread  which  I  will  give  is  My  flesh,  which  I  will  give  [ov  eyo>  Swcrw]  for 
the  life  of  the  world."  And  of  one  of  the  words  used  St.  Chrysostom  remarks 
how  it  could  not  be  said  of  the  Cross,  but  is  true  of  the  Holy  Eucharist.  "  For 
4  a  bone  of  Him,'  it  saith,  *  shall  not  be  broken.'  But  that  which  He  suffered 
not  on  the  Cross,  this  He  suffers  in  the  oblation  for  thy  sake,  and  submits  to  be 
broken  that  He  may  fill  all  men."  Hereby  He  seems  as  well  to  teach  us  that 
the  great  act  of  His  passion  then  began ;  then,  as  a  Priest,  did  He  through  the 
Eternal  Spirit  offer  Himself  without  spot  to  God ;  then  did  He  "  consecrate  " 
Himself,  before  He  was  by  wicked  hands  crucified  and  slain ;  and  all  which 
followed,  until  He  commended  His  Blessed  Spirit  to  the  hands  of  His  Heavenly 
Father,  was  one  protracted,  willing  suffering.  Then  did  He  begin  His  lonely 
journey,  where  there  was  none  to  help  or  uphold,  but  He  "  travelled  in  the 
greatness  of  His  strength  "  ;  then  did  He  begin  to  "  tread  the  winepress  alone," 
and  to  "  stain  all  His  raiment  "  ;  then  to  "  wash  the  garments  "  of  His  humanity 
"  with  "  the  "  wine  "  of  His  blood ;  and  therefore  does  the  blood  bedew  us  too  ; 
it  cleanses  us,  because  it  is  the  blood  shed  for  the  remission  of  our  sins.  There 
is,  accordingly,  an  entire  agreement  in  the  Eucharistic  liturgies  of  the  universal 

504 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK        chap.  xiv. 


Church,  in  prayer,  in  benediction,  in  declaration,  confessing  that  in  the  Holy 
Eucharist  there  is  forgiveness  of  sins  also.  Those  of  St  James  and  St.  Mark 
so  paraphrase  the  words  of  consecration  as  to  develop  the  sense  that  they  relate 
not  only  to  the  past  act  of  His  precious  bloodshedding  on  the  Cross,  but  to  the 
communication  of  that  blood  to  us  now.  "  This  is  My  body,  which  for  you  is 
broken  and  given  for  the  remission  of  sins."  "  This  is  My  blood  of  the  New 
Testament,  which  for  you  and  for  many  is  poured  out  and  given  for  the  remission 
of  sins."  Again,  the  liturgies  join  together,  manifoldly,  remission  of  sins  and 
life  eternal,  as  the  two  great  fruits  of  this  Sacrament.  Thus  in  the  prayer  for 
the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost  on  the  sacred  elements,  "  that  they  may  be  to  all 
who  partake  of  them  to  the  remission  of  sins,  and  to  life  eternal  "  ;  or  in  inter- 
cession, "  that  we  may  become  meet  to  be  partakers  of  Thy  holy  mysteries  to 
the  remission  of  sins  and  life  eternal "  ;  or  in  the  words  of  communicating,  "  I  give 
thee  the  precious  and  holy  and  undefiled  body  of  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ  for  the  remission  of  sins  and  life  eternal." 

III.  Since,  then,  this  Divine  Sacrament  has,  as  its  immediate  and  proper  end, 
union  with  Him  who  hath  taken  our  manhood  into  God,  and  the  infusion  into 
us  of  His  Spirit  and  life  and  immortality,  making  us  one  with  His  glorified 
humanity,  as  He  is  one  in  the  Godhead  with  the  Father,  and,  besides  this,  it  is 
ulteriorly  the  cleansing  of  our  sins,  the  refining  our  corruptions,  the  repairing 
of  our  decays,  what  must  be  the  loss  of  the  Church  of  the  latter  days,  in  which 
Communions  are  so  infrequent !  How  can  we  wonder  that  love  should  have 
waxed  cold,  corruptions  so  abound,  grievous  falls  have  been  among  our  youth 
almost  the  rule,  to  stand  upright  the  exception,  heathen  strictness  reproach 
Christian  laxity,  the  Divine  life  become  so  rare,  all  higher  instances  of  it  so  few 
and  faint,  when  "  the  stay  and  the  staff,"  the  strength  of  that  life  is  willingly 
forfeited  !  How  should  there  be  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  life,  amid  all  but  a 
month -long  fast  from  our  "  daily  bread  "  !  It  implies  a  life  so  different  from  this 
our  commonplace  ordinary  tenor,  a  life  so  above  this  world  as  knit  with  Him 
who  hath  overcome  the  world,  so  angelic  as  living  on  Him  who  is  angels'  food ; 
an  union  with  God  so  close,  that  we  cannot  mostly,  I  suppose,  imagine  to 
ourselves  how  we  could  daily  thus  be  in  heaven,  and  in  our  daily  business  here 
below—  -how  sanctify  our  daily  duties,  thoughts,  refreshment,  so  that  they  should 
be  tinged  with  the  hues  reflected  by  our  daily  heaven,  not  that  heavenly  gift  be 
dimmed  with  our  earthliness — how  our  souls  should  through  the  day  shine  with 
the  glory  of  that  ineffable  Presence  to  which  we  had  approached,  not  we  approach 
to  it  with  earth-dimmed  souls.  It  must  ever  be  so  ;  we  cannot  know  the  gift 
of  God  if  we  forfeit  it ;  we  must  cease  mostly  even  to  long  for  what  we  forego. 
We  lose  the  very  sense  to  understand  it. 

IV.  But,  however  we  may  see  that  our  present  decay  and  negligence  should 
not  continue,  restoration  must  not  be  rashly  compassed. — Sound  restoration 
must  be  the  gift  of  God,  to  be  sought  of  Him  in  humiliation,  in  prayer,  in 
mutual  forbearance  and  charity,  with  increased  strictness  of  life  and  more 
diligent  use  of  what  we  have.  He  who  alone  can  make  more  frequent  Com- 
munion a  blessing,  and  who  gave  such  strength  to  that  one  heavenly  meal, 
whereby  through  forty  days  and  forty  nights  of  pilgrimage  He  carried  Elijah  to 
His  presence  at  the  Mount  of  God,  can,  if  we  be  faithful  and  keep  His  gift 
which  we  receive,  give  such  abundant  strength  to  our  rarer  Communions,  that 
they  shall  carry  us  through  our  forty  years  of  trial  unto  His  own  Holy  Hill,  and 
the  vision  of  Himself  in  bliss.  Let  us  each  suspect  ourselves,  not  others ;  the 
backward  their  own  backwardness,  the  forward  their  own  eagerness ;  each 
habitually  interpret  well  the  other's  actions  and  motives ;  so,  while  we  each 
think  all  good  of  the  other,  may  we  all  together,  strengthened  by  the  same 
bread,  washed  by  the  same  blood,  be  led,  in  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  and  the  bond 

505 


cttAP.  xiv        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


of  peace  and  holiness  of  life,  to  that  ineffable  feast,  where  not,  as  now,  in 
mysteries,  but,  face  to  face,  we  shall  ever  see  God,  and  be  ever  filled  with  His 
goodness  and  His  love. — E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 

The  feelings  suited  to  our  last  Sacrament. — The  last  words  of  a  man  of  God,  at 
the  close  of  a  religious  solemnity,  are  regarded  with  peculiar  attention.  The 
parting  warnings,  counsels,  and  encouragements  of  such  a  man  have  counteracted 
the  influence  of  temptations  to  folly,  kept  the  mind  steadfast  in  seasons  of 
difficulty,  excited  to  the  most  arduous  duties,  and  reconciled  the  heart  to  the 
most  painful  separations.  Our  text  presents  to  us  the  last  words  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  at  the  observance  of  the  Holy  Communion — words  rich  in  admonition 
and  in  comfort — words  which  have  melted  many  a  heart  in  pious  affection, 
and  inspired  many  a  fearful  soul  with  the  most  blessed  hopes. 

I.  Consider  these  words  as  an  intimation  of  our  Lord's  speedy  departure,  and 
of  the  termination  of  all  the  present  intercourse  of  His  disciples  with  Him. — 
1.  Our  Blessed  Saviour  made  frequent  references  to  His  death  during  the  course 
of  His  life.  To  reconcile  His  disciples  to  an  event  so  necessary,  He  expatiates 
on  its  blessed  results,  and  generally  connects  with  it  consequences  of  the  most 
happy  description  both  to  Himself  and  to  them.  2.  The  intercourse  of  our 
Lord  with  His  disciples  had  been  of  the  most  affectionate  kind.  But  that 
intercourse  was  now  to  close;  from  the  circle  of  love  and  peace  in  which  He 
now  sat  He  was  about  to  be  removed  into  the  assembly  of  the  wicked,  and  to 
suffer  all  the  ignominy  and  pain  which  their  unrestrained  malice  could  inflict. 
3.  Mark  with  what  mild  resignation  our  Lord  contemplates  this  event.  What 
was  dear  to  Him  in  life  He  willingly  sacrificed  ;  what  was  painful  in  death  He 
cheerfully  bore.  4.  Our  Lord's  language  intimates  the  necessity  of  His  dying 
to  His  mediatorial  glory  and  to  the  future  happiness  of  His  people.  5.  Our 
Lord,  in  contemplating  this  as  His  last  participation  of  the  Holy  Sacrament 
with  them,  may  be  viewed  as  anticipating  the  close  of  all  that  worship  which 
was  suited  to  His  state  of  humiliation  and  suffering. 

II.  Consider  the  intimation  our  Lord  gives  of  a  reunion. — There  are  two 
considerations  which  stamp  a  peculiar  beauty  on  this  assurance.  The  termina- 
tion of  His  intercourse  with  them  was  to  be  closed  in  a  manner  no  way 
creditable  to  their  attachment  or  their  courage.  His  generous  heart  could 
forgive  their  weakness  and  cowardice,  and  friends  and  foes  were  the  objects  of 
a  charity  which  was  stronger  than  death.  I  may  add  that  this  promise  of 
reunion,  following  so  immediately  the  notice  of  His  separation,  shews,  in  a 
most  affecting  manner,  how  unwilling  He  is  that  His  people  should  mourn  in 
hopeless  grief,  and  how  ready  He  is  to  solace  and  to  encourage.  It  has  been 
much  disputed  to  what  place  or  scene  our  Lord  refers  as  that  of  reunion  with 
His  disciples.  Some  have  supposed  that  it  refers  to  His  renewed  intercourse 
with  them  after  His  resurrection ;  and  in  this  view  it  intimated  to  them  that 
the  death  of  their  Master,  to  which  they  looked  forward  with  so  much  terror, 
would  only  be  a  temporary  subjection  to  the  last  enemy,  and  that  He  would 
rise  in  heart  unchanged,  with  the  same  delight  in  their  society  and  the  same 
solicitude  for  their  welfare  as  ever.  But  as  it  appears  to  me  that  our  Lord 
meant  to  suggest  the  fullest  consolation,  it  seems  better  not  to  limit  the  passage 
to  an  intercourse  with  them  on  earth,  which  was  to  lie  in  a  few  meetings 
during  the  space  of  forty  days,  but  to  consider  it  as  pointing  to  the  communion 
of  the  world  of  glory.  1.  Considering  it  as  referring  to  the  heavenly  state, 
this  promise  suggests  that  the  reunion  of  the  disciples  with  their  Lord  is 
certain.  Men  have  often  spoken  of  meeting  their  friends  in  heaven  when 
parting  with  them  in  death ;  but  they  speak  of  a  place  whose  gates  they 
have  no  power  to  open,  whose  bliss  they  have  no  power  to  allot.     It  is  in 

506 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.       chap.  xiv. 


many  cases  the  language  of  ignorance  and  presumption,  which  reason  will  not 
sanction,  which  conscience  condemns  ;  but  the  Speaker  in  the  text  is  the  way, 
the  truth,  and  the  lif e.  Every  heart  is  in  His  hands,  every  lot  is  in  His  sentence, 
every  region  is  in  His  power,  and  all  futurity  is  in  His  eye.  2.  It  intimates 
that  this  reunion  should  be  in  the  most  glorious  place,  even  in  the  kingdom  of 
His  Father.  It  will  take  place  in  a  scene  where  naught  can  occur  either  to 
embitter  or  to  terminate  it.  In  that  kingdom  the  highest  honours  were  destined 
for  Himself ;  but  to  them,  poor  and  despised  as  they  now  were,  He  would 
grant  to  share  in  His  dignity,  and  to  rejoice  in  His  joy.  His  love  deemed  no 
abasement  too  low  for  Himself,  and  no  exaltation  too  high  for  them.  3.  It 
suggests  that,  when  thus  reunited,  their  intercourse  should  be  most  intimate 
and  affectionate.  In  His  intercourse  with  them  here  Judas  mingled,  though 
he  had  probably  gone  out  before  the  institution  of  the  Holy  Communion ;  but 
in  heaven  there  should  not  be  one  whose  heart  was  not  sincere  in  friendship, 
nor  one  whose  presence  should  in  the  least  check  the  freest  disclosure  of  the 
Redeemer's  feelings.  Here  too  the  idea  of  the  termination  of  this  intercourse 
afflicted  the  disciples ;  but  in  heaven  they  should  reign  in  life,  never  see  their 
Saviour's  countenance  less  complacent,  nor  behold  the  last  enemy  but  in  his 
final  destruction.  4.  It  intimates  that  in  this  reunion  they  should  enjoy 
together  the  purest  and  most  blissful  delights.  (1)  They  shall  enjoy  these 
delights  with  the  Saviour.  His  presence  shall  heighten  the  beauty  of  paradise, 
and  render  more  delicious  all  that  proceeds  from  its  living  fountains.  In  all 
the  tokens  of  their  Father's  complacency  He  shall  share,  and  in  all  their 
attainments  in  excellence  He  shall  be  the  pattern.  (2)  The  enjoyments  of  the 
heavenly  state  shall  be  the  same  in  kind  with  those  of  the  sanctuary  on  earth, 
however  they  may  differ  in  degree.  They  are  excited  by  the  same  objects 
and  directed  by  the  same  spirit.  (3)  These  enjoyments  in  heaven  shall,  like 
the  Holy  Communion  on  earth,  bear  a  direct  reference  to  the  Cross.  Every 
feeling  of  rapture  will  attest  its  efficacy,  every  song  of  the  redeemed  celebrate 
its  glory.     (4)  Their  reunion  with  one  another  is  intimated  in  this  assurance. 

III.  Consider  these  words  as  a  memento  intended  for  every  observance  of 
the  Holy  Communion. — At  one  Sacrament  or  another  these  words  will  be 
addressed  to  every  pious  communicant,  and  sooner  probably  to  the  most 
vigorous  and  healthy  than  he  is  aware  ;  for  "  we  are  strangers  before  God, 
and  sojourners,  as  were  all  our  fathers  :  our  days  on  the  earth  are  as  a  shadow, 
and  there  is  none  abiding."  It  would  be  proper  that  all  of  us  should  consider 
our  situation  in  this  light ;  for  none  can  promise  himself  another  solemnity  of 
this  nature,  and  none  will  improve  this  ordinance  properly  who  does  not  observe 
it  as  his  last  Sacrament.  1.  It  should  be  received  with  resignation.  (1)  It  is 
made  by  Him  who  hath  the  power  of  life  and  death,  and  whose  will  it  is  both 
impious  and  vain  to  resist.  (2)  The  kindness  of  the  manner  in  which  He 
intimates  this  is  another  reason  for  resignation.  It  is  with  the  voice  of 
invitation  and  persuasion  that  He  addresses  you,  rather  than  with  that  of 
authority.  (3)  You  cannot,  in  this  scene,  mark  the  resignation  of  your  Lord 
to  His  Father's  will,  nor  hear  Him  saying,  "The  cup  which  My  Father  giveth 
Me,  shall  I  not  drink  it  ?  "  and  be  disposed  to  rebel  against  the  determination 
of  His  providence.  2.  It  should  be  received  with  gratitude.  It  shews  His 
goodness  to  you  that  He  apprises  you  of  this  event,  that  you  may  use  all  the 
appointed  means  of  preparation  for  it.  He  wishes  to  save  you  from  the 
anxiety  and  horror  of  those  who  shall  be  awakened  from  the  sleep  of  security 
by  the  notice  of  His  approach.  3.  It  should  be  received  with  love.  Here  we 
see  Christ  submitting  to  death  to  redeem  us  from  destruction,  laying  open  to 
us  the  kindness  of  His  heart,  revealing  the  everlasting  felicity  for  which  He 
>hath  destined  us,  and  solacing  Himself  in  the  prospect  of  being  happy  with  us 

507 


chap.  xiv.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


for  ever.  That  heart  must  be  lost  to  all  proper  feeling  which  is  not  kindled 
into  affection  by  this  statement  of  the  Saviour.  It  ought  to  be  heard  with 
increasing  affection  to  our  Christian  brethren.  Aged  persons  have  been  some- 
times charged  with  implacability  of  temper,  with  brooding  over  the  injuries 
of  former  times,  and  instilling  their  prejudices  and  animosities  into  their 
descendants ;  but  let  your  conduct  shew  that  you  have  fully  imbibed  the  for- 
giving spirit  of  the  Cross,  and  that  every  malignant  feeling  is  extinguished 
within  you.  4.  It  should  be  received  with  a  determination  to  shew  increasing 
diligence  in  preparing  for  our  departure.  Nobler  objects  solicit  your  affections  ; 
let  them  now  engage  your  whole  heart.  5.  It  should  be  received  with  hope 
of  the  felicity  here  promised.  This  is  the  promise  of  Him  who  is  the  faithful 
witness,  and,  while  such  love  breathes  in  it,  you  cannot  question  His  intention 
to  fulfil  it.— H.  Bel/rage,  D.D. 

Yer.  26.  The  Hallel,  and  Jesus  singing. — The  best  scholarship  warrants  us  to 
assume  that  as  Psalms  cxiii.-cxviii.  formed  the  Hallel  or  hallelujah  songs 
of  praise  associated  with  the  Passover,  so  the  closing  hymn  sung  by  Jesus  and 
His  disciples  was  Psalm  cxviii.,  as  being  that  which  rounded  off  the  partaking 
of  the  fourth  festal  cup  ("  the  cup  of  salvation  "). 

I.  Psalm  cxviii.  opens  with  a  burst  of  hallelujahs  over  the  mercy  of  God. — 
The  sum  of  these  hallelujahs  is,  "0  praise  God  for  His  mercies  of  old  and 
now."  It  is  easy  to  understand  how  at  that  moment  thoughts  of  the  mercy 
of  God  would  gird  the  Redeemer  as  with  new  strength  to  go  forward  to  His 
appointed  work.  That  work  was  to  lay  open  the  channel  along  which  the 
mercy  of  God  should  flow  "  in  righteousness  "  toward  our  fallen  race.  So  that 
we  cannot  help  feeling  that  it  was  Divinely  ordered  that  this  jubilant  refrain 
should  come  in  as  part  of  the  Lord's  last  singing  on  earth.  You  remember  how 
similarly  this  was  the  keynote  of  the  dedication  of  the  first  Temple :  "  He  is 
good;  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  And  so  throughout.  The  great  heart 
of  the  world — as  of  a  sick,  weary  giant — ached  for  the  ultimate  manifestation 
of  this  mercy  ;  and  it  could  not  but  bring  to  the  Lord  a  strange  and  awful 
joy  that  now  at  long,  long  last  the  manifestation  was  about  to  be  made.  I 
covet  for  myself  and  you  all  deeper  insight  into  the  wonder  and  grace,  benedic- 
tion and  righteousness,  of  God's  ever -enduring  and  unchanging  mercy  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Grasping  it,  how  may  we  dare  to  go  to  the  guiltiest,  even  vilest,  and 
whisper,  "  God  loves  you."     Behold  the  proof  in  the  Cross,  in  the  Crucified  ! 

II.  The  suitableness  to  the  Lord's  circumstances  and  to  the  continuous 
dangers  of  His  Church  (vers.  5-13). — It  was  the  hour  and  power  of  darkness. 
Personally  the  shadow  of  Gethsemane  was  already  blackening  over  His  path. 
There  lay  before  Him  the  betrayal — the  arrest — the  forsaking — the  denial — 
the  arraigning — the  judgment — the  suborned  witnesses — the  insults — the 
mockery — the  loathsome  spitting — the  blows — the  scourging — the  condemnation 
— and,  beyond,  the  spectre  and  spectacle  of  the  ghastly  cross.  Is  it  not,  then, 
affecting  and  yet  again  sustaining  to  find  here  written  beforehand,  in  this  last 
psalm  of  the  Hallel,  great  words  of  strength  and  cheer  (vers.  5,  6) :  "  Out  of 
my  distress" — plumbless,  measureless  distress — "I  called  upon  the  Lord:  the 
Lord  answered  me,  and  set  me  in  a  large  place.  The  Lord  is  on  my  side; 
I  will  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  me."  We  can  again  conceive  the 
Lord  flinging  Himself  on  the  vast  breadth  of  these  exultant  words.  Amid  all 
dangers  and  tribulation  the  Church,  like  her  Divine  Head,  may  well  find  in 
this  portion  of  the  final  Hallel  psalm  inexhaustible  consolation.  Martin  Luther 
in  the  throes  of  the  Reformation  and  of  his  own  peril,  and  when  even  Catherine 
de  Bora  seemed  to  counsel  retreat  and  compliance,  turned  to  this  psalm  and 
"  waxed  valiant"  as  he  sang  (ver.  17),  "I  shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare 

508 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


the  works  of  the  Lord."  Let  us  not  fear.  The  waves  of  the  tempest-trampled 
sea  may  toss  to  and  fro  and  make  a  mighty  noise,  but  the  blue  heavens  beyond 
the  clouds  are  calm.  God  lives.  God  reigns.  The  once  pale  hand  grasps  the 
sceptre  of  the  universe,  and  sways  ebb  and  flow  of  event  and  circumstance  to 
His  "  everlasting  purpose." 

III.  The  joy  set  before  the  Redeemer  and  before  us  through  Him  (vers.  14-21). 
— Joy  is  the  sublimation  of  sorrow.  Sorrow  opens  the  door  for  joy  to  come  in. 
Sorrow  and  joy  are  strangely  akin,  or,  as  we  say  in  Scotland  and  old  English, 
"sib."  Sorrow  turns  into  joy — not  merely  is  followed  by  joy,  but  turns  into 
it.  So  was  it  with  the  disciples.  "  Your  sorrow  shall  be  turned  into  joy " — 
the  very  event  that  seemed  so  black  and  calamitous  becoming  the  centre  and 
source  of  everlasting  light.  Some  of  you,  doubtless,  have  seen  Dore's  great  picture 
of  "  Pilate's  Wife's  Dream."  Those  of  you  who  have  seen  it  will  remember 
that  whilst  the  horrid  cross  in  the  foreground  looms  up  large  and  hideous,  yet 
away  in  the  radiant  distance  that  same  cross  is  shewn  transformed  and  glorified, 
and  glorifying  all  that  it  shines  upon.  So  if  sorrow  is  deep,  I  think  it  leads 
to  and  issues  in  something  deeper  still,  and  that  is  joy.  Hence  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews,  by  one  of  those  deep  glances  into  the  heart  of  the  mystery 
of  things  that  make  this  letter  so  great,  we  have  all  this  summed  up  (xii.  2). 
Be  it  yours  and  mine,  like  our  Lord,  to  rest  on  this  Hallel  psalm  and  see  all 
around  us  demonstration,  that  the  Lord's  mighty  prayer  was  no  idle  breath 
like  "  idle  tears "  :  "  These  things  I  spake  in  the  world,  that  they  may  have 
My  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves"  (John  xvii.  13). 

IV.  The  great  Messianic  symbol  (vers.  22,  23). — As  we  turn  and  return 
on  the  favourite  texts  of  Jesus,  it  moves  and  melts  us  to  discover  how  they 
nearly  all  revolve  around  His  redemptive  work.  The  present  is  no  exception. 
For  we  all  carry  in  our  heart  of  hearts  the  "exceeding  great  and  precious 
promises  "  and  teaching  that  set  forth  the  Lord  Christ  as  a  "  stone."  Even 
the  glazing  eye  of  dying  Jacob  beheld  it  (Gen.  xlix.  24).  And  so  Isaiah  sang 
(xxviii.  16).  It  is  therefore  just  what  might  have  been  expected,  that  earlier 
the  Lord  turned  to  those  very  words  now  before  us,  and  uttered  from  them  some 
of  His  most  barbed  and  searching  words  to  rejecting  Israel.  And  as  we  to-day 
think  of  the  supernatural  structure — part  on  earth  and  part  in  heaven — that 
along  the  nineteen  centuries  has  been  raised  on  this  one  Stone,  do  we  not  thrill 
to  the  song  of  Christ's  last  singing,  and  exclaim,  "  This  is  from  the  Lord  :  it 
is  marvellous  in  our  eyes." 

V.  Finally,  in  vers.  25-29,  we  have  thanksgiving.  I  can  but  accentuate 
ver.  27  :  "  Bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even  unto  the  horns  of  the  altar." 
Once  more  to  the  vision  of  faith  this  sacrifice  has  been  set  forth — once  more 
it  has  been  our  privilege  by  the  memorial  symbols  appointed  to  remember  the 
Lord's  death  "  until  He  come."  And  so  as  thus  again  we  behold  "  the  Lamb 
of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  thanksgiving  may  fitly  close 
our  service  as  thanksgiving  closed  His,  as  perchance  falteringly  He  sang  for 
the  last  time  the  Hallel  of  His  own  sacrificial  death  :  "  He  filleth  our  mouths 
with  songs."  In  our  outlook  I  see  no  call  for  despondency,  I  discern  no  omens 
of  failure — I  catch  a  light  of  glory  on  the  mountain-tops  that  is  descending 
to  the  plains,  and  is  making  the  Cross  still  more  refulgent,  and  rallying  more 
and  more  myriads  of  tired  feet  and  wearier  hearts  to  the  great  broken  heart. 
Yea,  I  see  our  blood-ransomed  world  girdled  by  mightier  rings  than  Saturn's, 
swung  back  into  its  primal  orbit  of  unsullied  light ;  and  by-and-by  we  shall 
hear  reverberating  from  sea  to  sea  and  from  shore  to  shore  (Rev.  xi.  15). — 
A.  B.  Grosart,  D.D. 

Vers,   27-31.  Maris  need  of  Divine  support. — We  are  taught  by  our  holy 

509 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


religion  that  man's  ability  to  perform  the  appointed  duties  of  his  Christian 
calling  is  derived  from  the  co-operation  and  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  must  be  sought  by  humble  and  fervent  prayer.  Some,  however,  have 
entertained  doubts  on  the  subject,  in  consequence  of  their  inability  to  discri- 
minate between  the  natural  movements  of  their  minds  and  the  influences  of 
Divine  agency,  forgetting  that  we  are  required  not  to  give  account  of  the 
nature  or  extent  of  the  assistance  vouchsafed  from  above,  but  only  to  receive 
it  thankfully  and  to  use  it  diligently.  Others  have  questioned  the  existence 
of  such  spiritual  aid,  because  not  conscious  of  their  own  need  of  it.  To  them 
this  discourse  is  addressed. 

I.  The  circumstances  connected  with  the  fall  of  St.  Peter 1.  If  ever  an 

unassisted  mortal  might  have  been  expected  to  stand  by  his  own  strength, 
it  was  Peter — the  Rock-man.  The  instructions  he  had  received,  the  miracles 
he  had  witnessed,  the  variety  of  motives  with  which  his  intercourse  with  Christ 
must  have  supplied  him,  might  have  been  considered  almost  as  an  equivalent 
for  inspiration.  Yet  he  fell.  Betrayed  by  ignorance  of  his  own  heart  and 
presumptuous  confidence  in  his  own  resolution,  he  caused  himself  to  be  recorded 
for  an  everlasting  memorial  of  human  weakness  and  frailty.  2.  The  Master, 
as  the  time  of  His  betrayal  approached,  with  a  view  doubtless  of  consoling 
His  disciples  under  their  coming  disgrace,  gave  them  a  previous  intimation  of 
it  in  the  kindest  and  most  soothing  terms  (vers.  27,  28).  The  effect  of  this 
announcement  upon  the  others  is  not  recorded.  Perhaps  conscious  of  their  own 
weakness,  they  remained  silent ;  or  perhaps,  while  inwardly  trusting  that  they 
would  be  found  ready  for  any  emergency,  they  did  not  presume  to  express  that 
confidence.  Peter  alone  ventured  to  proclaim  his  imaginary  fortitude  (ver.  29). 
Christ  thereupon  revealed  a  lower  depth  even  than  desertion  to  which  Peter 
would  descend  (ver.  30).  Such  seeming  distrust  of  the  sincerity  of  his  attach- 
ment drew  from  the  warm-hearted  disciple  a  vehement  protest  (ver.  31).  But 
in  the  hour  of  trial,  how  did  he  behave  ?  Whence  that  equivocating  answer, 
conveying  falsehood  under  its  most  subtle  guise  (ver.  68)  ?  Whence  that  second 
denial  (ver.  70)  ?  Whence  that  cursing  and  swearing  with  which  the  third 
accusation  induced  him  to  accompany  the  repetition  of  his  assertion  (ver.  71)? 
Alas  !  human  nature  must  bear  the  shame  of  these  reiterated  falsehoods  and 
blasphemies.  Though  selected  for  the  apostleship,  Peter  yet  remained 
dependent  only  on  mortal  resources,  and  in  the  hour  of  trial  they  proved  utterly 
inadequate. 

II.  The  admonition  to  be  derived  from  St.  Peter's  sad  fall. — 1.  Is  there  to 
be  found  a  man  who,  in  face  of  such  an  example,  dares  to  refuse  the  proffered 
aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  encounter  life's  conflict  in  his  own  unaided 
strength?  Let  him  attend  to  an  exposition  of  the  delusion  under  which  he 
labours.  (1)  Such  a  man  may  have  persuaded  himself  that  his  reliance  on 
his  own  strength  is  not  the  effect  of  presumption,  but  only  of  a  fervent  wish 
and  sincere  resolution  to  tread  the  path  of  holiness.  But  such  we  know  was 
equally  the  disposition  of  Peter's  mind.  On  his  first  introduction  to  our  notice 
we  are  even  struck  with  his  exceeding  humility  and  self-abasement  (Luke  v.  8) ; 
and  the  same  meek  and  modest  distrust  of  himself  is  again  evinced  only  a  few 
hours  before  his  fall  (John  xiii.  6-9).  (2)  The  self-confident  man  may  imagine 
that  there  was  a  perverseness  in  the  character  of  Peter  from  which  he  is 
himself  free.  But  the  Gospel  history  lends  no  countenance  to  such  a  theory. 
On  more  than  one  occasion  the  extreme  openness  and  warmth  of  his  disposition 
led  Peter  to  so  unreserved  a  discovery  of  the  opinions  and  prejudices  of  his 
heart  as  exposed  him  to  sharp  reproof  (Matt.  xvi.  23;  John  xviii.  11).  Yet 
we  find  that  he  was  ever  submissive  to  the  correction  and  ever  obedient  to  the 
direction  of  his  Master.     (3)  A  man  may  flatter  himself  that  he  possesses  a 

510 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


firmness,  an  energy,  and  a  zeal  which  were  wanting  in  Peter.  But  what  reason 
has  he  for  thinking  so?  He  surely  must  have  had  no  inconsiderable  degree 
of  firmness  who  merited  and  received  from  Christ  the  name  "  Cephas " ;  and 
he  certainly  could  not  be  accused  of  want  of  energy  and  zeal  who,  when  his 
Lord  was  arrested,  instantly  drew  sword  in  His  defence,  and  wielded  it  so 
effectually  as  to  incur  the  displeasure  of  Him  for  whom  he  fought !  2.  How, 
then,  came  Peter's  resolution  to  miscarry  in  the  scene  of  his  Master's  dire 
extremity  ?  The  reason  seems  to  be  this :  he  had  grounded  the  execution  of 
that  resolution  upon  a  sudden  feeling  of  immoderate  self-confidence, — nothing 
doubting  but  his  will  was  in  his  own  power,  whether  God's  grace  assisted  him 
or  not ;  fully  satisfied  that  what  he  had  courage  to  resolve  so  honestly  he  had 
likewise  ability  to  perform.  He  had  not  sufficiently  considered  that  He  who 
forewarned  him  of  the  failure  of  his  resolution  was  the  Searcher  of  hearts,  and 
needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man,  for  He  knew  what  was  in  man — 
and  what  was  not.  Had  he  only  reflected  on  the  Master's  own  declaration, 
"  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing,"  the  empty  boast  would  have  died  away  upon 
his  lips,  and  given  place  to  a  humble  petition  for  Divine  assistance. 

III.  The  need  of  prayer  to  ensure  preservation  from  a  like  fall. — In 
contemplating  the  failure  of  a  man  who  seems  to  have  possessed  all  the  elements 
of  moral  strength,  and  all  the  qualities  requisite  for  a  life  of  consistent  integrity 
and  undeviating  holiness,  are  we  not  irresistibly  led  to  the  conclusion  that  our 
natural  powers  are  insufficient  for  the  work  which  we  have  to  do,  and  that 
consequently  an  appeal  must  be  made  to  heaven  for  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need  ?  If  we  reach  this  conclusion  by  a  comparison  of  ourselves  with  St.  Peter 
in  those  faculties  which  we  may  be  supposed  to  possess  in  common  with  him, 
must  not  the  conviction  of  our  insufficiency  be  increased  tenfold,  when  we  reflect 
that  he  must  have  had  many  opportunities  and  incentives  to  perseverance 
which  we  naturally  cannot  have  ?  Yet  he  fell !  His  f amiliar  association  with 
Christ — hearing  His  words,  witnessing  His  actions,  and  consequently  receiving 
continual  accessions  of  information  and  continual  confirmations  of  his  faith — 
must  necessarily  have  enlarged  his  understanding  and  strengthened  his 
judgment.  Yet  he  fell !  Who,  then,  at  the  distance  at  which  we  are  placed 
by  nature  from  intercourse  with  Christ,  can  possibly  hope  to  stand  alone  ? 
Who  that  sees  an  apostle  vanquished  will  dare  to  go  forth  to  the  battle  of 
life  unaided  by  that  Divine  Spirit  "  without  whom  nothing  is  strong,  nothing 
is  holy  "  ? 

Yers.  29-31.  How  best  to  promote  the  accomplishment  of  ov/r  good  resolutions. — 
Perhaps  it  is  not  taking  for  granted  too  much  to  suppose  that  few  Christians 
have  come  to  a  due  conviction  of  their  own  sinful  weakness  and  infirmity  of 
purpose  without  having  themselves  so  fallen  under  some  trying  occasion  or 
temptation  as  afterwards  to  bewail  from  the  heart  their  own  irresolution,  and, 
like  Peter,  to  go  out  and  weep  bitterly.  For  however  strong  the  mind,  however 
sound  the  faith,  and  however  fixed  and  confirmed  by  habit  the  religious  principles, 
there  are  occasions  when  the  Christian's  armour  seems  to  stand  him  in  little 
stead.  He  appears  taken  by  surprise, — either  his  situation  is  new  to  him,  or  the 
allurement  unusually  great,  or  the  opportunity  too  auspicious,  or  the  alterna- 
tive attended  by  great  dangers,  or  the  advantage  of  compliance  sure  and 
important,  or  the  favourable  concurrence  of  circumstances  not  likely  to  occur 
again.  One  or  other  or  even  all  of  these  considerations  perhaps  prompts  him 
to  decide  quickly ;  and,  alas !  to  determine  wrongly.  He  falls,  therefore, 
because  he  never  contemplated  such  a  trial  of  his  strength;  or  having  con- 
templated it,  thought  himself  quite  safe.  But  how,  it  may  be  asked,  is  such 
success  to  our  best  purposes  and  resolves  to  be  secured,  that  we  may  be,  as 

511 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


much  as  possible,  prepared  for  every  temptation — that  we  may,  as  far  as 
human  infirmity  will  permit,  prevent  "  sin  from  getting  dominion  over  us " — 
that  we  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,  and,  having  done  all,  "  to 
stand  "  ? 

I.  To  give  stability  to  our  good  resolutions  we  must  be  convinced  of  our 
own  weakness  as  well  as  wickedness. — No  man  can  be  ignorant  of  his 
besetting  sin — his  peculiar  bias  towards  some  one  vice,  temper,  or  failing ;  and 
whatever  it  may  be,  to  that  he  should  principally  direct  his  attention  in  forming 
his  resolves.  For  without  having  made  this  part  of  his  moral  nature  his 
especial  study,  without  understanding  clearly  what  little  reliance  he  can  place 
upon  himself,  in  the  case  of  allurement  and  temptation  addressed  to  this  his 
prevailing  sin,  his  most  deliberate  purpose  will  avail  him  nothing.  He  will 
seek  occasions  and  places  and  persons  from  which  he  never  yet  escaped 
without  guilt,  and  thus  perhaps  continue  to  impute  to  circumstances  the 
fault  which  belongs  only  to  his  own  heart. 

II.  We  must  have  minutely  considered  our  former  lapses  and  relapses 
before  we  presume  to  make  a  resolve. — The  causes  of  our  fall  should  be 
accurately  ascertained,  and  the  leading  incitement  to  each  relapse  be  singled 
out  and  set  up  as  a  kind  of  beacon  to  warn  us  effectually  where  our  danger 
lies.  The  repeated  practice  of  sin  has  made  this  admonition  by  no  means 
difficult  for  the  sinner  to  obey.  For  he  has  only  to  select  any  one  transgression, 
and  he  will  for  the  most  part  trace  in  it  the  usual  course  of  his  progress  in  the 
commission  of  sin.  Above  all,  he  will  perceive  that  with  each  relapse  his 
resolves  have  become  less  efficacious,  the  path  to  his  favourite  vice  has  become 
smoother,  his  compunctions  less  bitter,  his  heart  more  hardened. 

III.  The  sense  of  your  weakness  and  of  your  frequent  relapses  should 
induce  such  a  distrust  of  your  own  strength  as  to  deter  you  from  exposing 
yourselves  to  trials  which  may  be  avoided. — It  is  easy  to  attribute  to  your- 
selves powers  of  resistance  or  forbearance  and  self-denial  which  are  far  beyond 
your  present  attainments  in  Christian  discipline.  Your  resolves  should  there- 
fore be  made  in  all  humility.  Nothing  too  high  and  hard  for  your  present 
strength  should  be  attempted.  We  are  all  to  expect  trials  ;  but  it  is  a  criminal 
degree  of  rashness  to  go  out  needlessly  to  meet  them,  and  much  more  so  when 
a  little  reflexion  might  teach  us  that  we  have  not  arms  sufficiently  strong  for 
the  encounter. 

IV.  There  must  be  after  every  lapse  an  act  of  sincere  and  sorrowful 
repentance  before  we  presume  to  make  a  fresh  resolve. — Where  there  have 
been  shame  and  confusion,  and  remorse  and  fear,  there  may  be  some  promise 
of  our  "taking  heed  to  our  ways,"  of  our  hating  sin,  of  our  "recovering 
ourselves  out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil."  But  when  the  sinner,  in  order  to 
pacify  at  the  moment  the  fearful  misgivings  that  ever  attend  guilt,  satisfies 
himself  with  the  bare  resolution  to  offend  no  more,  what  grounds  can  he  have 
for  accepting  so  insignificant  a  pledge  of  his  own  actual  improvement  ? 

V.  Even  after  repentance  we  must  not  consider  our  resolves  as  any  warrant 
of  our  safety  without  two  other  safeguards. — 1.  The  first  of  these  is  vigilance. 
Our  minds  must  be  thoroughly  imbued  with  that  important  truth  that  ours  is 
a  life  of  warfare — that  we  are,  as  it  were,  in  an  enemy's  country.  Our  own 
corruption  within  and  constant  temptations  without  should  keep  us  ever  in  the 
state  of  sentinels.  For  the  greatest  security  for  the  sinner,  after  all,  is  to  avoid 
every  occasion  of  sin — to  be  beforehand  in  shunning  the  dangerous  opportunity, 
the  depraved  associate,  the  convenient  hour,  the  favourable  situation.  2.  The 
other  principal  safeguard  to  our  resolves  is  prayer.  We  have  only  to  be  earnest 
and  sincere  in  our  applications  to  the  throne  of  grace  for  spiritual  aid,  through 
the  intercession  of  that  Redeemer  who  is  "  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost 

512 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


that  come  unto  God  through  Him,"  and  we  shall  not  fail  to  receive  the  blessing 
that  we  ask. 

VI.  Among  the  religious  offices  which  come  in  aid  of  the  means  above 
recommended,  none  is  more  efficacious  than  the  "spiritual  food  and  suste- 
nance" properly  received  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper. — On  no 
occasion  does  the  heart  of  man  come  into  closer  intercourse  with  his  God  and 
Saviour  ;  on  no  occasion  does  he  draw  more  freely  from  the  fountain  of  Divine 
grace.  For  he  not  only  receives  remission  of  his  sins,  and  peace  and  comfort 
past  all  understanding,  but  he  is  endued  with  new  vigour  for  his  conflict  with 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  and  all  his  holy  purposes  and  resolutions 
receive  the  sanction  and  support  of  his  approving  Maker.  Thus  renewed  in  the 
inner  man,  he  cometh  forth  from  that  holy  ordinance  as  "  a  bridegroom  out  of 
his  chamber,  and  rejoiceth  as  a  giant  to  run  his  course." — A.  B.  Evans,  D,D, 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 


Vers.  12-16.  Christ's  preparation  for 
the  Passover. — Not  even  Peter  and 
John  are  to  know  beforehand  the  man's 
name  and  address,  lest,  if  Judas  should 
suspect  them  of  knowing,  he  should 
worm,  or  try  to  worm,  the  secret  out 
of  them.  Perhaps  he  did  suspect — 
perhaps  he  did  try  to  get  at  their 
secret ;  but  even  Peter  could  not  tell 
him  what  he  did  not  know.  In  His 
love  and  pity,  His  love  for  them,  His 
pity  for  Judas — to  save  them  from  a 
mistake  they  would  have  found  it  hard 
to  forgive,  and  to  hold  him  back  from 
a  sin  which  man  has  not  forgiven  yet, 
though  we  have  no  right  to  assume 
that  Christ  has  not  forgiven  it  long 
ago — He  rendered  it  impossible  for 
them  to  betray  Him  to  Judas,  and  for 
Judas  to  betray  Him  to  the  priests. 
The  incident,  thus  viewed,  has  many 
lessons  for  us.  1.  Even  when  He 
seems  most  unlike  Himself  our  Lord 
is  most  truly  Himself,  and  is  leading 
us  where  we  would  be,  though  by  ways 
we  know  not,  and  which  do  not  seem 
likely  to  lead  us  there.  2.  His  pre- 
science extends  to  the  minutest  details 
as  well  as  to  the  main  lines  and  critical 
occasions  of  life :  nothing  which  really 
concerns  us  is  overlooked  or  forgotten 
by  Him  ;  no,  not  even  the  pitcher,  or 
the  cup  of  cold  water  we  need  to  slake 
our  thirst,  or  are  carrying  to  a  neigh- 
bour who  needs  it  even  more  than  we 
do.  3.  If  we  love  Him,  and  are  bent 
on  serving  Him,  He  will  save  us  from 


those  innocent,  because  unconscious 
and  unintentional,  transgressions  of 
His  goodwill  for  us  which  must  in- 
evitably inflict  their  natural  punish- 
ment upon  us,  however  guiltless  we 
may  be — just  as  He  saved  Peter  and 
John  from  innocently  betraying  a 
secret  to  Judas  of  which  he  would  have 
made  an  evil  use.  4.  Even  when  we 
are  traitors  to  Him  in  our  hearts, 
when  we  are  meditating  some  sin 
which  will  cast  us  from  His  grace,  He 
will  do  all  He  can,  short  of  forcing  our 
will,  to  save  us  from  our  sin ;  He  will 
place  hindrances  and  impediments  in 
our  way  as  He  did  in  the  way  of 
Iscariot,  and  will  not  abandon  us  to 
our  evil  hearts,  until,  against  all  the 
remonstrances  and  warnings  of  His 
love,  we  overleap  all  hindrances  and 
plunge  into  what  we  know  to  be  a  path 
of  death.— S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Ver.  14.  Preparation  for  Christ  as 
our  guest. — At  all  seasons  of  the  year, 
and  on  festivals  and  ordinary  days 
alike,  the  question,  which  is  at  once  a 
warning  and  an  invitation,  is  addressed 
to  each  one  of  us,  "  Where  is  My  guest- 
chamber  ?  "  And  we,  far  more  than 
the  owner  of  that  honoured  house  in 
Jerusalem,  have  had  opportunities  of 
knowing  all  that  that  question  means. 
It  is  no  guest-chamber  built  with 
hands  that  He  needs,  but  the  temple 
built  without  hands,  which  temple  we 
are.     If  that  hospitable  disciple  would 

Li.  513 


chap   xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


do  so  much  for  His  entertainment 
during  a  few  hours,  surely  we  may  do 
as  much  when  we  aim  at  having  Him 
for  our  guest  for  ever — throughout 
life  and  in  eternity.  1.  It  must  be 
an  upper  room,  in  the  highest  part  of 
our  being,  the  best  that  we  have  to 
offer  to  any  one.  It  must  be  in  our 
heart  of  hearts,  where  we  can  love 
Him,  not  in  word  and  tongue,  but  in 
deed  and  truth,  with  all  our  soul  and 
all  our  strength.  There  are  those  who 
think  that  they  have  done  much  if 
they  have  given  Him  a  welcome  in  some 
transitory  emotion  of  religious  excite- 
ment. But  these  heated  feelings  are 
not  the  upper  room,  which  is  ever  calm 
and  quiet ;  they  are  more  akin  to  the 
common  hall,  where  noise  and  excite- 
ment are  frequent.  2.  It  must  be  a 
furnished  room  and  ready  :  furnished 
with  those  things  which  He  loves,  and 
which  will  enable  Him  to  rest  and 
abide— prayers  and  hymns,  thanks- 
givings and  intercessions,  holy  thoughts, 
kind  words,  and  good  deeds.  "Alms 
all  around  and  hymns  within" — that 
is  the  atmosphere  in  which  Christ  can 
abide  ;  and  the  heart  that  is  furnished 
with  these  can  offer  Him  a  home  in 
which  He  may  bestow  His  goods.  For 
Christ  is  no  man's  debtor.  If  He  comes 
as  a  guest  He  comes  open-handed,  and 
bestows  blessings  without  measure  or 
stint.  3.  And  therefore  we  must  pre- 
pare a  large  room.  As  we  are  niggardly 
in  what  we  offer  to  Him,  so  also  we  are 
half  hearted  and  little-minded  in  what 
we  ask  from  Him.  We  do  not  desire 
His  graces  enough,  and  we  do  not 
desire  enough  of  them.  We  must  open 
our  hearts  freely  to  receive  the  good 
measure,  pressed  down  and  shaken 
together,  which  He  yearns  to  bestow. 
It  is  His  own  command,  His  own 
promise,     which     says,     "  Open     thy 


mouth   ivide,    and   '. 
A.  Plwnmer,  D.D. 


will  fill  ur- 


Vers.  17-19.  A  traitor  among  the 
twelve. — 1.  In  the  holiest  society  on 
earth  the  unholy  may  have  a  place. 
2.  The  highest  goodness  may  fail  to 
win  to  the  obedience  of  faith.     3.  There 

514 


may  be  moral  wrong  without  present 
consciousness.  4.  The  knowledge  and 
appointment  of  God  do  not  hinder  the 
freedom  and  responsibility  of  man. — 
J.  H.  Godwin. 

The  traitor. — 1.  At  first  it  seems 
strange  to  find  a  traitor  amongst  the 
select  disciples  of  Christ.  Yet  there  is 
nothing  in  this  selection  of  a  bad  man 
to  be  an  agent  in  carrying  on  a  good 
design  which  is  not  in  harmony  with 
the  general  scheme  of  the  Divine 
government.  It  is  a  condition  of  the 
visible  Church  that  "  the  evil  should 
be  ever  mingled  with  the  good,"  and 
that  sometimes  the  evil  should  have 
authority  and  pre-eminence  over  the 
good.  Thus  the  small  circle  of  Christ's 
select  disciples  presented  a  sort  of 
epitome  of  the  world  into  which  they 
were  to  be  sent  and  the  Church  over 
which  they  were  to  preside.  2.  The 
next  thing  which  challenges  observa- 
tion here  is  the  unfruitfulness  of  this 
unhappy  man  under  the  extraordinary 
religious  advantages  which  he  enjoyed. 
We  plainly  see,  in  this  instance,  that 
mere  means  of  grace,  unaccompanied 
by  an  actual  operation  of  Divine  power 
upon  the  heart,  are  nothing.  Even 
the  Holy  Communion  of  the  Body  and 
Blood  of  Christ,  then  for  the  first  and 
last  time  administered  by  Christ  Him- 
self, and  of  which  Judas  was  permitted 
to  partake,  as  the  type  of  all  who 
should  thereafter  profane  those  holy 
mysteries,  had  no  effect  upon  him, except 
to  make  him  worse  than  before  (John 
xiii.  27).  3.  The  commonness  of  the 
sinful  lust  by  which  Judas  was  enticed. 
What  is  there  singular  in  a  man's 
rejoicing  because  his  wealth  is  great, 
or  desiring  that  it  may  be  still  greater  ? 
This  is,  in  fact,  the  ruling  passion  of 
mankind.  The  desire  of  acquiring  is 
one  of  the  most  powerful  springs  of 
human  conduct.  Bightly  directed  and 
strictly  regulated,  it  is  not  only  innocent, 
but  laudable.  Unregulated  and  mis- 
directed, see  what  it  leads  to ! — 
F.  Field,  LL.D. 

Yer.  18.  -4  question  of  propriety  as 
to  quality  and  time   of  news. — Christ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


then  breaks  news  at  table  that  operates 
distressfully.  He  knew  it  would.  That 
was  a  violation  of  hygienic  law.  At 
such  times,  to  secure  the  best  results, 
cheerfulness  should  reign.  He  who 
made  the  Sabbath  for  man  would 
surely  not  thoughtlessly  or  wantonly 
establish  a  precedent  the  observance 
of  which  would  be  against  man.  It 
cannot  be.  The  gospel  tends  to  glad- 
ness. Its  trend  makes  for  the  good  of 
man  as  man,  body  and  soul,  in  all  the 
phases  of  his  being.  But  there  is  a 
disturbing  element  in  him.  The  other- 
wise beautiful  equipoise,  adjustment, 
and  beneficent  operation  of  the  laws 
of  human  life  have  been  rudely  shat- 
tered by  sin.  Anarchical  times  demand 
different  treatment  from  the  "  piping 
times  of  peace."  Just  when  and  where 
the  province  of  one  law  should  be 
invaded  in  deference  to  another  and 
higher  were  questions  which  the  Saviour, 
we  may  be  sure,  in  His  own  case  settled 
righteously.  That  He  had  good  reason 
therefore  we  may  rest  assured.  But 
what  that  was  we  may  not  be  so  sure. 
Possibly  the  "  needs  be "  was  this  : 
His  hour  was  at  hand.  The  goal  was 
being  reached  without  the  unnecessary 
introduction  of  the  miraculous  either 
in  forcing  or  retarding.  God  does  not 
work  by  miracles  when  ordinary  means 
will  suffice.  Were  Christ  to  utter  these 
words  sooner,  Judas  might,  humanly 
speaking,  have  perfected  arrangements 
and  precipitated  matters.  Jesus  would 
then  have  been  betrayed  before  "  His 
time,"  unless  a  miracle  of  prevention 
were  wrought.  Had  He  spoken  them 
later,  Judas  might  not  have  the  requisite 
time  to  compass  his  plans  and  be  on 
the  ground  at  the  right  moment  for 
"  his  hour,"  unless  a  miracle  of  hasten- 
ing were  wrought.  And  then,  again, 
these  words  may  have  been  uttered  at 
that  moment  to  secure  the  absence  of 
this  disturbing  element  from  the  feast 
of  love  that  was  to  follow. — Wm.  M. 
Campbell. 

Ver.  19.  The  moving  of  conscience. 
— This  question  indicates  a  deep  stirring 
of  conscience,  quickened  by  God.     It 


is  a  question  of  which  every  human 
soul  at  some  time  or  other  is  more  or 
less  cognisant,  whatever  may  be  the 
answer  given  to  it.  It  is  a  question 
which  is  vital  to  any  adequate  con- 
ception either  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin, 
or  of  the  standard  of  personal  duty, 
or  of  the  ideal  walk  of  the  regenerate 
spirit  with  God. 

I.  Consider  it  in  some  of  the  various 
motives  and  intentions  with  which  a 
human  soul  may  conceivably  put  the 
question  to  God.  1.  Clearly  it  may 
be  put  (God  protect  us  from  it !)  in  a 
spirit  of  insolent  hardness.  Thus  Judas 
put  it.  A  man  to  whom  sin  is  not 
sinful,  to  whom  self-gratification  is  the 
law  of  his  being,  who  neither  fears 
God  nor  regards  man,  may  say,  "  Lord, 
is  it  I  ? "  But  he  will  not  care  for 
an  answer,  nor  wait  to  hear  it  given. 
2.  It  may  be  put  also  in  a  spirit  of 
shallow  and  ignorant  levity.  We  little 
know  what  possibilities  of  good  and 
also  of  evil  are  hidden  in  our  wonderful 
and  complex  nature — to  what  heights 
of  goodness  we  may  rise,  into  what 
abysses  of  infamy  we  may  fall.  3.  It 
is  also  the  question  of  a  holy  self- 
distrust.  There  are  so  many  pitfalls 
at  our  feet,  such  woful  surprises,  such 
mortifying  recollections  of  hopes  dis- 
appointed, opportunities  neglected, 
duties  omitted,  blessings  lost,  that 
"  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  is  often  the  aching, 
frightened  question  of  a  bewildered 
though  honest  spirit,  fearful  of  losing 
itself  in  the  mazes  and  obscurities  of 
its  unknown  tendencies,  and  quite 
distinct  from  the  morbid  self -question- 
ings of  spiritual  egotism. 

II.  There  are  circumstances  which 
from  time  to  time  suggest  if  they  do 
not  compel  it ;  and  so  sinuous  and  in- 
tricate are  the  windings  of  the  human 
heart,  so  apt  are  even  true  natures 
to  be  deceived  by  refined  sophistries, 
or  encouraged  to  mistake  transient 
emotion  for  the  continuous  action  of 
dominant  principles,  that  it  is  almost 
necessary  for  us,  if  we  would  adequately 
know  ourselves,  and  habitually  rule 
ourselves,  to  be  forced  to  find  ourselves 
out  as  we  stand  in  the  light  of  God. 

515 


chap   xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


v*&>* 


1.  The  sight  of  a  brother's  sin  may  be 
wholesome  though  humbling  in  making 
us  recognise  that  only  by  the  grace  of 
God  we  are  what  we  are.  Had  we 
been  tempted  as  he  was  tempted,  might 
not  we  have  fallen  perhaps  lower? 
Or  we  may  ourselves  have  been  ex- 
posed to  the  fiery  trial  of  temptation 
and  been  saved,  yet  so  as  "by  fire." 
We  never  knew  till  now  how  strong 
was  the  strength  of  God,  how  weak 
the  weakness  of  man.  2.  There  are 
also  occasions  in  life  which,  like  moun- 
tain-peaks rising  out  of  a  level  plain 
to  break  its  monotony  and  form  its 
landmarks,  bring  us  face  to  face  with 
hidden  corners  in  our  personal  life, 
and  make  us  feel  with  a  thrill  of  glad- 
ness the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon 
us.  Sometimes  it  is  a  special  mercy, 
which  makes  us  wonder  how  God  can 
be  so  good  to  us. — Bishop  Thorold. 

"  Is  it  I  ?  " — It  was  a  good  sign  that 
the  first  thought  of  each  of  them  was 
about  the  possibility  of  his  own  sin. 
When  a  man  foresees  a  great  tempta- 
tion that  is  coming,  it  is  always  better 
that,  instead  of  turning  to  his  neigh- 
bours and  saying,  as  he  searches  their 
faces,  "  I  wonder  who  will  do  this 
wicked  thing  ?  "  he  should  turn  to  him- 
self and  say,  "Is  it  possible  that  I  am 
the  man  who  will  do  it  ?  "  When  the 
wind  is  rising,  it  is  good  for  each  ship 
at  sea  to  look  to  its  own  ropes  and 
sails,  and  not  stand  gazing  to  see  how 
ready  the  other  ships  are  to  meet  it. 
We  all  feel  that  we  would  rather  hear 
a  man  asking  about  himself  anxiously 
than  to  see  him  so  sure  of  himself  that 
the  question  never  occurred  to  him. 
We  should  be  surer  of  his  standing 
firm  if  we  saw  that  he  knew  he  was 
in  danger  of  a  fall. 

I.  There  are  times  in  the  lives  of 
all  of  us,  I  think,  when  that  comes 
to  us  which  came  here  to  Christ's 
disciples.  —  Beneath  us,  as  beneath 
them,  the  worst  possibilities  of  our 
nature  sometimes  reveal  themselves. 
Such  times  are  not  our  worst  times 
certainly.  Often  they  are  times  which, 
by  their  very  sense  of  danger,  are  the 
safest  and  strongest  of  our  lives.     But 

516 


they  are  often  moments  that  dismay 
us.  They  come  in  upon  our  self- 
complacency  and  shock  it  with  their 
ominous  presence.  1.  One  of  them  is 
the  time  when  we  see  deep  and  flagrant 
sin  in  some  other  man.  When  some 
great  crime  is  done,  when  through  the 
community  there  runs  the  story  of 
some  frightful  cruelty  or  dreadful  fraud, 
I  think  that  almost  all  of  us  are  con- 
scious of  a  strange  mixture  of  two 
emotions,  one  of  horror  and  the  other 
of  a  terrible  familiarity.  The  act  is 
repugnant  to  all  our  conscientiousness ; 
but  the  powers  that  did  the  act,  and 
the  motives  that  persuaded  the  doing 
of  it,  are  powers  which  we  possess  and 
motives  which  we  have  felt.  When 
you  read  the  story  of  yesterday's  de- 
faulter fleeing  to-day,  an  exile  and  an 
outcast,  or  sitting  gloomily  behind  his 
prison  bars,  it  is  not  with  an  angel's 
innocent  wonder  what  a  sin  like  this 
can  mean  ;  it  is  with  the  understanding 
of  a  man  who  has  felt  the  same  tempta- 
tion to  which  this  poor  wretch  has 
yielded,  that  you  deplore  his  fate. 
With  simple  wonder  an  angel  might 
walk  through  our  State  prison-halls ; 
but  a  man  must  walk  there  full  of 
humbleness  and  charity ;  for  as  the 
best  man  that  ever  lived  finds  some- 
thing of  common  humanity  in  us  which 
makes  his  goodness  seem  not  impossible 
to  us,  so  the  worst  of  men  stirs  by  the 
sight  of  his  human  sin  some  sense  of 
what  human  power  of  sinfulness  we 
too  possess.  2.  Another  of  the  occa- 
sions which  let  us  see  our  own  possi- 
bility of  sin,  which  open  to  us  a  glimpse 
of  how  wicked  we  might  be,  is  when 
we  do  some  small  sin  and  recognise  the 
deep  power  of  sinfulness  by  which  we 
do  it.  A  pure,  honest  boy  cheats  with 
his  first  little  timid  fraud,  and  on  the 
other  side,  the  bad  side  of  him,  the 
door  flies  open,  and  he  sees  the  possibility 
that  he  too  should  be  the  swindler 
whose  enormous  frauds  make  the  whole 
city  tremble.  The  slightest  crumbling 
of  the  earth  under  your  feet  makes 
you  aware  of  the  precipice.  The  least 
impurity  makes  you  ready  to  cry  out, 
as  some  image  of  hideous   lust   rises 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiV. 


before  you,  "  Oh,  is  it  I  ?     Can  I  come  II.   What  is  this  but  saying  that 

to  that?"     3.  And  yet  another  occa-  in  every  serious  moment  of  life  the 

sion  when  we  become  aware  of  our  possibility  of  sin  stands  up  before  us  ? 

own  bad  possibility  is  the  expression  — None  but  the  man  who  has  no  serious 
of  any  suspicion  about  us  by  another  moments,  none  but  he  who  makes  all 
person.  I  think  that  for  you  or  me  life  a  play,  escapes  the  sight.  To  every 
to  find  our  names  linked  to-morrow  other  man — nay,  may  we  not  say  to 
in  this  community  with  some  great  every  man,  since  no  man  is  literally 
crime  of  which  we  knew  that  we  were  always  a  trifler  ? — to  every  man  at  some 
totally  innocent  must  stir  the  mystery  time  the  clouds  roll  back,  the  spell  is 
of  our  inner  life,  and  make  us  see  broken,  and  he  sees  what  a  power  of 
what  capacity  of  sin  is  lying  there,  being  wicked  as  of  being  good  belongs 
I  think  our  disavowal  of  the  sin  that  to  him  just  as  man.  1.  Is  it  good  for 
we  were  charged  with  would  be  not  him  to  see  this  ?  Will  it  help  him  or 
boisterously  angry,  but  quiet  and  harm  him  ?  That  will  depend  upon 
solemn  and  humble,  with  a  sense  of  the  way  it  works  in  him.  It  ciay 
danger  and  a  gratitude  for  preservation,  become  in  him  either  paralysis  or  in- 
I  think  that  ought  to  be  the  influence,  spiration.  One  man  sees  his  danger, 
And  even  the  boisterousness  with  which  and  stands  powerless.  Another  man 
some  men  deny  a  charge  against  their  sees  his  danger,  and  every  faculty  is 
characters  is  still  a  sign  in  a  worse  strung  to  its  intensest  strength.  If 
way  of  how  their  conscience  has  been  the  feet  are  set  more  resolutely  toward 
touched.  Would  you  want  the  clerk  goodness,  and  the  hands  lay  hold  more 
in  your  store  to  be  charged  with  dis-  firmly  upon  help,  it  is  good  for  us  to 
honesty,  and  not  go  back  to  his  work,  know  how  wicked  we  may  be,  how 
when  the  charge  had  been  disproved,  great  our  danger  is.  2.  What  is  it 
with  a  deepened  perception  of  tempta-  that  makes  that  difference  ?  How  is 
tion  and  a  quickened  watchfulness  and  the  consciousness  of  our  danger  pre- 
care  ?  4.  By  a  strange  but  very  natural  vented  from  becoming  a  depressing 
process  the  same  result  often  comes  emotion  and  turned  into  an  inspiring 
from  just  the  opposite  cause.  Not  motive  ?  It  must  be  by  opening  the 
merely  when  men  suspect  us  and  charge  life  upon  the  other  side.  It  must  be 
us  with  wrong-doing,  but  when  men  by  realising  the  possibilities  of  our 
praise  us  and  say  that  we  are  good,  human  life  for  good  as  well  as  for  evil, 
this  same  recognition  of  how  bad  we  by  seeing  and  never  forgetting  how 
have  the  power  to  be  often  arises.  A  good  we  have  a  chance  to  be,  as  well 
man  comes  up  to  our  life,  and,  looking  as  how  bad  we  may  become.  This  is 
round  upon  the  crowd  of  our  fellow-  the  power  of  hope;  and  hope  is  the 
men,  he  says,  "  See,  I  will  strike  the  true  master  of  fear.  A  merchant 
life  of  this  brother  of  ours,  and  you  hopes  to  be  rich,  and  the  fear  of  being 
shall  hear  how  true  it  rings."  He  poor,  instead  of  being  a  vexing  anxiety, 
does  strike  it,  and  it  does  seem  to  them  becomes  the  humble  servant  of  his 
to  ring  true,  and  they  shout  their  expectation,  and  helps  him  on  toward 
applause ;  but  we  whose  life  is  struck  wealth.  The  fear  of  death  is  terrible 
feel  running  all  through  us  at  the  to  a  sick  man  until  the  hope  of  life 
stroke  the  sense  of  hollo wness.  5.  Is  and  strength  and  activity  opens  before 
it  not  also  true  that  every  temptation  him ;  and  then  in  his  convalescence 
which  comes  to  us,  however  bravely  the  fear  of  death  has  ceased  to  depress 
and  successfully  it  may  be  resisted,  him  as  a  feeling,  and  only  remains 
opens  to  us  the  sight  of  some  of  our  with  him  as  a  motive  to  caution  and 
human  capacity  of  sin  ?  The  man  who  watchfulness.  Thus  fear  is  always 
dares  to  laugh  at  a  temptation  which  good  when  it  has  hope  to  rule  it. 
he  has  felt  and  resisted  is  not  yet  wholly  3.  Now  if  you  saw  a  young  man  over- 
safe  out  of  its  power.  whelmed  with  the  sight  on  which  our 

517 


chap.  xiv.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


eyes  have  been  fixed  to-day ;  if  you 
saw  him  so  full  of  the  consciousness 
of  the  power  of  sin  in  his  life,  the 
possibility  of  the  badness  that  he  might 
do  and  be,  that  he  was  wretched  and 
paralysed, — what  would  you  do  for  him? 
Would  you  try  to  make  him  forget 
what  he  had  seen?  Would  you  try 
to  shut  out  the  mystery  of  his  life 
from  him,  and  make  him  live  again 
the  life  of  narrow  satisfaction  in  the 
present  which  he  lived  before  he  looked 
down  into  the  deep  gulf  ?  You  could 
not  do  it.  But  if  you  could,  would  it 
be  well  ?  Surely  not.  What  you  need 
to  do  for  him  is  to  make  him  lift  up 
his  eyes  and  see  the  heights  above  him. 
You  want  to  make  him  like  the  climber 
on  a  ladder,  who  looks  up  and  not 
down,  who  climbs  not  to  escape  the 
gulf  below  him,  but  to  reach  the  top 
above  him,  and  who  feels  the  gulf 
below  him  only  as  a  power  that  makes 
the  hold  of  foot  and  hand  on  every 
round  of  the  ladder  which  they  strike 
more  firm.  Now  it  is  the  glory  of  the 
Christian  gospel  that  in  the  treatment 
of  man's  spiritual  nature  it  preserves 
this  true  relation  between  hope  and 
fear  perfectly.  4.  I  suggested  just 
now  the  analogy  between  our  physical 
and  moral  consciousness,  between  our 
consciousness  of  the  power  to  be  sick 
and  the  consciousness  of  the  power  to 
sin.  It  is  an  analogy  which  illustrates 
what  I  have  just  been  saying.  There 
is  a  nervousness  about  health  which  is 
all  morbid.  It  is  full  of  imaginations. 
There  are  people  who  can  never  hear 
a  disease  described  without  thinking 
that  they  have  it.  They  never  hear 
a  sick  man  talk  without  feeling  all  his 
symptoms  repeated  in  themselves.  You 
think  of  such  a  person  and  realise  his 
wretchedness.  Then  you  look  away 
from  him  to  a  perfectly  healthy  man 
who  seldom  thinks  about  being  sick  at 
all.  But  yet  he  is  something  different 
from  what  he  would  be  if  there  were 
no  power  of  sickness  in  him.  Un- 
conscious for  the  most  part,  but  now 
and  then  coming  forth  into  conscious- 
ness, there  is  always  present  with  him 
a  sense  of  his  humanity,  with  all  the 

518 


liabilities  which  that  involves.  He 
does  not  do  what  a  man  would  do  who 
had  literally  a  frame  of  iron.  And 
that  is  just  the  condition  of  the  man 
with  the  healthy  soul.  He  does  not 
nervously  believe,  when  he  hears  of 
any  flagrant  crime,  that  he  is  just 
upon  the  brink  of  that  crime  himself. 
He  lives  in  doing  righteousness,  but 
all  the  time  he  keeps  the  consciousness 
that  sin,  even  out  to  its  worst  possi- 
bilities, sin  even  to  the  cruelty  of  Cain, 
the  lust  of  David,  the  treachery  of 
Judas,  is  open  to  him. — Bishop  Phillips 
Brooks. 

Ver.  21.  A  wail  in  the  woe. — There 
is  a  wail  in  the  word  for  "  woe,"  a  tone 
of  lament,  if  also  a  tone  of  reprobation. 
Indeed,  we  shall  get  nearer  the  meaning 
of  the  whole  verse  if  we  think  of  it 
as  an  elegy,  rather  than  as  a  formal 
sentence  on  the  traitor.  Jesus  could 
not  lose  even  "  the  son  of  loss  "  without 
sorrow.  That  any  man  should  be  base 
enough  to  betray  "  the  best  Man  that 
e'er  wore  flesh  about  Him  "  might  well 
make  even  an  angel  weep.  There  must 
have  been  something  good  in  Judas,  or 
he  would  not  have  been  "  called  to  be 
an  apostle  " ;  but  there  must  also  have 
been  something  horribly  mean  in  a 
man  who,  while  affecting  great  love 
for  the  poor,  could  habitually  steal 
from  the  purse  which  commonly  held 
so  little,  but  always  a  little  for  the 
destitute  and  helpless.  And  how  could 
He  who  loved  all  men  but  mourn  over 
one  in  whom  much  that  was  good  and 
of  fair  promise  had  been  blighted  by 
a  sordid  selfishness  and  covetousness, 
one  who  had  given  place  to  the  devil, 
and  to  the  meanest  of  all  devils,  the 
most  sordid  of  the  spirits  that  fell? 
"  Good  for  that  man,"  etc.,  was  a  pro- 
verbial expression  of  blended  pity  and 
blame,  and  must  not  be  taken  too 
literally,  since  nothing  could  be  good 
or  bad  for  an  unborn  man.  It  means 
simply  that  not  to  have  been  at  all 
would  have  been  better  than  to  have 
become  such  a  man  as  Iscariot  was. 
And  there  are  many  of  whom  this 
might  be  said.     Judas  is  not  the  only 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


man  who  has  been  unfaithful  to  his 
ideal,  nor  the  only  man  who  has  played 
the  hypocrite  and  proved  a  traitor  to 
Christ  from  selfishness  and  greed. — 
S.  Cox,  D.D. 

The  grace  of  God  received  in  vain. — 
Judas  was  treated  even  as  the  rest  of 
the  apostles  up  to  the  moment  of  his 
defection.  That  he  was  meanwhile  so 
ill  disciplined  in  heart  as  to  be  robbing 
the  common  purse  of  his  little  fra- 
ternity almost  certainly  denotes  that 
he  had  received  this  favour  before  he 
had  become  "like  a  little  child" — that 
he  was  an  exception,  in  short,  to  the 
general  rule  of  the  Messiah's  ministry 
while  on  earth,  and  of  the  Comforter's 
dispensation  ever  since.  It  was  an 
exception  which,  considered  in  all  its 
bearings,  was  sure  to  be  always  re- 
membered and  recorded,  and  might 
therefore  have  been  made  and  exhibited 
in  a  strong  light  for  the  purpose  of 
shewing  that  the  rule  from  which  it 
was  a  departure  was  really  no  limita- 
tion to  the  free  mercy  of  God  in  Christ. 
In  the  same  manner  as  Adam's  fall 
proved  that  the  whole  human  race 
were  incapable  of  standing  without 
Divine  assistance  added  to  their  natural 
powers,  even  so  Judas'  case  was  per- 
haps designed  to  shew  that  if  in  the 
recovery  of  fallen  man  the  grace  of 
God  were  more  lavishly  dispensed,  if 
His  Son  while  on  earth  or  His  Spirit 
now  required  of  us  no  preparatory 
frame  of  heart  and  mind,  we  should 
not  be  the  better  for  the  removal  of 
the  apparent  restriction  in  the  offer 
of  mercy.  To  man  in  that  unprepared 
state  of  heart  the  grace  of  God  would 
be  the  pearl  thrown  to  swine. — S.  Hinds. 

Warning  from  the  fall  of  Judas. — 
The  Lord,  when  He  pleases,  can 
employ  bad  men  in  His  service,  and 
bestow  splendid  abilities  and  extra- 
ordinary spiritual  gifts  upon  them, 
which  He  perhaps  denies  to  His 
dutiful  and  beloved  children.  If  it 
be  asked  why  He  does  this,  and  why 
He  permits  hypocrites,  covetous  and 
deceitful  workers,  to  appear  among 
men  as  angels  of  light,  it  may  be 
answered  that    He  has  a  right  to  do 


what  He  will  with  His  own,  that  He 
giveth  no  account,  of  His  matters,  and 
that  from  what  He  has  revealed  of 
His  character  we  ought  to  believe, 
whether  we  can  always  see  it  or  not, 
that  He  is  righteous  in  all  His  ways, 
holy  in  all  His  works,  and  wise  in  all 
His  proceedings.  But  since  the  fact  is 
so,  that  Satan  can  transform  himself 
into  an  angel  of  light,  and  his  ministers 
appear  as  ministers  of  righteousness, 
that  Balaam  can  prophesy,  Judas  work 
miracles,  and  wicked  men  preach  and 
pray  with  great  eloquence,  we  ought 
to  be  aware  of  it,  lest  we  be  dazzled 
or  misled,  and  therefore  excited  to 
covet  splendid  gifts  instead  of  those 
graces  of  the  Spirit  which  essentially 
accompany  salvation,  and  mark  us  out 
as  real  members  of  Christ,  children  of 
God,  and  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven . — W.  Richardson. 

Vers.  22-24.  The  Holy  Communion. 
— When  the  earnest  Christian  kneels 
at  the  altar  to  take  the  Holy  Com- 
munion, he  performs  a  sixfold  act. 
1.  It  is  an  act  of  obedience.  Not  a 
suggestion  merely,  not  a  time-honoured 
custom  only,  but  a  command,  explicit, 
emphatic.  2.  It  is  an  act  of  remem- 
brance. Not  that  Christ  needed  a 
memorial,  but  that  we  needed  a 
memory.  3.  It  is  an  act  of  thanks- 
giving— a  eucharist.  This  is  worthy. 
Nations  honour  themselves  in  honour- 
ing their  heroes.  Thus  Garibaldi  is 
honoured  in  Italy,  Luther  in  Germany, 
Napoleon  in  France.  Thus  Italy,  and 
France,  and  Germany,  and  all  Chris- 
tian people  honour  the  world's  Hero, 
the  world's  Saviour,  in  this  sacrifice 
of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  in  this 
eucharistic  feast.  4.  It  is  an  act  of 
fellowship — a  communion.  We  join 
with  angels  and  archangels  and  all 
the  company  of  heaven  and  of  earth 
to  magnify  the  glorious  name  of  God. 
5.  It  is  an  act  of  testimony.  Every 
celebration  of  this  Sacrament  is  one 
new  link  in  the  continuous  chain  of 
testimony  that  comes  down  through 
the  ages  from  the  upper  chamber  of 
Jerusalem.      Every   hand    that   takes 

519 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST   MARK. 


this  bread  and  cup  joins  hands  with  for  both  break  the  bread  and  pour  the 

the  unbroken  chain  of  priestly  hands  wine,  and  receive  it  as  the  token  that 

that  reach  back  to  the  pierced  hands  the  Lord  had  died  for  them,  that  the 

of  Jesus.    6.  It  is  an  act  of  expectancy.  Lord    hath    pardoned     us,    that    the 

We  shew  forth    the  Lord's  death  till  Lord  is  nigh. — Dean  Church. 
He  come.     We  look  back,  and  we  look  The    presence     of    Christ     in     the 

forward  "  till  He  come."     It  is  going  Eucharist. — 1.  I  say  and  confess  with 

up  to  the  altar  on  the  mountain- top  the   Evangelists    and   with    St.    Paul 

and  looking  to  the  eastern  sky  to  see  that  the  bread  on  the  which  thanks 

if   there   be    any  sign   of  the  coming  are  given  is  the  body  of  Christ  in  the 

dawn. — R.  S.  Barrett.  remembrance  of  Him  and  His  death, 

The  Holy  Communion  the  most  solemn  to  be  set  forth  perpetually  of  the  faith- 

Christian  service. — 1.  If  any  one  were  ful  until  His  coming.      2.  I  say  and 

to    ask    what     is    the     most    sacred,  confess  the  bread  which  we  break  to 

solemn,    and    consoling    part    of    our  be   the  communion    and  partaking  of 

religious  service,  that  where  God  has  Christ's   body   with    the   ancient   and 

gathered    together    most    abundantly  the   faithful   Fathers.     3.  I   say   and 

the   greatest    of    His   truths   and  the  believe  that  there  is  not  only  a  signi- 

richest  of  His  graces,  where  it  is  that  fication  of  Christ's  body  set  forth   by 

in  our  life  on  earth  we  are  brought  the  Sacrament,  but  also  that  therewith 

nearest  to  heaven,  and  are  most  lifted  is  given  to  the  godly  and  faithful  the 

up   in   heart    and   spirit,    calmly   and  grace  of   Christ's   body — that   is,    the 

awfully   to   feel   the   presence   of   the  food  of  life  and  immortality ;  and  this 

God  whom  we  serve,  no  well-instructed  I  hold  with  Cyprian.     4.  I  say  also, 

Christian  would  doubt  how  to  answer,  with   St.  Augustine,  that  we  eat  life 

He  would  say  at  once,  "  In  the  Holy  and    we   drink   life  ;    with    Emissene, 

Communion."       2.  What    is    it    that  that  we  feel  the  Lord  to  be   present 

makes   it  so   different  from  all  other  in  grace ;    with   Athanasius,  that  we 

acts   of    prayer    and   praise?      What  receive    celestial    food    which    cometh 

gives   it   its   matchless    solemnity,   its  from  above ;  the  property  of  natural 

matchless  savour  of  heaven,  its  deep  communion,  with  Hilary  ;  the  nature 

comfort?     (1)  It  is  the  communication  of  flesh  and  benediction  which  giveth 

to   us   of   the    death    and   passion    of  life,  in   bread  and   wine,  with  Cyril ; 

Christ,  and  in  it  we  are  carried  back  and,  with  the  same  Cyril,  the  virtue  of 

for  the  time  to  that  One  Sacrifice,  in  the  very  flesh  of  Christ,  life  and  grace 

which  our  own  pardon  was  involved,  of  His  body,  the  property  of  the  Only- 

and  from  which  flowed  God's  mercy  to  Begotten,  that   is  to  say  life,  as  He 

the  world.      (2)   It    is   the   link   and  Himself    in   plain   words    expoundeth 

bond,   while    Christians   are  living  in  it.     5.  I  confess  also,  with  Basil,  that 

the  flesh,  between  earth  and  heaven,  we   receive   the  mystical   advent   and 

the    meeting-place    between    the    re-  coming  of  Christ,  grace,  and  the  virtue 

deemed   and   their    Redeemer,  out   of  of  His  very  nature ;  the  Sacrament  of 

sight,  but  not  far  off,  the  communion  His   very   flesh,    with   Ambrose  ;    the 

in   which    we    are   again    and    again  body     by    grace,     with     Epiphanius ; 

joined  to  the  risen  and  glorified  Lord,  spiritual  flesh,  but  not  that  which  was 

who  is  the  heavenly  strength  and  life  crucified,   with  Jerome ;  grace  flowing 

by   which   our   spirits  live.     (3)  Here  into  a  sacrifice,  and  the  grace  of  the 

we   have    communion    also    with   the  Spirit,    with    Chrysostom;    grace   and 

whole    Church    of   Christ.      Here   we  invisible  verity,    grace  and  society  of 

who  are  so  separated  are  one.     Here  the  members   of    Christ's   body,    with 

we  who  most  deeply  sympathise  with  Augustine.     6.  Finally,  with  Bertram, 

one  another,  and  we  who  never  could  I  confess  that  Christ's  body  is  in  the 

be  brought  on  earth  to  understand  each  Sacrament  in  this  respect — namely,  as 

other,  are   practically  joined   in   one;  he  writeth,  because  there  is  in  it  the 

520 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


Spirit   of   Christ,  that   is,   the   power  cup  which  He  gives  them  to  drink  is 

of  the   Word  of  God,  which  not  only  no  longer  merely  wine,  but  His  own 

feedeth  the  soul,  but  also  cleanseth  it.  blood  which  is  about  to  be  shed.     The 

Out  of  these  I  suppose  it  may  clearly  apostles   understood   it   so.     They  did 

appear  unto  all  men  how  far  we  are  not   ask,    "  How   can   this  be  done  ? " 

from   that   opinion   whereof   some   go  In  the  simplicity  and  fulness  of  their 

about   falsely   to    slander    us    to   the  faith,  knowing  that  the  power  of  the 

world,  saying  we  teach  that  the  godly  Master  was   boundless,   and  that  the 

and    faithful   should   receive   nothing  truth   was  in   Him,   they  believed  on 

else  at  the  Lord's  table   but  a  figure  His  words,   and  partook  of  His  body 

of  the  body  of  Christ. — Bishop  Ridley.  and   His    blood   under   the   forms    of 

Christ's  presence  in  the  Eucharist  to  bread    and    wine.     What    Jesus   had 

unworthy  receivers. — May  we  say,  then,  said   a   year   before  to  the  people   of 

that  Christ  is   really  present  in   the  Galilee   at   Capernaum    (John  vi.   35, 

Sacrament  as  well  to  the  unworthy  as  etc.),   He  realised  on  this  day  a  few 

to  the   faithful  receivers  ?     Yes,  this  hours  before   His  death.     He  taught 

we  must  grant,  yet  must  we  add  withal  them   that    He   was   the   "  Bread    of 

that  He  is  really  present  with  them  Life,"   that   in    eating   of    Him   they 

in   a   quite   contrary   manner ;   really  should  live ;  that  if  they  ate  not  the 

present     He     is,     because     virtually  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man  and  drank  not 

present  to  both — because  the  operation  His  blood,  they  should  not  have  life ; 

or   efficacy  of   His  body  and  blood  is  that  His  flesh  was  the  true  meat,  and 

not   metaphorical   but    real    in   both.  His   blood   the   true   drink ;   that   he 

Thus   the   bodily   sun,  though  locally  who  ate  of  His   flesh   and   drank   of 

distant    for    its    substance,   is    really  His  blood  should  dwell  in  Him.     The 

present  by  its  heat  and  light  as  well  people,  shocked  and  scandalised,    had 

to   sore  eyes   as   to   clear   sights,  but  turned   away,   asking    ironically   how 

really  present  to  both  by  a  contrary  He   would    give   any   man   His   flesh 

real  operation ;  and  by  the  like   con-  to  eat.     "  How  "  was  now  explained. — 

trary  operation  it  is  really  present  to  Father  Didon. 

clay  and  to  wax,  it  really  hardeneth  The  significance  of  the  Eucharist. — 

the     one    and     really    softeneth    the  This  scene  contains  the  whole  religion 

other.      So    doth    Christ's    body   and  of  Jesus.     In  this  single   moment  of 

blood,     by     its     invisible     but     real  His  life  He  realises  it   at  one  stroke 

influence,  mollify  the  hearts   of   such  in  its  perfection.     He  appears  at  once 

as  come  to  the  Sacrament  with  due  as  Priest  and  Victim,  as  creating  the 

preparation,     but     harden     such     as  eternal    priesthood    and    the    eternal 

unworthily  receive  the  consecrated  ele-  sacrifice.     He   reveals   without  meta- 

ments.     If  he  that  will  hear  the  Word  phor   or   parable   the    reason   of   His 

must  take  heed  how  he  hears,  much  death.     John  had  rightly  called  Him 

more  must  he  which  means  to  receive  "  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away 

the    Sacrament  of   Christ's  body  and  the  sins  of  the  world."     How  are  men 

blood  be   careful   how  he  receives. —  to   profit  by  the   personal   atonement 

T.  Jackson.  which    the    Son    of    God    comes    to 

The  mystery  of  the  Eucharist. — The  accomplish  ?      They    must    be    incor- 

words,  "  Take,  and  eat :  it  is  My  body.  porated   in   the   Victim    who   delivers 

Take,  and  drink :  it  is  the  cup  of  My  Himself  up  and  dies  for  their  sakes. 

blood,"  understood  in  their  true  mean-  And    Jesus    requires    not    only    that 

ing,  literally   and  without   metaphor,  there  should  be  a  spiritual  union  with 

are  to  human  reason  a  mystery  un-  His     spirit     and     His     person — His 

heard  of  and  impenetrable.     The  bread  design  is  a  grander  one.     His  aim  is  a 

that  Jesus  offers  to  His  apostles  is  no  spiritual  and  material  union  together  ; 

longer    merely   bread,   but   His   body  His   design  is  that   man,   being  both 

which  is   about  to  be   sacrificed;  the  spirit    and    matter,    body    and    soul, 

521 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


should  be  united  in  spirit  and  reality  learnt  to  converse  with  a  living  Lord, 
to  His  whole  being — to  the  Son  of  The  wine  took  for  them  the  place  of 
God  and  the  Son  of  Man — to  His  the  blood  in  which  His  life  had  dwelt. 
Divinity  and  His  humanity,  to  His  In  that  feast  of  blessing  and  thanks- 
soul  and  His  body.  His  design  is  giving,  that  joyful  participation  of 
that  he  should  believe  on  His  Word,  accepted  sacrifice,  no  life  was  found 
and  become  through  faith  one  and  too  earthly  to  be  offered  on  the  altar 
the  same  spirit  with  Him — that  he  of  the  Cross,  or  to  become  a  means  of 
should  eat  of  His  body  and  drink  of  human  fellowship  and  Divine  com- 
His  blood,  and  be  incorporated  in  the  munion. — Prof.  F.  J.  A.  Hort. 
flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man. — Ibid.  Communion. — 1.  Communion  is  per- 
The  Eucharist  an  extension  of  the  manent,  yet  needs  times  of  revival. 
Incarnation. — Gregory  Nazianzen  de-  2.  All  Christian  life  is  sacramental, 
fines  the  Eucharist,  "  a  communion  of  Not  alone  in  our  highest  act  of 
the  incarnation  of  God."  For  in  that  communion  are  we  partaking  of 
He  affirms  the  bread  to  be  His  body,  heavenly  powers  through  earthly  signs 
and  the  wine  to  be  His  blood ;  by  and  vehicles.  3.  This  neglected  faith 
receiving  this  body  and  blood  of  may  be  revived  through  increased 
Christ,  and  so  changing  it  into  the  sympathy  with  the  earth  derived  from 
substance  of  our  body  and  blood  by  fuller  knowledge,  through  the  fearless 
way  of  nourishment,  the  body  of  love  of  all  things. — Ibid. 
Christ  becomes  our  body  and  His  blood 

is  made  our  blood,  and  we  become  in  Ver.   22.  Analogies  between  Christ's 

a  mystical  manner  flesh  of  His  flesh  body  and  bread. — 1.  As  bread   is  the 

and   bone   of    His   bone.     And   as   in  strength  and  state  of  our  natural  life, 

His   conception   of    the   Holy   Virgin  so  Christ  is  for  our  spiritual,  being  all 

He  took  upon  Him  the  nature  of  man  in  all.     2.  As  bread  is  loathed  of  the 

that  He  might  save  man,  so  in  His  full  stomach,  but  most  acceptable  to 

Holy  Sacrament  He  takes  upon  Him  the   hungry   soul,    so   Christ    is    most 

the  nature  of  every  man  in  singular  welcome    to    such    as    "  hunger    and 

that   He  might  save  every  man  who  thirst    after    righteousness."      3.    As 

becomes  one  with  Him  in  the  Divine  bread   is   usual   and   daily,    so   Christ 

Sacrament   of    His   body   and    blood,  should  be  to  the  Christian,  feeding  on 

His  real  incarnation  was  only  in  one,  that    bread    which    came   down   from 

but  His  mystical  incarnation  in  many ;  heaven,   the  soul's  ordinary  refection, 

and   hence   comes  this    Sacrament   to  4.  As  bread  is  made  one  loaf  of  many 

be  an   instrument  whereby  Christ   is  grains,  so  we  that  are  many  are  one 

conveyed  unto  us,  His  benefits  applied,  bread  and  one  body,  because  we  are  all 

and  so  our  faith  confirmed. — J.  Mede.  partakers  of  one  bread.      5.  As  corn 

The  Eucharist  is  on  the  one  side  the  is  cut  down  with  the  scythe,  threshed 

perfection  of  the  sustenance  of  life  in  in  the  barn   with  many  stripes,   torn 

personal  communion,  on   the  other  a  in  the  mill  with  much  violence,  then 

use   of   the  products  of  the  earth  as  bolted   and    sifted,    last   of    all   baked 

instruments  of   communion,    implying  with   extreme    heat  in   the  oven,  and 

the    necessity    of    taking    the    whole  all   this  that  it  may  be  fit  meat  for 

nature  into  communion  if  it  is  to  be  our  body,   so   Christ  in  His  ripe  age 

real,    the  symbols  of   creation   and  of  was   cut    down    by   cruel   death,    His 

the  Lord's   body  in  one.     The  life  of  body    was    whipped,    His    flesh    rent 

the  disciples  with  Christ  was  exchanged  asunder,    His    soul    was    as    it    were 

for   a   life  in   Christ  :  they   abode   as  melted  in  the   fiery  furnace   of  God's 

branches  in  the   Yine  of   which    His  anger ;    and   all   this   that  He   might 

Father     is     the     Husbandman.     The  become    food    for   our    soul,    that   we 

bread  took  for  them  the  place  of  the  might  eat  of  this  bread  and  drink  of 

body    through   which    they   had    first  this  cup. — Dean  Boys. 

522 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiV. 


Vers.  23,  24.  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  becomes,  through  His  goodness, 
milk  for  His  children,  a  band  of  union 
to  His  members,  the  seal  of  His 
covenant,  and  the  ransom  of  His 
slaves ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  through 
the  wickedness  of  the  imitators  of 
Judas,  it  becomes  to  them  a  mortal 
poison,  a  sword  of  separation,  the  seal 
of  their  reprobation,  and  the  cause  of 
an  eternal  captivity. — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  25.  The  new  Passover. — Jesus 
never  partook  afterwards  of  the  Pass- 
over— never,  that  we  know  of,  cele- 
brated the  Eucharist  with  His  disciples. 
It  is  said,  indeed,  that  after  His  resur- 
rection "  He  was  known  of  them  in 
breaking  of  bread  "  ;  but  this  can  hardly 
be  so  applied.  Rather  say  that  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  Christ  is  in  His  Church, 
which  is  His  new  body,  even  as  His 
fleshy  frame  was  when  this  declara- 
tion was  made.  When,  therefore,  after 
the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost — when, 
at  this  day,  a  Christian  congregation 
partakes  of  the  new  Passover,  Christ 
is  in  the  midst  of  them,  they  are  His 
body  and  members  in  particular.  He 
is  then  as  truly  present,  and  as  truly 
a  partaker  in  the  ceremony  of  "  drink- 
ing the  fruit  of  the  vine,"  as  when 
His  Divine  nature  was  united  only 
with  the  Man  Christ  Jesus.  In  this 
sense  He  fulfilled  His  declaration  to 
the  apostles,  and  in  this  sense  continues, 
in  every  age  of  the  Church,  to  drink 
the  fruit  of  the  vine  in  His  own 
kingdom,  the  kingdom  of  God  on 
earth.  He  said  that  He  would  drink 
it  new,  because  it  was  thenceforth  to 
assume  a  new  character  and  efficacy. 
He  came  not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil, 
God's  former  appointments — to  make 
all  things  new. — S.  Hinds. 

Communian  in  heaven. — Let  us  take 
care  to  raise  our  hearts  from  the 
sacramental  communion  here  on  earth 
to  the  eternal  communion  in  heaven, 
to  be  celebrated  there  not  under  veils 
or  sensible  symbols,  but  openly  and 
without  veils.  The  sight  of  truth, 
unveiled  and  perfectly  disclosed  to  our 
eyes,  is  a  torrent  of  delight  and  joy, 


which  as  it  were  inebriates  the  soul, 
makes  it  forget  all  the  afflictions  and 
miseries  of  the  earth,  and  transports 
it  out  of  itself,  in  order  to  its  living 
only  in  the  truth,  upon  the  truth,  and 
for  the  truth. — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  26.  Jesus  singing. — That  song 
is  like  an  aureola  encircling  that  little 
company  in  the  gathering  gloom. 
There  is  no  concord  between  light 
and  darkness,  no  real  affinity  between 
woe  and  song.  One  is  from  above, 
the  other  from  beneath.  One  is  a 
daughter  of  the  skies,  the  other  a 
child  of  perdition.  Musical  harmonies 
are  not  heard  in  the  outer  darkness, 
breaking  sweetly  on  the  ear  amid  the 
awful  discords  of  despair.  But  heaven 
is  a  land  of  song.  Joyous  strains  are 
heard  constantly  echoing  in  sweetest 
refrain  over  the  "  bright  plains "  of 
paradise.  1.  Christ  singing !  And 
at  such  a  time  !  The  hour  and  power 
of  darkness  approaching.  The  agony 
of  Gethsemane  and  the  darkness  of 
the  Cross  near.  He  knows  it  all,  yet 
calmly  sings.  What  a  vision  is  here 
of  holy  confidence  and  anticipated 
triumph  !  Apparently  Christ  on  the 
eve  of  defeat ;  the  powers  of  darkness 
on  that  of  victory.  But  He  sings. 
Glad  omen  for  the  cause  of  redemption. 
Such  singing  does  not  indicate  a  dis- 
couraged leader  or  a  defeated   cause. 

2.  The  disciples  sang.  This  would 
have  a  tendency  to  neutralise  the 
effect  of  the  "  exceeding  sorrow  "  that 
oppressed  them.  It  would  prevent  a 
panic   until    the    "  hour "    had    come. 

3.  In  time  of  danger  and  in  the  face 
of  the  coming  storm,  how  much  de- 
pends, under  God,  on  the  leader ! 
Napoleon  in  the  hearts  of  his  soldiers 
fights  and  wins  an  Austerlitz  or  a 
Jena.  The  spirit  of  Wellington  per- 
vades Waterloo  and  saves  Europe. 
Jesus  can  sing  on  the  eve  of  the 
Waterloo  of  the  world's  redemption. 
Such  a  leader,  such  a  spirit,  such  a 
song,  animates  His  people  to  meet 
foas,  "fight  the  good  fight  of  faith," 
and  conquer.  Blessed  paradox !  The 
darkest  hours  may  still  be  bright  with 

523 


CHAP.  XIV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


the  light  of  the  heavenly  sun.  The 
Eternal  Father  and  Friend  is  "at  the 
helm." — Wm.  M.  Campbell. 

The  spirit  in  which  to  meet  the  trials 
of  life. — Praise  is  an  exercise  in  the 
spirit  of  which  we  should  meet  the 
trials  of  life.  I  use  the  term  "  spirit  " 
as  distinguished  from  the  outward 
act,  from  the  mere  utterance  of  words 
or  melody  of  sounds,  and  to  guard 
against  the  idea  that  apart  from 
those  feelings  of  which  it  ought  to 
be  the  expression  and  accompaniment 
any  form  of  worship  is  entitled  to 
the  commendation  given  in  Scripture 
to  the  exercise  of  praising  God.  The 
exercise  is  founded  on  a  knowledge 
and  belief  of  the  Divine  perfections  ; 
it  is  not  so  much  a  mechanical  as  a 
spiritual  act — it  is  not  the  exercise 
of  musical  taste,  but  of  devotional 
feeling — it  is  the  admiring  contem- 
plation of  the  Divine  perfections, 
expressed  in  the  appropriate  forms 
of  inspired  devotion.  Be  it  yours  to 
rise  from  the  contemplation  of  second 
causes  to  the  contemplation  of  the 
First  Cause,  in  adoring  admiration  of 
Him  who  appoints  and  arranges  all 
according  to  His  unerring  will.  Be 
it  yours  to  remember  that  the  hand 
which  removed  the  gourd  you  delighted 
in  likewise  bestowed  it, — that  the  worm 
which  withers  has  been  sent  by  Him, 
not  in  wrath,  but  in  love  ;  not  to 
leave  your  heads  defenceless  against 
the  scorching  sun  or  the  pelting  storm, 
but  to  lead  you  to  abide  in  a  safer 
and  sweeter  peace  under  the  shadow 
of  the  Almighty.  Trials  thus  met 
would  be  deprived  of  their  sting.  And 
did  either  your  own  interests  or  those 
of  Christianity  require  that  sufferings 
as  great  as  those  which  martyrs  have 
endured  should  be  appointed  you, 
encountering  them  in  the  same  spirit, 
you  would  come  out  of  them  with  the 
same  triumph. — R.  Brodie. 

Ver.  27.  Christ  the  Shepherd — 1.  As 
descending  from  ancient  patriarchs 
who  were  shepherds.  They  were 
types  of  Him.  2.  He  knows  His 
sheep,    and  marks  them  for  His  own 

524 


(John  x.  3,  14).  God  sets  His  seal 
on  them  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  3.  He  feeds 
their  souls  and  bodies  in  green  pastures 
(Ps.  xxiii.),  and  drives  them  to  the 
sweet  streams  and  waters  of  comfort 
by  the  paths  of  grace  and  righteous- 
ness. 4.  He  defends  them  from  the 
wolf  and  enemies ;  they  being  timorous, 
simple,  weak,  shiftless  creatures,  unable 
to  fly,  resist,  or  save  themselves.  5.  He 
nourishes  the  young  and  tender  lambs. 
6.  He  seeks  them  when  they  go  astray, 
and  rejoices  to  find  them.  7.  He  brings 
them  to  the  fold.  (1)  The  fold  of  grace. 
(2)  The  fold  of  glory.— T.  Taylor,  D.D. 
Christ  smitten,  an  example  to  us. — 

1.  He  suffered  for  no  necessity  or 
desert,  but  by  voluntary  humility, 
whereas  we  deserve  fiery  trials.  2.  He 
suffered  not  for  His  own  cause,  but 
ours  ;  and  shall  not  we  for  His  ?  3.  He 
despised  the  shame ;  and  why  shoidd 
not  we  ?  4.  The  end  of  His  Cross  was 
the  exaltation  at  God's  right  hand ; 
and  we  expect  the  same. — Ibid. 

The  sheep  scattered. — Why  were  the 
disciples  thus  scattered  ?  1.  Their 
own  weakness  and  carnal  fear  made 
them  fly  to  save  themselves.  They 
had  not  counted  the  cost  of  their 
profession.  Nor  had  they  yet  received 
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  afterwards 
kept     them     strong     and     steadfast. 

2.  God  in  His  wisdom  would  have 
Christ  deserted,  because  He  was  to 
be  known  to  tread  "  the  winepress  of 
God's  wrath  alone."  3.  Thus  it  behoved 
the  Scripture  to  be  fulfilled,  in  regard 
of  Christ  Himself,  who,  voluntarily 
undertaking  the  grievous  burden  of 
our  sin,  must  be  forsaken  by  all  for 
the  time.  4.  To  teach  us  that  all 
our  safety  depends  on  our  relation  to 
the  Chief  Shepherd.  Without  Christ 
we  lie  dispersed,  ungathered,  and 
forlorn. — Ibid. 

Ver.  28.  The  promised  meeting  in 
Galilee.— Why  in  Galilee?  1.  That 
our  Lord  and  His  disciples  may  more 
surely  enjoy  one  another  without  fear 
of  the  Jews,  and  that  He  may  instruct 
them  in  the  things  concerning  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.     2.  Because  Christ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


had  more  disciples  and  favourites   in  and   as   a  Mighty  Leader;   He   went 

Galilee  to  whom  He  would  familiarly  before   Joseph    to    Egypt ;    He   went 

offer  Himself  and  manifest  His  resur-  before  Moses  to  the  land  of  Midian, 

rection  than  in  Judea.    3.  His  disciples  and   through    the   wilderness    to    the 

belonged   to    Galilee,    and    He   would  Promised     Land ;     He     went     before 

bring   them   to   the   place   where   He  Daniel   to   the   lions'   den;    He   went 

found    them.       4.    They   must   follow  before  the  three  brave-hearted  Baby- 

their  calling  till  Christ  came,  and  for  Ionian     nonconformists    to    the    fiery 

the   time    before    they   can   get    into  furnace ;    He   went    before    Paul    to 

Galilee  He  will  be  there  before  them,  Pome  and  John  to  Patmos.     And  He 

waiting  for  them.— Ibid.  will   faithfully   go    before   us   in    our 

Christ   going   before. — It  is   a   very  paths  of   duty,  in   all  our   trials  and 

great  consolation  to  the  diseased   and  temptations,  and  in  sickness  and  death 

infirm    members    to   be  assured   that  we  shall  find  Him  going  before  us. 
their   Head    will    not   abandon  them 

when  they  fall,  but  that  He  will  even  Ver.  29.  The  rashness  of  the  heart. — 

go   before   them.      If    Jesus   did   not  When   we   love,    we    think    ourselves 

vouchsafe  to  come  to  meet  us  in   the  capable    of    anything.      Suffering    or 

power  of  His  new-raised  life — that  is,  death   seems   nothing    to   us.     Of   all 

by  powerful  graces — how  should  we  be  kinds  of  rashness,  the  most  incurable 

able  ever  to  rise  and  go  to  Him  ? —  and  the  most  unreflecting,  and  at  the 

P.  Quesnel.  same  time  the  most  excusable,  because 

Christ  the  Leader. — He  is  always  it  is  the  most  sincere,  is  not  the  rash- 
going  before  His  followers  as  an  In-  ness  of  the  mind  or  the  will,  but  the 
fallible  Teacher,  as  a  Faithful  Friend,  rashness  of  the  heart. — Father  Didon. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  32—42. 
(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxvi.  36-46 ;  Luke  xxii.  39-46.) 

The  agony  in  the  garden. — In  our  Litany  we  plead  with  our  Lord  by  His 
agony  and  bloody  sweat.  From  among  the  events  of  His  life  we  thus  select  the 
agony  in  the  garden  as  one  of  the  most  important.  We  bring  it,  if  we  may  so 
say,  to  our  Lord's  remembrance.  We  are  convinced  that  it  bore  a  prominent 
part  in  working  out  our  salvation.  The  remembrance  of  it  will  operate  to  make 
Him  grant  our  requests.  No  passage  of  His  life  is  more  mysterious ;  we  should 
approach  the  topic  with  awe  and  reverence,  taking  as  it  were  the  shoes  off  our 
feet,  because  it  is  holy  ground  that  we  purpose  to  visit. 

I.  His  sufferings  on  the  Cross  had  not  yet  begun.  What  was  the  cause  of  this 
exceeding  distress  ?  1.  Chiefly,  mainly,  I  believe,  it  was  the  grief  of  His  whole  life. 
He  was  in  the  place  of  sinners;  He  was  the  representative  of -sinners ;  He  was  suffer- 
ing for  sinners,  bearing  their  punishment,  and  their  punishment  is  that  God  hides 
His  face  from  them ;  and  the  holier,  the  more  loving,  the  more  capable,  the  soul 
of  the  Christ  was,  the  more  bitter  to  Him  was  this  punishment,  which  others 
deserved  and  He  endured.  2.  There  were  special  reasons  why  the  suffering 
thus  produced  should  at  this  time  press  with  extreme  violence  on  His  soul.  He 
had  completed  other  work  ;  He  had  trained  His  apostles,  finished  the  work  given 
Him  to  do,  had  reissued  the  law,  had  fulfilled  all  types  and  prophecies,  had 
revealed  the  Divine  character,  had  exhibited  the  type  of  perfect  manhood  ;  and 
so  the  work  of  suffering  and  expiation  alone  remained.  No  more  controversy, 
no  more  teaching — only  endurance.  The  mind  could  no  longer  be  diverted  by 
other  employment  from  that  which  lay  before  Him  in  the  way  of  suffering. 

525 


chap.  xiv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


3.  All  this  suffering  was  foreseen,  anticipated ;  it  was  not  like  our  sufferings, 
which  are  mercifully  hidden  from  us.  4.  There  are  also  other  explanations  of 
the  horror  of  great  darkness  through  which  Pie  now  passed.  He  said  a  little 
farther  on  that  it  was  the  hour  of  His  enemies  and  the  power  of  darkness.  We 
believe  that  Satan  now  put  forth  all  his  power  to  crush  Him.  Then  we  may 
also  believe  that  the  fear  of  death,  the  fear  of  all  that  was  to  come  to  body, 
mind,  and  spirit,  all  the  agonising  sufferings  of  the  Cross,  depressed  the  human 
soul  of  the  Redeemer.  5.  Again,  He  was  denied  those  consolations  which  have 
made  martyrs,  under  excruciating  sufferings,  triumphant.  What  is  it  makes 
a  martyr  meekly,  gladly,  patiently  endure,  though  every  nerve  be  racked  ?  It 
is  the  infusion  of  God's  grace,  a  drop  of  the  joy  of  heaven,  a  cordial  sent  by  God 
on  high  to  support  the  soul  of  His  faithful  witness.  But  this  is  just  what  was 
denied  the  Christ  while  bearing,  as  our  representative,  the  burden  of  our  sins. 
6.  We  see,  too,  in  the  narrative  the  mark  of  another  trial,  viz.  disappointment, 
owing  to  the  failure  of  human  support  and  sympathy. 

II.  What  is  to  be  learnt  from  this  passage. — 1.  This  passage  should  impress 
on  us  that  our  salvation  was  no  easy  work.  Creation,  with  all  its  wonders, 
might  be  effected  by  a  word.  He  had  only  to  speak,  and  it  was  done  ;  but  to 
recover  mankind,  to  cancel  sin,  to  extricate  the  race  from  Satan's  usurped 
dominion — this  was  a  task  which  cost  much.  This  required  the  infinite  descent, 
the  inconceivable  mystery  of  the  Son  of  God  emptying  Himself,  laying  aside  His 
garments  of  light,  taking  the  form  of  a  servant,  humbling  Himself  to  one  descent 
after  another,  divesting  Himself,  as  far  as  possible,  of  the  exercise  of  the 
attributes  of  Godhead,  acting  through  a  created  nature,  submitting  to  humilia- 
tions, and  laying  Himself  open  to  the  keenest  inroads  of  pain,  spiritual,  mental, 
and  physical.  Every  time  we  plead  with  Him  by  His  agony  and  bloody  sweat, 
we  should  remember  that  our  salvation  cost  Him  pain,  and  that  we  must  not 
expect  ourselves  without  tribulation  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  We 
see  the  completeness  of  our  Lord's  manhood.  He  took  not  only  our  body,  but 
our  mind,  our  most  essential  and  distinctive  quality,  our  will.  He  cries,  "  JSTot 
My  will,  but  Thine."  He  had  therefore  a  will,  as  Man  ;  and  His  perfection  was 
that  He  bowed  His  human  will,  sacrificed  it,  adjusted  it,  subjected  it  to  the  Divine 
will.  3.  We  see  that  it  is  not  wrong  to  make  known  our  wishes  to  God  in  prayer. 
We  may  shrink  from  pain,  we  may  ask  to  be  spared  suffering,  so  long  as  we  do 
so  in  entire  submission  to  the  Divine  will.  We  may  ask  that  the  cup  of  suffer- 
ing may  pass  from  us,  if  only  we  are  willing  to  drain  it  cheerfully,  when  God 
signifies  His  will  that  we  should  drink  it.  And  because  we  may  have  to  give 
up  our  wills  in  a  great  matter,  it  is  well  to  practise  ourselves  to  get  power  over 
our  will  in  smaller  matters.  4.  Observe  our  Great  Master  and  Pattern  called 
God  His  Father  in  the  very  crisis  of  bowing  His  human  will  to  the  greatest 
sacrifice  that  will  of  man  ever  made,  to  entire  accordance,  perfect  submission  to, 
and  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  appointment,  though  it  involved  inconceivable 
sufferings  :  "  Abba,  Father."  May  God  produce  in  all  of  us  a  faith  in  the  Father- 
hood of  God  !  Then  we  too  shall  be  able  to  bear  pain,  to  go  into  a  crisis  in  faith, 
and  to  come  out  of  it,  as  our  Master  did,  unscathed.  5.  Lastly,  notice  in  this 
crisis  that  our  Lord  was  not  so  engrossed  with  His  own  surpassing  agony  as  not 
to  attend  to  His  disciples,  and  strive  to  rouse,  stimulate,  and  shame  them  to 
better  endeavours.  He  graciously  makes  allowance  for  them,  acknowledges  that 
the  spirit  is  ready  though  the  flesh  is  weak.  He  honours  them  by  requesting 
their  support  and  sympathy  ;  He  returns  to  them  more  than  once  ;  He  rouses  them 
at  last  that  they  may  not  be  discredited  by  their  negligence  when  the  enemy  is 
close  at  hand.  Of  those  given  Him,  He  will  not  lose  one.  May  God  give  us 
grace  to  be,  after  His  example,  thoughtful  for  others,  if  God  should  be  pleased 
to  visit  ns  with  exhausting  and  engrossing  sufferings ! — Canon  Burrows. 

526 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


Gethsemane. — We  may  here  learn  our  true  attitude  in  suffering.  The  clouds 
which  darken  the  sky  of  this  transitory  life  have  gathered  over  us  all,  and 
maybe  their  shadows  fall  upon  some  of  you  now.  Adversity  is  an  inheritance  we 
cannot  decline,  forced  upon  us  all,  and  forced  because  we  have  not  sufficient 
grace  to  choose  and  bear  it  for  virtue's  sake.  Suffering — and  by  that  I  mean 
all  the  pains  and  trials,  physical,  intellectual,  spiritual,  which  attack  mankind — 
is  inevitable.  It  may  vary  in  degree  and  kind,  but  in  some  measure  we  all 
are  its  victims  ;  and  every  doubt,  every  sick-bed,  every  grave,  seals  this  true. 
There  is  no  exemption,  and  the  noblest  hearts  seem  to  hold  the  most ;  and 
looking  ahead,  we  ask  the  question,  not  for  the  first  time — 

"Is  it  so,  0  Christ  in  heaven,  that  the  highest  suffer  most, 
That  the  strongest  wander  farthest  and  most  hopelessly  are  lost, 
That  the  mark  of  rank  in  nature  is  capacity  for  pain, 
That  the  anguish  of  the  singer  makes  the  sweetness  of  the  strain  ? " 

It  may  appear  strange  that  one  cup  should  contain  so  much  more  of  bitterness 
than  another.  The  best  and  perhaps  only  way  of  coming  to  know  the  "  Why  ?" 
of  these  things  is  to  bear  a  right  attitude  towards  them,  and  towards  Him 
whose  care  never  fails,  whose  wisdom  never  errs,  whose  love  never  changes. 
Affliction  is  not  calamity  to  the  one  who  knows  how  to  bear  it,  but  a  mine 
of  inexhaustible  wealth ;  and  though  the  sun  may  go  down,  yet  to  the  one  who 
can  read  the  heavens  even  the  night  will  bring  its  joyful  truths.  Remember 
there  is  another  side  to  the  cloud  under  which  you  dwell,  and  there  is  light 
and  deliverance  and  an  everlasting  Father. 

I.  Christ's  suffering  did  not  shake  His  confidence  in  God. — "  All  things  are 
possible  unto  Thee  ;  remove  this  cup  from  Me."  There  was  the  recognition  of 
God's  power.  The  night  was  dark,  but  He  did  not  cry,  "  There  is  no  light ! " 
The  cup  was  bitter,  but  there  was  no  complaint  or  cruel  charge.  The  burden 
was  heavy,  but  weakness  never  suggested,  "  There  is  no  deliverer  !  "  Brethren, 
do  we  not  feel  condemned  when  we  recall  our  weakness  and  unbelief,  when 
overtaken  by  adversity  ?  At  times  God  lets  His  shadow  fall  upon  us,  and  we 
think  it  cold  and  harsh  and  meaningless.  But  instead  of  concluding  that  the 
sun  has  been  extinguished  when  he  sets,  instead  of  idle,  weak  complaints,  making 
the  time  bitter  unto  us,  let  us  labour  to  discover  the  treasure  of  His  love  in 
the  severest  stroke  He  deals  us.  As  in  nature,  so  in  grace,  there  must  be  a 
change  of  seasons.  When  grim  winter  appears  and  closes  the  eye  and  damps 
the  smile  of  mother-earth,  clothing  her  in  a  snow-white  shroud,  and  freezing 
her  body  hard  and  cold,  think  we  that  her  life  has  gone  and  we  must  starve, 
for  nature's  cupboard  is  empty  and  cannot  be  replenished  ?  Nay  ;  we  remember 
it  lay  as  helpless  but  a  year  ago ;  but  creeping  beneath  the  sun's  director  rays 
it  day  by  day  revived,  and  the  spring  and  summer  came,  followed  by  ripe  old 
autumn  with  his  lap  full  of  golden  fruit.  Oh,  how  often  shall  the  Master  save 
us  ere  we  cease  to  be  afraid  ?  When  shall  we  learn  to  trustfully  repose,  through 
hope  and  despair,  through  joy  and  sorrow,  in  that  eternal  principle  of  truth, 
"  We  know  that  to  them  that  love  God  all  things  work  together  for  good "  ? 
"All  things  are  possible  unto  Thee;  remove  this  cup  from  Me."  The  prayer 
is,  however,  by  no  means  complete  here.  There  must  be  something  more  than 
the  acknowledgment  of  God's  power.  We  may  come  to  God  and  say,  "Thou 
art  able,"  and  He  answering  may  declare,  "  I  am  willing."  But  should  He 
declare,  "  I  am  not  willing,"  what  then  ?  If  there  be  nothing  more  than  the 
acknowledgment  of  God's  ability,  the  result  will  be  disappointment  and  unbelief ; 
and  according  to  the  estimate  we  had  of  God's  ability  there  will  follow  this 
bitterness.     "  Howbeit,  not  what  I  will,  but  what  Thou  wilt." 

II.  The  complete  submission  of  Christ's  will  to  the  Father's. — Christ  has 
expressed   the  desire  of    His  heart,   He   has  prayed  for  deliverance;  but  He 

527 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


closes  His  petition,  He  interrupts  His  very  agonies,  He  turns  right  round  to 
the  Father  and  bows  in  adoring  submission  to  His  will ;  and  how  He  suffered 
it  we  know.  This,  brethren,  is  the  true  spirit  of  prayer.  To  pray  is  not  to 
claim  unconditionally,  to  ask  what  we  want  and  selfishly  require  it.  It  is  the 
soul's  request  submitted  to  the  will  of  God.  We  must  remember  our  ignorance, 
the  restive  desires  of  our  hearts,  the  circumscribed  present  only  visible  to  us ; 
and  realising  all  this,  and  more,  we  must  pray,  but  leave  our  prayer  in  His 
hands,  not  dictating  what  we  would  have  God  do,  but  beseeching  Him  to  grant 
our  requests  as  they  accord  with  His  will,  which  is  our  eternal  welfare.  And 
if  the  answer  come  as  we  call,  if  the  blessing  descend  whilst  we  still  linger  at 
the  throne  of  grace,  let  us  be  thankful.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  no  voice 
replies,  if  the  long-sought  blessing  be  delayed,  yea,  and  if  it  be  delayed  for  ever 
and  never  greets  us,  still  let  us  be  thankful,  rejoicing  to  forsake  our  own 
desires  when  the  wisdom  of  God  beckons  us  away.  Our  disappointment  is  our 
gain;  the  frustration  of  our  hopes  is  our  everlasting  benefit.  The  supreme 
purpose  of  our  life  should  be  to  know  the  will  of  God,  and  our  zealous  care 
to  gain  this  patient,  gentle  grace,  submission,  which  quickly  turns  its  face 
whichever  way  the  current  of  God's  Spirit  flows,  and  with  swift  obedience 
answers  each  movement  of  His  will.  The  knowledge  of  His  will  interprets 
our  duty,  which  is  the  fulfilment  of  that  will.  There  are  truths  we  do  not 
know,  we  cannot  know;  and  many  are  the  things  which  are  veiled  from  our 
sight,  for  the  revelation  of  which  we  must  wait.  They  lie  beyond  the  haze 
which  surrounds  and  circumscribes  our  vision  here,  in  a  clearer,  purer 
atmosphere.  A  time  will  come,  and  come  speedily,  when  this  concealing  cloud 
shall  be  the  pathway  for  our  feet,  and  when  we  shall  begin  to  know  these 
hidden  truths ;  but  believe  me,  brethren,  that  time  will  also  tell  us  of  eternal 
secrets  yet  unveiled,  and  we  shall  find  a  path  for  our  abiding  faith.  Our  pride 
and  unbelief  must  be  quenched,  and  the  Father's  will  must  reign  supreme,  the 
song  of  our  heart  ever  rising  in  clear  notes  to  the  attentive  sky,  "Not  my 
will  but  Thine  be  done."  It  was  this  complete  submission  which  led  the 
Saviour  to  His  death. 

III.  The  victory  of  the  Cross  was  gained  in  Gethsemane. — The  Crucifixion 
w%as  public,  but  the  Saviour  bore  it  first  in  secret.  The  hardship  and  grief 
of  the  soldier  is  not  as  he  stands  in  the  midst  of  the  fight,  but  as  he  takes  one 
farewell  glance  at  the  window  yonder,  where  his  child  waves  its  tiny  hand- 
kerchief and  his  bereaved  wife  sobs  her  pain  away.  The  trial  of  Archbishop 
Cranmer  was  not  greatest  when  he  stood  in  the  curling  smoke  and  thrust  his 
hand  in  the  devouring  flame,  but  in  the  agony  it  cost  him  to  go  there.  And 
it  was  even  so  with  our  agonising  Lord.  He  saw  the  cruel  Cross  as  He  knelt 
in  Gethsemane,  He  felt  the  wounds  of  the  nails,  and  wept  as  He  heard  the 
cries  of  the  mocking  crowd  He  died  to  save.  He  saw  and  felt  it  all  as  He 
wrestled  there.  If  we  would  discover  the  secret  of  our  Lord's  strength,  we 
shall  find  it  in  those  nights  of  earnest  prayer  spent  upon  the  green  slopes  of 
the  mountain.  Our  prayers  may  cast  us,  as  Daniel  of  old,  in  the  lions'  den, 
but  they  shall  close  the  lions'  mouths.  And  now  what  consolation  is  ours  and 
what  remaineth  unto  us  ?  We  are  not  left  comfortless,  brethren ;  the  Saviour 
has  provided  for  His  absence.  The  Spirit  comes  as  a  heavenly  messenger  to 
remind  us  that  we  have  interests  beyond,  a  Father  who  loves,  a  Saviour  who 
intercedes,  a  throne  vacant,  till  we  gain  the  shore. — JS.  W.  Kay. 

Ver.  37.  The  hour  of  watching. — There  is  an  unknown  element  in  human  nature 
which  makes  the  sympathy  of  others  a  necessary  factor  in  our  life.  A  writer  has 
told  us  that  joy  unshared  loses  half  its  glow,  and  that  the  weight  of  sorrow  is 
threefold  heavier  if  there  be  none  to  watch  with  the  sufferer.     Specially  in  our 

528 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


dark  moments  of  spiritual  need  we  cry  aloud  for  just  one  soul,  one  only,  to  watch 
with  us,  that  we  be  not  left  alone.  We  pity  the  man  who  has  to  take  a  solitary 
path  through  the  world ;  and  if  we  have  known  the  deep  privilege  of  walking 
through  the  sunlight  and  shadow  of  earth  with  some  sympathetic  human  soul, 
we  recognise  in  how  terrible  a  blank  moves  the  uncompanioned  life. 

I.  This  half- sorrowful  and  half -indignant  cry  is  just  one  of  those  cries  for 
sympathy,  for  friendship. — The  Bible  never  hesitates  to  emphasise  the  true 
humanity  of  Christ — His  anger,  His  sorrow,  His  pity,  His  hunger  and  thirst 
and  weariness,  His  need  of  love  and  fellowship.  He  could  face,  with  all  the 
self-reliance  of  His  loving  purpose,  the  frown  of  His  critics  and  enemies, 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  lawyers  and  the  Roman  soldiers ;  but  here  in  the 
solitude  of  the  garden  He  could  not  face  without  remonstrance  the  loneliness  of 
the  human  heart.  He  pleaded  for  one  hour  of  watching  with  Him.  He  knew, 
no  doubt,  that  His  disciples  could  not  help  Him  much.  Their  simple  and  child- 
like natures  were  too  far  from  His  for  that ;  and  it  was  not  until  He  was  taken 
from  them  that  they  even  began  to  understand  what  He  was.  Certainly  they 
never  guessed  what  He  was  suffering.  And  we,  had  we  been  there,  with  all 
our  larger  knowledge  and  deeper  insight — we  should  have  been,  if  sleepless,  at 
least  as  dumb  as  they.  For  this  is  one  of  the  tragic  colours  in  the  picture,  that, 
whereas  we  can  trace  clearly  enough  all  those  outward  forms,  we  do  not  know 
the  depth  of  all  they  represent.  We  cannot  tell  what  He  suffered  for  the  sins 
of  men.  Into  the  depths  of  that  story  the  world  has  never  entered.  That 
patience,  that  humility,  that  love,  have  never  been  felt,  fathomed,  or  rightly 
understood  even  by  the  most  sacred  spirits  of  earth.  A  very  immortality  of 
pain  is  centred  in  that  one  short  hour. 

II.  Does  not  the  cry  ring  down  to  us  across  the  ages  like  a  peal  of  thunder  ? 
— 1.  It  is  primarily  in  our  own  personal  life  that  we  are  thus  called  upon  to 
watch  with  Christ.  To  all  of  us  there  comes,  sometimes  in  little  things,  some- 
times in  great  things,  a  temptation,  an  impulse  to  do  what  we  know  to  be 
wrong — a  time  when  our  spiritual  principles,  our  Christian  temper,  is  put  to  the 
proof,  and  the  hour  of  trial  comes  to  the  Christ  within  us.  It  is  then  that  we 
are  alone  like  He  was,  in  the  sense  that  we  have  to  face  and  conquer  that 
temptation  without  help  from  others ;  it  is  then  that  He  appeals  to  us  most 
earnestly  to  watch  with  Him  one  hour,  to  watch  until  the  temptation  has 
passed,  and  we  come  out  victorious.  There  is  a  moral  truth  of  a  very  supreme 
value  in  the  words  "  one  hour."  For  the  temptation  that  is  thus  met  in  the 
spirit  of  Christ  is  a  brief  one.  It  loses  its  power  over  us,  and  every  successful 
resistance  of  it  makes  it  less  formidable  on  its  next  return.  That  is  the  true 
watchfulness  that  watches  not-,  like  the  old  ascetics,  that  it  may  shun  temptation, 
but,  like  Christ,  that  it  may  meet  and  subdue  it.  We  see,  in  a  word,  that  trial 
and  temptation  are  rather  less  things  to  be  shunned  than  blessings  in  disguise, 
angels  with  hidden  wings.  The  first  step,  as  Socrates  has  warned  us,  in  spiritual 
progress  is  learning  to  know  ourselves,  our  own  powers  and  potentialities,  just 
as  the  soldier  learns  the  work  of  shield  and  spear  and  the  measure  of  his  own 
courage  only  in  the  heat  of  the  fight.  Above  all,  we  learn  our  own  weakness, 
and  so  open  the  way  for  fresh  watchfulness.  Temptation,  thus  used,  becomes 
the  great  helper  in  human  development.  We  grow  larger  under  God's  discipline, 
and  emerge  from  it  with  new  faculties  and  a  finer  character.  We  have  seen 
something  of  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  can  never  more  shake  off  the  vision 
of  them.  If  we  have  thus  watched  with  Christ,  we  are  in  a  manner  sharing 
His  sufferings  and  receiving  His  sanctification ;  and  though,  if  we  are  wise, 
we  shall  love  good  because  it  is  good  and  hate  evil  because  it  is  evil,  quite  apart 
from  any  results  they  bring,  that  may  fairly  be  our  hope  and  prospect  in  the 
hours  when  we  are   tempted.      While,  on  the  other  hand,  if   we  have  slept 

mm  .529 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


in  the  time  of  trial,  there  is  the  miserable  thought  that  we  have  disappointed 
our  Master's  hope.  2.  The  appeal  comes  to  us  not  only  as  individuals,  but  as 
members  of  the  organic  body  we  call  "  the  Church."  Whatever  may  be  thought 
of  the  very  singular  age  in  which  we  live,  we  are  all  agreed  on  one  point,  that 
it  is  an  age  of  transition,  a  time  whose  thoughts  and  feelings  and  ideals  are  not 
fixed,  permanent,  complete.  It  is  the  one  short  hour  in  which  we  as  Christians 
are  called  upon  to  watch  with  Him.  And  we  can  do  it  best  not  by  engaging 
in  theological  disputes,  still  less  by  ignorantly  rejecting  the  genuine  results  of 
historical  or  scientific  research,  or  by  trying  vainly  to  smother  the  flame  of  free 
inquiry,  but  by  more  maintaining  our  Christian  principles  unshaken,  by  offer- 
ing to  men  the  sweet  apology  of  a  holy  and  self-devoted  life,  by  making  them 
feel  that  with  us  at  least  religion  shall  be  a  reality  and  not  a  form.  Christianity 
is  not  a  system  of  beliefs,  but  a  life,  a  new  life,  in  the  world.  "  I  am  come  that 
they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly."  The 
thoughtfulness,  therefore,  and  patience  and  self-devotion  of  our  daily  work 
may  become  the  best  apology  for  the  Christian  faith ;  for  the  new  life  that  is 
thus  lived  in  the  spirit  of  Christ  is  an  argument  which  men  can  neither  answer 
nor  ignore. — S.  A.  Alexander. 

,  Yer.  38.  The  nature  and  kinds  of  sins  of  infirmity. — One  can  scarce  acquit 
the  disciples  of  some  degree  of  negligence  and  want  of  respect.  But  our  Lord 
was  pleased  to  put  the  mildest  and  most  candid  construction  possible  upon  it. 
The  night  was  far  spent ;  sleep  stole  upon  them  unawares ;  and  they  were 
naturally  slow  and  heavy,  not  apprehending  how  much  depended  upon  that 
critical  juncture.  They  intended  no  affront  or  disrespect  to  their  Lord  :  they 
had  a  true  and  real,  only  not  so  lively  and  vigorous  a  concern  for  Him  as 
they  ought  to  have  had ;  their  spirit  truly  was  willing,  and  they  meant  well ; 
but  yet,  for  want  of  quicker  sentiments,  they  failed  in  the  performance.  It 
was  natural  infirmity  which  prevailed  over  their  resolutions,  which  overpowered 
their  very  hearty  and  honest  but  languid  endeavours. 

I.  What  sins  are  properly  sins  of  infirmity. — Their  general  nature  is  briefly 
described  thus  :  that  they  are  rather  weak  than  wilful,  having  much  more  of 
frailty  than  of  wilfulness  in  them.  Something  of  wilfulness  they  must  have, 
otherwise  they  could  not  be  imputed  as  sins.  But  as  the  degree  of  wilfulness  is 
small  in  comparison,  and  the  frailty  so  much  the  greater,  they  have  therefore 
their  denomination  from  their  most  prevailing  ingredient,  and  so  are  called 
sins  of  infirmity.  They  are  a  kind  of  slips,  failings,  or  deviations,  issuing  from 
an  honest  and  good  heart,  and  carrying  no  malice  prepense,  no  premeditated 
guile,  no  ill  meaning  in  them — harmless  almost  as  to  the  matter  of  them,  and 
without  any  bad  design.  They  are  owing  either  to  inadvertency,  forgetfulness, 
surprise,  strength  of  passion,  or  to  the  suddenness  and  violence  of  an  unlooked- 
for  temptation.  1.  I  begin  with  such  as  have  respect  to  the  inward  thought. 
And  here  we  are  liable  to  offend  two  ways — either  in  not  thinking  as  we  ought 
to  think,  or  in  thinking  as  we  ought  not.  Human  frailty  is  too  often  and  too 
sadly  felt  in  what  concerns  the  government  of  the  thoughts.  Who  is  there 
that  does  not  often  find  distraction  and  wanderings  and  deadness  at  his 
prayers,  private  or  public — but  public  more  especially,  as  we  there  meet  with 
more  objects  to  divert  the  eyes  and  to  turn  off  the  attention  ?  This  kind  of 
non- attention  or  absence  of  thought  in  religious  exercises,  so  far  as  it  is  a  sin 
(for  it  is  not  so  always),  is,  generally  speaking,  a  sin  of  infirmity,  and  no  more. 
And  it  is  then  only  to  be  reckoned  among  wilful  sins,  when  a  man  makes  a 
habit  of  it,  and  slothfully  submits  to  it,  without  striving  against  it ;  or  when 
it  carries  some  contempt  of  the  service  with  it,  arising  from  some  vicious 
principle  of  the  mind.  Besides  the  sin  of  infirmity  now  mentioned,  I  may 
530 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


name  some  others  reducible  to  the  same  head, — such  as  the  not  thinking  often 
enough  or  highly  enough  of  God  and  His  good  providence ;  not  having  Him 
constantly  in  our  thoughts,  nor  setting  Him  before  our  eyes ;  not  attending  to 
His  calls,  not  regarding  His  judgments,  nor  being  duly  thankful  for  His 
mercies,  etc.  To  these  we  may  add,  the  not  thinking  how  to  lay  hold  of  and 
to  improve  any  opportunities  we  meet  with  of  doing  good  in  the  world;  and 
this  through  dulness,  through  inadvertency,  or  forgetfulness  :  for  if  we  wilfully 
and  designedly  let  slip  the  golden  opportunity  offered  us,  and  despise  the 
invitation,  the  sin  is  then  wilful,  and  the  offence  presumptuous.  Among  sins 
of  infirmity  belonging  to  this  head  may  be  reckoned  some  kinds  of  unbelief, 
as  both  belief  and  unbelief  respect  the  inward  thoughts  of  the  heart.  Want 
of  faith  or  trust  in  God's  words  or  His  promises  in  some  timorous  minds 
may  justly  pass  for  a  sin  of  infirmity.  They  despond  and  sink  down  in  the 
day  of  adversity  more  than  becomes  them  to  do,  as  if  they  had  forgot  that 
the  very  hairs  of  their  heads  are  all  numbered,  or  as  if  they  had  never  read 
that  not  so  much  as  a  sparrow  falleth  to  the  ground  but  by  the  order  or  with 
the  permission  of  an  All-knowing  God.  Hitherto  I  have  been  considering 
such  sins  of  infirmity  as  respect  the  inward  thoughts,  in  such  cases  wherein 
we  do  not  think  as  we  ought  to  think.  There  is  another  branch  of  the  same 
head,  which  is  the  thinking  as  we  ought  not.  The  former  is  a  sin  of  omission 
only,  this  of  commission,  both  resting  in  the  mind.  When  we  are  thinking  of 
this  world  only,  suppose  in  prayer-time  or  sermon-time,  instead  of  thinking 
of  a  better,  as  most  of  us  are  apt  to  do — this,  we  hope,  may  pass  for  a  sin  of 
infirmity,  if  not  chosen  by  us,  nor  designedly  indulged.  Sometimes  profane, 
blasphemous  thoughts  will  rise  up  in  men's  minds  ;  but  if  they  be  checked  as 
soon  as  observed,  and  are  not  consented  to,  they  are  at  most  no  more  than 
sins  of  infirmity,  owing  generally  to  bodily  indispositions.  The  same  I  say 
even  of  unchaste  or  malicious  thoughts,  if  they  are  only  short  and  transient, 
which  abide  not,  which  do  not  gain  our  consent,  but  are  condemned  by  us  as 
soon  as  perceived  ;  they  are  then  either  sins  of  infirmity  only,  or  not  sins  at  all. 
For  what  the  will  or  choice  has  no  hand  in  is  not  imputable  to  us  as  a  fault ; 
it  may  be  our  misfortune.  Too  much  warmth  and  eagerness,  in  some  instances, 
is  a  sin  of  infirmity.  Such,  I  suppose,  was  Peter's  eagerness,  when  he  drew 
his  sword,  without  staying  for  his  Lord's  commission,  and  smote  off  a  servant's 
ear.  To  this  head  I  may  refer  credulity  or  over-hasty  belief,  as  being  often 
a  sin  of  infirmity  and  pertaining  only  to  the  mind.  To  the  same  head  may 
be  referred  over-great  carefulness  or  anxiety  in  respect  of  worldly  things. 
Martha,  a  very  good  woman  in  the  main,  was  yet  careful  and  cumbered  about 
many  things  more  than  she  should  have  been ;  and  she  received  a  gentle 
rebuke  for  it  from  our  Blessed  Lord.  2.  Many  are  our  sins  of  infirmity  in 
speech.  Our  greatest  comfort  is  that  several  of  them  may  pass  for  frailties 
only ;  and  happy  will  it  be  for  us  if  we  go  no  farther.  I  am  persuaded  that 
even  Peter's  denial  of  his  Lord  was  rather  weak  than  wilful ;  he  was  surprised 
into  it,  had  forgot  himself,  and  had  not  yet  time  to  recollect.  I  should  be 
willing  to  hope  that  hasty,  heedless  swearing,  or  taking  God's  name  in  vain,  in 
those  who  have  unhappily  got  a  habit  of  it  from  their  childhood,  may  be  but  a 
sin  of  infirmity  for  some  time  ;  but  to  such  as  perceive  it,  and  continue  it,  and 
use  not  all  proper  means  and  care  to  get  the  better  of  it,  and  to  break  the 
evil  habit,  to  them  it  is  wilful  and  deadly  sin.  Telling  of  lies  I  do  not  reckon 
among  the  sins  of  infirmity.  It  is,  generally  at  least,  a  voluntary  chosen  thing. 
But  varying  a  little  from  strict  truth,  or  adding  to  it,  as  is  sometimes  done, 
undesignedly,  hastily,  forgetfully,  in  the  making  a  report,  if  it  be  in  things 
of  slight  consequence,  that  may  be  numbered  among  human  frailties.  Angry 
and  passionate  speeches  may  mostly  fall  under  the  head  of  infirmities ;    but 

531 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


bitter  invectives,  and  irritating,  injurious  reflexions,  made  in  cold  blood,  made 
deliberately,  are  without  excuse.     It  would  be  endless  to  enumerate  all  the 
offences  of  the  tongue  which  men  are  liable  to.      It  is  a  difficult  matter  to 
talk  much  and  well.     Great  talkers  offend  often,  and  they  who  say  the  least 
are  generally  the  most  innocent.     Yet  there  may  be  a  fault  sometimes  in  being 
too  reserved,  shy,  and  silent — as  when  a  man  neglects  to  exhort  or  reprove  his 
neighbour   as  occasions  offer,  or  when  he  can  patiently  sit  by  and  hear  the 
name  of  God  dishonoured  or  an  innocent  absent  man  abused  without  opening 
his  mouth  in  defence  of  either.     Such  reservedness,  in  some  cases,  may  rise  no 
higher  than  a  sin  of  infirmity ;  but  for  the  most  part  we  may  more  justly  call 
it  a  wilful  neglect,  betraying  meanness  of  spirit  at  least,  or  something  worse. 
3.  I  come  now  to  the  most  material  article  of  all,  which  concerns  our  outward 
actions.     And  here  also  we  may  offend  two  ways — either  as  neglecting  to  do 
what  we  ought,  or  doing  what  we  ought  not.     Sins  of  infirmity  are  mostly  seen 
in   our   manifold   omissions   and    neglects,    either    forgetting    what   duties   are 
incumbent   upon  us  or  performing   them  but   in  part.      Hard  would   be   our 
circumstances  were  we  to  give  a  strict  account  of  all  our  omissions,  or  if  much 
the  greater  part  of  them  were  not  kindly  overlooked  by  an  All -merciful  God,  as 
pitiable  frailties.     Yet  let  not  any  man  set  light  by  omissions.     Wilful  omissions 
of  known  duties  are  wilful  and  presumptuous  sins ;  and  there  are  some  kinds 
of  omissions  which  will  be  always  charged  as  wilful,  and  will  be  enough  to 
exclude  us   from  the   kingdom   of  heaven,  particularly  if  we  omit  or  neglect 
to  worship  God  or  do  good  to  man  as  our  opportunities  and  abilities  permit. 
I  come  next  to  speak  of  sins  of  commission,  the  doing  what  we  ought  not  to 
do.     Sins  of  this  kind  are  mostly  wilful ;  but  some  there  are  which  may  be 
justly  looked  upon  as  sins  of  infirmity.     Drunkenness  in  righteous  Noah,  once 
only,  might  be  a  sin  of  infirmity.     He  was  not  aware  of  the  effects  of  wine  ; 
he  had  not  till  then  had  experience  of  it;  he  was  overtaken  unawares,  and 
surprised  into  it.     I  know  not  whether  the  like  favourable  excuse  may  not  be 
admitted  for  others  who  may  once  unhappily  fall  into  the  like  excess  unawares. 
But,  generally  speaking,  as  the  world  now  stands,  a  man  can  scarce  be  surprised 
into  such  excess  or  overtaken  without  his  fault.     Some  have  been  weak  enough 
to  plead  human  frailty  even  for  crying  and  scandalous  sins,  such  as  fornication 
or  adultery  or  other  sinful  lusts.      But  all  such  pretences  are  vain.     Sins  of 
that  kind  never  are,  never  can  be,  committed  without  great  degrees  of  wilfulness. 
There  are  some  other  kinds  of  sins  for  which  human  infirmity  is  sometimes 
pleaded,    and    with    very   little    reason — acts    of    hostility,    assaults,    beating, 
striking,  wounding,   and   the  like.      Good  men   run   sometimes   into   excessive 
warmth  and  zeal  in  the  discharge  of  a  duty  or  execution  of  an  office.     They 
may  be  guilty  of  indiscreet  rigours,  and  push  things  too  far — may  be  so  afraid 
of  not  doing   enough  that  they  will  even  overdo,  and  be  too  officious  or  too 
severe,  exceeding  the  bounds  of  Christian  prudence,  and  doing  hurt  when  they 
intended   good.      These    and    other    the   like   indiscretions   of    good    men   are 
properly  sins  of  infirmity,  owing  to  inadvertency  or  surprise  or  to  some  natural 
weakness  adhering  to  their  particular  temper,  complexion,  and  constitution. 

II.  How  far  our  spiritual  state  or  condition  is  affected  by  the  sins  of  this 
kind. — They  do  not  exclude  a  man  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  they  do  not 
put  him  out  of  a  state  of  grace,  or  out  of  favour  with  Almighty  God.  This 
may  be  proved  several  ways,  both  from  Scripture  texts  and  from  the  reason  of 
the  thing  itself.  1.  There  are  two  or  three  special  texts  of  Scripture  which 
number  up  and  recite  such  particular  sins  as  will  most  certainly,  if  not  repented 
of,  exclude  the  offenders  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (see  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10 ; 
Gal.  v.  19-21  ;  Matt.  xxv.  41-43).  Sins  of  mere  infirmity  are  not  the  sins 
which  either  St.  Paul  or  our  Blessed  Lord  refer  to  as  excluding  men  from 

532 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  Xiv. 


the  kingdom  of  heaven.  They  are  quite  of  another  kind  from  those  now 
mentioned  ;  and  therefore  they  do  not  exclude  the  person  from  a  state  of  grace, 
but  are  consistent  with  the  love  of  God  and  the  love  of  one's  neighbour,  and  so 
are  not  mortal  or  damning  sins.  They  are  the  spots  of  God's  children,  such  as 
the  best  of  men  are  not  entirely  free  from,  though  they  are  not  imputed  to 
them.  2.  There  is  the  greatest  reason  and  equity  imaginable  here  shewn  in 
making  such  distinctions  between  sins  of  infirmity  and  deliberate  sins ;  because 
this  is  estimating  of  men  according  to  their  sincerity,  and  according  to  the  turn 
of  their  hearts,  of  which  God  alone  is  the  unerring  Judge,  and  which  He  has 
chiefly  respect  to;  because  indeed  the  heart  is  the  principal  thing — the  mind 
is  the  man. 

III.  What  kind  of  conduct  or  management  on  our  part  is  prudent  or 
proper  in  regard  to  them. — 1.  It  concerns  us  to  repent  of  them,  that  is,  to  express 
our  sorrow  and  contrition  for  them,  and  to  humble  ourselves  before  God  on 
the  account  of  them.  That  they  are  sins  is  supposed,  though  not  wilful  or 
deliberate  sins ;  and  as  they  are  sins,  they  will  stand  in  need  of  pardon ;  and 
if  they  need  pardon,  they  will  also  require  repentance,  which  is  the  condition 
on  which  pardon  is  promised,  and  by  means  of  which  it  will  be  given.  But 
then  the  question  is,  "  What  kind  of  repentance?"  First,  a  general  repentance 
may  suffice.  We  need  not,  we  cannot  be  particular  in  all  our  sins  of  infirmity. 
Who  can  tell  how  oft  he  offendeth  in  this  kind  ?  We  are  not  aware  perhaps 
of  one  half  or  a  tenth  part  of  our  failures,  and  therefore  cannot  particularly 
repent  of  them.  And  even  those  which  we  have  been  aware  of,  while  fresh 
and  new,  yet  easily  slip  out  of  our  memories  ;  and  the  very  number  of  them, 
as  they  happen  daily  or  hourly,  is  much  too  great  to  be  distinctly  considered 
or  retained.  But  there  is  a  farther  difference  between  the  repentance  proper 
to  wilful  sins  and  the  repentance  required  for  human  frailties.  A  man  must 
not  be  content  merely  to  confess  and  to  declare  his  sorrow  for  wilful  sins,  but 
he  must  renounce  and  forsake  them,  and  never  rest  satisfied  till  he  has  divested 
himself  of  them.  But  as  to  sins  of  infirmity  the  case  is  different.  They  are 
such  as  a  good  man  may  be  content  to  live  with  and  die  with,  and  that 
because  he  never  can  entirely  remove  them  from  him.  They  are  inseparable 
from  flesh  and  blood,  are  interwoven  into  our  very  frame,  and  are  as  natural 
and  necessary,  in  some  degree  at  least,  as  it  is  to  be  weak  or  frail,  unthinking 
or  unobserving  ;  or  as  it  is  to  be  liable  to  forgetfulness,  fatigue,  weariness,  and 
the  like.  2.  We  should  farther  add  our  devout  prayers  to  God,  to  make  us 
every  day  less  and  less  liable  to  them,  and  not  to  impute  them.  The  greater 
perfection  we  attain  to,  the  more  secure  are  we  against  falling  back ;  and  not 
only  so,  but  we  thereby  become  qualified  for  a  higher  and  nobler  reward. 
3.  We  must  use  our  best  endeavours  along  with  our  prayers,  to  guard  as  much 
as  possibly  we  can  even  against  those  smaller  sins,  lest  they  should  lead  to 
greater. — Archdeacon  Waterland. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS   ON    THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  32.  Retirement  for  prayer. — An  prayer.      He   prays   retired,    not   out 

afflicted  heart  ought  to  shut  itself  up  of   any   necessity,    but    both    out     of 

from  men  by  retirement,  and  to  open  obedience    to    His    Father,    who   had 

itself  to  God  by  prayer.      Christ,  as  prescribed  this  to  Him  as  well  as  all 

the   Good    Shepherd,    does    that    first  the  rest,  and  out  of  love  towards   us, 

Himself  which  He  enjoins  His  sheep  whom    He   would  instruct,  edify,  and 

to    do,    preventing     temptations     by  redeem  by  this  means. — P.  Quesnel. 

533 


chap.  xiv.         H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


Vers.     33-36.      Christ's     agony    in  of   Moab,   of    Philistia,   of   Tyre,   the 

Gethsemane     was     consistent     with —  sins  of  Imperial  Rome,  of   barbarous 

1.  The  affection  of  God  towards  Him.  heathendom,    and    then,   worse    than 

He  suffered  as  the  Substitute  of  guilty  these,  the  sins  of  Israel — sins  of  dis- 

man  (2  Cor.  v.  21) — according  to  the  obedience    and    stubbornness,   sins   of 

Divine  plan  (John  v.  22) — with  satis-  scorn  and  ingratitude,  sins  of  cruelty 

faction  to  God  (John  x.  1 7).     2.  Volun-  and  hypocrisy — when  we  think  of  all 

tary    consecration.       (1)    Christ    was  that  was  suggested  to  the  mind  of  the 

equal  with  God,  and   therefore  could  Son  of  David  as  He  looked  up  from 

not  be  coerced.     (2)  Christ  was  loved  the  mount  there  in  Gethsemane,  and 

by  God,  and  therefore  would   not  be  beheld  in  the  moonlight   the   eastern 

coerced.      (3)   Christ   was   devoted   to  wall  of  the  city  which  was  rejecting 

God,  and  therefore  needed  not   to  be  Him,  on  the  hill  over  against  the  very 

coerced.      It   was   not   the   nails   but  spot  where  He  knelt — when  we  recall 

His  love  that  bound  Him  to  the  Cross,  that   which   touches   us   more  nearly, 

He   died   when    He   could  have  lived.  the    sins    of    redeemed    Christendom, 

3.  Purity  of  character.  He  did  not  and  Christian  Churches,  of  Christian 
suffer  because  He  sinned.  (1)  Men  nations,  of  individual  Christians — your 
testified  to  His  purity.  Judas,  Pilate,  sins  and  mine,  our  sins  against  light 
Peter.  (2)  Fiends  testified  to  His  and  knowledge,  our  sins  against  grace, 
purity.  "  Holy  One  of  God."  (3)  God  our  sins  against  merciful  warnings 
testified  to  His  purity.  u  Well  pleased."  and    wholesome    fears,    all    of    them 

4.  Consciousness  of  power  to  overcome  most  intimately  present  to  Him, — can 
opposition.  "  The  prince  of  this  world  we  wonder  that  His  bodily  nature 
shall  be  cast  out."  "  And  I,  if  I  be  gave  way,  that  His  passion  seemed 
lifted  up,"  etc.  "  It  is  finished."  (l)He  to  have  been  upon  Him  before  its 
was  fully  conscious  of  the  arduousness  time,  and  that  His  sweat  was,  as  it 
of  His  work.  (2)  He  experienced  the  were,  great  drops  of  blood  falling  to 
terrible  penalties  of  His  work.    (3)  He  the  ground  ? — Canon  Liddon. 

never  shrank  from   the   consequences  Christ  in  Gethsemane  an  example  to 

of  His  work.     (4)  He  finally  accom-  us. — It  is  not  at  all  times  that  even 

plished    the    design    of   His    work. —  good   Christians   can    enter    into   the 

B.  D.  Johns.  meaning   of  this   solemn    scene ;    but 

Christ's  agony  of  soul  on  account  of  there  are  mental  trials  which  interpret 

sin. — He  was,   so   to  speak,  mentally  it  to  us,  and  which,  in  turn,  are  by  us, 

robing  Himself  for  the  great  sacrifice  ;  if  we  will,  transfigured  into   heavenly 

He  was  robing,  He  was  folding  round  blessings.       1.    There    is   the    inward 

His  sinless  manhood,  He  was  laying  conflict  which  often  precedes  our  under- 

upon  a  sinless  soul  the  sins  of  a  guilty  taking   hard   or    unwelcome    duty   or 

world.     To  us,  indeed,  the  burden  of  sacrifice ;    there   is   no   doubt    of    the 

sin  is  as  natural  almost  as  the  clothes  obligation,  and   the   spirit   is   willing, 

we  wear ;  it  sits  on  us  as  lightly,  and  but    the    flesh    is    weak.       The    eye 

for  long  tracks  of  life,  it  may  be,  we  measures  the  effort  which  is  required, 

think   nothing   at   all   about   it ;    but  the   length   and   degree  of  endurance 

to  Him   the  touch  which  we  take  so  which  must  be  attempted  ere  the  work 

easily  was  an  agony  even  in  its  lightest  is  really  done  ;  and  as  the  eye  traverses 

form.      And   when   we    consider    the  the  field  before  it,  all  the  quick  sensi- 

weight    and     magnitude,    the    subtle  bilities  of  feeling  start  up  and  rehearse 

penetrating  poison,  the  dreadful  impor-  their   past  by  anticipation,  and  cling 

tunity  of  the  burden  which  He  willed  to  and  clog  and  embarrass  the  will — 

to  bear,  when  we  think  of  that  festering  the  will  already,  perhaps,  sufficiently 

accumulation  of  ages,  the  sins  of  the  sluggish  or  reluctant — that  they  may 

men  before  the  Flood,  the  sins  of  Egypt  hold  it  back  from  the  road  of  duty, 

and  of  Babylon,  the   sins   of   Sodom,  Ah  !  struggles   such   as   this   between 
534 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


inclination  and  duty  may  be  at  times 
sorrow  for  the  soul  even  unto  death. 
When  they  come  on  you,  brace  your- 
selves by  watching,  by  praying  with 
Jesus  in  Gethsemane,   that   you  may 
learn   to   say   after   Him,   "  Not    my 
will  but   Thine   be   done."      2.    Then 
there   are   forms   of   doubt  respecting 
God's  goodness  and   providence  which 
are  a  great  trouble  at  times  to  excellent 
Christians.        There    are,    of    course, 
obvious     sources    of    relief    for    this 
calamity  —  wise      books,      thoughtful 
friends;    but   the   best   remedy   is  to 
kneel  in  spirit  side  by  side  with  Jesus 
in  Gethsemane.     It  is  a  prayer  such 
as   was    His  prayer,    which   struggles 
on  under  a  darkened  heaven  into  the 
light  beyond.     3.  And  then,  quite  dis- 
tinct from  doubt,  there  is  a  desolateness 
of  the  soul,  which,  for  long  intervals 
of  time,  sometimes  makes  God's  service 
distasteful  even  to  the  best  Christians. 
They  who  experience  it  can  but  kneel 
in   their   Gethsemane   with  that   oft- 
repeated  prayer,  "  Oh,  my  Father,  let 
this  cup  pass  from  me ;    nevertheless, 
not  what  I  will,  but  what  Thou  wilt." 
4.    Lastly,   there  is   the  approach   of 
death,  which  may  come  upon  us  sud- 
denly as  a  thief  in  the  night,  but  may 
be  also  ushered  in,  as  it  generally  is, 
by  a  preface  of  weakening  health  and 
lingering    sickness.       "  I   was    sitting 
at  luncheon,"  said  one  of  the  best  of 
Christ's  servants   in   this    generation, 
"  and  I  suddenly  felt  as  I  never  did 
before.      I    felt  that  something   had 
given  way.     I   knew  what  it  meant, 
what  it  must  mean.     I  went  up  into 
my   room ;    I    prayed    God   that   He 
would    enable    me    to    bear   what    I 
knew   was  before  me,    and   would   at 
the  last  receive  me,  for  His  dear  Son's 
sake."     It  was  the  close  of  a  life  as 
bright  as  it  was  beautiful,  only  there 
was  much  to  leave  behind,  warm  and 
affectionate  friends,  and  an  abundance 
of   those    highest    satisfactions   which 
come    with    constant     and     unselfish 
occupation  ;  but  it  was  the   summons 
to  another  world,  and,  as  such,  it  was 
obeyed.       Death  is   awful,   and   that 
first  gaze  at  the  break  up  of  all  that 


we  have  hitherto  called  life  must  ever 
have  about  it  a  touch  of  agony ;  and 
yet  if  Jesus  in  Gethsemane  is  our 
Shepherd,  surely  we  should  lack 
nothing.  "  Yea,  though  we  walk 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death,  we  shall  fear  no  evil,"  for 
He  is  with  us  who  has  gone  before, 
His  rod  and  His  staff  comfort  us. — 
Ibid. 

Comfort  to  us  from  Christ's  agony. 
— In  our  reverential  contemplation  of 
Christ's  human  perfections  we  are  apt 
to  overlook  the  important  fact  that 
they  were  not  the  result  even  of  His 
original  human  nature  left  to  itself, 
but  as  it  was  influenced  and  perfected 
by  the  same  holy  comfort  which  He 
has  imparted  to  all  His  disciples. 
"  He  was  made  in  all  things  like  unto 
us,  sin  only  excepted."  The  tears 
which  fell  on  the  grave  of  Lazarus 
flowed  from  the  same  source  out  of 
which  in  unregenerate  man  springs 
weak  repining  or  sullen  discontent ; 
his  unwearied  industry  in  "  doing 
good  "  was  but  that  which  the  miser 
or  the  ambitious  man  employs  to  other 
ends ;  and  the  calm  fortitude  with 
which-  He  endured  insult,  pain,  and 
death  was  formed  out  of  the  very  same 
qualities  which,  ungoverned  and  mis- 
directed, brought  the  guilty  robber  to  a 
cross  by  His  side.  The  materials  were 
all  human  and  our  own,  the  workman- 
ship alone  Divine.  And  is  the  Lord's 
arm  shortened  ?  Will  not  the  same  God 
that  worketh  in  us  also  enable  us  like 
Him  perfectly  to  will  and  to  do  of  His 
good  pleasure,  if  only  the  same  mind 
be  in  us  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  It 
is  true,  indeed,  that  to  us  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  given  by  measure ;  still  that 
measure  is  a  measure  of  grace  sufficient 
for  us. — S.  Hinds. 

Christ's  craving  for  sympathy. — 
Tender  touch  of  nature  to  make  Him 
with  the  whole  world  kin.  In  any  great 
trial  this  craving  of  companionship,  if 
no  more  ;  if  no  hand  can  help  nor  voice 
can  soothe,  yet  a  motionless,  silent 
companionship ;  who  is  a  stranger  to 
the  desire  ?  It  begins  in  childhood, 
when  two  infants  will  walk  hand  in 

535 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


hand  "  in  the  dark "  where  neither 
would  go  alone.  Do  these  two  inno- 
cents calculate  that  the  twain  are 
more  defensible  against  "  the  giant " 
than  one?  By  no  means.  It  is  the 
embryo  of  that  wordless  hunger  of  the 
soul,  developing  as  life  broadens,  and 
finding  its  most  exalted  manifestation 
in  Gethsemane.  Invalids,  who  have 
counted  the  strokes  of  midnight  wake- 
ful hours,  conjured  by  the  wall-flashes 
and  flickers  of  dim  lamps,  and  need 
no  other  service,  cry  out,  "  Father ! 
Mother  !  Some  one  !  "  It  is  nothing, 
only  to  hear  you  answer  that  you 
are  there.  Then  we  sit  by  them,  long 
and  patiently,  perhaps  dozing  disciple- 
like as  we  hold  their  hands,  saying  and 
doing  nothing,  but  being — near  them. 
Jesus  knew,  as  the  crisis  approached, 
that  the  acme  of  sorrow  must  ever  be 
met  in  solitude;  but  up  to  the  outer 
vestibule  of  that  solitude  He  brought 
the  eight  disciples,  and  to  the  last 
inner  door  He  brought  the  three. 
Even  when  He  must  be  alone,  in 
conflict  and  victory,  He  yet  emerges 
twice  to  feel  the  helpfulness  of  His 
beloved  near  Him.  He  wants  our 
sympathy  still  in  His  warfare  with 
sin  on  the  earth.  He  who  so  wanted 
the  society  of  men  will  have  His  own 
with  Him  where  He  is,  at  last  and 
for  ever. — E.  J.  Haynes. 

Ver.  35.  Secret  prayer. — The  prayer 
of  Jesus  Christ  was  secret.  He  had 
withdrawn  Himself  from  His  disciples. 
They  were  not  able  to  bear  the  sight  of 
such  a  conflict.  Even  at  this  distant 
period  we  read  of  it  with  painful  emo- 
tions. The  transactions  of  the  soul 
with  God  demand  secrecy.  A  deeper 
humiliation  may  become  us  before  God 
than  it  would  be  proper  for  any  about 
us  to  witness.  We  do  well,  therefore, 
to  seek  opportunities  of  retirement,  and 
should  reserve  large  portions  of  our 
time  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  nigh 
to  God. — 0.  A .  Jeary. 

"Fell  on  the  ground." — With  His 
face  to  the  earth — a  posture  betoken- 
ing far  more  abasement  and  earnest- 
ness  than  even  kneeling.     That  the 

536 


Son  of  God  should  have  prayed  in 
such  a  posture  teaches  us  the  fear- 
ful darkness  of  that  shadow  of  death 
which  He  had  resolved  to  pass  through 
on  our  account ;  that  the  Son  of  God 
should  have  prayed  in  such  a  posture 
teaches  us  that  we  must  worship  God 
with  the  worship  of  the  body.  What 
a  reproof  to  those  who  would  fain 
make  a  shew  of  prayer,  sitting  at  ease, 
to  see  the  Holy  One  of  God  prostrated 
on  the  ground  ! — M.  F.  Sadler. 

Ver.  36.  Submission  to  the  will  of 
God. — There  is  no  Christian  grace 
which  we  have  oftener  occasion  to 
exercise  than  that  of  an  humble  and 
patient  submission  to  the  will  of  God. 

1.  There  are  few  moments  of  our  lives 
in  which  we  are  not  either  under  the 
pressure  of  some  evil  which  lies  heavy 
upon  our  minds,  or  under  the  appre- 
hension of  some  grievous  calamity 
which  hangs  over  our  heads  and  is 
ready  to  fall  down  upon  us.  In  both 
these  cases  an  entire  resignation  to  the 
good  pleasure  of  God  is  necessary,  that 
we  should  without  repining  bear 
whatever  He  hath  been  pleased  to 
inflict,  and  that  we  should  have  our 
minds  well  prepared  to  endure  what- 
ever He  in  His  infinite  wisdom  shall 
think  expedient  farther  to  lay  upon  us. 

2.  Those  who  have  taken  the  greatest 
care  to  arm  themselves  against  the 
time  of  conflict  find  it  sometimes 
difficult  enough  to  stand  their  ground 
and  to  come  off  conquerors  in  the  day 
of  battle  ;  but  those  who  have  in  their 
prosperous  state  made  no  provision 
against  adversity,  those  who  fall  into 
the  midst  of  troubles  defenceless  and 
unarmed,  those  who  are  then  to  learn 
the  hard  duty  of  submission  when 
they  are  called  to  practise  it,  will  be 
much  more  at  a  loss  how  to  bear  up 
against  evils  unforeseen  and  unpro- 
vided against,  and  how  to  demean 
themselves  in  the  needful  time  of 
trouble.  3.  The  difficulties  with  which 
we  are  to  encounter  during  our 
pilgrimage  in  this  world  are  very 
many  and  very  great,  so  many  that 
we  may  not  hope  by  any  foresight  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  XIV. 


escape  them  all,  and  some  of  them  so  much  less  likely  is  it  that  we  should 

great   that    without   due   preparation  know? — Jas.  Lonsdale, 
we  cannot  expect  to  be  patient  under  Obedience    learnt   by   suffering. — No 

them.     Liable  we  are  to  be  attacked  one  has  ever  learned  obedience  to  the 

with  troubles  of  mind  and  -with  pains  will  of  God,  and  joy  in  that  obedience, 

of  body,  with  losses  of  our  nearest  and  except    through    suffering.      He    who 

dearest  friends,  with  the  ruin  of  our  endures  because  he  must  suffers  only 

estates,  and  with  the  blastings  of  our  as   a  servant.     He  who  endures  only 

reputations  :  these  we  are  obnoxious  to  because  he  hopes  to  gain  something  by 

in  our  own  persons,  and  in  the  persons  it  is  not  a  Christian  at  all.     Christ's 

of  those  who  are  so  closely  tied  to  us  submission   is   a   lesson   of   utter   un- 

by  blood  or  by  friendship,  by  affection  selfishness.     "  God   has   good   ends   in 

or  by  interest,  that  what  happens  to  view  for  you,"  we  say,  to  console  the 

them  touches  us  as  nearly  and  afflicts  sufferer.     But  God  had  ends  in  view 

us  as  sensibly  as  what  happens  to  our-  in  Christ's  sufferings,  not  for  His  Son, 

selves.      4.  Upon   all   these   occasions  but  for  His  Son's  enemies.     He  only 

which  do  so  frequently  occur,  which  has  learned  to  suffer  as  a  son  who  has 

are  now,  it  is  to  be  feared,  present  to  found  that  the  will  of  God  is  sweet 

many  of  us,  and  which  to  those  who  even  when  it  involves  what  is  in  itself 

may   think    them    at    a    very    great  bitter.     To  suffer  gladly  because  it  is 

distance  may  probably  be  much  nearer  our   Father's  will  is   to  have  learned 

than  they  imagine,  submission  to  the  obedience.     When  that  is  learned,  the 

will  of  God  is  a  duty  which  we  are  Christian    need    not    wait    for    great 

called  to  exercise,  and  which  therefore  afflictions,   but    finds    in    every  little 

it  concerns  us   to  be  well  acquainted  trial,  every  disappointment,  each  daily 

with  and   to  be  well  prepared   for. —  cross  and  care,   a  discipline  to  bring 

Bishop  Smalridge.  him  into  richer  revelations  of  sonship 

"  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  with  God. 
pass  from  Me"  was  the  first  thought 

that    human    frailty    suggested   even  Ver.  37.    "  Couldest  not  thou  watch 

to  our  Blessed  Saviour  Himself ;  and  one    hour  ? " — Probably   many    of    us 

therefore  it  cannot  be  blameworthy  in  would    be   discomposed   by  an   arith- 

us  if  upon  the  first  hasty  view  of  any  metical    estimate   of    our   communion 

great   calamity  ready  to  overtake   us  with  God.     It  might  reveal  to  us  the 

we  do  in  the  like  manner  desire  and  secret  of  much  of  our  apathy  in  prayer, 

beg  that  we  may  escape  it ;  but  when  because  it  might  disclose  how  little  we 

we  have  time  to  consider  and  deliberate,  desire   to    be    alone    with    God.     We 

we    must    bring   our   natural   desires  might  learn  from  such  a  computation 

under  a  strict  discipline,  and  curb  them  that   Augustine's    idea   of   prayer    as 

with  the  same  restraint  as  Christ  did  :  "the   measure   of    love"  is    not   very 

"Nevertheless,  not  what   I   will,  but  flattering   to  us.     We  do  not  grudge 

what  Thou  wilt." — Ibid.  time   given   to   a   privilege  which  we 

Christ's   two   wishes. — Christ  is  not  love.     Why  should  we  expect  to  enjoy 

two  Christs,  but  one ;  yet  has  He  two  a   duty   which   we   have   no    time   to 

wishes — a  general  wish,  and  a  particu-  enjoy  ?     Do  we  enjoy  anything  which 

lar  wish.     His   particular   wish  is  to  we  do  in  a  hurry  ?     Enjoyment  pre- 

escape     this     suffering,    His    general  supposes  something  of  mental  leisure, 

wish   that   God's   will   be   done.     The  How   often  do  we  say  of  a  pleasure, 

one   is   the  wish   for    His   own   sake,  "I   wanted  more  time  to  enjoy  it  to 

the  other   the   wish    for   God's    sake,  my  heart's  content."     But  of  all  em- 

The    one  is    a   temporary   wish,    the  ployments  none  can  be  more  dependent 

other   an    enduring   wish.     If   Christ  on  "  time  for  it "  than  stated  prayer, 

knew  not  before  He  prayed  what  was  Fugitive    acts   of    devotion,    to   be  of 

possible    and    what    impossible,    how  high  value,  must  be  sustained  by  other 

537 


chap.  XIV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


approaches  to  God,  deliberate,  pre-  speak  plainly  and  without  ornament, 
meditated,  regular,  which  shall  be  to  And  Jesus  speaks  thus  to  God  because 
those  acts  like  the  abutments  of  a  He  has  clothed  Himself  with  our 
suspension  bridge  to  the  arch  that  humility  and  poverty. — Ibid. 
spans  the  stream.  It  will  never  do  to  Trouble — great,  searching,  over- 
be  in  desperate  haste  in  laying  such  whelming  trouble — has  no  varied  die- 
foundations.  This  thoughtful  duty,  tion.  Sorrow  has  but  few  words, 
this  spiritual  privilege,  this  foretaste  These  are  syllabled  by  lips  that  are 
of  incorporeal  life,  this  communion  pale  and  quivering.  There  is  a  terrible 
with  an  unseen  Friend — can  you  expect  concentration  in  grief.  The  soul  that 
to  enjoy  it  as  you  would  a  repartee  or  groans  under  its  pressure  is  swathed 
a  dance  ? — "  The  Still  Hour."  in  darkness,  even  amid  the  splendour 

of    high    noon.     The    light    is    gone. 

Ver.  38.   Watching  and  prayer. — If  The  stars  glitter  no  more.     The  voices 

we  must  watch  and  pray,  to  prevent  of   the  loving  are   unheard.     Oh   the 

and  withstand  temptation,  let  us  not  frightful   abstraction    of   woe  ! — Dean 

be  surprised  that  so  many  enter  into  Lefroy. 
it  and  fall  thereby  :  it  is  for  no  other 

reason  but  because  there  are  very  few  Vers.    41,    42.    The  past    and    the 

who  watch  and  pray  in  that  manner  future. — He  had  warned  the  disciples 

and  with  that  constancy  which  they  in  vain  to  watch  and  pray,  and  now  it 

ought.     Prayer  is   necessary  in  order  was  too  late  for  that — all  was  over ; 

to  watch,  and  watchfulness  in  order  to  the    opportunity    had     slipped    away 

pray  ;  and  both  the  one  and  the  other  from  them  and  was  buried  in  the  past, 

are    so  to  secure  us  from  temptation.  so  that,  as  far  as  this  duty  went,  they 

Peter  was   deficient   in   vigilance   be-  might  sleep  on,  for  it  must  remain  for 

cause  he  was  so  in  prayer ;  and  through  ever   undone.     But   then    He    turned 

the    neglect   of    both    he    fell,    being  away  at  once  from  this  contemplation 

overcome  by  the  fear  of  death  and  the  of    the    unchangeable,    and    pointing 

love  of  life. — P.  Quesnel.  onward    to    present    duty    He    said, 

"  Rise,    let    us   be   going."     The    one 

Ver.   39.  The  simplicity  and  plain-  thing  was  beyond   their  control,    and 

ness   of  Christ  in  His  prayers  is   an  though  they  might  mourn  they  could 

important  lesson,  and  of  great  use  and  not     alter     it ;    there    would    be    no 

advantage.     A   Christian   who    prays  answer  to  their  endeavours  but  "  Too 

to  God   is  not  an   orator  who  would  late,"  so  that   it   behoved   them   now 

persuade    by    his    eloquence,    but    a  to  turn  at  once  to  the  courses  which 

beggar  who  would  move  to  compassion  were  still  open. — J.  Percival,  LL.D. 
by  his  poverty  and  humility.     These 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  43—52. 

(Parallels:   Matt.   xxvi.   47-56;   Luke  xxii.   47-53;   John  xviii.  1-11.) 

The  captive  Christ  and  the  circle  round  Him. — A  comparison  of  the  first  three 
Gospels  in  this  section  shews  a  degree  of  similarity,  often  verbal,  which  is  best 
accounted  for  by  supposing  that  a  common  (oral)  "  gospel,"  which  had  become 
traditionally  fixed  by  frequent  and  long  repetition,  underlies  them  all.  Mark's 
account  is  briefest,  and  grasps  with  sure  instinct  the  essential  points ;  but,  even 
in  his  brevity,  he  pauses  to  tell  of  the  young  man  who  so  nearly  shared  the 
Lord's  apprehension.  The  canvas  is  narrow  and  crowded  ;  but  we  may  see 
unity  in  the  picture,  if  we  regard  as  the  central  fact  the  sacrilegious  seizure  of 
Jesus,  and  the  other  incidents  and  persons  as  grouped  round  it  and  Him,  and 
reflecting  various  moods  of  men's  feelings  towards  Him. 
538 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiV. 


I.  The  avowed  and  hypocritical  enemies  of  Incarnate  Love. — Again  we  have 
Mark's  favourite  "  straightway,"  so  frequent  in  the  beginning  of  the  Gospel,  and 
occurring  twice  here,  vividly  painting  both  the  sudden  inburst  of  the  crowd 
which  interrupted  Christ's  words  and  broke  the  holy  silence  of  the  garden,  and 
Judas'  swift  kiss.  The  passionless  narrative  tells  the  criminal  and  his  crime 
with  unsparing,  unmoved  tones,  which  have  caught  some  echo  beforehand  of  the 
Judge's  voice.  To  name  the  sinner,  and  to  state  without  cloak  or  periphrasis 
what  his  deed  really  was,  is  condemnation  enough.  Which  of  us  could  stand 
it  ?  Judas  was  foremost  of  the  crowd.  That  the  black  depths  of  his  spirit 
were  agitated  is  plain  from  two  things — the  quick  kiss,  and  the  nauseous 
repetition  of  it.  "  Straightway  ...  he  kissed  Him  much."  Probably  the 
swiftness  and  vehemence,  so  graphically  expressed  by  these  two  touches,  were 
due  not  only  to  fear  lest  Christ  should  escape,  and  to  hypocrisy  over-acting  its 
part,  but  reveal  a  struggle  with  conscience  and  ancient  affection,  and  a  fierce 
determination  to  do  the  thing  and  have  it  over.  The  very  extravagances  of  evil 
betray  the  divided  and  stormy  spirit  of  the  doer.  That  traitor's  kiss  has 
become  a  symbol  for  all  treachery  cloaked  in  the  garb  of  affection.  Its  lessons 
and  warnings  are  obvious  ;  but  this  other  may  be  added — that  such  audacity  and 
nauseousness  of  hypocrisy  is  not  reached  at  a  leap,  but  presupposes  long  under- 
ground tunnels  of  insincere  discipleship,  through  which  a  man  has  burrowed, 
unseen  by  others,  and  perhaps  unsuspected  by  himself.  Much  hypocrisy  of  the 
unconscious  sort  precedes  the  deliberate  and  conscious.  How  much  less  criminal 
and  disgusting  was  the  rude  crowd  at  Judas'  heels  !  Most  of  them  were  mere 
passive  tools.  Half -ignorant  hatred,  which  had  had  ample  opportunities  of 
becoming  knowledge  and  love,  offended  formalism,  blind  obedience  to  ecclesias- 
tical superiors,  the  dislike  of  goodness — these  impelled  the  rabble  who  burst  into 
the  Garden  of  Gethsemane. 

II.  Incarnate  Love  bound  and  patient. — "  They  laid  hands  on  Him."  That  was 
the  first  stage  in  outrage — the  quick  stretching  of  many  hands  to  secure  the 
unresisting  Prisoner.  They  "  took  Him,"  or,  as  perhaps  we  might  better  render, 
"  They  held  Him  fast,"  as  would  have  been  done  with  any  prisoner.  Surely 
the  quietest  way  of  telling  that  stupendous  fact  is  the  best !  It  is  easy  to 
exclaim,  and,  after  the  fashion  of  some  popular  writers  of  Lives  of  Christ,  to 
paint  fancy  pictures.  It  is  better  to  be  sparing  of  words,  like  Mark,  and 
silently  to  meditate  on  the  patient  long-suffering  of  the  love  which  submitted  to 
these  indignities,  and  on  the  blindness  which  had  no  welcome  but  this  for  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh.  Both  are  in  full  operation  to-day,  and  the  germs  of  the 
latter  are  in  us  all.  Mark  confines  himself  to  that  one  of  Christ's  sayings  which 
sets  in  the  clearest  light  His  innocence  and  meek  submissiveness.  With  all  its 
calmness  and  patience,  it  is  majestic  and  authoritative,  and  sounds  as  if  spoken 
from  a  height  far  above  the  hubbub.  Its  question  is  not  only  an  assertion  of 
His  innocence,  and  therefore  of  His  captors'  guilt,  but  also  declares  the  impotence 
of  force  as  against  Him  :  "  Swords  and  staves  to  take  Me  !  "  All  that  parade 
of  arms  was  out  of  place,  for  He  was  no  evil-doer;  needless,  for  He  did  not 
resist ;  and  powerless,  unless  He  chose  to  let  them  prevail.  The  second  clause 
of  Christ's  remonstrance  appeals  to  their  knowledge  of  Him  and  His  words,  and 
to  their  attitude  towards  Him.  He  would  have  them  ask,  "  Why  this  change 
in  us,  since  He  is  the  same  ?  "  Did  He  deserve  to  be  hailed  as  King  a  few  short 
hours  ago  ?  How,  then,  before  the  palm  branches  are  withered,  can  He  deserve 
rude  hands  ?  The  third  clause  rises  beyond  all  notice  of  the  human  agents,  and 
soars  to  the  Divine  purpose  which  wrought  itself  out  through  them.  That 
Divine  purpose  does  not  make  them  guiltless,  but  it  makes  Jesus  submissive. 
We,  too,  should  train  ourselves  to  see  the  hand  that  moves  the  pieces  and  to 
make  God's  will  our  will,  as  becomes  sons.     Then  Christ's  calm  will  be  ours, 

539 


chap.  xiv.        H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


and,  ceasing  from  self  and  conscious  of  God  everywhere  and  yielding  our  wills, 
which  are  the  self  of  ourselves,  to  Him,  we  shall  enter  into  rest. 

III.  Rash  love  defending  its  Lord  with  wrong  weapons. — Peter  may  have 
felt  that  he  must  do  something  to  vindicate  his  recent  boasting,  and,  with  his 
usual  headlong  haste,  stops  neither  to  ask  what  good  his  sword  is  likely  to  do, 
nor  to  pick  his  man  and  take  deliberte  aim  at  him.  If  swords  were  to  be  used, 
they  should  do  something  more  effectual  than  hacking  off  a  poor  servant's  ear. 
Christ  and  His  cause  are  to  be  defended  by  other  weapons.  Christian  heroism 
endures,  and  does  not  smite.  Not  only  swords,  but  bitter  words,  which  wound 
worse  than  they,  are  forbidden  to  Christ's  soldier.  We  are  ever  being  tempted 
to  fight  Christ's  battles  with  the  world's  weapons ;  and  many  a  "  defender  of 
the  faith  "  in  later  days,  perhaps  even  in  this  very  enlightened  day,  has  repeated 
Peter's  fault  with  less  excuse  than  he,  and  with  very  little  of  either  his  courage 
or  his  love. 

IV.  Cowardly  love  forsaking  its  Lord. — "  They  all  forsook  Him,  and  fled." 
And  who  will  venture  to  say  that  he  would  not  have  done  so  too  ?  The  tree 
that  can  stand  such  a  blast  must  have  deep  roots.  Their  flight  may  teach  us  to 
place  little  reliance  on  our  emotions,  however  genuine  and  deep,  and  to  look  for 
the  security  of  our  continual  adherence  to  Christ — not  to  our  fluctuating  feelings, 
but  to  His  steadfast  love. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  51,  52.  The  young  man  in  the  linen  cloth. — As  Jesus  was  being  led  a 
prisoner  through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  to  the  palace  of  Caiaphas,  a  certain 
youth,  awakened  probably  by  the  uproar  they  made,  sprang  from  his  bed,  seized 
the  first  wrapper  that  came  to  hand,  and,  hastily  folding  himself  in  it,  ran  out 
into  the  moonlight,  to  learn  the  cause  of  the  disturbance.  As  he  ran  after  and 
caught  up  the  retiring  group  of  officers,  he  saw  they  had  a  prisoner  in  their 
midst,  and  in  the  prisoner  he  recognised  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  rabbi  to  whom 
no  doubt  he  had  listened  with  delight  as  He  taught  in  the  Temple  and  in  the 
streets  ;  for,  we  are  told,  he  was  following  Him,  not  simply  following  the  crowd. 
In  Him  his  interest  is  so  great,  so  obvious,  that  it  compels  him  to  remonstrate 
with  the  officers  who  had  arrested  Him,  or  to  address  words  of  comfort  and  hope 
to  their  Prisoner.  For  the  officers,  irritated  by  his  too  obvious  sympathy  with 
Jesus,  lay  hold  upon  him,  and  are  about  to  arrest  him  as  a  follower  of  the  Galilean 
Rabbi.  But  for  this  the  young  man  is  not  prepared.  He  slips  out  of  the  linen 
robe,  which  they  have  grasped,  and  runs  back,  naked,  to  the  house  from  which 
but  a  few  moments  before  he  had  run  out. 

I.  In  all  probability  the  young  man  was  St.  Mark  himself,  the  writer  of  this 
Gospel. — 1.  At  least  one  other  of  the  Evangelists,  St.  John,  when  he  has  to  speak 
of  himself,  does  not  name  himself,  but  speaks  of  himself  in  the  indefinite  way  in 
which  "  a  certain  young  man  "  is  here  introduced  to  us.  So  that,  if  the  young 
man  were  Mark,  it  might  well  be  that  he  would  not  name  himself,  but  give  some 
such  indefinite  allusion  to  himself  as  is  here  employed.  2.  What  is  there  in  this 
incident  to  warrant,  or  even  to  account  for,  its  insertion  into  the  narrative, 
unless  it  be  a  personal  interest  ?  It  is  mentioned  in  no  one  of  the  other  Gospels. 
It  has  no  direct  bearing  on  the  story  of  Christ's  arrest  and  trial.  If  Mark 
himself  was  the  young  man  that  sprang  up  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  saw  Jesus 
led  by  the  officers  to  be  tried  by  the  high  priest,  we  can  understand  with  what 
profound  interest  he  would  afterward  recall  every  detail  of  that  incident,  and 
how  gladly,  when  he  wrote  his  Gospel,  he  would  connect  himself,  though  in  the 
most  modest  and  unobtrusive  way,  with  that  supreme  crisis  in  the  history  of  his 
Lord  and  ours.  Whereas,  on  any  other  hypothesis,  supposing  the  young  man 
to  have  been  any  one  but  himself,  we  can  see  no  sufficient  reason  why  he  should 
pause  to  narrate  so  trifling  an  event.     3.  The  minute  details  crowded  into  this 

540 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


brief  sentence  look  as  if  they  could  only  be  drawn  from  personal  recollection. 
As  we  read  it,  if  at  least  we  read  with  an  alert  imagination,  we  can  see  the 
young  man  lying  on  his  pallet ;  we  can  hear  the  brawl  in  the  street  that  awakes 
him  ;  we  see  him  start  up  and  snatch  at  the  first  covering  that  comes  to  hand, 
cast  it  hastily  about  him,  run  out  into  the  moonlit  street,  recognise  Jesus,  and 
interfere  impulsively  with  the  officers  in  the  execution  of  their  duty ;  we  see 
him  roused  to  a  sense  of  his  danger  as  they  lay  rough  hands  upon  him,  and  run 
away,  leaving  the  costly  linen  robe  in  their  hands.  I  have  sometimes  wondered 
whether  there  was  any  prophetic  symbolism  in  the  seeming  accident  that  the 
young  man  should  wrap  himself  in  a  sindon.  The  Lord  Jesus  was  on  His  way 
to  the  Cross  and  the  grave,  though  as  yet  no  official  sentence  had  been  pronounced 
against  Him.  Was  this  fine  linen  web,  this  costly  Indian  fabric,  which  came  so 
strangely  and  unexpectedly  into  the  hands  of  His  guard,  an  omen  of  what  that 
sentence  would  be  ?  Any  Jew  would  have  set  the  web  aside  to  be  a  winding- 
sheet.  Is  the  winding-sheet  brought  into  the  sacred  narrative  to  indicate  that 
Jesus  was  now  about  to  die  ?  4.  The  mother  of  Mark,  as  we  learn  from  Acts 
xii.  1 2,  had  a  house  in  Jerusalem ;  and  it  has  been  generally  held  that  St.  Mark 
was  a  native  of  this  city,  and  dwelt  in  it  until  he  became  a  missionary  of  the 
Cross  :  so  that,  unlike  most  of  the  disciples  and  friends  of  Jesus,  he  would  be 
living  in  Jerusalem,  and  perhaps  in  that  very  street  through  which  Jesus  was 
led  on  the  night  of  His  betrayal.  From  the  fact,  moreover,  that  Mark's  mother 
had  a  house  of  her  own  in  the  metropolis,  and  that  this  house  was  spacious 
enough  to  be  the  habitual  resort  of  the  primitive  Church,  we  infer  that  she  was 
a  woman  of  some  wealth  and  consideration — a  woman,  therefore,  in  whose  house 
a  costly  Indian  fabric,  such  as  the  young  man  cast  about  him,  might  well  lie 
ready  to  his  hand.  5.  The  impulsive  character  of  this  young  man — soon  hot, 
soon  cold,  ready  to  dare  all  risks  at  one  moment  that  he  may  follow  Jesus,  and 
ready  at  the  next  moment  to  abandon  his  sole  and  costly  garment  that  he  may 
escape  the  hands  of  the  officers — accords  entirely  with  what  we  know  of  the 
character  of  Mark  as  depicted  by  St.  Luke. 

II.  Why  was  this  incident  recorded?  What  is  there  in  it  for  us? — 1.  It 
teaches  us  at  least  this  lesson  :  that  Christ  has  room  in  His  service,  and  a 
discipline,  for  warm  and  impulsive  natures  ;  that  even  for  these  He  can  find 
some  duty  to  discharge,  some  function  to  fulfil.  St.  Mark  was  a  man  of  this 
kind — a  man  who  was  apt  to  begin  to  build  without  counting  the  cost.  He 
was  of  an  eager,  sensitive,  and  impressible  temperament,  as  the  graphic  touches 
which  abound  in  his  Gospel  indicate ;  but,  like  most  persons  of  this  sensitive, 
impulsive  temperament,  he  was  fickle  and  unsteadfast.  Probably  his  imagina- 
tion was  very  keen  and  active,  as  in  such  cases  it  often  is,  and  painted  the 
beauty  and  heroism  of  a  certain  line  of  conduct  very  brightly,  but  painted  just 
as  darkly  the  terrors  of  the  conflict  which  to  pursue  such  a  line  of  conduct 
would  involve.  And  thus  he  would  be  easily  moved  to  undertake  enterprises 
which  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  carry  through.  Even  when  he  had  grown 
older  and  was  an  avowed  servant  of  Christ,  Mark  betrayed  the  same  infirmity, 
the  same  unsteadfast  poise  of  spirit  between  conflicting  impulses,  the  same 
sensitive  apprehension  of  the  lions  that  lurk  in  the  path  of  devotion  to  any 
great  cause.  He  started  with  Paul  and  Barnabas  on  their  first  missionary 
journey,  just  as  he  rose  from  his  bed  to  follow  Christ  to  the  hall  of  judgment 
through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  ;  but  just  as  he  forsook  Christ  when  the 
officers  laid  their  rude  grasp  on  Him,  so  also  he  abandoned  Paul  and  Barnabas 
before  their  work  was  well  begun  (Acts  xiii.  13).  His  motive  for  abandoning 
them  was  the  very  motive  which  led  him  to  abandon  Christ — the  fear  of  harm 
and  loss.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  about  to  plunge  into  the  wild  mountains  of 
Asia  Minor,  to  encounter  "  perils  of  rivers  and  perils  of  robbers  "  among  the 

541 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


lawless  and  marauding  highland  clans.  Mark  did  not  like  the  prospect.  And 
so,  just  as  they  were  about  to  face  their  gravest  perils,  and  to  win  their  greatest 
successes,  he  forsook  them — deserted  them,  as  St.  Paul  indignantly  maintained — 
and  returned  to  his  mother's  comfortable  house  in  Jerusalem.  Yet  even  for 
this  impulsive  and  inconstant  man  there  was  not  only  room  but  an  appropriate 
discipline  in  the  service  of  Christ.  In  his  later  epistles  St.  Paul  speaks  of  Mark 
as  "  a  fellow- worker  in  the  kingdom  of  God,"  and  as  "  a  comfort  to  himself  "  ; 
and  in  his  very  last  letter  he  describes  him  as  being  "  profitable  to  him  in  the 
ministry."  We  may  be  sure,  therefore,  that  this  man,  once  so  impulsive,  so 
unreliable,  so  driven  by  contrary  winds  and  tossed,  became,  by  the  teaching  and 
grace  of  Christ,  a  brave  and  single-hearted  servant  of  the  Lord  whose  service 
he  had  more  than  once  abandoned.  2.  As  we  recall  the  past,  we  cannot  but 
see  that  our  lives  have  not  flowed  on  in  a  single  steady  current  to  an  eternal 
goal ;  that  they  have  been  broken  into  many,  and  even  into  adverse,  currents, 
some  flowing  in  one  direction,  some  in  another,  most  of  them  losing  themselves 
in  mere  marshes  and  bogs,  instead  of  carrying  health  and  fertility  along  their 
appointed  course.  We  are  conscious  that  unity  has  been  wanting  to  our  lives, 
so  that  they  will  not  have  left  one,  and  that  a  strong  and  good,  impression  on 
the  world,  but  many  broken  and  even  contradictory  impressions.  Our  influence, 
as  we  readily  acknowledge,  has  not  been  wholly  good  ;  it  has  not  always  helped 
to  foster  all  the  good  growths  springing  up  around  us ;  it  has  told  almost  as 
often  and  as  much  for  evil  as  for  good.  We  feel  that,  like  St.  Mark,  we  have 
again  and  again  abandoned  the  Master  we  profess  and  wish  to  serve.  And 
at  times  we  lose  all  hope  of  ever  reaching  that  constant  mind,  that  settled  and 
steadfast  loyalty  to  Him,  that  entire  devotion  to  His  service,  which  yet  we  long 
to  reach,  without  which,  should  we  fail  to  reach  it,  we  are  sure  that  we  cannot 
know  any  true  happiness  or  peace.  At  such  times  as  these  it  will  give  us  new 
heart  to  remember  that  even  for  Mark  there  was  reserved  a  place  in  the 
service  of  Christ,  and  a  discipline  which  enabled  him  to  fill  that  place.  For  the 
Master  will  deal  with  us  as  He  dealt  with  him.  If  we  have  any  true  love  for 
Him,  any  sincere  desire  to  live  to  Him,  He  will  teach  us  by  our  very  errors, 
and  train  us  by  our  very  failures,  and  make  our  dissatisfaction  with  ourselves  a 
spur  to  a  more  constant  and  cheerful  obedience. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 


OUTLINES  AND   COMMENTS  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  43.  Who  are  like  Judas  to-day  ?  nothing   but   violence,    rebellion,   and 

— Those  who  know  their  duty,  feel  the  treason. — P.  Quesnel. 
power  of  the  truth,  see  the  worth  of 

Christ,  recognise  the  privilege  of  the  Yers.  44,  45.  The  kiss  of  treachery. 

Christian  life,  and  yet  turn  their  back  — The  kiss  was  a  customary  expression 

on  all  this  and  give  themselves  up  as  of  mingled  affection  and  reverence  on 

the  slaves  of  their  passions.     Knowing  the   part   of  the   disciples  when  they 

perfectly  the  wrong  they  do,  they  do  met  their   Master.     To   suppose   that 

not  hesitate  to  injure  Christ  for  what  Judas  deliberately  selected  an  action 

they  consider  their  advantage.  which  was  as  remote  as  possible  from 

A  picture  of  apostates. — We  see  here  his  then  true  feelings  is  an  unnecessary 

but  too  lively  a  picture  of  apostates,  supposition.     It  is  more  true  to  human 

who  have  no  sooner  deserted  from  the  nature  to  suppose  that  he  endeavoured 

Church    but   they   persecute    it,    put  to  appease  whatever  there  may  have 

themselves  at  the  head  of  conspiracies  been  in  the  way  of  lingering   protest 

against  the  higher  powers,  and  breathe  in  his  conscience  by  an  act  of  formal 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


reverence  that  was  dictated  to  him  by 
long  habit,  and  that  served  to  veil 
from  himself  the  full  enormity  of  his 
crime  at  the  moment  of  his  doing  it. 
In  like  manner  the  brigands  in  the 
south  of  Europe  have  been  known  to 
accompany  deeds  of  thefts  and  deeds 
of  blood  with  previous  ejaculations 
whether  of  piety  or  superstition,  and 
cases  have  been  heard  farther  north 
of  pickpockets  when  the  thief  and  his 
victim  have  been  kneeling  side  by  side 
in  a  church  or  sitting  side  by  side  in 
a  meeting-house.  In  these  instances 
religion  may  be  employed  not  simply 
as  a  blind  to  an  immoral  act,  but  as  a 
sort  of  salve  to  a  protesting  conscience. 
The  passing  thrill  of  emotion  seems  to 
do  something  towards  reducing  the 
magnitude  of  the  crime  which  accom- 
panies it.  The  case  of  Judas  has 
become  a  proverb  for  all  those  pro- 
ceedings whereby,  under  the  semblance 
of  outward  reverence  for  religion  or  of 
devotion  to  its  interests,  its  substance 
or  its  reality  is  betrayed.  —  Canon 
Liddon. 

The  hardihood  of  evil. — Note :  1. 
The  malignant  influence  of  an  evi] 
leader.  2.  The  awful  change  in 
Judas.  He  might  have  been  the 
leader  of  the  twelve,  of  the  holy  com- 
pany of  disciples,  and  sinks  to  be 
the  leader  of  this  vile  crew.  3.  The 
hardihood  of  evil  in  kissing  Christ  : 
such  resolute  effrontery,  such  presump- 
tuous invasion  of  that  face  before 
which  earth  and  heaven  shall  flee 
away !  4.  The  infinite  meekness  of 
Christ.  He  requires  us  to  endure  the 
blow  of  an  enemy.  He  endures  the 
loathsome  kiss.  5.  As  their  number 
betrayed  their  sense  of  Christ's  great- 
ness, so  this  kiss  proclaims  Him 
worthy  of  allegiance  and  of  love. 
6.  The  worst  opponents  of  Christ  are 
still  those  who  betray  with  a  kiss — 
such  as  those  who  oppose  His  claims 
while  affecting  to  revere  His  character, 
and  deny  His  Saviourship  while  ac- 
knowledging the  excellence  of  His 
doctrine.  7.  The  depravity  of  human 
nature.  For  these  men  are  our 
brothers.     There  is  no  sermon  on  the 


need  of  repentance  can  be  so  convict- 
ing as  this  narrative  of  what  human 
nature  has  actually  done. — R.  Glover, 

Yer.  47.  Worldly  weapons. — In  rela- 
tion to  the  advancement  of  the  Church 
of  Christ,  worldly  views,  a  worldly 
temper,  worldly  methods,  efforts  to 
secularise  in  order  to  popularise,  how- 
ever well  meaning,  are  but  the  swing- 
ing of  swords,  which,  if  unchecked, 
would  nullify  Scripture  and  bar  the 
way  of  life  to  men.  There  is  a  law 
in  our  members  warring  against  the 
law  of  our  minds.  As  opportunity 
offers  it  eagerly  puts  a  sword  in  our 
hands  and  commands  the  use  of  it.  We 
obey  too  often,  to  our  own  and  others' 
spiritual  injury  and  the  hindrance  of 
the  sacred  cause  we  represent  and  would 
help. — Wm.  M.  Campbell. 

Yer.  50.  A  bad  deed  by  good  men. — 
The  apprehension  of  Christ  in  the 
garden  was  to  the  disciples  a  mystery. 
It  confounded  them.  In  their  ignor- 
ance they  were  terrified,  and  deserted 
Christ.  It  was  not  want  of  love,  but 
lack  of  courage.  It  was  an  eclipse,  not 
an  extinction,  of  their  faith. 

I.  The  disciples  deserted  Christ 
after  promising  not  to  do  so  ? — 1.  They 
had  promised  after  being  warned. 
"  Ye  shall  be  offended  because  of  Me," 
etc.  Christ  candidly  spoke  of  suffering. 
"  To  be  forewarned  is  to  be  forearmed." 
2.  They  had  promised  independently 
of  each  other.  "If  all  men,"  etc. 
"  So  said  all  His  disciples."  3.  They 
had  promised  whatever  would  be  the 
result.     "  Go  with  Thee  to  prison,"  etc. 

II.  The  disciples  deserted  Christ 
when  He  was  in  difficulties. — 1.  The 
instability  of  the  best  human  friend- 
ship. 2.  The  terribleness  of  Christ's 
sufferings.  3.  The  necessity  of  Chris- 
tians counting  the  cost. 

III.  The  disciples  deserted  Christ, 
though  He  suffered  in  their  cause. — 
This  made  them  guilty  of — 1.  Ingrati- 
tude. 2.  Discouragement.  3.  Cowardice. 

IY.  The  disciples  deserted  Christ, 
but  He  remained  steadfast. — 1.  The 
faithfulness  of  Christ.     2.  The  inde- 

543 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


pendence  of  Christ.  3.  The  courage 
of  Christ.  4.  The  forbearance  of 
Christ. — B.  D.  Johns. 

Christ  forsaken  by  His  disciples. — 
I.  How  weak  is  the  resolution  of  fallen 
man! — Man,  as  originally  formed  by- 
God,  was  capable  of  carrying,  into 
execution  whatever  his  judgment  ap- 
proved or  his  will  decreed ;  but  it  is 
far  otherwise  with  us  in  our  present 
state.  How  earnest  are  many,  when 
lying  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  to  redeem 
their  time;  and  how  determined,  if 
ever  they  should  recover,  to  devote  the 
remainder  of  their  lives  to  God  !  Yet 
they  are  no  sooner  restored  to  health 
than  they  go  back  to  their  former 
habits  and  companions,  and  leave  to 
a  distant  period  the  performance  of 
their  vows.  It  is  thus  also  with  many 
after  an  awakening  discourse  :  they 
see  how  vain  it  is  to  render  unto  God 
a  mere  formal  or  hypocritical  service, 
and  they  resolve  that  henceforth  they 
will  offer  Him  an  undivided  heart. 
But  their  hearts  are  not  steadfast  in 
the  covenant  which  they  make,  and 
their  lives  are  little  else  than  a  series 
of  reformations  and  declensions  with- 
out any  solid  improvement  in  the 
Divine  life. 

II.  What  great  evils  are  even  good 
men  capable  of  committing ! — What 
ingratitude  were  these  disciples  guilty 
of  in  forsaking  their  Lord,  when  their 
presence  might  perhaps  be  of  most 
essential  service  to  Him  ?  The  unbelief 
also  which  they  manifested  on  this  occa- 
sion was  highly  criminal.  They  had 
been  repeatedly  told  by  Jesus  that,  after 
His  death  and  resurrection,  He  would 
meet  them  in  Galilee.  This  was  equal 
to  a  promise  on  His  part  that  they 
should  be  preserved.  Moreover,  at 
the  very  time  when  He  was  appre- 
hended, He  said  in  their  hearing,  "  If 
ye  seek  Me,  let  these  go  their  way." 
This  ought  to  have  been  regarded  by 
them  as  a  certain  pledge  of  their 
security.  But  so  completely  were  they 
overcome  by  fear  that  they  could  not 
think  of  safety  but  in  flight. 

III.  How  desirable  is  it  to  have 
just  views  of  Jesus  Christ ! — Our  Lord 

544 


forewarned  His  disciples  that  their 
desertion  of  Him  would  originate  in 
their  misconception  of  His  character 
and  office :  "  All  ye  shall  be  offended 
in  Me  this  night."  They  had  seen 
their  Divine  Master  controlling  the 
very  elements  themselves,  from  whence 
they  had  concluded  Him  to  be  the  true 
Messiah.  But  now  they  behold  Him 
bound  and  led  away  by  an  armed  band, 
they  begin  to  think  that  all  their 
former  notions  were  false,  and  that  the 
expectations  which  they  had  founded 
on  His  numerous  miracles  were  delu- 
sive. Jesus  seemed  to  them  now  to 
be  like  Samson  after  his  locks  were 
cut  :  He  was  become  weak  as  other 
men.  Hence  they  could  no  longer 
repose  any  confidence  in  Him,  but  fled 
like  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  And 
is  it  not  thus  with  the  ungodly  ? 
Wherefore  do  they  despise  Jesus,  but 
because  they  know  neither  His  power 
nor  His  grace  ? — C.  Simeon, 

Vers.  51,  52.  Impulse. — I.  The  ex- 
citement of  impulse. — 1.  In  the  best 
cause.  (1)  Associated  with  the  best 
being.  (2)  Manifested  in  the  best 
way.  "  Followed."  Christ  alone  to 
lead.  (3)  Fired  by  the  best  spirit. 
Courage  when  all  others  fled.  2.  By 
an  anonymous  person.  (1)  The  youth- 
ful are  the  likeliest  to  be  impulsive. 
Passions  are  strong ;  curiosity  eager ; 
ambition  powerful.  (2)  Mere  im- 
pulse is  a  very  commonplace  passion. 
3.  Abruptly  displayed.  (1)  Thought- 
less in  regard  to  appearance.  (2)  Aim- 
less in  regard  to  design.  (3)  Useless 
in  regard  to  service. 

II.  The   opposition    to    impulse. — 

1.  Association  with  Christ  may  entail 
danger.     Needful   to   count    the   cost. 

2.  Impulsive  natures  need  extraordi- 
nary prudence.  3.  Those  near  to  Christ 
most  hated  by  the  enemy. 

III.  The  collapse  of  impulse. — 
1.  Fear.     (1)  No  true  love  to  Christ. 

(2)  Depended   on   His   own   strength. 

(3)  No  fear  of  God.  (4)  Love  of  life 
strong.  2.  Desertion.  Soon  ripe — 
soon  rotten.  3.  Oblivion.  Never 
heard  of  again. — B.  D.  Johns. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chaf.  xiv. 


Christ's  care  for  His  disciples. — This 
accident,  which  seems  to  be  of  no 
consequence,  serves  to  discover  the 
power  of  Christ,  and  His  great  care 
and  concern  for  His  apostles.  1.  He 
thereby  admonishes  '  Peter  that  he 
ought  to  fly  from  the  occasion  and 
not  expose  himself  to  temptation, 
these  people  having  a  design  to  seize 
all  the  disciples  of  our  Lord.     2.  He 


by  this  discovers  the  same  danger  to 
the  rest,  and  advises  them  likewise 
to  flee.  3.  He  shews  them  that  it 
was  by  His  power  that  they  escaped 
the  danger.  4.  That  even  that  person 
who  by  their  means  is  exposed  thereto 
escapes  from  it  by  the  appointment 
of  Providence,  and  because  He  Himself 
would  suffer  alone. — P.  Quesnel. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  53—72. 

(Parallels  :  Matt.  xxvi.  57-75  ;  Luke  xxii.  54-71 ;  John  xviii.  12-27.) 

Jesus  before  the  Sanhedrin. — The  Reformer,  who  had  detected  and  exposed  the 
prevailing  abuses  of  Jehovah's  law ;  the  Prophet,  who  had  sternly  rebuked  the 
inconsistencies,  hypocrisies,  and  vices  of  the  degenerate  men  who  sat  in  Moses* 
seat ;  the  Son  of  David,  who  appeared  as  a  mean  carpenter's  son  of  despised 
Nazareth  ;  the  King  of  the  Jews,  who  came  only  as  a  Prince  of  Peace,  whose 
servants  would  not  fight  against  Roman  dominion  ;  the  Messiah,  who  had  not 
been  anointed  with  oil  of  their  choosing, — this  Jesus  was  now  in  their  power. 

I.  The  pretended  trial. — 1.  As  the  supreme  court  of  judicature  in  Israel,  the 
Sanhedrin  sat  in  judgment  upon  Jesus.  But  the  men  who  were  here  assembled 
as  His  judges  had  already  conspired  against  Him  as  His  foes,  and  had  resolved  to 
arraign  Him  before  the  Roman  governor  as  His  prosecutors.  This  was  enough 
to  stamp  their  proceedings  with  injustice.  But  in  order  to  the  complete  justifica- 
tion of  truth,  and  for  the  warning  of  future  ages,  their  guilt  must  become  more 
heinous  and  more  evident.  2.  They  could  not  justify  to  their  own  people  the 
arraignment  of  a  Jew  before  a  Roman  tribunal,  unless  that  Jew  should  first 
have  been  condemned  and  excommunicated  by  themselves  as  a  breaker  of  the 
Mosaic  law.  Hence  the  necessity  for  this  pretended  trial.  3.  It  was  hurried 
on  with  indecent  haste,  conducted  in  the  dead  of  night,  with  the  omission  of 
many  legal  forms  :  false  evidence  had  been  prepared  by  the  judges  themselves. 
But  as  truth  is  always  consistent,  falsehood  seldom  or  never,  it  pleased  God  to 
confute  these  perjured  witnesses  by  their  own  words.  At  length  the  high 
priest,  disconcerted  by  the  palpable  failure  of  his  plot,  and  impatient  to  arrive 
at  his  foregone  conclusion,  resorts  to  the  unusual  and  unjust  expedient  of 
convicting  the  Accused  out  of  His  own  mouth  (vers.  61-64). 

II.  The  evil  principle  which  moved  the  Sanhedrin:  party-spirit. — 1.  The 
Sanhedrin  had  lost  the  power  of  life  and  death  ;  its  ancient  privileges,  curtailed 
under  the  Asmonean  and  Edomite  dynasties,  had  been  further  diminished  by  the 
Roman  emperors  ;  and  with  power  and  privilege  the  dignity  and  influence  of 
its  members  was  all  but  gone.  For  the  recovery  of  this  influence,  that  is  to  say, 
for  their  own  selfish  aggrandisement,  and  not  for  the  honour  of  God  and  the 
good  of  their  country,  these  counsellors  caballed,  combined,  conspired — formed  a 
party,  and  acted  together  as  a  party.  2.  At  one  time  they  had  looked  with  hope 
to  Jesus.  They  would  have  been  glad  to  use  Him  as  an  instrument  against  the 
hated  Romans,  and  when  He  had  served  their  turn  to  fling  away  the  lowly 
Nazarene  as  a  broken  tool.  But  Jesus  would  not  join  them.  Nay,  more,  He 
unveiled  their  abuses,  unmasked  their  hypocrisies,  confuted  their  pretexts, 
baffled  their  devices,  rebuked  their  sins.  Therefore  they  regarded  Him  as  an 
enemy,  and  agreed  together  to  destroy  Him.     3.  Then  was  waged  the  warfare 

n  n  545 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


of  an  unscrupulous  and  infuriated  party  against  one  obnoxious  individual.  Spies 
were  employed  to  entangle  Him  in  His  talk ;  snares  were  set ;  calumnies  were 
circulated.  But  from  His  armour  of  proof  all  their  shafts  fell  harmless.  At 
length  the  traitor  Judas  presents  himself  ;  the  bribe  is  offered  and  accepted ; 
hasty  preparations  are  made ;  witnesses  suborned ;  the  arrest  effected ;  the  trial- 
scene  performed  under  cover  of  night,  with  the  cruel  issue  which  had  been 
predetermined  and  concerted. 

III.  Distinguish  between  two  kinds  of  party-spirit. — 1.  There  is  an  unright- 
eous party-spirit,  which,  as  Christians,  we  are  bound  to  eschew.  (1)  All  party- 
spirit  is  by  the  nature  of  the  case  unrighteous  which  espouses  the  cause  of  evil 
and  falsehood  :  all  which  is  enlisted  against "  tho  honour  of  God — against  His 
eternal  attributes,  truth,  justice,  holiness — against  the  gospel  or  the  Church. 
(2)  Party-spirit  in  a  doubtful  or  even  in  a  good  cause  is  unrighteous  when  it 
proceeds  from  wrong  motives,  is  exhibited  in  a  wrong  spirit,  or  served  by  wrong 
means.  2.  If  wo  would  be  most  effectually  secured  by  the  grace  of  God  against 
the  influence  of  unchristian  party-spirit,  it  must  be  by  the  possession  of  that 
party-spirit  which  is  according  to  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  We  are  born 
into  a  world  of  warfare,  and  have  no  choice  but  to  take  a  part.  He  that  is  not 
with  Christ  is  against  Him  :  he  that  gathereth  not  with  Him  scattereth.  Let  His 
name  be  our  war-cry,  His  Cross  inscribed  upon  our  banner.  Let  His  holy  ark 
be  erected  in  our  heart,  and  the  Dagon  of  worldly  party-spirit  will  bow  down 
before  it  and  be  broken. — Prof.  B.  H.  Kennedy. 

Peter  s  fall  and  recovery. — In  the  whole  history  of  our  Saviour's  last  sufferings, 
perhaps  there  is  not  a  more  affecting  incident  than  the  denial  of  Christ  by 
Peter.  The  natural  simplicity  with  which  the  story  is  told,  and  the  striking 
circumstances  with  which  it  abounds,  make  the  deepest  impression  upon  the 
heart,  and  raise  a  tide  of  the  most  mixed  emotions.  1.  The  sincere  professions 
of  fidelity  which  Peter  made  to  Jesus,  the  zeal  which  he  discovered  in  His  defence, 
and  the  attachment  which  he  manifested  in  following  Him  to  the  palace  of  the 
high  priest,  are  circumstances  which  present  this  apostle  in  an  amiable  light, 
and  recommend  him  to  our  love.  2.  The  cowardice  with  which  he  deserted  his 
Master  in  the  garden  when  the  natural  means  of  defence  were  taken  away, 
the  baseness  with  which  he  afterwards  denied  Him,  and  the  obstinacy  with 
which  he  persisted  in  that  denial,  shew  the  man  in  a  very  different  point  of  view, 
and  fill  our  minds  with  the  strongest  indignation.  3.  The  conduct  of  our  Saviour 
in  forewarning  him  of  his  danger,  in  restoring  him  to  a  sense  of  his  guilt,  and  in 
admitting  him  freely  to  mercy,  gives  us  the  most  exalted  conceptions  of  our 
Saviour's  goodness,  and  fills  our  souls  with  just  admiration.  4.  The  speediness 
of  Peter's  repentance,  the  deepness  of  his  contrition,  and  the  tears  of  sorrow 
which  he  sheds  melt  our  souls  into  compassion,  and  lead  us  to  forgive  this 
unfortunate  man. 

I.  The  fall  of  St.  Peter. — 1.  It  affords  a  melancholy  instance  of  human 
infirmity.  Never  did  man  enjoy  greater  advantages  or  make  fairer  appear- 
ances than  this  disciple.  Was  it  not  most  natural  to  think  that  his  faith  and 
zeal,  his  courage  and  resolution,  would  have  supported  his  mind,  and  carried  him 
through  the  most  fiery  trial  ?  But,  alas !  in  the  hour  of  temptation  all  his 
principles  and  resolutions  forsook  him  ;  this  great  apostle  fell ;  and  in  his  fall 
has  left  an  awful  lesson  to  mankind,  even  to  the  most  eminent  Christians,  that 
it  is  not  in  man  who  walketh  to  direct  his  steps — that  we  are  not  sufficient  of 
ourselves,  but  that  our  sufficiency  is  of  God.  2.  Confidence  and  presumption, 
even  in  the  most  confirmed  Christians,  are  very  unpromising  signs  of  stead- 
fastness in  religion.  This  was  the  rock  upon  which  Peter  first  split,  when  he 
made  shipwreck  of  faith  and  of  a  good  conscience.     Trust  in  God  is  one  thing, 

546 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


and  trust  in  ourselves  is  another,  and  there  will  always  be  as  much  difference 
in  the  success  which  attends  them  as  in  the  powers  on  which  they  are  founded. 
If  we  proceed  on  a  sense  of  our  own  weakness,  and  a  reliance  on  the  Divine 
aid,  we  shall  continue  unto  the  end.     But  if,  like  Peter,  we  set  out  in  our  own 
strength,  like   him   we  shall   soon   be   offended,  and   turn   back.     3.  Natural 
courage  and  precipitate  zeal  will  not  supply  the  place  of  Christian  fortitude,  and 
carry  a  man  through  the  trials  of  religion.     When  St.  Peter  was  surrounded 
with  swords  and  staves,  he  was  nothing  dismayed  ;  his  heart  and  his  hand  went 
together  in  the  cause  of  God.     But  he  who  could  fight  for  his  Saviour  had  not 
fortitude  to  suffer  with  him  when  matters  came  to  extremity.     It  is  vain  to 
promise  yourselves  a  superiority  under  any  temptations,  unless  you  lay  the  right 
foundation,  by  imploring  the  aid  of  God's  Holy  Spirit,  whose  province  only  it  is 
to  confirm  the  faithful  unto  the  end.     4.  The  danger  of  exposing  ourselves  to 
temptations,  when  we  are  not  called  by  the  providence  of  God.     It  was  no  doubt 
a  concern  for  his  Master  which  induced  Peter  to  follow  Jesus  to  His  trial,  and 
to  venture  into  that  dangerous  place.     But  from  whatever  motive  he  acted,  it 
could  not  be  matter  of  duty  in  the  apostle  to  thrust  himself  into  the  company 
of  wretches  where  his  presence  could  be  of  no  use  to  his  Master,  and  where 
his  virtue  could  scarcely  come  off  unhurt.     Nay,  the  prediction  of  our  Blessed 
Saviour,  that  He  should  be  denied  by  Peter  that  very  night,  ought  to  have  been 
sufficient  warning  to  him  to  have  kept  at  the  greatest  distance  from  a  place 
where  he  was  in  the  most  imminent  danger  of  being  drawn  into  that  very  sin 
which  he  had  been  warned  against.     5.  How  naturally  sin  hardens  the  heart, 
stupefies  the  conscience,  and  involves  men  still  deeper  in  guilt !     First,  by  con- 
fidence and  presumption,  Peter  indecently  and  expressly  contradicted  his  Master, 
when  Jesus  foretold  the  flight  of  His  disciples,  and  the  denial  of  Him  by  Peter 
himself;  next,   when  his  Master  was  about  to  be  apprehended,  driven  by  an 
intemperate  zeal,  he  was  guilty  of  a  most  rash  and  imprudent  action  in  cutting 
off  the  ear  of  the  high-priest's  servant,  which   might  have  caused  not  only 
himself  but  all  the  rest  of  the  disciples  to  have  been  put  to  death  on  the  spot. 
Immediately  after,  when  he  saw  Jesus  seized  and  bound,  like  the  rest  of  the 
timid  disciples,  by  an  act  of  cowardice  and  ingratitude,  he  forsook  his  Master 
and  fled.     As  soon  as  he  had  recovered  himself,  he  inconsiderately  thrust  himself 
into  evil  company,  in  which  he  was  exposed  to  that  very  temptation  which  Christ 
had  warned  him  against.     This  was  the  unhappy  occasion  of  all  his  subsequent 
sin  and  sorrow.     Here,  disarmed  by  his  fatal  security,  he  was  quite  unprepared 
to  meet  any  trial,  and  of  course  yielded  to  the  first  attack.     Scarcely  had  Peter 
ended  this  act  of  baseness  when,  going  out  into  the  porch,  he  accidentally  heard 
the  cock  crow,  the  very  signal  of  his  fall.     Might  he  not  now  have  recollected 
himself,  and  gathered  resolution  to  retract  his  falsehood,  and  to  give  an  honest 
testimony  to  the  truth  ?     But,  alas  !  when  a  man  has  made  one  false  step,  it  is 
not  so  easy  a  matter  to  recover  himself.     One  sin  naturally,  nay,  almost  unavoid- 
ably, leads   to   another ;   one    lie   frequently   requires   another  to   support  the 
falsehood.     And  in  this  case  the  principle  of  shame,  which  was  before  the  guardian 
of  innocence,  now  bars  the  way  to  repentance ;  for  men  blush  to  retract  the 
falsehood  they  have  asserted,  or  to  own  the  baseness  they  have  committed.     A 
second  time  Peter  is  charged  with  being  a  follower  of  Jesus ;  a  second  time  he 
denies  his  Master.     But  he  does  not  even,  as  before,  rest  with  simple  assertions 
of  falsehood.     In  order  to  remove  every  ground  of  suspicion,  he  confirms  his 
denial  with  an  oath,  calling  upon  the  God  of  truth  to  witness  his  falsehood. 
To  complete  the  disgrace  of  this  unfortunate  man,  a  third  and  a  more  pointed 
attack  is  made  upon  him.     Two  strong  presumptions  are  adduced  against  him 
— that  his  speech  proved  him  to  be  a  Galilean,  and  that  he  had  been  seen  in 
the  garden  with  Christ.     Peter  was  now  tempted  to  the  last  degree;  and  in 

547 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


order  to  testify  his  innocence  by  resentment  of  their  suspicion,  he  not  only  by 
assertions  and  oaths,  but  by  dreadful  imprecations  on  himself,  abjured  his  Blessed 
Lord.  He  began  to  curse  and  to  swear,  saying,  "I  know  not  the  man."  To 
aggravate  his  guilt  still  more,  these  denials  of  Christ  were  all  made  in  the 
presence  of  the  other  disciples,  who  had  also  followed  the  Master  to  the  palace 
of  the  high  priest,  and  who  cjuld  not  be  strangers  to  Peter's  falsehood  and  base- 
ness. Nay,  the  last  and  most  shameful  denial  was  made  in  the  presence  of 
Christ  Himself,  who  must  have  been  more  painfully  wounded  by  this  per- 
fidiousness  of  Peter  than  by  all  the  indignities  and  insults  of  His  enemies. 
Lord,  what  is  man,  that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him ;  or  the  son  of  man,  that  Thou 
visitest  him  1  What  is  our  boasted  strength  but  weakness !  And  when  left 
to  ourselves,  how  do  our  firmest  principles  and  our  best  resolutions  melt  like 
snow  before  the  sun  ! 

II.  The  recovery  of  St.  Peter. — 1.  The  necessity  of  Divine  grace,  in  order  to 
the  restoration  of  fallen  saints,  as  well  as  to  the  conversion  of  habitual  sinners. 
2.  Though  good  men  may  accidentally  fall,  yet,  upon  a  speedy  and  effectual 
repentance,  they  will  be  restored  to  the  favour  of  God.  3.  Although  the  restora- 
tion of  Peter  f urnishes  matter  of  consolation  to  good  men  who  have  been  seduced 
into  a  fault,  it  affords  no  ground  of  hope  to  presumptuous  offenders  who  live  in 
the  deliberate  practice  of  sin.  If  Peter's  crime  was  great  in  its  nature,  it  was 
neither  premeditated  nor  of  long  continuance.  It  was  not  so  much  the  act  of 
the  man  as  the  effect  of  sudden  and  violent  temptation  which  unhinged  his 
mind  and  threw  him  into  utter  confusion.  The  moment  his  Saviour  gave  him 
the  signal  he  was  obedient  to  the  heavenly  call.  As  soon  as  he  recovered  the 
powers  of  reflexion,  he  bathed  his  soul  in  the  tears  of  repentance,  and  from 
that  time  became  the  same  faithful  and  affectionate  apostle  he  had  been  before. 
But  what  is  all  this  to  deliberate  transgressors  who  make  bold  with  sin  and 
presume  upon  the  mercy  of  God  ?  4.  Though  good  men  may  accidentally  fall, 
they  are  more  easily  reclaimed  than  habitual  sinners.  Their  minds,  not  being 
hardened  by  sin,  are  awakened  by  the  gentlest  calls  of  the  Spirit ;  and  the  sense 
of  virtue  revives  upon  the  first  motions  and  suggestions  of  conscience.  5.  The 
sins  of  the  best  men,  into  which  they  fall  accidentally,  are  expiated  with  the 
strongest  sense  of  sorrow  and  affliction.  When  men  are  truly  concerned,  they 
do  not  consider  what  they  are  to  get  by  their  tears,  or  what  profit  their  sorrow 
will  yield.  The  soul  must  vent  its  grief ;  and  godly  sorrow  is  as  truly  the  natural 
expression  of  inward  pain  as  worldly  sorrow  is,  however  much  they  differ  in 
their  causes  and  effects.  When  therefore  we  find  ourselves  truly  affected  with 
a  sense  of  our  sins,  and  in  earnest  lament  our  ingratitude  and  disobedience  to 
God,  we  have  the  best  indication  that  the  spirit  of  religion  is  still  alive  within  us, 
and  that  we  are  not  given  up  to  a  reprobate  mind. — A.  Donnan. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

"Ver.  54.  "Afar  off" — This  is  a  most  Rock-man.     Every  appeal  to  love  and 

unwelcome  revelation  of    the   apostle,  to  fidelity  which  was  made  in  silence 

We  see  him  separated  from  the  Saviour,  by  the  utter  desolation  of  the  Christ, 

He  is  following,  but  not  so  closely  as  every  incentive  to  steadfastness  which 

to  indicate  his  association  with  Jesus,  arose  from  the  memory  of  his  ardent 

The    adherent    is    being    lost    in    the  and  unreserved  pledges,  and  from  the 

apostate.    The  disciple  is  being  degraded  transcendent  importance  of  consistency, 

to   the   level  of   a   deserter.     Love   is  was  consigned  to  oblivion.    His  leaden 

being  chilled  to  lethargy.     The  ice  of  feet  moved  slowly  towards  the  palace 

the  coward  is  freezing  the  soul  of  the  of  the  high  priest. — Dean  Lefroy. 

548 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


Yers.  57,  58.  False  witness  through  For  here  was  the  head  of  the  nation, 

misapplication  of  words. — The   words  considered  as  a  theocracy,  demanding 

laid  to  His  charge  might  have  been,  of  One  whose  credentials  shewed  that 

and  probably   were,   literally  such  as  He   came   direct   from   God   who   He 

He  had  used.    But  the  falseness  of  the  was.      This   was   the   first   time   that 

evidence  lay  in  the  misapplication  of  Jesus  was  face  to  face  with  the  chief 

them.    Jesus  had  spoken  of  the  temple  minister  of  His  Father's  religion.     It 

of  His  body  ;  the  witnesses  gave  in  the  ought  not  to  have  been  so.    His  claims 

evidence  as  if  He  meant  the  Jewish  ought  long  ago  to  have  been  investi- 

Temple  of  stone.     Hence   it    was   no  gated,  as  to  whether  He  really  fulfilled 

doubt   that   their  evidence   could  not  the  prophecies  of   the   Messiah.     But 

be  made  to  agree,  because  each  false  long  ere  this  they  had  prejudged  His 

witness   would    probably   enough   add  case,  and  condemned  Him.     And  now 

something   more   which   might   go   to  they  sought  not  for  the  truth,  but  for 

prove  the  criminal  meaning  of  those  that  which  might  enable  them  to  carry 

words — that    they    were    so    spoken,  out  their  evil  will  against  Him.     He 

namely,  as  to  apply  to  the  holy  build-  might,  consequently,   I   think,    if   He 

ing  at  Jerusalem.  Even  so  we  Christians  had    only   looked    to   the    motive    of 

— and  it  is  a  serious  and  fearful  con-  Caiaphas  in  putting  such  a  question, 

sideration — may  be  quoting  the  words  have  declined  to  answer.   But  the  crisis 

of  Divine  truth,  the  very  language  of  had  come.     He  must  assert  who  He 

our  Lord,  and  yet  be  guilty  of  false  was,  though  He  knew  it  would  lead  to 

evidence.      When,    like     the     Jewish  His  crucifixion. — M.  F.  Sadler. 
witnesses,  we  first   frame   a  position, 

and  then  seek  for  texts  of  Scripture  to  Vers.  63,  64.  The  culpability  of  the 

support   it,  and   apply   these   only  in  Sanhedrin. — Some  have  been  troubled 

reference  to  the  view   predetermined  with    the    thought    that    the    judges 

on,  are  we  not  doing  even  the  same  ?  of  Jesus  were  conscientious.     Was  it 

— S.  Hinds.  not  their   duty,    when  any   one  came 

forward  with  Messianic  pretensions,  to 

Ver.   60.  The  patience  of  Christ. —  judge  whether  or  not  his  claim  was 

Jesus    astonishes   and   confounds   His  just?   And  did  they  not  honestly  believe 

judge  by  His  silence  and  patience.    But  that  Jesus  was  not  what  He  professed 

there  is  a  very  great  difference  betwixt  to   be  ?     No  doubt  they  did  honestly 

confounding  and  converting.     It  is  no  believe  so.    We  must  ascend  to  a  much 

small  humiliation  and  mortification  to  earlier  period  to  be  able  to  judge  their 

see  ourselves  deserted  by  those  who  are  conduct  accurately.     It  was  when  the 

most  obliged  to  defend  us.     How  much  claims  of  Jesus  were  first  submitted  to 

greater  is  it  then  to  see  them  at  the  them   that    they    went    astray.     He, 

head   of   our  enemies  !     This  is  what  being  such  as  He  was,  could  only  have 

Jesus  Christ  teaches  us  to  bear  with-  been    welcomed    and    appreciated    by 

out  bitterness,  animosity,  or  the  least  expectant,  receptive,  holy  minds.    They 

desire  of  revenge. — P.  Quesnel.  were  anything  but  that.     They  were 

totally  incapable  of  understanding  Him, 

Ver.  62.  Christ's  testimony  to  Him-  and  saw  no  beauty  that  they  should 

self. — Why  did  the   Lord,  when   thus  desire  Him.     As  He  often  told  them 

adjured,    break    His    silence  ?      Some  Himself,  being  such  as  they  were,  they 

have  thought  it  was  out  of  respect  to  could  not  believe.     The  fault  lay  not 

the  office  of  the  high  priest,  as   the  so  much  in  what  they  did  as  in  what 

representative  of  God  and  the  spiritual  they  were.     Being  in  the  wrong  path, 

ruler  of   the  people ;    and  if   we   can  they   went  forward   to   the   end.      It 

separate  the  office  from  the  character  may  be  said  that  they  walked  according 

of  him  who  held  it,  no  more  fitting  to  their  light ;  but  the  light  that  was 

opportunity  could  have  presented  itself,  in  them  was  darkness. — J.  Stalker ',  D.D. 

549 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MABR. 


Ver.  65.  Christ  dishonoured  and  ordinary  temptation,  some  common 
suffering  in  His  senses. — The  image  of  fault,  has  brought  us  down  from  our 
the  invisible  God  refuses  not,  for  our  dreams  and  shewn  us  what  worms  we 
sakes,  to  be  dishonoured  by  the  most  are.  We  have  gone  forth  in  the  morn- 
unworthy  treatment.  All  His  senses  ing  relying  on  our  steadfastness,  and 
suffer.  1.  His  sight,  by  their  covering  we  have  come  home  humbled  and 
His  face.  2.  His  hearing,  by  their  ashamed.  We  have  felt  sure  that 
blasphemies.  3.  His  smelling,  by  the  nothing  could  move  us,  and  the  merest 
nastiness  of  their  spittle.  4.  His  feel-  opportunity  was  enough.  We  have 
ing,  by  their  buffeting  Him,  and  the  risen  perhaps  from  sinning,  and  ab- 
blows  given  by  these  servants.  5.  His  horred  ourselves,  and  been  filled  with 
taste,  by  the  blood  which  proceeded  disgust  at  our  foolishness,  and  we  have 
from  these  blows,  etc.  This  is  a  dread-  returned  and  sinned  again.  We  have 
f ul  motive  of  humiliation  for  the  sinner,  prayed  against  temptation,  and  we 
who  seeks  only  to  gratify  his  senses  ;  have  run  into  it.  At  every  Communion 
and  it  is  more  so  for  the  proud  and  we  vow  ourselves  Christ's  servants ;  at 
revengeful  person,  who  cannot  bear  every  Communion  we  have  to  repent 
the  least  injury,  and  is  a  mere  idolater  of  broken  vows.  We  have  knelt  down 
of  his  false  honour. — P.  Quesnel.  and   wept,    and   next    week   we   have 

had  to  weep  again.     Our  infirmity  is 

Yers.  66,  67.  Peter  discovered. — The  miserable.     We  fall  and  fall  again. — 

place  which  the  apostle  occupied  illus-  C.  F.  Secretan. 

trates  the  reign  of  Providence  in  and  The  temptation  to  deny  Christ  before 
over  what  we  regard  as  trifles.  He  men. — This  is  a  common  temptation, 
sat  in  such  a  position  that  either  the  It  is  the  first  and  earliest  temptation 
glow  of  the  fire  or  its  light  shone  full  of  the  young  stepping  out  into  the 
upon  his  features.  How  often  have  world.  It  is  a  boy's  temptation,  when 
we  known  of  every  arrangement  being  he  first  finds  himself  under  a  strange 
made  to  perfect  some  plan  or  scheme  roof,  and  has  to  kneel  down  at  night 
or  purpose  with  the  most  studied  care  beneath  the  eye  of  a  strange  companion, 
and  the  most  anxious  regard  to  design  and  he  feels  uneasy,  and  half  inclined 
and  to  completeness,  and  yet  all  is  to  forego  his  accustomed  prayers.  It 
undone  by  some  simple  trifle  being  is  the  young  man's  temptation,  when 
omitted  or  disregarded  as  of  no  con-  he  takes  his  place  among  his  fellows, 
sequence  whatever,  and  as  being  most  and  too  often  finds  himself,  like  Peter, 
unlikely  to  affect  the  issue  the  success  surrounded  by  the  enemies  of  his 
of  which  commanded  such  attention,  Lord — when  he  sees  Jesus  insulted, 
thought,  and  care  !  So  here  the  golden  the  holy  name  blasphemed,  saintliness 
glow  of  the  fire  or  the  flicker  of  the  a  byword,  and  the  faith  of  his  affection 
lightsome  flame  fell  precisely  upon  the  treated  with  mockery  and  contempt — 
face  of  the  one  man  in  that  group  when  inquiring  eyes  are  bent  upon  him 
upon  whom  it  was  of  the  gravest  con-  to  know  how  it  is  he  does  not  echo 
sequence  that  it  should  not  fall !  And  their  irreligious  mirth.  "  Thou  also 
with  his  face  thus  illuminated  and  his  art  one  of  them.  Thy  speech  be- 
very  feature  revealed,  his  affectation  trayeth  thee."  Then  comes  the  trial  of 
of  indifference  appeared  to  the  maid  his  constancy ;  then  is  it  shewn  what 
to  be  the  meanest  dissimulation. —  root  he  has  in  himself ;  then  the  eye 
Dean  Lefroy.  of  Jesus  rests  upon  His  young  disciple, 

and  good  spirits  watch  what   answer 

Vers.     68-72.     Constant  falls. — At  he  will  make  to  his  blasphemers  ;  then 

times  perhaps,    after  reading  the  life  is  the  grace  of  God  waiting  too  to  help 

of  some  holy  man,  we  have  ventured  his  infirmity,  and  enable  that  young 

to  think    of   stricter    devotion   and   a  Christian  soldier  to  stand  his  ground 

closer  walk  with  God ;  and  then  some  with  manfulness,  and  quietly  but  de- 

550 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


cisively  declare  himself  for  God  and 
His  truth  against  sin.  "Yes,  I  am 
one  of  Jesus'  followers.  I  freely  con- 
fess it.  I  care  not  who  knows  my 
mind.  I  believe  in  Christ.  I  make 
it  my  study  to  serve  Him.  I  do  scruple 
at  an  oath.  I  find  no  pleasure  in  the 
language  of  uncleanness.  I  am  not 
used  to  talk  so.  I  do  not  like  such 
ways.  I  think  them  wrong.  I  hope 
I  shall  always  think  so."  And  if  you 
hardly  find  strength  to  speak  out  so 
boldly,  and  your  heart  fails  you  in 
your  hour  of  trial,  just  when  you 
should  stand  firm  ;  if  you  feel  inclined 
rather  to  laugh  off  the  imputation  of 
singularity,  to  disown  the  character 
of  a  disciple,  and  talk  and  jest  with 
the  rest, — oh  !  remember,  "  if  we  deny 
Christ,  He  will  also  deny  us." — Ibid. 

Yer.  71.  Peter  cursing  and  swearing. 
— This  was  no  doubt  the  resurrection 
of  an  old  fisherman's  habit,  long  since 
dead  and  buried.  Peter  was  just  the 
man  likely  to  be  a  profane  swearer 
in  his  youth — the  headlong  man  of 
temper,  who  likes  to  say  a  thing  with 
as  much  emphasis  and  exaggeration 
as  possible.  Old  habits  of  sin  are  hard 
to  kill.  Till  his  dying  day  the  man 
who  has  been  a  drunkard  or  a  forni- 
cator, a  liar  or  a  swearer,  will  have  to 
keep  watch  and  ward  over  the  grave- 
yard in  which  he  has  buried  the  past. 
2.  Yet  there  was  a  kind  of  method 
in  the  madness  of  Peter's  profanity. 
When  he  wanted  to  prove  that  he  was 
none  of  Christ's,  he  could  not  do  better 
than  take  to  cursing.  It  is  one  of 
the  strongest  testimonies  to  Jesus  still 
that  even  those  who  do  not  believe  in 
Him  expect  cleanness  of  speech  and 
conduct  from  His  followers,  and  are 
astonished  if  those  who  bear  His  name 
do  things  which  when  done  by  others 
are  matters  of  course. — J.  Stalker,  D.D. 

Yer.  72.  Thought  leading  to  penitence. 
— I.  Peter  alone. — Solitude  |s  a  test. 
It  often  shews  the  bent  of  a  man's  mind. 
It  is  a  critical  time,  and  may  issue  in 
good  or  for  evil.  Satan  watches  for 
such  occasions  to  war  against  the  soul. 


II.  Peter  thinking. — There  is  much 
thinking  that  is  mere  dissipation. 
Peter's  thought  was  earnest  and  prac- 
tical. Such  is  necessary.  Without  it 
there  can  be  no  real  life,  progress,  and 
achievement. 

III.  Peter  thinking  about  his  sin. — 
Such  a  subject  is  repulsive  and  painful. 
Sin  in  the  abstract  is  so  much  more 
the  sins  of  men?  and  especially  of 
friends  and  kindred ;  but  most  of  all 
our  own  sin.  And  yet  thinking  of 
our  sins  is  right  and  necessary.  We 
shall  have  to  do  it  sooner  or  later ;  and 
it  is  infinitely  better  to  do  it  in  time 
than  when  too  late. 

IY.  Peter  thinking  of  his  sin  with 
penitential  sorrow. — "  He  wept."  Tears 
not  always  true.  There  may  be  re- 
pentance without  tears,  and  tears  with- 
out repentance.  But  Peter  was  utterly 
sincere.  His  tears  were  the  real  ex- 
pression of  the  grief  and  shame  that 
wrung  his  heart.  Shall  we  love  what 
Peter  so  hated?  Shall  we  indulge 
in  ourselves  what  Peter  found  so  bitter 
in  its  fruits  ? 

Y.  Peter  thinking  of  his  sin  with 
hope  in  Christ. — He  "called  to  mind 
the  word,"  etc.  But  he  would  not 
stop  here.  Other  words  would  be  re- 
called, and  especially  that  gracious  word 
of  promise  and  of  hope  (Luke  xxii.  52). 
Besides,  he  could  not  but  be  conscious 
that  the  look  of  his  Master  indicated 
mercy  more  than  judgment.  That 
look  pierced  him  through  and  through. 
It  manifested  not  only  knowledge  and 
reproof  and  grief,  but  also  love. — 
William  Forsyth. 

Peter's  case  no  exceptional  one. — Can- 
not you  remember  in  your  own  life 
brave  resolutions  and  miserable  fulfil- 
ments— promises  which  seemed  easy  to 
make,  .but  which  turned  out  so  hard  to 
keep  ?  Cannot  you  remember  what  a 
picture  you  have  sometimes  drawn  in 
your  own  mind  of  your  intended  resist- 
ance to  temptation — how  nobly  and 
faithfully  you  imagined  yourself,  in 
your  thoughts  beforehand,  sorely  tried 
and  proudly  triumphing  over  the  temp- 
tation ?  And  cannot  you  remember, 
too,  after  the  storm  of  temptation  had 

551 


CHAP.   XIV 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


passed  over  you,  what  a  miserable  shew 
you  had  actually  made,  how  lightly  you 
had  been  overcome,  with  what  wretched 
weakness  and  stupidity  and  folly  you 
had  been  provoked  or  terrified  or 
enticed  from  your  strong  purposes  of 
good  ?  In  the  apostles  we  but  see  the 
reflexion  of  our  own  doings  towards 
our  Master. — Dean  Church. 

Recollection  more  needed  than  informa- 
tion.— Peter's  recollection  of  what  he 
had  formerly  heard  was  the  occasion 
of  his  repentance.  We  do  not  suffi- 
ciently consider  how  much  more  we 
need  recollection  than  information.  We 
know  a  thousand  things,  but  it  is 
necessary  that  they  should  be  kept  alive 
in  our  hearts  by  a  constant  and  vivid 
recollection.  It  is  therefore  extremely 
absurd  and  childish  for  people  to  say, 
"  You  tell  me  nothing  but  what  I 
know."  I  answer,  "  You  forget  many 
things,  and  therefore  it  is  necessary 
that  line  should  be  upon  line  and 
precept  upon  precept."  Peter  himself 
afterwards  said  in  his  epistles,  "  I  will 
not  be  negligent  to  put  you  always  in 
remembrance  of  these*  things,  though 
ye  know  them."  We  are  prone  to 
forget  what  we  do  know ;  whereas 
we  should  consider  that  whatever  good 
thing  we  know  is  only  so  far  good  to 
us  as  it  is  remembered  to  purpose. — 
Richard  Cecil. 

Tears  of  contrition. — Who  need  be 
ashamed  of  tears  wrung  from  him  on 
his  knees?  Let  sinners  take  shame 
rather  for  having  no  tears  to  flow,  for 
repentance  so  moderate,  for  devotion  so 
poor  and  low,  for  feelings  so  blunted  by 
the  habitude  of  sin,  and  hearts  so  dry 


and  dead  that  they  never  want  to 
relieve  themselves  by  tears.  We  feel 
a  little  sorry,  and  think  and  look  serious, 
and  resolve  to  mend.  We  are  not 
moved  to  weep.  And  yet  a  touching 
narrative  will  bring  water  into  our 
eyes ;  our  interest  in  a  mere  fictitious 
character  will  often  moisten  them. 
Shall  our  emotions  of  religion  be  so 
faint  and  feeble,  our  sense  of  sin  so 
dull,  as  never  to  draw  forth  one  tear  ? 
I  am  not  for  any  affectation  of  religious 
feeling.  I  would  make  every  allow- 
ance for  a  difference  of  temperament ; 
but  those  of  us,  at  least,  who  have 
wept  for  sorrow,  how  is  it,  I  would  ask, 
that  we  have  never  wept  for  sin? — 
C.  F.  Secretan. 

Peter's  lifelong  repentance. — Some 
say  that,  after  his  sad  fall,  he  was 
ever  and  anon  weeping,  and  that  his 
face  was  even  furrowed  with  continual 
tears.  He  had  no  sooner  taken  this 
poison  but  he  vomited  it  up  again,  ere 
it  got  to  the  vitals  ;  he  had  no  sooner 
handled  this  serpent  but  he  turned  it 
into  a  rod,  to  scourge  his  soul  with 
remorse  for  sinning  against  such  clear 
light  and  strong  love  and  sweet  dis- 
coveries of  the  heart  of  Christ  to  him. 
Clement  notes  that  Peter  so  repented 
that,  all  his  life  after,  every  night  when 
he  heard  the  cock  crow,  he  would  fall 
upon  his  knees,  and,  weeping  bitterly, 
would  beg  pardon  for  his  sins  ?  Ah  ! 
souls,  you  can  easily  sin  as  the  saints  ; 
but  can  you  repent  with  the  saints  ? 
Many  can  sin  with  David  and  Peter 
who  cannot  repent  with  David  and 
Peter,  and  so  must  perish  for  ever. 
— T.  Brooks. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    XIV. 


Vers.  3-9.  Common  things  idealised. — Sup- 
pose that  a  cultured  foreigner  should  walk 
over  the  ruins  and  examine  the  sculpture  and 
paintings  of  a  European  city.  Near  the  close 
of  the  day  his  soul  is  filled  with  a  strange, 
undefinable  joy.  He  has  a  feeling  of  awe 
mixed  with  gratitude  to  the  God  of  such 
beauty  and  grandeur.  It  is  a  feeling  to  which 
he  cannot  give  a  name,  and  which  he  cannot 
shake  off.  Oppressed  by  it,  he  enters  one  of 
the  ancient  churches.     At  that  moment  the 

552 


organ  awakes  in  the  gallery,  and  fills  the 
twilight  with  its  music.  Now  it  sinks  into 
the  faintest  whisper  or  rises  into  a  tempest 
of  melody,  and  he  is  entranced.  The  organ, 
to  him,  is  not  made  of  wood  or  metal,  nor  is 
its  music  simply  the  escaping  of  the  air. 
It  is  the  voice  in  which  his  strange  and 
oppressive  joy  finds  expression.  It  lifts  into 
distinctness  and  invests  with  meaning  the 
emotions  which  burdened  his  soul.  And 
these  emotions  go  out  in  its  music  as  a  well- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


defined  and  precious  sacrifice  to  the  God  of 
the  beautiful  and  the  grand.  Now  as  the 
organ  became  the  voice  through  which  the 
artist's  undefined  joy  became  definite  and 
went  out  in  service  to  God,  so  Christ  endowed 
the  offering  of  Mary  with  voice  and  beauty 
and  most  heroic  purpose,  and  then  accepted 
it. — JV.  R.  Hamer. 

Shew  love  to  the  living. — Truly  as  well  as 
beautifully  has  one  said  :  "  Do  not  keep  all 
the  alabaster  boxes  of  your  love  and  tender- 
ness sealed  up  until  your  friends  are  dead. 
I  would  rather  have  a  bare  coffin  without  a 
flower  and  a  funeral  without  an  eulogy  than 
a  life  without  the  sweetness  of  love  and 
sympathy.  Let  us  anoint  our  friends  before- 
and  for  their  burial.  Post-mortem  kind- 
ness does  not  cheer  the  burdened  spirit. 
Flowers  on  the  coffin  cast  no  fragrance  back- 
ward over  the  weary  days." 

Self-sacrifice  fruitful. — A  Scotch  woman, 
who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  giving  a  penny 
a  day  for  the  missions,  was  given  by  a  visitor 
a  sixpence  to  buy  some  meat— a  luxury 
which  she  had  not  lately  enjoyed.  But  she 
thought  to  herself,  "  I  have  long  done  very 
well  on  porridge,  so  I  will  give  the  sixpence 
also  to  God."  This  fact  came  to  the  know- 
ledge of  a  missionary  secretary,  who  narrated 
it  at  a  missionary  breakfast.  The  host  and 
his  guests  were  profoundly  impressed  by  it, 
the  host  himself  saying  that  he  had  never 
denied  himself  a  chop  for  the  cause  of  God. 
He  thereupon  subscribed  £500  additional, 
and  others  of  the  party  followed  his  example, 
till  a  large  sum  had  been  raised.  It  is  pro- 
bable that  this  poor  woman's  sixpence  was 
larger  in  God's  sight  than  the  thousands 
contributed  by  these  rich  people,  for  she 
gave  of  her  poverty,  and  they  out  of  their 
abundance.  There  is  nothing  so  fruitful  as 
self-sacrifice. 

Ver.  4.  False  estimates  of  waste. — A  Chris- 
tian gentleman,  when  blamed  by  his  partner 
for  doing  so  much  for  the  cause  of  God,  re- 
plied, "  Your  foxhounds  cost  more  in  one  year 
than  my  religion  ever  cost  in  two."  People 
sometimes  complain  of  what  they  call 
"waste  of  life"  in  establishing  Christian 
missions  among  savage  people  or  unhealthy 
climates,  e.g.  in  establishing  or  maintaining 
the  Nyanza  Mission  the  lives  of  Bishops 
Hannington  and  Parker,  of  O'Neill,  Shergold 
Smith,  Mackay,  and  several  others  have  been 
sacrificed.  But  were  those  lives  "  wasted  "  ? 
There,  as  elsewhere,  it  has  proved  that  the 
"  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the 
Church." 

Ver.  6.  Approval  of  Christ. — When  Anti- 
machus,  an  Ionian  poet  and  musician, 
repeated  one  of  his  compositions  before  a 
large  audience,  his  language  was  so  obscure 
that  all  his  hearers  retired  with  the  excep- 
tion  of  Plato.      Seeing  this,  he  remarked, 


"  I  shall  read  none  the  less,  for  Plato  is  to 
me  one  instead  of  all."  How  much  more 
should  the  disciple  of  Christ  be  content  with 
His  approval  I 

Ver.  7.  Christian  care  for  the  poor. — When 
the  deacon  St.  Lawrence  was  asked,  in  the 
Decian  persecution,  to  shew  the  prefect  the 
most  precious  treasures  of  the  Church  at 
Rome,  he  shewed  him  the  sick,  the  lame,  the 
blind.  "It  is  incredible,"  said  Lucian,  the 
pagan  jeerer  and  sceptic,  "  to  see  the  ardour 
with  which  those  Christians  help  each  other 
in  their  wants.  They  spare  nothing.  Their 
first  legislator  has  put  it  into  their  heads 
that  they  are  all  brothers."  "  These  Gali- 
leans," said  Julian  the  apostate,  "nourish 
not  only  their  own  poor,  but  ours  as  well." 
In  the  year  252  a  plague  raged  in  Carthage. 
The  heathen  threw  out  their  dead  and  sick 
upon  the  streets,  and  ran  away  from  them  for 
fear  of  contagion,  and  cursed  the  Christians. 
St.  Cyprian,  on  the  contrary,  assembled  his 
congregation,  told  them  to  love  those  who 
cursed  them ;  and  the  rich  working  with 
their  money,  the  poor  with  their  hands, 
never  rested  till  the  dead  were  buried,  the 
sick  cared  for,  and  the  city  saved  from 
destruction. 

Ver.  8.  Much  result  from  small  begin- 
wings.  —  There  was  once  a  child  in  an 
English  parsonage  who  shyly  gave  a  six- 
pence of  his  very  own  to  "the  missionary 
deputation"  as  he  sat  at  breakfast.  The 
missionary  spent  the  sixpence  on  a  Prayer 
Book  and  took  it  out  to  Australia.  One 
Sunday  as  he  was  waiting  in  his  church,  he 
saw  a  young  girl  peep  into  the  building. 
He  welcomed  her  with  kind  words,  and 
finding  she  was  a  workhouse  girl,  sent  out 
from  England,  who  had  got  a  situation  at 
a  farm  twenty  miles  inland,  he  gave  her  the 
Prayer  Book.  Several  weeks  passed  away, 
and  one  day  a  rough-looking  man  asked  to 
speak  to  him.  "  Ain't  you  the  parson  that 
gave  our  servant  girl  a  Prayer  Book  ?  "  His 
wife,  it  appeared,  was  very  ill,  and  interested 
at  hearing  from  the  emigrant  girl  about  the 
gift  of  the  Prayer  Book,  sent  to  beg  from 
the  clergyman  a  pastoral  visit.  With  some 
difficulty  he  managed  this.  The  sick  woman 
was  comforted,  and  departed  in  the  faith  of 
Christ.  The  husband's  mind  was  impressed. 
He  stirred  up  his  neighbours  to  build  a 
church  at  that  outlying  spot,  in  which  to 
this  day  services  and  sacraments  are  cele- 
brated. How  much  can  be  done  even  by  a 
little  effort  1 

"  She  hath  done  what  she  could." — Not  long 
ago,  in  an  American  city,  there  lived  a 
woman  who  had  once  been  proficient  in  her 
trade  of  dress  and  cloak-making,  but  a  severe 
illness  shattered  her  mind  and  quite  unfitted 
her  for  pursuing  it  again.  She  could  not 
endure  to  be  idle  and  useless,  and  so  would 

553 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


go  about  from  house  to  house  among  the 
poor,  to  cut  and  fit  their  simple  garments, 
always  refusing  to  take  any  pay  for  her 
labours.  "  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  me  to 
do  it,"  she  would  say  in  her  childlike  way. 
"  God  has  taken  away  a  great  deal  of  my 
health  and  a  portion  of  my  mind  ;  I  can't  go 
about  among  grand  folks  as  I  used  to ;  I 
should  get  all  confused  with  their  rich  trim- 
mings, and  make  mistakes  with  their  new 
patterns.  I  can't  be  trusted  with  so  much 
responsibility — it  bewilders  me.  But  I  love 
to  go  from  family  to  family  among  the 
poor,  especially  God's  poor.  When  I  see  the 
mothers  worn  out  with  overwork,  I  like  to 
step  in  and  say,  '  I've  come  in  to  sew  for  you 
a  few  days.'  When  I  know  they  stop  going 
to  church  because  their  old  Sunday  gown 
isn't  fit  to  be  seen,  I  like  just  to  take  it,  and 
sponge  it,  and  turn  it,  and  set  them  going 
again.  When  I.  see  the  children  staying  away 
from  Sunday  school  because  the  weather  has 
got  so  cold,  and  their  shawls  are  thin  or 
their  cloaks  worn  out,  it  makes  me  happy  to 
wad  up  the  old  cloak  again,  and  to  do  up 
warm  jackets  to  wear  under  the  thin  shawls. 
It's  true,"  she  would  add,  "  God  doesn't  ex- 
pect much  of  me,  because  He  knows  that  my 
health  is  weakly  and  my  mind  unsettled, 
but  when  the  end  comes  I  would  like  to 
have  Him  say,  '  She  hath  done  what  she 
could.'" 

Ver.  11.  A  picture  of  Judas. — There  is  a 
picture  in  one  of  the  Brussels  galleries  which 
possesses  awful  eloquence.  The  scene  is  laid 
near  the  Holy  City.  Night  has  flung  its  mantle 
over  home  and  field  and  Temple.  Three 
Jewish  artisans  are  resting  after  toil  beside 
the  embers,  glowing  and  lightsome,  of  a  fire. 
In  the  foreground  their  work  lies  well  nigh 
done.  That  work  is  a  cross.  A  man  in  full 
stature  fills  in  the  scene.  His  face  is  pallid, 
though  strong.  His  lips  seem  as  though 
sealed  for  ever.  His  eyes,  dark  and  furtive, 
seem  wild.  His  stride  is  long,  his  step  firm. 
In  his  right  hand  he  grasps  a  bag  of  money. 
As  he  makes  his  way  to  the  Temple  to  fling 
the  fiery  pieces  upon  the  pavement,  he 
stumbles  upon  the  workmen  who  are  mak- 
ing that  cross  which  is  to  be  occupied  by 
his  innocent  Master,  and  the  knowledge  of 
which  is  degradation  and  death  to  Judas. — 
Dean  Lefroy. 

Vers.  18,  19.  Betraying  Christ. — Upon  the 
mouldering  walls  of  the  refectory  at  Santa 
Maria  delle  Grazie,  in  Milan,  are  the  faded 
outlines  of  the  most  famous  fresco  in  the 
world.  It  is  the  Last  Supper  of  Leonardo 
da  Vinci.  The  artist  has  taken  the  moment 
when  the  Master  has  said  to  His  disciples 
that  one  of  them  would  betray  Him,  and  the 
disciples  have  started  up  and  fallen  into 
excited  groups,  and  they  are  depicted  in 
every  variety  of  surprise  and  consternation, 

554 


sorrow  and  self-searching.  Is  the  artist 
right  in  so  representing  it  ?  There  was  only 
one  traitor  amongst  them,  surely !  Judas 
knew  he  meant  to  betray  the  Master ;  but 
the  others  were  loyal  men — nothing  farther 
from  their  thoughts  than  handing  over  the 
beloved  Lord  to  His  persecutors  and  judges. 
I  think,  if  you  will  reflect,  you  will  see  that 
the  artist  is  right,  for  this  reason — these 
men  realised  the  possibilities  which  lay  in 
their  nature.  They  did  not  mean  to  betray, 
and  yet  they  might  be  on  the  moment  of 
betrayal.  And  all  of  us  have  understood 
how  a  sudden  question  applied  to  us,  a 
sudden  charge  made  against  us,  however 
unjustly,  or  a  charge  made  against  another 
justly,  will  sometimes  reveal  ourselves,  as  it 
were,  and  shew  what  we  little  suspected, 
that  we  were  capable  of  enormities  which, 
in  our  better  moments,  we  condemned,  and 
that  we  were  even  at  that  moment  standing 
upon  the  very  brink  of  a  precipice,  which  is 
revealed  to  us  by  a  lightning-flash.  The 
artist,  then,  was  probably  right  in  shewing 
all  the  disciples  equally  anxious,  though  only 
one  was  conscious  of  treachery. 

"  Is  it  I?  " — A  preacher  in  a  certain  village 
church  once  gave  an  easy  lesson  in  Christian 
ethics  from  the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  It 
was  to  this  effect :  "  You  say,  A  lies,  B  steals, 
C  swears,  D  drinks,  F  brags,  G  goes  into  a 
passion,  H  gets  into  debt.  The  letter  I  is 
the  only  one  of  which  you  have  nothing  to 
say." 

Vers.  22-25.  The  Holy  Communion. — All  our 
churches  contain  the  apparatus  for  a  certain 
sacred  ceremony.  And  this  is  no  novel  in- 
troduction ;  for  when  we  examine  the  most 
ancient  sanctuaries,  or  excavate  the  ruins  of 
the  oldest  structures,  we  find  this  arrange- 
ment existing — nay,  even  when  we  descend 
into  the  catacombs  of  Eome,  where,  under- 
ground, the  infant  Church  of  Jesus  wor- 
shipped in  the  days  of  persecution,  we  find 
due  provision  made  for  celebrating  the  Holy 
Communion.  Up  then  almost  to  the  very 
era  of  the  Saviour's  mission  do  we  trace  this 
ancient  institution,  and  every  time  we  behold 
the  Lord's  table  standing  in  its  appointed 
place  we  see  an  evidence  of  the  truth  of 
Christianity ;  for  there  is  no  way  of  account- 
ing for  its  existence,  or  for  the  appearance 
of  a  new  rite  amongst  the  religious  cere- 
monies of  mankind,  at  a  particular  period, 
except  by  assenting  to  the  truth  of  the 
gospel  narrative  that,  on  a  certain  eventful 
night,  Jesus  of  Nazareth  established  the 
Blessed  Sacrament  of  His  Body  and  Blood, 
and  commanded  it  to  be  observed  for  an 
everlasting  memorial. — Dr.  Hardman. 

Spiritual  nourishment. — When  General 
Grant  took  the  Federal  army  at  Chatta- 
nooga, it  was  feeble  and  dispirited  because 
it  was  almost  destitute.  The  food  of  the 
army  was  hauled  with  difficulty  over  moun- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


tain  roads  and  the  supply  was  totally  in- 
sufficient. His  first  movement,  on  assuming 
command — and  it  was  that  which  eventually 
led  to  victory — was  to  repair  the  railroads 
and  open  up  communication,  so  that  the 
army  soon  had  everything  it  needed.  There 
is  a  like  necessity  in  the  spiritual  life  of 
Christ's  army.  We  are  worth  very  little  in 
the  service  of  Christ  except  as  we  are  spirit- 
ually nourished.  The  soul  is  easily  starved  by 
lack  of  appropriate  food.  And  our  spiritual 
nourishment  must  come  from  Christ. 

Sacramental  grace. — Were  a  king  to  offer 
grants  of  land  to  any  who  would,  serve  in  a 
war  for  the  defence  of  the  country,  it  would 
be  a  foolish  question,  "  Can  we  not  obtain  a 
grant  without  serving  in  the  war  ? "  The  king 
might  give  a  grant  to  some  who  served  him 
in  a  different  way,  but  in  ordinary  cases  he 
would  not.  God  may  save  a  man  without 
the  sacraments;  but  those  who  reject  the 
sacraments  are,  to  say  the  least,  in  great 
peril.  There  was  a  labouring  man  some 
time  since  in  one  of  our  northern  towns  who, 
owing  to  some  mistake,  had  been  misin- 
formed as  to  the  hour  of  service.  He  came 
when  the  celebration  of  the  Holy  Communion 
was  just  over,  and  when  they  came  out  of 
church  they  found  him  waiting  sadly  out- 
side. The  clergyman  explained  how  the  mis- 
take had  arisen,  and  expressed  his  sorrow 
for  it.  "  Never  mind,  master,"  said  the  man ; 
but  the  poor  fellow  could  not  help  adding, 
"  only  I  did  so  build  upon  it."  He  knew  his 
own  weakness,  and  his  need  of  Divine  grace 
and  supernatural  assistance  ;  and  so  he  was 
coming,  not  as  if  there  was  any  virtue  in  the 
bare  act  of  coming,  not  as  if  the  Sacrament 
itself  could  save  him,  but  because  he  had 
grasped  the  great  truth  that  it  is  through 
the  Sacrament  that  God  imparts  grace  and 
strength  and  life  to  us  His  children,  un- 
worthy as  we  are  of  the  least  of  His  benefits. 

The  Eucharist  a  feast  of  consecration. — 
Here  we  renounce  the  idols  of  the  world  and 
put  on  more  and  more  devotion  to  our  God. 
Not  long  ago  a  foreign  potentate  was  re- 
ceived with  much  pomp  and  circumstance 
by  the  Lord  Mayor  of  London.  He  came 
along  the  Strand  with  courtiers  and  attend- 
ants to  Temple  Bar,  at  the  borders  of  the 
old  city,  where  the  Lord  Mayor  met  him 
and  delivered  to  him  the  keys  of  London,  so 
signifying  that  he  was  welcome  not  merely 
to  the  freedom  of  the  city,  but  also  to  the 
custody  of  it.  As  we  at  this  sacramental 
gateway  of  promise  pass  out  into  the  larger 
and  better  life,  let  us  turn  over  the  keys  to 
our  Prince.  Come  in,  Thou  Blessed  One  I 
Come  in  and  possess  Thine  own. 

The  Eucharist  prized. — In  times  of  perse- 
cution men  would  risk  their  4ives  to  get 
their  Communions.  A  hundred  years  ago, 
during  the  French  Revolution,  when  religion 
was  abolished  by  the  French  Parliament, 
when    Sunday  was    done  away  with,    the 


clergy  were  hunted  into  the  thickets  like 
beasts  of  prey,  and  none  might  conduct  or 
attend  a  service  on  pain  of  death,  did  people 
go  without  this  means  of  grace  ?  No ! 
From  time  to  time  a  messenger  hurried, 
with  a  mysterious  watchword  from  house  to 
house.  "  The  black  swamp,"  he  would  mutter, 
and  pass  on  without  greeting  or  farewell. 
But  the  persons  addressed  understood  him. 
Shortly  after  midnight,  men  and  women, 
dressed  in  dark  clothes,  would  meet  silently 
by  the  black  swamp  below  the  village,  and 
there,  by  the  light  of  a  carefully  guarded 
lantern,  one  of  the  homeless  priests  would 
give  the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  Lord  to  the 
faithful  of  the  neighbourhood.  They  all 
knew  that  at  any  moment,  before  the  alarm 
could  be  given,  the  soldiers  might  be  upon 
them,  and  a  volley  of  grape-shot  might 
stretch  them  bleeding  and  dying  on  the 
ground.  What  matter  ?  Man  might  kill  their 
body,  but  Jesus  had  said  that  He  would  raise 
them  up  at  the  last  day. 

Benefit  of  the  Sacrament. — A  poor  woman 
was  once  asked  by  a  neighbour  what  good 
she  got  by  receiving  the  Blessed  Sacrament. 
"  Can  you  understand  it  ? "  asked  her  neigh- 
bour. "No,"  said  the  woman,  "I  cannot 
understand  it,  I  cannot  explain  it ;  but  this 
I  know,  that  I  go  to  the  altar  empty  and  I 
come  down  full." 

The  Holy  Grail. — Such  was  the  name  given 
long  ago  to  the  actual  cup  out  of  which  our 
Saviour  dispensed  the  first  Lord's  Supper. 
This  cup,  it  was  believed,  had  been  taken 
up  to  heaven,  but  was  revealed  miraculously 
to  every  one  whose  heart  was  pure.  And  it 
was  thought  that  the  sight  of  this  cup 
imparted  pardon  and  peace  to  all  who  were 
favoured  with  a  vision  of  it.  This  was  the 
tradition  believed  by  our  forefathers,  and 
there  is  a  beautiful  truth  in  it  which  all  who 
consider  may  understand.  For  beneath  the 
outward  symbols  of  the  Holy  Eucharist  there 
is  a  Divine  reality  which  is  seen  only  by 
those  whose  hearts  have  been  purified. 
Everybody  sees  the  bread  and  wine,  but  few 
see  the  Divine  Flesh  and  Blood  behind  them 
that  purchased  salvation  for  us  on  the  bitter 
cross.  Long  ago  people  used  to  set  out  on 
painful  pilgrimages  in  the  hope  of  seeing 
the  Holy  Grail.  They  prayed,  they  fasted, 
they  wrought  good  works,  they  longed  for 
a  sight  of  the  wonderful  vessel  that  would 
give  them  blessing  and  joy.  But  these 
painful  pilgrimages  were  needless.  The 
Holy  Grail  was  nearer  than  they  thought. 
For  the  wonderful  vision  is  to  be  seen  at 
every  Communion,  and  all  we  need  to  see  it 
is  a  pure  heart. 

Ver.  24.  Bloodshedding  as  an  expression 
of  love. — A  certain  Asiatic  queen,  departing 
this  life,  left  behind  her  three  accomplished 
sons,  all  arrived  to  years  of  maturity.  The 
young  princes  were  at    strife    as    to  who 

555 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK. 


should  pay  the  highest  respect  to  their  royal 
mother's  memory.  To  give  scope  for  their 
generous  contentions  they  agreed  to  meet  at 
the  place  of  interment,  and  there  present 
the  most  honourable  gift  they  knew  how  to 
devise  or  were  able  to  procure.  The  eldest 
came,  and  exhibited  a  sumptuous  monument, 
consisting  of  the  richest  materials,  and 
ornamented  with  the  most  exquisite  work- 
manship. The  second  ransacked  all  the 
beauties  of  the  blooming  creation,  and 
offered  a  garland  of  such  admirable  colours 
and  delightful  odours  as  had  never  been 
seen  before.  The  youngest  appeared  with- 
out any  pompous  preparations,  having  only 
a  crystal  basin  in  one  hand  and  a  silver 
bodkin  in  the  other.  As  soon  as  he  ap- 
proached he  threw  open  his  breast,  pierced 
a  vein  which  lay  opposite  to  his  heart, 
received  the  blood  in  the  transparent  vase, 
and,  with  an  air  of  affectionate  reverence, 
placed  it  on  the  tomb.  The  spectators, 
struck  with  the  sight,  gave  a  shout  of  general 
applause,  and  immediately  gave  preference 
to  this  oblation.  If  it  was  reckoned  such 
a  singular  expression  of  love  to  expend  a 
few  of  those  precious  drops  for  the  honour 
of  a  parent,  oh,  how  matchless,  how  ineff- 
able, was  the  love  of  Jesus  in  pouring  out  all 
His  vital  blood  for  the  salvation  of  His 
enemies ! 

Ver.  26.  Affliction, producing  song. — In  his 
Hunting  for  the  Nightingale  in  England, 
John  Burroughs  tells  of  listening  one  black 
night  to  the  song  of  the  sedge- warbler  in 
the  hedge.  It  was  a  singular  medley  of 
notes,  hurried  chirps,  trills,  calls,  warbles. 
When  it  stopped  singing,  a  stone  flung  into 
the  bush  set  it  going  again,  its  song  now 
being  so  persistently  animated  as  to  fill 
the  gloom  and  darkness  with  joy.  Samuel 
Rutherford's  most  gladsome  letters  are  those 
from  his  prison.  The  saints  have  sung  their 
sweetest  when  the  thorn  has  pierced  their 
heart. 

The  power  of  a  hymn. — A  little  boy  came 
to  one  of  our  city  missionaries,  and  holding 
out  a  dirty  and  well-worn  bit  of  printed 
paper,  said,  "  Please,  sir,  father  sent  me  to 
get  a  clean  paper  like  this."  Taking  it  from 
his  hand,  the  missionary  unfolded  it,  and 
found  it  was  a  paper  containing  the  beauti- 
ful hymn  beginning,  "  Just  as  I  am."  The 
missionary  looked  down  with  interest  into 
the  face  earnestly  upturned  to  him,  and 
asked  the  little  boy  where  he  got  it,  and 
why  he  wanted  a  clean  one.  "  We  found  it, 
sir,"  said  he,  "in  sister's  pocket  after  she 
died ;  she  used  to  sing  it  all  the  time  when  she 
was  sick,  and  loved  it  so  much  that  father 
wanted  to  get  a  clean  one  to  put  in  a  frame 
to  hang  it  up.  Won't  you  give  us  a  clean 
one,  sir  ?  " 

Vers.  29-31.  Mistaken  self-complacency. — 
556 


It  was  well  said  once  by  a  remarkable 
man,  and  the  words  are  worth  remembering, 
"  Bear  in  mind  that  you  are  just  then 
beginning  to  go  wrong  when  you  are  a  little 
pleased  with  yourself  because  you  are  going 
right."  Let  us  watch  against  this  as  a 
snare  of  Satan,  and  endeavour  ever  to  main- 
tain the  apostolic  attitude  :  "  In  lowliness 
of  mind  let  each  esteem  other  better  than 
himself."  And  let  me  caution  you  not  to 
make  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  this 
self-complacency  can  be  effectually  guarded 
against  by  a  mere  use  of  the  recognised 
theological  expressions  duly  ascribing  all 
the  merit  and  all  the  praise  to  God.  These 
are  too  often  merely  the  garments  of  spiritual 
pride,  and  by  no  means  must  they  be  mis- 
taken for  true  humility. 

Presumption.  —  Henry  Winstanley,  who 
built  the  first  Eddystone  Lighthouse  in 
1696,  had  such  confidence  in  the  structure 
that  he  expressed  a  wish  that  he  might  be 
in  the  lighthouse  during  the  fiercest  possible 
hurricane.  In  November  1703  he  had  his 
wish  gratified;  and  the  morning  after  the 
tempest  not  a  vestige  of  the  lighthouse 
remained. 

Danger  of  presumption.  —  A  scientific 
gentleman,  deputed  by  the  Government,  was, 
not  many  years  ago,  examining  the  scene  of  a 
fatal  explosion.  He  was  accompanied  by  the 
underviewer  of  the  colliery,  and  as  they  were 
inspecting  the  edges  of  a  goaf  (a  region  of  foul 
air),  it  was  observed  that  the  "  Davy  "  lamps 
which  they  carried  were  afire.  "  I  suppose," 
said  the  inspector,  "  that  there  is  a  good  deal 
of  fire-damp  hereabouts."  "  Thousands  and 
thousands  of  cubic  feet  all  through  the 
goaf,"  coolly  replied  his  companion.  "  Why," 
exclaimed  the  official,  "  do  you  mean  to  say 
that  there  is  nothing  but  that  shred  of  wire- 
gauze  between  us  and  eternity  ?  "  "  Nothing 
at  all,"  replied  the  underviewer,  very  com- 
posedly. "  There's  nothing  here  where  we 
stand  bat  that  gauze  wire  to  keep  the  whole 
mine  from  being  blown  into  the  air."  The 
precipitate  retreat  of  the  Government  official 
was  instantaneous.  And  thus  it  should  be 
with  the  sinner ;  his  retreat  from  the  ways 
of  sin — those  "  goafs  "  of  poisonous  air — 
should  be  instantaneous.  Sir  Humphry 
Davy's  lamp  was  never  designed  as  a  substi- 
tute for  caution  if  accidentally  or  unknow- 
ingly carried  into  foul  air,  whereas  many  do 
so  knowingly  and  habitually. 

Ver.  32.  The  Garden  of  Gethsemane. — 
There  is  a  garden  in  the  Alps  surrounded 
by  dizzy  peaks,  mighty  glaciers,  yawning 
crevasses.  There  one  hears  the  gurgling 
waters  far  beneath  one's  feet,  like  the  moan 
of  imprisoned  spirits.  The  approach  to  that 
lonely  island  in  a  frozen  sea  is  through  a 
broken  way  of  ice  and  snow  and  frost. 
The  route  lies  in  uncertainty  and  even  peril. 
No  leaf,  flower,  or  shrub  appears  along  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xiv. 


icy  sea.  But  when  the  garden  is  reached, 
the  gentian  and  the  forget-me-not,  the  saxi- 
frage and  the  rose,  are  found  decking  the 
solitude  with  beauty  and  the  scene  with  life. 
So  here  this  Gethsemane  garden  has  its 
environment  of  height  and  depth — of  shadow, 
dark,  dreary,  and  deathlike — of  light,  faint 
and  full;  but  as  we,  by  faith  and  in  love, 
approach  reverently  near  to  Him  who  gives 
it  all  its  meaning,  we  gather  those  fruits  and 
flowers  which  ripen  best  in  an  atmosphere 
which  was  sanctified  by  the  presence  of  the 
Man  of  Sorrows,  and  which  for  that  reason 
are  likely  to  be  refreshing  to  those  who, 
living  His  life,  breathe  His  Spirit. — Dean 
Lefroy. 

In  communion  with  God. — There  was  each 
morning,  during  General  Gordon's  first  so- 
journ in  the  Soudan,  one  half -hour  during 
which  there  lay  outside  his  tent  a  handker- 
chief, and  the  whole  camp  knew  the  full 
significance  of  that  small  token,  and  most 
religiously  was  it  respected  by  all  there, 
whatever  was  their  colour,  creed,  or  business. 
No  foot  dared  to  enter  the  tent  so  guarded. 
No  message,  however  pressing,  was  carried  in. 
Whatever  it  was,  of  life  or  death,  it  had  to 
wait  until  the  guardian  signal  was  removed. 
Every  one  knew  that  Gordon,  in  there  alone, 
was  in  communion  with  God. 

Ver.  33.  Mutual  sympathy. — Christ  asked 
His  disciples  to  watch  with  Him  in  Geth- 
semane. Tender  touch  of  nature  to  make 
Him  with  the  whole  world  kin.  Two  infants 
will  walk  hand  in  hand  "  in  the  dark  "  where 
neither  would  go  alone.  Invalids,  who  have 
counted  the  strokes  of  midnight  wakeful 
hours,  conjured  by  the  wall-flashes  and 
flickers  of  dim  lamps,  and  need  no  other 
service,  cry  out,  "  Father  !  Mother  !  Some 
one  !  "  We  sit  by  them,  long  and  patiently, 
perhaps  dozing  disciple-like  as  we  hold 
their  hands,  saying  and  doing  nothing,  but 
being  near  them.  Through  the  streets  of 
Paris,  between  prison  and  block,  the  most 
desperate  were  often  observed  sitting  upon 
the  cart's  edge  hand  in  hand.  Triumph  wants 
friends  also.  Jesus  wants  our  sympathy 
still  in  His  warfare  with  sin  on  the  earth. 
He 'who  so  wanted  the  society  of  men  will 
have  His  own  with  Him  where  He  is,  at  last 
and  for  ever. — Haynes. 

Ver.  36.  Resignation  to  the  Divine  will. 
— Epictetus,  a  heathen  philosopher,  thus 
prayed,  "Great  God,  use  me  henceforward 
according  to  Thy  pleasure.  I  am  altogether 
of  Thy  mind.  It  is  indifferent  to  me  how 
Thou  dealest  with  me ;  I  refuse  nothing  if 
Thou  seest  it  good  for  me ;  lead  me  where 
Thou  thinkest  it  convenient;  clothe  me  in 
what  garment  Thou  pleasest,  whether  it  be 
whole  or  torn,  either  shall  be  welcome ; 
whether  Thou  wilt  have  me  to  bear  the 
office  of  magistrate,  or  lead  a  private  life; 


whether  Thou  wilt  have  me  to  stay  in  my 
own  country,  or  let  me  be  driven  into  exile ; 
whether  Thou  wilt  have  me  rich  or  poor  ;  in 
all  this,  by  my  equanimity,  I  will  justify 
Thee  before  men."  This  from  the  lips  of  a 
heathen  is  wonderful,  and  the  more  so 
because  real  Christians  seldom  reach  such 
an  elevation  of  soul.  The  King  of  Arra- 
gon  (Alfonso)  was  once  asked  whom  he 
considered  the  most  perfect  man ;  and  he 
replied,  "  Him  who  receives  all  things, 
whether  sad  or  pleasant,  as  coming  from 
a  kind  and  wise  Father's  hand,  with  an  even 
mind."  And  so  it  is  now ;  he  is  the  most 
perfect  Christian  who  is  not  lifted  up  by 
prosperity,  nor  cast  down  by  adversity ; 
who,  whatever  happens  to  him,  still  looks 
beyond  second  causes  to  God,  the  great  first 
cause  of  all ;  who  makes  it  his  daily  business 
to  desire  nothing  but  that  which  God 
appoints ;  and  whose  constant  prayer  is, 
that  God's  will  may  be  fully  carried  out,  and 
accomplished  in  him,  and  in  all  his  concerns. 
Edward  Payson,  who  was  a  great  sufferer, 
being  asked  if  he  saw  any  particular  reason 
for  a  dispensation,  replied :  "  No,  but  I  am 
as  well  satisfied  as  if  I  could  see  ten  thousand. 
God's  will  is  the  very  perfection  of  all  reason." 
Mr.  Simeon,  on  his  death-bed,  telling  an 
inquiring  friend  of  his  dependence  upon 
God,  said :  "  He  cannot  do  anything  against 
my  will." 

"  Thy  will  be  done" — It  is  related  that  when 
St.  Gertrude  used  to  say  the  Lord's  Prayer 
she  would  repeat  the  words  "Thy  will  be 
done  "  several  times  over.  One  day,  when 
she  was  praying  in  this  manner,  the  Saviour 
appeared  to  her  holding  health  in  His  right 
hand  and  sickness  in  His  left.  "  Choose,  My 
daughter,  which  you  please,"  said  the  Lord ; 
to  which  she  replied,  "  Thy  will  be  done,  not 
mine,  O  Lord."  Many  an  impressive  homily 
on  acquiescence  to  the  Divine  will  has  been 
written  by  sufferers.  Richard  Baxter  was 
throughout  life  familiarised,  as  few  are,  with 
hours  of  sickness  and  prostration.  Perhaps 
it  was  this  habitual  discipline  of  pain, 
causing  him  for  long  years  to  hover  on  the 
very  border-land  of  death,  which  imparted 
so  much  pathos  and  fervency  to  his  Saint's 
Rest,  and  its  realistic  vision  of  "  the  better 
country."  Quaint  and  beautiful  is  his  prayer 
— a  formula  of  devout  submission — to  Him 
whose  loving  hand  and  wisdom  he  recognised 
in  it  all.  "  What  Thou  wilt ;  where  Thou 
wilt ;  when  Thou  wilt ! " 

Ver.  38.  "  Watch  and  pray." — There  is  a 
custom,  among  the  Breton  sailors,  when 
launching  their  boats,  to  offer  this  prayer, 
"  Keep  me,  my  God  ;  my  boat  is  so  small,  and 
Thy  ocean  is  so  wide."  The  life  of  a  Christian 
may  be  likened  unto  a  frail  bark  cast  upon  the 
mighty  ocean,  which  unless  rightly  steered 
may  run  into  some  contrary  current  that  will 
toss  it  about  and  turn  its  course.     In  this 

557 


chap.  xiv.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


great  ocean  of  ungodliness  it  is  necessary  to 
pray  that  the  current  of  sin  may  not  turn  us 
from  our  course.  "  Pray  that  ye  enter  not 
into  temptation  " ;  and  if  ye  do,  "  call  upon 
Me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I  will  deliver 
Thee,"  saith  the  Lord.  Prayer  is  not  enough. 
Like  the  Scots  when  they  conquered  the 
English  at  Bannockburn,  or  the  English 
when  they  conquered  the  French  at  Crecy, 
we  are  to  rise  from  our  knees  ;  to  stand  up 
and  fight ;  to  quit  us  like  men ;  "  having 
done  all,"  to  stand.  We  are  to  put  on  the 
whole  armour  of  God;  and  since  we  know 
neither  when  nor  where  the  adversary  may 
assault  us,  we  are  never  to  put  it  off.  Live 
and  die  in  harness, — using  such  precautions 
as  some  say  Cromwell  did  against  the 
assassin's  dagger — his  dress  concealed  a 
shirt  of  mail.  In  the  council-chamber,  at 
the  banquet,  in  court  as  in  camp,  he  wore 
it  always.  Let  the  good  man  go  to  his  work- 
shop, counting-room,  market,  the  place  of 
business,  and  scenes  of  enjoyment,  as  the 
peasant  of  the  East  to  his  plough,  where  fiery 
Bedouins  scour  the  land,  and  bullets  whist- 
ling from  the  bush  may  suddenly  call  him 
to  drop  the  ox-goad  and  fly  to  arms.  The 
sun  glances  on  other  iron  than  the  plough- 
share, a  sword  hangs  at  his  thigh,  and  a  gun 
is  slung  at  his  back.—  T.  Guthrie,  D.D. 

Ver.  39.  "  Spake  the  same  words." — The 
late  Rev.  W.  H.  Krause,  of  Dublin,  was 
visiting  a  lady  in  a  depressed  state — "  weak, 
oh,  so  weak  ! "  She  told  him  that  she  had 
been  very  much  troubled  in  mind  that  day, 
because  in  meditation  and  prayer  she  had 
found  it  impossible  to  govern  her  thoughts, 
and  kept  merely  going  over  the  same  things 
again  and  again.  "  Well,  my  dear  friend," 
was  his  prompt  reply,  "there  is  provision 
in  the  gospel  for  that  too.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  when  His  soul  was  exceeding  sorrow- 
ful, even  unto  death,  three  times  prayed, 
and  spoke  the  same  words."  This  seasonable 
application  of  Scripture  was  a  source  of 
great  comfort  to  her. 

Ver.  40.  The  power  of  sleep. — The  most 
violent  passion  and  excitement  cannot  keep 
even  powerful  minds  from  sleep  ;  Alexander 
the  Great  slept  on  the  field  of  Arbela,  and ' 
Napoleon  upon  that  of  Austerlitz.  Even 
stripes  and  torture  cannot  keep  off  sleep,  as 
criminals  have  been  known  to  give  way  to  it 
on  the  rack.  Noises  which  at  first  serve  to 
drive  it  away  soon  become  indispensable 
to  its  existence ;  thus,  while  a  stage-coach, 
stopping  to  change  horses,  wakens  all  the 
passengers,  the  proprietor  of  an  iron  forge, 
who  slept  close  to  the  din  of  hammers,  forges, 
and  blast  furnaces,  would  wake  up  if  there 
was  any  interruption  to  them  during  the 
night;  and  a  sick  miller  who  had  his  mill 
stopped  on  that  account  passed  sleepless 
nights  until  the  mill  resumed  its  usual  noise. 

558 


Homer,  in  his  Iliad,  elegantly  represents 
sleep  as  overcoming  all  men,  and  even  the 
gods,  except  Jupiter  alone. 

Ver.  41.  The  hour  of  crisis. — Often  has  the 
fate  of  kingdoms  and  empires  been  left  to 
the  decision  of  an  hour,  and  that  hour  of 
inconceivable  importance  to  millions.  Often 
have  the  rights  and  the  liberties,  the  freedom 
or  the  slavery,  of  a  nation  depended  upon 
the  result  of  a  contest  where  valour  and 
patriotism  and  magnanimity  struggled  hard 
amidst  the  clash  of  arms  and  the  din  of  war; 
and  their  bosoms  have  beat  with  trembling 
anxiety,  as  from  lip  to  lip  the  important 
announcement  passed,  "  The  hour  is  come." 
But  although  we  could  put  together  all  the 
interesting  anticipations,  all  the  distressing 
and  conflicting  hopes  and  fears,  all  the  im- 
portant deeds  and  destinies  that  were  ever 
suspended  upon  any  hour  in  the  world's 
history,  they  would  instantly  sink  into  insig- 
nificance compared  with  the  vast  and  eternal 
interests  of  innumerable  myriads  which  were 
suspended  upon  the  results  of  that  hour 
which  our  Saviour  declares  in  the  text  to  be 
at  hand.  The  fate  of  kingdoms  and  empires 
is  nothing  compared  with  the  fate  of  the 
universe,  upon  whose  destiny  it  was  to  bear 
its  decision  for  eternity. 

Ver.  47.  Mistaken  zeal. — The  Saviour's 
method  is  to  conquer  force  by  submission, 
violence  by  meekness,  sin  by  the  Cross.  Yet 
many  make  this  mistake,  and  defend  a 
spiritual  cause  by  carnal  weapons.  On  a 
large  scale  the  Crusades  were  an  example  of 
a  continent  ready  to  fight  the  devil  in  others 
with  swords,  without  being  ready  to  fight 
the  devil  in  themselves  with  self-denial.  All 
violence  used  in  religion  by  inquisitors  or  by 
men  impatient  to  enthrone  the  right  is  an 
example  of  Peter's  mistake.  All  hatred  of 
those  doing  wrong,  all  vituperation  of  them, 
is  a  Peter's  sword.  What  Christ  wants  is 
some  that  can  bear  a  cross  with  Him,  not 
such  as  will  draw  a  sword  for  Him. — 
R.  Glover. 

Ver.  61.  Silence  often  more  effective  than 
speech. — "  I  have  often  repented  having 
spoken,  but  I  never  have  been  sorry  for 
having  kept  silent."  So  said  a  friend  in  our 
hearing,  and  his  words  often  are  recalled  to 
mind.  There  are  occasions  when  duty  bids 
a  man  speak,  if  he  be  a  true  man,  a  Christian 
man — when,  unless  he  fling  all  fear  of  con- 
sequences to  the  winds,  and  utter  words  in 
behalf  of  truth,  he  will  shew  himself  a 
coward.  There  are  times,  too,  when  it  is  his 
privilege  to  soothe  anxiety  and  to  comfort 
those  in  sorrow.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of 
these  and  some  other  cases,  silence  fre- 
quently is  wiser  and  no  less  effective  than 
speech.  Christ  calmly  and  silently  standing 
before    the   fuming    high   priest    has   been 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   XIV. 


confessed  through  all  the  ages  the  nobler  of 
the  two.  It  falls  to  almost  every  one  at  times 
to  encounter  abuse.  Bitter  accusations  are 
hurled  at  him,  caused  perhaps  by  misunder- 
standings. To  listen  in  silence  often  is 
better  evidence  than  anything  else  of  the 
actual  subjugation  of  one's  temper,  and  is 
the  most  effectual  way  of  disarming  an 
angry  adversary. 

Help  from  considering  Christ's  endurance. 
— When  Pollok  the  poet  was  a  boy,  he  was 
of  a  passionate  temper.  Sometimes  when 
offended,  he  allowed  himself  to  fall  into  a 
rage,  which  was  so  violent  that  it  was  very 
painful  to  witness.  About  the  age  of  fifteen 
a  very  striking  change  took  place  in  his 
temper.  This  was  observed  for  some  time 
by  his  friends ;  and  when  at  length  he  was 
questioned  on  the  subject,  his  answer  was, 
"  While  perusing  the  Gospels  for  myself,  I 
was  struck  with  the  meekness  and  calm 
dignity  of  the  Saviour  under  persecution, 
and  I  resolved  henceforward  to  command 
my  temper;  and  since  that  time,  though  I 
may  feel  anger,  nothing  ever  puts  me  in  a 
passion." 

Ver.  62.  Christ's  advent  glorg. — Sometimes 
perhaps  you  have  passed  in  the  daytime 
through  some  public  place  where  at  night 
there  was  to  be  a  magnificent  exhibition  of 
pyrotechnic  art,  and  you  have  seen  the 
figures  that  are  to  be  lighted  up  as  they 
stand  ready  for  the  exhibition.  They  are 
very  plain  and  common-looking.  You  can 
see  in  the  rude  outlines  the  forms  of  men, 
the  crown  upon  the  kingly  brow,  and  the 
jewels  that  flash  from  it ;  but  there  is  no 
beauty  and  glory  whatever  about  them.  But 
wait  till  the  eventide,  till  the  sun  goes  down, 
and  the  master  of  ceremonies  appears  on  the 
scene,  and  suddenly  at  the  signal,  perhaps  of 
a  trumpet-blast  or  a  chorus  of  melody,  the 
lights  are  turned  on  and  a  blaze  of  glory 
lights  up  the  scene.  Every  figure  stands  out 
in  radiant  light,  and  the  whole  scene  is 
illuminated,  transfigured,  and  seems  almost 
supernatural.  So  it  will  be  when  our  Master 
appears,  and  these  bodies  of  humiliation 
shall  be  lighted  up  with  His  brightness,  and 
all  the  members  shall  shine  with  the  beauty 
and  majesty  of  their  living  Head,  and  He 
shall  reveal  all  His  glory  in  His  heavenly 
bride. 

Vers.  66-71.  Unguarded  places  most  liable 
to  attack. — A  one-eyed  doe  used  to  graze 
near  the  sea,  and  always  kept  her  blind  eye 
next  the  water,  as  she  thought  her  danger 
would  only  be  from  the  land.  But  a  poacher, 
when  he  discovered  this,  took  a  boat  and 
shot  her,  and  as  she  died  the  doe  exclaimed, 
"  0  hard  fate !  that  I  should  receive  my  death 
wound  from  that  side  whence  I  expected  no 


ill,  and  be  safe  in  that  part  where  I  looked 
for  the  most  danger." — JtJsop. 

Ver.  72.  God's  voice  in  common  things. — In 
many  ways  and  by  many  voices  God  pleads 
with  us.  There  was  a  certain  ungodly  man 
who  complained  bitterly  of  the  church-bell. 
He  could  neglect  God's  service,  he  could  in 
the  insolence  of  wealth  refuse  to  listen  to 
God's  minister,  but  that  bell  as  it  rang  forth 
day  by  day  was  echoed  by  his  conscience  and 
would  not  let  him  rest.     God  can  make  even 

a  little  bird  preach  a  sermon  for  Him. 

Once  a  careless  shepherd  came  down  from  the 
plains  to  waste  in  revelry  and  sin  his  hard- 
earned  wages,  and  entered  one  of  the  cities 
of  Australia.  As  he  passed  along  the  streets 
a  wicker  cage  caught  his  eye,  from  which  a 
captive  lark,  an  English  lark,  brought  across 
the  ocean  by  some  emigrant,  was  pouring 
forth  its  cheerful  song ;  and  at  once  by  the 
magic  power  of  association  there  came  to  his 
memory  the  old  home  far  away,  the  village 
green,  the  grey  church  tower,  the  tender  voice 
of  his  mother,  the  good  advice  of  the  kind 
old  vicar,  and  by  God's  help  as  he  listened 
he  paused,  and  then  turned  back  determined 

to  lead  a  better  life. George  Macdonald, 

in  his  story  of  Robert  Falconer,  relates  a 
well-authenticated  incident  of  a  notorious 
convict  in  one  of  our  colonies  having  been 
led  to  reform  his  ways  through  going  one 
day  into  a  little  church  where  the  matting 
along  the  aisle  happened  to  be  of  the  same 
pattern  as  that  in  the  church  where  he  had 
worshipped  with  his  mother  when  a  boy. 
That  old  familiar  matting  recalled  the 
memories  of  childhood,  "  the  mysteries  of 
the  kingdom  of  innocence "  which  had  long 
been  hidden  and  overborne  by  the  sins  and 
sufferings  of  later  years.  It  came  to  him  like 
the  crowing  of  the  cock  to  Peter.   It  was  the 

turning-point  in  his  life. God  has  blessed 

the  tick  of  the  clock  and  the  falling  of  a 
leaf  to  rouse  in  man's  breast  a  sense  of 
responsibility.  A  thousand  voices  in  nature 
call  us  to  reflexion,  but  sometimes  a  simple 
incident  in  daily  life  has  done  so  more  effect- 
ually. The  hard-hearted  father  who  had 
listened  to  remonstrance  and  warning  for 
many  a  year,  was  at  last  touched.  He  had 
heard  most  of  the  temperance  orators  of 
the  day,  but  he  continued  the  drink.  One 
Sunday  afternoon  he  took  his  little  girl  to 
the  Sunday  school,  intending  himself  to  go 
after  more  drink.  At  the  door  of  the  school- 
house  he  put  the  child  down  from  his  arms, 
but  observed  that  tears  started  into  her  eyes. 
"  Why  do  you  cry  ? "  he  asked.  The  little 
one  sobbed  out  her  answer,  "  Because  you  go 
to  public-house,  and  frighten  us  when  you 
come  home."  It  was  enough.  He  never 
entered  a  public-house  again.  God  can  bless 
simple  means  to  reach  great  ends. 


559 


chap.  XV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAPTER  XV. 
CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  And  the  whole  council. — Even  the  whole  Sanhedrin,  which  consisted  of  the  three 
classes  just  named — chief  priests,  elders,  and  scribes  (1  Mace.  xiv.  28). 

Ver.  2.  Thou  sayest  it. — 2i>  \&yets.  This  is  generally  taken  as  a  direct  affirmation— an 
idiomatic  or  courteous  "  Yes  " ;  but  Prof.  Thayer  seems  to  have  shewn  that  it  is  rather  an 
appeal  to  the  questioner's  own  conscience.  "  Art  Thou  the  King  of  the  Jews  ? "  asked 
Pilate,  half  in  scorn  and  half  in  amusement.  "  Dost  thou  say  this  ?  "  is  Christ's  reply  ;  or, 
as  in  John  xviii.  34,  "  Sayest  thou  this  of  thyself,  or  did  others  tell  it  thee  concerning 
Me  ? "     See  Expository  Times,  vol.  vi.  No.  10,  pp.  437-439. 

Ver.  3.  But  He  answered  nothing. — Omit  this  clause,  imported  from  Matt,  xxvii.  12. 

Ver.  6.  Render  :  Now  at  feast-time  he  was  wont  to  release  unto  them  one  prisoner,  whomso- 
ever they  desired.     For  ovirep  -qtovvto,  K,  A,  B  read  dv  iraprjTovvro,  whom  they  begged  off. 

Ver.  16.  See  R.V. 

Ver.  17.  Render  :  And  they  invest  Him  with  "  a  purple  " — the  official  robe  of  gs  and 
rulers,  no  matter  what  its  colour. 

Ver.  21.  Compel. — Press  into  service  :  original  word  is  of  Persian  origin,  and  denotes  the 
impressment  into  service  which  officials  were  authorised  to  make  to  expedite  the  mails. 

Ver.  26.  The  fact  that  the  inscription  was  written  in  three  languages  is  quite  enough  to 
account  for  the  slight  variations  in  wording. 

Ver.  27.  Thieves. — Robbers,  or  bandits. 

Ver.  28.  Wanting  in  many  of  the  best  MSB.,  but  found  in  all  the  most  ancient  versions ; 
therefore  probably  genuine. 

Ver.  43.  Went  in  boldly. — Took  courage  and  went  in. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses    1—15. 

(Parallels:   Matt,  xxvii.  1,  2,  11-26;    Luke  xxiii.  1-7,  13-24; 

John  xviii.  28 — xix.  16.) 

Christ  and  Pilate  :  the  True  King  and  His  counterfeit. — The  so-called  trial  of 
Jesus  by  the  rulers  turned  entirely  on  His  claim  to  be  Messias ;  His  examination 
by  Pilate  turns  entirely  on  His  claim  to  be  King.  The  two  claims  are  indeed 
one ;  but  the  political  aspect  is  distinguishable  from  the  higher  one,  and  it  was 
the  Jewish  rulers'  trick  to  push  it  exclusively  into  prominence  before  Pilate,  in 
the  hope  that  he  might  see  in  the  claim  an  incipient  insurrection,  and  might 
mercilessly  stamp  it  out. 

I.  The  True  King  at  the  bar  of  the  apparent  ruler  (vers.   1-6). — Pilate 
holding  Christ's  life  in  his  hand  is  the  crowning  paradox  of  history  and  the 
mystery  of  self-abasing  love.     One  exercise  of  the  Prisoner's  will  and  His  chains 
would  have  snapped  and  the  governor  lain  dead  on  the  marble  "  pavement." 
The  two  hearings  are  parallel,  and  yet  contrasted.     In  each  there  are  two  stages 
— the  self-attestation  of  Jesus,  and  the  accusations  of  others  ;  but  the  order  is 
different.     The  rulers  begin  with  the  witnesses,  and,  foiled  there,  fall  back  on 
Christ's  own  answer.     Pilate,  with  Roman  directness  and  a  touch  of  contempt 
for  the  accusers,  goes  straight  to  the  point,  and  first  questions  Jesus.     His  question 
was  simply  as  to  our  Lord's  regal  pretensions.     ll  Thou  a  king  ?  " — poor,  helpless 
peasant !     A   strange   specimen   of  royalty   this  !     How   constantly  the   same 
blindness  is  repeated,  and  the  strong  things  of  this  world  despise  the  weak,  and 
material  power  smiles  pityingly  at  the  helpless  impotence  of  the  principles  of 
Christ's  gospel,  which  yet  will  one  day  shatter  it  to  fragments,  like  a  potter's 
vessel !     There  are  plenty  of  Pilates  to-day  who  judge  and  misjudge  the  King 
of  Israel.     The  silence  of  Jesus  in  regard  to  the  eager  accusations  corresponds 

560 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.         chap.  xv. 


to  His  silence  before  the  false  witnesses.  Christ  can  afford  to  let  many  of  His 
foes  alone.  Contradictions  and  confutations  keep  slanders  and  heresies  above 
water,  which  the  law  of  gravitation  would  dispose  of,  if  they  were  left  alone. 
Pilate's  wonder  might  and  should  have  led  him  further.  It  was  the  little 
glimmer  of  light  at  the  far-off  end  of  his  cavern,  which,  travelled  towards,  might 
have  brought  him  into  free  air  and  broad  day.  One  great  part  of  his  crime  was 
neglecting  the  faint  monitions  of  which  he  was  conscious. 

II.  The  people's  favourite  (vers.  7-15). — "Barabbas"  means  "son  of  the 
father."  His  very  name  is  a  kind  of  caricature  of  the  "  Son  of  the  Blessed," 
and  his  character  and  actions  present  in  gross  form  the  sort  of  Messias  whom 
the  nation  really  wanted.  The  popular  hero  is  like  a  mirror  which  reflects  the 
popular  mind.  He  echoes  the  popular  voice,  a  little  improved  or  exaggerated. 
Jesus  had  taught  what  the  people  did  not  care  to  hear,  and  given  blessings 
which  even  the  recipients  soon  forgot,  and  lived  a  life  whose  beauty  of  holiness 
oppressed  and  rebuked  the  common  life  of  men.  What  chance  had  truth  an  1 
goodness  and  purity  against  the  sort  of  bravery  that  slashes  with  a  sword,  and 
is  not  elevated  by  inconvenient  reach  of  thought  or  beauty  of  character  above 
the  mob?  Even  now,  after  nineteen  centuries  of  Christ's  influence  have 
modified  the  popular  ideals,  what  chance  have  they  ?  Are  the  popular  "  heroes  " 
of  Christian  nations  saints,  teachers,  lovers  of  men,  in  whom  their  Christ- 
likeness  is  the  thing  venerated  ?  That  fatal  choice  revealed  the  character  of 
the  choosers,  both  in  their  hostility  and  admiration ;  for  excellence  hated  shews 
what  we  ought  to  be  and  are  not,  and  grossness  or  vice  admired  shews  what  we 
would  fain  be  if  we  dared. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

A  coioard,  and  what  became  of  him. — Fix  your  eyes  on  Pilate.  An  o'er  close 
contact  with  an  evil  world  had  ploughed  f urrows  across  his  face  ;  sensuality  had 
left  its  impress  there.  He  had  come  up  from  Csesarea  a  little  while  ago  to  keep 
peace  during  the  great  annual  festival,  for  tLe  Jews  were  a  turbulent  race.  He 
made  his  headquarters  at  the  castle  of  Antonia,  and  doubtless  kept  well 
indoors ;  for  he  was  the  best-hated  man  in  all  Jerusalem,  and  deserved  it.  On 
the  morning  of  this  April  day  he  was  awakened  early  by  a  beating  at  his  gates. 
He  doubtless  arose  from  his  couch  with  reluctance  and  muttering  maledictions 
on  these  troublesome  Jews.  They  had  brought  a  prisoner  for  trial.  Last  night, 
at  the  conclave  of  the  Sanhedrin,  He  was  accused  of  blasphemy,  of  making  Him- 
self equal  with  God.  But  no  Boman  magistrate  would  take  cognisance  of  a 
theological  indictment.  So  they  must  needs  trump  up  charges  against  Him. 
First,  He  had  perverted  the  nation.  Second,  He  had  forbidden  payment  of 
tribute  to  the  emperor.  Third,  He  had  proclaimed  Himself  as  a  king.  Pilate 
must  determine  upon  this  case  :  there  was  no  escape.  And  you,  friend,  must 
also  decide  what  you  will  do  with  Jesus  who  is  called  the  Christ. 

I.  Now  mark  the  circumstances  which  aggravated  his  cowardice. — 1.  He 
had  heard  about  Jesus  and  knew  Him.  His  wonderful  work  and  words  and 
name  were  in  the  air.  He  had  had,  moreover,  an  interview  with  Jesus.  He 
had  asked  Him,  "  Art  thou  a  king  ?  "  And  Jesus  answered,  "  Thou  sayest  it ; 
but  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world — I  am  come  to  reign  in  the  province  of 
truth."  So  he  knew  about  Him.  What  will  he  do  with  Him?  2.  He  had 
been  warned  concerning  Him.  Not  only  had  his  conscience  rung  the  alarm — 
as  conscience  warns  us  all — but  a  special  admonition  had  been  given  him.  His 
wife  Procula  had  dreamed  in  the  waking  hours  of  the  morning — the  hour  when 
Israel  thought  all  dreams  came  true — and  tradition  tells  us  the  dream.  She 
saw  a  conflagration  that  consumed  homes  and  temples  and  palaces,  licked  up 
forests,  and  burned  the  heavens  like  a  parched  scroll,  so  that  nothing  could 
extinguish  it.     There  were  cries  of  the  homeless  and  fear-stricken  and  dying. 

oo  561 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


Then  a  lamb  appeared,  and  as  it  lifted  its  eyes  all  sounds  were  hushed.     It 

mounted  the  naming  pyre ;  its  side  was  pierced,  blood  gushed  forth,  and  the 

fires  were  quenched.     Then  the  lamb  assumed  human  form,  and  the  appearance 

was,  as  the  dreamer  said, 

"  Of  a  Man  Divine  and  passing  fair, 
And  like  your  august  Prisoner  there." 

Therefore  she  said,  "  Do  no  harm  to  that  just  Man."  3.  Pilate's  cowardice  was 
aggravated  by  his  attempts  at  evasion  and  compromise.  He  entreated  the 
people,  "  Why,  what  evil  hath  He  done  ? "  He  might  as  well  have  sung  a 
lullaby  to  a  cyclone.  "  Crucify  Him  !  "  was  the  answer.  "  Crucify  Him  ! " 
And  then  he  sent  Him  to  Herod — a  happy  thought.  But  Herod  would  not  be 
responsible  for  the  decision  of  this  perplexing  case ;  so  he  sent  the  Prisoner  back. 
Pilate  must  judge  Him  ;  so  must  you  and  I.  Here  is  this  Jesus  ;  and  what  will 
he  do  with  Him  ?  A  great  problem  confronts  him.  He  said,  "  I  will  chastise 
Him  and  let  Him  go."  Oh,  shame  upon  him  for  a  Roman  magistrate!  The 
Man  is  either  guilty  or  innocent.  If  guilty,  He  should  die  the  death ;  if 
innocent,  let  Him  go.  Compromise  never  pays.  "  Nothing  is  settled  until  it  is 
settled  right."  No  man  nor  Church,  no  pastor  nor  teacher,  can  afford  to  split 
the  difference  in  spiritual  things. 

II.  But  what  was  the  occasion  of  this  man's  cowardice? — 1.  To  begin  with, 
he  was  a  trifler.  He  lived  in  an  age  of  cynicism  ;  the  foundations  of  religion 
were  broken  up.  He  had  mingled  with  the  soldiers  at  the  camp-fire,  cracking 
jokes  about  the  gods  and  making  sport  of  sacred  things.  And  now,  facing  this 
Divine  Truth-giver,  the  irony  of  his  retort — "  What  is  truth  ?  " — was  but  the 
outcome  of  his  pernicious  habit.  Some  of  you,  perhaps,  have  been  wont  to  trifle 
in  like  manner.  But  we  cannot  make  light  of  any  serious  matter  without 
ultimately  paying  for  it.  2.  He  had  no  opinions  of  his  own.  He  went  to  the 
people,  to  his  wife,  to  the  priests,  for  advice.  Oh,  man,  think  for  thyself !  It 
behoves  us  to  have  convictions  of  our  own.  Let  us  live  by  them,  stand  for  them, 
and  be  willing  in  their  defence,  if  need  be,  to  die.  If  ever  we  are  in  doubt,  we 
have  a  sure  Counsellor  (Jas.  i.  5).  3.  Another  reason  for  Pilate's  cowardice 
was  his  sycophancy.  At  all  hazards  he  must  be  Caesar's  friend.  What  was  the 
result  ?  A  little  while  after  Tiberius  was  off*  the  throne  and  Caligula  was  on.  And 
Caligula  said,  "  Go  bring  me  Pilate  ;  he  must  answer  to  certain  charges  concern- 
ing an  aqueduct,  a  Roman  standard,  and  a  murder  at  the  altar."  And  a  little 
later  Pilate  was  an  exile  and  a  wanderer. 

III.  Let  us  not  be  too  hard  upon  Pilate,  for  there  may  be  some  moral  cowards 
among  us.  Let  me  give  you  a  parting  word,  the  motto  of  the  Guthrie  family, 
"  Sto  pro  veritate."  Let  us  stand  for  the  truth,  the  truth  against  the  world. 
There  is  nothing  better  than  that  We  are  all  in  Pilate's  place.  The  Lord 
Jesus  stands  in  judgment  before  us.  What  are  you  going  to  do  with  Him  ? 
Will  you  meet  Him  with  mock  heroics,  admiration  of  His  manhood  and  rejection 
of  His  Divine  claim  ?  Out  upon  all  mere  sentimentalism !  Let  us  be  logical 
and  sensible.  Christ  was  what  He  claimed  to  be,  or  else  an  impostor  who 
deserved  to  die. — D.  J.  Burr  ell,  D.D. 

Personal  conviction  and  popular  clamour. — This  Jewish  scene,  so  important  in 
the  world's  life,  introduces  us  to  a  very  serious  subject,  involving  moral  and 
religious  questions — the  rule  or  prevalence  of  the  majority.  The  theory  that 
every  man  has  a  voice  and  vote  in  the  arrangement  of  things,  and  that  that 
arrangement  shall  be  according  to  the  opinion  which  combines  the  greatest 
number  of  those  votes  or  voices,  is  almost  universal.  It  seems  to  embody  the 
only  principle  upon  which  a  decision  has  any  justice,  or  is  binding  at  all.  It 
encourages  activity,  free  thought,  and  discussion,  and  the  individual  personal 

.562 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  XV. 


interests  of  us  all.  And  yet  we  are  sorely  perplexed  about  it  at  times.  We 
feel  that  the  voices  of  the  majority  often  mean  nothing  at  all,  and  should  have 
no  weight — that  is,  they  are  mere  empty  noise,  behind  which  there  is  no  truth, 
but  only  ignorance,  or  only  a  half-truth,  destructive  in  its  mutilated  state. 
When,  then,  ought  the  many  voices  to  prevail  ? 

I.  When  the  responsibility  of  decision  and  action  is  to  belong  to  the  many 
whose  voices  are  heard. — If  a  company  of  travellers  are  to  choose  between 
certain  plans  or  paths  of  journeying,  and  no  one  person  has  or  is  to  have  the 
responsibility,  and  the  success  or  disappointment  will  not  be  visited  upon  any 
one  member,  but  all  are  interested  and  will  bear  the  blame  or  praise  of  the 
future  action,  then  a  vote  of  the  entire  companionship  is  taken.  Their  decision 
may  be  wrong  in  itself,  but  it  is  right  that  it  should  have  been  so  made.  Now 
in  the  case  of  our  text  it  was  not  so.  The  multitude  had  nothing  to  do 
with  the  judging  or  deciding.  It  was  an  individual  matter  between  Pilate  and 
Christ.  And  so  it  is  with  each  of  us.  Every  quiet  moment  of  conviction,  when 
we  stand  face  to  face  with  Christ  and  His  pure  cross-marked  religion,  and 
debate  anxiously  the  question,  "  Shall  I  decide  for  or  against  Him  ?  "  is  a 
reproduction  of  the  interviews  of  Pilate  and  Jesus  at  the  inner  judgment-seat. 
We  should  decide  in  a  moment  for  Jesus,  if  it  were  not  that  other  voices  enter 
in.  They  control  the  sentence,  and  we  bear  the  responsibility  and  results  of  it. 
Oh,  think  of  it !  That  empty-tongued  crowd  of  fashion  or  society,  which  cries 
down  your  single  heart's  voice — that  hard-voiced  throng  of  money-seekers,  which 
shames  and  silences  your  warm  conviction  for  the  Lord — that  false,  smooth-toned 
multitude  of  unbelievers,  which  surround  you  and  ply  you  with  their  infidel 
voices  and  sneers  and  arguments,  and  chill  your  spiritual  aspirations, — you  can 
never  fasten  the  blame  upon  them.  They  will  only  mock  at  you  when  the 
results  come.     They  will  say,  "  It  is  none  of  our  matter."     And  it  will  be  true. 

II.  In  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  testimony  of  experience. — The  more  witnesses 
to  a  fact  of  experience  that  can  be  brought,  the  better  for  the  truth,  whoever 
has  to  decide  it.  But  now  turn  to  this  story  of  Pilate  again.  What  sort  of 
voices  did  he  listen  to  and  allow  to  prevail  ?  Did  they  bring  the  overwhelming 
weight  of  experience  against  him  ?  Was  that  what  controlled  and  turned  his 
decision  ?  No,  he  knew  that  those  chief  priests  cried  for  crucifixion  out  of 
envy.  He  knew  that  his  own  experience  of  Christ,  that  his  comprehension  and 
appreciation  of  Him,  was  something  of  which  this  crowd  had  nothing.  They 
should  never  have  prevailed.  If  you  have  felt  the  truth  of  Christ's  love  to  you 
only  for  a  moment — if  you  have  felt  His  purity  by  the  side  of  your  sin  in  one 
quick  instant  of  repentant  experience — if  you  have  once  felt  His  gentle  yet 
complete  kingliness  by  the  side  of  false  earthly  power, — there  is  a  voice  of 
experience  within  you  over  which  all  voices  of  men  who  have  seen  and  learnt 
no  such  facts  should  never  prevail.  Oh,  if  a  man's  moral  self  and  God's  Spirit 
insist  upon  being  heard  together,  and  above  all  else,  it  is  not  obstinacy,  but 
firmness  of  purpose ;  it  is  the  strongest  condition  of  man ;  it  is  the  richest  of 
life's  harmonies — man's  voice  and  God's  voice  at  one. — F.  Brooks. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    1.    Activity  in    evil. — While  to     do     mischievously.     "  The    devil's 

honest  men  lay  them  down  in  peace  martyrs,"  saith   Bernard,    "are   more 

and  take  their  rest,  suspecting  no  harm  swift   in   running  to  hell  than  we  to 

because  they  mean  none,  thieves   and  heaven."     How    slack    are   we    to   do 

robbers  are  up  and  abroad,  spreading  God   any   service !    how   backward   to 

their  nets  for  the  prey  and  watching  suffer  anything  for  Him !     And  how 

563 


CHAP.    XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


they,  on  the  other  side,  can  bestir  them 
to  serve  the  devil,  and  be  content  to 
suffer  a  kind  of  martyrdom  in  his 
service !  The  way,  sure,  is  broad 
enough  and  easy  enough  that  leadeth 
to  destruction ;  yet  so  much  pains  is 
there  taken  to  find  it,  that  I  verily 
believe  half  the  pains  many  a  man 
taketh  to  go  to  hell,  if  it  had  been  well 
bestowed,  would  have  brought  him  to 
heaven. — Bishop  Sanderson. 

Jesus  delivered  to  Pilate. — What  a 
spectacle  was  that !  The  heads  of  the 
Jewish  nation  leading  their  own  Messiah 
in  chains  to  deliver  Him  up  to  a  Gentile 
governor,  with  the  petition  that  He 
should  be  put  to  death  !  Shades  of  the 
heroes  and  the  prophets,  who  loved  the 
nation  and  boasted  of  it  and  foretold 
its  glorious  fate,  the  hour  of  destiny 
has  come,  and  this  is  the  result !  It 
was  an  act  of  national  suicide.  But 
was  it  not  more  ?  Was  it  not  the  frus- 
tration of  the  purpose  and  the  promise 
of  God  ?  So  it  certainly  appeared  to 
be.  Yet  He  is  not  mocked.  Even 
through  human  sin  His  purpose  holds 
on  its  way.  The  Jews  brought  the 
Son  of  God  to  Pilate's  judgment-seat, 
that  both  Jew  and  Gentile  might  unite 
in  condemning  Him ;  for  it  was  part 
of  the  work  of  the  Redeemer  to  expose 
human  sin,  and  here  was  to  be  exhibited 
the  ne  plus  ultra  of  wickedness,  as  the 
hand  of  humanity  was  lifted  up  against 
its  Maker.  And  yet  that  death  was 
to  be  the  life  of  humanity  ;  and  Jesus, 
standing  between  Jew  and  Gentile,  was 
to  unite  them  in  the  fellowship  of  a 
common  salvation. — J.  Stalker,  D.D. 

Why  was  Jesus  taken  to  Pilate  ? — The 
common  opinion,  that  the  Romans  had 
deprived  the  Jews  of  the  power  to 
inflict  capital  punishment,  would  seem 
to  be  erroneous  ;  for  we  learn  from  the 
Acts  that  theSanhedrm  put  St.  Stephen 
and  others  to  death.  The  truth  prob- 
ably is,  that  the  Pharisees,  who  were 
the  chief  instigators  of  our  Lord's 
death,  were  averse  to  the  shedding  of 
Jewish  blood  by  the  Sanhedrin,  and 
preferred  to  throw  the  odium  of  His 
execution  upon  the  Romans.  The 
Sadducees,^  who  took  the  lead  in  the 

564 


persecution  of  the  early  Christians,  had 
no  such  scruples. 

Ver.  2.  Avowal  and  description  of 
kingship. — Never  answering  the  dis- 
honest attack,  the  Saviour  always 
answered  the  honest  inquiry.  Here  He 
explicitly  avows  that  He  is  "  a  king  " 
— the  King,  according  to  the  fuller 
reply  recorded  by  John,  of  more  than 
Jews ;  and,  according  to  that  ac- 
count, He  intimates  His  kingship 
(John  xviii.  36)  to  be  other  than 
worldly  royalties,  not  employing  force 
and  fighting  men,  but  that  His  king- 
ship is  the  royalty  which  invests  all 
who  can  testify  the  truth,  and  invests 
Him  as  the  Truth,  as  the  Great 
Revealer  of  God,  of  duty,  of  mercy,  of 
hope.  There  is  no  sort  of  kingliness 
like  this. — R.  Glover. 

Vers.  3-5.  The  silence  of  Jesus  pro- 
ceeds from  His  owning  all  our  crimes 
before  His  Father,  His  only  lawful 
judge.  Concern,  passion,  fear  of  death, 
love  of  reputation,  and  desire  to  be 
justified,  make  an  accused  person  speak 
who  has  nothing  at  liberty  but  his 
tongue ;  but  even  the  tongue  itself  of 
Christ  is  not  at  liberty,  being  under  a 
kind  of  confinement  from  His  meekness, 
His  patience,  His  wisdom,  His  humility, 
His  obedience,  and  His  quality  of  victim, 
which  make  Him  even  in  love  with 
shame  and  with  the  Cross. — P.  Quesnel. 

The  silence  of  Jesus. — Much  is  said, 
and  well  said,  on  the  teaching  of 
Jesus — His  manner  and  method  as 
a  speaker;  how  independent  He  was 
of  times  and  circumstances  ;  and  how, 
in  His  peasant's  garb,  and  by  the  hill- 
side or  the  river-shore,  He  forced  the 
confession  from  His  hearers,  "Never 
man  spake  like  this  man  !  "  He  was 
troubled  by  no  interruption.  He  was 
always  ready  to  bear  questionings,  and 
no  teacher  was  ever  so  patient  to 
repeat  himself  so  long  as  repetition 
promised  anything.  But  there  was 
the  limit.  When  speech  was  useless, 
He  was  silent.  The  prudence  of  Jesus 
is  seen  in  His  keeping  silence,  and 
never  more  so  than  where  He  answered 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xv. 


no   more   questions  or   thrusts.     And  shall  say  our  word  calmly,  solemnly, 
the  governor  marvelled  greatly.    Pilate  truthfully,   and  leave  the  issues  with 
marvelled  because  he  knew  Jesus  could  God,  not  doubting  the  fidelity  of  His 
speak.       He    knew    the    power    with  providence. — Henry  Bacon. 
which    He   could  plead   the   cause   of  Silence  under  misconception. — There 
truth.       He   knew   the    influence    He  still  are  few,  even  under  the  tuition 
had   exerted   by  His   eloquence.      He  of   the   example   of    Christ,   who   can 
knew  these  accusations  came  because  preserve  this   supreme   silence.     It  is 
of    the    power    which    the   wonderful  not  altogether  easy,  even  for  the  wisest 
Teacher   had  exerted  by  His   speech,  and  the  best,  to  be  serenely  contented 
He  did  not  keep  dumb  because  He  had  to    be    misunderstood — to     let     their 
no  words,  nor  because  He  was  unused  thought   quietly  grow,  their  good  in- 
to discussion,  nor  because  He  could  not  tention  gradually  become  known  of  all 
bear  the  presence  of  these  ecclesiastical  men,   their   larger   plan,  their  higher 
dignitaries.     Discussion  and  they  were  purpose,    their   prophetic   anticipation 
familiar  to  Him;  but  He  had  to  practise  of  the  world-age  next  to  come,   wait 
the  instructions  He  had  given  to  His  its  hour,   while  they  themselves  may 
disciples.     He  had  forbidden  them  to  be  regarded  as  unbelievers,  or  looked 
throw   pearls  where   they  would  find  upon  as  visionaries,  or  hardly  tolerated 
no  gold  setting ;  and  where  there  was  as  dangerous  Christian  teachers  ;  and 
only  talk  and  no  heart,  He  bade  them  they   themselves    may   not   expect   to 
leave  the  place  and  go  elsewhere.     He  live  to  see  the  larger  good  in  which 
had  not  only  taught  this,  but  He  had  some  day  their  thought  and  toil  may 
practised  it.     Many  instances  you  will  find  beneficent  fruitions.    And  if  silence 
find  which  illustrate  that  so  soon  as  under  misconception  is  no  easy  virtue 
He  discovered  that  the  disposition  of  always   even   for   the  wisest   and  the 
the  people  was  wrong  He  retired,  and  best,   it   is   a   spiritual   gift   not  even 
in  silence  found  confidence  and  strength.  coveted  by  the  great  mass  of  men  and 
And  there  in  Pilate's  hall,  accused  and  women  whom  the  slightest  misunder- 
scorned,  He  who  could  wake  the  dead  standing  may  irritate  into  bitter  speech 
and  still  the  sea,  who  could  blast  the  and   the    least    provocation    cause   to 
unproductive   fig  tree   whose  life  was  bristle   up   in   offensive   self-assertion, 
expressed  only  in  leaves,  and  who  could  The  millennium  can  hardly  be  expected 
open  the  deaf  ear  and  bid  the  dumb  to  come  even  to  the  best  society  until 
to  speak — He  in  the  hour  of  mortal  men  and  women  shall  have  mastered 
peril  was  silent.    There  He  stood  —still  more  humbly  and  unselfishly  the  secret 
as    the   stars    dropping   their   crystal  of  this  personal  silence  of  the  Christ, 
light — still   as   the  grass  springs  and  His  conduct  in  this  particular  seems 
the     blossoms     unfold — still     as    the  the  more  remarkable  when  we  consider 
subtlest  forces  of  nature  speed  on  their  what   powers   of    commanding   speech 
way — still    as   the   footsteps   of   God,  He   possessed,   had   He    been   pleased 
when  He   visits   specially  the  human  to  exercise  them  in    His  own  behalf, 
soul — still   as  the  spirit   goes   to   the  What  a  vindication,  had  He  pleased, 
resurrection.      The  example  of   Jesus  He  might  have  given  of  His  life  as  the 
in  reference  to  the  time  to  keep  silent  Son   of    Man,  when  the  Jews  falsely 
must  not  be  lost  upon  us.     We  some-  accused  Him  before  Pilate  of  making 
times   forget   that    the   world   is    not  Himself    a    king    in    Caesar's    place ! 
wholly  ruled   by  talk,    that  it  is  not  What     glorious      argument     of     His 
possible  at  all  times  to  find  an  unper-  doctrine  He  might  have  spoken  when 
verting    hearing,    and    we    need    the  Herod   asked    Him    many   questions ! 
discipline  of  silence.     To  Jesus  let  us  What  sublime  apology  for  His  life  as 
go    for   an   example    in   reference  to  the  Divine  Servant  of  men  He  might 
the  times  and  seasons  of  silence ;  and  have  left  for  disciples  to  publish  to  the 
then  in  the  difficult  passes  of  life  we  coming    ages    after    He    should   have 

565 


CHAP.  XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


suffered  a  martyr's  death  !  Yet  He 
chose  a  kinglier  silence  for  His  record, 
and  Heaven's  approval  for  His  crown. 
He  could  wait,  He  alone  of  the  great 
powers  of  our  human  history,  until 
the  glory  of  the  Father  which  He  had 
from  the  beginning  should  be  mani- 
fested, and  in  His  name  all  be 
reconciled. — N.  Smyth,  D.D. 

Ver.  10.  The  envy  of  the  chief  priests. 
— Christ's  earthly  life  was  in  many 
respects  so  unenviable  that  the  thought 
of  envy  at  first  occasions  surprise.  He 
had  no  advantage  of  wealth  or  station. 
His  limited  successes  in  preaching  the 
gospel  of  His  kingdom  were  chiefly 
among  poor  and  despised  classes.  How 
came  it,  then,  that  rich  and  haughty 
Sadducees  envied  Him  ?  The  truth  is, 
that  envy  is  a  passion  of  blacker  face 
than  the  mere  feeling  of  disquiet  at 
sight  of  the  worldly  successes  of  others. 
The  heart  that  is  apart  from  God  and 
unreconciled  to  Him,  lacking  a  worthy 
object  for  its  affection,  is  a  prey  to 
unrest.  Sometimes  it  must  needs  be 
discontented.  And  then  the  sight  of 
spiritual  peace  and  happiness  in  others 
awakens  that  sense  of  lack  and  that 
pain  of  contrast  which  we  call  envy. 
It  may  be  hardly  more  than  a  tinge 
of  feeling,  or  it  may  grow  to  be  a 
dominant  and  malignant  passion.  Lord 
Bacon  said :  "A  man  that  hath  no 
virtue  in  himself  ever  envieth  virtue  in 
others,  for  men's  minds  will  either  feed 
upon  their  own  good  or  upon  others' 
evil ;  and  who  wanteth  the  one  will 
prey  upon  the  other ;  and  whoso  is  out 
of  hope  to  attain  another's  virtue  will 
seek  to  come  at  even  hand  by  depress- 
ing another's  fortune." 

The  choice  of  alternatives. — Tinworth 
has  graphically  reproduced  this  scene 
in  clay,  and  called  it  "The  World's 
Choice."  He  thus  treats  it  not  only  as 
an  historic  but  also  as  a  typical  fact. 
It  expresses  the  spirit  of  the  world. 
Note  a  few  of  the  many  elements  in  it. 
1.  Hatred  of  Rome  and  a  desire  to 
perplex  Pilate.  2.  Sympathy  with  the 
man  who  had  lifted  up  his  hand  against 
the   hateful    rule  of    Rome   and   her 

56j 


representatives.  3.  Bitter  resentment 
against  Christ  for  His  scathing  words 
in  cleansing  the  Temple,  and  His  daring 
deeds  in  scourging  unholy  traffickers. 
4.  The  infectious  influence  of  raging 
passion,  or  the  feverish  and  mad  frenzy 
of  a  crowd.  5.  The  felt  inconvenience 
of  being  in  the  minority. — D.  Davies. 

The  tragedy  of  Pilate's  life. — There 
was  nothing  to  signalise  him  ;  he  was 
no  bad  example  of  an  average  Roman 
governor.  In  a  few  months  he  might 
have  retired  from  his  post,  to  end  his 
days  in  the  merciful  obscurity  which 
has  closed  over  the  remains  of  thousands 
such  as  he.  But  the  pathetic  tragedy 
of  his  life  lies  in  this :  that  suddenly, 
by  accident  (as  we  speak),  without  any 
wish  or  choice  or  consent  of  his  own, 
unasked,  unwarned,  surprised,  he  is 
found  to  be  placed  at  the  very  hour 
and  centre  of  the  sharpest  and  fiercest 
crisis  that  the  world  has  ever  seen. 
The  heat  of  the  great  battle  surges  with 
abrupt  vehemence,  with  furious  em- 
phasis, round  the  spot  where  he  happens 
to  stand.  It  is  the  hour  of  all  hours, 
and  he  is  in  the  very  thick  of  its  awful 
pressure  before  he  is  aware  of  it,  before 
he  can  take  its  measure.  Unexpected, 
uncalculated,  the  eternal  war  has 
swung  his  way — the  war  between  good 
and  evil,  God  and  devil — the  death- 
struggle  for  the  world's  redemption. 
Round  him  the  forces  of  the  spiritual 
strife  surge  and  swell.  In  a  moment 
he  is  caught  up  into  them,  as  into  a 
whirlpool — round  and  round  they  eddy, 
they  storm,  they  howl ;  they  clamour 
for  a  decision  from  him — a  decision 
swift,  momentous,  vital.  "  Yes  or  no." 
— Canon  Scott-Holland. 

Ver.  12.  The  parting  of  the  ways. — 
It  is  very  easy  and  respectable  to  place 
Pilate  in  our  thoughts  upon  a  pedestal 
of  infamy ;  but  are  we  sufficiently  alive 
to  the  fact  that  our  responsibility  is  as 
great  ?  We  have  to  pursue  a  certain 
course  in  regard  to  Christ.  There  are 
two  main  divergent  roads,  and  only 
two.  We  must  side  with  the  mob,  we 
must  belie  our  own  conscience,  as  Pilate 
did ;  or  we  must  yield  Him  our  allegi- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  XV. 


ance,  and  crown  Him  with  our  love.  all  bad,  driven  by  bold,  bad  men  to  do 

Yet,   of  course,    there   are   degrees  in  a  dreadful  deed,  a  deed  from  which  his 

partisanship.     The  relations  of  men  to  heart  and  his  conscience  and  his  honour 

Christ  may   be   more   elaborately   de-  each  in  turn  recoil,  a  deed  which  has 

scribed.     1.  For  example,  you  may  put  made  the  name  of  Pontius  Pilate  stand 

Christ  off.     Thousands  do  that  without  out  in  lurid  letters  as  no  other  name 

the  slightest  thought  of  dying  infidels,  ever  named  among  men  stands  out,  as 

and  finally  and  deliberately  rejecting  no  other  name  ever  can  stand  out.     It 

the  Christian  gospel.     But,  oh,  remem-  was  not,  you  must  notice,  the  first  or 

ber   postponement   is   distinct   action  !  the  second  time  that  Pilate  had  been 

For  the  time  being  it  is  final.     2.  Or  defeated  in  the  attempt  to  carry  out  his 

you   may  patronise   Him.      You  may  will  by  the  determination  of  the  Jews, 

clothe  Him  in  the  fine  robe  of  genteel  He  knew  well  what  they  were.     His 

respect ;  you  may  support  the  institu-  was  the  famous  order  which  sent  into 

tions  of  religion  that  bear  His  name ;  the  Holy    City  the   standards   of   the 

you  may  never  speak  against  Him —  Roman   soldiers  with  the   desecrating 

you  may  even  speak  up  for  His  Church,  image  of  the  emperor  ;  and  after  one 

How   high   a   value,    think  you,  does  device  and  another  had  failed,  after  he 

Christ  place  upon  this  kind  of  support  ?  had  tried  persuasion,  and  had  tried  the 

3.  Or,  again,  you  may  sell  Christ,  threat  and  the  shew  of  violence,  they 
You  love  money.  But,  it  may  be,  you  made  him  withdraw  the  order.  He  it 
cannot  make  money  as  you  have  been  was  who  hung  up  in  the  palace  of  the 
making  it  and  place  Him  on  the  throne  Roman  governor  shields  inscribed  with 
of  your  heart.  You  are  in  sight  of  a  the  names  of  the  Roman  deities ;  but 
big  success ;  you  have  only  to  square  here,  great  as  was  the  outrage  to  the 
your  conscience  and  the  thing  will  be  Jews,  he  remained  firm,  and  had  to  bear 
done.  Oh  !  face  the  situation  boldly,  the  indignity  of  a  special  order  from 
know  distinctly  what  you  are  going  to  Tiberius  to  remove  them.  In  both  of 
do  with  Jesus  which  is  called  Christ !  those  cases  he  was  wrong  from  the  first 

4.  Or,  once  more,  you  may  boycott  Him.  and  throughout,  and  he  had  to  give 
In  your  heart  of  hearts  you  acknow-  way, — in  the  one  case  to  submit ;  in 
ledge  His  claim  ;  yet  you  never  seem  the  other,  in  the  case  which  fills  our 
to  know  Christ  in  society.  You  never  thoughts  to-day,  he  strove  to  do  what 
speak  of  Him,  you  never  honour  Him,  was  right,  and  he  had  to  give  way,  as 
you  never  stand  up  for  Him,  you  treat  before.  It  is  a  terrible  warning  to  a 
Him  like  a  poor  relation  of  whom  you  weak  man  in  a  place  of  responsibility. 
are   ashamed.      Now,    is   not  each  of  — Canon  G.  F.  Browne. 

these  expedients  the  selection  of  a  way  ?  Pilate's   weakness. —  uPoor    mockery 

Is  it  not  the  adoption  of  a  party  ?     Is  of  a  ruler,"  one  has  said,  "  set  by  the 

it    not  enlistment  on  one  side  of  the  Eternal  to  do  right  upon  the  earth  and 

great  struggle  ?    The  most  obvious  and  afraid  to  do  it !     Told  so  by  his  own 

important    lesson   from    this   incident  bosom ;  strong  enough  in  his  legions, 

in  Pilate's  history  is  the  impossibility  and  in  the  truth  itself,  to  have  saved 

of  shirking  spiritual  responsibilities. —  the  Innocent  One  and  kept  his   own 

R.  B.  Brindley.  soul, — he    could    only    think    of    the 

A  crisis  in  Pilatds  life. — Quite  apart  apparently    expedient.    Type    of     the 

from  that  which  is  at  stake,  it  is  a  politician  of  all  ages  who  forgets  that 

terrible  picture  of  a  man,  by  no  means  only  the  right  is  the  strong  or  wise." 


567 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.    MARK. 

MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—20. 
(Parallel  :  Matt,  xxvii.  27-31.) 

The  Son  of  God  mocked  and  wounded. — Solar  eclipses  are  not  miraculous 
appearances.  Men  acquainted  with  the  situations  and  revolutions  of  the 
celestial  orbs  foretell  these  appearances.  The  humiliation  of  the  Son  of  God 
is  the  eclipse  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.  Infamy  and  reproach  covered  Him 
in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  and  toward  the  end  of  these  days  intercepted  His 
rays,  hiding,  like  a  dark  body,  the  brightness  of  His  glory  from  the  eyes  of 
the  world.  Foreseeing  this,  a  prophet  says,  "  His  visage  was  so  marred  more 
than  any  man,"  etc. ;  and  relating  this,  an  apostle  says,  "  Who  being  in  the 
form  of  God,"  etc.  The  obscuration  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  in  His 
humiliation  was  not,  however,  a  total  eclipse.  A  prophet  foretells  one  day 
that  shall  be  "  not  day  nor  night,"  the  light  being  not  clear  nor  dark,  but  a 
mixture  of  both  qualities.  So  is  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  in 
His  humiliation  ;  and  in  looking  down  to  Him  at  this  period,  we  behold  an 
unparalleled  mixture  of  light  and  shade,  of  glory  and  infamy,  of  honour  and 
dishonour,  and  of  beauty,  meanness,  and  shame. 

I.  Concerning  the  Sufferer. — 1.  The  Sufferer  is  the  Son  of  the  Highest. 
"  The  Highest "  is  one  of  the  lofty  titles  which  distinguish  and  exalt  the 
living  and  true  God  ;  and  "  the  Son  of  the  Highest  "  is  a  glorious  title,  with 
which,  according  to  the  prediction  of  Gabriel,  the  Saviour  of  the  world  is 
honoured.  The  real  import  of  it  is  given  by  the  apostle  when  he  affirms  Him 
to  be  "the  brightness  of  glory,  and  the  express  image  of  the  Father."  E\^ery 
perfection  essential  to  the  Father  dwells  bodily  and  essentially  in  the  Son ; 
and  the  singular  titles,  "  Own  Son,"  "  Dear  Son,"  "  Beloved  Son,"  "  Oaly 
Begotten  Son,"  exalt  Him  above  creatures,  and  equal  Him  to  the  Highest. 
2.  The  Sufferer  is  the  Kinsman  of  the  human  race.  To  a  part  of  our  race 
the  Lord  Jesus  bears  a  special  relation,  but  He  dwells  in  the  nature  common 
to  the  whole.  Partaking  of  flesh  and  blood,  of  which  all,  as  well  as  the 
children,  are  partakers,  every  man  under  heaven,  upon  the  revelation  of  Him, 
is  warranted  to  call  Him  kinsman.  3.  The  Sufferer  is  the  Undertaker  for  the 
elect.  All  that  the  precept  of  the  law  of  works  required  to  be  done  by  them 
He  undertook  to  perform,  and  what  its  penalty  denounced  He  engaged  Himself 
to  bear.  Nor  hath  He  failed  in  either.  The  satisfaction  which  by  suffering 
and  dying  He  made  is  the  shield  that  protects  them  from  its  vengeance. 
4.  The  Sufferer  is  the  Horn  of  Salvation  which  God  raised  up  in  the  house  of 
David.  The  horn  of  an  animal  is  its  weapon,  both  for  defence  and  vengeance. 
With  this  it  defends  itself,  and  with  this  it  pushes  down  the  enemy.  In  some 
prophecies  horn  is  an  emblem  of  the  power  of  a  king  and  the  strength  of  his 
kingdom,  and  with  the  highest  propriety  is  transferred  to  the  Lamb  of  God, 
in  whose  office  the  powers  of  salvation  and  destruction  are  vested,  and  in 
whose  administration  these  powers  are  exerted.  The  horns  of  the  bulls  of 
Bashan  were  not  able  to  break  the  horn  of  the  Lamb.  5.  The  Sufferer  is  the 
Author  and  Finisher  of  faith.  In  His  own  exercise  He  is  the  Prince  and 
Leader  who  goes  before  believers,  and  who,  in  trusting  and  hoping  Himself, 
leaves  them  a  finished  and  perfect  pattern  of  trust  and  hope.  6.  The  Sufferer 
is  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  or  Light  of  the  World.  In  His  birth  He  was 
deeply  obscured.  From  His  agony  and  seizure  in  the  garden  to  His  death  and 
resurrection  this  glorious  Sun  was  thought  to  be  totally  eclipsed.  His  visage 
was  marred,  His  face  discoloured  with  spittle,  His  head  crowned  with  thorns, 
His  back  furrowed  with  cords,  and  His  hands  and  feet  pierced  with  nails.     But 

568 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  XV. 


under  this  darkness  the  title  Sun  of  Righteousness  existed,  and  through  it  light 
beams  upon  the  world. 

II.  Concerning  the  indignities  which  our  Lord  suffered. — These  are  related 
in  the  text  without  colouring  and  without  reflexions.  The  holy  writer  neither 
praises  the  fortitude  and  glory  of  the  Sufferer,  nor  reprobates  the  baseness  and 
inhumanity  of  the  wicked  by  whom  He  was  abused.  Facts  are  truly  stated 
in  the  relation,  and  simplicity  is  rigidly  observed.  1.  When  made  under  the 
law,  our  Lord  subjected  Himself  to  the  suffering  of  these  indignities.  2.  In 
suffering  the  insolences  of  the  ungodly  our  Lord  was  not  ashamed  and  con- 
founded. Behold  the  Sufferer,  not  a  desponding  and  cowardly  but  a  bold  and 
mighty  Sufferer,  whose  back,  furrowed  by  the  lash,  and  covered  with  the 
scarlet  robe,  upheld  the  universe — whose  countenance,  marred  with  shame  and 
spitting,  was  harder  than  flint  and  bolder  than  Lebanon — and  whose  faith, 
assailed  and  affronted  by  every  indignity,  stood  firmer  than  the  pillars  of 
heaven  and  earth  !  Trusting  in  God,  and  beholding  the  joy  set  before  Him, 
He  despised  the  shame,  endured  the  pain,  and  triumphed  over  the  diversion 
and  wantonness  of  wickedness  and  inhumanity.  3.  The  Lord  Jesus  suffered 
these  indignities  for  and  instead  of  the  elect.  Indignation  at  the  rudeness  and 
brutality  of  the  soldiers  is  not  the  only  passion  which  the  record  of  these  abuses 
should  kindle  in  our  breasts.  Rather  it  should  kindle  indignation  against 
ourselves,  for  whose  iniquities  He  submitted  to  abuse.  4.  The  suffering  of 
*>hese  indignities  was  a  part  of  the  ransom  which  our  Kinsman  gave  for  the 
redemption  of  the  elect.  Redemption  is  an  expensive  undertaking;  none  but 
Himself  was  equal  to  it,  and  it  cost  Him  dear.  5.  In  suffering  these  indignities 
Our  Lord  Jesus  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  His  steps. 

III.  Concerning  the  glory  of  Christ  in  suffering  these  indignities. — The 

sacred  writer  relates  His  sufferings  without  revealing  His  glory.     But  by  the 

light  of  other  parts  of   Scripture  we  behold  it  ;  and  without  a  display  of  it 

the  knowledge  of  the  fellowship  of  His  sufferings  could  not  be  attained.     1.  In 

suffering  these  indignities  the  glory  of  His  faith  and  trust  appears  bright  and 

resplendent.     Unmoved,  undismayed,  unashamed,  He  stood  firm,  and  without 

fainting  held  fast  the  confidence  and  the  rejoicing  of  the  hope  firm  unto  the 

end.     2.  In  the  common  hall,  where  the  Lord  Jesus  suffered  the  indignities, 

the  glory  of  His  love  appears  in  splendour  and  dignity.     Observe  the  scarlet 

robe,  the  reed,  and  the  crown  of  thorns ;  behold  the  vilest  ruffians  bowing  the 

knee,  striking,  reviling,  and  spitting  upon  the  Blessed  and  Only  Potentate,  and 

say,  "  Behold  how  He  loved  us  !  "     3.  In  suffering  the  reproaches  and  indignities 

of  the  ungodly  glory  appears  in  the   zeal   of   our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     4.  In 

suffering  the  indignities  and  insolences  of  the  wicked  the  humility  of  the  Lord 

Jesus  is  glorious.     Found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  they  treated  Him  not  as  a  man, 

but  trampled   on  Him  as  a  worm.      Astonishing   humiliation  !      Astonishing, 

indeed,   when  we  consider  that  He  humbled  Himself   so  low   to   declare   the 

righteousness  of  God,  in  "  raising  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and  lifting  up 

the  beggar"  and  the  criminal  "from  the  dunghill,  to  set  them  among  princes, 

and  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory."     5.  In  suffering  the  insolences 

of  brutish  men  the  meekness  of  Jesus  Christ  is  glorious.     The  testimony  of  the 

false  witnesses  He  heard  in  silence.     The  rudeness  of  the  wicked,  who  spit  in 

His  face,  and  buffeted  Him,  and  smote  Him  with  the  palms  of  their  hands, 

He  endured  with  composure.     The  derision  and  pain  in  the  common  hall  He 

suffered  with  boldness  and  mildness.     Nothing  defective  appeared  in  His  temper, 

His  language,  nor  in  His  behaviour.     6.  In  suffering  the  insolences  and  abuses 

of  men  the  patience  of  Jesus  Christ  is  glorious.     "  He  suffered,  but  threatened 

not" — suffered  not  with  stoical  apathy  and  sullen  and  philosophical  pride,  but 

with  bold  tranquillity  and  reverential  and  humble  and  holy  composure.     7.  In 

569 


chap.  XV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


suffering  the  resignation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  glorious.  As  the  hour  of 
suffering  approached  a  conflict  was  felt — a  conflict  not  between  sin  and  grace, 
but  between  the  weakness  of  His  human  nature  and  the  strength  and  glory 
of  His  grace;  while  at  the  same  time  resignation  triumphed  (John  xii.  27). 
Another  conflict  was  in  His  agony,  when  resignation  also  triumphed  (Mark 
xiv.  36).  The  palm,  the  scourge,  the  reed,  the  thorn,  the  purple,  the  spittle, 
the  cross,  and  the  nails  were  bitter  and  painful  infusions ;  yet  these,  all  these 
dregs,  He  submitted  to  wring  out  and  drink. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  harmony  between  the  predictions  of  prophets  and  the 
relations  of  evangelists  concerning  the  sufferings  of  Christ  is  obvious  and 
striking.  2.  In  His  person  and  office  the  Lord  Jesus  is  inconceivably  glorious. 
"  Brightness  of  Glory  "  is  one  of  His  distinguishing  titles.  3.  The  grand  design 
of  revelation  is  to  manifest  the  glory  of  Christ  in  His  person — God- man.  4.  The 
various  representations  which  have  been  made  of  the  person,  sufferings,  and 
glory  of  Christ  are  suitable  means  of  working  in  believers  a  lively  frame  of 
heart  for  shewing  His  death  at  His  table.  5.  The  various  representations 
exhibited  of  the  person,  sufferings,  and  glory  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  lead 
to  the  satisfactory  answer  of  a  question  of  the  highest  importance  to  the 
unbelieving,  the  ungodly,  and  the  unholy.  "  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
Behold,  O  perishing  and  helpless  creatures  !  behold  the  Doer  and  the  Sufferer ! 
To  the  Doer  and  Sufferer  thou  must  be  united,  betrothed,  and  joined,  and 
married.  Obey  His  voice,  and  receive  His  grace;  believe  in  His  name,  and 
rejoice  in  His  salvation. — A.  Shanks. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  17-19.  Lessons  from  the  mock-  less,  and   powerless  should  make  any 

cry  of  the   soldiers. — 1.  Notice  in  the  such  pretensions.     Many  a  time  since 

conduct   of    the   tormentors   of   Jesus  then     has     the    same    derision    been 

the  abuse  of  one  of  the  gifts  of  God.  awakened    by    this   claim   of    Christ. 

Laughter  is  a  kind  of  spice  which  the  He    is    the    King    of   nations.      But 

Creator  has  given  to  be  taken  along  earthly  kings  and  statesmen  have  ridi- 

with  the   somewhat  unpalatable  food  culed  the  idea  that  His  will  and  His 

of   ordinary  life.     But   when  directed  law    should    control    them    in    their 

against  sacred   things  and   holy   per-  schemes  and   ambitions.     Even  where 

sons,  when   used   to   belittle   and   de-  His   authority   is   nominally   acknow- 

grade    what    is   great    and    reverend,  ledged,    both    aristocracies   and  demo- 

when    employed    as    a    weapon    with  cracies  are  slow  to  recognise  that  their 

which  to  torture  weakness  and  cover  legislation     and     customs     should    be 

innocence  with  ridicule,  then,  instead  regulated   by  His  words.     Most  vital 

of  being  the  foam  on  the  cup  of  the  of  all  is  the  acknowledgment  of  Christ's 

banquet  of   life,  it  becomes   a   deadly  kingship  in  the  realm  of  the  individual 

poison.     Laughter  guided  these  soldiers  life  ;  but   it   is   here  that  His  will  is 

in   their   inhuman  acts ;    it  concealed  most  resisted.     3.  In  what  Jesus  bore 

from  them  the   true   nature  of   what  on   this    occasion.     He    was   suffering 

they    were    doing  ;    and    it    wounded  for  us.     Thorns  were  the  sign  of  the 

Christ    more   deeply    than    even    the  curse.     And  does  not  the  thorn,  staring 

scourge  of  Pilate.     2.  It  was  against  from   the  naked   bough   of   winter  in 

the    kingly    office    of    the    Redeemer  threatening  ugliness,  lurking  beneath 

that  the  opposition  of  men  was  directed  the   leaves   or   flowers   of   summer   to 

on   this   occasion.      The   soldiers   con-  wound  the  approaching  hand,  tearing 

sidered   it   an   absurdity   and    a   joke  the  clothes  or  the  flesh  of  the  traveller 

that  one  apparently  so  mean,  friend-  who  tries   to  make   his  way  through 

570 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.         chap.  xv. 


the  thicket,  burning  in  the  flesh  where  sophy "  ;    the    language   of    a    people 

it  has  sunk,  fitly  stand  for  that  side  whose  mission  it  was  to  give  a  prin- 

of  life  which  we  associate  with  sin —  ciple  of   fermentation  to   all  races  of 

the  side  of  care,  fret,  pain,  disappoint-  mankind,    susceptible   of  those   subtle 

ment,  disease,  and  death  ?     In  a  word,  and     largely     indefinable      influences 

it   symbolises  the   curse.     But  it  was  which  are  called  collectively  Progress, 

the  mission  of  Christ  to  bear  the  curse  ;  In    Latin, — the    dialect    of    a    people 

and  as  He  lifted  it  on  His  own  head,  originally  the  strongest  of  all  the  sons 

He  took  it  off  the  world.     4.  Christ's  of  men.     The  three  languages   repre- 

sufferings  are  a  rebuke  to  our  softness  sent  the  three  races  and  their  ideas, — 

and   self- pleasing.     It  is   not,  indeed,  revelation,    art,    literature ;    progress, 

wrong  to  enjoy  the  comforts  and  the  war,    and    jurisprudence.      Wherever 

pleasures    of   life.      God   sends   these,  these   three  tendencies  of  the  human 

and  if  we  receive  them  with  gratitude  race  exist,  wherever  annunciation  can 

they  may  lift  us  nearer  to    Himself,  be  made  in  human  language,  wherever 

But  we  are  too  terrified  to  be  parted  there  is  a  heart  to  sin,  a  tongue  to 

from   them,    and   too   afraid   of    pain  speak,  and  eye  to  read,  the  Cross  has 

and  poverty.     Many  would  like  to  be  a  message. — Bishop  Wm.  Alexander. 
Christians,   but   are   kept   back   from 

decision  by   dread   of  the  laughter  of  Ver.  17.  The  crown  of  thorns. — The 

profane  companions  or  by  the  prospect  imposition  of  the  mock  crown  was  only 

of  some  worldly  loss.     But  we  cannot  one  among  many  indignities.     It  was. 

look  at  the  suffering  Saviour  without  not  only  a  mock  crown,  but  a  circlet 

being  ashamed  of  such  cowardly  fears,  of  torture. 

— J.  Stalker,  D.D.  I.  To  wear  this  crown  Christ  had 

Christ  was  intended  for  the  whole  laid  aside  that  of  Divine  majesty. — 

world. — Let  us  see  the  Divine  inten-  We  can  pity  the  fallen  and  weep  for 

tion  in   the  Crucifixion.     In  that  are  the  great  who  are  degraded,  or  who 

mingling  lines  of  glory  and  of  humilia-  are  made  to  feel  the  hardship  of  re- 

tion.     The  King  of  humanity  appears  versed  fortune — we   can  measure  the 

with    a    scarlet    camp-mantle    flung  depth  of  the  descent  because  they  are 

contemptuously   over   His    shoulders ;  human ;  but   we   have   no   power    to 

but  to  the  eye  of  faith  it  is  the  purple  gauge  the  height  from  which  He  came 

of   empire.     He  is  crowned   with  the  when    He     "humbled    Himself    and 

acanthus   wreath ;  but   the  wreath  of  became  obedient  unto  death." 
mockery  is   the   royalty  of   our   race.  II.  By    wearing     this     crown     of 

He  is  crucified  between  two  thieves ;  mockery  Christ  added  a  glory  to  that 

but  His  Cross  is  a   judgment- throne,  He   wears   eternally. — He   conquered 

and  at  His  right  hand  and  His  left  are  suffering,  sorrow,  death,  for   us,  and 

the    two    separated    worlds    of   belief  now   every   branch   and  spike   of  the 

and  unbelief.     All  the  Evangelists  tell  mock  crown  is  a  jewel  inwrought  with 

us    that   a   superscription,    a    title   of  that  of  His  Divine  majesty.     Thus  the 

accusation,  was  written  over  His  Cross  ;  very  scorn  of  man  Christ  transforms 

two  of  them  add  that  it  was  written  into  the  sign  of  Divine  regal  power, 
over  Him  "in  letters   of   Greek,  and  III.  By  wearing  the   mock   crown 

Latin,  and  Hebrew"  (or  in  Hebrew,  Christ  gained  the  further    right   to 

Greek,  Latin).  In  Hebrew, — the  sacred  bestow   a   crown  of  life   on    all  the 

tongue  of  patriarchs  and  seers,  of  the  faithful. 

nation  all  whose  members  were  in  idea         IV.  Consider     the     power     Christ 

and  destination  those  of  whom  God  gained  over  human  souls  by  wearing 

said,  "  My  prophets."     In  Greek, — the  that  mock  crown. — 1.    Men   are  led 

"  musical    and   golden    tongue    which  to  mourn  the  guilt  that  brought  Him 

gave  a  soul  to  the  objects  of  sense  and  such  pain.     2.  He  gains  such  intense 

va  body  to  the   abstractions  of   philo-  affection  as  He  could   have   obtained 

571 


CHAP.   XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;    ST.  MARK. 


in  no  other  way.  We  should  not  have 
loved  mere  majesty  or  power,  however 
great ;  but  Jesus  we  can  love  as  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh.  "  The  love  of 
Christ  constraineth." — Anon. 

The  crown  of  thorns. — In  the 
thorns  composing  the  Redeemer's 
crown  we  see  reflected — 1.  The  true 
character  of  sin  as  the  deadly  curse 
in  the  life  and  history  of  man.  2.  The 
triumphant  conquest  and  carrying 
away  of  sin.  3.  The  glorious  trans- 
formation of  the  consequences  of  sin. 
4.  A  symbol  of  Christ's  work.  Crowned 
with  thorns  !  Oh  the  deep  disgrace  to 
those  who  did  it !  Yet  what  so  pathe- 
tically appropriate,  what  so  beauti- 
fully significant,  that  at  the  close  and 
climax  of  such  a  life  as  His,  full  of 
travail  of  soul  and  agony  of  spirit, 
bitterness  and  reproach  of  men  and 
devils  and  sin's  burden,  there  should 
be  placed  on  His  head  a  crown  such 
as  should  be  the  expression  and  picture 
of  it  all !  Jesus  Christ,  the  ideal  King 
of  humanity,  who  shall  yet  be  historic 
King,  found  His  kingdom  "  lying  in 
the  beast "  of  prejudice  and  passion, 
and  ever  since  with  kingly  courage 
He  has  been  engaged  in  lifting  it 
into  the  "beauty  of  the  Lord" — 
bitter,  heart-breaking,  thorny  work. — 
W.  B.  Melville. 


The  crown  of  thorns. — I.  Jesus  Christ 
claimed  the  highest  dignity :  "  King." 
— Proved  by — 1.  His  own  words  and 
deeds.  2.  The  service  of  angels.  3.  The 
dread  of  demons.  4.  The  phenomena 
of  nature.  5.  The  appearance  of  the 
departed.  6.  The  acknowledgment  of 
God. 

II.  The  claim  of  Christ  to  the 
highest  dignity  was  treated  with  con- 
tempt.— "Crown  of  thorns."  1.  Its 
reason.  (1)  Its  ordinary  human  ap- 
pearance. (2)  The  spirituality  of  His 
kingdom.  (3)  The  preconceived  notions 
of  men.  2.  Its  form.  Mockery  and 
pain.  This  arose  from — (1)  A  cruel 
occupation  :  "  soldiers."  (2)  Servile 
obedience.  (3)  Heathenish  cruelty. 
(4)  Example  of  superiors.  (5)  Sinful 
excitement. 

III.  Contempt  for  the  claim  of 
Christ  to  the  highest  dignity  was 
overruled  to  the  advantage  of  Christ. — 
1.  Suffering  revealed  His  greatness. 
Love,  patience,  forgiveness.  2.  Great- 
ness gave  value  to  His  sufferings. 
Sufferings  of  the  God- man,  dignity  of 
Godhead,  and  sufferings  of  manhood — 
atonement.  The  "  curse  "  represented 
by  the  "  thorns"  becomes  a  blessing 
represented  by  the  "  crown  of  thorns." 
— B.  D.  Johns. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS    OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  21—41. 
(Parallels:  Matt,  xxvii.  32-56;  Luke  xxiii.  26-49;  John  xix.  17-37.) 

Lessons  from  Calvary. — I.  Let  us  be  willing  to  bear  the  cross  for  Him  who 
bore  the  cross  for  us  (ver.  21). — They  compel  Simon  to  bear  His  cross.  It  was  a 
reproach,  and  none  would  do  it  but  by  compulsion.  "  We  must  not  think  it 
strange  if  crosses  come  upon  us  suddenly,  and  we  be  surprised  by  them."  The 
cross  represents  the  sufferings  which  we  are  called  upon  to  bear  as  Christians. 
"  Cross-bearing  and  self-forgetfulness  fitly  go  together  (as  in  Matt.  xvi.  24) ;  for 
he  that  will  not  deny  himself  the  pleasures  of  sin  and  the  advantages  of  the 
world  for  Christ,  when  it  comes  to  the  push  will  never  have  the  heart  to  take  up 
his  cross."  In  running  the  race  set  before  us  there  is  often  a  cross  in  the 
way — something  which  is  not  only  not  joyous,  but  even  grievous.  This  is  no 
mournful  aspect  of  discipleship  ;  for  if  we  are  willing  to  bear  the  cross  for  Christ, 
we  shall  be  thereby  brought  into  closer  fellowship  with  Christ. 

II.  The  place  of  death  to  Him  is  the  beginning  of  life  to  us  (ver.  22). — 
"Once  a  Golgotha,  Calvary  has  ceased  to  be  a  place  of  skulls.  Where  men 
went  once  to  die  they  go  now  to  live."     There  was  opened  the  fountain  for  sin 

572 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.         chap,  x v. 


and  uncleanness — for  your  sins  and  mine,   for  the  sins  of   the   whole  world. 
Have  you  been  to  the  place  called  Calvary  ? 

III.  The  manner  of  death  He  endured  for  us  shews  with  what  manner  of 
love  He  loved  us  (ver.  24). — Crucifixion  was  regarded  as  the  appropriate 
punishment  for  the  most  infamous  characters.  "The  cross  being  placed  in 
position,  the  victim  was  within  reach  of  every  hand  that  might  choose  to  strike 
a  blow,  and  near  enough  also  to  note  every  gesture  of  insult,  and  to  hear  every 
mocking  word  levelled  at  him."  Yet  for  us,  for  our  salvation,  Christ  was 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  The  rocks  rent  asunder  when 
Jesus  died  ;  and  surely  our  hearts  must  be  harder  than  granite  if  the  story  of 
the  Cross  fail  to  touch  them.  Christ  died  for  the  ungodly,  and  He  will  not  see 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul  and  be  satisfied  until  every  heart  is  renewed,  as 
it  has  been  redeemed. 

IV.  The  cruel  challenge  (vers.  29-32). — Could  our  Lord's  enemies  but  have 
grasped  the  truth  comprehended  in  their  sarcastic  taunt,  tears  of  gratitude 
would  have  dimmed  their  eyes  as  they  learned  that  Christ  had  voluntarily  laid 
by  the  power  He  possessed  to  save  Himself,  that  by  His  death  the  way  might 
be  opened  for  fallen  man  to  return  to  God.  In  wilful  and  therefore  criminal 
ignorance  the  terrible  act  of  crucifixion  was  sanctioned  and  carried  out.  It  is 
possible  for  men  to  be  fulfilling  Scripture  prophecies  even  when  they  are 
breaking  Scripture  precepts. 

V.  The  two  signs — light  at  birth,  and  darkness  at  death  (ver.  33).  At  the 
Saviour's  birth  heaven's  host  rejoiced  and  the  dazzling  lustre  of  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  was  manifest.  At  the  Saviour's  death  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled, 
"  I  will  .cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at  noon,  and  I  will  darken  the  earth  in  the 
clear  day."  So  awestruck  were  the  people  that  one  heathen  writer  said 
concerning  it,  "  There  was  a  general  belief  that  either  the  God  of  nature  was 
suffering,  or  the  machine  of  the  world  was  tumbling  to  ruin." 

VI.  The  cry  of  a  Saviour's  agony  (ver.  34). — It  is  as  though  He  had  said, 
"  I  could  have  borne  all  else — the  being  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  I  could 
have  endured  the  outward  pain,  the  bodily  anguish ;  but  oh  !  My  Father,  Thy 
smile  has  been  My  light,  Thy  presence  and  fellowship  My  joy.  Why  hast  Thou 
forsaken  Me  ?  "  We  have  here  the  summit  of  human  bliss — "  My  God !  My 
God  !  "     We  have  here  the  lowest  depth  of  human  woe — the  being  God-forsaken. 

VII.  Triumph  in  death  (ver.  37). — He  commended  His  soul  to  God  and 
expired.     He  triumphed  in  death  at  Calvary.     So  may  we. 

VIII.  The  signification  of  the  rent  veil  (ver.  38). — The  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  open  to  all  believers.  We  may  now  draw  near  in  full  assurance  of  faith  ;  for 
we  may  boldly  "  enter  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living 
way  which  He  hath  consecrated  for  us  through  the  veil — that  is  to  say,  His 
flesh."— S.  Oliver. 

Ver.  25.  The  Son  of  God  nailed  to  the  Cross. — Upon  the  crucifixion  of  a  good 
man  Xenophon  or  Livy  would  have  lavished  all  the  stores  of  descriptive 
language,  loaded  the  memory  of  the  murderers  with  every  indignant  epithet, 
and  honoured  the  virtue  and  heroism  of  the  sufferer  with  the  highest  applause. 
Mark  despatches  his  history  of  the  crucifixion  of  the  Son  of  God  in  one  word, 
saying,  with  apparent  coolness  and  bold  simplicity,  "  And  they  crucified  Him." 
Taught  to  record  the  deed  and  suppress  the  reflexion,  he  hath,  however,  given 
the  world  all  that  faith  desires  for  a  foundation,  a  fact  under  the  hand  and  seal 
of  the  Spirit  of  truth. 

I.  The  crucifiers. — 1.  Israelites  and  Gentiles,  the  two  great  divisions  of  men 
at  that  time,  took  part  in  it;  the  agency  of  both  was  criminal,  though  not 
equally  criminal.     "  He   that  delivered   Me   to   thee,"   said  our   Lord   to  the 

573 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


Roman  governor,  "  hath  the  greater  sin."  The  agency  of  Judas  and  Caiaphas 
was  more  criminal  than  the  agency  of  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  and  the 
Gentiles  were  less  blamable  than  the  people  of  Israel.  By  the  hands  of  wicked 
men  Christ  was  crucified  and  slain,  but  their  wicked  hands  did  that  which  the 
righteous  counsel  of  God  determined  before  to  be  done.  The  determination  of 
His  counsel  was  just  and  holy ;  the  deed  of  the  ungodly  assembly  who  executed 
it  was  wicked  and  unjust.  2.  The  crucifiers  knew  not  what  they  did. 
Ignorance,  though  neither  the  justification  nor  the  excuse  of  wickedness,  is  an 
alleviation  pleadable  in  applications  to  the  throne  for  pardon. 

II.  The  Crucified. — 1.  The  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  Son  and  Servant  and  Elect 
of  God  (Ps.  ii.  7  ;  Isa.  xlii.  1), — Son,  the  Brightness  of  glory,  the  express 
Image,  and  in  every  perfection  the  Equal  of  the  Father,  by  whom  He  is 
begotten ;  Servant,  righteous  Servant,  who,  doing  the  work  which  pleased  the 
Father,  glorified  Him  on  earth,  finishing  it  by  bowing  His  head  and  giving  up 
the  Ghost;  Elect  of  God,  and  precious  Chosen  of  Him  from  eternity,  and 
foreordained  to  obedience  and  suffering  before  the  corner-stones  of  creation  were 
fastened.  2.  The  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Seed  of  the  woman,  and  the  Seed  of 
Abraham,  the  Boot  and  Offspring  of  David,  and  the  Son  of  Mary  (Gen.  iii.  15, 
xxii.  18;  Bev.  xxii.  16;  Luke  i.  32;  Acts  ii.  30).  These  titles,  which  break 
forth  along  the  line  of  His  ancestry  according  to  the  flesh,  are  proofs  that  He  is 
the  Saviour  promised  to  the  world  and  invitations  to  believe  and  praise  the  love 
of  God,  who  in  "  the  fulness  of  time  sent  forth  His  Son,"  etc.  3.  The  Man 
Christ  Jesus  is  the  Mediator,  the  Surety,  and  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant.  In 
the  covenant,  of  which  Christ  Jesus  is  mediator,  there  is  an  old  and  a  new  testament. 
The  efficacy  of  His  mediation,  running  along  the  Old  Testament,  breaks  forth 
with  greater  lustre  and  vigour  under  the  New ;  and  "  by  means  of  His  death 
for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  under  the  first  testament,  they  who 
are  called "  under  both,  whether  Israelites  or  Gentiles,  "  receive  the  promise 
of  eternal  inheritance."  The  Mediator  of  the  covenant  is  the  Suiety  of  it.  The 
vigour  of  His  suretyship,  together  with  its  precious  effects,  extends  itself  to  both 
testaments  of  the  covenant ;  but  under  the  new  its  beauty  is  more  conspicuous 
and  its  effects  more  extensive.  The  Mediator  and  Surety  is  the  Messenger 
of  the  covenant.  The  glad  tidings  of  a  new  and  everlasting  covenant  He 
published  to  the  world  in  paradise,  proclaimed  by  His  holy  prophets,  sealed 
and  ratified  with  His  own  blood  upon  the  Cross,  and  by  the  mouth  of  His  apostles, 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  made  them  known  to  all  nations 
for  the  obedience  of  faith.  4.  The  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  the  Priest,  the  Prophet, 
and  the  King  whom  God  hath  raised  up  and  anointed.  Salvation,  effected  by 
His  death  as  a  priest  and  revealed  in  His  Word  as  a  prophet,  is  completed  under 
His  administration  as  a  king.  While  on  earth  He  executed  the  offices  in  His 
humiliation ;  and  after  rising  and  ascending  into  heaven,  He  executes  them  in 
His  exaltation.  Their  glory  is  not  an  occasional  and  transient  blaze,  but 
a  sunshine,  « which  shall  continue  for  ever,  and  fill  the  heaven  of  heavens  with 
brightness  of  glory  through  eternity. 

III.  The  crucifying. — Christ  Jesus  is  the  Man  by  Himself.  Among  the 
sons  of  the  mighty  none  is  equal  to  Him,  none  is  like  Him,  and  there  is  none 
besides  Him.  The  crucifying  is  a  deed  of  which,  in  all  its  circumstances,  there 
is  no  example  in  the  history  of  punishment.  1.  The  crucifying  of  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus  is  exhibited  to  the  world  as  a  deed  which  executed  the  counsel  of 
God  (Acts  ii.  23).  2.  The  crucifying  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  exhibited  to 
the  world  as  a  deed  that  fulfilled  many  prophecies  of  Scripture  (Gen.  iii.  15  ; 
Ps.  xxii.  16;  Isa.  liii. ;  Zech.  xii.  10;  Dan.  ix.  26).  3.  The  crucifying  of  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus  is  exhibited  to  the  world  aS  the  infliction  of  a  penalty. 
The  crucifiers   beheld  it    as  the  punishment  which  their   laws   inflicted  upon 

574 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.         chap.  xv. 


blasphemers  of  God  and  the  king ;  but  "  He  had  done  violence  to  none, 
neither  was  any  deceit  in  His  mouth.  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him, 
to  put  Him  to  the  grief  "  of  dying  on  the  Cross,  and  to  "  make  His  soul  an 
offering  for  sin."  In  the  judgment  of  God,  which  is  according  to  truth,  the 
crucifying  of  the  Lord  of  Glory,  in  our  nature  and  stead,  is  the  punishment 
that  transgressors  of  the  law  under  which  He  was  made  deserved.  4.  The 
crucifying  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  is  exhibited  to  the  world  as  the  operation 
of  a  curse.  The  curse  is  the  sentence  which  the  Lawgiver  denounced  upon 
the  transgressor  of  His  law.  5.  The  crucifying  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  is 
exhibited  to  the  world  as  the  expedient  of  reconciliation  for  iniquity.  In  this 
expedient  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God  break  forth  to  the  world,  and  meeting 
together  with  His  holiness,  mercy,  truth,  and  righteousness,  glorify  themselves 
in  the  highest. 

IV.  Wonders  in  the  Crucifixion. — Here  God  and  man,  sin  and  holiness,  love 
and  hatred,  weakness  and  strength,  honour  and  dishonour,  death  and  victory, 
the  blessing  and  the  curse,  meet  together,  and  exert  themselves  wondrously, 
forming  coalitions  of  conflicting  causes,  and  producing  effects  apparently 
discordant,  yet  perfectly  harmonious. — A.  Shanks. 

The  call  of  the  Cross. — The  Cross  is  the  symbol  of  the  eternal  love  of  God,  and 
it  is  the  symbol  of  the  perfect  life  of  man.  The  call  of  the  Cross  is  like  the  call 
of  other  facts  of  nature  and  of  the  universe.  It  is  like  the  call  of  the  sunshine  and 
the  rain,  and  no  more  mysterious.  The  sunshine  and  the  rain  call  the  farmer 
to  sow  the  seed  to  co-operate  with  nature,  to  link  his  little  life  with  the  great 
life  of  God.  The  one  is  no  more  mysterious  than  the  other.  The  farmer  labours 
in  a  narrow  sphere ;  the  Christian  labours  in  all  the  spheres.  The  Cross  shews 
to  us  the  true  life  of  man — the  Christ-life. 

I.  The  Cross  calls  all  men  to  personal  holiness. — The  end  of  salvation  is  that 
men  may  have  the  very  life  of  God.  There  are  two  elements  in  this  idea  of 
holiness.  The  sacrifices  when  they  were  brought  to  be  offered,  if  they  were 
acceptable  sacrifices,  must  be  of  animals  in  perfect  health,  perfect  physical  health 
and  purity.  And  so  the  primary  idea  of  holiness  is  that  of  healthfulness  or  of 
purity.  We  speak  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  the  stainless  purity  of  Christ :  to  be 
fit  to  be  offered  to  God  as  He  was — to  that  all  men  are  called.  But  then  there  is 
another  idea  in  connexion  with  these  sacrifices.  The  first  idea  was  the  idea  of 
health  and  purity  ;  the  second  idea  is  of  something  which  is  set  apart  to  the 
service  of  God.  Now  we  are  to  understand  that  goodness  does  not  imply  weak- 
ness. Goodness  implies  the  finest  strength  and  the  finest  beauty  and  the  most 
finished  culture,  all  set  apart  to  God.  There  has  been  an  idea  in  other  ages  that 
what  we  call  the  heroic  virtues — bravery,  courage — that  these  were  the  things 
which  require  strength.  But  love  requires  more  strength  than  all  the  heroic 
virtues  combined.  It  was  a  braver  thing  for  Ignatius  Loyola,  when  that  rabble 
of  Chinese  turned  upon  him  and  a  rude  ruffian  rushed  up  and  spat  in  his  face, 
quietly  to  look  down  and  smile  upon  him  and  commend  him  to  the  love  of  God, 
than  for  Marshal  Ney  at  Waterloo  to  lead  the  Old  Guard.  The  one  had  all  the 
enthusiasm  and  passion  of  a  great  occasion ;  the  other  saw  ten  thousand  men 
against  him  and  only  God  above.  A  man  once  said :  "  If  I  were  an  artist,  I 
should  like  to  paint  my  ideal  of  God ;  I  should  paint  Him,  not  as  some  have 
painted  Him,  as  a  feeble  old  man  with  snowy  hair ;  I  should  paint  Him,  not  as 
others  have  painted  Him,  seated  upon  a  lofty  throne,  with  thousands  bowing 
before  Him  ;  I  should  paint  my  ideal  of  God  as  a  great  cloud,  and  out  of  the  cloud 
an  outstretched  hand,  and  in  our  weakness  and  guilt,  in  our  consciousness  of  our 
utter  impotence  to  be  that  to  which  we  are  called,  I  would  see  that  hand  reaching 
from  beyond  the  stars." 

575 


chap.  xv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.   MARK. 


II.  The  Cross  calls  all  to  fill  their  lives  with  service  and  sacrifice  for 
humanity. — Christ's  ideal  is  to  become  our  life.  Not  only  are  we  to  become  like 
Him,  not  only  are  we  to  think  His  thoughts,  but  we  are  to  do  as  He  did.  I  some- 
times wonder  how  it  is  that  people  have  so  mistaken  emphasis,  and  have  spent 
so  much  time  in  seeking  to  adjust  the  death  of  Christ  to  a  philosophical  system, 
when  all  the  while  there  is  the  example  of  One  who  went  about  doing  good,  who 
bound  up  the  broken-hearted,  who  was  seeking  opportunities  to  be  helpful  to  those 
who  are  in  suffering.  It  is  only  one  thing  that  can  make  a  cross,  and  that  is  love  ; 
and  love  must  go  into  that  shape,  because  love  means  sacrifice.  Love  always 
hangs  on  the  cross.  The  more  we  love,  the  more  we  must  suffer.  The  more  our 
hearts  are  tied  to  our  dear  ones,  the  more  awfully  will  they  be  broken  if  those 
dear  ones  do  not  realise  the  life  to  which  they  are  called. 

III.  We  are  called  by  that  Cross  of  Christ  to  believe  in  the  triumph  of  the 
truth  and  righteousness. — That  shews  us,  as  nothing  else  does,  what  has  been 
spent — that  poverty,  that  sorrow,  that  sin,  can  be  destroyed.  And  in  our  hours 
of  darkness,  when  we  feel  as  if  everything  were  going  awry,  when  it  seems  to  us 
as  if  there  were  no  God  at  the  heart  of  things,  when  we  look  up  into  the  great 
wide  sky  inquiring  wherefore  we  were  born,  for  earnest  or  for  jest — in  those 
moments,  when  it  seems  as  if  nothing  but  a  heartless  and  cruel  fate  were  at  the 
heart  of  things,  the  voice  from  the  cross,  serene  as  the  music  of  the  angel-choirs, 
rings  out  its  inquiry,  "  Can  you  believe  that  a  work  which  was  baptised  with 
the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  which  Jesus  died  to  start,  can  ever  be 
defeated?"— A  H.  Bradford,  D.D. 

Ver.  26.  The  title  on  the  Gross. — That  white  board  has  long  since  perished — 
it  has  crumbled  to  dust ;  and  yet  there  is  a  glorious  sense  in  which  the  inscription 
can  never  be  obliterated.  Fire  cannot  burn  it  out ;  waters  cannot  wash  it  away ; 
spears  cannot  erase  the  wondrous  words ;  and  to-day,  in  living  letters  of  glorious 
light,  it  stands  out  for  us  and  for  every  living  creature  to  read  that  Jesus — this 
Jesus  of  Nazareth — is  King — King  of  the  Jews  and  King  of  the  world. 

I.  What  this  inscription  meant  to  Pilate. — It  was  Pilate's  revenge  on  the 
priests ;  it  was  a  studied  insult  to  them.  It  was  one  of  those  sarcastic  sallies  in 
which  the  Romans  delighted.  Pilate  must  have  fallen  very  low  to  make  scoff 
and  sport  at  such  a  time.  There  is  no  knowing  where  a  man  may  be  led  when 
he  once  gives  way  to  revenge.  Nothing  is  sacred  then  ;  he  will  trample  under- 
foot the  most  solemn  thing ;  he  will  disregard  the  most  solemn  moment.  For 
ever  the  character  of  Pilate  stands  out  as  the  character  of  a  man  who  knew  the 
right,  but  did  it  not — who  was  convinced  of  the  true  path,  but  deliberately  turned 
round  and  walked  in  the  false. 

II.'  What  the  priests  could  have  seen  in  that  inscription. — To  them  it  was 
one  of  the  most  startling  and  searching  sentences  upon  which  their  eyes  had 
ever  looked,  and  we  can  see  from  the  wondrous  story  how  vexed,  how  bitter,  they 
were  when  they  found  out  the  trick  that  Pilate  had  played  upon  them.  Why, 
there  was  the  very  thing  they  least  loved — that  proclamation  of  the  Kingship  of 
this  Man  dying  on  the  Cross.  They  could  not  reconcile  His  lowly  origin  and  His 
ignominious  death  with  His  Divine  claims  and  glorious  title.  And  that  is  the 
difficulty  with  many  even  now.  The  real  distinctive  character  of  Christianity 
is  that  it  is  independent  of  all  outward  and  material  conditions  of  greatness. 

III.  What  could  have  been  the  special  relation  to  Jesus,  as  He  hung  upon 
the  Cross,  of  that  inscription  above  His  head  ? — It  was  written  in  jest — but 
there  was  a  tremendous  meaning  in  those  words !  There,  above  the  Cross,  is 
inscribed  His  sweetest  name.  Jesus !  Mystic,  blessed,  soul-healing  name ! 
Jehovah  !  Emmanuel !  Shepherd  !  Unspeakable  Gift  !  Saviour  !  Name  of  sweet- 
ness !    Name  of  power  !    Name  for  the  guilty  !    Name  for  the  lost !    Name  for  all 

576 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  xv. 


nations !  Note  also  that  on  the  Cross  is  a  mark  of  the  wondrous  condescension 
of  Jesus,  for  there  is  "  Nazareth,"  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  despised  Nazareth.  Ay, 
and  there  I  see  also  His  rightful  dignity,  "  King."  But  where  is  His  throne, 
and  where  His  sceptre  and  His  crown  ?  Ah !  don't  you  see  them  ?  That 
wooden  Cross  is  His  throne ;  the  nails  in  His  hands  are  His  sceptre ;  those  twisted 
thorns  form  His  crown.  "  He  conquered  when  He  fell " ;  He  reigned  when  He 
died  ;  and  never  king  was  more  kingly  than  Jesus  on  the  Cross.  But  I  see  also 
a  hint  of  His  future  glory.  "  King  of  the  Jews."  He  is  coming  again ;  and 
"  when  He  cometh  to  make  up  His  jewels,"  as  the  children  sing,  among  the 
brightest  of  His  crown  shall  be  some  of  the  children  of  Abraham,  "  bone  of  His 
bone,  and  flesh  of  His  flesh  " ;  and  though  now  they  are  cast  out  and  scattered, 
though  they  are  a  nation  and  yet  no  nation,  though  indeed  they  have  no  human 
king  and  no  human  governor,  when  He  comes,  He  who  scattered  Israel  shall 
gather  them,  and  reign  over  the  people  who  once  pierced  Him. 

IV.  What  is  it  to  us  ? — What  is  it  to  me  ?  Some  one  has  said  that  that 
inscription  on  the  Cross  was  the  first  printed  sermon.  It  was  printed  in  three 
languages — in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and  Latin.  Hebrew  was  the  language  of  religion, 
Greek  the  language  of  culture,  Latin  the  language  of  power.  Was  it  not 
prophetic  ?  Has  it  not  its  messages  for  to-day  ?  Yes.  What  is  the  message  of 
the  Cross  for  men  of  culture  ?  It  is  this  :  that  Jesus  must  be  their  King,  Jesus 
must  be  owned  as  Master  of  the  mind  and  Lord  of  every  gift  and  talent.  Oh 
that  to-day  intellect,  genius,  science,  art,  literature,  and  all  culture  might  own 
the  kingship  of  Christ !  And  what  shall  we  say  of  the  Latin — the  emblem  of 
power  and  empire  ?  Christ  must  be  King — King  over  men  of  influence,  men  of 
power,  statesmen,  rulers,  magistrates,  judges.  King  in  the  senate-house,  King 
on  the  bench,  King  in  our  courts  of  law,  King  in  all  our  local  assemblies. 
Dare  we  forget  it  ?  Woe  be  to  our  dear  land  if  we  do  !  And  what  of  religion  ? 
Oh,  if  He  is  not  King  here,  religion  will  be  the  deadest,  dullest,  dreariest,  most 
abominable  thing  of  all !  Oh  that  we  who  profess  to  be  men  and  women  religious 
in  heart  and  life  may  truly  own  the  kingship  of  Christ !  Now  I  want  us  all  to 
recognise  in  these  three  languages  emblems  of  the  three  parts  of  our  own  lives ; 
and  I  want  us  to  say  to  Jesus  Christ,  "  Oh,  Christ  of  the  Cross,  Saviour  of  men  ! 
come  and  rule  in  my  life,  not  in  one  part  of  it,  but  in  all  parts  of  it — come  and 
make  me  all  Thine  own." — W.  J.  Mayers. 

Jesus  our  King. — "  Behold  your  king !  "  exclaimed  Pilate  to  the  Jews,  as  they 
crowded  round  his  tribunal  to  witness  the  condemnation  of  Jesus.  The  words 
may  have  been  spoken  in  sarcasm  ;  but  we  would  hope  they  were  rather  intended 
as  a  last  appeal  to  the  compassion  of  the  populace.  Some  have  even  thought 
that  they  embodied  the  secret  impression  of  Pilate's  own  mind.  Certain  it  is 
that  he  was  alarmed  by  the  peculiarity  of  Christ's  appearance  and  manner ;  and 
possibly  enough  he  entertained  a  fear  lest  He  should  have  a  real  claim  to  the 
title  thus  assigned  Him.  But,  with  whatever  motive  he  uttered  the  words — 
whether  in  derision  or  in  seriousness,  in  contempt  or  in  faith — his  tongue  was 
the  instrument  of  Providence  in  declaring  a  great  and  stupendous  truth ;  and 
that  truth  he  afterwards  recorded,  in  "  the  three  great  languages  of  the  ancient 
world — the  languages  of  culture,  of  empire,  and  of  religion  " — upon  the  Cross 
of  Christ. 

I.  The  kingly  relation  in  which  Jesus  stands  to  us  is  far  more  definite  and 
intelligible  than  it  was  to  the  Jews. — 1.  Though  He  was  indeed  their  king 
by  the  strongest  claims — announced  to  them  as  such  by  prophecy,  expected  by 
them  in  that  character  for  ages,  and  manifested  to  them  by  demonstrations  of 
miraculous  power — yet  it  must  be  confessed  that  there  was  much  difficulty  and 
much  obscurity  hovering  about  His  pretensions,  when    He   stood   before   the 

pp  577 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


tribunal  of  Pilate  or  hung  upon  the  tree  of  Calvary.  It  must  have  been  a 
hard  matter  even  for  the  eye  of  faith  to  discover  in  that  apparently  helpless  and 
destitute  Object  any  appearance  of  regal  dignity.  He  seemed  abandoned  alike  by 
heaven  and  earth — One  whose  condition  was  that  of  utter  hopelessness,  whose 
ruin  was  inevitable,  and  who  was  only  rescued  from  absolute  contempt  by  the 
placid  dignity  of  His  manner.  Accordingly  we  find  that  even  those  who  had 
seen  His  arm  uplifted  in  the  majesty  of  omnipotence,  and  heard  His  voice  when 
it  hushed  the  tumult  of  the  waves  or  called  the  dead  back  to  earth,  made  ship- 
wreck of  their  faith  in  this  hour  of  trial.  Although  therefore  a  keen  observer 
of  mankind  might,  as  Pilate  did,  perceive  in  the  conduct  of  Jesus  symptoms  of 
an  extraordinary  and  wondrous  character,  how  were  the  multitude  to  discriminate 
or  to  recognise  a  King  in  One  condemned ^to  crucifixion  as  a  criminal  ?  But  we 
are  under  no  such  difficulty.  To  us  Jesus  appears  not  as  a  culprit,  but  as  the 
Conqueror  of  death  and  the  Lord  of  life.  Why,  then,  should  we  hesitate  to 
acknowledge  Him  as  our  King  ?  2.  The  Jews  were  differently  situated  from  us 
with  respect  to  Christ,  as  they  had  received  no  positive,  public,  and  official 
assurance  from  Him  of  His  being  their  king.  It  did  not  enter  into  His  design 
to  announce  Himself  formally  to  them  in  that  capacity.  He  was,  in  fact,  their 
spiritual,  not  temporal  sovereign  ;  but  as  long  as  He  was  present  amongst  them 
in  person  He  could  never  have  made  them  comprehend  the  distinction.  He 
therefore  left  it  to  His  apostles  to  explain  fully  the  nature  of  His  kingdom, 
its  extent,  and  the  qualifications  requisite  for  membership  in  it.  Now  the 
explanation  which  the  apostles  gave  in  consequence  of  that  commission  we  are 
in  full  possession  of.  We  find  in  the  New  Testament  an  account  of  a  spiritual 
kingdom,  whose  Invisible  Head  is  Christ,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 
3.  The  Jews  had  received  no  such  benefits  as  they  expected  from  Christ  as  their 
King.  He  had,  it  is  true,  proved  a  great  and  signal  benefactor  to  them  in 
many  respects  ;  but  the  blessings  of  His  kingdom  were  not  dispensed  so  long  as 
He  remained  on  earth  in  the  flesh.  The  Holy  Spirit^  who  was  to  be  the  agent 
in  dispensing  the  blessings  and  extending  the  bounds  of  that  kingdom,  did  not 
openly  commence  His  work  till  Christ's  bodily  presence  was  withdrawn.  We, 
on  the  other  hand,  have  from  infancy  shared  all  the  present  privileges  and 
advantages  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and  have  been  cheered  with  the  hope  of  those 
which  are  hereafter  to  be  revealed.  We  therefore  are  utterly  without  excuse 
if  we  do  not  acknowledge  and  reverence  Him  as  our  King.  In  His  hands  the 
Father  has  been  pleased  to  place  the  absolute  control  of  all  our  destinies.  He 
is  our  Ruler,  our  Protector,  our  Example,  and  our  Judge. 

II.  The  feelings  with  which  we  should  regard  Jesus  as  our  King. — 1.  WTith 
reverence.  The  very  thought  of  Him  should  stifle  every  lofty  imagination  and 
hush  every  unguarded  word.  We  bend  ourselves,  with  a  feeling  of  awe,  before 
an  earthly  monarch  :  should  we  not,  then,  present  ourselves  in  a  constant 
attitude  of  humility  before  the  Supreme  Sovereign  of  creation?  Let  this 
thought  operate  upon  the  minds  of  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  speaking  lightly 
of  the  gospel,  and  using  the  name  of  Christ  more  familiarly  than  they  would 
that  of  a  common  acquaintance.  This  practice,  though  originating  often  in 
thoughtlessness,  is  an  offence  of  a  very  serious  cast,  which  blunts  the  delicate 
edge  of  spiritual  susceptibility.  2.  With  love.  An  earthly  sovereign,  by  a  few 
acts  of  munificence,  or  even  by  a  few  generous  expressions,  finds  an  easy  passage 
to  the  hearts  of  his  people.  But  has  Christ  conferred  no  more  than  one  or  two 
benefits  upon  us  ?  Has  He  uttered  only  a  few  expressions  of  kindness  ?  Surely, 
if  ever  sovereign  deserved  the  love  of  His  subjects,  it  must  be  He  who,  after 
having  said  and  done  everything  that  could  encourage  and  console,  laid  down 
His  life  for  them  !  What  an  inversion  is  it,  not  merely  of  right  reasoning,  but 
of  proper  and  honourable  feeling,  when  we  loudly  extol  those  whose  ambition  has 

578 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.         chap.  xv. 


led  thousands  to  death,  as  sheep  to  the  slaughter,  but  dare  to  depreciate  that 
Divine   Mercy  which  could  offer  up   itself  a  sacrifice  for  the  ungodly ! 

III.  Where  especially  shall  we  offer  our  homage  to  Christ  as  King  ? — He 
is  not  to  be  seen,  as  formerly,  walking  amongst  men,  in  the  humble  state  of  a 
companion,  or  the  still  more  lowly  form  of  a  servant.  Nor  is  He  at  present  to 
be  seen  by  us  in  the  magnificence  of  celestial  splendour.  The  time  indeed  will 
come  when  the  eye  that  now  looks  to  Him  in  faith  shall  actually  behold  Him 
in  all  the  brightness  of  His  glory.  But  the  mists  of  earth  cannot  yet  be 
penetrated,  and  we  must  be  satisfied  with  a  distant  and  mental  contemplation 
of  our  King.  Yet  is  He  not  far  from  any  one  of  us ;  and  occasions  there  are 
when  we  may  know  that  He  is  specially  among  us,  to  receive  our  worship  and 
our  praise.  1.  He  marks  the  looks,  the  gestures,  nay,  the  inmost  thoughts,  of 
those  who  present  themselves  in  the  courts  of  His  house.  And  there  also  those 
who  are  thus  seen  by  Him  may  with  the  eye  spiritual  behold  Him  in  return — 
may  see  Him  smiling  benignly,  may  hear  Him  whispering  peace,  and  may  feel 
Him  in  their  souls  blessing  their  efforts  and  strengthening  their  resolutions. 
2.  We  may  behold  and  worship  Him  in  the  retirement  of  private  devotion. 
When,  bowed  down  under  the  sense  of  sin,  or  in  affliction  or  sickness,  we  raise 
our  hearts  to  heaven,  we  may  see  Him  bending  from  His  throne  of  love  to  hear 
our  prayer  and  recommend  it  by  His  advocacy  to  His  Father.  3.  But  surely 
our  homage  is  more  particularly  due  to  Him  when  we  kneel  before  Him  at 
that  altar  which  He  Himself  consecrated  as  the  peculiar  scene  of  His  intercourse 
with  His  people.  There  He  meets  us  by  special  appointment.  There  He  pours 
forth  in  fullest  measure  the  riches  of  His  grace.  There,  then,  let  us  not  fail  to 
present  ourselves  continually  before  Him,  and  offer  Him  our  most  heartfelt 
praise  and  thanksgiving,  and  plead  before  the  Eternal  Father  the  Great 
Sacrifice  of  Calvary. 

Ver.  34.  Our  Lords  desertion  by  the  Father. — This  complaint  is  borrowed 
from  the  twenty-second  Psalm,  which  begins  with  these  words.  And  if  it  be 
asked  why  our  Saviour  chose  to  express  Himself  on  this  occasion  in  the  language 
of  David,  two  probable  reasons  may  be  given  for  this.  1.  That  the  Jews  might 
call  to  mind  the  great  resemblance  between  His  case  and  that  of  this  illustrious 
king  and  prophet.  In  both  cases  innocence  and  virtue  were  borne  down  by 
violence  and  eclipsed  under  a  cloud  of  sufferings,  while  the  wicked  triumphed 
and  the  vilest  of  men  were  exalted.  2.  The  other  reason  of  Christ's  taking  the 
words  of  this  psalm  might  be  that  this  psalm  was  allowed  to  belong  to  the 
Messiah,  and  to  have  its  ultimate  completion  in  Him.  To  signify  that  He  was 
the  person  foretold  in  this  psalm  our  dying  Lord  makes  the  complaint  His  own, 
and  this  after  His  crucifiers  had  as  it  were  challenged  Him  to  make  good  His 
titles  to  this  character. 

I.  Consider  the  style  which  our  dying  Lord  uses  in  addressing  Himself  to 
God. — "My  God,  My  God."  1.  These  words  can  signify  no  less  than  a  con- 
sciousness of  His  integrity  at  the  time  of  our  Saviour's  using  them.  At  that 
very  time  His  heart  was  so  far  from  reproaching  Him  as  to  applaud  every 
action  of  His  life  and  fill  Him  with  great  peace  and  assurance.  2.  Christ 
might  well  say,  "  My  God,  My  God,"  because  He  had  chosen  and  avouched  Him 
for  such,  and  loved  and  delighted  in  Him  with  a  flame  of  devotion  which  angels 
themselves  cannot  equal.  3.  These  words  imply  the  filial  confidence  and  trust 
which  Christ  reposed  in  His  Father  at  the  very  time  that  He  complained  so 
tenderly  of  His  having  forsaken  Him. 

II.  In  what  sense  was  Christ  forsaken  by  God  in  His  passion? — 1.  Are  we 
to  believe  that  God  was  angry  with  His  well-beloved  Son  ?  Was  His  heart 
turned  against  Him,  and  His  love  towards  Him  for  some  time  interrupted? 

579 


CHAr.  xv.  IIOJIILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


Did  the  wrath  of  God  fall  upon  this  sacrifice  like  fire  from  heaven,  and  as  it 
were  consume  it,  as  He  saith  of  His  own  zeal ?  These  things  I  call  impossible. 
For  how  in  the  nature  of  things  could  they  possibly  be  ?  How  could  the  same 
Person  at  the  same  time  be  both  innocent  and  guilty,  the  object  of  the  love 
of  God  and  of  His  wrath  ?  Or  how  could  the  righteous  Judge  of  the  world,  who 
is  infinite  in  knowledge,  reckon  things  and  persons  to  be  what  they  really  were 
not  ?  2.  But  if  God  was  not  angry  with  His  Son,  might  not  the  Son  apprehend 
that  He  was,  or  at  least  doubt  of  the  continuance  of  His  Father's  love  to  Him, 
the  fear  of  which  filled  Him  with  this  amazing  anguish  ?  No.  The  Scripture 
saith  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie.  But  what  had  such  a  delusion  as  this  been 
better  ? — to  make  His  Son  believe  things  for  which  there  was  no  manner  of 
foundation  ?  And  as  for  His  being  in  such  an  error  if  left  to  Himself,  it  is 
also  impossible.  His  conscience  could  not  accuse  Him  of  what  He  never  com- 
mitted ;  and  He  had  too  worthy  and  honourable  thoughts  of  the  Deity  to 
apprehend  His  displea'sure,  while  His  own  heart  did  not  condemn  Him.  3.  The 
true  meaning  of  this  complaint.  (1)  "Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  i.e.  "Why 
dost  Thou  leave  Me  destitute  of  Thy  heavenly  aid  in  this  dreadful  conflict  ?  In 
My  agony  when  I  prayed  so  fervently  that  the  cup  might  pass  from  Me  there 
appeared  an  angel  from  heaven  strengthening  Me  ;  but  now  Thou  neither 
helpest  Me  immediately  nor  by  Thy  holy  angels  :  I  am  left  to  wrestle  single 
against  principalities  and  powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this 
world."  And  was  He  not  a  match  for  them  in  His  own  strength  ? — able  alone 
to  stand  against  their  whole  force,  and  to  support  the  load  of  sufferings  which 
was  laid  upon  Him,  without  the  assistance  of  ministering  angels  ?  Doubtless  He 
was,  and  for  that  reason  was  left  to  Himself  upon  the  Cross.  (2)  "  Why  hast 
Thou  forsaken  Me  ?  "  i.e.  "  Why  hast  Thou  taken  from  Me  the  joys  and  con- 
solations of  Thy  presence.  If  I  had  these,  as  I  have  formerly  enjoyed  them, 
no  sorrows  and  pains  that  I  could  feel  would  make  any  great  impression  upon 
Me.  But,  oh  !  the  scene  is  changed,  and  that  darkness  which  now  covers  the 
earth  is  but  an  emblem  of  that  thicker  night  which  has  involved  My  soul  ! " 
(3)  "Why  hast  Thou  forsaken  Me?"  i.e.  "Why  am  I  left  so  long  in  this 
suffering  condition,  exposed  to  the  insults  of  wicked  men  and  the  rage  of 
infernal  spirits,  a  spectacle  of  shame  and  horror  to  the  world  ?  Why  dost  Thou 
delay  so  long  to  take  My  soul  ?  Oh,  come,  My  Father,  and  at  length  release 
My  wearied  spirit  !  "  (4)  How  is  the  condition  of  our  Redeemer  changed  since 
the  time  He  made  this  bitter  complaint  !  As  the  sun,  after  its  eclipse,  broke 
out  with  double  lustre  upon  the  world,  so  did  the  light  of  His  Father's  counte- 
nance upon  His  soul ;  shame  and  sorrow  and  suffering  were  succeeded  by 
glory,  rest,  and  felicity — and  victory  with  triumph. 

III.  Inquire  into  the  reasons  of  God's  thus  forsaking  His  beloved  Son. — As 
the  Scripture  does  not  give  us  any  particular  reasons  of  this,  distinct  from  those 
of  His  sufferings  in  general,  we  have  no  other  rule  to  go  by  but  the  end  or 
design  of  His  sufferings,  which  relates  either  to  His  example,  or  His  sacrifice, 
or  His  priesthood,  or  His  victory  over  the  enemies*  of  His  Church.  1 .  If  the 
God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  pleased  to  forsake  His  well-beloved 
Son  in  His  dying  passion,  it  was  in  order  to  add  the  greater  perfection  to  His 
example  (1  Pet.  ii.  2  ;  Heb.  v.  7-9).  To  carry  His  example  to  the  greatest 
height,  He  not  only  suffered  from  men,  but  from  God — pain  and  shame  and 
death  from  men,  desertion  from  God  :  in  all  teaching  us  how  to  behave  with 
humble,  filial  resignation  to  the  One,  and  charity  and  meekness  to  the  other. 
2.  Another  design  of  the  Father  in  this  temporary  desertion  of  His  dying  Son 
might  be  to  increase  the  perfection  of  His  atonement  (1  Pet.  ii.  24;  Heb.  ix.  26, 
x.  14;  Eph.  i.  7).  He  not  only  sheds  His  blood,  in  which  the  life  of  the  body 
consists,  but  He  sheds  it  with  all  the  circumstances  necessary  to  complete  the 

580 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENT AMY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  XV. 


expiation :  His  soul  had  its  share  of  suffering ;  and  though,  being  pure  and 
innocent,  He  could  know  nothing  of  the  gnawings  of  a  guilty  conscience,  that 
worm  which  never  dies,  nor  suffer  under  the  wrath  and  displeasure  of  a  Holy 
God,  who,  loving  righteousness,  could  not  for  a  moment  hate  that  Person  who 
of  all  beings  represented  Him  most  exactly  in  this  respect,  yet  He  bore  all 
that  an  innocent  being  could  well  be  liable  to,  and  for  so  long  a  time  as  the 
Divine  Wisdom  judged  meet.  3.  This  circumstance  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings, 
His  being  forsaken  of  God,  contributes  to  the  perfection  of  His  priesthood.  He 
suffered  by  inward  sorrow  and  desertion,  as  by  outward  and  bodily  pain,  and 
is  therefore  able  to  succour  them  that  are  in  the  same  condition,  so  as  to  be 
also  willing  and  inclined  to  do  it.  4.  This  completes  His  victory  over  the  grand 
adversary  of  God  and  man,  and  renders  His  triumph  the  more  glorious.  Satan 
shall  see  that  he  has  another  kind  of  person  to  deal  with  than  he  had  in  the 
first  Adam — One  who,  left  to  Himself,  is  not  only  able  to  cope  with  him,  but  easily 
to  baffle  all  his  temptations  and  stratagems,  and  with  an  invincible  courage  to 
repel  all  his  assaults. 

Concluding  reflexions. — 1.  How  should  this  endear  the  Redeemer  of  the 
world  to  us,  who  was  willing  to  suffer  such  things  for  our  sakes — shame  and 
pain  and  death  ;  to  be  persecuted  by  men,  assaulted  by  Satan,  and  forsaken 
of  God !  2.  This  part  of  the  history  of  our  Saviour's  last  passion  carries  in  it 
a  great  deal  of  instruction  and  consolation  to  His  faithful  disciples  when  they 
are  in  like  circumstances  with  Him. — H.  Grove. 

Ver.  38  The  rent  veil. — This  seems  a  trifling  incident  to  record  in  such  a 
solemn  place.  That  an  ancient  curtain,  worn  out  in  the  lapse  of  years,  should 
be  torn — what  is  there  in  that  to  excite  surprise  or  be  thought  worthy  of 
notice,  especially  at  such  a  time  ? 

I.  The  whole  worship  and  ritual  of  the  Jews  was  like  a  volume  of  pictures, 
by  which  they  were  taught  spiritual  truths. — 1.  The  veil  told  them  that  there 
was  a  barrier  between  them  and  God — sin.  They  felt  as  they  gazed  upon  it 
somewhat  of  the  same  awe  that  falls  upon  us  as  we  stand  outside  the  chamber 
of  death,  and  know  that  a  few  feet  away  there  is  a  visitor  stronger  than  any 
human  power,  unseen,  but  terribly  real.  2.  There  is  nothing  to  hinder  us  from 
coming  face  to  face  with  God  in  worship — no  outward  symbol  that  sets  a 
barrier  to  us,  past  which  we  dare  not  go.  But  though  the  veil  has  been  taken 
away,  that  still  remains  of  which  the  veil  was  but  the  picture.  Our  sin  hangs 
as  a  thick  curtain  between  us  and  the  purity  of  God.  3.  Have  we  ever  felt 
that  this  veil  is  there,  over  our  hearts — no  delusion,  but  an  awful  fact  ?  It  is 
indeed  the  most  fundamental  of  all  truths — that  which  we  must  start  with. 
Here  a  beginning  is  made  with  us  by  God.  He  speaks  to  sinners,  and  to 
sinners  alone.  We  cannot  feel  the  full  joy  of  salvation  if  we  have  not  first 
felt  the  sorrow,  the  desolation,  of  the  separation  that  sin  has  made  between  us 
and  God.  4.  The  depths  and  the  heights  of  Christian  experience  lie  close 
together.  There  is  no  better  place  to  seek  God,  no  surer  place  to  find  Him, 
than  in  some  valley  of  humiliation.  The  veil  of  the  temple — let  us  take  our 
stand  before  it,  along  with  the  great  company  of  those  who  in  all  ages  have 
mourned  over  their  sin. 

II.  The  death  of  Christ  can  take  the  barrier  of  sin  away. — 1.  It  is  broken; 
the  veil  is  rent ;  there  is  a  way  for  us  to  God,  a  living  way,  for  whomsoever  will 
tread  it.  This  is  the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  a  gospel  that  wounds  before  it 
heals,  humbles  before  it  exalts,  strikes  us  down  with  a  conviction  of  sin  before 
it  lifts  us  up  with  the  assurance  of  forgiveness.  2.  It  is  glad  tidings  to  know 
that  Christ  has  opened  this  way.  But  what  good  will  it  do  to  know  it  if  we  do 
not  tread  it  ?     It  will  not  do  for  us  just  to  say,  "  Yes,  Christ  is  the  Saviour 

581 


Chap.  xv.         H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


of  sinners."  We  must  each  one  by  one  take  a  journey  to  the  Cross  alone,  and 
meet  Christ  there.  In  the  darkness  we  stretch  out  the  feeble  hands  of  faith, 
and  pray  that  the  veil  may  be  withdrawn,  the  shadow  lifted  from  off  our  souls. 
And  lo !  even  as  we  pray  our  scarlet  sins  become  white  as  snow,  the  veil 
is  rent,  and  we  are  at  peace  with  God. 

III.  The  rent  veil  signifies  also  that  death  is  conquered. — To  the  Jews 
death  was  at  the  best  a  sore  discouragement,  an  unsolved  problem.  God  was 
on  the  other  side  of  the  veil — they  knew  that ;  but  whether  He  dwelt  there 
alone  or  in  company  with  the  living  saints  of  bygone  days  they  could  not  be 
quite  sure.  So  the  whole  of  life  was  to  them  but  a  walking  in  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  at  the  farther  end  of  which  sat  that  giant  form — dim,  dark, 
repulsive — filling  up  the  whole  space,  and  projecting  his  gloomy  shadow  along 
the  whole  path  they  travelled.  But  Christ  has  changed  all  this.  He  has  rent 
for  us  the  veil  that  is  over  our  eyes,  has  brought  to  light  the  life  and 
immortality  that  is  beyond  death,  and  has  shewn  to  us  on  the  other  side  not  an 
empty  heaven  where  God  sits  alone,  but  a  heaven  peopled  with  all  who  have 
loved  and  served  Him  here. — R.  T.  Cunningham. 

Yer.  39.  The  confession  of  the  centurion. — Many  of  us  no  doubt  have  witnessed  a 
death — the  death,  probably,  of  some  one  near  and  dear  to  us.  It  was  one  of 
those  events,  necessarily  rare  in  life,  that  in  a  few  moments  impress  a  stamp 
upon  us  which  a  lifetime  cannot  efface.  We  are  not  dead  metal,  but  living 
souls.  Such  moments  are  full  of  awe, — not  merely  because  of  this  more 
immediate  contact  with  things  unseen,  but  because  of  the  increased  responsi- 
bility ;  for  we  have  one  more  great  crisis  to  answer  for,  one  more  opportunity 
of  making  a  fresh  start  on  the  flood-tide  of  feeling,  which  a  crisis  of  this  kind 
almost  necessarily  involves.  And  yet,  after  all,  how  small  the  event  was  which 
effected  all  this  !  The  death  of  just  one  out  of  the  myriads  of  the  human  race. 
How  few  there  were  that  even  for  a  short  time  missed  him  !  How  very  narrow 
was  the  circle  of  affairs  that  was  in  any  degree  affected  by  his  loss  !  But  in 
spite  of  the  evident  want  of  change  in  the  world  around  us,  we  cannot  for 
a  moment  doubt  the  reality  of  the  change  which  has  come  over  ourselves. 

I.  Once,  and  once  only,  in  the  history  of  the  world  all  surrounding  circum- 
stances did  change,  in  order  to  be  more  in  harmony  with  a  scene  of  death. — 
Once,  and  once  only,  nature  has  swerved  from  its  iron  course  for  the  sake  of 
a  dying  man,  and  shewn  clear  signs  of  distress  and  suffering,  in  order  to  be 
in  sympathy  with  a  soul  in  agony.  And  well  might  it  do  so  ;  for  the  agonised 
soul  was  the  soul  of  its  Maker  and  its  Master.  When  the  human  soul  of  Christ 
took  its  willing  flight  to  the  hands  of  its  Heavenly  Father,  the  sun  hid  its  face, 
"  the  earth  did  quake,  and  the  rocks  rent " — the  very  graves  set  free  their  dead. 
It  was  sights  and  sounds  such  as  these  which  told  upon  the  centurion  and  his 
companions,  and  wrung  from  them  that  marvellous  confession,  "  Truly  this  was 
the  Son  of  God." 

II.  In  all  that  multitude  they  were  the  very  group  from  whom  one  might 
least  have  expected  it. — Such  an  exclamation  would  have  come  naturally  from 
the  lips  of  the  disciples.  It  would  not  have  surprised  us  had  it  been  uttered  by 
the  crowd — a  mob  which  had  been  raised  to  such  enthusiasm  for  Him  on  Palm 
Sunday  by  the  report  of  the  raising  of  Lazarus,  and  to  such  frenzy  against  Him 
by  the  machinations  of  the  priests,  might  easily  have  been  won  back  (we  think) 
by  portents  like  these.  Nay,  it  would  not  wholly  have  astounded  us  if  it  had 
proceeded  from  the  priests  themselves.  The  darkness,  and  the  earthquake, 
and  the  rending  of  the  veil  might  have  forced  home  the  truth  even  on  them. 
But  no;  the  priests  are  already  preparing  to  take  further  measures  against 
"  that  deceiver."     The  most  that  any  of  the  people  do  is  to  smite  their  breasts 

582 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xv. 


and  return.  And  as  for  the  disciples,  the  very  things  that  should  have  turned 
their  hopes  into  certainties  robbed  them  of  hope  altogether.  On  Easter  morning 
the  news  of  His  resurrection  seemed  to  them  as  "  idle  tales."  No ;  the  only- 
persons  able  to  interpret  these  awful  signs  aright  are  despised  Gentiles ;  and 
among  these  not  people  of  thought  and  culture,  but  Roman  soldiers.  Nor 
was  it  the  execution  which  touched  them.  The  cruel  punishments  of  Rome 
had  made  them  familiar  enough  with  scourging  and  crucifixion.  But  they 
had  had  other  experiences  to-day.  They  may  have  been  part  of  the  band 
who  found  themselves  prostrate  on  the  ground  at  the  mere  word  of  their 
Prisoner.  They  may  have  heard,  one  of  them  may  have  carried,  the  message 
from  Pilate's  wife.  They  had  heard  the  cry  of  the  Jews,  which  made  Pilate 
"  the  more  afraid,"  and  of  which  their  own  exclamation  seems  to  be  an  echo : 
"  By  our  law  He  ought  to  die,  because  He  made  Himself  Son  of  God."  And 
no  doubt  they  had  been  on  duty  during  the  three  hours  of  darkness,  at  the 
close  of  which  came  the  earthquake.  They  had  heard  also  the  last  great  cry 
with  which  that  Life  which  redeemed  the  world  was  yielded  up.  And  St.  Mark 
tells  us  that  it  was  this  cry,  even  more  than  the  surrounding  wonders,  that 
called  forth  the  confession  of  the  centurion. 

III.  And  why  ? — Possibly  because  such  proof  of  unsubdued  power,  after  the 
long  hours  of  agony  and  exhaustion,  seemed  nothing  short  of  miraculous.  But 
still  more  perhaps  because  His  dying  immediately  after  such  proof  of  power 
shewed  that,  after  all  that  the  malice  of  His  enemies  had  inflicted  on  Him, 
His  death  was  voluntary.  He  surrendered  His  life.  There  is  yet  one  more 
fact  which  may  well  have  contributed  to  produce  this  startling  conviction  in 
the  mind  of  the  centurion  and  his  companions  :  the  dying  words  of  Christ. 
"  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  They  had  heard  that  He 
claimed  to  be  '•  Son  of  God  " — a  title  quite  unknown  to  them  among  their  own 
divinities  and  heroes.  What  did  it  mean  ?  "  Son  of  Jupiter,"  "  Son  of  Venus," 
"  Offspring  of  the  gods,"  they  could  have  understood.  But  "  Son  of  God "  ? 
Death  stared  Him  in  the  face ;  and  to  speak  falsely  in  the  hour  of  death  is 
scarcely  human  ;  and  yet  with  His  dying  words  He  had  commended  His  spirit 
into  the  hands  of  that  Almighty  Father  whose  Son  from  His  childhood 
upwards  He  had  claimed  to  be.  It  was  this  then  that  drove  the  truth  home 
to  the  Roman  soldiers.  "  Certainly,"  they  said,  "  this  was  a  righteous  man." 
Certainly  this  man  was  no  deceiver.     "  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God." 

IV.  The  assent  of  more  than  eighteen  centuries  has  ratified  their  verdict. — 
And  it  will  hold  good  till  He  Himself  makes  good  the  promise  made  to  Caiaphas : 
"  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power, 
and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven." 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ's  willing  surrender  of  His  life  may  teach  us  that  in  the 
spiritual  world  there  is  only  one  road  to  success — the  surrender  of  self.  He 
who  "  hallowed  birth  by  being  born,"  and  "  conquered  death  by  dying,"  conquered 
the  stubborn  wills  of  men  by  surrendering  His  own.  And  there  is  no  other  way 
for  us.  This  is  not  a  lesson  to  be  buried  in  a  napkin  until  some  great  affliction 
calls  it  into  use.  It  is  a  lesson  for  every  day  and  every  hour.  There  is  no 
annoyance  too  trifling  for  the  exercise  of  it.  If  in  the  petty  vexations  of  which 
we  have  a  dozen  a  day  we  learn  to  submit  with  cheerfulness  for  the  sake 
of  Christ's  Cross,  we  shall  be  ready  even  to  give  thanks  to  Him  for  His  chastise- 
ment, when  He  sees  fit  to  bruise  us  more  severely.  Thus  all  our  lives  long 
we  may  share  the  mind  of  our  dying  Master.  To  us  to  live  will  be  Christ, 
and  to  die  gain.  2.  And  this  easily  leads  us  to  the  second  point — our  Lord's 
commendation  of  His  spirit  into  the  hands  of  His  Father.  If  we  have  in  any 
way  learnt  to  surrender  our  wills  to  God,  we  shall  not  find  it  hard  to  commend 
our  whole  being  to  Him.     The  right  to  do  so  has  been  won  for  us  by  Christ. 

583 


Chap.  XV.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


That  which  would  be  an  abomination  to  Him,  "  who  charges  even  the  angels 
with  folly,"  becomes  a  sweet-smelling  sacrifice  when  united  with  the  Sinless 
Victim  of  the  Cross.  Christ's  offering  was  a  double  one — His  own  Divinity 
and  our  humanity.  Ours  must  be  double  also — ourselves  with  Christ,  Christ 
with  ourselves.  And  this  also  is  a  work  not  for  a  few  great  and  rare  occasions, 
but  for  our  whole  life.  In  all  that  we  do  we  must  ever  be  commending  ourselves, 
in  union  with  Christ,  to  God.  Yet  there  are  times  when  it  may  be  done  with 
more  than  usual  solemnity  and  devotion  ;  and  among  these  surely  is  our  Easter 
Communion.  Let  Easter  morning,  or  at  least  some  day  in  Easter  week,  find 
us  on  our  knees  before  God's  altar,  saying  with  all  the  humble  confidence  a 
sinful  soul  can  cherish,  and  all  the  loving  self-sacrifice  a  grovelling  heart 
can  feel,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commend  my  life.  Do  with  me  as  seemeth 
best  unto  Thee  in  time  and  in  eternity."  And  as  we  retire  with  the  seal  of 
Christ's  body  and  blood  within  us,  assuring  us  that  the  fire  of  the  Lord  has 
fallen  upon  our  offering,  we  shall  know,  not  by  the  darkness  and  the  earthquake, 
but  by  the  light  and  peace  of  His  presence,  that  "truly  this  is  the  Son  of 
God." — A.  Plummer,  D.D. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.    21.    Simon    the    Cyrenian. —  that  moulds  it  all  to  His  own  perfect 

Simon  was  a  Jew  by  descent,  probably  purposes.     Let  us  bring   the   highest 

born,  certainly  resident,  for  purposes  and  largest  principles  to  bear  on  the 

of  commerce,  in  Cyrene,  on  the  North  smallest  events  and  circumstances,  for 

African   coast  of   the    Mediterranean.  you  never  can  tell  which  of  these  is 

No  doubt  he  had  come  up  to  Jerusalem  going  to  turn  out  a  revolutionary  and 

for    the    Passover ;    and,    like    many  formative  influence  in  your  life.     And 

strangers,  met  some  difficulty  in  finding  then  let  us  learn  this  lesson,  too,  of 

accommodation  in  the  city,  and  so  was  quiet  confidence  in  Him  in  whose  hands 

obliged  to  lodge  in  one  of  the  outlying  the  whole  puzzling,  overwhelming  mys- 

villages.     From  this  lodging  he  is  com-  tery  lies. 

ing  in,  in  the  morning,  knowing  nothing  II.  The  blessedness  and  honour  of 

about  Christ  or  His  trial,  and  happens  helping  Christ. — Christ's  Cross  has  to 

to  see  the  procession  as  it  is  passing  out  be  carried  to-day ;  and  if  we  have  not 

of  the  gate.     He  is  compelled  by  the  found  out  that  it  has,  let  us  ask  our- 

centurion,  for  what  reason  we  do  not  selves  if  we  are  Christians  at  all.    There 

know,  to  carry  the  heavy  Cross  of  the  will  be  hostility,  alienation,  a  compara- 

Saviour, — reluctantly   no    doubt,    but  tive   coolness,   and   absence   of   a   full 

gradually  touched  into   some   kind  of  sense  of  sympathy  in  many  people  with 

sympathy  ;  drawn  closer  and  closer,  as  you,  if  you  are  a  true  Christian.    There 

we   suppose,   as   he   looked  upon  this  will  be  a  share  of  contempt  from  the 

dying  meekness ;    and  at  last  yielding  wise  and  the  cultivated  of  this  genera- 

to  the  soul -conquering  power  of  Christ.  tion,   as  in  all  generations.     The  mud 

I.  The  greatness  of  trifles. — Our  lives  that  is  thrown  after  the  Master  will 

are    like    the   Cornish   rocking-stones,  spatter  your  faces  too,  to  some  extent ; 

pivoted   on   little    points.      The   most  and  if  we  are  walking  with  Him,  we 

apparently   insignificant    things    have  shall    share    to    the    extent    of    our 

got  such  a  strange  knack  of  suddenly  communion  with  Him  in  the  feelings 

developing    unexpected     consequences,  with  which   many  men   regard    Him. 

and  turning  out  to  be  not  small  things  Stand  to  your   colours  !      Do   not   be 

at  all,  but  great  and  decisive  and  fruit-  ashamed  of  the  Master  in  the  midst 

ful.      And  so  let    us   look   with  ever  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation, 

fresh  wonder  on  this  marvellous  con-  And  there  is  another  way  in   which 

texture   of   human  life,  and   on    Him  this  honour  of  helping  the  Lord  is  given 

584 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   XV. 


to  us.  As  in  His  weakness  He  needed 
some  one  to  aid  Him  to  bear  His  Cross, 
so  in  His  glory  He  needs  our  help  to 
carry  out  the  purposes  for  which  the 
Cross  was  borne.  The  paradox  of  a 
man  carrying  the  Cross  of  Him  who 
carried  the  world's  burden  is  repeated 
in  another  form  too.  He  needs  nothing, 
and  yet  He  needs  us. 

III.  The  perpetual  recompense  and 
record  of  humblest  Christian  work. — 
"  How  little  Simon  knew  that  where  - 
ever  in  the  whole  world  this  gospel  was 
preached,  there  also  this  that  he  had 
done  should  be  told  for  a  memorial  of 
him  ! "  Why,  men  have  fretted  their 
whole  lives  away  to  get  what  this  man 
got,  and  knew  nothing  of  one  line  in 
that  chronicle  of  fame.  And  so  we 
may  say  it  shall  be  always,  "  I  will 
never  forget  any  of  their  works."  We 
may  not  leave  them  on  any  records  that 
men  can  read.  What  of  that,  if  they 
are  written  in  letters  of  light  in  that 
"  Lamb's  Book  of  Life,"  to  be  read  out 
by  Him  before  His  Father  and  the 
holy  angels  in  that  last  great  day.  We 
may  not  leave  any  separable  traces  of 
our  service,  any  more  than  the  little 
brook  that  comes  down  some  gully  on 
the  hillside  flows  separate  from  its 
sisters,  with  whom  it  has  coalesced  in 
the  bed  of  the  great  river  or  in  the 
rolling,  boundless  ocean.  What  of  that 
so  long  as  the  work,  in  its  consequences, 
shall  last ! — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  firstfruits  of  the  heathen  world. — 
The  Synoptists  in  the  accounts  which 
they  give  of  the  Crucifixion  bring  into 
prominent  notice  Simon  of  Cyrene  as 
the  man  who  was  compelled  to  bear 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  with  this  brief 
notice  he  disappears  apparently  from 
the  pages  of  Scripture.  I  think,  how- 
ever, if  we  look  a  little  more  closely, 
we  shall  find  that  he  reappears  in 
Acts  xiii.  1  as  a  member  of  the  early 
Church  under  the  name  of  Simeon, 
who  was  called  Niger.  My  view  of  the 
matter  was  suggested  by  the  following 
considerations :  1 .  Simon  and  Simeon 
are  interchangeable  names,  as  where 
in  Acts  xv.  14  Simon  Peter  is  called 
.Simeon.      2.  Simon   of   Cyrene  might 


appropriately  have  been  called  Niger, 
in  allusion  to  the  colour  of  his  skin, 
coming  as  he  did  from  Africa. 
3.  Simeon,  who  was  called  Niger,  is 
mentioned  in  Acts  xiii.  1,  in  close 
juxtaposition  with  Lucius  of  Cyrene. 
I  might  further  add,  not  as  an  argu- 
ment, but  as  a  fitting  corollary  to  the 
circumstances,  that  we  can  scarcely 
think  that  Simon  would  not  have  been 
greatly  impressed  by  the  scenes  which 
he  witnessed,  if  indeed  he  did  not 
receive  some  personal  blessing  from  our 
Lord — he  who  in  so  real  a  sense  had 
borne  the  Cross  up  the  hill  to  Calvary, 
who  had  come  into  such  close  contact 
with  Christ  at  such  a  critical  moment, 
and  who  in  all  probability  had  been  an 
eye-witness  of  the  Crucifixion.  So  that 
we  might  almost  expect  to  find  him  a 
member  of  the  early  Church,  or  at  least 
would  meet  him  there  without  surprise. 
If  this  identity  be  a  real  one,  we  see  in 
Simon  of  Cyrene  the  very  firstfruits  of 
the  heathen  world. — G.  F.  Assinder. 

Providential  leadings. — What  moved 
Simon  to  take  that  turning  in  the  streets 
which  brought  him  to  Christ  and  His 
Cross,  and  just  at  the  very  moment 
he  was  needed  ?  We  cannot  say.  How 
curiously  we  are  led !  We  take  one 
turning  in  life  rather  than  another, 
hardly  knowing  why,  and  the  whole 
of  our  after- history  is  changed.  It  is 
not  chance — it  is  God  and  ourselves. 
We  often  say  that  our  lives  are  very 
dull  and  commonplace — there  is  no- 
thing romantic  or  interesting  about 
them — their  story  is  not  worth  the 
telling.  If  we  could  only  see  them  for 
a  moment  as  God  sees  them,  how 
different  they  would  look !  If  we 
could  only  see  the  meaning  and  im- 
portance of  the  events  which  are  taking 
place,  of  the  things  we  do  so  thought- 
lessly, the  words  we  speak  so  care- 
lessly, and  understand  the  eternal 
interests  involved  in  every  hour  that 
we  live,  we  need  not  seek  for  romance 
outside  the  narrow  circle  in  which  we 
live. — R.  T.  Cunningham. 

Cross-bearing  is  never  pleasant,  take 
it  at  its  best ;  there  is  always  a  sting 
and  a  hardship  in  it  which  makes  us 

585 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY I   ST.  MARK. 


smart  at  the  time  :  take  it  as  for  the 
most  part  we  know  it,  and  we  shall 
find  that  we  generally  murmur  and 
resist  and  complain,  and  try  to  shake 
it  from  our  shoulders.  But  it  must 
be  done.  It  is  through  tribulation 
that  our  characters  are  perfected  and 
heaven  is  won.  So  God  does  not  ask 
our  permission,  or  whether  we  are 
willing.  He  lays  His  Cross  upon  us, 
and  compels  us  to  carry  it.  Thank 
God  He  does  ! — R.  T.   Cunningham. 

Carrying  Christ's  Cross.  —  Christ's 
Cross-bearing  is  not  over  yet ;  after 
nineteen  hundred  years  He  is  still 
carrying  it ;  and  somehow  I  cannot  but 
think  of  Him  as  continually  tired  and 
needing  help.  We  can  do  something 
to  relieve  the  sin  and  wretchedness 
beside  which  we  live  ;  and  in  relieving 
it  we  are  making  Christ's  Cross  easier 
for  Him  to  bear. — Ibid. 

The  Cross  of  Christ  is  the  pivot  of 
history. — On  this  the  doors  of  ancient 
life  shut  and  modern  history  open. 
Heathen  nations,  however  new  or 
young,  are  ancient ;  Christian  nations, 
however  old,  are  modern.  Western 
civilisation  began  on  Calvary.  Signi- 
ficant is  the  fact  that  the  root  of  the 
word  stauros  (cross),  descending  from 
the  Sanskrit,  and  meaning  what 
"  stands  '  or  is  "  fixed,"  and  thence 
reappearing  in  all  the  Indo-Germanic 
languages  of  Europe,  is  a  figure  of 
history's  humblest  yet  mightiest  land- 
mark. On  the  head  of  that  Cross  were 
joined  in  one  those  three  languages 
which  represented  religion,  culture, 
and  law,  typifying  the  three  world 
civilisations  that  were  to  become  con- 
fluent and  be  vitalised  by  a  Divine 
Person  and  character,  and  His  ever- 
abiding  Spirit.  Asia  furnished  alike 
the  Victim  and  him  who  delivered  Him 
up;  Europe  the  judge,  tribunal,  and 
executioners ;  but  Africa  bore  the 
Cross.  In  this  the  century  of  hope 
for  the  Dark  Continent,  let  it  be 
remembered  that  one  of  her  sons,  in 
vicarious  labour,  carried  that  Cross  on 
which  the  Redeemer  of  the  African, 
as  well  as  of  the  Asian  and  European, 
bore  the  sins  of  humanity. 

586 


Ver.  22.  Golgotha. — The  most  ap- 
proved explanation  of  this  name  is 
that  it  denotes  a  place  slightly  elevated 
and  skull-shaped.  The  Latin  designa- 
tion, Calvary,  which  comes  from  the 
Vulgate,  may  or  may  not  be  meant  to 
express  the  same  meaning.  That  it 
was  a  place  where  the  skulls  of  male- 
factors executed  there  were  found  is 
fanciful  and  improbable,  because  the 
Jews  would  not  have  suffered  it,  who 
were  so  careful  to  avoid  everything 
Levitically  unclean.  Though  Christ 
was  suffering  so  much  at  this  moment, 
and  was  about  to  suffer  so  much  more 
intensely,  He  forgot  Himself,  and 
thought  only  of  the  distress  of  those 
who  followed  Him  weeping  and  wailing, 
who  soon,  in  the  judgments  that  were 
hastening  to  fall  on  the  guilty  city, 
would  themselves  suffer  such  hitherto 
unknown  calamities  (Luke  xxiii.  27-31). 
— ff.  B.  Hackett,  D.D. 

Vers .  23-26.  The  mystery  of  eternity. 
Death  by  crucifixion  was  of  all  deaths 
the  most  shameful  and  most  horrible 
— a  pagan  penalty  that  Judaism  had 
never  adopted,  and  one  only  inflicted 
by  pagans  on  those  of  whom  it  was 
meant  to  make  a  horrible  example. 
Wounding  no  vital  part,  and  not 
robbing  the  victim  of  any  blood,  it 
was  a  death  horribly  lingering  ;  while 
infinite  varieties  of  anguish — from  the 
crushed  nerves,  from  the  weight  of  the 
body,  from  the  exposure  to  the  scorch- 
ing sun,  from  the  fever  set  up  by  the 
wounds,  and,  in  Christ's  case,  from  the 
back  ridged  and  furrowed,  where  each 
stroke  of  the  lash  had  cut  through  the 
flesh — all  conspired  to  make  it  a  death 
of  horror.  Yet  this  is  inflicted  on 
Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  whose  crime 
was  mercy,  whose  mission  here  was 
one  of  redeeming  love. 

I.  All  the  mysteries  of  human 
nature  are  here. — 1.  That  of  sin: 
depravity,  as  we  have  already  noted, 
shewing  itself  clearly  here,  and  demon- 
strating the  corruption  of  mankind. 
2.  That  of  free-will  is  here.  God 
restrains  our  sin  by  truth,  mercy,  grace, 
appeal,  and  warning,  but  not  by  force. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.         chap.  xV. 


Man's  freedom  to  wreck  his  immortal  when  He  has  been  with  us  in  passing 

nature   is   shewn   conspicuously   here,  through  the  waters,  He  has  changed 

3.  That  of  judgment  is  here  suggested  Jordan's  streams  into  still  waters  and 

strongly.      After    these    things   must  its  banks   to   green   pastures.     Death 

there  not  be  some  reckoning?  (Luke  fixed  its  sting  in  Christ  and  left  and 

xxiii.  31).  lost    it    there.     "  He    hath   abolished 

II.  The  mysteries  of  Divine  revela-  death  "  (2  Tim.  i.  10)  by  dying,  and  the 
tion  are  here. — Not  till  a,  man  has  consolations  of  peace  and  of  immortal 
seen  God  in  Christ  on  the  Cross  has  he  hope  come  from  it.  Thus  Christ's 
seen  God.  Here  all  marvels  of  God  Cross  is  our  Alpha  and  Omega,  glowing 
are  displayed.  1 .  The  mystery  of  God's  with  law  and  gospel,  comfort  and  con- 
love  is  here.  Nature  reveals  God's  straint,  power  and  peace ;  it  is  the  new 
wisdom  ;  providence,  His  mercy  and  tree  of  life  in  the  midst  of  life's  wilder- 
His  judgment ;  but  Calvary  reveals  ness.  Let  us  refuse  to  glory  save  in 
His  heart.  It  displays  God's  passion  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — 
of  mercy,  His  yearning  to  bless,  His  R.  Glover. 

appreciation    of    man,    His   power   of 

sacrifice.    2.  The  mystery  of  God's  meek-  Ver.      23.     "Wine     mingled     with 

ness  is  here.     Daily  He  turns  the  left  myrrh." — Literally,    "  myrrhed   wine," 

cheek  to  those  who  smote  the  right,  that    is,     drugged    wine,    to    produce 

and   men    mistake    His   patience    for  heartening  it  might  be  (see  Bartholi- 

indifference  to  their  faults.     Here  the  nus,  de  vino  myrrhato,  in  his  De  Cruce, 

meekness   and   lowliness  of   the  Lord  p.     136),    or    to    induce    comparative 

God  Almighty  are  displayed.     3.  The  anaesthesis  or  insensibility.     Myrrh  is 

mystery  of  God's  method  of  curing  sin  a  strong   stimulant.     The  administra- 

is  here.     By  enduring  its  strokes  He  tion   of    drugged    wine    to    criminals 

shames  and  vanquishes  transgression.  about  to  suffer  was  a  merciful  custom, 

III.  The  mysteries  of  salvation  are  which  relieved  to  a  small  degreei  the 
here. — 1.  For  here  is  atonement.  The  excessive  ferocity  so  characteristic  of 
sin  of  man  had  never  been  adequately  the  executions  of  those  olden  times  (see 
owned,  prayed  for,  counterbalanced.  Buxtorf's  Lexicon  Talmudic,  p.  2131, 
But  by  accepting  death — its  penalty —  and  Wetstein  in  loc.).  "  But  He  re- 
Christ  owns  the  death-worthiness  of  our  ceived  it  not."  Or,  as  the  reading  is  in 
sin.  In  His  prayer,  "  Father,  forgive  the  Sinaitic  and  Vatican  manuscripts, 
them  ;  they  know  not  what  they  do,"  and  "  the  queen  of  the  cursives  "  (33), 
He  makes  intercession  for  the  whole  who,  however,  received  it  not  (os  instead 
guilty  race.  And  there  is  enough  love,  of  o).  Our  Lord  did  not  wish  to  use 
faith,  obedience,  goodness,  in  Christ's  any  artificial  means  to  mitigate  or 
dying  to  more  than  balance  all  the  otherwise  modify  His  sense  of  the 
dishonour  a  world's  transgression  has  sufferings  connected  with  the  culmina- 
done  its  God.  This  owning,  praying  tion  of  His  work.  The  value  of  these 
for,  repairing  the  wrong  of  a  world's  sufferings  centred  in  the  free  activity 
transgression  is  atonement.  2.  Recon-  that,  first  of  all,  chose  their  endurance, 
ciliation  is  here  (John  x.  17;  1  John  in  consideration  of  the  sublime  moral 
iv.  19).  Our  love  meets  God's  love  ends  to  be  subserved,  and  then  self- 
there,  and  we  are  reconciled.  3.  The  sacrificingly  held  out,  under  their 
mystery  of  a  great  inspiration  is  here,  undiminished  superincumbence,  till  all 
Ever  since,  the  Cross  has  been  the  was  finished. — J.  Morison,  D.D. 
pattern  on  the  mount  which  holy  lives 

have  copied,  and  it  has  inspired  love  Vers.  24-25.  "When  they  had  crucified 

and  sacrifice  into  countless  hearts.  Him"  i.e.  when  they  had  affixed  Him 

IV.  All  mysteries  of  consolation  are  to  the  Cross.  A  world  of  pain  is  hidden 
here. — Had  Christ  evaded  death,  who  behind  these  simple  words.  Stripping 
would   have   dared   to   face   it  ?     But  the  Sufferer  of  cloak  and  coat,  the  outer 

587 


CHAP.   XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


and  inner  tunic,  the  soldiers  would 
place  Him  on  the  Cross  as  it  lay  on  the 
ground,  and,  stretching  His  arms  across 
the  cross-beam,  drive  the  point  of  a 
large  iron  nail  through  one  open  palm 
after  the  other  with  blows  from  a  mallet. 
They  would  then  draw  the  legs  down 
the  upright,  and  drive  another  such 
nail  through  either  foot,  or  perhaps 
through  both  together.  Then,  lifting 
the  Cross  into  its  socket,  fresh  pangs 
would  thrill  along  all  the  fine  and 
sensitive  nerves  thus  lacerated,  and 
the  whole  body  would  be  racked  with 
excruciating  pains.  All  this  He  en- 
dured for  us  men  and  our  salvation. 
And  it  seems  probable  that  it  was  at 
this  point  that,  instead  of  breaking 
into  a  scream  of  agony,  He  uttered  the 
prayer  for  His  murderers  which  Luke 
(xxiii.  34)  records,  "  Father,  forgive 
them;  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do."— S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Ver.  26.  "  The  King  of  the  Jews." 
— Jesus  is  a  King,  and  the  King  of  the 
Jews ;  and  neither  the  insult  of  Pilate, 
nor  the  anxious  denial  of  the  multitude, 
can  affect  the  reality  of  that  fact  in 
the  smallest  degree.  Though  humbled, 
insulted,  and  crucified,  Jesus  was  and  is 
at  once  the  King  of  Israel  and  the  Head 
and  Sovereign  of  every  immortal  man. 
To  Him  the  Almighty  has  assigned 
the  throne  of  His  father  David ;  and 
that  throne,  therefore,  He  needs  must 
occupy.  Nay,  He  has  been  exalted 
to  kingly  supremacy  over  the  whole 
universe ;  and  that  kingly  supremacy 
all  must  acknowledge,  or  perish. — 
J.  Cochrane. 

Vers.  27,  28.  Christ's  companions  in 
shame. — Pilate  may  have  to  surrender 
Barabbas,  the  leader  of  the  band,  to 
the  clamour  of  powerful  hypocrites ;  he 
all  the  more  readily  will  crucify  two  of 
his  comrades.  If  he  is  to  crucify  Christ, 
he  will  label  Him  "  King  of  the  Jews," 
and  give  Him  two  thieves  to  keep  Him 
company,  in  token  of  the  sort  of  nation 
He  would  have  to  rule.  The  fact  that 
such  association  dishonours  Christ  does 
not  prevent  him   ordering  it  when  it 

588 


may  give  him  the  sweets  of  a  little 
revenge  in  shewing  his  contempt  for 
everything  Jewish.  Yet  even  so  there 
is  something  very  instructive  as  the 
association  of  transgressors  with  Him 
in  His  death.  1.  It  is  suggestive  of  the 
philosophy  of  the  Atonement.  The 
prophecy  alluded  to  in  ver.  28  was 
quoted  by  Jesus  Himself  (Luke  xxii.  37), 
and  gives  the  simplest  theory  of  the 
Atonement  which  we  can  frame. 
Numbered  with  two  conspicuous  trans- 
gressors, the  fact  suggested  that  God 
had  "  numbered  "  Him  with  the  whole 
race  of  transgressors,  and  permitted  the 
common  penalty  of  the  world's  sin  to 
fall  on  Him.  He  is  associated  with  us 
in  our  curse,  that  we  may  be  associated 
with  Him  in  heavenly  bliss.  2.  Where 
most  need  and  misery  are,  there  Christ 
always  is.  On  His  Cross  He  is  near 
those  dying  on  a  cross.  He  is  always 
nearest  the  neediest.  3.  Be  not  over- 
solicitous  of  reputation.  Christ  is 
classed  with  thieves,  Paul  with  deceivers. 
One  of  the  most  universal  of  afflictions 
for  Christ's  sake  is  being  misunderstood. 
Marvel  not  if  your  name  be  "cast  out 
as  evil." — R.  Glover. 

Ver.  28.  Fulfilment  of  Scripture  at 
the  Crucifixion. — Above  every  other 
aspect,  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  was 
fulfilment.  Let  any  one  familiar 
with  the  language  of  prophet  and 
psalmist  pencil -mark  every  one  of 
their  words,  verses,  and  versicles  found 
in  the  Evangelists'  story  of  Calvary. 
The  result  will  be  a  well-underscored 
page,  and  the  effect  very  striking  to 
the  eye.  In  the  Greek  text,  like  that 
of  Westcott  and  Hort,  where  Old 
Testament  language  is  printed  in  un- 
cial or  capital  letter  type,  the  effect 
is  startling.  From  many  angles  of 
vision  the  seers  of  truth  in  the  past 
ages  caught  glimpses  of  history's  most 
august  figure.  Many  are  the  photo- 
graphic outlines  set  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment pages  of  the  Sinless  Victim ;  but 
they  are  in  profile  or  silhouette.  Not 
one  is  perfect,  none  full-face  or  express 
image.  Even  they  who  wrote  down 
their  visions  could  not  fully  compre 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.   XV. 


hend  and  interpret  what  they  saw. 
Nevertheless,  while  inquiring  and 
searching  diligently  of  the  salvation 
to  come,  they  searched  what  or  what 
manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when 
it  testified  beforehand  of  the  sufferings 
of  the  Messiah  and  the  glory  that 
should  follow. 

Vers.  29-32.  Mockers  at  the  Cross. 
— One  does  not  know  whether  the 
blindness  or  the  cruelty  of  these  words 
is  the  more  wonderful.  There  is 
nothing  so  cruel  or  so  blind  as  religious 
hatred. 

I.  Christ's  Cross  apparently  shatters 
to  fragments  Christ's  claims. — Either 
Jesus  Christ  died  and  rose  again  from 
the  dead,  and  then  He  is  the  Son  of 
God,  and  God  hath  exalted  Him  to  be 
a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  as  He  claimed 
to  be  ;  or  He  died  like  other  men,  and 
there  is  an  end  of  it.  And  then  it  is 
no  use  to  talk  about  Him  as  a  wise 
Teacher  and  a  lovely  perfect  character, 
He  is  a  fanatical  Enthusiast,  all  the 
beauty  of  whose  religious  teaching  is 
marred  and  spoiled  by  the  extravagant 
personal  claims  which  He  attached 
to  it.  We  must  dismiss  the  fair  dream 
of  a  perfect  Man,  unless  we  are  pre- 
pared to  go  further  and  say,  an 
Incarnate  God. 

II.  The  Cross  of  Christ  is  a  neces- 
sity, to  which  He  voluntarily  sub- 
mitted in  order  to  save  a  world. — 
These  men  only  needed  to  alter  one 
letter  to  be  grandly  and  gloriously 
right.  If,  instead  of  "  could  not," 
they  had  said  "  would  not,"  they 
would  have  grasped  the  very  heart  of 
the  power  and  the  very  central  bright- 
ness of  the  glory  of  Christianity.  It 
was  His  own  will,  and  no  outward 
necessity,  that  fastened  Him  there ; 
and  that  will  was  kept  steadfast  and 
immovable  by  nothing  else  but  His 
love — He  Himself  fixed  the  iron  chain 
which  bound  Him.  He  made  the 
"  cannot."  It  was  His  love  that  made 
it  impossible  that  He  should  relinquish 
the  task ;  therefore  His  steely  will, 
like  a  strong  spring  constantly  work- 


ing, kept  Him  close  up  against  the 
sharp  edge  of  the  knife  that  cut  into 
His  very  heart's  life. 

III.  The  Cross  is  the  throne  of 
Christ. — His  dominion  is  a  dominion 
based  upon  suffering,  and  wielded  in 
gentleness  and  meekness ;  and  the 
crown  of  thorns  lies  beneath  the  many 
diadems  that  He  wears  in  heaven. 
The  sceptre  of  reed,  light,  fragile, 
emblem  of  a  meek  and  merciful  do- 
minion that  lays  a  light  and  loving 
hand  upon  the  inner  springs  of  the 
will,  and  commands  by  serving,  is  a 
stronger  rod  of  dominion  than  all 
golden  jewel- tipped  sceptres  that 
monarchs  bear. 

IV.  The  death  of  Christ  is  the 
great  proof  that  God  had  delight  in 
Him. — Mystery  of  mysteries,  where 
blend  all  opposites  in  harmonious 
reconcilement :  Divine  justice  and 
Divine  righteousness ;  the  extremities 
of  humiliation  and  the  superlative  of 
exaltation :  life  and  death,  the  Divine 
forsaking  and  the  Divine  complacency. 
— A<  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  31.  Truth  in  mockery. — Many 
true  things  have  been  said  in  jest. 
This  is  one.  Never  did  a  more  impor- 
tant truth  fall  from  the  lips  of  a  scoffer. 

I.  A  great  tribute  involuntarily 
accorded  to  Jesus. — "  He  saved  others." 
They  practically  condemn  their  own 
unbelief  and  their  treatment  of  Him 
by  making  this  admission.  Even  His 
bitterest  enemies  could  find  nothing 
worse  to  say  about  Him  than  this — 
that  He  had  spent  His  life  in  acts 
of  self-sacrificing  love.  And  yet  they 
have  no  compunction  in  hounding  to 
death  the  One  True  Benefactor  of  man- 
kind! 

II.  A  declaration  true  in  one  sense, 
false  in  another. — "  Himself  He  cannot 
save."  1.  Not  true  in  the  sense  they 
meant.  (1)  That  God  had  disowned 
Him  as  an  impostor.  (2)  That  He 
was  unable  from  want  of  power. 
2.  But  most  blessedly  true  in  a  sense 
far  beyond  their  comprehension. 
(1)  Christ's  sufferings  and  death  were 
part  of  a  Divine  plan.     (2)  They  ful- 

589 


CHAP.    XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


filled  a  pledge  given  (Gen.  iii.  15). 
(3)  The  object  to  be  attained  by  them. 
(a)  God's  honour,     (b)  Man's  rescue. 

Ver.  32.  Sight  not  conducive  to  faith. 
— An  earnest  desire  to  see  is  but  a  very- 
ill  disposition  in  order  to  believe.  Had 
Christ  descended  from  the  cross  and 
not  died,  all  faith  had  been  quite 
destroyed,  and  He  could  not  have  been 
either  the  Author  or  Finisher  of  it.  See 
here  another  delusion  of  human  pride, 
to  imagine  that  miracles  are  of  them- 
selves sufficient  to  engage  men  to 
believe — as  if  faith  were  not  a  gift  of 
God.  These  men  will  believe,  they  say, 
if  Christ  save  Himself  from  death — 
when  they  themselves  had  seen  Him 
raise  one  who  had  been  dead  four  days, 
without  any  other  effect  than  increas- 
ing in  envy,  incredulity,  and  hardness 
of  heart.  So  greatly  does  the  sinner 
deceive  himself. — P.  Quesnel. 

Ver.  33.  The  veiled  Cross.— -The 
darkening  of  the  sun  was  the  testimony 
of  nature  to  her  dying  Lord.  It  is  a 
hint  of  the  truth  that  creation  is 
dependent  on  Him,  that  nature  is 
supported  by  unseen  and  spiritual 
powers,  that  the  fate  of  the  earth 
ultimately  rests  on  that  of  the  "  kingdom 
of  God." 

I.  The  suggestions  of  this  darkness. 
— 1.  It  indicated  the  going  out  of 
the  world's  Light.  2.  It  represented 
the  ignorance  of  the  Gentiles  and  the 
malignity  of  the  Jews.  3.  It  reminds 
us  of  the  mystery  of  the  Atonement. 
Christ  went  into  the  darkness  to  save 
us  from  darkness ;  and  when  the  gloom 
passed  away,  and  the  sun  shone  upon 
the  Cross,  the  restored  light  was  like 
the  bow  of  promise  after  the  Flood,  a 
sign  of  peace  between  man  and  God. 

II.  The  effects  of  the  darkness  upon 
those  who  surrounded  the  Cross. — 
1.  It  increased  the  solemnity  of  the 
event.  2.  It  veiled  His  agony  from 
those  around.  3.  It  whispered  warn- 
ing to  the  impenitent. — A.  Rowland. 

The  supernatural  darkness. — It  was 
not  occasioned  by  an  eclipse,  for  the 
full  moon  cannot  intervene  between  the 

590 


earth  and  the  sun.  It  was  no  doubt 
supernaturally  contrived  or  overruled, 
as  a  fringe  of  the  entire  supernatural 
drapery  of  the  great  supernatural  event 
which  was  transpiring  within  the 
Sufferer  on  the  Cross.  Not  that  any 
universal  laws  were  contravened  or 
suspended.  But  a  new  force  came  in, 
which  limited  the  scope  and  modified 
the  direction  of  the  other  forces  that 
were  ordinarily  at  work.  Or  when  we 
go  to  the  ultimates  of  thought,  and  to 
the  corresponding  ultimates  of  objective 
reality,  we  may  represent  the  case  thus 
— a  peculiar  volition  took  place  in  the 
Divine  mind,  which  modified  the  action, 
in  that  particular  scene,  of  the  omni- 
potent Divine  hand.  It  was  meet  that 
there  should  be  around  our  Lord  a 
penumbra  of  darkness.  It  at  once 
reflected  the  mediatorial  eclipse  that 
was  going  on  within,  and  cast  a  fitting 
shade  over  the  guilty  population  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  scene. — 
J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Ver.  34.  The  causes  of  Christ's  deso- 
lation.— Though  we  cannot  understand 
this  sorrow  of  our  dear  Lord,  because 
to  us,  perhaps,  to  be  forsaken  of  God 
would  mean  so  little — though  we  feel 
that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  a 
mystery  we  cannot  fathom,  whose 
depths  we  cannot  enter,  at  whose  brink 
we  can  but  stand  and  wonder  and  adore, 
— yet  we  may  in  reverence  consider 
three  causes  which  seem  to  have  pro- 
duced this  element  of  the  Sacred  Passion. 

1.  The  first  cause  of  this  awful  desola- 
tion was  the  fact  of  the  accumulated 
sin  of  the  whole  world,  from  the  dis- 
obedience of  Eden  down  to  the  last 
intention  of  sin  that  shall  be  disturbed 
by  the  archangel's  trumpet,  resting 
upon  one  Human  Soul,  to  whom  the 
faintest  shadow  of  sin  was  intolerable. 

2.  The  second  cause  was  the  gathering 
of  the  hosts  of  darkness,  vanquished  in 
the  wilderness,  and  in  the  garden,  and 
in  many  of  the  souls  they  had  possessed, 
but  now,  rallied  and  marshalled  and 
massed  for  one  last  supreme  effort, 
hurling  themselves  with  the  fury  of 
despair  and  hate  upon  their  Vanquisher. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.         chap.  xv. 


3.  The  third  cause  was  the  hiding  of  '  He  was  made  flesh/  Into  what 
the  Father's  face.  He  who  is  of  purer  mysterious  contact  with  the  sinfulness 
eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  could  not  to  which  the  flesh  of  man  had  given 
look  even  upon  His  beloved  Son,  when  itself  that  *  being  made  flesh '  brought 
deluged  thus  in  our  sin.  Him  I  know  no  man  has  ever  fathomed. 
"  He  hides  His  face  from  sinners,  If  I  try  to  fathom  it  at  all,  I  can  only 
He  hideth  it  from  Thee."  picture  to  myself  the  most  Christlike 
And  what  is  all  this  but  hell  itself  !  act,  the  most  Messianic  entrance  into 
To  be  deluged  in  sin,  literally  sin-ful,  the  strange  and  dreadful  fate  of  other 
to  be  surrounded  and  attacked  and  men  which  my  imagination  can  con- 
tormented  on  all  sides  by  devils,  to  be  ceive."  The  perfectly  Holy  One  did 
hidden  from  the  light  of  God's  counte-  bear  sin,  and  out  of  the  horrible  abyss 
nance — what  is  all  this  but  the  foretaste  into  which  He  had  plunged  came  the 
of   that  misery  of  outer   darkness,   of  agonising  cry. 

weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  of  ever-  The  last  temptation  and  triumph. — 

lasting  destruction  from  the  presence  These  words  are  a  quotation  from  the 

of   God — the  final  awfulness  of  unre-  twenty- second  Psalm.     Are  they  not 

pented  sin. — H.  S.  Miles.  more  an  appropriation   of   the   whole 

The  forsaking  of  Christ  by  His  Father.  psalm  ?    The  words  directed  the  disciples 

— All  His  other  sufferings  seem  small  to  it  as  pointing  out  the  current  of  His 

by  the  side  of  this  ;  they  bore  rather  thoughts  and  expressing  His  condition, 

upon  His  body,  this   upon  His  soul ;  Thus  they  direct  us,  and  in  the  psalm 

they  came  from  the  hands  of  men,  but  and  its  character  we  must  look  for  the 

this  from  His  Father.     1.  This  was  a  meaning  and  significance  of   His  cry. 

penal  forsaking,  inflicted  on  Christ  for  Pitying   them    amid    His    agony,    He 

the  satisfaction  of  our  sins.     2.  It  was  cannot   tell  them   all ;   but  calling  to 

a  real  forsaking,  not  a  fictitious  one.  mind  the  old  familiar  hymn,  let  them 

The  Father  kept  back  at  this  time  all  find  His  heart  and  its  experience  and 

the  joys,  comforts,  and  love  from  Christ  triumph  there.     Read   that  psalm  as 

the  Man.     3.  This  forsaking  took  place  such,  and  however  darkly  it  opens,  that 

in  the  very  time  of  Christ's  need.     Yet  only  makes  more  glorious  the  psalmist's 

His   soul   still  cleaves   to  God  for  all  testimony.      It    is    the    history   of   a 

this. — Jas.  Lonsdale.  passionate  soul  passing  through  fierce 

Why   God  forsakes. — For    our    sins,  discipline   and   suffering    to   confident 

worldliness,  carelessness,  coldness,  God  security  and  triumph,  feeling  its  way 

justly  forsakes  us.     Let  us  look  dili-  through  weakness  to  strength,  proving 

gently  for  the  cause.     Let  us  ask,  "  Is  each  step  how  faithful,  how  wonderful, 

it  in  this  thing  or  in  that,  that  we  have  is  the  abiding  presence  and  keeping  of 

grieved  Thy  Holy  Spirit  ?     What  duty  God.     The  passionate  cry  of  its  opening 

have  we  neglected  ?     What  evil  temper  verse  is  but  the  vivid  sense  of  need,  and 

shewn  ?     Do  our  thoughts  wander  in  emphasises  the  needlessness  of  all  fear, 

prayer  ?     Are  we  formalists  ?     Are  we  the   sureness   of   God's    enclosing   and 

unthankful  for  Thy  love  ? "     So  let  us  faithful  deliverance — the  impossibility 

search  our  spirits  that  nothing  escape  of   being  forsaken,  for    "  God  delivers 

us. — Ibid.  even  from  the  horns  of  the  unicorn." 

The   cry  of  desertion. —  Speaking   of  Christ's  utterance  told  truly  His  suffer- 

the   words   uttered  by  Christ  in  this  ing  and  need,  but  pointed  directly  to 

terrible  moment  of  loneliness,  one  says  :  the  sureness  of  His  triumph  and  glory. 

"  When  I  read  what  men  have  written  By   the   very    words  He   chooses   He 

to  explain  the  meaning  of  Jesus  in  that  would  seem   to   be   feeling   after   and 

cry,    I    always  feel  anew   how   much  touching  His   disciples'  inner  thought 

deeper  than  our   comprehension  went  and  weakness,  forestalling  as  it  were 

His  identification  with  humanity  when  their   despairful  fears  and   conclusion 

He  plunged  into  the  darkness  of  its  sin.  when  the  tragedy  shall  be  complete ; 

591 


CHAP.    XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


and  by  pointing  in  such  words  their 
u  ncompr  eh  ending  thought,  and  carrying 
their  minds  to  this  psalm,  He  would 
comfort  them  in  its  assurances  and 
give  them  its  hope  and  security.  Looked 
at  in  the  light  of  the  whole  psalm, 
Christ  is  standing  face  to  face  with 
His  sacrifice  and  work,  facing  its  temp- 
tation and  measuring  Himself  with  it. 
The  shadow  which  has  crept  nearer  and 
nearer,  vague  but  threatening,  and 
deepening  into  awfulness,  through  His 
whole  ministry,  at  length  is  known  and 
felt,  has  become  palpable  and  distinct, 
and  holds  Him  ;  and  He  must  know 
its  meaning  and  measure.  Isolating 
Him  from  human  sympathy,  it  insinu- 
ates Him  isolated  from  God  also.  The 
fear  of  the  psalmist  grows  distinct  and 
forceful  before  His  broken  and  suffer- 
ing spirit,  challenging  His  faith  ;  He 
takes  it  up,  and  through  it  moves  into 
the  confidence  of  the  psalmist.  "  God 
doth  not  abhor  the  affliction  of  the 
afflicted."  He  hurls  the  insinuation, 
baffled  and  destroyed,  from  Him  by 
His  clear  consciousness  and  confidence 
in  the  Father.  He  has  measured  His 
strength  and  resources,  and  can  drink 
the  cup  He  has  accepted,  and,  drinking 
it,  His  work  is  finished. — S.  D.  Thomas. 

Yer.  37.  The  death  of  Christ  reveals 
— 1.  His  perfect  humanity.  2.  A 
completed  work  of  self-sacrifice.  3. 
The  completeness  of  His  rejection 
by  the  world.  4.  The  completion 
of  the  old  dispensation.  5.  A  com- 
pleted salvation.  We  instinctively 
expect  consistency  in  a  great  and 
good  man's  death.  We  feel  he  ought 
to  leave  the  trail  of  his  greatness 
behind  him.  His  dying  influence 
should  adorn  what  he  leaves  as 
witness  to  his  worth.  So  Christ  dies, 
sinking  to  rest  as  the  setting  sun 
in  a  stormful  sky,  making  His  life's 
close  His  triumph.  You  have  seen 
the  broken  banks  of  storm-clouds 
massed  in  the  heavy  west  of  a  winter's 
sky,  with  broken  dun  cloudlets  float- 
ing through  monotonous  grey,  changed 
into  splendour  by  the  sinking  sun, 
flushed   into   rose   and   floating    islets 

592 


of  light  and  gold,  and  then  the 
many  tints  deepening  into  the  deep 
purple  of  evening's  quiet.  So  Christ 
passed  and  sank  to  rest,  so  set  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness,  changing  the 
storm,  the  tragedy,  and  Cross  by 
heroism,  wondrous  words  and  prayers, 
into  light  and  glory,  deepening  into 
serenity  and  rest.  There  was  such 
a  nobleness  and  greatness  in  the 
whole  we  cannot  think  of  it  as  death  ; 
it  was  but  a  setting,  His  life's  work 
crowned. — Ibid. 

Yer.  38.  The  veil  rent. — This  veil 
formed  the  first  mark  of  distinction 
which  was  observed  in  the  use  of 
the  Temple  with  respect  to  the  several 
gradations  of  those  who  worshipped 
therein.  In  these  gradations  con- 
sisted a  feature  of  the  Jewish  Church 
which  was  not  to  be  preserved  in  that 
which  was  to  succeed  it.  In  the 
new  temple  there  was  to  be  no  family 
like  Aaron's,  no  tribe  like  Levi's,  no 
nation  like  the  Israelites.  The  par- 
tition walls  between  outward  and 
inner  court,  between  the  temple  and 
its  holy  of  holies,  were  all  broken 
down ;  and  the  idolater  who  came 
in  at  the  eleventh  hour  was  as  free 
of  the  new  temple  as  the  converted 
son  of  Abraham,  whose  fathers  had 
served  there  from  the  first  dawn  and 
early  morning  of  the  Church.  See 
Heb.  ix.  1-8,  x.  16-22.— &  Hinds. 

Yer.  39.  Recognising  nobleness. — 
Next  to  being  noble  is  the  ability  to 
recognise  nobleness  in  others.  In  fact, 
this  ability  indicates  a  measure  of  noble- 
ness in  oneself  ;  the  recognition  is  a 
proof  of  kinship.  It  is  in  this  as  it  is  in 
every  other  line  of  observation  and  of 
outreaching :  one's  perceptions  and 
attractions  and  repulsions  are  the 
truest  test  of  one's  personal  character. 
The  next  thing  to  being  manly  is 
to  recognise  and  honour  manliness 
in  another.  The  next  thing  to  being 
unselfish  is  to  recognise  and  honour 
unselfishness  in  another.  The  next 
thing  to  being  pure  is  to  recognise 
and  honour  purity  in  another.     And 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


CHAP.   XV. 


the  next  thing  to  being  Christlike 
is  to  perceive  the  likeness  of  Christ ; 
indeed,  to  perceive  Christ's  likeness 
is  in  itself  to  be  Christlike. — H.  C. 
Trumbull. 

Vers.  40,  41.  Women  at  the  Cruci- 
fixion.— How  true  to  the  purpose  of 
woman's  creation  as  the  helpmeet 
of  man  was  the  association  of 
these  faithful,  clinging  souls  with 
their  Lord  in  His  passion !  And  He, 
in  the  perfection  of  His  manhood, 
did  not  refuse  the  comfort  of  their 
presence.  As  He  looked  down  upon 
that  little  group  of  loving  faces  in 
the  midst  of  the  pitiless  crowd  that 
was  now  surging  round  His  Cross, 
we  may  reverently  believe  that  the 
Son  of  Man  found  a  little  comfort 
in  their  true-hearted  devotion,  seeing 
in  them  the  firstfruits  of  the  faithful 
of  all  time,  in  whom  He  should  see 
of  the  travail  of  His  soul. — H.  S. 
Miles. 

Woman's  ministry  to  Christ. — If 
such  a  thing  is  possible,  the  Saviour 
had  done  much  more  for  woman  than 
for  man.  Some  who  have  rejected 
the  gospel  (Comte,  for  instance)  have 
been  the  readiest  to  admit  that  it  has 
raised  the  status  of  women  immeasur- 
ably. Of  the  many  elements  in  the 
gospel  which  have  contributed  to  this, 
nothing  has  been  more  operative  than 
the  services  which  the  Saviour  has 
received  from  woman's  hand.  The 
gospel  gave  them  a  noble  cause,  to 
be  advanced  by  methods  of  holiest 
peace ;  it  engaged  the  love  which 
made  such  service  a  delight,  and  gave 


the  grace  which  crowned  it  with 
supreme  success.  The  ministry  of 
women  to  the  Rabbis  was  a  recognised 
thing ;  and  Jesus,  in  His  homeless 
greatness  and  in  His  Divine  poverty, 
could  receive  the  gentle  tendance  of 
Galilean  matrons  without  reproach. 
(1)  It  is  a  great  cause  which  enlists 
the  best  feelings  of  the  best  women 
on  its  side.  (2)  Some  might  have 
objected  to  their  going  there,  asking, 
"  What  good  could  possibly  be  done  ?  " 
In  dealing  with  such  questions  it  is 
always  safer  to  trust  to  the  instincts 
of  affection  than  to  our  reason.  Their 
heart  bade  them  stand  beside  Him, 
and,  doing  so,  they  gave  a  testi- 
mony greatly  needed  and  of  richest 
worth,  and  found  themselves  ready  to 
help    Joseph    in    his    gracious    task. 

(3)  Mary  Magdalene,  "  out  of  whom 
went  seven  demons "  (Luke  viii.  2), 
ought  to  be  regarded  as  having  been 
a  great  sufferer  whom  Christ  relieved, 
not  as  a  great  sinner  whom  Christ 
forgave.  We  have  in  her  action  the 
full    beauty    of    gratitude    displayed. 

(4)  Mary,  wife  of  Cleophas  (or 
Alpheus,  for  these  are  two  forms 
of  one  name),  is  another  instance  of  a 
good  mother  having  good  sons.  When 
we  see  her  heroic  love,  and  that 
of  Salome,  who  stands  beside  her, 
we  do  not  marvel  that  each  of  them 
is     the     mother      of     two     apostles. 

(5)  What  honour  these  women  find, 
without  having  a  single  thought  of 
working  for  it !  So  honour  ever  flies 
those  who  seek,  but  seeks  those  who 
merit  it.  See  to  thy  work,  and  God 
will  see  to  your  reward. — R.  Glover. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  42—47. 

(Parallels  :  Matt,  xxvii.  57-61 ;  Luke  xxiii.  50-56.) 

Seasons  of  trial,  times  of  preparation. — The  unrenewed  mind  is  not  subject 
to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be.  Things  seen  and  temporal  have  a 
tendency  to  carnalise  the  affections,  and  we  are  apt  to  forget  whence  we  come, 
what  we  are  doing,  and  whither  we  are  going.  He  therefore  who  is  preparing 
for  a  happy  immortality  gladly  embraces  seasons  peculiarly  devoted  to  the 
concerns  of  the  soul.  A  pious  divine  has  justly  remarked  that  one  part  of  the 
week  is  properly  adapted  for  reflexion,  and  the  other  for  preparation.  A  time 
of  preparation,  generally,  is  a  season  of  trial,  and  is  painful  to  flesh  and  blood. 

QQ  593 


chap.  xv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


Training  is  not  enjoyment,  but  the  means  by  which  it  is  acquired.  The  way 
to  heaven  is  through  a  wilderness  and  by  a  vale  of  tears.  Times  of  refreshing 
revivals  are  ushered  in  by  a  night  of  preparation,  often  dark  and  portentous. 
What  may  be  said  of  the  state  of  the  Church  is  also  true  of  every  individual ; 
it  is  a  time  of  preparation,  because  every  individual  is  either  preparing  for 
happiness  or  misery. 

I.  Times  of  preparation  in  the  Church  are  seasons  of  trial. — Every  individual 
who  is  acquainted  with  the  history  of  the  Church  knows  that  it  has  undergone 
various  changes.  It  is  subject  to  incessant  fluctuations,  and  either  is  progressing 
or  retrograding.  Such  a  state  of  things  may  be  expected  under  the  spiritual 
warfare  in  which  the  Church  is  engaged.  If  we  fix  our  attention  on  that  even 
of  preparation  referred  to  in  the  text  and  connect  with  it  past  events  and  those 
which  immediately  succeeded,  we  shall  be  fully  convinced  that  a  time  of  preparation 
is  a  season  of  trial.  After  the  Babylonish  captivity  the  Jews  were  little  given 
to  idolatry.  The  means  of  instruction  were  more  widely  diffused,  and  with  this 
change  of  circumstances  the  carnality  of  their  heart  operated  in  new  channels. 
Satan  adapted  his  temptations  to  their  moral  state,  and  while  externally  they 
worshipped  God  the  internal  homage  of  the  heart  was  withheld.  Their  religion 
was  a  form  of  godliness  without  its  power.  At  this  period  the  heathen  nations 
lay  prostrate  at  the  feet  of  Satan ;  and  the  Jews,  with  few  exceptions,  yielded 
to  his  will.  During  this  even  of  preparation  Simeon  had  a  few  sons,  and  Anna 
some  daughters,  who  observed  the  aspect  of  the  times,  and  waited  for  the 
Consolation  of  Israel.  The  sceptre  had  departed  from  Judah,  and  every  event 
seemed  to  hasten  the  grand  consummation  foretold  by  the  prophets.  An 
astonishing  Personage  appeared,  in  whom  their  hopes  centred.  With  wisdom 
unequalled,  benevolence  unwearied,  and  power  uncontrollable,  He  seemed  to  be 
the  Desire  of  all  nations.  Hosannas  ascend  to  His  praise,  and  He  is  welcomed 
as  the  anticipated  Deliverer  of  Israel.  He  announces  that  His  kingdom  is  not 
of  this  world,  and  the  crowd  cease  their  acclamations — He  reproves  vice,  and 
sinners  overawed  retire,  determined  on  His  destruction.  The  hour  and  the 
power  of  darkness  was  come,  and  the  Saviour  of  mankind  was  apprehended, 
insulted,  and  nailed  to  the  accursed  tree  between  two  malefactors.  The  Saviour 
bowed  His  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  This  was,  if  not  the  hour  of  despair 
to  spiritual  Israelites,  at  least  it  was  the  even  of  preparation — the  season  of 
trial.  Even  those  who  had  imbibed  the  spirit  of  prophecy  had  much  to  agitate 
and  perplex  their  minds.  The  promises  of  God  they  could  not  doubt,  but  how 
they  were  to  receive  fulfilment  was  beyond  their  comprehension.  The  faithful 
disciples  were  scattered  as  sheep  without  a  shepherd.  The  mangled  body  of 
the  Saviour  was  entombed ;  and  hope,  though  still  lingering  in  the  breast, 
scarcely  durst  embody  a  wish.  The  Jewish  Sabbath  passed,  and  a  slumbering 
Saviour  burst  the  bands  of  death  asunder,  triumphed  over  death,  and  him  who 
had  the  power  of  death.  The  preparation  over,  the  trial  in  the  Divine  economy 
had  accomplished  its  purpose,  and  a  different  scene  is  now  presented  to 
our  contemplation.  A  triumphant  Saviour,  enraptured  disciples,  a  stupefied 
Sanhedrin,  an  amazed  multitude,  a  Conqueror  ascending  on  high,  bearing  gifts 
for  men,  the  Spirit  bestowed  at  Pentecost,  the  heralds  of  the  Cross  endowed  with 
miraculous  gifts,  numbers  added  to  the  Church,  and  Christianity  proclaimed 
throughout  the  vast  extent  of  the  Roman  Empire.  The  night  of  diffidence, 
doubt,  and  perplexity  was  the  immediate  harbinger  of  confidence,  assurance, 
and  clear  manifestations  of  Heaven's  approbation.  In  proportion  as  the  even 
of  preparation  was  awfully  portentous  and  severely  trying,  so  were  the  triumphs 
which  followed  and  the  pleasures  which  the  faithful  enjoyed. 

II.  Life  is  a  time  of  preparation  for  every  individual,  and  either  works 
for  his  good  or  evil  according  as  he  is  exercised. — From  a  consideration  of 

594 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.         chap.  xv. 


the  character  of  the  Creator,  we  conclude  that  benevolence  is  an  essential 
attribute  of  His  nature,  and  that  His  tender  mercies  will  appear  throughout 
all  His  works.  This  world,  as  wheeled  into  space,  was  crowned  with  beauty. 
It  was  worthy  of  the  creating  hand  of  a  benevolent  Being,  and  a  suitable  abode 
for  innocence  and  happy  creatures.  Every  creature  is  unite,  and,  coming  perfect 
from  the  hand  of  God,  may  become  imperfect  from  personal  acts.  By  the  Fall 
man  was  not  only  liable  to  punishment,  but  had  become  morally  depraved. 
Christ  by  dying  bore  the  penalty  of  a  violated  law,  and  thus  delivered  believers 
from  punishment,  and  He  procured  the  agency  of  the  Spirit  to  create  the 
heart  anew,  and  thus  restored  the  Divine  image  which  was  lost  by  sin.  The 
deliverance  from  punishment  which  Christ  effected  for  believers  is  an  act,  and 
is  called  "  justification "  ;  the  renewing  of  the  heart  is  a  work,  and  is  called 
"  sanctification."  The  latter  being  progressive,  though  an  act  of  grace,  is 
accomplished  by  means.  Life  to  Christians  frequently  is  a  chequered  scene, 
and  at  every  remarkable  stage  of  their  pilgrimage  to  eternity  fresh  proofs  of 
an  unseen  directing  Power  are  furnished.  They  are  often  led  by  a  way  which 
they  know  not,  and  conducted  to  an  issue  which  they  did  not  anticipate. 
Ordinary  occurrences  are  much  under  our  own  control,  and  by  certain  modes 
of  action  we  can  in  not  a  few  cases  predict  the  result.  Circumstances,  how- 
ever, which  we  did  not  foresee,  and  which  from  our  ignorance  of  the  cause  we 
term  accidents,  give  new  directions  to  our  plans,  and  change  in  a  greater  or 
less  degree  the  aspect  of  our  personal  history.  Prosperity  engenders  pride,  and 
adversity  balances  in  some. minds  the  actuating  powers.  A  sickly  existence 
may  preserve  the  soul  in  health.  Bereavements  loosen  the  heart  from  created 
objects.  All  works  for  the  good  of  the  Christian,  and  the  fluctuations  to  which 
he  is  exposed,  prepare  his  mind  for  the  spiritual  employments  of  heaven. 
Every  individual  in  future  will  be  rewarded  according  to  his  works.  As  we 
sow  so  shall  we  reap.  He  that  sows  sparingly  shall  reap  also  sparingly. 
Among  the  angelic  host  there  are  various  degrees,  and  though  all  are  happy 
in  heaven  the  capacity  for  enjoyment  is  infinitely  varied.  As  vessels  all  are 
full  to  overflowing,  but  all  cannot  partake  of  the  same  extent  of  enjoyment. 
In  the  joy  of  our  Lord  as  we  have  employed  our  talents  so  will  be  the  measure 
of  our  reward. — A.  Robertson. 

The  'dead  Christ. — Here  we  behold  the  dead  Christ.  We  follow  not  the 
departed  spirit  in  its  sojourn  till  the  third  day,  or  speculate  on  its  disembodied 
occupation.  We  do  not  attempt  to  dwell  on  the  incarnate  mystery  of  the  Son 
of  God  still  united  to  the  body  of  death.  We  contemplate  the  sacred  body, 
the  movements  of  affection  and  faith  called  forth  by  it,  and  the  providential 
circumstances  attending  the  sepulture. 

I.  The  reality  of  the  dead  Christ. — 1.  The  body  of  Jesus.  How  affecting 
the  sight  of  a  dead  body  !  Motionless,  inert,  cold,  and  pale  :  the  blood  no  longer 
circulates,  the  heart  has  ceased  to  beat  or  the  bosom  to  heave,  the  eye  emits  no 
flash — all  is  fixed,  dull,  marbled,  and  silent.  Deaf,  dumb,  blind,  palsied,  beauty 
itself  vanishes,  corruption  hastens,  the  last  feature  is  obliterated,  and  all  that 
remains  is  the  lifeless  clay.  And  this  was  the  powerful  frame,  the  fair 
countenance,  the  fine  organisation  ;  this  was  the  active,  indefatigable  machine 
of  life ;  this  was  the  outward  man,  and  tabernacle  of  the  friendship  and  love  of 
home  and  of  business  life,  that  have  passed  into  memory.  How  immeasurably 
affecting  to  gaze  on  the  dead  body  of  a  friend,  and  that  the  nearest  and  dearest 
of  the  earth,  and  the  most  revered,  on  whom  we  have  trusted,  depended,  and 
with  whom  we  have  taken  sweet  counsel — a  guardian  and  a  friend,  a  more  than 
half  of  our  soul !  How  keenly  all  this  was  felt  by  the  stunned  disciples  and 
the  mourning  women  as  they  gazed  on  the  lifeless  form  still  suspended  on  the 

595 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


cross,  and  withdrew,  leaving  it  in  the  rough  custody  of  the  soldiers,  possibly  to 
behold  it  no  more  !  2.  The  dead  body  of  Jesus.  More  than  the  common  mystery 
of  death  is  here.  This  was  He  "  who  should  have  redeemed  Israel."  This  was 
He  who  seemed  death-proof,  who  had  power  over  death,  who  gave  back  to  the 
widow  of  Nain  her  son  from  the  bier,  and  Lazarus  to  his  sisters  from  his  four 
days'  grave.  This  was  He  who  did  so  many  "  mighty  works  "  that  all  marvelled. 
Yet  here  death  has  laid  its  cold  grasp  even  upon  Him.  "  Son  of  Man,"  "  Son 
of  Abraham,"  "  Son  of  David,"  "  Son  of  God,"  so  named,  so  proved,  so  believed, 
and  held,  and  loved ;  yet  is  this  His  dead,  His  pulseless  form.  How  comes  it 
that  death  hath  this  "  dominion  over  Him  "  ?  They  are  not  yet  able  rightly 
to  answer.  "  Great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness."  "Crucified  through  weakness." 
Lo!  the  dead  Christ.  3.  Where  is  redemption  now?  What  chapter,  what 
verse,  is  this  ?  Where  stands  the  world,  the  Church,  redeemed  or  unredeemed  ? 
Was  redemption  yet  complete  ?  It  was  impossible,  doubtless,  for  Christ  to  fail — 
impossible  for  the  Son  of  God.  Yet  we  see  how  slight-seeming  are  the  links  of 
events,  how  frail -looking  is  the  agency,  how  hopeless  to  all  sense  as  we  gaze 
on  the  dead  Christ !  The  wisdom  of  God  is  foolishness  with  men.  4.  It  is  upon 
this  dead  body  we  must  continue  to  fix  our  eye.  We  must  understand  by  faith 
that  the  dead  Christ  fulfils  a  great  part  in  the  history  and  economy  of  our 
salvation.  We  are  allowed  to  gaze  until  the  reality  of  His  death  is  pressed 
home  on  our  soul.  There  in  that  dead  body  we  see  the  power  of  the  law. 
Who  can  stand  against  that  stroke  and  live  ?  Christ  Himself  is  smitten  by  it 
to  the  dust  of  death.  His  connexion  with  us,  His  adoption  of  our  liabilities, 
His  taking  of  our  sins,  though  Himself  spotless  and  righteous,  lays  Him  low. 
See  in  the  dead  Redeemer  the  deadliness  of  our  sins.  "  He  was  wounded  for 
our  transgressions  .  .  .  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  Him."  5.  To 
us  it  is  now  easy  and  possible  to  see  the  end  from  the  beginning.  In  the  dead 
Christ  is  the  token  of  the  finished  work  of  Calvary — the  foundation  of  redemption. 
He  has  laid  down  His  life.  He  has  yet  "  to  take  it  again."  A  dead  Jesus,  a 
disembodied  Christ,  fulfils  not  all  the  offices  of  Redeemer.  The  gospel  is  not 
the  story  of  one  who  died  and  "  saw  corruption,"  like  other  hopes  of  the  world, 
but  of  One  who  died  for  our  sins,  and  was  buried  and  rose  again,  and  saw  no 
corruption,  whom  yet  we  shall  behold  as  He  is  now  reigning  in  glory. 

II.  The  preciousness  of  the  dead  Christ. — How  precious  is  that  dead  body  ! 
It  is  to  be  the  transformed  and  glorified  organ  of  the  living  Iledeemer  through 
all  ages.  It  must  needs  ascend  incorruptible  and  unmutilated  to  the  heavens. 
But  how  shall  this  be,  exposed  to  the  indignity  and  careless  scorn  of  the  world, 
with  no  shield,  no  guardianship,  but  the  military  watch,  all  the  disciples  terrified 
and  fled  ?  And  is  this  Providence,  we  ask,  that  cares  for  the  sparrow's  fall  and 
numbers  the  hairs  of  our  head  ?  How  loose  all  seems,  how  casual,  how  easily 
natural,  as  if  there  were  no  more  care  in  heaven  for  this  sacred  body  than  for 
the  malefactor's  corpse  or  the  torn  prey  of  the  fields  !  Yes,  this  is  Providence, 
which  finds  its  instrument  in  every  fluctuation  of  human  feeling,  in  every 
incident  and  circumstance  of  the  hour,  all  united  by  invisible  connexions  to  the 
past  and  to  the  future,  a  line  of  purpose  and  of  agency  stretching  from  the 
throne  of  God  through  all  history,  and  joining  the  eternities.  Do  not  fear, 
mournful  soul,  for  the  dead  Christ !  Wait  and  watch  but  long  enough — and 
it  shall  not  be  unduly  long  :  you  shall  see  stirrings  of  life  beneath  the  shroud, 
the  colour  of  resurrection  on  the  pallid  cheek  ;  you  shall  behold  the  old  glistening 
of  the  eye  of  love,  you  shall  see  the  erect,  resuscitated  form,  hear  the  footstep 
of  the  Conqueror  of  death,  and  the  tones  of  "  the  voice  that  was  still."  This 
shall  be  for  Mary  and  John,  and  Peter  and  Thomas,  in  after-time,  not  distant ; 
but  now  this  dead  body,  so  precious  and  imperilled,  is  taken  into  unexpected  care 
and  is  protected  by  unlikely  means.     "  There  is  no  wisdom  nor  understanding 

596 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.   MARK.         chap.  XV. 


nor  counsel  against  the  Lord."  The  body  of  Jesus  is  brought  safely  through 
the  dark  passage  of  history — some  one  and  something  ever  provided  for  its 
protection  and  honour.  God  had  ready  not  His  angels  only,  but  His  centurion 
and  His  Pilate,  His  Joseph  and  His  Nicodemus — He  had  ready  the  willing  and 
the  unwilling  to  do  service  to  the  dead  Christ.  It  was  in  full  assurance  of  this 
that  Jesus  fell  asleep.  "Thou  wilt  not  leave  My  soul  to  Sheol,  neither  wilt 
Thou  suffer  Thine  Holy  One  to  see  corruption."  The  garden  was  there  and  the 
tomb,  and  the  heart  of  its  owner  ready  to  yield  to  the  touch  of  His  grace.  The 
hour  of  the  last  word  of  Calvary  was  timed  by  no  wisdom  of  men,  and  it 
anticipated  and  baffled  their  reckless  desires ;  and  all  that  looked  so  purposeless 
and  of  accident  was  part  of  the  sublime  but  unobserved  concatenations  of 
Heaven  (Acts  iv.  27,  28). 

III.  The  influence  of  the  dead  Christ. — How  powerful  and  mysterious  the 
influence  of  death !  How  it  softens  and  awes,  puts  men  on  honour  and  conscience, 
and  brings  home  a  sense  of  the  invisible  world  !  See  it  gathering  long- sundered 
friends  from  far  and  near,  renewing  ties  of  nature  and  grace,  imposing  order 
as  with  authority,  silencing  the  busy  tongue  !  See  the  dead  Christ  drawing,  as 
by  some  magnet,  the  secret  admirer,  the  unavowed  friend,  the  unsuspected  lover, 
the  cold  neighbour,  the  remorseful  wrong-doer,  the  abashed  ingrate,  the  very 
distant  relative,  the  negligent  and  unfriendly  one  of  former  days,  as  though 
summoned  to-day  before  some  unseen  tribunal,  to  say  why  it  was  they  thought 
and  spoke  and  acted  so  !  But  what  is  the  influence  of  the  dead  Christ  ?  There 
are  shattered  hopes,  but  no  doubts  of  the  heart.  Mystery  shrouds  all,  but  the 
Lord  and  Master  lost  was  never  more  precious.  Where  there  was  love  before, 
now  it  gushes  from  the  hearts  of  those  womanly  believers ;  where  it  was 
unavowed,  it  is  now  expressed  ;  where  it  was  secret,  it  now  reveals  itself ;  where 
it  was  remorseful  and  penitent,  it  is  now  of  inexpressible  contrition  ;  where  it 
was  intimate  and  thrice  endeared,  it  now  presses  home  the  sense  of  irreparable 
loss  ;  where  it  cannot  bear  disappointment,  it  bursts  into  language  which  refuses 
comfort ;  where  it  was  halting  and  fearing,  it  shoots  into  sudden  strength ; 
where  it  has  been  false,  it  works  despair  ;  Judas  cannot  bear  the  face  of  the 
dead  Christ,  and  rushes  to  his  place  ;  Peter  cannot  sleep  till  he  sees  it  again  ; 
John  must  reach  the  heart  of  the  mystery  of  the  bosom  on  which  he  leaned  ;  the 
Marys  and  the  loving  women  "  prevent  the  dawning,"  that  they  may  anoint 
the  body  of  the  blessed  dead.  Seeing  we  know  the  mystery  of  the  dead  Christ, 
let  us  thank  God  for  His  adorable  providence  in  grace  and  redemption,  by  which 
"  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God."  And  let  us  "  thus 
judge  that,  if  one  died  for  all,  then  all  were  dead  .  .  .  that  like  as  Christ  was 
raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  we  also  should  walk  in 
newness  of  life." — G.  C.  Button,  I).D. 

OUTLINES    AND    COMMENTS    ON    THE    VERSES. 

Vers.  43-46.  Joseph  of  Arimathea. —  after  we  are  gone  He  still  comes  to 

See  in  this  "good  and  just"  man  of  it,   looks   on   it,  and   keeps  it  up  like 

Arimathea     the     long    embrace    and  a  parent   treasuring  the   little  things 

tender  constancy  of  Jesus'  love  to  us.  of   a  departed  child,  and  keeping  the 

First,  He  puts  into  our  heart  the  good  little  garden  it  used  to  work  in  and 

desire  to  serve  Him ;  then  He  brings  call  its  own. — T.  F.  Crosse,  D.C.L. 
our  purpose  to  good  effect;  and  after- 
wards,  instead  of  claiming  the  work  Ver.  46.  The  Saviour's  grave. — Jeru- 

as  His,  He  allows  it  to  be  our  own.  salem  was  surrounded  by  graves  cut 

His   memory   will   not   forget  it,  His  out  of   the   limestone    rock.      Yet  it 

affection   will   not  leave  it ;   but  long  seems  strange  that  in  the  spot  recently 

597 


CHAP.   XV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


identified  by  Conder  and  Sir  William 
Dawson  as  Calvary  you  may  still  find 
a  garden,  and  in  the  garden  a  sepulchre, 
and  the  sepulchre  closed  with  a  huge 
circular  stone,  like  a  colossal  grindstone, 
which,  rolling  in  a  groove  cut  for  it, 
would  cover  or  expose  the  opening  into 
the  tomb  as  you  might  move  it.  Per- 
haps it  was  to  spite  Joseph  that  they 
had  the  Saviour  crucified  in  this  spot 
near  his  garden.  If  so,  the  spite  served 
Joseph  well.  None  other  -had  lain 
in  this  grave.  It  was  sacred  to  Him. 
Christ  died  what  one  may  call  a 
borrowed  death ;  He  is  laid  in  a 
borrowed  tomb.  Only,  the  death  was 
the  most  shameful  of  all  deaths  ;  while 
the  grave  is  rich  and  noble.  There 
is  much  about  this  grave -dwelling  of 
the  Saviour  worthy  of. earnest  thought. 
1.  A  grave  seems  an  item  in  the 
experience  of  all  things  good.  Nothing 
great  or  good  seems  to  go  straight  to 
its  throne,  but  always  through  a  grave. 
Good  causes  seem  always  lost  before 
they  are  won,  the  dark  hour  of  weak- 
ness being  used  of  God  to  draw  forth 
the  allegiance  that  gives  them  victory. 
The  testimony  of  prophets  seemed 
generally  to  find  only  a  grave,  and 
"  who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  "  has 
been   its  constant   epitaph.     Religion, 


truth,  and  goodness  go  not  through 
the  world  in  bright  apparel,  but  perse- 
cuted, dying,  and  finding  graves.  Judge 
not  success  by  seeming,  power  by 
popularity.  The  great  Christ  found 
a  grave.  2.  It  was  meet  Christ 
should  enter  our  graves,  for  all  the 
world  is  but  a  grave — a  vast  cemetery 
where  we  transact  a  little  business 
and  indulge  a  little  pleasure  before 
lying  down  beside  the  dead.  There 
is  no  household  without  its  grave. 
Life  is  only  a  procession  to  our  own 
funeral.  So  Christ  would  not  have 
thoroughly  come  to  the  world  if  He 
had  not  come  to  our  grave.  3.  The 
Saviour  hallows  the  grave  by  occupy- 
ing it.  He  removes  its  reproach,  dis- 
pels its  terrors.  When  He  enters  it, 
He  shews  it  is  one  of  "  the  places  of 
God's  dominion,"  a  region  where  life 
is  not  extinct  and  God's  mercy  not 
vanished  away.  Since  that  new  tomb 
was  occupied  all  graves  have  become 
new,  and  thoughts  of  rest,  sleep,  re- 
freshment, waking,  are  now  associated 
with  them.  When  death  fixed  its  sting 
in  Christ,  it  lost  it  for  all  who  follow 
Christ.  4.  We  now  can  feel  "  those 
who  sleep  in  Jesus  "  are  safe.  Where 
God  permitted  His  Son  to  lie  we  may 
safely  place  our  dear  dead. — R.  Glover. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    XV. 


Vers.  3-5.  Silence  and  self-control. — 
Moltke,  the  great  strategist,  was  a  man  of 
lowly  habits  and  few  words.  He  has  been 
described  as  a  man  "  who  can  hold  his  tongue 
in  seven  languages  !  " 

Ver.  10.  Envy. — Dionysius  the  tyrant,  out 
of  envy,  punished  Philoxenus  the  musician 
because  he  could  sing,  and  Plato  the  philo- 
sopher because  he  could  dispute,  better  than 
himself. 

Vers.  11-14.  A  change  of  national  senti- 
ment.— Englishmen  can  very  well  under- 
stand what  a  change  of  national  sentiment 
means — what  it  is  for  a  ruler  to  have  the 
confidence  of  the  nation  at  one  time  and 
lose  it  at  another.  When  that  happens,  and 
is  proved  to  have  happened  by  a  general 
election,  there  need  not  be  any  voters — there 
seldom  are  more  than  a  few  scores  or 
hundreds — who  actually  change  sides,  who 
vote  one  way  one  time  and  the  opposite  way 

598 


another.  But  the  party  that  was  dominant 
at  one  time,  that  knew  what  it  wanted  and 
meant  to  get  it,  is  at  another  time  half- 
hearted and  doubtful ;  if  they  will  not  vote 
against  their  old  party  they  perhaps  do  not 
care  to  vote  at  all,  or  at  any  rate  they  do 
not  care  to  try  to  convince  others,  to  gain 
over  those  who  are  doubtful,  or  to  urge  to 
activity  those  who  are  indifferent,  or  still 
more  half-hearted  than  themselves. —  W.  H. 
Simcox. 

Fickleness  of  popularity. — On  July  25th, 
1553,  Northumberland  and  Lord  Ambrose 
Dudley  were  brought  in  from  Cambridge, 
escorted  by  Grey  and  Arundel,  with  four 
hundred  of  the  Guards.  Detachments  of 
troops  were  posted  all  along  the  streets 
from  Bishopsgate,  where  the  duke  would 
enter,  to  the  Tower,  to  prevent  the  mob 
from  tearing  him  to  pieces.  It  was  but 
twelve  days  since  he  had  ridden  out  from 
that  gate  in  the  splendour  of  his  power: 
he  was  now  assailed  from  all  sides  with 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.    XV. 


yells  and  execrations  ;  bareheaded  with  cap 
in  hand,  he  bowed  to  the  crowd  as  he  rode 
on,  as  if  to  win  some  compassion  from 
them ;  but  so  recent  a  humility  could  find 
no  favour.  His  scarlet  cloak  was  plucked 
from  his  back ;  the  only  sounds  which  greeted 
his  ears  were,  "  Traitor  !  traitor  !  Death  to 
the  traitor  !  "  And  he  hid  his  face,  sickNat 
heart  with  shame,  and  Lord  Ambrose  at  the 
gate  of  the  Tower  was  seen  to  burst  into 
tears. — J.  A.  Froude. 

Inherent  weakness  of  human  nature. — The 
poet  has  said,  "  Nature  never  did  betray  the 
heart  that  loved  her."  Can  you  say  that  of 
human  nature  ? 

Ver.  13.  The  world's  reception  of  Christ. — 
It  is  said  of  Dr.  Robertson,  the  celebrated 
historian,  that,  preaching  once  in  the  fore- 
noon, he  affirmed,  in  the  words  of  the  ancient 
heathen,  that  "  if  perfect  virtue  were  to  de- 
scend to  the  earth  clothed  in  a  human  form, 
all  the  world  would  fall  prostrate  and  wor- 
ship her."  In  the  afternoon  Dr.  Erskine,  his 
colleague,  remarked,  on  the  contrary,  that 
"  perfect  virtue,  in  the  human  nature  of  the 
Saviour  of  mankind,  had  indeed  appeared 
on  the  earth ;  but,  instead  of  being  univers- 
ally worshipped,  the  general  cry  of  His 
countrymen  was,  "  Crucify  Him  1  crucify 
Him ! " 

Ver.  15.  Scourging. — We  cannot  tell  what 
that  Roman  punishment  was ;  we  read  about 
it  in  the  olden  books,  but  men  do  not 
understand  what  they  read  so  much  as  what 
they  feel.  The  victim  was  tied  by  the  hands 
to  a  post  or  standard ;  he  was  compelled  to 
assume  a  stooping  position  ;  the  knotted 
thong  was  in  the  hands  of  a  Roman  execu- 
tioner, and  he  administered  the  punishment 
largely  according  to  his  own  will  or  passion. 
We  have  heard  of  the  knout  in  Russia ;  in 
,our  own  land  we  have  the  "  cat,"  so  feared 
by  felons ;  in  the  Roman  law  there  was 
this  arrangement  for  scourging,  that  men 
might  be  humbled  as  well  as  punished,  that 
ithe  truth  might  be  extorted  from  them  as 
well  as  a  penalty  inflicted,  that  they  might 
be  brought  into  lowliness  of  mind  and  sub- 
missiveness  of  temper,  so  that  the  judge 
could  do  with  them  what  he  pleased.  The 
hands  of  Christ  were  tied  to  the  stake,  the 
flagellum  was  used  upon  His  naked  back ; 
He  was  scourged  by  Roman  hands. — 
J.  Parker,  D.D. 

Ver.  20.  Christ  mocked. — A  strange  illus- 
tration of  the  scene  is  afforded  by  what 
happened  only  a  few  years  afterwards  at 
Alexandria,  when  the  people,  in  derision 
of  King  Agrippa  I.,  arrayed  a  well-known 
maniac  in  a  common  door-mat,  put  a  papyrus 
crown  on  his  head,  and  a  reed  in  his 
hand,  and  saluted  him  as  "  maris  "  (lord). — 
A.  Edersheim,  D.D. 


Ver.  21.  The  shape  of  the  Cross.— The 
shape  of  the  Cross  on  which  our  Lord 
suffered  has  been  much  debated.  Some 
ancient  Fathers,  fancying  they  found  a 
typical  reference  in  the  crossing  of  the  hands 
over  the  head  of  the  scape-goat,  and  in  the 
peculiar  mode  in  which  Jacob  blessed  his 
grandsons,  often  assumed  that  it  was  in  the 
form  of  what  is  commonly  called  a  St. 
Andrew's  cross  ;  others  again,  seeing  in  the 
mystical  mark  or  Tau  set  upon  the  foreheads 
of  the  righteous  in  Ezekiel's  vision  a  fore- 
shadowing of  the  Cross,  concluded  that  it 
was  like  that  which  bears  the  name  of 
St.  Anthony,  in  form  like  a  capital  T*  It 
is  far.  more  probable  that  it  was  what  is 
known  familiarly  as  the  Latin  cross.  It 
was  prefigured  by  the  transverse  spits  which 
the  priest  placed  in  the  paschal  lamb.  Its 
four  arms,  pointing  to  the  four  quarters  of 
the  globe,  symbolised  "  the  breadth,  and 
length,  and  depth,  and  height  "  of  Christ's 
universal  Church.  It  is  a  strong  argument 
in  favour  of  this  form  that  "  the  inscription  " 
was  set  above  the  head  of  the  Crucified, 
which  would  be  impossible  in  either  of  the 
other  forms. — Dean  Luckock. 

Ver.  24.  Stripped  of  His  raiment.—  Dr. 
Norman  Macleod  relates  the  following  inci- 
dent :  "  Tom  Baird,  the  carter,  the  beadle 
of  my  working-man's  church,  was  as  noble  a 
fellow  as  ever  lived — God-fearing,  true,  un- 
selfish. I  shall  never  forget  what  he  said 
when  I  asked  him  to  stand  at  the  door  of  the 
working-man's  congregation,  and  when  I 
thought  he  was  unwilling  to  do  so  in  his 
working  clothes.     '  If,'  said  I,  •  you  don't  like 

to   do  it,   Tom ;    if    you  are  ashamed ' 

'  Ashamed ! '    he    exclaimed,   as    he    turned 
round  upon  me, '  I'm  mair  ashamed  o'  yersel' 
sir.    Div  ye  think  that  I  believe,  as  ye  ken 
1  do,  that  Jesus  Christ,  who  died  for  me, 
was  stripped  o'  His  raiment  on  the  Cross, 

and  that  I Na,  na,  I'm  prood  to  stand 

at  the  door.'  Dear,  good  fellow  !  There  he 
stood  for  seven  winters,  without  a  sixpence 
of  pay,  all  from  love,  though  at  my  request 
the  working  congregation  gave  him  a  silver 
watch.  When  he  was  dying  from  small-pox, 
the  same  unselfish  nature  appeared.  When 
asked  if  they  would  let  me  know,  he  replied  : 
4  There's  nae  man  leevin'  I  like  as  I  do  him. 
I  know  he  would  come.  But  he  shouldna' 
come  on  account  of  his  wife  and  bairns,  and 
so  ye  maunna'  tell  him ! '  I  never  saw  him 
in  his  illness,  never  hearing  of  his  danger  till 
it  was  too  late." 

A  hardened  gamester. — There  was  a  profli- 
gate gamester  whose  conversion  was  at- 
tempted by  some  honest  monks,  and  they, 
in  order  to  break  his  heart  for  sin,  put  into 
his  hands  a  fine  picture  of  the  crucifixion  of 
Christ ;  but  when  they  inquired  what  he  was 
studying  so  intently  in  the  picture,  hoping 
his  conversion  was  going  forward,  he  replied, 

599 


chap.  xv.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


"  I  was  examining  whether  the  dice  with 
which  the  soldiers  are  casting  lots  for  the 
garment  be  like  ours."  This  man  too  well 
resembles  bad  men  in  the  ceremonies  of 
religion,  for  their  hearts  guide  their  eyes  to 
what  may  nourish  their  vices,  not  to  what 
would  destroy  them. 

Ver.  25.  The  Cross  explains  the  world's 
mystery. — In  the  Palace  of  Justice  at  Rome 
they  take  you  sometimes  into  a  chamber 
with  strangely  painted  frescoes  on  the  ceiling, 
and  around  the  walls,  and  upon  the  floor,  in 
all  kinds  of  grotesque  forms.  You  cannot 
reduce  them  to  harmony ;  you  cannot  make 
out  the  perspective ;  it  is  all  a  bewildering 
maze  of  confusion.  But  there  is  one  spot 
upon  the  floor  of  that  room,  and  one  only, 
standing  upon  which  every  line  falls  into 
harmony;  the  perspective  is  perfect,  the 
picture  flashes  out  upon  you,  instinct  with 
meaning  in  every  line  and  panel.  You  can 
see  at  that  point,  and  that  only,  the  design 
of  the  artist  that  painted  it.  I  believe  that 
this  world  is  just  as  bewildering  a  maze 
looked  at  at  every  point  except  one.  I  look 
back  upon  the  records  of  history ;  I  look 
upon  the  speculations  of  science ;  I  endea- 
vour to  gaze  into  the  future  of  this  world's 
career;  wherever  I  turn  I  am  opposed  by 
the  mysteries  that  hem  me  in  and  crush 
me  down,  until  I  take  my  stand  at  the  foot 
of  the  Cross.  Then  darkness  and  discord 
become  light  and  harmony ;  the  mystery  is 
solved  ;  the  night  that  shuts  me  in  becomes 
radiant  with  the  Divine  light  and  glory.  At 
the  foot  of  the  Cross  art,  science,  literature, 
history,  become  at  once  to  me  a  Divine,  a 
glorious,  and  a  blessed  thing.  And  so  I 
claim  for  my  Lord  His  rightful  dominion 
over  all  the  works  of  His  hands.  We  will 
gather  all  the  beauties  of  art,  all  the  trea- 
sures of  music,  all  that  is  brightest  and  best 
in  this  world,  and  we  will  lay  them  down  at 
His  feet ;  for  "  worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain  to  receive  might,  and  majesty,  and 
riches,  and  power,  and  honour,  and  glory." 
His  is  the  sceptre,  His  is  the  right,  His  this 
universal  world. — Dr.  Manning. 

The  Cross  the  sufferer's  support. — A  poor 
woman  in  a  ward  of  one  of  the  great  London 
hospitals  had  to  undergo  a  fearful  operation, 
and  as  a  special  favour  besought  that  it 
might  be  performed  on  Good  Friday,  which 
was  close  at  hand,  that  the  reflexion  on  her 
Redeemer's  agony  might  the  better  enable  her 

to  endure  her  own  sufferings. A  preacher 

has  found  an  illustration  of  the  saving 
efficacy  of  the  Redeemer's  work  in  the  great 
breakwater  or  pier  which  stretches  in  front 
of  Plymouth  Harbour,  on  which  all  the  force 
of  the  storms  expend  their  violence,  and 
behind  whose  solid  strength  the  ships  of 
many  a  distant  land  find  shelter  and  security. 
So  does  the  atonement  of  Christ  offer  us 
rest  for  our  souls,  if  only  we  seek  it  as  our 

600 


refuge  ;  and  so  too,  when  the  things  of  this 
world  are  full  of  bitterness,  we  shall  find 
life  sweetened  and  purified  by  means  of  the 
Cross. 

Ver.  31.  Salvation  of  others  by  self-sacrifice. 
— 1.  A  converted  Japanese  was  explaining  the 
Atonement.  He  used  this  touching  illustra- 
tion :  A  woman  was  crossing  the  great  plain. 
She  carried  a  child  on  her  back.  When  in 
the  midst  of  the  plain,  she  looked  suddenly 
behind  her  and  saw  that  it  was  afire.  She 
had  but  a  moment  to  think.  She  laid  down 
the  child,  desperately  scooped  with  her  hands 
a  hole  in  the  earth,  with  trembling  haste 
laid  the  child  in  it,  and  covered  it  with  her 
own  body.  There  they  found  the  two.  The 
poor  mother  was  dead,  but  the  child  was 
saved.  "  So  Jesus  died  for  me,"  said  the 
simple-hearted  convert.  "  That  I  might 
live,  He  put  His  body  between  me  and  ever- 
lasting fire."  2.  When  Dr.  Bushnell,  after 
telling  one  of  his  children  that  if  he  touched 
the  plants  in  the  conservatory  his  own  gera- 
nium, as  a  penalty,  should  be  put  in  the 
cellar,  and,  seeing  the  child  disobey,  put  his 
own  geranium,  the  largest  and  most  beauti- 
ful of  all,  into  the  cellar  instead,  the  boy 
understood  the  sacrifice  of  feelings  thus 
made — that  if  he  was  to  be  spared,  and  his 
father's  word  respected,  his  father  must 
suffer.  3.  A  wealthy  young  man,  living  in 
London,  undertook  to  improve  the  condition 
of  the  poor  of  that  vast  city.  For  this  pur- 
pose he  visited  them  and  gave  away  large 
sums.  But  within  a  short  time  he  discovered 
that,  if  he  was  to  do  any  permanent  good, 
he  must  live  among  them.  He  did  not  hesi- 
tate. He  took  a  lodging  in  the  heart  of  the 
Seven  Dials,  the  worst  district  of  the  city. 
There  he  toiled  until  he  died.  He  was  cut 
off  in  the  beginning  of  his  work,  but  he 
succeeded.  He  had  found  the  secret  of  his 
calling — that  if  he  would  save,  he  must 
suffer. 

Self-sacrificing  devotion. — Edwin,  King  of 
Northumbria,  in  617  gave  audience  to  an 
envoy  from  the  King  of  Wessex.  In  the 
midst  of  the  conference  the  envoy  started  to 
his  feet,  drew  a  dagger  from  his  robe,  and 
rushed  madly  on  the  king.  Lilla,  one  of  the 
royal  band,  threw  himself  between  Edwin 
and  the  assassin ;  but  so  furious  was  the 
stroke  that  even  through  Lilla's  body  the 
dagger  still  reached  its  aim.  The  king, 
however,  soon  recovered,  though  his  devoted 
servant  died. 

Sacrifice  to  save. — In  the  early  days  of  the 
American  settlement  Captain  John  Smith 
was  among  the  most  intrepid  of  the  ex- 
plorers, and  earned  for  himself  the  title  of 
"  Father  of  the  Colony."  He  was  once  seized 
by  the  Indians  and  held  in  captivity,  being 
afterwards  sentenced  to  death.  A  tender- 
hearted Indian  maiden,  touched  with  pity, 
interceded  for  him,  but  in  vain,  and  then 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


CHAP.  XV. 


flung  herself  beneath  the  executioner's  axe, 
and  clasped  the  victim  in  her  arms,  risking 
her  own  life,  but  saving  the  captain  and  the 
colony  of  Virginia. 

Ver.  33.  Christ  eclipsed. — A  pious  astrono- 
mer, in  describing  an  eclipse  which  he  wit- 
nessed in  Norway,  says :  "  I  watched  the 
instantaneous  extinction  of  light,  and  saw 
the  glorious  scene  on  which  1  had  been 
gazing  turned  into  darkness.  All  the  horizon 
seemed  to  speak  of  terror,  death,  and  judg- 
ment ;  and  overhead  sat,  not  the  clear  flood  of 
light  which  a  starry  night  sends  down,  but 
there  hung  over  me  dark  and  leaden  black- 
ness, which  seemed  as  if  it  would  crush  me 
into  the  earth.  And  as  I  beheld  it  I  thought, 
"  How  miserable  is  the  soul  to  whom  Christ 
is  eclipsed ! "  The  thought  was  answered 
by  a  voice ;  for  a  fierce  and  powerful  sea- 
bird  which  had  been  swooping  around  us, 
apparently  infuriated  at  our  intrusion  on  its 
domain,  poured  out  a  scream  of  despairing 
agony  when  it  was  surprised  in  the  dark- 
ness." What,  then,  will  be  the  fearful  sur- 
prise when  the  lost  soul  finds  itself  in  that 
world  "  where  hope  withering  flees,  and 
mercy  sighs,  Farewell !  " 

Nature's  sympathy  with  her  Lord. — We 
feel  a  deep  appropriateness  in  the  sympathy 
of  nature  with  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord, 
in  the  profound  darkness  that  overspread  the 
earth  as  the  outer  token  of  the  spiritual 
darkness  that  overwhelmed  His  soul,  and  in 
the  rending  of  the  rocks  that  accompanied 
the  rending  of  His  mortal  flesh  and  the 
separation  between  soul  and  body.  Super- 
stition has  sought  for  farther  proofs  than 
those  which  Scripture  gives  of  such  sym- 
pathy, and  imagined  that  it  has  found  them 
in  the  continual  trembling  to  this  day  of  the 
leaves  of  the  aspen  when  all  around  is  still, 
as  if  in  shuddering  recollection  of  the  use 
made  of  its  wood  for  the  construction  of  the 
cross ;  and  also  in  the  dark  stains  that  appear 
ineffaceably  on  the  leaves  and  the  crimson 
spots  that  mingle  with  the  white  blossoms 
on  one  of  the  commonest  weeds  of  our  corn- 
fields, said  by  tradition  to  have  grown  beneath 
the  Cross.  And  the  scarlet  anemones,  which 
blaze  in  spring-like  embodied  flames  on  the 
hills  of  Palestine,  are  called  by  the  Christian 
residents  "  blood-drops  of  Christ,"  under  the 
idea  that  these  beautiful  flowers  were  dyed 
with  the  blood  that  issued  from  our  Saviours 
pierced  side.  Unfounded  as  these  super- 
stitions are,  it  must  be  confessed,  notwith- 
standing, that  there  is  something  in  them 
that  appeals  to  our  natural  sense  of  fitness. 
It  is  difficult  to  realise  that  nature  should 
hold  on  serenely  in  her  accustomed  way 
while  her  Lord  was  dying.  We  should  have 
expected  that  the  supernatural  darkness 
would  have  continued  all  the  time — that  the 
fields  would  languish  and  the  flowers  fade 
in  token  of  their  deep  sympathy  with  the 


death  of  Him  who  gave  them  all  their 
beauty,  and  whose  smile  of  blessing  rested 
always  upon  them  while  He  trod  the  earth, 
— Hugh  Macmillan,  D.D. 

Ver.  37.  The  death  of  Death.— A  Green- 
land missionary  relates  the  f ullovving :  "Last 
winter,  Jacob,  a  native  assistant  of  mine, 
was  summoned  to  his  rest.  On  the  day 
before  his  death,  having  been  asked  how  he 
felt,  he  replied,  '  I  shall  not  rise  from  this 
bed  again ;  I  am  called  hence  to  the  Lord.' 
He  then  raised  his  arm,  stretched  it  out  and 
said,  '  Look  !  my  arm  is  nothing  but  bones 
and  skin.  It  is  the  same  with  my  earthly 
body :  the  flesh  is  dead  within  me ;  my 
desire  is  fixed  on  my  heavenly  country — that 
country  where  I  shall  behold  Him  who  loves 
me  and  whom  I  love.  Yes,  I  shall  see  Him 
shortly.'  When  asked  whether  he  feared 
death,  '  Oh  no,'  he  answered ;  '  how  can  I 
love  Christ  and.  fear  death?  The  death  of 
Christ  was  the  death  of  Death.'  " 

Ver.  39.  Power  of  the  Cross. — The  well- 
known  story  of  Colonel  Gardiner's  conversion 
illustrates  the  power  of  the  Cross.  He  lived 
a  gay  life,  and  after  having  spent  the  Sunday 
evening  in  carousing  retired  to  his  room, 
when  he  took  up  a  book  entitled  The 
Christian  Soldier,  intending  to  make  fun  of 
it.  He  fell  asleep  with  the  book  in  his  hand, 
and  dreamed  :  a  blaze  of  light  shone  on  the 
book,  and  overhead  he  saw  suspended  in  the 
air  a  vivid  representation  of  the  Saviour  on 
the  Cross.  Distinctly  he  heard  a  voice  saying, 
"This  I  did  for  thee:  what  hast  thou  done 
for  Me  ? "  He  awoke,  and  filled  with  con- 
trition he  sought  and  found  pardon  and 
peace. One  afternoon  a  man  stood  in  Ant- 
werp Cathedral  gazing  at  Kubens'  "Descent 
from  the  Cross."  He  was  so  absorbed  in 
what  he  saw,  that  when  the  verger  came  and 
told  him  it  was  time  to  close  the  cathedral 
he  exclaimed,  "  No,  no,  not  yet ;  wait  until 
they  get  Him  down." 

Involuntary  testimony  to  the  Divinity  of 
Christ. — A  well-known  learned  man  of 
Saxony,  after  having  all  his  life  long  attacked 
Jesus  and  His  gospel  with  all  the  weapors 
of  sophistry  he  could  command,  was  in  his 
old  age  partially  deprived  of  his  reason, 
chiefly  through  the  fear  of  death,  and  fre- 
quently fell  into  religious  paroxysms  of  a 
peculiar  nature.  He  was  almost  daily  ob- 
served conversing  with  himself,  while  pacing 
to  and  fro  in  his  chamber,  on  one  of  the  walls 
of  which,  between  other  pictures,  hung  one 
of  the  Saviour.  Repeatedly  he  halted  before 
the  latter,  and  said  in  a  horrifying  tone  of 
voice,  "  After  all,  Thou  wast  only  a  man." 
Then  after  a  short  pause  he  would  continue, 
"  What  wast  Thou  more  than  a  man  ? 
Ought  I  to  worship  Thee?  No,  I  will  not 
worship  Thee,  for  Thou  art  only  Rabbi  Jesus, 
Joseph's  son,  of  Nazareth."    littering  these 

601 


chap.  xvl.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


words,  he  would  return  with  a  deeply  affected 
countenance,  and  exclaim,  "  What  dost  Thou 
say  ?  That  Thou  earnest  from  above  !  How 
terribly  Thou  eyest  me!  Oh,  Thou  art  dread- 
ful !  But  Thou  art  only  a  man,  after  all !  " 
Then  he  would  again  rush  away,  but  soon 
return  with  faltering  step,  crying  out,  "What! 
Art  Thou  in  reality  the  Son  of  God  ?"  The 
same  scenes  were  daily  renewed,  till  the 
unhappy  man,  struck  by  paralysis,  dropped 
down  dead  ;  and  then  really  stood  before  his 
Judge,  who,  even  in  His  picture  had  so 
strikingly  and  overpoweringly  judged  him. 
Rousseau's  testimony  to  the  death  of  Christ. 
— Rousseau  once  wrote  in  one  of  his  better 
moments  that  "  if  the  death  of  Socrates  was 
that  of  a  sage,  the  death  of  Jesus  was  that 
of  a  God."  It  may  be  too,  probably,  that  he 
wrote  not  as  one  who  adores,  but  as  one  who 
admires.  Bitter  epigrams  on  Rousseau's 
sentence  were  not  wanting.  M  It  may  be  a 
pretty  turn,"  some  one  said,  "  but  then, 
unluckily,  it  is  absurd."  But  He  who  in  one 
undivided  Person  is  God  and  Man,  who  died 
His  death,  is  so  different  from  all  others  that 
the  paradox  of  Rousseau  is  literally  true. — 
Bishop  Wm.  Alexander. 

Ver.  43.  Great  occasions  disclose  great 
qualities. —  Some  natures  need  powerful  in- 
centives to  draw  out  their  better  traits  and 
nobler  qualities.  Close  to  Bracelet  Bay, 
Mumbles,  is  a  bell-buoy  marking  a  concealed 
rock.  This  bell  rings  only  in  the  storm.  It 
is  only  when  the  wind  is  high  and  the 
billows  roll  and  beat  against  it  that  it  gives 
forth  the  music  that  is  in  it. 

Glastonbury. — In  the  middle  of  the  county 


of  Somerset  there  is  a  green  and  open  vale, 
through  which  several  small  rivers  flow 
quietly  along  towards  the  western  channel. 
These  waters,  as  they  wind  through  the 
meadows,  form  a  sort  of  island,  upon  which 
may  still  be  seen  the  grey  ruins  of  an  ancient 
abbey.  These  ruins  are  of  an  extent  and 
richness  which  tell  of  an  institution  once 
important.  Among  them  one  can  trace  the 
outline  of  a  solitary  chapel,  standing  west- 
ward and  apart.  This  chapel  was  dedicated 
to  Joseph  of  Arimathea,  and  it  was  ever  the 
fixed  and  firm  belief  of  all  the  inmates  of 
the  abbey,  and  the  long  tradition  of  preceding 
generations,  that  in  this  remote  and  sheltered 
place  Joseph  of  Arimathea  had  planted  a 
mission,  and  had  himself  passed  the  latter 
years  of  his  life.  Here  he  had  built  a  fragile 
church,  which  persevering  piety  renewed 
with  increasing  beauty  from  age  to  age. 
Here  he  who  had  buried  Jesus  had  himself 
found  a  grave,  and  here  his  Heavenly  Saviour 
had  paid  him  back  a  hundredfold  his  garden- 
grave  at  Calvary,  and  had  written  an  epitaph 
of  blessing  on  his  work  of  love,  until  it 
grew  into  a  stately  pile,  and  became  a  great 
light  of  learning  and  lamp  of  truth  in  the 
Western  world.  Such  was  the  beginning  of 
Avalon,  the  famed  Abbey  of  Glastonbury, 
where  men  said  King  Arthur  lies  asleep,  and 
where  King  Alfred  found  his  shelter  from 
the  Danes ;  but  chiefly  where  Joseph  of  Ari- 
mathea, the  councillor  of  the  East,  found 
both  his  first  and  last  refuge  from  the  world, 
and  was  in  his  turn  "  laid  in  a  sepulchre 
that  was  hewn  in  stone,  wherein  never  man 
before  was  laid." — T.  F.  Crosse,  D.C.L. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
CRITICAL  AND   EXEGETICAL   NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Had  bought  sweet  spices. — Simply,  bought  spices.  No  time  specified,  merely  the 
fact  stated.  From  Luke  xxiii.  56  we  gather  (unless,  indeed,  there  were  two  companies 
of  women)  that  the  purchase  was  made  before  the  Sabbath  began.  St.  Mark's  point  is,  that 
the  women  bought  spices  some  time  or  other — no  matter  when — in  order  that  when  the 
Sabbath  was  over  they  might  come  and  anoint  the  body  of  the  Lord.  They  seem  to  have 
wished  to  complete  the  imperfect  embalming  which  Joseph  and  Nicodemus  had  hastily 
begun.     See  John  xix.  39,  40,  and  cp.  2  Chron.  xvi.  14. 

Ver.  2.  They  came,  etc. — They  come  (so  as  to  be)  at  the  sepulehre  when  the  sun  had  risen. 
That  is,  they  start  from  home  very  early,  with  the  object  of  reaching  their  destination  soon 
after  daylight. 

Ver.  3.  The  door  of  the  sepulchre. — "  There  was  generally  an  approach  to  the  tomb  open  to 
the  sky ;  then  a  low  entrance  on  the  side  of  the  rock,  leading  into  a  square  chamber,  on  one 
side  of  which  was  a  recess  for  the  body,  about  three  feet  deep,  with  a  low  arch  over  it.  The 
stone  here  referred  to  would  be  the  stone  which  covered  the  actual  entrance  into  the  vault. 
It  would  probably  be  not  less  than  six  feet  in  breadth  and  three  in  height."  Had  the  women 
known  of  the  arrangement  recorded  in  Matt,  xxvii.  62-66,  they  might  have  hesitated  about 
■visiting  the  tomb  that  day  at  all. 

602 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


Ver.  4.  Looked. — Looked  up — "  the  only,  but  sufficient,  proof  that  Calvary  was  a  hill." 

Ver.  5.  While  Mary  Magdalene,  after  a  hasty  glance,  sped  away  to  inform  Peter  and  John 
that  the  sepulchre  had  been,  as  she  supposed,  rifled  (John  xx.  1,  2),  the  other  women  made 
bold  to  enter  and  inspect  for  themselves.  Affrighted. — The  word,  used  only  by  St.  Mark, 
signifies  amazement  blended  with  fear.  It  is  found  also  in  chaps,  ix.  15,  xiv.  34,  xvi.  6. 
Such  experiences  as  these  women  were  now  passing  through  filled  them  with  awestruck 
surprise. 

Ver.  7.  And  Peter. — With  what  solemnity  the  apostle  would  utter  these  words  as  he 
recounted  the  matter  to  St.  Mark ! 

Ver.  8.  Quickly. — Omit.  Fled. — Not  as  Mary  Magdalene  had  done,  in  terror  and  hope- 
lessness, but  full  of  bewildered  excitement,  for  agitation  and  ecstasy  had  them  in  its  grip. 
And  to  no  one  said  they  anything,  for  they  were  afraid  to  pause  until  they  had  delivered 
their  message  to  the  disciples  and  Peter. 

Vers.  9-20.  See  Appendix,  p.  641. 

Ver.  15.  Go  ye  into  all  the  world. — That  is  to  say,  "  Go  wherever  ye  will,  wherever  ye  can, 
that  the  gospel  may  be  diffused  :  no  limits  of  place  are  henceforth  prescribed  to  you." 
Every  creature. — Every  human  creature.  Cp.  "  all  nations  "  (Matt.  xx.  19),  as  contrasted  with 
the  one  Jewish  nation  to  which  their  labours  hitherto  had  been  restricted.     See  Matt.  x.  5. 

Ver.  16.  He  that  believeth  not. — Against  heretics  denying,  from  the  omission  in  this  latter 
clause,  the  necessity  of  baptism,  it  is  sufficient  to  reply  that  baptism,  if  not  a  necessary 
means  of  grace,  would  not  have  been  introduced  as  such,  and  without  qualification,  in  the 
previous  clause — to  say  nothing  of  the  assertion  of  its  necessity  elsewhere  (e.g.  John  iii.  3). 
Nor,  indeed,  is  the  insistence  on  baptism  really  absent  from  this  clause  after  all ;  although 
not  verbally  expressed,  it  is  evidently  implied ;  the  previous  conjunction  of  the  two — faith 
and  baptism — is  such  that  to  accept  or  deny  one  is  to  accept  or  deny  both.  Moreover, 
saving  faith  is  practical,  and  includes  the  observance  of  all  things  enjoined,  of  which 
baptism  is  among  the  first. 

Ver.  17.  These  signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe. — Not  to  be  understood  of  every 
believer,  nor  of  all  times  alike.  Miracles  were  more  needed  while  the  Church  was  in  its 
infancy  than  after  it  had  obtained  a  secure  footing  in  the  world.  Yet  it  must  not  be 
concluded  that  the  power  of  miracles  in  the  body  of  the  faithful  is  absolutely  extinct.  We 
dare  not  attempt  to  draw  the  line,  and  say  that  miracles  were  possible  up  to  such  a  date,  but 
not  beyond,  since  God  has  not  drawn  any  such  line  for  us  Himself.  To  be  critical  in 
investigating  evidence  is  wise  and  right ;  to  be  sceptical,  in  the  teeth  of  evidence,  is  foolish 
and  wrong. 

Vers.  19,  20.  Mark  the  antithesis.  The  Lord,  for  His  part,  was  received  up  into  heaven, 
and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God — the  seat  of  power ;  and  they,  for  their  part,  went  forth 
into  the  world  to  do  as  He  had  bidden  them,  and,  doing  it,  they  were  sustained  and 
reinforced  by  His  almighty  aid. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—8. 

(Parallels:  Matt,  xxviii.  1-8;  Luke  xxiv.  1-12;  John  xx.  1-10.) 

The  pious  women  visiting  the  sepulchre. — The  present  hopes  of  the  followers 
of  Jesus  had  been  destroyed  and  their  future  expectations  frustrated  by  the 
ignominious  death  of  their  Lord.  When  they  beheld  the  accomplishment  of  all 
which  the  malice  of  His  enemies  could  inflict,  they  seem  to  have  given  way  to 
their  feelings  of  despondency  and  dismay.  But  while  the  most  favoured  of  the 
apostles  had  retired  from  the  place  where  He  was  put  to  death,  and  from 
the  garden  in  which  they  had  seen  His  body  laid  and  a  large  stone  rolled  to  the 
mouth  of  the  sepulchre,  there  were  others  whose  faith  and  love  had  survived 
all  these  trials  (Mark  xv.  40,  41).  During  our  Saviour's  life  these  pious 
women  had  ministered  to  Him  of  their  substance.  They  had  followed  Him  out 
of  the  distant  part  of  the  country  in  which  they  resided  ;  and  they  were  still 
found,  in  that  hour  of  suffering,  hoping  against  hope,  or  desirous  to  testify 
to  the  end  the  love  which  they  bore  to  Him  who  had  loved  them.  When,  at 
a  later  hour  of  the  same  mournful  day,  the  body  of  Jesus  was  taken  down 
from  the  Cross  and  laid  in  the  new  sepulchre,  "  wherein  never  man  before  was 
laid,"  the  same  affectionate  attendants  still  followed  their  Lord  (Luke  xxiii.  35). 
"  As  yet  they  knew  not  the  Scripture,  that  He  must  rise  again  from  the  dead." 

603 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


But  perceiving  that  they  who  had  in  a  hurried  manner  buried  the  body  of 
Jesus  had  not  embalmed  it,  as  the  manner  of  the  Jews  was  to  bury,  but  had 
merely  wrapped  the  body  in  linen  with  dry  spices,  they  determined  to  perform 
that  last  office  of  affectionate  care,  and  "  returned,  and  prepared "  the  "  spices 
and  ointments "  necessary  for  the  purpose,  and  "  rested  the  Sabbath  day, 
according  to  the  commandment."  "  And  very  early  in  the  morning,  the  first 
day  of  the  week,  they  came  unto  the  sepulchre  at  the  rising  of  the  sun."  They 
knew  not  that  the  heavy  stone  which  they  had  seen  placed  over  the  mouth 
of  the  sepulchre  had  been  farther  secured  by  having  been  sealed  with  a  seal 
and  guarded  by  soldiers  set  as  a  watch.  But  they  were  aware  that,  even 
without  such  a  precaution,  there  was  an  impediment  to  the  accomplishment 
of  their  pious  intention  insurmountable  by  their  own  strength.  Still  they 
persevered  in  their  exertions,  though  not  without  some  secret  misgivings  that  their 
labour  would  be  in  vain  (ver.  3).  But  as  soon  as  they  reached  the  sepulchre 
all  their  apprehensions  were  proved  to  have  been  groundless.  They  came  but 
to  embalm  the  body  of  Jesus ;  they  expected  to  have  found  a  lifeless  corpse ; 
and  lo !  a  vision  of  angels,  which  told  them  that  He  was  risen  from  the  dead. 

I.  The  constancy  of  these  pious  women,  contrasted  with  the  comparative 
weakness  of  the  faith  even  of  the  apostles,  may  remind  us  that  the  "  faith 
which  worketh  by  love,"  the  religion  of  the  heart,  is  by  no  means  in  pro- 
portion to  the  ontward  advantages  which  different  individuals  may  possess. 
There  may  be  often  found  among  the  comparatively  unlearned,  in  the  meanest 
stations  and  in  circumstances  of  the  greatest  apparent  distress,  a  practical 
acquaintance  with  vital  religion,  a  firm  trust  in  God,  an  abiding  faith  in  the 
merits  of  the  Saviour,  and  a  sense  of  the  real  consolations  arising  from  a 
spiritual  frame  of  mind,  which  may  well  serve  as  an  encouragement  and  as 
a  lesson  to  others  who  have  been  blessed  with  far  greater  opportunities  of 
religious  improvement.  Such  examples  teach  us,  in  language  which  cannot 
be  misunderstood,  what  a  treasure  true  religion  is ;  for  it  is  found  supplying, 
and  more  than  supplying,  the  want  of  all  which  this  world  can  afford. 

II.  Another  reflexion  arising  from  this  history  is,  that  we  are  often 
ignorant  of  obstacles  which  really  beset  our  path  of  duty,  while  we  exaggerate 
to  ourselves  the  magnitude  of  those  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  How 
many,  when  inquiry  is  made  respecting  their  religious  condition,  are  found 
to  have  fixed  their  apprehensions  upon  some  circumstances  which  they  con- 
ceived to  be  the  principal,  if  not  the  only,  bar  to  their  advancement  in  piety ! 
Some  will  complain  of  the  cares  of  life.  Before  the  eyes  of  others  there  may  be 
set  some  trial  of  temper,  some  weakness  of  which  they  are  especially  conscious, 
some  trouble  which  at  present  occupies  their  thoughts,  or  some  easily  besetting 
sin  which  they  know  not  how  to  conquer  or  remove.  And  each  of  these  may 
conceive  that  there  is  but  this  one  barrier  interposed  between  him  and  his  duty. 
But  when  we  are  led  thus  unduly  to  estimate  the  magnitude  of  some  one 
obstacle  to  a  religious  life,  we  overlook  others  of  greater  importance  and  still 
less  surmountable  by  any  powers  of  our  own.  If  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus  was 
sealed  with  a  seal  to  prevent  all  access  from  without,  who  knows  not  that  the 
heart  of  man  is  by  nature  closed  against  Divine  grace  and  remains  dark  and 
impervious  to  its  holy  light !  If  the  sepulchre  of  Jesus  was  guarded  with  a 
band  of  soldiers,  whose  express  duty  it  was  to  prevent  the  seal  from  being 
broken  and  the  stone  from  being  rolled  away,  who  knows  not  what  a  band 
of  evil  passions  and  unholy  desires  and  worldly  thoughts  besets  the  heart  of 
man,  and  how  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  disposes  his  active  and  sleep- 
less forces,  to  keep  the  thoughts  and  affections  still  cold  and  dark,  "  lest  the 
light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine 
unto  them  " ! 

0U4 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


III.  But  while  we  thus  learn  justly  to  appreciate  the  real  obstacles  against 
which  we  have  to  contend,  the  example  of  the  pious  women  may  encourage  us 
to  persevere  in  the  plain  course  of  duty,  in  the  firm  persuasion  that,  although 
we  cannot,  by  our  own  strength,  roll  away  the  stone  from  the  sepulchre,  yet 
that,  however  great  it  may  be,  there  is  a  power  which  will  remove  it  for  us. 
There  are  periods  when  the  heart  even  of  the  faithful  Christian  is  weighed 
down  with  much  sorrow.  He  is  exposed  to  some  great  danger,  or  apprehends 
some  severe  trial.  At  such  a  time  his  faith  is  ready  to  fail  him.  He  goes  on 
his  way,  weary  and  sad  at  heart,  although  he  knows  that  he  is  treading  the 
direct  path  of  Christian  duty.  But  who  shall  set  bounds  to  the  mercy  or  power 
of  God  ?  When  the  Christian  has  accomplished  his  journey,  he  looks  and  sees 
that  the  stone  is  rolled  away.  Either  his  apprehensions  are  removed,  or,  if 
the  trial  which  he  feared  has  come  upon  him,  strength  has  been  given  him  to 
enable  him  to  bear  it.  And  if  this  be  true  in  the  trials  which  are  of  a  temporary 
kind,  so  is  it  especially  found  in  those  which  regard  our  spiritual  state. 

IY.  If  we  persevere  in  faithful  obedience,  our  exertions  will  often  be  blessed 
beyond  our  utmost  hopes. — The  pious  women  who  visited  the  sepulchre  of  their 
Lord  looked  only  for  the  sad  satisfaction  of  preparing  His  body  for  the  tomb. 
And  the  apprehension  which  chiefly  weighed  upon  their  minds  was  instantly 
removed,  as  soon  as  they  looked  and  saw  that  the  stone,  which  had  appeared  so 
great,  was  rolled  away.  And  after  they  had  been  relieved  from  this  fear, 
a  new  source  of  holy  joy  was  unexpectedly  opened  to  them.  Their  Lord  was 
risen  from  the  dead,  no  more  to  see  corruption.  'And  so  assuredly  will  God 
deal  with  His  servants  at  all  times.  With  the  temptation  He  will  make  a  [way 
to  escape,  that  they  may  be  able  to  bear  it ;  with  the  trial  He  will  give 
strength ;  with  the  tribulation  He  will  send  patience ;  and  with  patience, 
experience ;  and  with  experience,  hope. — Prof.  Temple  Chevallier. 

Vers.  3,  4.  All  difficulties  surmounted  by  the  faithful. — If  we  look  at  the  diffi- 
culties, trials,  and  sorrows  which  attend  man  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  and 
consider  at  the  same  time  only  man's  strength,  which  is  perfect  weakness,  we  must 
say  with  the  apostle,  "  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  "  Who  then  can  be 
saved  ?  "  Happy  is  it  for  him  who  is  brought  to  confess,  "With  man  it  is  impossible, 
but  with  God  all  things  are  possible  "  ;  for  when  men  are  brought  to  look  out  of 
themselves  and  to  say,  "  Who  shall  roll  us  away  the  stone  ?  "  they  have  taken 
the  first  step  towards  its  removal.  1.  Sometimes  the  Christian  is  in  great  fear 
of  danger,  in  common  with  other  men  who  fear  not  God.  He  sees  no  means 
of  escape — there  may  be  no  chance  of  it,  as  the  world  would  say  ;  a  fatal  sickness 
is  around  him,  or  he  is  in  the  power  of  an  enemy.  But  is  he  without  comfort 
or  resource  ?  Nay,  he  remembers  Joseph  in  Egypt,  Lot  in  Sodom,  Daniel  in  the 
lions'  den,  the  three  children  in  the  furnace,  Israel  at  the  Bed  Sea,  Paul  and 
Silas  and  Peter  in  prison  ;  and  when  ready  to  faint,  and  cry,  "  Who  shall  roll  away 
the  stone  ?  "  he  hears  again  those  cheering  words,  "  He  shall  give  His  angels 
charge  over  thee,"  etc.  "  Fear  ye  not,  stand  still,  and  see  the  salvation  of  the 
Lord."  2.  Sometimes  the  Christian  is  poor  and  in  misery,  and  knows  not  to-day 
how  he  shall  live  to-morrow  ;  distress  presses  him  hard  ;  he  is  in  great  straits, 
and  there  seems  no  help  for  it  ;  he  cannot  see  the  least  prospect  of  his  condition 
being  bettered  :  or  he  may  have  a  dread  that  poverty  must  soon  come  upon  him  ; 
his  faith  is  tried  to  the  uttermost ;  bad  success,  misfortunes  of  various  kinds,  daily 
threaten  him.  And  is  he  without  comfort  or  hope  ?  Does  he  forget  Hagar  in 
the  desert,  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  Elijah  at  the  brook  Cherith,  the 
widow  and  her  cruse  of  oil  ?  3.  The  Christian  is  sometimes  much  oppressed 
and  made  to  suffer  under  false  accusations,  his  character  mistaken,  words 
misrepresented,  motives  misunderstood  and  falsely  stated.     Who  shall  roll  away 

605 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ':   ST.   MARK. 


the  stone  ?  But  he  is  not  without  great  comfort  under  all  this,  for  he  calls  to 
mind  our  Saviour's  words  (Matt.  v.  11,  12).  He  does  not  forget  that  Christ 
"  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own  received  Him  not  "  ;  "  He  was  despised  and 
rejected  of  men  " ;  "  He  was  reviled."  If  he  be  inclined  to  think  that  God 
hath  forsaken  him,  he  hears  God  reasoning  with  him  thus :  Isa.  xl.  27  ; 
Ps.  xxxvii.  5-7.  4.  The  Christian  is  sometimes  sorely  perplexed  in  some  of 
his  plans  and  undertakings  :  nothing  he  takes  in  hand  seems  to  prosper ;  so 
many  difficulties  arise  that  he  is  tempted  to  yield  to  despair.  But  even  here  he 
can  patiently  abide ;  "in  quietness  and  confidence  is  his  strength  " ;  he  leans 
more  unreservedly  upon  God :  he  waits  His  time  ;  he  knows  that  man's  time  is 
always  ready — God's  time  may  not  be  yet.  He  remembers  that  God  often 
permits  one  to  sow  and  another  to  reap,  one  man  to  begin  and  another  to  finish — 
as  David,  who  prepared  the  materials,  and  Solomon,  who  built  Him  a  house ; 
and  so  looking  steadfastly  to  Him,  he  sees  the  stone  rolled  away.  5.  The 
Christian  is  sometimes  in  great  doubt  as  to  how  he  should  act — whether  this 
or  that  is  his  duty  ;  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  or  else  in  perplexity  as  to  how  he 
should  perform  that  which  he  knows  to  be  best.  He  is  often  haunted  with  the 
fear  of  consequences  and  of  a  doubtful  mind,  tossed  to  and  fro  like  a  wave  of 
the  sea.  How  comforting  then  are  such  words  to  him  !  (John  vii.  17  ;  Isa.  1.  10 ; 
Ps.  xcvii.  11  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  3).  6.  But  if  ever  the  Christian  is  ready  to  say,  "  Who 
shall  roll  away  the  stone,"  it  is  when,  having  borne  the  Christian  name,  he  is 
convicted  of  having  lived  as  a  stranger  to  Christ  the  hope  of  glory — of  exhibiting 
in  himself  that  sad  contradiction,  a  worldly  and  unholy  Christian.  Who  can 
tell  the  blessing  to  a  soul,  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  the  burden  of  its  sins, 
of  hearing  such  words  as  these,  "  Cast  thy  burden  upon  the  Lord,  and  He  shall 
sustain  thee  "  ?  Who  can  tell  the  comfort  of  such  consoling  counsel  as  this  ? 
Claim  the  privileges  of  the  covenant,  the  first  of  which  is  pardon  and  forgive- 
ness through  Christ,  into  whom  ye  were  baptised.  Treat  God  as  your  Father  : 
you  are  not  strangers  and  foreigners,  though  you  have  been  bad  and  rebellious 
subjects  ;  but  ye  are  fellow- citizens  with  the  saints.  You  have  "liberty  to  enter 
into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  "  ;  "  and  having  a  High  Priest  over  the 
house  of  God,  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith  "  :  for  though 
you  have  no  power  of  yourselves  to  help  yourselves,  yov\  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  which  strengthened  you. — E.  J.  Boyce,  M.A. 

Vers.  5,  6.  The  first  preaching  of  the  Resurrection. — Mark  has  scarcely  anything 
to  say  about  our  Lord's  appearance  after  the  Resurrection.  His  object  seems 
mainly  to  be  to  describe  rather  the  manner  in  which  the  report  of  the  Resurrection 
affected  the  disciples.  And  so  he  makes  prominent  the  bewildered  astonishment 
of  the  women.  If  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter  be  his,  he  passes  by  the  appear- 
ance of  our  Lord  to  Mary  Magdalene  and  to  the  two  travellers  to  Emmaus  with 
just  a  word  for  each — contrasting  singularly  with  the  lovely  narrative  of  the 
former  in  John's  Gospel  and  with  the  detailed  account  of  the  latter  in  Luke's,  he 
emphasises  the  incredulity  of  the  twelve  after  receiving  the  reports.  And  in 
like  manner  he  lays  stress  upon  the  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart  which  the 
Lord  rebuked. 

I.  The  first  witness  to  the  Resurrection. — There  are  singular  diversities  in  the 
four  Gospels  in  the  account  of  the  angelic  appearances,  the  number,  occupation, 
and  attitude  of  these  superhuman  persons ;  and  contradictions  may  be  spun, 
if  one  is  so  disposed,  out  of  these  varieties.  But  it  is  wiser  to  take  another  view 
of  them,  and  to  see  in  the  varying  reports — sometimes  of  one  angel,  sometimes 
two,  sometimes  of  one  sitting  outside  the  sepulchre,  sometimes  one  within, 
sometimes  none — either  different  moments  of  time  or  differences  produced  by 
the  different  spiritual  condition  of  the  beholders.     We  know  too  little  about  the 

605 


H0MILET1C  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


laws  of  angelic  appearances,  we  know  too  little  about  the  relation  in  that  high 
region  between  the  seeing  eye  and  the  objects  beheld,  to  venture  to  say  that 
there  is  a  contradiction  where  the  narratives  present  variety.  Enough  for  us 
to  draw  the  lessons  suggested  by  that  quiet  figure  sitting  there  in  the  inner 
vestibule  of  the  grave,  gazing  on  the  tomb  where  the  Lord  of  men  and  angels 
had  lain.  He  was  a  youth.  "  The  oldest  angels  are  the  youngest,"  says  the 
great  mystic.  He  was  "  clothed  in  a  long  white  garment,"  the  sign  at  once  of 
purity  and  of  repose;  and  he  was  sitting  in  rapt  contemplation  and  quiet 
adoration  there,  where  the  body  of  Jesus  had  lain.  Wherefore  was  he  there  ? 
Because  that  Cross  strikes  its  power  upwards  as  well  as  downwards — because  He 
that  had  lain  there  is  the  Head  of  all  creation,  and  the  Lord  of  angels  as  well 
as  of  men — because  that  Resurrection  following  upon  that  Cross,  "  unto  the 
principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places,"  opened  a  new  and  wonderful  door 
into  the  unsounded  and  unfathomed  abyss  of  Divine  love — because  into  these 
things  "  angels  desire  to  look,"  and,  looking,  are  'smitten  with  adoring  wonder 
and  flushed  with  the  illumination  of  a  new  knowledge  of  what  God  is  and  of 
what  man  is  to  God.  Farther,  we  see  in  that  angel- presence  not  only  the 
indication  that  Christ  is  his  King  as  well  as  ours,  but  also  the  mark  of  his  and 
all  his  fellows'  sympathetic  participation  in  whatsoever  is  of  so  deep  interest  to 
humanity.  All  the  servants  of  our  King  in  heaven  and  earth  are  one,  and  He 
sends  forth  His  brightest  and  loftiest  to  be  brethren  and  ministers  to  them 
who  shall  be  "  heirs  of  salvation." 

II.  The  triumphant  light  cast  upon  the  cradle  and  the  Cross.—"  Jesus,  the 
Nazarene,  who  was  crucified."  Do  you  not  catch  a  tone  of  wonder  and  a  tone 
of  triumph  in  this  threefold  particularising  of  the  humanity,  the  lowly  residence, 
and  the  ignominious  death  ?  All  that  lowliness,  suffering,  and  shame  are 
brought  into  comparison  with  the  rising  from  the  dead.  The  cradle  is  illuminated 
by  the  grave,  the  Cross  by  the  empty  sepulchre.  As  at  the  beginning  there  is 
a  supernatural  entrance  into  life,  so  at  the  end  there  is  a  supernatural  resump- 
tion of  it.  The  Birth  corresponds  with  the  Resurrection,  and  both  witness  to  the 
Divinity.  Brethren,  let  us  lay  this  to  heart — that  unless  we  believe  in  the 
Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  saying  "  He  was  crucified  "  is  the  saddest  word 
that  can  be  spoken  about  any  of  the  great  ones  of  the  past.  "  If  He  be  not 
risen,  our  preaching  is  vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain."  "  If  Christ  be  not 
risen,  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins."  But  if  what  Easter  Day  commemorates  be  true, 
then  upon  all  His  earthly  life  is  thrown  a  new  light,  and  we  first  understand 
the  Cross  when  we  look  upon  the  empty  grave. 

III.  The  majestic  announcement  of  the  great  fact,  and  its  confirmation. — 
"  He  is  risen  ;  He  is  not  here."  The  first  preacher  of  the  Resurrection  was  an 
angel,  a  true  ev-angel-ist.  His  message  is  conveyed  in  these  brief  sentences, 
unconnected  with  each  other,  in  token,  not  of  abruptness  and  haste,  but  of 
solemnity.  "  He  is  risen  "  is  one  word  in  the  original — a  sentence  of  one  word, 
which  announces  the  mightiest  miracle  that  ever  was  wrought  upon  earth,  a 
miracle  which  opens  the  door  wide  enough  for  all  supernatural  events  recorded 
of  Jesus  Christ  to  find  an  entrance  to  the  whole  understanding  and  the  reason. 
"  He  is  risen."  The  Resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  is  declared  by  angel  lips  to  be 
His  own  act.  The  Divine  power  of  the  Father's  will  did  not  work  upon  Him 
as  from  without  to  raise  Him  from  the  dead;  but  He,  the  embodiment  of 
Divinity,  raised  Himself,  even  though  it  is  also  true  that  He  was  raised  from 
the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father.  These  two  things  are  not  contradictory, 
but  the  former  of  them  can  only  be  predicated  of  Him ;  and  it  sets  Him  on  a 
pedestal  immeasurably  above  and  infinitely  apart  from  all  those  to  whom  life 
is  communicated  by  a  Divine  act.  He  Himself  is  the  Life,  and  it  was  not 
possible  that  Life  should  be  holden  of  Death.     Now,  then,  note  the  confirmation 

607 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


of  this  stupendous  fact.  "  He  is  risen ;  He  is  not  here."  We  take  it  as  a 
plain  historical  fact,  which  the  extreniest  scepticism  has  never  ventured  to 
deny,  that  the  grave  of  Christ  was  empty.  The  trumped-up  story  of  the  guards 
sufficiently  shews  that.  When  the  belief  of  a  resurrection  began  to  be  spread 
abroad,  what  would  have  been  easier  for  Pharisees  and  rulers  than  to  have  gone 
to  the  sepulchre  and  rolled  back  the  stone,  and  said,  "  Look  there  !  there  is  your 
risen  Man,  lying  mouldering,  like  all  the  rest  of  us " !  They  did  not  do  it. 
Why  ?  Because  the  grave  was  empty.  Where  was  the  body  ?  They  had  it 
not,  else  they  would  have  been  glad  to  produce  it.  Now  note  the  way  in  which 
the  announcement  of  this  tremendous  fact  was  received.  With  blank  bewilder- 
ment and  terror  on  the  part  of  these  women,  followed  by  incredulity  on  the  part 
of  the  apostles  and  of  the  other  disciples.  These  things  are  on  the  surface  of 
the  narrative  ;  and  very  important  they  are.  They  plainly  tell  us  that  the  first 
hearers  did  not  believe  the  testimony  which  they  call  upon  us  to  believe.  And 
that  being  the  state  of  mind  of  the  early  disciples  on  the  Resurrection  day,  what 
becomes  of  the  modern  theory,  which  seeks  to  explain  the  fact  of  the  early 
belief  in  the  Resurrection  by  saying,  "  Oh,  they  had  worked  themselves  into 
such  a  fever  of  expectation  that  Jesus  Christ  would  rise  from  the  dead  that  the 
wish  was  father  to  the  thought,  and  they  said  He  did  because  they  expected  He 
would  "  ? 

IV.  The  summons  to  grateful  contemplation. — "  Behold  the  place  where  they 
laid  Him."  To  these  women  the  call  was  simply  one  to  come  and  see  what 
would  confirm  the  witness.  But  we  may,  perhaps,  permissibly  turn  it  to  a 
wider  purpose,  and  say  that  it  summons  us  all  to  thankful,  lowly,  believing, 
glad  contemplation  of  that  empty  grave  as  the  basis  of  all  our  hopes.  Look 
upon  it  and  upon  the  Resurrection  which  it  confirms  to  us  as  an  historical  fact. 
It  sets  the  seal  of  the  Divine  approval  on  Christ's  work,  and  declares  the 
Divinity  of  His  person  and  the  all-sufficiency  of  His  mighty  sacrifice.  "  Behold 
the  place  where  they  laid  Him,"  and,  looking  upon  it,  let  us  think  of  that 
Resurrection  as  a  prophecy  in  its  bearing  upon  us  and  upon  all  the  dear  ones 
that  have  trod  the  common  road  into  the  great  darkness.  Chrift  has  died, 
therefore  they  live  ;  Christ  lives,  therefore  we  shall  never  die.  "  Behold  the 
place  where  they  laid  Him,"  and  in  the  empty  grave  read  the  mystery  of  the 
Resurrection  as  the  pattern  and  the  symbol  of  our  higher  life — that,  "  like  as 
Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also 
should  walk  in  newness  of  life."  Oh  to  partake  more  and  more  of  that  power 
of  His  resurrection  ! — A,  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  7.  The  message  of  the  Resurrection. — The  text,  'tis  the  first  joyful  tidings 
that  came  to  the  Church  of  God  of  our  Saviour's  Resurrection,  the  first  blessed 
news  of  Christ's  triumphant  victory  over  death  and  the  grave,  and  thereby  of 
His  restoring  of  us  to  life  and  immortality.  This  day  Satan  and  the  powers 
of  hell,  all  the  enemies  of  our  salvation,  were  vanquished  and  subdued  by  Christ's 
Resurrection ;  the  hold  and  fortress  of  death,  the  grave,  was  spoiled  and  ransacked, 
the  gates  and  bars  of  hell  broken  in  pieces.  Our  Samson  hath  taken  the  gates  of 
the  Philistines  on  His  shoulders,  and  carried  them  away.  Surely  this  is  a  day  of 
joyful  tidings.  Let  it  be  told  to  the  King's  household,  published  in  the  Church 
of  God.  Say  unto  Zion,  "  Behold,  thy  God  reigneth "  :  He  hath  triumphed 
gloriously  ;  He  hath  led  captivity  captive ;  the  horse  and  the  rider,  that  pale 
horse,  and  Death  riding  on  him,  hath  He  slain  in  the  battle  (Rev.  vi.  8). 

I.  The  despatch  of  this  message,  and  that  seems  very  hasty  and  somewhat 
abrupt :  it  begins  here  with  a  word  of  diversion — "  But."  Why  so  ?  Were  they 
in  the  wrong  way  ?  or  in  an  unwarrantable  employment  ?  Just  now,  in  the 
former  verse,  he  bids  them  come  and  see  the  place,  behold  the  sepulchre  where 

608 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


the  Lord  was  laid,  and  from  whence  He  was  risen.     Why  doth  he  now  presently 
remove  them  from  it,  not  let  them  stay  and  take  their  fill  of  that  joyful  vision  ? 
'Tis  said  of  Hilarion  he  went  once  to  Jerusalem  to  see  those  monuments  of 
Christ's  death  and  passion ;  but  he  went  no  more,  he  made  no  practice  of  it, 
placed  no  piety  in  it.     So  here  the  angel  allows  them  a  sight  of  the  sepulchre  to 
confirm  their  faith  ;  but  withal  he  dismisses  them  presently,  suffers  them  not  to 
fix  their  devotion  upon  it.     Besides  this  reason,  the  angel  is  thus  quick  and 
speedy  in  his  diversion,  to  teach  us  that  even  the  spiritual  delights  of  contem- 
plation must  give  way  to  religious  and  pious  actions.     Their  piety  in  meditating 
on  His  Resurrection  must  give  way  to  their  charity  in  imparting  it  to  others. 
He  is  the  best  servant,  not  that  delights  to  stand  in  his  master's  presence,  but 
that  carefully  minds  and  diligently  goes  about  his  master's  business.     For  the 
despatch  of  this  message  here  are  two  things  considerable.     1.  From  whom  it 
comes.     The  first  news  of  Christ's  Resurrection  is  sent  by  an  angel.     ( 1 )  It  becomes 
the  excellency  of  this  great  work  of  Christ's  Resurrection  to  be  attended  and 
published  by  the  ministry  of  angels.     (2)  Fit  it  was  an  angel  should  first  publish 
it,  a  heavenly  messenger,  as  being  a  matter  supernatural  and  heavenly,  and  of 
special   revelation.     All  proclamations   are  first  published  at   the  court-gate, 
then  sent  abroad  into  the  kingdom.     This  new  revelation,  'tis  first  proclaimed 
at  heaven's  gates  by  an  angel,   and  then  sent  abroad  unto  the  sons  of  men. 
(3)  Angels  are  made  messengers  and  publishers  of  these  tidings,  and  they  gladly 
undertake  it.     See  now  there  is  a  sweet  communion  and  intercourse  'twixt  them 
and  us.     It  shews  us  the  virtue  and  power  of  that  great  atonement  of  Christ's 
death  and  bloodshed ;  it  hath  made  up  the  breach  and  alienation  'twixt  us  and 
the  angels.     They  were  all  partakers  in  God's  quarrel ;  and  therefore  the  Scripture 
presents  them  in  martial  and  military  and  warlike  appearances,  tells  us  of 
armies  and  hosts  of  angels.     When  soldiers  and  martial  men  proclaim  peace  and 
good-will,  there  is  peace  indeed.     This  office  of  love  the  angel  performs,  'tis  the 
fruit  of  Christ's  mediation,  the  merit  of  His  death,  the  purchase  of  His  passion. 
2.  By  whom  the  angel  conveys  this  message  ;  they  are  the  women  that  repaired 
to  the  sepulchre.     Reason  would  conceit  that  some  other  messengers  should  have 
been  employed  than  these  poor,  weak  women.     But  God's  thoughts  are  not  as 
man's  thoughts  are.     (1)  God  purposely  makes  choice  of  such  instruments  in 
this  great  and  weighty  service.     In  the  whole  carriage  and  economy  of  the 
gospel  God  observes  a  mixture  of  much  spiritual  power  and  glory,  with  much 
outward  baseness  and  meanness.     (2)  The  tidings  of  His  Resurrection  are  con- 
veyed into  the  world  by  weak  women.     "  Kings  and  princes,"  saith  Chrysostom, 
"  make  known  their  minds  to  inferior  people  by  their  great  officers  and  ministers 
of  state  :  God,  He  employs  poor,  feeble,  contemptible  men  to  declare  His  will 
to  the  potentates  of  the  world."     (3)  But  yet  there  is  some  congruity  that  God 
observes  in  the  choice  of  these  messengers.     These  good  women,  they  stood  to  it 
and  clave  to  Christ  when  the  apostles  all  of  them  fled  and  forsook  Him ;  they 
assisted  His  Cross  when  the  others  hid  themselves  (Mark  xv.  40) ;  they  watched 
His  burial,  repaired  early  and  weeping  to  the  sepulchre  ;  they  were  forwardest 
in  attending  His  passion;  and   so  they  are  first  made  acquainted  with  His 
Resurrection. 

II.  The  persons  to  whom  these  tidings  are  directed. — "  Tell  His  disciples  and 
Peter."  1 .  Here  is  a  general  direction  to  His  disciples.  ( 1 )  Why  is  not  the  message 
directed  to  Pilate  and  Herod,  to  Annas,  and  Caiaphas,  and  the  priests,  that  con- 
demned Him  and  compassed  His  death  ?  It  might  have  been  a  mighty  conviction 
to  them.  No ;  'tis  purposely  hid  from  them  to  punish  their  infidelity  and  former 
obstinacy.  They  had  heard  Him  preach  in  His  lifetime ;  now,  should  He  appear 
from  the  dead,  they  would  not  believe  Him.  (2)  Why  not  to  the  common  people, 
that  sinned  out  of  ignorance  ?     No ;  this  manifestation  of  His  Resurrection  was  not 

rr  609 


chap,  XVI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


made  promiscuously  to  all,  purposely  to  prepare  a  way  to  faith  and  believing.  The 
great  honour  that  Christianity  doth  to  God  is  to  embrace  His  truth  upon  belief. 
(3)  This  message  and  tidings  of  Christ's  Resurrection  is  directed  to  His  disciples. 
(a)  They  were  the  only  visible  body  of  Christians — to  teach  us,  to  whom  the 
benefit  of  Christ's  Resurrection  belongeth  ;  'tis  to  the  Church,  'tis  limited  and 
confined  only  to  believers.  (6)  The  faith  of  the  disciples  was  now  in  a  great 
weakness ;  they  had  almost  given  over  all  belief  that  Jesus  was  the  Messias 
(Luke  xxiv.  21).  Our  faith,  not  only  when  'tis  in  robore,  in  its  full  strength  and 
vivacity,  but  when  'tis  in  vuhie?*e,  wounded  and  weakened  and  overwhelmed 
with  temptations,  is  accepted  of  Him.  (c)  These  disciples  were  at  this  time  full 
of  sadness  and  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  their  Master.  Such  mourners  are  blessed 
mourners  ;  they  shall  be  comforted.  They  that  can  lament  for  His  passion,  they 
shall  be  partakers  of  the  joy  and  comfort  of  His  Resurrection.  2.  To  acquaint 
Peter  with  these  good  tidings  an  express  message  is  directed  to  him.  (1)  Peter 
had  fallen  most  foully — denied,  forsworn,  his  Master  with  curses  and  execrations. 
Oh,  'twas  a  great  sin  of  the  first  magnitude  !  And  yet  to  such  and  so  vile  a  sinner 
are  these  tidings  directed.  It  shews  the  virtue  of  the  gospel  of  Christ's  death 
and  Resurrection  ;  the  greatest  sinners,  the  most  heinous  offenders,  may  get  good 
by  it.  (2)  Peter's  faith  and  graces  have  received  a  very  great  bruise  and  maim 
by  his  fall :  his  conscience  is  deeply  wounded.  He  is  like  one  fallen  from  a  high 
place,  exceedingly  bruised,  and  lies  for  dead.  Such  a  one  must  be  catched  up 
in  our  arms,  more  carefully  tended.  (3)  Peter  is  now  overwhelmed  with  sorrow 
for  his  heinous  sin  :  he  wept  bitterly,  no  doubt  abhorred  himself  in  dust  and 
ashes.  And  to  extraordinary  mourners  God  graciously  directs  extraordinary 
and  special  and  more  personal  comforts.  (4)  Peter  by  his  -great  fall  in  denying 
of  Christ  hath  incurred  a  great  and  an  infamous  scandal,  given  a  great  offence 
to  the  whole  Church  of  God.  This  personal  message  to  him  shall  not  only 
comfort  his  conscience,  but  cure  his  credit  too.  It  plainly  signifies  he  must  not 
be  cast  off,  but  be  dealt  mercifully  withal,  and  accounted  as  a  brother.  Nay,  it 
restores  him  not  only  to  his  discipleship,  but  to  his  office  of  an  apostle.  The 
tidings  are  sent  to  him  under  the  name  of  Peter,  his  apostolical  name.  (5)  From 
this  personal  message  to  Peter  we  may  briefly  collect  these  three  corollaries  : 
(a)  As  loving  parents  are  most  tender  of  their  weakest  children,  so  is  Christ  to 
the  feeble  Christians,  sorrowful,  heavy-hearted  Christians  ;  His  bowels  of  com- 
passion yearn  most  towards  them.  (6)  The  angel  pities  Peter,  and  hath  care 
and  compassion  on  him.  Peter's  tears  were  the  wine  of  angels  ;  they  were  a 
banquet  in  heaven,  (c)  In  conformity  to  Christ,  in  imitation  of  His  angel,  it 
must  be  our  duty  to  practise  the  charge  given  to  these  messengers  ;  have  a  care 
of  Peter,  of  a  sorrowful,  contrite,  broken-hearted  Christian. 

III.  The  sum  of  the  message,  the  news  to  be  imparted. — "  He  goes  before  you 
into  Galilee :  there  shall  ye  see  Him."  1.  Here  is  an  intimation  of  Christ's 
Resurrection.  The  angel  is  careful  to  confirm  that  truth  to  them.  Indeed,  'tis 
the  main  capital  truth  of  Christian  religion — the  sum  and  pith  and  kernel  of 
the  gospel.  It  strengthens  our  faith  in  other  saving  truths.  (1)  It  confirms 
us  in  the  truth  of  His  Divinity  (Rom.  i  4;  Ps.  xvi.  10).  (2)  It  confirms 
to  us  the  benefit  of  His  death  and  passion.  Had  He  died  only,  death  had 
overcome  Him;  now  He  is  risen,  He  hath  overcome  death.  (3)  This  intimation 
is  the  strongest  means  to  revive  and  comfort  them.  Faith,  'tis  like  the  flower 
called  heliotropium  :  when  the  sun  sets,  it  fades  and  closes ;  when  the  sun  rises 
and  returns,  it  blows  out  and  flourishes.  2.  Here  is  a  prediction  that  must 
evidence  the  truth  of  His  Resurrection.  "  He  goes  before  you  into  Galilee." 
(1)  Here  is  an  act  of  local  motion.  Christ's  body  now,  after  His  Resurrection, 
'tis  a  glorified  body,  and  yet  within  the  compass  and  condition  of  a  true  natural 
body,  to  be  transferred  by  motion  from  one  place  to  another,     (a)  After  His 

610 


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


Resurrection  'twas  a  finite  body : "  He  is  risen ;  He  is  not  here."  When  it  was  in  one 
place,  it  was  not  in  another,  (b)  It  was  a  sensible  body  (Luke  xxiv.  39).  (c)  It 
was  organical :  we  read  of  His  hands,  feet,  side.  It  had  all  the  parts  and  members 
of  a  human  body,  in  a  just  proportion  and  situation,  the  fit  proportions  of  a  human 
body.  (2)  Here  is  an  act  of  prevention  :  "  He  goes  before  you."  Early  and  speedily 
He  hastens  to  Galilee,  to  visit  and  comfort  them.  Tis  the  gracious  course  of 
God's  preventing  goodness  ;  He  is  forward  to  relieve  and  comfort  His  Church.  All 
delays  are  tedious  to  Him.  Nay,  see  the  impatience  of  His  love  to  His  poor 
disciples  :  He  appoints  them  Galilee  ;  but  He  cannot  withhold  Himself  so  long  from 
them — -He  appears  to  them  sooner,  (a)  To  Mary  in  the  garden.  (6)  To  the 
women  in  the  way  as  they  are  going  to  Jerusalem,  (c)  To  the  two  disciples 
as  they  are  going  to  Emmaus.  (d)  To  the  apostles  ere  they  stirred  one  foot 
out  of  the  city.  This  is  the  speediness  of  His  mercy  (Isa.  lxv.  24).  He  is  still 
better  than  His  promise.  (3)  Here  is  the  designation  of  the  place  :  "  Galilee." 
Why  to  so  remote  a  place  ?  (a)  As  'tis  said  of  Peter's  sinking,  'twas  not  pedes, 
but  Jides ;  not  his  feet,  but  his  faith  failed  him, — so  Christ  here  requires  them  not 
to  exercise  their  feet,  but  their  faith.  He  would  have  them  begin  with  faith, 
and  then  they  shall  end  in  sight,  (b)  He  sends  them  so  far  the  more  to  quicken 
and  inflame  their  desires  and  longings  to  see  Him.  If  He  comes  sooner  to  them, 
'tis  to  comfort  them  ;  if  He  stays  longer,  'tis  to  quicken  and  enliven  their  desires 
towards  Him.  (4)  In  particular  Galilee  is  the  place  appointed,  (a)  'Twas  locus 
tutus :  He  graciously  provides  for  His  disciples'  safety ;  He  calls  them  out  of 
Jerusalem,  the  place  of  persecution — makes  them  withdraw  themselves  from 
that  bloody  generation,  where  they  were  beset  with  dangers — leads  them  into  a 
place  of  safety,  where  with  greater  freedom  they  might  converse  with  Him. 
(b)  'Twas  locus  familiar  is,  a  place  where  He  had  usually  conversed  with  them; 
'twas  the  place  of  His  abode — He  was  called  a  Galilean.  Purposely  Christ 
chooses  all  the  circumstances  that  might  help  forward  their  faith.  In  Galilee 
they  had  often  enjoyed  His  presence ;  His  appearing  there  would  more  fully 
affect  them,  (c)  'Twas  locus  discipulorum  plenus  ;  it  was  a  place  wherein  Christ 
had  most  of  His  disciples.  His  preaching  had  nothing  the  success  at  Jerusalem 
that  it  had  in  Galilee.  In  Galilee  He  was  seen  of  five  hundred  brethren  at 
once.  Here  is  the  place  that  Christ  delights  to  visit  and  frequent,  where  He 
hath  the  fullest  churches,  the  greatest  communion  of  saints  and  believers. 
(d)  'Tis  locus  typicus.  Christ  calls  them  from  Jewry  to  Galilee ;  it  casts  the 
shadow  of  a  type  and  prefiguration ;  it  represents  to  us  the  passage  and  remove 
of  Christ  and  His  gospel  from  the  Jews  to  the  Gentiles.  Before  in  His  lifetime  He 
confined  His  own  presence  and  preaching  to  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  and  forbade 
His  apostles  to  preach  unto  the  Gentiles  ;  but  His  Resurrection  brake  down  the 
wall  of  separation;  now  their  commission  is  enlarged,  "  Go,  teach  all  nations." — 
Bishop  Brownrigg. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Vers.    1,    2.    The   quest   of  faith.  —  is  commanded  for  that  which  is  not. 

1.  Faith  seeks  after  life  in  the  very  3.  The   Spirit   of   God,   which   guides 

sepulchre  of  Christ,   and  it  will   find  these  holy  women,  permits  them  not 

even  more  than  it   seeks,  because   it  to  dispense  with  the  observance  even 

seeks   it   as   it   ought,    and   out   of   a  of   a   dying   law,   that    so  they   may 

principle  of  obedience.     2.  A  solid  and  perform   a    service    to    Christ    which 

substantial  devotion  is  always  regular,  could   be   deferred    but    a   very   little 

does   everything    in   its   proper   time,  while. — P.  Quesnel. 
and  is  very  far  from  neglecting  what  The  earnestness  of  the  women. — It  is 

6J1 


CHAP.   XVI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


no  wonder  if  we  find  the  women  here 
more  earnest  than  the  apostles  in 
their  grief  and  in  regard  to  the  death, 
the  burial,  and  the  embalming  of  the 
Lord's  body.  The  woman  is  the  first 
in  the  expression  of  her  grief,  for  she 
was  the  first  in  hastening  to  the  Fall ; 
she  goes  before  to  the  tomb  who  was 
the  precursor  to  corruption  ;  she  brings 
the  tidings  of  the  Resurrection  who 
had  been  the  herald  of  death ;  she 
who  had  conveyed  to  the  man  the 
message  of  so  dreadful  a  destruction 
herself  conveys  to  men  the  sounds  of 
a  great  salvation ;  that  the  loss  which 
she  occasioned  by  her  suggestion  to 
unbelief  she  might  now  compensate  for 
by  the  tidings  of  faith  (Gen.  iii.  6,12; 
1  Tim.  ii.  14,  15). — Pet.  Chrysologus. 

Apparent  discrepancies  in  the  narra- 
tives.— To  harmonise  the  accounts  a 
certain  effort  is  necessary,  because  they 
tell  of  interviews  with  men  and  women 
who  had  to  pass  through  all  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  despair,  suspense,  rapturous 
incredulity,  and  faith.  Each  of  them 
contributes  a  portion  of  the  tale. 
From  St.  John  we  learn  that  Mary 
Magdalene  came  early  to  the  sepulchre, 
from  St.  Matthew  that  others  were 
with  her,  from  St.  Mark  that  these 
women,  dissatisfied  with  the  unskilful 
ministrations  of  men  whose  rank  knew 
nothing  of  such  functions,  had  brought 
sweet  spices  to  anoint  Him  who  was 
about  to  claim  their  adoration ;  St. 
John  tells  how  Mary,  seeing  the  empty 
sepulchre,  ran  to  tell  Peter  and  John 
of  its  desecration  ;  the  others,  that  in 
her  absence  an  angel  told  the  glad 
tidings  to  the  women  ;  St.  Mark,  that 
Mary  was  the  first  to  whom  Jesus 
Himself  appeared.  And  thenceforth 
the  narrative  more  easily  falls  into 
its  place.  This  confusion,  however 
perplexing  to  thoughtless  readers,  is 
inevitable  in  the  independent  histories 
of  such  events,  derived  from  the  various 
parties  who  delighted  to  remember 
each  what  had  befallen  himself. — 
Dean  Chadwick. 

Ver.  2.  The  first  day  of  the  new 
creation. — Surely   we    Christians   may 

612 


see  the  reason  of  our  keeping  this  day 
far  more  than  any  other  day,  inas- 
much as  it  is  the  first  of  all  days,  the 
first  day  of  the  old  creation,  and  the 
first  day  of  the  new  in  Christ,  as  on 
this  day  Christ  rose  from  the  grave. 
On  this  day,  the  first  day  in  the  begin- 
ning, the  light  was  created.  On  this 
day,  the  first  of  days,  Christ,  the  True 
Light,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  rose 
from  the  grave.  On  this  day  the 
Holy  Spirit  came  down,  the  true  illu- 
mination, to  fill  the  new  creation  with 
the  light  of  God.  This  day,  therefore, 
is  beyond  all  days  the  day  of  our 
Maker,  the  day  of  our  Redeemer,  the 
day  of  our  Sanctifier  (Ps.  cxviii.  21-25.) 
The  journey  of  the  women. — A  jour- 
ney of — 1.  Love.  2.  Provident  care. 
3.  Hope.     4.  Joy.     5.  Life. 

Ver.  3.  "  Who  shall  roll  us  aviay  the 
stone  ?  " — This  question  is  applicable 
to — 1.  Those  who  are  seeking  Divine 
guidance  and  direction.  To  be  involved 
in  circumstances  of  doubt  and  per- 
plexity respecting  some  path  is  no 
evidence  of  the  want  of  the  Divine 
favour.  God  sometimes  keeps  His 
children  in  the  dark  to  secure  their 
safety  (Isa.  1.  10).  2.  To  the  subjects 
of  anxious  care  through  poverty  and 
affliction.  "  Stand  still,  and  see  the 
salvation  of  God."  3.  To  the  per- 
secuted and  tempted  believer.  God 
will  strengthen  thee  in  thy  weakness, 
and  nerve  thee  for  thy  duty.  4.  The 
hour  of  death.  The  eye  of  sense  sees 
only  the  western  horizon,  and  says, 
"  The  sun  is  going  down."  The  eye  of 
faith  turns  to  the  glowing  east,  and 
sees  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  rising 
with  healing  in  His  wings. 

Obstacles  in  the  Christian's  path. — 
Many  of  the  obstacles  in  the  life  of 
the  Christian,  when  they  are  first 
sighted  ahead  and  when  they  are  seen 
from  a  distance,  appear  to  be  invincible, 
insurmountable — barriers  never  to  be 
overstepped  or  moved  out  of  the  way. 
The  fact  is,  they  are  looked  at  only 
as  to  themselves  and  their  own  great 
size,  and  for  the  time  there  are  not 
taken  into  account  the  weapons  which 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


may  be  brought  to  bear  against  them  had    been    removed    from    its    place, 

and  for  their  removal.     In  themselves,  Filled    with    amazement,    they    seem 

and  as  they  stand  before  us,  they  are  to  have  paused  for  a  while ;  and  then, 

certainly  formidable  and  fear-inspiring.  while    Mary   of    Magdala   ran   off   to 

Any  mountain  in  the  Alpine  range  is  summon  Peter  and  John  (John  xx.  2), 

certainly  of   itself  rather   a  startling  the  other  women  gathered  courage  to 

and  somewhat   real   obstacle  ;    but   it  climb  up  to  the  vestibule  and  enter  it. 

only   requires,   that   one   should   pass  And  here  a  still  more  amazing  spectacle 

over  it  into  the  fertile  fields  beyond,  a  met   their   view.      They  saw — in   the 

stout  heart,  and  a  good  physical  frame,  mortuary  chamber,   I    suppose,  or   at 

and  abundance  of  "stay"  and  resolu-  the  entrance  into  it — a  youth  sitting 

tion,  and  plenty  of  time.     A  flood  of  on  the  right   hand,  clothed  in  a  long 

water  or  an   army   of  men  is,   either  white  stole,  i.e.  a  talar,  "  which  indi- 

of  them,  fear- inspiring  under  certain  cated   a    heavenly   being,    none   other 

circumstances ;  but  the  one,  be  it  re-  wearing  such  a  vestment."    They  would 

membered,  is  made  up  of  single  drops,  know  him  for  an  angel  by  his  garb 

and   the   other   of   single   units ;    and  and  by  his  youth,  angels  being  assumed 

either   the  one  or  the  other  may  be  never  to  lose  the  bloom  and  beauty  of 

very  easily  restrained  or  destroyed. —  youth.     "  And  they  were  affrighted,"  or 

W.  M.  Arthur.  rather  amazed,  the  word  denoting  the 

extreme  mental  perturbation  which  a 

Ver.    4.    The   stone  rolled    away. —  supernatural    presence    naturally    in- 

I.   To  let  Christ  out  of  the  grave. —  spires  in  those  who  are  compassed  with 

1.    To  express  the  Divine  acceptance  "  this  muddy  vesture  of  decay."     And 

of    the   work   of   Christ.       2.    To    do  what  wonder  that  amazement,  a  solemn 

homage  to  the  person  of  Christ.     3.  To  awe,  should  seize  them,  when,  in  the 

acknowledge  the  grandeur  of  the  occa-  chamber  of  death,  they  saw  the  very 

sion.     4.  To  shew  the  futility  of  the  type  of  immortal  life !     An  angel  in 

mightiest   human  opposition.      5.    To  a  tomb  should   teach  us  at   least,   if 

reveal    the    sympathy    of    the     holy  it  did  not  teach  them,  that  death  is 

universe  with  the  plan  of  salvation.  not  the  end,  but  a  new  beginning. — 

II.  To  let  Christians  into  the  grave.  S.  Cox,  D.D. 
— 1.   To  convince  them  of  the  reality 

of  the  Resurrection.      2.  To   comfort  Ver.  6.  The  empty  grave. — 1.  A  sure 

them  with  the  fact  of  the  Resurrection,  and  undeniable  proof  of  Christ's  Deity. 

3.  To  impress  them  with  the  power  of  2.  A  full  security  that  He  is  alive,  to 

the  Resurrection.     4.  To  qualify  them  die  no   more.     3.    An  awful  view  of 

for  the  announcement  of  the  Resurrec-  the   evil   nature   of   sin.     4.    The   in- 

tion.     5.  To  assure  them  of  their  own  sufficiency  and  uselessness  of   all  our 

resurrection. — B.  D.  Johns.  own   righteousness   in   the   matter   of 

our   justification  before  God.       5.    In 

Ver.  5.  The  tomb  of  a  wealthy  Jew,  the  grave  of  Christ  we  may  see  the 

even  when  hewn  from  the  solid  rock,  curse   of   the  broken  law  buried,  and 

was  a  large  and  ample  structure.     It  the  wrath  of  God  finally  and  effectually 

commonly   consisted   of    at   least   two  appeased    in    relation    to    every    one 

parts:  ( 1 )  an  antechamber,  which  often  who  enjoys  an  interest  in  a  risen  and 

took  the  form  of  a  long  vestibule  or  glorified  Redeemer.     6.  Here  we  may 

corridor;  and  (2)  the  mortuary  chamber  see  death  itself  lie  buried,  so  that  none 

itself,  in  which  the  body  or  bodies  were'  of   the  followers  of   Christ  have  any 

laid.      Joseph's   tomb   seems   to    have  reason  to  be  afraid  of  that  last  enemy, 

been  of  this  type.     When  the  women  — J.  Young. 

looked  up  as  they  drew  near,  they  saw  "He   is  not  here." — 1.   Not  in  the 

at  once    that   the   rocky   slab   which  grave,  for  He  is  risen  from  the  dead, 

closed  the  corridor  on  the  outer  side  2.   Not  in   the  garden,  for   He   goes 

613 


CHAP.  XVI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


forth  into  all  the  world.  3.  Not  here 
on  earth,  for  He  is  entered  into  His 
Divine  glory. 

Where  Christ  is  not. — There  is  but 
one  place,  only  one,  in  which  Christ 
is  not  to  be  found — His  grave.  He  is 
not  there;  He  arose  and  left  it,  and 
has  never  returned  thither.  If,  then, 
that  be  the  only  place  where  He  is 
not,  He  must  be  found  by  you,  if  you 
seek  Him  everywhere  else,  and  every- 
where only  to  bless  you  and  do  you 
good.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."  And 
yet,  though  emptied  of  Christ,  that 
grave  is  full  of  consolation.  His  not 
bein2  there  tells  us  that  He  is 
Emmanuel,  "  God  with  us  — that  His 
sacrifice  is  accepted,  and  that  we  are 
saved. 

"  The  place  where  they  laid  Him." — 
With  most  tombs  the  interest  consists 
in  the  fact  that  all  that  is  mortal  of 
the  saint  or  the  hero  or  the  near 
relative  rests  beneath  the  stone  or  the 
sod  on  which  we  gaze.  Of  our  Lord's 
sepulchre  the  real  interest  is  that  He 
no  longer  tenants  it.  It  is  not  as  the 
place  in  which  He  lies  ;  it  is  not  even 
chiefly  as  the  place  wherein  He  lay ; 
it  is  as  the  place  from  which  He  rose 
that  the  tomb  of  Jesus  speaks  to  faith. 
—  Canon  Liddon. 

The  empty  tomb  of  Jesus  recalls  an 
event  which  is  as  well  attested  as  any 
in  history  ;  it  is  so  attested  as  to  put 
the  idea  of  what  is  called  illusion  out 
of  the  question.  The  main  purpose, 
the  first  duty,  of  the  apostolic  ministry 
was  to  witness  to  the  fact  that  Christ 
had  risen.  The  apostles  did  not  teach 
the  Resurrection  as  a  revealed  truth,  as 
they  taught,  for  example,  the  doctrine 
of  justification;  they  taught  the  Resur- 
rection as  a  fact  of  experience,  a  fact 
of  which  they  themselves  had  had 
experience.  And  this  is  why  the 
different  Evangelists  did  not  report  the 
same  appearances  of  our  Risen  Lord. 
Each  one  reports  that  which  he  him- 
self witnessed,  or  that  which  was 
witnessed  by  an  eye-witness  on  whose 
authority  he  writes.  Put  the  various 
attestations  together,  and  the  evidence 

614 


is  irresistible.  That  which  these  wit- 
nesses attest  must  be  true,  unless  they 
have  conspired  to  deceive  us,  or  are 
themselves  deceived.  The  idea  that 
they  are  deceiving  us  cannot  be  enter- 
tained by  any  man  who  understands 
human  character  ;  the  idea  that  they 
were  themselves  deceived  is  inconsistent 
with  the  character  of  the  witness  which 
they  give. — Ibid. 

The  empty  tomb  an  incitement  to 
Christian  endeavour. — And  why  ?  Be- 
cause of  all  effective  endeavour  hope 
must  be  a  main  ingredient,  and  "hope 
nowhere  so  learns  successfully  to  resist 
the  pressure  and  shock  of  disappoint- 
ment, and  to  reach  forward  with 
confidence  into  an  unexplored  future, 
as  at  the  empty  tomb  of  Jesus.  Had 
He  been  crucified  without  rising  from 
the  dead,  hope  in  the  eventual  triumph 
of  truth  and  goodness  must  perforce 
have  died  away  from  the  hearts  of 
men ;  but  as  it  is  the  Resurrection  is 
a  warrant  that  if  the  heaviness  of 
spiritual  discouragement  should  endure 
for  a  night,  the  joy  of  spiritual  success, 
patiently  awaited,  cometh  in  the  morn- 
ing. So  it  is  that  those  who  while 
endeavouring  to  live  the  new  life  of 
Christ  are  fighting  a  hard  battle 
against  untoward  circumstances,  against 
strong  insurgent  passions,  against 
deeply  rooted  and  perhaps  very  evil 
habits,  against  some  fatal  weakness  or 
warp  of  the  will.  Fail  they  must,  if 
they  essay  to  fight  that  battle  in  their 
own  natural  strength  ;  but  they  can 
do  all  things  through  Christ  that 
strengtheneth  them,  and  the  Christ 
that  strengtheneth  them  is  not  only 
the  teacher  Christ,  the  example  Christ, 
the  perfect  sacrifice  for  sin,  He  is 
also  the  Risen  Christ,  risen  for  their 
justification,  and  to  this  end  making 
them  a  free  present  of  His  Resurrection 
strength.  As  such  a  soul  in  moments  of 
deep  discouragement  comes  in  thought 
to  see  the  place  where  the  Lord  lay 
once,  but  where  He  lies  no  more,  it 
learns  to  understand  its  share  in  His 
great  victory,  and  to  expect  with 
confidence  that  He  will  take  it  out  of 
the  horrible  pit,  out  of  the  miry  clay, 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


and  will  set  its  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  and  remorse  had  wrung  his  heart  with 

will   order   its   goings.      And   so,  too,  anguish,  which  could   bear   no   other 

with   enter  prises   undertaken   for   the  witness  than  the  eye  of  Heaven  :  "  He 

good  of  others — enterprises  which  seem  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."     Happy 

to  be  stricken  with  the  note  of  failure,  the   tears    which    Peter    shed   in   the 

which  fail  over  and  over  again,  which  seed-time   of    his   sorrow  !    and   great 

we  are  tempted  to  give  up  as  a  bad  the    measure    of    his   joy    when    the 

business.     Do  not  give  up  that  enter-  reaping  of  the  harvest  came ! 

prise,  be  it  what  it  may,  if  you  can  III.  In   order    that   he    might    be 

dare  to  offer  it,  if  you  have  offered  it,  invigorated  for  future  duty. — "  When 

to   God   as   intended   to  promote  His  thou   are  converted,"   said  our   Lord, 

glory  and  the  good  of  your  fellow-men —  "strengthen     thy     brethren."       The 

do  not  give  it  up.     There  was  darkness  infant   Church   was   in    some    degree 

over  the  whole  world  on  the  day  of  committed   to  his    especial   care ;  and 

Calvary — darkness  which   lately  por-  therefore  an  express  revelation  of  his 

tended,  though  it  necessarily  preceded,  Master's    triumph     over    death    was 

the    brightness    of    the    Resurrection  vouchsafed,  that  *he   might  bless   the 

morning.     Your   enterprise  will   have  God   and  Father   of   our   Lord   Jesus 

its  Easter,  if  you  will  only  have  the  Christ,  who,  according  to  His  abundant 

patience    and    the    grace    to    wait. —  mercy,   had  begotten  him  again  to  a 

Canon  Liddon.  lively    hope   by   the    Resurrection    of 

Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  His  faith 
Ver.  7.  The  message  to  Peter. —  was  to  be  confirmed  by  the  tidings  of 
Whence  happened  it  that  to  Peter,  that  wondrous  event.  His  holy  bold- 
guilty,  fallen  Peter,  is  vouchsafed  not  ness  in  the  great  gospel  cause  was 
only  a  common  interest  with  his  to  be  aroused  by  this  pledge  of  his 
brethren  in  the  angelic  tidings,  but  Saviour's  power  and  truth.  And  thus 
a  separate  and  individual  communica-  it  actually  happened.  He  continued 
tion  ?  sound     in     the     faith,     unshaken    in 

I.  Because  he  had  greatly  offended  danger,  unmoved  in  tribulation,  and 
against  his  Lord  and  Master. — The  at  length  laid  down  his  life  for  his 
Good  Shepherd  went,  as  it  were,  into  Master,  with  whom  he  now  reigns 
the  wilderness  to  recover  him  to  the  in  glory  everlasting,  bearing  on  his 
way  of  life  and  salvation.  And  what  brow  the  bright  diadem  of  Christian 
message  so  likely  to  effect  the  pur-  martyrdom.  1.  The  preachers  of  the 
poses  of  infinite  love,  or  to  animate  gospel  may  learn  from  the  angel's 
the  apostle's  hopes,  as  the  assurance  message  what  should  be  the  pattern 
that  Christ  had  gotten  Himself  the  of  their  own  ministrations.  We  should 
victory  over  death,  had  triumphed  guide  the  undutiful  son  to  the  tender 
gloriously  over  the  wide  dominion  of  Father  whom  he  has  left ;  and  when 
the  grave,  and  proved  Himself  to  be  he  comes  to  himself,  when  he  arises 
the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  the  to  seek  salvation,  we  should  shew  how 
Resurrection  from  the  dead  ?  He  was  his  peace  has  been  made,  and  how 
thus  taught  that  the  sincerity  and  he  may  partake  the  mercies  of  that 
bitterness  of  repentance  which  he  had  amnesty  which  the  trumpet  of  the 
felt  were  not  in  vain  ;  but  that  the  gospel  jubilee  proclaims  to  all.  2.  The 
same  compassion  which  had  awakened  spiritual  application  of  this  subject 
in  his  mind  a  salutary  sense  of  his  will  also  teach  us  the  duty  of  pre- 
guilt  still  waited  to  pardon,  to  em-  paring  to  meet  our  Risen  Saviour  in 
brace,  to  restore  him.  the    world    of    glory.     He    hath    first 

II.  Because  he  was  a  penitent  departed  to  prepare  the  way  for  us. — 
transgressor. — "  The  remembrance   of  R.  P.  Buddicom. 

his   sin   was   grievous   unto  him,    the  A  forgotten  promise. — In    common 

burden  of  it  was  intolerable."     Shame  with  the  apostles  they  had  forgotten 

G15 


chap.  XVI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  ST.  MARK. 


His  gracious  promise,  as  in  our  hours 
of  darkness  we  too  commonly  forget 
the  words  which  should  inspire  trust 
and  hope  :  "  But  after  I  am  risen,  I 
will  go  before  you  into  Galilee " 
(Mark  xiv.  28  :  see  also,  for  the 
pastoral  figure,  the  previous  verse), — 
go  before  you  as  a  shepherd  who 
collects  and  leads  his  scattered  sheep. 
It  may  be  doubted  whether  we  have 
any  of  us  laid  such  stress  on  this 
promise  as  it  deserves,  or  as  the  Gospels 
lay  on  it,  and  on  the  means  taken  to 
secure  its  fulfilment — whether  we  have 
not  been  almost  as  forgetful  of  it,  and 
with  less  excuse,  as  the  apostles  them- 
selves. What  it  really  meant  was, 
that  before  they  returned  from  the 
feast  to  their  Galilean  homes  Jesus 
would  be  there,  going  before  them  and 
shewing  the  way.  Had  they  remem- 
bered the  promise  and  acted  on  it, 
how  much  suffering  they  might  have 
been  spared  !  If,  instead  of  mourn- 
ing and  weeping  in  Jerusalem,  they 
had  set  out  for  Galilee,  assured  that 
He  would  there  manifest  Himself  to 
them  and  renew  His  broken  inter- 
course with  them,  the  days  lost  in 
grief  might  have  been  bright  with 
hope  and  action. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Galilee,  the  place  of  meeting. — Galilee 
was  the  place  where  He  had  spent 
most  of  His  time  on  earth,  where  His 
first  miracle  had  been  wrought,  and 
where  His  apostles  had  been  called 
to  follow  Him.  It  was  the  locality 
where  He  Himself  had  been  brought 
up,  and  also  the  native  place  of  the 
dearest  of  His  disciples — Peter,  James, 
and  John.  These  had  followed  Him 
from  Galilee  to  Jerusalem,  and  there 
had  witnessed  many  sad  and  solemn- 
ising scenes — scenes  fitted  to  trouble, 
to  agitate,  and  to  overwhelm.  Re- 
membering all  this,  we  cannot  help 
seeing  that  there  was  great  tenderness 
and  love  on  the  part  of  the  Redeemer 
in  asking  them  to  meet  Him  after 
His  Resurrection, — not  at  Jerusalem, 
where  He  had  been  faithlessly  betrayed 
by  one  of  the  twelve ;  not  at  Geth- 
semane,  the  scene  of  His  indescrib- 
able   agony;  not   at   Calvary,   where 

616 


He  had  poured  out  His  soul  even  unto 
death ;  but  in  Galilee — remote  and 
secluded  Galilee — inseparably  asso- 
ciated with  the  memory  of  their 
earliest  days,  and  with  their  first  im- 
pressions of  the  riches  of  the  Saviour's 
grace. 

A  testing  lesson  in  faith. — We  believe 
on  evidence,  but  in  difficult  things  we 
want  the  greatest  possible  amount  of 
evidence.  Faith  is  awakened  in  us, 
but  faith  needs  to  be  trained  and 
confirmed  by  some  hard  act  of  faith. 
The  disciples  heard  of  the  Resurrection, 
but  heard  it  as  an  idle  tale.  Then 
He  appeared  to  them,  and  they  were 
affrighted,  supposing  they  had  seen  a 
spirit.  They  behold  His  hands  and 
feet ;  they  handle  Him,  and  find  that 
He  has  flesh  and  bones,  and  is  not 
a  ghostly  apparition.  But  there  may 
yet  be  room  for  doubt;  it  may  be  an 
illusion  or  contagion  of  credulity  that 
has  crept  into  their  wearied  and  ex- 
cited minds.  And  so  they  are  led 
away  from  the  scene  of  the  event  to 
Galilee,  a  three  days'  journey.  Thus 
a  twofold  end  is  gained :  fresh  con- 
firmation, and  a  stern,  testing  lesson 
in  faith.  "Is  it,  after  all,"  we  can 
imagine  them  saying,  "  worth  the  while 
to  make  the  journey  to  Galilee  ?  Can 
He  who  died  on  the  Cross,  whose 
feet  were  pierced  with  nails,  journey 
thither  ?  That  He  should  appear  here 
is  possible ;  we  have  heard  the  like  be- 
fore :  but  will  He  appear  in  Galilee  ?  " 
So  their  minds  may  have  acted ;  and 
as  they  made  the  journey  every  step 
and  every  hour  must  have  tended  to 
throw  them  out  of  their  belief  and 
hope.  For  there  is  nothing  that  so 
tests  our  faith  in  an  event  difficult  of 
belief  as  to  get  out  of  the  atmosphere 
of  it.  The  wonder  lessens  as  we  go 
away  from  it.  When  remote  from  it, 
the  mind  settles  back  into  the  old 
habit  of  belief,  and  into  its  every- day 
habit.  And  nothing  so  aids  this 
tendency  as  a  journey.  Its  weariness 
takes  away  the  edge  of  interest;  the 
wider  view  of  the  world  draws  us  back 
to  the  steady  order  of  the  world  and 
the  great  facts  of  nature.    In  a  journey 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


we  believe  in  what  we  see ;    we  are  peals  of  the  world.     This  journey  of 

engrossed    in     the     changing     scene,  simple   trust   and  stout  adherence  to 

Travel  helps  the  mind,  but  it  is  not  hope  was  a  fine  preparation  for  harder 

favourable  to  the  finer  exercises  of  the  experiences    soon    to    follow.      There 

spirit.     This  journey   to   Galilee   was  would   come   times  when   not   merely 

made    by   the    disciples   in   resistance  the  faltering  of  their  own  hearts  was 

of  all  these  influences.     Doubtless  the  against  them,   but  all  the  powers  of 

energy  of  their  faith  sank  with  wear  i-  the  world — times  when  their  only  refuge 

ness,    and    their   practical   minds   fell  would  be  their  faith  in  the  Risen  and 

under  the  spell  of  the  old,  every-day  Ascended  Lord.     Then  the  memory  of 

world.     Doubtless  they  often  said  to  this  experience,  crowned  by  actual  sight 

one  another,  "  Has  not  our  life  these  of  their  Master,  would  come  to  their 

three   years  been   a   mistake?     Have  rescue. — T.  T.  Munger,  D.D. 
we  not  left  a  real   and  rational   life 

in  the  world  for  the  vagaries  of  an  Ver.  8.  "  They  were  afraid" — Why  ? 

enthusiast  ?  "    This  is  a  temptation  that  Certainly  not,  as  Petter  supposes,  "from 

we  all  undergo, — the  temptation  to  let  the  apprehension  of  some  hurt  or  danger 

go  the  ideals  of  life  that  have  been  which  might  befall  them  by  or  upon 

revealed   to   us — purity,    honour,    un-  the  apparition  of  the  angel  to  them." 

selfishness,    self-denial,  truth,   spiritu-  Neither  is  it  natural  to  think  of  any 

ality — and  sink  back  into  the  selfish,  far-seeing    solicitude    lest    the    news 

striving   world   that  is   all  about  us,  should  get  wind  and   reach  the  ears 

clamouring  at  every  door  of  our  nature  of  the  members  of  the  Sanhedrin,  so 

for  entrance.     But  if  this  experience  as  to  arouse  to  persecution.    Dr.  Edward 

of   the   disciples  was  a  trial  of  their  Wells   comes   nearer   nature.     "  For," 

faith,   it   also   strengthened   it.      For  says   he,   "  they  were   afraid  to  stay, 

faith  is  not   hurt   by   doubt   until   it  and  not  to  hasten  all  they  could  to  the 

yields  to  it.     The  very  weakness  and  apostles."     They  were  in  a  tumult  of 

faltering  of  faith  may  be  turned  into  commotion,  and  could  not  pause  by  the 

strength  by  pressing  on  in  its  path,  way  to  speak  to  any. — J.  Morison,  D.D. 
fighting  doubt,  and  resisting  the  ap- 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—18. 
(Parallels:  Matt,  xxviii.  9-20;  Luke  xxiv.  13-43;  John  xx.  11-29.) 

Christ's  first  appearance  after  His  Resurrection. — I.  Why  did  He  appear  first  to 
a  woman  ? — 1.  To  shew  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons  (Rom.  ii.  11) — that 
is,  that  in  the  bestowing  of  spiritual  graces  or  privileges  God  does  not  regard 
the  outward  quality  or  condition  of  the  persons  upon  whom  He  bestows  them, 
but  He  doth  freely  and  indifferently  bestow  such  graces  and  privileges  upon 
persons  of  all  sorts  and  conditions — upon  women  as  well  as  men,  poor  as  well 
as  rich,  etc.  2.  To  shew  that  the  fruit  and  benefit  of  His  resurrection,  and 
consequently  of  His  death  and  passion,  belong  to  women  as  well  as  to  men. 

II.  Why  did  He  appear  first  to  this  woman  in  particular? — 1.  Because  she 
shewed  most  love  to  Christ,  and  was  most  forward  and  diligent  in  seeking  after 
Him.  (1)  She  is  first  named  ;  yea,  she  alone  (John  xx.  1).  (2)  She  continued 
longest  seeking.  (3)  She  sought  Him  with  tears.  2.  To  comfort  her  against 
her  former  miserable  and  afflicted  condition. 

Lessons. — 1.  Christ  is  most  ready  and  forward  to  reveal  and  manifest  Himself 
and  His  comfortable  presence,  to  such  as  truly  and  earnestly  love  Him,  and  are 
most  forward  to  shew  and  express  their  love  towards  Him.  2.  Christ  hath  a 
great  care  of  such  of  His  saints  and  servants  as  have  been  in  great  misery  and 
distress,   that   they   may   not   want    comfort    and    encouragement   afterward. 

617 


CHAP.  XVI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


3.  Such  as  have  received  great  mercies  and  favours  from  God,  if  they  be  thank- 
ful to  Him  and  make  good  use  of  those  favours,  shall  have  more  added  unto 
them.  4.  The  more  any  have  tasted  of  the  mercy  of  God,  the  more  they  will 
love  God  and  Christ,  and  the  more  forward  they  will  be  to  shew  their  love  by 
its  fruits. — G.  Fetter. 

Christ's  appearance  to  two  disciples. — Had  St.  Luke's  Gospel  never  been 
written,  or  contained  no  reference  to  this  incident,  we  might  have  indulged  in 
a  variety  of  conjectures  and  speculations  regarding  it.  "  Who  were  these  two 
disciples  ?  "  we  might  have  asked ;  "  and  where  were  they  going  ?  On  what  day,  and 
what  time  of  day  ?  What  are  we  to  understand  by  the  expression  '  in  another 
form '  ?  Did  Christ  merely  shew  Himself  to  them  ?  or  did  He  converse  with 
them  ?  and  if  so,  on  what  subjects  ?  If  He  appeared  to  them  under  a  different 
form  from  that  under  which  they  had  hitherto  known  Him,  how  did  they 
recognise  Him  ?  What  feelings  and  impressions  did  the  incident  leave  upon 
their  minds  ?  "  These  and  many  other  questions  might  have  been  suggested  by 
St.  Mark's  brief  account ;  but  little  or  nothing  satisfactory  could  have  resulted 
from  the  inquiry.  In  this  state  of  uncertainty,  how  gladly  should  we  have 
welcomed  the  discovery  of  another  and  hitherto  unknown  portion  of  Scripture, 
containing  the  very  information  we  were  seeking — a  narrative  taken  down  from 
the  lips  of  one  of  the  two  disciples,  giving  a  full  and  particular  account  of  the 
whole  transaction — just  such  a  narrative,  in  short,  as  we  find  in  Luke  xxiv. 
13-35  !  Let  us  suppose  that  this  narrative  were  now  before  us  for  the  first 
time,  and  see  what  information  may  be  obtained  from  it  as  to  the  particulars 
upon  which  we  were  in  doubt. 

I.  The  meeting  of  the  two  disciples  with  their  Risen  Lord. — St.  Mark  only 
states  that  after  Jesus  had  first  appeared  to  Mary  Magdalene,  who  "  went  and 
told  them  that  had  been  with  Him"  (i.e.  the  general  body  of  disciples  in 
Jerusalem),  but  failed  to  convince  them — "  after  that  He  appeared  in  another 
form  unto  two"  of  those  who  had  heard  Mary's  story  and  believed  it  not. 
We  might  almost  infer  from  this  that  the  appearances  both  took  place  on 
Easter  Day  itself ;  and  St.  Luke  confirms  this  (xxiv.  1 3).  We  also  gathei 
from  his  account  that  it  was  in  the  afternoon  (ver.  29).  The  name  of  one  oi 
them — "  Cleopas" — is  mentioned  incidentally  (ver.  18) ;  but  no  hint  is  given  as  to 
who  the  other  was.  All  we  know  for  certain  is,  that  he  was  not  one  of  the 
eleven  apostles  (ver.  33).  To  these  two  disciples,  then,  Jesus  appeared,  "  as  they 
walked  and  went  into  the  country."  Had  we  only  St.  Mark's  statement,  we 
might  have  supposed  it  was  a  walk  of  recreation,  not  of  business  (as  Gen.  xxiv.  63). 
What  could  be  more  natural  than  for  persons  in  such  a  state  of  agitation  and 
suspense  to  seek  an  opportunity  of  calm  reflexion  and  discussion  in  a  quiet 
country  walk  !  We  learn,  however,  from  St.  Luke  that  they  were  on  their 
way  to  a  certain  place,  several  miles  distant  from  Jerusalem  (ver.  13),  where 
they  intended  to  lodge  that  night  (ver.  29),  though  whether  at  an  inn,  or  at  the 
house  of  one  of  them,  or  at  a  friend's  house  we  cannot  determine.  As  they 
walked  they  talked ;  and  their  conversation  could  not  but  turn  upon  those 
recent  and  still  passing  events  in  which  they  were  so  deeply  interested  (ver.  14). 
Their  hearts  were  full,  and  "out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh."  Their  discourse  was  earnest  and  solemn,  for  it  related  to  matters  on 
the  ultimate  event  of  which  the  whole  course  and  character  of  their  future  lives 
might  turn.  As  they  thus  talked  a  Stranger  came  up  and  joined  them.  It 
was  Jesus  ;  yet  they  knew  Him  not  (vers.  15,1 6).  They  were  not  struck  with 
blindness  ;  they  saw  other  objects,  and  saw  them  as  they  really  were ;  they  saw 
the  person  and  features  of  Jesus  Himself,  but  by  some  providential  arrange- 
ment of  which  we  can  form  no  conception  they  were  prevented  from  recognising 

618 


HOMILETlC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvl. 


Him.  Even  His  voice,  with  whose  accents  they  must  have  been  as  familiar  as 
a  child  with  its  parent's,  failed  to  convey  its  wonted  impressions  to  their  ears. 
The  same  mysterious  influence  which  had  been  exercised  for  a  brief  period  over 
the  senses  of  Mary  Magdalene  (John  xx.  14-16)  now  took  possession  of  them, 
and  maintained  its  ascendency  throughout  the  lengthened  conversation  which 
ensued.  First  the  two  disciples  related  to  the  Stranger  "the  things  which  were 
come  to  pass  there  in  those  days  "  (vers.  18-24).  When  they  had  finished  their 
statement,  the  Stranger  Himself  took  up  the  discourse  ;  and  their  share  in  the 
conversation  consisted  chiefly  (we  may  suppose)  in  such  inquiries  and  remarks 
as  scholars  are  in  the  habit  of  addressing  to  their  master,  to  elicit  further 
explanation,  and  so  forth.  There  was  but  one  subject  which  at  that  time  could 
be  of  the  slightest  interest  to  any  of  the  party,  viz.  the  accordance  of  all  that 
had  happened  to  Jesus  with  the  prophetic  announcements  respecting  the  Messiah 
(vers.  25-27).  On  this  subject  He  held  His  hearers  in  mute  and  rapt  attention 
until  towards  evening  they  drew  near  their  destination.  All  this  time  they  had 
no  idea  who  their  Companion  really  was ;  but  thinking  Him  a  man  like  them- 
selves, they  begged  Him  to  take  up  His  quarters  with  them  for  the  night.  All 
three  therefore  turned  in,  and  sat  down  to  meat ;  and  it  was  during  this  meal 
that  the  mist  or  veil  was  removed  from  their  eyes,  and  they  saw  Him  in  His 
own  proper  form  in  which  He  had  always  appeared  to  them.  Even  the  precise 
moment  of  the  discovery  is  recorded  by  St.  Luke  (vers.  30,  31,  35)  ;  it  was  when 
He  was  in  the  act  of  breaking  bread,  and  blessing  it,  and  giving  it  to  them, 
that  they  recognised  Him  who  had  so  often  before  performed  the  same  pious 
act  in  their  presence.  The  recognition  being  complete,  the  purpose  of  this  whole 
transaction  was  answered,  and  Jesus  "  vanished  out  of  their  sight." 

II.  The  feelings  of  the  two  disciples  in  the  presence  of  their  Eisen  Lord. — 
"  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us  !  "  they  exclaimed  (ver.  32).  The  expression 
is  a  striking  one,  and  seems  to  be  as  pregnant  with  meaning  as  their  hearts 
were  with  feeling.  It  indicates  the  presence  not  of  one  but  of  many  strong  and 
stirring  emotions  within  the  breast,  all  too  big  for  the  confined  space  in  which 
they  were  pent  up.  It  reminds  us  of  the  psalmist's  language  (Ps.  xxxix.  3), 
or  of  Jeremiah's  (Jer.  xx.  9).  1.  The  first  feeling  excited  in  their  breasts  was 
perhaps  that  of  hope.  They  had  had  hope  in  Christ  before  (Luke  xxiv.  21); 
but  His  condemnation  and  death  had  filled  their  minds  with  despondency.  To 
look  for  the  salvation  of  their  nation  to  One  who  had  not  been  able  to  save 
Himself  would  indeed  have  been  to  hope  against  hope.  But  the  discourse  of 
their  Fellow-traveller  rekindled  the  dying  embers,  and  fanned  them  into  a  flame. 
Did  not  the  Scriptures  of  the  prophets  expressly  point  to  a  suffering  as  well  as 
a  triumphant  Messiah,  and  suffering  in  order  to  triumph  ?  See  Isa.  liii.  And 
as  to  His  being  alive  again,  as  announced  to  the  women  by  a  vision  of  angels, 
why  should  they  discredit  it  or  be  astonished  at  it  ?  See  Ps.  xvi.  10.  If  we 
at  this  day  are  able  to  build  up  for  ourselves  "a  good  hope  through  grace" 
on  the  foundation  of  these  and  similar  texts,  we  may  imagine  what  it  must 
have  been  to  hear  Jesus  Himself  "  expounding  in  all  the  Scriptures  the  things 
concerning "  His  own  sufferings  and  exaltation ;  we  may  well  believe  that 
while  they  listened  the  hearts  of  these  two  disciples  beat  high  with  hope — the 
hope  of  seeing  their  Lord  again,  triumphant  over  death  and  the  grave,  and 
of  themselves  sharing  His  triumph.  We  often  hear  it  said,  "What  is  life 
without  hope  ?  "  but  those  who  say  it  are  thinking  of  some  temporal  advantage, 
some  improvement  in  worldly  condition,  the  hope  of  which  cheers  them  under 
present  difficulties  and  animates  them  to  fresh  exertion  in  the  struggle  of  life. 
But  what  is  life,  when  all  its  hopes  are  realised  and  all  its  objects  attained, 
without  the  Christian  hope  ?  2.  Did  not  the  hearts  of  the  two  disciples  burn 
within  them  with  love  and  gratitude  while  the  unknown  Object  of  that  love 

619 


CHAP.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.   MARK. 


talked  with  them  by  the  way  and  opened  to  them  the  Scriptures  ?  And  what 
should  be  more  effectual  to  inflame  love  where  it  exists,  or  to  kindle  it  in 
hearts  as  yet  unconscious  of  it,  than  the  contemplation  of  those  events  which 
were  recalled  to  the  minds  of  these  men  by  the  discourse  of  Jesus  ?  The 
thought  of  Christ  being  "  wounded  for  our  transgressions  and  bruised  for  our 
iniquities  "  is  one  with  which  we  have  been  familiar  from  childhood,  which  may 
have  weakened  somewhat  the  effect  it  ought  to  have  upon  our  minds.  But 
whenever  it  is  placed  strongly  and  clearly  before  us,  cold  and  dead  must  be 
that  heart  which  does  not  respond  to  the  appeal !  Fools  indeed  must  they 
be,  and  "  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  prophets  have  spoken "  and  all 
that  the  Evangelists  have  recorded,  who  are  not  melted  by  the  bare  recital 
of  all  that  the  Son  of  God  suffered  in  the  flesh  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation  ! 
3.  Doubtless  the  predominant  emotion  was  joy.  The  two  disciples  had  set  out 
on  their  journey  in  sorrow  and  heaviness.  But  as  the  Stranger  proceeded 
to  shew  them  from  Scripture  not  only  the  probability  but  the  certainty  and 
necessity  of  their  Lord's  resurrection,  their  hearts  were  cheered  and  warmed 
with  the  prospect  of  beholding  Him  again,  in  accordance  with  His  own  most 
gracious  promise  (John  xvi.  20-22).  And  if  they  had  cause  to  rejoice,  how 
much  more  have  we  !     See  Pst  cxviii.  24-29  ;  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8. 

Ters.  14-18.  The  departing  Saviour. — I.  Our  departing  Saviour's  chidings 
(ver.  14). — It  sounds  somewhat  harsh  to  hear  that  the  gentle  Jesus  mingled 
rebukes  with  His  parting  words.     But  it  was  love  itself  that  gave  birth  to 
these   upbraidings.      It   was   not    that    Jesus   took   pleasure    in    reproaching 
His  disciples,  or  that  He  did  not  wish  them  every  comfort  and  peace  of  mind  ; 
but  it  was  just  because  their  highest  welfare  was  the  chief  desire  of  His  heart 
that  He  thus  admonished  them.     Faith  is  the  great  saving  grace ;  and  where 
that  is  wanting  there  is  misery,  darkness,  and  death.     It  was  just  because  He 
loved  them,  and  wished  to  have  them  take  in  and  possess  the  true  joys  of  faith, 
that  He  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief.     Every   interest   of   their  own, 
and  of   those  who   were   afterward   to   believe   through   their   word,   was  put 
into  terrible   jeopardy  by  the   indulgence  of   such  stubborn  scepticism.     And 
as    the   Saviour    loved   them,    and    loved    the   souls    of   men   in   general,    He 
referred  to  it  in  His  last  interview,  expressed  again  His  dissatisfaction,  and 
gave  to  them,  and  through  them  to  all  men,  a  last  solemn  warning  against  "  an 
evil  heart  of  unbelief."     Nor  can  we  plead  that  no  such  evil  temper  and  hard- 
ness have  in  any  way  characterised  us  hitherto.     Have  we  so  believed  the  Resur- 
rection of  Christ  as  to  take  all  its  momentous  implications  home  to  our  souls, 
and  to  have  them  living  in  our  lives  ?     Have  we  so  believed  it,  "  that  like  as 
Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead,"  etc.  ?  (Rom.  vi.  4-6).    Admitting  that  Christ  is 
risen,  have  we  then  so  risen  with  Him  as  to  seek  those  things  which  are  above, 
where  Christ  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God  ?  (Col.  iii.  1,2).     Conceding  it  as 
true  that  there  is  a  blessed  resurrection  life  for  the  virtuous  and  the  good,  have 
we  really  set  ourselves  to  attain  to  that  resurrection  of  the  just  ?     Yielding  that 
Jesus  is  declared  the  Son  of  God  with  power,  have  we  embraced  Him  with  all 
our  heart,  and  clung  to  Him  as  the  only  Saviour  of  our  souls,  and  given  ourselves 
to  obey  Him  in  all  things  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  ? 

II.  Our  departing  Saviour's  commands  (vers.  15,  16). — Here  is  another  grand 
testimony  and  manifestation  of  our  Great  Redeemer's  love.  It  is  assumed  that 
there  is  a  heaven  and  that  there  is  a  hell ;  but  the  desire  of  Jesus  is  that  all 
men  should  escape  the  horrors  of  the  one  and  secure  the  blessedness  of  the  other. 
He  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance  " 
(2  Pet.  iii.  9).  But  there  is  only  one  way  in  which  men  can  be  saved  (John  iii.  36). 
The  Saviour  Himself  here  reannounces  the  same,  and  has  made  it  firm  and 

620 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap,  xvl 


unalterable  for  ever.  But  it  is  impossible  for  men  to  believe  on  the  Son,  or  to 
turn  themselves  heartily  to  Him  as  their  hope,  without  first  having  had  Him 
preached  unto  them.  This  is  now  the  grand  commission  of  all  Christ's  disciples. 
The  gospel  calls  men  not  only  to  be  saved  themselves,  but  to  be  agents  and 
messengers  in  carrying  the  same  salvation  to  others.  No  Christian  is  exempt 
from  its  binding  obligation,  and  no  Christian  is  excluded  from  the  high  privilege 
and  honour  of  taking  part  in  it,  according  to  his  sphere  and  measure.  There  is 
indeed  a  line  of  discrimination  to  be  observed  between  Christians  in  general  and 
those  who  are  the  chosen  and  appointed  ministers  of  the  Church  ;  but  the  election 
of  some  to  officiate  more  directly  for  the  rest  assumes  that  there  is  a  common 
office  of  this  sort  inhering  in  the  whole  body  and  in  all  its  members  in  common. 
That  office  it  is  the  business  of  every  individual  to  exercise,  if  not  in  his  own 
person,  yet  in  and  through  others,  by  his  vote,  concurrence,  and  aid.  But  the 
mere  preaching  and  hearing  of  the  truth  is  not  all.  Something  more  is  neces- 
sary in  order  to  full  profit  in  Divine  grace.  As  Christ  commands  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel  to  every  one,  so  He'  also  at  the  same  time  appoints  and  ordains 
the  holy  sacrament  of  baptism  to  be  received  by  every  one,  as  a  test  of  his 
obedience  to  the  truth,  and  as  a  further  means  of  imparting  His  Holy  Spirit. 
Faith  without  obedience  is  nothing,  and  salvation  is  promised  only  to  him  "that 
believeth  and  is  baptised."  We  must  remember,  also,  that  saving  faith  is  not 
a  product  of  our  reason  and  will.  "It  is  the  gift  of  God "  (Eph.  ii.  8).  It  is 
a  thing  wrought  in  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the  instrument  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  Word  and  sacraments.  God  has  appointed  baptism  as  well  as 
preaching  ;  and  the  promise  of  salvation  rests  on  one  as  upon  the  other.  Hence 
it  is  written  :  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (John  iii.  5).  And  again  :  "  Not  by  works  of 
righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us,  by 
the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Tit.  iii.  5).  And, 
again,  that  "  the  ark  wherein  eight  souls  were  saved  by  water "  was  a  "  like 
figure  whereunto  baptism  doth  also  now  save  us,"  which  is  "  not  the  putting 
away  of  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  toward  God  " 
(1  Pet.  iii.  20,  21).  Hence  the  farewell  charge  of  the  loving  Jesus  is,  that  we 
carry  this  sacrament  wheresoever  we  carry  the  gospel  itself  ;  and  that,  equally 
with  our  preaching  of  His  truth  to  every  creature,  it  is  our  duty  to  offer  baptism 
to  every  creature,  and  to  demand  of  all  men  obedience  to  the  one  as  we  require 
faith  in  the  other,  as  the  Divine  conditions  on  which  alone  we  are  authorised  to 
promise  salvation  to  them  that  hear  us. 

III.  Our  departing  Saviour's  promises  (vers.  17,  18). — These  are  grand  and 
startling  announcements.  Scepticism  has  often  pointed  to  them,  and  challenged 
Christians  to  attest  their  faith  accordingly.  Whether  such  miracles  occur  now 
or  not,  if  they  ever  were  actually  wrought  by  Christians,  then  the  promise  has 
been  fulfilled,  and  the  taunt  of  infidelity  falls  to  the  ground.  Turning  back, 
then,  to  those  trying  times  when  Christianity  went  forth  in  a  few  humble 
fishermen  and  tent-makers,  to  grapple  with  the  hoary  systems  which  then  held 
empire  over  the  world,  we  are  also  abundantly  certified  that  in  no  instance  did 
these  assurances  fail  (Heb.  ii.  4).  Were  they  to  be  able  to  cast  out  demons? 
(Acts  xvi.  16,  24,  xix.  11,  12).  And  many  demons  of  pride,  covetousness, 
nncleanness,  drunkenness,  gluttony,  ambition,  and  demons  of  lust,  hatred, 
moroseness,  and  spirits  of  wickedness  of  innumerable  sorts,  did  these  same 
apostles  expel  by  their  preaching,  turning  men  from  their  idols  and  corruptions 
to  serve  the  Living  and  True  God — thus  both  literally  and  spiritually  fulfilling 
the  blessed  promise  of  the  Master,  that  in  His  name  they  should  "  cast  out 
devils."  Were  they  to  be  able  to  speak  in  languages  which  they  had  never 
learned?  (Acts  ii.  5-11,  x.  46).     Were  they  to  be  able  to  take  up  poisonous 

621 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


reptiles  unharmed?  (Acts  xxviii.  1-6).  Were  they  to  be  able  to  drink  deadly- 
draughts  with  impunity  ?  Church  history  tells  of  a  fatal  potion  prepared  for 
the  destruction  of  the  Apostle  John,  which  he  drank,  but  was  unhurt  by  the 
poisoned  cup,  which  it  was  confidently  counted  would  be  his  death.  Were  they 
to  be  able  to  heal  the  sick  and  the  suffering?  (Acts  iii.  1-9,  ix.  33-35,  xiv. 
8-11).  And  time  would  fail  to  tell  the  works  of  healing  wonder  which  the 
disciples  wrought  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  by  prayer  and  the  laying  on  of  hands, 
in  which  the  Master  fulfilled  His  promise  :  "  They  shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick, 
and  they  shall  recover."  "They  went  forth,  and  preached  the  Word  everywhere, 
the  Lord  working  with  them,  and  confirming  the  Word  with  signs  following." 
Nor  was  the  promise  or  the  fulfilment  of  it  confined  to  them  alone.  It  was  not 
made  to  apostles  simply,  but  "  them  that  believe,"  and  hence  to  Christians  in 
general.  Accordingly  we  find  this  miraculous  power  working  in  and  by  the 
Church  for  a  hundred  years  after  the  Saviour's  ascension.  It  is  still  outstanding, 
firm,  and  good  ;  and  always  must  hold  good,  as  long  as  the  gospel  is  preached, 
and  men  are  found  to  believe  it.  The  lack  is  not  to  be  sought  in  the  absence 
of  necessity,  but  in  the  weakness  and  the  infirmity  of  our  faith.  There  were 
places,  when  Christ  was  on  earth,  at  which  He  did  not  many  mighty  works, 
because  of  the  unbelief  of  the  people.  Want  of  faith  will  always  restrain  and 
grieve  away  the  gracious  power  of  God.  And  instead  of  reasoning  these  precious 
promises  into  a  state  of  superannuation,  let  us  rather  conclude  that  the  Church's 
living  confidence  in  her  Lord  has  declined.  Let  us  look  for  more,  pray  with 
more  confidence,  realise  more  thoroughly  what  our  high  calling  is,  and  what  an 
Almighty  Saviour  we  have,  and  as  God  is  true  His  promise  will  be  verified 
now  as  well  as  in  other  ages. — J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D. 

Yer.  15.  What  is  Christian  preaching? — Our  Lord  believed  in  the  work  of 
the  preacher,  not  only  as  one  of  the  chief  methods  of  disseminating  the  gospel, 
but  as  the  chief  method.  By  Him  it  was  never  undervalued  as  something 
secondary.  He  "went  about  all  Galilee  teaching  in  their  synagogues  and 
preaching."  When  He  sent  forth  the  apostles  He  said,  "As  ye  go,  preach." 
After  His  Resurrection  "they  that  were  scattered  abroad  went  everywhere 
preaching  the  Word."     And  Paul  rejoices  that  he  "  was  ordained  a  preacher." 

I.  Realising  the  importance  of  this  office,  as  we  turn  to  study  the  great 
Model  we  find  ourselves  at  first  discouraged,  because  that  which  impresses  us 
most  strongly  is  the  dissimilarity  between  the  discourses  of  Him  who  "  spake 
as  never  man  spake"  and  any  which  we  may  ever  hope  to  produce.  1.  We 
must  study  and  frame  our  sentences  beforehand,  and  many  times  sit  down 
afterward  and  wonder  that  so  great  a  truth  could  be  so  poorly  told.  The  most 
striking  element  in  Christ's  discourses  is  their  marvellous  spontaneity.  His 
words  were  real  lightning :  they  flashed.  With  us,  and  our  perhaps  necessary 
elaborate  methods,  they  become  too  often  only  lightning  on  canvas — a  streak 
of  yellow  paint.  But  even  here,  in  this  at  first  most  discouraging  attribute  of 
our  Lord's  preaching,  we  may  find  for  ourselves  an  idea  and  an  ideal.  The 
ideal  Christian  discourse  will  be  that  which  in  manner  and  spirit  as  nearly 
as  possible  resembles  Christ's.  With  Him  preaching  was  speaking.  "He 
opened  His  mouth  and  spake."  We  cannot  do  this  as  He  did  it ;  and  if  the 
perpetuation  of  the  Christian  religion  had  depended  upon  this  kind  of  Christian 
preaching,  it  would  have  died  with  the  death  of  the  apostles  and  their  immediate 
successors.  If  the  inspiration  which  they  received  was  not  indeed  different 
in  kind  from  that  which  falls  on  us  to-day,  it  was  so  infinitely  different  in 
degree  that  the  result  is  the  same  in  either  case.  2.  And  yet  there  is  one 
method  by  which  in  its  effect  we  may  approximate  the  manner  of  Christ's 
preaching.     And  because  of  the  difference  between  us  and  the  apostles  that 

622 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


method  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  that  which  He  suggested  to  them.  What 
they,  fresh  from  immediate  personal  contact  with  the  Christ,  were  to  do  by 
"  taking  no  thought,"  we  can  accomplish  only  by  recognising  in  a  very  special 
sense  the  need  of  taking  much  thought.  Thomas  Guthrie  began  in  Edinburgh 
a  pastorate  which  lasted  thirty  years ;  and  he  determined  from  the  beginning 
to  preach  extemporaneously,  as  Christ  preached.  But  he  realised  that  he  had 
limitations  which  Christ  and  His  apostles  had  not — that  if  he  would  accomplish 
this,  it  must  be,  not  with  less  study  than  would  be  required  for  a  written 
sermon,  but  more.  He  rose  regularly  at  five  in  summer  and  six  in  winter, 
and  for  five  days  in  the  week  devoted  the  first  three  hours  of  every  morning 
to  the  preparation  of  his  sermon.  Thus  for  fifteen  hours  it  was  the  single 
object  of  his  thought.  He  wrote  it  and  rewrote  it,  eliminating  here  and 
emphasising  there,  until  when  Sunday  came  he  did  not  need  to  learn  it ;  as  our 
school- children  say,  "  It  had  learned  itself."  Unconsciously  he  had  absorbed 
it,  and  by  reading  it  over  once  or  twice  on  the  morning  of  its  delivery  he  went 
into  the  pulpit  surcharged.  The  ideas  leaped  to  his  lips  without  conscious 
effort,  in  almost  or  quite  the  very  language  in  which  he  had  thought  and 
written  them  out,  with  all  the  polish  of  a  scholar  and  all  the  spontaneity  of 
a  speaker.  He  preached  like  Christ ;  and  that  which  happened  eighteen 
hundred  years  ago  happened  again,  as  it  always  will  under  similar  circum- 
stances :  "The  common  people  heard  him  gladly." 

II.  What  was  the  substance  of  Jesus'  preaching  ?— 1.  Our  Lord's  sermons  were 
doctrinal,  if  we  remember  that  docere  means  to  teach.  When  He  speaks,  He 
speaks  as  though  something  were  settled ;  and  that  is  dogma,  truth  crystallised. 
The  very  name  of  His  followers  was  that  of  disciples,  learners.  He  had  some- 
thing to  teach.  His  discourses  were  not  "  guesses  at  truth."  There  was 
nothing  in  them  which  would  remind  one  of  the  debating  society,  where  "  every- 
thing is  an  open  question."  "  Do  you  know,"  said  the  late  Oliver  Wendell 
Holmes,  "  I  don't  like  to  listen  to  these  everlasting  negations  that  some 
ministers  deal  out  from  the  pulpit."  2.  Christ's  preaching  was  pictorial :  He 
knew  how  to  teach  it.  That  was  probably  an  overstatement  when  some  one 
said  of  Him  that  "  our  Lord  never  preached  a  sermon  in  which  He  did  not  tell 
a  story,  because  it  is  written  that  'without  a  parable  spake  He  not  unto 
them.'  "  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  His  style  of  address  was  essentially  Oriental. 
Neither  is  there  any  doubt  that  this  was  one  of  the  chief  reasons  why  the 
throngs  hung  so  breathlessly  upon  His  words.  His  eye  swept  all  heaven  and 
earth  for  metaphors  and  parables  and  similes.  We  may  mark  the  perils  to  be 
met  with  here  by  noting  how  deftly  He  avoided  them.  He  never  fondled  an 
illustration,  as  one  does  a  pretty  babe,  to  call  attention  to  itself.  His  illustra- 
tions illustrated.  They  were  suggestive,  not  exhaustive.  With  Him  a  metaphor 
was  only  "  a  window  into  an  argument."  He  never  deliberately  constructed 
ornamentation ;  but  we  must  believe,  with  His  sermons  before  us,  that  He  did 
ornament  construction.  But  even  here  we  need  a  qualifying  word.  Though 
His  teaching  was  illustrative,  it  was  always  teaching.  His  figures  were  not 
wax  flowers,  put  on  for  adornment,  simply  adherent.  They  were  inherent,  they 
were  the  truth  in  blossom.  3.  His  preaching  was  persuasive  :  He  knew  why 
He  taught  it.  There  is  no  true  Christian  sermon  ever  preached  which  does 
not  contain,  directly  or  indirectly,  this  element  of  persuasion  to  a  Christian 
life.  It  is  this  which  differentiates  it  from  other  forms  of  literature,  and 
makes  it  a  Christian  sermon.  A  drama  is  always  pictorial,  and  sometimes 
instructive  :  a  lyceum  lecture  is  supposed  to  be  both.  But  the  distinctive  mark 
of  a  Christian  sermon  is  that  it  is  a  discourse  aimed  at  the  will,  for  the  purpose 
of  inducing  or  strengthening  the  Christian  life.  What  Christ  said  of  Himself 
was  eminently  true  of  His  preaching  :  it  was  "  a  way  "  not  stopping  with  itself, 

623 


chap.  XVI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


but  leading  farther  on.  4.  In  His  teaching  He  was  spiritual :  He  addressed 
the  inner  life.  He  not  only  had  something  to  teach,  and  knew  how  to  teach 
it,  and  why  He  taught  it ;  He  knew  likewise  to  whom  He  taught  it.  His 
appeal  was  ever  to  the  spiritual  yearning  which  in  greater  or  less  degree  is  to 
be  found  in  every  soul.  "  I  don't  care  whether  it's  Briggsism  or  anti-Briggsism," 
said  a  man  at  the  close  of  a  celebrated  service  in  a  New  York  church,  as  he 
ran  up  into  the  pulpit  and  grasped  the  hand  of  the  clergyman  ;  "  but  for  God's 
sake  help  me ;  for  I  am  a  ruined  soul."  In  every  word  He  ever  uttered  Christ 
always  had  in  mind  that  ruined  soul,  longing  to  be  borne  upward  into  an 
atmosphere  of  health.  "  I  am  come,"  He  said,  "  that  they  might  have  life,  and 
that  they  might  have  it  more  abundantly." — G.  T.  Bowling,  D.D. 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  signs  of  faith. — When  we  remember  such  words  as  those 
which  tell  us  that  "  he  who  belie veth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,  and  he 
that  believeth  not  on  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth 
on  him,"  how  should  it  at  once  arrest  our  attention  to  hear,  from  the  lips  of 
Him  who  cannot  deceive,  an  account  of  those  very  signs  which  shall  mark  out 
the  possession  of  this  invaluable  gift ! 

I.  We  seem  to  be  reading — we  are  evidently  reading — of  gifts  and  of  powers 
which  have  long  passed  away  from  Christ's  Church :  gifts  and  powers  which 
never  infallibly  pointed  out  the  true  members  of  His  spiritual  body — for  some 
had  these  who  had  little,  if  any,  experience  of  the  inward  graces  of  Christ's 
Spirit — and  which  now,  at  all  events,  do  not  survive,  to  make  any  distinction, 
real  or  apparent,  amongst  the  multitude  of  His  professed  disciples.  It  was  one 
great  object  of  Christ's  revelation  to  draw  up  the  veil  which  separated  between 
the  material  and  the  spiritual,  and  to  disclose  to  the  eyes  of  men  those  great  but 
unseen  realities  in  the  very  midst  of  which  they  were  blindly  and  unconsciously 
dwelling.  This  unseen  world  was  of  a  twofold  character.  There  was  the  world 
of  God,  and  the  world  of  the  devil — the  world  of  Divine  agency,  and  the  world  of 
antagonist  evil.  With  both  of  these  every  man  upon  earth  was  deeply  concerned  ; 
and  yet  the  nature,  the  very  existence,  of  either  could  only  be  made  known  to 
him  for  certain  by  disclosures  from  God.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  the  devil  was 
permitted  in  that  generation  to  manifest  his  operation  upon  men's  souls  by 
visible  tokens  of  his  presence  in  their  bodies.  On  the  other  hand,  that  generation 
was  blessed  also  with  equally  palpable  proofs  of  the  operation  of  God's  Spirit.  He 
enabled  the  tongue  to  utter  languages  which  the  understanding  in  many  cases  could 
not  interpret ;  He  made  the  word  of  a  man  powerful  to  heal  diseases  which  had 
defied  all  the  skill  of  physicians — to  cast  out  from  the  convulsed  and  distorted  body 
those  evil  spirits  which  had  usurped  it  for  their  abode.  But  these  visible  and 
sensible  proofs  of  the  presence  of  God's  Spirit  were  never  designed,  we  may 
venture  to  say,  to  remain  with  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  signs  which  were  to 
follow  them  that  believed — if  in  the  first  instance  they  were  of  a  mixed  character, 
partly  gifts  and  partly  graces,  partly  outward  powers  and  partly  spiritual  virtues 
— were  designed  to  become  ere  long  wholly  of  the  latter  kind  :  the  only  powers 
with  which  Christ's  people  were  ultimately  to  be  endued  in  this  life  were  such  as 
are  inseparable  from  the  graces  of  love  and  knowledge  and  holiness — from  the 
insensible  but  resistless  influence  of  one  who  is  proved  by  his  life  and  spirit  to 
have  God  with  him  and  in  him  of  a  truth. 

II.  Every  one  of  these  signs  has  a  corresponding  token  in  times  when  miracles 
are  no  more. — Let  us  view  by  the  light  of  other  words  of  God  each  of  the  four 
particulars  here  enumerated  in  its  application  to  our  own  days.  1.  If  Christ 
stood  now  in  the  midst  of  us  and  said,  "  These  signs  shall  follow  those  amongst 
you  that  believe  :  in  My  name  shall  they  cast  out  devils,"  should  we  not  at  once 
understand  Him  to  declare,  that,  whatever  be  the  peculiar  sins  to  which  we  are 

624 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


most  often  and  powerfully  tempted,  whatever  the  snares  by  which  the  great  enemy 
most  easily  prevails  over  us,   in  His  name   we   must  overcome  them  ? — that, 
knowing  as  we  all  do  our  weaknesses,  our  faults,  our  past  sinful  acts,  our  present 
foolish  and  hurtful  desires  ;  knowing  whether  it  be  in  the  form  of  passion,  or  of 
selfishness,  or  of  sensuality,  or  of  sloth,  that  sin  has  most  power  over  us  ;  knowing 
by  experience  that  in  some  one  or  in  all  of  these  forms  it  has  great  power  over 
us,  and  recognising,  as  Christ  teaches  us  to  do,  in  all  these  things  indications  of 
his  presence  and  his  agency  who  like  a  roaring  lion  is  ever  going  about  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour,  we  must  cast  him  out  in  His  name  and  strength  ? — that, 
if  we  really  believe,  we  shall  do  so  ;  that  if  we  do  it  not,  it  is  because  we  have 
no  faith  and  therefore  no  life  in  us  V    2.  "  They  shall  speak  with  new  tongues." 
The  miraculous  power  which  fulfilled  this  prediction  has  long  passed  away.     But 
what  was  the  miraculous  gift  of  tongues — glorious  as  it  was,  and  most  convincing 
as  an  argument  of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  gospel — when  viewed  in  comparison 
with  that  grace  which  was  so  aptly  signified  by  its  exercise,  and  for  so  many  ages 
has  survived  its  withdrawal  ?     If  he  who  has  hitherto  found  no  response  within, 
when  he  would  fain  have  summoned  his  heart  to  awake  and  utter  praise — who 
has  knelt  on  his  knees  to  pray,  and  found  his  very  prayers  dried  up  at  their 
inmost  source  by  the  withering  power  of  long  indifference  or  unbelief — is  now 
able  to  realise  God's  being,  to  trust  in  Christ's  mediation,  to  enter  in  through 
that  door  into  the  heavenly  courts  of  the  Lord,  to  present  there  with  a  full  heart 
his'  daily  offering  of  confession  and  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  to  believe  that  he  is 
heard,  and  to  receive  according  to  his  need  the  supply  of  life  and  strength  and 
comfort, — what  is  this  but  the  gift  of  a  new  tongue,  a  sign  which  follows  them 
that  believe,  and  betokens  an  heir  of  salvation  ?     3.  "  They  shall  take  up  serpents  ; 
and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them."     In  other  words, 
this  is  one  of  the  signs  which  attend  Christ's  servants,  that  what  is  perilous  to 
others  is  safe  to  them,  that  that  is  health  to  them  which  to  others  is  but  an 
occasion  of  falling.     They  live  in  an  ensnaring  world.     Their  own  hearts  are 
weak  and  treacherous.     Their  occupations  in  life  are  often  perilous  to  the  well- 
being  of  their  souls.     They  hear  evil  maxims  often  avowed,  corrupting  principles 
more  often  insinuated.     Their  own  duty  sometimes  requires  them  to  read  or  to 
hear  that  of  which  they  had  been  happy  to  have  remained  ignorant.     Some  friend, 
whom  nature  or  choice  had  endeared  to  them  most  closely,  seeks  by  argument 
or  persuasion  or  ridicule  to  shake  their  steadfastness,  and  by  his  own  example 
encourages  them  to  sin.     But  what  then  ?     Greater  is  He  that  is  in  them  than 
he  that  is  in  the  world.     To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure.     The  tempest  which 
overthrows  others  but  roots  them  more  firmly.     4.  "  They  shall  lay  hands  on  the 
sick,  and  they  shall  recover."     We  have  dwelt  upon  other  signs  of  true  faith  : 
how  it  shews  itself  in  fighting  against  our  own  sins — in  bridling  the  tongue,  and  yet 
loosing  it — in  giving  safety  amidst  danger,  and  stability  amidst  general  defection. 
And  now  we  are  taught  to  remember  how  the  same  principle  tends  to  make  us 
useful  in  the  world — useful  in  our  own  world,  whatever  that  be,  whether  the 
world  of  youth  or  the  world  of  men  ;  how  it  enables  us  to  help  the  weak,  to  warn 
the  sinful,  to  comfort  the  weak-hearted,  to  establish  the  wavering,  to  bring  back 
the  wandering ;  how  the  consistent  maintenance,  in  word  and  conduct,  of  that 
spirit  of  faith  in  Christ  of  which  we  are  speaking,  will,  by  God's  blessing,  often 
without  a  word  of  direct  exhortation,  act  Upon  others  with  a  powerful  influence, 
silently  reproving,  teaching,  guiding,  supporting  our  brethren,  even  when  we  are 
least  conscious  of  any  eye  being  upon  us. — Dean  Vaughan. 


625 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON    TEE    VERSES. 


Ver.  9.  Christ's  appearance  to  Mary 
of  Magdala. — St.  Mark  reminds  us 
that  Mary  had  once  been  possessed 
by  seven  devils ;  and  whatever  else 
and  more  be  included  in  demoniacal 
possession,  we  know  that  it  must  have 
perilously  weakened  brain  and  nerve. 
Is  it  not  obvious,  then,  that,  as  we 
might  have  expected  of  Him,  Jesus 
appeared  first  to  Mary  because  she 
was  in  the  most  desperate  need  of 
Him  ?  Wandering  about  the  garden 
like  one  distraught,  blinded  with  her 
tears,  possessed  with  one  idea — so 
possessed  that  even  the  angelic  vision 
seems  to  have  had  no  awe  for  her, 
and  she  fails  to  recognise  the  Lord 
she  loved,  till  in  familiar  tones  He 
cries,  "Mary" — who  does  not  see  the 
extreme  danger  her  susceptible  and 
excitable  nature  was  in  ?  Insanity 
was  not  far  off  when  she  flung  herself 
upon  Him  with  the  cry,  "  My  Master," 
and  would  have  clasped  His  feet. 
How  wholesome  for  her  too  and 
calming  to  have  a  commission  con- 
fided to  her,  to  be  made  useful,  to  be 
sent  to  the  disciples  with  the  message, 
"I  ascend  unto  My  Father  and  your 
Father,  to  My  God  and  your  God  ! " 
—S.  Cox,  D.D. 

"First  to  Mary  Magdalene" — To 
reconcile  this  representation  with 
Matthew's  (xxviii.  9),  we  must  sup- 
pose— what  is  perfectly  natural — 
that  there  was  a  variety  of  runnings 
to  and  fro.  We  may  conceive  the 
case  in  some  such  way  as  the  following 
— without,  however,  imagining  that 
it  embodies  the  absolute  historic 
truth  :  When  the  group  of  women 
saw  the  open  tomb  and  the  angels, 
Mary  may  instantly,  in  a  kind  of 
ecstatic  bewilderment,  have  turned  on 
her  heels  to  run  and  carry  word  of 
the  fact  to  the  apostles.  By-and-by 
the  other  women  would  follow.  Ere 
long  Peter  and  John  would  come 
running,  and  then  return.  Mary 
for  a  little  season  was  alone,  near 
the    sepulchre,    and     Jesus     revealed 

626 


Himself  to  her.  By-and-by  the  other 
women  rejoined  her,  and  Jesus  ap- 
peared to  them  all,  as  they  were 
on  their  way  to  the  apostles.  There 
would  be  in  all  their  bosoms  not  only 
interest,  strung  to  the  highest  pitch, 
but  ecstasy,  and  trepidation,  and  an 
impossibility  of  resting  anywhere 
longer  than  a  few  moments  at  a 
time.  See  Greswell's  Forty -third  Dis- 
sertation.— ./.  M orison,  D.D. 

Ver.  12.  Another  form. — By  "an- 
other form  "  St.  Mark  seems  to  mean  a 
different  form  to  that  in  which  Christ 
appeared  to  Mary,  but  may,  and 
probably  does,  mean  nothing  more 
than  a  form  other  than  that  with 
which  they  had  been  familiar  in  the 
days  of  His  humiliation — "a  spirit- 
ual body,"  and  no  longer  "  a  natural 
body."  This  conjecture  is  confirmed 
by  the  word  rendered  manifested,  a 
different  word  to  that  rendered 
"  appeared "  in  ver.  9.  It  implies 
that  in  His  new  form  He  was  not 
necessarily  visible,  though  He  could 
render  Himself  visible  where  and  to 
whom  He  would. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Ver.  13.  The  unbelief  of  the  apostles. 
— "  Neither  believed  they  them." 
The  original  is  stronger :  but  not  even 
them  did  they  believe.  And  yet  it  is 
said  in  Luke  xxiv.  33,  34,  that  when 
they  got  into  the  midst  of  "  the 
eleven  and  them  that  were  with  them," 
they  were  met  with  the  exclamation, 
"  The  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  hath 
appeared  to  Simon."  This  apparent 
contrariety  demolishes  at  a  stroke 
the  theory  of  Hitzig,  who  supposes 
that  Luke  is  the  author  of  Mark 
xvi.  9-20.  It  also  completely  over- 
turns the  theory  of  those  who  imagine 
that  the  section,  though  not  composed 
by  Luke,  was,  by  the  hand  of  some 
other  one,  culled  out  of  Luke.  But 
there  is  no  real  contradiction  neverthe- 
less. The  disciples  of  our  Lord  were 
in  the  midst  of  the  inconsistencies  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;    ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


a  tumultuating  and  transition  state  of 
mind.  All  their  hopes  had  been  sud- 
denly dashed.  They  had  been  utterly 
disappointed.  And  yet  they  could 
not  bring  themselves  to  believe  that 
their  late  Beloved  Lord  had  been  an 
impostor.  Had  He  not  been  uniformly 
and  perfectly  pure  ?  Had  He  not 
been  almost  infinitely  unselfish  and 
noble  ?  It  could  not  be  that  He  was 
a  deceiver.  And  yet  the  unchallenge- 
able fact  stared  them  in  the  face, 
that,  instead  of  throwing  off  His 
disguise  and  assuming  His  royal  pre- 
rogatives, as  they  had  anticipated,  He 
had  been  seized,  tried,  condemned, 
and  crucified  like  a  slave !  What 
could  they  make  of  the  case?  Mary 
Magdalene  and  other  women  had  told 
them  that  the  sepulchre  was  found 
by  them  open  and  illumined  by  the 
presence  of  angels.  Peter  and  John 
had  run  to  it,  and  found  the  report 
of  the  women  true,  in  its  main  element 
at  least.  Then  Mary  had  told  them 
that  the  Lord  actually  appeared  to 
her.  They  could  not  for  a  moment 
doubt  her  sincerity.  But  surely 
her  imagination  must  have  imposed 
on  her !  By-and-by,  however,  the 
Lord  appeared  to  Peter  also,  and  he 
reported  the  fact  to  his  brethren. 
His  testimony  had  weight ;  and 
they  received  it  with  raptures 
(Luke  xxiv.  34).  And  yet  after  a 
little,  and  because  of  the  very  pre- 
ciousness  of  their  new-born  hope, 
they  begin  to  be  inquisitive  and 
critical  in  reference  in  its  foundation. 
What  if  Peter  himself  had  been  over- 
mastered by  his  imagination  ?  What 
if,  under  the  influence  of  his  sanguine 
nature,  and  with  that  haste  which 
has  been  all  along  his  besetting 
failing,  he  had  mistaken  a  mere 
subjective  vision  for  an  objective  fact  ? 
Then  perhaps  the  assembled  brethren 
would  question  Peter,  and  cross- 
question  him,  going  into  the  varied 
details  of  the  appearance,  until, 
it  may  be,  Peter's  own  faith  began 
to  waver.  When  once  in  the  full 
flow  of  this  doubting  mood,  they 
would   be  ready   enough  to   set  aside 


the  testimony  of  the  two  comparatively 
humble  brethren  who  had  returned 
from  the  country.  They  would  say, 
"  No  doubt  the  brethren  are  honest. 
But  surely  it  cannot  be  true  that 
He  who  actually  on  the  Cross  gave 
up  the  ghost,  and  was  then  buried, 
is  now  literally  alive  again !  How 
could  such  a  thing  be?  Must  not 
the  brethren  and  Peter  himself,  as 
well  as  Mary,  be  the  dupes  of  their 
fond  imaginations  ? "  Such  would 
naturally  be  the  state  of  the  disciples' 
minds  for  a  considerable  length  of 
time — the  tide  of  thought  and  feeling 
surging  and  resurging  in  contrary 
directions.  And  hence  the  facile 
conciliation  of  Mark's  statement  with 
Luke's. — J.  Morison,  D.D. 

Yer.      15.     Christ's     commission. — 

1.  What  is  implied  in  preaching  the 
gospel  ? — 1.  It  means  to  spread  the 
good  news.  2.  To  make  known  that 
revelation  which  God  has  given  of 
Himself.  3.  To  exhibit  the  privilege 
the  gospel  offers.  4.  To  declare  the 
precepts  the  gospel  enjoins. 

II.  To  whom  the  office  is  committed. 
— 1.  It  was  not  confined  to  the  apostles. 

2.  The  preacher  must  have  a  deep  and 
a  living  sense  of  the  importance  of 
Divine  truth.  3.  The  preacher  must 
have  good  sense  and  a  power  of  argu- 
ment. 4.  A  spiritual  and  experimental 
knowledge  of  the  gospel.  5.  A  par- 
ticular call  by  the  grace  of  God.  6.  A 
fervent  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  an 
earnest  desire  to  advance  His  honour 
and  interest.  7.  An  intense  desire  for 
the  salvation  of  souls.  8.  A  willing- 
ness to  endure  hardship  and  persecution 
in  the  work  on  which  he  is  engaged. 

III.  Where  and  to  whom  is  the 
message  to  be  preached? — Every 
rational  being  of  the  race  of  Adam  is 
to  receive  this  important  message,  for 
all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of 
the  kingdom  of  God.  1.  None  are 
excluded  by  the  decree  of  God.  He  is 
loving  to  all  men.  2.  None  are  excluded 
by  natural  or  moral  incapacity.  They 
are  not  too  weak,  ignorant,  or  depraved 
to  obey  the  precepts  of  the  gospel. 

627 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


IV.    The   condition  required  from  worthy  to  be  put   side  by  side  with 

those  who  hear. — Faith  is  required  in  believing. — M.  F.  Sadler. 
order  to  have  salvation,  for  the  gospel  Words  applicable  to  nations. — What- 

is — 1.    A    revelation   of    truths,    and  ever  unbelievers  think  about  individual 

implies  a  persuasion  of  their  certainty  souls,  it  is  plain  that  these  words  have 

and  importance.     2.  An  offer  of  privi-  proved     true     for    communities     and 

leges,  and  implies  that  we  accept  that  nations.      He   that    believeth    and   is 

offer  in  the  way  God  has  appointed,  baptised    has    been    saved ;    he    that 

3.  A  promulgation  of  laws,  and  implies  believeth    not    has    been    condemned, 

that  we  acknowledge  the  authority  of  The    nation    and    kingdom    that   has 

the  Lawgiver. — Preacher's  Analyst.  not  served  Christ  has  perished. — Dean 

Gospel    responsibility. — It    was    the  Chadwick. 
saying  of  a  great  missionary  preacher,  Nominal  Christianity  insufficient. — 

"  We  shall  soon  have  done  with  the  Let  a  man  (I  speak  of  the  generality 

gospel,   but  the  gospel  will  not  soon  of  men)  be  asked  upon  what  he  builds 

have  done  with  us."  his  hopes  of  salvation.     He  will  reply : 

"  I  am  a  Christian.     I  was  born  in  a 

Ver.  16.  Belief  and  baptism. — By  Christian  land,  of  Christian  parents, 
joining  "  believing  "  and  "  being  bap-  and  baptised  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
tised,"  as  both  necessary  to  salvation,  and  therefore  I  am  a  Christian."  It 
did  the  Lord  mean  to  put  on  an  equality  is  well  for  him  that  he  has  been 
the  highest  action  of  the  soul  in  blessed  with  such  advantages.  But  has 
embracing  the  truth  of  God  and  of  he  improved  them  as  they  might  have 
Christ  and  the  reception  of  an  outward  been  improved  ?  The  words  of  Christ 
rite  ?  Certainly  not.  For  He  did  not  are  not,  "  He  that  is  baptised  shall 
consider  that  the  baptism  which  He  be  saved " ;  but,  "  He  that  believeth 
ordained  was  an  outward  rite.  It  is,  and  is  baptised  shall  be  saved."  The 
according  to  His  own  words,  a  new  name  of  a  Christian  will,  of  itself,  do 
birth  of  water  and  the  Spirit  into  His  nothing  for  us  ;  it  will  only  be  an 
kingdom.  According  to  the  teaching  aggravation  of  our  guilt,  if  we  be  found 
of  St.  Paul,  it  is  a  death  and  burial  with  without  a  Christian  heart,  without  a 
Him  to  sin,  and  a  rising  again  with  Christian  faith,  without  a  Christian 
Him  to  newness  of  life  (Rom.  vi.  1-4),  practice.  But  perhaps  he  will  say :  "I 
so  that  the  baptised  man  must,  no  am  something  more  than  a  nominal 
matter  what  the  difficulty,  count  him-  professor  of  the  gospel.  I  am  constant 
self  to  be  in  a  new  state,  born  anew  in  my  attendance  at  the  house  of  God, 
into  the  Second  Adam,  grafted  into  and  regular  in  the  observance  of  the 
the  True  Vine,  endued  with- a  new  life  Holy  Communion."  But  let  him  be 
from  Christ,  and  gifted,  if  he  will  asked  again :  Is  the  heart  in  all  this  t 
faithfully  strive  to  use  them,  with  new  Is  it  done  solely  and  wholly  to  please 
powers  against  sin  and  on  the  side  of  God  ?  Is  it  done  with  seriousness, 
holiness  of  life.  It  was  the  Lord's  earnestness,  and  sincerity  ?  Or  is  this 
intention,  by  His  death  and  resur-  outward  shew  of  religion  the  result  of 
rection,  not  only  to  deliver  men  from  habit,  put  on  in  conformity  with  the 
sin  as  individuals,  but  to  incorporate  custom  of  the  world,  or  to  deceive  and 
them  into  His  mystical  body,  i.e.  His  gain  the  favour  of  mankind  ?  Does 
Holy  Catholic  Church,  so  that  in  the  he  enter  the  holy  sanctuary  with  the 
unity  of  that  Church,  in  the  unity  of  full  determination  that,  when  he  has 
its  faith,  its  hope,  its  charity,  they  been  taught  his  duty,  he  will  perform 
might  grow  up,  not  singly,  but  together,  the  same  ?  Does  he,  as  he  kneels  at 
in  the  fellowship  of  the  One  Body,  the  holy  table,  "acknowledge  and 
And  so  the  reception  of  His  baptism  bewail  his  manifold  sins  and  wicked- 
being  the  outward  sign  of  this,  and  the  ness,"  and,  "  intending  to  lead  a  new 
means  for  bringing  it  to  each  one,  was  life,"  pray  for  strength  and  grace  to 

628 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.        chap.  XVI. 


that  God  with  whom  alone  dwelleth 
the  power  to  bring  him  unto  happiness  ? 
Does  he  "commune  with  his  own 
heart "  in  public  and  in  private,  at  all 
times  and  seasons,  to  discover  whether 
he  be  wandering  from  the  right  way, 
from  his  duty,  his  religion,  and  his 
God,  and  with  the  purpose  to  correct 
what  he  finds  to  be  wrong,  and  to 
improve  what  is  deficient  ?  The  man 
who  can  answer  these  questions  to  the 
satisfaction  of  his  conscience  and  his 
God  will  "  be  accepted  with  Him " ; 
but  too  many,  it  is  to  be  feared,  are 
very  far  removed  from  such  an  ad- 
vanced state  of  spiritual  excellence. — 
H.  Marriott. 

"  Shall  be  damned." — "  God  is  too 
good  to  damn  anybody."  Quite  right. 
God  does  not  damn  anybody  ;  but  many 
damn  themselves.  Damnation  is  sin 
and  suffering  producing  and  perpetuat- 
ing each  other.  Look  at  the  low  dens 
with  their  diseased,  poisoned,  putres- 
cent inmates,  their  depravity,  their 
profligacy,  their  brutality,  their  bodily 
torture,  their  mental  anguish.  Is  not 
that  damnation  ? — sin  and  suffering 
acting  and  reacting.  Hell  is  that 
same  thing  projected  into  the  soul's 
future.  God  does  not  damn  men.  He 
moves  heaven  and  earth  to  prevent  it. 
The  Crucifixion  was  God's  supreme 
effort  to  keep  men  from  hell.  How 
unreasonable  to  charge  God  with  your 
death !  Suppose  I  went,  sick  and 
suffering,  through  the  stormy  night  to 
hold  a  light  for  you  at  some  dizzy 
chasm ;  suppose  you  struck  down  the 
light  which  I  had  brought  with  so 
much  pains ;  suppose  you  lost  your 
foothold  and  fell  into  the  abyss  below  : 
could  I  be  charged  with  your  death  ? 
Well,  then,  did  not  God  bring  you 
light  ?  Did  He  not  with  scarred  hand 
hold  that  light  over  your  pathway? 
If  you  reject  it  and  fall,  can  you  charge 
Him  with  your  death  ?  No  ;  oh  no  ! 
"  This  is  the  condemnation,  that  light 
came  into  the  world,  and  men  loved 
darkness  rather  than  light." — R.  S. 
Barrett. 

Vers.  17,  18.    "These  signs"— The 


Holy  Church  doth  spiritually  every 
day  what  she  then  did  through  the 
apostles  corporally.  For  when  the 
priests,  by  the  grace  of  exorcism,  lay 
hands  on  believers,  and  forbid  evil 
spirits  to  inhabit  their  minds,  what  do 
they  but  cast  out  devils?  And  any 
believers  whatever,  who  henceforth 
abandon  the  secular  words  of  the  old 
life,  and  utter  holy  mysteries,  and 
rehearse  as  best  they  can  the  praise 
and  power  of  their  Maker,  what  do 
they  but  speak  with  new  tongues  ? 
Moreover,  while  by  their  good  exhorta- 
tions they  remove  evil  from  the  hearts 
of  others,  they  are  taking  up  serpents  : 
which  miracles  are  greater,  because 
they  are  the  more  spiritual ;  the 
greater,  because  they  are  the  means 
of  raising  not  bodies,  but  souls.  These 
signs  then,  dearest  brethren,  ye  do,  if 
ye  will  (Ps.  xci.  13;  John  xiv.  12; 
1  Cor.  xiii.). — Gregory. 

Yer.  17.  The  promise  of  power. — 
This  promise,  observe,  is  contingent 
upon  faith ;  and  it  is  a  promise  of 
power  over  spiritual  foes  and  over 
natural  disqualifications.  1.  Over 
spiritual  foes,  so  that  even  demons 
shall  be  subject  unto  us.  O  Christian 
worker,  therefore  abandon  not  the 
hardest  case.  2.  Over  natural  dis- 
qualifications. The  timid,  shrinking 
Peter  shall  speak  with  boldness  before 
three  thousand  men  ;  and  John,  the 
hasty  Boanerges,  shall  become  the 
apostle  of  gentleness  and  love. — E.  A. 
Stuart. 

Yer.  18.  Safety  amid  danger. — The 
Master  promises  to  His  disciples,  on 
the  condition  of  their  faith  in  Him, 
perfect  safety  amidst  the  dangers  of 
the  work,  so  that  what  is  harmful  to 
others  shall  not  hurt  them.  And  this 
safety  will  consist  not  in  the  avoid- 
ance of  evil,  for  the  Master  knew  they 
would  still  be  in  the  world,  and  that 
temptations  would  be  round  about 
them  on  every  side.  Therefore  He 
does  not  promise  immunity  from 
danger,  but  immunity  from  harm. 
Yet  this  also,  of  course,  only  in  the 

629 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK. 


pathway  of  obedience.  We  may  not 
throw  ourselves  from  the  pinnacle  of 
the  Temple,  and  expect  His  angels  to 
bear  us  up  in  their  preserving  hands, 
for  we  may  not  tempt  the  Lord  our 
God  ;  but  right  sure  we  are  that  no 
harm  can  happen  unto  us  if  we  be 
followers  of  that  which  is  good — that 
He  doth  give  His  angels  charge  over 
us  to  keep  us  in  all  His  ways — that 
upon  the  highway  of  the  Lord  no  lion 
shall  be  there.  And  is  it  not  so? 
Take,  for  instance,  sceptical  books; 
and  can  you  take  up  a  more  deadly 
serpent,  or  drink  a  more  poisonous 
cup?  If  you  take  it  up  simply  from 
curiosity,  or  because  the  book  is 
popular,  and  you  covet  the  reputation 
of  being  liberal-minded  or  up  with 
the  times,  even  if  you  retain  your  faith, 
the  poison  of  that  book  will  oftentimes 
sting  you  in  years  to  come.  But  if 
you  read  that  book  because  it  is  your 
duty,  because  you  wish  to  expose  its 
fallacy  to  some  young  heart  who  is 
being  led  astray  thereby,  then  you 
may  take  up  the  serpent  or  drink  the 
deadly  thing,  and  it  shall  not  hurt  you. 
And  so  it  is  all  through.  This  man 
enters  into  politics  strong  in  faith 
and  in  his  desire  to  serve  both  God 
and  man,  and  therefore  walks  erect 
amidst  the  pitfalls  of  public  life,  into 
which  that  poor  miserable  wretch,  so 
selfishly  ambitious,  most  miserably 
falls.  This  tradesman  preserves  his 
character     unspotted     and     unsullied 


because  he  is  a  man  of  God,  when 
yonder  huckster's  conscience  is  seared 
day  by  day  by  the  tricks  of  trade, 
until  he  grows  so  callous  that  evil 
ceases  to  cause  pain. — E.  A.  Stuart. 

The  promise  of  usefulness. — "  They 
shall  lay  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they 
shall  recover."  Yes,  the  blessing  shall 
not  end  with  yourself ;  others  shall 
live  by  your  side.  You  will  only  be 
helpful  when  you  yourself  are  safe, 
and  you  will  only  be  safe  when  you 
are  helpful.  Bring  yourself  into  con- 
tact with  those  who  are  sick  and 
sorrowing,  and  you  will  know  the 
exquisite  delight  of  doing  good.  But 
we  must  "  lay  hands "  upon  them, 
come  close  to  them,  bring  our  personality 
into  touch  with  them.  You  can  never 
do  good  if  you  stand  at  a  distance  from 
your  fellow-men.  The  Risen  Jesus  has 
left  you  in  this  world  as  His  represen- 
tative, to  heal  the  sorrows  of  the  world, 
and  works  through  you  in  conferring 
blessings  upon  the  outcast  and  the 
sad. — Ibid. 

Christian  treatment  of  the  sick. — In 
nothing  has  the  spirit  of  Christianity 
been  more  apparent  than  in  the  treat- 
ment of  the  sick.  The  latest  discoveries 
of  medical  science  are,  in  our  great 
hospitals  and  infirmaries,  immediately 
on  their  discovery,  applied  to  the  benefit 
of  the  poorest  and  meanest  who  have 
been  taken  to  these  places. — M.  F. 
Sadler. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  19,  20. 

(Parallels  :  Luke  xxiv.  50,  51  ;  Acts  i.  9.) 

Christ's  ascension  and  co-operation. — The  words  "  after  the  Lord  had  spoken 
unto  them  "  may  refer  primarily  to  the  commission  which  He  had  just  given 
to  His  disciples  to  "go  into  all  the  world  and  to  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
creature,"  and  to  the  various  instructions  and  promises  with  which  that 
commission  was  accompanied.  But  the  words  probably  refer  also  to  all  that 
Christ  had  spoken  to  His  disciples  after  His  resurrection  from  the  dead  ;  for 
we  are  told  in  His  history  that  after  His  crucifixion  "He  shewed  Himself 
alive  by  many  infallible  proofs,  being  seen  of  them  forty  days,  and  speaking 
of  the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  God."  Eighteen  hundred  years  have 
passed  away  since  these  events  occurred,  and  we  never  saw  either  the  Saviour 
or  the  apostles  to  whom  they  refer.  But  we  believe  the  record  that  relates 
them  to  us,  we  make  them  the  subject  of  devout  and  delightful  contemplation, 

630 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


and  we  feel  that  we   have   an  interest   in   them   which  will   never   cease  to 
influence  our  hearts  through  time  or  through  eternity. 

I.  Let  us  contemplate  these  apostles  witnessing  the  ascension  of  their  Lord. — 
1.  The  place  from  which  He  ascended  was  the  Mount  of  Olives — that  part 
of  it  which  was  situated  in  the  district  of  Bethany  (Luke  xxiv.  50).  It  was 
the  place  to  which  He  had  been  accustomed  to  resort  after  the  labours  and 
fatigues  of  the  day,  and  where  He  had  often  spent  whole  nights  in  meditation 
and  in  prayer ;  and  now  He  Himself  ascends  from  the  same  place  whence  His 
nightly  supplications  had  so  often  ascended  to  His  Father  and  to  our  Father, 
to  His  God  and  to  our  God.  It  was  the  place  over  which  He  passed  as  He 
made  His  last  entry  into  Jerusalem,  where  He  was  crowned  with  thorns ;  and 
from  which  He  now  passes  to  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  to  be  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour.  It  was  the  place  to  which  He  repaired  with  His  disciples, 
after  they  had  partaken  of  the  Last  Supper ;  for  when  they  had  sung  a  hymn 
they  went  into  the  Mount  of  Olives.  There  His  disciples  forsook  Him  and 
fled,  and  there  He  was  afterwards  parted  from  them,  and  a  cloud  received  Him 
out  of  their  sight.  2.  The  manner  in  which  He  ascended  is  minutely  recorded 
(Luke  xxiv.  51).  His  ascension  was  visible,  and  His  disciples  were  eye-witnesses 
of  His  majesty,  as  He  rose  higher  and  higher  from  the  mountain,  till  the  cloud 
covered  Him  and  concealed  Him  from  their  sight.  But  the  most  interesting 
fact  connected  with  His  ascension  is  that  it  took  place  whilst  He  was  in  the 
act  of  blessing  His  disciples.  When  the  high  priest  among  the  Jews  began  to 
bless  the  congregation,  he  lifted  up  his  hands  and  exclaimed,  "  The  Lord  bless 
thee  and  keep  thee ;  the  Lord  cause  His  face  to  shine  upon  thee,  and  be 
gracious  unto  thee  ;  the  Lord  lift  upon  thee  the  light  of  His  countenance, 
and  give  thee  peace."  And  in  like  manner  our  Great  High  Priest  lifted  up  His 
hands — those  hands  which  had  so  often  given  bread  to  the  hungry,  health  to 
the  sick,  life  to  the  dead,  salvation  to  the  lost — those  hands  which  had  so 
lately  bled  upon  the  Cross,  and  in  which  the  print  of  the  nails  was  yet  visible 
— those  bountiful  and  wounded  hands  He  lifted  up,  and  then  He  began  to 
bless  His  disciples.  "  And  it  came  to  pass,  while  He  blessed  them  "  (after  His 
blessing  was  begun,  but  before  it  was  concluded) — "  it  came  to  pass,  while  He 
blessed  them  "  (for  how  often  does  it  happen  that  a  blessing  precedes  a  bereave- 
ment!)— "He  was  parted  from  them";  and  He  rose  from  the  mountain,  with 
His  hands  still  lifted  up,  and  with  the  blessing  still  dropping  from  His  lips, 
and  brightening  as  He  took  His  flight.  3.  Having  thus  left  the  earth,  our 
text  declares  that  "  He  was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand 
of  God."  As  He  had  descended  to  earth  in  the  likeness  of  men,  and  in  order, 
through  sufferings  and  death,  to  become  the  Mediator,  He  now,  having  procured 
eternal  redemption  for  us,  ascends  in  His  mediatorial  capacity,  and  rises  "  far 
above  all  principality,"  etc.  And  what,  think  you,  must  have  been  the 
rapturous  joy  that  thrilled  through  heaven,  when  the  expectant  and  listening 
silence  of  its  inhabitants  was  broken  by  the  shout,  "  Lift  up  your  heads,  O  ye 
gates,  and  be  ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King  of  Glory  shall 
come  in " !  And  having  thus  entered,  He  was  received  by  the  Everlasting 
Father,  who  declared,  "This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
"  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  Him  ! "  4.  Such  an  ascension  into  heaven, 
and  such  a  reception  there,  is  in  beautiful  harmony  with  the  dignity  of  the 
Saviour's  person,  and  with  the  glory  which  He  had  acquired  as  the  Author  of 
man's  redemption ;  and  it  was  also  a  pledge  and  a  preparation  for  the  triumphant 
spread  of  His  gospel  in  the  world. 

II.  Contemplate  the  apostles  going  forth  to  preach  His  gospel. — The  ministry 
of  the  gospel  is  represented  by  the  apostle  as  one  of  the  first  gifts  which  the 
Ascended  Saviour  acquired  and  bestowed  upon  the  world  (Eph.  iv.  11,  12).     We 

631 


cflAP.  xvt        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


therefore  find  that  immediately  after  the  ascension  of  their  Lord  these  disciples 
"went  forth,  and  preached  everywhere."  1.  The  subject  of  their  preaching  was 
the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  "  the  Word,"  as  it  is  emphatically  called  in  our  text. 
And  after  what  they  had  seen  and  heard  and  experienced  themselves,  on  what 
other  subject  could  they  preach  and  what  other  name  could  they  declare  ?  It 
was  not  merely  as  an  important  fact  that  they  contemplated  His  death,  but  as 
having  essentially  connected  with  it  a  moral  meaning  and  design,  as  the  only 
and  the  all-sufficient  means  of  redemption  to  a  ruined  world.  He  was  wounded ; 
but  it  was  for  our  transgressions.  He  was  bruised ;  but  it  was  for  our  iniquities. 
He  suffered  ;  but  He  suffered,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,  that  He  might  bring  us 
to  God.  He  bled ;  but  in  His  blood  there  is  redemption,  the  forgiveness  of  sins, 
according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace.  He  died ;  but  through  death  He  destroyed 
him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is  the  devil,  and  delivered  them  who 
through  fear  of  death  were  all  their  lifetime  subject  to  bondage.  In  preaching 
this  doctrine  the  apostles  warned  sinners,  as  we  warn  you,  to  beware  of  rejecting 
Christ  by  trusting  for  salvation  to  your  own  works ;  and  they  exhorted  sinners, 
as  we  exhort  you,  to  go  at  once  to  Christ,  and  to  go  to  Him  laden  with  the  full 
weight  of  all  your  guilt  and  condemnation,  because  "  He  came  into  the  world 
to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  2.  They  communicated  this  gospel 
to  mankind  by  preaching.  Nothing  can  equal  the  impressiveness  of  a  living 
address  from  man  to  man,  where  numbers  are  assembled,  where  the  place  which 
they  occupy  is  sacred,  where  the  gospel  is  the  theme,  where  the  whole  soul  of 
the  preacher  feels  and  speaks,  and  where  all  are  reminded  that  they  are  in  the 
presence  of  God.  Attention  is  awakened ;  emotions  are  excited  ;  conscience  is 
aroused ;  and  the  stream  of  sympathy  flows  from  soul  to  soul,  mingled  with  all 
those  hallowed  influences  which  render  the  gospel  the  power  of  God  to  our 
salvation.  3.  The  extent  to  which  they  preached  this  gospel  was  universal. 
They  preached  Christ  first  in  the  very  place  where  He  had  lived,  and  died,  and 
risen,  and  ascended.  They  preached  His  miracles  to  the  very  men  who  had 
witnessed  them  and  experienced  them.  They  preached  His  sufferings  in  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane  and  on  the  hill  of  Calvary  where  they  had  been  endured. 
They  preached  His  resurrection  at  the  mouth  of  His  deserted  sepulchre.  They 
preached  His  ascension  on  the  very  mount  where  He  had  been  parted  from 
them.  But  while  Jerusalem  was  the  centre  of  their  operations  the  world  was 
their  circumference ;  and  they  went  forth  and  preached  everywhere,  till  they 
could  say  to  the  Colossians,  "  The  gospel  is  come  unto  you,  as  it  is  in  all  the 
world." 

III.  Contemplate  the  apostles  experiencing  their  Lord's  co-operation  with 
them  in  their  labours. — Wherever  His  disciples  worked  as  instruments  He 
worked  also  as  the  efficient  agent ;  for  His  power  is  omnipotent.  .  And  by 
this  presence  and  this  power  He  graciously  fulfilled  His  own  declaration 
(vers.  17,  18).  1.  These  Divine  influences  qualified  the  preachers  of  the  gospel. 
The  change  which  took  place  in  the  sentiments  and  conduct  of  the  apostles, 
after  the  reception  of  Christ  into  heaven,  was  most  manifest  and  remarkable. 
To  that  same  Divine  Redeemer  let  every  minister  of  the  gospel  look  for  the 
knowledge,  and  the  holiness,  and  the  energy,  and  the  pathos,  and  the  patie  jt 
perseverance,  and  for  every  qualification  which  is  necessary  to  render  him  a 
workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth, 
and  instant  in  season  and  out  of  season,  watching  for  souls  as  one  who  must 
give  an  account.  2.  These  Divine  influences  confirmed  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 
As  He  sat  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  He  baptised  them  with  His  miraculous 
influences  and  power  to  such  an  extent  that  they  could  heal  the  sick  and  raise 
the  dead  whenever  they  invoked  the  name  of  Jesus.  These  miraculous  influences 
are  now  indeed  withdrawn.     But  as  we  can  prove  that  these  .miraculous  powers 

632 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


then  existed,  we  can  appeal  to  them  as  a  standing  evidence  in  our  day  that 
the  gospel  of  our  salvation  is  the  Word  of  God.  But  though  the  miraculous 
influences  are  withdrawn,  the  spiritual  and  sanctifying  influences  are  still  con- 
tinued. 3.  These  Divine  influences  ensured  the  success  of  the  gospel.  Though 
its  original  ministers  were  only  the  twelve  fishermen  of  Galilee — men  without 
learning,  without  worldly  wealth,  and  without  worldly  power — yet  they  became 
so  mighty  through  God  that  heathen  philosophers  were  confounded,  heathen 
oracles  were  struck  dumb,  heathen  temples  were  deserted,  and  so  mightily  grew 
the  Word  of  God  and  prevailed  that  in  about  thirty  years  after  the  ascension 
of  Christ  the  whole  Roman  world  was  conquered  by  the  Cross.  And  it  was 
a  glorious  conquest ;  for  it  was  a  triumph  over  mind  and  heart.  And,  thanks 
be  unto  God,  the  same  Divine  influences  ensure  the  success  of  the  gospel  in  every 
age  ;  and  many  of  you,  my  brethren,  are  living  witnesses  of  its  effectual  working 
in  the  hearts  of  them  that  believe;  "for  our  gospel  has  come  to  you  not  in 
word  only,  but  in  power,  and  in  the  Holy  Ghost  .and  in  much  assurance." 
And  believing  as  we  do  that  the  Ascended  Redeemer  possesses  all  power  both 
in  heaven  and  earth,  we  are  sure  that  His  moral  government  of  the  world 
will  be  productive  of  the  purity  and  joy  and  universality  of  the  Church,  and 
that  the  time  foretold  by  prophecy  shall  come,  when  to  Him  every  knee  shall 
bow  and  every  tongue  confess. — J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D. 

OUTLINES   AND    COMMENTS    ON   THE    VERSES. 

Ver.  1 9.  The  significance  of  Christ's  so  little  noticed  by  the  sacred  writers  ; 
Ascension. — 1.  It  was  the  end  of  the  for  it  is  mentioned  by  two  only,  St. 
work  of  redemption.  2.  It  was  the  Mark  and  St.  Luke,  and  these  two 
final  triumph  of  goodness.  3.  It  was  who  were  not  witnesses  of  it.  And 
the  exaltation  of  humanity.  4.  It  yet  we  need  not  wonder  at  this,  nor 
told  of  the  continuity  of  life.  5.  It  that  it  should  have  held  a  less  pro- 
inaugurated  the  reign  of  blessing.  minent  place  in  the  minds  of  the 
Let  us  realise  that  all  gifts,  both  apostles  than  the  Resurrection ;  for, 
spiritual  and  temporal,  come  from  indeed,  that  He  who  had  risen  from 
Him,  and  so  live  that  His  benediction  the  grave,  who  had  laid  aside  His 
may  be  able  to  rest  on  all  that  we  earthly  body  and  put  on  the  heavenly, 
do. — A.  G.  Mortimer,  D.D.  that    He   should    go    up    to    heaven, 

"Received  up    into   heaven." — There  that   He   who  had   so   clearly   shewn 

is'    something    remarkable     in    these  that  He  came  down  from  God  should 

words.     We  habitually  speak  of  Christ  return  to  God — this  was  but  natural, 

as     ascending,     but     Scripture    more  and  could  not  but  appear  natural  to 

frequently  declares  that  He  was  the  the  enlightened  minds  of  the  apostles, 

subject  of  the  action  of  Another,  and  What  else  could  happen  to  Him  who 

was  taken   up.     See  Luke  xxiv.    51  ;  had  risen  from  the  grave,  and  clothed 

Acts  i.  2,  9.     Physical  interference  is  Himself   with   His  "  house   that   was 

not    implied;    no    angels    bore    Him  from  heaven " ? — A.  Grant,  D.C.L. 
aloft;    and    the    narratives    make   it  Ascension  joy. — Truly  if  we  could  ever 

clear  that  His  glorious  body,  obedient  live  in  this  day  all  were  joy ;  for  the 

to   its   new  mysterious   nature,  arose  Ascension  is  the  crown  of  all  joys,  the 

unaided.     But  the  decision  to  depart  rapture  of  all  creation,  the  wonder  of 

and  the  choice   of   a   time   came  not  the   blessed   angels,  the  union  of   all 

from  Him  :  He  did  not  go,   but  was  being,  the  finishing  of  the  earthly  course 

taken. — Dean  Chadwick.  of  the  Son  of  God,  His  entrance  into 

Why  such  slight  mention  of  Christ's  glory  ! — E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D. 
Ascension  ? — It  may  seem  remarkable  We  ascend  with  Christ. — The  Ascen- 

that  so  great  an  occurrence  should  be  sion    of    Christ    is    the   great    pledge 

633 


chap.  xvi.        H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK. 


and  proof  of  our  eternal  state ; 
our  nature  is  for  ever  identified  with 
His,  so  that  as  long  as  He  is  man 
we  must  be  happy  as  one  with  Him. 
The  great  value  of  this  transcendent 
fact  is  not  merely  that  it  is  an  example 
of  our  future  ascension,  but  that  it 
is  our  ascension  begun — we  in  Him 
having  risen  to  heaven — we  in  Him 
being  at  this  time  present  before  God 
— we  in  Him  being  united  with  the 
eternal  plans  and  procedures  of  heaven, 
so  that  we  are  for  ever  blended  with 
Christ — His  property — His  purchased 
possession — the  very  members  of  His 
body. — Prof.  W.  A.  Butler. 
^    Thou  hast  raised  our   human  nature 

in  the  clouds  to  God's  right  hand, 
There  we  sit  in  heavenly  places,  there 

with  Thee  in  glory  stand  ; 
Jesus  reigns,  adored  by  angels ;  man 

with  God  is  on  the  throne  ; 
Mighty  Lord,  in  Thine  Ascension  we 

by  faith  behold  our  own  ! 

Bishop  Chris.  Wordsworth. 
Christ  on  the  right  hand  of  God  as 
our  Intercessor. — The  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  over  and  over  again  reiterates 
that  thought  that  we  have  a  Priest 
that  has  passed  into  the  heavens, 
there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God 
for  us.  And  the  apostle  Paul,  in 
that  great  linked  climax  in  the  eighth 
chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans, 
has  it,  "  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather, 
that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us."  There 
are  deep  mysteries  connected  with 
that  thought  of  the  intercession  of 
Christ.  It  does  not  mean  that  the 
Divine  heart  needs  to  be  won  to  love 
and  pity.  It  does  not  mean  that  in 
any  mere  outward  and  formal  fashion 
He  pleads  with  God,  and  softens  and 
placates  the  infinite  and  eternal  love 
of  the  Father  in  the  heavens.  It  at 
least  plainly  means  this,  that  He,  our 
Saviour  and  Sacrifice,  is  for  ever  in  the 
presence  of  God,  presenting  His  own 
blood  as  an  element  in  the  Divine 
dealing  with  us,  modifying  the  inci- 
dence of  the  Divine  lawr  and  securing 
through   His   own   merits   and  inter- 

634 


cession  the  outflow  of  blessings  upon 
our  heads  and  hearts.  It  is  not  a 
complete  statement  of  Christ's  work 
for  us  that  He  died  for  us.  He  died 
that  He  might  have  somewhat  to  offer. 
He  lives  that  He  may  be  our  Advocate 
as  well  as  our  propitiation  with  the 
Father.  And  just  as  the  high  priest 
once  a  year  passed  within  the  curtain, 
and  there  in  the  solemn  silence  and 
solitude  of  the  holy  place  sprinkled  the 
blood  that  he  bore  thither,  not  without 
trembling,  and  but  for  a  moment  per- 
mitted to  stay  in  the  awful  Presence, 
thus,  but  in  reality  and  for  ever,  with 
the-  joyful  gladness  of  a  Son  in  His 
"  own  calm  home,  His  habitation  from 
eternity,"  Christ  abides  in  the  holy 
place,  and  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  Majesty  of  the  heavens  lifts  up 
that  prayer,  so  strangely  compact  of 
authority  and  submission :  "  Father, 
I  will  that  these  whom  Thou  hast 
given  Me  be  with  Me  where  I  am." 
The  Son  of  Man  at  the  right  hand  of 
God  is  our  Intercessor  with  the  Father. 
"  Seeing,  then,  that  we  have  a  Great 
High  Priest  that  is  passed  through  the 
heavens,  let  us  come  boldly  to  the 
throne  of  grace." — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  20.  The  spread  of  Christ's 
influence. — As  the  ages  pass  the  in- 
fluence of  the  love  of  Christ  is  conquer- 
ing the  selfishness  of  mankind.  Even 
the  statute-books  of  civilisation  attest 
His  growing  power.  The  regeneration 
of  a  world  is  a  slow  process,  but  the 
healing  rays  from  His  glorified  presence 
at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father — 
calling  forth  the  verdure  and  fruitage 
of  an  ever  wider  imitation  of  His  life 
— have  in  them  the  pledge  of  a  future 
in  which  their  influence  will  extend 
over  all  lands. — C.  Geikie,  D.D. 

Christ  with  His  Church  throughout 
the  ages. — He  has  been  with  His 
Church,  keeping  her  from  fainting, 
from  decay,  declension,  so  that  she  has 
gone  on  conquering  and  to  conquer; 
so  that  the  hundred  and  twenty 
became  three  thousand  at  Pentecost; 
and  before  the  end  of  the  century  the 
three  thousand  had  become  probably 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   ST.  MARK.        chap,  XVI. 


(Lange)  half  a  million ;  by  the  eighth 
century  the  half- million  had  become 
thirty  millions ;  by  the  Reformation 
one  hundred  millions.  And  to-day 
four  hundred  and  forty  millions  of  men 
give  Jesus  the  Name  which  is  above 
every  name ;  multitudes  that  none  can 
number  doing  so,  not  with  lips  only, 
but  from  the  heart.  He  is  with  us 
still.  A  hundred  years  ago  Carey 
reckoned  up  the  population  of  the 
world  with  great  accuracy,  and  found 
Christendom  was  only  one-fifth  of  the 
whole;  now  it  is  nearly  one-third. 
What  another  century  of  missions  may 


make  it  will  probably  exceed  the  hope 
and  prayers  of  the  most  daring 
believer.  We  must  remember  He  is 
most  richly  with  us  when  we  are 
"  going  into  the  world  to  preach  the 
gospel,"  i.e.  when  we  are  on  the  move 
of  mercy.  Let  us,  for  our  personal 
consolation,  remember  He  will  be  with 
us  to  the  end  of  life  and  work  and 
need.  Let  us  remember  that,  in  all 
work  done  for  Him,  He  still  is  with  us, 
and  is  ever  making  the  foolishness  of 
preaching  and  teaching  omnipotent  to 
bring  men  into  His  fold. — R.  Glover. 


ILLUSTRATIONS    TO    CHAPTER    XVI. 


Ver.  1.  The  devotion  of  the  holy  women. — 
The  nightingale  is  celebrated  for  its  singing 
in  the  night.  We  have,  however,  seen  it 
maintained  that  it  is  all  a  mistake  to  sup- 
pose that  she  sings  only  in  the  night.  She 
sings  in  the  day  as  well,  only,  as  other 
songsters  are  then  in  full  chorus,  her  sweeter 
strains  are  not  particularly  distinguishable 
from  the  rest.  But  at  night,  when  all  others 
are  hushed,  her  song  is  heard,  and  is  more 
sweet  by  reason  of  the  contrast  with  the 
surrounding  stillness.  Similarly  was  it  with 
these  women.  They  served  in  the  day /of 
bright  sunshine,  but  their  service  was  then 
overshadowed,  so  to  speak,  by  the  demon- 
strative crowd  that  thronged  around  Him. 
Amidst  all  the  marks  of  attention  paid  Him, 
theirs  did  not  appear  particularly  distin- 
guishable. But  when  the  voice  of  the  noisy, 
effusive  crowd  was  hushed  during  the  dark 
night  of  trial  and  suffering  which  followed 
the  brief  day  of  popularity,  they  continued 
to  give  forth  the  music  of  love  and  sympathy 
through  the  dark  loneliness  of  the  night. 

Vers.  3,  4.  Imaginary  difficulties. — Once 
upon  a  time — so  the  homely  tale  runs — a 
man  and  his  wife  started  one  pleasant 
morning  to  pay  a  long-promised  visit  to  a 
friend  some  four  or  five  miles  away.  The 
good  woman  carried  her  only  little  one  with 
her;  and  they  had  not  got  far  from  home 
when  she  suddenly  remembered  a  bridge 
they  had  to  cross  which  was  very  old  and 
very  unsafe.  Then  she  began  to  worry 
about  it.  "  What  shall  we  do  about  that 
bridge  ? "  she  said  to  her  husband.  "  I  shall 
never  dare  to  go  over  it,  and  we  can't  get 
across  the  river  by  any  other  way."  "  Oh," 
said  the  man,  "  I  forgot  that  bridge  1  It  is 
a  bad  place,  What  if  it  were  to  break,  and 
we  fall  into  the  water  and  be  drowned  ? " 
"  Or  even,"  said    the  wife,   "  suppose  you 


should  step  on  a  rotten  plank,  and  break 
your  leg,  what  would  become  of  me  and  the 
child  ? "  "I  don't  know,"  said  the  man, 
"  what  would  become  of  any  of  us,  for  I 
couldn't  work,  and  we  should  starve  to 
death."  So  they  went  on  worrying  and 
fretting  and  framing  evil  till  they  got  to  the 
bridge,  when,  behold !  since  they  had  been 
there  last,  a  fine,  new,  substantial  stone* 
bridge  had  been  built  !  They  crossed  by  : 
in  safety,  and  found  that  they  might  have 
saved  themselves  all  this  anxiety. 

Difficulties  overcome. — Men  who  undertake 
great  works,  like  the  Mont  Cenis  tunnel, 
the  Atlantic  cable,  a  railway  across  a 
continent,  know  that  there  are  palpable, 
vast,  and  costly  difficulties.  There  are 
costs  which  are  certainly  known,  which  civil 
engineers  can  readily  calculate ;  and  there  are 
probable  costs,  which  hinge  upon  conjectured 
contingencies ;  and  there  are  possible  costs 
which  may  be  brought  to  light  by  the  pro- 
gress of  the  work.  The  men  who  furnish 
the  capital  necessarily  look  at  these.  They 
do  not  want  to  be  in  company  with  the  man 
whose  tower  was  not  finished,  of  whom  the 
Master  told  us.  But,  nevertheless,  they  go 
forward.  Immense  difficulties  had  to  be 
overcome  to  establish  the  Central  and  Erie 
and  Pacific  Railways,  the  continental  and 
sub-ocean  telegraphs,  and  other  great  works  ; 
but  they  have  been  brought  into  existence, 
and  stand  to-day,  because  men  who  are  not 
visionary  had  the  nerve  to  dare  to  take  up 
great  burdens,  and  the  shoulders  broad  and 
strong  enough  to  bear  them. 

Love  never  retreats. — A  little  English 
drummer-boy  was  brought  prisoner  before 
Napoleon.  The  emperor  told  him  to  sound 
the  retreat.  "I  never  learnt  it,"  was  the 
prompt  reply.  Love  never  retreats.  Love 
is  ever  accompanied  by  faith  and  hope,  and 
in  their  company  it  always  dares  to  pursue 

635 


chap.  xvi.        SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK. 


its  course,  however  the  odds  may  appear 
against  it. 

Ver.  6.  The  secret  of  Christ's  influence. — 
During  the  years  which  followed  the  out- 
break of  the  French  Revolution,  and  the 
revolt  against  Christianity  which  accom- 
panied it,  there  was  an  extraordinary  activity 
in  some  sections  of  French  society,  directed 
to  projecting  religions  that  might,  it  was 
hoped,  take  the  place  of  Christianity.  New 
philanthropic  enthusiasms,  new  speculative 
enthusiasms,  were  quite  the  order  of  the 
day.  On  one  occasion  a  projector  of  one  of 
these  schemes  came  to  Talleyrand,  who,  you 
will  remember,  was  a  bishop  who  had  turned 
sceptic,  and  so  had  devoted  himself  to 
politics  ;  but  whatever  is  to  be  said  of  him, 
he  was  possessed,  in  a  very  remarkable 
degree,  of  a  keen  perception  of  the  propor- 
tions of  things,  and  of  what  is  and  is  not 
possible  in  this  human  world.  The  visitor 
observed,  by  way  of  complaint  to  Talleyrand, 
how  hard  it  was  to  start  a  new  religion, 
even  though  its  tenets  and  its  efforts  were 
obviously  directed  to  promote  the  social 
and  personal  improvement  of  mankind. 
"  Surely,"  said  Talleyrand,  with  a  fine  smile 
— "  Surely  it  cannot  be  so  difficult  as  you 
think."  "How  so?"  said  his  friend.  "Why," 
said  Talleyrand,  "  the  matter  is  simple ;  you 
have  only  to  get  yourself  crucified,  or, 
anyhow,  put  to  death,  and  then,  at  your 
own  time,  to  rise  from  the  dead,  and  you  will 
have  no  difficulty." — Canon  IAddon. 

Nature's  testimony  to  the  Resurrection. — In 
the  life  of  Michael  Faraday  there  is  a  very 
touching  and  instructive  reference  to  the 
Resurrection.  He  tells  us  that  during  his 
travels  on  the  Continent  he  was  particularly 
struck  with  the  beauty  and  simplicity  of  the 
little  posts  of  remembrance  set  up  on  the 
graves  in  a  quiet  little  graveyard  in  Switzer- 
land. He  speaks  of  one  grave  which  more 
than  any  of  the  others  arrested  his  attention. 
Some  one  was  too  poor  to  put  up  an  engraved 
brass  plate,  or  even  a  painted  board,  but  had 
written  on  a  piece  of  paper  the  dates  of  the 
birth  and  death  of  the  one  whose  remains 
were  resting  below.  The  piece  of  paper 
was  fastened  to  a  board,  and  mounted  on 
the  top  of  a  stick  at  the  head  of  the  grave. 
The  paper  was  protected  from  the  rain  by 
a  small  roof,  the  ledge  of  which  protruded 
sufficiently  to  carry  the  water  away  from 
the  board.  It  was  a  very  simple  contrivance 
to  memorialise  a  friend.  But  on  examining 
the  contrivance  Faraday  saw  that  Nature 
had  contributed  her  part  towards  that 
humble  memorial.  Because  under  that  little 
shelter  formed  by  the  protruding  ledge,  and 
by  the  side  of  the  inscription  on  the  paper, 
a  caterpillar  had  attached  itself,  and  there 
had  passed  through  its  death-like  state  of 
a  chrysalis,  and  ultimately  assumed  its 
finished  state  of  a  butterfly,  and  had  winged 

636 


its  flight  from  the  spot,  leaving  its  corpse- 
like relics  behind.  And  the  young  scientist 
turned  away  from  that  humble  grave,  his 
heart  strengthened  in  the  belief  of  the 
Resurrection,  and  his  thoughts  kindled  into 
a  glow  by  the  contemplation  of  the  wonderful 
works  of  God. 

Ver  14.  Unbelief  unreasonable. — To  one 
who  affected  to  question  the  received  account 
of  the  death  of  Julius  Csesar  we  should 
not  say  "You  want  faith, "but  "You  want 
sense." — Isaac  Taylor. 

Ver.  15.  How  to  preach. — A  wise  clergy- 
man, now  deceased,  once  said  he  had 
learned  to  preach  not  only  so  that  people 
could  understand  him  if  they  had  a  mind  to, 
but  also  that  they  could  not  misunderstand 
him  if  they  wanted  to.  A  hint  here  to  all 
called  upon  to  make  statements  with  pen  or 
lips. 

The  preservation  of  the  gospel. — The  monks 
of  Lindisfarne  set  sail  for  Ireland  with  the 
book  of  the  Gospels  ;  a  storm  arose ;  the 
book  fell  overboard  and  was  lost :  they  were 
driven  back  to  the  English  coast.  Discon- 
solate, they  went  in  quest  of  the  precious 
volume:  for  a  long  time  they  searched  in 
vain,  but  at  length  (so  says  the  story)  a 
miraculous  revelation  was  vouchsafed  to 
them,  and,  following  its  directions,  they 
found  the  book  on  the  sand,  far  above  high- 
water  mark,  uninjured  by  the  waves,  nay, 
even  more  beautiful  for  the  disaster.  Does 
not  this  story  well  symbolise  the  power  of 
the  gospel  working  on  the  Church  ?  Through 
the  carelessness  of  man  it  may  disappear 
amidst  the  confusion  of  the  storm,  the  waves 
may  close  over  it  and  hide  it  from  human 
sight,  but  lost — lost  for  ever — it  cannot  be. 
— Bishop  Lightfoot. 

Preaching  Christ  everywhere. — Dr.  Boaz, 
of  Calcutta,  tells  in  his  journal  of  the  follow- 
ing incident,  which  happened  to  him  and 
a  fellow-missionary  at  the  great  fair  on 
Saugor  Island,  whither  they  had  come  to 
preach  to  the  assembled  multitudes.  While 
they  were  speaking.  "  a  respectable-looking 
man,  in  evident  astonishment,"  came  upon 
the  scene,  and  exclaimed  :  "  What,  are  you 
here  also  ?  When  I  am  in  the  north  of 
Calcutta,  there  I  am  sure  to  meet  you,  and 
hear  you  speaking  about  Jesus  Christ. 
When  business  takes  me  to  the  south  of  the 
city,  there  you  are  again,  telling  the  people 
about  the  same  Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  I  go  to 
a  distant  village,  I  am  sure  to  hear  the  same 
story ;  and  here,  in  the  midst  of  the  very 
jungles,  I  hear  the  name  of  Christ.  What 
is  all  this?  You  seem  to  be  everywhere, 
and  always  talking  about  the  same  thing. 
Who  would  have  thought  to  hear  anything 
about  Jesus  Christ  in  such  a  dreary  spot  as 
this  ?  " 

The  true  preacher  a   Divine  creation. — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.    MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


Speaking  of  art-training,  Mr.  Euskin  says : 
"  Until  a  man  has  passed  through  a  course 
of  academy  studentship,  and  can  draw  in 
an  improved  manner  with  French  chalk,  and 
knows  fore-shortening,  and  perspective,  and 
something  of  anatomy,  we  do  not  think  he 
can  possibly  be  an  artist.  What  is  worse, 
we  are  very  apt  to  think  that  we  can  make 
him  an  artist  by  teaching  him  anatomy,  and 
how  to  draw  with  French  chalk,  whereas 
the  real  gift  in  him  is  utterly  independent  of 
all  such  accomplishments."  So  the  highest 
powers  of  the  teacher  or  preacher,  the  power 
of  interpreting  the  Scriptures  with  spiritual 
insight,  of  moving  the  hearers  to  earnest 
worship  and  decision,  may  exist  with  or 
without  the  culture  of  the  schools.  Learned 
Pharisees  are  impotent  failures  compared 
with  a  rough  fisherman  Peter  anointed  with 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Inspiration  is  more  than 
education. 

Missionai'y  zeal.  —  Raymond  Lully,  or 
Lullius,  to  whom  the  Arabic  professorship 
at  Oxford  owes  its  origin,  was  the  first  Chris- 
tian missionary  to  the  Moslems.  When 
shipwrecked  near  Pisa,  after  many  years  of 
missionary  labour,  though  upwards  of  seventy, 
his  ardour  was  unabated.  "  Once,"  he  wrote, 
"  I  was  fairly  rich  ;  once  I  had  a  wife  and 
children ;  once  I  tasted  freely  of  the  plea- 
sures of  this  life.  But  all  these  things  I 
gladly  resigned  that  I  might  spread  abroad 
a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  I  studied  Arabic, 
and  several  times  went  forth  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  the  Saracens.  I  have  been  in 
prisons ;  I  have  been  scourged ;  for  years 
I  have  striven  to  persuade  the  princes  of 
Christendom  to  befriend  the  common  cause 
of  converting  the  Mohammedans.  Now, 
though  old  and  poor,  I  do  not  despair ;  I  am 
ready,  if  it  be  God's  will,  to  persevere  unto 
death."  And  he  died  so,  being  stoned  to 
death  at  Bugia,  in  Africa,  in  1314,  after 
gathering  a  little  flock  of  converts. 

Missionary  enthusiasm. — In  the  first  cen- 
turies every  Christian  looked  on  it  as  a  part 
of  his  life  to  be  God's  missionary,  and  for 
centuries  the  Church  produced  men  like 
Boniface  and  Columban.  Then  for  a  thou- 
sand years  the  darkness  was  only  broken  here 
and  there  by  a  man  like  St.  Louis  of  France 
or  St.  Francis  of  Assisi.  It  is  to  Count 
Zinzendorf  and  the  Moravians  that  we  owe 
the  revival  of  missionary  zeal.  In  the  last 
century  missionaries  were  regarded  as  foolish 
and  rash,  and  I  know  not  what.  When 
Carey  proposed  to  go  as  a  missionary  to 
India,  he  was  told  that  if  God  wished  to 
convert  the  heathen  He  would  doubtless  do 
so  in  His  own  way.  Think  of  John  Eliot, 
the  lion-hearted  "apostle  of  the  Indians," 
and  his  motto  that  prayer  and  painstaking 
can  accomplish  everything.  Think  of  young 
and  sickly  David  Brainerd  going  alone  into 
the  wild  forests  of  America  and  among  their 
wilder  denizens,  with  the  words,  "  Not  from 


necessity  but  from  choice,  for  it  seems  to  me 
that  God's  dealings  towards  me  have  fitted 
me  for  a  life  of  solitariness  and  hardship." 
Think  of  Adoniram  Judson  and  the  tortures 
he  bore  so  cheerfully  in  his  Burmese  prison. 
And  we,  too,  in  these  days  have  seen  Charles 
Mackenzie  leave  the  comforts  of  Cambridge 
to  die  amid  the  pestilent  swamps  of  the 
Zambesi,  and  Coleridge  Patteson,  floating, 
with  his  palm  branch  of  victory  in  his  hand, 
over  the  blue  sea  among  the  Coral  Isles. 
Nor  do  I  know  any  signs  more  hopeful  for 
the  nation  than  these,  that  our  public  schools 
are  now  founding  missions  in  the  neglected 
wastes  of  London,  and  our  young  athletes 
are  going  out  as  poor  men  to  labour  in 
China  and  Hindostan. — Dean  Farrar. 

Christ  wants  to  get  the  gospel  into  every 
home  in  the  world  ;  and  the  way  He  wants 
to  do  this  is  through  the  hearts  and  hands 
of  those  whom  He  has  already  saved.  If  we 
do  not  carry  the  good  news,  the  lost  will  not 
receive  it  at  all.  It  is  told  of  a  boy  who 
was  converted  that  at  once  he  started  to 
walk — for  he  was  poor  and  could  not  afford 
to  go  by  train — away  to  a  place  more  than 
a  thousand  miles  from  his  home,  to  tell  his 
brother  about  Christ.  History  relates  that 
the  early  Christians,  many  of  them,  were  so 
eager  to  carry  the  gospel  everywhere,  that 
they  even  hired  themselves  out  as  servants 
or  sold  themselves  as  slaves,  that  they  might 
be  admitted  into  the  homes  of  the  rich  and 
great  among  the  heathen,  to  live  there,  and 
thus  have  opportunity  to  proclaim  the  love 
of  Jesus  and  His  salvation. 

A  non-missionary  Church  is  like  Coleridge's 
ice-ship,  manned  by  dead  men  from  prow  to 
stern. 

A  clergyman  was  once  asked  by  the  Duke 
of  Wellington,  "  How  are  you  getting  on 
with  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  abroad  ? 
Is  there  any  chance  of  the  Hindoos  becoming 
Christians  ?  "  To  which  the  clergyman  re- 
plied, "  Oh  no  !  I  do  not  see  anything  doing 
there ;  I  see  no  reason  to  suspect  any  work 
of  the  kind  being  successful."  "  Well,"  said 
the  duke,  "  what  have  you  to  do  with  that  ? 
What  are  your  marching  orders  ?  Are  they 
not,  'Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature'?  Do  your 
duty,  sir,  and  never  mind  results." 

An  English  preacher  asked  some  British 
soldiers,  "  If  Queen  Victoria  were  to  issue 
a  proclamation,  and,  placing  it  in  the  hands 
of  her  army  and  navy,  were  to  say,  'Go  ye 
into  all  the  world  and  proclaim  it  to  every 
creature,'  how  long  do  you  think  it  would 
take  to  do  it  ?  "  One  of  these  brave  fellows, 
accustomed  to  obey  orders  without  hesitation 
or  delay,  and  at  peril  of  life,  promptly 
answered,  "  Well,  I  think  we  could  manage 
it  in  about  eighteen  months." 

Ver.  16.  Baptism,  in  the  apostolic  age. — It 
coincided  with  the  greatest  religious  change 

637 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.  MARK. 


which  the  world  had  yet  witnessed.  Mul- 
titudes of  men  and  women  were  seized  with 
one  common  impulse,  and  abandoned  by 
the  irresistible  conviction  of  a  day,  an  hour, 
a  moment,  their  former  habits,  friends, 
associates,  to  be  enrolled  in  a  new  society, 
under  the  banner  of  a  new  faith.  That  new 
society  was  intended  to  be  a  society  of 
"brothers,"  bound  by  ties  closer  than  any 
earthly  brotherhood — filled  with  life  and 
energy  such  as  fall  to  the  lot  of  none  but 
the  most  ardent  enthusiasts,  yet  tempered 
by  a  moderation,  a  wisdom,  and  a  holiness 
such  as  enthusiasts  have  rarely  possessed. 
It  was,  moreover,  a  society  swayed  by  the 
presence  of  men  whose  words  even  now 
cause  the  heart  to  burn,  and  by  the  recent 
recollections  of  One  whom,  "  not  seeing,  they 
loved  with  love  unspeakable."  Into  this 
society  they  passed  by  an  act  as  natural  as 
it  was  expressive.  The  plunge  into  the  bath 
of  purification,  long  known  among  the  Jewish 
nation  as  the  symbol  of  a  change  of  life, 
was  still  retained  as  the  pledge  of  entrance 
into  this  new  and  universal  communion — 
retained  under  the  sanction  of  Him  into 
whose  name  they  were  by  that  rite  "bap- 
tised." In  that  early  age  the  scene  of  the 
transaction  was  either  some  deep  wayside 
spring  or  well,  as  for  the  Ethiopian,  or  some 
rushing  river,  as  the  Jordan,  or  some  vast 
reservoir,  as  at  Jericho  or  Jerusalem,  whither, 
as  in  the  baths  of  Caracalla  at  Rome,  the 
whole  population  resorted  for  swimming  or 
washing.  The  water  in  those  Eastern 
regions,  so  doubly  significant  of  all  that  was 
pure  and  refreshing,  closed  over  the  heads 
of  the  converts,  and  they  rose  into  the  light 
of  heaven  new  and  altered  beings.  It  was 
natural  that  on  such  an  act  were  lavished 
all  the  figures  which  language  could  furnish 
to  express  the  mighty  change — "  Regenera- 
tion," "  Illumination,"  "  Burial,"  "  Resurrec- 
tion," "  A  new  creation,"  "  Forgiveness  of 
sins,"  "  Salvation."  Well  might  the  apostle 
say,  "  Baptism  doth  even  now  save  us,"  even 
had  he  left  his  statement  in  its  unrestricted 
strength  to  express  what  in  that  age  no  one 
could  misunderstand.  But  no  less  well  was 
he  led  to  add,  as  if  with  a  prescience  of 
coming  evils,  "Not  the  putting  away  the 
filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  answer  of  a  good 
conscience  toward  God"  (1  Pet.  iii.  21). — 
Dean  Stanley. 

New  birth  in  baptism. — An  old  man  of 
eighty  was  baptised  in  America  by  a 
missionary,  and  thenceforth  led  a  life 
devoted  to  God.  Two  years  later  he  was 
lying  on  his  death-bed,  and  when  asked  his 
age  he  replied,  "I  am  only  two  years  old, 
for  my  life  began  when  I  was  born  for  God 
in  baptism ;  the  previous  eighty  years  were 
a  life  of  death." 

Saved. — At  the  wreck  of  the  steamer 
Atlantic  on  the  coast  of  Halifax  hundreds 
of  lives  were  lost.     Amongst  the  passengers 

638 


who  escaped  was  a  Christian  merchant  from 
Boston,  who,  as  soon  as  he  could  reach  a 
telegraph  office,  sent  a  message  to  his 
family.  It  contained  only  a  single  word, 
but  it  was  worth  more  to  them  than  all  the 
world.  It  was  the  word  Saved.  Afterwards 
the  merchant  had  the  telegram  framed  and 
hung  up  in  his  office  to  remind  him  of  God's 
mercy  to  him. 

Ver.  19. — It  was  an  ancient  myth  that 
the  Milky  Way  was  the  bright  track  made 
by  the  flashing  wheels  of  the  car  of  Phaethon, 
driving  through  the  skies  ;  but  the  Man 
of  Calvary,  ascending  from  the  Mount  of 
Olives  to  His  celestial  throne,  has  left  across 
the  heavens  a  brighter  and  more  glorious 
pathway  than  the  pale  light  of  far-off  stars. 
He  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light,  and.  millions  who  believe  in  His  name 
have  in  all  ages  seen  and  rejoiced  in  His 
light,  and  by  it  been  guided  to  the  realm  of 
everlasting  day. 

Ver.  20.  "  The  Lord  working  with  them." — 
That  is  a  sweet  legend  hanging  about  an  old 
church  in  England,  and  it  tells  the  great 
truth  well, — how  centuries  ago,  when  the 
monks  were  rearing  it,  a  new  temple  for 
the  worship  of  their  God,  there  came  among 
the  workers  a  strange  monk,  unasked,  who 
always  took  on  himself  the  heaviest  tasks ; 
and  how  at  last,  when  a  particularly  gigantic 
beam  was  needed  for  a  position  as  important 
as  that  of  the  keystone  of  an  arch,  and 
when,  with  sweating  strain  and  united 
effort,  it  was  lifted  to  its  place,  it  was 
strangely  found  to  be  some  feet  too  short. 
No  device  of  the  builders  could  remedy  it ; 
they  had  tried  their  best  with  it,  they  had 
used  the  most  careful  measurement  they 
knew,  but  how  sadly  they  had  failed ! 
There  it  was,  too  short,  and  their  utmost 
skill  could  not  find  remedy.  The  night 
closed  in  upon  the  tired  workers,  and  they 
went  to  their  rest  with  sore  hearts,  leaving 
only  this  unknown  monk,  who  would  go 
working  on.  But  when  the  morning  came, 
and  the  workers  came  forth  again,  they  saw 
the  sunlight  falling  on  the  beam  exactly  in 
its  place,  lengthened  to  the  precise  dimen- 
sions needed,  and  resting  accurately  on  its 
supports.  But  the  unknown  monk  had 
disappeared.  Yet  the  workers  knew  Him 
now,  and  were  certain  they  could  carry  the 
temple  onward  to  its  topmost  turret.  For 
He  who  had  been  working  with  them  and 
supplying  their  lack  of  perfect  work,  they 
came  now  to  know,  was  none  other  than  the 
Lord  Himself.  They  were  not  unhelped 
toilers.     Nor  are  we. 

God  working  with  man. — When  Robert 
Morrison  went  out  to  China,  he  stopped  for 
a  little  while  in  New  York,  and  one  of  the 
American  millionaires  turned  to  him,  and 
in  a  supercilious  way  said,  "  Mr.  Morrison, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK.        chap.  xvi. 


do  you  expect  to  make  any  impression  on 
China?"  Robert  Morrison,  in  the  kingli- 
ness  of  a  consecrated  manhood,  replied,  "  I 
do  not,  but  I  do  expect  that  the  Lord 
Almighty  will." 

Power  of  the  Word. — Caesar  Malan  found 
himself  on  the  diligence  at  Angouleme  in 
the  company  of  a  sprightly  young  gentle- 
man from  Paris.  He  proved  to  be  a  mate- 
rialist, who,  when  his  companion  drew 
out  the  New  Testament,  treated  it  as  "a 
book  of  fables,  good  enough  for  children." 
Though  tempted  to  expose  to  him  by  argu- 
ment the  folly  of  infidelity,  M.  Malan 
thought  it  better  to  let  the  Word  of  God,  as 
he  said,  speak  for  itself.  So  he  read  several 
passages.  The  young  man  shewed  vexation, 
and  his  fellow-traveller,  judging  by  this 
that  his  conscience  was  troubled,  read  still 
more.  The  infidel  became  very  angry,  then 
biting  his  lips  he  took  refuge  in  silence. 
After  travelling  in  this  way  for  about  half 
an  hour,  he  suddenly  exclaimed  :  "  I  should 
like  to  have  a  book  like  that,  for  I  begin  to 
believe  that  what  it  contains  is  true,  and 
that  I  have  been  deceiving  myself."  M. 
Malan  gave  the  young  man  his  Testament ; 
and  meeting  him  afterwards  at  Bordeaux, 
he  found  that  he  was  attentively  studying 
it,  and  that  in  every  way  he  shewed  it  had 
made  a  profound  impression  upon  him. 
"  When  I  saw  this  fruit  of  the  Word  of  God," 
said  M.  Malan,  "  I  rejoiced  that  I  had  not 
spoken  of  myself  and  of  my  own  reasons." 

Divine  energy  of  Christianity. — Voltaire 
well  said  to  Lady  Chesterfield  that  the 
English  Parliament  patronised  Christianity 
because  no  better  system  of  religion  had 
yet  been  found.  Read  the  chronicles  of 
Buddhism,  Brahminism,  Parseeism,  and 
other  heathen  philosophies.  Their  logical 
work  has  been  to  quench  the  happiness  of 
their  devotees.  Hours  might  be  spent  in 
portraying  the  transfigurations  wrought  by 
Christianity.  She  has  recently  lighted  her 
vestal  fires  in  Australia,  Madagascar,  and 
Liberia,  and  to-day  each  is  a  pharos  of  civili- 
sation, shedding  its  radiance  far  out  on  the 
surges  of  domestic,  civil,  and  moral  gloom. 
Few  benedictions  of  civilisation  can  be 
named  that  she  has  not  pioneered.  Over  no 
acre  has  she  waved  her  wand  where  the 
wilderness  has  not  blossomed  as  the  rose. 
Prejudiced  sceptics  speak  of  modern  nations 
as  being  little  improved  over  classic  Greece 
and  Rome.  Look  back  to  that  period  when 
the  law  of  might  was  the  law  of  right, 
when  childhood  and  womanhood  were 
in  degradation,  and  when  iron-heartedv 
cruelty  was  enthroned  in  the  metropolis  of 
paganism.  Read  of  the  extensive  butcheries 
of  men  in  the  sports  of  the  Colosseum  under 
numerous  imperial  monsters.  Read  of  the 
successive  massacres  of  the  early  Christians, 
from  the  coronation  of  Nero  to  the  death  of 
Diocletian,  whose  slaughter  of  God's  saints 


was  so  general  that  on  his  commemora- 
tive medal  was  impressed,  "The  Christian 
religion  is  destroyed."  Even  such  infidel 
essayists  as  Bolingbroke  and  Gibbon  are 
pre-eminently  brilliant  in  their  eulogies  of 
Christianity  in  the  Roman  Empire.  Rousseau 
and  Bonaparte  penned  as  eloquent  tributes 
to  the  achievements  of  Christianity  as  did 
De  Tocqueville,  Pascal,  or  Bacon.  Macaulay 
describes  a  gorgeous  window  made  from 
rejected  fragments  of  glass.  So  Christianity 
has  taken  depraved  communities  and  con- 
verted them  into  moral  populations.  It 
is  because  Divine  energy  is  essential  to  the 
mental,  social,  and  spiritual  uplifting  of  all 
lands,  because  at  their  gates  Jesus  knocks 
to-day  more  earnestly  than  Henry  IV. 
knocked  at  the  gates  of  Hildebrand,  and 
because  history  attests  the  regenerative  in- 
fluence of  Christianity,  that  the  ascending 
Redeemer  commissioned  His  disciples  to  see 
to  it  that  His  kingdom  shall  finally  achieve 
universal  ascendency. 

Progress  of  Christianity. — Arnobius,  a 
heathen  philosopher,  who  became  a  Christian, 
speaking  of  the  power  which  the  Christian 
faith  had  over  the  minds  of  men,  says : 
"  Who  would  not  believe  it,  when  he  sees  in 
how  short  a  time  it  has  conquered  so  great 
knowledge  ?  Orators,  grammarians,  rheto- 
ricians, lawyers,  physicians,  and  philosophers 
have  thrown  up  those  opinions  which  but  a 
little  before  they  held,  and  have  embraced 
the  doctrines  of  the  gospel !  "  "Though  but 
of  yesterday,"  said  Tertullian,  "  yet  have  we 
filled  your  cities,  islands,  castles,  corpora- 
tions, councils,  your  armies  themselves,  your 
tribes,  companies,  the  palace,  the  senate, 
and  courts  of  justice ;  only  your  temples 
have  we  left  you  free." 

Final  triumph  of  Christianity. — Travellers 
tell  us  that  in  Arctic  regions,  when  the  six 
months  of  night  are  ending,  and  the  long 
day  of  sunshine  is  about  to  begin,  the  in- 
habitants ascend  the  peaks  and  await  the 
magnificent  sunrise.  When  his  ball  of  light 
has  chased  from  the  ice-fields  the  shadows, 
and  he  rests  like  a  globe  of  flame  on  the  rim 
of  earth,  ere  he  begins  to  climb  the  rounds 
of  a  ladder  of  glory  more  luminous  than 
Jacob  saw  at  Bethel,  the  people  shed  tears 
of  joy,  and,  embracing  each  other,  they  cry, 
"  The  sun  has  come  to  us,  and  the  long  night 
is  over."  So  in  fancy  I  see  standing  on  the 
crests  of  all  lands  of  heathenism  the  be- 
nighted races,  looking  for  the  appearance  of 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness  to  banish  their 
long  night  of  barbarism,  idolatry,  and 
cruelty,  and  usher  in  the  unending  day  of 
Christ's  universal  reign.  I  seem  to  stand 
to-day  in  this  vast  and  solemn  presence.  In 
vision  I  see  the  countless  millions,  Cau- 
casians, Mongolians,  Africans,  Malays,  and 
Indians.  They  crowd  the  summits  of  all  the 
mountains  of  pagan  provinces  in  fearful 
vastness  of  multitude.    From  the  standpoint 

639 


chap.  xvi.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


of  this  commission,  and  with  the  telescope 
of  this  farewell  pledge  of  the  Ascended 
Kedeemer,  we  can  even  now  by  faith  see 
that  splendid  period  in  history  when,  from 
the  tall  tops  of  all  mission  provinces,  the 
grand  concerted  acclaim  shall  ascend,  "  The 
Sun  has  come  to  us,  and  the  long  night  is 
over."— &  V.  Leach,  D.D. 

Amen. — "  My  heart  wishes  it  to  be  exactly 
so,"  is  the  Chinese  rendering  of  "  Amen."  The 


value  of  this  definition  is  that  it  is  not  a 
mere  lip  repetition  of  this  blessed  old  Hebrew 
word,  but  a  whole-souled,  whole-hearted 
desire  for  the  triumph  of  that  which  is  good. 
Is  there  not  danger  that  our  "  Amens  "  may 
become  a  mere  head  and  lip  endorsement  of 
the  truth,  while  the  heart  is  not  in  it  ?  Let 
us  be  sure  that  in  everything  excellent  that 
is  presented  to  us  we  can  say  of  a  verity, 
"  Amen,  my  heart  wishes  it  to  be  exactly  so." 


G40 


APPENDIX. 


[For  this  interesting  review  of  the  evidence  for  and  against  the  Last  Twelve  Verses  of 
St.  Mark,  I  am  indebted  to  my  friend  the  Rev.  F.  W.  Christie,  M.A.,  Rector  of  St  Mary's. 
Aberdeen.] 


NOTE   ON  ST.   MARK  XVI.  9—20. 

The  great  majority  of  modern  scholars  are  agreed  that  with  the  eighth  verse 
of  this  chapter  the  genuine  work  of  St.  Mark  comes  abruptly  to  an  end,  and 
that  the  twelve  verses  which  follow  are  an  addition  by  another  hand  in  the 
earliest  sub- apostolic  age.  Westcott  and  Hort  insert  these  verses  within 
double  brackets,  as  an  interpolation,  "  probably  Western  in  origin,  containing 
important  matter  apparently  derived  from  extraneous  sources  " ; l  and  Lightfoot 
ascribes  them,  together  with  the  account  of  the  woman  taken  in  adultery 
(John  vii.  53 — viii.  11),  "to  that  knot  of  early  disciples  who  gathered  about 
St.  John  in  Asia  Minor,  and  must  have  preserved  more  than  one  true  tradition 
of  the  Lord's  life  and  of  the  earliest  days  of  the  Church,  of  which  some  at 
least  had  themselves  been  eye-witnesses."  2  And  so  most  scholars.  On  the  other 
hand,  such  eminent  critics  as  Dr.  Scrivener,  Dean  Burgon,  Prof.  Salmon, 
Bishop  John  Wordsworth,  and  others,  maintain,  on  grounds  of  external  and 
internal  evidence,  that  these  verses  are  the  genuine  work  of  St.  Mark.  Dean 
Burgon's  elaborate  monograph  (The  Last  Twelve  Verses  of  the  Gospel  according 
to  St.  Mark  vindicated:  Oxford,  1871)  won  the  admiration  of  Lagarde,3  and  is 
acknowledged  to  have  proved  "  that  the  external  evidence  against  the  passage 
has  been  greatly  overstated  .  .  .  and  that  the  patristic  evidence  resolves  itself 
into  that  (perhaps  ultimately  of  Origen,  but  immediately)  of  Eusebius."  4  With- 
out presuming  to  settle  so  difficult  a  controversy,  it  will  be  useful  to  review 
the  evidence  on  which  the  decision  depends. 

External  evidence. — The  verses  are  wanting  in  the  two  oldest  MSS.,  the 
great  uncial  Bibles  of  the  fourth  century,  Codex  Vaticanus  (B)  and  Sinaiticus 
(N).  Tischendorf  has,  however,  pointed  out  that  these  MSS.  are  here  not 
independent  witnesses,  as  in  N  the  last  leaf  of  St.  Mark  has  been  written  by 
the  scribe  of  B.5  In  B  there  is  a  blank  column — the  only  one  in  the  whole 
MS. — after  ver.  8;  and  in  k  the  letters  of  the  last  page  of  St.  Mark,  which  might 
easily  have  been  written  in  one  column,  are  spread  out  so  as  to  carry  over 
a  few  lines  to  the  second  column,  as  if  to  avoid  leaving  it  quite  blank. 
Dr.  Salmon  infers  from  these  facts  that  both  MSS.  had,  as  first  copied,  contained 

1  New  Test.,  smaller  edition,  p.  583.  3  Expositor,  September  1894,  p.  226. 

3  On  Revision  of  N.  T.  *  W.  H.  Simcox,  Writers  o/iV.  £,  p.  11. 

5  Salmon,  Introd.  to  N.  T.,  p.  161. 

tt  641 


appendix.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


the  disputed  verses,  and  that  the  leaves  were  then  cancelled  and  rewritten  by 
the  original  scribe  of  B.  The  scribe  was  evidently  aware  of  the  twelve  verses, 
and  rejected  them.  Eusebius  (Bishop  of  Csesarea  315  A.D.,  died  340  a.d.)  says 
of  these  verses  : 1  "  He  that  rejects  Mark's  section  as  spurious  will  say  that  it 
is  not  current  in  all  the  copies.  The  accurate  copies  at  least  end  with  '  afraid.' 
For  this  is  the  end  in  nearly  all  the  copies."  Eusebius  himself,  the  great 
critic  of  that  century,  seems  to  have  rejected  this  section,  for  the  so-called 
Eusebian  Canons  were  not  carried  beyond  ver.  8.  The  words  of  Eusebius  just 
quoted  are  almost  verbally  repeated  by  Jerome  (circ.  400  a.d.),2  Hesychius  of 
Jerusalem  (circ.  400  a.d.),  and  Severus  of  Antioch  (circ.  500  a.d.).  Doubts 
about  the  genuineness  of  this  section  were  therefore  familiar  to  them.  The 
evidence  of  the  important  Armenian  Version  made  in  the  fifth  century  is 
specially  interesting.  All  MSS.  prior  to  1100  a.d.  omit  the  verses.  Later 
MSS.  containing  them  have  "Here  ends  Mark's  Gospel"  after  "  afraid,"  and 
then  after  a  pause  continue  with  vers.  9-20.  There  is,  however,  one  old  MS. 
in  the  Patriarchal  Library  at  Etchmiadzin  which  not  only  gives  the  verses,  but 
seems  to  throw  light  upon  their  origin.  This  MS.  was  examined  by  Mr.  F.  0. 
Conybeare  in  1891,  and  in  the  Expositor  for  October  1893  he  describes  it  and 
gives  his  conclusions.  The  MS.  is  an  Evangeliarium  written  about  986  a.d., 
and  purporting  to  have  been  copied  from  a  true  and  accurate  Armenian 
exemplar.  St.  Mark  is  written  out  to  xvi.  8.  Then  there  is  a  space  of  two 
lines,  after  which  in  the  same  uncial  hand,  only  in  red — a  distinction  otherwise 
reserved  for  the  titles  of  the  four  Gospels  themselves — is  written  "Ariston 
Eritzou,"  which  means  "  Of  the  Presbyter  Ariston."  This  title  occupies  one 
whole  line  (the  book  is  written  in  double  columns),  and  then  follow  the  last 
twelve  verses,  still  in  the  same  hand.  This  discovery  of  Mr.  Conybeare's  is  an 
important  one.  The  heading  no  doubt  embodies  a  very  ancient  tradition,  and 
may  meet  with  verification  elsewhere.  Mr.  Conybeare  identifies  this  Ariston  the 
Presbyter  with  the  Ariston  mentioned  by  Papias  (Euseb.,  Hist.  Eccl.,  iii.  39) 
as  one  of  the  elders  who  were  disciples  of  the  Lord.  Dr.  Resch 3  thinks  he  was 
Ariston  of  Pella,  a  Jewish  Christian  who  wrote  about  140  A.D.,  and  who — 
Dr.  Besch  thinks  after  this  discovery — also  arranged  the  Canon  of  the  Gospels. 
There  are  also  MSS.  which  exhibit  a  duplicate  ending.  The  uncial  Codex  L, 
eighth  century,  in  the  National  Library  at  Paris,  noted  for  its  frequent 
agreement  with  tf  and  B,  breaks  off  after  ver.  8,  and  then  continues  : 4  "  The 
following  also  is  current :  '  And  they  briefly  brought  word  of  all  the  things 
that  were  commanded  them  to  Peter  and  his  company :  but  after  these  things 
Jesus  Himself  also  sent  forth  by  them  from  the  east  even  unto  the  west  the 
holy  and  incorruptible  preaching  of  the  eternal  salvation.'  But  then  is  also 
current  the  following  after  '  for  they  were  afraid,'  '  But  when  He  was  risen 
again,'  etc."  The  same  duplicate  ending  is  also  found  in  a  fifth-century  MS. 
of  the  old  Latin,  the  Codex  Bobiensis.  The  alternative  ending  is  added  in  the 
margin  of  the  Harklean  Syriac  (616  A.D.),  and  is  found  in  various  MSS.  of  the 
Memphitic  and  ^Ethiopic  versions.  In  the  recently  discovered  Sinai  Palimpsest 
of  the  Old  Syriac,  allied  to  the  Curetonian,  the  text  of  St.  Mark  ends  with 
ver.  8,  as  in  k,  B  (see  Guardian,  October  31st,  1894).  On  the  other  hand, 
the  twelve  verses  are  found  in  the  other  two  great  uncial  MSS.,  the  Codex 
Bezse  (D)  and  the  Codex  Ephremi  (C),  both  of  the  fifth  century;  in  all  the 
other  uncial  MSS.  ;  in  MSS.  of  the  old  Latin  (including  the  important  Codex 
Colbertinus) ;  in  the  Vulgate ;  in  three  Syriac  versions  (Curetonian,  Peschito, 
Jerusalem)  ;    in    the    Gothic    and    various    Memphitic   and   ^Ethiopic    MSS. 

1  Qucest.  ad  Marinum,  iv.  957,  ed.  Migne.  3  See  Thinker,  October  1894,  pp.  291,  292. 

2  Ep.  120,  ad  Hedibiam.  *  McClellan,  New  Test.,  p.  681 

642 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    ST.  MARK.         appendix. 


Jrenceus  (circ.  185  a.d.)  quotes  ver.  19  as  St.  Mark's  (Adv.  Hcer.,  III.  x.  6). 
Justin  Martyr1  seems  to  cite  these  verses;  but  "  decision  seems  impossible."2 
They  are  found  in  Tatian's  Diatessaron  (160-170  a.d.).  Victor  of  Antioch 
(400-450  a.d.)  wrote  a  commentary  on  St.  Mark  which  had  a  wide  repute 
(see  list  of  MSS.  in  Burgon).  The  last  words  of  his  commentary  are  these : 
"Notwithstanding  that  in  very  many  copies  of  the  present  Gospel  the  passage 
beginning,  'Now  when  [Jesus]  was  risen  early  the  first  day  of  the  week,'  be 
not  found  (certain  individuals  having  supposed  it  to  be  spurious),  yet  we  at 
all  events,  inasmuch  as  in  very  many  we  have  discovered  it  to  exist,  have  out 
of  accurate  copies  subjoined  also  the  account  of  the  Lord's  ascension  (following 
the  words  '  for  they  were  afraid ')  in  conformity  with  the  Palestinian  exemplar 
of  Mark  which  exhibits  the  Gospel  verity :  that  is  to  say,  from  the  words 
'Now  when  [Jesus]  was  risen  early  the  first  day  of  the  week,'  etc.,  down  to 
1  with  signs  following.     Amen.'  " 

Internal  evidence. — Against  the  genuineness  it  is  urged :  1.  There  is  a  want 
of  connexion  between  this  section  and  the  foregoing.  St.  Mark  would  never 
have  written  consecutively  ifofiovvro  yap.  'Avaoras  8e  7rpa>i,  k.t  X.  Also  Mary 
Magdalene  is  introduced  in  ver.  9  as  if  she  had  not  been  mentioned  before  in 
ver.  1.  2.  The  usual  relation  between  St.  Mark  and  St.  Matthew  fails  in  this 
section.  Mark  xvi.  1-8  is  parallel  with  Matt,  xxviii.  1-8,  but  there  the 
connexion  ceases.  From  Mark  viii.  7  we  might  have  expected  a  mention  in 
the  sequel  of  this  appearance  in  Galilee,  such  as  we  find  in  St.  Matthew.  The 
twelve  verses  contain  no  mention  of  it,  and  must  therefore  be  from  another 
hand.  3.  The  diction  is  unlike  St.  Mark's,  irpunri  o-aflfidrov  is  unique ;  in 
ver.  2  Mark  had  written  the  usual  /ua  twv  aaj3/3d.T(i)v  (cp.  Gen.  i.  5,  R.V.). 
cKetvos  is  never  used  elsewhere  in  St.  Mark  without  a  substantive ;  here  it  occurs 
four  times  without  a  substantive.  Oavdcripos,  fjLop<f>r},  BtaoOai,  (SXairreiv,  7ropev€(r6at} 
airurrciv,  7rapa.KoXov6uv,  eTraKoXovOeiv,  do  not  occur  before  in  this  Gospel.  On 
the  other  hand,  arguments  for  the  genuineness  of  these  verses  based  on  internal 
evidence  are  not  wanting.  Dr.  Salmon  traces  in  the  first  fifteen  verses  of  this 
Gospel  a  resemblance  in  style  to  the  last  twelve.  These  opening  and  closing 
sections  are,  he  thinks,  the  framework  in  which  St.  Mark  set  the  Petrine 
tradition.  He  also  finds  the  characteristic  ideas  of  the  Gospel  in  these  verses. 
Thrice  does  St.  Mark  alone  of  the  Synoptics  record  the  unbelief  of  men 
(iii.  5,  vi.  -6,  52),  and  thrice  in  this  last  section  (xvi.  11,  13,  14)  does  this  thought 
appear.  Westcott  also  notices  this  correspondence  (Introduction  to  Study  of 
Gospels,  p.  334).  But  nowhere  has  it  been  stated  so  fully  as  in  a  university 
sermon  of  the  present  Bishop  of  Salisbury.3  St.  Mark,  he  thinks,  depicts  Christ 
as  the  strong  Son  of  God,  Lord  of  spirits  and  men  and  nature,  contending  with 
and  overcoming  evil  and  unbelief.  Hence  miracles  occupy  so  large  a  space  in 
this  Gospel.  Especially  does  St.  Mark  dwell  on  the  moral  resistance  offered 
to  Christ  by  the  hardness  of  the  human  heart.  These  being  the  general  lessons  of 
this  Gospel,  the  last  chapter  fits  on  to  the  rest  with  a  perfect  and  exact  harmony. 
"  What  do  we  read,  in  fact,  in  the  last  chapter  ?  It  describes  with  greater 
fulness  than  any  of  the  other  Gospels,  how  hopeless  and  weak  in  faith  the 
community  of  disciples  was  left  by  the  Crucifixion, — how  slow  of  perception 
and  hard  of  heart  they  still  remained,  notwithstanding  all  that  had  been  done 
for  them, — how  the  women,  going  to  anoint  the  body,  found  the  tomb  empty, 
and  fled  in  trembling  and  astonishment  and  fear  at  the  angel's  message, — 

1  See  Dr.  Taylor's  article,  Expositor,  July  1893. 

2  Westcott  and  Hort. 

s  Sermon  II.  in  University  Sermons  on  Gospel  Subjects:  Parker,  1878.     See  also  Addendum 
by  same  author  to  commentary  on  St.  Mark,  in  Bishop  Chr.  Wordsworth's  Greek  Testament. 

643 


appendix.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    ST.   MARK. 


how  the  disciples  disbelieved  Mary  Magdalene,  to  whom  the  Risen  Jesus  first 
appeared, — how  the  two  who  met  Him  in  another  form,  as  they  were  going 
into  the  country,  failed  to  convince  the  rest, — how,  at  last,  He  appeared  to  all 
Himself,  and  upbraided  them  with  their  unbelief  and  hardness  of  heart ;  and 
then,  finally,  and  after  a  long  and  gradual  process,  gained  a  conquest  over 
their  wills.  Then  it  was  that  He  addressed  them,  bidding  them  to  go  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  the  whole  creation,  offering  salvation  to  those  that  believe 
and  are  baptised,  foretelling  the  condemnation  of  those  who  reject  the  message, 
and  promising  fourfold  miraculous  powers,  like  His  own,  to  His  faithful 
followers  and  messengers.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  when  He  reveals  His  full 
majesty  by  the  transfer  of  these  gifts,  does  He  receive  the  title  of  '  Lord ' 
from  the  Evangelist's  own  lips.  The  word,  though  found  not  unfrequently  in 
the  reports  of  speeches  in  this  Gospel,  is  used  twice  only  in  it  as  an  historical 
title,  and  that  in  these  last  two  verses.  The  Lord,  it  is  said,  after  He  had 
spoken  with  them,  was  received  up  to  heaven,  and  sat  on  the  right  hand  of  God. 
And  they,  thus  conquered  by  Him,  are  no  longer  faithless,  but  believing. 
Having  gained  them,  He  has  gained  the  instrument  which  He  came  down  to 
earth  to  fashion,  the  only  instrument  which  in  His  wisdom  He  thinks  fit  to  use 
in  the  conversion  of  the  world — the  instrument  of  personal  faith  begetting  faith. 
And  thus  endowed  they  go  forth  and  preach  everywhere,  not  in  their  own 
strength,  but  His;  for  the  Lord  works  ever  with  them.  And  as  in  His  own 
ministry  He  has  supported  and  illustrated  His  teaching  with  appropriate 
miracles  and  mighty  works,  so  now  He  confirms  their  word  with  signs 
following." 

Whatever  we  may  infer  from  the  internal  evidence  as  to  the  genuineness  of 
these  verses,  one  conclusion  is  forced  upon  us.  These  verses  are  certainly 
authentic.  They  have  the  ring  of  truth.  "  This  section,"  says  Dr.  Resch,1  "  is 
free  from  all  affectation,  and  from  all  legendary  colouring — such  as,  for  example, 
we  meet  with  in  the  pseudo-Petrine  Gospel.  It  is  rather  characterised  by  a 
compendious  abruptness,  such  as  shews  that  the  author  of  it  says  less  than 
he  knows."  Compare  the  vague  generalities  of  the  alternative  ending  with 
the  fulness  of  independent  knowledge  shewn  in  these  verses.  Although  the 
statements  that  the  first  appearance  was  to  Mary  Magdalene  and  that 
she  bore  the  message  to  the  apostles  might  conceivably  be  derived  from 
St.  John's  Gospel,  and  vers.  9  and  12  seem  to  reflect  expressions  in  St.  Luke 
(viii.  2,  xxiv.  13),  yet  the  section  taken  as  a  whole  is  plainly  not  the  work  of 
a  compiler.  It  adds  to  our  knowledge  by  explicit  statement  and  vivid  detail. 
Here  only  in  the  Gospels  is  it  stated  that  our  Lord  rose  again  on  the  first  day 
of  the  week  (ver.  9)  ;  that  the  disciples  mourned  and  wept  (ver.  1 0) ;  that  they 
disbelieved  the  tidings  of  Mary  Magdalene  (ver.  11);  that  He  appeared  to  the 
two  in  another  form  (ver.  12) ;  that  the  disciples  again  disbelieved  the  testimony 
of  the  two  (ver.  13) ;  that  the  eleven  were  at  meat  when  He  appeared  (observe 
the  undesigned  coincidence  with  Luke  xxiv.  41-43) ;  and  that  He  upbraided 
them  (ver.  14).  The  apostolic  commission  in  vers.  15,  16,  though  resembling 
that  in  Matt,  xxviii.  19  in  the  two  points  universal  mission  and  the 
injunction  of  baptism,  is  evidently  independent.  The  promise  of  signs  to 
follow  believers  as  such  is  a  new  one  (cp.  Matt.  x.  8).  And  the  majestic 
closing  verses  (19  and  20)  stand  alone  in  the  Gospels  in  their  assertion  of  the 
Lord's  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  God  and  His  continued  working  with  the 
apostles. 

Concluding    summary. — After  this   review   of   the   evidence,   external  and 
internal,   it  may   be  said  by  way  of   summary,  that  if  these   verses  be   from 

1  Expositor,  September  1894,  p.  228. 
644 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   ST.  MARK.        appendix. 


St.  Mark's  pen  and  formed  part  of  his  Gospel  from  the  first,  it  seems  very 
difficult  to  account  for  the  multiplication  of  copies  without  these  verses  in 
widely  separate  lands,  for  the  obstinate  doubts  which  clung  to  them  (which 
Eusebius  states  and  Jerome  repeats),  for  the  existence  of  an  alternative 
ending,  and  lastly  for  the  tradition  which  ascribes  the  twelve  verses  to  the 
presbyter  Ariston.  To  account  for  all  that  by  an  imagined  accident  which 
may  have  torn  away  from  some  MS.  its  last  leaf,  on  which  just  these  twelve 
verses  were  written,  and  so  gave  rise  to  a  mutilated  family  of  MSS.,  is  to  assign 
a  very  inadequate  cause.  But  on  the  assumption,  to  which  so  much  of  the 
evidence  points,  that  these  verses  are  an  appendage  by  another  though  still 
authoritative  hand,  in  the  earliest  times,  all  the  phenomena  may  be  explained. 
St.  Mark  for  some  reason  left  his  Gospel  unfinished.1  It  may  have  been,  as 
Godet  thinks,2  the  breaking  out  of  persecution  and  the  death  of  St.  Peter  which 
caused  the  interruption.  It  was  no  wonder  then  that  some  early  disciple  should, 
it  may  be  by  request,  complete  the  unfinished  narrative  with  an  account  of 
the  Ascension ;  so  that  this  Gospel,  as  it  began  "  from  the  baptism  of  John," 
should  extend  to  the  "  day  that  He  was  taken  up,"  and  thus  correspond  to  the 
requirement  of  the  chief  of  the  apostles  (Acts  i.  22). 

1  i</>o(3ovvTo  yap  might  very  well  be  the  end   of  a  sentence   or  paragraph.    Cp.  Plato 
Protagoras,  p.  328,  D,  where  a  chapter  ends  with  vtoi  yap.     But  Plato  did  not  end  a  Dialogue 
with  a  particle,  nor  would  St.  Mark  end  his  Gospel  with  one.    The  reference  to  Plato  is 
due  to  Prof.  Marcus  Dods  in  Expository  Times,  March  1894. 
2  Studies  on  N.  T.,  p.  38. 


G45 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H.  =  Homily  ;  C.  ==  Comment ;  I.  =  Illustration.] 


Abuse  and  use  of  testimony,  C.  46 

of  ceremonies,  C.  257 
Acrimony,  something  better  than,  C.  346 
Action,  instant,  C.  97 
Activity,  Christ's,  in  doing  good,  C.  25 

devil's,  C.  136 

in  evil,  C.  563 
Adulterous  generation,  C.  308 
Advance,  gradual,  law  of,  I.  173 
Advantage    of    liturgy    in   public   worship, 

H.  412 
Advent  glory,  Christ's,  I.  559 

second,  C.  480 

Sunday  discourse,  H.  403 
Adversaries  to  Christ,  testimony  of,  C.  440 
Afar  off,  C.  548 
Afflicted  child,  H.  327 
Affliction,  long,  H.  194 

producing  song,  I.  556 
Afraid,  they  were,  C.  617 
After  John  comes  Christ,  I.  52 
After-days,  fruit  in,  I.  173 
Age,  Baptist  in  advance  of  his,  I.  48 
Ages,  Christ  with  His  Church  throughout, 

C.  634 
Agony,  Christ's,  comfort  to  us  from,  C.  535 

in  garden,  H.  525,  534 

of    soul,    Christ's,    on    account    of    sin, 
C.  534 
All  are  sinners,  I.  88 

love  in  Christ,  I.  125 

men  not  alike,  C.  74 
seek  for  Christ,  C.  37 

nations,  house  of  prayer  for,  God's  house, 
H.  409 

to  each,  C.  122 

things  possible  to  God,  I.  398 
Allegory,  veil  of,  C.  134 
All-forsaking  spirit  and  its  reward,  H.  372 
Alternatives,  choice  of,  C.  566 
Altogether  wrong,  I.  395 
Ambition,  I.  399 

a  universal  fault,  C.  338 

of  clergy,  C.  385 

synagogue  of,  I.  467 

wrong,  is  ?  C.  385 
Ambitious  person  finds  nothing  difficult,  pro- 
vided he  can  but  raise  himself,  C.  385 


Amen,  I.  640 

Amiability  among  the  worldly,  I.  396 

Analogies  between  Christ's  body  and  bread, 

H.  522 
Andrew,  C.  106 

Angels  and  wild  beasts,  Christ  with,  H.  20 
Anger  a  bar  to  forgiveness,  C.  424 

checks  wrong-doing,  I.  122 

drives  away  Spirit,  C.  424 

legitimate,  C.  96 
Anointing  at  Bethany,  H.  497 

of  Christ's  body  to  burying,  H.  490 
Answer,  blind  man's,  C.  295 

prayer  and  its,  C.  422 
Antithesis  of  heaven  and  hell,  H.  33 
Apathy,  imprudence  better  than,  C.  47 
Apostates,  picture  of,  C.  542 
Apostles,  H.  103 

four  kinds  of,  C.  27 

relationships  among,  C.  104 

three  chosen,  C.  320 

three  groups  of,  C.  104 

twelve,  sending  forth  of,  C.  212 

unbelief  of,  C.  626 
Apostleship  from  discipleship,  H.  102 
Apostolic  age,  baptism  in,  I.  637 

sufficiency,  Divine  source  of,  C.  473 
Apparent  discrepancies  in  narratives,  C.  612 
Appearance,  Christ's  first,  after  His  Resurrec- 
tion, H.  617 
Approval  of  Christ,  I.  553 
Argument,     Christ's,      against     Sadducees, 

H.  441 
Arimathaea,  Joseph  of,  C.  597 
Artistic  representations  of  Baptist,  I.  48 
As  He  was  wont,  I.  394 
Ascend,  we,  with  Christ,  C.  633 
Ascension  and  co-operation,  Christ's,  H.  630 

Christ's,  significance  of,  H.  633 

why  such   slight  mention  of  ?  C.  633 

joy,  C.  633 
Ashamed  of  Jesus,  on  being,  C.  308 
Aside  from  multitude,  I.  281 
Asking  a  sign,  I.  308 
Asleep  amid  storms,  C.  163 

Christian,  I.  487 
Aspects,  qualities,  and  relations  of  kingdom, 
distinctive,  C.  24 

647 


INDEX. 


Association  in  work,  C.  27 
Astray,  led,  danger  of  being,  C.  473 
Atmosphere,  right,  is  wanting,  C.  211 
Attack,   unguarded  places  most   liable    to, 

I.  559 
Attainment,  Christian,  C.  144 
Attention,  Divine  truth  needs,  C.  132 
Attitudes  of  men  towards  Christ,   various, 

C.  44 
Attraction,  Christ  centre  of,  I.  55,  86 
Audience,   authoritative   Teacher    and   His, 
H.  32 

first  addressed  by  our  Lord,  C.  23 
Authoritative   Teacher    and   His    audience, 

H.  32 
Authority,  Christ's,  challenged,  H.  424 

coinage  token  of,  C.  440 

credentials  of,  C.  214 

rejection  of,  C.  427 

teaching  with,  H.  32 
Authorise,  God  does  by  no   means,  every- 
thing which  He  tolerates,  C.  356 
Avarice,  I.  280 
Away  from  Jesus,  1.  396 
Awfulness  of  hell,  C.  340 

Back,  no  going,  I.  201 

Bad  deed  by  good  men,  H.  543 

heart,  I.  280 
Baptism  and  cup,  C.  385 

belief  and,  C.  628 

Christ's,  epoch  in  His  own  consciousness, 
C.  17 

Holy  Spirit's,  H.  14 

in  apostolic  age,  I.  637 

infant,  C.  359 

new  birth  in,  I.  638 

of  our  Lord,  H.  17 

Holy  Ghost  at,  C.  18 
Baptist,  artistic  representations  of  I.  48 

death  and  burial  of,  H.  214 

habits  of,  C.  13 

humility  of,  C.  13 

in  advance  of  his  age,  I.  48 

relics  of,  I.  244 

voice  of,  a  voice  of  severity,  C.  11 
Baptist's  ministry,  character  of,  C.  12 
Bar  to  forgiveness,  anger,  C.  424 
Barrier,  mundane  trust,  H.  370 
Bartholomew,  C.  106 
Bartimaeus,  H.  388 
Beauty  of  early  piety,  C.  1 55 

of  snow,  I.  348 
Beggar,  blind,  and  multitude,  I.  400 
Begin  with  the  children,  I.  351 
Beginning  of  eternity,  C.  193 

of  gospel,  I.  47 

only,  C.  212 

wonderful,  C.  9 
Beginnings,  H.  9 

small,  much  result  from,  I.  553 
Belief  and  baptism,  C.  628 

as  to  future  life,  effect  on  character  of, 
C.  444 

God  demands,  I.  53 

in  immortality,  universal,  I.  466 

648 


Believing  prayer,  power  of,  C.  423 
Benefit  of  rest-day,  I.  88 

of  sacrament,  I.  555 
Best  endowment,  C.  103 
Bethany,  anointing  at,  H.  497 
Bethsaida,  blind  man  at,  H.  292 
Betraying  Christ,  I.  554 
Bias  of  heart,  I.  280 
Birth,  new,  in  baptism,  I.  638 
Blade,  ear,  and  full  corn,  C.  153 
Blandishments,  suspicious,  C.  440 
Blasphemy  against  Holy  Ghost,  H.  Ill,  112; 

C.  118 
Blessed,  C.  235 

by  good,  I.  395 
Blind  beggar  and  multitude,  I.  400 
man  at  Bethsaida,  H.  292 
man's  answer,  C.  295 
uncomfortable  situation  of,  H.  391 
Blinded  by  self-interest,  I.  171 
Blindness,  wilful,  and  its  retributive  judg- 
ment, C.  427 
Blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  C.  523 
Bloodshedding  as  expression  of  love,  I.  555 
Board,  Christ  on,  C.  162 
Body,    Christ's,    anointing  of,    to   burying, 

H.  490 
unpardonable  sin  as  to,  I.  124 
Bread  and  Christ's  body,  analogies  between, 

H.  522 
Breeze,  rustled  by,  I.  242 
Bride-chamber,  children  of,  H.  71 
Bridge,  broken,  I.  396 
Bringing  others  to  Christ,  C.  267 
Broadcast,  sowing,  C.  135 
Broken  bridge,  I.  396 
Brotherhoods  of  life,  C.  26 
Builders    rejected,   stone    which,    H.    433 ; 

C.  436 
Burdens    of     humanity,     common,     Christ 

wrought  no  miracle  to  relieve  Himself 

from,  C.  34 
Burying,    anointing    of    Christ's    body    to, 

H.  490 
Business  and  religion,  I.  465 
Busybody,  C.  74 
By-errands  in  God's  service,  C.  194 

Calamities,  trials  not  always,  C.  164 
Call  and  feast  of  Levi,  H.  64  ;  C.  69,  70 

answered,  Master's,  H.  25 

Christ's,  and  man's  response,  H.  102 

Divine,  C.  70;  I.  240 

gospel,  I.  52 

of  cross,  H.  575 
Calls,  weigh,  C.  121 
Calling  of  Jesus,  C.  26,  27 

of  ministers  in  Church,  H.  427 
Callousness  in  youth,  C.  225 
Calvary,  lessons  from,  H.  572 

or  not  Calvary  ?  C.  323 
Camel  and  needle's  eye,  C.  371 
Camels,  rich  men  like,  I.  398 
Canaanitish  mother,  H.  264 
Capernaum,  sabbath  in,  H.  27 
Captive  Christ  and  circle  round  Him,  H.  538 


INDEX. 


Care,  Christ's,  for  His  disciples,  H.  545 

Christ,  as  Restorer,  C.  234 

for  children,  I.  395 

as  Shepherd,  H.  524 

for  Israel,  God's,  C.  433 

as  Sum  of  revelation,  C.  326 

Carpenter,  is  not  this  the  1  C.  210 

asleep,  C.  163 

Carrying  Christ's  cross,  C.  586 

betraying,  I.  554 

Case,  two  views  taken  of  same,  C.  196 

blessing  infants,  C.  360 

Casting-net,  I.  53 

bring  your  wants  to,  C.  269 

Casuist,  loose,  generally  wants  either  know- 

bringing others  to,  C.  267 

ledge  or  sincerity,  C.  356 

captive,  and  circle  round  Him,  H.  53 

Catechism,  Christ's,  H.  297 

Centre  of  attraction,  I.  55,  86 

Caution,  needful,  H.  460 

children  welcomed  to,  H.  357 

Celebrated  contribution,  H.  460 

choosing,  I.  398 

Centre,  Christ  the,  C.  322 

Church's  relationship  to,  H.  121 

of  attraction,  Christ,  I.  55,  86 

comes  in  strength  of  gentleness,  C.  19 

Centurion,  confession  of,  H.  582 

communion    with,   now   and   hereafter, 

Ceremonial,  hypocritical  regard  for,  I.  278 

C.  323 

Ceremonies,  abuse  of,  C.  257 

comprehensive  views  of,  I.  309 

Change  of  mind  and   life,  repentance  im- 

confessing or  denying,  C.  307 

plies,  I.  49 

confession  of,  I.  314 

of  national  sentiment,  I.  598 

dead,  H.  595 

Changes  in  life,  C.  239 

death  of,  H.  592 

Character  and  conduct,  C.  307 

discovers     not    Himself    to    hypocrites, 

completeness  of,  in  serving  God,  H.  447 

C.  428 

effect  on,  of  belief  as  to  future  life,  C.  444 

dishonoured  and  suffering  in  His  senses, 

of  Baptist's  ministry,  C.  12 

H.  550 

one's,  self-deception  as  to,  C.  368 

Divinity   of,    involuntary   testimony    to, 

Charity,  uncoined,  C.  462 

1.601 

universal,  motives  to,  C.  456 

doctrine  of,  concerning  marriage,  H.  356 

Cheer,  Christ's  words  of,  C.  240 

eclipsed,  I.  601 

Chief  concern,  soul,  1.  313 

entreating,  to  depart,  C.  188 

Child  afflicted,  H.  327 

eye  of  Church  fixed  on,  C.  326 

little,  to  receive  kingdom  as,  H.  360 

faith  in,  obedience  to  God  way  to,  H.  449 

wrong  done  to,  I.  352 

following,  at  cost  to  self,  I.  54 

Children  are  specially  susceptible  of  spiritual 

forsaken  by  His  disciples,  H.  544 

influences,  H.  359 

forsaking  of,  by  His  Father,  C.  591 

begin  with  the,  I.  351 

going  before,  C.  525 

care  for,  I.  395 

grace  of,  C.  195 

Church  guardian  of,  C.  339 

honouring  loving  service,  H.  492 

little,  He  loved,  I.  395 

how,  contends  with  unbelief  of  prejudice, 

look  at,  C.  338 

C.  211 

of  bride-chamber,  H.  71 

how  did,  exercise  His  influence  over  great 

of  men,  Son  of  man  among,  H.  359 

throngs  ?  C.  99 

welcomed  to  Christ,  H.  357 

how,  must  be  entertained,  C.  406 

Childhood,  brought  to  Christ  in,  I.  394 

I  am,  C.  473 

Christian,  C.  360 

in  glory,  C.  322 

our  model,  C.  339 

in  His  little  ones,  I.  350 

reverence  to,  I.  350 

in  His  offices,  H.  193 

Choice  and  commission  of  twelve,  H.  100 

in  His  prayers,  simplicity  and  plainness 

of  alternatives,  C.  566 

of,  C.  538 

Choked,  Word,  C.  136 ;  I.  170 

in  storm,  C.  165 

Chosen  lake,  C.  25 

inspires  trust,  C.  44 

Christ,  after  John  comes,  I.  52 

is  in  house,  when,  H.  61 

all  love  in,  I.  125 

is  to  His  Church  a  Stone,  C.  437 

all  men  seek  for,  C.  37 

joy  of  working  for,  I.  486 

always  better  than  His  word,  C.  320 

kinship  to,  H.  119,  121 

and  Gadarenes,  H.  177 

large,  experienced,  I.  310 

and  His  disciples,  H.  98 

lived  by  faith,  C.  239 

and    His    enemies,   mutual    bearing    of, 

loves  virtuous,  C.  369 

C.  426 

loyalty  to,  C.  303 

and  His  servants,  C.  26 

manifested  as  Monarch  of  all,  C.  20 

and  Pilate,  H.  560 

marriage  in  time  of,  C.  357 

and  temple  authorities,  H.  426 

mightier  than  John  Baptist,  H.  13 

approval  of,  I.  553 

ministering,  gifts  to,  C.  387 

as  Leader,  C.  525  ;  I.  311 

misunderstood  and  misrepresented,  H.  107 

as  our  Guest,  prepare  for,  C  513 

nearer  by  removal,  C.  99 

as  Pardoner,  I.  86 

not  hidden  from  seeking  soul,  C.  266 

649 


INDEX. 


Christ,  not  means,  source  of  healing,  C.  295 
not  recognised,  C.  240 
on  board,  C.  162 
on  right  hand  of  God  as  our  Intercessor, 

C.  634 
our  Guide,  I.  86 
patience  of,  C.  549 
personal  faith  in,  C.  44 
presence  of,  in  Eucharist,  H.  520,  521 
present  pardon  for  sin  taught  by,  C.  63 
rainbow  of  new  covenant,  I.  50 
rejection  of,  I.  200 
resorting  to  temple,  C.  419 
saddened    by  sight    of    human   misery, 

1.282 
safety  in,  C.  164 

where,  is,  I.  175 
seclusion  with,  C.  230 
seen  with  His  fore-announcers,  C.  323 
sigh  of,  infinite  meaning  of,  H.  290 
sinners  drawn  to,  I.  87 
smitten,  example  to  us,  H.  524 
Socrates  preparing  way  for,  I.  48 
sometimes  seems  to  sleep  in  our  hearts, 

I.  175 
sorrow  apart  from,  C.  369 
soul's  need  met  by,  C.  63 
suffers  many  things  in  His  Church  which 

are  done  without  His  mission,  C.  341 
teaching  in  ship,  H.  131 
testimony  of  adversaries  to,  C.  440 
the  Centre,  C.  322 
touching,  H.  242 

leprosies  of  humanity,  C.  45 
treatment  due  to,  from  sinners,  C.  435 
unable  to  come  to,  C.  239 
unbelief  which  comes  between  us   and, 

C.  212 
various  attitudes  of  men  towards,  C.  44 
waiting  on,  H.  286 
walking  on  sea,  H.  236 
was  intended  for  whole  world,  C.  571 
watching  for,  H.  484 
we  ascend  with,  C.  633 
what  has,  done  for  us  ?  C.  189 
where,  is  not,  C.  614 
why  did,  leave  Tyre  and  Sidon  and  go 

again  to  Galilee  ?  H.  276 
why,  spoke  in  parables,  H.  131 
will  not  fail  us  in  hour  of  need,  C.  288 
with  His  Church  throughout  ages,  C.  634 
with  wild  beasts  and  angels,  H.  20 
woman's  devotion  to,  H.  497 

ministry  to,  C.  593 
world's  estimate  of,  H.  303 

reception  of,  I.  599 
wrought  no  miracle  to  relieve   Himself 

from  common  burdens  of  human- 
ity, C.  34 
ye  belong  to,  H.  342 
yields,  C.  165 
zeal  in  opposing,  C.  118 
Christ's  actions  prove   His   Divine  mission, 

I.  123 
activity  in  doing  good,  C.  25 
advent  glory,  I.  559 

650 


Christ's  agony  in  Gethsemane,  H.  534 
answer  exact  echo  of  request,  I.  57 
appeal  to  testimony  of  Baptist,  C.  428 
appearance  to  Mary  of  Magdala,  C.  626 

to  two  disciples,  H.  618 
argument  against  Sadducees,  H.  441,  443 
ascension  and  co-operation,  H.  630 

significance  of,  H.  633 
attitude   towards   earthly  relationships, 

C.  198 
authority  challenged,  H.  424 
baptism  an  epoch  in  His  own  conscious- 
ness, C.  17 
body    and    bread,    analogies    between, 
H.  522 

anointing  of,  to  burying,  H.  490 
call  and  man's  response,  H.  102 
care  for  His  disciples,  H.  545 

for  humanity,  I.  55 

our  wants,  C.  288 
catechism,  H.  297 
command,  C.  47 
commission,  H.  627 
companions  in  shame,  C.  588 
compassion,  C.  286 
craving  for  sympathy,  C.  535 
cross,  and  ours,  H.  300 

carrying,  C.  586 
dealing  with  His  people,  C.  267 
delicate  sensibility,  C.  63 
departure  from  Galilee,  C.  266 
desolation,  causes  of,  C.  590 
diligence  incentive  to  us,  C.  70 
Divinity,  prophecy  proof  of,  C.  472 
eagerness  to  reach  souls,  C.  38 
early  Galilean  preaching,  and  first  dis- 
ciples, H.  21 
endurance,  help  from  considering,  I.  559 
feelings,  C.  96 

first  and  second  commandments,  H.  447  ; 
C.  451 

appearance    after    His    Resurrection, 
H.617 
followers    drawn     by    various    motives, 

C.  232 
forbearance  to  be  imitated,  C.  331 
freedom  in  use  of  means,  C.  295 
glance,  C.  26 
habit  of  prayer,  C.  37 
healing  touch,  H.  41  ;  C.  45 
helping  hand,  C.  45 
humanity,  C.  333 
independence  of  thought,  C.  32 
influence,  secret  of,  I.  636 

spread  of,  C.  634 
interview  with  scribe,  H.  445 
kingdom,  nature  of,  C.  406 
knowledge  of  His  future,  I.  350 

of  human  nature,  C.  287 
life  ransom  for  our  life,  H.  387 
little  ones,  offending,  C.  346 
look,  C.  96 

of  love,  C.  368 

sigh,  and  word,  H.  276 
lordship  over  sabbath,  C.  84 
manifestation  in  glory,  H.  474 


INDEX. 


Christ's  mercy,  H.  265 

Christian  profession,  salt  of,  H.  343 

message  to  sick  souls,  C.  64 

progress,  C.  296 

methods  in  revelation,  C.  142 

service,  Holy  Communion  most  solemn, 

ministers,  sympathy  with,  H.  341 

H.  520 

ministry  and  self-sacrifice,  H.  387 

reward  for,  C.  342 

miracles  of  healing,  C.  34 

soldier,  spirit  of,  I.  311 

progression  in,  I.  86 

teacher,  duties  of,  H.  158 

parables,  I.  166 

treatment  of  enemies,  I.  431 

popularity  with  masses,  C.  459 

of  sick,  C.  630 

power  to  shape  men,  I.  54 

usefulness,  H.  340 

prayer,  C.  239 

zeal,  world's  estimate  of,  I.  123 

preparation  for  ministry,  H.  14 

Christian's  gain  in  this  world,  C.  377 

for  Passover,  C.  513 

light,  I.  171 

presence  cannot  be  kept  secret,  I.  85 

path,  obstacles  in,  C.  612 

causes  storms,  C.  162 

Christians  are  lords  of  sabbath,  C.  85 

in  ordinances,  H.  285 

obscure,  C.  106 

question,  C.  118 

salt  of  earth,  C.  348 

questions,  C.  303,  338 

spiritual  and.  worldly  vocations  of,  C.  26 

reception  from  men,  I.  464 

world  watches,  I.  122 

reluctance  to  depart   from   His  plan  of 

Christianity  a  living  organism,  C.  157 

work,  C.  268 

cause  of  division,  C.  473 

royal  entry  into  Jerusalem,  significance 

Divine  energy  of,  I.  639 

of,  C.  405 

final  triumph  of,  I.  639 

search  for  fruit,  I.  429 

nominal,  insufficient,  C.  628 

second  coming,  I.  485 

progress  of,  I.  639 

service,  freedom  of,  C.  84 

rise  and  progress  of,  C.  156 

side,  on,  C.  341 

transforming  influence  of,  I.  200 

simplicity  in  miracle-working,  C.  196 

worth  of,  Judas  evidence  to,  I.  123 

teaching,  nature  of,  C.  144 

Christless  world,  C.  188 

testimony  to  Himself,  C.  549 

Church  and  social  questions,  C.  233 

thought  for  multitude,  C.  132 

and  State,  C.  440 

training,  C.  241 

calling  of  ministers  in,  H.  427 

Transfiguration,  H.  316,  321 ;  I.  348 

Christ  is  to  His,  a  Stone,  C.  437 

two  wishes,  C.  537 

suffers  many  things  in  His,  which  are 

use  of  Decalogue,  C.  368 

done  without  His  mission,  C.  341 

victory     over     feeble-minded     unbelief, 

with  His,  throughout  ages,  C.  634 

H.  162 

consequences   of    false    conservatism  in 

vocation,  preaching  kingdom  was,  C.  38 

the,  C.  75 

voluntary      limitation     of      knowledge, 

eye  of,  fixed  on  Christ,  C.  326 

C.  481 

guardian  of  children,  C.  339 

watchword,  Repent,  I.  52 

imperfect,  C.  131 

withdrawal,  C.  47 

in  peril,  H.  160 

word,  power  of,  C.  406 

mission  of — to  feed  hungry  souls,  C.  417 

words  of  cheer,  C.  240 

ordinances  of,  I.  202 

permanence  of,  H.  481 

treasury,  H.  461 

Christs,  false,  C.  478,  479 

Church's    duty  as    to    irregular    preachers, 

Christian  and  ecclesiastical  vocations,  C.  26 

C.  340 

asleep,  I.  487 

expansion,  I.  175 

attainment,  C.  144 

relationship  to  Christ,  H.  121 

care  for  poor,  I.  553 

Churches,  reverence  due  to,  H.  418 

childhood,  C.  360 

Circle  round  captive  Christ,  H.  538 

controversy,  H.  249 

Clamour,  popular,  personal  conviction  and, 

development,  C.  76 

H.  562 

devotion,  law  of,  C.  499 

Classical  parallel,  I.  395 

doctrine,  H.  209 

Cleansing  of  temple,  H.  418 

endeavour,  empty  tomb   incitement  to, 

Clearing  of  sight,  H.  294 

C.614 

Clergy,  ambition  of,  C.  385 

fellowship,  fundamentals  of,  H.  304 

Cloth,  linen,  young  man  in,  H.  540 

friendship,  H.  213 

Cloud,  gospel,  C.  325 

growth  imperceptible,  I.  173 

overshadowing,  C.  324 

liberality,  C.  498 

Coinage  token  of  authority,  C.  440 

life,  H.  142 

Coincidence,  striking,  I.  309 

image  of,  H.  162 

Cold  water,  cup  of,  I.  352 

Passover,  H.  501 

Comfort  to  us  from  Christ's  agony,  C.  535 

preaching,  what  is  ?  H.  622 

zeal  and  diligence  in  false   worship  no 

privilege  and  power,  H.  103 

ground  of,  H.  254 

651 


INDEX. 


Command,  Christ's,  C.  47 

Consider  your  cross,  C.  305 

to  watch,  H.  481 

Consideration,  want  of,  C.  241 

Commanded  him  to  be  called,  C.  392 

Conspiracy  of  priests,  C.  497 

Commandments,   Christ    first    and    second, 

Constancy,  I.  484 

H.  447  ;  C.  451 

Constant  falls,  C.  550 

sufficient,  C.  368 

Contact  with  individual,  C.  34 

Commencements    of    evil    to    be    rejected, 

Continental  Sunday  a  failure,  C.  83 

1.280 

Contribution,  celebrated,  H.  460 

Commendable  parts  of  good  pastor,  C.  440 

Contrition,  tears  of,  C.  552 

Commission,  choice  and,  of  twelve,  H.  100 

Controversy,  Christian,  H.  249 

Christ's,  H.  627 

Convenient  day,  C.  224 

Common  evil,  C.  74 

Conversion,  order  of,  C.  198 

life  sublime,  I.  351 

Converted  seeking  to  convert  others,  I.  87 

things,  God's  voice  in,  I.  559 

Converts,  fishermen  make  ready,  I.  53 

idealised,  I.  552 

revival,  C.  136 

power  in,  C.  214 

Conviction,  denial  in  spite  of,  C.  436 

Communion,  Holy,  H.  519,  520,  522 ;  I.  554 

personal,  and  popular  clamour,  H.  562 

in  heaven,  C.  523 

Convince  some  men,  you  cannot,  C.  289 

of  saints,  C.  444 

Co-operation,  Christ's  ascension  and,  H.  630 

with  Christ  now  and  hereafter,  C.  323 

Corn,  growing,  parable  of,  H.  145 

with  God,  in,  I.  557 

Corner,  headstone  of,  I.  465 

leisure  for,  C.  230 

Corruption,  inward,  C.  259 

Communities,  folly  of,  I.  201 

Couldest  not  thou  watch  one  hour  ?  C.  537 

sins  of,  C.  187 

Counterfeit,  true  King  and  His,  H.  560 

Companions  in  shame,  Christ's,  C.  588 

Counter-question,  H.  459 

Companionship,  support  by,  I.  242 

Courage,  invincible,  I.  399 

twofold  earthly,  of  disciples  a  foundation 

Course,  half  a  point  off,  I.  467 

for  higher,  C.  26 

Covenant,  better,  are  we  pleading  1  C.  268 

Compassion,  Christ's,  C.  286 

Covetous  to  last,  I.  397 

for  needy,  I.  308 

Covetousness,  beware  of,  I.  280 

personal,  C.  34 

Coward,  a,  and  what  became  of  him,  H.  561 

Compassionate  Saviour,  C.  276 

Craft,    innocence    best    protection   against, 

Compensation,  law  of,  C.  144  ;     I.  172 

C.  441 

Completeness  of  character  in     serving  God, 

Craving,  Christ's,  for  sympathy,  C.  535 

H.  447 

Creation,  new,  first  day  of,  C.  612 

Compliance,  guilty,  C.  226 

Credentials  of  authority,  C.  214 

Comprehensive  views  of  Christ,  I.    309 

Crisis,  hour  of,  I.  558 

Concealment,  reasons  for,  H.  326 

in  Pilate's  life,  C.  567 

Concupiscence,  I.  279 

Cross,  call  of,  H.  575 

Conditions  of  effectual  prayer,  C.  422 

Christ's,  carrying,  C.  586 

of  spiritual  life,  difficult,  H.  296 

and  ours,  H.  300 

Conduct  and  character,  C.  307 

consider  your,  C.  305 

Confessing  or  denying  Christ,  C.  307 

explains  world's  mystery,  I.  600 

Confession  of  centurion,  H.  582 

figure  of,  I.  311 

of  Christ,  I.  314 

mockers  at,  H.  589 

of  sin,  H.  12 

of  Christ  the  pivot  of  history,  C.  586 

power  of,  I.  315 

one's,  to  take  up,  I.  310 

Confidence  between     Master    and    disciple, 

power  of,  I.  601 

C.  340 

predominance  of,  I.  311 

filial,  I.  430 

shape  of,  I.  599 

in  prayer,  C.  423 

Son  of  God  nailed  to,  H.  573 

Conscience,  H.  221 

sufferer's  support,  I.  600 

bribed,  C.  221 

symbol  of,  I.  310 

darkened  by  sin,   C.  226 

title  on,  H.  576 

guilty,  I.  243 

veiled,  II.  590 

moving  of,  H.  515 

way  of,  C.  381 ;  I.  399 

stings  of,  I.  243 

to  life,  C.  305 

Consciousness,  Christ's  baptism  epoch  in  His 

Cross-bearing,  C.  585 

own,  C.  17 

Crowd,  importunity  of,  C.  232 

spiritually  disturbed,  H.  33 

Crowds  are  not  proofs,  but  means  of  success, 

Consecration,  Eucharist  feast  of,  I.  555 

C.  99 

of  Jesus  to  His  suffering  and  dying,  C.  322 

Crown  of  thorns,  H.  571,  572 

of  one  day  in  seven,  C.  83 

Crucified  Him,  when  they  had,  C.  587 

to  Lord  changes  man,  C.  321 

Crucifixion,  fulfilment  of  Scripture  at,  C.  588 

Conservatism,  false,  consequences  of,  in  the 

women  at,  C.  593 

Church,  C.  75 

Crushed  by  gold,  I.  314 

652 


INDEX. 


Cry  of  desertion,  C.  591 

Desertion  by  Father,  our  Lord's,  H.  579 

Culpability  of  Sanhedrin,  C.  549 

cry  of,  C.  591 

Cup  and  baptism,  C.  385 

Desolate  places  of  earth,  C.  184 

of  cold  water,  I.  352 

Desolation,  Christ's,  causes  of,  C.  590 

Cured  by  word,  C.  34 

Destruction  of  evil,  C.  345 

Cursing  and  swearing,  Peter,  C.  551 

of  temple,  H.  470 

of  fig  tree,  C.  417 

why  such  ?  C.  186 

Custom,  sitting  at  receipt  of,  H.  69 

Destructive  character  of  sin,  I.  200 

Cutting  off  of  foot,  C.  347 

Detection,  love  in,  C.  195 

Cyrenian,  Simon,  H.  584 

Deterioration,  C.  347 

Development,  Christian,  C.  76 

Damned,  shall  be,  C.  629 

of  good  and  evil,  C.  152 

Danger  of  being  led  astray,  C.  473 

Devil's  activity,  C.  136 

of  deception  by  false  Christs,  I.  485 

Devotion,  Christian,  law  of,  C.  499 

of  delay,  I.  485 

of  holy  women,  I.  635 

of  presumption,  I.  556 

self-sacrificing,  I.  600 

of  saint-worship,  C.  323 

to  Christ,  woman's,  H.  497 

prevented,  I.  352 

Devourer  of  widows'  houses,  I.  467 

safety  amid,  C.  629 

Did  many  things,  C.  223 

stern  resolution  in  face  of,  I.  399 

Different  conditions  of  spiritual  life,  H.  296 

Daughter,  Jairus',  H.  190 

Difficult  to  explain  truth  to  unspiritual  people, 

Day,  convenient,  C.  224 

I.  309 

first,  of  new  creation,  C.  612 

Difficulty  melting  before  endeavour,  I.  247 

of  manifestation,  C.  143 

of  saving  work,  C.  188 

Dead  Cbrist,  H.  595 

Difficulties,    all,    surmounted    by    faithful, 

Jesus  with,  C.  197 

H.  605 

Deaf-mute  healed,  H.  270 

and  power  of  faith,  H.  328 

Dealings,  Christ's,  with  His  people,  C.  267 

and  weakness  of  doubt,  H.  415 

God's,  C.  145 

explanation  of,  to  be  sought,  C.  134 

Death  and  burial  of  Baptist,  H.  214 

imaginary,  I.  635 

as  in  life,  so  in,  I.  314 

overcome,  I.  635 

Divine  estimate  of,  C.  444 

Dilemma,  Herod's,  C.  225 

of  Christ,  H.  592 

Diligence,  Christ's,  incentive  to  us,  C.  70 

Rousseau's  testimony  to,  1.  602 

Directions,  particularity  in  giving,  C.  405 

of  Death,  I.  601 

Disciple  and    Master,  confidence   between, 

point  of,  H.  193 

C.  340 

sleep  and,  I.  203 

meaning  of  word,  H.  209 

image  of,  H.  197 

true,  always  knows  where  to  find  Master, 

Decalogue,  Christ's  two  commandments  and, 

C.  37 

C.  451 

Disciples  by  twos,   Jesus    sends  out    His, 

use  of,  C.  368 

C.  212 

Deception  by  false  Christs,  danger  of,  I.  485 

Christ  and  His,  H.  98 

Deed,  bad,  by  good  men,  H.  543 

forsaken  by  His,  H.  544 

Defacement  of  God's  image  in  man,  I.  465 

Christ's  care  for  His,  H.  545 

Defile,  things  that,  C.  260 

first,   Christ's  early   Galilaean  preaching 

Defilement,  heart  seat  of,  C.  258 

and,  H.  21 

Delay,  danger  of,  I.  485 

two,  Christ's  appearance  to,  H.  618 

Delicate  sensibility,  Christ's,  C.  63 

twofold  earthly  companionship  of,  foun- 

Deliverance, trial  and,  work  together,  H.  162 

dation  for  higher,  C.  26 

Deliverer  hailed,  I.  429 

were  poor,  C.  82 

Demand,  unreasonable,  C.  290 

words  addressed  to,  H.  304 

Demoniac  greatness,  greed  in  its,  H.  500 

Disciples'  misconception,  C.  291 

possession,  C.  33 

part,  first  week  of  suffering  on,  C.  320 

Demoniac's  restoration,  I.  200 

Discipleship,  apostleship  from,  H.  102 

Demons,  prayer  of,  C.  186 

Discrepancies,  apparent,  in  narratives,  C.  612 

testimony  of,  C.  99 

Disease,  God  is  against,  I.  54 

Demonstrations,    popular,    slight   value    of, 

Disentangled  from  possessions,  C.  371 

I.  429 

Disheartening  influences,  C.  137 

Denial  in  spite  of  conviction,  C.  436 

Dissatisfaction  with  failure  a  hopeful  sign, 

Deny    Christ,    temptation    to,   before    men, 

C.  333 

C.  550 

Distress  of  sin,  C.  195 

Denying  or  confessing  Christ,  C.  307 

Divine  call,  C.  70  ;  I.  242 

Depart,  entreating  Christ  to,  C.  188 

creation,  true  preacher,  I.  636 

Departing  Saviour,  H.  620 

energy  of  Christianity,  I.  639 

Departure  from  Galilee,  Christ's,  C.  266 

estimate  of  death,  C.  444 

Depth  of  earth,  no,  C.  132 

forbearance,  I.  464 

653 


INDEX. 


Divine  grace,  greatness  of,  C.  70 

help,  I.  247 

mission,  Christ's  actions  prove  His,  I.  123 

Physician,  C.  71 

secrets,  C.  325 

source  of  apostolic  sufficiency,  C.  473 

support,  man's  need  of,  H.  509 

surprises,  C.  152 

truth  needs  attention,  C.  133 

visitation,  preparation  for,  H.  10 
Divinity,  Christ's,  prophecy  proof  of,  C.  472 

of  Christ,  involuntary  testimony  to,  I.  601 
Division,  Christianity  cause  of,  C.  473 
Doctrine,  Christian,  H.  209 

erroneous,  like  leaven,  H.  291 

of  Christ  concerning  marriage,  H.  356 
Dog,  feed  me  as  a,  I.  281 
Dogmatic  teaching,  C.  46 
Doing,  waiting  is  harder  duty  than,  I.  122 
Door  kept  open,  I.  168 
Double  aspect  of  parables,  C.  134 

nature,  C.  185 
Doubt  and  faith,  C.  331 

spirit  of,  is  spirit  of  weakness,  C.  422 

weakness  and  difficulties  of,  H.  415 
Dove,  Holy  Spirit  came  as,  C.  19 
Downward  path,  C.  224 
Doxologies  to  God  for  mountains,  I.  348 
Drowning  of  herd,  C.  186 
Dulness  in  spiritual  matters,  C.  258 
Dumb  spirit,  C.  330 
Duty,  Herod's,  plain,  C.  226 

of  reproving  sin,  C.  222 

of  resistance,  C.  165 

of  watchfulness  enforced,  H.  483 

to  neighbour,  C.  455 
Duties  of  Christian  teacher,  H.  158 

of  ministers,  C.  230 

of  pastor,  C.  214 

Each,  all  to,  C.  122 

Eagerness  to  reach  souls,  Christ's,  C.  38 

Ear,  and  full  corn,  blade,  C.  153 

Ears  opened  before  tongue  untied,  C.  276 

to  hear,  I.  167 
Early    Christians,    loyalty   of,   to    emperor, 
C.  441 

morning,  I.  55 

piety,  beauty  of,  C.  155 
Earnestness  in  work,  I.  123 

of  women,  C.  611 
Earth,  desolate  places  of,  C.  184 

heaven  on,  H.  323 

no  depth  of,  C.  132 

salt  of,  Christians,  C.  348 
Earthly  companionship  of  disciples,  twofold, 
foundation  )'or  higher,  C.  26 

relationships,    Christ's  attitude  towards, 
C.  198 
Eastern  prisons,  I.  51 

roads,  I.  48 

roofs,  I.  85 
Ecclesiastical,      Christian     and,     vocations, 

C.  26 
Echo,  John  Baptist  voice,  not,  C.  10 

of  request,  Christ's  answer  exact,  I.  57 

654 


Economy,  wise,  I.  245 

Effect  on   character  of  belief  as  to  future 

life,  C.  444 
Effectual  call,  Christ's,  I.  87 

prayer,  conditions  of,  C.  422 
Effort,  persistent,  C.  266 
Elders,  tradition  of,  C.  256,  257 
Eloquent  hearing,  C.  132 
Elias  and  Moses,  why  did,  appear  ?  H.  322 
Elijah  and   Moses,   meeting   of   Lord  with, 

H.  322 
Emblem  of  seed  for  God's  Word,  C.  135 
Emergency,  every,  sufficient  equipment  for, 

C.  103 
Emperor,   loyalty    of    early    Christians    to, 

C.  441 
Empty  grave,  H.  613,  614 
Encouragement      for      Christian     workers, 
H.  154 

from  severe  word,  C.  268 

warning,  and  promise,  H.  471 
Endeavour,   Christian,   empty  tomb   incite- 
ment to,  C.  614 

difficulty  melting  before,  I.  247 
Endowment,  best,  C.  103 
Endurance,  I.  484 

Enemies,  Christ  and  His,  mutual  bearing  of, 
C.  4-26 

Christian  treatment  of,  I.  431 

friends  mistaken  for,  I.  351 
Energy,  Divine,  of  Christianity,  I.  639 
Enmity,  madness  of,  C.  97 
Entertained,  how  Christ  must  be,  C.  406 
Enthusiasm,  missionary,  I.  637 

religious,  cannot  be  detained,  I.  349 
Entry  into  Jerusalem,  final,  H.  402 ;  C.  405 
Envy,  I.  598 

of  chief  priests,  C.  566 
Ephphatha,  H.  272  ;  I.  282 
Equipment,  sufficient,  for  every  emergency, 

C.  103 
Erroneous  doctrine  like  leaven,  H.  291 
Error,  one,  fatal,  I.  396 
Estimate  of  death,  Divine,  C.  444 

world's,  of  Christ,  H.  303 
of  Christian  zeal,  I.  123 
Eternal  life,  C.  199 

one  thing  may  keep  soul  from,  I.  396 

sin,  I.  124 
Eternity,  beginning  of,  C.  193 

mystery  of,  H.  586 

to  time,  folly  of  sacrificing,  I.  314 
Eucharist  extension  of  Incarnation,  C.  522 

feast  of  consecration,  I.  555 

Holy,  H.  502 ;  C.  522 

mystery  of,  C.  521 

presence  of  Christ  in,  H.  520,  521 

prized,  I.  555 

significance  of,  C.  521 
Evangelical  teaching,  hardened  by,  I.  169 
Evening,  C.  406 
Evil,  activity  in,  C.  563 

and  good,  development  of,  C.  152 

commencements  of,  to  be  rejected,  I.  280 

common,  C.  74 

destruction  of,  C.  345 


INDEX. 


Evil  eye,  C.  262  ;  L  280 

False  Christs,  C.  478,  479 

hardihood  of,  H.  543 

danger  of  deception  by,  I.  485 

influence  of,  I.  172 

conservatism,    consequences    of,   in    the 

plea  of,  and  its  rejection,  H.  31 

Church,  C.  75 

precautions  against,  C.  347 

estimates  of  waste,  I.  553 

thoughts,  C.  260 ;  I.  280 

prophets,  C.  479 

Exaltation,  spiritual,  C.  303 

witness  through  misapplication  of  words, 

Example,  spell  of,  I.  311 

C.  549 

Excellence  of  moral  law,  H.  446 

worship,  zeal  and  diligence  in,  no  ground 

Excellent  question,  C.  367 

of  comfort,  H.  254 

Expansion,  Church's,  I.  175 

Fame,  unconscious,  C.  462 

Experience,  new,  C.  64 

Family  of  God,  gospel  of,  C.  121 

Explanation    of    difficulties   to    be    sought, 

of  Jesus,  false  and  true,  H.  121 

C.  134 

of  love  and  service,  C.  122 

External  preferred,  C.  257 

visit,  C.  120 

reform  insufficient,  I.  88 

Fasting,  H.  72  ;  I.  350 

Externalism  in  religion,  I.  278 

and  prayer,  C.  334 

Eye,  evil,  C.  262  ;  I.  280 

right  use  and  end  of,  C.  74 

of  Church  fixed  on  Christ,  C.  326 

Fatal,  one  error,  I.  396 

window  of  soul,  C.  262 

Father,  forsaking  of  Christ  by  His,  C.  591 

our  Lord's  desertion  by,  H.  579 

Failure,  dissatisfaction    with,  a    hopeful 

Fault  to  be  guarded  against,  C.  47 

sign,  C.  333 

Fault-finding,  C.  256 

of  scribes  as  teachers,  C.  32 

Fear  and  faith,  C.  163 

Faith,  C.  331 

Feast  of  consecration,  Eucharist,  I.  555 

and  doubt,  C.  331 

Feeble-minded  unbelief,  Christ's  victory  over, 

and  fear,  C.  163 

H.  162 

and  omnipotence,  I.  202 

Feed  me  as  a  dog,  I.  281 

and  repentance,  C.  24 

Feeding  of  four  thousand,  H.  283 

and  want  not  to  be  silenced,  C.  392 

Feeling,  many  mistake,  for  faith,  C.  136 

can  reconcile  apparent  opposites,  C.  459 

no  hope  for  those  past,  I.  124 

Christ  lived  by,  C.  239 

towards  enemies,  Christian,  I.  431 

fluctuations  of,  I.  349 

Feelings,  Christ's,  C.  96 

high  in,  low  in  repentance,  but,  I.  52 

suited  to  our  last  sacrament,  H.  506 

imperfect,  C.  196 

Fell  on  ground,  C.  536 

in  Christ,  obedience  to  God  way  to,  H.  449 

Fellowship,     Christian,     fundamentals     of, 

personal,  C.  44 

H.  304 

in  God,  C.  422 

of  penitence,  I.  50 

have,  I.  429 

Fickleness  of  popularity,  I.  598 

in  power  of  truth,  I.  174 

Fidelity  and  watchfulness,  C.  483 

in  supremacy  of  good,  faith  in  God  means, 

Fig  tree,  cursing  of,  C.  417 

C.  422 

withered,  C.  421 

is  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  C.  423 

Figure  of  cross,  I.  311 

lack  of,  1.  349 

Filial  confidence,  I.  430 

many  mistake  feeling  for,  C.  136 

Final  effort,  God's,  I.  464 

not  superstition,  but,  C.  196 

entry  into  Jerusalem,  H.  402 

power  and  difficulties  of,  H.  328 

triumph  of  Christianity,  I.  639 

of,  H.  413  ;  I.  86 

Fire,  true  sacrificial,  C.  347 

prayer  for,  C.  331 

Fires,  two,  C.  347 

quest  of,  C.  611 

Firm  basis,  obedience  has,  I.  349 

removing  mountains,  C.  422 

First  and  last,  C.  377 

responsible  for,  C.  165 

appearance,  Christ's,  after  His  Resurrec- 

sight not  conducive  to,  C.  590 

tion,  H.  617 

signs  of,  H.  624 

day  of  new  creation,  C.  612 

stages  of,  I.  430 

disciples,  Christ's  early  Galilaean  preach- 

testing lesson  in,  C.  616 

ing  and,  H.  21 

thy,  hath  made  thee  whole,  C.  391 

preaching  of  Resurrection,  H.  606 

various  phases  of,  H.  193 

week    of    suffering    on    disciples'    part, 

weak,  use  of,  I.  349 

C.  320 

Faith's  progress,  H.  331 

Firstfruits  of  heathen  world,  C.  585 

Faithful,  all  difficulties  surmounted  by,  H.  605 

Fishermen  make  ready  converts,  I.  53 

Faithless  reproved,  H.  165 

Fishers,  ministers  are,  I.  53 

Fall  and  recovery  of  Peter,  H.  546 

Flowers,    fragrant,   cannot     be     concealed, 

Falls,  constant,  C.  550 

C.  61 

False  and  true  family  of  Jesus,  H.  121 

Fluctuations  of  faith,  I.  349 

power,  I.  396 

Follow  Me,  C.  305,  369 ;  I.  87 

655 


INDEX. 


Followers,  Christ's,  drawn  by  various  motives, 

C.  232 
Following  Christ  at  cost  to  self,  I  54 
in  self-denial,  I.  311 
Jesus  fearingly,  H.  380 
Folly  of  communities,  I.  201 

of  sacrificing  eternity  to  time,  I.  31 
Food,  injunction  as  to,  C.  198 
Foot,  cutting  off  of,  C.  347 
For  My  sake,  C.  376  ;  I.  399 
Forbearance,  Christ's,  to  be  imitated,  C.  331 

Divine,  I.  464 
Forbid  him  not,  C.  341 
Forbidding,  receiving  and,  H.  336 
Force  of  holy  personality,  C.  419 
Foreannouncers,  Christ  seen  with  His,  C.  323 
Forgetf ulness  of  former  mercies,  C.  287 
Forgive  others,  God  forgives  us  as  we,  C.  423 
Forgiveness,  anger  a  bar  to,  C.  424 
of  sin,  C.  63 
prayer  and,  C.  423 
Forgiving  spirit,  necessity  of,  I.  431 
Forgotten  promise,  C.  615 

truth,  C.  136 
Form  and  spirit,  C.  75 

another,  C.  626 
Formality  and  indifference,  warning  against, 

H.  290 
Former  mercies,  forgetfulness  of,  C.  287 
Forsaking  of  Christ  by  His  Father,  C.  591 
Foundation,     sound,     for    religious     belief, 

C.  368 
Foundations  out  of  sight,  C.  239 
Four  kinds  of  apostles,  C.  27 
paralytic  borne  of,  H.  58 
thousand,  feeding  of,  H.  283 
Fragments,  gather  up,  C.  235 
Fragrant  flowers  cannot  be  concealed,  C.  61 
Fraternity,  C.  27 
Freedom,  Christ's,  in  use  of  means,  C.  295 

of  Christ's  service,  C.  84 
Friends  mistaken  for  enemies,  I.  351 

opposition  from,  C.  117 
Friendship,  Christian,  H.  213 
Friendship's  shortcomings,  H.  118 
Frugality,  religious,  C.  288 
Fruit,  Christ's  search  for,  I.  429 

in  after-days,  I.  173 
Fruitful,  be,  C.  189 
self-sacrifice,  I.  553 
warning,  C.  478 
Fugitive  impressions,  I.  169 
Fulfilment    of     Scripture     at     Crucifixion, 

C.  588 
Full  corn,  blade,  ear,  and,  C.  153 
Fulness  of  Scripture,  C.  443 
Fundamentals      of      Christian      fellowship, 

H.  304 
Future,  Christ's  knowledge  of  His,  I.  350 
life,  effect   on  character  of  belief  as  to, 

C.  444 
past  and,  C.  538 
punishment,  I.  352 

Gadaeenes,  Christ  rejected  by,  H.  177,  181 
Gain  by  loss,  I.  311 

656 


Gain,  Christian's,  in  this  world,  C.  377 

Gained,  but  not  possessed,  I.  312 

Galilasan  preaching,  Christ's  early,  and  first 

disciples,  H.  21 
Galilee,  Christ's  departure  from,  C.  266 
place  of  meeting,  C.  616 
promised  meeting  in,  H.  524 
sea  of,  C.  25,  162  ;  I.  53 
why  did  Christ  leave  Tyre  and  Sidon  and 
go  again  to  ?  H.  276 
Gamester,  hardened,  I.  599 
Garden,  agony  in,  H.  525,  534 

of  Gethsemane,  I.  556 
Gather  up  fragments,  C.  235 
Generation,  adulterous,  C.  308 
Gennesaret,  C.  241 
Gentleness,   Christ    comes    in    strength    of, 

C.  19 
Genuine,  seed  must  be,  C.  135 
Gethsemane,  Christ's  agony  in,  H.  534 

garden  of,  I.  556 
Gift  of  God,  healing  art,  C.  214 
Gifts  of  poor,  I.  468 

to  ministering  Christ,  C.  387 
Girdle,  I.  49 

Giver  of  wealth  forgotten,  I.  398 
Giving  away,  no  loss  by,  I.  172 

rule  of,  for  rich,  C.  463 
Glance,  Christ's,  C.  26 
Glastonbury,  I.  602 

Glory  and  sufferings  intimately  connected, 
C.  335 
Christ  in,  C.  322 

Christ's  manifestation  in,  H.  474 
God's,  veiled  in  mercy,  C.  325 
prayer  accompanied  by,  C.  322  ■ 
Saviour's,  revelation  of,  C.  184 
God,  all  things  possible  to,  I.  398 

Christ  on  right  hand  of,  as  our  Interces- 
sor, C.  634 
communion  with,  leisure  for,  C.  230 
completeness   of    character    in    serving, 

H.  447 
demands  belief,  I.  53 
does  by  no  means  authorise   everything 

which  He  tolerates,  C.  356 
does,  harden  hearts  ?  I.  168 
enriched  by  man's  devotion,  C.  499 
faith  in,  C.  422 

forgives  us  as  we  forgive  others,  C.  423 
goodness  of,  H.  362 ;  C.  368 
gospel  of  family  of,  C.  121 
grace  of,  received  in  vain,  C.  519 
hath  done  all  things  well,  H.  274  ;  C.  276 
have  faith  in,  I.  429 
healing  art  gift  of,  C.  214 
in  communion  with,  I.  557 
in  hand  of,  C.  198 
is  against  disease,  I.  54 
kingdom  of,  H.  23 ;  C.  24,  134,  153,  324 
love  to,  and  one's  neighbour,  H.  447 
loving,  with  heart,  soul,  mind,  strength, 

C.  453,  454 
nature  leads  to,  I.  167 
obedience  to,    way  to  faith    in  Christ, 
H.  449 


INDEX. 


God  often  calls  men  in  strange  places,  I.  86 

often  last  resource  of  sorrow,  C.  194 

retirement  with,  I.  56 

seeking  to  save,  I.  202 

the  Provider,  I.  245 

unity  of,  C.  453 

welcomes  sinners,  I.  87 

working  with  man,  I.  638 

works,  as  we  work,  C.  96 
God's  care  for  Israel,  C.  433 

commandments  and  human  rules,  I.  278 

dealings,  C.  145 

final  effort,  I.  464 

hands,  winds  in,  I.  175 
world  in,  I.  175 

house  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  nations, 
H.  409 
reverence  for,  H.  408 

image  stamped  on  man,  I.  465 

long-suffering,  I.  464 

messengers,  H.  213 

need  of  all,  I.  429 

opportunity,  man's  extremity,  H.  333 

sickle,  C.  155 

truth     overcoming     human     opposition, 
C.  436 

vineyard,  soul,  C.  434 

voice  in  common  things,  I.  559 

Word,  emblem  of  seed  for,  C.  135 

work,  no  waste  in,  C.  287 
order  in,  C.  234 
Godhead,  further  revelation  of,  I.  50 
Godlike  works,  I.  55 
Going  back,  no,  I.  201 
Gold,  crushed  by,  I.  314 
Golden  hour  for  prayer  and  praise,  morning 

is,  I.  55 
Golgotha,  C.  586 
Good  and  evil,  development  of,  C.  152 

blessed  by,  I.  395 

doing,  Christ's  activity  in,  C.  25 

faith  in  supremacy  of,  faith  in  God  means, 
C.  422 

for  us  to  be  here,  it  is,  H.  318 

how  to  do,  C.  71 

life,  I.  171 

Master,  C.  367 

men,  bad  deed  by,  H.  543 

news  of  pardon,  I.  86 

pastor,  commendable  parts  of,  C.  440 

persecution  of,  H.  222 

resolutions,  how  best  to  promote  accom- 
plishment of  our,  H.  511 

reverence  for,  I.  244 

to  be  with  Jesus,  C.  323 
Goodness  of  God,  H.  362  ;  C.  368 

sowing  seed  of,  C.  135 
Gospel,  beginning  of,  I.  47 

call,  I.  52 

cloud,  C.  325 

for  outcast,  I.  281 

hearers,  qualities   to  be    cultivated   by, 
C.  132 

how,  to  be  propagated,  H.  189 

kingdom  a,  C.  23 

of  family  of  God,  C.  121 


Gospel,  power  of,  H.  99 

preparation  for,  H.  6 

preservation  of,  I.  636 

responsibility,  C.  628 

seen,  though  never  heard,  I.  47 

to  be  heard,  I.  167 

triumph  of,  I.  174 

zeal  in  spreading,  I.  201 
Government,  religion  no  enemy  to,  C.  441 
Grace,  Divine,  greatness  of,  C.  70 

means  of,  C.  195 

of  Christ,  C.  195 

of  God  received  in  vain,  C.  519 

sacramental,  I.  555 
Gradual  advance,  law  of,  I.  173 

progress  towards  perfection,  C.  153 
Grail,  Holy,  I.  555 
Grain  of  wheat,  Word  of  life  in  figure  of, 

H.  152 
Grave,  empty,  H.  613,  614 

Saviour's,  C.  597 
Great  evil,  talkativeness,  I.  57 

God,  little  faith  in,  I.  349 

loneliness  of,  I.  399 

men,  we  must  not  always  follow,  C.  256 

occasions  disclose  great  qualities,  I.  602 

refusal,  H.  361 

temptations,  I.  51 

things  from  small,  I.  173 
Greatness  and  weakness  of  man,  C.  18 

of  Divine  grace,  C.  70 

of  widow's  gift,  H.  461 

true,  C.  338 
Greed  in  its  demoniac  greatness,  H.  500 
Ground,  fell  on,  C.  536 

which  disappointeth  not  sower,  C.  137 
Groups  of  apostles,  three,  C.  104 
Growing  corn,  parable  of,  H.  145 
Growth,  C.  153 

Christian  imperceptible,  I.  173 

in  spiritual  world,  C.  154 

of  sin,  I.  56 

order  of,  C.  155 

spiritual,  H.  148 
Guardian  of  children,  Church,  C.  339 
Guest,  Christ  as  our,  preparation  for,  C.  513 
Guidance  in  religious  life,  C.  452 
Guide,  Christ  our,  I.  86 
Guiding  light,  C.  143 
Guilty  compliance,  C.  226 

conscience,  I.  243 


Habit  of  prayer,  Christ's,  C.  37 

of  uncleanness,  inveterate,  C.  184 
Habits  of  Baptist,  C.  13 
Half  a  point  off  course,  I.  467 
Hallel,  and  Jesus  singing,  H.  508 
Hamlet  of  New  Testament,  I.  397 
Hand,  C.  95 

Christ's  helping,  C.  45 
helping,  C.  333 
of  God,  in,  C.  198 
took  him  by,  H.  333 
withered,  restored,  H.  90 
Hands*of  God,  salvation  in,  C.  372 
Hand-help,  I.  57 

uu  657 


INDEX. 


Hard  requirement,  C.  369 

Helps,  hindrances  turned  into,  C.  240 

to  leave,  I.  398 

Helping  hand,  C.  333 

Hardened  by  evangelical  teaching,  I.  169 

Christ's,  C.  45 

Hardening  their  hearts,  what  was  ?  C.  96 

others,  H.  242 

Hardihood  of  evil,  H.  543 

Helplessness,  man's,  I.  85 

Hardness  of  heart,  H.  92  ;  C.  241 

Herd,  drowning  of,  C.  186 

Harmony  restored,  I.  54 

Heritage,  rich,  I.  281 

Harvest  lessons,  H.  150 

Hermon,  C.  321 

Hatred  against  reprovers,  C.  223 

Herod  and  John  Baptist,  H.  216 ;  C.  224 

He  hath  done  all  things  well,  H.  274  ;  C.  276 

religion  too  costly  for,  C.  223 

He  is  not  here,  H.  613 

Herod's  dilemma,  C.  225 

Headstone  of  corner,  I.  465 

duty  plain,  C.  226 

Healing  art,  gift  of  God,  C.  214 

thoughts,  I.  243 

Christ's  miracles  of,  C.  34 

Heroes  and  workers,  unrecorded,  H.  101 

of  leper  sign  of  hope  to  world,  H.  46 

Hidden  lights,  C.  143 

outside  and  inside,  C.  269 

things,  manifestation  of,  H.  138 

source  of,  Christ,  not  means,  C.  295 

to  be  revealed,  I.  171 

touch,  Christ's,  H.  41 ;  C.  45 

High  in  faith,  low  in  repentance,  but,  I.  52 

Health  by  obedience,  C.  96 

Higher,  make  for,  I.  203 

Hear  Him,  H.  325 

twofold   earthly   companionship  of   dis- 

sermons, how  to,  H.  139 

ciples,  foundation  for,  C.  26 

take  heed  what  ye,  C.  143 

Highways  through  hearts  of  men,  C.  11 

Heard,  gospel  seen,  though  never,  I.  47 

Hindrance,  riches,  C.  371 

Hearers,  gospel,  qualities  to  be  cultivated  by, 

Hindrances  turned  into  helps,  C.  240 

C.  132 

History  of  Nazareth,  C.  210 

unprofitable,  C.  143 

pivot  of,  cross  of  Christ,  C.  586 

three  kinds  of,  I.  169 

Hollow  profession,  C.  96 

Hearing,  I.  167 

Holy   Communion,   most    solemn    Christian 

eloquent,  C.  132 

service,  H.  520 

worthless,  I.  167 

Eucharist,  H.  502  ;  C.  522 

Heart,  bad,  I.  280 

Ghost  at  baptism  of  our  Lord,  C.  18 

bias  of,  I.  280 

sin  against,  H.    109,    111,  112,   114; 

everv  man  porter  of  his  own,  C.  484 

C.  118 

hardness  of,  H.  92;  C.  241 

Grail,  I.  555 

King's  image  on,  C.  440 

personality,  force  of,  C.  419 

loving  God  with,  C.  453 

places,  traffic  in,  I.  429 

propensity  of,  to  self-delusion,  C.  222 

Spirit  came  as  dove,  C.  19 

rashness  of,  C.  525 

Spirit's  baptism,  H.  14 

religion  in,  rise  and  progress  of,  C.  151 

women,  devotion  of,  I.  635 

seat  of  defilement,  C.  258 

Home,  C.  188 

sin  has  its  source  in,  I.  279 

Honouring  parents,  I.  279 

thankful,  C.  189 

Honours,  no  true,  are  lightly  won  in  either 

trodden,  I.  169 

earth  or  heaven,  C.  385 

Hearts  and  hands,  withered,  C.  95 

Hope,  no,  for  those  past  feeling,  1. 124 

Christ  sometimes  seems  to  sleep  in  our, 

to  world,  healing  of  leper  sign  of,  H.  46 

I.  175 

Hopeful    sin,    dissatisfaction    with    failure, 

does  God  harden  ?  I.  168 

C.  333 

of  men,  highways  through,  C.  1 1 

Hopeless,  unpromising,  but  not,  I.  169 

what  was  hardening  their  ?  C.  96 

Horizons,  two,  C.  480 

Heart-defilement,  C.  259 

Horrors  of  winter  flight,  I.  485 

Heathen  world,  firstfruits  of,  C.  585 

Hour  of  crisis,  I.  558 

Heaven  and  hell,  antithesis  of,  H.  33 

of  need,  Christ  will  not  fail  us  in,  C.  288 

communion  in,  C.  523 

of  watching,  H.  528 

incapacity  removed  in,  I.  281 

House,  God's,  reverence  for,  H.  408 

kingdom  of,  C.  359 

of  prayer  for  all  nations,  God's  house, 

land  of  living,  I.  467 

H.  409 

on  earth,  H.  323 

when  Christ  is  in,  H.  61 

•  received  up  into,  C.  633 

Houses,  widows',  devourer  of,  I.  467 

repentance  way  to,  I.  49 

Human  claims  paramount,  I.  245 

Heavenward  look,  C.  276 

misery,    Christ    saddened  by    sight   of, 

Hell  and  heaven,  antithesis  of,  H.  33 

1.282 

awfulness  of,  C.  346 

nature,  Christ's  knowledge  of,  C.  287 

in  present  life,  I.  352 

inherent  weakness  of,  I.  599 

Help,  Divine,  I.  247 

opposition,     God's     truth     overcoming, 

from    considering    Christ's    endurance, 

C.  436 

1.559 

rules  and  God's  commandments,  I.  278 

658 


INDEX. 


Human   societies,   shepherd  needed  in  all, 

C.  234 
Humanity,    Christ    touching    leprosies    of, 
C.  45 
Christ's,  C.  333 

care  for,  I.  55 
common  burdens  of,  Christ  wrought  no 
miracle  to  relieve  Himself   from, 
C.  34 
Humble  service,  H.  405 
Humility.  I.  350 

of  Baptist,  C.  13 
Hundredfold  now,  C.  376 
Hungry  souls,  to  feed — mission  of   Church, 

C.  417 
Husband  and  wife,  C.  357 
Husbandmen  and  vineyard,  H.  432 

wicked,  C.  434 
Hymn,  power  of,  I.  556 
Hypocrisy,  exposed,  C.  440 
Hypocrites,  Christ  discovers  not  Himself  to, 

C.  428 
Hypocritical  regard  for  ceremonial,  I.  278 

If,  C.  307 

no,  in  Jesus,  I.  57 
Ignorant  prejudices,  I.  242 
Image,  God's,  stamped  on  man,  I.  465 

King's,  on  heart,  C.  440 

of  Christian  life,  H.  162 
Imaginary  difficulties,  I.  635 
Imagination,  C.  259 
Immortality,  universal  belief  in,  I.  466 
Impedimenta,  I.  397 
Impediments,  I.  243 
Imperfect  Church,  C.  131 

faith,  C.  196 

reformation  insufficient,  H.  217 
Imperishable  and  perishable,  H.  480 
Importance  of  vigilance,  I.  486 
Important  rule,  H.  258 

thing,  most,  love,  I.  467 
Importunity  of  crowd,  C.  232 
Impotence,  man's,  I.  246 
Impression,  no  spiritual,  I.  168 
Impressions,  fugitive,  I.  169 

good,  destroyed,  I.  170 
Imprudence  better  than  apathy,  C.  47 
Impulse,  H.  544 
Inability,  royal,  I.  244 
Incapacity  removed  in  heaven,  I.  281 
Incarnation,  Eucharist  extension  of,  C.  522 
Incentives  to  perseverance,  C.  473 
Incidental  services  to  men,  C.  70 
Increase,  law  of,  H.  287 

moral,  I.  173 
Independence  of  thought,  Christ's,  C.  32 
Indestructible  Jesus,  H.  420 
Indifference  and  formality,  warning  against, 

H.  290 
Indiscreet  zeal,  C.  340 
Individual,  contact  with,  C.  34 
Individuality,  C.  209 
Infant  baptism,  C.  359 
Infants,  Christ  blessing,  C.  360 
Inferiority  to  Jesus,  John's,  I.  49 


Infinite  meaning  of  sigh  of  Christ,  H.  290 
Infirmity,    sins    of,    nature  and    kinds    of, 

H.  530 
Influence,  I.  171 

Christ's,  spread  of,  C.  634 
of  evil,  I.  172 
secret  of  Christ's,  I.  636 
Influences,  disheartening,  C.  137 
Information,  recollection  more  needed  than, 

C.  562 
Ingratitude,  I.  464 

Inherent  weakness  of  human  nature,  I.  599 
Inheritance  shall  be  ours,  C.  436 
Injunction  as  to  food,  C.  198 
Innocence    best    protection    against    craft, 

C.  441 
Insecurity  of  life  in  unsettled  times,  I.  463 
Inside  and  outside  healing,  C.  269 
Insight,  looking  back  after,  I.  397 
Insincerity  in  worship,  H.  253 
Instant  action,  C.  97 
Intensity  of  Jesus,  H.  379 
Intercessor,  Christ  on  right  hand  of  God  as 

our,  C.  634 
Interview,  Christ's,  with  scribe,  H.  445 
Invincible  courage,  I.  399 
Involuntary  testimony  to  Divinity  of  Christ, 

1.601 
Inward  corruption,  C.  259 
renewal  needed,  C.  260 
Irony  sometimes  lawful,  C.  257 
Irregular  preachers,   Church's  duty  as    to, 

C.  340 
Irreverence,  rebuke  of,  I.  429 
Is  it  I  ?  H.  516  ;  I.  554 
Israel,  God's  care  for,  C.  433 

Jairus'  daughter,  H.  190 
James  and  John,  C.  105 
request  of,  H.  383 

son  of  Alphaeus,  C.  106 
Jerusalem,  final  entry  into,  H.  402 ;  C.  405 

on  way  to,  H.  377  ;  C.  381 
Jesus  and  John  Baptist,  H.  26 

ashamed  of,  on  being,  C.  308 

away  from,  I.  396 

before  Sanhedrin,  H.  545 

Christ,  blood  of,  C.  523 

popular  teachings  of,  H.  126 

calling  of,  0.  26,  27 

consecration    of,   to   His    suffering    and 
dying,  C.  322 

delivered  to  Pilate,  C.  564 

did  not  court  martyrdom,  C.  99 

empty  tomb  of,  C.  614 

false  and  true  family  of,  II.  121 

following,  C.  394 
fearingly,  H.  380 

gives  demons  leave,  C.  186 

good  to  be  with,  C.  323 

he  came  to,  I.  400 

in  Phoenicia,  C.  266 

in  request,  H.  36 

indestructible,  H.  420 

intensity  of,  H.  379 

John's  inferiority  to,  I.  49 

659 


INDEX. 


Jesus,  no  "  if  "  in,  I.  57 

of  Nazareth — the  name,  C.  33 

only,  H.  326  ;  I.  349 

our  King,  H.  577 

parables  of,  I.  166 

representative  man,  C.  20 

silence  of,  C.  564 

singing,  Hallel  and,  H.  508 ;  C.  523 

testimony  to,  I.  201 

walked  on    the   sea,   direction   of  wind 
when,  I.  245 

was  tempted,  H.  19 

with  dead,  C.  197 

wonders,  C.  211 
Jew,  wealthy,  tomb  of,  C.  613 
Jews,  King  of,  C.  588 
John  Baptist  and  Herod,  H.  216  ;  C.  224 
Christ  mightier  than,  H.  13 
Jesus  and,  H.  26 

model  prophet  and  ambassador,  I.  48 
voice,  not  echo,  C.  10 
John,  after,  comes  Christ,  I.  52 
John's  inferiority  to  Jesus,  I.  49 

mission  fulfilled,  C.  226 
John  and  James,  C.  105 
request  of,  H.  383 
Jordan,  C.  17 

Joseph  of  Arimathasa,  C.  597 
Journey  of  women,  H.  612 
Joy,  ascension,  C.  633 

of  wicked,  C.  500 

of  working  for  Christ,  I.  486 
Judas  Iscariob,  H.  493 

among  twelve,  C.  107 

evidence  to  worth  of  Christianity,  I.  123 

picture  of,  I.  554 

who  are  like,  to-day  ?  C.  542 
Judgment  of  world,  C.  221 

retributive,     wilful     blindness    and    its, 
C.  427 

Key  of  day  and  lock  of  night,  prayer  should 

be,  I.  56 
Kindred,  Christ's  outside,  C.  120,  121 
Kinds    and    nature    of    sins    of    infirmity, 

H.  530 
King,  Jesus  our,  H.  577 
of  Jews,  C.  588 

true,  and  His  counterfeit,  H.  560 
Kingdom  a  gospel,  C.  23 
Christ's,  nature  of,  C.  406 
distinctive  qualities,  aspects,  and  relations 

of,  C.  24 
of  God,  H.  23 ;  C.  153 
mystery  of,  C.  134 
requirements  of,  C.  24 
there  are  mountains  in,  C.  324 
of  heaven,  C.  359 
not  far  from,  H.  457 
preaching     of,    was     Christ's     vocation, 

C.  38 
to  receive,  as  little  child,  H.  360 
King's  image  on  heart,  C.  440 
Kings,  testimony  before,  I.  244 
Kingship,  avowal  and  description  of,  C.  564 
Kinship  to  Christ,  H.  119 

660 


Kiss  of  treachery,  C.  542 

Knowledge,  Christ's  voluntary  limitation  of, 

C.  481 
or  sincerity,  loose  casuist  generally  wants 

either,  C.  356 

Labour  and  patience,  I.  244 

does,  block  way  to  manhood  ?  H.  205 
Lack  of  faith,  I.  349 
Lake,  chosen,  C.  25 

storm  on,  H.  159 
Land  of  living,  heaven,  I.  467 
Last,  first  and,  C.  377 
Large  Christ  experienced,  I.  310 
Law  of  Christian  devotion,  C.  499 

of  compensation,  C.  144  ;  I.  172 

of  gradual  advance,  I.  173 

of  increase,  H.  287 

of  life,  world  as,  C.  307 

of  service,  I.  400 
Laws  of  nature,  prayer  and,  I.  430 
Leader,  Christ  as,  C.  525;  I.  311 
Leadings,  providential,  C.  585 
Leaven,  H.  291 

erroneous  doctrine  like,  H.  29Ii 
Left  ear,  best  to  have  no,  I.  167 

not  much,  I.  314 
Legend  of  Ninus,  I.  313 
Legion,  C.  185,  186 
Legitimate  anger,  C.  96 
Leisure  for  communion  with  God,  C.  230 

no,  I.  244 

use  of,  H.  230 
Length,  prayers  judged  by  weight,  not,  I.  468 
Lenten  retirement,  H.  229 
Leper,  healing  of,  sign   of   hope  to  world, 

H.  46 
Leprosy,  C.  44 ;  I.  56 
Leprosies  of  humanity,  Christ  touching,  C.  45 

of  modern  society,  C.  46 
Lessons,  harvest,  H.  150 
Levi— Matthew,  C.  69 

call  and  feast  of,  H.  64  ;  C.  69,  70 
Liberality,  Christian,  C.  498 

must  correspond  with  means,  I.  468 
Life  and  mind,  change  of,  repentance  implies, 
I.  49 

as  in,  so  in  death,  I.  314 

as  service,  I.  399 

brotherhoods  of,  C.  26 

changes  in,  C.  239 

Christian,  H.  142 

cross  way  to,  C.  305 

eternal,  C.  199 

good,  I.  171 

insecurity  of,  in  unsettled  times,  I.  463 

new,  threefold  mark  of,  H.  75 

of  religion,  C.  304 

our,  Christ's  life  ransom  for,  H.  387 

penances  of,  H.  60 

test  of  relationship  is,  I.  125 

this,  time  for  work,  I.  486 

two  aspects  of,  I.  246 
Life's  storms,  suddenness  of,  C.  162 
Lifelong  repentance,  Peter's,  C.  552 
Light,  Christian's,  I.  171 


INDEX. 


Light,  guiding,  C.  143 

revealing,  I.  313 
Lights,  hidden,  C.  143 
Limitation  of  knowledge,  Christ's  voluntary, 

C.  481 
Limitations  of  mercy,  C.  269 

of  our  Lord's  manhood,  H.  476 
Linen  cloth,  young  man  in,  H.  540 
Lines,  reading  between,  C.  268 
Lip-service,  I.  278 
Little  faith  in  great  God,  I.  349 

much  lost  lor,  I.  314 

ones,  Christ  in  His,  I.  350 
Christ's,  offending,  C.  346 
Liturgy   in    public   worship,   advantage    of, 

H.  412 
Living,  land  of,  heaven,  I.  467 

organism,  Christianity,  C.  157 

show  love  to,  I.  553 
Lock  of  night  and  key  of  day,  prayer  should 

be,  I.  56 
Loneliness  of  the  great,  I.  399 
Long  affliction,  H.  194 
Long-suffering,  God's,  I.  464 
Look  at  children,  C.  338 

Christ's,  C.  96 

heavenward,  C.  276 

of  love,  Christ's,  C.  368 

sigh,  and  word,  Christ's,  H.  276 
Looking  back  after  insight,  I.  397 
Loose  casuist  generally  wants  either  know- 
ledge or  sincerity,  C.  356 
Lord,  audience  first  addressed  by  our,  C.  23 

baptism  of  our,  H.  17 

consecration  to,  changes  man,  C.  321 

hath  need  of  him,  C.  405 

Holy  Ghost  at  baptism  of  our,  C.  18 

nature's  sympathy  with  her,  I.  601 

sabbath  and  its,  H.  76 

tell  what,  hath  done  for  thee,  I.  201 

touching  the,  H.  238 

working  with  them,  I.  638 
Lord's  day  and  sabbath,  H.  78 

deep  sigh,  H.  290 

desertion  bv  Father,  our,  H.  579 

doings,  C.  189 

pathway,  C.  11 

question  concerning  Messiah,  H.  458 

temptation,    three    prominent   points  in 
our,  C.  20 
Lords  of  sabbath,  Christians  are,  C.  85 
Lordship  over  sabbath,  Christ's,  C.  84 
Loss,  gain  by,  I.  311 

no,  by  giving  away,  I.  172 

of  soul,  H.  301 

service  no,  I.  172 
Lost,  I.  312 
Love  and  service,  family  of,  C.  122 

best  motive  for  work,  C.  498 

bloodshedding  as  expression  of,  I.  555 

Christ's  look  of,  C.  S68 

in  detection,  C.  195 

most  important  thing,  I.  467 

never  retreats,  I.  635 

of  God,  in,  ample  room,  C.  268 

show,  to  living,  I.  553 


Love  to  God,  and  one's  neighbour,  H.  447 
Loving  God  with  heart,  soul,  mind,  strength, 
C.  453,  454 
neighbour  as  self,  I.  467 
service,  Christ  honouring,  H.  492 
Low  in  repentance,  but  high  in  faith,  I.  52 
Loyalty    of    early    Christians    to    emperor, 
C.  441 
to  Christ,  C.  303 

Madness  of  enmity,  C.  97 

of  sin,  C.  185 
Magdala,  Mary  of,  Christ's  appearance   to, 

C.  626 
Magdalene,  Mary,  first  to,  C.  626 
Maintenance  for  ministers,  C.  213 
Man  and  tree,  H.  296 

consecration  to  Lord  changes,  C.  321 

God  working  with,  I.  638 

God's  image  stamped  on,  I.  465 

greatness  and  weakness  of,  C.  184 

in  ruins,  I.  199 

Jesus,  representative,  C.  20 

sabbath  was  made  for,  C.  82 

salvation  of,  depends  upon  his  subjection 
to  rule  of  God,  I.  52 

Son  of,  C.  84 

what  manner  of,  is  this  ?  C.  166  ;  I.  175 
Man's  devotion,  God  enriched  by,  C.  499 

extremity,  God's  opportunity,  H.  333 

helplessness,  T.  85 

impotence,  I.  246 

need  of  Divine  support,  H.  509 

response,  Christ's  call  and,  H.  102 
Manhood,  does  labour  block  way  to  ?  H.  205 

our  Lord's,  limitations  of,  H.  476 
Manifest,  Christ's  presence,  I.  85 
Manifestation,  Christ's,  in  glory,  H.  474 

dav  of,  C.  143 

of  hidden  things,  H.  138 
Mark's  Gospel,  author,  1 
characteristics,  4 
date  and  place  of  publication,  3 
Appendix  (ch.  xvi.  9—20),  641 
Marriage,  H.  354 ;  C.  35(> 

doctrine  of  Christ  concerning,  H.  356 

in  time  of  Christ,  C.  357 
Marriage-bond,  C.  357 
Martyrdom,  Jesus  did  not  court,  C.  99 
Marvelling,  0.  189 
Mary  of    Magdala,  Christ's    appearance    to, 

C.  626 
Masses,  Christ's  popularity  with,  C.  459 
Master    and    disciple,   confidence    between, 
C.  340 

good,  C.  367 

rejected  ;  servants  sent  forth,  H.  204 

true    disciple    always    knows    where    to 
find,  C.  37 
Master's  call  answered,  H.  25 
Matthew,  C.  106 

Levi,  C.  69 
Matthew's  example,  I.  123 
Maturity,  quick,  C.  136 
Meaning,  infinite,  of  sigh  of  Christ,  H.  290 
Means,  Christ's  freedom  in  use  of,  C.  295 

C61 


INDEX. 


Means,    liberality    must    correspond    with, 

I.  468 
Measure,  with  what,  ye  mete,  C.  144 
Meeting,  Galilee  place  of,  C.  616 

in  Galilee,  promised,  H.  524 
Men,  Christ's  power  to  shape,  I.  54 

Christ's  reception  from,  I.  464 

fishers  of,  I.  53 

good,  bad  deed  by,  H.  543 

hearts  of,  highways  through,  C.  11 

incidental  services  to,  C.  70 

Satan  hinders,  C.  136 

temptation  to  deny  Christ  before,  C.  550 

tradition  of,  H.  249 

truth  divides,  C.  421 

various  attitudes  of,  towards  Christ,  C.  44 
Mention,  why  such  slight,  of  Christ's  ascen- 
sion ?  C.  633 
Mercy,  Christ's,  H.  265 

God's  glory  veiled  in,  C.  325 

limitations  of,  C.  269 
Mercies,  forgetfulness  of  former,  C.  287 
Message  and  reception,  rite,  H.  11 

Christ's,  to  sick  souls,  C.  64 

more  than  messenger,  C.  211 

of  Resurrection,  H.  608 

startling,  I.  49 

to  Peter,  H.  615 
Messengers,  God's,  H.  213 
Messiah,    our    Lord's    question   concerning, 

H.  458 
Mighty  calling  of  Lord,  C.  26 
Mind  and  life,  change  of,  repentance  implies, 
*  I.  49 

loving  God  with,  C.  453 
Ministering  Christ,  gifts  to,  C.  387 

throne  for,  I.  400 
Ministers  are  fishers,  I.  53 

Christ's,  sympathy  with,  H.  341 

duties  of,  C.  230 

in  Church,  calling  of,  H.  427 

maintenance  for,  C.  213 

ostentation  to  be  avoided  by,  H.  276 
Ministry  and  self-sacrifice,  Christ's,  H.  387 

Baptist's,  character  of,  C.  12 

Christ's  preparation  for,  H.  14 

woman's,  to  Christ,  C.  593 
Miracle,  Christ  wrought  no,  to  relieve  Him- 
self   from   common     burdens   of    hu- 
manity, C.  34 

parable  in,  H.  38 

symbolic  teaching  of,  C.  45 
Miracles,  C.  214 

Christ's,  progression  in,  I.  86 

not  necessarily  convincing,  C.  187 

of  healing,  Christ's,  C.  34 

three,  H.  99 
Miracle-working,  Christ's  simplicity  in,  C.  196 
Miraculous,  view  of,  C.  296 
Mirror,  nature  a,  I.  167 
Misapplication     of    words,    false    witness 

through,  C.  549 
Misconception,  disciples',  C.  291 

silence  under,  C.  565 
Misery,  human,  Christ  saddened  by  sight  of, 
1.282 

662 


Misrepresented  and  misunderstood,  Christ, 

H.  107 
Mission,  Divine,  Christ's  actions  prove  His, 
I.  123 

of  Church — to  feed  hungry  souls,  C.  417 

of  Son,  C.  435 
Missionary  enthusiasm,  I.  637 

trials  and  reward  of,  H.  375 

zeal,  I.  637 
Mistaken  self-complacency,  I.  556 

zeal,  I.  558 
Misunderstood  and   misrepresented,  Christ, 

H.  107 
Mites,  widow's,  I.  468 
Mockers  at  cross,  H.  589 
Mockery  of  soldiers,  lessons  from,  H.  570; 
I.  599 

truth  in,  H.  589 
Model,  childhood  our,  C.  339 

prayer,  C.  163 

prophet  and  ambassador,  John  Baptist, 
1.48 
Modern  society,  leprosies  of,  C.  46 
Monarch  of  all,  Christ  manifested  as,  C.  20 
Money,  C.  370 
Moral  increase,  I.  173 

law,  excellence  of,  H.  446 

paralysis,  I.  85 

purification,  symbol  of,  C.  13 
Morning,  early,  I.  55 

is  golden  hour  for  prayer  and  praise,  I.  55 

praises,  I.  55 
Moses  and  Elias,  why  did,  appear  ?  H.  322 

and  Elijah,  meeting  of  Lord  with,  H.  322 
Mother,  Canaanitish,  H.  264 
Motive  for  work,  love  best,  C.  498 
Motives,  Christ's  followers  drawn  by  various, 
C.  232 

to  universal  charity,  C.  456 
Mountain,  this,  I.  430 
Mountains,  C.  321 

doxologies  to  God  for,  I.  348 

faith  removing,  C.  422 

in  kingdom  of  God,  there  are,  C.  324 
Moving  of  conscience,  H.  515 
Much  result  from  small  beginnings,  I.  553 

lost  for  little,  I.  314 
Multitude,  aside  from,  I.  281 

blind  beggar  and,  1.  400 

Christ's  thought  for,  C.  132 

fed,  H.  231 

sympathy  with,  I.  245 
Mundane  trust  a  barrier,  H.  370 
Mutual  bearing  of  Christ  and  His  enemies, 
C.  426 

relations  of  prayer  and  work,  H  35 

service,  C.  386 

sympathy,  I.  557 
Myrrh,  wine  mingled  with,  C.  587 
Mystery  of  eternity,  H.  586 

of  Eucharist,  C.  521 

of  kingdom  of  God,  C.  134 

world's,  cross  explains,  I.  600 
Mystical  sense  of  healing  of  paralytic,  C.  61 

Name,  in  My,  C.  339 


INDEX. 


Narratives,  apparent  discrepancies  in,  C.  612 
National  sentiment,  change  of,  I.  598 
Nations,  words  applicable  to,  C.  628 
Nature  a  mirror,  I.  167 

a  print  of  God,  I.  167 

and  kinds  of  sins  of  infirmity,  H.  530 

double,  C.  185 

God's  control  of,  I.  430 

human,  Christ's  knowledge  of,  C.  287 

laws  of,  prayer  and,  I.  430 

leads  to  God,  I.  167 

of  Christ's  kingdom,  C.  406 

spirit  in  which  to  study,  I.  166 

what  we  can  see  in,  I.  167 
Nature's  sympathy  with  her  Lord,  I.  601 

testimony  to  Resurrection,  I.  636 
Nazarenes,  offence  of,  C.  210 
Nazareth,  history  of,  C.  210 

Jesus  of — the  name,  C.  33 
Nearer  by  removal,  Christ,  C.  99 
Nearness  not  possession,  H.  457 
Necessity  of  forgiving  spirit,  I.  431 

of  self-denial,  H.  297 
Need,   hour  of,  Christ  will  not  fail  us  in, 
C  288 

of  all,  God's,  I.  429 

of  our  time  is  for  voices,  C.  10 

of  Spirit,  I.  50 
Needed  ransom,  C.  388 
Needful  caution,  H.  460 
Needle's  eye,  camel  and,  C.  371 
Needy,  compassion  for,  I.  308 
Neglect  not  signs  already  given,  C.  289 
Negligence  and  remissness,  C.  484 
Neighbour,  duty  to,  C.  455 

love  to  God  and  one's,  H.  447 

loving,  as  self,  I.  467 
New  birth  in  baptism,  I.  638 

covenant,  Christ  rainbow  of,  I.  50 

creation,  first  day  of,  C.  612 

experience,  C.  64 

life,  threefold  mark  of,  H.  75 

Passover,  C.  523 

Testament,  Hamlet  of,  I.  397 
News,  question  of  propriety  as   to   quality 

and  time  of,  C.  514 
Ninus,  legend  of,  1.  313 
Nobleness,  recognising,  C.  592 
Nominal    Christians,    confession    of    Christ 
unknown  to,  I.  315 

Christianity  insufficient,  C.  628 
Nourishment,  spiritual,  I.  554 

Obedience  has  firm  basis,  T.  349 
health  by,  C.  96 
learnt  by  suffering,  C.  537 
to  God  way  to  faith  in  Christ,  H.  449 
Obscure  Christians,  C.  106 
Obstacles  in  Christian's  path,  C.  612 
Occasions,   great,   disclose    great    qualities, 

I.  602 
Offence  of  Nazarenes,  C.  210 
Offences,  H.  342 
Offended  in  Him,  H.  207 
Omnipotence,  faith  and,  I.  202 
One  day  in  seven,  consecration  of,  C.  83 


One  error  fatal,  I.  396 

flesh,  they  twain  shall  be,  I.  394 

thing  may  keep  soul  from  eternal  life, 
I.  396 
needful,  I.  396 
Open,  door  kept,  I.  168 
Opportunities,  I.  56 
Opposites,    apparent,    faith    can    reconcile, 

C.  459 
Opposition  from  friends,  C.  117 
Ordinances,  Christ's  presence  in,  H.  285 

of  Church,  I.  202 
Order  in  God's  work,  C.  234 

of  conversion,  C.  198 

of  growth,  C.  155 
Ordinary  course,  works  out  of,  C.  235 
Organism,  living,  Christianity,  C.  157 
Origin  of  sin,  I.  279 
Ostentation    to    be    avoided    by  ministers, 

H.  276 
Other  side,  unto  the,  H.  161 
Outcast,  gospel  for,  I.  281 
Outside  and  inside  healing,  C.  269 
Outsiders,  parables  necessary  for,  C.  133 
Overshadowing  cloud,  C.  324 

Palsy,  C.  61 

Parable  in  miracle,  H.  38 

mode  of  conveying  truth,  I.  167 

of  growing  corn,  H.  145 

of  promise,  C.  158 

of  sower,  H.  128;  C.  132 
Parables,  Christ's,  I.  166 

double  aspect  of,  C.  134 

necessary  for  outsiders,  C.  133 

rules  for  interpretation  of,  H.  131 

why  Christ  spoke  in,  H.  131 
Paralysis,  moral,  I.  85 

of  soul,  I.  124 
Paralytic  borne  of  four,  H.  58 

mystical  sense  of  healing  of,  C.  61 
Pardon  for  sin,  present,  taught  by  Christ, 
C.  63 

good  news  of,  I.  86 
Pardoner,  Christ,  I.  86 
Parents,  honouring,  I.  279 
Particularity  in  giving  directions,  C.  405 
Parting  of  the  ways,  H.  566 
Partners,  no  silent,  I.  315 
Passover,  Christian,  H.  501 

Christ's  preparation  for,  C.  513 

new,  C.  523 
Past  and  future,  C.  538 
Pastor,  duties  of,  C.  214 

good,  commendable  parts  of,  C.  440 

true,  is   never  weary  of  Instructing  his 
people,  C.  356 
Path,  Christian's,  obstacles  in,  C.  612 

downward,  C.  224 
Pathway,  Lord's,  C.  11 
Patience  and  labour,  I.  244 

of  Christ,  C.  549 

or  severity  ?  C.  213 
Peace,  salt  and,  I.  352 

without  from  purity  within,  0.  348 
Penal  element  in  punishment,  I.  124 

GG3 


INDEX. 


Penances  of  life,  H.  60 

Porter,  every  man,  of  his  own  heart,    C. 

Penitence,  fellowship  of,  I.  50 

484 

thought  leading  to,  H.  551 

Possessed,  gained,  but  not,  I.  312 

People,  Christ's  dealings  with  His,  C.  267 

Possession,  demoniac,  C.  33 

Perfection,  gradual  progress  towards,  C.  153 

nearness  not,  H.  457 

Performance,  pretension  and,  H.  416 

Possessions,  disentangled  from,  C.  371 

Peril,  Church  in,  H.  160 

Post,  each  at  his,  I.  486 

of  property,  I.  397 

Poverty,  problem  of,  and  how  to  deal  with 

of  riches,  1.  398 

it,  H.  500 

Periods  of  repose,  I.  245 

Power  and  difficulties  of  faith,  H.  328 

Perishable  and  imperishable,  H.  480 

and  privilege,  Christian,  H.  103 

Permanence  of  Christ's  words,  H.  481 

in  common  things,  C.  214 

Persecution  of  good,  H.  222 

of  believing  prayer,  C.  423 

trial  to  perseverance,  C.  474 

of  Christ  to  shape  men,  I.  54 

Perseverance,  I.  484 

of  Christ's  word,  C.  406 

incentives  to,  C.  473 

of  confession,  I.  315 

rewarded,  C.  269 

of  cross,  I.  601 

Persistent  effort,  C.  266 

of  faith,  H.  413  ;  I.  86 

Personal  compassion,  C.  34 

of  gospel,  H.  99 

conviction  and  popular  clamour,  H.  562 

of  hymn,  I.  556 

faith  in  Christ,  C.  44 

of  prayer,  C.  334 

religious  character,  teaching  enforced  by, 

of  self-denial,  I.  49 

C.  32 

of  sleep,  I.  558 

Personality,  holy,  force  of,  C.  419 

of  truth,  faith  in,  I.  174 

Peter  cursing  and  swearing,  C.  551 

of  usefulness  destroyed,  C.  95 

discovered,  C.  550 

of  Word,  I.  638 

good  intention  and  error  of,  C.  323 

promise  of,  H.  629 

message  to,  H.  615 

supernatural,  source  of,  C.  421 

Peter's  case  no  exceptional  one,  C.  551 

true  and  false,  I.  396 

fall  and  recovery,  H.  546 

Powers,   three  determined    and  most  mis- 

lifelong repentance,  C.  552 

chievous,  working  of,  C.  97 

reply,  H.  303 

Praises,  morning,  I.  55 

Petition  of  Zebedee's  sons,  H.  381 

Pray,  watch  and,  H.  483 ;  I.  485 

Phases  of  faith,  various,  H.  193 

Prayer,  I.  349 

Philip,  C.  106 

accompanied  by  glory,  C.  322 

Phoenicia,  Jesus  in,  C.  266 

and  fasting,  C.  334 

Physician,  Divine,  C.  71 

and  forgiveness,  C.  423 

Picture  of  apostates,  C.  542 

and  its  answer,  C.  422 

Piety,  early,  beauty  of,  C.  155 

and  laws  of  nature,  I.  430 

Pilate  and  Christ,  H.  560 

and  work,  mutual  relations  of,  H.  35 

why  was  Jesus  taken  to  ?  C.  564 

before  work,  C.  37 

Pilate's  life,  crisis  in,  C.  567 

Christ's,  C.  239 

tragedy  of,  C.  566 

habit  of,  C.  37 

weakness,  C.  567 

confidence  in,  C.  423 

Pious  women  visiting  sepulchre,  H.  603 

for  faith,  C.  331 

Pivot  of  history,  cross  of  Christ,  C.  586 

for  others,  C.  267 

Place  where  they  laid  Him,  C.  614 

house  of,  for  all  nations,   God's  house, 

Plainness  and  simplicity  of   Christ   in   His 

H.  409 

prayers,  C.  538 

model,  C.  163 

Plan  of  work,  Christ's  reluctance  to  depart 

of  demons,  C.  186 

from  His,  C.  268 

power  of,  C.  334 

Plea  of  evil,  and  its  rejection,  H.  31 

retirement  for,  C.  533 

Pleading  better  covenant,  are  we  ?  C.  268 

secret,  C.  536 

Point  of  death,  H.  193 

should  be  key  of  day  and  lock  of  night, 

Pollution,  unclean  spirit  essence  of,  I.  54 

1.56 

Poor  always  with  us,  C.  500 

watching  and,  C.  538  ;  I.  557 

Christian  care  for,  I.  553 

Prayers,  Christ  in  His,  simplicity  and  plain- 

disciples were,  C.  82 

ness  of,  C.  538 

gifts  of,  1.  468 

judged  by  weight,  not  length,  I.  468 

treatment  of,  I.  400 

two,  H.  182 

Popular  clamour,   personal  conviction  and, 

Preach,  how  to,  I.  636 

H.  562 

Preacher,  good,  qualifications  of,  I.  123 

demonstration,  slight  value  of,  I.  429 

true,  Divine  creation,  I.  636 

teaching  of  Jesus  Christ,  H.  126 

Preachers,  lessons  for,  H.  354 

Popularity,  Christ's,  with  masses,  C.  459 

Preaching,  I.  123 

fickleness  of,  I.  598 

Christ  everywhere,  I.  636 

664 


INDEX. 


Preaching,  Christ's  early  Galilaean,  and  first 
disciples,  H.  21 

Christian,  what  is  ?  H.  622 

first,  of  Resurrection,  H.  606 

of  kingdom  was  Christ's  vocation,  C.  38 
Precautions  against  evil,  C.  347 
Prediction    of     sufferings,     more    explicit, 

H.  334 
Predominance  of  cross,  I.  311 
Preferment  and  rule,  service  road  to,  C.  338 
Prejudice,  how  Christ   contends   with    un- 
belief of,  C.  211 

religious,  I.  87 
Prejudices,  ignorant,  I.  242 
Preparation  for  Christ  as  our  Guest,  C.  513 

for  Divine  visitation,  H.  10 

for  gospel,  H.  6 

for  ministry,  Christ's,  H.  14 

times  of,  seasons  of  trial,  H.  593 
Presence,  Christ's,  causes  storms,  C.  162 
in  ordinances,  H.  285 
manifest,  I.  85 

of  Christ  in  Eucharist,  H.  520,  521 
Present  life,  hell  in,  I.  352 

pardon  for  sin  taught  by  Christ,  C.  63 
Preservation  of  gospel,  I.  636 
Presumption,  danger  of,  I.  556 
Pretension  and  performance,  H.  416 
Priests,  chief,  envy  of,  C.  566 

conspiracy  of,  C.  497 
Principle,  great,  vindicated,  C.  419 

of  scramble,  C.  386 
Print  of  God,  nature  a,  I.  167 
Prisons,  Eastern,  1.  51 
Privilege  and  power,  Christian,  H.  103 
Privileges,  temptation  following  on,  I.  51 
Problem  of  poverty,  and  how  to  deal  with  it, 

H.  500 
Procession,  triumphal,  I.  429 
Profession,  Christian,  salt  of,  H.  343 

hollow,  C.  96 
Profusion  is  not  necessarily  waste,  C.  498 
Progress,  Christian,  C.  296 

faith's,  H.  331 

gradual,  towards  perfection,  C.  153 

how,  is  possible,  H.  139 

of  Christianity,  I.  639 

rise  and,  of  Christianity,  H.  156 
Progression  in  Christ's  miracles,  I.  86 
Promise,  forgotten,  C.  615 

of  power,  H.  629 

of  usefulness,  C.  630 

parable  of,  C.  158 

warning,  and  encouragement,  H.  471 
Promised  meeting  in  Galilee,  H.  524 
Proof  of  Christ's  Divinity,  prophecy,  C.  472 
Propagated,  how  gospel  to  be,  H.  189 
Propensity  of  heart  to  self-delusion,  C.  222 
Property,  peril  of,  I.  397 
Prophecy  proof  of  Christ's  Divinity,  C.  472 
Prophet,  C.  428 
Prophets,  false,  C.  479 
Propriety,  question  of,  as  to  quality  and 

time  of  news,  C.  514 
Providential  leadings,  C.  585 
Provider,  God  the,  L  245 


Public    worship,   advantage    of    liturgy  in, 

H.  412 
Publicity,  strain  of  constant,  C.  117 
Punishment,  future,  I.  352 
penal  element  in,  I.  124 
Punishments  proportionable  to  sins,  H.  208 
Pure,  treasure  only  for,  I,  172 
Purification,  moral,  symbol  of,  C.  13 
Purity  within,  peace  without  from,  C.  348 

Qualifications  of  good  preacher,  1.  123 
Qualities,  aspects,  and  relations  of  kingdom, 
distinctive,  C.  24 

great  occasions  disclose  great,  I.  602 

to  be  cultivated  by  gospel  hearers,  C.  132 
Quarantania,  I.  50 
Quest  of  faith,  C.  611 
Question  as  to  tribute  money,  H.  437 

Christ's,  C.  118 

excellent,  C.  367 

our  Lord's,  concerning  Messiah,  H.  458 

scribe's,  C.  451 
Questions,  Christ's,  C.  303,  338 
Quick  maturity,  C.  136 

Rabbinical  washings,  C.  256 
Raiment,  stripped  of  His,  I.  599 
Rainbow  of  new  covenant,  Christ,  I.  50 
Ransom  for  our  life,  Christ's  life,  H.  387 

needed,  C.  388 

paid  for  all,  C.  388 
Rashness  of  heart,  C.  525 
Reading  between  lines,  C.  268 

superficial,  prejudicial,  C.  82 
Reasons  for  concealment,  H.  326 

for  sabbath  observance,  C.  83 

for  silence,  II.  326 

for  watchfulness,  H.  484 
Rebuke  of  irreverence,  I.  429 
Receiveth  Me,  C.  339 
Receiving  and  forbidding,  H.  336 
Reception,  Christ's,  from  men,  I.  464 

of  Christ,  world's,  I.  599 
Receptiveness,  I.  171 
Recollection  more  needed  than  information, 

C.  552 
Recovery,  fall  and,  of  Peter,  H.  546 
Reform,  external,  insufficient,  I.  88 
Reformation,  imperfect,  insufficient,  H.  217 
Reformed  character,  C.  187 
Refuge  from  storm,  no,  I.  169 
Refusal,  great,  H.  361 
Regard  for  ceremonial,  hypocritical,  I.  278 
Rejection  of  authority,  C.  427 

of  Christ,  I.  200 

of  plea  of  evil,  H.  31 
Relations  of  prayer  and  work,  mutual,  H.  35 

qualities,  and   aspects  of  kingdom,  dis- 
tinctive, C.  24 
Relationship,  test  of,  is  life,  I.  125 

to  Christ,  Church's,  H.  121 
Relationships  among  apostles,  C.  104 

earthly,  Christ's  attitude  towards,  C.  198 
Relics  of  Baptist,  I.  244 
Religion  and  business,  I.  465 

externalism  in,  I.  278 

665 


INDEX. 


Keligion  in  heart,  rise  and  progress  of,  C.  151 

Retirement,  Lenten,  H.  229 

life  of,  C.  304 

with  God,  I.  56 

no  enemy  to  government,  C.  441 

Retreats,  love  never,  I.  635 

too  costly  for  Herod,  C.  223 

Retributive  judgment,  wilful  blindness  and 

true,  C.  452 

its,  C.  427 

Religions  belief,  sound  foundation  for,  C.  368 

Revealed,  hidden  to  be,  I.  171 

character,  personal,  teaching  enforced  by, 

Revealing  light,  1. 313 

C.  32 

Revelation,  Christ  Sum  of,  C.  326 

enthusiasm  cannot  be  detained,  I.  349 

Christ's  methods  in,  C.  142 

frugality,  C.  288 

of  Godhead,  further,  I.  50 

life,  guidance  in,  C.  452 

Reverence  due  to  churches,  H.  418 

prejudice,  I.  87 

for  God's  house,  H.  408 

Remissness  and  negligence,  C.  484 

for  good,  I.  244 

Remorse,  worm  of,  C.  347 

to  childhood,  I.  350 

Removal,  Christ  nearer  by,  C.  99 

Revival  converts,  C.  136 

Renewal,  inward,  needed,  C.  260 

Reward,  all-forsaking  spirit  and  its,  H.  372 

Rent  veil,  H.  581 ;  C.  592 

for  Christian  service,  C.  342 

Renunciation,  C.  392 

of  self-sacrifice,  I.  311 

total,  I.  395 

trials  and,  of  missionary,  H.  375 

Repent,  Christ's  watchword,  I.  52 

Rich  heritage,  I.  281 

Repentance,  C.  11 

men  like  camels,  I.  398 

and  faith,  C.  24 

rule  of  giving  for,  C.  463 

implies  change  of  mind  and  life,  I.  49 

young  ruler,  H.  360 

low  in,  but  high  in  faith,  I.  52 

Riches  a  hindrance,  C.  371 

Peter's  lifelong,  C.  552 

peril  of,  I.  398 

soul  incapacitated  for,  C.  119 

weight  of,  I.  397 

the  longer  delayed,  the  harder  it  becomes, 

Right  hand  of  God,  Christ  on,  as  our  Inter- 

I. 52 

cessor,  C.  634 

true,  H.  213 

use  and  end  of  fasting,  C.  74 

twofold  aspect  of,  I.  48 

Righteous,  not,  but  sinners,  H.  67 

way  to  heaven,  I.  49 

who  are  the  ?  C.  70 

Reply,  Christ's,  to  Sadducees,  H.  443 

Rise  and  progress  of  Christianity,  H.  156 

Peter's,  H.  303 

of  religion  in  heart,  C.  151 

Repose,  periods  of,  I.  245 

Rite,  message,  and  reception,  H.  11 

Representative  man,  Jesus,  C.  20 

Roads,  Eastern,  I.  48 

Reproof  should  be  welcomed,  C.  437 

Roofs,  Eastern,  I.  85 

Reprovers,  hatred  against,  C.  223 

Room,  ample,  in  love  of  God,  C.  268 

Reproving  sin,  duty  of,  C.  222 

Root,  no,  C.  136 

Request,  Christ's  answer  exact  echo  of,  I.  57 

want  of,  I.  170 

Jesus  in,  H.  36 

Rousseau's   testimony   to    death  of   Christ, 

of  James  and  John,  H.  383 

I.  602 

Requirement,  hard,  C.  369 

Routine  service,  I.  278 

Requirements  of  kingdom  of  God,  C.  24 

Royal  entry  into  Jerusalem,  Christ's,  signi- 

Resignation to  will  of  God,  I.  557 

ficance  of,  C.  405 

Resistance,  duty  of,  C.  165 

inability,  I.  244 

Resolution,  stern,  in  face  of  danger,  I.  399 

Ruins,  man  in,  I.  199 

Resolutions,  our  good,  how  best  to  promote 

Rule  and  preferment,  service  road  to,  C.  338 

accomplishment  of,  H.  511 

important,  H.  258 

Response,  man's,  Christ's  call  and,  H.  102 

Ruler  of  storm,  C.  166 

Responsibility,  I.  465 

rich  young,  H.  360 

gospel,  C.  628 

Responsible  for  faith,  C.  165 

Sabbath  and  its  Lord,  H.  76 

Rest  after  work,  H.  227 

and  Lord's  day,  H.  78 

for  a  while  only,  C.  230 

Christ's  lordship  over,  C.  84 

Rest-day,  benefit  of,  I.  88 

Christians  are  lords  of,  C.  85 

Restoration,  demoniac's,  I.  200 

in  Capernaum,  H.  27 

of  sight,  C.  296 

observance,  reasons  for,  C.  83 

Restored  harmony,  I.  54 

was  made  for  man,  C.  82 

Restorer,  Christ  as,  C.  234 

Sacrament,  benefit  of,  I.  555 

Resurrection,  Christ's  first  appearance  after 

our  last,  feelings  suited  to,  H.  506 

His,  H.  617 

Sacramental  grace,  I.  555 

first  preaching  of,  H.  606 

Sacrifice  and  service,  C.  387 

message  of,  H.  608 

of  all,  C.  376 

nature's  testimony  to,  I.  636 

to  save,  I.  600 

Retirement  for  prayer,  C.  533 

Sacrificial  fire,  true,  C.  347 

from  world,  C.  47 

Sad,  C.  369 

m 


INDEX 


Sadducees,      Christ's     argument     against, 

Seed  saved  by  tempests,  I.  174 

H.  441,  443 

sower  and,  H.  129 

Safety  amid  danger,  C.  629 

Seeds  slumbering,  I.  173 

in  Christ,  C.  164 

Seeking  Saviour,  I.  202 

where  Christ  is,  I.  175 

seeking  soul,    Christ    not  hidden   from, 

Sailors,  thought  for,  I.  247 

C.  266 

Saints,  communion  of,  C.  444 

Seen,  gospel,  though  never  heard,  I.  47 

Saint-worship,  danger  of,  C.  323 

Self,  loving  neighbour  as,  I.  467 

Salt  and  peace,  I.  352 

Self-complacency,  mistaken,  I.  556 

losing  its  savour,  I.  352 

Self-control  and  self-denial,  C.  345 

of  Christian  profession,  H.  343 

and  silence,  I.  598 

of  earth,  Christians,  C.  348 

Self-deception  as  to  one's  character,  C.  368 

Saltless  salt,  C.  347 

Self-delusion,  propensity  of  heart  to,  C.  222. 

Salvation  in  hands  of  God,  C.  372 

Self-denial,  H.  304 

of  man  depends  upon  his  subjection  to 

and  self-control,  C.  345 

rule  of  God,  I.  52 

following  Christ  in,  I.  311 

of  others  by  self-sacrifice,  I.  600 

necessity  of,  H.  297 

spiritual,  C.  163 

power  of,  I.  49 

Sanhedrin,  culpability  of,  C.  549 

Self-evident  truth,  I.  279 

Jesus  before,  H.  545 

Self-interest,  blinded  by,  I.  171 

Satan,  confession  of  sin  hindered  by,  C.  13 

Self-possession,  C.  165 

hinders  men,  C.  136 

Self-sacrifice,  C.  304 

vanquished,  I.  51 

and  ministry,  Christ's,  H.  387 

versus  Satan,  C.  118 

fruitful,  I.  553 

Satans,  we  all  have  our,  I.  310 

reward  of,  I.  311 

Saved,  I.  638 

salvation  of  others  by,  I.  600 

Saving  work,  difficulty  of,  C.  188 

Self-sacrificing  devotion,  I.  600 

Saviour,  compassionate,  C.  276 

Selfish  life  and  spiritual  life  hang  at  opposite 

departing,  H.  620 

ends  of  scale-beam,  C.  305 

seeking,  I.  202 

Senses,  Christ  dishonoured  and  suffering  in 

Saviour's  glory,  revelation  of,  C.  184 

His,  H.  550 

grave,  C.  597 

Sensibility,  Christ's  delicate,  C.  63 

Savour,  salt  losing  its,  I.  352 

Sentiment,  natural,  change  of,  I.  598 

true,  C.  347 

Sepulchre  pious  women  visiting,  H.  603 

Scale-beam,   selfish   life    and   spiritual  life 

Sermons,  how  to  hear,  H.  139 

hang  at  opposite  ends  of,  C.  305 

Servants,  Christ  and  His,  C.  26 

Scourging,  I.  599 

sent  forth ;  Master  rejected,  H.  204 

Scramble,  principle  of,  C.  386 

Service  and  love,  family  of,  C.  122 

Scribe,  Christ's  interview  with,  H.  445 

and  sacrifice,  C.  387 

Scribe's  question,  C.  451 

by-errands  in  God's,  C.  194 

Scribes,  C.  63 

Christian,  Holy  Communion  most  solemn, 

character    and    conduct    of,   denounced, 

H.  520 

H.  460 

Christ's,  freedom  of,  C.  84 

failure  of,  as  teachers,  C.  32 

humble,  H.  405 

questioning,  C.  330 

law  of,  I.  400 

Scripture,  fulfilment  of,  at  Crucifixion,  C.  588 

life  as,  I.  399 

fulness  of,  C.  443 

loving,  Christ  honouring,  H.  492 

Sea,  Christ  walking  on,  H.  236 

mutual,  C.  386 

Jesus  walked  on  the,  direction  of  wind 

no  loss,  I.  172 

when,  I.  245 

road  to  preferment  and  rule,  C.  338 

of  Galilee,  C.  25,  162 ;  I.  53 

routine,  I.  278 

Search  for  fruit,  Christ's,  I.  429 

Services,  incidental,  to  men,  C.  70 

Season,  at  the,  I.  463 

Seven,  consecration  of  one  day  in,  C.  83 

Seasons  of  trial,  times  of  preparation,  H.  593 

Severe  word,  encouragement  from,  C.  268 

Seclusion  with  Christ,  C.  230 

Severity  or  patience  ?  C.  213 

Second  Advent,  C.  480 

voice  of  Baptist  a  voice  of,  C.  11 

coming,  Christ's,  I.  485 

Shame,  Christ's  companions  in,  C.  588 

Secret,   Christ's  presence   cannot  be    kept, 

Shape  of  cross,  I.  599 

1.85 

She  hath  done  what  she  could,  I.  553 

of  Christ's  influence,  I.  636 

Sheep  scattered,  C.  524 

prayer,  C.  536 

Shepherd,  Christ  as,  H.  524 

work,  C.  197 

needed  in  all  human  societies,  C.  234 

Secrets,  Divine,  C.  325 

Ship,  Christ  teaching  in,  H.  131 

Seed,  emblem  of,  for  God's  Word,  C.  135 

Shortcomings,  friendship's,  H.  118 

must  be  genuine,  C.  135 

Shrinking  from  commission  of  the  sin,  I.  124 

of  goodness,  sowing,  C.  135 

Sick,  Christian  treatment  of,  C.  630 

G67 


INDEX. 


Sick  souls,  Christ's  message  to,  C.  64 

Sitting  at  receipt  of  custom,  H.  69 

Sickle,  God's,  C.  155 

Six  days,  after,  C.  320 

Sickness  and  the  soul,  C.  44 

Skandala,  C.  346 

Sidon,  Tyre  and,  I.  280 

Sleep  and  death,  I.  203 

Sigh,  Christ's  look,  and  word,  H.  276 

image  of  death,  H.  197 

Lord's  deep,  H.  290 

power  of,  I.  558 

Sight,  clearing  of,  H.  294 

Sleeping,  only,  I.  202 

foundations  out  of,  C.  239 

Slight    mention,    why    such,     of    Christ's 

more  needed  than  signs,  C.  289 

ascension  ?  C.  633 

not  conducive  to  faith,  C.  590 

value  of  popular  demonstrations,  I.  429 

obscured  by  trivial,  I.  309 

Slumbering  seeds,  I.  173 

restoration  of,  C.  296 

Small  beginnings,  much  result  from,  I.  553 

Sign,  asking  a,  I.  308 

great  things  from,  I.  173 

of  summer's  approach,  I.  485 

Snow,  beauty  of,  I.  348 

refused,  H.  288 

Social  questions,  Church  and,  C.  233 

Signs  already  given,  neglect  not,  C.  289 

Society,  modern,  leprosies  of,  C.  46 

of  faith,  H.  624 

speculators  of,  C.  221 

of  weak  faith,  H.  163 

Socrates  preparing  way  for  Christ,  I.  48 

sight  more  needed  than,  C.  289 

Soldier,  Christian,  spirit  of,  I.  311 

these,  C.  629 

Soldiers,  mockery  of,  lessons  from,  H.  5 

70 

Signal  instance  of  faith  in  Christ,  C.  44 

Solemnity  of  preaching,  I.  123 

Significance  of  Christ's  ascension,  H.  633 

Solicitation  to  sin,  resist,  C.  225 

royal  entrv  into  Jerusalem,  C.  405 

Solitude,  C.  231 

of  Eucharist,  C.  521 

led  into,  C.  295 

Silence  and  self-control,  I.  598 

Son  known  and  rejected,  C.  436 

enjoined,  H.  198 

mission  of,  C.  435 

of  Jesus,  C.  564 

of  God  mocked  and  wounded,  H. 

568; 

often  more  effective  than  speech,  I.  558 

1.599 

reasons  for,  H.  326 

nailed  to  cross,  H.  573 

submissive,  C.  327 

strong,  C.  10 

under  misconception,  C.  565 

title,  C.  10 

Silent,  be,  H.  42 

of  man,  C.  84 

partners,  no,  I.  315 

among  children  of  men,  H.  359 

Simon  Cyrenian,  H.  584 

even,  C.  387 

Peter,  C.  104,  105 

Song,  affliction  producing,  I.  556 

Simplicity  and  plainness  of   Christ  in  His 

Sorrow  apart  from.  Christ,  C.  369 

prayers,  C.  538 

God  often  last  resource  of,  C.  194 

Christ's,  in  miracle-working,  C.  196 

Sorrows  of  war,  I.  484 

Sin  against  Holy  Ghost,  H.  109,  114 

Sought  out,  C.  196 

confession  of,  H.  12 

Soul  chief  concern,  I.  313 

conscience  darkened  by,  C.  226 

Christ's  agony  of,  on  account  of  sin,  C 

.534 

destructive  character  of,  I.  200 

God's  vineyard,  C.  434 

distress  of,  C.  195 

incapacitated  for  repentance,  C.  119 

duty  of  reproving,  C.  222 

loss  of,  H.  301 

eternal,  I.  124 

loving  God  with,  C.  453 

forgiveness  of,  C.  63 

one  thing  may  keep,  from  eternal 

life, 

growth  of,  I.  56 

I.  396 

has  its  source  in  heart,  I.  279 

paralysis  of,  I.  124 

legion  of,  C.  186 

sickness  and  the,  C.  44 

madness  of,  C.  185 

that  may  be  lost,  C.  307 

origin  of,  I.  279 

window  of,  eye,  C.  262 

present  pardon    for,   taught   by    Christ, 

without  Spirit,  I.  49 

C.  63 

world  and,  H.  306 

resist  solicitation  to,  C.  225 

worth  of,  H.  306  ;  I.  313,  314 

struggle  to  get  rid  of,  C.  185 

Soul's  need  met  by  Christ,  C.  63 

the,  shrinking  from  commission  of,  I.  124 

Souls,  Christ's  eagerness  to  reach,  C.  38 

Sins  of  communities,  C.  187 

to  feed  hungry — mission  of  Church,  C 

.417 

of  infirmity,  nature  and  kinds  of,  H.  530 

Soul-healing  first,  C.  62 

punishments  proportionable  to,  H.  208 

Soul-sickness,  C.  195 

Sincerity     or     knowledge,     loose      casuist 

Soul-sight,  I.  400 

generally  wants  either,  C.  356 

Sound  foundation  for  religious  belief,  C. 

368 

Sinners,  all  are,  I.  88 

Source  of  healing,  Christ,  not  means,  C. 

295 

drawn  to  Christ,  I.  87 

of  supernatural  power,  C.  421 

God  welcomes,  I.  87 

sin  has  its,  in  heart,  I.  279 

not  righteous,  but,  H.  67 

Sower  and  seed,  H.  129 

treatment  due  to  Christ  from,  C.  435 

ground  which  disappointeth  not,  C,  137 

G68 


INDEX. 


Sower,  parable  of,  H.  128  ;  C.  132 

Striking  coincidence,  I.  309 

Sowing  broadcast,  C.  135 

Strong  Son  of  God,  C.  10 

twofold,  C.  135 

Struggle  to  get  rid  of  sin,  C.  185 

Word,  I.  168 

Stumbling-blocks,  C.  346 

Spake  same  words,  I.  558 

Sublime,  common  life,  T.  351 

Speculators  of  society,  C.  221 

Submission  to  will  of  God,  C.  536 ;  I.  557 

Speech,  silence  often  more  effective  than, 

Submissive  silence,  C.  327 

1.558 

Substance  of    things    hoped    for,  faith   is, 

understanding  must  precede,  C.  336 

C.  423 

Spell  of  example,  I.  311 

Success,  crowds  are  not  proofs,  but  means 

Spirit,  anger  drives  away,  C.  424 

of,  C.  99 

dumb,  C.  330 

Suddenness  of  life's  storms,  C.  162 

form  and,  C.  75 

Sufferer's  support,  cross,  I.  600 

in  which  to  meet  trials  of  life,  C.  524 

Suffering,  first  week  of,  on  disciples'  part, 

in  which  to  study  nature,  I.  166 

C.  320 

need  of,  I.  50 

obedience  learnt  by,  C.  537 

of  Christian  soldier,  I.  311 

use  of,  I.  399 

of  doubt  is  spirit  of  weakness,  C.  422 

Sufferings  and  glory  intimately  connected, 

soul  without,  I.  49 

C.  335 

unclean,  essence  of  pollution,  I.  54 

more  explicit  prediction  of,  H.  334 

zealous,  C.  118 

Sufficiency,    apostolic,     Divine    source    of, 

Spirits,  unclean,  C.  32,  34 

C.  473 

Spiritual  and  worldly  vocations   of   Chris- 

Sum of  revelation,  Christ,  C.  326 

tians,  C.  26 

Summer's  approach,  sign  of,  I.  485 

exaltation,  C.  303 

Sun  makes  stars  more  glorious,  C.  323 

from  temporal  to,  C.  103 

Sunday,  Continental,  a  failure,  C.  83 

growth,  H.  148 

Superficial  reading  prejudicial,  C.  82 

impression,  no,  I.  168 

Supernatural  power,  source  of,  C.  421 

influences,   children    are    specially    sus- 

Superstition and  unbelief,  C.  222 

ceptible  of,  H.  359 

not,  but  faith,  C.  196 

kindred,  Christ's,  C.  121 

Support  by  companionship,  I.  242 

life  and  selfish  life  hang  at  opposite  ends 

Divine,  man's  need  of,  H.  509 

of  scale-beam,  C.  305 

Supremacy  of  good,  faith  in,  faith  in  God 

difficult  conditions  of,  H.  296 

means,  C.  422 

matters,  dulness  in,  C.  258 

Surprises,  Divine,  C.  152 

nourishment,  I.  554 

Suspicious  blandishments,  C.  440 

salvation,  C.  163 

Symbol  of  cross,  I.  310 

strength,  C.  184 

of  moral  purification,  C.  13 

temple,  C.  472 

Symbolic  teaching  of  miracle,  C.  45 

world,  growth  in,  C.  154 

Sympathy,  Christ's  craving  for,  C.  535 

Spiritually  disturbed  consciousness,  H.  33 

mutual,  I.  557 

Spread  of  Christ's  influence,  C.  634 

nature's,  with  her  Lord,  I.  601 

Stages  of  faith,  I.  430 

with  Christ's  ministers,  H.  341 

Stars,  sun  makes,  more  glorious,  C.  323 

with  multitude,  I.  245 

Startling  message,  I.  49 

Synagogue  of  ambition,  I.  467 

State,  Church  and,  C.  440 

Syro-phcenician  woman,  H.  262 

Stern  resolution  in  face  of  danger,  I.  399 

Stings  of  conscience,  I.  243 

Talitha  cumi,  C.  198 

Stone,  Christ  is  to  His  Church  a,  C.  437 

Talkativeness  great  evil,  I.  57 

rolled  away,  H.  613 

Taunts  of  unbelievers,  C.  117 

which  builders  rejected,  H.  433  ;  C.  436 

Teacher,   authoritative,   and    his    audience, 

who  shall  roll  us  away  ?  H.  612 

H.  32 

Storm,  Christ  in,  C.  165 

Christian,  duties  of,  H.  158 

no  refuge  from,  I.  169 

Teachers,  failure  of  scribes  as,  C.  32 

on  lake,  H.  159 

Teaching,  Christ's,  nature  of,  C.  144 

Ruler  of,  C.  166 

dogmatic,  C.  46 

Storms,  asleep  amid,  C.  163 

enforced  by  personal  religious  character, 

Christ's  presence  causes,  C.  162 

C.  32 

life's,  suddenness  of,  C.  162                      , 

popular,  of  Jesus  Christ,  H.  126 

Story  helps  truth,  I.  167 

symbolic,  of  miracle,  C.  45 

Strain  of  constant  publicity,  C.  117 

with  authority,  H.  32 

Strange  places,  God  often  calls  men  in,  I.  86 

Tears  of  contrition,  C.  552 

Strangled,  I.  170 

Tell  no  man  of  Him,  C.  303 

Strength,  loving  God  with,  C.  453 

what  Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  I.  201 

of  gentleness,  Christ  comes  in,  C.  19 

Tempests,  seed  saved  by,  I.  174 

spiritual,  C.  184 

Temple  authorities,  Christ  and,  H.  426 

669 


INDEX. 


Temple,  Christ  resorting  to,  C.  419 

cleansing  of,  H.  418 

destruction  of,  H.  470 

spiritual,  C.  472 
Temporal  to  spiritual,  from,  C.  103 
Temptation  and  triumph,  last,  C.  591 

following  on  privileges,  I.  51 

our  Lord's,  three  prominent  points   in, 
C.  20 

to  deny  Christ  before  men,  C.  550 
Temptations,  great,  I.  51 

troops  of,  C.  185 
Tempted,  Jesus  was,  H.  19 

like  as  we  are,  I.  51 
Tender  tone,  words  with,  C.  268 
Terrible  text,  I.  124 
Test  of  relationship  is  life,  I.  125 

usefulness,  sole,  C.  417 
Testimony  before  kings,  I.  244 

Christ's,  to  Himself,  C.  549 

involuntary,  to  Divinity  of  Christ,  I.  601 

nature's,  to  Kesurrection,  I.  636 

of  adversaries  to  Christ,  C.  440 

of  Baptist,  Christ's  appeal  to,  C.  428 

of  demons,  C.  99 

to  Jesus,  I.  201 

use  and  abuse  of,  C.  46 
Testing  lesson  in  faith,  C.  616 
Text,  terrible,  I.  124 
Thankful  heart,  C.  189 
Thomas,  C.  106 
Thorns,  crown  of,  H.  571,  572 
Thought,  Christ's  independence  of,  C.  32 

dissipated,  I.  169 

for  sailors,  I.  247 

leading  to  penitence,  H.  551 
Thoughts,  C.  259 

evil,  C.  260 ;  I.  280 
Three  chosen  apostles,  C.  320 

determined  and  most  mischievous  powers, 
working  of,  C.  97 

groups  of  apostles,  C.  104 

kinds  of  unprofitable  hearers,  I.  169 

miracles,  H.  99 

prominent  points  in  our  Lord's  tempta- 
tion, C.  20 
Threefold  mark  of  new  life,  H.  75 
Throne  for  ministering  Christ,  I.  400 
Throngs,  great,  how  did  Christ  exercise  His 

influence  over  ?  C.  99 
Time,  folly  of  sacrificing  eternity  to,  I.  314 

need  of  our,  is  for  voices,  C.  10 
Times    of    preparation,     seasons    of    trial, 

H.  593 
Timid  woman's  touch,  H.  190 
Title  on  cross,  H.  576 

Son  of  God,  C.  10 
Toil,  I.  247 
Toilers,  I.  247 
Tolerates,  God  does  by  no  means  authorise 

everything  which  He,  C.  356 
Tomb  of  Jesus,  empty,  C.  614 

of  wealthy  Jew,  C.  613 
Tombs,  I.  199 
Tongue  loosed,  I.  282 

untied,  ears  open  before,  C.  276 

670 


Total  renunciation,  I.  395 

Touch,  Christ's  healing,  H.  41  ;  C.  45 

timid  woman's,  H.  190 

two  kinds  of,  C.  196 
Touching  Christ,  H.  242 

the  Lord,  H.  238 
Tradition  of  elders,  C.  256,  257 

of  men,  H.  249 
Traffic  in  holy  places,  I.  429 
Tragedy  of  Pilate's  life,  C.  566 
Training,  Christ's,  C.  241 
Traitor  among  twelve,  H.  514 
Transfiguration,  H.  316,  321 ;  I.  348 
Transfigurations    not    to  be    talked    about, 

C.  327 
Transforming     influence     of     Christianity, 

1.200 
Treachery,  kiss  of,  C.  542 
Treasure  only  for  pure,  I.  172 
Treasury,  Church,  H.  461 
Treatment,  Christian,  of  sick,  C.  630 

due  to  Christ  from  sinners,  C.  435 

of  enemies,  Christian,  I.  431 

of  poor,  I.  400 
Tree,  man  and,  C.  296 

useless,  H.  407 
Trial  and  deliverance  work  together,  H.  162 

seasons  of,  times  of  preparation,  H.  593 

to  perseverance,  persecution,  C.  474 
Trials  and  reward  of  missionary,  H.  375' 

not  always  calamities,  C.  164 

of  life,  spirit  in  which  to  meet,  C.  524 
Tribute  money,  question  as  to,  H.  437 
Triumph,  final,  of  Christianity,  I.  639 

last  temptation  and,  C.  591 

of  gospel,  I.  174 
Triumphal  procession,  I.  429 
Trivial,  sight  obscured  by,  I.  309 
Trodden  heart,  I.  169 
Troops  of  temptations,  C.  185 
Trouble,  C.  538 
True  and  false  power,  I.  396 

disciple    always    knows    where   to   find 
Master,  C.  37 

family  of  Jesus,  H.  121 

greatness,  C.  338 

honours,  no,  are  lightly  won   in   either 
earth  or  heaven,  C.  385 

King  and  His  counterfeit,  H.  560 

pastor  is  never  weary  of  instructing  his 
people,  C.  356 

preacher  Divine  creation,  I.  636 

religion,  C.  452 

repentance,  H.  213 

savour,  C.  347 
Trust,  Christ  inspires,  C.  44 

mundane,  a  barrier,  H.  370 
Truth,   difficult    to   explain,   to    unspiritual 
people,  I.  309 

divides  men,  C.  421 

Divine,  needs  attention,  C.  133 

faith  in  power  of,  I.  174 

forgotten,  C.  136 

in  mockery,  H.  589 

parable  mode  of  conveying,  I.  167 

self-evident,  I.  279 


INDEX. 


Truth,  story  helps,  I.  167 

Twain,  they,  shall  be  one  flesh,  I.  394 

Twelve  apostles,  sending  forth  of,  C.  212 

choice  and  commission  of,  H.  100 

Judas  among,  C.  107 

traitor  among,  H.  514 
Two  and  two,  C.  212 

aspects  of  life,  I.  246 

disciples,  Christ's  appearance  to,  H.  618 

fires,  C.  347 

horizons,  C.  480 

kinds  of  touch,  C.  196 

prayers,  H.  182 

views  taken  of  same,  case,  C.  196 

wishes,  Christ's,  C.  537 
Twos,   Jesus    sends   out   His   disciples    by, 

C.  212 
Twofold  aspect  of  repentance,  I.  48 

earthly     companionship     of      disciples, 
foundation  for  higher,  C.  26 

sowing,  C.  135 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  I.  280 

why  did  Christ  leave,  and  go  again 
to  Galilee?  H.  276 

Unable  to  come  to  Christ,  C.  239 
Unbelief,  H.  163 ;  C.  210 

and  superstition,  C.  222 

Christ's     victory     over      feeble-minded, 
H.  162 

helped,  C.  332 

nature,  causes,  and  effects  of,  H.  211 

of  apostles,  C.  626 

unreasonable,  I.  636 

which  comes  between    us    and    Christ, 
C.  212 
Unbelievers,  taunts  of,  C.  117 
Unclean  spirit  essence  of  pollution,  I.  54 

spirits,  C.  32,  34 
Uncleanness,  inveterate  habit  of,  C.  184 
Uncoined  charity,  C.  462 
Uncomfortable  situation  of  blind,  H.  391 
Unconscious  fame,  C.  462 
Understand,  why  it  is  we  do  not,  C.  291 
Understanding  must  precede  speech,  C.  336 
Unguarded  places  most   liable    to    attack, 

I.  559 
Unity  of  God,  C.  453 
Universal  belief  in  immortality,  I.  466 

charity,  motives  to,  C.  456 

fault,  ambition  a,  C.  338 
Unpardonable  sin  as  to  body,  I.  124 
Unprofitable  hearers,  C.  143 
three  kinds  of,  I.  169 
Unpromising,  but  not  hopeless,  I.  169 
Unreasonable  demand,  C.  290 

unbelief,  I.  636 
Unrecorded  workers  and  heroes,  H.  101 
Unsatisfying,  world,  I.  312 
Unsettled  times,  insecurity  of  life  in,  I.  463 
Unspiritual  people,  difficult  to  explain  truth 

to,  I.  309 
Unwomanly  women,  I.  244 
Unworthy    receivers,    Christ's    presence    in 

Eucharist  to,  C.  521 
Use  and  abuse  of  testimony,  C.  46 


Use  of  leisure,  H.  230 
Usefulness,  H.  142 

Christian,  H.  340 

power  of,  destroyed,  C.  95 

promise  of,  C.  630 

sole  test,  C.  417 
Useless  tree,  H.  407 

Vain,  grace  of  God  received  in,  C.  519 
Value    of   popular   demonstrations,    slight, 
I.  429 

of  soul,  I.  314 
Varying  yields,  C.  137 
Veil  of  allegory,  C.  134 

rent,  H.  581 ;  C.  592 
Veiled  cross,  H.  590 
Vice  respects  virtue,  C.  223 
Victory,  Christ's,  over  feeble-minded  unbelief, 

H.  162 
Views  of  Christ,  comprehensive,  I.  309 
Vigilance,  importance  of,  I.  486 
Vineyard,  God's,  soul,  C.  434 

husbandmen  and,  H.  432 
Virtue,  vice  respects,  C.  223 
Virtuous,  Christ  loves,  C.  369 
Vision  withdrawn,  C.  325 
Visit,  family,  C.  120 

Visitation,  Divine,  preparation  for,  H.  10 
Vitality  of  Word,  I.  169 
Vocations,  Christian  and  ecclesiastical,  C.  26 

of  Christians,  spiritual  and  worldly,  C.  26 
Voice,  God's,  in  common  things,  I.  559 

not  echo,  John  Baptist,  C.  10 

of  Baptist  a  voice  of  severity,  C.  11 
Voices,  need  of  our  time  is  for,  C.  10 
Voluntary  limitation  of  knowledge,  Christ's, 
C.  481 

Wail  in  woe,  C.  518 

Waiting  is  harder  duty  than  doing,  I.  122 

on  Christ,  H,  286 
Want  and  faith  not  to  be  silenced,  C.  392 

of  consideration,  C.  241 

of  root,  I.  170 

what  is  your  ?  I.  401 
Wants,  our,  Christ's  care,  C.  288 

to  Christ,  bring  your,  C.  269 
War,  sorrows  of,  I.  484 
Warning  against  formality  and  indifference, 
H.  290 

fruitful,  C.  478 

promise,  and  encouragement,  H.  471 
Washings,  rabbinical,  C.  256 
Waste,   all  is  not    waste  that  looks    like, 
C.499 

false  estimates  of,  I.  553 

no,  in  God's  work,  C.  287 

profusion  is  not  necessarily,  C.  498 
Watch  and  pray,  H.  483  ;  I.  485 

command  to,  H.  481 

on,  I.  487 

one  hour,  couldest  not  thou  ?  C.  537 
Watchfulness  constantly  needed,  I.  487 

duty  of,  enforced,  H.  483 

fidelity  and,  C.  483 

reasons  for,  H.  484 

671 


INDEX. 


Watching  and  prayer,  C.  538  ;  I.  557 

hour  of,  H.  528 
Watchword,  Christ's,  Kepent,  I.  52 
Water,  cup  of  cold,  I.  352 
Way  of  cross,  C.  381 ;  I.  399 

to  heaven,  repentance,  I.  49 

to  Jerusalem,  on,  H.  377 ;  C.  381 

to  life,  cross,  C.  305 
Ways,  parting  of  the,  H.  566 
Wayside,  by,  C.  135 
Weak  faith,  signs  of,  H.  163 

use  of,  I.  349 
Weakness  and  difficulties  of  doubt,  H.  415 

greatness  and,  of  man,  C.  184 

of  human  nature,  inherent,  I.  599 

Pilate's,  C.  567 

spirit  of,  spirit  of  doubt  is,  C.  422 
Wealth,  giver  of,  forgotten,  I.  398 
Wealthy  Jew,  tomb  of,  C.  613 
Weapons,  worldly,  C.  543 
Weigh  calls,  C.  121 
Weight,  not  length,  prayers  judged  by,  I.  468 

of  riches,  I.  397 
Well,  He  hath  done  all  things,  H.  274;  C.  276 
What  manner  of  man  is  this  ?  C.  166  ;  I.  175 
What  then  ?  I.  313 
Wheat,  grain  of,  Word  of  life  in  figure  of, 

H.  152 
Whence,  from  ?  I.  308 
Wicked,  characteristics  of,  C.  33 

husbandmen,  C.  434 

joy  of,  C.  500 
Widow's  gift,  greatness  of,  H.  461 

mites,  I.  468 
Widows'  houses,  devourer  of,  I.  467 
Wife  and  husband,  C.  357 
Wild  beasts  and  angels,  Christ  with,  H.  20 
Wilful  blindness  and  its  retributive  judgment, 

C.  427 
Will  be  done,  Thy,  I.  557 

of  God,  submission  to,  C.  536  ;  I.  557 
Will-power,  I.  399 
Wind,  direction  of,  when  Jesus  walked  on 

the  sea,  I.  245 
Winds  in  God's  hands,  I.  175 
Window  of  soul,  eye,  C.  262 
Wine  mingled  with  myrrh,  C.  587 
Winter  flight,  horrors  of,  I.  485 
Wise  economy,  I.  245 
Wishes,  Christ's  two,  C.  537 
Withdrawal,  Christ's,  C.  47 
Withered  fig  tree,  C.  421 

hand  restored,  H.  90 

hearts  and  hands,  C.  95 
Witness,  false,  through  misapprehension  of 

words,  C.  549 
Woe,  wail  in,  C.  518 
Woman,  Syro-phcenician,  H.  262 
Woman's  devotion  to  Christ,  H.  497 

faith,  H.  194 

ministry  to  Christ,  C.  593 

touch,  timid,  H.  190 
Women  at  Crucifixion,  C.  593 

earnestness  of,  C.  611 

journey  of,  H.  612 

pious,  visiting  sepulchre,  H.  603 

672 


Women,  unwomanly,  I.  244 
Wonderful  beginning,  C.  9 
Word  choked,  C.  136  ;  I.  170 

Christ's  look,  sigh,  and,  H.  276 

cured  by,  C.  34 

God's,  emblem  of  seed  for,  C.  135 

of  life  in  figure  of  grain  of  wheat,  H.  152 

power  of,  I.  638 

sowing,  I.  168 

vitality  of,  I.  169 
Words  applicable  to  nations,  C.  628 

Christ's,  permanence  of,  H.  481 

misapplication  of,  false  witness  through, 
C.  549 

spake  same,  I.  558 

with  tender  tone,  C.  268 
Work  and  prayer,  mutual  relations  of,  H.  35 

as  we,  God  works,  C.  96 

association  in,  C.  27 

earnestness  in,  I.  123 

for  all,  I.  486 

love  best  motive  for,  C.  498 

prayer  before,  C.  27 

rest  after,  H.  227 

secret,  C.  197 

this  life  time  for,  I.  486 
Works,  Godlike,  I.  55 

out  of  ordinary  course,  C.  235 
Workers  and  heroes,  unrecorded,  H.  101 

Christian,  encouragement  for,  H.  154 
Working  for  Christ,  joy  of,  I.  486 

of    three    determined    and    most    mis- 
chievous powers,  C.  97 
World  and  soul,  H.  306 

as  law  of  life,  C.  307. 

Christ  was  intended  for  whole,  C.  571 

Christless,  C.  188 

hope  to,  healing  of  leper  sign  of,  H.  46 

in  God's  hands,  I.  175 

judgment  of,  C.  221 

retirement  from,  C.  47 

this,  Christian's  gain  in,  C.  377 

unsatisfying,  I.  312 

wants  us,  C.  330 

watches  Christians,  I.  122 
World's  estimate  of  Christ,  H.  303 
of  Christian  zeal,  I.  123 

mystery,  cross  explains,  I.  600 

reception  of  Christ,  I.  599 
Worldly,  amiability  among,  I.  396 

and  spiritual  vocations  of  Christians,  C.  26 

weapons,  C.  543 
Worldly-mindedness,  H.  364 
Worm  of  remorse,  C.  347 

that  dieth  not,  I.  352 
Worship,  false,   zeal    and   diligence  in,  no 
ground  of  comfort,  H.  254 

insincerity  in,  H.  253 

public,  advantage  of  liturgy  in,  H.  412 
Worth  of  Christianity,  evidence  to,  I.  123 

of  soul,  H.  306 ;  I.  313,  314 
Worthless  hearing,  I.  167 
Wrong  done  to  child,  I.  352 
Wrong-doing,  anger  checks,  I.  122 

Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask,  C.  385 


INDEX. 


Yields,  varying,  C.  137 

Young  man  in  linen  cloth,  H.  540 

Youth,  callousness  in,  C.  225 

Zeal,  I.  123 

in  opposing  Christ,  C.  118 


Zeal  in  spreading  gospel,  I.  201 

indiscreet,  C.  340 

missionary,  I.  637 

mistaken,  I.  558 
Zealous  spirit,  C.  118 
Zebedee's  sons,  petition  of,  H.  381 


HOMILIES   FOR   SPECIAL  OCCASIONS. 

Church  Seasons:   Advent,  ch.  xi.  1-11;   xiii.  33-37.     Lent,  ch.  i.  13;   ii.  18-22  ;  vi.  30-32. 

Palm  Sunday,  ch.  xi.  1-11.     Good  Friday,  ch.  x.  45 ;  xiv.  32-42  ;  53-72 ;  xv.  1-15  ;  16-20  ; 

21-41  ;  31;   33.     Easter,  ch.  xvi.   4;   5,  6;  7;  9-18.     St.  Mark's   Day,  ch.  xiv.  51,  52. 

Ascension  Day,  ch.  xvi.  14-18  ;  19,  20.     John  Baptist's  Day,  ch.  i.  1-8 ;  vi.  14-29.     St. 

Matthew's  Day,  ch.  ii.  13-17.     Sabbath,  ch.  ii.  23-28. 
Baptism :  ch.  i.  8  ;  x.  13-16. 
Holy  Communion:  ch.  xiv.  12-31. 
Foreign  Missions  :  ch.  iv.  30-34  ;  x.  28-31 ;  xvi.  15. 
Evangelistic  Services :  ch.  ii.  17  ;  v.  25-34 ;  vii.  24-30 ;  viii.  36,  37. 
Special :  Workers,  ch.  iii.  13-19;  14;  iv.  1-20;  21 ;  xiv.  6-9  ;  xv.  21.     Worship,  ch.  vii.  1-23  ; 

ix.  5 ;  xi.  17.     Quiet  Days,  ch.  vi.  30-32.     Hospital  Sunday,  ch.  i.  21-34  ;  40-45  ;  x.  46. 

Harvest  Festival,  ch.  iv.  26-29.     Marriage,  ch.  ii.  18-22 ;  x.  1-12.     Children,  ch.  ix.  37  ; 

x.  13-16.     Labour  Congress,  ch.  vi.  3a.     Almsgiving,  ch.  xii.  41-44. 


X   X 


673 


DATE  DUE 

AUG  0  S  i486 

If    v     I     , 

Brigham  Young  University 

