THE    L 1  B  R  All"^ 
BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UMVERSITY 

FT?n.rn.  UTAH 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet09newy 


THE    PREACHER'S    COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


BOOKS  OF  CHRONICLES. 


THB 


Ireackers   CcmpleU  f)omikttcal 

OOMMENTAEY 


ON  THE 


OLD    TESTAMENT 

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN). 

aith  dTrttical  anb  (Explauatarg  #oto,  Enbias,  ^^c,  H 


BY 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1892 


v: 


IIOMILETICAL    COMMENTARY 


OlSr  THE  BOOKS  OF 


CHRONICLES. 


BY 

REV.  JAMES   WOLFENDALE. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


^^E    LIS. 

"'■^  VCUNG  v'r^      

'^KOVO,  UTAH  "^^ 


HOMILEriC    COMMENTARY 

ON 

THE    BOOKS    OF    CHRONICLES. 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  two  Books  of  Chronicles,  like  the  Books  of  Kings,  formed  originally  one, 
and  were  divided,  as  in  the  English  Bible,  by  translators  of  the  Septuagint. 
The  division  was  adopted  in  the  Latin  Vulgate  by  Jerome,  whence  it  passed  into 
various  branches  of  the  Western  Church.  In  Hebrew  the  title  is  Dih-rey  hay- 
yamim,  meaning  *'  The  acts  of  the  days  "  (acta  not  verba  dierum),  a  title  applied 
to  accounts  which  historians  wrote  of  kings.  A  daily  record,  a  sort  of  "  Court 
Journal,"  was  usual  at  Oriental  palaces  (see  Esth.  ii.  23 ;  vi.  1  ;  x;  2),  of.  Speak. 
Com.  The  Books  record  the  leading  incidents  of  the  times.  The  term  chronicon 
was  suggested  by  Jerome,  as  equivalent  to  the  Hebrew  title ;  and  this  in  the 
plural  form,  chronica  or  chronicorum  liber^  was  adopted  in  some  editions  of  the 
Vulgate,  whence  the  English  translators  took  it. 

The  Author.  Ascribed  to  Ezra  generally.  Its  close  connection  with  the  book  of 
Ezra  is  very  apparent.  "  The  same  spirit  breathes  through  both,  and  numerous 
little  expressions,  identical  or  nearly  so  in  the  two  works,  indicate  almost  cer- 
tainly the  same  hand.  The  curious  fact,  moreover,  that  the  one  Book  ends  and 
the  other  begins  with  the  same  passage,  suggests  the  same  author,  and  probably 
indicates  that  originally  the  two  books  were  united  and  formed  but  one  work, 
which  it  was  afterwards  thought  better  to  divide  into  two"  (Speak.  Com.), 

The  Date.  Internal  evidence  proves  that  Chronicles  were  written  after  the 
Captivity.  This  opinion  is  supported  by  the  orthography  and  the  nature  of  the 
language  employed,  both  of  which  are  Aramaean  in  complexion,  and  harmonise 
with  books  written  after  the  exile.  "  If  Ezra  was  the  author,  the  date  could  not 
be  much  later  than  B.C.  435,  for  Ezra  probably  died  about  that  time.  There  is 
nothing  in  the  contents  or  style  of  the  work  to  make  the  date  B.C.  450-435 
improbable ;  for  the  genealogy  in  eh.  iii.  23,  24,  which  appears  to  be  later  than 
this,  may  be  a  subsequent  addition  "  (Speak.  Com.). 

The  Style.  The  work  is  one,  a  record  of  annals,  a  supplement  of  former 
historic  books.  The  Septuagint  designates  the  work  Paraleipomena,  things  left 
out  or  unnoticed.  We  have  repetitions  of  Samuel  and  Kings,  and  important 
supplements  to  fill  up  earlier  narratives.  A  high  value  is  set  upon  "  Levitical 
spirit,"  that  is,   regard   to  externals  in  religion.     Its  history  has  been  termed 

1 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


**  ecclesiastical,"  that  of  Samuel  and  Kings  "  political."  In  the  mind  of  the 
writer  the  religious  establishment  is  of  primary,  the  State  of  secondary  import- 
ance (cf. Speak.  Com.).  "  There  are  three  principal  features — (a)  a  greater  tendency 
to  dwell  on  the  ritual,  on  the  details  of  the  Temple  worship,  the  various  functions 
of  the  Priests  and  Levites,  the  arrangement  of  the  courses  and  the  like ;  {h)  a 
marked  genealogical  bias,  and  desire  to  record  names  of  persons  engaged  in 
events  narrated  ;  (c)  a  more  constant,  open,  and  direct  ascription  of  all  the  events 
of  history  to  Divine  agency,  and  especially  a  more  plain  reference  of  every  great 
calamity  or  deliverance  to  the  good  or  evil  deeds  of  the  monarch,  or  the  nation, 
which  Divine  Providence  so  punished  or  rewarded  f^cf.  Speak.  Com.). 

The  Object.  It  is  historical,  yet  the  writer  seems  to  forget  former  histories 
and  gives  his  own.  First  to  give  an  entire  history  from  the  very  beginning  to 
meet  the  difficulties  of  the  time — to  preserve  true  genealogies  of  families — and 
since  future  prosperity  depends  upon  the  preservation  of  the  Temple  with  its 
priests  and  service,  he  begins  with  David,  describes  Solomon's  acts,  and  then 
follows  out  the  history  of  Judah  f  not  of  Israel),  and  shows  how  kings  maintained 
its  worship  or  introduced  idolatry,  and  were  rewarded  or  punished  according  to 
their  conduct.  "  It  is  thus  apparent  that  the  object  of  Ezra  in  writing  the 
Books  of  Chronicles  was  to  place  before  the  Jews  such  an  aspect  of  their  past 
history  as  would  show  them  that  from  the  peculiar  constitution  of  their  govern- 
ment as  a  Theocracy,  the  glories  and  decadence  even  of  the  Davidic  monarchy 
were  most  closely  associated  with  the  recognition  of  the  Lord's  presence  by  a 
faithful  maintenance  of  the  worship  which  he  had  ordained  for  that  purpose. 
Such  a  view  of  their  history  was  calculated  to  strengthen  the  religious  element  of 
their  nationality,  to  teach  them  that  their  highest  glory  was  the  special  sovereignty 
of  God  over  them,  and  that  although  that  sovereignty  was  exceptionally  exer- 
cised through  prophets,  its  natural  and  ordinary  manifestation  was  to  be  found 
in  association  with  the  Levitical  system  "  [J.  H.  Blunt]. 

The  Analysis.  Naturally  divided  into  four  parts.  Part  I.  a  series  of 
genealogies  or  a  summary  of  ancient  history  of  man  in  the  line  of  Israel  to 
David.  1  Chr.  i.-ix.  Ch.  i.  from  Adam  to  Israel ;  chs.  ii.-vii.  the  twelve  tribes  of 
Israel;  chs.  viii.— ix.  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  Part  II.  contains  the  history 
of  David's  reign  from  the  death  of  Saul,  partly  agreeing  with  the  account  in  the 
Books  of  Samuel,  yet  with  important  additions  concerning  the  Levites,  chs. 
x.-xxix.  Part  III.,  in  nine  chapters,  comprises  the  reign  of  Solomon,  2  Chr. 
i.-ix.  Part  IV.  gives  a  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah  (while  Israel  remained, 
x.-xxviii. ;  and  after  Israel's  downfall),  especially  in  connection  with  the  worship 
of  God,  xxix.-xxxvi.  The  account  continues  to  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus  author- 
ising the  return  of  the  people  and  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple.  "  There  are 
twenty  whole  chapters  and  twenty-four  parts  of  chapters  occupied  with  matter 
not  to  be  found  in  other  books  of  Scripture.  These  books,  therefore,  are  highly 
important  on  account  of  the  new  material  as  well  as  the  new  aspect  of  things 
which  they  present.** — See  Murphy,  The  Books  of  Chronicles  (Clark). 

"  And  these  are  ancient  things"  (I  Chr.  iv.  22). 


2 


CHAP  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTER    L 

Critical  Notes.]  The  writer  gives  no  explanation  or  introduction,  presumes  upon 
the  knowledge  of  the  reader,  and  simply  enumerates  names  from  Creation  to  the 
Flood,  contained  in  Gen.  v.     The  Deluge,  1,656  years  from  the  creation  of  Adam.. 

Ver^.  1-4. — These  names  embrace  Gen.  i.-ix.,  which  the  reader  is  presumed  to  know. 
This  furnishes  a  principle  of  interpretation  to  other  parts  of  the  book.  The  Hebrew 
pointing  will  often  account  for  the  orthography  of  the  names. 

Vers.  5-7. — List  of  sons  and  grandsons  of  Japheth  {cf.  Gen.  x.,  Noah's  sons  in  order  of 
Genesis  x.  1).  Beginning  with  Japheth,  youngest,  to  dispose  of  what  is  not  exactly 
required,  the  writer  gives  seven  sons — three  through  Gomer,  the  eldest  son,  and  four 
through  Javan,  the  fourth  son. 

Vers.  8-16. — Descendants  of  Ham,  sons,  grandsons,  and  great-grandsons.  Four  sons  of 
Haw;  six  grandsons,  including  Nimrod,  through  Cms/?,  the  eldest  son  of  Ham;  seven 
grandsons  through  Muvatw,  second  son  of  Ham ;  two  great-grandsons  through  Raamah^ 
Gush's  fourth  son  ;  30  altogether. 

Vers.  17-27. — Shem^s  descendants  to  Abraham.  A  pause  half  way  at  the  name  of  Peleg, 
ver.  19,  to  mention  t/ofcfan,  his  brother,  and  then  Joktans  thirteen  sons,  vers.  20-23.  Then 
repeating  the  first  five  names  of  lineal  descent,  and  picking  up  the  thread  at  Peleg,  the 
remaining  five  to  Abraham  are  given  — Gen.  xi.-xvii. — given  as  briefly  as  possible. 
Abraham  the  tenth  from  Noah,  and  twentieth  from  Adam. 

Vers.  28-33. — The  collaterals  of  Isaac.  This  reaches  from  Gen.  xvi.-xxv.  Isaac  put 
first  as  child  of  promise,  though  born  fourteen  years  after  Ishmael  (Gen.  xvii.  25  and 
xxi.  5).  So  Shem  put  first,  though  second  son.  This  must  be  kept  in  mind  in  examina- 
tion of  lists.  From  call  of  Abraham  to  birth  of  Isaac,  thirty  years.  Vers.  29-31  taken 
from  Gen.  xxv.  12-16.  Their  generations,  a  new  starting-point,  modified  £rom 
Gen.  XXV.  12,  to  include  Isaac  as  well  as  IshmaeL  Vers.  82, 33  abridged  from  Gen.  xxv. 
1-4.     The  sons  of  Dedan  omitted  {Murphy). 

Vers.  34-37.  -  Descendants  of  Esau  {cf  Gen.  xxxvi.  10-14).  Timna,  ver.  36,  seems  to  have 
been  concubine  of  Eliphaz  and  Amalek,  another  son  by  her.  Ver.  37,  four  grandsons  of 
Esau  by  Reuel. 

Vers.  38-42. — Descendants  of  Seir.  Seir  probably  a  Shemite,  though  his  relation  is  un- 
recorded {cf.  Murphy).  Twenty-seven  names  given  agree  with  Gen.  xxxvi.  20-27,  except 
for  Homam,  Alian,  Shephi,  Amram,  and  Jakan  we  have  Hemam,  Alvan,  Shepho^  Hemdan, 
and  Akan. 

Vers.  43-50. — The  Kings  of  Edom  {cf.  Gen.  xxxvi.  31-43).  Before  any  king,  before 
Israel  had  any  civil  government,  or  became  a  nation  with  a  king.  There  are  eight 
names,  the  parentage  or  the  land  of  each  given. 

Vers.  51-54.-  The  Dukes  of  Edom.  Eleven  given.  Some  think  a  list  of  places,  not  of 
persons,  compared  with  Gen.  xxxvi.  15,  41,  43.  This  ch.  contains  genealogies  which 
embrace  about  2,300years.  Not  a  remark  given  apparently,  moral,  religious,  or  didactic 
It  connects  Israel  with  Adam,  and  retraces  the  pedigree  of  men  to  its  original  source. 

EOMILETICS. 

Three  Pages  op  Human  History. —  Ver.  1. 

Names  are  potent  things,  represent  mighty  factors,  sustaining  forces  in  life, 
and  important  periods  in  history.  We  are  apt  to  think  genealogies  are  dry, 
and  names  of  no  significance,  but  Scripture  nomenclature  reads  a  diflferent 
lesson.     How  suggestive  the  names  in  ver.  1  1 

I.  The  creation  of  man.  Adam  first  and  representative  of  the  race.  The 
historic  man,  apparently  no  "  prehistoric  man."  The  creation  of  man  a  decree 
and  last  work  of  God,  the  crowning  point  of  all.  In  man,  and  through  man, 
nature  finds  its  purpose  and  transformation.  II.  The  inspiration  of 
hope.  Seth  means  Jlxed,  settled ,  or  compensation.  He  came  in  the  place 
of  Abel  taken  away.  At  birth  of  Cain,  Eve  hasty  in  joy  (I  have  gotten  the 
man) ;  in  Abel  (vanity,  perishable)  desponding ;  in  Seth  confident.  Divino 
I  2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  r. 


power  compensated  for  what  human  cruelty  took  away,  inspired  hope  of 
permanent  blessing.  God  can  wonderfully  comfort.  If  one  gone,  He  can 
give  another.  He  can  strengthen,  establish,  and  perpetuate  the  family  and  the 
Church,  so  that  "  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  them."  III. 
The  beginning  of  public  worship.  Enos  designates  weakness, 
human  frailty,  a  sorrowful  remembrance  of  Abel  (Ps.  viii.  6 ;  xc.  3).  How 
soon  are  hopes  dashed  1  But  God  becomes  great  when  we  feel  small.  "  Then 
began  men  to  call  upon  (proclaim,  announce)  Jehovah  "  (Gen.  iv.  26).  A  new 
Kne  of  promise  in  Enoch  (Enos)  after  line  of  Cain  had  lost  it.  Hope  finds 
expression  in  formal  worship.  The  Sethites  merge  into  a  community,  outline  a 
church,  and  publicly  honour  Jehovah.  In  a  new  race  and  a  believing  generation 
God's  name  ever  presented  with  higher  glory  and  greater  attractions. 

Solemn  Views  op  Human  Life. — Verses  1-4. 

I.  The  beginning  of  human  life.  In  Adam  a  distinct  beginning 
of  humanity  on  earth,  not  as  a  physical  act  merely  or  completion  of  physical 
progress.  It  happened  in  the  supernatural  and  spiritual.  "  Not  merely  forma* 
tion,  animation,  but  direct,  divine  inspiration^'  (Gen.  ii.  7)  \Tayler  Leiois], 
From  the  first  man  spring  all  the  race.  History  and  science  cannot  present  the 
contrary.  "  The  first  man  was  made  a  living  soul."  II.  The  length  oi 
human  life.     Before  the  Flood  men  long-lived  (of.  Gen.  v.).     Accounted  for 

1.  By  natural  causes.     Habits  simple,   food   nutritious,   and   climate   healthy. 

2.  £y  providential  design.  To  establish  institutions,  people  the  earth,  and 
propagate  truth.  III.  The  corruption  of  human  life.  The  Oainitea 
ungodly — first  civilisation  worldly,  art  and  culture  misused,  polygamy  prevails, 
races  intermix,  unbelief  and  Titanic  pride  corrupt  the  race.  "  God  saw  that  the 
wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagination  of  the 
thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually "  (Gen.  vi.  5).  IV.  The 
destruction  of  human  life.  Evil  contagious,  rapidly  spread  and 
deteriorated  the  race.  They  were  Jlesh,  wholly  carnal  or  animal.  *'  He  also  ia 
flesh "  (Gen.  vi.  3).  In  wanton  deeds,  divine  warnings  despised,  the  Holy 
Spirit  grieved.  The  world  ripe  for  judgment.  God  repented,  that  is,  changed 
his  procedure,  not  his  purpose,  concerning  man  (Gen.  vi.  7,  8).     The  Flood  swept 

"  every  Kving  thing  from  off  the  earth."    V.  The  deliverance  of  human 

life.  A  few  were  saved  (1  Pet.  iii.  20).  Noah  and  his  family  preserved,  and 
were  progenitors  of  a  redeemed  race.  God  held  human  life  sacred,  bound  him- 
self by  signs  never  more  to  destroy  it  by  flood.  Noah,  the  last  of  Sethic  race 
and  first  in  the  line  of  Shem,  a  second  ancestor  of  the  human  family.  Man 
rises  to  a  higher  place  in  the  world.  As  a  believer  he  is  saved  from  general 
wreck,  inherits  a  new  earth  purged  from  sin,  and  becomes  heir  of  a  righteous- 
ness by  faith. 

The  Human  Race,  in  its  Unity,  Progress,  and   Declension. — Verses  1-54. 

Glancing  at  these  names,  what  an  insight  into  human  life,  human  activity 
itnd  circumstances  ! 

I.  The  unity  of  the  race.  The  race  not  merely  represented  but  com- 
prehended in  Adam.  "  Made  of  one  (blood)  all  nations  of  men"  (Acts  xvii.  26). 
Mankind  not  "  a  living  sand-heap,"  without  generic  connection.  The  Bible  sees 
in  Adam  **  the  power  of  a  single  life — men  one  before  they  became  many ;  and 
RS  many,  still  one."  One  natural  "fatherhood,"  and  one  ''common  brother- 
hood" in  him.  *' One  touch  of  nature  makes  the  world  kin."  II.  The 
progress  of  the  race.  Every  movement  implies  beginning,  progress,  and 
consummation.     This  makes  history.     1.  In  knowledge.    Not  from  barbarism  at 


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


first,  but  from  supernatural  light  shining  directly  or  indirectly  on  human  steps. 
2.  Jn  arts.  Laniech's  three  sons  authors  of  inventions  (Gen.  iv.  20-23). 
Culture  and  science  as  old  as  humanity.  Barbarism  and  brutality  result  from 
corrupt  civilisation.  3.  In  civil  government.  Cities  built,  states  founded, 
kingdoms  formed,  titles  given,  and  rulers  chosen.  4.  In  population.  Begin- 
ning from  a  single  pair,  in  seven  generations  the  human  family  attained 
considerable  increase.  "  If  Abraham's  stock,  in  less  than  400  years,  amounted 
to  600,000,  Cain's  posterity,  in  the  like  time,  might  arise  to  the  like  multitude  " 
[  Willet\  It  should  remind  of  the  reality  and  power  of  God's  blessing  (Gen.  i.  28). 
5.  In  religion.  Abel's  piety  revived  in  the  godly  Sethites.  **  While  the  family 
of  Cainites,  by  the  erection  of  a  city  and  the  invention  and  development  of 
worldly  arts  and  business,  were  laying  the  foundation  for  the  kingdom  of  this 
world,  the  family  of  the  Sethites  began,  by  united  invocation  of  the  name  of 
the  God  of  grace,  to  found  and  erect  the  kingdom  of  God  "  [^DelitzscK].  Sep.ira- 
tion  from  ungodly  associates  needful.  This,  with  social  worship,  checks 
declension  and  secures  advancement.  III.  The  declension  of  the  race. 
Before  the  Flood,  licentiousness  and  violence,  pride  and  self -gratification.  This 
1.  Seen  in  sinful  tvorks.  Nothing  wrong  to  build  cities,  handle  harps,  and 
cultivate  poetry  and  music.  These  intended  for  the  benefit  of  men,  and  should 
be  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God.  But  sadly  misapplied  when  they  lead  to 
pride  and  forgetfulness  of  God.  2.  Seen  in  ungodly  lives.  Cain,  the  murderer; 
Lamech,  the  polygamist ;  Nimrod,  the  powerful  tyrant  (Gen.  x.  8).  "  The  earth 
was  filled  with  violence."  3.  Seen  in  significant  names.  Qualities,  principles, 
nnd  characteristics  seen  in  names  of  Enoch,  Irad,  Mehujael,  Lamech,  &c. 
(Gen.  iv.  23-26).  Adah  and  Zillah  indicative  of  sensual  attractions.  Learn 
1 13  danger  of  intellect  and  civilisation  separated  from  religion,  the  downward 
progress  of  sin,  and  the  necessity,  in  these  days  of  science  and  mechanical 
invention,  of  steadfastly  fearing  God  and  maintaining  public  worship. 

•'  Grieved  at  his  heart  when,  looking  down,  he  saw 
The  whole  earth  filled  with  violence  "  \^MiUon\, 

Posterity  op  Noah's  Sons. — Verses  5-23. 

I.  The  enemies  of  the  Church.  1.  Sons  of  Japhet  (vers.  5-7  and 
Gen.  X.  2-5).  Trace  the  wide  world- wandering,  in  which  future  generations 
disappear  from  the  theocratic  line.  2.  Sons  of  Ham  (vers.  8-16).  Hamite 
culture  early,  corrupt  and  mixed  with  Cainite  elements.  II.  Allies  of  the 
Church  (vers.  17-23).  In  the  line  of  Shem  we  have  the  gravitation  of 
humanity  to  its  centre,  the  gradual  preparation  for  the  calling  of  Abraham,  and 
for  the  Messianic  descent.  Shem*s  history,  the  last  in  the^  world,  first  in  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

The  Mighty  Hunter. — Verse  10. 

In  the  formal  register  of  Gen.  x.  8—12,  a  brief  account  of  an  individual 
inserted.  A  fact  of  importance,  because  it  concerned  the  Hebrews  to  know 
that  though  their  own  ancestors  came  from  the  region  where  Nimrod  played  so 
conspicuous  a  part,  the  great  kingdom,  afterwards  known  as  Babylon,  was  of 
Cushite,  not  of  Semitic  origin  [Dr.  Dods\  1.  His  descent.  Cusli  begat 
Nimrod.  He  is  put  back  before  the  time  of  Abraham  and  assigned  to  the 
Ethiopian  race.  2.  His  occupation.  "  He  was  a  mighty  hunter."  Hunting  of 
ravenous  beasts  a  benevolent  act  for  the  human  race.  Powerful  huntsmen 
pioneers  of  civilisation,  as  in  the  myth  of  Hercules.  Nimrod,  successful,  became 
a  great  man,  conqueror,  and  rular.  3.  His  extensive  empire  (Gen.  x.  10—12). 
As  a  mighty  hunter,  he  founded  a  powerful  kingdom.  The  founding  of  the 
kingdom   is  shown  to  have  been  the  consequence  or  result  of  his  strength  in 

5 


HOlvULEVlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLE^. 


[chap. 


I. 


hunting,  so  tliat  the  hunting  was  most  intimately  connected  with  the  estabhsli- 
ment  of  the  kingdom.  Figuratively,  he  was  "  a  hunter  of  men"  ('^  a  trapper  of 
men  by  stratagem  and  force,"  Herder),  and  became  a  tyrant  and  oppressor  of 
liberty  (cf.  Keil,  Gen.  x.  9).  4.  His  great  fame.  Recognised  as  mighty;  became 
a  pi'overb,  "  It  is  said,"  &c.  Expression  before  the  Lord  added  as  if  God  himself 
must  take  note  of  Jiis  skill.  Some  think  that  blame  is  intended,  that  his 
notoriety  for  boldness  and  wickedness  is  expressed;  something  so  bad  that  God 
could  not  take  his  eyes  from  it.  Learn  the  responsibility  of  power.  Check  the 
tendency  to  do  homage  to  greatness  which  takes  the  form  of  "  hero-worship." 
Wisely  use  and  not  abuse  the  endowments  entrusted  to  your  care. 

"  O  execrable  son,  so  to  aspire 
Above  his  brethren,  to  himself  assuming 
Authority  usurped,  from  God  not  given  "   [Milton[, 


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 


Genealogies  and  their  use.  1.  In 
helping  Jews  to  identify  their  tribes. 
After  return  from  captivity,  all  con- 
fusion. In  prospect  of  future,  needful 
to  revise  and  reconstruct.  2.  In  illus- 
trating Jewish  History.  Here  and 
there  names  of  great  importance, 
and  significant  of  solemn  crises  of 
history,  3.  In  tracing  the  descent 
of  the  Messiah. 

Vers.  1,  4,  28.  Three  covenants — 
Adam,  Noah,  and  Abraham.  Double 
names  —  Abraham^,  the  natural  and 
spiritual  name ;  Jacob ^  supplanter 
and  jrrince. 

Ver.  10.  Nimrod^ s  threefold  position. 
1.  As  the  pioneer  of  civilisation;  2. 
A'i  oppressor  of  patriarchal  liberties; 
3.  As  the  instrument  of  God  for  the 
development  of  the  world  [^Lange\ 

Ver.  19.  Peleg,  or  Division  of  the 
earth.  Its  time,  method,  design,  and 
commemoration  (Gen.  x.  25). 

Vers.  24-27  (Gen.  xi.).  Other  na- 
tions shaken  off-line  from  Shem  to 
Abraham  given  here.  1.  Ishmaelites 
(vers.  29-31):  12  sons  =  12  princes 
(Gen.  xvii.  20).  2.  Midianites^  children 
of  Keturah  (vers.  32,  33).     3.  Edom- 


ites  (vers.  36-54,  cf.  Gen.  xxxvi.) :  {a) 
Kings  of  Edom  (vers.  43-50) ;  {b) 
Dukes  of  Edom  (vers.  51-54). 

Ver.  47.  Hadad  dead  {cf  ver.  43). 
Notice  1.  Changes  in  earthly  govern- 
ments— "reigned  and  died."  2.  Un- 
certainty of  human  life :  {a)  In  life's 
circumstances,  "  reigned  "  ;  {!))  In  life's 
end,  "  died." 

Vers.  1-54.  In  list  we  find  :  1. 
Progenitors  of  a  new  race.  2.  Foun- 
ders of  great  nations.  Napoleon 
vowed  that  he  would  found  a  family, 
though  not  himself,  of  great  lineage. 
Many  famous  inien :  Adam,  the  first 
man  ;  Methuselah,  the  oldest ;  Lamech, 
polygamist,  musician,  and  poet;  Enoch, 
Noah,  Nimrod,  Abraham,  &c.  Great 
events  :  Creation  of  man  ;  invention  of 
arts ;  translation  of  Enoch ;  fiood  of 
Noah  ;  call  of  Abraham,  &c.  Suggested 
subjects:  "The  Antiquity  of  Man"; 
The  Origin  of  Civilisation  ;  The  Divi- 
sion of  Nations ;  The  Unity  of  the 
Race  ;  The  Foundation  of  the  Israeli tish 
People. 

*'  For  human  weal,  Heaven  husbands  all 
events  "  lYoungl, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  I. 


Ver.  1.  These  chronicles  have  a 
mission.  As  no  star  was  useless  in 
the  heavens,  and  as  eveiy  atom  has 
been  created  for  a  purp)se,  so  God 
would    not  devote   these    rhapters   to 


a  pedigree  without  design.     The  end  ia 
Christ. 

Ver.  1.  Adam.  Every  human  being 
is  a  volume  worthy  to  be  studied,  and 
I  thank  God  that  my  own  lot  is  bound 


CHAP. 


II.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


up  with  that  of  the  human  race 
[Channing\  No  man  can  think  too 
highly  of  his  nature,  or  too  meanly  of 
himself  \Young\ 

Vers.  5-18.  Threefold  division  of 
nations  according  to  the  names  Japheth, 
Ham,  and  Shem.  For  part  played  by 
the  several  races  in  civilisation,  cf.  Fair- 
bairn's  Studies  in  Phil,  of  Religion,  and 
Noah's  prophecy  (Gen.  ix.  25-27).  "  All 
these  sons,  the  white  posterity  of 
Japheth,  the  yellow  and  dark  sons  of 
Ham,  however  they  may  live  in  tem- 
poral separation,  are  all  still  God's 
children,  and  brothers  to  one  another." 

Ver.  27.  Abram.  The  tenth  from 
Noah,  and  the  twentieth  from  Adam. 
The  letter  H,  which  was  added  to  the 
original  name  of  the  patriarch,  occurs 
twice  in  the  sacred  name  of  Jehovah. 
It   was   added,    also,   to   the  name  of 


Sarai.  The  addition  in  each  case 
seems  to  mark  a  new  and  closer  rela- 
tion to  God.  "  And  I  will  write  upon 
him  the  name  of  inyGod  "  \J.H.  Blunt] 
(Gen.  xvii.  5).  The  sacramental  cha- 
racter of  a  name  consists  in  its  divine 
appointment  to  represent  and  com- 
memorate and  testify  some  special 
grace  and  blessing,  and  so  to  be  a 
permanent  pledge  of  its  bestowal. 
Wilkinson,  Personal  Names,  (fee. 

Vers.  44,45.  Bela  dead,  Jobab  reigned 
in  his  stead.  A  great  hand  is  sometimes 
laid  even  on  the  fly-wheel  of  life's 
engine  [George  Macdonald]. 

*'  What  exhibitions  various  hath  the  world 
Witness'd  of  mutability  in  all 
That  we  aecouat  most  durable  below  I 
Change  is  tlie  diet  on  which  all  subsist, 
Created  changeable,  and  change  at  last 
destroys  them  '  [Gowper], 


CHAPTER   II, 


Critical  Notes.]  The  sons  of  Israel.  Names  more  numerous  than  Genesis,  without 
regard  to  order.     Greater  interest  by  filliog  up  former  accounts. 

Vets.  3-12. — Posterity  of  Judah.  Vers.  1,  2,  sons  of  Leah  first ;  sons  of  Rachel  between 
Dan  and  Naphtali  {cf.  Gen.  xxix.-xxxv.).  Vera.  3-8,  Judah  first,  pre-eminent  (Gen.  xlix.  8), 
and  descendants  given  to  third  generation.  Vers.  3,  4,  abridged  from  Gen.  xxxviii.,  and 
ver  5  found  in  Gen.  xlvi.  Vers.  6-8,  descendants  of  Zerah,  Zimri,  Zabdi  in  Josh.  vii.  1  ; 
the  other  four  given  1  Kings  iv.  31 ;  called  "  sons  of  Mahol."  or  *'  sons  of  music."  Achar 
(Achan,  Josh.  vii.  1),  "  troubler."  Ver.  10,  Ram,  first  as  ancestor  of  David.  Line  given 
in  Ruth  iv  18-22.  "  The  five  names  from  Salma  to  David  cover  a  period  of  at  least 
450  years  from  the  Exodus  to  the  birih  of  Solomon." 

Vers.  13-15. — Sotis  of  Jesse.  Three  eldest  (1  Sam.  xvi.  6-9);  next  three  here  only. 
Some  think  Raddai  is  Rei  (1  Kings  i.  8). 

Vers.  18-20. — In  remainder  of  this  ch  the  writer  obtains  scarcely  any  assistance  from 
the  earlier  Scriptures,  and  must  have  drawn  almost  entirely  from  genealogical  sources, 
accessible  to  him,  which  have  since  perished  {Speak.  Com.).  Caleb,  son  of  H.  (ver.  18),  to 
distinguish  him  from  other  Calebs  in  ch.  Hur,  companion  of  Aaron  (Gen.  xvii.  12j. 
Bezaleel,  f&moua  artificer  (Ex.  xxxi.  2). 

Vers,  21-24. — Resumed  reference  to  Hebron.  Jair,  son  of  Manasseh  (Num.xxxii.  41;, 
belonged  to  Judah  by  father's  side,  yet  attached  himself  to  the  house  of  Machir.  His 
wife  an  heiress,  and  her  inheritance  was  to  follow  her  tribe  {cf.  Num.  xxvii.  and  xxxvii.), 
cf.  Murphy.     He  pushed  his  conquests  far  and  wide  (Deut.  iii.  14). 

Vers.  25-41. — A  second  interruption  in  account  of  Caleb's  posterity.  Descendants  ol 
Jerahmeel,  vers.  25-27.  Vers.  28-33,  sons  of  Onan  to  seventh  generation  in  line  of 
Shammai,  to  fourth  in  Jada. 

Vers.  42-49. — Off.-ipring  of  Caleb  resumed,  probably  of  Jerioth,  a  different  mother,  ver. 
18.  Two  concubines  of  Caleb  introduced,  ver.  46-19.  EphaWs  sons  unknown.  Second 
concubine  mother  of  four  or  five  sons  and  a  daughter. 

Vers.  50-55. — A  little  difficulty  in  these  verses.  Some  maintain  only  one  Caleb,  and 
others  that  there  were  several  (cf.  Speak.  Com.).  Ver.  55,  scribes,  civil  or  ecclesiastical 
officers  of  Kenite  origin,  classed  with  Judah,  not  as  descendants,  but  dwelling  in  its 
territory,  intermixed  through  kindly  feeling  and  incorporated  with  them  (Ex.  xviii  10-19 ; 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  n 


Num.  X.  29-32 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  6).    Rechab^  ver.  55,  father  or  progenitor  of  the  Bechabites 
who    retained    to   late  date  nomadio  habits   of   Kenite   ancestors  (c/.  Jer.  xxxv.  10; 


2  Kings  X.  15). 


HOMILETICS. 
The  Twelve  Patriarchs. — Verses  1,  3. 


This  is  a  most  important  register  of  Israel,  who  should  dwell  alone  and  not 
be  reckoned  among  nations.  Notice — I.  The  six  SOns  of  Lieah — Reuben, 
Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar,  and  Zebulon  (Gen.  xxix.  32-35).  Learn — 1.  God^s 
grace  in  LeaKs  fruitfvlness.  Leah  loved  less  than  Rachel  (Deut.  xxi.  15). 
God  works  above  human  thoughts,  neither  to  compensate  Leah  for  lack  of 
Jacob's  love,  nor  to  punish  Jacob  for  sinful  partiality ;  but  to  manifest  sovereign 
power,  to  teach  that  children  are  a  heritage  from  him,  and  to  indicate  his  pur- 
pose in  fixing  the  line  of  promise,  not  by  the  fruit  of  nature,  but  the  gift  of 
grace.  2.  LeaKs  gratitude  expressed  in  names  of  her  sons — Reuben,  behold 
a  son ;  Simeon,  hearing ;  Levi,  joined ;  Judah,  praise.  "  God  hath  endued 
me  with  a  good  dowry"  (Gen.  xxx.  20).  II.  The  two  SOns  of 
Kachel — Joseph  and  Benjamin.  1 .  In  Joseph  reneioed  faith  ;  reproach  taken 
away,  an  expression  of  spiritual  life  and  dependence,  not  on  human  device 
(mandrakes),  but  on  God  for  offspring  and  help.  2.  In  Joseph  revived  hope, 
"  He  shall  add  "  another  son  (Gen.  xxx.  24).  Grateful  for  one,  she  expects  God 
will  give  another.  Experience  of  divine  faithfulness  a  great  help  in  looking  to 
the  future.  *'  Experience  (worketh)  hope,  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed." 
The  wish  was  realised,  but  she  died  in  Benjamin's  birth.  The  fulfilment  of  our 
wishes  may  be  dangerous  and  fatal. 

A  Family  History. — Verses  3-12. 

In  this  record  of  Judah,  as  in  all  families,  a  record  bright  and  cheering,  dark 
and  disgraceful. 

I.  A  record  of  family  shame.  Some  were  wicked,  guilty  of  abomin- 
able crimes.  1.  Sin  ending  with  untimely  death.  Er's  wickedness  great,  a 
special  sin  in  Israel's  descendants,  a  defiance  of  God  and  his  word  to  make 
them  a  numerous  nation.  Onan  refused  to  raise  up  children  in  his  brother's 
name.  An  indication  of  his  envious  disposition  and  vile  pollution  of  body. 
Both  displeased  the  Lord,  and  were  cut  ofi*  by  untimely  death.  Many,  it  is 
feared,  act  in  the  same  way — dishonour  body  and  destroy  soul  (Gen.  xxxviii. 
8-10).  2.  Sin  connected  with  shame.  Tamar  guilty  of  incest  (Gen.  xxxviii. 
16-18).  3.  Sin  bringing  trouble.  "  Achar  the  troubler  of  Israel."  "  He  trans- 
gressed the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and  wrought  folly  (trouble)  in  Israel "  (Jos. 
vii.  15).  In  Israel^  in  the  Church,  and  among  the  people  of  God,  with  God's 
presence  to  provide  for  them  and  protect  them  !  guilty  of  theft,  sacrilege,  and 
invading  the  rights  of  God,  by  converting  for  private  use  what  is  designed  for 
his  glory.  Achan,  branded  with  disgrace,  a  monument  of  judgment,  and  a 
perpetual  warning.  These  sins  were  early,  unnatural,  and  grievous.  Yet 
Thamar  received  a  place  in  the  Toledoth  of  Christ  (Mat.  i.  3),  and  the  "  valley 
of  Achor"  becomes  "a  door  of  hope"  (Hos.  ii.  15).  II.  A  record  of 
fam.ily  honour.  The  potentiality  of  families  great.  Children  become  saints 
or  scourges,  joys  or  sorrows.  1.  SoTne  greatly  distinguished  in  position.  Ram, 
an  ancestor  of  David  (Ruth  iv.  18-22)  ;  Nahshon,  a  prince  in  Judah,  and  led 
the  van  during  encampment  of  Israel  in  wilderness ;  Salma  was  in  post  of 
honour  when  they  entered  Canaan.  2.  Others  excelled  in  mental  qualities. 
Varied  gifts  of  body  and  mind  in  members  of  the  same  family,  (a)  Eminent  in 
wjzsc^ow— Ethan,  Heman,  Calcol,  and  Dara,  the  glory  of  their  father's  house. 
For  when  Scripture  magnifies  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  he  is  declared  to  be  wiser 
d 


CHAP,  u.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


than  these  four  men  (1  Kings  iv.  30).  When  Joseph  was  in  authority  they 
dwelt  in  Egypt,  cultivated  natural  talents,  distinguished  for  social  wisdom  and 
fine  arts,  and  became  eminent  among  the  sons  of  Egypt  and  the  East.  (6) 
Skilled  in  music.  The  family  of  Zerah,  or  Ezrah,  said  to  be  sons  of  Machol,  or 
the  choir  (1  Chr.  xv.  17-19).  Psalm  Ixxxviii.  is  ascribed  to  Heman  the  Ezrahite, 
and  Psalm  Lxxxix.  to  Ethan  the  Ezrahite.  Hence  they  were  choristers,  skilled 
in  music  and  its  kindred  arts — poetry,  singing,  and  dancing.  These  qualities 
cultivated  in  tribe  of  Judah,  and  attained  highest  lustre  in  David  and  Solomon. 
Thus  families  have  their  sunshine  and  their  shame,  their  glory  and  decline,  their 
troublers  and  comforters.  Secure  your  name  in  the  record  of  heaven,  that  when 
the  page  of  history  fades,  your  title  may  never  expire. 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vep.  1.  Pre-emi/nence.     Reuben^  na-  Holy   Ghost    permit  these    shameful 

tural  firstborn;  Lev%  legal  firstborn;  things    to    be   written?     Answer:    1. 

Judahy    Messianic     firstborn.      "  The  That  no  one  should  be  self-righteous, 

names    of    Jacob's    sons    a    type    of  2.  That  none  should  despair  on  account 

human  weakness  and  divine  salvation  of  sin.    3.  To  remind  us  that  Gentiles, 

in  his  house  "  \La/ng6\.  by  natural  right,  are  mother,  brothers, 

Ver.    3.  Er  and   Ona/n,     One  acted  sisters  of  our  Lord  "  [Luther^  in  Lange^ 

"  wicked  in  the  sight  of   the  Lord,"  Gen.  xxviii.]. 

another  *'  displeased  the  Lord."     Both  Ver.  6.  Sons  of  Zerah.     A  famoiu^ 

the    same    in    perverting    a    natural  choir.   Influence  of  music  in  the  family 

ordinance,   militating    against    purity  and    the    Christian    Church.       "The 

and    development    of    the    theocratic  music  of  the  spheres "  \Shakes'peare\. 

family,  and  deserving   Divine    repro-  Ver.  7.  Achor,  the  transgressor  and 

bation.  troubler.     The  connection  of  sin  with 

Ver.  4.    Tamar,     Guilty  of  tempta-  trouble.     Trouble  leadeth  to  discovery 

tion,   practised    dev>eption,   and    com-  of  sin.     Sin  ending  in  death  of  indi- 

mitted  incest.  These  events  in  Judah's  viduals  and  punishment  of  community, 

family  display  the  goodness   and  se-  "  That  man  perished  not  alone  in  hi3 

verity  of  God,  illustrative  of  grace  and  iniquity  **  (Jos.  xxii.  20), 
judgment.    "Why  did  God  and  the 


E0MILETIC3. 

The  Family  op  Jesse. — Verses  13-15. 

*  A  special  account  kept  of  this  family  for  the  sake  of  David  and  the  Son  of 
UibVid,  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  (Isa.  xi.  1).'*  Several  principles  illus- 
trated in  history  of  this  family. 

I.  The  mistakes  of  human  judgment.  A  family  of  imposing  per- 
sons— Eliab,  majestic  in  appearance  ;  Abinadab  and  Shammah,  great  in  physical 
power  and  brave  in  battle  (1  Sam.  xvii.  13).  "  Surely  the  Lord's  anointed  is 
before  him."  No  I  look  not  on  the  beauty  of  countenance  and  the  height  of 
stature,  &c.  II.  The  law  of  divine  choice.  David  chosen.  Weak 
things  to  confound  mighty ;  cripples  to  overcome  giants,  and  shepherds  to  rule 
men.  Unlikely  men  to  the  front.  God  takes  out  of  range  of  appearances, 
pays  no  regard  to  human  prejudice.  "  For  the  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth ; 
for  man  looketh  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart." 
Learn  that  human  judgment  is  not  infallible.  God*s  choice  is  best ;  submit  to 
it,  and  seek  its  proof  in  its  spiritual  gifta  and  results, 

9 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  n. 


The  Descendants  op  Caleb. — Verses  18-24,  42-49. 

In  the  list  we  find — 

I.  Persons  of  note.  Eur,  the  companion  of  Aaron,  who  rendered  help 
to  Moses  and  to  Israel  on  the  mount  (Ex.  xvii.  20) ;  Bezaleel,  the  famous  arti- 
ficer of  the  Tabernacle,  grandson  of  Hur  (Ex.  xxxi.  2);  Jair,  the  taker  of 
cities,  to  which  he  gave  his  name  (Num.  xxxii.  41)  :  threescore  cities  (towns  or 
livings)  fell  before  his  valour  (Jos.  xiii.  30).  Hezron  himself  was  eminent,  one 
of  the. seventy  that  went  down  to  Egypt  with  Jacob  (Gen.  xlvi.  12)  'll 
Illustrative  incidents.  Events  displaying  God  in  history  and  Godin  the 
family,  1.  In  human  families.  One  childless  (ver.  30)  ;  another  no  sons  (ver. 
34).  Intermarriage  in  vers.  34,  35.  Perhaps  the  Egyptian  was  upright  and 
wise,  and  became  a  proselyte  to  the  Jewish  religion.  2.  In  human  history, 
Ephrath  (ver.  19),  named  after  her  who  gave  the  name  to  the  town  Ephrathj 
which  is  Jerusalem.  "  We  begin  here  to  learn  the  interesting  and  unexpected 
iact  that  the  intercourse  of  Israel  with  the  localities  in  Palestine,  where  their 
ancestors  had  acquired  property,  was  kept  up  so  long  as  they  were  a  free  and 
honoured  people  "  [Murphy].  Machir  is  called  "father  of  Gilead"  (ver.  21) 
who  was  born  before  death  of  Joseph  (Gen.  1.  23).  "  Gilead,  memorable  in  his- 
tory of  Jacob  and  the  scene  transacted  there  remembered  by  Joseph,  an 
observant  youth  at  the  time  of  the  parting  covenant  between  Laban  and  Jacob. 
If  Jacob  established  any  title  to  the  mount  at  that  time,  this  would  be  an 
additional  reason  for  calling  a  son  of  Machir  after  this  celebrated  spot" 
[Murphy].  Thus  we  learn  that  God  can  make  the  obscurest  eminent,  and 
smallest  service  memorable.  He  presides  over  the  destinies  of  families  and  the 
relationships  of  life.     We  can  trace  Divine  impress  upon  records  of  history. 

Offspring  op  Caleb  continued.— Fer^es  50-55, 

Since  Hur  was  the  son,  not  the  father,  of  Caleb,  a  difficulty  presented  here. 
Best  way  to  read  "  sons  "  for  "  son  "  before  the  word  Hur.  All  difficulty  will 
disappear,  and  we  shall  have  the  sense.  "  These  (the  list  in  verses  42-49)  were 
the  sons  of  Caleb.  The  sons  of  Hur,  the  firstborn  of  Ephratah,  were  Shobal... 
Salma...Hareph."  The  clause  "these  were  the  sons  of  Caleb"  corresponds 
exactly  to  that  which  concludes  the  genealogy  of  Jerahmeel  (ver.  32),  and 
properly  belongs  to  what  has  gone  before,  not  to  what  follows  [Speak.  Com.X 
In  the  list  we  discover — 

I.  The  company  of  colonisers.  Fathers,  first  settlers  of  places. 
Shobal,  Salma,  Hareph;  the  four  families  mentioned  in  ver.  53,  who  left 
parents  and  residence  (Kirjath-jearim)  to  colonise  towns  and  villages  in  neigh- 
bourhood from  which  sprang  Zorah  and  Eshtaol.  II.  The  family  of 
scribes  (ver.  55).  A  trio  of  civil  or  ecclesiastical  officers,  the  heads  of  whom 
were  Tirah,  Shimea,  and  Suchah,  of  Kenite  origin,  dwelling  in  Judah,  but  dis- 
tinguished from  another  Kenite  clan  which  dwelt  in  Mannasseh  (Judg.  iv.  11). 
III.  The  famous  Rechabites  (ver.  55).  Not  only  famous  for  nomadic 
habits  of  their  ancestors  (2  Kings  x.  15),  but  for  honourable  connection  with 
the  ancient  Abrahamic  tribe  of  the  Kenites  to  which  the  father-in-law  of  Moses 
belonged  (Judg.  i.  16  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  6,  xxvii.  10).  Their  descendants  were  meu 
of  character  and  influence,  and  highly  commended  by  God  (Jer.  xxxv.  18,  19). 

EOMILETIC  EINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  13-15.     The    story   of  Boaz.      character  of  Jesse,  as  indicated  by  the 
Prominent  in  the  Book  of  Euth.     The      incident  of  the  text. 
10 


CHAP    11.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Ver.  19.  Bezaleel,  art  consecrated 
to  God.  JaiVj  prowess  and  valour  em- 
ployed in  advancing  the  cause  of  God. 

Ver.  24.  Hezron  was  dead.  A  sug- 
gestive hint,  a  solemn  reminder,  in 
pursuits  of  life  and  conquests  of  nations 
that  earthly  possessions  cannot  be  kept. 

•♦  And  that    nail  model  of  the  barren  earth, 
Which  serves  as  paste  and  oover  to  our 
bones"  \_Shakespeare']. 
••  Nothing  can  we  call  our  own,  but  Death.'* 

Ver.  55.  Scribes,  A  class  devoted 
to  exposition  of  law,  instruction  of  the 
nation,  and  preservation  of  its  records 
1.  A  noble  calling.  To  study  and  ex- 
pound sacred  books,  intone  society, 
and  spread  the  will  of  God.  2.  A 
family  calling.  "  The  families  of  the 
scribes."  Hereditary  pursuits  in  all 
communities.  Advantageous  to  fix 
traditions  and  habits  in  persons,  to 
pursue  studies  in  cities,  colleges,  and 
schools.  3.  A  needful  calling.  The 
revelation  of  God,  written  and  printed, 
requires  study,  application,  and  circu- 
lation. A  literary  profession  useful 
to  society;  a  learned  ministry  the 
want  of  the  times.  "  Writing  is  now 
the  mightiest  instrument  on  earth  " 
[Channing].  "The  families  of  the 
scribes.  These  were  the  public 
notaries,  or,  as  some  think,  text-men, 
who  took  the  literal  interpretation,  as 


distinct  from  Wise,  that  is,  teachers  of 
traditions,  and  from  Disputers,  that  is, 
teachers  of  allegories  and  mysteries 
(see  1  Cor.  i.  20 ;  Jer.  viii.  9 ;  Ezra  vii. 
6).  The  first  were  the  best  of  the 
three,  and  of  these  were  the  Rechabites, 
who  being  Shuchathites,  that  is,  dwell- 
ers in  tents,  might  dwell  where  they 
pleased,  and  now  dwelt  at  Jabez,  a 
place  which  seemeth  to  have  its  name 
from  that  good  Jabez  of  Judah,  who 
prayed  so  hard  (cf.  iv.  10),  having 
haply  the  help  of  these  holy  Kenites, 
the  posterity  of  Jethro  (see  Judg.  i. 
16)."    [Trapp]. 

Vers.  18-55.  I.  What  multitudes  un- 
known !  Men  with  names  and  nothing 
more.  They  live,  die,  and  are  buried 
in  oblivion  1  So  we  think.  But  what 
do  we  know  of  history?  Best  men, 
quiet  service,  and  patient  endurance 
gain  no  record.  II.  But  men  unknown 
and  most  obscure  may  be  honoured. 
**  Nobodies  "  become  "  notabilities," 
and  through  divine  grace  introduce 
Christ  to  man  and  bless  the  world. 
"  There  will  be  a  resurrection  of  names 
some  day,"  says  Buskin. 

••  Whose  silent  prayers  and  labours  Heaven 
employs 
To  do  the  good,  whilst  others  make  the 
noise  "  [Jane  Taylor], 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II. 


Vers.  1-13.  Sons  of  Israel,  sons 
of  Judah,  &c.  "  The  child  is  truly  and 
literally  *  the  heir  of  all  the  ages.*  The 
past,  with  all  its  legacies,  has  existed 
for  it,  just  as  all  the  future  will  be  its 
own.  To  whatsoever  heights  of  human 
excellence  it  may  rise,  or  to  whatsoever 
depths  of  human  degradation  it  may 
sink,  the  child  is  now  an  element  in 
the  sum  of  human  life ;  a  new  unit  in 
the  aggregate  of  mankind.  It  is  there- 
fore worthy  both  of  study  and  rever- 
ence. Did  we  but  form  an  adequate 
conception  of  the  dignity  and  also  the 
marvellousness  of  human  existence,  the 
oldest  man  might  well  stand  bareheaded 
and  thoughtful  in  the  presence  of  a 
babe"  [^non.].  (Luther's schoolmaster 
taking  his  hat  off  to  his  pupils.) 

Vers.  19  and  24.     Was  dead. 


"  How  he  marks  his  way 
With  dreadful  waste  of  what  deserves  to 

shine ! 
Art,  genius,  fortune,  elevated  power  ! 
With   various   lustres  these  light  up  the 

world, 
Which  Death  puts  out,  and  darkens  human 

race"  [Young']. 

Vers.  18-55.  Live  for  something. 
Do  good  and  leave  behind  you  a  monu- 
ment of  virtue  that  the  storms  of 
time  can  never  destroy.  Write  your 
name  by  kindness,  love,  and  mercy  on 
the  hearts  of  thousands  you  come 
in  contact  with  year  by  year,  and  you 
will  never  be  forgotten.  No,  your 
name,  your  deeds  will  be  as  legible  on 
the  hearts  you  leave  behind  as  the 
stars  on  the  brow  of  evening.  They 
shall  shine  as  brightly  on  earth  as  starg 
of  heaven  [Dr,  Chalmers'], 

11 


EOILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [ohap.  ni. 


*    T-' 


CHAPTEH  IIL 

merSV  w;rfnL  ^^'^'"^  ^^^^^^^^^  Bathshua,  Bathsheba  ;  Ammiel,  Eliam,  letters 

S>ned  ac^^^^^^^^^^         n^^Tw  ?*"If  *  ^  ^^  ^^^-  ^^-  ^^^^  "  ^ne  daughter  (Tamar)  men! 
fWlnoTf^     ^  to  rule,  that  daughters  are  given  only  when  the  Hne  is  saved  or  that 


xxvi   1-2  KiTicTQ  ^iV  oTr   -p'^ ^^-x^ucijr  alter  aeaiin,  ana  so  named  elsewhere  (2  Chr. 

establish.-  ^"*  ^^'  ^""^  Jehoiachin  in  Kings,  meaning   "Jehovah  will 


apSentlv  "^?«  fnL^-^'^'^*  and  a/t.rtoard..  This  text  is  difficult  and  disarranged 
apparently  The  followmg  arrangement  is  given  by  Dr.  Davidson  {Hermeneutics): 
Ezra  m  t.  Nph%1?  1    of  Jecpmah  the  captive ;    Salathiel  (asked  of    God)  (Shealtiel, 

Zerubbabei  fsown    V V  ^tf  ll  ^^'  -^  'i\^]  ^''  '"^  ''  ^-  ^^'  ^^  *he  sons  of  Salathiel 
z,eruDDabel  (sown,    i.e.,   begotten,  m  Babylon— who  was   the  direct  son   of  Pedaiah  • 

Shi^i  rr'elor^^^^^    intermediate  links,  is'called  the  son  of  Salathier Mat  i  12rand 
bhimei  (renowned):    and  the   sons  of   Zerubbabei;   Meshullam  (friend    ie     of   God^ 
A^r^l^l   (graciously  given   of   God),   and   Sheloiith   (pacifi?),  theTr   sister     V    19* 

^ah^:Wed'^^  ""Y/T^  ?^^^^^^^^  (^1--^  of' Jehovah),  and  Hasa 

Eenhaiah  ^nd  ^?^^^^  ^"S^^^  ^^^®  '^  returned).     20.  And  Malchiram,  and 

Sah .  Pe^^^^^^^     «nf  T      '•  ^^^T'^^'  Hoshama,  and  Nedabiah.     21.  The  sons  of  Hana- 
mah     Pelatiahand  Jesaiah:  the  sons  of  Rephaiah  ;  his  son  Arnan,  his  son  Obadiah 
(worshipper  of  Jehovah),  his  son  Shecaniah  (dwelling  with  Jehovah)" 
E^rfro^Bab^^^^^^^  ''^'  ^^-"-^  probably  accompanied 

EOMILETICS. 

The  Sons  op  David. — Verses  1-10. 

, .  \  ^^®//,  places  of  birth.  The  verses  classified  according  to  the  place  of 
birth.  In  Helron,  six  sons  born,  each  of  a  different  mother.  In  Jerusalem,  thirteen, 
tour  of  one  mother  and  nine  of  others  not  mentioned.  Places  often  identified 
with  birth  of  important  persons.  Bunyan  and  Bedford,  &c.  Let  character  and 
conduct  give  renown  to  place.  II.  Their  Varied  lives.  Ahsolalom,  son  of  a 
king  s  daughter,  a  murderer  and  rebel,  ^<  died  a  fool."  Amnon  violated  his  sister 
lamar,  and  was  slam.  Adonijah  conspired  against  the  throne,  and  met  with  bitter 
disappointment.  Nathcm  reminded  his  father  of  the  prophet  who  reproved 
his  sm,  brought  him  to  repentance,  and  had  the  honour  of  belonging  to 
the  ancestry  of  Jesus  (Lu.  iii.  31).  Solomon,  wisest,  most  gifted,  and  successor. 
But  what  checkered  lives  !  Little  to  give  parental  joy.  Much  to  cause  anxiety 
and  grief.  Amid  the  splendour  of  his  reign  and  the  power  of  his  palace,  his 
cup  was  mixed  with  grief  and  sorrow,  &c.  "Trust  not  thou  in  their  (children's) 
life,  neither  respect  their  multitude:  for  one  that  is  just  is  better  than  a 
thousand ;  and  better  it  is  to  die  without  children,  than  to  have  them  that  are 
ungodly  "  (Ecclus.  xvi.  3). 

•*  Virtue,  not  pedigree,  stampi  nobility," 


CHAP.  III. 7  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHROJSlICLES, 


The  Golden  Age. — Verses  10-16. 

David's  successors  given  up  to  the  Captivity.  For  convenience  call  it  the 
golden  age. 

I.  The  description  of  the  period.  1.  A  long  period.  "Seldom  has 
a  crown  gone  in  direct  line  from  father  to  son  for  seventeen  descents  together  as 
here" — say  Henry.  Judah  survived  Kingdom  of  Israel  by  135  years,  and  lasted 
from  B.C.  975  to  B.C.  586.  2.  A  prosperous  period.  In  population,  resources,  and 
empire  Judah  great;  soil  fertile;  aristocracy  hereditary  in  sacerdotal  caste; 
an  army  always  subordinate ;  a  venerated  centre  of  worship  and  administration ; 
on  the  whole,  peaceful  and  uninterrupted  success  of  kings.  In  language,  litera- 
ture, and  religion  a  glorious  period.  II.  The  nature  of  individual 
reigns.  Peaceful  and  warlike ;  powerful  and  weak;  long  and  short.  Kings 
wise  and  foolish ;  godly  and  idolatrous ;  reigned  by  natural  right  and  fixed  on 
throne  by  foreign  potentates.  The  first  part  began  in  splendour,  the  latter 
ended  in  desolation.  In  David  and  Solomon  we  pass  from  conflict  to  peace ;  in 
Jeconiah  and  Zedekiah  from  grief  to  exile. 

*•  This  strange,  sad  world  is  but  our  Father's  school ; 
All  chance  and  change  His  love  shall  grandly  overrule  ** 

[F.  JR.  Havergal], 

The  Decaying  Glory. — Verses  17-24. 

In  these  verses  we  have  the  royal  remnant  during  captivity.  The  decaying 
glory. 

I.  The  dark  beginning.  Jeconiah  adopted  Salathiel,  otherwise  written 
childless,  the  signet  God  plucked  from  his  hand,  dear  as  an  ornament,  yet  rejected 
(Jer.  xxii.  24).  There  is  a  striking  contrast  between  this  beautiful  name 
{Jehoiakin,  Jehovah  will  establish)  and  the  miserable  fate  of  the  man.  Enthroned 
by  Necho,  powerless  against  Nebuchadnezzar,  Jerusalem  was  besieged,  Jeconiah 
taken  prisoner,  bound  in  fetters  and  carried  to  Babylon  (2  Chr.  xxxvi.  6,  7). 
II.  The  gradual  decay,  Zerubbabel  the  last  with  any  shred  of  authority. 
After  him  royal  line  disappears  into  obscure  private  Hfe.  Nehemiah  next  governor 
of  whom  we  read.  Sennacherib  repulsed,  religious  revivals  under  Hezekiah  and 
Josiah,  but  the  impious  reign  of  Manasseh  and  the  lingering  decay  of  the  people 
under  the  four  feeble  descendants  of  Josiah  prepared  for  the  final  ruin.  Babylon 
in  successive  deportations  drained  away  their  strength.  The  temple  was  de- 
stroyed amid  wailing  of  prophets ;  the  nation  ceased  amid  taunts  of  heathen 
tribes,  released  from  the  yoke  of  David.  "  The  nation  and  kingdom  that  wiU 
not  serve  thee  shall  perish  :  yea,  those  nations  shall  be  utterly  destroyed." 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.     1-24.       Review     the     list,  come  with  those  that  shall  come  here- 

1.  Indicative  of  God^s  providential  dis-  after"   (Ecc.  i.   11).     3.  Indicative  of 

cipline.     In  bestowing  mercy  upon  bad  vanity  of  worldly  fame.    The  humorist 

men,  fulfilling  his  word  to  good  men,  Thackeray     asks,    "  What     boots     it 

and  unfolding  his  purpose  in  wonderful  whether  it  be  Westminster  or  a  little 

events  to  all   ages.      2.  Indicative   of  country  spire  which  covers  your  ashes; 

vicissitudes  in  human  life.     In  joy  and  or  if  a  few  days  sooner  op  later  the 

grief,  in  splendours  of  the  palace  and  world  forgets  you  I  " 

the   obscurity  of  exile.      Revolutions  .,  _  .    ^      . 

in   time    and   place.      Change   every-  "  Thus^are  we  fortune's  pastunes ;  one  day 

where.  "There  is  no  remembrance  of  Advanced  to  heaven  by  the  people's  breath, 
former  things :  neither  shall  there  be  The  next,  hurled  down  into  th'  abyss  of 
any  remembrance  of  things  that  are  to  death  **  [Mayl, 

18 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[OHU.   XT. 


Vers.  10-16.  Sketch  the  Kves  of 
David  and  Solomon,  Hezekiah's  reign, 
Manasseh's   wickedness,  and    Josiah's 

piety. 

Ver.l9.  Zervhhahel,  \. Distinguished 
in  work,  (a)  Leading  a  liberated 
people  to  their  own  land.  (6)  Ee- 
building  the  Temple,  (c)  Instituting 
civil  government.  2.  Distinguished  in 
the  prosecution  of  that  work.  Courage, 
patience,  faith,  and  enthusiasm.  A  per- 
sonal example  and  a  power  among  his 
people.  3.  Distinguished  as  the  object  of 
prophecy*    Often  addressed  by  name  by 


Haggai  and  Zechariah  j  received  glori- 
ous predictions  concerning  temple  he 
was  building  and  future  magnificence 
of  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  which  exer- 
cised great  influence  upon  his  mind 
and  preserved  a  spirit  which  endured 
till  the  coming  of  Christ.  A  name 
suggestive  of  important  events.  1.  Re- 
turn of  captives.  2.  Restoration  of 
national  government.  3.  Establishment 
of  religious  worship.  "  The  hands  of 
Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of 
this  house,"  &c.  (Zech.  iv.  9). 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III. 


Vers.  1-24.  Sons  of  &c.  It  was, 
perhaps,  ordained  by  Providence,  to 
hinder  us  from  tyrannising  over  one 
another,  that  no  individual  should  be 
of  such  importance  as  to  cause,  by  his 
retirement  or  death,  any  chasm  in  the 
world  [Dr,  Johnson]. 

"Men  die  and  ar«  forgottw*    The  gr«al 

WQXld 


Goes  on  the  same.    Among  the  myriads 
Of  men  that  live,  or  have  lived,  or  shall 

live. 
What  is  a  single  life,  or  thine,  or  mine, 
That  we  should  think  all  nature  would 

stand  still 
If  we  were  gone  ? 
The  great  are  not  great  to  me  unless  they 

are  good  "  IS,  Michardson], 


OHAPTEE  nr. 

Ouw^  Notes.]    Obscurity  often  arising  from  brevity  conspicuous  in  this  passasft. 
Yet  we  discern  an  order  m  it,  indicated  in  first  verse.    It  contains  descendants  of  ShobfL 
?n?^f  r^^f'  Hezron,and  of  Pharez     The  section  chiefly  of  local  interest,  kitended  to 
point  out  founders  of  some  of  the  towns  in  the  province  of  Judah   [Murphyh    Reaiah 
conjectured  to  be  same  as  Haroeh,  ii.  52.     3,  4.  Descendants  of  Hur.     FaSie^hit 
founders  of  Etam  a  town  on  rocky  hills  of  Judah  (Judg.  xv.  8  ;  2  Chr.  xi6)Ged!^  n^w 
ithJj%9).'  ^^^'    ^'^^*'  ""^  '^^''^''  '^*'' ^^*  indicltion  of  the  pkce'(¥Sam! ^\  7^ 
Vers.  &-10.— Descendants  ofAshur  (Carmi),  posthumous  son  of  Hezron  by  Abia,  called 
father  or  chief  of  Tekoa;  with  two  wives,  three  children  to  one,  and  four  to  the  other 
Jabez,  ver.  9,  son  or  maternal  kinsman  of  Ashur,  who  names  the  town  (ii   55^ 
^fiT^''"*  "-15-~^^«c^w^«w<«  of  Hezron.    Chelub,  brother  of  Shuah,  to  distinguish  him  from 
others.     The  group  m  vers.  11, 12.  unknown.     In  vers.  13-15  return  to  names  noTqSS 
strange,    ^ren  (and    JT.najr    ver.  16,  translate  as  marg.   Uknas,  or  suppose Tnrme 
(Jehaleel)  to  have  fallen  out  after  Elah.  o^^i't'^Bo  »  "»me 

Vers.  16-20.— Descendants  of  Pharez.  From  vers.  17,  18,  difficult  to  come  to  any  con- 
elusions,  ^nd  tJiese,  an  interesting  phrase,  indicative  of  sojourn  of  these  persons  in 
Egypt,  when  Israel  was  free,  prosperous,  and  respected.  "  It  was  then  as  becoming  for  a 
sovereign  of  pOTt  to  give  a  daughter  in  marriage  to  Mered,  as  at  a  later  period  a  lister* 

Shtlenth^"  ^^^^^^  ^^^.,^^^^^^^  "*^  '^^^  '^^^  *^^  ''''  ^'  *^^  ^y-^*y  *^'*  preceded  tl'e 

Vers,  21-n.— Descendants  of  Judah,    We  have  been  ascending  from  Shobal  to  Hur  to 

Carmi,  to  Hezron,  to  Pharez ;  now  we  rise  to  Judah  himself.    A  list  of  descendants  of 

his  son  Shelah  here  given  [cf.  Murphy],   Linen,  a  staple  commodity  of  Egypt  Ashbea  a 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES. 


descendant  of  Shelah,  had  a  factory  there.     Ver.  23,  last  of  Judah,  and  leave  the  t..ibe  in 
obscurity.     Some  of  those  potters,  and  others  gardeners. 

Vers.  24-43.— r/it!  sons  of  Simeon.  Classed  with  Judah,  because  possessions  partly  in 
their  territory  (Jos.  xix.  1).  Differences  of  particulars  in  list  occasioned  by  some  hav.ng 
more  than  one  name  {cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  10;  Ex.  vi.  15,  and  Num.  xxvi.  12,  13).  Ver.  27, 
Shimei  distinguished  from  his  brethren  by  a  large  family.  "Progeny  of  Simeon  hero 
traced  to  settlement  in  Canaan."  Vers.  28-38,  His  territory.  Eighteen  cities  given  in 
Jos.  xix.  2-7.  Changes  in  name  took  place  in  time  between  Joshua  and  David.  Vers. 
34-oS,  Subsequent  increase  of  certain  families  of  Simeon  ;  princes,  ver.  38.  "  The  number 
of  names  is  thirteen,  corresponding  to  number  of  cities  in  first  list  (vers.  28-31),  so  that 
it  may  be  suspected  that  the  princes  mentioned  were  registered  chiefs  of  those  cities  in 
time  of  Hezekiah  (see  ver.  41)  "  [Speak.  Com.'\.  Vers.  39,  40,  the  first  migration.  Valley 
into  which  mountain  streams  ran  to  fertilise  the  land,  suitable  for  Simeonites,  quiet  and 
peaceable  on  account  of  seclusion  and  long  undisturbed  inhabitants.  Ham,  ver.  40,  on 
their  way  to  Africa  induced  by  fertility  of  soil  and  abundance  of  water.  Vers.  41-43, 
further  migrat  ons.  Days  o/Hez.,  hence  date  of  Simeonite  expedition,  before  captivity  of 
ten  tribes  (2  Kings  xviii.  8).  Rest,  ver.  43,  remnant  left  by  Saul's  great  slaughter 
(1  Sam.  XV.  7,  8),  and  by  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  12). 


EOMILETICS. 

The  Chiefs  op  Judah. — Verses  1-23. 

Judah  the  most  famous  and  most  important  of  all  tribes.  A  tribe  which 
survived  other  tribes,  and  whose  register  was  specially  cared  for.  I.  Posterity 
of  Shobal  (vers.  1-4).  From  these  came  the  Zorathites  (ch.  ii.  53).  II. 
Posterity  of  Ashur  (vers.  5-10).  Ashur,  posthumous  son  of  Hezron 
(ch.  ii.  24),  whose  mother  was  probably  a  daughter  of  Carmi.  If  so,  he  is  grand- 
son of  Carmi,  hence  introduction  of  this  name  in  ver.  1.  III.  Posterity 
of  Chelub  (vers.  11-20).  Men  of  Rechah  as  inhabitants  of  an  unknown 
place  of  that  name.  IV.  Posterity  of  Shelah  (vers.  21-23). 
Shelah,  son  of  Judah,  a  family  ingenious  and  industrious  above  others.  Honest 
labourers  are  the  salt  of  society ;  the  healthy,  luxurious  and  dissolute,  the  idle 
and  predatory  would  corrupt  it.  1.  Craftsmen  (ver.  14).  A  wise  arrangement 
that  men  should  be  fitted  for  dififerent  employments.  2.  Weavers  (ver.  21). 
This  an  ancient  and  skilful  labour.  Children  excelled  and  became  famous  in 
their  business.  "  He  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall  find  good."  3.  Rulers 
in  Moah  (ver.  22).  Entrusted  with  power  for  many  generations.  But  this  long 
ago  ('*  ancient  things  ").  A  great  change.  Fathers  had  dominion  then,  posterity 
in  servitude  now  1  4.  Potters,  Sindi  ^.Gardeners  (ver.  23).  "With  the  king," 
on  the  king's  property ;  or  preferring  to  stay  with  him  in  Babylon  rather  than 
return  to  their  own  country.  "  Unworthy  the  name  of  Israelites  are  those  who 
dweU  among  plants  and  hedges  rather  than  go  to  Canaan." 

Jabez  the  Honoured  ISTame. — Verse  9. 

This  a  strange  description  in  a  catalogue  of  names.  The  man  worthy  of 
remembrance,  an  honoured  name  deserving  attention.  I,  The  circum- 
stances of  his  birth.  Born  in  sorrow.  1.  Sorrow  the  lot  of  all  (Gen.  iii. 
16).  Man  born  to  sorrow  as  sparks  fly  upward  (Job  xiv.  1).  2.  This,  perhaps, 
special  sorroio,  which  the  mother  wished  to  perpetuate  in  name.  O.  T.  names 
significant  of  qualities  and  circumstances  of  life.  Benjamin  (Ben-oni),  son  of  my 
Borrow,  by  Rachael ;  son  of  my  right  hand,  by  the  father. 

"  I  do  heseech  you, 
Chiefly  that  I  might  set  it  on  my  prayer% 
What  is  your  name?  "  iShakes^care], 

in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  it. 


II.  The  dignity  of  his  character.  "  More  honourable."  Not  a  title 
of  position  or  office  as  "The  Hon."  and  "  The  Right  Hon.,"  &c.  1.  Honourable 
in  himself,  literally  "  a  man  of  weight."  Jews  say,  a  famous  doctor  of  the  law  who 
had  disciples  and  founded  a  city  which  took  his  name  (ch.  ii.  65).  But  honour- 
able and  upright  in  personal  character  and  conduct.  A  man  of  prayer  and 
fervent  piety,  whose  name  is  held  in  everlasting  remembrance.  2.  More  honour- 
able than  others.  Some  think  he  was  exalted  above  them  as  judge,  signalised  in 
war,  or  gained  larger  estates  than  his  brethren.  Not  richer  in  material  wealth, 
but  in  moral  worth  ;  more  dignified  in  private  life,  more  distinguished  in  action 
and  public  philanthropy.  *'  The  righteous  is  more  excellent  than  his  neighbour." 
Seek  this  honour  of  character  and  life,  not  worldly  honour  which  decays  like  a 
flower,  but  honour  from  God,  perpetual  and  true. 

The  Remarkable  Prayer. — Verse  10. 

Many  things  deserving  attention,  which  make  it  a  model  of  thoughtful, 
earnest,    and    successful    prayer.      I.    Its    spiritual    characteristics. 

Devotion  an  expression  of  spirit,  not  lips.  1.  Its  view  of  God.  Right  views 
of  God  essential.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  he  is,"  &c.  Not 
Jehovah,  the  Almighty,  Self-existent,  and  Eternal ;  but  God  of  Israel,  the 
covenant  God  who  keeps  his  word  and  never  forgets  his  people.  2.  Its  humble 
tone,  a  kind  of  vow.  If  thou  wilt  bless  me,  thou  shalt  have  my  heart  and  service 
(Jacob.  Gen.  xxviii.  20),  but  without  thee  undone,  &c.  3.  Its  earnest  spirit.  "  Oh 
that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed."  Language  of  ardent  feeling  and  intense 
desire,  becoming  and  needful.  "  0  God,  let  me  not  fall  from  earnestness. 
Grant  me  to  hate  every  false  way,"  cried  Thomas  Chalmers.  II.  Its  worthy 
object.  Most  personal  and  direct,  straight  as  an  arrow  to  the  point.  1.  For 
personal  blessing.  "  Bless  me  indeed."  This  the  beginning,  the  most  needful 
of  all.  2.  For  successful  undertaking.  "  Enlarge  my  coast."  Expulsion  of 
Canaanites,  or  special  effort  in  which  he  desired  to  succeed.  All  success  from 
God.  Pray  when  you  enter  life,  start  business,  begin  some  fresh  pursuit,  take  a 
journey,  or  enter  a  new  residence.  3.  For  preservation  from  danger.  "  Thine 
hand  with  me."  His  undertaking  risky.  He  wanted  something  beside  reputa- 
tion, shields,  and  soldiers.  Wealth,  friendship,  and  human  aid,  nothing  without 
God.  **  Uphold  me  with  thy  right  hand."  4.  For  deliveram^ce  from  evil.  Evil 
of  sorrow  implied  in  his  name.  Deeply  impressed  with  his  mother's  conduct. 
Let  it  not  be.  Desired  to  be  joy  and  help  to  parents,  not  a  grief.  Evil  of  sin 
generally.  In  remembrance  of  Achan,  perhaps.  Sin  ever  brings  sorrow,  "  keep 
me  from  evil."  Deliver  me  from  its  guilt  and  consequences.  "  Let  sin  have  no 
dominion  over  me."  III.  Its  gracious  answer.  "God  granted  him 
that  which  he  requested."  God  preserved  in  danger,  gave  success  in  enterprise, 
delivered  from  grief  and  sin,  and  exalted  him  to  honour  and  position.  This  to 
xaagnify  his  grace,  encourage  piety  and  prayer. 

•*  In  all  thou  dost,  first  let  thy  prayers  ascend. 
And  to  the  gods  thy  labours  first  commend ; 
From  them  implore  success,  and  hope 
A  prosperous  end."  [W.  Fleming], 

Jabez  the  "  Honourable." 

According  to  a  worldly  standard,  this  list  includes  more  hon.  names  than  that 
of  Jabez.  But  in  the  estimation  of  heaven,  the  only  reputation  that  will  live 
must  have  connection  with  God.  The  words  we  specially  emphasise  are,  "  Oh 
that  thou  wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  emd  enlarge  my  coast  T'  Some  analogies 
suggested  by  the  sea-coast  may  teach  the  following  lessons.  I.  An  enlarged 
16 


CHIP.  IV.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


**  coast''  suggests  an  expanded  horizon.  Carnal  sympathies  and 
lack  of  faith  limit  to  narrow  visions  of  divine  truths  and  holy  revelations.  Our 
spiritual  relations  determine  whether  soul  vision  commands  outlook  from  a  small 
bay,  or  toward  broad  ocean.  To  the  mother  of  Jabez  his  entrance  into  the 
world  was  associated  with  some  special  suffering,  and  she  named  him  ^^  sorrowfuV* 
Years  rolled  on,  God  by  his  prophet  knighted  him  and  pronounced  him  "  more 
honourable  than  his  brethren."  Even  so  now  according  to  our  faith  will  be  the 
significance  of  our  individual  history.  Let  our  vision  be  bounded  by  time  and 
sense  only,  and  life  will  be  a  baptism  of  grief.  Let  faith  widen  our  coast, 
expand  our  horizon,  and  all  along  the  coast  the  lamps  of  **  hope  "  shall  hang, 
and  a  "  more  honourable  "  name  be  gained  than  those  who  refuse  the  "  faith, 
which  is  the  substance  of  things  not  seen,  and  by  which  the  elders  obtained   a 

good  report."  II.  An  enlarged  **  coast ''  suggests  a  broader 
surface.  The  glory  of  a  coast  is  its  wide  sweep  of  the  ocean.  There  go  ships, 
whose  massive  keels  skim  the  surface  of  the  waters.  There  floods  lift  up  their 
voice,  whose  swelling  waves  declare  the  fulness  of  its  strength.  Such  in  figure 
is  the  human  soul  when  possessed  and  enlarged  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  What 
sublime  possibilities  of  divine  enlargement  belong  to  the  heart  of  man  !  Sin 
circumscribes,  hems  in,  and  we  are  '*  straitened  in  ourselves."  But  the  coast 
may  be  enlarged ;  hills  of  difficulty  be  removed,  and  mountains  of  unbelief 
levelled,  until  an  expanded  horizon  sheds  calm  and  enlivening  radiance  all 
around,   and  the   renewed   soul   takes   up   the   language   of   a  renewed   earth 

(Is.  Ix.  4,  5).     III.  An   enlarged    "coast''    suggests    a   more 

extended  pathway.  Sometimes  a  narrow  strip  of  land  forms  the  only 
path  when  walking  on  the  sea-coast.  Then  we  are  in  danger  of  falling,  slipping 
over  a  precipice ;  and  but  for  a  helping  hand  many  would  have  thus  perished. 
These  words  are  singularly  applicable.  Similar  are  those  of  the  Psalmist, 
Ps.  xviii.  35,  36;  cxix.  32  (Prov.  iv.  12).  This  enlarged  pathway  will  secure 
two  things.  (1)  Safety.  "Kept"  by  the  divine  hand.  No  other  power  to 
keep.  In  the  king's  highway  alone  is  security.  This  a  way  of  holiness.  "  A 
highway  shall  be  there,  it  shall  be  called  the  way  of  holiness."  (2)  Peace.  Jabez 
not  only  desires  safety,  but  prays  that  sin  may  not  **  grieve  "  him.  This  a  fine 
test  of  sincerity  of  prayer  and  the  cleannetg  of  heart.  What  various  motives, 
prompt  obedience  to  divine  laws  !  What  a  great  gulph  of  moral  disparity 
between  the  sayings,  Svn  hurts  me  physically,  and  sin  grieves  me  spiritually  I  [The 
Study,  1874]. 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  10.    The  Mighty  Hand.    Avail-  the  marriage  of  an  Egyptian  princess 

able,  ever  ready,  and  always  sufficient,  to   a   descendant   of   Caleb.       1.    The 

A  hand  of  universal  control  and  per-  marriage  must  have  taken  place  in  the 

petual   activity.     "  God's   right    hand  wilderness.    2.  The  barriers  of  a  differ- 

doeth  valiantly."  ent   national   language    and    national 

Ver.    13.     OthnieVs    adventure    (of.  religion   kept   the    Hebrews   separate 

Jos.  XV.  15,  16  ;  Judg.  i.  12,  13 ;  iii.  9).  from  the  Egyptians  ;  but  they  did  not 

The  brave  man  waits  not  for  numbers  wholly  prevent   intimacies,   and   even 

and    applause.       Enough    for   him    to  occasional      intermarriages       between 

know  the  cause  is  just,  that  danger  private  individuals  of  the  two  nations. 

threatens,  that  action  is  required.  3.  Ere  such  unions,  however,  could  be 

"  Where  duty  bids,  he  confidently  steerg.  sanctioned,  the   Egyptian  party  must 

Faces  a  thousand  dangers  at  her  call,  have     renounced     idolatry,     and     this 

And,  trusting    in    his    God,    surmounts  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  as  appears  from 

them  all."  j^qp   name,  had   become   a   convert  to 

Vor.  18.    The  Egyptian  convert.   Thin  the    worship   of    the   (iod    of    Israel 

passage  records  a  very  interesting  fact,  [Jamieson^ 

17 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  iv. 

HOMILETIGS. 
The  Posterity  op  Simeon. — Verms  24-43* 

The  sons  of  Simeon  are  classed  with  those  of  Judah,  because  their  possession 
was  partly  taken  out  of  the  extensive  territory  of  Judah  (Jos.  xix.  1). 

I.  The  cities  they  possessed.  The  same  list  given  (Jos.  xix.  2-6) 
with  a  little  difference  in  spelling;  eighteen  given.  Virtue  and  self  control 
better  than  taking  a  city  (Prov.  xvi.  32).  II.  The  conquests  they 
made.  In  the  days  of  Hezekiah  a  generation  animated  to  conquests.  1. 
Some  took  Gedor  (ver.  39).  A  place  in  Arabia,  the  entrance  of  Gedor,  inhabited 
by  Ham's  posterity.  2.  Others  took  Mount  Seir  (ver.  42).  Smote  the  remnant 
of  devoted  Amalekites  and  possessed  the  country.  The  curse  pronounced  on 
Ham  and  Amalek,  though  dormant,  was  not  dead.  To  Simeon  the  curse 
(Gen.  xlix.  5-7)  was  a  blessing,  to  the  others  a  terrible  reality.  III.  The 
prosperity  they  enjoyed.  1.  Increase  of  numbers.  They  increased 
wonderfully,  but  not  like  the  children  of  Judah  (ver.  27).  2.  Enlargement  of 
boundaries.  In  possession  of  limited  area,  they  were  forced  to  seek  accommoda- 
bion  elsewhere.  They  established  themselves  in  the  fertile  pastures  of  Gedor 
(Gerar),  which  soon  proved  inadequate,  and  a  new  colony  settled  on  Mount 
Seir.  They  enjoyed  a  land  of  peace  and  plenty,  numerous  flocks  and  quiet 
habitations.  Thank  God  for  fixed  homes,  but  ever  guard  against  the  perils  of 
prosperity. 

SuEVEY  of  THE  GENEALoaY.— rerw5  1*»43. 
I.  How  great  the  obscurity  of  most  men !    ITot  many  known 

and  prominent  here.  But  obscurity  hides  not  God.  We  are  great  if  the  world 
gains  by  our  life  and  example.  II.  What  folly  to  seek  place  and 
power  only  here !  From  place  we  shall  be  ejected,  and  of  power  we  shall 
be  deprived.  A  family  of  princes  were  captives  in  exile  (ver.  22).  **  Whei'e 
will  ye  leave  your  glory?"  III.  How  needful  to  secure  renown 
hereafter  !  Better  to  have  names  written  in  heaven  than  rolled  in  lists  of 
honour  and  published  in  daily  papers.  "  Bejoice  that  your  names  are  written  m 
heaven,"  said  the  dying  Haller,  when  friends  congratulated  him  on  the  honour 
of  receiving  a  visit  from  the  Emperor  Joseph  II. 

Origin  and  Use  of  Artb  and  Inventions. — Vertes  14,  21-23. 
I.  Useful  arts  emanate  from  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of 

God.  In  early  history  man  taught  of  God  in  special  callings.  Human  inven- 
tions had  no  existence  save  in  the  purpose  of  God.  Proof  from  reason  and 
scripture.  *'  This  also  cometh  from  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in 
counsel  and  excellent  in  working."  II.  Useful  arts  are  beneficial  in 
their  tendency.  They  mitigate  human  toil  and  alleviate  suffering;  prolong 
human    life,    increase    sources   of   comfort,   and   secure  universal   peace.     ItL 

Therefore  all  engaged  in  useful  arts  promote  the  welfare  of 

society.  It  is  better  to  excel  in  trade  than  to  gain  dominions  of  territory. 
In  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  an  illustration  of  this  principle.  Let  us 
be  among  the  "  willing-hearted  "  and  the  "  wise-hearted,"  and  contribut#  our 
share.  "  Produce  !  produce  I  were  it  but  the  pitiful] est  infinitesimal  fraction 
of  a  product,  produce  it  in  God's  name  1  'Tis  the  utmost  thou  hast  in  thee:  out 
with  it,  then  "  \GarlyU\ 
18 


OHAP.    IV.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


EOMILETIG  HIN-TS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  32.  These  cities  u7Uo  reign  of 
David.  In  consequence  of  the  sloth 
or  cowardice  of  the  Simeonites,  some  of 
the  cities  within  their  allotted  territory- 
were  only  nominally  theirs,  but  were 
never  taken  from  the  Philistines  until 
David's  time,  when  the  Simeonites 
having  forfeited  all  claim  to  them,  he 
assiirned  them  to  his  own  tribe  of 
Jiidiih  [Jamieson].  Hence  danger  of 
delay. 

V  er .  33.  Habitations  and  genealogy; 
or  Homes  and  Eegisters. 

Ver.  38.  Princes  in  Families. 
Thirteen  names  corresponding  with 
number  of  cities  in  first  list  (verses 
28-31),  so  that  the  princes  mentioned 
were  registered  chiefs  of  those  cities  in 
the  time  of  Hezekiah  (see  ver.  ^\)\Speak, 
Cow.].  1.  Families  and  kingdoms  of 
divine  appointment.  2.  P^ulers  of 
families  and  kingdoms  represented  God 
and  order,  justice  and  truth.  3.  Hence 
subjection  needful  for  order,  happiness, 
and  success. 

Ver.  40.    Fat  pastures,    1.  Prepared 


by  God,  natural  formation.  2.  Dis- 
covered by  God's  direction.  ThQj found, 
did  not  create.  Application  in  com- 
fortable homes,  favourable  situations 
and  spiritual  refreshment. 

Ver.  43.  Doom  of  Amalek.  Sin  not 
forgotten,  judgment  not  neglected  nor 
fails  in  execution.  Curses  may  be 
dormant  but  not  dead.  "  Preservation 
from  the  sword  of  Joshua  (Ex.  xvii. 
13),  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  xv.  7),  and  of 
David  (2  Sam.  viii.  12)  was  but  a 
reservation  to  this  utter  destruction, 
which  God  had  solemnly  sworn,  with 
hand  laid  upon  his  own  throne  (Ex. 
xvii.  16)  "  [Trapp]. 

Vers.  39-43.  A  fragment  of  famous 
history.  Learn  from  this  chronicle  of 
events  —  1.  Expedition  frst,  under 
thirteen  leaders,  with  many  followers, 
against  Hamites  and  Mehurrim.  2. 
Expedition  second,  smaller,  but  more 
adventurous.  Under  four  chiefs,  a 
band  of  500  smote  powerful  enemies 
and  possessed  their  quarters.  Be 
valiant  for  God  spiritually. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  9.  Honourable .  Virtue  and 
honour  are  such  inseparable  com- 
panions that  the  heathens  would  admit 
no  man  into  the  temple  of  honour  who 
did  not  pass  through  the  temple  oi 
virtue. 

"  If  it  be  of  a  sin  to  covet  honour, 
I  am  the  most  offending  soul  alive  ** 

Ver.  10.  Evil.  The  greatest  evil 
is  sin.  1.  In  the  nature  of  it,  as 
being  contrary  to  the  greatest  good, 
even  God.  2.  In  the  effect  and  con- 
sequences of  it  here  and  hereafter. 
3.  Therefore  to  pray  against  sin  is  to 
pray  against  all  other  evils  whatever; 
for  the  devil,  the  evil  one,  cannot  hurt 
us  but  by  sin  \^H^shop  Hopkins^. 

Be  loith  me.  Ora  et  labora  is  the 
legend  of  the  Christian's  faith,  and 
the    plan   of   his   life.      His    fervent 


prayer  begets  honest,  manly,  unshrink- 
ing work ;  his  work  as  it  is  faithful 
and  it  is  faithful  in  proportion  as  he 
realises  it  is  for  God,  throws  him  back 
upon  prayer  [Stevenson^. 

Vers.  14,  21,  23.  Graf tsmen, potters, 
isc.  If  all  men  affected  one  and  the 
same  trade  of  life  or  pleasure  of  recrea- 
tion, it  were  not  possible  they  could 
Uve  on^  by  another;  neither  could 
there  be  any  use  of  commerce,  whereby 
life  is  maintained.  It  is  good  reason 
we  should  make  a  right  use  of  this 
gracious  dispensation  of  the  Almighty, 
that  we  should  improve  our  several 
dispositions  and  faculties  to  the  advan- 
cing of  the  common  stock,  and  that 
we  should  neither  encroach  upon  each 
other's  profession  nor  be  apt  to  censure 
each  other's  recreation  [Bishop  Hall], 


19 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  v. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Cbitioal  Notis.]  This  oh.  contains  Reuben,  Gad,  and  tlie  liaM  of  ITanaBseb  east  of 
Jordan,  with  two  episodes,  one  on  the  wars  of  these  tribes,  and  the  other  on  the  removal 
by  Tilgath-pilneser.  The  upper  Assyrian  monarchy  began  1273  b.c,  the  lower  747  B.C. 
\^Murphy'\. 

Vers.  1-10. — Reuben  lost  his  birthright.  The  priesthood  given  to  Levi;  the  double 
portion  (Deu.  xxi.  17)  to  Joseph,  whose  sons,  Ephuaim  and  Manasseh,  reckoned  as  distinct 
tribes.  Judah  had  supremacy,  ver.  2.  Chief  ruler,  prince,  i.e.,  David,  and  eventually 
Messiah  (Mic.  v.  1).  Ver.  3,  sons  four,  as  Gen.  xlvi.  9  ;  Ex.  vi.  14.  Vers.  4-6.  The  line 
of  Joel.  Ver.  7.  Brethren,  kinsmen  of  Joel,  chief  was  Jeiel.  Ver.  10.  Ha^rantes,  Hagarenes 
(Ps.  Ixxxiii.  6),  a  tribe  of  North  Arabia,  perhaps  Agraioi  of  Strabo  [^Speak.  Com.'\^  or 
Ismaelites  as  descendants  of  Hagar. 

Vers.  11-17. — Gad.  Chiefs,  ver.  12,  and  seven  others,  ver.  13.  "Their  pedigree  traced 
back  ten  generations.  For  Buz  and  Ahi  are  really  parts  of  one  name,  Buzahi,  for  which 
Sept.  has  Ahibuz  by  transposing  parts.  Not  informed  to  what  family  Guni  belonged  " 
\_Murphy'],  must  have  been  contemporary  with  Solomon  or  David,  therefore  before  the 
secession  of  ten  tribes. 

Vers.  18-22. —  Wars  of  Eastern  tribes  with  Arabs.  Jetur  and  Nephish  (Naphish)  among 
descendants  of  Ismael  in  Chr.  i.  31,  and  in  Gen.  xxv.  15.  Of  Nodab,  nothing  known. 
Hagarites  made  raids  from  desert.  Hence  war  in  self-defence.  Confederate  tribes  pre- 
vailed over  invaders.  Booty  indicates  dense  population  and  extensive  campaign  ;  ♦'  may 
be  compared  with  that  from  Midianites  (Num.  xxxi.  32-35),  and  does  not  exceed  amount 
which  kings  of  Assyria  constantly  carried  off  in  raids  upon  tribes  of  no  great  note  or  name  " 
{STpeak.  Com.].     Captivity  of  Tiglath-pileser  (2  Kings  xv.  29). 

Vers.  2d-2Q.— Half  Manasseh,  north  of  Gad.  Three  names  given  of  three  parts  or 
"summits"  of  Antilebanon.  Valour  or  special  bravery  of  Manassites  (c/.  ch.  xii.  21). 
Famous,  i.e.,  *'  men  of  names,"  celebrated  men.  Trans gres^ied,  a  long  description  in  2  Kings 
xvii.  He  carried,  i.e.,  Tilgath.  Pul  only  levied  tribute  on  the  land.  Deported  to  places 
named,  as  parts  of  region  to  which  remainder  of  ten  tribes  removed  by  Shalmaneser* 


E0MILETIG8. 


The  Forfeited  Blessing. — Verses  1-3, 

Reuben,  rash  and  impulsive,  lost  splendid  position  and  power  through  passioii 
(Gen.  xlix.  4).    I.  The  sin  through  which  the  blessing  was  lost. 

A  most  abominable  and  iniquitous  act,  worthy  of  death  under  law  of  Moses 
(Lev.  xviii.  8),  and  not  to  be  mentioned  among  Christians  (1  Cor.  v.  1).  Sin 
dethrones  from  excellency,  stamps  disgrace  upon  character,  and  entails  loss  upon 

posterity.  II.  The  peroons  to  whom  the  blessing  was  bestowed. 

Taken  from  one  and  given  to  another.  1.  Joseph's  sons  had  double  portion. 
Ephraim  and  Manasseh  reckoned  distinct  tribes ;  blessed  by  the  expressed  will 
of  Jacob  (Gen.  xlviii.  22)  and  in  the  partition  of  Canaan  (Jos.  xvi.,  xvii.).  2. 
Judah  had  pre-eminence.  Honour  to  Judah,  and  birthright  to  Joseph.  One  need 
not  envy  the  other,  (a)  In  power.  The  sceptre  assigned  to  Judah  (Gen.  xlix. 
1 0).  (6)  In  dignity.  From  him  came  chief  ruler  David  first,  and  afterwards  the 
Saviour.  Those  related  to  Christ,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  have  a  better  portion 
than  men  endowed  with  wealth  and  perishing  honour.  III.  The  principle 
on  which  the  blessing  was  given.  The  writer  careful  to  explain 
why  Judah  was  made  supreme.  "  The  genealogy  not  reckoned  after  the  birth- 
right ; "  not  in  natural,  but  in  providential  order ;  **  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will 
of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God." 
20 


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


The  Linb  op  Reuben. — Verses  1—10. 

I.  The  chief  of  the  tribe.     The  genealogy  traced  to  £>edi*aL,  iho  head 

of  the  clan,  when  carried  into  Assyria  (ver.  6).  What  are  tbrKied  **  unfortunate 
positions"  and  "evil  days"  are  controlled,  if  not  created,  by  rtod.  *'  My  times 
are  in  thy  hand."  II.  The  privileges  of  the  tr^tbo.  Degraded,  but 
not  entirely  disinherited.  Sullied  honour  not  always  lost  happiness.  Reuben's 
sons  had  their  share  of  honour  and  estate,  were  "valiant"  in  war,  and  "  helped" 
in  victory.  Their  inheritance  received  before  Judah  or  yiphraim.  III.  The 
enlargemonts  of  the  tribe  (vers.  9,  10).  They  im^reased  in  cattle  and 
population,  crowded  out  their  neighbours,  and  extended  conquests  into  the 
wilderness  and  near  the  Euphrates.  IV.  The  disinheritance  of  the 
tribe.  The  prediction  exactly  fulfilled  in  history,  "  Thou  shalt  not  excel." 
Reuben  made  no  figure,  and  produced  no  judge,  prophet,  or  eminent  person. 
He  lingered  among  the  sheepfolds,  preferred  the  shepherd's  pipe  to  the  trumpet 
of  battle.  Robbed  of  pre-eminence,  his  individuality  fades  away.  Remote  from 
the  centre  of  government  and  religion,  he  lost  faith  in  Jehovah,  "  went  after 
other  gods,"  and  finally  carried  ofi"  into  captivity. 

Unity  and  its  Achievements. — Verses  11-22. 

The  three  tribes  united  went  to  war  and  gained  victory.  I.  A  descrip- 
tion of  the  army  (ver.  18).  1.  Courageous  in  character.  "Sons  of  valour." 
2.  Skilful  in  the  use  of  weapons.  "  Men  able  to  bear  buckler  and  sword,  and  to 
shoot  with  the  bow  and  skilful  in  war."  3.  Aggressive  in  spirit.  "  Went  out  to 
war."  4.  Great  in  number.  "  Four  and  forty  thousand  seven  hundred  and 
threescore."  II.  The  method  in  which  they  fouglit  (ver.  20).  1. 
United  in  rank.  "Men  who  could  keep  rank"  (1  Chr.  xii.  3).  2.  Earnest  in 
prayer,  "  For  they  cried  to  God  in  the  battle."  3.  Thoroughly  reliant  upon 
God.  "  They  put  their  trust  in  him."  "  They  cried  unto  thee  and  were 
delivered;  they  trusted  in  thee  and  were  not  confounded."  III.  The 
success  they  achieved.  Not  only  "helped"  and  "delivered,"  but 
enriched.  1.  The  booty  enormous.  "They  took  away  their  cattle,"  &c.  (ver.  21). 
2.  TJie  slain  numerous.  "  There  fell  down  many  slain,"  <fec.  The  Church 
united,  courageous,  and  prayerful,  ever  victorious. 

The  Apostate  Tribes. — Ver$ea  23-26. 

Special  attention  paid  to  this  great  sin  of  the  tribes,  this  beginning  of  national 
evil  and  national  suffering.  I.  Shameful  apostasy.  A  full  description 
in  2  Kings  xvii.  of  idolatries,  heathen  and  native.  1.  Beginning  inforgetfidness 
of  God.  "  They  transgressed  against  the  God  of  their  fathers  "  (ver.  25).  One 
known  to  them  as  a  nation,  venerated  by  their  fathers  and  worthy  of  their 
service.  2.  Ending  in  forsaking  God.  "  Went  a  whoring  after  the  gods  of  the 
people."  Forsaking  their  own  God,  they  worshipped  idols  of  the  heathen. 
Man  must  have  a  god,  will  worship  something,  even  if  he  adores  himself. 
Whoring^  a  strong,  emphatic  w^ord,  indicative  of  special  aggravation  and  intense 
jealousy.  II.  Merited  judgment.  We  have  a  full  and  impressive 
vindication  of  divine  procedure.  Patience  exhausted,  and  God,  whom  they  had 
forsaken,  permitted  captivity  to  cure  national  evils.  1.  Utter  defeat,  (a)  First 
God  stirred  up  Pul,  King  of  Assyria  (ver.  26).  The  first  of  northern  sovereigns 
who  invaded  Palestine  was  bribed  by  silver  to  return  (2  Kings  xv.  16-20). 
Tribute  was  imposed,  which  caused  prophetic  protest,  great  dissatisfaction,  and 

21 


IWMILETIV  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[chap.  ? 


impoverished  the  kingdom  by  reducing  its  territory  and  its  inhabitants.  (6) 
Then  Tiglath  inflicted  utter  defeat.  Valour  and  numbers  of  no  avail.  When 
God  has  left  us,  defence  is  gone.  2.  Helpless  exile.  They  were  ''  carried  away" 
into  distance  and  slavery.  God's  instruments,  many  and  varied,  to  chastise. 
Idolatry  most  destructive  sin  to  people  loved  and  led  by  Jehovah.  **  Little 
children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols." 


EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  2.  Judah  prevailed.  1.  God  in 
family  history.  2.  Persons  giving 
pre-eminence  to  families,  David  and 
Messiah  from  Judah.  3.  Grace  dis- 
tinguishing families  in  civil  and  re- 
ligious matters,  in  national  and  indi- 
vidual life. 

Vers.  18-20.  Cried  in  battle.  So 
did  Jabez  (ch.  iv.) ;  Jehoshaphat  (2 
Chr.  XX.)  ;  the  thundering  legion  ;  the 
late  King  of  Sweden,  whose  prayer 
before  the  great  battle  of  Lutzen,  where 
he  fell,  was,  "  Jesus,  vouchsafe  this 
day  to  be  my  strong  helper,  and  give 
me  courage  to  fight  for  the  honour  of 
thy  name."  Prayer  alone  he  held  the 
surest  piece  of  his  whole  armour 
\Trapp\ 

Ver.  25.  Transgressed.  1.  Danger  of 
proximity  to  the  world.  The  tribes  on 
the  borders  had  intercourse  with  neigh- 


bouiing  people,  then  drawn  into  sin. 
2.  Fearful  consequences  of  yielding  to 
enticements  of  the  world.  Cast  off  by 
God,  invaded  by  enemies,  and  displaced 
by  Providence.  Be  governed  by  faith, 
not  by  sense.     Lot. 

Ver.  26.  Stirred  up.  \.  God's  in- 
fluence over  men's  spirit.  Stirred  up, 
moved,  prompted.  "The  king's  heart," 
the  most  absolute  and  uncontrollable 
will,  "  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  as 
rivers  of  water"  (Prov.  xxi.  1).  2. 
God's  control  over  man's  conduct.  De- 
spotic rule,  political  projects,  and 
ambitious  wars  directed  to  the  fulfil- 
ment of  his  purpose.  Pul  restrained 
in  conduct.  "  Howbeit  he  meaneth 
not  so,  neither  doth  his  heart  think  so ; 
but  it  is  in  his  heart  to  destroy  and  cut 
off  nations  not  a  few  "  (Is.  x.  7). 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO  CHAPTER   V. 


Ver.  2.   JudaNs  pre-eminence. 

**  Some  must  be  great.  Great  officers  will 
have 
Great  talents.  And  God  gives  to  ev'ry  man 
The  virtue,  temper,  understandmg,  taste, 
That  lifts  him  into  life,  and  lets  him  fall 
Just  in  the  niche  he  was  ordained  to  fill " 

[^Cowper^. 

Ver.  18.  Valiant  men.  It  is  not  the 
will  of  God  that  his  people  should  be  a 
timorous  people  \^Mt.  Henry\ 

Ver.  20.  Helped.  We  are  like  Wil- 
liam of  Orange,  with  a  few  followers 
and  an  empty  purse,  making  war 
against  the  master  of  half  the  world 
with  the  mines  of  Peru  for  a  treasury. 


But  like  William,  too,  when  questioned 
concerning  our  resources,  we  can  reply, 
"  Before  we  took  up  this  cause  we 
entered  into  a  close  alliance  with  the 
King  of  Kings  "  \Sword  and  Trowel]. 

Ver.  26.  Carried  away.  When 
lesser  warnings  will  not  serve,  God 
looks  into  his  quiver  for  deadly  arrows. 
Abuse  of  mercy  ripens  us  for  judgment 
[Nicholls]. 

'*  Heaven  gives  the  needful  but  neglected 
call. 
What  day,   what  hour,  but    knocks   at 

human  hearts 
To  wake  the  soul  to  sense  of  future  scenesf " 

lYoung'] 


88 


CHAP.V1.J  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  ClllUJMCLES. 


CHAPTER  VL 


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  refers  wholly  to  tribe  of  Levi.  Gives  the  family  of  A^ron 
vers.  1-15  ;  the  descendants  of  Gershom,  Kohath,  and  Merari,  vers.  16-30  ;  the  pedigrees 
of  the  song-masters,  vers.  31-48  ;  the  line  from  Aaron  to  Ahimaaz,  vers.  49-53  ;  ana  tne 
towns  assigned  to  the  tribe,  vers.  54-81.  •    -,/?  ok\   ^o  4?o^  «« 

Vers.  1-6 -The  sons  of  Levi.  The  genealogy  of  Levi  follows  (Ex.  vi.  16-25)  as  far  as 
Phinehas,  after  which  the  writer  must  have  had  documents  before  him  which  have  not 
come  down  to  us  ISpeak.  Com.'\.  -ta.   -     jj  t         *v,^ 

Vers.  4.-15.— Line  of  priests  unto  Captivity.  This  list  must  have  been  obtained  from  the 
oriestly  registers.  It  is  given  in  inverse  order  (Ezra  vii.  1-5),  with  omission  of  ijames 
^oetweeu  Meraioth  and  Azariah  II.  It  wants  the  name  Meraioth  between  Ahitub  II.  and 
Zadok  II.  (ix.  11).  It  is  not  a  succession  of  high  priests,  but  simply  the  hue  from  Eleazar 
to  Jehozadak  [cf .  Murphy].  Zadok,  ver  8,  priest  with  Abiathar  (2  Sam.  vm.  18),  one  probably 
in  Gibeon,  the  other  in  Zion.  Azariah,  ver.  9,  grandson  of  Zadok,  m  the  court  of  bolomon 
II  Kings  iv.  2).  Temple,  ver,  10,  first  to  distinguish  it  from  second  existing  m  days  of 
writer.  Amariah,  ver.  11,  high  priest  under  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chr.  xix.  11).  5f//a//um. 
ch.  ix.  11  (Neh.  xi.  11).  Hilkiah,  ver.  12,  in  office  under  Josiah,  took  part  in  reformation 
then  (2  Kings  xxii.  4-14  ;  xxiii.  4 ;  2  Chr.  xxxiv.  9-22).  Seraiah,  ver.  14,  put  to  death 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  at  time  of  Captivity  (2  Kings  xxv.  18-21 ;  Jer.  In.  24-27). 

Vtrs.  16-30.  -Sons  of  Levi.  Having  traced  high  priestly  line  from  Levi  to  Jehozadak 
(vers.  1-15),  writer  returns  to  fountain  head  and  gives  general  account  of  branches  of 
tribe  of  Levi  as  far  as  materials  allow.  Vers.  16-21.  The  Gershomites,  after  first-born  of 
MoBes  (Ex.  ii.  22).  Vers.  17-19.  These  appear  in  Ex.  vi.  Vers.  20,  21.  This  line  appears 
to  coincide  with  part  of  that  of  Asaph  (vers.  39-43),  except  in  Jeaterai,  who  may  have  been 
another  son  of  Zerah.  Vers.  22-28.  The  Kohathites.  The  same  as  that  of  Heman  (vers. 
33-38).  Object  of  list  to  trace  genealogy  of  Samuel,  prophet  and  judge  of  Israel.  Vers. 
29,  30.  The  Merarites. 

Vers.  Bl-iS.— Pedigrees  of  the  three  song-masters.  Asaph,  Heman,  Ethan,  or  Jeduthan 
(Ps.  Ixxxix.),  sons  of  Korah,  set  over  departments  of  musical  service.  House,  a  tent 
erected  by  David  to  receive  the  ark,  considerable  time  before  building  of  the  Temple. 
Waited  in  order,  instituted  by  David,  doubtless  directed  by  Holy  Spirit,  for  regulation  of 
worship.  33.  Shemuel,  i.e.,  Samuel.  Ver.  48.  Levites  employed  in  door-keepmg  or  attend- 
ing  to  priests.  v  •  -     . 

Vers.  49-53.— Oj^ce  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  {cf.  vers.  3-8).  Eleazar,  third  son,  chief  of 
Levites  (Num.  iii.  32),  ministered  with  his  brother  Ithamar,  before  death  of  Aaron,  and 
succeeded  him  (Num.  xx.  28).  In  Eleazar's  family  high  priesthood  remained  till  the  time 
of  Eli,  who  was  descended  from  Ithamar.  It  returned  to  Eleazar  in  Zadok,  fulfilling  the 
words  of  1  Sam.  ii.  30.  ... 

Vers.  54-81.— The  cities  given  to  priestly  families  and  to  other  Levites.  Jos.  xxi.,  its 
parallel.  54-60.  Cities  given  to  Aaron's  family.  Castles,  places  of  defence  against  robbers 
or  beasts  of  prey.  Vers.  61-81.  Cities  of  the  Levites,  their  number  and  distribution: 
13  cities  to  Gershom,  ver.  62 ;  12  to  Merari,  ver.  63,  as  in  Jos.  xxi.  34-40 ;  cities  of  other 
Kohathites,  vers.  66-70  ;  of  Gershomites,  vers  71-76  ;  and  of  Merarites,  vers.  77-81. 
Vers  80,  81,  agree  with  those  in  Joshua.  Ten  only  of  twelve  named.  Only  42  out  of  48 
named,  and  some  different  from  original  cities  assigned  to  Levites.  This  proof  of  accu- 
racy of  author.  He  remembers  whole  numbers  in  time  of  Joshua.  But  pohtical  arrange- 
ments readjusted  in  course  of  ages.  State  of  things  given  which  had  supervened  in  time 
of  David  (vii.  2)  [cf .  Murphy'\, 

EOMILETICS. 

A  Glance  of  History. — Verses  1-15. 

In  these  verses  we  have  a  glance  from  deliverance  in  Egypt  to  bondage  in 
captivity.      Notice  two  or  three  features  of  the  period. 

I.  The  inequalities  of  men.  Inequalities  physical,  mental,  and  social 
appear  in  whatever  light  we  regard  mankind.     In  this  list  some  exalted  t« 

as 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  vi. 


sacred  office  and  perform  noble  deeds.  Others  fall  into  sin  and  disgrace. 
Vast  differences  in  character  and  career  1  Royalty  and  beggary,  grandeur  and 
wretchedness,  palaces  and  slums  !  "  There  were  two  men  in  one  city,  the  one 
rich  and  the  other  poor."  II.  The  vicissitudes  of  families,  Aaron 
a  priest,  but  Aaron's  sons  terrors  of  divine  justice.  Samuel  a  prophet,  but 
Samuel's  sons  perverted  justice  and  dishonoured  religion.  According  to 
political  and  religious  feeling,  ancestors  exalted  and  descendants  rejected.  III. 
The  events  of  Providence.  Deliverance  from  bondage.  Scenes  of 
conflict  and  triumph.  Times  of  revival,  relapse  and  punishment.  Accession  and 
dethronement  of  kings,  Providences,  special,  striking,  and  constant.  "  He 
hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation." 

The  Sons  op  Levi. — Verses  16-30. 

I.  Their  chief  Fathers.  Ger shorn  the  eldest,  Kohath  the  second,  and 
Merari  the  youngest  son  accompanied  Levi  into  Egypt  with  Jacob  (Gen.  xlvi. 
11),  and  became  heads  of  three  great  divisions  of  Levites.  II.  Their 
numerous  descendants.  Many  unknown  or  passed  over.  Others 
eminent  in  character,  distinguished  in  service,  and  remarkable  in  career. 
Children  of  privilege  and  monuments  of  judgment,  born  in  sunshine  and  dying 
in  shadows.  What  a  mixture  of  good  men  and  bad  men  in  life  1  What  a 
contrast  between  character  and  circumstances,  beginnings  and  ends  1 

The  Ministry  of  Song. — Verses  31-48. 

Song  a  divine  gift,  has  a  mission  or  ministry.  I.  Song^  an  element  of 
Christian  worship.  "  The  service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord." 
A  branch  of  natuial  and  revealed  religion  in  all  ages,  prevalent  in  Jewish  and 
heathen  worship.     A  duty  reverently  to  be  performed.     Its  decay  a  mark  of 

desolation  (Ezek.  xxvi.   13).     II.   Song  an   expression  of  human 

feeling.  Joy  and  sorrow,  gratitude  and  prayer,  must  have  appropriate  and 
audible  expression.  When  the  ark  is  in  captivity,  in  times  of  darkness  and 
depression,  our  harps  are  hung  upon  the  willows.  When  the  ark  finds  rest  and 
fixed  residence  in  times  of  revival,  we  sing  praise  to  God  (David's  joy,  2  Sam. 
vi.  17-21,  xvi.  1-3).     "Is  any  merry?  let  him  sing  psalms."      III.   Song  a 

power  for  which  its  possessors  are  responsible.    In  pagan  and 

Jewish  nations  recognised  as  a  divine  gift.  It  is  a  talent  entrusted  to  indivi- 
duals ;  a  faculty  to  be  cultivated,  for  which  there  is  room,  and  which  should  be 
consecrated  to  God.  The  duty  of  all  who  have  the  gift  to  lay  it  upon  the  altar 
of  God,  in  the  home,  the  school,  and  the  sanctuary. 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Ver.  1.     Three  chief  Fathers.     Their  service.       High   priest   in   temple   of 

names,  history,  and  pedigree.  Solomon.  "  Executed"  &c.  Some  think 

Ver.    3.     Nadah   and   Ahihu.     Im-  that  he  withstood  King  Uzziah,  and 

proper    spirit   in  worship  ;    unlawful  thus   risked    life   in    faithful   reproof 

method  and  awful  judgment.    Perished  (2  Chr.  xxvi.  17,  18). 
on  day  of  consecration  !  (Lev.  x.).  Ver.  13.     Hilkiah   most  celebrated 

Ver.     4.       Phineas,    a    memorable  of  seven  bearing  this  name  as  priest 

name    (Num.    xxv.    7-13 j    Jos.    xxii.  and   reformer.     He   discovered    "the 

10-33;  Ps.  cvi.  30,  31).  Book  of  the  Law"  (2  Kings  xxii.  8); 

Ver.      10.       Azariah's      important  was  zealous  in  reformations  of  Josiah 
24 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


(2  Kings  xxii.  14-20,  xxiii.  4-27);  and  as  remarkable  that  the  heads  of  both 

prominent  in  observing  the  Passover  tlie  priestly  and  the  royal  stock  caniod 

(2  Chr.  XXV.  1-19).  to    Babylon    should    have   had    names 

Ver.  15.     Jehozadak.     Three   forms  (Zedekiah  and  Jehozadak)  composed  of 

of  this  name  (see  Ezra  iii.  2 ;  Hag.  i.  1 ;  the  same  elements,  and  assertive  of  the 

and   this  verse).     Only  two  forms  in  **  justice  of  God,'"  which  their  sullerings 

original.      Jehozadak   full    form,    and  showed  forth  so  signally  [i:ipeak.  Com.]. 

Jozadak  contracted.     The  meaning  is,  Ver.   22.     Koralis  sin  and  punish- 

"  Jehovah  is  righteous."     It  is  noted  ment  (Num.  xvi.  1-33). 

HOMILETIGS, 

Beligious  Worship. — Verses  32-53. 

The  order  of  song  a  matter  of  importance  in  time  of  David.  The  ark  had  a 
settled  place.  Choral  service  was  established  in  the  Temple,  and  chief  singers 
were  appointed.  I,  Worship  varied  in  its  forms.  Music  and  singing 
prayer  and  praise,  must  not  become  formal  and  stereotyped  "  All  manner  of 
service  "  II.  Lively  in  its  spirit.  Dulness  and  despondency  dishonour- 
ing to  God  and  unprofitable  to  men.  "  This  duty  must  be  our  delight."  Then 
it  becomes  attractive  and  helpful.  "  Serve  the  Lord  with  gladness ;  come 
before  his  presence  with  singing."  III.  Orderly  in  its  method.  '  They 
waited  on  their  office  according  to  their  order."  Things  not  left  to  chance ; 
arrangements  made  with  care  and  thought.  Each  his  own  work,  place  and 
time  in  keeping  up  the  service.  "  The  order  of  the  sanctuary.  '*  Let  all  things 
be  done  decently  and  in  order."  IV.  Universal  in  itS  participation. 
They  "  waited  with  their  children  "  in  the  choir  The  service  of  song  tor  the 
whole  " congregation"  not  left  to  the  choir  to  sing,  nor  to  the  preacher  to  pray. 
All  hearts  and  all  lips  must  join.  Congregational  worship  must  be  sought  and 
cultivated.     "  Let  the  people  praise  thee,  let  all  the  people  praise  thee. 

The  Ancient  Priesthood. — Verses  49-53. 
Aaron  and  his  sons,  -the  house  of  Aaron,"  appointed  to  the  priestly  office^ 
Other  Levites  given  to  them  and  performed  subordinate  duties.  I.  its 
sacred  dignity  Not  the  investure  of  man;  endowments  for  the  work 
fr^m  God  The  office  not  a  personal  assumption,  but  in  obedience  to  divine 
Xm^n^festTn  Providence, 'the  gift  of  the  Holy  ^P-t  and  he  hd^^^^^ 
friends  "No  man  taketh  this  honour  unto  himself.  II  Its  solemn 
duties  On  the  brazen  altar,  the  golden  altar  and  the  mercy  seat  in  the  ho^ 
of  holfes'  they  performed  their  functions.  This  chiefly  ;  to  make  an  atonement 
trl^^P^^^^^^^^  A  constant  need  for  this ;  the  life  of  the  individua  and 
thenltion  imperilled  by  sin;  covenant  relations  must  be  res^n-ed^       Tl.  d.iy 

of  atonement,"  an  in.pressive  scene  ^^^  V^P^f  ^  ^^^f '.JJ^Vofs^^^^^^^^ 

Character.     The  high  priests  in  official  character  the  ceie mony  o^^^^-^^-^ 

blood  were  figures  of  good  things  to  come.     Under  the  g^P^  ^^^  ,n  appointed 

priests,  ministering  to  God  hi  his  ^P-^-^^g  ,i 

service  which  contributes  to  the  perpetual  ^^^'^^^^P  ^^^,,  ^^^„3^ 

Only  in  fulfilment  of  prescribed  ordinance  can  we  secure  the  presence  ana 

of  Jehovah. 

Cities  and  Dwellings  of  Levites.— Fer«es  64-81. 

First  cities  given  to  the  priestly  family  of  '^^2.^:^''^.i^^t^'^r.^^-^t 
number   and   distribution  of   those  assigned   to  other  Levites   ^vers.   ^ 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


[chap.  VI. 


Regard  them  as — I.  A  fulfilment  of  prediction.  Jacob's  dying  prophecy 
was  accomplished  and  this  tribe  was  '*  scattered  in  Israel "  (Gen.  xlix.  7).  God's 
people  are  preserved,  and  events  are  arranged  for  their  possessions.  II.  An 
arrangement  of  providence.  These  cities  wisely  ordered,  a  provision 
of  mercy  and  safety.  1.  To  facilitate  the  administration.  Centres  of  justice  and 
law,  freeing  individuals  from  avenging  themselves,  fixing  authority  and  pro- 
moting peace  and  order.  2.  To  disseminate  light.  Each  city  the  centre  of  light 
and  instruction,  the  place  where  law  was  expounded  and  administered.  A  school 
of  learning  and  social  influence  to  the  people.  3.  To  support  the  ministry. 
Cities  allotted  to  priests  and  Levites  for  residence  and  maintenance.  Certain 
provisions  made  for  spiritual  service.  Men  set  apart  for  God,  dependent  upon 
the  people  they  serve.  Those  who  "  preach  the  gospel  "  may  reasonably  expect 
*'  to  live  of  the  gospel."  "  Let  him  that  is  taught  in  the  word  communicate  to 
him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things." 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 


Ver.  31.  The  vicissitudes  of  the  Arh. 
"Without  a  proper  resting-place  from 
victory  over  Philistines  in  time  of  Eli 
till  the  tabernacle  of  David,  about  fifty 
years  (1  Sam.  iv. ;  2  Sam.  vi.). 

Vers.  32  and  33.  Waited  on  their 
office.  1.  Each  an  office  or  work,  fixed 
in  choir,  leading  in  service  of  song, 
officiating  at  the  altar,  and  waiting  at 
the  door.  2.  Each  responsible  for  the 
performance  of  his  work — not  envy- 
ing his  neighbour,  waiting  for  some- 
thing better ;  but  with  diligence,  order, 


and  delight  each  fills  his  position  and 
renders  his  service. 

Vers.  31-48.  Three  chipf  song- 
masters.  Heman's  pedigree  (vers.  33— 
38).  Pedigree  of  Asaph,  the  Gershonite 
(vers.  39-43).  He  stood  on  right  hand. 
Pedigree  of  Ethan,  the  Merarite  (vers. 
44-47).  He  stood  on  the  left  of  He- 
man. 

Vers.  49-53.  Priests  and  Levites, 
two  orders  of  ministry  in  the  Jewish 
Church.  Their  divine  appointment, 
special  duties,  and  worldly  provision. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VI. 


Ver.  31.  Service.  The  three  inten- 
tions of  song :  To  improve  the  under- 
standing, to  improve  the  heart,  and  to 
soothe  the  mind.  The  three  things 
which  ought  to  pervade  song  :  Perfect 
learning,  perfect  vigour,  perfect  nature 
\Gatherair\. 

Ver.  32.  Waited  in  office.  Man 
hath  his  daily  work  of  body  or  mind 
appointed  [Milton^. 

"  A  servant  with  this  clause 
Makes  drudgery  divine  : 
Who  sweeps  a  room,  as  for  Thy  laws, 
Makes  that  and  the  action  fine  " 

[^Geo.  Herbert], 

Ver.  54.     Cities,     If  the  history  of 


cities  and  their  influence  on  their  re 
spective  territories  be  deducted  from 
the  history  of  humanity,  the  narrative 
remaining  would  be  of  no  very  attrac- 
tive description.  If  anything  be 
certain,  it  would  seem  to  be  certain 
that  man  is  constituted  to  realise  his 
destiny  from  his  association  with  man, 
more  than  from  any  contact  with 
places.  The  great  agency  in  calling 
forth  his  capabilities,  for  good  or  for 
evil,  is  that  of  his  fellows.  The  pic- 
turesque may  be  with  the  country,  but 
the  intellectual,  generally  speaking, 
must  be  with  the  town  \pr,  Vaughan'a 
Age  of  Cities^, 


26 


CHAP.  VII.]  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTEE    VII. 

Critical  Notes.]  Vers.  1-5. — Issachar.  A  tribe  of  more  than  average  strenc^th,  eince 
the  entire  return  from  all  the  tribes,  except  Judah,  was  no  more  than  800,000  men 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  9)  [Speak.  Com.].  In  days  of  David,  ver  2,  probably  from  census  taken  by 
Joab  (xxi.). 

Vers.  6-12. — Benjamin.  Ten,  Gen.  xlvi.  21 ;  five,  viii.  1  ;  three  here,  most  eminent  men- 
tioned, or  other  families  extinct.  Ver,  7.  Bela,  list  different  from  ch,  viii.  3-5  and  from 
Num.  xxvi.  40.  "Probably  persons  mentioned  not  literally  'sons,'  but  among  later 
descendants  of  Bela,  chief  men  of  family  in  time  of  David's  census  "  [Speak.Com.].  Ver.  10. 
Jediael,  sons  may  include  grandsons.  Ver.  12.  Three  other  sons  of  Benjamin  named  (cf. 
Num.  xxxvi.  39;  Gen.  xlvi.  21;  and  ch.  viii.  5). 

Ver.  13. — Naphtali  [cf.  Gen.  xlvi.  24:  Num.  xxvi.  48).  His  territory  originally 
included  in  Judah  (Jos-  xix.  40). 

Vers.  14-19. — Manasseh.  An  intricate  and  defective  passage,  appears  to  refer  to  western 
Bide  of  Jordan  ;  other  side  in  ch.  v.  23-26.  Ver.  15.  Daughters  {cf.  account  Jos.  xvii. 
3-6;  Num.  xxvi.  33).  Vers.  16,  17.  None  of  these  mentioned  elsewhere,  unless  "  Bedan" 
is  the  •'  judge  "  of  1  Sam.  xii.  1 1  Ver.  19  ''  This  paragraph  is  of  peculiar  interest  as  illus- 
trating the  freedom  and  independence  with  which  sons  of  Israel  moved  in  period  before 
the  new  king  arose  that  knew  not  Joseph  "  [Murphy]. 

Vers.  20-29. — Ephraim.  Difficult  to  solve  the  question  of  chronology  and  genealogy  of 
this  passage.  The  line  of  Shuthelah  is  traced  to  seventh  generation,  viz.,  to  another 
Shuthelah.  "Ezer  and  Elead,  perhaps  two  brothers  of  the  first  Shuthelah,  i.e.,  own 
sons  of  Ephraim."  Men  of  Gath,  settled  inhabitants  (contrasted  with  strangers, 
nomadic  Hebrews,  Amalekites,  &c.),  attacked  shepherds  of  Ephraim,  and  the  conflict 
produced  the  usual  result.  Ver.  23,  Beiiah,  "  m  evil,"  some  render  "a  gift,"  to  the  house 
by  the  birth  of  another  son.  Ver.  24.  Beth-horon  (Jos.  x.  10  ;  xvi.  3-5;  xviii.  13,  14). 
V£%3.  25-27.  Two  other  sons  of  Ephraim  added,  Rephah  and  Resheph,  from  latter 
sprang  Joshua  (Jehovah,  Saviour).  Elishama,  son  of  Ammihud,  prince  of  Ephraim  in 
time  of  Exodus  (Num.  i.  10;  ii.  18).  Nan,  for  Nun  (Num.  xiii.  8-16).  Vers.  28,  29. 
Possessions  and  boundaries  of  the  two  tribes  here  given. 

Vers.  dO-iO.  —  Asher.  Sons,  daughters,  and  grandsons,  given  as  in  Gen.  xlvi.  17  and 
partly  Num.  xxvi.  44,  ii  we  allow  for  slight  changes  of  spelling  in  names^ 


HOMILETICS. 

Registered  Soldiers. — Verses  1-40. 

In  this  chapter  a  genealogy  of  those  tribes  only  who  were  "  mighty  men  of 
valour." 

I.  Issachar,  the  industrious  tribe  (ver.  1-5).  1.  Patient  in 
labour.  He  possessed  a  fruitful  district,  willingly  submitted  to  toil  and  tribute 
{cf.  Gen.  xlix.  14,  15  ;  Jos.  xix.  17-22).  2.  Great  in  number  (ver.  5).  3.  Valiant 
in  loar  (ver.  5).  II.  Benjamin,  the  warlike  tribe  (ver.  6-12).  Quick, 
rapacious,  and  powerful  (Gen.  xlix.  27;  cf.  Judg.  v.  14,  xx.  16).  Ehud,  Saul, 
Jonathan.  Paul  from  this  tribe.  III.  Naphtali,  the  heroic  tribe 
(ver.  13).  Beautiful  and  active,  comparable  to  the  gazelle  (2  Sam.  ii.  18). 
Remarkable  also  for  culture.  "  He  giveth  goodly  words,"  rich  in  poetry  and 
speech  (Gen.  xlix.  21).  IV.  Manasseh,  the  divided  tribe  (ver.  14-19). 
One  half  of  the  tribe  on  the  other  side  Jordan  (ch.  v.  23).  Division,  perhaps, 
according  to  the  fitness  of  those  who  composed  it  at  the  time.  More  warlike 
adapted  to  coast  of  Jordan.  V.  Ephraim,  the  exalted  tribe  (ver. 
20-29).  Manasseh  the  elder,  but  Jacob  gave  the  preference  to  Ephraim 
(Gen.  xlviii.  10-12).  Great  things  declared  of  this  tribe  in  best  days.  Here 
notice — 1.  Its  bereavement   (ver.    21).      2.  Its  possessions   (ver.    28).      3.    It* 

27 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY    CHRONICLES.  [chap.  vn. 


vicissitudes.  Its  predicted  greatness  (Gen.  xlviii.  19)  nipped  in  the  bud* 
Powerless  to  protect  itself,  thrown  into  grief,  humbled,  yet  comforted  and  dis- 
tinguished in  its  sons  (ver.  27).  VI.  Asher,  the  undistinguished 
tribe  (vers.  30-40).  A  few  "  choice  and  mighty  men  of  valour,"  but  inferior 
in  numbers,  no  great  record  in  sacred  history,  furnished  no  hero  or  judge  to  the 
nation.  *'  One  name  only  shines  out  of  the  general  obscurity.  The  aged  widow, 
*  Anna,  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of  Aser,'  who,  in  the  very  close 
of  the  history,  departed  not  from  the  Temple,  *  but  served  God  with  fastinga 
and  prayers  day  and  night '  "  [Stanley], 

Family  Sorrow.^ Ferses  21-23. 

I.  The  cause  of  the  sorrow.  Gathites  robbed  sons  of  E.  of  their 
cattle,  and  slew  them  when  defending  themselves  (ver.  21)  Life  often  exposed 
and  lost  by  wealth ;  the  sword  devours  ;  death  takes  away  children.  Families 
bereaved  and  thrown  into  griet  "  Ephraim  mourned  many  days."  II.  The 
sympathy  in  the  sorrow.  '*  His  brethren  came  to  comfort  him."  The 
affliction  of  others  should  excite  our  own  pity  and  grief.  Relatives  and  intimate 
friends  should  ever  be  ready  "  to  comfort "  the  bereaved.  Hard  to  bear  the 
burden  alone.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens."  Most  available  and  tender  is 
the  help  of  one  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  III.  The 
remembrance  of  the  sorrow.  Afflictions  may  be  overcome,  but 
occasions  of  them  never  forgotten.  1.  Perpetuated  in  joy.  Another  son  born 
(ver.  23)  in  Beriah.  Like  Seth,  another  seed  instead  of  Abel,  w  hom  Cain  slew 
2.  Perpetuated  in  sorrow.  ''  It  went  evil  with  his  house."  Weeping  yet  rejoic- 
ing ;  humbled  by  the  stroke,  yet  grateful  for  deliverance.  God  compensates  for 
the  loss  in  human  sympathy,  heavenly  gifts,  and  perpetual  joy.  "  The  Lord 
bii  deth  up  the  breach  of  his  people,  and  healeth  the  stroke  of  their  wound." 

•*  ShriDk  not  from  suffering.     Each  dear  blow 
From  which  the  smitten  spirit  bleeds 
Is  but  a  messenger  to  show 
The  renovation  which  it  needs." 


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  2.     Valiant  men  of  might,     1.  daughter,     Sherah,  a  virtuous  woman, 

Timeg    of    conflict.      Days   of   war   in  who  built  cities  at  her  own  charge  (one 

Israel   many.     Thank    God    for  peace  Uzzen-sherah,  named   after    her-),  and 

and  advance  of  civilisation  and  human-  became  an  honour  to  the  family.     "  A 

*ty.     2.  Men  fitted  by  God  to  engage  gallant  woman,  famous  in  her  genera- 

in  conflict.     "  Apt  to  the  war  and  to  tion  for  beautifying  and  fortifying  of 

battle  "  (ver.  40).     Physical  strength,  sundry  cities.     Thus  also  God  made  up 

skill  in  command,  statesmanship,  and  Ephraim's  loss  "  [Trapp']. 

success.     The  gift  of  God  needful,  and  Ver.   22.     A    great  leader ;  Joshua, 

should  be  consecrated  to  holy  purposes,  son    of   Nun.     In  name  and   work  a 

Ver.   17.     Bedan  (cf.  mentioned   in  type   of   Jesus;    yet  a   contrast  (Jos. 

1  Sam.  xii.  11).     A  great  deliverer  in  xiii.  8-16).     Human  life  a  register  and 

Israel.  rapid  genealogy,  but  we  have  a  place 

Ver.  24.   Loss  replaced  or  a  famous  and  work. 


CHAi-   vin.j  tiOMILETIC    COMMEM'ARY .   CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

Cbitical  Notes.]    Benjamin^  son  of  Bilhan  (vii.  10),  great-grandson  of  son  of  itacob. 

Posterity  giveu  on  account  of  history  of  Saul.  This  tribe  remained  faithful  during  the 
revolt  of  the  ten,  and  reiurned  with  Judah  from  Babylon. 

Vers.  3-5. — The  nine  sons  of  this  Bela  are  all  different  in  name  from  the  five  sons  of 
the  earlier  Bela  (vii.  7).  The  names  Gera,  Naaman,  and  Shephuphan  (Num.  xxvi.  39) 
are  heirlooms  from  the  household  of  the  former  Benjamin  (Judg.  iii.  15)  \^Murplnj~\. 

Vers.  <!-12. — Ehud  same  as  vii.  10  ;  others  either  Abihud  of  ver.  3,  or  Ahoah  of  ver.  4. 
Some  of  sons  heads  of  houses  in  Geba,  nov/  Jeba,  probably  removed  by  force  to  Manhahath, 
ver  7.  Ver.  8.  "  Sliar,  from  some  untold  cause,  made  a  temporary  migration  to  the  plains 
of  Moab,  as  Elimelech  and  David  afterwards  (Ruth  i.  2  ;  1  Sam.  xx.  3)."  Ver.  9.  Hodesh^ 
third  wife,  from  whom  seven  sons,  some  names  indicating  Moabitish  affinity.  Ver.  12. 
These  places  mentioned,  Ezra  ii.  33  ;  Neh  vii.  37.  Lod,  same  as  Lydda  (Acts  ix.  32), 
•which  is  now  J^ydd  [Speak.  Com-I.  Ver.  13.  Ber.  and  Sh.^  names  to  be  attached  to  last 
verse  to  complete  list  of  sons  of  Elpaal  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Vers.  14-18. — Nine  sons  of  Beriah,  vers.  14-16  ;  seven  other  sons  of  Elpaal,  vers.  17,  18; 
twelve  altogether. 

Vers.  19-21. — Nine  sons  of  Shimi,  the  Shema  (ver.  13),  son  of  Elpaal,  associated  with 
Beriah. 

Vers.  22-28. — Eleven  sons  of  Shashak,  son  of  Beriah,  ver.  14.  Ver.  27  Jerokam  as 
Jeremoth,  ver.  14.  Ver.  28.  These,  descendants  of  Bilhan,  given  from  beginning  of  ch. 
Dwelt.  Jerusalem  partly  witfhin  the  limits  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  (Jos.  xviii  28)  ;  but 
we  do  not  hear  of  Benjamites  inhabiting  it  until  return  from  Captivity  (1  Chr.  ix.  13 ; 
Neh.  xi.  4). 

Fers.  29-40.— Genealogy  of  Saul  and  Jonathan.  (x/Jeow,  not  Gibeah,  capital  of  Saul's 
kingdom  (1  Sam.  x.  26;  xiii.  2);  modern  name  El-jib,  five  or  six  miles  from  Jerusalem. 
Father,  i.e.,  chief  of  city,  whose  name  Jehiel  dropped  out  here,  but  given  ch.  ix.  35,  where 
this  genealogy  is  repeated.  Ver.  30.  i?aa/,  between  which  and  Nadab  should  come  "  Ner,'* 
restored  ch.  ix.  36;  Zacher  (Zacchariah),  to  which  add  Mikloth,  ch.  ix.  37.  Ver.  33.  Kish^ 
called  after  his  uncle,  ver.  30.  Abinadab,  another  name  for  Ishui,  1  Sam.  xiv.  49  ;  xxxi.  2. 
Esh-baal  Ish-bosheth  ("  man  of  shame  ").  as  Jerub-baal  and  Jerub-besheth,  2  Sam.  xi.  21. 
Merib-baal  ("  striving  with  Baal  ")  called  Mephi-bosheth,  2  Sam.  iv.  2.  Ver.  36.  Jehodah^ 
Jarah  in  parallel  list  ch.  ix.  42  ;  and  Kapha  (ver.  87)  Rephaiah  (ver.  43).  Ver.  40.  This 
genealogy  of  the  house  of  Saul  appears,  by  the  number  of  generations,  to  belong  probably 
to  time  of  Hezekiah  (c/.  ch.  iv.  41).  Ulam's  "  sons'  sons"  are  in  the  thirteenth  generation 
from  Jonathan,  as  Hezekiah  is  in  the  thirteenth  generation  from  David  [^Speak.  Com.l* 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Nature  op  Inspired  History. — Verses  1-40. 

I.  The  materials  of  which  it  is  composed.      Persons  and  events 

histories  and  genealogies,  exhortations  and  warnings,  giving  variety  and  interest. 
II.  The  difficulties  which  surround  it.  In  names  and  repeti- 
tions, chronology,  numbers,  and  authorship.  Difficulties  in  history  and  condi- 
tion of  text  itself.  But  these  do  not  destroy  the  value  of  the  record.  Difficulties 
an  evidence  in  favour  of  its  Divine  character,  in  harmony  with  its  professed 
design,  and  a  moral  test  and  training.  **  The  very  difficulties  and  limitations  of 
revelation  are  adapted  to  the  conditions  of  moral  growth.  It  requires  and  repays 
toil.  It  tasks,  tries,  and  puzzles  and  strengthens  faith.  It  is  like  man  to  make 
everything  regular,  easy,  and  plain  ;  but  that  is  not  like  the  God  of  nature,  of 
history,  and  of  the  Bible  "  \Smyth\  III.  The  principles  on  which  it 
is  written.  Special  in  design  ;  substantial  unity  in  authorship,  periods,  and 
growth.  Hence  care  in  choice  of  matter,  and  providence  in  preservation  of  the 
records.     Methods  to  bring  in  prominence  and  to  keep  in  shade.     Records  in 

29 


BOJMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONtCLBS.  [ottAP.  nil. 


full,  and  apparently  insignificant  allusions ;  but  one  grand  aim,  one  directing 
force,  one  unbroken  leadership  in  all  ages,  arranging  and  guiding  for  the  accom« 
plishment  of  one  purpose. 

The  Tribe  of  Benjamin. — Verses  1-32. 

The  tribe  mentioned,  .;h.  vii.  6—12 ;  reverted  to  because  Saul,  the  first  king  of 
Israel,  came  from  this  tribe.  The  genealogy  contains  its  chief  men,  and  forms 
an  introduction  to  the  history  recorded  in  these  books.  I.  The  chang^es 
through  which  it  passed.  Its  history  to  entrance  into  Promised  Land 
as  meagre  as  afterwards  full.  After  departure  from  Egypt,  the  smallest  tribe 
but  one  (Num.  i.  36) ,  in  the  time  of  the  Judges  involved  in  civil  war,  upon  the 
occasion  of  iniquity  of  Gibeah,  almost  extinguished,  and  little  hope  of  revival, 
for  nearly  all  women  slain,  and  the  eleven  other  tribes  bound  by  oath  not  to 
marry  their  daughters  to  any  man  belonging  to  Benjamin  (Judg.  xix.  20,  21  ; 
xxi.  10,  21).  But  increase  of  tribe  so  rapid,  that  in  time  of  David  it  numbered 
69,434  able  men  (1  Chr.  vii.  6-12);  in  that  of  Asa,  280,000  (2  Chr.  xiv.  8); 
and  in  that  of  Jehoshaphat,  200,000  (2  Chr.  xvii.  17).  The  tribe  honoured 
with  giving  the  first  king  to  Israel,  and  after  the  exile,  along  with  Judah^  con- 
stituted the  flower  of  the  Jewish  colony  (cf,  Ezra  xi.  1  ;  x.  9).  II.  The 
notices  by  "which  it  is  characterised.  Several  circumstances  con- 
duce to  the  importance  of  this  small  tribe.  1.  The  only  tribe  that  produced 
skilful  archers,  men  expert  with  the  bow,  ver.  40  {cf.  1  Sam.  xx.  20  ;  2  Sam. 
i.  22;  2  Chr.  xvii.  17),  and  with  sling  (Judg.  xx.  16).  2.  From  this  tribe 
sprang  a  deliverer.  After  first  conquest  of  country  the  nation  under 
foreign  yoke,  groaned  in  misery,  and  turned  to  Ehud,  son  of  Gera,  for  help 
(ver.  6).  Proficient  in  use  of  left  hand,  a  practice  confined  to  Benjamites, 
who  did  work  with  small  risk  {cf.  Judg.  iii.  15;  xx.  16;  1  Chr.  xii.  2).  3. 
Baanah  and  Rechab,  captains  of  predatory  bands,  were  of  "  the  children  of 
Benjamin  **  (2  Sam.  iv.  2). 

The  Rotal  Family. — Verses  33-40. 

A  particular  account  given.  I,  Its  head  or  chief.  "  Saul,  son  of  Kish.* 
Good-looking  and  of  commanding  appearance,  the  choice  of  Israel,  but  not  by 
the  will  of  God  (1  Sam.  ix.  2).  A  man  of  valour,  with  capacity  to  govern 
and  lead  ;  the  first  king  of  Israel  who  occupied  a  position  between  the  heroic 
age  of  Judges  and  the  settled  monarchy  of  David  and  Solomon.  II.  Its 
posterity.  Numerous,  able,  and  honoured  in  sacred  genealogy.  Jonathan's 
line  given  for  about  ten  generations.  The  list  ends  in  Ulam,  whose  family 
became  famous  in  the  tribe  (ver.  40),  and  qualified  to  serve  their  country.  This 
better  than  wealth  and  high  position.  In  this  list  trace  the  hand  of  David  in 
fulfilling  his  promise  (1  Sam.  xx.  15  ;  2  Sam.  ix.  1,  3,  7).  A  mark  of  generosity 
to  remember  in  prosperity  what  we  promised  in  adversity. 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  8  and  9.  Shaha/raim^  the  Ben-  name  for  Baara,  so  called  because  her 

jamite   polygamist,  sent   away  (by  di-  husband,  after  long  desertion,  returned 

vorce  many  think)  Hushim  and  Baara,  in  affection  to  her. 
his  wives,  and  this  prepared  the    way         Vers.  9-11.    Seven    unknown  sons. 

for    another,    Hodesh    (new,   recent).  How  many  pass  away  never  mentioned, 

Others  say  that   Hodesh   is  another  unknown  and  buried  in  oblivion  1 
30 


CHAP.   IX.] 


EOMtLETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Ver.  13.  Drove  away.  A  deed  show- 
ing— 1.  That  inheritance  gained  by  vio- 
lence may  be  taken  away  again.  It  is 
insecure.  Wicked  schemes  may  prosper, 
but  justice  tracks  their  steps  and  ruin 
is  inevitable.  '*  So  are  the  ways  of 
everyone  that  is  greedy  of  gain,  which 
taketh  away  the  Hfe  of  the  owners 
thereof."  2.  Hence  retribution  cer- 
tain. In  ch.  vii.  21,  the  men  of  Gath 
slew  the  Ephraimites;  in  this  verse 
Beriah  and  Shema  *'  drove  away  the 
inhabitants  of  Gath."  "  They  that  take 
the  swfvrd  shall  perish  with  the  sword." 

Ver.  28.  Dwelling  in  Jerusalem. 
After  return  ft'om  Babylon,  in  the  city 
was  danger,  civic  duties  and  lack  of 
population.  Hence — 1.  Preference  for 
position  of  duty  and  danger.  2.  Imi- 
tation of  noble  example.  Their  ances- 
tors dwelt  in  the  city,  and  they  were 
induced  to  take  their  place.  *'  The 
glory  of  children  are  their  fathers." 
Let  ws  become  children  of  "parents 
passed  into  the  skies,"  take  their  place 
and  carry  on  their  work.  3.  Blessed- 
ness in  the  result.  "  The  people  blessed 
all  the  men  that  willingly  offered  tliem- 
selves  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem"  (Neh. 
x\.  2). 

Ver.  33.  J<mathanf  who  was,  as  the 


Romans  said  of  Ponipey,  a  most  ami- 
able son  of  an  odious  father  \Trapp\, 

Vers.  33,  34.  Suggestive  names. 
Esh-haal,  Ishbosheth  (2  Sam.  ii.  8 ;  iii. 
7-14;  iv.  4-12).  Meri-haal,  Mephi- 
bosheth  (2  Sam.  ix.  12).  The  Hebrew 
word  hosheth  is  always  applied  in  Scrip- 
ture to  denote  an  idol,  *'  as  exposing 
the  devotee  to  shame,  as  well  as  being 
an  abomination  to  the  Lord."  Esh,  a, 
man  of  shame,  and  Merib-baal  (con- 
tender against  Ba-^1),  the  destroyer  of 
shame,  exterminator  of  idols  [Gesenius], 

Ver.  40.  All  these  sons*  1.  The 
natitral  succession  of  the  race.  We 
read  of  "  sons,"  **  children,"  and 
"  fathers,"  and  "  children's  children." 
"  One  generation  passeth  away  and 
another  generation  cometh."  *'  The 
earth  is  a  stage,  persons  passing  and 
vanishing  before  our  eyes"  [Beza'\. 
2.  The  moral  connection  of  the  race. 
Men  an  honour  or  dishonour  to  their 
own  lineage ;  influenced  by  their  fathers 
as  they  ai-e  influencing  posterity.  There 
are  laws  of  influence  and  dependence 
which  run  through  the  whole  race. 
Every  human  being  sustains  a  relation, 
possesses  a  right  and  is  endowed  with 
power  to  subserve  the  great  end.  "  No 
man  liveth  unto  himself." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Critical  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  a  list  of  inhabitants  in  Jerusalem  (vers.  1-34) ;  and 
genealogy  of  Saul  repeated  (vers.  35-44). 

Vers.  1-6. — Reckoned,  registered  in  form  of  gen.  First  after  captivity,  4  classes. 
NethinimSy  root  nathan,  "  to  give,"  a  sort  of  hieroduli,  or  sacred  slaves — persons  given  to 
Levites  to  perform  lower  and  more  laborious  duties  of  sanctuary  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  3.  Eph. 
and  Man.,  some  attached  themselves  to  David  whea  a  fugitive,  and  were  citizens  of  Jeru- 
salem wh«n  it  became  capital  (2Chr.  xxiv.  9).  Vers.  4-6.  Sons  of  Judah.  Uthai,  chief  of 
family  called  after  his  name  and  not  same  as  Atliaiah  in  Neh  xi.  4  [cf.  MurpJti/].  Ver.  5. 
Shilonites  (Shelani),  family  of  Shelah,  third  son  of  Judah  (ch.  iv.  21).  ZeraK  not  men- 
tioned after  return,  though  an  officer  of  this  house  was  in  Persian  court  (Neh.  xi.  24). 

Vers.  7-9.— Sons  of  Benjamin.  Sallu's  gen.  different  from  that  in  Neh.  xi.  7,  8.  Vers.  10-13. 
Three  priests,  heads  of  families  in  Jerusalem,  origin  of  their  names  found  in  ch. 
xxiv.  7-17. 

Vers.  14^1Q.— Levites.  Shemaiah  head  (Neh.  xi.  15).  Nehop-«^!ili  and  author  of  Chronicles 
fairly  agree.  The  principal  differences  are  that  Nchemiah  contracts  "  Obadiah "  into 
••  Abda"  (ver.  17),  gives  Shemaiah  an  additional  ancestor,  liunni  (ver.  15),  and  in  gen.  of 
Matauiah  Bubstitutea  ♦'  Zabdi  "  fct  »•*  Zichri  "  (ver.  16)  ISpeak.  Com.]. 

31 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENrARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  n. 


Vers,  17-27.— Porters,  i.e.,  keepers  of  the  temple  gates  (2  Sam.  xvii.  26 ;  Mark  xiii.  3 ; 
John  X.  3).  Ver.  18.  Companies,  orders  or  courses  of  sei  vice.  Ver.  19.  Korahites  occupied 
a  higher  position,  their  office  more  directly  connected  with  sacred  service  than  others. 
Ver.  21.  Porter,  chief  in  reign  of  David  (ch.  xxvi.  1,  2  ;  xxvii.  2).  Tabernacle,  lit.  tent 
of  meeting  (Ex.  xxix.  42),  and  points  to  tabernacle  on  Mount  Zion  in  time  of  David. 
Ver.  22.  Seer,  ancient  popular  term  for  prophet.  Ver.  23.  Children,  office  hereditary; 
wards,  according  to  watches  in  set  time.  Ver.  24.  Quarters  {cf.  ver.  18  and  ch.  xxvi  14-16). 
Ver.  25.  Sevm  >  2  Kings  xi.  5),  change  of  watch  on  Sabbath,  which  began  at  sunset. 
Ver.  26.  Ch^ivibers,  for  use  of  priests  (1  Kings  vi.  6  ;  xii.  18  ;  xxii.  14).  Ver.  27.  Lodged 
during  week  of  office. 

Vers.  28-34. — Various  other  functions  of  Levites.  Charge  of  vessels,  "  sacrificial  bowls, 
fcrays  for  the  shew-bread.  and  cups  and  flagons  for  the  libations,  vessels  for  holding  stores 
not  directly  used  in  worship,"  also  ver.  29.  Charge  of  ointment,  compounding  which  of 
special  service,  ver.  30  {cf.  Ex.  xxx.  23).  Charge  of  baking,  ver.  31.  Charge  of  shew-bread^ 
laid  in  order  on  table  every  Sabbath,  ver.  32  [cf.  Lev.  xxiv.  8).  Charge  of  singing,  ver.  33, 
free  from  any  special  duty  besides  supervision,  therefore  could  devote  themselves  night 
and  day.     Ver.  34.  Closes  first  part  of  chapter. 

Vers.  35-44. — A  repetition  of  ch.  viii.  29-38.  Some  propose  to  cancel  in  one  place  or 
other.  This  unnecessary,  ftlif  given  wi  both  places.  In  ch.  viii.  an  account  of  sub- 
divicions  of  tribe  of  Benjamin,  and  could  not  properly  omit  the  most  celebrated  family 
of  that  tribe,  that  of  Saul.  Here  bent  on  connecting  the  genealogical  section  of  work 
with  historical,  and  find  it  most  convenient  to  effect  the  junction  by  re-introducing 
the  gen.  of  the  person  with  whose  death  his  historical  section  opens  {^Speak.  Com.}, 

HOMILETIGS. 

Returned  Exhes. — Ver$e  2. 

First  implies  that  others  returned  and  settled  afterwards  in  places  not  occu- 
pied by  first.  Numbers  returned  successively  under  Ezra,  Neiiemiah,  and  in 
later  periods.  Some  who  returned  to  the  ancient  inheritance  had  lived  before 
time  of  captivity  (Ezra  iii.  12;  Hag.  ii.  4-10).  Four  classes,  representatives 
mentioned.  1.  Israelites.  Laymen.  The  whole  nation  including  Judah.  The 
name  "  Jews "  gradually  supplanted  the  name  *'  Israelites,"  especially  among 
foreigners.  2.  Priests.  Mediation  essential  idea  of  priesthood.  Israel  had  re- 
presentatives between  them  and  Jehovah.  The  office  typical,  and  a  perpetual 
inheritance  from  father  to  son.  3.  Levites.  A  special  order  to  aid  priests  in 
higher  functions.  The  first-born  performed  priestly  offices  before  the  organised 
temple  service.  To  prevent  disorder  in  domestic  relations,  and  secure  greater 
efficiency,  primogeniture  conferred  upon  tribe  of  Levi,  which  was  to  give  undi- 
vided attention  to  duties  of  the  sanctuary  (Num.  iii.  11-13).  They  had  to  guard 
tabernacle  and  temple,  take  charge  of  vessels,  and  encamp  round  the  tabernacle 
to  form  a  partition  between  it  and  the  people.  4.  Nethinims.  As  Levites,  so 
these  were  given  to  help.  A  great  increase  of  them  when  Gibeonites  submitted 
(Jos.  ix.  23) ;  enlargement  made  by  David  (Ezra  viii.  20).  After  return  from 
captivity,  their  services  most  important  on  account  of  small  number  of  Levites 
who  returned  (Ezra  ii.  40).  These  classes  set  forth  different  kinds  of  Christian 
work.  "  In  the  work  of  the  service,"  positions  of  trust  and  honour,  duties 
lowly  and  menial,  variety  and  unity.  All  appointed  by  God,  calUng  forth  abiHty 
and  activity  of  man.     "  Who,  then,  is  willing  to  consecrate  himself  ?  '* 

Ability  for  God's  Service  .-^Fer^es  13—24. 

The  return  was  a  critical  time,  exposing  to  danger,  requiring  courage  and 
physical  strength.  "  Able  men  for  the  work  of  the  service."  This  ability  requires 
I.  Intelligence  to  understand  the  work.  It  must  be  received  as  a 
divine  appointment,  "  ordained  in  their  set  office "  (ver.  22).  No  prosecution 
without  comprehending  its  nature,  design,  and  responsibilities.  Porters  and 
32 


ODAP.  IX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CERONICLES, 


overseers,  confectioners  and  singers,  must  train  and  cultivate  gifts  and  power  to 
work.  Be  well  informed  in  the  science  of  duty  and  of  God.  "  Take  your  wise 
men,  and  understanding:,  and  known  among  your  tribes,  and  I  will  make  them 
rulers  over  you."  II.  Perseverance  to  prosecute  the  -work. 
They  lodged  all  night  (ver.  25)  ;  attended  a  week  in  turn  (ver.  25) ;  and  were 
employed  nigh+.  and  day.  Many  get  tired,  work  half  time,  or  leave  entirely. 
The  nobles  bent  not  their  necks  to  work,  but  Nehemiah  continued  at  the  wall 
(ch.  V.  16).  Steady,  patient,  faithful  service  acceptable  to  God.  "  Continue 
thou  in  the  things  which  thou  hast  Wrned."  "  Pray  and  stay  are  two  blessed 
monosyllables  "  [I)onne\, 

Order  in  God's  Service.— Fer^es  23-34. 

Extreme  care  taken  to  secure  regularity  and  reverence  in  God's  house. 
"Order  is  heaven's  first  law."  I.  In  the  appointment  of  officers 
to  rule.  Each  his  own  place  and  authority.  Priests  at  the  altar,  porters  at 
the  gate,  and  leaders  in  the  choir.  Times  of  duty  and  relief  fixed.  Many  dis- 
orderly, unsympathetic,  and  fail.  "  For  we  sought  him  not  after  the  due  order  " 
(1  Chr.  XV.  13).  II.  In  the  regular  method  of  worship.  Variety 
but  unity.  In  sacrifices  to  present,  bread  to  lay  out,  and  songs  to  arrange, 
"  they  waited  on  their  office  according  to  their  order."  Order  gives  cheerfulness, 
alacrity,  and  success.  Disorder  produces  aversion,  resistance,  and  failure.  "  Let 
all  things  be  done  decently  and  in  order."  "  God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion" 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  33-40). 

**The  least  confusion  but  in  one,  not  all 
That  system  only,  but  the  whole  must  fall"  [Pope}, 


Pedigree  op  Saul. — Verses  35-44. 

To  construct  Saul's  genealogy,  compare  various  statements  in  Scriptures  (cf.  I 
Sam.  ix.  1 ;  xiv.  61 ;  1  Chr.  vii.  6-8;  viii.  29-33;  ix.  35-39).  In  the  choice, 
anointing,  and  pedigree  of  Saul,  which  enter  the  history  of  Israel,  notice — 1. 
The  condescension  of  God.  Both  to  human  weakness,  in  asking  a  king,  and  to 
smallest  and  apparently  trivial  events  in  life.  2.  The  sovereignty  of  God.  Inde- 
pendent of  earthly  and  human  relations.  Saul  not  notable,  from  a  prominent 
family ;  but  unknown,  *'  from  the  smallest  family  of  the  smallest  of  the  tribes." 
3.  The  providence  of  God.  In  preserving  the  record  for  the  instruction  of  others, 
"  How  has  God,  the  Holy  Ghost,  stooped  to  become  a  historian  of  the  smallest, 
most  contemptible  affairs  on  earth,  in  order  to  reveal  to  man,  in  his  own  lan- 
guage, in  his  own  business,  in  his  own  ways,  the  purposes,  the  secrets,  and  the 
ways  of  the  Deity  "  [Hamann], 


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1,2.  Carried  away.  1.  The  sin.  kept  her  Sabbaths  for  those   seventy 

2.  The  punishment.      3.  The   return,  years,  so  the  country  slumkl  be  all  that 

and    4.    The   restoration.      Many   re-  while  kept  empty,  till  tho   letui-n   of 

mained  in  Babylon,  others  returned  to  the  natives  ;  for  we  read  not  that  any 

possessions,    privileges,    and    honour,  colonies  were  sent  thither,  nor  any  dis- 

This  typical  of  spiritual  conduct.     "  A  placed  to  make  room  for  thec»e  ;\t  their 

wonderful  providence  that  as  the  land  return  "  \Trapp\ 

33 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


[OHAP.   X. 


Yer.  13.  Very  able  men.  Men  of 
valour  or  men  of  work  for  the  service; 
in  either  sense  we  get  aptitude  or  fitness 
for  service,  bodily,  mentally,  and  spiri- 
tually. "  Able  ministers  of  the  New 
Testament "  (2  Cor.  iii.  6  ',  cf,  Ep.  iii. 
7;  ITim.  i.  11,  12). 

Ver.  20.     Phineas,  highly  favoured. 

1.  God's  presence  a  mark  of  time.  In 
individual  life  and  national  history. 
**  The  object  of  this  verse  is  to  mark 
the  time  to  which  the  writer  refers  in 
the   verse   preceding "   [Speak.   Com^, 

2.  God's  presence  the  source  of  honour. 
"  The  ruler  over  them."  3.  God's  pre- 
sence the  source  of  success  in  effort. 
**  The  Lord  was  with  him  "  in  his  action 
at  Baal-peor  (Num.  xxv.). 

Yer.  22.  Samuel  the  seer  a  privi- 
leged person.  One  who  receives  dreams 
and  visions,  gets  insight  into  divine 
revelation,  and  is  consulted  by  the 
people.  All  teachers  should  be  seers 
in  opening  the  eyes  and  giving  the 


light  and   knowledge  of  God  (2  Cor 
iv.  6). 

Yer.  26.  Doorkeepers.  1.  To  open 
the  doors  of  God's  house  every  morning 
and  shut  them  at  night  (ver.  27).  2. 
To  keep  off  the  unclean  and  hinder 
those  from  intruding  who  were  foi*- 
bidden  by  the  law.  3,  To  direct  and 
introduce  into  the  courts  those  who 
came  to  worship  and  facilitate  their 
safety  and  profit  [cf.  Henry].  This 
required  zeal,  to  be  there  first;  patience, 
to  stay  until  the  last ;  and  cajre,  to  be 
exact  and  successful.  A  mean  employ- 
ment in  the  estimation  of  many. 
Nothing  mean  for  God.  "  I  would 
rather  be  a  doorkeeper  in  the  house  of 
my  God  than  to  dwell  in  the  tents  of 
wickedness." 

*♦  The  trivial  round,  the  common  task, 
Would  furnish  all  we  ought  to  ask — 
Room  to  deny  ourselves— a  road 
To  bring  us  daily  nearer  Crod  "  [iTebl*]. 


CHAPTER  X. 


OrtticaIi  Wotes.]    The  genealogical  introduction  now  closed.    Narrative  fn  twenty 

chapters  describes  the  reign  of  David.  The  first  12  verses  in  this  chapter  a  second 
edition  of  1  Sam.  xxxi.,  with  variations  in  diction  and  in  facts,  partly  from  brevity  and 
an  interval  of  five  or  six  centuries. 

Vers.  1-7. — The  death  of  Saul.  GiJboa  on  which  Gideon  triumphed  (Judg.  vii.  1-8). 
Followed.  Hebrew  implies  that  Saul  was  special  object  of  pursuit.  Vev.  2.  "  Sons  of  .S.," 
without  article:  four  altogether  (cf.  ix.  39).  Yer.  3.  Wounded^  not  dangerously,  perhaps. 
•'  Some  read  he  trernhled  before  the  archers,"  who  hit,  literally  found,  reached  him  in 
pursuing.  Ver.  4.  Abuse  me,  mock  me.  Afraid  out  of  respect  for  loyalty  and  in  the 
same  peril.  Ver.  6.  House,  not  whole  family  or  all  his  sons,  for  Ishbosheth  survived  and 
succeeded  him  in  portion  of  kingdom  (2  Sam.  ii.  8-16 ;  iii.  6-15) ;  but  "  all  his  house- 
hold," or  body  of  attendants  in  war. 

Vers.  8-12. — Treatment  of  remains.  House  of  Ashtaroth  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  10;.  Customary 
to  deposit  spoils  of  war  in  heathen  temples,  Ver.  10.  Head,  skull.  Dayun  (1  Sam.  \.  2). 
This  temple  destroyed  in  time  of  Maccabees  (1  Mace.  x.  82-85).  Tlio  headlesH  coip:-:e 
fixed  to  the  wall  of  Beth-shan  (1  Sam.  xxxi.  10).  Ver.  11.  Jab-gil.  m.ovz(!i  by  gratlluuc 
for  former  help  (1  Sam.  xi.  1-3).  Biiried  the  bones  (after  buruiuj;  of  the  bodies,  1  Sa-Lii. 
xxxi.  12)  under  oak  or  terebinth,  ♦'  the  tree  "  or  tamarisk  in  Samuel.  The  word  in  bjlh 
places  generic,  different  names  from  one  root,  refer  to  large  variety  of  oaks  [cf.  JUr.  Tho^., 
The  Ld.  and  Bk.,  pp.  243,  244]. 

Vers.  13,  li.— Moral  of  SauVs  death.  Transgression  in  sparing  king  of  Amalckitcp 
(1  Sam.  X.  8  ;  xiii.  15);  and  in  consulting  a  familiar  spirit  (1  Sam.  xxviii.).  Ver.  14. 
Inquired  in  form,  not  in  right  spirit.  Impatient  consultation  considered  by  the  writer  »& 
BO  inquiry  at  alL 

34 


CHAP.  X.1  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY!  CHRONICLES, 


HOMILETIGS. 

The  Heights  of  Gilboa. — Verses  1-6. 

Mount  Gilboa  a  noted  place  in  the  lot  of  Issachar,  "  flanked  by  the  Little 
Hermon  ridge  on  north-east,  and  by  Gilboa  on  south-east ;  a  mountain  range  of 
ten  miles  long,  about  600  feet  high,  and  mentioned  only  in  the  melancholy 
connection  of  this  history."  I.  The  important  battle.  Philistines  an 
old  and  inveterate  enemy,  more  numerous,  perhaps  better  led  and  better  posted, 
began  attack.  Some  think  Saul  had  gone  to  consult  the  witch  and  left  the  camp. 
Israel  ever  exposed  to  a  watchful  foe.  Christian  life  a  conflict.  When  thrown  off 
our  guard  and  God  forgotten,  we  are  easily  surrounded  and  overcome.  II. 
The  disgraceful  flight.  Best  of  troops  put  into  disorder.  The  people  of 
God  chased  by  the  enemy,  and  multitudes  slain !  How  different  from  yore,  when 
one  put  a  thousand  to  flight  I  But  when  a  people  walk  contrary  to  God,  He  will 
send  a  faintness  into  their  hearts,  and  the  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase 
them;  and  they  shall  flee  as  fleeing  from  a  sword;  and  they  shall  fall  when  none 
pursueth  (Lev.  xxvi.  23-36).  III.  The  pride  of  Israel  slain.  Sad 
scenes  on  Gilboa*s  top !  The  chosen  of  God  and  the  hero  of  Israel  wounded  by 
archers  and  falling  upon  his  own  sword  !  The  king's  sons,  the  bodyguard  and 
the  pride  of  his  army,  perish  with  him.  **  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  ! "  Learn 
that  one  sinner  not  only  destroyeth  much  good,  but  entails  much  suffering.  1. 
Upon  his  own  kindred.  Parents  sin,  and  children  suffer.  Princes  disobey,  and 
their  heirs  are  cut  off.  2.  In  society  at  large.  Not  only  the  family,  but  the 
subjects  of  Saul  suffered.  How  many  homes,  how  many  nations  have  been 
thrown  into  sorrow  and  deprived  of  their  glory  through  sinful  leaders  1  Achan 
perished  not  alone  in  his  iniquity.  "  If  ye  shall  still  do  wickedly,  ye  shall  be 
consumed,  both  ye  and  your  king." 

The  Death  op  Saul. — Verses  3-7,  13,  14. 

The  life  and  conduct  of  Saul  full  of  incident,  dramatic  effect,  and  solemn 
warning.     Learn — 

I.  That  a  splendid  beginning  may  have  an  awful  ending. 

Saul  loved  and  elevated,  called  from  obscurity  to  the  service  of  his  country ; 
had  gifts  of  body  and  mind  ;  but  opportunities  lost,  calling  unfulfilled,  and  life 
a  failure !  "  The  chosen  of  the  Lord  "  died  a  self-murderer  !  "  All  is  well  that 
ends  well."  II.  That  divine  judgments  overtake  men's  sins. 
*'  The  Lord  slew  him."  He  had  disobeyed  law,  defied  the  authority  of  Samuel ; 
persisted  in  his  self-will,  and  became  the  proud  controller  of  his  own  life. 
Frightful  to  die  in  rebellion,  to  rush  unbidden  into  God's  presence,  and  become  a 
monument  of  judgment !  From  Scripture,  history,  and  moral  law  we  learn  that 
*'  God  overthroweth  the  wicked  for  their  wickedness."  III.  That  in 
national  calamities  the  godly  suffer  with  the  ungodly.    The 

sons,  the  family,  and  the  dynasty  of  Saul  suffered  through  his  guilt.  Sin  is 
personal,  but  its  consequences  extensive  and  self-propagating.  The  innocent 
involved  by  the  guilty.  A  father's  conduct  ruins  the  children ;  a  monarch's 
government  destroys  the  nation.  If  by  the  arrangements  of  society  and  by  the 
law  of  influence  we  entail  good  or  evil,  let  the  ungodly  beware  and  the  righteous 
be  faithful,  "  for  none  of  us  liveth  to  himself." 

Scenes  in  the  Capital  of  Gath.^ Fer«M  7-10. 

I.  Tidings  of  the  deaths  of  the  royal  family.  When  day  after 
battle  dawned,  the  Philistines  found  dead  bodies  of  father  and  three  sons. 

36 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [cnks.  x. 


Tidings  told  in  capital  of  Gath  and  published  in  the  streets  of  Ashkelon.  II. 
Welcome  to  the  victorious  army.  Daughters  of  accursed  race 
rejoiced  and  welcomed  back  their  victorious  army.  Retribution  had  come  for 
the  fall  of  their  champion  leader.  III.  Trophies  suspended  in  the 
tem.ple  of  the  gods.  This  customary.  "As  head  and  sword  of  Goliath 
were  carried  off  to  the  sanctuary,  so  head  of  Saul  cut  off  and  fastened  to  the 
temple  of  Dagon  at  Ashdod,  and  his  arms — the  spear  on  which  he  had  so  often 
rested,  the  sword  and  the  famous  bow  of  Jonathan — were  sent  round  in  festive 
processions  to  the  Philistine  cities,  and  finally  deposited  in  the  temple  of 
Ashtaroth,  in  the  Canaanitish  city  of  Bethshan,  hard  by  the  fatal  field.  On  the 
walls  of  the  same  city,  overhanging  the  public  place  in  front  of  the  gates,  were 
hung  the  stripped  and  dismembered  corpses."  A  lasting  memorial  of  Israel's 
ignominious  defeat  and  subjugation. 


The  Devoted  City. — Verses  11, 13. 

I.  The  patriotism  of  the  city.  In  general  defection  trans- Jordanic 
towns  loyal  to  the  fallen  house.  .Jabesh-gilead  specially  devoted.  Concerned 
for  the  land  defiled  by  exposure  of  dead  bodies,  and  for  the  crown  of  Israel 
profaned  by  uncircunicised.  II.  The  zeal  of  the  city.  Enthusiasm 
contagious.  Seen—l.Inarmingihe2^eo2)le.  "  All  the  valiant  men  arose."  2. 
In  a  successful  raid  A  long  journey,  a  distance  of  about  twelve  miles ; 
dangerous  in  the  night,  and  by  a  narrow  upland  passage;  guard  surprised  and 
bodies  rescued.  III.  The  gratitude  of  the  city.  All  this  in  remem- 
brance of  services  rendered  by  Saul  against  their  enemies  (1  Sam.  xi.  1-13). 
Gratitude  expressed— 1.  In  solemn  funeral  rites  ;  and  2.  In  fasting  and  sorroio. 
Rare  to  show  gratitude  to  a  fallen  foe.  This  act  commended  by  David  (2  Sam. 
ii.  5),  and  mentioned  by  Josephus  {Antiq.  vi.  6,  ch.  xiv.,  sect.  8).  ^  Cherish  the 
memory  of  past  help ;  repay  when  opportunity  comes,  for  come  it  will.  You 
shall  reap  what  you  sow,  a  reward  from  God  and  man.  "  The  Lord  show 
kindness  and  truth  unto  you ;  and  I  also  will  requite  you  this  kindness,  because 
ye  have  done  this  thing  "  (2  Sam.  ii.  6). 


Saul's  Transgression. — Verse  14. 

I.  He  "was  a  disobedient  king:.  God's  command  definite:  "Slay 
man  and  woman."  Saul's  conduct  was  partial,  he  spared  Agag  the  king,  and 
kept  best  of  cattle  (1  Sam.  xvi.  1).  Men  never  prosper  who  violate  God's 
commands.  Sooner  or  later  punishment  overtakes  them.  Adam,  Balaam, 
Jonah.  II,  He  was  an  untruthful  king.  ''I  have  performed  the 
commandment  of  the  Lord."  Saul  had  a  bad  heart  and  a  false  tongue.  He 
coveted  Agar's  wealth  and  Samuel's  blessing.  The  bleeting  of  sheep  convicted 
the  lying  king.  God  will  expose  the  untruthful.  Abraham,  Ananias,  &c.  III. 
He  was  a  hypocritical  king:.  "  The  people  spared  the  fattest  of  the 
sheep  and  the  oxen  to  sacrifice  to  the  Lord."  When  convicted  of  sin  he  blamed 
the  people,  but  attributes  their  sin  to  a  sacred  motive.  Hypocrisy  adorns  herself 
in  the  most  attractive  attire.  One  sin  opens  the  gates  for  another.  Dis- 
obedience leads  to  falsehood ;  falsehood  to  hypocrisy;  hypocrisy  to  ruin.  Bad 
men  disqualify  themselves  for  exalted  positions.  AVhen  kings  refuse  to  obey 
God,  he  will  cut  them  off.  When  great  men  fail,  God  appoints  their  successors. 
God  can  raise  up  men  for  the  most  arduous  duties  [J,  T,  Woodkouse^ 


CHAP.    X.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


The  Lost  Kingdom. — Verse  14. 

I.  tiOSt  through  sin.  Disobedience,  obstinate  pride,  and  self-will.  II, 
Transferred  by  divine  appointment.  "  He  turned  the  kingdom  unto 
David,  the  son  of  Jesse."  God  overturns  one  and  raises  up  another.  Royalty 
no  shelter  against  judgments,  power  no  defence  against  heaven.  "  Thy  kingdom 
shall  not  continue."  A  proud  man,  elated  by  talent  and  success ;  a  boasting 
church,  a  people  glorying  in  wealth  or  wisdom,  in  anything  but  Christ,  may 
soon  be  abased.  God  brings  down  the  mighty  from  their  seats  and  exalts  the 
humble,  "  to  the  intent  that  the  living  may  know  that  the  Most  High  ruleth  in 
the  kingdom  of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  will." 


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND   SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1-7.  Battle  against  Saul,  who 
was — 1.  Ahandoned  to  despair.  "Sore 
afraid,"  ver.  4,  i.e.,  he  trembled,  was 
friorhtened  at  archers.  After  scene  of 
Endor  might  well  fear.  2.  Failed  in 
resources.  No  prophet,  no  divine  guid- 
ance, sorely  wounded  and  unable  to 
defend  himself.  A  fearful  thing  to 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God. 

Ver.  2.  Jonathan.  That  peerless 
prince,  the  glory  of  chivalry,  that  lumen 
et  columen  of  his  country.  He  dieth 
among  the  rest,  and  hath  his  share  as 
deep  as  any  other  in  that  common 
calamity;  so  true  is  that  of  Solomon, 
**  There  is  one  event  to  the  righteous 
and  to  the  wicked  "  (Ecc.  ix.  1,2);  but 
God  maketh  them  to  differ  (Mai. 
in.  18),  as  the  harvest-man  cutteth 
down  the  good  corn  and  the  weeds  to- 
gether, but  for  a  different  purpose 
\Trapp\ 

Ver.  4.  Ahuse  me,  i.e.,  my  body, 
whereof  he  took  more  care  than  for  his 
precious  soul.  A  common  fault.  His 
body  was  abused  nevertheless  [IVapp^. 
Ver.  5.  Fell  likewise.  Evil  examples, 
especially  of  the  great,  never  escaped 
imitation :  the  armour-bearer  of  Saul 
follows  his  master,  and  dares  do  that 
to  himself  which  to  his  king  he  durst 
not  [Bj?.  Hall].  Fell  by  Saul's  evil 
example,  and  perhaps  in  love  to  him, 
as  loth  to  outlive  him  whom  he  had 
held  the  joy  of  his  heart,  the  breath  of 
his  nostrils.  He  had  done  better  if  he 
had  died  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  in 
his  master's  defence  [Trajjp]. 

Ver.  4.     Suicide  as  illustrated  by  the 
case   qf   Said,      I.    C«  ises :     1.     Not 


merely  accumulated  misfortunes,  but 
long-continued  wrongdoing ;  2.  Cow- 
ardly fear  of  suffering  (ver.  3),  even  in 
a  man  formerly  brave  ;  3.  Caring  more 
for  disgrace  than  for  sin  ;  4.  Abandon- 
ment of  trust  in  God  as  to  this  life 
and  the  future  life.  II.  Effects:  1. 
Others  led  by  the  example  into  the 
same  folly  and  sin  (ver.  5);  2.  Personal 
dishonour  not  really  prevented  (vers. 
4,  9,  10) ;  3.  A  crowning  and  lasting 
reproach  to  the  man's  memory  \Lange\. 

Vers.  11,  12.  Exploit  of  men  of 
Jabesh-gilead.  1.  It  was  a  brave  deed; 
2.  A  patriotic  deed;  3.  A  grateful 
deed  (ch.  xi);  4.  But  the  bravery, 
patriotism,  and  gratitude  had  been 
better  shown  before  Saul's  death  by 
helping  him  (which  they  do  not  appear 
to  have  done).  Honours  after  death 
make  poor  amends  for  neglect  and 
unfaithfulness  during  life;  5.  And 
care  of  the  poor  remains  could  avail 
little  for  the  man's  reputation  in  this 
world,  and  nothing  for  his  repose  in 
eternity  [Lange]. 

Ver.  13.  A  familiar  spirit.  He 
turned  aside  (1  Sam.  xii.  20),  indicat- 
ing not  only  external  defection  in  non- 
fulfilment  of  the  word,  but  internal,  a 
falling  away  in  fellowship  and  walk 
with  God,  was  not  subject  to  God's 
will  and  word.  Learn— 1.  The  possibility 
that  a  man  may  fall  from  spiritual  com- 
mimion  with  the  divine  and  invisible. 
"  God  is  departed  from  me  and  an- 
swereth  me  no  more,  neither  by  pro- 
phets nor  by  dreams."  2.  The  rapidity 
with  rvhich  a  man  may  faU  from 
the  highest  eminence,     "Because  thou 

37 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[OHAP.  ZI. 


obeyedst  not,  therefore  hath  the  Lord      old  teachers.     "  Bring  me  up  Samuel 
done  this  thing."    3.  The  certainty  that      [City  Temple^  vol.  i.]. 
OTie  day  the  impenitent  will  wa/nt  their 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  X. 


Ver.  6.  SaTJit  died.  There  is  not 
in  sacred  history,  or  in  any  other,  a 
character  more  melancholy  to  contem- 
plate than  that  of  Saul.  Naturally 
humble  and  modest,  though  of  strong 
passions,  he  might  have  adorned  a 
private  station.  In  circumstances 
which  did  not  expose  him  to  tempta- 
tion, he  would  probably  have  acted 
virtuously.  But  his  natural  rashness 
was  controlled  neither  by  a  powerful 
understanding  nor  a  scrupulous  con- 
science, and  the  obligations  of  duty 
and  the  ties  of  gratitude,  always  felt 
by  him  too  sliglitly,  were  totally  dis- 
regarded when  ambition,  envy,  and 
jealousy  had  taken  possession  of  his 
mind.  The  diabolical  nature  of  these 
passions  is  seen,  with  frightful  dis- 
tinctness, in  Saul,  whom  their  indul- 
gence transformed  into  an  unnatural 
monster,  who  constantly  exhibited  the 


moral  infatuation  so  common  among 
those  who  have  abandoned  themselves 
to  sin,  of  thinking  that  the  punish- 
ment of  one  crime  may  be  escaped  by 
the  perpetration  of  another.  In  him 
also  is  seen  the  moial  anomaly  or  con- 
tradiction which  would  be  incredible 
did  we  not  often  witness  it,  of  an  in- 
dividual pursuing  habitually  a  course 
which  his  better  nature  pronounces 
not  only  flagitious,  but  insane  (1  Sam. 
xxiv.  16-22).  Saul  knew  that  the 
person  should  be  king  \v4iom  he  per- 
sisted in  seeking  to  destroy,  and  so 
accelerated  his  own  ruin  \^Kitto]. 

Ver.  14.  Turned.  Because  of  un- 
righteous dealings,  the  kingdom  is 
turned  from  one  people  to  another 
(Ecclus.  X.  8). 

*'  Kings  then  at  last  have  but  the  lot  of  all, 
By  their  own  conduct  they  must  stand 
or  fall "  [CWper], 


CHAPTER  XL 


Cbitical  Notes.]  The  writer  here  passes  by  the  7^  years  of  David's  reign  over  Jndah, 
at  which  he  had  glancei  in  his  introductory  section  (chap.  iii.  4),  and  hastens  to  the 
glorious  period  of  his  inauguration  as  king  over  the  whole  people  of  Israel.  This,  as 
we  learn  from  2  Sam.  iv.  5,  was  at  the  death  of  Ish-bosheth,  who  succeeded  Saul  as  king 
over  all  the  tribes,  except  that  of  Judah  [^Spcak.  Com.'\, 

Vers.  1-4. — David  made  king,  Hebron,  chap.  iii.  4,  an  ancient  royal  and  priestly  city 
(Jos.  xii.  10;  xxi.  11  j;  most  mountainous,  safest  part  of  Judah,  and  divinely  selected 
(2  Sam.  ii.  1).  Yer.  3.  Covenant,  "  league"  (2  Sam.  v.  3).  By  Samuel  (cf.  ver.  10).  added 
by  writer  to  mark  divine  origin  of  Davidic  Monarchy,  which  he  had  not  previously 
declared  [cf.  Speak.  Com.'\ — covenant,  a  solemn  transaction  before  the  Lord,  united 
monarch  and  people  in  terms  of  government  and  obedience. 

Fers\  4-9.  — Zion  taken  from  Jebusites.  Jebuz  (cf.  Josh.  xv.  8 ;  Judg.  xix.  10).  Ver.  5 
Said  abbreviates  ;  full  speech  2  Sam.  v.  6.  Zion  mentioned  first  in  2  Sam,  v.  7,  mean- 
ing lofty,  bare,  rocky  top,  exposed  to  sun;  Heb.  a  fortified  place.  City  extended  northward 
and  southward  ;  the  royal  residence  and  stronghold.  Ver.  6.  Chief  head  of  government. 
Captain  command  of  army.  Prowess  of  Joab  on  this  occasion,  and  the  part  which  he 
took  in  building  city  of  David,  known  only  from  this  passage —rc/)aire<f  breaches  made  in 
siege,  rebuilt  houses,  demolished  and  reconstructed  old  part  of  city  occupied  by  Jebas. 
David  built  a  new  town. 

Ter.  9. — Waxed.  Literally,  "  went  on  and  grew  great,"  as  2  Sam.  v.  10.  Hosts.  Sept., 
the  Lord  Omnipotent. 

38 


CHIP.  XI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES. 


Vers,  10-47. — David^s  mighty  men  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  8-39).  Strengthened^  exerted  them 
selves  ;  ♦•  assisted  with  all  Israel  in  making  David  king  "—margin,  "  held  fast  v^ith  him 
in  affection  and  obedience.  Ver.  11.  Number.  In  Hebrew  a  plural  pronoun  ("  these  "; 
and  a  singular  noun.  Moreover,  the  number  not  given  ;  therefore  read,  "  These  are  the 
names"  [:^peak.  Com.'].  J  ash.,  called  son  of  Zabdiel  ^ch.  xxvii.  2);  hence  grandson  ol 
Hachmoni  (c/.  ch.  xxvii.  32).  Three,  800  in  2  Sani.  xxiii.  8.  One  or  other  of  these  corrupt 
iSpeak.  Com.'\.  Some  suppose  he  attacked  800  and  slew  300  of  them.  Ver.  12.  Eleazar 
and  Jashobeam  only  two  here  ;  Shammah  third  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  11.  Ver.  13.  Pas.  Place 
where  Goliath  slain,  between  Shoehoh  and  Azekah  (1  Sam.  xvii.  1).  Ver.  14.  Parcel. 
This  achievement  given  in  detail  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  9-11).  Eleazar  had  given  up  from 
fatigue,  and  then  Shammah  helped  by  his  prowess  to  keep  the  field.  These  feats  per- 
formed when  David  acted  as  general  of  daul  against  Philistines.  Vers.  15-19.  Feat  of 
three  men  of  the  thirty  mentioned  in  vers.  26-40.  Rock  {cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  13).  Ver.  17. 
Well  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  15-17).  This  feat  performed  by  a  second  three,  Abishai  chief  (ver.  20) ; 
not  the  three  in  vers.  15—19.  Ver.  21.  Hon.,  yet  not  on  a  par  with  first  three.  Ver.  22.  Kab. 
South  of  Judah  (Jos.  .xv«  21 ;  Neh.  xi.  25).  Many,  three  daring  deeds  given  as  specimens. 
Lionlike,  two  Ariels ;  literally,  lions  of  God,  great  lions,  or  champions  in  David's  war  with 
Moab  (2  Sam.  viii.  2).  Ver.  23.  Stature,  i.e.,  measure,  aspect,  conspicuous  for  size. 
Ver.  24.  Three  mighties.  The  second  three,  of  whom  Benaiah  held  second  place.  Ver.  25. 
Guard,  Ges.  gives  "David  took  him  into  his  privy  council,"  as  margin  of  2  Sam.  xxiii.  23. 
He  was  captain  over  Kerethi  and  Pelethi,  a  body-guard  of  the  king.  Vers.  26-47.  The 
'iS  men  of  war.  "Valiant  men  of  the  armies"  {cf  list  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  24-38).  Asahel 
(2  Sam.  ii.  18).  Ver.  27.  Haroite,  Harodite,  a  native  of  Harod  (Jud.  vii.  1).  Helez  "the 
Paltite."  Ver.  28.  Tekoite  of  Tekoa  (2  Sam.  xiv.  2).  Antothite,  of  Anathoth  (Jos,  xxi.  18). 
Ver.  29.  Sih.,  Mebunnai  in  Sam.  I/ai,  Zalmon.  Ver.  30.  Mah.,  chief  of  detachment  of 
guards  (ch.  xxvii.  13).  Ver.  39.  Nah.,  armour-bearer  to  Joab.  Vers.  41-47.  These  sixteen 
are  a  supplement  to  Samuel.  Uriah,  well  known  (2  Sam.  xi.) ;  the  others  associated  with 
places  unknown,  or  connected  with  cities  and  districts  on  east  of  Jordan. 


EOMILETIGS. 

The  Chosen  King. — Verses  1-4. 

After  the  death  of  Saul,  countiy  on  east  of  Jordan,  and  in  short  time  west 
also,  with  exception  of  province  of  Judah,  over  which  David  ruled  in  Hebron, 
was  brought,  by  skilful  generalship  of  Abner,  to  acknowledge  Ishbosheth  as 
king  (2  Sam.  ii.  8  seq.).  Not  till  Abner  and  Ishboshelh  were  dead,  and  no  one 
left  belonging  to  house  of  Saul,  but  lame  Meribosheth,  who  was  then  only 
twelve  years  old,  that  all  the  Israelites  resolved  to  make  David  king.  These 
verses  an  account  of  the  assembly  in  which  the  resolution  was  carried  into 
effect  \Keil\ 

I.  The  reasons  for  the  choice  of  a  king:.    N^ot  a  rash,  blind,  and 

imprudent  choice.  1.  Blood  relatio7iship.  ''We  are  thy  bone  and  thy  flesh." 
Close  and  affectionate  relationship,  whi{}h  ensured  deep  interest  and  patriotism. 
2.  Military  leadership.  "  Thou  wast  he  that  leddest  out  and  broughtest  in." 
Past  services  of  value,  who  so  likely  in  future  to  rule?  Qualifications  for 
leadership,  inborn,  called  out  by  circumstances  and  cultured  under  a  sense  of 
responsibility.  Prove  men  before  you  choose  them  for  office.  "  Let  these  also 
first  be  proved."  3.  Divine  afpointment.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  said."  Samuel 
the  seer,  who  anointed  Saul,  nominated  his  successor.  David  often  designated, 
now  chosen  by  the  nation.  Trial  and  patient  waiting  now  rewarded.  Time 
fulfilled,  all  things  ready,  and  **  they  anointed  David  king  over  Israel  according 
to  the  word  of  the  Lord."  II.  The  duties  of  the  chosen  king". 
*'  Thou  shalt  feed  my  people  Israel,  &c."  This  first  time,  the  king  called  pastor. 
Ti>e  sei'vant  described  as  the  master;  the  under-shepLerd's  duty  like  that  of 
chief -shepherd.  1.  To  rule.  Not  in  pride  and  tyranny,  but  in  love  and 
humility ;  respecting  liberty,  property,  and  human  life.  "  He  that  ruleth  over 
men  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God"  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  3).  2.  To  feed.  The 
true  king  a  real  shepherd  to  his  people,  watching  over  their  interests,  providing 

39 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  t. 


for  them  and  defending  them.  This  picture  of  a  theocratic  king  invested  with 
moral  grandeur;  should  be  copied  by  every  servant  of  God,  high  or  low  in  posi- 
tion ;  but  only  completely  realised  in  Messiah.  "  A  Governor  who  shall  rule 
(shepherd)  my  people  Israel"  (Matt  ii.  6).  III.  The  allegiance  given 
to  tiie  chosen  king*.  All  Israel  were  assembled,  united  and  represented 
by  elders.  For  once  vox  populi  vox  Dei.  In  this  ceremony  Idng  reminded  of 
solemn  responsibility  and  people  of  implicit  obedience.  In  form  a  covenaiity 
mutual  agreement  on  both  sides  to  be  true  and  helpful  one  to  another.  Notice 
— 1.  Unity  in  the  covev.ayd.  The  unity  introduced  by  Samuel,  weakened  by 
Saul,  restored  internally  and  externally  on  the  theocratic  basis.  "All  Israel  " 
represented  in  the  choice.  2.  Loyalty  in  the  covenant.  Attachment  to  the 
person  of  the  king,  adhesion  to  hLs  cause  and  determination  to  obey  his  word. 
Service  is  poor  and  cold  in  warmest  subject  without  the  glow  of  loyalty.  Our 
Master  deserves  and  seeks  it  in  every  servant.  "  If  ye  love  Me,  keep  My 
commandments.'*  3.  Solninity  in  the  covenant.  "  Before  the  Lord,"  acting  in 
his  sight.  People  and  king  jointly  render  unconditional  obedience  t<j  the 
Invisible  Buler.  "  King  David  made  a  league  with  them  before  the  Lord;  and 
they  anointed  David  king  over  Israel "  (2  Sam.  v.  3). 

The  Capture  of  the  Stronghold.  — Fer^e*  5-9. 

David  now  begins  to  act,  seeks  to  establish  his  throne,  and  subdue  his  enemies. 
Zion  the  centre,  chief  stronghold,  and  boast  of  the  Jebusites  (2  Sam.  v  8). 
I.  The  taking  of  the  city.  The  south  and  middle  of  Palestine  unsafe, 
as  long  as  this  citadel  unconquered.  Its  siege  and  capture  a  daring  act.  1. 
Taken ^  against  great  opposition.  Its  natural  position  very  strong.  Built  on  a 
precipice,  waterfalls  and  gorges  round  about.  Thought  to  be  impiegnable. 
"  David  cannot  come  in  hither."  Its  defenders  very  courageous.  Quarters  very 
close ;  a  matter  of  life  or  death  ;  but  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  builders 
and  watchmen  in  vain.  2.  Taken  by  personal  valour.  Joab  scaled  the  rocks,  led 
the  assault,  and  captured  the  city.  For  this  act  of  bravery  he  was  promoted, 
confirmed  in  position,  and  increased  in  influence.  3.  Taken  in  God's  strength. 
Valour,  numbers,  and  resources  avail  not  without  this.  Victory  only  when  God 
vouchsafes  it.  "  All  this  assembly  shall  know  that  the  Lord  saveth  not  with 
sword  and  spear:  for  the  battle  is  the  Lord's"  (1  Sam.  xvii.  47).  II.  The 
repairing  of  the  city.  "  David  built  round  about  from  the  Millo  (the 
mound)  and  inward"  (2  Sijm.  v.  9);  and  "Joab  restored  (revived)  the  rest  of 
the  city "  (c/  Neh.  iii.  34).  Houses  restored,  fortifications  reared,  rebuilding 
regarded  as  restoration  to  life.  No  longer  a  dry,  barren  rock,  but  a  place  of 
beauty  and  strength.  *' Beautiful  for  situation, 'the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  is 
Mount  Zion."  III.  The  royal  residence  in  the  city.  David  took 
up  his  abode,  "  therefore  it  is  called  the  City  of  David."  It  becomes  the  seat  of 
government,  the  centre  of  festivities,  the  memorial  of  its  founder's  name. 
Mount  Zion  becomes  *'  the  city  of  the  great  king,"  a  type  of  the  royal  seat  and 
the  dominion  of  Messiah.  "  I  have  set  my  king  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion." 
"Out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  woid  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem." 

David's  Prosperity. — Verse  9. 

The  words,  then  David  went,  &c.,  indicate  the  point  of  time  from  which  his 
becoming  great  first  dates ;  then  (from  the  coihjuest  of  Jerusalem)  David  became 
continually  greater  and  greater  [Keil].  Learn— I.  God  is  the  tme  Source 
of  prosperity.  "  The  Lord  of  Hosts  was  with  him."  Not  fleets  and  aimies, 
skill  of  captains  and  valour  of  soldiers^  but  from  pesenc©  of  God.     "Ascribe 


CHAP,  xt.3  BOMlLETtC  COMM/CNTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


(by  word  and  conduct,  give)  ye  greatness  unto  our  God**  (Deut.  xxxii.  3). 
*•  Thine,  0  Lord,  is  the  greatness,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  and  the  victory, 
and  the  majesty."  II.  Cod  determines  the  real  nature  of 
prosperity.  Temporal,  spiritual,  or  both.  Regal  qualities,  prudent 
counsellors,  faithful  friends,  and  devoted  subjects;  crowns,  capitals,  and  thrones; 
personal  influence,  relic^ious  privileges,  gifts  of  any  kind,  progress  of  any  degree, 
bestowed  by  God.  III.  God  fixes  the  exact  time  of  prosperity. 
From  conquest  of  Zion  a  turning-point  in  David's  fortunes.  H  is  life  a  series  of 
successive  stages  and  positions  in  which  one  prepared  for  the  other.  "  Even 
when  Saul  was  king,  David  led  out  and  brought  in  Israel."  After  he^  was 
anointed,  "  he  waxed  greater  and  greater,"  '*  went  on  growing  and  growing." 
Our  life's  work  fashioned  by  God,  not  by  ourselves,  may  be  long  time  and  go 
through  strange  discipline  in  its  attainment ;  but  God  appoints  means  and  fixes 
seasons.  *'  My  times  are  in  Thy  hands."  Use  the  means,  wait  in  faith  and  seek 
the  aid  of  God  for  progress  and  position  here  and  hereafter. 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1,2.    Then.    1.  Great  honours  (J)  in  what  he  refused  to  do.     3.  By 

often  preceded  by  great  trials.   Through  waiting  for  it :  (a)  continuing  patient 

sufiering  to   glory.     II.  Great    trials  through  a  long  course  of   trials;    {h) 

often  end  with  unexpected  relief ;  or,  using  all  lawful  means  in  his  power  to 

1.  Men  divinely  designated,  specially  gain  it  (e.^.,  2  Sam.  ii.  5 ;  iii.  20-36); 
trained  for  position.  2.  When  specially  (c)  preparing  for  it  consciously  and  un- 
trained, God's  providence  fulfils  God's  consciously ;  learning  how  to  rule  men, 
word  in  placing  them  in  position.  3.  and  to  overcome  difficulties  [Lange]. 
When  so  placed  by  God's  providence,  Ver.  5.  The  Castle  of  Zion.  Like 
often  an  epoch  in  their  own,  and  a  the  human  heart,  harder  to  take  and 
blessing  in  history  of  others.  Feed  my  keep  for  Christ  than  Khartoum.  Pride, 
people.  The  shepherd  king.  Evil  selfishness,  and  envy  must  be  driven 
rulers  termed  roaring  lions,  devouring  out.  Like  heaven,  only  gained  by 
wolves,  &c.  (Ezek.  xix.  2).  Teachers  violence  (Matt.  xi.  12),  and  under  the 
and  prophets  pastors  of  people  (Ezek.  leadership  of  the  Captain  of  salvation, 
xxxiv.  23),  to  feed  "by  procuring  for  David  dwelt  (ver.  7).  A  type  of  Christ, 
them  the  v/holesome  food  of  the  word,  who  subdueth  all  our  enemies,  and 
by  going  before  them  in  good  example,  openeth  unto  us  the  heavenly  Jeru- 
by  driving  av/ay  the  wolf,  by  tending  salem  \Trapp\  Ver.  8.  Joab  repaired. 
them,  and  tendering  their  good  every  Heb.  revived  vivificavit  vel  sanavit,  as 
w&y "  [Trapp],  2  Chron.  xxiv.    13.       City  of   David^ 

Ver.  3.  David  king.  How  he  as  Constantine  called  Bizantium  Con- 
reached  the  throne.  1.  By  aspiring  stantinople  after  his  own  name ;  making 
to  it  only  because  divinely  appointed,  it  also  the  metropolis  and  seat  of  the 

2.  By  deserving  it  (a)  in  what  he  did  ;  empire  ITrapp'l. 

EOMILETICS, 

Famous  Exploits. — Verses  10-47. 

These  are  the  heads,  chiefs  of  David's  heroes,  heroes  among  heroes,  attached  to 
his  person,  with  whom  he  carried  on  the  Lord's  war,  and  whose  deeds  are 
''works"  of  "great  deliverance."  I.  The  tWO  mighties  (ver.  10-14). 
The  third,  Shammah  (2  Sain,  xxiii.  11),  not  given  here.  1.  Exploit  of  Jashoheam 
(ver.  11).  Chief  of  captains,  riders  (or  knights,  Sam.),  bodyguard  of  king. 
He  lifted  up,  brandished  his  spear  time  after  time  in  strength  and  courage,  and 

41 


BOMILETtC  COMMENTARY    CBitONICLJSS,  [chip.  si. 


slew  300.     In  Sam.  800  given — attacked  800  and  slew  300,  or  slew  300  at  one 
time  and  800  at  another.     2.  Exploit  of  Eleazar.    A  fugitive  in  the  wilderness 
with  David,     {a)  Stood  when  others  fled  in  fear  and  disgrace,     {h)  Weary,  yet 
would   not  quit  the  work ;  hand   cramped  round  hilt  of  sword,  but  held  the 
weapon.     Faint,  yet  pursuing  (Judg.  viii.  4).     (c)  Advantage  followed  up,  and 
victory  gained.     "  A  great   victory   that  day."     Heb.   in   theocratic  form    of 
deliverance^  salvation  from  God.     Aided  by  Shammah  ("  they  set  themselves  ") 
the  parcel  of  ground  preserved,     (d)  Then  people  returned  for  spoil  and  share 
honour.     Many  quit  the  field  in  danger,  and  hasten  back  for  gain,  willing  to 
share  the  victory,  not  the  fight.     The  men  of  Ephraim  (Judg.   viii.   1).     II, 
The  three   captains  (vers.  15-19).     1.  The  chivalrous  act  they  performed 
evinces   enthusiasm   and    readiness  for    humblest   wish   of   the   king.     (1)   A 
dangerous  act.     To  force  passage  through  garrison  of  the  enemy  at  risk  of  life. 
(2)  A  brave  act.     Fearless  of  results,  glad  to  defy  Philistines,  and  ambitious  to 
serve  their  king.     Be  you  ready,  like  Jesus,  to  comply  with  every  intimation  of 
God  by  his  word  and  providence.     (3)  An  unselfish  act.     No  thought  for  them- 
selves, ail  for  their  sovereign  and  their  fellows.     (4)  A   loyal  act.     Indicative  of 
aft'ection  ar.d  loyalty.     No  command,  no  request;  perhaps  a  wish  overheard,  and 
they  spring   into  action.      Service  free  and  spontaneous,  not  pressed  nor  con- 
strained.    First}  a  willing  mind,  then  it  is  accepted  to  what  we  can  do.     2.  The 
generous  estimation  of  the  act.     The  water  refused,  gained  at  peril  of  Ufe,  and  too 
.sacred  to  gratify  a  wish  foolishly  expressed.     Poured  it  out  as  a  libation  (Gen. 
XXXV.  14  ;    Ex.  xxx.  9 ;    Judg.  vi.  20).     A   practical  acknowledgment  of  his 
error  ,  an  expj-ession  of  sympathy  with  the  bravery  and  devotion  of  the  men ; 
a  check   to  impulse  and  rashness  in  future.     The  sacrifice  to  God  of  what  we 
mosU  desire  gives  the    strength    and    earnest   of    future   success.     III.  The 
second  couple  (vers.  20-25).     1.  Abishai,  "  a  man  of  repute,"  had  a  name, 
and  i-enowned  for  valour  ;  held  high  position,  chief  leader  of  his  company ;  slew 
300;  but  was  excelled  in  heroic  conduct  by  the  three  in  vers.  11-14.     2.  JBenaiah, 
a  valiant  maji,  accustomed  to  clanger,  "  had  done  many  acts  "  (great  of  acts,  lit.) ; 
commander  of   bodyguard  (marg.,  privy  councillor).      (a)    Slew  three  heroes. 
An  Egyptian,  terrible  in  height  and  appearance,  well  armed ;    thus  displayed 
coui'age  (only  a  staff),  dexterity,  strength,  and  skill  by  snatching  the  spear  out 
of  the  giant's  hand  and  killing  him  with  it  (David  and  Goliath).     Slew  two  lion- 
like  men,  "  two  sons  of  Ariel  of  Moab  "  [I{eif\.    Ariel  a  title  of  honour  given  to 
King  of  Moab.     A  feat  performed  probably  in  war  between  David  and  Moabites 
(2  Sam.  viii.  2).    (b)  Slew  a  lion  (ver.  22),  "  probably  in  a  cave  in  which  he  took 
refuge  from  a  snowstorm,  and  in  which  a  savage  lion  would  have  its  lair.     This 
far  greater  achievement  than  if  the  monster  had  been  previously  snared  in  a  pit." 
On  a  snowy  day,  when  greater  courage  and  hardship  would  be  required.  Benaiah's 
influence    and  fidelity  known   in    Solomon's  time  (1  Kings   i.  8,  10,  44).     3. 
A shael,  chief  of  men  historically  unknown  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  24);  captain  of  4th 
division  (xxvii.  7) ;  slain  by  Abner  (2  Sam.  ii.).     After  him,  names  in  Samuel 
are  thirty,  and  one  over  Uriah  the  Hittite.     Some  of  the  list  are  Gentiles,  who 
cast  their  lot  with  Israel,  and  reminds  of  that  service  in  which  is  neither  Greek 
nor  Jew,  bond  nor  free,  but  all  one. 

David's  Conduct  in  Refusing  to  Drink. — Verse  19. 

I.  An  act  of  great  unselfishness.  Thought  of  others,  not  himself* 
appreciated  the  deed  of  the  noble  three,  and  felt  that  he  had  no  right  to  claim 
the  blood  of  others.  Men  do  not  exist  for  us,  but  we  exist  for  them.  Sir  P. 
Sidney  took  the  cup  from  his  thirsty  lips  to  give  to  the  poor.  II.  An  ex- 
pression of  profound  humility.  He  bowed  before  the  Lord,  laid  the 
cup  at  his  feet,  through  whom  it  wa«  gained  and  to  whom  it  belonged.  Nono 
42 


oaAP.ii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMt^.NTARY :  CHRONICLES, 


so  fit  to  rule  as  those  who  stoop.  "Before  honour  is  humility.'*  III.  An 
estimate  of  the  value  of  human  life.  Great  regard  for  the  worth  of 
men.  Soldiers  not  made  for  powder  and  shot.  Blood,  sacred  and  inestimable. 
Human  life  an  opportunity,  a  power  for  service,  must  not  be  thrown  away. 
Wellington  valued  the  life  of  his  men.  **  Of  every  man  will  I  require  the  life  of 
man."     Life  is 

•*  No  trifle,  however  short  it  seem ; 
And  howsoever  shadowy,  no  dream  ; 
Its  value  what  no  thought  can  ascertain, 
Nor  all  an  angel's  eloquence  explain  '*  [Cowper], 

True  Heroism. — Verses  10-47. 

I.  In  its  real  nature.  Not  mere  physical  vigour  and  exuberant  spirit. 
Not  foolhardiness  nor  reckless  waste  of  strength  and  life,  but  self-sacrificing 
love,  which  shuns  no  duty  and  braves  all  danger.  Often  seen  in  forbearance,  in 
provocation,  patience,  in  trial,  tenderness  towards  others,  and  self-control  in 
adversity  and  prosperity.  It  is  the  stuff  of  which  martyrs  are  made,  who  refuse 
wealth,  honours,  and  applause  for  censcience  sake.  Seen  in  Eliot — "  Lion  Eliot, 
that  great  Englishman" — who  refused  the  bribes  and  defied  the  tyranny  of 
Charles  I. ;  in  Savonarola,  the  Italian  monk,  "  a  Reformer  before  the  Reforma- 
tion " ;  in  Luther,  before  the  Diet  at  Worms ;  and  in  all  "  brave  men  of  old." 
II.  In  its  hidden  source.  Love  to  God,  "strengthened  themselves  with 
him  "  (ver.  10).  Acquaintance  with  David,  loyalty  to  him  prompted  to  arms 
and  conflict.  Great  men  attract  and  excite  to  entliusiasm.  King  Arthur  had 
his  knights,  Cromwell  his  Ironsides,  and  David  his  heroes.  Jesus  Christ  has 
toUowers  devoted  to  him,  led  to  victory  by  him.  "  Through  God  we  shall  do 
valiantly."  III.  In  its  noble  achievements.  Enterprises  full  of 
risks ;  leading  a  forlorn  hope  ;  a  successful  skirmish ;  a  dashing  charge  and 
a  splendid  capture.  In  our  hearts  and  lives,  in  the  Christian  church  and 
the  world,  what  have  we  done  for  God  ?     "  Quit  yourselves  like  men." 

••Let  us  go  forth,  and  resolutely  dare 
With  sweat  of  brow  to  toil  our  little  day"  [Lord  Houghton], 

HOMILETIQ  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.    15.     Cave  of  Adullam.     1.  A  Happy  the  people  that  has  heroes  who 

place  of  exile.     2.  A  centre  of  attrac-  (1)  advance  in  God's  strength,  (2)  cou- 

tion — **a  great   host,  as  the  host  of  rageously   stake   their    life   for   God's 

God,"    gathers   round    David.      3.    A  honour  and  the  people's  welfare,  and 

picture   of   Christ's  reign.      Rejected,  (3)  are  counted  worthy  by  God  to  work 

yet  gathering  those  in  spiritual   debt  great  deliverance  for  their  people, 

and    distress    unto  himself.      "Every  Hail  to  the  throne  that  is  encompassed 

one  that  was   in  distress,  and  every  hy  heroes  who   (1)  find  their  highest 

one  that  was  in  debt,  and  every  one  nobility  in  the  real  knighthood  that 

that  was  bitter  of  soul,  gathered  them-  roots  itself  in  the  true  fear  of  God, 

selves   unto   him;    and   he   became  a  (2)  with  humble  heroism  defend  altar 

captain  over  them."  and    throne,    (3)   seek   their    highest 

Ver. 41.  Uriahthe  Hittite(^^2im..\\.^\  honour  in  being  God's  instruments  for 
The  mention  of  this  name  in  list  suggests  the  aims  of  his  kingdom  and  for  the 
(1)  a  man  of  distinguished  merit;  (2)  aa  revelation  of  his  power  and  righteous- 
aggravation  of  David's  guilt  towards  ness,  and  (4)  set  the  whole  people  an 
him.  He  was  a  foreigner,  a  Hittite.  But  example  of  self -devoting  love  and 
his  name  and  manner  of  speech  indicate  fidelity  and  of  unterrified  courage 
that  he  adopted  the  Jewish  religion,  \Lanye\ 

a 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  CHRONtCLES,  [ohap.  «t. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XL 

Vers.  4-8.      During    the    wars    of  Ver.  18.     Brake  through  the  host 

Kassau  a  council  of   officers   debated  ..xx  .   ,,             ,        .,    ^ ' ''"'^ '^^^' 

whether  to  attack  a  certain  town.  A  Wh^l^i  ^l^  l^^%  ^'^^  unmanly  fears ; 
■n„^  u  1  I.  1  '^^  ^^"-"^  ^"^"-  ^  where  duty  bids,  he  confidently  steers : 
JJutch  general^  had  so  much  to  say  Faces  a  thousand  dangers  at  her  call, 
about  the  formidable  guns  mounted  on  -^^d,  trusting  in  his  God,  surmounts  them 
the  defences  of  the  place  that  many  ^W  [Coioper]. 
grew  discouraged  and  advised  giving  Ver.  19.  God  forbid.  That  which  espe- 
up  the  dangerous  job.  "  My  lords,"  cially  distinguishes  a  high  order  of  man 
said  Sir  Horace  Vere,  a  stout  English  from  a  low  order  of  man — that  which 
baron,  "  if  you  fear  the  mouth  of  a  constitutes  human  goodness,  human 
cannon  you  must  never  come  into  the  nobleness — is  surely  not  the  degree  of 
field."  Without  the  Christian's  courage  enlightenment  with  which  men  pursue 
it  is  useless  to  enter  the  Christian's  fight,  their  own  advantage;  but  it  is  self- 
Ver.  11.^  Lifted  up.  "Courage  forgetfulness,  it  is  self-sacrifice,  it  is 
mounteth  with  occasion"  [Shahespeare\  the  disregard  of  personal  pleasure  and 
*Do  not  for  one  repulse  forego  the  purpose  personal  indulgence,  personal  ad  van- 
That  you  resolve  to  effect."  tages  remote  or  present  [Froude\, 


CHAPTER   XII. 

Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  entirely  new  matter — supplementary  to  Samuel — con- 
tains a  list  of  those  who  joined  David  in  time  of  Saul  (vers.  1-22),  and  of  those  who  came 
to  make  him  king  over  Israel  (vers.  23-40). 

Vers.  1-7. — Benjamin  and  Judah  came  to  Ziklag.  A  town  which  belonged  to  Simeon 
(Jos.  xix.  5),  but  given  to  David  for  residence  it  fell  to  Judah.  Close,  hidden  {cf.  1  Sam. 
xxvii.  30).  £7vt/trc'?i,  7'.e.,  Benjamites,  i.e.,  members  of  the  same  tribe;  disgusted  with 
his  treatment  of  David  or  persuaded  that  God  was  with  him.  Ver.  3.  Azmav.  (viii.  13,  30  ; 
xi.  33).  Ver.  4.  Gcder.  (Jos.  xv.  36).  Ver.  5.  The  Haruph.,  sons  ot  Harix:)h  (Neh.  vii.  24), 
probably  Beiijamites.  Ver.  6.  Korahites,  not  of  tribe  of  Levi,  but  descendants  of  some 
Korah  of  Judah.    Ver.  7.  Gedor  (ch.  iv.  4). 

Vers.  8-15. —  Gndites  aided  David.  Ho'd,  cave  of  Adullam,  or  a  fort  in  wilderness  of 
Judah  (1  Sam.  xxii.  5)  ;  faces  (cf.  2  Sam.  i.  2,  3  ;  ii.  18)  ;  buckler,  lance  or  spear  (ver.  24). 
Ver.  15.  Jordan,  to  help  brethren  {cf,  Jos.  iii.  15)  ,  first  month,  in  spring,  when  river  is 
swollen ;  valkys,  literally  all  the  valley  on  both  sides  Jordan.  Ver.  14.  Over,  equal  to 
(as  in  margin). 

Vers.  16-18. — Men  of  Judah  and  Benjamin.  Ver.  17.  Meet.  David  reason  to  suspect 
perhaps,  feared  treachery  and  required  a  solemn  declaration.  Ver.  18.  Came  upon,  literally 
clothed.     A.  spoke  not  of  himself,  but  as  the  Spirit  of  God  prompted  him. 

Vers.  19-22. — Men  of  Manasseh.  Seven  are  given  who  joined  David,  when  dismissed 
by  Philistines  from  their  army  {cf.  1  Sam,  xxix.  1-11).  Ver.  21.  Band,  the  troop  of 
Amalek  (1  Sam,  xxx.  8),  which  sacked  Ziklag  during  absence  of  David.  Ver.  22.  Host  of 
God,  a  formula  for  great  things. 

Vers.  23-40, — Different  tribes  who  attended  and  made  David  king  at  Hebron.  Vers.  24,  25. 
Judah  and  Simeon,  two  southern  tribes,  had  already  acknowledged  David.  Vers.  26-28. 
Many  of  the  Levites  closely  associated  with  these  tribes.  Jehoiada,  father  of  Benaiah 
(xi.  22) ;  leader,  commander  of  priestly  troops.  Zadok  became  high-priest  at  a  later  time 
(2  Sam.  viii.  17  ;  1  Kincfs  i.  8),  Ver.  29.  Beujamites  few,  for  greater  part  still  in  service 
of  Saul's  house.  Ver,  30.  Famous,  men  of  name  or  renown.  Ver.  31.  Expressed,  i.e., 
nominated  and  deputed  by  the  rest  of  the  tribe  to  go  to  Hebron  and  make  David  king 
[Speak.  Com.] .  Ver.  32,  Understanding,  best  interpreted  politically  (Esth.  i.  13)  [Speak, 
Com.].  Ver.  33.  Not  of  double  heart,  falling  into  rank  not  with  double  heart,  i.e.,  with 
firm  and  faithful  mind.  Naphtali  decided,  Dan  in  full  strength,  and  Asher  in  great  force. 
Ver.  37.  A  large  contingent  from  eastern  tribes. 

Vers.  3S-40. — Great  majority  enthusiastic,  agreed  in  heart,  i.e.,  had  a  common  wish 
(2  Chr.  xxx.  12)  to  make  David  king.  Ver.  40.  Tribes,  near  and  distant,  brought 
provisions  on  beasts  ot  burdou ;  every  one  made  it  a  festival  of  joy. 


CHAP.  XII.]  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 

HOMILETIGS. 
The  Assembly  at  Ziklag. — Verses  1-22. 

These  joined  David  in  the  time  of  Saul,  were  early  helpers  in  the  time  of 
exile  and  danger. 

I.  The  ingenious  tribe  (vers.  1-7).  Benjamites,  Saul's  kinspeople, 
and  for  some  reason  not  satisfied  with  his  rule.  Several  leading  men  given. 
Men  of  great  dexterity.  1.  Skilful  archers.  "  Shooting  arrows  out  of  a  bow." 
2.  Famous  sling ers.  "  Hurling  stones."  3.  Well  disciplined.  Active  and  wonderful 
in  "  use  of  right  hand  and  left."  II.  The  courageous  tribe  (vers.  8-14). 
Gadites.  1.  Able-bodied.  "Men  of  might  and  men  of  war  fit  for  battle." 
2.  Specially  trained.  "  Could  handle  shield  and  buckler."  3.  Remarkably  fleet. 
"  Swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains,"  not  in  flying  from  the  foe,  but  in 
pursuing,  so  that  none  escaped.  "  He  maketh  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet,  <fec." 
(2  Sam.  xxii.  34 ;  Hab.  iii.  19).  4.  Splendidly  courageous,  (a)  They  went  over 
Jordan  in  time  of  floods,  (b)  They  put  to  flight  the  people  of  the  valley. 
5.  Awfully  determined.  "Whose  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  lions."  Saul  and 
Jonathan  "swifter  than  eagles  and  stronger  than  lions"  (2  Sam.  i.  23). 
III.  The  suspected  tribes  (vers.  16-18).  Some  of  Benjamin  and 
Judah.  Benjamites  probably  invited  Judahites  to  go  with  them  to  prevent 
suspicion;  their  anticipations  well  founded,  as  seen  by  results.  David  thought 
they  were  secret  emissaries  of  Cush  (Ps.  vii.  inscription),  but  soon  persuaded 
otherwise,  by  {a)  their  entire  submission,  "Thine  are  we  David  and  on  thy 
side  ; "  (6)  their  earnest  prayer  for  his  success,  "  Peace  be  unto  thee."  IV.  The 
volunteer  tribe  (vers.  19-22).  These  "  fell "  not  by  lot,  but  by  desertion 
from  one  to  another.  These  persons  left  the  service  of  Saul  for  that  of  David. 
Transfer  allegiance  from  a  bad  to  a  good  master,  from  a  losing  to  a  winning 
cause.  Nothing  else  known  of  these  seven  captains.  But  one  noble  act  may 
immortalise. 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

SauVs  brethren.     Some  akin  to  Saul         Yer.   8.     Separated    themselves.      1. 

came  over  to  David.    1.  A  testimony  From   what   connections?    Service   of 

to  unblemished  character.     2.  A  pro-  Saul  and  other  Gadites  who  remained 

test  against  grievous  wrong  (done  to  with  him.    2.  For  what  purpose  ?    To 

David).     3.  A  determination  to  share  serve     David,     the     anointed     king, 

the  fortunes  of  the  king.     "  It  is  God  3.  At  what  time  ?  When  David   was 

who     worketh      men's     hearts     and  in  distress  and  danger.    We  must  come 

fashioneth   their   opinions.     Paul  had  out  of  the  world,  separate  from  evil 

friends  in   Nero's   court,  and  Luther  company,  and   never   be   ashamed    of 

in  the  Pope's  "  [Trapp],  Christ  and  his  cause.     Thus  shall  we 

Ver.  2.    Roth  right    hand  and  left,  be  renowned  and  registered  with  his 

The  word  'Heft-handed"  (in  Septuagint)  people. 

in    Judges   iii.   15    is   rendered    both-         Vers.  17,  18.  Notice — I.  The  earnest 

handed.  1.  Some  are  left-handed^  weak  appeal,   1.  In  its  spirit.     He  does  not 

and    awkward    in   every   good   work,  imprecate  nor  condemn.    2.  In  its  pur- 

2.   Others  are  right-handed^  active,  but  pose.     What  are  you  come  for,  peace 

single-handed  after  all.     3.  Roth  hands  or    war  ?       3.     In    its    requirement, 

lequired.     Head,  hands,  heart,  and  all  Loyalty  to  me.    II.  The  grounds  of  the 

for    Christ.      "  Both  hands  earnestly "  appeal.      1 .    Their   intimate    relation. 

for  good,  not  for  evil.  Both  parties  descended  from  the  same 

••  Take  my  hands ;  and  let  them  move  ancestors    and    dependent    upon    the 

At  the  impulse  of  Thy  love."  came  God.    **  The  God  of  our  fathers." 

45 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xii. 


2.  His  solemn  declaration  of  innocence.  "  Captains  of  the  host.**  2.  Physically 
"  Seeing  there  is  no  wrong  in  mine  strong.  "  Least  could  resist  an  hun- 
hands."  3.  His  reliance  upon  divine  dred,  &c."  {cf.  margin  and  Lev.  xxvi.  8). 
interposition.  An  appeal  to  God  as  3.  Brave  in  danger.  Exploit  well 
righteous  and  omniscient  judge  to  re-  known  in  crossing  Jordan,  only  needed 
buke,  avenge,  and  help.  III.  The  simple  allusion.  4.  Victorious  in  fight. 
respo7ise  to  the  appeal.  Amasai  gave  a  They  overcame  all  in  the  valleys,  east 
beautiful,  prompt,  and  earnest  reply,  and  west  of  the  river. 
1 .  In  unconditional  submission  to  the  •*  I  sing  the  warrior  and  his  mighty  deeds." 
king.  "  Thine,  David."  2.  In  sincere  ^^er.  18.  The  spirit  came  upon 
pledge  of  their  services.  "  With  thee,  (clothed)  Amasai.  An  unusual  ex- 
son  of  Jesse."  3.  In  wishing  success  pression.  We  hear  constantly  in  O.T. 
to  his  cause.  "  Peace  to  thee,"  every-  of  "  the  Spirit  of  God,"  but  only  here 
thing  thy  heart  desires.  "Peace  to  (and  possibly  in  1  Chr.  xxviii.  12)  of 
thy  helpers,"  among  whom  we  wish  to  "  the  Spirit"  absolutely.  Clear,  how- 
be  numbered.  4.  In  assurance  of  divine  ever,  the  two  expressions  mean  the  same 
help.  "  For  thy  God  helpeth  thee."  {cf.  Jud.  vi.  34  and  2  Chr.  xxiv.  20). 
lY.  The  results  of  the  appeal.  When  A.  spoke  not  of  himself,  but  as 
David  saw  the  passionate  earnestness  God's  spiritual  influence  moved  him 
and  the  loyal  surrender — 1.  He  received  [Speak.  Com.].  The  need  of  the  Holy 
them  heartily.  "  Then  David  received  Spirit  to  submit  to  Christ  and  recog- 
them."  2.  He  trustfully  promotes  nise  him  king — to  preach  his  word  and 
them.  "And  made  them  captains  of  the  carry  on  his  cause.  Tarry  until  ye  be 
band."  Submit  to  God,  follow  him  endued  (clothed)  with  power  from  on 
implicitly,  and  you  shall  be  promoted  to  high  (Luke  xxiv.  49). 

-iT      '  -I  A    IK      Cf  J*  y*    1     rr  '*  Angsls  give  thee  in  command 

Vers.  14,10.   ^onsofGad.  Honour-        -^Vhat  to  the  smallest  tittle  thou  shalt 
able  mention,     1.    High  in  command.  say." 

ffOMILETICS. 

The  Host  op  God. — Verse  22. 

In  distress  David  had  few  friends,  600  who  served  as  guards.  When  he  had 
to  act  for  God  many  were  disposed  to  help  from  different  tribes.  All  welcome. 
So  the  army  grew  "  like  the  host  of  God,"  great  in  numbers,  valour,  and  success. 
I.  Animated  by  the  presence  of  God.  David  counted  for  something. 
"  How  many  do  you  reckon  me  ? "  said  a  leader  to  his  fainting  soldiers.  What 
inspiration  and  strength  to  have  "  the  Captain  of  salvation "  with  the  Church ! 
Wellington,  one  day  in  battle,  rode  into  the  midst  of  his  wavering  men.  One 
who  saw  him  cried,  "  There's  the  Duke ;  God  bless  him ! "  Then  followed  a 
tremendous  cheer,  and  the  tide  was  turned.  "  I  am  with  you  always."  II. 
Increased  by  the  grace  of  God.  God  only  makes  **  willing  in  the  day 
of  power"  (Ps.  ex.  3) ;  the  power  of  his  Spirit  and  word.  Numbers  not  always 
increase  and  efiiciency.  Many  desert  or  weaken  the  cause.  Grace  adds  such  as 
are  being  saved  (Acts  ii.  47).  *'  The  Lord  make  his  people  a  hundred  times  so 
many  more  as  they  be."    III.  Successful  through  the  help  of  God. 

1.  In  gathering  numbers.  Confederates  came  to  David  in  successive  bands  "  day 
by  day,"  as  emergencies  required.  A  gradual,  constant  accession,  incessant  pro- 
gress in  the  army  and  cause  of  Christ.  2.  In  gaining  victories.  Everything 
possible  to  David's  captains,  counsellors,  and  friends.  *'  Men  of  might  and  men 
of  war."  In  service  of  God  warriors  numerous  as  dewdrops  of  the  morning ; 
strong  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts ;  certain  to  overpower  all  opposition. 
"  There  is  no  disputing,"  said  one  to  Caesar,  "  with  him  that  commands  legions." 
46 


eHAP.  xu.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


"  For  the  Lord  your  God,  he  it  is  that  fighteth  for  you,  as  he  hath  promised 
you." 

The  Assembly  at  Hebron. — Verses  23-40. 

This  was  seven  years  after  Saul's  death.  "  They  should  have  come  sooner,** 
says  Trapp;  "  but  better  late  than  never."  Briefly  classify  and  describe  different 
tribes.  1.  Judah,  the  equipped  tribe.  "  Ready  armed  "  (ver.  24)  ;  expecting  and 
prepared  to  figlit.  Though  fewer  than  others,  they  entertained  those  from  afar. 
"  Given  to  hospitality."  2.  Simeon,  the  tribe  of  valour.  "  Mighty  men  of  valour 
for  the  war"  (ver.  25).  3.  The  Levites,  the  priestly  tribe  (vers.  26-28).  Earnest, 
led  by  famous  men  and  recognised  the  providence  of  God  in  call  of  David. 
"  Priestly  troops "  required  now  to  fight  and  to  pray.  4.  Benjamites,  the  tribe 
small  in  number.  Affection  for  their  kin  and  jealousy  for  their  honour  kept 
many  in  army  of  Saul.  All  must  be  left  for  Christ.  "  Kindred  should  never 
over-rule  conscience."  5.  Epbraim,  the  renowned  tribe.  "  Famous  throughout 
the  house  of  their  fathers"  (ver.  30).  6.  Manasseh,  the  deputed  tribe.  "Ex- 
pressed by  name  "  (ver.  31).  "  Deputed  by  the  rest  of  the  tribe  to  represent 
them"  [Speak.  Com.].  7.  Issachar,  the  intelligent  tribe  (ver.  32).  (1)  Men  o/ 
political  sagacity.  *'  Had  understanding  of  the  times."  No  longer  "  a  strong 
ass"  (Gen.  xlix.  14).  (2)  Men  of  insight.  Knew  "what  Israel  ought  to  do" 
in  their  critical  condition.  (3)  Afen  of  authority.  For  "  all  their  brethren  were 
at   their   command,"      Some   knew   how   to   rule   and  the  rest  how  to  obey. 

8.  Zebulon,  the  enthusiastic  tribe  (ver.  33).  (1)  Sincere  in  heart.  "  Not  of 
double  heart,"  not  of  doubtful  and  divided  mind.  (2)  Fixed  in  purpose.  Not 
of  distracted  mind,  divided  purpose,  and  half  a  heart;  but  07ie  in  effort  and 
interest.  (3)  United  in  discipline.  They  "  could  keep  rank,"  in  the  march  and 
on  the  field.     Ever   obedient    to   command   and   united  with  the  companies. 

9.  Other  tribes  are  given  (vers.  34-37).  Naphtali  very  decided  (ver.  34). 
Dan  in  great  strength  (ver.  35).  Asher  expert,  able  to  marshal  war  (ver.  36). 
Eastern  tribes  grouped  together,  make  a  large  contingent  and  well-equipped 
(ver.  37).  Thus  came  friends  and  adherents,  to  make  David  king  and  render 
loyal  obedience  to  him. 

Fitness  for  the  Service  op  the  Great  Kino. 

Each  tribe  noted  for  some  special  quality.  Sum  all  up  and  describe  qualifica- 
tions needful  in  God's  service.  I.  Intellig'ence  is  required.  Knowledge 
enough  for  personal  salvation  and  for  communication.  Ignorance  is  unfitness 
and  must  never  be  excused.  Knowledge  must  be  the  mind's  nutriment,  ^^ vigour 
of  mind;"  must  become  wisdom  and  power  in  action.  Many  generals  opposed 
to  Napoleon  were  acquainted  with  military  science,  but  he  excelled  where  victory 
depended  upon  wise  movement  and  sudden  thought.  We  must  understand  the 
times  in  which  we  live  and  the  duties  we  have  to  perform.  II.  Courage  is 
required.  "Woe  be  to  fearful  hearts  and  faint  hands,"  says  the  son  of 
Sirach.  A  stout  heart  a  great  blessing.  Cheering  to  see  men  in  humble  life 
and  public  conflict  suffering  in  patience  and  triumphing  in  their  integrity. 
Instances  of  courage  in  daily  life  and  fields  of  action.  "  The  heroic  example 
of  other  days  is  in  a  great  part  the  source  of  the  courage  of  each  generation ; 
and  men  walk  up  composedly  to  the  most  perilous  enterprises,  beckoned 
onwards  by  the  shades  of  the  brave  that  were"  [Helps'].  "Be  strong  and  of 
good  courage;  be  not  afraid,  neither  be  thou  dismayed."  III.  Unity  is 
required.  Divided  counsel  leads  to  broken  ranks.  Party  spirit  and  envy 
will  frustrate  design.     Rank  must  be  kept  in  Christian  efforts  and  co-operation 

47 


BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY-  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  mi. 


given  in  national  interests.  "  United  we  stand,"  broken  we  are  scattered  from 
the  field.  Tacitus  said  of  Germans  what  the  world  says  of  Christians,  "  Whilst 
fighting  separately,  all  are  conquered  together."  *'  One  body,  one  spirit."  IV. 
Enthusiasm  is  required.  This  makes  up  for  lack  in  numbers  and 
weapons.  Ardour  is  a  help  in  life,  a  useful  and  energetic  motive-power.  How 
often  does  it  cool  down  by  time,  get  repressed  by  toil  and  sneers!  To  succeed, 
enthusiasm  must  be  contagious  in  our  ranks  and  never  die  out.  "  Every  great 
and  commanding  movement  in  the  annals  of  the  world  is  the  triumph  of  enthu- 
siasm "  [EmersoTi].  "  Stir  up  (blow  up,  keep  alive,  as  a  dull  fire)  the  gift  of  God 
within  thee"  (2  Tim.  i.  6).  Thus  are  we  to  qualify  and  equip  ourselves  for  the 
warfare  of  life.  "  Men  of  understanding,"  "  mighty  men  of  valour,"  and  "  ready 
armed;"  unity,  spiritual  sagacity  and  enthusiasm,  all  needful  in  leaders  of 
tribes  and  soldiers  of  the  "  host  of  God." 


The  Propriety  of  Considering  Times  and  Circumstances. — Verse  32. 

From  the  character  here  given  of  the  men  of  Issachar  we  shall  take  occasion 
to  show — I.  That  our  conduct  must  often  be  affected  by  times  and  circumstances 
of  whatever  nature.  1,  Civil ;  2,  Social ;  3,  Personal.  But  your  conduct  must 
be  influenced  by  them  in  temporal  matters.  There  is  still  reason  to  inquire — 
II.  How  far  it  may  be  properly  affected  by  them  in  the  concerns  of  religion. 

1.  That  we  may  attend  to  times,  &c.,  is  certain  (example  of  Christ  and  apostles). 

2.  But  how  far  is  not  easy  to  determine.  III.  What  there  is  in  the  times,  &c., 
of  the  present  day  to  affect  our  conduct.  Application  :  suggest  a  caution  or  two. 
1.  Guard  against  yielding  to  any  corrupt  bias.  2.  The  future  judgment  will  be 
according  to  motives.     3.  Seek  for  wisdom  that  is  profitable  to  direct  [C.  Simeon^ 

m.a:\. 


The  Joyous  Entertainment. — Verses  38-40. 

Supplies  of  provisions  furnished  in  abundance  by  neighbours  and  others  from 
distant  parts.  All  enthusiastic  for  David,  and  wished  to  feast  on  a  liberal  and 
magnificent  scale  worthy  of  the  occasion.  I,  The  cause  of  joy.  Three 
reasons  for  it.  1.  United  under  one  king.  End  of  divided  rule.  Prospect  of 
settlement  under  strong  government.  2.  A  king  chosen  of  God.  Divine  frown, 
clouds  and  darkness  taken  away.  A  king  given  under  different  circumstances, 
"  a  man  after  God's  own  heart."  3.  Universal  loyalty  to  the  chosen  king.  All 
joined  in  the  choice,  submission,  and  gratitude.  II.  The  manifestation 
of  joy.  A  cause  or  religion  without  expression  or  room  for  joy  neither  suits 
the  wants  of  man  nor  accords  with  the  will  of  God.  1.  In  unity  of  pur  pose. 
"  To  make  David  king."  2.  In  sincerity  of  feeling,  **  With  a  perfect  heart." 
No  deception,  no  half-hearted,  no  double-hearted.  "Were  of  one  heart  and 
one  soul.''  This  oneness  expressed  in  thought  and  act  towards  each  other  and 
towards  their  sovereign.  3.  In  social  fellowship.  Three  days  feasting.  Not 
selfish,  individual  joy;  but  domestic,  social,  and  national.  III.  The  extent 
of  the  joy.  "All  the  men  of  war"  and  "all  the  rest  of  Israel"  (ver.  38). 
The  soldier  and  the  priest,  the  weak  and  the  strong — all  ages,  all  classes  par- 
ticipated— none  shut  out  from  national  feasting  and  rejoicing.  This  suggests 
the  pure  and  unmixed  joy  in  crowning  and  serving  Christ  as  our  king — the 
perfect  happiness  and  order  when  he  shall  become  the  chosen  of  all  nations, 
kindreds,  and  tribes.     **  The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  rejoice," 

48 


OHAF.    XII.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES, 


EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 


Ver.  28.  Zadok  the  warrior  priest 
{cf,  2  Sam.  viii.  17;  1  Kings  i.  8). 
Notice — 1.  His  profession.  A  soldier 
and  priest.  The  cause,  a  "  holy  war." 
2.  His  qualifications,  (a)  "  A  young 
man."  (b)  ''  Mighty  of  valour."  The 
need  of  young,  valiant  men,  religious 
and  devoted  to  God.  "  The  history  of 
heroes  is  the  history  of  youth"  [Lord 
Beaconsfield\ 

Ver.  32.  Understanding.  Noscentes 
scite  tempora,  such  as  well  knew  what 
was  to  be  done  and  when  to  do  it,  by 
a  singular  sagacity,  gotten  by  long  ex- 
perience, rather  than  by  skill  in  astro- 
logy. See  Esther  i.  13.  David  set  a 
high  price  upon  these ;  so  doth  God  on 
such  as  regard  and  use  the  season  of 
well-doing  [Trapp"]. 

Ver.  33.  Not  of  a  double  heart. 
Heb.,  without  a  heart  and  a  heart ; 
plain-hearted  ;  non  aliud  in  ore  pronip- 
tuni,  aliud  in  pectore  conclusum  ha- 
hentes  ;  downright  dealers  [^r<xjop].  1. 
Men  of  fluctuating   sentiments.     "A 


double-minded  man"  (having  two 
minds)  "  is  unstable  in  all  his  ways " 
(Jas.  i.  7).  2.  Men  of  compromising 
habits.  "Woe  be  to  the  sinner  that 
goeth  two  ways*'  (Ecclus.  ii.  12).  3. 
Men  of  hypocritical  worship.  "  Come 
not  unto  the  Lord  with  a  double  heart " 
(Ecclus.  i.  28). 

Unity  of  purpose.  It«  strength  and 
advantage.  "  Napoleon  gained  his  vic- 
tories by  consolidation.  Austria  and 
Kussia  attacked  in  columns  and  sepa- 
rate bodies;  he  concentrated  his  forces 
and  fell  on  one  point  like  an  avalanche. 
So  it  must  be  with  the  Church.  Scep- 
ticism will  never  be  broken,  Popery 
will  never  be  dissipated,  till  the  whole 
Christian  Church  is  more  thoroughly  at 
one  with  each  other"  \^Dr.  Cumnfiing], 

Ver.  38.  Under  discipline.  I.  What 
keeping  rank  involves.  1.  Obedience 
to  authority.  2.  Regard  to  the  general 
peace  of  the  whole.  3.  Mutual  help. 
II.  The  importance  of  keeping  rank  in 
church  life  and  action  [Bib.  Myseym\, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XII. 


Ver.  1.  These  came  to  David,  The 
good  and  the  great  draw  others  after 
them  ;  they  lighten  and  lift  up  all  who 
are  within  reach  of  their  influence. 
They  are  so  many  living  centres  of 
beneficent  activity.  Let  a  man  of 
energetic  and  upright  character  be 
appointed  to  a  position  of  trust  and 
authority,  and  all  who  serve  under 
him  become,  as  it  were,  conscious  of 
an  increase  of  power  [aS'.  Smiles\ 

"  Whose  spirit  lent  a  fire 
Even  to  the  dullest  peasant  in  his  camp  " 

\_Shalieii'peare\. 

Ver.  8.     Separated  themselves. 

"  The  man  whom  I 
Consider  as  deserving  of  the  name, 
Is  one  whose  thoughts  and  actions  are  for 

others, 
Not  for  himself  alone ;  whose  lofty  aim, 
Adopted  on  just  principles,  is  ne'er 
Abandoned  while  earth  or  heaven  afford 
The  means  of  its  accomplishment " 

[Blanchard']. 

Ver,   32,      Men>   of  tmdersiandin^^ 


Happy  are  those  that,  knowing  in 
their  births  they  are  subject  to  un- 
certain changes,  are  still  prepared  and 
arm'd  for  either  fortune ;  a  rare  prin- 
ciple, and  with  much  labour  learn 'd  in 
wisdom's  school  [Massinger^. 

Ver.  40.  Joy  in  Israel.  Joy  is 
regarded  as  a  happy  accident  of  the 
Christian  life,  an  ornament  and  luxury 
rather  than  a  duty  [Dr.  Dale],  Joy 
in  the  Lord  is  strength,  positive  actual 
power  for  ministry.  It  creates  around 
us  the  most  favourable  atmosphere  for 
evoking  our  resources;  raises  our  entire 
nature  to  the  highest  pitch  of  energy, 
and  gives  unwonted  elasticity  and  ca- 
pacity of  tension  to  all  our  faculties. 
When  the  heart  is  brimming  over  with 
gladness,  labour  is  acceptable,  opposi- 
tion helpful,  duty  a  delight,  and 
responsibility  a  privilege  [Dr.  Clif- 
ford]. "The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength"  [stronghold,  marg.l  (Neh.  viii. 
10). 

49 


HOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLED.  icm^.  xm. 


CHAPTER  Xin. 


Critical  Notes.]    This  chapter  corresponds  closely  with  2  Sam.  vl.  1-11 ;  but  in  the 

first  verse  of  that  chapter  is  stated,  with  great  brevity,  what  is  given  here  in  fuU 
(vers.  1-5). 

Vers.  1-5. — The  Consultation.  Leaders  (omit  and^  for  leaders  intended)  are  captains 
named,  /.c,  chiefs  of  people.  If  civil  and  military  organisation  existed  before  this, 
♦'  David  seems  to  have  been  the  first  to  recognise  in  these  officers  of  the  host  repre- 
sentatives of  the  people,  to  consult  them  on  public  affairs  and  to  give  them  a  certain 
political  position  (see,  besides  the  present  place,  ch.  xv.  25  ;  xxvi.  26  ;  xxviii.  1)  "  \_!Speak. 
Com.].  Ver.  2.  ^fZ  assembled  together  ;  send  quickly  every  where  ;  left  at  home.  Ver.  3. 
Enquired  not  [cf.  1  Sam.  vii.  1,  2  ;  xxviii.  6  ;  1  Chr.  x.  14).  Ver.  5.  Shihor,  probably  one 
of  the  names  of  the  Nile  (cf.  Jos.  xiii.  3 ;  Is.  xxiii.  3 ;  Jer.  ii.  18) ;  was  the  southern 
bounds,  as  He  math  was  the  northern  of  Canaan  lPat.'\.  Kirjath-jearim^  where  it  had 
been  since  it  returned  out  of  land  of  Philistines  {cf.  1  Sam.  vi.). 

Vers.  Q-8.—Tlie  U mi e.rtaking  [cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  2-11).  All  Israel,  30,000  in  Sam.  Ver.  6. 
Baalah  (Jos.  xv.  9-60).  Whose  name,  rather  "  who  is  worshipped  there."  Ver.  7.  Uzza 
and  Ahio,  sons  or  grandsons  of  Abinadab,  who  from  age  or  death  was  unable  to  accom- 
pany procession.  Ver.  8.  **  Harps  Sbud  lutes ^  stringed  instruments ;  timbrels  and  cymbals, 
percussive  instruments  for  keeping  time  in  march  or  solemn  dance."  Trumpets  used  by 
priests,  generally  on  joyous  occasions  (Num.  x. ;  Ps.  xcviii.  6).  Some  suppose  that 
Ps.  xxxiv.  was  sung  in  parts  on  this  occasion. 

Vers.  9-14. — The  Breach.  Chidon,  Nachon  (2  Sam.  vi.  6).  Stumbled,  descent  steep 
and  dangerous.  Hand,  ark  not  to  be  touched,  would  not  have  required  it,  if  in  obedience 
to  law,  it  had  been  carried  on  the  priests'  shoulders  by  poles  [of.  Ex.  xxv.  14 ;  Num. 
iv.  15).  Ver.  11.  David  displeased  and  afraid  at  such  sudden  vindication  of  holiness. 
Ver.  14.  Obed,  a  Levite,  and  afterwards  doorkeeper  in  tabernacle  (1  Chr.  xv.  18  ;  xvi.  5), 
Gittitet  of  Gath-rimmon,  one  of  the  Levitical  cities  (Jos.  xxi.  24), 


HOMITETICS. 

The  First  Council. —  y<r8e8  '—5. 

David  securely  established  on  the  throne,  taken  and  fortified  Jerusalem, 
organised  and  trained  an  army,  turns  attention  to  civil  and  religious  concerns. 
First  thing  to  restore  the  ark  to  its  proper  place.  Hence  consultation  with 
chiefs.  I.  The  parties  of  "which  it  was  composed.  David  begins 
well.  Instead  of  ignoring  the  people,  he  calls  their  representatives ;  he 
*'  consults  "  them  and  decides  nothing  absolutely,  and  unconstitutionally.  Many 
sovereigns,  proud  and  tyrannical,  will  yield  nothing,  give  nothing,  overrule  the 
wish  and  rights  of  the  people.  "  I  am  the  state,"  said  one.  The  people's 
allegiance  is  best  secured  by  consent  in  their  representatives.  "If  it  seem  good 
unto  you."    II.  The  purpose  for  which  it  was  convened.    Many 

historic  councils  summoned  for  important  objects.  This  not  called  to  celebrate 
success,  organise  plans  of  campaign  ;  but  to  unite  the  people  and  establish  the 
worship  of  the  sanctuary  by  the  restoration  of  the  most  sacred  of  all  symbols. 
This — 1.  A  religions  movement.  Former  neglect  great,  people  degenerated  by 
influence  and  example  of  Saul ;  careless  and  indifferent  concerning  ordinances 
and  worship  of  God.  "  We  enquired  not  in  the  days  of  Saul."  2.  A  national 
nwveTnent.  "If  it  seem  good  unto  you."  The  throne  established,  national 
government  under  one  head;  foundation  laid  for  internal  unity  by  concentrating 
national  life  on  its  oeutre  and  source.     Not  like  other  kings,  David  displays  in 


CHAP.  XIII.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


proceedings  the  popvlar  character  of  his  rule,  assembles  all  round  the  sanctuary 
before  the  throne,  and  under  the  government  of  Jehovah  (Ps.  xxiv.  1-10). 
3.  A  divinely  sanctioned  movement.  "  If  it  be  of  the  Lord  our  God."  All  enter- 
prises opposed  to  his  will,  though  carried  on  with  numbers  and  valour,  will  come 
to  nought.  This  first,  "  Is  it  the  will  of  God  ?  "  For  "■  man  proposes,  but  God 
disposes."  "  Ye  ought  to  say  if  the  Lord  will  we  shall  live  and  do  this  or  tliat.** 
III.  The  decision  at  which  it  arrived.  The  purpose  noble,  and 
leasons  for  execution  weighty  and  abundant.  1.  A  wise  decision.  ^*  It  was 
right."  Always  wise  to  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  (fee.  "  Oh  that  they 
were  wise  1  "  2.  A  unanimous  decision.  ^^All  the  congregation  ^aid  it  was  right." 
People  rightly  consulted  readily  agree.  Leaders  should  nevei-  fear  to  appeal  in 
God's  name  to  the  nation,  seek  to  rouse  its  conscience  and  gain  its  sympathies. 
The  response  will  be  cordial  and  unanimous.  "  The  Lord  our  God  will  we  serve, 
and  his  voice  will  we  obey  "  (Jos.  xxiv.  24).  3.  A.  firm  decision.  "  We  will  do 
so."    Needful  to  be  prudent  in  counsel  and  firm  in  execution. 


The  Abk  in  thb  BoYAii  Oitt. 

A  place  of  honour,  influence,  and  right,  as — I,  The   centre   of  unity. 

Politically  and  morally,  outwardly  and  inwardly  people  one.  Unity  in  worship 
not  complete,  for  there  were  two  holy  places,  one  in  Gibeon,  another  pitched 
over  the  ark,  but  internal  unity  which  did  not  exist  before.  II.  The  source 
of  religious  life.  Under  Saul  it  had  fallen  from  the  height  to  which 
Samuel  had  brought  it.  The  royal  family  had  lost  piety,  and,  as  instanced  by 
Michal,  had  become  proud.  In  her  father's  house  she  had  an  idol  god.  But 
this  act — 1.  Purified  religious  life.  Elevated  its  tone  and  grandeur.  2.  Unified 
religious  life.  External  unity  destroyed  by  war  between  Saul  and  David.  Now 
national  life  one  centre  and  source  in  dwelling  of  God  in  Zion.  The  sanctuary 
in  Gibeon  retires  from  view.  3.  Organised  religious  life.  He  arranged  priests 
and  Levites,  divided  them  into  classes  for  service,  gave  a  new  impulse  to  music 
and  culture.  Reorganisation  raised  divine  worship  from  its  disintegration  and 
lawlessness  under  Saul  to  an  artistic  and  beautiful  order.  III.  The  sign  of 
God's  presence.  David  had  captains  and  mighty  men,  but  God  was 
required.  Conscious  of  dependence  upon  God,  he  confesses  desire  to  rule 
according  to  the  will  of  God.  If  it  be  "  of  the  Lord  our  God."  This  act  one 
of  reverence  and  gratitude,  which  enthrones  God  the  king  of  glory  (Ps.  xxiv.) ; 
makes  Jerusalem  the  city  of  the  Great  King  (Ps.  xlviii.  3) ;  from  whence 
proceed  all  manifestations  of  glory  and  might  (Ps.  xx.  3) ;  and  before  whom 
it  is  an  unspeakable  privilege  to  worship.  "  Who  may  be  guest  in  thy  tent  / 
who  may  dwell  on  thy  holy  mownXain  ? "  (Ps.  xv.  1). 

Thb  Solemn  Procession. — Verses  6-8. 

Extreme  anxiety  to  have  the  ark  in  the  city,  for  counsel  and  succour  on 
all  occasions.  To  attain  this  all  classes  eager  to  undertake  any  effort  and 
submit  to  any  inconvenience.  A  procession  formed  which  befits  the  object 
in  view.  I.  In  military  escort.  The  way  rugged,  the  enemy  defeated, 
but  not  destroyed.  We  must  ever  be  on  guard.  II.  In  united  ranks. 
**  All  Israel  "  (30,000  in  Sam.),  king,  priests,  and  people  in  order  and  position. 
All  ranks  indebted  to  God,  all  should  join  in  service  and  praise.  III.  In 
festive  joy.  "  The  festival,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  *' was  one  which  exactly 
corresponded   to   what  in  the  Middle   Ages   would   have  been  'the  Feast  of 

51 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xm. 


the  Translation'  of  some  great  relic,  by  which  a  new  city  or  a  new  church 
was  to  be  glorified.  Long  sleepless  nights  had  David  passed  in  thinking  of 
it  (Ps.  cxxxii.  4),  as  St.  Louis  of  the  transport  of  the  Crown  of  Thorns  to 
the  Royal  Chapel  of  Paris."  Such  joy  is  natural  and  becoming,  pleasing  to 
men  and  acceptable  to  God. 


The  Lesson  op  Uzza. — Verses  8-12. 

David  loved  God,  venerated  the  symbol  of  his  presence,  desired  to  restore 

appointed  worship,  and  put  the  ark  where  it  should  be.  But  right  things  must 
be  done  in  right  manner,  or  they  will  fail.  In  this  case  failure,  sad  and  signal, 
for  Uzza  died  and  the  ark  turned  aside  to  the  house  of  Obed-edom.  I.  The 
failure.  Here  multitudes,  "David  and  all  Israel,"  yet  business  nought. 
Crowds  do  not  ensure  blessing.  Here  pomp,  singing,  harps,  trumpets,  &c.,  yet 
ended  in  mourning.  Gorgeous  ceremonial  no  guarantee  of  grace.  Here  energy ; 
" they  played  before  God  with  all  their  might" — no  dull  and  sleepy  worship, 
but  a  bright,  lively  service,  yet  the  matter  fell  through.  But  there  was  no 
thought  as  to  God's  mind.  David  confessed,  "  "We  sought  him  not  after  the  due 
order"  (1  Chr.  xv.  13).  The  priests  not  in  their  places,  nor  Levites  to  carry 
the  ark ;  oxen  took  the  place  of  willing  men.  The  worship  was  not  sufficiently 
spiritual  and  humble.  There  was  no  sacrifice.  This  a  fatal  flaw,  for  how 
can  we  serve  the  Lord  apart  from  sacrifice  ?  There  was  little  reverence.  We 
hear  little  of  prayer,  but  much  of  oxen,  a  cait,  and  the  too  familiar  hand  of 
Uzza.  Now,  even  David  must  keep  his  place,  and  the  Lord's  command  must 
not  be  supplanted  by  will- worship.  Therefore  the  breach  upon  Uzza,  and 
David  greatly  afraid.  May  we  not  expect  similar  failures,  unless  careful  to  act 
obediently  and  serve  the  Lord  with  holy  awe  ?  Are  all  observances  and  prac- 
tices of  our  churches  scriptural  ?  Are  not  some  of  them  purely  will-worship  ? 
II.  Tlie  fear.  The  terrible  death  of  Uzza  caused  great  fear.  Thus  the  Lord 
slew  Nadab  and  Abihu  for  offering  strange  fire ;  and  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh 
for  looking  into  the  ark.  **  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me,  and 
before  all  the  people  I  will  be  glorified  "  (Lev.  x.  3).  Sense  of  wrong-feeling 
caused  fear  in  David,  for  we  read,  "  And  David  was  displeased"  (ver.  11).  We 
are  too  apt  to  be  displeased  with  God  because  he  is  displeased  with  us.  Sense  of 
unworthiness  for  such  holy  work  made  him  cry,  "  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of 
God  home  to  me  ?  "  His  feeling  that  he  failed  in  that  which  God  expected  of 
his  servants  created  a  holy  fear.  "  Sanctify  yourselves,  that  ye  may  bring  up 
the  ark  of  the  Lord  God"  (1  Chr.  xv.  12).  He  meant  well,  but  erred  and  came 
to  a  pause ;  yet  not  for  long.  Ark  remained  with  Obed-edom  three  months,  not 
more  (ver.  14).  Some  make  the  holiness  of  God  and  the  strictness  of  His  rule 
an  excuse  for  wicked  neglect.  Others  are  overwhelmed  with  holy  fear,  and 
pause  awhile  till  they  are  better  prepared  for  the  holy  service  \Spurge<m\. 

Right  Things  Done  in  a  Wrong  Wat. 

I.  The  matter  and  right  manner  of  performing:  duties  are, 
in  the  command  of  God,  linked  together.  He  will  have  his 
service  well  done,  as  well  as  really  done,  with  a  perfect  heart  and  a  willing  mind, 
for  the  Lord  searcheth  all  hearts  and  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the 
thoughts.  Masters  on  earth  challenge  to  themselves  a  power  to  oblige  their 
servants,  not  only  to  do  their  work,  but  to  do  it  so-and-so ;  and  though  they  do 
the  thing  itself,  yet  if  not  in  the  manner  required,  it  is  not  accepted.     II.  The 

4oing:  of  ^  duty  in  a  wrong  manner  alters  the  ^at^r^  of  it. 


CHAr.   XIII.J 


BOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


and  makes  it  sin.  Hence,  the  ploughing  of  the  wicked  is  sin  (Prov. 
xxi.  4).  Hence,  prayer  is  accounted  a  howling  upon  their  beds  (Hos.  vii.  14). 
Unworthy  communicating  is  not  counted  as  eating  the  Lord's  Supper  (1  Cor. 
xi.  20).  If  a  house  be  built  of  never  so  strong  timber  and  good  stones,  yet  if  it 
be  not  well  founded  and  rightly  built,  the  inhabitant  may  curse  the  day  he  came 
under  the  roof  of  it.  III.  Duties  not  prepared  according  to  the 
right  order  are  but  the  half  of  the  service  we  owe  to  God, 
and  the  worst  half  too  \Thos.  Boston\. 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


"Ver.  2.  Send  abroad.  ErumpamuSy 
dimittamus.  Let  us  break  forth  and 
send,  i.e.,  let  us  send  speedily  and 
effectually.  See  his  zeal  for  the  Lord 
of  Hosts  [Trapp]. 

Ver.  8.  Placed  before  God.  Public 
joy  should  always  be  as  before  the  Lord, 
with  an  eye  to  him,  and  terminating 
in  him,  otherwise  it  is  no  better  than 
public  madness,  and  the  source  of  all 
manner  of  wickedness  [Benson]. 

Vers.  7-10.  Perez- Uzza.  1.  The  act 
of  Uzza.  Kash,  lacking  faith  in  God's 
power  or  providence  to  preserve  the 
ark ;  irreverent ;  disobedient.  2.  The 
punishment  of  Uzza.  Sudden,  signal, 
and  severe.  Apparently  out  of  all 
proportion  to  the  act.  But  we  are  im- 
proper judges  of  wrong,  desert,  and 
divine  justice.  God  displays  holiness, 
to  secure  discipline  and  check  sin,  to 
which  we-  are  prone.  One  instance  of 
justice  may  benefit  generations  and 
ages.  3.  The  results  of  the  punishment 
of  Uzza.  {a)  The  procession  was  broken 
up.  (6)  David  was  afraid.  "  How  could 
such  a  festal  joy  which  knew  nothing 
of  holy  fear,  however  well  meant,  prove 
acceptable  to  God  ?  It  is  not  enough 
that  we  mean  well,  and  have  pious 
thoughts;  we  must  also,  in  what  we 
do,  hold  fast  to  God's  word  and 
commandment,  and  in  all  our  joy  in 
the  Lord  must  not  allow  ourselves  to 
forget  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  holy 
God." 


Uzza,  or  Irreverence  in  sacred  things. 
1.  Rashness  in  devotion.  *'  God  smote 
Uzza  for  his  rashness  (marg.)  "  (2  Sam. 
vi.  7).  Worldly  thoughts  and  plans 
brought  into  the  very  house  and  pre- 
sence of  God.  Haste  in  spirit  and 
utterance.  **  Be  not  rash  with  thy 
mouth,"  &c.  (Ecc.  v.  2).  2.  Thought- 
lessness in  Christian  effort.  N"o  due 
preparation,  trust  to  accidents  or 
emergencies.  Inconsiderate  effort  has 
blasted  many  a  noble  project.  Pru- 
dence and  thought  required.  Collect 
and  arrange  materials ;  for  an  unfur- 
nished minister  can  never  be  "  a  wise 
master-builder."  "  Prepare  thy  work 
(set  it  in  order)  without  and  make  it 
fit  for  thyself  in  the  field"  (Prov. 
xxiv.  27).  3.  Sinfulness  in  the  Chris- 
tian ministry.  Uzza  a  type  of  all  who, 
unsanctified  in  spirit,  take  upon  them- 
selves to  rescue  the  cause  of  God.  "  Be 
ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord."  Profanation  of  the  ark.  It  is 
of  importance  to  observe  the  propor- 
tionate severity  of  the  punishment 
attending  the  profanation  of  the  ark. 
The  Philistines  suffered  by  diseases, 
from  which  they  were  relieved  by  their 
oblations,  because  the  law  had  not  been 
given  to  them ;  the  Bethshemites  also 
suffered,  but  not  fatally,  their  error 
proceeding  from  ignorance  or  inadver- 
tency ;  but  Uzza,  who  was  a  Levite  and 
well  instructed,  suffered  death  for  his 
breach  of  the  law  \Jamieson'\. 


HOMILETICS. 

Peeez-Uzza  and  its  Lessons. 

Arrangements  of  David  for  transport  of  the  Ark  differed  from   those  which 
God  had  prescribed  (Num.  iv,),     ^ever  carry  on  the  work  of  God  by  means 

^3 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xiix. 


which  God  has  forbidden.  Learn— I.  If  God  be  absent  from  a  people, 
and  the  ark  be  long  in  obscurity,  that  people  will  lose  a 
sense  of  reverence.  All  thought  of  divine  power  in  the  ark  forgotten,  a 
question  of  mere  safety,  not  reverence ;  arrangements  those  of  heathen  nations, 
not  divine  injunctions.  *II.  That  God,  mindful  of  his  honour,  often 
singles  out  guilty  men  to  be  monuments  of  his  displeasure. 
God  will  be  sanctified  in  those  who  come  nigh  him  (Lev.  x.  3).  Uzza  presump- 
tuous and  irreverent,  like  Nadab  and  Abihua,  suffered  for  sin.  "  When  many 
have  sinned,  God  commonly  punishes  one  or  two  of  the  leaders,  in  order  that  the 
others  may  remember  their  sin  and  beg  forgiveness."  III.  That  by  SUCh 
examples  of  terror  God  warns  others.  King,  priests,  and  people 
inspired  with  dread  of  divine  majesty.  Judgment  opened  the  eyes  and  humbled 
the  soul  of  David,  who  wisely  delayed  for  thought,  self-examination,  and,  under 
divine  teaching,  to  learn  the  right  way.  "  For  when  thy  judgments  are  in 
(strike)  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  (earth)  will  learn  righteousness  " 
(Is.  xxvi.  9)* 

••  Heaven  wills  our  happiness,  allows  our  doom ; 
Invites  us  ardently,  but  not  compels"  {Young\, 

David's  Displeasure. — Ver$Qs  11,  12, 

T?he  king  greatly  agitated,  dreaded  God's  displeasure  might  be  extended  to 
himself  and  people  if  ark  further  conveyed.  Resolved  to  wait.  The  word  betokens 
anger  and  grief,  used  by  Jonah  (iv.  1-9).  I.  He  was  afraid  of  personal 
danger.  He  had  neglected  duty ;  knew  not  what  might  happen;  dangerous 
to  bring  ark  into  the  city.  A  guilty  conscience  makes  cowards.  II. 
He  was  vexed  at  the  interruption  of  his  plan.  People  disap- 
pointed, his  prestige  damaged,  and  his  enemies  encouraged.  We  are  often 
tempted  to  find  fault  when  our  religious  enterprise  is  interrupted,  when  we 
as  leaders  are  dishonoured,  and  our  purposes  broken.  Complain  of  God's 
providence  when  we  should  accuse  ourselves.  "  Should  it  be  according  to 
thy  mind?"  III.  He  was  overcome  with  superstitious  dread. 
Something  about  the  ark  itself  he  did  not  understand.  He  misinterpreted 
the  event.  Superstition  ever  misdirects,  scares  by  expected  evil.  "  It  were 
better  to  have  no  opinion  of  God  at  all  than  such  an  opinion  as  is  unworthy  of 
him ,  for  the  one  is  unbelief,  the  other  is  contumely ;  and  certainly  superstition  is 
the  reproach  of  the  Deity "  [Bacon\, 

The  House  of  Obed-edom. — Verse  14. 

People  dismayed,  David  perplexed,  one  perfectly  calm  and  ready  to  welcome 
the  ark.  Obed.  not  a  great  warrior ;  for  great  talents  no  guarantee  for  holy 
life  and  faithful  sarvice  (Balaam,  Saul,  Byron),  but  a  man  of  sincere  heart  and 
upright  conduct.  I.  The  service  which  he  rendered.  The  ark 
was  carried  "aside  into  the  house  of  Obed-edom."  A  most  signal  service  which 
no  one  else  would  undertake.  A  service  for  which  he  was  trained,  and  which  he 
was  ready  when  required  to  give.  Lonely  homes  are  scenes  of  highest  trust  and 
purest  character.  Not  the  palace,  but  the  cottage  often  the  residence  of  God, 
and  the  national  glory.  II.  The  spirit  in  which  he  performed 
this  service.  IJzza  slain  for  rashness,  David  shrinks  in  fear,  Obed-edom 
receives  ark  gladly.  1.  In  filial  fear.  In  love  to  God  and  earnest  desire  to 
help  his  cause.  2.  In  striking  courage.  He  knew  what  had  been  done  among 
the  Philistines  and  the  Bethshemites,  yet  invites  the  ark  to  his  house.  "  0  the 
courage,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "of  an  honest  and  faithful  heart  I  Nothing  can 
znake  G<m1  otherwise  than  amiable  to  him ;   even  his  justice  is  lovely."     Ill, 


CHAP.   XIII.  J 


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


The  reward  which  he  gained.  "  The  Lord  blessed  the  house."  1. 
A  personal  blessing.  2.  A  social  blessing.  3.  An  extensive  blessing.  "  All 
that  he  had."  None  suffer  whose  guest  is  the  ark  of  God.  Piety  is  the  best 
friend  to  prosperity.     Happy  and  attractive  the  home  in  which  God  dwells. 


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  9-13.  1.  God's  people  misin- 
terpret his  dealings.  2.  How  much 
they  lose  by  this  interpretation.  3. 
How  much  they  gain  who  receive 
God  simply.  (1)  Beware  of  flying 
from  God  or  shutting  out  God.  (2) 
Let  God  into  the  heart  and  the 
dwelling  [ZT.  Bonarj. 

Ver.  14.  Ark  in  the  house.  Family 
devotion,  its  nature,  duty,  and  results. 
Howard,  the  philanthropist,  never  neg- 
lected family  prayer,  if  even  but  one, 
and  that  his  domestic  servant,  declar- 
ing that  where  he  had  a  tent,  God 
should  have  an  altar.  "  Pour  out  thy 
fury  upon  the  heathen  that  know  thee 
not,  and  upon  the  families  that  call  not 
upon  thy  name." 


The  Ark  with  Uzza,  David,  and 
Obed-edom  ;  or  the  Ark  the  cause  of 
judgment,  fear,  and  blessing,  accord- 
ing to  its  treatment. 

Yer.  14.  Blessed.  As  he  will  do 
all  those,  both  small  and  great,  that 
favour  his  cause  and  further  his  king- 
dom; for  he  is  a  Hberal  paymaster, 
and  his  retributions  are  more  than 
bountiful.  If  Abinadab  was  not  so 
well  blessed  as  Obed-edom,  it  was  haply 
because  he  entertained  not  the  ark 
with  like  reverence.  As  men  measure 
to  God  in  preparation,  &c.,  so  will  God 
measure  to  them  in  blessing  \Trapp\. 

"  A  Deity  believed,  will  nought  avail, 
Rewards   and    punishments    make    God 
adored"  [Young'\. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIII, 


Vers.  6-8.  Singing,  Oh  that  we 
might  have  such  joy  as  that  which 
inspired  the  men  at  the  battle  of 
Leuthen  !  They  were  singing  a  Chris- 
tian song  as  they  went  into  battle.  A 
general  said  to  the  king,  "  Shall  I  stop 
these  people  singing  ? "  **  No,"  said 
the  king.  "  Men  that  can  sing  like  that 
can  fight"  [Talmage]. 

Ver.  11.  Breach.  God  would  have 
us  read  our  sins  in  our  judgments, 
that  we  might  both  repent  of  our  sins, 
and  give  glory  to  his  justice  [Bishop 
Hall]. 

Ver.  14.  Blessed  the  house.  Parents  I 
if  you  would  banish  Satan  from  your 
households,  and  with  him  all  the  train 


of  sins  that  bring  misery  and  desola- 
tion into  many  a  home,  and  convert 
into  a  wilderness  with  wild  beasts  what 
might  be  a  family  paradise,  where  every 
human  affection  bloomed  in  beauty, 
grew  in  grace,  and  brought  forth  fruit 
to  God's  glory,  seek  the  constant 
presence  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  covet, 
above  all  earthly  honour  or  renown, 
that  your  family  should  be  like  that  one 
of  old  in  Bethany  which  '*  Jesus  loved." 
His  presence  will  be  your  true  pros- 
perity, making  your  daily  mercies  true 
mercies,  and  your  seasons  of  bereave- 
ment seasons  of  richest  blessing  and 
deepest  peace  [Eev,  Nor.  Macleod^  1).D,\ 


55 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  m. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Critical  Notes.]     This  chapter  runs  parallel  with  2  Sam.  v.  11-25,  and  presents  a 

general  verbal  identity,  which  is  insufficiently  represented  by  the  Authorised  Version. 
The  only  important  variations  from  2  Sam.  v.  are  in  verses  4-7  and  12,  in  the  former  of 
which  passages  the  sons  of  David  are  given  somewhat  differently,  while  in  the  latter  the 
fact  is  added  that  the  idols  taken  from  the  Philistinas  were  burned  \^Speak.  Com.]. 

Vers.  1,  2.— David's  house.  IT.  elsewhere  Huram  (2  Chr.  ii.  3;  viii.  18;  ix.  10;  cf. 
2  Sam.  V.  11).  A  Phoenician,  a  Ganaanite,  speaking  the  language  of  David,  and  sovereign 
of  a  city  trading  in  cedars  and  abounding  with  craftsmen  in  stone  and  wood  [cf.  Murphy]. 
Ver.  2.   Confiryn^d  in  contrast  to  his  former  state  and  the  fate  of  Saul's  kingdom. 

Vers.  3-7. — David's  family  {cf.  2  Sam.  iii.  5).  Concubines  in  ch.  iii.  9  ;  a  list  of  children 
vers.  5-8;  those  born  in  Jerusalem,  2  Sam.  v.  14-1 G.  But  names  of  Eliphalet  and  Nogah 
not  found,  and  Beel  ada  appears  the  same  as  Eliada. 

Vers.  8-17. — David's  victories.  Seekto  ruin  him  before  consolidated  in  kingdom.  Ver.  9. 
Rpph'iim  (xi.  15)  south  east  of  Jerusalem,  near  capital  of  David.  Ver.  10.  Enqvired  for 
high  priest  to  give  tone  to  his  reign.  Ver.  11.  Smote  in  the  engagement  at  Mount  Perazim 
(Is.  xxxviii.  21),  in  valley  of  Rephaim.  This  first  victory.  Ver.  12.  God's  images 
carried  into  battlefields  (1  Sam.  iv.  4-11 ;  2  Sam.  v.  21). 

Vers.  lZ-11.— Second  victory.  Again  in  next  season  campaign  renewed.  Ver.  14.  Not 
up  to  meet  them  directly;  come  upon  them  by  stratagem  in  the  rear.  Ver.  15.  Sound, 
the  rustling  of  leaves  by  strong  breeze,  the  appointed  sign  and  moment  for  attack.  Ver.  16. 
Gibeon,  now  Yefa,  in  Judah.  Ver.  17.  Fane  in  all  the  surrounding  nations.  This  verse 
an  appropriate  conclusion,  not  found  in  Samuel. 


HOMILETICS. 
The  Building  of  the  Eoyal  House. — Verses  1,  2. 

David  had  conquered  Jebusites  ;  made  Zion  capital ;  had  now  wisely  made  a 
^eaty  with  a  neighbouring  prince.  Magnanimous  and  godfearing.  In 
Hiram's  conduct  notice — I.  An  instance  of  true  friendship.  History 
gives  noble  examples  of  love  and  friendship.  1.  This  was  genuine.  Real  and 
excellent.  David  need  of  artisans.  War  and  disorder  had  depopulated.  "  A 
friend  in  need  is  a  friend  indeed." 

"  111  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey,  * 

Where  wealth  accumulates  and  men  decay.** 

2.  fhis  was  lasting.  Friends  often  change  with  change  of  principles  and 
circumstances ;  vary  vi^ith  temperature  and  desert  in  meanness.  Hiram  did  to 
the  son  what  he  had  done  to  the  father  (2  Chr.  ii.  3) ;  *'  for  Hiram  was  ever  a 
lover  of  David"  (1  Kings  v.  1).  II.  An  illustration  of  human  agency 
in  the  service  of  God.  None  independent.  All  require  friends  and  help. 
Rich  to  give  to  poor ;  wise  to  teach  the  ignorant,  and  kings  to  rule  subjects. 
All  may  communicate,  interchange  stores  of  thought,  knowledge,  and  substance. 
1.  Agency  in  men.  Tyrian  workmen  renowned  and  skilful;  helped  David  to 
build  a  city,  so  splendid  in  cedar  structures  that  Jeremiah  exclaimed,  "  Thou 
dwelltist  on  Lebanon  and  makest  thy  nest  in  the  cedars"  (Jer.  xxii.  23).  2. 
Agency  in  Tuaterials.  Israel  agricultural,  furnished  corn  and  oil ;  Tyre  commercial, 
gave  its  map^ufactures  a.U(J  foreign  produce.  Thus  mutually  helpful.  All  thd 
66 


CHAP,  xir.]  nomLETlC  GOMUESVAliY:  CHRONICLES. 


treasures  of  art  and  materials  of  nature  .subserve  man's  highest  interests  and 
God's  work.  III.  A  proof  of  Qod'S  providence.  David  more  than 
"  fortunate  in  having  a  friend  in  Hiram  at  this  time."  1.  Providence  in  Hiram's 
conduct.  God  disposed  him  to  render  help.  The  God  of  infinite  wisdom  has  a 
purpose  in  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires,  in  all  events  of  life,  obscure  or  illustrious. 
As  a  gardener  directs  rills  of  water  through  different  parts  of  his  ground,  so 
*'  the  king's  heai't  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  as  the  rivers  of  water :  he  turueth 
it  whithersoever  he  will"  (Prov.  xxi.  1).  2.  Providence  in  David's  accession  to  the 
throne.  "  David  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  established  him  king  over  Israel." 
By  internal  unity,  external  peace,  and  friendly  connection  with  Hiram.  3. 
Providence  in  the  honour  and  extension  of  David's  kingdom.  "  And  that  his 
kingdom  was  exalted  on  high."  Respected  at  home  and  abroad  among  nations ; 
elevated  as  the  people  of  God  above  others  in  knowledge,  privilege,  and  destiny. 
In  building  characters,  chinches,  and  societies  rely  upon  God,  not  too  much  upon 
human  friendship  and  human  instrumentality,  wealth,  eloquent  preachers 
and  active  evangelists.  Recognition,  consciousness  of  God,  gives  strength  and 
success.     ^*  Daivid  perceived  "  <fec. 

HiBAM  AND   DaYIDs 

The  treaty  between  these  two  kings  illustrates — I,  The  providence  of 
God  in  the  exaltation  of  a  good  man.  "  Confirmed  him  king." 
Scholars,  ministers,  statesmen,  fitted  and  exalted  from  obscurity  to  honour. 
Joseph  from  prison  to  prime  minister;  Garfield  from  log  cabin  to  White  House; 
Livingstone  from  Blantyre  to  Westminster  Abbey.  "  The  Most  High  ruleth  in 
the  kingdom  of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  will."  II,  The 
influence  of  a  good  man  upon  others  when  thus  exalted. 
David's  influence  far  and  near.  Men  pay  homage  to  moral  worth  and  holy  life. 
This  power  every  Christian  may  possess  and  wield.  The  secret  is,  "  The  Lord 
was  with  him."  III.  The  design  for  which  God  exalts  a  good 
man.  **For  his  people  Israel's  sake"  (2  Sam.  v.  12).  ISTot  for  themselves, 
but  for  others  are  men  enriched  and  honoured.  Great  interests  often  sacrificed 
for  selfish  ends.  Kings,  popes,  and  emperors  forget  that  others  are  as  dear  to 
God  as  they.  Elevation  should  never  separate.  Kings  created  for  the  people, 
not  the  people  for  kings. 

HOMILETIG  HINTib  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1,  2.     1.  David's  house   built,  not  acknowledge  God,  talk  about  their 

Fit  for  his  court  and  homage.     Work-  "  fortune,"     "  star,'*     and     "  chance." 

men  of  a  wealthy  prince  helped  to  rear  "  David  perceived,^*   &c.     "  By   this  I 

it.     "  The  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  know      that      thou     favourest      me" 

up"  the  walls  of  the  spiritual  house,  (Ps.  xli.  1). 

"  and  their  kings  shall  minister  unto  Ver.    2.     Lifted   up.      Man   throws 

thee"  (Is.  Ix.  10).     2.  David^ s  kingdom  down.     God  lifts  up  persons,  societies, 

established.    Saul  not  established.     No-  and   nations ;  lifts  up  above  distress, 

thing  to   shake  or  disturb   possession,  opposition,  and  danger.     "  A  good  man 

Exalted  before  friend  and  foe.  *' Higher  in  great  prosjyerity.     1.  He  ascribes  it 

than  the  kings  of  the  earth."     3.   God^s  all  to  the  Lord.     2.   He  regards  it  as 

hand  recognised  in  this.     Many  blessed  given  him  for  the  benefit  of  his  fellow- 

and  honoured  do  not  perceive  this,  will  men  "  [La/nge^ 


57 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xiv. 


EOMILETICS, 

The  Extension  of  the  Eoyal  Family. — Verses  3-7. 

When  the  palace  was  built  and  the  kingdom  established,  David's  family 
multiplied  and  increased.  Of  his  sons,  see  1  Chr.  iii.  1-9 ;  and  his  concubines, 
2  Sam.  XV.  16;  xvi.  22;  xix.  5.  This — I.  In  -worldly  policy.  Always 
thought  to  be  politic  to  have  many  children;  marry  them  into  powerful  families, 
and  thus  strengthen  interest  and  gain  support.  The  custom  of  Oriental 
monarchs  to  gather  a  numerous  harem.  This  an  essential  part  of  court-state, 
and  a  symbol  of  royal  power.  But  David  overstepped  the  mark  and  went 
astray.  "Men  who  have  once  broken  the  fence  will  wander  carelessly."  II. 
In  disobedience  to  God's  command.  Multiplication  of  wives  expressly 
forbidden  to  the  kings  of  Israel.  "  Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself, 
that  his  heart  turn  not  away"  (Deut.  xvii.  17).  Worldly  policy  often  contra- 
dictory to  God's  design.  Expediency  never  safe.  Divine  wisdom  the  only 
preservative  and  redemptive  force  in  life.  "  When  wisdom  entereth  into 
thine  heart  and  knowledge  is  pleasant  unto  thy  soul,  discretion  shall  preserve 
thee,  understanding  shall  keep  thee." 

"To  know 
That  which  before  ns  lies  in  daily  life 
Is  the  prime  wisdom"  [Miltmi]. 

Famous  Battles. — Verses  8-17. 

Philistines  afraid  of  David's  growing  power — that  Jie  would  wipe  away  the 
national  dishonour  of  Gilboa,  and  that  his  knowledge  of  the  country  would  give 
superior  advantage  in  war — resolve  to  attack,  surprise,  and  ruin  him.     Went  u]) 
to    seek,   with   intention   to   crush   him    before   consolidated   in    his   kingdom 
(cf.  1    Sam.  xxiii.  15;   xxiv.  2),  but   were  overcome   in   two  famous   battles. 
I.   The  counsel   by  ■which    they  were   undertaken.     "David 
enquired   of    God"    (ver.    10);    "David    enquired   again   of    God"   (ver.    13). 
In  all  affairs  look  to  God  for  direction.     Have  his  will  and  word  for  your 
guide.     Means  always  at  hand  to  discover  his  mil.     Submit  thoughts,  plans, 
and  ways  to  God's  approval — to  check  if  wrong,  to  perfect  if  right.    If  depressed 
by  their  weight,  "  commit  "  (literally,  roll  as  a  burden  which  you  cannot  bear) 
**  thy  way  unto  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  5).     "  Roll  thy  v^orks"  (thy  undertakings) 
"upon  the  Lord"  (Prov.  xvi.  3).    II.  The  help  by  which  they  were 
fought.     This  from  above.     1.  In  divine  direction.     "  The   Lord  said   imto 
him,  go  up."     Never  stir  without  this.     2.  In  hearty  co-operation.     David  did 
not  entrench  himself  in  Zion,  nor  act  merely  on  the  defensive,  but  made  the 
attack  and  conquered.     "  To  serve  the  gods  was  to  reign,"  said  a  heathen  writer. 
III.    The  victories  which   they  gained.    Brilliant  and  complete. 
1.  The  enemy  overcome.     "  David  smote  them  " — like  rising  waters,  overflowing 
their  banks  and  sweeping  everything   before  them.     2.  Their  false  confidence 
destroyed.     Philistines  carried  their  gods  into  battle,  with  the  belief,  common  in 
ancdient  nations,  that  they  would  grant  success.     Their  owners  left  them  helpless 
on  the  field  ;  the  victors  cariied  them  as  trophies  to  the  capital,  and  consumed 
them  in  the  flames.     "  They  were  burned  with  fire."     3.  David  becaotie  famous. 
"  The  fame  of  David  went  out  unto  all  lands  "  (ver.  17).     As  a  great  warrior,  a 
powerful  monarch,  and  a  good  man.     4.  God  was  honoured.     Acknowledged  as 
the  source  of  victory — "  God  hath  broken  in  "  (ver.  11) — praised  for  his  gift  and 
presence,  and  feared  above  all  the  gods  of  the  earth.     Give  to  him  the  glory 
due  to  his  name. 
58 


CHAP.  XIV.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Signals  for  Duty. — Verses  15,  16. 

In  the  responses  to  David^s  inquiries  we  not  simply  have  commands  in  words, 
and  symbols  in  sound,  but  signals  for  duty  or  action.  I.  God's  answer  to 
man's  prayer.  Given  twice,  in  terms  direct  and  explicit.  1.  Prayer  for 
knowledge  of  duty.  "  Shall  I  go?"  2.  Prayer  for  assurance  of  success.  "Wilt 
thou  deliver  them  into  my  hand?"  David  often  defeated.  For  his  own 
encouragement  and  that  of  his  army,  he  desires  grounds  of  confidence.  True 
prayer  will  give  knowledge,  hope,  and  strength.  II.  God's  help  in  man's 
circumstances.  These  often  strange  and  apparently  against  us  ;  render 
powerless  and  insufficient.  God's  help  adequate  to  feeble  men  and  scanty 
resources.  In  his  service  never  left  without  indications  of  his  presence. 
"  God  is  gone  forth  before  thee.'*  III.  God's  signal  for  man's  action. 
We  need  not  only  to  know  and  strength  to  obey  God's  will,  but  the  call  to  duty 
— the  signal  to  "  go  ''  at  the  exact  time.  A  detachment  on  one  occasion  waited 
for  orders,  longed  to  join  their  comrades  in  battle,  instead  of  standing  in  silence, 
exposed  to  danger.  At  length  Wellington  gave  the  command,  and  the  attack 
was  successful.  "  They  serve  who  stand  and  wait."  A  time  to  "  stand  still  " 
and  to  "  go  forward,"  but  God  must  give  the  signal.  Wait  for  his  salvation. 
"  The  vision  shall  come  and  not  tarry." 

The  Battle  of  Baal-perazim. — Verses  8-13. 

Here  the  Philistines  marched  from  Rephaim,  pitched  their  tent,  and  offered 
battle  (2  Sam.  v.  18-20).  I.  The  spirit  in  which  it  was  fought. 
Most  commendable  and  advantageous.  1.  A  spirit  of  reliance  upon  God. 
"  ShaU  I  go  ?  "  An  attitude  of  conscious  danger  and  helplessness.  2.  A  spirit 
of  humility,  David  talks  of  his  "  hand,"  not  his  sword.  God  is  the  giver,  he 
only  receives  with  the  hand.  None  fit  to  be  great  but  those  who  can  stoop 
lowest.  "  Before  honour  is  humility."  3.  A  spirit  of  obedience.  "  They  came 
up."  Wise  to  listen  to  and  obey  law — to  be  convinced  of  its  divine  authority 
and  justice.  Men  ever  ready  to  order,  to  modify  and  repeal,  in  danger  and 
doubt.  But  "  the  wise  in  heart  will  receive  commandments."  4.  A  spirit  of 
courage.  Yictory  promised  by  God,  hence  bravery  and  enthusiasm.  "  A  good 
cause  makes  a  stout  heart." 

♦'He  holds  no  parley  with  unmanly  fears, 
Where  duty  bids,  he  confidently  steers, 
Faces  a  thousand  dangers  at  her  call, 
And  trusting  in  his  G-od,  surmounts  them  all"  [Gowper]* 

II.  The   scenes  by   which  it  was  characterised.     Battlefields 

never  pleasant  to  inspect.  Great  soldiers  have  often  wept  on  them.  1 .  Shame- 
ful defeat.  '*  David  smote  them,"  and  like  an  impetuous  flood  cariied  all  before 
him.  The  defeat  terrible,  and  perpetuated  in  name  of  place.  "  Baal-perazim 
water-breach"  (c/*.  Is.  xxviii.  21).  2.  National  disgrace.  The  gods  were  forsaken, 
lost,  and  destroyed.  The  disgrace  of  the  Philistine's  capture  of  the  ark  was 
wiped  away,  and  the  idolatrous  peopl'e  dishonoured.  God  makes  men  weary 
of  things  they  love,  and  compels  them  to  desert  what  they  worship.  "  In  that 
day  a  man  shall  cast  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold,  which  they 
made  each  one  for  himself  to  worship,  to  the  moles  and  to  the  bats" 
(Is.  ii.  20).  ^ 

The  Battle  of  Gibeon. — Verses  14—17. 

Agava  the  enemy  renewed  hostile  attempt  with  greater  force.     God  interposes 
in  a  peculiar  way,  caused  a  sound  to  be  heard,  and  David  suddenly  attacked  from 

59 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[chap,  xiy 


behind  the  mulberry-trees.     Notice— I.  A  special  change  in    tactics. 

Much  depends  upon  methods  in  war.  David  not  permitted  to  act  as  in 
first  battle,  though  successful.  This  would  have  been  natural.  But  God 
alone  must  be  followed  ;  not  rules  of  earthly  warfare,  not  past  experience, 
nor  past  success  must  guide.  God  does  ''  a  new  thing."  ''  Thou  shalt  not 
go  up;  fetch  a  compass  behind  them."  II.  A  special  sign  by  which 
these  tactics  are  carried  out.  "  When  thou  shalt  hear  a  sound  of 
going,  &c."  1.  A  supernatural  sign.  "Sound  of  going" — viz.,  of  God. 
Soldiers  must  look  to  the  commander  for  orders.  This,  many  think,  was  a 
noise  made  by  angels,  who  came  to  help  (c/.  2  Kings  vii.  6).  2.  A  disciplinary 
sign.  Requiring  an  upward  look,  an  open  eye  to  see,  an  attentive  ear  to  hear. 
Duty  of  soldiers  to  wait  and  watch  in  readiness  and  order.  3.  A  typical  sig  n. 
In  the  setting  up  of  Christ's  kingdom,  disciples  waited  to  be  equipped  for  work. 
The  Spirit  "  came  with  a  sound  from  heaven  as  of  a  rushing  mighty  wind." 
When  they  heard  and  felt  that,  they  bestirred  themselves,  and  went  forth  to 
conquer. 


EOMILETIG   HINTS  AND  SUGGESTION'S. 


Ver.  8.  1.  A  vigilant  foe.  "  Philis- 
tines heard."  2.  An  army  on  guard. 
"David  heard."  3.  An  army  pre- 
pared to  meet  the  foe.  "Went  out 
against  them."  A  Christian's  duty 
like  that  of  a  soldier.  He  does  not 
attempt  to  meet  temptation,  to  fight 
the  enemy  in  his  own  strength.  His 
watchfulness  lies  in  observing  its 
approach,  telling  God  of  it  in  prayer, 
and  being  prepared  in  God's  strength. 

Ver.  10.  1.  The  thing  to  ascertain. 
Is  it  God's  will?  2.  The  power  re- 
quired to  perform  it  when  known. 
Many  wish  for  God's  favour  and  help 
without  doing  God's  will.  The  order 
can  never  be  reversed ;  first  God's  will, 
then  God's  help.  No  answer  and  no 
power,  if  not  in  right  attitude  and 
relation  to  him. 

Ver.  11.  God  hath  hrohen  asunder 
or  through  mine  enemies  as  a  breach  of 
waters,  i.e.,  as  a  violent  torrent  makes 
a  rift  or  breach.  Philistines  scattered 
suddenly,  unexpectedly  and  violently. 
God's  terrors  awful.  "  Thy  fierce  anger 
goeth  over  me  (as  waves  of  the  sea) ; 
thy  terrors  have  cut  me  off.  They 
came  round  about  me  daily  like  water ; 
they  compassed  me  about  together" 
(Ps.  Ixxxviii.  16,  17). 

Vers.  9-11.  1.  An  instance  of  self- 
conquest.  David  conquered  self,  and 
then  consulted  God.  2.  A  lesson  of 
60 


dependence  upon  God.  Pray,  look  up, 
and  expect.  3.  An  instance  of  success 
through  obedience. 

<*  God  fights  the  battles  of  a  will  resigned." 

Ver.  15.  Sound  of  going  applies 
figuratively  to  us  also  in  our  spiritual 
conflict  with  the  children  of  unbelief 
in  the  world.  There,  too,  it  comes  to 
nothing  that  one  should  make  war 
with  his  own  prowess  and  merely  in 
the  human  equipment  of  reason  and 
science.  Success  can  only  be  reckoned 
on  when  the  conflict  is  waged  amid 
the  blowing  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  breath 
and  with  the  immediate  presence  of 
the  Lord  and  of  the  truth  of  his  word 
\_Krummacher\  God  before  thee.  1.  In 
the  pledge  of  success.  2.  By  con- 
founding the  enemy.  Sound  some- 
thing amazing,  like  the  noise  of  a 
mighty  host.     Hence  panic  and  flight. 

Ver.  15.  Before  thee.  1.  A  word  of 
consolation  in  sore  distress.  2.  A 
word  of  encouragement  amid  inward 
conflict.  3.  A  word  of  exhortation  to 
unconditional  obedience  of  faith.  4.  A 
word  of  assurance  of  the  victory  which 
the  Lord  gives  [Lange\  The  rustling 
of  the  Lord's  approaching  help  in  the 
tops  of  the  trees.  1.  Dost  thou  wait 
for  it  at  his  bidding?  2.  Dost  thou 
hear  it  with  the  right  heed  ?  3.  Dost 
thou  understand  it  in  the  ri£:ht  sense  ? 


CHAP.  XV.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


4.  Dost  thou  follow  it  without  delay?  undertaken  in  the  Lord's  name  and  for 

[Idem].     Victory  comes  from  the  Lord.  His  cause.     3.  When  it  is  fought  with 

1.  When    it    is    beforehand    humbly  obedient   observation    of    the     Lord's 

asked  for  according  to  the  Lord's  will  directions  and  guidance  [Idem], 
and    word,      2.  When    the   battle  is 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIY. 


Vers.  1,  2,  Hiram  and  David. 

"A  generous  friendship  no  cold  medium 
knows, 
Burns  with  one  love,  with  one  resentment 
glows  "  [Pope's  Homer]. 

It  was  reckoned  a  crime  among  the 
Romans  to  be  without  a  friend. 
"  Friends,"  says  one,  *'  are  to  be  in- 
ventoried as  well  as  goods." 

Ver.  8.  David  heard  of  it.  "  Set 
double  guard  on  that  point  to-night," 
was  an  officer's  command  when  an 
attack  was  expected. 

Ver.  10.  Shalllgoup?  The  English 
Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  Prussia 
sat  at  a  table  of  Frederick  the  Great, 
then  meditating  a  war  whose  sinews 
were  to  be  mainly  formed  of  English 
subsidies.  Round  the  table  sat  infidel 
French  wits,  and  they  and  the  king 
made  merry  over  decadent  supersti- 
tions, the  follies  of  the  ancient  faith. 
Suddenly  the  talk  changed  to  war. 
Said  the  Ambassador,  "  England  would, 
by  the  help  of  God,  stand  by  Prussia.'* 
"  Ah  !  "  said  the  infidel  Frederick,  "  I 
did  not  know  you  had  an  ally  of  that 


name,"  and  the  infidel  wits  smirked 
applause.  "  So,  please  your  Majesty," 
was  the  swift  retort,  "  He  is  the  only 
ally  to  whom  we  do  not  send  subsi- 
dies "  [Baxendale\ 

Vers.  14-16.  Luther's  strength  lay 
in  the  way  in  which  he  laid  the  burden 
of  the  Reformation  upon  the  Lord. 
Continually  in  prayer  he  pleaded, 
"  Lord,  this  is  thy  cause,  not  mine. 
Therefore,  do  thine  own  work;  for 
if  this  gospel  do  not  prosper,  it  will 
not  be  Luther  alone  who  will  be  a 
loser,  but  thine  own  name  will  be  dis- 
honoured" [Spurgeon\. 

Yer.  17.  Fame  of  David.  "Begin 
with  modesty,  if  you  would  end  with 
honour." 

"Some  men    are    raised  to    station    and 

command, 
When  Providence  means  mercy  to  a  land. 
He  speaks,  and  they  appear ;  to  him  they 

owe 
Skill  to  direct,  and  strength  to  strike  the 

blow, 
To  manage  with  address,  to  seize  with 

power 
The  crisis  of  a  decisive  hour  "  {Cow^er}. 


0HAPTBR  XV; 


Critical  Notes.]  The  bulk  of  this  chapter  consists  of  new  matter,  which  the  writer 
of  Chronicles  found  in  his  authorities,  and  regarding  as  important  for  his  purpose,  intro- 
duced at  this  point  into  the  narrative.  Only  verses  25-29  are  parallel  with  2  Samuel, 
corresponding  to  ch.  vi.  12-23  {Speak.   Com.'].  i 

Vera.  l-S.— Preparation  to  remove  ark.  Houses.  Interval  of  three  months  employed 
in  building  his  palace  and  city  for  accommodation  of  his  wives  and  family.  Tent^  a  new 
one,  old  one  still  at  Gibeon  (2  Chr.  xvi.  39  ;  2  Chr.  i.  3) ;  thought  to  be  too  old,  perhaps. 
Ver.  ?.  None,  except  Levites,  to  bear  ark,  nor  convey  it  in  cart  (c/.  Num.  i.  60 ;  Jos. 
ix.  7-17).     "External  things   carried  on  waggons  under  charge  of  Gershonites    and 

61 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xr. 


Merarites  ;  but  articles  of  the  sanctuary  to  be  borne  on  poles  by  Kohathites  "  (Num.  iv.). 
Ver.  4.  All  representatives  of  nation. 

Vers.  5-15. — Priests  and  Levites.  **  This  classification  of  sons  of  Aaron^  as  the  special 
priests,  and  of  the  Levites,  is  constantly  observed  (ch.  xii.  26,  27  ;  xxvii.  17).  The  men- 
tion of  the  six  representative  Levitical  families  follows.  That  of  Kohath  (ver.  5)  takes 
lead,  because,  though  second  in  order  of  birth  (Gen.  xlvi.  11 ;  Ex.  vi.  16-19  ;  ch.  vi.  1-30), 
its  priestly  importance  gave  it  always  first  rank.  To  the  same  head  belonged  also  three 
of  the  remaining  five  families,  viz.,  Hebron  (ver.  9)  and  Uzziel  (ver.  10),  who  were 
brothers,  as  being  both  sons  of  Kohath  (Ex.  vi.  18)  ;  and  Elizaphan,  who,  though  son  of 
Uzziel  (Ex.  vi.  22),  had  come  to  represent  a  distinct  family  (Num.  iii.  30).  The  other  two 
required  to  complete  the  six  are  Asaiah  (ver.  6),  of  the  house  of  Merari,  and  Joel 
(ver.  7),  of  the  house  of  Gershom.  The  representatives,  then,  of  these  six  families,  with 
the  company  of  the  brethren  belonging  to  each  of  them,  and  the  two  priests,  Zadok  and 
Ahiathar  (ver.  11),  are  now  summoned  into  the  presence  of  David  to  receive  a  short  but 
Bpecial  charge." 

Vers.  11-13. — David's  address.  Sanctify,  according  to  Mosaic  requirements,  before 
engaging  in  any  service  (Num.  i.  50;  vii.  9;  x.  17;  2  Chr.  xxix.  5).  Ver.  13.  Did  not 
sanctify  yourselves  before.  Levites  even  sadly  to  blame.  Breach  (ch.  xiii.  11).  Order 
that  ark  should  be  borne  on  shoulders  of  Levites  (c/.  ver.  15). 

Vers.  lQ-2\.  — The  singers.  Sacred  8ong  in  use  from  earliest  times  (Ex.  xv. ;  Deut.  xxxii. ; 
Jud.  v.).  This  first  occasion  on  which  duty  of  conducting  musical  services  expressly  laid 
on  Levites.  Hitherto  music  seems  to  have  been  cultivated  in  "  schools  of  the  prophets  " 
(1  Sam.  X.  5).  Henceforth  services  of  tabernacle  and  temple  were  regularly  choral,  and 
a  considerable  section  of  Levites  was  trained  in  musical  knowledge  and  set  apart  to 
conduct  this  portion  of  national  worship  (c/.  ch.  xxiii.  5  ;  xxv.  1-31 ;  2  Chr.  v,  12  ;  vii.  6  ; 
XXXV.  15)  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Ver.  17. — Heman  {cf.  1  Kings  iv.  31 ;  1  Chr.  ii.  6).  Ver.  18.  Second,  subordinate  leaders, 
or  forming  the  second  choir.  Porters  applies  to  Obed-edom  and  Jeiel  (or  Jehiah,  ver.  24). 
Ver.  19.  Cymbals,  instruments  of  percussion,  making  clanging  sound.  Ver.  20.  Psalteries^ 
a  kind  of  lute.  Alamoth,  "psalteries  of  high  pitch,'  whose  tones  resembled  voices  of 
girls  [alamoth)  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  21.  Shem.,  the  eighth  in  a  series  of  times,  or  an  instru- 
ment with  eight  strings  ;  uncertain  meaning.  Excel,  lead  or  preside  :  harpers  with  bass 
voices  led,  and  lutists  with  treble  followed. 

Vers.  22-24. — Bearers  of  ark.  Chen.,  chief,  from  his  office,  and  different  from  Chen,  in 
ch.  xxvi.  29.  For  song,  marg.  for  carriage.  Instructed,  presided  over  bearing.  Skilful 
in  customs  and  observances  in  carriage  of  holy  things.  Vers.  23,  24.  This  part  of  cortege 
arranged  thus  :  Berechiah  and  Elkanah  went  before  to  open  doors.  The  seven  priests 
followed,  blowing  trumpets  (Num.  x.  8),  and  Obed-edom  and  Jehiah  brought  up  the  rear 
and  closed  the  doors,  when  the  ark  was  put  in  its  place.  Arrangements  here  merely  for 
the  occasion,  and  it  was  possible  for  these  two  doorkeepers  to  sing  in  choir  and  after- 
wards close  the  sacred  doors  [Murphy]. 

Vers.  2^-2^.  — The  procession.  Ver.  26.  Helped,  regarded  with  favour.  Offered,  distinct 
from  that  in  2  Sam.  vi.  13.  Ver.  27.  Linen,  made  of  buta  (byssus),  a  species  of  flax  ;  a 
robe  worn  by  highest  rank  kings  and  priests  (Esth.  viii.  15  ;  1  Sam.  xxii.  18).  All  Levites 
formed  part  of  procession.  Ver.  28.  Cornet,  first  time  mentioned.  Ver.  29.  Danced 
ftooords  with  brief  account  in  2  Sam.  vi.  15.     Michal  (^cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  20-23). 


EOMILETICS. 
A  Place  Prepared  for  the  Ark. — Verses  1-4, 

David  anxious  to  convey  the  ark  from  house  of  Obed-edom  to  tabernacle  in 
Zion.    I.    An  evidence  of  his  desire  for  God's  presence.    He 

thought  more  about  a  place  for  the  ark  of  God  than  the  splendour  of  the  palace 
and  the  enlargement  of  the  city.  Men  build  houses,  buy  land,  and  make 
fortunes,  but  have  no  room  for  God,  for  a  church  in  the  house,  for  a  temple  in 
the  city.  II.  An  indication  of  a  better  state  of  mind.  Not  now 
afraid,  did  not  cry,  "How  shall  the  ark  of  the  Lord  come  to  me?"  (2  Sam. 
vi.  9).  In  three  months  wonderfully  changed.  Obed-edom's  prosperity  and 
divine  judgment  broke  down  prejudice,  humbled  him,  and  induced  him  to 
RiTange  for  return  of  ark.     **  Thy  judgments  are  made  manifest."     III.    A 

proof  of  anxiety  for  the  welfare  of  his  people.    Not  anxious  to  OU 
62 


OHAP.  XV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


the  city  with  soldiers,  to  Luild  warehouses,  but  to  pitch  a  tent  for  God.  The 
seat  of  government  should  be  the  centre  of  worship.  The  presence  of  the  ark 
asserted  the  presence,  supremacy,  and  claims  of  God.  The  king  desired  the 
people  to  remember  Him  in  their  homes  and  their  business.  IV.  An 
earnest  endeavour  to  secure  that  welfare.  David  first  to  move, 
prominent  in  efibit,  and  earnest  in  consulting  the  people.  He  prepared  a 
place,  was  ready  to  employ  labour,  and  make  sacrifice  to  accomplish  the  work. 
To  ^'  the  chief  of  the  fathers  "  he  gave  a  solemn  charge  and  a  personal  example. 
Let  us  thus  work  ourselves,  and  incite  others  to  follow  our  example. 

Removal  of  the  Ark,  or  Carrying  on  the  Work  of  God. — Verses  1-24. 

The  chapter  gives  an  account  of  preparation  and  procession  in  the  removal  of 
the  ark.  Learn — I.  Preparation  for  God's  work.  The  work  impor- 
tant and  needful,  should  never  be  undertaken  without  thought,  purpose,  and 
prepai'ation.  1.  By  personal  sanctijication.  "Sanctify  yourselves"  (ver.  12). 
Legal  defilement  unfitted  for  solemn  duties.  Removal  of  sin  from  heart  and 
life,  the  first  requisite  in  seeking  and  serving  God.  Secret  sin  forsaken,  the 
heart  made  steadfast  and  sincere.  "  If  iniquity  be  in  thine  hand,  put  it  far 
away."  2.  By  implicit  obedience  to  God's  command.  God's  work  done  in  God's 
way,  not  in  ours.  Trifles  most  serious.  Difierence  between  a  cart  and  poles  in 
conveying  ark  seems  small.  But  '*  to  the  law  and  testimony."  No  right  to  put 
I  he  plans,  the  ordinances  of  men  for  the  commandments  of  God.  II,  Hearty 
co-operation  in  God's  work.  David  sought  fit  persons,  and  appealed  to 
{^riests  and  Levites  to  help.  This  co-operation  given.  1.  Gained  by  consultation. 
David  could  not  force,  calls  the  assembly  and  makes  appeal.  Well-conducted 
meetings.  Teachers'  Meetings,  Ministers'  Conferences,  and  National  Councils 
of  great  help  in  effective  work.  *'  Come  now  and  let  us  take  counsel  together." 
2.  Displayed  in  united  ra,nhs.  In  "due  order  "  (ver.  13).  In  obedience  to  God, 
and  special  rank  in  procession.  Neglect  of  this  brought  failure  at  first. 
Worship,  work,  and  liberality  should  be  systematic.  "  Order  gave  each  thing 
view  "  \_Shakespeare\  3.  Expressed  by  individual  effort.  Each  took  his  place 
and  gave  his  work.  Some  played  with  cymbals,  harps,  and  psalteries ;  others 
"  did  blow  with  the  trumpets."  Some  sang  and  others  danced.  Some  door- 
keepers and  others  commanders.  All  joined  the  order  and  the  shouts  (2  Sam. 
vi.  15).  "As  every  man  hath  received  the  gift,  even  so  minister  the  same  one 
to  another,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God."  III.  Success 
achieved  in  God's  WOik.  If  sincerely  consecrated  and  unitedly  engaged, 
we  shall  succeed  in  God's  service.  When  all  was  done  reverently  and  in  order, 
*'  God  helped  the  Levites  that  bare  the  ark."  They  might  tremble  in  remem- 
brance of  former  judgments ;  but  they  did  not  stumble.  The  sacrifices  were 
acceptable  to  God,  and  the  favour  of  God  was  not  withheld.  Songs  of  praise 
were  given,  and  the  ark  "  came  to  the  city  of  David." 

TThb  Procession  with  the  Ark. — Verses  3-28. 

After  due  preparation,  the  procession  arranged,  and  we  have  all  particulars. 

I.  The  bearers  of  the  ark.     "  None  ought  to  carry  the  ark  of  God  but 

the  Levites."  David  had  carefully  ascertained  legal  requirements,  and  anxious 
they  should  be  strictly  carried  out.  1.  Rightly  chosen.  2.  Properly  arranged. 
Three  families  of  Levites  (vers.  4-7).  Kohathites  not  priests  (vers.  8-10); 
Zadok  and    Abiathar,   the    princes    of    two  priestly   lines   of    house  of  Aaron. 

II.  The    regulations    for    conveying    the    ark.      These   varied. 

63 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xv. 


1.  Sacrificial  rites,  (a)  At  beginning  for  help.  (6)  At  the  end  in  gratitude. 
These  forgotten  in  first  attempt,  hence  the  breach.  2.  Musical  accompaniments. 
Leaders  in  song  and  subordinate  or  second  choir.  Psalteries,  cymbals,  and  lutes, 
accompanied  procession.  3.  Ra'pturous  joy.  Joy  unbounded,  expressed  in 
corresponding  gestures  and  rhythmical  movements,  (a)  The  king  danced.  A 
religious  ceremony  in  which  highest  and  holiest  feeling  found  expression. 
{h)  The  people  shouted  and  sang.  The  festival  was  popular,  right,  joyous.  The 
king  took  the  lead,  and  God  made  the  whole  people  glad.  Every  one  did  "  soar 
above  the  heights  of  earth." 

••  Joy  is  the  sweet  voice,  joy  the  luminous  cloud. 

We  in  ourselves  rejoice  1 
And  then  flows  all  that  charms  our  ear  or  sight, 

All  melodies  the  echoes  of  that  voice, 
All  colours  a  suffusion  from  that  light"  [Coleridge\* 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Ver.  1.  A  place  for  the  ark.     1.  A  None    ought   to   carry ,   <S:c.     Gentle 

lovely  thought.    2.  A  wise  consultation  reproof.  1.  Do  we  not  deserve  it?  Have 

to  carry  it  out.    3.  An  example  worthy  we  not  erred  from  God  in  doctrine  and 

of  imitation.  conduct?     2.  Can  we  receive  it  with - 

Ver.  2.  None  ought.     1.  Wise  men  out   offence  from  prince   or  peasant? 

may  be  guilty  of  oversight  and  wrong.  3.  When  thus  reproved,  are  we  ready 

The  king  and  priests  knew  the  law,  to    amend  ?      "  To    reprehend    well," 

and  should  have  carried  it  out.   2.  God's  says  Feltham,  "  is  the  most  necessary 

methods  of  bringing  them  to  acknow-  and    the   hardest   part   of   friendship, 

ledge  and  confess  wrong,  often  severe,  Who  is  there  that  does  not  merit  a 

memorable,  and    beneficial  in  results,  check  ?     And  yet  how  few  will  endure 

"  When   pious   men,   who   have   been  one  I  "     "  Its  nail,"  says  an  old  author, 

betrayed  into  unwarrantable  conduct,  "  must   be   well    oiled    with   kindness 

have   had    time   for   self-examination,  before    it    can    be   effectually   driven 

searching  the  Scriptures,  and   prayer,  home."     "  Let  the  righteous  smite  me, 

they  will   discover  and   confess   their  and   it  shall  be  a  kindness;   let  him 

mistakes,  and  be  reduced  to  a  better  reprove  me,  and  it  shall  be  an  excel- 

temper;  they  will  justify  God  in  his  lent  oil;  it  shall  not  break  my  head." 

corrections;    they   will    be   convinced  Vers.  2-24.    L  The  call  to  service — 

that  safety  and  comfort  consist,  not  in  personal,  pressing,  and  worthy.    2.  The 

absenting   themselves   from    his   ordi-  response  to  the  call — ready,  universal, 

nances,    or    in     declining     dangerous  and  immediate.     3.  The  directions  to 

services,   but    in   attending    to    their  carry   it   out — clear,  right,   and   safe, 

duty  in  a  proper  spirit  and  manner ;  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  do  it  heartily,  as 

they  will  profit  by  their  own  errors  **  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men." 
\Scott\ 

EOMILETIGS. 

Personal  Holiness  Essential  to  Sacred  Service.— Fer«e  12. 

Sanctify  yourselves,  a  needful  duty  for  any  work  for  God.  Present  comfort 
and  eternal  happiness  depend  upon  this.  I.  Personal  holiuess  required 
in  tliose  who  serve.  Holiness  means  setting  apart,  fitting  for  special  use. 
God's  servants  separated  from  a  profane  world  and  devoted  to  God.  1.  In  hea/rt. 
This  must  be  purified,  and  filled  with  holy  thoughts  and  aspirations.  Likeness 
64 


OfiAP.  Xt.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


to  God  in  mind  and  disposition.  Root  and  centre  of  spiritual  being  rectified. 
"  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts y  2.  In  life.  Holiness  of  heart  repro- 
duced, translated  into  life,  retain.  "  Be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  " 
(deportment,  course  of  life)  (1  Pet.  i.  15).    II.  Personal  holiness  the 


abstraction  within  sight  and  easy  reach.  Infidels  even  admire  his  character, 
but  to  believers  he  is  a  model  of  imitation,  the  standard,  the  law  of  life  and 
service.  There  is  innate  likeness  by  regeneration  and  the  indwelling  Spirit ; 
outward  likeness  by  conformity,  study,  and  obedience.  He  did  the  will  of  God, 
went  about  doing  good,  and  sets  an  example.  "Be  ye  therefore  followers** 
(imitators)  "of  God,  as  dear  children"  (Eph.  v.  1).  III.  Personal 
holiness  is  the  only  condition  on  which  we  can  serve.    Not 

only  necessary  for  personal  salvation,  but  for  personal  usefulness.  1.  By  this  we 
influence  others.  Doctrines  not  always  understood.  Holiness  seen,  felt,  and 
admired.  Holy  living  wins  to  Christ  and  helps  his  cause.  2.  By  this  we  answer 
the  end  of  our  being.  Of  no  use  whatever  without  holine^ ;  worse  than  a  rose 
without  blossom,  or,a  tree  without  fruit.  Use  the  design  in  view.  "  He  hath 
not  called  you  to  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness." 

Sacred  Joy:  its  Source  and  MANiFESTATioNi. 

The  conveyance  of  the  ark  an  occasion  of  general  rejoicing  {cf.  Pss.  ci. ;  xv. ; 
Ixviii.;  xxiv.;  cxxxii.,  which  are  supposed  to  commemorate  the  event).  I.  The 
source  of  sacred  joy.  Sacred — that  is,  true  joy,  not  a  common  feeling, 
must  have  some  cause  or  spring.  By  nature,  too  full  of  ingratitude  and  morbid 
feeling.  1.  God^s  presence  with  u$.  In  our  hearts,  renewing  and  cleansing 
them.  In  our  homes,  sanctifying  bereavements  and  guiding  domestic  affairs. 
In  duties,  public  and  private.  With  God,  even  in  trouble  and  obscurity,  our 
life  maybe  "a  sunshine  in  a  shady  place."  "All  my  springs  are  in  thee." 
2.  God's  blessing  upon  our  efforts.  Effort  essential  to  health  and  joy.  God's 
blessing  upon  work  rightly  done  gladdens  the  heart  and  turns  grief  into  gladness. 
"  God  hath  made  them  rejoice  with  great  joy."  II.  The  manifestations 
of  sacred  joy.  Joy  not  self-concealing.  Here  seen  in  forms  fit  and  natural. 
From  beginning  to  end,  all  "with  joy"  (vers.  16  and  25).  1.  In  sacred  psalmody, 
"  The  singers  with  instruments  of  music,  &c."  (ver.  16).  Reminding  of  Milton's 
"  sevenfold  chorus  of  hallelujahs  and  harping  symphonies."  2.  In  sacrificial 
rites.  Without  these,  ceremony  incomplete.  In  the  success  of  any  enterprise, 
the  completion  of  any  work,  offer  thanksgivings,  "  sacrifices  of  joy."  Duty 
performed  with  the  presence  and  by  direction  of  God  will  create  enthusiasm  in 
numbers,  and  bring  many  a  festal  day  1 

"  A  solemn  yet  a  joyful  thing  is  life, 
Which,  being  full  of  duties,  is  for  this 
Of  gladness  full,  and  full  of  lofty  hopes.** 

David  before  the  Ark. — Verses  25-29. 

"  It  was  the  greatest  day  in  David's  life  Its  significance  in  his  career  is 
marked  by  his  own  pre-eminent  position — conqueror,  poet,  musician,  priest  in 
one.  The  sacrifices  were  offered  by  him ;  the  benedictions,  both  on  his  people 
and  on  his  household,  were  pronounced  by  him.  He  was  the  presiding  spirit  of  the 
\yhole^scene  "  [Stanley].  I.  David's  attire.  "  Clothed  with  a  robe  of  fine 
linen"  (ver*  27).     1.  Priestly  attire     White  ephod  worn  only  by  priests.    David 

66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [cttAP.  Xf. 


the  head  of  "  a  kingdom  of  priests  "  (Ex.  xix.  6),  and  on  this  occasion  performed 

the  functions  of  a  priest.  2.  A  penitential  dress.  Although  king,  David  laid 
aside  royal  robes  and  put  on  the  dress  of  a  servant,  and  owned  himself  as 
mere  minister  of  God.  He  sets  forth  his  humility  in  the  presence  of  whole 
people.  In  position  and  spirit  expresses  dependence  upon  God,  and  becomes  the 
faithful  leader  and  overseer.  II.  David's  conduct.  His  joy  increased  as 
procession  went  on,  expressed  according  to  the  manner  of  the  times — singing, 
shouting,  and  dancing  before  the  Lord,  as  music  inspired  and  directed,  till  the 
ark  was  fixed  in  position.  1.  Misinterpreted  hy  Michal.  She  had  no  share  in 
people's  joy.  Her  "heart  not  attuned  to  high  devotion.  The  ceremony  a  foolish 
masquerade  to  her.  A  cold,  unspiritual  nature  cannot  understand  enthusiasm, 
any  more  than  an  Icelander  can  understand  tropical  heat.  2.  Defended  hy 
himself  {cf.  2  Sam.  vi.  21-23).  In  his  procediu*e  he  had  an  eye  to  God's  glory, 
from  whom  he  received  his  kingdom,  and  before  whom  he  ought  to  be  judged. 
He  did  not  lower  himself  in  his  own  opinion — honoured  with  being  on  a  level 
with  the  maids  whom  she  despised.  Honour  with  God  more  highly  esteemed 
than  honour  with  men  (John  xii.  43).  David  a  noble  example  of  firmness  and 
enthusiasm  for  God. 

**  He  put  so  much  of  heart  into  his  act 
That  his  example  had  a  magnet's  forot." 

MiCHAL*s  Contempt. — Verse  29, 

"  One  only  incident  tarnished  its  brightness.  Michal,  his  wife,  in  the  proud — 
we  may  almost  say  conservative  spirit  of  the  older  dynasty,  not  without  a  thought 
of  her  father's  fallen  house  (2  Sam.  vi.  21),  poured  forth  her  contemptuous 
reproach  on  the  king  who  had  descended  to  the  dances  and  songs  of  the  Levitical 
procession.  He,  in  reply,  vowed  an  eternal  separation,  marking  the  intense 
solemnity  which  he  attached  to  the  festival"  \Stanley\  1.  Sp'inging  from  pride. 
She  blamed  him  for  exchanging  royal  robes  for  sacerdotal  dress.  He  forgot  hia 
dignity,  mixed  with  the  common  people,  and  put  himself  on  a  level  with  them. 
"  Worldly  hearts  see  nothing  in  actions  of  zeal  but  folly  and  madness  "  [Bishop 
Hall].  She  could  admire  his  valour,  not  his  piety — the  soldier,  not  the  saint. 
2.  Punished  with  barrenness.  "  Michal  had  no  child  until  the  day  of  her  death  " 
(cf  2  Sam.  vi.  20-23).  This  a  dishonour,  the  deepest  humiliation  for  an  oriental 
woman.  She  unjustly  reproached  David,  and  God  put  her  to  perpetual  reproach. 
As  we  sow,  we  reap.  "  God  hath  still  a  barren  womb  for  mocking  Michal,"  says 
Trapp. 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  25-28.  Sacred  joy.   Its  source,  one  until,  through  the  Spirit  of  God  Him- 

manifestations,  and  results.  "All  God's  self,  it  is  unsealed  to  his  experience^* 

services  must  be  performed  with  joy,  [Krummxicher\.    Learn — 1.  To  be  mis- 

or  else  they  lose  their  lustre  "  [Trapp].  understood,  ridiculed,  and  opposed  in 

Ver.  29.     Michal  a  type   of   many  God's  service.     2.  That  a  man's  foes 

who  despise  devotion,  enthusiasm,  and  may  be  those  of  his  own  household.   3. 

liberality  in  the  cause  of  God.     "In  To  exercise  true  charity.  Michal  should 

the   present  day  there  is  no  lack   of  have  commended    David ;     been    less 

people  like  Michal.     In  the  pure  fire  bitter  and  ironical  in  spirit.      David 

of  the  Spirit  from  on  high  these  per-  calmly  defended  himself,  and  explained 

sons  also  see  only  a  morbid  fanaticism;  to  Michal  that  he  had  regard  to  the 

in  the  most  animated  and  vigorous  ex-  glory   of   God  in  all    his    procedure. 

pression  of  hallowed  exultation  of  soul,  "  Charity  is  not  easily  provoked,  think- 

a  hypocritical  display.     The  life  from  eth  no  evil," 
and  in  God  remains  a  mystery  to  every 
66 


CBiP.  XVI.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XV. 

Vers.  8-24.     Order  in  procession.  haughty  temper  of  her  birth.    She  for- 

"  The  heavens  themselves,  the  planets  and  got  that  there  was  a  greater  king  than 

this  centre,  Saul  or  David,  before  whom  the  princes 

Observe  degree,  priority,  and  place,  of  the  earth  are  as  vanity.     It  is  the 

Insisture,   course,    proportion,    season,  ^pge  which  stands  high  and  alone  that 

^1°^°^'     X        •      nv      «*««;!«,«  is  in  danger  of  being  struck  by  light- 
Office,  custom,  m  all  Imo  of  order  ^  .              TT               1      •        -i.            'i           ^r, 

[Shakspeare].  ning.     Her   soul,   m    its    pride,    wa3 

Ver.29.    The  pride  of  Mi^haL    She  scorched  by  the  fire  of  divine  judgment 

waa  a  king^s  daughter,  with  aU  the  l^'  ^-  ^«i/««*H 


CHAPTER  XVL 

Cbiticil  Notes.]    In  9  Sam.  vi  17-23,  only  three  verses  and  a  clause  parallel  with 

this  chapter.  ,    .    n   i. 

Vers.  1-6. — The  ark  lodged  in  tent.  After  this  event  Levites  entered  upon  their  duties 
hefore  the  ark,  instructed  by  David.  Blessed  (ver.  2)  as  head  or  father  of  the  people. 
Dealt  with  remains  of  extensive  thankofferings  as  in  ancient  royal  hospitality.  Appointed 
(ver.  4)  Asaph  and  associates  first  company  with  cymbals;  Zechariah  and  colleagues, 
with  whom  were  conjoined  Jeiel  and  seven  others,  in  second  company  with  lutes 
and  harps. 

Vers.  l-d7,—A  psalm  of  thanksgiving.  Firsts  the  order  of  worship  then  appointed  for 
first  time.  This  special  hymn  prepared  for  the  occasion.  *♦  The  language  is  remarkably 
archaic,  and  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  it  is  in  the  main  an  extract  from  a 
record  of  the  time  of  David"  [Speak.  Com.], 

Vers.  8-10.— Thanksgiving  (c/.  Ps.  cv.  1-15).  Wondrous  miracles.  His  strength^  the 
ark  called  such  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  61 ;  cxxxii.  8)  because  strength  shown  by  it  at  Jordan, 
Jericho,  &o. 

Vers.  11-13.— Call  to  seek  the  Lord.    Seed  of  Israel  (of  Abraham  in  Ps.  ov.  6). 

Vers.  14-19.— Covenant  with  Abraham.  Mindful^  admonition.  Fewt  literally  men  of 
number  (Gen.  xxxiv.  30). 

Vers.  20-22.— Preservation  when  wandering.  Reproved  (Gen.  xii.  17 ;  xx.  8).  Anointed  as 
kings,  and  priests,  and  prophets  (Ex.  xix.  6). 

Vers.  23-33.— God  salvation  of  all  nations  (ef.  Ps.  xovi.).  Gladness  (beauty) ;  place 
(sanctuary) ;  kindreds  (ver.  28),  generations  and  families.  Give  (ascribe) ;  offering  (ver.  29) 
in  public  worship.  Stable  (ver.  30),  idea  moral,  not  physical  (Ps.  xcvi.  10).  Sea  (Medi- 
terranean) ;  fulness,  striking  poetic  figure.  Trees ^  allusion  to  Kirjath-jearimt  **  the  city  of 
woods,"  where  the  ark  had  rested. 

Vers.  34-36.— This  (ver.  24)  verse  is  found  at  the  commencement  of  Ps.  cvi. ;  ovii. ; 
cxviii.  ;  and  cxxxvi.  It  was  the  ordinary  Jewish  doxology,  and  may  be  regarded  as 
closing  the  first  or  thanksgiving  portion  of  the  service,  which  is  then  followed  by  a  short 
prayer  (ver.  35),  after  which  comes  a  second  doxology  [Speak.  Com.].  Yer.  35.  ^ay  (not 
found  in  Ps.  cvi.  47),  a  liturgical  direction.  Deliver,  longing  for  freedom.  Amen  (ver. 
36),  a  description  of  the  manner  in  which  the  ceremony  terminated. 

Vers.  37-43. — Sequel,  a  description  of  appointment  of  musicians  and  their  respective 
duties.  Brethren  {cf.  ch.  xxvi.).  Forters  (door-keepers).  Gibeon.  Hence  two  places  where 
worship  was  performed  in  time  of  David.  Continually  (Ex.  xxix.  38  ;  Num.  xxviii.  3-6). 
BUss  (c/.  2  Sam.  I'u  19, 20). 

HOMILETICS. 

The  Inaugural  Service. — Versea  1-6. 

Stress  here  laid  upon  the  fact  that  Asaph  entered  for  the  first  time  upon  the 
duties  assigned  him,  and  that  the  order  of  worship  appointed  by  David  now  com- 

67 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES.  [ciiap.  xyt. 


menced.    I.  Service  to  commeniorate  an  important  event.    "  The 

ark  of  God  set  in  the  midst  of  the  tent."  No  longer  in  obscurity,  nor  in  a 
private  house,  but  fixed  in  the  city,  venerated  as  the  centre  and  symbol  of  God's 
presence.  In  the  accomplishment  of  any  work,  at  the  beginning  of  every  new 
period  in  life,  "  thank  and  praise  the  Lord."  !!•  Service  conjoined  with 
sacred  rites.  Rites  significant  and  expressive,  by  which  king  and  people 
acknowledged  God's  authority  and  sought  his  favour.  1.  Appropriate  sacrifices. 
"  Ofiering  the  burnt  offerings"  by  which  victims  were  wholly  presented  and  con- 
sumed. "  They  offered  peace-offerings  "  in  acknowledgment  of  God's  favour.  Tho 
former  speaks  of  atonement  (Lev.  i.  3-9),  the  latter  of  reconciliation  (Lev.  iii.  1-5). 
One  indicates  complete  self-surrender,  the  other  thanksgiving  to  God.  Grateful 
recognition  of  divine  mercies  and  entire  consecration  to  God's  service  reasonable, 
and  required  at  all  times.  2.  Earnest  prayer.  David  publicly  blessed  the  people 
and  besought  continued  help.  Needful  to  petition  for  future,  as  well  as  to  be 
thankful  for  past,  mercies.  3.  Musical  arrangement  (vers.  4—7).  Levitical  service 
of  thanksgiving  dates  from  this  time.  Music  cultivated  in  the  schools  of  the  pro- 
phets and  in  the  palace  of  the  king  now  consecrated  to  the  highest  service,  and 
constituted  part  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Music  should  not  minister  to 
debauchery  and  excess,  but  to  gladness  and  praise.  III.  Service  connected 
with  hospitality.  Devotion  to  God  will  lead  us  to  think  of  man.  When 
God  blesses  us  we  feel  that  we  should  distribute  to  others.  A  glad  heart  will 
open  a  wide  hand.  David's  generosity  was  on  a  large  scale.  1.  /Suitable  in 
variety,  "  Bread,"  "  flesh,"  and  "  wine."  Flowers  cannot  grow  in  one  element. 
Man  requires  variety ;  in  body,  animal  and  vegetable  food,  bread  and  water ;  in 
mind,  something  more  than  dogmas.  In  the  house  of  God  a  table  spread  with 
boundless  variety.  2.  Universal  in  application.  Women,  a  recognised  place  in 
the  assembly,  or  not  forgotten  in  their  homes  {children,  says  Josephus).  Not 
merely  to  great  men,  but  "  he  dealt  among  all  the  people,  even  among  the  whole 
multitude  of  Israel "  (2  Sam.  vi.  19).  In  that  day  the  people  fared  well.  "That 
they  should  make  them  days  of  feasting  and  joy,  and  of  sending  portions  one  to 
another,  and  gifts  to  the  poor  "  (Ezra  ix.  22). 

A  Psalm  of  Thanksgiving. — Verses  7-22. 

This  a  composite  psahn,  represents  a  form  of  service  rather  than  a  psalm. 
The  whole  of  it,  with  slight  variations,  found  in  Pss.  cv.  1-15 ;  xcvi. ;  and  cvi.  47, 48. 
It  celebrates  redemption  as  unfolded  in  history  of  Israel,  proclaimed  to  the 
world,  and  triumphant  in  judgment.  This  part  sets  forth — I.  An  exhorta- 
tion to  the  noblest  work.  The  work  of  praising  God— a  work  in 
which  our  faculties  find  their  vigorous,  harmonious,  and  happy  development — 
a  work  for  which  all  rational  and  created  beings  are  made.  In  three  waySj 
chiefly,  is  this  duty  recommended.  1.  In  giving  thanks  to  God  (ver.  8).  Author 
of  all  benefits,  therefore  to  him  all  gratitude  and  praise,  (a)  By  singing 
psalms  (ver.  9).  Best  thoughts  in  sweet  sounds.  **Sing  unto  A^m,"  not  to 
please  others  or  gratify  self.  (6)  By  social  conversation,  "  Talk  ye  *' — men  love 
to  speak  and  to  hear  of  "  wondrous  works."  Christiana  have  plenty  to  talk 
about — themes  interesting  and  inexhaustible.  Wonders  of  grace,  mercy,  and 
providence,  (c)  By  glorying  in  his  name  (ver.  10).  A  name  above  every  name, 
fuU  of  wonder  and  reverence,  untainted  with  lust  and  blood.  A  name  in  which 
we  may  boast  without  shame,  and  rejoice  without  fear.  2.  In  seeking  God. 
Seek  "his  face"  and  "his  strength,"  his  favour  and  help,  (a)  Seek  earnestly.  The 
word  repeated  to  stir  us  up — "  seek,  seek,  seek."  (6)  Seek  joyfidly.  Not  in 
dulness  and  despair — in  gladness  of  heart  and  cheerful  hope,  (c)  Seek  con- 
tinually (ver.  11).  Not  by  assembling  occasionally  in  tabernacle  or  temple,  not 
08 


CHAP.  XTi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


by  observance  of  external  rites,  but  in  constant  fellowship,  "for  evermore.* 
3.  In  commemorating  God! 8  works.  "  Remember  his  marvellous  works  "  (ver.  12). 
They  are  striking  and  impressive.  Remember  their  nature,  number,  and 
design.  What  more  could  God  have  done  for  us?  Yet  how  forgetful  and 
ungrateful!  II.  Motives  to  influence  us  in  this  noblest  work. 
The  argument  founded  upon  God's  character  and  God's  care  for  them  from 
beginning  of  history  to  removal  of  ark.  1.  God! 8  great  love.  "The  Lord  God 
of  Israel,"  "the  Lord  our  God."  A  relation  filial  and  unique.  But  Israel'i 
election  united  to  universality  of  Jehovah's  reign,  therefore  he  is  the  God,  not 
of  one,  but  of  all  nations — may  be  our  God  and  Father.  2.  God! 8  great  mani- 
festations of  love.  In  heaven  above  and  earth  beneath,  among  angels  and  men. 
Making  and  confirming  his  covenant,  receiving  offerings  and  worship  in  his 
sanctuary.  "  Glory  and  honour  in  his  presence,  strength  and  gladness  in  his 
place "  (ver.  27).  3.  God^s  great  dominion.  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth.  Uni- 
versal Sovereign;  "above  all  gods,"  for  "the  gods  of  the  people  are  idols," 
impotent  and  worthless — mere  nonentities,  for  an  idol  is  nothing;  supreme 
in  grandeur  and  government.  4.  God's  great  claims.  For  creation,  covenant 
mercies  and  protecting  care.  God  has  right  to  homage  and  praise.  They  are 
due  to  him.  As  children,  we  are  bound  to  love  him ;  as  servants,  to  consult  his 
will,  declare  his  goodness,  and  advance  his  kingdom.  5.  Gods  vindication  of 
these  claims.  His  rights  can  never  be  given  to  another.  Men,  however 
intelKgent ;  gods,  adorned  with  gold  or  silver,  must  never  receive  homage  due 
to  him.  "  He  cometh  to  judge  the  earth."  "  He  shall  judge  the  people 
righteously  ;  "  "  judge  the  world  with  righteousness  and  with  truth." 

The  Seeker  Encouraged. — Verse  10. 

Yet  many  believe,  or  pretend  to  believe,  that  religion  is  a  joyless  thing  1 
The  heart  has  very  little,  if  any,  share  in  other  em  joy  men  ts,  which  only  gratify 
appetites,  strike  senses,  and   charm  imagination.      But  where   is  the   heart? 
Even  in  laughter  the  hea/rt  is  sorrowful ;  the  end  of  that  mirth  is  heaviness.     In 
religion  the  heart  finds  relief,  repose,  satisfaction,  and  joy.     "  Let  the  heart  of 
them  that  rejoice  seek  the  Lord."    There  are  three  reasons  for  this.     Firsts 
because  it  is  an  evidence  of  grace.     They  may  conclude  against  themselves, 
refuse  to  be  comforted ;  but  no  man  can  seek  to  know,  enjoy,  and  serve  God 
from  mere  nature.     Actions  may  not  indicate  the  state  of  mind,  but  desires 
spring  from  it.     We  may  be  forced  to  do,  but  cannot  be  compelled  to  prefer  and 
choose.     Secondly,  because  their  success  is   sure.     This  the  case  in  no  other 
pursuit.     In  fields  of  worldly  labour  we  spend  our  strength  for  nought.     A  rival 
may  bear  off  a  prize  which  we  have  long  been  chasing,  at  the  very  moment  we 
are  seizing  it.     The  cup  of  enjoyment,  filled  with  eager  hope,  is  often  dashed  to 
the  ground  from  the  very  lip  that  touches  it.     But  their  heart  shall  live  that 
seek  God.     "  He  that  goeth  forth  weeping,  bearing  precious  seed,  shall  doubtless 
return  again,"  <kc.   "  Blessed  are  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness, 
for  they  shall  be  filled."     "  Is  there  unfaithfulness  in  God  ?     Did  he  ever  say  to 
the  seed  of  Jacob,  Seek  ye  in  vain  ? "     Thirdly,  because,  when  they  have  found, 
their  aim  and  wish  in  seeking  are  fully  answered.     All  they  desire  is  treasured 
up  in  him,  and  they  that  seek  the  Lord  shall  not  want  a/ny  good  thing.     The 
wise  man  tells  us  of  success  in  other  cases.     **  All  is  vanity  and  vexation  of 
spirit " — vexation  if  we  miss,  and  vanity  if  we  gain.    To  one  of  these  alternatives 
we  are  inevitably  subjected.     We  must  be  disappointed  in  acquiring  them,  and 
this  often  the  case ;  or  in  possessing  them,  and  this  always  the  case.    Everything 
earthly  falls  short  of  hope,  but  impossible  to  form  adequate  expectation  of  the 
riches  of  glory  of  the  inheritance  in  the  saint«.     What  to  have  God  himself  for 

69 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xvt 


our  possession  and  exceeding  joy  I  To  be  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in 
Christ  1  To  realise  happiness  which  solitude  increases,  trouble  improves,  and 
death  perfects !  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  While  thus  the  heart  of  them  that 
seek  rejoices,  the  heart  of  others  should  be  induced  to  seek  him.  He  invites 
you  to  seek,  therefore  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found  "  [Jay\. 

HOMILETIG   HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  7-11.      Holy   duties.      "Give  fulness.      "He  hath  remembered    his 

thanks-^llupon— make  known— sing  covenant"  (Ps.  cv.  8).     2.  Our  mind- 

^talk— o-lory  ye."  fulness  of  this  faithfuhiess.   "  Remem- 

Ver   ll     To  seek  his/«ce  is  to  desire  ber  "  (ver.  12),  "Be  mindful "  (ver.  15). 

his   presence,  smile,   and   favour  con-  "  If  the   Lord    keeps  his  promise   m 

sciously  enjoyed.     First  we  seek  him,  memory,  surely  we  ought  not  to  forget 

then  his  strength,  and  then  his  face;  the  wonderful  manner  in  which  he  per- 

from  the  personal  reverence  we  pass  on  forms  it.     To  us  it  should  be  matter 

to  the  imparted  power,  and  then  to  the  of  deepest  joy,  that  never  in  any  m- 

conscious  favour.      This  seeking  must  stance  has  the  Lord  been  unmindful  of 

never  cease,  the  more   we   know   the  his  covenant  engagements,  nor  will  he 

more  we  seek  to  know.     Finding  him,  be  so,  world  without  end.     0  that  we 

we  must  "  our  minds  inflame  to  seek  were   as  mindful  of  them  as  he  is  I 

him  more  and  more."    He  seeks  spiritual  \_Spurgeon\ 

worshippers,  and  spiritual  worshippers         Vers.  12-15.     1.  The  operations  of 

seek  him;  they  are  therefore  sure  to  divine  providence.  Acts  wonderful,  bene- 

meet  face  to  face  ere  ]ong  {Spurgeon\  ficent,  and  memorable,  comprehending 

Threefold  seeking.       1.    The  Lord  for  the    mightiest  and    most  insignificant 

mercy       2.    His  strength  for  service,  creatures.     2.  The  notice  which  should 

3     His    face    for    happiness    [A,    G.  be  taken  of  these  operations.     Amid 

^rown]  displays  of  power  and  beauty  we  should 

Vers     12-15.      Subjects   of  Remem-  not  be  deaf  nor  blind,  but  attentive, 

brance.     Marvellous    works    God    has  appreciative,  and    apt  to  learn.      We 

done,  and  wonderful  judgments  (words)  should  remember,  relate,  &c. 
God  has  uttered.     Or— 1.  God's  faith- 


HOMILETICS. 

The  National  Covenant. — Verses  16-22. 

Its  nature,  blessings,  and  contracting  parties  all  specially  set  forth.  Learn— 
I  That  God's  method  of  intercourse  with  men  has  ever  been 
in  the  form  of  a  covenant.  A  covenant  is  generally  defined  as  an 
agreement  between  two  parties,  on  certain  terms— a  conditionary  and  a  pro- 
missory;  one  to  be  performed  and  the  other  to  be  fulfilled.  This  method  of 
divine  procedure  in  Adam  and  Christ.  God  requires  from  us  faith  and 
obedience,  then  he  will  give  life  and  salvation.  In  old  time  ever  reminded  of 
this  by  symbol  and  sacrifice.  Hence  "  the  books  of  the  covenant  the  ark  ot 
the  covenant,"  "the  blood  of  the  covenant,"  and  "  the  tables  of  the  covenant 
*'The  old  covenant"  and  "the  new  covenant."  We  must  acknow  edge  God. 
''There  is  no  religion  without  this  idea  of  covenant  with  a  personal  Cxod,  and 
therefore  all  such  views  as  those  of  Comte,  Mill  and  Spencer  are,  for  aU 
moral  and  religious  purposes,  wholly  atheistical"  [Tayler  Lew^.  II.  inat 
this  covenant  method  of  intercourse  with  men  displays  the 
sovereign  will  and  free  grace  of  God.  Man  not  disposed,  not  able 
70 


CHAP,  xrtj  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHUONiCLES. 


to  make  an  agreement  with  his  Maker.  God  might  have  left  man  in  his  guilty 
condition,  without  promise,  hope,  or  mercy.  But  God  graciously  condescended 
to  pledge  his  word  and  bestow  his  grace  in  Christ.  Adam  failed,  in  Christ 
everlasting  life  secured.  In  scripture  everything  is  traced  to  the  sovereign 
grace  and  mere  good  pleasure  of  God.  Not  to  merit,  foreseen  belief,  and 
holiness,  but  "  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of  his  will,  to  the  praise  and 
glory  of  his  grace"  (Eph.  i.  5).  III.  That  this  covenant  method  of 
intercourse  puts  men  under  deep  obligation  to  God.    Eightly 

viewed,  it  affords  no  ground  of  complaint  or  despair,  but  foi-  submission  and 
hope.  1.  The7j  are  chosen  to  great  favours.  "  His  chosen  ones."  Elected, 
exalted  in  mind,  character,  and  destiny.  2.  They  should  render  thanks  for  these 
favours.  Never  be  slow  to  acknowledge  debt  and  praise  God  for  his  mercy. 
He  ceases  not  to  be  good,  cease  not  to  be  grateful.  IV.  The  obHgations 
of  men  to  God  for  his  covenant  mercies  can  never  cease. 
As  long  as  we  exist  we  depend  upon  God  and  should  praise  God.  He  never 
ignores  his  claims,  nor  alters  his  covenant.  1.  It  is  of  divine  authority. 
Higher,  more  sacred,  more  certain  than  the  law  of  man.  2.  It  is  confirmed 
from  time  to  time.  Made  with  Abraham,  confirmed  to  Jacob,  established  with 
Noah  (literally,  made  to  stand,  Gen.  vi.  18),  not  because  impaired,  changed,  or 
destroyed  in  itself.  But  it  had  been  broken  and  forgotten — like  something 
which  had  fallen  down,  it  needed  repetition  and  prominence.  Hence  3.  It  is 
'* an  everlasting  covenant^'  (ver.  17).  To  last  as  long  as  moral  government 
through  the  ages  of  the  world.  "  Made  with  man  as  an  immortal  being,  and 
in  itself  an  evidence  of  his  designed  immortality."  A  covenant  of  eternity 
(Is.  xxiv.  6). 

The  Infant  Nation. — Verses  6-22. 

If  interesting  to  trace  some  mighty  river  from  its  source  to  its  entrance  into 
the  sea,  some  magnificent  building  from  foundation  to  its  topstone,  what  to 
trace  the  beginning  and  watch  the  progress  of  God's  people  !  Early  incidents  and 
history  briefly  given.  I.  The  humble  origin  of  the  nation.  Numbers 
noisy,  attract,  and  commend.  Israel  "few,  even  a  few  "  (very  few,  Ps.  cv.  12), 
lit.  men  of  number,  who  could  be  counted  at  first ;  but  "  the  fewest  of  all  people" 
gradually  increased  and  made  numerous  as  the  sands  and  the  stars.  Small 
churches,  poverty-  of  members,  no  barriers  to  God.  II.  The  wonderful  pre- 
servation of  the  nation.  Few,  unsettled  and  helpless  Israel  ever  exposed 
and  kept.  1.  In  their  journeys.  Migrating  from  nation  to  nation,  from  one 
kingdom  to  another  people.  They  were  not  lost,  nor  prevented  from  ending 
their  journeys.  **  The  Lord  guided  them  on  every  side."  2.  Amidst  their  enemies. 
In  Egypt,  Philistia,  and  Canaan,  the  heirs  of  promise  secure.  This  not  by  for- 
bearance of  neighbours,  for  many  sought  to  injure  and  destroy,  to  cut  off  root 
and  branch,  but  "  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them  wrong,  &c."  III.  The  rich 
inheritance  of  the  nation.  "The  lot  of  your  inheritance"  (ver.  18).  1. 
N'ot  gained  by  their  own  skill.  "  For  they  got  not  the  land  in  possession  by  their 
own  sword,  neither  did  their  own  arm  save  them,  &c."  (Ps.  xliv.  3).  2.  Bestoioed 
by  divine  a2)pointment,  "  The  lot  of  your  inheritance."  God  planted  and  enriched 
them  in  gratuitous  and  sovereign  favour.  "  He  cast  out  the  heathen  also  before 
them,  and  divided  them  an  inheritance  by  line,  and  made  the  tribes  of  Israel 
to  dwell  in  their  tents"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  55).  IV.  The  high  destiny  of  the 
nation.  Blessed  and  exalted  above  all  others.  1.  In  their  special  relation  to 
God.  "  Children  and  chosen  ones ; "  bound  to  imitate  their  father  in  fervent 
prayei',  holy  faith,  and  obedience.  If  God  sets  his  choice  upon  us,  let  us  be 
more  devout  and  zealous  than  others.  "A  people  near  unto  him."  2.  In  their 
elevation  to  bless  others.     Not  put  into  Canaan  to  be  secluded  and  shut  up  from 

71 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  m. 


intercourse  with  other  nations,  but  to  bless  them.  Israel  a  missionary  people, 
gave  a  Bible  and  a  Saviour  to  the  world.  "  To  make  thee  high  above  all  nations 
which  he  hath  made,  in  praise,  in  name,  and  in  honour." 

EviLDOiNG  Restrained. — Verses  19-22. 

I  resolve  the  words  into  three  parts.  1.  Here  is  the  nearness  and  dearness 
of  the  saints  unto  God.  They  are  dearer  to  him  than  kings  and  states,  simply 
considered  ;  that  is,  otherwise  than  as  they  in  their  persons  are  also  saints  ;  for 
you  see  for  their  sakes  he  reproved  kings,  and  so  showeth  that  he  preferreth 
them  to  kings.  2.  Here  is  the  great  danger  to  kings  and  states  to  deal  with  his 
saints  otherwise  than  well.  It  appeareth  many  ways;  for  he  doth  not  only  in 
words  give  a  charge  not  to  touch  them,  but  he  carries  it  in  a  high  way  (for  so 
God  will  do  when  he  pleads  their  cause).  Touch  thom  not ;  as  if  he  had  said. 
Let  me  see  if  you  dare  so  much  as  touch  them ;  and  it  is  with  an  intimation  of 
the  highest  threatening  if  they  should ;  upon  your  peril  if  you  do  so  ;  for  that 
is  the  scope  of  such  a  speech.  In  deeds  he  made  this  good ;  not  that  he  did 
altogether  prevent  all  wrong  and  injuries,  for  they  received  many  as  they  went 
through  those  lands ;  but  at  no  time  did  he  let  it  go  unpunished.  He  plagued 
Pharaoh  for  Abraham's  wife's  sake  (Gen.  xii.),  and  also  Abimelech  (Gen.  xx.  3). 
3.  Here  is  the  care  and  protection  which  God  had  over  them,  set  and  amplified — 
(1)  By  the  number  and  condition  of  the  persons  whom  he  defended;  though  ^^few 
men  in  number"  that  is,  soon  reckoned,  for  their  power  and  strength,  a  few,  or 
very  small,  as  Septuagint.  (2)  By  what  he  did  for  them.  He  suffered  no  man, 
however  great,  to  do  them  wrong,  however  small,  not  without  recompense  and 
satisfaction.  Though  the  people  hftd  an  ill  eye  at  them  (Gen.  xxvi.  11),  God 
caused  Abimelech  to  make  a  law  on  purpose,  and  to  charge  all  his  people  in 
Isaac's  behalf,  and  spake  in  the  very  words  of  the  text,  **  He  that  toucheth  this 
man  or  his  wife  shall  be  put  to  death '  [Thomas  Goodwirij, 

HOMILETIC  HINT»  AND  SUGG  EST  10  Nas. 

Vers.    19-22.      1.  The  condition  of  prophets  to  declare  and  set  forth  his 

Israel.     Few,  very  few,  strangers  and  will.       3.  The   protection    which    they 

migrating.     Men  of  number,  accounted  enjoyed.     To  them  intrusted  the  word 

unworthy,  not  distinguished  by  exter-  of   life,  preserved    to  the  world.     To 

nal  dignity  and  power,  as  Rome  marks  them    a  safe   passport   to   accomplish 

her  communicants.     Humblest  parts  of  God's  design  among  men. 

communities,  but  honoured    of    God.  "  Yers.  20-22.     1.  God's  people  may 

2.  The  estimation  in  which  they  are  held,  often  be  removed.     2.  They  can  never 

God's  anointed  kings  and  priests,  or-  be  injured.     3.  God's  property  in  them 

dained  to  reign  with  Christ.     God's  will  ne?'er  be  renounced  \Spurgeon\. 

HOMILETICS, 

The  Greatness  of  Jehovah.—  Verses  23-33, 

These  verses,  like  Psalm  xcvi.,  celebrate  Jehovah's  greatness.  Great  in  essence 
and  supremacy ;  gTeat  in  mercy  and  dominion.  All  who  hear  and  know  this 
greatness  are  to  tell  it  to  others,  that  heaven  and  earth  may  rejoice  in  his  reign. 
I.  Jehovah's  transcendent  greatness.  1.  He  is  the  only  true  God. 
"The  gods  of  the  people  are  idols,"  images  in  wood  or  stone,  vanities  and 
nothings,  2.  He  is  the  Creator  of  the  world,  "  The  Lcr^  iwad^  t.b^  h«»avftns," 
72 


CHIP.  xvL]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CURONICLES. 


His  Godhead,  proved  by  his  works,  chief  of  which  is  the  architecture  of  heaven, 
whose  lamps  shine,  and  whose  rain  falls  upon  all  mankind.  3.  He  is  glorious  in 
operations.  His  works  are  "  marvellous."  No  petty  deity  presiding  over  one 
nation,  or  one  department  of  nature.  Great  in  power  and  act,  infinitely  to  be 
adored.  Earthly  potentates  count  themselves  famous  and  strong.  "  God  alone 
is  great,"  Massillon  declared,  and  imperial  majesties  bowed  their  heads.  II, 
Jehovah  must  be  worshipped  on  account  of  his  greatness. 
*'  Worship  the  Lord."  Tribes  and  families  called  to  honour  him  in  his  courts. 
"All  worship  be  to  God  only"  is  a  fit  motto  of  a  city  company.  1.  By 
submitting  to  his  authority.  No  worship  without  submission.  Eecognise  his 
claims  and  authority.  Give  him  "  the  glory  and  strength  "  of  intellect,  heart, 
and  Ufe.  2.  By  presenting  our  gifts.  Sacrifices  of  praise  and  thanksgiving 
springing  from  humble  submission ;  gifts  of  money  and  efibrt  prompted  by 
love.  To  him  who  gives  all,  we  should  gladly  "  bring  an  ofijering  and  come  into 
his  courts."  "  None  of  you  shall  appear  before  me  empty."  3.  By  a  true  spirit. 
God  looks  not  at  architecture  and  apparel.  Worship  must  not  be  sinful  and 
superficial ;  but  reverent  and  sincere,  (a)  In  the  beauty  of  holiness.  "  Purity 
is  the  white  linen  of  the  Lord's  choristers,"  says  Spurgeon,  "righteousness  is  the 
comely  garment  of  his  priests,  holiness  is  the  royal  apparel  of  his  servitors." 
ib)  Inprofoundest  awe.  **  Fear  {tremble)  before  him,  all  the  earth"  (Ps.  xcvi.  9). 
Jehovah  no  earthly  sovereign,  but  clothed  in  omnipotent  grandeur.  Dread  of 
idols,  mere  superstition.  Holy  fear  the  spirit  of  true  religion.  III.  Heathen 
nations  shall  know  and  recognise  Jehovah's  greatness. 
"Declare  his  glory  among  the  heathen"  (ver.  24).  The  name  of  God  dis- 
honoured by  heathen  idolatry,  vices,  and  cruelties.  But  they  shall  hear  of  his 
wonders  of  grace  and  mercy.  The  duty,  the  privilege  of  the  church  to  tell 
them.     A  truly  loyal  and  Kving  church  will  resolve  to  publish  salvation  to  the 

ends  of  the  earth.     IV.  The  world  shall  rejoice  in  the  reign  of 

the  great  Jehovah.  *'  Say  among  the  nations.  The  Lord  reigneth  ' 
(ver.  31).  1.  Joy  in  heaven.  "  Let  the  heavens  be  glad."  2.  Joy  in  earth, 
"  Let  the  earth  rejoice."  3.  Joy  in  which  all  creatures  shall  participate.  "The 
sea,  no  more  troubled  over  shipwrecked  mariners,  and  rehearsing  grief  of  widows 
and  orphans,  shall  adopt  a  cheerful  note."  The  fields  shall  rejoice  in  culture, 
abundant  harvests,  and  freedom  from  rapine.  The  trees  of  the  woody  no  longer 
sheltering  horrid  cruelty,  shall  "  sing  out  at  the  presence  "  of  God  in  the  retire- 
ment and  devotion  of  men.  "  These  verses  are  full  of  comprehensive  beauty  and 
power.  They  present  the  gathering  together  of  everything  under  the  confessed 
dominion  of  the  reigning  Christ.  Things  in  heaven,  as  well  as  things  on 
earth,  rejoice  together  in  the  acknowledged  blessing  of  the  Lord  of  peace. 
The  Psalm  is  throughout  a  very  sweet  strain  of  millennial  prophecy  "  [Arthur 
Pridham^, 

^  The  truth  that  David  learned  to  sing, 
Its  deep  fulfilment  here  attains. 
•  Tell  all  the  earth  the  Lord  is  King  I  * 

Lo,  from  the  cross  a  King  he  reigns  1 "  [Mrs,  Charles\, 

The  Beautiful  Place. — Verses  27-29. 

Place,  abode  of  the  ark,  the  tabernacle  and  temple,  apply  to  the  sanctuary ; 
public  worship  in  God's  house.  I.  Beautified  by  God's  presence. 
God  pleased  to  locate  his  presence  of  old.  "  Let  them  make  me  a  sanctuary  that 
I  may  dwell  among  them."  Here  "  glory  and  honour  "  are  constant  attendants. 
In  God  combined,  not  in  outward  show  and  parade,  all  that  is  mighty  and  lovely, 
powerful  and  resplendent.  Displays  of  meicy  and  love  "  beautify  the  place  of 
his  sanctuary  and  make  the  place  of  his  feet  glorious."     II,  Beautified  by 

73 


HOMILETIC  COMMEJSTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xti. 


attractive  services.  I,  Cheerful  song.  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord."  No  dismal 
rites  celebrated ;  no  bacchanalian  shouts  heard ;  mourning  turned  into  joy. 
Singing  a  fitting  expression  of  love,  a  reverent  method  of  worship.  2.  Free- 
will offerings,  No  part  given  reluctantly,  but  gladly.  Offerings  responsive 
signs  and  inspiriting  examples  to  fellow-worshippers.  3.  Spiritual  fervour. 
In  Ps.  xcvi.  we  have  a  triple  call,  "  sing  .  .  .  sing  .  .  .  sing."  No  discordant  note, 
no  voice  silent.  Jew  and  Gentile,  heaven  and  earth  should  join.  The  sacred  fire 
of  praise  should  burn  and  bless  in  perpetual  flame.  Ill,  Beautified  by 
loyal  attendants.  The  house  of  God  the  centre  of  joys  and  fellowships. 
1.  Regular  in  attendance.  They  "  come  before  him,"  habitually,  punctually,  and 
reverently ;  do  not  forget  to  assemble  themselves  together  as  the  manner  of 
some,  but  resolve  *'  we  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our  God."  2.  Mindful  of 
its  interests.  They  bring  their  offerings,  respond  to  its  claims,  contribute  to  its 
support,  and  encourage  its  enterprises.  3.  Obedient  to  its  rules.  Law  every- 
where, and  should  be  decency  and  order  in  God'.s  house  "  In  beauty  of  holiness," 
a  certain  prescribed  attire  like  splendid  robes  of  ancient  priests  ;  or  in  right  form 
and  spirit,  *'  in  holy  reverence  "  [Boothroyd^  Holiness  in  thought  and  heart 
required.  Repeated  and  solemn  warnings  on  ohis  point.  **  I  will  be  sanctified 
in  them  that  come  nigh  me." 

Religious  Worshif  ^Verses  28,  29. 

I.  It  is  due  to  God.  "  The  glory  due  unto  his  name."  1.  It  is  right. 
However  much  we  adore  we  cannot  give  more  than  he  deserves.  All  honour, 
natural  and  reasonable,  due  to  him  as  Creator,  Preserver,  Benefactor,  and 
Redeemer.  2.  It  is  acceptable.  Though  not  enriching,  yet  well  pleasing  to  him. 
"  Whosoever  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me."  II.  It  befits  OUr  moral 
nature.  Man  made  to  worship,  the  only  creature  capable  of  it.  1.  It  meets 
our  aspirations.  We  long  for  God,  restless  and  dissatisfied  without  him,  ever 
display  anxiety  to  find  him.  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him,  that  I 
might  come  even  to  his  seat."  2.  It  satisfies  our  wants.  Nothing  but  a  personal 
God  will  do  this.  We  feel  for  a  living  God.  No  sympathy  with  force,  nor 
adoration  of  mere  law.  A  senseless  power  satisfies  no  social  or  religious  instincts, 
draws  out  no  song  or  psalm.  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  for  the  living  God." 
3.  It  dignifies  our  diaracter^  "  In  beauty  of  holiness."  It  detaches  from  earth 
and  sin,  gives  beauty  to  contemplate,  strength  to  imitate,  andyear  to  humble  and 
guide.  Fellowship  with  God  most  holy  and  most  exalting.  "  It  is  good  for  me 
to  draw  near  to  God*** 


A  Geand  IiiosPECT. — Verses  30-33. 

Here  find  a  splendid  prospect  for  the  heathen,  "  a  grand  missionary  hymn  " 
for  the  Christian  Church!  I.  Jehovah  reigns  supremely.  "The 
Lord  reigneth."  No  abstract  principle,  no  blind  force  nor  law  rules  the  world. 
Infinite  and  unchangeable,  absolute  and  independent,  almighty  and  supreme — 
the  fountain  of  all  being,  filling  heaven  and  earth  with  splendour.  II.  Thw 
reign  of  Jehovah  a  cause  of  joy  to  the  world.  ''The  Lord 
reigneth  ;  let  the  earth  rejoice  ;  let  the  multitudes  of  isles  be  glad."  1.  It  is  a 
reign  of  righteousness.  Others  tyrannical  and  oppressive  have  produced 
injustice,  bloodshed,  and  terror.  Truth  and  justice  conspicuous  everywhere  in 
his  dominions,  shines  bright  as  stars  in  heaven.  "  The  heavens  declare  (put 
before  us,  in  our  sight)  his  righteousness"  (Ps.  xcvii.  6).  2.  A  reign  of  moral 
stability,  **The  world,"  shaken  with  revolutions,  impaired  with  sin,  ''shall  be 
74 


CHAF.  xn.]  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


stable,"  settled  in  government  and  free  from  invasions,  "  that  it  be  not  moved." 
Society  is  safe,  social  and  political  order  secure  where  Christ  is  supreme.  3.  A 
reign  of  purity.  Idolatry  shall  cease,  peace  prevail,  the  earth  purified ;  blessed 
with  the  presence  and  delivered  by  the  grace  of  Messiah.  On  this  account 
earth  may  rejoice  and  heaven  be  glad.  "  Alleluia :  for  the  Lord  God 
omnipotent  reignethl" 

Thb  Closing  Prayer  ind  Doxology. — Verses  35,  36. 

God's  mercy  had  commenced  deliverance,  encouragement  is  given  to  pray  for 
its  completion.  The  prayer  is  based  upon  the  promise,  Deut.  xxx.  3,  and  is 
a  psalm  of  thanksgiving  for  its  prospective  accomplishment. 

I.  The  Prayer.  1.  In  its  spirit.  Earnest,  humble,  and  sincere.  2.  In 
its  purpose,  (a)  For  deliverance.  "  Save  us  and  deliver  us."  {h)  For  unity. 
"  Gather  us  together."  (c)  For  gratitude.  "  To  give  thanks  to  thy  holy  name." 
No  longer  a  scattered  people,  but  united  in  God's  courts  to  triumph  in  praise. 
God's  people  a  prayerful  people,  saved,  united,  and  grateful  to  God  for  his 
goodness.  Hence — II.  The  Doxology.  1.  Praise  to  God  as  their  God, 
"  The  Lord  God  of  Israel."  2.  Praise  universal,  "  Let  aU  the  people  say, 
Amen."  3.  Praise  continual,  **  For  ever  and  ever."  God  blessed  from  eternity, 
will  be  through  eternity,  let  him  be  praised  without  intermission,  **  from  ever- 
lasting to  everlasting." 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.   23-33.      A   song    of  praise,  faithful    guardian.     IV.    Declare  the 

I.  Setting  forth  God's  excellencies,  glory  of  his  word,  that  they  may 
Creator,  Ruler,  and  majestic.  Claiming  prize  it  as  their  chief  treasure.  V.  De- 
homage  and  service  as  due  to  his  great  clare  the  glory  of  his  service,  that  they 
name.  2.  Asserting  God's  supremacy  may  choose  it  as  their  chief  occupa- 
in  the  world.  "Above  all  gods,"  tion.  VI.  Declare  the  glory  of  his 
overruling  physical  nature  and  social  residence,  that  they  may  seek  it  as 
communities  for  the  welfare   of  men.  their  best  home  [William  Jackson], 

3.  Predicting  God's  universal  kingdom.  Vers.  28,  29.  The  claims  of  God  to 

Triumphant    over   evil   and   bringing  the  worship  and  homage  of  his  creatures, 

universal  joy.   •  What   I   have    to    demonstrate    is — 

Vers.    23,  24.    Notice — I.  The  end  I.  That  God  is  entitled  to  the  homage 

desired.      To   see    the   earth   singing  of  his  creatures,  and  claims  it  as  proper 

unto  the  Lord  and  blessing  his  name,  and  right.     II.  That  these  claims  are 

II.  The  means  suggested.  The  show-  made  upon  us,  his  intelligent  creatures, 
ing  forth  his  salvation  from  day  to  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  show 
day;  declaring  his  glory,  <kc.  III.  The  that  we  are  capable  of  knowing  God 
certainty  of  its  accomplishment.  The  to  all  the  extent  necessary  to  excite  in 
Lord  hath  said  it.  "  0  sing,  <fec."  our  minds  the  feelings  of  awe,  rever- 
When  he  commands,  earth  must  obey  ence,  and  admiration,  since  these  are 
[Treasury  of  David'],  I.  Declare  among  essential  to  homage  and  worship.  Also 
the  heathen  the  glory  of  God's  per-  to  prove  that  such  claims  are  not  only 
fections,  that  they  may  acknowledge  reasonable,  but  founded  in  justice  and 
him  as  the  true  God.  II.  Declare  the  right.  III.  That  the  worship  and  hom- 
glory  of  his  salvation,  that  they  may  age  required  is  such,  that  it  not  only 
accept   him   as   their  only  Redeemer,  does  not  degrade,  but  elevates  the  man 

III.  Declare  the  glory  of  his  providence,  that  pays  it;  that  it  is  not  the  hard 
that  they  may  confide  in  him  as  their     requirement    of    despotism,   but    the 

75 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[chap,  xvt 


righteous  claim  of  infinite  excellence, 
not  the  service  of  flattery  and  servility, 
the  free-will  offering  of  a  discerning 
and  admiring  mind  \J,  Bohinson], 

Ver.  29.  The  beauty  of  holiness.  The 
religion  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  is 
"  the  beauty  of  holiness,*'  as  it  concerns 
its  Author,  its  plan,  its  fruits,  1.  As  it 
concerns  its  Author.  Whatever  we  can 
understand  as  meant  by  beauty  or 
hohness,  we  see  in  the  attributes  of 
God,  whether  we  consider  them  in  all 
their  harmony,  or  contemplate  any 
one  of  them  in  particular.  2.  As  to 
its  plan.  Survey  the  gospel  where  we 
will,  or  regard  whatever  we  can  that  is 
revealed  concerning  it,  we  find  it  to 
be  all  *'  beauty  ;  "  and  we  cannot  call  it 
by  a  more  appropriate  name  than  *'  the 
beauty  of  holiness."  3.  A&  io  ii^  fruits. 
There  is  a  holy  separation,  a  beautiful 


character  of  holiness,  a  separation  as 
to  character,  feelings,  and  conduct; 
these  are  all  the  various  fruits  of 
grace  ;  and  so  the  man  becomes  beau- 
tiful in  holiness  [Legh  Richmond, 
1772-1827]. 

Ver.  34.  Thanks  for  divine  good- 
ness. I.  God  its  source.  II.  Displayed 
in  suitable  ways.  Mercy  to  the  miser- 
able. III.  Lasting  in  its  nature.  Out- 
weighing sin  and  rebellion.  "  Endure th 
for  ever." 

Ver.  36.  The  people^ s  amen.  1.  In- 
dicating attention,  appreciation,  and 
interest  in  the  service.  2.  A  solemn 
sealing.  Katification  and  acceptance 
of  what  has  been  done.  3.  A  real 
duty.  The  people  to  respond  (not  the 
minister  merely)  with  hearty  and  uni- 
versal voice.     "  Amen  so  be  it.*' 


EOMILETICS. 

Ministry  before  the  Ark. — Verses  37-42. 

The  sequel  of  this  chapter  describes  the  arrangement  of  services,  appointment 
of  musicians  and  porters,  with  their  respective  duties.  I.  An  orderly 
service.  Asaph  and  his  brethren  officiated  as  singers ;  Obed-edom  and  Hossah 
served  as  doorkeepers,  each  in  his  place  and  in  his  time.  "  Order  gave  each 
thing  view  "  [Shaks^.  II.  A  musical  serviCB.  This  chiefly  at  Gibeon, 
where  Heman  and  Jeduthun  presided  over  the  sacred  music.  In  both  places 
"musical  instruments  of  God'*  used.  Ill,  A  cheerful  service.  *'To 
give  thanks  to  the  Lord.'*  It  becomes  the  redeemed  to  praise  God.  The  greater, 
more  numerous  God's  blessings,  the  greater  honour  and  service  we  should  feel 
are  due  to  liim.  "  Gratitude  is  the  memory  of  the  heart.'*  IV.  A  perpetual 
service.  At  Jerusalem  before  the  ark,  ministry  was  "  continually  as  every 
day's  work  required  "  (ver.  37).  At  the  altars  at  Gibeon,  priests  attended,  incense 
burnt  "  continually,  morning  and  evening.**  A  permanent  local  ministry  and 
regular  choir  are  established,  in  fixed  place  and  due  order.  Prayer  and  praise 
should  ever  be  kept  up  in  God's  house,  and  in  our  own  hearts  and  lives.  "  His 
praise  shall  continually  be  in  my  mouth." 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  43.  DavidHs  attention  to  his 
household.  Personal  religion  was  ex- 
emplified by  David.  I.  By  the  work 
in  which  he  had  been  engaged.  1.  It 
was  a  glorious  work.  2.  It  had  been 
performed  in  a  manner  most  accept- 
able to  God.  II.  By  the  work  to 
which  he  returned.  He  returned  to 
bless  his  house,  that  is — 1.  To  obtain 
blessing  for  them  by  prayers.  2.  To 
76 


render  himself  a  blessing  by  his  con- 
duct. Consider  (1)  How  highly  we 
are  privileged.  (2)  How  we  should 
improve  our  privileges  \C.  Simeon, 
M.A.].  He  that  had  "blessed  the 
people"  (v.  18)  returns  to  "  bless  his 
household  "  (v.  20).  Piety  in  pubUc 
and  in  private — public  worship  and 
family  worship.  A  good  man  after 
public  religious  duties,  returns  joyous, 


CHAP.  XVII.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


thankful,  and  loving  to  his  house  (cj,  bless  their  own  households.     And  none 

Lange,  2  Sam.  vi.  20).     Ministers  must  is  too  great  to  do  this.     It  is  the  work 

not  think  that  their  public  perform-  of  angels  to  worship  God ;  and  there- 

ances    will   excuse  them   from  family  fore  certainly  can  be  no  disparagement 

worship;  but  when  they  have  blessed  the  to  the  greatest  of  men  [Benson^, 
public  assembly  they  are  to  return  and 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XVI. 

Vers.  4—7.    With  harps.    The  mean-  theology  of  nature  be  blended  with 

ing  of  song  goes  deep.     Who  is  there  the    theology    of    conscience — a    full 

that,  in  logical  words,  can  express  the  recognition   of   the  strength  and   the 

effect  that  music  has  on  us  ?     A  kind  glory  which  shine  palpably  forth  in  the 

of  inarticulate,  unfathomable  speech,  wonders  of  creation,  with  the  spiritual 

which  leads  us  to  the  edge  of  the  infi-  offerings   of    holy   worship   and   holy 

nite,  and  lets  us  for  moments  gaze  into  service  [Thomas  Chalmers^ 

that  [Carlylel    Like  her  friend  Mdlle  Vers.  32-38.     Sea  roar,  <md  trees  c/ 

J anotha,  Jenny  Lind  believed  her  art  ^^^  ^^^^  ^.^                                         '^ 

was  the  gift  of  God,  and  to  be  dedicated  ^* 

to  his  service.     "  I  have  always  put  **  His  praise,  ye   winds,  thai  from   four 

him  first,"  said  she,  in  her  last  illness  _  quarters  blow, 

\Gliurch  Worker].  Breathe  soft  or  loud ;  and  wave  your  tops, 

Vers.  8-11.    The  Psalmist  speaks  of  with^every  plant,  in  sign  of  worship 

singing  to  the  name  of  the  Lord,  bless-  wave "                                 IMilton]. 
ing,  extolling,  thanksgiving,  exalting 

(c/.  vers.  28-31).  Just  as  the  stem  which  ^^rs.  34-36.     For  ever.    A  Hne  of 

is  full  of  sap  throws  out  many  branches.  Praise  is  worth  a  leaf  of  prayer,  and  an 

so  the  believer  who  is  full  of  a  spirit  of  lio^r  oi  praises  is  worth  a  day  of  fast 

praise  will   give   vent  to  it   in  many  ^^S    and    mourning   [J.   Livingstone]. 

different  forms  [P.  B.  Power],  It  was  the  law  in   some   of   the   old 

Ver.    26.       The    Lord    made    the  monasteries  that  the  chanting  of  praise 

heavens.     This  verse   is  a  notandum.  should  never  be  interrupted,  and  that 

What  a  tribute  to  astronomy  is  it  that  one   choir  of    monks    should    relieve 

the  Lord  is  so  often  done  homage  to  as  another    in    the    holy    service    [Bib. 

having  made  the  heavens !     Let  the  Museum\ 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  coincides  with  2  Sam.  vii. — ^records  David's  purpose  to 
build  a  house  for  God  (vers.  1,  2),  and  Nathan's  approval.  God  refuses  to  permit  this, 
promises  a  perpetual  kingdom  in  David's  line  (vers.  3-15) ;  grateful  response  to  this 
promise  (vers.  lG-27). 

Vers.  1,  2. — David's  purpose.  Sat  in  splendour  and  rest.  Curtains  as  a  common  tent. 
David  probably  fancied  the  time  predicted  (Deu.  xii.  10,  11)  had  come.  Nathan  followed 
his  own  impulse,  and  fell  into  mistakes  like  others  (1  Sam.  xvi.  6 ;  2  Kings  iv.  27). 

Vers.  3-15. —  God''s  refusal  and  promise.  Thou  (ver.  4),  Hebrew  emphatic,  ^^  Not  thov 
shalt  build,"  but  some  one  else.  Tent  to  tent  (ver.  5).  "I  was  walking  in  a  tent  and  in  a 
dwelling,"  from  one  place  to  another  travelling  and  resting  with  his  people.  Judges, 
suitable  antithesis  to  David.  Cedars,  costly  materials.  David  elevated  from  low  condition — 
"  sheepcotes,"  rude  structures  of  mud  walls— to  govern  Israel  (ver.  7).  Name  (ver.  8)  as 
warrior  and  king.  Place  (ver.  9)  fixed.  Settled  kingdom,  constant  changes  before.  House 
(ver.  10),  a  family,  a  line  of  successors.  Ver.  11.  Go,  promise  now  personal.  Seed 
indefinite,  not  yet  known  which  son.  Vers.  12-14  refer  to  Solomon,  and  faithfully 
fulfilled  to  him.    Mercy^  alluding  to  Saul.    Evermore  (2  Sam.  vii.  16). 

77 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xvH. 


Vers.  16-27. — David^s  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  which  inflicates  teaching  of  deep  signi- 
fioanoe  and  far-reaching  promise.  Sat  (cf.  2  Sam.  vii.  18-29).  House,  dynasty,  family — 
i.e..  from  David  onward  in  remote  futiire.  Knowest  (ver.  18),  therefore  no  necessity  for 
further  expression  of  gratitude  [Keil].  Servants  for  thy  word's  sake  (2  Sam.  vii.).  Heart, 
all  attributed  to  divine  mercy.  Let  be  e>itab.  (ver.  24).  Rather  "  And  let  thy  name  be 
established  and  magnified  for  ever ;  "  that  is  to  say,  Let  not  only  thy  promise  stand 
firm,  but  let  thy  name  also  stand  firm  (continue  to  be  held  in  honour)  and  be  magnified, 
&o.  [Speak.  Cord.].  To  bless  (ver.  27),  it  hath  pleased  thee  (marg).  "  For  tkou^  O  Lord, 
bast  blessed  it,  and  may  it  be  blessed  for  ever  "  (c/.  2  Sam.  vii  29)1 

HOMILETIGS. 
The  King's  Proposal. — Verses  1-10. 

David  had  established  worship  on  its  proper  basis,  reorganised  the  priesthood, 
and  introduced  music,  yet  not  content.  Gods  of  other  nations  had  splendid 
temples,  why  not  adorn  Jerusalem  with  a  house  for  God  which  should  be  the 
emblem  of  the  nation's  consecration  ? 

I.  David's  proposal.  "  All  that  is  in  thine  heart."  1.  A  noble  purpose. 
To  build  a  house  for  God.  Good  to  erect  asylums  and  benevolent  institutions, 
more  useful  to  help  to  build  houses  for  God.  Such  work  needful,  must  be  done, 
and  greatly  appreciated.  He  "  hath  built  us  a  synagogue."  2.  A  generous  pur- 
pose. **  I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedars,  <fec."  He  felt  ashamed  of  the  contrast 
between  his  house  and  the  house  of  God.  One  substantial  and  costly,  the  other 
only  a  tent.  Impropriety,  injustice,  and  dishonour  for  him  to  have  more  costly 
surroundings  than  the  ark  of  God.  God  should  always  have  our  best.  Many 
have  "an  house  of  cedar"  for  worldly  Hfe — best  talents,  most  time  and  money, 
keenest  insight  for  business,  but  only  meagre  remnants  for  God.  3.  A  purpose 
commended  by  the  prophet.  Nathan  here  introduced  for  first  time.  The  king 
opened  his  mind  to  him.  Purpose  reasonable,  he  commended  it.  "  Do  all,  <fec." 
(ver.  2).  But  holy  prophets  did  not  know  God's  will  until  revealed  to  them ; 
often  spoke  as  religious  men,  from  human  aspects,  and  found  out  their  error. 
Kings  and  prophets  have  need  to  consult  God.  II.  Qod's  disapproval  of 
David's  proposal.  God  not  displeased  with  intention,  did  not  condemn 
nor  entirely  reject,  but  forbade  David  to  build.  "Thou  shalt  not  build"  (ver.  4). 
1.  God  knows  all  our  purposes.  David's  known  "the  same  night"  it  was  formed. 
He  sees  the  heart  and  reads  our  inmost  thoughts ;  knows"whether  our  desires 
are  mean  or  generous  towards  his  house.  "  The  Lord  looketh  on  the  heart." 
A  sincere  heart  better  than  finest  gold,  a  beautiful  life  more  than  cedar.  2.  God 
often  hinders  the  accomplishment  of  our  purposes.  They  may  be  selfish  and  not 
for  his  glory.  We  may  ignore  God  in  forming  them.  "  If  the  Lord  will,  ye 
should  say."  God  may  seek  to  save  us  from  spiritual  pride  and  self-dependence ; 
to  increase  reverence,  faith,  and  purity ;  to  withhold  one  thing  to  give  a  better. 
**  Oftentimes  I  purposed  to  come  unto  you,  but  was  let  (hindered)  hitherto " 
(Rom.  i.  13).  "  My  purposes  are  broken  ofi""  (Job  xvii.  11).  III.  Reasons 
for  God*s  disapproval  of  David's  proposal.  Some  given  here  and 
others  found  elsewhere.  1.  It  was  something  entirely  new.  No  such  building 
had  ever  existed,  perhaps  not  possible  in  Israel's  wanderings ;  nor  had  God  ever 
commanded  the  erection  of  a  temple  as  he  did  the  tabernacle.  No  suggestion 
had  been  given  to  tribe,  judge,  or  leader.  God  had  shared  the  pilgrim  lot  and 
unsetbledness  of  his  people.  2.  It  was  untimely  in  its  beginning.  Time  for 
building  not  yet.  Present  condition  of  the  people  not  fit,  must  be  improved. 
They  were  surrounded  by  hostile  nations,  had  no  permanent  rest,  therefore 
God's  sanctuary  must  still  be  a  tent.  Not  in  David's  reign,  but  in  Solomon's 
must  plan  be  accomplished.  God's  time  always  best.  We  delay,  act  before  the 
time,  or  become  too  hasty  in  plan  and  purpose.  Enter  upon  great  engagements 
78 


CHAP,  xm.]  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY t  GHRONlCLESt 


with  much  thought  and  prayer.  3.  David  was  not  the  right  mem  to  build.  "War 
a  necessary  evil  in  his  life.  The  temple,  significant  of  peace,  must  not  be  built 
by  a  man  of  war.  Kings  in  Middle  Ages  desired  to  atone  for  a  wicked  life  by 
erection  of  a  church  or  monastery.  God  will  choose  his  own  men  and  fix  his 
own  terms.  "  TIu>u  shalt  not  build  a  house  unto  my  name,  because  thou  hast 
shed  much  blood  upon  the  earth  in  my  sight"  (1  Chr.  xxii.  8;  2  Ohr.  ii.  3). 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.   S-6.      Nathan* s  message.     1.  "Ye   are  the    temples  of    the   Holy 

Its  form.     "All  this  vision"  (ver.  15).  Ghost." 

2.  Its  contents,  showing  that  God  Vers.  9,  10.  Israel's  well-being  from 
seeks  to  correct  mistakes  of  his  ser-  God.  1.  A  place  appointed  for  them, 
vants,  that  he  alone  is  fit  judge  So  for  us  in  habitations  and  Christian 
of  what  is  pleasing  to  him,  and  work.  2.  Settlement  in  the  appointed 
that  not  even  a  prophet  must  step  place.  ^'  I  will  plant "  as  a  tree,  and 
in  between.  they  shall  grow  (a)  without  disturb- 

Ver.  5.      From  tent   to   tent.      Not  ance.     "  Children  of  wickedness  shall 

like  heathen  p-ods,  confined  to  localities,  waste,"  afflict,  or  injure  them  no  more; 

and  carried  about  from  place  to  place.  (6)  without  termination.      *'  Shall    be 

The  Heb.  Mithhallek  a  travelling  God.  moved    no  more,"  at  least   until   im- 

An  active,  constant  companion  of  his  portant   ends  are  answered.     *' These 

people,   going   when   they  go,  resting  gradually  advancing  manifestations  of 

when    they    tent.       Learn — 1.  God's  the  Lord's  favour  to  David  look  to  the 

condescension.    2.     God's    providence,  well-being  of  the  people  of  Israel.     (1) 

3.  God's  help  in  all  its  adaptations  to  He  thereby  prepared  a  place  for  them ; 
camp  or  tent,  synagogue  or  city,  that  is,  by  subduing  their  enemies, 
Happy  in  mean  accommodations  if  God  made  room  for  a  safe,  unendangered 
be  with  us  1  expansion   in  the  promised  land ;  (2) 

Vers.  5,  6.     God's  house  in  relation  Planted  them;  that  is,  on  the  soil  thus 

to  marCs  condition.     1.  It  is   not   re-  cleansed  and  made  safe  He  established 

quired  by   God    himself.      The   Most  a  firm,  deep-rooted  national  fife;  (3) 

High  dwells  not  in  temples  made  with  They  dwell  in  their  (own)  place,  their 

hands  (Acts  vii.  4),  neither  worshipped  life-power    unfolds   itself   within    the 

with    men's    hands    (Acts    xvii.    24).  Hmits  secured  them  by  the  Lord  \  (4) 

Hence  the   purity  and  spirituality  of  They  shall  no  longer  be  affrighted  by 

Bible  religion.  Other  religions  mean  in  restless  enemies.     In  these  words  the 

thought,    indicate     that     God    needs  discourse  turns  to  the  future   of  the 

temples  and   gifts.    2.  It   is  required  people.     The  sense  is:  after  aU  these 

only  by  man,  as  a  dependent  spiritual  manifestations  of  favour  in  the  past  up 

being,  craving  for  God,  for  a  "  taber-  to  this  time,  the  Lord  will  for  \hQ future 

nacle  of  witness,"  that  God  concerns  assure  his    people  a   position   and  an 

himself  with    man,  and  will   hearken  existence,  wherein  they  shall  no  more 

to  prayer.      God's   dwelling-place   the  experience  the  affliction  and  oppression 

human  heart;  not  sacred  groves,  con-  that  they  suffered  from  godless  nations" 

secrated  temples,  or  grand  cathedrals.  [Lange], 

HOMILETICS. 

God  in  Personal  Life. — Verses  7,  8,  cmd  11. 

God's  grace  wonderfully  magnified  in  David's  history.  Every  age  and  every 
nation  its  prominent  men  with  special  mission,  proving  the  possibilities  of 
personal  lift  and  the  providence    of    God  in  their    development.      I.  God 


BOMILETIQ  (JOMMENTARYi  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  rm. 


elevates  men  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  station  in  life. 

David,  '*  from  the  sheepcote  to  the  throne  ; "  Amos,  from  flocks  of  Tekoah  to 
prophetic  office  ;  fishermen,  from  their  nets  to  be  heralds  of  the  gospel.  History 
full  of  illustrations  of  God  selecting,  qualifying,  and  in  due  time  raisin^^  men  to 
fill  their  place  as  reformers,  preachers,  and  rulers.  "  He  raiseth  up  the  poor 
out  of  the  dust,  and  lifteth  up  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill,  to  set  them  amon^i^ 
princes,  and  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory."    II.  God  helps  men 

to  do  the  work  for  which  they  are  elevated.    This  special  work 

not  left  undone.  No  failure  in  God's  plans.  "  Faithful  is  he  who  calleth  you. 
who  also  v/ill  do  it."  1.  By  his  constant  presence.  "I  have  been  with  thee 
whithersoever  thou  hast  walked."  David,  Daniel,  Luther  never  left  to  them- 
selves. 2.  By  continttal  victories.  Much  opposition  to  overcome.  If  God  with 
us,  opposition  disarmed  ;  "  enemies  cut  ofi"."  None  can  prevent  us  rising,  none 
frustrate  our  work.  "  I  will  work,  and  who  shall  let  (hinder)  it  ?  "  (undo  it. 
Horsley)  (Is.  xliii.  13).  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed,  and  who  shall  dis- 
annul it  ? "  (xiv.  27).  III.  God  honours  men  for  faithful  perform- 
ance of  the  work  to  which  they  are  elevated.  David  greatly 
honoured  in  his  own  life  and  that  of  his  posterity.  L  Honoured  in  reputed 
life.  "  Made  thee  a  name  like  the  name  of  the  great  men  that  are  in  the 
earth."  Names  are  •made^  as  well  as  fortunes,  by  God.  Many  ambitious  for  a 
name,  but  get  one  of  ill-repute.  Love  of  fame,  not  love  of  virtue;  often 
becomes  a  passion,  and  tramples  on  the  rights  of  humanity  and  sheds  innocent 
blood.  Byron  sought  fame,  pronounced  it  worthless :  "  'tis  nothing  but  cold 
snow."  **  A  good  name  rather  to  be  chosen  " — ^renders  more  useful  and  gains 
more  respect — "  than  great  riches."  This  we  may  register  in  the  annals  of  the 
Church  and  "  in  the  book  of  life."  2.  Honoured  in  peaceful  death.  "  When 
thy  days  be  expired,  thou  must  go  to  be  with  thy  fathers"  (ver.  11).  Days 
gradually  drawing  to  an  end.  Then  go  to  lie  with  thy  fathers  (Deut.  xxxi.  16). 
Death  a  sleep,  quiet  and  peaceful  to  the  Christian.  Not  "  an  eternal  sleep  "  I 
A  family  gathering  hereafter,  "  with  thy  fathers."  As  Straflbrd  disrobed  and 
prepared  himself  for  the  block,  he  said,  "I  thank  God  that  I  am  nowise  afraid 
of  death,  nor  am  daunted  with  any  terrors ;  but  do  as  cheerfully  lay  down  my 
head  at  this  time  as  ever  I  did  when  going  to  repose." 


God's  Promises  to  Davu). — Venti  11-15. 

More  given  to  David  than  acceptance  of  his  proposal.  The  spiritual  superior 
to  the  material.  The  political  throne  falls,  but  a  kingdom  is  established  for 
ever.  Here  are  three  things  chiefly — -I.  The  erection  of  the  houSB  of 
God  by  the  seed  of  David.  Seed  raised  up,  one  of  his  sons  should  suc- 
ceed him  and  build.  David  lived  on  in  Solomon,  who  used  the  materials  his  father 
collected,  and  carried  out  the  plans  that  his  father  suggested.  Death  never  cuts 
oflf  the  influence  nor  destroys  the  work  of  a  good  man.  '*  When  thy  days  be 
fulfilled  and  thou  shalt  sleep  with  thy  fathers,  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after  thee, 
which  shall  proceed  out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I  will  establish  his  kingdom  "  (2  Sam. 

vii.  12,  13).  II.  The  elevation  of  David's  seed  to  sonship  with 
God.  **  I  will  be  his  father,  and  he  shall  be  my  son."  God  a  father  to 
Solomon  in  early  life  and  reign.  Tender  love  and  providential  care  ever 
displayed.  Mercy  not  taken  from  him  as  from  Saul.  He  became  popular, 
wealthy,  and  wise.  What  a  privilege  to  take  the  place  and  receive  the 
honour  of  sons  I  In  bestowment  of  the  blessing  a  display  of  love  and  grace 
beyond   expression,  and  calls  forth  admiration  from  all  who  partake.     "  Behold 

what  manner  of  love,  &c."    III.  The  establishment  of  everlasting 
80 


OttAP.  tyit.1  HOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:  CHROmCLtlS. 


dominion  in  David's  seed.  Promise  added  to  promise,  embracing 
present  and  all  future  time.  "  God's  thoughts  not  as  our  thoughts."  David 
dies,  Solomon  succeeds,  the  family  prospered  and  remained  in  power  400  years ; 
but  "  his  throne  shall  be  established  for  evermore "  in  the  Messiah,  David's 
seed  and  son. 

David's  Reception  op  the  News. — Verses  16-27. 

David  sat  before  the  Lord  in  waiting  attitude  and  devout  meditation ;  received 
the  message  from  Nathan  with  admiring  wonder,  and  petitioned  for  its  accom- 
plishment in  himself,  family,  and  kingdom.  I.  In  grateful  praise.  *' The 
content  of  this  thanksgiving  prayer  is  like  a  clear  glass,  wherein  we  see  into  the 
innermost  depths  of  David's  heart.  His  soul  wholly  taken  up  with  the  divine 
revelation  and  promise,  expresses  itself  in  the  utterances  which  follow  one 
another  quickly,  in  accordance  with  internal  excitement  of  feeling."  1.  In  spirit 
of  deep  humility.  "  Who  am  I  ? '*  (ver.  16).  An  expression  of  deep  feeling  of 
nothingness  in  contrast  to  God's  greatness  and  goodness.  Divine  loftiness  and 
human  lowliness  (c/*.  Ps.  viii.  5 ;  cxliv.  3).  2.  In  astonishment  for  personal 
favours  (vers.  17-19).  {a)  Favour  to  his  house.  (6)  Favour  for  the  future.  If 
unworthy  to  receive  former  mercies,  how  should  I  feel  in  regard  to  promises 
reaching  in  the  far  future — "  a  great  while  to  come  "  ?  Silence  most  befitting 
and  eloquent,  for  language  fails  to  express  feeling.  "  What  can  David  speak 
more?"  3.  In  adoration  of  GodJs  greatness  (vers.  20,  21).  He  is  great;  the 
incomparable  God — "  none  like  thee;"  the  only  Crod — none  **  beside  thee."  Let 
his  attributes  and  lovingkindness  awaken  our  gratitude  and  praise ;  prompt  us 
to  adore  his  excellence  and  glory.  4.  In  remembrance  of  national  mercies. 
David  passes  from  present  blessings  to  review  the  past — ''rises  from  his  personal 
experience  to  the  whole  line  of  God's  glorious  manifestations  in  the  history  of 
his  people  "  (Hengs,).  Israel  the  only  nation  redeemed  by  its  God.  This  redemp- 
tion incomparable  and  peculiar,  an  act  which  separated  them,  and  made  them 
independent.  Deeds  of  "  greatness  and  terribleness "  followed.  Nations 
expelled  to  make  room  for  Israel,  whom  he  claimed  as  specially  his  own,  adopted 
them  that  he  "might  become  their  God."  II.  In  earnest  prayer 
(vers.  23-27).  Connected  with  thanksgiving  for  present  and  past,  David 
prays  for  the  future.  1.  For  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  "  Do  as  thou  hast 
said."  Royal  dignity  set  up,  "  establish  it  for  ever."  Everlasting  continuance 
promised,  let  the  word  become  deed.  2.  For  the  glorification  of  God's  name. 
This  the  design  or  consequence  of  the  fulfilled  word.  Not  the  honour  of  his 
house,  not  the  glory  of  his  people,  but  solely  the  honour  of  God  had  David  in 
view.  3.  For  the  continuance  of  the  blessing.  The  blessing  secures  the  con- 
tinuance. Neither  posterity  nor  power  without  this.  "  Except  the  Lord  build 
the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it "  (Hterally,  its  builders  labour  in  vain 
in  it)  (Ps.  cxxvii.  1).  Needful  to  pray  for  families,  temples,  and  churches.  "  Let 
it  please  thee  to  bless  the  house  of  thy  servant,  &c."  (ver.  27). 

The  Greatness  op  Divine  Favours. — Verses  16-19. 

We  briefly  fill  up  an  adapted  sketch  from  Lange  (2  Sam.  vii.  18).  I.  They 
infinitely  surpass  human  desert.  "  Who  am  I,  and  what  is  mine 
house  ?  "  David's  gifts  and  graces  eminent,  his  honour,  success,  and  reputation 
great.  His  house  of  the  royal  tribe,  and  allied  to  the  best  families,  but  no 
worthiness  in  family  or  head.  II.  They  fill  all  times  from  remotest 
past  to  distant  future.     "  For  a  great  while  to  come."     From  beginning 

81 


HOMTLETIC  COM^UENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [cha?.  xfii. 


of  David's  reign  to  end  of  the  world,  throiagh  David's  seed.  From  the  fall 
of  man  to  his  redemption  in  glory.  III.  They  spring  from  sovereign 
mercy.  *'  According  to  thine  own  heart,  hast  thou  done  all  this  greatness." 
People  made  great  not  by  their  own  deeds,  but  by  works  which  God  in  free 
sovereign  mercy  performs  for  and  in  them.  IV.  They  are  beyond  all 
human  comprehension.  What  can  David  say  more?  (v.  18).  Words 
cannot  express  our  obligations,  and  even  a  sense  of  obligation.  As  heaven  is 
high  above  the  earth,  so  are  God's  thoughts  above  our  thoughts. 

True  Prayer. — Verses  23-27. 

Founded  upon  God's  promise  and  declared  purpose.  David  honoured  God's 
faithfulness,  expressed  his  heart's  desire,  and  becomes  a  model  to  us  in  this 
prayer.  I.  It  is  grounded  on  God's  promise.  "  Thou  hast  spoken." 
Without  this  darkness  and  uncertainty — no  hope,  no  encouragement  to  pray. 
The  labourer  in  the  field,  the  soldier  in  the  army,  and  the  maidservant  in  the 
family  animated  by  promise.  The  Bible  filled  with  promises  well  adapted  to  our 
moral  condition,  and  reveals  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises."  II.  It 
regards  God's  honour  solely.  "That  thy  name  may  be  magnified" 
(ver.  24).  This  shall  be  the  sum  and  aim  of  all  our  prayers.  Magnify  self  less 
and  God  more.  Both  as  "  Lord  of  hosts  and  God  of  Israel,"  that  is  as  uni- 
versal Ruler  and  covenant  God  let  him  be  glorified.  III.  It  ascribes  all  tO 
God's  free  grace.  "  Thou  hast  told  thy  servant."  The  beginning,  the 
revelation  from  thee.  None  ^ could  have  guessed,  been  assured,  or  predicted 
without  thy  word.  All  of  God's  good  pleasure,  whose  name  is  mentioned  no 
less  than  eight  times  in  these  few  verses  (cf.  parallel  passage,  2  Sam.  vii.  24-29). 
IV.  It  appeals  to  God's  faithfulness,  "  Thou  art  God,"  unchangeable, 
powerful,  and  fit  to  be  trusted.  "  Thy  words  are  truth  "  (2  Sam.),  never  fail,  and 
their  accomplishment  may  be  relied  upon.  The  Bible  invites  unbounded  trust 
in  God's   character  and  procedure — represents  it  to  be   the  grand  duty  and 

joyous  privilege  of  all  men.    V.  It  receives  the  fulness  of  God's 

blessing.  God  blesses  now,  and  his  blessing  cannot  be  revoked  (ver.  27). 
Independent  of  future  mercies,  prayer  is  a  training,  discipline,  and  dignity — the 
appointed  means  for  our  spiritual  and  future  good,  and  the  needed  preparation 
to  attain  it.  Never  in  vain.  Good  to  draw  near  now  to  receive  that  blessing, 
"  which  maketh  rich,  &c." 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  13.     /  will  he  his  father  cmd  (ver.    16).      2.    As  the  gift  of  God's 

he    shall  he    my  son.     This   true — (1)  sovereign  grace  \Ihid.'\, 

of  Solomon  and  other  descendants  of  Vers.  20-22.      God^s  relation  to  his 

David  who  were  kings  of  Judah  ;  (2)  people.     Let  us  for  the  illustrating  of 

of  Christ,  "the  son  of  David"  (Heb.  i.  these  words  consider — I.  The  relation 

5) ;  (3)  of  every  one  who  is  a  believer  which  God  bears  to  his  people.     1.  He 

in   Christ  and   thus   a   child   of   God  has   chosen   them   out   of   the   world, 

(1  Jno.  iii.  1;  V.  1)  \_Lange\.  which  Ueth  in  wickedness.     2.  He  has 

Vers.  17-22.      A    model    of  devout  given  himself  to   them  in   a  peculiar 

thanksgiving.     I.  Over  that  he  rejoices,  way.  3.  He  avows  that  relation  to  them 

1.  Over  great  blessings  received  in  the  before  the  whole  universe.     II.  Inquire 

past.      2.  Over   yet    greater  blessings  what,  under  that  relation,  we  may  expect 

promised  in  the  future  (ver.  17).     II.  at  his  hands.     1.  The  care  of  his  pro- 

In  what  spirit  he  regards  these  favours,  vidence.    2.  The  communications  of  his 

1.  As  utterly  undeserved  by   himself  grace.     3.  The   manifestations   of  his 

a2 


dflAP.xm.j  ^OMrLETTC  COMHE^TARY:  CFIRO^^tCLJ^!^. 


love.  4.  The  possession  of  his  glory,  and  imshahahle  confidence  towards  his 
III.  What,  under  that  relation,  he  is  God."  To  this  prayer,  which  proceeds 
entitled  to  expect  from  us.  1.  That  from  a  joyfully  shocked  and  deeply 
we  **  be  a  people  to  him."  2.  That  we  moved  heart,  applies  (so  far  as  is  poss  ble 
give  ourselves  to  him,  as  he  has  given  from  the  Old  Testament  standpoint) 
himself  to  us.  Conclude  with  two  pro-  what  Bernard  of  Clair vaux  says  of  true 
posals — (1)  That  we  at  this  very  hour  prayer:  "If  the  way  to  God's  throne 
accept  Jehovah  as  our  God  ;  (2)  That  is  to  stand  free  and  open  to  our  prayer, 
we  now  consecrate  ourselves  to  him  as  and  it  is  there  to  find  ready  acceptance 
his  people  \C.  Simeon^  M.A.].  and  hearing,  it  must  proceed  from  an 
Vers.  23-27.  The  relation  between  humble,  fervid,  and  trusting  heart. 
God!8  promise  cmd  prayer.  I.  The  Humility  teaches  us  the  necessity  of 
promise  prompts  to  prayer.  The  prayer,  fervour  gives  it  flight  and  en- 
character  of  him  who  makes  the  pro-  durance,  trust  piovides  it  with  an 
mise,  the  value  of  the  blessing  promised  unmovable  foundation"  [Lange], 
stir  up  and  never  prevent  prayer.  II.  "  This  thanksgiving  confirms  anew  the 
The  promise  assures  success  in  prayer,  fact  that  the  only  foundation  on  which 
It  is  not  a  mere  venture,  presumption,  the  true  godliness  and  everlastingness 
or  uncertainty,  but  confident  hope  of  of  the  kingdom  can  rest  is  the  purity 
God's  blessing.  Characteristics  of  and  holiness  of  an  humble  heart,  and 
true  prayer.  "  The  prayer  of  David  therefore  the  hearty  and  living  humility 
after  the  reception  of  the  Lord's  pro-  of  David's  thanksgiving  may  give  us 
mise  of  favour  bears  testimony  to  the  the  strongest  assurance  that  here  is 
unexpected,  joyfully  surprising  revela-  really  enthroned  the  culmination  of  all 
tion  that  was  made  to  him  and  mirrors  royal  rule  "  \Baumgarten\ 
his  childlike  hwmitityy  fervid  devotion^ 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  GHAPTBR  XVII. 

Ver.  7.    From  the  sheepcote.  Be  not  "  Oh,  yes ;  and  God  is  a  good  creditor ; 

ashamed  of  your  origin.     It  is  well  for  he  never  seeks  back  the  principal  sum, 

the  great  who  have  risen  to  be  reminded  and  indeed  puts  up  with  a  poor  annual 

of  the  humble  place  which  they  once  rent "  [Life  of,  d:c.]. 
occupied.     At  one  of  Napoleon's  grand  Vers.    20-26.     A   great  God  to  trust 

imperial  receptions,  where  his  brothers  in.     Wesley,  preaching  at  Doncaster, 

and  sisters  were,  aU  of  them  elevated  said,  a  poor  Komanist  woman,  having 

to  high  rank,  and  some  of  them  with  broken  her  crucifix:,  went  to  her  priest 

royal  titles,  it  is  reported  that  one  of  frequently  crying  out,   "  Now  I  have 

them  said  to  another,  **  What  would  broken   my  crucifix,  I  have  nothing  to 

our  father  and  mother  have  said  if  they  trust  in  but  the  great  God."     Wesley 

had  seen  us  as  we  are  now  ? "  [S.  S.  exclaimed,  "  What  a  mercy  she  had  a 

Teache7''\.  great  God  to  trust  in  1 "     A  Romanist 

Ver.  11.  Days  expired.     God  respects  present  was  powerfully  afiected — "the 

not  so  much  after  what  manner  we  die,  great   God   to   trust  in "   touched  his 

as    what    manner    of    death    we   die  heart.     He  was  very  deeply  convinced 

[Augustine].     Is  that  a  death-bed  where  of  his  need  of  salvation,  and  joined  the 

a  Christian  dies  ?     Yes ;  but  not  his —  Methodist    Society,   and    became    an 

"  'tis  Death  itself  that  dies"  [Coleridge],  ornament  to  religion  [Bib.  Museum]. 

Vers.     16-19.       What    speak    more.  ^^r.  26.     Promised. 

Debt   to   grace.     When   a   friend   ob-  •♦  The  thing  surpasses  all  my  thought, 

served  to  Rev.  John  Brown,  of  Had-  rr^^^  ^^^^^^ V'".  ^^.^""'^ '    f 

J .      ^        , ,     ,  ,  ,'  ,  Tnrougn  unbelief  I  stagger  not, 

dmgton,  that  we  must  run  deeper  and  Po,  qo^  hath  spoke  the  word." 

deeper  into   grace's   debt,   he  replied,  {John  Gt/q, 

83 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xviit. 


CHAPTER  XVin. 

Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter,  parallel  with  2  Sam.  "vili.,  givei  ftn  account  of  David's 
wars  (vers.  1-13) ;  and  a  list  of  his  chief  officers. 

Vers.  1,  2.— (/aM,  "the  arm  bridle,"  so  called  (2  Sam.  viii.  1)  for  its  supremacy,  as 
capital  of  Philistia,  over  other  towns,  or  because  in  its  capture  and  dependencies,  David 
gained  complete  control  of  his  restless  neighbours.  Moab.  Severities  by  which  they 
were  treated,  and  probable  reason  for  such  retribution,  given  in  Sam.  GiftSf  •,«.,  became 
tributary  to  Israel. 

Vers.  S-S.—  Zobak  conquered.  Had.,  "derived  from  Hadad,  a  Syrian  deity.  It  seems 
to  have  become  the  official  and  hereditary  title  of  the  rulers  of  that  kingdom  "[/am.]. 
Ver.  4.  Chariots.  Great  discrepancy  between  this  and  2  Sam.  viii.  3-14.  Houghed,  i.e.,  cut 
the  sinews,  lamed  the  horses,  and  made  chariots  useless.  Ver.  6.  Garrisons,  not  in  text, 
rightly  restored  from  Sam.  [/S)t)ea^.  Com.'].  Ver.  7.  /SAee/o?s,  indicative  of  wealth.  Ver.  8. 
These  places  specially  given  on  account  of  brass  or  copper  obtained  there. 

Vers.  9-11. —  Congratulations  from  Tou(To\  in  Sam.).  Ver.  10.  Had.,  Joram.  Enquire,  "  to 
greet  him  and  congratulate  him."  Had  war,  lit.  was  a  man  of  wars  (c/.  Is.  xli.  12). 
Ver.  11.  Edam,  from  Aram  ;  more  fully  in  2  Sam.  viii. 

Vers.  12,  IB.—Edomites,  having  provoked  David,  he  sent  an  army,  subdued  and  made 
their  country  a  tributary  province.  Valley  of  Salt  south  of  Salt  Sea.  This  annexation 
of  Edom  enlarged  Israel  on  south-east  to  Red  Sea,  fulfilled  divine  prediction  (Ex.  xxiii.  31), 
and  gave  command  of  its  ports. 

Vers.  14-17. — Officers  of  the  King.  Joah,  supreme  command,  minister  of  war.  Jehos., 
not  keeper  of  records  merely ;  but  referee  on  internal  affairs,  the  chancellor,  who  drew 
up  and  issued  royal  decrees.  Zadok,  became  high-priest  after  David's  accession,  through 
his  father  Ahitub,  a  descendant  of  Aaron's  son  Eleazar.  Ahim.,  Ahimelech,  through 
Abiathar  from  Ithamar,  younger  son  of  Aaron  (1  Chr.  xxiv.  3-6).  Shavsha,  a  variant  from 
"  Shisha  "  (1  Ki.  iv.  3);  the  "  Sheva"  of  2  Sam.  xxii.  25,  and  the  "  Seraiah  "  of  2  Sam. 
viii.  17,  are  probably  corrupt  readings  [Speak.  Com.].  Scribe,  State  Secretary.  Ver.  17. 
-Be/?.,  a  mighty  warrior  of  Kabzeel  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  20-23).  Cher,  and  the  Pel.,  the  royal 
body-guard  attached  to  the  king's  court  and  person.  Chief,  heads  or  princes,  officers  in 
the  palace. 

EOMILETIGS. 

David*s  Wars. — Verses  1-8. 

A  short  time  elapsed  between  events  of  last  chapter  and  events  of  this,  but 
David  ready  for  active  service.  Wonderful  promises  stirred  up  to  brave  deeds. 
I.  The  Philistines  are  subdued  (ver.  1).  Ancient  inveterate  enemies, 
finally  smitten,  bereft  of  their  capital  and  their  towns.  "  David  smote  the 
Philistines  and  subdued  (humbled)  them"  (2  Sam.  viii.  1).  All  must  fall  before 
the  authority  of  Christ.  II,  The  Moabites  are  smitten.  Why  Moab 
was  at  enmity  with  David  not  known,  formerly  on  friendly  terms  (1  Sam.  xxii. 
3,  4).  The  severe  punishment  inflicted  upon  them  implies  some  grave  offence. 
They  became  servants  and  paid  tribute  for  a  long  time.  Balaam's  prediction 
now  fulfilled  (Numb.  xxiv.  17).  III.  Hadarezer,  king  of  Zobah, 
defeated.  A  powerful  king,  reigned  over  a  country  central  and  convenient 
for  help.  1.  Defeated  when  trying  to  enlarge  his  kingdom.  "He  went  to  stablish 
his  dominion  "  shaken  by  Saul  and  to  confirm  after  regaining  it.  One  thing  lost 
by  grasping  at  another.  Worldly  possessions  uncertain.  Wealth,  power,  and 
empire  often  taken  when  possessors  seek  to  stablish  them.  2.  Defeated  when 
allied  with  Syria/as.  Allies  in  vain  when  God  is  opposed.  Hand  may  join  hand, 
enemies  of  God's  people  may  contribute  their  men  and  their  stores,  but  they 
often  combine  to  ruin  themselves.  Their  wealth  Mid  up  for  the  just,  and  the 
sf)oi]s  of  nations  help  to  adorn  the  house  and  kingdom  of  God.  IV.  The 
Edomites  are  conquered  (ver.  13).  David's  splendour  increased  by 
another  victory.  Edomites  fancied  that  David's  wars  in  north  would  give  them 
quiet  possession  of  the  southern  part  of  Israelitish  territory.  But  returning 
84 


0SA».  vni.J  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


from  the  conquest  of  Aramoeans  and  Ammonites  he  engaged  Edomites  in  Valley 
of  Salt,  slew  eighteen  thousand,  and  garrisoned  the  country.  Thus,  from  north 
to  south,  Israel's  enemies  were  overcome.  David's  wars  were  wars  of  God.  He 
overcame,  as  we  must  overcome,  by  God's  presence  and  help.  "  He  causeth  us 
to  triumph." 

CONQRATULATIONS  OF  THE  KlNG  OP   HaMATH. VerseS  9-11, 

Toi  heard  of  the  decisive  victory  over  Hadarezer,  sent  an  embassy  to  greet 
David  and  congratulate  him  on  success.  Look  at  this — I.  As  an  Eastern 
custom.  '*  Who  in  the  East  has  not  witnessed  similar  things?  Has  a  man 
gained  a  case  in  a  court  of  law ;  has  he  been  blessed  by  the  birth  of  a  son ;  has 
he  given  his  daughter  in  marriage ;  has  he  gained  a  situation  under  government ; 
has  he  returned  from  a  voyage  or  a  journey,  or  finished  a  successful  speculation ; 
then  his  friends  and  neighbours  send  messengers  to  congratulate  him — to  express 
the  joy  they  feel  in  his  prosperity ;  so  much  so  that  had  it  come  to  themselves 
their  pleasure  could  not  have  been  greater"  [Roberts],  II.  As  a  Stroke  of 
policy.  Had  carried  on  constant  war  with  Toi.  Hence  joy  at  deliverance 
from  an  enemy  and  anxiety  to  be  friendly  with  the  conqueror.  It  is  our  interest 
to  be  on  terms  with  God  and  his  people.  ''  Kiss  the  son  (be  subject  to  him  and 
reverance  him),  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way  when  his  wrath  is 
kindled  but  a  little"  (Ps.  ii.  12).  III.  As  an  expression  of  friendship. 
Toi  sent  his  son  to  seek  friendly  alliance.  The  rich  presents  an  expression  of 
respect  and  submission.  Friendship  with  God  procured  by  dedication  of  heart 
and  life  to  him. 

Consecrated  Spoils.— Ferw  11. 

Need  not  approve  of  all  David's  actions  in  war,  but  may  commend  his  spirit 
and  example  in  the  disposal  of  his  booty.  I.  As  an  evidence  of  loyalty 
to  God.  Many  princes  adorned  their  palaces,  beautified  the  arms  of  their 
soldiers,  or  preserved  the  spoils  of  the  enemy  for  their  own  aggrandisement. 
David  set  them  apart  from  profane  to  sacred  use,  put  them  into  the  treasury  of 
the  sanctuary.  An  instance  of  gratitude  to  God,  by  whose  aid  he  had  gained 
them,  seldom  imitated  by  victorious  kings.  Men  not  always  faithful  in 
prosperity.  If  we  are  successful  in  studies,  business,  and  pursuits,  let  us  devote 
our  spoils,  our  knowledge,  wealth,  and  influence  to  him  from  whom  comes  every 
gift.  II.  As  a  help  to  the  furtherance  of  God's  cause.  David 
gained  subjects,  territories,  and  political  alliance :  received  gifts  of  horses  and 
chariots,  gold  and  brass,  but  all  consecrated  to  lawful  use.  Presents  of  friends 
and  spoils  of  enemies  devoted  to  the  Lord,  and  helped  to  rear  and  adorn  the 
temple.  Many  refuse  gifts  from  worldly  men  for  religious  purposes,  disparage 
liberality  on  the  ground  that  God  cares  not  for  material  wealth.  But  Go  I 
connects  the  wealth  with  the  work  of  men.  Christ  regards  whatever  is  done  to 
his  people  as  done  to  himself,  and  heathens  will  turn  and  bring  presents  to  him 
(Is.  bu  6). 

David's  Administration  and  Officers. — Verses  13-17. 

Besides  military  exploits  and  activity,  a  description  of  internal  government 
with  its  officials   and  their  duties,     I.    David's    government   was 

righteous  government.     One  or  two  qualities  chronicled.     "  He  executed 
judgment  and  justice  among   all  the   people."     Right   and  purity  not  always 

85 


MOMrtETlC  COMMENTAttt:   CQtiOmcLES, 


[chap,  xritt. 


connected  with  authority.  Society  is  maintained  and  its  advantages  consolidated 
by  justice.  Just  rulers  make  contented  and  united  people.  Justice  in  the  court, 
on  the  bench,  and  in  the  ranks  exalts  a  nation,  and  gives  it  a  sacred  mission  to 
the  world.  II.  David's  oflB.cers  were  eminent  men.  The  most  eminent 
of  the  age  composed  his  cabinet.  The  commander-in  chief,  clever,  courageous, 
and  renowned  for  military  achievements.  Faithful  to  the  king,  not  always 
to  principle.  The  chancellor  correctly  published  royal  decrees  and  registered 
events  in  the  State  archives.  The  body-guard  round  the  king  and  priests  before 
the  altar,  each  in  his  place  and  work,  gave  influence  to  the  reign,  and  felt 
honoured  in  the  service.  Thus  David's  rule  not  only  associated  with  military 
prowess,  but  poetic  genius  and  personal  piety.  Remarkable  for  men  of  rank  and 
administrative  ability,  and  did  more  for  Israel  than  Charlemagne  did  for  Europe 
or  Alfred  for  England. 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTION'S. 


Vers.  1—3.  1.  How  trying  the  life 
of  David  I  Its  wars,  toils,  hardships, 
and  perils  great  and  numerous. 
2.  Yet  how  happy  the  life  of  David  I 
God  preserved  him,  gave  honour  and 
success.  He  rendered  true  service; 
nevei  separated  any  part  from  God  to 
keep  for  self.  This  severs  from  divine 
care.  If  we  take  our  lives  wilfully 
into  our  hands,  and  devote  them  to 
our  own  selfish  pursuits,  God  with- 
draws special  grace,  we  fall  into  the 
enemy's  hands,  and  fail  to  accomplish 
the  work  we  might  have  done. 

Ver.  13.  The  Lord  preserved  David, 

1.  From  spiritual  pride.  In  exalta- 
tion,  power    and    success    in    battle. 

2.  From  personal  injury  in  war.  Often 
in  danger,  but  an  unseen  hand  sus- 
tained him.  3.  From  disgraceful 
defeat.     Many  commanders  lost  their 


lives,  and  kings  their  crowns.  4.  From 
unjust  government.  He  began  with 
no  fatal  blunder,  levied  no  unjust 
taxes,  introduced  no  unwise  policy,  nor 
created  any  disloyalty.  He  reigned  in 
the  affections  of  the  people,  gave  the 
glory  to  God,  and  was  preserved  in 
honour  and  prosperity. 

Vers.  9-13.  Lessons  from  David^s 
years  of  warfare.  1.  A  pious  man 
may  have  many  enemies.  2.  A  pious 
man  may  be  required  to  spend  much  of 
his  life  in  war.  3.  A  pious  man  may  be 
compelled  to  inflict  severe  punishments. 
4.  A  pious  man,  even  though  not  always 
prospered  or  preserved,  is  always  guided 
and  blessed.  5.  A  pious  man  will  re- 
joice to  consecrate  the  richest  results 
of  his  struggles  and  toils  to  God  [Lange, 
2  Sam.  viii.]. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XVIIL 


Ver.  4.  Houghed,  The  reason  of 
this  mutilation  was  that,  horses  being 
forbidden  by  the  Mosaic  constitution 
to  the  Hebrews,  both  in  war  and  in 
agriculture,  it  was  of  no  use  to  keep 
them;  and  their  neighbours  placing 
much  dependence  on  cavalry,  but 
having,  for  want  of  a  native  breed,  to 
procure  them  by  purchase,  the  greatest 
damage  that  could  be  done  to  such 
enemies  was  to  render  their  horses  un- 
serviceable in  war  (c/*.  Gen.  xlix.  6; 
Josh.  xi.  6-9)  \Jamieso7i\. 
86 


Ver.  11.  Dedicate,  Eastern  princes 
have  always  been  accustomed  to  hoard 
up  vast  quantities  of  gold  [see  Layard, 
*'  Nineveh  and  its  Remains,"  II.,  p. 
344].  This  is  the  first  instance  of  a 
practice  uniformly  followed  by  David, 
of  reserving,  after  defraying  expenses 
and  bestowing  suitable  rewards  upon 
his  soldiers,  the  remainder  of  the  spoil 
taken  in  war,  to  accumulate  for  the 
grand  project  of  his  life — ^the  erection 
of  a  national  temple  at  Jerusalem 
\Ihid.\ 


OltAP.  xil.]  IJOMlLETtC  COUUENTAkY:  CMHoNICLES. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Critical  Notes.]    After  this  other  wars  with  Ainmon  and  Aram.    The  chapter  oorre- 

^"^Ters.  T-5.-/nsS'  fo  David's  messengers.  Nahash  (1  Sam.  xi.  1  ;  2  Sam.  x.  1).  Kindness, 
N.  friendly  with  David,  and  an  enemy  to  Saul.  Comfort,  condole  him.  Sea7ch  thy  capital. 
Shaved  half  the  face.  The  beard  greatly  valued  in  East,  to  violate  it  the  greatest  insult. 
Tarry  in  seclusion  till  the  mark  of  disgrace  had  disappeared. 

Vers  6  l.-Ammon  and  Syria  war  with  David.  Odious,  Israel  universally  roused  to 
avenge  the  insult.  Talents,  equal  to  £342,100  ;  to  procme  the  help  of  foreign  mercenaries. 
Chariots,  also  riders,  or  cavalry,  accustomed  to  tight  on  horseback  or  m  chariots,  and 
occasionally  on  foot.  Accepting  this  as  the  true  rendering,  the  number  of  hired  aux- 
iliaries mentioned  in  this  passage  agrees  exactly  with  the  statement  in  2  bam.  x.  b  [cj. 
Davidson's  Hermeneutics,  p.  552 j.  ja  •     xi,-    ^„,. 

Vers.  8-16.- Joab  defeats  Aimiion.  Host,  the  whole  forces  of  Israel  engaged  in  this  war. 
Beset  by  Ammonites  in  front  and  by  Syrians  behind,  Joab  resolves  to  attack  the  Matter— 
the  more  numerous  and  formidable  host— while  he  directed  Abishai,  with  a  suitable 
force,  to  attack  the  Ammonites  (vers.  12,  13).  This  brief  address  appeals  to  the  courage, 
patriotism,  and  religion  of  his  men.  Ver.  15.  Mercenaries  defeated,  the  courage  ot  the 
Ammonites  failed,  they  took  flight  and  entrenched  themselves  within  fortified  walie. 

Vers  IQ-ld.— Second  victory  over  Aram.  River,  Euphrates.  Shophach  (2  Sam.  x.  l»-iy> 
Seven  thousand  (of  2  Sam.  x.  18).  "  Either  the  text  in  one  of  the  books  is  corrupt  (^Keil, 
Davidson),  or  the  accounts  must  be  combined  {Kennicott,  Houbigant,  Cabmi)  yamtesonj. 
Yer.  Id.  Servants,  tributaries. 


EOMILETWS. 

The  Message  of  Condolence. — Verses  1-5. 

Nahash,  a  neighbourly  king,  friendly  with  David  in  the  days  of  Saul,  and 

perhaps  congratulated  him  on  accession  to  the  throne.     Hanun,  son  of  Nahash, 

succeeded  after  his  father's  death.   To  him  David  sent  an  embassy  of  condolence. 

I.  The  generous  message   of  David.    Gratitude  not  absorbed  by 

death.     Expressions  of  sympathy  needful.     Nothing  worthier  than  to  requite 

kindness  with  thanks.     1.  In  its  occasion.     A  time  of  bereavement  and  sorrow 

when  such  a  message  is  seasonable.     2.  In  its  form.     The  customary  method  of 

sending  courtiers  to  condole  with  friends  in  loss  or  suffering.     But  Hanun's  loss 

was  David's  loss.     A  true  friend  valued  by  relatives  and  neighbours,  honoured 

in  death  and  memory.    II.  The  disgraceful  treatment  of  David's 

messengers.     If  suspected,  they  might  have  been  dismissed  civilly,  or  kept 

in  honourable  custody  till  the  truth  was  known.     They  were  treated  with  the 

greatest  indignity.      Shaving  their  beards  and  shortening  their   garments  a 

double  insult  in  the  East,  where  long  beards  and  long  garments  are  badges  of 

honour.     Many  Orientals  would  rather  die  than  lose  their  beards  (signs  of  the 

dignity    and   ornament   of    freedom),    and     Turks   used  to   regard   beardless 

Europeans  as  runaway  slaves.     III.  The  considerate  kindness  for 

the  disgraced  messengers.     "  Tarry  at  Jericho,   &c."     The  first   place 

they  reached  in  Canaan,  a  private  village,  where  they  might  remain  until  fit  to 

appear  in  public.     Men  of  that  character  must  not  be  seen  dishonoured  and 

unfit  for  duty.     Character  gives  influence,  commands   admiration,  and  is  the 

real  power  of  men.     "  Men  of  character  are  the  conscience  of  society  to  which 

they  belong  "  [Emerson].     If  character  be  lost,  then  nothing  left  worth  saving. 

Ever  be  concerned  for  good  character.     Preserve  and  keep  that  from  dishonour 

and  impurity. 

87 


SOMtLETtC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xit. 


Avenging  an  Insult. — Verses  6-19. 

Israel  roused  by  the  insult.  The  Ammonites  knew  that  they  had  made 
themselves  "  odious "  to  David,  and  both  sides  prepared  to  engage  in  foolish 
war.  I.  Insult  springing  from  slight  provocation.  Hanun 
seems  bereft  of  wisdom,  acted  most  foolishly,  and  brought  ruin  to  himself  and 
his  nation.  "  Woe  to  thee,  0  land,  when  thy  king  is  a  child."  1.  From  a 
suspicious  mind.  Embassy  treated  as  spies.  Wicked  men  measure  others  by 
themselves,  and  put  an  evil  construction  upon  the  best  intention.  Bp.  Patrick 
well  says,  *'  There  is  nothing  so  well  meant  but  it  may  be  ill  interpreted, 
and  is  wont  to  be  so  by  men  who  love  nobody  but  themselves."  2.  From  advice 
of  jealous  princes.  "  Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth  honour  thy  father  ? " 
Nothing  of  the  kind.  They  are  come  to  inspect  the  capital,  spy  the  land,  and 
prepare  for  its  conquest.  These  princes  were  jealous  of  the  mighty  growth  of 
David's  kingdom,  counselled  the  adoption  of  a  hostile  policy,  and  conveyed 
slight  reproach  in  their  question.  The  king  was  influenced,  and  the  insult 
committed.  II.  Insult  leading  to  unjust  war.  This  war,  like  many 
others,  commenced  by  a  wrongdoer,  and  might  have  been  avoided  by  an 
honourable  apology  or  better  understanding.  One  evil  leads  to  another.  When 
men  begin  a  quarrel,  they  know  not  where  it  will  end.  "  It  is  one  of  the  mad 
principles  of  wickedness,"  says  Bp.  Hall,  "  that  it  is  wickedness  to  relent,  and 
rather  to  die  than  yield.  Even  ill  causes,  once  undertaken,  must  be  upheld, 
although  with  blood ;  whereas  the  gracious  heart,  finding  his  own  mistaking, 
doth  not  only  remit  of  an  ungrounded  displeasure,  but  studies  to  be  revenged  of 
itself,  and  to  give  satisfaction  to  the  offended."  III.  War  terminating  in 
disgraceful  overthrow.  Syrians  from  three  places  hired  and  headed  by 
powerful  men,  fought  with  chariots,  cavalry,  and  infantry.  A  vigorous  attack 
was  made,  and  they  fled,  "as  often  happens,"  says  Bp.  Patrick,  "  with  those 
that  fight  for  pay  alone,  without  respect  to  the  cause."  1.  Defeat  m^ost 
humiliating.  Syrians  first  fled,  and  the  Ammonites  soon  followed,  without 
fighting  at  all.  They  retreated  to  the  city,  but  stone  walls  are  no  defence 
without  stout  hearts.  2.  Defeat  most  complete.  The  commander  was  killed, 
thousands  were  slain.  Vassal  princes  submitted  to  David,  and  the  Syrian  nation 
forsook  their  alHes,  and  became  tributary  to  Israel.  Persistence  in  evil-doing 
is  sure  to  ruin.  Strife  spreads.  One  angry  word  leads  to  another.  One  l(iok 
of  revenge,  one  act  of  resentment,  will  kindle  a  fire  that  may  set  a  neighbourhood 
or  a  nation  into  flame.  "  Therefore  leave  off  contention  before  it  be  meddled 
with." 

"  Contention,  like  a  horse 
Full  of  high  feeding,  madly  hath  broke  loosai 
And  bears  all  before  him  "  [^Shakespean], 


The  Wae  Chy.— Verses  10-13. 

The  enemy  appeared  on  the  field,  divided  then*  forces,  the  Syrians  in  front 
and  the  Ammonites  behind  Joab.  But,  Hke  an  expert  commander,  he  picked 
out  the  best  soldiers  to  engage  the  Syrians,  the  strongest  and  most  valiant.  He 
gave  a  spirited  address  to  his  army,  set  a  brave  example,  and  left  the  issue  with 
God. 

I.  The  purpose  for  which  they  fought.  Not  for  aggiessive  or 
ambitious  purposes.  For  the  cause  of  humanity,  "  for  our  people ;  "  for  religious 
freedom  and  the  cause  of  God,  "  and  for  the  cities  of  our  God."  li.  The 
88 


CHAP,  xit.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


method  in  which  they  fought.  Success  always  depends  upon  certain 
conditions.  Joab  owed  his  victory  partly  to  sagacious  command.  1.  A  wise 
economy  offcyrces.  Bravest  in  front,  and  less  trained  for  less  important  work. 
A  strong  reserve  force,  not  all  concentrated  on  a  given  place.  Naseby  lost  to 
Charles  by  Kupert  pursuing  fugitives  too  far.  The  king  on  the  point  of  over- 
powering Fairfax.  Cromwell  hastened  to  his  chief  and  decided  the  battle. 
Charles  cried  in  vain  to  rally  his  men,  *'  One  more  charge  and  we  recover  the 
day."  In  the  battle  of  life  we  should  direct  our  physical  and  mental  powers 
wisely — ever  seek  to  have  strength  reserved  for  **  the  evil  day."  2.  A  deter- 
mination  to  render  mutual  help.  "  If  Syrians  be  too  strong  for  me,  thon  thou 
shalt  help  me,  &c."  Unity  and  hearty  co-operation  essential.  The  strong  should 
ever  be  ready  to  help  the  weak.  Solitude  is  selfishness  and  death  in  moral 
warfare.  "  Two  are  better  than  one.  For  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his 
fellow  ;  but  woe  to  him  who  is  alone  when  he  falleth."  III.  The  spirit  in 
which  they  foug*ht.  Joab's  advice  admirable,  though  not  always  practised 
by  himself.  He  shared  David's  powers,  but  not  David's  piety.  1.  A  spirit  oj 
exalted  courage.  "  Let  us  behave  ourselves  valiantly"  (ver.  13).  Brave  words 
from  a  brave  heart.  "  A  good  leader  must,  out  of  his  own  abundance,  put  life 
and  spirits  into  all  others ;  if  a  lion  lead  sheep  into  the  field,  there  is  hope  of 
victory"  [^Bishop  Hall\  "  Play  the  man,"  Latimer's  motto  ;  let  it  be  ours  in  all 
conflicts  and  departments  of  life.  Idlers,  dreamers,  and  irresolute  never  win 
anything.  '*Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  us  play  the  men  for  our  people" 
(2  Sam.  X.  12).  2.  A  spirit  of  true  patriotism.  Personal  glory  and  family 
reputation  powerful  motives.  But  when  a  country  must  be  defended  and  a 
people  delivered,  then  a  true  spirit  required.  "Remember  the  Lord  which  is 
great  and  terrible,  and  fight  for  your  brethren,  your  sons,  and  your  daughters, 
your  wives,  and  your  houses."  3.  A  spirit  of  submission  to  God.  "  Let  the  Lord 
do  that  which  is  good  in  his  sight"  (ver.  13).  An  element  of  uncertainty  in  all 
events.  Here  an  expression  of  confidence,  not  despair,  nor  fatalism.  The 
heraldic  motto  on  a  broken  helmet  in  Battle  Abbey  most  suitable,  "  L'espoir  est 
ma  force."  Diligently  prepare,  bravely  enter  the  battle,  and  humbly  submit  to 
God.  "  The  fortune  of  war  "  not  in  our  hands,  but  God's.  "  The  race  is  not  to 
the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong." 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  2.     Da/oid  said.     Let  Hanun  to  cmother.     "  One   injustice  produces 

be  as  graceless  as  he  will,  David  will  another,  and  drags  men  on  irretardably 

show  himself  gracious  by  being  grate-  to  destruction  by  the  resulting  chain 

ful.     The  same   Greek  word   (charts)  of  sins  and  injustices.     The  King  of 

signifieth   both   grace  and   gratitude.  Ammon,  with   sinful  levity,  lends  his 

Neither  doth  the   ill  success  he  had  ear  to  the  liars  and  calumniators  that 

argue  that  he  did  amiss,  as  Pellican  surround  him  ;  thence  comes  the  most 

will  have  it,  for  duty  is  to  be  done,  outrageous  insolence  towards   David's 

however  it  speed  or  take  with  wicked  ambassadors,    and    the   most   abusive 

persons.     What    if     Hanun    were    a  insult  to  the  whole  people  of  Israel ; 

heathen  king  ?     Might  not  his  friend-  on  this  follows  the  hasty  preparation 

ship  be  therefore  sought  ?  might  not  and  provocation  of   a  wholly  unjust, 

his  father's  courtesy  be  requited  ?     If  wicked  war ;    therein  the  princes  are 

a  very  dog  fawn  upon  us  we  stroke  forced  to  take  part,  and  so  to  stake 

him  on  the  head,  and  clap  him  on  the  their   land   and    people.     The     end  is 

side  ;  much  less  is  the  common  band  complete  destruction  "  [Lange\ 
of  humanity  untied  by  grace  [Trapp].  Vers.  8-15.    Joab's  word  to  Abishai 

Vers.   4-7.     One  false  step  leadeth  is  a  prelude  to   the   Lord's   word  to 

89 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[chap.  xr. 


Peter :  "  Strengthen  thy  brethren." 
Heroic  bravery  in  the  war  is  to  be 
combined — 1.  With  the  recognition 
of  those  most  sacred  possessions  and 
ends  for  which  the  struggle  is  to  be 
made  ;  thereby  it  is  consecrated  ;  and 
2.  With  humble,  trustful  submission 
to  the  will  of  the  Lord  ;  thereby  it  is 
preserved  from  temerity  and  presump- 
tuousness.  The  war  is  a  just  and  holy 
one,  undertaken  for  the  defence  of 
the  possessions  received  from  God,  to 
guard  the  honour  of  God,  and  in 
the  name  of   God  \Ihid.'\.     Yer.    13. 


Bravery  in  battling  for  the  highest 
object,  1.  It  is  rooted  in  fidelity  to 
God  and  to  our  brethren  the  people  of 
God.  2.  It  is  proven  by  devotion  of 
body  and  soul  and  the  whole  life  to 
the  aims  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  3.  It 
is  sanctified  by  unconditional  submis- 
sion to  the  purposes  and  doings  of  the 
willoi  God  [Ibid.].  ^^Let  us  behave  our- 
selves, dec"  United  help  by  advice, 
sympathy,  and  hearty  co-operation  in 
contending  for  truth  and  Christ  in  the 
world.  "  United  we  stand,  divided 
we  fall/' 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIX. 


"Ver.  2.  Kindness,  How  unsuitable 
is  it  for  us,  who  live  only  by  kindness 
(Tit.  iii.  4-7),  to  be  unkind  1  \Edwards\ 

Ver.  3.  Thinkest  thou.  To  think 
well  is  the  way  to  act  rightly  [Paley], 
It  is  an  easy  thing  to  pick  a  quarrel 
where  we  intend  a  mischief  [Bishop 
Halt].  Upright  simplicity  is  the 
deepest  wisdom,  and  perverse  craft  the 
merest  shallowness  \B arrow]. 

Ver.  12.  Unity  and  unanimous 
movement.  The  strength  of  the  Church 
is,  not  as  an  army  of  irregular  soldiers, 
regiments  in  loose  disorder,  uncon- 
nected with  each  other,  but  when  she 
goeth  forth  by  bands  (Prov.  xxx.  27) 
united,  concentrated,  well  disciplined, 
everj  officer  at  his  post,  every  soldier 


in  his  ranks,  each  under  rule,  helpful 
to  each  other,  and  to  their  great  cause! 
When  shall  it  once  be  ?  Lord,  heal  our 
unhappy  divisions.  Unite  our  energies 
"  in  one  holy  bond  of  Truth  and  Peace, 
of  Faith  and  Charity  "  \Bridges]. 

Vers.  16—18.  Syrians  defeated  a 
second  time.  So  incurable  is  the  folly 
and  wickedness  Of  some  men  that, 
though  to  reproofs  and  chidings  you 
should  add  stripes  and  blows,  they 
would  not  grow  wiser  and  better.  "  An 
obstinate  man  does  not  hold  opinions, 
they  hold  him"  [Pope].  *' Stiff  in 
opinion,  always  in  the  wrong"  [Dryderi]. 

"  You  may  as  well 
Forbid  the  Bea  for  to  obey  the  mooa, 
As,  by  oath  remove,  or  oounsel  shake 
The  f abrio  of  his  folly  "  [Shakespeare\  • 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Obitioal  Notes.]  This  extract  from  the  ancient  records  tells  of  Rabbah  taken  (vers. 
1-3) ;  and  three  sons  of  the  giant  of  Gath  slain  (vers.  4-8).  It  covers  2  Sam.  xi.-xxi. 
[Murphy^ 

Vers.  1-3. — Rabbah  taken.  Year^  at  the  return  or  beginning  of  the  year,  setting  in  of 
spring.  Time,  when  kings  of  Israel  were  accustomed,  after  winter  season,  to  go  out  to  war. 
Rabbah  besieged  to  complete  chastisement  of  Ammoti  for  insult  to  David's  messengers. 
Tarried,  his  presence  not  required  in  the  war,  more  needful  in  seat  of  government  (c/. 
2  Sam.  xii.  26-31).  Crown.  When  citadel  was  taken,  the  king  captured  or  killed  ;  David 
took  the  crown  from  his  head  and  set  it  upon  his  own,  to  represent  himself  lord  of 
the  Ammonite  territory.  Cut  (ver.  3,  cf.  ma? gin,  made  them  sawers  of  stone,  diggers  of 
iron,  and  cutters  of  wood,  i.e.,  condemned  them  to  forced  labour  ;  cf.  2  Sam.  xii.  30,  31). 

Vers.  4-8. —  Giants  slain.  Gezer,  Gob  (2  Sam.  xxi.  19).  Sibb.  (chap.  xi.  29).  Sippai, 
Saph.  They,  the  Philistines.  Elh.  (2  Sam.  xxi.  19 ;  1  Ohr.  xi.  26).  Gath  (ver.  6  ;  Josh.  xi. 
22).  Man  (2  Sam.  xx.  6,  7).  Fell  (ver.  8,  cf.  2  Sam  xx.  22,  where  an  account  of  a  oonfliot 
between  David  and  a  son  of  Kapha  is  given). 


CHAP.  XX.]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CURONICLES, 


HOMILETIGS, 

The  Oapturb  op  Rabbah. — Verses  1-3. 

Punisliment  of  Ammon  for  treatment  of  embassy  of  condolence,  hindered  by 
inclement  season,  now  to  be  completed.  The  chief  city  taken,  and  its  fall  the 
crowning  act  of  David's  conquests.  From  the  manner  of  its  capture  and  the 
punishment  of  its  people  we  learn — I.  That  in  spiritual  warfare  there 
must  be  no  cessation.  Rest  gives  advantage  to  the  enemy,  and  may 
delay  or  frustrate  the  end  in  view.  "  Forwards,  children,  forwards  1 "  urged 
Blucher,  in  meeting  Wellington  at  Waterloo.  1.  Make  needfvZ  preparation. 
Count  cost,  and  fail  not  through  lack  of  forethought  and  preparation.  Enter- 
prises break  down,  plans  wrecked  in  every  department  of  labour,  through  neglect 
of  this  principle.  "  What  king  going  to  make  war  against  another  king,  sitteth 
not  down  first,  and  consulteth  whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to  meet 
him  that  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  thousand  ? "  2.  5e  ready  for  every 
advantage,  "  The  time  to  go  out "  must  be  discovered  and  seized.  Many  such 
seasons  given  to  a  watchful  Christian.  "  Take  the  instant  by  the  forward  step." 
"To  everything  there  is  a  season,  and  a  time  to  every  purpose  under  heaven." 
II.  That  in  conducting  spiritual  warfare  opportunity  is 
given  for  the  display  of  virtuous  qualities.  Joab  had  besieged 
the  capital,  taken  lower  part  of  town,  or  "city  of  watery"  and  knowing  that  it 
would  soon  fall,  sent  for  the  king  to  come  in  person  and  have  the  honour  of 
taking  it  himself  (c/.  2  Sam.  xii.  26).  Taking  this  act  as  that  of  an  adroit 
courtier,  unwilling  to  run  the  risk  of  exciting  the  king's  envy  by  his  success,  it 
was  wise.  But  the  act  of  a  devoted  servant,  denying  himself,  honouring  his 
master,  and  shielding  him  from  popular  disfavour  (through  his  conduct  with 
Bathsheba).  Room  for  us  to  help  the  weak,  admire  the  successful,  and,  above 
all,  to  transfer  the  glory  of  our  conquests  to  our  gracious  "  Commander  and 

Leader."  III.  That  all  things  in  spiritual  warfare  will  be 
subdued  under  God's  power.  The  city  was  taken,  and  the  people 
subdued.  In  Christian  warfare,  every  evil  thought  in  heart,  every  besetting 
sin,  and  every  vicious  principle  in  life,  overcome  by  grace;  every  stronghold  of 
Satan,  and  every  enemy  to  Christ  eventually  subdued.  "  He  must  reign  till  he 
hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet."  Great  the  punishment  of  those  who 
resist.  Ammonites  suffered  severely,  but  "  woe  to  the  wicked ;  it  shall  be  ill 
with  him.** 

The  Heroes  and  the  Giants. — Verses  4-8. 

Individual  exploits  here  given  marvellous.  Sibbechai,  Elhan,  and  Jonathan 
slew  their  men,  sons  of  Rapha,  descendants  of  the  race  of  Raphaim  at  Gath, 
remains   of   pre-Canaanitish    inhabitants,   distinguished   by  their  gigantic  size 

(cf.  2  Sam.  xxi  15-22).  Learn— I.  The  enemies  of  God's  people  are 
most  powerful  Giants  in  appearance  and  reality.  1.  Splendid  m  equip- 
ment. Armed  with  shields  and  spears,  mighty  in  stature,  and  conspicuous 
among  their  fellows.  Our  enemies  often  powerful  in  material  advantages, 
learning,  and  all  appliances  of  modern  science.  2.  Defiant  in  attitude,  "  He 
defied  Israel "  (ver.  7).  Thinking  much  of  themselves,  highly  esteemed,  perha|>s, 
by  contemporaries ;  men  of  *'  a  high  look  and  a  proud  heart."     "  The  lofty  looks 

of  man  shall  be  humbled,"  &c.    II.  God's  people  are  ever  victorious 

in  God's  strength.  Inferior  in  number  and  unequal  m  outward  equip- 
ment, yet  a  match  for  giants  of  ignorance,  vice,  and  sin.  Shepherd  boys  havo 
overthrown  kingdoms,  and  striplings  slain  giants  of  evil.  Men  of  faith,  with 
''lamps  and  pitchers/'  with  "the  jawbone  of  an  ass,"  with  the  meanest  instru- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


[chap.   XX. 


ments,  have  overcome  men  of  might  and  stature.  *' Never  let  the  church's 
friends  be  disheartened  by  the  power  and  pride  of  the  church's  enemies  We 
need  not  fear  great  men  against  us  while  we  have  the  great  God  for  us     \vhat 

Omid  otfnceT" ''^  ''''  ^^""^  ^^""^  ^""^  ''''  ^  ^""^  '^''''^  ''''  ^^""^  ^''°^'  '"^  '^'''^^^^  ^'^^^ 
HOMILETIC  HIN-TS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.     David  tarried  at  Jerusalem, 
Out  of  the  way  of  temptation  if  he  had 
gone  with  the  army  in   active  duty. 
Temporary  rest  from  work  and  fight 
leads  often  to  (a)  moral  indolence  or 
spiritual    sloth;    {b)    carelessness    in 
office,  or  unfaithfulness  in  calling ;  (c) 
temptation  and  disgrace.     ''Idle  hours 
bring   forth   idle   thoughts,   and    idle 
thoughts  are  nothing  but  dry,  kindling 
wood,  that  waits  only  for  a  spark  to  be 
suddenly  a  blaze.     All  have  had  pain- 
ful experience  that  our  sins  often  have 
their  roots  in  indolence  and  unfaithful- 
ness in  our  calling.     As   long   as  we 
walk  and  work  in    our  office,  we  are 
encompassed  with  a  wall;  as  soon  as 
we  fall  out  of  our  office,  we  fall  away 
from  our  fortunes,  and  become  a  prey 
to  the  enemy"  [Disselhoff]. 

Ver.  2.  Grown  from  off  his  head. 
1.  Earthly  crowns  and  kingdoms  may 
be  lost  and  transferred  to  others.  By 
war,  wickedness,  and  death.  When 
Richard    II.    was    deposed,    he    was 


brought  forth,  says   the  historian,  in 
a  royal  robe,   and  a  crown    upon  his 
head.     Never  was  a  prince  so  gorgeous 
with   less  glory   and   more  grief.     2. 
Heavenly    croAvns     may    be     gained! 
David  set  store   on   this  crown  from 
the  King  of  Ammon.    Better  far  the 
crown  of  God's  favour,  the  crown  of 
righteousness,    the    crown    of    glory. 
These     untarnished     by     blood     and 
severities,  real   ornaments  to   charac- 
ter, and  unfading  with  time,  <kc. 

Vers.  4-8.  The  conflict  of  the  world- 
power  against  GodJs  kingdom  is  (1)  a 
continual  conflict  ever  again  renewed 
{There  was  war  again,  ver.  5) ;  (2)  a 
conflict  carried  on  with  malicious 
cunning,  frightful  power,  and  mighty 
weapons  (ver.  5) ;  (3)  a  conflict  peri- 
lous to  the  people  of  God,  demanding 
all  the  power  given  them  by  the  Lord, 
and  their  utmost  bravery;  (4)  a  con- 
flict tliat  by  God's  help  at  last  ends  in 
the  victory  of  his  kingdom  [Lange], 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XX. 


Ver.  2.    An  incorruptible  crovm,    A 
French  officer,  a  prisoner  on  parol  at 
Reading,  met  with  a  Bible ;  he  read  it, 
was  so  impressed   with   its    contents 
that  he  was  convinced  of  the  folly  of 
sceptical  principles  and  of  the  truth  of 
Christianity,  and  resolved  to  become  a 
Protestant.   When  rallied  by  gay  asso- 
ciates for  taking  so  serious  a  turn,  he 
said  in  vindication,  "  I  have  done  no 
more  than  my  old  schoolfellow  Berna- 
dotte,   who  has  become  a  Lutheran." 
"Yes,   but   he   became   so,"   said   his 
associates,  "  to  obtain  a  crown."     "  My 
motive,"  said  the  Christian  officer,  "  is 
the  same;  we  only  differ  as  to  the  place. 
The  object  of  Bernadotte  is  to  obtain  a 
crown  in  Sweden ;  mine  is  to  obtain  a 
crown  in  heaven  "  [Bib.  Museum]. 
93 


y®^*    3.     A    lesson    to    conqtLerora. 
When    Edward     the    Confessor    had 
entered    England  from    Normandy  to 
recover  the  kingdom,  and  was   ready 
to  give  the  Danes  battle,  one  of    his 
captains  assured  him  of  victory,  add- 
ing, "We   will    not  leave    one    Dane 
alive."      To    which    Edward    replied, 
*'  God  forbid  that  the  kingdom  should 
be  recovered  for  me,  who  am  but  one 
man,  by  the  death  of  thousands.     No  ; 
I  will  rather  lead  a  private  life,  un- 
stained by  the  blood  of  my  fellow-men, 
than  be  a  king  by  such  a  sacrifice.'' 
Upon  which   he  broke  up   his  camp, 
and  again  retired  to  Normandy,  until 
he  was  restored  to  his  throne  without 
bloodshed  [Percy  Anecdotes], 


CHAP.  XXI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Critical  Notes.]  The  events  here  given  appear  in  2  Sam.  xxiv.,  where  the  manner  in 
which  the  census  was  taken  is  fully  described,  which  took  Joab  nine  months  and  twenty 
days.     This  narrative  is  condeused. 

Vers.  1-6. — Numbering  of  people.  Satan,  the  Lord  in  Sam.  "  Both  had  their  hand  in  the 
work — God  by  permission,  Satan  by  suggestion "  [Bp.  Hall].  Provoked,  stirred  up. 
Trespass  (ver.  3),  the  results  of  trespass  -  i.e.,  punishment.  Yer.  4.  A  summary  of  five 
verses  of  2  Sam.  xxiv.  4-8,  which  give  route  taken  by  Joab  and  assistants,  and  time 
occupied  to  their  return.  Ver.  5.  Number  oi  all  lists  added  together.  Discrepancy  not  easy 
to  explain.  "  It  seems  far  better  to  explain,  with  most  commentators,  that  the  numbers 
have,  in  one  passage  or  the  other  (or  possibly  in  both),  suffered  corruption"  [Speak. 
Coin.] .  Yer.  6.  Levi,  following  precedent  in  Num.  i.  47-49  ;  BerJ.,  because  Joab  desired  to 
frustrate  king's  intention,  or  because  taken  on  former  occasion  (ch.  vii.  6-11),  and  register 
preserved  in  archives  of  the  tribe. 

Vers.  7,8. — God's  displeasure.  These  words  an  anticipation  of  verses  14  and  15;  are 
placed  here,  interrupting  the  narrative,  to  show  that  Joab's  artifice  was  not  successful  —it 
did  not  avert  God's  wrath.  David  was  punished  for  his  intention,  though  that  intention 
was  not  completely  carried  out  by  his  subordinate  [Speak.  Cojn.], 

Vers.  9-13. — Gad's  message.  Seer,  prophet  elsewhere;  perhaps  a  pupil  of  David 
(2  Sam.  xxii.  8),  and  successor  of  Samuel  in  office.  Offer,  stretch  out  to  thee.  Choose, 
take  to  thee.  Three  things,  famine,  sword,  or  pestilence,  which  often  recur  in  Scripture 
(Dent,  xxviii.  21-25 ;  Eev.  vi.  4-8).  "  This  beautiful  agreement  in  the  numbers  is  com- 
pletely destroyed  by  the  reading  seven"  [Keil].  Strait,  one  form  of  the  evil  must  betaken, 
cannot  be  avoided.     Experience  taught  him  which  to  choose. 

Vers.  14-17. —  God  sends  pestilence.  Its  form  not  given  ;  results  most  sweeping.  At  length 
reached  the  capital.  Angel  to  destroy  it.  Oman  and  his  sons  hid  themselves  on  the 
apparition  of  the  angel,  but  came  out  to  welcome  David.  The  king  saw  the  vision, 
appeared  with  the  elders  in  the  garb  and  assumed  the  attitude  of  penitence,  confessed 
their  sins,  and  deprecated  the  wrath  of  God. 

Ve7's.  18-22. — David  builds  an  altar.  Command  to  build  and  choice  of  site  directly  from 
God,  through  an  angel,  to  Gad.  Altar  marked  the  site  for  the  future  temple.  Threshing- 
floor,  the  level  summit  of  elevated  ground  on  eastern  ridge  on  which  Jerusalem  was 
situated. 

Vers.  23-26. — David  bugs  the  threshing-floor.  In  Eastern  style  of  politeness,  Oman  ofi"er8 
the  whole  to  David,  as  Ephron  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xxiii.).  Yer.  25.  Gave  value  of  the  place 
here;  that  of  threshing-floor  and  oxen  in  Sam.  "The  one  writer  states  the  matter  of 
present  interest,  the  other  records  the  matter  of  permanent  moment  "  [Murphg], 

Vers.  27-30. — David  sacrifices  on  the  altar.  Sacrificed.  The  whole  code  of  regu- 
lations for  offerings  given  in  Lev.  i.-vii.  By  fire,  answer  given  on  critical  occasions 
(Lev.  ix.  24  ;  1  Kings  xviii.  24-38).  Sacrifice  accompanied  with  cessation  of  plague. 
There  (ver.  28),  regarding  that  spot  as  sacred.  The  altar  of  burnt- offering  still  at  Gibeon, 
where  he  could  net  go  in  present  emergency,  for  fear  of  the  angel.  After  this  divine 
institution  Mount  Moriah  (2  Chron.  iii,  1)  became  a  place  of  lawful  sacrifice  [cf.  Murphy]. 
David  knowing  that  by  sacrifice  on  this  altar  he  had  caused  the  angel  to  stay  his  hand, 
was  afraid  to  transfer  his  offerings  elsewhere,  lest  the  angel  should  resume  his  task,  and 
pestilence  again  break  out  [Speak.  Com.}, 


HOMILETIGS. 
The  Wicked  Census. — Verses  1-6. 

What  wrong  in  numbering  the  people?  A  shepherd  likes  to  know  the 
number  of  his  sheep.  A  census  had  been  commanded  and  taken  in  the 
wilderness  (Num.  i.  1,  2)  It  was  customary  with  other  kings,  that  they 
might  know  what  an  army  to  muster  for  war.  Judging  from  Scripture 
accounts,  we  learn  the  following  truths — I.  It  was  an  act  instigated 
by  mysterious  influence.      Supernatural  influence.      Satan  the  adver- 

93 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,   xxl 


sary  was  permitted  in  some  way  to  move  David.  God  is  said  in  Scripture  to 
do  what  he  suffers  or  permits.  Man's  free  will  not  forced  nor  destroyed 
by  the  Divine  will.  "  The  w^eb  of  human  actions  is  very  complex.  The  great 
Mover  rules  over  all,  but  many  undermovers  intervene  in  the  drama  of  life ; 
so  that  it  is  not  more  difficult  to  foretell  the  course  of  the  weather  than  of 
the  will."  Yet  sin  is  man's  own  act,  and  the  punishment  of  a  righteous  God 
presupposes  its  guilt.  II.  It  was  an  act  of  sinful  pride.  Enemies 
subdued,  his  rule  undisputed,  yet  not  content.  Wanted  to  ascertain  and  boast 
in  the  military  strength  of  the  people,  "  that  I  may  know  the  number  of  the 
people"  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  2 ;  c/*.  1  Chr.  xxvii.  23).  "  This  clear  also  from  the  fact 
that  Joab  delayed  as  long  as  possible  carrying  it  into  Benjamin,  in  order  not 
to  arouse  the  insurrectionary  spirit  of  this  tribe,  which  could  not  forget  the 
leadership  it  had  possessed  under  Saul"  \^Hengs.\  Kings  proud,  prosperous, 
and  ambitious,  often  vain,  confident  in  their  own  greatness,  boastful  of  the 
number  of  their  soldiers  and  the  resources  of  their  subjects.  David  remark- 
ably successful,  and  thought  himself  invincible.  III.  It  was  an  act  of 
treason  ag^ainst  God.  Israel  were  God's  people,  not  David's  to  count 
and  number  as  he  thought  fit.  Disobedient  to  take  a  census  without  God's 
command ;  perversion  of  God's  favours  to  turn  them  into  schemes  of  self- 
aggrandizement,  and  the  purposes  of  God,  according  to  the  laws  of  justice 
and  moral  order,  cannot  be  obscured  or  hindered  without  impunity  by  proud 
acts  and  ambitious  plans  of  kings.  David's  sin  akin  to  that  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
whom  Jehovah  taught  by  bitter  experience  *'  to  know  that  the  Most  High  ruleth 
in  the  kingdom  of  men."  IV.  It  was  an  act  of  peril  to  the  nation. 
Joab  saw  this  and  remonstrated,  "Why  will  he  be  a  cause  of  trespass  to  Israel?" 
It  might  endanger  the  liberty  of  the  people,  become  a  State  device  for  heavy 
taxation,  and  would  be  sure  to  bring  divine  displeasure.  *'  The  apprehension  of 
a  Nemesis  on  an  overweening  display  of  prosperity,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "  if  not 
inconsistent  with  the  highest  revelations  of  the  Divine  nature  in  the  gospel, 
pervades  all  ancient,  especially  all  Oriental  religions."  Presentiments  often 
forebode  evil.  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  V.  It  was  an  act 
of  obstinate  persistence.  Joab's  rebuke  had  no  effect  upon  David. 
Foolish  pride  puffed  up,  and  he  neither  took  the  counsel  of  God  nor  the 
advice  of  friends.  With  stubborn  self  will  he  would  have  his  own  way — ''the 
king's  word  prevailed  against  Joab."  Advice  may  demand  hard  and  unpleasant 
things,  involve  humiliation  and  confession  of  mistake,  and  be  very  different 
from  the  words  we  expected.  Hence  disregard  to  warnings,  persistence  in  evil, 
and  ultimately  inevitable  sufferings.  "The  way  of  a  fool  is  right  in  his  own 
eyes ;  but  he  that  hearkeneth  unto  counsel  is  wise." 


The  Progress  op  True  Penitence. — Verses  7-13. 

In  these  words  a  beautiful  picture  of  David's  repentance — successive  steps  of 
restoration  to  God,  and  the  conduct  of  a  real  penitent  under  the  chastening 
hand  of  God.  I.  In  signs  of  GodJs  displeasure.  "  God  was  displeased"  (ver.  7). 
Displeasure  revealed  to  vindicate  God,  aid  us  in  apprehending  our  responsibility 
to  him,  and  to  secure  right  mind  for  due  restoration.  II.  In  the  power  of  an 
awakened  conscience.  "  David's  heart  smote  him  "  (Sam.).  "  The  bitter  thoughts 
of  conscience  born."  Suggestions  from  God ;  proofs  that  we  are  not  left  alone,  nor 
hardened  beyond  hope.  III.  In  the  penitent  confession  of  sin.  Accuses  himself ,  and 
is  deeply  grieved  that  others  are  involved  in  his  sin  (ver.  1 7).  /  am  guilty ; 
these  sheep^  what  have  they  done  ?  He  is  so  penetrated  with  sense  of  guilt,  and 
with  sympathy  for  his  innocent  people,  that  he  desires  God  to  send  judgments 


CHAP.  XXI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


"  on  him  and  his  house  "  alone,  and  spare  the  people  as  his  flock  (these  sheep). 
lY.  In  earnest  prayer  for  pardon.  ''Take  away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant" 
(Sam.).  This  only  his  resource.  Acknowledgment  of  guilt,  and  entreaty  for 
divine  forgiveness,  a  proof  of  true  state  of  heart.  V.  In  the  revelation  of  GocUs 
will.  The  inner  cry  met  by  outer  word.  Gad  announced  punitive  righteous- 
ness (ver.  9).  This  without  human  means  or  occasion.  God  ever  ready  to  give 
light  and  guidance,  but  in  his  way  and  time.  VI.  In  humble  submission  to  God's 
will  lohen  known.  He  bows  under  divine  judgments,  yet  with  hope  of  delivering 
mercy. 

The  Awful  Judgments. — Verses  11-15. 

The  judgment  descended  in  the  form  of  a  tremendous  pestilence — "  a  death," 
as  it  is  expressly  termed  in  the  original,  like  "  the  Black  Death  "  of  the  Middle 
Ages.  Appearing  in  the  heat  of  the  summer  months,  aggravated  by  the 
greatness  of  the  population  which  had  occasioned  the  census,  spreading 
with  the  rapidity  of  an  Oriental  disorder  in  crowded  habitations,  it  flew 
from  end  to  end  of  the  country  in  three  days,  and  at  last  approached 
Jerusalem.  The  new  capital,  the  very  heart  of  the  nation,  the  peculiar 
glory  of  David's  reign,  seemed  to  be  doomed  to  destruction  [Dean  Stanley]. 
I.  Judgments  entailed  by  one  man's  sin.    David  responsible  chiefly 

for  its  results.  Man's  power  to  entail  tremendous  evils  or  greatest  blessings 
upon  others.  Seventy  thousand  human  beings  cut  off  by  judgment.  What 
deaths  lie  at  our  door!  II,  Judgments  easily  prepared  for 
execution.  God  has  agents  ever  ready  to  do  his  will.  Famine,  sword,  and 
pestilence,  set  in  order,  waiting  the  command  to  attack,  and  fearful  in  results. 
"  The  terrors  of  God  do  set  themselves  in  (military)  array  against  me  "  (Job  vi.  4). 
III.  Judgments  sent  according  to  human  preference.  ''  Choose 

thee."  Wonderful,  mysterious  offer !  Not  often  done ;  would  not  always  be 
consistent  with  God's  justice.  We  are  not  always  able,  enlightened  enough  to 
choose.  This  a  special  case,  only  a  temporary  fall  from  loyalty,  and  the  design 
was  the  restoration  to  full  trust.  God  wise  and  merciful.  IV.  Judgments 
arrested  by  earnest  prayer.  Room  in  the  purposes  of  God  and  in  the 
operations  of  nature  for  prayer.  "  Natural  law  "  interferes  not  with  piayer  and 
human  freedom.  Who  knows  what  judgments  may  be  averted,  mitigated,  or 
turned  into  blessings,  by  earnest  petition?  Scripture  and  ecclesiastical  history 
full  of  illustrations.  *'  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer  than  the  world  dreams 
of"  \Tennysori\. 

David's  Choice. — Verses  11-13. 

David  offered  three  things.  To  show  him  and  the  world  that  the  evils 
denounced  were  no  casual  calamities,  nor  effects  of  any  natural  cause,  he  was 
permitted  to  choose  which  should  be  immediately  inflicted.    Regard  the  choice — 

I.  As  the  result  of  an  awakened  conscience.    *'  I  am  in  a  great 

strait."  The  natural  feeling  of  one  under  the  terrors  of  God ;  the  voice  of 
conscience  in  anguish  and  torture.  ''  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  II.  As 
the  revelation  of  the  principle  of  Christian  life.  Famine  would 
leave  Israel  dependent  upon  others  for  food;  defeat,  on  the  mercy  of  the 
heathen ;  in  pestilence,  they  would  have  God  only  to  deal  with.  God  the  only 
refuge;  no  liu  man  power  could  defend.  He  left  himself  confidently  with  God. 
Thus  gave  a  public  testimony  that  it  is  vain  to  trust  in  man ;  that  God  (jnly  is 
■upreme,  gracious,  and  wise.     III.  As  a  picture  Of  future  doom  tO 

95 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAR  Y.   CHRONICLES, 


[OBAr.  XXI. 


all.  A  choice  for  us  to  make.  We  must  fall  into  God's  hands  by  voluntary 
submission  now,  or  by  compulsion  at  last.  Decide  to-day,  before  choice  is  taken 
away.     "Now,  therefore,  advise  thyself"  (ver.  12). 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AKD  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  2.  Know  it.  But  what  needs 
that,  now  that  there  was  a  general 
peace  or  truce  with  all  nations  ?  Curi- 
osity, it  was  at  least ;  yea,  it  was  pride 
and  creature  confidence  that  pricked 
David  on  to  this  numbering  of  the 
people,  and  made  him  so  peremptory. 
This  Augustus  Caesar  might  do  for  his 
pleasure,  and  carry  it  away  without 
punishment  (Luke  ii.  1).  Not  so 
David.  God  will  take  that  from 
others  what  he  will  not  bear  with  in  his 
own  (Amos  iii.  2).  The  Philistines 
might  cart  the  ark,  but  David  smarted 
for  so  doing  [Trapp\. 

Ver.  6.  The  interrupted  swrvey.  1. 
Joab  from  policy  did  not  number  all 
the  people.  The  work  grew  tedious, 
and  Joab  did  not  reUsh  it,  "  for  the 
king's  word  was  abominable  to  Joab." 
2.  But  GodJs  providence  seen  in  result. 
Other  agency  beside  man's  recognised. 
Two  tribes  not  numbered,  "  partly 
because  Levi  was  devoted  to  His 
service,  and  Benjamin  had  become  the 
least  of  all  tribes  (Judges  xxi.);  and 
partly  because  God  foresaw  that  they 
would  remain  faithful  to  the  house  of 
David  in  the  division  of  the  tribes, 
and  therefore  would  not  have  them 
diminished  "  [Jamieson^. 

'*  There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  our  eads, 
Rough-hew  them  how  we  will." 

Vers.  9, 10.  Gad  an  emblem  oj  a 
true  minister.  His  message  was — I. 
Divine.  So  is  the  gospel  message,  of 
which  there  is  evidence  drawn  from — 
1.  The  facts  of  history.  2.  Its  con- 
gruity  with  the  spiritual  constitution 
of  man.  3.  Experience  of  those  who 
feel  its  power.  II.  An  appeal  to 
choice:  *' Advise  thyself."  1.  You  can 
reject  it.  2.  You  can  accept  it.  III. 
Was  to  be  accounted  for :  **  What  word, 
<fec."  1.  Gad  was  responsible  for  its 
delivery.  2.  David  was  responsible  for 
its  results  \Bih.  Mum\ 
96 


Ver.  8.  Foolishly,  He  thought  at 
first  he  had  done  very  wisely ;  now  he 
seeth  his  error,  and  disclaimeth  it.  We 
had  before  his  contrition,  confession, 
and  supplication,  all  which  make  up 
his  repentance  for  sin ;  here  we  have 
his  conversion  or  reformation,  which  is 
his  repentance  from  sin,  his  amendment 
of  life  \Trapp\ 

Ver.  13.  Into  the  hand  of  the  Lord, 
The  reason  for  this  choice  was  partly 
his  confidence  in  God's  great  goodness ; 
partly  because  the  other  judgments, 
especially  the  sword,  would  have  been 
more  dishonourable,  not  only  to  David, 
but  also  to  God  and  his  people;  and 
partly  because  he,  having  sinned  him- 
self, thought  it  just  to  choose  a  plague, 
to  which  he  was  as  obnoxious  as  his 
people ;  whereas  he  had  better  defences 
for  himself  against  the  sword  and 
famine  than  they  had.  True,  it  is  a 
fearful  vhing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
tJie  living  God  I  Fearful  indeed  for 
those  who  have,  by  their  impenitence, 
shut  themselves  from  his  mercy.  But 
a  penitent  dares  cast  himself  into  God's 
hand,  knowing  that  his  mercies  are 
great  [Benson^.  The  compelled  choice 
of  punitive  infliction,  and  the  dread 
alternatives.  The  Divine  mercy  amid 
calamity.  There  is  here  a  Contrast 
between  Divine  and  Human  Chastise- 
ments. Strange  that  men,  who  are  so 
near  us,  should  be  less  trustworthy  than 
God,  who  is  unseen.  Men  treat  us 
worse,  God  better,  than  we  have  de- 
served. David's  preference  is  justified 
when  we  consider — 1.  The  harsh  judg- 
ments men  pronounce  on  each  other. 
2.  The  harsh  treatment  of  the  guilty 
who  are  in  men's  power.  3.  The 
absence  of  sympathetic  kindness  in 
human  warfare.  4.  That  when  God 
punishes  he  does  so  in  righteousness. 
5.  That  in  the  treatment  of  the  guUty 
God  always  shows  mercy.  The  lessons 
are— -1.  Submission  to  God.     2.  Hope- 


OHAP.  ml]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


ful    trust.       David! s   choice.       1.    The  tion  of  a  truth,  the  ground  of  hope,  and 

option  declined.     Had  too  much  of  his  the  testimony  of  experience.     (2)  Not 

own  will  already.  Refers  it  back  to  God  into   the   hand   of  man.     The    tender 

and  resigns  himself  into  his  hands.     2.  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel.     Trust 

What  are  the  reasons  for  this?     (1)  in  man    destroys  freedom,   dishonours 

''  Great  are  his  merciea**     The  declara-  character,  and  disappoints  hope. 

HOMILETIGS. 

David  and  Israel. — Verses  17-27. 

The  sad  circumstances  of  David  and  Israel.  David's  wisdom  in  giving  himself 
Into  the  hands  of  God.  God's  hand  is  safest  to  hold  the  rod — the  hand  of  a 
king,  master,  father.  I.  The  progressive  COUrse  of  sin.  1.  Tempta- 
tion (ver.  1).  Satan  the  black  fountain  of  all  transgress.  David  not  conscious 
that  Satan  was  so  near.  Insidiousness  of  Satanic  influence.  2.  Transgression 
(ver.  2).  In  face  of  warning  (ver.  3).  Its  desperate  folly  seen  by  others  (ver.  6). 
The  deadening,  hardening  power  of  any  lust.  3.  Punishment  (vers.  10-12).  As 
soon  wiU  the  magnet  escape  the  influence  of  the  pole,  the  sea  the  influence  of 
the  moon,  an  atom  the  binding  force  of  gravitation,  as  the  sinner  escape 
punishment.  '*  Be  sure  thy  sin."  II,  The  progressive  course  of 
reconciliation  with  God.  1.  The  messenger.  God's  afllictive  stroke  (ver. 
7).  The  prophet  Gad  (ver.  9).  Every  person  or  circumstance  that  reproves  is 
God's  messenger.  *'God  smote."  "  The  Lord  spake  to  Gad,  Go,  &c."  2.  Con- 
viction (ver.  8).  The  true  convict  always  confesses,  never  excuses.  Not  only 
owns  the  sin,  but  acknowledges  its  greatness.  Text.  "  It  is  I,  &c."  3.  Penitence 
(ver.  16).  "Sackcloth,"  emblem  of  deepest  grief;  "fell  upon  their  faces;" 
evidence  of  profound  humihation  and  utter  prostration  before  God.  4.  Accept- 
ance. Expressly  permitted  to  worship  (ver.  18).  Consciously  and  visibly 
accepted  in  worship  (ver.  26).  Delivered  from  the  dread  visitation.  5.  Grate- 
ful acknowledgment  (ver.  24).  Would  not  offer  costless  worship.  Would  not 
offer  cheap  worship — "  full  price."  We  are  to  be  living  sacrifices.  Ill, 
Underlying  truths.  1.  Though  man  he  tempted,  sin  is  his  own  act.  Satan 
suggested,  "provoked"  David,  yet  the  sin  was  David's.  He  might  have  had 
resisting  strength.  2.  Our  sins  affect  others.  How  many  widows  and  orphans! 
How  much  anguish  and  unutterable  misery  through  David's  sin !  Any  man's 
sins  are  a  widespread  and  far-reaching  curse.  Text.  David  sinned :  "  these 
sheep"  were  terribly  smitten.  3.  Though  sin  he  pardoned,  it  leaves  terrible  scars 
behind.  In  David's  memory.  Gaps  in  the  families  and  homes  of  the  people. 
Avoidance  of  sin  infinitely  better  than  pardon.  Christ  the  great  and  only  sin- 
healer.     O  Holy  Ghost,  draw,  <fec.  [R.  Berry], 

Thi  Angel  Abbested. — Verses  15-17. 

The  infliction  of  pestilence  briefly  noticed,  without  account  of  duration  or 
ravages ;  but  minute  description  of  visible  appearance  and  menacing  attitude  of 
the  angel.  Notice — I.  The  errand  of  the  angel  "  to  destroy  it."  Even 
angels  ready  executioners  of  God's  judgments.  Sodom  and  Jerusalem  ;  destruc- 
tion of  firstborn  in  Egypt  and  of  Sennacherib's  army.  Unseen  agents  often 
sent  within  sphere  of  things  seen,  to  impress  the  heart  through  the  senses  and 
convince  of  God's  ways.  But  Christ  came  not  to  destroy  men's  lives,  &c.  II. 
The  destiny  of  the  angel.     PestUence  had  swept  the  country,  now  sur- 

97 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xn. 


rounded  the  capital.  The  centre  of  glory  and  empire,  seat  of  the  palace  and 
the  ark  apparently  doomed  1  God  strikes  at  our  dearest  objects  to  chastise  our 
sins  and  bring  us  to  himself.  III.  The  attitude  of  the  angel.  "  A 
drawn  sword  in  his  hand.'*  Indicative  of  wrong  and  determination  to  punish  it. 
Giving  opportunity  to  intercede  for  the  city.  God  ready  to  punish,  yet  waits 
to  be  gracious.  This  attitude  warns,  yet  encourages.  I V".  The  commaild 
to  the  aug^el.  "  Enough."  God  knows  exactly  how  far  to  go,  how  much  is 
required  to  bring  us  to  submission.  "  Stay  now  thine  hand."  Prayer  has  been 
offered  and  the  design  accomplished.  "  The  Lord  repented  him  of  the  evil," 
changed  his  method  of  procedure  and  stayed  the  plague.  In  this  very  spot 
Abraham  countermanded  from  slaying  his  son.  For  the  sake  of  the  great 
Sacrifice  and  Intercessor  our  lives  are  preserved  from  destruction. 

The  Altar  Built  and  the  Plague  Stayed. —  Verses  14:-26. 

Here  a  national  calamity  traceable  to  David's  sin,  and  that  sin  apparently  of 
minor  magnitude.  But  what  evil  in  it  ?  It  was  the  result  of  pride  and  vain- 
glory, to  see  the  army  he  could  raise,  and  to  which  he  trusted  instead  of  God. 
It  was  ingratitude  for  past  deliverances,  &c.,  hence  the  wrath  of  God  kindled. 
David  soon  became  conscious  of  guilt.  A  prophet  sent  to  announce  God's  will, 
and  choice  had  to  be  made.  Observe — ^I.  A  fearful  evil.  The  evil — 1.  Was 
the  plague.  Some  fearful  disease,  swiftly  mortal ;  for  in  nine  hours,  at  most, 
some  think  70,000  died.  How  awful  I  and  beyond  the  power  of  human  skill  to 
deliver.  Sudden,  terrible,  fatal !  2.  An  angel  was  the  messenger  employed.  Now 
ready  to  fulfil  his  commission  in  Jerusalem,  but  God  stayed  him.  3.  David 
beheld  the  angel  and  interceded  for  the  people.  A  beautiful  instance  of  lofty,  con- 
scientious feeling.  Generous  and  magnanimous.  II,  The  divine  remedy. 
An  altar  must  be  built,  sacrifice  offei'ed,  (fee.  1.  Human  guilt  was  acknowledged. 
2.  God  was  glorified.  Both  his  justice  and  wrath  in  punishing,  and  his  great 
mercy  in  staying  his  judgments.  3.  No  doubt  the  typical  end  of  sacrifices  would 
be  realised.  Looking  on  to  the  coming  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  For  both  sin,  evil, 
and  remedy  may  direct  us  to  the  great  subject  of  atonement  for  a  perishing 
world.  Besides,  this  altar  finely  symbolizes  the  erection  of  houses  for  the 
worship  of  God.  For,  through  the  divine  agency  of  gospel  truth,  by  these  the 
plague  of  the  world  is  removed.  Ignorance  displaced  by  knowledge,  profligacy 
by  moral  order,  irreligion  by  godliness,  unbelief  and  death  by  bestowment  of 
salvation  and  eternal  life.  III.  A  generous  proposal.  Altar  to  be 
erected  at  a  given  spot.  Nothing  in  religion  left  to  fancy.  David  states  the 
case  clearly  to  Oman.  Then  came  the  proposal.  1.  This  offer  was  beyond  what 
David  stated.  "  I  give  thee  oxen,  <kc."  2.  It  was  prompt,  the  result  of  generous 
and  pious  resolution.  3.  It  was  pressed  on  David.  4.  It  was  followed  with  prayer 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  23).  How  pious  and  noble  !  A  finer  specimen  of  godly  liberality 
never  was  exhibited — the  act,  the  manner,  the  spirit,  the  prayer  I  I V .  A 
noble  and  self-sacrificing  spirit.  Oman  did  well.  David  did  better. 
Selfishness  or  formality  would  have  accepted  it.     David  desired  the  offering. 

1.  To  be  his  own.     The  guilt  had  been  his;  so  the  repentance,  so  the  fruit. 

2.  He  valued  his  religion  more  than  his  wealth.  So  he  paid  full  \/orth  for  the 
place.  This  act  of  David's  the  opposite  of  two  classes  in  our  day — (1)  Those 
who  wish  others  to  pay  for  their  religion ;  (2)  those  who  wish  to  have  religion 
witliout  cost.  Learn— 1.  The  frailty  of  good  men.  David  numbered  the  people. 
2.  The  necessary  results  of  sin — misery  and  ruin.  3.  The  only  way  of  averting 
it.  By  repentance,  coming  to  the  one  sacrifice  on  the  only  perpetual  altar  reared 
for  the  world's  guilt.  4.  The  fruit  of  a  sanctified  heart.  Holy  zeal  and  liberality 
in  the  cause  of  God  \J.  Burns,  D.D.^» 

98 


rau*.  XXI.]  aOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


The  Propitiation. — Verses  18-27, 

Taking  the  altar  and  sacrifice  as  means  of  propitiation  to  reconcile,  to  restore 
man  to  God,  we  have  an  illustration  of  the  atonement  of  Christ  in  its  design, 
method,  and  results.    I.  The  moral  condition  which  it  is  designed 

to  meet.  1.  Outward  difficulties.  Offence  committed  and  punishment  due. 
God's  anger  must  be  taken  away ;  his  justice  displayed.  Man  cannot  remove 
penalty,  dissolve  law,  nor  deliver  himself.  In  the  work  of  Christ  claims  of 
justice  satisfied,  obstacles  to  pardon  removed,  demands  of  moral  government 
met.  Jehovah  "a  just  God  and  a  Saviour."  2.  Inward  feelings.  Man's  guilt 
creates  fear  and  distance.  **  I  was  afraid  and  I  hid  myself."  "  He  was  afraid 
because  of  the  sword."  God's  love  in  Christ  represents  him  unrevengeful,  near 
and  ready  to  forgive.  The  Holy  Spirit  renews  the  disposition,  enlightens  the 
mind,  and  takes  away  fear.  Thus  distance  is  destroyed,  guilt  overcome,  and  God 
and  man  reconciled.  II.  The  provision  made  for  this  condition. 
With  the  distinct  understanding  that  we  simply  glance  at  one  aspect  of  this  pro- 
found subject,  we  assert  that  to  make  atonement  for  sin  required  great  cost.  Not 
*'  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,"  not  "  by  gold  and  silver  "  are  we  redeemed, 
but  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  Christ  himself  was  the  sacrifice.  Scrip- 
ture and  history  rich  in  examples  of  benevolence  and  self-sacrifice ;  none  like 
this.  The  gift  of  God's  beloved  Son  more  costly  than  worlds  upon  worlds ; 
inestimable,  incomprehensive.  "  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift." 
III.  The  results  which  it  accomplished.  1.  Danger  warded  off^.  When 
David  repented  of  sin,  God  repented  of  judgment ;  plague  arrested ;  destroy- 
ing angel  commanded  to  stay  his  hand  (ver.  15)  and  sheath  his  sword  (ver.  27). 
2.  Sacrifices  accepted,  "  God  answered  from  heaven  by  fire "  (ver.  26),  to 
signify  that  anger  was  turned  away  and  God  propitious.  *'  So  the  Lord  was 
entreated  for  the  land,  and  the  plague  was  stayed  from  Israel."  This  typical 
of  the  sinner's  reconciliation  and  acceptance  with  God  through  Christ.  "He 
(himself)  is  the  propitiation  (propitiatory  sacrifice)  for  our  sins ;  and  not  for 
ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  "  (1  Jno  ii.  2). 


The  Cost  and  Selp-Sacripiob  op  Religion. — Verses  22-26. 

Sacrifice  was  to  be  presented  ;  specific  directions  were  given.  David  promptly 
obeyed.  A  generous  scene  of  altercation  takes  place.  A  pious  and  self-sacrificing 
decision  expressed  by  David.  Acceptable  religion  is  a  religion  of  self-sacrifice — 
a  reUgion  of  cost ;  and  the  cost  must  be  personally  paid.  In  illustration  of  this, 
contemplate  the  subject.  I.  In  reference  to  the  spiritual  expansion 
of  the  intellectual  powers.  Theology,  the  divine  science  of  religion, 
one  of  boundless  extent.  The  greatness,  number,  variety,  and  importance  of 
the  subjects.  God — his  works,  his  government,  his  will.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ---the  gospel,  eternal  life.  To  understand  there  must  be  reading,  study, 
reflection.  A  course  of  divine  training — religious  education.  We  may  be 
Christians  without  much  knowledge,  but  our  honour,  glory,  felicity,  to  abound 
in  knowledge.  The  cost  must  be  paid,  in  the  attainment.  The  astronomer  pays 
it,  the  man  of  literature,  so  the  Christian.  II.  Apply  the  subject  tO 
the  spiritual  cultivation  of  the  moral  nature.  The  soul  before 
conversion  like  a  barren  heath,  or  desert,  arid,  &c.  It  must  be  cultivated, 
ploughed,  sown,  tilled.  Much  labour  needful.  Evil  habits  to  be  abandoned. 
Holy  habits  to  be  formed.  Virtues  to  be  grafted  in ;  graces  to  be  cherished. 
Hence  duties,  toils,  and  spiritual  efibrts  necessary.  Hence  the  exhortations, 
"Be   diligent,  <fcc./*   "Work  out  your  salvation,  <fcc."     Apply  the   subject — 

99 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxi. 


III.  To  the  influence  of  self-denial  in  adorning  the  Chris- 
tian profession.  Self-denial  not  the  abandonment  of  sin,  <fec.,  but  sur- 
rendering even  of  what  might  be  lawfully  retained.  Hence  the  case  of  eating 
flesh,  <fec.,  as  given  by  the  apostle  (Rom.  xiv.  1).  Now  our  habits,  costume, 
conversation,  spirit,  must  all  be  sacrificed,  if  God's  glory  and  the  good  of  others 
demand  it.     Our  will  sacrificed  that  God's  may  be  done.     Apply  the  subject — 

IV.  To  the  importance  of  usefulness  in  the  cause  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  one  great  end  of  conversion.  "  I  will  blesa 
thee  and  make  thee  a  blessing,  &c"  First,  the  heart  must  be  given  to  Christ ; 
then  life,  talents,  influence,  time,  wealth.  If  we  will  be  useful,  the  cost  must 
be  paid;  the  law  of  self-sacrifice  must  rule  us;  ease,  sordidness,  <fec.,  must  be  cast 
off.  "  Brethren,  I  beseech  you,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  <fec."  These  cases  illus- 
trate the  subject.  But  I  give  additional  thoughts.  Not  only  must  the  cost  be 
paid,  but  paid  (1)  In  the  right  spirit.  Not  the  spirit  of  ostentation  for  display ; 
of  self-righteousness  for  merit ;  of  backwardness  and  grudgingly ;  but  in  humble, 
cheerful  love  to  Christ.  Felt  to  be  a  privilege  as  well  as  a  duty.  Need  no  force 
nor  threatening.  Not  the  whip,  but  the  curb.  As  David  in  the  text.  **  Freely 
we  have  received,  <fec."     In  the  language  of  the  poet — 

**  Had  I  a  thousand  hearts  to  give, 
Lord,  they  should  all  be  thine." 

(2)  Observe,  this  cost  paid  in  religion,  is  not  equal  to  the  demands  of  sin.  Look 
at  the  sacrifice,  the  worldly,  the  proud,  the  sensual  make.  What  money  I  what 
time  1  what  energies  !  What  peace  I  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,  and 
the  end  ruin.  (3)  To  pay  this  cost  in  the  service  of  Christ,  grace  is  both  neces- 
sary and  provided.  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing."  "  My  grace  is  suf- 
ficient, (fee."  Grace  must  inspire  the  desire,  purpose,  and  motive — give  the 
ability  and  elasticity.  The  grace  of  God  is  provided  abundantly.  It  was  found 
so  by  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Daniel,  Paul.  Our  subject,  then,  should— 
1 .  Lead  to  examination.  What  has  religion  done  for  us  ?  What  have  we  done 
for  it  ?  What  has  it  cost  us  ?  Have  you  the  inward  sense  of  God's  full  favour  ? 
Have  you  the  testimony  that  you  please  God  ?  2.  It  condemns  two  classes  oj 
persons.  Those  who  wish  others  to  pay  for  their  religion,  and  those  who  wish  to 
have  a  costless  religion.  Not  so  David.  Forget  not — 3.  That  true  religion  is  its 
own  present  reward.  Peace,  hope,  and  joy,  now ;  hereafter,  the  glories  of  a 
blissful  eternity.  Let  the  spirit  of  the  text  ever  dwell  in  you.  4.  Address  the 
sinner.  Who  is  indifferent  to  religion  altogether.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto 
all  things,  (kc."     \J.  BwrnSy  D.D\ 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  14-17.    I.  Judgments  follow-  ence.     2.  David's  willingness  to  suffer 

ing  sin.     This  a    necessary,   natural,  alone.     3.  David's  intercession  for  the 

and  certain  sequence.     II.  Judgments  people.      "  Most    people,   when   judg- 

mixed  with  mercy.      1.  Shortened   in  ments  are  abroad,  charge  others  with 

duration.      2.  Ending   in    correction,  being  the  cause  of  them,  so  they  can 

"  Mercy  rejoices  over  judgment.    ( 1 )  The  escape ;  but  David's  penitent  and  public 

penitent   man  casts  himself    into   the  spirit  was  otherwise  affected.     As  be- 

arms  of  God's  mercy ;  (2)  Mercy  falls  came  a  penitent  he  is  severe  upon  his 

into  the  arms  of  justice,  in   order  to  own  faults,  while  he  extenuates  those 

stay  its  blows ;  punitive  justice  must  of  the  people  and  intercedej=  for  them." 

yield  to  mercy  at  the  command  of  the  Ver.    24.     Full    price.     Apply     to 

Lord.      *  It  is  enough  :  stay  now  thy  ministers  and  Sunday-schoolteachers  in 

hand ' "  [Lange\.  preparation  for  pulpit  and  class. 

Vers.  16-20.  1.  David's  ready  obedi-  Vers.  22-27.  I.  The  altar  purchased. 
100 


CHAP.  XXI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CUROjSllCLES. 


(1)  By  divine  instructions.  Concerning  tinual  preservation  of  spiritual  offer- 
place,  person,  and  purpose.  (2)  By  ings,  which  are  acceptable  to  the 
honourable  transaction.  In  spirit  of  Lord ;  and  (4)  For  the  reception  of 
courtesy,  generosity,  and  self-sacrifice,  the  highest  gift  of  grace,  peace  with 
II.  The  altar  accepted.  Acceptance  by  the  propitiated  God  "  [Lange\  Chap, 
fire,  and  hallowed  by  tokens  of  God's  xxi.  1.  David's  sin.  2.  David's  self- 
presence.  III.  The  altar  perpetuated,  reproach,  penitence,  and  confession. 
Partly  to  meet  David's  fears,  also  to  3.  David's  punishment.  4.  David's 
fulfil  God's  purpose.  Reverence  for  supplication  and  expiatory  offering. 
Divine  Being  led  him  to  stay  at  the  5.  David's  forgiveness  and  restoration, 
place,  to  make  additional  offerings  and  How  God  meets  the  'presumptiumsness  oj 
seek  favour  by  earnest  prayer.  God  his  favoured  ones.  (1)  He  comes  upon 
was  gracious,  approved  and  sanctioned,  them  with  the  edge  of  the  sword ; 
Mount  Moriah  became  a  place  of  lawful  (2)  His  sword  is  not  to  kill,  but  to 
and  continual  sacrifice.  ^^  Rear  an  altar  loose  the  chains  of  pride;  (3)  Where 
wnto  the  Lord  I  (1)  In  obedience  to  the  sword  of  the  Lord  has  done  its 
the  Lord's  command ;  (2)  With  dedi-  work,  there  he  builds  his  temple  of 
cation  of  thyself,  and  what  is  thine,  to  peace  [/.  Disselhoff]. 
the  Lord's  honour;  (3)  For  the  con- 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXI. 

Ver.  2.     The  number.    This  attempt  the  Lord  our  God ;  none  so  wise,  so 

to  take  the  census  was  not  unnaturally  mighty,  so  good  ;  no  enemy  so  formid- 

suggested  by  the  increase  of  his  power,  able,  no  friend  so  desirable,  so  valuable 

but  it  implied  a  confidence  and  pride  \Mt.  Henry].     O  God,  I  have  made  an 

akin  to   the  spirit  inculcated  on  the  Hi  use  of   thy  mercies,  if  I  have  not 

kings    of    the    chosen    people    [Dean  learnt  to  be  content  with  thy  correc- 

Stanley],  tions  [Bp.  Hall].     How  sweetly  doth 

Ver.  4.   King's  word  prevailed.  Wis-  God  dispose  of  all  second  causes,  that 

dom  is  gotten  by  hearkening  to  good  while  they  do  their  own  will  they  do 

counsel,  for  none  are  born  so  naturally  his  [Ibid.]. 

(Job  xi.  12).  *'  Many  had  proved  wise  Vers.  24-27.  Full  price.  A  bargain 
if  they  had  not  thought  themselves  is  sometimes  as  unmerciful  as  a  robbery 
so "  [Bp.  Hall].  There  cannot  be  a  [j^icholls].  Kindness  will  dictate  much 
more  worthy  improvement  of  friend-  in  carrying  on  business  which  law  can- 
ship  than  in  a  fervent  opposition  to  not  take  cognizance  of.  It  will  preserve 
the  sins  of  those  we  love  [/6zc?.].  from  the  wretched  practice  of  exclusive 

Vers.  9-15.  Pwnishment.  He  that  dealing,  of  punishing  a  man  for  his  re- 
would  be  safe  from  the  acts  of  evil  ligion  or  politics  by  withholding  custom; 
must  wisely  avoid  the  occasions  [Bp.  of  making  commerce  the  instrument  of 
Hall].  How  hard  a  master  he  serves  bigotry  and  exclusiveness,  a  practice 
where  the  devil  gives  the  employment,  which  all  condemn  when  they  suffer 
and  shame  is  his  entertainment,  and  from  it,  and  all  approve  when  they  are 
sin  is  his  work,  and  hell  is  his  wages  advantaged  by  it.  It  will  teach  us  to 
[Bp.  J.  Taylor].  "  Sinners  labour  in  give  a  tender  consideration  to  the  cases 
the  very  fire."  of  others,  to  treat  inferiors  with  cour- 

Ver.  7.     God  was  displeased,  tesy  and  gentleness,  to  pay  respect  to 

••  But  Providence  will  intervene  those  whose  circumstances  make  them 

To  throw  His  dark  displeasure  o'er  th«  apt  to  suspect  unkindness,  not  to  make 

scene"  [C/oifptfr],  a  vigorous  exaction  of  mere  rights,  to 

Ver.  17.      Plagued.     The   great  de-  allow  for  unavoidable  causes,  and  by 

sign,  both  in  judgment  and  mercies,  is  studious  car©  smooth  the  path  of  honest 

to  convince  us  that  there  is  none  like  poverty  [A.  J.  Morris]. 

101 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [ohap.  xxii. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Cbitioal  Notes.]  The  remaining  chapters  of  this  book  are  peculiar  to  the  ohronist. 
They  narrate  the  arrangements  of  David  for  the  building  of  the  temple,  his  religious 
and  political  regulations,  and  his  last  will  and  death  [Murphy^.  This  chapter,  which 
consists  entirely  of  new  matter,  helps  to  fill  up  the  gap  which  had  been  left  by  the 
earlier  authors  between  2  Sam.  xxiv.  and  1  Kings  i.  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Vers.  1-5. — Preparations  fo?'  the  Temple.  This,  the  spot  on  which  the  altar  was  built,  he 
regards  as  the  site  of  the  temple.  Ver.  2.  Strangers,  non-Israelites,  descendants  of  old 
Canaanites,  war  captives  from  whom  exacted  a  tribute  of  bond-service  (2  Chron.  viii.  7-10), 
and  war  captives  (2  Chron.  ii.  7)  reserved  for  the  great  work  contemplated  [Jaride-ion]. 
Masons,  stone-cutters.  Ver.  3.  Joinings,  braces  or  brackets  for  binding  wood  or  stone. 
Ver.  4.  Zidon,  abounded  in  timber  merchants  and  navigators  {cf.  1  Kings  v.  1,  15-18 ; 
2  Chron.  ii.  16).  Ver.  5.  Tender,  exact  age  unknown.  ''  It  cannot  have  been  more  than 
24  or  25.    It  may  have  been  as  little  as  14  or  15  "  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Ve7's.  6-16. — Charge  to  Solomon.  Ver.  6.  Called,  a  short  time  before  his  death  to  give 
him  special  instructions.  Ver.  7.  Mind,  heart  (2  Sam.  vii.  1-17).  Ver.  8.  Blood.  This 
referred  to  in  ch.  xxviii.  3  and  1  Kings  v.  17,  though  not  in  same  terms.  Nathan's  mes- 
sage (ch.  xvii.  4-14)  assigned  no  ground  for  prohibition.  In  form  of  command  here  and 
the  first  intimation  of  reason  why  David  must  not  build.  Oa  character  of  David's  wars, 
cf.  2  Sam.  viii.  2,  x.  18,  xii.  31 ;  1  Kings  xi.  16.  Sol,  "  had  two  names— viz.,  Solomon, 
'peaceful,'  and  Jedidiah,  'beloved  of  Jehovah'  (2  Sam.  xii  25).  The  former  name 
prevailed  on  account  of  this  prophecy,  which  attached  to  the  name  the  promise  of  a 
blessing"  [Speak.  Com.].  Give  peace  (I  Kings  iv.  20-23,  v.  4).  Ver.  10.  Son  in  peculiar  and 
special  manner.  Ver.  11.  Prosper,  literally  "  The  Lord  shall  be  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
prosper.  But  future  may  have  an  imperative  sense '^  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  12.  Wisdom 
{cf.  Ps.  Ixxii.  1 ;  Sol.'s  prayer,  1  Kings  iii,  5-15).  Ver.  13.  Strong,  words  which  are  found  in 
Deut.  iv.  1,  V.  1,  vii.  4,  xi.  32,  xxxi.  6;  Josh,  i.  7.  Ver.  14.  Trouble,  poverty.  "By  my 
strenuous  labour,  according  to  Gen.  xxxi.  42 ;  see  the  precisely  similar  expression  (ch. 
xxix.  2),  I  have  prepared  with  all  my  might"  [Keil].  Talenta,  taking  usual  idea  of 
talent,  this  would  be  more  than  eighty  millions  sterling.  Either  the  talent  of  smaller 
value  or  text  corrupted.  "  The  latter  is  certainly  the  more  probable  supposition  " 
I  Speak  Com.].  Ver.  15.  Cunning,  i.e.,  skilful,  serfs  of  ancient  kingdoms  very  numerous 
(cf.  2  Chron.  ii.  17). 

Vers.  17-19. —  Charge  to  Princes.  Members  of  court,  including  other  sons  of  David. 
Ver.  18.  Beasons  for  liberality  in  giving.  Ver.  19.  Sett  make  this  your  purpose  and 
effozt  I  holy  yessels  used  in  tabernacle  service. 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Building  op  the  Temple. —  Verses  1-5. 

This  chapter  and  the  seven  which  follow  are  supplementaiy  to  the  Second  Book 
of  Samuel,  and  f i  1  up  the  space  between  the  end  of  that  Book  and  the  beginning 
of  the  First  Book  of  Kings.  Pieparations  for  building  going  on  for  twenty-five 
or  thirty  years.  In  times  of  war  and  domestic  affliction,  David  accumulated 
treasure  and  materials  to  be  handed  over  to  his  successor. 

I.  The  work  for  which  he  prepared.    "This  is  house  of  the  Lord 

God."  Its  building  '*  exceeding  magnifical."  1.  In  the  costliness  of  its  materials. 
Iron  and  brass,  timber  and  stone,  gold  and  silver.  In  the  spiiitual  temple  the 
materials  are  human  beings,  intellectual  and  immortal  spirits.  The  preparation 
and  forming  of  these  materials  into  a  temple  for  God  includes  the  calling,  regen- 
eration, and  consecration  of  men  in  Christ,  "in  whom  all  the  building,  fitly 
framed  (exactly  fitted)  together,  groweth  into  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord  '* 
(Eph.  ii.  20).  2.  In  the  grcmdeur  of  its  design.  Not  for  earthly  and  inferior 
102 


CHIP,  xxn.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


objects.  (1)  For  the  honour  of  the  great  God,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth. 
"Build  an  house  for  the  Lord  God."  (2)  For  the  benefit  of  men.  "  Of  fame  and 
of  glory  throughout  all  countries."  Reminding  men  of  God's  existence  and 
claims  ;  the  centre  of  light  and  purity,  bringing  heaven  down  to  earth,  and 
securing  the  triumphs  and  praise  of  redeeming  grace.  II.  Tlie  incentives 
to  the  performance  of  this  work.  There  are  many.  1.  Consider  the 
greatness  of  the  work.  More  than  the  erection  of  a  palace,  the  building  of  a 
city,  the  founding  of  an  empire.  A  work  agreeing  with  youth  and  age  ;  affords 
scope  for  ambition,  enthusiasm,  and  skill.  2.  Divine  instructions  are  given  to  its 
pei'formance.  God  revealed  the  site,  the  plan,  the  ornaments,  and  all  the 
arrangements  for  service.  When  way  is  known,  walk  in  it.  Knowledge  given 
to  practice.  3.  Good  examiple  inspires.  ''Precepts  teach,  but  examples  draw." 
Man  a  creature  of  imitation  by  education  and  habit,  A  noble  example  interests, 
rouses  attention,  and  stimulates  to  action.  Illustrates  the  possibility  and  the 
manner  of  doing  what  is  enjoined.  David  set  a  noble  example.  4.  The  circum- 
stances of  others  should  influence  us.  "  Solomon  is  young  and  tender."  Others 
may  not  be  situated,  prepared,  blessed  as  we  are,  may  be  weak,  aged,  and  helpless. 
Consider  the  wants  of  the  Church — men,  money,  and  materials  ;  the  wants  of  the 
rising  generation — good  examples,  education,  and  sympathy  ;  the  wants  of  the 
world — temples.  Bibles,  and  missionaries.  Care  for  the  future,  and  if  you  cannot 
build,  gather  materials. 

Preparation  for  the  Work  of  God. — Verses  1-5. 

This  needful,  urgent,  and  within  the  reach  of  all.  I.  By  personal  effort. 
David  earnest,  patient,  and  persevering ;  getting  ready  in  prosperity  and 
adversity.  Warned  by  shortness  of  time,  infirmity,  and  approaching  end, 
"  prepared  abundantly  before  his  death."  II.  By  initiation  of  the  work.  Gat  ler 
materials,  begin  or  enter  some  work  for  God.  Forethought  is  the  best  security 
against  waste,  idleness,  and  failure.  An  unfurnished  minister,  scholar,  or  church 
member  cannot  be  "  a  wise  master-builder."  "  Prepare  thy  work  without,  and 
make  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the  field,  and  afterwards  build  thine  house."  III.  By 
employment  of  willing  helpers.  "  Strangers "  gathered  together  and  enlisted  in 
the  service.  Aliens  (the  non-Israelite  population)  hewed  wood,  carried  burdens, 
(fcc.  Often  questioned  whether  help  for  building  sanctuaries,  supporting  and 
maintaining  religious  institutions  and  worship,  should  be  received  from  ungodly. 
But  God  urges  every  one  to  surrender  to  him.  All  our  possessions  are  God's,  and 
should  be  consecrated  to  him.  Some  are  willing,  others  may  be  induced.  Only 
cherish  a  liberal,  kindly  feeling,  and  they  "  shall  be  his  servants,  that  they  may 
know  his  service,  and  the  service  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  countries." 

"  All  the  means  of  action— 
The  shapeless  masses,  the  materials, 
Lie  everywhere  about  us.     What  we  need 
Is  the  celestial  fire  to  change  the  flint 
Into  transparent  crystal,  bright  and  clear  "  [Lon^/ciZotp]. 

David's  Charge  to  Solomon. — Verses  6-16. 

Something  more  than  dead  materials  required.  Gold  and  silver  nothing 
without  willing  hearts  and  active  hands.  David  would  gladly  have  done  the 
work,  but  forbidden.  Gives  a  touching  and  direct  charge  to  incite  Solomon  to 
build.  Learn — I.  That  some  originate  a  good  "work,  but  are 
UOt  permitted  to  execute  it.      David  himself  gives  a  special   reason 

103 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  CBRONICLES.  [ohap.  xxii. 


left  behind.  Present  a^t,  ^»t  •  a  " '.  ^"^  "^^^  ^  forgiven,  but  a  stain 
decide  the  lot  that  .houMLluLT'/"*u™  ''^^^^^'  tinder  holy  work, 

will  ever  deprive^Vftri  Pa^'^ht  t 'Yi  "  Thrt  tt^^'r^'^H^^ 
caUed  to  execute  work  whinh  t w  il'  ^*  others  may  be 
prepared,  and  Solomon  uld^he  mSs  " ?^n^  ''^'l.°''T^**«<^-  ^""^'^ 
and  thus  the  work  is  cflVrieH  L  .    J  j-  ?  ®  ^?'^®*''  ^""^  another  reapeth," 

sphere  appo^d  to  dtT  m»f  f.  -^'^'^^  Z'^''-  A  work  for  us,  and  a 
Christian^^etf^rt  no  man's  Ufel^lalr^n  '"^^'''  '''^T^S,  or  end?  No 
Ufe's  purpose  is  unfolded  1  TO™"  •  ^,'^,«"™"'idmgs  and  duties  our 
shall  build  an  house  "  OvrufZiT  F'"^^^^  de^naUd  for  the  work.  "  He 
captives  free  (Is  ^v.  28  "^v  T  2  ^IT/'  *v'°  "^"^'^  ^''^^' ^-<^  «et 
Solomon  had  rest  from  enemiel'  «h  t;  ^f  "'^  ""^^^^^  «™  ?»''«»  <Aem  to  work. 
his  days      Where  oS  t^t^    '       .      ?^' ,  ^"•'°y®"^      P^^'^e  ^"d  quietness  "  in 

If  not^done  in  time  and  fCl  mTt"k  ^  't""'  '^"''-  ^'^'^'^^  ''^  '^P^''*^  --k. 
knoweth  whether  thou  Ct  ^om^tn  If  IT'  °^.^''"'''  *°  '^"°*^'^'--  "  Who 
III.  That    ^h^nlc^J    A       *t!  l^ingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this?" 

them  to  do  "A  ^  i?**'  .*^®y  should  finish  the  work  ffiven 
«xiem  to  ao.  "Arise,  therefore,  and  be  doins-"  /v^r  ifi\  i  ^f  siven 
urgent.  "Arise,  <fec."  We  are  anftn  f»li;t*^.u  ^^  ■*"<•.  ^-  ^^^^  work  u 
ness-to  be  absorbed  bv  e!.,^W  »!.  "'*°  ^P''*''^'  f°™aJism,  and  forgetful- 

holy  zeal,  inte^c^nce^l^iLT«;. "''  '"'f^'°"f  ^^  temptation.  Awfke  to 
Need  of  men  anrmonev  satlfi^^  'Ttf'^'''"''-.  ^-  ^od  ha, promised  help. 
shoulders  and  a^SvehXdTbTm^hilli'"*'  ^!.^  "'",1"''"*  *°"^e^'  ^^^oad 
Do  we  rely  upon  this  ?     Ar«  w«  T        I,'  "^'^  ^'-'"'^  *''*''  ''"'  *h«  lord's  presence. 

Lord  be  ithXe^.'^nd  p^er  thee?  t!^  (tTTfr'  '"'"'  '°^  *'^'    "  ^''^ 
BOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

noSe  'type^"5 V^'ca^LT*:?- tht  k''-^^'-  ^I.ffis  great  work  wa.  the 
Gentiles ;  ?nd  the  See  weX  iy  o?  ofthrl  r^*^;^'"^'^  \  '°  "  *'^^  ""^"^ 
the  temples  being  buOt  on  the^g?^und  v  ,  fo  ^^^"H- 
of  aJebusite.andbythehelpofTyrians  ^^^^s- ^1-13.  A  father's  prayer  for 
and  Zidonians,  and  adorned  with  the  ;  — '  ^'^^  possession  of  moral 
spoils  of  divers  nations  rchan  xviii  ^  ?«<««<«««•  1-  "  Wisdom  and  understand- 
[Trapp].  ^  ^'  -*  ^"^-  Parents  should  be  anxious  for  the 
Ver.  3.  Prepared.  Many  parents  e^"^''*'""  ^'^^  reUgious  welfare  of 
prepare  guat  in  abundance,  hoards  and  "'^"^f®"-  Inheritance,  wealth,  and 
heaps  of  evil-gotten  goods— and  there-  5°  °°  nothing  without  this.  Wis- 
withal  God's  curse— to  spend  on  their  ^  w°j®®  *°  t"'""  "^^  *"  g""''  account, 
lusts,  &c.  As  for  pious  and  charitable  *  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing ;  there- 
uses,  they  cry  out  with  Judas,  Whereto  *°^t-^      wisdom;    and   with    all  thy 

is  this  waste  2  [Ibid]  getting  get  understanding."  2.  Strength 

Ver.   5.      Magnifcal.     The    second  T'^  "^f"'  courage.     "  Be  strong  and 

temple  was  notMng  like  it,  thoueh  the  /  ,       '^"'"'^ge-       ^er.  13.  Enemies 

glory  of  it  was  greater  (Hag   U)  by  *'^'^.  <*'^ngers  cause   "dread."     In  pos- 

the  presence  and  preachins  of  Jesus  ^??.™"  °^  ^ound  wisdom  and  in  vital 

Christ  in  it  [76id.].  alhanee  with  God  we  are  perfectly  safe. 

Ver.  9.     A  son  predicted.     I.  Son  of  ^^^  without  understanding  and  cour- 

David ;  so  was  Christ.     II.  A  man  of  *^®'  °"*  °^  P'***^*'  ^^'^'^  *"*^  useless. 

rest ;  so  was  Christ.      IIL  The  giver 

of  peace ;  so  was  Christ.     IV.  He  had  "  ^®*  '"''  *®   world   see   fear   and   sad 

a  significant  name  ;  so  has  Jesus  Christ  n  ™'^'™*'' 

V.    He    was    a    giorioua    J^^^  I  Gov^n  the  motion  of  a  kingly  eye"  [.9ftai.. 


CHAP.  XXII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES. 


II.  For  the  presence  of  God.  "The  children  in  every  pursuit,  possession  of 
Lord  be  with  thee."  A  petition  often  influence  and  authority,  "  charge  over 
repeated,  too  Kttle  understood ;  needful  Israel."  This  often  selfish,  without 
and  appropriate  to  all  times,  under-  reverent  regard  for  the  Lord's  will, 
takings,  and  places ;  the  wish  of  every  Be  anxious  for  moral  integrity  and 
good  father,  and  the  prayer  of  every  loyal  obedience  of  youth.  No  pro- 
true  Christian  for  an  earnest  worker,  sperity  without  obedience  to  "  the  law 
**Be  strong  and  of  good  courage;  be  of  the  Lord"  and  regard  for  his  will, 
not  afraid,  neither  be  thou  dismayed,  "  Then  shalt  thou  prosper,  if  thou 
for  the  Lord  thy  God  is  with  thee  takest  heed  to  fulfil  the  statutes,  &c." 
whithersoever  thou  goest."  III.  For  „  .rj^^^  ^^^  ^^  mortals  to  command  success, 
successful  undertaking.  "Prosper  thou  But  we'll  do  more,  Sempronius;  we'll 
and  build."  All  parents  wish  success  to  deserve  it." 


HOMILETIGS. 

Conditions  op  Successful  Effort. — Verses  11-13. 

Time  procured  by  our  labours  or  help  of  others  most  profitably  spent  in  God's 
service,  utilising  the  preparations,  improving  the  advantages,  and  carrying  on 
the  work  of  predecessors.  But  success  only  on  certain  conditions.  I.  Personal 
fitness.  There  must  be  ability,  power,  capacity,  physical,  intellectual,  and 
moral.  1 .  Wisdom  to  direct.  "  Wisdom  and  understanding."  Not  woi'ldly 
poHcy,  human  education,  "earthly  wisdom;"  but  "wisdom  from  above" 
(Jas.  iii.  15-17),  that  "wisdom  profitable  to  direct"  (Ecc.  x.  10).  2.  Strength 
to  work.  Weakness,  distrust,  and  hesitancy  certain  to  fail.  "  Fortune  favours 
the  brave."  "  Woe  unto  him  that  is  faint-hearted,"  says  the  son  of  Sirach. 
There  must  be  no  unfitness  in  act,  heart,  or  capacity.  II.  God's  presence 
to  help  in  its  prosecution.  The  word  only  (ver.  12)  most  suggestive, 
indicates  entire  failure  without  this.  Skilful  workmen,  wise  diplomatists,  useful 
materials  for  work,  may  be  needful,  but  divine  help  can  never  be  dispensed  with. 
The  wisdom,  the  royal  influence,  and  the  powerful  rule  of  Solomon  not  sufficient. 
"The  Lord  was  with  Joseph,  and  he  was  a  prosperous  man."  III.  LiOyal 
obedience  to  God.  "  Keep  the  law  of  the  Lord."  Success  in  departments 
of  nature  gained  by  submission  to  matter  and  co-operation  with  its  laws.  Our 
strength  lies  in  "keeping  the  law."  The  throne  of  kings,  the  business  of 
merchants,  the  prosperity  of  churches,  established  by  obedience.  "  Observe  to 
do  according  to  all  that  is  written  therein ;  for  then  thou  shalt  make  thy  way 
prosperous,  and  then  thou  shalt  have  good  success."  . 

The  Earnest  Appeal. —  Fer«e«  17-19. 

Princes  urged  to  help,  to  consecrate  themselves  first,  for  this  the  foundation  of 
zeal;  then  reasons  given  for  liberality  in  the  work.  This  earnest  appeal 
suggests — I.    That   God  has  a   temple   to  build  among   men. 

"  Bmld  ye  the  sanctuary."  1.  A  sanctuary  to  he  built.  Not  by  earthly  materials, 
but  by  "Hvely  (living)  stones"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  A  spiritual  temple,  a  Christian 
church,  as  well  as  a  material  palace.  2.  A  sanctuary  to  be  furnished.  "  Bring 
the  ark  and  the  holy  vessels."  Furnished  not  with  pompous  ceremonies  and 
burning  tapers,  but  with  moral  beauty,  appropriate  rites,  spiritual  songs,  devout 
attendants,  and  the  presence  of  God.  This  the  work  of  Solomon  on  the  throne, 
courtiers  in  the  palace,  and  people  in  the  cottage.     Gather  your  materials,  and 

105 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxii. 


offer  your  gold  and  silver;  give  yourselves,  and  resolve  "  to  help."  II.  That 
to  this  "work  the  Christian  Church  is  called.  Not  privileged  to 
help  in  rearing  the  first  or  second  temple,  but  earnestly  called  to  this  work. 
1.  Galled  hy  favourable  circumstances.  Land  taken,  inhabitants  overcome,  and 
rest  given.  Hindrances  moved,  and  opportunities  many.  2.  Galled  hy  the  will 
of  God,  Expressed  in  his  word,  by  his  servants,  and  by  everything  around 
us.  3.  Galled  hy  the  urgency  of  the  work.  *'  Arise,  therefore,  and  be  doing." 
Now  is  the  time.  Delay  risky  to  yourselves  and  others.  It  is  sinful 
in  itself,  and  an  evil  example  to  others.  Ill,  That  a  spirit  of 
active  zeal  should  characterise  the  prosecution  of  this 
work.  This  designed  by  God  in  bestowment  of  gifts  and  arrangements 
of  providence.  *^  Now"  because  this  done  for  you,  "  arz^e,  therefore."  1.  The 
heart  should  he  fixed  on  it.  Not  the  work  of  accident  nor  compulsion.  Must  be 
your  choice  and  purpose.  Energy,  aim,  and  sympathy  must  be  roused  and  fixed. 
Everything  within  us  '■'■  setr  2.  Active  excitement  must  he  associated  with 
constant  lahour.  Apt  to  fall  into  a  state  of  apathy  and  formalism.  Nothing  can 
overcome  indolence,  temptation,  and  neglect  but  holy  love,  heavenly  excitement, 
and  burning  zeal.  The  Church  must  awake  to  a  lively,  intense  concern,  to  adopt, 
carry  out  every  plan,  and  become  a  diligent,  faithful,  and  woiking  Church. 
Listen  to  the  call,  and  remember  the  promise  of  God.  Answer  every  foe  with 
Nehemiah  :  "  The  God  of  heaven,  he  will  prosper  us ;  therefore  we  his  servants 
will  arise  and  build." 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  12.     The  qualifications  needed.  1.  The  great  object  of  our  life,     2.   In 

The  source  from  whence  they   come,  what  way  we  are  to  prosecute  it.    And 

The  design  for  which  they  are  given,  now  (1)  Avail  yourselves  of  the  oppor- 

Keep  the  law  of  the  Lord  thy  God.     1.  tunities  afforded  for  public  usefulness  ; 

God's  will  is  a  law.     Not  an  opinion,  (2)    Begin  with  a  surrender  of  your 

creed,    or    counsel.     Something     laid  whole  souls  to  God  \G.  Simeon,  M.A  ]. 

down,   revealed,    with    authority   and  The  Important  Search.     I.    The  object 

pubhcity.     2.  This  law  should  he  kept,  searched.     "  The  Lord  your  God."    An 

**  That  thou  mayest  keep  the  law."  Not  object  supremely  gi-eat    and   glorious, 

given  for  mere  study,  information,  or  the  perfection  of  all  beings,  the  foun- 

speculation,  but  for  practice    in    life,  tain  of  life  and  glory.    Seek  his  favour, 

3.  Obedience  to  this  law  is  wisdom.  It  grace,  and  presence.     II.    The  method 

secures   physical    health,    "  length    of  of  search.     Naturally  without  God,  yet 

days  and  long  life."     It  improves  the  our  duty  and  privilege  to  seek,   find, 

powers  of  mind,  and  enlarges  the  sphere  and  serve  him.     1.  Earnestly.  "  Heart 

of    usefulness.     It    is    **  a    crown    of  and  soul  engaged."     No  fits  and  starts, 

glory,"  and  the  highest  possible  good,  not   half-heartedness.      2.     Resolutely. 

the  summum  honum  to  men.  "  Wisdom  "  Set    your    heart."     Nothing    accom- 

is  the  principal  thing ;    therefore  get  plished  without   fixed    purpose.     God 

wisdom ;  and  with  all  thy  getting  get  the  sublimest  object  on  which  we  can 

understanding."  fix  our   hearts.     He  is  merciful    and 

Ver.  19.     Seeking  after  God.   I.   The  loveworthy.     "Ye  shall  seek  me  and 

occasion  on  which  this  injunction  was  find  me,  when  ye  search  for  me  with 

given.       II,     The    injunction     itself,  all  your  heart." 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXII. 

Vers,  1—5  and   14—16,     David  pre-  important  and  necessary  be  done  first, 

pared.     *'  Let  those   things,"  says   an  and  the  less   uigent  afterwards.     Let 

author,    **  which    are    obviously    most  not  a  man  begin  business  by  building 
106 


«HAP.  Txm]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


and  expensively  furnishing  a  fine  house,  and  teach  our  children  to  be  not  what 

Let  the  land  be  first  cultivated.     Let  we  are,  but  what  they  should  be  "  \W. 

your  business,  whatever  its  nature,  be  Penn\. 

faithfully   and  diligently  minded  and  Vers.  12,  13.     Prosper.  "Man*swis- 

well-established,  as  far  as  human  in-  dom  consists  in  observing  God's  unalter- 

dustiy  can  efiect,  or  human  foresight  able  appointments  and  suiting  himself 

calculate.  Be  content,  in  the  meantime,  to  them"  [aS'co^^].      Then   the   way  of 

with  inferior  accommodation.     A  man  God's  precepts  leads  to  the  enjoyment 

should  have  property  well  realised  and  of   his   promises.     Thou    meetest   him 

secured  before  he  enters  on  schemes  of  that  worketh  righteousness, 

expensive    building.     He    must     not,  Ver.  18.     Be  doing.     A  pious  Scotch 

with  sanguine  infatuation,  appropriate  lady,  Mrs.   Duncan,  remarked,  **  I  feel 

the  very  first  proceeds  of  his  trade  to  that  my  heart  is  apt  to  grow  to  weeds, 

the  erection  of  a  palace  to  live  in"  it  needs  the  safeguard  of  steady  em- 

"  When  we  mean  to  build,  ployment."     "  Doing  nothing  is  doing 

We  first  survey  the  plot;  then  draw  the  ill."     "Life  accordingly   is   a    delight, 

model ;  just  in  the  degree  that  it  is  consecrated 

And  when  we  see  the  figure  of  the  house,  ^o  action,  or  the  conscious,   volitional 

Then  must  we  rate  the  cost  of  the  erection;  .        '»                   ^^     ^            iTi- 

Which,  if  we  find  outweighs  ability,  exercise     of   our    noblest    capabilities. 

What  do  we  then    but  draw    anew   the  Action   and  enjoyment  are  contingent 

™o<iel  upon  each  other ;  when  we  are  unfit 

In  fewer  offices,  or  at  least  desist  for  ^^^k  we  are  always  incapable  of 

To  build  at  all  ?  &c.     [Shakespeare].  -,                         i    •    .i              •        i         r-  i_ 

■■          ^       -•  pleasure ;  work  is  the  wooing  by  which 

Vers.  6-10.  A  son.  If  we  would  "mend  happiness  is  won"  \L,  Grindon'\, 

the  world  we  should  mend  ourselves, 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Cbitioal  Noteb.]  This  and  following  three  chapters  contain  an  account  of  Levites  and 
distribution  of  their  services.  Here  their  number,  classification,  and  work  (vers.  1-6).  But 
vers.  6-32  give  heads  of  houses  composing  the  four  Levite  families  and  their  offices. 

Ver.  l.—King.  For  full  particulars  c/.  1  Kings  i.  ''The  author  of  Chronicles,  who 
does  not  concern  himself  with  the  domestic  history  of  David,  naturally  omits  the  circum- 
stances, and  merely  states  the  fact  "  [Speak.  Com.']  . 

Vers.  2-5. — Number  and  distribution  of  the  Levites.  Princes.  David  made  arrangements 
with  Levites  in  their  assembly  (c/.  xxv.  1).  Thirty,  Mosaic  census  followed  (Num.  iv.  3). 
None  counted  who  exceeded  60  years  by  man,  i.e.,  reckoning  men  only.  Judges,  local 
magistrate  (chap.  xxvi.  29).  "This  office  resembled  that  of  the  modern  Mahometan 
Cadi "  [Speak.  Com.'] .  Porters  (ver.  5),  door-keepers  by  night  and  day.  *'  Ps.  oxxxiv.  is  the 
chant  of  the  night  sentries  *'  [Speak.  Com,]. 

Vers.  Q-2S.  -  Houses  or  families  of  Levites.  Enumeration  of  all  Levites,  afterwards 
distributed  into  their  classes.  Courses,  divisions  definitely  numbered  and  arranged  by 
David.  Vers.  7-11.  The  Qershonites  (Ex.  vi.  6).  Laadan,  called  Libni  (chap.  vi.  17,  c/. 
use  in  Ex.  vi.  17 ;  Num.  iii.  18).  Shimei,  not  that  of  ver.  7,  but  another,  of.  ver.  10. 
Ver.  10.  Zina,  marg.  Zizah.  Ver.  11.  Not  many  and  did  not  make  separate  houses. 
Vers.  12-20.  The  Kohathites  (Ex.  vi.  16).  Separated,  therefore  not  counted  in  the  number 
(ver.  3).  Burn  incense  {cf  Ex.  xxx.  7,  8;  Num.  vi.  23-27).  Named  (ver.  14)  not  like  those 
of  Aaron  (ver.  13).  Ver.  15.  Moses  {cf.  Ex.  xviii.  3,  4).  Ver.  10.  Shebuel  (cf.  xxiv.  20). 
Ver.  18.  Shel.y  the  founder  or  head.  Vers.  21-23.  Sons  of  Merari,  two  chiefly  given 
(Num.  iii.  20  ;  1  Chr.  vi.  19),  but  1  Chr.  xxiv.  26  seems  to  give  a  third  son. 

Vers.  24-27. — Sons  of  Levi.  Polls  (ver.  3).  Twenty,  thirty  previously  fixed.  Certain  lighter 
duties  imposed  at  25  (Num.  viii.  24),  but  only  liable  for  full  service  at  30  years.  David 
made  a  change.  The  temple  would  require  a  more  numerous  ministry  since  the  ark 
ceased  to  be  carried  from  place  to  place.  Tliia  limit  continue  1  in  after  times  as  David 
fixed  it.  Ver.  27.  Last  orders  or  arrangements  Some  under -.tand  a  historical  work, 
drawn  up  by  Gad  or  Nathan,  or  a  work  of  directions  for  tha  service  of  the  sanctuary. 

107 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxiii. 


Vers.  28-dO.— Purifying,  i.e.,  washing  holy  things  ;  shewbread  (Lev.  xxiv.  5-9) ;  Jine  flour, 
materials  for  all  chief  kinds  of  meat  offerings  (c/.  Ler.  ii.  1-5 ;  vi.  14,  15 ;  xxiii.  13)  ; 
cakes,  must  he  rightly  made,  Ac;  measure  of  liquids  and  things  dry  fixed  by  law 
(Ex.  xxix.  40  ;  Lev.  vi.  20 ;  Num.  xv.  4-10). 

Ver.  SI.— By  number,  exact  number  of  cattle  to  b«  offered  at  various  festivals  fixed  by 
law  (Num.xxviii.  9-11 ;  xxix.  8-13). 

Ver.  S2.—Keep,  duties  of  Levites  here  summed  up  in  words  from  Num.  xviii.  3-6. 
"  This  passage  (verses  8  to  32)  gives  the  most  complete  account  to  be  found  in  Scripture 
of  the  nature  of  the  Levitical  office  "  [Speak,  Com.] , 


HOMILETIGS. 

The  Sacred  Tribe  :  its  Calling  and  its  Duties. — Verses  2-5. 

In  view  of  death,  David  called  a  representative  assembly.  Solomon  succeeds 
him,  and  he  wishes  to  arrange  for  the  service  of  the  temple.  The  Levites  called 
to  officiate ;  here  classified  in  order  and  houses,  with  distribution  and  general 

regulations  for  work.  I.  The  sacred  calling  of  the  tribe.  *'Toset 
forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the  Lord."  **  Their  office  to  wait  on  the  sons 
of  Aaron"  (vers.  28,  29),  and  "to  offer" — to  help  in  the  offering  of  "  burnt 
sacrifices"  (vers.  31,  32).  This  a  noble,  **a  high  calling."  Notice — 1.  The  legal 
age  of  entering  the  work,  "  From  thirty  years  old  and  upward,  even  until  fifty 
years  old"  (Num.  iv.  3) ;  then  reduced  to  twenty-five  years  (Num.  viii.  24),  and 
now  fixed  "  from  the  age  of  twenty  years  and  upward  "  (ver.  24).  2.  The  numbers 
engaged  in  the  work.  Thirty-eight  thousand,  an  increase  of  more  than  fourfold 
since  the  time  of  Moses  (Num.  iv.  47,  48).  What  a  proof  of  God's  power  and 
grace,  who  can  make  his  servants  "  a  thousandfold  more."  Considered  a 
privilege  to  belong  to  the  retinue  of  an  earthly  monarch.  What  must  it  be  to 
be  numbered  with  the  household  of  God  on  earth,  and  with  the  innumerable 
company  in  heaven  1  II.  The  special  duties  of  the  tribe.  We 
have  four  classes  given  (vers.  4  and  5),  which  are  afterwards  described  in  detail* 
1.  The  overseers.  Twenty-four  thousand,  including  priests  and  attendants,  to 
(set  forward)  superintend  (ver.  4).  They  had  under  their  charge  the  younger 
Levites  and  servants  of  the  sanctuary,  devoted  to  menial  duties  (ix.  2).  2.  The 
judges.  Administrators  of  civil  affairs  **for  the  outward  business  of  Israel" 
(2  Chr.  xix.  5-11).  Officers  mentioned  early  (Ex.  v.  6),  generally  foremen; 
judges  concerned  with  religious  matters  chiefly.  3.  The  musicians,  who  praised 
on  instruments — "cymbals,  psalteries,  harps,  trumpets"  (2  Chr.  v.  12) — which 
David  might  approve  or  appoint,  but  not  invent  for  service.  He  was  given  to 
music,  and  desired,  in  his  latter  days,  to  give  example  of  its  use.  Handel 
declared,  when  he  finally  resolved  to  consecrate  himself  to  sacred  music,  "  that 
it  was  better  suited  to  a  man  descending  in  the  vale  of  years."  4.  The  porters. 
At  gates,  guarding  entrance  of  improper  persons,  and  keeping  from  profanation 
and  divine  displeasure.  In  such  service  we  may  engage,  leading  in  the  song, 
and  perfecting  the  praise  of  the  sanctuary ;  administering  law  and  government ; 
creating,  preserving,  and  perpetuating  reverence  and  truth  in  all  things. 

The  Sacred  Tribe  :   its  Heads  and  Arrangements. — Verses  6-24. 

After  giving  number  and  divisions  of  Levi  according  to  duties,  we  have  next 
an  enumeration  of  heads  of  houses  into  which  the  four  families  branched,  with 
a  brief  account  of  their  work.  I.  The  houses  of  Gershon  (vers.  6-11). 
This  branches  into  two — six  families  for  Laadan,  and  three  for  Shimei ;  nine 
houses  altogether.  II.  The  houses  of  Kohath  (vers.  11-20).  Aaroq 
108 


CHAP,  urn.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


not  reckoned  because  specially  set  apart.  His  sons  form  subject  of  eh. 
XXV.  1-19.  Hence  such  descendants  of  Amram  noticed  whicb  belonged  to 
Moses,  whose  sons  were  numbered  among  Levites  generally,  and  did  not  belong 
to  that  part  to  whom  priestly  duties  were  assigned.  Kohath,  the  founder  of 
nine  fathers'  houses  (mentioned  ch.  xxiv.  20-25).  To  these  must  be  added 
the  priests  through   Aaron   and   his  sons,  two  houses,  making  eleven  in  all. 

III.  The  houses  of  Merari  (vers.  21-23).  Two  sons  as  two  leading 
branches,  Machli  and  Mushi  (Ex.  vi.  19 ;  Num.  iii.  33).  Merari  is  third  son  of 
Levi  (Gen.  xlvi.  11).  As  there  are  four  houses  for  him,  nine  for  Gershon,  and 
eleven  for  Kohath,  we  have  twenty-four  in  all  of  the  sons  of  Levi.  Some 
give   Merari  six,  and  the  others  nine  each,   which  makes  the  same   number. 

IV.  The  arrangements  of  the  Levites  (vers.  24-32).    By  the  last 

words  of  David,  at  the  end  of  his  life,  new  arrangements  were  made.  He 
thought  it  would  contribute  to  the  glory  of  God  to  have  as  many  officers  as 
possible  in  divine  service.  1.  The  enrolment  of  office  was  changed.  The  rule 
was  to  begin  at  30  years ;  for  two  reasons  he  relaxed  this.  First,  Jerusalem  was 
the  chosen  city,  and  there  would  be  no  more  moving  from  place  to  place. 
Second,  the  carrying  of  the  tabernacle  was  not  needed  any  longer.  2.  The 
duties  of  office  are  arranged.  Detailed  in  a  few  items.  Aaron's  sons  had 
higher  ofiice  in  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  Service  in  the  courts 
(Ex.  xxvn.  9);  the  chambers  as  judges;  and  in  religious  work  generally.  Levites 
helped  in  this  service,  had  "  to  wait  on  the  sons  of  Aaron."  Several  things 
mentioned — (1)  Keeping  things  clean.  "Purifying,  i.e.,  cleansing  of  all  lioly 
things"  (ver.  28).  Iloiy  places,  garments,  vessels,  and  sacrifices.  (2)  Getting 
things  ready.  The  shewhread  for  priests  to  arrange  on  the  table ;  fine  flour 
morning  and  evening  in  just  quantity  for  meat-offering ;  unleavened  cakes  rightly 
made.  (3)  Adjusting  weights  and  measures.  Standards  of  which  were  con- 
sidered sacred,  kept  in  the  sanctuary,  and  not  to  be  altered  in  liquids  (wine, 
oil,  (fee.)  or  dry  goods.  (4)  Blowing  with  their  instruments.  Every  morning  and 
night  "  to  praise  the  Lord  "  in  sounding  their  trumpets  (Num.  x.  10). 
(5)  Offering  sacrifices.  *' To  offer  all  burnt  sacrifices"  (ver.  31).  Priests  alone 
sprinkled  the  blood,  trimmed  the  fire  on  the  altar,  and  lay  the  parts  of  the 
victim  on  it,  Levites  did  everything  preparatory  and  needful  to  these  priestly 
acts.  Sacrifices  offered  in  right  number  (2  Sam.  ii.  15  ;  Num.  xxviii.  1-31),  and 
at  set  feasts :  Passover  (Lev.  xxiii.  4,  5);  Pentecost  (Lev.  xxiii.  15-17);  and 
Tabernacles  (Lev.  xxiii.  33-37).  (6)  Guarding  the  tabernacle.  "  Keep  the  charge 
of  the  tabernacle  "  (ver.  32).  Charge  of  the  tent  of  meeting,  of  holy  apparatus, 
to  have  evorything  fit,  orderly,  and  ready  for  special  functions  of  priests. 
(7)  Attendance  on  priests,  "The  charge  of  the  sons  of  Aaron,  their  brethren." 
Thus  service  honourable  and  menial,  orderly  and  regular.  Nothing  a  drudgery, 
but  pleasant,  joyful,  and  devout. 

••  Who  sweeps  a  room  as  for  God's  laws 
Makes  that  and  the  action  fine  "  \Herhert'\» 

The  Threefold  Functions. — Verse  13. 

The  posterity  of  Aaron  advanced  to  dignity  and  the  priest's  office  to  "  sanctify 
the  most  holy  things."  Their  office  here  described  as  threefold.  1.  To  make 
atonement.  Offer  burnt  incense  upon  the  golden  altar  in  the  holy  place.  For  a 
"stranger  to  come  near"  and  do  this  would  incur  prompt  punishment  (Num.  xvi. 
40).  Incense- burning  a  preliminary  to  morning  and  accompaniment  of  evening 
sacrifice  (Ex.  xxx.  7,  9  ;  Lu.  i.  9,  10),  and  a  special  part  of  ceremony  on  Day  of 
Atonement  (Lev.  xvi.  11-13).  Amid  sudden  danger  and  impending  wrath,  the 
priest  took  the  censer  of  incense  "  to  make  atonement"  (Num.  xvi.  46,  47).     No 

109 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  mn, 


priesthood,  no  office  like  this  now ;  but  regarding  this  as  typical  of  diffusive 
influence  and  specific  intercession,  the  minister  of  the  gospel  may  be  an  inter- 
cessor for  his  people,  render  acceptable  service  and  point  to  the  atonement  for  sin 
and  the  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  2.  To  minister  to  God  for  man.  "To 
minister  unto  him."  This  a  privilege  and  within  the  power  of  every  one.  The 
Christian  minister  specially  called,  and  set  apart  for  this  work.  In  prayer, 
preaching,  and  daily  work,  he  should  minister  to  God.  3.  To  bless  man  for  God, 
"  To  bless  in  his  name."  None  have  power  to  bless  and  bestow  grace  in  them- 
selves. But  first  receiving  light  and  life  they  give — speak  of  God's  favour  to 
men,  offer  pardon  and  assure  of  acceptance.  They  represent  God  in  their 
ministry ;  bring  down  the  influence  of  Heaven  in  their  walk ;  and  seek  to 
recover  fallen  men  from  sin  and  death.  "  Speak  unto  Aaron  and  unto  his  sons 
saying  on  this  vnse  ye  shall  bless  the  children  of  Israel"  (Num.  vi.  23). 

The  Rest  op  the  People  of  God. — Verse  25. 

I.  In  the  mysterious  polity  of  the  people  of  Israel,  spiritual  and  temporal 
blessings  were  so  closely  allied  that  the  same  language  might  naturally  be 
employed  to  signify  either.  II.  Hence  David  hinted  at  profounder  truths  than 
lie  on  the  surface  of  his  words.  III.  It  becomes  us  to  secure  the  great  blessing 
— the  rest  that  remaineth — as  the  chief  object  of  existence.  lY.  Rest  and 
peace  must  fall  on  a  Christian  spirit — (1)  From  the  imitation  of  Christ;  (2)  The 
singleness  of  its  object;  (3)  The  nature  of  the  Christian  affections;  (4)  To 
support  and  exalt  us,  heaven  must  mingle  with  earth  \A,  Butler^ 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.    \,  An  instructive  view  of  life.  If  ready  to  depart  we  can  say  cheer- 

"  Old  and  full  of  days."     Life  made  up  fully,  Nunc  dimittis, 

of  days,  not  years.     Day  by  day  given  Yer.  14.     Moses  the  man  of  God  ;  the 

until  the  numbers  appointed  (Jobxiv.  5)  honourable  appellation.   Given  to  Moses 

are  filled  up,  finished.  ''There  is  no  elixir  five  times  in  the  whole  of  Scripture — - 

of  life,"  says  one,  "that  can  prolong  our  once  in  the  Pentateuch  (Deut.  xxxi.  1), 

days  beyond  that  period.    Soon  we  shall  once  in  Joshua  (xiv.  6),  twice  in  Chron- 

come  to  the  outer  limit;  then  we  must  icles  (here  and  in  2  Chr.  xxx.  16),  and 

die."     Isaac  died,  being  "  old  and  full  once  in  Ezra  (iii.  2).    It  is  also  assigned 

of  days."     2.  A  touching  picture  of  old  thrice  to  David  (2  Chr.  viii.  14;  Neh. 

age.     As  a  portrait  made  up  of  minute  xii.  24,  36),  and  once  to  the  prophet 

touches,  so  old  age  in  character,  habits,  Shemaiah  (1  Kings  xii,  22).     "  Man  of 

hopes,  and  condition.     It  has  peculiar  God,"  without  the  article,  is  common 

comeliness  and  attractiveness  of  its  own  \Speak.Com^,     1.  Specially  called  and 

when  crowned  with  piety.     Pitiable  to  qualified  for  God's  work.    2.  Privileged 

see  an  old  man  who  has  missed  the  with  close  and  familiar  intercourse  with 

object  of  life  and  spent   his   days  in  God.     Face  to  face  with  God  and  "the 

folly.     "The  sinner,  being  an  hundred  similitude  of  the  Lord  shaU  he  behold." 

years  old,  shall  be  accursed."    But  "the  3.  Divinely  taught  to  declare  the  will 

hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  gold,  if  it  be  of  God.   "  With  him  will  I  speak  mouth 

found  in   the  way  of   righteousness."  to  mouth."     "The  law  was  given  by 

3.  A  solemn  warning  to  all.     The  end  Moses."     4.  Faithfully  carried  on  the 

sure  in  youthful  days  or  "  full  of  days."  work  of  God.    "  My  servant  Moses  who 

"  Old  age  is  near  neighbour  to  death."  is  faithful  in  all  my  house."    God  gave 

Understand  life   before  you  leave  it.  orders,     Moses  verily  was  faithful  aa 
110 


CHAP.    XXIT.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


a  servcmt  (Heb.  iii.  5),  and  obedient  in 
carrying  them  out.  5.  Wonderfully 
honoured  by  God  at  the  end.  God 
buried  him.  "  There  arose  not  a  pro- 
phet in  Israel  like  unto  Moses,  whom 
the  Lord  knew  face  to  face.*'  *'  We 
must  think  and  speak  honourably  of 
saints  departed"  [Trapp]. 

Vers.  28-32.  Waiting  in  service, 
1.  In  active  work.  2.  In  orderly 
worship.  3.  In  devout  supphcation. 
4.  In  watching  attitude. 

"  God  doth  not  need 
Either  man's  work  or  his  own  gifts ;  who 

best 
Bear  his  mild  yoke,  they  serve  him  best ; 

his  state 


Is  kingly  ;  thousands  at  his  bidrlinf^  speed, 
And  post  o'er  laud  and  ocean  witliout  rest; 
They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait  " 

Rest  an  argument  for  service.  1. 
Rest  affording  opportunity.  2.  Speci- 
ally designed  for  service.  3.  Service, 
individual,  orderly,  and  varied.  Service 
entered  upon  early,  and  patiently  con- 
ducted. Morning  and  evening  thanks, 
Needful,  demanded,  and  should  be  will- 
ingly given.  "  Every  day  will  I  praise 
thee."  **  Evening,  and  morning,  and  at 
noon  will  I  pray,  and  cry  aloud"  (Psalm 
Iv.  17).     "  Pray  without  ceasing." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXIII. 


Ver.  1.  Old,  I  venerate  old  age, 
and  I  love  not  the  man  who  can  look 
without  emotion  upon  the  sunset  of 
life,  when  the  dusk  of  evening  begins 
to  gather  over  the  watery  eye,  and  the 
shadows  of  twilight  grow  broader  and 
deeper  upon  the  understanding  \L(mg- 
fellow\, 

Ver.  6.  Courses,  If  there  be  any 
beauty  and  comeHness  in  order,  where 
should  we  most  expect  to  find  it  than 
in  the  divine  government,  and  in  the 
conduct  and  management  of  the  affairs 
of  the  supreme  and  the  celestial  king- 
dom, wherein  only  the  remoteness  of 
those  things  from  our  sense  makes 
everything  seem  little  and  inconsider- 
able [/.  Howe\ 

*'  All  things  are  injBlnite  in  parts,  and  the 
moral  is  as  the  material. 
Neither  is  anything  vast,  but  it  is  com- 
pacted of  atoms  "  [Martin  Tupper] . 


Vers.  6  and  30.  Instruments  and 
praise.  In  order  to  the  high  result 
intended,  the  music  of  rehgion  must 
be  religious.  There  must  be  a  distinc- 
tion of  sounds.  As  this  language  is 
given  for  the  heart,  it  becomes  a  fi.rst 
principle  that  it  must  be  of  the  heart, 
else  it  is  an  unknown  tongue.  And  so 
true  is  this,  that  nothing  really  can 
fulfil  the  idea  of  religious  music  which 
is  not  the  breathing  of  true  love  and 
worship.  Even  instruments  without 
life  will  not  speak  the  true  notes  of 
power  unless  the  touch  of  faith  is  on 
them,  and  the  breath  of  holy  feeling 
is  in  them;  how  much  less  the 
voice  itself,  whose  very  qualities  of 
sound  are  inevitably  toned  by  the 
secret  feeling  of  the  spirit  [£>r,  II. 
Bushnelt\, 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


CRiTiOAii  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  we  have  divisions  of  the  24  orders  of  priests  (vers. 
1-19),  and  the  classes  of  Levites  who  attended  them  in  discharge  of  their  sacred 
functions. 

Vers.  1-6. — The  sons  of  Aaron.  The  divisions  supply  from  ver.  6  of  chap,  xxiii.  The 
author  had  there  stated  that  "to  the  sons  of  Levi  David  assigned  their  courses." 
He  now  adds,  •'  To  the  sons  of  A.  also  (David  assigned)  their  courses.  The  sons  of  A. 
(wero)  Nadab,  <&o."  [Speak.  Com.].    Bothf  i.e.,  Zad.  and  Ahim.,  assisted  David.    Ver.  4. 

ill 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxiv 


Chiefs  more  heads  of  houses.  Ver.  6.  Lot,  that  is,  the  assignment  of  their  order  in  the 
courses  made  by  lot  to  the  families  belonging  to  both  E.  and  Ith,  Governors  or  princes  oj 
the  sanctuary.    Ver.  6.    Wrote,  as  lots  were  drawn  forth.  Taken  alternately. 

Vers.  7-19. — T'he  allotted  order.  Some  nanxes  in  this  list  found  elsewhere  and  others 
not.  Ver.  10.  Ahijah,  Abia  (Lu.  i.  6;  Neh.  x.  7).  Ver.  11.  Jeshuah,  whose  descendants 
returned  from  captivity  (Ez.  ii.  6  ;  Neh.  vii.  39).  Ver.  12.  Eliashib,  not  progenitor  of  the 
one  in  Neh.  iii.  1,  20,  21.  Ver.  15.  Hezir,  as  a  layman  (c/.  Neh.  x.  20).  Ver.  16.  Peth., 
one  of  those  who  separated  themselves  from  alliances  contracted  in  captivity  (Ez.  x.  23 ; 
Neh.  ix.  5).  Ver.  17.  Jachin  {cf.  chap.  ix.  10;  Neh  xi.  10),  probably  the  Achim  of  Matt.  i.  14. 
Ver.  19.  Orderings,  the  charge  as  ver.  3.  Under,  by  the  hand  of  Aaron.  Commanded,  a 
constant  expression  in  the  law  of  Moses  (Ex.  xxxix.  42  ;  Lev.  xxvii.  34 ;  Num.  zxxvi.  13 ; 
Deut.  xxxiv.  9). 

Vers.  20-31. — Distribution  of  other  Levites.  The  rest.  Object  of  this  second  enumeration 
of  the  Levitical  families  {cf.  xxiii.  7-23)  seems  to  be  the  designation  of  the  heads  of  the 
families  in  David's  time.  The  omission  of  the  Gershonites  is  curious,  and  can  only  be 
accounted  for  by  supposing  that  the  author  did  not  find  any  account  of  their  heads  in  his 
authorities.  The  addition  to  the  Merarites  (vers.  26,  27)  is  also  curious.  It  brings  the 
number  of  families  up  to  25,  which  is  one  more  than  we  should  have  expected  \_Speak. 
Com.].  Ver.  21.  Rehahi.  (cf.  chap,  xxiii.  17).  Ver.  22.  Shel,  Shelomith  in  chap,  xxiii.  18, 
adiflferent  person  from  Amramite  Shel.  {cf.  chap.  xxvi.  25,  26).  He  was  probably  not  a 
contemporary  of  David,  as  the  head  of  the  family  in  David's  time  was  Jahath  [Speak. 
Com."^.  Ver.  26.  Bene,  not  really  a  name  ;  Hel.  for  his  son,  and  to  be  attached  to  Jaaziah. 
The  meaning  of  the  whole  passage  (vers.  26-30)  seems  to  be  that  there  were  three 
branches  of  the  Merarites — the  Beni-Mahli,  the  Beni-Mushi,  and  the  Beni-Jaaziah — of 
whom  the  first  formed  a  mighty  house  in  David's  time,  viz.,  the  Beni-Kish,  their  head 
being  Jerahmeel,  while  each  of  the  other  branches  comprised  three  families,  the  heads  of 
which  were  respectively  in  David's  time  Shoham,  Zaccur,  Ibri,  and  Mahli,  Eder,  Jerimoth 
\ Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  31.  Principal,  **  all  the  Levitical  houses  enumerated  drew  lots  in  their 
courses  on  equal  terms,  the  elder  families  having  no  advantage  over  the  younger  ones," 
as  there  were  24  courses  of  the  priests,  so  we  must  suppose  that  there  were  24  of  the 
Levites,  though  the  number  of  the  families  as  given  in  the  text  (chap,  xxiii.  7-23 ; 
xxiv.  20-30)  is  25  iSpeak,  Com,], 

EOMILETIGS. 
The  Divisions  op  Priests  (Sons  op  Aaron). — Verses  1-1 D, 

The  word  "  divisions"  means  courses,  as  ver.  6  in  chap,  xxiii. ;  and  evidently 
continues  the  subject  and  construction  of  that  verse.  Two  sons  of  A.  died,  and 
the  other  two  supply  *'the  chief  men  of  the  house,"  viz.,  16  from  Eleazar  and  8 
from  Ithamar,  24  in  all.  I.  Divisions  tO  facilitate  work.  Divided 
more  easily  performed.  "  Many  hands  make  light  work."  Burdens  equalised 
carried  better.  Jealousies  are  prevented  and  a  true  spirit  created.  "  Be  not 
solitary,  be  not  idle"  a  saying  of  Burton.  II.  Divisions  by  lot  (ver.  5). 
No  ground  of  choice  between  the  two  families,  who  differed  only  in  number,  and 
as  the  highest  places  had  already  been  filled  by  both  of  them,  the  impartiality  of 
lot  to  settle  the  order  of  service.  1 .  Lot  appointing  to  dignified  work.  "  For  the 
governors  (or  princes)  of  the  sanctuary  "  (ver.  5).  Pligh  priests  who  exclusively 
could  enter  into  the  most  holy  place  before  God  [Keil].  2.  Lot  publicly  taken. 
**  Shem.,  the  scribe,  wrote  them  before  the  king "  (ver.  6).  Openly  before 
witnesses  and  a  clerk  acting  as  secretary  to  scrutinise.  Before  king,  princes,  and 
priests  the  act  most  solemn.  Fraud  and  suspicion  impossible.  "  The  lot  causeth 
contentions  to  cease,  and  parteth  between  the  mighty."  III.  Divisions  in 
specific  order  (vers.  7-19).  Order  essential  to  existence  and  efficiency.  Men 
who  seek  pre-eminence  and  power  create  disorder,  anarchy,  and  ruin.  Well- 
ordered  words  make  good  logic ;  well-ordered  regulations  preserve  the  social 
constitution ;  and  well-set  stones  make  architecture.  Order  in  God's  house  and 
service  secures  regularity,  beauty,  and  efficiency  ;  excludes  what  is  called  "  good 
fortune,"  happy  "  hits,"  and  points  to  the  divine  side  of  life  on  its  appointment. 
No  "  chance  "  work  ;  all  appears  to  be  settled  by  law.  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the 
lap;  but  the  whole  disposing  thereof  is  of  the  Lord," 
112 


CHAP,  xxiyj  EOMlLETtC   COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Thb  Death  of  Nadab  and  Abihu. — Verse  2. 

The  story  strange,  and  understood  only  by  intimate  acquaintance  with  the 
Jewish  system  and  the  prevailing  sentiments  of  the  time.  Nadab  and  Abihu 
had  been  honoured  with  special  privileges,  but  unduly  exalted  themselves, 
became  proud,  negligent,  and  presumptuous.  Learn  from  their  death — I.  That 
sin  inverts  the  natural  order  of  things.  "They  died  before  their 
father."  "  Sin,"  as  "  transgression  of  law,"  creates  confusion  and  disorder.  It 
overturns  and  inverts.  What  more  natural  than  a  son  to  outlive  his  father ; 
but  wickedness  shortens  life,  and  brings  untimely  death.  II.  That  sln 
deprives  of  blessings  which  God  can  bestow.    They  ''had  no 

children."  Children  great  blessings,  "  a  heritage  from  the  Lord."  To  be  child- 
less, under  Jewish  dispensation,  considered  calamity.  Profane  the  name  of  God, 
and  you  may  be  cut  off  from  high  honour,  just  lineage,  and  blessed  memory. 
The  righteous  alone  can  secure  posthumous  fame.     "  The  memory  of  the  just  is 

blessed."    III.   That  sin  often  overwhelms  with  fearful  ruin. 

They  died  not  a  natural  death.  "  There  went  out  fire  from  the  Lord  and 
devoured  them."  A  punishment  sudden  and  severe,  awful  and  retributive  (Lev, 
X.  1-4).     Indicative  of  their  heinous  guilt,  and  God's  jealousy  in  punishing  it. 

IV.  That  sin  is  often  mentioned  in  history  to  warn  of  its 
consequences.  This  special  sin  frequently  mentioned  in  Scripture.  *'  By 
this  awful  judgment  the  wisdom  of  God  observed  the  same  course,  in  repressing 
the  first  instance  of  contempt  for  sacred  things,  as  he  did  at  the  commencement 
of  the  Christian  dispensation  (Acts  v.  1—11)."  "  The  temple  mouse  fears  not  the 
temple  idol,"  is  a  proverb.  Those  who  minister  in  holy  things  need  be  careful 
not  to  arrogate  to  themselves  the  glory  which  belongs  to  God,  but  ever  keep 
before  them  the  solemnity  and  responsibility  of  that  service  in  which  they  are 
engaged. 

The  Divisions  op  the  Levites. —  Verses  20-31. 

The  rest  refers  to  those  not  of  the  sons  of  Aaron,  and  does  not  exhaust  non- 
priestly  class,  for  we  find  in  following  two  chapters  others  who  were  singers, 
doorkeepers,  and  treasurers.  Two  families  given  chiefly.  Gershonites  found 
among  officers  and  judges;  1.  The  family  of  Kohath  (vers.  20-25).  2.  The 
family  of  Merari  (vers.  26-29).  3.  The  three  sons  of  Mushi  (vers.  30,  31),  These 
aU  content  with  an  inferior  "lot,"  anxious  to  do  their  best,  and  joyfully  contri- 
buting to  the  whole.  "  They  were  arranged  by  lot  to  match  the  courses  of  their 
brethren,  the  sons  of  Aaron,  in  the  presence  of  the  same  superiors."  "  The 
principal  fathers,"  or  the  chief  over  against  his  lesser  brother.  Each,  great 
and  small,  his  place  and  his  work,  and  acting  under  "  the  great  Taskmaster's 
eye."  *'  Let  every  man  be  occupied,  and  occupied  in  the  highest  employment  of 
which  he  is  capable,  and  die  with  the  consciousness  that  he  has  done  his  best " 
\Sidney\ 

•*  A  wise  man  Bcorneth  nothing,  be  it  never  so  small  or  homely, 
For  he  knoweth  not  the  secret  laws  that  may  bind  it  to  great  effects  ** 

[^Martin  Tupper']. 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  2.  Sad  deaths.  I.  The  sins  commanded  them  not."  2.  Gross  incon- 
which  caused  them.  1.  Disobedience  sistency.  Perhaps  they  were  drunk, 
to  divine  injunction.  "They  offered  hence  the  law  (Lev. x.  8).  "They  drink 
strange  fire  before  the  Lord,  which  he     and  forget  the  law "  (Prov.  xxxi.  5), 

113 


HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[chap.    XXIV. 


3.  Rashness  in  approaching  God, 
They  *'took,"  snatched  (some  read 
ver.  1),  their  censers  without  reverence 
and  consideration;  rushed  into  God's 
presence  in  haste.  4.  Presumptuous 
in  act.  Not  only  did  they  take 
*'  strange  incense,"  but  went  both  to- 
gether when  one  only  should  have 
olficiated ;  intruded  into  the  holy  of 
holies,  to  which  access  denied  to  all 
but  high  priest,  and  thus  set  a  prece- 
dent most  dangerous,  and  which  called 
for  divine  displeasure.  II.  The  punish- 
ment which  followed  the  sins,  "  They 
died."  1.  A  dishonourable  death. 
*'  Without  children."  2.  A  sudden 
death.     "Fire    came   out"    suddenly. 

3.  An  overwhelming  death.  Instantly 
died  as  if  struck  by  a  lightning-flash. 

4.  A  retributive  death.  "  Before  the 
Lord."  Before  the  veil  that  covered 
the  mercy-seat.  "  Without  mercy,"  and 
without  divine  interference.  A  fore- 
taste of  torment  **in  the  presence  of 
the  Lamb"  (Rev.  xiv.  10).  "God 
will  be  sanctified  either  actively  or 
passively,  either  in  us  or  upon  us; 
sure  it  is  that  he  will  be  no  loser  by 
us.  Sanctified  he  will  be,  either  in  the 
sincerity  of  men's  conversation  or  else 
in  the  severity  of  their  condemnation. 
Singular  things  are  expected  of  all  that 
draw  nigh  to  God  in  any  duty,  but 
especially  in  the  office  of  the  ministry. 
Those  that  stand  in  the  presence  of 
princes  must  be  exact  in  their  carriages. 
God  appointed  both  the  weights  and 
measures  of  the  sanctuary  to  be  twice 


as  large  as  those  of  the  commonwealth, 
to  show  that  he  expects  much  more  of 
those  that  serve  him  there  than  he 
doth  of  others.  The  souls  of  priests 
must  be  purer  than  sunbeams,  saith 
Chrysostom  "  [Trapp\. 

Vers.  5-30.  Hemarhahle  persons. 
Ver.  6,  Governors  {Heh.)^  Princes  of 
the  house  of  God.  Chief  priests  rulers 
over  others  of  their  own  order,  and 
subject  to  the  high  priest.  Submission 
and  diligence  give  distinction  in  calling. 
"  O'est  par  le  travail  qu'on  regne " 
[Louis  XIV.  ].  If  translation  be  Princes 
of  Holiness,  then  hoHness  gives  influence 
and  power ;  distinction  of  character 
and  approbation  of  God.  Good  men 
are  kings  of  society.  Ver.  7.  Jehoiarihy 
the  father  of  the  Maccabees  (1  Mace, 
ii.  1).  Ver.  10.  From  Ahijah  came 
Zacharias,  father  of  John  the  Baptist 
(Lu.  i.  5).  "  Old  he  was,  yet  not  free 
from  taking  his  turn.  Dumb  also  for 
a  time ;  yet  he  went  on  to  do  his  office 
in  the  ministration.  The  evangelist's 
word  of  the  course  (Grk.  epi  and 
emerias,  a  daily  service)  importeth  a 
daily  attendance  upon  the  work 
while  the  course  continueth  "  \Trapp\. 

Ver.  23.  Sons  of  Hebron.  The 
four  persons  named  appear  to  have 
been  contemporaries  of  David,  the 
heads  of  the  Hebronite  houses  in  his 
time  {cf  ch.  xxvi.  31)  \Speak,  Com..]. 
"  What  shall  I  do  to  be  for  ever 
known?"  asked  Schiller.  Scripture 
will  give  the  answer. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Ver.  2.  Died.  It  is  a  dangerous 
thing  in  the  service  of  God  to  decline 
from  his  own  institutions  ;  we  have  to 
do  with  a  God  who  is  wise  to  prescribe 
his  own  worship,  just  to  require  what 
he  has  prescribed,  and  powerful  to 
revenge  what  he  has  not  prescribed 
[Bp.  Hall]. 

Vers.  5  and  31.  Lot,  Methods  are 
the  masters  of    masters    [TaUerand]. 


Method  is  essential,  and  enables  a 
larger  amount  of  work  to  be  got 
through  with  satisfaction.  "Method," 
said  the  Bev.  B.  Cecil,  "  is  like  packing 
things  in  a  box :  a  good  packer  will  get 
in  half  as  much  again  as  a  bad  one." 
Cecil's  despatch  of  business  was  extra- 
ordinary, his  motto  being,  **  The  shortest 
way  to  do  many  things  is  to  do  one 
thing  at  once  "  ISmilesl, 


114 


ciAP.  xxv.j  HO\£lLETIO  COMMEH^TARY:  CUaJNICLE^. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

Critioal  Notes.]  This  chapter  relates  to  the  number  and  offices  of  the  ringers  (vers. 
1-8) ;  a  list  of  the  choirs  divided  by  lot  into  24  orders  (vers.  9-31). 

Vers,  1-8. — The  families  of  singers.  Captains,  chiefs  who  preside  over  the  order  cf 
service;  those  mentioned,  xxiii.  2;  xxiv.  6.  Separated,  divided  or  distributed  for  the 
service.  Prophesy,  publicly  recite  the  sacred  service,  sing  psalms ;  a  reference  to  the 
praising  element  Ver.  2.  Hands,  direction  of  A.,  who  prophesied  as  an  inspired  poet, 
composed  psalms  (Pa.  1.  73-83).  Ver.  3.  Six,  only  5  names  given ;  entire  list  only  23, 
■which  should  be  24  according  to  the  account  of  lots  ^vevs.  8-31);  supply  a  name  (as  Sept.), 
Shimei,  which  appears  in  ver.  17.  Vers.  4,  5.  Uz.  {cf.  ver.  18) ;  Sheb.  (ver.  20).  Kinfs  seer, 
not  to  distinguish  H.  above  his  brethren  (cf.  2  Chr.  xxix.  30 ;  xxxv.l5).  All  three  possessed 
prophetic  gifts.  Words,  matters  {marg.).  Lift  up  horn.  Blow  with  horn  or  trumpet 
loudly,  a  fig.  expression  for  honour  and  dignity  (1  Sara.  ii.  1,  10 ;  Ps  Ixxv.  10 ;  Ixxxix.  17). 
Ver.  6.  'rhes9  refers  to  Heman.  According,  the  reading  should  be,  "  At  the  king's  hands 
were  Asaph,  Jeduthun,  and  Heman,"  or  under  the  direction  of  the  king,  of  A.,  of  Jed.,  and 
of  H.  Ver.  8.  Ward  formerly  signified  a  class  or  division ;  the  term  is  still  used  in 
hospitals :  trans.  "  for  the  ward  (charge)  for  as  well  the  small  as  the  great,  the  teaoher 
with  the  scholar  "  \Mujphi/^. 

Vers.  9-31. — The  list  of  choir  leaders.  Asaph  was  given  the  precedence  over  his  brethren, 
and  his  four  courses  were  assigned  the  first,  and  then  each  alternate  place.  Jeduthun 
took  rank  next,  and  received  alternate  places,  first  with  Asaph,  and  then  with  Heman, 
until  his  courses  were  exhausted.  After  this,  all  the  later  places  fell  necessarily  to 
Heman,  whose  courses  continue  without  interruption  from  the  15th  to  the  24th.  This 
scheme  for  the  apportioning  of  the  courses  among  the  three  families  must  have  been  a 
matter  of  formal  arrangement.  What  the  lot  decided  was  simply,  on  each  occasion, 
which  course  of  the  family,  whose  term  it  was,  should  fill  the  place  ^Speak.  Com.'}.  *'  The 
series  is  so  determined  by  the  lot,  that  the  four  sons  of  Asaph  hold  the  fijrst,  third,  fifth, 
and  seventh  places  ;  the  six  sous  of  Jeduthun  the  second,  fourth,  eighth,  tenth,  twelfth, 
and  fourteenth  places  *'  IKeiQ, 

HOMILETICS. 

Thb  Classification  op  Singers  and  Musicians. — Yersea  1-8. 

David  had  settled  the  courses  of  Levites  wlio  attended  to  the  priests  in  thei 
ministrations ;  now  he  arranges  those  appointed  to  sing  and  play.  Three  families 
of  choristers.  I.  Their  solemn  consecration.  "Separated  to  the 
service."  No  disputing,  nor  taking  by  force;  no  self  electing,  nor  promotion  by 
favour ;  each  carefully  appointed  to  his  place  and  work.  No  small  honour  to  be 
separated  from  the  world  and  called  into  the  family  and  service  of  God.  Greater 
honour  and  responsibiUty  to  be  further  "  separated  from  the  congregation  of 
Israel,"  to  be  brought  nearer  to  God,  and  "  to  stand  before  the  congregation  and 
minister  unto  them "  (Num.  xvi.  9).  II.  Their  sacred  employments. 
These  manifold  and  necessary.  1.  Prophets  with  harps.  To  reveal  the  will  of 
God  in  song  ;  sing  psalms  indited  by  the  spirit  of  God.  Musical  instruments  to 
rouse  and  quicken  the  prophetic  spirit.  This  often  the  method  to  soothe  the 
mind,  to  prepare  for  the  work  of  praise  and  prayer.  Room  for  instruments  yet 
in  service  of  God ;  above  all,  be  filled  with  the  spirit,  sing  with  the  spirit,  and 
make  melody  with  the  heart  (Eph.  v.  18, 19).  2.  Players  of  instruments.  Heman 
presided  over  the  wind  instruments,  and  Jeduthun  over  the  harp,  to  keep  time 
and  observe  order.  Micsic  may  help  song  ;  refine  and  educate  the  worshippers  of 
the  sanctuary.  "As  well  the  singers  as  the  players  on  instruments  shall  be 
there."  3.  Superintendents  of  order,  "Captains  of  the  host"  (ver.  1),  those 
who  helped  David  to  arrange  and  superintend  the  order  of  worship;  leaders  of 

115 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY',   CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxt. 


the  courses  of  priests  and  Levites,  before  whom  lots  were  cast ;  chiefs  of  the 
sacred  order.  Captains  of  armies  held  responsible  positions ;  to  be  leaders  in  God's 
house  a  more  distinguished  privilege  and  honour.  4.  All  this  designed  to  honour 
God,  Music,  instrumental  and  vocal;  choirs  and  leaders  "instructed"  (ver.  7) 
and  employed  "  to  give  thanks  and  praise  the  Lord  "  (ver.  3).  This  delightful 
and  "  comely  to  the  upright.'*  Fresh  cause  for  praise  every  time  we  enter  God's 
house.  If  no  other  theme  than  the  love  of  Christ,  which  employs  the  tongues 
of  heaven,  this  enough  to  stir  up  and  perpetuate  grateful  emotion  on  eaith. 
III.  Their  astonishing  number.  Every  choir,  with  its  leader,  consisted 
of  12,  and  the  24  choirs  contained  288  choristers  (288  =  12  x  24),  who  served  a 
week  in  rotation.  "  These,  half  of  whom  officiated  every  week  with  a  propor- 
tionate number  of  assistants,  were  skilful  and  experienced  musicians,  capable  of 
leading  and  instructing  the  general  musical  corps,  which  comprised  no  less  than 
4,000  (ch.  xxiii  5)  "  \Jamieson\ 

The  Distinctiyb  Features  op  Service. — Verses  1-31. 

Many  special  elements  of  worship  set  forth.     I.  Pleasing  variety,     Male  and 
female  (ver.  5),  small  and  great,  teacher  and  scholar  "  (ver.  8),  prophesying  with 
harps,  psalteries,  and  cymbals  (ver.   1).      Yariety  helps    to   discriminate   and 
recognise  persons,  to  classify  into  systems  and  impersonate  with  names.  "  Variety 
is  charming,"  attractive  and  beneficial  in  natural  scenery  and  Christian  worship. 
II.  Hearty  thanksgiving.     Most  solemn  and  delightful  to  hear  a  large  assembly 
sing  and  praise  the  Lord.     May  be  "  Hke  a  little  heaven  below,"  or  the  sweet 
earnest  of  the  "  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb."     III.  Cultured  song.     "  They 
were  instructed  in  the  songs  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  7).     If  a  regular  trained  or 
cultured  choir  is  impossible,  there  is  no  excuse  for  the  slovenly  songs  which 
dishonour  many  sanctuaries.     If  spirituality  of  subjects  and  proper  frame  of 
heart  be  an  apology,  on  the  same  principle  may  we  tolerate  bad  reading  and 
wretched  delivery.     Why  should  harmonious  themes  of  devotion  be  rendered 
unpleasant  to  the  outward   ears,  when  a   little   care   and    culture,  spii^it  and 
energy  might   correct   many  defects    in    religious    assembhes?      IV.    Orderly 
performance.  This  observed  and  insisted  upon.    All  classes  and  ages  co-operated ; 
instruction  imparted  and  music  regulated  for  desired  end.     Order  is  economy 
of  time  and  work,  for  without  it   both   are   lost.       The  world   began  and   is 
ruled  with  order.     Method  should  characterise  our  studies,  habits,  and  worship. 
V.  Kindly  feeling.     Some  dutiful  and  obedient  as  sons  ;  others  acted  and  loved 
as  "brethren,     No  partiaHty,  dissatisfaction,  nor  uncharitableness.     All  united  in 
feeling,  purpose,  and  effort  "  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  God."     **  Behold 
how  good  and  how  pleasant  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity ! "     Let 
us  learn  to  adapt  these  ancient  rules  to  modern  requirements. .   "Worship  should 
not  be   stereotyped,   lawless,   nor   irreverent,  but  room  for  improvement  in 
psalmody,  arrangement,  and  spirituality, 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.     Worhmen  according  to  their  and  that  in  our  present  state  of  cor- 

service,     1.  Each   a  part  in  worship,  ruption  and  infirmity  it  will  not  be 

None  silent,  none  idle.     2.  Work  no  done   as  it   should   be   done,  without 

drudgery,  no  slavery,  no  reluctance  to  labour  and  struggle.     We  must  take 

perform  it.     3.  "It  intimates  that  it  pains  with  our  hearts  to  bring  them 

is  our  duty  to  make  a  business  of  it,  and  keep  them  to  this  work,  and  to 

and  stir  up  all  that  is  within  us  to  it ;  engage  aU  that  is  within   us."      l^ht 
116 


OfiAP.  ZZT.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


workmen.  The  use  of  this  noble  word 
in  association  with  the  choral  service 
of  the  sanctuary  is  a  warning  against 
regarding  such  service  as  a  dilettante 
employment.  It  is  a  work  and  lahowr 
in  the  honourable  service  of  the  Lord, 
and  one  that  was  anciently  dignified 
with  the  name  of  prophecy.  The  use 
of  the  word  for  His  ministers  was 
adopted  by  our  Lord  when  He  said, 
"The  workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat'* 
(Matt.  X.  10) ;  and  was  among  the  last 
injunctions  that  fell  from  the  one  who 
"laboured  more  abundantly  than  you 
all,"  when  he  exhorted  the  young  bishop 
Timothy,  "Study  to  shew  thyself  ap- 
proved unto  God,  a  workman  that 
needeth  not  to  be  ashamed "  (2  Tim. 
ii.  15)  [Blunt\.  Psalteries.  Psalmody 
in  GocCs  house.  Spiritual  in  its  nature, 
metrical  (musical)  in  its  form,  cultured 
in  its  development.  The  bearing  of 
these  subjects  on  selection  of  hymns 
and  tunes,  training  of  choirs,  and  irre- 
verent singing. 

Vers.  5,  6.     A  family   choir.     The 
fathers  Asaph,  Jeduthun,  and  Heman 


presided,  and  their  children  were  v/ader 
the  ham^ds  of  their  father  (vers.  2,  3,  6). 
This  (1)  an  example  of  parental  train- 
ing, (2)  of  obedience  in  children,  (3)  of 
younger  submitting  to  elder  in  judg- 
ment and  conduct.  This  gives  order 
and  honour  to  families,  churches,  and 
communities.  In  the  words  of  God 
(ver.  5).  "  I  wish  the  time  were  come," 
says  Andrew  Fuller,  "when  we  could 
lay  aside  all  men's  compositions  and 
sing  only  the  words  of  Scripture  in  the 
praises  of  God.'*  When  shall  we  find 
the  poet  and  "the  chief  musician"? 

Ver.  7.  Number.  A  number  com- 
petent, skilful,  orderly,  and  devout. 
What  a  pattern  choir  1  All  may  im- 
bibe their  spirit  and  follow  their  ex- 
ample. "As  it  is  commanded  of  God 
that  all  should  sing,  so  all  should  make 
a  conscience  of  learning  to  sing,  as  it 
is  a  thing  that  cannot  be  done  decently 
without  learning.  Those,  therefore, 
who  neglect  to  learn  to  sing  live  in 
sin,  as  they  neglect  what  is  necessary 
to  their  attending  one  of  the  ordinances 
of  God's  worship"  [President  Edwards], 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXV. 


Ver.  1.  Harps f  tke.  History  re- 
minds us  that  great  religious  reforma- 
tions have  been  associated  with  revived 
interest  "  in  the  service  of  song  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord."  Owing  to  worldli- 
ness  in  the  Jewish  Church,  the  beautiful 
musical  service  of  the  Temple  declined; 
but  at  the  revival  in  the  reign  of 
Hezekiah,  "  the  kings  and  the  princes 
commanded  the  Levites  to  sing  praise 
unto  the  Lord,  with  the  words  of 
David  and  Asaph  the  seer."  Concerning 
the  great  American  revival  in  his  day. 
President  Edwards  writes :  "  Our 
public  praises  were  greatly  enlivened. 
In  our  psalmody  God  was  served  in 
the  beauty  of  holiness.  There  has 
been  no  part  of  divine  worship  in  which 
good  men  have  had  grace  so  drawn 
forth  and  their  hearts  so  lifted  up  in 
the  ways  of  God    as  in  singing  his 


praise.  The  people  sang  with  unusual 
elevation  of  heart  and  voice"  [J,  S, 
Pear  salt], 

Ver.  3.  To  praise  the  Lord.  He 
praiseth  God  best  that  serveth  and 
obeyeth  him  most;  the  life  of  thank- 
fulness consists  in  the  thankfulness  of 
life  [Burkitt]. 

Ver.  7.  Number.  "Nothing  pro- 
moted the  Reformation  more,"  says 
Bp.  Jewel,  "  than  inviting  the  common 
people  to  sing  psalms,  and  that  some- 
times there  would  be  six  thousand 
persons  at  St.  Paul's  Cross  singing 
together,  which  was  very  grievous  to 
the  Papists.'* 

•*  From  every  place  below  the  skies, 

The  grateful  song,  the  fervent  prayer, 
The  incense  of  the  heart  may  rise 

To  heaven,  and  find  acceptance  there.** 

[J.  PierpontJ, 


117 


BOMiLETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [ohaf.  xxti. 


CHAPTER  XXVL 

Gbxtioal  Notes.]  The  courses  of  the  porters  (vers.  1-12) ;  lots  oast  for  gate-keepers 
(vera.  13-19) ;  keepers  of  treasures  (vers.  20-28) ;  the  officers  and  the  judges  (vers.  29-32). 

Ve7'S.  1-12. — Divisions  of  the  porters.  On  the  importance  of  the  office  cf.  chap.  ix.  17- 
27  ;  xxiii.  5.  There  were  4,000  (chap,  xxiii.  6),  all  from  the  families  of  Kohathites  and 
Merarites  (ver.  14),  divided  into  twenty -four  courses,  as  the  priests  and  musicians.  Mesh. 
Seven  sons  of  whom  mentioned  (ver.  2)  ;  eighteen  given  in  ver.  9,  which  includes  rela- 
tives. Another  name  given  (ver.  14);  probably  alluded  to  in  chap.  ix.  19.  Asaph.  Not 
of  preceding  chap.  A  Gershonite,  probably  the  same  as  Ab.  in  Ex.  vi.  24  ;  and  Ebi, 
1  Chr.  vi.  37,  an  actual  son  of  Korah.  Ver.  4.  Ohed,  a  porter  for  time  of  fixing  of 
ark  in  Jer.  xv.  24  ;  xvi.  38.  B  essed  (cf.  chap.  xxv.  5  ;  2  Sam.  vi.  11,  12).  Ver.  6.  Mighty. 
Ver.  7.  Strong.  The  office  of  porters  required  physical  strength  to  open  and  close  pon- 
derous gates,  act  as  guard  against  theft  and  insurrection.  Ver.  12.  Chief  nien^  overseers  of 
the  watch.  Translate  "  to  these  divisions  of  the  porters,  principal  men  (use  assigned)  the 
watches,  together  with  their  brethren,  for  service  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  the 
*' chief  men, "  enumerated  in  vers.  1-11,  and  amounting  to  no  more  than  ninety-three, 
kept  the  watch  and  ward  of  the  house,  together  with  a  further  number  of  their  brethren 
(4,000  are  mentioned  in  chap,  xxiii.  6),  who  assisted  them  from  time  to  time  [S^eak, 
Com.]. 

Vers.  13-19. — Arrangements  of  porters.  Lots^  by  which  duties  assigned  to  them  as  to  the 
other  Levites,  and  names  of  chiefs  or  captains  given,  with  respective  gates  allotted  to 
them.  Ver.  15.  Assvpim,  literally  the  house  of  collections  (c/.  Neh.  xii.  25)  ;  probably 
a  storehouse  for  grain,  wine,  and  oiferiugs  for  sustenance  of  priests.  Ver.  16.  Shall, 
literally  "the  gate  of  projection,"  the  gate,  i.e.,  through  which  were  "  thrown  out  "  the 
sweepings  of  the  temple,  the  a^hes,  the  offal  of  the  victims,  and  the  like  [Speak.  Com.] . 
Ver.  16.  Against  ward.  Watch  opposite  to  watch.  Hosah  had  two  watches,  western  and 
the  gate  Shallecheth,  hence  kept  one  watch  over  against  the  other.  Ver.  17.  Six,  because 
eastward  gate  most  frequented.  Ver.  18.  Parbar  must  designate  the  space  between 
the  western  wall  of  the  temple  building  and  the  wall  of  the  court,  which  would  be  a  sort 
of  "precinct  "  or  ••  purlieu"  of  the  temple.  Here  were  two  gates,  at  one  of  which  two 
guards  were  stationed ;  while  at  the  other,  called  Shallecheth,  which  gave  upon  the 
causeway,  there  were  four.  It  is  noticeable  that  in  this  whole  account  the  Temple  is 
spoken  of  as  if  it  were  existing,  when  it  was  not  as  yet  built.  We  must  suppose  that 
David  formed  the  whole  plan  of  the  Temple,  and  fixed  the  stations  and  numbers  of  the 
porters,  though  it  was  left  for  Solomon  to  carry  his  instructions  out  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Vers.  20-28. — Levites  in  charge  of  treasures.  Ahijah,  doubtful  reading.  The  Scriptures 
give  Aheyhem,  "  their  brethren,"  which  is  preferable,  especially  as  there  is  no  other  mention 
of  this  A.  [Speak.  Com.].  7 reaswres,  gifts  and  payments  (Ex.  xxx.  12;  Num.  xviii.  16). 
Laad.  (chap.  vi.  17).  Jehi.  (ver.  22),  the  Jehielite.  Jehiel  gives  name  to  the  family,  which 
accordingly  includes  his  two  brothers  (xxiii.  8).  Two  of  this  family  were  the  grand 
treasurers,  under  whom  many  of  the  Gershonites  may  have  been  employed  [cf.  Murphy]. 
Ver.  23.  Of  ot  for  the  four  houses  of  Kohathites,  a  kind  of  preface  to  rest  of  the  chapter. 
i^w/e/- (ver.  24),  chief  custodian.  Ver.  26.  Dedicated,  for  service.  Ver.  28.  Hand,  in.  the 
care  of  Shel. 

Vers.  29-32. — The  officers  and  judges.  O^cg?-.?,  ccribes  or  secretaries  ;  magistrates  who, 
attended  by  their  clerks,  exercised  judicial  functions.  Outward,  the  people's  private  and 
public  affairs,  contrasted  with  functions  of  sacred  worship.  "  There  were  6,000  (chap.  ii. 
3-4)  of  them,  who  probably  acted  like  their  brethren  on  the  principle  of  rotation,  and 
these  were  divided  into  three  classes — one  (ver.  29)  for  the  outward  business  over  Israel  ; 
ono  (ver.  30),  consisting  of  1,700,  for  the  rest  of  Jordan,  '  in  all  the  business  and  in  the 
service  of  the  king ' ;  and  the  third  (vers.  31, 32),  consisting  of  2,700,  were  rulers '  for  every 
matter  pertaining  to  God,  and  affairs  of  the  king*"  [Jamieson],  i.e.,  superintended 
religious  matters  and  the  interests  of  the  king. 

EOMILETIOS. 

Porters  at  thb  Doors.— Ferw*  1-19. 

Porters  not  like    burden-bearers  of    modem  times,  but  gate-keepers   with 
special  dutie.s  and  responsibilities   (Latin  iportarius^  the  man  who  attends  the 
118 


CHAP.  XXVI.  EOMILKTIC  COMMETrARY:  CFIR0NICLE3, 


porta).  I.  Their  special  qualifications.  An  office  of  considerable 
dignity,  and  only  conferred  upon  men  of  first  rank.  More  desirable  than  a 
courtier's  position  in  a  worldly  palace.  "  I  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  the 
house  of  my  God,  &c."  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10).  1.  Physical  strength,  "  Strong  men" 
(ver.  7);  "able  men"  (ver.  8).  To  open  and  shut  heavy  gates,  ward  off  attacks, 
and  quell  insurrection,  to  exclude  intruders  and  unclean,  and  to  guard  against 
thieves  and  robbers.  In  some  respects  the  office  military.  They  were  the 
soldiers  of  Jehovah  and  guards  of  the  temple.  2.  Patient  in  spirit.  To 
direct  the  worshippers,  to  instruct,  to  encourage  the  timid,  and  continue 
watch  night  and  day  (Deut.  x.  10  ;  Lev.  viii.  35  ;  Ps.  cxxxiv.  2).  *'  A  man 
called  *  The  Man  of  the  Mountain  of  the  House '  went  round  every  night  to  see 
that  all  were  in  their  places,  and  that  none  of  them  slept.  If  he  found  any 
one  asleep  he  struck  him,  and  had  liberty  to  burn  his  clothes.  To  this 
Lightfoot  thinks  there  is  a  reference  in  Kev.  xv.  16:  'Blessed  is  he  that 
watcheth  and  keepeth  his  garments.*"  3.  Fixed  in  number.  ITo  less  than 
4,000  mentioned,  a  given  number  at  each  door,  relieved  by  others  at  a  certain 
time.  How  the  number  of  porters  were  distributed  under  25  chiefs  or  the 
93  captains  not  informed.  II.  Their  peculiar  mode  of  appointment. 
"They  cast  lots"  as  usual.  The  lot  for  sacred  purposes  sanctioned  by  divine 
authority  (Lev,  xvi.  8 ;  Num.  xxvi.  55 ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  41  ;  Prov.  xvi.  33),  and 
continued  until  the  time  of  our  Lord  (Luke  i.  9).  Among  the  heathen  often 
used  in  choice  of  a  champion  or  priority  in  combat;  in  the  decision  of 
fate  in  war;  and  in  the  appointment  of  magistrates,  jurymen,  and  other 
functionaries.  It  appears  to  be  a  solemn  appeal  to  an  omniscient  God,  and 
teaches  that  things  apparently  accidental  are  under  his  control.  "What  is 
chance  to  man,  is  the  appointment  of  God,"  says  one.  **  He  hath  cast  t.ho 
lot  for  them,  and  his  hand  hath  divided  it  unto  them  by  line." 

The  Blessing  op  Obededom, — Verse  5. 

**  God  blessed  him,"  a  short,  suggestive  phrase  connecting  past  history  with 
present  condition,  and  giving  an  insight  into  Obededom's  history  and  God's 
providence.  Learn — I.  That  God  will  honour  signal  service. 
Everything  in  material  creation  is  made  to  serve ;  no  insect,  element,  or  atom 
created  for  itself.  Man  is  made  to  serve.  Wealth,  social  elevation,  and  privi- 
lege put  him  under  greater  obligation.  Our  aim  should  be  to  do  our  duty,  that 
God  may  lead  us  to  higher  and  nobler  work.  Caleb,  Phineas,  and  Obededom 
distinguished  for  service  and  honour.  1.  Honour  is  given  naturally  Jor  service. 
In  war,  commerce,  and  legislation,  men  are  promoted,  knighted,  and  made  peers 
of  the  realm.  *'  Whoso  keepeth  the  fig-tree  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof  (by  natural 
law,  through  diligent  cultivation) ;  so  he  that  waiteth  on  his  master  shall  be 
honoured"  (Prov.  xxvii.  18).  2.  Honour  is  given  providentially.  "He  that 
waiteth  faithfully  on  his  Divine  master  shall  be  honoured."  Joseph,  Nehemiah, 
and  Daniel  ''stood  before  kings  and  not  mean  men."  "  If  any  man  serve  me, 
him  will  my  Father  honour;"  honour  with  his  friendship  and  presence  on  earth, 
and  at  length  approved  before  an  assembled  universe,  "Well  done,  good  and 
faithful  servant."  II.  That  signal  service  thus  rewarded  is  com- 
mended to  our  notice.  "  Honourable  mention "  often  found  in  Scripture. 
\.  That  we  may  discern  the  goodness  of  God.  The  smallest  service,  even  a  cup  of 
cold  water,  not  overlooked.  He  is  gracious,  accepts  and  crowns  our  service  for 
him.  "  God  is  not  uniighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour  of  love."  2.  That 
vne  may  imitate  the  example.  We  may  not  be  in  the  same  circumstances  and  able 
to  do  the  same  things,  but  we  may  cherish  the  same  spirit  and  copy  their  example. 
"  Nobleness  of  condition,"  says  Dr.  Chalmers,  "  is  not  essential  as  a  school  for 

119 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxvi. 


nobleness  of  character.  It  is  delightful  to  think  that  humble  life  may  be  just  as 
rich  in  moral  grace  and  moral  grandeur  as  the  loftiest  places  in  society  ;  that  as 
true  dignity  of  principle  may  be  earned  by  him  who  in  homeliest  drudgery  plies 
his  conscientious  task,  as  by  him  who  stands  entrusted  with  the  fortunes  of  an 
empire/* 

••  Howe'er  it  be,  it  seems  to  me, 
'Tis  only  noble  to  be  good ; 
Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets, 
And  simple  faith  than  Norman  blood  **  \Tennys(yn\, 

Guards  op  the  Stores  Types  op  Christian  Soldiers. —  Verses  20-28. 

Temple  watch  a  warfare.  Two  grand  keepers  of  stores — one  to  maintain 
officers  and  services,  the  other  for  things  consecrated  to  the  building,  *'  in  the 
house  of  God."  Many  assisted,  as  a  kind  of  brotherhood,  in  the  use  and 
defence  of  treasures.  This  service  a  type  of  Chriscian  warfare.  I.  In  the 
acqwisition  of  the  treasure.  Much  of  it  "  spoils  won  in  battles,"  taken  from  the 
enemy,  therefore  gained  by  courage,  strength,  and  conflict.  The  treasures  of 
Christian  experience,  the  privileges  of  the  Christian  Church,  and  the  advance  of 
Christian  missions  only  acquired  through  conflict.  II.  In  the  defence  of  the 
treasure.  Religion  in  the  soul,  God's  kingdom  in  the  world  must  be  kept  or 
maintained  by  fighting.  Warfare  is  constant,  enemies  attack,  temptations 
surround.  The  battle  not  yet  over,  "  Wherefore  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour 
of  God,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having  done  all,  to 
stand."  III.  In  the  use  of  the  treasure.  Ancient  trophies  were  hung  up  in 
heathen  temples.  Plunder  was  divided,  and  priests  had  influence  to  procure  the 
gods  certain  offerings  and  acceptable  presents.  Our  "  spoils "  gained  through 
God,  and  must  be  dedicated  to  him.  Samuel,  Saul,  Abner,  and  Joab  had 
collected  treasures  which  David  now  consecrated  to  the  highest  purpose,  "  to 
maintain  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Our  gold  and  silver,  time  and  strength, 
trophies  gained  over  sin,  Satan,  and  the  world,  all  laid  at  the  Saviour's  feet. 
Abraham  gave  Melchisedec  the  spoils,  and  the  victorious  officers  presented  their 
"  oblation  to  the  Lord  "  (Num.  xxxi.  60). 

The  Officers  and  Judges. — Verses  29-32. 

Thre©  separate  lists  presented  doorkeepers,  treasure-keepers,  and  rulers  of 
civil  afiairs,  or  "  outward  business  over  Israel."  Doorkeepers  were  Korahites 
and  Merarites,  to  whom  belonged  Obededom  and  his  descendants.  The  treasures 
of  God's  house  under  the  charge  of  Gershonite  branches  ;  the  dedicated  things 
under  a  branch  of  Kohathites.  The  service  **  of  scribes  and  judges "  was 
committed  to  the  Izarites,  along  with  Chenaniah  (ver.  29).  Notice — I,  The 
character  of  their  oflB.ce.  There  are  two  departments.  1.  The  judges 
administered  the  law.  Singers,  porters,  and  Levites  employed  in  the  service  of 
the  sanctuary  were  not  concerned  in  this  business.  One  department  enough  to 
fill  and  understand.  Pray  not  for  enlargement  of  your  sphere,  but  for  ability 
to  fill  it.  2.  The  officers  collected  the  revenue.  Managed  "  God's  tithes  and  the 
king's  taxes."  Thus  city  and  country,  Jehovah  and  the  king  were  cared  for, 
idolatry  and  injustice  avoided,  civil  and  sacred  interests  interwoven  and 
advanced.  II.  The  period  in  which  they  held  oflB.ce.  "■  In  the 
fortieth  year  of  the  reign  of  David"  (ver.  31),  the  last  year  of  his  reign.  He 
felt  the  end  approaching,  and  arranged  the  orders  of  the  sanctuary.  We  should 
diligently  improve  our  time,  and  if  we  do  not  reap  the  fruit  of  our  labours,  let 
us  not  grudge  it  to  our  successors. 
120 


CHAP.    XXVI.] 


EOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


nOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  5.  Blessing  of  Ohed,      I.  What 
it  consists  of.     1.  Family  increase.     A 
large  family  of  eight  sons,  descendants 
of  whom  he  might  be  proud.  2.  Family 
honour.     His  sons  exalted  to  places  of 
trust  in  the  sanctuary.     A  great  bless- 
in  f^  to  have  children  eminent  in  the 
service  of  God.     3.  Family  reputation. 
Held  in  great  repute  for  conduct  and 
character.     ''  The  memory  of  the  just 
is  blessed."     II.  How  it  is  gained.  Not 
by  wealth  and  worldly  influence.     1. 
By  a  right  mind.     Obed.   was  willing, 
very  ready  to  take  the  ark  when  all 
others  were  afraid.     When  the  heart  is 
right  before  God,  we  shall  be  eager  to 
render  any  help.     2.  By  right  action. 
This   springs   from   genuine   affection. 
The   mind   has   its  own  thoughts  and 
actings.     These  anterior  to  all  outward 
acts.     Hence  the  saying,   "Think  be- 
fore you  act."     *'  For  as  he  thinketh  in 
his  heart  so  is  he." 

Ver.  10.  A  father's  favourite. 
Simri  made  chief  not  by  right  of 
primogeniture,  but  in  office.  If  the 
ftrsthorrif  that  is,  the  issue  of  the  first- 
born had  failed :  we  learn  "the 
vicissitudes  of  families,"  the  uncertain 
tenure  of  earthly  fame  and  fortune. 
But  very  likely  he  was  better  qualified 
for  office  than  his  elder  brother.  His 
father  saw  in  him  eminent  qualifica- 
tions. What  differences  in  ihe  same 
family  I  How  anxious  parents  are  to 
possess  and  promote  clever  children  I  ^ 

Ver.  14.  A  wise  counsellor.  Lit. 
a  giver  of  counsel  with  wisdom — a 
high  commendation.  Many  have 
counsel,  but  no  wisdom.  Many  givQ 
counsel,  but  not  wisely.  Zechariah,  a 
wise  man,  equal  to  his  father  and  held 
a  chief  place.  1.  The  service  of  God 
requires  wise  men.  2.  God  in  his 
providence  raises  up  wise  men.  Hence, 
3.  This  service  is  wisely  and  efficiently 
carried  on  in  all  ages. 

Vers.  20-28.  Ministers  stewards  in 
God's  house.     "Allowed  to  be  put  in 


trust."       Hence      responsibility     and 
honour;    requiring  piety,    administra- 
tive ability,  and  faithfulness.  "  Stewards 
of   the    mysteries    of   God."     Not   de- 
positories, nor  owners,  but  dispensers 
("  rightly  dividing  "  or  dispensing)  the 
word  to  others.     "  Moreover,  it  is  re- 
quired in  stewards  that  a  man  be  found 
faithful"  (c/.    1    Cor.   iv.    1,2).     The 
treasury  of  God' s  house.     1.  Its  origin. 
As  far  back  as  the  time  of  Samuel  its 
foundations  laid   (ver.   28) ;  such   had 
been  once   established    under   Joshua 
(vi.  24)  ;  but  soon  exhausted  and  not 
heard    of    under    later    judges    until 
Samuel.     2.  Its   object.      "To   main- 
tain the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  27) 
in  its  services  and  its  officials.     The 
Heb.  means  to  strengthen,  not  the  out- 
ward building  merely,  but  to  help  its 
servants,   encourage    its   efforts,    and 
build    up    its    worshippers.      3.    The 
necessity   of  its  replenishment.      The 
more  God   gives   to  us  the   more   we 
should  devote  to  him.     Great  success 
in  business,  great  "  spoils  "  in  war,  call 
for    proportionate    returns.       Church 
revenues  ever   needed.     "The   Lord's 
position  "  should  never  be  forgotten. 

Vers.  29-32.  The  two  spheres  oj 
Christian  service.  1.  They  are  dis- 
tinguished from  one  another.  Civil  and 
religious  affairs.  Church  and  State  not 
opposed  to  one  another,  but  entirely 
distinct.  One  concerns  earthly,  and 
the  other  heavenly  affairs  in  nature 
and  purpose.  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of 
this  world."  2.  They  are  intimately 
related  one  to  another.  The  Church 
may  help  and  intone  the  State,  but  the 
State  should  never  control  nor  oppose 
the  Church.  "  It  would  certainly  be 
ruinous  to  true  religion,"  says  A. 
Clarke,  "  to  make  the  State  dependent 
on  the  Church  ;  nor  should  the  Church 
be  dependent  on  the  State.  Let  them 
mutually  support  each  other;  and  let 
the  State  rule  by  the  laws,  and  the 
Church  live  by  the  Bible." 


121 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARYi    CHRONICLES.  [chip.  xxvn. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXVL 


Vers.  1—19.  Porters.  Five  things 
are  requisite  to  a  good  officer — ability, 
clean  hands,  despatch,  patience,  and 
impartiality  [W.  Penrh\.  Divisions. 
One  man  perhaps  proves  miserable  in 
the  study  of  the  law,  who  might  have 
flourished  in  that  of  physic  or  divinity ; 
another  runs  his  head  against  the 
pulpit,  who  might  have  been  service- 
able to  his  country  at  the  plough; 
and  the  third  proves  a  very  dull  and 
heavy  philosopher,  who  possibly  would 
have  made  a  good  mechanic,  and  have 
done  well  enough  at  the  useful  philo- 
sophy of  the  spade  or  anvil  \South\ 

Ver.  27.  Spoils.  There  was  a  dis- 
pute in  the  army  of  Mohammed  between 
young  men  who  had  fought  and  old 
who  had  stayed  under  the  ensigns. 
Mohammed  pretended  to  have  received 
orders  from  heaven  to  divide  the  booty. 
This  the  origin  of  ch.  viii.  in  The 
Koran^  "entitled  the  Spoils,  revealed 


at  Medina,"  beginning  thus,  "  They  will 
ask  thee  concerning  the  spoils.  Answer, 
The  division  of  the  spoils  belongeth 
unto  God  and  the  apostle  "  \cf.  Ed.  by 
Geo.  Sale\  It  was  customary  among 
the  E-omans,  when  entering  upon  war, 
to  promise  some  part  of  their  prey  to 
their  deities.  There  was  a  temple  at 
Rome  dedicated  to  Jupiter  Prcedator, 
because  a  part  of  the  prey  was  due  to 
him  \cf.  A.  Clarke  in  loco\. 

Ver.  29.  Officers.  The  curious  fact 
comes  out  in  all  the  arrangements  that 
office  was  hereditary.  The  heads  of  the 
different  departments  are  named  after 
the  heads  of  the  families  employed  in 
them.  All  that  David  seems  to  have 
done  was  to  restore  and  regulate  a 
system  that  had  been  organised  at  the 
first  settlement  of  the  nation.  In  this 
respect  it  presents  a  striking  contrast 
to  our  modern  customs  [Murphj/]. 


CHAPTER   XXVII. 


Critioal  Notes.]  We  have  captains  of  monthly  divisions  of  the  army  (vers.  1-16), 
princes  of  tribes  (vers.  16-24),  stewards  of  treasures  and  possessions  of  the  king  (vers. 
25-29),  and  David's  counsellors  (vers.  30-34). 

Vers,  1-15.  —  Captains  of  divisions.  Arrangements  for  army  similar  to  those  for  priests 
and  Levites.  Military  force  consisted  of  12  companies  of  24,000  each,  a  company  serving 
a  month  at  a  time  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  8;  1  Chr.  xi.  11).  Chief  fatht^rs,  princes  of  tribes  and 
chief  officers  of  state.  Captains,  subordinate  to  commanders  of  monthly  divisions. 
Officers,  scribes  who  performed  duty  of  commissariat,  and  kept  muster-roll  in  army. 
This  verse  heads  the  chapter.  *'  It  may  be  safely  assumed  that  the  heading  originally 
referred  to  a  more  elaborate  description  of  the  classes  and  their  different  officers,  for 
which  we  have  here  only  a  shorter  extract "  IKeil].  Ver.  2.  Jash.,  son  of  Hachmoni 
(ch.  xi.  11 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  8)  ;  Zab.,  one  of  his  ancestors,  or  these  may  be  different  names 
of  the  same  person.  Ver.  3.  Perez^  Pharez.  Ver.  4.  Dad. ,  read  Eleazar,  son  of  Dodo 
(ch.  xi.  12;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  9).  Ver.  5.  Ben.  {2  Sam.  xxiii.  20-23).  Chief  py-iest,  i.e.,  chiei 
prince.  Abiathar  chief  priest,  but  Jehoiada  head  of  Aaronite  family,  Ver.  7.  Asahelf 
slain  by  Abner  (2  Sam.  ii.  18-23  ;  xxiii.  24)  ;  his  name  given  in  honour  of  his  memory. 
Ver.  8.  Sham.  {cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  11 ;  1  Chr.  xi.  27).  Ver.  11.  Sibh  ,  for  different  spelling  see 
oh.  ?;x.  4  ;  2  Sam.  xxi.  18.  Ver.  15.  Oth.^  a  descendant  of  the  judge  in  succession  to 
Joshua  (Judg.  iii.  9-11). 

Vers.  16-24. — Princes  of  the  tribes.  This  a  civil  institution,  in  contrast  to  the  military 
rvler.  "Rulers"  or  ••princes"  of  the  tribes  appear  to  have  been  the  eldest  lineal 
descendants  of  the  patriarchs,  according  to  the  law  of  primogeniture  [Speak.  Com.] . 
Ver.  18.  ElihUf  for  ••Eliab,"  eldest  son  of  Jesse  (1  Sam.  xvi.  6).  Ver.  21.  Abner,  Saul's 
general.  Ver.  22.  These,  princes  of  most  of  the  tribes,  for  •'  Gad  and  Asher  omitted* 
122 


cHvp.  XXVII.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Similarly,  Dan  and  Zebulon  omitted  from  the  genealogical  survey  of  the  tribes  in 
ch8.  iy.-vii.  We  can  only  suppose  that  the  lists,  as  they  came  down  to  the  writer  of 
Chronicles,  were  incomplete  "  [Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  23,  Took  not,  but  only  those  above  twenty 
years,  or  of  those  that  drew  sword  (1  Chr.  xxi.  5).  Said,  therefore  to  number  all  above 
and  under  twenty  years  old  would  have  been  immense  trouble  and  offensive  to  God. 
Ver.  24.  Finished  not  (cf.  1  Chr.  xxi.  6).  Chronicles.  The  census  was  not  completed ; 
full  details  not  reported  to  David  by  enumerators,  and.  therefore  not  registered  in  public 
archives  or  daily  records. 

Vers.  25-31. — Stewards  of  royal  possessions.  Treasvres,  those  in  royal  palace,  private 
accumulations.  Storehouses,  scattered  in  country,  for  taxes  paid  in  kind,  not  in  money. 
Castles,  watch-towers  in  border  districts  exposed  to  raids  from  plundering  tribes  in  the 
desert  (cf.  2  Chr.  xxvi.  10;  xxvii.  4).  Ver.  31.  Substance,  consisting  of  money,  fruits, 
labourers,  flocks,  and  land.  '•  David  had  become,  by  some  means  or  other,  a  large  landed 
proprietor,  as  well  as  a  capitalist,  possessed  of  much  moveable  wealth  "  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Vers.  32-34. — David's  ministers.  Compare  in  contents  and  style  with  its  counterpart  in 
2  Sam.  viii.  15-18;  1  Chr.  xviii.  15-17;  2  Sam.  xx.  23-26.  "The  li^t  is  chiefly  supple- 
mental, the  ofi&cers  mentioned  being,  in  the  main,  such  as  have  not  been  noticed  before — 
e.g.,  king's  counsellor,  king's  friend,  companion  of  the  king's  sons.  The  list  cannot  belong 
to  a  very  late  part  of  David's  reign,  since  it  contains  the  name  of  Ahithophel,  who  slew 
himself  during  Absalom's  rebellion  (2Sam.xvii.  23)  "  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  32.  C/hc/e,  David's 
•♦  nephew,"  as  word  often  used  (cf.  ch.  xx.  7  and  2  Sam.  xxi.  21).  Ver.  33.  Ahith.,  only 
mention  made  by  writer  of  Chronicles.  Companion,  "  king's  friend  '*  (1  Ki.  iv.  6).  Ver.  34. 
JehoiadOt  son  of  Ben.,  named  probably  after  his  grandfather. 

HOMILETIGS. 

The  Militabt  Fobce  op  David. — Verses  1*1 6. 

Here  an  account  of  the  army,  the  militia,  vdth  its  officers  and  regulations. 
The  organisation  in  part  inherited  from  Saul,  but  greatly  developed  by  David. 
I.  The  strength  of  its  numbers.  Twelve  legions,  each  24,000  men ; 
divided  into  regiments  of  1,000,  and  these  again  into  companies  of  100  men, 
under  the  command  of  their  respective  subalterns,  there  being  24  captains  of 
thousands  and  240  centurions.  This  a  sufficient  force  for  ordinary  purposes  of 
State ;  for  putting  down  sudden  attacks  or  popular  tumults,  and  repelling 
invasion.  "  When  extraordinary  emergencies  demanded  a  larger  force,  the  whole 
standing  army  could  easily  be  called  to  arms,  amounting  to  288,000  or  300,000 
including  the  12,000  officers  that  naturally  attended  on  the  twelve  princes"  (vers. 
16-24).  "  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude  of  an  host  (by  the  greatness 
of  his  warlike  might).     A  mighty  man  (a  warrior)  is  not  delivered  by  much 

strength"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  16).    II.    The  limited  period  of  its  service. 

'*  Month  by  month."  This  monthly  course  would  not  be  burdensome  to  the 
country  nor  royal  exchequer ;  would  be  a  training  and  discipline ;  and  would 
permit  every  soldier  to  return  to  the  pursuits  and  duties  of  private  life  for  eleven 
months  in  the  year.  None  compelled  to  serve,  nor  at  expc  uses  for  more  than  a 
month,  which  could  easily  be  borne.  Every  wise  king  will  contribute  for  public 
safety,  with  as  little  expense  as  possible  to  the  people.  "  The  prince  shall  not 
take  of  the  people's  inheritance  by  oppression."  III.  The  of&cers  by 
which  it  was  commanded.  These  termed  "the  chief  fathers,"  the 
hereditary  '*  heads  of  tribes,  who,  Uke  chieftains  of  clans,  possessed  great  power 
and  influence."  1.  Men  of  great  experience.  Not  ignorant  and  unaccustomed  to 
warfare.  They  are  mentioned  among  David's  worthies  in  2  Sam.  xxiii.  and 
1  Chr.  xi.  "  At  the  head  of  his  army  were  officers  of  consummate  experience, 
and  what  was  more  highly  esteemed  in  the  warfare  of  the  time,  extraordinary 
personal  activity,  strength,  and  valour.  His  heroes  remind  us  of  those  of  Arthur 
or  Charlemagne,  excepting  that  the  armour  of  the  feudal  chieftains  constituted 
their  superiority  ;  here  main  strength  of  body  and  dauntless  fortitude  of  mind  " 
[^^  Hist,  of  Jews"  MilmaTi],     2.  Men  promoted  by  merit.     Tried  and  distinguished 

123 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chip,  xxvii. 


by  great  actions,  then  advanced  to  great  preferments.  Favoritism  had  no 
influence.  Each  appointed  to  office  for  which  best  qualified.  Men  of  worth 
thus  encouraged,  and  public  efficiency  promoted.  "  Many  seek  the  ruler's 
favour  "  in  social  servility ;  to  whom  a  smile  from  superiors  is  like  a  sunbeam. 
But  princes  find  it  good  policy  to  promote  men  of  truth  and  incorruptible 
honesty  rather  than  sycophants  and  time-servers.  "  The  king's  favour  is  towards 
a  wise  servant."  The  great  King  will  finally  promote  "  the  faithful  and  wise 
servant "  who  has  improved  his  talents,  been  diligent  in  his  work,  and  is  ready 
for  his  account. 

The  Civil  Officers  op  David. — Verses  16-22. 

Here  a  Kst  of  hereditary  chiefs  or  rulers  of  tribes — ^tribal  princes — at  the  time 
of  David's  census.  Gad  and  Ashar  for  some  reason  excluded.  Take  the  record 
— I.  As  illustrating  the  optimist  style  of  the  writer.  David 
pictured  in  his  struggles,  elevation,  and  grandeur.  His  wars  and  conquests,  the 
extension  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  list  of  his  officers.  Arrangements  sacred  and 
civil,  and  the  use  of  symbolic  numbers  illustrate  the  same  tendency.  A  preference 
for  brilliant  scenes.  Parts  omitted  chiefly  dark.  "  Such  as  would  disturb  and  in 
some  points  obscure  the  lustre  of  the  picture.  He  collects  all  that  is  fitted  to 
represent  the  hero-king  in  his  greatness,  and  the  activity  of  his  reign  as  an 
uninterrupted  chain  of  splendid  theocratic  events.  To  finish  a  picture  that 
presents  David  in  the  meridian  height  of  his  glory  and  mighty  achievements  is 
the  obvious  aim  of  all  that  our  author  adds  in  the  way  of  supplement  on  the 
ground  of  his  resources  to  the  life-picture  of  the  great  king  as  given  in  the  Books 
of  Samuel "  [Zow^'e].  II.  As  upholding  ancient  institutions.  Moses 
gave  to  every  tribe  its  chief.  Many  references  to  the  Pentateuch,  Levitical  rites, 
and  prescriptions  of  the  law.  A  few  changes  are  made  to  meet  the  exigencies  of 
the  time ;  but  constant  regard  is  paid  to  "  the  command  of  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel"  in  ancient  days.  Institutions  educational  and  industrial,  social  and 
religious,  have  a  wonderful  energy,  re- duplicate  human  strength,  embody  and 
perpetuate  the  acquisitions  of  society  in  sacred  forms.  There  is  much  to  conserve 
as  well  as  create.  The  spirit  of  reverence  must  ever  be  joined  with  the  spirit  of 
invention ;  the  old  and  the  new  must  be  inseparably  linked  together  in  the  work 
of  the  legislator  and  social  reformer.     "  Destroy  it  not,  for  a  blessing  is  in  it." 

The  Restraints  of  God  on  the  Will  of  Man. — Verses  23,  24. 

God  restrained  David  from  completing  the  census,  and  often  controls  men's 
actions  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  will.  His  sway  most  absolute  and  indis- 
putable. He  could  not  fulfil  his  designs  without  this.  But  no  interference  with 
human  volition  and  responsibility.  Divine  restraint  over  the  human  will  difficult 
to  understand,  but  involves  no  absurdity.  How  does  God  restrain  man's  will  ? 
I.  By  revealing  his  own  will.  **  The  Lord  had  said,  &c."  We  are  apt 
to  do  what  we  think  is  right ;  hence  need  for  a  clear,  distinct  revelation  from 
God.  This  is  given.  1 .  GodJs  will  should  he  our  law.  It  is  best,  the  safest  and 
only  guide.  2.  To  disobey  his  law  is  rebellion.  David  knew  God  had  promised 
that  his  people  should  be  innumerable,  yet  was  determined  to  number  them, 
though  regarding  the  custom  not  to  include  those  under  twenty.  A  full  and 
unmistakable  revelation  of  duty  should  induce  to  its  performance  and  check,  aa 
intended,  in  disobedience.  II.  By  restraining  man's  will.  David, 
unchecked  by  Joab,  determined  to  carry  out  his  own  wish  and  make  arrange- 
ments for  political  and  military  purposes.  God  restiained  him  and  kept  him 
124 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


in  bounds.  \.  By  inward  conviction  of  v)rong-doing.  "  I  have  sinned."  Wounded 
to  the  quick,  as  if  struck  by  an  arrow.  Conscience  roused,  accused,  and  checked. 
We  cannot  ily  in  the  face  of  God  without  moral  rebuke  and  self -accusation. 
2.  By  outward  restraints.  When  Joab's  reluctance  and  natural  delay  produced 
no  impression,  God  sent  the  plague.  This  answered  the  end.  Thus  God  controls 
the  human  heart.  (Abimelech,  Pharaoh,  and  Babylonish  monarchs.)  "  The 
king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  &c." 


David's  Possessions. — Verses  25-31. 

I,  "What  they  consisted  of.  "  The  king's  treasures,"  royal  possessions 
in  palace,  and  stores  in  other  places.  1.  Treasures,  gold,  silver,  &c.,  in  Jerusalem. 
2.  Goods  in  the  provinces,  grain  and  stores  in  castles,  cities,  villages,  and  in  the 
fields  (ver.  25).  3.  Cultivators  of  the  ground  (ver.  26).  4.  Vineyards  and 
their  produce  (ver.  27).  5.  Olive-trees  and  their  produce,  and  sycamore  planta- 
tions (ver.  28).  6.  Flocks  and  herds  in  different  districts.  7.  Camels  and 
asses  (ver.  30).  As  younger  son,  David  had  not  much  private  property 
(1  Sam.  xvi.  11-20).  Now  a  laroje  landed  proprietor,  and  a  capitalist  owning 
moveable  wealth.  II.  How  they  were  gained.  By  successful  wars. 
During  Saul's  lifetime  he  had  made  raids  and  gained  wealth  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  8,  9; 
XXX.  20).  He  received  much  spoil,  and  acquired  newly  conquered  countries 
(2  Sam.  viii.  4).  "  His  olive  grounds  and  sycamore  plantations  were  in  the 
'  low  plain,'  which  was  the  country  of  the  Philistines  (ver.  28) ;  camels  and 
flocks  were  pastured  by  Arabs  (vers.  30,  31) ;  probably  on  lands  formerly 
belonging  to  Arabs.  No  doubt  he  derived  considerable  revenue  from  subject 
kings  (1  Sam.  viii.  2;  x.  19),  as  Solomon  did  (1  Kings  iv.  21),  and  he  may  have 
bought  or  rented  lands  in  different  places.  There  may  possibly  have  been  a 
certain  quantity  of  public  unassigned  land  in  Palestine  at  the  time  when  he 
became  king,  which  would  naturally  fall  into  his  hands  to  be  dealt  with  as  he 
chose.  Further,  he  enjoyed,  of  course,  the  usual  rights  of  a  Jewish  king  over 
the  landed  property  of  his  subjects,  and  was  thus  entitled  to  receive  a  tithe  of 
the  produce  (1  Sam.  viii.  15-17).  He  would  also  from  time  to  time  obtain  those 
*  benevolences '  which  were  expected  from  all  on  certain  occasions  "  [Speak.  Gom\ 
III.  How  they  were  guarded.  "All  these  were  rulers  of  the  sub- 
stance "  (ver.  31).  The  king  divided  his  private  possessions  into  twelve 
departments,  like  his  public  affairs.  In  these  departments  were  choice  men, 
able  to  manage  and  guard  his  treasure.  No  officers  for  state  and  display,  none 
for  sport,  but  all  for  service.  Men  loyal  and  obedient,  in  whom  the  king  could 
put  confidence.     "  The  hand  of  the  diligent  shall  bear  rule." 

The  Ministers  of  David's  Court. — Verses  32—34, 

In  this  list  David's  counsellors,  seven  men  of  high  position,  worthy  apparently 
of  special  mention.  Four  or  five  known  in  other  capacity  {cf.  lists  ch.  xviii. 
14-17  ;  2  Sam.  viii.  16-18;  xx.  23-26).  1.  The  counsellors  of  the  king.  First 
Jonathan,  kinsman  of  David,  a  pohtician,  scribe,  and  eminent  for  wisdom.  Then 
AliitliO'phel,  cunning  ;  held  in  great  estimation,  and  generally  followed  in  counsel. 
After  death  of  Ahith.,  Jehoiada  and  Ahiathar  succeeded  in  the  privy  counciL 
2.  The  companion  of  the  king.  '•'  Hushai  was  the  king's  companion,"  the  friend 
whom  he  entrusted  with  secrets,  and  whose  conversation  was  acceptable  (2  Sam, 
xvi.  37).  H,  an  opponent  of  Ahithophel,  but  honest  and  faithful.  3.  The  tutor  of 
the  king^s  sons.  Jehiel,  the  Hachmonite,  filled  this  position ;  an  office  mentioned 
miAy  here.     4.  Tlie  commander-in-chief  to   the   king.     Joah^    as    generalissimo, 

125 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [cha*.  «vn. 


would  be  in  some  sense  minister  of  war,  and  belong  to  rank  of  counsellor.  As 
Bucb  he  appears  to  act  in  taking  the  census  of  the  people  (ch.  xxi.).  Such 
men  eminent  for  wisdom  and  integrity,  most  honourable  and  trusty  advisers, 
but  David  preferred  his  Bible  above  all,  says  one.  "  Thy  testimonies  also  are  my 
delight  and  my  counsellors "  (men  of  counsel)  (Ps.  cxix.  24).  A  privilege  to  be 
counsellor  to  such  a  king ;  but  Jehovah  has  friends  whom  he  admits  to  his 
audience.  "  The  secret  (privy  council  met  for  deliberation)  of  the  Lord  is  with 
them  that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant "  (Ps.  xxv.  14). 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

"Vers.  1-22.     1.  David  as  a  'powerful  then  may  we  number  God's  children ! 

prince,   a   type  of  Christ.     Thousands  They  are  perpetually  increasing ! 

trained  as  regular  militia  for  his  ser-  Yer.  27.  A  remembered  name.  Asahel, 

vice.     His  kingdom  well  defended,  and  captain  of  the  fourth  course,  died  early 

secure  against  all  assault.  Christ's  king-  in  David's  reign  (2  Sam.  ii.    12-23). 

dom  and  Church  well  guarded — never  But  greatly  respected,  and  gave  name 

wants  champions ;  legions  of  angels  at  to  family  or  regiment.     The  value  of  a 

his  command.    2.  David^s  soldiers  a  type  good  name.    A  good  reputation  insepar- 

of  Christ^ s  subjects.     They  are  bound  to  able  from  man,  outlasts  every  worldly 

fight,  should  never  desert,  and  will  be  blessing.     *'  The  righteous  shall  be  had 

sure  to  win  if  faithful.  in  everlasting  remembrance." 

Vers.  23,  24.     "  The   Lord  said  he  Ver.    33.     The    King's    companion. 

would  increase  Israel."     The  wonderful  Heb.,  friend  or  companion.     A  great 

promise.     \,  Embodied  in  the  tradition  privilege  and   distinction.     ''Hushai's 

of  the  nation.     2.  The  ground  of  hope  is  not  obscurely  indicated  in  the  ques- 

for  the   people.      3.    Fulfilled  by  the  tions  which  Absalom  addressed  to  him, 

providence  of  God.  Or,  An  innumerable  **  Is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend  ?" 

people  (cf.  Gen.  xv.  5  ;   xxii.  17  ;  xxvi.  Why  wentest  thou  not  with  thy  friend  ? 

4).    1.  In  actual  existence.  2.  In  future  (2   Sam.  xvi.  17).     On  his  devotion  to 

calculations.    The  actual  number  of  the  David,  see  2  Sam.  xv.  32-37 ;    xvii.  5- 

people  living  at  a  given  time  is  not  the  16)"    [Speak.     Com.].      Abraham    "a 

Bum   of   the   Lord's   people.      In   the  frisnd  of  God."     "  Ye  are  my  friends" 

Divine  estimate  those  gone  before  and  says  Christ,  **  if  ye  do  what  I  command 

those    coming    after    are   taken    into  you." 
account.     Can   we   count    the    stars? 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXVIL 

Yers.  1-15.     Captains.    An  English  by  the  Indian's  answer,  the  officer  left 

captain   in    the   year   1759,  who  was  him  unmolested  \Baxc,ndale\. 

beating  up  for  recruits  in  the  vicinity  Yers.  25-29.  Our  treasures.  If  every 

of  Bethlehem,  Pennsylvania,  met  one  man  works  at  that  which  nature  fitted 

day  a  Moravian  Indian,  and  asked  him  him  for,  the  cows  (ver.  26)  will  be  weU 

whether  he  had  a  mind  to  be  a  soldier,  attended  \La  Fontaine].     Not  what  I 

"  No,"   answered   he,  "  I  am  already  have,  but  what  I  do,  is  my  kingdom 

engaged."     *'  Who  is  your  captain  ?  "  \Carlyle]. 

asked  the  officer.  **I  have  a  very  brave  Yers.  32-34.     Counsellor.   The  best 

and    excelkat    captain,"    replied    the  friends  are  those  who  stimulate  us  to 

Indian.     "  His  name  is  Jesus  Christ,  that    which    is    good    (Heb.    x.    24) 

Him  will  I  serve   as   long   as  I  live.  [NichoUs].      Every   friend    is   to    the 

My  life  is  at  his  disposal."     Reproved  other  a  sun  and  a  sunflower  also ;  he 
126 


CHIP,  xxviii.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


attracts    and    follows   \Richter\.     "A  "Ointment  and  perfume   rejoice   the 

faithful  friend  is  a  strong  defence,  and  heart,    so   doth   the    sweetness    of    a 

he  that  hath  found  such  an  one  hath  man's  f liend  by  hearty  counsel "  (Prov. 

found  a  treasure'*    (Ecclus,    vi.   14).  xxvii.  9). 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Critical  Notes.]     Thia  chapter  and  following  comprise  last  words  of  David,  special 

directions  to  Solomon  in  building  the  temple  and  succeeding  to  the  throne. 

Vers.  1-4. — The  assembly  of  princes.  All  various  officials,  of  whom  account  formerly 
given  ;  really  the  whole  court.  Princes,  the  term  one  under  which  all  persons  of  import- 
ance might  be  included  not  comprised  in  any  other  of  the  six  classes  \_Speak.  Com.']. 
Ver.  2.  Stood.  An  effort  in  his  age  and  weakness.  Brethren,  modest  and  affectionate. 
Hovse  of  rest.  Contrast  with  movable  tabernacle.  Ready.  Gathered  materials,  Ver.  3. 
War  (2  Sam.  vii.  5-18  ;  1  Kings  v.  6).  Ver.  4.  Juduh  (Gen.  xlix.  8-10;.  Like  me  {cf, 
1  Sam.  xvi.). 

Vers.  5-8. — Solomon  declared  successor.  Succession  indefinite  at  first  through  Nathan, 
then  a  distinct  revelation  that  Solomon  was  chosen.  Ver.  6.  Courts — i.e.,  temple  courts 
(2  Chron.  iv.  9).  Constant  (1  Kings  iii.  14;  ix.  4).  Ver.  8  Now.  Appeal  to  congregation 
first,  then  to  Solomon  in  their  presence.  Keep  and  seek.  Exhortation  similar  to  that  of 
Moses  (Deut.  xxx.  15-20). 

Vers.  9,  10. —  Charge  to  Solomon.  Know,  experimentally.  Search.  Least  failure  observed 
(cf.  Ps.  cxxxix.  1-3).  Seek  him  {cf.  Ps.  ix.  10).  Strong  (ch.  xxii.  13;  cf.  Ps.  xxvii.  14; 
Ps.  xxxi.  24).     Ver.  10.  Special  duty  urged. 

Vers.  11-21. — The  plan  of  ihe  temple.  Pattern,  worMiig  plan,  as  Ex.  xxv.  10.  Set  of 
directions  in  writing.  Porch  before  the  sanctuary  (2  Chron.  iii.  4).  Houses.  Holy  and 
most  holy  places.  Ti-eas.  Chambers  built  round  the  wall  (1  Kings  vi.  5).  Upper  chambers. 
Over  mosb  holy  place  (2  Chron.  iii.  9).  Inner  parlours.  Lower  rooms  of  side  buildings  of 
holy  place,  and  perhaps  also  of  porch.  Ver.  12.  By  the  spirit.  Literally  the  pattern  of 
all  that  was  with  him  in  the  spirit  or  the  form  of  all  that  floated  before  his  mind. 
David's  spirit,  not  God's  spirit  spoken  of  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  13.  Courses.  Explained 
chaps,  xxiii.-xxv.  Ver.  14.  Weight.  Fixing  proportionate  weights  in  things  of  gold. 
Candlesticks  in  temple  were  ten  (2  Chron.  iv.  7) ;  silver  ones  for  uses  not  specified.  Tables, 
Ten  connected  with  shewbread  (1  Kings  vii.  48);  silver  tables  for  minor  purposes. 
Bowls  for  sprinkling  (2  Chron.  iv.  11).  Cups  for  libations  (Ex.  xxv.  29).  Basons,  covered 
Vessels,  tankards.  Chariot.  Two  cherubs  on  mercy-seat  constituted  the  chariot  on  which 
Jehovah  rides  {cf.  Ps.  xviii.  10  ;  xcix.  1).  Ver.  19.  Hand.  Pattern  given  by  one  of  the 
prophets  in  writing;  or  by  divine  revelation,  for  which  hand  of  Jehovah  is  equivalent 
(2  Chron.  xxix.  15).  Vers.  20,  21.  Resume  address  broken  off  in  ver,  10.  For  former 
part,  c/.  chap.  xxii.  13.     Command,    Literally,  for  all  thy  words. 


EOMILETICS. 

David's  Address  to  the  Princes. — Verses  1-8. 

An  assembly  convened,  consisting  of  princes  of  tribes,  captains,  and  subor- 
dinate ofidcers  of  the  army,  stewards  of  the  royal  household,  and  nobles  of  the 
land.  The  nation  represented.  The  occasion  solemn  and  important.  David 
the  centre  and  chief  actor  of  the  scene,  about  to  abdicate  in  a  diilerent  way  from 
Charles  V.,  before  his  grand  audience,  after  a  life  spent  in  military  pursuits  and 
ambitious  projects.  The  scene  portrayed  worth  attention.  Notice — I.  Tlie 
attitude  ^which  David  assumed.  '*The  king  stood  up  upon  his  feet." 
Probably  had  been  sitting  before ;  very  likely  recovered  from  sickness  mentioned 

127 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxvin. 


(1  Kings  i.  1).  He  receives  strength  in  age  and  infirmity  to  stand  up  to  improve 
the  opportunity,  and  to  inspire  his  audience  with  his  own  earnestness  and 
enthusiasm.  A  reverent,  dignified  attitude  that  he  felt  due  to  the  occasion, 
indicative  of  the  influence  of  a  great  thought  over  the  mind  of  man,  and  the 
power  of  that  influence  even  in  old  age  to  rouse  to  duty.  "  Forsake  me  not,  0 
God,  in  mine  old  age,  when  I  am  grey-headed,  until  I  have  shewed  thy  strength 
unto  this  generation,  and  thy  power  to  all  them  that  are  yet  for  to  come" 
(Ps.  Ixxi.  16).  II.  The  spirit  w^hich  David  manifested.  "My 
brethren  and  my  people."  1.  A  humble  spirit.  "My  people"  whom  I  rule, 
with  whom  I  rank  myself  in  this  great  work.  He  is  their  superior,  but  does  not 
forget  the  command  "  that  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up  above  his  brethren." 
2.  An  affectionate  spirit.  "  My  brethren  "  whom  I  love,  not  servants  whom  I 
command.  Affection  and  condescension  to  inferiors  becoming  in  monarchs. 
Not  less  honoured,  but  more  beloved.  "  Love  levels  all,"  said  Cerva,ntes.  3.  A 
spirit  of  authority.  "  Hear  me."  The  king's  circumstances,  history,  and  expe- 
rience gave  weight  to  his  authority.  His  message  solemn,  requii-ed  attention, 
and  must  be  obeyed,  if  the  nation  prospered.  "  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is 
there  is  power."  Court  and  people  are  bound  in  faithfulness  to  their  sovereign, 
and  to  the  interests  of  their  country.  Hence  "  Whoso  keepeth  the  command- 
ment shall  feel  no  evil  thing  "  (Ecc.  viii.  4,  5).  III.  The  ambition  "which 
David  cherished.  "  I  had  it  in  mine  heart  to  build,  &c."  (ver.  2).  His 
cherished  resolve  not  to  be  great,  to  build  a  family  and  extend  a  kingdom,  &c., 
but  ''  to  build  an  house "  for  God,  a  purpose  which  filled  his  heart,  occupied 
his  time,  and  to  accomplish  which  he  gave  his  gold  and  gathered  his  materials. 
A  noble  purpose  of  immense  value  in  life  in  giving  strength  and  direction.  To 
have  one  great  aim,  constantly  present  and  made  the  habit  of  mind,  to  make 
every  thought  and  every  pursuit  to  centre  upon  this  aim,  will  secure  the  happi- 
ness and  improvement  of  life.  IV.  The  confession  which  David 
makes.  God  denied  him  the  pleasure  of  building.  In  his  heart,  not  executed 
by  his  hand,  ''  because  thou  hast  been  a  man  of  war,"  a  confession  candid  and 
unieserved.  Many  things  veiled  in  forgetfulness,  passed  by  in  silence,  and  never 
made  prominent  and  public.  This  a  warning  to  all,  that  sins  stain  character, 
hinder  from  noblest  work,  and  give  unsuitableness  to  its  accompHshment.  "  The 
Lord  hath  purposed  j  who  shall  disannul  it  ?  " 

"  A  greater  power  than  we  can  contradict 
Hath  thwarted  our  intents  "  \^Shaks.'\. 

The  Testimony  of  a  Noble  Life. — Verses  4-6. 

David  here  reviews  his  life,  and  at  its  close  testifies  to  the  goodness  and  grace 
of  God.  I.  In  his  choice  to  the  throne  God  displays  his 
sovereignty.  The  difi'erent  steps  mentioned.  The  tribe  of  Judah,  then  his 
father's  house,  and  among  the  sons  of  his  father  he  alone  chosen.  Tribe,  family, 
individual.  The  choice  not  according  to  man's  judgment.  One  after  anothei 
set  aside.  "  The  Lord  hath  not  chosen  these ; "  right  one  found  at  length. 
**  This  is  he."  II.  In  his  acquisition  of  the  kingdom  God  mani- 
fests his  providence.  '*To  be  king  over  Israel  for  ever."  Trained  in 
shepherd  life  under  a  sense  of  duty,  dependence  upon  God  and  self-control, 
disciplined  by  Divine  providence  to  wait  and  prepare  for  the  throne,  gifted  by 
'  God's  grace  with  special  characteristics  of  prudence,  wisdom,  generosity,  and 
courage,  he  was  elevated  to  be  king.  The  recollection  of  this  sudden  exaltation 
from  humble  station  deeply  impressed  him  through  life.  His  last  words  a 
declaration  of  God's  providence  and  mercy.  III.  In  his  son's  succession 
to  the  throne  God  fulfils  his  promise.  "  He  said  unto  me,  Solomon, 
thy  son  shall  build,  &c."  God  se«n  through  his  own  life  down  to  succession  of 
128 


cflAP.  xxvm.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


his  son — who  should  build  the  temple,  be  established  on  the  throne,  iind  be 
taken  into  special  covenant  with  God  (cf.  2  Sam.  vii.  12—16).  Blessings  entailed 
upon  family  and  posterity — "  the  promise  to  you  and  your  children."  What  we 
do,  or  sincerely  design  to  do  for  God,  though  prevented,  we  shall  in  no  wise  lose 
reward.  Satisfaction  to  parents  while  they  live,  to  have  signs  and  assurance 
through  Divine  promise  of  family  piety  and  prosperity  when  they  are  dead. 

The  Choice  of  Solomon. — Verses  5-8. 

David  addressing  the  assembly  traces  his  election  to  the  sovereignty  of  God. 
Solomon  presented  in  the  same  set  speech  as  successor;  chosen  on  the  same 
principle  as  himself,  therefore  worthy  of  reception  and  obedience.  Notice — I, 
The  method  by  which  Solomon  came  to  reign.  "  He  hath  chosen 
Solomon  to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  the  kingdom."  Divine  selection  all  through 
history  of  father  and  son.  Human  events  to  David  not  fortuitous  occurrences, 
but  Divine  acts.  Hi^nce  design,  goodness,  power,  and  providence  in  individual 
life.  II.  The  conditions  on  w^hich  his  government  w^iil  be 
established.  Not  by  his  policy,  armies,  and  fleets;  but  by  loyal  obedience 
to  God.  This  the  rule  for  nations,  leaders,  and  king.  God  purposes  and 
arranges  not  in  disregard  to  our  response  to  his  commands.  1.  The  constant 
obedience  of  the  sovereign.  "  I  will  establish  his  kingdom  for  ever,  if  he  be 
constant  to  do  my  commandments."  The  security  and  perpetuity  of  Solomon's 
reign  depended  upon  this  condition.  2.  The  intelligent  obedience  of  the  'people, 
"  Keep  and  seek  for  all  the  commandments  "  (ver.  8).  Seek,  inquire  to  know; 
then  keep,  practise  what  you  know ;  all  commandments.  Obedience  intelligent, 
obedience  impartial,  and  obedience  uniform,  the  triple  conditions  of  temporal 
prosperity,  of  real  establishment  of  families  and  nations — the  only  way  to  enjoy 
our  inheritance  and  to  transmit  it  safely  to  our  successors.  "  That  ye  may 
possess  this  good  land,  and  leave  it  for  an  inheritance  for  your  children  after  you 
for  ever, 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  David  assembled.     1.     In  a  saith  the  same  to  aU  Christian  princes, 

critical  time  of  national  history — the  but  then  they  must 'make  it  their  case 

king's   departure,  and  choice  of   sue-  to  build  him  a  spiritual  temple  \lbid.\ 

cesser.     2.  To  hear  parting  counsel  of  Be  constant  (ver.  7).  Hebrew,  strong ; 

the  dying  monarch.     Advice  to  Solo-  for  he  will  be  hard  put  to  it.     God's 

mon,  princes,  and  all ;  advice  concern-  promises  are  conditional.     See  2  Sam. 

ing  present  and  future.  vii.     As    at    this  day.     Solomon    had 

Vers.  5-8.  Solomon,  my  son.   Scarce  been   well   instructed  in  the  ways  of 

any  of  the  Roman  emperors  had  a  son  God,  both  by  father  (Prov.  iv.  4)  and 

to  succeed  him  ;  all,  or  most  of  them,  mother    (Prov.    xxxi.    1),   and    while 

till  Constantine,  died  unnatural  deaths  young  he  did  God's  commandments  and 

\jl7'app\       Shcdl      build     a     material  judgments,  as  hinted  in  these  words, 

temple  ;  Christ,  a  mystical,  that  is  the  but  he  was  not  so  constant.     Ver.  8. 

Church,  which  is   the   house  of    God  Keep  amd  seek.     Keep  what  you  know 

(1  Tim.  iii.  15).     For  this  and  the  fol-  already,   and   seek  to  be  yet    further 

lowing  promises  are,  some  peculiar  to  instructed.       By     this      latter     word 

Solomon,  some  to  Christ,  and  some  to  "  seek  "      tollit      ignorantiam      illam 

both  as  the  types  and  antitypes  [Ibid.],  crassam,  saith  Vatablus,  he  strike th  at 

/  will  be  his  father  (ver.  6).    Solomon's  afiected  ignorance  [Ibid.]. 
by    adoption    and  regeneration.     See         Ver.   8,    grounded  on  this   promise 

2  Cor.  vi.   16.      Christ's,   by    eternal  is    a     double    charge;     first,    to    the 

generation  and  personal  union.     God  people,  and  then  to  Solomon.     Keep- 

U9 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxvm. 


ing  and   seeking  the   commandments  in tellectually  and  morally.  III.  Solemn 

of  the  Lord,  is  at  once  the    test   and  in  its  sanctions.     "  In  the  sight  of  all 

the  security  of  his  people  [Murphy],  Israel,  the  congregation  of  the  Lord. 

A  religious  training.     I.    Given  with  and    in    the    audience    of    our    God." 

great  affection.     Many  sons.    Solomon  IV.  Benevolent  in  its  design.     To  be 

choson,  &c.  (ver.  5).     II.    Practical  in  established  in  our  position,  and  to  pre- 

its  tendency.     "  Keep  and  seek  for  all  serve   and   hand   down   our   trust    to 

the  commandments  of  the  Lord."     A  others.     "  That  ye  may  possess    this 

training  that  deadens ;  this  quickening  good  land,  <fec." 

EOMILETICS. 
David's  Charge  to  Solomon. — Verses  9,  10,  and  20,  21. 

Very  touching  and  important  is  this  charge ;    everything  to  give  solemnity 
and  perpetual  interest  to  the  scene.     Solomon   urged    to — I.    A  personal 
acquaintance    with   God.     "  Know  thou  the   God   of  thy  father  " — not 
theoretic  knowled^^e,  Solomon  plenty  of  that;  but  practical  and  experimental. 
David  concerned  that  his  son  should  be  religious ;  not  great,  popular,  and  wise. 
Knowledge  of  God  the  foundation  of  all  religion  and  usefulness.     This  knowledge 
includes — 1.  An  intelligent  view  of  his  nature.     Impossible  to  know  God  perfectly, 
but  belief  in  his  existence,  holiness,  omniscience,  and  truth.     The  science  of  God, 
the  central,  the  vital  science — that  which  gives  life,  unity,  and  beauty  to  every 
branch  of  knowledge.     2.  This  knowledge  obtained  hy  obedience.     Loving  and 
serving  God  the  way  to  know  him.     ''  If  any  man  will  do  his  will,  he  shall  know." 
II.  A  practical  regard  to  God's  service.    Knowledge  that  is  life 
first,  and  then  service.     Much  excitement,  efibrt,  and  service  without  personal 
acquaintance  with  God.     1.  A  willing  service.     "With  a  willing  mind."     The 
hand  may  act  without  the  will.     Service  mechanical,  drudgery,  unless  willingly 
given.     God  requires  consent — does  not  force  nor  constrain.     Taskmasters  force 
(Pharaoh).     God's  service  free  and  voluntary.     "  Who  is  willing  to  consecrate 
his  service?"     2.  A  stedfast  service.     "Serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart "^ with 
an  undivided  mind  ;   with  the  whole  heart.     Not  "  a  double  heart "  (Heb.,  a 
heart  and  a  heart),  Ps.  xii.  2.     No  duplicity  nor  deception  ;  no  wavering,  halting 
between  two  opinions,  nor  compromise  (Matt.  vi.  24).     "  Ungodly  professors  have 
two  hearts,  two  lords,  two  ends,  two  ways  "  (Cocceius).     "  Come  not  unto  the 
Lord  with  a  double  heart "  (Eccles.  i.  28).     III.  The  importance  of  the 
work  bequeathed  him  to  finish.     "  Thou  art  to  build  a  house  for  the 
sanctuary."     Solomon's  whole  life  should  be  active  and  holy  service.     The  temple 
special  and  inherited  work.    1.   Undertake  cautiously.    "  Take  heed  now."    Work 
difficult,  requiring  prudence  and  care.     Solomon  young  and  inexperienced,  and 
possibly  might  meet  with  indifference,  if  not  opposition.    2.  Finish  it  courageously. 
"  Be  strong  and  do  it."     Do  it  without  delay  and  reluctance.     *' Blessed  is  the 
man  that  findeth  his  work,"  says  Carlyle.     Many  find,   but  neglect  it.     The 
blessedness  in  doing  it.     "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them. 
IV.   The  powerful  inducements  to  the  performance  of  this 
work.     Solomon's  circumstances  most  eventful   and  inspiriting.     Ever  sur- 
rounded by  infiuences  and  motives  to  performance  of  duty.     1.  He  is  chosen  to 
the  work.     "  The  Lord  hath  chosen  thee  to  build."     Not  every  man  is  a  builder. 
Some  gather  materials,  and  others  plan  and  lay  the  foundation.     God  choosea 
and  qualifies  his  architects  in  Church  and  State.     "  I  have  raised  him  up    .    .    . 
he  shall  build  my  city  "  (Isa.  xlv.  13).     2.  The  people  are  ready  to  co-operate  with 
him  in  the  work.     "  The  courses  of  the  priests  and  the  Levites  shall  be  with 
thee"   (verse  21).     Advice  and  help — workmen  "  willing  and  skilful "  of  greai 
130 


CHAP,  xxviir.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


service.  When  none  oppose,  when  "  the  princes  and  all  the  people  are  wholly 
at  command,"  then  work  is  likely  to  succeed,  and  we  should  be  eager  to  carry  it 
on.  3.  God  will  help  him.  "  The  Lord  God,  even  my  God,  will  be  with  thee  " 
(verse  20).  God,  who  strengthens  and  prospers  the  father,  will  "  not  fail  nor 
forsake  the  son."  These  motives  fit  to  stir  up,  animate  true-hearted  workers, 
and  admonish  to  action.  Avoid  fear;  "  fear  not,  nor  be  dismayed.  Cherish 
courage;'^  be  strong  and  of  good  courage.  Begin  thy  work  at  once,  "do  it." 
"Arise,  therefore,  and  be  doing,  and  the  Lord  be  with  thee." 

**  Do  what  thou  dost,  as  if  the  earth  were  heaven, 
And  that  thy  last  day  were  the  judgment  day : 
When  all's  done,  nothing's  done  "   [Kingsley], 

God's  Relation  to  Human  Life. — Verse  9. 

This  description  of  God  introduced  as  an  argument  for  sincerity  of  life.  He 
sees,  knows,  our  hearts  and  actions  ;  therefore  serve  him  perfectly,  &c.  Learn 
— I.  That  our  life  is  exposed  to  God's  inspection.  "The  Lord 
searcheth  all  hearts."  This  implies  that  all  our  deportment  is  open  to  God's 
inspection.  Some  imagine  that  God  is  too  great  to  regard  such  a  creature  as 
man.  But  what  he  created  is  not  beneath  him  to  notice.  To  Him  great  and 
small  are  equal.  He  is  cognisant  of  an  atom  as  of  a  globe ;  of  an  insect  as  an 
angel.  From  Him  nothing  hid.  "  Hell  is  naked  before  Him,  and  destruction 
hath  no  covering."  "  He  looketh  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  seeth  under  the 
whole  heaven."    II.  That  our  service  to  God  should  spring  from 

sincere  motives.  ''And  understandeth  all  the  imaginations  of  the  thoughts." 
God's  attention  not  limited  to  actions  and  words — his  province  and  preroga- 
tive to  read  and  understand  '^  imagi7iations"  (phantases,  imaged  deeds)  *' of  the 
thoughts."  Hence  no  deceiving  Him  by  falsehood  and  form.  He  desires  "  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,'*  as  opposed  to  hypocrisy  and  self-deceit  (Ps.  li.  6).  Hearts 
must  be  sincere  and  thoughts  of  God  pure.  "  Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not 
mocked "  with  heartless,  outward  service.  "  Search  me,  O  God,  and  know  my 
heart ;   try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts,"  <fec.     III.    That    OUr    "Welfare 

depends  upon  our  conduct  towards  God.    He  is  to  be  known  and 

served.  Our  interest  to  obey.  1.  True  service  will  be  rewarded.  "  If  thou  seek 
him  he  will  be  found  of  thee."  The  smallest  service  no  trifle  to  God.  David's 
desire  to  build  well-pleasing  to  God.  "Thou  didst  well  that  it  was  in  thine 
heart."  The  will  accepted  for  the  deed.  "  For  if  there  be  first  a  willing  mind, 
it  is  accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath."  2.  Opportunity/  neglected  will  he 
disastrous.  "  If  thou  forsake  him,  he  will  cast  thee  ofi"  for  ever."  Forsake,  after 
knowing,  obeying,  and  working  for  him.  Cast  off,  as  worthless  and  lost. 
Solomon's  interest,  duty,  and  danger  are  put  before  him  in  true  and  impressive 
light  by  a  pious  and  dying  father.  If  youth  give  no  heed  to  parental  requests 
and  heavenly  calls,  they  forsake  their  highest  interests ;  enter  a  path  of  folly, 
which  leads  to  failure ;  to  death  without  recovery ;  to  a  future  without  hope. 

Instructions  for  Building  the  Temple. — Verses  11-20. 

Evidently  David  wished  to  make  a  solemn  and  formal  business,  in  giving  in- 
structions and  handing  over  the  plans  for  the  Temple  with  elevations,  measure- 
ments, apartments,  and  chief  articles  of  furniture.  I.  The  plan  of  the 
Temple.  "David  gave  to  Solomon  the  pattern."  1.  Divine  in  its  origin. 
He  claims  the  divine  sanction  and  inspiration  which  Moses  claimed  for  the  taber- 
nacle of  old  (Ex.  XXV.  40).  From  porch  at  one  end  to  sanctuary  at  the  other, 
nothing  left  to  arbitrary   choice,  to  man's  act   and   invention ;  all   given    by 

131 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CBRONl  CLES,         [chap,  xxviii. 


inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Models  given  in  Christian  life  and  Christian 
character;  the  Spirit  wiU  help  to  carry  them  out  and  guide  in  every  detail. 
2.  Written  in  form.  **  The  Lord  made  me  understand  in  writing  "  (ver.  19). 
Visions  and  dreams  pass  away.  Written  instructions  abide ;  often  consulted  and 
meet  our  necessities.  The  word  of  God  is  "  written  for  our  instruction "  in 
building  up  Christian  lift  and  the  spiritual  temple.  But  **  the  hand  "  must  be 
upon  us  to  make  the  word  effectual  and  the  work  successful.  II.  The 
materials  of  the  Temple.  Gold  and  silver,  '*  wrought  stones  and  brass  in 
abundance  without  weight."  Gathered,  as  we  have  seen,  from  all  quarters  and 
in  different  times.  David's  work  was  difficult  and  thorough  ;  lasting  and  worthy 
of  imitation.  He  gave  time  and  trouble,  his  substance,  and  his  heart  to 
accomplish  it.  III.  The  furniture  of  the  Temple.  Vessels  of  gold  and 
silver,  candlesticks  and  lamps,  tables  and  altars,  &c.  The  porch,  the  holy  and 
most  holy  place  to  be  appropriately  furnished.  In  these  directions  David  guided 
by  Divine  will,  not  by  his  own  taste.  God  only  knows  what  is  fit  for  his  own 
house.  Put  nothing  into  it  that  ought  not  to  be  there ;  take  nothing  out  which 
ought  to  be  there.  "  Look  that  thou  make  them  after  the  pattern  which  was 
shewed  thee  in  the  mount." 

David's  Address  to  Solomon. 

Observe — 1.  It  was  an  address  of  a  dying  father  to  a  son.  May  all  our  children 
read  it  with  a  feeling  heart !  2.  It  embraces  the  sum  total  of  real  religion.  This 
has  two  distinct  parts — (1)  The  first  includes  a  knowledge  of  God  :  "  Know  thou 
the  God  of  thy  fathers."  1st.  Know  him  as  a  sin-pardoning  God  (Jer.  xxiv.  7). 
2nd.  Know  him  so  as  to  be  at  peace  with  him  (Job  xxii.  21).  3rd.  Know  him 
so  as  to  love  and  live  to  him.  4th.  This  true  saving  knowledge  of  God  may  be 
known  by  its  peculiar  properties.  It  is,  first,  experimental  (Ps.  xxxiv.  8  ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  3)  ;  second,  soul-abasing  (Job  xlii.  5,  6 ;  Ep.  iii.  8) ;  third,  growing  (Job  i. 
10  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  18)  ;  fourth,  pure  (Jas.  iii.  17 ;  1  Mi.  iii.  6)  ;  fifth,  practical 
(1  Mi.  ii.  3 ;  Mi.  x.  4).  (2)  True  piety  includes  the  serving  of  God  "  with  a 
perfect  heart,  a  willing  mind."  1st.  God  must  be  served  ;  that  is,  worshipped 
and  obeyed.  2nd.  He  must  be  served  "  with  a  perfect  heart ; "  that  is,  with  an 
entire  and  undivided  heart ;  with  a  heart  inflamed  with  love  and  burning  with 
zeal  for  God's  glory.  3rd.  "  With  a  wiUing  mind ; "  that  is,  with  alacrity,  dehght, 
and  joy.  (3)  David  urged  this  exhortation  upon  the  attention  of  his  son  by  a 
threefold  consideration  :  1.  By  the  consideration  that  God  is  the  searcher  of 
hearts :  **  The  Lord  searcheth  all  hearts."  The  heathens  had  no  such  exalted 
ideas  of  any  of  their  gods.  2.  That  he  is  the  rewarder  of  piety  :  "  If  thou  seek 
him,"  in  the  way  he  hath  appointed,  "  he  will  be  found  of  thee ; "  will  make 
himself  known  to  thee  as  thy  Friend,  and  Father  and  God  in  covenant.  3.  That 
he  is  the  punisher  of  apostasy :  "  If  thou  forsake  him,"  desert  his  love  and 
service  and  turn  from  following  him,  "he  will  cast  thee  off;"  will  withdraw 
his  gracious  and  powerful  presence  from  thee,  and  change  his  countenance  and 
course  towards  thee  [JRev,  J,  Wilson\ 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  9.  The  God  of  thy  father,     1.  to    another.     Home    influence   never 

The  rich  experience  behind  these  words,  lost. 

2.  The  force   of   parental  affection  in  " The  fond  attachment  to  the  well-known 

ffivinff  that   experience.     3.  The   sus-  place,                       .      ,., 

ceptMity  of  youth   to  rrofit  by  the  "^^Z^^'^Jt.t^^^^^^iZ^, 

teaching.      Home  instruction  needed,  ^^  fg^i  it  ^'en  in  age,  and  at  our  latealj 

may  be  repeated  from  one  generation  day"    [Center]. 


CHAP,  xxvni.] 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


If  tliou  seek  God,  dsc.  1.  The  object 
of  search.  God  lost  through  sin  ;  must 
be  sought ;  worthy  of  seeking.  His 
friendship  and  favour,  the  best  of  all 
blessings.  2.  The  promise  of  success. 
*'He  will  be  found  of  thee."  This 
proved  from  Scripture  and  experience. 
A  declaration  of  David's  experience.  3. 
The  threatened  displeasure.  "  If  thou 
forsake  him,  (fee."  This  caution  to 
guard  and  stimulate.  Forsaking  God 
to  be  alienated  in  thought  and  affec- 
tion. The  unregenerate  turn  their  backs 
and  wander  like  the  prodigal.  Uncon- 
verted world  without  God,  in  dark 
region  of  atheism.  Those  who  remain 
in  this  state  will  be  cast  away.  But 
"  God,"  says  one,  "  never  cast  man  off 
until  they  first  cast  Him  off." 

Vers.  9,  10.  Fathers  and  Children. 
In  this  earnest  and  affectionate  charge 
we  see  one  generation  —  1 .  Trans- 
mitting the  knowledge  of  God  to  its 
successor.  2.  Enjoining  the  service  of 
God  upon  its  successor.  3.  Indicating 
God's  method  of  dealing  with  its  suc- 
cessor. 4.  Bequeathing  its  unfulfilled 
intentions  to  its  successor  [Mt. 
Braithwaite\. 

Yer.  30.  For  the  sanctuary  or  for 
sanctifi cation — i.e.,  where  God  may 
sanctify  his  people  in  holy  ordinances, 


and  be  sanctified  by  them  in  holy 
duties  \Trapp\. 

Ver.  11.  Place  of  the  mercy  seat,  lit. 
the  house  of  the  mercy  seat.  Seat  of 
mercy  in  Holy  of  Holies,  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Christian  Church  and  the  human 
heart. 

Yer.  14.  Gold  by  weight.  The 
vessels  for  the  holy  place  were  of  gold, 
as  those  for  the  priests'  court  were  of 
silver.  Now,  like  as  in  the  temple 
there  were  some  vessels  of  gold,  and 
some  of  silver,  and  all  had  their 
weight  and  their  use  ;  so  in  the  Church 
of  Christ  there  are  diversity  of  vessels, 
and  of  gifts  (2  Tim.  ii.)  \Trapp\ 

Yer.  18.  Chariot  a  fit  comparison, 
because  God  is  said  to  sit  and  to  dioell 
within  them.  Because  a  chariot  is 
made  to  carry  a  person  from  place  to 
place,  an  intimation  that  God  was  not 
fixed  to  them  by  the  building  of  the 
temple,  but  that  he  would  remove  from 
them  if  they  forsook  him  \^Benson\ 

Yers.  20,  21.  Learn— 1.  The  dignity 
and  lustre  of  David's  dying  hour.  2.  The 
usefulness  of  David's  death,  as  well  as 
life.  3.  The  great  privilege  of  those 
interested  and  blessed  with  the  dying 
counsels  and  prayers  of  the  godly 
\J,  Burns,  D.D.\ 


ILLUSTRATION  TO  CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Yer.  2.  Hear  me.  The  death-bed  of  a 
saint  ofttimes  resembles  the  setting  sun, 
whose  rays  are  the  brightest  when  it  is 
nearest  the  horizon.  "  The  tongues  of 
dying  men  enforce  attention,  like  deep 
harmony"  [Shahs. ^ 

••The  chamber  where  the  good  man  meets 
his  fate, 
Is  privileged  beyond  the  common  walk 
Of   virtuous  life,   quite  in  the  verge   of 
heaven  "   [Youngl. 


Yer.  10.  Take  heed.  The  sulstanee 
of  a  child's  duty  and  the  foundation  of 
his  happiness  lie  in  these  two  rules  laid 
down  in  Prov.  i.  7-9,  namely,  to  fear 
God  and  to  honour  his  parents 
[Nicholls\ 

Yer.  20.  My  God.  How  few  like 
David  have  God  and  gold  together  \(t. 
Villiers\  "  There  is  much  religion  in 
the  possessive  pronouns  "  [LtU/ier]. 


188 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxijt 


CHAPTER   XXIX 

Obitical  Notes.]  We  have  in  this  chapter  contributions  of  the  princes  to  the  temple 
(vers.  1-9)  ;  fche  public  thanksgiving  of  David  (vers.  10-13) ;  David's  prayer  for  Solomon 
(vers.  14-19)  ;  Solomon's  succession  to  the  throne  (vers.  20-25) ;  the  close  of  David's 
reign  and  life  (vers.  26-30). 

Vers.  1-9. — Contributions  to  the  temple.  Palace^  a  Persian  word  (c/.  Esther  i.  2-5  ; 
Neh.  i.  1 ;  Dan.  viii.  2)  applied  to  the  temple  (ver.  19).  Ver.  2.  Onijx  (Gen.  ii.  12) ; 
glistering,  "  coloured  stones ;  "  some  dark  stones,  of  a  hue  like  that  of  the  antimony  by 
which  women  painted  their  eyes  [Speak.  Coin.'].  Marble,  white  stones  or  alabaster,  found 
near  Damascus.  Ver.  3.  Froper  good  from  private  sources,  not  from  spoils  in  war,  &o. 
Ver.  4.  Ophir,  brought  by  Arabian  traders;  overlatj  with  veneer.  Ver.  5.  Consecrate^ 
literally  '-fill  his  hands."  Ver.  6.  Rulers,  probably  stewards  of  the  king's  substance 
(ch.  XX viii.  1 ;  xxvii.  25-31).  Ver.  7.  Drams,  Heb.  adarcon  (Ezra  viii.  27),  known  as 
Persian  daric,  the  same  as  the  darkemon  (Ezra  ii.  69  ;  Neh.  vii.  70),  variously  valued  at 
12s.  6d.  and  25s.  Tiie  writer  does  not  intend  to  say  that  the  Jews  possessed  darics  in 
David's  time,  but  to  express  in  language  what  would  be  intelligible  to  his  readers,  the 
value  of  gold  subscribed,  and  to  translate  the  terms  of  his  document,  whatever  they 
were,  into  terms  in  use  in  his  own  day  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  8,  Jehiel,  one  of  the  temple 
treasurers  (xxvi.  21,  22). 

Vers.  10-19. — David's  thanksgiving.  Father,  Israel  (ver.  18).  Ver.  11,  cf.  Rev.  v.  12. 
Ver.  12.  Power,  physical  and  moral.  Ver.  15.  Strangers  (cf.  Ps.  xxix.  12).  Abiding, 
literally,  "there  is  no  hope" — i.e.^  of  abiding  or  continuing  here.  Ver.  17.  Triest 
[cf.  Ps.  vii.  9  ;  Ps.  xvii.  3 ;  1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  Ver.  18.  This,  i.e.,  "  preserve  for  ever  this  spirit 
of  liberal  and  spontaneous  giving  in  the  hearts  of  thy  people  "  [Speak.  Com.].  Prepare, 
establish  their  hearts. 

Vers.  20-25. — Solomon  enthroned  king.  Worshipped,  prostrated  themselves  to  the 
ground ;  same  outward  reverence  to  God  and  king,  with  the  respect  due  to  each. 
Ver.  21.  I.e.,  with  drink  offerings  appropriate  to  each  kind  of  burnt  offering,  and  required 
by  law  to  accompany  them  [cf.  Num.  xv.  5,  7,  10).  Ver.  22.  Second,  for  first  see  1  Kings 
i.  35-39.  This  a  more  formal  and  representative.  Ver.  23.  Sat.  Solomon  actually  reigned 
during  some  short  time  of  his  father's  life  (1  Kings  i.).  Ver.  24.  All  sons,  even  Adonijah 
(1  Kings  i.  53).     Ver.  25.  Magnified  (1  Kings  iii.  13),  Solomon's  grandeur  traced  to  God. 

Vers.  26-30. — Close  of  David/s  reign  and  life.  Ver.  27.  Time  {cf.  1  Kings  ii.  11).  For  more 
exact  account  of  duration  of  reign,  2  Sam.  v.  5.  Ver.  28.  Age,  in  his  seventy-first  year. 
Ver.  29.  Book  used  by  author;  of  this  and  book  of  Gad  no  account.  Seer,  a  commoner 
title  than  that  of  Samuel.  Ver.  30.  Went,  a  singular  expression.  '*No  other  instance  of 
this  in  Scripture.  '  The  times  that  went  over  David '  were  the  events  that  happened 
to  him.  Compare  his  own  words  in  Ps.  xxxi.  15:  'My  times  are  in  thy  hand'" 
[Syeah,  Com.}, 

EOMILETICS. 

Contributions  for  Building  the  Temple. — Verses  1-10. 

David  addresses  all  the  congregation  respecting  his  son's  tender  age,  his 
personal  gifts,  and  efforts  towards  building  the  temple.  He  makes  an  earnest 
appeal,  and  meets  with  a  ready  response.  I.  David's  example  in  giving, 
**  I  have  prepared  with  all  my  might."  1.  Giving  from  his  own  resources.  Public 
resources,  such  as  spoils  of  war,  numerous  and  most  valuable.  Private  resources ; 
his  own  "  proper  good "  or  private  property ;  additional  gifts ;  selected  with 
great  care  "  the  gold  of  Ophir,"  the  purest  and  finest  in  the  world  (Job  xxii  24  ; 
Is.  xiii.  12);  bestowed  for  a  specific  purpose;  the  overlaying  of  the  walls  of  the 
temple.  2.  Giving  in  right  order.  The  heart  first,  and  then  the  substance. 
True  religion  touches  the  heart  and  conscience,  and  regulates  the  gifts.  "I 
have  set  my  affection  to  the  house  of  my  God  "  (ver.  3).  3.  Giving  in  true  spirits 
**  I  have  prepared  with  all  my  might."  Might,  intelligence,  and  ardour  must  bi^ 
tkrowa  mt©  God*8  work,  or  nothing  will  be  done.  Pavid  east&  not  ^la.  kurdei^ 
184 


CHAP.  xxK.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


upon  princes  and  people,  though  the  temple  for  them,  but  contributes  to  the 

utmost  of  his  power,  and  sets  them  a  noble  example.     II.   David's  appeal 

to  others  to  give.    "  Who,  then,  is  wilhng  to  consecrate  his  service  ?"  (ver.  5). 

He  levies  no  tax,  but  asks  for  free-will  offerings  of  the  people.     This  the  right 

way  to  build,  support,  and  establish  the  house  of  God.     This  appeal  founded  on 

many  things.     1.  He  reminds  them  of  Solomoyi^s  necessities.     Young  and  tender, 

without  much  wisdom  and  experience,  but  under  great  responsibilities.     Yet 

God  had  chosen  him  for  the  undertaking.     Hence  no  reproach  to   David  for 

partiality  and  preference  of  Solomon.     Young  people  should  ever  be  encouraged 

in  good  works.     2.  He  sets  before  them  the  greatness  of  the  work.      "  The  work  is 

great."     Great  not  in  outward  appearance,  but  great   in   purpose.     "  The  palace 

not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord  God."     3.  He  stimulates  them  by  his  own  example. 

"  Now  I  have  prepared."     Exhortation  and  appeal  must  be  backed  by  personal 

effort   and   example   to   be   eiEcient.      III.   The    response    tO    David's 

appeal  (vers.  6-9).     They'' offered  willingly."     The  response  was:  \.  Hearty 

response  not  only  filled  their  hands,  but  offered  "  with  perfect  heart "  (ver.  9). 

*'  Of  every  man  that  giveth  it  wilHngly  with  his  heart  ye  shall  take  my  offering" 

(Ex.  XXV.  2).     2.  Immediate  response.     No  hesitation,  no  consultation  nor  delay. 

This  damps  ardour,  and  makes  all  work  difficult.    3.  Liberal  response.    Influenced 

by  the  persuasive  address  and  powerful  example  of  the  King,  they  gave  according 

to  their  abilities.     Their  united  contributions  amounted  to  the  gross  sum — of 

gold  5,000  talents  and  10,000  drams,  of  silver  10,000  talents,  besides  brass  and 

iron.      IV.   The  results  of  this  response.     "  They  rejoiced  " — "  were 

glad  with  great  gladness."     David  rejoiced  to  see  the  work  on  which  his  heart 

was  set  so  earnestly  carried  on.     Princes  rejoiced  under  a  sense  of  duty  rightly 

performed,  and  God's  acceptance  of  it.     People  rejoiced  in  the  generosity  of  their 

rulers.    The  selfish  and  niggardly  ai^e  miserable ;  the  sympathetic  and  self-denying 

are  happy  and  cheerful.     "  The  Uberal  soul  shall  be  made  fat  "— 

"  The  truly  generous  is  the  truly  wise ; 

And  he  who  loves  not  others  lives  unblest.*' 

Christian  Experience  and  Christian  Influence. — Verses  1-10. 

The  life  of  David  fitted  to  encourage  faith  in  God,  and  proves  that  a  good  man 
may  begin  a  woik  which  shall  continue  after  his  death.  Learn^from  these  verses — 
I.  The  nearer  a  good  man  approaches  his  end,  the  more  spiritually  'minded  he  becomes. 
David  intensely  anxious  about  the  work  of  God.  Past  experience  of  divine  favour 
and  anticipations  of  future  good — consciousness  of  God's  presence  and  of  God's 
guidance  give  hope  and  assurance.  The  powers  of  the  world  to  come  influence 
and  prepare  for  the  end.  II.  The  more  spiritually  minded  a  good  man  becomes, 
the  greater  his  influence  upon  others.  The  force  of  his  example,  the  authority  of 
his  teaching,  backed  by  a  consistent  consecrated  life,  have  more  influence  than 
the  sceptre.  Exalted  in  place  and  dignity,  David  shone  in  spiritual  character, 
drew  because  he  led,  stimulated  others  because  earnest  himself.  III.  The  greater 
influence  a  good  man  has  upon  others,  the  more  certainicill  God^s  work  be  accomplished. 
David  died  before  the  temple  was  built,  but  his  influence  lived.  His  persuasion, 
not  enactment,  won  the  hearts  and  prompted  the  efforts  of  the  people.  He  re- 
joiced in  the  succession  of  his  son  to  the  throne,  and  in  the  offerings  of  the  nation 
for  the  work  of  God. 

A  Call  to  Early  Devotedness. — Terse  5. 

I.  We  shall  explain  what  we  regard  as  the  consecration  of  sei'vice  to  God. 
1.  There  must  be  correct  views  of  the  Divine  character  and  claims;  2.  A  practical 
obedience  t©  the  will  of  God;  3.  Active  exertion  to  promote  the  Divine  glory. 

I3» 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARYi  CHROiNlCLES. 


[chap.  XXIX. 


II.  We  shall  present  the  considerations  which  ought  to  urge  to  an  engagement 
in  the  service  of  God.  1.  We  are  placed  under  universal  and  imperative  obligation 
to  do  so ;  2.  The  influence  his  service  has  in  preventing  the  degradation  and  pro- 
moting the  dignity  of  our  nature ;  3.  The  true  and  solid  pleasure  his  service 
communicates  to  the  soul ;  4.  The  glorious  recompense  by  which  the  engagements 
of  his  service  are  consummated.  III.  We  shall  impress  the  question  by  which, 
to  an  engagement  in  the  service  of  God,  you  are  emphatically  challeuged 
[J.  Parsons], 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Yer.  3.  /  have  set  my  affection.  The 
force  of  religious  affection  for  one 
thing.  1.  In  its  possession  and  govern- 
ment of  the  mind.  To  build  the 
thought  of  his  mind,  the  object  of  his 
life.  ''  This  one  thing  I  do."  2.  In 
its  command  over  the  resources  of  our 
life.  He  prepared  and  gave  with  all 
his  might  gold  and  silver  ;  the  spoils  of 
his  enemies,  and  the  treasures  of  his 
palace,  devoted  to  the  chosen  work,  not 
to  transient  pleasure,  nor  temporal 
interests.  Such  thought  and  pains, 
such  concentration  of  purpose  and 
affection  rebuke  the  loiterers  and  half- 
hearted. 

Ver.    5.    Consecration.      1.    Service. 
Every   child  of    God   is   a   servant,  a 
worker,   a  commissioned   officer.       In 
performance   of    life's   duties   are   de- 
manded— First  :  A   settled  purpose,   a 
purpose  arising  from  a  survey  of  our 
being,  relationships,  and  surroundings. 
Life's  great  question,  "  What  must  I 
do  ?  '*       Secondly  :    An    active    resolve. 
Will  the  motive  power   within.     The 
energies   of    life   in   the  will — rightly 
directed,  obstacles  like  chaff  before  it. 
But  religious  service  specified.     Many 
receive  but  give  not,  unprofitable  ser- 
vants, (fee.  2.  A  willing  service.  "  Who 
is   willing?  "      This    is   the   principal 
quality  in  Christian  service.     Gigantic 
intellect,  profusion  of    gifts,  untiring 
activity,  a  great  moral  force,    and  all 
these  put  together  without  the  heart, 
God  will  reject;  but  two  mites  and  the 
heart  He  will  accept.     First :  A  willing 
service  is  the  only  efficient  service.  Things 
unwillingly  done,  badly  done.   Workers 
that   need   not   be   ashamed   of   their 
work,  put  their  heart  into  it.  Secondly : 
The   willingness  of  our  service  is  the 
136 


only  part  of  it  which  is  absolutely  required. 
What    God   wants  is  nowhere    to   be 
found  except  within  the  human  breast. 
It   is   the  only   treasure  God   covets. 
"  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart."     3.  An 
immediate  service.    '*  This  day."    Every 
Jew's    attention     was     fixed    on    the 
cherished  object  of  David's  life.     We 
are  instructed  to  build  a  temple   for 
God,  have  our  work  planned  and  we 
can  begin  "this  day."     Look  generally 
at  the  subject.     First :  Seasons /or  ser- 
vice are  never  absent.     A  farmer  is  busy 
summer  and  winter.     Christians  need 
lose  no  time,  nor  wait  for  opportuni- 
ties.    Some  wait  for  special  occasions 
which  they  never  find.     Ignorant  to  be 
taught,  erring  to  lead  home  and  poor 
always  with  us.     Secondly  :  Efficiency 
and  pleasure  ensue  when  service  is  per- 
formed  in   its   own   time.     Service  of 
Jesus  like  a  meal,  must  be  taken  at  its 
proper  time  to  produce  enjoyment  and 
strength.     If  morning  prayer  be  said 
at  night  its  unction  is  lost.    Now  is  the 
gospel's    great    time,    "  the    accepted 
time."     4.  The  highest  service,    "  Unto 
the   Lord."      Noble   motives   produce 
highest   service.      Some   serve   Satan, 
themselves,    and    the    world  ;  as    the 
object,    so  the  nature  of   the   service. 
Every  service  receives   its   inspiration 
from  the  Master.     The  service  of  the 
Lord  implies.  First :  That  the  mind  is 
perpetually  under  the  injluence  of  divine 
truth.      Holy   thoughts   produce   holy 
living.     As  we  think,  so  we  live  ;  he 
who  thinks  Christ  lives  Christ.    **  Let 
this  mind  be  also  in  you,  &c."  Secondly : 
TJtat  holy  thoughts  are  actuated  by  th% 
presence  of  the  Spirit   in    them.     This 
communion  is  maintained    by  prayer. 
Best  thoughts  sent  up  to   heaven   to 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


receive  the  Master's  living  touch.    The  soul  of  the  iiiistii-  is  always  miserable, 

fire  must  be  fanned  into  a  flame  by  his  and  sinks  lower  into  spiritual  destitu- 

breath      The  praying  heart  has  work-  tion.    The  good  man  lives  like  the  sun, 

ir-  lands.      Thirdly:  Entire  consecra-  and  shines  to  bless  in  the  influence  of 

tiou.     We  cannot  serve  two  masters,  ideas,  wealth,  and  effort.     "  The  bless- 

GoJ's  service  enough  to  absorb  our  whole  ing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish 

being.    These  are  the  steps — a  Saviour  came    upon    me ;  and    I    caused   the 

from  sin,  an  example  to  follow,  efforts  widow's  heart  to  joy,  &c." 

put  forth,  and  a  reward  in  expectation.  Vers.  1—9.     The  principles  of  Ghris- 

*'  Not  with  eye  service  as  men-j)'<'  users,  tian  worh.     1,    Personal  consecration 

but  as  servants  of  Christ,  &c."  \_rhos.  and  example.     2.  Willing  co-operation 

DavieSy  D.D.\  by  all.     3.  Appropriateness  of  service 

Yqt.^.  Liberality  and  joy.   Liberality  and    gifts.      4.    Animated   by   a   true 

often    brings  temporal  wealth,   invari-  spirit  of  enthusiasm  and  joy. 

ably  in  spiritual  matters  does  it  bring  u  ^^t  us  do  our  work   as  well, 

wealth  and   joy  of  soul.      Every  effort  Both  the  unseen  and  the  seen  ; 

has  r( 'iction,  and  reaction  the  law  of  ^ake  the  house  where  gods  may  dwell, 

material    and    spiritual    worlds.      The  Beautiful,  entire,  and  clean " 

^  iLongfellowj. 

HOMILETIGS. 

The  Last  Thanksgiving. — Verses  10-20. 

Every  sentence  weighed  and  measured  for  the  occasion.  The  scene  grand  and 
impressive.  "  David's  Psalms,  towards  the  latter  end  of  the  book,  are  most  of 
them  Psalms  of  praise.  The  nearer  we  come  to  the  world  of  everlasting  praise 
the   more  we  should    speak    the   language  and    do  the  work  of    that  world." 

I.  The  infinite  perfections  of  God.  Adores  God  and  ascribes  glory 
to  him.  1.  God  in  his  unspeakable  grandeur.  "  Thine,  O  Lord,  is  the  great- 
ness!^ "  Thou  art  great,  and  greatly  to  be  feared;"  the  power ,  "in  thine  hand 
is  power  and  might"  (ver.  12);  the  victory ^  "the  victory  (strength)  of  Israel" 
(1  Sam.  XV.  29) ;  the  majesty,  "  honour  and  majesty  are  before  him  (his 
inseparable  attendants)"  (Ps.  xcvi.  6).  2.  God  in  his  universal  dominion.  "Thine 
is  the  kingdom,  0  Lord."  Exalted  over  all,  ruling  without  rival.  3.  God  in 
his  absolute  ownership.  "  All  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is  thine." 
Proprietor,  not  Trustee,  of  all  the  universe.  A  title  underived  and  not  shared 
by  another.  His  inheritance  infinite  and  secure.  He  had  no  predecessor,  will  have 
no  successor,  and  nothing  will  ever  pass  from  him.  4.  God  in  his  covenant  relation, 
*'Lord  God  of  Israel,  our  Father."  The  expression  more  fuU  in  ver.  18.  He  was 
the  tutelary  God  and  fountain  of  blessing  to  the  patriarchs,  with  whom  he  made 
special  covenants.  5.  God  in  his  goodness  to  men  (ver.  12),  "Riches  and  honour" 
come  from  him.  He  gives  strength  and  makes  great.  The  piinces  merited 
nothing  by  their  generosity.  All  through  the  influence  of  his  grace  ;  therefore, 
no  g  ound  for  boasting.  "  Let  no  flesh  glory  in  liis  presence ;  for  of  him,  and 
throigh  him,  and  to  him,  are  all  things ;  to  wh  )iii   be  glory  for  ever.     Amen." 

II.  The  peculiar  relations  of  man  to  the  infinite  God.  The 
Psal  a  not  only  lilled  with  devout  reveience  to  God,  in  language  of  beauty  and 
fi.ial  piety ;  but  a  description  of  man  as  unworthy,  dependent,  and  short-lived. 
1.  Man  is  a  dependent  creature.  The  more  we  think  of  God's  greatness,  the 
more  we  feel  this,  "Who  am  I?" — {a)  Dependent  for  substance  to  give.  "Of 
thine  own  have  we  given  thee."  (b)  Dependent  for  the  disposition  to  give  it. 
He  works  in  us  to  will  and  to  do,  etc.  (c)  Theiefore,  indebted  to  God  for  all 
things.  Thanks  due  to  him  for  heart  and  mind,  substance  and  success.  2.  Man 
is  a  short-lived  creature.  Tiie  earth  abides,  its  inhabitants  die.  Life  a  pilgrim' 
age  ;  we  are  strangers  and  sojourners,  not  at  rest,  not  at  home.     Life  a  shadow, 

137 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxix. 


transient,  dark,  and  vain ;  ending  in  perfect  darkness  or  perfect  light.  Life 
uncertain  :  "  there  is  none  abiding."  We  can  neither  expect  to  stay  long,  nor 
work  much  while  we  do  stay  on  earth.  If,  then,  uncertain,  what  are  the 
services  of  a  poor  short  life  ?  God  favours  us  by  their  acceptance.  3.  Mail's 
conduct  is  observed  hy  God.  "  Thou  triest  the  heart."  Seest  the  motives,'  as  well 
as  the  gifts  for  thy  cause.  Takest  pleasure  in  uprightness  of  heart.  An  act,  a 
life  may  be  misinterpreted  or  despised,  but  the  good  man  is  conscious  of  integrity 
("  I  know")  and  may  appeal  to  God,  who  is  acquainted  with  all  our  way.  We 
can  neither  rejoice  nor  work  without  a  sense  of  spiritual  rectitude.  "  If  our 
heart  condemn  us,  God  is  greater  than  our  hearts,  and  knoweth  all  things." 

God's  Proprietorship  and  Man's  Obligation  to  Him. — Verses  13-16. 

I.  God  owns  all  things.  1.  Absolutely.  "Thine."  2.  Universally.  "All 
that  is  in  the  heavens,  &c."  (ver.  11).  3.  Perpetually.  He  will  eternally  keep  his 
own.  II.  Man's  obligation  to  God.  1.  To  render  thanks  to  God. 
Every  gift  from  thee,  therefore  thank  the  Giver.  "What  shall  we  render  to  the 
Lord  for  all  his  benefits?"  2.  To  use  rightly  the  gifts  of  God.  Health,  time, 
■  and  money  not  to  be  abused— should  be  used  carefully.  Stewards  should  be 
found  faithful.  *'  Will  a  man  rob  God  ?  "  All  essentially  God's,  and  should  be 
willingly  given  to  him. 

"  Lord,  what  my  talents  are  I  cannot  tell, 
Till  thou  shalt  give  me  grace  to  use  them  well : 
That  grace  impart ;  the  bliss  will  then  be  mine, 
But  all  the  power  and  all  the  glory  thine." 

The  Sojourners  and  the  Shadow;  or,  Different  Aspects  of  Life. — Verse  15. 

Those  epithets  do  not  apply  to  all  men  indiscriminately.  Human  life  has 
varied  aspects  according  to  moral  condition  and  future  expectation.  I.  All 
men  are  sojourners  on  earth.  David  uses  language  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Jacob,  who  lived  as  men  without  permanent  home.  All  sojourners  or 
pilgrims  on  earth,  because  all  passing  through  it  to  a  future  beyond  it.  Stei-n 
law  compels  advance.  We  live  and  we  must  die.  Not  naturalised,  no  rights  of 
inheritance,  foreigners  here ;  we  should  seek  home,  rest,  and  bliss  in  heaven. 
II.  All  men  sojourn  in  shadows  on  earth.    "  Our  days  on  earth 

are  as  a  shadow."  1.  Life  itself  is  a  shadoiv.  In  swiftness  and  uncertainty; 
darkness  and  perplexing  changes.  "  Shadows  in  career,"  says  Geo.  Herbert. 
We  flee  as  a  shadow  and  continue  not  (Job  xiv.  2).  2.  Men  walk  in  shadows. 
"  Every  man  walketh  in  a  vain  show  (an  image)  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  6).  "  All  shadows  and 
pursuing  slimlows,"  says  Burke.  Deluded  by  sense,  refusing  to  see  the  only 
lasting  substance ;  men  live  in  lies,  dream  of  false  pleasure,  and  find  everything 
fleeting  and  unsubstantial.  After  all  discussions  concerning  the  supreme  good, 
some  pointing  to  pleasure,  some  to  virtue,  and  others  to  apathy,  who  can  give  a 
definite  and  decisive  answer  ?  Life  without  God  is  vain,  and  not  worth  living. 
**  Who  knoweth  what  is  good  for  man  in  this  life,  all  the  days  of  his  vain  life 
which  he  spendeth  as  a  shadow  "  {Heb.  "  the  number  of  the  days  of  the  life  of  his 
vanity")  (Ecc.  vi.  12).     III.    Only   some  men  are    strangers  on 

earth.  Christians  are  strangers.  They  feel,  dress,  and  act  as  such.  "Confess 
that  they  are  strangers  and  pilgiims  on  the  eruth."  But  a  large  class  of  men  to 
whom  the  world  is  perfectly  congenial;  who  feel  nothing  strange,  nothing 
unnatural.  They  are  in  their  element ;  find  their  place  and  satisfaction  in  its 
pursuits  and  enjoyments.  They  desire  no  better  country,  but  seem  to  fix  their 
138 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY i  OHMONIOLES. 


hearts  and  homes  in  this,  through  which  they  rapidly  pass.     What  a  foolish 
exchange ;  shadows  for  substance ;  ti-ifles    or  eternity  1 

"  All  on  earth  is  shadow, 
All  beyond  is  substance.     How  solid  all 
"Where  change  is  known  no  more  I  •'    [Young'\* 

The  Last  Prayer.— Fer^e^  18,  19. 

After  solemn  recognition  of  God's  sovereign  and  universal  proprietorship,  an 
unqualified  disclaimer  of  all  merit,  we  have  earnest  and  appropriate  prayer  for 
people  and  prince.     I*  Prayer  for  the  people.     Praise  should  ever  end 
in  prayer  for  ourselves  and  others.     1.  That  they  may  he  kept  in  the  right  mini. 
**  Keep  this  for  ever,"  &c.     This  disposition  of  joyful,  willing  consecration  of 
heart  and  gifts  to  thee.     Let  it  not  be  transient  and  forgotten,     2.  That  the 
perpetuity  of  this  right  mind  may  be  properly  based.     Promises  are  broken ; 
appearances  change  and  hopeful  beginnings  may  fall   through.     The  heart,  the 
deepest  source,  must  be  fixed,  framed,  and  established.     "  Prepare  their  heart 
unto  thee."     II.   Prayer   for   Solomon.     Blessings  fit  &nd  most  needful. 
1.  That  he  may  obey  God.     '*  Give  to  Solomon,  my  son,"  first  of  all  sincerity,  a 
perfect  heart.     Then  help  him  *'to  keep  thy  commandments,"  binding  on  con- 
science ;  "  thy  testimonies,"  evidences  of  God's  character  ;  *'  and  thy  statutes," 
enactments  for  instruction  of  the  people.     2.  That  he  may  build  the  temple  of 
God.     **  And  to   build   the  palace."     Mark  the  order — right  in  heart  first,  then 
engagement  in  work.     True  to  God,  faithful  in  service.     This  prayer   required 
now.     We   build   temples,   fortunes,  and  families — make  '^  provision  "  for  grand 
enterprises,  but  forget  that  materials,  strength,  and  stability  come  from  God, 
"  Except  the  Lord  build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it." 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Vers.  10-20.     David^s  thanksgiving,  Yer.    15.     Apply    to    the  Christian, 

1.      Its    adoration    of    God.     2.     Its  Be  vigilant  in  duty  while  here.     Im- 

acknowledgment  of    dependence  upon  prove  the  world  as  much  as  possible 

him.     3.  Its  recognition    of    the    in-  while  in  it.     Seek  to  persuade  others 

fllience   of   his  grace.      4.  Its  solemn  to  go  with  you  to  "  a  better  country, 

appeal  to  conscious  integrity.     5.  Its  even  a  heavenly  one."     Our  days  on 

earnest  prayer  for  king  and  people.  earth,    dec.      1.     The    brevity   of   life. 

Vers.  12-14.     The  right  value  and  "Thou  hast  made  my  days  as  a  hand- 

right  use  of  divine  gifts.     1.  We  only  breadth."  2.  The -yam^y  of  life.  "Every 

give   what  has  been   given  to  us.     2.  man   at   his    best   state  is   altogether 

We  only  give  what  we  must  leave.     3.  vanity."     3.    The    emptiness    of    life. 

We  have  but  a  short  time  to  give  at  "  Every  man  walketh  in  a  vain  show." 

all.  4.  The   end   of   life.     "Make    me   to 

Ver.  14.     Of    thine    own    have   we  know  mine  end."     ^^  Hays  Sive  one  of 

given    thee.       1.    Apply    to    temporal  the  shortest    measures   of   time ;  but 

things.     Money,  time,   &c.     2.  Apply  long  enough  to  decipher  man's  life  by  " 

to  spiritual  things.    Repentance,  faith,  \Trapp\. 

and  works,  bestowed  by  God  and  due  Ver.  19.  To  keep  thy  command- 
to  him.  ^  "  When  ye  have  done  all  ments.  Not  for  wealth,  power,  nor 
those  things  which  are  commanded  learning.  "  Learn  here,"  says  Trapp, 
you,  say.  We  are  unprofitable  servants ;  "  what  to  pray  for  in  the  behalf  of  our 
we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  children.  A  child  of  many  such 
^  ^®»  prayers  cannot  easily  miscarry." 

139 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxix. 

HOMILETIGS, 
Solomon's  Elevation  to  the  Throne. — Verses  20-25. 

The  second  time.  The  first  done  hastily,  on  account  of  Adonijah's  conspiracy 
(cf.  1  Ki.  i.  35-39).  This  anointment  deliberate,  most  solemn,  and  by  a 
representative  assembly.  I.  The  Divine  choice  of  Solomon  to  the 
throne.  "S.  sat  on  the  throne  of  the  Lord."  Not  David's  throne,  nor 
Israel's  to  give  away.  The  LordJs  in  a  special  sense.  Hence  the  government 
called  a  Theocracy^  God's  government,  by  Josephus.  All  thrones  belong  to  him. 
He  sets  up,  deposes,  and  determines  the  destiny  of  rulers.  "  By  me  kings  rule 
and  decree  justice.  By  me  princes  rule,  and  nobles,  even  all  the  judges  of  the 
earth."    II.  The  loyal  obedience  to  Solomon  on  the  throne. 

This  most  joyful  and  universal.  1.  The  people  submitted.  Kepresented  by  ''all 
the  princes  and  the  mighty  men,"  they  put  the  hand  under  Solomon's  thigh 
and  bound  themselves  by  oath  to  allegiance.  "  All  Israel  obeyed  him."  2. 
Theroyal  family  submitted.  *' All  the  sons  likewise  of  King  David."  Some  of 
them  were  elder  and  of  nobler  birth  or  of  nobler  mothers.  But  now  convinced 
by  the  national  act  and  God's  choice  that  Solomon  was  to  be  king.  Adonijah 
failed  and  died.  God's  will  done  notwithstanding  man's  claims  and  ambitious 
designs.  III.  The  prosperity  of  Solomon  on  the  throne.  "The 
Lord  magnified  Solomon  exceedingly."  Notice — 1.  The  source  of  prosperity. 
Ascribed  to  the  source  of  all  greatness.  A  majesty  "  bestowed,"  not  humanly 
cren'  1.  2.  The  peace  which  attended  the  prosperity.  No  rival  to  disquiet,  no 
foreign  power  to  oppose.  "  All  Israel  obeyed  him."  3.  A  prosperity  unequalled. 
"  Such  royal  majesty  as  had  not  been  on  any  king  before  him  in  Israel."  A  fit 
type  of  Christ.  "  He  was  a  king  blessed  of  the  King  of  kings"  \8ha'kes\  "I 
was  great  and  increased  more  than  all  that  were  before  me  in  Jerusalem," 

David's  Latter  End. — Verses  26-30. 

The  writer  now  finishes  a  picture  which  presents  the  great  king  in  meridian 
splendour.  The  btilliant  life  is  closing  and  the  evening  is  calm  and  peaceable. 
I.  The  length  of  David's  reign.  "The  time  that  he  reigned  over 
Israel  was  forty  year.s."  This  divided  into  two  eventful  periods.  About  "  seven 
years  in  Hebron"  (2  Sam.  v.  5),  and  ''three  and  thirty  in  Jerusalem."  A 
reign  of  glory,  yet  falling  short  of  the  divine  ideal ;  signalised  by  services  which 
contributed  to  the  exaltation  of  the  kingdom  and  the  glory  of  God ;  but 
darkened  by  crimes  and  calamities,  and  which  gradually  prepared  for  the  reign 
of  his  successor.  II.  The  end  of  David's  life.  "He  died."  Then 
the  mightiest  men  are  mortal ;  the  most  useful  withdrawn  from  ministry ;  and 
the  world  can  get  on  without  its  greatest  and  best  men.  "  The  thing  is  not  to 
leave  a  name  behind  us — a  mere  name.  It  is  to  leave  behind  influences  that 
hearts  will  feel,  memories  that  will  be  cherished  at  home,  and  that  will  be 
blessed  by  those  whom  we  have  served  and  helped  in  life"  [Dr.  Parker].  He 
died.  1.  Rich  in  circumstances.  "  Full  of  riches  and  honour."  Enough^  of 
this  world's  wealth  by  which  he  adorned  the  capital  and  prepared  for  the  build- 
ing of  God.  2.  In  a  good  old  age.  Not  so  old  as  many  predecessors,  not 
exceeding  seventy  years.  But  his  life  not  cut  short,  lasted  the  appointed  term 
and  filled  with  opportunities  and  work.  In  expressive  Hebrew,  "  full  of  days." 
Many  days  empty  and  many  lives  like  a  blank  !  Nothing  done,  everything 
lost !  3.  Satisfied  in  mind.  "  Full  {i.e.,  satisfied)  of  days  "  {cf.  Gen.  xxv.  8  ;  Job 
xlii.  17).  Satisfied  with  days  given  both  in  number  and  char.ic^ter  ;  filled  with 
gratitude  and  submission.  4.  Ready  to  depart.  He  had  "  served  his  generation 
by  the  will  of  God,"  now  ready  to  fall  asleep.  Having  seen  God's  salvation,  he 
140 


Chap,  xxix.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


was  wishful  to  depart  in  peace.  A  tranquil  sunset  1  III.  The  records  of 
David's  kinsjdom.  Not  given  in  full.  "The  times"  indicate— 1.  His 
private  life.  "  Times  that  went  over  him,"  of  joy  and  sorrow,  of  conflict  and 
rest,  &c.  (c/.  Job  xxiv.  1;  Ps.  xxxi.  16).  2.  His  civil  career.  "And  over 
Israel."  National  changes  in  political  and  ecclesiastical  affairs.  3.  His  military 
enterprises.  "  Over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  countries,"  hostile  or  friendly.  A 
sovereign  who  raised  his  country  to  power  and  dominion,  beloved  in  life  and 
honoured  in  death.  His  "  royal  majesty,"  was  not  in  the  splendour  of  his 
palace  and  retinue ;  but  in  the  unity  and  moral  worth  of  his  people,  the 
excellency  of  his  Hfe  and  the  legacy  of  his  reign. 


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTION'S. 


Ver.  20.  Bless  the  Lord,  David  was 
excellent  at  this — viz.,  stirring  up 
others  to  join  with  him  in  praising 
God  (see  Ps.  xxxiv.  3  and  ciii.  20) 
\Trapp\  Worship,  its  true  nature : 
"  Bless  the  Lord."  Its  solemn  expres- 
sion :  "  Bowed  down  their  heads."  Its 
sublime  object ;  ''  Worshipped  the 
>Lord."  Its  connection  with  civil 
efeverence  :  *' Worshipped  the  Lord  and 
the  king!^ 

Yer.  23.  Solomon  sat  on  the  throne. 
The  fulfilment  of  promise,  the  display 
of  power  and  providence,  and  the  type 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  David  died  and 
Solomon  reigned  in  his  stead.  Compare 
them — 1.  As  kings  of  Israel.  2.  As 
servants  of  God.  3.  As  authors  of 
inspired  songs  and  literature. 

Vers.  29,  30.  These  words  indicate — 
1.  The  fragmentary  record.  The  books 
mentioned  are  lost,  except  a  few  parti- 
culars in  the  books  of  Samuel,  Kings, 
and  Chronicles.  They  were  sources 
used  by  the  author.  2.  The  order  in 
which  events  are  given.  In  accord- 
ance with  his  design  the  writer  sig- 
nal isies  the  relij?ious  aspect  of  the  nation. 


has  omitted  many  events  from  David's 
history,  and  enlarged  in  details  of 
arrangements  of  worship  and  prepara- 
tions for  the  building  of  the  temple. 
He  writes  partly  as  an  excerpter  and 
partly  a  supplementer. 

Ver.  29.  Three  eminent  men,  per- 
sonally acquainted  with  David  through 
the  principal  part  of  his  life — Samuel, 
Nathan^  and  Gad.  "  The  three  (Heb.) 
words,  Roch^  Nahi,  and  Chozeh,  are 
here  brought  together  and  apparently 
contrasted "  {cf,  1  Sam.  ix.  9)  [i>r. 
Jamieson\ 

Lifers  changing  current.  \.  Times 
make  a  deep  mark  upon  the 
body,  the  least  important  portion  of 
our  complex  nature.  2.  Equally 
marked  is  the  effect  of  '*  the  times"  as 
they  pass  over  us  upon  our  intellectual 
nature.  3.  Not  less  striking  or  im- 
portant is  the  stamp  of  time  upon  the 
history  of  our  sensibilities.  4.  The 
most  important  change  is  the  one  that 
refers  to  our  moral  and  spiritual  state. 
6.  Our  social  and  relative  condition  is 
subject  to  the  constant  variations  of 
time  [Dr.  S.  T.  Spear\ 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Ver.  6.  Offered  willingly.  Kich 
men's  presents  are  gold  and  silver,  or 
other  costly  things.  Mine  must  be 
recommended  by  the  affectionate 
pleasure  with  which  I  give  them 
[The  Ven.  Bede  when  dying\  It  is 
the  comfort  of  poverty  that  our 
affections  are  valued,  not  our  presents 
[Bp.  HaU\. 

Ver.  U.^  Who  am  If  What  I 
have  done  is  worthy  of  nothing  but 


silence  and  f orgetf ulness ;  but  what 
God  hath  done  for  me  is  worthy  of 
everlasting  and  thankful  memory  [Ibid.]. 

Ver.  15.  Shadow.  In  this  I  see 
that  we,  all  we  that  live,  are  but 
vain  shadows,  unsubstantial  dreams 
[Sophocles]. 

Ver.  19.  Give  unto  Solomon.  No 
good  man  is  jealous  of  his  son,  but 
desires  to  see  his  children  more  famous 
than  himself  [Theodont], 

141 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[chap.   XXIX. 


Vers.  20-22.  Worshipped.  Devo- 
tion, when  it  does  not  lie  under  the 
check  of  reason,  is  apt  to  degenerate 
into  enthusiasm  [AddisoiiV.  All  is 
holy  where  devotion  kneels  YHolmes], 

Vers.  26-28.  Died.  The  death-bed 
of  saints  often  resembles  the  setting 
sun,  whose  rays  are  the  brightest  when 
it  is  nearest  the  horizon.  *  *  The  tongues 
of  dying  men  enforce  attention  like 
deep  harmony  "  \^Shahes\ 

Ver.  30.  Times.  Amongst  rational 
beings  that  life  is  longest,  whether 
brief  or  proiraeted  its  outward  %xan^ 


into  which  the  largest  amount  of  mind, 
of  mental  and  moral  activity,  is  con- 
densed. It  is  possible  for  the  longest 
life  to  be  really  briefer  than  the 
shortest,  and  the  child  or  youth  may 
die  older,  with  more  of  life  crowded 
into  his  brief  existence,  than  he  whose 
dull  and  stagnant  being  drags  on  to 
an  inglorious  old  age  \Caird\ 

**  We   must  need   weep   the  chance    and 
change  of  life, 
And    mortal    sorrows  touch  a  mortars 
heart "  {Virg,  ^n.  i.  4&2\ 


tts 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY 

ON  THB 

SECOND    BOOK   OF    CHRONICLES. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Seb  the  general  introduction  of  the  first  book  for  analysis  and  date.     "  The 
most  remarkable  feature  in  the  historical  books  of  Scripture,  and  especially  of 
Kings  and  Chronicles,  is  their  religious,  theocratic   character.     Secular  history 
gives  the  public  changes  which  nations  have  undergone,  with  their  causes  and 
results.     Church   history  traces  the   progress   of    sentiment,    and   of    vaiious 
influences  in  relation  to  the  Church.     But  here,  king,    church,  state   are   aU 
represented  as  under  God.     The  character  of  each  king  is  decided  by  his  fidelity 
to  the  religious  obUgations  of  his  office.      Of  each  it  is  said,  *  He  walked  in  the 
ways  of  David  his  father,*  and  so  prospered,  or  of  Jeroboam,  who  'made  Israel 
to  sin,'  and  so  failed.     These  books  are  valuable  as  the  history  of  God  and  His 
law  in  the  nation,  and  that  nation  a  monarchy ;  as  the  Books  of  Joshua  and 
Judges  are  the  history  of  God  and  His  law  in  an  aristocracy  or  democracy,  or  as 
the  earlier  books  are  the  history  of  God  and  His  law  in  the  family.     In  the 
Prophets  and  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  we  have  gUmpses  of  what  is  to  be  the 
history  of  God  and   His  law  in  the  world.     Mark,  therefore,  the  prominence 
given  to  the  erection  of  the  temple ;  the  numerous   references  to  the  ancient 
law,  especially  when  the  two  kingdoms  were  drawing  near  to  their  end,  as  if  to 
account  for  their  decay  and  approaching  fall ;  the   frequent  interposition   of 
prophets,  now  rebuking  the  people  and  now  braving  the  sovereign  ;  the  depo- 
sition and  succession  of  kings ;  and  the  connection  everywhere  traced  between 
what  seem  to  be  mere  pohtical  incidents  and  the  fidelity  or  idolatry  of  the  age. 
Were  nations  wise,  these  records  would  prove  their  best  instructors.     They  are 
adapted  to   teach  alike  the  world  and  the  Church.     The  genealogical   tables 
though  to  us  comparatively  uninteresting,  were  highly  important  among  the 
Jews,  who   were   made   by   prophetic  promises   extremely  observant  in   these 
particulars.     These  tables  give  the  sacred  line  through  which  the  promise  was 
feansmittod  f^r  nearly  3,500  years,  a  fact  itself  unexampled  in  the  history  of  the 
human  race"  [^w^w^].     "This  history  of  the  Jewish  monarchy,  as  it  is  more 
authentic,  so  it  is  more  interesting  and   instructive  than  the  histories  of  other 
monarchies.     We  had  the  story  of  the  house  of  David  before,  in  the  first  and 
second  books  of  Kings,  intermixed  with  that  of  the  kings  of  Israel,  which  there 

14d 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES^ 


took  more  room  than  that  of  Judah ;  but  here  we  have  it  entire.  Much  is 
repeated  here  which  we  had  before,  yet  many  of  the  passages  of  the  story  are 
enlarged  upon,  and  divers  added  which  we  had  not  before,  especially  relating  to 
the  affairs  of  religion;  for  it  is  a  church  history,  and  it  is  written  for  our 
learning,  to  let  nations  and  families  know  that  then,  and  then  only,  they  can 
expect  to  prosper,  when  they  keep  in  the  way  of  their  duty  to  God ;  for  all 
along  the  good  kings  prospered  and  the  wicked  kings  sufiered.  The  truth  of 
the  word  of  God  appears,  '  Those  that  horuntt  me  I  will  honour,  hut  those  that 
despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed*" 

144 


CHAv.!.]  BOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Critical  Notes.]  The  reign  of  Solomon  is  comprised  in  nine  chapters  of  this  hook, 
corresponding  to  1  Kings  i.-xi.,  and  forms  the  third  part  of  the  whole  work.  This 
chapter  contains  the  sacrifice  at  Gibeon,  the  vision  and  the  wealth  of  Solomon. 

Vers.  X-^.— Solomon'' s  offenng  at  Gibecn.  Strengthened,  a  favourite  word  [of.  xii.  13; 
xiii.  21  ;  xxi.  4),  meaning  established,  firmly  settled  in  government.  Magnified  (1  Chr. 
xxix.  25).  Ver.  2.  All  Israel,  by  their  representatives.  Cajjtains  (1  Chr.  xxvii.  1  ;  xxviii.  1). 
Judges  desirable  on  all  occasions  like  this  (1  Chr.  xxiii.  4).  Chief  of  fathers.  Heads  of 
families  still  recognised,  though  having  no  special  function  (cf .  Speak.  Coin.),  Ver.  3.  Gibeon. 
Through  inroads  of  Philistines,  tabernacle  removed  from  Shiloh  to  Nob  (1  Sam.  xxi.  1) ; 
after  destruction  of  Nob  by  Saul  to  Gribeon  (1  Sam.  xxii.  9).  Ver.  4.  Ark  separated  from 
tabernacle,  consequently  two  centres  of  worship  {cf.  account  in  1  Chr.  xiii.  and  xv.). 
Ver,  5.  Altar  (marg.)  "  was  there  ;"  this,  therefore,  the  legitimate  place  of  worship.  Sought, 
i.e.,  frequented  it,  in  the  habit  of  making  use  of  it  [Speak.  Cotn.].  Some  give  "  sought 
Him,  the  Lord." 

Vers.  7-12.— Solomon's  vision  at  Gibeon.  Night,  after  sacrifice,  through  dream  (1  Kings 
iii.  5-15).  Ver.  8.  Me  to  reign.  First  case  of  son  succeeding  father.  Ver.  9.  Promise^ 
special,  made  to  David,  that  his  successor  should  be  wise  and  able  to  judge.  Though  no 
express  record,  Ps.  Ixxii.  amounts  to  nearly  the  same;  a  Psalm  undoubtedly  Messianic, 
yet  its  primary  subject  is  Solomon.  May  we  not  understand  Solomon  here  as  calling 
upon  God  to  make  good  this  prophecy,  to  **  establish  "  this  implied  "promise"?  [Speak. 
Com.]  Ver.  10.  Knowledge,  insight  {cf.  Dan.  i.  4-17  ;  Ecc.  x.  20).  Wisdom,  the  power  of 
appljdng  knowledge  rightly.  Go  out,  do  all  parts  of  the  kingly  office  ;  reminding  of 
Deut.  xxxi.  2  ;  1  Sam.  xviii.  13-16  ;  1  Kings  iii.  7.  Vers.  11  and  12.  God's  answer.  Long 
life  omitted  here,  given  in  1  Kings  iii.  14,  conditionally.  Riches  and  wealth,  stores  of 
commodities  ready  for  use. 

Vers.  13-17. — Soloinon's  riches  came  "from  the  high  place  that  was  at  Gibeon  to  Jerusalem  " 
[Speak.  Com.].  Ver,  14-17.  This  passage  is  very  nearly  identical  with  1  Kings  x.  26-29. 
The  only  difference  of  any  importance  is  the  addition  here  (ver.  15)  of  the  words  "and 
gold,"  which  do  not  occur  in  1  Kings  x.  27.  The  touch  thus  added  is  characteristic  of  the 
writer  of  Chronicles,  who  is  more  rhetorical  and  more  bold  in  his  use  of  hyperbole  than 
the  author  of  Kings  [Speak.  Com."], 

HOMILETICS. 

The  Splendid  Beginning. — Verses  1-12. 

Solomon  magnified  in  character,  accession,  and  choice.  Many  princes  have  had 
good  fathers,  wise  training,  and  great  privileges,  but  lacked  wisdom  and  turned 
out  badly.  Solomon  crowned  while  David  lived,  surrounded  by  a  loyal  people 
and  blessed  by  Divine  Providence.  His  beginning  wise,  most  promising  and 
glorious.  I.  Solomon's  accession  to  the  throne  "was  provi- 
dentially secured.  "  The  Lord  his  God  was  with  him."  Chosen,  he  was 
enthroned,  not  deprived  of  the  kingdom.  Endangered  by  sedition,  he  was 
"  strengthened,"  established.  The  feast  of  conspirators  broken  up.  Adonijah 
fled  to  the  altar  for  refuge.  God's  providence  opened  up  the  way,  and  God's 
promise  was  fulfilled.  In  allusion  to  the  rapid  suppression  of  resistance,  and  to 
this  signal  entrance  on  his  new  reign,  without  rival  or  rebel,  Solomon  declares, 
**  As  the  Lord  liveth,  which  hath  established  me  and  set  me  on  the  throne  of 
David  my  father,"  &c.  II.  Solomon's  claims  to  the  throne  were 
sanctioned  by  a  representative  assembly.  He  was  confirmed  by 
recognition  and  allegiance  of  all  the  tribes  in  representatives.  Captains,  judges, 
and  heads  of  families,  princes,  and  people — all  received  him.  Those  in 
authority  should  side  with  right  and  use  their  influence  to  promote  true  religion 

H6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  Tchap. 


and  God's  glory.  Weakness  in  kings,  selfishness  in  rulers,  and  disaffection  in 
people,  outrage  liberty,  destroy  the  peace,  and  endanger  the  throne  of  kingdoms. 

*'  Let  not  the  world  see  fear  and  sad  mistrust 
Govern  the  motion  of  a  kingly  eye  "  [Shakes.^. 

III.  Solomon's  accession  to  the  throne  -was  signalised  by 
solemn  acts  of  worship,  *'  All  the  congregation  with  him,"  a  vast  con- 
course of  dignitaries  in  solemn  procession  on  its  way  up  the  hill  to  Gibeon,  six 
miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  to  offer  royal  sacrifices  !  \.  In  obedience  to  divine  law. 
The  brazen  altar  was  there  (ver.  6);  that  is,  the  Gibeonite  sanctuary  was  still 
the  legal,  the  official  and  historically  rightful  place  for  burnt  offerings. 
2.  In  appropriate  magnificence.  The  holocaust  became  the  rank  and  attests  the 
splendour  of  the  sovereign  on  this  occasion.  Sacrifices  abundant.  Zadok  the 
officiating  high  priest  (1  Ohr.  xvi.  39).  The  time-honoured  altar  prepared  by 
the  skill    of  Bezaleel  in    the   wilderness  (Ex.  xxxviii.   1).     IV.   Solomon's 

accession  to  the  throne  was  in  a  spirit  of  devout  supplication. 

How  many  kings  begin  their  reigns ;  how  many  youths  in  critical  moments, 
turning-points  in  life,  begin  their  course  altogether  differently  1  Alas  I  many 
gain  distinctions,  enter  life  fully  equipped,  for  awhile  out-distance  others  ;  but 
with  the  turn  of  fortune  fall  behind  and  end  in  ruin.  Solomon  remembered 
the  position  of  his  predecessor,  his  own  youth  and  weakness,  the  responsibility 
under  which  he  was  placed,  and  made  request  for  gifts  and  grace  to  help  him. 
When  Victoria  learned  that  she  was  about  to  become  Queen  of  England,  her 
first  words  to  the '  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  were,  "I  beg  your  Grace  to 
pray  for  me."     Together  they  knelt,  and  the  new  reign  began  with   prayer. 

V.  Solomon's  accession  to  the  throne  was  unequalled  in 
splendour.  None  before  him,  nor  after  him,  had  the  like  (ver.  12). 
1.  0 at Loard  splendour.  *'  Riches  and  wealth  and  honour."  Good  in  themselves 
and  good  as  a  means  of  usefulness.  The  good  which  the  world  seeks ;  but  this 
honour  decays.  All  worldly  greatness  is  fleeting  in  character  and  worthless  at 
last.  "  We  brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can  carry 
nothing  out."  2.  Moral  splendour.  "  Wisdom  and  knowledge "  higher  than 
material  wealth.  The  riches  of  Croesus  would  not  add  a  fraction  of  value  to  a 
man.  *'The  gold  is  but  the  guinea  stamp."  "  How  much  better  is  it  to  get 
wisdom  than  gold  I  and  to  get  understanding  rather  to  be  chosen  than  silver." 
Better,  for  it  enriches  its  possessor,  creates  higher  enjoyments,  invests  with 
greater  dignity,  and  is  destined  to  longer  existence.  "  King  Solomon  exceeded 
all  the  kings  of  the  earth  for  riches  and  for  wisdom." 

Solomon's  Choice. — Verses  7-12. 

Probably  at  the  close  of  festivities  on  Gibeon,  when  the  mind  of  Solomon  had 
been  elevated,  and  his  heart  touched,  that  God  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream  ;  ySkYQ 
him  the  option  of  everything  good  in  the  world.  He  felt  intense  desire,  and 
offered  earnest  prayer  for  wisdom.  Whether  the  dream  was  imaginary  or  not, 
the  choice  was  made,  and  God's  grant  of  it  real.  Learn — I.  That  ability  to 
discharge  the  duties  of  our  calling  is  most  desirable.  Some 
time  since  a  paper  aj^peared  in  a  popular  Review  under  the  title,  ''  What  know- 
ledge is  of  most  worth  ? "  the  object  of  which  was  to  show  the  sufficiency  of  what^ 
is  generally  called  science  to  guide  in  life.  *'  The  universal  reply  is  science.  This 
is  the  verdict  on  all  counts."  But  what  is  meant  by  science  ?  If  mere  education 
without  religion,  knowledge  without  wisdom,  we  cannot  agree  with  it.  There  is 
a  difference  between  science  and  wisdom.  Wisdom  is  the  right  use  of  know- 
ledge. Science  seeks  truth  for  its  own  sake,  wisdom  for  practical  uses.  Science 
U6 


I 


«HAP.i.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


exercises  the  intellect,  wisdom  affects  the  heart.    A  man  cannot  be  wise  and  able 
to  fulfil  his  mission  who  does  not  use  what  he  knows.     Wisdom  is  the  principal 
thing,  therefore  get  wisdom,  to  govern  as  kings  ''  in  righteousness   and  judg- 
ment," to  rule  as  masters  "  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,"  to  win  souls  as  ministers, 
for  "  he  that  winneth  souls  is  wise."     II.  That  this  ability  can  only 
come   from    God.     Solomon's    surroundings    favourable,    education    good, 
friends  numerous,  and  wealth  enormous,  but  he  lacked  wisdom,  and  looked  to 
God  for  it.     True  wisdom  is  needed  as  much  to  build  up  the  Christian  Church,  to 
govern  a  kingdom  and  rule  a  house,  as  to  rear  the  tabernacle.     If  there  be 
capacity,  culture  and  application  may  make  a  scholar,  a  philosopher,  or  an  orator. 
But  "  the  wisdom  which  is  profitable  to   direct "  is  "  the  wisdom  from  above." 
We  must  look  to  the  source  from  whence  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  gained  their  skill 
and   ability  (Ex.  xxxv.  30-35).     "Give   me    wisdom    and  knowledge."     III. 
That  where  the  desire  for  this  ability  is  supreme,  God  will 
honOTir  and  bless  it.     "I  have  also  given  thee   that  which   thou  hast  not 
asked"   (1  Kings  iii.  13).     Great  pretension  to  wisdom  often  covers  the  want  of 
it.     Shallow  streams  make  greatest  noise.  There  must  be — 1 .  Intense  desire.     A 
feeling  of  deep  want.     "  This  was  in  thine  heart."     Opinionated,  self-sufficient 
men  will  never  get  it.     A  craving  for  its  possession,  growing  out  of  sense  of 
need,  a  cry  of  the  soul,  "  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ? "     2.  Earnest  search. 
Mere  want  or  desire  not  enough.     There  must  be  effort,  honest,  strenuous,  and 
persevering.     A  search  as  for  silver  and  gold.     "  If  thou  seekest  her  as  silver, 
and  search  for  her  as  for  hid  treasures,  &c."     3.   There  must  he  prayer.     "  Give 
me  now  wisdom  and  knowledge."     God  will  honour  our  petitions  when  sincere  ; 
will  give  inferior  when  we  ask  for  superior  blessings.     God  gave  the  wisdom 
asked,  and  the  wealth  unasked.     If  we  value  and   pray  for  understanding,  God 
will   do  for  us  "  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  can  ask  or  think."  ''  If 
any  of  you  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  and 
upbraideth  not,  and  it  shall  be  given  him." 

The  Blessedness  of  Wisdom. — Yersea  10-12. 

I.  It  helps  to  govern  life.    "  Who  can  judge  this  thy  people  ?  "     l-  By 
giving  insight.     "  Knowledge  of  men  and  things,"  understanding  of  the  times  in 
which  we  live,  and  their  demands  upon  us.     2.  By  imparting  activity.     ''  That  I 
may  go  out  and  come  in  before  this  people."     Public  activity  unceasing  and  un- 
checked.    3.  By  teaching  us  to  avoid  evil  and  do  good.     "  Discretion  shall  pre- 
serve thee,  understanding  shall  keep  thee."     "  When  thou  goest  thy  steps  shall 
not   be   straitened "  (freedom  in  the  great  highway  of  life) ;  "  and  when   thou 
runnest  thou  shalt  not  stumble"  (safety  in   activity)    (Prov.  iv.  12).      II.  It 
endows  with  best  wealth.     Wealth  of  soul.     "  For  the  soul  to  be  with- 
out knowledge  it  is  not  good."     Wealth  of  the  character.     "  She  shall  give  to 
thine  head  an  ornament  of  grace ;  a  crown  of  glory  shall  she  deliver  to  thee." 
An  ornament  better  than  kings'  robes,  a  crown  not  of  fading  laurels  or  rusting 
metal.     Adornments  of  holiness  preparing  for  the  crown  of  glory  which  fadeth 
not  away.     Character  better  than  cash,  the  only  wealth  that  will  go  into  the 
other  world,  and  determine  con'^ition  there.    "  Treasures   of  wickedness  profit 
nothing,  but  righteousness  delivereth  from  death."     III.  It  ensures  per- 
manent good.     It  is  excellent  in  itself,  described  as  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord," 
and  "  the  knowledge  of  God,"  blessing  the  intellect  and  the  heart.     In  this  life 
often  brings  riches,  honour,  length  of  days,  and  unequalled  privileges.    But  these 
things  may  all  end.     Heavenly  wisdom  is  supereminent,  an  eternal  possession,  a 
treasure   we   can   lay  up   in   heaven.     It  sets  before  us  the  way  of  life,  and 
eecures  our  salvation.     Worldly  good  pertains  to  earth  only;  here  is  limitless 

UT 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARt:    CERONtCLES. 


[chap,  t. 


blessing  helping  to  escape  the  miseries  of  false  choice,  and  giving  endless   pos- 
session of  perfect  bliss. 

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.  God  with  him,  1.  God  is 
often  against  the  kings  of  the  earth. 
This  seen  in  the  disasters  which  he 
brings  on  their  armies,  &c.,and  maybe 
illustrated  by  the  histories  of  many 
kings  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  2.  God 
is  with  some  kings  for  the  punishment 
of  others.  The  wicked  are  the  sword 
of  God.  3.  God  was  with  Solomon 
for  the  good  of  Israel ;  with  him  in 
answer  to  prayer.  4.  God  was  not 
with  Solomon  unconditionally  [Bib. 
Museum]. 

Yer.  7.  How  to  get  rich.  "  Ask 
what  I  shall  give  thee,  &c."  Observe, 
for  the  acquirement  of  the  highest 
wealth  that  "asking" — 1.  Is  the 
simplest  method.  Only  a  word.  2. 
Is  the  divinely  appointed  method  (Matt, 
vii.  7  ;  Mark  xiv.  38).  3.  Is  the  only 
method.  Purchase  is  impossible. 
Deserts  ?  We  have  none.  4.  Is  the 
certain  method.  It  never  has  failed 
yet.  5.  Is  the  abundantly  enforced 
method.  Enforced  by  the  whole  Bible, 
by  the  story  of  God's  acts,  the  promises 
and  exhortations,  the  life  and  death  of 
Jesus.  6.  Has  ever  been  the  abun- 
dantly successful  method  \R.  A. 
Griffin\. 

Vers.  7—10.  Solomon^ s  Choice.  I. 
The  address  which  God  made  to  Solo- 
mon when  He  said,  "Ask,  <kc.,"  He 
does  in  effect  make    to   each   of  us, 


especially  to  the  young.  II.  Though 
we  need  not  the  qualification  which 
Solomon  required  for  his  kingly  office, 
yet  we  all  need  spiritual  wisdom  and 
understanding,  and  may  therefore  imi- 
tate his  example.  III.  God  is  pleased 
with  those  who  make  the  choice  and 
offer  up  the  prayer  of  Solomon.  Be- 
cause—  1.  It  is  the  effect  of  His  grace; 
2.  It  indicates  opinions  and  feelings 
similar  to  his  own ;  3.  It  indicates 
humility;  4,  It  shows  a  benevolent 
concern  for  his  glory,  and  for  the 
happiness  of  their  fellow-creatures  ;  5. 
It  actually  tends  to  promote  his  glory, 
IV.  All  who  make  this  choice  and 
adopt  this  prayer  shall  certainly  be 
favoured  with  a  wise  and  understanding 
heart  [Br.  Payson\ 

The  Prayer  for  Wisdom.  I.  Come 
and  see  a  youth  who  at  a  critical  mo- 
ment is  found  in  prayer.  II.  Come 
and  see  a  king's  son  who  prays  ex- 
clusively for  wisdom.  III.  Come  and 
see  a  humble  one  who  prays  not  in  vain. 
IV.  Come  and  see  here  a  favoured  one 
who  receives  much  more  than  he  asks 
for.  V,  Come  and  see  an  unhappy 
one  who  by  his  own  fault  has  forfeited 
the  blessings  of  his  prayer  [Dr.  J.  Van 
Oosterzee], 

"  To  know 
That  which  before  us  lies  in  daily  life 
Is  the  prime  wisdom  *'  [Milton], 


HOMILETICS. 

Solomon's  Wealth. — Verses  13-17. 

This  passage  refers  to  commerce  with  Egypt  in  exports  and  imports,  and  is 
like  1  Kings  x.  26-29.  The  road  from  Egypt  to  Syria  not  always  under  the 
control  of  the  Israelites.  Solomon  gained  complete  possession  of  the  country 
and  took  the  trade  in  horses  between  Egypt  and  northern  nations  into  his  own 
hands.  I.  Wealth,  derived  from  trading  speculations.  In  addi- 
tion to  large  treasures  collected  and  bequeathed  by  his  father,  Solomon's  wealth 
derived  from  commerce  with  other  nations.  His  fleets  brought  gold  and  silver 
from  Ophir  and  Tharshish,  and  made  them  plenteous  as  stones  in  Jerusalem. 
His  chariots  and  chariot  horses  or  chargers  were  of  the  best  kind  of  Egyptian 
breed  and  highly  valued.  Kings  of  the  Hittites  and  Syria  welcomed  Jerusalem 
as  the  opening  of  an  emporium  for  trade.     Inland  cities  founded  for  special, 


tttup.  1.J  BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  CHRONtCLSS. 


markets,  and  lofty  towers  on  the  coast  pointed  to  commerce  with  distant  countries. 
II.  Wealth  acquired  in  opposition  to  God's  commands.    The 

King  forbidden  to  multiply  horses  and  gold  under  the  Theocracy  (Deut.  xvii. 
16,  17).  He  must  trust  in  the  Lord  God,  not  in  chariots  and  horses  (Ps.  xx.  7). 
Besides,  in  a  hilly  country  like  Judea,  cavalry  of  no  essential  service ;  and  going 
to  Egypt  might  open  up  the  way  to  idolatry  and  corruption  again.  But  Solomon 
must  equal  other  nations,  hence  his  passion  for  horses,  a  prohibited  luxury,  led 
to  risk  and  excess.  Wealth  gained  unjustly  is  held  insecurely.  **  Better  is  the 
poor  that  walketh  in  his  uprightness  than  he  that  is  perverse  in  his  ways  though 
he  be  rich."  III.  Wealth  therefore  risky  in  its  possession. 
Prosperity  of  Solomon  his  great  misfortune.  Indulgence  outran  want.  Abun- 
dant leisure  to  gratify  desires.  Prosperous  enterprises,  rank,  riches,  and  power 
were  his.  His  fame  spread  and  raised  to  the  pinnacle  of  gloiy  among  nations. 
But  ambition  mastered  him.  Wealth  the  first  step  downwards.  His  wisdom 
availed  little  and  his  end  ruin.  Sad  that  a  beginning  so  promising  should  end 
in  consequences  so  fearful.  The  smallest  departure  from  rectitude  may  lead  to 
grievous  errors  and  fearful  miseries.  Neither  wealth  nor  worldly  wisdom  can 
check  a  downward  course.  "  The  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them."  **  In 
all  time  of  our  wealth,  good  Lord,  deUver  us." 

The  King's  Merchants. — Verse  16. 

Linen  yarn  means  influx  (mikre),  and  thence  import  {maho),  contrast  of  export 
(Sept.  1  Kings  x.  28) ;  in  which  case  the  verse  would  run  thus  :  "  And  the  export 
of  horses  for  Solomon  was  from  Egypt;  and  the  import  which  the  king's 
merchants  took  was  an  import  in  price" — that  is,  in  money.  It  was  more 
convenient  for  Solomon  to  send  cash  than  commodities  in  exchange  for  the 
chariots  and  horses  [Murphy].    I.  The  advantages  of  Commerce.     In 

softening  manners  and  breaking  down  prejudices.  In  helping  industry,  pro- 
moting peace,  and  stimulating  into  Nature's  resources.  II.  The  blessings 
of  the  nation  whose  sovereign  takes  an  interest  in  commerce. 
Kings  may  aid  in  developing  commerce,  reviving  depressed  industries,  and  in 
adopting  enlightened  policy.  Our  own  country  privileged.  "  As  soon  as  the 
commercial  spirit  acquires  vigour,"  says  Kobertson,  *'  and  begins  to  gain  an 
ascendant  in  any  society,  we  discern  a  new  genius  in  its  policy,  its  alliances,  its 
wars,  and  its  negotiations." 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I, 

Vers.   3,  6.     The  national  worship  of  Gibeon.     And  now  occurred  one  of 

was  still  in  the  unsettled  state  in  which  those    prophetic    dreams    which    had 

it  had  been  since  the  first  entrance  into  already  been  the  means  of  Divine  com- 

Palestine.     "  The  people   sacrificed  in  munication  in    the    time    of  Samuel, 

high  places."     The  chief  local  sanctity  Thrice  in  Solomon's  life — at  the  three 

still  adhered  to  the  spot   where  "  the  epochs  of  his  rise,  of  his  climax,  of  his 

Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  "  stood,  fall — is  such  a  warning  recorded  [Dean 

on  what  was  called   *'  the   great  high-  Stanley^. 

place  of  Gibeon."  Hither  as  on  a  Ver.  10.  Wisdom  consists  chiefly  in 
solemn  pilgrimage,  with  a  vast  con-  three  things — 1.  Knowledge  to  dis- 
course of  dignitaries,  the  young  King  cern.  2.  Skill  to  judge.  3.  Activity 
came  to  ofl'er  royal  saciifices  on  his  to  prosecute  \T.  Watson].  He  showed 
accession.  A  thousand  victims  were  his  wisdom  by  asking  for  wisdom.  He 
consumed  on  the  ancient  altar.  Tlie  became  wise  because  he  had  set  his 
night  was  spent  within  the  sacred  city  heart  upon    it  [StanleyX      Who  can  t 

I4d 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  n. 


Wisdom  is  preferred  to  riches,  to  long  Ver.  11.     In  thine  heart.     Without 

life,  and  to  victory  over  enemies — the  a  rich  heart  wealth  is  an  ugly  beggar 

common  ambition  of  kings.     Honour-  \Emerson\. 

able  to  any  man,  but  especially  to  one  Yer.  12.  /  will  give.  God  is  a 
so  young  as  Solomon;  the  dictate  of  light  that  is  never  darkened,  an  un- 
early  piety  and  of  the  purest  patriot-  wearied  life  that  cannot  die,  a  fountain 
ism ;  expressing  the  most  profound  always  flowing,  a  garden  of  life,  a 
humility  in  circumstances  favourable  seminary  of  wisdom,  a  radical  begin- 
to  the  growth  of  pride  ;  so  moderate  ning  of  all  goodness  \Qua/rles\. 
and  so  modest ;  breathing  sentiments  Vers.  14-17.  Prosperity.  Many  are 
of  the  deepest  gratitude  to  God,  and  not  able  to  suffer  and  endure  pros- 
of  entire  devotion  to  the  public  wel-  perity ;  it  is  like  the  light  of  the  sun 
fare  [Dr.  T.  Guthrie].  to  a  weak  eye — glorious  indeed  in  itself, 
"  Wisdom  is  of ttimes  nearer  when  we  stoop  ^^^  ^^t  proportioned  to  such  an  instru- 
Than  when  we  soar  "  [  Wordsworihl,  ment  [Jeremy  Taylor\, 


CHAPTER  II. 


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  corresponds  with  1  Kings  v.  It  comprises  preparations 
for  building  the  temple  (vers.  1,  2)  ;  Solomon's  message  to  Huram  (vers.  3-10) ;  Huram's 
reply  (vers.  11-16) ;  and  the  census  of  the  strangers  (vers.  17,  18). 

Vers.  1,  2. — Preparatiovs  for  building.  Determined,  i.e.,  commanded,  gave  orders  to 
build.  Name  (1  Chr.  xxii.  10  ;  cf.  1  Kings  v.  5).  Kingdom^  royal  palace.  Ver.  2.  The  sub- 
stance of  this  verse  given  in  ver.  18,  here  indicative  of  magnitude  of  the  undertaking. 

Vers.  3-10. — Solomon'ft  message  to  Huram.  H.  had  congratulated  Sol.  (1  Kings  v.  1). 
Deal  (cf.  1  Chr.  xiv.  1  and  2  Sam.  v.  11).  Cedars  (1  Chr.  xiv.  1).  Ver.  4.  Incense,  lit. 
incense  of  spices  (marg.)  ;  the  regular  incense  burned  every  morning  and  every  evening 
(Ex.  XXX.  7);  for  symbolic  meaning,  see  Rev.  viii.  3,  4.  Shewbread  {cf.  Ex.  xxv.  30; 
Lev.  xxiv.  5-9  ;  Num.  iv.  7).  Moons  (Num.  xxviii.  11-15).  Feasts,  three  great  annual. 
Ver.  5.  Great,  exceeding  in  size  any  separate  building  in  Palestine  and  any  temple  of  the 
gods  of  surrounding  nations.  See  Stanley's  Jewish  Ch.f  vol.  ii.,  p.  224.  V  er.  6.  Able  {cf. 
1  Kings  viii.  27;  2  Chr.  vi.  18).  "In  the  question,  ♦Who  am  I?'  {cf  1  Chr.  xxix.  14) 
there  is  implied  :  a  house  for  him  to  dwell  in  I  cannot  build  ;  and  with  this  is  connected 
the  antithesis  ;  but  only  for  the  purpose  of  burning  incense  before  him,  i.e.,  only  to  main- 
tain  a  place  in  which  God  may  be  honoured  by  sacrifice,  can  I  venture  to  build  him  a 
house"  [Keil].  Ver.  7.  Cunning,  i.e.,  skilful  to  work  in  gold  (1  Chr.  xxii.  15)  and  with 
knowledge  of  sculpture  in  metal  and  wood  ;  a  man  to  design  and  superintend  all  work  in 
metals  and  other  materials  (Ex.  xxv.  4).  Ver.  8.  Send.  "  The  cedar  and  cypress  were 
valued  as  being  both  rare  and  durable ;  the  algum  or  almug  trees  (likewise  a  foreign 
wood),  though  not  got  on  Lebanon,  is  mentioned  as  being  procured  through  Huram  " 
[Jamieson],  Ver.  9.  Wonderful,  lit.  great  and  wonderful.  Ver.  10.  Give.  "According  to 
Kings,  Solomon's  original  proposal  was  simply  to  pay  Hiram's  workmen  for  their  labour, 
and  it  was  at  Hiram's  suggestion  that  he  commuted  his  proposed  '  hire'  into  an  annual 
payment  in  kind  (see  1  Kings  v.  6,  9,  11).  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  author  of 
Chronicles  here  throws  into  one  at  least  two  distinct  messages  sent  by  Solomon  to 
Hiram"  [Speak.  Com.']. 

Vers.  11-16. — Huram's  reply  {cf.  1  Kings  v.  8,9).  Loved,  "It  would  seem  that  neigh- 
bouring sovereigns,  in  communications  with  Jewish  monarchs,  adopted  the  Jewish  name 
for  the  Supreme  Being  (Jehovah,  *  the  Lord'  of  our  version),  either  identifying  him  with 
their  own  chief  god  or  (sometimes)  meaning  merely  to  acknowledge  him  as  the  special 
god  of  the  Jewish  nation  and  country.  In  Hiram's  case  the  acknowledgment  seems  to 
be  of  the  former  kind"  \^8peak.  Com.\  Ver.  12.  The  Lord,  a  formula  designating  the 
Supreme  God  with  several  Asiatic  nations.  In  Persian  inscriptions  Ormazd  is  con- 
Btantly  called  **  the  great  god,  who  gave  (or  made)  heaven  and  earth  *'  [Speak,  Com."}, 
Ver.  13.  Huram,  the  king's  own  father's  name  appears  to  have  been  Abibaal.  Father  ia 
used  in  the  honourable  sense  of  master,  and  the  trans,  should  be  as  generally  admitted. 
**  X  have  sent  a  ouuningman,  endued  with  understanding,  one  Huram,  mjf  taatter'W^rhman^'* 
150 


CHAP,  n.]  BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CURONICLES. 


Ver.  14.  A  Tyrian  by  race,  whose  mother  was  of  the  daughter  of  Dan,  though  her  father 
was  of  Naphtali  {\  Kings  vii.  14),  skilled  in  all  things  specified,  and  in  wood,  stone,  and 
fine  linen.  Ver.  16.  Joppa,  now  Jaffa,  the  natural  port  of  Jerusalem,  distant  about  35 
miles. 

Vers.  17,  18.— 77ie  ce-^sus  of  strangers.  Strangers,  descendants  of  Canaanites  not  driven 
out  of  the  land  at  the  invasion  (Judg.  i.  21-36;  i  Kings  ix.  20),  and  non-Israelite  population 
influx  from  surrounding  nations.  Numbered,  reimposition  of  bond-service  had  been  dis- 
continued between  Joshua  and  Saul  David  numbered  the  strangers  (c/.  1  Chr.  xxii.  2), 
and  Solomon  imitated  his  father. 

HOMILETICS. 

The  Building  of  the  Temple. —  Verses  1-16. 

Solomon's  wisdom  given  not  for  self-adornment  and  speculation,  but  for 
practical  purposes  ;  to  build,  govern,  and  do  the  work  of  God.  David  talked 
about  the  work,  gathered  mateiials;  Solomon  executed.  I.  The  magnitude 
of  the  work.  Wonderfully  great  (ver.  9).  Great  not  so  much  in  outward 
structure  as  in  style  and  design.  1.  Great  because  God,  for  wlwrn  it  is  built ,  is 
great.  "  For  great  is  our  God  above  all  gods  "  (ver.  5).  Infinite,  self -existent, 
and  supreme.  Our  ideas  of  God  determine  our  plans  in  building  up  character, 
family,  business,  and  places  of  worship.  "  Our  theology  determines  our  archi- 
tecture," says  Dr.  Parker.  Defective  views  of  God  will  influence  expenditure 
and  worship.  God  is  great,  and  should  have  nothing  mean.  2.  Great  because 
its  worship  is  becorning.  "To  burn  sacrifice  before  him"  (ver.  6).  The  spiritual 
always  greater  than  the  material.  However  magnificent  the  place,  God  is 
greater  than  the  temple.  A  great  God  indicates  great  worship.  A  ritual 
not  to  please  the  eye  and  gratify  the  taste,  but  holy,  sincere,  and  devout. 
3.  Great  because  it  satisfies  great  needs.  "  To  burn  before  him  sweet  incense,  (fee." 
(ver.  4).  "  Solomon  seems  to  mean  that  to  build  a  temple  can  only  be  justified 
on  the  human — not  on  the  divine — side.  '  God  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made 
with  hands,'  cannot  be  confined  to  them,  does  in  no  sort  need  them.  The  sole 
reason  for  building  a  temple  lies  in  the  needs  of  man.  Man  is  finite ;  his 
worship  must  be  local ;  the  sacrifices  commanded  in  the  law  had,  of  necessity, 
to  be  ofltered  somewhere.  Only  in  view  of  these  necessities  did  Solomon  venture 
to  think  of  building  God  a  'house'"  \Speak.  Com.^.  Man  will  ever  need  incease, 
which  sets  forth  prayer ;  the  continual  shew-bread,  or  communion  with  God ; 
and    the   burnt-offering,    or    propitiation  for  sin   (Ex.   xxx.    7 ;  Num.   xxviii. ; 

Lev.  xxiii.).    II.  The  spirit  in  which  the  work  was  undertaken. 

Solomon  felt  the  necessity,  urgency,  and  responsibility  of  the  work.  1.  A  spirit 
of  determination.  "I  purpose  to  build  a  house"  (1  Kings  v.  5).  Energy, 
settled  and  fixed  resolution  in  himself.  Gave  orders  to  others  also  to  help ; 
stirred  up  the  nation  to  take  an  interest  in  work.  Prayer  should  show  itself  in 
action  and  enthusiasm  for  God.  "The  truest  wisdom  is  a  resolute  determiria- 
tion,"  says  Napoleon.  2.  A  spirit  of  humility.  "  But  who  is  able  to  build,  <Src.  ?" 
(ver.  6).  Feeling  that  he  was  undertaking  an  impossible  work  almost.  Not 
as  a  conceited  king  or  wealthy  prince,  but  as  unworthy  of  the  work,  did  ho 
regard  himself.  A  due  sense  of  insufficiency  becoming  in  the  wisest  and 
sti'ongest ;  the  only  way  to  secure  strength  and  success ;  will  never  lead  to 
despair,  but  to  do  what  can  be  done.  "  When  ye  shall  have  done  all  those 
things  which  are  commanded  you,  say,  We  are  unprofitable  servants  ;  we  have 
done  that  whicli  was  our  duty  to  do."  Ill  The  help  which  was  Secured 
in  the  execution  of  the  work.  Solomon  great,  wise,  and  rich  but 
required  help  from  Hiram.  Kings  want  men  !  Everything  worthy  done  by 
co-operation,  leciprocity  of  laboui*.  1.  f/elp  readily  given.  No  excuse,  no 
delay,  no  mere  promise.  Willingness  combined  with  respect,  congratulations, 
and  gladness  of  the  opportunity.     "  When  Hiram  heard  the  words  of  Solomon 

151 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CITRONICLUS,  'cfiA?.  ix. 


he  rejoiced  greatlv."  2.  Help  most  shilfuL  Cut  timber,  *' costly  stones  and 
hewed  stones,"  the  best  that  could  be  given.  We  should  contrive  more  for  God. 
Give  more  intelligence,  more  value  in  our  service ;  put  more  cunning  in  the 
fingers,  more  penetration  in  the  mind,  and  more  polish  in  the  brass;  more 
beauty  in  every  sacrifice.  3.  Help  most  suitable.  One  thing  not  substituted 
for  another ;  cedar-trees  for  gold,  and  silver  for  brass.  Timber,  stones,  and 
fine  linen  in  exact  quantity  and  quality.  Cunning  men  "  filled  with  wisdom 
and  understanding,"  "  able  to  grave,"  to  superintend  and  direct.  Give  what  is 
suitable  and  required,  and  you  will  help  in  building  the  temple. 

Hiram  and  Solomon. — Verses  2-16. 

Hiram  had  been  a  friend  of  David,  now  a  faster  friend  of  Solomon,  with 
whom  he  formed  treaties  and  alliance,  by  which  commerce  was  extended  and 
peace  maintained.  We  learn  from  this  intercourse — I.  That  friendship  in  life  is 
helpful.  Hiram  served  both  father  and  son  ;  gratitude  and  filial  loyalty  bound 
Solomon  to  him.  An  old  family  friend  revives  touching  memories;  should 
never  be  forsaken,  though  you  may  rise  and  he  may  sink  in  the  world,  nor 
undervalued  in  counsels  and  oflices  of  love.  "  Thine  own  friend  and  thy  father's 
friend,  forsake  not."  II.  That  co-operation  among  men  is  desirable.  True 
friendship  leads  to  common  courtesy  and  co-operation.  Kings  not  independent, 
need  men,  and  cannot  build  without  others.  Tyre  may  help  Jerusalem,  Gentile 
the  Jew  In  the  cause  of  humanity,  skilled  and  unskilled,  overseer  and  common 
labourer,  may  work  together.  "  Every  man  has  his  own  kingship.  Every  man 
has  something  that  no  other  man  has.  A  recognition  of  this  fact,  and  a  proper 
use  of  its  suggestions,  would  create  for  us  a  democracy  hard  to  distinguish 
from  a  theocracy."  III.  That  'men  Tnay  know  God,  yet  not  serve  him.  Hiram 
acknowledged  the  God  of  the  Jewish  people,  now  known  among  the  nations,  but 
no  reason  to  think  that  he  was  a  proselyte  to  the  Jewish  religion.  The  doxology 
("  Blessed,  &c.")  may  spring  from  courtesies  of  style,  community  of  language, 
and  religious  tradition  which  existed  between  Phoenicians  and  Hebrews.  Men 
may  know  much  of  God,  speak  well  of  him,  yet  withhold  homage  from  him 
and  give  it  to  idols.  IV.  That  when  God's  people  are  consistent  in  their  life,  their 
influence  upon  others  is  for  good.  Hiram  felt  more  than  respect  for  Solomon ; 
was  well-disposed,  through  the  honour  and  worship  rendered  to  God.  When 
Israel  were  idolatrous,  they  were  weakened ;  when  holy,  they  influenced  and 
instructed  surrounding  nations ;  lent,  but  borrowed  not.  Let  your  life  be  pure, 
and  the  worship  of  your  God  sincere,  then  you  overcome  opposition,  touch  the 
heart,  and  secure  the  help  of  strangers.  **  The  sons  of  strangers  shall  build  up 
thy  walls,  and  their  kings  shall  minister  unto  thee." 

Naturalisation  of  Foreigners. — Verses  17,  18. 

I.  A  good  Government  will  tend  to  make  a  country  attractive  to  foreigners. 
II.  Foreigners  thus  attracted  are  amenable  to  the  laws  of  the  State.  III.  Thus 
protected,  they  may  contribute  materially  to  the  enrichment  of  a  State  by  the 
importation  of  foreign  industries.  IV.  The  kind  treatment  of  exiles  often 
repays  those  who  so  regard  them.  Illus. :  The  silk-weavers  of  Spitalfields. 
V.  Be  kind  to  strangers  [^Bib.  Museum]. 

HOMILETIG    HINTS    AND    SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  3-7.    In  opening  the  business  temple  he  proposed  to  build  must  be  a 

Solomon   grounded    his     request    for  solid  and  permanent  building,  because 

Tyi'ian   aid   on   two    reasons:   1.  The  the   worship  was  to  be  continued  in 
152 


CHAP.  1 


T.l 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


perpetuity,  and  therefore  the  building 
mateiials  lequired  to  be  of  the  most 
durable  quality.  2.  It  must  be  a  mag- 
nificent fetructare,  because  it  was  to  be 
dedicated  to  the  God  who  was  greater 
than  all  gods ;  and,  therefore,  as  it 
might  seem  a  presumptuous  idea  to 
erect  an  edifice  for  a  Being  *'  whom  the 
heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  do 
not  contain,"  it  was  explained  that 
Solomon's  object  was  not  to  build  a 
house  for  him  to  dwell  in,  but  a  temple 
in  which  his  worshippers  might  offer 
sacrifices  to  his  honour.  No  language 
could  be  more  humble  and  appropriate 
than  this.  The  pious  strain  of  senti- 
ment was  such  as  became  a  King  of 
Israel  \Jamieso7i\. 

Vers.  6,  7.  By  the  sentence  "  the 
heaven  and  heaven  of  heavens,"  that 
is,  the  heaven  in  its  most  extended 
compass,  "cannot  contain  God,"  Solo- 
mon strikes  down  all  rationalistic  asser- 
tions that  the  Israelites  imagined 
Jehovah  to  be  only  a  finite  national 
god.  The  infinitude  and  supramun- 
dane  exaltation  of  God  cannot  be  more 
clearly  and  strongly  expressed  than  it 
is  in  these  words.  That,  however, 
Solomon  was  addicted  to  no  abstract 
idealism  it  sufficiently  apparent  from 
this,  that  he  unites  this  consciousness 
of  the  infinite  exaltation  of  God  with 
the  firm  belief  of  his  real  presence  in 
the  temple.  The  true  God  is  not  merely 
infinitely  exalted  above  the  world,  has 
not  only  his  throne  in  heaven  (1  Ki. 
viii.  34,  36 ;  Ps.  ii.  4 ;  xi.  4 ;  ciii. 
19  ;  Is.  Ixvi.  1  ;  Amos  ix.  6),  he  is  also 
present  on  the  earth  (Deut.  iv.  39),  has 
chosen  the  temple  for  the  dwelling- 
place  of  his  name  in  Israel,  from  which 
he  hears  the  prayers  of  his  people 
[KeiL] 

Ver.  7.  Send  a  man.  Men  wanted 
to  consecrate  their  skill  to  God  and  lead 
in  Christian  work,  &c.  A  famous  son. 
Hiram,  the  first  sculptor  and  engraver 


of  Israel,  was  half  a  foreigner.  His 
father  was  a  Tyrian  and  was  dead;  but 
his  mother  was  a  Danite  who  lived  in 
Naphtali  (1  Ki.  vii.  13,  14).  He  thus 
sprung  on  the  Israelite  side  from  the 
same  tribe,  and  (according  to  Jewish 
tradition)  from  the  same  family  as 
Aholiab,  the  Danite  artist  in  the 
wilderness.  So  wide  was  his  fame,  and 
so  profound  the  reverence  entertained 
for  him  by  the  two  sovereigns  to  whom 
he  belonged,  that  he  is  called  "  the 
father,"  both  of  Solomon  and  of  Hiram 
[Stanley^  I.  A  widow*s  son  trained 
in  his  father's  workshop,  helping  his 
mother,  and  striving  to  do  his  duty. 
II.  This  son,  by  diligence,  faith- 
fulness, and  skill,  became  famous, 
excelled,  and  was  promoted.  III. 
This  promotion  a  reward  for  his 
diligence,  and  a  joy  to  his  widowed 
mother.  Industry,  filial  love,  and  per- 
severance sure  to  bring  eminence. 
"  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  busi- 
ness ?  he  shall  stand  before  kings :  he 
shall  not  stand  before  mean  men" 
(Prov.  xxii.  29).  (Henry  Martin, 
known  in  his  college  as  "  the  man  who 
had  not  lost  an  hour."  Joseph,  Nehe- 
miah,  Daniel.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Solomon! $  workmen. 
Builders,  Israelites  and  heathen  (Ps. 
xxii.  29).  A  prophetic  anticipation  of 
Ep.  ii.  14,  19-22;  iii.  4-6.  Solo- 
mon! s  treatment  of  his  workmen,  Not 
arbitrary  like  Pharaoh,  who  would 
have  raised  discontent,  if  not  opposition, 
but  considerate.  A  wise  arrangement 
to  give  rest  at  home  and  relief  in 
labour.  Hence  no  murmuring  in  work. 
This  an  example  to  modern  builders. 
Learn — l^he  temple  a  house  of  prayer 
for  all  nations.  Many  help  in  the 
material  work  of  the  church,  who  do 
not  enjoy  its  worship  and  privileges. 
"We,  his  servants,  will  arise  and  build : 
but  ye  have  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor 
memorial  in  Jerusalem.* 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  II. 


Vers.    3,  4.      Friendship. 
Friendship  1    mysterious    cement    of    the 

soul  I 
Sweet'ner  of  life  I  and  solder  of  society  1  *• 


Vers.  5,  6.  God  above  all  gods.  As 
the  human  mind  is  finite  and  conceives 
by  defining  the  limits  of  its  thougj^t, 
and  m  God   is  known  to  us   to    }^ 

153 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  m. 


infinite,   it  is  evident  that  the  human  Yer.  14.     ShUful.     The  mechanical 

mind    can    never   be   capable  of   con-  genius   of   the    Phoenicians  generally, 

ceiving  God  adequately  as  He  is,  or  of  and  of  the  Sidonians  in  particular,  is 

defining  His  being  \Hodge\.  noticed  by  many  ancient  writers  \8peak, 

Ver.  7.     A  man.     The  most  impor-  Com,], 
tant  point  in  any  affair  is  to  know  what 
is  to  be  done  [Columella], 


CHAPTER  IIL 


ChiiTioAL  Notes.]  In  two  chapters  if  narrated  the  building  of  the  temple,  which 
correspond  with  1  Kings  vi.  and  vii.  Here  greater  fulness  of  description,  and  mora 
precise  introduction  and  different  arrangement  of  things  described. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Place  and  time  of  building.  Moriah  (Gen.  xxii.  2),  from  which  was  named 
the  land  of  Moriah — "  land  of  the  appearing  of  the  Lord."  Appeared,  "  which  was  shown 
to  David,"  as  future  site  (1  Chr.  xxi.  15).  Prepared,  fixed  (1  Chr.  xxii.  5).  O  nan^ 
see  2  Sam.  xxiv.  18  ;  1  Chr.  xxi.  18.  Yer.  2.  Second  day  not  in  original.  Translation 
should  be  ••  He  began  to  build  in  the  second  month  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign  "  [S2)eak, 
Com.],  about  1012  e.g. 

Vers.  3-7. — The  holy  house  and  porch.  These  measures  afterwards  given.  Instructed^ 
founded  (marg.),  and  translation  should  be,  '♦  Now  this  is  the  ground-plan  of  Solomon  for 
the  building  of  the  house  of  God.'  Cubits,  i.e.,  cubits  after  the  old  Mosaic  standard. 
Threescore,  only  length  and  width  given  here,  not  height,  as  1  Ki.  vi.  2.  Ver.  4.  Porch, 
in  length  as  breadth  of  the  house.  Height  a  difficulty.  Speak.  Com.  proposes  to  read 
20  for  120.  Overlaid  (1  Ki.  vi.  22).  Yer.  5.  Greater  house,  i.e.,  the  holy  place  or  chief 
room  of  the  house,  double  in  area  the  holy  of  holies.  Ceiled.  The  walls  were  lined  with 
cedar,  and  the  floor  with  fir,  the  ceiling  only  to  be  covered  with  fir  and  overlaid  with 
gold  (1  Ki.  vi.  15).  Palm,  for  ornaments  (1  Ki.  vi.  29).  Chaim,  probably  garlands  or 
festoons.  Yer.  6.  Garnished,  covered,  or  *'  paved  the  house  with  precious  and  beautiful 
marble"  [Kitto'].  Stones,  gems  for  '*  its  beautification  "  (cf.  1  Chr.  xxix.  2).  Parvaiw,  not 
found  elsewhere,  generally  taken  for  a  y»lace,  but  uncertain  what  place.  Yer.  7.  Houses 
the  holy  place  still  spoken  of,  the  whole  of  whose  beams,  posts,  &c.,  had  the  sama 
decorations. 

Vers.  8-14. — The  most  holy  house,  i.e.,  sanctuary  or  holy  of  holies.  For  its  dimensions, 
see  1  Ki.  vi.  20.  Six  hundred  talents,  an  addition  to  narrative  in  Kings.  Yer.  9.  Nails,  to 
fasten  the  gold  plate  on  the  wooden  lining  of  the  walls.  Upper  chambers,  given  1  Chr. 
xxviii.  11  ;  their  position  uncertain.  Yer.  10.  Cherubims  {cf.  image),  moveable  work; 
sculptured  work.  Original  word  only  found  here.  Yers.  11-13.  Their  position  described. 
They  stood  on  floor,  occupying  each  a  space  ten  cubits  in  height  and  in  width  (I  Ki.  vi.  23). 
Wings  touched  each  other  over  the  ark,  and  stretched  across  from  wall  to  wall.  Faces 
not  looking  at  each  other,  like  the  cherubs  of  Moses  (Ex.  xxxvii.  9),  but  looking  outward 
from  the  most  holy  to  the  holy  place.  Yer.  14.  Vail,  an  important  addition  to  Kings. 
Blue,  exactly  the  same  colours  as  that  of  tabernacle  (Ex.  xxvi.  31). 

Vers.  15-17. — The  pillars  and  their  ornaments.  High  {mshrg.^  Long  refers  to  distance  of 
one  from  the  other;  height  given  1  Ki.  vii.  15  ;  2  Ki.  xxv.  17 ;  confirmed  by  Jer.  lii.  /A,  22. 
They  appear  to  have  stood  on  a  line  with  the  front  of  the  porch  ;  their  position  defined 
obscurely.  Yer.  16.  Chains,  chaplets  or  festoons  in  the  manner  of  the  oracle,  which  must 
have  had  similar  chain  work  {cf.  1  Ki.  vi.  21).  Bertheati  reads  "  in  a  ring,"  so  as  to  go  all 
round  the  neck  as  a  necklace.  Ver.  17.  Reared  before  the  temple,  conspicuous  to  beholders. 
Jachin,  he  will  establish.  Boaz,  strength.  Possibly  proper  names,  and  may  belong  to 
supposed  younger  sons  of  Solomon  \^Ewald].  The  LXX.  trans,  direction  and  strength, 
*'  Lit.,  Jachin  would  seem  to  be,  as  rendered  in  the  margin,  '  He  will  establish,'  whila 
Boaz  may  either  be  •  in  strength,'  or  *  in  him  is  strength,'  or  *  in  it  is  strength.*  Th« 
meaning  was  probably,  'God  will  establish  in  strength*  (i.i.,  firmly)  the  temple  and  tha 
religion  connected  with  it "  It^eak.  Com,}, 
154 


CHAP,  in.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 

EOMILETICS. 

The  Building  op  the  Temple. — Verses  1-14. 

This  first  work  that  Solomon  undertook  was  long  in  preparation  but  lasting  in 
effect.    "  Of  all  monuments  of  the  internal  administration  of  Solomon,  none  is  to 
be  compared  in  itself  or  in  its  effect  on  the  future  character  of  the  people  with 
the  building  of  the  temple.     It  was  far  more  than  a  mere  architectural  display. 
It  supplied  the  framework  of  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.     There  is 
hardly  any  reign  which  is  not  in  some  way  connected  with  its  construction  or  its 
changes "  [Stanley].      L  The  site  chosen.     Consecrated  by  the  offering  of 
Isaac  and  the  gracious  appearance  of  the  angel  to  David.     The  place  selected  by 
David,  bought  with  his  money,  and  prepared  by  his  labours — pulling  down  build- 
ings, levelling  rocks,  marking  out  dimensions — ^revealed  by  the  Spirit  of  God 
(1  Ohr.  xxii.  1,18,  26).     Solomon  not  at  liberty  to  fix  nor  at  a  loss  to  find  a 
place.     Wisdom  to  submit  to  God's  appointment  and  to  be  guided  by  his  provi- 
dence.    II.  The  specifications  given.     "  These  are  the  ground  plans,  <fec.* 
(ver.  3).     There  must  be  foundation  or  ground  plan — many  build  *'  in  the  air," 
build  from  the  top,  buUd  without  principles,  plan,  or  good  materials.     We  have 
need  to  be  *'  instructed,"  not  born  natural  architects  like  the  bee  and  the  beaver. 
In  life-building  keep  to  the  "  first  measure,"  the  divine  rule.     This  the  only 
guide,  the  only  foundation.     No  other  can  be  laid.     III.   The  time  the 
work  commenced.     In  the  second  month  and  fourth  year  of  his  reign. 
Time  more  specific  in  1  Kings  vi.  1 .     Memorable  day.     Many  such  in  Christian 
life;   not  monotonous    and    commonplace — "red-letter  days"  crises  in  life  to 
remind  and  help.     The  day  when  born  again,  when  school  was  entered,  when 
home  was  left.      The  month  when  business  started  or  the  Christian  church 
entered.     "  The  year  after  "  some  great  event.    The  deliverance  from  Egypt,  from 
sickness  or  spiritual  bondage.     "  Days  should  speak"  of  plans  formed  and  work 
commenced,  of  special  providences  and  significant  events.     IV.  The  form  of 
the  building  erected.     First,  the  Porch  and  its  Pillars  (vers.  15-17). 
**  The  most  startHng  novelty  of  the  building  in  which  foreign  architects  had 
freest  play.     In  materials  it  was  probably  suggested  by  Assyrian,  in  elevation 
by  Egyptian  architecture,  while  Tyrian  sculptors  displayed  their  art  to  the  full 
in  the  two  elaborate  pillars.     They  stood  immediately  under  the  porch,  within, 
but  not  supporting  it,  and  were  called,  either  from  the  workmen  or  fiom  their 
own  firmness  and  solidity,  Jachin  and  Boaz.   Their  golden  pedestals,  bright  brazen 
shafts,  rich  capitals,  light  festoons,  were  thought  prodigies  of  art  so  remarknble 
that  the  Israelites  were  never  wearied  of  recounting  their  glories"  [Stanley]. 
Second,  the  Holy  Place,  "the  greater  house"  (ver.  5),  double  the  area  of  the 
Holy  of  Holies.     "  The  whole  interior  was  lined  with  boards  richly  decorated 
with  carved  work,  clusters  of  foliage  and  flowers,  among  which  the  pomegranate 
and  lutus,  or  water-lily,  were  conspicuous,  and  overlaid,  excepting  the  floor,  with 
gold,  either  by  gilding  or  in  plates"  (1  Eli.  vi.)  [Jamieson].      Third,  the  Most 
Holy  Place.     Its  upper  chambers  (ver.  9) ;  sculptured  cherubim  of  colossal  size, 
their  faces  inwards  conformably  to  their  use,  which  was  to  vail  the  ark  (vers. 
10-13).    The  vail  between  the  Holy  and  the  Most  Holy  Place  (ver.  14)  displayed 
the  beauty  of  colour,  embossed  with  cherubims,  and  made  of  four  materials. 
This  pattern  given  to  Solomon  (1  Chr.  xxix.  11,  12),  not  the  invention  of  human 
architects.     Destitute  of  invention,  we  may  gather  materials  and  work  according 
to  pattern.     But  remember  the  builder  depends  upon  the  architect.     "  Except 
the  Lord  build  the  house,  dKW^ 

155 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES.  [chap.  m. 


The  Desckiption  op  the  Temple. 

I.   Solid  in  its  form.     Stones  and  pillars  indicate  strength  and  duration. 

Whatever  God  builds  is  strong  and  solid.  The  earth  is  ''  established  "  ;  the  hills 
are  "  everlasting  "  ;  the  church  is  built  on  a  rock.  "  The  foundation  of  the  Lord 
standeth  sure."  II.  Costly  in  its  materials.  Not  only  grand  and 
massive  in  style,  but  costly.  Best  cedars,  best  gold,  and  '*  costly  stones " 
(1  Ki.  vii.  10).  The  porch,  the  holy  place,  and  *'  the  most  holy  house  overlaid 
with  gold."  To  the  artistic  use  of  precious  metals  was  added  the  glory  of  coloured 
gems.  ,**  Garnished  the  house  with  precious  stones  for  beauty"  (ver.  6). 
III.  Beautiful  in  its  appearance.  The  temple  of  nature  is  beautiful. 
The  sky  spread  out  as  curtains,  and  the  stars  shine  as  lamps.  The  decorations 
of  the  Temple  were  not  a  form  of  mere  "  barbaric  splendour"  as  thought  by  some 
writers.  The  skill  of  the  smith,  the  sculptor,  and  the  engraver  lavished  upon 
substances  and  in  a  place  rarely  seen  by  the  eye  of  man.  In  its  symmetry,  order, 
and  design,  the  work  was  an  offering  to  Jehovah,  whose  presence  filled  the 
temple.  The  house  of  the  earthly  Jerusalem  was  a  type  of  the  glorified  Church, 
**  the  city  of  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass.*' 

••  And  it  is  a  joy  that  in  every  age 
The  greatest  works  of  mind  or  hand  have  been 
Done  unto  God  "  [Bailey's  Festus'\. 

The  Surpassing  Beauty  of  the  Temple. — Verse  6. 

Observe — I.  That  God  did  not  need  this  lavish  expenditure  of  gold  and  gems 
and  rich  ornaments.  They  were  all  perishable  things.  II.  Yet  divine  conde- 
scension accepted  this  ofiering  of  human  gratitude.  III.  The  beauty  and  costli- 
ness of  the  temple  not  without  their  uses.  The  temple  so  adorned  served  to 
impress  the  mind  of  surrounding  nations  with  the  feelings  of  the  people  of  Israel 
towards  their  great  God.  IV.  The  adornment  of  the  temple  a  rebuke  of  the 
utilitarian  views  of  those  who  are  advocates  of  a  Judas-like  economy,  and  who 
regard  as  waste  all  that  is  given  to  God  beyond  the  bare  necessities  of  the  case 
[Bib.  Mus.\ 

HOMILETIG    HINTS    AND    SUGGESTIONS, 

Yer.  4.  Within  with  pure  gold.  Such  Vers.  10-13.    Gherichims.    1.  Image 

was  Christ's  inside  (Col.  ii.  9) ;  in  his  work^  painted  to  impress  mind  and  life, 

outside  was  no  such  desirable  beauty  Symbols  of  spiiitu  il  truths.     "  The  eye 

(Is.  liii.  2) ;  so  the  church's  glory  is  in-  may  help  the  fancy  and   the  soul ;  but 

ward  (Ps.  xlv.  13),  in  the  hidden  man  if  our  creed  be  only  painted,  it  is  as  a 

of  the  heart  (1  Peter  iii.  4)  [Trapp],  painted  wing  :  you  will  always  find  it 

Ver.  6.     Gold  and  fir.     1.  The  best  where  you  left  it — a  wing  that  cannot 

things  employed  for  God.     2.  The  best  flutter,  much  less  fly,  a  wing  that  is 

employed  with  no  niggard  spirit  and  useless  in  every  respect "  [Dr.  Parker']. 

empty  hand.     3.  The  best  applied  to  2.  Stood,  denoting  attendance  and  ser- 

secure  harmony,  beauty,  and  strength,  vice.       *'  They  serve  who    also   stand 

The  lofty  buildings  set  forth  "the  and  wait"  (c/t  Ps.  ciii.  20).     3.    Wings 

germs  of  all  Christian  architecture  and  extended,  to  teach  alacrity  in  service, 

the  principle  of  national  worship   in  "  swift  as  an  angel."    4.  Faces  inward^ 

fixed  places  for  ever.**  not  fixed  on  a  throne  and  faced  towards 

*'  A  thing  of  beauty  is  a  joy  for  ever ;  worshippers.     God  only  must  be  wor- 

Its  loveliness  increases  j  it  wiU  never  shipped,  not  angels  who  merely  attend 

Pass  into  nothingness."  aad    vail     their    fa^od     before    him, 

15a 


cUSIlP.  in.] 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARt:   CHRONTGLBi. 


**  Whatever  the  cherubim  were,  it  is 
Certain  that  they  were  in  no  sense 
representations  or  emblems  of  deity, 
like  the  winged  figures  of  Assyria  and 
Egypt,  with  which  they  have  been  often 
compared  .  .  .  the  representation  sim- 
ply expresses  the  claim  of  Jehovah,  the 
God  of  Israel,  of  such  lordship  over  all 
creation  as  is  hymned  in  the  seraphic 
song  of  Is.  vi.  3"  [ElUcott,  0.  T, 
Com.']. 

Yer.  17.  JacJiin  and  Boaz  establish- 
ment and  strength  in  temple  work 
(c/  1  Ki.  vii.  21).  "  The  pillars  were 
richly  decorated  and  placed  in  a  very 
conspicuous  position  in  front  of,  and 
detached  from,  the  temple.  The  one 
on  the  dexter  side  was  named  '  Jachin,' 
that  is,  *  He  shall  establish/  and  that 
on  the  sinister  side  *  Boaz,*  that  is, 
*  In  it  is  strength.'  These  names  seem 
to  show  that  they  were  memorial 
columns,  such  as  have  often  been 
erected  in  one  form  or  another  in  all 


ages,  and  that  they  commemorated  the 
Lord's  work  in  establishing  his  king- 
dom and  presence  in  Jerusalem.  They 
thus  expressed  to  future  ages  tiie 
thanksgiving  words  of  David  :  *  Lord, 
by  thy  favour  thou  hast  settled  strength 
for  my  mountain '  (Ps.  xx.  7,  marg.)  ; 
*  Honour  and  majesty  are  before  him; 
strength  and  beauty  are  in  his  sanc- 
tuary' (Ps.  xcvi.  6)"  \J,  H,  Blunt]. 
Showing  not  only  by  the  matter- 
brass — but  by  the  names  of  these 
pillars,  what  steadfastness  the  elect 
stand  in  before  God,  both  for  present 
and  future.  For  present  they  have 
strength  in  themselves — Boaz,  i.e.,  in 
it  is  strength ;  for  future  God  will  so 
direct  and  establish  them  with  his 
grace — Jachin,  i.e.,  he  shall  direct  or 
establish,  that  they  shall  never  wholly 
depart  from  him.  "  Him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the 
temple  of  my  God,  and  he  shall  go  no 
more  out"  (Rev.  iii.  12)  [TrappL 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III. 


Ver.  6.  Stones  for  beauty.  The 
lavish  use  of  the  precious  metals  in 
ornamentation  was  a  peculiar  feature 
of  early  Oriental  architecture  [Speak. 
Com.].  'Tis  the  eternal  law  that 
first  in  beauty  should  be  first  in  might 
[Keats],  Precious  stones.  They  who 
are  not  made  saints  in  a  state  of  grace 
shall  never  be  saints  in  glory.  The 
stones  which  are  appointed  for  that 
glorious  temple  above  are  hewn  and 
polished  and  prepared  for  it  here,  as 
the  stones  were  wrought  and  prepared 
in  mountains  for  the  building  of  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem  [Leighton]. 

Vers.  7-10.  The  mission  of  art.  Art 
is  on  a  mission  for  tke  great  common 


people.  It  is  to  educate  them.  It  is 
to  elevate  them.  It  is  to  refi.ne  them. 
It  is  to  do  its  work  now,  no  longer  for 
the  palace,  no  longer  for  the  temple, 
but  for  that  which  has  something  of 
both  the  palace  and  the  temple  in  it — - 
for  the  family.  Art  is  aiming  at  the 
household,  and  when  it  shall  have  done 
its  work  there,  it  will  be  with  such 
resplendent  and  wondrous  fruits  as 
shall  make  aJl  the  past  as  nothing  in 
the  comparison.  We  are  just  on  the 
eve  of  this  great  development.  The 
wealth  of  the  world  is  increasing,  so 
that  men  are  beginning  to  be  able  to 
make  their  houses  richer  than  Grecian 
temples  used  to  be  \Beecher\, 


157 


EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARt :  CSROmCLMS.  [c^t^.  tt. 


CHAPTER  rV. 


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  describes  the  holy  furniture  of  the  temple  and  the  court 
(vers.  1-10) ;  the  brass  works  of  Huram  (vers.  11-18) ;  and  the  golden  vessels  of  the  sanc- 
tuary (ver.  19 ;  eh.  v.  1 ;  cf.l  Ki.  vii.  48-51). 

Vers.  1-10. — The  furniture  of  the  temple  court.  Ver.  1.  Altar,  of  burnt  offering,  dimen- 
sions not  given  in  Kings.  Vers.  2-5.  Brazen  sea  (c/.  1  Ki.  vii.  23-26).  Oxen,  true  read- 
ing appears  to  be  knops,  colocynths,  or  flower  buds,  as  in  1  Ki.  vii.  24.  The  word  seems 
to  have  come  in  by  mistake  from  the  next  verse  \_Murphy'].  Vers.  4,  5.  The  exact  words 
of  Kings  used  until  last  clause  of  ver.  5.  Lilies  (ver.  5),  like  a  lily  flower  (marg.).  Ver.  6. 
Ten  lavers  placed  in  the  court,  five  on  south  and  five  on  north  side ;  used  for  washing 
utensils ;  sea  for  bathing  of  the  priests.  Ver.  7.  Candlesticks  made  after  the  pattern  of 
that  by  Moses  (Ex.  xxv.  31).  Form,  no  allusion  to  shape,  but  to  express  what  more  fully 
given  ver.  20.  Ver.  8.  Ten  tables,  one  in  tabernacle.  Ver.  9.  Court,  inner  court  (2  Ki. 
vi.  36).  Great  court  for  the  congregation.  Ver.  10.  Sea,  great  brazen  sea,  placed  between 
the  brazen  altar  and  the  porch,  a  little  south  (1  Ki.  vii.  39),  where  the  laver  before  the 
tabernacle  formerly  stood  (Ex.  xxx.  18). 

Vers.  11-18. — The  brass  works  of  Huram.  Pots,  buckets  for  carrying  ashes  from  altar. 
Shovels  to  lift  them  from  altar.  Basins  to  receive  and  pour  blood  upon  altar.  Vers.  12-16. 
Various  things  (1  Ki.  vii.  40-47).  Pommels,  balls  on  top  of  chapiter,  upper  parts,  or 
capital  of  column.  Pomegran.  (1  Ki.  vii.  20).  Ver.  14.  Bases  mentioned  first  time,  orna- 
mental stands  for  lavers.  Ver.  16.  Father — i.e.,  his  master-workman,  as  ii.  13.  Ver.  17. 
Thick  claij  of  the  ground.  Sue.  lay  beyond  Jordan,  south  of  the  Jabbok.  Zared.,  Zarthan. 
(1  Ki.  vii.  46),  probably  name  of  place  in  time  of  writer.  Ver.  18.  Found  out,  so  freely 
used  that  weight  was  not  taken. 

Vers.  19-22. — Golden  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  (I  Ki.  vii.  48-51).  Tables,  the  table  in 
Kings,  perhaps  the  shew-bread  never  put  on  more  than  one  of  the  ten  at  a  time  [Speak, 
Com.] .  Ver.  20.  Candlesticks,  law  of  burning,  Ex.  xxvii.  20,  21 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  2,  3.  Ver.  21, 
Flowers,  lamps,  &c.  (c/.  Ex.  xxv.  31-39  ;  1  Ki.  vii.  49).  Ver.  22.  Entry t  the  door  frame ; 
the  doors,  the  door  leaves.    These  were  overlaid  with  gold. 

EOMILETICS. 
The  Furniture  op  the  Holy  Court. — Verses  1-10. 

A  continued  account  of  the  furniture,  things  made  of  brass  and  of  gold. 
Without  and  within  types  of  good  things  to  come.  Here  furniture  in  open 
court,  in  view  of  all  the  people,  of  great  significance.  1.  The  altar  of  brass. 
Twenty  cubits  (30£t.)  square,  by  ten  cubits  (15ft.)  high.  Larger  than  that  in 
Tabernacle.  Israel  more  numerous  and  richer,  should  be  more  devout.  When 
God  enlarges  our  borders  and  business  we  should  increase  our  gifts.  The  burnt 
offerings  an  impressive,  instructive  sight,  before  the  people  in  the  court.  2.  The 
sea  of  brass.  For  the  same  purpose  as  the  Laver  in  Tabernacle,  washing  hands 
and  feet  of  priests  while  ministering  at  the  altar.  Ten  cubits  (15ft  )  in  diameter, 
by  five  cubits  (7jft.)  in  height,  and  raised  higher  by  standing  upon  12  brazen 
oxen.  Reminding  that  God  requires  sanctity  in  all  that  approach  him.  Tho.se 
that  draw  nigh  must  cleanse  their  hands  and  purify  their  hearts  (Jas.  iv.  8).  3. 
The  ten  lavers  (ver.  6).  They  were  set  upon  wheels  to  move  about,  and  used  for 
the  ablution  of  sacrifices.  Not  only  the  priests,  but  the  sacrifices  must  be  washed. 
We  must  purify  our  persons  and  performances.  Iniquity  cleaves  to  our  holy 
things.  4.  The  ten  golden  candlesticks  (ver.  7).  Only  one  in  Tabernacle.  Light 
increases.  Divine  direction  was  given  to  increase  the  number  of  tables  for 
shew-bread  and  candlesticks  for  light.  5.  2'he  ten  tables.  **  Five  on  right  side  and 
158 


cnkP.  tv.j  noMtLETW  COMMENTARY:  CtlRONlCL^S. 


five  on  the  left ; "  to  which  belonged  100  basins  or  dishes  of  gold  (ver.  7). 
6.  The  golden  altar ^  on  which  incense  was  burnt  (ver.  19) ;  probably  enlarged  in 
proportion  to  the  brazen  altar.  Christ  makes  atonement  and  intercedes  for  ever 
in  virtue  of  that  atonement.  But  what  use  all  this  splendid  furniture  ?  Not  for 
mere  display,  but  utility.  Talents,  education,  the  furniture  of  mind  not  given 
for  mere  polish,  but  practical  use.  Outward  adornment,  material  grandeur  only 
of  service  when  leading  to  spiritual  results. 

The  Molten  Sea. — Yersea  2-5. 

I.  Its  use  suggests  purification  for  God's  service.  Priests  and  people  iinfit 
without  this.  Holiness  becomes  God's  house  and  God's  servants.  "  Be  ye  clean 
that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord."  II.  Its  size  suggests  abundant  provision 
for  purification.  Not  a  laver,  but  a  sea  ;  kept  full  and  overflowing  for  constant 
use.  A  type  of  that  "  fountain  opened  to  the  house  of  David  and  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  for  sin  and  uncleanness."  III.  Its  construction. 
1.  The  material  precious  and  durable.  2.  The  oxen,  sacrifices  of  priests, 
emblems  of  strength  and  patience — looking  all  ways.  The  blessings  procured  by 
a  holy  priesthood  would  be  universally  diffused  [Adapted\, 

The  Brass  Works  of  Hiram. — Verses  11-18. 

A  detailed  enumeration  of  principal  articles  executed  for  sacred  edifice  {cf. 
1  Ki.  vii.  14-46).  I.  The  articles  which  Hiram  made.  Hiram 
skilled  in  work  in  gold,  silver,  and  iron ;  in  wood  and  stone ;  in  purple,  blue, 
fine  linen  and  in  crimson  (2  Chr.  ii.  1 4) ;  but  chiefly  metal  work  or  works  in 
brass  contributed.  Works  splendid  in  material,  "  bright  brass  '*  (1  Ki.  vii. 
45);  numerous  in  quantity,  "in  great  abundance"  (ver.  18),  and  suitable  in 
style.  II.  The  foundry  at  which  they  were  prepared.  In  neigh- 
bourhood of  Succoth  and  Zarthan,  in  valley  of  Jordan,  where  the  soil  is  marl. 
What  natural  abundant  provision  for  man  in  the  earth  !  If  brass  or  bronze  was 
not  smelted  and  alloyed  by  Hiram,  but  received  from  Syria  as  a  tribute  in  manu- 
factured form,  yet  he  would  melt  it  down  for  casting  (1  Chr.  xviii.  8).  Furnaces 
would  be  required  and  filled  with  metal.  Moulds  made  in  the  ground  and 
national  foundry  erected  far  from  the  capital,  which  would  not  be  annoyed  by 
smoke  and  noxious  vapours.  Thus  we  have  civilisation  in  its  beginning, 
progress,  and  end. 

An  Ancient  Contract, — Verses  11-18. 

**  Hiram  finished  the  work  that  he  was  to  make  for  King  Solomon  "  (ver.  11). 
The  agreement  in  2  Chr.  xi.  I.  The  contractor.  An  eminent  Tyrian 
artizan,  skilled  in  great  variety  of  departments ;  appointed  for  his  great  natural 
ability  to  superintend  the  execution  of  all  works  of  art  in  the  temple ;  and  a 
faithful,  diligent  man,  worthy  of  all  confidence.  II.  The  articles  for 
which  he  contracted.  Numerous  and  most  valuable,  well-finished  and  most 
suitable.  The  best  material  and  the  best  workmanship.  III.  The  comple- 
tion of  the  contract.  "He  made  an  end  of  doing  all  the  work"  (1  Ki.  vii. 
41).  Finished  the  work  and  all  the  work.  No  breach  of  contract ;  no  delay. 
Everything  completed  in  time;  gave  satisfaction;  and  becomes  a  model  transaction. 

"The  Entry  op  the  House." — Verse  22. 

This  central,  conspicuous,  and  attractive,  suggesting — I.  Access  tO  God 
in  Christian  worship.  God  great  and  man  sinful.  The  door  might  have 
been  for  ever  closed ;  but,  in  love,  Jehovah  directs  in  building  a  house,  promises 

159 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  it. 


to  dwell  in  it,  and  invites  men  to  meet  him  there.  "  Let  them  make  me  a 
sanctuary;  that  I  may  dwell  among  them."  II.  Access  tO  symbolic 
beauty  in  Christian  worship.  Perfection  of  gold,  or  material  prosperity 
given  to  God.  Palms  indicating  growth  and  fruit  fulness  in  Christian  life ; 
flowers,  emblems  of  beauty  and  fragrance  in  Christian  character;  cheruhims, 
suggestive  of  alacrity  in  God's  service.  Thought  is  expressed  in  forms  of  art. 
Beauty  pleases  the  senses,  originates  in  the  mind  the  ideal,  calls  imagination 
into  play,  and  exercises  wonderful  fascination  over  man.  Delight,  love,  and 
reverence  touch  the  heart,  emotions  arise  and  action  result. 

•*  We  live  by  admiration,  hope,  and  love ; 
And  even  as  these  are  well  and  wisely  fixed. 
In  dignity  of  being  we  ascend." 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  6.     Ten  lavers.     Ten  symbol  of  with  gracefulness  will  be  found  in  all 

completeness.     Their  position  in  court,  the  Divinest  thoughts.     1.  The  pillars 

five  on  the  noi'^h,  and    ive  on  south  must  be  before  the  florid  ornamenta- 

side.     Their  us-\  for  washi  ig  parts  of  tion;  2.  But  beauty  is  also  in  God's 

offering.     Fun  lure  of  s^jlendid  skill,  sanctuary,  and  '' upon  the  top  of  the 

labour,  and  ex|   ns  .  pillars  was  lily  work "  [G.  J.  Procter]. 

Yer.  5.  With  jiowers  of  lilies,  lit.  like  In   reviewing  the  whole   chapter,   we 

a  lily  flower.     Consider — 1.  That  there  learn — 1.  The  beautiful    in  Christiar4 

is  an  acceptableness  in  a  good  and  true  architecture  ;  the  temple  an  example 

work  in  itself,  but  much  more  by  rela-  and    stimulus.     2.    Art    in    Christian 

tion ;  that  is,  when  it  is  rendered  as  to  service ;  subservient  to  man's  highest 

God.     We  must  come  to  do  our  best,  needs  and  God's  glory.     3.  The  sym- 

because  we  are  doing  it  for  the  Lord,  bolic  in  Christian  worship.     The  O.  T. 

2.  The  soundness  and  honesty  of  service  dispensation  a  picture  adapted  to  infant 

in  God's  spiritual  temple.     3.  As  some  minds  and  first  stages  of  divine  instruc- 

of    Hiram's    work    was    "lily    work"  tion,  "a  shadow  (dim  sketch)  of  things 

(c/*.  1  Ki.  vii.  22),  so,  majesty  crowned  to  come"  (Col.  ii.  17;  Heb.  x.  1). 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV. 

Ver.    14.     Bases    and    lavers.     No  lovingly,  but  not  servilely — ^learning  to 

heathen    parallel  to   these   bases   and  compose  as  she  does — not  following  her 

lavers ;  the  whole  arrangement,  so  full  laws   without   laying   down   his   own. 

of  meaning,  appears  quite   peculiar  to  Above    all,    let   him    remember    that 

the  Israelitish  temple,  for  nothing  of  ornamentation   is   to  art  whiib   words 

the  kind  is  found  anywhere  else,  either  are  to  thought,  and  that  if  design  and 

on  Egyptian  or  Assyrian  monuments  architecture  are  dead,  no  ornamenta- 

\Thenius\  tion,  however  beautiful,  can  give  them 

Vers.  19-22.     Gold.     Symbolic  art.  life.     It   wiU  be,  at  the   best,   but   a 

It  is  an  incarnation  of  fancy,  and  is  a  wreath  of  flowers  round  the  pale  brow 

sort  of  petrified  poetry,  or  concrete  rhe-  of  the  corpse. 

toric.   It  is  the  blossom  of  the  art-tree,  ,     .,,.,.,"  ^  powers 

whose  root  is  thought,  and  whose  trunk      S  '^'iS^j^i  A'  ^^l^^l  ^If  ^^^  ,       , 

.         .      ..  ^p  .  * .  ,.        .    .  Of  God's  great  mantle  our  poor  stars  do 

it  imagmation.    It  is  inventive,  imita-  o&ai »» 

tional,  and  composite.  .  .  .     Let  our  [RyskmX, 

^students    follow     nature    boldly    and 


160 


CJHAP.  T.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


CHAPTER  V. 


Critioai,  Notes.]  Removal  of  the  ark  (vers.  1-10)  is  followed  by  visible  token  of  Gcd'a 
favour  (vers.  11-14)  (c/.  1  Ki.  viii.  1-11),  an  addition  to  narrative  in  Kings,  is  the  account 
of  the  circumstances  under  which  the  manifestation  took  place. 

Vers.  1-10.— The  ark  removed.  Dedicated  (1  Chr.  xxii.  14  ;  xxvi.  26).  Ver.  2.  Assembled, 
the  elders  in  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  which  began  on  15th  of  Ethanim,  the  seventh 
month  (1  Ki.  viii.  2).  The  closing  festival  of  the  sacred  year.  Ver.  4.  Levites,  such  as 
were  priests,  whose  office  in  particular  to  bear  ark  (1  Ki.  viii.  3).  Ver.  5.  Tabernacle 
brought  from  Gibeon  (2  Chr.  i.  3).  Ver.  6.  Sacrificed  through  the  priests.  Told,  counted 
(1  Ki.  vui.  5).  Ver.  7.  Wings,  those  which  met  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Ver.  8. 
Covered,  shaded.  Ver.  9.  Drew  out,  intimating  that  the  ark  was  not  to  be  moved  again. 
They  rested  in  the  outer  wings,  so  made  a  barrier.  This  day,  i.e.,  the  time  this  history 
was  written.  After  Babylonish  captivity,  no  trace  of  ark  or  staves.  Ver.  10.  Nothinq. 
Hence  tables  of  the  law  put  into  the  ark  by  Moses  (Deut.  x.  5)  existed  in  time  ox 
Solomon. 

Vers,  ll-li.— God's  glory  manifested.  Priests  without  regard  to  courses  ;  all  priests  at 
hand  took  part  in  ceremony.  Ver.  12.  Singers,  full  choir  required  on  solemn  occasions 
like  this  ;  aD  twenty-four  choirs  combined  in  white  linen  {cf.  1  Chr.  xv.  27),  with  instru- 
ments proper  for  the  Levites,  and  trumpets  for  priests  {cf.  Num.  x.  8 ;  1  Chr.  xv.  24; 
xvi.  6;  2  Chr.  vii.  6;  xiii.  12-14).  Ver.  13.  One.  The  performance  arranged  as  one  whole. 
The  song  of  praise  usual  refrain  (1  Chr.  xvi.  34;  Ps.  cxxxvi.).  Cloud  as  in  erection  of 
tabernacle  (Ex.  xl.  34),  the  symbol  of  Divine  presence,  too  dazzling  for  them  to  officiate. 

EOMILETICS. 

Dedicated  Things. — Verse  1. 

This  incident  worthy  of  note,  something  to  be  commended,  thought  the 
writer.   The  treasures  of  David  carefully  stored  into  the  chambers  of  the  temple. 

I.  David  before  his  death  dedicated  certain  treasures  to  God. 

With  toil,  self-sacrifice,  and  entire  devotedness,  David  collected  materials.  "  In 
my  trouble  I  have  prepared,  <fec.**  (1  Chr.  xxii.  14).  His  spoils  and  property 
consecrated  to  the  highest  uses.  The  gold  of  the  heathen  may  enrich  the  coffers 
of  the  Son  of  God.  II.  Solomon  most  scrupulous  in  carrying  out 
his  father's  wish.  He  might  have  taken  them  for  the  expenses  of  his 
house  and  government.  As  executor  he  willingly  appropriated  all  to  its  lawful 
use.  Nothing  was  alienated.  The  will  was  felt  to  bind  and  fulfilled.  Frequently 
the  wishes  of  pious  parents  are  evaded  by  worldly-minded  relatives.  The  manner 
important  and  specific.  Thus  (ver.  1  ;  cf.  1  Ki.  viii.  51,  so  ended,  &c.) — 
1.  Resolving  to  secure  the  blessing  by  fulfilling  the  conditions.  2.  Anxious  to 
bestow  upon  the  people  the  best  blessings.  3.  Continuing  the  work  until  com- 
pletely finished.  III.  Solomon's  example  worthy  of  our  imitation. 
Treasures  we  can  give — hearts,  personal  efibrts,  contributions  and  attendance, 
obedience  to  the  Divine  will,  and  prayer  f.or  the  Divine  presence. 

The  Removal  of  the  Ark. — Verses  2-10. 

Along  with  holy  vessels,  needful  to  bring  in  the  ark,  the  most  precious  furni- 
ture. The  occasion  one  of  great  interest  and  solemnity.  I.  The  time  of  its 
removal.  1.  Remarkable  in  itself.  The  building  finished  in  the  mouth  Bui 
(November),  eighth  of  the  year,  eleventh  of  Solomon's  reign  (B.C.  1005-4),  having 

161 


BOMILETIC  COMMEJSTARY:  CHROJSIVLES,  [chap.  v. 


occupied  workmen   seven  years  and  a  half  (1  Ki.  vi.  1,  37,  38).     Dedication 
began  in  seventh  month  of  the  year  Ethanim  (October),  not  the  same  year  in 
which  completed.     Intervening  eleven  months  spent  in  getting  ready ;  delay  to 
choose  fit  time  when  Jerusalem  would  be  filled  with  people.  Feast  of  Tabernacles 
most  suitable  season  to  dedicate  temple.     2.  Remarkable  in  its  influence.     "  The 
magnitude  of  the  event  is  marked  by  the  fact  that  now,  for  the  first  time  since 
the  exodus,  we  have  the  years  and  months  recorded "  [Stanley].     Events  often 
fix  dates  in  life.     *'  I  have  shewed  thee  new  things  from  this  time."     II.  The 
method  of  its  removal.     Similar  to  the  ceremony  of  removing  from  house 
of  Obededom  to  Zion  (2  Sam.  vi.  12  ;  1  Chr.  xv.  25).     1.  Representatives  of  the 
nation  summoned  to  take  part.     Heads  of  tribes,  chiefs  of  the  fathers,  senators, 
judges,  and  rulers.     2.   Vast  spectators  met  together.     "All  the  men  of  Israel 
assembled  themselves"  (ver.  3).     Not  only  chief  men,  those  invited,  but  vast 
numbers  of  common  people  to  watch  the  ceremony.     3.  An  orderly  procession 
was  formed.      The  king,  preceded  by  his   royal  guard  (1  Ki.  xiv.  27,  28),  took 
the  lead ;  elders  of  the  people  followed ;  then  came  the  Levites  bearing  the  ark. 
This  procession  was  joined  by  another  on  Mount  Zion  from  lofty  height  of 
Gibeon,  "bearing  with  it  the  relics  of  the  old  pastoral  worship,  now  to  be  disused 
for  ever"  (ver.  5).     Levite  choirs  sang  joyous  psalms  (the  Psalms  of  Degrees 
cxx.-cxxiv.),  in  solemn  steps,  accompanied  with  cymbals,  psalteries,  harps,  and 
trumpets.     Up  the  hill  the  procession  went,  and  in  nearing  Moriah  they  would 
sing,  "Arise,  O  Lord,  into  Thy  resting-place,  Thou  and  the  ark  of  Thy  strength." 
III.  The  cerem.onies  which  accompanied  its  removal.    Every- 
thing fit  for  a  great  and  solemn  event  like  this.     1.  Innumerable  saci'ifices  offered. 
Stationed  in  different  places,  priests  offered  "  sheep  and  oxen  which  could  not  be 
numbered  for  multitude "  (ver.  6).    "  The  ground  was  moist  with  drink-offerings 
and  sacrifices,"  says  Josephus.     2.  Priests  attended  in  a  body.     This  an  extra- 
ordinary occasion,  more  than  wonted  solemnity.     All  priests  came  up  from  all 
parts  of  Judsea  to  lake  part.     **  All  the  piicsts  that  uere  present  (found)  were 
sanctified  and  did  not  then  wait  by  course"  (ver.  11).     3.  Musicians  orderly 
arranged.     The  station   of   priests  with  instruments  at  marble  table  on  the 
south-west   of   the   altar    apart    from    others.      Levite    singers     occupied    an 
orchestra   east   of    the    altar.        Both   stood   with    their    faces   to   the   altar. 
The    new    and    gentler    notes    of     David's     music    blended    with    the    loud 
trumpet  blast  of  earlier  days  in  praising  God,  "  for  he  is  good ;  for  his  mercy 
endureth  for  ever."    IV.  The  solem.n  deposit  in  its  resting-placa. 
Brought  into  its  place,  into  the  oracle  of  the  house,  to  the  most  holy  place,  even 
under  the  wings  of  the  cherabims  (1  Ki.  viii.  6).     "There  it  is  unto  this  day" 
(ver.  9).     1.  Its  public  inspection.    "  Before  the  ark  disappeared  for  the  last  time 
from  the  eyes  of  the  people,  the  awful  reverence  which  had  kept  any  inquisitive 
eyes  from  prying  into  the  secrets  of  that  sacred  chest  gave  way  before  the  united 
feelings  of  necessity  and  of  irresistible  curiosity.     The  ancient  lid  formed  by  the 
cherubs  was  to  be  removed ;  and  a  new  one  without  them  was  to  be  substituted, 
to  fit  it  for  its  new  abode.     It  was  taken  off*,  and  in  so  doing  the  inte  rior  of  t 
ark  was  seen  by  Israelite  eyes  for  the  first  time  for  more  than  four  centuries, 
perhaps  the  last  time  for  ever"  \Stanley\     2.  Its  careful  seclusion.     Put  into 
"the  place  of  its  rest"  (Ps.  cxxxii.  8-14),  in  token  that  its  wanderings  were 
over — that  God  had  given  rest  to  the"  Levites  and  privilege  to  minister  in  fixed 
service ;  a  final  pledge  of  God's  presence  with  his  people  in  their  new  capital. 
God  present  in  religious  assemblies.     "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always." 

The  Joy  op  Finished  Work. 

1.  The  accom^plishment  of  a  good  "work  is  the  cause  of  joy. 

The   building  of  the   fixst  and  second  temple,  the  establishment   of   national 
16^ 


CHAP.  T.]  EOBIILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


government  and  the  acquisition  of  national  liberty,  the  rearing  of  great  monu- 
ments and  the  opening  of  places  of  worship,  &c.  1.  Joy  to  the  builder.  Solomon 
rejoiced  that  no  accident  delayed,  that  no  providence  prevented  the  erection  of 
the  temple.  2.  Joy  to  the  nation.  The  people  rejoiced ;  all  classes  represented, 
and  shared  in  the  consecration.  Sacrifice  and  cymbal  j  king,  princes,  and  people 
united  in  praise  to  God,  "  who  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  with  them  that  love 
him."  II.  The  power  to  accomplish  this  work  should  be 
ascribed  to  God.  Not  to  the  skill  of  the  architect,  the  labour  of  the 
builders,  the  wealth  of  the  contributors,  but  to  God.  Genius  to  invent,  material, 
gold,  and  silver,  to  give  all  from  him.  We  return  simply  what  we  receive.  "  All 
things  come  of  thee,  and  of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee."  III.  Hence,  in 
every  great  undertaking  we  should  ask  for  God's  direction. 
In  building  ask  for  a  site,  materials,  and  workmen,  for  time  to  finish,  and 
privilege  to  consecrate.  "  All  the  works  of  this  pattern,"  only  from  the  Divine 
Architect.  If  enterprises,  social  and  national,  succeed,  wisdom  from  above  must 
guide.  In  building  a  family  and  a  business,  if  the  foundations  be  laid  in 
oppression  (Hab.  ii.  11,  12),  and  the  materials  be  gathered  and  put  together  in 
pride  and  forgetfulness  of  God,  the  erection  may  fall,  and  great  may  be  the  fall. 
The  best-laid  project  fails  unless  God  crown  it  with  success.  "  Except  the  Lord 
build  the  house,  they  labour  in  vain  that  build  it," 

The  Temple  Choir. — Verses  12,  13. 

A  full  choir  on  this  occasion.  Levites^  with  cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps, 
their  proper  instruments ;  and  joHes^^  with  trumpets.  I.  Music  a  revelation 
from  God.  Music  of  a  certain  kind  in  nature — "  the  notes  of  birds,"  •'  the 
music  of  the  spheres,"  <fec.  But  sounds  not  music  until  reduced  to  scale ;  not  a 
hymn  of  praise  until  formed  by  the  mind  of  man,  taught  by  the  help  of  God,  to 
awaken  emotions.  ''  There  is  no  fuller  revelation  of  God  in  nature  than  is  found 
in  these  laws  of  sound,  by  which  he  comes  into  the  very  heart  of  man,  e^'en  to  its 
inmost  recesses  of  love  and  adoration ;  and  it  requires  only  a  sensitive,  child-like 
heart  to  interpret  this  speechless  music  locked  within  nature  as  the  voice  of  God 
pleading  to  be  let  out  into  music,  and  praise  through  the  heart  of  man,  for  so 
only  can  his  works  praise  him "  [Munger].  II.  Music  as  a  science  tO 
cultivate.  Materials  and  laws  of  music  in  nature  must  be  reduced  to 
harmony,  and  made  the  vehicle  of  thought  and  feeling.  Musicians  desciibed  as 
workmen,  a  guild  of  sacred  minstrels  who  labour  and  study  to  perfect  tlieir  art 
(1  Chr.  XXV.  1).  1.  Some  may  lead.  Asaph,  Heman,  and  Jeduthem  '*  set  over 
service  of  song."  Leaders  required  to  train  and  conduct.  2.  All  may  leaiii. 
Voice  given  to  cultivate.  Members  of  the  choir  and  the  congregation  may 
practise  singing.  All  should  feel  that  sacred  music  pleads  for  better  use  and 
nobler  exercise.  III.  Music  consecrated  to  its  highest  use  in  the 
worship  of  God.  The  temple  the  great  school  of  music,  which  was  conse- 
crated to  worship  of  Jehovah,  hence  "  songs  of  the  temple "  (Amos  viii  3). 
Nothing  calls  for  music  like  religion.  It  may  be  left  out  of  other  departments 
of  Ufe,  but  religious  worship  would  suffer  without  music.  Where  praise  is 
repressed  for  the  sake  of  the  sermon  the  service  will  become  dull  and  un- 
profitable. Cease  to  sing,  and  men  will  forget  to  assemble.  Music  takes  to 
itself  the  noblest  instruments,  attunes  and  inspires  the  greatest  composers,  and 
becomes  the  expression  of  the  greatest  reverence,  adoration,  and  praise  in  the 
house  of  God.  The  heart  has  lost  its  sadness,  atheists  have  wept,  and  men  been 
brought  to  God  under  the  influence  of  song.  "  Both  young  men  and  maidens, 
old  men  and  children,  let  them  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord," 

lf3 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  ▼. 


The  Cloud  Filling  the  Temple. — Verses  11-14, 

I.  As  a  confirmation  of  acceptance.  By  this  God  approved  of 
Solomon's  work,  honoured  the  ark  and  accepted  the  temple.  Priests  drew  back 
in  holy  dread.  Sinful  man  cannot  approach  the  glory  of  God,  who  is  like  a 
consuming  fire.  But  God  condescends  to  meet  him,  to  hear  prayer  and  restore 
to  friendship.    II.  As  a  distinguishing:  feature  of  the  Jewish 

from  other  nations.  Heathen  nations  had  temples,  but  gods  without 
glory.  No  manifestation  like  that  of  Jehovah  ever  seen  by  them.  This  cloud  a 
striking  testimony  that  God  took  the  nation  under  His  care  and  protection.  The 
glory,  stability,  and  attractive  force  of  any  people  is  to  have  God  with  them. 
**  For  what  nation  is  there  so  great  who  hath  God  so  nigh  unto  them,  as  the 
Lord  our  God  is  in  all  things  that  we  call  upon  him  for  ? "  III.  Asa  symbol 
of  permanent  habitation.  After  the  dedication  the  visible  sign  with- 
drawn, but  God  constantly  dwelt  in  the  temple.  Only  driven  out  when  polluted 
by  manifold  idolatry  (Ezek.  x.  4-18).  His  return  in  the  Messiah  greater  than 
in  the  magnificence  of  temple.  IV.  A  consecrating  element  in  all 
sacred  buildings.  Not  until  the  glory  fills  the  Christian  church,  the 
human  heart,  and  the  plans  of  life,  will  they  become  fit  for  God.  *'  Let  this  be  a 
lesson  to  all  church  builders.  Your  painted  windows,  and  gilded  columns,  and 
majestic  roofs  are  nothing  until  the  living  Spirit  comes  into  the  sanctuary,  fills 
it  with  an  illuminating  presence.  The  house  is  built  for  God,  and  until  God 
comes  it  is  but  a  structure  of  calculated  matter;  when  he  comes  every  stone 
glows  and  every  corner  of  the  house  becomes  a  sacred  refuge,  and  the  whole 
temple  becomes  as  it  were  a  part  of  heaven  "  [i>r.  Parker], 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTION'S. 

Yer.  2.      Bring  up  the  arh.     Why  and  commend  to  others  (2  Tim.  i.  13, 

this  display  and  ceremony?      1.  The  14). 

ark   the   chief   thing   in   the  temple.  Vers.  12,  13.    Singers.    1.  In  heauti- 

The  temple  without  the  ark  like  the  ful  attire.     ''Arrayed  in  white  linen" 

Church  without  a  Bible,  the  universe  — the  symbol  of  purity,  beauty,  and 

without  a  sun.      2.   The  ark   in   the  splendour.      "White   is   everywhere," 

temple  significant  of  God's  desire    to  says  one,   "  the  livery  and   colour  of 

be  reconciled  to  man,  to  dwell  with  his  heaven."     2.  With  various  instruments. 

people  and  not  be  separated  from  them.  Stringed  and  unstringed,  all  forms  and 

3.  The  temple,  therefore,  nothing  until  all    ministries,    may   be   employed   in 

consecrated  by  the  ark.    The  same  with  God's  service.     3.  With  marvellous  uni- 

aspects  and  departments  of  human  life.  son.     All  the  twenty-four  choirs  com- 

Men,  places,  and  abilities  nothing  until  bined  into  one  grand  choir.     Singing 

utilised  for  good.     How  many  empty  and    playing    arranged    to   form    one 

places   and  unfulfilled  plans  and  pro-  whole,  "  to  make  one  sound "  in  prais- 

phecies  of  life  I  ing  the  Lord.     Such  strains  fit  type  of 

Yer.  9.     There  it  is.     Tilings   that  heaven  and  of  the  everlasting  life  of 

remain.     1.  Sin  and  misery  remain —  glorified  spirits.    A  life  of  melody,  love, 

cannot  be  ignored  or  explained  away,  and  order  in  themselves.  A  life  in  har- 

2.  Redemption  in  Christ  remains —  mony  with  each  other  and  with  God. 
may   be   enjoyed    and   offered    to   all.  4.  The  theme  of  their  song.     The  good- 

3,  Religious  ordinances  remain — the  ness  and  mercy  of  the  Lord.  "  He  is 
Bible,  the  Sabbath,  and  privileges  of  good,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 
God's  house.  There  they  are,  lodged  The  song  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven, 
with  us,  tokens  of  God's  favour  and  Yer.  13.  The  cloud.  1.  A  type  o^ 
presence  committed  unto  us  to  enjoy  Old  Testament  dispensation^    Kites  and 

164 


CHAP,  vi.j  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


ceremonies,  types  and  shadows.     "  He  in  the  unveiled  brightness  of  heaven, 

made  darkness   his    secret   place."     2.  but  in  the  glorious  cloud  of  mystery, 

The  prcaent  mode  of  viewing  God.    Can  through  which  it  must  always  be  seen 

only  knoward  see  God  through  a  cloud  on  earth,  and  whijh  indeed  is  all  that 

"  darkly."       The    cleaiest    conceptions  the  eye  of  man  can  bear  to  contemplate, 

dark  ;    the   greatest   capacity   limited.  Out  of  that  glory  comes  the  only  revela- 

None  can  find  out  God  by  searching.  tion  which  can  be  destined  to  man — • 

"  The  symbol  clearly  implies  a  re  vela-  the  voice  or  word  of  the  Lord  (Deut.  iv. 

tion  of  divine  glory,  as  it  is  seen,  not  12)"  [Ellicott^s  0,  T,  Com.]. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  V. 

Ver.  1.     Finished.     There  are  some  embellish,  enforce,  impress,  and  fix  in 

buildings  that  are  never  finished.     A¥e  the  attentive  mind  the  grand  and  im- 

never  finish  our  life  building;  the  life  portant  truths  of  Christianity  [^nc?re?y 

temple  goes  up  evermore.     Let  every  Law,  "  Essay  on  Music"].      Man  did 

man  take  heed  how  he  buildeth.     Do  not  make  the  laws  of  music  j  he  has 

not  suppose  that  you  finish  your  edu-  only  found    them  out,  and  if  he  be 

cation.     In  the  higher  education  you  self-willed  and  break  them,  there  is  an 

only  finish  that  you  may  begin ;  you  end  of  music  instantly ;  all  he  brings 

close  one  book  as  a   pledge   of   your  out  is  discord  and  ugly  sounds  \Chas, 

qualification  to  open  another.     There  Kingsley\. 

is  always  a  hisfher  aspect  of  thinars  to  ,.  /^  ^  •    •-        .i          3      ,.            ■,■,.-, 

,•',        Y         irriTiTT  God  IS  its  author  and  not  man :  he  laid 

apprehend  and  apply  [i)r.  Par/^er].  1.1,^   key-note    of  aU  harmonies;   he 

Yers.   12,  13.     Singers  and  ha/rps,  plann'd 

Theology  and  music  unite  and   move  All  perfect  combinations ;  and  he  made 

on,  hand  in  hand,  through  time,  and  ^^^J"^*^®  ^"^^  ^®^^  *^^  ^^^^' 

will  continue  eternally  to   illustrate,  * 


CHAPTER  VL 


CriticaIi  Notes.]    Close  parallelism  of  this  chapter  and  1  Kings  viii.  12-50;  ver*  13 

only  important  variation. 

Ver.  1  (c/.  Lev.  xvi.  1),  darkness^  not  cloud,  but  of  holy  of  holies,  into  which  cloud  entered. 

Vers.  3-11. — Solomon's  address  to  people.  Face,  from  looking  towards  the  temple.  Congre- 
gation, men,  women,  and  children.  Blessed^  offered  blessings  probably  in  form  of 
Num.  vi.  23-25.  Ver.  4.  Spake  (2  Sam.  vii.).  Ver.  6.  Chose  untH  David's  time.  Vers.  10, 
11.  The  promise  is  fulfilled. 

Vers.  12-42. — Solomon's  prayer.  Before,  eastward  of  it,  with  face  towards  temple,  as 
speaking  for  the  people.  Ver.  13.  Scaffold,  brazen  platform.  Kneeled,  in  solemn  posture. 
The  prayer  sublime  and  orderly  in  arrangements.  Ver.  15.  Preface;  then  three  petitions. 
First,  perpetuate  the  line  of  David.  Ver.  16.  Keep  good  the  promise.  Second,  regard  the 
house  where  name  is  put.  Thy  word  (1  Chr.  xvii.  9-12).  Ver.  18.  A  conception  of  God's 
condescension  not  limited  to  the  temple.  Ver.  19.  Prayer,  next  verse.  Ver.  21.  Third 
petition.     Forgive  in  general,  not  limited  sense. 

We  have  now  seven  different  cases  in  which  Israel  turns  to  the  temple  in  prayer. 
1st  case.  A  man  wronged  by  his  neighbour  (vers.  22,  23).  Oath  of  self -purgation  usual 
when  no  witnesses.  Requitting,  returning  equivalent.  Do  justice  to  the  innocent. 
2nd  case.  When  worsted  by  the  enemy  (vers.  24,  25).  Worse  in  defensive  war  (Josh.  vii.  5). 
Defeated  on  account  of  sin.  Jlear  when  they  repent.  3rd  case.  Suffering  from  drought 
(vera.  26,  27).    Mainf  heavens  liks  »  gtorehouse,  ma/  be  shut  ap  (1  Ei.  viii.  .^n)  when 

16^ 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chip,  vl 


good  toay  forsaken.  4th  case.  Visitation  by  death  or  any  other  calamity  (vers.  28-31). 
Beven  kinds  of  affliction.  Dearth,  scarcity  from  other  causes  than  rain.  Pestilence,  which 
often  sweeps  over  Eastern  lands.  Blasting,  various  forms  of  danger  in  crops  (Deut.  xxviii.  22). 
Locusts  (Deut.  xxviii.  38).  Enemies  in  gates,  none  therefore  able  to  go  in  or  come  out. 
Plagues,  sore  or  sickness  of  every  kind,  recognised  as  Divine  chastisement.  6th  case.  The 
stranger  coming  to  pray  (vers.  32,  33).  As  thy  people  (ver.  33).  Eights  and  privileges  of 
Israel  thrown  open  to  all.  May  know,  godly  fear  in  O.T.  the  foundation  of  piety  ;  the 
temple  the  only  place  where  God  is  worshipped.  6th  case.  Aggressive  war  undertaken  by 
Divine  permission  (vers.  34,  35).  Prayer  for  God  to  maintain  their  cause.  7th  case.  If 
in  captivity  (vers.  36-39).  If  captives  in  war,  on  account  of  sin.  Bethink,  reflect,  *'  brin^ 
back  their  heart  "  (marg. ).  Consider  seriously  exact  words  of  Deut.  xxx.  1-3,  then  heai 
and  forgive.  Conclusion. —  Fer^.  40-42  wanting  in  Kings,  ^rise,  words  spoken  probably 
when  ark  was  brought  into  Jerusalem  (c/.  Ps.  cxxxii.  8-10).  Resting-place,  Holy  of 
Holies.  Turn  not,  i.e.,  reject  his  prayer  and  cause  him  to  be  ashamed.  Mercies  towards 
David  (Pb.  Ixxxix.  2). 

HOMILETICS, 

The  Temple  the  Fixed  Dwelling-Place  of  God. — Verses  1-10. 

To  reassure  priests  and  people,  Solomon  reminded  them  that  the  cloud,  instead 
of  being  a  sign  of  evil,  was  the  fulfilment  of  promise.  "The  Lord  hath  said," 
if  not  in  express  words  yet  by  continual  course  of  action,  "  that  he  would  dwell, 
<fec."  Hence  a  token  of  approval,  a  method  of  taking  possession  of  the  house, 
and  this  prayer  a  petition  that  God  would  for  ever  keep  possession.     I.  The 

temple  now  a  fixed  residence  for  God.    "A  settled  place  for  thee." 

1.  In  opposition  to  the  tabernacle.  Which  was  temporary  and  provisional.  A 
tent  J  a  mutable  and  fragile  dwelling ;  but  a  house  of  stone  and  cedar,  durable 
and  solid.  2.  As  required  by  the  circumstances  of  God's  people.  The  dispen- 
sation made  a  fixed  place  needful.  Man  required  locality,  visible  signs,  and 
special  adaptations.  Now  not  a  question  of  place^  but  of  being;  not  in  Jerusalem 
nor  Mount  Gerizim.  God  is  spirit  and  worshipped  not  by  material  representa- 
tion, nor  ritual,  but  by  the  heart,  the  spirit  of  man.  Not  hands,  not  wood  and 
stone,  but  living  souls  must  become  God's  abode.     II.  The  temple  as  a 

fixed  residence  built  in  fulfilment  of  God's  promise.    ''God 

hath  fulfilled  that  which  he  spake  "  (ver.  4).  I.  A  promise  made  to  David. 
Reference  to  2  Sam.  vii.  11—14,  where  is  promised  that  David's  dynasty  should 
continue  for  ever,  and  David's  son  should  build  a  house.  Thus  the  promise 
established  the  royal  house  by  its  connection  with  the  royal  seed.  **  I  will  set 
up  thy  seed  after  thee."  2.  A  promise  fulfilled  in  Solomon.  "I  am  risen  up  in 
the  room  of  my  father  "  (ver.  20).  Not  in  pride,  as  Ahasuerus  made  his  feast 
and  Nebuchadnezzar  built  his  city;  but  in  a  spirit  of  gratitude  Solomon  built 
the  temple  and  finished  his  father's  work.  Traced  the  providence  of  God,  and 
urged  the  people  to  praise  him.  III.  The  design  of  this  fixed 
residence  to  perpetuate  the  presence  of  God.  The  temple  a 
permanent  centre  of  worship  to  Jehovah.  Neither  city  for  worship,  nor  king  to 
govern  chosen  before  David's  time.  Now  God  has  chosen  a  residence  and 
purposed  to  abide  in  it  for  ever.  "  This  is  the  hill  which  God  desireth  to  dwell 
in;  yea,  the  Lord  will  dwell  in  it  for  ever"  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  16).  Hence  God 
accessible,  Zion  secure  and  communion  attractive  and  blessed.  "  God  is  known 
in  her  palaces  for  a  refuge"  (Hterally  a  high  place  for  shelter  and  defence, 
Ps.  xlvi.  7-11 ;  Prov.  xviii.  10)  (Ps.  xlviii.  3). 

The  Performance  op  God's  Promise. — Verses  4—11. 

God  had  made  good  one  part  of  his  promise,  Solomon  prays  that  he   would 
perform  the  other.     Concludes,  as  he  began,  with  thankful  acknowledgment  of 
166 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


Divine  goodness  in  performance  of  promise.  I.  That  God  deals  with,  his 
people  in  all  ages  by  way  of  promise.  With  Adam,  Abraham,  and 
David.  Throughout  the  O.  and  N.  T.  dispensation,  with  individuals  and  nations 
we  have  promise  after  promise.  ^'  Exceeding  great  and  precious  promises,"  to 
encourage  and  help.  Here  we  have — 1.  Promise  to  build  a  house.  2.  Promise 
to  raise  up  a  king.  II.  That  the  performance  of  this  promise  is 
a  source  of  joy  to  God's  people.  1.  In  revealing  God  to  them.  God 
never  compelled  to  act ;  enters  into  engagements  and  covenants  with  perfect 
freedom ;  and  never  reluctant  to  bestow  what  is  promised.  Hence  the  goodness 
and  grace  in  giving  the  word,  and  the  veracity,  power,  and  providence  in  its 
fulfilment.  God  may  be  trusted,  for  "  He  cannot  deny  himself."  In  this  the 
true  God  stands  contrasted  with  the  "  lying  vanities  "  of  heathen  deities  and 
weak,  sinful  man.  *'  He  is  not  man  that  he  should  lie,  (fee."  2.  In  the  actual 
bestowment  of  good  to  them.  Providence  on  their  behalf  ;  power  exercised  for 
their  deliverance,  and  actual  fulfilment  in  their  history  and  experience.  The 
covenant  kept  and  mercy  bestowed  (ver.  14).  "There  failed  not  aught  of  any 
good  thing  which  the  Lord  had  spoken  unto  the  house  of  Israel ;  all  came  to 
pass."  III.  That  there  are  special  seasons  to  testify  to  God's 
goodness  in  the  performance  of  his  promise.  "As  it  is  this 
day "  (ver.  16).  In  conversion,  restoration  from  sickness  and  danger ;  in 
dedication  of  places  of  worship  and  in  times  of  special  favour,  we  may  testify  to 
God's  mercy  and  truth.  Numerous  are  the  occasions  in  which  we  may 
"  abundantly  utter  (lit.  bubble  forth  as  from  a  fountain)  the  memory  of  his 
great  goodness  and  sing  (lit.  with  loud  eulogies)  of  his  righteousness" 
(Ps.  cxlv.  7). 

Invocation  of  Divine  Favours. — Verses  11-24. 

Solomon  had  dedicated  the  temple,  now  offered  the  consecration  prayer  to  God. 
**  He  stretched  forth  his  hands  in  the  gesture  of  Oiiental  prayer,  as  if  to  receive  the 
blessings  for  which  he  sought,  and  at  the  same  time  exchanged  the  usual  standing 
posture  of  prayer  for  the  extraordinary  one  of  kneeling,  now  first  mentioned  in 
the  sacred  history,  and  only  used  in  Eastern  worship  at  the  present  day  in 
moments  of  deep  humiliation.  The  prayer  itself  is  one  of  unprecedented  length, 
and  is  remarkable  as  combining  the  conception  of  the  infinity  of  the  Divine 
Presence  with  the  hope  that  the  Divine  mercies  will  be  drawn  down  on  the 
nation  by  the  concentration  of  the  national  devotions,  and  even  of  the  devotion 
of  foreign  nations,  towards  this  fixed  locality "  [Stanley].  Learn — I.  That 
God  is  infinitely  great.  "  Heaven  and  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot 
contain  thee  "  (ver.  18).  To  be  infinite  is  literally  to  be  unbounded,  unlimited. 
This  includes  omnipresence  and  incomprehensibility.  His  immensity  extends 
infinitely  beyond  the  boundaries  of  space.  God  fills  heaven,  earth,  and  hell.  No 
place,  no  temple  contains  him  as  a  house  is  built  for  man.  He  was  not  confined 
to  the  Jewish  people,  nor  "  chiefly  to  the  narrow  bounds  of  the  Jewish  land,"  as 
some  think  ;  not  a  mere  "  God  of  the  hills,"  a  patrial  or  Gentile  Deity.  His 
settled  abode  is  eternity,  ^^  inhabiteth  eternity."  *'Do  not  I  fill  heaven  and 
earth  ?  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xxiii.  24).  "  Where  is  the  house  that  ye  built 
unto  me?  and  where  is  the  place  of  my  rest?"  II.  That  God  is  infinitely 
faithful.  "  Kept  that  thou  promisedst  "  (ver.  15).  The  truth  of  God  makes 
it  impossible  for  him  not  to  fulfil  whatever  he  hath  spoken.  He  is  "the  faithful 
God  "  (Deut.  vii.  9).  **  It  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie."  Performance  of  threatening 
and  promise  not  impracticable.  God  not  liable  to  forget  nor  to  change.  We 
may  be  persuaded  that  **  there  shall  not  fail  one  good  word  of  all  that  the  Lord 
our  God  hath  spoken,"  III.  That  God  is  infinitely  good.  This  attri- 
bute  may   be   termed  the  glory  of  God.     Moses  desired  to  see  the  glory   of 

167 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  vl 


Jehovah ;  the  answer  was,  "  I  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before  thee."  In 
this  narrative  goodness  is  distinguished  by  different  names,  and  exercised  in 
different  ways.  *'  Goodness  is  the  genus  that  comprehends^^mercy,  grace,  long- 
suffering,  kindness,  and  truth  in  it ;  these  are  branches  from  that  as  the  root " 
\Ooodwin  on  Ex.  xxxiii.  19].  1.  In  answering  prayer.  Heathen  gods  had  eyes,  but 
could  see  not ;  ears,  but  could  hear  not.  God  is  accessible,  has  not  hid  himself 
from  men,  nor  retired  into  the  bosom  of  eternity.  *'  O  thou  that  hearest  prayer," 
**  Hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling-place."  2.  In  dwelling  with  men.  In  the 
hearts  of  those  who  love  him,  and  walk  before  him  in  daily  life.  In  the  temple 
with  those  who  worship  him  in  sincerity  and  truth.  *'  Though  the  Lord  be  high, 
yet  hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly."  *'  I  dwell  in  the  high  and  holy  place  with 
him  also  that  is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit."  3.  In  the  hestowment  of  mercy. 
"And  shewest  mercy"  (ver.  14).  Mercy  suggests  misery  (Latin  miseria), 
wretchedness.  God  relieves  in  distress,  confers  favours  on  undeserving,  forbears 
to  punish,  and  bestows  innumerable  favours.     **  Thou  art  good,  and  doest  good." 

The  Solemn  Question. — Verse  18. 

Will  God  dwell  with  man  ?  The  question  of  all  ages,  the  dream,  the  desire  of 
humanity.  Irrepressible  anticipations  in  the  deification  of  heroic  men,  the 
incarnations  of  Hindoo  gods,  and  in  the  Messianic  hope  of  the  Jews.  I.  Where 
the  anS"Wer  ?  Not  in  ancient  philosophy,  even  with  its  moral  teachings  and 
intense  longings.  No  God  for  the  poor  and  illiterate,  only  for  noble  and  learne-l 
if  for  any  class.  God  was  thought  too  great  to  regard  man.  Not  in  modern  philo- 
sophy. IJngodly  science  substitutes  some  abstract  principle,  "  Infinite  Wisdom," 
"  the  Ruling  Principle  of  the  Universe,"  or  talks  of  "  law "  and  "  omnipotent 
power."  God  is  not  a  living  personal  God,  accessible  to  man,  and  willing  to 
dwell  with  him.  II.  What  saith  the  Scripture  ?  Manifestations  of 
God  in  O.T.  symbols  in  tabernacle  and  temple.  Promises  in  abundance,  not 
merely  to  sojourn  as  a  stranger,  to  tarry  for  a  night  (Jer.  xiv.  8),  but  to  settle  in 
fixed  residence  among  men.  "  There  shall  be  a  place  which  the  Lord  God  shall 
choose  to  cause  his  name  to  dwell  there"  (Deut.  xii.  11).  *'  The  hill  which  God 
desireth  to  dwell  in  ;  yea,  the  Lord  will  dwell  in  it  for  ever  "  (Ps.  Ixviii.  16).  "  I 
wiU  dwell  in  the  midst  of  them  for  ever"  (Ezek.  xliii.  9).  God  with  men  in 
Christian  worship ;  in  the  incarnation  of  Christ,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh ; "  in 
the  human  heart  by  his  Holy  Spirit ;  in  heaven  by  special  presence. 

HOMILETIG   HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Vers.  6-8.    D  fvi'Vs  intention  to  build  III.     The  comfort    which   those   con- 

the    temple.     1.     Man's    purposes    are  siderations   are   calculated    to    afford, 

sometimes   gi-eater    than    his    power.  This  theme  is  full  of  comfort  to — 1.  The 

Limitations  of — 1.  Character.  2.  Body,  poor  and  uneducated.     2.  The  suffer- 

3.  Culture.    4.  Circumstances — want  of  ing.     3.  Those  who  are  called  to  pre- 

means  or  liberty.    5.  Destiny.     6.  Life,  mature  death.     4.  All  good  men  in  the 

II.  The  importance  and  value  of  these  presence  of  their  imperfect  lives  [W.  L. 

gracious    but     unfulfilled     intentions.  Watkinson]. 

Earnest  purposes,  sincere  desires,  are  Ver.  10.     In  the  room  of  my  father. 

facts,  and  as  facts  will  be  recompensed.  1.  A  succession  of  men.     Joshua  after 

1.    They   are  facts  to   God.     2.  They  Moses;    Solomon   after   David.     2.  A 

are  facts  to  those  who  cherish  them,  succession    of    office.      To    some    high 

3.  Unfulfilled  intentions  are  not  with-  responsibility — priesthood,  government 

out  their  practical  influence  upon  society.  — by  electioii,  by   hereditary  descent. 
168 


6nAP.  TI.3 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CBRONICLES. 


No  mere  form  to  fill  the  same  place 
and  be  surrounded  by  the  very  circum- 
stances and  associations  which  inspired 
our  predecessors.  *'  He  took  up  the 
mantle  of  Elijah."  3.  A  succession  of 
work.  Work  should  be  carried  on  and 
finished,  if  possible,  by  those  called  to 
it.  Thus  ideas,  liberties,  and  institu- 
tions are  handed  down  from  generation 
to  generation.  Thus  have  we  the  true 
continuity  of  the  Christian  church,  the 
true  communion  of  saints,  and  the 
true  identity  of  man's  life  with  God's 
work. 

Yers.  15,  16,  The  stability  and  per- 
petuity of  the  Davidic  throne,  the 
sonship  of  the  Davidic  King,  and  the 
consequent  heirship  of  all  nations  (c/*. 
2  Sam.  vii.  13,  14). 

Vers.  14,  15.  "  Lord  God  of  Israel. 
This  was  a  worthy  precedent  for  princes, 
who,  if  they  would  imitate  Solomon  in 
devotion,  might  likewise  share  with  him 
in  blessing.  This  is  a  long  prayer 
and  full  of  affection  to  the  end.  So  to 
pray  is  hard  and  happy.  It  is  a  prece- 
dental  prayer,  as  one  calleth  it.  Kept 
with  thy  servant  David.  We  may 
pray  to  good  purpose  though  in  the 
self -same  words  as  before.  Christ  him- 
self did  so  in  his  agony,  when  he  prayed 
most  earnestly.  Let  this  comfort  those 
who  complain  that  they  cannot  vary 
their  petitions"  \Trapp\,  Be  verified, 
v.  17.  He  reiterateth  and  reinforceth 
his  former  request ;  this  evinceth  his 
holy  importunity.  This  he  learned  of 
his  father  (cf  Prov.  iv.  4)  \Ibid.\ 

Ver.  18.  Will  God,  &c.  ?  The  great 
contrast — 1.  Between  the  heaven  of 
heavens  and  the  material  temple.  2. 
Between  the  infinite  grandeur  of  God 


and  the  unworthiness  of  man  (creature 
and  sinful  creature).  3.  The  deep 
humility  which  this  contrast  should 
create  in  our  approach  to  God. 

*'  The  more  thy  glories  strike  mine  eye 
The  humbler  I  shall  lie,"  Ac. 

Vers.  18-21.  The  Sanctity  ofGod^s 
House,  1.  As  the  residence  of  a  great 
God.  2.  As  the  house  of  prayer.  3* 
As  the  place  consecrated  to  worship. 
God's  name  there.  The  centre  and  core 
of  all  fellowship, 

Vers.  12-21.  Solomon^ a  Prayer.  1. 
Position  from  whence  offered.  Stood 
on  scaffold  where  he  could  be  seen  and 
heard.  2.  Solomon's  attitude.  Reve- 
rent, kneeled ;  expectant,  "  spread  forth 
his  hands."  Looked  up  to  heaven  in 
dependence ;  kneeled  in  humility. 
**  Kneeling  never  spoiled  silk  stockings  " 
\Herhert\  3.  Its  length.  Longest 
recorded  in  Scripture.  4.  Its  spirit. 
Hopeful  on  the  ground  of  fulfilled 
promise;  humble  on  account  of  un- 
worthiness. 5.  Its  language.  Beauti- 
ful and  scriptural.  6.  Its  purpose. 
That  God  would  fulfil  the  remainder 
of  his  promise.  That  God  would  regard 
and  honour  the  temple,  by  watching 
over  its  interests,  dwelling  in  its  courts, 
answering  prayers  and  pardoning  sins. 
^^  Hear  thou  to  thy  dwelling-place  in 
heaven" — a  pregnant  expression  for, 
hear  the  prayer  which  ascends  or  is 
sent  to  thy  dwelling  place,  to  heaven. 
The  last  words,  "  hear  and  forgive," 
are  to  be  left  in  their  generality,  and 
not  to  be  limited  by  any  complement. 
Forgiveness  of  sins  alone  can  remove 
the  curse  which  transgression  draws 
after  it "  \Kei£\. 


HOMILETICS, 

Justice  Executed. —  Verses  22,  23. 

The  first  specific  case  of  petition  is  doubtful.  A  man  has  sustained  injury 
and  charges  a  suspected  person,  though  not  able  to  prove  the  fact.  Petition 
that  false  oath  may  not  be  taken ;  but  that  the  innocent  may  be  discovered,  and 
the  guilty  punished.  I.  The  injury  charged.  A  "  trespass  against  his 
neighbour."  If  goods  or  money  to  be  kept  be  lost ;  cattle  to  have  died,  driven 
away,  or  injured  (Ex.  xxii.  7-9) ;  if  any  one  over-reached  another  (Lev.  v, 
21-25),  be  suspected  of  theft,  fraud,  and  wilful  damage,  he  might  be  sued  at 

169 


MOMlLETtC  COMMENTAllY:  CSRONlCLES,  [cnkf.  VI. 


law  to  make  oath  of  integrity.  II.  The  solemn  appeal  made.  Punisn- 
ment  could  only  be  made  after  discovery  of  guilty  person.  1.  An  oath  was 
made  hy  accused.  Witnesses  could  not  be  found.  Dispute  or  difference  to  be 
settled  by  oath  of  accused.  Hence  party  brought  before  the  altar  to  swear  in 
all  due  solemnity.  2.  God  appealed  to.  *'  Hear  thou  from  heaven."  Many  false 
oaths  might  be  taken  and  guilty  escape,  who  then  could  justify  the  innocent  ? 
God  above  sees  all,  hears  all,  and  never  errs.  This  appeal  accords  with  our 
instinct  of  justice  and  revelations  of  Scripture.  "  The  works  of  his  hands  aro 
verity  and  judgment." 

National  Disaster. — Verses  24,  26. 

Worsted  by  enemy  making  inroads  upon  them,  defeating  them  as  predicted 
(Lev.  xxvi.  3-7 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  15-25)  I.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  national 
reverses.  "  Because  they  have  sinned  against  thee."  Forgetting,  forsaking, 
denying  God,  creating  displeasure  by  neglecting  his  worship  and  becoming 
idolatrous.  II.  Forsaking  sin  may  ward  off  national  reverses. 
Judgments  bring  to  penitence,  and  those  that  slight  God  often  solicit  his  mercy. 
"In  their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early."  1.  With  earnest  prayer.  "Pray 
and  make  supplication."  Afflictions  remind  of  neglected  duties,  and  kill  corrup- 
tions bred  by  prosperity.  2.  With  humble  confession.  "  And  confess  thy  name." 
This  opposed  to  forgetting,  extenuating,  or  denying  sins.  They  must  be  acknow- 
ledged, not  in  cold,  formal  expression ;  but  with  deep,  humble,  and  sincere 
penitence.  3.  With  practical  amendment.  "  Shall  turn  again  to  thee."  There 
is  utter  renunciation,  abandonment.  The  wicked  man  "forsakes  his  way." 
Then  comes  mercy,  restoration,  and  new  life.  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall 
not  prosper;  but  whoso  confesseth  them  and  forsake th  them  shall  have  mercy." 

Perils  to  Agriculture. —  Ferse*  26-31. 

Various  plagues  dangerous  to  growing  crops.  Grain  blasted,  cities  besieged,  and 
sickness  of  every  kind  upon  transgressors  themselves.     Hence  we  have — I.  A. 

rebuke  to  rationalism  in  natural  evils.    Mildew  and  caterpillars, 

with  their  terrible  ravages,  traceable  by  modern  science  to  natural  causes.  But 
who  originated  the  causes,  laws,  or  conditions  ?  All  meteorological  phenomena, 
all  providential  dispensations  ascribed  to  God  and  under  his  control.  This  the 
only  adequate  and  satisfactory  reply  to  the  question,  "  Is  there  not  a  cause  ? " 
The  heavens  are  store-rooms  to  shut  up  or  open  at  God's  pleasure.  He  com- 
mands locusts  to  devour,  and  smites  the  land  with  pestilence  (2  Chr.  vii.  13). 
In  all  afflictive  events  God  speaks  to  cities  and  nations.  "  The  Lord's  voice 
crieth  unto  the  city,  and  the  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  name."  II.  A 
moral  design  in  the  infliction  of  natural  evils.  "When  thou 
hast  taught  them  the  good  way."  Sufferings  to  nations,  as  to  individuals, 
disciplinary,  sent  to  humble,  correct,  and  restore  to  God.  1.  To  requite  justice. 
Retributions  inevitable;  nations  corrupt  and  idolatrous  cannot  escape.  God 
will  not  reverse  his  law.  2.  To  lead  to  God.  "  That  they  may  fear  thee."  God 
must  be  acknowledged,  to  believe  in  whom  is  not  superstition.  The  progress  of 
art  and  the  applications  of  science  must  not  thrust  him  out  from  events.  God 
smites  to  deliver,  that  we  may  pray  to  him,  stand  in  awe  of  his  justice,  and 
adore  his  goodness.  III.  A  place  for  prayer  in  removing  natural 
evils.  This  denied  by  many.  Prayer  may  be  necessary  for  man's  highest 
culture.  "  But  no  good  can  come  of  giving  it  a  delusive  value,  by  claiming  for 
it  a  power  in  physical  nature,"  says  Prof.  Tyndall.  We  do  not  classify  it  with 
powers  in  physical  natura  It  is  not  a  natural  but  a  moral  power,  and  may 
have  influence  over  the  will  of  One  above  nature,  viz.,  "  Nature's  God."  God's 
170 


eaii».  n.]  HOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


laws  do  not  interfere  with  human  will  and  human  choice.  The  ordination  of 
God  leaves  room  for  prayer.  Prayer  may  be  one  of  the  laws  of  the  universe  as 
certain  in  its  sphere  as  the  laws  of  heat  or  of  gravitation  in  their  peculiar 
realms.  Neither  history,  scripture,  nor  experience  forbid  us  to  pray  in  times  of 
national  distress.     "  Hear  thou  in  heaven  thy  dwelling-place,  (kc.* 

••  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  the  world  dreams  of  "  [Tennysonl* 

Prayer  for  the  Stranger. — Verses  32,  33. 

Prayers  in  the  temple  to  be  answered  in  such  a  striking  manner  that 
unbelievers  were  to  see  proof  of  Jehovah's  mercy.  Probably  many  resident 
foreigners  amongst  the  Jews.  The  number  would  increase  by  the  attractions  of 
Solomon's  reign.  This  prayer  indicates  growing  liberality  to  those  ^*  not  of  the 
people  of  Israel."  I.  The  benevolence  of  O.  T.  spirit.  This  prayer 
larger  and  more  comprehensive  than  that  for  the  Israelites,  a  proof  of  bene- 
volent and  public  spirit.  Kindness  to  strangers  argued — 1.  From,  IsraeVs  own 
experience.  Spiinging  from  humble  origin  ;  delivered  from  a  strange  land  and 
great  oppression,  they  were  to  love,  pity,  and  relieve  the  stranger.  Events  in 
their  history  which  might  lead  to  feelings  of  rancour  and  revenge,  such  as  in 
later  periods  brought  upon  them  the  stigma  of  being  hostes  humani  generis^  were 
the  very  ground  on  which  the  Mosaic  law  taught  them  benevolence  to  the 
wretclied  and  defenceless  of  every  nation.  "  The  stranger  that  dwelleth  with 
thee  shall  be  unto  thee  even  as  one  born  among  you,  and  thou  shall  love  him  as 
thine  own  self.  For  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  I  am  the  Lord  '* 
(Lev.  xix.  33).  2.  From  the  known  character  of  IsraeVs  God.  For  special 
purposes  in  the  interests  of  humanity  the  covenant  God  of  Israel.  Yet  no  mere 
local,  national  divinity.  **  The  Lord  your  God  is  the  God  of  gods  and  the  Lord 
of  lords."  **  He  loveth  the  stranger!^  Every  nation  teaches  hospitality  and  kind- 
ness to  strangers,  not  as  a  civU  and  social,  but  sacred  duty.  In  a  higher  sense 
than  Zeus,  God  is  "  the  stranger's  God."  Homer's  touching  language  almost 
the  sentiment  of  scripture.  "Love  ye  therefore  the  stranger:  for  the  Lord 
loveth  the  stranger." 

"  Love's  special  care 
Are  strangers  poor  and  friendless." 

II,  The  catholicity  of  O.  T.  spirit.  The  spirit  of  the  petition  beyond 
Jewish  exclusiveness.  Often  said  Jewish  rehgion  taught  that  benevolence  should 
be  confined  to  the  narrow  circle  of  families,  tribes,  or  the  nation;  while  the 
Gospel  expands  into  wider  fields  and  sets  forth  a  brotherhood,  a  "  religion  of 
humanity."  But,  says  one,  "  Little  as  we  may  have  heeded  the  fact,  yet  certain 
it  is,  that  expressions  of  the  most  expansive  philanthropy  echoed  in  the  anthems 
of  the  Jewish  temple."  In  the  Pentateuch  and  in  the  Psalms  the  feelings  often 
overleap  the  ritual  and  challenge  all  nations  to  partake  of  Jewish  privileges.  A 
striking  contrast  to  exclusiveness  of  after  times,  when  Samaritans  were  indignantly 
excluded  from  sharing  in  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  (Ez.  iv.  2,  3)  ;  and  when 
Jews  persecuted  Paul  for  speaking  of  his  mission  to  the  strangers  for  whom 
Solomon  prayed  (Actsxxii.  22).  III.  The  prophetic  element  of  O.  T. 
spirit.  Great  anticipations  expressed  in  the  prayer.  L  When  strangers 
would  he  led  to  believe  in  God.  They  would  hear  of  the  marvellous  deeds  of 
Jehovah  for  his  people,  be  drawn  to  the  temple,  worship  and  join  in  the  devotions 
of  the  chosen  people.  "  When  he  shall  come  and  pray  toward  this  house." 
2.  When  strangers  would  enjoy  equal  rights  with  the  Jews.  In  religious  matters, 
when  all  surrounding  nations  were  exclusive,  Israel  were  commanded  to  admit 

in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


[chap.   Tt 


strangers  to  equal  privileges,  in  the  offerings  of  tlie  tabernacle  (Num.  xv.  14-16); 
and  at  the  solemn  reading  of  the  law  once  in  seven  years  (Dent.  xxxi.  12).  In 
the  spirit  of  this  law  Solomon  anticipates,  if  not  predicts,  the  time  when  from 
the  remotest  nations  strangers  shall  come  to  pray  and  hope  for  acceptance  before 
God  on  equal  conditions  with  His  people,  without  becoming  citizens  of  the 
Jewish  state,  without  submission  to  civil  law  or  Mosaic  ritual.  "And  fear  thee, 
as  doth  thy  people  Israel."  "  O  thou  that  hearest  prayer,  unto  thee  shall  all 
flesh  come." 


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  26.  Heaven  shut  up.  1,  All 
things  controlled  hy  ,God.  Atheism, 
Pantheism,  and  Materialism,  all  philo- 
sophy which  sees  nothing  but  law, 
nothing  distinct  from  and  above  matter, 
reproved.  2.  All  things  controlled  hy 
God  in  the  interests  of  men,  "  All 
things  work  together,"  work  in  har- 
mony, and  subserve  the  ends  for  which 
they  were  made  for  the  good  of  his 
people.  3.  These  interests  are  secured 
hy  prayer  and  submission  to  God.  Not 
by  science,  education,  or  human 
industry  without  God.  A  regular 
system  of  agency  connects  results  Vyith 
the  sovereign  will  of  God.  An  un- 
broken link  between  the  naturaJ  and 
moral  world,  between  the  condrict  of 
men  and  the  conditions  of  nature.  The 
principle  of  mediation  seen  in  all 
departments  of  God's  government.  "  I 
will  hear  the  heavens,  and  they  shall 
hear  the  earth ;  and  the  earth  shall 
hear  the  corn,  and  the  wine,  and  the 
oil,  and  they  shall  hear  Jezreel." 

Vers.  26,  27.  1.  The  path  forsaken. 
**  The  good  way."  Good  in  itself,  end, 
and  consequences  to  travellers.  2.  The 
method  of  return  to  it.  Discovery  of 
wandering,  confession  of  sin,  and 
return  to  God.  "  Confess  thy  name, 
and  turn  from  sin."  3.  The  cause  of 
this  return.  **  When  thou  dost  afflict 
them."  Some  like  metals,  which 
nothing  but  fierce  fire  can  purify 
(Mai.  iii.  2,  3).  Severe  corrections 
reclaim.  Manasseh  (2  Chr.  xxxiii. 
12,  13),  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  iv. 
34-37).  "Before  I  was  afflicted  I 
went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept  thy 
word."  "  The  order  of  Solomon's 
prayer  is  very  observable  here.  First 
and  chiefly,  he  prays  for  their  repent- 
US 


ance  and  forgiveness,  which  is  the  chief 
blessing  and  the  only  foundation  of  all 
other  mercies,  and  then  he  prays  for 
temporal  mercies,  thereby  teaching  us 
what  to  desire  principally  in  our 
prayers,  which  also  Christ  hath  taught 
us  in  his  perfect  prayer,  wherein  there 
is  but  one  petition  for  outward,  and  all 
the  rest  are  for  spiritual  blessings " 
[Bensori\. 

Vers.  29-31.  Heart  Disease.  Special 
instances  not  given.  Grievances  innu- 
merable. "  Every  man  the  plague  of 
his  own  hewrV  (1  Ki.  viii.  38).  1.  The 
diagnosis  of  the  disease.  The  heart  the 
seat  of  sin ;  fountain  from  which  issue 
sinful  thoughts,  words,  and  actions; 
"deceitful  above  all  things,"  restless 
and  dissatisfied.  "  Who  can  know  it  ? " 
Many  acknowledge  it ;  few  really  feel, 
discover,  and  confess  it.  2.  The  cure  of 
the  disease  hy  the  great  Physician, 
Incurable  by  man.  "  Canst  thou 
not  minister  to  a  mind  diseased?" 
When  we  enter  the  sanctuary,  lament 
and  seek  deliverance,  the  sore  will  be 
healed.  Bodily  sufferings  may  be 
endured,  but  remorse  of  conscience, 
convictions  of  sin,  wound  of  spirit,  God 
alone  can  remove.  "  The  spirit  of  man 
will  sustain  his  infirmity,  but  a 
wounded  spirit  who  can  bear?"  1. 
God's  omniscience  discerns.  "Thou 
only  knowest  the  hearts  of  the  children 
of  men."  2.  God's  justice  rectifies. 
"  Bender  unto  every  man  according 
to  his  ways."  3.  God's  mercy  en- 
courages.    "  Hear  thou  and  forgive." 

Vers.  32,  33.  The  stranger,  1.  ThB 
attractive  force  of  God!s  house.  Not 
beauty  of  architecture  or  furniture,  not 
members  nor  ritual,  but  God's  presence 
revealed  to  devout  worshippers.  2.  Th4 


CHAP.  VI. J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONlVLEiS. 


wonderful  provision  made  for  those  who  spirit  in  which  we  should  return,  "What 

come.     Prayer  and  praise,  the  reading  we   hear    of    God    should  be  told  to 

and   exposition   of   Scripture.     Every  others.     His  mighty  deeds  should  be 

ordinance  helpful  and  needful.  *'  I  will  proclaimed  to  all  nations.     "  That  all 

abundantly  (surely)   bless  her   provi-  people   of   the   earth   may   know  thy 

sion,  and  satisfy  her  poor  with  bread  "  name  and  fear  thee." 
(Ps.  cxxxii.  16).     3.   The   missionary 

EOMILETIGS. 

Divine  Commission  in  War. — Verses  Z^-Z^. 

Israel  not  permitted  to  war  for  self-gratification,  unlawful  or  ambitious  ends ; 
only  in  just  cause,  and  by  divine  warrant.  *'  Thou  shalt  send  them."    I.  Israel 
engaged  in  'wars  for  God  may  be  delivered  iato  the  power  of 
tlie  enemy.    Commission  alone  would  not  preserve  from  sin,  might  lead  to 
pride  and  self-reliance.     Then  foreign  armies  would  enter  the  land,  take  them 
captives,  and  lead  them  into  countries  far  away.     God  may  send  us,  but  through 
apostasy  may  withdraw  and  leave  us  to  war  alone.     II.  Earnest   prayer 
would  restore  them  to  liberty.     Captivity  would  lead  to  reflection, 
repentance,  and  prayer.     1.  Prayer  offered  in  great  distress.    *'  Carried  captives," 
"in  the  land  of  their  enemies,"  &c.     "Then  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their 
trouble,  and  he  saved  them  out  of  their  distresses."     2.  Prayer  offered  in  deep 
reflection.    "  Bethink  themselves."     Consider  their  ways,  and  reflect  on  the  cause 
of  their  distress.     Men  thoughtless,  and  receive  no  correction  from  affliction. 
"  In  the  day  of  adversity  consider."     3.  Prayer  offered  with  humhle  confession. 
"  We  have  sinned,  we  have  done  amiss."     Confession  should  be  full  and  free. 
Forgiveness  only  promised  upon  confession.     "  I  said  I  will  confess  my  trans- 
gressions unto  the  Lord,  and  Thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin."    4.  Prayer 
offered  with  earnest  spirit.    "  With  all  their  heart  and  all  their  soul."     With 
understanding,  affections,  and  will ;  without  delay,  with  zealous  and  undivided 
hearts.    "With  my  whole  heart  have  I  sought  thee."     5.   Prayer  offered  in  given 
direction.     "  Toward  the  city  chosen,  and  toward  the  house."     Thus  originated 
the  favourite  custom  of  ancient  and  modern  Jews  of  turning  towards  Jerusalem 
in  devotions.     Prayer  should  ever  be  upwards,  direct  to  the  presence  of  God. 
Not  to  man,  not  without  aim,  but  straight  as  an  arrow  to  its  centre.     Not  at 
random,  but  with  orderly  words  and  definite  purpose.     "  In  the  morning  will  I 
direct  {set  in  order  as  wood  upon  the  altar,  and  shew-bread  upon  the  table)  my 
prayer  unto  thee,  and  will  look  up "  (Ps.  v.  3).     Only  by  this  kind  of  prayer 
could  they  be  delivered.     Continuance  in  sin  would  increase  their  misery,  pro- 
long their  captivity,  and  add  to  their  griefs.      By  repenting  and  turning  to  God, 
restoration  and  peace  would  follow.     "  I  will  turn  away  your  captivity,  and  I 
will  gather  you  from  all  the  nations,  and  from  all  the  places  whither  I  have 
driven  you,  saith  the  Lord  ;  and  I  will  bring  you  again  into  the  place  whence  I 
caused  you  to  be  carried  away  captive." 

The  Ark  and  the  Restino-Plaoe. — Verses  40-42. 

These  words  not  found  in  Kings.  There  seems  to  be  a  return  to  the  third 
great  petition  in  expiessions  borrowed  from  the  Psalms,  and  from  the  ancient 
song  in  the  Wilderness  (c/.  Num.  x.  35).  I.  The  ark  the  symbol  of 
divine  strength.  The  sign  and  pledge  of  power  exerted  on  behalf  of  his 
people;  the  symbol  of  his  glory  {cf.  Ps.  Ixxviii.  61);  for  when  the  ark  was 
taken  **  the  glory  "  was  departed.     God's  presence  to  awe,  help,  and  overcome. 

173 


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  CBRONICLES,  [chap.  n. 


"  For  tlie  ark  was  not  a  dead  ghost,  but  really  showed  that  God  was  nigh  to  his 
church  "  [Calving  God  present  now  in  his  word — "  the  rod  of  his  strength " 
out  of  Zion,  the  centre  of  government  from  whence  the  word  to  overcome 
ignorance,  prejudice,  and  opposition;  to  subdue  rebels  and  win  to  Christ. 
II.  An  earnest  prayer  to  locate  this  divine  strength.  "Arise, 
O  Lord,  into  thy  rest."  God  desires  an  abode,  a  resting-place  with  men ;  should 
not  be  absent,  nor  driven  away.  Power  everywhere  displayed ;  but  power  of 
divine  truth  concentrated  in  God's  house  and  in  spiritual  worship.  Here  should 
be  "  the  resting-place,"  the  fixed,  permanent  habitation  of  God.  In  the 
Christian  Church  and  in  human  hearts  the  power  of  God  should  be  felt  and 
displayed.  For  this  we  should  pray.  Without  God  the  ark  even  of  no  avail. 
"  5^/iow  and  the  ark.'*  III.  When  this  divine  strength  is  exhibited 
in  localities  great  blessings  result.  Miraculous  deeds  and  brilliant 
victories  distinguished  the  Jews  when  God  was  with  them ;  so  now  revivals  and 
abundant  signs  of  divine  presence.  "  The  name  of  the  city  from  that  day  shall 
be,  the  Lord  is  there."  1.  In  the  full  equipment  of  ministers,  "Priests,"  all 
officials  "  clothed  with  salvation."  Not  merely  adorned  with  outward  garments 
of  sacerdotal  beauty,  but  with  spiritual  gifts,  righteous  character  and  life, 
acceptable  in  persons  and  services  before  God  and  the  people.  2.  In  the  exultant 
joy  of  saints.  "  Let  thy  saints  rejoice  in  goodness."  Joy  pure  and  holy,  spring- 
ing from  God's  presence  and  successful  work.  Not  that  trivial,  fleeting,  super- 
ficial thing  which  often  bears  the  name ;  runs  out  in  noise  like  the  crackling  of 
thorns.  But  serious,  solid  feeling  which  fills  the  soul  as  God  fills  the  universe ; 
satisfactory,  inspiriting,  and  exultant.  "  And  her  saints  shall  ahovA  aloud  for 
joy." 

The  Mercies  op  David. — Verse  42. 

1,  Itemembranee  most  sacred.  "Once  have  I  sworn  by  my  holiness 
that  I  will  not  lie  unto  David  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  35).  God  is  holy,  infinitely  above 
falsehood  and  deceit.  To  break  his  promise  would  profane  his  essential  attribute. 
**  He  demands,  on  the  part  of  his  people,  truth  and  fidelity  towards  himself, 
only  on  the  ground  of  his  own  truth  and  fidelity  towards  them"  [Hengstenberg\ 

II.  Remembrance  most  unalterable.  The  unfaithfulness  of  man 
cannot  alter  the  faithfulness  of  God.  "  My  covenant  will  I  not  break,  nor 
alter  the  thing  that  is  gone  out  of  my  Hps."     "  The  sure  mercies  of  David.* 

III.  Remembrance  most  powerful.'  For  David's  sake  God  raised  up 
Solomon  and  spared  the  i  gs  of  Judah.  For  the  sake  of  David's  greater  Son 
and  seed  he  will  bless  the  world.  Blessings  shall  abound  on  earth,  the  influence 
of  his  covenant  shall  last  to  the  end  of  time.  "  His  seed  shall  endure  for  eyer, 
and  his  throne  as  the  sun  before  me." 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  36-39.  Sin,     1.  A  description  1.    Conditions  of    its    enjoyment.     2» 

of  human   nature.     "No   man  which  Cause  of  its  loss.     3.  Method   of  its 

sinneth    not."      2.    A  moral  difficulty  restoration.  Hear  and  forgive.    1.  For- 

between   God   and    man.      "  Thou    be  giveness  the  great  need  of  man.     No 

angry  with  them."    3.  A  cause  of  great  happiness   and   rest,   no    heaven    and 

trouble   in    man's   experience.      4.    A  fellowship  with  God  without.     2.  For- 

bitter    experience    in    man's    history,  giveness  the  prerogative  of  God  alone. 

Sin  in  the    universality  of    its    exist-  Nature,    conscience,    and     law    know 

ence,   in   the  moral   consciousness    of  nothing  of  forgiveness.    3.  Forgiveness 

men,   in   its    prejudicial    influence   to  bestowed  through  prayer  and  confession 

human  interests.  Pray  toward  the  land,  of  sin.     This  answers  God'et  character 
174 


•HA^.  Ttl 


nOMILETtO  COMMENTARY:  CIIRONTCLES, 


and  man's  need,  upholds  moral  order, 
and  argues  infinite  risk  in  refusing  to 
seek  it  in  Christ.  "  In  whom  we  have 
redemption  through  his  blood,  even  the 
forgiveness  of  sins." 

Ver.  39.  Maintain  their  cause.  The 
rights,  interests,  and  cause  of  GocTs 
people  at  stake.  Require  defending, 
clearing  up,  and  preserving.  2.  This 
only  done  by  God*s  help.  Human  swords 
and  hands  grow  weak  and  get  broken. 
Standard-bearers  faint  and  die.  Im- 
possible for  holiest  and  mightiest  to 
equal  God's  *'  mighty  hand  and  stretched 
out  arm."    <*  With  me,"  said  Luther, 


"moral  effort  is  an  alternation  of  rising 
and  sinking,  of  advancing  and  retreat- 
ing." 3.  17iis  help  micst  be  enlisted  by 
prayer,  "  Hear  and  maintain."  Prayer 
and  contest  combined.  The  bravest 
commanders  men  of  prayer.  Prayer  a 
means  of  divine  fellowship  and  training, 
imparts  strength,  courage,  and  victory 
in  conflict. 

"In  all  thou  dost,  first  let  thy  prayers 
ascend, 

And  to  the  gods  thy  labours  first  com- 
mend; 

From  them  implore  success,  and  hope  % 
prosperous  end "  [W.FUmingy 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VI. 


Vers.  7,  8.  Wishing  and  willing.  To 
wish  and  to  will  are  very  different 
things.  There  are  a  thousand  men 
who  wish,  where  there  is  one  man  that 
wills.  Wishing  is  but  a  faint  state  of 
desire.  Willing  is  a  state  of  tlie  reason, 
and  of  the  affections,  and  of  the  will  in 
activity,  to  secure  what  one  desii'es.  A 
man  may  wish  and  yet  reject  all  the 
steps  and  instruments  by  which  that 
wish  can  be  cai-ried  into  effect.  No 
man  wills  until  he  has  not  only  made 
up  his  mind  to  have  the  end,  but  to 
have  all  the  steps  intermediately  by 
which  that  end  is  to  be  secured 
\Beecher']. 

Vers.  19,  20.  The  greatness  of  God, 
Will  he  indeed,  whom  the  heaven  of 
heavens  cannot  contain,  take  up  his 
abode  with  men  ?  What  heart  among 
us  but  glows  with  gratitude  and  love 
at  these  joyful  tidings  1  Let  us,  at  the 
head  of  our  several  families  in  a  trans- 
port of  devout  affection,  v/elcome  this 
kind  and  generous  Guest  into  our 
houses.  Let  us  give  him  the  entertain- 
ment he  demands,  even  that  of  a 
cordial  love  and  obedience.  Let  us 
present  him  the  saciifices  he  requires, 
even  those  of  daily  prayer  and  praise. 
And  let  us  tremble  at  the  thought  of 
so  demeaning  ourselves  in  the  habita- 
tioDB  he  has  thiiA   honoured,  ajs  ever 


to  provoke  him  to  depart  thence   \S' 

Stennett\ 

Solomon's  Prayer.  He  prayed  for 
wisdom  at  the  outset,  and  he  has 
verified  the  answer  to  prayer  by  the 
wonderful  structure  he  put  up.  But 
the  blessing  did  not  end  in  architectural 
skill ;  that  great  proof  of  the  blessing 
given  to  Solomon  is  to  be  found  in  the 
prayer  which  he  prayed  at  the  dedica- 
tion of  the  temple.  No  man  could 
have  prayed  that  prayer  without  help. 
This  we  should  have  said  about  it  in  all 
honesty  if  we  had  found  it  in  Sanscrit; 
if  we  had  exhumed  it  out  of  Indian 
libraries,  it  would  have  been  due  to  the 
author  to  have  said,  "You  never 
dreamed  that  dream ;  it  was  a  vision  of 
God."  Read  the  prayer  from  begin- 
ning to  end,  and  say  if  this  be  not  so. 
How  majestic  in  conception  1  how 
beauteously  eloquent  in  expression  I 
how  wise,  how  lender,  how  patriotic, 
how  philanthropic  !  How  it  grows  and 
swells,  and  abounds  in  all  elements  of 
spiritual  sympathy!  Probably  there 
is  no  such  prayer  in  all  literary  records. 
If  ever  that  prayer  be  excelled  it  will 
be  by  the  Son  of  God  alone,  and  his 
excelling  of  it  will  be  by  contrast 
rather  than  by  comparison  [Dr, 
Faarker\ 


m 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  m. 


CHAPTER  VU. 

Critical  Kotes.]  This  chapter,  parallel  with  1  Kings  viii.  62 ;  ix.  9,  records  acceptance 
of  consecrated  temple  by  fire  (vers.  1-10) ;  and  answer  given  by  the  Lord  to  Solomon 
(vers.  11-22). 

Vers.  1-10. — Acceptance  of  temple  by  fire.  This  not  mentioned  in  Kings,  which  creates 
difficulty.  "  What  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  is— 1.  That  omissions  are  not  contra- 
dictions ;  and  2.  That  they  occur  constantly  in  all  historical  writers,  and  are  frequently 
quite  unaccountable  "  [Speak.  Com.}.  Fire  as  in  tabernacle  (Lev.  ix.  24);  glory,  chapter 
V.  13, 14.  Ver.  3.  Bowed  in  adoration  and  reverence.  Ver.  4.  All  people  did  not  offer, 
but  gave  them^  to  be  offered  on  altar.  Sacrifices  enormous  and  difficult  to  realise. 
Ver.  6.  Waited  in  their  stations  to  receive,  kill  sacrifices,  &c.  Instruments,  cymbals, 
harps,  and  psalteries  (1  Chr.  xv.  16;  compare  chap.  v.  12).  Ver.  7.  Middle  court  on 
account  of  blood  of  sacrifices  and  burning  of  fat.  Ver.  8.  Feast,  not  feast  of  dedication 
only,  but  feast  of  tabernacles  also  (Lev.  xxiii.  34).  Hamath  to  river  Sihor,  which 
separated  Egypt  from  Palestine.  "  The  territory  of  Israel,  according  to  its  whole  extent 
from  north  to  south  "  (2  Chr.  vii.  8)  IKeit].  Ver.  9.  Solemn  assembly  closed  the  festival. 
Kept  dedication  seven  days  and  feast  of  tabernacle  next  seven  days  (1  Ki.  viii-  65). 
Festival  closed  on  22nd  of  the  month,  on  23rd  people  sent  home  rejoicing. 

Vers.  11-22. — God's  amwer  to  Solomon's  prayer.  "  The  narrative  now  runs  parallel  with 
1  Ki.  ix.  1-9,  but  is  fuller  and  presents  less  of  verbal  agreement.  Vers.  13-15  are  additional 
to  the  earlier  record"  \_Speak.  Com.^.  King's  house,  i.e.,  his  own  palace  (c/.  1  Ki.  vii.  1-12'. 
Vers.  12-22.  Explicit  answer  to  Solomon.  Appeared  as  at  Gibeon  (1  Ki.  iii.  5;  ix.  2). 
Ver.  13.  If,  (fee,  answer  to  third  petition  (vi.  26).  Ver.  14  recalls  chief  points  in 
Solomon's  prayer.  Ver.  15.  Attent,  promise  accords  with  very  words  of  petition 
{cf  vi.  40).  Prayer  of  this  place  (marg.)  "  chosen  to  include  the  two  cases  of  prayers 
offered  in  (vi.  24)  and  towards  (vi.  34-38)  the  sanctuary"  ISpeak.  Com.].  Ver.  16. 
Sanctified.  "  Here  additions  to  1  Ki.  ix.,  end  and  remainder  of  chapter  adds  nothing  to 
the  earlier  record."  Ver.  17.  Walk  refers  to  first  petition ;  conditions  which  Solomon 
failed  to  meet.  Ver.  19.  The  other  alternative  put  before  Solomon.  Ver.  21.  This  house 
high,  conspicuous  in  glory.  Astonishm,ent  in  ruin.  Ver.  22.  All  this  the  fearful  con- 
sequencfls  of  apostasy  {cf.  Ezekiel'a  wailing  over  the  city  and  temple,  xiv.  23;  xxxvL  17-20), 

HOMILETICS. 

The  FntB  and  the  Gloet. — VersetX-Z. 

Tv/o  elements  prominent  in  O.  T.  symbolism  which  made  the  dedication 
solemn,  impressive,  and  real.    I,    As   Confirmation  of  acceptance. 

Sacrifice  accompanied  every  act  of  worship.  Miraculous  fire  a  sign  of  acceptance, 
as  Moses  (Lev.  ix.  24),  Gideon  (Judg.  vi.  21),  David  (1  Chron.  xxi.  26),  Elijah 
(1  Ki.  xviii.  38).  Generally  to  accept  burnt  sacrifice  in  Hebrew  was  to  turn  to 
ashes.  "  Remember  all  thy  offerings,  and  accept  (turn  to  ashes  or  make  fat)  thy 
burnt  sacrifice  "  (Ps.  xx.  3).  The  surest  evidence  of  acceptance  in  prayer  is  the 
descent  of  the  holy  fire  upon  us.  This  fills  the  heart  with  reverence  and  awe, 
as  the  glory  filled  the  temple.  This  leads  to  humble  submission  to  divine 
authority,  and  a  true  sense  of  un worthiness.  **  They  bowed  themselves,"  with 
profound  reverence  and  humility.  II.  As  Symbols  of  spiritual  truths. 
Thej^re  indicative  of  God's  nature.  "  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,"  terrible  iu 
Zion,  before  whom  sinners  have  reason  to  fear.  But  God  consumed  the  sacrifices, 
not  the  offerers  ;  turned  away  his  anger,  and  showed  mercy  in  their  acceptance. 
Christ  a  great  sacrifice  for  sin,  through  whom  Holy  Spirit  given  to  appljr  the 
176 


OHAP.  vn.J  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES, 


word,  consume  sin,  and  convert  the  soul.  The  glory  fills  earthly  temples,  when 
his  presence  dwells  in  the  sanctuary,  and  the  heart  is  made  a  living  temple — 
when  Israelites  rise  from  their  prostrate  attitude,  regain  their  confidence,  and 
offer  themselves  as  sacrifices  upon  the  altar  of  God — when  hearts  are  tuned,  and 
songs  abound  to  God.     "  For  he  is  good,  and  his  mercy  endure th  for  ever," 

The  Dedicated  Temple. — Verses  1-1 0, 

Dean  Milman's  description  most  truthful  and  graphic  ("  History  of  the  Jews," 
vol.  i.,  pp.  315-318).  Here  two  glances  at  the  scene,  showing  its  outward 
grandeur  and  inward  importance.  I.  The  eternal  grandeur  of  the 
event.  The  vast  assembly,  "  all  Israel  "  present.  The  enormous  sacrifices,  on 
a  scale  suitable  to  the  extraordinary  occasion,  requiring  the  open  court,  in  which 
the  assembly  only  could  take  part.  The  preparation  and  offering  of  burnt 
offerings  and  peace  offerings  in  festive  joy.  All — king,  priests,  and  people — 
performing  their  part.  The  fall  of  the  sacred  fire,  and  the  dazzling  glory  of  the 
cloud  resting  on  and  then  entering  into  the  courts.  The  music  and  the  oft- 
recurring  chorus  (Ps.  cxxxvi.).  The  awe-struck  priests  and  the  nation  on  their 
knees  would  be  an  impressive  sight.  But  notice — II.  The  moral  signifi- 
cance of  the  event.  This  ceremonial  was  not  commanded  by  the  law,  but 
the  expression  of  devout  sentiment  and  reverence  in  the  people.  The  symbolic 
presence  led  the  innumerable  multitudes  to  prostrate  themselves  on  the  ground, 
the  instinctive  and  natural  expression  of  loving  reverence.  The  prostrate  person 
and  the  bended  knee  tokens  of  humility,  unreserved  surrender,  and  dutiful 
obedience.  "0  come,  let  us  worship  and  bow  down.  Let  us  kneel  before  the 
Lord  our  Maker."  The  consuming  fire  fills  with  dread.  "  Who  among  us  shall 
dwell  with  the  devouring  fire  ?  "  Judgments  alarm,  glory  without  mercy  leads 
to  despair,  but  God  accepts  the  sacrifice,  and  spares  the  offerer.  "  Which  was 
the  greater,  the  external  magnificence  or  the  moral  sublimity  of  the  scene  ? '" 
asks  Milman.  *' Was  it  the  temple  situated  on  its  commanding  eminence,  with 
aU  its  courts,  the  dazzling  splendour  of  its  materials,  the  innumerable  multitudes, 
the  priests  in  their  gorgeous  attire,  the  king  with  all  the  insignia  of  royalty  on 
his  throne  of  burnished  brass,  the  music,  the  radiant  cloud  filling  the  temple, 
the  sudden  fire  flashing  upon  the  altar,  the  whole  nation  upon  their  knees? 
Was  it  not  rather  the  religious  grandeur  of  the  hymns  and  of  the  prayer  ;  the 
exalted  and  rational  views  of  the  Divine  Nature;  the  union  of  a  whole  people  in 
the  adoration  of  the  one  Great,  Incomprehensible,  Almighty,  Everlasting 
Creator  ? " 

Solomon's  Sacrifices. — Verses  4-7. 

I.  Sacrifice  in  its  symbolic  meaning.  Refined  nations  of  modem 
times  esteem  animal  sacrifices  a  cruel  and  uncultured  mode  of  expressing 
religious  sentiments.  But  remembering  the  genius,  habits,  and  moral  instincts 
of  ancient  nations,  and  the  special  circumstances  of  the  Jewish  people,  we  see 
their  fitness  and  propriety.  Use  of  letters  unknown,  signs  and  symbols  needful 
and  beneficial.  God  instructs,  helps,  and  encourages  in  this  rite.  Its  value, 
therefore,  partly  actual,  and  partly  typical,  but  in  all  respects  derived  from  the 
one  true  sacrifice  typified.    II.    Sacrifice  a  form  of  true  religion. 

Opposed  to  heathen  will- worship  in  place,  method,  and  in  the  invention  of 
costly  and  monstrous  offerings.  An  evidence  of  obedience  to  God  ;  a  symbol  of 
self-dedication,  and  an  expression  of  thanksgiving.  Some  form  of  sacrifice  always 
required  in  religion.  He  who  offers  nothing  accounted  irreligious  (Ecc.  ix.  2,  cf. 
Ifl. xliiL  23)«    We  must  not  forget  the  higUer  affections  of  the  heait  in  over- 

177 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [ohap.tiu 


valuing  the  symbol,  and  turn  our  offerings  into  an  opus  operatum  « For  I 
desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice,  and  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  burnt 
oflerings  III.  Sacrifice  a  method  of  national  festivity.  Festivals 
held  m  all  ancient  nations.  Sacrificial  meals  common  and  under  special  direction 
in  Israel.  Sometimes  in  private  houses,  other  times  in  the  temple.  Held 
weekly,  monthly,  and  yearly.  These  methods  nob  only  commemorations  of  great 
national  events,  but  occasions  for  reunion  of  friends,  enjoyment  of  hospitality 
and  interchange  of  sentiment.  Families  would  be  filled  with  joy.  Strangers 
fatherless  and  widows  received  with  religious  warmth.  The  nation  bound  in 
unity,  commerce,  and  brotherhood. 

National  Kejoicing. — Verses  8-11, 

The  timo  of  dedication  immediately  before  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  The 
festival  prolonged,  and  afforded  opportunity  for  large  number  of  peace  offerings, 
which  were  the  means  of  national  enjoyment.  I,  Joy  in  its  purest 
sources.  1.  In  Divine  loorks.  "Solomon  finished  the  house."  Joy  from 
contemplation  of  the  order,  beauty,  splendour,  and  completion  of  temple.  Its 
vast  extent,  manifold  adaptations,  practical  use,  and  symbolic  teaching.  "  I  will 
triumph  in  the  works  of  Thy  hands."  2.  In  the  Divine  presence.  Infinite  and 
supreme,  yet  will  dwell  with  man !  In  the  vision  and  service  of  God  we  find  the 
bhss  of_  heaven.  "  We  joy  in  God."  3.  In  acceptance  in  the  Divine  presence. 
God  with  man,  not  to  judge,  condemn,  and  destroy.  "We  shall  surely  die, 
because  we  have  seen  God,"  was  the  impression  of  Manoah.  A  popular  belief 
that  the  revelation  of  God's  terrible  majesty  would  cause  death,  not  joy.  But 
the  acceptance  of  the  offerings  a  pledge  of  gracious  disposition  (Judges  xiii.  23). 
The  cloud  and  the  fire  at  dedication  of  temple  tokens  of  condescension  and 
mercy.  II.  Joy  in  its  vast  extent,  1.  In  all  classes.  Universal  joy. 
King,  priests,  and  people  partook  of  it.  **  All  Israel  with  him,  a  very  great  con- 
gregation" (ver.  8).  2.  In  all  places.  In  the  palace  of  the  king,  and  the  tents 
of  the  people.  In  the  temple  of  Jehovah,  and  the  homes  of  the  land,  "  from  the 
entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the  river  of  Egypt,"  the  usual  and  known  bounds, 
the  utmost  length  of  the  land.  "  He  sent  the  people  away  into  their  tents,  glad 
and  merry  in  heart,"  tlianking  God  for  his  goodness  to  David,  to  Solomon,  a 
wise  and  religious  son,  and  '*  to  Israel  his  people."  In  this  spirit  we  should  go 
home  from  God's  house  j  rejoice  in  the  grace,  advancement,  and  enthronement  of 
the  Redeemer,  and  in  the  sanctification  and  spiritual  welfare  of  all  believerg. 

God's  Answers  to  Solomon's  Pbaybr. — Verses  12-22. 

Acceptance  of  prayer  seen  in  fire  from  heaven,  and  second  appearance  by 
night.     I.    Answers    to    special   prayers.     Solomon   not   aimless  and 
indefinite,    but    specific.    To    prayer    suggested   by   Holy   Spirit,   and   offered 
according  to  God's  will,  answers  are  definite  and  explicit.     Vers.  12-15  contain 
answer    to    third    petition,    ver.    16    to    second,  and   vers.     17-22    to    first. 
11.^  Answers  exceeding  the  prayer  itself.     Solomon  desired  that 
God's  eyes  might  be  directed  to  the  temple  continually  (ch.  viii.  29).  The  answer 
is,  "  Not  mine  eyes  only,  but  mine  eyes  and  mine  heart."  Not  only  to  Solomon's 
but  to  prayer  made  toward  that  place  in  future  from  any  person ;  not  to  the 
tlioughts  merely,  but  in  the  very  words  of  the  petitioner.     We  are    straitened 
in  ourselves,  not  in  God,  "  who  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all 
that  we  ask  or  think."    III.    Answers   Conditionally  promised. 
Suspended  on  conduct.     This  a  test  of  faith,  a  motive  to  obedience,  and  a  rule  of 

17a 


CHAP,  vii.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


discipline.     «  If  ye  walk  in  my  statutes  .    .    .     then  I  will  give  you,  Ac.     But 
if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me    ...    I  will  set  my  face  against  vou* 
Lev.  xxvi.  1-20),  "  -a  j 

Solemn  Warnings. — Verses  19-22. 

»*  The  record  of  this  second  vision,  in  which  were  rehearsed  the  conditions  o' 
Uods  covenant  with  Solomon,  and  the  consequences  of  breaking  them  is 
inserted  as^  a  proper  introduction  to  the  narrative  about  to  be  given 
of  tlie  king's  commercial  enterprises,  and  ambitious  desire  for  worldly  glory 
For  this  king,  by  encouraging  an  influx  of  foreign  people,  and  a  taste  for  foreign 
luxuries  rapidly  corrupted  his  own  mind  and  those  of  his  subjects,  that  they 
turned  from  following  God,  they  and  their  children"  [^amtesowl  I  God's 
goodness  m  warning:  before  punishment.  God  not  revengeful  and 
unjust.  Judgment  strange  to  Him.  He  gives  gpace  for  repentance,  opportunity 
to  avoid  danger;  thus  declares  reluctance  to  punish,  and  goodness  to  warn. 
Longsuffermg  of  God  signally  displayed.  «  Because  sentence  is  not  executed 
speedily,  men  should  not  resolve  on  sinful  courses,  and  run  to  ruin  II  Dis 
obedience  to  warning:  exposes  to  punishment.  Sentence  is  gone 
torth,  judgment  only  suspended,  and  seems  to  loiter,  hence  the  sinner  thinks 
there  IS  chance  of  escape.  "  I  shall  have  peace,  though  I  walk  in  the  way  of  my 
own  heart.^  But  warnings  unheeded,  calls  neglected,  hasten  the  stroke,  and 
render  the  judgments  heavier.  Abuse  of  mercy  only  ripens  for  judgment.  *'  He 
that,  benig  often  reproved,  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  destroyed  and 
that  without  remedy "  III.  Punishment  which  foUows  abused 
warning:  IS  merited  and  most  severe.  A  limit  to  discipline  and 
patience.  The  time  ends  and  the  day  of  retribution  comes.  Ruin  often  sudden 
and  without  remedy.  \  The  temple  cursed.  The  house  conspicuous  for  its 
sanctity,  glory  and  usefulness,  would  become  a  desolation,  a  byword,  and 
disgrace.  2.  The  natwn  cursed,  "  Plucked  up,"  carried  away,  and  exposed  to 
mockery,  msult,  and  despair  m  a  foreign  land.  The  temple  of  God  no  protection 
to  uhose  who  forsake  him  Their  sins  will  be  read  in  the  judgments  they  suffer, 
beek  to  be  a  monument  of  grace,  not  of  judgment. 

•*  Heaven  gives  the  needful  but  neglected  call. 
What  day,  what  hour,  but  knocks  at  human  hearts 
To  wake  the  soul  to  a  sense  of  future  scenes  "  lYoung\ 

BOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1  and  15, 16    The  Comearated  structed  probably    after  the  building 

House       Solomon     builder,  God  con-  was  finished.     The  builders  who  werf 

secrated,    sanctified    it.       1.  By    the  released  from  the  work  7  tLws 

symbolic  cloud  and  sacred  fire.     2^^  By  house  were  free  to  betake  theml^lves 

open  &c.    (v   15).     3.  By  his  constant  other  public  buildings.     At  the  end  of 

f^Z.Z^'^'  '^"^'  '^'^'^  '^''^^^  thii.ee'nyears(ll<:in|sviia)th:te^^^^^ 

V'er.  llfThesum,thegreatness,and  ^e^TSd^'e^th^^^^^ 

the   competionof  Solomon's  works-  the  consecration  "^^^^                 ^'' 

sacred,  voluntary,  and  successful  works.  ^       ^  ^•* 
*'The   house   of  the   Lord  was  seven 

years  in  building.      But  the  court,  the  *'^^  ^^^  ^^^1^   days  of  ait, 

pillars,    and    all     the     external     and  Builders  wrought  with  greatiMitcmri^ 

internal    fittings    began    to    be    con-  'Fo^rotX'eeT/e^yw^h^rl 

vm 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[OHAP.  Til. 


•  Let  us  do  our  work  as  well, 

Both  the  unseen  and  the  seen; 
Make  the  house,  where  God  may  dwell, 
Beautiful,  entire,  and  clean" 

\^Longfello7o'\ 

Ver.  12.    An  house  of  sacrifice,     1. 
In    contrast   with   the   synagogue,  in 
which  no  sacrifice.      2.  Descriptive  of 
worship  of  0.  T.  with  its  symbolic  rites, 
social     feasts,     and     moral    teaching. 
"  This  expression  does  not  elsewhere 
occur.     Its  meaning,  however,  is  clear. 
God  declares  that  Solomon's  temple  is 
the    place  which  he  had   promised  to 
•choose'    from   among  the   tribes    of 
Israel,    whereto    all    IsraeHtes    were 
commanded  to  bring  their  burnt  offer- 
ings and  sacrifices  "  (see  Deut.  xii.  6,  6) 
[Speak.    Com.].      The  Lord   appeared. 
This  vision  presents  a  remarkable  con- 
trast with  that  recorded  (1   Kings  vi. 
11-13)  while  the  temple  was  in  build- 
ing.      Then     all     was    promise    and 
encouragement;     now,    not     only     is 
warning  mingled  with  promise,  but  as 
in  Solomon's  own  prayer,  the  sadder 
alternative  seems  in  prophetic  anticipa- 
tion  to  overpower  the  brighter.     In 
this  there  is  (as   often    remarked)    a 
striking  exemplification  of  the  austere 
and    lofty  candour    of     the    inspired 
narrative,    sternly   contradicting    that 
natural   hopefulness   in   the   hour    of 
unexampled    prosperity,  which    would 
have   shrunk   from  even  entertaining 
the  idea  that  the  blessing  of  God   on 
the  temple  should  be  frustrated,  and  the 
glory  of  Israel  pass  away  [EllicoUy  0.  T, 
Co7n.]. 

Vers.  15,  16.  Biblical  Anthropo- 
morphism. Human  organs.  The  eyes 
and  ears  of  God.  This  language  is 
used  for  two  purposes.  I.  To  express 
His  cognisance  of  man.  He  knows  us. 
1.  Directly.  2.  Thoroughly.  II.  To 
express  His  interest  in  man.  1.  In 
the  various  capacities  of  enjoyment 
with  which  He  has  ei?dowed  us,  and 
the  provision  He  made  for  them.  2. 
In  the  preservation  of  our  existence, 
notwithstanding  our  sinfulness.  3. 
In  our  redemption  by  Christ  Jesus. 
Conclusion  :  Thou  God  seest  me,  we 
unite  with  the  blessed  fact,  "  Thou 
God  lovest  me"  [-St6,  Mm,],  My  name 


therefor  ever,  God's  gifts  are  "  with- 
out repentance."  When  he  puts  his 
name  in  the  temple  he  does  it,  in 
intention,  for  ever.  He  will  not 
arbitrarily  withdraw  it  after  so  many 
years,  or  so  many  centuries.  Once 
placed  there,  it  will  remain  there  for 
ever,  so  far  as  God  is  concerned.  But 
the  people  may  by  unfaithfulness  drive 
it  away  [Speak.  Com.\ 

Vers.  19,  20.  Turn  awanf,  L 
Possibility  of  wrong  course.  "If  ye 
turn  awayr  2.  Rapid  progress  when 
this  course  is  adopted.  "  Forsake  my 
statutes,"  easily  understood  and  profit- 
able to  them,  "set  before  you." 
Wholly  forsake  God  for  idols,  then— 
3.  Fearful  consequences.  Entire  de- 
flection would  cut  Israel  off  from  the 
land.  "This  whole  passage  stands  out 
in  bold  reHef,  when  illuminated  by  the 
light  of  history  "  [Murphy], 

Ver.  20.  Plucked  up.  1.  The  soil 
in  which  they  were  planted,  chosen 
and  prepared  by  the  Great  Husband- 
man. 2.  The  source  of  their  growth  and 
fruit.  "  From  me  is  thy  fruit  found." 
3.  The  danger  to  which  they  were 
exposed.  "  Plucked  up."  No  growth 
independent  of  God.  Plants  require 
rain,  Ught,  and  warmth.  We  can  only 
live  as  we  five  and  are  rooted  in  God. 
"  There  would  be  men  who  are  twice 
dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots,  and  the 
roots  are  only  fit  for  burning.  We  do 
not  know  what  God's  burning  means. 
Let  us  take  care  how  we  exclude  the 
penal  element  from  our  theology  and 
from  our  contemplation  of  the  f utui-e  " 
[Dr.  Parker].  Learn— 1.  The  evil  of 
apostasy.  2.  The  reahty  of  God's 
government.  3.  The  terrible  effects 
of  Divine  displeasure. 

Ver.  22.  Why  thus?  A  Problem. 
1.  The  actual  fact  in  history,  that  the 
Jews,  the  anciently  favoured  people  of 
God,  found  to  this  day  a  byword  and 
a  proverb.  2.  The  question  is,  why 
hath  the  Lord  done  this  ?  Plas  God 
changed  his  purpose,  or  been  unfaithful 
to  his  word  ?  The  problem  solved  by 
the  conduct  of  the  people  who  for- 
sook God  and  rejected  the  Saviour. 
"  It  is  notable,  that  in  its  reference  to 
the  two  parts  of  the  promiga  ol  I>avid 


CHAP.  VII.]  aOMTLETIC   COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES- 


there  is  a  subtle  and  instructave  dis-  tion  that  even  in  case  of  sin  the  mercy 

tinction.     As  for  the  temple  now  just  of  God  would  chastise  and  not  forsake 

built  in  fulfilment  of  that  promise,  it  the  house  of  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  13,  14  ; 

is    declared    without  reserve   that  in  Ps.  Ixxix.  30-37).     So  again  and  again 

the  case  of  unfaithfulness  in  Israel,  it  in  prophecy  captivity  is  denounced  as 

shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  and  become  a  penalty  of  Israel's  sin,  but  the  hope 

an    astonishment    and    a  proverb   of  of  restoration  is  always  held  out,  and 

reproach  before  the  world.      But,  in  thus  the  belief  in    God's  unchanging 

respect  of  the  promise  of  the  perpetuity  promise  remains  unshaken.     The  true 

of  David's  kingdom,  the  true  Messianic  idea    is  strikingly  illustrated  by  the 

prediction,  which  struck  the  key-note  of  prophet  Amos  (ix.  9-11):  I  will  sift 

all  future  prophecies,  it  is  only  said  the  house  of  Israel  among  all  nations, 

that  Israel  shall  be  *  cut  off  from  the  .     .     .     Yet  shall  not  the  least  grain 

land/  and  so  *  become  a  proverb  and  fall  upon  the  earth.     ...     I  will 

a  byword '  in  captivity.      Nothing  is  raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  David  that 

said  to  contradict  the  original  declara-  is  fallen,  &c.*'   [EUicoUy  0,  T,  Com\ 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  VII. 

Vers.  4,  5.  Sacrifices.   Profusion  the  we  degrade  our  nature,  and  dishonour 
usual    feature    of  ancient     sacrifices :  our  Creator.    Our  happiness  is  not  in 
300  oxen  formed  a  common  sacrifice  at  the  body,  but  in  the  soul;  not  without, 
Athens.     But  all  sacrifices  offered  by  but    within ;  and  ought  never   to   be 
men  to  God  are  inadequate.      "  Leba-  sought  for  as  an  end,  it  comes  only  in 
non  is  not  sufficient  to  burn,  nor  the  self-consecration   to  duty  and  to  God 
beasts  thereof    sufficient  for  a  burnt  [Dr,    Thomas].      If  I  see   a   dish    to 
offering."     "  Jehovah  being  so   much  please  my  appetite  I  see  a  serpent  in 
greater  than  man,  how  can  any  sacri-  that  apple,  and  will  please  myself  in  a 
ficial     rites     be    worthy    of    Him  ? "  wilful  denial  [Bishop  Hall]. 
\Cheyne.]      **  What    real   propitiation  Ver.    12.  Heard   thy  prayer.     If    I 
could  be  effected,    though  the  whole  cared  for  nothing   I    would  pray  for 
region  of  Lebanon  were  made  an  altar,  nothing  [Melancthon]. 
its  pines  andcedars  piled  up  on  it  for  .  ^hat  work  which  is  begun  well  is  half- 
firing,   and   its    thousands    of    beasts  done; 

offered  as  victims  ?    Very  different  was  And  without  prayer  no  work  is  well 

the  offering  which  was  to  procure  man's  begun       [Fanshawe}. 

redemption"    [J^ay].       That    offering  Vers.  17-21.     Turn  away.      Those 

which  alone  avails  before  God  is  the  who   forsake    God    to   return  to  the 

sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  a  sacrifice  of  world,  do  it  because  they  find   more 

infinite  value  because  He  is  God.     All  gratification  in  earthly  pleasures  than 

our  offerings,  our  acts  of  worship,  our  in  those  arising  from  communion  with 

self-denial,   our  good  deeds  cannot  in  God ;  and  because  this  overpowering 

themselves  avail  with  God.      But  they  charm,  carrying   them    away,   causes 

are  accepted  when  offered  upon  "  the  them  to  relinquish  their  first  choice, 

altar  which  sanctifieth  the  gift,"  the  and  renders  them,  as  Tertullian  says,  the 

altar  of  ChrivSt's  merits.  penitents  of   the  devil  [Blaise  Pascal], 

Vers.  8-10.       Feasts.     All     bodily  **  God  never  leaves  any  till  they  first 

appetites   should    be    attended  to  for  leave  Him." 

purposes    of   relief y    not  gratification.  Vers.  21,  22.     IVTiyf     Nothing  but 

The  very  moment  we  seek  gratification  grace  can  teach  us  to  make  a  right  use 

in  any  organ  or  appetite  of  the  body,  of  others*  judgments  [Bishop  HaU\. 


191 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  tui. 


CHAPTER  Tm. 

Critical  Notes.]  Solomon's  buildings  (vers.  1-6) ;  the  tributaries  (vers.  7-11) ;  the  festival 

worship  (vers.  12-16);  and  the  fleet  of  Solomon  (vers.  17,  18)  (1  Ki.  ix.  10-28). 

Solomon's  buildings.— Yers.  1-6.  Twenty  years  (cf.  1  Ki.  vi.  38  ;  vii.  1 ;  ix.  10).  Cities  noith- 
west  of  Galilee,  the  occupation  of  which  was  granted  to  Huram,  who  seems,  after 
consideration,  to  have  refused  them  as  unsuitable  to  the  commercial  habits  of  his  people 
and  returned  them  to  Solomon,  who  built  (Heb.  repaired)  and  filled  them  with  a  colony  of 
Hebrews.  Ham.,  a  territory  bordering  on  Zobah,  identified  in  Jewish  tradition  with 
Helbon  (Aleppo).  Tadmor,  the  famous  Palmyra  (palm- city),  which  became  capital  of  a 
province  (sent  80,000  men  to  join  the  Assyrian  army),  the  splendid  ruins  of  which  remain 
to  this  day  (a  wall  11  miles  in  circumference).  Store  cities  for  provisions,  situated  on 
great  trade  roads  to  relieve  travellers  and  beasts  of  burden.  Ver.  5.  Beth-horons,  two 
cities  in  Ephraim,  very  ancient  (Josh.  xvi.  3-6;  1  Ki.  ix.  27;  1  Chr.  vii.  24).  Ver.  6. 
Baal,  belonged  to  Dan  (I  Ki.  ix.  18,  19). 

Solomon's  tributaries.— Y era.  7-10.  Left,  descendants  of  Canaanites  in  the  country 
treated  as  war-prisoners,  employed  in  vast  building  operations,  and  had  to  pay  tribute. 
Ver.  9.  Sons  of  Israelites  not  serfs,  but  soldiers  and  officers.  Ver.  10.  Chiefs  of  Israelites 
only  given,  250  in  number.  J  Ver.  11.  Daughter,  writer  assumes  points  of  narrative  in 
1  Ki.  iii.  1  and  7,  8,  and  further  assigns  motive  for  change  of  residence.  Holy,  sanctified 
by  presence  of  the  ark,  and  as  she  was  an  idolater,  therefore  could  not  permanently  dwell 
in  the  city. 

Solomon's  regulations  of  worship. — Vers.  12-16.  An  expansion  and  amplification  of 
1  Ki.  ix.  23.  They  add  several  important  particulars.  No  departure  from  the  ordinances 
established  by  Divine  authority  by  Moses  or  David  in  offering  of  sacrifices— arrangements 
of  priests  and  Levites  (1  Chr.  xxiv.  26)— and  in  provision  and  management  of  all  sacred 
things.  Ver.  16.  This  verse  sums  up  in  brief  the  whole  previous  narrative  on  the 
subject  of  the  temple,  which  began  with  ch.  ii.  Solomon's  work  "  unto  the  day  of 
foundation  "  was  the  subject  of  that  chapter ;  his  work  subsequently  has  been  related  in 
chapters  iii.-viii.  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Solomon's  fleet  and  gold. — Vers.  17,  18.  Eloth  {Elath)  (Eland  of  Greeks,  north-east  of 
the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  "  The  writer  of  Kings  tells  us  that  the  fleet  of  Solomon  was  built 
at  Ezion-geber  (the  giant's  backbone,  Num.  xxxiiL  35,  36),  *'  which  is  beside  Eloth  "  (1  Ki. 
ix.  26) ;  and  Ebon-geber  alone  is  mentioned  as  the  place  where  Jehoshaphat  built  his 
ships  (2  Chr.  xx.  36).  Solomon,  it  appears  by  the  present  passage,  visited  both  ports 
before  determining  at  which  he  should  establish  his  docks  [Speak.  Com."].  Ver.  18. 
Solomon  made  his  navy  by  receiving  ships  as  models,  materials  for  building,  carpenters, 
and  seamen  from  Huram,  who  probably  had  ships  Ijang  in  the  ports  of  the  Red  Sea. 
His  own  servants  went  with  the  Phoenicians  on  the  voyage.  Ophir,  son  of  Jokton 
(Gen.  X.  29),  gave  name  to  the  land  of  Ophir,  which  was  at  least  originally  in  the  south 
of  Arabia,  though  some  look  for  it  in  India  or  Ceylon.  The  450  talents  of  gold  (in  Kings, 
420)  may  have  been  the  result  of  many  voyages  to  this  land  [Murphy'}, 


HOMILETICS. 

Solomon's  Military  Enterprises. — Verses  1-6. 

Chiefly  in  acquiring  cities  rebuilt  and  taken  from  the  enemy.  Solomon  not 
satisfied  to  build  God's  house,  ambitious  to  gain  cities  and  enlarge  his  kingdom. 
Lawful  ambition  desirable — all  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  Christian  Church 
will  scheme  for  the  good  of  the  country.  I.  Cities  for  stores  {cf. 
1  Ki.  ix.  19).  Centres,  i.e.,  cities  in  which  provisions  for  beasts,  travellers,  and 
troops  (2  Chr.  xxxii.  28).  Chiefly  north,  in  Hamath  (ver.  4),  and  Naphtali 
(ch.  xvu  4).  Solomon  prudent  in  action  and  kind  in  planning  for  the  necessitiet 
182 


CHAP,  vin.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


of  his  people.  II.  Cities  for  colonisation.  "  Solomon  built  (rebuilt) 
them,  and  caused  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell  there"  (ver.  2).  Cities  out  of 
repair,  quitted  by  population,  or  never  occupied  by  Israelites.  Anxious  to  locate 
trade,  promote  industry,  and  for  all  to  dwell  in  right  place.  III.  Cities  for 
pleasure.  **  Cities  for  his  chariots,  and  cities  for  his  horsemen ; "  dwellings 
for  pleasure  as  distinguished  from  fortresses  and  store-cities.  "  I  said  in  mine 
heart.  Go  to  now,  I  will  prove  thee  with  mirth,  therefore  enjoy  pleasure."  But 
pleasure  is  expensive,  and  demands  costly  sacrifices.  **  He  that  loveth  pleasure 
shall  be  a  poor  man.  "  IV.  Cities  for  defence.  The  cities  of  Bethhoron 
and  Baalith  were  fortified.  His  kingdom  exposed  required  defence.  Surrounding 
enemies  dangerous,"  especially  in  north  ;  strong  garrisons  required,  and  a  levy  of 
men  and  money  to  support  a  gigantic  military  system.  Hence  danger  from 
wars,  taxation,  and  oppression.  Suggested  Lessons  from  Solomon's  Military 
Enterprises. — 1.  That  those  who  attend  to  the  spiritual  will  not  neglect  the 
temporal  interests  of  a  nation.  Solomon  built  the  temple,  but  patriotic  enough 
to  build  cities.  True  religion  ends  not  in  ceremony,  but  in  philanthropy. 
Those  who  build  churches  build  hospitals.  A  libel  to  say  that  Christians  who 
support  missionary  agencies  neglect  home.  2.  That  amidst  the  temporal 
enterprises  of  a  nation  great  risks  exist.  Fortified  cities  needful,  but  indicate 
evils  to  be  checked;  incursions,  insurrections,  and  subjugation.  Hence — (1) 
Lessons  of  Frudenee.  Why  *'  fenced  cities  with  walls,  gates,  and  bars?  "  "  Silent 
witnesses  against  the  honesty  of  the  society  in  which  we  live.  Every  bolt  upon 
the  door  is  a  moral  accusation  ;  every  time  we  turn  the  lock  we  mean  that  there 
is  an  enemy  outside  who  may  endeavour  to  violate  the  sanctity  of  the  house" 
\P'^\  -P«^^6^]-  (2)  The  Danger  of  Prosperity.  "  Commercial  intercourse  with 
foreign  nations,  the  assimilation  of  the  Israehtish  monarchy  to  corresponding 
institutions  of  surrounding  kingdoms,  though  indispensable  to  certain  elements 
of  the  Church  and  State  of  Judea,  yet  was  fraught  with  danger  to  a  people 
whose  chief  safeguard  had  hitherto  been  their  exclusiveness,  and  whose  highest 
mission  was  to  keep  their  faith  and  manners  distinct  from  the  contagion  of  the 
world  around  them.  The  gigantic  experiment  of  Solomon,  though  partially  and 
prospectively  successful,  yet  in  a  greater  part  and  for  the  moment  failed.  As  he 
is  the  representative  of  the  splendours  of  the  monarchy,  so  is  he  also  the  type 
and  cause  of  its  ruin  "  \StanUy\ 


Solomon'8  Statesmanship,— Fer*e#  7-10. 

Civil  government  a  divine  institution.  Cannot  exist  without  laws  and 
adjustments.  These  require  wisdom  to  express  and  enforce.  The  people  have 
instinct  to  obey,  but  lack  power  to  govern.  Hence  need  of  statesmen  and  rulers. 
Solomon  a  wise  ruler.     I.  In  the  tributary  services  rendered  by 

the  people,  1.  Foreigners  non-Israelites  employed  as  serfs.  Treated  as  prisoners 
of  war,  compelled  to  drndgery,  hard  labour,  and  to  pay  tribute  (ver.  8).  This  a 
matter  of  pohcy  and  borrowed  from  Esryptian  customs  of  employing  lowest  caste  on 
public  works.  2.  Native  Jeios  employed  in  S7iperior  labour.  "  Not  bondmen, 
but  men  of  war,  servants,  princes,  captains,  rulers  of  chariots  and  of  horsemen  " 
(1  Ki.  ix.  22).  Positions  of  honour  and  influence.  II,  In  the  choice  of 
ofQcers  to  rule  the  people.  Officers  divided  into  two  bodies.  The 
lesser  consisted  of  twelve  chiefs  corresponding  to  the  twelve  princes  of  the 
twelve  tribes,  wh')  aLniiiLtereJ  the  kiugdoin  unJur  David.  Hence  their  wisdom 
and  expeiience  would  be  profitable  to  direct.  The  larger  body  were  officers 
chosen  from  Israelites  to  control  task  work,  exacted  from  Canaanites.  No  way 
pf  a<x)ounting  for  discrepancies  in  number  (c/.  1  Ki.  v.  16;  2  Chr.  ii.   18,  and 

183 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap. Yin. 


ver,  10  of  this  ch)  except  by  error  of  copyist,  or  to  imagine  with  many,  that 
250  were  on  duty  at  once.  Solomon  desired  the  ablest  men  for  the  best  work. 
Some  fitted,  born  to  rule,  and  others  to  serve.     Ill,  In  the  appointment 

of  all  classes  of  the  people  to  their  proper  sphere.    Work  for  all 

and  every  one  at  work  for  which  best  adapted.  Some  to  labour,  others  to  think 
and  direct.  Not  great  men  to  do  small  work  and  weak  men  to  fail  in  respon- 
sible work.  Canaanites  and  Israelites  all  useful.  This  law  of  adaptation 
essential  to  success  in  family  circles,  church  government,  and  national  legislation. 
"  Thou  shalt  teach  them  ordinances  and  laws,  and  show  them  the  way  wherein 
they  must  walk,  and  the  work  that  they  must  do," 


Solomon's  Marriage.— Ferw  1 

At  beginning  of  his  reign  he  married  an  Egyptian  princess,  assigned  her  a 
temporary  abode  in  Jerusalem  until  a  suitable  place  could  be  found.  I.  As  a 
matter  of  worldly  policy.  A  startling  act,  for  since  Exodus  no  inter- 
course between  two  countries.  Sprang  from  desire  to  counteract  influence  of 
Hadad,  who  was  received  with  royal  honours  and  formed  alliances  with  king  of 
Egypt  (1  Ki.  xi.  14-20);  from  wish  to  obtain  support  for  his  new  dynasty  and 
recognition  from  one  of  older  fame  and  greater  power  ;  from  anxiety  to  strengthen 
himself  by  foreign  alliances.  Besides  the  new  queen  brought  with  her  a  frontier 
city  as  a  dowry.  Gezer  still  possessed  by  remnant  of  Canaanites.  Pharaoh 
had  led  his  armies  against  it,  and  tranquillity  of  Israel  threatened.  But  this 
worldly  policy.  Many  marriages  for  inferior  motives.  Better  look  to  bonds 
that  unite  families  and  thrones  to  God.  II.  As  a  SOUrce  of  moral 
perplexity.  What  must  be  done  with  her?  If  she  conformed  with  the 
Hebiew  faith,  yet  as  a  foreigner  she  must  dwell  in  a  separate  place,  not  near 
the  ark,  the  symbol  of  Divine  presence.  The  house  of  God,  holy,  must  be  free 
from  personal  and  official  pollution.  This  a  matter  of  conscience  to  Solomon, 
who  felt  that  God's  presence  sanctified  all  localities ;  that  a  broad  distinction 
must  be  made  between  Judaism  and  heathenism,  between  idolatry  and  the 
worship  of  Jehovah.  When  this  distinction  is  ignored  and  worldly  policy 
adopted,  men  plunge  into  temptations  and  find  it  difficult  to  rectify  errors  by 
punctilious  morality  and  zealous  care  about  trifles.  III.  As  the  beginning 
of  trouble.  The  policy  advantageous  at  first,  but  ultimately  proved  hollow 
and  impolitic.  A  revolution  in  Egypt  changed  its  dynasty  or  its  policy,  and  the 
court  welcomed  the  fugitive  Jeroboam  in  his  eflforts  to  secure  kingly  power. 
By  seeking  fresh  alliances,  giving  way  to  lust  for  "  strange  women,"  Solomon 
involved  in  worship  of  strange  gods,  &a  The  reign  which  began  so  gloriously 
ended  in  gross  darkness  and  fetish  worship, 

Solomon's  Religious  Service. — Veiaes  12 

Solomon  not  only  built  the  temple,  but  worshipped  in  it.  What  use  a  temple 
without  worship  ?  The  duty  of  high  and  low  to  meet  for  worship.  I.  Re- 
markable for  its  conformity  to  Divine  La'W.  "  According  to  the 
command  of  Moses."  God  the  supreme  object  and  his  revealed  will  the  rule  of 
worship.  1.  In  its  appointed  seasons.  Daily  sacrifices.  **  A  certain  rate  every 
day."  "  Every  day  will  I  bless  thee."  ''  On  the  sabbaths."  Weekly  sacrifices ; 
monthly  **  on  the  new  moons ;"  and  yearly  at  the  three  solemn  feasts.  "  Three  times 
in  a  year  shall  all  thy  males  appear  before  the  Lord  thy  God  in  the  place  which 
he  shall  choose."  2.  In  its  customary  method.  As  Moses  commanded  and  David 
observed  (ver.  14),  care  should  be  taken  to  observe  divine  order,  but  custom 


c«AP.  VIII.]  BOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


should  never  fetter  spirit.  Daily,  weekly,  monthly,  and  yearly,  we  should  bo 
free,   thankful,  and  devout.      "  The  heart  will   observe   its  own  order."      II. 

Remarkable   for    its    systematic    arrangements.      "Order   is 

heaven's  first  law."  1.  Arrangements  divinely  appointed.  Priests  in  their 
courses ;  Levites  in  their  charges  ;  porters  at  the  gates,  and  persons  to  manage 
the  treasures  (of.  1  Chr.  xxvi.  20-23).  2.  Arrangements  scrupulously  observed. 
By  every  person  and  in  every  particular.  "  They  departed  not  from  the  com- 
mand of  the  king  concerning  any  matter  "  (v.  15).  3.  Arrangements  completing 
the  work.  "  So  the  house  of  the  Lord  was  perfected."  This  the  finishing  touch 
to  erection  and  consecration.  Something  incomplete  without  real  worship, 
reverent  order  and  self-surrender.  Sacrijice  the  essence  and  result  of  worship. 
"  I  will  freely  sacrifice  to  thee," 

**  One  act  that  from  a  thankful  heart  prooeeds, 
Excels  ten  thousand  mercenary  deeds"  [CowperJ, 

Solomon's  Greatest  Work. — Verse  16. 

This  verse  a  brief  summary,  describing  method  and  completion  of  Solomon's 
greatest  work.  Temple  work  was  prepared,  i.e.,  contemplated  and  fixed,  before 
built  and  completed.  I.  It  was  wisely  planned.  Prudence  displayed  in 
collection  and  preparation  of  materials.  The  cost  counted — 1.  Suggesting  wise 
forethought.  Every  part  of  an  undertaking  should  be  well  considered  and  weighed. 
"  Prepare  thy  work  without  and  make  it  fit  for  thyself."  2.  Providing  against 
failure.  What  wrecks  in  all  departments  of  human  labour  through  want  of 
forethought  and  preparation  !  "  This  man  began  to  build  and  was  not  able  to 
finish."  II.  It  was  nicely  furnished.  Not  half  done,  nor  slovenly  done. 
Finished  in  furniture,  style,  and  ceremonies.  Perfected  in  harmony  with  God's 
will.  "  A  thing  of  beauty  and  a  joy  for  ever.**  Choose  your  life's  work.  Collect 
materials  and  build  for  God.     Begin  well  and  in  God's  strength  finish.     Never 

be 

••  Like  one  who  draws  a  model  of  a  house, 
Beyond  his  power  to  build  it ;  who,  half  throngby 
Gives  o'er,  and  leaves  his  part-created  cost 
A  naked  subject  to  the  weeping  clouds, 
And  waste  for  churlish  winter's  tyranny.* 

Solomon's  Fleet. — Verses  17,  18* 

I.  The  method  of  its  construction.  Huram  senty  supplied  him,  t.e., 
huUt  him  ships,  viz.,  in  docks  at  Eloth  {cf.  1  Ki.  ix.  26,  27)  [Jamieson],  Or 
Solomon  made  his  fleet,  by  receiving  model  ships,  materials,  and  carpenters  from 
Huram.  "  The  probability  is  either  that  the  Tyrians  maintained  at  this  period  a 
fleet  in  the  Red  Sea,  or  that  Hiram's  shipwiights  constructed,  at  their  master's 
expense,  some  ships  on  that  sea,  and  then  presented  them  to  the  Jewish 
monarch"  [Speak.  Com.].  II.  The  voyages  it  undertook.  Solomon 
monarch  and  merchant.  Egyptians  might  have  been  rivals  in  southern  maritime 
traffic,  but  their  religion  and  exclusive  principles  unfavourable  to  sea  voyages. 
They  probably  abstained  from  sending  their  own  people  abroad  for  commerce. 
Solomon's  fleet  opened  the  Mediterranean,  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  Indian  Ocean, 
the  far  east  and  the  far  west.  The  extraordinary  influence  of  these  voyages  on 
their  own  and  on  all  future  times  was  remarkable  [see  Stanley's  Jew.  Ch., 
vol.  ii.,  p.  155].  III.  The  cargo  it  brought.  Articles  of  commerce  most 
abundant;  almug,  ivory,  aloes,  cassia,  cinnamon,  apes  and  peacocks,  strange 

186 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.  [cha^.  vnt. 


plants  and  animals,  fragrant  woods  and  brilliant  metals,  silver  and  gold.  "  Gold 
of  Ophir "'  the  most  famous  in  the  world.  Men  more  precious  than  gold  ; 
wisdom  more  precious  ''than  the  merchandise  of  silver."  ''I  will  make  a  man 
more  precious  than  fine  gold  ;  even  a  man  than  the  golden  wedge  of  Ophir." 
IV.  The  sailors  who  manned  it.  Hebrews  had  none  capable  of 
performing  distant  expeditions ;  were  only  fishermen,  whose  boats  coasted  on 
the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean,  or  plied  on  inward  lakes.  Tyrians  manned 
the  navy  of  Solomon,  who  excelled  in  nautical  science  (c/*.  1  Ki.  v.  6  ;  ix.  27) 
''When  we  consider  that  in  the  case  of  Solomon  the  commercial  wealth  of  the 
entire  community  was  concentrated  in  the  hands  of  the  government,  that  much 
of  the  trade  was  a  monopoly,  and  that  all  was  assisted  or  directed  by  the 
experience  and  energy  of  the  Tyrians,  the  overwhelming  riches  of  this  eminent 
merchant-sovereign  are,  perhaps,  not  surprising." 

HOMILETIG    HINTS    AND    SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  2.  Caused  Israel  to  divell  there. 
Principles  of  colonisation — 1.  A  matter 
of  necessity  often.  To  provide  for 
employment,  surplus  population;  and 
2.  Should  always  be  in  the  interests  of 
humanity.  Not  for  national  glory, 
material  prosperity,  or  destruction  of 
uncivilised  races.  What  remains  of 
the  colonies  founded  by  ancient  nations? 
Prosperity  and  duration  only  when 
God  plants  a  people  (America  and  the 
Pilgrim  Fathers). 

Vers.  4-6.     If  some  of  the  public 
works  had  the  plea  of  utility,  the  forti- 
fications  of   some   cities  for  purposes 
of  defence  (Millo  the  suburb  of  Jeru- 
salem, Hazor,  Megiddo,  the  two  Beth- 
horons);     the    foundation    of    others 
(Tadmor  and  Tiphsah)  for  purposes  of 
commerce.       These   were    simply   the 
pomps    of  a   selfish   luxury;  and    the 
people,  after  the  first  dazzle  was  over, 
felt  that  they  were  so.     Forty  thousand 
horsemen  made  up  the  measure  of  his 
magnificence  (1    Ki.  iv.   26).     As  the 
treasury  became  empty  taxes  multiplied, 
and  monopolies  became  more  irksome. 
If,   on  the  one  hand,  the  division  of 


the  kingdom  came  as  a  penalty  for 
Solomon's  apostasy  from  Jehovah,  on 
the  other,  it  was  the  Nemesis  of  a  selfish 
passion  for  glory,  itself  the  most 
terrible  of  all  idolatries  [Bib.  Dict.\ 

Ver.  14.  David  the  man  of  God,  A 
wonderful  title.  Only  applied  to  Moses 
and  a  nameless  prophet,  besides  David. 
1.  How  gained  ;  2.  What  it  imphes  in 
character  and  life. 

Vers.     12-18.     Here    we    find— 1. 
Solomon  "  diligent  in  busines."    Build- 
ing   and    fortif3dng    cities;    engaging 
ships    and    trading   to    Ophir.     Thus 
occupied  usefully  for  his  country,  and 
employed  many  that   would,  perhaps, 
have  otherwise  been  idle.     2.  Solomon 
**  fervent  in  spirit,  serving  the  Lord." 
Carefully    guarding    the    sanctity    of 
God's  house,  duly  offering  sacrifices  at 
all  appointed  times,  and   seeing   that 
priests    and    Levites    performed    the 
sacred   duties   devolving    upon    them. 
Here  Solomon  exhibited  religion  as  it 
should   be ;  the   concerns   of   life   not 
unfitting  him  for  religion,  nor  religion 
unfitting  him  for  the  concerns  of  life 
\Ingram  Cohhin's  Com,\ 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER    VIIL 


Ver.  2.  Cities.     Some  of  these  forti-  them    [Tuch\     Dwell   there.     The  in- 

fied  places  may  have  been  necessary  to  crease  of  a  great  number  of  citizens  in 

keep  in  check  the  Canaanitish  popula-  prosperity  is  a   necessary  element   to 

tion,  who  were  likely  to  fret  under  the  the  security  and  even  to  the  existence 

forced  labour  which  he  exacted  from  of  a  civilised  people  \B%ir€i\, 
18o 


CHAP.  IX.] 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


Vers.  7,  8.  Pay  tribute.  A  mercan- 
tile democracy  may  govern  long  and 
widely ;  a  mercantile  aristocracy  cannot 
stand  [La7ido7']. 

"  Curs'd  merchandise  1  where  life  is  sold, 
And  avarice  consents  to  starve  for  gold  " 

[Howe]. 

Vers.  12-15.  Burnt  offerings.  Before 
we  ask  what  a  man  worships,  we  have 
to  ask  whether  he  worships  at  all 
[Busking.  Solomon  was  great  in  burnt 
ofi'erings.  Do  not  men  sometimes  make 
up  in  burnt  offerings  what  they  lack 
in  moral  consistency?  Is  not  an 
ostentatious  religion  sometimes  the 
best  proof  of  internal  decay  ?  It  ought 
not  to  be  so.  The  hand  and  the  heart 
should  be  one,  the  outward  and  the 
inward  should  correspond,  the  action 
should  be  the  incarnation  of  the 
thought.  We  are  not  always  to  look 
upon  the  ceremonial  action  of  the 
church  as  indicative  of  its  real  spiritu- 
ality. Sometimes  men  make  a  great 
noise  in  order  to  conceal  a  courage  that 
is  giving  way  [JDr.  Parher\ 

Ver.  16.  Prepared.  When  Bishop 
Heber  read  his  beautiful  poem,  "  Pales- 
tine," in  manuscript  to  Sir  Walter  Scott, 
his  friend  remarked  that  in  speaking  of 
the  temple  of  Solomon  he  had  for- 


gotten to  refer  to  the  silence  which 
prevailed  during  its  erection.  The 
poet  immediately  retired  for  a  few 
minutes,  and  introduced  the  following 
beautiful  lines : — 

"  No  workman's  steel,  no  ponderous  axes 
wrung ; 
Like  some  tall  palm  the  noiseless  fabrio 
sprung." 

This  circumstance  is  remarkable  as  an 
indication  of  the  method  of  preparation 
and  of  the  deep  sense  which  Solomon 
had  of  the  sacredness  of  his  work. 

Vers.  17,  18.  Ships.  I  am  wonder- 
fully delighted  to  see  a  body  of  men 
thriving  in  their  own  fortunes,  and  at 
the  same  time  promoting  the  public 
stock;  or,  in  other  words,  raising 
estates  for  their  own  families,  by  bring- 
ing into  their  country  whatever  is 
wanting,  and  carrjdng  out  of  it  whatever 
is  superfluous.  Nature  seems  to  have 
taken  a  particular  care  to  disseminate 
her  blessings  among  the  different 
regions  of  the  world,  with  an  eye  to 
their  mutual  intercourse  and  traffic 
among  mankind,  that  the  nations  of 
the  several  parts  of  the  globe  might 
have  a  kind  of  dependence  upon  one 
another,  and  be  united  together  by 
their  common  interest  \Addi8ori\. 


CHAPTER  IX 


Cbitioal  Notes.]  Vers.  1-12.  This  narrative  is  parallel  with  1  Ki.  x.  1-13,  from  which 
it  varies  little  ;  Solomon's  glory  (vers.  13-28) ;  and  the  close  of  his  reign  (vers.  29-31) 
corresponding  with  1  Ki.  xi.  41-43. 

Vers.  1-12. — The  Queen  of  Sheba's  visit.  Two  Shebas,  Ethiopian  and  Arabian.  Both 
countries  have  traditions  on  the  visit ;  in  both  government  by  queens  was  common.  Sheba, 
in  Arabia,  was  the  great  spice  country  and  an  important  kingdom.  Sheba  in  Ethiopia 
a  mere  town  and  furnished  no  spices.  The  expression  "  Queen  of  the  South  "  (Matt, 
xii.  42)  corresponds  with  Hebrew  Teman  (Arabic  Yemen),  and  Jewish  and  Christian 
traditions  in  favour  of  Arabian  Sheba.  Fame,  by  the  Ophir  fleet.  Name,  Solomon's  great 
knowledge  of  God,  or  great  things  which  God  had  done  for  him.  Questions,  lit.  riddles 
(enigmas.  Judge  xiv.  12  ;  Ps.  xlix.  4  ;  Prov.  i.  6 ;  Ezek.  xvii.  2).  In  East  natural  acuteness, 
united  with  idle  life,  still  make  these  exercises  of  understanding  a  favourite  amusement. 
Ver.  1.  CamelSf  &c.,  a  common  method  of  travelling  by  these  beasts  of  burden  in  Arabia, 
a  country  most  famous  also  for  spices.  In  her  heart,  in  her  mind.  Yer.  3.  Told,  i.e., 
answered  all  her  questions  without  any  exception.  She  could  not  puzzle  him.  Vers.  4, 5. 
S4enf  wisdom,  natural  endowments.  House,  the  palace  ;  the  variety  and  luxury  of  table. 
Sitting f  t.«.,  the  seats,  the  plaoe  assigned  to  each  aooordiug  to  gradation,  or  collective  bodj 

187 


UOMILJlTIC  COMMENTARY:  CERONICLES,  \QUki,  tt. 


•ad  orderly  manner  of  domestic  arrangements.  Standing  posts  of  ministers ;  apparel  of 
(cup-bearers)  butlers;  ascent  (Heb.),  burnt  offerings  wbich  he  offered,  by  Luther,  LXX, 
and  others.  Generally  thought  to  be  a  superb  way  for  the  king's  use  alone,  as  Emperors 
of  China  ascend  the  throne  by  steps  consecrated  to  their  use  alone.  "  A  stair  by  which 
he  went  up  to  the  house  of  God,"  "  a  private  way  from  the  palace  on  the  western,  across 
the  ravine  up  the  eastern  hill  to  the  temple  area"  ^KetC].  Spirit  in  her,  an  expression  for 
highest  degree  of  admiration  and  astonishment.  Ver.  5.  True  report,  word  of  acts,  sayings. 
Ver.  6.  Exceedesty  thou  hast  added  to  report.  Ver.  8.  Blessed,  a  frank  acknowledgment 
of  Solomon's  God,  but  no  reason  to  think  she  adopted  Him  as  her  God.  Ver.  9.  Gave, 
not  as  tribute,  but  in  token  of  friendship  (about  £720,000,  Jamieson).  Vers.  10,  11.  Mer- 
cantile transactions.  Algum  trees,  sandal  wood.  Terraces,  high  ways  (margin),  stairs, 
steps.  PsaZfme*  (I  Samuel  X.  5).  Ver.  12.  Z)mre, in  the  way  of  bounty.  Asked,  OtienioS. 
custom  to  ask,  specify  what  is  agreeable.  Solomon  gave  ample  remuneration  for  presents 
in  exchange  with  him,  i.e.,  besides  his  presents  for  hers,  he  made  a  free  donation  of 
whatever  she  liked. 

Vers.  13-28. — Solomon's  wealth.  Weight  {cf.  1  Kings  x.  14-29).  Chapmen,  who  buy  and 
sell,  probably  smaller  retail  merchants.  Governors  in  outlying  dominions.  Heb.  pechah. 
•'If  connected  with  2>«s/?a/i,  the  history  of  the  word  would  be  curious"  [Max  Miiller']. 
Ver.  15.  Targets,  large  shields,  covering  the  whole  man,  made  usually  of  wood  or  wicker- 
work  covered  with  leather.  These  made  for  ornamentation  and  plated  with  gold.  Ver. 
16.  House,  a  part  of  the  royal  palace  (1  Kings  vii,  2-5),  resembling  a  forest  in  structure  ; 
used  for  state  purposes  and  an  armoury  for  targets  and  shields.  Vers.  17-19.  The  throne 
of  ivory,  not  all  solid,  but  parts  venocred  with  it.  Footstool,  the  throue  raised.  Stays, 
arms  on  each  side  of  seat.  Lions,  symbols  of  royal  power.  Ver.  19.  Number  alludes  to 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  Ver.  20.  Accounted,  because  of  abundance  ;  scarcity  a  value. 
Ver.  21.  Tarshish,  prob.  Tartessus  in  Spain.  Peacocks,  thought  to  have  come  from  India. 
Some  give  "parrots."  Ver.  22.  Passed,  outrivalled  (1  Kings  iii.  13).  Kings  of  neighbour- 
ing nations.  Sought  (1  Kings  iv.  34).  Present  tribute  of  respect  year  by  year.  Ver.  25. 
Four  thousand,  not  forty  thousand,  considered  an  error  in  copyist  (1  Kings  iv.  26).  Ver. 
26.  Eiver  Euphrates.  Ver.  27.  Stones,  fig.  for  abundance  and  comparative  worthlessneas. 
Ver.  28.  Horses  from  lands  famous  for  good  breeds. 

Vers.  29-Sl.— Solomon's  death.  Book,  words.  Three  sources  given,  only  in  1  Kings  xi. 
29.  Nathan  (2  Sam.  vii.  1-17).  Ahijah  (1  Kings  xi.  11-13,  29-39),  in  earlier  part  of 
Solomon's  life.  Iddo  (2  Ghr.  xii  15  ;  xiii.  22),  in  later  years  of  reigns  of  Saul  and  David. 
*•  The  Chronist  omits  the  blemishes  that  marked  the  character  and  administration  of 
Solomon,  and  leaves  the  impression  that  notwithstanding  these  he  continued  to  be  a 
follower  of  the  Lord  unto  the  end  of  his  career.  This  is  in  harmony  with  hia  design  to 
note  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  its  religious  aspect "  \_Murphy^ 

HOMILETIOS 

The  Queen  op  Sheba's  Visit  to  Solomon — Verses  1-12. 

Solomon's  influence  upon  surrounding  nations  very  great.  Legends  abound 
in  Jewish  and  Arabic  traditions,  like  those  concerning  Nimrod  and  Alexander. 
Visit  of  the  queen  conspicuous  instance  and  given  as  a  sign  to  us  (Matt.  xii.  42). 
I.  The  spirit  "Whicll  prompted  the  visit.  Its  method,  long  train  of 
camels,  in  striking  harmony  with  Eastern  imagination.  What  its  spirit  ?  \.  A 
spirit  of  curiosity.  She  heard  of  Solomon's  wisdom  and  glory,  co-extensive  and 
manifold  in  forms.  *'  The  countries  marvelled  at  thee,  for  thy  interpretations, 
songs,  and  proverbs  and  parables"  (Ecclus.  xlvii.  14-17).  Solomon's  fame  like 
Christ's,  could  not  be  hid.  Curiosity  excited  and  she  desired  to  know,  to 
ascertain  truth.  2.  A  spirit  of  inquiry.  She  came  to  hear  hia  wisdom  and 
enlarge  her  own;  to  ask  as  well  as  answer  questions.  "  The  spirit  of  this  asking 
of  questions  and  solving  of  dark  riddles  is  of  the  very  nature  of  true  philosophy. 
*  To  ask  questions  rightly,'  says  Lord  Bacon,  *  is  the  half  of  knowledge.'  *  Life 
without  cross  examination  is  no  hfe  at  all,'  said  Socrates.  When  we  inquire, 
when  we  restlessly  question  in  our  search  after  truth,  when  we  seek  it  from 
unexpected  quarters,  we  are  but  following  in  the  steps  of  the  wise  King  of 
'Judah  and  the  wise  Queen  of  Sheba"  [Stanley'].  3.  A  spirit  of  restlessness. 
Rank,  wealth,  and  position  could  not  satisfy.  Something  beyond  herself  and  her 
wise  men,  to  know  and  feel.  No  trilling  questions,  questions  merely  to  puzzle. 
188 


CHAP.  dlJ  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


Hard  questions  concerning  "  the  name  of  the  Lord'*  whom  Solomon  worshipped. 
Problems  ever  new  and  ever  old,  found  in  the  book  of  Job  and  stirring  the 
hearts  of  men  to-day.     "  How  shall  man  be  just  with  God  ? "     "  Where  shall  wis- 
dom  be  found?"  &c.     Only   **an   interpreter,  one   among  a  thousand,"   can 
answer  these  questions.     4.  A  spirit  of  self-sacrifice.     Curiosity  prompted  to 
action,  anxiety  led  her  to  start  on  a  long  and  risky  journey.     A  reproof,  says 
Christ,  to  indifiference  and  stupidity  concerning  himself.     True  wisdom  is  of 
great  price.     Those  who  know  and  seek  its  worth  will  not  begrudge  the  cost. 
II.  The  mutual  intercourse  during  the  visit.    Solomon  did  not 
blame  her  for  her  trouble  and  weakness ;  gave  her  every  encouragement  and 
permitted  her  "  to  commune  with  him  of  all  that  was  in  her  heart,"  freely  and 
fully.     1.  He  answered  her  questions.     "Solomon  told  her  all  her  questions" 
(ver.  3).     Natural,  political,  intellectual,  or  religious.     He  was  equal  to  the  test 
and  could  not   be  puzzled  (see  traditions).     Taught  of   God,   he   could   teach 
others.     **  A  divine  sentence  in  the  lips  "  of  this  king  satisfied  every  inquiry. 
Jesus  can  remove  doubt  and  perplexity,  ease  the  mind,  and  teach  all  we  desire 
to  know.     2.  He  received  her  gifts.     Not  content  with  words,  she  gave  practical 
expression  to  gratitude.     Useless  are  verbal  thanks  if  life  be  void  of  lovely 
deeds.     These  rich  presents  show  the  extent  of  her  commerce,  and  the  apprecia- 
tion of  her  intercourse  with  the  Hebrew  monarch.     Solomon  accepted  her  gifts, 
and  gave,  in  addition  to  customary  exchanges,  "  of  his  royal  bounty."     Neither 
cared  for  gold.     Both  valued  wisdom,  cultivated  and  confirmed  their  friendship 
by  mutual  kindness  and  conversation.     **  She  communed  with  him."     III.  The 
impressions  received  from  the  visit.    Welcomed  sincerely,  valuing 
her  privileges,  she  was  intent  on  learning  and  observant  of  all  she  could.     1. 
She  was  astonished  at  the  magnificence  of  Solomon.     High  culture  and  magnificence 
exceeded  anything  she  had  ever  seen.     Meals  served  with  great  state.     Tables 
at  which  king,  guests,  and  ministers  sat  down  displayed  variety,  luxury,  and 
splendour.     The  order  of  domestic  arrangements,  varied  costumes  and  attire  of 
ministers,  choice  vessels  of  cup-bearers,  all  impressed  her  acute   mind.     The 
houses,  streets,  and  buildings  of  Jerusalem,  the  temple  and  the  king's  private 
entrance  into  it,  like  a  scene  of  enchantment  to  her.     She  was  overwhelmed. 
**  There  was  no  more  spirit  in  her,"  almost  fainted  with  astonishment.     2.  She 
was  surprised  at  the  wisdom  of  Solomon.      This   chiefly  impressed   her  mind. 
"When  she  had  seen  the  wisdom  of  Solomon"  (ver.  3).     A  word  which,  in 
Hebrew,  comprehends  not  only  natural  endowments  and  useful  qualities,  but 
practical  knowledge.     The  economy  of  his  government,  the  schemes  of  industry 
and  the  works  of  art  displayed  familiarity  with  natural  science  and  deep  insight 
into  the  principles  of  human  nature.     This  wisdom  was  superhuman.      She 
acknowledged  it  to  be  from  Solomon's  God,  "  by  whom  kings  reign  and  princes 
decree  justice"  (ver.  8,  cf  Prov.  viii.  16).     3.  She  was  confirmed  in  her  belief 
concerning  Solomon.     "  It   was   a   true   report   which    I  heard,  <fec."  (ver.   5). 
Faith  exercised  will  be  strengthened,  really  tested  will  give  greater  certainty. 
*'  The  one-half  of  the  greatness  of  thy  wisdom  was  not  told  me."     This  just  the 
result  of  honest  search  after  truth,  of  personal  intercourse  with  Christ  and  of 
engagement  in  God's  service.     This  is  the  way  "  to  verify  your  beHefs."    Hear, 
see,  and  feel.     Wonders  of  grace,  depths  of  experience  to  be  discovered  beyond 
all  comprehension  I     ''That  ye  may  know  the  love  of  Christ  which   passeth 
knowledge." 

Heart  Communing. — Verw  !• 

Not  generally  wise  to  tell  all  our  heart.  Samson  reached  the  climax  of  folly 
when  he  did  this  to  Delilah.  Yet  if  we  could  meet  with  a  Solomon  who  could 
solve  all  our  difficulties  we  might  wisely  do  so.      A  greater  than  Solomon  in 

189 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY!  CHRONICLED.  [chap.  tL 


Jesus,  who  is  incarnate  wisdom.  With  him  too  silent,  with  worldly  friends  too 
communicative.  I.  We  ought  to  Communicate  "with  him.  of  all 
that  is  in  our  heart.  1.  Neglect  of  intercourse  with  Jesus  is  very  unkind. 
*'  Let  me  see  thy  countenance,  &c."  (Cant,  ii.  14.)  2.  To  conceal  anything  from 
so  true  a  friend  betrays  the  sad  fact  of  something  wrong.  3.  Shows  a  want  of 
confidence  in  his  love,  sympathy,  and  wisdom,  if  we  cannot  tell  Jesus  all  in  our 
hearts.  4.  Will  be  the  cause  of  uneasiness  in  ourselves  if  we  withhold  anything 
from  him.  Responsibility  will  rest  and  weigh  heavily  with  us.  5.  Will  involve 
the  loss  of  counsel  and  help.  He  meets  our  case  when  we  unbosom  ourselves, 
6.  Reticence  towards  Jesus  is  greatly  aggravated  by  eagerness  to  tell  our 
troubles  to  others.  Will  you  make  a  confidant  of  man  and  hide  the  matter 
from  God?     II.  We  need  not  cease  communing  for  -want  of 

topics.  1.  Our  sorrows.  He  knows  what  they  are,  will  comfort  us  under 
them,  help  to  profit  by  them,  &c.  2.  Our  joys.  He  will  sober  and  salt  them, 
Joy  without  Jesus,  sun  without  light,  the  essence  gone.  3.  Our  service.  He  a 
servant  knows  our  heart,  can  sympathise  with  our  difficulties.  4.  Our  plans. 
He  has  zeal,  ardour,  quick  of  understanding,  and  will  gladly  commune  with  us 
concerning  all  in  our  hearts  to  do  for  God.  5.  Our  success  and  failures  should 
be  reported  at  head-quarters.  The  disciples  of  the  martyred  John  (Matt.  xiv.  12), 
the  evangelists  of  our  Lord,  returned  to  him  (Lu.  ix.  10).  6.  Our  desires. 
Holiness,  usefulness,  heaven,  awaken  the  sympathy  of  Jesus,  who  prays  for  us 
about  these  things.  7.  Our  fears.  Fears  of  falling,  needing,  failing,  dying. 
8.  Our  loves.  Of  earth  and  heaven,  towards  others  and  himself.  9.  Our 
mysteries.  Incomprehensible  feelings,  uneasiness,  emotions,  will  be  better  for 
ventilation  in  presence  of  Jesus.  III.  Nor  shall  we  cease  communing 
for  want  of  reasons.  1.  How  ennobling  and  elevating  is  intercourse  with 
Him  1  2.  How  consoling  and  encouraging  with  Him  who  has  overcome  the 
world  !  3.  How  sanctifying  and  refining  union  with  the  Perfect  One !  4.  How 
safe  and  healthy  is  a  daily  walk  with  ever-blessed  Son  of  Man  1  How  proper 
and  natural  for  disciples  to  talk  with  their  Teacher,  and  saints  with  their 
Saviour !  6.  How  delightful  and  heavenly  is  rapturous  converse  with  the 
Beloved  !  Warning  to  those  who  never  speak  with  Jesus — '*  I  never  knew  you.** 
Complaint  of  those  who  seldom  commune — "Is  this  thy  kindness  to  thy  friend  ? " 
Hint  to  those  usually  in  communion  with  him — Keep  up  the  holy  intercourse ; 
to  this  end  be  thorough  ;  unlock  every  room  in  the  house  and  let  Jesus  enter 
Congratulation  to  those  who  have  long  enjoyed  his  fellowship  \_Spurgeon\. 

Solomon's  Household  and  Christ's  Household. 

Compare  them — I.  In  the  splendour  of  appearance.  Solomon 
himself^  inferior  to  Christ  in  person,  wisdom,  and  dominion.  The  glory  of  court 
artificial,  product  of  labour,  and  liable  to  decay  •  Christ's  inward,  spiritual,  and 
lasting.  II.  In  the  servants  engaged.  1.  Their  position :  Near  the 
king,  standing,  sitting,  waiting  and  watching  attitude.  2.  Their  attire : 
Beautiful,  costly,  fit,  and  free.  3.  Their  felicity  :  ** Happy  are  thy  servants." 
Apply  the  eulogy  to  Christians,  happy  now  and  hereafter.  III.  In  the 
provision  made  for  members.  Costly,  abundant,  satisfactory,  and  free. 
Wisdom  hath  prepared  a  feast ;  come  in  and  partake.  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that 
heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  waiting  at  the  posts  of  my  doors." 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Queen  a  Type  of  for  light  and  knowledge.  2.  In  her 
Truth  -  seekers.  1.  In  her  spirit,  self-sacrifice.  Allured  from  groves  of 
Reverence  for  Ood,  sincerity  of  desire     palm  to  hear  and  know  wisdom,  sh% 

in 


OHl?.  TxJ]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


undertook    a  journey  not  much   less  "  Now,  we  believe  not  for  thy  saying, 

thsin  a  thousand  miles  from  "  utter-  for  we  have  heard  him  ourselves,  and 

most  parts  of  the  earth,"  t.«.,  from  the  know  that  this  is  indeed  the  Christ,  the 

extremities  of  the  world  then  known.  Saviour  of   the    world."      2.  Express 

3.     In     her    reception    hy    Solomon,  testimony.      Open   confession    follows 

Illustrates  welcome   to    inquirers    by  experimental  evidence.     Christ  tolls  all 

God  "  that  giveth  to  all  men  liberally  in  our  hearts  and  discloses  secrets  of 

and    upbraideth   not,"  with   past  in-  life  and  conscience,  reveals  himself  to 

gratitude  or  future  abuse  (as  Solomon  earnest  inquiry,  excites  wonder,  admira- 

abused  his  wisdom  at  length).      Man  tion,  and  love.      Grateful  acknowledg- 

"  giveth  little  and  upbraideth  much  "  ments. 

(c/.  Ecclus.  XX.  15  ;  xli.  23).  Or— 1.  She         Ver.  8.     1.  The  source  of  Solomon's 

sought   in   the  right   disposition.     2.  greatness.     Queen   reminds  him   that 

She  sought  from  the  right  source.     3.  God  must  be  praised  for  the  greatness 

She  sought  in  belief  of  its  reality.     4.  of  the  nation,  and  for  the  wisdom  of  its 

She   sought  to  possess  it  and  render  ruler.     2.  The    design  for    which  the 

homage  to  it.    The  rule  "  he  who  seeks  greatness  bestowed.     Not  for  his  own, 

shall  find."  but  for  the  sake  of   his  people,  God 

Vers.  3-8.  1.  Experimental  evidence,  chose  him  to  occupy  the  throne.      He 

"  I  came,  and  mine  eyes  had  seen  it "  permits    and  appoints.      Government 

(ver.  6).     Many  hear  and  admit,  but  in  all  ministrations.      Kings,  princes, 

gospel  for  trial  its  power  must  be  felt ;  nobles,  judges,  a  Divinely  constituted 

arguments,  evidence  insufficient  with-  power,  to  be  held  in  subordination  to 

out  experience.    To  sceptics  and  doubt-  "  King  of  kings  "  and  administered  for 

ing  our  appeal  is,  "  Come  and  see."  To  the  good  of  people,  "  to  do  judgment 

all  who  come  the  surprise  will  be  great,  and  justice.** 

EOMILETIGS, 
Wisdom  Sought. — Verses  1,  23  cmd  24. 

**  All  the  earth  sought  to  Solomon  to  hear  his  wisdom "  (1  Kings  x.  24). 
Sought  the  face  of  Solomon,  who  had  unveiled  wisdom  and  given  to  the  world  its 
beauty  and  use.  I.  The  indigence  of  human  greatness.  A  queen 
and  kings  seeking  !  E-ank  and  wealth  of  no  avail.  Monarchs  in  their  palaces, 
and  peers  in  their  mansions,  happy  only  in  loyal  obedience,  under  the  dominion 
of  truth  (wise-dom).  "  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ? "  Facts  in  matter  and 
mind  require  a  solution,  problems  in  moral  Hfe  press  heavily  and  fearfully  upon 
the  heart.  The  richest,  most  learned  cry  for  an  interpreting  principle.  We  may 
get  pearls  from  the  ocean,  treasures  from  the  earth,  but  *'  where  is  the  place  of 
understanding?"  "God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  &c."  II.  The 
Divine  source  of  supply.  God  *'  the  only  wise  God."  "  The  wisdom  of 
EgyP^"  proverbial  in  geometry,  astronomy,  and  medicine,  but  "  Solomon's 
wisdom  excelled  the  wisdom  of  all  the  children  of  the  east  country  and  all  the 
wisdom  of  Egypt."  God  gives  sufficiency  to  the  most  indigent  and  most  exalted. 
1.  It  cannot  be  bought  with  money.  "  Man  knoweth  not  the  price  thereof."  2. 
It  cannot  be  found  by  investigation.  Search  in  realms  of  nature  useless.  "  The 
depth  saith  it  is  not  in  me,  and  the  sea  saith  it  is  not  in  me."  The  domains  of 
Hfe  and  of  departed  spirits  reveal  it  not.  **  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is 
wisdom,  and  to  depart  from  evil  is  understanding."  III.  The  need  of 
personal  effort  to  secure  this  supply.  They  heard  and  came  to  see. 
The  attainment  depends  upon  the  spirit  and  efibrt  of  the  seeker.  A  scorner  is 
proud,  irreverent, ''seek eth  wisdom  and  findeth  it  not."  The  slothful  excuse 
—the  distance  is  great,  the  price   is  too  much,   "  there  is  a  lion  in  the  w«j.* 

191 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  OHHONICLES.  [chap.  n. 


Diligence  and  activity  the  conditions  of  getting  and  enjoying  the  blessing.  True 
and  earnest  inquirers,  like  Queen  of  Sheba,  Nioodemus,  Mary  sitting  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus,  and  the  Ethiopian  eunuch  travelling  hundreds  of  miles,  seek  and 
secure  knowledge,  the  highest  knowledge,  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  centre  and 
soul  of  all  science.  "A  wise  man  will  hear,  and  will  increase  learning;  and  a 
man  of  understanding  shall  attain  unto  wise  counsels." 

"  Truths  on  which  depend  our  main  concern, 
That  'tis  our  shame  and  misery  not  t©  learn, 
Shine  by  the  side  of  every  path  we  tread 
With  such  a  lustre,  he  that  runs  may  read  '*  {Co\Dftr\, 

Solomon's  Glory  and  Death. — Verses  13-31. 

Bolomon  pre-eminent,  surpassed  all  kings  of  the  earth,  <fec.     I,  Solomon's 

glory.  Of  two  kinds,  material  and  moral.  1.  Material  glory.  None  with 
greater  splendour,  which  glittered  in  the  eyes  of  his  people  like  the  sun.  Gold 
and  silver,  large  treasures  untold.  Empire  and  power  unique.  Tributary  princes 
and  presents  from  all  parts  of  the  known  world.  Household  extensive,  exchequer 
unlimited,  and  fame  universal.  2.  Moral  glory.  Moral  and  mental  qualities 
equal  to  his  surroundings,  and  preserved  harmony  between  himself  and  kingly 
state.  Scripture  specially  dwells  on  wisdom.  Men  of  noted  intelligence  in  his  own 
country  :  Ethan  in  charge  of  temple  music,  Heman  "the  king's  seer  in  the  words 
of  God,"  Chalcol  and  Darda ;  but  Solomon  "wiser  than  all  men"  (1  Ki.  iv. 
29-31).  Sage,  poet,  and  naturalist — ^an  intellect  stored  with  vast  information  ; 
active,  shrewd,  and  penetrating ;  a  heart  kind,  sympathies  wide,  rising  to  high 
and  noble  thoughts  of  God.  These  more  becoming  and  better  than  material 
grandeur.  Wisdom  better  than  wealth.  "  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."  II,  Solomon's 
death.  Reign  not  long,  though  glorious.  End  certain.  Glory  and  death 
strange  association  1  A  common  end  to  great  and  small.  "  Solomon  slept 
(lit.,  lay  down)  with  his  fathers,"  The  crown,  the  robes  of  office,  and  the  sceptre 
of  power  must  be  laid  down.  **  To  leave  these  things,"  said  a  nobleman  crowned 
with  honours,  "  makes  one  miserable."  Kings  extraordinary  and  brilliant  level 
with  the  meanest  in  the  grave.  They  come,  reign,  and  sleep,  and  so  history  rolls 
on.  "Where  will  you  leave  your  glory?" — ^in  fragrant  names,  righteous  deeds, 
and  holy  life  ?  or  in  grief,  disgrace,  and  oblivion  ?  "A  man  shall  be  commended 
according  to  his  wisdom."  "  The  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remem- 
brance." 

UOMlLETia  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  17-19.    Solomon's  throne.    The  put  in  his  heart.     Supernatural  gifts  in 

symbol  of  a  throne  of  grace.     The  seat  answer  to  prayer.  1.  The  lesson.    2.  The 

of  judgment  and  dominion ;  of  public  learners.     3.  The  method  of  teaching, 

audience  to  nobles,  strangers,  and  all  4.  The  warning  to  us.  Application  made 

who  resorted  to  him.     For  beauty  and  in  eagerness,  to  hear  Solomon  aggravates, 

strength,    workuianship    and     design,  shames  and  condemns  general  contempt 

"  there  was  not  the  like  made  in  any  for  Christ,  in  whom  are  "  hid  all  the 

kingdom."  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge." 

Ver.  23.     Wisdom.     Knowledge    of  5.  A  prophecy  that  "all  they  from  Sheba 

God's  works,  skill  in  physic  and  state-  shall  come,  they  shall  bring  gold  and 

policy,  rules  of  prudence  for  human  life  incense,  and  they  shall  show  forth  the 

and  principles  of  true  religion.     God  praises  of  the  Lord." 
192 


OBAJ*.  X.]  BOMTLETlC  COMMENTART:   CIinoXtCLES. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Philosophy  was  born  a  fingers  [/S'eneca].  We  like  the  gift  when 
Pagan ;  but  she  may  become  a  Christian,  we  the  giver  prize  [Owrf]. 
and  should  be  christened  "  Mary."  She  Vers.  20-23.  Gold.  Greatness  stands 
may  be  proud  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  upon  a  precipice,  and  if  prosperity  car- 
Hellas  coming  to  Judea's  Messiah  is  a  riesaman  ever  so  little  beyond  his  poise, 
rarely  beautiful  sight  \I)r.  Duncan].  it  overbears  and  dashes  him  to  pieces 

Questions.  Do  not  suppose  that  wisdom  [AS'eweca].  Prosperity  seems  to  be  scarcely 

is  so  much  flattered  at  having  you  for  a  safe  unless  it  be  mixed  with   a  little 

pupil  that  she  will  set  you  easy  lessons,  adversity  [Ilosea  Ballow\ 
and  yet  give  you  the  gold  medal  [7'.  T.  Ver.  29.     First  and  last.     His  first 

LyncK\.  Questioners  must  be  teachable,  were  best ;  of   his  last  this  historian 

When  Haydn  was  in  London,  a  noble-  saith  nothing,  but  layeth  his  finger  on 

man  came  to  him  for  lessons  in  music,  the  scar  [Trapp].    Solomon  did  not  live 

but  found  fault  with  all  that  Haydn  said,  to  a  very  great  age,  since  he  was  not 

At  last,  out  of  patience,  the  musician  more  than  twenty  years  old  when  he 

exclaimed,  "  I  see,  my  lord,  that  it  is  ascended  the  throne.  Whether  Solomon 

you  who  is  so  good  as  to  give  lessons  to  turned  to  the  Lord  again  with  all  his 

me,  and  I  am  obliged  to  confess  that  I  heart,  a  question  widely  discussed  by  the 

do  not  merit  the  honour  of  having  such  older  commentators,  cannot  be  ascer- 

a  master"  [Spurgeon],    Communed.    Do  tained  from  Scripture.    If  the  Preacher 

you  want  anything  of  which  you  cannot  (Koheleth)  is  traceable  to  Solomon,  so  far 

tell  your  Lord  ?  It  argues  either  no  real  as  the  leading  thoughts  are  concerned, 

need  or  else  little  faith.     Strong  faith  we  should  find  in  this  fact  an  evidence 

hath  free  communion  with  heaven,  and  of  his  conversion,  or  at  least  a  proof 

conceals  nothing, but  tells  all.  Ep.  iii.  12.  that  at  the  close  of  his  life  he  discovered 

"  In  whom    we   have   boldness."    The  the  vanity  of  all  earthly  possessions  and 

word    boldness  is  "  telling  all "  [Thos,  aims  and  declared  the  fear  of  God  to 

Boston^,  be  the  only  abiding  good,  with  which  a 

Vers.  9  and  24.     Presents.    There  is  man  can  stand  before  the  judgment  of 

no  grace  in  a  benefit  that  sticks  to  the  God  [j^ei^}. 


CHAPTER  X 


Critical  Notes.]  Here  begins  the  fourth  part  of  the  book  of  Chronicles,  extending  from 
the  division  of  the  kingdom  to  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  authorising  the  return  of  the  exiles 
and  confining  itself  to  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  The  present  chapter 
includes  the  proposal  of  the  people  to  Eehoboam  (vers.  1-5) ;  the  counsel  given  to  him 
(vers.  6-11) ;  and  the  answer  that  provokes  the  revolt  (vers.  12-19).  This  corresponds  to 
1  Ki.  xii.  1-19  [Muiyhy']. 

Vers.  1-5. — Proposal  to  the  people.  Shechem,  a  judicious  step,  meeting  there  not  simply 
because  central  and  convenient,  but  honouring  the  capital  of  Ephraimites  and  removing 
disaffection.  King,  assembled  to  receive  Rehoboam  as  lawful  king  and  join  in  usual 
acclamations  (1  Sam.  x.  24 ;  1  Ki.  i.  39)  [cf.  Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  2.  Jer.  an  Ephraimite 
appointed  by  Solomon  to  civil  administration  of  house  of  Joseph  (1  Ki.  xi.  28),  of  which 
Ephraim  a  branch.  Cause  of  flight  to  Egypt  given  (1  Ki.  xi.  29-40).  He  returned  to  be 
leader  and  spokesman  of  people.  Ver.  4.  Yoke,  pomp  and  style  of  Solomon  made  taxation 
heavy.  Vast  building  operations  required  forced  labour,  &o.  Ease,  grant  relief,  make 
concessions,  most  reasonable  request. 

Vtrs,  &-11. — Counsel  given  to  the  king.     Old  men  who  served  under  Solomon  and  well 

193 


BOMILEtlC  COMMENTARY:  CltHONJCLES.  [chap.  x. 


able  to  advise.  Yer.  7.  Spake,  yield  to  will  of  people,  for  once  be  servant,  be  ruled  by  them 
and  attach  to  thyself  servants  for  ever.  Ver.  8.  Forsook,  refused  good  words,  consulted 
younger  advisers,  who  gave  counsel  more  flattering  and  agreeable  to  king's  temper. 

Vers.  12-19. — Little  finger.  Proverbial  for  increasing  rather  than  diminishing  burdens. 
••  Finger  not  in  original ;  but  may  be  safely  implied.  The  meaning  is,  '  You  shall  find 
my  hand  heavier  on  you  than  my  father's ;  as  much  heavier  as  if  my  little  finger  were 
thicker  than  his  loins '  "  [Speak.  Com.].  Whips,  often  with  sharp  bones  or  pieces  of  lead 
tied  to  end.  Scorpims,  i.e.,  scourges  with  sharp  points  (Latin  scorpio),  "  iron  thorns  " 
inflicting  exquisite  pain.  Harsh  and  foolish  answer.  Ver.  15.  Cause,  i.e.,  the  turn  of 
events  was  from  the  Lord,  to  fulfil  his  word  (1  Ki.  ii.  29-31).  Ver.  16.  What  portion? 
Words  of  sedition  by  Sheba  (2  Sam.  xx.  1),  expressing  deep-rooted  aversion  to  royal 
house  and  resulting  in  open  rebellion.  Ver.  18.  Adoram,  identified  by  some  with  Ad.  of 
1  Ki.  iv.  6  ;  v.  14 ;  and  Adoram  of  2  Sam.  xx.  24.  *'  The  three  names  mark  three 
distinct  persons,  perhaps  of  same  family,  who  were  respectively  contemporary  with 
David,  Solomon,  and  Rehoboam"  [Speak.  Com.],  Sent  to  alleviate  burdens.  Stoned, 
usual  mode  of  mob  vengeance.  Ver.  18.  King  himself  narrowly  escaped  the  same  fate. 
From  that  time  Israel  and  Judah  separated  and  distinguished  one  from  another. 

HOMILETIGS. 

The  Representative  Assembly. — Verses  1-5. 

I.  The  place  of  meeting.  ''  Shechem  "  wisely  chosen  by  Rehoboam,  to 
remove  dissatisfaction  ;  at  the  ad\dce  of  judicious  men,  whose  counsels  he  after- 
wards rejected.  A  place  of  great  antiquity,  noted  for  conventions  (Jos.  xxiv.  1) 
and  royalty  (Judg.  ix.).  II.  The  purpose  in  view.  The  future  govern- 
ment of  the  nation.  1.  To  make  Rehoboam  king.  King  with  oflScers  of  state 
around  ;  tribes  drawn  up  under  their  leaders  ready  to  receive  him.  How  pro- 
claimed? Not  with  hearty  shouts  of  '*  God  save  the  king."  A  pause  and 
solemn  silence.  Jeroboam  steps  forward !  2.  To  represent  the  people.  **  Make 
our  yoke  lighter  and  we  will  serve  thee."  This  unexpected  ;  surprised  and 
annoyed  Rehoboam ;  not  what  he  came  for,  not  what  he  liked  1  Not  bold 
enough  to  deny,  not  grace  enough  to  concede.  Delay  dangerous,  may  breed 
suspicion  and  intensify  ill-feeling.  Ill,  The  conclusion  arrived  at. 
**  Come  again  unto  me  after  three  days."  King  did  not  commit  himself  to  rash 
impromptu  reply.  Adjournment  might  seem  wise,  but  demands  just,  prompt 
redress  would  have  been  better  than  prudent  caution.  "  There  is  a  gift  whose 
recompense  is  double"  (Ecclus.  xx.  10). 

Thb  Foolish  Ruleb  and  the  Revolting  Tribes. — Verses  6-19. 

The  four  scenes  may  be  treated  separately  or  in  one  sketch.  I.  The 
grievance  stated.  Real,  not  imaginary;  outspoken  and  not  kept  back. 
"  The  grievous  servitude  of  thy  father  and  his  heavy  yoke  that  he  put  upon  us." 
1.  A  reasonable  demand.  Couched  in  a  spirit  of  fairness  and  loyalty.  Reason 
and  justice  will  ever  triumph.  Violence  and  storms  spend  themselves  foi 
nothing,  (a.)  Heavy  taxes.  Splendour  of  Solomon's  court,  the  magnitude  of 
his  undertakings,  such  that  neither  tribute  of  dependent  states,  presents  of 
foreign  princes,  nor  profits  of  commercial  enterprises  could  support.  He  was 
obliged  to  levy  taxes  for  necessary  revenue.  (6.)  Forced  service.  This  chief 
ground  of  complaint  {cf.  1  Ki.  iv.  6;  v.  13,  14;  xi.  28).  Each  tribe  called  upon 
to  render  without  payment.  "  Forced  labour  has  been  among  the  causes  leading 
to  insurrection  in  many  ages  and  countries.  It  alienated  the  people  of  Rome 
from  the  last  Tarquin  (Li v.  i.  56) ;  it  helped  to  bring  about  the  French 
revolution,  and  it  was  for  many  years  one  of  the  principal  grievances  of  the 
Russian  serfs "  \Speah  Com\  (c.)  Loiig  endured,  "  Put  upon  us  by  thy 
194 


CBif.  X.]  EOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES. 


father."     Complaint  of  past  reign.     Solomon  wise,  but  oppressive  in  government. 
"  No  man  can  always  be  wise,"  says  Pliny.     We  are  more   apt  to  copy  the 
defects  of  our  ancestors  than  imitate  their  virtues;  to  remember  the  evil    of 
their  lives,  not  their  benefits.     2.  A  national  demand.     It  was  the  voice  of  "  all 
Israel."     The  people  unanimous;  not  a  few  merely  turbulent  and  dissatisfied. 
Thus  was  prophecy  fulfilled.     "  This  will  be  the  manner  of  the  king  that  shall 
reign  over  you;  he  will  take  your  sons,  (kc."  (1  Sam.  viii.  11-18).     II.  Th.e 
consultation   held.     If  impolitic  to  delay,  it  was  prudent  to  seek  advice. 
1.    With    aged    counsellors.     Wise,    experienced,   and   suitable.     "  How    do   ye 
advise  ? "     "  With  the  ancient  is  wisdom,  and  in  length  of  days  understanding." 
Be  kind,  concede,  speak  good  words,  and  they  will  be  thy  servants  for  ever. 
Advice — (a),  just ;  (6),  timely ;  (c),  far-seeing ;  and  (d),  wise.     Happy  the  ruler 
with  such  statesmen  I     No  sentimentalists,  but  true  patriots  and  philosophers  I 
Kindness  wins  and   overcomes.     *'  A   soft  answer   turneth   away   wrath  ;  but 
grievous  words  siii*  up  anger."     2.   With  young  counsellors.     Conceited,  proud, 
and  inexperienced.     They  recommend  oppression  and  defiance.     Yield  nothing, 
put  more  on,  afflict  with  scorpions.     This  considered  spirited  and  kingly !  but 
(a),  unreasonable ;  (6),  foolish ;  (c),  cruel ;  and  (c?),  destructive.     "  Wise  men  lay 
up  knowledge :  but  the  mouth  of  the  foolish  is  near  destruction."     III.  The 
decision  given.     "  The  king  answered  the  people  roughly,  and  forsook  the 
old  men*s  counsel  that  they  gave  "  (ver.  13).     This — 1.  Unexpected.     Demands 
reasonable ;  ease  and  m-.ike  yoke  "  lighter."     Delay  gave  time  to  think,  and  this 
course  resolved  uponl     2.  Foolish.     Kough  words  unbecoming;  display  weakness, 
ignorance,  and  pride.     A  grain  of  wisdom  would  have  taught  that  such  conduct 
would  widen  the  breach  between  him  and  his  people.     3.  Presumptuous.     Kings 
made  to  serve,  not  to  tyrannise ;  should  rule  for  the  good  of  the  people  and  not 
for  selfish  purposes.     The  way  to  govern  is  to  serve.     Those  kings  safest  who 
stoop  lowest.     *'  I  would  ratlier  be  king  of  the  French  than  king  of  France," 
said  Louis  XIV.,  i.e.,  rule  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  than  over  the  territories  of 
the  kingdom.     "Whosoever  will  be  great  among  you,  shall  be  your  minister; 
and  whosoever  of  you  will  be  chiefest,  shall  be  servant  of  all."     4.  Mischievous. 
This  tone  like  that  of  the  nobility  of   France  before  the   great  revolution, 
calculated  to  irritate  {cf.  the  Ephraimites,  Judg.  xii.  1-4 ;  men  of  Israel  and 
Judah,  2  Sam.  xix.  41-43 ;  and  the  harsh  words  of  Eliphaz,  Job  xxii.  5),  to  add 
fuel   to  the  fire.     Mischievous  in   themselves  and  in   results.     "  How   many 
thousand  souls  are  hurt  every  day  by  the  words  of  others!"  \Baxter\     How  sad 
the  result  here  I     "  The  beginning  of  the  words  of  the  mouth  is  foolishness :  and 
the  end  of  talk  is  mischievous"  (Ecclus.  xi.  13).     IV.  The  results  "Which 
followed  (ver.  16).     Whatever  ground  for  resisting  before,  they  now  receive 
provocation,  which  accounts   for   strong  words   and   firm   resolve.      1.  Revolt. 
Threatened,  insulted,  they  raised  a  shout  expressive  and  well  understood.     "  To 
your  tents,  O  Israel  1 "     2.  Resistance.     Hadoram  sent,  the  man  who  was  "  over 
the  levy  "  (Rev.  Vers.)  of  forced  labourers,  whose  presence  would  rouse  Israel 
to  anger,  exasperate,  and  outrage.     A  foolish  and  imprudent  act.     "  Israel  stoned 
him  with  stones,  that  he  died."     3.  Final  separation  (ver.  19).     God  prevented 
the  king  from  filling  the  land  with  blood.     "  It  was  with  one  exception  (Hadoram) 
a  bloodless  revolt"  \Stanley\     The  attempt  to  recover  lost  tribes  forbidden. 
The  determinatioii  of  king,  the  loyalty  and  number  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  of 
no  avail.     The  thing  was  done  and  could  not  be  altered.     The  army  disbanded 
and  submitted  to  the  God  of  battles.     "  For  the  cause  was  of  God,  that  the  Lord 
might  perform  his  word."     Even  if  right  appear  on  our  side,  better  sit  still  than 
fight  in  disobedience  to  God.     When  God's  will  is  known  ever  submit,  whatever 
loss  may  be  involvecL 


IM 


no  M I  LET!  C  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES.  [chaf,  x. 


The  Mystery  op  Divine  Working. — Verse  15, 

The  cause,  the  Hebrew  circuit,  or  turning  about,  was  of  God  ;  for  here  was  a 
**  wheel  within  a  wheel,  as  Ezek.  i."  \Trapp\  The  original  idea  of  the  disrup- 
tion was  that  it  was  a  divine  dispensation.  "  The  thing  was  from  the  Lord." 
"  It  was  as  much  a  part  of  the  divine  economy  of  the  national  destinies,  as  the 
erection  of  the  monarchy  itself,  or  as  the  substitution  of  the  House  of  David  for 
the  House  of  Saul"  \St(mley\  I.  Events  of  history  controHed  and 
directed  to  accomplish  divine  purposes.  God's  will  supreme  and 
ultimate.  "  The  turn  of  events  "  not  aimless  and  independent.  The  current 
directed,  turned,  according  to  God's  pleasure  and  word.  II.  In  the  accom- 
plishment of  divine  purposes  men  act  as  free  agents.  Neither 
the  folly  of  the  king,  nor  rebellion  of  people  pre-ordained.  Events  from  natural 
order.  Men  not  fated,  but  free  to  act ;  are  under  moral,  not  physical  govern- 
ment. "  But  as  for  you,  ye  thought  evil  against  me,  but  God  meant  it  unto  good, 
to  bring  to  pass,  as  it  is  this  day,  to  save  much  people  alive."     Ill,  Men  thus 

acting:  as  free  agents  are  responsible  for  their  actions.    We 

are  not  subjects  of  accidents,  bereft  of  power  to  do  good  or  evil,  but  morally 
responsible  for  our  actions.  The  hands  of  the  Jews  were  wicked  in  crucifying 
Christ,  though  he  was  delivered  up  to  them  "  by  the  determinate  counsel  and 
foreknowledge  of  God "  (Acts  ii.  23).  Those  who  rebel  against  God  and  lose 
heaven  vdll  have  to  blame  themselves  for  wilfulness  and  folly. 

Two  Methods  op  Treating  Men, — Verses  6-11, 

I.  The  conciliatory.  II.  The  unconciliatory.  Social  positions  are  graduated. 
Yet  no  elevation  of  social  rank  gives  one  man  the  right  to  tyrannise  over 
another.  Pass  in  rapid  review  a  few  of  the  cases  in  which  the  two  methods  of 
treating  men  come  into  constant  operation.  The  maintenance  of  a  conciliatory 
policy  is  quite  consistent  with  a  headship.  1.  Firmness;  2.  Justice.  "What  is 
the  cure  for  all  false  relations  among  men?  The  gospel  of  reconciliation 
\Beecher\ 

Governments  and  Subjects. 

From  the  whole  narrative  learn — I.  That  governments  create 
dissatisfaction  among  their  subjects  by  injustice.  Order, 
contentment,  and  affection  essential  to  prosperity  in  government.  Severe  laws, 
over- taxation,  curtailment  of  liberties,  and  coercive  measures  create  uneasiness 
and  opposition.  "  The  government  of  a  prudent  man  is  well  ordered " 
(Ecclus.  X.  1).  II.  That  it  is  right  for  subjects  to  agitate  for  the 
removal  of  injustice.  Within  right  to  get  redress  in  just  and  legal 
methods.  History  abounds,  in  critical  and  stirring  times,  in  witnesses  against 
oppression  and  tyranny.  Wrong  to  submit  to  despotisms.  "  I  know  how  to 
add  sovereign  to  the  king's  person,  but  not  to  his  power,"  said  Pym.  Ill, 
That  it  is  wise  for  rulers  to  listen  to  the  complaints  of 
injustice.  Concessions  more  becoming  than  extravagant  assertions  of 
''divine  right."  Mild  and  merciful  procedure  quickens  the  spirit  of  freedom; 
destroys  jealousy  towards  a  ruler's  actions  and  character,  and  the  best  safeguard 
of  thrones  and  constitutions.  "  When  a  king  speaks  *  good  words,'  they  seem 
to  be  better  than  if  spoken  by  other  lips  ;  when  a  king  is  kind,  he  seems  to  add 
to  his  kindness  by  his  very  kingliness ;  the  stoop  of  his  condescension  redoubles 
the  value  of  his  benefaction.  If  when  the  people  returned  after  three  days 
Rehoboam  had  spoken  so,  the  welkin  would  have  rung  with  the  resonant  cheers 
of  a  delighted,  thankful,  because  emancipated,  people  "  [Dr,  Parker]^ 
196 


CHAP.    X.J 


nOMTLETlC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  1-12.  Rehoboam  the  headstrong. 
Only  son  of  Solomon,  but  did  not  profit 
by  his  father's  wisdom.  1.  His  training. 
Not  like  that  of  his  father,  {a)  His 
mother  an  idolatress  (2  Chr.  xii.  13), 
not  the  wise,  good  mother  which 
Solomon  seems  to  have  had  (Prov.  iv.  3). 
Hence  the  mother's  influence  over  the 
young  prince.  (5)  He  had  not  the 
good  example  which  Solomon  had  in 
David.  Solomon's  later  years  degen- 
erate, what  wonder  if  his  son  was  far 
behind  I  2.  His  accession.  Without 
difficulty  (c/*.  1  Ki.  xi.  43)  at  the  death 
of  his  father,  when  about  41  years  old. 
(a)  By  promise  of  perpetual  sovereignty 
to  David's  posterity;  (6)  By  public 
assembly  of  representatives.  "  Met  not 
to  exercise  right  of  election  (1  Sam. 
X.  19-21);  for  after  God's  promise, 
their  duty  was  submission  to  the 
authority  of  rightful  heir ;  but  their 
object  was  to  renew  the  conditions  to 
which  their  constitutional  kings  were 
subject  (1  Sam.  x.  25),  and  to  the 
omission  of  rehearsing  which,  under 
the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which 
Solomon  was  made  king,  they  were 
disposed  to  ascribe  the  absolutism  of 
his  government "  \Jamiesori\.  3.  Hia 
trouble.  Xm^5  not  without.  **  Uneasy 
is  the  head  that  wears  the  crown."  (a) 
A  corrupt  empire ;  (6)  A  dissatisfied 
people ;  (c)  A  dark  future.  4.  His 
folly.  Wisdom  not  inherited  as  wealth. 
Some  infatuated,  nothing  can  teach 
them.  Men  have  no  right  to  tyrannise 
in  social,  political,  or  religious  aflTairs. 
The  rough  answer  was  a  fearful  mis- 
take. "  He  that  walketh  with  wise 
men  shall  be  wise ;  but  a  companion  of 
fools  shall  be  destroyed." 

Vers.  2,  3,  and  12-15.  Jerohoam 
the  first  king  of  Israel.  1.  His  early 
life.  Jerohoam  (whose  people  is  many) 
"  son  of  Nebat,"  an  Ephrathite,  i.e., 
belonging  to  territory  of  Ephraim ;  of 
Zereda  (2  Chr.  iv.  17  ;  cf.  Judg.  v.  22), 
a  town  near  Scythopolis.  Mother 
Zeruah,  a  widow,  reduced  by  the  execu- 
tion of  her  husband  at  beginning  of 
Solomon's  reign,  if  Jeroboam  be  iden- 
tical with  Shemei  {cf.  2  Sam.  xvi.  5 ; 


of.  1  Ki.  ii.  46).  2.  His  natural  ability, 
"A  mighty  man  of  valour"  (1  Ki.  xi. 
27);  mighty  in  power  as  Nimrod 
(Gen.  X.  8) ;  in  wealth,  as  Boaz,  Kish, 
and  other  Israelites  (Ruth  ii.  1 ;  1  Sam. 
ix.  1 ;  2  Ki.  xv.  20).  But  clever,  of 
strong  natural  capacity;  active  and 
enterprising  {Sept.  a  man  of   works). 

3.  His  rapid  promotion.  Solomon  dis- 
cerning his  talents,  "  seeing  the  young 
man  that  he  was  industrious,  that  he 
did  the  king's  business  (Dan.  viii.  27), 
made  him  ruler ;  set  him  over  all  the 
charge,  the  burden;"  superintendent 
of  taxes  and  public  works  (1  Ki.  xi. 
27,  28).  "The  hand  of  the  diligent 
shaU  bear  rule"  (Prov.  xii.  24;  xxii.  29). 

4.  His  prophetic  designation.  By  pro- 
phet Ahijah  in  symbolic  action  (1  Ki. 
xi.  29-39).  From  which  time  he  be- 
came a  marked  man  by  Solomon.  5. 
His  seditious  conduct.  Ambitious,  im- 
patient for  the  death  of  Solomon,  he 
was  led  to  plot  and  conspire,  and  in 
consequence  driven  to  Egypt.  Chosen 
of  God,  yet  could  not  wait  for  Provi- 
dence. Incurred  penalty  of  death  by 
rebellion.  6.  His  accession  to  the  throne. 
Chosen  at  length  by  people  and  per- 
mitted to  become  first  king  of  Israel. 

Ver.  7.  Be  kind.  The  power  of  kind- 
ness in  winning  affection  and  service. 
Lenity  and  moderation  in  a  prince  is 
very  prevalent  with  the  people,  as  to 
win  their  affections  at  first,  so  to  hold 
them  in  obedience  ever  after.  The 
advice  of  an  ancient  French  counsellor 
to  his  sovereign  at  his  departure  from 
court  was  good.  Being  wished  to  lay 
down  some  general  rules  for  govern- 
ment, he  took  a  paper,  and  wrote  on 
the  top  of  it  "  moderation,"  in  the 
middle  of  the  leaf  "  moderation,"  and 
at  the  bottom  "  moderation  "  [Trapp]. 

Vers.  6-11.     I.  The  national  council. 

1.  Assembled  and  consulted  by  the 
king ;  2.  Composed  of  old  and  young, 
wise  and  foolish  men.  II.  The  resolu- 
tion adopted.     1.  From  whom  it  came; 

2.  What  its  nature;  3.  What  its 
results.  Forsook  old  men,  whom  he 
consulted  for  fashion's  sake,  as  Xerxes 
did  when  he  invaded  Greece.     Eesolved 

197 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES. 


[CHAF.   t. 


beforehand  to  stand  upon  his  pantoyflet 
and  not  at  all  to  stoop  to  the  people. 
He  had  those  about  him,  doubtless, 
that  would  tell  him,  as  some  Court 
parasites  did  our  King  John,  when  he 
had  jdelded  to  the  requests  of  his 
barons  for  the  subjects'  liberty,  that 
now  he  was  "  a  king  without  a  king- 
dom, a  lord  without  a  dominion,  and  a 
subject  to  his  subjects"  \Trapp\.  Con- 
sulted young  men.  So  did  our  king 
Richard  II.,  to  his  utter  ruin.  So 
Xerxes  despised  the  grave  counsel  of 
his  uncle  Artabanus,  and  was  led 
wholly  by  young  Mardonius  to  the  loss 
of  all.  The  like  is  reported  of  Diony- 
sius,  king  of  Sicily;  Croesus,  king  of 
Lydia;  Nero,  emperor  of  Rome;  James 
that  reigned  in  Scotland  in  Edward 
IV.'s  time ;  and  Lantrer,  of  whom  it  is 
reported  that  he  lost  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  from  the  French  king,  his 
master,  and  all  that  he  had  in  Italy, 
because  he  would  not  ask  nor  follow 
the  advice  of  those  who  were  wiser  than 
himself  [/Z>^c?.]. 

Yers.  12-15.  The  adjourned  meeting, 
1.  The  decision  given.  Haughty  and 
imperious.  2.  The  effect  produced. 
(a)  On  the  aged  counsellors ;   (6)  On 


deputies;  (c)  On  the  nation  [adapted 
from  Bib.  Mu8\ 

Yer.  16.  To  yowr  tents ^  0  Israel. 
"  It  was  a  national  watchword,  and  not 
the  war-cry  of  a  single  tribe  which  led 
the  revolt"  \Stanley\  1.  Its  antiquity. 
Raised  in  time  of  David,  now  with 
fatal  effect  (2  Sam.  xx.  1).  2.  Its 
ingratitude.  What  have  we  to  do  with 
David  ?  3.  Its  selfishness.  Cut  them- 
selves off  from  their  brethren  and 
their  sovereign.  To  your  tents,  let  us 
have  a  king  of  our  own  I 

Yers.  16-19.  The  great  secession,  1 . 
Its  strange  beginning.  2,  Its  remark- 
able progress.  3.  Its  fatal  consequences. 
Two  kingdoms ;  rival  worship.  Weak- 
ness, jealousy,  and  political  decline  of 
Jewish  nation.  Terrible  is  progress  of 
strife.  One  angry  word,  one  look  of 
revenge,  one  act  of  resentment,  will 
kindle  a  fire  which  may  set  a  neigh- 
bourhood or  a  nation  into  flame.  A 
drop  of  revenge  soon  becomes  a  river, 
and  the  river  a  torrent,  which  sweeps 
everything  before  it.  "  The  beginning 
of  strife  is  as  when  one  letteth  out 
water.  Therefore  leave  off  contention 
before  it  be  meddled  with." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  X 


Yers.  6-10.  Counsel.  Judge  BuUer, 
when  in  the  company  of  a  young  gentle- 
man of  sixteen,  cautioned  him  against 
being  led  astray  by  the  example  or  per- 
suasion of  others,  and  said  :  "  If  I  had 
listened  to  the  advice  of  some  of  those 
who  called  themselves  my  friends  when 
I  was  young,  instead  of  being  a  judge 
of  the  King's  Bench,  I  should  have  died 
long  ago  a  prisoner  at  the  King's 
Bench." 

Yers.  12-15.  Answered,  Who  knows 
what  he  is  till  he  is  tried,  and  until  he 
meets  his  own  trial  ?  for  every  one  is 
not  discovered  in  the  same  way;  he 


may  be  firm  in  one  peril  and  fail  in 
another  [Jay],  His  friends  were  sum- 
moned on  a  point  so  nice,  to  pass  their 
judgment  and  to  give  advice;  but  fixed 
before,  and  well  resolved  was  he,  as 
those  who  ask  advice  are  wont  to  be 
[Pope]. 

Yers.  16-19.  When  any  one  per- 
son or  body  of  men  seize  into  their 
hands  the  power  in  the  last  resort, 
there  is  properly  no  longer  a  govern- 
ment, but  what  Aristotle  and  his 
followers  call  the  abuse  and  corruption 
of  one  [Sudft], 


tmmm^mB^^mem 


19S 


CHAP,  xij  EOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Critical  Notes.]  Eehoboam  forbidden  to  war  (vers.  1-4).  This  section  a  repetition  in 
abbreviated  form  of  1  Ki.  xii.  21-24.  Remainder  of  chapter  new  matter.  Rehoboam 
fortifies  many  towns  (vers.  6-12)  ;  receives  accessions  from  Israel  (vers.  13-17);  and  takes 
many  wives  and  concubines  (vers.  18-23). 

Vers.  1-4. — The  forbidden  war.  l^i^ /it  to  crush  the  rebellion.  Fourscore  thousand  ahont 
one-third  of  Judah's  number  under  Joab's  levy  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  9).  Shem.  (1  KL  xiL  22-24)  ; 
all  Israel  in  Judah  and  Benjamin  now  united  together. 

Vers.  5-12. — Defensive  measures.  Jerusalem,  a  judicious  step,  unlike  northern  kings,  who 
shifted  their  capital.  Built,  repaired  and  fortified;  fifteen  given.  Beth.,  Et.,  and  Tek. 
near  together,  a  little  south  of  Jericho,  on  way  to  Hebron.  Ver.  7.  Beth-zur,  a  strong 
position  about  five  miles  north  of  Hebron,  on  route  between  that  place  and  Jerusalem. 
It  played  »n  important  part  in  the  wars  of  the  Maccabees  (I  Mac.  iv.  29-61 ;  vi.  7-26,  &c.) 
[Speak.  Com.'].  Shoca,  now  Sumeikeh,  threc-and-a-half  hours  south-west  of  Jerusalem. 
Adul  (Josh.  XV.  35).  Ver.  8.  Qath.  Exact  site  not  known.  Mares.  (Josh.  xv.  44).  Its 
importance  appears  in  the  invasion  of  Zerah  (ch.  xiv.  9) ;  and  from  1  Mac.  v.  66  ;  2  Mac. 
xii.  35.  Modern  name  Marash.  Ziph.  Two  of  this  name  in  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  24-55). 
This  famous  in  David's  history  (1  Sara,  xxiii.  14-24  ;  xxvi.  2-25).  Exact  site  appears  to 
be  the  modern  Til  Zif,  about  three  miles  south  of  Hebron  [^Speak.  Com.].  Yer.  9.  Ador., 
Adora  or  Dora,  now  Dura,  west  of  Hebron  (Josh.  xv.  24).  Lackish,  now  Um-Lakish. 
Azekah  (Josh.  x.  10).  Yer.  10.  Zor.  (1  Chr.  ii.  53),  now  Surah;  and  Aij.,  now  Yalo,  further 
north  than  other  cities  here  mentioned.  Both  in  territory  originally  assigned  to  Dan 
(Josh.  xix.  41, 42),  but  afterwards  absorbed  into  Judah  [Speak.  Com^.  Judah  and  Benjamin, 
now  the  designation  of  southern  kingdom  (c/.  vers.  12  and  23),  Yer.  11.  Oil,  odoriferous; 
wine,  sweet,  used  by  ancient  Jews  and  modern  Arabs ;  healthy  and  useful  in  hot  climates 
(c/.  Ps.  civ.  15). 

Vers.  13-17. — Accessions.  Left,  ejected  from  their  office  because  they  would  not 
minister  to  Jeroboam's  calves,  who  appointed  priests  not  Levitea.  Suburbs  {cf.  Num. 
XXXV.  1-8).  High  places,  i.e.,  Dan  and  Bethel  {cf.  1  Ki.  xii.  28-33) ;  a  kind  of  contemp- 
tuous description  as  not  equal  to  temple  at  Jerusalem,  only  on  a  level  with  those  in  other 
parts.  Yer.  15.  Devils,  a  term  sometimes  used  for  idols  in  general  (Lev.  xvii.  7) ;  here 
applied  distinctively  to  the  goat-deities,  which  were  probably  worshipped  chiefly  in  the 
northern  parts  of  the  kingdom,  where  the  heathen  Canaanites  still  abounded  [Jamieson]. 
Yer.  17.  Strengthened  by  numbers  and  moral  tone  of  excellent  subjects  ;  but  sad  change 
noted  in  king  next  chapter. 

Vers.  18-23.  Rehohoam's  wive»  and  children,  Jerimoth  not  given  among  legitimate  sons 
of  David,  hence  son  of  concubine.  Read  David  and  of  Abihail.  Mother  as  well  as 
father  of  Mah.  is  given.  Daughter  o/ JS. ,  probably  ♦♦grand-daughter,"  since  an  actual 
daughter  of  E.  must  have  been  too  old  to  be  a  fit  wife  for  Rehoboam.  Yer.  20.  Daughter, 
grand-daughter  of  Abs.  (cf.  ch.  xiiL  2).  Yer.  21.  Threescore  (cf.  Cant.  vi.  8  and  2  Chr. 
xiii.  21).  Yer.  22.  Chief,  though  not  eldest  of  his  sons.  Affection  for  M.  led  him  to 
violate  the  law.  Wisely,  prudently  with  calculation  (Ex.  i.  10).  Many  wives.  Rehoboam 
careful  to  please  his  sons  by  making  them  governors  of  fortresses,  and  ♦♦  sought  for  them  a 
multitude  of  wives"  (marg.) ;  perhaps  from  cities  over  which  they  were  set.  In  Persia  and 
Turkey,  younger  princes,  until  lately,  were  shut  up  in  the  harem  during  their  father's 
lifetime  ;  and  to  prevent  competition,  were  blinded  or  killed  when  their  brother  ascended 
the  throne.  In  former  country  the  old  practice  of  dispersion  through  the  country,  like 
Rehoboam,  has  been  again  revived  [Jamieson}, 

H0MILETIC8. 

The  Restraints  op  Divine  Peoyidbnob. — Verses  1-4. 

Events  concerning  kingdom  of  Judah  chiefly  given  after  revolt  of  ten 
tribes.  Rehoboam  determined  to  enter  disaffected  provinces ;  but  divine  decroe 
gone  forth,  the  army  overawed,  dispersed,  and  the  king  obliged  to  submit. 

199 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CltUONlCLES,  [chap.  ti. 


I.  "Restraints  unmistakably  clear.  "The  word  came  to  Shem.,'*  and  was 
spoken  "  unto  Rehoboam."  Prophets  gave  no  uncertain  sound  in  either  kingdom. 
Divine  interposition  most  clear.  No  visions,  no  voices  now ;  but  around  and  in 
us  as  we  fight  in  life,  a  power  above  the  wiles  and  schemes  of  men,  secret,  in- 
visible influences,  deep  impressions,  and  mysterious  thoughts,  amounting  almost 
to  divine  revelations,  to  check  or  prompt.  *'Thou  shalt  not  go  up."  II, 
Restraints  merciful  in  design.  "Nor  fight  against  your  brethren." 
Nations  and  tribes  bound  by  natural  ties ;  man-hinned  (mankind)  should  help 
each  other.  "  Quarrel  with  your  faults  and  not  with  our  fellow-men,"  was  the 
motto  of  Otho  II.,  Emperor  of  Germany.  "Man's  inhumanity  to  man"  is  great. 
If  Alexanders,  Caesars,  and  Napoleons  were  not  restrained,  the  world  would 
become  a  pandemonium.  God  careful  of  human  life  and  human  weal,  prevents 
disgrace,  mischief,  and  bloodshed.  Men  seek  to  destroy  peace,  injure  reputation 
and  property.  "  Revenge  is  wild  justice,"  says  Bacon.  "  Say  not  thou  I  will 
recompense  evil ;  but  wait  on  the  Lord  and  he  shall  save  thee."  Ill, 
Restraints  timely  made.  God  times  events  and  interpositions ;  permits 
much  show  and  great  progress,  as  in  Jeroboam's  preparations.  Why  restrained 
when  army  assembled,  everything  ready  and  about  to  march  with  every  pros- 
pect of  success?  Has  God  been  consulted?  Education,  preparations,  and 
enterprises  of  no  avail,  if  not  for  him.  A  thousand  forces  may  be  enlisted, 
simply  to  be  sent  home  again  !  We  may  form  our  programme,  set  an  object  in 
view,  adapt  our  means  and  arrange  time  to  attain  it.  Just  when  attainment 
near,  lo  !  deprivation,  disappointment.  "  A  man's  heart  deviseth  his  way  :  but 
the  Lord  directeth  his  steps."  IV.  Restraints  implicitly  heeded. 
The  prophet  represented  God.  The  event  could  not  be  changed.  "  They 
hearkened,"  disbanded,  and  went  home.  Another  power  beside  Judah  and 
Israel  must  be  recognised.  Folly  to  resist,  to  fight  against  God  1  Motives, 
arguments,  to  acquiesce  in  arrangements  of  Providence  are  unanswerable.  "  Let 
the  potsherd  strive  with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth,"  but  "  woe  unto  him  that 
striveth  with  his  Maker." 

Defensive  Measures. — Verses  5-12. 

Rehoboam  forbidden  to  aggress,  undertakes  to  defend  the  frontiers  of  his 
kingdom.  "  He  huUt  cities  for  defence."  The  verb  denotes  fortification  of 
cities  ;  "  partly,"  says  Hengstenberg,  "  because  in  the  case  of  a  city  already  in 
existence,  the  building  must  necessarily  have  been  restricted  to  the  fortification 
of  it,  and  partly  because  the  term  city,  in  its  fullest  extent,  involves  the  idea  of 
fortification."    I.  He  protected  against  great  dangers.    \,  From  the 

attack  of  Israel.  Disruption  of  tribal  unity  brought  danger  and  enemies  within. 
Israel  restless  and  allied  with  Egypt.  2.  From  Egyptian  bondage.  From  this 
quarter  greatest  danger.  Out  of  fifteen  cities  all  but  three,  on  southern  or 
western  frontier.  **  And  now,  for  the  first  time  since  the  Exodus,  Judah  was 
once  more  threatened  with  an  Egyptian  bondage "  [^Stanley].  II.  He  dis- 
played great  wisdom.  1.  In  retaining  the  capital.  "  Rehoboam  dwelt  in 
Jerusalem"  (ver.  5).  Unlike  kings  of  Israel,  who  shifted  their  capital  from 
place  to  place  for  convenience  and  policy,  he  perceived  importance  of  retaining 
hold  on  the  city  of  David.  This  central  fortress  surrounded  by  a  chain  of 
fortresses,  in  part  to  carry  out  the  designs  of  his  father,  in  part  to  increase  his 
strength.  2.  In  fortifying  the  kingdom.  Reduced  by  secession,  he  sought  to 
keep  what  he  possessed.  He  rebuilt,  garrisoned,  and  provided  with  arms  and 
stores  to  stand  a  siege.  If  we  cannot  attack,  we  can  perhaps  build  ;  if  not 
recover  lost  privileges,  we  may  defend  what  we  have.  "  That  good  thing  (goodly 
deposit)  which  was  committed  unto  thee,  keep  (guards  of.  1  Tim.  vi.  20)  by  the 
200 


CHAP.  XI.]  TTOMUjKTIC  COMMENTARY:  GRRONICLES, 


Holy  Ghost,  which  dwelleth  in  us"  (2  Tim.  i.  14).  III.  He  illustrated 
great  principles.  Under  these  measures  are  hidden  powerful  principles  in 
human  Hfe.  1.  The 'power  of  conscience.  Accused  of  doing  wrong,  he  now  fears 
further  mischief.  A  guilty  conscience  gives  timidity,  creates  a  panic,  and 
expects  retaliation  when  "  no  man  pursueth."  *'  Suspicion  always  haunts  the 
guilty  mind."  2.  The  tendency  to  aggressive  war.  Jeroboam  took  similar  pre- 
cautions to  Rehoboam  (1  Ki.  xii.  25).  Kings  ambitious  and  plunge  into  war. 
**  He  that  is  of  a  proud  heart  stirreth  up  strife."  Who  can  teU  the  strifes  and 
wars  thus  created  ? 

••  Towns  turned  to  ashes,  fanes  involved  in  fire',! 
These  deeds  the  guilt  of  rash  ambition  tell." 

2.  Lack  oj  faith  in  God.  This  leads  to  self-sufficiency,  mischievous  eirterprises 
and  failure.  In  personal  salvation  and  national  deliverances,  weak  is  an  arm  of 
flesh.  ''Some  remember  (trust,  glory  in  remembrance  of)  chariots,  and  some 
remember  horses,  but  we  will  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  omr  God " 
(Ps.  XX.  7). 

Conscientious  Scruples. — Verses  13-17, 

Jeroboam,  afraid  of  reunion  of  the  tribes,  took  measures  to  make  separation 
final.     He  introduced  calf-worship  in  Bethel  and  Dan,  two  distinct  places  at 
opposite  ends  of  his  kingdom.      He  selected  priests  from  the  lowest   of  the 
people,  thus  weakened  his  kingdom  and  caused  many  worthy  men  to  migrate  to 
Judah,  who,  faithfully  attached  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  could  not  conscien- 
tiously bow  to  idols.     I.  In  refusing  to  worship  idols.     They  remem- 
bered the  injunction,  "Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  worship 
them."     Daniel's  companions  were  steadfast.     II.  In  braving  the  results 
of  their  conduct.     The  wrath  of  the  king,  and  the  ridicule  of  the  tribes ; 
ejection  from  their  office,  persecution  and  exile.     "  The  emperor  commands  thee 
to  do  sacrifice,"  said  the  Proconsul  to  Cyprian ;   "  therefore  consult  for   thy 
welfare."     *'  I  am  a  Christian,"  was  the  heroic  reply;  "and  I  cannot  sacrifice  to 
your  gods  ;  do,  therefore,  what  you  are  commanded  ;  as  for  me,  in  so  just  a 
cause  there  needs  no  consultation."     III.  In  seeking  tO  worship  God 
according  to  conscience.     They  desired  a  purer  worship  and  sought  a 
more  convenient  place ;  left  their  suburbs  and  their  possessions,  and  came  to 
Judah  and  Jerusalem.    (Pilgrim  Fathers.)     In  the  conduct  of  these  priests  and 
people  we  have — 1.  A   conscience  to  acknowledge.      Some  in  authority  do  not 
recognise  it.     Conscience  the   vicegerent   of   G-od,   omnipotent,   can  never    be 
crushed.     Kings  may  control  movements  of  body,  but  never  alter  convictions  of 
soul.     Neither  fraud  nor  force  can  make  good  men  disobey  behests. of  conscience. 
2.  A  precedent  to  follow.     Men  may  urge  customs  of  the  people  and  fashions  of 
the  nation ;  expediency  and  personal  obligations  to  superiors ;  the  dangers   of 
singularity  and  terrible  penalty  of  our  choice,  but  we  must  be  faithful :  "  Dare 
to  do  right."     "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men." 

The  Strength  and  Attraction  op  a  Kingdom. — Verses  3  and  13-17# 

I.  In  the  unity  of  its  subjects.  By  blood  Benjamin  more  closely 
related  to  Ephraim  than  Judah.  All  traditions  of  Benjamin  antagonistic  to 
Judah.  Now  estrangement  and  feud  ceased.  Religious  and  political  capital  estab- 
lished on  border  line.  Two  tribes  unite,  and  prepare  for  defence.  Danger 
unites  all  ranks  together.  (Elizabeth  and  Spanish  Armada.)  II.  In  the  purity 
of  its  worship.  Benjamin  attached  to  temple  worship.  Priests  and  Levites 
migrated  in  large  numbers  to  the   southern   kingdom   for  purer  worship  and 

201 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xt 


safety.  Recognition  of  God  greater  security  than  armies  and  fleets ;  moral 
vigour  more  attractive  than  extensive  trade.  III.  In  the  righteousness 
of  its  rule.  Wise  to  strengthen  cities  and  defend  forts;  better  to  consolidate 
the  throne  in  rectitude.  Numbers  give  physical  strength,  but  just  concessions 
and  righteous  laws  support  and  safeguard  the  nation.  Jeroboam's  kingdom 
weakened,  Rehoboam's  strengthened. 

The  Family  and  Domestic  Policy  op  Rehoboam. — Verses  18-23, 

Danger  past,  indulgence  began.  The  domestic  policy  of  Rehoboam  might  be 
worldly  wise,  but  it  was  sinful.  I.  The  family  was  founded  in  dis- 
obedience to  God.  The  royal  harem  inferior  to  his  father's,  equally 
in  violation  of  the  law.  1,  In  multiply  iiig  wives,  {a)  For  himself;  (b)  For  his 
sons.  Wives  not  strangers,  but  daughters  of  Israel,  and  of  family  of  David,  yet 
forbidden.  "  Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself."  2.  In  choice  of  a 
favourite  son.  He  set  aside  eldest  son,  preferred  Abijah  in  fondness  for  his 
mother.  Solomon  had  divine  warrant,  but  in  destining  youngest  for  kingdom 
the  king  violated  the  law  (Deut.  xxi.  15,  16).  "They  have  set  up  kings,  but 
not  by  me ;  they  have  made  princes,  and  I  knew  it  not."  II,  The  family 
was  governed  by  worldly  policy.  "He  dealt  wisely" — i.e.,  with 
deep  and  calculating  policy  (Ex.  i.  10).  "Rehoboam's  wisdom  was  shown — 
1.  In  dispersing  his  other  sons  instead  of  allowing  them  to  remain  together  in 
Jerusalem,  where  they  might  have  joined  in  a  plot  against  Abijah,  as  Adonijah 
and  his  brothers  did  against  Solomon  (1  Ki.  i.  5-10).  2.  In  giving  his  sons 
positions  which  might  well  content  them,  and  prevent  them  from  being  jealous 
of  Abijah"  [Speak.  Com.],  Rivalry  prevented,  public  peace  and  safety  secured, 
not  by  worldly  sagacity  and  bestowment  of  patronage.  Trust  in  God  and  loyalty 
to  his  commands  the  best  policy. 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.    13-16,     The    duty    of    Pro-  into  it.     3.  The  search  steadfast.    The 

testants.     This    will    lead    me    to   set  heart  fixed,  determined,  purposed.    No 

before  you — I.     The  conduct  of  Pro-  hesitancy,  wandering,  and  half-heart- 

testants  in  that  day.     1.    In  it  they  edness.     "  Qui  tradiderunt  cor  suum, 

bore   testimony   against   the    reigning  who  delivered  up  their  hearts  to  seek 

abominations;      2.     They     steadfastly  the  Lord;  to  run  any  hazard  rather 

adhered  to  the  service  of  their  God  ;  than  violate    conscience.     Such    were 

3.  They  renounced   all  for  conscience  the   EngHsh   exiles   in   Queen  Mary's 

sake.     II.  Our  duty  as  Protestants  at  days,    from    whom    Stephen  Gardiner 

the  present  day.     1.  We  should  realise  vowed  so  to  stop  sending  of  all  supplies 

our  own   religious  principles ;    2.  We  that  for  very  hunger  they  should  eat 

should  show  their  superior  efficacy  to  their  own  nails,  and  then  feed  on  their 

sanctify  the  heart  and  life.     Address  fingers'    ends ;    but   *  threatened    folk 

those  (1)  Who  are  conforming  to  this  live  long,'   and  before  these  banished 

world  ;   and  (2)   Those  who  are   like  men  were  brought  to  that  bill  of  fare, 

the    Israelites,    setting    their    hearts  the  Bishop  was  eaten  up  of  worms " 

fully   to    seek   the    Lord    their    God  \Trapp\ 

\G.  Simeori\,  These  verses  describe  the  condition 

Ver.    16.     1.     God    the    object    of  of  the  northern  kingdom  in  Jeroboam's 

search.     The  sublimest  and  most  need-  time.     1.    Disgraced   by  calf-worship. 

ful  in  creation.     The  foundation  of  all  2.  Lacking  the  principal  thing.     Seats 

religion  and  strength.     2.  The  search  of  worship,  no  true  sanctuaries,  for  the 

sincere.     Heart,  all  the  heart  thrown  ark,   the    symbol    of    God's    presence 
202 


CHAP.  XI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


wanting.  Not "  the  house  of  God,"  but  disturbed  (ch.  xii.  28).  High  places, 
**a  house  of  high  places."  3.  Weakened  monumental  stones  and  idols,  dis- 
hy emigration.  Innovations  drove  the  figured  the  land.  Apostasy  more 
best  from  the  country.  The  king  grievous  than  before.  The  first  three 
went  from  bad  to  worse.  years  walked  in  the  way  of  David  ;  in 
Ver.  17.  Three  years y  d^c.  Temporary  the  fourth  year,  decline  which  neutral- 
Religion,  This  a  brief  description  of  ised  all  advantages  of  immigration,  and 
the  spirit  of  his  reign.  I.  Period  of  in  the  fifth  year  punishment  by  inva- 
profession.  By  apostasy  of  ten  tribes,  sion  and  success  of  Shishak  (xii.  2). 
and  the  belief  that  the  thing  proceeded  Such  the  course  of  Hfe  1 
from  God  as  a  punishment  for  Solo-  Vers.  18-22.  A  Family  Record.  In 
mon's  idolatry,  the  king  brought  to  which  we  find  —1.  Kindred  mixed 
reflection  and  obedience.  This  only  together.  All  three  wives  of  David's 
temporary.  When  kingdom  suffi-  family,  and  his  own  kindred.  2.  Par- 
ciently  fortified,  and  he  thought  him-  tiality  displayed.  "  Rehoboam  loved 
self  secure,  he  forsook  the  law  of  Maachah "  (ver.  22)  for  beauty  or  con- 
Jehovah,  and  all  Israel  with  him  (ch.  formity  to  his  wickc  I  practices, 
xii.  1).  Many  fall  away,  some  before,  3.  Numbers  in  abundance.  "  Eighteen 
and  others  after  three  years  of  pro-  wives  and  threescore  concubines,  and 
fession.  "  Ye  did  run  well,  who  did  begat  twenty  -  and  -  eight  sons  and 
hinder?"  II.  The  period  of  threescore  daughters."  The  family  a 
apostasy.  In  prosperity  or  security,  divine  institution,  should  be  the  best 
When  no  dangers  nigh.  In  heart  un-  of  kingdoms  and  a  type  of  heaven. 
faithful,  though  external  worship  un- 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XI. 

Vers.  1-5.     Ye  shall  not  go.     Little  Vers.  14-16.     Left,  (ko.     The   good 

can  we  at  the  beginning  of  an  action  men    in    a    kingdom    counteract   the 

guess  at  God's  intention  at  the  conclu-  tendency  to    anarchy  and  disruption, 

sion  [Bishop  Hall],     It  is  one  of  the  "Righteousness    exalteth    a   nation." 

greatest  praises  of  God's  wisdom  that  The  guarantee  of    a  nation's  progress 

he  can  turn  the  evil  of  men  to  his  own  and  stability  is  to  be  found,  not  in  the 

glory  [Ibid.],  invincibility  of  its  armies,  not  in  the 

Vers.    13-15.       Worship     cast     off,  vastness  of  its  commerce,  not  in  the 

Whatever  is  morally  wrong  cannot  be  genius,  the  learning,  or  the  wealth  of 

politically  right    [Burke],     We   never  its  citizens,  but  in  the  sound  morality 

do  evil  so  thoroughly  and  cordially  as  and  religious  sentiment  of  the  people 

when  we    are    led   to   it  by   a    false  [Dr,  Thoma8\, 
principle  of  conscience  [^Pascal], 

*'  Not  thon,  O  Lord,  from  us,  but  w« 
Withdraw  ourselyes  from  thee  " 

IFreneK]^ 


303 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLBS.  [chap.  xii. 


CHAPTER  Xn. 


Critioal  Notes.]  This  chapter  parallel  with  1  Ki.  xiv.  21-31,  but  considerably  enlarges 
the  narrative  contained  in  that  passage.  The  account  of  Shishak's  chariots  and  horse- 
men, the  composition  of  his  army,  the  warning  and  the  promise  of  Shemaiah  are  wholly 
new  features  [Speak.  Com.']. 

Vers.  1-12. — The  invasion  of  Shishak.  Forsook,  details  in  Kings.  All  Is.,  i.e.,  all  Judah 
and  Benjamin — all  Israelites  of  these  tribes.  Shishak  (Shishonk),  first  king  of  22nd  or 
Bubastic  dynasty,  which,  after  the  fall  of  Thebes  from  proud  position  of  capital,  990  B.C., 
Bucceeded  to  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole  country  [.Tam.] .  Came  to  resent  provocation 
or  carry  out  ambitious  design,  with  great  number  of  foreign  auxiliaries.  Ver.  3.  Lubim, 
Libyans  west  of  Egypt  (c/.  ch.  xvi.  8  ;  Neh.  iii.  9).  Suk.,  called  Troglodytes^  cave-dwellers, 
by  Sept.  Some  think  they  are  Semitic  Arabs,  dwellers  in  tents.  Ethiop.,  Heb.  Cushim, 
from  south  of  Egypt.  Ver.  4.  Fenced  (ch.  xi.  5-12),  fortified  with  so  much  trouble. 
Shem.  (ch.  xi.  2).  The  message  not  in  Kings  ;  addressed  to  Rehoboam  and  princes  while 
Shishak  before  Jerusalem.  Yer.  6.  Humbled,  bowed  themselves  (chs.  vii.  14 ;  xiii.  18 ;  xxxii. 
26).  Jehovah  is  just  (Ezra  ix.  15;  Neh.  ix.  33).  Ver.  7.  Some  deliverance,  i.e.,  deliyer&nce 
in  a  little  or  short  time  [cf.  Ezra  ix.  8) ;  respite  from  total  destruction,  yet  tributary  to 
Egypt.  Ver.  8.  Know  the  difference  between  God's  rule  and  foreign  yoke.  Vers.  9-11. 
Came  up,  (&c.,  resumes  description  of  attack  upon  Jerusalem.  Took  everything  valuable. 
Shields  borne  like  maces  by  owners  or  guard  of  the  palace  when  they  attended  the  King 
in  public  procession.  Ver.  12.  Instead  of  destruction,  lit.,  t/iese  were  good  words;  signs 
of  national  repentance  and  amendment ;  good  things,  purposes,  and  practices  to  which 
God  had  regard.  "  Ver.  12.  Concludes  the  narrative,  is  additional  to  Kings  and 
characteristic.  It  aptly  terminates  the  writer's  history  of  the  invasion,  which  he  has 
presented  to  us  throughout  in  a  strictly  moral  and  didactic  aspect  "  [Speak.  Com.']. 

Vers.  13-16. — Rehoboam's  reign  and  death.  Strengthened,  new  life  and  vigour  after  in- 
vasion ;  revival  of  religion  and  long  reign.  Years,  on  age  of  Rehoboam  {cf.  1  Ki.  xii.  8 ; 
xiv.  21).  Naamah,  probably  a  daughter  of  Nahash  (1  Chr.  xix.  1).  Evil,  through  unhappy 
influence  of  his  mother,  a  heathen  foreigner,  he  received  a  bias  towards  idolatry.  Pre- 
pared not,  fixed  not ;  lacked  earnestness  and  consistency.  5oo^,  refers  to  authorities  of 
the  reign  of  which  he  gives  account.  WarSy  not  open  war,  but  incursions  and  skirmishes 
on  borders  for  plunder. 

HOMILETICS. 

National  Idolatry  and  National  Punishment. — Verses  1-3  and  9-12. 

Rehoboam  did  not  check  introduction  of  heathen  abominations.  The  lascivious 
worship  of  Ashtoreth  allowed  to  exist  by  side  of  true  religion.  "  Images  "  of 
Baal  and  fellow- divinities  set  up,  and  the  worst  corruptions  tolerated.  For 
fuller  account  see  1  Ki.  xiv.  22-24.  These  evils  punished  and  put  down  by 
terrible  calamity  of  Egyptian  invasion.  I.  The  national  sins.  "They 
had  transgressed  against  the  Lord."  1.  In  provoking  hini  to  jealousy.  God 
announced  Himself  to  be  "a  jealous  God  "  (Ex.  xx.  5) ;  a  God  "  whose  name 
is  jealous."  A  figure  of  marriage,  in  which  God,  like  a  husband  of  his  people,  is 
provoked  to  jealousy  by  the  unfaithfulness  of  his  wife.  A  strong,  suggestive 
term.  2.  In  public  worship  of  idols.  Altars  and  high  places  built,  woods  planted, 
gods  and  graven  images  publicly  patronised  in  utter  disobedience  to  God's  com- 
mand. 3.  In  rapid  spread  of  immorality.  "  There  were  also  Sodomites  in  the 
land.'*  They  did  accoiding  to  all  the  abominations  of  the  nations,  &c.  (1  Ki. 
xiv.  24).  Paramours  consecrated  to  the  gods,  a  degraded  class  who  pi-actised 
immorality,  traded  in  wickedness  under  the  sanction  of  religion.  Judah's 
204 


CHAP.  XII.]  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


abominations  worse  than  former  days.  The  splendour  of  the  temple  and  the 
pomp  of  the  priesthood  ;  secular  privileges  and  religious  teachers  restrained  not. 
Their  sins  were  grievous  and  universal ;  sins  *'  above  all  that  their  fathers  had 
done."  II.  The  national  punishment.  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,  in- 
cited by  Jeroboam,  or  ambitious  of  conquest,  invaded  the  land  and  humbled  the 
nation  in  a  successful  camp&,ign.  1.  The  capital  was  disgraced.  Jerusalem 
entered  and  pillaged  by  a  heathen  army  1  A  national  disgrace  for  a  city  to  be 
broken  down,  without  walls  or  defence  (Prov.  xxv.  28  ;  Neh.  ii.  17).  2.  Th^. 
cities  were  taken.  Places  on  which  he  spent  such  time  and  treasure  to  repair  and 
defend.  Great  Canaanite  towns  and  Levitical  cities  east  and  west  of  Jordan  fel] 
without  a  struggle.  High  towers  and  fortified  places  no  defence  against  wicked- 
ness. "  A  man  shall  not  be  established  by  wickedness."  3.  The  treasures  carried 
away.  The  palace  and  the  temple  robbed.  The  shields  of  gold  and  everything 
valuable  taken  away.  Deep  humiliation,  grievous  bondage  the  price  of  igno- 
minious peace  and  the  retribution  of  a  watchful  providence  I  **  I  also  left  you 
in  the  hand  of  Shishak." 

The  Beleagured  Court. — Verses  6-^. 

While  Shishak  was  before  the  city,  Rehoboam  and  the  princes  were  delibera- 
ting in  solemn  assembly.  Warned  of  sin  and  punishment,  and  spared  on  account 
of  repentance.  Notice — I,  The  sins  committed.  **  Ye  have  forsaken 
me."  This  the  gravamen  of  offence.  Though  possessing  the  temple  and  the 
priesthood,  yet  idolatry  mixed  with  worship  of  Jehovah.  Impure  rites  and  un- 
checked licence.  II.  The  danger  threatened.  1.  Forsaken  of  God. 
**  Therefore  have  I  also  left  you.".  Many  would  think  this  through  negligence 
in  preparations,  impolicy  in  government.  Bereft  of  strength  and  defence 
because  God  had  forsaken  them.  2.  Besieged  hy  Shishak,  *'  In  the  hand  of 
Shishak."  A  hand  strong  and  oppressive.  This  a  natural  result.  When  God 
forsakes,  we  are  unable  to  resist,  and  the  enemy  conquers.  III.  The  humilia- 
tion produced.  Calamity  traced  to  national  sins,  repentance  and  contrition 
followed.  When  rebuked  we  should  be  humbled,  justify  God,  and  judge  our- 
selves. "  Even  kings  and  princes  must  bend  or  brake  before  God,  either  be 
humbled  or  be  ruined."  IV.  The  deliverance  granted.  "  t  will  grant 
them  some  deliverance."  A  short  space  was  given  for  amendment,  wrath  was 
not  poured  out  like  a  flood  upon  the  city,  yet  suzerainty  of  Egypt  had  to  be 
accepted.  Punishment  delayed,  not  escaped.  Destruction  of  Jerusalem  reserved 
for  Nebuchadnezzar.     Escape  only  through  Christ  and  righteous  conduct. 

Shemaiah's  Preaching. — Verses  7-12. 
I.  It  was  divinely  taught  in  its  matter.    "  The  word  of  the  Lord 

came  to  Shemaiah."  Not  truth  from  second-hand  or  traditional  forms.  The 
message  not  argument  nor  speculation ;  but  simple,  entire  word  of  God.  **  The 
preaching  that  I  bid  thee  "  was  the  command  to  Jonah.  "  If  any  man  speak, 
let  him  speak  as  the  oracles  of  God."  II.  It  was  direct  in  its  aim.  A 
simple,  clear  utterance,  direct  as  an  arrow  to  its  end.  Preaching  toned  down, 
lacks  point,  goes  not  from  the  heart  to  the  heart.  The  end  missed  for  want 
of  vitality  and  definite  aim.  We  must  not  merely  arouse  emotion  to  find  vent 
in-  action ;  but  preach  to  save  sinners.  Chrysostom's  hearers  admired  and 
applauded ;  he  rebuked  and  desired  amendment  of  life.  "  Show  your  appro- 
bation by  obedience ;  that  is  the  only  praise  I  seek."  Massillon's  hearers  felt 
the  word  to  "  strike  and  stick."  Peter's  audience  *'  were  pricked  to  the  heart  " 
by  his  earnest  appeal.     III.    It   waS  practical   in   itS  results.     Very 

205 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xii 


great  and  encouraging ;  illustrating  the  power  of  the  Divine  word  faithfully 
preached.  1.  In  the  minds  of  the  people.  Why  not?  Are  there  not  laws  in  the 
moral,  like  chemical  affinities  in  the  natural  world ;  between  religious  truth  and 
the  deepest  feelings  of  the  human  heart  ?  Where  one  is  spoken,  why  should  not 
the  other  respond  ?  (a)  In  acknowledgment  of  guilt.  "  They  said.  The  Lord  is 
righteous."  (6)  In  contrition  of  spirit.  "  They  have  humbled  themselves."  2. 
In  the  procedure  of  God.  (a)  Divine  decree  revoked.  **  The  wrath  of  the  Lord 
turned  from  him,  that  he  would  not  destroy  altogether."  (6)  Certain  deliver- 
ance given.  "  I  will  grant  them  some  deliverance."  (c)  Measure  of  prosperity 
restored.  "Also  in  Judah  things  went  well"  (ver.  12).  With  results  like 
these  pulpit  power  will  never  decay.  The  revivals  of  Pentecost,  of  Whitfield 
and  Wesley,  may  be  accomplished  again  by  right  men.  "  Cry  aloud,  spare  not, 
lift  up  thy  voice  like  a  trumpet." 

Brass  for  Gold,  or  Counterfeit  Principles. — Verses  9-11, 

In  the  plunder  of  Egyptian  king  were  "  golden  shields,"  splendid  insignia  of 
Solomon.  Old  court  etiquette  kept  up  notwithstanding  its  loss,  on  public  and 
solemn  occasions.  Inferior  metal  replaced  the  gold.  This  typical  of  counterfeits 
in    personal    conduct.    Christian    worship,    and    Christian    organisations.     I, 

Worthless  profession  instead  of  real  piety  in  personal  life. 

Form  of  godHness  without  power.  Profession  "  sounding  brass  or  tinkling 
cymbal,"  hollow,  vain,  and  useless.  Professors  degenerate  in  character, 
influence,  and  solid  worth.  "  Thy  silver  is  become  dross."  Worse  even  than 
this,  for  baser  and  harder  metals  express  debased  and  degenerate  life.  "They 
are  brass  and  iron  "  (Jer.  vi.  28).    II.  Idolatrous  practices  instead  of 

pure  "worship  of  God.  Men  exchange  the  glory  of  God  for  idols  of  gold 
and  silver.  The  ritual  takes  the  place  of  the  spiritual.  God  is  forgotten,  and 
images  and  saints  are  adored ;  Mammon  and  the  world  worshipped.  "  They 
changed  the  glory  of  the  uncorruptible  God  into  an  image  like  to  corruptible 
man  "  (Rom.  i.  23) — (The  infinite,  spiritual,  and  divine  changed  into  something 
finite,  material,  and  human).  III.  False  representations  by  which 
institutions  hide  their  decline.  What  folly  for  Rehoboam  to  carry 
shields  of  brass  in  customary  procession  1  Vain  and  proud,  he  was  anxious  not 
to  appear  degraded  by  absence  of  gold  shields  1  In  churches  deadness  and 
divisions  cannot  be  hidden  by  noise,  numbers,  and  display.  In  kingdoms 
rottenness  and  decay  will  not  be  healed  by  bribery,  court  splendour,  and 
successful  war.  "  How  is  the  gold  become  dim  1  How  is  the  most  fine  gold 
changed  I  ** 

Rehoboam  the  Unready. — Verse  12. 

This  is  the  summing-up  of  Rehoboam's  life.  He  was  not  so  bad  as  some,  but 
did  evil  in  various  ways,  not  from  design  as  from  neglect.  Evil  effects  of  the 
father's  sin  and  mother's  idolatry  seen  in  their  son ;  yet  another  cause,  viz.,  a 
want  of  lieart.  He  was  not  thoroughly  consecrated  to  worship  of  Jehovah. 
I.  He  did  not  begin  life  with  seeking  the  Lord.  1.  He  was 
young,  should  have  sought  wisdom ;  but  went  to  Shechem  without  prayer  or 
sacrifice.  That  which  commences  without  God  will  end  in  failure.  2.  He 
leaned  on  counsellors,  saying,  "  What  advice  give  ye  ?  "  Of  those  counsellors,  he 
chose  worst,  younger  and  prouder  nobles.  Those  who  reject  divine  wisdom 
generally  refuse  all  other  wisdom.  3.  He  committed  great  folly  by  threatening 
the  people  and  refusing  just  demands ;  and  that  before  he  was  accepted  as  their 
Idng.  None  of  his  father's  wisdom.  How  can  they  act  prudently  and  prosper- 
ously who  are  not  guided  of  the  Lord?  II.  He  showed  UO  heart  in 
206 


CHAP.  XII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


seeking  the  Lord  afterwards.  1.  He  obeyed  the  voice  when  the  man 
of  God  forbade  him  to  fight  with  Israel;  yet  afterward  forsook  the  law 
(2  Chr.  xii.  1).  He  is  said  to  have  been  "young  and  tender-hearted,"  which 
means  soft  (2  Chr.  xiii.  7).  2.  He  winked  at  most  horrible  crimes  among  people 
whom  he  ought  to  have  judged  (1  Ki.  xiv.  24).  3.  He  fell  into  his  father's  sins. 
4.  He  busied  himself  more  for  the  world  than  for  God.  We  hear  nothing  of 
his  worship,  but  much  of  his  building ;  nothing  of  his  faith,  but  much  of  his 

fickleness  (2  Chr.  xi.  5-12).  III.  He  was  not  fixed  and  persevering 
in  seeking  the  Lord.  1.  For  three  years  loyalty  to  God  made  him 
prosper,  by  bringing  better  sort  from  calf  worship  into  Judah  (2  Chr.  xi.  13-17), 
yet  he  forsook  the  Lord  who  prospered  him.  2.  He  grew  proud;  and  God 
handed  him  over  to  Shishak.  3.  Humbled  himself,  was  pardoned,  yet  stripped 
the  Lord's  house  to  buy  off  King  of  Egypt.  4.  Wrought  no  great  reforms, 
celebrated  no  great  passover,  yet  owned  "the  Lord  is  righteous"  (ver.  6). 
IV.  He  had  no  care  to  seek  the  Lord  thoroughly.  Yet  no  man 
good  by  accident ;  no  one  goes  right  without  intention  to  do  so.  Without  heart 
religion  must  die.  1.  Human  nature  departs  from  the  right  way,  especially  in 
kings  tolerated  in  more  sin  than  others.  2.  Courtiers  usually  run  the  wrong 
way,  especially  young,  proud,  and  frivolous.  Rehoboam  lived  gay  and  proud, 
and  gave  himself  up  to  their  lead.  3.  Underlings  apt  to  follow  us  and  applaud 
if  we  go  in  an  evil  path,  even  as  Judah  followed  Rehoboam.  Thus  those  who 
should  lead  are  led. 

The  kind  of  preparation  required  in  diligent  and  acceptable  seeking  of  the 
Lord.  To  feel  and  confess  need  in  whole  of  Hfe.  Cry  unto  him  for  help  and 
wisdom.  Yield  to  his  guidance  and  not  follow  counsel  of  vain  persons.  Be 
anxious  to  be  right  in  everything,  searching  the  Scriptures  and  seeking  by  prayer 
to  know  what  to  do.  Serve  the  Lord  carefully  and  earnestly,  leaving  nothing 
to  chance,  fashion,  or  whim.  Are  there  any  professors  like  Rehoboam  ?  Any 
hopeful  young  men  who  lack  whole-hearted  devotion  to  the  Lord  ?  Any  older 
men  who  have  suffered  for  vacillation,  hesitation,  or  double-mindedness  ?  Any 
just  escaped  from  such  trouble,  but  are  not  firm  and  ready  even  now  ?  Oh,  for 
a  clear  sense  of  the  evil  and  folly  of  such  a  condition  1  Oh,  for  the  confirming 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  1     Oh,  for  vital  reunion  with  the  Lord  Jesus  [Spurgeon\, 

HOMILETIG    HINTS    AND    SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1.  Strong,  and  forsook  the  law.  Awful  results  of  abandonment  hy  God. 

No     danger,    no    watchfulness.     Pro-  Prevalent  corruption,  deeper  disgrace, 

sperity  leading  to  apostasy.  In  poverty  and  national  disaster, 
men  pray,  in  weakness  and  affliction  Ver.   7.    Humiliation  the    means  of 

attend  God's  house,  &c.    "Established"  deliverance.     From  the  message  which 

and     "  strengthened  "    leads    to    say,  was  sent  them  from  the  Lord  we  pro- 

*'  Depart  from  us."     "  The  prosperity  perly  observe— I.  That  sin  will  surely 

of   fools    destroys   them."     All   Israel  bring  the  judgment  of   God  upon  us. 

with  him.  1.  The  force  of  bad  example.  Nor  is  there  any  possibility  of  escape 

2.  The  readiness  of  men  to  follow  it.  but    by    repentance,    since    God    has 

3.  The  guilt  of  those  who  follow,  when  ordained— 11.  That  sin,  in  order  to 
they  should  reprove.  Example  con-  its  being  forgiven,  must  be  repented  of. 
tagious;  beneficially  or  perniciously  It  is,  however,  no  little  consolation 
men  influence  others ;  raise  them  up  to  know— III.  That  sin,  truly  repented 
or  bring  them  down.  "  Be  not  par-  of,  shall  assuredly  be  forgiven.  Appli- 
taker  of  other  men's  sins."  cation— 1.  Have  you  repented  ?  2.  Are 

Jer.  5.  Forsaken  me.     Conditions  of     you     pardoned?    [G.   Simeon,    M.A.]. 
enjoyment,     prosperity    and     success.      Wrath  of  God.     1.  Its  reality.     2.  Its 

^07 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


[CHAP.  XII. 


cause.  3.  Its  agencies.  4.  Its  sus- 
pense. In  the  midst  of  judgment  God 
remembers  mercy. 

Yer.  8.  Know,  The  discipline  of 
punishment,      or       great      contrasts. 

1.  Between  the  Theocracy,  or  rule  of 
God,  and  foreign  rule  or  *'  servants  " 
of  Shishak.  2.  Between  the  freedom 
of  Christ  and  the  bondage  of  sin. 
3.  Between  correction  of  providence 
and  left  alone  in  folly. 

Yer.  12.  Went  well.  1.  Many  good 
men  in  general  defection  in  whom  good 
things  were   found    (1    Ki.   xiv.    13). 

2.  Many  good  things,  in  prevalent  cor- 
ruption. Temple,  priesthood,  sacrifices 
and  ordinances.  A  few  may  be  "  the 
holy  seed,  the  substance  thereof,"  the 
preserving  principle.  Few  in  Sardis 
(Rev.  iii.  4). 

Yer.  14.  Prepared  not.  Learn — 
1.  That  serving  God  will  prevent  from 
evU.  2.  That  for  God's  service  the 
heart  should  be  prepared  and    fixed. 

3.  That  when  the  heart  is  not  fixed  or 
prepared  men  are  easily  drawn  away. 

4.  That  when  men  are  drawn  away  from 


God  into  evil,  consequences  are  fearful. 
Weakness  ensues,  corruptions  spread, 
temptations  increase,  enemies  prevail, 
and  ruin  inevitable  1 

*♦  And  he  that  will  be  cheated  to  the  last, 
Delusions   strong  as  hell  shall  bind  him 
fast." 

Yer.  15.  Booh  of  Shem.  Not  now 
extant,  though  God,  if  he  had  pleased, 
could  as  well  have  preserved  those 
books  for  the  use  of  the  church,  as  he 
did  the  holy  vessels  of  the  temple  from 
the  spoil  of  Shishak  [Trapp].  Provi- 
dence and  goodness  of  God  in  pre- 
serving and  handing  down  Scriptures 
to  our  times.  Why  not  lost,  like  many 
classic  authors,  amid  the  ruins  of  the 
barbarians  ?  From  the  whole  chapter 
we  see — 1.  Rehoboam  forsaking  the 
law.  2.  Rehoboam  punished  for  his 
defection.  3.  Rehoboam  spared  on 
repenting.  4.  Rehoboam  ruined  at 
last  for  want  of  decision  in  religion 
\Ing.  Cohbin]. 

"  But  evil  is  wrought  for  want  of  thought 
As  well  as  want  of  heart "  [Hood]. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XII. 


Yer.  1.  Forsook,  A  man  cannot 
have  been  three  years  wise  and  then 
have  returned  to  old  courses  without 
his  return  being  marked  by  aggrava- 
tions of  evil.  The  last  state  of  the  man 
is  worse  than  the  first.  *'  The  dog  is 
turned  to  his  own  vomit  again,  and  the 
sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing 
in  the  mire."  To  have  been  halfway  to 
heaven,  and  then  to  have  been  thrown 
down — what  agonies  of  recollection  I 
[Dr.  Parker]. 

Yers.  5-8.  Shemaiah  the  prophet. 
Ministers  of  the  gospel  should  be 
gentle,  tender,  and  affectionate.  They 
should  be  kind  in  feelinor  and  courteous 
m  manner,  like  a  father  or  mother. 
Nothing  is  ever  gained  by  a  sour,  harsh, 
crabbed,  dissatisfied  manner.  Sinners 
ft  re  never  scolded  either  into  duty  or 
into  heaven  [A.  Barnes.]  I  never  was 
fit  to  say  a  word  to  a  sinner  except 
when  I  had  a  broken  heart-  myself ; 
when  I  was  melted  into  penitency,  and 


felt  as  though    I    had   just   received 
pardon  to  my  soul,  when  my  heart  was 
full  of  tenderness  and  pity  [Payson], 
Yer.  6.  Humbled  themselves. 

'•  If  hearty  sorrow 
Be  a  sufficient  ransom  for  offence, 
I  tender  it  here  ;  I  do  as  truly  suffer 
As  e'er  I  did  commit "  [Shaks.'\. 

Yer.  8.  Servants.  It  is  not  in  man's 
nature  to  be  out  of  all  service,  and  to 
be  self-dependent.  We  may  choose 
our  master,  but  God  or  mammon  we 
must  serve.  We  cannot  possibly  be 
in  a  neutral  or  intermediate  state. 
Such  a  state  does  not  exist.  If  we  will 
not  be  Christ's  servants  we  are  forth- 
with Satan's,  and  Christ  set  us  free 
from  Satan  only  by  making  us  His 
servants  \J.  H.  Newman], 

Yer.  10.  Shields  of  brass, 

♦•  Thus  men  go  wrong  with  an  ingenious 
skill, 
Bend  the    straight   rule   to  their  owq 
orookod  will. 


cfiAP.  XIII.]  ffOMlL^TIC  COMyiESTAltY:  CltRONlCLEiS. 


And    with    a    clear   and    shining   lamp  comfortable  and  satisfactory.     That  ig 

supplied,              ,  ,    .,  ,            .,    „  not  a  proper  estimate  of    the    whole 

Fu'st  put  it  out,  then  take  it  for  a  guide  ,.   ^       mu*      .                    ^                   ^^ 

^                                     [Cowperl  question.     Things    can    only  go    well 

when  the  heart  goes  well.  When  things 

Yer.  12.  Tilings  went  well.    We  are  do  not  go  well  we  should  inquire  into 

called  upon    to    observe  the    relation  moral  reasons  ;  why  this  affliction,  why 

and  progress  of  events  and  to  inquire  this  loss,  why  this  discontent  ?     Out  of 

into  the  moral  reasons  which  explain  such  faithful  self -dealing  will  come  the 

either  their  ill-going  or    their    happy  humbleness,  the  penitence  which   are 

advancement.     We    often     speak     of  always  followed  by  pardon,  restoration, 

things   going   well    in   too   narrow   a  and  spiritual  harmony  [Dr.  Parker]. 

sense,  simply  meaning   that  property  Ver.   15.   Wars. 

increases,  that  health  is  continued,  and  «« Then   time    turns    torment  when    man 

that  the  whole  outward  environment  is  turns  a  fool "  \Young\, 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  parallel  to  1  Ki.  xv.  1-8.  Abijah  suoceeda  and  wars 
against  Jeroboam  (vers.  1-4) ;  declares  the  right  of  his  cause  (vers.  4-12)  ;  his  victory  and 
end  (vers.  13-22). 

Vers.  1-3. — The  opening  war  of  Abijah.  Abijah,  Abijam  in  Kings.  Ver.  2.  Michaiah, 
variation  of  Maachah  (xi.  10  ;  1  Ki.  xv.  3) ;  daughter  of  Uriel  and  Tamar,  daughter  ot 
Absalom.  Hence  called  daughter,  i.e.,  granddaughter  of  Absalom.  Ver.  3.  War.  Probably 
Jeroboam  sought  to  wrest  whole  country  from  Abijah.  Array,  i.e.,  took  the  field  and  began 
war.  "  The  numbers  are  doubtless  large,  considering  the  smallness  of  the  two  kingdoms. 
It  must  be  borne  in  mind,  however,  that  Oriental  armies  are  mere  mobs,  vast  numbers 
accompanying  the  camp  in  hope  of  plunder;  so  that  the  gross  numbers  described  as 
going  upon  the  Asiatic  expedition  are  often  far  from  denoting  the  exact  number  of  the 
fighting  men.  But  in  accounting  for  the  large  number  of  soldiers  enlisted  in  the  respec- 
tive armies  of  Abijah  and  Jeroboam,  there  is  no  need  of  resorting  to  this  mode  of  explana- 
tion ;  for  we  know,  by  the  census  of  David,  the  immense  amount  of  the  population  that 
was  capable  of  bearing  arms  (2  Chr.  xxi.  5  ;  cf.  ch.  xiv.  8  ;  xvii.  14)  [t/awieson]. 

Vers.  4-12. — Ahijah's  address  to  Jeroboam,  Ver.  4.  Zemaraim,  a  mount  not  identified, 
amid  the  great  range  of  Central  Palestine  ;  upon  borders  of  the  two  kingdoms.  Ver.  5. 
Gave.  Divine  right  claimed,  but  conditions  omitted  (Ps.  cxxxii.  12;  Ixxxix.  30-32).  Sultf 
i.e.,  a  covenant  inviolable,  irrevocable  (Lev.  ii.  13  ;  Num.  xviii.  19).  Salt  emblem  of  per- 
petuity. Ver.  6.  Rebelled.  Jeroboam  upbraided  as  a  usurper,  and  his  subjects  as  rebels. 
Ver.  7.  Vain  men,  i.e.,  "  low  fellows,"  "  persons  of  the  baser  sort "  {cf.  Judg.  ix.  4  ;  2  Sam. 
vi.  20).  Belial,  profitless  and  evil  (Deut.  xiii.  13).  Young,  i.e.,  new  to  his  work,  in- 
experienced. Tender-hearted,  wanting  in  resolution  and  spirit.  Ver.  8.  Religious  condi- 
tion of  two  kingdoms  now  contrasted.  Enemy  proud  of  a  great  multitude,  and  with  them 
golden  calves, -pvoota  of  apostasy.  Ver.  9.  Cast  out  (ch.  xi.  14).  Seven,  "a  bullock  and 
two  rams  "  the  offering  required  at  original  consecration  of  sons  of  Aaron  (Ex.  xxix.  1 ; 
Lev.  viii.  2).  It  appears  that  Jeroboam,  for  reasons  of  his  own,  enlarged  the  sacrifice 
and  required  it  at  the  consecration  of  every  priest  [Speak.  Com.^.  Ver.  10.  Judah  had 
pure  and  regular  observance  of  ordinances  of  Moses.  Not  forsaken.  God  with  them 
(only  in  a  certain  degree).  They  had  daily  sacrifice  with  all  its  accompaniments. 
Ver.  11.  God  himself  their  captain.  Priests  with  their  trumpets  brought  to  war  in 
remembrance  of  God's  command  (Num.  x.  9),  and  example  of  Moses  (Num.  xxxi.  6^. 
The  war,  therefore,  sacred  war. 

Vers.  13-20. — AbijaiCs  victory.  Ambush.  To  surprise  in  front  and  rear;  made  while 
Abijah  was  haranguing.  Ver.  14.  Cried.  A  panic  might  have  ensued  if  leaders  had  not 
looked  to  God  and  "  sounded  trumpets,"  which  was  a  pledge  of  victory  and  help  to  the 
men  (Num.  x.  9  ;  xxxi.  G).  Judah  responded,  and  the  rush  was  resistless.  Ver,  17.  Great 
slaughter.  Nothing  in  original  to  indicate  this  was  all  in  one  day.  The  writer  is  pro- 
bably compressing  into  a  few  words  the  circumstances  of  the  whole  war  [Speak.  Coau], 

209 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONlCLtiS.  [chap.  xiii. 


Ver.  18.  Under.  Humbled,  defeated,  not  made  tributary.  Ver.  19.  Bethel.  Frontier  town 
in  which  one  of  calves  placed.  Towns,  villages  or  suburbs.  Ver.  20.  Defeat  so  great  that 
Jeroboam  did  not  recover  in  Abijah'a  time.  He  died  in  second  year  of  Asa  (1  Ki.  xv  25). 
Struck.     Probably  the  message  of  the  prophet  Ahijah  (1  Ki.  xiv.  10 ;  xii.  15). 

Vers.  21,  22.— Ahijah' s  end.  Mighty.  "Took  courage,  grew  bold,"  after  security;  like 
"his  father  and  grandfather,  gave  himself  to  indulgence  and  multiplied  wives.  Ver.  22. 
Story,  commentary,  "the  midrash  or  memoir,  which  was  extant  in  the  time  of  the 
ohronist,  or  the  original  form  from  which  he  drew  his  information  "  [ilfwrp^y]. 

ffOMILETWS. 

Attempt  to  Reverse  Divine  Arrangements. — Verses  3-19. 

God  permitted  revolt  of  ten  tribes  and  Rehoboam  forbidden  to  regain  th  em 
(ch.  X.  15),  Frequent  skirmishes  between  kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  (ch.  xii. 
15).  Jeroboam  now  takes  advantage  of  Abijah's  youth,  and  judging  from  the 
speech,  claims  the  crown  and  invades  the  territory  of  Judah.  No  prophet  for- 
bade the  war,  Jeroboam  had  forfeited  all  claims  to  protection,  his  effort  in  vain, 
the  Divine  arrangements  could  not  be  upset.  I.  An  attempt  most  daring 
in  its  design.  '*  Now  ye  think  to  withstand  the  kingdom  of  the  Lord " 
(ver.  8).  A  kingdom  not  set  up  by  men,  but  established  and  perpetuated  by 
Divine  decree  in  the  house  of  David.  The  design  indicates  pride,  presumption, 
and  impiety.  Might  as  well  withstand,  resist  the  rolling  planet  or  the  rising 
tide.  *'  If  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of  men,  it  will  come  to  nought  (be  over- 
thrown) ;  but  if  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot  overthrow  it,  <fec."  (Acts  v.  39).  II. 
An  attempt  depending  upon  numbers  for  its  success.  "Ye 
be  a  great  multitude  "  (ver.  8).  "  There  is  no  king  saved  by  the  multitude  of 
an  host ;  a  mighty  man  is  not  delivered  by  much  strength."  "  Behold  the 
multitude  melted  away"  in  the  armies  of  Xerxes,  Sennacherib,  and  Napoleon, 
before  the  presence  and  purpose  of  God.  **  Associate  yourselves,  0  ye  people, 
and  ye  shall  be  broken  in  pieces."     III.  The  numbers  employed   in 

the  attempt  were  men  of  worthless  character.  The  best  soldiers, 
men  of  courage  and  character,  generally  selected  for  daring  enterprises  (Crom- 
well's Ironsides,  Havelock's  Saints).  But  the  army  of  Jeroboam  composed  of 
worthless  men.  1.  The  king  himself  stained  with  ungodly  actions,  Jeroboam 
an  idolater  and  innovator  in  past.  Now  found  rebelling  against  God  and  taking 
advantage  of  Abijah's  youth,  as  he  did  of  Rehoboam's  weakness  (ver.  8).  2. 
The  men  employed  were  a  mixed  mob.  (a)  "  Vain  men,"  loose  in  character  and 
useless  in  war  (Cataline's  comrades).  Plenty  such  now,  "  empty  fellows,"  ready 
to  join  any  cause,  follow  any  leader  who  pays  best.  "  I  have  not  sat  with  vain 
persons."  [b)  The  children  of  Belial,  wicked  men,  hating  all  control  and  setting 
up  any  that  would  carry  out  their  wishes.  Abimelech  hired  "vain  and  light 
persons,  which  followed  him  "  (Judges ix.  4).  IV.  Hence  the  utter  failure 
of  the  attempt.  **  God  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  Israel  before  Abijah  and 
Judah '*  (ver.  15).  "When  omnipotence  goes  forth  to  war,  what  can  be  the 
issue  of  the  battle  ?  When  God  takes  the  glittering  sword,  and  his  hand  lays 
heavy  in  judgment,  can  grasshoppers  stand  before  him  ? "  *'  There  is  no  wisdom, 
nor  understanding,  nor  counsel  against  the  Lord."  Julian  the  Apostate  could 
not  falsify  prediction.  The  word  was  uttered  and  the  secession  a  fact.  The 
powers  of  earth  and  hell  could  not  change  that.  **  For  he  spake  and  it  was 
done ;  he  commanded  and  it  stood  fast."  Hence  beware  "  lest  haply  ye  be 
found,"  in  daily  life  and  moral  conduct,  "  even  to  fight  against  God." 

A  Great  Speech. — Verses  4-13. 

Abijah  had  entered  the  enemies'  territory — stood  upon  eminence.     Jeroboam's 
army  at  foot  of  the  hill,  and  according  to  ancient  custom  Abijah  harangued, 
210 


cfiAP.  tiu.]  MOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


poured  out  invective  and  abuse  upon  the  enemy  and  extolled  his  own  merits. 
I.  Its  claims  concerning  Judah.  God  recognised  in  the  gift  of  the 
kingdom ;  in  the  worship  of  the  temple,  with  its  legal  priesthood  and  regular 
sacrifices  ;  in  the  warfare  of  hfe.  "  The  Lord  is  our  God  and  we  have  not  for- 
saken him."  He  claims  the  right  position  and  obeys  the  true  commands.  Con- 
ceptions of  God  afi'ect  doctrine  and  practice.  Custom,  law,  and  outward  restraints 
may  keep  right  in  some  things  ;  but  only  feeHng  of  dependence  upon  God,  sense 
of  responsibility  to  him  and  constant  acknowledgment  of  him,  will  give  security, 
strength,  and  dignity  to  inheritance.  II.  Its  accusations  against 
Israel.  Jeroboam  a  rebel  and  usurper,  and  must  be  put  down.  He  was 
leading  a  revolutionary  party,  "  sons  of  Belial."  He  had  not  the  beauty  and 
established  order  of  worship,  the  legal  priesthood ;  but  golden  calves,  illegal  and 
heathen  priests,  desecrated  altars,  and  a  hopeless  cause.  Abijah  no  usurper  nor 
idolater  !  Whatever  the  corruptions  of  his  kingdom,  it  was  better  than  Israel, 
(kc.  1  Thus  men  may  deny  the  power  of  religion  and  boast  of  its  form — view 
themselves  not  in  their  defects  and  infirmities,  but  in  their  good  quaUties  and 
virtues.  In  lofty  and  contemptuous  tones  recite  their  merits  and  condemn  their 
adversaries.  Trust  in  themselves  that  they  are  righteous  and  despise  others. 
III.  Its  passionate  appeal  to  the  people.  "  0  children  of  Israel, 
fight  ye  not  against  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers"  (ver.  12).  Religion  is 
appealed  to.  God  is  concerned ;  the  war  sacred  and  religious.  History  appealed  to. 
Abijah  in  historic  line,  they  were  cutting  themselves  ofi"  from  its  unity,  currents, 
and  privileges,  and  setting  the  God  of  their  fathers  at  nought.  Humanity 
appealed  to;  why  engage  in  a  fruitless  war?  *< For  ye  shall  not  prosper."  What 
folly,  base  ingratitude  to  fight  against  God  I 

A  Great  Battle. — Verses  13-20. 

Jeroboam  planning  while  Abijah  speaking.  Address  unheeded.  A  detach- 
ment sent  quietly  round  foot  of  the  hill.  Abijah  and  his  men  found  themselves 
surrounded.  Leaders  "  cried  unto  the  Lord,"  Judah  rallied,  responded  with  a 
war-shout,  which  preserved  from  panic  and  led  to  victory.  I.  Fought  with 
unequal  forces.  1.  Humcm  aid  on  one  side.  A  proud  king,  immense 
multitudes,  skill  and  generalship.  2.  God's  presence  on  the  other  side.  Presence 
in  temple,  on  field  of  battle,  and  with  symbols  of  victory  (Num.  x.  9  ;  xxxi.  6). 
No  wise  king  enters  upon  war  without  due  preparation  to  stand  his  ground, 
despite  formidable  odds.  "  What  king  going  to  make  war  against  another  king 
sitteth  not  down  first,  and  consulteth  whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to 
meet  him  that  cometh  against  him  with  twenty  thousand  ? "  Common  sense 
should  teach  us  not  to  begin  any  costly  work  without  materials  to  Jhuish  it ;  not 
to  undertake  what  we  have  neither  strength  nor  will  to  achieve,  nor  that  in 
which  we  are  not  prepared,  if  need  be,  to  sacrifice  life  itself.  II.  Fought 
for  an  impossible  end.  "For  the  cause  was  of  God"  (ch.  X.  15).  If 
the  decree  of  Darius  and  the  superscription  of  Pilate  could  not  be  altered,  neither 
could  the  established  fact,  the  fixed  arrangements  of  God.  All  opposition  abor- 
tive, can  never  set  aside  the  plans  and  processes  of  Divine  government,  and  will 
re-act  upon  the  rebel  himself.  The  Great  Maker  and  Kuler  of  the  universe  does 
not  act  by  necessity  nor  by  caprice,  but  by  intelligent  plan.  Man  may  change 
his  purpose,  because  defective  or  impracticable.  God  is  absolutely  perfect.  **  He 
is  in  one  mind,  and  who  oftn  turn  him  ?"  III.  Hence  Utter  failure  in 
the  attempt.  "The  children  of  Judah  prevailed"  (ver.  18).  Terrible 
slaughter,  towns  and  cities  captured.  *'  The  children  of  Israel  were  brought 
under  at  that  time,"  utterly  defeated  in  their  purpose.  "  Ambushment,"  strata- 
gems cannot  thwart  God.     "  Eight  hundred  thousand  chosen  men "  no  more 

211 


UOMXLETIC  COMMENTARY^  CBliONtCLBa.  [chip.  xitt. 


avail  than  one  thousand.  Folly  to  resist  God  and  harden  ourselves  in  sin,  by 
disobeying  his  commands,  by  rebelling  against  his  providential  dealings,  and 
by  refusing  the  offers  of  mercy.  **  He  is  wise  in  heart,  and  mighty  in  strength ; 
who  hath  hardened  himself  against  him  and  prospered?"  "Ye  shall  not 
prosper  "  (ver.  12). 

Religious  Observance  and  Practical  Apostasy. 

Abijah  here  at  his  best ;  eloquent  in  speech,  religious  in  appearance,  and 
victorious  in  conflict.  Read  account  in  Kings  to  form  a  true  estimate.  He 
walked  in  the  sins  of  Rehoboam,  and  his  heart  "  was  not  perfect  before  God." 
He  boasted  of  religious  observances,  yet  guilty  of  idolatry  and  its  attendant 
immoralities  (1  Ki.  xiv.  23,  24).  Learn — I.  The  folly  of  judging  men 
by  outward  forms  or  special  occasions.  Forms  may  be  assumed, 
put  on  like  clothes  for  the  occasion.  Circumstances  may  call  forth  the  best  of 
the  man.  Religious  for  the  occasion.  II.  Men  may  hide  their  sins 
under  the  garb  of  religious  practices.  Domestic  evils  and  personal 
inconsistency  hidden  by  outward  worship,  liberal  giving,  &c.  The  dark  side 
eovered  with  the  bright  side,  truth  defended  and  its  claims  resisted.  III. 
Men  may  reproach  others  for  sins  of  which  they  are  guilty 
themselves.  Abijah  blamed  Jeroboam  for  casting  off  God,  when  he  was  not 
right  with  God  himself.  His  own  character  not  better  than  that  of  his  enemy. 
The  Jews  condemned  the  Gentiles  for  doing  the  same  things  which  they  virtually 
did  themselves.  Greville,  in  his  memoirs,  exhibits  the  very  faults,  critics  say, 
which  he  freely  condemns  in  kings,  queens,  and  nobles.  "  Thou  art  inexcusable, 
O  man,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  judgest:  for  wherein  (the  matter  in  which) 
thou  judgest  another,  thou  condemnest  thyself;  for  thou  that  judgest  doest 
(substantially)  the  same  things"  (Rom.  ii,  1). 

••  Be  not  too  rigidly  censorious : 
A  string  may  jar  in  the  best  master's  hand. 
And  the  most  skilful  archer  miss  his  aim  "  \B.oicomm(yiC^ 

Abtjah's  Religion. 

1.  Defective  in  its  source.  Springing  from  a  divided  heart.  "  His  heart  was 
not  perfect"  and  "he  walked  in  the  sins  of  his  father."  2.  Occasional  in  its 
appearance.  Called  into  vigour  by  special  exigency,  fitful  in  operation,  a  religion 
for  special  seasons.  Much  loud  and  spurious  religion  now  ;  demonstrative  on 
extraordinary  occasions,  at  ordinary  times  lukewarm  and  languid.  In  times  of 
war  many  awake,  pub  on  armour  ;  in  time  of  quietness  at  home  and  early  life 
they  are  found  in  enemy's  camp.  3.  Prominent  in  its  display.  Great  in  reform, 
eloquent  in  speech,  prominent  in  actions.  Circumstances  brought  him  to  the 
front.  But  only  a  religion  of  place  and  occasional  service.  4.  Uncertain  in  its 
duration.  David  before  the  giant,  Judas  Maccabseus  before  the  host  of 
Epiphanes  could  not  have,  been  more  prominent  and  more  ready,  but  piety  no 
vital,  lasting  hold  upon  him.  A  heart  weakened  and  dissipated  by  double 
allegiance,  became  alienated ;  service  a  vicious  compromise ;  religion  a  mere 
episode,  an  interlude  in  a  life  of  flagrant  idolatry  i 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.    5.    Covenant    of  salt.     1.     A  and   mutual    attachment,"    friendship 

bond   of  intimate  friendship.     "To  eat  inviolable,  incorruptible.     2.    A  pledge 

salt  together  an  act  of  sure  friendship  of  perpetuity.     Salt    consolidates    and 
212 


cnAt.  tan.] 


BOMTLETiC  COMMENTARY:  CrtR()NtCLE3. 


preserves.  The  "  lamp  "  or  "  torch  "  of 
David  was  always  to  burn  (1  Ki.  ii.  36 ; 
2  Ki.  viii.  19).  Often  on  verge  of 
extinction  through  sins  within  and 
darkness  without,  but  house  of  David 
never  perished.  "  It  is  the  struggle 
between  these  contending  elements  to 
which,  after  the  shock  of  the  disrup- 
tion, the  kingdom  and  church  of  Judah 
was  exposed,  that  gives  the  main 
interest  to  the  period  of  the  seven 
first  successors  of  Solomon.  Both 
kingdom  and  church  were  menaced 
with  destruction  at  its  commencement. 
At  its  close  both  were  established  on  a 
basis  sufficiently  solid  to  withstand  the 
dangers  of  the  later  period  for  two  more 
centuries"  [Stanley]. 

Vers.  6-12.  AhijaNs  remonstrance 
with  Jeroboam.  I.  We  shall  consider 
the  words  of  our  text — 1.  In  reference 
to  the  contest  then  pending  between 
Judah  and  Israel ;  2.  Abijah's  address 
was  certainly  striking  and  judicious ; 
3.  The  event  justified  his  expectations. 
II.  In  reference  to  the  contest  now 
existing    between    God    and    sinners. 

1.  There  is  a  contest   now  pending; 

2.  Sufier  the   word   of    exhortation ; 

3.  From  the  former  view  of  this  sub- 
ject we  may  learn  how  to  obtain  the 
blessing    of     God    upon    our     aims ; 

4.  From  the  latter  view  of  this  sub- 
ject we  may  learn  how  to  escape  the 
destruction  to  which  we  are  exposed 
\C.  Simeon,  M.A.\ 

Vers.  13-17.  ManHs  extremity  and 
God's  power  to  help.  Judah  in  veiy 
great  danger  inveigled  by  ambushment. 
I.  God's  ]M^P^^  often  brought  into 
extremities.  1.  By  their  own  foolish 
enterprises.  2.  By  the  temptations  of 
their  enemies.  3.  By  the  providence 
of  God  leading  them  to  test  and  train 
them.     "Their  defence  {Heb.  shadow. 


God  a  shadow  from  heat  and  tempest) 
departed  from  them  (Num.  xiv.  9). 
II.  God's  people  delivered  by  him  in 
extremities.  Jeroboam  had  two  to  one 
against  Abijah,  but  lost  the  day. 
Sense  sees  no  deliverance,  reason 
declares  it  unlikely,  hut  faith  assures  it 
will  come.  "The  Lord  is  with  us." 
1.  By  prayer.  "They  cried  unto  the 
Lord."  2.  By  supernatural  power. 
"  God  delivered  them  into  their  hand." 
Israel  at  Bed  Sea  against  the 
Ethiopians  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11).  In  the 
day  of  great  distress  and  great  danger 
to  God's  people  in  Germany,  Luther 
cried  in  his  closet,  and  came  out, 
declaring  to  friends  "  VicimuSj 
vicimus,"  we  have  overcome,  we  have 
overcome.  From  that  day  Charles  the 
Fifth  issued  a  proclamation  that  none 
should  be  further  molested  for  reli- 
gion "  Thou  art  my  deliverer :  God 
is  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  with  him  alone 
is  strength  and  power  to  deliver  Israel." 
Yers.  20-22.  Death  a  common  lot. 
1.  It  is  inevitable.  Knocks  with 
impartial  step  at  the  door  of  the 
cottage  and  the  palace  of  the  prince, 
says  Horace.  It  is  appointed  unto  all 
men.  Cannot  be  bribed  by  prosperity 
("  Abijah  waxed  mighty "),  nor  post- 
poned by  adversity  ("  neither  did  Jero- 
boam lecover  strength ").  2.  It  is 
peculiar  in  method.  Abijah's  a  natural 
death,  "  slept  with  his  fathers."  Jero- 
boam "  struck."  He  never  survived 
defeat ;  stung  by  accusing  conscience, 
or  inflicted  by  lingering,  incurable 
disease  (like  Jehoram,  2  Chron.  xxi.  19) 
which  at  last  killed  him.  Death 
terminates  all  earthly  glory. 

*'  Death  hath  ten  thousand  several  doors 
For  men  to  take  their  exits  " 

IJohn  Webster^, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIII. 


Yer.  5.  Salt.  The  Orientals  were 
accustomed  to  ratify  their  federal 
engagements  by  salt.  This  substance 
has,  among  the  ancients,  the  emblem  of 
friendship  and  fidelity,  and  therefore 
used  in  all  their  sacrifices  and  cove- 


nants. It  is  a  sacred  pledge  of  hospi- 
tality which  they  never  venture  to 
violate.  Numerous  instances  occur  of 
travellers  in  Arabia,  after  being  plun- 
dered and  stripped  by  the  wandering 
tribes  of  the  desert,  claiming  the  pro- 

213 


SOMILETtC  COMMENtAnT:  GSnoniCLEB 


[OHAP.   XIV. 


tection  of  some  civilised  Arab,  who, 
after  receiving  him  into  his  tent  and 
giving  him  salt,  instantly  relieves  his 
distress,  and  never  forsakes  him  till  he 
has  placed  him  in  safety.  An  agree- 
ment thus  ratified  is  called  in  Scripture 
**  a  covenant  of  salt "  \Paaiton\, 

Vers.  6—12.  Religion,  When  some 
people  talk  of  religion  they  mean 
they  have  heard  so  many  sermons 
and  performed  so  many  devotions,  and 
thus  mistake  the  means  for  the  end. 
But  true  religion  is  an  habitual  recol- 
lection of  God,  and  intention  to  serve 
Him,  and  thus  turns  everything  into 
gold  \John  Newto7i\,  For  in  religion 
as  in  friendship,  they  who  profess  most 
are  ever  the  least  sincere  \Sheridan\. 
The    dispute    about  religion  and    the 

f practice    of    it     seldom    go    together 
Young\. 
Vers.    13-17.     God    delivered.    The 
craft  of  the  Church's  enemies  is  never 
but   accompanied    with    cruelty,  and 


their  cruelty  Is  seldom  without  craft. 
But  in  things  wherein  they  deal 
proudly,  God  is  above  them,  and  by  his 
presence  with  his  people  he  brings  all 
their  plots,  counsels,  and  enterprises  to 
nought.  The  enemies  of  the  Jews  in 
Nehemiah's  time  made  great  brags 
at  first  what  they  would  do,  but  when 
they  saw  their  plots  discovered,  and 
their  purposes  defeated,  they  are  pre- 
sently crestfallen,  and  have  no  mind 
nor  courage  to  advance  at  all.  To 
plotters  may  be  applied  what  is  said  of 
Charles  VIII.,  King  of  Franro,  in  his 
expedition  against  Naples  :  "  That  he 
came  into  the  field  like  thunder  and 
lightning,  but  went  out  like  a  snufi"; 
more  than  a  man  at  first,  and  less  than 
a  woman  at  last."  In  all  ages  of  the 
world,  God's  signal  presence  with  his 
people  hath  delivered  them  and  frus- 
trated the  designs  and  counsels  of  the 
wicked  \Thom(X9  Brooks]^ 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Cbitioal  Notes.]  Asa  succeeds,  suppresses  idols,  and  defends  his  kingdom  (vers. 
1-8 ;  cf.  1  Kings  xv.  8-12,  14,  15).     Gains  victory  over  Zerah  and  spoils  Ethiopiana. 

Vers.  1-5. — Asa  destroys  idol.  Reigned,  mounted  the  throne  very  young.  Quiet,  con- 
tinued effect  of  the  great  battle  of  Zeraaraim  {cf.  I  Ki.  xv.  11-14).  Good  (ch.  xxxi.  20). 
Strange,  gods  of  foreign  origin.  Idolatry  of  Judah  now  detailed  for  first  time.  High 
places  first  mentioned  (Num.  xxiii.  3).  Images,  statues  in  stone  of  Baal.  Groves,  trunks 
or  stocks  of  trees,  dedicated  to  Ashtoreth,  the  Venus  of  Phoenicians.  Ver.  5.  Images, 
Bun-images  of  Baal,  different  from  images  in  ver.  3(c/.  xxxi  v.  4  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  30). 

Vers.  6-8. — Asa^s  military  defences.  Built,  fortresses  dismantled  when  Shishak  made 
successful  invasion.  Judaea  had  been  a  dependency  upon  Egypt  (ch.  xii,  8),  and  dared 
not  to  erect  fresh  fortifications.  Now  Egypt  weak,  Asa  grew  bold,  strengthened  himself 
against  his  southern  and  northern  neighbours.  Among  cities  restored,  probably  most  of 
those  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (ch.  xi.  6-10)  [Speak.  Com.'\.  Ver.  7.  Land,  i.e.,  unoccupied 
by  the  foe ;  free  and  open  to  go  where  we  please.  Ver.  8.  Targets,  Judah  heavy  armed ; 
Benjamin,  a  warlike  tribe,  light  armed,  using  sling  and  bow  (Judg.  xx.  16  ;  1  Ch.  viii.  40). 
The  number  embraced  all  capable  of  carrying  arms  and  liable  to  service. 

Vers.  8-15. — Asa  defeats  the  Ethiopians  or  Oashites.  So  called  by  Greeks,  because  their 
faces  were  burned  or  blackened  by  sun.  Zerah,  supposed  to  be  Osorken  (TJsarken)  II., 
third  King  of  Egypt  after  Shishak,  second  king  of  twenty-second  dynasty.  Object  of 
invasion  to  chastise  Asa  and  bring  Judah  under  yoke  again.  Ver.  9.  Mar.,  one  of  cities 
fortified  by  Rehoboam  (ch.  xi.  8),  in  line  of  march  from  Egypt.  Ver.  10.  Went  out,  lit. 
before  him,  sensible  of  inferiority  but  confident  in  God.  Nothing  with  thee,  "  it  is  alike  to 
thee  to  help  the  powerful  or  the  weak,  thou  canst  as  easily,  i.e.,  help  the  weak  as  the 
Btrong  **  [Speak.  Com.l^  There  is  none  beside  thee  to  help  between  the  mighty  and  the 
214 


CUAP.  XIV.]  BOMILMTIC  COMMEMtARY:  CHRONICLES. 


powerless,  t.e.,  no  other  thaa  thoa  can  help  in  an  unequal  conflict ;  meaning,  of  course, 
give  help  to  the  weaker  side  [Keil].  Ver.  12.  Smote,  gave  strength  to  smite.  Yer.  13. 
Destroyed,  broken  before  his  camp.  Enemy  unable  to  rally,  pursued  to  Gerar,  south, 
twenty  miles  at  least  from  scene  of  battle.  Cities  of  Philistines  spoiled,  because  they 
likely  accompanied  Zerah  in  his  expedition.  Yer.  15.  Tents,  nomadic  tribes  in  neigh- 
bourhood  of  Gerar  couquered,  and  camels  and  sheep  taken  as  prey.  Besor  flows  through 
this  region,  hence  fertility  and  food  for  man  and  beast.  All  terrified  at  Asa's  victory  and 
unablo  to  resist. 

EOMILJSTICS. 

Asa  the  Reformer. — Verses  1-5, 

Asa  as  a  constitutional  monarch  acted  like  David,  endeavoured  to  abolish  tlie 
traces  and  polluting  customs  of  idolatry.  Pursued  his  purpose  with  earnestness 
and  impartiality.  I.  The  reforms  W^hich  he  introduced.  Begarding 
God  himself,  he  took  advantage  of  his  authority  and  tranquillity,  tried  to  undo 
the  evil  left  by  his  father  (1  Ki.  xv.  3),  and  by  his  grandfather  (1  Ki.  xiv.  22). 
1 .  He  destroyed  idolatry/.  Altars  and  high  places  pulled  down  ;  broke  images  of 
Baal ;  destroyed  public  objects  and  relics  of  idolatry  in  Jerusalem  and  other 
cities.  "  When  God  lets  loose  upon  the  world  a  thinker,  let  men  beware,"  says 
one.  When  God  raises  up  a  true  Reformer,  he  will  secure  attention  and 
accomplish  a  great  work.  2.  He  revived  religious  worship.  Useless  to  put  down 
evil  without  setting  up  good.  Outward  reformation  defective.  A  revived  religion. 
(1.)  By  personal  example.  He  "did  that  which  was  good  and  right,  &c."  (2.)  By 
the  use  of  his  authority.  "  He  commanded  Judah,  &,c."  (ver.  4).  Religion 
requires  no  human  edicts  and  decrees  to  support  it.     But  those  in  authority  may 

recommend  it.     II,    The  spirit  in  which  he   carried    out   the 

reforms.  1.  A  spirit  of  self-consecration.  Self  first.  He  did  not  engage  in 
work  to  which  he  had  not  devoted  himself.  Many  work  for  God  who  are  not 
consecrated  unto  God.  Reform  self  before  you  reform  others.  2.  A  spirit  of 
zeal.  He  began  early,  executed  boldly  and  spared  no  dignity.  The  **  king's 
mother  "  deposed  from  her  position,  her  idol  destroyed,  and  its  ashes  thrown  into 
the  brook  Kidron  (1  Ki.  xv.  13).  "  See,  I  have  set  thee  over  (appointed  thee  to 
the  oversight  of)  the  nations  and  over  the  kingdoms,  to  root  out  and  to  pull  down, 
&c."  (Jer.  i.  10).  III.  The  rule  by  which  he  was  guided  in  the 
jeforms.  "Asa  did  good  and  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord."  Not  what  was 
expedient,  pleasing  to  himself,  or  to  his  courtiers.  He  sought  to  please  God. 
God  discerns  conduct ;  dishonoured  by  the  zeal  of  some ;  susceptibility  to  be 
influenced  by  him  should  be  cultivated.  Act  ever  under  "the  Great  Taskmaster's 
eye."  "Thou  God  seest  me."  Thus  Asa  the  reformer  an  example  to  us  in 
purpose,  spirit,  and  conduct — in  pulling  down  Popery,  Ritualism,  and  idolatry, 
in  setting  forth  true  religion  by  personal  life  and  public  teaching 

Asa  the  Prudent. — Verses  6-8. 

7^  time  of  peace  he  strengthened  his  kingdom  with  fortifications  and  armies. 
I.  Prudent  in  tracing  peace  to  the  right  source.  "  The  Lord  had 
given  him  rest."  Not  gained  by  his  valour  and  success  over  Abijah.  No  foes  at 
hand,  progress  undisputed  because  God  protected.  "  When  he  giveth  quietness, 
who  then  can  make  trouble "  in  the  land  ?  When  God  bestows  comfort  and 
peace  in  the  home  and  in  the  heart,  who  can  take  away  ?  But  when  he  hideth 
the  face  (condemns),  who  then  can  behold  him  (enjoy  his  power  or  remove  the 
sentence  of  death)  ?  Whether  it  be  done  against  (towards)  a  nation,  or  against 
a  man  only?  (Job  xxxiv.  29).  II.  Prudent  in  making  the  best  use  of 
peace.     Like  a  wise  king  he  observed  '*  the  land  before  him  "  free  wid  needing 

116 


noMILETiC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [cuat,  uf. 


improvements.  1.  Mindful  of  danger  ^  he  prepared  for  defensive  war.  "To  be 
prepared  for  war  is  one  of  the  most  effectual  means  of  preserving  peace,"  said 
Washington.  2.  Conscious  of  weakness,  he  raised  an  army.  Not  perhaps  a 
standing  army,  but  militia,  trained-bands  of  the  country.  Judah  mustered  a 
share.  Benjamin,  formerly  little  Benjamin  (Ps.  Ixviii.  27),  had  greatly  increased. 
The  little  one  by  God's  blessing  had  become  a  thousand.  These  tribes,  armed 
offensively  and  defensively,  were  ready  for  action.  3.  Depending  upon  his  people^ 
he  enlisted  their  efforts.  "Therefore  he  said.  Let  us  build"  (ver.  7).  Many 
rulers  raise  an  army,  levy  taxes,  and  govern  without  consent  of  the  people.  This 
arbitrary  conduct  will  create  tumult  and  endanger  the  throne  (Chas.  1.).  Self- 
willed  monarchs  have  destroyed  kingdoms  and  ruined  themselves.  "  For  by 
wise  counsel  thou  shalt  make  thy  war ;  and  in  multitude  of  councillors  there  is 
safety." 

••  But  war's  a  game  which,  were  their  subjects  wise, 
Kings  would  not  play  at  "  [Cowper], 

Asa  the  Conqueror.— Fer^e*  9-15. 

"  Zerah  the  Ethiopian  mistook  quietness  for  languor,  and  made  the  vulgar  mis- 
take of  supposing  that  silence  was  indifference.  He  did  not  know  that  repose  is  the 
very  highest  expression  of  power"  [Dr.  Parker],  An  expedition  prepared,  a 
million  soldiers  gathered  to  subjugate  Asa  and  bring  Judsea  under  Egyptian  yoke. 
Asa  shrank  not  from  war,  met  and  conquered  the  foe.  I.  The  source  to 
which  he  looked  for  help.  "  Asa  cried  unto  the  Lord  his  God."  1.  To 
God's  strength.  He  knew  God  in  peace  and  looked  to  him  in  war — believed  in 
God's  power  to  help  with  few  or  many,  to  weak  or  strong.  Man,  mortal  man, 
could  not  prevail  against  him.  God  omnipotent,  works  how  he  likes,  and  depends 
not  upon  numbers.  "  For  there  is  no  resti*aint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by  many  or  by 
few."  2.  To  God's  strength  gained  hy  prayer.  Help  ever  ready,  only  available 
by  seeking.  Prayer  before  battle  short,  earnest,  and  intense.  Notice  ground 
of  confidence,  "  Thou  art  our  God,"  well  tried  and  ever  sufficient ;  active  reliance, 
"  We  rest  on  thee."  Thus  can  we  only  overcome  in  temptations  and  spiritual 
conflicts.  II.  The  spirit  in  which  he  entered  the  fight.  Not 
cowardly  and  fearful.  God  gives  not  the  spirit  of  fear,  but  of  courage.  "  Be 
thou  strong  and  courageous."  The  war  not  aggressive,  but  sacred ;  for  God's 
glory,  not  his  own,  "  In  thy  name."  "  Jehovah-Nissi,  the  Lord  my  banner,"  the 
standard  or  ensign  around  which  we  must  rally  to  indicate  our  party,  define  our 
cause,  and  march  to  victory.  He  is  the  captain  of  our  salvation,  fights  our 
battles,  and  wins  our  victories.  He  bids  us  to  fight,  not  his  will  that  we  should 
be  timorous  and  weak,  **  In  the  name  of  our  God  we  will  set  up  our  banner." 
III.  The  victory  by  which  it  was  distinsruished.  "The  Lord 
smote  the  Egyptians  before  Asa."  The  foe  driven  like  straw  before  the  wind ; 
pursued  and  overcome.  Cities  smitten,  cattle  taken,  and  booty  enormous.  "  The 
defeat  of  Zerah  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events  in  the  history  of  the  Jews. 
On  no  other  occasion  did  they  meet  in  the  field  or  overcome  the  forces  of  either 
of  the  two  great  monarchies  between  which  they  were  placed.  Under  Asa  they 
appear  to  have  gained  a  complete  and  most  glorious  victory,  over  the  entire  force 
of  Egypt,  or  of  Ethiopia  wielding  the  power  of  Egypt "  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Warfare  and  Prayer. — Verses  9-12. 
Notice  in  the   prayer — I.  A    devout    acknowledgment  of  the 

Divine  government.     From  God  alone  he  received  the  kingdom,  and  by 
him  alone  could  he  defend  it.     He  was  supreme,  and  could  help  against  "a great 
216 


CHAP.  xiT.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES, 


multitude."  "  He  breaketh  down  "  kingdoms  and  cities — Sodom,  Babylon,  Petra, 
and  Pompeii — and  "  they  cannot  be  built  again ; "  He  builds  up  and  none  can 
"  pull  down  " — God's  agency  is  traced  over  man  and  nations,  in  nature  and 
religion.  II.  The  obedient  method  in  which  he  conducted  the 
war.  The  spirit  of  dependence  upon  God  ;  the  spirit  of  hope  and  prayer.  The 
spirit  of  Moses,  Samuel,  and  David.  In  prayer  he  may  expect  courage  and  help, 
such  reinforcements  "  the  gift  of  the  knees." 

•*  Hast  thou  not  learned  what  thou  art  often  told, 
A  truth  still  sacred,  and  believed  of  old, 
That  no  success  attends  on  spears  and  swords 
Unblest,  and  that  the  battle  is  the  Lord's  ?"  [Cov}per\t 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  2.     Right,      1.   Right  is  good  dertaken  for  a  sacred  purpose — with 

(acceptable)  to  God,  when  the  heart  is  confidence  of  divine  help,  to  maintain 

put  into  it.     2.  Right  is  good  to  man,  the  honour  and  service  of  God.     The 

helpful  to  temporal  and  spiritual  in-  parties  most  unequally  matched.     The 

terests.     But  right  implies  rule,  law  of  Lord  Jehovah  and  mortal,  feeble  man. 

rectitude.  The  rule  followed,  constantly  How  can  man  prevail  against  his  Maker  1 
obeyed,  to  be  acceptable.     God's  law  .  The  folly  of  opposing  God.   The  war-cry 

must  be  path  of  duty  and  this  path  most  stimulating.     Assurance  in  God's 

pursued  firmly,  without  pause  or  re-  name  gives  comfort  in  trouble,  triumph 

trograde  step.  in  conflict.     It  is  strength  impregnable 

Ver.  6.  Given  him  rest.  1.  God  and  sufficient  for  greatest  dangers.  Only 
the  sovereign  dispenser  of  quietness  or  under  this  one  ensign,  lifted  above  all 
comfort  to  individuals.  Gives  peace  to  other  banners  of  the  sacramental  host, 
awakened  sinners  in  Christ.  Peace  and  bearing  this  one  name,  can  we  asciibe 
rest  the  fruit  of  faith  in  him.  2.  God  the  words :  In  hoc  vinces, 
the  sovereign  dispenser  of  quietness  and  Ver.  13.  Before  his  host.  Before 
comfort  to  nations  and  churches.  To  his  camp  ;  the  army  of  Asa,  the  camp  of 
nations  (1  Chr.  xxii.  9-18).  To  churches  Jehovah,  who  resided  in  it,  defended  it, 
(Acts  ix.  31).  He  makes  peace  in  our  and  led  it  to  victory.  "  Earlier  ex- 
borders  (Ps.  xiv.  7-14) ;  causes  wars  to  positors  fancied  that  the  reference  was 
cease  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  (Ps.  xlvi.  to  a  heavenly,  a  host  of  angels,  accord- 
9).  Ver.  7.  Rest.  It  did  his  heart  ing  to  Gen.  xxxii.  2  seq.^^  \Keil\ 
good  to  think  how  piously  they  had  Ver.  14.  Fear  of  the  Lord.  Its 
purchased  their  present  peace  ;  and  efiect  upon  men  now  renders  them  fear- 
therefore  he  repeateth  it  (Zech.  viii.  ful  and  helpless,  what  hereafter  I  Who 
19)  \Traj)p\.  can  stand  before  him  ?     Resist  not,  but 

Vers.  9-11.      The  Holy  War,     Un-  humbly  submit  and  be  saved. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XIV. 

Vers.     2-5.      High      places.        No  Vers.  6-8.     Built.     Prudence  is  an 

sooner  is  a  temple  built  for  God,  but  ability  of  judging  what  is  best  in  the 

the   Devil    builds  a   chapel    hard    by  choice  both  of  the  end  and  of  the  means 

[Geo.    Herbert].     Man  is  a  born  idol-  [Groves].     No  evil  can  surprise  us  if  we 

worshipper,   «((//<  ^ worshipper,   so  sen-  watch,  no  evil  can  hurt  us  if  we  pray 

suous,  imaginative     is    he;     and  also  [Bp.  Hall]. 

partakes  much  of  the  nature  of  an  ape  Ver.  9.   This  is  the  largest  coUected 

[Carlyle].  army  of  which  we  hear  in  Scripture ;  but 

•*  'TiB  to  make  idols,  and  to  find  them  clay  "  ^^  ^^o®?  ^^^t  exceed  the  known  numbers 

[Mrs.  Hemans^  of  Oriental   armies  in  ancient    time'^ 

nr 


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


loRAP.  rr. 


Darius  Codomannus  brought  into  the 
field  at  Arbela  a  force  one  million  and 
forty  thousand.  Xerxes  crossed  into 
Greece  with  certainly  above  a  million 
of  combatants.  Artaxerxes  Mnemon 
collected  one  million  two  hundred  and 
sixty  thousand  men,  to  meet  the  attack 
of  the  younger  Cyrus  [Sjyecik.  Com.\ 

Yers.  12-15.  Fled.  The  results 
which  follow  are  most  striking.  The 
southern  power  cannot  rally  from  the 
blow,  but  rapidly  declines,  and  for 
above  three  centuries  makes  no  further 


effort  in  this  direction.  Assyria  grows 
in  strength,  continually  pushes  her 
arms  further,  and  finally  under  Sargon 
and  Sennacherib,  penetrates  to  Egypt 
itself.  All  fear  of  Egypt  as  an  aggres- 
sive power  ceases ;  and  the  Israeli  fees  learn 
instead  to  lean  upon  the  Pharaohs  for 
support  (2Ki.  xvii.  4;  xviii.  21 ;  Is.  xxx. 
2-4).  Friendly  ties  alone  connect  the  two 
countries;  and  it  is  not  till  B.C.  609 
that  an  Egyptian  force  again  enters 
Palestine  with  a  hostile  intention  [/Wc?.] 


CHAPTER  XY. 


ObitigaIi   Notes.]     A  prophetic  warning  (veri.   1-7).     Asa's  reforms  (vers.  8-lS); 

renewal  of  covenant  (vers.  12-19),  and  deposes  Maachah. 

Vers.  1-7. — Azaiiahwatiis  Asa.  Spirit  u-pon  A.  (c/.  Num.  xxiv.  2).  Oded,  by  some  Iddo, 
prophet  and  historian  of  two  preceding  reigns.  Names  differ  very  slightly  in  Heb.  Seek 
him  {cf.  1  Chr.  xxviii.  9  ;  Jer.  xxix.  13),  as  they  had  done  in  battle  (vers.  3-6).  A  future 
condition  predicted  according  to  some.  "Israel  here  is  used  generally  for  the  whole 
people  of  God  ;  and  the  reference  is  especially  to  the  many  apostasies  in  the  days  of  the 
Judges  (Jud.  iii.  7-12  ;  vi.  1 ;  viii.  33 ;  x.  6),  which  were  followed  by  repentance  and 
deliverance  "  [Speak.  Com.'],  Priest^  succession  unbroken,  but  occasions  when  none  taught 
true  religion.  Ver.  6.  Peace,  free  communications  interrupted;  commotions,  great 
vexations  (Amos  iii.  9 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  20).  Ver.  6.  Destroyed,  different  provinces  crushed 
one  another  by  contentions  among  themselves.  Ver.  7.  Strong,  Le.,  be  firm,  continue 
faithful  to  Jehovah.     Rfward  will  follow,  as  in  conquest  of  Zerah. 

Vers.  8-11. — Asa's  religious  reforms.  Earlier  reforms  only  partial  success.  Animated 
by  Azariah,  he  became  more  zealous,  extirpated  abominations  in  his  own  kingdom,  in 
cities  which  his  father  had  taken  from  Jeroboam,  and  renewed  altar  of  burnt  offering 
before  porch.  Ver.  9.  Gathered.  Pious  Israelites  drawn  into  the  territory  of  Judah  by 
reformed  worship,  for  solemn  renewal  of  national  covenant.  Ver.  10.  Third  months 
Sivan,  corresponding  with  June.  Ver.  11.  Same  time,  Heb.  in  that  day  ;  the  day  on 
which  the  festival  was  celebrated,  sixth  of  third  month,  the  Feast  of  Weeks.  Offered 
peace-oiferings,  in  communion  with  Jehovah  and  with  on^  another  (Lev.  vii.  11-21).  Spoils 
brought  by  them  as  thank-offerings  (c/.  ch.  xiv.  13). 

Vers.  12-19. — Renewal  of  national  covenant.  Seek  the  Lord  and  to  execute  with  vigour 
laws  which  make  idolatry  punishable  with  death  (Ex.  xxii.  20 ;  Deut.  xvii.  2-5 ; 
Heb.  X.  28).  Ver.  15.  Oath  taken  in  solemn  and  joyful  emotion.  God  was  found,  because 
sincerely  sought,  and  gave  them  rest  (ver.  15).  Ver.  16.  Maachah  {cf.  1  Ki.  xv.  13)  "  held 
honoured  place  of  queen-mother,  like  Sultana  Walide  of  East,"  withdrawn  from  rank 
and  her  idol  destroyed.  Ver.  17.  High  places,  hills  on  which  sacrifices  were  offered,  were 
not  entirely  destroyed  by  people,  though  intended  by  the  King,  Ver.  18.  Things,  for 
ornament  and  repairs.  Ver.  19.  War.  As  B.  died  in  the  26th  year  of  Asa  (1  Eli.  xvi.  8), 
it  appears,  from  ver.  10  and  from  ch.  xvi.  1-9,  that  the  date  here  ought  to  be,  not  the  35th, 
but  the  25th  year  al  Asa.  This  allows  ft  |>eriod  of  re(>ose  after  the'  refonu  o|  Asa 
^Mwphy'\. 

218 


CHAP.xt.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


HOMILETIGS. 

Reciprocal  Fellowship. — Vers^  2. 

The  prophet  met  Asa  in  returning  from  victorious  pursuit.  Signal  success 
a  proof  of  God's  presence  ;  victory  the  reward  of  implicit  trust  in  him.  Keep 
close  to  God  and  he  will  bless  you ;  f^«sake  him  and  you  reap  the  fruits  of 
apostasy.  As  you  deal  with  him  he  will  deal  with  you.  I,  A  distin- 
guished privilege.  God's  presence  with  them.  In  the  ordinances  of  his 
house,  in  special  providence,  and  covenant  engagements.  God  owns  them  as  his 
people,  protects  them  from  enemies,  and  prospers  them  in  all  things.  This  a 
glory  and  happiness  beyond  description.  Not  in  good  things  common  to  them 
with  the  world,  but  the  distinguished  privilege  of  God's  people,  to  possess  his 
favour  and  enjoy  his  presence.  "  Happy  is  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord." 
II.  The  conditions  on  which  this  privilege  is  enjoyed.  "While 
ye  be  with  Him."  Nothing  bestowed  arbitrarily  nor  kept  without  care.  The 
duration  and  degree  of  happiness  on  certain  conditions.  1.  Reasonable  conditions. 
If  we  do  not  seek,  nor  care  for  God,  is  it  likely  that  he  will  be  with  us  ?  "  How 
can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ? "  2.  Scriptural  conditions,  A 
doctrine  of  Scripture  that  God's  continual  favour  depends  upon  obedience  and 
perseverance,  "  continuance  in  well-doing."  "  Draw  nigh  to  God  and  he  will 
draw  nigh  to  you."  "  Ye  shall  seek  me  and  find  me,  when  ye  shall  search  for  \ 
me  with  all  your  heart."  3.  Wise  conditions.  To  put  us  on  guard  and  caution 
against  danger.  To  comfort  in  sorrow  and  encourage  in  effort.  Seek  and  ye 
shall  find.  Serve  and  you  shall  succeed.  Forsake  God  and  present  triumphs^ 
present  enjoyments  are  not  secure. 

Dark  Shadows  on  a  Bright  Day. — Verses  1-7, 

Azaiiah  did  not  congratulate  Asa  on  splendid  victory,  nor  indulge  in  flattery  to 
court  princely  favour.  The  speech  appears  unsuitable  for  the  occasion.  Whether 
it  unfolds  future  apostasy  or  describes  past  history,  it  is  a  prophetic  warning,  a 
gloomy  picture  on  a  bright  day.  It  proves  necessary  connection  between  God's 
service  and  human  weal,  and   dwells  on  apostasy  with  its  fearful  consequences. 

I.  The  awful  apostasy.  Tui-ningaway.  I.  Practical  atheism,  "Without 
the  true  God."  A  God  of  truth  (Jer.  x.  10),  "the  God  of  Amen"  (Is.  Ixv.  16). 
Idols  not  true,  nonentities.  "  An  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world."  Hence  true 
here  not  only  opposed  to  error  and  idolatry,  but  to  emptiness,  deceit,  and  God's 
character.  Everything  else  a  lie^  and  idolatry  the  greatest  lie.  Practically  to 
be  without  God,  to  be  in  darkness,  error,  and  uncertainty.  2.  Deprived  of  priestly 
function.  No  instruction  and  guidance  for  ministers,  or  no  reverence  and  regard 
for  their  office.  Sad  when  the  light  of  ministry  is  darkened.  "  Without  a 
teaching  priest "  descriptive  of  spiritual  destitution.  For  duty  of  a  priest  is  to 
"  keep  "  (store  up  and  distribute)  "  knowledge,  and  they  (people)  shall  seek 
the  law  (God's  will)  at  his  mouth,  <fec."  (Mai.  ii.  7,  8).  3.  Prevalence  of  moral 
disorder.  "  Without  law."  Where  no  direction  is,  no  law  can  govern.  God's 
law  forgotten,  and  every  one  a  law  to  himself.  Right  neither  taught  nor 
practised.  Rectitude  perverted,  and  whatever  straight  made  crooked.  Natural 
conscience  and  God's  command  defied,  and  as  in  age  of  Nero  nothing  unlawful. 

II.  The  terrible  judgments  which  followed  apostasy.  Conse- 
quences of  forsaking  God  set  forth  in  expressive  terms.  1.  Widespread  anarchy. 
"  No  peace  to  him  that  went  out "  (ver.  6).  No  free  intercourse  nor  safe  abode 
in  any  village.  "The  highways  were  unoccupied,"  t.«.,  rested  from  noise  of 
chariots,  and  'the  feet  of  the  travellers  walked  (for  safety)  through  by-waya 

219 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xv. 


(winding,  unfrequented  ways)  (Judg.  v.  6).  In  times  of  public  panic  resort  to 
subterranean  hiding-places  (ch.  vi.  2).  2.  Civil  dissensions.  Vexations  in 
various  regions  of  the  land.  **  Nation  was  destroyed  of  nation,"  beaten  in  pieces 
by  oppression  and  war.  Gilead  against  Ephraim,  and  Benjamin  against  other 
tribes,  until  almost  exterminated  (c/*.  Judg.  xii.  4  ;  xx.  33-48 ;  illus.  by  Wars  of 
the  Roses,  the  Commonwealth,  and  American  Civil  War).  3.  General  calamity. 
"  For  God  did  vex  them  with  all  adversity,  confounded  them  with  all  kinds  of 
oppressions,"  social  and  national.  Depth  of  corruption  brought  severity  of 
chastisement.  Idolatry  and  evil-doing  most  provoking ;  judgment  most 
crushing  and  bitter,  retribution  like  a  consuming  fire.  "  Through  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord  of  hosts  is  the  land  darkened  (with  smoke,  ver.  18),  and  the  people  shall 
be  as  the  fuel  of  the  fire  "  (Is.  ix.  19). 

"  Take  heed :  for  God  holds  vengeance  in  His  hand 
To  hurl  upon  their  heads  that  break  His  law  "  \Shake8^, 

III.  The  way  of  escape  from  these  judgments.     "The  Lord 

is  with  you,  while  ye  be  with  him,  <fec."  1.  This  a  fact  in  Divine  procedure. 
Proved  in  days  of  Judges,  division  of  the  two  kingdoms,  recent  victory,  and  in 
all  periods  of  national  history.  "  Why  transgress  ye  the  commandments  of  the 
Lord,  that  ye  cannot  prosper?  because  ye  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  he  hath 
forsaken  you."  2.  This  a  warning  for  the  future.  Victory  over  Zerah  should 
teach  something.  God's  blessing  upon  all  who  steadfastly  adhere  to  him,  but 
abandon  him  and  he  will  abandon  you.  Hence  be  quickened  in  your  work 
(ver.  7).  Kesolve  with  energy  to  carry  it  on  amid  opposition.  The  most 
blessed  results  to  yourself  and  others  will  follow.  "If  thou  seek  him  he 
will  be  found  of  thee ;  but  if  thou  forsake  him  he  will  cast  thee  off  for  ever," 

Asa's  Continued  Reforms. — Verses  8-19. 

The  warning  had  influence.  Asa  obeyed,  took  courage,  and  entered  upon  measures 
judicious,  decisive,  and  extensive.     I.  The  character  of  the  reforms 

upon  which  he  entered.  Destructive  of  evil  and  establishment  of  good. 
1 .  He  sought  to  extirpate  idolatry.  "  Put  way  the  abominable  idols,  {a)  Idolatry 
most  prevalent.  In  his  own  territory,  "  the  land  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  ;  "  in 
cities  taken  by  his  father  (ver.  8).  (6)  Idolatry  most  abominable.  Idol  of  king's 
mother  horrible,  of  some  monstrous  kind ;  so  obscene  that  it  was  publicly  burned 
under  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  (verse  16).  We  should  purify  our  hearts  and 
land ;  destroy  gods  material,  literary  and  moral,  worshipped  in  our  days.  2. 
He  engaged  in  needful  repairs.  **  Renewed  the  altar,  &c."  (verse  8).  Recon- 
structed a  temporary  altar  like  that  of  Solomon  (vii.  7),  for  extraordinary 
sacrifices  on  special  occasions ;  or  renewed,  embellished  the  one  desecrated  in 
reigns  of  Rehoboam  and  Abijah.  AU  reforms  began  here.  Prophets  and 
reformers  of  O.T.  especially  concerned  for  the  altar  and  restoration  of  Divine 
worship.  Decayed  altars  signify  neglected  sacrifices,  perverted  religion,  and 
practical  apostasy.  In  revivals,  offerings,  and  thanksgiving  restored.  3.  He 
pledged  the  nation  to  solemn  covenant.  *'They  entered  into  a  covenant."  Humble 
for  sin,  they  renewed  their  obligations ;  joined  together  in  pledges  to  keep  the 
law  and  punish  disobedience,  {a)  To  seek  the  Lord.  Seek  the  laws,  favour,  and 
help  of  their  father's  God,  whom  they  had  forsaken.  Seek  with  heart  and  soul, 
with  diligence  and  energy.  Naturally  without  God,  he  must  seek  in  faith,  peni- 
tence, and  under  guidance  of  Holy  Spirit,  (b)  To  punish  idolators.  Punish- 
ment severe,  "  put  to  death  ;  "  impartial,  "  small  or  great,  man  or  woman ;  '* 
universal,  "whosoever,  &c."  Must  not  go  too  far  in  penalty  and  severity. 
Christianity  advances  by  charity,  liot  by  persecution.  "  We  do  not  find  this 
( ngagement  expressly  made  in  other  renewals  of  the  covenant.     It  would,  how- 

m 


CHAP.  XV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


ever,  be  implied  in  them,  since  it  was  one  of  the  commandments  (see  Ex.  xxii.  20; 
Deut.  xiii.  9-15 ;  xvii.  2-7)  [Speak,  Com.\  II.  The  spirit  in  which  he 
carried  out  these  reforms.  1.  A  spirit  of  vigour.  No  trifling  with  the 
jccasion.  His  foundation  bi'oad,  and  the  policy  built  upon  it  gracious,  energetic, 
and  complete.  2.  A  spirit  of  impartiality.  Gods  of  high  places  and  gods  of 
groves ;  images  from  the  city  and  of  the  palace.  He  would  not  allow  even 
his  mother  to  keep  an  idol.  Many  are  great  reformers  in  national,  not  in 
private  matters.  Earnest  before  the  public,  too  lenient  at  home.  Asa  knew 
nothing  about  father  or  mother,  paitiality  or  concession.  The  royal  grove  cut 
down,  the  favourite  god  stamped  upon,  consumed  in  the  flame,  and  its  ashes 
thrown  into  the  brook.  3.  A  S2nrit  of  gratitude.  He  presented  votive  off'erings 
in  the  temple.  "  The  things  that  his  father  had  dedicated,"  spoils  from 
Abijam's  victory  over  Jeroboam ;  spoils  of  his  own  from  Zerah,  the  Ethiopian, 
were  presented  as  thank-offerings  to  him  by  whose  power  they  had  been  gained, 
and  to  w^hom  all  silver  and  gold  belong.  Things  dedicated  to  holy  use  should 
not  be  desecrated  nor  withheld.  Our  vows  should  be  performed  and  our  first- 
fruits  offered  to  God.  Gratitude  helped  by  the  vow  of  it.  "  Yow  and  pay  to 
the  Lord  your  God  ;  let  all  that  be  round  about  him  bring  presents  unto  him 
that  oufifht  to  be  feared." 

"The  Solemn  League  and  Covenant." — Verses  10-16. 

"  Entered  into  the  covenant."  It  is  evident  that  a  covenant  existed  before 
this;  they  renew  it  with  gladness  and  enthusiasm.  "Solemn  renewals  of 
original  covenant  made  in  the  wilderness  (Ex.  xxiv.  3-8)  occur  from  time  to 
time  in  Jewish  history  after  intervals  of  apostasy.  This  renewal  in  reign  of 
Asa  is  the  first  on  record.  The  next  falls  300  years  later,  in  reign  of  Josiah 
(2  Ki.  xxiii.  3).  There  is  a  third  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah  (Neh.  x.  28,  29). 
On  such  occasions  the  people  bound  themselves  by  solemn  oath  to  observe  all 
directions  of  the  law,  and  call  down  God's  curse  upon  them  if  they  forsook  it " 
[Speak.  Com.].  I.  The  assembly  by  vrhich  it  was  ratified. 
Kepresentatives  from  Judah  and  Benjamin,  strangers  from  Ephraim,  Manasseh, 
and  Simeon.  The  king's  own  subjects  and  those  who  had  transferred  allegiance 
to  him  from  Israel.  Outsiders  invited,  welcomed,  and  encouraged  to  acquaint 
themselves  with  God  and  walk  in  his  commands.  II.  The  solemnities  by 
which  it  was  accompanied.  Besides  rededications  of  themselves  and 
stern  but  wholesome  league  against  idolatry — 1.  Innumerable  sacrifices.  "They 
offered  unto  the  Lord  seven  hundred  oxen  and  seven  hundred  sheep."  2. 
Exultant  joy.  "  With  shouting,  with  trumpets,  and  with  cornets."  People 
testified  unbounded  satisfaction  with  loud  voice  and  instruments.  The  revival 
of  religion,  the  manifestation  of  God's  presence,  a  source  of  pure  and  permanent 
joy.     "When  his  glory  shall  be  revealed,  ye  maybe  glad  also  with  exceeding 

joy." 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Inspiration  and  duty.   1.  experience;  3.  A  correction  in  general 

An  inspired  man  is  qualified  to  give  a  tendencies.      Neither  to  presume  nor 

message.      Suitable,    intelligent,    and  to  despair, 

timely.     2.  An  inspired  man  will  give  Yer.  3.    A  picture  of  utter  destitution 

his  message  fearlessly  and  successfully,  in  spiritual  life.     "  Without  the  true 

3.  Inspired  men,  men  taught  of  God,  God."      Then  Israel  had    false   gods  ? 

not  time-servers,  required  now.  Yes,    innumerable    gods    even    Israel 

Yer.  2.  If  ye  seek  hint.    1.  A  fact  in  acquired,    notwithstanding    the    com- 

national  history;  2,  A  truth  in  Christian  mandment,  **Thou8halt  have  no  other 

221 


MOMTLETIC  COMMBNTAUT:  CHUONICLBB. 


[OHAjp.   !▼. 


gods  before  me."  "  It  is  not  a  com- 
mandment that  can  keep  a  man  at 
home.  No  bill  of  stipulations  can  con- 
vert your  children  and  make  them  filial. 
We  may  have  a  time-bill  for  the  action 
of  the  whole  day,  but  the  world  was 
never  yet  saved  by  commandments. 
Israel  trampled  ten  of  them  under 
foot,  and  we  have  trampled  ten  thou- 
sand. We  can  do  despite  unto  the 
spirit  of  grace;  we  can  insult  God. 
*  Without  a  teaching  priest,' — not  an 
ornament,  nor  a  ceremonialist,  but  a 
teaching  priest.  A  man  whose  busi- 
ness it  was  to  expound  the  law  and 
make  the  people  understand  it.  So 
they  preached  in  olden  time ;  they 
took  the  law  syllable  by  syllable,  ex- 
plained it  word  by  word,  and  sentence 
by  sentence ;  they  analysed  it,  took  it 
member  from  member.  They  put  it 
together  again  and  hurled  it  upon  the 
people  like  a  thunderbolt  from  heaven. 
They  had  naught  else  to  expound,  be- 
cause they  thought  nothing  else  worthy 
of  exposition.  We  are  lost  in  details. 
Any  man  may  get  up  a  lecture,  if  he 
has  great  quoting  power.  It  is  almost 
impossible  not  to  get  up  a  lecture ;  the 
temptations  are  innumerable,  and  in 
many  cases  irresistible.  Only  one 
speech  is  worth  listening  to,  that  is  the 
speech  which  begins  in  eternity,  sweeps 
down  through  time,  leaves  behind  it 
immortal  lessons,  and  ascends  to  the 
fountain  of  origin.  Demand  the 
gospel  of  salvation  through  Jesus 
Christ.  Be  in  earnest.  *  Seek  ye  the 
Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  <fec.* " 
\pr.  Parker], 


Yers.  8-10.  The  influence  of  a  great 
example.  When  Asa  entered  earnestly 
upon  reform — T.  He  drew  others  to  his 
side.  The  halting  decide,  the  half- 
hearted kindle,  before  a  zealous  man. 
*'  They  fell  to  him  out  of  Israel  in 
abundance."  Armies  often  perish, 
churches  decay  for  want  of  leaders. 
II.  He  succeeded  in  his  efforts.  Success 
not  given  to  hesitancy  and  idleness. 
Asa  positive,  determined,  rallied  others 
round  him  and  accomplished  great 
things.  III.  He  gained  freedo'm  from, 
attachment.  "  And  the  Lord  gave  them 
rest  round  about."  A  bold,  defiant 
attitude  frightens  the  foe.  Numbers 
and  God's  help  will  overcome  them  and 
ensure  peace. 

"Virtue    is    bold,    and    goodness    never 
fearful." 

Ver.  16.  Heart  service.  1.  God  will 
not  accept  a  divided  heart.  This  use- 
less. The  whole  or  none.  "  Ye  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon."  2.  God  re- 
quires the  whole  heart.  "With  all 
their  heart."  3.  This  requirement 
eminently  reasonable  and  Jit.  4.  The 
heart  must  be  willingly  given.  Devo- 
tion only  true  when  free.  When  King 
William  (Rufus)  tried  to  force  Anselm 
to  a  certain  course,  he  replied,  "  Treat 
me  as  a  free  man,  and  I  devote  myself 
and  all  I  have  to  your  service.  Treat 
me  as  a  slave,  and  you  shall  have 
neither  me  nor  mine."  "The  servant 
(bondslave)  of  Jesus  Christ "  (Rom.  i. 
1).  5.  When  thus  sought  and  served 
he  will  be  fomd.  "  Search  me,  0  God, 
and  prove  me." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XV. 


ers.  1-7.  God^s  presence.  Walking 
together  is  a  very  common  action  of 
human  fellowship  ;  much  interchange 
of  thought  and  opinion  takes  place  in 
the  long  daily  walks  of  two  friends, 
but  this  implies  a  certain  evenness  and 
similarity  of  gait ',  for  "  how  can  two 
walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  " 
In  common  parlance  this  is  spoken  of 
as  "  keeping  step ; "  and  that  this  very 

222 


thing  is  required  of  us,  we  see  in  a 
very  striking  and  reiterated  warning 
in  Lev.  xxvi  12,  21-28,  where  God 
promises  to  "walk  among  His  people," 
ready,  as  it  were,  for  this  steady,  even 
step.  "  But  if  ye  walk  contraiy  unto 
me,"  or  as  in  margin,  "  If  ye  walk  at 
all  adventures  with  me;"  or  by  another 
reading,  "If  ye  walk  at  haphazard 
with,  me,"  in  a  jerking,  spasmodic,  con- 


CHAP.XV1.1  HOMlLETtO  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


trary  fashion,  such  as,  alas !  we  know  and  the  sleepless  sea  and  st^rs,  I  have 

too  well,  then  "  will  I  also  walk  contrary  devoted  myself  to  God— a  vow  never 

unto  you"  [Mrs.  Gordon].  (if   He  gives  me  the  faith  I  pray  for) 

,,    ,     ,                •      •.->         /-I  a  i.       lu  to  be  recalled." 

•*  My  business  now  is  with  my  God  to  walk,  -,  a       mi      r     j                  *        t,. 

And  guided  by  His  holy  eye  to  go  ;  Ver.    15.     The  Lord  gave  rest.      In 

Sweet  fellowship  with  Him  to  cultivate,  1815,    when    the    British     Parliament 

Ajid  His  unclouded  countenance  to  know"  were   voting  honours  and  emoluments 

[J.  F.  Elwinl  ^Q  Wellington,  and  considering  "  the 

Ver.  12.    Covencmt.    Charles  Kings-  measures  necessary  towards  forming  a 

ley  wrote,  on  entering  his  22nd  year:  peace  establishment,"  suddenly  aU  their 

"My  birth-night.     I  have  been  for  the  plans  were  interrupted  and  their  peace 

last  hour  on  the  seashore ;  not  dream-  prospects  dissipated  by  the  intelligence 

ing,  but  thinking  deeply  and  strongly,  that  Napoleon  had  escaped  from  Elba, 

and  forming  determinations  which  are  Nothing  like  this  will  occur  during  the 

to  affect  my  destiny  through  time  and  rest  which   God    gives.     His  enemies 

eternity.     Before   the   sleeping  earth,  once  subdued  will  be  subdued  for  ever. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 


Cbitical  Notes.]  Asa  prevents  Baasha  from  invading  Judah  (vers.  1-6) ;  Asa  reproved 
by  Hanani  (vers.  7-10)  ;  Asa's  sickness  and  end  (vers.  11-14 ;  cf.  parallel  in  1  Ki.  xv.  16-24). 

Vers.  1-6. — Baasha  invades  Judah.  Six  and  thirtieth.  Baasha  died  before  this  date 
(1  Ki.  XV.  33).  Critics  consider  the  date  calculated  from  the  separation  of  the  kingdoms, 
and  coincident  with  16th  year  of  Asa's  reign.  A  mode  of  reckoning  generally  followed  in 
the  Book  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  and  Israel,  the  public  annals  of  the  time  (ver.  11),  the 
source  from  which  the  inspired  historian  drew  his  account  (c/.  Jamieson  and  Keil).  Built, 
i.e.,  fortified.  Go  out,  to  prevent  all  communication  between  the  countries,  **  The  fortification 
of  Ramah  by  Baasha  presupposes  his  recovery  of  the  cities,  which  had  been  taken  by 
Abijah  from  the  northern  kingdom,  and  which,  according  to  eh.  xv.  8,  were  still  in  Asa's 
possession"  [^Keil^  Benhadah,  Benhidri  in  Assyrian  monuments;  Ader  in  Sept.,  to 
whom  smaller  provinces  round  Damascus  {Heb.  Darmesck)  were  subject.  Ver.  3.  There  is, 
let  there  be  a  league,  &c.  Ver.  4.  Ijon,  city  of  Naphtali  (1  Ki,  xv.  20).  Dan  colonised 
(Judg.  xviii. ;  Jos.  xix.  47).  Abel-maim,  "  meadow  of  waters,"  supposed  to  be  situated  on 
marshy  plain  near  uppermost  lake  of  Jordan.  Store  or  *'  all  Cinneroth  and  all  the  land 
of  Naphtali"  in  1  Ki.  xv.  20.  Both  statements  true  and  supplementary.  Ver.  5.  Cease. 
Baasha  might  intenti  to  reside  in  Ramah.  Unexpected  hostilities  from  his  son  and  ally 
prevented  further  progress,  and  Baasha's  death  soon  after  interrupted  work  of  fortifying'. 
Ver.  6.  No  actual  engagement  mentioned.  Geba  (Jos.  xviii.  24).  Mizpah  (Gen.  xxxi. 
45-55). 

Vers.  7-10.  Asa  reproved  by  prophet  Hanani.  Hanani,  father  of  Jehu  the  prophet  (xix.  2) 
Relied  not  on  God,  from  whom  prosperity  and  former  victory,  but  on  man.  Escaped.  That 
is,  if  he  had  trusted  in  God  he  would  not  only  have  defeated  the  army  of  Baasha,  but  that 
of  Benhadad.  His  conduct  in  parting  with  temple  treasures  and  bribing  an  ally  of  the 
King  of  Israel  most  fvj  5lish  and  lost  him  a  splendid  victory.  Ver.  8.  The  huge  host  of  the 
Ethiopians  overcome  by  God's  help.  Assyria  would  have  been,  had  Asa  trusted  in  God 
Ver.  9.  For,  a  striking  description  of  divine  providence  over  the  man  whose  heart  is  perfect 
with  God.  Ver.  10.  This  address  vexed  Asa,  and  spread  discontent  among  his  peoplc\ 
whom  he  oppressed,  tried  to  crush  in  some  form  or  other.  He  maltreated  the  prophet. 
Prison,  house  of  stocks,  a  sort  of  torture  for  crime — Heb. ,  house  of  distortion,  because  limb' 
were  so  set  and  fixed  as  to  be  twisted  and  distorted  in  it. 

Vers.  11-14. — Asa's  sickness  and  end.  Book  of  Kings,  a  public  record  of  civil  events. 
Diseased,  a  kind  of  gout,  but  uncertain,  began  two  years  before  death  (ver.  13),  became 
greatly  ♦*  moved  upwards  "  in  body  and  proved  violent  in  nature.  Yet,  as  in  war,  so  in  sick- 
oegs,  he  put  undue  confidence  in  man.    FhysicianSf  Egyptians  in  high  repute  at  foreigii 

223 


HOMLLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [cba?.  xn. 


courts,  who  pretended  to  expel  disease  by  cliarms  and  mystic  rites.  Buried  him  in  a  rock 
tomb ;  made,  digged  by  himself,  in  his  lifetime,  as  often  done  by  Oriental  kiugs,  with 
special  funeral  magnificence  ;  odours  to  neutralifse  offensive  smells  of  corpse  exposed  on 
*' the  bed^'  to  public  view,  or  to  embalm  with  aromatic  spices  in  great  profusion.  Great 
burning.  According  to  some,  consuming  spices  customary  at  funerals  of  kings  ;  according 
to  others,  for  cremation  of  the  body,  "  a  usage  which  was  at  that  time,  ard  long  after, 
prevalent  among  the  Hebrews,  and  the  omission  of  which  in  the  case  of  royal  personages 
was  reckoned  a  great  indignity  (eh.  xxi.  19  ;  1  Sam.  xxxi.  12  ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  5 ;  Amos  vi.  10) " 

EOMILETICS. 

The  Folly  of  Bribery. — Verses  1-10. 

Asa  hired  the  help  of  a  heathen  neighbour,  the  powerful  King  of  Syria, 
to  defend  himself  against  the  attack  of  Baasha.  This  considered  prudent,  a 
good  stroke  of  policy,  but  trust  in  man,  not  in  God,  and  met  with  condemnation 
from  Hanani  the  seer.  I.  It  led  to  sacrilege  in  religious  things. 
Treasures  of  the  temple  were  diverted  from  sacred  to  worldly  use.  The  sanctuary 
and  the  palace  robbed  to  bribe  an  earthly  king  to  help  I  Religious  ordinances 
desecrated,  justice  sold,  and  men  bribed  often  by  "  silver  and  gold " ;  gifts 
bestowed  or  promised  with  a  view  to  prevent  judgment  or  corrupt  morals 
abominable.  Bribery  a  canker  in  constitutional  governments,  a  disgrace  in  all 
departments  of  life.  He  who  presents  a  bribe  perpetuates  moral  evil,  sacrifices 
both  truth  and  right  to  selfish  interests.  Absalom  bribed  the  people  to  become 
the  king.     Judas  bribed  by  high  priests  to  effect  the  death  of  Christ. 

"  Judges  and  senates  have  been  bought  for  gold : 
Esteem  and  love  were  never  to  be  sold  *  [Poy>«]. 

II.  It  brought   down   Divine  reproof.    God  not  bribed,  comes  on 
the  scene  in  the  person  of  the  prophet,  "  At  that  time  Hanani  the  seer  came  " 
(ver.   7).      Wrong   must   be   condemned,   right   declared,    and  severe   reproof 
administered    to    evil-doers.       1.  Asa  acted  unworthy  of  GocCs    representative. 
Kings,  priests,  and  judges  God's  vicegerents,  must  be  free  from  corruption  and 
bribery.     "  Thou  shalt  not  wrest  judgment ;    thou  shalt  not  respect  persons, 
neither  take  a  gift."      2.    Asa   sought  not  God's  help.      "  Because  thou   hast 
relied  on  the  King  of  Syria  and  not  relied  on  the  Lord  thy  God."     When  God 
is  forsaken  he  will  assert  his  supremacy  and  claims  in  conscience,  in  providence, 
in  afiliction.     Wicked  men  not  allowed  to  indulge  in  excuses  and  selfish  pleas ; 
nor  to  plead  the  power  of  circumstances,  the  force  of  reason,  and  the  probability 
of  success.     Never  put  money  before  duty,  mai  before  God  1     II.  It  defeated 
its  own  ends.     "  Herein  thou  hast  done  foolishly."     Man's  foresight  not 
always   wise.       1.  Asa    rnissed  the  opportunity  of  a  double  victory.       "There- 
fore is  the    host   of  the    King   of    Syria   escaped   out   of    thine   hand."      A 
victory  over  the  combined  forces  of  Baasha  and  Benhadad  more  splendid  than 
that   over  the   Ethiopians   lost  by  his  conduct      Possible  by  unnecessary  and 
improper  alliances  to  hinder  our  good  and  prevent  God  from  granting  deliverance. 
2.  Asa  exposed  himself  to  greater  danger.    "  Thwefore   from   henceforth   thou 
shalt  have  war"  (ver.  9).     The  cupidity  of  the  one  increased  the  hostility  of  the 
other  (1  Kings  xv.  32).     Those  who  bribe  and  those  bribed  not  to  be  depended 
upon.     Money  will  dissolve  the  most  solemn  league.     For  gold  men  will  sell 
their  votes,  their  conscience,  and  themselves.     Cato  complained  that  M.  Coslius 
the  Tiibune  "  might  be  hired  for  a  piece  of  bread  to  speak  or  to  hold  his  peace," 
Never  rule  conduct  by  the  fear  of  man  instead  of  trust  in  God.     "  The  fear  of 
man  bringeth  a  snare :    but  whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  be  safe 
(may  set  on  high  above  danger,  <fec.)  "  (Prov,  zxix.  25), 
224 


CHAP.  XV1.J  HO  MI  LET  I C  GOMMKNTARYi    CHRONICLES, 


The  Influence  op  Monet, — Verses  2—4. 

There  seems  much  to  excuse  Asa's  conduct.  In  his  days  it  was  often  thought 
right  to  buy  oneself  out  of  daiiger.  But  the  bribery  of  Benhadad  condemned 
and  cannot  be  justified.  Learn  the  influence  of  money.  I.  There  is  a  law- 
ful use  of  money.  Used  for  educational  and  philanthropic  purposes,  to  en- 
courage industry,  arts,  and  sciences,  to  relieve  distress  and  advance  the  cause  of  God, 
it  is  better  than  fleets  and  armies.  Rightly  used,  ''money  answereth  all  things." 
II.  There  is  an  unlawful  use  of  money.  Used  for  selfish  ends,  to  frus- 
trate right  and  bribe  men  to  wrong.  It  may  buy  men  in  limbs,  intellect,  and  con- 
science ;  make  peace  and  create  war.  It  is  one  of  the  mightiest  rulers,  one  of 
the  most  popular  gods  in  the  world!  "  A  man  furnished  with  the  arguments 
from  the  mint  will  convince  his  antagonist  much  sooner  than  one  who  draws 
them  from  reason  and  philosophy.  Gold  is  a  wonderful  clearer  of  the  under- 
standing, it  dissipates  every  doubt  and  scruple  in  an  instant ;  accommodates  itself 
to  the  meanest  capacities  ;  silences  the  loud  and  clamorous,  and  brings  over  the 
most  obstinate  and  inflexible"  [Addisori].  III.  The  unlawful  USe  of  money 
becomes  a  curse.  Put  against  dut;^-,TL  tue,and  God,  its  power  is  pernicious. 
It  breaks  up  alliances,  prepares  for  em  stations,  corrupts  human  nature,  and 
influences  to  injustice.  "  Benhadad  hearkened  unto  King  Asa  "  and  was  a  striking 
contrast  to  Hanani.  True  religion  only  begets  love  for  truth,  upholds  commercial 
honesty,  social  order,  and  just  goveinment.  God  rewards  the  man  who  resists 
bribes  and  acts  uprightly.  "  He  that  despiseth  the  gain  of  oppressions,  that 
shake  I;  11  his  hands  from  holding  of  bribes,  that  stoppeth  his  ears  from  heaiiug 
of  blood,  and  slmtteth  his  eyes  from  seeing  evil,  he  shall  dwell  on  high  ;  his 
place  of  defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks ;  bread  shall  be  given  him, 
his  waters  shall  be  sirre." 

Asa's  Vain  Help. — Verses  2-4  and  12,^ 

Years  of  prosperity  did  not  make  Asa  a  better  man.  **  In  all  time  of  our 
wealth,  &c."  He  forgot  need  of  help,  and  in  times  of  danger  resorted  to  worldly 
policy  and  trusted  not  to  God.  I.  In  time  of  war  he  relied  upon 
human  help.  In  northern  kingdom,  Baasha  exterminated  posterity  of 
Jeroboam,  ruled  upon  the  throne,  and  menaced  Jerusalem.  Bamah,  on  the 
dividing  lines  of  the  two  kingdoms,  built  and  held  in  defence.  Baasha 
strengthened  himself  in  his  bold  designs  by  league  with  King  of  Syria,  but  was 
bought  off,  bribed  to  help  Asa.  This  political  wisdom,  but  spiritual  folly; 
prospered  for  a  time,  but  costly  in  its  triumph.  It  might  be  prevalent  custom, 
but  not  the  path  of  duty.  Is  our  code  of  honour  any  purer  ?  Do  we  seek  to 
get  out  of  difficulties  by  questionable  means  ?  Give  money  for  leagues,  covenants, 
and  deliverance?  Such  reliance  is  vain  help,  entails  mischiefs  in  social  and 
spiritual  matters  which  outweigh  all  apparent  gains.  Better  confide  in  God 
than  in  our  own  schemes.  "  Cursed  be  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and 
maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord."  II.  In  time 

of  sickness  he  relied  upon  foreign  physicians.     No  harm  in 

physicians,  but  physicians  without  scientific  training,  physicians  with  only  charms 
and  mystic  arts,  are  '*  physicians  of  no  value."  (Heathen  doctors  and  witchcraft.) 
1.  This  foolish  conduct.  "Sought  not  to  the  Lord,"  after  his  former  experience 
of  God's  faithfulness  and  truth,  after  his  stern  reproof  by  the  prophet.  What 
avails  physicians  of  greatest  skill  and  kindness  without  God  ?  Entire  confidence 
in  creature,  misplaced  and  dishonours  God.  2.  This  useless  conduct.  Physicians 
could  not  cure ;  the  disease  spread,  and  recovery  impossible.  Physicians, 
Bainisters,  and  friends  but  men,  not  to  be  despised,  only  used  as  servants  of  Grod, 

225 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES,  [ohap.  xyi. 


and  not  as  sum-totala.  In  all  extremities,  sickness,  and  death,  call  upon  the 
Lord  for  help.  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  the  son  of  man,  in  whom 
there  is  no  help  (salvation)"  (Ps.  cxlvi.  3).  "  Oease  ye  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in 
nis  nostrils ;  for  wherein  is  he  to  be  accounted  of  ?  " 

The  Ministry  of  Truth.— r«r55«  7-10. 

I.  Exercised  by  a  Divine  messenger.  "Hanani  the  .eer  came  to  Asa, 
King  ot  Judah  —specially  qualified  and  commissioned  by' God.    "  The  Lord  God 
of  their  fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes  and  sending. 
because  he  had  compassion  on  his  people  and  on  his  dwelling-place  "     IT     Re- 
vealing the  true  source  of  help.     Asa  overcame  Ethiopians  with  very 
many  chariots  and  horsemen.    "  Because  thou  didst  rely  on  the  Lord,  he  delivered 
them  into  thine  hand."     Men   could  not  be  reproved  for  doing  wrong  if  thev 
knew    no    right-for    not    trusting   God,   if  God  was   not  revealed   to  them. 
III.  Treated  with  injustice.  "  Asa  was  wroth  with  the  seer  and  put  him 
m  a  prison,  &c.       Rejection  of  Divine   reproof   sadly  common  and  self-ruinous 
Message  despised  and   messenger   persecuted.     '*  He  that    refuseth   instruction 
(correction)  despiseth  his  own  soul."    IV.    Justified  by  its  results 
I'ruth  may  be  kept  down,  but  never  crushed;  prophets  imprisoned  or    put  to 
death  but  right  prevails.     Divine  reproofs  attested  by  conscience,  vindicated  by 
providence.     Hevenge  is  impotent.     God's  purpose  cannot  be  frustrated. 

God's  Providenck  in  the  World. — Verse  9. 

God     would    have     helped     Asa    if    he    had    called     upon    him  :    for  he 
is   everywhere    present    in    time    of   need— specially    ready    to    help     those 
who  trust  Him.    I.  Providence  benevolent  in  its   desie-n      *'To 
show   himself   strong   in   the  behalf   of  them   whose    heart   is  perfect  'toward 
him        He  not   only   sees  danger,  but  delivers  from  it,   keeps  and  defends  his 
people      If  King  Philip  could  sleep  safely  because  his  friend  Antipater  watched 
over    him,    how    much     more    kind  and   efficient    the   providence    of    God  1 
II.    Providence    personal    in   its    exercise.    "We    learn     from 
observation  of  others.   God  inspects  and  rules  of  himself— not  by  abstract  laws 
and  principles   merely,  not  by  secondary  causes,  not  by  the  eyes  and  agencies 
of  inferior  creatures.     «  He  shews   himself  strong"  in  purpose  and  proceedings 
Tr  1        y^^®^^®    n^inute    in   its    inspection.      "To  and    fro,' 
publicly  and  privately,    in  thought   and  act.     His   vigilance  ever   active  and 
never  worn  out.     Nothing  escapes  his  notice  nor  eludes  his  grasp.     "For  his 
eyes  are  upon  the  ways   of  man,  and   he  seeth  all  his  goings."     IV.    Provi- 
dence     universal       in     its     extent.     "Through  \he    who'le    earth." 
Diana  s  temple  was  burnt  down  when  she  was  busied  at  Alexander's  birth.       "  I 
cannot  be  everywhere  present,"  cried  Napoleon  when  he  lost  one  battle  in'tryincr 
to  gam  another.     "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place  "—on  sea  and  land" 
in    society  and  solitude.      We  cannot  go  from    his  spirit  nor  flee  from    his 
presence.      In  heaven  above  and  hell  beneath  (Psa.  cxxxix.). 

"  What  can  'scape  the  eye 
Of  God,  all-seeing,  or  deceive  his  heart 
Omniscient?"  [Milton']. 

V.  Providence  swift  in  its  operation.  "The  eyes  of  the  Lord 
rtm  to  and  fro."  Implying  celerity,  swiftness  in  giving  relief.  Delay  only 
when  needful  and  good  for  us.  In  promise  and  fulfilment,  "his  word  runneth 
very  swiftly."  Lessons— Encouragement  for  the  believer,  a  warning  to  the 
wicked,  a  reason  for  circumspection  to  all, 
226 


CHAP,  xvl]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


The  Eyes  op  the  Lord. — Terse  9, 

I.  The  description  of  providence.  "  Eyes  of  the  Lord  "  in  Scripture 
signify — 1.  His  knowledge.  2.  His  providence.  (1)  The  immediateness  of  provi- 
dence— His  own  eyes.  (2)  Its  celerity  and  speed.  (3)  Its  extent.  (4)  Its  diligence. 
(5).  Its  efficacy.  II.  The  design  of  providence. ''  To  show  himself  strong, 
&c."  l.He  has  strong  understanding,  and  wisdom  to  contrive.  2.  Strong  affection  to 
love.  3.  Strong  woi-ds  to  cheer  and  fortify.  4.  A  strong  arm  to  exert  almighty 
power.  The  persons  for  whom  those  who  are  truly  gracious  and  sincere 
[«/.  Ryland,  sen.,  1750]. 

Asa's  Pertinacity  in  Wrono-doino. 
I.  When  reproved  for  sin  he  did  not  confess  it.    In  consequence 

he  committed  one  evil  after  another.  David  reproved  by  Nathan  was  conscience- 
stricken,  melted  to  penitence  and  confessed,  "  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord." 
Not  so  Asa.  II.  He  added  greater  guilt  by  trying  to  hide 
his  sin.  He  denied  it,  got  into  a  rage  with  the  seer,  and  persecuted  him. 
Reproved,  probably  in  the  presence  of  courtiers ;  he  was  haughty,  took  advanta^je 
of  his  circumstances,  and  adopted  severe  measures  in  apparent  refutation  of  his 
sin.  "  To  hide  a  sin  with  a  lie  is  like  a  crust  of  leprosy  over  an  ulcer,"  says 
Jeremy  Taylor.  "  He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper ;  but  whoso 
confesseth  and  forsaketh  them  shall  have  mercy."  III.  When  he  would 
neither  confess  nor  forsake  his  sin  God  sent  affliction,  which 
did  not  at  first  humble  him.  Man  could  not  lodge  Asa  from  his 
hiding-place,  but  God's  resources  are  never  exhausted.  What  the  final  issue 
was  appears  uncertain.  From  Scripture  references  the  last  expedient  might 
humble  the  king  and  bring  him  to  God.  But  at  beginning  of  sickness  not 
in  right  state  of  mind,  and  applied  to  wrong  source  for  help.  "  This  is  a  striking 
example  of  pertinacity  in  sin,  which  carries  with  it  a  solemn  warning.  Who 
would  have  expected  this  of  the  once  pious  Asa !  What  an  urgent 
enforcement  does  this  example  furnish  of  the  exhortation  of  the  apostle  :  '  Take 
heed,  brethren,  lest  there  be  in  any  of  you  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief  in  departing 
from  the  living  God.  But  exhort  one  another  daily,  <fec.'  That,  indeed,  must 
be  a  most  treacherous  and  deceitful  thing  which  could  lead  a  rational  and 
religious  being  so  far  away  from  the  truth  and  piety  as  thus  to  persist  in  his 
iniquity,  and  attempt  to  justify  himself  before  God — yea,  more  than  that, 
virtually  to  engage  in  an  unequal  warfare  with  Heaven,  and  to  accomplish, 
by  unblessed  means,  what  God  had  pronounced  impracticable*'  [Rev,  W, 
Sparrovi\. 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yers.  5,  6.     He  built  Geha.     Forti-  ployed    to    spread    the  word   of  God. 

Jications     demolished.      1 .    Men  pros-  The  stronghold;  of  the  world  become  the 

trated  in  their  wicked  design.     2.  The  defences  of  the  Church.  I.  This  illustrated 

materials  by  which  they   carried  out  by  the  case  of  Eamah.  II.  It  has  been 

that   design     captured  and   used    for  often  observed  since — 1.    The  world's 

opposite  purposes.  Ramah  taken,  "  the  stronghold  of  science  has   been   rifled 

stones     and     timber  "  used   to    build  by  the  Church  for  its  defence,  and  the 

other  defences,       Voltaire's     printing  woild  defeated  with  its  own  weapons, 

press,  by  which  he  sought  to    deluge  2.  By  the  grace  of  God,  men  who  were  a3 

France   with  infidelity,    feU  into    the  Ramah — Saul  of  Tarsus  for  example  — 

hands  of  the  Bible  Society,  and   em-  have  been  made  as  the  outworks  of 

227 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xvi. 


Christianity  \Bih.  Museum].  It  is 
a  fine  use  to  which  Bossuet  has  turned 
this  military  incident  as  illustrating 
the  duty,  not  of  rejecting  the  materials 
or  the  arguments  collected  by  un- 
believers or  by  heretics,  but  of  employ- 
ing them  to  build  up  the  truth, 
"  Batissons  les  forteresses  de  Juda  des 
debris  et  des  ruines  de  celles  de 
Samarie  "  [Stanley], 

Ver.  9.  Whatever  is  done  in  the 
ivorld  falls  under  the  notice  of  God. 
Not  that  he  needs  move  from  place  to 
place,  or  run  up  and  down  from 
country  to  country  to  see  what  is  done, 
for  by  one  infinite,  indivisible  act,  he 
beholdeth  all  things  in  all  places ;  but 
the  Scripture  thus  teaches  the  infalli- 
bility and  particularity  of  his  know- 
ledge; even  as  we  are  said  to  know 
those  things  infallibly  which  we  have 
viewed  upon  the  place ;  for  otherwise 
there  is  neither  high  nor  low,  far  nor 
near,  first  nor  last,  to  Gc  i  all  things 
being  at  once  before  him  for  ever 
(Jer.  xxiii.  23).  If  the  Lord  is  every- 
where, let  us  <  very  where  see  the 
Lord.  Moses  saw  him  that  was 
invisible.  Did  we  but  keep  this  com- 
mon principle  warm  upon  our  spirits. 
The  Lord  seeth  under  the  ivhole  heaven, 
how  heavenly  would  our  lives  be  I 
And  seeing  the  Lord  seeth  as  under 
the  whole  heaven,  so  into  the  hearts  of 
all  men,  how  should  it  deter  us,  even 
from  heart  sins,  and  the  closest 
hypocrisy  I  Again,  the  Lord  seeing  in 
all  things,  disposeth  all  things.  As 
his  hand  set  up  all  in  order  at  first, 
so  his  eye  hath  kept  all  in  order  ever 


since,  and  will  do  for  ever.  Take 
these  conclusions  concerning  the  sight 
of  God  :  First,  the  Lord  beholdeth  all 
things  distinctly,  not  in  gross  only — 
the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest.  He 
looks  upon  every  parcel  and  opens  the 
whole  pack  of  human  afiairs.  Secondly, 
he  beholds  every  thing  and  person  per- 
fectly, fully,  quite  through.  His  is  an 
intentive  and  most  attentive  view. 
Thirdly,  in  seeing  he  governs  every- 
thing effectually  and  works  it  to  his 
own  ends.  Fourthly,  he  seeth  all 
things  together,  not  successively,  or 
one  thing  after  another.  He  that  is 
all  eye  seeth  all  at  once,  all  is  one. 
"Known  unto  God  are  all  his  works 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world." 
Hence,  take  two  inferences  :  the  first 
serving  for  the  instruction  and  conso- 
lation of  all  who  know  and  fear  God  ; 
and  the  second  for  conviction  and 
terror  to  the  wicked  [Caryl], 

Vers.  12-14.  Asa's  End.  I.Asa's 
sickness  and  death.  At  first  afiliction 
unimproved,  grew  more  severe.  Death 
sad,  certain,  and  hopeful.  2.  Asa's 
burial,  magnificent,  honoured,  and 
admonitory.  *'  The  eminent  piety  and 
usefulness  of  good  men,"  says  one, 
"  ought  to  be  remembered  to  their 
praise,  thoiioli  they  have  had  their 
blemishes.  Let  their  faults  be  buried 
in  their  graves,  while  their  services  are 
remembered  over  their  graves.  He 
that  said, '  There  is  not  a  just  man  that 
doeth  good  and  sinneth  not,'  yet  said 
also,  *  The  memory  of  the  just  is 
blessed,'  and  let  it  be  so.** 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XVI. 


Vers.  3-6.  Silver.  "  A  bribe  is  a 
price ;  reward,  gift,  or  favour  bestowed 
or  promised,  with  a  view  to  pervert  the 
judgment  or  corrupt  the  conduct  of  a 
judge,  witness,  or  other  person  "  [Web- 
ster]. "  Philip  of  Macedon  was  a  man 
of  most  invincible  reason  this  way,'*  says 
Addison.  "  He  refuted  by  it  all  the 
wisdom  of  Athens — confounded  their 
statesmen,  struck  their  orators  dumb, 
and  at  length  argued  them  out  of  their 
hberties"  [quoted  by  Dr,  Thomas], 
223 


Yer.  9.  Strong.  Csesar  was  accus- 
tomed to  write  short  letters.  One  of 
his  generals,  Quintus  Cicero,  was  in 
great  extremity,  being  besieged  by 
fierce  hordes  of  Gauls,  when  he  received 
from  him  the  following  message :  "  Caesar 
to  Cicero:  Keep  up  your  spirits.  Expect 
help."  Let  us  expect  help  from  God, 
trust  to  him  instead  of  relying  on  man 
in  times  of  extremity  and  danger. 

Ver.  10.  Wroth  with  the  seer.  The 
most  diflicult  province  in  friendship  is 


ciur.  XVII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


letting  a  man  see  his  faults  and  errors,  always   be   strictly  just    ami    not   too 

which  should,  if  possible,  be  so  contrived  frequent  [^BacoTi]. 

that  he  may  perceive  our  advice  is  given  Vers.  13,  14.  Asa  slept, 

him  not  so  much   to  please  ourselves  ^xr-  ^  +i,       *  i    *  i.        -u  t.  *.\     ^  *.    t    ^^ 

„       ,  .                   ,       \              ^,  "  Kings  then  at  last  have  but  the  lot  of  all, 

as  for  his  own   advantage.      The   re-  ^y  their  own  conduct  they  must  stand  or 

preaches  therefore  of  a  friend  should  fall"  [Cowper], 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


Critioaij  Notes.]  This  chapter  is  peculiar  to  the  writer  of  Chronicles.  Jehoshaphat 
becoming  king  takes  measures  for  defence  of  his  kingdom  (vers.  l-9j ;  in  consequence 
grows  in  power  (vers.  10-19). 

Vers.  1-6. — Jehoshaphat' s  measures  for  defence.  Strengthened^  prepared  to  resist,  to  defend 
against  attack  from  northern  kingdom.  Ver.  2.  Garrisons  or  governors  (cf.  1  Ki.  iv. 
7-19),  all  fortresses  filled  with  troops,  military  stations  established  in  various  parts  of  the 
country  and  in  cities  of  Mount  Ephraim  which  belonged  to  Jehoshaphat  (ch.  xv.  8). 
Ver.  3.  First,  ancient  imitated  piety  of  his  great  ancestor  in  early  part  of  his  reign. 
Baalim  in  contrast  with  the  God  of  his  father,  idol  deities  generally  (Judg.  ii.  11).  Ver.  4. 
Doings  of  Israel.  Special  idolatrous  customs  of  northern  kingdom  at  the  time  and  the 
worship  of  the  calves.  Ver,  5.  Presents,  freewill  offerings,  not  ordinary  taxes  paid  to 
royal  treasury.  "  Some  reason  to  believe  that  a  '  benevolence  '  of  this  kind  was  expected 
as  a  matter  of  course  at  the  accession  of  a  new  sovereign"  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  6. 
Lifted  up,  not  proud  (chs.  xxvi.  16  ;  xxxii.  25) ;  exalted  by  the  ways  of  Jehovah  (marg.),  was 
encouraged,  emboldened  by  a  sense  of  Divine  favour  and  ventured  on  reforms. 

Vers.  7-11. — Mural  measures.  Frinces,  extraordinary  commissioners  and  priests  along 
with  them.  A.  deputation  of  live  princes,  nine  Levites  assisted  by  two  priests,  took  a  copy 
of  the  law  with  them,  sent  on  tour  in  towns  of  Judah  to  give  religious  instruction  to  the 
people.  Vers.  9-11.  Presents,  Philistines  tributaries  or  wishing  to  become  such  ;  Arabians, 
nomad  tribes  on  south  of  Dead  Sea,  sought  protection  and  paid  tribute  in  cattle. 

Vers.  12-19. — Jehoshaphat' s  greatness  and  prosperity.  CasfZrs,  places  of  defence  situated 
for  protection  of  roads,  or  valleys  opening  into  the  country  (ch.  xxvii.  4).  Store,  cities  for 
keeping  ammunition  and  provisions  in  preparation  of  siege.  Business,  much  labour  also 
expended  on  old  "  cities  of  Judah,"  besides  building  and  fortifying  other  places.  Vers. 
14-19.  "  Whenever  a  census  was  taken  among  Israelites,  the  numbering  was  by  tribes 
and  families.  Hence  the  expression  in  text,  which  occurs  thirteen  times  in  first  chapter 
of  Numbers"  [^Speak.  Com.].  Captains,  princes  of  thousands,  highest  officers  in  command. 
Three  of  them,  Adnah  the  highest  post.  By  the  side  of  him  who  commanded  largest 
division,  Jehohanan  and  Amaziah  had  command  of  280,000  and  200,000  men.  Ver.  16.  Amaz. 
a  volunteer,  or  by  an  act  of  his  own  devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.  Light- 
armed  and  heavy-armed  troops  waited  on  the  king.  "  These  numbers  have  been  with 
good  reason  regarded  as  corrupt  by  most  critics.  They  cannot  be  successfully  defended 
either  as  probable  in  themselves  or  as  in  harmony  with  the  other  statements  of  the 
military  force,  or  of  the  population,  contained  in  our  author  "  [S-prak.  Com.'].  Others 
account  for  the  numbers  by  including  every  one  fit  to  bear  arms  in  time  of  peace  pursu- 
ing their  daily  callings  ;  auxiliaries  from  tributary  Philistines  and  Arabs  ;  and  all  who  on 
religious  grounds  attached  themselves  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah  [cf.  Murphy^ 

EOMILETIG&. 

Jbhoshaphat's  Good  Beginning. — Verses  1—19. 

Natural  for  Jehoshaphat  to  succeed  his  father,  but  in  defending  his  kingdom 
ne  indicated  a  policy  ;  in  rising  above  his  surroundings,  resisting  prevalent 
mistoms,  and  introducing   reforms  he  made   a  good   beginning.       Taking  the 

-  229 


EOMILETIG  VUMMEISTARY i  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xvn 


chapter  as  a  sketch— I.  Jehoshaphat's  natural  defences.    Jehosha- 
phat  "strengthened  himself  against  Israel."      During  Asa's  decay  Ahab  acted 
with  vigour.     Israel  getting  a  formidable  kingdom,  needful  for  Jehoshaphat  to 
bestir  hiinself  and  maintain  his  own.     This  done  not  by  league  and  bribe,  but  in 
uatural,  just,  and  quiet  method  against  possible  attack.      A   prudent  man  fore- 
sees the  evil  and  prepares  for  it.     The  tempers  of  men  must  be  watched,  the 
threatenings  of  the  times  met,  and  weak  places   should  be  strengthened'  and 
guarded.     To  ignore  inevitable  tendencies,  to  act  without  foresight  and  prepara- 
tion, inost  ruinous.    II.  Jehoshapliat's  moral  reforms.     He  cared  for 
the  spiritual  welfare  as  well  as  for  the  outward  security  of  the  kingdom.  Anxious 
to  restore  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  to  instruct  the   people,  and  to  administer 
justice  (xix.  5).     1.  Reforms  springing  from  personal  piety.     He  himself  upright 
and  sincere  in  serving  God.    A  man  of  foresight  and  reverence,  of  deep  convic- 
tion and  uncompromising  principle.     One  who  felt  God's  presence  more  needful 
than  garrisons  in  cities  and  forces  on  land.       2.  Reforms  displaying  zeal  against 
idolatry.     He   walked  "  not   after  the  doings  of   Israel  "  (verse  4),  was  dead 
against  calf  worship,  strictly  adhered  to  Divine  enactments,  removed  monuments, 
and  destroyed  groves  which  disgraced  the  land,  and  almost  entirely  cleansed  it 
from  idylatry  (xx.  33).     3.  Reforms  connected  with  the  histruction  of  the  people. 
A  commission  of  education  was  formed,  equipped,  and  sent  "  about  throughout 
all  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  taught  the  people  "   (ver.  9).      Kings  and  princes 
help  a  nation,  not  by  stifling  inquiry,  attempting  to  force  opinion  and  punishing 
heterodoxy ;  but  by  spreading  education,  encouraging  virtue,  and  exalting  God's 
word.       Nations  who  receive  this  word  most    tolerant   and  intelligent,  most 
philanthropic  and  exalted.     III.  Jehoshaphat's  consequent  pros- 
perity and  honour.      In  personal  conduct    separated    alike   from   gross 
idolatry  and  Israelitish  apostasy  ;  in  government  ruling  in  the  fear  of  God,  and 
for  the  good  of  his  subjects, /'the  Lord  stablished  the  kingdom  in  his  hand."    1,  At 
home  peace  and  plenty.     His  people  loyal  and  submissive,   voluntary  oifferings 
abundant—"  riches  and  honour  "  without  stint.     2.  Abroad  security  and  honour. 
None  disturbed  his  peaceful  reign,  hostile  peoples  bowed  before  him,  tlie  tributes 
of  nations  poured  into  his  treasury,  and  the  fear  of  God  "  feU  upon  all  the 
kingdoms  "  with  its  restraining  influence. 

Jehoshaphat's  Uprightness. — Verses  3^  4. 

Jehoshaphat  expressly  commended  for  integrity,  even  when  condemned  for  his 
sin  (xix.  3).  This  corresponds  with  his  conduct  at  beginning  of  his  reign, 
and  the  continuance  of  his  uprightness  after  sad  and  untoward  events.  I.  A 
man's  character  is  determined  by  his  relation  to  God.  He 
acknowledged  and  *'  sought  the  Lord  God  of  his  father."  In  some  relation  all 
stand  to  God,  and  according  to  conduct,  not  creed,  profession  nor  opinion,  moral 
character  and    condition    determined.       II.   A    man's    character    and 

course  of  life  are  specially  observed  by  God.  David's  life  described 
in  parts,  each  part  under  God's  inspection.  Youth,  manhood,  and  old  age  ; 
relapses  and  restorations  known  to  him.  Scripture  lives  detected,  impartially 
given  in  temptations,  failings,  and  virtues.  *'  Thou,  0  Lord,  knowest  me  :  thou 
hast  seen  me  and  tried  mine  heart  toward  (with)  thee"  (Jer.  xii.  3).  III.  The 
latter  part  of  a  man's  life  may  be  worse  than  the  first  part. 
''  "VVi^  first  ways  of  his  father  David."  A  contrast  between  the  earlier  and  the 
latter  days  of  David,  who  relapsed  and  dishonoured  in  character.  Age  should 
bring  wisdom,  honour,  and  meetness  for  eternity.  The  seed  ripens  for  the  crop. 
Youth  grows  into  maturity,  and  the  student  should  give  the  accomplished 
scholar.  Sad  to  deteriorate  in  life  (Solomon,  Jehoshaphat,  &c.).  *'  Sad  when 
230 


CHAP.  XVII]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CFtRONTCLh^, 


you  have  to  go  back  to  a  man's  youth  to  find  his  virtues,  or  his  most  conspicuous 
excellences ;  but  most  beautiful  when  a  man's  earlier  mistakes  are  lost  in  the 
richness  and  wisdom  of  his  later  conduct "  [Parker].  IV.  The  good  only 
and  not  the  evil  in  a  man's  life  should  be  imitated.  Jeho- 
shaphat  walked  in  the  godly  ways  of  David  ;  customary  and  easier  to  follow  the 
evil.  Multitudes  and  fashions  influence  ;  men  naturally  prone  to  the  inferior 
and  to  forget  the  lofty  and  spiritual.  The  universal  influence  of  bad  examples 
presupposes  a  universal  readiness  to  yield  to  it.  "  Be  ye  therefore  followers 
(Greek,  imitators)  of  God  as  dear  children  "  (Eph.  v.  1). 

*•  Presume  not  that  I  am  the  thing  I  was, 
For  I  have  turned  away  my  former  self, 
So  will  I  those  that  keep  me  company  "  [Shakes."]. 

The  Teachinq  Commission.-^  Fer^e*  6-9. 

This  a  counterpoise  to  influences  which  had  degraded  Judah,  and  a  continua- 
tion of  Asa's  reaction.     These  men  employed  eminently  useful,  though  otherwise 
unknown.    I.  The  persons  which  composed  the  commission. 
Officers  of  court  and  camp,  of  civil  and  religious  authority.     1.  The  princes.     A 
deputation  of   five  to  represent  civil  and  constitutional  government.     2.  The 
Levites.     Nine   in  number   to   instruct  in  ritual  and  temple   service.     3.  The 
priests.     Two  to  explain  the  nature  and  enforce  the  duties  of  religion.     The 
commission  not  warriors  nor  revolutionists,  but  reformers  and  revivalists.     To 
educate  the  people  in  their  duty  to  God,  the  king,  and  to  each  other.     II.  The 
work  which  the  commission  hai  to  perform.     Educational  and 
religious.     1.  To  teach  the  people.     "  They  taught  in  Judah  "  (ver.  9).     Educa- 
tion required  to  chase  away  superstition,  ensure  just  legislation,  develop  the 
energies,  and  alleviate  the  condition  of  the  people.     2.  To  expound  the  word. 
*'  The  book  of  the  law  "  with  them.     God's  law  their  text-book  and  authority. 
The  command  of  the  prince,  the  creed  of  the  priest,  and  the  ritual  of  the  Levite 
not  to  displace  God's  word.     A  law  above  man,  a  book  more  than  human  to 
appeal  to  :  a  written  statute,  an  authoritative  declaration,  a  final  revelation  to 
which  to  call  men's  attention.     "  In  vain  do  they  worship  me,  teaching  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men."     III.  The  effects  which  followed 
the  work   of  the   commission.     The  nation  improved,  reformed,   and 
greatly  blessed.     1.  In   outward  prosperity.     Peace   and   prosperity   enjoyed ; 
insurrections  and  wars  prevented ;  unbroken  opportunities  for  pursuit  of  educa- 
tion and  commerce.     2.  In  moral  character.     People  taught  the  law  of  God, 
returned  to  religious  ways  and  worship.     God's  presence    their   defence   and 
dignity  (ver.  10).     Such  the  efiect  of  the   Bible  at  all  times.     Its  principles 
tend  to  civilise  and  elevate,  reform  and  refine.     It  is  the  foe  of  oppi-ession,  the 
protector  of  the  weak,  and  the   Magna   Charta   of   true   Hberty.     What   the 
boasted  civilisation  of  ancient  or  modern  nations  without  the  Bible  1     Judo-e 
Bible  teaching  by  its  fruits  I     Everywhere  it  justifies  its  existence  and  claims. 
Its  itinerant  ministry  and  popular  teaching  in  the  providence  of  God  has  preserved 
this  country  from  revolutions  and  wars  amid  the  ruins  and   dissolutions   of 
European  nations  1 

Jehoshaphat^s  Greatness. — Verses  12-19. 

I.  In  the  extent  of  his  possessions.  "Castles  and  cities  of  store," 
places  for  victuals  and  arms.  "  He  had  much  business,"  undertakings  of  religion, 
preparations  for  peace  and  war.     A   great  kingdom  and  great  responsibilities 

committed  to  his  care.    II.  In  the  vastness  of  his  army.     The  warriors 

231 


HOUILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [ch*p,  xvii 


aixanged  m  the  army  according  to  their  father's  houses.  Consisted  of  five 
unequal  divisions  comprised  1.160,000  men,  without  includinTthose  wC 
garrisoned  the  fortresses.  No  monarch,  since  the  time  of  Solomon  Zu-vHed 
Jehoshaphat  in  the  extent  of  his  revenue,  in  the  strength  of  his  fortifiluons 
and  the  number  of  his  troops  [Jamieson].  III.  In  the  skiU  of  hTc.* 
captains.  Five  great  generals,  loyal  in  spirit,  mighty  in  valour  and  rfdv  for 
any  undertaking.     "  These  waited  on  the  king  " '  (ver  19)  ^ 

"There  is  not  a  sovereign  in  Europe  or  in  the  world,  but  might  read  this 
chapter  with  advantage.  1 .  It  shows  most  forcibly  that  true  religion  is  're  bas  s 
of  the  state;  and  that  wherever  it  prospers,  there  the  state  prospers  2  It 
shows  also  that  it  is  the  wisdom  of  kin/s  to  encourage  reli^on  Jtlall  the  r 
power  and  influence;  for  if  the  hearts  of  the  subjects  b^  noHound  and 
influenced  by  true  religion,  vain  is  the  appKcation  of  kws,  fines,  impri^onmente 
or  corporal  punishment  of  any  kind.  3.  A  religious  nktion  feeC  aTeat 
nation;  it  ,s  loved  by  its  friends,  it  is  dreaded  by  its  enemies.  4.  It  is  ever  a 
peacefu  and  united  nation :  the  blessings  of  religion,  and  a  wholesle Tnd 
paternal  government,  are  .so  fully  felt  and  prized,  that  all  find  it  theTrTnterTs^ 
to  preserve  and  defend  them.  Harmony,  peac;  piety,  and  strength  are  the 
stabihty  of  such  times.     May  Britain  know  and  value  th;m  1"  [A.  Clarke] 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yers.  4^    Jehoshap/M'3  religion.    1.  it;     2.  Its  policy  was  not  inferior  to 
Fract^cal^n Us possesszon.  Jlot  formal,  its  benevolence;  3.  The  benefitsarisin^ 
complimentary,  nor  expedient  for  the  from   it  were  incalculable.      II    Thf 
times.      A   man   of    deep  conviction,  manner  in  which  it  was  carried  into 
courage  and  generous  patriotism.     If  execution.      This     suggest-       That 
the  end  had  on  y  been  as  beginning,  loyalty  to  the  king  demands  our  concur- 
almost  a  complete  character  !  2.  Ear-  rencewith  him  inhisgoodwork   2  ThTt 
neHzn  Us  nature.     He  "  sought "  ear-  gratitude  to  the  Jewish  natfon  demands 
nestlyand  constantly  "the  Lord  God  of  it  at  our  hands ;     3.   roveto^he 
his  father^"     3.  ^rom^nent  in  its  testi-  rising   generatioi  should  S  us   to 
mmy.     For  eighteen  years-contem-  avail  ourselves  of  the  present  onpoi 
porarywithAhabaudJezebel,theperiod  tunity  to   promote  ther welfare^! 
of  Baalism  in  Israel-firm  and  faithful.  That  a  concern  for  the  honour  of  our 
"sought  not  unto  Ba^ Inn."      4.  Self-  holy  religion  should  operate  to  un^  e 
<Ur,yzng  vmts  example.  "  iNot  after  the  us    all   i^    executing  the  roya"   ed  ct 
domgs  of  Israel,"  fashionable  and  pre-  [0.  Simeon,  M.A  1 
valent;  but  "lifted  up  "in  conformity  Ver.   13.      5^^,,  which  he  per- 
to  God  and  delight  in  God's  service,  formed  diligently,  personally,  and  IZ- 

rheworkmghandandthehappyheart.  roughly.  "  Many  works  (LXX.)  goine 

The  chief  things  for  a  traveller  on  such  forward  at  once ;  a  negotious  ma™ 

a  pilgrimage  as  ours  is  a  right  goal  he.      His   busine.ss,  say  some,  lay  £ 

before  him   the  right  road  before  him,  beautifying  and  fortifying  thok  cities 

cMef^ttuItrnT  ';'*'."  ""■      "^""^  Augustlas  Vied  at'^hi^  death,  that 

chief  thoughts  of  which  we  are  here  whereas  he  had  found  Rome  buUt  with 

reminded  are :   1-  Religion  pervading  brick,  he  had   left  it  made  of  m^ble 

our  hfe— the  Lord.     2.  Activity  per-  [Trapp]                                         maroie 

vading  our    religion-the   ways.      3.  Ver.  16.     WUlingly  offered  himself. 

Oheertulness    pervading    our    activity  The  volunteer-1.  Religious  in  soil 

[(7W«m  Treasury,  1 859]  Recognition  of  "  the  Lord."  2.  Resolute 

J     :u      J-  /  '/f-^"^"^*"'-     '•  ^®     inarms.     The  vows  of  God  upon  him 
notice  the  edict  of  king  Jehoshaphat:      3.    Valiant  in   service.     LikeTncient 
232         ''®''®^°1®"'*  displayed  in     votaries  in  Mohammedan  armies,  never 


CHAP,  xvm.]  BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARYt  CHRONICLES. 


known  to  return  home  without  victory.  «<  tt„  oi^o,,^  ^-  „  „v^  „• -,        ..,  ,-11. 

,,  mi,             1    1,1         J     n  j.i_                XI    ^  ^^  always  wins  who  sides  with  Thee, 

The  people  blessed  all  the  men  that  To  him  no  chance  is  lost ; 

willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwell  at  Thy  will  is  sweetest  to  him,'  when 

Jerusalem."  I*  triumphs  at  his  cost"  \F,  W.  Fdber\ 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XVII, 

Yers.  3-5.  The  Lord  with  him,  stab-  bulent  princes  and  fierce  warriors,  and 

lished  the  kingdom,  d;c.     God  is  the  only  the  effect  of  that  authority  in  meliora- 

source  of  stability  as  infinite,  absolute,  ting  manners,  checking  violence,  and 

and  changeless.     He  gives  stability  to  introducing  a  system  of  morals  which 

his  word,  church,  and  people.     "  In  the  inculcate  peace,  moderation,  and  justice 

great  hand  of  God  I  stand"  [Shake-  [Chancellor Kent]. 

speare],  Yer.   13.     Much  business.     Nothing 

Yers.  7-9.  The  hook  0/ the  law.  The  is  denied  to  well-directed  labour;  no- 
influence  of  the  Bible  has  been  very  thing  is  ever  to  be  attained  without  it 
efficient  towards  the  introduction  of  a  [Sir  Joshua  Reynolds].  All  sorts  of 
better  and  more  enlightened  sense  of  mischiefs  happen  to  unoccupied  pro- 
right  and  justice  among  the  several  fessors  of  religion;  there  is  no  evil 
governments  of  Europe.  It  taught  from  which  they  are  secure.  Better 
the  duty  of  benevolence  to  strangers,  would  it  be  for  them  to  accept  the 
of  humanity  to  the  vanquished,  of  the  lowest  occupation  for  the  Lord  Jesus 
obligation  of  good  faith,  of  the  sin  of  than  remain  the  victims  of  inaction 
murder,  revenge,  and  rapacity.  The  [SpurgeonX 
history  of  Europe,  during  the  earlier 

periods  of  modern  history,  abounds  with  «  Troubles  spring  from  idleness, 

interesting  and  strong  cases  to  show  And  grievous  toils  from  needless  ease" 

the  authority  of  revelation  over  tur-  IFrankliiil. 


CHAPTER    XYIIL 


Critical  Notes.]     This  chapter  relates  Jehoshaphat's  alliance  with  Ahab  (vers.  1-3) ; 

induced  to  go  to  Ram.-gil.  (vers.  4-11) ;  Micaiah*s  adverse  prediction  (vers.  12-17)  ;  con- 
tinued reproof  (vers.  18-22) ;  and  sufferings  (vers.  23-28);  tlie  two  kings  enter  battle  with 
sad  results  (vers.  28-34).     Witli  this  chapter  corresponds  1  Ki.  xxii.  1-35. 

Vers.  1-3. — Jehoshaphafs  alliance  with  Ahab.  Affinity.  Joram,  his  son,  married  Athaliah, 
daughter  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  (xxi.  6).  Years,  in  Jehoshaphat's  seventeenth  year,  eight 
after  marriage.  Killed,  gave  magnificent  feast  to  influence  bim  in  favour  of  enterprise. 
Ramoth.,  heights  of  Gilead,  in  territory  of  Gad,  to  wrest  from  King  of  Syria.  Ver.  3. 
Jehoshaphat  easily  consents,  without  consulting  God. 

Vers.  4-11. — The  consultations.  Previous  to  declaration  of  war  customary  to  consult 
prophets  (1  Sam.  xxviii.).  Ahab  complied.  400  prophet?,  creatures  of  Ahab  connected  with 
calf-worship,  encouraged  the  king.  Yer.  6.  Jehoshaphat,  dissatisfied,  inq^Iired  for  a  true 
prophet ;  besides,  in  addition,  or  yet  more.  Ver.  7.  Micaiah,  known  only  froiii  this  incident, 
sent  for.  Always  evil,  lit.,  all  his  days,  wanting  in  Kings.  Ver.  8.  OJflccis,  eunuch  or  cham- 
berlain. Ver.  9.  Graphic  scene,  void  place  (^open  space,  B^ey.  Yers.).  A  large  area  for 
markets,  courts,  and  business.  Each  king  on  his  portable  throne,  clothed  in  royal 
garments,  and  spectators  all  around.  Ver.  10.  Zed.,  more  prominent  than  rest. 
Had  made  previously,  in  anticipation  of  some  such  occasion  as  now  given  ISpeafc  Com.]. 

233 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  Cchap.  xviii 


Hm^s,  like  candle  extinguishers  (often  worn  as  military  ornaments)  ;  iron,  symbol  of 
military  power.  Push,  a  common  metaphor  for  attacking  and  overcoming  enemies. 
Thus  two  heroes  impersonated  ;  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah  would  triumph  (Deut.  xxxiii. 
17 ;  Ps.  xliv.  5  ;  Dan.  viii.  4). 

Vers.  12-17. — MicaiaKs  adverse  prediction.  The  well-intentioned  messenger  tries  to 
persuade  Micaiah  to  agree  with  majority,  predict  success,  and  be  released  from  prison 
and  severer  punishment.  He  rejects  counsel,  remains  fearless  and  firm.  Ver.  14.  Go  up^ 
the  ironical  answer  of  the  400,  well  understood  by  Ahab.  Adjure,  put  on  oath,  he  changes 
tone  and  becomes  very  serious.  Ver.  16.  Saw,  purport  of  this  vision  that  Israel  would  be 
defeated,  dispersed,  and  king  destroyed. 

Vers.  18-28. — Micaiah' s  reproof  and  sufferings.  Saw  in  providence  of  God  events  in 
fuller  detail.  Therefore  liear  the  Divine  will.  Sitting,  in  splendour  and  supremacy 
(Ps.  ix.  7  ;  xi.  4  ;  xlvi.  6,  &c.).  Standing,  about  him  on  both  sides.  Ver.  19.  Entice, 
persuade  or  deceive  (1  Ki.  xxii.  20).  Ver.  2O.  A  spirit,  the  spirit,  i.e.,  "the  evil  spirit," 
Satan  some ;  others,  "  the  spirit  of  prophecy  "  in  the  400,  under  the  control  and  command 
of  the  Governor  of  the  universe,  at  his  direction  and  permission.  Ver.  21.  Li/ing  spirit, 
to  mislead  when  consulted.  **  The  details  of  a  vision  cannot  safely  be  pressed  any  more 
than  the  details  of  a  parable  "  [cf.  Speak.  Cotn.'\.  Ver.  23.  Zed.,  by  this  fearful  disclosure,  is 
vexed,  presumed  upon  liis  favour  with  Ahab,  smote  Micaiah  in  contempt  and  scorn 
(Job  xvi.  10  ;  Jer.  xx.  2  ;  Lam.  iii.  30;  Mk.  xiv.  65)  ;  and  insinuates  that  the  spirit  did  not 
speak  by  him.  Ver.  24.  The  event  would  be  a  reply,  when  he  would  go  from  chamber  to 
chamber,  in  some  secret  place.  To  hide  himself  in  shame  and  fear  of  punishment  for 
his  false  predictions.  Ver.  25.  Micaiah  sent  back  to  prison,  with  scanty  prison  fare ; 
submitted,  courageously  reproves  the  king  ;  predicts  his  death,  and  appeals  to  the  people, 
who  should  witness  the  result. 

Vers.  29-34. — War  undertaken.  Ahab  afraid,  disguises  himself,  ungenerously  advises 
Jehosh.  to  fight  in  royal  attire.  Ver.  30.  Command  of  King  of  Syria  proves  the  prudence 
of  Ahab's  conduct.  Ver,  31.  Jehosh.  only  king  in  field.  Cried  out,  whether  to  followers  or 
to  enemy,  not  stated.  Perceived,  probably  from  his  cry,  and  pursuit  ceased.  Ver.  33. 
Venture,  i.e.,  in  his  simplicity,  without  special  aim  or  intention.  Joints,  parts  where 
pieces  of  armour  fitted  together.  Ahab  wounded,  notwithstanding  his  precaution  ;  kept 
standing  in  his  chariot  during  the  day  the  battle  raged,  at  sunset  all  over.  The  war-cry 
went  through  the  host,  every  man  returned  to  his  city  and  to  his  country.  But  Ahab 
was  carried  .dead  to  Samaria,  and  there  buried. 

HOMILETICS. 

The  Danger  op  Worldly  Friendship. — Verses  1-3. 

Jehoshaphat  displeased  God  by  his  choice  of  friends,  and  began  a  downward 
course,  marked  by  gradual  steps.  I.  Friendship  beginning  with  family 
affinity.  Jehoshaphat  "  joined  affinity  with  Ahab  "  by  uniting  his  son  with 
Ahab's  daughter.  Perhaps  proud,  for  he  "had  riches  and  honour  in  abundance," 
and  did  not  want  Jehoram  ''to  marry  beneath  him."  Nothing  but  marriage  with 
a  royal  house  would  satisfy — perhaps  to  conciliate  Israel  and  bring  them  back  to 
Jehovah.  Evil  cannot  be  conciliated.  This  might  be  considered  good  policy, 
but  morally  wrong ;  disobedient  to  God*s  command,  and  brought  the  kingdom 
and  royal  house  to  verge  of  destruction.  Unsuitable  marriages  to  preserve 
name,  property  in  family  circle.  "  Be  not  unequally  yoked  together  with 
unbelievers."  II.  Friendship  leading  to  social  visits.  "After 
certain  years  he  went  down  to  Ahab  to  Samaria."  What  more  natural  and 
needful  to  improve  acquaintance  and  inquire  about  welfare  !  Eeceived  in  royal 
style,  but  corrupted  in  moral  character.  Joins  in  converse  with  ungodly,  can 
bear  their  company,  and  dwell  in  their  house  (Lot  in  Sodom).  He  becomes 
weaker,  more  complaisant,  and  exposed  to  risk.  "  I  am  as  thou  art,  and  my 
people  as  thy  people."  "  What  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  unrighteous- 
ness? &c."  III.  Friendship  ending  in  alliance  for  war.  "He 
persuaded  him  to  go  up."  Feasted  so  splendidly,  friendship  so  close,  extrication 
difficult.  The  height  of  incivility,  most  unreasonable  to  refuse  !  Evil  wrought 
on  his  mind,  spiritual  constitution  not  proof  against  bad  atmosphere.  He  lost 
power  to  testify ;  censure  lost  its  energy ;  ius  presence  no  longer  a  restraint  on 
23i 


CHAP,  xmi.]  nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


folly,  and  impossible  to  assume  high  tone  and  faithful  attitude.  "  Let  not  the 
king  say  so,"  the  only  mild  rebuke.  Difficult  to  walk  wisely,  faithfully,  and 
surely  in  these. days  of  compromise  and  fashion.  But  God  looks  for  entire 
separation  from  the  world  in  character,  purpose,  and  conduct.  "  Know  ye  not 
that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  ?  Whosoever,  therefore, 
will  be  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God."  **  Shouldest  thou  help  the 
ungodly,  and  love  them  that  hate  the  Lord  % " 

The  Important  Question:  War  or  no  War? — Verses  4-22. 

Ahab,  tired  of  waiting  for  peaceful  restoration  of  Ram.-gil.,  determined  to 
recover  it  from  the  Syrians  by  force.  Aware  of  the  military  strength  of  the 
Syrian  king  (1  Ki.  xxii.  3,  4),  he  takes  advantage  of  visit  and  friendship  of 
Jehoshaphat,  whose  resources  are  great,  and  who  suggests  an  immediate  inquiry 
of  the  Lord  before  expedition.  I.  The  tribunal  before  which,  to 
decide.  Picture  the  open  space  (ver.  9).  The  kings  robed  in  splendour ; 
the  prophets  in  their  imposing  ranks  and  display,  confident  and  insolent  in  their 
lying  message ;  the  one  true  prophet,  hated  by  Ahab,  imcared  for  by  spectators, 
yet  calm,  brave,  and  true  !  Luther  before  the  Diet  of  Worms.  II.  The 
judgments  given.  Two  kinds  from  two  parties.  1.  From  false  i^ro'phets. 
**  Ahab  gathered  his  prophets  together,  about  400  men."  Every  great  enterprise 
seeks  the  sanction  of  God  and  to  clothe  itself  with  Divine  authority.  Right  and 
wrong  of  actions  felt  to  be  determined  by  One  higher  than  man.  If  Heaven's 
signature  not  gained  often  forged.  Ahab  multiplied  pagan  prophets  as  Julian 
multiplied  pagan  sacrifices.  A  band  ready  to  interpret  divine  decrees  in  favour  of 
the  king  they  serve.  Think  of  their  number,  office,  and  unanimity  1  With  one 
consent  they  say.  Go  !  2.  From  the  true  prophet.  Jehoshaphat  not  satisfied  ; 
saw  from  their  manner  they  were  not  truthful,  not  Jehovah -prophets ;  asks  for 
" a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  that  he  might  inquire  of  him"  The  vox  popvZi  not 
always  the  vox  Dei.  Micaiah  sent  for,  appears,  determines  to  speak  the  truth 
fearless  of  consequences.  "  Athanasius  against  the  world."  In  terms  of  irony, 
in  visions  of  splendour,  when  adjured  by  the  king  and  in  appealing  to  the  people. 
Smitten  by  the  priests  and  threatened  with  the  prison,  the  same  answer  given. 
III.  War  foolishly  undei  taken.  Ahab  bent  on  war,  Jehoshaphat  unable 
to  check  him.  *' And  they  went  to  the  battle"  (ver.  29).  1.  Reluctantly  by 
Jehoshaphat.  Ventured  too  much  and  gone  too  far ;  ensnared  and  drawn  along. 
"  Enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of  evil  men." 
2.  Timidly  by  Ahab.  Desired  to  falsify  prediction,  and  disguised  himself. 
What  a  cowardly  act  1  What  friendship  to  preserve  your  own  life  at  the 
expense  of  another  1  **  A  good  cause  makes  a  stout  heart."  A  soldier  conscious 
of  right,  accompanied  by  God,  will  stand  fearless  and  victorious  on  the  field  of 
battle.  IV.  War  ending  in  disasters.  Death  to  Ahab.  To 
Jehoshaphat  danger  in  the  field,  deserved  rebuke  from  God's  servant  (xix.  2), 
invasion  of  the  kingdom,  and  almost  total  extinction  of  the  family  (xxii.  10). 
Ever  dangerous  to  fight  against  God.  Enterprises  opposed  to  his  will  can  never 
prosper.  Inquire,  ShaU  I  go  or  shall  I  not  ?  When  decision  known,  submit, 
and  escape  the  ruin. 

**  We  leap  at  stars,  and  fasten  in  the  mud, 
At  glory  grasp,  and  sink  in  infamy  "  [Young\m 


235 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xviii. 


The  Faithful  Prophet. — Verses  7-27. 
I.  The  estimation  in  which   he   v/as   held.  *  "I  hate  him." 

Counted  like  Elijah  as  an  enemy  by  Ahab.      Micaiah  consistent  in  veracity, 
courage,  and  reproof.     The  king  offended,  and  imputed  all  to  evil  disposition, 
personal    grudge.      Hatred,    inveterate    and    strong,    often     the    reward    of 
fidelity.     "  Am   I   therefore  become  your  enemy  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ? " 
If,  The  stand  which  he  takes.     "What  my  God  saith,  that  will  I 
speak"  (ver.  13).     1.  Dependence  upon  God,     In  God's  hands,  not  Ahab's.     '*  So 
help  me  God,"    cried    Luther.      "  Fear  him  who  can  destroy  both  body  and 
soul."     2.  Expectation  of  God's  help.     Assured  that  God  would  say  something, 
teach   him,  and  reveal  light.       Disciples  before  councils  (Mat.  x.  18-19).      3. 
Determination  to  utter  God's  word.     "That  will  I  speak."      Balaam  could  make 
no  compromise.     Reverent  attention  to  divine  truth,  and  determination  to   die 
rather  than  withhold  or  betray  it,   the  mark  of  a  true  prophet.     III.   The 
pleas  urged  to  move  him  from  this  stand.    The  messenger  in  kind- 
ness  warned   and   advised.      1.  The    opinion    of  the  majority.       400  prophets 
unanimous  in  decision  !     Think  of  their  power  and  position  1     Why  be  singular 
and  foolish  in  opposing  ?     Agree  with  the  multitude.      Unity  built  on  truths 
better  than   unity  built  on    men.      2.  The  difficulty  of  judging  who  is  right. 
"  Which  way  went  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  from  me  to  thee? "     Zedekiah assumed 
to  possess  the  spirit  alone,  ridiculed  in  scorn  the  idea  of  Micaiah  having  it. 
Circumstances  make  it  difficult  to  judge  who  is  right  among  many  claimants. 
But  there  is  a  divine  word;  imn  can  understand  and  receive  it,  must  judge 
and  decide  for  himself.     Know   by  results.     False  prophets   assume  authority, 
take  fulfilment  of  truth  in  their  own  hands,  despise  and  persecute  others.     True 
prophets  receive  and  utter  the  word,  leave  it  with  God  to  verify  and  vindicate  it. 
3.  The  employment  of  physical  force.     This  is  a  tyrant's  weapon.      The  screw, 
the  prison,  and  the  stake,  bonds,  persecution,  and  martyrdom  in  vain.      Micaiah 
calm  in  suffering,  as  bold  in  action,  immovable  as  a  rock,  honoured  and  exalted 
in  Israel  as  independent  and  true,  when  prophets  of  Ahab  are  confounded  and 
scattered  in  shame  and  disgrace. 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS 

Ver.  2.   Wentdovm.     The  royal  visits  sought,    and    sought  without    delay. 

1.  The   object   for    which    made.      2.  "  Enquire  ^o-c^ay."  Ahab  never  thought 

Results    to  which    led.      "The  bond  of  this.    God  not  in  his  thoughts  (Ps.  x. 

between  the  two  families  dates,  there-  4).     If  Scipio  went  first  to  the  capital, 

fore,   at  least   from    this     time,    but  and    then    to    the    senate  ;       if    the 

apparently  it  had  not  hitherto  led  to  Romans  consulted    gods   and    offered 

any  very  close  intimacy,  much  less  to  sacrifices  before   war,  should  we   not 

any  joint  military  expeditions.  Jehosha-  enquire,  &c.  ? 

phat  seems  to  have  taken  no  part  in  the  Yers.  5-7.     /  hate  him.     A  picture 

former  Syrian  wars  of  Ahab,  nor  did  he  of   present    time.      1.  Men  love    to  he 

join  with  the  great  league  against  the  flattered.      Ahab,    satisfied    with     his 

Assyrians.      From  this   time  till   the  prophets,  thought  they  were  inspired 

displacement   of    Ahab's    dynasty   by  and  would   listen   to  no  one  else.     2. 

Jehu,  very  intimate  relations  subsisted  Men  speak  lies  to  flatter  their  superiors , 

between  the  two  kingdoms  {cf  1   Ki.  servants  their  masters,  courtiers  their 

xxii.  49 ;  2  Ki.  iii.  7 ;  viii.  28 ;  2  Ohr.  sovereigns.    Thus  the  yery  fountains  of 

XX.  36)  \Speak.  Com.].  life    corrupt.     Prophets,   priests,   and 

Ver.  4.  Enquire.     God,  forgotten  in  judges     encourage     falsehood.        "  A 

men's  undertakings,  should  always  be  wonderful  and  horrible  thing  (astonish- 
236 


CHAP.  XVIII.]  BOMfLETlC   COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


ment  and  filthiness)  is  committed  in  Yers.  8-11.     A  performance  at  court, 

the    land ;     the      prophets     prophesy  Picture  place,  kings  on  their  separate 

falsely,  and  the  priests   bear  rule   by  thrones,    spectators   and   performance, 

their  means    (lit.,    according  to  their  Zed.  in  employing  a  symbolic   action 

hands,  i.e.,  under  their  guidance  and  was  following  the  example  of  a  former 

power),  and  my  people  love  to  have  it  Israelite      prophet,      whose      "  acted 

so"   (Jer.  V.  30,  31).     [Populus  vidt  parable"  could  never  be  forgotten  in 

decipi,  et  decijnatur).      3.  In  speaking  Israel  (cf.  1  Ki.  xi.  30)    [Speak,  Com.\ 

lies  they  are  influenced  hy  supernatural  Ver.    13.     A  faithful  ministry.      1. 

powers.      Such     powers     exi^t      and  The    necessity    imposed    on    faithful 

mysteriously  influence   the    minds   of  ministers   to  speak   the   truth.       God 

men.  Lying  spirits  are  subtle,  wise,  and  requires  it,  needful  to  the  welfare  of  the 

numerous  ;  have  easy  access  to  men  and  people,  and    consequences    of  neglect 

deceive.    Seek  to  hear  not  what  is  palat-  feaiful.      2.  The  results  of    speaking 

able  to  our  corrupt  hearts,  but  what  is  truth.      Hated  by  those  in  authority, 

true,  needful,  and  profitable  to  our  souls,  ridiculed  and  opposed  by  rivals,  treated 

"  Hear  the  just  law,  the  judgment  of  the  with  indifference,  cruelty,  and  death. 

slvlGS  I 

He  that  hates  truth  shall  be  the  dupe  of  lies.  "  ?^  spake  the  seraph  Abdiel  faithful  found 

And  he  that  will  be  cheated  to  the  last,  -^"^^^S  ^^^  faithless,  faithful  only  he  ' 

Delusions,  strong  as  hell,  shall  bind  hun  \_Milton\, 
fast"  [CoMJjjer], 

HOMILETICS. 

The  Prophetic  Visions. — Verse  16. 

Solemnly  urged  to  give  a  serious  answer,  Micaiah  declared  the  visions  revealed 
to  him  by  the  spirit  of  God.  I.  The  shepherdless  people.  "  I  did  see 
all  Israel  scattered,"  &c.  (ver.  16).  1.  TJie  death  o^  the  king.  Ministers  and 
kings  shepherds  of  the  people  to  feed,  govern,  and  protect.  Ahab  fell  in  battle, 
and  Israel  deprived  of  ruler.  "  These  have  no  master."  2.  The  defeat  of  the 
army.  *'  All  Israel  scattered,"  in  broken  ranks  and  helpless  condition.  A  picture 
of  society  away  from  God  and  divided  from  one  another;  inadequately  supplied 
with  helpers,  and  needing  a  compassionate  Saviour  (Mat.-ix.  36-38).  II.  The 
parabolic  Providence.  "  It  may  be  doubted  whether  we  ought  to  take 
literally,  and  interpret  exactly,  each  statement  of  the  narrative.  Visions  of  the 
invisible  can  only  be  a  sort  of  parables  :  revelations  not  of  truth  as  it  actually  is, 
but  of  so  much  of  truth  as  can  be  shown  through  such  a  medium.  The  details 
of  a  vision,  therefore,  cannot  safely  be  pressed,  any  more  than  the  details  of  a 
parable.  Portions  of  each  must  be  accommodations  to  human  modes  of  thought, 
and  may  very  inadequately  express  the  realities  which  they  are  employed  to 
shadow  forth  to  us"  \_Sp)eak.  Com.\  1.  A  picture  of  God's  supremacy.  "The  Lord 
sitting  upon  his  throne,"  supreme  in  authority,  wisdom,  and  splendour  (Is.  vi.  1). 
2.  An  insight  into  supernatural  ministry.  "All  the  host  of  heaven"  ready  to 
serve.  "  Satan  walks  to  and  fro  in  the  earth  "  in  restless  activity  to  do  mischief 
to  God's  people  (Job  i.  7).  Other  spirits  sent  on  divine  errands  (Zech.  i.  10 ; 
Dan.  vii.  10).  3.  An  inteipretation  of  the  events  of  history.  Why  does  this 
happen?  God  orders  or  permits  it.  Sometimes  heaven  is  opened  to  shadow 
forth  events  on  earth.  God's  seers  only  can  interpret  and  apply  the  vision — a 
privilege  to  them  and  a  warning  to  us. 

Lying  Spirits  in  the  Prophets. — Verses  18-22. 

This  chapter  gives  an  insight  into  the  meaning  of  the  awful  word  "tempta- 
tion."    Yet  comforting,  for  it  shows  how  God  is  long-suffering  and  merciful  to 

237 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xvni. 


the  most  hardened  sinner ;  how  to  the  last  he  puts  before  him  good  and  evil, 
and  warns  him  of  his  choice  and  the  ruin  to  which  it  leads.  I.  What  warning 
more  awful,  yet  more  plain,  than  that  of  the  text?  Ahab,  told  that  he  was 
listening  to  a  lie,  had  free  choice  to  follow  that  lie  or  not,  and  did  follow  it. 
After  imprisonment  of  Micaiah  for  speaking  the  truth  to  him,  he -went  to  Ram. 
gilead;  yet  felt  that  he  was  not  safe.  He  went  into  battle  disguised,  hoping 
to  escape  from  evil  by  these  means.  But  God's  vengeance  not  checked  by  paltry 
cunning.  II.  This  chapter  tells  us  not  merely  how  Ahab  was  tempted,  but  how 
we  are  tempted  in  these  very  days.  By  every  wilful  sin  we  commit  we  give  room 
to  the  devil.  By  every  wrong  step  we  take  knowingly,  we  give  a  handle  to  some 
evil  spirit  to  lead  us  seven  steps  further  wrong.  Yet  in  every  temptation  God 
gives  us  a  fair  chance,  sends  his  prophets,  as  he  sent  Micaiah  to  Ahab,  to  tell  us 
that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,  to  set  before  us  good  and  evil  at  every  turn,  that 
we  may  choose  between  them  and  live  and  die  according  to  choice.  The  Bible  is 
a  prophet  to  us.  Every  man  a  prophet  to  himself.  The  still  small  voice  in  the 
heart,  the  voice  of  God  within  us ;  the  spirit  of  God  striving  with  our  spirits, 
whether  we  will  hear  or  forbear,  setting  before  us  what  is  righteous,  noble, 
pure,  and  godlike,  to  see  whether  we  will  obey  that  voice,  or  cbey  our  own 
seli&sh  lusts,  which  tempt  us  to  please  oiirselves  \G,  Kingsley^  "  Village 
Sermons  "]. 

Divine  Truth  and  its  Typical  Reception. 

Bible  full  of  human  nature.  Humanity  in  varied  aspects  its  excellence  and 
chief  feature.  A  book  for  the  world.  Its  biographies.  "  Representative  men." 
Here  four  types  of  human  conduct  in  relation  to  divine  truth.  I.  Those 
who  seek  the  truth.  Micaiah  believed  in  its  existence,  prayed  for  its 
teaching,  and  determined  to  follow  its  leading.  Sought  truth  under  impression 
of  its  reality,  from  the  right  source,  in  order  to  render  homage  to  it.  *'  Lead 
me  by  thy  truth  and  teach  me."  II.  Those  who  are  Opposed  to 
the  truth.  The  priests  assumed  to  be  its  only  depositories,  denied  the  claims 
of  others,  ridiculed  and  opposed  its  representative.  None  so  slow  to  believe  in 
a  Divine  spirit  as  those  accustomed  to  speak  Divine  words,  but  in  whose  hearts 
is  no  Divine  life.  A  lifeless  church  always  bitterest  enemy  to  inquiry,  reform, 
and  independency.     "  Ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a  man  that  hath  told  you  the  truth." 

III.  Those  "who  believe  yet  disobey  the  truth.  J.  believed  the 
prophet  Micaiah,  mildly  defended  his  character,  yet  would  not  withdraw  from 
Ahab.  He  sinned  against  light  and  better  judgment.  Risky  thus  to  act. 
"  Holding  (^.e.,  keeping  down,  obscuring,  overbearing)  the  truth  in  (a  course  of) 
unrightousness  ^  is  the  way  to  bring  down  the  judgment  of  God  (Rom.  i.  18), 
to  lose  the  ability  to  perceive  it,  and  the  power  to  embrace  and  practise  it. 

"  Thus  men  go  wrong  with  an  ingenious  skill, 
Bend  the  straight  rule  to  their  own  crooked  will ; 
And  with  a  clear  and  shining  lamp  supplied, 
First  put  it  out,  then  take  it  for  a  guide  "  [  Cowperl, 

IV.  Those  who  are  alarmed  at  truth.  Ahab  roused  in  conscience, 
afraid  of  results,  and  tried  to  escape  by  stratagem.  The  dupe  of  his  own  fears. 
The  child  whom  Herod  sought  to  destroy  lived,  grew,  and  rose  to  sovereignty  of 
the  universe.  The  prediction  of  Micaiah  fulfilled,  terror  struck  into  hearts  of 
soldiers,  and  the  king  died  in  blood-stained  chariot. 

Gospel  Archery. — Terse  33. 

I.  The  hearts  of  the  unsaved  are  encased  in  harness.     The  harness  of  (1)  In- 
difference, (2)  pleasure,  (3)  worldliness,  (4)  religious  formality.      II.  Having 
238 


CHAP.    XVIII.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


these  harnessed  hearts  for  a  mark,  the  gospel  bow  must  be  drawn.  At  some 
must  be  shot  the  arrows,  of  (1)  Divine  goodness,  (2)  Divine  threateninga, 
(3)  Divine  love  [R.  Berry] 

HOMILETIC   HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  18-22.  Lyinj?  spirits.  1.  A 
doctrine  of  Scripture  (Jud.  ix.  23  ;  Job 
i.  6 ;  ii.  1  ;  Ez.  xiv.  9  ;  Jno.  viii.  44 ; 
Rev.  xii.  9).  2.  A  fact  in  experience. 
Eve  seduced.  Many  now  under  strong 
delusion  (error  energising  and  effectual) 
that  they  should  believe  a  lie  (2  Thess. 
ii.  11,12),  3.  A  mystery  of  providence. 
The  problem  of  human  character,  of 
human  life  and  destiny  insolvable  on 
any  other  hypothesis.  Inscrutable 
providence  I 

Ver.  31.  Jehoshaphat^scry.  1.  Danger 
the  result  of  warning  unheeded.  2. 
God  interfering  to  deliver.  God  may 
be  displeased,  never  deserts  when  we 
cry  unto  him.  Ahab  cared  not  to 
succour.  God  moved  them  to  depart 
from  him.  3.  Lesson,  associate  with 
evil-doers,  then  in  danger  of  sharing 
their  calamities.  "  A  violent  man 
enticeth  his  neighbour,  and  leadeth 
him  into  the  way  that  is  not  good." 

Learn,  from  the  whole — 1.  That  the 
contrivances  of  the  wicked  are  cruel 
(Prov.  xii,  5,  10).  2.  That  in  carrying 
out  these  contrivances  they  are  gi'eatly 
alarmed.       Conscience     makes     them 


cowards  (Prov.  xxviii.  1).  3.  That  in 
the  end  their  fears  are  realised.  In 
attempt  to  ensnare  others  ensnared 
themselves  (Prov.  xii.  13 ;  xxiv.  15, 
16;  xxvi.  27):  expectations  of  good 
disappointed  (Prov.  x.  2-28 ;  xxiv.  19, 
20),  and  their  iniquity  becomes  their 
punishment  (Prov.  v.  22 ;  xi.  3  ;  xiv. 
32). 

Yer.  33.  Accidents  of  Providence.  I. 
The  end  certain.  Bow  did  its  work. 
Darts  of  judgment,  designs  of  Pjo- 
vidence,  never  miss  the  mark.  II.  The 
method  of  accomplishing  the  end  ap- 
parently accidental.  At  a  venture, 
casual  shot.  The  hand  strengthened, 
shaft  levelled  with  unerring  eye.  What 
we  term  chance,  casualty,  really  Pro- 
vidence accomplishing  deliberate  de- 
signs, but  interposition  concealed.  1. 
A  comfort  to  godly  in  trouble,  sorrow, 
and  peril.  2.  A  wai^ning  to  ungodly, 
who  are  not  safe,  exposed  everywhere. 
Most  common  occurrences,  those  from 
which  we  suspect  no  harm,  may  prove 
destructive  to  life. 

"The  all- surrounding  heav'n,  the  vital  air, 
Is  big  with  death." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XVI II. 


Vers.  1-3.  Friendship.  It  is  good 
discretion  not  to  make  too  much  of 
any  man  at  the  first,  because  one  cannot 
hold  out  that  proportion  \Bacon\ 

Vers.  7-22.  Lying  spirits.  Com- 
pare Elijah's  tone  (1  Ki.  xviii.  27). 
"  In  the  vision  which  he  describes  we 
feel  that  we  are  gradually  drawing 
nearer  to  the  times  of  the  later 
prophets.  It  is  a  vision  which  might 
rank  with  those  of  Isaiah  or  Ezekiel " 
\ Stanley].  Not  by  any  stroke  of  ven- 
geance, but  by  the  very  network  of 
evil  counsel  which  he  has  woven  for 
himself,  is  the  King  of  Israel  to  be 
led  to  his  ruin  \Ihid^. 

Ver.  29.    Disguised.     As  knowledge 


without  justice  ought  to  be  called 
cunning  rather  than  wisdom,  so  a 
mind  prepared  to  meet  danger,  if 
excited  by  its  own  eageiness  and  not 
the  public  good,  deserves  the  name  of 
audacity  rather  than  of  courage  \^Plato\ 
Yer.  33.  Bow  at  a  venture.  It  is 
marvellous  to  note  on  what  small  con- 
tingencies depends  our  life.  An  acci- 
dental blow,  an  unexpected  fall,  a  mis- 
take in  drinking  out  of  the  wrong  cup, 
a  misstep  in  the  dark,  a  fly,  a  fishbone, 
the  smallest  things  often  occasion  its 
termination.  This  fact  is  serious  enough 
to  cool  ambition,  make  us  thoughtful 
in  merriest  moods,  and  watchful 
against  any  surprise   that  death  may 

239 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    CITIiONICLES.  [chap.  xix. 


have  in    reserve  for  us.     Died—''  The  truth  ;  and  the  lie  on  the  throne  is  on 

truth  cannot  be  burned,  beheaded,  or  the  way  to  defeat,  and  the  truth  in  the 

crucified.     A  lie  on  the  throne  is  a  lie  dungeon  is  on  the  way  to  victory," 
6till«  and  truth  in  a  dungeon  is  still 


CHAPTER   XIX. 


Critical  Notes.]    This  chapter  is  entirely  additional  to  Kings,  and  of  great  interest.    It 

deals  with  three  matters  only,  the  rebuke  addressed  to  jehosh.  by  the  profit  Tehu 
(vers.  1-3) ;  the  personal  efforts  of  Jehosh.  to  efifect  a  religious  reformation  (ver.  4) ;  and  his 
reform  of  the  judicial  system  (vers.  5-11)  [Speak.  Com.']. 

Vers.  1-3. —  The  Rebuke  of  Jehosh.  In  peace ,  without  capture  or  pursuit ;  a  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  (eh.  xviii.  16).  Jehu,  son  of  Hanani  (xx.  34),  of  Northern  Kingdom  in  time  of 
Baasha  (1  Ki.  xvi.  1).  Went  out  (xv.  2).  Help,  make  common  cause  with  Ahab.  Wrath, 
God  angry,  and  caused  expedition  to  fail,  or  may  be  in  the  invasion  of  kingdom  about  to 
happen.  Ver.  4.  Rebuke  mild,  "good  things"  (cf.  xii  12  ;  1  Ki.  xiv.  13).  Groves,  stocks  of 
trees  representing  Ashtoreth  (xiv.  3  ;  xvii.  4-6). 

T  ers.4-11. — The  Reforms  of  Jehosh.  IFeni,  turned  and  went  out.  Again,  efforts  for  instruction 
resumed,  and  secured  full  complement  of  teachers  from  the  tribe  of  Levi  now  fixed  in 
Judah.  Vers.  5-7.  Inxtructiovs  to  judges.  Jehosh.  appointed  fresh  judges,  enlarged  their 
staff  and  number;  limited  to  fenced  cities,  by  concentrating  power  in  the  hands  of  a  few, 
or  creating  superior  courts.  Ver.  6.  Judge  not  at  dictation  or  in  compliance  with  wishes 
of  men,  but  for  Jehovah  (Deut.  i.  17 ;  xvi.  18-20).  In  judgment — i.e.,  in  your  decisions. 
Ver.  7.  Iniquity  of  inequality  or  undue  leaning  to  one  side  {cf.  Deut.  x.  17  ;  xvi.  19).  Vers. 
8-11. — Instructions  to  the  priests  and  Levites.  Ver.  8.  C/n(f,  great  patriarchal  chiefs, 
heads  of  great  houses  or  clans.  "It  is  interesting  to  find  that  such  persons  were  now 
admitted  to  share  in  the  judicial  office,  which  seems  in  David's  time  to  have  been  confined 
to  the  Levites"  [Speak.  Com.].  Judgment  of  the  Lord.  Disputes  in  religious  matters, 
payments  to  temple,  offerings  for  firstborn,  &o.  Controversies,  ordinary  civil  cases. 
Jerusalem,  seat  of  supreme  tribunal  (Ex.  xviii.  19  ;  Deut.  xvii.  8-13),  which  was  composed 
of  three  classes,  to  review  appellate  cases  from  inferior  courts  in  two  divisions,  ecclesi- 
astical and  civil  affairs.  Decisions  of  provincial  judges  might  be  carried  to  Jerusalem  as 
a  court  of  appeal  [cf.  Speak.  Cojn.].  Ver.  10.  Blood,  case  of  murder  or  homicide  as  to 
degree  of  blood-guiltiness  (Ex.  xxi.  12-23).  Law  and  command,  when  a  conflict  of  laws, 
clashing  one  with  another.  Warn,  admonish  them  to  abstain  from  wrong,  and  avoid 
God's  vengeance  on  the  nation.  Ver.  11.  A  chief,  high  priest,  president  of  court  in 
religious  concerns.  Zeb.,  in  civil  or  criminal  affairs.  Levites,  superintending  managers, 
assistants,  and  servants  about  court.  The  good,  God  with  upright  judges  {cf,  v.  6  ;  xv.  2^-6). 
Deal,  take  courage  and  act. 

EOMILETIOS. 

The  Stern  Rebuke Verses  1-3. 

Alliance  between  two  kingdoms    against  a  common  enemy,  substitution  of 

friendship  for  hatred  and  distrust,  wise  steps  to  worldly  politicians.  But  one 
thing  against  it.  Ahab,  an  idolator,  had  introduced  a  new  religion  of  most 
degraded  type.  Jehosh.  did  not  reject  this  alliance.  As  Hanani  rebuked  Asa 
for  league  with  Ben.  (ch.  xvi.  7),  so  his  son  instructed  to  rebuke  Jehosh.  for 
league  with  wicked  Ahab.  Military  success  from  Jehovah  ;  unlawful  alliance,  if 
240 


CHAP.  XIX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 

persisted  in,  will  forfeit  this  blessing.  I.  In  a  timely  season.  "  J.  went  out 
to  meet  him,"  at  earliest  possible  moment,  when  king  had  been  preserved,  and 
returning  in  peace.  Hence  in  fit  mind  to  listen.  Rebuke  should  be  timely,  in 
"  due  season,"  then  it  comes  down  upon  the  heart  like  rain  upon  the  new-mown 
grass.  II.  In  faithful  words.  Jehu  direct  and  faithful.  "Thou  hast 
helped  the  ungodly,  and  loved  them  that  hate  the  Lord."  No  toning  down,  nor 
mincing  matters.  Man's  reproofs  sometimes  undeserved,  implying  guilt  which 
exists  not.  Divine  reproofs  truthful,  needful,  and  attested  by  conscience. 
**  Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend,  but  the  kisses  of  an  enemy  are 
deceitful."  Ill,  In  mitigating  circumstances,  "  Nevertheless,  there 
are  good  things  found  in  thee  "  (ver.  3).  God  displeased,  but  overlooks  not 
"  good  things  "  ;  in  wrath  remembers  mercy ;  withholds  judgments,  and  waits  to 
see  how.  Jehosh.  will  act  in  future.  In  the  Church  at  Ephesus  all  that  God  can 
find  to  approve  put  foremost,  and  only  afterwards  notes  shortcomings  (Eev.  ii. 
2-4).  Then  (ver.  6)  returns  to  praise  and  console.  We  should  laave  more 
pleasure  in  commending  than  in  fault-finding. 

I.  The  friendship  of  wicked  men  one  of  the  most  dangerous  temptations  to 
which   Christians  are   subjected.     Modern   life  in   cities   illustrates   this  with 
special  force.     1.  The  wealth  of  the  world  is  largely  in  the  hands  of  men  who 
are  not  friends  of  Christ.     2.  In  many  communities  intelligence  and  culture  are 
possessed  mainly  by  the  irreligious.     3.  Interests  of  business  sometimes  create 
similar  peril.     4.  In  a  higher  circle  of  life  professional  success  often  tempts 
young  men  of  aspiring  mind  to  seek  to  ally  themselves  with  those  who  love  not 
God.     II.  Of  this  trial  of  Christian  principle,  it  may  be  said  that  the  Chiistian 
religion  requires  no  narrow  or  ascetic  seclusion  from  the  world.     The  thing 
which  Christian  principle  forbids  is  seeking  worldly  friendships  and  alliances  for 
selfish  ends  and  to  the  peril  of  religious  usefulness  and  religious  character. 
III.  The  irreligious  friendships  of  religious  men  violate  the  ruling  spirit  of  the 
Scriptures.     It  is   a   policy   of   life   which  starts   wrong ;   therefore   threatens 
catastrophe  ia  the  end.     lY.  Entangling  alliances  with  the  world  often  involve 
immense   sacrifice   of   Christian   usefulness.     Y.   Christian   alliances   with   the 
wicked  do  not  command  the  respect  of  the  very  men  for  whose  favour  they  are 
formed.     YI.  Loving  those  that  hate  God  inflicts  a  wound  of  great  severity  on 
the  feelings  of  Jesus  Christ.     It  is  from  Calvary  that  the  voice  comes  to  each 
in  our  solitude,  ''Shouldest  thou  love  them  that  hate  the  Lord?"  \A,  Phelps^ 
O.T.  a  Living  Bk.\ 

The  Reforming  Tour. — Verses  4-7, 

While  Jehosh.  sought  to  maintain  alliance,  he  was  careful  to  show  that  he  had 
no  sympathy  with  idolatry,  and  determined  to  keep  his  people  from  it.  Hence 
a  second  tour  to  reform  what  had  gone  wrong  and  complete  what  was  wanting. 
I.  The  noble  design  of  the  tour.  Not  to  strengthen  defences,  revive 
trade,  or  relieve  distress.  1.  To  administer  justice.  "He  set  judges  in  the 
land,"  in  centres  convenient  and  accessible.  2.  To  bring  the  people  hack  to  God. 
Many  perhaps  revolted  to  idolatry  when  they  saw  the  king  familiar  with 
idolaters.  Hence  to  counteract  our  bad  influence  and  restore  the  fallen.  II. 
The  vast  extent  of  the  tour.  Personal  inspection  through  the  whole 
kingdom  from  the  extreme  south  to  extreme  north,  from  Beer-sheba  to  Mount 
Ephraim.  No  place  should  be  overlooked,  no  enemy  spared  in  religious  reforms. 
III.  The  beneficent  results  of  the  tour.  Personal  and  thorough, 
results  encouraging.  1.  Local  courts  established.  Existed  before;  Jehosh.  the 
first  king  to  modify  them  according  to  recjuirements  of  kingdom.     Fixed  in 

241 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CERONICLES.  [chat,  xdl 


fortified  cities  the  provincial  capitals  of  the  districts  {cf.  Deut.  xvi.  18-20).  2. 
Judicial  administration  purified.  Special  instruction  to  judges,  high  and  lofty 
motives  put  before  them.  Soldiers  must  not  abuse  their  power  by  violence  and 
wrong;  magistrates  must  not  degrade  their  character  by  injustice  and  partiality. 
All  duties  to  be  performed  to  God,  not  to  man  (ver.  6). 

The  Supreme  Tribunal. — Verses  8-11. 

This  institution  or  Metropolitan  Court  founded  on  Ex.  xviii.  19-26  ;  Deut. 
vii.  8-13.  Notice — I.  Its  representative  character.  Three  classes — 
Levites,  priests,  and  chief  of  fathers ;  persons  learned  in  law,  eminent  for 
wisdom,  and  of  mature  age  and  experience.  "  Peers  of  the  realm."  II.  Its 
presiding  of&cers.  Amariah,  high  priest  over  religious  causes.  "  In  all 
matters  of  the  Lord."  Zebadiah  supreme  in  civil  court.  To  assist  both,  the 
Levites  were  a  kind  of  counsellors.  III.  Its  executive  po'wers.  Appeal 
made  from  inferior  courts  to  this.  Pleas  for  the  crown  and  for  religious  obser- 
vances in  one  division.  In  other  division  common  pleas.  Controversies  between 
party  and  party ;  differences  of  hlood,  manslaughter  or  accidental  murders,  or 
consanguinity,  settlement  of  inheritance  and  family  claims.  Civil  affairs  hetioeen 
law  and  commandments.  Conflicts  between  moral  rites  and  precepts  of  law,  &c. 
''Without  good  and  wholesome  laws  no  nation  can  be  prosperous,  and  vain  are 
the  best  laws  if  they  be  not  judiciously  and  conscientiously  administered.  The 
things  of  God  and  the  things  of  the  king  should  never  be  confounded  in  the 
administration  of  justice.  Amariah  the  priest,  and  Zebadiah  the  ruler,  should 
ever  have  their  distinct  places  of  jurisdiction"  \A,  Clarke], 

A  Tonic  Promise. — Verse  11, 

Explain  what  is  meant  by  "good."  The  melancholy  fact  that  all  men  are  not 
good.  The  promise  of  the  text  justifies  three  inquiries :  (1)  Why  should  the 
good  be  fearful?  ''  They  that  be  with  us,"  &c.  (2)  How  can  bad  designs  finally 
•prevail  ?  (3)  How  are  men  to  know  that  God  is  surely  with  them  ?  The  answer 
involves  character.  It  is  not  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  great,  the  rich,  the  old, 
&c.,  but  with  the  good.  God  identifies  himself  with  all  that  is  good  in  thought 
as  well  as  in  act ;  in  purpose  as  well  as  in  service.  This  is  the  security  of  the 
world.  Even  when  the  godly  'man  ceaseth,  God  will  maintain  the  cause  that  is 
good. 

This  promise,  like  all  the  promises  of  God,  is  designated  not  as  a  sedative,  but 
2^  stimulant.  Deal  courageously  1  See  how  the  text  might  have  read :  The  Lord 
shall  be  with  the  good,  therefore  sit  still ;  the  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good, 
therefore  let  wickedness  have  all  its  own  way  in  the  world  ;  the  Lord  shall  be  with 
the  good,  therefore  pay  no  attention  to  self -discipline.  The  text  reads  contrariwise. 
The  Lord  shall  be  with  the  good,  therefore  deal  courageously.  Goodness  is  not 
to  be  merely  passive,  it  is  to  be  active,  aggressive,  defiant  of  all  evil,  sublime  in 
patience  \I)r.  ParkeVy  City  Temple\ 

BOMILETIC    HINTS    AND    SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1-3.    Jehoshaphat's  connection  Why  is  it  so  displeasing  to   God?     1. 

vyith  Ahah.     I.  What  is  that  intimacy  On  account    of  the  state   of   mind    it 

with  the  ungodly  which  God  forbids?  implies.    2.  On  account  of  its  pernicious 

1.    An    alliance    with    them.     2.     A  tendency.     3.  On  account  of  its  oppo- 

conformity  with    thoiii.      3.    An    un-  sition  to  his  revealed  will  [Z)r.  Chajnn^. 

necessary  association  with  them.     II,  Ver.  7.     God's  Justice.     1.  God  just 
242 


CHAP.   XX.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


and  righteous  in  himself.  On  justice 
all  his  pi'oceedings  are  based  and 
regulated.  He  is  **  the  Just  One," 
"  Most  just,"  "  Just  and  right  is  he  " 
(cf.  Deut.  X.  17 ;  xvi.  19  ;  xxxii.  4). 
2.  Just  and  righteous  in  the  gift  of 
just  laws  to  mankind.  Laws  adapted 
to  their  natures,  powers,  and  cond  - 
tion.  The  moral  code  so  right  and 
benevolent  as  to  require  no  pro(  f. 
Supreme  love  to  God  and  true  regard 
to  our  neighbour.  3.  Just  and 
righteous  in  the  administration  of  these 
laws — strictly  and  impartially  here. 
No  favouritism,  conniving  at  guilt, 
or  overlooking  sin.  In  Christ  justice 
and  holiness  displayed,  and  God  the 
justifier  of  him  that  believeth.  At  last 
no  iniquity  nor  respect  in  the  bestow- 
meut  of  rewards  and  punishmenta. 


Vers.  6,  7.  Address  to  Judges.  1. 
In  office  they  represent  God,  act 
worthy  of  God,  represent  not  his  law, 
express  not  his  will  as  crooked  and 
corrupt.  "  Ye  judge  not  for  man,  but 
for  the  Lord."  2.  In  spirit  the 
must  fear  God.  Fear  to  ofl'end 
One  who  sees  and  knows  all.  3.  In 
decisions  be  impartial  and  just.  Give 
sentence  deliberately  in  conformity 
with  truth.  Judges,  ministers,  all  in 
high  position  should  be  remarkable  for 
integrity,  and  free  from  bribery  and 
corruption, 

•*  Be  just  and  fear  not. 
Let  all  the  ends    thou  aim'st  at  be  thy 

country's, 
Thy  God's,  and  truth's"  [ShaTies,'^ 


CHAPTER   XX, 


Critical  Notes.]  Narrative  to  ver.  30  entirely  additional  to  Kings.  Invasion  of 
Moabites  (vers.  1-3) ;  fast  and  supplicatiou  of  king  and  people  (vers.  3-13) ;  the  message 
of  JahazJel  (vers.  14-19)  ;  exhortation  and  victory  of  Jehoshaphat  (vers.  20-30)  ;  close  of 
bis  reign  (vers.  31-37),  which  runs  parallel  with  1  Ki.  xxii.  41-49. 

Vers.  1,  2. — Invasion  of  Moabites.  Ammonites,  Sept.,  some  of  the  Minoei,  inhabitants  of 
Maon  (Mehunins),  a  town  near  Petra.  Ver.  2.  /S'ea,  Dead  Sea.  Syria^  probably  Edonu 
Haz.-tam.f  having  come  round  southern  extremity  of  Dead  Sea  and  entered  Judasa  from 
Edom. 

Vers.  3-13. — Fast  and  supplication.  Set  himself,  his  face  (resolved,  cf.  2  Ki.  xii.  18; 
Jer.  xlii.  15).  Seek,  i.e.^  to  turn  to  Jehovah  to  implore  help  (xv.  12,  13).  Fast^  national, 
the  first  "  proclaimed  "  by  authority.  New,  one  of  the  two  courts  in  Solomon's  temple, 
renovated  by  Jehoshaphat  or  by  Asa  (xv.  8),  known  now  as  "  the  new  court."  Vers.  6-12. 
The  suppHcation.  Ver.  6.  An  appeal  to  God,  omnipoteub,  supreme,  and  irresistible. 
Ver.  7.  To  God's  covenant,  who  gave  them  possession  of  land.  Friend,  first  historic  use 
of  this  title,  though  repeated  Is.  xli.  8  ;  Jas.  ii.  23.  Ver.  8.  To  God  as  owner  of  temple. 
Ver.  9.  A  brief  summary  of  cases  described  in  Solomon's  prayer  (ch.  vi.  22-39).  Vers. 
10,  11.  Invaders  whom  Israel  were  not  permitted  to  touch  (Edom,  Deut.  ii.  5  ;  Moab,  ii. 
9  ;  Ammon,  ii.  19),  have  now  entered  the  land  to  cast  us  out.  Ver.  12.  In  despair  God 
sought.     Eyes,  i.e.,  we  look  to  thee  for  succour  {cf.  Ps.  xxv.  15  ;  cxli.  8). 

Vers.  14-19. — The  Message  of  Jahaziel.  A  prophet  not  elsewhere  mentioned,  but  his 
claim  verified  by  message  and  results.  Ver.  15.  Words  familiar  to  people  and  connected 
with  great  deliverances  (Deut.  i.  21 ;  Josh.  i.  9,  &c.)  [Speak.  Com.^.  Ver.  16.  Cliff,  ascent  of 
Ziz  (HazzLz)  at  end  of  brook,  gully,  or  dry  torrent  course.  Ver.  17.  Stand  still,  directed  to 
do  nothing,  watch  the  Lord's  course  (Ex.  xiv.  13,  14  ;  Num.  xiv.  9).  Ver.  18.  Reverent 
obedience  in  confidence  and  gratitude.  Ver.  19.  Praise  from  Kohathites  in  general,  from 
Korhites,  a  branch  of  them,  in  particular. 

Vers.  20, 21. — The  Mai  ch  and  Exhortation.  Went  forth  early.  Tekoa,  ten  or  eleven  miles 
from  Jerusalem,  southerly  direction.  Stood^  exhorted  them  to  be  firm  and  confident. 
Singers,  line  of  procession  arranged,  signal  to  move  forward ;  Levites  led  van  with  musical 

243 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xx. 


instruments  and  song  (Ps.  cxxxvi.).  Vers.  22-30.  Overthrow  of  the  enemy.  Ambush, 
Hers  in  wait.  Edomites  intending  to  attack  Jews,  but  through  panic  fell  uponMoabites,  and 
rest  of  enemy  or  angels  employed  by  God  to  confuse  the  host  and  destroy  it.  Ver.  24. 
Work  completed  before  Israel  on  the  field,  which  was  strewed  with  dead  bodies.  They 
had  not  to  fight,  but  to  collect  and  carry  away  spoil.  Ver.  26.  Set  out  on  fourth  day  to 
return  in  same  joyful  mood  as  they  came.  Ver.  29.  Fear  salutary  fell  on  surrounding 
kingdoms  and  brought  blessings  at  home. 

Vers.  30-33.  —  6'/ose  of  Jehoshaphafs  reign  (1  Ki.  xxii.  41-50).  Steadfast  and  consistently 
religious  (xv.  18),  yet  people  not  wholly  diverted  from  idolatry.  In  deference  to  popular 
prejudice  all  high  places  not  taken  away.  Words  of  Jehoshaphat  not  elsewhere  noticed, 
entered  into  the  book  of  Kings  of  Judah,  same  apparently  as  the  Chronicles  of  Kings  of 
Judah,  mentioned  in  Kings  \_Murj)hy']. 

Vers.  35-37. — Alliance  with  Ahaziah,  closely  on  death  of  Ahab,  whom  A.  survived 
little  more  than  a  year  (1  Ki.  xxii.  51 ;  2  Ki.  iii.  1).  Ships,  combined  fleet  destined  for 
Tartessus,  but  wrecked.  Eliezer  denounced  the  unholy  alliance.  Ahaziah  attributed  the 
disaster  to  unskilfulness  of  Jehoshaphafs  sailors ;  proposed  to  fit  out  another  joint  fleet  with 
his  own  subjects.  Jehoshaphat  accepted  the  wreck  as  a  judgment  and  declined  the  offer 
(c/.  1  Ki.  xxii), 

EOMILETICS. 

Jehoshaphat's  War  with  Moabites  and  their  Allies. — Verses  1-30. 

Defeated  in  a  great  battle  by  Joram  and  Jehoshaphat,  the  Moabites  sought 
to  retaliate  (2  Ki.  iii.).     Combined  with  their  kinsmen,  they  entered  Judah  and 
defied  its  king.    li   The  invading  enemy.    Formidable,  near,  and  brought 
surprise.     \.    In    a   spirit   of  boldness.     Great   in  number  of   auxiliaries,   far 
advanced,  and  most  eager  for  the  fight.     2.  In  a  spirit  of  ingratitude,     "  Behold 
how  they  reward  us  "  (ver.  11).     Israel  not  permitted  to  touch  them  nor  disturb 
them   in   the   least   in    the  march  through   wilderness  (Deut.   ii.    5 ;  ix.    19). 
Jehoshaphat  had  lately  helped  them,  now  they  seek  to  get  the  land  for  them- 
selves.    Cast  Israel  out,  and  thus  to  requite  them  evil  for  good  !     *'  0  our  God, 
wilt  thou  not  judge  them?"  (ver.  12).    II.  Jehoshapliat's  preparations 
to  meet  tllis  army.     Alarmed  at  the  intelligence,  the  danger  brings  out 
his  religious  feeling.     He  is  equal  to  the  occasion,  does  not  call  his  forces,  but 
determines  to  seek  God.     1.  He  proclaims  a  national  fast.     The  people  of  Judah 
hasten  to  Jerusalem.     The  nation  bowed  before  God  and  confessed  their  sins  as 
one  man.     The  scene  touching  and  solemn,  emergency  great.     2.  He  implores 
God's  help.     Prayer  embraces   every  argument   which   king  and  people  could 
urge  ;  concluding  with  earnest  appeal  for  God  to  protect  them,     (a)  They  are 
helpless.     No  power,  "  we  have  no  might ;"  no  plan,  "  neither  know  we  what  to 
do  ;  "  no  allies,  their  wives  and  little  ones  only  increased  their  anxiety  (ver.  13). 
(b)  God  could  help  them,     "  In  thine  hand  is  there  not  power   and  might  ? " 
(ver.  6).     God  supreme  and  omnipotent,  checks  the  enemy  and  defends  his 
people,     (c)  They  rely  upon  God.     "  Our  eyes  are  up  unto  thee "  in  hope  and 
earnest  expectation.     Ill*  The  encouragement  given.     Help   is   pro- 
mised.    Words  famihar  and  inspiriting  fell  from  the  mouth  of  the  prophet, 
given  by  inspiration.     1.  Fears  are  calmed,     "  Be  not  afraid  nor  dismayed  by 
reason  of  this  great  multitude"  (ver.   15).     Cowardice  shall  flee,  and  courage 
shall  keep  the  field.     2.  Assurance  is  renewed.     "The  Lord  will  be  with  you" 
(ver.  17).   That  should  be  sufficient  for  any  contest !    3.  Implicit  trust  is  required, 
"Believe  in   the  Lord  your  God,  so   shall   ye   be   established"  (ver.  20).     4. 
Specific  directions  are  given.    "  To-morrow  go  ye  down  against  them,  ye  shall  find 
them  at  the  end  of  the  brook"  (ver.  16).     IV,  The  method  of  attack. 
Great  joy  and  relief  at  the  prophet's  message.     With  humble  confidence  they 
prepared  for  assault.     1.  They  engaged  in  reverent  woi^ship.     The  king  bowed  to 
the  ground,  the  people  "fell  before  th^  X»ord,  worshipping  the  Lord  "  (ver.  18), 
244  ' 


CHAP.  XX.]  EOMILETIC  COMMEXTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


2.  They  united  in  joyful  praise.  Singers  were  appointed  to  praise  the  Lord  for 
his  mercy  (ver.  21).  3.  They  formed  orderly  procession.  Officials  and  people 
united  in  ranks,  and  preceded  by  "  singers,"  marched  till  they  came  "  to  the 
watch-tower  in  the  wilderness  "  (ver.  24).  4.  They  fought  in  confidence  of  victory. 
God  had  helped  them  in  past  (ver.  7) ;  promised  at  dedication  of  temple  that  he 
would  help  them  again  (ver.  9).  None  trust  him  in  vain.  V.  The  victory 
achieved.  Easy,  most  signal,  and  wrought  for  them,  not  by  them.  1.  By 
divine  agency.  Whether  by  hosts  of  angels  or  ambushments  of  their  own,  we 
cannot  eliminate  divine  agency.  2.  By  self  extermination.  In  confusion  they 
fell  upon  their  friends,  whom  they  mistook  for  enemies.  God  turned  them 
against  themselves,  and  the  army  that  came  to  fight  Jehoshaphat  destroyed 
itself.  God  can  touch  the  reason  of  the  king,  rob  the  general  of  command,  and 
blind  the  soldiers.  A  thousand  ways  at  his  dit^posal  of  which  we  know  nothing. 
But  victory  sure  to  those  who  have  him  as  leader.  ''The  battle  is  not  yours, 
but  God's."  VI.  The  impression  of  the  event  on  Jews  and 
neighbours.  Report  spread  in  surrounding  people;  influence  remarkable. 
1.  In  giving  security  and  peace  to  Judah.  Nations  feared  to  molest  a  people  who 
worshipped  a  God  who  did  such  wonders.  Idolators  felt  that  he  had  justified 
claims  to  their  homage.  They  were  still  satisfied  among  themselves.  *'  So  the 
realm  of  Jehoshaphat  was  quiet "  (ver.  30).  2.  In  exercising  salutary  influence 
upon  others.  God's  victory  ended  wars ;  the  fear  of  God  fell  on  all  kingdoms, 
restrained  them  from  invading  Judah.  Probably  now  tribute  was  brought  to 
Jehoshaphat  from  Philistines  and  Arabians  (cf  ch.  xvii.  11),  "  For  his  God 
gave  him  rest  round  about." 

Man's   Extremity  is  God's   Opportunity. — Verses  5-13. 

Learn— I.  That  in  the  discipline  of  life  we  should  expect 
dangers  and  extremities.  These  needful  to  touch  and  develop  our 
powers.  History  in  Old  and  New  Testament  full  of  instances.  To  know  other 
resources  we  must  learn  the  weakness  of  our  own.  "  We  have  no  might  against 
this."    II.  That  in  these   dangers   and   extremities  God    has 

many  ways  of  deliverance.  Human  agency  but  a  small  part  of  holy 
ministry.  Birds  and  beasts,  insects,  elements  of  nature,  and  hosts  of  angels 
under  his  command.     Hence  the  folly  of  proscribing,  measuring,   or  limiting   in 

God's  work.    III.  That  in  all  dangers  and  extremities  of  life  we 

should  look  to  God  for  help.  Depend  not  upon  numbers,  generalship, 
and  human  might ;  but  spiritual  force,  prayer,  and  presence  of  God.  Then  war 
easy,  loses  character  of  conflict,  and  becomes  a  matter  of  spoil. 

The  Battle  is  not  Yours,  but  God*s. — Verse  15. 

The  text  addresses  a  word — 1.  To  all  who  are  bearing  Christian  protest 
against  evil.  2.  To  all  who  are  undergoing  severe  temptation.  3.  To  all  who 
are  labouring  for  the  good  of  the  world.  4.  To  all  who  are  engaged  in  contro- 
versy on  behalf  of  Christian  doctrine.  If  we  had  to  defend  everything  and 
fight  everything  in  our  own  strength,  and  for  our  own  ends,  the  case  would  be 
perfectly  diff*erent ;  but  when  God  says  to  us,  "  Ye  have  this  treasure  in  earthen 
vessels ;  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  of  God,  and  not  of  man,"  when  he  teaches 
us  that  we  are  servants  and  not  masters,  creatures  and  not  creators,  with  no 
grasp  of  eternity,  it  becomes  us  patiently  to  wait,  to  stand  still  and  see  the 
salvation  of  the  Lord  [2)r.  Parker,  City  Temple^ 

^45 


HOMILMTIC  COMMJSiYTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


[chap.  XX 


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  5-9.     Invocation  of  God  as — 

1.  The  Ruler  of  the  universe.  1.  Seated 
in  heaven.  "God  in  heaven."  2. 
Governing  all  nations.  "  Rulest  not 
thou  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
heathen  ?  "  3.  Secure  in  his  dominions. 
"  None  is  able  to  withstand  thee."  II. 
The  covenant  God  of  Judah.  1.  The 
friend  of  Abraham,  the  nation's  founder. 
"  Ahab  thy  friend  for  ever "  (ver.  7). 

2.  The  guaidian  of  the  nation's  interests. 
"  Thou  didst  drive  out  the  inhabitants, 
<kc."  3.  The  centre  of  the  nation's 
worship.  "  A  sanctuary  therein  for 
thy  name."  "  Jehoshaphat's  appeal  is 
threefold — 1.  *  Art  thou  not  the  God 
omnipotent,  and  so  able  to  help  us  %  * 
2.  *  Art  thou  not  our  God,  who  hast 
given  us  this  land,  and  so  art  bound 
to  help  us  against  invaders  ? '  And  3. 
*  Art  thou  not  the  God  of  this  place, 
the  temple,  and  so  bound  to  help  those 
who  pray  to  thee  here  ?  *  "  [Speak. 
Com!\, 

Yer.  7.  Ah.  thy  friend.  1,  By 
familiarity  in  devotion  (cf  Gen.  xviii. 
23-33).  2.  By  promptitude  in  obe- 
dience. 3.  By  uprightness  of  Hfe  (cf. 
Gen.  xvii.  1-22  ;  xxii.  1-18). 

Yer.  17.  Salvation  of  tJie  Lord.  1. 
The  deliverance,  salv^^lon.     Reference 


always  to  evil,  ^.e.,  dangers  in  Old 
Testament,  sins  under  the  gospel.  2. 
Its  greatness.  "  Of  the  Lord,'^  not  by 
human  power.  So  great  "  salvation " 
that  every  other  is  nothing ;  not  only 
from  evils,  but  to  privileges.  3. 
Method  of  securing  it.  Stand  still. 
Picture  Israel  at  Bed  Sea.  ^^  Set 
yourselves "  in  hope  and  firm  alliance ; 
^^ stand  still"  not  in  your  power  to  do 
anything;  ''^ee,"  wait  in  faith,  watch 
God's  work  for  you.  Wholly  from 
him,  not  from  you.  "In  thee,  O  God, 
do  we  put  our  trust;  our  souls  wait 
on  thee." 

Yer.  20.  Believe  and  he  established. 
Faith  in  God's  presence,  and  God's  pro- 
mise, confirms  experience  in  God's 
mercy,  gives  courage  in  conflict,  and 
establishes  peace  and  prosperity.  Un- 
behef  brings  fear,  frustrates  God's 
promise,  and  turns  victory  into  defeat. 
Faith  in  God  alone  will  overcome  con- 
flicts in  heart  and  convulsions  in  the 
world. 

Yer.  21.  Beauty  of  Holiness.  Rich 
apparel  and  ornaments  of  old,  typical 
of  moral  character  and  holy  life. 
"Worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of 
holiness." 


EOMILETIGS. 


Songs  before  Yiotoky. — Verse  21, 

Anybody  can  sing  the  "  Te  Deum  "  when  the  battle  is  over.  The  difference 
between  an  ordinary  man-of-war  and  a  Christian  is  this ;  a  Christian  shouts 
before  the  victory,  because  he  knows  it  is  sure  to  come. 

I.  We  learn  here,  first,  a  lesson  of  patriotism.  The  foreign  policy  of  Ammon 
and  Moab  seemed  very  brilliant  for  a  time.  They  carried  everything  before 
them,  but  in  due  time  were  overthii©wn.  We  must  not  trust  in  the  numbers  of 
our  soldiers,  in  the  boundless  resources  of  our  country,  but  in  the  beauty  of 
holiness,  in  the  justice  of  our  cause,  in  the  purity  of  our  motive ;  in  one  word,  in 
the  blessing  of  our  God.  II.  The  special  object  of  the  lesson  is  to  illustrate  the 
history  of  the  Christian  Church,  for  the  Christian  Church  is  engaged  in  holy 
war.  If  we  go  forth  to  war  we  must  do  as  Jehoshaphat ;  we  must  be  clothed 
with  the  spirit  of  holiness.  God  came  down  to  fill  the  hearts  of  his  children ; 
then  they  were  ready  for  the  great  work.  The  Pentecostal  blessing  delivered 
the  early  Christians  from  the  three  hindrances  to  the  progress  of  the  Gospel — 
cowardice,  selfishness,  and  ignorance.  Catch  the  spirit  of  the  Apostles,  and  you 
will  save  the  whole  world  \H,  F.  Hui/hesl, 


OHAF.  XX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


Jehoshaphat's  Character  and  Reign. — Verses  31-34. 

I.  His  general  uprightness  of  character.  **  He  walked  in  thewav 
of  Asa,  his  father,"  earnestly  and  constantly.  Regarded  God's  approval  and  will, 
'■'■  doing  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  A  prosperous  and 
successful  ruler,  his  kingdom  flourished,  and  he  died  in  peace.  II.  His 
besetting  sins.  Leaned  to  his  own  understanding  in  momentous  concerns  ; 
put  policy  before  principle,  and  sowed  seeds  of  evil  which  lived  and  fructified  long 
after  death.  1.  In  his  son's  marriage  with  Ahab's  daughter.  2.  In  his  guiUy 
alliances  with  kings  of  Israel.  Alliances  in  war,  in  commerce.  The  subtlety  of 
worldly  wisdom,  and  the  spurious  kindness  of  worldly  liberality  interfered  with 
the  simplicity  of  faith  in  God  and  love  toward  man.  *'  As  the  deadjly^  though 
only  a  little  creature,  gives  ill-savour  to  most  costly  ointment ;  so  even  a  small 
degree  xA  folly  mars  a  fair  reputation  for  wisdom  and  honour  "  (Ecc.  x.  1), 

The  Wrecked  Fleet. — Verses  35-37. 

I.  Notice  first  the  disaster  to  Jehoshaphat's  shipping.    The 

eastern  arm  of  Red  Sea,  Gulf  of  Akabah,  is  much  deeper  than  the  western ;  a 
narrow,  deep  ravine,  with  steep  and  rocky  sides,  the  valley  of  which  it  forms 
part  stretching  far  away  to  the  north,  till  where  it  holds  in  its  trough  the  waters 
of  the  Dead  Sea.  Down  through  the  mountain  gorge  swept  the  mad  hurricane 
with  resistless  might,  shattering  the  ships  of  Jehoshaphat  to  pieces,  and  leaving 
the  grey  morning  to  look  upon  only  pitiful  wreckage  all  along  the  shore. 
II.  Notice  the  cause  of  this  disaster.  A  judgment  from  Heaven. 
The  grand  mistake  and  sin  of  Jehoshaphat  lay  in  associating  himself  with  the 
enemies  of  God.  This  the  signal  error  of  his  life.  If  he  had  been  an  openly 
wicked  man,  a  mere  man  of  the  world,  probably  this  disaster  would  not  have 
occurred,  but  God  would  not  allow  one  of  his  own  servants  to  prosper  in  such  an 
undertaking.  III.  The  lesson  which  the  disaster  teaches  is  this — 
Do  not  choose  your  associates  amongst  those  who  do  not  fear  the  Loi'd.  Always 
safest  to  keep  under  Christian  influences.  A  man  is  rarely  better  than  the 
company  he  keeps.  Jehoshaphat  may  hope  to  bring  Ahaziah  up  to  his  own  level  ; 
but  Ahaziah  is  much  more  likely  to  bring  Jehoshaphat  down.  The  lesson  of  the 
text  bears  also,  and  with  peculiar  point,  upon  all  business  alliances.  You  will  do 
well  even  to  sacrifice  a  measure  of  financial  interest  and  worldly  prospect 
rpither  than  be  associated  in  business  with  a  man  who  is  out  of  aU  sympathy 
with  you  in  religion  \J.  Thain  Davidson\. 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yers.  20,  2L  I.  The  march  to  battle,  awful  defeat.     3.  Of  enthusiastic  joy. 

With  musical   strains.     In  confidence  Jehoshaphat    means    Jehovah    judges, 

of   victory.     Under    divine    command  hence  this  valley  the  type  of  final  con- 

(vers.  26,  27).     II.  The  joyous  return.  flict    and    final    judgment,    in   which 

In  solemn  order.  In  grateful  spirit.  In  Jehovah  will  judge  and  overthrow  {cf. 

triumphant  victory.  Joel  iii.  2-12). 

Vers.  26-30.     The  valley  of  blessing.  Vers.    35-37.     The     wrecked    fleet, 

Wady  Bereikut,  two     miles    west    of  1.    The  cause  from   God,   who   reigns 

Tekoa.     Jews     assembled    here    after  over  elements  of  nature  and  minds  of 

three  days'  plunder,  to  arrange  them-  men  (Spanish  Armada).    2.  The  design 

selves,  and  return  to  worship  in  temple,  to  instruct.     Jehoshaphat  had  foimed 

1.  The  place  of  terrible  conflict.  2.  Of  worldly  alliances  j  could  not  be  weaned 

247 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxi. 


from     them,    nor     see     their     folly,  teach  that  his  blessing  rests  not  upon 

Disaster    predicted    (see    history),  yet  men  and  ways  which  are  contrary  to 

refused     good     advice.     Hence    must  his  will. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XX, 

Ver.  4.    Seek.    Seek  God  upon  thy  Vers.  35-37.  Gold.  Midas  longed  foi 

way,  and  he  will  come  to  thee  [Schiller],  gold,  and  insulted  the  Olympians.     He 

Yers.    17,    18.     Stand    ye.     Prayer  got  gold,  so  that  whatever  he  touched 

without  watching    is    hypocrisy,   and  became  gold,  and  he  with  his  long  ears 

watching  without  prayer  is  presump-  was  little  the  better  for  it.     Midas  had 

tion  [Jay].  insulted    Apollo    and    the   gods;    the 

"  Teach  U8  in  watchfulness  and  prayer  f^"  ^^^^  ^'''\}'t  '^'.'^'  ^""^  ^  ^^'"^  ""t 

To  wait  for  the  appointed  hour;  ^°"g    ^^^^y    which    also    were    a  good 

And  fit  us  by  thy  grace  to  share  appendage   to   it.     What  a  truth    in 

The  triumphs  of  thy  conquering  power."  these  old  fables  I  [Carli/le\, 


CHAPTER  XXI. 


Ceitical  Notes.]  This  chapter  corresponds  with  2  Ki.  viii.  16-24  ;  contains  Jehoshaphat's 
family  arrangements  (vers.  1-4)  ;  beginning  and  character  of  Jehoram's  reign  (vers. 
6-11)  ;  the  writing  of  Elijah  to  Jehoram  (vers.  12-15) ;  the  end  of  Jehoram's  reign 
(vers.  16-20). 

Ver'.  1-4:.— Family  arrangements  of  J.  Six  sons,  towards  whom  he  pursued  the  same 
policy  as  Rehoboam  (ch.  xi.  23).  This  probably  provoked  the  jealousy  of  Jehoram  and 
induced  him  to  put  them  to  death.  3.  firstborn  (ver.  3),  whose  natural  right  to  succeed 
was  carried  out  (Deut.  xxi.  15).  liivcrs,  Jehoram's  brothers,  supported  by  some  chief  men 
in  country  ;  or  suspected  of  disloyalty. 

Vers.  5-li. —  Character  of  J.'s  reign.  Ver.  6.  Eight  years.  According  to  2  Ki.  viii.  16, 
began  in  fifth  year  of  Joram,  K.  of  Is.,  therefore  in  twenty-second  year  of  Jehoshaphat. 
Four  of  his  eight  years  coincided  nearly  with  the  last  four  years  of  his  father's  reign,  and 
after  his  father's  death  he  reigned  four  years  [cf.  Murphy].  Ver.  6.  Daughter,  i.e.,  the 
grand-daughter  of  Omri  (2  Ki.  viii.  ^6).  Ver.  7.  The  promise  to  David  and  an  explanation 
of  God's  patience  to  Jehorara.  Ver.  8.  Edam.  Flourishing  kingdom  of  Jehoshaphat 
dwindling  away.  Edomites  governed  since  time  of  David  (1  Ki.  xxii.  47  ;  2  Ki.  iii.  9) 
revolted.  Defeated  in  first,  they  made  another  attempt,  succeeded,  and  Libnah,  on  south 
frontier  towards  Edom,  followed  example.  Ver.  11.  Fornication,  signifying  unfaithfulness 
in  following  other  gods  {cf.  2  Ki.  ix.  22). 

Vers.  12-15.— Elijah's  writing  to  J.  The  document  in  question  is  not  called  a  letter 
{iggereth  or  sepher),  but  a  writing  (micetab),  Words.  The  only  notice  of  E.  in  Chronicles. 
As  prophet  of  northern  kingdom,  natural  that  he  should  engage  but  slightly  the  historian 
of  southern  one.  Notice  one  of  considerable  interest.  Shows  that  E.  did  not  confine 
attention  to  affairs  of  his  own  state,  but  looked  beyond  its  borders,  to  check  progress  of 
idolatry  in  Judah.  It  proves  that  the  prophet  was  upon  earth  after  the  death  of 
Jehoshaphat  (ver.  13),  whence  it  follows  (1)  that  the  account  of  his  translation  occurs  in 
Kings  out  of  its  chronological  order,  and  that  (2)  Elisha,  who  prophesied  in  the  time  of 
Jehoshaphat  (2  Ki.  iii.  11-19),  commenced  his  public  ministry  before  his  master's  trans- 
lation [Sj?eak.  Com.].  Some  think  this  was  not  E.  the  Ti^hbite^  but  one  distinct  from  him  ; 
others  that  this  should  be  Elisha.  Ver.  13.  Way,  extreme  measures  which  dishonoured 
God ;  better,  not  idolaters,  as  thou  art.  Ver.  14.  Plague,  stroke,  invasion  of  Philistines 
(vers.  16  and  17),    Ver.  15.  ^i$^(ise,  a  chronic  an<i  incurable  dysentery.    Ver.  17.  Brake^ ».«,, 


crtAP.  xxi]  nOMlLETlC  COMMENrAIiY:  CllliONlCLES. 


"wasted  it"  {^\x\g.^  vastaverunt),  applied  to  cities  (c/.  ch.  xxii.  1;  Jer.   xxix.   2;  Ezcb 
XXX.  16). 

Vers.  18-20.  -  End  of  Jehoram's  reign.  Out  off  by  his  malady  in  two  years.  No  burning, 
not  honoured  by  his  subjects ;  desired,  unregretted.  Custom  of  giving  or  withholding 
funeral  honours  introduced  from  Egypt  into  Judasa. 

HOMILETIGS. 
The  Succession  op  Jehoram. — Verses  1-20. 
I.  The  cruelty  by  which,  he  entered  upon  his  reign.    "  Slew 

all  his  brethren."  In  covetousness  for  their  positions,  or  jealous  at  their 
authority.  Pretending  he  was  not  secure,  or  under  false  accusation.  Grievous 
sin  to  cut  off  kindred  because  better  than  ourselves  (ver.  13).  Fratricide  com- 
mon.    Kings  filled  with  "maliciousness,  envy,  murder"  (Rom.  i.  29). 

*♦  Base  envy  withers  at  another's  joy, 
And  hates  the  excellence  it  cannot  reach"  [Thomson^, 

II.  The  wickedness  which  dishonoured  his  reign.     He  began 

wrong  and  went  on  to  worse.  1.  He  walked  in  idolatrous  ways.  "  Like  as  did 
the  house  of  Ahab"  (ver.  6).  The  husband  of  a  wicked  woman,  he  became 
corrupt,  idolatrous,  and  vile.  2.  He  drew  his  people  into  the  same  snare.  He 
encouraged  whoredom  in  high  places.  By  counsel  and  example,  by  force  and 
penalties,  "compelled  Judah  thereto"  (ver.  11).  In  a  land  where  the  true  God 
resided,  the  sad  spectacle  beheld  of  king  and  people  forsaking  his  service  and 
giving  themselves  to  excesses  and  abominations  of  heathen  gods  !  III.  The 
calamities  to  w^hich  wickedness  exposed  his  reign.  God  for- 
saken, subjects  withdrew  allegiance,  no  defence.  1.  Tributary  provinces  rebelled. 
Edom  revolted  and  made  themselves  a  king  (ver.  8).  Lebnah,  a  city  in  his  own 
kingdom,  threw  off  his  yoke  (ver.  10).  Arabians  encouraged  to  rebellion  (ver.  16). 
Thus,  2.  The  kingdom  almost  politically  extinguished.  By  destruction  of  his  army, 
capture  of  Jerusalem,  and  plunder  of  royal  palace ;  by  devastation  of  the  country 
and  deportation  of  royal  family  (ver.  17).  Wicked  men  insecure  in  business, 
position,    and   prospects.      "A  man  shall  not   be   established  by  wickedness." 

IV.  The  sad  events  which    terminated  his   reign  through 

wickedness.  Sins  great  and  retribution  grievous,  "a  great  stroke"  (ver.  14). 
1.  Loathsome  disease  in  his  person.  2.  U^iregretted  in  his  life.  3.  Dishonoured  in 
death.  At  the  early  age  of  40  smitten  with  disease,  a  nuisance  to  himself  and 
others.  The  palace  turned  into  a  hospital  and  a  tomb.  Not  loved  in  life,  not 
lamented  in  death.  Denied  a  royal  sepulchre,  and  only  out  of  resnect  allowed 
interment  in  the  city  of  David  I     Sad  picture,  awful  moral  I 

Jehoshaphat's  Family  Arrangements. — Verses  1-4. 

I.  Prudent  in  plan.  The  eldest  son  appointed  to  succeed,  the  others 
governors  of  cities  and  enriched  with  "gifts  of  silver  and  of  gold."  This  very 
arrangement  might  provoke  jealousy.  Look  further  than  time  and  higher  than 
worldly  prudence.  II.  Difi3.cult  in  execution.  Jehoram  not  established 
without  struggle ;  slew  his  brothers,  with  princes  attached  to  their  interest  or 
ready  to  avenge  their  deaths.  Thus  he  disappointed  the  good  intentions  of  his 
father,  and,  like  many,  founded  his  kingdom  in  blood  (Hab.  ii.  12).  Ill, 
Frustrated  in  purpose.  We  arrange,  others  upset.  "  Things  excellently 
designed,"  says  Cicero,  "  have  often  a  very  ill  event."  Often  special  trial  to  leave 
the  fruits  of  labour,  the  treasures  of  home  and  empire,  "  unto  the  man  that  shall 
be  after  us."  Will  they  be  devoted  to  perpetuate  a  godly  name  or  desecrated  to 
the  world  %  "  And  who  knoweth  whether  he  shall  be  a  wise  man  or  a  fool  ? " 
(Ecc.  ii.  18,  19;  c/".  Pss.  xlix.  10,  xxxiy.  6). 

249 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CtlRONtCLKS,  [chap.  xxi. 


The  Lamp  op  David's  House. — Verse  7. 

Apostasy  would  have  led  to  entire  extinction  of  royal  family,  but  for  the  divine 
promise  to  David  "  to  give  alway  a  light  (candle  or  lamp)  to  his  children  "  (2  Ki. 
viii.  24).  I.  How  the  lamp  was  kindled.  A  divine  "gift."  All  rights 
from  God.  None  can  create  a  family,  build  a  kingdom  without  him.  "  I  have 
ordained  a  lamp  for  mine  anointed."  II.  How  the  lamp  was  preserved 
from  extinction.  The  same  power  that  lit,  kept  the  light  burning.  Wicked- 
ness of  the  king,  abominations  of  the  people  and  surrounding  darkness  of  idolatry 
almost  destroyed  it.  God  remembered  and  fulfilled  his  promise.  **  For  thou  wilt 
light  my  lamp;  the  Lord  my  God  will  enlighten  my  darkness"  (Ps.  xviii.  29). 
III.  How  the  lamp  will  permanently  shine.  The  dynasty  of  David 
the  source  of  light  to  all  generations — raised  from  degradation  and  persecution 
to  honour  and  prosperity.  The  past  a  pledge  for  future.  In  Christ  the  light 
shall  shine  for  ever,  can  never  be  darkened  nor  extinguished.  "  Unto  his  (Solo- 
mon's) son  will  I  give  one  tribe,  that  David  my  servant  may  have  a  ligltt  (lamp) 
alioay  before  me  in  Jerusalem? "  (1  Ki.  xi.  36). 

Jehoram  a  Warning  History. 

I.  In  marriage  neutralising  effect  of  religious   education. 

Good  influences  and  pious  training  of  early  days  neutralised.  Association  with 
wicked  made  him  an  idolator,  worldling,  and  profligate.  A  wedding-day  may 
be  a  wrong  start  and  turn  the  joy  of  life  into  mourning.  II.  In  conduct 
entailing  sufferings  upon  himself  and  descendants.  His  example 
pernicious,  transmitted  poison  to  successive  generations,  brought  terrible  retri- 
bution upon  himself  and  his  kingdom.  Achan  "perished  not  alone  in  his 
iniquity."  III.  In  life  a  fearful  warning  to  all.  To  parents  not  to 
marry  their  children  for  policy  or  profit ;  to  guard  their  associations,  friendships, 
and  alliances ;  above  all,  to  set  a  good  example,  lest  folly  in  them  becomes  sin  in 
their  oflfspring.  To  young  people  to  shun  evil  companions  and  never  forget  the 
claims  of  truth  and  God.  *'  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,  but  a 
companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed." 


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Veis.  6-11.  TJie  unfaithful  king,  allurements  and  partly  by  affright- 
Calamities  which  befel  Jehoram  ap-  ments,  as  did  Julian  also  the  apostate, 
pended  "  because  he  had  forsaken  the  qui  persicdendo  persectus  est "  [Ti-app], 
Lord  God  of  his  father."  1.  Seduced  Vers.  12-15.  Elijah's  writing.  When 
by  his  ivife.  Athaliah,  daughter  of  written  ?  how  sent  ?  for  what  purpose  ? 
Ahab,  a  worshipper  of  Baal.  "  There  Learn  the  word  of  God  sent  to  correct, 
needs  no  more  than  a  bad  wife  to  if  despised  may  become  our  worst 
undo  a  family "  (Bp.  Patrick).  2.  enemy.  This  letter  foretold  the  doom 
Encouraged  idolatrous  practice.  Es-  of  the  king,  but  unheeded  and  sad 
tablished  altars  in  high  places ;  set  up  prediction  fulfilled.  *'  Why  is  he  not 
groves,  images,  and  pillars,  and  filled  then  better  believed  ?  If  some  as- 
the  country  with  heathen  abomina-  trologer  had  once  or  twice  prognosti- 
tions.  3.  Forced  the  people  to  follow  cated,  and  it  proved  true,  he  should  be 
his  example.  "  Compelled  Judah  "  (ver.  much  carried  up  and  credited.  And 
11).  "  This  was  the  worse,  because  in  shall  not  God's  prophets  be  so?  *  Be- 
Jerusalem,  the  holy  city  ;  and  because  lieve  the  prophets  and  ye  shall  pros- 
he  caused  them  to  do  it,  partly  by  his  per.'  But  many  believe  them  no 
250 


CHAP.  TXTi]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


otherwise  than  they  do  the  predictions  mities   of   his   reign,  (3)   humiliating 

of  an  almanack,  if  so  much  "   [Trapj-f].  nature  of  his  death.     J.  died  in  bloom 

Vers.  19,  20.     No    horning.      Dis-  of  manhood,  but  lived  long  enough  to 

honoured  by  his  subjects.    On  account  teach  that  "  he  that  soweth  iniquity 

of  (1)    sins  he  committed,   (2)  cala-  shall  reap  vanity." 


CHAPTER  XXIL 


Critical  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  the  reign  of  Ahaziah  (vers.  1-6) ;  his  end  (vers. 
7-9) ;  and  usurpation  of  Atlialiah  (vers.  10-12).  Parallel  in  2  Ki.  viii  24-29 ;  ix.  27 ;  and 
xi.  1-3. 

yers.  1-4. — Succession  and  beginning  of  A.  Ah.  (called  Jehoahaz,  xxi.  17)  chosen  by  the 
people,  elder  brothers  slain  by  Arabs  and  could  not  be  ransomed.  Forty  and  two^  an 
error  of  transcription  for  22  (2  Ki.  viii.  26),  for  J.,  his  father,  not  more  than  40  at 
death  (xxi.  20)  ;  daughter,  i.e.,  grand-daughter  of  Omri,  founder  of  family  (2  Ki.  viii.  18-26). 
Ver.  3.  He  also  as  well  as  his  father  walked,  &c.  Ver.  4.  They^  Athaliah  and  Jehoram 
of  Israel,  her  brother  {cf.  vers.  1,  3,  5). 

Vers.  5-9.— Fmz^  of  A.  to  Jehoram.  This  ver.  and  next  have  come  from  a  source  used 
also  by  writer  of  Kings,  and  are  nearly  identical  with  2  Ki.  viii.  28,  29  [SjJeah.  Com.'].  War 
of  two  kings  against  Hazael,  aggressive  to  recover  Ramoth-Gil.,  which  Ahab  and 
Jehoshaphat  had  failed  to  do  fourteen  years  earlier  (1  Ki.  xxii.  3-36).  J.  wounded  by 
Syrians  withdrew  from  siege  to  Jezreel,  leaving  his  army  under  Jehu  within  the  walls  of 
town.  Ahaz.  went  to  visit  Joram,  and  met  with  death.  Ver.  8.  Sons,  princes  of  royal 
house,  on  a  visit  met  with  Jehu,  and  42  of  them  slain  (2  Ki.  x.  14).  Ver.  9.  Hid,  about  to 
hide  in  Samaria,  where  friends  (2  Ki.  x.  12-15)  were,  but  turned  aside  by  pursuers, 
brought  to  Jehu,  was  wounded  mortally,  fled  and  died  at  Megiddo.  None  left  of  royal 
house  to  assume  rule. 

Vers.  10-12. — AthaliaVs  usurpation  {cf.  2  Ki.  xi  1-3).  Seed  royal^  who  aspired  to  govern. 
Bed-chamher^  in  a  chamber  of  mattresses,  a  repository  for  beds,  not  a  lodging  chamber. 
Jeh.,  as  priest,  had  a  right  to  occupy  buildings  in  outer  wall,  and  resided  in  one  of  these 
apartments. 

HOMILETIGS. 

Ahaziah*s  Wicked  Reign. —  Verses  1-9. 

I.  Its  beginning  through  home  influence.  Here  all  start  life  in 
right  or  wrong  direction.  Foundations  then  laid,  habits  then  formed,  are 
permanent  factors  in  future  years.  To  begin  life  without  godly  training  and 
virtuous  principles  will  ensure  failure,  often  early  and  final.  Home  influence 
affects  societies,  churches,  and  nations.  *'  They  that  rock  the  cradle  rule  the 
world,"  said  Napoleon.  II.  Its  continuance  by  evil  counsellors. 
A.  and  her  brother  counselled  A.  (ver.  4).  Bad  training,  bad  advice.  Formed 
in  childhood,  directed  as  a  man,  how  could  his  reign  be  otherwise  ?  "  In  the 
multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety,"  and  the  larger  the  number  the  greater 
the  safety.  To  one  such  Pharaoh  owed  the  security  of  his  kingdom  from 
desolating  famine.  But  "  where  no  counsel  is,"  or  only  evil  counsel,  "  the  people 
must  fall "  (Prov.  xi.  14).  A  nation  with  evil  legislators  like  a  ship  directed  in 
the  midst  of  rocks  in  imminent  peril.     **  The  counsels  of  the  wicked  are  deceit." 

251 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxn 

III.  Its  end  in  judgment  which  it  entailed,  A.  survived  to  be 
the  riun  of  her  son,  as  she  had  been  the  bane  of  her  husband  (ver.  10).  Under 
her  influence  he  began  a  career  of  ungodliness  and  Hcentiousness  which  ended  in 
his  destruction.  Certain  and  irretrievable  ruin  results  from  wicked  counsel  and 
wicked  life.  "  How  oft  is  the  candle  of  the  wicked  put  out  1  and  how  oft 
Cometh  their  destruction  upon  them  1     God  distributeth  sorrows  in.  his  anger." 

The  Power  of  a  Mother's  Influence. — Verse  3. 

For  is  a  kind  of  explanation,  the  reason  assigned  for  results  which  are  given. 
"  For  his  mother  was  his  counsellor  to  do  wickedly."  I.  It  begins  early 
in  life .  Education  begins  sooner  than  parents  imagine  ;  long  enough  before 
they  are  responsible ;  even  when  they  begin  to  see,  feel,  and  observe.  Hence 
great  importance  to  have  first  teaching  of  a  child.  Early  impressions  are 
elementary  principles  out  of  which  mature  life  is  organised.-  "  When  should  I 
begin  the  education  of  my  children  now  four  years  old  ? "  asked  a  mother  from  a 
clergyman,  who  replied,  "  Madam,  if  you  have  not  begun  already  you  have  lost 
those  four  years.  From  the  first  smile  that  gleams  upon  an  infant's  cheek  your 
opportunity  begins."  II.  It  moul  ds  through  life.  A  living  power,  form- 
ing character  and  directing  conduct.  The  child  becomes  a  man,  the  subject 
becomes  a  sovereign;  influence  is  thus  repeated  and  transmitted.  Home  the  most 
poweiful  school  in  the  world.  Mother's  influence  for  good  or  evil  mightier  than 
pulpits  and  thrones.  "  My  opinion  is,"  said  Napoleon,  "  that  the  future  good  or 
bad  conduct  of  a  child  depends  entirely  on  the  mother."  Ill,  It  leaves 
permanent  impress  upon  life.  Alexander  the  Great  could  never  correct 
the  faults  of  gait  and  manners  learned  in  childhood  from  Leonidas,  his  master. 
The  face,  words,  and  example  of  mothers  leave  permanent  influence.  "  Every 
first  thing  continues  for  ever  with  the  child  ;  the  first  colour,  the  first  music,  the 
first  flower,  paint  the  foreground  of  life.  Every  new  educator  efi"ects  less  than 
his  predecessor ;  until,  at  last,  if  we  regard  all  life  as  an  educational  institute,  a 
circumnavigator  of  the  world  is  less  influenced  by  all  the  nations  he  has  seen 
than  by  his  nurse"  \Eic]iter\ 

•*  The  fond  attachment  to  the  well-known  place, 
"Whence  first  we  started  into  life's  long  race, 
Ketains  its  hold  with  such  unfailing  sway, 
We  feel  it  e'en  in  age,  and  at  our  latest  day"  \_C4)wjjer\, 

The  Death  of  Ahaziah. — Verses  6-9. 

I.  Untimely  in  its  method.  Neither  advanced  in  life,  nor  delicate  in 
health.  On  a  friendly  visit  to  see  a  sick  relative !  Surely  this  errand  of  pity 
the  occasion  of  gladness,  not  grief  ?  Death  everywhere  at  home  and  abroad,  in 
our  own  families  and  those  of  friends.  From  the  desk,  the  pulpit,  and  the  throne 
we  may  be  suddenly  carried  to  the  grave.  II.  Brought  about  by 
conipanionship  with  evil  men.  Intimacy  with  Joram  involved  him  in 
the  common  ruin  of  Ahab's  house.  *'  Tell  me  with  whom  thou  goest,  and  I  will 
tell  thee  what  thou  art,"  is  the  Spanish  proverb ;  rendered  into  English,  "  A 
man  is  known  by  the  company  he  keeps."  To  be  seen  with  the  frivolous  is  to 
be  known  as  frivolous ;  to  have  friendship  with  the  wise  is  to  enjoy  reputation 
tor  wisdom  ;  but  "  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed." 

•*  Heaven  with  a  secret  principle  endued 
Mankind  to  seek  their  own  similitude.* 

III.  Arranged  by  the  providence  of  God.    "  And  the  destruction  of 
A.    was   of   God   by   coming  to  J."    (ver.   7).     Kemarkable  that    threatened 
252 


OHAP.xxn.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


vengeance  was  brought  on  house  of  Ahab  at  the  very  time  King  of  Judah  was 
visiting  Joram,  that  he  might  partake  of  punishment  as  a  descendant  of  wicked 
x^Lhab.  No  evidence  that  Jehu  fixed  on  this  time  from  wish  to  include  Ahaziah 
in  punishment ;  nor  was  he  aware  of  his  presence  at  Jezreel.  Unexpected 
concurrence  of  circumstances.  All  result  of  immutable  purpose,  and  accom- 
plished by  a  wonderful  arrangement  of  Providence  in  time  and  place.  May  escape 
for  a  time,  but  no  concealment  from  divine  retribution. 

Women  Good  and  Bad. — Verses  10-12. 

What  a  contrsist  in  these  verses  1  Two  females  acting  very  different  parts. 
I.  A  bad  woman  eng:aged  in  wicked  designs.  Athaliah  endea- 
vours to  destroy  seed  royal  after  death  of  her  son.  To  this  wickedness  impelled 
in  rage  at  destruction  of  Ahab's  family,  hence  David's  family  must  share  the 
same  fate ;  in  zeal  for  idolatry  and  worship  of  Baal,  which  she  was  determined 
to  uphold  amid  opposition ;  in  regard  to  her  own  defence  and  in  ambitious 
desire  to  usurp  the  throne  and  transmit  the  crown  to  her  own  family, 
"  Athaliah  had  inherited  the  spirit  of  Jezebel,  her  mother.  As  wife  of  Joram 
and  mother  of  Ahaziah,  she  had  guided  both  the  internal  and  the  external  policy 
ol  the  Jewish  kingdom  ;  she  had  procured  the  establishment  of  the  worship  of 
Baal  in  Judsea  (2  Ki.  viii.  18-27),  and  had  maintained  a  close  alliance  with  the 
sister  kingdom.  The  revolution  effected  by  Jehu  touched  her  nearly.  It  struck 
away  from  her  the  entire  support  which  she  derived  from  the  power  and 
grandeur  of  her  relatives  and  their  readiness  to  help  her  at  need.  It  isolated 
her  religious  system,  severing  the  communication  with  Phoenicia.  Moreover,  the 
death  of  Ahaziah  deprived  her  of  her  legal  status  in  Judsea,  which  was  that  of 
Gehirahj  or  queen-mother,  and  transferred  that  position  to  the  chief  wife  of  her 
deceased  son.  Under  these  circumstances,  which  might  well  have  daunted  even 
a  woman  of  more  than  ordinary  courage,  Athaliah's  hereditary  spirit  and  energy 
asserted  itself.  Instead  of  yielding  to  the  storm,  or  merely  standing  on  the 
lefensive,  she  resolved  to  become  the  assailant,  and,  before  any  plans  could  be 
formed  against  her,  to  strike"  [Speak.  Com.\  II.  A  good  woman 
engaged  in  benevolent  designs.  The  family  of  David  not  entirely 
destroyed.  J.,  daughter  of  Joram  (not  of  Athaliah,  Josephus),  wife  of  Jehoiada, 
the  high  priest,  took  Joash,  her  nephew,  to  conceal  and  save  him  (ver.  11).  The 
lineage  of  David  and  the  human  descent  of  Messiah  suspended  on  the  life  of  a 
child  one  year  old  !  This  loyal  act  a  benevolent  work,  the  means  of  fulfilling 
prophetic  words  and  blessing  the  world  1  Women  may  be  devils  or  ministering 
angels.  "  If  once  she  falls,  it  is  the  fall  of  Lucifer  "  \Colton\.  But  "  in  great 
arises  it  is  woman's  special  lot  to  soften  our  misfortunes  *'  \Napole<yriS^ 

^  Her  office  there  to  rear,  to  teach, 
Becoming,  as  is  meet  and  fit, 
A  link  among  the  days,  to  knit 
The  generations  each  with  each  "  [Tennyitti)^ 


253 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [ohap.xxiil 


OHAPTEB  XXIU. 


Cbitioal  Notes.]  This  chapter  parallel  with  2  Ki.  xL  4-20,  evidently  from  same 
source,  although  presenting  certain  points  of  difference.  In  Ki.  narrative  related  from 
civil  point  of  view,  in  Chronicles  writer  concerns  himself  mainly  with  the  ecclesiastical 
aspect  of  the  transaction  [Speak.  Com.'\.  Joash  is  made  king  (vers,  1-11) ;  Athaliah 
slain  (vers.  12-15) ;  and  worship  restored  (vers.  16-21). 

Vers.  1-11. — Joash  made  King.  J.  strengthened,  braced  himself  to  the  effort  from  which 
he  had  previously  shrunk  [S;peah.  Com,'].  Captains,  centurions  of  royal  guards  loyal 
to  legitimate  heir  of  crown.  Covenant  for  overthrow  of  Athaliah's  tyranny.  Ver.  2. 
Gathered,  probably  at  time  of  festivals,  to  disarm  suspicion.  Israel,  i.e.,  Judah.  Ver.  3. 
Congregation,  select  Levites  and  trusty  persons,  collected  by  captains  from  various  cities. 
Said,  Jehoiada  said,  pointing  to  Joash.  Lord  (2  Sam.  viii.  12,  13).  Ver.  4.  Ye.  Levites 
received  orders,  in  Ki.  orders  to  royal  guard  given.  Entering,  Levites  released  each  other 
every  Sabbath  day  (1  Chron.  ix.  25).  Porters,  watchmen.  Doors,  Hebrew  thresholds. 
Ver.  5.  Courts,  people  not  admitted  ordinarily,  on  this  occasion  allowed  to  witness  pro- 
ceedings. Remember  Athaliah  had  completely  desecrated  the  entire  enclosure  \_Speak. 
Com.].  Ver.  6.  Watch,  see  that  no  worshippers  of  Baal  forced  their  way  in.  Ver.  7. 
Convpass,  Levites  not  engaged  as  indicated  to  surround  king  at  entrance  and  exit. 
Ver.  8.  Dismissed,  not  to  keep  a  sufficient  force  for  the  occasion ;  armed  them  within  temple 
courts  to  avoid  suspicion  (ver.  9),  and  equipped  '•  all  the  people,"  i.e.^  combined  princes, 
guai'ds,  and  Levites,  who  surrounded  the  king.  Ver,  11.  Testimony.  The  law  according 
to  which  he  was  to  rule  (Deut.  xvii.  18). 

Vers.  12-15. — Athaliah  is  slain.  She  is  permitted  to  enter  outer  court  without  a 
guard.  Ver.  13.  Pillar,  platform  on  which  king  elevated  to  be  seen.  Treason,  conspiracy. 
She  was  taken  out  of  temple  grounds  to  horse  gate  (for  king's  mules),  and  there  slain 
(2  KL  xi.  16-18 ;  xxiii  2,  6,  12). 

Vers.  16-21. — Jehoiada^s  reforms.  J.  represented  the  Lord  (2  Ki.  xi.  17) ;  ratified 
the  covenant  to  be  the  Lord's  people  (ver.  16) ;  destroyed  temple  of  Baal  (ver.  17) ;  and 
arranged  for  restoration  of  priests  and  Levites,  singers  and  porters.  Ver.  20.  Brought 
dowut  escorted  king  to  palace,  through  high  gate,  chief  gate  of  outer  court  (gate  of  guard, 
2  Ki.  xi.  19).  Quiet t  a  bloodless  revolution  (except  Athaliah's  death)  and  free  from 
tyranny  And  idolatry. 

EOMILETICS. 

Joash  Made  Kino. — Verses  1-11. 

Six  years  of  Athaliah's  tyranny  had  ripened  the  people  for  revolution.    They 

were  weary  and  ready  for  change.     Agents  and  managers  at  hand,  and  the 

revolution  was  successful.     I.  The  measures  adopted,     "  Every  step  was 

taken  in  accordance  with  the  usages  which  had  been  gradually  gaining  head 

during  the  previous  reigns,  and  all  the  means  which  his  office  placed  at  the 

disposal   of  Jehoiada  were  freely  employed"    [Stanleyl,     1.  He  concerted  with 

the    leaders  of  the  army.     Indirect  communication    with  the  five  officers  of 

loyal  guard,  whom  he  bound  by  solemn  oath.     2.  He  enlisted  the  co-operation  of 

the  Levites.     These  divided  into  three  bands:  one  to  guard  the  king,  the  other 

two  posted  at  doors  and  gates.     Captains  and  military  officers  entered  the  temple 

unarmed  to  lull  suspicion,  and  furnished  with  sacred  armoury.     All  courts  of 

temple  filled  with  those  favourable  to  the  cause,  and  secret  kept  wonderfully. 

**The  words  of  the  wise  are  heard  in  quiet"  (Ecclus.  ix.  17).     II.  The  leading 

man  to  arrange  them.     Jehoiada  chief  in   this  conspiracy.     A  man  of 

prudence,  piety,  and  commanding  position.     United  by  marriage  with  the  royal 

family,  he  sought  to  overturn  the  usurper,  and  restore  lawful  sovereignty.    As 

high  priest  it  was  his  duty  officially  to  watch  over  the  temple  and  execute  the 

]aws  of  God.     In  his  signal  services  to  God,  his  king,  and  country  he  was 

264 


CHAP,  xxra.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


supported  by  chief  authorities  civil  and  religious,  counselled  by  the  prophets  of 
Ills  time,  and  directed  by  divine  guidance.  He  earned  a  foremost  name  in  Israel, 
and  was  buried  with  honour  in  the  city  of  David.  Ill,  The  time  in 
which  the  measures  were  carried  out.  Success  depends  upon  time, 
the  exact  moment  as  well  as  method.  The  Sabbath  was  the  day  fixed.  Need- 
ful to  have  as  large  a  force  as  possible.  Those  detained  who  under  other  cir- 
oumstances  would  have  gone  home.  But  the  excitement  of  the  moment  did  not 
make  J.  forget  the  sanctity  of  God's  house.  None  but  priests  and  ministering 
Levites  permitted  to  enter,  and  strict  orders  given  to  take  Athaliah  out  of 
;ts  precincts.  IV.  The  success  which  attended  the  execution  of 
the  measures.  At  the  given  signal  the  king  was  exhibited  and  crowned. 
Bystanders  clapped  hands  together  and  raised  the  national  shout,  "  Long  live  the 
king."  Trumpeters  announced  the  royal  inauguration.  Athaliah  entered  the 
temple,  saw  the  fatal  hour  was  come,  rent  her  royal  robes,  and  cried  out, 
''  Conspii'acy,  conspiracy !"  but  the  temple  was  kept  from  pollution ;  the 
hi'one  of  David  was  preserved,  and  the  worship  of  God  restored.  A  revolution 
arried  out  with  tact,  unanimity,  and  with  little  bloodshed.  "  All  the  people  of 
he  land  rejoiced  ;  and  the  city  was  quiet." 

The  Reforms  of  Jehoiada. — Verses  15-21, 

Only  part  of  work  done  by  overthrow  of  tyranny  and  death  of  Athaliah,  to 
( omplete  revolution  government  must  be  settled  and  interests  of  religion  secured. 
I.  The  national  covenant  was  renewed.  A  covenant  with  Israel 
"to  be  unto  him  a  people  for  inheritance  "  (Deut.  iv.  6 ;  xxvii.  9  ;  Ex.  xix.).  A 
threefold  covenant  by  which  the  king  bound  himself  to  rule  according  to  divine 
rule,  and  the  people  pledged  themselves  to  be  loyal  to  him  as  God's  representa- 
tive— by  which  the  king  and  people  agreed  to  "  be  the  Lord's  people."  Sensible 
of  obligation  to  God,  we  are  bound  closer  to  one  another.  Men  first  give  them- 
selves to  the  Lord  and  then  to  us  (2  Cor.  viii.  5).  Starting  in  this  spirit  they  are 
more  likely  to  prosper  in  families,  churches,  and  kingdoms.  II.  The 
idolatry  of  Baal  was  destroyed.  This  immediate  fruit  of  the  renewal 
of  covenant.  BaaFs  temples,  altars,  and  images  shattered  to  pieces  by  popular 
fury.  Beside  the  altar  fell  the  priest  of  Baal,  for  God  commanded  that  seducers 
to  idolatry  should  be  put  to  death  (Deut.  xiii.  5,  6).  Sins  must  be  forsaken  and 
overcome ;  every  usurper  in  heart  and  life  dethroned,  and  God's  reign  supreme 
over  all.  III.  The  worship  of  Jehovah  w^as  restored.  Priests 
were  appointed  to  their  courses,  and  sacrifices  duly  ofiered.  Singers  and  porters 
arranged  according  to  former  custom.  Praise  and  thanksgiving  filled  the  courts 
of  God's  house,  and  worship  restored  in  its  ancient  purity.  IV.  The  throne 
of  Judah  was  established.  The  young  king  wonderfully  preserved,  was 
brought  down  from  the  temple  to  the  palace,  seated  on  the  throne — "  the 
throne  of  the  kings  of  Judah  "  (2  Kings  xi.  19) — and  crowned  as  lawful  sovereign. 
"  Through  the  priesthood  the  lineage  of  David  had  been  saved  and  the  worship 
of  Jehovah  restored  in  Judah,  even  more  successfully  than  it  had  been  in 
Samaria  through  the  prophets"  \Sta7iley\.  V.  The  priesthood  was 
elevated  to  highest  honour.  "During  minority  of  Joash,  Jehoiada 
virtually  reigned.  The  very  ofiice  in  some  sense  created  by  him.  He  raised  the 
priesthood  to  an  importance  which  (with  single  exception  of  Eli)  it  had  never 
before  attained  in  history  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  which  it  never  afterwards 
altogether  lost.  The  name  of  *High  Priest,'  which  had  not  been  given  to 
\aron,  or  Eli,  or  Zadok,  was  given  to  him,  and  afterwards  continued  to  his 
^^uccessors.  He  was  regarded  as  a  second  founder  of  the  order,  so  that  in  after 
•lays  he^  rather  than  Aaron,  is  described  as  the  chief  "  [Stanley]. 

269 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARYt  CHBONJOLES,  toHAP.  xxin. 


Temple  Worship  Kestored  and  Established. — Verses  15-21, 

Reparation  of  this  venerable  fabric  first  object,  and  one  of  the  great  events  of 
his  reign.  From  Joash  seemed  to  come  the  impulse,  "  Joash  was  minded 
to  restore  the  house  of  the  Lord."  It  had  suffered  from  neglect,  been 
spoiled  of  its  treasures,  and  only  a  faded  remnant  of  former  splendour. 
I.  In  its  structure  and  worship.  Its  outward  form,  its  foundations 
had  been  injured,  "  broken  up  "  (ch.  xxiv.  7)  by  Athaliah's  workmen  taking  away 
stones  for  her  own  temple.  Priests  had  not  taken  care  to  repair  the  breaches, 
but  the  king  zealous.  Sad  to  see  ministers  dilatory  in  sacred  duties,  professors 
with  mere  form  becoming  careless  and  hypocritical !  Spiritually  its  worship  was 
restored  in  purity  and  attraction.  Officers  appointed  for  departments,  lawful 
sacrifices  offered,  and  true  service  revived.  II.  In  its  method  of 
support.  An  account  of  measures  adopted  (2  Kings  xii.).  Three  sorts  of 
money  levied — redemption  money,  estimation  money,  and  freewill  offerings.  This 
method  seemed  to  have  failed  for  some  reason,  and  the  plan  adopted  in  chapter 
xxiv.  (c/.  outline).  III.  In  its  principles  and  design.  Its  purpose  to 
remind  of  God  and  his  claims,  to  afford  the  privilege  of  meeting  and  praising  God. 
In  teaching  it  set  moral  before  ritual,  intoned  the  minds  of  kings,  the  lives  of  the 
people,  and  the  traditions  of  the  nation.  From  God  came  restoration  from  danger, 
elevation  to  honour,  and  prosperity  to  all  ranks.  Hence  needful  to  have  a  fixed 
place  to  cultivate  reverence  and  social  fellowship ;  to  embody  order  and  devotional 
life.  Common  worship  is  the  necessity  of  our  nature  and  the  command  of 
Scripture ;  the  indestructive  principle  of  Sabbatic  law  and  temple  ritual.  The 
recognition  of  God — the  formal  recognition  of  him  by  the  people  as  Ruler, 
Saviour,  and  Portion — ^is  the  germinal  moral  principle  of  duty  and  religion. 

••  One  place  there  is — beneath  the  burial  sod, 
Where  all  mankind  are  equalised  by  death  ; 
Another  place  there  is — the  fane  of  God, 

Where  all  are  equal  who  draw  living  breath.* 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  10-13.  Joash  made  King.  1,  (ver.  11).  A  form  used  among  Con- 
Presented  in  the  temple.  2.  Crowned  tinental  nations,  as  the  French  "Vive 
with  the  diadem  and  testimony.  "It  le  Roi."  "Our  own  form  of  loyal 
is  the  first  direct  example  of  a  corona-  acclamation  comes  from  the  ritual  of 
tion.  The  diadem,  probably  a  band  daily  responses  and  of  the  ancient 
studded  with  jewels,  was  placed  on  his  coronation  service,  *  Domine,  salvum 
head  by  the  high  priest,  and  upon  it  fac  Regem,*  which  is  taken  from  Ps. 
the  sacred  *  testimony,'  which,  in  the  xix.  9,  as  in  Sept.  and  Vulgate  Ver- 
reign  of  Jehoshaphat,  had  been  raised  sions.  Coverdale  translation  (1537) 
into  new  importance.  It  seemed  like  gives  *  God  save  the  new  kynge  * ; 
the  intimation  of  a  limitation  to  the  Geneva  (1560)  *  God  save  the  kynge.' 
king's  despotic  power — an  indication  The  Authorised  Versions  of  1539  and 
that  he  was  not  to  be,  like  David,  1572  had  *  God  send  the  kynge  hfe'" 
above,   but   beneath   the  law    of    his  \J,  H.  Blunt]. 

country"  [Stanley].    3.  Anointed  with         Ver.  11,    The  crown  and  the  testi- 

sacred  oil.     According  to  Hebrew  text,  mony.     Two  important  symbols.     The 

2  Ki.  xi.  12,  by  people  ;  to  LXX.   (of  crown  the  sign  of  power,  and  the  law 

same),  by  Jehoiada;  to  2  Chr.  xxiii.  11,  the  sign  of  theocratic  wisdom.  "Finely 

by  Jehoiada  and  his  sons.     4.  Accepted  are  both  the  crown  and  the  book  pre- 

by  the  nation.     Trumpets  and  shout-  sented  to  the  king,  that  he  might  be 

ing,  "God  save,  lit.  Long  live  the  king"  not  only  mighty,  but  also  wise,  or  (as 
250 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


we  may  say)   know   God's  word    and  patriotic  right,  and  having  filled  the 

ri<'ht.     Thus  even  now  we  make  kings  cup  of  her  iniquity,  the   people  arose, 

wfth  a  sword  and  book"  [Luther].  and    Athaliah    was     slain    with     the 

Yers.  U-U.  Death  of  Athaliah.     1.  sword"     [Farker].      Athaliah     might 

By  secret  plot.     2.  By  agency  of  high  well  have  written,  as  Mary  Queen  of 

priest.     3.     By    co-operation    of    the  Scots  did  in  a  window  at  Fotheringay 

people.     4.  As  a  righteous  judgment.  Castle : — 

"  This  woman  ruled  viciously,  selfishly,  «♦  From  the  top  of  all  my  trust 

without  regard  to  patriotic  instinct  or  Mishap  hath  laid  me  in  the  dust "  ITrapp}. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 


Gbitioal  Notes.]  This  chapter  parallel  with  2  Ki.  xii.;  gives  same  order  of  events  with 
fresh  matter  and  in  different  style.  Joash's  interest  in  religion  under  guidance  of 
Jehoiada  (vers.  1-14)  ;  forsakes  the  God  of  his  fathers  after  death  of  Jehoiada  (vers. 
15-22) ;  distressed  by  Syrians  and  put  to  death  by  his  servants  (vers.  23-27). 

Vers.  1-14. — Zeal  of  Joash  under  infiuence  of  Jehoiada.  Days,  Jehoiada  lived  after 
accession  of  Joash  twenty-three  years  (2  Ki.  xii.  6).  Idolatry  of  king  confined  to  last  ten 
or  fifteen  years.  Ver.  3.  Two  wiveSy  anxious  to  secure  succession  to  throne,  and  limit 
licence  which  kings  permitted  themselves  (1  Ki.  xL  3;  2  Chr.  xi.  21 ;  xiii.  21).  Ver.  4. 
Rejjair^  renew,  strengthen.  Levites  hastened  not^  through  limited  funds  or  indifference 
(ver.  6).  Ver.  6.  Collection,  tax  assigned  by  law  for  tabernacle ;  half  a  shekel  from  every 
one  (Ex.  XXX.  12-16;  xxxviii.  25).  Ver.  7.  Sons^  Aiiaziah  and  elder  brothers  (xxi.  17), 
devoted  to  idolatry,  and  who  carried  out  their  mother's  designs  against  temple.  Ver.  8. 
Chesty  full  particulars  2  Ki.  xii.  9.  Ver.  9.  Collection,  contributions  flowed  in  after  pro- 
clamation. Ver.  10.  End,  until  enough  to  complete  restoration.  Ver.  12.  Did  work, 
overseers  of  work  (2  Ki.  xii.  11).  Ver.  13.  Perfected,  lit.  the  healing  (binding,  cf.  Neh.  iv.  1 ; 
Jer.  XXX.  17)  went  up  (was  laid,  Jer.  viii  22).  State,  lit.  on  its  measure,  original  propor- 
tions Ex.  XXX.  32.     Ver.  14.  To  minister,  refurnishing  temple  with  utensils,  &c.  ' 

Vers.  15-22. — Joash  declines  after  the  death  of  Jehoiada.  This  paragraph  not  in  Kings. 
Full  of  days,  not  applied  to  many.  Years  unparalleled  from  Exodus  downwards.  Many 
dispute  this  age,  others  see  no  reason  to  do  so.  Ver.  17.  Obeisance,  flattered  the  king, 
requested  toleration  for  idolatry.  Hearkened,  yioidiedi  to  them.  Ver.  19.  P/op/i^is,  names 
not  mentioned,  except  Zech.,  who  warned  of  danger.  Ver.  20.  Spirit  came  clothed. 
Ver.  21.  Conspired,  they  would  inflame  the  king,  urge  him  to  extreme  measures.  Stones, 
the  punishment  for  idolaters  (Lev.  xx.  2).  Court,  between  temple  and  altar  (^Mt. 
xxiii.  35).    Ver.  22.  Said,  dying  words  of  Zech.  utterance  of  prophetic  doom. 

Vers.  23-27. — Syiian  invasion  and  death  of  J.  End,  turn  of  the  year;  time  of  such 
expeditions.  Came,  led  by  Hazael,  whom  Joash  bribed  to  withdraw  from  siege 
(2  Ki.  xii.  18).  Destroyed,  a  mere  handful  of  men  inflicted  humiliating  defeat  upon 
collected  force  of  Israel  (ver.  24).  Ver.  25.  Departed,  pressed  on  against  Jerusalem  after 
defeat  of  Joash's  army,  but  retreated  because  enriched  by  gold  of  temple  (2  Ki.  xii.  18). 
Diseases,  plural  of  intensity,  sore  distress.  Bed,  where  he  lay  sick.  Ver.  26.  Zahad, 
Zachar  perhaps  originally,  as  letters  are  of  like  form  ;  in  Kings,  Jozachar.  Shim., 'Ki. 
Shomer.  Mothers  only  given.  Ver.  27.  Burdens,  according  to  common  usage  in  prophetic 
writings  (2  Ki.  ix.  25 ;  Is.  xiii.  1 ;  Lam.  ii.  14)  are  denunciations  of  coming  evils  [Keil\ 
(ver.  19).    Story  (marg.),  commentary,  the  memoir  contained  in  state  annals. 

HOMILETIGS. 

Beoabd  for  God*s  House. — Verses  4-14. 

Remarkable  that  first  movement  should  come  from  the  king  and  not  the  priest 
to  restore  temple.     Jehoiada  had  permitted  it  to  remain  unrepaired  during  the 

267 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.        [chap.  xxiv. 


whole  period  of  his  regency.  Now  Joash,  not  regardless  of  the  place  which  had 
given  him  shelter,  displays  zeal.  I.  In  repairing  its  physical 
structure.  "  Mindful  to  repair  (renew)  the  house,"  which  was  in  decay.  No 
right  to  permit  dilapidations  in  God's  house  than  in  private  property.  We 
should  keep  it  in  repair,  make  it  attractive  and  durable  outside  as  well  as  inside. 
Many  more  concerned  for  their  own  than  for  God's  house ;  build  and  adorn 
for  themselves,  but  neglect  God.  "Is  it  time  for  you,  O  you,  to  dwell  (at 
ease)  in  your  ceiled  houses,  and  this  house  lie  waste?"  (Hag.  i.  4).  II.  In 
urging  others  to  interest  themselves  in  this  work.  J.  con- 
sulted officers,  advised  them  to  collect  expenses  from  the  cities,  reproved  the  high 
priest,  and  urged  all  to  diligence.  "  See  that  ye  hasten  the  matter  "  (ver.  5). 
Too  long  had  they  been  negligent.  The  honour  of  God  and  the  interests  of  the 
nation  demanded  exertion.  Shamefully  remiss  are  many  who  ought  to  be  awake 
and  first.  Let  us  be  alive  ourselves,  and  excite  others  to  the  work.  "  Nothing 
of  worth  or  weight  can  be  achieved  with  half  a  mind,  with  a  faint  heart,  with  a 
lame  endeavour,"  says  South.  III.  In  creating  a  fund  to  keep  it 
in  repair.  1.  A  tax  was  levied  upon  the  people  (ver.  5).  Priests  ordered  to 
collect  the  three  kinds  of  money  {cf.  2  Ki.  xii.),  but  were  careless,  and  did  not 
call  upon  the  people,  or  people  had  little  confidence  in  management  of  priests 
that  they  were  reluctant  to  pay  dues.  What  money  was  collected  not  applied 
to  proper  use.  "The  breeches  of  the  house  were  not  repaired."  2.  A  freewill 
offering  box  was  provided.  The  general  levy  failed.  A  chest  made,  hole  bored 
into  lid,  and  placed  at  door  to  receive  voluntary  ofierings  of  people.  A 
separation  thus  made  between  money  for  repairs,  "  incidentals,"  and  money  for 
support  of  priests.  This  novel,  touched  the  hearts  of  the  people.  Cheerfulness 
and  sufficiency  the  result  (ver.  11).  Need  of  reform  in  management  of  Church 
finances.  Great  deficiency  in  serious  consideration,  conscientious  liberality, 
enlightened  system  and  Christian  patriotism.  IV.  In  the  lawful  USe  of 
the  fund  thus  created.  Formerly  money  sadly  misappropriated.  1.  Duly 
audited  by  prop  r  persons.  The  Levites  took  the  box  to  "  the  king's  scribe,  and 
the  high  priest's  officer  came  and  emptied  it,*'  counted  it,  put  it  into  bags, 
labelled  and  sealed  as  customary,  and  delivered  them  to  overseers  of  building  to 
pay  workmen  and  buy  necessary  materials.  2.  Thus  nothing  misappropriated. 
Nothing  lost.  Confidence  in  financial  business.  No  account  exacted,  overseers 
honest,  and  surplus,  after  repairs,  appropriated  to  purchase  of  temple  furniture 
(ver.  14).  This  a  type  of  apostolic  method,  an  example  to  the  Christian  Church. 
V.  In  the  completion  of  the  work  begun.  Many  hindrances. 
Prevalence  of  idolatrous  customs,  official  dilatoriness,  failure  of  first  plan,  and 
lethargy  of  people.  But  work  went  on,  priests  ashamed,  and  consented  to 
measures  adopted.  All  difficulties  finally  overcome.  "  The  work  was  perfected 
(healed),  restored  to  beauty,  set  in  its  measure  and  proportion,  and  strengthened 
in  durability  and  structure  "  (ver.  13). 

The  foregoing  outline  may  suggest  other  thoughts.  I.  It  is  natural  for  the 
believing  heart  to  regard  the  house  of  God.  Its  interests  ever  dear  to  the  Christian. 
To  him  the  temple  is  the  house  of  bread — his  Bethlehem ;  the  centre  of 
attraction,  fellowship,  and  joy.  It  is  instinctive  for  him  to  mind  it,  as  it  is 
natural  for  the  hart  to  pant  after  the  water  brook,  or  doves  to  fly  to  their 
windows.  II.  When  men  pay  due  regard  to  God's  house,  they  will  provide  for  its 
interests.  They  build,  and  keep  the  fabric  in  repair  ;  provide  for  sustenance  of 
its  agencies,  and  perpetuation  of  its  worship  ;  always  and  everywhere  revere  the 
place  in  which  God  is  publicly  worshipped.  III.  In  thus  providing  for  the 
interests  of  God's  house,  they  promote  the  welfare  of  the  nation.  Both  intimately 
connected.  Associations  of  worship  affect  the  education,  culture,  and  morals  of 
258 


CHAP.  xiiT.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


the  community.  Public  worship  is  the  secret  power  of  the  Ohurch,  the  nurse  of 
virtue  in  the  nation. 

National  Bela?sb  into  Idolatry. — Verses  17-24. 

A  great  change  after  death  of  Jehoiada.  Many  took  part  in  revolution  which 
dethroned  Athaliah  and  placed  Joash  on  the  throne,  on  political  not  religious 
grounds.  Dislike  to  rule  of  a  woman,  a  foreigner,  without  zeal  for  pure 
religion,  hence  relapse.  I.  Beginning  with  the  demands  of  the 
princes.  "The  princes  of  Judah"  came  to  king  (ver.  17).  Worldly- 
minded,  hating  priestly  power,  and  tired  with  thirty  years'  pure  and  simple 
worship,  yearned  for  seductive  rites  of  heathenism.  They  requested  permission 
to  worship  in  high  places,  not  to  be  put  to  expensive  and  frequent  journeys  to 
Jerusalem.  Advised  the  king  to  be  more  tolerant  and  less  under  priestly 
dominion.  By  unusual  humility,  framed  a  plausible  and  inoffensive  petition, 
which  was  granted.  II.  Encouraged  by  the  concessions  of  the 
king.  Flattered  by  their  "  obeisance  to  the  king,"  he  hearkened  to  them. 
Pleased  apd  weak-minded,  their  requests  were  more  agreeable  than  the  dictates 
of  Jehoiada  used  to  be.  Princes  often  flattered  and  drawn  into  ruin  by  those 
who  promised  Hberty.  George  III.,  after  his  accession,  reproved  a  high 
dignitary  for  fulsome  adulation,  and  issued  an  order  prohibiting  any  clergyman 
called  to  preach  before  him  from  paying  compliments  to  him.  III.  Protested 
against  by  the  warnings  of  the  prophet.    Z.,  son  of  J.,  urged 

people  from  a  prominent  place  not  to  transgress  the  commandments  of  the  Lord. 
This  would  never  prosper,  but  bring  national  disaster.  Prompted  by  irresistible 
influence,  he  boldly  protested  against  prevailing  tendencies.  But  denunciations 
unpalatable  to  the  king,  roused  fierce  passions  of  multitude,  and  a  band  of 
miscreants,  instigated  by  Joash,  put  him  to  death  (cf.  Mt.  xxiii.  35).  But  the 
death  of  the  prophet  not  the  destruction  of  his  message.  IV.  Punished  in 
awful  judgments  upon  the  nation.  The  dying  words,  a  prophetic 
doom  of  Z.,  fulfilled  at  end  of  the  year.  Syrians  invaded  the  land,  princes  of 
people  destroyed,  and  immense  spoil  sent  to  Damascus.  How  suggestive  the 
words,  "  a  small  company  of  men"  overcame  "  a  very  great  host "  1  To  men  who 
estimate  everything  by  great  numbers  and  dazzling  splendour,  this  would  be  a 
striking  calamity.  "Wrath  came  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  for  this  their 
trespass." 

The  Death  op  Joash. — Verses  25-27. 

I.  An  end  embittered  by  painful  malady.  "They  left  him  in 
great  diseases,"  which  long  confined  him  in  bed.  Plural  of  intensity,  a  severe 
malady.  Charles  IX.  of  France,  author  of  Parisian  massacre,  died  in  great 
distress.  Kingly  dignity  wards  not  off  loathsome  disease.  II.  An  end 
brought  about  by  conspiracy.  Not  even  permitted  to  die  peaceably 
in  his  own  bed.  Perhaps  in  hope  of  recovery  or  escape,  his  own  servants 
conspired  against  him.  A  punishment  degrading,  depriving  death  of  mitigations 
and  friendships.  Ill,  An  end  considered  as  divine  judgment. 
God  smites  wicked  men  in  everything ;  end  of  one  trouble  beginning  of  another. 
The  winds  of  divine  judgments  rise  from  every  quarter,  bend  and  break,  and  no 
escape  from  tempest.  J.  plagued  with  the  Syrians  and  smitten  with  terrible 
disease,  met  with  untimely  death,  and  refused  official  honour  in  burial.  The 
memory  of  the  wicked  doomed  to  perish.  "  Let  him  not  be  written  with  the 
righteous." 

259 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxiv. 


Life  and  Oharaotee  op  Joash. 

The  beginning  well  in  outward  actions  and  national  government.  But 
evident  from  the  history  that  the  rectitude  of  administration  was  owing  to  his 
preserver  and  tutor,  not  to  his  enlightened  principles  and  sincere  convictions. 
I.  The  instability  of  his  religion.  1.  He  was  zealous  for  God  under 
restraint.  "  Was  minded  to  repair  the  house,"  in  excitement  and  prosperity, 
but  zeal  died  out.  "  When  the  sun  went  down  the  reflected  brightness  went 
with  it.**  2.  He  degenerated  when  that  restraint  was  taken  away.  He  depended 
upon  wise  counsel  and  piety  of  Jehoiada;  when  prop  removed  he  fell.  Had  no 
root  in  himself,  and  left  to  his  own  resources,  could  not  stand.  Circumstances 
not  principles  made  him  what  he  was.  When  these  changed  he  changed.  His 
religion  was  temporary  and  superficial.  He  only  "  did  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord  aU  the  days  of  Jehoiada  the  priest "  (ver.  2).  II.  The  honour  and 
disg^race  of  his  reign.  A  mixed  reign,  marked  with  singular  honour 
and  stained  with  remarkable  disgrace.  1.  Honourable  reforms.  He  rebuilt 
and  restored  temple.  Established  its  order  and  worship,  and  thus  removed 
national  scandal.  He  reproved  officers  in  their  languid  work,  adopted  efficient 
means  to  finish  it,  and  at  length  the  temple  stood  in  grandeur  and  dignity  in 
which  it  was  left  hj  ancestors,  the  glory  of  his  own  reign  and  administration  of 
Jehoiada.  2.  Disgraceful  crimes.  Like  Nero,  after  death  of  his  teacher  Seneca, 
the  philosopher,  he  was  stained  with  crimes.  He  not  only  made  shipwreck  of 
faith,  but  in  a  period  of  ten  years,  the  restorer  of  the  temple  became  an  idolater ; 
the  ward  of  Jehoiada  was  the  murderer  of  his  son.  A  reign  under  excellent 
guardians  (like  many  in  the  middle  ages  and  modern  times,  German  Emperors 
Otto  III.  and  Henry  IV.,  in  many  respects  Louis  XIV.  of  France)  at  first,  ended 
in  humiliation  and  war.  The  memory  of  a  king  hopeful  in  beginnings  stands 
marked  with  blood  and  the  ways  of  Cain.  III.  The  disastrous  end  of 
his  life.  CompUcated  in  deeds  of  violence.  Horrid  outrage  on  a  prophet  of 
God — ^base  ingratitude  to  a  family  who  had  preserved  his  life — atrocious  treat- 
ment of  a  true  Hebrew  prophet--illegal  exercise  of  power  and  authority  as 
king — some  of  his  acts.  Invasion  and  defeat,  severe  disease,  and  smitten  while 
languishing  on  his  bed,  by  his  own  servants.  "  But  they  buried  him  not  in  the 
sepulchres  of  the  kings."  The  murderer  of  the  son  not  permitted  to  sleep  with 
that  father  whose  memory  he  outrageously  dishonoured.  From  this  review  learn — 

1.  The  responsibility  of  those  to  whom  care  of  young  persons  is  entrusted. 

2.  Caution  those  yet  under  guardianship  of  friends  and  tutors.     5.  The  awful 
end  of  those  who  turn  aside  from  hopeful  beginnings. 


HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Under  minority  of  Joash.  Vers.  8-11.  The  alma  chest.  "It  is 
1.  The  king  weU  trained  and  prepared  a  curiously  circumstantial  record  of  a 
for  duty.  2.  High  priesthood  increased  church  restoration  fund  belonging  to  a 
in  dignity.  "Name  *High  Priest*  period  2,730  years  distant  from  our 
not  given  to  Aaron,  Eh,  or  Zadok,  own  time,  and  perhaps  in  the  lifetime 
given  to  him  and  his  successors ;  of  Homer "  \Blunt\ 
regarded  as  second  founder,  and  in  Vers.  15,16.  Jehoiada.  As  guardian- 
after  days  described  as  chief "  priest  and  patriot.  Honoured  in  age, 
[Stamley],  3.  Morality  lax.  National  burial,  and  reputation,  yet  lacking  in 
rehgion  mixed  with  worship  "  in  high  zeal  and  energy.  Melancthon  orthodox 
places."  Temple  neglected,  and  money  and  learned,  but  accomplished  no  great 
misappropriated.  reformation.  Luther  inferior  in  some 
260 


CHAP.  XXI?.]  HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


respects,  a  man  for  his  times  and  work,  this  crowning  crime  of  the  House  of 

bold   and    zealous,  and,    under    God,  Judah  took  place  on  the  Sabbath  day, 

effected  deliverance  from  Popery,  and  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  and 

the  Reformation.  that    its    marks    were    never    to    be 

Vers.  18-23.    Murder  of  Zechariah,  effaced.     The  sacredness  of  the  person 

1.  Horrid  outrage  on  a  prophet  of  the  and  of  the  place,  the  concurrent  guilt 

Lord.     A  sacred    person,  a  Hebrew  of  the  whole  nation — king,  nobles,  and 

patriot.    2.  An  instance  of  base  ingra-  people — the    ingratitude  of   the  chief 

titude.   To  a  family  who  had  preserved  instigator,    the    culmination    of    long 

his  life.  3.  A  deed  of  violence  involving  tragedy   of  the   House   of  Omri,   the 

great  criminality.     Illegal  and  unjust  position  which  the  story  held  in  the 

exercise  of  power,  bringing  retribution .  Jewish  canon,  as  the  last  great  murder 

upon  king  and  nation.   The  last  words,  of  the  last  Book  of  the  Old  Testament, 

"  The  Lord  require  it"  not  vindictive  all  conspired   to  give   it   the  peculiar 

(then  a  great    contrast    to    those    of  significance  with  which  it  is  recorded  in 

Stephen,  Acts  vii.  60),  but  a  prophetic  the  Gospels  as  closing  the  catalogue  of 

warning  to  Jews  (Mt,  xxiii.   35)   in  unrighteous    deaths,   from    the  blood 

time  of  Jesus  and  to  us.     "The  act  of  righteous    Abel    to    the    blood  of 

produced   a  profound  impression.     It  Zechariah  ....   who     was    slain 

was  a  later  Jewish  tradition,  but  one  between  the   temple  and  the  altar" 

which  marks  the  popular  feeling,  that  \St(mley\, 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Yer.  6.  Hasten.  "  That  I  may  be  of  of  a  banker*s  seal,  without  any  exami- 

the  number  of  those  that  spend  them-  nation  of  its  contents  \Burder\ 
selves  with  labour,  and  not  of  those  Ver.  18.     Left  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

who  waste  in  rust  and  laziness.     Lord  I  A  man's  conception  of  worship  really 

let  me  rather  wear  out  in  the  work,  reaches   his  life.     Let    him   lose    his 

than   consume   (like   a  garment    laid  reverence  for  the  Bible,  for  God,  for 

by   with  moths)    for    want    of    use  "  man,  however  much  he  may  boast  of  it, 

[Swinnoch^s    "Christian    Man's   Call-  will   in  that  measure   go  down.     The 

ing  "].     "/like  to  be  at  my  post,  doing  victory  of  the  enemy  will  be  easy  and 

my  duty ;  indifferent  whether  one  set  complete.    It  cannot  be  a  fatal  offence, 

or    another    govern,    provided     they  it    may    be  thought,   to   neglect  the 

govern  well "  [Sir  J.  Moore],  assembly  of  ourselves  together  at  least 

Vers.  11, 12.  Money.  We  see  here  occasionally,  to  regard  other  occasions 
a  distinct  indication  of  a  practice  still  of  coming  together  as  of  equal  import- 
followed  in  the  East  where  large  sums  ance  with  meetings  in  the  Church.  It 
of  money  are  concerned,  as  in  the  dis-  cannot  be  wrong  surely  to  elevate 
bursements  of  the  Government,  and  in  certain  kinds  of  intellectual  inquiry 
the  taxes  and  tributes  paid  to  the  into  a  species  of  worship  on  the  Lord's 
Crown.  The  money  in  such  cases  is  day;  all  these  thoughts  are  most  in- 
deposited  in  long  narrow  bags,  each  sidious,  full  of  temptation,  and  when 
containing  a  certain  sum,  and  carefully  perverted,  it  is  in  innumerable  cases 
sealed  with  the  official  seal  [^i^^o].  In  not  the  lower  that  is  lifted  up,  but  the 
East  in  present  time  a  bag  of  money  higher  that  is  degraded  or  impoverished 
passes  (for  some  time  at  least)  currently  [Dr,  Parker], 
from  hand  to  hand,  under  the  authority 


261 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [ohaf.  xx?. 


OHAFIEB  XXV. 


Cbitioal  Notes.]  We  have  Buccession  of  A-  (vers.  1-4),  his  expedition  against  Moab 
(6-13),  his  idolatry  (14-16),  his  war  with  Joash  (17-24),  and  his  death  and  burial  (25-28). 
Parallel  2  Ki.  xiv.  1-20. 

Vers.  1-4. — A.h  succession  (c/.  2  Ki.  xiv.  2-6).  Perfect^  single  heart ;  not  like  ancestor 
David,  but  like  Joash,  father.  Ver.  3.  Slew^  executed  justice  ;  an  instance  of  right-doing. 
Ver.  4.  l^oty  as  Deut.  xxiv.  16.     Families  of  traitors  often  destroyed. 

Vers.  6-13. — Expedition  against  Moah.  Ver.  5.  Old  method  of  organisation  by  families 
(Num.  ii.  34),  under  captains  of  hundreds,  &c.  Hired,  paid  for  others,  his  own  army  too 
reduced  to  protect  country.  Ver.  8.  If,  (&c.,  some  suppose  not  dropped  out,  and  would 
read,  ♦♦  Go  alone,  and  God  will  not  make  thee  fall."  Generally  thought  to  be  ironical. 
"  Go  (if  thou  wilt  be  self-willed)  thou,  act,  be  strong,  it  will  be  of  no  avail."  Ver.  10. 
AngeVf  caused  through  sudden  and  apparently  unreasonable  dismissal.  Ver.  11.  Salt. 
South  of  Dead  Sea,  where  dwelt  Seirites,  associated  with  Edom  (Gen.  xxxvi.  18).  Ver.  12. 
Rockt  unto  the  height  of  Selah.  *'  Battle  probably  fought  not  far  from  Selah  (Petra) ; 
the  captains  marched  to  Petra  itself,  and  precipitated  from  the  steep  cliffs  in  its  neigh- 
bourhood "  [Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  13.  Soldiers,  mercenaries  sent  by  Joash  to  ravage  Jewish 
cities  from  Sam.  to  Beth.,  in  revenge  for  considered  insult. 

Vers.  14-16. — A.*s  idolatry.  Not  in  Kings.  Gods,  common  practice  to  carry  gods  of 
conquered  places  as  trophies  of  victory,  not  generally  to  be  worshipped.  Ver.  16.  Talked^ 
prophets  entitled  to  counsel  kings.  Art  thou,  dtc?  lit.,  "Have  we  made  thee  a  king's 
counsellor?"  Forbare,  ceased  remonstrance,  asserted  his  right,  and  consequences  of 
disobedience. 

Vers.  17-24. — A.'s  war  with  Joash  (jcf.  2  Ki.  xiv.  8-14).  Advice,  counsel  not  from  God. 
Face^  a  challenge  to  combat  (2  Sam.  ii.  13).  Ver.  18.  Thistle.  Parabolic  forms  employed 
in  East  to  carry  unwelcome  truths,  or  express  contemptuous  sneers.  This  designed  here. 
A  thistle^  low  shrub  ;  represents  A.  a  petty  prince ;  cedar,  the  potentate  of  Israel.  The 
wild  beast,  the  overwhelming  army  of  Israel,  would  destroy  the  strength  of  Judah.  The 
moral  of  fable  in  ver.  19.  Ver.  20.  Not,  sarcastic  tone  incited  more.  Asa  in  a  judicial 
state  of  blindness.  From  God,  characteristic  of  the  author.  Joash  overcame  A., 
plundered  palace  and  temple,  and  took  hostages  to  prevent  further  war. 

Vers.  26-28. — A.'s  end.  Turn  away,  apostasy  followed  by  maladministration.  King  lost 
respect,  fled  to  Lachish,  frontier  town  of  Philistines,  there  traced  and  murdered.  Body 
brought  without  pomp  in  a  ohariot  to  Jerusalem,  and  interred  among  ancestors. 


EOMILETICS. 

Ahaziah's  Beginning. — Verses  1-4. 

Son  and  successor  of  Joash,  ninth  king  on  throne  of  JudaL ;  25  years  old  at 
accession,  reigned  29  years,  B.C.  837-808  (2  Ki.  xiv.  1,  2).  I.  In  ordinary 
circumstances  of  succession.  A  privilege  to  inherit  a  crown,  great 
natural  rights  and  positions.  Better  to  become  kings  and  priests,  aristocracy 
of  God,  to  rule  over  the  hearts  and  affections  of  men,  than  on  thrones  of 
empires.  II.  With  considerable  zeal  for  Jehovah.  Did  right, 
"  but  not  with  a  perfect  heart,"  not  like  David  his  father.  Half-hearted,  zealous 
for  God,  but  "high  places  not  taken  away."  Obeying  God  and  making  sacrifices, 
but  honouring  the  idols  of  Edom.  Double-minded,  his  good  beginning  as  that 
of  Joash  unlike  his  later  conduct.  III.  By  an  act  of  justice  and 
mercy.  Punished  traitors  who  murdered  his  father,  as  an  act  of  justice;  but 
was  moderate.  "  With  a  mercy  shown  apparently  for  the  first  time  in  Hebrew 
annals,  their  children  were  spared"  [Stanley].  Generally  families  of  traitors 
262 


CHAP.  !?xv.]  nOMTLETTC  COMMENTARYf    CHRONTCLES. 


were  destroyed.     This  act,  therefore,  had  regard  for  law  of  God  more  than 
customs  of  nations  ;  displayed  kindly  feeling,  and  became  a  king. 

••  No  ceremony  that  to  great  ones  'longs — 
Not  the  king's  crown,  nor  the  deputed  sword, 
The  marshal's  truncheon,  nor  the  judge's  robe, 
Become  them  with  one  half  so  good  a  grace 
As  mercy  does  "  [Shakes.'], 

Expedition  against  Edom. — Verses  5-24. 

This  chief  event  in  reign,  an  attempt  to  impose  upon  Edomites  the  yoke  cast 
off  in  time  of  Jehoram  (2  Ki.  viii.  20  ;  1  Ki.  xxii.  48).  I.  An  expedition 
ambitious  in  design.  Might  be  natural  and  prudent  to  assemble  army, 
class  according  to  respective  families,  and  appoint  officers  from  among  brethren, 
that  all  might  be  an  army  of  brothers,  relatives,  and  friends.  Might  be  patriotic 
to  reduce  insurgents  to  former  subjection.  But  A.  the  slave  of  reckless 
ambition;  adventurous,  fond  of  conquest  and  military  renown,  prone  to  *' meddle 
to  his  hurt."  Real  wisdom  to  cultivate  peace,  develop  internal  resources  of 
kingdom  ;  real  **  strength  to  sit  still "  at  home. 

•*  Vaulting  ambition,  which  o'erleaps  itself, 
And  falls  on  the  other  side." 

II.  An  expedition  in  which  alien  forces  were  hired  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  design,  Edom  strong.  A.  considered  his 
300,000  troops  unequal,  hired  160,000  men  from  Israel,  and  sets  first  example 
of  employing  mercenary  forces.  Such  help  useless,  dangerous,  and  opposed  to 
God's  will.  He  should  go  alone,  in  dependence  upon  God,  *'  who  hath  power 
to  help  and  to  cast  down."  Any  other  plan  would  displease  God  and  result  in 
defeat.  With  God's  presence  our  own  resources  sufficient ;  without,  numbers 
only  ruin,  and  "  make  thee  fall  before  the  enemy."  III.  An  expedition 
the  success  of  which  was  turned  into  a  curse.  A.  heeded  not 
prophet,  went,  conquered,  and  captured  cities.  1.  In  the  cruelty  exercised. 
Savage  cruelty  dealt  out  in  revenge  for  barbarities  inflicted  on  Hebrews,  or  to 
strike  terror  into  a  rebellious  people.  "  Man's  inhumanity  to  man."  2.  In  the 
spii'it  which  it  begot.  Not  a  spirit  of  gratitude  and  caution.  Flattered  probably 
by  those  from  whom  he  **  took  advice"  (ver.  17),  he  became  proud  and 
presumptuous.  Burning  with  revenge  for  Israel's  insult,  not  satisfied  without 
defiant  challenge,  he  undertakes  aggressive  war.  The  fruits  of  victory  mis- 
appropriated.    Unsanctified  successes  often  turned  into  curses. 

Duty  and  Self-Interest. — Verse  9. 

A.  made  every  preparation  for  expedition,  ready  to  start,  but  suddenly 
**  there  came  a  man  of  God  **  and  forbids.  But  what  must  he  do  for  the  money  ? 
Lose  it  and  go  to  war  in  right  way.  Learn — I.  That  we  often  invest 
our  resources  without  prudence  or  security.  Money,  friends, 
position,  and  life  pledged  for  wrong  purposes.  Enterprises  without  divine 
guidance,  gifts  used  sinfully.  Men  morally  going  astray,  poor  and  insecure, 
though  strong  and  sufficient  in  their  own  (Stimation.  The  "  man  of  God,"  the 
ministry  of  the  word  ever  meets  in  the  ^\ays  of  life,  condemning  our  treaties 
and  alliances,  reproving  our  plans  and  investments,  and  calling  us  back  to  God. 
II.  That  we  are  often  called  upon  to  sacrifice  our  resources 
thus  invested.  Beluctant  to  give  up  besetting  sins,  worldly  pleasure,  and  to 
forsake  evil  ways.  Often  much  at  stake  in  worldly  friendships,  Sunday  trading, 
and  unlawful  compacts.     **  What  must  we  do  with  our  money  risked  upon  it  ?  " 

263 


UOMILETIO  COMMJBNTAJlTt  CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxv. 


•*  Why  forfeit  the  deposit  % "  But  why  strike  the  bargain  if  wrong  ?  Why 
make  the  deposit  without  prudence  and  security,  (fcc.  ?  The  answer  to  all 
questions,  God  demands.  Before  divine  authority  objections  ridiculous.  In 
divine  promise  compensation  for  any  loss.  "  The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much 
more  than  this."  III.  That  when  called  to  duty  obedience 
guarantees  success  and  brings  abundant  reward.  Impossible 
to  induce  obedience  without  offer  of  superior  good.  Motive  power  needful. 
Think  not  that  nature  or  some  law  of  mind  breaks  the  chains  of  desire  confirmed 
by  habit  and  long  years  of  life !  Calculate  not  too  confidently  on  moral  powers 
wasted  in  sinful  pursuits  1  It  is  never  easy  for  a  selfish  man  to  renounce  himself 
even  with  help  of  gospel  1  But  God  imparts  disposition  and  strength.  In  sin 
**  the  first  loss  is  the  best."  In  duty  we  find  compensation  and  gain.  "  The 
Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this  " — abundant  reward  for  leaving 
all  and  following  him.  "  Manifold  more  in  this  present  time,  and  in  the  world 
to  come  life  everlasting." 

Amaziah's  Fall  into  Idolatry. — Verses  14-16. 

A.  took  the  gods  of  Edom  as  tokens  of  victory,  but  deserted  God  who 
gave  victory,  and  worshipped  the  idols  he  captured,  like  the  Romans  subduing 
nations  and  paying  tribute  to  their  gods.  I.  Idolatry  most  gratu- 
itous. This  not  asked  of  him.  Probably  he  sought  to  disarm  spite  of 
Edomites  for  harsh  treatment,  or  attracted  by  pomp  and  splendour  of  worship 
of  idols.     Idolatry,  sin  fascinates  unholy  men.     But  what  humility  and  disgrace 

voluntarily  and  slavishly  to  bow  down!  II.  Idolatry  most  unreason- 
able. The  gods  could  neither  protect  themselves  nor  worshippers,  senseless 
and  most  absurd  to  lean  upon  them  or  put  them  in  place  of  Jehovah  I  The 
sinner,  a  criminal  and  a  fool,  can  give  no  reason  for  his  choice.  "  Why  hast 
thou  sought  after  the  gods  of  the  people,  (fee?"  III.  Idolatry  most 
dangerous.  It  estranges  further  from  God,  confirms  self-will,  and  binds  us 
faster  to  the  false  and  debasing.  It  brings  down  rebuke  from  God,  and  leads  to 
destruction.     **  Wherefore  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Amaziah." 

The  Dangers  op  Success  and  Ambition. — Verses  17-28. 

Dangerous  to  succeed  without  God.  Amaziah's  false  step  at  beginning,  and 
the  spirit  in  which  it  was  originated  turned  the  end  into  misfortune.  I, 
Success  begetting  pride  and  ambition.  The  victory  of  Edom 
made  A.  proud ;  its  issue  unblest ;  kindled  boldness  and  a  spirit  of  revenge. 
He  glories  in  strength.  Success  led  him  on  to  fresh  undertakings  which  involved 
defeat.  "  Pride  cometh  before  destruction,  (fee."  II.  Pride  leading  into 
presumption.  Thought  himself  more  than  a  match  for  King  of  Israel. 
He  cannot  sit  still,  must  punish  him  for  wrong-doing,  and  sends  the  challenge, 
*'Come,  let  us  look  one  another  in  the  face."  The  bitter  and  contemptuous 
language  of  the  parable  only  enraged  him  to  repeat  the  challenge.  Nothing 
checks.  "  He  is  a  proud  man,  neither  keepeth  at  home,  who  enlargeth  his 
desire  as  hell,  and  is  as  death,  and  cannot  be  satisfied."  III.  Presumption 
ending  in  destruction.  Exultation  often  the  prelude  to  downfall,  down- 
fall more  dismal  and  complete  on  account  of  previous  eminence.  Prosperity  of 
fools  destroys  them.  1.  Warning  wnheeded,  Edom  conquered.  Be  content. 
Stay  at  home.  Why  meddle  to  thy  hurt  ?  2.  Blinded  by  self -security.  He  could 
not  be  defeated,  could  see  no  danger,  and  knew  not  that  God  had  forsaken  him. 
3.  Miserable  failure.  Joash  surprised  him  before  ready  for  war ;  defeated  him 
in  a  pitched  battle ;  routed  his  army,  and  took  him  prisoner.  The  disasters  of 
264 


OHAP.    XXV.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


his  conduct  created  opposition  and  conspiracy,  and  he  was  slain.  No  real, 
permanent  success  to  ungodly  man.  If  no  reverses  in  life,  death  makes  him  a 
wreck.  His  honours  and  achievements  buried  in  the  dust,  and  he  stands  naked 
in  the  presence  of  God  I 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Vers.  2.  Right,  hut  not  with  perfect 
heart.  Many  good  things  in  A.,  had 
respect  for  ordinances  of  religion,  knew 
Scriptures,  and  had  desire  to  do  right. 
But  failed  because  not  thoroughgoing 
in  principle  and  piety.  1.  Much  half- 
heartedness,  levity,  and  superficial 
goodness.  2.  A  perfect  heart  required. 
Earnest,  consecrated  feeling  and  energy. 
"  He  had  a  good  name ;  it  imported '  one 
strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power 
of  his  might ; '  but  he  was  far  enough 
from  that "   \Trapp\. 

Vers.  3,  4.  Two  practices.  Revenge 
and  forbearance.  One  natural  to  man 
and  prevalent  in  the  East.  "  Revenge 
is  sweet  to  man."  Difficult  to  stop 
with  one  life,  without  taking  another. 
But  God  controls  and  educates  men  by 
law.  The  other  practice  of  divine 
authority.  "  It  is  strange  at  first  sight, 
that  when  the  law  contained  so  very  plain 
a  prohibition,  the  contrary  practice 
should  have  established  itself.  But  we 
must  remember  first\  that  the  custom 
was  that  of  the  East  generally  (see 
Dan,  vi.  24;  Herod.  III.  119,  (fee.) ;  and 
secondly,  that  it  had  the  sanction  of 
one  who  might  be  thought  to  know 
thoroughly  the  mind  of  the  legislator, 
viz.,  Joshua  (cf.  Josh.  vii.  24,  25) " 
[Speak.  Com.],  Always  better  to  for- 
bear than  revenge. 

**  Revenge  at  first,  though  sweet, 
Bitter  ere  long  back  on  itself  recoils  ** 

[Milton]. 

"Ver.  16.  1.  The  question  of  the  king. 
**  Art  thou  of  the  king's  counsel?" 
Who  authorises,  entitles  thee  to  give 
advice  ?  2.  The  prophet^ s  reply.  Con- 
sists of  two  parts — (a)  He  *'  for  bare  " 
to  dispute.  Silence  best  answer  to 
some;  contention  makes  them  worse. 
(b)  He  predicts.  "  The  prophet  ceased 
his  remonstrances  and  retired,  but 
aimed  a  Parthian  shaft  on  quitting  the 
royal  presence,  *  If  I  am  not  of  thy 


counsel,  I  am  of  God's  counsel,  and 
know  what  is  determined  there.  God 
has  counselled  to  destroy  thee.*  For 
fulfilment  of  prophecy,  see  verses  12-24 
and  27  "  [Speak.  Gom.].  Not  hearkened, 

1.  A  sign  of  hardness,  judicial  blind- 
ness and  obduracy.  2.  A  ground  of 
desertion  by  God.  Ignored  and  for- 
saken, the  result  natural.  3.  A  prelude 
to  destruction. 

Yers.  18,  19.  The  parable  of  Gedar 
and  Thistle.  1.  The  inequalities  of 
character  and  condition  of  men.  Great 
and  little,  contented  and  restless,   &c. 

2.  The  ridiculous  conduct  and  ambition 
of  some  men.  The  less,  the  more 
unsettled  and  ambitious,  the  more 
meddlesome,  &c.  3.  The  need  to  be 
satisfied  with  present  possessions. 
Grasping  after  more  may  lose  what 
you  have.  The  miseries  of  discontent. 
Quench  that  fire  which 

*•  Preys  upon  high  adventure,  nor  can  tire 
Of  aught  but  rest ;  a  fever  at  the  core, 
Fatal  to  him  who  bears,  to  all  who  ever 
bore  "  [Byron]. 

Tarry  at  home.  1.  Better  for  indi- 
viduals, than  meddle,  create  mischief 
with  neighbours,  seek  home  comforts 
and  decencies.  Officious  interference 
creates  discord.  Meddling  the  parent 
of  strife.  "It  is  an  honour  for  a 
man  to  cease  from  strife ;  but  every  fool 
will  be  meddling."  2.  Better  for 
nations  to  look  to  themselves,  stay  at 
home  and  cultivate  arts  of  peace  than 
engage  in  aggressive  wars.  Kings 
dethroned,  governments  upset,  and 
empires  rent  asunder  through  hasty 
war. 

Yer.  27.  Providential  consequences. 
"  After  the  time  from  following  the 
Lord.  The  writer  means  to  observe 
that  the  violent  death  of  A.  followed 
on  his  apostasy  not  closely  in  point  of 
time — for  it  must  have  been  at  least 
fifteen  years  after  (ver.  25) — nor  was, 
humanly  speaking,  caused  by  it ;  but 

265 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


[chap.  XXVI. 


in  the  way  of  a  divine  judgment—a  then  risk  and  disaster.     « For  it  came 

complete   fulfilment  of  the  prophecy,  of  God,  that  he  might  deliver  them 

yer.  16  "     \Speah.   Gom\     Sequences  into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  because 

in  the  natural  as  well  as  moral  world,  they  sought  after  the  gods  of  Edom." 
Forsake  God   and  duty,   violate  law, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXV. 


Ver.  4.  Law.  When  the  Lord  laid 
down  that  law  he  taxed  human  for- 
bearance to  the  uttermost.  It  may  not 
seem  to  be  so  in  reality,  but  test  the 
matter  by  human  consciousness  and  by 
human  action.  Have  we  not  wronged 
whole  families?  Have  we  not  often 
thrown  in  the  child  as  if  he  were  part  of 
the  father,  and  let  both  be  crushed  by 
the  mill  of  revenge?  [Dr.  Parker], 

Yers.  7-9.  What  of  hundred  talents  ? 
Do  your  duty  and  leave  the  rest  with 
God  [R.  Cecil].  This  is  the  first  of 
rights,  the  only  absolute  duty.  No 
right  more  sacred  [Tme^].  There  is 
little  or  nothing  in  this  life  worth 
living  for,  but  we  can  all  of  us  go  straight 
forward  and  do  our  duty  [Wellington]. 

Yers.  11-13.  Success.  There  is  a 
glare  about  worldly  success  which  is 
very  apt  to  dazzle  men's  eyes  [Hare]. 
Watch  lest  prosperity  destroy  gene- 
rosity [Beecher].  Success  at  first, 
doth  many  times  undo  men  at  last 
[Venning]. 

Yers.  14-16.  The  gods  of  the  people. 
Idolatry  is    one   of  the  most  uncon* 


queiable  of  all  the  corrupt  propensities 
of  the  human  soul.  Miracles  under  the 
new  dispensation  had  scarcely  ceased, 
apostolic  fathers  were  scarcely  cold  in 
their  graves,  before  idolatrous  forms 
were  again  superinduced  upon  the 
pure  spirituality  of  the  Holy  Gospel 
[Walker]. 

Yers.  17-24.  See  one  another  in 
face.  Every  presumption  is  properly 
an  encroachment,  and  all  encroach- 
ment carries  in  it  a  still  further  and  a 
further  invasion  upon  the  person  en- 
croached upon.  Presumption  never 
stops  in  its  first  attempt.  If  Csesar 
comes  once  to  pass  the  Rubicon,  he 
will  be  sure  to  march  further  on,  even 
till  he  enters  the  very  bowels  of  Rome, 
and  break  open  the  Capitol  itself.  He 
that  presumes  steps  into  the  throne  of 
God  [Dr.  South]. 

Yers.  27,  28.     Buried. 

"  Death  lays  his  icy  hand  on  kings  ; 
Sceptre  and  crown  must  tumble  down, 
And  in  the  dust  be  equal  made 
With     the    poor   crooked    scythe    and 
•pade"  [Shirleyl, 


CHAPTER    XXYL 


Obitical  Notes.]  TTzziah's  character  (vers.  1-6).  "  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  we 
are  indebted  to  Chronicles  for  our  whole  conception  of  the  character  of  Uz.,  and  for 
nearly  our  whole  knowledge  of  the  events  of  his  veign^*  [Speak.  Com.].  U.'sfame  and 
achievements  (vers.  6-15);  U.'s  sin  (vers.  16-21);  U.'s  end  (vers.  22,  23).  Parallel  to 
this  in  2  Ki.  xiv.  21,  22 ;  xv.  1-7. 

Vers.  1-5. — Uz.'s  character.  Azariah  (help  from  Jehovah)  in  Kings.  XJz.  usual  form 
(strength  from  Jehovah).  Eloth,  an  important  port  (2  Ki.  xiv.  22).  Ver.  6.  Days  of  Z.^ 
who  sustained  relation  Uz.,  as  Jehoiada  to  Joash,  exercising  salutary  influence  and 
guiding, 

Fer«.  6-15. —  Vz.\  fame  and  achievements.  Not  in  Kings.  Ja6.,  Jabneal  (Josh.  xv.  11). 
Dismantling  of  these,  and  building  of  other  cities  among  the  Philistines,  is  a  restoration 
of  things  in  time  of  Jehoshaphat  (xvii.  11).  Yer.  8.  Ammonites.  Countries  east  of 
266 


CHIP,  xxvx.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Jordan  became  tributaries,  and  by  rapid  sucoess  of  yiotorisB  Mb  kingdom  advanced  to 
Egyptian  frontier  (cf.  Is.  xvi.  1-6  with  2  Ki.  iiL  4).  Vers.  9,  10.  Buildings,  towers  in  the 
wilderness — i.e.,  held  pasturage  on  borders  of  Holy  Land  as  refuges  for  flocks  and  herds- 
men. Wells  (out  out  many  cisterns)  from  rock.  Low  country  between  hills  of  Judaea  and 
sea.  Plains  east  of  Jordan.  Carmel^  not  the  mountain,  but  cultivated  portions  of  hill 
tract.  Hush.y  cultivated  agriculture  and  arts  of  peace.  Vers.  11-15.  Army  and  engines 
of  war.  Ver.  11.  Men,  a  body  of  militia  divided  into  companies  or  regiments,  which 
Iserved  in  rotation.  Ver.  12.  Number  of  chiefs,  heads  of  families,  occupying  positions 
over  the  army.  Ver.  13.  The  number  of  troops  does  not  exceed  that  in  time  of  Amaziah 
(xxv.  5).  Ver.  14.  Different  weapons  for  different  classes  of  men.  Ver.  15.  Engines^ 
machines  for  discharging  missiles ;  the  balista  for  stones,  and  catapult  for  arrows  or 
darts. 

Vers.  16-21. — U.'g  sin  and  punishment.  Lift  up  to  do  wickedly,  in  pride.  Priests  only 
permitted  to  enter  holy  place  (Num.  xviii.  7).  U.  presumed  to  act  as  neighbouring 
princes.  High  priest  remonstrated,  and  intended  to  expel  or  hinder  by  force.  Ver.  19.  U. 
angry  was  struck  suddenly  with  leprosy.  Ver.  20.  Hasted,  in  fear  of  death  denounced 
upon  those  who  invaded  priest's  office.  Ver.  21.  Several,  separate,  lit.,  the  house  oj 
liberation,  an  infirmary ;  he  was  excluded  from  communion. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Ws  end.  Isaiah  took  part  in  composing  the  records  of  the  kingdom 
(chap  i.  1  ;  vi.  6).  '*  He  cannot  have  been  contemporary  with  Uz.  as  an  adult  for  more 
than  a  very  small  portion  of  his  long  reign.  Most  critics  regard  him  as  about  twenty 
when  Uz.  died.  He  must  then  have  written  his  history  of  Uz.'s  reign  rather  from 
documents  and  accounts  of  others,  than  from  his  own  knowledge"  [^Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  23. 
Field,  i.e.,  in  the  burial  ground,  but  in  a  separate  sepulchre,  as  the  corpse  of  a  leper  would 
have  polluted  it. 

HOMILETIGS. 

Uzziah's  Character  and  Successful  Reion. — Verses  1-15. 

The  reign  of  U.  was  vigorous,  and  signally  blessed.  He  was  successful  as  a 
king,  though  he  failed  as  a  man.  I,  Uzziah's  character  is  promising. 
Signs  of  ability  and  usefulness.  Acts  well  as  a  ruler,  and  fills  high  office  with 
credit  to  himself,  and  benefit  to  the  nation.  1.  He  was  active  in  promoting  the 
interests  of  his  kingdom.  He  overcame  its  enemies  in  south  and  west, 
strengthened  its  fortifications  and  commercial  relations,  was  a  patron  of  agri- 
culture, cultivated  vineyards,  and  protected  flocks.  He  administered  internal 
affairs  with  peace  and  prosperity.  2.  For  the  greater  part  of  his  reign  he  lived  in 
the  fear  of  God.  "  Did  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  4).  Never  deserted 
the  worship  of  the  true  God,  and  was  much  influenced  by  the  prophet  Zachariah. 
Happy  in  his  guardian,  "  He  sought  God,"  who  made  him  to  prosper. 
II.  Uzziah's  reign  is  successful.  Success  crowned  all  efforts  and 
enterprises  until  fatal  error  blasted  his  life.  1.  In  its  financial  resources.  Flocks, 
wells,  husbandmen,  vine-dressers,  and  foreign  commerce.  2.  In  the  extent  of  his 
dominion.  He  overcame  the  Philistines,  and  demolished  their  cities.  "  God 
helped  him  against  the  Arabians."  The  Ammonites  rendered  tribute  to  him, 
and  his  conquest  extended  to  the  Egyptian  frontier  (ver.  8).  3.  In  the  strength 
of  his  defences.  Cities  weU  fortified,  military  forces  well  organised,  equipped, 
and  commanded.  4.  In  the  splendour  of  his  fame.  His  name  spread  far  and 
wide.  Palmy  days  of  David  and  Solomon  seemed  to  return ;  failures  of  pre- 
ceding reign  wiped  away.  Judah  possessed  an  active,  enlightened,  and 
prosperous  king,  who  conducted  himself  as  became  viceroy  of  Jehovah,  and 
prospered  in  all  things.  **  His  name  spread  far  abroad,  for  he  was  marvellously 
helped,  till  he  was  strong"  (ver.  16). 

Uzziah's  Sin  and  Punishment. — Verses  16-21. 

Long  and  uniform  prosperity  a  severe  trial  for  any  prince.  Uzziah's  goodness 
gave  way.     "  His  heart  was  lifted  up,"  and  he  committed  grievous  sins,  for  which 

267 


MOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxti. 


he  suffered  severe  punishment.  I.  Uzziall's  sins.  1.  He  was  lifted  up  with 
pride.  Elated  with  a  splendid  career,  he  forgot  his  position  and  was  changed  in 
spirit.  "  When  he  was  strong,  his  heart  was  Hfted  up."  It  is  strength,  not 
weakness,  that  makes  proud  and  arrogant.  Affliction  and  reverses  humble.  In 
Pharaoh,  Sennacherib,  and  Nebuchadnezzar  see  fearful  e\'ils  of  pride.  "  By  that 
sin  fell  the  angels."  2.  He  iLsurped  the  priestly  function.  He  can  do  anything 
in  his  kingdom ;  perhaps  thought  priestly  qualities  were  natural  to  royalty,  and 
that  in  exercising  them  he  revived  suspended  rights,  and  restored  primitive 
custom.  The  intrusion  a  sin  of  great  magnitude,  "  for  he  transgressed  against 
the  Lord  his  God,  and  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn  incense,"  &c. 
3.  He  showed  daring  presumption.  The  act  involved  a  claim  to  abrogate  the 
priestly  office,  a  defiance  of  ancient  decree  originating  in  rebellion  of  Korah  : 
it  was  rebuked  solemnly  and  signally,  but  U.  defied  and  resisted  opposi- 
tion, was  determined  to  minister,  "  took  the  censer  and  was  wroth  with  the 
priestfi," 

•*  Pride  is  still  aiming  at  the  blessed  abodes, 
Men  would  be  angels,  angels  would  be  gods  "  {^Pope\, 

II.  XJzziah's  punishment.  "The  Lord  had  smitten  him."  1.  Retribu- 
tive and  severe,  A  leper — "  a  leper  until  the  day  of  his  death."  The  crown  lost, 
and  his  forehead  stained  with  marks  of  guilt.  2.  Deprived  of  his  own  function 
hy  invading  the  province  of  others,  U.  was  obliged  to  recognise  the  authority 
which  he  despised  ;  compelled  to  leaVe  the  palace  by  venturing  into  the  priest- 
hood, and  had  to  dwell  in  a  separate  house,  **  like  the  slain  that  lie  in  the  grave, 
whom  Thou  rememberest  no  more  ;  and  they  are  cut  off  from  Thy  hand."  Be  con- 
tent with  your  own  place.  Discharge  your  own  duties  without  seeking  to  intrude 
into  others.  The  leprous  king  is  a  warning  to  all  that  we  are  not  to  "  minister 
to  men  in  things  pertaining  to  God "  without  permission.  Step  out  of  your 
lawful  calling,  you  create  disorder,  play  the  fool,  and  bring  destruction  upon 
yourselves  and  others. 

"  God  gives  to  every  man 
The  virtue,  temper,  understanding,  taste, 
That  lifts  him  into  life,  and  lets  him  fall 
Just  in  the  niche  he  was  ordain 'd  to  filL" 


TJzziah's  Sm, 

Rightly  to  understand  it  remember  what  barriers  he  had  to  break  before  he 
could  resolve  to  do  it.  He  had  to  disregard  the  direct  command  of  Jehovah, 
that  priests  alone  could  burn  incense  upon  His  altar ;  to  despise  the  history  of  his 
people,  to  defy  the  holy  name  by  which  he  himself  was  called.  Therefore  because 
his  rebellion  was  so  great,  his  defiance  of  correction  and  of  God  so  flagrant,  the 
Lord  smote  him,  and  he  bore  till  death  the  mark  of  the  curse  that  fell  upon  him. 
I.  We  see  here  prosperity  and  pride.  Mere  worldly  prosperity  often 
the  prelude  to  daring  impiety.  U.,  a  good  king,  but  a  bad  priest :  not 
the  priest  whom  God  had  chosen.  Statecraft  and  policy  have  no  claims  to 
spiritual  direction.  Spirit  of  the  gospel  not  that  of  a  successful  worldHng,  but 
that  of  a  little  child  of  the  kingdom.  II.  We  see  here  pride  and 
punishment.  It  is  a  part  of  God's  order  of  nature  that  bodily  pains  should 
often  rebuke  and  reveal  the  workings  of  an  ungodly  soul.  The  solemn  truth  that 
pride  and  passion  are  destroyers  of  men,  the  remembrance  of  those  destroyed 
by  them,  are  admonitions  to  us.  "  Verily  he  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the 
earth."  III.  Punishment  and  shame.  Hope  of  Uzziah  given  in  record 
of  his  hasting  to  go  out  of  the  temple.  His  proud  heart  broken;  he  wm 
268 


CHIP.  XXVI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


smitten  with  shame.  A  man  not  altogether  lost  while  he  can  feel  shame.  God 
quickens  "  the  sorrow  of  the  world,  which  worketh  death,"  into  "  godly  sorrow 
working  repentance  to  salvation  not  to  be  repented  of  \Dr.  A.  Mackennal\ 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  1,     In  this  and  the  next  ten  Yer.  16.    Lifted  up.     1.  By  pride  of 

chapters    we    have    the    histories    of  money.    2.  By  pride  of  intellect.    3.  By 

Uzziah  and  ten  more  kings  of  Judah,  pride  of  wit  \Thain  Davidson].    Learn — 

in  whose  days  prophesied  the  most  of  I.  The  abominable  nature  of  pride.    A 

the  prophets,  both  major  and  minor ;  rivalry  and  robbery  of  God.   The  sin  of 

to  whose  writings  these  eleven  chapters  Satan  and  unregenerate  men  generally. 

lend  not  a  little  light,  and  are  there-  Pharaoh,  Nebuchadnezzar,  &c.    II.  The 

fore  diligently  to  be  read  and  heeded  awful  transgression  to  which  it  leads. 

[Trapp].  Transgressed  and  went  into  the  temple. 

Ver.    15.     Marvellously/    helped    till  "  Men  would  be  angels,  angels  would  be 

strong.      Two   kinds   of   help,   natural  gods."    III.  The  power  of  God  to  abase 

and  supernatural.     1.  A  time  when  we  and  punish  the  proud.     Honour  and 

cannot  help  ourselves.    Infancy.    2.  A  dominion,  mind  and  body  under  God's 

time  of  growth  when  we  can  help  our-  control.     Reason  dethroned,  the  coun- 

selves.  Youth,  manhood.   3.  When  thus  tenance  stamped  with  idiocy,  when  he 

strong  the   supernatural   help   ceases,  pleases.     Madness,  leprosy,  and    death 

Not  less  provision  made  on  that  account,  at  his  bidding.  "  Come,  and  it  cometh." 

There  is  joy  and  co-operation  with  God.  Most  exalted  insignificant  atoms  before 

As  an  earthly  father   requires  to  be  Him.   "'God  resisteth  the  proud,  but 

obeyed   and   served,  beholds  strength  giveth  grace  unto  the  humble." 
and  disposition  to    co-operate,   so  the 
Heavenly  Father,  (kc.  [Dr.  Matheson]. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Ver.  8.   ffis  name  spread  abroad.  slaughter  among    the    people  by  his 

soldiers,  who  destroyed  7,000  citizen? 

"  Unblemished  let  me  live,  or  die  unknown ;  Ambrose,  Bishop  of  Milan,  heard  to  his 

O  grant  an  honest  fame,  or  grant  me  none  j.        '  i?          i       i         ,i       -r. 

[Popel.  great  griet,  and    when  the   Emperor, 

afterwards  returning  to  Milan,  would 

Ver.  16.     Went  into  temple.    We  do  have  come,  as  his  manner  had  been,  to 

not  believe  that  the  Christian  ministry  the  holy  assembly,  he  stoutly  withstood 

is  any  less  Divine  than  the  Levitical  him,  saying,  "  With  what  face  canst 

priesthood,  or  that  the  commission  it  thou  look  upon  Him  who  is  Lord  of 

bears  is  less  clear  and  definite.     The  all  ?     With  what  feet  canst  thou  enter 

conclusion  is,  that  the  intrusion  into  it.  His  house,  whom  thou  hast  so  deeply 

an  usurpation  of  its  powers,  or  a  vio-  displeased?     How  canst   thou  receive 

lation  of  its  order,  be  it  by  prince  or  His  body  with  those  hands  so  drenched 

peasant,  by  scholar  or  unlearned,  by  in  Christian  blood  ?  or  drink  His  blood 

good  men  ignorantly,  or  by  evil  men  with  that  mouth  that  commanded  such 

presumptuously,    cannot   be    anything  inhuman  slaughter  ?    Depart,  therefore, 

else  but  ofiensive  to  God,  and  fruitful  and  go  not  about  to  add  one  wickedness 

of  mischief   to   mankind    [R.  Hallam,  to  another,  but  stand  thou  excommu- 

D.D^.                            ^  nicate,  till    by  repentance  thou    hast 

Ver.  18.      They   withstood.      When  obtained    pardon   of   God,   and   given 

Theodosius,  the  Emperor,  was  at  Thes-  satisfaction   to   his    offended    people." 

salonica,  in  revenge  for  certain  of  his  The  good   Emperor — rehgiously  bred, 

judges     slain    there,    made    a    great  knew  well  what  was  fit  for  a  king  to 

269 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  toHiP.  xxm 


do  and  what  for  a  bishop-^returned  to  lotion,  which,  after  many  rebukes,  he 

his  palace,  acknowledged  the  greatness  obtained  \Trapp\. 

of  his  sin,  and  spent  eight  months^  in  „  rji^jg  jg  ^xM^ih.  the  poet  sings, 

weeping  and  lamentation ;  then  coming  r^hat  a  sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remem 

to  Ambrose,  begged  pardon  and  abso-  boring  happier  things"  lIcmyson\, 


CHAPTER  XXVIX. 


CBmct.  K0X.S.]    This  chapter  is  par  with  9  ^  xv.  |2-38  and  taken  mainl^^^^^^^^^ 

the  same  source  or  sources.    ^^f^r^^icTsnear^^^^^  (^^^«- 

religious  reflections  after  manner  of  writer  (cf.  fi;^^f;^,^^^-J;ti,*^^^^^^  (vers.  7-9). 

1,2),  Jotham's  buildings  and  wars  (vers.  3-6),  Jotham  v  .^^^ 

Vers  1.  2.—j:s  character.  Bight,  better  than  his  J^*/^®^' ^^^®  ^^  ^  ^.  .„  05^  j^q- 
temple.  Ver.  2.  Corruptly,  which  frustrated  his  efforts  to  reform  {of,  2  Kl  xv.  35).  ±  or 
general  character  of  corruption,  see  Is.  L-v.  j^.^j  ^   temple. 

Fm.  3-6.-/.>  rc^Ti^w^^.    .^t.^^I5,  t....  ^fP^^J^f '  ^^f  ^ft  ilf^o^  to  defend 

Ophel,  i...,  the  mound  or  ^mmence  on  south-e^^^^^^^^^  temp^e^^^     ^^^^^^^        ,.^  ^^^^ 

Jerusalem  in  every  direction.    Ver.  4.  ^f^^^^^f '  7^^^^^^  XJzziah  (xxvi.  8\  revolted 

forts  to  check  invaders.     Ammon  restless  under  the  y^lf^^'^  q)  Prepared,  marg. 
against  Jotham.     Revolt  repressed,  and  higher  tribute  exa^^^^  i 

cftaMished;  directed,  disposed  ^^^^  ways  aright  (c/.Prov.xx.^y^  ^^.^  ^^^ 

of  the  kings. 

EOMILETIGS. 

Jotham's  Peosperous  Beign.—- r«r«efl  1-8. 

T   TT«  beffan  bv  imitating  his  father  in  good,  not  evil  ways. 

I.  ?^et)egan  oyimiLtio     s  greater  portion  of  his  reign,  though 

Amaziah  considered  a  good  king  m  J^^®  §^^         ^        2   ^^   ^gx      j.  imitated 

conspicuous  a--g  "*^«^P;S^  Srig^t  measures.  He  detected  the 
powerful  by  tJie  af^OP^J"^  "•" ,  j  |i„„dom.  1.  His  military  measures. 
dangers,  and  desired  the  welfare  of  ^^;™fX;es    and  repressed  revolting 

He  strengthened  Jf  "f^l^'^'j^f.'^^ttraXu^^^^^  pl-^««  ^  ''^^^■^'=*«^' 

nations.     Wise  to  fortify  against  attack  ana  guaiu  w         !■  ,  j^j 

churches  and  kingdom.     2,  |^J^*|;%— /tnd  w^Sttd  in  piet^ 

srghraifon^So/ld  fc^  p- -^-S  a%fp^rT^d 

^^l^Z.:t^:  fS £ rVhJin^teadfast  in  religion,  the  more 
S  to  r^t  evil,  perform  good,  and  influence  others. 

Peeparation  asd  Strength.— Ferse  6. 

Here  we  get  an  insight  into  Jotham's  purpose  and  ^y^.f «  P;"^^^^  ^ 


CHAP.  xxvnLj  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


Strength  of  body  and  mind,  strength  of  character  and  position,  result  from 
exercise,  discipline,  and  growth.  The  virtue  of  the  soil,  the  events  of  Providence, 
the  creation  of  the  world,  and  the  incarnation  of  Christ  after  long  and  silent 
preparation.  II.  All  preparation  must  be  in  recognition  of  God. 
This  invests  all  acts  with  influence,  and  gives  them  religious  character.  **  Prepare 
thy  work  without  and  n)ake  it  fit  for  thyself  in  the  field."  1.  In  recognition  of 
God's  supremacy,  **  Before  the  Lord^  God  sovereign  and  supreme  Ruler. 
All  power  in  his  hands,  all  events  under  his  control.  2.  In  covenant  with  His 
mercy.  "  Before  the  Lord  thy  God"  Conscious  of  God's  presence  and  love;  a 
sense  of  interest  and  sonship.     Loving  appropriation  and  humble  dependence. 

III.  When  a  person  thus  prepares  his  ways  before  God,  he 
will  become  mighty.  '*  J.  became  mighty  because  he  prepared  his  way." 
Preparations  never  vain;  rashness  and  haste  lead  to  failure  and  misfortune. 
Strength  and  success  gained  by  fixed  resolve,  entire  consecration,  and  devout 
preparation.  Mighty  in  prayer,  influence  for  good  given  "  before  God " ; 
required  in  Christian  eflTort  and  in  a  sinful  world.     "  Mighty  through  God." 

EOMILETIC    HINTS    AND    SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  2.  **  According  to  all  that  his         Yers.     1-9.     JotharrCa    life.       His 

father  Uzziah  did."      One  single  act  mother's  name  and  relations.    His  age 

of  impiety  destroys  not  general  good  at    succession    (ver.    1).     His     great 

character  of  his  reign  [^Speak.    Com.\  achievements :  built  cities,  conquered 

People  did  corruptly ^  civil  injustice  and  enemies,  and  became  mighty  in  fame, 

social  cruelty;   laborious  service  and  wealth,     and     power.     His    death    a 

empty  ritual ;  foreign  oppression  and  lamentation,  and  his  son  an  unworthy 

providential     misery    (cf.    Is.    i.-v,).  successor.  "  Wrought  a  woeful  change, 

Jotham  a  witness  for  God  in  prevalent  being  optimi  patria   pessimus  JUius** 

corruption  and  national  faithlessness,  [Trapp^, 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 


Cbitical  Notes.]  This  chapter  corresponds  with  2  Ki.  xvi.,  and  gives  chief  events  in 
same  order.  Narrative  fuller  in  military  affairs,  yet  an  omission  of  two  or  three  facts. 
Idolatry  of  A.  and  its  consequences  (vers.  1-8) ;  release  of  captives  (vers.  9-15)  ;  Assyrian 
help  sought  (vers.  16-21) ;  continued  trespass  and  distress  (vers.  22-25) ;  end  of  A* 
(ver.  26,  li7). 

Vert,  1-8. — Idolatry  of  A.  and  its  consequences.  Ver.  2.  Molten,  i.e.,  representatives  of 
different  forms  or  characters  of  the  chief  Phoenician  deity.  Eeturn  to  superstition  of 
Northern  kingdom,  from  which  Judah  had  been  clear  since  days  of  Joash.  Ver.  3.  Burnt, 
restored  worphip  of  Moloch,  savage  god  of  Ammon.  Heathen,  Oanaanites.  Ver.  4.  Tree, 
great  extremes  (cf.  2  Ki.  xvi.  4).  Ver.  6.  Two  battles  with  Kezin  and  Pekah  not  in  Kings. 
Ver.  7.  Azrik.,  governor,  chief  officer  of  royal  palace  (cf.  1  Ki.  iv.  6  ;  xviii.  3  ;  2  Ki.  xviii.  18). 

Vers.  9-15. — Release  of  captives.  0<i«d,  possibly  same  as  Iddo.  Samaria,  wheve  Elijah, 
Elisha,  and  other  prophets  exercised  their  vocation.  Bage,  great,  violent,  and  displeasing 
to  God  ;  reacheth,  where  God  hears.  Ver.  10.  Purpose,  in  heart.  Sins,  with  you  greater 
than  in  Judah,  therefore  oppress  not  erring  brothers.  Ver.  11.  Deliver,  send  back.  Fierce, 
law  forbade  Israel  to  make  bondmen  (Lev.  xxv.  39-46).  Ver.  12.  Heads,  patriarchal  chiefs 
who  formed  king's  counsel.  Ver.  13.  Forbade  captives  to  be  brought  into  Samaria. 
Offended,  remembered,  confessed  their  own  sins,  and  felt  ashamed.  Veir.  14.  Remonstrance 
successful.  Ver.  15.  JVawi«,the  four  in  ver.  12,  acting  with  general  consent  of  whole  body 
of  princes  and  people.  Ver.  16.  Prisoners  released,  fed  with  spoil,  and  conveyed  to  Jericha 
on  their  way  home.    Falm  (Deut  zxxiv.  3^ 

371 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTABTt    CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxvin. 


Vers.  1^-21,— Assyrian  help  sought.  Time,  after  disastrous  war  with  Ephraim  and  Aram. 
Kings^  more  than  one  in  succession  or  in  conjunction  ;  other  versions  give  singular  instead 
of  plural.  Vers.  17,  18.  Assign  reason  for  seeking  help.  Invasion  (ver.  18)  and  refrac- 
toriness of  Judah  (ver.  19).  Naked,  lit.,  *'  had  caused  licentiousness  in  Judah."  Had 
allowed  Judah  to  break  loose  from  religious  restraint.  Ver.  20.  Distressed  by  heavy 
tribute,  and  no  help  rendered. 

Vers.  22-25.— Continued  trespass  and  affliction  Yet  more,  "trespassed  still  more." 
Spoliation  (ver.  21)  of  no  avail.  Ver.  23.  SacHRced,  superstition  led  him  to  believe  that  he 
might  receive  aid  from  the  gods  of  D.,  Hadad,  Rimmon,  Ac.  (2  Ki.xvi.  10-16).  Ver.  24.  Cut, 
demolished ;  shut  up,  suspended  worship,  and  made  altars  after  models  at  Damascus. 
Several,  separate. 

Vers.  26,  27.— End  and  burial  of  A.  Written,  &c.  (2  Ki.  xvi.).  Ver.  27.  Brought  not,  buried 
with  his  fathers  (2  KL  xvi  20),  but  not  in  sepulchres  of  the  kings.  Not  an  honourable 
burial, 

HOMILETIGS. 

The  Evil  Beign  op  Ahaz. — Verses  1-7, 

A,  forgot  principles  and  example  of  his  father.  Soon  apparent  by  what 
unhappy  influences  he  was  surrounded,  and  to  what  degeneracy  the  people  had 
fallen.  Increase  of  worldly  wealth  and  luxury  in  reigns  of  Azariah  and  Jotham 
introduced  corruptions  which,  by  the  example  of  Ahaz,  prevailed  in  idolatrous 
practices  of  every  kind  (ver.  24).  I.  The  "anmitigated  "Wickedness  of 
Ahaz.  A.  one  of  the  stupendous  examples  of  Israel,  one  of  the  few  men  in 
history  of  whom  not  one  good  thing  is  recorded.  His  wickedness  uniform, 
unmitigated  and  extraordinary  development.  1.  He  patronised  symbolic  worship 
of  Israel.  "Walked  in  the  ways  of  Israel"  (2  Ki.  xvi.  3)  at  beginning  of  reign. 
All  forms  and  practices  of  heathenism  among  Israelites  he  adopted.  2.  He 
practised  gross  idolatry  of  Canaan,  Not  content  with  paganism,  he  imported 
fresh  modes  of  worship.  He  restored  idolatry  of  Moloch,  and  fixed  it  under 
the  very  walls  of  the  city,  "the  valley  of  Hinnom."  He  gave  personal 
sanction  to  cruel  rites,  by  causing  his  sons  to  pass  through  fire,  to  burn  them  to 
death,  or  purify  them  and  dedicate  them  to  heathen  gods.  A  custom  in  Persia 
for  the  king  to  send  his  son,  seated  on  a  black  horse,  to  ride  through  the  flames, 
to  prove  sacredness  of  character  and  to  show  the  people  fire  will  not  hurt.  This 
practice  forbidden  by  law  (Lev.  xviii.  21  ;  xx.  2;  Deut.  xviii.  10).  II,  The 
fearful  consequences  of  this  wickedness.  Having  left  God,  God 
forsook  him,  and  a  series  of  calamities  happen.  1.  Deliverance  unto  the  Syrians. 
This  the  issue  of  a  confederate  invasion.  False  dependence,  heathen  gods  could 
not  protect.  2.  Fearful  slaughter.  Smitten  by  kings  of  Assyria  and  of  Israel 
"  with  a  great  slaughter,"  a  complete  panic  and  rout  result.  Defeat  bereft  them 
of  defence,  and  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  slaughtered  like  sheep.  3.  Dis- 
graceful captivity.  "  A  great  multitude  of  them  captives  "  (ver.  5).  Made  prisoners, 
they  were  divided  between  allies,  sent  off  under  military  escort  to  capitals  of 
Syria  and  Israel.  4.  National  calamity.  Persons  of  distinction  among  captured 
or  slain  (ver.  7).  The  king's  (probably  Jotham's)  son,  governor  of  Royal  Palace 
and  Prime  Minister.  Loss  of  these  chief  officers  a  national  calamity.  "  How  are 
the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  ?"  Thus  blood  shed,  country  wasted, 
and  families  ruined  through  sin.  A  good  king  may  shelter  a  corrupt  people ;  a 
bad  king  may  bring  judgments  like  a  flood.  The  happiness  of  one  reign  may  be 
Talued  by  miseries  of  another. 

Thb  Release  op  Captives. — Verses  8-1 5. 

Report  of  "brethren"  led  captive  excited  indignation  in  better  disposed. 
Oded,  a  prophet,  went  out,  accompanied  with  princes,  to  meet  the  escort  and  to 
prevent  disgrace  of  introducing  such  prisoners  into  the  city.     I,  Heleased 
273 


CHAP,  xxfizi.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


through  stern  rebuke  of  the  prophet.  O.  did  not  applaud  their 
valour  and  congratulate  them  on  their  victory — in  God's  name  declared  their 
faults  and  warned  them  of  judgment.  1.  Rebuked  pride  of  victory,  Not  by 
superiority  in  numbers,  arms,  and  valour  had  they  overcome ;  but  in  consequence 
of  Divine  judgments  against  Israel.  Not  for  the  righteousness  of  victors  (Deut. 
ix.  5),  but  for  the  wickedness  of  the  vanquished;  therefore  boast  not,  "be  not 
high-minded,  but  fear"  (Eom.  xi.  20,  21).  2.  Rebuked  abuse  of  power.  Victory 
gave  no  authority  for  cruelty.  Offensive  to  keep  "  brethren "  as  slaves  in  war. 
Might  not  always  right.  They  had  "  slain  them  in  a  rage,"  and  they  further 
"  purposed  to  keep  them  under  "  and  sell  them  as  "  bondmen  and  bondwomen." 
"  The  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God."  3.  Rebuked  forget- 
fulness  of  personal  guilt,  "Are  there  not  with  you,  even  with  you,  sins  against  the 
Lord  your  God?"  (ver.  10).  Ten  tribes  not  innocent,  fallen  away  more  com- 
pletely, more  hopelessly,  than  the  two.  Severity  would  add  to  their  guilt  and 
aggravate  their  punishment.  "  Thinkest  thou  this,  O  man,  that  judgest  them 
which  do  such  things  and  doest  the  same,  that  thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment 
of  God?"  II.  Released  through  the  humanity  of  the  people. 
Spirited  remonstrance  not  in  vain — chiefs,  soldiers,  and  people  touched.  1.  Dis- 
played in  the  ojjposition  of  chiefs  (ver.  12).  Conscience-stricken  when  reminded 
of  their  own  sins.  Men  of  character  and  high  position,  remarkable  for  bene- 
volent feeling,  forbade  entrance  of  captives  into  Samaria — took  lead  in  difficult 
task  of  restoring  them,  and  gained  themselves  a  name.  2.  Displayed  in  com- 
pliance of  soldiers.  Soldiers  only  obeying  orders,  might  have  defended  what 
they  gained  by  sword  ;  but  yielded,  left  captives  and  spoil  at  disposal  of  "  the 
princes  "  (ver.  14).  Right  to  give  up  what  is  wrong  to  retain — more  generous 
to  yield  to  reason  and  religion  than  to  stick  at  self-interest.  3.  Displayed  in  the 
kindness  of  the  people.  Under  benevolent  superintendence  the  captives  clothed 
and  fed  from  the  spoils ;  assisted  in  their  weakness  and  conveyed  on  their  way 
home  (ver.  15).  A  beautiful  incident,  and  full  of  interest.  A  proof  of  loyalty 
to  law  amid  national  decline,  of  generosity  in  scenes  of  cruelty,  and  a  type  of  a 
greater  deliverance  in  the  Gospel. 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.   1-5.     Like  son,   like  father,  picture  of  a    good    preacher.      Oded 

In  A.  we  have — I,  A  son  who  rebelled  teacheth,  reproveth,  exhorteth,  turneth 

against  the  maxims  of  his  father.     In-  himself  into  all  shapes,  of  spirit  and 

stead  of   carrying   on    improvements  of  speech,  that  he  may  work  upon  his 

inaugurated   by  his  father,   we    find  hearers ;  and  he  had  his  desire.     See 

that  he  initiated  altogether  a  new  state  Timothy's    task    (2   Tim.    iv.    2,     3) 

of   things.     II.    A    father    who    was  \Trapp\      Reacheth     up    to     heaven. 

devoid  of  natural  affection  towards  his  Sins    of    violence — 1.  Seen  by   God; 

children.     "  He  burnt  his  children  in  2.  Provoke    God ;     3.  Will    be    pun- 

the   fire."     III.    The   wicked  sons  of  ished   by   God.     "  Our   iniquities  are 

good  fathers  may  sometimes  be  fathers  increased  over  our  head,  and  our  tres- 

themselves,  and  the  evil  they  have  done  pass  (guiltiness)  is  grown  up  unto  the 

will  be  repaid  to   them   again     [Bib,  heavens  "  (Ez.  ix.  6). 
Mus.\  Yer.  10.    Personal  guilt,  a  sense  of 

Vers.  9-11,  Oded  went  out — 1.  In  our  own  sins  should  check — 1.  In  the 
courageous  spirit.  Defying  risk  to  pride  of  triumph.  2.  In  the  con- 
meet  face  to  face.  2.  In  faithfulness  trol  of  passion.  3.  In  the  neglect 
to  God,  for  whom  he  acted,  and  from  of  charity.  Know  self,  moderate  re- 
whom  received  help.  3.  In  benevolent  eentment,  and  imitate  God's  com- 
deaigu.     Hear  me.    Here  we  have  the  passion*    Or   learn — 1.  Man's    readi- 

273 


HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxvin. 


ness  to  judge  others.     2.  By  judging,  universal  history  of  the    wars  which 

treating   others  harshly,  we  condemn  savage  man  has  carried  on  against  his 

ourselves.     "  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  fellows   from  the  foundation    of    the 

for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  world"     [A.     Clarke].      That    which 

"  We  do  pray  for  mercy.  happened  in  the  time  of  Ahaz,  was  to 

And  that  same  prayer  doth  teach  us  aU  to  occur  again,  as  Is.  xhu.  5,  b,  and  ix.  6, 

render  and  other   similar   passages  show  on 

The  deeds  of  mercy  "  [Shakes.'],  a,  much  larger,  more    glorious  scale  at 

Ver.  15.  Primitive  charity.  Clothing  the  time  of  the  great  redemption.     We 

the     naked,     feeding     the     hungry,  see  at  once  from  the  words  themselves 

helping    the    weak,    &c.      "  We    can  with  what  pleasure  the  historian  dwells 

scarcely  find  a  parallel  to  this  in  the  upon  this  event  [Keil\, 

H0MILETIG8. 

A:prEA.ij  FOB  Assyrian  Help. — Verses  16-21. 

Invasion  of  Judah  by  Eezin  and  Pekah  not  mere  predatory  expedition,  but 
designed  to  reduce  the  country,  upset  the  royal  family,  and  establish  another 
tributary  prince.     Extirpation  of  dynasties  common  in  East.     The  older  and  more 
venerated  the  dynasty,  the  more  needful  to  destroy  it.     The  unconditional  pro- 
mise to  David  prevented  change,  and  occasioned  defeat  of  allies.     I.  Appeal 
in  immineilt  danger.     Kingdom  reduced  to  great  distress — 1.  By  Invasions 
of  the  enemy.     After  succession  of  defeats,  retreated  within  walls  of  Jerusalem, 
and  besieged.     Country  infested  north  and  south,  and  cities  captured.     2.  By 
Providential  disaster.     "  For  the  Lord  brought  Judah  low."     Bereft   of  wealth 
and  power,  humbled  and  helpless  for  defence.     As  despicable  as  they  had  been 
formidable.     3.    By  Internal  disorder,     **  For  he  made  Judah  naked,"  caused 
licentiousness  in  Judah.     Bonds  of  government  loosened,  restraints  of  religion 
thrown   off,  and  idolatry  of    every  degree   practised.     II.  Appeal    which 
cost  immense  sacrifice.     "A.  took  away  a  portion  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  <fec."  (ver.  21).     1.  Self  independence.     "I  am  thy  servant  and  thy  son" 
(2  Ki.  xvi.  7).    A  plain  acknowledgment  of  his  dependent  position,  and  the  sub- 
mission of  a  vassal.     2.  Enormous  treasure.     To  procure  adequate   sum  for  pro- 
tection the  palace  and  the  temple  ransacked.     Costly  is  the  price   of   sin   and 
departure  from  God.  III.  Appeal  which  ended  in  disappointment. 
Belief  only  temporary.     Assyria  prepared  for  the  advantage.     The  end   worse 
than  the  beginning.     "  The  King  of  Assyria  came  unto  him  and  distressed  him, 
but  strengthened  him  not. "    Distressed — 1 .  By  occupying  the  land.  Hostile  inroads 
of  the  enemy  devasted  the  kingdom.     Invaders,  like  Saxons  invited  by  Britons 
against  Picts  and  Scots,  remained  masters  of  the  land.     2.  By  exacting  heavy 
tribute.     Payments  exhausting,  impoverished  and  weakened.     The  submission  of 
Judah,  proffered  by  Ahaz,  pleasing  and  of  utmost  importance  to  projects  of 
conquest.     Money  demanded  in  return  for  help.     3.  By  withholding  help  desired. 
Nothing  but  disappointment  at  last :  "  But  he  helped  him  not  "  (ver.  21).  Ahaz 
not  placed  in  a  safe  and  independent  position  ;  an  actual  for  a  threatened  sub- 
jection resulted.     It  led  to  further   idolatry  and  risk,  which  provoked  God's 
anger  and  tended  to  ruin  the  nation.     Sin   no  "  help  "  nor  "  strength,"  but  a 
cause  of  "  distress."     Confidence  in  men,  the  world,   and   false   ways,  create 
disappointment  and  pierce  the  hand  like  a  broken  reed.     "  If  ye  will  not  believe, 
surely  ye  shall  not  be  established."      Be  Urm  in  faith y  or  ye  will  not  be  raadA 
Arm  in  fact  [Speak.  Com,,  Is.  vii.  9]. 

274 


©HAP.  XXVIII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONIOLES. 


Ahaz's  Deepbe  Sins  and  Miseries. — Verses  22-25. 

The  infatuated  king  unchastened  by  distress,  surrendered  himself  to  slavish 
fear  and  pursued  his  course  "  yet  more  against  the  Lord.**  Notice — I.  The 
wilful  obstinacy  displayed  in  his  evil  course.  He  exerted  royal 
authority  to  extend  idolatry ;  suspended  the  worship  of  Jehovah  in  the  temple ; 
committed  gross  sacrilege,  and  superseded  the  altar  of  God  by  one  from  Damas- 
cus. He  discarded  the  doctrine  of  one  true  God  and  affected  polytheism.  His 
religion  was  a  kind  of  diplomacy.  The  Temple,  the  residence  of  Jehovah,  by  the 
help  of  the  priesthood,  was  turned  into  a  shelter  for  idols,  and  in  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem  were  erected  altars  to  foreign  gods.  II.  The  fearful  conse- 
quences of  this  obstinacy.  "  He  sacrificed  unto  the  gods  of  Damascus 
which  smote  him."  1.  God  provoked  to  anger  (ver.  25).  "The  wrath  of  a  king 
is  as  messengers  of  death  ;  but  a  wise  man  will  pacify  it,"  by  proofs  of  penitence 
and  amendment  of  life.  2.  Ruin  brought  upon  himself  and  kingdom.  "  They 
were  the  ruin  of  him  and  of  all  Israel."  The  gods  of  Syria  befriended  him  no 
more  than  the  kings  of  Assyria,  He  was  cut  off  in  the  midst  of  his  days.  Per- 
nicious influence  of  idolatry  lasted  through  the  reforms  of  next  reign,  and  only 
destroyed  after  Babylonian  captivity.     III.  The  a"wful  stigma  which 

rested  upon  him  through  this  obstinate  course.  "  This  is  that 
king  Ahaz."  Like  "  Jeroboam  who  made  Israel  to  sin,"  and  Judas  who 
betrayed  the  Saviour,  he  is  branded  by  the  spirit  of  God.  If  ever  a  man  is  to 
be  held  up  as  a  warning,  this  is  the  man.  Mark  him,  shun  his  ways.  Not  one 
good  thing  in  bis  life  and  no  hope  in  his  death  I 

Abuse  op  Judgment. — Verse  22. 

"  Trespassed  more  and  more  "  in  utterly  forsaking  God  and  selling  himself  to 
sin.  I.  Judgment  abused  by  mistaking  it.  He  thought  because 
Syrian  gods  helped  them,  they  would  be  of  service  to  him.  Jehovah  had  smitten 
him  and  helped  his  enemies,  but  he  could  or  would  not  see  it.  He  therefore 
sacrificed  to  idols.  This  a  vulgar  conception  of  God,  and  leads  to  abuse  of 
devotion  and  into  greater  risk.  II.  Judgment  abused  by  defying  it. 
There  is  stiU  a  lofty  imperial  spirit  in  Ahaz.  Neither  judgment  nor  mercy  opens 
his  eyes.  When  overthrown  he  must  still  fight  against  God,  be  master  of  his 
own  condition  and  destiny.  He  abused  the  house  of  God,  the  altar  of  God, 
and  the  judgments  of  God.  His  heart  was  more  fully  set  to  do  evil,  and  he 
"  provoked  to  anger  the  Lord  God  of  his  fathers." 

Lessons  rROM  the  Life  op  Ejno  Ahaz. 

I.  That  a  course  of  sin  is  continually  downward.  This  is  a  funda- 
mental law  of  character,  the  natural  working  of  sin.  It  propagates  itself,  but 
is  not  self -reformatory.  One  kind  of  sin  produces  another  kind,  and  the  law  of 
habit  applies  to  physical,  mental,  and  moral  actions.  Character  becomes  fixed. 
"  His  own  iniquities  shall  take  the  wicked  himself,  and  he  shall  be  holden  with 
the  cords  of  his  sin."  II.  That  God  is  faithful  in  checking  men 
in  this  downward  course.  "  The  Lord  brought  Judah  low  because  of 
Ahaz,  King  of  Israel "  (ver.  19).  Disappointed  in  alliances,  overcome  in  war, 
captives  taken  by  thousands,  and  nothing  going  well.  God  contended  with  him, 
but  was  despised  by  him ;  persevered  in  efforts  to  check  him,  but  was  defied  and 
resisted.  God  ever  seeks  by  his  providence  and  spirit  to  turn  men  from  an 
evil  course  which  wUl  end  in  ruin.  "  That  he  may  withdraw  man  from  his  pur- 
pose (marg.y  work)  and  hide  pride  from  man.     He  keepeth  back  his  soul  from 

276 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxviii. 


the  pit  and  his  life  from  perishing  by  the  sword."  III.  That  if  men  will 
not  be  checked  in  a  downward  course  they  may  become 
notable  examples  of  punishment.  "  This  is  that  king  Ahaz  "  (ver. 
22).     The  end  is  come,  but  not  the  end  of  life.     Chastised,  but  not  corrected, 

given  to  idols  and  let  alone,  "  he  did  trespass  yet  more."  What  possibilities 
of  human  guilt  1     What  distinctions  in  human  shame  !     **  Is  not  destruction  to 

the  wicked  and  a  strange  punishment  to  the  workers  of  iniquity  ?" 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.  16.     Send  in  spite  of  promise  see  everything  arranged  according  to 

given  by  Isaiah  (vii.  14;  viii.  4),  the  one  its  whims  ;  the  Church  yields  for  the 

immediate  and  the  other  remote,  that  sake    of    temporal    advantage      [Bib. 

confederate  kings  should  not  prevail  Mus.\ 

over  him.     This — 1.    A  forgetfulnesSf  Yer.    22.      This   king  Ahaz,      The 

wilful    rejection   of   divine    assurance,  stigma  fixed.     1.  An  expression  of  the 

Ahaz  by  his    unbelief    had    not  only  writer's  feelings.     2.  An   example  of 

disestablished  himself  (ver.  9),  he  mort-  the   force  of  sin.     3.  A   providential 

gaged  the  hope  of  Israel.     He  had  a  warning  to  all.     "  Learn  wisdom   by 

policy  of  his  own,  and  was  determined  the  folly  of  others." 

to  pursue  it.     He  betrayed  the  Mes-  Ver.  23.     I.  The  true  God  forsaken, 

siah  and  deliverer  of  his  people.     The  1.  From  wrong  views  of  his  character, 

assurance  of  this  betrayal  is  the  sign  2.  From  false  confidence  in  his  rivals, 

of  his  obduracy,  a  signal  and  terrible  II.  The   certain    ruin   which    results 

proof  of  his  irretrievable  sin  in  calling  from  this  course.     "  The  ruin  of  him." 

upon  the   Assyrians,     The   king  has  Kuin  personal  and  national,  physical 

been  found  wanting"  (cf.  Smith's  Bk.  and  moral,  present  and  future.     Gods 

of  Is.,  p.  118).    2.  An  unworthy  achnow-  of  heathen,  gods  of  sectarianism,  gods 

ledgment  of  human  dependence.     God  of  gold,  or  gods  of  learning  will  bring 

would    have    been    his   help,   but  he  ruin.     Mistake  to  seek  inspiration,  to 

foolishly  turned  to  those  who  ruined  covet   relief,  and   implore  deliverance 

him.     This  proved  by  Scripture   and  from  wrong  sources.     "  Turn  ye  unto 

by  Assyrian  monuments,  which  record  him  from  whom  the  children  of  Israel 

payment  of  tribute  by  tribes  of  Israel,  have  deeply  revolted." 

"  His  heart  was  moved,  and  the  heart  Vers.  26,  27.    Acts  of  AhaZj  which 

of  his  people,  as  the  trees  of  the  wood  may    be    thus    summed  up  :     1.  His 

are  moved  with  the  wind,"  in  craven  proud  and  faithless  refusal  of  a  sign 

fear  (Is.  vii.  2).                               •  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah  (vii.  10-13) ; 

Ver.  19.     Israel  low.     The  influence  2.  His  discontinuance  of  temple  wor- 

of  the  ruler  upon  the  nation's  welfare  ship  by  closing   the  temple  itself ;  3. 

and  condition.     Nakedness    or  abun-  His  desecration  of  the  sacred  vessels  ; 

dance,  internal  anarchy  or  prevalent  4.  His  erection  of  altars  to  the  false 

order.    The  higher  the  rank  the  more  gods  in  every  corner  of  Jerusalem,  and 

aggravated  the  sin.     A  corrupt  king  a  in  every  several  city  of  Judah ;  5.  His 

corrupt  court  (like  that  of  Charles  II.).  sacrificing  to  the  gods  of  Damascus  that 

"  Woe  to  thee,  O  land,  when  thy  king  they  might  help  him.     The  first  and 

is  a  child."  last  of  these  offences  belonged  to  the 

Ver.  21  {cf  2  Ki.  xvi.  8).     Sacrilege  early  part  of  his  reign,  the  others  were 

upon  the  House  of  God,     1.  The  king's  among,  the  latest  practices,  and  to  be 

self-willed  assault  on  established  insti-  reversed  by  his  successor  in  the  king- 

tutions.     II.   The   high   priest's   con-  dom     (2  Ki.  xviii.  4 ;  2  Chr.  xxix.  3, 

cessions.     See  in  this  a  clear  picture  of  19)  [Speak.  Com.], 

the  lack  of  Christian  spirit  in  the  two  I.  The   Character  of  Ahaz,    1.  He 

highest  ranks.     Th«  State  desires  to  was  one   of    those   whose  iniquity  is 
276 


CHAP.  XXIX.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


enhanced  by  the  contempt  of  spiritual 
privileges;  2.  His  downward  career 
was  rapidly  progressive ;  8.  He  reached 
the  lowest  point  of  human  obduracy. 
II.  The  illustration  he  affords  of  the 
appalling  power  of  sin.  1.  Evil  habits 
strengthen  by    indulgence;     2.    The 


world  increases  its  power  over  its 
votaries  as  they  advance  in  life ;  3. 
Sinners  in  mature  years  lose  the  per- 
ception of  religious  truth  ;  4.  There  is 
a  limit  to  divine  endurance,  and  hard- 
ened transgressors  are  often  left  to 
perish  in  their  sin  [Bib,  Mu9i\» 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXVIII 


Vers.  1-5  Did  not  right.  How 
many  a  son  of  godly  parents  is  de- 
stroyed by  evil  communications.  Com- 
panions first  known  at  school,  by  near 
residence,  or  picked  up  casually  at  a 
friend's  house,  often  blight  the  most 
promising  young  life.  It  would  be 
mere  affectation  to  suppose  that  the 
history  of  Ahaz  is  unconnected  with 
the  prevalent  corruption  in  Judah 
during  his  father's  reign.  Pharaoh 
himself  was  not  a  more  signal  instance 
of  forbearance  of  judgment  than  he. 
He  had  a  godly  eximple  and  godly 
counsel  in  his  father.  But  other 
mercies  were  given  to  him,  and  though 
some  were  severe  chastisements,  yet 
were  they  mercies  nevertheless,  and 
should  have  been  for  his  good  [Ed, 
Walker,  Ser,  0.  T.  Subjects]. 

Vers.  3-5.  Children  in  fire.  The  king 
seems  to  have  had  a  mania  for  foreign 
religions.  The  worship  of  Moloch  was 
now  established  in  the  valley  of  Hin- 
nom,  in  a  spot  known  by  the  name  of 


Tophet,  close  under  the  walls  of  Jerusa- 
lem. There  the  brazen  statue  of  the 
god  was  erected,  with  the  furnace 
within,  or  at  its  feet,  into  which  the 
children  were  thrown.  To  this  dread- 
ful form  of  human  sacrifice  Ahaz 
gave  the  highest  sanction  by  the  devo- 
tion of  one  or  more  c5  his  sons 
[Stanley], 

Vers.  9-15.  Clemency.  The  record 
of  this  act  of  compassion  of  these 
Israelites  towards  the  captives  of 
Judah  is  to  be  noted  as  affording  a 
refutation  of  the  allegation  of  some 
modern  critics  that  the  writer  of 
Chronicles  was  swayed  by  partiality 
for  Judah  and  by  prejudice  against 
Israel  [WordswortK]. 

Vers.  22-25.  Continued  sin.  The 
way  of  sin  is  down  hill,  a  man  cannot 
stop  where  he  would,  and  he  that  will 
be  tampering  with  dangerous  occasions 
in  confidence  of  his  resolution,  shall 
often  find  himself  carried  beyond  his 
purpose  [Abp,  Leighton], 


wmmmiff'^m' 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Critical  Notes.]  Hezekiah's  reign  commenced  and  carried  through  four  chapters  in 
marked  contrast  with  corresponding  portion  (2  Ki.  xviii.-xx).  The  writer  of  Kings  fixes 
on  civil  affairs— the  two  invasions  of  Sennacherib  and  on  the  embassy  of  Merodach-baladan, 
related  at  length,  passing  lightly  and  hastily  over  Hezekiah's  reformation  (ch.  xviii.  4-7), 
the  author  of  Chron.  gives  a  full  account  of  this  latter  in  three  chapters  (xxix.-xxxi.), 
compressing  into  one  (xxxi.)  the  whole  that  he  has  to  say  of  the  civil  history  of  the  reign. 
Thus  chs.  xxix.  to  xxxi.  of  2  Chron.  contain  matter  which  is  almost  wholly  new  ;  while 
ch.  xxxii.  is  little  more  than  a  brief  summary  of  what  the  writer  of  Kings  has  related 
fully  in  the  three  chapters  which  he  has  devoted  to  this  reign  [^Speak.  Com.']. 

Vers.  1-11. — H.^s  good  beginning  and  restoration  of  worship.  Ztch.,  possibly  the  person 
given  Is.  viii.  2.  Right,  his  father's  idolatry  revolting  to  him  ;  he  began  restoration  at  once, 
Ver.  3.  Opened  doors  closed  by  his  father  (ch.  xxviii.  24)  ;  repaired,  lit.  made  them  strong, 
damaged  by  Ahaz  {cf,  2  Ki.  xviii.  16).    Ver.  4.  East  street,  probably  open  space  before 

277 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES^  [chip.  xxix. 


eastern  gate.  Sanctify^  Levitical  purity  (1  Chr.  xv.  12,  13).  Filthy  stains  of  idolatry. 
Ver.  6.  Fathers,  Ahaz  and  his  contemporaries.  Turned  back,  not  looking  towards  rising 
snn,  as  Ezek.  viii.  16,  with  their  faces  from  the  Temple  ;  but,  figuratively,  for  neglecting 
and  despising  God.  Ver.  7.  Acts  of  Ahaz.  Ver.  8.  Punishment  for  these  acts  in 
expressions  which  are  new  and  have  no  parallel  in  the  rest  of  Chron.,  one  which  Hez. 
might  naturally  use,  for  it  had  occurred  in  a  prophecy  of  Micah  (vi.  16),  his  contemporary 
and  monitor  (Jer.  xx\i.  18),  which  was  probably  uttered  towards  the  close  of  Ahaz's 
reign.  In  Jeremiah  pi  ras3  becomes  common  (Jer.  xviii.  16  ;  xix.  8 ;  xxv.  9,  &c.)  [Speak. 
Com.].  Ver.  9.  Cf.  ch.  xxviii.  6-8.  Ver.  10.  Purpose  of  H.  Ver.  11.  Sons,  affectionate, 
hjearty  appeal  to  priests  and  Levites.  Negligent,  remiss ;  burn,  make  any  fire  offering 
generally. 

Vers.  12-19. —  T?ie  Temple  cleansed.  Fourteen  chiefs  undertake  to  collect  and  prepare 
their  brethren.  Ver.  15.  At  commandment  of  king,  **  in  the  business  (matters)  of  the 
Lord,"  prescribed  by  law  (Ex.  xix.  22;  Lev.  xi.  44).  Ver.  16.  Priests  only  entered  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  Whatever  found  there  unclean  they  brought  into  the  outer  court, 
where  Levites  took  it  from  them  to  carry  beyond  boundary  of  Temple.  Kidron  (ch.  xxx. 
14;  2  Ki.  xxiii.  12).  Ver.  17.  Work  began  first  day  with  purification  of  courts  and 
reached  porch  eighth  day.  Then  eight  days  more  to  cleanse  Temple  ;  sixteen  altogether. 
Ver.  18.  Altar,  great  brazen,  before  porch.  Ver.  19.  Cast  away  (ch.  xxviii.  24 ;  2  Ei. 
xvi.  14). 

Vers.  20-26. — Hez?s  sin-offering.  Early  next  day  H.  went  with  princes,  without  waiting 
to  assemble  representatives  of  the  nation.  Ver.  21.  Seven,  number  of  covenant.  Kingdom, 
i.e.,  for  sins  of  kings  and  predecessors ;  sanctuary,  for  sins  of  priests ;  Judali,  for  sins  of 
the  nation.  Ver.  22.  Blood  expiates,  and  Levitical  rites  duly  observed  in  shedding  it. 
Ver.  23.  Sin-offering;  hands  (Lev.  i.  4  ;  iv.  15,  24).  Ver.  24.  All  Israel  repeated  twice,  for 
sanctuary  belonged  to  all  Israel,  and  invitation  given  for  northern  tribes  to  take  part  in 
passover  (ch.  xxx.  1).  "  Northern  kingdom  in  a  state  of  anarthy.  Four  Assyrian  invasions 
had  swept  over  it  within  thirty-five  years.  Hoshea,  contemporary  of  Hez.,  not  an  inde- 
pendent ruler.  Hence  Hez.  invited  revolted  tribes  to  return,  if  not  to  their  old  temporal, 
to  their  old  spiritual  allegiance.  To  prepare  the  way  for  this  return,  he  included  '  all 
Israel  *  in  expiatory  sacrifice  **  [^Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  25.  Cf.  1  Chr.  xvi.  4 ;  xxiii.  6 ;  xxix.  29. 
Trumpets,  cf.  Num.  x.  8  ;  1  Chr.  xv.  24  ;  2  Chr.  v.  12. 

Vers.  27-31. — Hez.*8  humt-offering.  Consumed  on  altar,  only  fat  for  sin-offering  (Lev. 
iv.  19).  A  sound  of  instruments  heard  when  old  worship  recommenced.  Sang,  some 
anthem  for  the  occasion.  All  hawed  (ver.  29)  in  solemn  worship.  At  invitation  of  king  a 
great  number  of  thank-offerings  presented. 

Vers.  31-36. — Order  of  service  completed.  Flaying  of  victims  not  a  priestly  function,  but 
a  work  of  the  offerer  (Lev.  i.  6)  at  first,  afterwards  on  public  occasions  by  Levites,  as  here. 
Ver.  34.  Upright,  i.e.,  displayed  more  alacrity  than  priests  ;  perhaps  tainted  by  idolatry, 
and  looked  coldly  on  reforms  of  Hez.  Ver.  35.  Another  reason  which  prevented  priests 
from  flaying  to  completion,  was  the  great  demand  upon  their  time  by  the  work  to  be  done. 
Ver.  36.  No  small  joy  at  opening  of  newly  consecrated  Temple.  Prepared  the  people's 
minds,  or  it  oould  not  have  been  done  so  heartily  and  immediately. 

HOMILETICS. 

Hezekiah's  Reforms  in  the  Temple. — Verses  1-11. 

The  reign  of  H.  (726-697)  culminating  point  of  interest  in  history  of  kings  of 
Judah.  Whether  or  not  contemporary  prophecies  foretelling  the  birth  of  a 
Divine  Heir  to  the  throne,  contained  any  reference  to  the  son  of  Ahaz,  then  a 
mere  child,  it  is  certain  that  no  other  Prince  since  the  death  of  David  could  so 
well  have  answered  to  them  {Hezekiah,  Jehovah  strengthens).  In  point  of  fact, 
he  was  the  centre  of  the  highest  prophetic  influence  which  had  appeared  since 
Elijah  [Stcmley].  I.  The  work  itself  \^as  well  chosen.  Methods  for 
extirpating  idolatry  and  accomplishing  thorough  reformation  given  in  detail. 
1.  God! 8  work  chosen  first.  Temple,  sacred  work.  Needful  to  strengthen  and 
defend  his  empire,  but  no  work  for  God  can  prosper  without  friendship  with 
God.  H.  might  have  done  many  useful  works,  become  a  benefactor  to  his 
people,  but  saw  re-opening  of  fellowship  with  God  most  required  for  nations  and 
individuals.  "  Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  &c."  (a)  This  im,  opposition  to 
past  exwmple.  He  did  not  follow  the  example  of  a  wicked  father,  nor  listen  to 
the  voice  of  a  corrupt  court,  <S^.,  but  did  "  that  which  was  good  and  right  and 
278 


CHA».  XXIX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


truth  before  the  Lord  his  God."  (b)  This  as  a  promise  of  future  usefulness. 
Chose  out  a  work  of  his  own,  opened  doors,  repaired  and  cleansed  the  Temple. 
He  pursues  work  in  perplexity,  difficulty,  and  peril.  2.  God's  work  deliberately 
(chosen.  "  It  is  in  mine  heart "  (ver.  10),  He  begins  in  right  way,  and  at  right 
end  ;  shows  in  what  consists  true  wisdom  and  wise  government.  A  happy  open- 
ing, an  encouraging  pledge  of  his  whole  course.  A  course  which  begins  with 
God,  will  be  one  of  usefulness  and  triumph.     II.  The  spirit  in  which 

the  work  was  performed  was  cominendable.  No  compromise; 
no  half -measures ;  no  delay.  "  In  the  first  year  of  his  reign  "  he  began  and 
delayed  not.  1.  In  personal  consecration  {y&c,  \0).  All  reformation  begins  here. 
Outward  work  done  from  life  within.  Everything  depends  upon  our  relation  to 
God,  that  is,  there  is  a  strong  moral  link  between  our  estimate  of  God  and 
success.  2.  In  tracing  historical  relationship.  He  looks  back,  reads  providence, 
and  finds  his  work.  We  cannot  work  efficiently  without  a  survey  of  the  field, 
and  an  insight  into  present  requirements.  We  have  incentives  to  work  when 
we  see  need  of  its  performance,  and  feel  called  to  perform  it.  "  Who  knoweth 
whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ? "  3.  In  the 
strength  of  deep  conviction.  Convinced  of  sin  and  bitter  fruits  of  idolatry,  he 
determines  to  reverse  policy  of  his  father  ;  announced  his  resolution  at  beginning 
of  his  reign,  and  waited  not  for  consolidation  of  his  rule.  Courage  and  determi- 
nation characterise  all  earnest  reformers.  4.  In  seeking  co-operation  from  others. 
Desired  help  from  the  ministry  (ver.  5).  "  Sanctify  yourselves."  By  legal  rites, 
specially  by  penitence,  faith  and  fresh  obedience.  We  should  be  sensible  of  our 
own,  and  the  sins  of  our  fathers ;  earnestly  cleanse  ourselves,  and  co-operate  for 
reformation  of  others.  Let  each  man,  therefore,  do  what  he  can,  but  remember 
that  the  secret  of  social  development  is  combination — that  the  best  social  system 
is  that  in  which  organisation  for  the  common  good  is  made  most  complete  and 
most  efficient. 

The  Levites  Enlisted  to  Help. — Verses  11-19. 

The  response  to  H.'s  appeal  given  by  Levites  in  united,  hearty  service.  "  Then 
the  Levites  arose."  Notice — I.  The  method  in  which  they  rendered 
help.  1.  They  were  united.  "They  gathered  their  brethren  and  worked 
altogether."  2.  They  worked  in  orderly  arrangement.  Began  with  outer  courts 
— those  of  priests  and  people ;  they  proceeded  to  inner.  But  as  Levites  could 
not  enter  the  Temple,  sweepings  were  brought  by  priests  to  porch,  and  then 
carried  to  Kidron.     No  hurry  ;  no  disorder.     "  All  things  done  decently  and  in 

order."  II.  The  rule  by  which  they  were  guided.  As  "  command- 
ment of  the  king,"  but  with  a  desire  to  obey  God's  word.  "  Let  the  priests  also, 
which  come  near  to  the  Lord,  sanctify  themselves,  lest  the  Lord  break  forth 
upon  them"  (Ex.  xix.  22;  cf  1  Chron.  xxv.  5;  2  Chron.  xxx.  12).  III.  The 
report  which  they  made.  The  house,  the  altar,  and  the  vessels  all 
cleansed  and  ready  for  use.  Glad  themselves,  they  came  to  gladden  the  king,  not 
to  seek  reward,  nor  boast  of  care  and  trouble.  Happy  those  who  can  report 
successful  work.  But  never  failure  1  To  open  and  repair  the  door,  to  light  the 
lamps  and  sweep  the  floor  acceptable  to  God.  Let  each  resolve,  "  It  is  in  mine 
heart"  (ver.  10). 

*•  Do  not,  for  one  repulse,  forego  the  purpose 
That  you  resolved  to  effect "  [^Shakes.'], 

Praise  and  Worship.— Fer^e  30. 

In  sixteen  days  the  burnt-offering  began;  songs  were  heard,  the  trumpet  rent 
the  place,  and  all  hearts  quivered  with  joy.     Observe  two  points — I.  They 

279 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxn 


were  old  words  that  the  people  sang.  Moreover  H.  the  king  and 
the  princes  commanded  the  Levites  to  sing  praise  unto  the  Lord,  with  the  words 
of  David  and  Asaph  the  seer.  What  do  we  want  with  new  words,  new  hymns, 
new  forms  of  praise  ?  The  time  is  coming — would  it  could  hasten  its  longed-for 
advent — when  there  wUl  be  only  one  book  in  the  Church.  At  present  the 
number  has  been  reduced  in  many  instances  to  two,  and  one  of  them  we  do  not 
want.  The  time  will  come  when  the  Bible  will  be  the  only  hymn  book  in  the 
house  of  God.  What  hymns  like  the  hymns  of  the  Bible  ?  What  devotional 
language  like  the  devotional  language  of  the  Psalms?  What  finer  teachers 
could  we  have  than  David,  Asaph,  and  Isaiah,  and  the  mighty  minstrels  and 
prophets  of  Israel  ?  The  people  had  the  words  all  ready.  If  we  want  to  sing  we 
need  not  wait  for  some  man  to  make  words  for  us ;  so  long  as  the  Psalms  are  before 
us  we  may  begin  our  song  at  once.  II.  Not  Only  were  the  words  old, 
the  enthusiasm  was  new.  "And  they  sang  praises  with  gladness,"  literally 
with  exultation,  with  rapture.  Keligion  is  nothing  if  not  enthusiastic.  Praise  with- 
out exultation  is  but  a  skeleton  form.  The  whole  place  in  which  Christians  are 
assembled  for  worship  should  vibrate,  tingle  again  because  of  the  mighty,  gracious, 
holy  song.  Here  we  have  the  changeable  and  the  permanent — the  permanent 
in  "  the  words  of  David  and  of  Asaph  the  seer ;  "  and  the  changeable  or  capable 
of  increase  and  variation  is  the  gladness,  the  enthusiasm,  the  transport,  the  holy 
rapture.  Nor  was  it  merely  vocal  in  the  sense  of  displaying  musical  gymnastic 
skill,  for  the  people  having  sung  with  rapture  as  if  they  had  not  space  enough 
to  sing  in,  as  if  they  would  split  the  overarching  heaven  with  their  cry,  "  tliey 
bowed  their  heads  and  worshipped."  The  look  was  upward,  downward ;  wild 
with  an  infinite  rationalistic  joy,  and  subdued  because  of  a  sense  of  the 
majesty  of  heaven  [Dr.  Farker]. 

HOMILETIO  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yers.  1,  2.  Notice — I.  A  mother's  in-  unchristian  parents,  and  crowns  with 

fluence   in   the   training   of  Hezekiah,  honour  the  faithfulness  of  roc^^y  parents. 

"  His  mother's  name  was  Abijah,  the  III.  The  great  work  which  God  performs 

daughter  of  Zechariah."     Ver.  1.  Pro-  in  the  youth   of  Hezekiah.     Only   20 

bably  the  Zechariah  whose  influence  for  or   25   years   old  when   he  began    to 

good  was  signally  owned  of  God  in  the  reign,  no  common  character,  no  ordin- 

reign  of  Uzziah  (ch.  xxvi.  6).     Perhaps  ary  piety  in  one  so  young.     The  work 

Abijah  was  neglected  by  her  husband,  begun  and  begun  rightly,  as  soon  as 

surrounded  by  greatest  difficulties,  for  seated  on  the    throne ;    accomplished 

every  corner  of  Judah  full  of  idols ;  splendidly  by  the  providence  of  God. 

yet    she  attended   to   duty,  felt    the  "  The    Lord   was   with   him,  and   he 

solemnity  of  her  trust,  and  wonderfully  prospered    whithersoever     he      went 

succeeded.     II.  The  sovereign  grace  oj  forth.' 


» 


God  in  the  conversion  of  Hezekiah.     A  Vers.   6—10.      I.    A    description   of 

wicked  father,  a  corrupt  court,  and  an  apostasy.  Mark  the  order  of  departure, 

idolatrous     country,     yet      Hezekiah  Trespassed^   going   beyond ;     forsaken 

chosen  and  qualified  in  youth  for  the  him ;  then    turning   away  their  faces 

throne,  and   became   one   of   the  best  from  the   habitation ;    God   forsaken, 

thpee  kings  of  the  Jews.     "  All  except  worship  forsaken;  finally  ''turned  their 

David,  Ezekias,  and  Josias   were  de-  hacks "  entirely  and  choosing  idolatry, 

fective,  for  they  forsook  the  law  of  the  the  source  of  all  misery.     II.  The  fear- 

Most    Highest ;    even   the    kings    of  ^ul  evils  which  follow  exposed   to  God's 

Judah  failed"  (Ecclus.  xlix.  4).     This  wrath  manifest — 1.    In    the  invasion 

encouragement  to  parents.  God  delights  and  devastation  of  land,  "upon  Judah 

in  miracles  of  grace ;  saves  children  of  and  Jerusalem."     2.  In  the  fall  and 
280 


OHAP.  XXIZ.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES, 


mourning  of   families,    "our    fathers 
have  fallen  by  the  sword."     3.  In  the 
evils  of  foreign  captivity,   "  our  sons, 
daughters,  and  wives  are  in  captivity." 
4.  In  the  disgrace  to  which  they  were 
reduced.     Former  prosperity  and  glory 
fled,  now  a  byeword  and  hissing,  (fee. 
III.  The  source  to  wJiich  these  evils  are 
traced,     Hezekiah  had  discernment  to 
ascribe    national   calamities   to    right 
cause.     God  caused  them  on  account 
of    their    sins.      Others,   servants   or 
ministers  of  a  moral  providence.     Men, 
forces  of  nature  no  power  at  all  except 
given  from  above.  Hence  {a)  no  ground 
for  violence  and  petty  reprisals.     Keep 
down  anger  against  mere  agents  ;  (6) 
The  necessity  of  forming  correct  esti- 
mates of  outward  vicissitudes,  and  (c) 
of  learning  to  discover  and  submit   to 
God's  will  the  great  rule  of  the  uni- 
verse.    As  "Wordsworth — 

"  One  adequate  Bupport, 
For  the  calamities  of  mortal  life, 
Exists — one  only,  an  assured  belief 
That  the  procession  of  our  fate,  however 
Sad  or  disturbed,  is  ordered  by  a  Being 
Of  infinite  bene'»olence  and  power, 
Whose  everlasting  purposes  embrace 
All  aooidents,  oonverting  them  to  good.'* 


Ver.  1 1 .     My  sons.     A  fatherly  Icing, 
With  what  gentle,  paternal  eloquence 
Hezekiah  addressed  the  men  on  whose 
co-operation    he    relied.     A    pastoral 
king :  a  most  shepherdly  heart  was  the 
heart  of  king   Hezekiah.     There  is  a 
fatherliness  that  does  not  depend  on 
age.     Hezekiah  not  an  old  man,  spoke 
not  from  under  a  crown  of  hoary  hairs ; 
but  a  father  because  of  his  capacity  of 
love,     unselfish     solicitude,     patriotic 
aspiration.     There  are  young  pastors, 
born  shepherds ;  in  earliest  conscious 
life  they  seem  to  be  made  to  care  for 
others.     The  pastor  is  a  man  who  can 
carry  all   men.      You    cannot    make 
pastors,  kings,  or  fathers.     Men  may 
bear  the  nominal  functions,  but  here 
an  entail  sanctioned  by  heaven.     Have 
not  some  men  a  right  to  accost  us  as 
sons?     Is   there   not   a   touch   which 
means   solicitude,  brotherhood,  unity, 
mutual   understanding?      The    words 
come  to  Hezekiah  as  he  needs  them ; 
they  are  his  servants,  wait  upon  him. 
Thus  he  talks  with  healthy  frankness, 
tender  appreciation,  and  majestic  famil- 
iarity which  cannot  be  trifled  with  \pr. 
Farker\ 


HOMILETIGS. 


Consecration  and  Sacrifices. — Verses  20-31. 

I.  Sacrifices  expiatory.  Sin-offerings  to  atone  and  make  worshipper 
acceptable  to  God.  Unusually  comprehensive,  embracing  four  kinds,  and  seven 
of  each  kind,  for  sms  conscious  and  unconscious.  II.  Sacrifices  for  all 
classes.  "  For  the  kingdom  and  for  the  sanctuary  and  for  Judah  " — i.e.,  for 
king  orjroyal  house,  ministers  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  people  of  Judah  generally. 
"Atonement  for  all  Israel"  as  well  as  Judah  (ver.  24).  Ill,  Sacrifices 
dedicatory.  After  sin-offering,  the  burnt-offering  presented,  an  expression 
of  self-dedication  to  God.  This  a  natural  order— acceptance,  gratitude,  and  self- 
consecration.  ''Now  that  you  have  consecrated  yourselves  unto  the  Lord, 
come  near  and  bring  sacrifices"  (ver.  31).  Sacrifices  abundant,  generous,  and 
appropriate.  IV.  Sacrifices  accompanied  with  symbolic  rites. 
1.  Laying  on  of  hands,  confessing  guilt.  2.  Instruments  of  music  expressing 
gladness.  3.  Bowing  of  heads  denoting  reverence  and  adoration.  The  solemnities 
of  the  day  memorable,  typical,  surprising,  and  a  proof  of  God's  presence.  "  For 
the  thing  was  done  suddenly." 

Music  and  Christian  Service. — Verses  25-30. 

This  scene  beautiful  and  suggestive.  Old  life  forsaken ;  new  forms  of  worship 
resumed,  fresh  sacrifices  presented,  and  monarch  and  people  working  together 

281 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES,  [chap.  xxix. 


with  gladness  and  rejoicing.  I.  Christian  service  begins  with  fresh 
demands  upon  our  life.  "Now  ye  have  consecrated  yourselves,  come 
near."  Once  far  off;  now  sin  forsaken ;  and  all  dedicated  to  God.  Near  in  faith 
and  fellowship,  in  purpose  and  daily  life.  Fresh  demands  upon  time,  talents,  and 
efforts.  Sacrifices  not  to  self  and  world,  but  to  God  and  his  cause.  Self- 
surrender,  represented  by  burnt-offerings,  perpetually  needful.  Will  and  life 
given  to  another.  "  Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice."  II.  Christian 
service  is  a  joyful  service  when  these  demands  are  satisfied. 

"  The  congregation  brought  in  sacrifices  and  thank-ofterings."  No  joy  in  appro- 
priating to  self  and  withholding  from  God  what  is  due.  No  happy  life  except  in 
self-devotion  to  God  and  in  doing  good  to  others.  To  live  in,  and  to  be  of  no 
service  to  the  world,  a  terrible  thing.  "  The  liberal  soul  (lit.,  the  soul  of  blessing; 
i.e.,  that  blesses  others)  shall  be  made  fat"  (satisfied  and  gladdened)  (Prov. 
xi.  25).  Always  a  re-active  influence  in  temporal  and  spiritual  matters ;  action 
and  reciprocal  influence  the  law  of  the  universe.  Withhold  it,  will  tend  to  poverty 
of  spirit ;  "  give  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you,  good  measure,  <fec." 

**  The  truly  generous  is  the  truly  wise, 
And  he  who  loves  not  others  lives  unblest." 

III.   This  joyful  service  is  the  strength  of  Christian  life. 

Joy  from  duty  not  mere  luxury  or  excitement,  but  help,  strength  to  more 
perfect  work.  Whatever  God  is  for  us — life,  light,  love,  and  strength — ^it  is 
that  we  may  be  the  same  for  others.  This  is  Nehemiah's  gospel.  "  The  joy  of 
the  Lord  is  your  strength."  Joy  creates  enthusiasm,  elevates  above  despair  and 
opposition,  and  develops  all  our  resources.  As  bodies  expand  through  heat,  so 
the  soul  is  enlarged,  and  effort  prompted  under  the  genial  influence  of  joy. 

God's  Preparation. — Verse  36. 

God  prepares  in  nature  and  in  providence.  Men  gradually  fitted  and  appointed 
for  their  work.  Our  duty  to  watch  and  enter  upon  work  when  discovered. 
I.  God  seen  in  removing  difficulties  in  the  work.  Idolatry 
prevalent,  and  nation  corrupted.  The  people  indisposed,  and  officials  reluctant ; 
the  work  itself  great  and  perhaps  thought  impossible  by  many.  II,  God  seen 
in  helping  on  the  work  to  completion.  "The  service  of  the  Lord 
was  set  in  order."  Not  only  difficulties  removed,  but  strength  given  to  finish. 
If  priests  could  not  be  found,  Levites  were  ready  (ver.  34).  No  delay,  no  excuse 
given.  Early  in  the  king's  reign  the  work  began,  expeditiously  was  it  finished, 
"  for  the  thing  was  done  suddenly."  The  people  seen  gathered  together.  God 
gave  them  "a  free  heart"  and  they  worked  willingly,  "  This  is  the  Lord's  doing 
and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes." 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  12-19.    The  thoroughness  of  first  in  rank  and  position  not  always 

the  work  done,  the  readiness  and  num-  fit  for  service  and  most  willing  to  enter 

ber  of  those  who  engaged   in  it,  the  it. 

method  in  which  they  proceeded  (ver.  Vers.  11,30,32-34.     Popular  gene- 

15),  and  the  delights  that  spring  from  rosily  a/ad  cold  officialism.     The  "free 

its  completion.  heart "  of  the  people  a  contrast  to  the 

Yer.    13.     On    triple    division    of  negligence  of  officials.     A    reflection 

musical  Levites,  see  1  Chr.  xxv.  1-6  ;  seems  to  be  cast  upon  their  dilatoriness 

2  Ohr.  V,  12.     When  God  has  a  work  and   negligence   in  sanctifying  them- 

to  do,  he  raises  up  men  to  do  it.     But  selves   (ch.  xxx.    15),   of  which   they 

282 


CHAP.  XXX.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY,  CHRONICLES, 


were  afterwards  ashamed  "  Gene- 
rosity may  sometimes  confuse  olfficialism, 
so  that  people  may  sometimes  get 
ahead  of  the  Levites"  [Z>r.  Parkerl. 
Priests  should  be  examples  to  others, 
never  be  satisfied  with  worldly  emolu- 
■ments,  grossed  in  earthly  afifairs,  and 


forget  the  demands  of  the  people  and 
the  duties  of  their  calling.  The  higher 
the  position,  the  greater  should  be  the 
readiness  to  work. 

**  In  persons  grafted  in  a  serions  trust, 
Negligence  is  a  crime." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  3-7.  Door  opening.  To 
cleanse  the  sanctuary  is  to  pray. 
When  Hezekiah  opened  the  doors,  by 
that  very  act  he  worshipped;  when 
Hezekiah  repaired  the  doors  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord,  he  wrought  a 
wondrous  work  upon  the  heart  that 
was  sore  by  reason  of  its  long-con- 
tinued need  and  painful  solitude.  To 
repair  the  building  is  to  worship  the 
living  God  ;  to  give  a  cup  of  cold  water 
to  a  disciple  for  Christ's  sake  is  to 
oblige  herein  [Dr.  Parker], 

Vers.  10,  11.  Energy.  Energy  of 
character  has  always  a  power  to 
evoke  energy  in  others.  It  acts  through 
sympathy,  one  of  the  most  influential 
of  human  agencies.  The  zealous,  ener- 
getic man  unconsciously  carries  others 
along  with  him.  His  example  is  con- 
tagious and  compels  imitation.  He 
exercises  a  sort  of  electric  power  through 
every  fibre — flows  into  the  nature  of 
those  about  him  and  makes  them  give 
out  sparks  of  fire  [Smiles]. 

Yers.  14-17.  Order,  Order  is  the 
best  manager  of  time ;  for  unless  work 
is  properly  arranged  time  is  lost ;  and 
once  lost  it  is  gone  for  ever.    Order 


illustrates  many  important  subjects. 
Thus  obedience  to  the  moral  and 
material  law  is  order.  Kegard  for  the 
rights  and  obligations  of  all  is  order. 
Virtue  is  order.  The  world  began 
with  order,  chaos  prevailed  before  the 
establishment  of  order  [Smiles]. 

Vers.  25-28.  Instruments.  Music 
has  a  most  humanising  eflect.  The 
cultivation  of  the  art  has  a  most 
favourable  influence  upon  public 
morals.  It  furnishes  a  source  of 
pleasure  in  every  family.  It  gives 
home  a  new  attraction.  It  makes 
social  intercourse  more  cheerful. 
Father  Mathew  followed  up  his  tem- 
perance movement  by  a  singing  move- 
ment. He  promoted  the  establish- 
ment of  musical  clubs  all  over  Ireland, 
for  he  felt  that,  as  he  had  taken  the 
people's  whisky  from  them,  he  must 
give  them  some  wholesome  stimulus  in 
its  stead.  He  gave  them  music.  Sing- 
ing classes  were  established,  to  refine 
the  taste,  soften  the  manners,  and 
humanise  the  mass  of  the  Irish  people. 
But  we  fear  that  the  example  set  by 
Father  Mathew  has  already  been 
forgotten  [Smiles], 


OHAFTEB  XXX. 


Cbitioal  NoTKf.]  Preparations  for  PasBOVtr  (vers.  1-12) ;  the  keeping  of  Passover 
(vers.  13-17) ;  H.*8  prayer  for  unclean  persona  (vers.  lS-22) ;  the  solemnities  of  the  second 
seven  days. 

Vers.  1-12. — Preparations  for  Passover.  Sent  messengers.  Special  letters  to  remote  and 
near  tribes  (e/.  ch.  zxiz.  24  for  object  in  sending  them).    Yer.  2.  Second  month,  a  time 

283 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxx. 


which  allowed  for  purification  of  priests,  proclamation  to  he  made  through  all  Israel  and 
lor  absentees.  Yer.  3.  Other  reasons  assigned.  PZeaserf,  i.*.,  arrangements  made.  Ver.  6. 
Order  made  and  proclaimed  from  Dan  to  Beer.,  i.e.,  the  extent  of  Israel ;  "for  they  had 
not  (for  some  time)  kept  the  Passover  in  full  numbers,  as  required  (written)  by  law/  Ver. 
6.  Postg^  runners  or  bearers  of  letters  (ch.  xxiii.  1,  2).  Remnant,  portions  of  people  had 
been  removed  by  Assyrian  invasions  to  Asshur  (2  Ki.  xv.  20),  the  rest  now  tributary 
(2  Ki.  xvii.  1-4).  Yer.  8.  Stiffnecked,  hardening  neck  (Deut.  x.  16) ;  gesture  of  disobedi- 
ence (2  Ki.  xvii.  14 ;  Ezra  x.  19 ;  Ezek.  xvii.  18).  Yield,  lit.,  give  the  hand,  i.e.,  submit 
(1  Chr.  xxix.  24;  Lam.  v.  6).  Yer.  9.  Find,  "  shall  be  for  compassion  before  your  captors." 
Ver.  10.  Zeh.^  extreme  north.  Yer.  11.  Divers,  certain ;  representatives  of  five  tribes  sent. 
Yer.  12.  Hand,  direct  ascription  to  God  for  united  national  response. 

Vers.  13-17. — The  keeping  of  Passover.  Yer.  14.  Altars  which  Ahaz  had  erected  in  city 
(oh,  xxviii.  24)  partly  for  victims  and  partly  for  incense — a  sign  of  earnestness.  Yer  15. 
Ashamed,  behind  in  zeal  for  worship  or  given  to  idolatry,  put  now  to  blush  by  forwardness 
of  people  ;  received  burnt-offerings  from  offerers  at  doors  of  inner  court,  and  took  them 
to  brazen  nltar  in  front  of  porch.  Ver.  16.  Hand,  Levites  being  obliged  to  help  in 
slaying  muxjerous  victims.  Ver.  17.  Charge,  because  unsanctified  people  could  not  do  it 
themselves. 

Vers.  18-22.— JTis  prayer  for  unclean.  Otherwise^  i.e.,  contrary  to  Mosaic  rites.  Ver.  19. 
Prepareth,  so  is  sincere.  Ver.  20.  Healed,  forgave  (sin)  uncleanness  and  delivered  from 
physical  or  moral  consequences.  Ver.  21.  Seven,  according  to  requirement  (Ex.  xii.  18  ; 
xxiii.  15) ;  loud,  strong  instruments,  ascribing  might  to  the  Lord.  Ver.  22.  Comfortably, 
encouragingly  to  heart.    Confession  of  past  sin  and  keeping  feast  full  appointed  time. 

Vers.  23-27. — Solemnities  of  second  seven  days.  Took,  resolved  to  imitate  Solomon's  feast 
at  dedication  of  temple  (1  Ki.  viii.  65).  Ver.  24.  Give,  lit.,  gave  as  heave-offering 
(cf.  ch.  XXXV.  7).  Thousand,  victims  liberally  offered  by  kings  and  princes,  majiy  priests 
sanctified  themselves  to  overtake  this  extraordinary  abundance.  Strangers  responded  to 
invitation,  and  not  such  a  national  feast  since  time  of  Solomon  (cf.  Josiah's  Passover, 
2  Ki.  xxiii.  22,  23).  Ver.  27.  Blessed,  benediction  of  priests,  who  were  entitled  to  bless, 
reached  to  heaven  itself  (ef.  Num.  yL  24-26). 

H0MILETIG8. 

The  Proclamation  op  the  Passover. — VeraeB  1-12. 

Division  of  kingdom,  disorders  which  followed,  and  prevalent  idolatry  prevented 
national  observance  for  long  time.     Hezekiah  desired  to  revive  it,   consulted 
princes  and  chief  men,  met  with  hearty  response,  and  resolved  to  proclaim  it. 
I.  The  invitation  to  keep  the  passover.    1.  Official^  from  kings  and 
princes.     2.  Special,  by  decree  (ver.  5).     3.  Pressing,  by  letters  and  proclama- 
tion.     4.  Universal,  to  Israel  as  well  as  Judah.      Indicating  zeal,  generosity, 
and  love.      5.  Timely,  though  temple,  priests,  and  people  not  duly  sanctified 
by  14th  day  of  first  month  Msan.     Yet  only  postponed  till  14th  day  of  second 
month,  not  a  whole  year.    II.  The  motives  to  comply  with  this 
invitation.     In  passionate  language  he  urges  personal  obedience  and  ready 
response.     1.  Their  covenant  relation  urged  them.     God  forsaken,  though  **the 
Lord  God  of  their  fathers  "  and  **  the  Lord  their  God."     2.  Their  present  con- 
dition wged  them.     Trans -Jordanic  region  desolate.     Two    tribes  in  captivity 
would  find  compassion  from  their  captors  (Ps.  cvi.  46),  and  God  would  return 
unto  the  remnant.     3.  If  they  complied  God  would  be  gracious.     "  Gracious  and 
merciful,  &c."  (ver.  9).     His  fierce  wrath  would  be  turned  away  if  they  sought 
him  (Joel  ii.  13).  4.  li  they  refused  God  would  he  Q.ngry.     III.  The  response 
which  was  given  to  the  invitation.    A  twofold  reception.    1.  Some 
were  ready  and  willing.    "  Divers  of  Asher  and  Manasseh  and  of  Zebulun  humbled 
themselves  and  came  to  Jerusalem."     "  In  Judah  "  God's  power  seen  in  zeal  and 
unanimity  of  people.     2.  Others  mocked  and  insulted.     Not  merely  refused,  but 
openly  derided.     "  Laughed  them  to  scorn."     A  type  of  gospel  message,  "  a 
savour  of  life  unto  life  or  of  death  unto  death."     Which  to  you  I     Neutrality 
impossible.     Are  you  refusing  or  yielding  ?     "  They  mocked  the  messengers  of 
284 


CHAP.  XXX.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


God  and  despised  his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord  arose  against  his  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy." 

Hezekiah's  Invitation. — Verses  1-12. 

Hezekiah  determined  to  keep  passover  not  in  selfish  spirit  within  narrow 
limits  of  Judah  or  Jerusalem,  but  commanded  "that  the  burnt-offering  and  the 
sin-offering  should  be  made  for  all  Israel:'  In  this  we  learn— I.  The  centre 
of  unity  for  all  God's  people.  "  The  house  of  the  Lord."  The  sanctu- 
ary the  centre  round  which  all  Israel  should  gather.  Through  Jeroboam's  act 
three  centres,  Jerusalem,  Bethel,  and  Dan.  Hezekiah  pointed  out  ^  one. 
"Turn  again  to  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers."  Not  places  of  worship,  cities  of 
refuge,  creeds  or  denominations,  but  Christ  the  centre  and  bond  of  unity.  One 
Lord,  one  table,  one  object.  II.  The  method  of  securing  this  unity. 
1.  Cherish  and  cultivate  a  spirit  of  love.  Hezekiah  not  cold  and  exclusive,  thought 
not  of  his  own  people  merely,  but  of  those  in  connection  with  him.  Too  much 
sectarianism  and  bigotry  separate  true  believers  one  from  another  and  repel  the 
world.  2.  By  personal  effort  endeavour  to  bring  it  about.  Discountenance  every- 
thing that  promotes  separation.  Encourage  and  incite  in  minds  of  all  Christians 
a  desire  to  be  found  together.  Not  the  purpose  of  God  that  his  people  should 
be  "  scattered  abroad "  in  bitter  feelings,  sectarian  feuds,  and  selfish  actions. 
Working  to  secure  the  unity  of  the  body,  we  co-operate  with  God  for  a  divine 
object.  That  "  he  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that  were 
scattered  abroad.*' 

The  Observance  op  the  Passover. — Verse*  13-26. 

I.  At  an  unusual  though  legal  time.     "In  the  second  month." 

"  At  that  time  "  (in  the  first  month,  ch.  xxix.  3),  they  could  not  keep  passover, 
because  priests  had  not  sanctified  themselves  in  sufficient  numbers,  nor  had  the 
people  assembled.  King  and  princes  consulted  not  to  delay  another  year,  but 
to  hold  it  second  month.  Zeal  of  people  might  cool  down.  Present  benefit 
desired.  Let  circumstances  give  way  to  realities.  Never  neglect  a  greater  for  a 
smaller  good.  II.  By  an  unprecedented  number  of  victims. 
Hezekiah  gave  a  thousand  bullocks  and  seven  thousand  sheep.  The  princes  gave 
a  thousand  bullocks  and  ten  thousand  sheep.  These  besides  the  stock  of  sacri- 
ficial animals  brought  by  the  people  which  soon  were  exhausted.  Pious  example 
should  ever  incite.  Pich  will  never  be  poorer  for  genuine  Hberality.  III.  By 
the  great  numbers  who  attended.  Some  refused,  but  others  gladly 
observed  passover.  All  Judah  with  priests  and  Levites,  some  from  Israel,  the 
northern  kingdom,  and  strangers — probably  proselytes  from  both  Judah  and 
Israel.  "  A  very  great  congregation  "  (ver.  13),  to  whom  God's  arm  was  revealed 
(Is.  liii.  1),  and  who  were  made  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power.  No  passover 
like  this  since  the  great  festival  of  Solomon,  which  lasted  fourteen  days,  for 
excess  of  Levitical  zeal,  unbounded  joy,  and  extent  of  duration. 

Hezekiah's  Prayer. — Verses  18-20. 

Passover  kept,  but  remarkable  is  the  description,  "  otherwise  than  it  was 
written."  Many  involved  in  ceremonial  or  moral  uncleanness,  and  unfit  to 
Blay  their  own  lambs  ;  needed  intercession  of  the  king,  who  proved  himself  to  be 
a  true  ruler  and  a  true  priest  for  the  people.  Learn — I,  That  purity  of 
heart  is  required  for  sanctuary  worship.    Outward  cleansing  of 

285 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  Lohap.  xxx. 


Old  Testament  a  symbol  of  inward.  Truth  in  the  inward  parts,  sincerity  of 
heart  and  mind  needful.  Worship  is  not  sensual,  but  a  living  fellowship  with 
Christ  ]  for  this,  preparation  must  be  made.  "  If  thou  prepare  thine  heart,  and 
stretch  out  thine  hands  towards  him,  <kc."  (Job  xi.  13).  II.  That  the  best 
preparation  in  sanctuary  -worship  is  defective.  Not  what  law 
requires,  not  up  to  spiritual  ideal,''  according-  to  the  purification  of  the  sanctuary." 
Iniquity  cleaves  to  oin*  holy  things,  and  "  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth, 
that  doeth  good  and  sinneth  not."  Best  oflerings,  holiest  worshippers  unworthy 
— need  the  intercession,  the  incense  of  the  great  IIigh-Prie>t.  III.  That 
when    the    heart  is    sincere   God  will  hear  prayer.    God  is 

Jehovah  the  good,  kind  and  merciful ;  proclaiming  goodness  in  forgiving  iniquity, 
transgression  and  sin.  Prayer  to  Him  will  be  heard.  "  And  the  Lord  hearkenod 
to  Hezekiah."  God  ever  condescending  to  the  upright  in  shortcomings  and 
defects.  But  this  no  excuse  for  negligence  in  preparation,  for  reliance  upon  duty 
performed  as  well  as  we  can  perform  it,  nor  any  ground  for  despair  on  account  of 
weakness  or  imperfection.  "  If  there  be  first  a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted 
according  to  that  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  that  he  hath  not." 

A  Second  Joyful  Month. — Verses  23-26. 

A  voluntary  service  made  in  addition  to  requii^ements  of  law,  a  fruit  and  sign 
of  abundant  zeal  and  gladness.  This  illustrates — I.  The  true  method  of 
deliverance  from  sectarianism.  No  form  prescribed.  Law  not 
exactly  obeyed.  The  sweetness  of  unity  in  decided  hostility  to  separation, 
idolatry,  and  narrow-mindedness.  Hospitality  warmed,  the  nation  enthusiastic 
and  one  ;  numbers  grow,  and  pardon  multiplies  at  the  feast.  II.  The  true 
principle  of  all  reformation.  Not  to  pull  down  what  is  false,  but  to 
build  up  what  is  true.  Assemble  Israel  round  the  altar,  lead  them  into  the 
presence  of  the  God  of  their  fathers  ;  then  a  mighty  power  will  go  forth  from 
Jerusalem  to  sweep  the  land  from  idols,  upset  the  seats  of  superstition,  and 
confirm  righteous  works.  Not  to  resuscitate  fallen  religion  by  novel  measures,  to 
promote  excitement,  and  raise  up  a  denomination,  but  to  return  to  appointed 
means,  regularly,  orderly,  and  reverently  observe  divine  worship,  and  restore 
to  freedom  and  efficiency  old  institutions  by  which  God  will  raise  the  Church 
and  bless  the  nation.    III.  The  only  way  to  secure  service  out  of 

worship.  "When  all  this  was  finished,  all  Israel  that  were  present  went 
out  to  the  cities  of  Judah,  and  brake  the  images  in  pieces,"  (fee.  (ch.  xxxi.  1). 
Altars  not  destroyed  in  going  up  to  Jerusalem.  They  needed  the  experience  of 
the  feast,  the  blessings  of  worship.  Hezekiah  began  with  God  in  sanctuary, 
Israel  pursued  the  same  order.  Power  to  reform  and  execute  judgment  derived 
from  God's  presence.  Luther  and  Knox  prayerful  in  closet,  therefore  successful 
in  reform.     "Not  by  might,  <kc." 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Vers.  14—17.    Removal  of  altars.     1.  quence  of  transgression  they  had  cause 

Destruction    after    construction.      Evil  to   fear    physical    and    moral    disease 

taken  away  before  good  accomplished.  (Lev.  xv.  31).     2.  God   the  physician. 

2.  Official  lukewarmness  to  remove  evil.  Will  heal  this  moral  sickness.  "  The 
Its  widespread   and    its    future    end.  Lord  healed  and  restored  to  penitence 

3.  Personal  revival  to  stir  up  others.  and  health."     This  revealed   probably 
Vers.  18-20.     Hez's  prayer.    1.  Sin      by  a  prophet  (c/l  2  Ki.  xix.  20;  xx.  5). 

brings  sickness.    Ceremonial   unclean-  Yer.  22.     Hez.^s    encouragement    to 

ness   exposure   to   danger.    In   conse-      Levites.    Work  holy  and  great.    Unity 
286 


CHAP.    XXXI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


and  resources  of  all  to  accomplish  it. 
Hence  "  H.  spake  comfortably."  I. 
Qualifications  required,  (a)  Knowledge^ 
good  and  extensive,  ritual  and  musical. 
(h)  Wisdom  to  execute  and  consecrate 
it  to  God's  service,  (c)  Humility  before 
God.  *'  Knowledge  is  proud  because 
she  knows  so  much,  wisdom  humble 
because  she  knows  no  more."  II.  The 
advantages  of  possessing  these  qualifica- 
tions, (a)  AbiHty  to  encourage  others. 
(h)  Facility  to  arrange  and  conduct 
public  worship. 


Vers.  1-27.     Reviewing   whole,  we 
have — I.  A  revival  of  theocratic  spirit. 

II.  Destructioti  of  idolatrous  customs. 

III.  Establishment  of  true  unity  in 
public  worship.  IV.  A  pattern  lUfor- 
mation,  in  its  benevolent  design,  in 
the  spirit  in  which  it  was  conducted, 
and  in  the  priestly  blessing  it  secured. 
Benedictions  fell  from  lips  of  leaders, 
praises  of  the  people  ascended  to  heaven, 
the  nation  restored  to  God  "  and  great 
joy." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXX. 


Vers.  1-12.  Zeal  ("  My  sons,  be  not 
negligent")  should  be  inspired  by 
principles,  not  by  circumstances.  Yet 
the  value  of  circumstances  must  not 
be  underrated,  for  they  are  means 
which  God  employs  to  awaken  our 
attention  to  duty.  It  is  not  difficult 
to  trace  the  course  of  events  through 
which  the  dying  embers  of  religious 
zeal,  and  especially  of  zeal  for  Christian 
missions,  have  been  kindled  by  the 
breath  of  God.  We  may  not  overlook 
the  happy  results  from  the  command- 
ing influences  of  leading  men  and  the 
powerful  impressions  produced  on  the 
lethargy  into  which  the  public  mind 
is  ever  sinking,  by  the  stirring  appeals 
of  pulpit,  platform,  and  press.  By  such 
means  it  has  pleased  God,  in  a  degree, 
to  conquer  public  opinion,  and  they 
must  continue  to  be  plied  with  un- 
abating  energy  till  the  conquest  is 
complete  [W.  H.  Stowel,  D.D.\ 

Ver.  22.    Confession. 

"  What  better  can  we  do  than  to  the  place 
Repairing  where  he  judged  us,  prostrate 
faU 


Before  him  reverent,  and  there  confess 
Humbly  our  faults,  and  pardon  beg  with 
tears  "  {Miltoii]. 

Vers.  23-27.  Universal  joy.  I  am 
not  unmindful  of  the  assertion  that  the 
God  of  the  Hebrews  is  usually  thought 
of  as  a  Being  of  preternatural  severity, 
overwhelming  men  by  his  majesty, 
begetting  profound  and  soul  filling  awe 
by  his  greatness,  dwelling  in  the  thick 
darkness,  making  clouds  his  chariot, 
and  sweeping  down  on  his  foes  like  a 
cyclone.  But  this  representation  is  one- 
sided and  unfair  to  a  religion  which 
had  more  festivals  than  fasts,  more 
psalms  than  prophecies,  and  more 
triumphs  than  despairs.  By  the  side 
of  intolerance  of  sin  there  is  mercy 
that  reacheth  to  the  very  heavens, 
and  near  to  the  righteousness  that  is 
like  the  great  mountains  there  is  a 
forgiveness  that  inspires  hopeful  peti- 
tion, even  out  of  depth  of  sufferings 
and  misfortune  [Dr,  J,  Clifford], 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Critical  Notes.]  Destruction  of  idolatry  (ver.  1)  ;  H.  appoints  courses  and  contributions 
(vers.  2-10)  ;  and  arranges  the  chambers  and  officers  (vers.  11-21). 

Ver.  I.— Idol,  destroyed  {cf.  2  Ki.  xviii.  4).  After  festival,  all  Jtidah  and  Benj.,  i.e.  from 
southern  kingdom;  in  Eph.  and  Man.,  i.e.,  in  northern  kingdom.  Images,  statues  of 
Baal ;  groves^  stocks  representing  Ashtaroth  (xiv.  3) ;  utterly  destroyed,  had  made  an  end 

287 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxxl 


Vers.  2-10. — if.  ajppoints  courses  and  contributions.  Courses  as  appointed  by  David  (1  Ghr, 
xxiii.  6 ;  xxiv.  1).  The  tents,  i.e.,  within  the  gates  (precincts)  of  the  Temple.  Ver.  3. 
King's  portion.  H.  set  example  in  giving  tithes  (c/.  ch.  xxxii.  27-29  for  what  possession 
consisted).  Ver.  4.  Portion.  Having  set  example,  people  called  to  do  their  part. 
Priests,  i.e.,  first-fruits  (Num.  xviii.  12-18)  and  tithe  [ib.  21-24) ;  encouraged,  i.e. fth&t  they, 
priests  and  Levites,  might  devote  themselves  wholly  to  their  proper  work,  the  service  of 
sanctuary  and  teaching  of  God's  law  (ch.  xvii.  7-9),  and  not  engage  in  secular  occupations 
(c/.  Neh.  xiii.  10-14)  [Speak.  Gom.^.  Ver.  5.  Improved  state  of  feeling  stirred  up  to  gene- 
rosity ;  honey  (dates),  and  tithes  brought  from  Israel  in  Jerusalem.  Others  (\er.  6)  in 
country  districts  brought  first-fruits  and  tithe  of  sheep  and  oxen ;  heaps  upon  heaps. 
Ver.  7.  Seventh  month,  which  completed  the  harvesting.  Ver.  9.  Questioned.  Whether  all 
he  saw  was  sufficient  to  maintain  priests  and  Levites.  Ver.  10.  Azar.,  possibly  A.  of 
ch.  xxvi.  17  ;  replied  that  there  was  enough,  and  that  the  people  were  grateful  to  Jehovah 
for  his  goodness. 

Vers.  11-20. — H.  provides  store-chambers  and  officers.  Chambers  (storehouses)  always 
among  rooms  (1  Ki.  vi.  5)  or  among  outer  buildings  attached  to  courts.  But  disused  of 
late  years,  required  to  be  prepared  afresh.  Faithfully,  acting  carefully  and  honestly,  not 
appropriating  for  common  use  (ch.  xix.  9).  Shimei  (ch.  xxix.  14).  Ver.  13.  Jehiel  and 
Mah.  (ch.  xxix.  14).  Ver.  14.  Doorkeeper  tov73i,rdL  east  (1  Chr.  ix.  18);  freeioill,  i.e. ,  voluntary 
offerings  to  God  (Deut,  xii.  17)  ;  holy  things,  portion  of  sin-offerings,  which  had  to  be  eaten 
by  priests  in  a  holy  place  (Lev.  vi.  10-22 ;  vii.  6).  Ver.  15.  Six  Levites  situated  in  cities 
of  priests  to  distribute  to  priestly  families,  old  or  young,  great  or  small,  their  due  share  of 
temple  offerings.  Those  at  Jerusalem  obtained  their  share  at  the  temple.  Ver.  17.  "  The 
writer  here  proceeds  to  state  nature  of  lists  which  guided  officers  who  made  distributions. 
Three  enumerated — one  of  priests  made  out  according  to  families  ;  one  of  Levites,  includ- 
ing all  above  twenty  years  of  age,  and  made  out  according  to  courses ;  and  a  third  of 
priestly  and  Levitical  families,  containing  wives,  sons,  and  daughters  of  both  priest^  and 
Levites  indiscriminately  \_Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  19.  In  fields,  not  even  country  priests  and 
Levites  neglected. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Hez.'s  thoroughness.  Good  acting  as  servant  of  Jehovah  ;  integrity  and 
benevolence  attested.  All  his  hearty  a  perfect  heart  (cf.  ch.  xix.  9 ;  2  Ki.  xx.  3 ;  la. 
xxxviii.  3). 

HOMILETICS. 

A  Popular  Movement. — Verse  !• 

Many  indications  in  this  history  that  the  power  of  Hebrew  kings  over  people 
was  not  so  arbitrary  as  that  of  Eastern  monarchs  in  general.     Here  the  people 
began  a  movement,  a  revival,  which  ended  in  destruction  of  high  places,  and  estab- 
lishment of  one  form  of  worship.    I,  The  enthusiasm  from  which  it 
sprang.     Not  mere    excitement,  not  violence  and   tumult,  but  holy  fervour. 
Iconoclasm  came  from  religious  enthusiasm  ;  inspiration  from  God  {en  and  theos). 
Different  from  the  wild  fanaticism  of  heathen  gods.     All  leform  from  deep 
religious  conviction,  from  real  intercourse  with  God.     The  heart  must  be  filled 
before  the  hand  can  strike.    II.  The  extent  to  which  it  reached. 
Jerusalem  cleansed  before  Passover,  and  all  signs  of  idolatry  removed.   Now  the 
land  had  to  be  purged.     In  the  northern  and  southern  kingdoms  the  movement 
spread.  Amendment  must  begin  in  the  heart  first,  the  centre  and  source  of  action  ; 
outward  sins   may  be    forsaken,  and  the  heart    unrenewed.     "  Cleanse  your 
heart,"    and    then    "  make   your   ways   and   your   doings   good."     III.    The 
thoroughness  with  which  it  was  finished.    They  began  and  made 
a  complete    finish ;    did  not  give    up,  nor    act  partially,  "  all  was   finished.** 
Destruction   entire.     "Statues"  broken   in    pieces,    "the   groves   cut   down.** 
"  High  places,"  time-honoured  centres  removed  ;  "  altars,"  and  all  remnants  of 
idolatry,    "  utterly  destroyed."     Every  evil  must  be  forsaken,  no  sin  spared 
through  favour  or   affection.     "  Ephraim  shall  say,  What  have  I  to  do  any 
more  with  idols  ? "    IV.  The  national  peace  which  resulted  fron^ 
its  completion.     "  Then  the  children  of  Israel  returned,"  &c.  Though  long 
absent,  they  could  not  return  and  feel  secure,  "  every  man  in  his  possession," 
until  images  were  destroyed.     Idols  no  longer  their  gods  and  defence.     They 
288 


CHAP,  xxxi.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES. 


returned  to  Him  from  whom  they  had  deeply  revolted.  "  For  in  that  day 
every  man  cast  away  his  idols  of  silver,  and  his  idols  of  gold,  which  Ids  own 
hands  had  made  unto  him  for  a  sin"  (Is.  xxxi.  7 ;  ii.  20). 

Hezekiah    Establishes    Orderly    Performance    op     Temple    Worship. — 

Verses  2-10. 

H.  now  turns  attention  to  public  worship,  suspension  of  which  had  disarranged 
the  courses  appointed  by  David,  which  were  intended  to  relieve  each  other  in 
perpetual  succession  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  6  ;  xxiv.  1).  I.  Tlie  arrangeniGllt 
of  priests  and  Levites  in  courses.  The  order  settled  afresh  in 
wliich  they  should  undertake  their  parts  of  service.  Every  man  found  his 
work,  put  into  his  place,  and  made  to  contribute  to  the  whole.  '•  Levites  after 
their  courses;  "  priests  "  for  burnt-ofierings  and  for  peace-offerings,"  and  Levites 
to  "  minister  "  to  priests,  or  ''  give  thanks  and  praise."  But  place,  time,  and 
position  nothing  without  heart.  They  must  represent  the  man  himself. 
Allegiance  to  God  inspires  worship,  and  worship  inspires  and  sanctions  duty. 
No  motives  so  strong  and  overpowering  as  those  which  worship  kindles  and 
sustains  ;  self -approbation,  self-respect,  regard  for  esteem  of  others  fail  to  take 
hold  of  conscience  and  life.  Faith  in  the  ever-present  God,  actual  communion 
with  the  Father  of  Spirits,  will  create  homage  in  worship,  and  faithfulness 
in  sanctuary  work.  II.  The  Commands  for  payment  of  dues 
from  the  people.  When  every  one  had  his  proper  place  assigned  him,  an 
edict  was  issued  for  the  regular  payment  of  dues  for  revenues  of  the  temple. 
1 .  llie  king  set  an  examjile.  Contributions  from  privy  purse  and  royal  estate  to 
defray  expenses  of  altar.  A  generous  act,  honouring  God,  and  relieving  his 
people;  after  the  example  of  David  and  Solomon  before  him  (ch.  viii.  14;  1  Ki. 
ix.  25).  Kings  not  exempt ;  may  be  noble  examples  of  liberality  and  duty  to 
their  subjects.  2.  The  people  responded  to  the  call.  Formerly  the  sacred  tiibute 
entirely  neglected  or  withheld  by  the  people  because  misappropriated  by 
idolatrous  princes  ;  now  improved  state  of  public  feeling  prompts  to  leady  com- 
pliance. First-fruits  and  tithes  poured  in  from  all  parts  of  Judah  and  Israel, 
which  astonished  the  king,  proved  sufficient  for  the  priests,  and  expressed 
gratitude  to  God,  whose  law  was  obeyed  (of.  Ex.  xxiii.  19 ;  Num.  xviii.  21),  who 
had  crowned  the  year  with  his  goodness  and  mercy.  Loyal  hearts  secure  liberal 
contributions ;  liberal  contributions  will  secure  God's  blessing.  "  Bring  ye  all 
the  tithes  into  the  store-house,  that  there  may  be  meat  in  mine  house,  and  prove 
me  now  herewith,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  if  I  will  not  open  you  the  windows 
of  heaven  and  pour  (empty)  you  out  a  blessing,  that  there  shall  not  be  room 
enough  to  receive  it." 

Hezekiah'8  Provision  of  Store  Chambers. — Verses  11-19. 

I.  Chambers  were  prepared.  Storehouses,  granaries,  or  cellars.  Old 
ones  had  fallen  into  decay  and  needed  repairing  or  fresh  ones  built.  Tithes  and 
offerings  not  left  exposed  in  heaps  and  disorder,  liable  to  be  wasted  or  taken 
away,  but  preserved,  consecrated  to  right  use.  People  encouraged  when  their 
contributions  are  well  received  and  properly  used.  II.  Officers  were 
appointed  to  distribute  stores.  Officers  chosen  for  different  depart- 
ments, and  distribution  made  ''by  courses"  according  to  three  lists  of  priestly 
families.  1.  hapariial  distribution.  *'  As  well  to  the  great  as  to  the  small." 
Those  near,  in  actual  attendance  (ver.  17),  and  those  "in  the  fields  of  the 
suburbs"  were  not  overlooked  (ver.  19).  2.  Cowscie?2^ww5  distribution.  "One 
list  of  priests  made  out  according  to  families ;  one  of  Levites,  including  all  above 

289 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxxi. 


twenty  years  of  age,  and  made  out  according  to  courses  ;  and  a  third  of  priestly 
and  Levitical  families  containing  wives,  sons,  and  daughters  of  both  priests 
and  Levites  indiscriminately."  **  They  sanctified  themselves,"  conscientiously 
devoted  themselves  to  their  duties,  "  in  their  (trust)  set  office,"  in  confidence  of 
support,  and  were  not  disappointed.  "  Attend  to  my  duties,"  said  Queen  Eliza- 
beth to  a  courtier,  "and  I  will  attend  to  thy  wants." 

Hezekiah's  Thoroughness  in  God's  Service. — Verses  20  and  21. 

Other  kings  good,  did  right  as  Solomon,  Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  Joash,  and  Amaziah, 
but  fell  away  from  God.  Hezekiah  remained  firm  to  the  last,  and  prospered  in 
all  things.  I,  The  WOrk  he  performed.  He  displayed  qualities  of  a 
constitutional  sovereign,  restored  cities  and  institutions  of  the  land,  and  gained 
renowii  equal  to  his  predecessors.  His  work  summarised — 1.  In  temple  service. 
2.  "  In  the  law."  3.  "  In  the  commandments."  II,  The  spirit  in  which 
he  performed  it,  1.  A  spirit  of  impartiality.  Not  religious  merely  at 
home  and  in  the  temple,  but  before  his  people,  "throughout  all  Judah."  2.  A 
spirit  of  integrity.  He  was  faithful  to  God  like  Abraham,  and  could  appeal 
to  divine  justice.  He  "  wrought  that  which  was  good^  and  right,  and  truth 
before  the  Lord  his  God."  3.  A  spirit  of  zeal.  "  He  did  it  with  all  his  heart," 
a  heart  filled  with  earnestness  and  sincerity,  and  not  shared  or  swayed  with 
rival  deities  (1  Ki.  xi.  4).  III.  The  blessing  of  God  which  followed 
its  performance.  "And  prospered."  In  expeditions  and  in  all  under- 
takings "  the  Lord  was  with  him."  He  had  enormous  wealth,  shared  in  authority 
over  northern  kingdom,  and  had  great  influence  over  surrounding  nations  {cf. 
2  Ki.  xviii.  7;  2  Chr.  xxxii.  22-29).  Hegard  to  God's  glory  will  secure  honour  here 
and  reward  hereafter. 

The  text  speaks  of  work.  Only  adopt  Hezekiah's  plan,  and  "  in  every  work 
thcit  you  begin  to  do  with  all  your  heart,  you  may  prosper."  I.  We  learn  from 
Hezekiah  a  lesson  of  concentration  of  energy.  He  did  not  begin  half  a  dozen 
things  at  once,  and  drivel  his  energy  away  upon  them  ;  he  did  not  commence 
one  thing  till  he  had  finished  another.  II.  Method  and  punctuality,  too,  seem 
to  be  indirectly  hinted  at  in  the  text,  and  they  are  almost  indispensable  to  pros- 
perity. III.  But  the  great  lesson  we  learn  from  the  text  is  the  value  of 
thoroughness  in  doing  whatever  we  undertake  with  our  whole  heart  and  doing  it 
well.  Do  nothing  as  if  it  were  trifling ;  if  it  be  so,  it  is  unworthy  of  you.  IV. 
Emulate  Hezekiah's  ardent  and  consistent  piety.  He  stands  in  the  front  rank 
among  the  saints  of  Scripture  as  a  man  of  prayer.  Every  difliculty  and  trouble 
he  took  straight  to  God,  and  spread  it  out  before  Him  \J.  Thain  Davidson^. 

HOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Yer.  1.    Religion  at  home.    Well  to  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for 

attend  public  worship,  but  "  show  piety  thee." 

at    home."       1.  Not   in   temples   and  Ver.  2.    Gates  of  the  tent — lit.,  the 

cathedrals,  churches   and   chapels,   in  camps  of  the  Lord.    JehovaKs  camp. 

ritual  and  foi'ms.    2.  Not  at  feasts,  in  "  Fitly  compared  to  a  camp,  for  the 

excitement,  numbers,  and  haste.  3.  Not  watch   and   ward   there   kept   by  the 

in     organisations    and    agencies.      In  priests,  and  for  the  convention  of  the 

quietness   and    domestic  duty ;  before  people  thither,  as  to  their  rendezvous, 

friends  and  your  own  family.     Display  to  pray,  which  is  the  chief  service  of 

the  good  received  in  ordinances  in  the  our  spiritual  warfare  "  [Trapp].    I.  Its 

strength  and  example  of  home.     "  Go  orderly    arrangements.      II.    Its  sure 

home  to  thy  friends  and  tell  them  how  defences.       III.    Its    enlisted    tribe& 
290 


CKAP.  XXXII.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


IV.  Its  central  worship.     V.  Its  great  in   secular  occupations   (c/*.  JSTeh.  xiii. 

commander.  10-14). 

Vers.  2-5.      Priestly     maintenance.  Ver.  8.    They  blessed  the  Lord.     The 

1.  Due  from  all  those  near  the  temple  source  of  all  good.  1.  For  a  bountiful 
at  Jerusalem,  those  in  cities  of  Judah.  year.     2.  For  disposition  to  consecrate 

2.  Due  according  to  the  law  of  God.  its  gifts.     3.  For  abundance  which  is 

3.  Due  that  they  might  devote  them-  left  (ver.  10).  Nothing  should  be 
selves  entirely  to  their  proper  work,  wasted,  only  right  use  of  everything 
the  service  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  brings  blessings. 

exposition  of  the  law,  and  not  engage 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Ver.  1.  Reform,  Men  cannot  strike  Vers.  20,  21.  All  his  heart.  Let  us 
finally  if  they  only  act  as  reformers,  take  heed  we  do  not  sometimes  call 
Reform  is  an  active  word,  and  is  to  be  that  zeal  for  God  and  his  gospel  which 
regarded  with  great  favour,  and  is  the  is  nothing  else  than  our  own  tempes- 
only  word  that  is  permissible  under  tuous  and  stormy  passion.  True  zeal 
some  circumstances ;  but  the  greater  is  a  sweet,  heavenly,  and  gentle  flame 
word  is  regeneration.  Heform  that  which  maketh  us  active  for  God,  but 
does  not  point  to  regeneration  is  a  always  within  the  sphere  of  love  \Cud- 
waxen  flower  that  will  melt  when  the  wortK\.  Prosperity.  Hezekiah  "  pros- 
sun  is  well  up  in  the  heavens.  It  is  pered."  God  walks  with  the  good  man. 
not  in  man  to  regenerate,  therefore ;  God  rewards  enthusiasm.  We  do  not 
this  is  the  mystery  of  God's  action  in  throw  our  divinely-inspired  passion 
the  soul.  When  the  man  is  new  the  away  to  a  cold,  selfish  world.  Our 
action  will  be  new.  The  great  process  passion  may  appear  to  be  frenzy,  en- 
does  not  begin  with  the  action,  but  thusiasm,  insanity,  but  the  reply  is 
with  the  soul.  Make  the  tree  good,  before  us,  we  can  return  to  it,  and  if 
then  the  fruit  will  be  good  [Dr,  we  can  return  with  a  sound  heart, 
Parker"].  blessed  are  we;  then  we  can  say  with 

Vers.  2-10.  Service  maintained.  This  moral  emphasis.  If  we  be  beside  our- 
caref ul  and  bountiful  provision  is  pain-  selves  it  is  to  God.  May  we  understand 
fully  deficient  in  present  church  econo-  what  it  is  to  eat  the  passover,  and 
mics,  hut  manifestly  essential  to  liberal  having  eaten  it,  to  rise  with  moral 
and  cheerful  giving.  No  rate  of  giving  dignity,  that  we  may  smite  every  un- 
to God,  short  of  sacrifice,  is  worthy  of  holy  thing  and  go  about  our  whole 
those  who  are  redeemed  by  the  price-  business  with  a  united  heart,  expecting 
less  sacrifice  of  a  Saviour's  blood,  or  is  the  blessing  of  God  which  created  the 
adequate  to  the  vast  requirements  of  a  enthusiasm  daily  to  sustain  its  holy 
ruined  world  \J,  Rossi,  fury  [Dr,  Parker], 


CHAPTER  XXXIL 

Critical  Nuies.]  Sen.  invades  Israel  (vera.  1-5);  H.'s  preparations  to  meet  Jiim 
(vers.  6-8);  Sen.'s  seductions  (vers.  9-15);  Sen.'s  letter  (vers.  16-20);  destruction  of 
Assyrian  host  (vers.  21-26)  ;  end  and  reign  of  Ilez.  (vers.  27-33).  Cf.  parallel  account  in 
2  Ki.  xviii.  13,  xix.  87,  and  Is.  xxxvi.  and  xxxvii. 

Vers.  1-5.- Sen.  invades  Israel.     After,  i.e.,  14th  year  of   Ilez.  (2  Ki.  xviii.  18).     Estab., 

201 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [cukt.  xxxil. 


faithfulness  or  truth  on  part  of  Hez.  Sen.,  Sanherib  (Sin-ahi-ir-ba  of  Assyrian  inscriptions), 
son  and  successor  of  Sargon,  the  successor  of  Shalmaneser  and  conqueror  of  Samaria. 
Wiriy  break  into  them.  Ver.  2.  Purposed  to  fight,  face  was  for  war  (cf.  ch.  xx.  3  ;  Lu.  ix. 
53).  Ver.  3.  Counsel  (cf.  xxx.  2).  Stop,  not  wholly,  but  cover  them  over  (Luther,  cover),  to 
hide  them  and  to  convey  water  underground  for  bis  own  supply  in  siege  [cf.  Ecclus.  xlviii. 
17).  Ver.  4.  Brcok,  Gihon,  brook  of  valley  of  Ben-hinnom  {cf.  ver.  30 ;  2  Ki.  xx.  22). 
Kings,  mighty  men.  Ver.  5.  Strengthened,  made  careful  inspection  of  city  defences, 
renewed  the  masonry,  raised  projecting  machines  to  the  towers,  and  specially  fortified 
Millo,  the  lower  portion  of  city. 

Vers.  6-8. — His  preparations.  Gathered  them  in  large  open  space.  Comfortably,  to  their 
heart,  inspiring  courage  and  confidence  (xxx.  22).  Ver.  7.  More  with  us  (cf.  2  Ei.  vi.  16). 
Ver.  8.  Arm  of  flesh,  designates  human  weakness  [cf.  Is.  xxxi.  3;  Jer.  xvii.  6  ;  Ps.  Ivi.  6). 
Fight  (1  Sam.  viii.  20 ;  xviii.  17).     Bested,  leaned. 

Vers.  9-15. — Sen.  seduces  the  people.  After  this.  Hez.'s  submission  (2  Ki.  xviii.  14-16) 
omitted  and  the  second  expedition  given.  Lachish  approached  (cf.  xxv.  27).  Power,  all  his 
sovereignty  with  him  {cf.  Is.  xxxiv.  1).  Judah  (2  Ki.  xviii.  27,  and  ver.  18).  Ver.  lO.  In 
siege,  in  straitness  (marg.,  fortress)  [cf.  2  Ki.  xxv.  2  ;  Ezek,  iv.  7).  Jer.  not  besieged,  but 
in  distress  and  straitened  for  supplies.  Ver.  11.  Persuade,  urge  you  to  destruction. 
Ver,  12.  {cf.  2  Ki.  xviii.  22).  One  altar.  ♦♦  A  more  distinct  reference  to  exclusive  validity 
of  worship  in  temple,  which  had  been  once  more  established  by  Hez."  [Keil] .  Miscon- 
ception of  religious  reforms  natural  to  a  heathen.  Ver.  13.  i^ai/i^rs,  ancestors.  People, 
mentioned  2  Ki.  xviii.  35  {cf.  Is.  x.  8-11  ;  xxxvi.  20;  xxxvii.  11-13).  Ver.  15.  No  God,  in 
addition  to  reviling  God  of  Israel,  and  he  adds  no  god  of  any  nation  and  kingdom  can 
rescue  from  him.  Ver.  15.  Servants,  Tartan,  Eabsaris,  and  Rabshakeh  the  spokesman 
(2  Ki.  xviii.  19-35). 

Vers.  16-20, — Sen.*8  insulting  letters.  Letter,  in  plural  referring  to  characters  in  which 
written  {Murphy~\,  or  used  as  often  of  a  single  document  {Speak.  Com.']  {cf.  2  Ki.  xix.  14). 
Facts  co-ordinated  in  real  sequence,  not  temporal.  First  speech,  then  letter,  and  lastly 
demand.  Ver.  18.  CViW,  to  produce  panic.  Ver.  19.  Against  gods  (2  Ki.  xix.  18),  classi- 
fying Jehovah  among  them.     Ver.  20.  H.'s  prayer  given  2  Ki.  xix.  15-19. 

Vers.  21-23. — Destruction  of  Assyrian  host.  Angel  (2  Ki.  xix.  35).  Mighty  men,  common 
soldiers  (as  xvii.  14)  in  distinction  from  leaders  and  princes.  Came  forth,  his  own  sons 
(2  Ki.  xviii.  37).  Ver.  22.  From  hand,  guarded,  sustained  (Gen.  xlvii.  17),  "  gave  them 
rest— round  about."    Ver.  23.  Presents,  precious  things  (xvii.  10  ;  xx.  29). 

Vers.  24-33. — Remaining  history  of  Hez.  Sickness  described  in  full  in  2  Ki.  xx.  1-11 ; 
and  Is.  xxxviii.  Sign,  going  back  of  shadow  on  dial.  Ver.  25.  Lifted  up  in  pride,  in 
display  of  treasures  (2  Ki.  xx.  13).  Ver.  26.  Wrath,  rebuked  by  Is.,  humbled  himself 
(2  Ki.  XX.  17,  18).  Ver.  27.  EicJies,  personal  estates  in  land  and  agricultural  produce; 
accumulated  treasures  as  silver  and  gold  (c/.  2  Ki.  xx.  13;  Is.  xxxix.  2),  cattle  for  stalls, 
&c.  Ver.  30.  Stopped,  upper  sources  of  Gihon.  Doivn,  underground.  This  noticed  as  a  great 
act  of  Hez.  Ver.  31.  Business,  interpreters  from  Babylon, where  astronomy  was  cultivated, 
greatly  interested  and  sent  on  embassy.  Wonder,  i.e. ,  going  back  of  shadow.  Try  {cf. 
Deut.  viii.  2).  Ver.  32.  Goodness,  good.  deedB  (Neh.  xiii.  14).  Vision,  "title  given  by  Is. 
to  his  prophecy  (Is.  i.  1)."  Chiefest,  highest,  an  excavation  above  all  other  tombs — in 
same  repository,  but  at  higher  level  -  intended  by  some,  others  that  no  room  in  family 
sepulchres,  and  a  private  tomb  constructed  for  him  and  successors.  Honour,  the  burning 
of  spices  {cf.  xvi.  14 ;  xxi.  19). 

HOMILMTICS. 


Sennacherib's  Attempt  on  Jerusalem. — Verses  1-26. 

In  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  701  B.C.,  S.  marched  his  forces  to  reduce 
rebellious  vassals  to  submission.  Sidon  and  Phoenician  cities  were  taken  and 
reduced,  and  bordering  kings  rendered  homage.  He  climbed  the  lofty  heights 
of  Lebanon  (2  Ki.  xix.  23),  and  "  passed  along  the  banks  of  the  streams, 
which  he  drained  by  his  armies,  or  over  which  he  threw  bridges  for  them  to 
cross"  (Is.  xxxvii.  24,  25,  LXX).  He  was  renowned  far  and  wide  as  the 
destroyer.  His  chief  object  not  Palestine  but  Egypt,  the  only  rival  worthy  of 
his  arms.  Useless  to  take  Lachish,  with  the  strong  fortress  of  Jerusalem 
in  rear.  Each  stage  of  march  foreseen,  all  intervening  obstacles  swept  away. 
Fenced  cities  of  Judah  taken,  Zion  alone  remained.  Hezekiah  counselled  to 
292 


fcHAP.xxxii.3  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


submit  and  pay  tribute,  was  shut  up  in  the  city,  and  determined  to  resist.  The 
invading  army  reached  the  city,  "  and  passed  in  long  defile  under  the  walls. 
Chariots  and  horses  filled  the  ravines,  scarlet   dresses  and  scarlet  shields  blazed 
in  the  sun,  and  the  veil  of  the  city  was  torn  away.     The  general,  accompanied 
by  high  personages,  made   demands  for  unconditional  surrender  "  [see  Stanley ^ 
\o\,\\.  jQw.Gh\    I.  Sennacherib's  design.    *' He  was  purposed  to  fight 
against  Jerusalem."  1.  By  craft  he  seeks  to  withdraw  the  people  from  allegiance  to 
Hezekiah.     (a)  He  will  lead  them  into  danger.     **  To  give  over  yourselves  to  die 
by  famine  and  by  thirst"  (ver.  11).     (h)  He  has  excited  divine  displeasure  by 
removing  high  places.     Hezekiah's  reforms  ridiculed.     He  could  not  expect  help 
from   Jehovah,  the  national  Guardian  or  tutelary  Deity,  for  he  had  forfeited 
favour  by  his  sacrilegious  conduct  in  demolition  of  sanctuaries.     But  Hezekiah 
designed  not  to  exterminate,  only  to  promote  worship  of  God.     (c)  His  forces 
will  only  lead  you  to  ruin  (ver.  15).     If  local  gods  of  those  powerful  nations 
could  not  deliver  people  from  might  of  Assyria,  how  improbable,  impossible  for 
the  god  of  so  small  a  state  to  deliver  them  1     A  contradiction  to  his  boast  in 
2  Ki.  xviii.  25,  and  a  heathenish  view  of  Jehovah.     2.  By  hlaspJismy  he  misre- 
presents Jehovah.     He  is  pub  on  a  level  with  other  gods,   "  the  gods  of  the 
nations."     He  is  declared  impotent  to  deli^^er  those  who  trust  in  him.     "  So 
shall  not  the  God  of  Hez.  deliver  his  people"  (ver.  17).     "The  boastful  and 
blasphemous  tone  of  this  caitiflTs  speech,  which,  in  the  concluding  part  of  it,  here 
reaches  its  climax.    He  spoke  of  Jehovah  as  a  heathen,  and  as  the  representative 
of  a  despot  whose  head  was  turned  by  his  hitherto  unbroken  course  of  con- 
quests "  (Jam.  on  2  Ki.  xviii,  33-35).     3.  By  self- exaltation  he  becomes  insulting, 
A  towering  pride  exalted  him  above  all  authority,  human  and  divine.     *'  Had 
not  Asshur's  deity  proved  himself,  by  the  capture  of  Samaria,  to  be  mightier 
than    Israel's !     Only  one  more  evidence  of  this  was  needed — the  capture  of 
Jerusalem — and  then  the  King  of  Assyria  was  undisputed  lord  of  the  world" 
[Speak.    Com.].     II,    Hezekiah's    preparations    to    meet    this 
design.     "H.  responded  to  the  call.     By  a  sustained  effort,  which  gave  him 
a   peculiar   renown  (Ecclus.  xlviii.  17)  as  a  second  founder  or  restorer  of  the 
city  of  David.     1.    He  stopped   the  two  springs  of  Siloam,  and  diverted  the 
waters  of  the  Kedron,  which,  unlike  its  present  dry  state,  and  unusually  even 
for  that  time,  had  been  flooding  its  banks,  and  in  this  way  the  besiegers,  he 
hoped,  would  be  cut  off  from  all  water  on  the  barren  hills  around.     2.  He  also 
fortified  the  walls,  and  rebuilt  the  towers,  which  had  probably  not  been  repaired 
on  the  north  side  since  the  assault  of  Joash,  King  of  Israel,  and  completed  the 
armoury  and  outworks  of  the  castle  or  fortress  of  Milo.     3.  He  assembled  the 
people  in  the  great  square  or  open  place  before  the  city  gate,  and  there,  with  his 
officers,  nobles,  and  guards,  addressed  them  in  a  spirit  which,  combined  with  his 
active  preparations,  reminds  us  of  the  like  combination  in  the  well-known  speech 
of  Cromwell.     *  And  the  people  rested  on  the  words  of  H.,  King  of  Judah.' 
Well  might  any  nation  repose  on  one  to  whom  even  now  the  world  may  turn  as 
a  signal  of  what  is  meant  by   faith,  as  distinct  from   fanaticism "    [Stanley]. 
Ill,  Sennacherib^s  failure  to  accomplish  his  design.    Measures 
of  Rab.   entirely  ineffectual.     Troops  at  his  disposal  not  sufficient  to  enforce 
submission.     He  was  obliged  to  report  to  his  royal  master  unsuccessful  mission. 
His  second  demand  unavailing.     H.  spread  defiant  letter  before  Jehovah,  who 
intervened  to  fulfil  his  word  and  answer  prayer.     "  The  skilled  strategy  of  the 
Assyrian  will  avail  him  no  more ;  his  past  career  has  been  in  accordance  with  the 
purposes  of  Providence,  but  his  appointed  bound  has  at  length  been  reached. 
Hope  still  remains  for  the  '  remnant '  of  Judah.     *  By  the  way  that  he  come,  by 
the  same  shall  he  return,  and  unto  this  city  he  shall  not  come,  saith  Jehovah.' 
That  night  the  long  series  of  Isaiah's  predictions  received  its  fulfilment — ^the 
flower  of  the  Assyrian  army  was  cut  off  and  the  Assyrian  monarch  *  heard  the 

293 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxxii. 


rumour '  which  impelled  his  return  to  his  own  land  **  \priver  on  Isaiah].  He 
*'  decamped,  departed,  returned,  remained  at  Nineveh "  (Is.  xxxvii.  37,  38). 
Worshipping  without  attendants,  the  once  triumphant  conqueror  in  humiliation 
sought  the  help  of  his  own  special  god,  but  was  slain  by  his  own  sons. 

"  The  Assyrian  came  down  hke  the  wolf  on  the  fold, 
And  his  cohorts  were  gleaming  in  purple  and  gold  ** 

iByrorCs  Heh.  ilf^A).'//] 

Sennacherib's  Letter. — Verses  17-20. 

Hez.'s  letter  different  in  form  from  our  letters.  Assyrians  did  not  use  paper 
or  even  skins,  but  wrote  on  clay.  It  is  very  likely  the  letter  was  a  tablet  of 
terra-cotta.  I.  **  Went  up  into  the  house  of  the  Lord"  {cf.  2  Kings  xix.  14). 
Where  so  likely  to  find  God  as  in  his  house  ?  Notice  how  he  speaks  of  God 
dwelling  between  the  cherubim.  Perhaps  he  had  heard  how  Sen.  sat  on  his 
throne  between  winged  bulls  and  lions ;  but  he  heard  Isaiah  tell  of  seeing  the 
Lord  surrounded  by  winged  intelligences.  God  has  only  to  speak  to  his  winged 
messenger  and  the  angel  goes  to  crush  the  foes  of  his  people.  This  was  a  model 
prayer,  not  going  all  round  the  world,  but  fastening  on  the  thing  wanted,  and 
asking  for  that.  If  our  prayers  were  more  like  telegrams  we  should  have 
speedier  answers.  II.  Was  the  letter  ever  answered  ?  Yes,  Jehovah  answered 
it  himself.  We  know  what  the  result  was,  and  how  soon  the  bolt  of  vengeance 
struck  down  the  proud  blasphemer.  III.  There  is  a  postscript  to  God's  answer. 
"  It  came  to  pass  that  night  ....  they  were  all  dead  corpses."  Suppose 
we  read  in  the  newspaper  to-morrow,  **  Sudden  death  of  185,000  soldiers  ! "  What 
a  stir  it  would  make  !  What  a  sight  the  camp  must  have  been  next  morning  ! 
There  has  been  considerable  discussion  as  to  the  cause  of  the  destruction  of  so 
large  an  army,  and  it  is  generally  understood  now  to  have  been  the  simoon. 
Cambyses,  King  of  the  Medes,  lost  fifty  thousand  men  by  one  of  these  dreadful 
winds.  But  whether  the  wind  was  a  messenger  or  an  angel,  it  matters  not. 
God  willed  it,  and  nature  hastened  to  do  his  bidding  \T.  Champness,  "  New 
Coins,  &c."]. 

Assaults  on  Christian  Faith. — Verses  9-15. 

The  Rabshakeh's  plausible  speech  and  Jerusalem's  faith,  greatly  distressed  by 
him,  are  typical.  Still  as  men  hang  moodily  over  the  bulwarks  of  Zion,  doubtful 
whether  life  is  worth  living  within  the  narrow  limits  which  religion  prescribes, 
or  righteousness  worth  fighting  for  with  such  privations  and  hope  deferred, 
comes  upon  them  some  elegant  and  plausible  temptation,  loudly  calling  to  give 
the  whole  thing  up.  Disregarding  the  official  evidences  and  arguments  that 
push  forward  to  parley,  it  speaks  home  in  practical  tones  to  men's  real  selves — 
their  appetites  and  selfishness.  "  You  are  foolish  fellows,"  it  says,  "  to  confine 
yourselves  to  such  narrowness  of  life  and  self-denial !  The  fall  of  your  faith  is 
only  a  matter  of  time ;  other  creeds  have  gone,  yours  must  follow,  and  why  fight 
the  world  for  the  sake  of  an  idea,  or  from  the  habits  of  discipline  ?  Such  things 
only  starve  the  human  spirit ;  and  the  world  is  so  generous,  so  free  to  every  one, 
so  tolerant  of  each  enjoying  his  own,  unhampered   by  authority  or  religion " 

[G.  A,  Smith,  Bk.  of  Is  J.  Notice— I.  The  unwarrantable  assump- 
tion of  unbelief.  Kab.'s  address  a  type  of  modern  criticism,  the  forces  of 
culture  and  unbelief,  with  lofty  pretentions,  patronising  airs,  and  deceitful 
promises,  designed  to  shake  confidence  in  religion,  create  confusion  in  Christian 
communities,  and  seduce  from  Christ.  1 .  In  displays  of  immense  self-confidence, 
Hezekiah  never  styled  a  king.  Rab.'s  master  was  destined  to  conquer.  This  an 
occasion  for  self-glorifination.  Jerusalem's  defenders  underrated.  The  city  to 
294 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES. 


be  captured  by  clever  speeches.  More  in  Christianity  than  human  wisdom  and 
power.  It  can  never  be  hindered,  destroyed  by  craft,  worldly  policy,  or 
worldly  wisdom  2.  It  seeks  to  undermine  religious  faith.  Honourin/^  and 
commending  and  then  trampling  it  under  foot.  God  only  on  a  level  with  idols. 
Christianity  only  one  form  among  many.  Faith  is  held  in  risks  and  ignoble 
sacrifice.  Your  system  has  had  its  day,  is  becoming  effete,  and  its  decay  only  a 
matter  of  time.  Predictions  which  have  been,  and  may  again  be  falsified. 
3.  It  offers  false  lih  rty,  *'Make  a  treaty  with  me,  and  come  out  to  me,  and  eat 
every  one  of  his  vine,  and  every  one  of  his  fig  tree,  &c."  (Is.  xxxvi.  1 2).  "  A 
subtle  assault  upon  the  companionship,  discipline,  and  patriotism  of  the  common 
soldiers  by  the  promises  of  a  selfish,  sensuous  equality  and  individualism."  An 
independent  easy  life  ofiercd  to  men  who  throw  off  allegiance  to  God,  and 
restraints  of  Christian  faith.  But  no  philosopher,  sceptic,  or  unbeliever  can 
ensure  freedom  from  starvation  in  unbelief,  and  captivity  in  the  tolerance  of  the 
world.  II.  The  defence  of  faith..  "If  faith  be  held  simply  as  the 
silent  garrison  of  Jerusalem  held  it,  faith  in  a  Lord  God  of  righteousness,  who 
has  given  us  a  conscience  to  serve  him,  and  has  spoken  to  us  in  plain  explanation 
of  this  by  those  whom  Ave  can  see,  understand,  and  trust,  not  only  by  an  Isaiah, 
but  by  a  Jesus,  then  neither  mere  cleverness  nor  the  ability  to  promise  comfort 
can  avail  against  our  faith"  [Smith,  Bk.  of  Is.].  1.  Their  representations  are  false, 
Zion  is  not  endangered.  Our  God  is  greater  than  all  other  gods,  worthy  of  trust 
and  service.  Liberty  and  satisfaction  not  given  in  unbelief,  enemies  themselves 
being  witness.  Our  religion  not  likely  to  decay,  has  recuperative  power,  and  is 
destined  to  triumph  over  all.  What  faith  makes  such  heroes  and  philanthro- 
pists, gives  such  happiness  in  life,  such  hope  in  death  ?  2.  Faith  in  God  is 
reasonable.  He  is  omnipotent,  supreme  Ruler,  and  ever  present  with  his  people. 
His  word  is  fulfilled  by  his  providence.  No  home,  no  freedom  away  from  him. 
Unbelief  is  exile.  In  his  palace,  obedient  to  his  law,  and  standing  by  his  people 
will  be  found  our  security  and  peace.  Well  might  Isaiah  exclaim  on  the 
morning  of  the  night  of  destruction  to  the  Assyrian  army,  "  Jehovah  is  our 
Judge ;   Jehovah  is  our  Lawgiver ;  Jehovah  is  our  King  :  He  saveth  us." 

EOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Vers.  6-8.     Hez's  Exhortation.     1.  (h)  pledged  to  help,  "  to  help  us  and 

Numbers    no    guarantee     of    success,  to  fight  our  battles."     Hence  be  more 

"All  the  multitude  with  him"  availed  anxious  about  the  justice  of  your  cause 

not.     "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  and  God's  presence  to  help  it  on,  than 

&c."     2.  Worldly  policy  and  shrewd-  its  popularity  and  favourable  circum- 

ness   will  not   ensure  success.     These  stances.     Exercise   confidence   in  God 

combined  in  largest  measure  have  failed  and  speak  comfortably  to  those  in  his 

thousands  of  times.     3.  Unlimited  re-  service.     He  that  "  feareth  the  fury  of 

sources  of  all  kinds — men,  money,  or  the  oppressor  forge tteth  the  Lord  his 

influence — will  not  give  success  against  Maker." 

right  and  God.     All  "an  arm  of  flesh,"  Yer.  9.  In  demand  of  Sen.  he  seems 

and -what  "an  arm  of  flesh"  multiplied  — \.  Unchecked  by   moral  obligation. 

a  million  times  when   measured  with  Would  not  be  satisfied  with  payment 

the   single    arm   of   omnipotence  I     4.  of  tribute  from  Hez.  "  He  hath  broken 

God  alone  can   give  victory.     *'  With  the  covenant."     2.  Unchecked  by  fear 

us  is  the  Lord  our  God."    "  The  import  of  military  defences,  *'  despised  cities." 

of  *Immanuel ;'  by  which  name  Christ  3.  Unchecked   by  respect   for  human 

now  began  to  be  known  amongst  them  "  life,  "  regardeth  not  men"  (Is.xxxiii.  8). 

[Trajyp].     God  (a)  greater  than  num-  "  Sen.,  like  Napoleon  in  that  terrible 

bers,  '*more  with  us  than  with  him;"  Russian  expedition  of  1812,  had  essayed 

295 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxxil 


a  task  he  was  unable  to  complete.   The  ye  say  unto  me,  (fee."  (ver.  22).    "  Thua 

Assyrians  had  no  conception  of  bene-  he  thinks  to  beat  them  off  all  their 

fiting  or  civilising  the  nations  which  holds  that  he  may  bring  them  to  the 

they  conquered ;  their  activity  was  a  bent  of  his  bow.     Satan  doth  the  like, 

purely    destructive     one ;    their    only  *  whom  resist  steadfast  in  the  faith ' " 

motive  was  ambition  and  lust  of  do-  \TTapp\. 

minion.     And   now   in   pursuing    the  I.  What  accusations  here  made :  (1) 

same  objectless  career  they  were  medi-  that  Hez.  had  forfeited  their  allegiance 

tating  the  extermination  of  a  nation  and  God's  protection  by  his   reforms 

whose   preservation  was   vital   to   the  (ver.  12);  (2)  that  Hez. 's  God  only  like 

future   of   humanity.      The   Assyrian,  other  gods,  and  could  not  deliver  him. 

though  he  knows  it  not,  is  an  instru-  II.  What    scenes    of    desolation    here 

ment  in  the  hand  of  Providence ;  he  pictured.    Nations  conquered,  gods  in 

has  a  mission  to  execute  by  the  limits  captivity  at  Nineveh,  and  everywhere 

of    which    his    pretensions    must    be  turned    into    a   desert.       III.    What 

bounded  "  \_Driver\  assumptions  of  pride,  power,  and  pro- 

Vers.  10-15.  Wherein  your  trust?  fanity. 
A  most  important  question  for  all.  1.  Ver.  20.  The  Wonderful  Prayer  Meet- 
Hez.  trusted  to  Egypt ;  a  bruised  reed,  ing.  Its  purpose.  Its  attendants  (Is. 
slender  and  easily  broken.  Weakened  and  Hez.,  "  Where  two  or  three").  Its 
by  Saragon,  Egypt  failed  to  help,  grand  results.  "  The  issue  was  as  mo- 
Resolutions  of  amendment,  self- right-  mentous  as  any  that  have  been  deter- 
eousness,  and  vague  hopes  of  God's  mined  by  the  *  decisive  battles  of  the 
mercy  broken  reeds.  2.  God  the  only  world.*  It  was  a  crisis  as  grave  as 
ground  of  trust.  Well  when  sinners  when  Persia  threatened  to  intercept 
are  roused  by  this  question.  Wisdom  the  rising  civilisation  of  Greece,  or 
to  trust  in  God,  for  he  can  and  will  Vandal  and  Moor  to  destroy  the 
deliver.     3.  The  test  of  this  trust,  "  If  Christianity  of  Europe"  [Driver's  /«.]. 

EOMILETICS. 

The  Wonderful  Deliverance. — Verses  16-20. 

I.  Judah's  helpless  condition.  City  surrounded.  Sen.  determined. 
Egypt  driven  back.  The  crisis  real.  Sen.'s  boast  true.  Resistance  desperate 
and  chances  of  escape  hopeless.  To  all  human  appearance  fate  of  city  and 
inhabitants  sealed.  II.  The  concerted  prayer.  The  prophet  and  the 
king  bending  together  in  prayer  I  In  estimation  of  the  world  this  a  sign  of 
weakness,  the  refuge  of  cowardice.  But  confidence  not  misplaced  in  this  critical 
period.  United,  concerted  prayer  secures  deliverance.  "  If  two  of  you  shall 
at^ree,  &c."  (Mt.  xviii.  19).  Illus.  from  0.  T.  history,  life  of  Luther,  and  history 
of  Christian  Church.  III.  God's  signal  Interposition.  "Man's 
extremity"  became  *'  God's  opportunity."  In  a  single  night  miraculous  deliver- 
ance came — the  night  in  which  Isaiah's  predictions  came  to  pass.  "  The  rumour 
was  heard "  which  compelled  Sen.'s  hasty  retreat.  Whether  the  stroke  which 
fell  upon  the  Assyrian  army  was  due  to  natural  causes  (Herodotus)  or  super- 
natural interposition  it  was  a  fact,  "  a  coincidence  which  no  political  forecast 
could  have  anticipated,  no  estimate  of  probabilities  calculated."  ''  At  eventide, 
behold  terror  !  before  morning  it  is  not."  IV.  The  marvellous  effect  of 
this  interposition.  "  Remember  that  it  had  been  foretold  by  Jehovah's 
word,  and  achieved,  despite  all  human  probability,  by  Jehovah's  own  arm,  we 
shall  understand  the  enormous  spiritual  impression  which  it  left  upon  Israel. 
1.  The  religion  of  the  one  supreme  God,  supreme  in  might,  because  supreme  in 
righteousness,  received  a  most  emphatic  historical  vindication,  a  signal  and 
29G 


CHAP.  xxxiL]  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    CnilONICLES, 


glorious  triumph.  No  other  god  for  the  present  had  any  chance  in  Judah. 
Idolatry  discredited,  not  by  the  poKtical  victory  of  a  faction,  nor  by  the  destruc- 
tive genius  of  a  nation,  but  by  an  evident  act  of  Providence  to  vi^hich  no  human 
aid  had  been  contributory.  It  was  nothing  less  than  the  baptism  of  Israel  in 
spiritual  religion,  the  grace  of  which  was  never  wholly  undone "  [Smith's  Is.]. 
2.  Hez.  was  honoured  before  nations  (ver.  23).  **  From  surrounding  nations 
tribute  poured  in  as  to  an  awful  avenger "  [Stanley].  Precious  things  laid  in 
.abundance  at  the  feet  of  Judah's  king,  who  was  magnified  as  the  favourite  and 
special  care  of  Heaven.  God's  help  will  turn  enemies  into  friends  and  gain  for 
us  honour  and  influence.  3.  But  the  effect  not  confined  to  the  times  and 
country  of  Hezekiah.  The  Egyptian  general,  Tirhakah,  advancing  from  the 
south,  as  well  as  Hez.  in  Jerusalem,  heard  the  results  with  joy.  Three  centuries 
afterwards,  the  Psalmist's  exulting  language  (Ps.  Ixxvi.)  was  repeated  by  Egyptian 
priests.  The  Maccabees  were  sustained  by  the  recollection  of  Sen.'s  fall  in  their 
struggle  against  Antiochus  (1  Mace.  vii.  41),  and  in  the  churches  of  Moscow  the 
exultation  over  the  event  is  still  read  on  the  anniversary  of  the  retreat  of  the 
French  from  Eussia  (cf.  Stanley,  Jew.  Ch.,  vol.  ii.).  "  One  generation  shall 
praise  thy  works  to  another,  and  shall  declare  thy  mighty  acts." 

Hezekiah's  Sickness  and  Recovery. — Verses  24  and  26. 

The  illness  and  miraculous  recovery,  the  fall  and  repentance  of  Hezekiah,  given 
very  briefly  here,  more  fully  in  2  Ki.  xx.  Learn — I.  The  great  contrasts 
in  tlie  events  of  life.  In  the  palace  a  sick  man,  a  dying  king.  By  his 
side  quietly  stood  the  faithful  prophet  who  had  delivered  the  prophetic  message, 
**  Set  thine  house  in  order ;  for  thou  shalt  die  and  not  live."  In  the  public 
crisis,  there  had  been  excitement,  intense  anxiety,  and  great  joy  at  deliverance. 
The  question  personal,  "  thine  house,"  not  national.  Hezekiah  needs  protection 
as  well  as  his  kingdom  from  God.  An  air  of  deep  solemnity  in  the  sick-bed  of 
Hezekiah  striking  and  peculiar.  "  No  sickness  in  Jewish  annals  so  pathetically 
recorded,"  says  Stanley.  II.  The  suddenness  'with  "which  these 
events  happen.  At  one  time  in  the  midst  of  victory  and  joy,  at  another 
**  at  the  gates  of  the  grave."  Now  in  the  sanctuary  with  head  "  lifted  up 
above  his  enemies  round  about,"  then  laid  prostrate  and  the  angel  of  death 
ready  to  cut  him  down  !  *'  Man  knoweth  not  his  time"  of  success  or  failure,  of 
life  or  death.  "  As  fishes  taken  in  an  evil  net,  and  birds  caught  in  a  snare,  so  are 
the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time,  when  it  falleth  suddenly  upon  them" 
(p:cc.  ix.  12).  III.  The  distress  with  which  they  are  often 
attended.  In  the  sickness  of  Asa,  Jehoram,  and  Uzziah  we  see  divine 
visitations,  in  that  of  Hezekiah  national  calamity.  1.  It  was  distressing. 
Grieved  to  part  with  life  because  promise  of  a  long  and  prosperous  one  would 
not  be  fulfilled  if  cut  off.  He  spoke  of  upright  deeds  faithfully  done  as 
conditions  to  promise  made  to  David.  He  wept  at  having  no  children  to 
succeed  him.  The  dark  and  silent  world  close  at  hand,  in  which  he  would  no 
longer  see  and  praise  God.  His  thread  of  life  about  to  be  severed ;  from  morning 
to  night  and  from  night  to  morning  he  wasted  away.  2.  It  was  hopeless. 
The  cry  of  a  dying  lion,  the  plaintive  murmur  of  a  wounded  doe,  only  sounds 
heard  in  sick-chamber.  There  seemed  no  hope  whatever  of  recovery,  "  Thou 
Shalt  die  and  not  live."  IV.  The  wonderful  deliverance  which 
God  can  grant.  The  disease,  of  a  mortal  kind  and  malignant  character, 
would  prove  fatal  unless  the  healing  power  of  God  should  interpose.  1. 
Deliverance  given  tJtrough prayer.  Not  like  Ahab,  Hezekiah  prayed  unto  the  Lord, 
•'turned  his  face  to  the  wall"  (2  Ki.  xx.  3),  to  conceal  fervency  of  devotion 
from  attendants,  looking  in  direction  of  temple,  or  in  solemn  meditation.  The 
prayer  of  this  righteous  man  availed  much.  **  Afore  Isaiah  was  gone  out  into  the 

297 


HOMILFTIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xxxii. 


middle  court,  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him,  saying,  Turn  again,  and  tell 
Hezekiah,  ...  I  have  heard  thy  prayer,  seen  thy  tears :  behold,  I  will  heal  thee," 
(fee.  (2  Ki.  XX.  4-7).  A  cluster  of  figs,  an  Eastern  remedy,  applied  to  the  king's 
tumour  and  instant  relief  ensued.  2.  Deliverance  with  miraculous  signs.  Recovery 
so  unlocked  for  that  Hezekiah,  like  Ahaz,  asked  for  some  token  to  confirm 
belief  in  the  prophet's  word.  Sign  specified  granted  to  him.  Shadow  of  the 
sun  went  back  upon  the  dial  of  Ahaz  ten  degrees.  Fifteen  years  were  added  to 
his  life.  In  three  days  he  appeared  in  the  temple,  and  ''the  almost  funeral 
dirge  of  his  sick-chamber  was  then  blended  with  the  praise  of  triumphant  thanks- 
giving with  which  he  returns  to  the  living  world  of  joyous  human  voices  and 
sounding  music,  rejoicing  in  the  Living  Source  of  all  life,  and  looking  forward 
to  the  hope  of  transmitting  the  truth  to  children  yet  unborn"  \Stanley\ 

Hezekiah's  Test  and  Failure. — Verses  25,  26  and  31. 

Soon  after  Hezekiah's  recovery  an  embassy  from  Babylon  sent  to  Jerusalem, 
to  ascertain  the  internal  resources  of  the  country,  to  inquire  as  sages  into  the 
astronomical  wonder  with  which  Hezekiah's  restoration  was  connected,  to  form 
an  alliance  with  him,  or  to  join  in  general  homage  of  surrounding  nations. 
Whatever  the  object  of  the  visit,  it  was  famous  in  the  city  and  a  moral  test  to 
the  king.  I.  Hezekiah's  sins.  "  His  heart  was  lifted  up  "  in  vanity  and 
ingratitude.  1.  By  vain  dis'play  of  his  treasures.  Flattered  by  the  honour, 
Hezekiah  showed  the  ambassadors  his  [irecious  things,  regalia,  hereditary  treasures 
belonging  to  the  crown ;  his  armoury  and  warlike  stores  ;  and  "there  was  nothing 
in  his  house,  nor  in  all  his  dominion,  that  Hezekiah  showed  them  not."  2.  By 
motives  of  worldly  policy.  All  this  display  evidently  that  the  deputies  might  be 
more  induced  to  prize  his  friendship  and  treat  him  as  an  ally  on  equal  terms. 
3.  By  utter  for  get  fulness  of  God.  "Hezekiah  rendered  not  again  according  to 
the  benefit  done  to  him."  Not  a  word  said  for  God  who  had  so  signally  blessed 
him  to  foreigners.  All  about  his  own  house  and  kingdom.  God  dis23leased,  his 
will  opposed  to  all  coquetting  with  foreign  powers;  the  prophet  predicts  a  darker 
prospect.  Those  treasures  carefully  accumulated  would  become  the  prey  of  a 
new  power.  Babylon  had  solicited  friendship  and  would  end  by  enforcing 
slavery.  We  can  never  ^x/?/  our  debt,  but  should  ever  acknowledge  it.  **  What 
shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  towards  me?"  II.  Hezekiall's 
liumiliation.  "Hezekiah  humbled  himself."  Isaiah's  searching  questions 
and  awful  predictions  not  without  effect.  King  and  city  mourned  as  guilty 
together.  Bespite  was  granted  and  divine  judgment  not  executed  during  his 
lifetime.  "  So  that  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  come  not  upon  them  in  the  days 
of  Hezekiah." 

Tests  op  Moral  Character. — Terse  3L 

God  looks  more  narrowly  into  our  ways  than  the  world  or  the  church — will 
pui'ify  us  and  fit  for  service  by  trial' — never  rests  satisfied  with  a  well-ordered 
kingdom^  or  well-ordered  house,  but  seeks  to  set  up  a  loftier  standard  in  a  well- 
ordered  heart  and  upright  life.  I.  Moral  tests  in  their  means.  Wealth 
and  worldly  prosperity ;  domestic  happiness  and  numerous  ofitspring ;  sickness, 
popularity;  great  victories  and  heavy  afflictions;  suspension  of  grace  and 
withdrawment  of  comfort.  Tests  applied  to  Abraham,  Job,  and  Peter. 
II.  Moral  tests  in  their  design.  "  To  try  him  that  he  might  know 
all  that  was  in  his  heart."  *'  Lord,  show  me  myself,"  was  the  prayer  of 
one.  Satan  tempts  to  sin ;  God  tries  men  to  make  them  conscious  of  real 
self  ;  to  discover  qualities  of  heart  and  character.  Self-knowledge  often  partial, 
part  not  all  known  ;  always  needful  and  always  difficult  to  attain  ;  only  acquired 
in  the  school  of  God,  by  peculiar  discipline.  "  God  left  him."  III.  Moral 
298 


CHAP.  XXXII.]         ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


tests  in  their  results.  Sometimes  virtues  and  worth  confirmed  and  puri- 
fied; failure  in  Hezekiah's  case.  From  which  learn — 1.  The  insuffloicncy  of  man. 
Hezekiah  more  than  mortal  if  he  could  stand.  Highly  commended,  much  to 
encourage  and  rejoice  in  past  deeds  ;  aided  by  clear  teaching  of  prophet,  yet  fell 
from  simplicity  of  faith.  When  left  of  God  the  strongest  falls.  2.  The  need  of 
divine  interposition.  This  failure  the  proof  that  the  blessings  which  were  to 
come  to  all  nations  could  not  be  realised  through  any  king,  priest,  or  prophet, 
not  even  through  the  dispensation  itself.  Not  by  progressive  amelioration  under 
Mosaic  law.  Tendencies  in  man's  soul  which  could  not  be  thus  eradicated  ;  in- 
creasing sin,  signal  failures  pressing  on  the  world  which  could  not  be  removed. 
In  Judaea  and  in  Gentile  nations  ''  all  flesh  grass,"  fading  away  beneath  "  the 
burning  heat"  (Jas.  i.  11)  of  divine  justice.  3.  The  glory  of  God's  mercy.  A 
"righ  6) us  servant  shall  justify  many."  God's  displeasure  removed  in  Christ. 
A  higher  order  of  things  introduced,  and  God  magnified  for  his  abundant 
goodness ! 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  20.  Hez.'s  prayer  in  2  Kings 
xix.  15-19  ;  but  no  distinct  mention  of 
Is.  Hez.  asked  him  to  pray  (ver.  4).  In 
affliction  personal  prayer  needed.  Good 
to  get  others  to  join.  Two  better  than 
one.  Isaiah  here  performs  the  function 
of  minister,  sick  visitor,  and  physician. 
Signs  given  to  Hez.  In  life  God  ac- 
counted him  righteous,  and  gave  him 
(a)  a  good  conscience,  (h)  success  in 
work,  best  proofs  of  divine  favour.  In 
sickness  a  special  sign  in  answer  to 
prayer,  and  in  which  Hez.  read  a  moral 
lesson. 

Vers.  27-31.    Hez.'s  wealth.  1.  How 


he  secured  it.  2.  What  he  did  with 
it.  3.  What  influence  it  had  upon 
him.  "  In  all  time  of  our  wealth, 
good  Lord  deliver  us." 

Vers.  32,  33.  Hez!s  death  and  burial. 
1.  His  death  appointed.  Though  life 
prolonged,  yet  its  length  decreed.  None 
exempt.  Death  ends  joys,  sorrows,  and 
probation.  Preparation  the  solemn 
duty  of  all.  2.  His  burial  a  national 
honour.  Funeral  marked  with  un- 
usual respect.  Royal  tribe  of  Judah 
and  whole  population  of  Jerusalem 
present,  and  a  marked  epoch  in  roya) 
interments. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Vers.  1,  2.  War.  We  possess  in 
duplicate,  on  the  Taylor  cylinder,  found 
at  Nineveh  in  1830,  and  now  in  the 
British  Museum,  and  on  the  Bull- 
inscription  of  Kouyunjik,  Senna- 
cherib's own  account  of  the  stages 
of  his  campaign  \B river's  /s.]. 

Vers.  6-8.  Courageous.  Leonidas, 
at  the  Straits  of  Thermopylae,  was  not 
afraid  with  400  men  to  oppose  Xerxes, 
the  invad  -'-  ^f  Greece,  at  the  head  of  a 
million.  Wi  iiam  Tell,  with  a  handful 
of  adherents,  boldly  resisted  the 
Austrian  multitude  and  repulsed  it. 

*♦  Virtue  is  bold,  and  goodness  never  fear- 
ful." 

Ver.    10.     Trust.     The   practice   of 


Egypt  was  to  pretend  friendship,  to 
hold  out  hopes  of  support,  and  then  to 
fail  in  time  of  need  \S'peak.  Com.]. 

Ver.  18.  Jews'  speech.  Hez.'s  repre- 
sentatives desire  Bab.  to  speak  in 
Aramaic,  the  language  of  commerce, 
and  probably  of  diplomacy  in  the  East. 
But  his  aim  is  to  produce  an  impres- 
sion upon  the  multitude,  and  he  insists 
on  using  Hebrew.  His  speech  breathes 
the  spirit  which  pervades  all  the  repre- 
sentations of  Assyrian  power. 

Ver.  21.  Cut  off'.  The  deliverance 
was  complete  and  final.  The  Assyrian 
king  at  once  returned,  and,  according 
to  Jewish  tradition^  wrecked  his  ven- 
geance on  the  Israelite  exiles  whom  he 
found   iu  Mesopotamia  (Tobit  i.    18)» 

299 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES,       [chap,  xxxiii. 


He  was  the  last  of  the  great  Assyrian  without  any  endeavour  to  acknowledge 

conquerors.     No   Assyrian  host  again  or  repay  it.    It  is  too  base  to  return  a 

ever   crossed  Jordan.     Within   a   few  kindness  and  too  proud   to  regard  it 

years  from    that    time   the    Assyrian  [South^ 

power   suddenly    vanished    from    the  "  A  grateful  mind 

earth  ]J:itantey\.                                   ^  By  owing  owes  not,  but  still  pays,  at  once 

Ver.  25.    Rendered  not.    Ingratitude  Indebted  and  discharged  "  [Miltonl. 
is  an  insensibility  of  kindness  received 


CHAPTER   XXXIIL 

Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  is  parallel  with  2  Ki.  xxi.,  yet  differs  in  omitting  some 
things  and  adding  new  matter,  especially  in  central  part.  Impiety  of  Man.  (vers.  1-10) ; 
his  captivity  and  repentance  (vers.  11-17;  ;  his  end  (vers.  18-20).     Amon  (vers.  21-25). 

Vers.  1-10. — Manasseh's  revival  of  idolatry.  Named  after  a  tribe  of  Israel,  born  after 
his  father's  recovery.  Evil,  through  influence  of  those  around  him,  Ver.  3.  Btiilt  (2  Ki. 
xviii.  4);  groves,  one  in  2  Ki.  xxi.  3-7,  that  which  was  intruded  into  the  temple.  Ver.  4. 
House,  i.e.,  within  precincts  of  temple  and  in  its  courts  (ver.  5).  Ver.  6.  Th  ough  fire,  like 
Ahaz  (xxviii.  3) ;  observed,  he'^itched  with  an  evil  eye ',  enchavtments,  seripeut  charms; 
accustomed  to  all  the  black  arts  of  the  day.  Ver.  7-  Carved,  in  Ki.  wooden  stock  of 
Aehtoreth.  Ver.  8.  Appointed,  fixed.  Ver.  9.  Err,  by  example  and  conduct.  Ver.  10. 
Spake,  full  account  2  Ki.  xxi.  10-15. 

Vers.  11-17. — Manasseli's  cap.  and  repentance.  Thorns,  among  which  he  hid  himself 
for  refuge  (1  Sam.  xiii.  6);  some  "  among  the  living,"  i.e.,  took  him  alive  ;  others  '*  which 
took  M.  cap.  with  rings."  Ver.  12.  Besouyht,  lit.  "  stroked  or  smoothed  the  face  of  the 
Lord"(c/.  Ex.  xxxii.  11;  1  Sara.  xiii.  11  ;  1  Ki.  xiii.  6;  Dan.  ix.  13).  Ver.  14.  Wall,  re- 
built or  repaired.  Gihon,  xxxii  A  ;  fishgate,  nea.r'N. 'El.  corner  of  lower  city;  went  round 
to  Ophel.  Ver.  15.  Strange  (vers.  3-5)  ;  idol  of  ver  7,  Ver.  16.  Repaired,  desecrated,  or 
damaged  altar.  Ver.  17.  High  places  (xxxi.  1),  prohibited  that  there  might  be  one 
national  altar. 

Vers.  18-20.— Manasseli's  end.  Prayer,  preserved  in  some  MSS.  of  Sept.,  no  claim  to  be 
considered  the  genuine  utterance  of  Jewish  king.  The  composition  of  an  Hellenistic 
Jew,  well  acquamted  with  the  Sept.,  writing  at  a  time  probably  not  much  anterior  to  the 
Christian  Era  [6/)  nk.  Com.'].  Ver.  19.  Seers,  of  Hozai  (marg.),  a  prophet  of  the  time. 
Ver.  20.  Hou  e,  fuller  in  2  Ki.  xxi.  18.     Reason  not  known. 

Vers.  21-25. — Anions  reign  and  end.  A.  re-established  the  idolatries  which  his  father 
put  aside ;  met  the  fate  of  Joash  and  Amaziah  from  his  servants,  at  whose  death  executive 
government  was  suspended, 

EOIIILETIGS. 

Manasseh*s  Wickedness. —  Verses  1-9. 

Hezekiah's  reformation  not  completed  by  successors,  lost  its  influence  upon 
manners  of  people.  Corruption  and  vice  increased  and  openly  practi^ed  by 
degenerate    leaders.     Young    king    trained    up    in     idolatry   and    introduced 

abominations  when  he  became  ruler.    I.  Wickedness  determined  in  its 

Spiiit.  '*  He  wrought  much  wickedness."  A  libei-al  patron  and  zealous  adept 
in  Chaldean  arts  and  imposture.  Multiplied  sins  privately  and  publicly.  De- 
termined, energetic,  and  violent  in  his  career.  Did  wickedness  "  with  both  hands 
earnestly."  II,  Wickedness  awful  in  its  extent.  Upset  his  father's 
reforms,  increased  idolatrous  customs,  raised  soothsayers  to  dignity  in  his 
couit,  filled  the  land  with  altars  of  Baal,  and  outraged  all  decency 
300 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  BOMILETIC  COMMEN'IAUY:    CURONICLES. 


by  putting  an  image  of  Asherah  in  the  very  precincts  of  the  temple 
dedicated  to  the  true  worship  of  God.  III.  Wickedness  exceptional  in 
its  nature.  He  practised  sorcery  and  necromancy,  and  restored  the  fires  of 
Tophet.  "  He  made  Judah  do  worse  than  the  heathen."  He  became  a  cruel 
persecutor,  and  his  reign  a  reign  of  terror.  Streets  of  Jerusalem  ran  with 
innocent  blood.  "  His  name  became  in  Jewish  annals  the  synonym  of  infamy  " 
(c/*.  2  Ki.  xxi.  16).  Sins  terrible  in  themselves,  inexcusable  in  Manasseh,  and 
most  fruitful  of  evil!  IV.  Wickedness  unchecked  by  Divine 
warnings.  "The  Lord  spake  to  M.  and  to  his  people,  but  they  would  not 
hearken"  (ver.  10).  God  about  to  destroy,  not  build  and  defend  the  city  I 
"Line  and  plummet "  threatened.  Destruction  would  be  entire  and  unhindered 
by  any  destroying  angel.  People  taken  away  as  "a  prey  and  a  spoil,"  M. 
himself  a  captive  in  chains  and  carried  to  Babylon.  A  punishment  deserved, 
sent  in  mercy,  and  brought  repentance  and  restoration* 

Manasseh^s  Eepentance. — Verses  10-13. 

Exact  time  of  Manasseh's  confinement  in  dungeon  of  Babylon  not  known,  but 
narrative  one  of  deepest  interest,  one  which  reveals  the  glory  of  unparalleled 
mercy.  "  The  hardships,  the  loneliness,  the  disgrace  of  captivity  were  good  for 
M."  I.  An  exception  in  youthful  experience.  "The  remarkable 
distinction  of  his  career  is  that  he  is  the  only  case  clearly  recorded  in  the 
Scriptures  of  a  youth  breaking  away  from  the  restraints  and  example  of  a 
religious  parentage,  who  was  recovered  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  brought  to 

repentance"  [il.  i^/ieZps,  i>.i>.].    II.  It  was  sincere  in  its  character. 

The  misery  and  solitude  of  prison  led  to  calm  reflection.  1.  His  humility  was 
great.  The  iron  entered  his  soul.  He  recalled  the  days  of  childhood,  thought  of 
scenes  of  blood  and  cries  of  the  murdered.  The  stars  of  heaven,  which  he 
had  sinfully  worshipped,  shone  in  the  dark  prison  to  remind  him  of  his  guilt. 
He  saw  the  vileness  of  his  actions  and  the  evil  of  his  heart.  "  He  humbled 
himself  greatly. ^^  2.  His  inayer  was  earnest.  He  humbly  besought  God  for 
pardon ;  implored  for  opportunity  to  evince  the  sincerity  of  his  sorrow.  God 
heard,  and  restored  him ;  "  was  entreated  of  him,  and  heard  his  supplication,  and 
brought  him  again  to  Jerusalem  into  his  kingdom."  III.  It  was  per- 
manent in  its  results.  On  his  return  he  exerted  himself  to  the  uttermost 
to  correct  errors  of  his  reign,  and  establish  the  worship  of  God  in  former  purity 
and  splendour.  1.  He  was  concerned  for  the  temporal  welfare  of  the  kingdom. 
Repaired  the  old  walls  of  the  city,  added  a  new  one ;  surrounded  and  fortified  the 
hill  of  Ophel ;  strengthened,  garrisoned,  and  provisioned  "  the  fenced  cities  of 
Judah."  2.  He  endeavoured  to  practise  and  promote  religion  among  the  people.  In 
remembrance  of  former  evils,  among  multitudes  who  had  been  former  associates, 
and  perhaps  amid  scoffs  and  taunts  of  ignominious  capture  and  disgraceful  impri- 
sonment, he  purged  the  land  and  the  temple  from  idolatry;  repaired  the  altar  of 
Jehovah,  and  sacrificed  peace-offerings  upon  it,  and  "commanded  Judah  to  serve 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  IV.  It  is  most  encouraging  to  others.  A 
wonderful  display  of  God's  mercy.  A  proof  "  that  the  Divine  mercy,"  says 
Stanley,  "  far  exceeds  the  Divine  vengeance,  and  that  even  from  the  darkest 
reprobation  the  free  will  of  man  and  the  grace  of  God  may  achieve  a  deliverance. 
If  Manasseh  could  be  restored,  there  was  no  one  against  whom  the  door  of 
repentance  and  restitution  was  finally  closed.** 

Manasseh's  Life  and  its  Lessons. 

I.  That  the  sins  of  parents  arrested  in  one  generation  may 
appear  in  another*     As  diseases  pass  over  some,  and  reappear  in  others, 

301 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxini 


80  wickedness,  thought  to  be  extinct,  assumes  its  virulence,  and  brings  forth  its 
fruit.  II.  That  when  children  of  godly  parents  sin  they  often 
become  worse  than  others.  M.  went  further,  and  more  guilty  of 
excess,  than  heathens  around  him.  *'  M.  seduced  them  to  do  more  evil  than  did 
the  nations  whom  the  Lord  destroyed  before  the  children  of  Israel."  III.  That 
God  exercises  providential  checks  to  prevent  these  sins. 
Thus  far  men  can  only  go.  The  end  often  distant,  but  certain,  when  God  designs 
to  restore.  1.  To  fulfil  his  covenant.  2.  To  illustrate  his  mercy.  Paul 
obtained  mercy  as  a  pattern  to  others,  a  form  sketch  to  imitate,  to  be  filled  up 
by  others  (1  Tim.  i.  16).  3.  To  reveal  his  nature.  "Then  M.  knew  that  the 
Lord  he  was  God."  IV.  That  in  the  conversion  of  M.  we  have 
encouragement  to  labour  and  pray  for  the  salvation  of 
sinners.  Give  none  up  in  despair.  God's  power  omnipotent,  and  his  grace 
sufficient.  Augustine,  Newton,  Eunyan,  (kc.  This  should  be  the  theme  of 
preaching  as  it  is  the  doctrine  of  Scripture.  After  teaching  theology  for  forty 
years,  the  elder  Alexander  said :  "  The  longer  I  five,  the  more  I  incline  to  sum 
up  my  theology  in  the  single  sentence,  *  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to 
save  sinners,  of  whom  I  am  chief.* " 


)  f» 


Hezekiah  and  Manasseh:  a  Contrast. 

We  have  in  end  of  one  and  beginning  of  the  other  a  magnificent  sunset  and 
a  sunrise  of  quite  an  opposite  description.  A  good  father  and  king  closing  life 
in  Hezekiah  ;  a  bad  son  and  successor  commencing  life  in  Manasseh.  I.  Con- 
sider Hez.  and  what  we  learn  about  him.  1.  That  genuine  goodness  shall  not 
wa»t  appropriate  record  and  remembrance.  2.  God  the  inspirer  of  goodness  in 
the  hearts  of  men  will  not  forget  it.  3.  The  beneficiaries  of  goodness  will  not 
be  unmindful  of  their  benefactors.  4.  Sympathetic  imitators  will  mirror  forth 
their  goodness  from  whom  they  have  derived  its  idea  and  impulse.  II.  Now 
turn  to  Man  and  what  the  history  says  about  him.  1.  A  youthful  king. 
2.  A  long  reign.  3.  A  life  of  great  wickedness.  Application :  1.  What  may 
parents  learn  from  the  son  of  such  a  father  ?  Hez.  hoarded  up  wealth  for  his 
son.  Did  he  undervalue  the  moral  element  in  him  ?  2.  What  may  subjects 
learn  from  the  successor  of  such  a  king  ?  Not  to  trust  religion  to  princes  who 
may  be  alternately  reformers  and  destroyers  \J,  Spencer  Hill], 

Lessons  from  the  Life  of  Three  Kings. — Verses  21-25. 

I.  Manasseh.    There  is  no  limit  to  the  mercy  of  God.    Sinners  chief,  welcome 
'to  complete  forgiveness.     If  only  great  saints  got  into  heaven  great  sinners 

would  lose  hope.  But  when  we  see  M.  and  men  like  him  going  in  and  getting 
welcome,  there  is  hope  for  us.  If  we  follow  their  steps  in  repentance,  we  shall 
be  permitted  to  join  their  company  in  rest. 

II.  Amon.  Beware  of  turning  the  riches  of  God's  grace  into  a  snare.  As 
Manasseh's  case  is  recorded  in  the  Bible  that  an  aged  sinner  desiring  to  turn 
may  not  be  cast  into  despair,  Amon*s  case,  recorded  beside  it,  that  the  young 
may  not  delay  an  hour,  lest  they  perish  for  ever. 

III.  None  will  be  lost  or  saved  in  consequence  of  anything  in  our  parents. 
Amon  saw  his  father  born  again  when  old,  but  the  son  did  not  inherit  his 
father's  goodness.  Josiah  the  child  of  an  ungodly  parent,  yet  he  became  a  godly 
child.  Two  lessons  plainly  written  in  the  history — one  to  make  presumptuous 
humble,  the  other  to  give  despairing  hope :  (1)  a  converted  father  cannot  secure 
the  safety  of  an  unconverted  son  ;  (2)  an  unconverted  father  cannot  drag  down 
a  child  in  his  fall  if  that  child  follows  the  Lord  [W,  Arnot,  "  Fam.  Treasury"]. 

302 


CHAP.  XXXIU.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 


Ver.  1.     Reigned  Jifty-and-five  years, 

1.  For  the  punishment  of  people's  sins. 

2.  That  he  might  have  time  enough 
to  amend  his  own  hfe.  3.  That  in 
him,  as  afterwards  in  Paul,  "  God 
inic^ht  show  forth  all  lonfjsufferins '* 
\Trapp\, 

\  er.  8.  Israel  fixed  in  God's  house 
and  in  the  land.  1.  Fixed  by  God's 
appointment,  not  their  own  choice  or 
preference.  2.  Fixed  conditionally. 
"  Only  if  they  will  observe,  (fee."  3. 
Ejected  by  violation  of  conditional 
promise. 

Ver.  9.  M.  seduced.  The  power  of 
example.  Ahaz.  abandoned  worship  of 
God,  but  did  not  seduce  generality  of 
his  subjects.  Manasseh's  influence 
cariied  the  whole  nation  with  him  into 
idolatry.  Evil  examples  like  pes- 
tilential diseases. 

Vers.  11-13.  M.^s  conversion.  1. 
AiSiction  its  occasion.  This  designed. 
"  They  shall  come  with  weeping,  and 
with  supplications  will  I  lead  them." 
"  When  the  rod  spoke  he  heard  it 
(Mic.  vi.  9)  who  would  not  hear  the  word 
(v.  10).  God  sent  him  into  the  dun- 
geon to  repent;  as  he  did  David  into 
the  depths,  and  Jonah  into  the  whale's 
belly  to  pray.  Adversity  hath  whipt 
many  a  soul  into  heaven,  which  other- 
wise prosperity  had  coached  to  hell" 
[Trapp].  2.  Prayer  its  accompaniment. 
"  He  besouo^ht  the  Lord."  "  His  afiec- 
tions,  like  I3en-hadad  sbest  counsellors, 
sent  M.  with  a  cord  about  his  neck,  to 
the  merciful  King  of  Israel "  [Trapp], 

3.  Amendment  its  fruits.  Complete 
reversal  of  former  policy;  zeal  in  de- 
struction of  idols,  and  in  worship  of 
God ;  public  example  and  encourage- 
ment to  others  to  do  right.  "  Fruits 
meet  for  repentance." 

Yer.  17.  Peojyle  did  sacrifice.  The 
force  of  habit,  {a)  To  withstand  good 
example ;  (6)  To  resist  religious  in- 
fluences ;  and  (c)  To  despise  Divine 
warnings.  Easier  to  corrupt  than  to 
reform  men,   and   difficult    to    break 


ofT  evil  customs  and  forsake  religious 
superstitions. 

Yers.  1 7,  18.   A  dark  day  and  a  bright 
sunset.     Here  is  an  unostentatious,  un- 
honoured,  and  lincpitaphed  grave.     We 
have  to  trace  in  this  case  a  sunrise  of 
promise,  soon  obscured  with  clouds  of 
guilt  and  crime.    These  clouds  burst  in 
floods   of    penitence    and    S(.rrow.      A 
meridian  of  sudden  brilliancy  follows. 
The    sky   clears,    and  the    orb    of    a 
chequered  life  sets  cloudless  and  serene 
on  the  hills  of   Judah.     Standing  by 
his  grave,  let  us  consider — I.  Manas- 
seh's sin.  Look  at  (1)  His  early  training. 
Hezekiah  would  well    bring    him  up; 
(2)  The  baneful  influence  his  creed  and 
example  had  on  his  subjects ;  (3)  His 
repeated    and    obdurate    rejection    of 
Divine  warning.      II.  His  conversion. 
His  dungeon  became  the  gate  of  heaven. 
Note    here    the  wonderful    power    of 
sanctified  affliction.     III.  His  new  life. 
The  grand  te.st  of  the  reality  of  con- 
version is  the  regenerated  being.     The 
tree  is  known  by  its  fruits.     We  read 
that  when  God  brought  him  again  to 
Jerusalem   into   his   kingdom,    *'  then 
M.  knew  that  the  Lord  He  was  God  " 
[Dr.  Macduff]. 

Yer.  20.  Buried  in  house,  "  in  the 
garden  of  his  own  house"  (2  Ki.  xxi. 
18).  The  sepulchre  in  the  garden  (cf, 
Jno.  xix.  41). 

Yers.  21-25.  Anion  trespassed  more 
and  more,  lit.,  multiplied  trespasses. 
1.  He  began  early.  Early  in  age  and 
in  reign.  Only  twenty- two,  only  two 
years  in  Jerusalem.  2.  He  did  much 
in  the  time.  To  do  good  much  effort, 
time,  and  sacrifice  required.  Easy  to 
do  evil,  which  spreads  quickly  and 
makes  a  harvest  in  short  season, 
"  How  then  was  Manasseh  dead  ?  In 
what  sense  was  Manasseh  buried? 
Here  is  an  active  boy  who  has  caught 
his  mantle,  and  is  working  with  re- 
doubled industry  "  [Dr.  Parker].  "  The 
evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them." 


303 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


[CflAP.    XXXIV, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXXIII. 


Vers.  1-7.  Did  evil.  It  was  the 
misfortune  of  Manasseh  to  pass  the 
most  critical  period  of  his  life,  the 
transition  from  youth  to  manhood,  in 
an  atmosphere  so  fraught  with  moral 
corruption,  unfavourable  to  the  forma- 
tion of  manly  sentiments,  holy  pur- 
poses, and  virtuous  habits — a  court,  the 
court  of  a  youth,  himself  the  victim  of 
a  deadly  miasma ;  the  beams  of  his 
own  glory  exhaled  under  such  influ- 
ences, and  the  better  impressions  of 
earlier  teachings  were  speedily  erased ; 
and  he  emerges  into  notice  a  worldling 
and  an  idolater,  a  stain  upon  his 
country's  annals,  for  fifty  years  a 
scourge  and  corrupter,  himself  at  last 
saved,  but  only  "  in  the  furnace  of 
afiliction"  and  "so  as  by  fire"  \Rev. 
R.  Hallam,  D.D.]. 

Yers.  11-13.  When  in  affliction. 
Methinks  I  hear  God  say,  Take  this 
medicine ;  it  is  exactly  fitted  to  the 
case,  prepared  and  weighed  by  my 
own  hands.  Adam's  (Friv.  Thoughts) 
sin  the  disease,  Christ  the  physician, 
pain  the  medicine  [Cecil].  By  pain 
God  drives  me  to  prayer,  teaches  me 


what   prayer  is,  inclines  me  to  pray 
[Adams]. 

**  Prayer  is  a  creature's  strength,  his  very 
breath  and  being ; 
Prayer  is  the  golden  key  that  can  open 
the  wicket  of  mercy." 

Vers.  21-24.  Did  evil.  M.  might 
repent  and  reform — ay,  and  be  accepted 
by  God  ;  but  could  he  undo  the  conse- 
quences— the  effects  upon  others — of 
his  life  and  wickedness  ?  May  as  well 
expect  to  prevent  the  appearance  of 
disease  after  having  used  every  effort 
to  spread  infection.  The  father  may 
turn  to  God  in  true  sorrow,  but  the 
son  he  begat  shall  follow  in  his  parent's 
course  of  evil  and  never  turn  from  it. 
Oh.  how  fearful  a  thing  is  sinl  If  we 
put  our  hands  to  it,  we  know  not  what 
we  do.  The  thought  of  the  irrevoc- 
able, irremediable  consequences  of  sin 
should  help  to  keep  us  from  sinning 

"  How  many,  all  weak  and  withered  of 
their  force, 
Wait  on  the  verge  of  dark  eternity, 
Like  stranded  wrecks  1" 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 


Critical  Notes.]    This  and  next  chapter  give  history  of  Josiah,  and  parallel  with 
2  Ki.  xxii.  and  xxiii.  1-30.    Josiah's  good  beginning  (vers.  1-7) ;  cleanses  temple  (vers 
8-13) ;  finds  a  copy  of  the  law  (vers.   14-17) ;  which  is  read  by  Shaphan  (vers.  18-22)  ; 
Huldah's  messa;.;e  (vers.  23-28) ;  J.  reads  the  law  to  the  elders  (vers.  29-33). 

Vers.  1-7.  — J.' s  good  heginnlng.  IValked,  declined  neither  to  right  hand  nor  left  : 
honourable  contrast  to  predecessors.  Yer.  3.  Young,  flfieen  or  sixteen  years  old.  Jewish 
youths  in  majority  at  thirteen.  Ver.  4.  Images,  sun  statues  (marg.),  xiv.  3.  Bust  (Ex. 
xxxii.  20).  Strewed,  as  if  graves  guilty  of  crimes  of  inmates.  Burnt,  greatest  infamy  to 
disinter  bones  of  idolatrous  priests  (c/.  2  Ki.  xxiii.  1 3-20).  Ver,  6.  Cities  of  Mana.  The 
power  of  Assyria  now  (b.c.  G29-624)  greatly  weakened,  if  not  completely  broken.  J.,  it  is 
evident,  asserted  and  maintained  a  claim  to  authority  over  the  whole  land  of  Is.  {Sr)eah. 
Com.'].  Mattocks,  "  in  their  dry  (desolate)  places  "  (c/.  Ps.  cix,  10).  Ver.  7.  He  had,  king 
himself  went  in  person  and  purified  the  land. 

Vas.  8-18. — Temple  repaired.    Purged,  lirst  cleansed,  then  repaired  (2  Ki.  xxiii.  4).     S., 
M.,  and  J.  sent  to  report  progress  ;  repair,  carry  on  tlie  work.    Ver.  9.  Money  collocted  in 
temple  and  in  all  parts  of  Judah  and  Is.    Ver.  10.  Workmeut  overseers  or  superintendents 
304 


CHAP.  XXXIV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CnRONICLES, 


(2  Ri.  xxii.  5).  Eastern  people  only  work  under  overseers.  Yer.  11.  Couplings^  beams  to 
bind  the  bouse  and  support  joists.  Floor^  to  rafter  chambers  surrounding  temple  or  out- 
buildings attached  to  courts.  Ver.  12.  Faithfully,  skilfully  and  diligently.  Ver.  13. 
Scribes,  now  designating  a  class,  a  distinct  division  of  Levitical  body. 

Vers.  14-22. — Discovery  of  a  copy  of  the  law.  Found,  probably  an  original  copy  of  Penta- 
teuch. Ver.  15.  The  hook,  the  temple  copy,  kept  in  most  holy  place  (Deut.  xxxi.  26). 
Shaphan  the  scribe  able  to  read  it.  ♦'  If  this  were  the  very  autograph  of  Moses  or  his 
scribe,  it  would  not  be  more  than  830  years  old.  Manuscripts  exist  of  nearly  twice  this 
age"  \_Murphy'\.  Ver.  16.  S.  took  the  book  to  king  and  reported  the  work  (2  Ki.  xxii.  9). 
Ver.  17.  Gathered,  emptied  out  of  a  chest  into  a  bag.  Ver.  19.  Rent,  in  distress  of  mind. 
Ver.  21.  Enquire,  from  a  prophet.  Agitated  feelings  prompted  J.  to  seek  immediate 
counsel  to  avert  curses  under  which  his  kingdom  lay.  Huldah,  keeper  of  wardrobe^ 
priestly  or  royal  garments ;  she  dwelt  in  college,  second  part  or  suburb  of  city  (c/.  Neh.  xi 
9  ;  Zeph.  i.  10). 

Vers.  28-28. — iMessage  of  Huldah.  Tell,  oracular  response,  in  which  justice  is  blended 
with  mercy,  announcing  impending  evil  to  overtake  the  city  and  its  inhabitants.  Very 
likely  such  places  as  Lev.  xxvi.  and  Deut.  xxviii.-xxxii.  were  read  to  the  king.  Ver.  27. 
Heard,  wrath  delayed  and  prayer  of  king  heard  on  account  of  penitence. 

Vers.  29-33. — Public  reading  of  the  law.  King  does  what  he  can  to  bring  people  to 
penitence.  Elders,  representatives  of  the  nation.  Read,  caused  to  be  read  aloud  before 
the  whole  assembly.  Ver.  31.  Place,  upon  his  pillar,  covenanted  with  his  subjects  to 
keep  commandments  and  walk  after  the  Lord.  Ver.  33.  Took  away.  Completes  purgation 
of  the  land,  is  followed  by  the  people  in  outward  reformation  during  his  lifetime ;  but 
the  spe  ial  mission  of  Jeremiah  in  earlier  ministry  to  rebuke  the  error  and  urge  real 
change  of  heart  and  life  (c/.  Jer.  vii.  3,  4,  21-24), 

EOMILETIGS. 

JosiAH,  OB  Early  Piety, — Verses  1-1 3, 

What  Hezekiah  had  accomplished  was  soon  undone  by  successors,  Manasseh 
and  Amon.     Manasseh  brought  down  God's  judgment  for  present  and  awful 
thieatenings  for  future.     Destruction  not  averted,  but  delayed.     God's  goodness 
and  longsuffering  displayed.    Josiah  mounts  the  throne,  and  even  in  youth  shows 
the  power  of  true  reli  j'on,  and   the  blessings  which  it  gives  to  its  possessor. 
I.  Displayed  in  seeking:  God  in  youth.     "  For  in  the  eighth  year  of 
his  reign,  while  he  was  yet  young,  &c."     A  minor  till  thirteen  years  old,   he 
sought  God,  in  three  ye  irs  after  he  attained  majority.     Probably  devout  and 
prayerful  before  this.     No  difficulty  in  young  persons  serving  God.     Joseph, 
Samuel,  David,  and  Timobhy,     Boys  may  evince  beautiful  character,  and  give 
promise  of  virtuous  life.     Beza  thanked  God,  in  his  last  will  and  testament, 
that  he  bpcame  a  Christian  at  the  age  of  sixteen.     "  Those  that  seek  me  early 
shall    find   me."    II.   Displayed   in   the   administration    of  his 
kingdom.     **  In  the  twelfth  year  he  began  to  purge  Judah  and   Jerusalem." 
,  1 .  He  purged  the  temple.     In  the  long  reign  of  his  idolatrous  grandfather,  and 
'short  but  wicked  rule  of  his  father,  the  temple  neglected  and  out  of  repair — 
dilapidated    and    deserted  for  the  gods  of  heathenism.     Concerned  for  Gcd's 
glory  and  God's  ho  ise — sought  to  make  temple  attractive  and  restore  it  to  former 
beauty.     2.  He  clecnsed  the  land.     Altars  of   Baal  overturned,  images  broken 
down  and  turned  to  dust,  and  groves  uprooted.     The  shrines  of  idols  forsaken 
and  obliterated.     The  land  cleansed  and  the  worship  of  temple  restored  and  per- 
formed with  scrupulous  obedience.    III.  Displayed  with  undeviating 
consistency.     "  Declined  neither  to  the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left."     Not 
satisfied  with  first  impressions,  first  convictions,  and  first  feelings  towards  God, 
but   reformed   the   wrong  and  "did  that  which  was  right."     Surrounded   by 
profligate  courtiers,  opposed  by  unprincipled  men,  he  was  earnest,  decided,  per- 
severing, and  consistent.     **  He  began  to  seek,"  continued  and  spent  a  whole  life 
in  setting  things  right  through  length  and  breadth  of  his  kingdom.     One  of  tho 

m 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxxiv. 


first,  he  was  one  of  the  most  zealous  converts,     Judah  never  had  a  more  devoted 
and  earnest  prince. 

JosiAH  THE  Young  Reformer. 

I.  Heform  originated  by  personal  agency.  Personal  efforts  of 
king  and  priests,  elders  and  officers  of  the  court.  Good  laws,  religious  institu- 
tions, helpful,  required  and  not  to  be  ignored ;  but  moral  influence  essentially 
personal.  Good  men,  earnest  reformers — originate  good  laws  and  good  institu- 
tions— the  means  of  revivals  and  extensive  reforms.  Luther,  Whitfield,  and 
Wesley.  II.  The  object  of  reform  to  restore  the  worship  of 
God  in  the  land.  Not  commerce  or  education  even — not  to  introduce  any 
new  religion,  but  revive  the  old,  pure  religion  which  God  instituted  at  first. 
J.  destroyed  the  evil  and  fostered  the  good ;  secured  workmen  and  overseei's  to 
repair  the  temple  in  great  numbers.  We  are  addicted  to  idolatry,  to  love  the 
creature  more  than  the  Creator ;  but  God  will  have  no  rival,  should  have  the  chief 
place  in  our  hearts  and  lives,  in  our  temples  and  kingdoms.  III.  Heform 
"was  regulated  by  the  principles  of  God's  Word.  Engaged  in  the 
work,  he  was  stimulated  by  the  discovery  of  the  law.  Henceforth  he  acted  with 
greater  intelligence  and  reverence  for  the  book.  Great  reforms  have  always 
been  preceded  and  accompanied  by  study  of  God*s  Word.  In  days  of  Isaiah 
and  Ezra  people  brought  to  penitence  and  prayer  by  reading  of  Scrip.  The 
Keformation  prepared  by  the  translations  of  Tyndale  and  Wyclifie.  The  germ 
of  the  great  movement  in  days  of  Whitfield  and  Wesley,  in  the  ''  Holy  Club," 
a  meeting  of  a  few  students  and  tutors  to  study  the  Greek  Testament  in  Oxford 
University.  Bible  study  and  Christian  activity  now  joined  together.  "  Have  a 
Bible  always  about  you,"  was  Wesley's  injunction.  Follow  not  what  is  fashion- 
able, prevalent,  and  convenient,  but  what  is  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 


The  Discovery  op  the  Book, — Verses  1-21. 

The  Book  of  the  Law  found  is  no  other  than  the  temple  copy,  which  was 
deposited  beside  the  ark  in  the  holy  of  holies  (Deut.  xxxi.  25,  26),  and  during 
the  ungodly  reigns  of  Manasseh  and  Anion,  perhaps  under  Ahaz.  when  the 
temple  itself  had  been  profaned  by  idols,  and  as  we  may  infer  from  2  Chr. 
XXXV.  3,  the  ark  also  removed  from  its  place,  was  somehow  lost,  and  was  now 
found  again  during  the  repair  of  the  temple  [Keil].  I.  The  Scriptures 
may  be  lost  for  a  season.  If  not  actually  lost,  hidden  away  and  forgotten. 
The  Bible  lost  by  wilful  neglect  to  read ;  by  mere  attention  to  the  letter  and  not 
the  spirit ;  by  criticising  and  dissecting  it  as  if  the  pi'oduction  of  man ;  by  every 
abuse   of  it,   though   boasting   of   its   possession.     II.  When  found   and 

rightly  read,  the  Scriptures  will  quicken  spiritual  life.  Its 
discovery  a  complete  surprise  to  the  king,  who  "  rent  his  clothes,"  studied  the 
book  himself,  and  read  it  to  others.  "  It  is  possible  that  it  may  have  been  a 
mere  rediscovery,  like  the  revival  of  the  Pandects  at  Amalfi,  like  the  revival 
of  the  Hebrew  and  Greek  text  of  the  Bible  at  the  Beformation.  But,  in 
either  case,  this  sudden  appearance  of  the  Law  amounted  almost  to  a  new 
revelation"  [Stanley].  1.  It  reminded  of  neglected  duty.  Duties  of  prophets, 
priests,  and  kings  set  forth  in  the  volume,  concerning  religious  and  political 
unity,  the  destruction  of  high  places  and  obedience  to  Jehovah.  "All  that 
which  is  written  concerning  us."  2.  It  produced  a  sense  of  guilt.  "  Our  fathers 
have  not  hearkened  unto  the  words  of  this  book."  Curse  pronounced  on  apostasy 
pierces  the  king's  heart ;  he  rends  garments  and  bows  down  in  deep  sorrow 
306 


CHAP.  xxxiy.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLEa. 


before  God.  3.  It  gave  insight  into  God!s  service.  "  Enquire  of  the  Lord.**  The 
enquiry  revealed  the  moral  condition  of  the  nation  and  urged  the  necessity  of 
reform.  "  There  was  still  a  higher  purpose  which  the  *  Second  Law  *  served,  a 
still  nobler  spirit  in  which  Moses  might  be  said  to  have  risen  again  in  the  days 
of  Josiah,  to  promulgate  afresh  the  code  of  Sinai.  Now,  for  the  first  time,  the 
love  of  God,  as  the  chief  ground  of  his  dealing  with  his  people — the  love 
towards  God  as  the  ground  of  their  service  to  him — the  spiritual  character  a 
free  choice  of  that  service — were  urged  on  the  nation  with  all  the  force  of  Divine 
and  human  authority  "  \Stanley\  4.  It  stimulated  to  vigorous  activity.  King 
active  before,  more  so  after  discovery.  Not  deterred  by  stern  message  from 
Huldah.  Rulers  of  people  inspired,  if  not  with  the  spirit  of  penitence,  yet  with 
the  burning  zeal  that  destroys  the  monuments  of  idolatry  and  repeats  the  deeds 

of  Elijah.  III.  Hence,  'when  a  right  sense  of  duty  is  created 
by  reading  the  Scripture,  a  revival  of  religion  will  ensue. 

Spiritual  sensibility  was  maintained  in  the  king's  profession  and  elevation.  In 
the  personal  life  of  the  leaders,  the  religious  worship  of  the  temple  and  the 
government  of  the  nation.  Political  reforms  and  ameliorations  beneficial  when 
a  spirit  of  piety  pervades  the  people,  and  the  nation  fears  God.  Regard  to  God's 
will  the  secret  of  prosperous  churches,  happy  governments,  and  genuine 
revivals.  As  individuals,  churches,  and  nation,  how  do  we  treat  the  Bible?  Is 
it  losing  or  keeping  its  hold  upon  our  religion,  our  manners  and  customs? 
"  Hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  ye  that  tremble  (with  holy  awe)  at  His  word  ** 
(Is.  IzvL  5). 

The  Loss  of  the  Scriptuebs. 

Consider  what  we  should  lose  if  we  were  to  part  with  the  Christian  Scriptures, 
and  with  all  the  institutions  and  blessings  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  them. 
I.  In  the  loss  of  the  Bible  and  its  fruits,  we  should  lose  the  knowledge  of  the 
true  God.  History  proves  this  beyond  reasonable  dispute.  God  must  speak,  or 
man  does  not  find  him.  Mankind  needs  a  book  to  keep  alive  in  the  earth  the 
knowledge  of  a  spiritual  and  personal  God.  II.  By  the  loss  of  the  Scriptures 
and  their  results  from  the  knowledge  of  mankind,  we  should  lose  sooner  or  later 
our  institutions  of  benevolence.  Benevolence  on  a  large  scale,  and  in  the  form 
of  permanent  institutions,  and  for  all  classes  of  mankind,  is  a  Biblical  idea. 
III.  In  the  loss  of  the  Bible  and  its  fruits,  we  should  sooner  or  later  suffer  the 
loss  of  our  institutions  for  popular  education.  Culture  has  existed  without  a 
revelation  from  heaven.  Schools  are  not  the  product  of  the  Bible  only.  But 
it  is  beyond  question  that  popular  education  is  of  Bible  origin.  Other  than 
Christian  religions  build  themselves  on  the  ignorance  of  the  masses.  IV.  By  the 
loss  of  the  Scriptures  and  their  creations,  we  should  sooner  or  later  part  -svith 
our  institutions  of  civil  liberty.  History  shows  that  the  gi*eat  charter  of 
freedom  in  the  world  is  the  Word  of  God.  The  great  free  nations  of  the  earth 
are  the  great  Christian  nations  \A.  Fhelps,  0.  T.  a  Living  Book]. 

Early  Piety  km>  its  Advantaqes. 

I.  Enlightened  piety  consists  in  seeking  God.  J.  "  while  yet. 
young  began  to  seek  after  God.'*  God  the  object  of  all  religion.  To  seek  his 
favour,  presence,  glory,  the  end  of  rational  and  immortal  beings.  The  essence 
of  sin  to  deny,  dishonour,  and  disobey  God.  1.  In  seeking  earnestly.  Not 
enough  to  think,  talk,  and  argue  about  God.  Seek  as  after  riches,  "  he  that 
Beeketh  findeth.**  2.  In  seeking  promptly.  J.  delayed  not.  Jehovah  had  kept 
him  from  influence  of  corruption,  from  passing  through  the  fire  in  his  father'a 

307 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  Cchap.  xxnv. 


reign ;  but  this  satisfied  not,  he  sought  higher  knowledge,  "  began  "  early  and 
promptly  "  to  seek  God."  3.  In  seeking  perseveringly.  In  youthful  inex- 
perience, surrounded  with  temptations  and  hindered  with  disadvantages,  he 
pursued  "  that  which  was  right  with  decided  steps,"  "  declined  neither  to  the 
right  hand  nor  to  the  left."  II.  Seeking  God  early  will  conduce  to 
honour.  In  temporal  things  it  tends  to  health,  reputation,  and  long  life  ;  in 
spiritual  and  eternal  more  advantageous.  1.  It  keeps  alive  religious  suscepti- 
bilities. "  His  heart  was  tender,"  not  only  in  the  ardour  and  sensibility  of 
youth,  but  in  maturity  of  age,  crowned  with  regal  honours  and  surrounded  by 
worldly  pleasures.  2.  It  saves  from  snares.  Temptations  like  wind,  spring 
from  every  quarter.  Exposed  in  company  and  in  solitude,  in  God's  house  and 
in  our  own — always  exposed.  Business,  pleasure,  and  companions  may  become 
a  snare.  But  great  risks  in  youth.  Beligion  alone  can  preserve.  3.  It  brings 
eminent  usefulness  in  life.  Power  in  patience,  love,  courage,  and  action; 
influence  over  others  in  relations  of  life ;  safety  in  position.  Self-willed 
monarchs  have  brought  destruction  on  themselves  and  ruin  on  kingdoms.  4.  It 
prepares  for  happy  death.  J.  honoured  in  age  and  lamented  in  death.  Virtues 
which  led  to  prosperity  cherished,  and  vices  w^hich  tended  to  poverty  escaped. 
Converted  in  early  morning,  his  day  bright,  his  work  accomplished.  Few  sins 
to  bewail  at  last,  no  remorse,  no  sins  of  youth  to  fill  his  bones  with  pain ;  his  end, 
though  mysterious,  peaceful  and  triumphant.  **  Godliness  profitable  to  all 
things,  &a" 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Ver.  3.  The  character  of  Josiah.  I.  but  to  begin  *  to  seek.'  What  sug- 
He  began  to  serve  God  at  a  very  early  gestions  of  modesty,  lowliness,  and 
period  of  life.  II.  He  proceeded  in  insignificance  of  effort !  What  deter- 
his  career  with  extraordinary  zeal  and  mination  expressed  in  simple  patience  I 
diligence.  III.  He  was  as  zealous  in  No  violence,  no  demonstrativeness, 
promoting  piety  as  in  suppressing  vice,  nothing  of  ostentation,  but  inquiry, 
IV.  In  all  he  did  he  adhered  strictly  waiting,  expectancy,  a  look  that  means 
to  the  Word  of  God  [^Rev.  C.  Simeon\  I  know  not  from  what  part  of  the 
Learn — I.  That  a  child  may  begin  to  heavens  the  Lord  may  come,  but  from 
serve  God  early.  II.  That  a  child  may  some  point  he  will  presently  descend, 
serve  God  Avhen  the  world  is  most  and  it  is  for  me  to  seek,  to  be  prepared 
attractive.  Moses,  David,  Josiah.  III.  to  receive  him "  [Dr.  Darker],  The 
That  when  a  child  begins  to  serve  verse  contains  a  description — I.  Of  our 
God  early  he  will  be  likely  to  become  moral  condition ;  without  God.  2.  Of 
honourable  and  useful.  "  Train  up  a  essential  principles  of  all  religion ; 
child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  and  seeking  God.  3.  Of  true  prayer ;  ear- 
when  he  is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  nest  desire  for  God,  not  cold  asking, 
it."  A  lesson — I.  To  the  young.  Avoid  formal  seeking,  &c.  The  words  also 
the  wrong  and  "do  that  which  is  describe  the  way  to  (1)  eminent  piety; 
right."  2.  To  parents  and  guardians  (2)  eminent  consistency;  (3)  eminent 
of  youth.    Look  weU  to  rising  genera-  usefulness. 

tion.   The  welfare  of  families,  churches,  Ver.  13.     Scribes.     Hitherto  desig- 

and  the   nation    depends   upon   their  nation  of  a  class,  officers  of  state,  who 

training.     "  That  of  all  men  we  meet  mustered  troops  and  managed  finances 

with,  nine  parts  out  of  ten  are  what  (cf  2  Sam.  viii.  17 ;  xx.  25 ;  2  Ki.  xii. 

they  are,  good  or  bad,  useful  or  not,  10;  Is.  xxxiii.  18).     Here  evidently  a 

according  to  their  education"  [Locke],  new  state  of  things — an  order  of  scribes 

Began   to   seek.      "  Sweet    words    are  forming  a  distinct  division  of  Levitical 

these  I — to*  begin;'  not  only  to  begin,  body.     The  class  term  first  found  in 
808 


CHIP,  ixxiv.]         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


this  passnge,  yet  probably  originated  hension,  ready  reflections  of  conscience* 
in  reign  of  Ilezekiah,  who  employed  a  disposition  to  be  easily  affected.  2. 
men  to  *' copy  out"  uncollected  proverbs  A  pliable  disposition  to  yield  to  Divine 
of  Solomon  (Prov.  xxv.  1).  Probably  influences.  II.  The  way  in  which  such 
to  the  rise  of  this  class  are  we  indebted  a  temper  should  express  itself.  1.  In 
for  preservation  of  many  prophecies  relation  to  the  W(  rd  of  God.  2.  In 
belonging  to  Hezekiah's  time,  while  relation  to  sin.  3.  In  relation  to  pro- 
works  of  previous  prophets — of  Ahijah,  vidential  events.  4.  In  relation  to  the 
Iddo,  S^liemaiah,  Jehu  son  of  Hanani,  honour  of  God.  III.  What  foundation 
and  others  —  have  perished  \Sptak  is  laid  for  such  a  temper  in  Christianity. 
Com.].  1.  Good   men   in   the  ancient  church 

Yer.  14.  Found  a  Book.  1.  The  were  not  strangers  to  it.  2.  The  re- 
profound  sensation  created.  2.  The  compenses  of  the  life  to  come  are  more 
intense  anxiety  to  know  the  truth,  fully  revealed.  3.  Richer  discoveries  of 
The  inquiry,  personal  reading,  and  grace  are  made  to  us.  4.  Ceremonials 
public  exposition.  3.  The  need  of  the  have  given  way  to  substantials  of 
Book  now.  To  preserve  reHgion,  edu-  religion.  5.  The  softening  spirit  is 
cate  the  race,  and  advance  the  cause  more  plentifully  communicated.  IV. 
of  God  and  humanity.  Inferences.     1.  Discern  the  difference 

Yers.  23—28.    The  faithful  message,  between  a  truly  Christian  temper  and 

Notice — 1.  The  estimate  of  the  king,  some  things  mistaken  for  it :  it  is  not 

"  Tell  the  manP     Only  a  man,  sinful  natural  easiness  of  disposition,  not  occa- 

and   mortal   like   other   men.     Kings  sional  tenderness.     2.  Let  us  all  seek 

need  to  be  told  this  truth.  "  I  acknow-  after  and  cultivate  this  tenderness  of 

ledge  myself  a  mortal,"  said  Charles  Y.  spirit.   3.  If  conscious  of  its  possession, 

Emperor.     With   God    no   respect  of  take  the  comfort  of  it  as  good  evidence 

persons.    2.  The  threatened  judgment,  of  a  renewed  and  Christian  state  [-Dr. 

"  I  will  bring  evil  upon  this  place."  Evans]. 

No  hiding,  no  toning  down  of  unplea-  Yers.  29-33.     I.  The  public  reading 

sant  truths.     3.  The  procuring  cause  of  the  Book.     The  Book  exists ;  not 

of  judgment.      "They  have  forsaken  to  be   invented;    only   to    be    found, 

me."      Announcement    to    Manasseh  used,  understood,  and  obeyed.    II.  The 

repeated  with  terrible  significance  to  making  of  the  solemn  covenant.  Made 

Josiah.     Bepentance   will    not    avail,  with  sincerity,  "  with  all  his  heart  and 

now  too  late   to   save   guilty   people,  with  all  his  soul;"  made  "to perform" 

"  Wrath  poured  out  and  shall  not  be  in  Kings  (xxiii.  2),  "  to  stand  to  the 

quenched."  covenant."    Many  forget  and  fall  away. 

Yers.  26-28.  A  tender  spirit.  Hul-  III.  The  impression  created  upon  the 
dah  in  first  outburst  of  prophetic  spirit  people.  The  example  of  the  king,  re- 
thinks only  of  the  matter  in  hand,  for-  forms  in  the  temple  and  solemn  reso- 
getting  the  person  of  the  inquirer;  but  lution  in  open  covenant.  A  restraint 
when  that  is  past,  and  the  stream  flows  for  a  season.  No  open  idolatry,  no 
more  smoothly,  the  thought  of  the  per-  grove,  nor  Baal  worship,  yet  super- 
son  occurs  to  her,  "the  King  of  Judah"  ficial,  not  deeply  seated  amendment. 
[Speak.  Com.].  Here  she  giveth  him  Did  not  stand  for  personal  purity  and 
his  just  title,  whom  before  she  had  loyal  obedience.  The  mission  of  Jere- 
called  "  man."  Piety  is  no  enemy  to  miah  in  his  early  ministry  to  rebuke 
civility  [IVapp].  I.  Give  a  general  and  urge  a  real  change.  "  Except  your 
account  of  a  tender  heart.  1.  It  im-  righteousness  exceed  the  righteousness 
plies  a  quick  and  ready  sense  of  feeling  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees," 
in  spiritual  things — quickness  of  appre- 


.~,JEv 


809 


MUMlJjJSTIO   VUMMEJSTAUy :    CUUUJSIULEIS.  [chap.  XXXIT. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXXIV, 


Vers.  1-7.     Eight  years  old.     There 
is  at  the  top  of  the  Queen's  staircase 
in  Windsor  Castle  a  statue  from  the 
studio  of  Baron  Triqueti,  of  Edward 
VI.  marking  with  his  sceptre  a  passage 
in  the  Bible,  which  he  holds  in  his  left 
hand,  and   upon  which    he   earnestly 
looks.       The    passage    is    concerning 
Josiah.     "  J.  was  eight  years  old  when 
he  began  to  reign    .    .    .    and  walked 
in  all  the  way  of  David  his  father,  and 
turned  not  aside  to  the  right  hand  or 
to  the  left."     The  statue  was  erected 
by  the  will   of   the  late   prince,  who 
intended  it  to  convey  to  his  son  the 
Divine  principles  by  which  the  future 
governor  of  England  should  mould  his 
life  arid  reign  on  the  throne  of  Great 
Britain  \T.  Hughes^ 

Vers.  8-13.    Men  did  work  faithfully 
(ver.  12).    What  we  are  accustomed  to 
decry  as  great  social  evils  will,  for  the 
most  part,  be  found  to  be  but  the  out- 
growth of  man's  own  perverted  life; 
and  though  we  may  endeavour  to  cut 
down  and  extirpate  them  by  means  of 
law,  they  will  only  spring  up   again 
with  fresh  luxuriance  in  some  other 
form,  unless  the  conditions  of  personal 
life   and   character   are   radically   im- 
proved.    If  this  view  be  correct,  then 
it  follows  that  the  highest  patriotism 
and  philanthropy  consist,  not  so  much 
in  altering  laws  and  modifying  insti- 
tutions, as  in  helping  and  stimulating 
men  to  elevate  and  improve  themselves 
by   their   own    free   and   independent 
individual   action    [Smiles].      We   put 
too  much  faith  in  systems  and   look 
too  little  to  men  [B.  Disraeli]. 

Vers.  14-22.  The  Bible  the  Saviour  of 
the  Church.  Men  say  that  the  Church 
has  saved  the  Bible.  I  say  that  the 
Bible  has  saved  the  Church  ten  thousand 
times  over.  You  shall  find  that  when 
great  questions  come  up  in  a  community 
churches  do  not  go  ahead.   You  cannot 


make  them.   Churches  are  like  the  bag- 
gage-waggons of  an  army.    They  carry 
the  provisions  and  indispensable  things; 
but,  after  all,  baggage-waggons  never  go 
first  in  a  march.    And  the  Church  is  sc 
busy  taking  care  of  the  things  which  it 
carries  that  it  has  no  time  to  devote  tc 
new  things  that   present   themselves. 
Keforms     hardly     ever    originate    in 
churches.     I  am  not  speaking  against 
churches,  I  am  merely  putting  them 
where  they  put  themselves,  and  saying 
that  tendencies  to  unusual  conduct  in 
the  application  of  gospel  principles  to 
new  questions  are  oftentimes  ridiculed 
by   ministers,   rejected    from    pulpits, 
and  refused  places  in  conference  meet- 
ings, and  stigmatised  by  church  mem- 
bers  as  being  fanatical  [H.  W.  Beecher]. 
When  we  find  the  book  of  the  law,  let 
us  not  shrink  from  finding  its  judg- 
ments as  well  as  its  gospels.     The  pro- 
phecies must  all  be  fulfilled,  when  they 
indicate  that  the  wicked  shall  be  de- 
stroyed (ver.  26),  shall  be  driven  away 
in  the  wrath  of  God.    The  Bible  is  not 
all  gospel ;  or  where  it  is  all  gospel  it 
involves  the  element  of  judgment  and 
the  certainty  of  doom  [Dr.  J.  Parker]. 
Ver.  33.     Departed  not.    The  multi- 
tude "go  at  all  adventures"  (Lev.  xxvi. 
21,  marg.),  careless  of  their  ways,  reck- 
less  of   their   end.     It  is  with  them 
scarcely  worth  looking  into — whether 
God  is  displeased  or  not ;  whether  they 
be  walking   in   the   narrow  or  broad 
path,  and  what  the  end  of  that  path 
may  be.  Sometimes  they  come  into  the 
world  fresh  from  the  influence   of  a 
religious  education.     For  a  while  they 
yield  alternately  to  their  conscience  and 
their  corruptions.    They  are  touched  a 
moment  under  the  convictions  of  the 
word,  or  the  corrections  of  the  rod.  Yet 
the  want  of  steadiness  and  consistency 
soon   sweeps  all  away  into   "worse" 
hardness  than  before  [C.  Bridge]. 


110 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  nOMILETlU   COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


OHAPTEE,  XXXY, 


Critical  Notes.]  The  preparations  for  the  Passover  (vers.  1-9) ;  the  actual  celebration 
(vers.  10-19);  Josiali's  defeat  by  Necho  (vers.  20-27;.  2  Ki.  xxiii.  21-30  corresponds  to 
this  chap. 

Vers.  1-9. — The  jjreparation.  Day  not  irregular,  but  time  appointed  (Ex.  xii.  0).  Prie.'^ts 
re-established  in  their  courses  and  duties,  as  prescribed  {cf.  ch.  xxix.  5  ;  xxx.  IG).  Ver.  3. 
Taurjlit,  instructed  people  in  matters  pertaining  to  worship.  Put,  for  some  reason  removed 
during  repairs.  Bicrden,  ark  once  in  its  place,  to  remain ;  not  to  be  carried  about,  as 
customary  before  Temple  built.  Ver.  4.  Prepare,  other  duties  devolved  upon  them  ;  they 
nmst  attend  with  dihgence  to  regulations  of  public  service  {cf.  1  Chr.  xxiii.-xxvi.). 
Ver.  5.  A  section  of  Levites  to  attend  to  every  division  of  families  of  people.  Ver.  (i.  Sn, 
particular  direction  required.  Personal  purity  required  that  brethren  may  be  prepared. 
V'.rs.  7-9.  King  and  princes  give  animals.  J.  gave  (ch.  xxx.  24)  lambs  and  kids  for  the 
meal ;  bullocks  for  burnt-offerings  (Num.  xxviii.  19)  and  thank-offerings.  Ver.  8. 
Wllhniilij,  number  not  given,  unless  included  in  next  verses.  Unt  >  priesU,  for  poor 
families  of  their  own  order  ;  leading  priests  furnished  offerings  ;  chief  Levites  also  gave 
to  poor  Lcvitical  families. 

Vers.  10-19. —  Tlie  celebration  of  Pas- over.  So,  everything  ready,  according  to  law. 
Ver.  11.  SprinJilcd  {cf.  xxx.  16).  Played,  removed  skins.  Priests  and  Levites  performed 
their  parts.  Ver.  12.  Removed,  parts  to  be  consumed  on  the  altar,  viz.,  fat,  kidneys,  &c.  ; 
parts  cut  off  by  Levites  and  given  to  offerers  for  burnt-offerings.  Ver.  13.  Roasted  (Ex. 
xii.  8,  9  ,  peace-offerings  boiled  and  eaten  on  days  of  unleavened  bread.  Ver.  14.  There- 
fore, because  priests  too  much  engaged  to  prepare  food  for  themseh  es.  Ver.  15.  Singers 
divided  like  other  Levites,  divided  into  courses,  took  service  in  turn  ;  the  order  determined 
by  lot,  first  lot  to  sons  of  Asaph  (1  Chr.  xxv.  8-31).  "  Probably  this  course  retained  its 
presidency  over  the  rest,  and  now  commenced  in  the  Temple  the  restored  choral  service" 
[Speak.  Com.'].  Ver.  16.  Savie  day,  at  that  time.  Ver.  17.  Seven  days,  Israel,  i.e.,  the 
whole  people  {cf.  ver.  3  and  ver.  18).  Hezekiah's  kept  fourteen  days  (xxx.  20).  Ver.  18. 
Like,  for  exact  conformity  to  Mosaic  law  and  legal  purity.  Ver.  19.  Year,  culminating 
point  in  reforms  (2  Ki.  xxii.  3). 

Vers.  20-27. — T]ie  defeat  ofjosiah.  After,  thirteen  years  after,  B.C.  608.  A  blank  in  Jewish 
hislory.  Necho,  son  of  Psammetichus,  king  of  Egypt,  against  Babylonian  forces  which 
he  expected  to  find  near  Charchemish,  chief  city  of  Northern  Syria.  N.  did  not  wish  to 
embarrass  Josiah.  Ver.  21.  llou^e,  with  which  at  war  and  against  which  he  was  commis- 
sioned by  God.  Ver.  22.  J.  disguised;  some,  equipped  himself ;  others,  was  eager  ;  Sept., 
strengthened  himself  to  fight.  Mfg.^  between  Magdol  and  Hadadriramon.  Ver.  23.  Shot 
by  an  arrow,  J.  ordered  his  servants  to  carry  him  away  ;  put  in  a  second  chariot, 
reserved  for  flight  probably,  lighter  than  a  war-chariot,  and  taken  to  Jer.  Ver.  25  His 
death  lamented  by  Jeremiah  in  words  no  longer  extant,  but  preserved  and  chanted  by 
professional  singers  long  after  the  event.  "  Some  find  the  prophet's  elegy  in  the  entire 
Book  of  Lamentations;  others  iira  part  of  it  (ch.  iv.)  ;  most  critics  of  opinion  that  tlie 
lament  is  lost  "  [Speak.  Com.].  Ver.  25.  Ordinance,  not  minstrels,  but  those  in  authoritv. 
A  certain  day  set  apart,  a  standing  custom  to  lament.  Ver.  26.  Goodness,  good  deeds, 
religious  faithfulness,  acts  of  kindness  or  goodwill,  according  to  that  law  which  he  found, 
read,  and  remembered. 

HOMILETICS, 

A  Celebrated  Passover. — Verses  1-19. 

Great  events  and  remarkable  days — *'  red  letter  days  " — relieve  monotony  of 
life  ;  stand  out  prominently  in  history  and  create  epochs  in  memory.  Such 
times  afford   comfort,  inspiration,  and  never  forgotten.     No   such  passover  as 

this.    Notice — I.   The  devout  preparation  for  its  celebration. 

"  So  the  service  was  prepared."     King  exhorted  and  stimulated  the  indifferent 

311 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxxv. 


and  unwilling.  1.  By  rigidly  fixing  the  arh.  Put  away  by  idolatrous  Manasseh, 
who  set  a  carved  image  in  its  place;  or  temporarily  removed  by  Josiah  during 
repairs ;  it  was  replaced  in  temple,  not  carried  about  any  longer.  Now  the 
priests  were  discharged  from  this  burden,  they  must  be  careful  for  other  duties. 

2.  By  personal  sanctification.  "  Sanctify  yourselves "  by  separation  from  un- 
cleanness  and  consecration  to  God.  But  not  to  end  here,  "  prepare  their 
brethren,"  by  instruction,  exhortation,  and  example.     Self  first,  others  after. 

3.  By  orderly  arrranqement  of  classes.  "  He  set  them  in  their  charge."  Not 
any  new  work  nor  novel  method  ;  just  a  return  to  written  divine  order.  The 
written  word  the  rule  to  which  magistrates  and  ministers  should  appeal. 
"Walk  by  the  same  rule."  II.  The  unlimited  numbers  "which 
attended.  "  Neither  did  all  the  kings  of  Israel  keep  such  a  passover  as 
Josiah  kept,  and  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and  all  Judah  and  Israel  that  were 
present,  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem."  "  If  we  allow  thirteen  persons  for 
each  lamb  or  kid,  there  were  upwards  of  500,000  communicants,  while  so  fai 
as  we  know,  there  were  only  17,000  sheep  presented  by  Hezekiah  and  his 
princes  (xxx.  24),  which  would  not  supply  more  than  half  the  number  of  par- 
takers" [Murphy].  III.  The  earnest  spirit  by  which  it  was 
characterised.  Remarkable  for  enthusiasm,  holy  excitement,  and  unity 
of  heart.  1.  A  spirit  of  unbounded  liherality.  Multitudes  reduced  to  poverty, 
especially  from  Israel  by  Assyrian  devastations;  unprovided  with  means  of  com- 
memorations. The  king  gave  to  the  people  lambs,  kids,  and  bullocks  (ver.  7). 
Princes  gave  to  priests  and  Levites ;  and  chiefs  of  these  officers  remembered 
poor  families  of  their  order.  Hearts  touched,  a  spirit  of  brotherhood  prevailed 
and  all  "  gave  willingly."  2.  A  spirit  of  thorough  consecration.  "  The  priests 
stood  "  waiting  *'  in  their  place,"  the  singers  in  their  station,  all  "  busied  in 
offering  that  they  might  not  leave  their  place"  (ver.  15).  None  left  their  posts 
unless  relieved  by  brethren,  and  then  return  to  duty  with  delight.  3.  A  spirit 
of  hearty  co-operation.  They  urged  and  helped  one  another,  did  their  worl? 
"  speedily."  Places  not  long  empty,  viands  lost  not  heat  nor  flavour  through 
delay.  "The  service  of  the  Lord  was  prepared  the  same  day"  (ver.  16). 
IV.  The  loyal  obedience  by  which  it  was  observed.  In  accord- 
ance with  law  in  time,  method,  and  spirit.  1.  Right  time  observed.  Day 
appointed  by  law  {cf  ch.  xxx.  2,  13),  "  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  "  (Ex.  xii.  6). 
Nothing  must  be  done  untimely.  2.  Personal  purity  observed.  Priests 
and  people  sanctified.  "  So  the  service  was  -prepared."  Need  for  cleansiug 
with  more  than  sprinkling  of  blood  and  water  with  hyssop — withdrawal  from 
more  than  earthly  pollution.  God's  service  pure  and  loving,  "  sincerity  and 
truth"  (1  Cor.  v.  7),  like  God  who  is  holy  (1  Pet.  i.  13)  and  liorht  and  love. 
3.  Legal  authority  observed.  Not  according  to  the  will  of  the  king,  the  con- 
jecture of  the  court,  but  "  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  hand  of 
Moses  "  (ver.  6),  '*  the  writing  of  David  and  the  writing  of  Solomon  "  (ver.  5). 
"  As  many  as  walk  according  to  this  rule  (lit.  straight  line,  e.g.  of  a  mason's 
rule  or  a  surveyor's  chain),  peace  be  on  them  and  mercy  upon  the  Israel  of 
God"  (Gal.  vi.  16). 

The  Disturbed  Reign.— Ferses  20-25. 

If  Josiah  thought  that  after  restoration  of  divine  worship  and  revival  of 
religion  he  would  have  a  period  of  settled  peace  and  national  prosperity,  he  was 
disappointed.  The  bright  interval  brief,  "^oo  late  is  written  on  the  pages  even 
which  describe  this  momentary  revival,"  says  Stanley  (Jew.  Gh,,  vol.  ii.),  from 
whom  we  condense  this  outline.  "  It  did  not  reach  the  deeply-seated,  wide- 
spread corruption  which  tainted  rich  and  poor  alike.  Large  as  is  the  space 
312 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES. 


occupied  by  it  in  the  historical  books,  by  the  contemporary  prophets  it  is  never 
mentioned  at  all."  The  kingdom  doomed,  though  day  delayed  ;  two  calamities 
the  immediate  precursors.  I.  The  invasion  of  the  Scythians  (B.C. 
634-639).  ''  The  earhest  recorded  movement  of  Northern  populations,  hid  be- 
hind the  long  mountain  barrier,  reared  by  nature  between  civilised  and  un- 
civilised races  of  old  world.  Suddenly  appeared  those  strange,  uncouth,  fur-clad 
forms,  hardly  to  be  distinguished  from  their  horses  and  waggons,  fierce  as  their 
own  wolves  or  bears,  sweeping  towards  the  southern  regions  which  seemed  to 
them  their  natural  prey.  No  wonder  that  now  all  the  ancient  monarchies  of 
the  south — Assyria,  Babylon,  Media,  Egypt,  even  Greece  and  Asia  Minor — 
stood  aghast  at  the  spectacle  of  savage  hordes  rushing  down  on  seats  of  luxury 
and  power.  About  the  middle  of  Josiah's  reign  one  division  broke  into  Syria, 
penetrated  on  their  way  to  Egypt,  to  the  southern  frontier  of  Palestine,  were 
bought  off  by  Psammetichus  and  retired,  after  sacking  the  temple  of  Astarte  at 
Ascalon.  They  left  one  permanent  trace  as  they  scoured  through  the  plain  of 
Esdioclon.  The  old  Canaanitish  city  of  Bethshan,  at  eastern  extremity  of  that 
plain,  from  them  received  the  name,  which  it  bore  throughout  the  Poman 
Empii-e,  in  the  mouths  of  Greeks,  Scythopolis,  Hhe  city  of  the  Scythians.'"  II. 
The  invasion  ofNecho.  "Strengthened  by  influx  of  Northern  nations, 
Babylon  now  ri.siug  into  overwhelming  predominance.  Necho,  the  vigorous 
King  of  Egypt,  wished  to  anticipate  that  growth  by  securing  himself  on  east 
and  north.  Kingdom  of  Judah  between  these  contending  powers.  Necho 
advanced  through  Palestine  towards  passes  of  Lebanon  on  his  way  to  the  great 
battlefield  of  Carchemish.  In  the  plain  of  Esdroelon,  the  scene  of  so  many  cf>m- 
bats  in  earlier  history  of  Israel,  Josiah  determined,  with  a  rashness  which 
appeared  to  be  against  the  counsels  of  Providence  (2  Chr.  xxxv.  21 ;  1  Esdras  i. 
27,  28),  to  stay  the  progress  of  the  Egyptian  army.  No  details  given  of  the 
battle.  Everything  absorbed  in  one  tragical  event  which  closed  it"  [Stanley]. 
*'  What  stability  is  there  in  earthly  things  ?  How  seldom  is  excellency  of  any 
kind  long-lived  ?  In  the  very  strength  of  his  age,  in  the  height  of  his  strength, 
is  Josiah  withdrawn  from  the  earth  :  as  not  without  a  merciful  intention  of  His 
glory  on  God's  behalf ;  so  not  without  some  weakness  on  his  own.  .  .  Sometimes 
both  grace  and  wit  are  asleep  in  the  wariest  and  holiest  breasts.  The  best 
of  God's  saints  may  be  sometimes  miscarried  by  their  passions  to  their  cost " 
[Bp.  Hall]. 

God's  Command  to  Make  Haste. — Verse  21. 

Applying  this  to  Christians,  observe  on  what  command  founded.  A  distinc- 
tion between  moral  and  positive  duties.  Positive  right  because  commanded  ; 
moral  commanded  because  right,  founded  on  the  very  nature  of  thiugs.  We 
may  be  satisfied,  therefore,  with  God's  revealed  will,  because  sure  that  it  is 
founded  on  rectitude.  Here  command  to  make  haste  founded  on  three 
principles — First,  because  of  the  importance  of  the  thing  itself.  Not  a  trifle,  but 
our  life,  cannot  neglect  without  infinite  loss,  and  plunging  into  lamentation  and 
woe.  If  religion  be  anything,  it  is  everything;  the  "one  thing  needful." 
Secondly,  because  of  the  limitation  of  our  oppoi'tunities.  We  have  only  one  season 
to  regard  these  things,  the  world  over.  "  No  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge 
in  the  grave,  &c."  Several  circumstances  to  be  mentioned  in  regard  to  thi> 
season  of  attention.  It  is  short.  "  What  is  thy  life  ?  &c."  It  is  uncertain. 
**  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,  (fee."  It  has  also  much  in  it  not  applicable  to 
any  serious  and  importaiit  service.  The  whole  of  infancy,  much  of  childhood  and 
youth ;  lawful  business,  allowed  recreation  and  necessary  sleep.  Observe  also 
that  of  this  only  season  for  action,  many  favourable  periods  may  fail  before  the 
end  of  it.     "  The  harvest  may  be  passed  and  the  summer  ended,  &c."     Then  of 

313 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   CHRONICLES.  [chap.  xxxv. 


this  season  much  is  already  gone.  Only  a  day  and  sun  risen  very  high  with 
some.  **  It  is  high  time  to  awake,  &c."  And  if  this  applies  to  all,  with  what 
force  to  those  of  sixty  or  seventy  or  more  'I  Thirdly,  because  of  the  advantages  to 
he  derived  from  ardour.  Often  said,  and  is  literally  true,  that  '•  the  lazy  tfike  the 
most  pains."  They  make  no  progiess,  because  everything  a  diversion  or 
hindrance ;  have  to  begin  again  and  again.  How  often  have  we  succeeded 
1)eyond  expectation  when  we  have  applied  ourselves  with  decision  and  vigour  I  A 
pleasure  in  acting  with  vigour  which  listless,  inert,  lounging  and  yawning  never 
know.  Never  so  happy  as  in  application.  Slothful  say,  "  See  a  lion  in  the  way, 
&c.'*  But  zeal  clears  the  way  of  the  lion,  removes  impediments,  or  turns  them 
into  auxiliaries  \Jay,  "  Evenings  with  Jesus  "]. 

Rashness  and  Risks. — Verses  20-24, 

From  the  time  of  Manasseh,  Judah  had  been  a  vassal  of  Assyria,  the  rival  of 
Egypt.  In  thi-^  war  Josiah  might  feel  bound  as  a  matter  of  honour  to  support 
the  interests  of  his  northern  liege-lord  and  oppose  Necho.  Might  think  it  per- 
fectly legitimate  to  prevent  the  march  of  the  enemy  through  his  own  territories — 
might  doubt  Necho's  faith  in  ^*  Elohim,"  whom,  he  said,  gave  him  commission. 
Warnings  unheeded,  attack  made,  and  results  sad  1  I.  Josiah  rash,  in  his 
conduct.  May  be  excused  in  some  things,  but  erred  in  others.  All  not 
good  that  good  men  do.  *' Great  men  are  not  always  wise."  1.  Josiah' s  action 
Lvas  unwise.  Intermeddled  with  strife  not  belonging  to  him.  *'  His  be  t 
apology,"  says  one,  "  perhaps  would  be  that  Necho  was  marching  through  a  p:at 
of  Judea.  But  then,  first,  this  part  did  not  belong  to  him ;  and,  secondly,  if 
Necho  had  passed  through,  he  might  have  done  so,  as  Israel  formerly  desired  to 
pass  through  the  borders  of  Moab,  engaging  to  commit  no  injury,  and  to  pay  for 
all  they  used."  2.  Josiah  acted  from  hnpidse  and  not  conviction.  Passion  worse 
than  conviction,  and  never  a  wise  counsellor.  '*  Make  no  friendship  with  an 
angry  man,  and  with  a  furious  man  thou  shalt  not  go,  lest  thou  learn  his  ways, 
and  get  a  snare  to  thy  soul."  3.  Josiah  sought  not  divine  counsel.  Jeremiah, 
Zephaniah,  Urijah,  and  a  college  of  seers  with  him,  but  did  not  ask  counsel  of 
the  Lord.  *'  Shall  I  go  up,  or  shall  I  forbear  ?  "  If  we  reject  divine  counsel,  it 
betrays  consciousness  of  wrong,  and  leads  to  risks  in  any  enterprise.  4.  Josiah 
rejected  urgent  warnings.  Necho,  calm  and  conciliatory,  sent  ambassadors. 
"  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  &c."  But  J.  despised — (1)  Appeals  to  reason.  "I 
come  not  against  thee."  (2)  Appeals  to  religion.  "  For  God  commanded  me  to 
make  haste."  (3)  Appeals  to  self-interest.  "  Forbear  thee  from  meddling  with 
God,  who  is  wath  me,  that  He  destroy  thee  not."  II.  Josiah's  rash 
conduct  brought  fearful  results.  **  J.  would  not  turn  his  face  from 
him,  (fee."  1.  Uj^oii  himself.  "  In  his  chariot,  but  disguised,  according  to  the 
practice  of  the  royal  families  of  Israel  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  22  ;  1  Ki.  xxii.  30)  in 
moments  of  extreme  emergency.  The  Egyptian  archers,  such  as  we  see  on  their 
monuments,  discharged  a  volley  of  arrows  against  him.  He  fell,  was  placed  in 
his  second  chariot  of  reserve,  and  carried  to  Jerusalem  to  die"  [^Sta7iley'\.  A  death 
untimely,  which  might  have  been  avoided,  but  permitted  by  God,  a  mystery  and 
a  correction.  2.  Upon  the  nation.  Unworthy  of  such  a  prince,  he  was  taken 
away  from  impending  calamities.  A  striking  illustration  how  *'  the  righteous  is 
taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come."  God's  decree  took  fatal  effect,  after  delay, 
in  Josiah's  life.     Jerusalem  taken,  and  inhabitants  carried  to  Babylon, 

The  Death  of  King  Josiah. —  Ver^ses  23-25. 

I.  The  mystery  of  the  event.    A  good  man's  end  often  strange. 
Steps  taken  which  result  in  failure  and  death.     One  event,  specially  stamped 
3U 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES 


with  uncertainty,  but  linked  with  God's  purpose.  "  A  time  to  die."  "Who  can 
tell  a  man  when  it  shall  be  ? "  "  In  the  day  of  death,"  the  king  impotent  to  resist 
as  the  beggar ;  depends  upon  God's  will,  not  man's  effort.  Drawn  by  policy, 
alliance,  or  apparent  duty;  '*so  are  the  sons  of  men  snared  in  an  evil  time, 
when  it  falleth  suddenly  upon  them."  II.  The  memorial  of  the  event. 
A  mournful  death,  without  precedent  in  annals  of  Judah.  Commemorated— 
1.  In  jn-ophetic  dirge.  "Jeremiah  lamented,"  and  minstrels,  male  and  female, 
sang  dirges  of  the  event.  2.  In  national  mourning.  "  All  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
mourned  for  Josiah."  A  contrast  to  the  unwept  fates  of  those  who  depart 
"  without  being  desired"  (ch.  xxi.  20).  3.  In  appointed  ordinance.  **  Made  them 
an  ordinance  in  Israel."  The  elegy  of  prophet,  chanted  at  stated  public  occa- 
sions, long  perpetuated,  and  the  lamentation  became  proverbial  for  any  great  and 
extraordinary  sorrow  (Zech.  xii.  11).  Good  men  valued  by  their  loss,  honoured 
by  those  who  live  contrary  to  their  teaching,  and  survive  after  death.  In  long 
continuance,  in  holy  influence,  "  the  memory  of  the  just  is  blessed." 

"  Unblemish'd  let  me  live,  or  die  unknown  : 
O  grant  an  honest  fame,  or  grant  me  none  "  IPope], 

I.  The  striking  feature  of  the  story  is  the  picture  it  gives  of  the  quiet  manner 
in  which  God's  servants  are  sometimes  allowed  to  pass  away  when  they  have 
finished  their  work.  The  history  of  Josiah's  death  compared  with  his  life  puts 
things  in  right  order ;  his  life  active,  hard-working,  and  zealous ;  death  quiet, 
unexciting,  what  we  call  inglorious.  The  history  fitted  to  check  tendency  to  lay 
too  much  stress  upon  circumstances  of  a  man's  death ;  to  be  fond  of  exciting 
death-bed  scenes,  to  delight  in  religious  books  which  vividly  describe  last  moments 
of  departing  friends.  He  who  will  stand  least  reprovable  at  last  day,  will  be  he 
who  has  worked  most  earnestly  and  vigorously  in  cause  of  holiness  and  of  Christ 
when  all  temptations  of  the  world  and  the  strength  of  Satan  have  been  opposed 
to  him.  II.  The  moral  we  draw  from  the  text  is  that  he  who  does  his  work  in 
the  proper  time,  who  does  not  put  off  till  old  age  the  work  of  youth,  nor  the 
hour  of  death  the  labour  of  life,  may  be  quiet  and  unconcerned  for  the  way  in 
which  God  may  please  to  call  him.  If  called  by  sudden  providence  when  engaged 
in  work,  or  summoned  by  speedy  sickness,  he  may  be  of  good  cheer  and  of  quiet 
mind,  knowing  that  God  will  do  all  things  well  [Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin\ 

HOMILETIG  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS, 

Ver.  3.     Ark  replaced.     Change  of  appropriate,    and    spirited.       Certain 

circumstances,   relief   of    burden,   and  Psalms  cxiii.-cxviii.  inclusive.  Kesolve, 

opportunity  for  more  vigorous  service  "I  will  praise  the  Lord  with  my  whole 

in  known  duty.     Pray  not  for  a  larger  heart,  in  the  assembly  of  the  upright 

sphere,   for  more  work.     Do  what  is  and  in  the  congregation."  2.  Itsleaders. 

appointed,  and  fill  well  present  sphere.  Numbered,    stationed,    and    qualified. 

Stand  in  your  place.  This    needful  and  helpful.      Organist, 

Ver.  4.  Prepare.   Heathens  saw  that  clerk,  and  choir  should  be  early  in  place, 

God  was  not  to  be  served  but  by  those  devout  in   spirit,   and   orderly  in  all 

who  were  prepared  aforehand.     Solon  things.     3.  Its  design.     Not  a  musical 

willed  in  his  laws   that  the  sacrifices  performance   for   gratification   of    the 

should  be  chosen  and  selected,  and  the  people  ;    not   to    display    ability,   cul- 

sacrificers    should    purify    themselves  ture,  and  efficiency  in  singers  :  but  to 

some  days  before  [Trappy.    Should  not  please  God  (Phil.  ii.  8-10),  and  praise 

people  long  before  prepare,  when  they  Christ.      Pliny  found   in   worship    of 

come  to  the  Lord's  table?  \Ihid.'],  Bithynians  a  hymn  ^^to  Christ  as  God." 

Ver.  15.  Singers  in  their  place.  Song  "Sentimental  twaddle,  sung  by  a  con- 
in  God's  house.  \.  Its  nature.  Spiritual,  gregation,  is  essentially  carnalising  and 

315 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES. 


[chap.  XXXVl 


paganising.  What  sort  of  a  nation  will 
our  '  Songs  of  Zion'  make?  Are  they 
of  Zion  ?  Some  of  them  have  a  look 
of  Rome,  and  some  of  E,acow  [Fro/. 
J.  Macgregor,  D.D.\ 

Ver.  21.  Haste.  Three  things  con- 
cerning which  God  "commands  to  make 
haste" — 1st,  To  secure  the  salvation  of 
the  soul ;  2nd,  To  a  course  of  godliness  ; 
3rd,  To  efforts  in  seeking  the  welfare  of 
others  \Jay\. 


Ver.  22.  Hearkened  not.  1.  Provi- 
dence asserted  in  Necho.  Individual 
and  supreme — *'  Commanded,  me."  2. 
Providence  contravened  in  Josiah. 
Ignorantly  in  some  degree,  yet  really 
opposed  to  divine  plan.  "  Woe  then 
to  such  as  hearken  not  to  the  un- 
doubted words  of  God,  in  the  mouths 
of  his  faithful  ministers." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Vers.  7-9.  Gave  willingly.  If  a 
wealthy  man  promise  much  and  perform 
nothing,  a  poor  man  who  is  unable  to 
undertake  or  perform  is  better  than  he 
\^Bp.  HalV].  Rich  men's  presents  are 
gold  and  silver  or  other  costly  things. 
Mine  must  be  recommended  by  the 
affectionate  pleasure  with  which  I  give 
them  \_Ven.  JBede  when  dying']. 

Ver.  16.  Prejyared  the  same  day. 
Life  is  a  short  day,  but  it  is  a  working 
day.  **0h  1  my  Father,  help  me  to 
finish  my  work  in  Thine  honour" 
[Livingstone's  Journal,  Jan.  1st, 
1871]. 

Ver.  21.  Haste.  These  are  remark- 
able words  in  the  mouth  of  a  heathen; 
but  they  are  not  without  a  parallel  in 
the  remains  of  ancient  Egypt  that 
have  come  down  to  us.    Piankhi,  for 


instance,  King  of  Egypt,  about  B.C.  750, 
says  in  an  inscription  which  has  been 
translated  by  the  Rev.  Canon  Cook, 
**  Didst  thou  not  know  that  the  Divine 
shade  was  over  me  ?  I  have  not  acted 
without  his  knowledge ;  He  com- 
manded my  acts  "  [Speak.  Com.]. 

Vers.  23-25.  Lamented.  While  the 
living  minister  is  neglected,  the  dying 
one  may  be  lamented,  and  lamented  the 
more  when  dead  because  he  was  neg- 
lected while  living.  The  children  of 
Israel  were  always  complaining  of 
Moses,  and  frequently  threatening  him, 
yet  they  wept  for  him  on  the  Plains  of 
Moab  thirty  days,  and  we  are  per- 
suaded sincerely.  Want  endears  and 
increases  worth  [^«?/]. 

"How    mercies    brighten    as    they  take 
tiieir  flight  I"  \^Young'\, 


CHAPTER  XXXVL 


Critical  Notes.]  This  chapter  gives  the  reigns  of  Jehoahaz  (vers.  1-4),  of  Jehoiakim 
(vers.  6-8),  of  Jehoiachiu  (vers.  9,  10),  and  of  Zedekiali  (vers.  11-21);  the  proclama- 
tion of  Cyrus  (vers.  22,  23).  Parallel  with  2  Ki.  xxiii.  31 — xxv.  "  The  chapter  scarcely 
adds  anything  to  our  knowledge  of  the  later  history  of  the  Jewish  kingdom,  but  it  was 
requisite  to  complete  the  design  of  the  work,  which  aimed  at  tracing  the  fortunes  of  the 
Jewish  people  from  the  death  of  Saul  to  the  return  under  Zerubbabel"  {^Speak.  Gom.\. 

Vers.  1-4:.— Succession  of  Jehoahaz.  Original  name  Shallum  (Jer.  xxii.  11)  ;  third  son  of 
Josiah  (1  Chron.  ill.  15);  took  name  of  Jehoahaz  ("  the  Lord  possesses")  on  accession. 
Ver.  3.  Necho  followed  up  advantage  gained  in  Judah,  deposed  J.  Condemned,  fined  the 
land,  and  set  up  Eliakim  as  vassal  on  the  throne.  Ver.  4.  Turned,  change  of  Eliakim  into 
Jehoiakim  ("  God  sets  up,"  into  "  Jehovah  sets  up "),  in  deference  to  the  king  and 
people,  and  in  keeping  with  politic  character  of  Necho.    Eg.^  where  he  died. 

310 


CHAP,  xxxtl]  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES, 


Vers.  5-8. — Jehoiahim  two  years  older  than  Jehoahaz,  and  of  a  different  mother  (2  Ki. 
xxiii.  31-36) ;  evil,  followed  the  course  of  idolatrous  predecessors.  Ver.  6.  Nehuchad.,  first 
expedition  against  Palestine  in  lifetime  of  his  father,  Nabopolassar,  who  was  old  and 
infirm,  and  adopted  his  son  Neb.  joint  sovereign,  dispatched  him  against  Egyptian 
invaders  of  the  empire.  Neb.  victorious  at  Carchemish,  drove  them  from  Asia,  reduced 
provinces  west  of  Euphrates,  and  Jehoiakim  became  vassal  of  Assyrian  kingdom  (2  Ki. 
xxiv.  1).  At  end  of  three  years  J.  rebelled,  but  vanquished,  stripped  of  possessions,  and 
taken  prisoner.  Allowed  for  a  short  time  to  remain  in  his  tributary  kingdom,  gave  fresh 
offence.  Jerusalem  besieged,  and  the  king  slain  in  a  sally  (c/.  3  Ei.  xxiv.  2-7 ;  Jer.  xxii. 
18,  19  ;  xxxvi.  30). 

Vers.  9,  10. — Jehoiachin.  Eight:  <*As  Nebuchad.  carried  away  this  king's  wives  (2  Ki. 
xxiv,  16),  it  is  plain  that  eight  here  is  a  slip  of  the  transcriber  for  eighteen,  the  number 
found  in  2  Ki.  xxiv.  8  ;  and  even  in  the  Sept.  Jehoiachin  is  otherwise  Jechoniah  (1  Chron. 
iii.  16),  and  even  Coniah  (Jer.  xxii.  24).  His  reign  of  three  months  and  ten  days  scarcely 
called  a  reign,  as  he  merely  claimed  the  crown  until  taken  away  by  Nebuchad." 
[^Murphy'\.  Year  expired,  lit.,  "at  the  return  of  the  year,"  in  spring,  when  campaigns 
began  City  captured,  temple  pillaged,  king,  nobles,  and  skilful  artisans  carried  to 
Babylon  (2  Ki  xxiv.  8-17). 

Vers.  11-21. — Zedekiah^s  reign.  Originally  Mattaniah,  appointed  by  Nebuchad.,  from 
whom  he  received  crown  on  conditions  of  solemn  oath.  Ver.  13.  Sw^ar,  took  oath  of 
allegiance,  which  he  broke,  and  was  censured  (Ezek.  xvii.  13).  Ver.  14.  Further  justifica- 
tion for  God's  rejection.  Idolatry  added  to  other  sins.  Ver.  16.  Messengers^  Isaiah, 
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and  others.  Betimes,  continually  and  carefully.  Ver.  16.  No  remedy, 
no  healing ;  sinned  beyond  mercy  (2  Ki.  xxiv.  4).  Ver.  17.  Slew,  cut  and  slew ;  reference 
to  God,  who  caused  disasters  to  fall  upon  them  for  sins.  Slaughter  fearful  at  capture  of 
city  (c/.  Ezek.  ix.  6,  7;  Lam.  ii.  7-10).  Ver.  20.  Vessels  enumerated  (2  Ki.  xxv.  14,  15). 
The  pillage  more  sweeping  than  in  days  of  Jehoiakim  (2  Ki.  xxv.  1-10  ;  Jer.  xxxix.  1-8). 
Those  who  escaped  from  sword  carried  into  exile  till  accession  of  Persian  king  ;  servants, 
slaves  to  Neb.  and  his  sons,  employed  in  forced  labour  which  great  works  neces- 
sitated. Ver.  21.  Word  (Jer.  xxv.  11 ;  xxix.  10).  tSabbatlis  (Lev.  xxvi.  34,  35).  The 
seventy  years  to  be  counted  from  first  taking  of  Jer.  by  Neb.  in  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim 
(605  B.O.). 

Vers.  22,  23. — Proclamation  of  Cyrus.  Peculiar  to  Chron.  *•  An  interval  of  fifty  years 
passed  over  in  silence"  [^Murphy'].  First  year,  as  sovereign  of  second  monarchy  of  Daniel 
(B.C.  538).  Stirred  up,  mode  not  mentioned ;  prophecy  (Is.  xliv.  28  ;  xlv.  1)  may  have  been 
shown  to  him  by  Daniel,  and  exercised  powerful  influence  over  him.  God  of  heaven^ 
••similar  formula  at  commencement  of  the  great  majority  of  Persian  inscriptions" 
[Speak.  Com.].  Intimates  acquaintance  with  supreme  God,  not  necessarily  an  intelligent 
adherent ;  Cyrus  considered  that  he  was  charged,  chosen  agent  to  build  God's  house,  and 
therefore  invites  his  people  to  return.  "  Such  is  the  finale  of  Chronicles.  It  thereby 
shows  itself  to  be  an  introduction  to  the  history  of  the  returning  exiles  of  Judah  and 
Israel,  which  is  contained  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  and  an  exposition  of  the  peculiar 
principles  by  whioh  the  restored  people  had  to  be  governed  "  IMurphy], 

HOMILETICS, 

The  Reign  of  Jehoahaz. — Ver»e9  1-4. 

Alter  death  of  Josiah,  a  deplorable  period  of  misrule  and  imbecility.  Un- 
happy sons  struggled  for  independence,  but  entailed  miseries  of  siege  and 
capture.  Kings  recede  into  obscurity :  Jeremiah,  the  prophet,  the  central 
figure  around  whom  gather  interests  of  a  falling  State.  For  three-and-twenty 
years  almost  alone,  he  endeavours  to  avert,  delay,  or  mitigate  the  judgments, 
but  in  vain.  "  When  he  cannot  give  hope,"  says  one,  "  or  consolation,  or  peace, 
he  gives  his  tender  sympathy — ^is  himself  the  sad  example  of  exile,  persecution, 
misery,  death." 

I.  The  method  of  his  accession.  "  The  people  of  the  land  made 
him  king."  Not  the  eldest  son  of  Josiah,  but  popular  favourite  on  account  of 
his  martial  spirit  (Ezek.  xix.  3),  and  determined  opposition  to  aggressive 
measures  in  Kgypt.  Anointed — a  ceremony  not  deemed  necessary  in  regular 
and  undisputed  succession — to  impart  greater  validity  to  popular  choice  and 
render  disiurbauce  from  Necho  less  likely,  who,  like  all  Egyptians,  associated  idea 

317 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxxti. 


of  sanctity  with  regal  anointing.  "  Man  proposeth,  but  God  disposeth."  II. 
The  shortness  of  his  reign.  "  He  reigned  three  months,  and  the  king 
put  him  down."  Necho  on  victorious  return  from  the  Euphrates  deposed  him, 
and  deemed  it  expedient  to  have  a  king  of  his  own  nomination  on  the  throne. 
The  will  of  the  people,  the  solemnity  of  anointing  of  no  avail.  The  autocrat, 
good  or  bad,  a  Solomon  or  a  Herod,  is  without  control.  (Sic  volo;  sic  jubeo  ;  stat 
pro  ratione  voluntas),  "  He  doeth  whatsoever  pleaseth  him,  and  who  may  say 
unto  him,  What  doest  thou  ? "  (Ecc.  viii.  3-4).  III.  The  taxing  of  the 
land.  "Put  the  land  to  a  tribute"  (a  hundred  talents  of  silver, 
£3,418  16s.;  anda  talent  of  gold,  £5,475;  total  amount  of  tribute,  £8,893  15s.). 
Heb.,  set  a  mulct  upon  the  land  (2  Ki.  xxiii.  33).  This  a  dishonour,  a  sign  of 
subjection  and  dependence.  What  a  fall  from  exalted  position  and  former 
greatness  I  IV.  The  end  of  his  career.  The  deposed  king  sent  for 
to  E-iblah,  in  Syria,  arrested  in  chains,  taken  prisoner,  and  carried  into  Egypt, 
where  he  died.  "  Something  there  had  been  in  his  character,  or  in  the 
popular  mode  of  his  election,  which  endeared  him  to  his  country.  A  lamentation, 
as  from  his  father,  went  up  from  the  princes  and  prophets  of  the  land  for  the 
lion's  cub  (Ezek.  xix.  34),  that  was  learning  to  catch  his  prey,  caught  in  the 
pitfall,  and  led  off  in  chains — by  a  destiny  even  sadder  than  death  in  battle. 
*  Weep  not  for  the  dead,  nor  bemoan  him,  but  weep  sore  for  him  who  goeth 
away.'  He  was  the  first  King  of  Judah  who  died  in  exile.  *  He  shall  return 
no  more,  he  shall  return  no  more  to  see  his  native  country — his  native  land  no 
more'  (Jer.  xxii.  10-12)"  [Stanley], 

Jehoiakim,  the  Wicked  Prince. — Verses  3-8. 

Jehoiakim  second  son  of  Josiah,born  B.C.  634,  and  eighteenth  king  of  separate 
throne  of  Judah  for  a  period  of  eleven  years,  set  up  as  vassal  of  Egyptian  king. 
I.  The  significant  change  of  his  name.     Originally  Eliakim  {El- 
yakim),  changed  into  Jehoiakim    (JeAo-Yakim).      Heathen  princes   gave   new 
names  to  those  who  entered  their  service  usually  after   their   gods.     This  an 
Israelitish  name,  bestowed  probably  at  Eliakim's  own  request,  whom  Hengsten- 
berg  supposes  to  have  been  influenced  by  a  desire  to  be  connected   with  the 
promise  (in  2  Sam.  vii.  12),  where  not  El,  God,  but  ''Jehovah  will  set    up." 
The  change   signifies    loss   of    liberty   and    dependence.      A  striking  contrast 
between  the  beauty  of  the  name  and  the  misery  of  its  fate.     Aspire  to  that 
*'new  name  which  no  man  knoweth,  saving  he  that  receiveth  it."     II*   The 
wickedness  of  his  conduct.     A  reign  filled  with  idolatry,  oppression, 
and  misfortunes.     Sketched  with   masterly  hand  in  Jer.   xxii.    13-23,  and  in 
Ezekiel  xix.  5-9.     1.  In  his  restoration  of  idolatry.     He  followed  the  example 
of  idolatrous  predecessors,  peopJe  eagerly  availed  themselves  of  vicious  license 
of  a  lax  government.     Land  filled  with  heathen  *'  abominations."     2.  In  his 
tyrannical  measures  of  government.     Jeremiah  reproaches  him  for  covetousness, 
cruelty,  injustice,  violence,  and  luxury  (xxii.  1 3-1 7).     Bloodthirsty  (xxvi.  20-23), 
selfish,  and  most  extravagant.     Indifferent  to  sufferings  of  his  people,  and  at  a 
time  of  impoverishment  of  land  by  heavy  tributes  to  Egypt,  he  squandered  large 
sums  in  building  luxurious  palaces.     3.  In  his  impious  defiance  of  God.     From 
beginning  of  his  reign  the  voice  of  Jeremiah  predicts  and  prefigures  danger  by 
striking  signs.     Attempts  to  silence  the  prophet  by  princes,  priests,  and  false 
prophets.     Jehoiakim   used  the  penknife  to  cut  up  the  leaves  of  the  Book  and 
destroy  the  effect  of  the  message,  at  a  period  of  solemn  fast.     The  counsel  of 
God  stood  sure,  but  no  impression  made  upon  the  mind  of  the  king  by  the 
fresh  roll.     4.  In  his  rebellion  against  Nebuchadnezzar,     After  three  years'  sub- 
jection, deluded  by  Egyptian  party  in  court,  he  ventured  to  withhold  tribute 
and  throw  off  (Jhaldiean  yoke  (2  Ki.  xxiv.  1).     Perhaps  desired  to  spend  money 
316 


CHAP.  xxxYi.J  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    CHRONICLES, 


in  luxury  and  pride,  not  to  pay  the  King  of  Babylon;  perhaps  sought  to  become 
independent  since  severance  of  Egypt  from  Syria  at  battle  of  Oarchemish.  But 
the  step,  contrary  to  earnest  remonstrance  of  Jeremiah,  in  violation  of  oath  of 
allegiance,  and  the  ruin  of  king  and  country.  III.  The  calamities  of 
his  reign.  Scripture  statements  brief  but  graphic.  1.  The  invasion  of  his 
kingdom.  Nebuchadnezzer  too  busy  in  conflict  between  Lydian  and  Median 
empires  to  march  against  Jerusalem  and  chastise  his  rebellious  vassal,  sent  his 
governors  to  rouse  surrounding  nations,  and  Syrians,  Moabites,  and  Ammonites 
united  with  Chaldsean  forces  to  harass  Judah.  No  rest  or  safety  out  of  the 
walled  cities.  At  length,  in  seventh  year  of  his  reign  (b.o.  598),  Nebuchadnezzar 
took  field  in  person,  concentrated  forces,  marched  first  against  Tyre,  which  had 
rebelled  about  time  of  Judah ;  then,  after  investment  of  city,  went  against 
Jerusalem.  2.  The  desecration  of  the  Temple.  "  Cariied  the  vessels  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord  to  Babylon,"  A  portion  of  sacred  vessels,  perhaps  in  lieu  of  tribute 
unpaid,  and  deposited  in  the  house  of  Bel  us,  his  god  (Dan.  i.  2 ;  v.  2).  IV. 
The  dishonour  of  his  end.  Though  a  prisoner  and  chained  to  be  carried 
to  Babylon  at  first,  he  was  permitted  to  remain  in  his  tributary  kingdom.  In 
siege  of  the  city,  by  an  engagement  with  the  enemy,  or  by  the  hand  of  his  own 
oppressed  subjects,  who  thought  to  conciliate  the  Babylonians  by  the  murder  of 
their  king,  he  came  to  a  violent  end  in  eleventh  year  of  his  reign.  His  body 
i<Tnominiously  treated  as  predicted — cast  over  the  walls,  left  exposed,  dragged. 
away  **  with  the  burial  of  an  ass  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  "  (c/.  Jer.  xxii. 
10  and  xxxvi.).  Warning  lost  upon  J. ;  disregarded  future  with  its  clear  and 
awful  signs,  held  the  throne  in  sufierance,  until  he  fell  into  disgrace  and  ruin. 
'*  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 

Zedekiah's  Reign  :  the  Extinction  or  the  Royal  Line. — Verses  11-21. 

Zed.  the  twentieth  and  last  king  of  Judah.  His  proper  name,  Mattaniah, 
changed  to  Zedekiah  at  accession,  may  be  in  allusion  to  Jeremiah's  prophecy  of 
Israel's  future  as  Jehovah-tsidkenu — Jehovah,  our  Righteousness  (xxiii.  5,  8). 
Rather  weak  than  wicked,  Z.  requested  the  prophet  to  pray  for  him,  but  refused 
his  advice.  Rebellion  brought  siege  to  the  city,  destruction  to  the  Temple,  and 
exile  to  himself  and  Royal  family.  The  events  of  his  reign  summed  up  in  brief 
record — I.  Reckless  disregard  of  Divine  warnings.  Jeremiah  a 
true  prophet  and  best  friend,  but  unheeded ;  treated  alternately  as  a  traitor  and 
a  madman  (Joseph.  Ant.  x.  7,  sec.  41) ;  and  at  last  imprisoned.  Admonished, 
but  amended  not.  "  He  humbled  not  himself  before  Jeremiah,  <fec."  II. 
Ruinous  policy  pursued.  Policy  of  Jeremiah  prevailed  for  a  while  in 
foreign  matters.  An  embassy  sent  to  Babylon  to  take  solemn  oath  with 
Nebuchadnezzar  in  the  sacred  name  of  Elohim,  which  Israel  and  Babylon  alike 
acknowledged.  1.  In  throwing  off  yoke  of  allegiance.  "  Rebelled  against  N.,  who 
had  made  him  sware  by  God "  that  he  would  keep  the  kingdom  for  Nebuchad., 
make  no  innovation,  enter  into  no  alliance  with  Egypt  (Ezek.  xvii.  3  ;  Joseph,  x. 
7,  s.  3).  He  acted  in  contravention  to  this  oath,  perjured  his  character,  and 
committed  the  crowning  act  of  wickedness,  according  to  the  high  standard  of 
prophetic  morality.  "  Shall  he  prosper  ?  shall  he  escape  that  doeth  such  things  ? 
or  shall  he  break  the  covenant  and  be  delivered  ?  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God, 
surely  in  the  place  where  the  king  dwelleth  that  made  him  king,  whose  oath  he 
despised,  and  whose  covenant  he  brake,  even  with  him  in  the  midst  of  Babylon 
shall  he  die"  (Ezek.  xvii.  15,  16).  2.  In  persisting  in  rebellion.  Hananiah's 
prophecy  had  been  falsified,  and  he  himself  had  died  according  to  the  word  of 
Jeiemiah — the  folly  of  a  mere  remnant  opposing  a  mighty  nation  was  exposed. 
Egyptian  help  in  vain,  and  real  alliance  with  surrounding  nations  impossibla 

319 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES,  [chap,  xxxrr. 


Yet  the  king  infatuated,  held  out  and  was  ruined.  III.  Incurable  idolatry 
into  "which  the  nation  had  fallen.  1.  All  classes  were  corrupted.  "  All 
the  chief  of  the  priests  "  who  should  have  opposed  idolatry,  *'  and  the  people 
transgressed  very  much  after  all  the  abominations  of  the  heathen."  Into  the 
sacred  precincts  of  the  temple  idolatrous  rites  had  crept.  In  the  outer  court 
women  wept  and  wailed  for  Tammuz  (Ezek.  viii.  14);  in  subterranean  chambers 
incense  offered  by  elders  to  creeping  things  and  abominable  beasts  (ib.  x.  11)  ; 
and  at  the  entrance  to  the  temple  building,  between  porch  and  altar,  the  rising 
sun  was  worshipped,  by  those  who  turned  their  backs  to  the  sanctuary  and  their 
faces  to  the  east  (ver.  16).  Thus  "they  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord  which 
he  had  hallowed  in  Jerusalem."  2.  The  prophets  of  God  were  insulted.  Mocked 
in  words,  opposed  openly  in  acts,  and  ill-treated  in  life.  This  affront  to  God  who 
sent  them,  an  evidence  of  implacable  enmity  and  an  invincible  determination  to 
persevere  in  sin.  But  those  that  abuse  God's  messengers  provoke  his  wrath  and 
cannot  escape.  3.  The  nation  beyond  all  hope.  "  The  wrath  of  the  Lord  arose 
against  his  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy"  (ver.  16).  **No  healing,"  no 
physician,  for  a  body  corrupt  and  already  dead.  Sins  beyond  mercy,  "  which  the 
Lord  would  not  pardon"  (2  KL  xxiv.  4).  Possible  to  sin  too  long,  to  sin  away 
the  day  of  grace.  "  They  would  none  of  my  counsel ;  they  despised  all  my 
reproof,  therefore  shall  they  eat  of  the  fruit  of  their  own  way  and  be  filled  with 
their  own  devices."  IV.  The  execution  of  Divine  judgments.  The 
end  rapidly  coming.  The  city  besieged  and  reduced  to  extremities.  Fire  of 
besiegers  aided  by  severe  famine  within.  Inhabitants  resorted  to  terrible  expe- 
dience (Jer.  xxxviii.  9  ;  Lam.  iv.  10).  At  length  a  breach  effected  and  Ohaldaens 
entered.  1.  The  temple  burned;  2.  The  city  ruined;  and  3.  The  inhabitants 
carried  to  Babylon.  Sacred  vessels  taken,  palaces  of  princes  levelled  to  the 
ground,  fortifications  demoUshed,  and  predictions  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  No 
escape  Isy  flight.  Zedekiah  pursued,  caught,  and  despatched  to  Riblah.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, with  cruelty  characteristic  of  the  times,  ordered  his  sons  to  be  killed 
and  his  own  eyes  to  be  thrust  out  (cf.  Jer.  xxxii.  4  and  Ezek.  xii.  13).  "  The 
king  of  Babylon  bound  him  in  chains  and  carried  him  to  Babylon,  and  put  him  in 
prison  till  the  day  of  his  death."  1.  Transgressors  cannot  escape  from  appointed 
judgments.  2.  The  bitterness  of  sin  is  seen  in  the  overthrow  which  it  creates. 
3.  Since  we  have  not  otherwise  any  guarantee  against  national  humiliation,  what 
need  to  have  the  Lord  on  our  side  ! 

**  Justice,  like  lightning,  ever  should  appear 
To  few  men's  ruin,  but  to  all  men's  fear  "  [StDenam]* 

Thb  Proclamation  of  Cyrus. — Verses  22,  23. 

God  pitied  his  people  in  captivity.  Predicted  long  before  that  he  would 
restore  them  again  to  the  land  of  their  fathers.  The  promise  not  forgotten. 
"  In  the  first  year,"  when  Cyrus  gained  possession  of  Babylon,  an  edict  granting 
exiles  permission  to  return  to  Jerusalem.  I.  The  work  Cyrus  was 
called  upon  to  undertake.  "He  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an 
house."  Jerusalem  in  ruins,  materials  and  men  required  to  rebuild.  Some  pull 
down  and  delight  in  destruction.  Cyrus  felt  responsible  for  rebuilding  of 
Temple,  construction  of  Theocracy,  and  arrangements  for  future  kingdom  and 
welfare  of  God's  people.  The  secular  welfare  of  his  government  and  the  religious 
interests  of  his  own  country  overlooked.  Absorbed  in  one  grand  mission. 
Israel's  disobedience  to  God's  charge  aggravated  by  obedience  of  Cyrus,  a  heathen 
king.  II.  The  proclamation  for  help  in  this  work.  *'  He  made  a 
proclamation  throughout  all  his  kingdom."  His  dominions  first  confined  to 
province  of  Persia,  successively  enlarged  by  addition  of  Media,  Lydia,  Asia 
320 


CHAP.  xxxYi.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  CHIWMCLES. 


Minor,  Babylon  and  Assyria,  Samaria  and  Judea.  1.  The  proclamation  was 
inspired.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus."  Not  the  suggestion  of 
Magi  in  the  city ;  not  the  instruction  of  Daniel,  who  informed  Cyrus  of  pre- 
dictions concerning  him.  But  "the  Lord  God  of  heaven,"  who  induences  the 
heart  of  kings  like  rivers  of  water,  prompted  him  to  fulfil  this  duty.  2.  The 
proclamation  was  written.  Written  in  Jewish  language  to  be  understood  by 
tribes  in  distant  provinces.  Written  and'  proclaimed  aloud,  "caused  a  voice  to 
pass,"  like  a  jubilee  trumpet  to  sound  deliverance  to  captives.  3.  The  procla- 
mation was  gracious.  Political  considerations  might  prompt.  Egypt  a  for- 
midable rival  to  the  great  world  empires.  Might  be  advantageous  to  have 
an  advanced  post  in  south  of  Judea  to  protect  against  invasion,  or  from  which 
to  make  rapid  descent  upon  lands  of  the  Nile.  But  higher  aim  in  the  emanci- 
pation of  Jews  and  liberty  to  return.  III.  The  response  tO  tlie 
proclamation.  Cf.  Ezra  i.  Leaders  and  chief  men  responded  heartily. 
God  disposed  many  to  make  sacrifices  and  return,  others  remained  in  Babylon. 
1.  The  response  must  be  immec?«'a^6.  "Let  him  go  up  without  delay."  2.  The 
response  must  he  voluntary.  "  Who  is  there  among  you  of  all  the  people  ? " 
3.  The  response  must  he  accepted.  May  involve  risk,  long  journey  and  great 
sacrifices  ;  but  duty  urges,  God  promises,  and  privileges  enjoyed  if  we  comply. 
The  gospel  preaches  deliverance  to  the  captives,  but  many  in  love  with  sin, 
prefer  to  stay  in  the  world  and  have  no  portion  in  Jerusalem. 

EOMILETIC  HINTS  AND  SUGGESTIONS. 

Yer.   8.     Found  in    him.     1 .    Evil  apart ;  all  pre-eminently  raised  above 

latent    in   every    heart.      2.    Circum-  their    fellow-men,     "  the    messengers 

stances  only  required   to  discover  and  of  God."     Earnestly  taught.     "  Bising 

develop  it.  vp   betimes,"  i.e.,  earnestly  and  care- 

Ver.  13.  Three  steps  in  wickedness,  fully:  unwearied  anxiety  and  solicita- 
Broke  his  engagement,  stiffened  his  tion.  Patiently  taught.  "  Sending 
neck,  and  hardened  his  heart.  Re-  them"  constantly,  though  ill-treated 
helled,  dec.  1.  The  sanctity  of  an  oath,  and  set  at  nought.  What  kindness 
Though  taken  under  compulsion,  and  and  forbearance  I  3.  Rejection  of 
not  due  on  natural  equity :  yet  must  be  this  teaching  brings  guilt  and  danger, 
held  sacred,  not  binding  merely  till  Guilt  aggravated,  "  until  the  wrath  of 
exigency  should  pass  away.  2.  The  the  Lord  arose."  Escape  hopeless,  ^^tiU. 
danger  of  infringement.  Its  violation  there  is  no  remedy."  God's  long- 
not  excused,  nor  passed  in  silence;  but  suffering  and  earnest  entreaties  by 
the  filling  up  of  the  cup  of  the  nation's  servants  '*  rising  early  and  protesting 
guilt.  Contracts  and  oaths  not  mere  to  them."  The  most  awful  aggrava- 
legal  forms,  to  be  lightly  esteemed,  but  tions  of  guilt  in  "refusing  to  hear" 
solemn  obligations.  Violations  more  {cf.  Jer.  xi.  11). 
criminal  than  breaking  promises  ;  sins 
of    great    dehberation,    signs   of    lax  "  God  sends  his  teachers  with  every  age, 

morals     and    may    be    precursors   of  ^°u^r7vetTorflVe^Io^^"itro"^^.• 

national  rum.  j^g^  shape  of  mind  "  ILowel], 

Ver.  16.  His  prophets,  1.  Pro- 
phetic teaching  a  constant  element  in  No  remedy.  These  words  contain 
Israel's  history.  Not  left  in  darkness  three  facts  of  great  importance.  1. 
like  heathen  nations.  Crises  and  That  there  was,  at  least  at  one  time,  a 
master  minds.  Moses,  Samuel,  David,  remecJy.  2.  That  the  remedy  went 
Elijah,  <kc.  2.  The  method  of  this  on,  and  might  have  been  used,  for  a 
teaching  unique  and  worthy  of  con-  very  long  period.  3.  That  there  came 
sideration.    Divinely  taught.    Each  set  a   time  when  the  remedy  ceased.     L 

321 


BOi^flLmiC  COMMENTARY:  CHRONICLES.  [chap,  xixvi. 


All  life  is  a  remedy.  The  conditions  desolation  predicted  by  Jeremiah, 
of  things  require  it.  Life  a  gieat  "  The  idea  that  the  duration  of  the  de- 
restorative  process.  1.  Comes  that  solation  was  determined  in  the  Divine 
marvellous  provision  of  God  in  Jesus  counsels  by  the  number  of  the  neg- 
Christ.  2.  Subordinate  to  this  great  lected  sabbatical  years,  and  that  the 
remedy  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  enforced  fallow  was  intended  to  com- 
working  with  it,  all  providences  have  pensate  for  previous  unlawful  cultiva- 
a  curative  character.  3.  Every  one  tion,  is  not  found  in  Jeremiah,  and, 
carries  within  himself  an  antidote  to  indeed,  appears  only  in  Lev.  xxvi. 
himself.  Conscience,  till  silenced,  a  34, 35,  and  in  this  place"  [*S/?ea^.  (7om.l 
sure  antidote  for  evil.  II.  Notice  the  Learn — 1.  The  purpose  of  God  in  the 
word  "  tiU."  It  shows  how  slow  God  affliction  of  his  people.  2.  The  provi- 
is  to  take  away  the  remedy.  His  dence  of  God  in  regulating  afflic- 
mercy  holds  back  the  arm  of  justice,  tion  for  good,  and  as  regards — a, 
But  we  may  sin  ourselves  into  a  state,  method ;  6,  degree  ;  c,  time.  As  the 
not  in  which  there  is  no  forgiveness,  exodus  from  Egypt  came  in  the  exact 
but  no  thought  or  desire  to  seek  for-  time,  so  return  from  Babylon  after 
giveness.  *'  No  remedy,"  not  on  God's  seventy  years.  Times  of  deliverance 
account,  but  your  own ;  not  in  God's  correspond  with  minute  exactness 
want  of  will  to  save  you,  but  in  your  to  prophetic  announcements.  Hence 
own  incapacity  to  will  your  own  salva-  patience,  submission,  and  hope.  "  Even 
tion  [J.  Vaughan,  Sermons],  the  selfsame  day  it  came  to  pass" 
Yer.  21.     As  long.      Seventy  years'  (Ex.  xii.  41). 


Z22 


IJSDEX. 


I.-GENEEAL     SUBJECTS. 


Abram,  7. 

Abijah's  religion,  212. 

Adam,  4,  6. 

AduUam,  cave  of,  43. 

ASection,  religious,  136. 

Age,  the  golden,  13. 

Aiiaziah's  wicked  reign,  251 ;  death,  252. 

Ahaz's  evil  reign,   272 ;   deeper  sins,   276 ; 

lessons  from  life,  275;   acts,  276 ;  and 

character,  276. 
Altar  plague,  98 ;  purchased,  100 ;  removed, 

287. 
Amaziah's  beginning,  262 ;  fall  into  idolatry, 

264. 
Ambition,  dangers  of,  264. 
Amalek,  doom  of,  19. 
Amen,  the  people's,  76. 
Anion's  trespass,  302,  303. 
Angel  arrested,  97. 
Anthropomorphism,  biblical,  180. 
Apostasy,   180;    and  religious  observance, 

212;  described,  280. 
Appeal,  an  earnest,  106. 
Archery,  gospel,  238. 
Agriculture,  perils  to,  170. 
Ark,  vicissitudes  of,  26 ;  in  Royal  city,  51 ; 

in  house,  55 ;  fixed,  62 ;  procession,  63 ; 

removed,  161 ;  rested,  173. 
Art  in  Christian  service,  160. 
Arrangements,  Divine,  reversed,  210. 
Armie»,  mighty,  217. 
Asa,  the  reformer,  215,  220;  conqueror,  216; 

▼ain  help,  225  ;  end,  228. 
Aisembly,  representative,  194. 

Battles,    famous,    58;   Baalperazim,    69; 

Gibeon,  59  ;  a  great  battle,  211 ;   march 

of,  247 ;  God's  not  ours,  245. 
Benjamin,  tribe  of,  30. 
Bible,  influence  of,  233. 
Blessing  forfeited,  20. 
Book  discovered,  306,  309. 
Bow  at  a  venture,  239. 
Bribery,  foUy  of,  224. 

Caleb's  descendants,  9. 

Camp  of  Jehovah,  290. 

Captivity,  33,  87. 

Captives  delivered,  273. 

Cause,  God's,  maintained,  176. 

Census,  wicked,  93  ;  interrupted,  96. 

City,  the  devoted,  36. 

Clouds,  symbolic,  165. 

Choir,  a  family,  117 ;  th«  temple,  163. 

Chariots,  133. 


Christian  experience  and  influence,  136. 

Colonisation,  18G. 

Congratulations  of  Hamath,  86. 

Convert,  Egyptian,  17. 

Contract,  the  ancient,  159. 

Covenants,  three,  6  ;  national,  70 ;  of  salt, 

212. 
Council,  the  first,  50. 
Councillor,  a  wise,  121. 
Courage  in  battle,  90. 
Court,  the  beleagured,  205 ;  performAnoe  in, 

237. 
Counterfeit  principles,  206. 
Crowns,  earthly,  92. 
Cyrus,  proclamation  of,  320. 

David,  sons  of,  12;  unselfishness,  42;  dis- 
pleasure, 54 ;  and  Hiram,  56,  61 ;  before 
the  ark,  66  ;  attention  to  household,  76  ; 
God's  promises  to,  80 ;  administration, 
85  ;  life  of,  86  ;  at  Jerusalem,  92 ;  choice, 
95  ;  obedience,  100  ;  charge  to  Sol.,  103, 
132 ;  a  type,  126 ;  address  to  princes, 
127  ;  latter  end,  140. 

Day,  a  dark  and  bright  sunset,  303. 

Dark  shadows  on  a  bright  day,  219. 

Death,  Hadad's,  4,  14 ;  sad,  113 ;  a  common 
lot,  213. 

Dedicated  things,  161. 

Deeds,  31. 

Devotedness,  call  to  early,  136. 

Discipline,  under,  49. 

Disobedience,  265. 

Divisions  of  priests,  112 ;  and  of  Levites,  113. 

Deliverance,  God's,  in  man's  extremity,  213. 

Disaster,  national,  170. 

Doorkeepers,  34  ;  door-opening,  283. 

Duty,  signals  of,  59  ;  a  Christian's,  60  ;  holy, 
70;  inspiration  of,  221;  and  self 
interest,  263. 

Eabth  divided,  6. 

Edict,  royal,  232. 

Early  piety,  advantages  of,  805,  307. 

Effort,  condition  of  snccessfol,  104. 

Entertainment,  joyous,  48. 

Exiles,  returned,  32. 

Example,  influence  of,  222. 

Expedition  against  Edom,  263. 

Evidence,  experimental,  191. 

Evil-doing  restrained,    72;    latent    in    the 

heart,  321. 
Exploits,  37 ;  famous,  41. 

Faob,  seeking  God's.  70. 


II 


INDEX, 


Families,  19;  royal,  30;  records,  203. 
Father's  prayer  for  children,  104  ;  favourite, 

121;  three  chief,  24;  and  children,  133. 
Favours,  greatness  of  Divine,  81  ;    Divine, 

invoked,  167. 
Faith,  Christian,  assaulted,  294, 
Fellowship,  reciprocal,  219. 
Fleet,  wrecked,  247. 
Fire,  children  In,  277. 
Force,  military,  of  David,  123. 
Foreigners,  naturalised,  152. 
Friendship,  danger  of  worldly,  234. 
Functions,  the  threefold,  109. 

Gad's  sons,  46;  an  emblem  of  a  true 
minister,  96. 

Gath,  scenes  in,  35. 

Genealogies,  use  of,  96 ;  surveyed,  18. 

Generosity,  popular,  and  cold  officialism, 
282. 

Gilboa's  heights,  35. 

Giants  and  heroes,  91. 

Glory,  the,  and  the  fire,  176 ;  Solomon's  and 
death,  192  ;  the  decaying,  13. 

God,  object  of  search,  202,  236,  246 ;  ser- 
vice, 33 ;  hosts,  46  ;  dealings,  55  ;  order 
and  help,  60  ;  glory,  75  ;  travelling  with 
his  people,  79 ;  relation  to  his  people, 
82 ;  in  personal  life,  79 ;  seeking,  106, 
133 ;  greatness,  175 ;  name,  180 ;  in- 
spection, 238 ;  forsaken,  276. 

Goodness,  Divine,  76. 

Governments  and  subjects,  196. 

Hand,  the  mighty,  17 ;  right,  45 ;  and  heart, 

232. 
Heart  service,  222,  290 ;  disease,  170;  com- 
munions, 189  ;  not  perfect,  265. 
Heaven  shut  up,  170. 
Haste,  and  God's  command,  313. 
Help,  Assyrian,  275;    helped  marvellously, 

269. 
Hezekiah's    reforms,     278 ;    passover,    284 ; 

prayer,  285,  286 ;  temple  worship,  289  ; 

thorough  service,  290 ;  exhortation,  295  ; 

sickness  and  recovery,  298 ;   tests  and 

failure,  298  ;  death,  300. 
History,  three  pages  of  human,  3 ;  a  family, 

8 ;  famous,  18  ;  glance  of,  23  ;  inspired, 

29. 
Heroism,  true,  43. 
Hiram  and  Solomon,  152 ;  brass  works  of, 

159. 
Holiness,  beauty  of,  76,  246. 
Home,  265 ;  religious,  290. 
House,   entry  of,  159 ;    sanctity    of   God's, 

169;  consecrated,  179. 
House,  royal,  building,  56  ;  God's  in  relation 

to  man,  79  ;  God's  regarded,  258. 
Household,  Solomon's  and  Christ's  compared, 

190. 
Humility,  means  of  deliverance,  207 
Hunter,  the  mighty,  5. 

Inventions,  origin  of,  18. 
Insult  avenged,  88. 
Irreverence  in  sacred  things,  53. 


Israel's  condition,  72;  well-being  foi  God, 
79  ;  and  David,  97. 

Jabez,  the  honoured  name,  15. 

Jehovah's  greatness,  72. 

Jehoram's  succession,  249  ;  a  warning,  250. 

Jehoshaphat,  beginning,  230  ;  greatness,  231 ; 
cry,  239  ;  connection  with  Ahab,  242  ; 
war  with  Moabites,  244  ;  character  and 
reign,  247  ;  family  arrangements,  249. 

Jehoiakim,  the  wicked  prince,  318. 

Jehoahaz.  reign,  317. 

Jeroboam,  first  king  of  Is.,  197;  remon- 
strated, 213. 

Jehoiada's  reforms,  255,  260. 

Jerusalem,  dwellers  in,  31  ;  taken,  40. 

Jews,  a  problem,  180. 

Jesse's  family,  8  ;  character,  10. 

Joash,  King,  254,  256 ;  death,  259  ;  life  and 
character,  260. 

Josiah,  or  Early  Piety,  305  ;  reformer,  306  ; 
death,  314. 

Jotham's  prosperous  reign,  270 ;  life,  271. 

Jonathan's  character,  37 

Joshua,  a  great  leader,  23. 

Joy,  sacred,  its  source  and  manifestation, 
66;  universal,  287;  of  finished  work, 
162. 

Judgments  awful,  95;  follow  sin,  100; 
abused,  275. 

Justice  executed,  169. 

Judah,  chiefs,  15  ;  prevailing,  22. 

Kindness,  power  of,  197. 

King,  the  chosen,  39,  41. 

Kings,  three,  lessons  from  their  lives,  303. 

Kingdom,  the  lost,  37  ;  David's,  57  ;  strength 

and  attraction  of,  201. 
Korah's  sin,  25. 

Lamp,  in  David's  house,  250. 

Lavers,  the,  160. 

League,  Solomon's,  and  covenant,  221. 

Levi,  sons  of,  24. 

Levites,  dwellings  of,  25. 

Liberality  and  joy,  137. 

Life,  human,  Solomon's  view,  4 ;  interesting 

view  of,  110  ;  current,  141 ;  spiritual  and 

desolation,  221. 
Like  son,  like  father,  273. 
Lying  spirits  in  prophets,  237,  239. 

Maintenance,  priestly,  291. 

Manasseh's  sins  and  repentance,  301,  303; 

contract  to  Hezekiah,  302. 
Meeting,  the  adjourned,  198. 
Men,    famous,  6 ;    valiant,  28 ;    right,    64 ; 

wanted,  153. 
Merchants,  Solomon's,  149. 
Message,  a  faithful,  309. 
Methods  of  treating  men,  196. 
Mercies  of  David,  174. 
Ministry,  before  the  ark,  76  ;  faithful,  237. 
Ministers,  stewards  of    God,   121 ;    David's 

court,  125 ;  character,  208. 
Michal's  contempt,  66 ;  pride,  67. 
Money,  inlluenc*  of,  225. 


INDEX. 


iii 


Month,  a  joyful,  286. 

Moses,  man  of  God,  110. 

Mother's  influence,  252  ;  over  Hezeklah,  280. 

Movement,  a  xjopular,  288, 

Music  and  service,  281. 

Musicians  and  singers,  115,  117. 

Mystery  of  Divine  vt'orking,  196. 

Nadab  and  Abihu,  24. 

Names,  11,  14;  suggestive,  31;  a  remem- 
bered, 126. 

Nation,  infant,  71. 

Nations  divided,  7  ;  idolatrous  punished,  204 ; 
relapse  of,  259. 

Nathan's  message  to  David,  79. 

New^s,  David's  reception  of,  81. 

Number,  117. 

Oaths,  sanctity  of,  321. 

Obededom's  house,  54;  blessing  of,  119,  121. 

Obligation,  man's  to  God,  138. 

Office,  waiting  in,  26. 

Officers  and    judges,   120;    civil    demands, 

124. 
Orders,  Priests  and  Levites,  26. 
Othniel's  adventure,  17. 
Opportunity,  God's,  and  man's   extremity, 

245. 

Pastures,  fat,  19. 

Passover,  a  celebrated,  312. 

Patriarchs,  the  twelve,  8. 

People,  happy,  43  ;  innumerable,  126. 

Personal  life,  God  in,  79. 

Pillars,  the  two,  157. 

Place,  the  beautiful,  78. 

Phineas,  34. 

Porters  and  doorkeeping,  118. 

Prayer,  remarkable,  16 ;  true,  82 ;  relation  to 
promise,  83;  Solomon's,  170,  175;  and 
Doxology,  75;  last,  149;  wonderful  meet- 
ing for,  216. 

Preaching,  Shemiah's,  205. 

Preparation  and  strength,  271. 

Priesthood,  ancient,  25. 

Pride,  269. 

Procession,  solemn,  51« 

Progress  and  true  penitence,  94. 

Promise,  wonderful,  126;  a  tonic,  242;  per- 
formance, 167. 

Propitiation,  the,  99. 

Protestants,  duty  of,  202. 

Prosperity,  David's,  40,  57. 

Prophet,  a  grand,  74 ;  a  faithful,  236  ;  teach- 
ing of,  321. 

Providence,  operations  of,  70 ;  in  the  world, 
226,  316;  described,  227;  accidents  of, 
239 ;  timed,  322. 

Proposal,  the  king's,  78. 

Possessions,  David's,  125. 

Practices,  265. 

Psalm,  a  thanksgiving,  69. 

Qualifications  for  work,  106, 106. 

Queen  Sheba's  visit  to  Solomon,  188 ;  a  type 

of  truth-seekers,  190. 
Question,  the  solemn,  168. 193i. 


Rabbah  captured,  91. 

Rashness  and  risks,  314. 

Race,  human :  its  unity,  progress,  and  de- 
clension, 4. 

Rechabites,  the,  10. 

Relation,  God's  to  life,  131. 

Religion :  its  cost  and  self-sacrifice,  99 ;  tem- 
porary, 20:} ;  voluntary,  232. 

Rebuke,  the  stern,  240. 

Reforming,  the  tour,  241. 

Reign,  the  disturbed,  312. 

Rehoboam,  the  headstrong,  197 ;  family  and 
domestic  policy,  202  ;  unready,  206. 

Restraints,  God's  on  man's  will,  124 ;  of  Divine 
Providence,  199. 

Reuben,  line  of,  21. 

Rest,  of  God's  people,  110,  217. 

Remembrance,  subjects  of,  70. 

Rejoicing,  national,  178. 

Rich,  how  to  get,  148. 

Right,  217. 

Ruler,  the  foolish,  and  revolting  tribes,  194. 

Sacrifice,  house  of,  180 ;  and  consecration, 

281. 
Saul's  pedigree,  33 ;  death,  35  ;  transgression, 

36 ;  in  battle,  37 ;  brethren,  45. 
Samuel,  34. 

Sacrilege  of  God's  house,  276. 
Secession,  a  great,  198. 
Sea,  the  molten,  159. 
Seeker,  encouraged,  69 ;  threefold,  70. 
Service,  inaugural,  67;  waiting,  110;  rest  an 

argument  for,  110  ;  in  Church  and  State, 

121 ;  ministerial,  208  ;  ability  for  God's, 

32 ;  orders  in,  33  ;  sacred,  64. 
Senechrib's     attempt    on    Jerusalem,    292 ; 

letter,  294  ;  demand,  295. 
Separation,  45. 
Simeon,  posterity  of,  18. 
Scruples,  conscientious,  201. 
Sons,  31,  83  ;  famous,  153. 
Solomon  chosen,   129 ;   elevated,   140,  192 ; 

splendid  beginning,  145 ;  sacrifice,  177 ; 

prayer  answered,  178  ;  military  exploits, 

182  ;  statesmanship,  183  ;  marriage,  184; 

religious  service,   184 ;    greatest  work, 

185  ;  fleet,  185  ;  greatness,  191 ;  end,  193. 
Soldiers,  registered,  27. 
Sojourners  and  shadow,  138. 
Sorrow,  family,  28. 
Song,  ministry  of,  24 ;   masters  of,  26 ;  of 

praise,  75;  and  revivals,  117,  164;   in 

God's  house,  315. 
Spirit,  familiar,  37  ;  upon  Amasai,  46 ;  tender, 

309. 
Seat,  mercy,  307. 
Scriptures  lost,  307, 
Spoils  consecrated,  86. 
Speech,  ignorant,  210. 
Step,  a  false,  89. 

Strangers  gathered,  104 ;  prayer  for,  171, 171. 
Stronghold  captured,  40. 
Successions,  168. 
Suicide,  37. 

Temple,  building  of,  102, 151, 155 ;  instruo- 


iv 


INDEX. 


tions  for,  131;  contributions  to,  134; 
described,  156 ;  beauty,  156 ;  clouds, 
164 ;  fixed  residence  of  God,  166 ;  dedi- 
cated, 177  ;  restored,  250. 

Testimony  of  noble  life,  128  ;  a  crown,  256. 

Teaching,  commission,  231. 

Times  considered,  48 ;  understanding  of,  49. 

Thanksgiving,  last,  137  ;  David's,  139. 

Things  right,  done  in  a  wrong  way,  52 ; 
which  remain,  164. 

Tests  and  moral  character,  298. 

Treasury  of  God's  house,  121. 

Training,  religious,  130. 

Trials,  41, 

Tribes,  the,  8 ;  apostate,  21 ;  registered,  27  ; 
sacred,  108. 

Trust,  false,  290. 

Truth,  ministry  of,  225  ;  reception  of,  238. 

Tribunal,  supreme,  242. 

Unity,  its  achievements,  21 ;   of  purpose, 

49 ;  prayer  for,  90. 
Uriah,  the  Hittite,  43. 
Uzzah's  conduct,  52 ;  breech,  53. 
Uzziah's  character  and  reign,  267 ;  sin  and 

punishment,  268. 

Value  of  Divine  gifts,  139. 

Valley  of  blessing,  247. 

Victory  of  God's  cause,  92;  songs  before, 

246. 
Visit,  royal,  236, 
Visions,  prophetic,  237* 


Waes,  David's,  84;  Divine  commission  in, 
173  ;  holy,  217  ;  entering  upon,  235. 

Warfare  and  Prayer,  216. 

Warnings  solemn,  179. 

War  cry,  88. 

Watchword,  the  National,  198. 

Wealth,  Solomon's,  148,  186. 

Wisdom,  blessedness  of,  147;  prayer  for, 
148,  149 ;  sought,  191. 

Wishing  and  willing,  175. 

Works,  Solomon's,  179. 

Work,  God's,  carried  on,  63  ;  preparation  for, 
103  ;  principles  of  Christian,  137. 

Workmen,  116,  117  ;  Solomon's,  153. 

Wonderful  deliverance,  296. 

World,  danger  of  proximity,  22 ;  its  strong- 
holds demolished,  227. 

Worship,  religious,  25,  74;  God's  claims 
upon,  75;  features  of,  116,  141;  temple, 
256  ;  and  praise,  279. 

Wrath  of  God,  207. 

Wrongdoing,  pertinacity  in,  227. 

Years  of  David's  warfare,  86. 

Zadok,  the  warrior  priest,  49. 

Zeal,  287. 

Zechariah,  the  murder  of,  260. 

Zedekiah's,  extinction  of  royal  line,  319. 

Zerubbabel,  14. 

Zion,  Castle  of,  41. 

Ziglag,  assembly  o^  46. 


XL-AUTHORS     QUOTED. 


Adams  quoted,  304. 
Addison,  142,  187,  225,  228. 
Augustine,  83. 

Bacon,  on  superstition,  54 ;  asking  ques- 
tions, 188  ;  revenge,  200 ;  on  friendship, 
229. 

Barrow,  93. 

Barnes,  208. 

Baxter,  on  harsh  words,  196. 

Bede,  Ven.,  141. 

Beza,  31. 

Beecher,  on  art,  157,  175;  success,  268; 
Bible,  310. 

Blair,  on  friendship,  153. 

Beaconsfield,  Lord,  on  heroes,  49. 

Blanshard,  49. 

Boston,  Thos.,  193. 

Burke,  203. 

Bushnell,  H.,  lit 

Byron,  266. 294. 


Cabltle,  on    producing,   18;   music,    77; 

work,  126,  130;  worship,  217;  gold,  248. 
Cecil,  Rev.  Rd.,  114,  266,304. 
Channing,  7,  11. 
Charles,  Mrs.,  73. 
Chalmers,  on  life,  11 ;  nobility  of  character, 

119. 
Cicero,  249. 
Cervantes,  128. 
Clifford,  Dr.  J.,  287. 
Colton,  253, 
Coleridge,  64,  83. 
Cowper,  7,  22,  38,  43,  69,  61,   101,  133,  185, 

192,  209,  216,  229,  237,  252,  268. 

DiSBABLI,  31$. 

Dods,  Dr.,  5. 
Donne,  33. 
Dryden,  90. 
Duncan,  Dr.,  193. 


INDEX. 


Edwabds,  Pres.,  117. 

Emmerson,  on  enthusiasm,  48 ;  chaxacter, 
87 ;  wealth,  150. 

Feltham,  on  reproof,  64. 

Fleming,  W.,  16, 174. 

Fontaine,  La,  126. 

Faber,  F.  W.,  233. 

Franklin,  233. 

Froude,  on  orders  of  men,  44. 

Fuller,  A..  117. 

Goodwin,  Thos.,  72. 
Gordon,  Mrs.,  223. 
Grin  don,  107. 
Guthrie,  Dr.,  150. 

Hall,  Bp ,  on  evil  example,  37  ;  courage,  54; 
judgments,  55  ;  insults,  88,  101 ;  visita- 
tion, 114 ;  gifts,  141  ;  appetite,  181 ; 
God's  interest,  203,  217;  earthly 
stability,  313 ;  liberality,  316. 

Hamam,  on  providence,  33. 

Hare,  266,  268. 

Havergal,  F.  R.,  13. 

Helps,  on  courage,  47. 

Herbert,  Geo.,  26,  109,  138, 169,  217. 

Hopkins,  Bp.,  19. 

Houghton,  Ld.,  43, 

Howe,  John,  111. 

Hood,  208. 

Hughes,  Thos.,  310. 

Johnson,  Dr.,  on  providence. 
Jay,  314,  316. 

Eat,  on  sacrifices,  181. 

Keats,  157. 

Keble,  on  duty,  34. 

Eingsley,  Obas.,  131 ;  on  music,  165. 

Lewis,  Taylor,  4,  70. 
Louis  XIV.,  114. 
Leighton,  Arbp.,  157,  277. 
Locke,  J.,  on  education,  308. 
Longfellow,  103,  113,  137,  179. 
Livingstone,  J.,  77. 
Luther,  8, 133,  175,  257. 

Maodonald,  Geo.,  7. 

Macleod,  N.,  D.D.,  on  a  blessed  home,  55. 

Massinger,  49. 

May,  13. 

Melancthon,  on  prayer,  181. 

More,  Sir  J.,  260. 

Milman,  Dean,  123. 

Milton,  56,  58,  77.  Ill,  148,  226,  237.  265, 

287,300. 
Munger,  on  music,  163. 

Napoleon  I.,  on  true  wisdom.  151 :  savings. 
251, 253.  »     J    6  . 

Newman,  J.  H.,  208. 
Newton,  John,  213. 


NichoUs,    on    judgments,  22;    honour    to 
parents,  133. 

Ovid,  quoted,  193. 

Parker,  Dr.,  156, 164,  196,  208,  281,  291. 

Pascal,  on  apostasy,  181 ;  evil,  203. 

Patrick,  Bp.,  quoted,  88,  250. 

Paley,  quoted,  90. 

Penn,W.,  122. 

Power,  P.  B.,  77. 

Pope,  33,  61,  90,  198,  268,  816. 

Priests,  maintained,  291. 

Plato,  quoted,  239. 

Pym,  on  oppression,  196. 

Richardson,  S.,  13, 

Richmond,  Legh,  76. 
Richter,  quoted,  127. 
Reynolds,  Sir  J.,  233. 
Roberts,  85. 
Robertson,  quoted,  149. 
Ruskin,  on  names,   11;  art,  160;  worshirx 
186. 

Schiller,  quoted,  248. 

Seneca,  on  gold,  193. 

Shakespeare,  8,  15,  19,  44,   49,  66,  90,  106, 

128,  133,  208,  220,  231,  263. 
Shirley,  quoted,  266. 
Sidney,  quoted,  113. 
Sheridan,  213. 
Smiles,  S.,  49,  283,  310. 
Sophocles,  142. 
South,  122,  258,  266,  268,  300. 
Stanley,  Dean,  28,  51,  94,  95,  101,  149,  155, 

162,  188,255,300. 
Spurgeon,  70,  193,  206. 
Swift,  Dean,  198. 
Swinnock,  quoted,  260. 
Smyth,  on  inspiration.  29. 

Taylor,  J..  Bp.,  101;  on  prosperity,  150; 

hiding  sin,  227. 
Taylor,  Jane,  quoted,  11. 
Tennyson,  95,  120,  171.  253. 
Talleyrand,  114. 
Thackeray,  quoted,  13. 
Thomas,  Dr.,  203. 
Thomson,  quoted,  249. 
Tupper,  Martin,  111,  113. 

Vauqhan,  Dr..  on  cities.  26. 
Vinet,  quoted,  266. 

Washington,  215. 
Webster,  quoted,  225. 
Wellington,  266. 
Wordsworth,  150,  281. 
Wordsworth,  Bp.,  277. 

Young,  6, 11,  22,  53,  55,  133,  140,  20a,  235. 
816. 


vi 


INDEX, 


III. -ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTEATIVE   INCIDENTS. 


Ambassadors,  English,  at  Persian  Court,  61. 
Ambrose  and  Emperor  Theodosius,  269. 
Alexander  the  Great,  252. 
Alexander,  Dr. ,  and  preaching,  302. 
Augustine's  saying,  232. 

Battle  Abbey,  motto  of,  89. 
Bede,  Ven.,  dying,  316. 
Beza's  will,  305. 
Blucher  at  Waterloo,  91. 
Brown,  J.,  of  Haddington,  83. 
Buller,  Judge,  and  advice,  198. 
Byron's  fame,  80. 

Cambyses  lost  army,  294. 

Captain,  an  English,  126. 

Cato's  complaint,  224. 

Cassar's  letters,  228. 

Chalmers'  prayer,  16  ;  on  astronomy,  77. 

Chanting  in  old  monasteries,  77. 

Charles  V.,  309. 

Charles  VIII.,  expedition    against   Naples, 

214. 
Charles  IX.  of  France,  death  of,  259. 
Chrysostom's  hearers,  205. 
Clifford,  Dr.,  49. 
Councillor  French,  197. 
Courage  illustrated,  300. 
Cyprian  and  Proconsul,  201, 

Death,  nobleman's,  192. 

Edward  Confessor  and  kingdom,  92, 
Eliot  refusing  bribes,  43. 
Elizabeth,  Queen,  and  courtier,  290. 
Emperor  Joseph  II.,  visit  to  Haller,  18. 

France,  nobility  of,  194, 195. 
French  officer's  conversion,  92. 

Gardner,  Bp.,  and  English  exiles,  201. 
George  III.,  reproof  of  clergyman,  259, 
God  save  the  King,  256. 
Greville's  history,  212. 

Haydn's  musical  lessons,  193. 

Handel  and  music,  108. 

Heber,  Bp.,  poem  on  Solomon's  temple,  187. 

Henry  IV.  of  France,  260. 

Horace  Vere,  Sir,  in  council  of  war,  44. 

King  John  and  subjects,  198. 

King  of  Sweden's  prayer  before  battle,  22 ; 

of  Naples  and  loss,  198. 
Kingsley's,  C,  birthday,  223, 

XiATlMER's  motto,  89. 


Lind,  Jenny,  and  art,  77. 
Livingstone's  journal,  316. 
Lowel,  321. 
Lewis,  St.,  52. 
Louis  XIV.,  195,  260. 

Luther's  schoolmaster,  11;  at  Worms,  43 ; 
prayer,  61 ;  in  closet,  213. 

Massillon's  preaching,  73. 
Mary,  Queen  of  Scots,  257. 
Mathews,  Father,  music  of,  282. 
Mahommed  and  army  dispute,  122, 
Midas  and  gold,  248. 
Mottoes  of  City  company,  73. 
Mother  and  clergyman,  252. 

Napoleon's  attack,  49 ;  relations,  83 ; 
escape  from  Elba,  223 ;  saying,  226, 
252  ;  Russian  expedition,  296. 

Nero,  260. 

Officer's  command,  61. 
Orange,  William  of,  in  war,  22, 
Otho  II.,  Emperor  of  Germany,  200. 

Persian  custom  and  fire,  272 ;  invasion  oi 

Greece,  296. 
Philip  and  Antipater,  226  ;  victory  of,  227. 
Pliny  and  worship,  315. 

Richard  II.  deposed,  92. 
Ruf  us  and  Anselm,  222. 

Schiller,  114, 
Scipio  and  the  Romans,  236. 
Sennacherib's  fall  remembered,  298. 
Scotch  lady,  106. 
Solon's  laws,  315. 

Singing  in  battle,  55;  in  St.  Paol'f  Gross, 
117. 
^  Statue  in  Windsor  Castle,  310. 
Stanley,  307. 
Strafford  and  block,  80. 

Tacitus,  48. 

Turks,  87. 

Voltaire's  printing  press,  227. 

War  and  Romans,  122. 

Wellington  on  battlefield,  43,  59;  saluted, 

46. 
Wesley,  John,  and  Romanist,  83 ;  advice  of, 

306. 

Xerxes  and  Council,  198. 


INDEX. 


fU 


IV.-ILLUSTRATED  TEXTS. 


Acts  T.  39...        .M 

„    xvii.  26 
1  Cor.  xiv.  33-40... 

Col.  ii.  17 

Deut.  xxxii.  3      ••• 
Eph.  ii.  20 

„    iii.  12 

Ecc.  vi.  12 

„    ix.  12.. 
Gen.  iv.  29 

„    vi.  16  ... 

*»     »»  lo  ••• 

i>  »»  1A«»»  ••• 
Is.  vii.  9     

„   xxiv.  5 

„   xxvi  9 

,,  xliii.  16 

„   Ixvi.  5 

Jer.  i.  10 

„    V.  30,  31 

„    zxii.  11,  12    ... 
Josh.  vii.  15 
Job  vi.  4 

„     xxxiv.  29 
1  John  ii.  2 
1  Kings  XL  ... 

Luke  i.  5 

Mai.  vii.  8 

Math.  ii.  6 

Neb.  iii.  34  ••• 

M    viii.  10        ••• 


... 
... 


•  •• 
..• 
... 

•  •» 
... 

•  •• 
... 
... 
... 
.•• 
«•* 
... 
... 

•  •• 


*•• 
... 
... 
•  •• 
... 


... 


... 
... 
... 
... 
••* 
••• 
... 


•  •• 
.•• 
... 
... 
... 
••• 

•>• 

«•• 
••• 
••• 
... 
... 

•  •! 

•  t  • 

••• 
••• 

•  •• 

•  «. 


PAGE 

TAOE 

210 

1  Pet  L  15 

•M 

••• 

M* 

••a 

65 

64 

„       ii.  5 

... 

••• 

••• 

••a 

105 

33   , 

Ps 

.  V.  3      ... 

••• 

••a 

••a 

•aa 

173 

160 

f» 

XV.  1    „. 

••• 

•m» 

••• 

•aa 

51 

41 

>* 

xii.  2  ... 

•*« 

••• 

••a 

*•• 

130 

102 

»> 

XX.  7    ... 

•    • 

*•• 

••• 

176,  201 

193 

»t 

xxi.  12 

•  •• 

a.. 

..a 

••» 

85 

65 

n 

XXV.  14 

... 

... 

aaa 

•aa 

126 

138 

n 

xxvii.  5 

•a. 

... 

••• 

•  •• 

58 

297 

n 

xxxiv.  16 

•  •• 

•  *• 

••a 

aa. 

123 

4 

n 

xxxix.  6 

... 

•  *• 

*•• 

*a. 

138 

312 

n 

xcvi.  9... 

••• 

••• 

••a 

.•• 

73 

71 

*» 

xcvii.  6 

•  •• 

•  •• 

*•• 

... 

74 

6 

)t 

cv.  12  ... 

••• 

••• 

... 

... 

71 

5 

*i 

cxxvii.  1 

•  <• 

aaa 

•  •« 

... 

81 

274 

»> 

0x1  v.  7... 

*.. 

••• 

aaa 

aa* 

167 

71 

Prov.  xi.  24 

.•• 

•  a. 

... 

••* 

282 

54 

„     xvi.  3 

.•• 

•  •• 

»•• 

a*. 

58 

80 

„     xxi.  1,  22 

... 

... 

aaa 

... 

67 

307 

„     xxiv.  27 

... 

'     ... 

aaa 

••• 

53 

215 

„     xxvii.  18 

... 

... 

... 

aaa 

119 

237 

„     xxix.  25 

... 

... 

... 

•f 

224 

219 

„     xxx.  27 

... 

... 

... 

••• 

90 

317 

Eon),  i.  13    .. 

«•• 

•  •• 

*«• 

a.. 

78 

8 

„      „  23... 

... 

»•• 

... 

... 

206 

95 

„      ii.  1  ... 

.*• 

*•• 

..a 

... 

2Vi 

215 

2  Sam.  V.  9 

... 

... 

... 

... 

40 

99 

»      •^.  7 

•  •• 

•  •» 

••• 

... 

53 

36 

„      vii.  12 

•a. 

... 

... 

•  •• 

317 

114 

1  Tim.  i.  16 

... 

... 

••• 

aa. 

302 

219 

„      vi.  20 

... 

•  •• 

•  •• 

••• 

200 

40 

2  Tim.  i.  14 

a*. 

a*. 

••• 

... 

201 

40 

„     i.  6... 

aa. 

••a 

••• 

a.. 

48 

49 

2  Thess.  ii.  11, 12 

••• 

••• 

••• 

239 

IIOMILETICAL    COMMENTARY 


ON  THE  BOOK  OF 


EZRA 


WITH    CRITICAL     AND     EXPLANATORY    NOTES, 
ILLUSTRATIONS,  AND     INDEXES, 


BY 

WILLIAM    JONES, 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


HOMILETIO    COMMENTARY 


ON  THS 


BOOK    OF    EZRA. 


INTRODUCTION. 

L  The  Nature  of  the  Book.     The  Book  of  Ezra  was  correctly  characterised  by 

Bishop  Hilary  as  "a  continuation  of  the  Books  of  Chronicles."  The  Second  Book 
of  Chronicles  brings  the  history  of  the  people  of  Israel  down  to  the  destruction  of 
the  Temple  of  Jehovah  and  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  carrying  captive 
into  Babylon  such  of  the  people  that  remained  in  the  land.  The  Book  of  Ezra 
takes  up  the  history  of  the  nation  at  the  close  of  the  seventy  years  of  captivity, 
and  tells  of  the  return  of  some  of  the  exiles  to  Jerusalem  under  Zerubbabel 
prince  of  Judah,  and  by  permission  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  of  the  restoration  of 
the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  the  rebuilding  of  His  Temple  by  them,  of  the  return 
of  a  second  company  of  exiles  many  years  afterwards  under  Ezra,  the  celebrated 
priest  and  scribe,  and  by  permission  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia,  and  of  the  social 
and  religious  reformation  which  was  accomplished  under  Ezra.  And  some  portion 
of  this  history  is  given  in  contemporary  historical  documents,  which  seem  to  have 
been  written  "  from  time  to  time  by  the  prophets,  or  other  authorised  persons,  who 
were  eyewitnesses  for  the  most  part  of  what  they  record,"  and  were  collected  by  the 
author  and  incorporated  by  him  into  his  work. 

II.  The  Design  of  the  Book.  From  a  survey  of  the  contents  of  this  book,  Keil 
concludes  *'that  the  object  and  plan  of  its  author  must  have  been  to  collect  only 
such  facts  and  documents  as  might  show  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord  God,  after 
the  lapse  of  the  seventy  years  of  exile,  fulfilled  His  promise  announced  by  the 
prophets,  by  the  deliverance  of  His  people  from  Babylon,  the  building  of  the 
Temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  the  restoration  of  the  Temple  worship  according  to  the 
law,  and  preserved  the  reassembled  community  from  fresh  relapses  into  heathen 
customs  and  idolatrous  worship  by  the  dissolution  of  the  marriages  with  Gentile 
women.  Moreover,  the  restoration  of  the  Temple  and  of  the  legal  Temple  worship, 
and  the  separation  of  the  heathen  from  the  newly-settled  community,  were  neces- 
sary and  indispensable  conditions  for  the  gathering  out  of  the  people  of  God  from 
among  the  heathen,  and  for  the  maintenance  and  continued  existence  of  the  nation 
of  Israel,  to  which  and  through  which  God  might  at  His  own  time  fulfil  and  realise 
His  promises  to  their  forefathers,  to  make  their  seed  a  blessing  to  all  the  families 
of  the  earth,  in  a  manner  consistent  both  with  His  dealings  with  this  people 
hitherto,  and  with  the  further  development  of  His  promises  made  through  the 
prophets.  The  significance  of  the  Book  of  Ezra  in  sacred  history  lies  in  the  fact 
that  it  enables  us  to  perceive  how  the  Lord,  on  the  one  hand,  so  disposed  the 
hearts  of  the  kings  of  Persia,  the  then  rulers  of  the  world,  that  in  spite  of  all  the 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


machinations  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people,  they  promoted  the  building  of  His 
Temple  in  Jerusalem,  and  the  maintenance  of  His  worship  therein  ;  and  on  the 
other,  raised  up  for  His  people,  when  delivered  from  Babylon,  men  like  Zerubbabel 
their  governor,  Joshua  the  high  priest,  and  Ezra  the  scribe,  who,  supported  by  the 
prophets  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  undertook  the  work  to  which  they  were  called, 
with  hearty  resolution,  and  carried  it  out  with  a  powerful  hand." 

III.  The  Authorship  of  the  Book.  The  statement  of  Keil  on  this  point  seems 
to  us  to  rest  on  trustworthy  bases :  "  There  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  that 
author  was  Ezra,  the  priest  and  scribe,  who  in  chaps,  vii.-x.  narrates  his  return 
from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  circumstances  of  his  ministry  there,  neither  its 
language  nor  contents  exhibiting  any  traces  of  a  later  date."  It  is  not  meant  by 
this  that  the  whole  book  is  the  original  work  of  Ezra,  but  that  it  was  put  together 
by  hiui,  and  that  the  last  four  chapters,  and  probably  some  portions  of  the  other 
chapters,  were  his  original  work.  As  illustrations  of  historical  documents  which 
were  collected  by  Ezra  and  embodied  in  his  work,  we  may  mention  the  list  of 
names  in  chap,  ii.,  which  is  also  inserted  in  Neh.  vii.  6—73,  and  "which  must  have 
been  composed  in  the  earliest  times  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  congregation" 
(see  Neh.  vii.  5),  and  the  letters  and  decrees  which  are  given  in  chaps,  iv.-vi. 

All  that  we  know  as  certainly  true  concerning  Ezra  is  recorded  in  this  book 
(chaps,  vii.— X.),  and  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah  (chaps,  viii.  and  xii.  26).  He  was 
eminent  for  his  learning,  piety,  patriotism,  love  of  the  Sacred  Writings,  and  zeal 
for  the  honour  of  God ;  and  was  held  in  the  highest  esteem  by  his  countrymen  in 
ancient  times,  as  he  is  also  by  those  of  modern  days. 

IV.  The  Canonicity  of  the  Book.  On  this  point  Bishop  Hervey  says :  "  There 
has  never  been  any  doubt  about  Ezra  being  canonical,  although  there  is  no  quota- 
turn  from  it  in  the  New  Testament.  Augustine  says  of  Ezra,  *  magis  rerum  gesta- 
rum  scriptor  est  habitus  quam  propheta '  (De  'Civ.  I)ei,  xviii.  36)." — Bibl.  Diet, 

V.  Date  of  the  Book.  The  first  event  recorded  in  this  book  took  place  in  the 
first  year  of  the  rule  of  Cyrus  over  Babylon  (chap,  i  1),  which  was  in  the  year 
530  B.C. ;  and  the  work  of  Ezra,  so  far  as  it  is  recorded  in  this  book,  was  completed 
in  the  spring  of  457  B.C.  (chap.  x.  17),  which  was  the  first  spring  after  Ezra's 
arrival  at  Jerusalem,  which  took  place  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  (chap.  vii. 
7,  9)  or  458  B.c.  So  that  this  book  deals  with  a  period  of  about  eighty  years. 
But  of  fifty-seven  of  these  years,  which  intervene  between  the  conclusion  of  chap, 
vi.  and  the  commencement  of  chap,  vii.,  nothing  is  recorded.  From  the  fact  that 
the  history  is  carried  on  in  this  book  so  far  as  the  spring  of  457  B.C.,  we  conclude 
that  Ezra  could  not  have  compiled  it  before  that  year.  And  from  the  fact  that  no 
mention  is  made  in  it  of  the  mission  of  Nehemiah  to  Jerusalem,  which  took  place 
in  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  (Neh.  ii.  1)  or  about  445  B.C.,  we  infer  that  it 
was  written  before  that  date.  The  probability,  therefore,  is  that  the  work  of  Ezra 
the  scribe  must  be  aissigned  to  some  time  between  the  years  457  and  445  B.C. 

VI.  Analysis  of  the  Contents  of  the  Book. 

I.  Thk  return  op  the  Jews  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  under  Zerub- 
babel, AND  THE  rebuilding  OF  THE  TeMPLE  (chapS.  i.-vi.). 

i   The  return  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  under  Zerubbabel 
(chaps,  i.  and  ii.). 

1.  The  edict  of  Cyrus  granting  permission  to  the  Jews  to  return  and  re- 

build the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  (chap.  i.  1-4). 

2.  The  preparations  of  the  Jews  for  returning  (vers.  5  and  6). 

3.  The  restoration  of  the  sacred  vessels  of  the  Temple  to  Zerubbabel  prince 

of  Judah  (vers.  7-11). 


BOM  I  LET  J  C  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


4.  The  list  of  the  names  and  the  number  of  the  people  who  returned 

(chap.  ii.  1-64). 

5.  The  possessions  of  those  who  returned  and  their  offerings  for  building 

the  Temple  (vers.  65-70). 
ii.  The  erection  of  the  altar,  tlie  restoration  of  worship,  and  the  commence- 
ment of  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  (chap.  iii.). 
iii.   llie  hindrance  of  the  work  by  the  Samaritans  (chap.  iv.). 

1.  The  request  of  the  Samaritans  to  co-operate  in  the  rebuilding  of  the 

Temple,  and  its  refusal  by  the  Jewish  authorities  (chap,  iv,  1-3). 

2.  The   opposition    of   the    Samaritans  in  consequence  of   this  refusal 

(vers.  4-6). 

3.  The  letter  of  the  hostile  Samaritans  to  Artaxerxes  the  king  (vers.  7-16). 

4.  The  reply  of  the  king  to  this  letter,  in  consequence  of  which  the  work 

was  arrested  (vers.  17-24). 
i?.  The  renewal  and  the  completion  of  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  (chaps. 
V.  and  vi.). 

1.  The  renewal  of  the  work  in  consequence  of  the  prophesying  of  Haggai 

and  Zechariah  (chap.  v.  1,  2). 

2.  The  inquiries  of  the  Persian  officers  concerning  the  work,  and  their 

report  to  Darius  the  king,  which  includes  the  reply  of  the  Jews  to 
their  inquiries  (vers.  3-17). 

3.  The  reply  of  Darius  to  the  letter  of  his  officers,  including  the  discovery 

of  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  and  the  commands  of  Darius  to  his  officers  to 
allow  and  to  promote  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  (chap.  vi.  1-12). 

4.  The  completion  of  the  Temple  (vers.  13-15). 

5.  Tlie  dedication  of  the  Temple  (vers.  16-18). 

6.  The  celebration  of  the  feast  of  the  Passover  (vers.  19-22). 

II.  The  return  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  under  Ezra, 

AND   THE   REFORMATION    WHICH    HE   ACCOMPLISHED    AMONGST    THE   PEOPLE    (chaps. 

vii.-x.). 

i  The  return  of  Ezra  and  his  company  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  (chaps, 
vii.  and  viii.). 

1.  The  genealogy  of  Ezra,  and  a  statement  concerning  his  going  with  others 

to  Jerusalem  (chap.  vii.  1-10). 

2.  The  letter  of  Artaxerxes  the  king,  authorising  Ezra  to  do  certain 

things  (vers.  11-26). 

3.  Ezra's  praise  to  God  for  the  kindness  of  the  king  (vers.  27  and  28). 

4.  The  list  of  the  names  and  the  number  of  those  who  accompanied  Ezra 

(chap.  viii.  1-14). 
6.  Their  encampment  by  "  the  river  that  runneth  to  Ahava,"  from  whence 
Ezra  sent  for  ministers  for  the  Temple,  and  prepared  for  the  journey 
by  fasting  and  prayer,  and  by  the  delivery  of  the  precious  things  of 
the  Temple  into  the  hands  of  twelve  priests  and  an  equal  number 
of  Levites  (vers.  15-30). 

6.  The  journey  "from  the  river  Ahava"  to  Jerusalem  (vers.  31  and  32). 

7.  The  gwing  up  of  the  precious  things  to  certain  priests  and  Levites  in 

the  Temple,  and  the  presentation  of  offerings  unto  the  Lord  (vers. 
33-35). 

8.  The  deliverance  of  the  king's  decree  to  the  Persian  satraps  and  gover- 

nors west  of  the  Euphrates  (ver.  36). 
IL   The  social  and  religious  reformation  effected  by  Ezra  (chaps,  ix.  and  x.). 

1.  The  evil  to  be  remedied,  viz.,  the  marriages  of  the  Jews  with  heathen 

women  (chap.  ix.  1,  2). 

2.  The  sorrow  and  prayer  of   Ezra  in  consequence  of  this   evil  (vers. 

3-15). 

3 


OHAP.  L  BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENT AR  Y :  EZRA . 


3.  The  proposal  of  Shechaniah  for  the  removal  of  the  evil,  knd  its  accept- 

ance by  Ezra  (chap.  x.  1-5). 

4.  The  accomplishment  of  the  reformation  (vers.  6-17). 

5.  The  names  of  those  who  had  married  heathen  wives  and   put  them 

away  (vers.  18-44). 

Respecting  our  own  work,  we  have  very  little  to  add  to  what  we  stated  in  the 
introduction  to  The  Homiletic  Commentary  on  Numbers^  as  the  method  of  that  work 
is  followed  in  this  also. 

A  considerable  number  of  selected  sermon  outlines  by  various  authors  will  be 
found  in  the  following  pages.  By  their  introduction  we  liave  sought  to  secure 
variety  in  relation  both  to  the  mental  view  and  the  homiletic  treatment  of  the  texts. 

We  wish  to  acknowledge  our  obligations  to  the  expositions  of  Professor  Fr. 
W.  Schultz  (in  the  great  work  of  Dr.  Lange),  C.  F.  Keil,  D.D.,  Matthew  Henry, 
and  Thomas  Scott. 


CHAPTER  L 


Critical  awd  Explanatory  Kotes.]    In  this  chapter  we  have  (i.)  the  proclamation  of 
Cyrus  (vers.  1-4) ;  (ii.)  the  preparation  of  the  Jews  for  availing  themselves  of  it  (vers.  5,  6) 
and  (iii.)  the  restoration  of  the  sacred  vessels  (vers.  7-11). 

Ver.  1.  Now,  Heb. )  and]  The  conjunction  connects  the  history  of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews 

with  the  history  of  the  destruction  of  their  capital  and  kingdom,  as  in  2  Chron.  xxrvi.  22.  In 
the  first  year  of  Cyrus]  i.e.  the  first  year  of  his  rule  over  Babylon,  which  was  536  B.O.  Cyrus, 
K^"li3  is  the  Hebrew  for  the  ancient  Persian  Kurus,  Greek  Kvpos.     "As  to  the  meaning  of 

the  name,"  says  Fuerst,  **the  ancients  have  already  observed  that  it  is  an  expression  lov  the 
sun.  The  sun  was  called  in  old  Persian  Khor^  Khur.  li^—  is  the  sign  of  the  Persian  nomi- 
native s  or  ush.     In  cuneiform  inscriptions  the  name  is  Khurush."    Persia]  **  D"13  signifies  in 

Biblical  phraseology  the  Persian  Empire  (comp.  Dan.  v.  28  ;  vi.  8,  &c.)" — Keil.  That  the 
word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah]  &c.  The  prophecy  referred  to  is  in  Jer.  xxv. 
11,  12  ;  xxix.  10.  The  seventy  years  began  in  the  fourth  year  of  Jelioiakim,  when  Nebuchad- 
nezzar first  took  Jerusalem  and  carried  Daniel  and  others,  with  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house 
of  God,  to  Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiii.  36-xxiv.  4 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  5-8  ;  Jer.  xlvi.  2  ;  Dan.  i.  1, 
2).  This  was  the  year  606  B.C.  And,  as  we  have  seen,  the  first  year  of  the  rule  of  Cyrus  over 
Babylon  was  536  B.C.,  which  completes  the  seventy  years.  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of 
Cyrus]  i.e.  God  inspired  within  him  the  desire  and  the  determination  (comp.  1  Chron.  v.  26  ; 
2  Chron.  xxi.  16  ;  Hag.  i.  14).  Made  a  proclamation]  Margin:  "Caused  a  voice  to  pass." 
The  expression  signifies  to  make  known  by  heralds  (comp.  Exod.  xxxvi.  6 ;  2  Chron.  xxx.  6  ; 
chap.  x.  7  ;  Neh.  viii.  16).  And  put  it  also  in  writing]  Schultz  :  **  And  also  (made  known) 
by  writing."     In  addition  to  the  proclamation  by  heralds,  Cyrus  issued  written  edicts. 

Ver.  2.  All  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth]  These  words,  which  are  not  to  be  taken  literally, 
"are  explained,  from  the  wide  extent  of  the  Persian  Empire.  When  Cyrus  conquered  Babylon, 
he  had  already  subjugated  to  himself  almost  the  entire  eastern  Asia,  even  to  the  Indian  Ocean 
(according  to  Berosus  in  Josephus,  c.  Ap,).  Afterwards  he  pressed  southward  also,  and  entered 
even  into  Egypt  and  FAhiopia.."  —  Schultz.  He  hath  charged  me]  &c.  **It  is  a  reasonable 
conjecture,"  says  Rawlinson,  "that,  on  the  capture  of  Babylon,  Cyrus  was  brought  into  per- 
sonal contact  with  Daniel,  and  that  his  attention  was  drawn  by  that  prophet  to  the  prophecy 
of  Isaiah  (Isa.  xliv.  24-28  ;  xlv.  1  seq.)  Cyrus  probably  accepted  this  prophecy  as  a  *  charge' 
to  rebuild  the  Temple." 

Ver  3.  All  His  people]  Not  Judah  only,  but  also  the  descendants  of  the  ten  tribes.  He 
is  the  God  which  is  in  Jerusalem]  does  not  mean  that  His  presence  was  confined  to  that 
place,  but  that  He  had  chosen  it  as  the  chief  seat  of  His  worship  (comp.  Neh,  i.  9,  last  clause ; 
Ps.  xlviii.  1,  2;  cxxxii.  13,  14). 

Ver.  4.  And  whosoever  remaineth]  &c.  Schultz:  "And  as  for  every  one  of  the  survivors** 
(comp.  Neh.  i.  2  ;  Hag.  ii.  3).  The  men  of  his  place]  signifies  those  who  were  not  Israelites. 
Help  him]  Margin  :  "  Heb.  lift  him  up."  Both  Keil  and  Schultz  give  the  meaning  "to  assist." 
Goods!  Fuerst :  "  Movable  property."  Schultz :  "  Here  perhaps  clothing  or  tents."  Beside  the 
freewill  offering]  &c.  t.c  in  addition  to  the  gifts  intended  for  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple. 

Ver.  5,  With  aU]  &c.  Keil  would  render  this,  "in  short,"  or,  "namely,  all  whose  spirit,** 
4 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAl>.  I. 


&c.     He  says,  "the  ?   in   ^3?  serves  to  comprise  the  remaining  persona,  and  may  therefore 

be  rendered  by,  in  short,  or  namely."     Many  elected  to  remain  in  Babylon. 

Ver.  6.  All  they  that  were  about  them]  both  their  heathen  neighbours  and  the  Jews  who 
preferred  to  remain  in  Babylon.  Strengthened  their  hands]  The  idea  is  correctly  expressed 
in  the  margrin  :   '*that  is,  helped  them." 

Ver.  7.  The  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  Lord]  &c.  Most  probably  those  mentioned  in 
2  Chron.  xxxvi,  7,  and  Dan.  i.  2. 

Ver.  8.  Mithredath]  According  to  Rawlinson,  the  Persian  is  Miihradata,  and  is  made  up 
of  Mithra,  "the  sun-g^od,"  and  data  past  part,  of  da,  "to  gire,"  and  signifies  "given  by 
Mithra.'"  Sheshbazzar]  is  the  Chaldee  name  of  Zerubbabel.  The  etymology  and  meaning 
of  the  name  are  uncertain.  The  prince  of  Judah]  He  was  of  the  royal  family  of  Judah 
(1  Chron.  iii.  19  ;  Matt.  i.  12),  and  was  the  recognised  head  of  that  tribe  at  this  time. 

Vers.  9,  10]  'I'he  usual  names  for  the  sacred  vessels  are  not  used  here,  and  consequently 
there  is  much  uncertainty  as  to  their  meaning. 

Ver.  11.  Five  thousand  and  four  hundred]  This  total  is  more  than  double  the  numbers 
whicli  are  given  in  detail  in  vers.  9,  10.  The  statement  of  Keil  may  be  correct :  "The  differ- 
ence between  the  two  statements  has  certainly  arisen  from  errors  in  the  numbers,  for  the 
correction  of  which  the  means  are  indeed  wanting."  But  we  prefer  the  suggestion  of  J.  H. 
Michaelis,  "  that  the  author  passed  over  many  subordinate  vessels  in  the  detail,  but  in  the  sum 
total  has  taken  them  all  into  consideration." 


The  Fulfilment  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 

(Verse  1.) 


Here  are  four  things  which  claim  our 
attention  : — 

I.  The  regard  of  God  for  His  word. 
"  Now  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  king 
of  Persia,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  by 
the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  might  be  ful- 
filled," <fec.  The  word  referred  to  is  in 
Jer.  xxix.  10  :  *'  Thus  saith  the  Lord, 
That  after  seventy  years  be  accomplished 
jit  Babylon  I  will  visit  you,  and  perform 
My  good  word  toward  you,  in  causing 
}  ou  to  return  to  this  place."  The  seventy 
years  were  now  accomplished,  and  God 
proceeds  to  perform  His  word  to  His 
people.  He  is  punctual  in  the  fulfilment 
of  His  promises.  "  God  is  not  a  man, 
that  He  should  lie  "  &c.  (Num.  xxiii.  19). 
'*  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 
My  words  shall  not  pass  away."  "  The 
word  of  the  Lord  endureth  for  ever." 
"He  abideth  faithful  ;  He  cannot  deny 
Himself."     We  have  in  this — 

1.  An  assurance  that  the  prophecies 
and  promises  of  His  word  will  he  fulfilled. 
"  As  the  architect  progressively  executes 
every  part  of  the  plan  which  he  had 
delineated,  till  the  whole  design  is  com- 
pleted, so  God  in  His  providence  per- 
forms in  due  order  all  the  prophecies 
of  His  word  :  a  great  proportion  of  His 
great  scheme  has  already  been  accom- 
plished, and  revolving  ages  will  hasten 
the  performance  of  all  the  rest  in  the 
appointed  periods." — Scott,  (a) 


%  An  encouragement  to  trust  in  Him, 
"  Whoso  putteth  his  trust  in  the  Lord 
shall  be  set  on  high."  '*  Blessed  is  that 
man  that  maketh  the  Lord  his  trust*' 
See  Ps.  xxii.  4,  5 ;  xviii.  2.  (6) 

II.  The  mercy  of  God  to  His  people. 
This  mercy  is  seen — 

1.  In  the  design  and  effect  of  the  cap- 
tivity. The  captivity  was  the  punish- 
ment of  their  many  sins,  and  especially 
their  idolatry;  and  was  designed  to 
eradicate  their  apparently  inveterate 
tendency  to  idolatry.  And  in  this  it 
was  thoroughly  successful.  "  Prone  be- 
fore on  every  occasion  to  adopt  the 
idolatrous  practices  of  the  adjacent 
nations,  the  Jews  now  secluded  them- 
selves from  the  rest  of  the  world,  in 
proud  assurance  of  their  own  religious 
superiority.  The  law,  which  of  old  was 
perpetually  violated  or  almost  forgotten, 
was  now  enforced  by  general  consent  to 
its  extreme  point,  or  even  beyond  it. 
Adversity  endeared  that  of  which  in 
prosperity  they  had  not  perceived  the 
value.  Prone,  the  mass  of  them,  all 
but  the  wiser  and  more  enlightened, 
who  worshipped  Jehovah,  to  worship 
Him  but  as  a  national  God,  greater  and 
mightier  than  tl>e  gods  of  other  nations 
(a  conception  in  itself  polytheistic),  they 
threw  aside  this  lower  kind  of  pride  to 
assume  that  of  the  sole  people  of  the 
One  True  God."     In  this  way  the  pun- 

5 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


isbmeiit  of  their  sins  was  an  expression 
of  the  Divine  mercy  to  them.  **He  doth 
not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  chil- 
dren of  men."  *'  Thus  the  Divine  word 
of  chastisement,"  says  Schultz,  "  ever 
goes  hand  in  hand  with  His  word  of 
salvation.  His  chastening  is  in  truth 
ever  a  helping;  yea,  His  killing  is  a 
making  alive.  He  puts  to  death  only 
the  dead." 

2.  In  the  release  from  captivity.  ( 1 . ) 
As  to  its  time.  The  emancipation  was 
not  delayed  one  moment  longer  than 
was  necessary.  As  soon  as  the  exile 
had  accomplished  its  purpose,  the  Lord 
brought  it  to  a  conclusion.  *'  Though 
He  cause  grief,  yet  will  He  have  com- 
passion, according  to  the  multitude  of 
His  mercies."  (2.)  As  to  its  meaning. 
It  was  an  assurance  of  the  Divine  for- 
giveness of  their  sins.  Isaiah  clearly 
expresses  this  :  *'  Comfort  ye,  comfort 
ye  My  people,  saith  your  God,"  (kc. 
(Isa.  xl.  1,  2).  Their  release  was  also 
the  commencement  of  many  and  great 
blessings.  "This  chapter  contains," 
says  Schultz,  *'  nothing  less  than  the 
beginning  of  the  fultilment  of  all  the 
great  and  glorious  prophecies  with  which 
the  prophets  before  the  exile  brightened 
the  gloomy  night  of  the  severe  judgments 
of  God — the  dawning  light  of  the  grace 
of  God  in  all  its  greatness,  that  would 
reawaken  the  people  of  God  from  death 
and  the  grave,  and  enable  them  to  live 
a  new  and  glorious  life — the  glorious 
liberty  of  the  children  of  God  in  the 
fullest  and  hic^hest  sense.  What  a 
great  revolution  of  affairs  was  now  to 
be  expected  !  What  a  fulness  of  salva- 
tion after  the  night  of  misfortune — the 
entire  extent  of  Messianic  redemption!" 

III.  The  influence  of  God  upon  the 
spirit  of  man.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up 
the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia." 

L  The  nature  of  this  influence.  "The 
Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus." 
"  This  does  not  mean,"  says  Schultz, 
"  that  Cyrus  was  influenced  in  the  same 
way  as  were  the  prophets,  upon  whom, 
with  their  greater  susceptibility,  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  ;  but  yet  an 
influence  in  consequence  of  which  Cyrus 
made  the  will  of  God  his  own  will,  and 
executed  it  in  the  things  under  con- 
6 


sideration.  God  gave  him  the  resolution 
and  the  desire  to  execute  His  intention." 
All  the  pure  desires  and  noble  resolu- 
tions of  men's  hearts  are  Divine  inspira- 
tions. All  the  good  in  human  life  is  the 
result  of  Divine  influence,  (c) 

2.  The  subject  of  this  influence. 
"  Cyrus  king  of  Persia."  Cyrus  was 
the  greatest  king  of  the  mightiest  empire 
of  the  world  ;  he  was  a  heathen,  but,  in 
common  with  his  countrymen  at  this 
period,  was  probably  a  pure  Theist, 
believing  in  One  Supreme  Being.  As 
a  prince,  he  was  distinguished  for  his 
justice,  and  for  the  mildness  and  kind- 
ness of  his  administration.  His  relations 
to  the  people  of  God,  and  the  terms  by 
which  they  are  described  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, are  very  remarkable.  He  ia 
spoken  of  as  "  the  righteous  man " 
(Isa.  xli.  2) ;  "  My  shepherd  '*  (Isa.  xliv. 
28),  and  *'  The  Lord's  anointed  "  (Isa. 
xlv.  1).  God  employed  this  celebrated 
heathen  monarch  in  the  accomplishment 
of  His  purposes,  in  the  emancipation  of 
His  people,  and  the  rebuilding  of  His 
Temple,  {d)  *'  The  king's  heart  is  in  the 
hand  of  the  Lord,  as  the  rivers  of  water" 
He  turneth  it  whithersoever  He  will. : 
He  is  now  using  the  powers  of  the 
world  to  promote  the  interests  of  His 
cause.  We  have  in  this  an  earnest  of 
His  final  victory  over  all  heathen  powers. 
"  The  kings  of  Tarshish  and  of  the  isles 
shall  bring  presents,"  <fec.  (Ps.  Ixxii. 
10,  11). 

3.  The  design  of  this  influence.  *'The 
Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  that 
he  made  a  proclamation,"  <fec  Divine 
influence  was  exerted  upon  Cyrus  to 
cause  him  to  do  an  act  of  great  gene- 
rosity and  nobility.  The  intention  of 
the  action  of  God  upon  the  spirit  of  man 
is  alwaj^s  gracious.  In  all  the  inspira- 
tions and  impressions  which  He  imparts 
to  man.  His  aim  is  to  save  and  bless 
him,  and  to  make  him  an  agent  in 
blessing  others. 

IV.  The  suitable  response  of  man 
to  the  influence  of  God.  "  Cyrus  made 
a  proclamation  throughout  all  his  king- 
dom," <kc.  God's  influence  upon  the 
spirit  of  man  is  not  irresistible.  He 
impresses  man,  but  He  does  not  co*  r(;e 
him.      He   inspires  man,   but   He  does 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.   I. 


not  compel  him.  Divine  influence  does 
not  invade  human  freedom.  Man'  may 
harden  himself  against  it,  may  resist  it 
to  his  own  injury.  *'Ye  do  always 
resist  the  Holy  Ghost,"  was  a  charge 
brought  by  Stephen  against  the  Jews. 
Or,  like  Cyrus,  man  may  yield  to  this 
influence,  and  suitably  and  heartily  re- 
spond to  it.  When  this  is  the  case  the 
Divine  influence  results  in  rich  blessings. 
''  Quench  not  the  Spirit"  '*  Grieve  not 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  God."  (<?) 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Is  God  all-mighty?  Then  be  assured 
that  the  throne  of  right  shall  stand  upon  the 
ruins  of  all  wrong;  but  here  God  is  apparently 
at  a  disadvantage, because  you  cannot  kill  evil 
with  the  sword.  The  abolition  of  evil  is  a 
work  of  time,  requiring  the  combination,  the 
conspiring  of  innumerable  moral  influences 
;ind  educational  forces ;  but  that  conspiring 
is  going  on.  **  The  Lord  is  not  slack  concern- 
ing His  promises,  as  Bome  men  count  glack- 
ness." — Joifph  ParktTf  D.D, 

(6)  *'  I  will  go  before  thee."  This  was  a 
Divine  promise  made  to  Cyrus  ;  and  God  has 
made  the  same  promise  to  all  who  put  their 
trust  in  Him.  It  is  surely  something  to  have 
a  Father's  promise  singing  in  the  heart.  Many 
of  us  know  the  inspiration  even  of  a  human 
promise ;  many  of  us  know  that  we  never 
could  have  endured  this  bitter  trial,  or  sur- 
mounted that  overshadowing  difficulty,  had 
we  not  enjoyed  the  presence  and  hopefulness 
of  some  friendly  promise  in  the  heart.  What 
we  want  to  feel  is  the  triumphant  faith  that 
says  definitely  to  God,  "  Thou  didst  promise 
this,  and  we  will  wait  for  its  fulfilment." — 
Ihid. 

(c)  It  is  taught  that,  besides  the  general 
moral  influences,  unconscious  and  diffused — 
as  it  were  distilled,  like  dew,  in  silence  and 
darkness — there  is  an  active  energy,  arousing, 
filling,  impelling  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  said 
that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  judges, 
that  it  came  upon  kings,  upon  prophets,  upon 
apostles — came  mightily  and  stirred  them  up. 
As  sudden  and  mighty  winds  make  trees  rock, 
and  wrencli  them,  and  even  overturn  them, 
so,  as  by  a  mighty  rushing  wind,  tiie  Spirit  of 
God  has  descended  on  men — on  Samuel,  on 
David,  on  Isaiaii,  on  Paul.  It  is  taught,  like- 
wise, that,  while  this  energy  of  the  Divine 
mind  prepared  certain  men  for  emergencies, 
and  prepared  them  to  act  official  parts,  all 
true  Christians,  all  godly  souls,  are  opening 
to  a  quickening  influence,  if  not  so  mighty 
yet  of  the  same  general  kind — an  influence 
which  stimulates,  assists,  ripens,  and  so  finally 
^^anctifies. 


The  Divine  Spirit  works  along  the  line  of  a 
man's  own  thinking  power,  along  the  channel 
of  a  man's  own  motive  power,  and  wakes  up 
in  the  man  that  which  was  in  him.  It  is  not 
said  that  God's  thought  rolls  along  and  be- 
comes a  part — a  material  part — of  the  current 
of  our  thouL^ht ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  said 
that  God  makes  us  think,  makes  us  will, 
makes  us  feel.  What  is  the  formula?  "Work 
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trem- 
bling." That  is,  work,  vmrlc  in  tamest,  aa 
men  do  about  a  thing  which  they  are  afraid 
they  shall  not  accomplish.  Why  ?  Because 
"it  is  God  that  worketh  in  you" — what? 
putting  His  own  will  there  and  His  own 
thought? — because  "it  is  God  that  worketh 
in  you  to  will  and  to  do."  There  is  the  point 
in  which  the  Divine  influence  expends  itself, 
according  to  the  explicit  testimony  of  Scrip- 
ture, for  the  development  in  man  of  that 
which  he  had  in  him  of  dormant  power.— 
B.  W.  Beecher. 

{d)  One  of  the  designations  of  Cyrus,  **  the 
man  that  executeth  My  counsel,"  furnishes 
the  key  to  the  prophetic  view  of  his  character 
and  position — a  view  which  pervades  all  that  is 
said  of  him,  and  promised  to  him.  This  forma 
the  most  striking  and  the  most  sustained  of 
the  instances  in  which  the  Lord  not  only 
asserts  His  supremacy  in  the  government  of 
the  world,  but  reveals  to  us  the  mode  in  which 
that  government  operates,  and  the  form  in 
which  it  is  most  usually  conducted.  The 
marked  manner  in  which  Cyrus  and  his 
Persians  are  represented  as  set  apart  to  exe- 
cute the  purposes  of  the  Lord,  while  they  con- 
sidered themselves  pursuing  their  own  objects, 
cannot  fail  to  suggest  many  interesting  reflec- 
tions respecting  the  manner  in  which  the  Lord 
acts  in  executing  the  high  purposes  of  His  will 
— often  by  agents  who  little  think  whom  they 
are  sei-ving,  and  who  are,  it  may  be,  aa  in  this 
case,  ignorant  even  of  His  name. 

•  •  •  •  • 

The  greatest  difficulty  is  supposed  to  be 
found  in  the  designation  of  Cyrus,  a  heathen, 
as  a  "  righteous  man."  But  this  title,  which 
indicates  one  who  acts  with  habitual  rectitude, 
who  would  not  consciously  inflict  wrong — a 
just  man,  is  not  in  Scripture  confined  to 
Israelites ;  and,  what  is  more,  it  correctly 
describes  the  character  of  Cyrus,  which,  not 
less  than  his  military  exploits,  caused  his  name 
to  be  long  held  in  honour  by  his  countrymen. 
...  In  fact,  as  Dr.  Henderson  remarks:  "It 
is  not  a  little  remarkable,  that  of  all  the  virtu- 
ous princes  of  antiquity,  he  alone  was  thought 
worthy  of  being  exhibited  as  a  model  of  just 
government.  Not  only  was  he  exemplary  in 
private  life,  but  his  victories  and  conquests 
had  for  their  object  the  vindication  of  law  and 
justice.  He  is  even  said  to  have  been  an 
object  of  the  Divine  love  (Isa.  xlviii.  14).  Hia 
destruction  of  the  Babylonian  Empire  and 
liberation  of  the  Jews  were  special  acts  of 
righteousness;  and  the  abolition  of  idolatry, 
which  in  a  great  measure  followed  the  success 


OBAP.  L 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


of  the  Persian  arms,  comes  also  under  the 
same  head."  .  .  . 

.  .  .  But  the  Lord  had  not  only  called  Cyraa 
by  his  name — He  had  "surnamed"  him,  as 
our  translation  somewhat  vaguely  renders  it. 
What  is  meant  is,  not  that  He  had  given  him 
any  surname — for  the  name  already  mentioned 
was  his  own  proper  name — but  that  He  had 
made  honourable  mention  of  him,  and  be- 
stowed upon  him  titles  of  high  honour,  such 
as  no  heathen  prince  had  ever  received.  Wiiat 
were  these  titles  and  honourable  distinctions  ? 
One  of  them,  *'The  righteous  man,"  has  al- 
ready engaged  our  attention.  Two  more  occur 
in  the  passage  last  extracted  (Isa.  xliv.  28,  xlv. 
1-4):  "  My  shepherd  "  and  '*  Mine  anointed." 

As  to  the  first  of  these  titles,  that  of  "shep- 
herd," we  know  that  good  kings  and  rulers 
are  called  shepherds  in  Scripture,  as  they  are 
in  the  ancient  classics.  It  is  a  fact,  however, 
that  David,  Cyrus,  and  Christ  in  His  Messianic 
character,  are  the  only  sovereigns  to  whom  the 
title  is  personally  given.  In  other  instances 
it  is  applied  to  the  office  of  sovereign  rather 
than  to  the  person  of  any  particular  king. 
What  is  more  remarkable  is,  that  this  very 
title  was  one  to  which  Cyrus  was  partial,  and 
the  purport  of  which  he  fully  appreciated. 
Xenophon  describes  him  as  saying,  **The 
business  of  a  good  king  and  a  good  shepherd 
are  much  alike.  The  shepherd  bught,  before 
all  things,  to  provide  for  the  welfare  and  safety 
of  his  flock,  and  to  in  ike  use  of  these  creatures 
consistently  with  their  happiness  ;  and  a  king 
ought,  in  the  same  manner,  to  make  men  and 
cities  happy,  and  in  the  same  manner  to  make 
use  of  them." 

Cyrus,  again,  is  called  "the  Lord's  anointed," 
in  reference  to  the  ancient  custom  of  anointing 
kings  with  oil  at  their  inauguration.  To  be 
merely  the  "anointed,"  was,  therefore,  no 
peculiar  distinction  to  Cyrus,  but  to  be  "the 
Lord's  anointed "  was  a  very  high  distinc- 
tion ;  and  it  is  given  to  him  obviously  because 


the  Lord  had,  in  His  providence,  appointed 
him  to  be  the  prince  under  whose  rule  the 
Jews  were  to  be  restored,  and  the  other  pur- 
poses of  His  will  accomplished. — John  KittOf 
D.D. 

(e)  When  we  lee  a  casket  wrenched  open, 
the  hinges  torn  away,  or  the  clasp  destroyed, 
we  mark  at  once  the  hand  of  the  spoiler  ;  but 
when  we  observe  another  casket  deftly  opened 
with  a  master  key,  and  the  sparkling  contents 
revealed,  we  note  the  hand  of  the  otoner. 
Conversion  is  not,  as  some  suppose,  a  violent 
opening  of  the  heart  by  grace,  in  which  will, 
reason,  and  judgment  are  all  ignored  or 
crushed.  This  is  too  barbarous  a  method  for 
Him  who  comes  not  as  a  plunderer  to  his 
prey,  but  as  a  possessor  to  His  treasure.  In 
converiion,  the  Lord  who  made  the  human 
heart  deals  with  it  according  to  its  nature  and 
constitution.  His  key  insinuates  itself  into 
the  wards ;  the  will  is  not  enslaved  but  en- 
franchised ;  the  reason  is  not  blinded  but  en- 
lightened ;  and  the  wliole  man  is  made  to  act 
with  a  glorious  liberty  which  it  never  knew 
till  it  fell  under  the  restraints  of  grace. — 0. 
H.  Spurgeon. 

We  are  not  forced  to  have  God  ;  we  can 
deliberately  take  up  our  pen  and  strike  His 
name  out  of  the  page  on  which  we  intend  to 
record  our  life ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can 
say,  "  We  are  of  yesterday,  and  know  nothing; 
we  are  so  wise  as  not  to  be  able  to  tell  what 
will  occur  to-morrow ;  we  are  so  empty  and 
barren  as  to  carry  our  little  earthly  immor- 
tality in  our  nostrils.  Lord,  lead,  and  we  shall 
follow  ;  we  accept  Thy  mercy ;  we  will  go 
where  Thou  goest."  So,  then,  religion  is  no 
tyranny  ;  it  is  no  pitiless  compulsion  of  under- 
standing and  heart  which  we  resent,  but  a 
blessing  which  first  makes  us  poor,  that  it 
may  afterwards  enrich  us  with  unwasting 
riches  of  purity,  and  strength,  and  love. — 
Joseph  ParkcTf  D.D. 


Rbsemblancb  between  the  Proclamation  of  Ctrus  and 

THE  Gospel. 

{Verse  1.) 


I.  In  the  disposition  from  which  it 

originated.  The  motive  which  actuated 
the  Persian  emperor  was  benevolence. 
The  love  of  Christ. 

II.  In  the  deliverance  which  it  an- 
nounced. From  Babylon  to  Canaan. 
From  the  captivity  of  Satan  and  sin 
to  a  state  of  salvation  here  and  here- 
after. 

Ill  In  the  terms  which  it  specified. 
8 


No  pecuniary  compensation  for  liberty. 
Salvation  by  grace. 

IV.  In  the  universality  of  its  offers. 
Every  Hebrew  captive.  Every  sinner  is 
invited. 

V.  In  the  aids  it  promised.  Provi- 
sion of  help  for  the  journey.  Provi- 
dential and  spiritual  aid  for  Christias. 
There  were  some  who  did  not  welcome  the 
proclamation  of  Cyrusw — George  Brooks. 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY.    EZRA. 


<mkf,  I. 


The  Edict  of  Cyrus. 
(Verses  2-4.) 


Notice : 

I.  The  devout  acknowledgment  of 
God's  sovereignty. 

1.  In  the  hestowment  of  His  favours. 
*'  Thus  saith  Cyrus  king  of  Persia,  The 
Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  given  me  all 
the  kingdoms  of  the  earth."  The  Persian 
Empire  at  this  time  was  very  vast  in  its 
extent.  In  Isaiah  xli.  2,  the  Lord  is 
represented  as  giving  the  nations  to  the 
rigliteous  man  from  the  East,  and  making 
him  ruler  over  kings.  The  prophecy 
was  remarkably  fulfilled  in  Cyrus,  (a). 
His  attention  was  probably  called  to  it 
by  Daniel ;  and,  perceiving  its  striking 
applicability  to  himself,  he  speaks  of 
his  wide  dominions  as  given  to  him  by 
Jehovah  the  God  of  heaven.  (6).  "  The 
Most  High  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of 
men,  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  He 
will."  '*  His  dominion  is  an  everlasting 
dominion,  and  His  kingdom  is  from 
generation  to  generation ;  and  He  doeth 
according  to  His  will  in  the  army  of 
heaven,"  &c.  (Dan.  iv.  32,  34,  35). 
*•  Promotion  cometh  neither  from  the 
east,  nor  from  the  west,  nor  from  the 
so^th :  but  God  is  the  Judge  ;  He  putteth 
down  one,  and  setteth  up  another." 
God  bestows  His  gifts  according  to  His 
own  wise  and  righteous  will.  (c). 

2.  In  the  authority  of  His  commands. 
"  And  He  hath  charged  me  to  build 
Him  an  house  at  Jerusalem,  which  is  in 
Judah."  In  Isaiah  xli  v.  28,  it  is  pre- 
dicted that  Cyrus  would  say  "to  Jeru- 
salem, Thou  shalt  be  built;  and  to  the 
Temple,  Thy  foundation  shall  be  laid." 
Josephus  [Ant.  xi.  i  1,  2)  states  that 
Cyrus  having  read  the  prophecies  by 
Isaiah  on  this  matter,  *'an  earnest  de- 
sire and  ambition  seized  upon  him  to 
fulfil  what  was  so  written."  He  accepted 
it  as  a  charge  from  God.  Moreover,  it 
is  probable  that  God  charged  him  by 
His  own  immediate  action  upon  his 
spirit.  As  He  stirred  up  his  spirit  to 
make  the  proclamation,  He  also  pro- 
bably charged  his  spirit  to  rebuild  the 
Temple.     And  the  king  acknowledged 


His  authority,  accepted  the  charge,  and 
proceeded  to  execute  it.  (d).  All  the 
commandments  of  the  Lord  are  righteous, 
and  are  ever  binding.  He  is  infinitely 
holy,  and  His  will  is  ever  authoritative 
on  all  moral  beings  everywhere,  (e). 

n.  The  magnanimous  emancipation 
of  God's  people.  "  Who  is  there  among 
you  of  all  His  people  ]  his  God  be  with 
him,  and  let  him  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
which  is  in  Judah,  and  build  the  house 
of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  He  is  the  God 
which  is  in  Jerusalem,"  The  edict  of 
Cyrus  does  not  grant  political  freedom 
to  the  Jews,  but  full  religious  liberty, 
with  permission  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem 
to  rebuild  the  national  Temple  and  re- 
store the  celebration  of  its  worship. 

Notice : 

1.  The  spirit  in  which  the  emancipation 
wa>s  made,  (1.)  It  was  generous.  "  Who 
among  you  of  all  His  people?"  He 
does  not  attempt  to  keep  back  any.  All 
are  quite  at  liberty  to  depart  if  they  are 
so  minded.  (2.)  It  was  pious.  "His  God 
be  with  him."  Thus  he  wishes  them  the 
presence  and  blessing  of  God ;  and  having 
these,  they  would  be  sure  to  succeed. 

2.  The  purpose  for  which  the  emanci- 
pation was  made.  "  Let  him  go  up  to 
Jerusalem  which  is  in  Judah,  and  build 
the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  He 
is  the  God  which  is  in  Jerusalem."  He 
sets  them  free,  not  for  purposes  of  war, 
but  of  worship ;  not  for  his  own  ag- 
grandisement, but  for  the  honour  of 
God ;  that  they  might  build  a  temple, 
not  to  Ormuzd  the  god  of  the  Persians, 
but  to  Jehovah  the  God  of  Israel. 

III.  The  generous  exhortation  to 
assist  God's  people.  "And  whosoever 
remaineth  in  any  place  where  he  so- 
journeth,  let  the  men  of  his  place  help 
him,"  (fee.  (ver.  4). 

Notice : 

1.  The  purport  of  this  exhortation. 
That  the  subjects  of  Cyrus  should  assist 
the  returning  Jews  with  gifts.  These 
gifts  were  of  two  classes : — (1.)  Some  were 
for  their  personal  use.     **  Help  him  with 

9 


GBAt,  L 


MOMJlEfW  COMMSNTARY :  EZflA. 


silver,  and  with  gold,  and  with  goods, 
and  with  beasts."  (2.)  The  others  were 
for  the  great  work  which  they  were  about 
to  undertake.  "  The  freewill  offering 
for  the  house  of  God  that  is  in  Jeru- 
salem." 

2.  TJte  persons  to  whom  it  was  ad- 
dressed. "The  men  of  his  place"  are 
those  who  belonged  not  to  the  Israelites 
— the  heathen  amongst  whom  they  had 
sojourned,  and  whose  goodwill  they  seem 
to  have  won.  We  may  view  it  as  an 
example  of  the  world  helping  the  Church 
in  its  enterprises.  In  spiritual  things 
the  world  is  unable  to  do  this,  but  by 
material  gifts  it  may  aid  the  Church  in 
the  prosecution  of  its  holy  mission. 

3.  The  pattern  hy  which  it  was  en- 
forced. It  is  probable  that  Cyrus  en- 
forced his  exhortation  by  his  example, 
in  bestowing  liberal  gifts  upon  the  re- 
turning exiles.  Rawlinson  regards  *'  the 
freewill  offering  for  the  house  of  God  "  as 
the  gift  of  Cyrus  himself.  This  is  doubt- 
ful; but  there  is  very  little  reason  to 
doubt  that  he  did  render  them  personal 
help  of  this  kind.  He  not  only  wished 
them  well,  but  helped  them  to  realise  his 
wishes. 

Lessons  : 

1.  Be  prepared  to  achnowledge  and 
appreciate  moral  excellence  outside  of  the 
visible  Church  of  God.  Cyrus,  the  cen- 
turion of  Capernaum  (Luke  vii.  1-10), 
and  Cornelius  the  centurion  (Acts  x.  22) 
are  examples. 

2.  Imitate  Cyrus  in  his  practical  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  sovereignty  of  God. 

3.  When  we  cannot  offer  our  labours 
in  good  enterp7'ises,  let  us  cheerfully  offer 
our  gifts. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(«)  In  the  forty-first  chapter  of  Isaiah,  the 
Almiglity  is  subHmeiy  introduced  as  demand- 
ing who  it  was  that  had  raised  up  this  great 
conqueror,  this  Cyrus,  characterised  as  *'  the 
righteous  man  from  the  East ;  "  who  had  called 
him  to  His  foot — that  is,  had  made  him  the 
instrument  of  the  high  purposes  of  His  will. 
"Who,"  the  interrogation  proceeds, 

**  Gave  the  nations  before  him. 
And  made  him  ruler  over  kings? 
He  gave  tliem  as  the  dust  to  his  sword, 
And  as  driven  stubble  to  bis  bow. 
10 


He  pursued  them,  and  passed  safely ; 
Even  by  the  way  that  he  had  not  gone  with 

his  feet. 
Who  hath  wrought  and  done  it, 
Calling  the  generations  from  the  beginning? 
I  the  Lord,  the  First, 
And  with  the  last;  I  am  He." 

This  assertion  of  the  instrumentality  of  Cyrus 
— of  his  being  in  a  peculiar  manner  the  child 
of  the  Lord's  providence,  is  always  thus  em- 
phatically produced,  and  gives  the  clue  to  his 
history. 

The  fact  that  the  Persians  had  not  before 
taken  part  in  the  affairs  of  the  West,  and,  in 
particular,  that  Cyrus  had  not,  is  clearly  pointed 
out  in  the  lines  which  describe  his  westward 
march  as  one  not  previously  known  to  his  feet. 
In  fact,  he  had  to  march  so  far  west  as  to  the 
neighbourhood  of  Sardis,  before  he  was  enabled 
to  meet  the  enemy  in  full  force  and  give  him 
battle.  Tiiis  Sardis  was  the  capital  of  the 
Lydian  Empire  ;  and  it  seems  to  have  been  the 
policy  of  Croesus  to  draw  the  Persian  far  away 
from  his  own  resources,  and  into  the  district 
where  his  own  means  were  most  available, 
before  he  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  coming 
to  a  decisive  action. 

The  extent  of  this  victory  and  its  important 
consequences  are  indicated  by  the  largeness  of 
the  terms  employed  ;  not  one  nation,  but  many 
nations,  not  one  king,  but  many  kings,  are 
given  **as  the  dust  to  his  sword,  and  as  the 
driven  stubble  to  his  bow."  Accordingly,  the 
nations  who  had  leagued  against  him  on  this 
occasion,  and  whom  he  subdued,  were  Lydians, 
Greeks,  Egyptians,  Babylonians,  and  all  the 
nations  of  Asia  Minor,  and,  taken  in  a  large 
sense,  with  reference  to  the  final  extension  of 
his  power,  it  embraced  the  Medes,  Hyrcaiiians, 
Assyrians,  Arabians,  Cappadocians,  Phrygians, 
Lydians, Carians, Phcenicians,and  Babylonians. 
"He  ruled  also,"  says  Xenophon,  "over  the 
Bactrians,  Indians,  and  Cilicians,  as  well  as 
the  Sacians,  Paphlagonians,  and  Megadiiiians, 
and  many  other  nations,  whose  names  even 
one  cannot  enumerate.  He  ruled  the  Greeks 
that  were  settled  in  Asia;  and,  descending  to 
the  sea,  the  Cyprians  and  the  Egyptians.  These 
nations  heruled,though  their  languages  difi'ered 
from  his  own,  and  from  each  otlier ;  and  yet 
was  he  enabled  to  extend  the  fear  of  himself 
over  so  great  a  part  of  the  world,  as  to  astonish 
all,  so  that  no  one  dared  to  attempt  anything 
against  him." — John  Kitto,  D.D. 

{b)  Cyrus  saw  and  acknowledged  the  Hand 
by  which  his  path  had  been  marked  out,  and 
his  steps  guided  ;  and  he  hastened  to  testify 
his  convictions  and  his  obedience  by  executing 
with  earnestness  the  remaining  task  to  which 
he  had  been  called — that  of  restoring  the  Jews 
to  their  own  land.  These  are  the  memorable 
words  of  the  edict  which  was  promulgated  in 
writing  through  all  his  empire  :  *'  Jeliovab,  the 
God  of  heaven,  hath  given  me  all  the  kingdoms 
of  the  earth  ;  and  He  hath  charged  me  to  build 
Him  an  house  at  Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah." 
There  is  nothing  indefinite  or   uncertain  in 


BOMILETIC  COMAfBNTART     BZRa. 


tHk^  I 


this.  If  he  had  said  simply,  "  the  God  of 
heaven,**  we  miglit  have  been  doubtful  as  to 
his  meaning.  It  might  have  been  understood 
of  the  god  he  had  been  used  to  worship.  But 
here  he  gives  Him  the  name  by  which  the 
Lord  was  peculiarly  known  among  the  Hebrews 
— the  great  name  of  Jehovah  ;  and  declares 
unreservedly  his  conviction  that  He  was  "the 
God  of  heaven."  Surely  this  is  a  gnat  de- 
claration. It  shows  not 'only  that  Cyrus  re- 
cognised the  truth  and  inspiration  of  these 
prophecies,  but  that  tliey  wrought  tlie  convic- 
tion in  his  mind  that  the  Jehovah,  in  whose 
name  they  were  uttered,  was,  and  could  be,  no 
other  than  •'  the  God  of  heaven.** 

That  this  "Jehovah,  the  God  of  heaven,** 
Rnd  not  his  own  Ormuzd,  "had  given  liim  all 
rhe  kingdoms  of  the  earth,"  he  could  only 
lave  known  from  Isaiah's  prophecy,  which 
d-^clared  the  intention  to  give  them  to  him,  so 
long  before  he  saw  the  light.  Indeed,  if  he 
believed  anything  at  all  of  the  prophecy,  he 
could  not  but  believe  this — that  he  owed  all 
his  glory  and  his  greatness  to  his  being  the 
predestinated  and  prenominated  agent  of  Je- 
hovah ;  and  that  it  was  He,  and  no  other,  who 
had  made  the  nations  **as  dust  to  his  sword, 
and  as  driven  stubble  to  his  bow."— /6Mi. 

(c)  The  whole  world  is  in  the  hand  of  God, 
let  us  be  thankful.  The  whole  past  is  under 
His  review,  let  us  leave  it  with  the  assurance 
that  His  judgment  is  righteous.  The  whole 
future  is  under  His  control,  let  us  pass  into  it 
with  the  steadiness,  the  quietness,  and  the 
majesty  of  those  who  know  that  all  the  re- 
sources of  God  are  placed  at  the  disposal  of  all 
who  put  tlieir  whole  trust,  in  His  wisdom  and 
love. — Joseph  Parker ^  D,D, 

{d)  *t  was  only  through  Isaiah's  prophecy 
th;it  Cyrus  could  have  realised  the  conviction 
that  "Jehovah,  God  of  Israel,"  had,  as  he 
snys,  "charged  me  to  build  Him  an  house  at 
Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah."  For  nowliere 
else  is  this  command  given ;  and  nothing  but 
the  convincing  evidence  of  this  command  being 
contained  in  an  old  prophecy,  which  in  so 
majiy  other  circumstances  unmistakably  in- 
dicates him  and  no  other,  could  have  invested 
this  command,  to  his  thoughtful  and  sagacious 
mind,  with  an  authority  and  power  not  to  be 


gainsaid.  The  intensity  of  hia  conriction  is, 
however,  manifested  by  the  alacrity  and  fulness 
with  which  he  discharged  the  high  duty  im- 
posed upon  him.  This  gives  a  marked  inten- 
sity to  the  '*  me."  *'  He  hath  charged  me  :'* 
**Me,"  and  no  other.  It  was  not  a  duty  im- 
perative on  any  king  of  Persia,  but  on  him 
personally  and  individually. — John  Kitto,  D.D. 

(e)  The  first  act  of  sovereignty  is  the  making 
laws.  This  is  essential  to  God  ;  no  creature's 
will  can  be  the  first  rule  to  the  creature,  but 
only  the  will  of  God  :  He  only  can  prescribe 
man  his  duty,  and  establish  the  rule  of  it ; 
hence^  the  law  is  called  "the  royal  law*' 
{.las.  ii.  8) ;  it  being  the  first  and  clearest 
manifestation  of  sovereignty,  as  the  power  of 
legislation  is  of  the  authority  of  a  prince.  Both 
are  joined  together  in  Isa.  xxxiii.  22:  "The 
Lord  is  our  Lawgiver  ;  the  Lord  is  our  King," 
— legislative  power  being  the  great  mark  of 
royalty.  God,  as  a  King,  enacts  laws  by  His 
own  proper  authority,  and  His  law  is  a  declara- 
tion of  His  own  sovereignty,  and  of  men's 
moral  subjection  to  Him  and  dependence  on 
Him.  His  sovereignty  doth  not  appear  so 
much  in  His  jiromises  as  in  His  precepts:  a 
man's  power  over  another  is  not  discovered  by 
promising  ;  for  a  promise  doth  not  suppose  the 
promiser  either  superior  or  inferior  to  the 
person  to  whom  the  promise  is  made.  It  is 
not  an  exercising  authority  over  another,  but 
over  a  man's  self  ;  no  man  forceth  another  to 
the  acceptance  of  his  promise,  but  only  pro- 
poseth  and  encourageth  to  an  embracing  of  it. 
But  commanding  supposeth  always  an  autho- 
rity in  the  person  giving  the  precept  ;  it 
obligeth  the  person  to  whom  the  command  is 
directed  ;  a  promise  obligeth  the  person  by 
whom  the  promise  is  made.  God,  by  His 
command,  binds  the  creature  ;  by  His  promise 
He  binds  Himself  ;  He  stoops  below  his  sove- 
reignty to  lay  obligations  on  His  own  majesty; 
by  a  }>rocept  He  binds  the  creature,  by  a  pro- 
mise He  encourageth  the  creature,  to  an  ob- 
servance of  His  precept.  What  laws  God 
makes,  man  is  bound,  by  virtue  of  His  crea- 
tion, to  observe  ;  that  respects  the  sovereignty 
of  God.  What  promises  God  makes,  man  is 
bound  to  believe  ;  but  that  respects  the  faith- 
fulness of  God. — Stephen  Charnocke,  £,J). 


The  Pkoclamation  of  Cyrus. 


( Verses 

This  proclamation,  interesting  in  it- 
self, is  adapted  to  convey  instruction  of 
a  very  edifying  nature  if  properly  con- 
sidered.    We  may  view  it — 

I.  In  a  way  of  literal  interpretation. 

1.  A7id  here  that  which  Jirst  calls  for 
our  notice  is  the  person  hy  whom  this 
proclamation  nas  issued.  It  was  Cyrus 
king  of  Persia;  who,  though  by  edutu- 


1-5.) 

tion  ignorant  of  God,  and  how  He  was 
to  be  served,  was  yet  employed  as  an 
instrument  in  effecting  His  gracious  pur- 
poses— which  shows  the  power  He  exer- 
cises over  the  spirits  of  men,  a  power 
far  exceeding  that  merely  human,  which 
extends  only  to  tlieir  bodies. 

2.  Bid  the  proclamation  itself  is  that 
tohich  more  particularly  demands  our  at- 

11 


CfiAP.  I. 


ffOMILSTTC  COMMENTART:  EZRA. 


tention.  In  this  we  see  that  a  great 
event  was  to  be  eflfected,  namely,  the 
deliverance  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon, 
after  a  long  and  trying  captivity  ;  which 
event  opened  to  them  the  pleasing  pro- 
spect of  again  worshipping  Jehovah  in 
their  native  land.  This  God  had  fore- 
told by  the  mouth  of  His  servant  Jere- 
miah (chap.  xxix.  10) ;  and  as  He  did 
not  forget  His  promise,  so  neither  did 
He  delay  the  fulfilment  of  it  beyond  the 
proper  time  (Isa.  xliv.  26-28). 

II.  In  a  way  of  spiritual  improve- 
ment. In  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus 
we  may  see — 

1.  What  a  sad  state  the  men  of  the 
world  at  large  are  in.  They  are  slaves 
and  captives,  being  in  bondage  to  their 
lusts,  to  the  world,  to  Satan,  and  to  the 
grave  (Rom,  vi  12,  viii.  21  ;  Eph.  ii. 
2 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19  ;  1  John 
V.  19).  This  is  a  humiliating,  but  just, 
view  of  them. 


2.  What  an  invaluable  blessing  the 
Gospel  is.  No  one  needs  be  told  what 
a  blessing  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus 
was  to  the  captive  Jews ;  and  precisely 
such  is  the  Gospel,  as  announcing  de- 
liverance to  us  (Isa.  xxvii.  13). 

3.  What  ivill  he  necessary  to  obtain 
what  it  offers  ?  However  deeply  all  are 
interested  in  doing  this,  too  many,  alas  ! 
are  well  contented  with  their  bondage, 
displaying  thus  most  inconceivable  mad- 
ness ;  whereas,  by  repentance  and  faith, 
they  should  go  up  out  of  it ;  and  by  re- 
turning to  God  enjoy  the  glorious  liberty 
of  His  children. 

4.  What  is  our  bounden  duty  when  it 
has  become  effectual  for  our  good  ?  God 
is  said  to  "  raise  the  spirits  "  of  such  as 
were  ambitious  for  liberty ;  and  it  need 
not  be  said  to  whom  we  are  indebted, 
if  we  differ  from  others  (1  Cor.  iv.  7, 
XV.  10;  Jas.  I  17;. —  William  Sleigh, 


God  with  Us. 
(Verse  3  :  «  His  God  be  with  him.") 


Notice : 

I.  The  devout  wish  expressed.    "  His 

God  be  with  him."  It  is  equivalent  to 
our  "  Good-bye,"  which  is  an  abbrevia- 
tion of  "  God  be  with  you."  This  wish 
comprises  two  things — 

1.  Personal  relation  to  God.  "  His 
God."  The  expression  may  be  viewed 
in  two  aspects  —  (1.)  "His  God,"  as 
opposed  to  the  gods  of  the  heathen. 
"  Jehovah  the  God  of  heaven  "  be  with 
him.  He  is  the  only  living  and  true 
God.  (2.)  '*  His  God,"  as  engaged  to 
him  in  covenant  relation.  God  had 
condescended  to  enter  into  covenant  with 
the  Israelites  (Gen.  xvii.  1-14;  Exod. 
xix.  3-8  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  38-41  ;  Ezek.  xvi. 
8).  And  in  the  Gospel  He  engages,  or 
covenants,  to  forgive  and  save  all  who 
accept  Christ  by  faith,  to  receive  them 
as  His  people,  and  to  be  their  God. 
Thus  our  Lord  speaks  :  "  My  Father  and 
your  Father ;  My  God  and  your  God  " 
(John  XX.  17).  All  that  He  has,  and 
all  that  He  is.  He  gives  to  them  as  their 
p(irtion,  to  be  employed  for  their  good. 
Without  any  presumption  the  true  be- 
12 


liever  in  Jesus  Christ  may  say  unto  the 
great  God,  "My  God  and  my  Father.'*  (a). 
Martin  Luther  said  that  the  sweetness 
of  the  Gospel  consisted  chiefly  in  its 
pronouns  —  such  as  me,  wy,  thy,  (fee. 
"  Who  loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for 
me  "  (Gal.  ii.  20).  "  Christ  Jesus,  my 
Lord"  (Phil.  iii.  8).  ''My  Lord  and 
my  God  "  (John  xx.  28).  It  is  the  as- 
surance of  our  personal  interest  in  God, 
through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  that 
makes  Him  so  unspeakably  precious 
unto  us.  (6). 

2.  Realisation  of  the  presence  of  God, 
"His  God  be  with  him."  He  is  every- 
where present ;  but  His  presence  is  rea- 
lised only  by  believing,  loving,  and  reve- 
rent spirits.  Such  spirits  feel  Him  near 
—  they  have  communion  with  Him, 
(fee.  (c).  His  presence  is  a  guarantee  of 
all  the  help  and  blessing  which  we  need. 
We  have  all  things  in  Him.  {d).  But  in 
uttering  this  wish  in  respect  to  the  Jews, 
Cyrus  probably  had  an  eye  to  two  things 
which  the  presence  of  God  would  secure 
to  them — (1.)  Guidance  and  guardian- 
ship on  their  long  journey.     In  the  pil- 


nOMILETlC  COMMENT  ART:  EZRA, 


OHAP.  L 


grimage  of  life  we  have  infallible  direc- 
tion and  inviolable  protection,  if  our 
God  be  with  us.  (2.)  Success  in  their 
great  undertaking.  Having  the  Divine 
Presence,  the  returning  exiles  would  be 
able  to  overcome  the  difficulties  which 
lay  before  them,  and  to  rebuild  the 
Temple  of  the  Lord  their  God.  The 
presence  of  God  is  the  pledge  of  the 
success  and  triumph  of  His  people. 

II.  The  kind  expression  of  this  wish. 
The  expression  of  this  wish  indicates  on 
the  part  of  Cyrus — 

1.  Revefi^ence  towards  God.  He  does 
not  utter  these  words  thoughtlessly,  but 
seriously.  His  proclamation  makes  it 
quite  clear  that  he  entertained  reverent 
and  exalted  views  of  the  Divine  Being. 
In  our  kind  wishes  let  us  never  use  the 
Divine  Name  except  with  consideration 
and  veneration. 

2.  Kindness  towards  the  captives.  He 
wished  them  well,  and  proved  the  sin- 
cerity of  his  wishes  by  practically  help- 
ing them  in  their  best  interests. 

Conclusion  : 

1.  Do  we  sustain  this  personal  relation 
to  God? 

2.  Do  we  realise  the  blessed  presence 
of  God? 

3.  Do  we  desire  that  others  also  may 
realise  His  gracious  presence  ? 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

{a)  This  goodness  appears  in  the  choice  gift 
of  Himself  which  He  hath  made  over  in  this 
covenant  (Gen.  xvii.  7).  You  know  how  it 
runs  in  Scripture  :  "  I  will  be  their  God,  and 
they  shall  be  My  people"  (Jar.  xxxii.  38);  a 
propriety  in  the  Deity  is  made  over  by  it.  Ai 
He  gave  the  blood  of  His  Son  to  seal  the  cove- 
nant, so  He  gave  Himself  as  the  blessing  of 
the  covenant ;  "  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  called 
their  God"  (Heb.  xi.  16).  Though  He  be 
environed  with  millions  of  angels,  and  presides 
over  them  in  an  inexpressible  glory,  He  is  not 
ashamed  of  His  condescensions  to  man,  and  to 
pass  over  Himself  as  the  propriety  of  His 
people,  as  well  as  to  take  them  to  be  His.  It 
is  a  diminution  of  the  sense  of  the  place,  to 
understand  it  of  God,  as  Creator.  What  reason 
was  there  for  God  to  be  ashamed  of  the  ex- 
pressions of  His  power,  wisdom,  goodness,  in 
the  works  of  His  hands?  But  we  might  have 
reason  to  think  there  might  be  some  ground 
in  God  to  be  ashamed  of  making  Himself  over 
in  a  deed  of  gift  to  a  mean  worm  and  a  filthy 
rebel  ;  this  might  seem  a  disparagement  to 
His  majesty ;   but  God  is  not  ashamed  of  a 


title  so  mean  as  the  God  of  His  despised 
people ;  a  title  below  those  others,  of  the 
"  Lord  of  hosts,  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in 
praises,  doing  wonders,  riding  on  the  wings  of 
the  wind,  walking  in  the  circuits  of  heaven." 
He  is  no  more  ashamed  of  this  title  of  being 
our  God,  than  He  is  of  those  other  that  sound 
more  glorious ;  He  would  rather  have  Hig 
greatness  veil  to  His  goodness,  than  His  good- 
ness be  confined  by  His  majesty.  He  is  not 
only  onr  God,  but  our  God  as  He  is  the  God 
of  Christ ;  He  is  not  ashamed  to  be  our  pro- 
priety, and  Christ  is  not  ashamed  to  own  His 
people  in  a  partnership  with  Him  in  this  pro- 
priety (John  XI.  17)  :  "I  ascend  to  My  God 
and  your  God."  This,  of  God's  being  our  God, 
ig  the  quintessence  of  the  covenant,  the  soul 
of  all  the  promises  ;  in  this  He  hath  promised 
whatsoever  is  infinite  in  Him,  whatsoever  is 
the  glory  and  ornament  of  His  nature,  for  our 
use  ;  not  a  part  of  Him,  or  one  single  perfec- 
tion, but  the  whole  vigour  and  strength  of  all. 
As  He  is  not  a  God  without  infinite  wisdom, 
and  infinite  power,  and  infinite  goodness,  and 
infinite  blessedness,  A;c.,  so  He  passes  over  in 
this  covenant  all  that  which  presents  Him  as 
the  most  adorable  Being  to  His  creatures. 
He  will  be  to  them  ag  great,  as  wise,  as  power- 
ful, as  good  as  He  is  in  Himself ;  and  the 
assuring  us  in  this  covenant  to  be  our  God 
imports  also  that  He  will  do  as  much  for  us 
as  we  would  do  for  ourselves  were  we  furnished 
with  the  same  goodness,  power,  and  wisdom. 
In  being  our  God  He  testifies  it  is  all  one,  as 
if  we  had  the  same  perfections  in  our  own 
power  to  employ  for  our  use ;  for  He  being 
possessed  with  them,  it  is  as  much  as  if  we 
ourselves  were  possessed  with  them,  for  our 
own  advantage,  according  to  the  rules  of  wis- 
dom and  the  several  conditions  we  pass  through 
for  His  glory. — Stephen  Chamocke,  B.D. 

(6)  Only  to  be  permitted  to  contemplate  such 
a  Being  as  Jehovah  ;.  to  see  goodness,  holiness, 
justice,  mercy,  long-suffering,  and  sovereignty 
personified  and  condensed  ;  to  see  them  united 
with  eternity,  infinite  power,  unerring  wisdom, 
omnipresence,  and  all-sufficiency  ;  to  see  these 
natural  and  moral  perfections  indissolubly 
united  and  blended  in  sweet  harmony  in  a 
pure  spiritual  Being,  and  that  Being  placed 
on  the  throne  of  the  universe;  to  see  this 
would  be  happiness  enough  to  fill  the  mind  of 
any  creature  in  existence.  But  in  addition  to 
this,  to  have  this  ineffable  Being  for  our  God^ 
our  portion,  our  all ;  to  be  permitted  to  say, 
'*  This  God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever ; "  to 
have  His  resplendent  countenance  smile  upon 
us  ;  to  be  encircled  in  His  everlasting  arms  of 
power,  and  faithfulness,  and  love  ;  to  hear  His 
voice  saying  to  us,  **  I  am  yours,  and  you  are 
Mine ;  nothing  shall  ever  pluck  you  from  My 
hands,  or  separate  you  from  My  love  ;  but  you 
shall  be  with  Me  where  I  am,  behold  My  glory, 
and  live  to  reign  with  Me  for  ever  and  ever." 
This  is  too  much  ;  it  is  honour,  it  is  glory,  it 
is  happiness  too  overwhelming,  too  transport- 
ing for  mortal  minds  to  conceive,  or  for  mortal 

13 


CHAP.  I. 


nOMTLETW  COMMENTARY :  JSZRA. 


irames  to  support ;  and  it  is  perhaps  well  for 
lis  that  here  we  know  but  in  part,  and  that  it 
doih  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be. — Edward 
Pay  son,  D.D. 

(c)  My  friend  has  gone  away  from  me  over 
the  sea  and  beyond  the  mountain,  but  I  have 
him  in  my  heart;  his  thoughts,  his  views  of 
life,  his  behaviour  under  given  circumstances, 
his  noble  impatience,  his  magnanimous  scorn 
of  all  that  is  low  and  mean,  never  leave  me ; 
they  will  mould  my  life,  they  will  save  me 
in  many  a  temptation.  He  is  with  me  always 
because  of  tlie  realising  power  of  love.  And 
this  tliat  we  know  something  about  in  friend- 
ship, in  the  family  circle,  in  literature,  reaches 
its  highest  consummation  in  Jesus  Ciirist ;  for 
though  He  has  gone  away  from  us,  He  says, 
"  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of 
the  world."  Though  we  cannot  see  Him,  yet 
He  says,  **  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake 
thee."  Though  we  would  gladly  lay  hold  of 
His  wounded  hand.  He  says  it  is  better  not. 


It  is  expedient  for  you  that  fleshly  conttet 
cease,  and  that  you  lay  hold  of  Him  by  the 
tendrils  of  your  love.  For  what  if  we  did 
grasp  hands,  death  would  break  up  our  union  | 
but  if  we  grasp  hearts,  we  are  one  for  ever, — 
Joseph  Parker,  D.D» 

{d)  **I  have  read,"  says  an  old  divine,  "of 
a  company  of  poor  Christians  who  were 
banished  into  some  remote  part,  and  one 
standing  by,  seeing  them  pass  along,  said  that 
it  was  a  very  sad  condition  those  poor  people 
were  in,  to  be  thus  hurried  from  the  society  of 
men,  and  made  companions  with  the  beasts  of 
the  field.  *  True,  said  another,  *  it  were  a 
sad  condition  indeed  if  they  were  carried  to  a 
place  where  they  should  not  find  their  God ; 
but  let  them  be  of  good  cheer,  God  goes  along 
with  them,  and  will  exhibit  the  comforts  of 
His  presence  whithersoever  they  go,  God's 
presence  with  His  people  is  a  spring  that  never 
fails.' " — The  Sunday  School  Teacher, 


The  Release  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  an  Illustration  of 
THE  Redemption  of  Man  from  Sin. 

(  Verses  S  and  5.) 


We  discover  an  analogy  in  these  two 
things  as  regards — 

I.  The  suhjects.  The  Jews  were  exiles 
and  captives  in  Babylon,  Apart  from  the 
redemptive  power  of  God,  man  is  the 
captive  of  Satan  and  the  slave  of  sin. 
He  is  "taken  captive  by  him  at  his 
will.'*  He  is  the  slave  of  sinful  passions 
and  habits.  He  is  captive,  imprisoned, 
and  bound  (Isa.  Ixi.  1 ;  Luke  iv.  18). 
*'  Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  slave 
of  sin"  (John  viii.  34).  "  I  see  a  law 
in  my  members,  warring  against  the  law 
of  my  mind,  and  bringing  me  into  cap- 
tivity to  the  law  of  sin  which  is  in  my 
members  "  (Rom.  vii.  23).  In  his  sinful 
state,  man  is  an  exile  from  his  true  con- 
dition and  place,  and  the  bondsman  of 
evil  powers,  (a). 

II.  The  agents.  Cyrus,  and  Jesus 
Christ.  The  analogy  between  them  is 
at  least  twofold. 

1.  Both  were  called  of  God  to  this 
work.  Ages  before  his  birth  Cyrus  was 
prenominated  for  this  work,  and  spoken 
of  as  the  anointed  of  the  Lord,  and  as 
strengthened  by  Him  for  the  accomulish- 
ment  of  this  work  (Isa.  xliv.  24-xlv.  6). 
And  Jesus  Christ  is  pre-eminently  the 
Servant,  the  Anointed,  the  Sent  of  God 
(Isa,  xlii.  1 ;  Ixi.  1-3;  Luke  iv.  18,  19; 
U 


John  iii.  16,  17 ;  Gal.  iv.  4,  5 ;  1  John 
iv.  9). 

2.  Both  effected  this  work  hy  battling 
with  and  overcoming  the  oppressors. 
Cyrus  bad  to  conquer  the  Babylonian 
Empire  before  he  could  release  the  cap- 
tive Jews.  And  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
as  the  Son  of  Man,  encountered  sin  and 
mastered  it ;  He  resisted  temptation  and 
overcame  it ;  He  battled  with  the  devil 
and  vanquished  him  ;  He  grappled  with 
death  and  abolished  it;  and  thus  He 
offers  freedom  from  sin  and  Satan  to 
all  men.  (6). 

III.  The  source.  In  both  cases  the 
blessing  flowed  from  the  free  and  un- 
merited grace  of  God.  The  Jews  had 
no  claim  upon  Him  against  whom  they 
had  so  persistently  and  so  grievously  re- 
belled. He  *' stirred  up  the  spirit  of 
Cyrus"  to  grant  them  release,  of  His 
own  spontaneous  and  gracious  will.  In 
like  manner  He  gave  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ  for  the  salvation  of  men.  **  God 
commendeth  His  love  toward  us,  in 
that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ 
died  for  us."  "  Herein  is  love,  not  that 
we  loved  God,  but  that  He  loved  us," 
<kc.  "  Not  by  works  of  righteousness 
which  we  have  done,  but  according  to 
His  mercy  He  saved  us,"  <fcc.  (Tit.  iii. 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  I. 


5-7).  He  gave  His  Son,  He  bestowed 
the  Holy  S{)irit,  He  instituted  means 
and  ministries  of  grace,  all  of  His  own 
sovereign  favour.  Human  redemption 
in  its  origin,  in  its  accomplishment,  and 
in  its  conditions,  is  entirely  of  divine 
grace.  "  It  is  of  faith  that  it  might 
be  by  grace."  (c). 

IV.  The  extent. 

1.  It  is  offered  to  all.  "  Who  is  there 
among  you  of  all  His  people  ? "  &c. 
Every  Jew  was  free  to  go  to  Jerusalem 
if  he  pleased.  SaWation  from  sin  ia 
provided  for  all,  and  freely  offered  to 
all.  Christ  "  died  for  all."  "  God  our 
Saviour,  who  will  have  all  men  to  be 
saved,"  &c.  "  God  so  loved  the  world," 
(kc.  *'  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the 
water  of  life  freely."  "  Go  ye  into  all 
the  world,"  <kc. 

2.  It  is  accepted  only  hy  some.  "  Then 
rose  up  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Judah 
and  Benjamin,  and  the  priests,  and  the 
Levites,  with  all  whose  spirit  God  had 
raised,"  (kc.  Great  numbers  preferred 
to  remain  in  Babylon.  (1.)  Many  did 
not  feel  any  deprivation  or  degradation 
in  their  exile  and  subjection.  They  had 
been  born  in  Babylon,  had  passed  their 
lives  there,  <fec.  Many  do  not  accept 
the  offered  '*  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  because  they  are  not  conscious  of 
the  slavery  of  sin.  Like  the  Jews  of  a 
later  age,  they  say,  **  We  were  never  in 
bondage  to  any  man."  {d).  (2.)  Many 
had  attachments  and  interests  in  Babylon 
which  they  could  not  or  would  not  leave. 
And  great  numbers  in  this  day  will  not 
comply  with  the  conditions  of  spiritual 
redemption.  Their  love  of  the  things 
of  this  world,  and  their  devotion  to  tem- 
poral things,  bind  them  to  the  Babylon 
of  the  world  and  sin.  When  summoned 
to  *'  Arise,  and  depart,"  they  are  unwill- 
ing to  obey. 

V.  The  object.  **Go  up  to  build  the 
house  of  the  Lord  which  is  in  Jerusa- 
lem." A  striking  illustration  of  the 
grand  end  of  redemption,  which  may  be 
expressed  thus — 

1.  The  universal  realisation  of  the 
presence  of  God.  So  St.  John  describes 
it :  "  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  is 
with  men,  and  He  will  dwell  with 
them,"  (fee.  (Rev.  xxl  3). 


2.  The  universal  presentation  of  worship 
to  God.  "  And  every  creature  which  is 
in  heaven,  and  on  the  earth,  and  under 
the  earth,"  <kc.  (Rev.  v.  13,  U). 

**  And  the  Temple  again  shall  be  built 
And  filled  as  it  was  of  yore  ; 
And  the  burden  be  lift  from  the  heart   of 
the  world, 
And  the  nations  all  adore. 
Prayers  to  the  throne  of  Heaven 

Morning  and  eve  shall  rise  ; 
And  unto  and  not  of  the  Lamb 
Shall  be  the  sacrifice." — P.  J.  Bailey* 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(o)  Sin  may  be  conceived  of  as  an  object,  but 
also  as  a  power — as  something  to  which  our 
actions  are  directed,  but  also  as  something 
from  which  our  actions  proceed.  Sin  is  an 
internal  principle,  and  he  who  **  commits 
sin,"  who  lives  in  it,  obeys  it  in  this  sense — 
obeys  it  as  a  force.  Occasional  acts  may  not 
represent,  but  belie  a  man's  real  nature  ;  but 
he  can  do  as  a  habit  only  what  he  is,  and  if 
that  is  sinful,  he  is  the  slave  of  sin.  The 
whole  and  constant  tendency  and  bias  of  the 
soul  is  a  despotic  rule ;  it  is  more  than  any 
external  authority  or  verbal  law.  It  has  a 
more  rigorous  and  relentless  rule.  It  is  more 
besetting,  has  a  more  constant  presence  and 
constraining  power  ;  it  acts  directly  on  the 
will ;  it  controls  and  stimulates  volition.  That 
is  a  great  bondage  which  overbears  the  will, 
which  brings  it  against  itself  into  subjection, 
which  ignores  and  defies  its  choice,  but  tliat 
is  a  greater  far  which  corrupts  and  perverts 
it.  There  is  no  slavery  like  that  in  which  the 
very  seat  and  source  of  freedom  is  held  cap- 
tive. It  is  the  salt  itself  losing  its  savour  ; 
it  is  the  light  leading  astray  ;  it  is  the  king 
and  leader  falling  in  battle. — A.  J.  Morris. 

Go  to  the  intemperate  man  in  the  morn- 
ing,  when  his  head  aches,  his  hand  trembles, 
his  throat  burns,  and  his  whole  frame  is  re- 
laxed and  unstrung  :  he  is  ashamed,  hates  his 
sin,  would  not  do  it.  Go  to  him  at  night, 
when  the  power  of  habit  is  on  him  like  a 
spell,  and  he  obeys  the  mastery  of  his  craving. 
He  can  use  the  language  of  Rom.  vii. :  "That 
which  he  would,  he  does  not;  but  the  evil  that 
he  hates,  that  does  he."  Observe,  he  is  not  in 
possession  of  a  true  self.  It  is  not  he,  but  sin 
which  dwelleth  in  him  that  does  it.  A  power 
which  is  not  himself,  which  is  not  he,  com- 
mands him  against  himself. 

This  is  a  gross  case,  bnt  in  every  more 
refined  instance  the  slavery  is  just  as  real. 
Wherever  a  man  would  and  cannot,  there  is 
servitude.  He  may  be  unable  to  control  his 
expenditure,  to  rouse  his  indolence,  to  check 
his  imagination.  Well,  he  is  not  free.  He 
may  boast,  as  the  Jews  did,  that  he  is  Abra- 
ham's son,  or  any  other  great  man's  son;  that 
he  belongs  to  a  free  country  ;  that  he  never 

15 


CHAP.   L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


was  in  bondage  to  «any  man  ;  but  free  in  the 
freedom  of  the  Son  he  is  not. — F,  W.  Robert- 
soHf  M.A» 

(6)  Christ  came  to  open  the  prison  doors 
and  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives.  "If 
the  Son,  therefore,  shall  make  you  free,  ye 
shall  be  free  indeed."  When  Paul  was  describ- 
ing the  bitter  bondage  of  the  unregenerate 
state,  he  could  not  finish  it  without  the  paren- 
thetical exclamation,  *'  I  thank  God,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  **  The  law  of  the 
spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  me 
free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death,"  &c. 
(Rom.  viii.  2-4). 

Yes,  Christ  is  a  Redeemer,  a  Redeemer  from 
the  slavery  of  sin,  by  entering  into  the  per- 
sonal contest  with  evil,  with  sin,  Satan,  and 
the  world  lying  in  wickedness  ;  suflfering,  but 
not  submitting  ;  falling,  but  yet  a  victor  ; 
being  **  made  sin  for  us,  though  He  knew  no 
sin,"  and  thus  becoming  "the  Author  of 
eternal  redemption  to  all  them  that  obey 
Him."  He  became  sin,  "that  we  might  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him." 
*•  Through  death  He  destroyed  him  that  had 
the  power  of  death."  He  *'  hath  redeemed  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being  made  a  curse 
for  us." 

This  is  our  hope.  There  is  no  other  can 
break  our  chains,  or  make  us  wish  to  have 
them  broken.  There  is  no  other  can  rescue 
us  from  bondage,  or  be<ret  in  us  the  love  and 
aspiration  of  spiritual  freedom.  It  remains 
for  us  to  lay  hold  of  this  hope.  And  this  can 
be  done  only  by  believing  His  word.  "Ye 
shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make 
you  free."  "  But  God  be  thanked  that  ye  were 
the  servants  of  sin  ;  but  ye  have  obeyed  from 
the  heart  that  form  of  doctrine  which  was  de- 
livered to  you."— ^.  /.  Morris. 

(c)  Every  good  thing  that  is  in  a  Christian, 
not  merely  begins,  but  progresses,  and  is  con- 
summated by  the  fostering  grace  of  God, 
through  Jesus  Christ.  If  my  finger  were  on 
the  golden  latch  of  Paradise,  and  my  foot 
were  on  its  jasper  threshold,  I  should  not  lake 
the  last  step  so  as  to  enter  heaven  unless  the 
grace  which  brought  me  so  far  should  enable 
me  fully  and  fairly  to  complete  my  pilgrimage. 
Salvation  is  God's  work,  not  man's.  This  is 
the  theology  which  Jonah  learned  in  the  great 
fish   college,  in  the  university  of   the  great 


deep,  to  which  college  it  would  be  a  good 
thing  if  many  of  our  divines  could  be  sent,  for 
human  learning  often  pnflTeth  up  with  the  idea 
of  human  sufficiency  ;  but  he  that  is  schooled 
and  disciplined  in  the  college  of  a  deep  experi- 
ence, and  made  to  know  the  vilenesg  of  his 
own  heart,  as  he  peers  into  its  chambers  of 
imagery,  will  confess  that  from  first  to  last 
salvation  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of 
him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth 
mercy. — C,  H,  Spurgeon, 

{d)  Men  may  have  a  high  notion  of  personal 
independency  and  make  a  great  boast  of 
freedom,  and  yet  be  in  the  deepest  and  most 
degrading  bondage.  And  we  may  extend  this 
thought  to  other  things.  Moral  and  spiritual 
evil  may  be,  and  frequently  is,  allied  to  a  keen 
sense  and  a  tenacious  hold  of  other  kinds  of 
good.  We  may  live  in  sin,  which  is  the  worst 
weakness,  and  yet  have  reverence  for  many 
kinds  of  not  the  lowest  power.  We  may  live 
in  sin,  which  is  the  deepest  degradation,  and 
yet  have  noble  elevation  of  moral  thought  and 
sympathy.  The  thought  of  slavery  may  fire 
our  blood  with  scorn  and  hate,  and  yet  we 
may  be  slaves  of  sin. 

The  reason  is  obvious.  Sin  is  voluntary. 
It  must  be.  Compulsory  sin  is  a  contradiction 
in  terms.  Its  root  and  fountain  is  in  the  will. 
It  is  its  being  willed  that  constitutes  it  sin. 
For,  as  Coleridge  said,  "  Nothing  is  me  but 
my  will."  In  sinning  men  do  what  they  wish, 
what  gives  them  pleasure.  They  feel  no  con- 
straint; they  are  but  acting  out  their  wills. 

And  then,  again,  the  practice  of  sin  gradu- 
ally destroys  the  power  of  seeing  and  feeling 
that  it  is  slavery.  We  see  things  by  means 
of  their  opposites.  We  estimate  by  contrast. 
And  as  we  see  we  feel.  It  is  what  is  good  in 
man  that  resists  evil,  mourns  over  it,  repents 
of  it.  One  wholly  evil  could  do  none  of  these 
things,  and  when  men  are  wholly  evil  they  are 
lost.  It  is  the  memory,  the  feeling,  the  aspi- 
ration of  freedom  that  makes  men  writhe  under 
slavery.  It  is  the  reason  not  entirely  blinded, 
the  conscience  not  utterly  seared,  that  sees  and 
smarts  under  sin.  And  when  the  sense  of 
liberty  and  the  sense  of  holiness  have  died  out, 
the  man  may  hug  his  chains,  and  the  sinner 
is  no  more  able  to  deliver  his  soul  or  say,  "  Is 
there  not  a  lie  in  my  right  hand  ?"  And  this 
is  the  curse  of  both  slavery  and  sin. — A.  J. 
Morris, 


The  Return  of  the  Exiles. 


( Verses  6 

In  these  verses  two  main  points  claim 
our  attention  — 

I.  The  company  who  returned. 
"  Then  rose  up  the  chief  of  the  fathers," 
&c.  (ver.  5). 

1.  They  were  of  various  classes.  "The 
chief  of  the  fathers  of  Judah  and  Benja- 
16 


and  6.) 

min,  and  the  priests,  and  the  Levites, 
with  all  whose  spirit  God  had  raised,'* 
It  was  well  that  the  chiefs,  men  of  expe- 
rience and  rank  and  influence,  and  the 
priests  and  the  Levites,  men  who  were 
consecrated  to  the  service  of  God,  should 
take  the  lead  in  this  worthy  and  diffi- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


OHAP.  L 


cult  undertaking.  Tbey  who  are  con- 
spicuous in  position  should  be  solicitous 
to  act  becomingly ;  and  they  whose  in- 
fluence is  great  should  see  to  it  that  it 
is  also  good. 

2.  They  were  of  noble  character.  "All 
whose  spirit  God  had  raised."  *^Only 
those  marched  up,"  says  Schultz,  "whom 
the  Spirit  of  God  awakened,  that  is,  only 
the  zealous  and  the  awakened,  whose 
spirits  allowed  themselves  to  be  filled 
from  God  with  courage  and  joy  to  over- 
come all  the  diflBculties  that  opposed 
them,  and  with  a  longing  for  the  land 
of  their  fathers  that  outweighed  every 
other  consideration.  This  limitation  was, 
moreover,  entirely  in  accordance  with 
the  Divine  purpose.  They  must  bring 
with  them  a  zeal  for  the  service  of  the 
true  God  that  could  not  be  quenched, 
at  least  entirely,  by  the  difficult  and 
gloomy  circumstances  in  Judea,  that 
might  be  enkindled  and  fed  in  some  of 
them  by  these  very  circumstances."  They 
were  men  of — (1.)  Piety ^  as  we  see  from 
their  zeal  for  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple 
of  God,  and  the  restoration  of  their 
national  worship.  (2.)  Patriotism^  or 
they  would  not  have  left  Babylon  for 
their  desolate  fatherland.  (3.)  Courage^ 
or  they  could  not  have  confronted  the 
perils  of  this  enterprise,  (a). 

3.  They  were  exalted  in  purpose.  They 
went  "  up  to  build  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  which  is  in  Jerusalem."  No  per- 
sonal or  selfish  aim  was  theirs ;  but  the 
honour  of  their  fatherland,  and  the 
glory  of  their  God. 

"  What  sought  they  thus  afar? 
Bright  jewels  of  the  mine  ? 
The  wealth  of  seas  ?  the  spoils  of  war  f 
They  sought  a  faith's  pure  shrine  !  " 

4.  They  were  comparatively  few  in 
number.  (1.)  Only  three  of  the  tribes 
are  mentioned  (Judah,  Benjamin,  Levi) 
as  availing  themselves  of  the  oppor- 
tunity offered  by  the  proclamation  of 
Cyrus.  There  may  have  been  some  of 
the  other  tribes  with  them  ;  but  if  this 
were  so,  their  numbers  were  so  few  that 
they  are  not  noticed  in  this  place.  The 
ten  tribes  of  Israel  are  conspicuous  by 
reason  of  their  absence  from  this  record. 
/2.)  And  of  the  tribes  mentioned  only 


a  portion  returned  to  their  own  country 
There  is  considerable  uncertainty  as  to  the 
exact  number;  but  certainly  there  were 
not  fifty  thousand  persons  in  all.  "  The 
return  home,"  says  Schultz,  "  was  not  a 
matter  that  required  no  consideration. 
Their  native  land  lay  either  desolate  or 
occupied  with  heathen  and  barbarous 
nations.  Great  dangers  threatened  the 
little  nation,  that  would  put  itself  in 
opposition  with  the  inhabitants;  and, 
indeed,  severe  tasks  awaited  them.  In 
Babylon,  on  the  other  hand,  their  cir- 
cumstances had  become  such  that  tbey 
could  very  well  endure  them,  yea,  tbey 
were  favourable,  as  we  can  see  from 
Isaiah  Ivi.  11-lviii.,  hence  *many  re- 
mained behind  in  Babylon,  unwilling 
to  relinquish  their  property '  (Joseph, 
Ant.  XT.  i.  3)."  {b).  An  illustration  of 
those  who  are  in  love  with  this  present 
evil  world,  and  decline  to  enter  upon 
the  Christian  life  with  its  self-denials 
and  difficulties. 

II.  The  assistance  which  they  re- 
ceived. 

1.  This  was  general.  "  And  all  they 
that  were  about  them  strengthened  their 
hands,"  &c.  The  Jews  who  elected 
to  remain  in  Babylon  would  be  likely 
to  aid  them  liberally,  in  order  to  a  cer- 
tain extent  to  make  up  for  their  appa- 
rent neglect  in  remaining  behind.  And 
the  Babylonians,  encouraged  by  the  ex- 
hortation and  example  of  Cyrus,  would 
aid  them  also. 

2.  This  was  spontaneous.  "  They  that 
were  about  tbem"  were  not  compelled 
to  aid  them  at  all.  It  is  indeed  stated 
that  thegifts  for  rebuilding  of  the  Temple 
were  '^  willingly  offered  ;*'  and  the  j^ame 
cheerful  liberality  doubtless  characterised 
their  other  gifts.  They  gave  "  not  grudg- 
ingly, or  of  necessity  ;  for  God  lovetli  a 
cheerful  giver."  In  the  hearty  contri- 
butions of  these  heathens  towards  build- 
ing the  Temple  of  the  true  God,  have  we 
not  a  hint  and  a  foreshadowing  of  the 
gathering  of  the  heathen  world  into  the 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  ? 

3.  This  was  honourable  to  both  the 
givers  and  the  receivers.  (1.)  To  the 
givers,  who  were  not  only  willing  that 
the  exiles  should  return  home,  but 
generously  aided  them  to  do  so.    (2.)  To 

17 


OHAF.  L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


the  receivers.  These  gifts  are  a  proof 
tiiat  in  the  land  of  their  captivity  their 
conduct  must  have  won  the  esteem  of 
their  conquerors. 

Conclusion  : 

Apply  the  subject  as  illustrating  the 
offers  of  deliverance  from  the  bondage  of 
sin  which  are  made  in  the  Gospel,  and  of 
the  aids  which  are  provided  for  those 
who  accept  those  offers,  and  urge  their 
immediate  and  hearty  acceptance. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  dominion  of  God  is  manifested  in 
raising  up  and  ordering  the  spirits  of  men 
according  to  His  pleasure.     He  doth,  as  the 
Father  of  spirits,  communicate  an  influence 
to  the  spirits  of  men,  as  well  as  an  existence ; 
He  puts  what  inclinations  He  pleaseth  into 
the  will,  stores  it  with  what  habits  He  pleases, 
whether  natural  or  supernatural,  whereby  it 
may  be  rendered  more  ready  to  act  according 
to  the  Divine  purpose.     The  will  of  man  is  a 
finite  principle,  and  therefore  subject  to  Him 
who    hath    an    infinite    sovereignty   over   all 
things;  and  God,  having  a  sovereignty  over 
the  will,  in  the  manner  of  its  acting,  causeth 
it  to  will  what  He  wills,  aa  to  the  outward  act, 
and  the  outward  manner  of  performing  it.  .  ,  . 
Thus  He  appointed  Gyrus  to  be  His  shepherd, 
and  gave  him  a  pastoral  spirit  for  the  restora- 
tion of  the  city  and  Temple  of  Jerusalem  (Isa. 
xliv.  28) ;  and  Isaiah  (chap.  xlv.  5)  tells  them, 
in  tiie  prophecy,   that   He   had  girded  him, 
though  Cyrus  iiad  not  known  Him;  i.e. God 
had  given  him  a  military  spirit  and  strength 
for  so  great  an  attempt,  though  he  did  not 
know  that  he  was  acted  by  God   for   those 
Divine  purposes.     And  when  the  time  came 
for  the  house  of  the  Lord  to  be  rebuilt,  the 
spirits  of  the  people  were  raised  up,  not  by 
themselves,  but  by  God  (Ezra  i.  5),  "  Whose 
spirit  God  had  raised  to  go  up  ;"  and  not  only 
the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel,  the  magistrate,  and 
of  Jeshua,  the  priest,  but  the  spirit  of  all  the 
people,  from  the  highest  to  the  meanest  that 
attended  liim,  were  acted  by  God  to  strengthen 
their  hands,  and  promote  the  work  (Hag.  1. 
14).     The  spirits  of  men,  even  in  those  works 
which  are  naturally  desirable  to  them,  aa  the 
restoration  of  the  city  and  rebuilding  of  the 
Temple  was  to  those  Jews,  are  acted  by  God, 
as  the  Sovereign  over  them,  much  more  when 
the  wheels  of  men's  spirits  are  lifted  up  above 
their  ordinary  temper  and  motion.     It  was 
this  empire  of  God  good  Nehemiah  regarded, 
as  that  whence  he  was  to  hope  for  success  ;  he 
did  not  assure  himself  so  much  of  it,  from  the 
favour  he  had  with  the  king,  nor  the  reason- 
ableneM  of  his  intended  petition,  but  the  i^bso- 


lute  poorer  God  had  over  the  heart  of  that  great 
monarch  ;  and,  therefore,  he  supplicates  the 
heavenly,  before  he  petitioned  the  earthly, 
throne  (Neh.  ii.  4):  **  So  I  prayed  to  the  God 
of  heaven.'*  The  heathens  had  some  glance 
of  this ;  it  is  an  expression  that  Cicero  hath 
somewhere,  **  That  the  Roman  commonwealth 
was  rather  governed  by  the  assistance  of  the 
Supreme  Divinity  over  the  hearts  of  men,  than 
by  their  own  counsels  and  management."  How 
often  hath  the  feeble  courage  of  men  been 
heightened  to  such  a  pitch  as  to  stare  death  in 
the  face,  which  before  were  damped  with  the 
least  thought  or  glance  of  it !  This  is  a  fruit 
of  God's  sovereign  dominion.  —  Chamocke. 
For  further  illustration  of  this  topic,  see  p.  7* 

(6)  Some  readers  may  perhaps  wonder  that, 
on  this  proclamation  of  Cyrus,  the  Jews  did 
not  assemble  in  one  body,  and  directly  go  and 
take  possession  of  their  ancient  inheritance  ; 
but  a  little   reflection  shows  the  matter   in 
another  light.   The  city  and  Temple  lay  a  heap 
of  ruins,  and  it  would  cost  immense  labour 
and  expense  to  rebuild  them.     The  land  was 
either  wholly  desolate  or  occupied  by  encroach- 
ing neighbours  ;  and  in  either  case  it  would 
require  some  time  and  trouble  to  procure  for 
themselves  habitations  and  provisions.     The 
journey  was  long,   arduous,    and  perilous  to 
those  who  were  attended   with   families  and 
substance;  and  many  enemies  would  endeavour 
to  plunder  them  by  the  way,  as  far  as  they 
could  and  dared  (chap.  viii.  21-23  ;  Neh.  ii. 
7).     None  of  the  Jews  had  seen  Jerusalem  or 
the  Temple,  except  such  as  were  above  fifty 
years  of  age  ;  at  which  period  of  life  the  spirit 
of   enterprise    commonly    begins   to   decline. 
Few  were  attached  to  theTemple  by  true  piety: 
and  most  of  them  wanted  even  that  attachment 
which  men  naturally  feel  for  the  land  of  their 
nativity,  having  been  born  in  the  places  where 
they  were  then  settled.     Some  persons  of  true 
and  eminent  piety  were  so  situated  that  they 
did  not  think  it  their  duty  to  remove  ;  as 
Daniel  in  the  court  of  Cyrus.   Others  would  be 
hindered  by  the  infirmities  of   old  age,  and 
the  peculiar  circumstances  of  their  families 
and   connections.     In  short,    the  difficulties, 
hardship,  and  peril  were  manifest ;  Uie  success 
of  the  attempt  would  be  doubtful  to  all  but 
those  that  were  *' strong  in  faith;"  its  tem- 
poral advantages  were  remote  and  precarious, 
and  not  worth  the  venture,  especially  to  such 
as  had  obtained  comfortable  settlements  or 
occupations   in   the  land  of   their   captivity. 
Even  the  spiritual  advantages  would  appear 
to  the  pious  mind  more  intended  for  posterity 
than  for  that  generation;  and  to  engage  in  it, 
in  this  view,   would   require  vigorous  faith, 
lively  hope,  and  an  active  zeal  for  the  honour 
of  God,  and  the  benefit  of  His  Church,  and 
establishment   of    His   worship,  in   ages   to 
come. — Thomas  Scott. 


18 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


OHAF.  I. 


The  Results  of  the  Captivity. 
(Verses  5  and  6.) 


It  may  be  well  to  consider  here  what 
were  the  actual  effects  of  the  captivity 
upon  the  Jewish  people.  These  are  well 
stated  in  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary  of  the 
Bihlc,  art.  Cyrus^  from  which  we  quote 
the  following  paragraphs  : — 

The  edict  of  Cyrus  for  the  rebuilding 
of  the  Temple  was,  in  fact,  the  beginning 
of  Judaism  ;  and  the  great  changes  by 
which  the  nation  was  transformed  into 
a  Cliurch  are  clearly  marked. 

I  The  lesson  of  the  kingdom  was 
completed  by  the  captivity.  The  sway 
of  a  temporal  prince  was  at  length  felt 
to  be  at  best  only  a  faint  image  of  that 
Messianic  kingdom  to  which  the  pro- 
phets pointed.  The  royal  power  had 
led  to  apostasy  in  Israel,  and  to  idolatry 
in  Judah ;  and  men  looked  for  some 
outward  form  in  which  the  law  might 
be  visibly  realised.  Dependence  on 
Persia  excluded  the  hope  of  absolute 
political  freedom,  and  oflFered  a  sure 
guarantee  for  the  liberty  of  religious 
organisation. 

II.  The  captivity  which  was  the 
punishment  of  idolatry  was  also  the 
limit  of  that  sin.  Thenceforth  the 
Jews  apprehended  fully  the  spiritual 
nature  of  their  faith,  and  held  it  fast 
through  persecution.     At  the  same  time 


wider  views  were  opened  to  them  of  tlie 
nnseen  world.  The  powers  of  good  and 
evil  were  recognised  in  their  action  on 
the  material  world,  and  in  this  way  some 
preparation  was  made  for  the  crowning 
doctrine  of  Christianity. 

III.  The  organisation  of  the  out- 
ward Church  was  connected  with  the 
purifying  of  doctrine,  and  served  as 
the  form  in  which  the  truth  might  he 
realised  by  the  mass.  Prayer — public 
and  private — assumed  a  new  importance. 
The  prophetic  work  came  to  an  end. 
The  Scriptures  were  collected.  The 
*'  law  was  fenced  "  by  an  oral  tradition. 
Synagogues  were  erected  and  schools 
formed.  Scribes  shared  the  respect  of 
priests,  if  they  did  not  supersede  them 
in  popular  regard. 

IV.  Above  all,  the  bond  by  which 
"  the  people  of  God  "  was  held  together 
was  at  length  felt  to  be  religious  and 
not  local,  nor  even  primarily  national. 
The  Jews  were  incorporated  in  different 
nations,  and  still  looked  to  Jerusalem  as 
the  centre  of  their  faith.  The  boun- 
daries of  Canaan  were  pa^^sed,  and  the 
beginnings  of  a  spiritual  dispensation 
were  already  made  when  the  *'  Disper- 
sion "  was  established  among  the  king- 
doms of  the  earth. — B,  F,  Westcoity  M.A, 


The  Restoration  of  the  Sacred  Vessels. 
(r<rm«7-Il.) 


Notice  : 

L  The  preservation  of  the  sacred 

vessels.  "  Also  Cyrus  the  king  brought 
forth  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  which  Nebuchadnezzar  hadbrought 
forth  out  of  Jerusalem,  and  had  put 
them  in  the  house  of  his  gods;  even 
those  did  Cyrus  king  of  Persia  bring 
forth  by  the  hand  of  Mithredath  the 
treasurer."  These  are  the  vessels  which 
are  mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  7,  and 
Dan.  i.  2.  They  did  not  include  all  the 
consecrated  things ;  for  we  read  in  2 
Kings  xxiv.  13,  of  some  that  were  after- 
wards "  cut  in  pieces  "  by  Nebuchadnez- 


zar or  some  of  his  soldiers.  But  in  the 
providence  of  God  these  vessels  were  re- 
markably preserved,  to  be  in  due  time 
restored  to  their  original  place  and  uses. 
Nebuchadnezzar,  regarding  them  as 
sacred  things,  did  not  appropriate  them 
to  purposes  of  his  own,  but  placed  them 
in  the  temple  of  his  god  Merodach,  or 
Bel,  as  he  was  called  by  the  Greeks,  at 
Babylon ;  and  in  this  way  they  were 
preserved. 

Learn  : 

Since  God  is  so  careful  of  the  mere 
vessels  consecrated  to  His  service^  may 
we  not  rest  assured  that  He  will  mvck 

Id 


0HA7.L 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


more  preserve  His  consecrated  people  f 
His  children  are  Car  more  precious  in 
His  sight  than  the  most  costly  furniture 
of  His  temples,  (a). 

II.  The  numeration  of  the  sacred 
vessels.  "  Even  those  did  Cyrus  lung 
of  Persia  bring  forth  by  the  hand  of 
Mithredath  the  treasurer,  and  numbered 
them  unto  Sheshbazzar  the  prince  of 
Judah."     This  numbering  indicates — 

1.  The  reverent  care  of  Cyrus  for  these 
sacred  vessels. 

2.  The  grave  responsihilily  of  Shesh- 
bazzar for  these  sacred  vessels.  He  would 
be  held  accountable  for  the  number  of 
them  thus  counted  out  to  him. 

Learn : 

That  persons,  places,  and  things  which 
are  devoted  to  religious  uses  should 
he  reverently  regarded  hy  us.  Their 
associations  should  raise  them  far  above 
the  level  of  common  things.  (6). 

IIL  The  restoration  of  the  sacred 
vessels.  "All  these  did  Sheshbazzar 
bring  up  with  them  of  the  captivity  that 
were  brought  up  from  Babylon  unto 
Jerusalem." 

1.  This  was  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy 
(Jer.  xxvii.  22).  Prophecy  is  a  "  sure 
word."  The  predictions  of  the  Holy 
Bible  will  become  accomplislied  facts  ;  its 
promises  will  all  be  fulfilled.  The  vera- 
city and  the  power  of  God  guarantee 
the  fulfilment  of  the  declarations  and 
assurances  of  His  Word. 

2.  This  is  an  illustration  of  the  resto- 
ration of  perverted  things  to  their  true 
uses.  Many  of  the  gifts  of  God  are 
sadly  misused;  e.g.,  wealth,  when  it  is 
employed  for  purposes  of  self-indulgence 
or  vain  show,  or  when  it  is  avariciously 
hoarded ;  eloquence,  when  it  is  em- 
ployed to  arouse  and  inspire  men  in 
unworthy  enterprises;  poetry,  when  it 
is  made  the  vehicle  of  impure  sugges- 
tions, or  the  quickener  of  corrupt  imagi- 
nations ;  art,  &c.  All  these  things,  like 
the  sacred  vessels  of  the  Jews,  shall  be 
restored  to  their  true  uses.  They  shall 
be  employed  in  harmony  with  the  will 
of  God,  for  His  glory,  and  for  the  good 
of  mankind.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  great  Restorer  of  the  violated  order, 
and  the  broken  harmony  of  the  universe 
of  God.     "  In  the  dispensation  of  the 

20 


fulness  of  times  God  will  gather  together 
in  one  all  things  in  Christ,  both  which 
are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  on  earth ; 
even  in  Him."  (c). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  "They  shall  be  Mine,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  My  jewels." 
God  has  jewels  even  amid  the  ruins  of  tiiis 
shattered  and  degraded  world.  **  Ye  are  a 
chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  an  iioly 
nation,  a  peculiar  people."  Terrible  as  has 
been  the  havoc  created  by  sin,  there  are 
*' jewels"  still  on  the  earth,  and  no  hand  can 
rifle  them.  Many  times  have  Satan  and  his 
legions  sought  to  purloin  the  treasure,  but  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  is  faithful — **  no  man  can 
pluck  them  out  of  My  Father's  hand." — Joseph 
Parker,  D.D. 

Beneath  the  wings  of  the  Almighty  God, 
night  with  its  pestilence  cannot  smite  the 
saints,  and  day  with  its  cares  cannot  destroy 
them  ;  youth  with  its  passions  shall  be  safely 
passed  ;  middle  age  with  its  whirl  of  business 
shall  be  navigated  in  safety;  old  age  with  its 
infirmities  shall  become  the  land  of  Beulah  ; 
death's  gloomy  vale  shall  be  lit  up  with  the 
coming  splendour  ;  the  actual  moment  of  de- 
parture, the  last  and  solemn  article  shall  be 
the  passing  over  of  a  river  dryshod.  *'  When 
thou  passest  through  the  waters,  I  will  be 
with  thee  ;  and  through  the  rivers,  they  shall 
not  overflow  thee  ;  when  thou  walkest  through 
the  fire,  thou  shalt  not  be  burned  ;  neither 
shall  the  flame  kindle  upon  thee,  s.iith  the 
Lord."  "They  shall  never  perisli."— 6'.  H. 
Spurgeon. 

(6)  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  trifle  with  sacred 
matters.  If  at  any  time  we  open  the  Bible, 
or  anything  out  of  it  be  opened  to  us,  and  we 
have  not  the  serious  design  before  our  eyes 
and  upon  our  hearts,  that  we  would  know  more 
of  divine  things,  that  we  may  be  made  more 
like  God,  and  be  more  fitted  for  His  service 
and  communion  both  here  and  hereafter,  we 
shall  be  found  guilty  of  trifling  with  that  which 
is  sacred;  and  though  in  this  world  the  punish- 
ment may  not  be  so  visibly  severe,  yet  the 
guilt  is  undoubtedly  greater  than  that  which 
Uzzah  lay  under  when  he  rashly  laid  hold  on 
the  ark  ;  and  the  Bethshemites,  when  they 
opened  and  would  be  curiously  prying  into  it. 
When  a  man  meddleth  with  the  great  things  of 
God,  and  can  give  no  account  for  what  he  does, 
but  only  to  satisfy  his  curiosity,  and  the  idle 
fancy  of  a  vain  mind  ;  this,  sooner  or  later, 
must  have  a  sad  issue. — John  Howe, 

(c)  The  reconciliation  which  our  Lord  has 
effected  has  bearings  as  wide  as  creation.  The 
whole  creation  will  be  restored,  and  inherit 
with  man  the  peace  and  glory  of  Christ.  Evil 
struggles,  and  will  yet  struggle,  but  it  ig 
doomed.  Christ's  death  will  be  fulfilled  in 
the  death  of  evil  throughout  all  nature.  His 
ascension  will  be  fulfilled  in  the  universal 
diffusion  of  His  Life,  Love,  and  Glory.     But 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA,  ohap.  n. 


Ke  will  not  make  haste.    By  His  loner  patience,  nnity.    The  reconciliation  of  all  things  in  Him 

He  gives  the  utmost  possibility  to  the  endea-  is  very  Divine.    And  when  tlie  like  reconcilia- 

v(Mirs  of  evil.      In  the  eiid,   evil  powers  will  tion  is  fulfilled,  both  in  man  and  nature,  tho 

work  their  own  confusion  and  downfall.     The  work  of  the  Mediator  will  be  done,  and  "the 

Son  of  God  is  sure  of  final  victory.     He  fore-  mystery  of  God  finished." 

sees  it.     The  whole  field  will  come  about  to  Observe  once  for  all,  that  whoever  speaks 

Him.     He  will  wait  for  it.     In  His  ascension,  merely  of  the  redemption  of  mankind,  muti- 

all  tiie    elements   and   powers  of   nature  are  ktes  the  redemption  of  God,  and  is  unfaithful 

already  glorified.      In  Him,  they  have  all  come  to  the  New  Testament.     The  mystery  of  God's 

b:ick  to   God,   with    increase.      'I'liey  are   no  will  and  purpose,  which  Paul   commends  to 

lont,'er  divided  and  striving.     They  underwent  us,  is  the  knitting  into  unity,   the  gatiiering 

Iheir  grand  decisive  and  bloody  sweat  in  Him.  together  in  one,  of  **aZZ  things  in  Christ,  both 

The  worst  is  past.      **  Tlie  restitution  of  all  the  things  which  are  in  heaven,  and  the  things 

things"  is  certain.     All  things  are  at  peace  which    are   on    earth;    even    in   Him."     The 

in  Christ,  and  the  peace  is  wonderful.  Headship  of  Christ  is  universal.     Heaven  and 

**  It  is  finished,"  proclaimed  the  end  of  the  earth,  and  "all  things"    therein,   are   to  be 

fallen  order  of  nature.      **  He  is  risen,"  an-  brought  under  One  Head  ;  and  thus  into  the 

nounced    the   beginning   of    the    new   order.  fellowship  of  a  divinely   balanced    harmony. 

Christ   glorified    is   God's    firstfruits  of   the  The  whole  course  of  sin  and  sorrow  is  His 

whole  harvest  of  !His  recovered  creation.     All  chastisement,  which  He  will  bear  until  it  melts 

things  will  be  made  after  the  pattern  of  Christ's  into  His  own  Purity  and  Peace. — JohnPuUford. 


CHAPTER   II. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  we  have  the  list  of  those  who  returned 
from  captivity  with  Zerubbahel,  and  their  contributions  for  rebuilding  the  Temple.  The  contents 
may  be  arranged  thus — 1.  The  description  of  the  chapter  (ver.  1),  with  the  names  of  tlie  leaders 
of  tlie  exodus  (ver.  2).  2.  The  numbers  of  the  people  who  returned,  arranged — (1)  according  to 
families  (vers.  3-19;  (2)  according  to  cities  (vers.  20-35).  3.  The  numbers  of  the  priests  and  Levites 
who  returned,  arranged  according  to  families  (vers.  36-42).  4.  The  numbers  of  the  Nethinim 
and  the  descendants  of  Solomon's  servants  (vers.  43-58).  5.  People  and  priests  who  could  not 
produce  their  genealogy  (vers.  69-63).  6.  The  sum  total  of  the  persons  who  returned,  with 
their  servants  and  beasts  of  burden  (vers.  64-67).  7.  The  oflferings  of  those  who  returned  for 
the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  (vers.  68,  69),  and  a  concluding  statement  (ver.  70).  This  cata- 
logue appears  also  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah  (chap.  vii.  6-73),  he  having  "found"  the  docu- 
ment (ver.  5),  and  incorporated  it  in  his  work.  It  also  appears  in  the  apocryphal  book, 
1  Esdras  v.  7-45.  The  three  texts  differ  to  some  extent  in  the  names,  and  yet  more  in  the 
numl)ers.  Tiie  difierences,  however,  are  unimportant,  and  arose  probably  from  the  mistakes  of 
copyists,  to  which  there  is  great  liability  in  transcribing  long  lists  of  names  and  numbers. 

Ver.  1.  The  province]  **i.€.  the  province  of  Judea  as  a  district  of  the  Persian  Empire ;  so 
chap.  V.  8,  Neb.  i.  3." — Keil.  Every  one  unto  his  city]  All  who  returned  did  not  settle  in  Jeru- 
salem.    Many  were  located  in  neighbouring  cities  and  villages. 

Ver.  2.  Zerubbabel]  =  "  born  in  Babylon."  His  Chaldean  name  was  Sheshbazzar  (chap.  i. 
8).  Jeshua]  A  later  and  abbreviated  form  of  Jehoshua.  He  was  the  son  of  Jehozadak  (1 
Chron.  vi.  14),  or,  as  it  is  written  in  Hag.  i.  1,  Josedech  ;  was  probably  born  in  Babylon; 
and  was  the  first  high  priest  of  the  restored  community.  *'A  man  of  earnest  piety,  patriotism, 
and  courage."  The  names  of  nine  other  persons  are  given  in  this  verse.  Nehemiali  (chap, 
vii.  7)  gives  the  name  of  Nahamani,  which  is  not  mentioned  here,  and  makes  twelve  in  all. 
Of  these  ten  persons  we  know  nothing  except  their  names,  and  that,  with  Zerubbabel  and 
JeshiKi,  they  were  probably  the  twelve  heads  of  twelve  divisions  into  which  the  new  com- 
munity was  arranged.  Nehemiah]  is  not  "Nehemiah  the  son  of  Hachaliah  "  (Neh.  i.  1)  ; 
Seraiah]  is  Azariah  ;  Keelaiah]  is  Raamiah  ;  Mizpar]  is  Mispereth  ;  and  "Rehum]  is  Nehum, 
in  Neh.  vii.  7  ;  Kordecai]  not  Moidecai  the  cousin  and  foster-parent  of  Esther  (Eslh.  ii.  7). 
Ihe  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel]  is  "the  special  title  of  the  first  division 
(vers.  3-35)  of  the  following  list,  with  which  the  titles  in  vers.  36,  40,  43,  and  55  correspond. 
They  are  called  'the  people  of  Israel,*  not  the  people  of  Judah,  because  those  who  returned 
represented  the  entire  covenant  people." — Keil.  Although,  as  we  before  stated,  those  who 
returned  were  almost  all  from  the  tribes  of  Judah,  Benjamin,  and  Levi, 

Vers.  3-35]  It  is  not  necessary  for  us  to  enter  into  a  comparison  of  the  names  and  numbers 
here  given  and  those  of  the  corresponding  passage  in  Nehemiah. 

Vers.  36-39.  The  priests]  This  brief  catalogue  corresponds  exactly  with  Neh.  vii.  39-42. 

Vers.  40-42.  The  Levites]  were  of  three  classes — 1.  Those  who  assisted  the  priests  in  Divine 
worship.     2.  The  singern.     3.  The  porters.     (Comp.  1  Chron.  xxiv.  20-31,  xxv.,  and  xxvi.  1-19.) 

Vers.  43-64.  The  Nethinims]  Nethinim  =  "given  or  dedicated  ones  ; "  from  |ri3  ="to  give," 
"dedicate,"  &c.  They  were  captives  of  war,  who  were  given  to  the  Levites  to  be  employed  in 
the  rougher  and  more  laborious  duties  of  their  ofiices  (Num.  xxxi.  47;  Josh.  ix.  27).  "The 
Netliinims,  whom  David  and  the  princes  had  appointed  (Heb.  given)  for  the  service  of  the 
Levites"  (chap.  viii.  20).     Keil  briefly  designates  them  "temple-bondsmen." 

21 


OHAP.  n.  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


Vers  55-57.  The  children  of  Solomon's  servants]  were,  according  to  Plumptre  {Bihl, 
Diet.)  and  Rawlinson,  the  descendants  of  the  remnant  of  the  ancient  Canaanites,  upon  whom 
Solomon  "levied  a  tribute  of  bond-service"  (1  Kings  ix.  20,  21;  2  Chron.  viii.  7,  8).  But, 
according  to  Keil  and  Schultz,  they  were  prisoners  of  war  from  some  otlier  nations,  whom 
Solomon  made  to  do  services  similar  to  those  of  the  Gibeonites  (Josh.  ix.  27).  In  rebuilding 
the  Temple  their  services  would  be  of  arreat  importance. 

Ver.  58.  Three  hundred  ninety  and  two]  So  also  Neh.  vii.  60. 

Vers.  59,  60.  Could  not  show  their  father's  house,  and  their  seed]  Margin:  **  pedigree." 
"Although  they  could  not  prove  their  Israelite  origin,  they  were  permitted  to  go  up  to  Jeru- 
salem with  the  rest,  the  rights  of  citizenship  alone  being  for  the  present  withheld." — Keil. 

Vers.  61-63.  ChildreD  of  the  priests]  who  could  not  prove  that  they  belonged  to  the  priesthood. 

Ver.  61.  Which  took  a  wife  of  the  daughters  of  Barzillai]  &c.  Keil  and  Schultz  think 
that  the  daughters  of  Barzillai  were  heiresses,  and  that  the  priest  who  married  one  of  them 
aasum<jd  her  name  in  order  to  take  possession  of  her  inheritance.  But  tiiis,  to  say  the  leant, 
is  very  questional)le,  seeing  that  they  had  brothers  (1  Kings  ii.  7) ;  and  daughters,  according 
to  Jewish  law,  did  not  inherit  any  of  their  father's  property  except  in  those  cases  in  which  he 
had  no  son  (Num.  xxvii.  8).  It  is  more  probable  that  the  name  of  the  wife's  family  was  pre- 
ferred because  of  the  honourable  associations  of  that  name;  for  Barzillai  the  Oileadite  "was  a 
very  great  man,"  and  distinguished  by  reason  of  his  relations  to  king  David  (2  Sam.  xvii. 
27-29,  xix.  31-39  ;  1  Kings  ii.  7).  The  change  of  name  would  not  invalidate  the  claim  of 
the  descendants  of  the  family  to  the  priesthood;  but  in  process  of  time  it  might  have  occa- 
sioned doubts  as  to  their  priestly  origin. 

Ver.  62.  Therefore,  were  they,  as  polluted]  &c.  Margin  :  **  Heb.,  they  were  polluted  from 
the  priesthood."     They  were  pronounced  unclean,  and  so  excluded  from  the  priesthood. 

Ver.  63.  Tirshatha]  Margin  :  "Or,  governor."  It  is  the  Persian  title  of  tlie  civil  governor, 
and  is  here  given  to  Zerubbabel.  It  was  afterwards  applied  to  Nehemiah  (Neh.  viii.  9,  x.  1). 
Not  eat  of  the  most  holy  things]  (comp.  Lev.  ii.  3  ;  Num.  xviii.  9).  Tiiis  prohibition  involved 
their  exclusion  from  the  discharge  of  priestly  functions.  '*  A  portion  of  the  general  fees  which 
were  offered  to  the  priests  was  not  denied  them,  since  their  right  to  the  priesthood  was  not 
expressly  denied,  but  left  in  suspenso.^* — Schultz.  Till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with  Urim 
and  with  Thummim]  Zerubbabel  expected  that  when  the  altar  and  Temple  were  rebuilt, 
Jehovah  would  again  grant  them  some  special  manifestation  of  His  presence,  and  would 
restore  the  privilege  of  obtaining  direct  answers  from  Him  by  means  of  Urim  and  Thummim. 
His  expectation,  however,  was  never  fulfilled. 

Ver.  64]  The  number  here  given  agrees  exactly  with  that  given  both  in  Nehemiah  and  in 
1  Esdras.  "The  sum  total  being  alike  in  all  three  texts,  we  are  obliged  to  assume  its  correct- 
ness. " — Keil. 

Ver.  65.  Their  servants  and  their  maids,  of  whom  there  were  seven  thousand  three 
hundred  thirty  and  seven]  In  Neh.  vii.  67  the  same  number  of  servants  is  given.  Two 
hundred  singing  men  aud  singing  women]  These  singers  were  employed  to  increase  the 
delight  of  the  festivities,  and  to  chant  dirges  in  times  of  mourning  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  25; 
Eccles.  ii.  8)  ;  and  as  they  were  hired  and  paid,  and  were  probably  not  of  Israelite  origin, 
they  are  here  classed  with  the  servants. 

Vers.  66,  67]  With  these  verses  Neh.  vii.  68,  69,  exactly  agree. 

Ver.  68.  When  they  came  to  the  house  of  the  Lord]  ».e.  to  the  site  of  the  Temple.  Probably 
considerable  ruins  of  the  Temple  were  yet  remaining. 

Ver.  69]  The  account  of  the  offerings  given  in  Neh.  vii.  70-72  differs  from  that  in  this 
verse,  and  is  held  both  by  Keil  and  by  Schultz  to  be  more  correct.  Threescore  and  one 
thousand  drams,  or  darics,  of  gold]  According  to  Rawlinson,  the  daric  was  worth  £1,  Is.  lO^d. 
of  our  money.  The  61,000  darics  were  therefore  equal  to  £66,718,  15s.  Five  thousand  pound, 
or  minu,  of  silver]  The  Greek  silver  mina  was  worth  a  little  over  £4  of  our  money  ;  and  the  value 
of  the  Hebrew  silver  manch,  according  to  Rawlinson,  was  probably  not  very  different  from  the 
Greek.  Thus  the  offering  in  silver  would  be  worth  over  £20,000 ;  and  the  entire  offering  in 
money  worth  nearly  £90,000.  Keil,  however,  reckons  the  61,000  darics  of  gold  to  be  worth 
£68,625,  and  the  5000  mina  of  silver,  £30,000,  and  the  entire  offering  nearly  £99,000. 

Going  up  out  of  Captivity. 
(Verse  1  and  part  of  2.) 

"We     have     here    presented    to    our  Ion."     The   captivity  from  which  they 

notice —  were  escaping  was  (l.)  A  degradation, 

I.  The  deliverance  from  captivity.  It  was  the  loss  of  their  power  and  inde- 

''  These  are  the  children  of  the  promise  pendence.      (2.)  A   subjection.      It  was 

that  went  up  out  of  the  captivity,  of  the  loss  of  their  freedom.     They  were 

those    which    had    been    carried    away,  brought   under  the  power  of  their  con- 

whom    Nebuchadnezzar     the    king    of  querors.    (3.)  A  transportation.    'Nebu- 

Babylon    had  carried  away  into  Baby-  chadnezzar  the  king  carried  them  away 


IIOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


OHAP.  n. 


unto  Babylon."  From  their  own  land, 
with  all  its  hallowed  and  inspiring 
memories  and  associations,  they  were 
forcibly  removed  unto  the  land  of  their 
heathen  conquerors.  (4.)  A  retrihution. 
Their  captivity  was  the  punishment  of 
their  numerous,  heinous,  and  long-con- 
tinued sins  against  God,  and  especially 
their  forsaking  Him  by  the  adoption  of 
dolatrous  customs.  Nebuchadnezzar  was 
the  rod  of  God  for  their  chastisement. 

The  most  deplorable  degradation  and 
the  most  real  and  terrible  subjection  are 
those  of  sin. 

But  now  many  of  the  Jews  are  going 
"up  out  of  the  captivity.*'  The  offer 
of  release  has  been  made,  and  they 
who  are  mentioned  in  this  chapter  have 
accepted  it. 

Concerning  this  deliverance,  notice  : — 

1.  It  originated  in  the  favour  of  God 
(chap.  i.  1). 

2.  It  was  effected  hy  an  unlikely  agent. 
Cyrus. 

3.  It  was  permissive y  not  compulsory. 
The  Jews  were  quite  free  to  accept  or  to 
decline  the  offer  of  Cyrus. 

Salvation  from  the  bondage  of  sin  is 
freely  offered  in  the  Gospel,  but  no  one  is 
compelled  to  accept  the  offer.  All  who  ac- 
cept it  do  so  willingly,  of  their  own  accord. 

II.  The  journey  home.  "  And  came 
again  unto  Jerusalem  and  Judah,  every 
one  unto  his  city."  It  is  here  suggested 
that  this  journey  was  : — 

1.  A  restoration.  "  And  came  again." 
They  were  going  unto  the  land  which 
God  had  given  to  their  fathers ;  to  the 
scenes  of  the  most  sacred  and  stirring 
events  in  their  national  history. 

2.  A  restoration  to  their  own  home, 
"  Came  again  every  one  unto  his  city.'* 
It  seems  to  us  that  where  it  was  prac- 
ticable the  returning  Jews  would  settle 
in  the  cities  where  their  ancestors  had 
resided,  and  take  possession  of  the  in- 
heritances which  they  had  held.  They 
went  back  to  the  scenes  amid  which 
their  forefathers  lived  and  laboured,  to 
the  lands  which  they  had  cultivated,  to 
the  places  where  they  had  prayed  and 
worked,  rejoiced  and  wept,  loved  and 
Buffered,  lived  and  died.  There  must 
have  been  in  this  a  very  strong  and 
tender  attraction  to  many  hearts,  (a). 


3.  A  restoration  to  religious  privileges. 
"  Came  again  unto  Jerusalem."  Jeru- 
salem was  not  only  the  metropolis  of 
the  nation,  but  the  holy  city,  the  place 
where  the  Temple  had  been  and  was  to 
be  again.  "  This  Mount  Zion,  wherein 
Thou  hast  dwelt "  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  2).  "  Jeru- 
salem .  .  .  whither  the  tribes  go  up," 
&c.  (Ps.  cxxii.  4). 

The  salvation  of  Jesus  Christ  restores 
man  to  his  true  condition  and  to  his 
forfeited  inheritance,  "When  divine 
grace,"  said  Legh  Richmond,  "renews 
the  heart  of  the  fallen  sinner,  Paradise 
is  regained,  and  much  of  its  beauty 
restored  to  the  soul." 

But  they  were  not  returning  with 
complete  independence.  They  were  still 
"the  children  of  the  province."  Judea 
remained  a  "province"  of  the  Persian 
Empire.  Full  religious  freedom  was 
granted  unto  them,  but  politically  they 
remained  subject  to  Persian  rule.  Sin, 
even  when  it  is  forgiven,  blotted  out, 
always  leaves  some  detriment,  or  loss, 
or  pain  behind  it.  {b). 

III.  The  subordination  to  leaders. 
**  Which  came  with  Zerubbabel  :  Jeshua, 
Nehemiah,  Seraiah,  Reelaiah,  Mordecai, 
Bilshan,  Mizpar,  Bigvai,  Rehum,  Baa- 
nah."  Zerubbabel  prince  of  Judah  was 
head  over  all.  Jeshua  was  the  head  of 
the  party  as  regards  its  religious  duties ; 
and  in  addition  to  these  there  were  ten 
recognised  leaders.  Society  could  not 
exist  without  rulers  and  leaders.  They 
are  necessary — 

1.  For  the  maintenance  of  order.  The 
authority  of  law  must  be  maintained ; 
its  sanctions  must  be  enforced,  or  the 
bands  of  society  would  be  utterly  dis- 
solved, (fee.  And  for  this  purpose  rulers 
or  magistrates  are  necessary. 

2.  For  insuring  progress.  The  growth 
and  improvement  of  a  community  a<re 
impossible  apart  from  the  exercise  of 
wise  leadership. 

3.  Because  of  the  differences  in  the 
characters  and  abilities  of  men.  By  their 
native  faculties,  their  character,  and  their 
training,  some  men  almost  inevitably  be- 
come the  rulers  and  leaders  of  others,  (c).* 

♦  These  points  are  treated  in  a  less  frag- 
mentary manner  in  the  Horn.  Com.  on  Xfum- 
berSf  p.  12. 

113 


OHAP.  II. 


HOMIhETIO  COMMBNTART:  EZRA. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  There  is  a  sanctity  in  a  good  man's 
house  which  cannot  be  renewed  in  every  tene- 
ment that  rises  on  its  ruins:  and  I  believe 
tliat  good  men  would  generally  feel  this ;  and 
that  having  spent  their  lives  happily  and  hon- 
ourably, they  would  be  grieved  at  the  close  of 
them  to  think  that  the  place  of  their  earthly 
abode,  which  had  seen,  and  seemed  almost  to 
sympathise  in,  all  their  honour,  their  gladness, 
or  their  suffering — that  this,  with  all  the  record 
it  bare  of  them,  and  all  of  material  things  that 
they  had  loved  and  ruled  over,  and  set  the 
stamp  of  themselves  upon — was  to  be  swept 
away,  as  soon  as  there  was  room  made  for  them 
in  the  grave;  that  no  respect  was  to  be  shown  to 
it,  no  aflfection  felt  for  it,  no  good  to  be  drawn 
from  it  by  their  children  ;  that  though  there 
was  a  monument  in  the  church,  there  was  no 
warm  monument  in  the  hearth  and  house  to 
them  ;  that  all  that  they  ever  treasured  was 
despised,  and  the  places  that  had  sheltered 
and  comforted  them  were  dragged  down  to  the 
dust.  I  say  that  a  good  man  would  fear  this; 
and  that,  far  more,  a  good  son,  a  noble  descen- 
dant, would  fear  doing  it  to  his  father's  house. 
I  say  that  if  men  lived  like  men  indeed,  their 
houses  would  be  temples — temples  which  we 
should  hardly  dare  to  injure,  and  in  which  it 
would  make  us  holy  to  be  permitted  to  live ; 
and  there  must  be  a  strange  dissolution  of 
natural  affection,  a  strange  unthankfulness  for 
all  that  homes  have  given  and  parents  taught, 
a  strange  consciousness  that  we  have  been  un- 
faithful to  our  father's  honour,  or  that  our  own 
lives  are  not  such  as  would  make  our  dwellings 
sacred  to  our  children,  when  each  man  would 
fain  build  to  himself,  and  build  for  the  little 
revolution  of  his  own  life  only,  .  .  . 

When  men  do  not  love  their  hearths,  nor 
reverence  their  thresholds,  it  is  a  sign  that 
they  have  dishonoured  both,  and  that  they 
have  never  acknowledged  the  true  universality 
of  that  Christian  worship  which  was  indeed  to 
supersede  the  idolatry,  but  not  the  piety,  of 
the  pagan.  Our  God  is  a  household  God,  as 
well  as  a  heavenly  One  ;  He  has  an  altar  in 
every  man's  dwelling;  let  men  look  to  it  when 
they  rend  it  lightly  and  pour  out  its  ashes  .  .  . 
It  is  one  of  those  moral  duties,  not  with 
more  impunity  to  be  neglected  because  the 
perception  of  them  depends  on  a  finely  toned 
and  balanced  conscientiousness,  to  build  our 
dwellings  with  care,  and  patience,  and  fond- 
ness, and  diligent  completion,  and  with  a  view 
to  their  duration  at  least  for  such  a  period  as, 
in  the  ordinary  course  of  national  revolutions, 
might  be  supposed  likely  to  extend  to  the 
entire  alteration  of  the  direction  of  local  in- 
terests.— John  Ruskin,  M.A. 

Home  !  angels  encamp  about  it.  Ladders 
are  let  down  from  heaven  to  every  pillow  in 
that  house.  Over  the  child's  rough  crib  there 
are  chantings  as  sweet  as  those  that  broke 
above  Bethlehem.  It  is  home  I  home  I  The 
children  of  the  family  will  grow  up,  and 
24 


though  they  may  get  splendid  reaidencei  ot 
their  own,  they  will  never  forget  that  homely 
place,  the  place  where  their  father  rested,  and 
their  mother  sang,  and  their  sisters  played. 
If  you  wanted  to  gather  up  all  tender  memo- 
ries, all  lights  and  shadows  of  the  heart,  all 
banquetings  and  reunions,  all  filial,  fraternal, 
paternal,  conjugal  affections,  and  had  only  just 
four  letters  with  which  to  spell  out  that  height, 
and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth,  and  mag- 
nitude, and  eternity  of  meaning,  you  would 
write  it  out  with  these  four  capital  letters  : 
H-O-M-E.— r.  dc  Witt  Talmage,  D.D. 

(6)  Even  pardoned  sins  must  leave  a  trace 
in  heavy  self-reproach.  You  have  heard  of  the 
child  whose  father  told  him  that  whenever  he 
did  anything  wrong  a  nail  should  be  driven 
into  a  post,  and  when  he  did  what  was  good  he 
might  pull  one  out.  There  were  a  great  many 
nails  driven  into  the  post,  but  the  child  tried 
very  hard  to  get  the  post  cleared  of  the  nails 
by  striving  to  do  right.  At  length  he  was  so 
successful  in  his  struggles  with  himself  that 
the  last  nail  was  drawn  out  of  the  post.  The 
father  was  just  about  to  praise  the  child,  when 
stooping  down  to  kiss  him,  he  was  startled  to 
see  tears  fast  rolling  down  his  face.  "Why, 
my  boy,  why  do  you  cry?  Are  not  all  the 
nails  gone  from  the  post  ? "  ♦*  Oh  yeg  I  the 
nails  are  all  gone,  but  the  marks  are  left." 
That  is  a  familiar  illustration,  but  don't  de- 
spise it  because  of  that.  It  illustrates  the 
experience  of  many  a  grey  old  sire,  who,  look- 
ing upon  the  traces  of  his  old  sins  as  they  yet 
rankle  in  his  conscience,  would  give  a  hundred 
worlds  to  live  himself  back  into  young  man- 
hood, that  he  might  obliterate  the  searing 
imprint  of  his  follies.  Have  you  never  heard 
of  fossil-rain  ?  In  the  stratum  of  the  old  red 
sandstone  there  are  to  be  seen  the  marks  of 
showers  of  rain  which  fell  centuries  and  cen- 
turies ago,  and  they  are  so  plain  and  perfect 
that  they  clearly  indicate  the  way  the  wind 
was  drifting,  and  in  what  direction  the  tem- 
pest slanted  from  the  sky.  So  may  the  tracks 
of  youthful  sins  be  traced  upon  the  tablet  of 
the  life  when  it  has  merged  into  old  age — 
tracks  which  it  is  bitter  and  sad  remorse  to 
look  upon,  and  which  call  forth  many  a  boot- 
less longing  for  the  days  and  months  which 
are  past. — A.  Mursell. 

(c)  In  the  long  run  leadership  resolves  itself 
into  a  question  of  personal  qualification.  For 
a  time  men  may  arise  who  claim  command- 
ing positions  who  are  unable  to  discharge  the 
duties  which  their  ambition  has  coveted.  In 
such  instances  there  would  seem  to  be  a  mis- 
carriage of  the  natural  law  and  order  of  things; 
yet  it  is  only  temporary ;  sooner  or  later  un- 
qualified men  have  to  resign  positions  which 
they  ought  never  to  have  assumed. — Joseph 
Parker,  D.D. 

In  a  great  leader  many  elements  of  qualifi- 
cation are  combined.  Other  men  may  excel 
him  in  detached  points,  but  taken  as  a  whole 
he  rules  not  perhaps  by  one  dominant  faculty. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA.  ohap.  n. 


but  by  a  noble  proportion  of  natural  and  ac-  involves.    The  only  sound  rule  for  promotion 

quired  gifts.     The  position  of  a  leader  is  not  to  influential  positions  in  the  Church  is,  that 

80  easy  as  it  may  appear  to  be  to  unreflect-  wisdom,  wheresoever  found,  in  the  rich  or  the 

ing  observers.    Men  see  the  elevation,  not  the  poor,  the  old  or  the  young,  shoald  be  reeog- 

strain  and  responsibility  which  that  elevation  nised  and  honoured, — Ihia, 

A  SUGGESTTTE  ReOORD. 

(Verses  2  (last  clause)-^4t :  **  The  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel:  The 

children  of  Farosh,^*  <kc.) 

Consider:  be  absent  from  the  chain  of  evidence 

I.  The  significance  of  the  fact  of  the  which  shows  that  our  Lord  was  of  the 

record.  family  of  king  David  (comp.  Isa.  xi.  1 ; 

1.  It  was  an  honour  to  the  pious  and  Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  Matt.  i.  1-17  ;  xxii.  42). 
patriotic  ones  who  ret^crned.  In  going  (2.)  Jeshua,  who  was  a  distinguished 
back  to  their  own  land  at  this  time,  and  type  of  Jesus  Christ  (Zech.  iii.,  vi. 
for  the  purpose  of  rebuilding  the  Temple,  11-13). 

they  acted  very  religiously  and  coura-  2.  A    significant  place.       Bethlehem 

geously  ;  and  to  their  praise  their  names  (ver.  21).     This  place  must  be  rebuilt, 

were  recorded,  and  in  the  providence  of  and   reinhabited  by  Jews ;   for   in   the 

God  the  record  has  been  preserved  to  Divine  purposes  a  great  destiny  awaited 

this  day.      "  Them  that  honour  Me  I  it  (Mic.  v.  2 ;  Matt,  il  1).     Here,  then, 

will  honour."  in  this  record  we  have  two  persons  and 

2.  It  is  an  illustration  of  the  Divine  one  place  which  sustained  close  relations 
record  of  God's  spiritual   Israel,      The  to  the  Messiah. 

name  of  every  true   believer  in  Jesus  3.  Significant  numbers.    (1.)  The  num- 

Christ  is  '*  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  ber  of  those  who  settled  in  Bethlehem 

of  life "  (Rev.  xxi.  27).     "  Rejoice,  be-  was   small — *'  an   hundred  twenty  and 

cause  your  names  are  written  in  heaven"  three."     Bethlehem  was   "  little   among 

(Luke  X.   20 ;  comp.  Exod.   xxxii.  32  j  the  thousands  of  Judah."     Yet  how  il- 

Ps.  Ixix.  28;  Phil.  iv.  3;  Heb.  xii.  23;  lustrious  and  universal  is  its  renown! 

Rev.  xiii.  8).     "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  Size  and  populousness  are  utterly  un- 

that  are  His."  (a).  satisfactory  tests  of  worth  and  greatness. 

3.  It  suggests  that  every  one  of  His  (c).  (2.)  The  number  of  those  who 
people  is  precious  in  the  sight  of  God.  settled  in  Anathoth  was  also  small — '*  an 
"A  book  of  remembrance  was  written  hundred  twenty  and  eight"  (ver.  23). 
before  Him  for  them  that  feared  the  In  this  we  have  an  illustration  of  thie 
Lord,  and  that  thought  upon  His  name.  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  threatenings 
And  they  shall  be  Mine,  saith  the  Lord  (Jer.  xi,  21-23).  The  word  of  the  Lord, 
of  Hosts,  in  that  day  when  I  make  up  whether  it  be  a  promise  or  a  menace. 
My  jewels."  He  knows  the  number  of  shall  surely  be  accomplished  in  due 
His  people,  and  the  name  of  every  one  season.  (3.)  The  number  of  the  whole 
of  them.  "  He  calleth  His  own  sheep  was  comparatively  small.  *'  The  whole 
by  name."  He  will  not  lose  any  one  of  congregation  together  was  forty  and  two 
them.  He  has  not  only  written  their  thousand,  three  hundred  and  threescore  " 
names  in  His  book  of  life,  but  has  graven  (ver.  64).  What  a  small  number  as 
them  upon  the  palms  of  His  hands  compared  with  the  603,550  men  "that 
(Isa.  xlix.  16).  (6).  were  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in  Israel," 

II.  The  significance  of  the  contents  who  were  numbered  in  the   desert  of 

of  the  record.     We  have  in  this  list —  Sinai !     How   small,   too,   as  compared 

1.  Significant  persons.     (1.)  Zerubba-  with  the  601,730  men  "able  to  go  to 

bel,  "  the  prince  of  Judah,"  an  ancestor  war  in  Israel,"  who  were  numbered  in 

of  the  Messiah  (Matt.  i.  12 ;  Luke  iii.  the  plains  of  Moab,  before  the  entrance 

27).     It  was  important  that  his  name  into  the  Promised  Land  I    The  smallness 

should  be  recorded,  that  no  link  might  of  the  number  of  those  who  returned  to 

26 


OfiAP.  11. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


their  own  land  may  be  viewed — (i.)  As 
a  discredit  to  those  who   remained  in 
Babylon.     In  them  the  love  of  material 
prosperity  was  stronger  than  the  love  of 
country.      They  had  neither  piety  nor 
patriotism  enough  to  inspire   them   to 
make  the  sacrifices  and  encounter  the 
perils  which  the  return  to   their   own 
land  involved,     (ii.)  The  greater  honour 
to  those  who  returned.    They  acted  with 
a  noble  faithfulness  and  independence 
in  doing  what  they  deemed  to  be  their 
duty  and  privilege,  though  they  were  in 
a  minority,  and  though  the  course  they 
followed     involved    loss    and     danger. 
They  had  the  courage  of  their  convic- 
tions ;  they  were  heroes  in  their  fidelity 
to  their  country  and  to  their  God.     (iii.) 
An  element  which  contributed  to   the 
success  of  their  undertaking.     To  settle 
down  again  in  the  deserted  land,  and  to 
rebuild  the  ruined  Temple  in  the  face  of 
difficulty  and  opposition,  demanded  men 
of  the  right  quality  rather  than  men  in 
great  multitude.     It  was  force  of  charac- 
ter, and  not  force  of  numbers,  that  was 
needed  for  the  success  of  the  returning 
exiles — men  of  sincere  piety  and  fervent 
patriotism.     As  the  victory  of  Gideon 
over  the    Midianites  was  achieved  not 
by  the  32,000,  some  of  whom  were  fear- 
ful and  others  lacking  zeal,  but  by  the 
300  eager  and  heroic  ones ;  so  with  this 
company  under  Zerubbabel,  success  wai 
to  be  achieved  by  their  faith  and  cour- 
age, not  by  their  multitudinousness.  (<3?). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  God  knows  the  persons  of  all  His  own. 
He  hath  in  His  infinite  understanding  the 
exact  number  of  all  the  individual  persons  that 
belong  to  Him  (2  Tim.  ii.  19)  :  *'The  Lord 
knows  them  that  are  His."  He  knows  all 
things,  because  He  hath  created  them  ;  and 
He  knows  His  people  because  He  hath  not  only 
made  them,  but  also  chose  them.  He  could 
no  more  choose  He  knew  not  what,  than  He 
could  create  He  knew  not  what.  He  knows 
them  under  a  double  title ;  of  creation  aa 
creatures  in  the  common  mass  of  creation,  as 
new  creatures  by  a  particular  act  of  separation. 
He  cannot  be  ignorant  of  them  in  time  whom 
He  foreknew  from  eternity.  His  knowledge 
in  time  is  the  same  as  He  had  from  eternity  ; 
He  foreknew  them  that  He  intended  to  give 
the  grace  of  faith  unto  ;  and  He  knows  them 
after  they  believe,  because  He  knows  His  own 
act  in  bestowing  grace  upon  them,  and  His 

26 


own  mark  and  seal  wherewith  He  has  stamped 
theiti.     No  doubt  but  He  that  '*  calls  the  stars 
of  heaven   by  their  names"  (Ps.  cxlvii.  4), 
knows  the  number  of  those  hving  stars  that 
sparkle  in  the  firmament  of  His  Church.     He 
cannot  be  ignorant  of  their  persons  when  He 
numbers  the  hairs  of  their  heads,  and  hath 
registered  their  names  in  the  book   of  life. 
As  He  only  had  an  infinite  mercy  to  make  the 
choice,  80  He   only   hath  an  infinite  under- 
standing to  comprehend  their  persons.     We 
only  know  the  elect  of  God  by  a  moral  as- 
surance in  the  judgment  of  charity,  when  the 
conversation  of  men  is  according  to  the  doc- 
trine of  God.      We   have   not  an   infallible 
knowledge  of  them,   we  may  be  often  mis- 
taken ;  Judas,  a  devil,  may  be  judged  by  man 
for  a  saint  till  he  be  stripped  of  his  disguise. 
God  only  hath  an  infallible  knowledge  of  them; 
He  knows  His  own  records,  and  the  counter- 
parts in  the  hearts  of  Hie  people  ;  none  can 
counterfeit  His  seal,  nor  can  any  raze  it  out. 
When  the  Church  is  either  scattered  like  dust 
by  persecution,  or  overgrown  with  supersti- 
tion   and  idolatry,  that  there  is  scarce   any 
grain  of  true  religion  appearing,  as  in  the 
time  of  Elijah,  who  complained  that  he  was 
left  alone,  as  if  the  Church  had  been  rooted 
out  of  that  corner  of  the  world  (I  Kings  xix. 
14,  18)  ;  yet  God  knew  that  He  had  a  number 
fed  in  a  cave,  and  had  reserved  seven  thousand 
men  that  had  preserved  the  purity  of    His 
worship,  and  not  bowed  the   knee  to  Baal. 
Christ  knew  His  sheep,  as  well  as  He  is  known 
of  them  ;  yea,  better  than  they  can  know  Hinj 
(John  X.  14).    History  acquaints  us  that  Cyrus 
had  so  vast  a  memory  that  he  knew  the  name 
of  every  particular  soldier  in  his  army,  which 
consisted  of  divers  nations  ;  shall   it  be  too 
hard  for  an  infinite  understanding  to  know 
every  one  of  that  host  that  march  under  His 
banner  !    May  He  not  as  well  know  them  as 
know   the   number,  qualities,    influences,   of 
those  stars  which  lie  concealed  from  our  eye 
as  well  as  those  that  are  visible  to  our  sense  t 
Yes,  He  knows  them,  as  a  general  to  employ 
them,  as  a  shepherd  to  preserve  them.    He 
knows  them  in  the  world  to  guard  them,  and 
He  knows  when  they  are  out  of  the  world  to 
gather  them,  and  call  out  their  bodies  though 
wrapped  up  in  a  cloud  of  the  putrefied  carcasses 
of  the  wicked.     As  He  knew  them  from  all 
eternity  to  elect  them,  so  He  kjiows  them  in 
time  to  clothe  their  persons  with  righteous- 
ness,  to  protect  their  persons   in    calamity, 
according  to  His  good  pleasure,  and  at  last 
to  raise  and  reward  them  according  to  His 
promise. — Stephen  Charnocke,  B.D. 

(6)  Our  God  has  a  particular  notice  of  us, 
and  a  particular  interest  in  our  personal  his- 
tory. And  this  was  one  of  the  great  uses  of 
the  incarnation  ;  it  was  to  humanise  God,  re- 
ducing Him  to  a  human  personality,  that  we 
might  believe  in  that  particular  and  personal 
love  in  which  He  reigns  from  eternity.  For 
Christ  was  visibly  one  of  us,  and  we  see  in  all 
His  demonstrations  that  He  is  attentive   to 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMENTART:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  n. 


every  personal  want,  woe,  cry  of  the  world. 
When  a  lone  woman  came  up  in  a  crowd  to 

SLeal,  as  it  were,  some  healing  power  out  of 
His  person,  or  out  of  the  hem  of  His  garment, 
Ke  would  not,  let  her  off  in  that  impersonal, 
unrecognising  way  ;  He  compelled  her  to  show 
herself  and  to  confess  her  name,  and  sent  her 
away  with  His  personal  blessing.  He  pours 
out  everywhere  a  particular  sympathy  on  every 
particular  child  of  sorrow  ;  He  even  hunts  up 
the  youth  He  has  before  healed  of  his  blind- 
ness, and  opens  to  him,  persecuted  as  he  is 
for  being  healed,  the  secrets  of  His  glorious 
Messiahship.  The  result,  accordingly,  of  this 
incarnate  liistory  is  that  we  are  drawn  to  a 
different  ojiinion  of  God  ;  we  have  seen  that 
He  can  love  as  a  man  loves  another,  and  that 
such  is  the  way  of  His  love.  He  has  tasted 
death,  we  say,  not  for  all  men  only,  but  for 
every  man.  We  even  dare  to  say,  for  me — 
who  loved  toe  and  gave  Himself  for  me.  Nay, 
He  goes  even  further  than  this  Himself,  call- 
ing us  friends,  and  claiming  that  dear  rela- 
tionship with  us, — friends  because  He  is  on 
the  private  footing  of  friendship  and  personal 
confidence  :  **  The  servant  knoweth  not  what 
his  lord  doeth,  but  I  have  called  you  friends." 
He  even  goes  beyond  this,  promising  a  friend- 
ship 80  particular  and  personal,  that  it  shall 
be  a  kind  of  secret,  or  cipher  of  mutual  under- 
standing open  to  no  other — a  new  white  stone 
given  by  his  King,  "and  in  the  stone  a  new 
name  written,  which  no  man  knoweth  saving 
he  that  receiveth  it." 

.  .  .  His  Saviour  and  Lord  is  over  him 
andwith  him,  as  the  Good  Shepherd  calling  him 
by  name  ;  so  that  he  is  finally  saved,  not  as  a 
man,  or  some  one  of  mankind  led  forth  by 
his  Lord  in  the  general  flock,  but  as  the  Mas- 
ter's dear  Simon,  or  James,  or  Alpheus,  or 
Martha,  whose  name  is  so  recorded  in  th« 
Lamb's  book  of  life. — Horace  BushneUf  D,D, 


(c)  The  moral  magnitude  of  things  has  no 
relationship  to  the  physical.  What  if  a  man 
should  say  that  Washington  was  not  a  great 
man  because  he  was  not  a  ten-thousandth  part 
as  great  as  the  Alleghany  Mountains,  compar- 
ing moral  magnitude  with  physical  ?  What  has 
the  size  of  a  man,  or  the  duration  on  earth  of 
a  man,  or  his  physical  powers,  to  do  with  the 
moral  measurement  that  belongs  to  the  under- 
standing, the  reason,  or  the  moral  sentiments  ? 
Is  a  battle  great  by  the  size  of  the  nation  that 
fought  it,  or  the  held  that  it  was  fought  in  f 
Or  is  it  great  by  the  skill  and  the  bravery 
enacted,  and  by  the  long-reaching  sequences 
that  flow  from  it?  The  part  which  this  world 
is  to  play  in  the  far  future,  the  experiment  of 
human  life,  the  story  of  Divine  sacrifice  and 
love,  the  part  which  redeemed  men  are  to 
enact  in  their  translation  into  the  heavenly 
sphere — these  all  give  a  moral  grandeur  to 
this  world,  and  utterly  overcome  the  objection 
that  God  would  not  be  likely  to  give  minute 
personal  thought  to  the  evolutions  of  indivi- 
dual life. — H,  W.  Beecher. 

{d)  Gideon's  army,  we  see,  must  be  lessened. 
And  who  so  fit  to  be  cashiered  as  the  fearful  ? 
God  bids  him,  therefore,  proclaim  licence  for 
all  faint  hearts  to  leave  the  field.  God  will 
not  glorify  Himself  by  cowards.  As  the  timo- 
rous shall  be  without  the  gates  of  heaven,  so 
shall  they  be  without  the  lists  of  God's  field. 
Reader  I  does  but  a  foul  word,  or  a  frown, 
scare  thee  from  Christ  ?  Doth  the  loss  of  a 
little  land  or  silver  disquiet  thee  ?  Doth  but 
the  sight  of  the  Midianites  in  the  valley  strike 
thee  with  terror?  Home  then,  home  to  the 
world  ;  thou  art  not  for  the  conquering  band 
of  Christ.  If  thou  canst  not  resolve  to  follow 
Him  through  infamy,  prisons,  racks,  gibbets, 
flames,  depart  to  thy  house,  and  save  thjaeli 
to  thy  loss.  —Bishop  HaU, 


Religious  Service. 
{Verses  36-58.) 


This  section  of  the  record  suggests  the 
following  observations  concerning  service 
in  the  Church  of  God : — 

L  There  are  various  spheres  of  ser- 
vice in  the  Church  of  God.  In  the 
verses  before  us  there  are  several  classes 
of  persons,  and  each  of  these  classes  bad 
its  own  proper  duties  to  discharge.  The 
priests  (vers.  36-39),  the  Levites  who 
assisted  the  priests  (ver.  40),  the  Leviti- 
cal  choir  or  choirs  (ver.  41),  the  Levitical 
porters  or  gate-keepers  (ver.  42),  the 
Nethinim,  who  performed  the  more 
menial  and  laborious  duties  (vers. 
43-54),  and  "the  children  of  Solomon's 
servants,"  who  were  a  grade  lower  even 


than  the  Nethinim,  and  did  the  humblest 
work  of  all.  In  these  we  have  an  illus- 
tration of  the  various  spheres  of  religious 
work  in  this  Christian  dispensation.  "  He 
gave  gifts  unto  men.  And  He  gave 
some,  apostles ;  and  some,  prophets ; 
and  some,  evangelists;  and  some,  pastors 
and  teachers;"  <fec.  (Epb.  iv.  11,  12). 
In  our  own  day  we  have  pastors, 
preachers,  evangelists,  conductors  of 
prayer-meetings,  Sunday-school  teachers, 
tract  distributors,  visitors  of  the  sick  and 
sorrowful,  leaders  of  the  psalmody  of  the 
church,  and  managers  of  its  financial 
and  other  business  arrangements.  In 
the  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus    amongst 

27 


oHAP.  n. 


HOMILSTIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


men  there  is  scope  for  every  kind  and 
degree  of  faculty.  The  feeblest  power 
may  be  beneficially  employed  ;  and  the 
greatest  gifts  may  find  spheres  of  service 
wliich  demand  their  utmost  exercise. 
This  fact  deprives  the  idlers  in  the 
Church  of  God  of  any  legitimate  excuse 
for  their  indolence.  There  is  work  for 
every  one,  and  suited  to  every  capacity ; 
and  the  obligation  of  service  rests  upon 
every  one.  Let  every  one,  then,  be  up 
and  doing,  &c.  (a). 

II.  The  humblest  sphere  of  service 
in  the  Church  of  God  is  a  place  of 
privilege  and  honour.  This  seems  to 
us  to  be  fairly  deducible  from  the  fact 
that  the  Nethinim  and  "  the  children  of 
Solomon's  servants "  are  here  recorded 
and  numbered.  Even  the  bondsmen 
taken  from  alien  and  conquered  peoples, 
being  employed  in  the  most  menial  ser- 
vices in  connection  with  the  Temple, 
find  a  place  in  this  sacred  record  of  the 
returning  people  of  God.  That  we  are 
permitted  to  do  anything  for  Jesus  our 
Lord,  if  it  be  the  very  lowest  and  hum- 
blest service,  should  be  regarded  as  a 
precious  privilege  and  a  high  honour. 
Is  it  not  an  honour  that  we  may  aid  in 
any  way,  and  in  any  degree,  in  the  con- 
version, education,  or  progress  of  a  soul 
imniortal  and  redeemed  by  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ  ?  Is  it  not  an  honour 
that  we  are  permitted,  nay,  called  to  be 
co-workers  with  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
in    His  great  redemptive   undertaking  1 

(J). 

III.  The  privilege  of  service  in  the 
Church  of  God  is  not  limited  to  any 
particular  races  or  classes  of   men. 

Neither  the  Nethinim  nor  "the  children 
of  Solomon's  servants "  were  Israelites  ; 
but  they  were  not  excluded  from  the 
privilege  of  employment  in  connection 
with  the  Temple  and  its  services.  In 
this  Christian  age  no  races  or  classes  are 
privileged  to  share  in  this  service  to  the 
exclusion  of  others.  All  men  may  par- 
ticipate in  the  blessings  of  Christ's  sal- 
vat  i(m  ;  and  every  true  Christian  may 
serve  in  some  sphere  of  holy  work,  and 
ought  so  to  serve.  *'For  there  is  no 
difference  between  the  Jew  and  the 
Greek :  for  the  same  Lord  over  all  is 
rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  Him."  In 
28 


the  Christian  life  "there  is  neither  Greek 
nor  Jew,  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision, 
barbarian,  Scythian,  bond  nor  free ;  but 
Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  Neither  is 
there  any  exclusive  sacerdotal  class  with 
special  privileges  and  powers.  Every 
sphere  of  Christian  service  is  open  to 
every  Christian  who  possesses  the  quali- 
fications for  efficiently  discharging  the 
duties  of  such  sphere,  (c). 

Let  every  Christian,  then,  promptly 
undertake  and  faithfully  discharge  some 
service  in  the  cause  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour.  *'  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  My 
vineyard."  **  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have 
me  todol" 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Every  Christian  who  wants  to  have  a 
blessing  for  himself  or  for  others,  must  set  to 
work  by  active  exertion.  Some  of  you  young 
men  might  preach — you  have  the  ability,  you 
have  the  time  for  study  ;  I  want  you  to  lay 
out  your  talents  in  that  holiest  of  enterprises  : 
in  the  street  corners,  anywhere,  proclaim 
Christ.  Some  of  you  ought  to  be  teaching 
in  Sabbath-schools,  but  you  are  putting  that 
talent  by  ;  it  is  rusting,  it  is  spoiling,  and  you 
will  have  no  interest  to  bring  to  your  Master 
for  it.  I  want  that  Sabbath-school  talent  to 
be  used.  Many  of  you  might  do  good  service 
by  teaching  senior  classes  at  your  own  houses. 
This  work  might  be  most  profitably  extended. 
If  our  intelligent  Christian  brethren  and 
matrons  would  try  to  raise  little  classes,  of 
six,  eight,  ten,  or  twelve,  at  home,  I  know  not 
what  good  might  come  of  it.  You  would  not 
be  interfering  with  any  one  else  ;  for  in  such 
a  city  as  this,  we  may  all  work  as  hard  as  we 
will,  and  there  is  no  chance  of  interfering 
with  each  other's  labours.  This  sea  is  too 
large  here  for  us  to  be  afraid  of  other  folks 
running  away  with  our  fish.  Some  of  you, 
perhaps,  will  do  best  in  tract  distribution  : 
well,  do  it — keep  it  up ;  but  mind  there  is 
something  in  the  tract — and  that  is  not  always 
the  case  —  mind  there  is  something  worth 
reading,  which  will  be  of  use  when  read.  Do 
not  give  away  somnolent  tracts,  which  are 
more  likely  to  send  the  readers  to  sleep  than 
to  prayer.  Some  of  them  might  be  useful  to 
physicians,  when  they  cannot  get  their  patients 
to  sleep  by  any  other  means.  Get  somethiiig 
useful, interesting,  telling,  scriptural,  and  give 
it  away  largely  out  of  love  to  Jesus,  And  if 
these  labours  do  not  suit  your  taste,  talk  per- 
sonally to  individuals.  Ciirist  at  the  well  ! 
What  a  schoolmaster  for  us !  Talk  to  the  one 
woman,  the  one  child,  the  one  carter,  the  one 
labourer,  whoever  he  may  be.  He  who  makes 
one  blade  of  grass  grow  that  would  not  other- 
wise have  grown,  is  a  benefactor  to  his  race; 
and  he  wiio  scatters  one  good  thought  which 
would  not  else  have  been  disseminated,  has 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHU.  n. 


done  somethinGf  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 
I  cannot  tell  you  what  is  most  fit  for  every- 
body to  do  ;  but  if  your  heart  is  right,  there 
is  something  for  eacli  one.  There  are  so  many 
niches  in  the  temple,  and  so  many  statues  of 
living  stone  to  fill  those  niches,  to  make  it  a 
complete  temple  of  heavenly  architecture. 
You  and  I  must,  each  find  our  own  niche. 
Remember,  Christian,  your  time  is  going.  Do 
not  be  considering  always  what  you  ought  to 
do,  but  get  to  work;  shut  your  eyes  and  put 
your  hand  out,  and  "Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might."  The  very 
first  Christian  effort  will  do,  only  do  it  with 
your  might ;  do  it  in  the  name  and  strength 
of  God. — (7.  H.  Spurgeon. 

(6)  I  know  of  no  service  that  can  be  more 
distinguished  than  the  doing  of  good,  the 
scattering  of  blessings  among  the  sons  of  men. 
Methinks  the  very  angels  before  the  throne 
m'ght  envy  us  poor  men  who  are  permitted  to 
talk  of  Christ,  even  though  it  be  but  to  little 
children.  I  reckon  the  humblest  ragged-school 
teacher  to  be  more  honoured  than  even  Gabriel 
himself,  in  being  commissioned  to  tell  out  the 
story  of  the  Cross,  and  to  win  youthful  hearts 
to  the  Saviour's  service.  You  are  not  em- 
ployed as  scullions  in  your  Master's  kitchen, 
though  you  might  be  content  with  such  a 
service ;  you  are  not  made  as  His  hired 
servants,  to  toil  in  meanest  drudgery,  you  are 
not  sent  to  be  hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of 
water  ;  but  you  are  His  friends,  the  friends  of 
Jesus,  to  do  such  work  as  He  did  ;  and  even 
greater  works  than  He  did  are  you  enabled 
to  do,  because  He  hath  gone  to  His  Father. 
"This  honour  have  all  the  saints," the  honour 
of  being  gentlemen-at-arms  under  Jesus,  the 
Captain  of  their  salvation. — Ihid. 

(c)  The  work  of  conversion  is  not  to  be  the 
exclusive  prerogative  of  the  pulpit.  There  is 
no  sacerdotalism  in  the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ. 


"We  have  a  great  High  Priest,  but  it  is  Jesus. 
There  is  a  holy  priesthood,  but  it  is  no  privi- 
leged caste,  it  is  no  modern  tribe  of  Levi ;  it 
is  the  whole  community  of  the  faithful,  the 
Church  of  God  which  He  has  purchased  with 
His  own  blood.     That  figment  of  old  Popery, 
which   restricts  all   endeavour   to  spread  the 
Gospel  of  Clirist  to  the  clergy  merely,  is  alien 
from  Apostolic  teaching,  and  would  leave  the 
harvest  to  rot,  neglected  in  the  field,  because 
of  the  miserable  fewness   of   the   reapers  to 
gather   it    in.      Though   I  yield   to  no  man 
under  heaven  in  respect  for  the  office  of  the 
Christian  ministry  ;  though  I  would  rather,  far 
rather  if  I  know  myself,  have  the  seal  of  its 
baptism  upon  my  brow  than  the  coronet  of  any 
earthly-patented  nobility,  I  do  feel  that  I  am 
but  fulfilling  one  of  its  most  solemn  vocations, 
when  I  summon  every  member  of  the  sacra- 
mental host  to  participate  in  the  glorious  war. 
God  forbid  that  I  should  trespass  upon  the 
crown   rights  of  any  of  the  blood  royal   of 
heaven.     I  should  feel  as  if  that  were  for  a 
guardian  to  squander  his  ward's  inheritance, 
or  for  a  father  to  jparalyse  the  growing  man- 
hood of  his  children,  to  deprive  you,  the  very 
poorest  of  you,  the  luxury  of  doing  good.  The 
highest  honour  in  this  world,  the  honour  of 
bringing  souls  to  Christ,  may  be  the  common 
privilege  of  you  all.     The  child  with  the  linen 
coat,  who  listens,  as  did  little  Samuel,  when 
the  Master  speaks;  the  love- watchers  of  the 
paralytic,  who,  if  they  can  do  nothing  else,  can 
take  him  and  let  him  down  through  the  roof 
to  the  room  where  Jesus  is  ;  the  little  servant- 
maid  that  waits  upon  Naaman's  wife — all,  all 
may  have  an  apostolical  commission,  and  may 
share  in  the  glories  of  an  apostolical  reward. 
There   is  not   a  single  member  of  a  single 
church  in  the  world  that  is  exempt  from  this 
service.     All  are  summoned  to  the  labour,  and 
all,  oh  !  infinite  condescension !  may  be  workers 
together  with  God. — W.  M,  PunshoUf  LL.D, 


The  Importance  of  a  Clear  Spiritual  Pedigree. 

(Verses  59-63.) 


Consider : 

I.  The  doubtful  pedigree  amongst 
the  people  as  an  illustration  of  uncer- 
tainty as  to  our  spiritual  state.  Verses 
59  and  60  suggest  concerning  such  un- 
certainty— 

1.  7'Aai  it  may  consist  with  association 
with  the  people  of  God.  Those  who 
'*  could  not  show  their  father's  house, 
and  their  seed,  whether  they  were  of 
Israel,"  were  permitted  to  go  up  to  Jeru- 
salem with  those  whose  Israelitisb  de- 
scent was  beyond  question.  And  they 
whose  evidences  as  to  their  spiritual 
lineage  are  not  clear  and  conclusive,  may 


have  a  name  and  a  place  amongst  God's 
spiritual  Israel.  And  more  than  this, 
they  may  really  be  true  members  of  that 
Israel.  Sincere  believers  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  do  not  always  realise  the 
blessedness  of  Christian  assurance.  Some- 
times even  he  *'  that  feareth  the  Lord, 
that  obeyeth  the  voice  of  His  servaiit, 
walketh  in  darkness,  and  bath  no 
light."  (a). 

2.  That  it  must  involve  spiritual  loss. 
Those  persons  of  doubtful  pedigree  who 
journeyed  with  the  Jews  to  Jerusulem, 
could  not  enjoy  the  full  rights  of  citi- 
zenship until  they  proved  their  Israeli- 

29 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


tisli  descent.  And  doubt  as  to  our 
spiritual  lineage  must  involve  loss — (1.) 
Of  spiritual  joy.  Such  doubters  are 
strangers  to  the  strong  consolation  which 
they  enjoy  who  can  say,  "  I  know  whom 
I  have  believed,  and  am  persuaded  that 
He  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I  have 
committed  unto  Him  against  that  day;*' 
and  who  can  utter  the  triumphant  chal- 
lenge, "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  Christ  *?  shall  tribulation,"  <fec. 
(Rom.  viii.  35-39).  (6).  (2.)  Of  spiri- 
tual usefulness.  Lacking  Ciiristian  as- 
surance, our  testimony  for  Christ  would 
be  likely  to  be  deficient  in  clearness  and 
attractiveness,  in  fervour  and  force  ;  it 
would  especially  fail  to  set  forth  the 
joyful  character  of  true  religion.  And 
thus  our  religious  usefulness  would  be 
diminished,  (c). 

IL  The  doubtful  pedigree  amongst 
the  priests  as  an  illustration  of  uncer- 
tainty as  to  our  ministerial  calling  and 
condition.  A  man's  ministerial  pedigree 
in  the  Church  of  Christ  may  be  said  to 
be  unquestionable  when  he  possesses — 

1.  The  Divine  vocation.  The  true 
minister  is  assured  that  he  is  called  of 
God  to  his  work.  He  can  enter  into 
the  feeling  of  the  Apostle,  who  said, 
** Necessity  is  laid  upon  me;  yea,  woe 
is  unto  me,  if  I  preacli  not  the  Gospel!" 

2.  The  Divine  qualification.  If  a  man 
is  unfitted  for  the  sacred  duties  of  the 
ministry,  his  ministerial  pedigree  is 
ruinously  defective.  3.  The  Divine 
sanction.  That  a  ministry  is  blessed  to 
the  conversion  of  sinners  and  the  edifi- 
cation of  Christian  believers  is  an  evi- 
dence that  it  is  approved  by  God. 

The  verses  under  consideration  (GI- 
GS) suggest — 

1.  That  a  ministericd  pedigree  may 
he  lost  by  reason  of  worldliness.  The 
children  of  the  priests  who  could  not 
find  "  their  register  among  those  that 
were  reckoned  by  genealogy,"  were  de- 
scendants of  one  who  "took  a  wife  of 
the  daughters  of  Barzillai  the  Gileadite, 
and  was  called  after  their  name."  Now 
Barzillai  was  a  great  man  in  his  day,  and 
the  priest  who  married  his  daughter 
seems  to  have  esteemed  his  alliance  with 
that  distinguished  family  more  highly 
than  the  dignity  of  his  priesthood,  and 
30 


80  he  adopted  the  name  of  Barzillai  for 
his  family,  and  his  family  register  wag 
with  the  house  of  Barzillai,  and  not  with 
the  house  of  Aaron,  and  in  this  way  it 
seems  to  have  been  lost.  His  preference 
for  worldly  distinction  issued  in  the  sus- 
pension, if  not  the  total  loss,  of  the 
sacerdotal  heritage  of  his  descendants. 
We  regard  this  as  an  illustration  of  the 
effect  of  worldliness  on  the  character  and 
influence  of  a  minister  of  the  Gospel 
of  Jesus  Christ.  The  eager  pursuit  of 
either  the  possessions  or  the  distinctions 
of  this  present  world  tends  to  despoil 
the  Christian  minister  of  spiritual  power 
— to  render  his  perceptions  of  truth  less 
quick  and  clear,  his  spiritual  sympathies 
and  susceptibilities  less  true  and  active, 
his  spiritual  zeal  less  fervent,  his  spiri- 
tual aspirations  less  intense  and  constant, 
<fec.  {d). 

2.  The  loss  of  ministerial  pedigree  in- 
volves  a  corresponding  loss  of  ministerial 
power  and  reward.  The  priests  whose 
pedigree  could  not  be  found  were  pro- 
hibited from  discharging  certain  priestly 
functions,  and  from  receiving  certain 
emoluments  of  that  office.  "  They  were 
polluted  from  the  priesthood ;  and  the 
Tirshatha  said  unto  them  that  they 
should  not  eat  of  the  most  holy  things," 
<kc.  If  a  minister  of  the  Gospel,  from 
worldliness  or  any  other  cause,  suflfer 
personal  spiritual  deterioration  or  loss, 
it  will  tell  sadly  upon  his  influence  for 
good,  and  upon  the  joy  and  spiritual  re- 
ward which  he  finds  in  his  work.  («). 

3.  The  final  decision  as  to  the  stand- 
ing of  a  mi^iister  of  uncertain  pedigree 
must  he  given  hy  God  Himself.  "And 
the  Tirshatha  said  unto  them,  that  they 
should  not  eat  of  the  most  hol^  things, 
till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with  Urim 
and  with  Thummim."  The  high  priest 
in  former  times  sought  to  know  the  will 
of  God  by  means  of  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim, and  the  decisions  which  were  given 
by  this  medium  were  regarded  as  those 
of  God  Himself.  So  the  case  of  the 
priests  of  uncertain  pedigree  was  left 
for  the  decision  of  God.  Doubtless 
there  are  certain  questions  of  ministerial 
character  and  qualification  with  which 
Church  courts  and  councils  are  com})e- 
tent  to  deal     But  when  a  man's  minis- 


HOMILMTIO  00MMBNTAM7:  EZRA. 


OBAF.  n. 


terial  pedigree  is  merely  doubtful  or  un- 
certain, the  final  decision  must  be  left 
to  the  great  Searcher  of  hearts.  "To 
his  own  Master  he  standeth  or  falleth." 

**  All  to  the  great  tribunal  haste, 
The  account  to  render  there  ; 
And  shouldst  Thou  strictly  mark  our  faults, 
Lord,  how  should  we  appear  f " 

— Doddridge, 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

{a)  Faith,  let  us  remember,  is  the  root,  and 
assurance  is  the  flower.  Doubtless  you  can 
never  have  the  flower  without  the  root ;  but  it 
is  no  less  certain  you  may  have  the  root  and 
not  the  flower.  Faith  is  that  poor  trembling 
woman  who  came  behind  Jesus  in  the  press, 
and  touched  the  hem  of  His  garment  (Mark  r. 
25)  ;  assurance  is  Stephen  standing  calmly  in 
the  midst  of  his  murderers,  and  saying,  "  I 
Bee  the  heavens  opened,  and  the  Son  of  Man 
standing  on  the  right  hand  of  God  (Acts  vii. 
66).  Faith  is  the  penitent  thief,  ciying, 
**  Lord,  remember  me "  (Luke  xxiii.  42) ; 
assurance  is  Job  sitting  in  the  dust,  covered 
with  sores,  and  saying,  "I  know  that  my 
Redeemer  liveth "  (Job  xix.  25).  "Though 
He  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in  Him  "  (Job  xiii. 
15).  Faith  is  Peter's  drowning  cry,  as  he 
began  to  sink,  '*  Lord,  save  me  1  "  (Matt.  xiv. 
30)  ;  assurance  is  that  same  Peter  declaring 
before  the  council,  in  aftertimeg,  "This  is  the 
Stone  which  was  set  at  nought  of  you  builders, 
which  is  become  the  head  of  the  corner. 
Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other;  for 
theire  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved  "  (Acts 
iv.  11,  12).  Faith  is  the  anxious,  trembling 
voice,  **  Lord,  I  believe  ;  help  Thou  mine  un- 
belief "  (Mark  ix.  24) ;  assurance  is  the  confi- 
dent challenge,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to 
the  charge  of  God's  elect?  Who  is  he  that 
condemneth?"  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34).  Faith  is 
Saul  praying  in  the  house  of  Judas  at  Damascus, 
sorrowful,  blind,  and  alone  (Acts  ix.  11)  ; 
assurance  is  Paul  the  aged  prisoner,  looking 
calmly  into  the  grave,  and  saying,  "I  know 
Whom  I  have  believed.  There  is  a  crown  laid 
up  for  me "  (2  Tim.  i.  12,  iv.  8).  Faith  is 
life.  How  great  the  blessing  I  Who  can  tell 
the  gulf  between  life  and  death  ?  And  yet  life 
may  be  weak,  sickly,  unhealthy,  painful,  trying, 
anxious,  worn,  burdensome,  joyless,  smileless 
to  the  very  end.  Assurance  is  more  than  life. 
It  is  health,  strength,  power,  vigour,  activity, 
energy,  manliness,  beauty. — Bishop  Ryh. 

Suppose  thou  hast  not  yet  attained  so  much 
as  to  this  inward  peace,  yet  know  thou  hast 
no  reason  to  question  the  truth  of  thy  faith 
for  want  of  this.  We  have  peace  with  God  as 
•oon  as  we  believe,  but  not  always  with  our- 
selves. The  pardon  may  be  past  the  prince's 
hand  and  seal,  and  yet  not  put  into  the  pri- 
soner's hand.  Thou  thinkest  them  too  rash 
(dost  not  ?)  who  judged  Paul  a  murderer  by 


the  viper  that  fastened  on  his  band.  And 
who  art  thou,  who  condemnest  thyself  for  an 
unbeliever,  because  of  those  troubles  and  in- 
ward agonies  which  may  fasten  for  a  time  on 
the  spirit  of  the  most  gracious  child  God  hath 
on  earth  \ — W.  Qurnall, 

(b)  A  man  may  praise  God  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  the  world,  &c.,  who  has  no  conscious- 
ness of  having  secured  an  interest  in  it,  but 
not  like  him  who  feels  he  has  a  property  in  it. 
How  diflferent  will  be  their  feelings !  Just  as 
great  will  be  the  diff'erence  of  interest  which 
will  be  felt  by  a  stranger  passing  through  a 
beautiful  estate,  and  by  the  owner  of  it.  One 
may  admire  the  richness  of  the  soil,  the  beauty 
of  its  crops,  and  the  stateliness  of  its  trees ; 
but  his  interest  in  it  will  fall  very  far  short  of 
his  who  has  the  title  and  property  in  it. — H, 
Q.  Salter. 

(c)  Christianity  did  not  in  its  beginning 
succeed  by  the  force  of  its  doctrines,  but  by 
the  lives  of  its  disciples.  It  succeeded  first  as 
a  light,  in  accordance  with  the  Master's  com- 
mand, **  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men, 
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify 
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  Make  religion 
attractive  by  the  goodness  that  men  see  in  you  ; 
so  sweet,  so  sparkling,  so  buoyant,  so  cheerful, 
hopeful,  courageous,  conscientious  and  yet  not 
stubborn,  so  perfectly  benevolent,  and  yet  not 
mawkish  or  sentimental,  blossoming  in  every- 
thing that  is  good,  a  rebuke  to  everything  that 
is  mean  or  little  ;  make  such  men  of  yourselves 
that  everybody  that  looks  upon  you  may  say, 
"  That  is  a  royal  good  fellow  ;  he  has  the  spirit 
that  I  should  like  to  lean  upon  in  time  of 
trouble,  or  to  be  a  companion  with  at  all  times." 
Build  up  such  a  manhood  that  it  shall  be  win- 
ning to  men.  That  is  what  the  early  Church 
did.— jy.  W,  Beecher. 

{d)  What  the  astronomers  say  of  the  eclipse 
of  the  sun,  that  it  is  occasioned  by  the  inter- 
vening of  the  moon  between  the  sun  and  our 
sight,  is  true  in  this  case :  if  the  world  get 
between  Christ,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  and 
our  sight,  it  will  darken  our  sight  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  bring  eclipses  upon  our  comforts 
and  graces.  Again,  those  men  that  dig  deep 
into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  they  are  often- 
times choked  and  stifled  by  damps  that  come 
from  the  earth.  So  is  it  with  Christians, 
those  that  will  be  ever  poring  and  digging 
about  the  things  of  this  world,  it  is  a  thousand 
to  one  that  if  from  worldly  things  a  damp 
doth  not  arise  to  smother  their  comforts  and 
quench  their  graces.  Lastly,  a  candle,  though 
it  may  shine  to  the  view  of  all,  yet  put  it  under 
ground,  and,  though  there  be  not  the  least  puff 
of  wind,  the  very  damp  will  stifle  the  light  of 
the  flame ;  and  so  it  is  that  men  may  shine 
like  candles  in  their  comforts,  yet  bring  them 
but  under  the  earth,  and  a  clod  of  that  will 
stifle  their  candle,  will  damp  their  spiritual 
comforts,  and  bereave  them  of  those  joys  that 
are  in  themselves  unspeakable. — John  Magii'us, 

31 


OHAF.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


(e)  A  true  miniBter  is  a  man  whose  manhood 
itself  is  a  strong  and  influential  argument  with 
his  people.  He  lives  in  such  relations  with 
God,  and  in  such  a  genuine  sympathy  with 
man,  that  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  under  the  in- 
fluence of  such  a  mind.  Just  as,  lying  on  a 
couch  on  a  summer's  evening,  you  hear  from 
a  neiglibouring  house  the  low  breathing  of  an 
instrument  of  music,  so  far  away  that  you  can 
only  hear  its  palpitation,  but  cannot  discern 
the  exact  tune  that  is  played,  and  are  soothed 
by  it,  and  drawn  nearer  to  hear  more ;  so  the 
true  man,  the  true  Christian  minister,  is  him- 
self so  inspiring,  so  musical,  there  is  so  much 
of  the  Divine  element  in  him,  rendered  home- 


like by  incarnation  with  his  disposition,  brought 
down  to  the  level  of  man's  understanding,  that 
wherever  he  goes,  little  children  want  to  see 
him,  plain  people  want  to  be  with  him  ;  every- 
body says  when  he  comes,  *'Good  ;"  and  every- 
body says  when  he  goes  away,  '*  I  wish  he  had 
stayed  longer  ;"  all  who  come  in  contact  with 
nim  are  inclined  to  live  a  better  life.  Man- 
hood is  the  best  sermon.  It^.is  good  to  fill  the 
mind  with  the  goodness  and  sweetness  of  the 
thing  itself  to  which  you  would  fain  draw  them. 
"Go,  preach,"  was  no  more  authoritative  than 
"Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they 
may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your 
Father  which  is  in  heayen," — H,  W,  Beecher. 


Possessions  and  Offerings, 


(  Verses 

These  verses  present  the  following 
homiletical  topics,  which  may  be  con- 
sidered with  advantage  : — 

I.  The  completion  of  their  journey. 
"  They  came  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 
which  is  at  Jerusalem."  No  account  of 
the  journey  is  given  by  the  historian. 
It  is,  however,  certain  that  the  journey 
was — (l)/o7?.^,;the  distance  was  more  than 
one  thousand  miles,  and  Ezra  and  his 
company  (who  went  up  many  years  after- 
ward) were  four  months  on  the  way 
(chap.  vii.  9)  j  (2)  difficult,  by  reason  of 
their  uncertainty  as  to  the  best  way,  and 
the  comparatively  small  number  of  beasts 
of  burden  ;  (3)  perilous,  as  we  see  from 
chap.  viii.  22.  The  country  through 
which  their  course  lay  was  infested  by 
Bedouin  Arabs,  who  frequently  plun- 
dered and  assaulted  travellers.  But  the 
returning  Jews  were  sustained,  guided, 
and  guarded  by  the  Lord  their  God.  It 
was  by  His  blessing  that  they  reached 
their  destination  in  safety.  So  will  He 
lead  and  keep  all  those  who  forsake 
sin,  seek  to  do  His  will,  and  set  their 
faces  Zion-ward.  ''  An  highway  shall  be 
there,  and  a  way,  and  it  shall  be  called, 
The  way  of  holiness  ;  the  unclean  shall 
not  pass  over  it  ;  but  He  Himself  shall 
be  with  them,  walking  in  the  way  ;  and 
the  foolish  shall  not  err  therein.  No  lion 
shall  be  there,*'  &c.  (Isa.  xxxv.  8-10). 

II.  The  extent  of  their  possessions. 
**  Beside  their  servants  and  their  maids, 
of  whom  there  were  seven  thousand 
three  hundred  thirty  and  seven,"  <kc. 
(vers.  65-67).     There  might  have  been 

32 


65-70.) 

some  wealthy  men  amongst  them ;  but 
viewed  as  a  whole  this  company  was 
certainly  poor.  Their  reduced  and  im- 
poverished condition  is  indicated  by  the 
number  of  servants  and  beasts  of  burden 
in  relation  to  the  number  of  persons. 
They  had  only  one  slave  to  every  six  per- 
sons, one  horse  to  every  fifty-eight  per- 
sons, one  mule  to  every  one  hundred  and 
seventy-three  persons,  one  camel  to  every 
ninety-eight  persons,  and  one  ass  to  every 
seven  persons.  Sin  always  impoverishes 
and  degrades  the  sinner.  Some  forms 
of  it  lead  to  temporal  poverty,  e.g., 
drunkenness,  indolence,  wastefulness. 
"For  the  drunkard  and  the  glutton 
shall  come  to  poverty  ;  and  drowsiness 
shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags"  (Prov.  xxiii. 
21).  "I  went  by  the  field  of  the  slothful," 
<fec.  (Prov.  xxiv.  30).  But  the  worst 
poverty  to  which  sin  leads  is  that  of  the 
spirit.  It  despoils  man  of  high  and  holy 
thoughts,  of  pure  and  pious  aspirati(«is, 
of  generous  and  noble  purposes ;  it 
tends  to  make  him  "wretched,  and 
miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and 
naked ;  "  and  to  render  him  unconscious 
of  his  destitution  and  degradation. 

III.  The  presentation  of  their  offer- 
ings. '*  And  some  of  the  chief  of  the 
fathers,  when  they  came  to  the  house  of 
the  Lord,"  &c.  (vers.  68,  69).    Notice  : 

1.  The  object  of  their  offerings.  "They 
offered  freely  for  the  house  of  God  to 
set  it  up  in  his  place."  Their  contri- 
butions were  for  the  rebuilding  of  the 
Temple.  In  this  way  they  sought  to 
promote  the  honour  of  God ;  and  they 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAF.  n. 


were  faithful  to  the  purpose  for  which 
they  were  permitted  to  leave  Babylon. 
Offerings  for  the  building  of  temples 
for  the  worship  of  the  Most  High  are 
both  prudent  and  pious  ;  they  are  en- 
couraged both  by  philanthropy  and  by 
religion  ;  they  promote  the  good  of 
humanity  and  the  glory  of  God. 

2.  The  spirit  of  their  offerings.  (1.) 
They  offered  promptly,  without  delay ; 
soon  as  *'  they  came  to  the  house  of  the 
Lord,  which  is  at  Jerusalem."  If  they 
could  not  begin  to  rebuild  the  Temple  at 
once,  they  could  contribute  towards  the 
expenses  of  rebuilding,  and  they  did  so. 
(2.)  They  offered  spontaneously,  without 
constraint.  "  They  offered  freely  for  the 
house  of  God."  *'  Every  man  accord- 
ing as  he  purposeth  in  his  heart ;  not 
grudgingly,  or  of  necessity ;  for  God 
loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  It  is  probable 
that  gratitude  for  the  mercies  received 
during  the  journey,  and  for  their  safe 
arrival  at  their  destination,  would  prompt 
them  to  present  hearty  offerings,  (a). 

3.  2'he  measure  of  their  offerings. 
"  They  gave  after  their  ability  unto  the 
treasure  of  the  work,"  &c.  This  seems 
to  imply — (1.)  Proportion;  that  they 
gave  according  to  their  means,  the  rich 
according  to  his  riches,  and  the  poor  ac- 
cording to  his  poverty.  "  If  there  be  first 
a  willing  mind,  it  is  accepted  according 
to  that  a  man  hath,  not  according  to  that 
he  hath  not."  (6).  (2.)  Liberality  ;  that 
each  one  who  gave,  gave  as  much  as  he 
could.  The  total  amount  contributed 
was,  at  least,  about  £90,000  ;  which 
gives  an  average  of  about  £2  per  per- 
son, including  servants.  An  example 
worthy  of  imitation  by  many  congrega- 
tions in  our  day  which  are  far  more 
favourably  circumstanced,  (c). 

IV.  The  settlement  in  their  cities. 
"So  the  priests,  and  the  Levites,  and 
some  of  the  people,  and  the  singers,  and 
the  porters,  and  the  Nethinims,  dwelt 
in  their  cities,  and  all  Israel  in  their 
cities."     Two  ideas  are  suggested — 

1.  Home  after  exile.  "  Dwelt  in  their 
cities."  Their  cities  ;  not  the  cities  of 
their  conquerors.  The  cities  were  to  a 
great  extent  ruined  and  desolate  ;  but 
they  were  their  own.  It  was  the  land 
of  their  fathers,  and  their  own  land.  {d). 


2.  Rest  after  a  long  and  tedious 
Journey.  The  toils  and  perils  of  their 
pilgrimage  were  over.  Rest  in  their  own 
cities  would  be  sweet  to  their  weary  feet, 
but  sweeter  still  to  their  spirits. 

"  But  rest  more  sweet  and  still. 
Than  ever  nightfall  gave  ; 
Our  yearning  hearts  shall  fill, 
In  the  land  beyond  the  grave. 

There  shall  no  tempests  blow, 
No  scorching  noontide  beat; 

There  shall  be  no  more  snow, 
No  weary,  wandering  feet. 

So  we  lift  our  trusting  eyes 

Prom  the  hills  our  fathers  trod. 

To  the  quiet  of  the  skies, 
To  the  Sabbath  of  our  God." 

— Mi^.  Remans. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  **  She  hath  done  what  she  could."  The 
costliness  of  her  gift  in  proportion  to  her 
means,  while  it  was  nothing  to  Him  she  would 
honour,  was  a  guarantee  that  she  was  not 
trifling.  Had  it  been  far  less  than  it  was,  and 
had  it  been  all  she  could  bring.  His  blessing 
would  have  been  the  same.  For  mind,  He 
does  not  say,  "  Stop,  consider,  this  alabaster 
box  really  cost  a  good  deal  of  money  ;  it  could 
not  have  been  bought  for  less  than  three  hun- 
dred denarii."  No  ;  but  He  says,  **Slie  hath 
done  what  she  could ;  "  that  is,  she  h;ith  de- 
monstrated the  deep  and  tender  attachment 
of  her  soul.  She  believes  on  her  Lord.  She 
loves  the  Saviour  for  His  holiness,  His  mercy, 
His  Divine  benignity.  One  penny's  worth,  if 
it  is  only  the  utmost  that  self-denial  can  do,  is 
as  good  for  that  as  ten  thousand  shekels.  Did 
He  not  declare  as  much,  in  what  He  said  of 
the  two  mites  that  the  poor  widow  cast  into 
the  Temple  treasury  ?  Nay,  did  He  not  equally 
accept,  and  bless  with  the  same  favour, 
another  woman,  poorer  and  frailer  still,  who 
had  nothing  to  give  Him  but  tears  and  kisses 
for  His  feet  ?  The  whole  spiritual  meaning 
of  gifts  consists  in  the  disposition  of  the  giver. 
Distinctions  of  weight  and  measure,  standards 
of  currency,  tables  of  value,  rates  of  exchange, 
calculations  of  outlay,  colour,  material,  and 
shape,  vanish  before  that  simple  and  royal 
touchstone  in  the  breast.  It  is  felt  to  be  so, 
even  in  the  presents  of  human  friendship  ; 
and  spiritual  sincerity  does  not  pass  for  less 
in  the  eyes  of  Him  who  searches  and  sees  the 
heart. — F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

(6)  Hohannes,  the  blind  missionary  of  Har- 
poot,  tells  of  a  place  where  the  Board  had 
spent  much  money  with  little  result,  where  he 
was  sent.  It  was  a  poor  place.  The  people 
were  to  raise  six  hundred  piastres  ;  and  the 
Board  was  to  pay  the  balance  of  his  salary. 
The  people  said  they  could  not  raise  that  sum ; 
a  neighbouring  pastor  said  it  was  impossible, 
they  were  bo  poor.     After  much  anxiety,  the 

O  33 


OHAP.  in. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


missionary  laid  the  case  before  God  in  prayer, 
when  it  was  impressed  upon  him  that  each 
should  give  his  tenth.  He  proposed  it  to  the 
people,  and  they  agreed  to  it.  The  money 
was  easily  raised,  and  amounted  to  more  than 
the  entire  salary.  That  people  never  prospered 
60  much  before  ;  their  crops  were  abundant, 
and  their  satisfaction  great.  They  not  only 
supported  their  preacher  and  school-teacher, 
but  gave  two  thousand  piastres  to  other  pur- 
poues. — Dict»  o/Iilust. 

{e)  If  there  be  any  principle  in  our  religion  ; 
if  our  obligation  to  worship  be  anything  more 
than  a  seemly  form,  or  an  irksome  impost 
upon  time  and  thought  ;  if  the  idea  of  God 
within  us  be  not  a  remote  and  impersonal 
divinity,  but  a  Being  warm,  near,  watchful, 
provident,  the  living  God  of  our  clinging 
heart  and  of  our  crying  soul,  then  surely  it 
were  mockery  to  render  any  homage  but  the 
truest  at  His  footstool,  and  to  oflFer  any  gifts 
but  the  chiefest  on  His  altar.  The  old  heathen 
understood  this  matter  better.  Their  eyes 
were  blinded  and  their  rites  were  cruel,  but 
they  never  erred  in  this.  The  goodliest  spoil, 
the  most  fragrant  libation,  the  fairest  in  the 
stall,  the  nearest  to  the  heart,  were  reserved 
to  be  devoted  to  their  gods ;  and  shall  we, 
heirs  of  all  the  ages  and  of  all  the  economies, 
we  on  whom  God  has  caused  to  shine  a  sun  in 
His  meridian  of  privilege — shall  we  anger  our 
God  airainst  us  by  our  selfish  indifference  to 
His  claims,  or  by  our  unfilial  withholding  of 
His  honour  ?  We  to  whom  He  has  given 
every  faculty  which  makes  us  capable  of  God, 
shall  we  withhold  from  Him  the  hearts  which 
He  asks  only  to  brighten  and  redeem  ?  We 
to  whom  He  has  allotted  a  day  so  clear  and  so 
brilliant,  shall  we  insult  Him  by  the  offer  of 
the  refuse  of  our  time  ?  We  who  are  gifted 
by  Him  alike  with  our  wealth  and  with  our 
power  to  amass  it,  shall  we  deal  out  our 
niggard  pittance  in  His  cause  like  the  coarse 
miser  churl  who  parts  with  coin  like  blood? 
Brethren,  I  summon  you,  with  all  possible 
solemnity,  to  answer  this  invocation.  If  there 
has  been  indifference  in  the  past,  let  our  peni- 
tence  mourn  it,  and  let  our  consecration  atone 
it,  to-day.  It  is  but  little  at  the  best  that  we 
can  offer  ;  our  collective  wealth  would  be 
absorbed  by  one  single  city's  needs.  Our 
influence,  even  at  its  widest,  is  contracted 
within  a  narrow  span.  The  shadows  gather 
swiftly  upon  the  noon  of  our  very  longest  day. 


We  are  feeble,  and  half  onr  time  must  be 
apent  in  sleep  that  we  may  recruit  our  strength. 
We  are  frail,  and  Death  standing  by  laughs  at 
our  arithmetic  when  we  calculate  on  future 
years.  We  receive  unfinished  labours  from 
our  fathers,  and  we  transmit  them  unfinished 
to  our  children.  Watchmen  in  the  night,  it 
is  not  given  to  us  to  tarry  until  the  morning. 
Guardians  of  the  battle-flag,  we  can  but  wave 
it  gallantly  for  awhile ;  but  we  know  full  well 
that  our  hands  will  stiffen,  and  that  our  com- 
rades will  bury  us  before  the  work  is  done. 
But  the  present  is  ours.  We  have  room  to 
work ;  we  have  light  to  work  in.  There  are 
ample  opportunities,  and  there  are  passionate 
needs,  and  there  are  strong  encouragements, 
and  there  are  faoilities  such  as  no  age  ever 
possessed,  for  honest  work  for  God.  Now  who, 
then,  is  willing  to  consecrate  his  service  this 
day  unto  the  Lord?  Give  Him  your  hearts,  dear 
brethren — ^your  costliest  and  most  acceptable 
offering.  The  sordid  and  the  worldly  may 
despise  your  choice,  but  there  awaits  you  on 
earth  God's  palpable  smile,  and  the  blessing 
of  those  that  are  ready  to  perish  ;  and  in 
heaven  the  angel's  welcome,  and  the  con- 
queror's palm,  and  the  King's  palace  as  the 
soul's  home,  and  the  King  Himself  in  His 
beauty  as  your  exceeding  great  reward  — IF. 
M,  Punskon,  LL,D, 

{d)  No  bricks  and  mortar  and  timber  can 
make  a  home.  No  marble,  however  fine  and 
polished,  can  make  a  home.  No  gold,  or  silver, 
or  tapestry,  or  painting,  can  make  a  home.  It 
is  that  which  makes  heaven  which  makes  a 
home  even  on  this  earth.  It  is  love  that  makes 
a  home.  To  love,  and  to  be  loved,  though  it  be 
in  the  peasant's  cot,  though  it  be  in  the  rudest 
barn  through  the  fissures  of  which  the  wind 
makes  music,  is  to  be  at  home  ;  and  often  you 
find  homes  in  the  rudest  dwellings,  and  none 
in  the  most  splendid  palaces.  But  where  love 
is  likely  to  be  disturbed — where  some  rude 
band  can  take  the  threads  that  love  is  ever 
spinning  and  tying  and  fastening,  and  cut 
them  and  sever  them,  the  home  feeling  must 
of  course  be  partial.  And  we  long  for  a  place 
and  a  state  where  those  whom  we  love  will 
never  be  taken  from  us,  and  where  we  shall 
know  that  we  shall  abide  eternally  in  the  pre- 
sence of  those  who  love  us.  **  We  seek  one  to 
come."  A  higher  and  a  settled  dwelling- 
place,  a  final  home,  a  permanent  state  of 
being. — Samuel  Mariin, 


CHAPTER  m. 

Cbitioi-L  and  Expla-Natort  Notkb.]  This  chapter  contains — 1,  The  rebuilding  of  the  altar 
(yers.  1-Za).  2.  The  renewal  of  the  sacrificial  worship  and  of  the  observance  of  the  religious 
festivals  (vers.  36-6a).  3.  The  preparations  for  rebuilding  the  Temple  (vers.  66,  7).  4.  The 
laying  of  the  foundation-stone  of  the  new  Temple,  the  religious  celebration  of  the  occasion,  and 
the  mingled  feelings  of  the  people  (vers.  8-13). 

Ver.  1.  The  seventh  month]  i.e.  of  the  year  in  which  they  arrived  at  Jerusalem.  The 
34 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA.  ohap.  m. 


Beventh  month  was  Tisri,  "the  month  of  the  full  streams,"  or  "floods,"  which  corresponded 
with  the  latter  part  of  our  September  and  the  greater  part  of  October.  (For  further  notes  of 
time,  see  notes  on  ver.  8).  As  one  man]  The  expression  does  not  signify  every  man ;  but, 
with  L'^reat  unanimity,  "as  if  inspired  by  one  will." 

Ver.  2.  As  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses]     (See  Lev.  xvii.  2-6  ;  Deut.  xii.  5-11). 

Ver.  3,  They  set  the  altar  upon  his  bases]  i.e.  they  built  it  in  its  former  position  and  on 
the  old  foundations.  For  fear  was  upon  them]  &c.  They  were  afraid  of  the  hostility  of  the 
neighbouring-  nations.  The  people  of  those  countries]  are  the  surrounding  peoples,  which 
are  mentioned  in  chap.  ix.  1.  Burnt  oflferings  morning  and  evening]  as  commanded  in  Exod. 
xxix.  38-42;  Num.  xxviii.  3-8. 

Ver.  4.  The  feast  of  Tabernacles,  as  it  is  written]  (See  Lev.  xxiii.  33-43).  And  offered 
the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  number,  according  to  the  custom,  as  the  duty  of  every  day 
required]  The  last  clause  is  in  the  margin  :  "The  matter  of  the  day  in  his  day."  Vulg.  : 
•'  Opus  dies  in  die  suo."  The  offerings  for  each  day  of  the  feast  of  Tabernacles  are  carefully 
prescribed  in  detail  in  Num.  xxix.  12-38.  "The  offerings  required  at  this  feast  were  the 
largest  of  all.  They  amounted  to  fourteen  rams,  ninety-eight  lambs,  and  no  less  than  seventy 
bullocks,  being  twice  as  many  lambs  and  four  times  as  many  bullocks  as  were  enjoined  for  the 
Passover.  The  feast  of  Tabernacles  was  especially  one  of  thankfulness  to  God  for  the  gifts  of 
the  fruit  of  the  earth,  and  the  quantity  and  nature  of  the  offerings  were  determined  accord- 
ingly."— Speaker' $  Com. 

Ver.  5.  After  the  feast  of  tabernacles  the  prescribed  order  of  sacrifices  was  regularly  observed, 
viz.  The  continual  burnt  offering]  i.e.  the  daily  morning  and  evening  sacrifice  (Num.  xxviii. 
3-8).  Both  of  the  new  moons]  Rather,  "And  (the  offerings)  of  the  new  moons"  (Num. 
xxviii.  11-15).  And  of  every  one  that  willingly  offered]  &c.  (Lev.  vii.  11-17;  Num.  xxix. 
39  ;  Deut.  xvi.  10,  16,  17). 

Ver.  6.  From  the  first  day  of  the  seventh'^month]  &c.  "The  altar  service,  with  the  daily 
morning  and  evening  sacrifice,  began  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  ;  this  daily 
sacrifice  was  regularly  offered,  according  to  the  law,  from  then  till  the  fifteenth  day  of  the 
seventh  month,  i.e.  till  the  beginning  of  the  feast  of  Tabernacles.  All  the  offerings  commanded 
in  the  law  for  the  separate  days  of  this  feast  were  then  offered  according  to  the  numbers 
prescribed  ;  and  after  this  festival  the  sacrifices  ordered  at  the  new  moon  and  other  holydays 
of  the  year  were  offered,  as  well  as  the  daily  burnt  offerings, — none  but  these,  neither  the 
sacrifice  on  the  new  moon  (the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month),  nor  the  sin-offering  on  the 
tenth  day  of  the  same  month,  i.e.  the  day  of  atonement,  having  been  offered  before  this  feast 
of  Tabernacles." — Keil.  This  interpretation  is,  however,  opposed  by  Schultz,  who  says  :  "It 
is  merely  said  (ver.  5)  that  after  the  sacrifices  of  the  feast  of  Tabernacles  the  usual  order  of 
ofierings  was  again  continued,  which  included  the  daily  offerings,  and  then  also  those  of  the 
new  moon  and  other  feasts." 

Ver.  7.  Meat  and  drink]  i.e.  corn  and  wine.  Xlnto  them  of  Zidon]  &c.  (Comp.  1  Chron. 
xxii.  4 ;  1  Kings  v.  6-18  ;  2  Chron.  ii.  3-18.)  According  to  the  grant]  &c.  This  probably 
refers  to  the  permission  to  rebuild  the  Temple,  which  would  involve  permission  to  negotiate 
with  the  Phoenicians  for  sucii  assistance  as  they  needed ;  for  we  do  not  read  anywhere  that 
Cyrus  made  them  a  grant  of  Phoenician  timber. 

Ver.  8.  Now  in  the  second  year  of  their  coming]  &c.  "  Whether  this  second  year  of  the 
return  coincides  with  the  second  year  of  the  rule  of  Cyrus"  (over  Babylon),  "so  that  the 
foundations  of  the  Temple  were  laid,  as  TheophU.  Antioch.  ad  AntoHc.y  lib.  3,  according  to 
Berosus,  relates,  in  the  second  year  of  Cyrus,  cannot  be  determined ;  for  nothing  more  is 
said  in  this  book  than  that  Cyrus,  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  issued  the  decree  concerning 
the  return  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon,  whereupon  those  named  in  the  list  (chap,  ii.)  set  out 
and  returned,  without  any  further  notice  as  to  whether  this  also  took  place  in  the  first  year  of 
Cyrus,  or  whether  the  many  necessary  preparations  delayed  the  departure  of  the  first  band  till 
the  following  year.  The  former  view  is  certainly  a  possible  though  not  a  probable  one,  since 
it  is  obvious  from  iii.  ],  that  they  arrived  at  Jerusalem  and  betook  themselves  to  their  cities  as 
early  as  the  seventh  month  of  the  year.  Now  the  period  between  the  beginning  of  the  year  and 
the  seventh  month,  i.e.  at  most  six  months,  seems  too  short  for  the  publication  of  ihe  edict,  the 
departure,  and  the  arrival  at  Jerusalem,  even  supposing  that  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  entirely 
coincided  with  a  year  of  the  Jewish  calendar.  The  second  view,  however,  would  not,  make  the 
difference  between  the  year  of  the  rule  of  Cyrus  and  the  year  of  the  return  to  Jerusalem  a 
great  one,  since  it  would  scarcely  amount  to  half  a  year." — Keil.  In  the  second  month]  i.e. 
Zif  (1  Kings  vi.  1),  "the  month  of  'blossom;'  or,  more  fully,  *the  bloom  of  flowers,*" 
corresponding  to  our  May.  Appointed  the  Levites  ...  to  set  forward  the  work]  i.e.  to 
preside  over  or  superintend  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple. 

Ver,  9.  Jeshua]  not  the  high  priest,  but  the  head  of  an  order  of  Levites  (chap.  ii.  40). 
Judah]  is  an  error  of  a  copyist.  It  should  be  Hodaviah,  as  in  the  margin,  and  chap.  ii.  40.  In 
Neh.  vii.  43,  it  is  written  Hodevah.  Together]  Margin:  "Heb.  as  one,"  i.e.  "all,  without 
exception."  The  sons  of  Henadadj  &c.  Keil  suggests,  as  an  explanation  of  the  striking  posi- 
tion of  the  record  of  "  the  sons  of  Henadad,"  "  that  the  two  classes  Jeshua  with  his  sons  and 
brethren,  and  Kadmiel  with  hia  sous,  were  more  closely  connected  with  each  other  than  with 

35 


CHAP.  m. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


the  sons  of  Henadad,  who  formed  a  third  class."    The  authority  of  the  elanse,  however,  ig 

doubtful. 

Ver.  10.  They  (Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua)  set  the  priests  in  their  apparel]  i.e.  in  their  robes 
of  office  (Exod.  xxviii.  40,  xxxix.  27-29,  41,  and  chap.  ii.  69).  With  trumpets]  (Num.  x.  8, 
xxxi.  6  ;  1  Chron.  xv.  24,  xvi.  6;  2  Chron.  v.  12).  After  the  ordinance]  Ac.  (1  Chron.  xv. 
16  ;  XXV.  1). 

Ver.  11.  And  they  sang  together  by  conrse]  Or,  "And  they  sang  antiphonally."  Fuerst 
gives  the  meaning  :  **to  sing  an  alternate  song,  or  in  alternate  choir  (1  Sam.  xviii.  7  ;  Ezra 
iii.  11),  .  .  .  but  always  to  sing  in  reply ,  not  to  sing  merely."  The  singing  was  responsive. 
One  clioir  sang,  "Give  thanks  unto  the  Lord,  for  He  is  good;"  and  the  other  responded, 
"  For  His  mercy  endureth  lor  ever."  Shouted  with  a  great  shout]  for  joy  that  the  foundation 
of  the  Temple  was  laid. 

Ver.  12.  But  many  of  the  priests  and  Levites]  &c.  "  Solomon's  Temple  was  destroyed  b.o. 
588,  and  the  foundation  of  the  subsequent  Temple  laid  B.C.  635  or  534  ;  hence  the  older  men 
among  those  present  at  the  latter  event  might  possibly  have  seen  the  former  house ;  indeed, 
some  (according  to  Hag.  ii.3)  were  still  living  in  the  second  year  of  Darius  Hystaspes,  who  had 
beheld  the  glory  of  the  earlier  building.  Upon  these  aged  men,  the  miserable  circumstances 
under  which  the  foundations  of  the  new  Temple  were  laid  produced  so  overwhelming  an 
impression,  that  they  broke  into  loud  weeping." — KeU, 


The  Rebuilding  of  the  Altar  :   Exemplary  Features  of  Divine 

Worship. 


(  Venei 

We  discover  here — 

I.  Unanimity  and  zeal  in  Divine 

worship. 

Notice : 

1.  The  evidences  of  unanimity  in  wor- 
ship. '*  The  people  gathered  themselves 
together  as  one  man  to  Jerusalem.  Then 
stood  up  Jeshua,"  &c.  The  movement 
seems  to  have  been  a  spontaneous  one 
on  the  part  of  the  people.  They  were 
not  summoned  to  Jerusalem  either  by 
Zerubbabel  the  prince  or  by  Jeshua  the 
high  priest,  but  went  there  of  their  own 
accord,  urged  by  the  religious  impulses 
of  their  own  souls.  And  they  assembled 
"as  one  man,"  i.e.  as  with  one  heart 
and  will.  And  the  authorities  were  not 
tardy  in  taking  up  the  matter  and  lead- 
ing it  onward.  "Then  stood  up  Jeshua 
the  son  of  Jozadak,"  &c.  Jeshua  with 
the  priests,  and  Zerubbabel  with  the 
princes,  entered  heartily  into  the  move- 
ment. Priests  and  Levites,  prince  and 
people,  high  and  low,  cordially  united 
in  the  prejtaiation  for  the  restoration  of 
their  national  worship. 

2.  The  evidences  of  zeal  in  worship. 
This  great  gathering  at  Jerusalem  took 
place  "  when  the  seventh  month  was 
come,  and  the  children  of  Israel  were 
in  the  cities."  They  had  only  recently 
returned  from  Babylon  ;  their  country 
was  to  a  great  extent  desolate,  and  would 

"d  much   cleansing  and  cultivation ; 
36 


1-3.) 

their  houses  would  need  renovation,  or 
new  ones  would  have  to  be  built  by 
them ;  many  private  interests  urgently 
claimed  their  attention ;  but  all  these 
were  freely  and  resolutely  set  aside  until 
they  had  rebuilt  the  altar  of  Jehovah, 
and  restored  His  worship,  and  made 
ready  to  celebrate  the  sacred  festivals  of 
this  seventh  month.  Such  unanimity 
and  zeal  for  the  worship  of  God  are 
worthy  of  imitation  by  both  individuals 
and  communities  in  this  age. 

IL  Sacrifice  in  Divine  worship. 
"And  builded  the  altar  of  the  God  of 
Israel,  to  offer  burnt  offerings  thereon." 
The  altar  and  the  burnt  offerings  sug- 
gest— 

1.  MavbS  need  of  atonement  with  God, 
The  consciousness  of  guilt,  and  the  de- 
sire to  propitiate  God,  or  the  craving  of 
the  heart  for  fellowship  with  Him,  are 
the  experiences  which  give  rise  to  sacri- 
ficial offerings.  The  altar  is  an  answer 
to  the  deep  cry  of  man,  "  Wherewith 
shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow 
myself  before  the  high  God  ? "  Burnt 
offerings  were  intended,  in  some  cases  at 
least,  to  express  the  idea  of  expiation, 
as  well  as  that  of  self  -  consecration  ; 
hence  they  are  said  "  to  make  atonement 
for  him  "  who  offered  them  (Lev.  i.  4  ; 
xiv.  20,  31).  The  tendency  of  sin  is  to 
estrange  man  from  God ;  the  tendency 
of  the  love  of  God  in  the  sacrifice  of 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CBAP.  III. 


Jesus  Christ  is  to  destroy  the  power  of 
sin  in  man,  and  to  bind  him  to  God  in 
loving  loyalty.  We  do  not  now  need 
the  altar  and  the  expiatory  victim  ;  but 
we  do  need  the  Cross  and  the  influence 
of  the  great  Sacrifice,  which  once  for  all 
was  offered  thereon  to  put  away  sin.  (a). 

2.  Mans  duty  of  self-consecration  to 
God.  The  chief  significance  of  the  burnt 
offering  was  that  it  expressed  the  self- 
consecration  of  the  offerer  to  God. 
Without  this,  such  off'erings  were  worth- 
less in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  The  moral 
or  spiritual  element  was  the  essential 
thing  in  all  the  sacrifices.  Without 
penitence  the  sin  offering  was  offensive 
to  God.  Without  gratitude  the  peace 
or  thank  offerings  were  rejected  by  Him. 
And  without  the  self-dedication  of  the 
worshipper  the  burnt  offerings  were  an 
abomination  unto  Him  (comp.  Ps.  1. 
8-15;  Isa.  i.  11-15).  Our  richest  gifts 
are  accepted  by  God  only  as  they  ex- 
press our  self-devotion  to  Him.  '*  And 
He  died  for  all,  that  they  which  live 
should  not  henceforth  live  unto  them- 
selves, but  unto  Him  which  died  for 
them,  and  rose  again."  (6). 

III.  Respect  for  precedent  in  Divine 
worship.  This  was  manifested  by  the 
Jews  at  this  time  in  two  particulars — 
(1.)  In  assembling  at  the  old  place. 
"  The  people  gathered  themselves  to- 
gether as  one  man  to  Jerusalem.**  They 
congregated  at  the  place  where  the 
Temple  had  once  stood,  and  where  their 
fathers  were  wont  to  worship.  (2.)  In 
erecting  the  altar  upon  the  old  founda- 
tion, and  thus,  as  it  were,  associating 
it  with  its  distinguished  predecessor. 
There  is  much  that  is  commendable  in 
the  feelings  which  led  them  to  act  thus. 
It  is  well  to  be  willing  to  adopt  changes 
in  our  modes  and  accessories  of  worship, 
when  really  enlightened  judgment,  and 
cultured  taste,  and  sincere  religious  feel- 
ing unite  in  recommending  them.  It  is 
also  well  to  cling  tenaciously  to  what  is 
suitable  and  seemly  in  existing  methods 
and  arrangements  of  religious  worship. 
The  site  of  the  former  Temple  and  the 
bases  of  the  ancient  altar  possessed  for 
the  Jews  a  sanctity  and  an  inspiration 
to  which  no  other  spots  in  this  wide 
world  could  lay  claim.  There  are  memories 


and  associations  clinging  around  certain 
ancient  forms  and  places  hallowed  by 
holy  uses  which  greatly  stimulate  and 
enrich  the  worship  of  the  devout  heart. 

IV.  Conformity  to  Scripture  in 
Divine  worship.  In  building  the  altar 
and  in  offering  their  sacrifices,  the  Jews 
did  *'  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses 
the  man  of  God.'*  We  must  take  heed 
that  in  our  worship,  whether  clinging 
to  precedent,  or  accepting  suggestions  of 
change,  we  do  not  depart  from  the  prin- 
ciples and  spirit  of  worship,  as  revealed 
in  or  fairly  deduced  from  the  holy  Book. 
There  are  certain  directions  which  are 
unmistakable  and  imperative  :  e.g.,  "God 
is  a  Spirit ;  and  they  thart  worship  Him 
must  worship  Him  in  spirit  and  in 
truth.**  "  To  this  man  will  I  look,  even 
to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite 
spirit,**  &c. 

V.  Feax  of  enemies  in  Divine  wor- 
ship. "  Fear  was  upon  them  because 
of  the  people  of  those  countries.** 

1.  The  fear  of  enemies  should  not 
intimidate  us  from  the  worship  of  God. 
The  Jews  built  the  altar  notwithstand- 
ing their  dread  of  their  enemies.  The 
history  of  religious  persecutions  supplies 
many  splendid  examples  of  perseverance 
in  worship  despite  the  threats  and  cruel- 
ties of  foes.  (c). 

2.  The  fear  of  enemies  should  impel 
us  to  worship  God.  The  Jews  were  the 
more  eager  to  build  the  altar  because  of 
the  hostility  of  neighbouring  peoples. 
The  opposition  of  man  led  them  the 
more  earnestly  to  seek  the  protection  of 
God.  They  were  not  in  a  position  to 
join  battle  with  their  enemies,  if  they 
had  been  attacked  by  them ;  but  in 
placing  themselves  under  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  Lord  God  they  did  that 
which  was  far  wiser  and  better.  The 
persecutions  of  men  should  cause  us  to 
be  more  earnest  in  prayer  to  God. 

VI.  Regularity  in  Divine  worship. 
"And  they  offered  burnt  offerings  thereon 
unto  the  Lord,  even  burnt  offerings  morn- 
ing and  evening.*'  The  offering  of  the 
daily  sacrifice  suggests — 

1.  Our  daily  need  of  atonement  with 
God.  There  are  daily  temptations,  omis- 
sions, and  transgressions,  which  tend  to 
alienate  the  heart  from  God  ;  hence  we 

37 


OH  AT.  in* 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


need  daily  to  realise  the  reconciling  in- 
fluences of  the  Cross  of  Obrist.  (rf). 

2.  Our  daily  need  of  renewed  conse- 
cration. Every  morning  we  require  a 
renewal  of  our  purpose  and  endeavour 
to  live  to  God.  The  reception  of  new 
mercies  also  summons  us  to  fresh  dedi- 
cation of  ourselves  to  the  bounteous 
Giver  of  all  our  mercies. 

3.  Our  daily  need  of  renewed  blessings. 
Forgiveness  and  grace,  guidance  and 
guardianship,  are  blessings  which  we 
need  every  day,  therefore  we  should 
seek  them  in  prayer ;  they  are,  more- 
over, blessings  which  we  receive  every 
day,  therefore  we  should  acknowledge 
them  in  praise  to  God. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  I  do  not  think  any  one  ever  knows  the 
preciousness  of  the  blood  of  Christ  till  he  has 
had  a  full  sight  and  sense  of  his  sin,  his  un- 
cleanliness,  and  his  ill-desert.  Is  there  any 
such  thing  as  really  and  truly  coming  to  the 
cross  of  Christ  until  you  first  of  all  have  seen 
what  your  sin  really  deserves?  A  little  light 
into  that  dark  cellar,  sir ;  a  little  light  into 
that  hole  within  the  soul ;  a  little  light  cast 
into  that  infernal  den  of  your  humanity,  and 
you  would  soon  discern  what  sin  is,  and, 
seeing  it,  you  would  discover  that  there  was 
no  hope  of  being  washed  from  it,  except  by 
a  sacrifice  far  greater  than  you  could  ever 
render.  Then  the  atonement  of  Christ  would 
become  fair  and  lustrous  in  your  eyes,  and  you 
would  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  in  that 
boundless  love  which  led  the  Saviour  to  give 
Himself  a  ransom,  tiie  Just  for  the  unjust,  that 
He  might  bring  us  to  God,  May  the  Lord 
teach  us,  thundering  at  us,  if  need  be,  what 
sin  means.  May  He  teach  it  to  us  so  that  the 
lesson  shall  be  burned  into  our  souls,  and  we 
shall  never  forget  it.  I  could  fain  wish  that 
you  were  all  burden-carriers  till  you  grew 
weary.  I  could  fain  wish  that  you  all  laboured 
after  eternal  life  until  your  strength  failed, 
and  that  you  might  then  rejoice  in  Him  who 
has  finished  the  work,  and  who  promises  to 
be  to  you  all  in  all  when  you  believe  in  Him 
and  trust  in  Him  with  your  whole  heart. — C, 
H.  Spurgeon. 

{h)  It  is  not  the  greatness  of  Christ's  Bufi*er- 
ings  on  the  cross  which  is  to  move  our  whole 
souls,  but  the  greatness  of  the  spirit  with  which 
He  suffered.  There,  in  death.  He  proved  His 
entire  consecration  of  Himself  to  the  cause 
of  God  and  mankind.  There,  His  love  flowed 
forth  towards  His  friends,  His  enemies,  and 
the  human  race.  It  is  moral  greatness,  it  is 
victorious  love,  it  is  the  energy  of  principle, 
which  gives  such  interest  to  the  cross  of  Christ. 
We  are  to  look  through  the  darkness  which 

38 


hung  over  Him,  through  His  wounds  and 
pains,  to  His  unbroken,  disinterested,  con- 
fiding spirit.  To  approach  the  cross  for  the 
purpose  of  weeping  over  a  bleeding,  dying 
Friend,  is  to  lose  the  chief  influence  of  the 
crucifixion.  We  are  to  visit  the  cross,  not  to 
indulge  a  natural  softness,  but  to  acquire  firm- 
ness of  spirit,  to  fortify  our  minds  for  hard- 
ship and  suffering  in  the  cause  of  duty  and 
of  human  happiness.  To  live  as  Christ  lived, 
to  die  as  Christ  died,  to  give  up  ourselves  as 
sacrifices  to  God,  to  conscience,  to  whatever 
good  interest  we  can  advance — these  are  the 
lessons  written  with  the  blood  of  Jesus.  His 
cross  is  to  inspire  us  with  a  calm  courage, 
resolution,  and  superiority  to  all  temptation. 
—  W.  E.  Charming,  D.D. 

Mercy,  love,  is  more  acceptable  worship  to 
God,  than  all  sacrifices  or  outward  offerings. 
The  most  celestial  worship  ever  paid  on  earth 
was  rendered  by  Christ,  when  He  approached 
man,  and  the  most  sinful  man,  as  a  child  of 
God,  when  He  toiled  and  bled  to  awaken  what 
was  Divine  in  the  human  soul,  to  regenerate  a 
fallen  world.  Be  such  the  worship  which  you 
shall  carry  from  this  place.  Go  forth  to  do 
good  with  every  power  which  God  bestows,  to 
make  every  place  you  enter  happier  by  your 
presence,  to  espouse  all  human  interests,  to 
throw  your  whole  weight  into  the  scale  of 
human  freedom  and  improvement,  to  with- 
stand all  wrong,  to  uphold  all  right,  and 
especially  to  give  light,  life,  strength  to  the 
immortal  soul.  He  who  rears  up  one  child  in 
Christian  virtue,  or  recovers  one  fellow-crea- 
ture to  God,  builds  a  temple  more  precious 
than  Solomon's  or  St.  Peter's,  more  enduring 
than  earth  or  heaven. — Ibid. 

(c)  Lord  Macaulay,  writing  of  the  perse- 
cutions of  the  Protestant  dissenters  in  the 
reign  of  James  II.,  says  : — The  number  of  the 
rebels  whom  Jeffreys  banged  on  this  (the 
Western)  circuit  was  three  hundred  and  twenty. 
Such  havoc  must  have  excited  disgust  even  if 
the  sufferers  had  been  generally  odious.  But 
they  were,  for  the  most  part,  men  of  blame- 
less life,  and  of  high  religions  profession. 
They  were  regarded  by  themselves,  and  by  a 
large  proportion  of  their  neighbours,  not  as 
wrong-doers,  but  as  martyrs  who  sealed  with 
blood  the  truth  of  the  Protestant  religion. 
Very  few  of  the  convicts  professed  any  repen- 
tance for  what  they  had  done.  Many,  ani- 
mated by  the  old  Puritan  spirit,  met  death, 
not  merely  with  fortitude,  but  with  exultation. 
It  was  in  vain  that  the  ministers  of  the  Esta- 
blished Church  lectured  them  on  the  guilt  of 
rebellion  and  on  the  im{)ortance  of  priestly 
absolution.  The  claim  of  the  king  to  un- 
bounded authority  in  things  temporal,  and 
the  claim  of  the  clergy  to  the  spiritual  power 
of  binding  and  loosing,  moved  the  bitter  scorn 
of  the  intrepid  sectaries.  Some  of  them  com- 
posed hymns  in  the  dungeon,  and  chanted 
them  on  the  fatal  sledge.  Christ,  they  sang 
while  they  were  undressing  for  the  butchery, 
would  soon  come  to  rescue  Zion  and  to  mako 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  m. 


war  on  Babylon,  would  set  up  His  standard, 
would  blow  His  trumpet,  and  would  requite 
His  foes  tenfold  for  all  the  evil  which  had 
been  inflicted  on  His  servants.  The  dying 
words  of  these  men  were  noted  down  ;  their 
farewell  letters  were  kept  as  treasures  ;  and 
in  this  way,  with  the  help  of  some  invention 
and  exaggeration,  was  formed  a  copious  sup- 
plement to  the  Marian  Martyrology. 

Never,  not  even  under  the  tyranny  of  Laud, 
had  the  condition  of  the  Puritans  been  so  de- 
plorable as  at  that  time  (autumn  1685).  Never 
had  spies  been  so  actively  employed  in  detect- 
ing congregations.  Never  had  magistrates, 
grand  jurors,  rectors,  and  churchwardens  been 
so  much  on  the  alert.  Many  dissenters  were 
cited  before  the  ecclesiastical  courts.  Others 
found  it  necessary  to  purchase  the  connivance 
of  the  agents  of  the  government  by  presents 
of  hogsheads  of  wine  and  of  gloves  stuffed 
with  guineas.  It  was  impossible  for  the 
separatists  to  pray  together  without  precau- 
tions, such  as  are  employed  by  coiners  and 
receivers  of  stolen  goods.  The  places  of  meet- 
ing were  frequently  changed.  Worship  was 
performed  sometimes  just  before  break  of  day 
and  sometimes  at  dead  of  night.  Round  the 
building  where  the  little  flock  was  gathered 
sentinels  were  posted  to  give  the  alarm  if  a 
stranger  drew  near.  The  minister  in  disguise 
was  introduced  through  the  garden  and  the 
back  yard.  In  some  houses  there  were  trap 
doors  through  which,  in  case  of  danger,  he 
might  descend.  Where  Nonconformists  lived 
next  door  to  each  other,  the  walls  were  often 
broken  open,  and  secret  passages  were  made 
from  dwelling  to  dwelling.  No  psalm  was 
sung;  and  many  contrivances  were  used  to 
prevent  the  voice  of  the  preacher,  in  his  mo- 
ments of  fervour,  from  being  heard  beyond 


the  walls.  .  .  .  Dissenting  ministers,  howevei 
blameless  in  life,  however  eminent  for  learning 
and  abilities,  could  not  venture  to  walk  the 
streets  for  fear  of  outrages,  which  were  not 
only  not  repressed,  but  encouraged,  by  those 
whose  duty  it  was  to  preserve  the  peace.  Some 
divines  of  great  fame  were  in  prison.  Among 
these  was  Richard  Baxter.  Others,  who  had, 
during  a  quarter  of  a  century,  borne  up  against 
oppression,  now  lost  heart,  and  quitted  the 
kingdom.  Among  these  was  John  Howe. — 
UisUrry  of  England^  chap.  v. 

(c{)  Is  it  not  said  in  Scripture,  "  If  any  man 
sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  "  ?  Why  is  Christ  an 
advocate  to-day  f  Only  because  we  want  an 
advocate  every  day.  Does  He  not  constantly 
intercede  yonder  before  the  eternal  throne? 
Why  does  He  do  that  ?  Because  we  want 
daily  intercession.  And  it  is  because  we  are 
constantly  sinning  that  He  is  constantly  an 
advocate — constantly  an  intercessor.  He  Him- 
self has  beautifully  set  forth  this  in  the  case 
of  Peter  :  after  supper  the  Lord  took  a  towel 
and  girded  Himself,  and  then,  taking  His  basin 
and  His  ewer,  He  went  to  Peter,  and  Peter  said, 
"  Thou  shalt  never  wash  my  feet."  But  Jesus 
told  him,  "If  I  wash  thee  not,  thou  hast  no 
part  in  Me."  He  had  been  washed  once;  Peter 
was  free  from  sin  in  the  high  sense  of  justifi- 
cation, but  he  needs  the  washing  of  purifica- 
tion. When  Peter  said,  "  Lord,  wash  not  my 
feet  only,  but  also  my  head  and  my  hands," 
then  Jesus  replied,  **  He  that  is  washed  " — 
that  is,  he  who  is  pardoned — "needeth  not 
save  to  wash  his  feet,  for  he  is  clean  every 
whit."  The /eci  want  constant  washing.  The 
daily  defilement  of  our  daily  walk  through  an 
ungodly  world  brings  upon  us  the  daily  necessity 
of  being  cleansed  from  fresh  sin,  and  that  the 
mighty  Master  supplies  to  us. — 0»H»  Spurgeon, 


The  Celebration  of  the  Sacred  Festivals  Resumed. 

(Verses  4-6  a.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  the  record  of 
the  observance  of  the  religious  feasts  of 
the  nation.  "  The  continual  burnt  oflfer- 
ing,"  which  we  noticed  in  our  exposition 
of  the  preceding  section,  is  again  men- 
tioned. The  feast  of  Tabernacles,  the 
observance  of  the  new  moons,  and  the 
presentation  of  freewill  offerings,  are 
also  distinctly  mentioned.  To  these, 
therefore,  let  us  direct  our  attention. 
They  present  to  us  the  following  homi- 
letic  topics  : — 

I.  The  commemoration  in  Divine 
worship  of  national  experiences  and 
blessings.  Such  was  the  feast  of  Taber- 
nacles. 

1    It  was  a  memoricU  of  the  emanci- 


pation of  Israel  from  Egypt,  ieaehing  u% 
that  we  should  cherish  the  memory  offer- 
mer  mercies.     (See  Lev.  xxiii.  43.) 

2.  It  was  a  memorial  of  their  life  in 
the  wilderness,  reminding  us  that  our 
present  condition  is  that  of  strangers  and 
pilgrims,  (See  Lev.  xxiii.  40^3  j  Heb. 
xiii  14.) 

3.  It  was  a  thanksgiving  for  rest  and 
a  settled  abode  in  the  premised  land,  sug- 
gesting the  certainty  and  blessedness  of 
the  rest  which  remains  for  the  people  of 
God,  (Comp.  Lev.  xxiii.  40  with  Rev. 
vii.  9.) 

4.  It  was  a  thanksgiving  for  the  com- 
pleted harvest,  teaching  us  to  receive  the 
precious  fruits  of  the  earth  as  the  kind 

39 


oBAP.  m. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


gifts  of  a  hountiful  Providence.  (See 
Exod.  xxiii.  166;  Lev.  xxiii.  39  ;  Deut. 
xvi.  13-15.*)  But  this  festival  was 
specially  appropriate  and  significant  at 
this  time.  **  It  was,"  as  Schultz  re- 
marks, "because  of  the  season  of  the 
year  in  which  the  congregation  had  ar- 
rived in  Canaan  that  the  first  feast 
which  they  could  again  celebrate  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  law  was  the  feast  of 
Tabernacles.  At  the  same  time,  however, 
we  may  see  therein  a  special  providence 
of  God,  which  was  at  once  lovely  and 
significant  to  the  congregation.  The 
booths  adorned  with  foliage  and  fruits 
had  previously  represented  as  well  the 
gracious  help  in  the  times  of  the  wilder- 
ness, as  also  the  gracious  blessings  of 
harvest  in  the  present;  corresponding 
with  this,  the  booths  now  gained  of 
themselves  a  reference,  on  the  one  side, 
to  the  exhibition  of  grace  during  the 
new  prolonged  wilderness-time  of  the 
exile  which  had  entered  with  so  much 
gloom  into  the  midst  of  the  history  of 
Israel ;  so  to  speak  to  the  booths  of  pro- 
tection and  defiance  which  had  arisen 
for  the  people,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord, 
even  in  the  heathen  world ;  and,  on  the 
other  side,  to  the  new  regaining  of 
Canaan,  which,  to  a  certain  extent,  was 
a  security  and  a  pledge  of  all  the  further 
blessings  in  store  for  them  in  this  land. 
They  expressed  the  thanks  which  they 
owed  to  the  Lord  for  both  of  these 
blessings  in  an  especially  lively  and  in- 
ternal manner.  This  feast  of  tabernacles 
was  a  festal  and  joyous  conclusion  of  all 
the  preservations,  consolations,  and  bless- 
ings that  were  behind  them,  connected 
with  a  joyous  glance  into  the  future ;  it 
was  an  evidence  that  a  height  had  been 
reached  upon  which  finally  even  the 
last  height  might  be  attained,  an  indica- 
tion that  some  day,  after  all  their  strug- 
gles and  all  their  labours,  a  still  more 
glorious  feast  of  Tabernacles,  the  Messi- 
anic, the  eternal  and  truly  blessed  one, 
would  come.  (Comp.  Zech.  xiv.)"  The 
text  distinctly  mentions  one  feature  of 
this  celebration  of  the  feast,  viz.,  the 
fidelity  with  which  the  original  direc- 

*  For  remarks  and  illustrations  on  these 
points  see  The  Preachers  Commentary  on  Num- 
bers, pp.  529,  530. 

40 


tions  for  its  observance  were  carried  out : 
**  They  kept  also  the  feast  of  Tabernacles 
as  it  is  written,  and  offered  the  daily 
burnt  offerings  by  number,"  <fec.  The 
directions  are  given  in  Num.  xxix.  13- 
39.  (See  The  Preacher^s  Commentary  on 
Numbers,  p.  628.)  For  a  people  in  their 
straitened  circumstances  the  offerings 
required  were  very  numerous ;  but  they 
were  fully  and  cheerfully  provided  by 
them.  If  their  means  were  small,  their 
zeal  was  great,  (a). 

II.  The  celebration  in  religious  wor- 
ship of  the  natural  divisions  of  time. 
"And  of  the  new  moons,"  They  pre- 
sented the  offerings  appropriate  to  those 
occasions.  "  The  first  day  of  the  lunar 
month  was  observed  as  a  holyday.  In 
addition  to  the  daily  sacrifice  there  were 
offered  two  young  bullocks,  a  ram,  and 
seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  as  a  burnt 
offering,  with  the  proper  meat  offerings 
and  drink  offerings,  and  a  kid  as  a  sin 
offering  (Num.  xxviii.  11-15).  It  was 
not  a  day  of  holy  convocation,  and  was 
not  therefore  of  the  same  dignity  as  the 
Sabbath.  But,  as  on  the  Sabbath,  trade 
and  handicraft  work  were  stopped  (Amos 
viii.  5),  the  Temple  was  opened  for  pub- 
lic worship  (Ezek.  xlvi.  3 ;  Isa.  Ixvi. 
23),  and,  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel  at 
least,  the  people  seem  to  have  resorted 
to  the  prophets  for  religious  instruction 
(2  Kings  iv.  23).  The  trumpets  were 
blown  at  the  offering  of  the  special  sac- 
rifices for  the  day,  as  on  the  solemn 
festivals  (Num.  x.  10;  Ps.  Ixxxl  3). 
.  .  .  The  seventh  new  moon  of  the  re- 
ligious year,  being  that  of  Tisri,  com- 
menced the  civil  year,  and  had  a  signifi- 
cance and  rites  of  its  own.  It  was  a 
day  of  holy  convocation  *'  (Num.  xxix. 
1-6).  What  was  the  design  of  this  re- 
ligious celebration  of  "the  beginnings 
of  their  months  "  1 

We  suggest : 

1.  2^0  impress  them  with  the  value  of 
time.  Its  irrevocableness  should  suggest 
its  invaluableness.  The  religious  ob- 
servance of  the  new  moons  was  calcu- 
lated to  emphasise  the  facts  that  one 
month  more  had  passed  away  for  ever, 
with  all  its  possibilitiei  and  opportuni- 
ties, and  that  another  had  commenced 
its  course,  and  its  opportunities  must  be 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


QTux,  m. 


promptly  seieed  and  diligently  employed 
ere  they  also  departed,  (h), 

2  To  assist  them  to  form  a  correct 
estimate  of  their  life  upon  earth.  "  All 
men  tliink  all  men  mortal  but  them- 
selves." Man  needs  frequent  and  for- 
cible reminders  of  the  swift  flight  of 
time,  and  of  the  brevity  of  his  life  upon 
earth.  "  So  teach  us  to  number  our 
days,  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto 
wisdom."  The  religious  observance  of 
the  natural  divisions  of  time  may  be 
regarded  as  an  answer  to  this  request, 
inasmuch  as  it  helps  to  impart  and  to 
impress  the  lesson  desired,  (c). 

3.  To  arouse  them  to  make  a  wise  use 
of  the  time  which  remained  to  them.  As 
we  realise  the  fact  that  one  month  of 
our  allotted  time  upon  earth  quickly  fol- 
lows another  into  the  everlasting  past, 
we  should  also  realise  with  imperial  force 
the  solemn  conviction,  "I  must  work 
the  works  of  Him  that  sent  Me  while  it 
is  day,  the  night  cometh  when  no  man 
can  work."  "  Whatsoever  thy  hand 
findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might,"  <fec. 

III.  The  presentation  in  Divine  wor- 
ship of  personal  voluntary  offerings. 
"  And  of  every  one  that  willingly  offered 
a  freewill  offering  unto  the  Lord."  These 
offerings  were  in  addition  to  those  re- 
quired by  the  law,  and  were  purely 
spontaneous  on  the  part  of  the  wor- 
shipper. The  law  required  much,  but 
in  their  zeal  the  returned  exiles  gave 
more.  And  in  Christianity  there  is 
ample  room  for  the  expression  of  the 
grateful  and  reverent  emotions  of  the 
soul.  "  Every  man  according  as  he  pur- 
poseth  in  his  heart ;  not  grudgingly,  or 
of  necessity  ;  for  God  loveth  a  cheerful 
giver."  "In  all  thy  gifts,"  says  the  Son 
of  Sirach,  "  show  a  cheerful  countenance, 
and  dedicate  thy  tithes  with  gladness. 
Give  unto  the  Most  High  according  as 
He  hath  enriched  thee;  and  as  thou  hast 
gotten  give  with  a  cheerful  eye.  For 
the  Lord  recompenseth,  and  will  give 
thee  seven  times  as  much."  (d) 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  end  of  the  festival  days  among  the 
Jews  was  to  revive  the  memory  of  those  signal 
acts  wherein  His  power  for  them,  and  His 
l^oodnesB  to  them,   had  been  extraordinarily 


evident ;  it  is  no  more  bnt  our  mouths  to 
praise  Him,  and  our  hand  to  obey  Him,  that 
He  exacts  at  our  hands.  He  commands  us 
not  to  expend  what  He  allows  us  in  the  erect- 
ing stately  temples  to  His  honour;  all  the  coin 
He  requires  to  be  paid  with  for  His  expense  is 
the  "offering  of  thanksgiving"  (Ps.  I.  H);  and 
this  we  ought  to  do  as  much  as  we  can,  since 
we  cannot  do  it  as  much  as  He  merits,  for 
"who  can  show  forth  all  His  praise?"  (Ps. 
cvi.  2).  If  we  have  the  fruit  of  His  goodness, 
it  is  fit  He  should  have  "the  fruit  of  our  lips" 
(Heb.  xiii.  15) ;  the  least  kindness  should  in- 
flame our  souls  with  a  kindly  resentment. 
Though  some  of  His  benefits  have  a  brighter, 
some  a  darker,  aspect  towards  us,  yet  they  all 
come  from  this  common  spring;  His  goodness 
shines  in  all  ;  there  are  the  footsteps  of  good- 
ness in  the  least,  as  well  as  the  smiles  of  good- 
ness in  the  greatest ;  the  meanest  therefore  is 
not  to  pass  without  a  regard  of  the  Author. 
As  the  glory  of  God  is  more  illustrious  in  some 
creatures  than  in  others,  yet  it  glitters  in  all, 
and  the  lowest  as  well  as  the  highest  adminis- 
ters matter  of  praise  ;  but  they  are  not  only 
little  things,  but  the  choicer  favours  He  hath 
bestowed  upon  us.  How  much  doth  it  deserve 
our  acknowledgment,  that  He  should  contrive 
our  recovery,  when  we  had  plotted  our  ruin  I 
that  when  He  did  from  eternity  behold  the 
crimes  wherewith  w«  would  incense  Him,  He 
should  not,  according  to  the  rights  of  justice, 
cast  us  into  hell,  but  prize  us  at  the  rate  of  the 
blood  and  life  of  His  only  Son,  in  value  above 
the  blood  of  men  and  lives  of  angels !  How 
should  we  bless  that  God,  that  we  have  yet  a 
Gospel  among  us,  that  we  are  not  driven  into 
the  utmost  regions,  that  we  can  attend  upon 
Him  in  the  face  of  the  sun,  and  not  forced  to 
the  secret  obscurities  of  the  night  1  Whatso- 
ever we  enjoy,  whatsoever  we  receive,  we  must 
own  Him  as  the  Donor,  and  read  His  hand  in 
it. — S.  ChamocJce,  B.  D. 

{h)  Suppose  that  God  had  so  cast  the  arrange- 
ments of  our  system  as  never  to  give  notice,  at 
all,  of  the  passage  of  time,  by  the  distinction 
of  days,  seasons,  and  years.  In  that  case,  we 
should  all  be  living  on  together,  but  how  fast 
or  how  slow  we  could  scarcely  guess.  One 
year  of  men's  childhood  seems  as  long  to 
them,  they  say,  as  two,  or  perhaps  even  ten 
years,  later  in  life.  This  shows  you  how  they 
would  mistake  if  there  were  no  measure  of 
time  save  that  of  their  inward  judgment.  They 
would  never  realise  how  fast  they  are  living. 
They  would  take  the  period  equal  to  ten  years, 
in  the  later  portion  of  life,  to  be  the  same 
period  which  constituted  only  its  tenth  part  in 
their  childhood  ;  and  so,  when  drawing  on  to- 
wards the  close  of  their  days, — the  very  time 
when  they  ought  most  of  all  to  be  awake  to 
the  shortness  of  their  stay, — then  would  they 
be,  most  of  all,  insensible  to  the  flight  of  time, 
and  the  swift  approach  of  eternity. 

Observe,  then,  the  faithfulness  of  God.  He 
has  made  the  very  universe  to  be  the  clock  of 
the  universe,  and  admonish  every  mortal  heart 

41 


OBAP.  m. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


of  the  snre  and  constant  passage  of  time.  We 
are  not  left  to  our  inward  judgments.  Time 
has  its  measures  without,  in  the  most  palpable 
and  impressive  visitations  of  the  senses.  Every 
twilight  tells  us  that  a  day  is  gone,  and  that 
by  a  sign  as  impressive  as  the  blotting  out  of 
the  sun  !  it  is  as  if  we  had  a  clock,  so  adjusted 
as  to  give  notice  of  the  hour,  by  displacing,  at 
a  stroke,  the  light  of  heaven,  suspending  the 
labours  of  the  world,  quenching  the  fevers  of 
its  earthly  schemes  and  passions,  and  diffusing 
an  opiate  spell  of  oblivion  over  all  human  con- 
sciousness. The  impalpable  odours  of  spring 
penetrate  our  secret  sense  as  monitors  of  time. 
The  summer  heat  is  the  heat  of  time,  the 
winter's  cold  is  the  cold  of  time — both  forcing 
their  way  into  our  experience  by  a  visitation 
that  we  cannot  resist.  One  season  tells  us 
that  another  is  gone  ;  and,  when  the  whole 
circle  of  seasons  is  completed  and  returned 
into  itself,  the  new  year  tells  us  that  the  old  is 
gone.  And  a  certain  number  of  these  years, 
we  know,  is  the  utmost  bound  of  life.  How 
sure  is  the  reckoning  1  It  is  even  compulsory 
— none  can  escape  it. — H.  Bushndlf  D.D. 

(c)  A  thousand  years  is  a  long  time,  but  how 
soon  it  flies  I  One  almost  seems,  in  reading 
English  history,  to  go  back  and  shake  hands 
with  William  the  Conqueror;  a  few  lives  bring 
us  even  to  the  flood.  You  who  are  getting  on 
to  be  forty  years  old,  and  especially  you  who 
are  sixty  or  seventy,  must  feel  how  fast  time 
flies.  I  only  seem  to  preach  a  sermon  one 
Sunday  in  time  to  get  ready  for  the  next. 
Time  flies  with  such  a  whirl  that  no  express 
train  can  overtake  it,  and  even  the  lightning 
flash  seems  to  lag  behind  it.  We  shall  soon 
be  at  the  great  white  throne  ;  we  shall  soon  be 
at  the  judgment  bar  of  God.  Oh  !  let  us  make 
ready  for  it.  Let  us  not  live  so  much  in  this 
present,  which  is  but  a  dream,  an  empty  show, 
but  let  us  live  in  the  real,  substantial  future. — 
C,  H.  Spurgeon, 

{d)  Who,  with  the  Word  of  God  in  hit  hand. 


bnt  must  feel  that  an  era  of  enlarged  Christian 
liberality  is  hastening  on  f  .  .  . 

Now,  the  Christian  professor  too  commonly 
allows  his  regular  contribution  to  check  his 
liberality,  to  prevent  his  giving  more  than  the 
stipulated  sum,  though  there  are  times  when 
his  benevolent  impulses  would  prompt  him 
to  exceed  that  sum ;  then,  he  will  regard  his 
subscription  only  as  a  pledge  that  he  will  not 
give  less,  but  as  leaving  his  liberality  open  to 
all  the  impulses  of  an  unrestricted  benevolence. 
Now,  he  is  too  often  disposed  to  shun  the 
applications  for  charity,  and  if  he  is  overlooked 
and  passed  by,  to  view  it  as  a  fortunate  escape ; 
but  then  he  will  do  good  as  he  hath  opportunity 
— creating  the  opportunity  which  he  cannot 
find  already  made  to  his  hands.  Now,  his 
ability  exceeds  his  inclination ;  but  then  his 
inclination  will  be  greater  than  his  ability  ; 
like  the  Macedonian  Christians  of  whom  the 
Apostle  testifies,  **  I  bear  them  record  that  to 
their  power,  yea,  and  beyond  their  power,  they 
were  willing  of  themselves."  Instead  of  being 
charitable  only  on  comparative  distrainty  he 
will  often  anticipate  application,  and  surprise 
the  agents  of  beneficence  by  unexpected  gifts; 
thus  strengthening  their  faith  in  God,  and 
inciting  them  to  enlarge  their  designs  for  the 
kingdom  of  Christ :  like  the  same  believers  of 
whom  the  Apostle  records,  that,  instead  of 
needing  to  be  solicited,  they  entreated  him  to 
accept  their  contributions — "praying  us  with 
much  entreaty  to  accept  the  gift."  Like  the 
happy  parent  of  ahappy  family,  he  will  hail  every 
new-born  claim  on  his  resources,  and  cheerfully 
deny  himself  in  order  to  support  it.  And,  in- 
stead of  giving  as  he  now  does,  as  scantily  as  if 
he  only  aimed  to  keep  the  Christian  cause  from 
famishing,  he  will  then  act  on  the  persuasion 
that  his  own  enjoyment  is  identified  with  its 
growth  and  prosperity. — John  Harris,  B.D, 

Works  of  piety  and  charity  should,  like  water 
from  a  fountain,  flow  spontaneously  from  the 
gratitude  and  benevolence  of  a  believing  heart, 
and  not  require  to  be  extorted  with  impor- 
tunity, like  the  toil  and  trouble  of  drawing 
water  from  a  deep  well.  -^A-Mm* 


The  Work  of  the  Day  Done  in  the  Day. 


( Verse  4  :  "  ^«  the  duty 

The  pious  Jews  returned  from  Babylon 
having  erected  an  altar,  kept  also  the 
feast  of  Tabernacles  as  it  is  written,  and 
offered  the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  num- 
ber, according  to  the  custom,  "as  the 
duty  of  every  day  required."  It  is  in 
the  margin,  **  the  matter  of  the  day  in 
his  day."  This  has  grown  into  a  pro- 
verbial saying  among  those  who  love 
Scripture  phraseology,  and  teaches  us 
that  we  should  do  the  work  of  the  day 
in  the  day. 

I  We  may  apply  this  to  life  in 
42 


of  every  day  required,**) 

general  This  is  called  a  "day,"  and 
it  is  a  single  day,  a  short  day,  a  day 
which  it  is  impossible  to  lengthen.  And 
what  is  the  language  of  reason,  of  Scrip- 
ture 1  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  His 
voice,  harden  not  your  heart."  *'  Behold 
now  ...  is  the  day  of  salvation."  And 
what  will  be  your  language  if  the  same 
mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?  *'  I  must  work  the  works  of  Him 
that  sent  Me  while  it  is  day ;  the  night 
Cometh,  wherein  no  man  can  work." 
II.  It  will  apply  to  prosperity.  Thia 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OHAP.  nu 


is  called  a  "day;"  and  Solomon  tells 
us  what  is  the  duty  of  it.  "  In  the  day 
of  prosperity  be  joyful."  He  cannot 
intend  to  encourage  extravagance  and 
excess.  We  are  to  '*  use  this  world  as 
not  abusing  it."  The  wise  man  would 
teach  us  to  enjoy  the  comforts  our  cir- 
cumstances afford,  in  opposition  to  that 
self-denial  that  arises  not  from  religious 
motive,  but  from  anxiety;  from  a  dis- 
position to  live  comparatively  poor  and 
destitute  at  present  in  order  to  hoard 
up  for  the  future ;  whereas  the  Apostle 
tells  us  that  "God  gives  us  all  things 
richly  to  enjoy."  God,  like  a  generous 
friend,  is  pleased  to  see  His  presents 
enjoyed — "  to  enjoy  is  to  obey."  But 
let  us  be  always  joyful  in  Him ;  let  us 
enjoy  all  in  God,  and  God  in  all.  Behold 
another  thing  that  the  duty  of  this  day 
requires.  It  is  gratitude.  Compare  your 
circumstances  with  those  of  others,  whose 
plans  are  equally  wise,  and  whose  de- 
pendencies seemed  equally  sure.  Com- 
pare your  present  with  your  former 
condition ;  the  "  two  bands "  with  the 
"staff."  Compare  your  indul;^ences 
with  your  deserts,  and  how  can  you 
be  unthankful]  And  surely  the  duty 
of  this  day  requires  liberality.  He  has 
made  you  stewards,  and  not  proprietors; 
and  He  will  soon  call  you  to  give  up  your 
account.  "  Charge  them  that  are  rich 
in  this  world  that  they  do  good,"  &c. 

III.  It  will  apply  to  adversity.  This 
is  also  called  a  "day;"  and  it  is  said, 
"In  the  day  of  adversity,  consider." 
This  is  the  grand  duty  of  the  season. 
Whatever  be  your  affliction,  it  is  a 
solemn  call  to  consider  your  ways,  to 
examine  your  hearts  and  lives,  to  in- 
quire wherefore  He  contends  with  you, 
and  what  He  would  have  you  to  do. 
You  are  also  to  consider  the  alleviations 
of  your  suffering ;  how  much  worse  it 
might  have  been ;  and  to  compare  your 
resources  with  your  difficulties.  Another 
part  of  the  duty  this  "  day  "  requires  is 
submission.  "  Submit  yourselves  under 
the  mighty  hand  of  God,"  <fec.  This 
subjection  does  not  exclude  feeling,  but 
regulates  it ;  keeping  us,  while  sensible 
of  the  affliction,  from  quarrelling  with 
Providence,  from  charging  Him  foolishly 
or  unkindly,  and  leading  us  to  say,  "  It 


is  the  Lord,  let  Him  do  what  seemeth 
Him  good."  The  duty  of  this  day  also 
requires  prayer,  "  Call  upon  Me  in  the 
day  of  trouble,"  &c.  "  Is  any  afflicted  ] 
Let  him  pray.'*  The  very  exercise  of  it 
will  soothe  him,  while  the  answer  of  it 
will  deliver  him. 

IV.  We  may  apply  it  to  the  Sabbath. 
This  is  called  "  the  Lord's-day  "  because 
it  is  consecrated  to  the  memory  of  His 
resurrection,  and  is  employed  in  His 
service.  But  as  to  advantage,  it  is  our 
day.  It  "  was  made  for  man."  We  are 
commanded  to  "  sanctify  it,  calling  the 
Sabbath  a  delight,"  (fee.  A  Christian 
will  say,  "  How  amiable  are  Thy  taber- 
nacles, O  Lord  of  hosts  ! "  &c.  He  will 
take  heed  what  he  hears,  and  how  he 
hears.  But  this  is  not  all.  He  will 
retire.  He  will  indulge  in  private  re- 
flection. 

V.  It  will  apply  to  every  day.  No 
day  comes  without  its  appropriate  duty. 
We  are  to  do  everything  in  its  season  ; 
to  do  the  work  of  the  day  in  the  day ; 
and  not  leave  it  till  to-morrow. 

1.  Because  we  may  not  live  till  to- 
morrow.  "We  know  not  what  a  day 
may  bring  forth." 

2.  Each  day  mil  have  its  own  engage- 
mentSf  and  it  is  wrong  to  surcharge  one 
period  with  the  additional  work  of  an- 
other. "  Sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the 
evil  thereof."  It  is  unlawful  to  encumber 
to-day  with  the  care  of  to-morrow  ;  and 
to  encumber  to-morrow  with  the  work  of 
to-day. 

3.  Because  by  this  temporary  negli- 
gencCy  we  have  nothing  to  do,  or  too 
much;  whereas  by  doing  the  work  of  the 
day  IN  the  day,  we  are  never  unoccupied, 
never  oppressed. 

4.  Because  by  this  means  the  mind  is 
kept  cool,  and  tranquil,  and  cheerful ; 
and  we  shall  know  nothing  of  the  per- 
plexities and  ill- temper  of  those  who  are 
always  in  confusion  and  haste. 

To  verify  this  important  maxim,  let 
me  lay  down  three  rules — 

!1.)  Rise  early. 
2.)  Grasp  not  so  much  business  aa 
to  "entangle  yourselves  in  the  affairs  of 
this  life." 

(3.)  Arrange  a  plan  of  life,  and  firmly 
adhere  to  it. — William  Jay. 

43 


OHAP.  IIL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


The  Preparations  for  Rebuilding  the  Temple. 

{Verses  66,  7  :  ^^ But  the  foundation  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord  was  not  yet  hid. 

They  gave  money  also"  &c.) 

**  Labour  with  what  zeal  we  will, 
Something  still  remains  undone, 
Something  uncompleted  still 
Waits  the  rising  of  the  sun." 

— Longfellow, 

Even  when  death  approaches,  most  men 
have  much  which  they  desire  to  accom- 
plish. The  statesman  is  summoned  hence 
devising  new  measures  for  his  country's 
good,  which  he  will  not  assist  in  passing 
into  laws.  The  author  dies  leaving  his 
book  unfinished.  The  Christian  minister 
lays  down  his  charge,  leaving  many  plans 
for  the  welfare  of  his  people  not  yet 
carried  out;  and  the  parent,  while  he 
longs  still  to  do  much  for  the  welfare  of 
his  children.  Doubtless  the  good  man 
is  not  called  to  leave  this  world  until  his 
work  here  is  finished ;  but  to  us  it  often 
seems  that  life  closes  here  in  incomplete- 
ness. This  incompleteness  of  our  human 
works  is  also  ordered  wisely  and  well. 
It  tends  to  prevent  stagnation  ;  to  rouse 
to  earnest  activities,  &c.  (6). 

3.  The  obligation  of  the  Church  of 
God,  The  Jews  at  Jerusalem  felt  them- 
selves bound  not  to  rest  content  with  the 
joys  and  blessings  of  the  altar,  but  to 
proceed  to  the  more  arduous  task  of 
rebuilding  the  Temple.  In  seasons  of 
religious  worship  the  Church  must  not 
forget  the  work  which  it  is  called  to 
accomplish.  Our  holiest  delights  should 
not  detain  us  from  our  arduous  duties. 
The  Church  should  not  entertain  the 
idea  of  any  pause  or  decrease  in  its 
labours  until  the  spiritual  temple  of  our 
God  is  raised  into  utmost  and  beautiful 
completeness  out  of  the  ruins  of  our 
fallen  humanity.  Let  Christians  labour 
on  until  the  head  stone  of  this  temple 
shall  be  brought  forth  "with  shoutings 
of,  Grace,  grace  unto  it."  (c). 

II.  The  prompt  preparations  for  the 
accomplishment  of  this  work.  "  They 
gave  money  also  unto  the  masons,  and 
to  the  carpenters,"  <fec.  (ver.  7).  Two 
points  claim  attention — 

1.  The  variety  of  service  and  the  unity 


Two  chief  points  are  here  presented 
to  our  notice — 

I.  The  great  work  yet  to  be  accom- 
plished. Mingled  with  the  joy  of  the 
Jews  in  their  restored  worship  was  the 
recollection  of  the  great  work  which  as 
yet  was  not  even  commenced.  "The 
foundation  of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord 
was  not  yet  laid."  We  regard  this  as  an 
illustration  of — 

1.  7^he  incompleteness  of  human  joys. 
The  gladness  of  the  returned  exiles  in 
celebrating  the  feast  of  Tabernacles  was 
tempered  by  the  fact  that  they  had  only 
an  altar;  they  had  no  temple.  The 
brightest  day  of  our  life  here  has  its 
cloud  and  its  shadow.  Our  most  serene 
seasons  are  not  entirely  free  from  dis- 
turbance. Our  joys  are  incomplete.  Our 
gladness  is  often  checked  by  sadness. 
"  There  is  a  cross  in  every  lot."  The 
victorious  and  calm  eventide  of  the  life 
of  king  David  was  darkened  by  trials  in 
his  family.  "Although  my  house  be 
not  so  witli  God  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  St. 
Paul  "  was  caught  up  into  Paradise " 
and  there  received  "abundance  of  reve- 
lations;" but  there  was  given  to  him 
"  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  the  messenger  of 
Satan  to  buffet "  him.  This  inconiplete- 
ness  of  our  joys  here  is  a  wise  and  kind 
arrangement.  We  need  the  shadow  as 
well  as  the  sunshine.  We  are  reminded 
by  vicissitude  that  this  is  not  our  rest, 
and  urged  to  set  our  affections  on  spiritual 
and  eternal  things,  (a). 

2.  The  incompleteness  of  human  works. 
The  altar  was  built,  but  the  Temple  was 
not  begun.  The  work  of  these  patriotic 
and  pious  Jews  was  only  just  com- 
menced. It  would  be  long  before  it  was 
completed.  The  work  of  the  earnest 
man  is  never  accomplished.  Ere  one 
task  is  completed  another  summons  him 
to  effort.  If  he  were  tempted  to  settle 
down  to  re()Ose,  his  rest  would  soon  be 
broken  by  the  demands  of  unfinished 
enterjirises,  or  by  challenges  to  new  en- 
deavoura 

44 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CEMX,  III. 


of  design.  See  the  various  ways  in  which 
different  persons  contributed  to  the  pre- 
parations for  rebuildingthe  sacred  edifice. 
(1.)  Certain  Jews  gave  of  their  posses- 
sions to  pay  the  workmen.  "  They  gave 
money  also  unto  the  masons,  and  to  the 
carpenters ;  and  meat,  and  drink,  and 
oil  unto  them  of  Zidon,  and  to  them  of 
Tyre."  (2.)  Other  Jews  laboured  in  the 
work  of  preparation.  '*  The  masons  and 
the  carpenters."  (3.)  Zidonian  and 
Tyrian  workmen  also  laboured  in  this 
work.  **  Them  of  Zidon  and  them  of 
Tyre  brought  cedar  trees  from  Lebanon 
to  the  sea  of  Joppa."  And  (4)  Cyrus 
assisted  by  his  patronage  and  by  his 
gifts.  "According  to  the  grant  that 
tliey  had  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia."  And 
others  might  be  mentioned  who  other- 
wise promoted  the  great  object ;  such  as 
the  Levites  who  acted  as  overseers  of  the 
work.  AH  these,  each  in  his  own  way 
and  in  his  own  sphere,  helped  to  accom- 
plish the  end  which  was  so  eagerly  de- 
sired by  most  of  them.  And  in  building 
the  spiritual  temple,  there  should  be 
the  individual  effort  of  every  Christian 
for  the  attainment  of  the  great  object 
which  they  all  have  in  common  :  each 
one,  in  some  form  or  other,  should  con- 
tribute his  share  in  the  glorious  work, 
and  all  should  keep  in  view  the  one 
grand  end.  (d). 

2.  The  co-operation  of  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles. "  It  was  significant  also/*  says 
Schultz,  "  that  at  this  building  of  the 
Temple  again  it  was  not  Canaan  proper, 
but  the  Phoenician  Lebanon,  that  pro- 
vided the  building  material,  and  that 
corresponding  with  this,  heathen  work- 
men and  artists  also  took  part  in  erecting 
the  house  of  God.  It  indicates  that  the 
rest  of  the  earth  also,  and  corresponding 
thereto,  the  rest  of  mankind,  are  to 
render  their  gifts  and  capacities,  which 
are  more  and  more  to  take  part  in  the 
complete  and  true  worship  of  the  Lord, 
that  the  Lord  by  no  means  regards 
them  as  profane.  The  rest  of  the  earth 
and  mankind  become  thereby,  to  a  certain 
extent,  consecrated  in  advance  and  de- 
signated as  one  who,  if  now  already  in 
the  Old  Testament  economy,  yet  still 
more  some  day  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
would  take  part  in  the  highest  destiny 


of  Israel."  (^).  In  the  Church  of  Christ 
"there  is  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  cir- 
cumcision nor  uncircumcision,  barbarian, 
Scythian,  bond  nor  free  ;  but  Christ  is 
all  and  in  all." 
Conclusion  : 

1.  A  re  we  "  as  living  stones  built  up  " 
in  the  spiritual  temple  of  God  ?  (Com p. 
1  Pet.  ii.  4-6.) 

2.  Are  we  also  assisting  to  build  this 
glorious  temple?  (Comp.  1  Cor.  iii. 
10-15.)  It  is  paradoxical  yet  true, 
that  we  should  be  both  stones  in  the 
edifice  and  toilers  for  its  completion. 
But  are  we  ? 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Mark  the  same  people  that  usually  have 
the  highest  joys,  and  see  whether  at  other 
times  they  have  not  the  greatest  troubles.  This 
week  they  are  as  at  the  gates  of  heaven,  and 
the  next  as  at  the  doors  of  hell :  I  am  sure  with 
many  it  is  so.  Yet  it  need  not  be  so,  if  Chris- 
tians would  but  look  at  these  high  joys  as 
duties  to  be  endeavoured,  and  mercies  to  be 
valued  ;  but  when  they  will  needs  judge  of 
their  state  by  them,  and  think  that  God  is 
gone  from  or  forsaken  them  when  they  have 
not  such  joys,  then  it  leaves  them  in  terror 
and  amazement.  Like  men  after  a  flash  of 
lightning,  they  are  left  more  sensible  of  the 
darkness.  For  no  wise  man  can  expect  that 
such  joys  should  be  a  Christian's  ordinary 
Btate  ;  or  God  should  so  diet  us  with  a  con- 
tinual feast.  It  would  neither  suit  with  our 
health  nor  the  condition  of  this  pilgrimage. 
Live,  therefore,  on  your  peace  of  conscience 
as  your  ordinary  diet ;  when  this  is  wanting 
know  that  God  appointeth  you  a  fast  for  your 
health  ;  and  when  you  have  a  feast  of  high 
joys,  feed  on  it  and  be  thankful ;  but  when 
they  are  taken  from  you,  gape  not  after  them 
as  the  disciples  did  after  Christ  at  His  ascen- 
sion, but  return  thankfully  to  your  ordinary 
diet  of  peace.  And  remember  that  these 
joys  which  are  now  taken  from  you  may  so 
return  again.  However,  there  is  a  place  pre- 
paring for  you,  where  your  joys  may  be  full. 
— Richard  Baxter. 

(h)  Human  life  is  short ;  God's  work  is  com- 
plex and  prolonged,  and  steadily  flowing  on. 
Hence  we  are  continually  beginning,  and  pass- 
ing away,  and  leaving  what  we  begin  for 
others  to  finish.  Every  generation  is  begin- 
ning, and  every  generation  is  passing  away 
without  having  finished  what  it  has  begun. 
But  that  which  we  begin  is  not  going  to  stop 
because  we  ceage  to  go  forward  with  it.  One 
worker  dies ;  the  loom  goes  on,  and  another 
worker  takes  up  the  thread  that  he  has  laid 
down.  We  pass  away,  and  another  man, 
somewhere,  is  prepared  to  step  into  our  place. 
We  commence  a  work,  and  perform  a  part  ol 

45 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


it ;  when  we  are  gone,  others  perform  another 
part ;  when  they  are  gone,  still  others  perform 
another  part ;  and  so  that  which  we  under- 
take is  by  others  earrie'i  along  to  its  bright 
consummation. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

(c)  I  ask  you  to  remember  that  every  chiiJ 
whose  heart  is  touched  by  the  love  of  Christ, 
every  worker  for  God  who  is  ready  to  sacrifice 
his  time,  his  comfort,  his  luxury,  his  life,  for 
Christ,  whose  sympathy  with  the  advance  of 
God's  kingdom  is  produced  by  an  intelligent 
understanding  of  the  magnitude  of  the  in- 
terests that  are  at  stake  ;  every  bedridden, 
poverty-stricken  Christian,  who  is  daily  wrest- 
ling with  God  in  prayer  ;  every  Sunday-school 
teacher  who  identifies  himself  with  this  great 
enterprise,  not  simply  by  giving  money  (that 
is  sometimes  an  easy  way  of  putting  aside  a 
pressing  claim),  but  by  earnest  thonglit,  honest 
speech,  and  loyal  feeling ;  every  one  of  us  who, 
appreciating  the  magnitude,  sublimity,  and 
consecration  of  Christian  missions,  does  devote 
himself  to  this  work,  rises  up  for  God  against 
the  evil-doers,  enlists  in  the  great  battle  which 
can  only  terminate  when  death  and  hell,  the 
beast  and  the  false  prophet,  are  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire. — ff.  R,  Reynolds,  D.  D. 

{d)  I  would  stir  you  all  up  to  help  in  this 
work — old  men,  young  men,  and  you,  my 
sisters,  and  all  of  you,  according  to  your  gifts 
and  experience,  help.  I  want  to  make  you 
feel,  "  I  cannot  do  much,  but  I  can  help ;  I 
cannot  preach,  but  I  can  help  ;  I  cannot  pray 
in  public,  but  I  can  help ;  I  cannot  give  much 
away,  but  I  can  help  ;  I  cannot  officiate  as 
an  elder  or  a  deacon,  hut  I  can  help  ;  I  cannot 
shine  as  *a  bright  particular  star,'  but  I  can 
help ;  I  cannot  stand  alone  to  serve  my  Mas- 
ter, but  I  can  help."  There  is  a  text  from 
which  an  old  Puritan  once  preached  a  very 
singular  sermon.  There  were  only  two  words 
in  the  text,  and  they  were,  **  And  Bartholo- 
mew." The  reason  he  took  the  text  was,  that 
Bartholomew's  name  is  never  mentioned  alone, 
but  he  is  always  spoken  of  as  doing  some  good 
thing  with  somebody  else.  He  is  never  the 
principal  actor,  but  always  second.  Well,  let 
this  be  your  feeling,  that  if  you  cannot  do  all 
yourself,  you  will  help  to  do  what  you  can. — 
G.  H.  Spurgeon, 

(«)  There  are  those  in  the  Church  who  be- 
lieve that  God's  express  aim  in  Judaism  was 


to  keep  the  Jewish  people  as  separate  from  the 
world  as  possible  ;  to  keep  them,  like  Noah, 
in  an  ark,  while  He  plagued  and  punished  the 
world  at  His  will.  But  I  maintain,  on  the 
contrary,  that  Judaism  was  always  genial  and 
benignant  to  the  stranger  who  would  adopt  its 
belief  and  accept  its  blessings.  From  the  evil 
which  was  in  the  world  God  was  minded  to 
keep  the  Jewish  people  free  at  any  cost.  From 
idolatry  and  its  attendant  pollutions  He  sought 
to  deliver  them,  inasmuch  as  idolatry  in  the 
long  run  inevitably  leads  to  national  decline 
and  death.  To  the  stranger,  the  foreign  person 
or  nation,  who  would  dishonour  its  beliefs  and 
trample  on  its  blessings,  Judaism  was  stern  as 
fate  and  pitiless  as  death.  The  nations  which 
had  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquity, 
whose  influence  must  be  corrupting,  were 
ruthlessly  exterminated.  .  .  ,  The  Jews 
were  simply  God's  executioners  here,  and  the 
same  doom,  they  are  plainly  warned,  awaited 
them  if  they  suffered  themselves  to  be  tempted 
into  the  same  sins.  The  nations,  of  whose 
pollutions  the  very  land  was  weary,  were  swept 
off  as  the  stubble  before  the  flame.  But  this 
was  the  accident  and  not  the  essential  char- 
acter of  the  dispensation.  The  law  here  in 
England  is  merciful,  though  it  has  often  to 
deal  out  terrible  judgments  on  flagrant  sins. 
And  I  am  persuaded  that  the  more  carefully 
the  spirit  of  the  dispensation  is  studied,  the 
more  plainly  will  it  appear  that  .  .  .  from 
Moses  to  Zechariah,  it  is  a  cry  to  the  nations 
not  to  rot  in  their  own  corruption,  **  Come 
with  us  and  we  will  do  you  good.'*  How  be- 
nignantly,  in  the  closing  verses  of  the  eighth 
chapter  of  the  book  of  Joshua, the  "strangers 
which  were  conversant  among  them  "  are  in- 
cluded in  the  benediction  !  How  earnestly 
Daniel  and  his  coadjutors  sought  to  diffuse  the 
blessings  of  Judaism  among  the  nations  which 
had  enslaved  them,  and  to  make  the  Oriental 
despots  sharers  in  the  knowledge  of  the  living 
God,  which  by  revelation  they  had  gained  ! 
How  emphatically  the  prophets  take  up  and 
echo  the  invitation  with  growing  clearness  and 
earnestness  through  the  ages,  until  it  breaks 
out  into  full  utterance  in  the  great  Successor 
of  Moses,  the  great  Fulfil ler  of  the  Law,  the 
Son  of  David,  the  King  of  Zion,  "And  /,  if  I 
he  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me." 
Judaism  in  all  ages  was  a  witness  for  God  to 
the  nations,  and  a  means  of  drawing  all  that 
would  be  drawn  unto  Himself. — J,  B,  Brovm, 
B.A. 


Laying  the  Foundation  of  the  Temple. 
(Verses  S-IS,) 

Notice  :  months  the  masons  and  carpenters,  and 

I.  The  work  already  done.  the  Tyrian  and  the  Sidonian  workmen, 

1.    Something    was    already    accom-  had  not  been  idle.     Considerable  labour 

plished.      Several  months   had   passed  must  have  been  expended  on  the  site  of 

away  since  the  arrangements  mentioned  the  Temple  before  it  was  ready  for  laying 

in  verse  7  were  made ;  and  during  those  the  foundation  thereof, 

46 


HOMLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


CWLkX,     I. 


2.  Arrangements  were  made  for  carry- 
ing on  the  worh  *'Now  in  the  second 
year  of  their  coming  into  the  house  of 
God  at  Jerusalem,  in  the  second  month, 
began  Zerubbabel,"  <fec.  (vers.  8,  9^ 
And  in  these  arrangements  there  was  a 
unanimity  which  augured  well  for  the 
success  of  the  enterprise.  '*  Zerubbabel 
the  son  of  Shealtiel,  and  Jeshua  the  son 
of  Jozadak,  and  the  remnant  of  the 
brethren,  the  priests  and  the  Levites, 
and  all  they  that  were  come  out  of  the 
captivity  unto  Jerusalem,"  were  united 
in  their  arrangements  and  efforts  for 
prosecuting  the  work  to  a  successful 
issue. 

IL  The  worsliip  offered.  "  And 
when  the  builders  laid  the  foundation 
of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord,  they  set  the 
priests  in  their  apparel  with  trumpets," 
<fec.  (vers.  10,  11).     Notice: 

1.  The  manner  of  their  worship, 
**  They  set  the  priests  in  their  apparel 
with  trumpets,  and  the  Levites,  the 
sons  of  Asaph,  with  cymbals,  to  praise 
the  Lord,  after  the  ordinance  of  David 
king  of  Israel.  And  they  sang  together 
by  course  in  praising  and  giving  thanks 
unto  the  Lord/'  Their  worship  was 
orderly  and  seemly  in  manner.  It  was 
conducted  by  those  who  were  qualified 
for  the  work  and  called  to  it  by  the 
command  of  God,  and  in  accordance 
with  the  arrangements  made  by  king 
David  (1  Chron.  vi.  31,  xvi.  4-6,  42, 
XXV.  1  :  Neh.  xii.  24). 

2.  The  character  of  their  worship. 
''Praising  and  giving  thanks  unto  the 
Lord,"  (kc.  Their  worship  consisted  of 
grateful  and  joyful  praise ;  because  of — 
(1.)  The  goodness  of  God.  "Praising 
and  giving  thanks  unto  the  Lord ; 
because  He  is  good,"  (2.)  The  per- 
petuity of  His  goodness.  "  For  His 
mercy  endureth  for  ever."  (3.)  Their 
perpetual  interest  in  His  goodness. 
**  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever  toward 
Israel."  Reverent  and  grateful  praise 
is  the  highest  form  of  worship  which  we 
present  to  the  Father  of  spirits,  (a). 

3.  The  occasion  of  their  worship. 
**  When  the  builders  laid  the  foundation 
of  the  Temple  of  the  Lord."  We  call 
attention  to  the  occasion  in  this  place, 
because    it    illustrated   and    stimulated 


their  thankful  praise.  God  had  vouch- 
safed to  them  unmistakable  manifests 
tions  of  His  goodness  and  mercy,  in  pre 
serving  and  blessing  them  in  Babylon, 
in  granting  them  so  favourable  a  return 
to  their  own  land,  and  in  helping  them 
thus  far  with  their  work  of  restoration 
and  renewal.  Their  own  experiences 
would  give  force  and  fervour  to  their 
worship-song. 

4.  The  spirit  of  their  worship.  This 
was  hearty  and  enthusiastic.  **  And  all 
the  people  shouted  with  a  great  shout, 
when  they  praised  the  Lord,  because 
the  foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord 
was  laid."  Worship  which  is  not  hearty, 
or  which  is  cold  or  lukewarm,  does  not 
meet  with  Divine  acceptance. 

m.  The  emotions  excited.  "And 
all  the  people  shouted  with  a  great 
shout,"  <fec. 

1.  Great  joy,  **  And  many  shouted 
aloud  for  joy."  This  joy  probably  arose 
from — (1.)  The  consideration  of  what 
was  accomplished.  "Those  that  only 
knew  the  misery  of  having  no  temple  at 
all,"  says  M.  Henry,  "  praised  the  Lord 
with  shouts  of  joy  when  they  saw  but 
the  foundation  of  one  laid.  To  them 
even  this  foundation  seemed  great,  and 
was  as  life  from  the  dead ;  to  their 
hungry  souls  even  this  was  sweet.  They 
shouted  so  that  *  the  noise  was  heard  afar 
off.*  Note. — We  ought  to  be  thankful 
for  the  beginnings  of  mercy,  though  we 
have  not  yet  come  to  the  perfection  of 
it;  and  the  foundations  of  a  temple,  after 
long  desolations,  cannot  but  be  fountains 
of  joy  to  every  faithful  Israelite.'*  Every 
step  in  the  progress  of  our  communion 
with  God  should  be  a  matter  of  great 
joy  to  us.  (2.)  The  anticipation  of 
what  would  yet  be  accomplished.  They 
looked  forward  with  confident  and  exul- 
tant hope  to  the  completion  of  the  sacred 
edifice. 

2.  Great  sorrow.  "  But  many  of  the 
priests  and  Levites,  and  chief  of  the 
fathers,  ancient  men,  that  had  seen  the 
first  house,  when  the  foundation  of  this 
house  was  laid  before  their  eyes,  wept 
with  a  loud  voice."  Their  grief  arose 
chiefly  from  memories  of  the  past,  with 
which  the  present  contrasted  unfavour- 
ably.    (1.)  Recollections  of  the  former 

47 


0HA7.  in. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


Temple.  They  "had  seen  the  first 
house,"  and  they  knew  well  that  they 
could  not  hope  to  build  one  which  would 
be  at  all  comparable  with  it  in  magnifi- 
cence and  splendour.  **  Who  is  left 
among  you  that  saw  this  house  in  her 
first  glory  ]  and  how  do  ye  see  it  now  1 
is  it  not  in  your  eyes  in  comparison  of 
it  as  nothing  1 "  (Hag.  ii.  3).  Moreover, 
they  might  have  wept  because  of  the 
sins  which  had  led  to  the  destruction  of 
the  former  Temple,  and  the  manifold 
miseries  which  had  resulted  from  those 
sins.  (2.)  E-ecollections  of  their  own 
lives.  The  joyful  acclamations  of  the 
young  generation  probably  recalled  to 
these  "ancient  men  "  the  brightness  and 
hopefulness  and  enthusiasm  of  their  own 
youth,  and  the  recollection  awakened 
sad  thoughts.  The  contrast  between  the 
purpose  of  early  life  and  the  performance 
of  after  days,  and  the  sad  disparity 
between  the  hopes  of  youth  and  the 
attainments  of  manhood,  are  generally 
sufficient  to  subdue  and  sadden  the 
hearts  of  the  aged.  The  difference 
between  the  ideal  entertained  at  twenty 
years  of  age  and  the  actual  realised  at 
fifty  or  sixty  is  often  a  mournful  thing. 
And  even  if  a  man  is  able  to  carry  out 
his  purposes,  and  achieves  what  is  com- 
monly called  "  success  in  life,"  how 
different  the  objects  gained  appear  in 
possession  from  what  they  appeared  in 
anticipation,  and  how  disappointing ! 
Much,  very  much,  after  which  men  as- 
pire and  for  which  they  labour,  cannot 
satisfy  them ;  and  having  obtained  their 
chief  aims,  they  may  cry  mournfully — 

"  Years  have  gone  by  !  and  life's  lowlands  are 

past, 
And  I  stand  on  the  hill  which  I  sighed  for, 

at  last  : 
But  I  turn  from  the  summit  that  once  was 

my  star. 
To  the  vale  of  my  childhood,  seen  dimly  and 

far; — 
Each  blight  on  its  beauty  seems  softened  and 

gone, 
Like  a  land  that  we  love,  in  the  light  of  the 

morn."— y.  K.  Hervey.  (b). 

3.  Great  Joy  and  great  sorrow  mingled, 
"  The  people  could  not  discern  the  noise 
of  the  shout  of  joy  from  the  noise  of  the 
weeping  of  the  people."  We  may  regard 
this  scene  as — (1.)  An  illustration  of  our 
48 


personal  experiences  in  this  world.  All 
our  joys  are  tinged  with  sadness ;  all  our 
sorrows  have  their  mitigations,  and  if 
they  do  not  yield  rich  compensations 
the  blame  will  be  our  own.  (c).  (2.)  An 
illustration  of  the  experiences  of  mankind 
in  this  world.  The  shouts  of  those  who 
rejoice  and  the  cries  of  those  who  mourn 
are  ever  mingled  in  this  world.  The  exul- 
tations of  the  victors  and  the  lamenta- 
tions of  the  vanquished  rise  together  from 
earth  to  heaven.  (3.)  A  feature  which 
distinguishes  the  present  from  the  future 
state.  These  mingled  experiences  belong 
only  to  this  present  life  and  world.  In 
hell  no  one  "  shouts  aloud  for  joy."  And 
in  heaven  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears 
from  their  eyes ;  and  there  shall  be  no 
more  death,  neither  sorrow,  nor  crying, 
neither  shall  there  be  any  more  pain: 
for  the  former  things  are  passed  away." 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Praise  is  the  very  highest  mood  and 
exercise  of  the  religious  soul ;  it  is  the  expres- 
sion towards  God  of  the  holiest  emotions  of 
which  we  are  capable — reverence,  obligation, 
gratitude,  love,  adoration.  Whenever  these 
are  uplifted  to  God  in  admiration  and  homage, 
there  is  the  worship  of  praise — the  highest  and 
most  perfect  expressioM  of  all  that  is  purest 
and  noblest  in  our  religious  nature.  As  con- 
trasted with  the  worship  of  prayer,  the  worship 
of  praise  is  manifestly  transcendent.  Prayer 
is  the  pleading  of  our  human  indigence  and 
helplessness  ;  praise  is  the  laudation  of  Divine 
excellency  and  sufficiency.  Prayer  supplicates 
the  good  that  God  may  have  to  bestow  ;  praise 
is  the  adoration  of  the  good  that  there  is  in 
God  Himself.  When  we  pray  we  are  urged  by 
necessities,  fears,  and  sorrows, — it  is  the  cry 
of  our  troubled  helplessness,  often  of  our  pain 
or  our  terror  ;  we  are  impelled  by  feelings  of 
unworthiness,  memories  of  sin,  yearnings  for 
forgiveness  and  renewal.  Praise  brings,  not  a 
cry,  but  a  song, — it  does  not  ask,  it  proffers, — 
it  lifts,  not  its  hands,  but  its  heart, — it  is  the 
voice,  not  of  our  woe,  but  of  our  love,  not  of 
beseeching,  but  of  blessing.  It  comes  before 
God  not  clothed  in  sackcloth,  but  with  its 
"singing  robes"  about  it,  not  wailing  litanies, 
but  shouting  hosannas.  Prayer  expresses  only 
our  lower  religious  moods  of  necessity  and 
sorrow  ;  praise  expresses  our  higher  religious 
moods  of  satisfaction  and  joy.  Prayer  asks 
God  to  come  down  to  us ;  praise  assays  to  go 
up  to  God.  The  soul  that  prays  falls  prostrate 
with  its  face  to  the  ground,  often  being  in  an 
agony  ;  the  soul  that  praises  stands  with  up- 
lifted brow  and  transfigured  countenance  ready 
to  soar  away  to  heaven.    Moreover,  the  instinct 


nOMJLETJC  COMMENT  Ant:  EZRA. 


cntAP.  lit 


of  praise  is  deeper  in  the  religions  heart  than 
that  of  prayer ;  song  in  the  human  soul  is 
earlier,  and  will  be  later,  than  supplication. 
Prayer  is  the  accident,  of  our  present  sinful 
necessity  ;  praise  is  the  essence  of  all  religious 
life  and  joy.  The  birthplace  and  homo  of 
prayer  is  on  earth.  The  birthplace  and  home 
of  praise  is  in  heaven." — H.  Alloriy  D.D. 

(b)  I  used  to  think  a  slight  illness  was  a 
luxurious  thing ;  ...  it  is  different  in  the 
latter  stages  ;  the  old  postchaise  gets  more 
shattered  at  every  turn,  windows  will  not  pull 
up,  doors  refuse  to  open,  or,  being  open,  will 
not  shut  again.  There  is  some  new  subject  of 
complaint  every  moment;  your  sickness  comes 
thicker  and  thicker,  your  sympathising  friends 
fewer  and  fewer.  The  recollection  of  youth, 
health,  and  uninterrupted  powers  of  activity, 
neither  improved  nor  enjoyed,  is  a  poor  strain 
of  comfort.  .  .  .  Death  has  closed  the  long 
dark  avenue  upon  loves  and  friendships  ;  and 
I  look  at  them  as  through  the  grated  doors  of 
a  burial  place  filled  with  monuments  of  those 
who  were  once  dear  to  me,  with  no  insincere 
wish  that  it  may  open  for  me  at  no  distant 
period,  provided  such  be  the  will  of  God.  I 
shall  never  see  the  threescore  and  ten,  and 
shall  be  summed  up  at  a  discount;  no  help 
for  it,  and  no  matter  either. — Sir  Walter  Scott. 

There  is  no  joy  unmixed  with  grief — 

Each  garden  has  more  weeds  than  flowers — 
Care  rides  upon  the  winged  hours, 

And  doubt  for  ever  haunts  belief. 

We  stop  to  pluck  some  beauteous  flower, 
And  cold  precaution  idly  scorn, 
To  find  some  sharp  and  hidden  thorn 

Exacts  a  forfeit  for  the  dower. 

There  have  been  tears  of  wormwood  shed, 
For  every  pleasure  life  can  bring ; 
The  joys  of  earth  are  flowers  that  spring 

From  out  the  ashes  of  the  dead — E.  H.  Dewart. 

In  the  bitterest  grief,  in  the  sharpest  period 
of  agony,  in  the  dullest,  most  hopeless  pro- 
spect, there  is  a  source  of  joy  which  none  but 
the  spirit  of  Jesus  can  find  or  use.  St.  Paul 
calls  it  rejoicing  in  the  Lord.     Then  we  go 


out  of  ourselves,  as  it  were,  and  leave  the  last 
trial  like  a  cloak  that  is  thrown  off.  We  pass 
from  the  sharpest  and  most  disappointing 
trouble  into  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord.  We  move  in  by  a  mental  flash,  as  it 
were,  and  there  see  the  source  of  life  unshaken, 
undimmed,  steady,  like  the  shining  of  the 
moon  above  a  battlefield  ;  calm  and  quiet,  as 
the  sunlight  amid  the  shrieks  and  tumult  of 
a  pillaged  town, — Harry  Jones^  M.A. 

There  is  great  joy  of  prosperity,  of  love,  of 
victory,  but  there  is  a  joy  that  belongs  to  the 
experience  of  suffering  and  sorrow  which  is 
more  divine  and  exquisite  than  any  joy  the 
heart  ever  knows  outside  of  trouble.  When  a 
soul  is  afflicted  till  it  is  driven  into  the  very 
pavilion  of  God,  till  Christ,  as  it  were,  wraps 
His  arms  about  it  and  says,  "Rest  here  till 
the  storm  be  overpast,"  that  soul  experiences 
an  exquisiteness  of  joy  which  only  those  who 
have  felt  it  can  understand. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

Then  happy  those,  since  each  must  drain 
His  share  of  pleasure,  share  of  pain  ; 
Then  happy  those,  beloved  of  Heaven, 
To  whom  the  mingled  cup  is  given, 
Whose  lenient  sorrows  find  relief. 
Whose  joys  are  chastened  by  their  grief. 

—Sir  W.  Scott. 

{d)  This  is  a  world  of  weeping — a  vale  of 
tears.  Who  is  there  that  has  not  wept  over 
the  grave  of  a  friend  ;  over  his  own  losses  and 
cares;  over  his  disappointments,  over  the  treat- 
ment he  has  received  from  others  ;  over  his 
sins ;  over  the  follies,  vices,  and  woes  of  his 
fellow-men  ?  And  what  a  change  would  it 
make  in  our  world  if  it  could  be  said  that 
henceforward  not  another  tear  would  be  shed  ; 
not  a  head  would  ever  be  bowed  again  in  grief  I 
Yet  this  is  to  be  the  condition  of  heaven.  In 
that  world  there  is  to  be  no  pain,  no  disappoint- 
ment, no  bereavement.  No  friend  is  to  lie  in 
dreadful  agony  on  a  sick-bed,  no  grave  is  to 
be  opened  to  receive  a  parent,  a  wife,  a  child  ; 
no  gloomy  prospect  of  death  is  to  draw  tears 
of  sorrow  from  the  eyes.  To  that  blessed  world, 
when  our  eyes  run  down  with  tears,  are  we 
permitted  to  look  forward ;  and  the  prospect 
of  such  a  world  should  contribute  to  wipe  away 
our  tears  here — for  all  our  sorrows  will  soon  be 
over. — A.  Bametf  D,D, 


Thb  Building  of  the  Temple. 
(Verses  lUlS.) 


That  an  exuberance  of  joy  and  of 
sorrow  should  be  excited  at  once  by  the 
same  event,  is  undoubtedly  a  curious 
fact ;  and  it  will  be  profitable  to  show 
you — 

I.  What  there  was  at  that  time  to 
caU  forth  such  strong  and  widely-dif- 
ferent emotions.  The  Jews,  after  their 
return  from  Babylon,  had  just  laid  the 


foundation  of  the  second  Temple,  and 
this  was — 

1.  To  some  an  occasion  of  exalted  Joi/. 
It  was  not  the  mere  circumstance  that 
a  macjnificent  buildinor  was  about  to 
be  raised,  but  the  thought  of  the  use 
to  which  that  building  was  to  be 
appropriated,  that  proved  to  them  a 
source  of  joy.  The  erection  of  it  was 
D  49 


enkt.  nt. 


aOMlLETtC  COMMBNTARt :  SZltA, 


justly  regarded  by  them  as  a  restoration 
of  God's  favour  to  them  after  the  heavy 
judgments  which  He  had  inflicted  on 
them  during  their  captivity  in  Babylon. 
This  event  opened  to  them  a  prospect  of 
again  worshipping  Jehovah  according  to 
all  the  forms  prescribed  to  them,  by  the 
Mosaic  ritual.  Nor  could  they  fail  to 
view  it  as  tending  to  advance  the  honour 
of  their  God;  in  which  view  pre-eminently 
it  must  of  necessity  fill  them  with  most 
exalted  joy.  With  such  views  of  the 
event  before  them  the  people  could  not 
but  shout  for  joy ;  and  "  if  they  had 
been  silent,  the  very  stones  would  have 
cried  out  against  them." 

2.  To  others  an  occasion  of  the  deepest 
sorrow.  The  persons  who  manifested 
such  pungent  grief  were  "the  priests, 
and  Levites,  and  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
who  were  ancient  men,  that  had  seen 
the  former  Temple."  They  wept  because 
they  well  knew  how  infinitely  this  struc- 
ture must  fall  below  the  former  in  point 
of  magnificence.  Of  necessity  it  must 
want  many  things  which  constituted  the 
glory  of  that  edifice,  and  could  never  be 
replaced.  The  Shechinah,  the  bright 
cloud,  the  emblem  of  the  Deity  Himself, 
was  for  ever  removed.  The  ark  was 
lost,  and  the  copy  of  the  law  which  had 
been  preserved  in  it.  The  Urim  and 
Thummim  too,  by  which  God  had  been 
wont  to  communicate  to  His  people  the 
knowledge  of  His  will,  was  irrecoverably 
gone  ;  and  the  fire  which  had  descended 
from  heaven  was  extinct,  so  that  they 
must  henceforth  use  in  all  their  sacrifices 
nothing  but  common  fire.  And  what 
but  their  sins  had  brought  upon  them 
all  these  calamities  ?  Would  it  have 
been  right,  then,  in  these  persons  to  lose 
all  recollection  of  their  former  mercies, 
and  of  the  sins  through  which  they  had 
been  bereaved  of  them ;  and  to  be  so 
transported  with  their  present  blessings 
as  not  to  bewail  their  former  iniquities  1 
No  !  I  think  that  the  mixture  of  feeling 
was  precisely  such  as  the  occasion  called 
for. 

II    How  far  similar  emotions  be- 
come us  at  the  present  day. 

1.   There  is  at  this  time  great  occasion 
for  joy.     We  are  not,  indeed,  construct- 
ing a  material  temple  for  the  Lord  ;  but 
50 


the  whole  nation  is  engaged  in  endea- 
vours to  erect  a  spiritual  temple  to  Him 
throughout  the  world.  Never  was  there 
a  period  since  the  apostolic  age,  when 
the  exertions  were  so  general,  so  diversi- 
fied, so  difi'usive.  And  is  this  no  ground 
of  joy  ]  Is  there  no  reason  to  rejoice  in 
what,  we  trust,  is  going  on  amongst  us  1 
If  the  Gospel  be  *'  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy  unto  all  people,"  is  it  no  cause  for 
joy  that  it  is  brought  to  our  ears ;  and 
that  it  is  effectual  amongst  us  to  convert 
men  to  God?  Are  there  not  amongst 
you  some  at  least  who  have  been  "turned 
,  from  darkness  unto  light,  and  from  the 
power  of  Satan  unto  God  "  ?  Surely  we 
have  reason  to  rejoice. 

2.  Yet  is  there  amongst  us  abundant 
occasion  for  grief  also.  If  we  suppose 
the  Apostle  Paul,  who  witnessed  the 
state  of  God's  Church  in  its  primitive 
and  purest  age,  to  come  down  in  the 
midst  of  us,  what  would  be  his  feelings 
at  the  present  hour?  Would  his  joy  be 
unmixed  with  sorrow  ?  Would  he  be 
satisfied  with  what  he  saw  ?  It  was  with 
"weeping"  that  St.  Paul  contemplated 
many  of  the  Philippian  converts ;  and 
for  many  of  the  Galatian  Church  he 
"  agonised  as  in  the  pangs  of  childbirth 
till  Christ  should  be  more  perfectly 
formed  in  them."  And  was  this  from 
a  want  of  charity,  or  from  a  contempt 
of  piety  in  its  lower  stages  of  existence? 
No ;  but  from  love^  and  from  a  desire 
that  God  should  be  honoured  to  the 
uttermost  wherever  His  Gospel  came, 
and  wherever  its  blessings  were  expe- 
rienced in  the  soul. 

See,  then — 

(1.)  What,  above  all  things^  should 
interest  our  souls.  Nothing  under  heaven 
should  transport  us  with  joy  like  the 
establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the 
world  and  in  the  soul.  Nothing  should 
produce  in  us  such  acute  sensations  of 
grief  as  a  consciousness  that  God  is  not 
glorified  in  the  midst  of  us  as  He  ought 
to  be. 

(2.)  What  use  we  should  make  of  our 
hnowledge  and  experience.  It  is  not  so 
much  an  unqualified  effusion  of  joy  that  is 
pleasing  to  the  Most  High,  as  that  which 
is  moderated  with  shame,  and  tempered 
with  contrition. — Charles  Sim^eon,  M,A, 


BOM  I  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHA^.  lit. 


The  Altar  and  the  Foundation  of  the  Temple. 
Notes  for  Scripture  Lesson  {Whole  Chapter), 


Our  lesson  contains  the  account  of 
the  beginning  of  the  great  work  of  re- 
building the  Temple.  It  is  sad  to 
find  that  through  delays  and  indiffer- 
ence twenty  years  passed  before  it  was 
finished,  and  then  only  on  the  arousing 
preaching  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah. 
They,  however,  began  well,  collecting 
material  and  laying  the  foundations  by 
the  fourteenth  month  after  their  return. 
Of  this  great  and  rejoicing  day  our 
lesson  contains  the  brief  account. 

Looking  carefully  at  the  chapter,  it  will 
be  seen  that  it  contains  two  things,which, 
though  related,  are  quite  distinct — 

1.  The  beginning  of  Worship. 

2.  The  beginning  of  the  Temple  for 
Worship. 

It  will  also  be  observed  that  the 
people  very  properly  thought  more  of 
the  spiritual  worship  than  of  the  material 
building,  and  found  that  they  could 
have  the  worship  at  once,  though  the 
Temple  to  worship  in  might  be  long 
unbuilt.  The  things  we  give  to  God, 
buildings,  <fec.,  must  always  come  second, 
and  have  no  value  before  Him  until  we 
have  given  Him  ourselves.  The  true  wor- 
shippers worship  "  in  spirit  and  in 
truth ; "  but  they  properly  accept  all 
the  helps  of  buildings  and  services. 
The  key  to  the  lesson  may  therefore  be 
the  sentence  of  praise  spoken  by  Paul 
concerning  the  Macedonians  (2  Cor.  viii. 
5).  They  "  first  gave  their  ownselves  to 
the  Lord,  and  unto  us  by  the  will  of 
God." 

We  have  then  this  to  set  forth  and 
illustrate,  and  we  call  it — 

I.  The  true  order.  First  the  burnt 
offering,  then  the  Temple.  First  the 
self-surrender,  then  the  doing  of  duty. 
First  the  worship  of  the  soul,  then  the 
work  of  the  hands.  The  burnt  ofi'ering 
was  designed  to  represent  the  entire 
yielding  of  the  worshipper  to  God.  How 
suitable  such  an  act  was  for  the  newly- 
restored  people,  just  beginning  their 
national  life  !  They  properly  began 
with  a  very  solemn  consecration  of  the 


whole  nation  to  God  by  burnt  offering. 
Though  we  do  not  bring  representative 
sacrifices  now,  we  follow  the  example  of 
these  earnest-hearted  men.  Tell  of  the 
youth,  going  out  into  life  from  a  country 
town,  not  knowing  what  temptations 
might  befall  him,  and  solemnly  conse- 
crating himself  to  God,  and  using  David's 
resolve,  "  1  will  go  in  the  strength  of 
the  Lord  God,  I  will  make  mention  of 
Thy  righteousness,  even  of  Thine  only." 
That  w  as  his  offering  of  himself  on  the 
altar  of  burnt  offering,  and  the  right  and 
noble  beginning  for  his  life.  That  youth 
lived  to  work  at  building  in  the  world 
the  great  Temple  of  God.  But  in  the 
second  part  of  the  lesson  we  have  another 
event  introduced — layingthe  foundations 
of  the  second  Temple,  and  this  brings 
before  us — 

II.  The  mingled  feelings.  In  the 
worship  all  feelin<:s  were  absorbed  in 
solemn  joy  ;  but  when  the  foundations 
were  laid,  such  memories  blended  with 
hope,  that  tears  fell  plentifully,  and  the 
wail  of  sorrow  almost  drowned  the  shout 
of  triumph.  Laying  foundations  of  a 
new  temple  or  church  is  the  occasion  for 
joy ;  show  how  we  decorate  with  flags, 
(fee,  and  have  music  and  song.  And  yet 
7io2^-a-days,  when  a  new  church  replaces 
an  old  one,  we  cannot  wonder  that  very 
touching  memories  should  crowd  round 
the  elder  people,  making  them  sorrow 
in  the  very  midst  of  other  joys.  So  it 
is  through  our  life,  songs  and  tears  are 
blended.  Joys  and  sorrows  go  hand  in 
hand  continually.  And  so  it  must  be 
in  a  sin-stricken  world  until  '*  God  Him- 
self shall  wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes." 
Impress  the  duty  which  surely  comes  to 
all  who  give  themselves  to  the  Lord  "a 
living  sacrifice."  They  have  ivorh  to  do 
for  God  in  the  world,  and  whatever  forms 
that  work  may  take,  it  is  really  a  part 
of  the  work  of  building  a  great  temple 
in  the  earth  for  the  glory  of  God ;  a 
great  spiritual  temple  that  needs  all  sorts 
of  workers  and  work ;  and,  when  one 
day  complete,  will  win  from  the  universe 

61 


«HAP.  IV.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY    EZRA. 


triumphant  songa,  with  which  shall  blend  dwell  among  them."  God's  temple  among 
n-j  sorrow  and  no  tears.  "The  Temple  men  we  mn^i  help  to  build. — R,  Tuck, 
of  God  shall  be  with  men,  and  He  shall     B.A, 


CHAPTER   lY. 


Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  we  have — (i.)  The  proposal  of  the 
Samaritans  to  unite  with  the  Jews  in  builditig  the  Temple,  and  its  rejection  (vers.  1-3). 
(ii.)  The  opposition  of  the  Samaritans  because  of  the  rejection  of  their  proposal  (vers.  4,  6). 
(iii.)  The  leiters  of  the  Samaritans  to  King  Artaxerxes  against  the  Jews,  one  of  which  is  here 
given  (vers.  6-16).  (iv.)  The  reply  of  Artaxerxes  to  their  letter  (vers.  17-22).  (v.)  Th« 
stoppage  of  the  building  of  the  Temple  (vers.  '2,\i^  24). 

Ver.  1.  The  adversaries  of  Judah  and  Benjamin]  These  "adversaries"  speak  of  themselves 
in  the  second  verse  as  having  been  brought  up  hither  by  Esarhaddon  king  of  Assur.  They 
are  the  peoples  spoken  of  in  2  Kings  xvii,  24  :  "And  the  king  of  Assyria  brought  men  from 
Babylon,  and  from  Cuthah,  and  from  Ava,  and  from  Hamatli,  and  from  Sepiiarvaim,  and 
placed  them  in  the  cities  of  Samaria  instead  of  the  children  of  Israel ;  and  they  possessed 
Samaria,  and  dwelt  in  the  cities  thereof."  They  described  themselvess  in  vers.  9,  10,  as  "the 
Diiiaites,  the  Apharsathciiites,  the  Tarpelites,  the  Babylonians,  the  Susanchites,  tlie  Delia vites, 
the  Elamites,  and  the  rest  of  the  nations,"  &c.  They  "were  called  Samaritans  after  the 
central  point  of  their  settlement."  They  were  a  very  mixed  people,  including  some  Israelites, 
but  chiefly  composed  of  heathens. 

Ver.  2.  For  we  seek  your  G-od,  as  ye  do;  and  we  do  sacrifice  unto  Him]  They  did  vorship 
Jehovah,  but  not  as  the  faithful  Jews  did.  They  worshipped  Him  not  as  the  only  living  and 
true  God,  but  as  one  amongst  others,  according  to  tlie  statement  in  2  Kings  xvii.  29-.'53. 

Ver.  3.  Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  to  build]  &c.  "The  question  was  not,"  as  Keil 
observes,  "whether  they  would  permit  Israelites  who  earnestly  sought  Jahve  to  parLicipate  in 
His  worship  at  Jerusalem — a  permission  which  they  certainly  would  have  refused  to  none  who 
sincerely  desired  to  turn  to  the  Lord  God — but  whether  they  would  acknowledge  a  mixed 
population  of  Gentiles  and  Israelites,  whose  worship  was  more  heathen  than  Israelite,  and  who 
nevertheless  claimed  on  its  account  to  belong  to  the  people  of  God.  To  such,  the  rulers  of 
Judah  could  not,  without  unfaithfulness  to  the  Lord  their  God,  permit  a  participation  in  the 
building  of  the  Lord's  house."  But  we  ourselves  together]  =  "we  as  a  compact  unity, 
excluding  others." — Schulti. 

Ver.  4.  The  people  of  the  land]  i.e.  "  the  adversaries,"  of  ver.  1.  Weakened  the  hands] 
&c.     Hindered  them  by  diminishing  their  courage  and  strength  for  the  work. 

Ver.  5.  And  hired  counsellors  against  them,  to  frustate  their  purpose]  Whether  by  "  hired 
counsellors"  we  are  to  understand  ministers  of  state  whom  the  Samaritans  bribed,  or  legal 
agents  whom  they  employed  to  bring  about  a  stoppage  of  the  work,  is  uncertain.  All  the  days 
of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia]  &c.  "The  machinations  against  the  building,  begun  immediately 
after  the  laying  of  its  foundations,  in  the  second  year  of  the  return,  had  the  eflfect,  in  the 
beginning  of  the  third  year  of  Cyrus  (judging  from  Dan.  i.  2),  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  work 
till  the  reign  of  Darius, — in  all,  fourteen  years,  viz.,  five  years  of  Cyrus,  seven  and  a  half  of 
Cambyses,  seven  months  of  the  Pseudo-Smerdis,  and  one  year  of  Darius  (till  the  second  years  of 
his  reign)." — Keil. 

Vers.  6  and  7.  Ahasuerus.  .  .  .  Artaxerxes.  Heb.  Ahaskverosh.  .  .  .  Artachshashta]  Dr. 
Cotton,  Bishop  of  Calcutta,  says  that  Ahasuerus  "  must  be  Cambyses,"  the  successor  of  Cyrus, 
and  Artaxerxes  "must  be  the  Pseudo-Smerdis"  (Bibl.  Diet.).  So  also  Rawlinson,  et  al.  But 
Keil,  Schultz,  et  al.f  hold  that  by  Ahasuerus  we  must  understand  Xerxes,  and  by  Artaxerxes 
"really  Artaxerxes"  Longimanus.  The  question  is  argued  by  them  at  considerable  length  in 
their  observations  in  loco.  Bishop  Hervey  takes  the  same  view,  and  states  it  thus  :  "  Ezra.  iv. 
6-23  is  a  parenthetic  addition  by  a  much  later  hand,  and,  as  the  passage  most  clearly  shows, 
made  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus.  The  compiler  who  inserted  chap,  ii.,  a  docu- 
ment drawn  up  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes,  to  illustrate  the  return  of  the  captives  under  Zerub- 
babel,  here  inserts  a  notice  of  two  historical  facts — of  which  one  occurred  in  the  reign  of 
Xerxes,  and  the  other  in  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes — to  illustrate  the  opposition  offered  by  the 
heathen  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  Temple  in  the  reign  of  Cyrus  and  Cambyses.  He  tells  us  that 
in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Xerxes,  i.e.  before  Esther  was  in  favour,  they  had  written  to 
the  king  to  prejudice  him  against  the  Jews — a  circumstance,  by  the  way,  which  may  rather  have 
inclined  him  to  listen  to  Haman's  proposition  ;  and  he  gives  the  text  of  letters  sent  to  Arta- 
xerxes, and  of  Artaxerxes'  answer,  on  the  strength  of  which  Kehum  and  Shimshai  forcibly 
hindered  the  Jews  from  rebuilding  the  city.  These  letters  doubtless  came  into  Ezra's  hands  at 
Babylon,  and  may  have  led  to  those  endeavours  on  his  part  to  make  the  king  favourable  to 
Jerusalem  which  issued  in  his  own  commission  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  reign.  At  ver.  24 
52 


EOMILETIC  COMMENXAR  Y  .  EZRi,  oHAf.  IT, 


Haggai's  narrative  proceeds  in  connection  with  ver.  6."  Puerst  also  holds  that  Ahasuerna  was 
Xerxes,  but  on  Artaxerxes  he  says  that  the  name  was  "borne  by  Pscndo-Smerdis  and  Arta- 
xerxes  Longimanus."  But  if  Ahasuerus  was  Xerxes,  the  Artaxerxes  of  the  text  must  have  been 
Artaxerxes  Loiiiciinanns.  Matthew  Henry  propounds  another  view,  viz.,  that  Aliasuerus  (ver, 
6)  was  also  called  Artaxerxes  (ver.  7),  and  is  identical  with  Cambyses.  The  view  of  Rawlinson 
is  perhaps  correct,  that  tlie  theory  that  Ahasuerus  is  Cambyses  and  Artaxerxes  the  Pseudo- 
Snierdis  '*  presents  fewer  difficulties  tiiun  any  other."  Hut,  notwithstanding  difficulties,  the 
other  theory  seems  to  us  to  be  ihe  true  one.  It  is  beyond  our  province  to  enter  further  into  the 
question. 

Ver.  7.  BisMam,  Mithredath,  Tabeel]  **  These  names  certainly  indicate  Samaritans  who, 
without  beina:  Persian  officials,  enjoyed,  just  as  Sanballat  subsequently,  a  certain  degree  of 
consequence." — Schultz.  /nd  the  rest  of  their  companions]  Margin:  **Heb.  societies.** 
Fuerst :  **  Associates,  colleagues."  The  writing  of  the  letter  was  written  in  the  Syrian  tongue] 
It  was  written  in  Syriac  or  Aramaic  characters.  And  interpreted  in  the  Syrian  tonguej  It 
was  in  the  Syriac  or  Aramaic  language.  Both  the  characters  and  the  language  were  Aramaic. 
The  Samaritans  "spoke  a  language  more  nearly  akin  to  Hebrew  than  to"  Aramaic  ;  and  what 
they  had  thought  in  their  own  language  they  translated  into  Aramaic,  and  wrote  in  Aramaic 
characters. 

Ver.  8.  Rehum  the  chancellor]  Heb.  Dyp"^J/3.  Fuerst :  "Properly,  lord  of  the  (royal) 
decree,  i.e.  either  stadtholder,  and  so  the  parallel  is  nn.3j  (comp.  Ezra  v.  3,  vi.  6,  or,  accord- 
ing to  Ezra  Apocr.  ii.  25;  Jos.  (Arch.  xi.  2),  and  Kirnchi,  &c.)  =  TSTD  IDD   chancellor;  but 

the  former  is  more  probable."  It  is  probably  the  title  of  tlie  Persian  governor  of  the  Samaritan 
province.     Shimshai  the  scribe]     Margin:  *' Or,  secretary.'*     Fuerst:  "Royal  scribe." 

Ver.  9.  The  Dinaites]  were  probably,  as  sugii:(  ^ted  by  Ewald,  people  from  the  Median  city 
Deinaver.  Rawlinson  suguests  that  they  were  the  people  of  Dayan,  a  country  bordering  on 
Cilicia.  The  Apharsathchites]  Avere  probably  the  same  as  the  Apharsachites"  (chap.  v.  6),  and 
were  perhaps  identical  with  the  Parsetacae,  or  Parsetaceni,  a  tribe  of  mountaineers  living  on  the 
borders  of  Media  and  Persia.  The  Tarpelites] :  "The  territory  Tarpel  has  been  supposed  to 
be  found  in  {Tdirovpoi)  of  Ptolemy,  east  of  Elam,  with  which  it  is  mentioned  ;  more  correctly, 
perhaps,  the  territory  Tarpel  is  at  the  Maeotic  swamp,  whose  inhabitants  Tapiri^Tes  are  men- 
tioned in  Strabo  (i.  p.  757).  In  no  case  can  it  be  the  Phoenician  Tripolis." — Fuerst.  The 
Apharsites]  are  by  some  regarded  as  Persians,  by  others  as  the  Parhasii,  in  eastern  Media.  The 
Archevites]  were  people  from  the  city  Erech,  now  Warka.  The  Susanchites],  or  Susanites,  were 
from  the  city  of  Susa.  The  Dehavites]  were  the  Dai  or  Dahi,  mentioned  by  Herodotus  (i.  125) 
among  the  nomadic  tribes  of  Persia.  The  Elamites]  were  the  original  inhabitants  of  the 
country  called  Elam. 

Ver.  10.  The  great  and  noble  Asnapper]  seems  to  have  been  a  distinguished  officer  in  the 
service  of  Esarhadtlon  (ver.  2),  and  employed  by  him  to  conduct  the  colonists  to  Samaria  and 
arrange  their  settlement  there.  And  at  such  a  time.]  Chaldee  D^i^^^  =  "  and  so  now,  Ezra 
iv.  10,  vii.  12,  i.e.  and  so  forth,  et  cetera." — Fuerst. 

Ver.  12.  And  have  set  up  the  walls]  &c.  Keil  would  translate  :  "And  are  setting  up  its 
walls  and  digging  its  foundations."  "  Repairing  "  (Fuerst)  "  its  foundations"  would  perhaps  be 
better. 

Ver.  13.  Toll]  Rather  tax  or  tribute  ;  the  money  payment  required  from  every  one. 
Tribute]  "A  tax  on  articles  consumed,  excise. — Fuerst.  Custom]  "A  road  tax,  a  toll." 
Ihid.  Thou  shalt  endamage  the  revenue]  The  meaning  of  the  word  rendered  "revenue" 
in  the  text^.  and  "  strengtli  "  in  the  margin,  is  entirely  uncertain.  Keil,  Rawlinson,  and  others 
say  that  D^^^?  depends  upon  the  Pehlevi  word  DniSi  and  signifies  "at  last."  "And  so  at  last 

thou  shalt  endamage  the  kings."  Fuerst,  however,  says  that  this  "gives  no  suitable  sense." 
But  it  seems  to  us,  as  Schultz  observes,  that  "the  meaning  of  'finally,'  *at  last,'  is  entirely 
appropriate." 

Ver.  14.  We  have  maintenance  from  the  king's  palace]  Margin  :  "  We  are  salted  with 
the  salt  of  the  palace. '^  The  Heb.  is,  "  We  salt  the  salt  of  the  palace  ; "  i.e.  we  eat  the  salt  of 
the  palace;  a  figurative  expression,  signifying  to  be  in  the  king's  service  and  to  obtain 
subsistence  from  him,  and  implying  the  obligation  to  look  after  his  interests.  The  king's 
dishonour]  Keil:  "The  damage  of  the  king"  Hpy  deprivation,  emptying,  here  injury  to 
the  royal  power  or  revenue." 

Ver.  15.  The  book  of  the  records  of  thy  fathers.]  It  is  called  in  Esth.  vi.  1,  "the  book  of 
the  records  of  the  chronicles."  Thy  fathers]  are  the  predecessors  of  the  king  on  the  throne, 
and  the  term  applies  not  only  to  the  Medo-Persian  but  also  to  the  Chaldean  sovereigns.  Of 
old  time]  Heb.  :  "From  the  days  of  eternity,"  i.e.  from  time  immemorial.  For  which  cause 
was  this  city  destroyed] — by  Nebuchadnezzar. 

Ver.  16.  No  portion  on  this  side  the  river]  The  statement  amounts  to  this,  that  the 
returned  Jews,  it  allowed  to  rebuild  and  fortify  Jerusalem,  would  seize  all  the  country  west  of 
the  Euphrates,  and  so  the  king  would  lose  that  part  of  his  dominions.  A  very  absurU 
exaggeration. 

Ver.  17.  And  at  such  a  time]     Rather,   "And  so  forth."    iSeeoa  rer.  10.) 

^3 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


Ver.  18.  Bead  before  me]     Persian  monarchs  were  not  accustomed  to  read  letters  or  records 

themselves,  but  to  have  them  read  to  them  by  others  (comp.  Esth.  vi.  1). 

Ver,  20.  There  have  been  mighty  kings]  &c.  This  is  most  applicable  to  David  and  Solomon, 
and  in  a  smaller  degree  to  Uzziah,  Jotham,  and  Josiali.  Kuled  over  all  beyond  the  river]  i.e. 
over  all  the  region  west  of  the  Euphrates. 

Ver.  23.  By  force  and  power]  Or,  as  in  the  margin,  **  By  arm  and  power."  They  com- 
pelled the  Jews  to  desist  fi-om  buildinjr. 

Ver.  24.  According  to  Keil,  Schultz,  et  al.,  the  historian  in  this  verse  takes  np  the  thread  of 
the  narrative  wliich  he  dropped  at  the  close  of  verse  5,  in  order  that,  by  inserting  the  episodical 
section  (vers.  6-23),  he  might  give  in  this  place  "a  short  and  comprehensive  view  of  all  the 
hostile  acts  against  the  Jewish  community  on  the  part  of  the  Samaritans  and  surrounding 
nations."  In  their  view  this  verse  refers  to  the  opposition  which  was  commenced  in  the  reign 
of  Cyrus,  while  verses  6-23  narrate  subsequent  hostilities.  But  according  to  the  view  of  Bishop 
Cotton,  that  Ahasuerus  (ver.  6)  must  be  Cambyses  and  Artaxerxes  (ver,  7)  the  Pseudo-Smerdis, 
and  that  this  chapter  is  one  continuous  narrative,  the  enforced  suspension  of  the  work  lasted 
for  about  two  years. 


The  Proposal  op  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews. 

(Verses  1-3.) 


Notice  : 

I.  The  proposal  made  by  the  Sama- 
ritans. "  Now  when  the  adversaries 
of  Judah  and  Benjamin  heard  that  the 
children  of  the  captivity  builded  the 
Temple  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel ; 
then  they  came  to  Zerubbabel,"  &c. 
(vers.  1,  2).     This  proposal  was— 

1.  Plausible  in  its  form.  They  pro- 
posed— (1)  To  render  help  in  a  great 
and  good  work.  "  They  said,  Let  us 
build  with  you."  They  do  not  ask  for 
anything  for  themselves,  except  per- 
mission to  co-operate  in  building  "  the 
Temple  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  ; " 
but  they  offer  something  to  the  Jews, 
even  their  assistance  in  their  great  under- 
taking. (2.)  To  render  help  in  this  work 
for  an  excellent  reason.  "  For  we  seek 
your  God  as  ye  do,  and  we  do  sacrifice 
unto  Him  since  the  days  of  Esarhaddon 
king  of  Assur,  which  brought  us  up 
hither."  They  urge  that  they  v\ere 
worshippers  of  Jehovah  even  as  the 
Jews  were  ;  that  they  were  interested 
in  the  promotion  of  His  honour ;  and 
that  it  would  therefore  be  appropriate 
for  them  to  unite  in  building  a  temple 
unto  Him.  Moreover,  the  returned 
Jews  being  neither  a  strong  nor  a 
wealthy  people,  and  having  much  to 
occupy  their  time  and  energies,  would 
naturally  be  prepared  to  welcome  any 
suitable  offers  of  assistance.  Tempta- 
tion is  always  plausible  in  its  presenta- 
tion to  the  tempted,  (a).  But  this  pro- 
posal was — 

54 


2.  Evil  in  itself.  Fair  and  plausible 
in  appearance,  it  was  false  and  perilous 
in  reality.  The  evil  of  their  proposal 
will  appear  if  we  consider  that — (L) 
They  were  not  Israelites.  They  were 
brought  into  Samaria  by  Esarliaddon 
king  of  Assur.  *'And  the  king  of 
Assyria  brought  men  from  Babylon, 
and  from  Cuthah,  and  from  Ava,  and 
from  Hamath,  and  from  Sepharvaim," 
(fee.  (2  Kings  xviL  24).  Tbey  were 
**  Dinaites,  Apbarsathchites,  Tarpelites, 
Apharsites,  Archevites,  Babylonians, 
Susanchites,  Dehavites,  and  Elamites  " 
(ver.  9).  If  it  be  allowed  that  these 
peoples  had  become  mixed  by  marriage 
with  the  remnant  of  the  Israelites  who 
remained  in  the  land  at  the  captivity, 
still  the  heathen  elements  and  usages 
and  influences  were  predominant  amongst 
them.  They  were  not  Israelites  either 
by  descent  or  by  sympathy.  (2.)  They 
did  not  worship  Jehovah  as  the  true 
God.  When  they  were  first  planted  in 
Samaria  they  were  ignorant  of  the  wor- 
ship of  Jehovah  ;  and  after  they  had 
been  instructed  in  it,  they  adopted  it 
not  as  exclusive  of  the  worship  of  other 
gods  but  in  common  with  such  worship. 
"They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served 
their  own  gods,"  <kc.  "  These  nations 
feared  the  Lord,  and  served  their 
graven  images,"  <fec.  (2  Kings  xviii.  24- 
41).  To  have  received  such  a  people 
into  commanity  and  co-operation  with 
the  true  people  of  God  would  have  been 
an  act  of  utter  unfaithfulness  and  dis- 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  IT. 


loyalty  to  Him.     (3.)  Their  design  in 
making  this  proposal  was  an  unworthy 
one.     '*  The  occasion  of  this  request  of 
the  Samaritans,"    says    Schultz,    '*  was 
the  correct  recognition  of  the  fact  that 
those  who  should  liave  the  Temple  at 
Jerusalem   would    be    regarded   as    the 
leading  nation,  whilst  those  who  should 
be  excluded  from  this  central  point  of 
the  worship  of  the  laiid  would  appear  as 
less  authorised,  as  intrusive  ;  they  like- 
wise no  doubt   expected,   if  they  were 
admitted  to  participation  in  the  building 
of  the  Temple,  as  well  as  to  consultation 
with  reference    to    it,   to    gain    thereby 
influence  in  shaping   the  affairs  of   the 
congregation  in  general.     If  in  addition 
to  this  they  had  also  a  religious  interest 
in  the  matter,  it  was  only  in  order  to 
secure  for  themselves  the  favour  of  the 
God  of  the  land,  whom  they  recognised 
as  Jehovah,  and  then  therewith  also  the 
same  possessions  and  blessings  in  their 
new  home   as   the   Jews   designed   for 
themselves.     We    cannot   regard    them 
as  actuated   by  any  higher   and   purer 
motive  ;    for   their    entire    subsequent 
behaviour,  which  makes  them  appear  as 
quite  indifferent  to  religious  affairs,  and 
also  that  which  we  elsewhere  learn  of 
their  religion  (2  Kings  xvii.  24-41),  is 
opposed  to  that  view."    (4.)  The  accept- 
ance of  their  proposal  would  have  been 
perilous    to    the    Jews.       Proneness   to 
associate  with  their  heathen  neighbours 
and  to  adopt  their  idolatrous  customs 
had    been    painfully    prevalent    in    the 
Israelites    previous   to    their    captivity, 
and   had  been  the  chief  cause  of  their 
miseries.     To  have  acceded  to  the  pro- 
posal   of   the    Samaritans    would    have 
been  to  have  placed  themselves  in  the 
utmost  danger  of  falling  again  into  their 
former  sins  with  all  their  train  of  bitter 
consequences.      They  were    not   strong 
enough   to   overcome   the  heathen  ele- 
ments and  influences  which  they  must 
have   encountered   in   association    with 
the   idolatrous    Samaritans.       In    such 
association    there    was   grave    peril    to 
their   best  interests.     Separation  from 
the    Samaritans    was    essential    to    the 
spiritual  safety  of  the  Jews.  (6). 

II.  The   proposal  rejected  by  the 
Jews,     "  But  Zerubbabel,  and  Jeshua, 


and  the  rest  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
of  Israel,  said  unto  them,"  <fec.  (ver.  3). 
In  this  rejection  there  are  several  note- 
worthy points — 

1.  An  exclusive  obligation  in  relation 
to  the  work  is  asserted.  "  Ye  have  no- 
thing to  do  with  us  to  build  an  house 
unto  our  God ;  but  we  ourselves  to- 
gether will  build  unto  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel."  In  such  an  undertaking  the 
Jews  and  the  Samaritans  had  nothing 
in  common.  The  obligation  to  build 
the  Temple  devolved  upon  the  Jews,  and 
they  alone  would  fulfil  that  obligation. 

2.  The  alleged  similarity/  of  worship 
is  indirectly/  denied.  The  rulers  of  the 
Jews  in  their  reply  to  the  Samaritans 
speak  of  "our  God"  and  of  "the  Lord 
God  of  Israel,"  implying  that  He  was 
not  the  God  of  the  Samaritans.  The 
returned  exiles  worshipped  Jehovah  as 
the  only  living  and  true  God,  while  the 
Samaritans  worshipped  Him  simply  as 
a  local  deity,  as  one  god  amongst  others. 
In  this  sense,  then.  He  was  "the  Lord 
God  of  Israel,"  but  not  of  the  Samari- 
tans, (c). 

3.  The  command  of  King  Cyrus  is 
adduced  in  support  of  this  rejection. 
"  As  King  Cyrus  the  king  of  Persia  hath 
commanded  us/'  The  authority  of  Cyrus 
was  binding  upon  both  the  Jews  and  the 
Samaritans.  The  Jews  had  his  commis- 
sion to  come  to  Jerusalem  and  build  the 
Temple  ;  but  if  it  was  a  work  which  the 
Samaritans  could  appropriately  under- 
take, he  need  not  have  encouraged  or 
even  allowed  the  Jews  to  leave  Babylon 
to  do  it.  Again,  if  it  was  a  work  which 
might  be  done  by  others  than  Jews,  why, 
seeing  that  he  was  so  much  interested 
in  it,  did  he  not  undertake  it  himself  1 
The  mentioning  of  the  authority  of  King 
Cyrus  by  the  Jewish  leaders  was  cer- 
tainly a  prudent  thing.  "  Be  ye  wise 
as  serpents,  and  harmless  as  doves." 

4.  The  rejection  of  the  proposal  was 
unanimous.  "  Zerubbabel,  and  Jeshua, 
and  the  rest  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers 
of  Israel,"  i.e.,  all  the  heads  of  the 
people,  concurred  in  declining  the  co- 
operation of  the  Samaritans.  This  una- 
nimity is  further  indicated  in  the  ex- 
pression, "  We  ourselves  together  will 
build,"  which  Schultz  correctly  explains. 

55 


OBAT.  IT. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


**  we,  as  a  compact  unity,  excluding 
others.**  If  the  Church  of  Christ  would 
stand  against  and  conquer  its  enemies, 
it  must  present  to  them  a  compact 
opposition,  (d). 

5.  The  rejection  of  the  proposal  was 
prompt  and  decided.  There  is  neither 
hesitation  nor  uncertainty  in  the  reply 
of  the  heads  of  the  Jewish  people  to  the 
Samaritans.  It  is  perilous  to  parley 
with  evil  proposals.  They  should  be 
immediately  and  firmly  repudiated,  (e). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  It  was  but  a  shallow  device,  and  showed 
a  very  ihadeauate  conception  of  devilish  art, 
to  represent  Satan  a  hideous  and  repulsive 
figure,  with  frightful  marks  to  be  recognised 
by,  with  a  beastly  foot  to  certify  his  track,  and 
all  concentrated  malignities  on  his  distorted 
features.  Why,  men  would  run  from  such 
ugliness  by  instinct ;  and  if  this  were  the  type 
of  evil,  it  could  never  come  near  enough  to 
tempt  us.  Our  virtue  would  be  safe  against 
a  seducer  that  inspired  nothing  but  disgust. 
In  the  real  Satan  we  must  look  for  a  shrewder 
cunning,  a  more  subtle  diplomacy,  a  more 
politic  disguise.  Whatever  he  may  have  been 
to  the  superstitious  fears  of  ruder  ages,  to  try 
the  temper  of  the  nineteenth  century  he  takes 
on  the  address  of  a  courtier,  the  self-possession 
of  a  man  of  the  world,  the  royal  dignity  of  a 
prince,  the  beauty  of  a  seraph,  and  the  man- 
ners of  a  gentleman.  If  you  meet  him  now — 
and  meet  him  you  certainly  will  to-morrow 
and  to-day — he  will  be  transformed  into  an 
angel  of  light. — F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

(6)  Let  not  any  so  much  presume  upon 
their  own  strength  as  to  imagine  that  they 
can  retain  their  sincerity,  though  they  keep 
wicked  company,  and  rather  convert  them  to 
good  than  be  perverted  by  them  to  evil,  see- 
ing this  is  a  matter  of  great  difficulty.  "  To 
be  good  among  the  good,"  says  Bernard,  '*  has 
in  it  health  and  safety  ;  among  the  wicked  to 
be  so,  is  also  commendable  and  praiseworthy: 
in  that,  happiness  is  joined  with  much  security; 
in  this,  much  virtue  with  difficulty."  For  as 
he  who  is  running  down  the  hill  can  sooner 
pull  with  him  one  that  is  ascending,  than  he 
who  is  going  up  can  cause  him  to  ascend  that 
is  running  down  ;  so  he  who  holds  a  headlong 
course  in  wickedness  can  more  easily  carry 
with  him  one  that  is  ascending  the  hill  of 
virtue,  being  a  motion  contrary  to  natural 
disposition,  than  he  can  cause  him  to  ascend 
with  him.  For  in  common  experience  we 
see  that  the  worser  state  prevails  more  in 
altering  the  better  to  its  condition,  than  the 
better  to  make  the  worse  like  itself.  'J^he  in- 
fected are  not  so  soon  cured  by  the  sound,  as 
they  are  tainted  with  their  contagion.  Rotten 
apples  lying  with  the  sound  are  not  restored 

56 


to  soundness,  but  the  sound  are  corrupted 
with  their  rottenness.  Dead  carcasses  united 
to  living  bodies  are  not  thereby  revived,  un- 
less it  be  by  miracle,  as  we  see  in  Elijah  and 
Peter  ;  but  the  living,  if  they  continue  any 
time  united  to  the  dea<l,  partake  with  them 
in  their  mortality  and  corruption.  And  thus 
it  is  in  our  spiritual  state,  wherein  the  worse 
more  prevails  to  corrupt  the  better,  than  the 
better  to  reform  the  worse. — Downame. 

(c)  Prone  before,  on  every  occasion,  to 
adopt  the  idolatrous  practices  of  the  adjacent 
nations,  the  Jews  now  secluded  themselves 
from  the  rest  of  the  world  in  proud  assurance 
of  their  own  religious  superiority.  The  law, 
which  of  old  was  perpetually  violated ,  or  almost 
forgotten,  was  now  enforced,  by  general  con- 
senttoitsextreme  point,  or  even  beyond  it.  Ad- 
versity endeared  that,  of  which  in  prosperity, 
they  had  not  perceived  the  value.  Prone,  the 
mass  of  them,  all  but  the  wiser  and  more  en- 
lightened who  worshipped  Jehovah,  to  wor- 
ship Him  but  as  a  national  God,  greater  and 
miirhtier  than  the  gods  of  other  nations  (a 
conception  in  itself  polytheisfic),  they  threw 
aside  this  lower  kind  of  pride,  to  assume  that 
of  the  sole  people  of  the  one  true  God.  Their 
city,  their  native  soil,  their  religion,  became 
the  objects  of  the  most  passionate  attachment. 
Intermarriages  with  foreigners,  neither  for- 
bidden by  statute  nor  by  former  practice,  were 
strictly  inhibited.  The  observance  of  the  Sab- 
bath, and  even  of  the  sabbatical  year,  was 
enforced  with  rigour  of  which  we  have  no 
precedent  in  the  earlier  annals,  even  to  the 
neglect  of  defence  in  time  of  war.  In 
short,  from  this  period  commences  that  un- 
social spirit,  that  hatred  towards  mankind 
and  want  of  humanity  to  all  but  their  own 
kindred,  with  which,  notwithstanding  the 
extent  to  which  they  carried  proselytism  to 
their  religion,  the  Jews  are  branded  by  all 
the  Roman  writers.  The  best  of  these  writers 
could  not  but  be  unconsciously  or  involun- 
tarily impressed  by  the  majesty  of  this  sub- 
lime monotheism,  but  their  pride  resented 
the  assumption  of  religious  superiority  by 
this  small  people  ;  and  the  stern  self-isolation 
of  the  Jews  from  all  religious  communion 
with  the  rest  of  mankind  was  beheld  only  in 
its  seemingly  proud  and  lonely  obstinacy — ^in 
its  refusal  to  contaminate  itself  with  what  it 
openly  declared  to  be  the  unholy  and  un- 
righteous and  foolish  usages  of  the  world. — 
H,  H.  MUman,  D.D. 

{d)  Union  is  power.  The  most  attenuated 
thread,  when  sufficiently  multiplied,  will  form 
the  strongest  c;ible.  A  single  drop  of  water 
is  a  weak  and  powerless  thing;  but  an  infinite 
number  of  drops,  united  by  the  force  of  at- 
traction, will  form  a  stream  j  and  many 
streams  combined  will  form  a  river ;  till 
rivers  pour  their  waters  into  the  mighty 
ocean,  whoso  proud  waves,  defying  the  power 
of  man,  none  can  stay  but  He  who  formed 
them.     And  thus  forces  which^  acting  singly. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  IV. 


are  utterly  impotent,  are,  vvlien  actin.;  in  com- 
bination, resistless  in  their  energies,  miu;hty 
in  power.  And  when  this  irreat  union  of  the 
geveral  powers  of  the  Church  siiali  be  brought 
to  bear  unitedly  on  one  point,  its  triumph 
will  be  the  subjection  of  a  world  to  Ciirist 
wliich  now  defies  the  solitary  efforts  of  single 
forces. — H.  0.  Salter. 

(e)  Decision  of  character  and  promptitude 
of  action,  qualities  so  important  on  board 
ship  in  a  storm,  in  the  manoeuvring  of  troops 
in  battle,  are  indispensable  to  the  Christian 


life,  both  to  our  getting  through  the  "strait 
gate,"  and  our  getting  on  in  the  **  narrow 
way."  Mow  often,  for  example,  does  it  hap- 
pen  that  to  hesitate  even  for  one  moment 
between  resisting  and  yielding  to  temptation 
is  to  fall  I  The  battle  is  lost  in  that  moment 
of  vacillation.  In  such  cases,  our  safety  lies 
in  coming  to  an  immediate  decision ;  in 
promptly  resolving  to  dally  with  the  tempter 
not  an  instant,  to  flee  if  we  can,  and  if  we 
cannot  flee  to  figlit — so  resisting  the  devil 
that  if  we  cannot  flee  from  him,  he  shall  flee 
from  us,  and  leave  us. — Thomas  Outhrie^  D.D. 


The  Proposals  of  the  Wicked  and  how  to  Treat  Them. 


(  Verses 

'*  The  children  of  the  captivity  "  who 
had  returned  to  their  own  land  were 
true  Israelites,  both  in  their  origin  and 
in  their  sympathies ;  the  Samaritans 
were  heathens  of  various  races,  or  at 
best  only  heathens  mingled  with  Israel- 
ites. The  Jews  were  decided  mouo- 
theists ;  the  Samaritans  were  confirmed 
polytheists,  and  are  here  correctly  de- 
scribed as  "  the  adversaries  of "  the 
Jews.  For  these  reasons  we  may  fairly 
regard  the  Jews  as  representing  the  true 
and  good,  and  the  Samaritans  the  false 
and  evil.  Viewed  in  this  respect,  the 
text  suggests — - 

I.  That  the  wicked  often  propose 
to  enter  into  alliance  with  the  good. 
"  Now  when  the  adversaries  t)f  Jiidah 
and  Benjamin  heard  that  the  children  of 
the  captivity  builded  the  Temple  unto 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel ;  then  they  came 
to  Zerubbabel,  and  to  the  chief  of  the 
fathers,  and  said  unto  them,  Let  us 
build  with  you."  For  selfish  reasons 
these  idolaters  propose  to  co-operate  with 
the  Jews  in  building  the  Temple  of  the 
true  and  only  God.  In  like  manner 
worldly  and  wicked  men  often  seek  to 
form  alliances  with  the  relisjious  and  the 
godly.  These  alliances  are  of  different 
kinds,  e.g. — 

1.  Commercial.  Partnerships  in  busi- 
ness, <fec. 

2.  Social.  Reception  into  their  society, 
or  personal  friendship. 

3.  Matrimonial.  From  various  selfish 
motives  the  non-religious  man  may  seek 
a  religious  wom m  for  hia  wife  ;  or  the 
worldly  woman  a  godly  man. 

4.  And  even^  as  in  this  case,  Religious. 


1-3.) 

Persons  who  have  no  real  godliness, 
actuate  I  by  unworthy  motives,  some- 
tijnes  seek  to  co-operate  in  religious 
enterprises. 

II.  That  the  proposals  of  the  wicked 
for  alliance  with  the  good  are  often 
supported  by  plausible  reasons.  "  For 
we  seek  your  God,  as  ye  do ;  and  we 
do  sacrifice  unto  Him,"  (fee.  How 
plausible  !  And  men  argue  with  equal 
plausibility  for  the  formation  of  alliances 
between  the  worldly  and  the  godly  in 
our  own  day.  Take  the  alliances  men- 
tioned above,  and  see  how  men  argue 
for  them. 

1.  Commercial.  It  is  argued  that 
religious  principles  have  nothing  to  do 
with  business  transactions. 

2.  Social.  That  the  advantage  and 
enjoyment  of  social  intercourse  is  inde- 
pendent of  the  question  of  personal 
piety. 

3.  Matrimonial.  That  the  ungodly 
partner  will  soon  be  won  over  to  the 
beliefar  'and  practices  of  the  godly  one ; 
or,  at  the  very  least,  will  derive  much 
moral  benefit. 

4.  Religious.  That  there  is  very  little 
difference  between  the  two  parties  ;  as, 
in  the  argument  of  the  Samaritans.  Such 
proposals  must  needs  be  plausibly  sup- 
ported, or  they  would  not  have  even  the 
remotest  chance  of  acceptance,    (a). 

III.  That  the  alliances  proposed  by 
the  wicked  are  always  perilous  to  the 
good.  The  Samaritans  were  "the  ad- 
vei  saries  of  the  "  Jews,  and  their  pro- 
posal was  a  dangerous  one  to  the  Jews. 
And  the  alliances  we  have  spoken  of 
place  the  best  interests  of  the  godly  in 

^7 


OBAF.  IT. 


HOMILBTIV  COMMkNTARY:  EZRA, 


jeopardy.  In  such  business  partnerships 
the  good  man's  high  standard  of  morality 
and  business  principle  is  in  sore  danger 
of  a  sad  reduction.  In  social  and  mat- 
rimonial relationships  of  this  mixed 
moral  character  there  is  great  danger 
that  the  delicate  bloom  of  piety  will  be 
soon  swept  away,  that  zeal  for  truth 
and  for  God  will  grow  cold,  that  habits 
of  devotion  will  gradually  fail,  and  thus 
the  very  life  of  the  soul  will  be  gravely 
imperilled.  And  if  the  wicked  be  ad- 
mitted mto  religious  alliances  and  enter- 
prises, such  enterprises  will  run  immi- 
nent risk  of  being  first  degraded  and  then 
defeated.  (6). 

IV.  That     the    proposals    of    the 
wicked   for    alliance  with    the  good 
should  always  be  firmly  rejected.    The 
leaders  of   the  Jews  are  an  example  to 
us  in  this  respect.       "Zerubbabel  and 
Jeshua.  and  the  rest  of  the  chief  of  the 
fathers  of  Israel,   said  unto  them,   Ye 
have  nothing  to  do  with  us  to  build  an 
house  unto  our  God,"  <fec.     When  the 
difference  of  character  is  essential  and 
radical,  there  should  be  no  hesitation  as 
to    the    treatment    of    such    proposals. 
Occasional  association  between  the  un- 
mistakably good  and  the  unmistakably 
wicked    is    sometimes   justifiable    and 
necessary ;    as  in  business  transactions 
and  in  the  efforts  of  the  good  to  benefit 
the  wicked.    "  I  pray  not,"  said  Christ, 
"that    Thou    shouldest  take   them  out 
of  the  world,   but  that  Thou  shouldest 
keep  them  from  the  evil."  (c).       But  the 
first  suggestion  of  intimate  association 
or  close  alliance  between  them,  however 
plausibly  presented  and  enforced,  should 
be  at   once  and  decisively  checked   by 
the  good.      "  Can   two  walk   together, 
except  they  be  agreed  %  "     "  Be  ye  not 
unequally  yoked    together    with    unbe- 
lievers ;  for  what  fellowship  hath  righte- 
ousness    with     unrighteousness?"     (kc. 
(2  Cor.  vi.   14-18).      Resist  temptation 
promptly  and  firmly.  (</). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Satan  never  plays  a  bold  game.  He 
wins  by  not  showing  his  worst  at  first,  by  con- 
cealing his  tricks,  transformed  into  an  angel 
of  light.  It  takes  a  great  deal  of  effort  to  put 
us  thoroughly  ou  our  guard  against  his  wiles  ; 
bub  when  it  is  done,  it  is  worth  the  pains! 
0^ 


Tempting  men  imitate  their  great  leader  and 
prototype.  They  never  go  directly  and  openly 
to  their  object.  If  they  would  bend  you  from 
your  integrity,  they  will  flatter  your  self-respect 
by  holding  out  to  you  a  moral  inducement.  If 
they  would  corrupt  your  piirity,  they  insinu- 
ate the  poison  through  some  appeal  to  your 
better  affections.  If  they  would  weaken  the 
holy  restraints  that  gird  in,  with  their  blessed 
zone,  the  innocence  of  childhood,  they  will 
urge  some  sly  argument  to  an  honourable 
pride,  or  else  to  a  friendly  sympathy,  or  el&e  to 
a  praiseworthy  love  of  independence  ;  and  the 
first  battery  that  has  been  plied  against  many 
a  boy's  virtue  has  been  the  cunning  caution 
that  bade  him  not  be  afraid  of  his  elders. 
They  may  say,  as  Milton  makes  the  Archfiend 
say,  sitting  like  a  cormorant  on  a  tree  that 
overlooked  the  sinless  Eden  and  the  yet  inno- 
cent inmates,  deceiving  even  his  own  black 
heart — 

"  Should  I  at  your  harmless  innocence 
Melt,  as  I  do,  yet  public  reason  just, 
Honour  and  empire,  with  revenge  enlarged 
By  conquering  this  new  world,  compels  me 

now 
To  do  what  else,  though  damned,  I  should 
abhor." 

Theologians  can  cover  their  sectarian  mis- 
representations with  the  plea  of  "  zeal  for  the 
cause,"  and  controversialists  baptize  their 
bigotry  with  language  of  Holy  Writ  wrested 
from  its  meaning. 

"The  devil  can  cite  Scripture  for  his  pur- 
pose .  .  . 
Oh  what  a  goodly  outside  falsehood  hath  ! " 
Says  the  Apostle  Paul,  *«  If  Satan  himself  is 
transformed  into  an  angel  of  light,  it  is  no  great 
thing  if  his  ministers  also  be  transformed  as 
the   ministers   of  righteousness ;    whose   end 

shall    be   according   to  their  works." F.  D. 

Huntington,  D.D. 

(6)  Man,  being  a  sociable  creature,  is  mightily 
encouraged  to  do  as  others  do,  especially  in  an 
evil  example;  for  we  are  more  susceptible  of 
evil  than  we  are  of  good.  Sickness  is  sooner 
communicated  than  health  ;  we  easily  catch  a 
disease  of  one  another,  but  those  that  are  sound 
do  not  communicate  health  to  the  diseased. 
Or  rather,  to  take  God's  own  expression  that 
sets  it  forth  thus,— by  touching  the  unclean 
the  man  became  unclean  under  the  law,  but 
by  touching  the  clean  the  man  was  not  puri- 
fied. The  conversation  of  the  wicked  hag 
more  power  to  corrupt  the  good,  thati  the  con- 
versation  of  the  virtuous  and  holy  to  correct 
the  lewd. —  Manton. 

(c)  All  C(juipany  with  unbelievers  or  mis- 
believers is  not  condemned.  We  find  a  Lot 
in  Sodom,  Israel  with  the  Egyptians,  Abra- 
ham and  Isaac  with  their  Abimelechs  ;  roses 
among  thorns,  and  pearls  in  mud  ;  and  Jesus 
Christ  among  publicans  and  sinners.  So 
neither  we  be  infected,  nor  the  name  of  the 
Lord  wronged,  to  converse  with  them  that  we 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OELAT,  IT. 


may  convert  them  is  a  holy  course.  But  still 
we  must  be  among  them  as  strangers  :  to  pass 
through  an  infected  place  is  one  thing,  to  dwell 
in  it  anotlier.  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and 
men  are  His  ;  wheresoever  God  shall  find  the 
merchant,  let  liini  be  sure  to  find  God  in  every 
place. — Thomas  Adams. 

(d)  Keep  the  devil  at  arm's  length,  and 
fight  him  at  a  distance.  Suffer  him,  in  easy 
security,  to  draw  near,  and  resistance  is  over  ; 
the  citadel  of  your  soul  is  won.  Nine-tenths 
of  the  gross,  degrading,  damning  sins  into 
which  people  are  betrayed,  are  committed 
without  premeditation,  nay,  with  a  clear  pur- 
pose against  them  ;  but  a  man  or  a  woman 
has  toyed  with  temptation — just  thus  far  I  can 
yenture,  and  stop  short  of  foul  and  fatal  sin. 


And  then,  as  the  poor  bird  when  he  sees  the 
bait  in  the  trap,  Satan  knows  he  has  you  fast ; 
he  knows  that  those  encroachments  are  never 
staid.  The  art  of  godly  living  in  its  earlier 
stages  is  an  art  of  wise  defences,  a  constant, 
earnest  vigilance  at  the  outworks  of  the  spirit, 
tliat  they  may  never  be  stormed  or  sapped  by 
the  foe.  Gradually,  as  a  man  grows  in  grace 
and  godliness,  the  outer  defence  may  be  aban- 
doned. Paul,  the  aged,  could  look  steadily 
in  the  face  many  a  peril  which  Paul  the  neo- 
phyte would  have  wisely  shunned.  But  let  the 
young  pilgrim  of  life  beware,  and  if  he  feels 
himself  in  an  atmosphere  of  temptation,  let 
him  raise  bulwarks  of  habits  and  self-denials 
by  which  the  pestilent  foe  may  be  kept  as  far 
as  may  be  from  the  near  neighbourhood  of  the 
soul. — /.  B.  Brown,  B.A. 


The  True  Builders  of  the  Spiritual  Temple  of  God. 

{Verse  3.) 


The  chiefs  of  the  Jewish  community 
here  aflSrm  that  the  building  of  the 
Temple  at  Jerusalem  was  their  work, 
that  the  Samaritans  had  no  proper  part 
in  it;  and  that,  therefore,  they  would 
do  the  work  themselves,  without  the 
proffered  aid  of  the  Samaritans.  This 
position,  which  they  took  up  and  main- 
tained, suggests  that  the  true  spiritual 
Israelites  are  the  only  authorised  and 
legitimate  builders  of  the  spiritual  Temple 
of  Gody  or  that  Christian  work  should 
he  done  only  hy  Christians.  This  posi- 
tion may  be  supported  by  the  following 
reasons  ; — 

I.  They  alone  will  build  on  the 
true  foundation.  "  Behold  I  lay  in 
Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried 
stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure 
foundation :  he  that  believeth  shall  not 
make  haste.'*  "  Other  foundation  can 
no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  which  is 
Jesus  Christ."  He  is  the  only  founda- 
tion of  a  true  character  ;  the  only  corner- 
stone of  a  true  church.  Neither  theolo- 
gical creeds  or  systems,  nor  ecclesiastical 
politics,  nor  even  divinely  instituted 
sacraments,  nor  schemes  of  social  im- 
provement, nor  the  unreliable  excel- 
lences and  fancied  merits  of  individuals 
— none  of  these,  nor  all  of  them  com- 
bined, can  be  the  true  foundation  of  the 
spiritual  Temple  of  God.  Christ  is  the 
only  true  and  sure  foundation.  And 
the  true  Christian,  who  is  both  a  stone 
in  the  edifice  and  also  a  builder  of  the 


edifice,  is  himself  built  upon  Christ  and 
builds  others  upon  Him.  He  who  is  not 
himself  a  true  Christian  will  suggest 
some  other  foundation,  (fee.  (a). 

II.  They  alone  will  build  with  the 
true  materials.  The  spiritual  temple 
is  to  be  built  of  living  and  Christ ly 
souls.  *'Ye  also  as  living  stones  are 
built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an  holy 
priesthood."  The  Christian  Church 
should  be  composed  of  Christian  persons, 
and  only  of  them.  The  great  spiritual 
dwelling-place  of  God  must  be  con- 
structed of  spiritual  persons.  The  car- 
nally-minded, the  worldly-minded,  the 
ungodly,  have  no  true  place  in  it.  The 
Christian  builder  will  seek  to  build  the 
edifice  of  true  materials  ;  he  will  '*  build 
upon  this  foundation  gold,  silver,  pre- 
cious stones."  Those  who  are  not  them- 
selves true  Christians  would  build  of 
"  wood,  hay,  stubble  ;  "  they  would  put 
into  the  edifice  unsuitable  materials, 
(fee.  (6). 

III.  They  alone  will  build  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  true  plan.  The 
design  of  the  Church  is  Divine.  They 
who  labour  in  the  erection  of  the  spiri- 
tual temple  are  not  to  carry  out  their 
own  ideas,  but  to  fulfil  the  plan  of  God. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  great  Master 
Builder :  He  also  superintends  the 
work.  The  business  of  the  workmen  is 
to  carry  out  His  directions.  Here  are 
some  glimpses  of  the  Divine  design  for 
this  temple.     "  In  whom  all  the  build 

59 


OHAr.  IT. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


ing  fitly  framed  together  groweth  unto 
an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord."  "  A  glori- 
ous Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle, 
or  any  such  thing  ;  but  that  it  should 
be  holy  and  without  blemish."  Only 
the  membeia  of  the  true  spiritual  Israel 
will  keep  the  Divine  plan  in  view,  and 
faithfully  build  in  accordance  with  it. 

IV.  They  alone  will  build  with  the 
true  aim.  What  is  the  great  end  of 
the  spiritual  temple  which  is  being  built 
amongst  men  ?  The  glory  of  God.  For 
this  end  the  Jews  rebuilt  their  Temple. 
This  is  the  end  of  the  great  redemptive 
work  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  of  all  Christian 
aojencies.  "  Ye  are  builded  too:ether  for 
an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit." 
*'  Ye  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  an 
holy  priesthood,  to  otfer  up  spiritual 
sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ."  *'  Behold  the  tabernacle  of 
God  is  with  men,  and  He  will  dwell 
with  them,  and  they  shall  be  His 
people,  and  God  Himself  shall  be  with 
them,  and  be  their  God."  The  final 
cause  of  this  spiritual  temple  is  that 
God  shall  be  manifest  in  it  everywhere, 
realised  everywhere,  obeyed  everywhere, 
adored  everywhere.  Only  the  godly 
will  faithfully  labour  for  this  end.  The 
ungo^liy,  like  the  Samaritans,  will  be 
moved  by  political  or  other  inferior  con- 
siderations, and  will  aim  at  some  selfish 
end. 

V.  They  alone  will  build  in  the 
true  spirit.  The  true  spirit  for  Chris- 
tian work  is  that  of — 

1.  Ohediencey  as  opposed  to  self-will. 

2.  Humility,  as  opposed  to  haughti- 
ness and  self-conceit. 

3.  Patience  in  dealing  with  difiiculties 
and  disappointments,  as  opposed  to 
petulance. 

4.  Trust  in  God,  as  opposed  to  self- 
confidence. 

5.  Self-consecration,  as  opposed  to  self- 
seeking.  This  is  the  true  spirit  for  the 
builders  of  the  spiritual  Temple  of  our 
God ;  and  this  spirit  belongs  only  to 
the  true  people  of  God.  The  first  and 
chief  condition  of  doing  good  to  others 
is  being  good  ourselves.  To  accomplish 
successful  Christian  work  we  must  live 
sincere    Christian   lives.      And  so  our 


subject  brings  us  to  the  cross  and  to 
the  Saviour,  to  the  atonement  and  the 
example  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Fitness  for 
holy  work  begins  by  trusting  in  Him, 
and  is  maintained  by  imitating  Him.  (c). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Christ  is  often  called  the  foundation  ;  the 
stone ;  the  corner-stone  on  which  the  Church 
is  reared  (Isa.  xxviii.  16  ;  Matt.  xxi.  42  ;  Acts 
iv.  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  20  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6). 
The  meaning  is,  that  no  true  church  can  be 
reared  which  does  not  embrace  and  hold  the 
true  doctrines  respecting  Him — those  which 
pertain  to  His  incarnation,  His  Divine  nature, 
His  instructions,  His  example.  His  atonement, 
His  resurrection,  and  His  ascension.  Th^ 
reason  why  no  true  church  can  be  established 
without  embracing  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Christ, 
is,  that  it  is  by  Him  only  that  men  can  be 
saved  ;  and  where  this  doctrine  is  wanting,  all 
is  wanting  that  enters  into  the  essential  idea 
of  a  church.  The  fundamental  doctrines  of 
the  Christian  religion  must  be  embraced,  or  a 
church  cannot  exist ;  and  where  those  doctrines 
are  denied,  no  association  of  men  can  be  recog- 
nised as  a  Church  of  God.  Nor  can  the  foun- 
dation be  modified  or  shaped  so  as  to  suit  the 
wishes  of  men.  It  must  be  laid  as  it  is  in  the 
Scriptures ;  and  the  superstructure  must  be 
reared  on  that  alone. — Albert  Barnes,  D.D. 

(b)  By  going  to  the  lowest  stratum  of  human 
nature,  Christ  gave  a  new  idea  of  the  value  of 
man.  He  built  a  kingdom  out  of  the  refuse 
of  society.  To  compare  small  things  with  great, 
it  has  been  pointed  out  by  Lord  Macaulay 
that  in  an  English  cathedral  there  is  an  ex- 
quisite stained  window  which  was  made  by  an 
apprentice  out  of  the  pieces  of  glass  which  had 
been  rejected  by  his  master,  and  it  was  so  far 
superior  to  every  other  in  the  church,  that, 
according  to  tradition,  the  envious  artist  killed 
himself  with  vexation.  All  the  builders  of 
society  had  rejected  the  "sinners,"  and  made 
the  painted  window  of  the  "righteous."  A 
new  Builder  came ;  His  plan  was  original, 
startling,  revolutionary  ;  His  eye  was  upon  the 
contemned  material ;  He  made  the  first  last, 
and  the  last  first ;  and  the  stone  which  the 
builders  rejected  He  made  the  head  stone  of 
the  comer. — Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

(c)  The  true  philosophy  or  method  of  doing 
good  is,  first  of  all  and  principally,  to  be  good 
— to  have  a  character  that  will  of  itself  com- 
municate good.  There  must  and  will  be  active 
efibrt  where  there  is  goodness  of  principle  ;  but 
the  latter  we  should  hold  to  be  the  principal 
thing,  the  root  and  life  of  all.  Whether  it  is 
a  mistake  more  sad  or  more  ridiculous,  to  make 
mere  stir  synonymous  with  doing  good,  we 
need  not  inquire  ;  enough,  to  be  sure  that  one 
who  has  taken  up  such  a  notion  of  doing  good 
is  for  that  reason  a  nuisance  to  the  church. 
The  Christian  is  called  a  light,  not  lightning. 


BOMJLETW  COMMENTARt:  B^itLA, 


olup.  tt. 


In  order  to  act  with  effect  on  others,  he  must 
Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  thus  become  the  image 
of  goodness;  he  must  be  so  akin  to  God,  and 
so  filled  with  His  dispositions,  that  he  shall 
seem  to  surround  himself  with  a  hallowed  atmo- 
sphere. It  is  folly  to  endeavour  to  make  our- 
selves shine  before  we  are  luminous.  If  the 
sun  without  his  beams  should  talk  to  the 
planets,  and  argue  with  them  till  the  final  day, 
it  would  not  make  them  shine  ;  there  must  be 
light  in  the  sun  itself,  and  then  they  will  shine, 
of  course.  And  this,  my  brethren,  is  what 
God  intends  for  you  all.     It  is  the  great  idea 


of  His  Gospel,  and  the  work  of  His  Spirit,  to 
make  you  lights  in  the  world.  His  greatest 
joy  is  to  give  you  character,  to  beautify  your 
example,  to  exalt  your  principles,  and  make 
you  each  the  depositary  of  His  own  Almighty 
grace.  But  in  order  to  this,  something  is 
necessary  on  your  part  —  a  full  surrender  ot 
your  mind  to  duty  and  to  God,  and  a  perpetual 
desire  of  His  spiritual  intimacy  ;  having  this, 
having  a  participation  thus  of  the  goodness  of 
God,  you  will  as  naturally  communicate  good  as 
the  sun  communicates  his  beams. — U,  Bush- 
nell,  D.D. 


The  Hostility  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews. 

{Verses  4,  5,  and  24.) 


The  advances  of  the  Samaritans  having 
been  firmly  declined  by  the  Jews,  they 
resorted  to  opposition,  and  endeavoured 
to  thwart  them  in  their  great  work. 
Notice  : 

L  The  tactics  of  the  wicked.     Hav- 
ing failed    to    accomplish    their    selfish 
purposes  by  the  proposal  to  co-operate 
in  the  work,  "  the  people  of  the  land  " 
at  once  proceeded  to  hinder  the  work. 
If  the  Jews  would  not  accept  their  prof- 
fered assistance,  they  were  resolved  tbat 
they  should   experience  their  hostility. 
The  Jews  had  said  that  they  would  do 
the  work  alone,  whereupon  the  Samari- 
tans determined  that  they  should  not  do 
it  at  all.     They  *'  weakened  the  hands 
of  the  people  of  Judah,"  "  ».«.,  tbey  dis- 
couraged  and   intimidated   them   as  re- 
gards their    great    work.       The  wicked 
are,   alas !    fertile   in    resources  for  the 
accomplishment    of    their  evil    designs. 
Their  methods  are  often  manifold  and 
crafty.     If  they  cannot  bend  the  good 
to  their  wishes  and  aims  by  plausible 
pretences,   they   alter  their    tactics  and 
betake  themselves  to  unscrupulous   op- 
position in  various  forms. 

11.  The  venality  of  the  wicked.  The 
Samaritans  "  hired  counsellors  against 
them,  to  frustrate  their  purpose."  M. 
Henry  suggests  that  these  counsellors, 
"pretending  to  advise  them  for  the  best, 
should  dissuade  them  from  proceeding, 
and  so  *  frustrate  their  purpose,'  or  dis- 
suade the  men  of  Tyre  and  Sidon  from 
furnishing  them  with  the  timber  they 
had  bargained  for  (chap.  iii.  7) ;  or  what- 
ever business  they  had  at  the  Persian 
court,  to  solicit  for  any  particular  grants 


or  favours,  pursuant  to  the  general  edict 
for  their  liberty,  there  were  those  that 
were  hired  and  lay  ready  to  appear  of 
counsel  against  them."  Or,  as  Schultz 
suggests,  they  were  hired  to  get  the 
edict  of  Cyrus  cancelled  by  influencing 
"  the  ministers  to  whom  chap.  vii.  28 
and  viii.  25  refer,  or  other  influential 
persons,  to  give  advice  to  Cyrus  un- 
favourable to  the  Jews.  At  court  they 
naturally  did  not  understand  how  it 
could  be  that  those  who  were  as  much 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land  as  the  re- 
turned exiles,  and  therefore  seemed  en- 
titled to  the  God  of  the  land,  should  be 
excluded.  If  Cyrus  had  seen  in  Jehovah 
his  own  supreme  God,  it  must  have  been 
all  the  more  annoying  to  him  that  those 
who  apparently  had  the  best  intentions 
of  worshipping  Him  should  be  rejected. 
It  would  seem  as  if  the  reason  why  the 
Jews  opposed  the  union  could  only  be 
a  national  and  political  one,  and  the 
suspicion  was  quite  natural,  that  they 
already  designed  to  form  not  merely  a 
religious  community,  but  also  had  na- 
tional and  political  designs,  that  they 
thus  gave  an  entirely  false  interpretation 
to  the  decree  of  Cyrus."  But,  however 
these  counsellors  proceeded  in  their 
work,  it  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  they 
were  men  of  some  skill  and  resource  and 
power  of  persuasion,  and  they  deliber- 
ately exercised  their  abilities  in  an  evil 
cause  for  gain.  In  them  the  voice  of 
conscience  was  overwhelmed  by  the 
cravings  of  cupidity.  In  the  twenty- 
fourth  chapter  of  Acts  we  have  two 
illustrations  of  this  venality.  The  learn- 
ing and  eloquence  of  Tertulhis,  a  Roman 

61 


CfiAP.  It. 


aOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


barwster,  were  employed  to  promote  the 
cause  of  tyranny,  injustice,  and  false- 
hood, and  to  persecute  a  true  and  holy 
man.  And  Felix  the  governor  refrains, 
for  the  space  of  two  years,  from  doing 
what  he  is  convinced  is  his  duty  in  re- 
leasing St.  Paul  from  his  imprisonment, 
in  the  hope  of  receiving  bribes  to  do  so. 
It  is  inexpressibly  mournful  to  see  men 
prostituting  their  genius,  or  learning,  or 
wisdom,  or  eloquence,  or  power  for 
money.  Yet  how  numerous  are  the 
forms  and  instances  of  it  in  our  own 
day,  e.g.^  men  write  fictions  and  songs 
which  minister  to  men's  lower  nature  at 
the  expense  of  their  higher  nature, 
&c.  (a). 

III.  The  temporary  triumph  of  the 
wicked.     The  Samaritans  succeeded  in 
discouraging  the  Jews,  harassing  them 
in  their  work,  and  finally  putting  a  stop 
to  their  work.      They  frustrated  "  their 
purpose  all  the  days  of  Cyrus  king  of 
Persia,  even   until  the  reign  of  Darius 
king   of  Persia.   .  .   .  Then   ceased   the 
work  of  the  house  of  God  which  is  at 
Jerusalem.       So    it    ceased    unto    the 
{second  year  of  Darius  king  of  Persia." 
For   the  space   of    fourteen    years    the 
building  of   the  Temple  was    arrested, 
viz.,  for  five  years  of  the  reign  of  Cyrus, 
seven  and   a  half   of   Cambyses,  seven 
months  of  the  Pseudo-Smerdis,  and  one 
year  of  Darius.     The  wicked  have  often 
succeeded  in  hindering  the  progress  of 
the   cause   of   God.     St.   Paul  was  hin- 
dered  by  Satan,  once  and  again,  from 
the  execution  of  his  purposes  (1  Thess. 
ii.  18).      Persecution  too  has  frequently 
obstructed  sadly  the  work  of  God,  and 
inflicted  grievous    trials  and    sufferings 
upon  His  people. 

IV.  The  freedom  allowed  by  God  to 
the  wicked.  He  allowed  the  Samaritans 
to  resist  His  purposes,  to  persecute  His 
people,  to  arrest  the  building  of  His 
Temple  for  fourteen  years.  And  still 
He  allows  the  atheist  to  deny  His  exist- 
ence, the  blasphemer  to  blaspheme  His 
name,  and  the  wicked  to  "do  evil  with 
both  hands  earnestly."  He  will  not  in- 
vade the  moral  freedom  with  which  He 
Himself  has  dowered  us.  And  "sen- 
tence against  an  evil  work  is  not  speedily 
executed."     His  forbearance,  even  with 

62 


the  most  pernicious  and  provoking  sin- 
ners, is  very  great.  "  The  Lord  is  merci- 
ful and  gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and 
plenteous  in  mercy."  But  let  no  one 
presume  upon  the  Divine  patience. 
"Thinkest  thou,  O  man,  that  thou 
shalt  escape  the  judgment  of  God?  Or 
despisest  thou  the  riches  of  His  good- 
ness and  forbearance  and  long-suffer- 
ing?"  <kc.  (Rom.  ii.  4-11).  (6).  And 
in  the  end  the  Temple  of  God  shall 
be  built,  and  His  purposes  fully  and 
splendidly  accomplished.  The  triumph 
of  the  wicked  is  only  temporary.  God 
will  frustrate  their  deepest  designs,  and 
overrule  them  for  the  fulfilment  of  His 
own.  "  Surely  the  wrath  of  man  shall 
praise  Thee :  the  remainder  of  wrath 
shalt  Thou  restrain."  Let  us  learn, 
before  leaving  this  section  of  the  nar- 
rative, that  the  most  dangerous  enemies 
of  the  Church  of  God  are  hypocritical 
adherents  to  it.  Half-hearted,  incon- 
sistent, ungodly  professors  of  religion 
are,  in  their  influence,  the  worst  obstruc- 
tions to  the  progress  of  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Gold  is  the  only  power  which  receives 
universal  homage.  It  is  worshipped  in  all 
lands  without  a  single  temple,  and  by  all 
classes  without  a  single  hypocrite  ;  and  often 
has  it  been  able  to  boast  of  having  armies  for 
its  priesthood,  and  hecatombs  of  human  victims 
for  its  sacrifices.  Where  war  has  slain  its 
thousands,  gain  has  slaughtered  its  millions  ; 
for  while  the  former  operates  only  with  the 
local  and  fitful  terrors  of  an  earthquake,  the 
destructive  influence  of  the  latter  is  universal 
and  unceasing.  Indeed  war  itself — what  has 
it  often  been  but  the  art  of  gain  practised  on 
the  largest  scale  ?  the  covetousness  of  a  nation 
resolved  on  gain,  impatient  of  delay,  and  lead- 
ing on  its  subjects  to  deeds  of  rapine  and 
blood  ?  Its  history  is  the  history  of  slavery 
and  oppression  in  all  ages.  For  centuries, 
Africa — one  quarter  of  the  globe— has  been  set 
apart  to  supply  the  monster  with  victims — 
thousands  at  a  meal.  And,  at  this  moment, 
what  a  populous  and  gigantic  eiupire  can  it 
boast  !  the  mine,  with  its  unnatural  drudgery  ; 
the  manufactory,  with  its  swarms  of  squalid 
misery  ;  the  plantation,  with  its  imbruted 
gangs  ;  and  the  market  and  the  exchange, 
with  their  furrowed  and  careworn  counte- 
nances,— these  are  only  specimens  of  its  more 
menial  offices  and  subjects.  Titles  and  honours 
are  among  its  rewards,  and  thrones  are  at  its 
disposal.  Among  its  counsellors  are  kings, 
and  many  of  the  great  and  mighty  of  the  earth 


ffOMlLBfIC  COMMENTARY:  BZRA. 


cAkt.  itr. 


•re  enrolled  among  its  subjects.  Where  are  the 
waters  not  ploughed  by  its  navies?  What 
imperial  element  is  not  ^'oked  to  its  car?  Philo- 
sophy itself  has  become  a  mercenary  in  its  pay  ; 
and  science,  a  votary  at  its  shrine,  brings  all 
its  noblest  discoveries,  as  offerings,  to  its  feet. 
What  part  of  the  globe's  surface  is  not  rapidly 
yielding  up  its  last  stores  of  hidden  treasure  to 
the  spirit  of  gain  ?  or  retains  more  than  a  few 
miles  of  unexplored  and  unvanquished  terri- 
tory? Scorning  the  childish  dream  of  the 
philosopher's  stone,  it  aspires  to  turn  the  globe 
itself  into  gold. — John  Harris,  D.  D. 

(6)  The  patience  of  God  informs  us  of  the 
reason  why  He  lets  the  enemies  of  His  Church 
oppress  it,  and  defers  His  promise  of  the 
deliverance  of  it.  If  He  did  punish  them  pre- 
sently, His  holiness  and  justice  would  be  glori- 
fied, but  His  power  over  Himself  in  His 
patience  would  be  obscured.  Well  may  the 
Church  be  content  to  have  a  perfection  of  God 
glorified,  that  is  not  like  to  receive  any  honour 
in  another  world  by  any  exercise  of  itself.  If 
it  were  not  for  His  patience,  He  were  incapable 
to  be  the  Governor  of  a  sinful  world ;  He 
might,  without  it,  be  the  Governor  of  an  inno- 
cent world,  but  not  of  a  criminal  one  ;  He 
would  be  the  destroyer  of  the  world,  but  not 
the  orderer  and  disposer  of  the  extravagancies 
and  sinfulness  of  the  world.  The  interest  of 
His  wisdom,  in  drawing  good  out  of  evil,  would 
not  be  served  if  He  were  not  clothed  with  this 
perfection  as  well  as  with  others.  If  He  did 
presently  destroy  the  enemies  of  His  Church 
upon  the  first  oppression.  His  wisdom  in  con- 
triving, and  His  power  in  accomplishing  de- 
liverance against  the  united  powers  of  hell  and 


earth,  would  not  be  visible,  no,  nor  that  powe 
in  preserving  His  people  unconsumed  in  the 
furnace  of  afiliction.  He  had  not  got  so  great 
a  name  in  the  rescue  of  His  Israel  from 
Pharaoh,  had  He  thundered  the  tyrant  into 
destruction  upon  His  first  edict  against  the 
innocent.  If  He  were  not  patient  to  the  most 
violent  of  men,  He  might  seem  to  be  cruel. 
But  when  He  offers  peace  to  them  under  their 
rebellions,  waits  that  they  may  be  members  of 
His  Church,  rather  than  enemies  to  it,  He  frees 
Himself  from  any  such  imputation,  even  in  the 
judgment  of  those  that  shall  feel  most  of  His 
wrath  ;  it  is  this  renders  the  equity  of  His 
justice  unquestionable,  and  the  deliverance  of 
His  people  righteous  in  the  judgment  of  those 
from  whose  fetters  they  are  delivered.  Christ 
reigns  in  the  midst  of  His  enemies,  to  show 
His  power  over  Himself  as  well  as  over  the 
heads  of  His  enemies,  to  show  His  power  over 
His  rebels.  And  though  He  retards  His  pro- 
mise, and  suffers  a  great  interval  of  time  be- 
tween the  publication  and  performance,  some- 
times years,  sometimes  ages  to  pass  away,  and 
little  appearance  of  any  preparation  to  show 
Himself  a  God  of  truth  ;  it  is  not  that  He  hath 
forgotten  His  word,  or  repents  that  ever  He 
passed  it,  or  sleeps  in  a  supine  neglect  of  it : 
but  that  men  might  not  perish,  but  bethink 
themselves,  and  come  as  friends  into  His 
bosom,  rather  than  be  crushed  as  enemies 
under  His  feet  (2  Pet.  iii.  9) :  "  The  Lord  is 
not  slack  concerning  His  promise,  but  is  long- 
suffering  to  usward,  not  willing  that  any  should 
perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance." 
Hereby  He  shows  that  He  would  be  rather 
pleased  with  the  conversion  than  the  destruc- 
tion of  men. — S.  Charnockej  B.D, 


The  Antagonism  of  the  World  to  the  Church. 

{Verses  6-16.) 


In  these  verses  we  have  a  further 
account  of  the  hostility  of  the  Sama- 
ritans to  the  Jews  in  their  great  work. 
Homiletically  we  may  view  it  as  an 
illustration  of  The  antagonism  of  the 
world  to  the  Church.  This  antagonism 
as  it  is  here  illustrated  is — 

L  Persistent.  The  opposition  to  the 
Jews  was  carried  on  during  a  consider- 
able portion  of  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  the 
whole  of  the  reigus  of  Cambyses  and  of 
the  Pseudo-Smerdis ;  and  it  was  con- 
tinued by  means  of  letters  of  accusation 
in  the  reigns  of  Ahasuerus  (ver.  6)  and 
of  Artaxerxes  (ver.  7).  Terrible  is  the 
persistence  of  the  world  in  its  hostility 
to  the  Church  of  God.  In  different 
forms  it  is  continued  age  after  age  ;  and 
at  present  we  can  discover  no  signs  of 
its  cessation.     The  spirit  of  worldliness 


is  as  hostile  now  to  the  spirit  of  decided 
piety  as  ever  it  was.  "  Marvel  not,  my 
brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you."  **  If 
the  world  hate  you,"  said  our  Lord,  "ye 
know  that  it  hated  Me  before  it  hated 
you,"  &c.  (John  xv.  18-21).  (a). 

II.  Authoritative.  This  letter  was 
written  and  sent  to  Artaxerxes  by  two 
high  officers  of  the  Persian  monarch. 
It  seems  to  have  been  devised  by 
Bishlam,  Mithredath,  Tabeel,  and  their 
associates,  and  to  have  been  written  by 
Rehum  the  Persian  governor  in  Samaria, 
and  Shimshai  the  royal  scribe  in  the 
same  province.  The  letter  of  accusa- 
tion had  all  the  weight  which  the 
authority  of  these  distinguished  officers 
could  impart  to  it.  The  spirit  of 
secular  governments  has  often  been 
inimical  to  the  spirit  of  true  godliness, 

63 


CHAP.  lY. 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


and  their  action  hostile  to  the  principles 
of  truth  and  rigliteotisness.  "  The 
kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and 
the  rulers  take  counsel  together,  against 
the  Lord  ajid  against  His"  Church. 

III.  Combined.  All  the  colonies  of  the 
Samaritans  concurred  in  the  statements 
and  in  the  sending  of  this  letter.  "  Rehum 
the  chancellor,  and  Shimshai  the  scribe, 
and  the  rest  of  their  companions  :  the 
Dinaites,"  &c.  (vers.  9,  10).  "They 
followed  the  cry,  though  ignorant  of 
the  merits  of  the  cause."  The  popu- 
larity of  a  movement  is  no  proof  of  its 
truth  or  righteousness.  Numbers  are 
not  a  reliable  guarantee  of  the  wisdom 
and  worthiness  of  a  cause.  Majorities 
have  very  frequently  been  on  the  side 
of  falsehood,  injustice,  and  folly.  Mark 
what  a  combination  there  was  against 
the  Lord  and  Saviour.  **  Against  Thy 
holy  child  Jesus,  whom  'i'hou  hast 
anointed,  both  Herod  and  Pontius 
Pilate,  with  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  to- 
gether.*' There  is  combination  in 
hell. 

"Devil  with  devil  damned  firm  concord 
holds." 

IV.  Unscrupulous.  This  is  very  mani- 
fest in  the  gross  exaggerations  of  this 
letter.  Notice  two  or  three  of  them. 
"Jerusalem  .  .  .  the  rebellious  and  the 
bad  city."  A  most  unjust  description 
of  its  character.  "  If  this  city  be  builded 
and  the  walls  set  up,  they  will  not  pay 
toll,"  (fee.  (ver.  13).  An  unwarranted  and 
slanderous  assertion,  for  these  Jews  had 
never  given  any  cause  why  their  loyalty 
to  the  Persian  monarchs  should  be  sus- 
pected. "  If  this  city  be  builded,  and 
the  walls  thereof  set  up,  by  this  means 
thou  shalt  have  no  portion  on  this  side 
the  river."  An  extremely  absurd  exag- 
geration. One  would  suppose  that  the 
authors  of  it  must  have  known  it  to  be 
a  gross  misrepresentation.  The  chief 
assertions  of  the  letter  were  unscrupulous 
and  base  calumnies.  The  enemies  of 
the  Church  of  God  have  never  been 
particular  as  to  the  weapons  they  should 
use  against  it.  Falsehood  and  cruelty, 
fines  and  imprisonment,  bonds  and 
banishment,  fire  and  sword,  have  all 
been  employed  against  it. 


V.  Plausible.  This  letter  to  Arta 
xerxes  reveals  the  craft  and  plausibility 
of  the  Samaritans — 

1.  In  their  profession  of  loyalty  to  the 
king.  "Thy  servants"  (ver.  11)  .  .  . 
"  Now  because  we  have  maintenance 
from  the  king's  palace,  and  it  was  not 
meet  for  us  to  see  the  king's  dishonour," 
<fec.  (ver.  14). 

2.  In  their  presentation  of  proof  of 
(heir  assertions.      Tliey   suggest    "that 
search  may  be  made  in  the  book  of  the 
records  of  thy  fathers,"  <fec.  (ver.   15). 
The  remarks  of  M.  Henry  on  this  verse 
are  admirable :    "  It  cannot  be  denied 
but  that  there  was  some  colour  given 
for  this  suggestion  by  the  attempts  of 
Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah  to  shake  off  the 
yoke  of  the  King  of  Babylon,  which,  if 
they  had  kept  close  to  their  religion  and 
the  Temple  they  were  now  rebuilding, 
they    would    never    have    come   under. 
But  it  must  be  remembered — (1.)  That 
they  were  themselves,  and  their  ances- 
tors, sovereign  princes,  and  their  efforts 
to  recover  their  rights,  if  there  had  not 
been  in  them  the  violation  of  an  oath, 
for   aught   I   know,  would   have  been 
justifiable,  and  successful  too,  had  they 
taken  the  right  method  and  made  their 
peace    with    God    first.       (2.)    Though 
these  Jews,  and  their  princes,  had  been 
guilty  of  rebellion,   yet   it   was  unjust 
therefore  to  fasten  this  as  an  indelible 
brand  upon  this  city,  as  if  that  must  for 
ever  after  go  under  the  name  of   *  the 
rebellious  and  bad  city.*     The  Jews,  in 
their  captivity,  had  given  such  specimens 
of  good  behaviour  as  were  sufficient,  with 
any  reasonable  men,  to  roll  away  that 
one  reproach ;  for  they  were  instructed 
(and  we  have  reason  to  hope  that  they 
observed   their   instructions),  to    'seek 
the  peace  of  the  city  where  they  were 
captives,  and  pray  to  the  Lord  for  it  * 
(Jer.  xxix.  7).     It  was,  therefore,  very 
unfair,  though  not  uncommon,  thus  to 
impute   the   iniquity  of  the  fathers  to 
the  children."     But  it  was  craftily  con- 
ceived and  executed;  and,  for  a  time, 
it  answered  the  purpose  of  its  authors. 
The  Church  now  has  to  contend  against, 
not  only  the  strength  but  also  the  subtlety 
of  its  foes ;  not  only  against  the  *'  roar- 
ing lion,"   but  also   against   the   "  old 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OBkt.  If. 


serpent/'  "  Satan  himself  is  transf(>rmed 
into  an  angel  of  light."  And  the 
blandishments  of  the  world  are  more 
perilous  to  the  Church  th;in  its  threats. 
Christi.'ins  need  to  be  "  wise  as  serpents," 
watchful  as  trusty  sentinels,  and  prayer- 
ful as  devoutest  saints. 

Yet  greater  is  He  that  is  in  us  and 
for  us,  than  all  our  foes,  with  all  their 
might,  and  malice,  and  cunning.  "  The 
Lord  is  on  my  side;  I  will  not  fear: 
what  can  man  do  unto  nie  ] "  (6). 

ILLUSTKATIONS. 

(a)  From  the  fiery  days  of  the  stakes  of 
Smithfield  even  until  now,  the  world's  black 
heart  has  hated  the  Church  ;  and  the  world's 
cruel  hand  and  laughing  lip  have  been  for  ever 
against  us.  The  host  of  the  mighty  are  pur- 
suing us,  and  are  thirsty  for  onr  blood,  and 
anxious  to  cut  us  off  from  the  earth.  Such 
is  our  position  unto  this  hour,  and  such  must 
it  be,  until  we  are  landed  on  the  other  side  of 


Jordan,  and  until  our  Maker  comes  to  reign 
on  the  earth. — C.  H.  Spurgeon, 

{b)  As  for  the  trouble  thou  puttest  thyself 
to  concerning  the  cause  and  Church  of  Christ, 
which  thou  niayest  see  at  any  time  distressed 
by  the  enemy,  though  God  takes  thy  goodwill 
to  them  (from  which  those  thy  fears  arise) 
very  kindly,  yet  there  is  no  need  of  torment- 
ing thyself  with  that  which  is  sure  never  to 
come  to  pass.  The  ark  may  shake,  but  it 
cannot  fall.  The  ship  of  the  Church  may  be 
tossed,  but  it  cannot  sink,  for  Christ  is  in  it, 
and  will  awake  time  enough  to  prevent  its 
wreck.  Theie  is,  therefore,  no  cause  for  us, 
when  the  storm  beateth  hardest  upon  it,  to 
disturb  Him,  as  once  the  disciples  did,  with 
the  shrieks  and  outcries  of  our  unbelief,  as  if 
all  were  lost.  Our  faith  is  more  in  danger  of 
sinking  at  such  a  time  than  the  cause  and 
Church  of  Christ  are.  They  are  both  by  the 
promise  set  out  of  the  reach  of  men  and  devils. 
The  Gospel  is  an  **  everlasting  Gospel." 
*'  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  not 
one  iota  of  this  shall  perish."  "The  Word  of 
the  Lord  endureth  for  ever,"  and  shall  be  alive 
to  walk  over  all  its  enemies'  graves,  yea  to  see 
the  funeral  of  the  whole  world. — W.  OurnalL 


Good  Cause  for  Great  Zeal. 

(Verse  U.) 


The  facts  of  the  case  were  these.  .  .  . 
Now  let  me  take  these  words  right  out 
of  those  black  mouths,  and  put  them 
into  my  own  and  into  yours.  They 
will  suit  us  well  if  we  turn  them  to  the 
great  King  of  kings.  We  may  truly 
say,  *'  Now  because  we  have  maintenance 
from  the  King's  palace,"  &c.  Tlie  text 
will  enable  nie  to  speak  on  three  points. 

I.  We  acknowledge  a  very  gracious 
fact.  "  We  have  maintenance  from  the 
king's  palace.*'  Both  the  upper  and  the 
nether  springs  from  which  we  drink  are 
fed  by  the  eternal  bounty  of  the  great 
King.  Hitherto  we  have  been  supplied 
with  food  and  raiment.  Although  we 
do  not  drink  of  the  water  from  the  rock, 
or  find  the  manna  lying  at  our  tent  door 
every  morning,  yet  the  providence  of 
God  produces  for  us  quite  the  same 
results,  and  we  have  been  fed  and  satis- 
fied ;  and,  at  any  rate,  many  of  us,  in 
looking  back,  can  say,  "  My  cup  runneth 
over.  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  have 
followed  me  all  the  days  of  my  life." 
Hence,  we  have  thus,  even  in  things 
temporal,  been  made  to  feel  that  we 
have  been  maintained  from  the  King's 


palace.  But  it  has  been  in  spiritual 
things  that  our  continual  experience  of 
the  King's  bounty  has  been  most  not- 
able. We  have  a  new  life,  and  there- 
fore we  have  new  wants,  and  new 
hunger,  and  a  new  thirst ;  and  God  has 
maintained  us  out  of  His  own  palace  as 
to  this  new  life  of  ours.  We  have  had 
great  hunger  at  times  after  heavenly 
things,  but  He  has  "satisfied  our  mouth 
with  good  things,"  and  our  youth  has 
been  "  renewed  like  the  eagle's."  Some- 
times we  have  been  drawn  aside  from 
our  steadfastness,  and  we  have  wanted 
mighty  grace  to  set  us  on  our  feet 
again,  and  to  make  us  once  more 
"strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power 
of  His  niiglit;"  and  we  have  had  it, 
have  we  not?  In  looking  back  upon  all 
the  way  wherein  the  Lord  our  God  has 
led  us,  we  can  sing  of  the  beginning  of 
it,  we  can  sing  of  the  middle  of  it,  and 
we  believe  we  shall  sing  of  the  end  of 
it ;  for  all  through  we  have  been  main- 
tained out  of  the  King's  palace.  This 
is  matter  of  fact  both  as  to  things 
temporal  and  things  spiritual  Be- 
loved, it  is  a  great  mercy  that  you 
m  65 


OttAP.  IV, 


BOMtLBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


and  I  have  been  maintained  out  of  the 
King's  palace  as  believers ;  because, 
where  else  could  we  have  been  main- 
tained ]  As  to  spiritual  things,  to  whom 
could  we  go  but  unto  Him  who  has  been 
so  good  to  us  %  What  empty  wells 
ministers  are  if  we  look  to  them  !  If 
we  look  to  their  Master,  then  "  the  rain 
also  filleth  the  pools,"  and  we  find  that 
there  is  supply  in  the  preached  word  for 
our  consolation.  And  the  books  you 
once  read  with  so  much  comfort  appear 
to  have  lost  their  flavour,  their  aroma, 
and  their  sweet  savour,  and,  I  may  add, 
even  the  Word  of  God  itself,  though  it 
is  unchanged,  appears  to  be  changed 
sometimes  to  you.  But  God,  your  God, 
oh,  how  graciously  has  He  still  supplied 
you!  "All  my  springs  are  in  Thee," 
my  God ;  and  had  they  been  elsewhere 
they  long  ago  had  failed. 

We  may  remember  that  our  mainte- 
nance from  the  King's  palace  has  cost 
His  Majesty  dear.  He  has  not  fed  us 
for  nothing.  It  cost  Him  His  own  dear 
Son  at  the  very  first.  We  should  not 
have  begun  to  live  if  He  had  spared  His 
Son  and  kept  Him  back  from  us ;  but 
the  choicest  treasure  in  heaven  He  was 
pleased  to  spend  for  our  sakes  that  we 
might  live ;  and  ever  since  then  we 
have  been  fed  upon  Jesus  Christ 
Himself.  Let  us  bless  and  magnify 
our  bounteous  God,  whose  infinite  fav- 
our has  thus  supplied  our  wants. 
Think  over  the  kind  of  maintenance  you 
have  had  from  the  King's  palace.  We 
have  had  a  bountiful  supply.  As  the 
sun  throws  out  his  wealth  of  heat  and 
light,  and  does  not  measure  it  by  the 
consumption  of  men,  but  throws  it 
broadcast  over  all  worlds,  even  so  does 
God  flood  the  world  with  the  sunlight 
of  His  goodness,  and  His  saints  are 
made  to  receive  it  in  abundance.  Our 
receptive  faculty  may  be  small,  but  His 
giving  disposition  is  abundant.  We 
have  had  an  unfailing  por^tion.  As  there 
has  been  much  of  it,  so  it  has  always 
come  to  us  in  due  season.  Times  of 
need  have  come,  but  the  needed  supply 
has  come  too.  The  supply  has  ennobled 
us.  For,  consider  how  great  a  thing  it 
is  to  be  supported  from  a  king's  palace  ; 
but  it  is  the  greatest  of  all  privileges 
66 


to  be  living  upon  the  bounty  of  the 
King  of  kings.  "  Such  honour  have 
all  the  saints."  Even  those  that  are 
weakest  and  meanest  have  this  high 
honour — to  be  supplied  by  Royalty  it- 
self with  all  that  they  need.  And  there 
is  reason  for  good  cheer  in  thisy  that  we 
have  such  a  soul-satisfying  portion  in 
God.  A  soul  that  gets  what  God  gives 
him  has  quite  as  much  as  he  can  hold 
and  as  much  as  he  can  want.  He  has 
got  a  portion  that  might  well  excite 
envy.  .  .  .   Let  us  rejoice,  <fec. 

n.  Here  is  a  duty  recognised.  "  It 
was  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the  king's 
dishonour."  The  reasoning  comes  home 
to  us.  If  we  are  so  favoured — we,  who 
are  believers — with  such  a  choice  por- 
tion, it  is  not  meet  for  us  to  sit  down 
and  see  our  God  dishonoured.  By  every 
sense  of  propriety  we  are  bound  not  to 
see  God  dishonoured  by  ourselves.  It  is 
well  to  begin  at  home.  Art  thou  doing 
anything  that  dishonours  thy  God,  pro- 
fessor— anything  at  home,  anything  in 
thy  daily  avocation,  anything  in  the 
way  of  conducting  thy  business  1  Is 
there  anything  in  thy  conversation,  any- 
thing in  thy  actions,  anything  in  thy 
reading,  anything  in  thy  writing,  any- 
thing in  thy  speaking,  that  dishonours 
God  ?  Seeing  that  thou  art  fed  from 
the  King's  table,  I  beseech  thee  let  it 
not  be  said  that  the  King  got  damage 
from  thee.  Perhaps  that  dishonour  may 
come  from  those  who  dwell  under  our 
roof,  and  live  in  our  own  house.  I 
charge  you  that  are  parents  and  masters 
to  see  to  this.  Do  not  tolerate  anything 
in  those  over  whom  you  have  control 
that  would  bring  dishonour  to  God. 
We  cannot  impart  to  our  children  new 
hearts,  but  we  can  see  to  it  that  there 
shall  be  nothing  within  our  gates  that  is 
derogatory  to  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Let  the  same  holy  jealousy  animate 
us  among  those  with  whom  we  have  in- 
fluence— as,  for  instance,  amongst  those 
who  wish  to  be  united  with  us  in  Church 
fellowship.  It  is  the  duty  of  every 
Church  to  try,  as  far  as  it  can,  to  guard 
the  honour  and  dignity  of  King  Jesus 
against  unworthy  persons,  who  would 
intrude  themselves  into  the  congregation 
of  the  saints,  of  those  who  are  called, 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  BJSRA. 


CHA.P.  I^. 


and  chosen,  and  faithful.  To  receive 
into  our  membership  persons  of  unhal- 
lowed life,  unchaste,  unrighteous — of 
licentious  life  and  lax  doctrine,  such  as 
know  not  the  trutli  as  it  is  in  Jesus — 
would  be  to  betray  the  trust  with  which 
Christ  has  invested  us. 

Under  what  sacred  obligations  do  we 
stand  to  maintain  the  statutes  and  testi- 
monies of  the  Lord!  And,  oh,  how  the 
King  is  dishonoured  by  the  mutilation 
and  misrepresentation  of  His  Word ! 
Therefore  we  are  always  bound  to  bear 
our  protest  against  false  doctrine.  Those 
who  have  their  maintenance  from  tlie 
King's  palace  ought  not  to  allow  the 
Lord  to  be  dishonoured  by  a  neglect  of 
His  ordinances.  The  Lord  Jesus  has 
given  you  only  two  symbolic  ordinances. 
Take  care  that  you  use  them  well. 
Again,  let  us  take  care  that  He  be  not 
dishonoured  by  a  general  decline  of  His 
Church.  Wlien  churches  go  to  sleep — 
when  the  work  of  God  is  done  deceit- 
fully— for  to  do  it  formally  is  to  do  it 
deceitfully ;  when  tliere  is  no  life  in  the 
prayer-meeting,  when  there  are  no  holy 
enterprises  afloat  for  the  spread  of  the 
Redeemer's  kingdom,  then  the  world 
says,  "  That  is  your  Church  !  What  a 
sleepy  set  these  saints  are  ! "  Oh  !  let 
not  the  King  be  thus  dishonoured. 
And,  oh,  how  can  we  tolerate  it  that  so 
many  should  dishonour  Christ  hy  reject- 
ing His  Gospel  I  We  cannot  prevent 
their  doing  so,  but  we  can  weep  for 
them ;  we  can  pray  for  them,  we  can 
plead  for  them,  we  can  make  it  uncom- 
fortable for  them  to  reflect  that  believers 
are  loving  them,  and  yet  they  are  not 
loving  the  Saviour.  Privileged  as  you 
iire,  you  ought  to  love  your  Master,  so 
that  the  slightest  word  against  Him 
should  provoke  your  spirit  to  holy 
jealousy. 

IIL  A  course  of  action  pursued. 
"Therefore  have  we  sent  and  certified 
the   king."     How   shall   we   do   that? 


Doubtless  we  act  as  it  well  becomes  us, 
when  we  go  and  tell  the  Lord  all  about 
it  ?  "  Certified  the  King  !  " — but  does 
He  not  know  %  Are  not  all  things  open 
to  Him  from  whom  no  secrets  are  hid  % 
Ah,  yes ;  but  when  Hezekiah  received 
Rabshakeh's  blasphemous  letter  he  took 
it  and  spread  it  before  the  Lord.  It  is 
a  holy  exercise  of  the  saints  to  report 
to  the  Lord  the  sins  and  the  sorrows 
they  observe  among  the  people — the 
griefs  they  feel,  and  the  grievances  they 
complain  of — to  spread  before  Him  the 
blasphemies  they  have  heard,  and  appeal 
to  Him  concerning  the  menaces  with 
which  they  are  threatened.  After  those 
people  had  certified  the  king,  they  took 
care  to  plead  with  him.  Plead  with 
God  !  That  praying  is  poor  shift  that  is 
not  made  up  of  pleading.  And  when 
you  have  done  it,  do  not  go  away  and 
make  your  prayers  into  a  lie  by  contrary 
actions,  or  by  refraining  from  any  action 
at  all.  He  that  prays  hard  must  woik 
hard  ;  for  no  man  prays  sincerely  who  is 
not  prepared  to  use  every  effort  to  ob- 
tain that  which  he  asks  of  God.  We 
must  put  our  shoulder  to  the  wheel 
while  we  pray  for  strength  to  put  it  in 
motion.  Ail  success  depends  upon  God  ; 
yet  He  uses  instruments,  and  He  will 
not  use  instruments  that  are  useless  and 
unfitted  to  the  work.  Therefore  let  us 
be  up  and  be  stirring,  for  if  we  are 
maintained  from  the  King's  palace,  it  is 
not  meet  that  we  see  the  King's  dis- 
honour, but  it  is  due  to  Him  that  we 
should  seek  His  glory.  Alas  !  there  are 
some  here  that  have  never  eaten  the 
Kiuir's  bread,  and  will  be  banished  from 
the  King's  i»resence  if  they  die  astheyare. 
But,  oh  remember,  the  King  is  always 
ready  to  receive  His  rebel  subjects,  and 
He  is  a  God  ready  to  pardon.  "  Kiss  the 
Son  lest  He  be  angry,  and  ye  perish 
from  the  way  when  His  \\  rath  is  kindled 
but  a  little,"  *'  Blessed  are  all  they  that 
put  their  trust  in  Him." — G.H.Spurgeon^ 


«7 


CHAP.  IT. 


HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


The  Success  of  the  Subtle  Scheme  of  the  Samaritans,  or  the 
Temporary  Triumph  of  the  Wicked. 

{Verses  17-23.) 


L  Examine  the  letter  of  the  king. 
"  Then  sent  the  king  an  answer  nnto 
Rehum/'  &c.  (vers.  17-22).  This  letter 
suggests — 

1.  7 'hat  the  subtlety  of  the  wicked 
frequently  obtains  a  temporary  triumph 
over  the  good.  We  have  already  noticed 
that  the  letter  of  the  Samaritans  to  the 
king  was  very  plausible.  And  that  it 
completely  succeeded  is  clear  from  the 
reply  of  the  king  to  it.  (1.)  The  search 
in  the  archives  of  the  nation  which  they 
recommended  (ver.  15)  was  made.  "I 
commanded,  and  search  hath  been  made" 
(ver.  19).  (2.)  The  result  which  they 
predicted  (ver.  15)  followed  the  search. 
"  And  it  is  found  that  this  city  of  old 
time  hath  made  insurrection  against 
kings,  and  that  rebellion  and  sedition 
have  been  made  therein."  The  Jews 
had  formerly  rebelled  against  foreign 
powers  by  whom  they  had  been  sub- 
jected. Hezekiah  "rebelled  against  the 
king  of  Assyria "  (2  Kings  xviii.  7). 
Jehoiakim  rebelled  against  the  king  of 
Babylon  (2  Kings  xxiv.  1).  Zedekiah 
also  '*  rebelled  against  the  king  of  Baby- 
lon "  (2  Kings  xxiv.  20).  (3.)  The 
warnings  which  they  gave  (vers.  13,  16) 
were  heeded.  As  a  result  of  the  exami- 
nation of  the  records  of  the  kingdom, 
the  king  discovered  that  "there  had 
been  mighty  kings  over  Jerusalem, 
which  had  ruled  over  all  countries  be- 
yond the  river  ;  and  toll,  tribute,  and 
custom  had  been  paid  unto  them  ;"  and 
so  the  warnings  of  the  Samaritans  seemed 
to  him  reasonable  and  timely,  and  he 
acted  upon  them,  inquiring,  "  Why 
should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of  the 
kings  1"  (4.)  The  end  which  they 
aimed  at  was  attained.  Their  object 
was  to  obtain  authority  to  put  a  stop  to 
the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem.  And  the 
king  writes,  "Give  ye  now  command- 
ment to  cause  these  men  to  cease,  and 
that  this  city  be  not  builded,  until 
another  commandment  be  given  from 
me.  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to 
do  this."  The  misrepresentations  of  the 
6S 


Samaritans  had  sufficient  truth  in  them 
to  completely  mislead  Artaxerxes  the 
king  and  to  accomplish  their  evil  design. 
"Falsehood,"  says  Colton,  "is  never  so 
successful  as  wlien  she  baits  her  hook 
with  truth  ;  and  no  opinions  so  fatally 
mislead  us  as  those  that  are  not  wholly 
wrong,  as  no  watches  so  effectually  de- 
ceive the  wearers  as  those  that  are  some- 
times right." 

"  A  lie  which  is  half  a  truth 
Is  ever  the  worst  of  lies." 

2.  That  one  generation  frequently 
suffers  through  the  sins  of  another  and  an 
earlier  one.  The  Jews  of  this  time  were 
suspected  of  disloyalty,  and  were  pre- 
vented from  carrying  on  their  great 
work  because  some  of  their  ancestors 
had  rebelled  asrainst  the  domination  of 
foreign  powers.  They  smarted  for  the 
sins  of  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah.  The 
children  of  the  spendthrift,  the  drunkard, 
and  the  impure  man  generally  have  to 
bear  the  iniquities  of  their  fathers. 
(Comp.  Exod.  XX.  5.)  This  stern  fact 
should  prove  a  restraint  from  sin.  (a). 

2.  Tlmt  the  cause  of  God  is  frequently 
reproached  and  hindered  by  the  evil  con- 
duct of  some  of  its  adherents.  The  re- 
bellions of  Jehoiakim  and  Zedekiah 
were  now  made  use  of  to  asperse  the 
Jews  and  to  stop  the  work  of  God.  "  A 
few  instances  of  this  kind,"  as  Scott  ob- 
serves, "  standing  on  record,  whilst  the 
blameless  lives  and  patient  sufferings  of 
thousands  are  unnoticed  and  forgotten, 
serve  through  revolving  ages  as  a  pre- 
text, by  which  malignant  enmity  mis- 
leads worldly  policy.  All  who  love  the 
Gospel  should  therefore  walk  circum- 
spectly, avoiding  all  appearance  of  evil, 
especially  in  this  particular,  lest  the 
Church  of  God  and  posterity  should 
suffer  through  their  misconduct ;  for  the 
whole  body  will  be  condemned  without 
hearing,  if  a  few  individuals  act  impro- 
perly." (6). 

n.  Notice  the  action  of  the  Sama- 
ritans.    "  Now  when  the  copy  of  king 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OBilP.  IT. 


Artaxerxes*  letter  was  read,"<fec.     Their 
action  was — 

1.  Prompt,  They  allowed  no  delay 
whatever,  but  eagerly  carried  out  the 
royal  mandate.  *'They  went  up  in 
haste  to  Jerusalem,"  <kc. 

2.  Fersonal.  They  did  not  depute 
others  to  put  a  stop  to  the  work  of  the 
Jews  :  their  interest  was  too  deep  and 
zealous  for  that.  They  themselves  *'  went 
up  in  haste  to  Jerusalem  unto  the  Jews." 

3.  Powerful.  They  *' made  them  to 
cease  by  force  and  power."  They  com- 
pelled the  Jews  by  a  display  of  force, 
which  they  probably  took  with  them,  to 
desist  from  building  the  city.  Thus  the 
plotters  prevailed ;  the  enemies  were 
triumphant,  and  the  progress  of  the  good 
work  was  arrested.  The  tact  and  energy 
and  zeal  of  the  Samaritans  were  worthy 
of  a  good  cause,  and  they  were  rewarded 
with  success. 

Learn  : 

1.  That  the  temporary  triumph  of  a 
cause  or  a  party  is  not  a  proof  of  its 
rigliteousness.  When  Jesus  Christ  was 
crucified,  dead  and  buried,  the  enemies 
of  truth  and  light  and  God  appeared  to 
be  completely  victorious,  (c). 

2.  lliat  we  are  not  competent  to  judge 
the  relation  of  present  events  to  the  pur- 
poses and  providence  of  the  great  God, 
These  require  time  for  their  development, 
<kc.  '*  One  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a 
thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as 
one  day." 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  This  is  a  truth  evident  by  universal  ex- 
perience. It  is  seen  every  day,  in  every  part 
of  the  world.  If  Mr.  Paine  indulge  in  in- 
temperance, and  leave  children  behind  him, 
they  may  feel  the  consequences  of  his  mis- 
conduct when  he  is  in  the  grave.  The  sins  of 
the  fathers  may  thus  be  visited  upon  the 
children  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation. 
It  would,  however,  be  their  affliction  only,  and 
not  their  punishment.  Yet  such  visitations 
are  wisely  ordered  as  a  motive  to  sobriety. — 
Andrew  Fuller. 

The  child  generally  inherits  the  natural  con- 
stitution, the  mental  peculiarities,  and  some- 
times even  the  moral  character  of  his  parent. 


His   secular  condition,   too,   rich  or  poor,  ii 

frequently  determined  by  his  parents.  Some 
inherit  a  princely  fortune,  and  some  a  crushing 
penury,  from  their  ancestors.  And  their  social 
status,  too,  is  often  ruled  by  the  position  and 
conduct  of  those  of  whom  they  were  born. 
Cliildren  participate  in  the  shame  or  the  glory 
connected  with  the  memory  of  their  parents. 
The  brilliant  reflection  of  an  illustrious  sire 
seems  to  lead  his  oflspring  to  social  honour, 
and  to  shed  a  radiance  on  his  name.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  infamy  which  parents  by  theft, 
treason,  or  murder,  have  gained  for  them- 
selves, transmits  its  odious  influence  down  to 
their  children,  depreciating  their  own  personal 
worth,  and  degrading  them  in  the  estimation 
of  their  contemporaries. — David  Thomas,  D.D. 

{b)  Was  there  ever  a  club  in  all  the  world 
without  disreputable  persons  in  it  f  Was  there 
ever  any  association  of  men  that  might  not  be 
condemned,  if  the  fool's  rule  was  followed  of 
condemning  the  wheat  because  of  the  chaflf  ? 
When  with  all  our  might  and  power  we  purge 
ourselves  of  deceivers  as  soon  as  we  detect 
them,  what  more  can  we  do  ?  If  our  rule  and 
practice  is  to  separate  them  wholly  as  soon  as 
we  unmask  them,  what  more  can  virtue  itself 
desire  ?  I  ask  any  man,  however  much  he  may 
hate  Christianity,  what  more  can  the  Church 
do  than  watch  her  members  with  all  diligence, 
and  excommunicate  the  wicked  when  dis- 
covered ?  It  is  a  foul  piece  of  meanness  on 
the  part  of  the  world  that  they  should  allege 
the  faults  of  a  few  false  professors  against  the 
whole  Church  :  it  is  a  piece  of  miserable  mean- 
ness of  which  the  world  ought  to  be  ashamed. 
Nevertheless,  so  it  is.  **  Ha  !  ha!  "  they  say, 
**  So  would  we  have  it  I  so  would  we  have  it !  " 
The  daughter  of  Philistia  rejoices,  and  the 
uncircumcised  triumphs  when  Jesus  is  betrayed 
by  His  friend,  and  sold  by  His  traitorous  dis- 
ciple. 0  deceitful  professor,  will  not  theLodr 
be  avenged  upon  you  for  this  ?  Is  it  nothing 
to  make  Jesus'  name  the  drunkard's  song  If 
Nothing  to  make  the  enemy  blaspheme?  0 
hardened  man,  tremble,  for  this  shall  not  go 
unpunished. — C.  H,  Spurgeon. 

(c)  If  ever  failure  seemed  to  rest  on  a  noble 
life,  it  was  when  the  Son  of  Man,  deserted  by 
His  friends,  heard  the  cry  which  proclaimed 
that  the  Pharisees  had  successfully  drawn  the 
net  round  their  Divine  Victim.  Yet  from  that 
very  hour  of  defeat  and  death  there  went  forth 
the  world's  life — from  that  very  moment  of 
apparent  failure  there  proceeded  forth  into  the 
ages  the  spirit  of  the  conquering  Cross.  Surely 
if  the  Cross  says  anything,  it  says  that  appa- 
rent defeat  is  real  victory,  and  that  there  is  a 
heaven  for  those  who  have  nohly  and  truly 
failed  on  earth. — P,  W.  Roberts(y/i,  M.A, 


CHAP.  T.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CHAPTER  V. 

Critical  and  Explanatobt  Notes.]  i.  I^he  work  resumed  through  the  preaching  of  Haggai 
and  Zcchariah,  the  prophets  (vers.  1,  2).  ii.  The  workers  interrogated  by  the  Persian  autho- 
rities west  of  the  Euphrates  (vers.  3-5).  iii.  The  letter  of  the  Persian  authorities  to  Darius 
the  kiuir  concerning  tlie  work  (vers.  6-17). 

Ver.  1.  Then]  sliows  tlie  close  connection  of  this  with  the  last  verse  of  the  previous  chapter. 
Zechariah,  the  son  of  Iddo]  He  was  really  the  son  of  Berechiah,  and  the  grandson  of  Iddo  (Zech. 
i.  1).  It,  is  probable,  as  Dean  Perowne  suggests,  "that  Berechiah  had  died  early,  and  that 
there  was  now  no  intervening  link  between  the  grandfather  and  the  grandson.  The  son,  in 
giving  his  pedigree,  does  not  omit  his  father's  name;  tlie  historian  passes  it  over,  as  of  one 
who  was  but  little  known,  or  already  forgotten."  In  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel,  even  unto 
them]  Rather,  **  which  was  upon  them,"  i.e.  the  name  of  God  was  called  upon  them,  indicating 
that  they  belonged  to  Him  (comp.  Isa.  iv.  1  ;  Jer.  xv.  16). 

Ver.  2.  Then  rose  up  Zerubbabel  .  .  .  and  Jeshua]  &c.  The  exhortations  of  Haggai  were 
addressed  chiefly  to  these  two  leaders  (Hag.  i.  1,  ii.  2,  4),  and  speedily  they  responded  to  them. 
**  In  the  sixth  month,  in  the  first  day  of  the  month,"  the  prophet  delivered  his  first  message 
to  them  ;  and  **in  the  four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  sixth  month,"  the  "work  in  tlie  house 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  their  God,"  was  resumed  by  them  and  the  people  (Hag.  i.  1,  14,  15). 
Zechariah  did  not  enter  upon  his  mission  until  the  eighth  month,  which  was  two  months  later 
than  Haggai.  And  with  them  the  prophets  of  God]  Haggai  and  Zechariah.  Helping  them] 
by  exhortation,  encoura<jfement,  &c. 

Ver.  3.  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  river]  Tatnai  was  governor  (pechah)  of  tlie  entire 
country  west  of  the  Euphrates,  wiiile  Zerubbabel  was  governor  (pechah)  of  Judah  only,  and 
was  therefore  subordinate  to  Tatnai.  Shethar-boznai]  was  probably  the  royal  scribe  or  secre- 
tary. Who  hath  commanded]  &c.  In  investigating  this  matter  the  Persian  magistrates  only 
did  their  duty. 

Ver.  4.  Then  said  we  nnto  them]  &c.  It  is  almost  certain  that  the  text  here  has  been 
corrupted  in  someway,  and  that  the  genuine  reading  is,  "Then  said  they  unto  them,"  &c.  The 
question  was  put  by  the  Persian  officers  to  the  Jews,  as  appears  from  vers.  9,  10. 

Ver.  5.  And  then  they  returned  answer  by  letter]  &c.  Schultz  :  **  *  And  they  then  brought 
back  a  letter,'  &c.  The  letter  to  be  brought  back  was  certainly  to  come  from  Darius."  Keil  : 
'*  *  And  they  should  then  receive  a  letter,'  &c.  They  (the  royal  officials)  then  receive  a  letter, 
i.e.  obtain  a  decision." 

Ver.  6.  The  Apharsachites]  are  probably  the  same  as  "the  Apharsathchites "  (chap.  iv.  9). 
See  notes  on  that  verse. 

Ver.  7.  They  sent  a  letter]  or  a  report,  a  message.  AU  peace]  i.e.  "peace  in  all  things,  in 
every  respect." 

Ver.  8.  With  great  stones]  Margin:  "Chald.,  'stones  of  rolling.'"  So  also  Fuerst,  who 
explains  it  as  denoting  "heaviness,  weight.  Ezra  v.  8,  vi.  4,  stone  of  heaviness,  i.e.  a  heavy, 
large  stone,  hewn."  And  timber  is  laid  in  the  walls]  Rawlinson  interprets  tins  as  the  employ- 
ment of  timber  as  the  material  of  the  party  walls.  Schultz,  as  indicating  "  the  inlaying  of  the 
walls  with  woodwork  artistically  finished."  Keil ;  **  The  placing  of  wood  in  the  walls  refers  to 
building  beams  into  the  wall  for  flooring;  for  the  building  was  not  so  far  advanced  as  to  make 
it  possible  that  this  should  be  said  of  covering  the  walls  with  wainscoting." 

Ver.  11.  We  are  the  servants]  &c.  The  elders  of  the  Jews  when  asked  for  their  names 
replied  by  stating  their  relationship  to  "the  God  of  heaven  and  earth,"  which  implied  their 
obligation  to  obey  Him.  Which  a  great  kirg  of  Israel  builded  and  set  up]  Or,  "and  a  great 
king  of  Israel  built  and  completed  it." 

Ver.  12.  But  after  that  our  fathers]  &c.  Keil  :  "  For  this  reason,  because  our  fathers,"  &c. 
Similarly  Schultz:  "On  this  account,  because  our  fathers,"  &c.  The  significance  of  this 
verse  he  expresses  tiius  :  "  It  is  true  the  Temple  has  been  destroyed,  but  this  does  not  show 
any  weakness  in  their  God,  but  rather  His  holiness."  Nebuchadnezzar  could  not  have 
destroyed  their  Temple,  and  carried  them  away  into  captivity,  if  God  had  not  first  withdrawn 
His  protection  from  them  because  of  their  sins. 

Ver.  15.  Take  these  vessels]  &c.  "The  three  unconnected  imperatives,  'take,  go  forth,  lay 
down,'  comprehend  the  three  acts,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  on«,  thus  expressing  likewise  the  zeal 
of  Cyrus,  and  the  zeal  tliat  Sheshbazzar  was  expected  to  exhibit." — Schultz.  Let  the  house  of 
God  be  builded  in  his  place]  i.e.  in  its  former  sacred  place. 

Ver.  16.  And  since  that  time  even  until  now  hath  it  been  in  building]  These  words  were 
probably  not  a  part  of  the  answer  of  the  elders  of  the  Jews  to  Tatnai,  but  simply  his  own 
statement  to  the  king,  which  lie  thought  was  correct.  "It  was  entirely  in  the  interest  of  the 
Jews  to  be  silent  respecting  the  fact  that  Cyrus  had  allowed  an  interruption  to  take  place;" 
and  Tatnai  and  his  associates  were  probably  quite  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  the  work  had  been 
suspended. 

Ver.  17.  The  king's  treasure  house]  This  is  called,  in  chap.  vi.  1,  "  the  house  of  the  rolls, 
where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  Babylon."  Important  documents  were  preserved  in  tli« 
treasure  house  attached  to  the  royal  residence, 

70 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  T. 


The  Great  Work  Resumed, 


(Verses  1 

The  best  commentary  on  these  verses 
is  the  first  chapter  of  Haggai.  In  the 
light  of  that  chapter  we  propose  to  in- 
terpret them.  For  fourteen  years  the 
rebuilding  of  the  Temple  was  stayed. 
We  have  now  to  consider  the  resump- 
tion of  the  work. 

Notice  : 

L  The  inciters  to  the  work.  "Then 
the  prophets,  Haggai  the  prophet  and 
Zechariah  the  son  of  Iddo,  prophesied 
unto  the  Jews,"  &c. 

1.  Want  of  interest  in  the  work  is 
implied.  The  Jews  were  backward  at 
making  a  new  efibrt  to  erect  the  sacred 
edifice,  and  needed  stirring  up  to  their 
duty  in  the  matter.  They  had  been 
building  their  own  houses,  attending  to 
their  own  affairs,  and  had  become  in- 
different as  to  the  rebuilding  of  the 
house  of  God.  They  said,  '*The  time 
is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's 
house  should  be  built "  (Hag.  i.  2).  Had 
they  been  zealous  in  this  affair,  they 
would  have  renewed  their  efforts  when 
Darius  came  to  the  throne.  But  the 
spirit  of  worldliness  possessed  them, 
and  they  deferred  this  sacied  duty 
until  they  were  sharply  summoned  to 
it. 

2.  Obligation  to  perform  the  work  is 
implied.  The  prophets  summoned  them 
to  the  work  "in  the  name  of  the  God 
of  Israel  which  was  upon  them."  This 
impliesHis  authority  over  them,  and  their 
obligation  to  render  loyal  obedience  to 
Him.  In  His  name  Haggai  commanded 
them  to  resume  this  work.  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  .  .  .  Go  up 
to  the  mountain  and  bring  wood,  and 
build  the  house,"  &c.  (Hag.  i.  7,  8). 
The  Jews  did  not  deny  the  obligation. 
Fourteen  years  previous  they  had  claimed 
it  as  their  exclusive  privilege.  At  that 
time  they  were  forcibly  prevented  from 
fulfilling  it ;  and  afterwards,  in  process 
of  time,  they  grew  indifferent  as  to  its 
fulfilment,  and  while  acknowledging  the 
obligation,  they  postponed  its  discharge. 
By  neglecting  the  performance  of  duty 
our   sense    of    its   sacredness    and  im- 


and  2.) 

perativeness  will  almost  certainly  be 
diminished. 

3.  Exhortations  to  resume  the  work 
were  given,  "  The  prophets  Haggai 
and  Zechariah  prophesied  unto  the 
Jews,"  &c.  The  nature  of  their  pro- 
phesying we  can  ascertain  by  reference 
to  the  books  which  bear  their  names. 
In  the  address  of  Haggai  (Hag.  i.  1-11, 
13),  which  led  to  the  resumption  of  the 
work,  we  find — (1.)  Earnest  remon- 
strance because  of  their  neglect  (ver.  4). 
(2.)  Solemn  and  repeated  summons  to 
reflection,  "  Consider  your  ways  "  (vers. 
5,  7).  (3.)  Interpretation  of  the  Divine 
dealings  with  them,  showing  that  God 
had  withheld  His  blessing  because  of 
their  neglect  (vers.  6,  9-11).  (4.) 
Command  to  build  the  Temple  (ver.  8). 
(5.)  Encouragement  to  them  to  enter 
upon  the  work  (vers.  86,  13).  Thus  the 
prophet,  under  the  direction  of  the  Most 
High,  endeavoured  to  arouse  them  from 
their  sloth,  and  incite  them  to  interest 
and  effort  in  the  good  and  great  work. 

n.  The  leaders  in  the  work.  "  Then 
rose  up  Zerubbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel, 
and  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak,  and  be- 
gan to  build,"  <fec. 

1.  They  resumed  the  work  readily.  In 
less  than  a  month  after  the  summons  of 
Haggai  they  began  the  work.  On  the 
first  day  of  the  sixth  month  the  first  pro- 
phetic message  was  delivered  to  them, 
and  on  the  twenty-fourth  day  of  the 
same  month  actual  operations  were  re- 
sumed at  the  Temple.  The  readiness  of 
their  response  is  commendable.  Delay 
in  the  performance  of  duty  is  perilous. 
Promptitude  in  its  discharge  is  both 
binding  and  blessed,  (a). 

2.  Tliey  led  the  work  appropriately. 
It  was  becoming  that  Zerubbabel  the 
chief  prince,  the  first  man  in  the  state, 
and  Jozadak  the  chief  priest,  the  finst 
man  in  the  Church,  should  take  the  lead 
in  such  a  work.  "  Those  that  are  in 
places  of  dignity  and  power,"  as  M. 
Henry  observes,  *'  ought  with  their  dig- 
nity to  put  honour  upon,  and  with  their 
power  to  put  life  into  every  good  work ; 

71 


cnLo*.  ▼. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


thus  it  becomes  those  that  precede,  and 
those  that  preside,  with  an  exemplary 
care  and  zeal  to  fulfil  all  righteousness 
and  to  go  before  in  a  good  work." 

3.  lliey  led  the  work  infiuentially. 
"  All  the  remnant  of  the  people "  fol- 
lowed their  example,  *'  and  came  and 
did  work  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  their  God."  The  force  of  ex- 
ample is  proverbially  great ;  but  it  is 
especially  influential  in  the  case  of  those 
who  hold  the  position  of  leaders  amongst 
men.  The  example  of  those  who  occupy 
high  stations  is — (1.)  Most  conspicuous. 
It  is  visible  with  great  clearness  and  to 
great  numbers.  (2.)  Most  attractive.  To 
the  majority  of  mankind  the  example  of 
persons  in  eminent  positions,  from  the 
mere  fact  that  they  occupy  such  posi- 
tions, has  an  influence  which  is  denied 
to  others  however  wise  and  worthy  they 
may  be.  (6).  Great  is  the  responsibility 
of  those  who  are  called  to  the  high 
places  of  society.  "  For  unto  whomso- 
ever much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much 
required,"  <fec.  (Luke  xii  48). 

III.  The  helpers  in  the  work.  "And 
with  them  were  the  prophets  of  God 
helping  them."  The  nature  of  the 
assistance  which  the  prophets  rendered 
in  the  work  may  be  gathered  from  the 
prophecies  of  Haggai  which  were  de- 
livered after  the  work  was  resumed 
(Hag.  ii).     They  assisted  by  their — 

L  Exhortations  to  vigorous  prosecu- 
tion of  the  work.  "  Be  strong,  O  Zerub- 
babel,  saith  the  Lord,"  <fec.  (ver.  4). 

2.  Assurances  of  the  presence  of  God 
with  them.  "  For  I  am  with  you,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts :  according  to  the 
word  that  1  covenanted  with  you,"  &c. 
(vers.  4,  5).  This  means  more  than  His 
mere  presence ;  for  He  is  everywhere 
present.  "Whither  shall  I  flee  from 
Thy  presence?  If  I  ascend  up  into 
heaven.  Thou  art  there,"  &c.  (Ps. 
cxxxix.  7-10).  It  is  an  assurance  of 
His  gracious  and  helpful  presence — 
His  presence  as  their  covenant  God. 
With  the  obedient  God  is  ever  present 
for  their  protection,  encouragement,  as- 
sistance, <fec. 

3.  Promises  of  future  blessings  from 
God  to  them.  "  The  desire  of  all  na- 
tions  .shall  come,  aii4  I  will  fill  this 

72 


house  with  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of 
hosts,"  <fec.  (vers.  7-9).  What  a  mighty 
inspiration  there  must  have  been  in 
promises  of  such  blessings  as  these, 
uttered  by  the  prophet  of  God  !  He 
who  thus  encourages  the  hearts  of 
workers  renders  them  most  valuable 
help  in  their  work.  Thus  the  earnest 
thinker,  and  the  firm  believer  in  God, 
may  help  those  who  are  engaged  in 
more  active  labours  in  building  the 
spiritual  temple  of  our  Lord. 

IV.  The  great  First  Cause  of  the 
work.  It  was  God  who  inspired  and 
sent  forth  the  prophets,  and  who  excited 
the  spirit  of  the  Jewish  leaders  and 
people  to  resume  the  work.  "  The 
Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerub- 
babel,  the  son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of 
Judah,  and  the  spirit  of  Joshua  the 
son  of  Josedech,  the  high  priest,  and  the 
spirit  of  all  the  remnant  of  the  people ; 
and  they  came  and  did  work  in  the 
house  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  their  God.'* 
"  All  holy  desires,  all  good  counsels,  and 
all  just  works  do  ])roceed"  from  Him. 
He  is  the  great  Master-Builder  of  His 
own  Church.  "  I  will  build  My  Church," 
said  our  Lord  to  Peter.  All  the  in- 
spiration and  wisdom,  the  patience  and 
power  of  the  under-builders,  come  from 
Him.     And  to  Him  be  all  the  praise. 

Learn  : — 

1.  The  insidious  nature  of  the  sin  of 
worldliness.  See  how  gradually  and 
stealthily  it  came  upon  the  Jews.  (d). 

2.  The  value  of  faithful  ministers. 
They  both  arouse  men  to  duty,  and 
assist  them  to  perform  it. 

3.  The  solemn  ohligation  of  men  in 
eminent  stations.  Let  them,  like  Zerub- 
babel  and  Jeshua,  be  forward  in  every 
good  work. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Pleasant  is  it  to  entertain  the  picture  of 
ourselves  in  some  future  scene,  planning  wisely, 
feeling  nobly,  and  executing  with  the  holy 
triumph  of  the  will ;  but  'tis  a  different  thing 

not  in  the  green  avenues  of  the  future,  but 
m  the  hot  dust  of  the  present  moment — not 
in  the  dramatic  positions  of  the  fancy,  but  in 
the  plain  prosaic  now — to  do  the  duty  that 
waits  and  wants  us,  and  put  forth  an  instant 
and  reverential  liand  to  the  noondav  or  even* 
iug  task. — James  Martineatu 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


QBAP.  ▼. 


(6)  As  we  give  them  (kings)  all  advantages 
of  honour,  bo  do  we  soothe  and  authorise  all 
their  vices  and  defects,  not  only  by  approba- 
tion, but  by  imitation  also.  Every  one  of 
Alexander's  followers  carried  their  heads  on 
one  side,  as  he  did,  and  the  flatterers  of  Diony- 
sius  ran  against  one  another  in  iiis  presence, 
stumbled  at,  and  overturned  whatever  was  under 
foot,  to  show  that  they  were  as  purblind  as 
he.  Natural  imperfection  has  sometimes  also 
served  to  recommend  a  man  to  favour.  I  have 
seen  deafness  affected  ;  and  because  the  master 
hated  his  wife,  Plutarch  has  seen  his  courtiers 
repudiate  theirs,  whom  they  loved ;  and,  which 
is  yet  more,  uncleanness  and  all  manner  of 
dissoluteness  has  been  in  fashion  ;  as  also  dis- 
loyalty, blasphemies,  cruelty,  heresy,  super- 
gtition,irreligion  effeminacy,  and  worse,  if  worse 
there  be.  And  by  an  example  yet  more  dan- 
gerous than  that  of  Mithridates'  flatterers,  who, 
by  how  much  their  master  pretended  to  the 
honour  of  a  good  physician,  came  to  him  to 
have  incission  and  cauteries  made  in  their 
limbs;  for  these  others  suffered  the  soul,  a  more 
delicate  and  noble  part,  to  be  cauterised.  But 
to  end  where  I  began :  the  Emperor  Adrian, 
disputing  with  the  philosopher  Favorinus 
about  the  interpretation  of  some  word,  Fa- 
vorinus soon  yielded  him  the  victory  ;  for 
which  his  friends  rebuking  him,  **  You  talk 
simply,"  said  he,  "would  you  not  have  him 
wiser  than  I,  who  commands  thirty  legions  ? " 
— Montaigne, 

(c)  The  scribe  is  more  properly  said  to  write 
than  the  pen,  and  he  that  maketh  and  keepeth 
the  clock  is  more  properly  said  to  make  it  go 
and  strike  than  the  wheels  and  poises  that 
hang  upon  it,  and  every  workman  to  effect 
his  work  rather  than  the  tools  which  he  uses 
as  his  instruments.  So  the  Lord,  who  is  the 
chief  Agent  and  Mover  in  all  actions,  may 
more  fitly  be  said  to  bring  to  pass  all  things 
which  are  done  in  the  earth  than  any  sub- 
ordinate causes,  as  meat  to  nourish  us,  clothes 
to  keep  us  warm,  the  sun  to  lighten  us,  friends 
to  provide  for  us,  &c. ,  seeing  they  are  but  His 
instruments. — Dovmame, 


Day  and  night  the  tides  are  rising  along  our 
shores,  filling  bay  and  estuary,  silently  for  the 
most  part,  yet  surely.  The  power  that  draws 
them  resides  afar  off  in  the  heavenly  bodies, 
and  is  not  seen  or  noticed,  but  only  inferred. 
All  the  goodness  of  men,  their  generous  im- 
pulses, their  loves  and  faiths  and  inspirations 
of  purity,  their  zeal  and  enthusiasm  in  self- 
denial  and  devotion — that  great  moving  tide 
of  goodness  which  is  moving  in  upon  the  hu- 
man heart — is  derived  from  God,  who,  afar  off, 
silent  as  the  moon  in  summer  nights,  is  draw- 
ing all  men  unto  Him. — //.  W.  Beecher. 

{d)  Nearly  all  can  recall  that  favourite  fiction 
of  their  childhood — the  voyage  of  Sinbad  the 
Sailor  into  the  Indian  Sea.  They  will  remem- 
ber that  magnetic  rock  thatrose  from  the  surface 
of  the  placid  waters.  Silently  Si nbad's  vessel 
was  attracted  towards  it ;  silently  the  bolts  were 
drawn  out  of  the  ship's  side,  one  by  one, 
through  the  subtle  attraction  of  that  magnetic 
rock.  And  when  the  fated  vessel  drew  so  near 
that  every  bolt  and  clamp  were  unloosed,  the 
whole  structure  of  bulwark,  masts,  and  spars 
tumbled  into  ruin  on  the  sea,  and  the  sleeping 
sailors  awoke  to  their  drowning  agonies.  So 
stands  the  magnetic  rock  oi  worldliness  athwart 
the  Christian's  path.  Its  attraction  is  subtle, 
silent,  slow  ;  but  fearfully  powerful  on  every 
soul  that  floats  within  its  range.  Under  its 
enchanting  spell,  bolt  after  bolt  of  good  re- 
solution, clamp  after  clamp  of  Christian  ob- 
ligation, are  steadily  drawn  out.  What  matters 
it  how  long,  or  how  fair  has  been  the  man's 
profession  of  religion,  or  how  flauntingly  the 
flag  of  his  orthodoxy  floats  from  the  mast 
head?  Let  sudden  temptation  smite  the  un- 
bolted professor,  and  in  an  hour  he  is  a  wreck. 
He  cannot  hold  together  in  a  tempest  of  trial, 
he  cannot  go  out  on  any  cruise  of  Christian 
service,  because  he  is  no  longer  held  togther 
by  a  Divine  principle  within.  It  has  been 
silently  drawn  out  of  him  by  that  mighty 
loadstone  of  attraction  —  a  sinful,  godless, 
self-pampering,  Christ  rejecting  world. — T,  L. 
CuyUr,  J),D, 


The  Great  Work  Investigated  and  Continued. 

{Verses  3-5.) 


L  The  sacred  work  investigated  by 
the  secular  authorities.  "  At  the  same 
time  came  to  them  Tatnai,  governor  on 
this  side  the  river,  and  Sbethar-boznai, 
and  their  companions,  and  said  thus 
unto  them,"  <kc.  (vers.  3,  4). 

Notice : 

1.  7 'he  nature  of  the  investigation. 
Two  points  are  inquired  into: — (1.) 
The  authority  of  the  builders.  "  Who 
hath  commanded  you  to  build  this  bouse, 
apd  %o  make  up  this  wall  ? "    (2.)  The 


names  of  the  builders.  "  Then  said  they 
unto  them  after  this  manner,  What  are 
the  names  of  the  men  that  make  this 
building?" 

2.  The  spirit  of  the  investigation.  It 
is  probable  that  some  of  the  Samaritan 
enemies  of  the  Jews,  prompted  by  bitter 
and  hostile  feelings,  communicated  with 
Tatnai  and  instigated  this  inquisition. 
But  as  regards  the  inquisition  itself  there 
is  nothing  to  complain  of;  for  —  (1.) 
Tatnai  had  the  authority  to  make  the 

T3 


OHAP.  T. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


investigation.      He  was  "governor  on 
this   side   the  river;"   all  the  country 
west  of  the  Euphrates  was  subject  unto 
him.     The  governorsliip  of  Zerubbabel, 
being   of  Judea  only,   was   subordinate 
to  that  of  Tatnai,  who  therefore  acted 
within  the  limits  of  his  power  in  makinf^ 
this  inquisition.     (2.)  Tatnai  exercised 
his  authority  in  a  commendable  manner. 
He   made  no  vexatious  or  impertinent 
inquiries.     And  he  presented  an  impar- 
tial   and    honest    report   to   Darius  the 
king.       Very  different    was   the   course 
which    he   and    his   associates   pursued 
from  that  of  Rehum  and  his  associates 
(chap.   iv.).      There    is  nothing  in  the 
conduct  of  the  present  Persian  officials 
which  bears  any  resemblance  to  the  un- 
scrupulous  and    bitter   hostility  which 
their  predecessors  displayed  to  the  Jews. 
The  eye  of  the  world  is  upon  the  work 
of  the  Church  to-day.     And  while  there 
are  some  who  would  wilfully  misrepre- 
sent and  maliciously  oppose  that  work, 
there  are  others  who  regard  it  fairly,  and 
speak  of  it  with  candour  and  truthful- 
ness.    Let  the  members  of  the  Church 
see  to  it  that  it  shall  be  apparetit  to  all 
unprejudiced    persons    that  their   work 
tends  to  promote  truth   and  righteous- 
ness, purity  and  peace,  piety  and  patrio- 
tism, (a). 

II.  The  sacred  work  carried  on 
through  the  Divine  blessing.  *'  But 
the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  elders 
of  the  Jews,  that  they  could  not  cause 
them  to  cease,"  (fee.  These  words 
suggest — 

1.  The  Divine  interest  in  the  work, 
"The  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the 
elders  of  the  Jews "  is  an  expression 
denoting  His  deep  concern  in  the  pro- 
gress of  their  undertaking.  As  we  atten- 
tively observe  that  in  which  we  are 
greatly  interested,  so  God  regards  His 
Church  and  the  enterprises  in  which  it 
is  engaged. 

2.  The  Divine  oversight  of  the  work. 
His  eye  ever  upon  the  Jewish  leaders 
suggests  the  accuracy  and  thoroughness 
of  His  knowledge  of  them  and  of  their 
great  business.  In  His  previdence  the 
great  God  watches  over  the  interests  and 
efforts  of  His  people.  (6). 

3.  The  Divine  ins^nration  of  the  workers. 

u 


The  consciousness  that  "  the  eye  of  their 
God  was  upon"  them  encouraged  the 
Jews,  made  even  coward  spirits  brave, 
and  nerved  even  the  feeblest  arm  for 
vigorous  toil,  and  so  raised  them  above 
fear,  and  enabled  them  to  carry  on  the 
work.^  And  to-day  to  godly  souls  there  is 
unlimited  inspiration  in  the  consciousness 
that  the  Divine  Eye  is  upon  them.  (c). 

4.  The  Divine  protection  of  the  workers. 
"The  eye  of  their  God  upon"  them 
clearly  involved  this.  The  figure  implies 
not  only  interest  and  knowledge  and 
oversight,  but  also  defence.  His  eye 
was  upon  them  not  only  to  inspire  but 
also  to  shield  them ;  not  only  to  mark 
their  perils,  but  also  to  preserve  them 
from  injury.  And  in  this  way  the  work 
was  carried  on.  It  suffered  no  interrup- 
tion by  reason  of  the  inquisition  of  the 
Persian  officials,  and  the  reference  of  the 
case  to  Darius,  (d). 

If  we  are  engaged  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,  we  may  confidently  look  to  Him 
for  protection.  The  path  of  duty  is  the 
path  of  safety.  And  the  consciousness 
of  the  eye  of  our  God  upon  us  should 
make  us  patient  in  suff'ering,  calm  in 
peril,  earnest  in  work,  and  courageous 
in  conflict. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

{a)  If  the  Cliurcii  will  go  forth  to  win  new 
victories,  she  needs  only  to  take  fearlessly  up 
the  supremacy  with  which  her  God  has  dowered 
her,    namely,  the  reconciling  life  of  her  in- 
dwelling Lord.    Shutting  up  all  internal  ques- 
tions that  make  her  militant  against  herself, 
she  is  to  move  on  in  her  own  absolute,  sublime 
majesty,  militant  only  against  every  form  of 
Bin,  to  enthrone  the  kingdom  of  God.     She 
must  cease  to  beg  favours  of  worldly  policy. 
She  must  stop  her  infamous  coquetry  with 
Mammon.     She  must  not  be  bowing  on  Sun- 
days to  sectarian  prejudice,  nor  on  week-days 
to  social  respectability,  nor  ever  whisper  guilty 
flatteries  to  popular  sins,  nor  wait  till  great 
public  vices  are  manifestly  dying  out  of  them- 
selves, and  feeble  with  approaching  dissolution, 
before  she  dares  strike  at  them.    The  staunch, 
uncompromising  sincerity  of  old  Puritans  and 
confessors  must  be  in  her  muscles.     An  awful 
zeal  must  gird  up  her  loins.    Purity,  freedom, 
equity,   are  to   be   more   to   her   than  costly 
churches  ;  the   prayers   of  saintly  men,  and 
women  and  children  too,  her  patronage ;  and 
her  daily  speech,  the  benediction  of  charity. — 
F.  D.  Huntington,  D,D. 

(6)  The  infinite  knowledge  of  God  fits  Him 


HOMILETW  COMMENT AJiY :  EZJiA. 


CHAP.  V. 


to  be  a  special  object,  of  trust.  How  could  we 
depend  upon  Him,  if  He  were  ignorant  of  our 
state?  His  compassions  to  pity  us,  His  readi- 
ness to  relieve  us,  His  power  to  protect  aiid 
assist  us,  would  be  insignificant,  without  His 
omniscience  to  inform  His  ffoodness  and 
direct  the  arm  of  His  power.  Tliis  perfection 
is,  as  it  wore,  God's  office  of  intelligence :  as 
you  go  to  your  memorandum-book  to  know 
what  you  are  to  do,  so  doth  God  to  His  omni- 
science. This  perfection  is  God's  eye,  to  ac- 
quaint Him  with  the  necessities  of  His  Church, 
and  directs  all  His  other  attributes  in  their 
exercise  for  and  about  His  people.  You  may 
depend  upon  His  mercy  that  hath  promised, 
and  upon  His  truth  to  perform;  upon  His 
sufficiency  to  supply  you,  and  His  goodness  to 
relieve  you,  and  His  righteousness  to  reward 
you  ;  because  He  hath  an  infinite  understand- 
ing to  know  you  and  your  wants,  you  and 
your  services.  And  without  this  knowledge 
of  His,  no  comfort  could  be  drawn  from  any 
other  perfection  ;  none  of  them  could  be  a 
sure  nail  to  hang  our  hopes  and  confidence 
upon.  This  is  that  the  Church  alway  cele- 
brated (Ps.  cv.  8) :  "He  hath  remembered 
His  covenant  for  ever,  the  word  which  He  com- 
manded to  a  thousand  generations  ;  "  and  (ver. 
42),  "He  remembered  His  holy  promise;" 
"  And  He  remembered  for  them  His  covenant'* 
(Ps.  cvi.  45).  He  remembers  and  understands 
His  covenant,  therefore  His  promise  to  per- 
form it,  and  therefore  our  wants  to  supply 
them.— <Si.  Chamocke,  B.D. 

(c)  Were  the  Olympian  Agonistse  inspired 
by  the  admiring  gaze  of  applauding  thousands  ? 
Did  the  thunders  of  acclamation  which  awoke 
the  echoes  of  Olympus  excite  the  Athletse  to 
hiiiher  energies?  How,  then,  shall  we  be 
affected  who  believe  that  we  are  ever  under 
the  watchful  eye  of  the  dread  Supreme  ?    The 


King  looks  on  those  who  are  running  the 
heavenly  race — who  are  wrestling  with  spiri- 
tual antagonists — and  who  are  handing  "  a 
cup  of  cold  water"  to  some  drooping  and 
tliirsty  disciple  !  As  the  King's  eye  brightens 
with  approbation,  Ir^t  us  resolve  to  climb  the 
highest  steeps  of  duty  and  to  walk  on  the  lof- 
tiest mountains  of  holj^  enterprise  ! — Joseph 
Parker,  B.D. 

{d)  The  tribulation  and  poverty  of  His 
Church  is  not  unknown  to  Him  (Rev.  ii.  8,  9)  : 
"  I  know  thy  works  and  tribulation,"  &c.  He 
knows  their  works,  and  what  tribulation  they 
meet  with  for  Him  ;  He  sees  their  extremities 
when  they  are  toiling  against  the  wind  and 
tide  of  tlie  world  (Mark  vi.  48);  yea,  the  natural 
exigencies  of  the  multitude  are  not  neglected 
by  Him  ;  He  discerns  to  take  care  of  them. 
Our  Saviour  considered  the  three  days'  fasting 
of  His  followers,  and  miraculously  provides  a 
dish  for  them  in  the  wilderness.  No  good 
man  is  ever  out  of  God's  mind,  and  therefore 
never  out  of  His  compassionate  care  :  His  eye 
pierceth  into  their  dungeons,  and  pities  their 
miseries.  Joseph  may  forget  his  brethren,  and 
the  disciples  not  know  Christ  when  He  walks 
upon  the  midnight  waves  and  turbulent  sea; 
but  a  lions'  den  cannot  obscure  a  Daniel  from 
His  sight,  nor  the  depths  of  the  whale's  belly 
bury  Jonah  from  the  Divine  understanding: 
He  discerns  Peter  in  his  chains,  and  Stephen 
under  the  stones  of  martyrdom  ;  He  knows 
Lazarus  under  his  tattered  rags,  and  Abel 
wallowing  in  his  blood  ;  His  eye  and  know- 
ledge goes  along  with  His  people,  when  they 
are  translated  into  foreitrn  countries,  and  sold 
for  slaves  into  the  islands  of  the  Grecians,  for 
He  "will  raise  them  out  of  the  place"  (Joel 
iii.  6,  7).  He  would  defeat  the  hopes  of  the 
persecutors,  and  applaud  the  patience  of  His 
people.— «S.  Chamocke,  B.D, 


The  Letter  to  the  King  Concerning  the  Wobk. 

{Verses  6-17.) 


This  letter  has  three  chief  divisions, 
each  of  which  requires  brief  notice. 

I.  The  inquisition  of  the  Persian 
authorities.  "The  copy  of  the  letter 
that  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the 
river,"  &c.  (vers.  6-10).  Here  is  a 
report  of — 

1.  The  observations  which  they  made, 
(1.)  That  the  work  was  being  ivell  done. 
"  Be  it  known  unto  the  king,  that  we 
went  into  the  province  of  Judea,  to  the 
house  of  the  great  God,  which  is  builded 
with  great  stones,  and  timber  is  laid  in 
the  walls."  This  seems  to  show  that 
the  work  was  being  done  in  a  substan- 
tial and  excellent  manner.  (2.)  That 
the  work  was  being  rapc?/y  doue,    "And 


this  work  goeth  fast  on,  and  prospereth  in 
their  hands."  Inspired  by  the  exhorta- 
tions of  Haggai  the  prophet,  and  en- 
couraged by  the  example  of  Zerubbabel 
the  prince,  and  Jeshua  the  chief  priest, 
the  people  worked  zealously  and  the 
edifice  was  progressing  quickly. 

2.  The  inquiries  which  tliey  proposed, 
(1.)  As  to  the  authority  oi  the  builders. 
"  Then  asked  we  those  elders,  and  said 
unto  them  thus,  Who  commanded  you 
to  build  this  house,  and  to  make  up  these 
walls?"  (oomp.  ver.  3).  (2.)  As  to  the 
names  of  the  builders.  "  We  asked  their 
names  also,  to  certify  thee,  that  we  might 
write  the  names  of  the  men  that  were 
the  chief  of  them  "  (comp.  ver.  4). 

n 


CHAP.T. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


n.  The  reply  of  the  Jewish  leaders. 

**  And  thus  tliey  returned  us  answer,  say- 
ing," (fee.  (vers.  11-16).  This  answer  is 
remarkable  both  for  its  prudence  and 
for  its  piety.  It  seems  to  us  to  present 
the  following  aspects  of  the  work.  That 
it  was — 

1.  Not  a  mere  human  enter  prise,  hut 
a  Divine  commission.  Wheu  asked  to 
give  their  own  names,  the  Jewish  elders 
replied,  "  saying,  We  are  the  servants 
of  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth,"  &c. 
Of  their  personal  names  and  distinctions 
they  say  nothing;  but  assert  that  in  re- 
building tlie  Temple  of  Jehovah  they 
were  acting  as  servants  of  the  Supreme 
Being,  whom  tliey  were  bound  to  obey. 
The  work  was  to  them  not  optional,  but 
obligatory. 

2.  Not  an  innovation,  but  a  restora- 
tion. "  We  build  the  house  that  was 
builded  these  many  years  ago,  wliich  a 
great  king  of  Israel  builded  and  set  up." 
Nearly  five  hundred  years  had  passed 
since  Solomon  built  the  first  Temple. 
The  building  they  were  raising  was  not 
a  novel  invention  of  their  own,  but  was 
supported  by  the  venerable  antiquity 
of  its  predecessor,  and  by  the  fame 
of  the  great  king  which  built  that  pre- 
decessor. 

3.  Not  in  a  spirit  of  presumption  and 
pride,  hut  of  obedience  and  humility. 
"  But  after  that  our  fathers  had  pro- 
voked the  God  of  heaven  unto  wrath, 
He  gave  them  into  the  hand  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar the  king  of  Babylon,  the 
Chaldean,  who  destroyed  this  house, 
and  carried  the  people  away  into  Baby- 
lon." At  least  three  portions  of  this 
statement  have  a  bearing  of  more  or 
less  importance  in  tlie  present  position 
of  affairs.  (1.)  That  the  destruction  of 
the  former  Temple  was  not  owing  to  any 
imperfection  on  the  part  of  their  God. 
Nebuchadnezzar  did  not  prevail  against 
Him.  This  testimony  vindicates  Him 
against  any  imputation  of  inability  to 
defend  His  people  and  His  Temple.  (2.) 
That  the  destruction  of  their  former 
Temple  was  owing  to  their  God  having 
forsaken  them.  "  He  gave  them  into 
the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar.*'  He  with- 
drew His  protection  from  them,  and  they 
speedily  fell  before  the  Chaldeans,     (3.) 

7e 


That  their  God  forsook  them  because  of 
their  numerous  and  heinous  sins.  Their 
fathers  provoked  Him  unto  wrath  by 
abominable  idolatries,  and  He  retired, 
leaving  them  to  themselves  and  to  the 
gods  whom  they  had  chosen.  They 
forsook  God,  then  God  forsook  them. 
This  testimony  reveals  the  fact  that  it 
was  in  a  spirit  of  penitence  rather  than 
of  presumption  that  they  were  working. 
It  also  shows  the  obligatoriness  of  the 
work  :  having  seen  the  evil  of  their  ways 
and  retu;*ned  unto  Jehovah  their  God,  it 
behoved  them  to  rebuild  the  Temple  for 
His  worship. 

4.  Not  in  opposition  to,  hut  in  confor- 
mittj  with,  royal  authority.  "  But  in  the 
first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king  of  Babylon," 
&c.  (vers.  13-16).  Three  things  (which 
we  have  already  noticed)  are  here  laid 
down.  (1.)  That  the  work  was  com- 
manded by  King  Cyrus.  '*  King  Cyrus 
made  a  decree  to  build  this  house  of 
God.  .  .  .  Let  the  house  of  God  be 
builded  in  his  place"  (comp.  chap.  i. 
1-3).  (2.)  That  the  work  was  assisted 
by  King  Cyrus.  "  And  the  vessels  also 
of  gold  and  silver  of  the  house  of  God," 
Ac.  (vers.  14,  15,  and  comp.  chap.  i. 
4-11).  (3.)  That  the  work  was  carried 
on  by  the  officer  appointed  by  king 
Cyrus.  "  Then  came  the  same  Shesh- 
bazzar,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
house  of  God  which  is  in  Jerusalem,"  &c. 
(ver.  16,  and  comp.  ver.  2,  and  chap.  i. 
8).  Thus  they  show  that  in  this  work 
they  w^ere  obedient  and  loyal  subjects  of 
the  Persian  monarch. 

5.  Not  political,  hut  religious  in  its 
character.  Tiiey  were  building  an  edifice 
which  was  designed  not  for  plotting  but 
for  piety,  not  for  political  schemes  but 
for  religious  services — "the  house  of 
God."  Moreover,  they  were  not  build- 
ing this  Temple  to  any  merely  local  or 
national  deity,  but  to  the  One  Su})rume 
Being — *'  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth." 
Thus  the  reply  of  the  Jewish  elders  was 
fitted  to  honour  Jehovah  their  God,  and 
t"  disarm  the  opposition  of  men  ;  it  was 
6oth  pious  and  prudent,  (a). 

III.  The  appeal  of  the  Persian  autho- 
rities to  the  king.  "Now,  therefore, 
d  it  seem  good  to  the  king/'  4cc.  They 
ask  Dariua— 


ttOMILETIO  OOMMENTAkY :  EZRA, 


oiiAp.  t. 


1.  To  ascertain  whether  Cyrus  did 
authorise  and  encourage  this  work.  "  Let 
there  be  search  made  in  the  king's 
treasure  house,  which  is  there  at  Baby- 
lon, whetlier  it  V)e  that  a  decree  was 
made  of  Cyrus  the  king  to  build  this 
house  of  God  itt  Jerusalem." 

2.  To  issue  instructions  for  their  guid- 
ance in  relation  to  this  work.  "  And  let 
the  king  send  his  pleasure  to  us  concern- 
ing this  matter." 

Conclusion  : 

Two  things  we  may  well  admire  and 
imitate — 

1.  The  fairness  of  the  Persian  officials. 
Let  us  deal  justly  with  those  who  differ 
from  us  in  faith  or  opinion  ;  let  us  be 
careful  to  represent  their  views  and  be- 
liefs fairly  and  accurately,  <kc.  (6). 

2.  The  faithfulness  of  the  Jeudsh 
leaders.  They  "  witnessed  a  good  con- 
fession." Let  us  imitate  them  in  this. 
By  the  testimony  both  of  the  lip  and  of 
the  life,  let  us  honour  "  the  God  of 
heaven  and  earth."  (c). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  As  the  hermits  were  communing  together, 
there  arose  a  question  as  to  which  of  all  the 
virtues  was  most  necessary  to  perfection.  One 
said  chastity ;  another,  humility  ;  a  third, 
justice.  St.  Anthony  remained  silent  till  all 
had  given  their  opinion;  and  then  he  spoke, 
"  Ye  have  all  said  well,  hut  none  of  you  have 
said  aright.  The  virtue  most  necessary  to 
perfection  is  prudence  ;  for  the  most  virtuous 
actions  of  men,  unless  governed  and  directed 
by  prudence,  are  neither  pleasing  to  God,  nor 
serviceable  to  others,  nor  profitable  to  our- 
selves."— Diet,  of  Illus. 

(6)  There  are  a  great  many  who  cannot 
accept  religion  as  a  mere  fact.  There  are  a 
great  many  on  whose  minds  are  thronging 
thousands  of  thouij:ht8.  There  are  those  who 
come  to  religion  from  the  side  of  their  house- 
hold, and  from  the  side  of  their  affections. 
And  they  cannot  doubt.  Blessed  be  that  man 
who  had  such  a  father  and  mother,  that  as 
long  as  the  memory  of  father  and  mother  lives 
he  cannot  doubt.  Under  such  circumstances, 
whatever  the  intellect  may  do,  the  heart  recti- 
fies it.  The  intellect  may  write  '*  Scepticism," 
but  the  heart  rubs  it  out,  and  writes  **  Love." 
But  many  have  no  such  childhood,  no  such 
teaching,  and  no  such  association.  My  memory 
goes  back  to  the  Sabbaths  of  my  childhood — 
to  the  bright  hill  top,  to  the  church-bell,  and 
so  long  as  1  remember  these  things,  and  have 
a  vision  of  my  mother,  and  a  recollection  of 
my  father,  I  cannot  doubt  religion.    But  there 


are  many  who  had  no  such  parents,  or  none 
within  their  remembrance.  Many  have  had 
their  whole  life's  traininir  in  the  most  material 
elements,  some  in  artistic  relations,  some  in 
realms  of  doubt,  some  in  intellectual  gladia- 
tion.  Men  come  to  the  subject  of  religion 
from  entirely  different  points.  And  when 
men  come  to  religion  in  such  ways  that  they 
have  in  themselves  no  moral  witness  to  the 
truth,  and  have  suggestions  and  doubts  that 
they  do  not  seek,  but  that  are  forced  upon 
them,  there  is  a  certain  respect  to  be  paid  to 
them,  and  a  certain  s.vmpathy  to  be  experi- 
enced for  them. — B.  W.  Beecher, 

(c)  We  all  have  our  creeds,  and,  in  gpite  of  our- 
selves, we  profess  them  ; — the  creed  of  fashion  ; 
the  creed  of  appetite  ;  the  creed  of  a  selfish  ex- 
pediency ;  the  creed  of  a  sect;  the  creed  of  in- 
difference, which  is  as  irreligious  and  as  bigoted 
in  its  way  as  any  other ;  or  the  creed  of  eternal 
right  and  Gospel  faith.  Conduct  is  the  great 
profession.  Behaviour  is  the  perpetual  reveal- 
ing of  us.  A  man's  doctrines  flow  from  his  fin- 
gers* ends,  and  stand  out  in  his  doings.  What 
he  may  say  is  not  his  chief  profession,  but  how 
he  acts.  Character  lets  out  the  secret  of  his 
belief  ;  what  he  does  tells  what  bet's.  He  has 
"put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  when  he  has 
"Christ  formed  within  him."  His  profession 
is  as  natural  as  the  pulse  in  his  veins.  The 
good  man  makes  profession  of  his  goodness  by 
simply  being  good  ;  but  the  Christian  man  will 
not  forget  that  he  is  not  wholly  good  till  he 
has  joined  himself  to  Christ's  body.  He  pub- 
lishes his  adhesion  as  spontaneously  as  nature 
publishes  her  laws, — as  the  sun  its  light, — as 
the  rose  its  sweetness;  by  being  steadfaet; 
by  shining;  by  fragrant  charities.  It  costs  a 
graceful  elm  no  spasm  to  paint  a  graceful 
image  on  our  eye,  and  the  sea  spreads  its  mys- 
terious arms  around  the  hemispheres  without 
vanity.  They  make  their  nature  known  by 
silently  keeping  its  laws.  And  because  the 
Christian  soul  is  made  to  be  a  conscious  mem- 
ber in  a  living  organism  or  church,  it  keeps 
its  own  high  law  only  by  being  there.  Religion 
belongs  in  the  heartbeat  of  a  man's  affections, 
and  the  breath  of  his  daily  desire  ;  till  it  has 
so  possessed  him,  it  is  a  small  matter  that  he 
keeps  its  eflSgy  as  a  connoisseur  keeps  his  mar- 
ble Apollo, — on  the  outskirts  of  his  practical 
fortunes.  The  true  hospitality  takes  it  to  the 
heart.  But  when  the  heart  has  taken  it  in,  it 
will  not  lock  it  there,  and  make  it  a  prisoner. 
It  must  go  abroad  again,  for  the  blessing  of 
man  and  the  praise  of  God.  It  will  put  its 
owner  into  the  Church,  not  to  show  himself, 
but  that  he  may  the  better  become  one  with 
his  brethren,  and  their  common  Head.  So 
does  the  religion  that  is  natural  unite  the 
public  confession  of  it  with  the  hiding  of  its 
inward  power. — F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

The  matter  of  professing  Christ  appears  to 
be  regarded  by  many  as  a  kind  of  optional 
duty,  just  as  optional  as  it  is  for  light  to  shine, 
or  goodness  to  be  good,  or  joy  to  sing,  or  gra- 
titude to  give  thanks,  or  love  to  labour  and 

77 


OBAP.  T 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTAHY :  EZRA. 


sacrifice  for  its  ends.  No,  my  friends,  there 
is  no  option  here,  save  as  all  duties  are  op- 
tional, and  eternity  hangs  on  the  option  we 
make.  Let  no  one  of  you  receive  or  allow  a 
different  thought.     Expect  to   he  open,  out- 


standing witnesses  for  God,  and  rejoice  to  be. 
In  ready  and  glorious  option,  take  your  part 
with  such,  and  stifle  indignantly  any  lurking 
thought  of  being  a  secret  follower. — H,  Bush- 
nell,  D.D. 


The  Supremacy  of  God. 
{Verse  n.) 


"  We  are  the  servants  of  the  God  of 
heaven  and  earth." 

These  words  lead  us  to  consider — 

I.  The  universal  supremacy  of  God. 
"  The  God  of  heaven  and  earth."  The 
idea  of  sovereignty  is  involved  in  the 
idea  of  God.  "  The  very  name  of  a 
God  includes  in  it  a  supremacy  and  an 
actual  rule.  He  cannot  be  conceived  as 
God,  but  He  must  be  conceived  as  the 
highest  authority  in  the  world.  It  is 
as  possible  for  Him  not  to  be  God  as  not 
to  be  su{>reme."  Our  text  brings  to  our 
notice  the  extent  of  the  Divine  supre- 
macy, but  we  shall  do  well  briefly  to 
notice — 

1.  The  ground  of  tlie  Divine  supre- 
macy. God  is  the  universal  Sovereign 
because  of — (1.)  The  perfections  of  His 
being.  He  is  infinitely  wise,  righteous, 
and  kind.  He  is  supreme  in  authority 
because  He  is  supreme  in  ability  and 
excellence.  "  God  therefore  being  an 
incomprehensible  ocean  of  all  [lerfection, 
and  possessing  infinitely  all  those  virtues 
that  may  lay  a  claim  to  dominion,  hath 
the  first  f(mndution  of  it  in  His  own 
nature."  (a).  (2.)  Because  all  things 
were  created  by  Him.  The  maker  of 
anything  has  an  undoubted  right  over 
the  thing  which  he  has  made.  The  in- 
vention is  the  property  of  the  inventor ; 
the  picture,  of  the  painter  ;  the  book, 
of  the  author.  God's  creatorship  is 
most  complete  ;  all  things,  in  respect 
both  of  matter  and  of  form,  were  made 
by  Him  ;  therefore  His  sovereignty  is 
absolute.  (3.)  Because  all  tilings  are 
sustained  hy  Him.  "  By  Him  all  things 
consist."  He  "  upholds  all  things  by 
the  word  of  His  power."  *' In  Him  we 
live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being." 
He  is  the  Force  of  all  forces  ;  the  Super- 
intendent of  all  laws  and  processes  of 
nature,  &c.  **  As  the  right  to  govern 
resulted  from  creation,  so  it  is  perpetu- 
78 


ated  by  the  preservation  of  things/ 
(4.)  And  this  supremacy  should  be  the 
more  heartily  recognised  and  responded 
to  by  us  because  of  the  benefits  which 
He  bestows  upon  us,  and  especially  be- 
cause of  our  redemption  from  sin  by 
Jesus  Christ.  *'  Ye  are  not  your  own  ; 
for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price  :  there- 
fore glorify  God,"  &c.  "  I  beseech  you 
therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of 
God,  that  ye  present,"  <fec.  (b). 

2.  The  extent  of  the  Divine  supremacy. 
(1.)  It  extends  throughout  heaven.  He 
is  "the  God  of  heaven."  He  is  supreme 
over  heavenly  beings.  **  Angels  that 
excel  in  strength,  do  His  commandments, 
hearkening  unto  the  voice  of  His  word." 
They  are  "  His  hosts,  ministers  of  His, 
that  do  His  pleasure."  The  music  and 
joy  of  their  being  is  in  doing  His  will. 
He  is  supreme  over  heavenly  bodies. 
"Lift  up  your  eyes  on  high,  and  behold 
who  hath  created  these,  that  bringeth 
out  their  host  by  number :  He  calietb 
them  all  by  names  by  the  greatness  of 
His  might,  for  that  He  is  strong  in 
power;  not  one  faileth."  "He  telleth 
the  number  of  the  stars ;  He  calleth 
them  all  by  name."  (2.)  It  extends 
throughout  earth.  He  is  "  the  God  of 
heaven  and  earth." 

**  By  knowledge  supreme,  by  wisdom  Divine, 
God  governs  the  earth  with  gracious  design. 
O'er  beast,  bird,  and  insect  His  providence 

reigns, 
Whose  will   first  created,  whose  love  still 

sustains." 

He  rules  over  all  men.  The  highest 
potentate  and  the  humblest  peasant  are 
alike  under  His  authority.  He  "  bringeth 
the  princes  to  nothing  ;  He  maketh  the 
judges  of  the  earth  as  vanity,"  <fec.  (Isa. 
xl.  23,  24).  He  rules  over  men  in  every 
respect.  Nothing  pertaining  to  their  life 
is  too  great  or  too  small  for  His  over- 
sight and  control.     Even  "  the  bounds 


BOM  1  LET W  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  V. 


of  their  habitation  "  are  determined  by 
Him.  (3.)  It  extends  tliroughout  hell. 
"  Ttie  devil  and  his  angels  "  are  rebels 
against  God's  authority,  but  they  cannot 
annul  that  authority,  or  free  themselves 
from  the  restraints  of  His  arm.  Satan 
could  not  afflict  Job  beyond  a  certain 
limit,  which  was  determined  by  God 
(Job  i.  12;  ii.  6).  "God  spared  not 
the  angels  that  sinned,  but  cast  them 
down  to  hell,"  &c.  (2  Pet.  ii.  4).  "  The 
angels  which  kept  not  their  first  estate, 
but  left  their  own  habitation,'*  &c.  (Jude 
6).  Thus  the  Divine  supremacy  is  uni- 
versal in  its  extent,  (c). 

IL  The  great  obligation  of  man. 
**We  are  the  servants  of  the  God  of 
heaven  and  earth  ; "  and  are  therefore 
under  solemn  obligations  to  obey  Him. 
His  will  we  should  accept  as  our  law. 
And  our  obedience  to  Him  should  be — 

1.  Complete.  We  should  conform  to 
His  will  in  all  things.  No  department 
of  our  life  is  beyond  His  control.  We 
may  not  select  certain  commandments  for 
our  obedience,  and  reject  or  ignore  others. 
We  must  "have  respect  unto  all  His 
commandments."  (d), 

2.  Perpetual.  His  kingdom  is  an 
everlasting  kingdom.  Our  obedience 
must  be  continued  as  long  as  our  being. 
•The  redeemed  will  "serve  Him  day 
and  night  in  His  Temple"  through  all 
eternity. 

3.  Hearty,  Mere  mechanical  obedience 
is  not  acceptable  to  Him.  The  service 
of  the  hireling  is  an  abomination  in  His 
sight;  but  that  which  is  spontaneous 
and  sincere  He  delights  in.  (e). 

4.  Joyous.  Obedience  to  Him  should 
be  a  pleasure  to  us.  Joyous  service  is 
frequently  commended  in  the  Scriptures. 
"  I  will  run  in  the  way  of  Thy  command- 
ments." "Thy  statutes  have  been  my 
songs."  "  Serve  the  Lord  with  glad- 
ness." "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  O 
my  God."  (/). 

III.  The  exalted  privilege  of  man. 
It  is  deemed  an  honour  to  serve  human 
sovereigns  and  princes.  How  much 
greater — how  immeasurably  greater — is 
the  honour  of  serving  the  God  of  heaven 
and  earth  !  When  the  service  of  God 
is  rightly  estimated,  it  is  regarded  as  a 
glory,  and  rejoiced  in  as  a  privilege. 


Conclusion  : 

What  is  our  attitude  towards  the 
sovereignty  of  God  %  Do  we  bow  to  it 
only  wlien  we  are  forced  to  do  so,  and 
because  we  are  forced  to  do  so  ?  Or  do 
we  rejoice  in  being  "  the  servants  of  the 
God  of  heaven  and  earth  "  % 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  This  is  the  natural  order  God  hath 
placed  in  His  creatures,  that  the  more  excel- 
lent should  rule  the  inferior.  He  committed 
not  the  government  of  lower  creatures  to  lions 
and  tigers,  that  have  a  delight  in  blood,  but 
no  knowledge  of  virtue ;  but  to  man,  who  had 
an  eminence  in  his  nature  above  other  crea- 
tures, and  was  formed  with  a  perfect  rectitude, 
and  a  height  of  reason  to  guide  the  reins  over 
them.  In  man,  the  soul  being  of  a  more 
sublime  nature,  is  set  of  right  to  rule  over  the 
body  ;  the  mind,  the  most  excellent  faculty  of 
the  soul,  to  rule  over  tlie  other  powers  of  it; 
and  wisdom,  the  most  excellent  habit  of  the 
mind,  to  guide  and  regulate  that  in  its  deter- 
minations ;  and  when  the  body  and  sensitive 
appetite  control  the  soul  and  mind,  it  is  a 
usurpation  against  nature,  not  a  rule  according 
to  nature.  The  excellency,  therefore,  of  the 
Divine  nature  is  the  natural  foundation  for 
His  dominion.  He  hath  wisdom  to  know 
what  is  fit  for  Him  to  do,  and  an  immutable 
righteousness  whereby  He  cannot  do  anything 
base  and  unworthy  ;  He  hath  a  foreknowledge 
whereby  He  is  able  to  order  all  things  to 
answer  His  own  glorious  designs  and  the  end 
of  His  government,  that  nothing  can  go  awry, 
nothing  put  Him  to  a  stand,  and  constrain 
Him  to  meditate  new  counsels.  So  that  if  it 
could  be  supposed  that  the  world  had  not  been 
created  by  Him,  that  the  parts  of  it  had  met 
together  by  chance,  and  been  compacted  into 
such  a  body,  none  but  God,  the  supreme  and 
most  excellent  Being  in  the  world,  could  have 
merited,  and  deservedly  challenged  the  govern- 
ment of  it ;  because  nothing  had  an  excellency 
of  nature  to  capacitate  it  for  it,  as  He  hath,  or 
to  enter  into  a  contest  with  Him  for  a  suffi- 
ciency to  govern. — S.  Charnocke,  B.D. 

(6)  That  benefit  of  redemption  doth  add  a 
stronger  right  of  dominion  to  God  ;  since  He 
hath  not  only  as  a  Creator  given  them  being 
and  life  as  His  creatures,  but  paid  a  price,  the 
price  of  His  Son's  blood,  for  their  rescue  from 
captivity;  so  that  He  hath  a  sovereignty  of 
grace  as  well  as  nature,  and  the  ransomed  ones 
belong  to  Him  as  Redeemer  as  well  as  Creator 
(1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20):  "Ye  are  not  your  own, 
for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price;"  therefore 
your  body  and  your  spirit  are  God's.  By  this 
He  acquired  a  right  of  another  kind,  and 
bought  us  from  that  uncontrollable  lordship 
we  affected  over  ourselves  by  the  sin  of  Adam, 
that  He  might  use  us  as  His  own  peculiar  for 
His  own  glory  and  service.  By  this  redemp- 
tion there  results  to  God  a  right  over  our 

79 


CftAP.  ▼. 


SOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


bodies,  over  our  spirits,  over  our  services,  as 
well  as  by  creation  ;  and  to  show  the  strength 
of  this  right,  the  Apostle  repeats  it,  **youare 
bought,"  a  purchase  cannot  be  without  a  price 
paid  ;  l)ut  he  adds  price  also,  '*  bought  with  a 
price."  To  strengtlien  tlie  title,  purchase  gave 
Him  a  new  right,  and  the  greatness  of  the 
price  established  tliat  right.  The  more  a  man 
pays  for  a  thing,  the  more  usually,  we  say,  he 
deserves  to  liave  it ;  He  hath  paid  enough  for 
it ;  it  was,  indeed,  price  enough,  and  too 
much  for  such  vile  creatures  as  we  are. — Ihid. 

(c)  The  sapphire  throne  of  God,  at  this 
moment,  is  revealed  in  heaven,  where  adoring 
angels  cast  their  crowns  before  it ;  and  its 
power  is  felt  on  earth,  where  the  works  of 
creation  praise  the  Lord.  Even  those  who 
acknowledge  not  the  Divine  government  are 
compelled  to  feel  it;  for  He  doeth  as  He  wills, 
not  only  among  the  angels  in  heaven,  but 
among  the  inhabitants  of  this  lower  world. 
Hell  feels  the  terror  of  that  throne.  Those 
chains  of  fire,  those  pangs  unutterable,  are  the 
awful  siiadow  of  tlie  throne  of  Deity  ;  as  God 
looks  down  upon  the  lost,  the  torment  that 
flashes  through  their  souls  darts  from  His 
holiness,  which  cannot  endure  their  sins.  The 
influence  of  that  throne,  then,  is  found  in 
every  world  where  spirits  dwell;  and  in  the 
realms  of  inanimate  nature  it  bears  rule. 
Every  leaf  that  fades  in  the  trackless  forest 
trembles  at  the  Almighty's  bidding,  and  every 
coral  insect  that  dwelleth  in  the  unfathomable 
depths  of  the  sea  feels  and  acknowledges  the 
presence  of  the  all  -  present  King.  —  C  H, 
Spurgeon. 

{d)  All  the  commandments  have  the  same 
Author,  and  the  same  sanction.  He  who 
thinks  to  atone  for  the  breach  of  one  by  the 
observation  of  another ;  he  who  reserveth  to 
himself  a  license  of  indulging  in  any  favourite, 
darling  lust,  while,  in  general,  he  preserveth 
the  appearance  of  an  exemplary  conduct,  is  a 


hypocrite,  and,  unless  he  repent,  will  be  brought 

to  shame,  if  not  before  men  here,  yet  before 
men  and  angels  hereafter.  — Bishop  Borne. 

The  hypocrite  is  in  with  one  duty,  and  out 
with  another:  like  aglobousbody,  he  toucheth 
the  law  of  God  in  one  point — some  particular 
command  he  seems  zealous  for  ;  but  meets  not, 
in  the  rest ;  whereas,  the  sincere  heart  lies 
close  to  the  whole  law  of  God  in  his  desire  and 
endeavour. —  W.  Ournall. 

(«)  As  fruits  artificially  raised  or  forced  in 
the  hot-house  have  not  the  exquisite  flavour  of 
those  fruits  which  are  grown  naturally,  and  in 
their  due  season ;  so  that  obedience  which  is 
forced  by  the  terrors  of  the  law,  wants  the 
genuine  flavour  and  sweetness  of  that  obedience 
which  springs  from  a  heart  warmed  and 
meliorated  with  the  love  of  God  in  Christ 
Jesus. — H,  0.  Salter. 

(/)  Men  are  commonly  more  cheerful  in 
their  obedience  to  a  great  prince  than  to  a 
mean  peasant,  because  the  quality  of  the  master 
renders  the  service  more  honourable.  It  is  a 
discredit  to  a  prince's  government,  when  his 
subjects  obey  him  with  discontent  and  dejected- 
ness,  as  though  he  were  a  hard  master,  and  his 
laws  tyrannical  and  unrighteous.  When  we 
pay  obedience  but  with  a  dull  and  feeble  pace, 
and  a  sour  and  sad  temper,  we  blemish  our 
great  Sovereign,  imply  His  commands  to  be 
grievous,  void  of  that  peace  and  pleasure  He 
proclaims  to  be  in  them  ;  that  He  deserves  no 
respect  from  us,  if  we  obey  Him  because  we 
must,  and  not  because  we  will.  Involuntary 
obedience  deserves  not  the  title  :  it  is  rather 
submission  than  obedience,  an  act  of  the  body, 
not  of  the  mind  :  a  mite  of  obedience  with, 
cheerfulness,  is  better  than  a  talent  without 
it.  The  testimonies  of  God  were  David's 
delight  (Ps.  cxix.  24).  Our  understandings 
must  take  pleasure  in  knowing  Him,  our  wills 
delightfully  embrace  Him,  and  our  actions  be 
cheerfully  squared  to  Him. — S.  Charnocke,  B.D 


Arguments  against  Sinning. 
{Verse  12.) 


In  this  verse  we  have  three  weighty 
reasons  for  abstaining  from  sin. 

I.  It  provokes  God.  *'  Our  fathers 
provoked  the  God  of  heaven  unto  wrath." 
By  many  sins,  and  especially  by  the 
practice  of  idolatry  with  its  accompany- 
ing vices,  the  people  of  both  Israel  and 
Judah  had  long  provoked  Jehovah  before 
He  suffered  them  to  be  carried  into  exile. 
The  evil  of  sin,  as  a  provocation  of  the 
Most  High,  will  be  more  impressively 
realised  if  we  reflect  that  He  is  a  Being 
of— 

1,  Infinite  purity.  He  is  "glorious 
80 


in  holiness  ;"...*  of  purer  eyes  than 
to  behold  evil,  and  cannot  look  upon 
iniquity."  Sin  is  the  very  opposite  of 
holiness;  therefore  it  grieves  Him,  and 
if  persisted  in,  it  provokes  Him.  It  is 
the  *'  abominable  thing,  which  He  hates." 
Have  we  not  in  this  a  reason  for  shun- 
ning it  ?  (a). 

2.  Infinite  patience.  He  is  "not 
easily  provoked ; "  "  The  Lord  is  merci- 
ful and  gracious,  slow  to  anger,  and 
plenteous  in  mercy."  He  "  is  longsuffer- 
ing  to  us  ward,  not  willing  that  any 
should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OEAT,  T. 


to  repentance."  How  wonderful  was 
His  forbearance  with  His  ancient  people  ! 
How  long  He  suffered  them,  notwith- 
standing their  heinous,  widespread,  and 
long-continued  sin  !  Yet  at  length  they 
provoked  Him  unto  wrath.  How  wicked 
and  how  persistent  must  the  sin  be  which 
provokes  so  patient  a  Being  to  anger  ! 
Therefore  let  us  flee  from  sin.  (b). 

II.  It  deprives  tlie  sinner  of  His 
protection.  '*  He  gave  them  into  the 
hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  of 
Babylon,  the  Chaldean."  By  their  sin 
the  Israelites  deprived  themselves  of  the 
sure  defence  which  His  presence  afforded 
to  them,  and  frustrated  His  gracious 
purposes  in  relation  to  tht  m.  This  truth 
is  pathetically  and  beautifully  ex[)ressed 
in  Ps.  Ixxxi.  11-16:  "  My  people  would 
not  hearken  to  My  voice  ;  and  Israel 
would  none  of  Me,"  &c.  By  his  sin  the 
sinner  places  himself  beyond  the  protec- 
tion of  the  Divine  Providence  ;  he  takes 
up  the  position  of  a  rebel  against  the 
Divine  government,  and  so  forfeits  the 
rights  and  privileges  which  that  govern- 
ment confers  upon  its  loyal  subjects. 

III.  It  strips  the  sinner  of  power 
to  battle  with  his  foes.  "  Nebuchad- 
nezzar the  king  of  Babylon  destroyed 
this  house,  and  carried  the  people  away 
into  Babylon."  Bereft  of  the  Divine 
presence  and  protection,  the  men  of  Israel 
and  of  Judah  could  not  stand  before  their 
enemies.  Guilt  robs  a  man  of  courao^e. 
The  consciousness  of  righteous  action  in 
a  righteous  cause  is  the  mightiest  inspira- 
tion in  conflict  and  the  surest  defence  in 
peril.  Sin  deprives  a  man  of  this.  Guilt 
brings  faintness  into  men*s  "hearts;  and 
the  sound  of  a  shaken  leaf  shall  chase 
them  ;  and  they  sh<jll  flee,  as  fleeing  from 
a  sword  ;  and  tliey  shall  fall  when  none 
pursueth,"&c,  (Lev.  xxvi.  36,  37).  "The 
wicked  flee  when  no  man  pursueth ;  but 
the  righteous  are  bold  as  a  lion."  Or,  as 
Shakespeare  expresses  it — 

**  Suspicion  always  haunts  the  guilty  mind  ; 
The  thief  doth  fear  each  bush  an  officer." 

A  guilty  "conscience  does  make  cowards  of 
us  all." 

And  Wordsworth  : 

"  From  the  body  of  one  guilty  deed 
A   thousand    ghostly   fears  and    haunting 
thoughts  proceed."  '<). 


By  all  these  reasons  let  us  beware  of  sin, 
.^hun  it,  hate  it ;  and  '*  follow  after  holi- 
ness." For  in  respect  of  holiness  we 
may  reverse  the  argument  of  our  subject, 
and  affirm  that  (1)  it  is  well  pleasing  to 
God  j  (2)  it  secures  to  its  possessor  the 
Divine  protection ;  and  (3)  it  invests 
its   possessor  with  moral  strength  and 


courage. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


{a)  Is  it  (if  the  supposition  maybe  allowed) 
anything  merely  personal  which  God  con- 
demns in  the  action  of  the  sinner  against 
Himself  ?  Can  the  sinner  do  God  any  harm? 
Can  the  mightiest  chief  in  all  the  armies  of 
hell  pluck  one  star  from  the  sky,  or  keep 
back  the  light  of  the  sun,  or  bind  the  sweet 
influences  of  Pleiades,  or  loose  the  bands  of 
Orion  ?  God  is  not,  eo  to  speak,  alarmed  for 
His, personal  government.  The  offences  against 
}i\Bpo2oer  cost  H  im  no  concern,  but  the  ofiences 
against  His  Ao^iwess  afflict  Him  with  great  sor- 
row. The  parent  cares  nothing  for  the  mere 
blow  of  the  child's  tiny  fist,  but  the  passion 
which  prompted  it  breaks  his  heart.  (Jo  1  has 
to  maintain  the  public  virtue  and  order  of  the 
universe.  He  fears  no  stroke  of  power ;  but 
if,  for  mere  convenience  of  expression,  we  may 
distinguish  between  His  personality  and  His 
attributes,  we  may  say  tliat  offences  against 
His  person  are  forgiven,  but  offences  against 
His  attributes  cannot  be  forgiven  apart  from 
confession  and  repentance  on  the  side  of  the 
criminal. — Joseph  Parker^  D.D, 

(b)  The  more  His  patience  is  abused,  the 
sharper  will  be  the  wrath  He  inflicts.  As  His 
wrath  restrained  makes  His  patience  long,  so 
Hig  compassions  restrained  will  make  His  wrath 
severe ;  as  He  doth  transcend  all  creatures  in 
the  measures  of  the  one,  so  He  transcends  all 
creatures  in  the  sharpness  of  the  other.  Christ 
is  described  with  "feet  of  brass,  as  if  they 
burned  in  a  furnace"  (Rev.  i.  15),  slow  to 
move,  but  heavy  to  crush,  and  hot  to  burn. 
His  wrath  loseth  nothing  by  delay ;  it  grows 
the  fresher  by  sleeping,  and  strikes  with  greater 
strength  when  it  awakes  :  all  the  time  men 
are  abusing  His  patience,  God  is  whetting  His 
sword,  and  the  longer  it  is  whetting  the  sharper 
will  be  the  edge  ;  the  longer  He  is  fetching 
His  blow,  the  smarter  it  will  be.  The  heavier 
the  cannons  are,  the  more  difficultly  are  they 
drawn  to  the  besieged  town ;  but,  when  arrived, 
they  recompense  the  slowness  of  their  march 
by  the  fierceness  of  their  battery.  "Because 
I  have  purged  thee,"  i.e.,  used  means  for  thy 
reformation,  and  waited  for  it,  **  and  thou  wast 
not  purged,  thou  shalt  not  be  purged  from  thy 
filthiness  any  more,  till  I  have  caused  My  fury 
to  rest  upon  thee.  I  will  not  go  back,  neither 
will  I  spare  ;  according  to  thy  ways,  and  ac- 
cording to  thy  doings,  shall  they  judge  thee" 
(Ezek.  xxiv.  13,  li).  God  will  spare  as  little 
then  as  He  spared  much  before:  His  wrath 

V  81 


OHAF.  TL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


will  be  as  raging  npon  them  as  the  sea  of  their  and  demand  to  be  righted  by  Justice ;  Jnitiea 

wickedness  was  within  them.     When  there  is  will  take  the  account  from  the  hands  of  Patience, 

a  bank  to  forbid  the  irruption  of  the  stream,  and  exact  a  recompense  for  every  disingenuous 

the  waters  swell;  but  when  the  bank  is  broke,  or  injury  offered  to  it.     When  Justice  comes  to 

the  lock  taken  away,  they  rush  with  the  greater  arrest  men  for  their  debts.  Patience,  Mercy, 

violence,  and  ravage  more   than  they  would  and  Goodness  will  step  in  as  creditors  and  clap 

have  done  had  they  not  met  with  a  stop  :  the  their  actions  upon  them,  which  will  make  the 

longer  a  stone  is  in  falling,  the  more  itbruiseth  condition  so  much  more  deplorable. — S,  Char' 

and  grinds  to  powder.      There  is  a  greater  nockef  B.D. 
treasure  of  wrath  laid  up  by  the  abuses  of 

patience  :  every  sin  must  have  a  just  recom-  (c)  They  say  sheep  are  scared  with  the  clatter 

pense  of  reward  ;  and  therefore  every  sin,  in  of  theirown  feet  as  they  run  ;  so  is  the  sinner 

regard  of  its  aggravations,  must  be  more  pun-  with  the  din  of  his  guilt.     No  &uonor  Adam 

ished  than  a  sin  in  the  singleness  and  simplicity  saw  his  plate  off,  and  himself  to  be  nuk-d,  but 

of  its  own  nature.     As  treasures  of  mercy  are  he  is  afraid  of  God's  voice,  as  if  he  luid  ucV'  r 

kept  by  God  for  us,  "He  keeps  mercy  for  been  acquainted  with  Him,      Never  cm   we 

thousands;"   so  are  treasures  of  wrath  kept  truly  recover  our  courage  till  we  recover  our 

by  Him  to  be  expended,  and  a  time  of  expense  holiness.    **  H  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then 

there  must  be.    Patience  will  account  to  Jus-  have  we  boldness  before  God  "  (1  John  iii.  21). 

tice  all  the  good  offices  it  hath  done  the  sinner,  —  TF.  Gurnall, 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Critical  and  Explanatort  Notes.]  This  chapter  contains— (i.)  The  search  for  and  dis- 
covery of  the  decree  of  Cyrus  (vers.  1-5).  (ii.)  The  decree  of  Darius  for  the  furtherance  of  the 
building  of  the  Temple  (vers.  6-12).  (iii.)  The  carrying  on  and  completion  of  the  building  of 
the  Temple  (vers.  13-15).  (iv.)  The  dedication  of  the  Temple  (vers.  16-18).  (v.)  The  cele- 
bration of  the  feasts  of  the  Passover  and  of  Unleavened  Bread  (vers.  19-22). 

Ver.  1.  Then  Darius  the  king  made  a  decree]  *'  These  words  seem  to  refer  only  to  the 
command  to  make  an  investigation  ;  but  in  reality  they  serve  as  an  introduction  to  the  decree 
which  was  promulgated  to  Tatnai,  &c.  (comp.  v.  6).  It  is  as  if  the  subsequent  narrative  :  and 
search  was  made]  were  taken  up  merely  as  an  explanation  of  the  decree  following  in  ver.  6 
sq."  —  Schultz.  The  house  of  the  rolls]  Margin:  "  Chald.  books."  Schultz  :  "  wiitings." 
(Comp.  chap.  v.  17.)  Laid  up]  Margin:  "Chald.  made  to  descend.*'  The  apartment  was 
probably  underground. 

Ver.  2.  Achmetha]  i.e.,  Ecbataua.  **  The  name  *Achmetha,  which  at  first  sight  seems  some- 
what remote  from  Ecbatana,  wants  but  one  letter  of  Hagmatana,  which  was  the  native  appella- 
tion. .  .  .  Two  cities  of  the  name  of  Ecbatana  seem  to  have  existed  in  ancient  times,  one  the 
capital  of  Northern  Media;  the  other  the  metropolis  of  the  larger  and  more  important  province 
known  as  Media  Magna.  The  site  of  the  former  appears  to  be  marked  by  the  very  curious 
ruins  at  Takht-i- Suleiman ;  while  that  of  the  latter  is  occupied  by  Hamadan,  which  is  one  of 
the  most  important  cities  of  modern  Persia.  There  is  generally  some  difficulty  in  determining, 
when  Ecbatana  is  mentioned,  whether  the  northern  or  the  southern  metropolis  is  intended. 
Few  writers  are  aware  of  the  existence  of  the  two  cities,  and  they  lie  sufficiently  near  to  one 
another  for  geographical  notices  in  most  cases  to  suit  either  site.  The  northern  city  was  the 
*  seven- walled  town'  described  by  Herodotus,  and  declared  by  him  to  have  been  the  capital  of 
Cyrus  (Herod,  i.  98,  99,  153;  comp.  Mos.  Choren.  ii.  84)  ;  and  it  was  thus  most  probably  there 
that  the  roll  was  found  which  proved  to  Darius  that  Cyrus  had  really  made  a  decree  allowing 
the  Jews  to  rebuild  their  Temple."— 5/6Z.  Diet.  A  roll]  "The  anci>iii  Persians  used  parch- 
ment for  their  records,  as  appears  from  Ctesias  (cap.  Died.  Sic.  ii.  32) " — RawUnson. 

Ver.  3.  In  the  fixst  year  of  Gyrus  the  king]  (Comp.  chaps,  i.  1  ;  v.  13.)  Omit  "concern- 
ing "  as  supplied  by  the  translators  of  the  A.  V.  The  house  of  God  at  Jerusalem]  These 
words  "stand  alone  by  themselves,  and  constitute  to  a  certain  extent  a  title."  The  place 
where  they  offered  sacrifices]  Keil  :  "Asa  place  where  sacrifices  are  offered."  Schultz  :  "  As 
a  place  where  offerings  are  brought."  And  let  the  foundations  thereof  be  strongly  laid] 
Schultz  :  "  'And  whose  foundations  are  capable  of  supporting'  (namely,  the  structure)."  The 
height  thereof  threescore  cubits]  &c.  In  these  dimensions  the  length  is  not  specified  ;  probably 
because  in  this  respect  the  new  Temple  was  to  correspond  with  the  former  one. 

Ver.  4.  With  three  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row  of  new  timber]  The  meaning  of  this 
is  uncertain.  One  interpretation  is  that  the  word  translated  row  nSljl)  should  be  rendered 
"storey  ;*'  and  that  it  applies  "  to  the  three  storeys  of  chambers  that  surrounded  Solomon's, 
and  afterwards  Herod's  Temple,  and  with  this  again  we  come  to  the  wooden  Talar  which  sur- 
mounted the  Temple  and  formed  a  fourth  storey." — Bihl.  Diet  But  it  is  questionable  whether 
•tj^lD  ever  signifies  "storey."  Fuerst  gives,  as  the  meaning  of  the  word,  "a  layer,  a  row,"  as 
of  stones  or  bricks  in  a  wall.  So  also  Keil.  Schultz  says  it  means  "  that  three  of  the  Temple 
walls  were  of  hewn  stone,  the  other,  namely,  the  front,  which  must  for  the  most  part  be  com- 
82 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA,  ohap.  ti. 


posed  of  a  larire  entrance,  was  to  be  made  of  wood."  In  support  of  this  view  he  argues  from 
1  Kings  vi.  36,  "that  Solomon  provided  the  inner  court  (of  his  Temple)  on  three  sides  with 
walls  of  quarried  stone,  on  the  one  other  side,  without  doubt  the  front  side,  where  the  chief 
entrance  was,  where  then  there  was  probably  a  larger  door,  with  an  enclosure  of  hewn  cedar. 
...  In  the  Temple  of  Herod  also,  the  entrance  side  of  the  holy  place  was  still  composed  of  one 
great  folding  door,  sixteen  cubits  broad."  Another  interpretation  is  that  the  walls  were  three 
rows  or  courses  of  stone  in  thickness  witli  an  inner  wainscoting  of  wood.  And  another,  taking 
"?)3"IJ  as  signifying  row,  or  layer,  is  that  the  walls  were  built  of  three  layers  of  large  stones  and 
then  a  layer  of  timber,  repeated  from  the  base  to  the  summit.  But  there  is  a  complete  absence 
of  evidence  of  the  existence  of  buildings  of  this  kind  in  the  East  in  olden  times.  And 
let  the  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  king's  house]  or  from  the  royal  revenues  (Comp. 
ver.  8.)  This  must  either  refer  to  the  cost  of  only  the  materials  of  the  building,  or  M  was  never 
.carried  into  effect;  for  the  Jews  themselves  contributed  largely  to  the  cost  of  the  building 
'  (chaps,  ii.  68,  69  ;  iii.  7). 

Ver.  5.  And  also  let  the  golden  and  silver  vessels  of  the  house  of  God]  &c.  (Comp.  chaps, 
i.  7,  8;  V.  14,  15.) 

Ver.  6.  Now  therefore  Tatnai]  &c.  This  is  the  decree  made  by  Darius  the  king  (ver.  1). 
Your  companions  the  Apharsachites]  (See  on  chap.  v.  6.)  Be  ye  far  from  thence]  i.e.  do  not 
trouble  or  interfere  with  the  Jews  in  this  matter. 

Ver.  10.  That  they  may  offer  sacrifices]  &c.  This  was  the  object  aimed  at  by  Darius  the 
king  in  the  preceding  orders  of  his  decree.  "  We  find,"  says  Keil,  "  that  in  after  times  sacrifices 
were  regularly  ofi'ered  for  the  king  on  appointed  days  ;  comp.  1  Mace.  vii.  33,  xii.  11  ;  2  Mace, 
iii.  35,  xiii.  23  ;  Joseph.  Anliq.  XII.  ii.  5,  and  elsewhere." 

Ver.  11.  Alter  this  word]  either  by  transgressing  or  by  abolishing  it.  Let  timber  he  pulled 
down  from  his  house,  and  being  set  up,  let  him  be  hanged  thereon]  Keil  :  *'  Let  a  beam  be 
torn  from  his  house,  and  let  him  be  fastened  hanging  tliereon."  Schultz:  **  Let  him  be  fastened 
thereon  and  crucified."  It  is  almost  beyond  doubt  that  crucifixion  is  the  punishment  signified 
here.  And  let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghill  for  this]  **  that  is,  let  it  be  torn  down  and  changed 
into  a  common  sewer,  comp.  2  Kings  x.  27  ;  Dan.  ii.  5." — Schultz. 

Ver.  14.  And  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia]  "  This  king  did  not  reign  till  long  after  the  com- 
pletion of  the  Temple,  and  the  insertion  of  his  name  here  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  sup- 
posing that  the  compiler  or  editor  of  this  record  inscribed  his  name  as  one  who,  in  later  times, 
contributed  to  the  maintenance  of  the  Temple,  and  so  kept  up  the  work  his  predecessors  had 
be2:un." — Clemance.  And  Schultz  points  out  that,  instead  of  giving  a  simple  narrative  of  the 
completion  of  the  building,  **the  author  would  rather  express  recognition  and  thanks,  and 
hence  could  forget  none  who  were  deserving  of  mention.  Artaxerxes  came  into  consideration 
only  on  account  of  the  gifts  which  he  caused  to  be  brought  to  Jerusalem  by  Ezra  "  (chap.  vii. 
15-20). 

Ver.  15.  The  month  Adar]  which  is  the  twelfth  month,  and  corresponds  with  our  March.  The 
building  was  completed  about  twenty  years  after  the  laying  of  the  foundation  by  Zerubbabel, 
and  four  years  five  months  and  a  few  days  after  the  resumption  of  the  work  by  reason  of  the 
prophesying  of  Haggai  (Hag.  i.  15). 

Ver.  17.  An  hundred  bullocks,  two  hundred  rams]  &c.  These  numbers,  though  small  as 
compared  with  those  offered  at  the  dedication  of  the  former  Temple  (1  Kings  viii.  5,  63),  con- 
sidering the  number  and  the  circumstances  of  the  peapld,  constitute  a  hearty  and  joyful  offering. 
A  sin  offering  for  all  Israel,  twelve  he-goats]  &c.  While  the  great  majority  of  those  who 
returned  with  Zerubbabel  were  of  Judah,  it  is  probable  that  some  families  of  the  other  tribes 
returned  with  them,  and  that  for  that  reason  a  sin  offering  was  presented  for  every  tribe.  More- 
over, as  Keil  observes,  a  sin  offering  was  brought  for  all  Israel,  "  because  the  Temple  was 
intended  for  the  entire  covenant  people,  whose  return  to  the  Lord  and  to  the  land  of  their  fathers, 
according  to  the  predictions  of  the  prophets,  was  hoped  for.  (Comp.  e.g.  Ezek.  xxxvii.  15,  aq, 
Jer.  xxxi.  27,  sj.)  " 

Ver.  18.  They  set  the  priests  in  their  divisions,  and  the  Levites  in  their  courses]  &c. 
(Comp.  1  Chron.  xxiii.  6-23  ;  xxiv.  1-19  ;  2  Cliron.  xxxv.  5,  12.)  As  it  is  written  in  the  book  of 
Moses]     (Comp.  Num.  iii.  6-10  ;  viii.  5-26.)     With  this  verse  the  Chaldee  section  closes. 

Ver.  19.  Kept  the  passover  upon  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month.  (Comp.  Exod. 
xii.  6.) 

Ver.  20.  For  the  priests  and  the  Levites  were  purified]  &c.  Rawlinson  says  that  this  is  a 
mistranslation,  and  that  it  should  be,  **  For  the  priests  had  purified  themselves,  and  the  Levites 
were  all  pure  as  one  man,  and  killed,"  &c.  He  furtlier  suggests  that  this  was  the  reason  why 
the  Levites  killed  the  paschal  lambs  not  only  for  themselves  and  for  the  people,  but  also  for  their 
brethren  the  priests  (Comp.  2  Chron.  xxix.  34.)  But,  as  Keil  remarks,  from  the  days  of  Josiah 
it  seems  to  have  been  customary  for  the  Levites  to  slaughter  the  passover  lambs  for  the  whole 
community,  both  priesthood  and  laity.  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  11,  14,15).  Schultz  translates,  "For 
the  priests  and  Levites  had  purified  themselves  as  one  man,  they  were  all  clean,  and  killed,"  &c. 
He  suggests  that  the  latter  slaughtered  the  lambs  "  for  the  priests,  because  they  were  so  busy 
elsewhere." 

Ver.  21.  And  all  such  as  had  separated  themselves]  &;c.     "  Those  who  separated  themselvea 

83 


OflAT.TL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


from  these  heathen  are  not  proselytes  from  heathenism,  but  descendants  of  the  Jews  and 
Israelites  who  had  remained  in  the  land  when  the  rest  of  the  nation  had  been  carried  captive, 
as  all  the  parallel  passages  show,  comp.  ix.  1,  10,  x.  2,  10,  11  ;  Neh.  ix.  2,  x.  28.  They  had 
without  doubt  intermarried  with  the  heathen,  and  the  more  they  had  entered  into  communion 
with  them,  the  less  were  they  in  a  position  to  observe  the  Mosaic  laws  respecting  food  and 
purification.  To  separate  themselves  from  the  impurities  of  the  heathen  meant  for  them  to 
forsake  altogether  communion  with  the  heathen,  and  seek  communion  with  the  Jewish  congre- 
gation."— Schultz. 

Ver.  22.  Kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven  days]  (Comp.  Exod.  xii.  15,  xiii.  7,  Ac.) 
The  king  of  Assyria]  "  Darius,  the  king  of  Persia,  is  here  called  king  of  Assyria,  not  only  as 
ruler  of  the  territory  of  the  previous  Persian  empire  (Keil),  or  because  Assyria  from  ancient 
time  l)ad  been  the  usual  name  for  all  that  region  (Clericus),  which  cannot  be  proved  from 
Judith  ii.  1  ;  hut,  above  all,  likewise,  because  Darius,  as  head  of  the  great  empire  of  the  world, 
properly  took  the  same  relative  position  over  against  the  people  of  God  as  the  Assyrian  and 
Chaldean  kings  had  once  had,  because  it  was  properly  only  a  continuation  or  renewal  of  the 
same,  and  because  the  thought  was  now  to  be  expressed,  that  finally  that  very  enemy  who  had 
once  so  fearfully  and  destructively  oppressed  the  people  of  God,  had  been  changed  by  the  grace 
of  God  into  a  friend,  so  that  he  had  even  himself  strengthened  the  hands  of  the  congregation 
in  re-establishing  the  destroyed  Temple." — Ibid. 


A  Thorough  Search  and  an  Important  Discovert, 

(Verses  1-5.) 


I.  The  search  for  the  decree  of 
Cyrus. 

1.  Was  thorough.  "  Search  was 
made  in  the  house  of  the  rolls,  where 
the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  Babylon," 
as  being  the  most  likely  place  in  which 
to  find  a  copy  of  the  alleged  decree  of 
Cyrus.  The  document,  however,  was 
not  found  there.  But  the  search  was 
not  abandoned  when  it  failed  there,  but 
was  continued  at  Achmetha,  or  Ecba- 
tana,  as  being  the  place  where,  next  to 
Babylon,  it  would  most  probably  be 
discovered.  The  thoroughness  of  this 
search  seems  to  us  an  evidence  of  the 
desire  of  Darius  the  king  to  deal  fairly 
and  honourably  with  his  Jewish  sub- 
jects. 

2.  Was  successful.  "  And  there  was 
found  at  Achmetha,  in  the  palace  that 
is  in  the  province  of  the  Medes,  a  roll," 
<fec.  Thus  the  honest  and  earnest 
search  was  rewarded,  the  veracity  of 
the  statement  of  the  elders  of  the  Jews 
(chap.  v.  13-15)  was  clearly  proved, 
and  the  lawfulness  of  the  authority  by 
which  they  acted  firmly  established. 

Learn : 

Honest  and  thorough  investigation 
promotes  the  interests  of  religion  and  of 
the  Church  of  God.  Partial  examina- 
tion, and  yet  more,  examination  by  per- 
sons whose  opinions  or  feelings  are 
prejudiced,  often  leads  to  conclusions 
which  are  inimical  to  the  cause  of  God 
U 


and  of  religious  truth.  But  sincere, 
patient,  thorough  investigation  into  the 
credentials  of  Christianity  is  eminently 
desirable,  and  conduces  to  its  progress. 
Merely  human  systems  of  religion  may 
well  shun  the  light;  some  of  the  doc- 
trines of  men  concerning  Christianity, 
upon  examination,  may  prove  unten- 
able ;  and  error  may  naturally  seek  to 
evade  every  real  test ;  but  truth,  righte- 
ousness, and  the  religion  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  court  inquiry,  and  by  in- 
quiry they  spread  and  prevail,  (a). 

IL  The  discovery  of  the  decree  of 
Cyrus.  "  And  there  was  found  at 
Achmetha,  in  the  palace  that  is  in  the 
province  of  the  Medes,  a  roll,  and 
therein  was  a  record  thus  written  :  In 
the  first  year  of  Cyrus,"  &c.  (vers.  2-5). 
The  edict  thus  brought  to  light  con- 
tained three  commands  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  the  Jews. 

1.  That  their  Temple  should  he  rebuilt. 
"  In  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the  king, 
Cyrus  the  king  made  a  decree  : — The 
house  of  God  at  Jerusalem  : — Let  the 
house  be  built,"  (fee.  It  was  to  be 
built  (1)  at  the  old  place  ;  "  at  Jerusa- 
lem." This  was  important,  because  of 
the  old  and  precious  associations  and 
memories  which  clustered  thickly  around 
it.  (2.)  For  the  old  purposes.  "  The 
house  of  God  ...  a  place  where  they 
may  offer  sacrifices."  It  was  for  the 
worship  of  the  same  holy  Being,  and  in 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


OHAP.  fL 


the  same  manner,  as  tbeir  fathers  had 
worshipped.  (3.)  In  solid  and  durable 
manner.  "  And  let  the  foundations 
thereof  be  strongly  laid/'  so  as  to  be 
thoroughly  capable  of  supporting  the 
superstructure,  tliat  the  edifice  may  en- 
dure the  longer. 

2.  That  the  expenses  of  building  he 
granted  them  from  the  royal  revenues. 
"  And  let  the  expenses  be  given  out 
of  the  king's  house."  Either  this  com- 
mand was  intended  to  apply  only  to 
the  materials  of  the  building,  or  it  was 
never  fully  carried  out.  It  may  be 
that  they  did  not  receive  what  was  here 
ordered  them,  as  Matthew  Henry  sug- 
gests, because  the  face  of  things  at  court 
was  soon  changed.  But  we  know  that, 
out  of  their  own  resources,  the  Jews 
contributed  largely  to  the  expenses  of 
the  building  (chaps,  ii.  68,  69  ;  iii.  7). 

3.  That  the  costly  and  sacred  vessels 
of  the  former  Temple  should  he  restored. 
"And  also  let  the  golden  and  silver 
vessels  of  the  house  of  God,"  tfec.  (ver.  5). 
(1.)  These  vessels  had  been  degraded  to 
base  uses  by  heathen  kings.  '*  Which 
Nebuchadnezzar  took  forth  out  of  the 
Temple  which  was  at  Jerusalem,  and 
brought  unto  Babylon."  "And  he 
brought  the  vessels  into  the  treasure 
house  of  his  god  "  (Dan.  i.  2).  Belshazzar, 
at  his  great  and  impious  feast,  "  whiles 
he  tasted  the  wine,  commanded  to  bring 
the  golden  and  silver  vessels,"  (kc.  (Dan. 
V.  2-4).  (2.)  They  had  been  preserved 
from  destruction  or  loss  in  the  Providence 
of  God.  God  had  so  ordered  events 
that  these  vessels  were  regarded  by  the 
heathen  Nebuchadnezzar  as  sacred,  and 
were  by  him  deposited  in  a  secure  place. 
(3.)  They  were  restored  to  their  original 
place  and  use  by  a  heathen  king,  who 
was  moved  thereto  by  the  Spirit  of 
God.  Let  them  "  be  restored,  and 
brought  again  unto  the  Temple  which 
is  at  Jerusalem,  to  their  place,  and 
(thou)  shalt  place  them  in  the  house  of 
God."  Seeing  that  God  thus  preserves 
even  consecrated  utensils,  how  much 
more  will  He  keep  His  consecrated 
people  I  "  Fear  thou  not  ;  for  I  am 
with  thee :  be  not  dismayed,"  &c.  (Isa. 
xli.  10,  13).  **Fear  not;  for  I  have 
redeemed  thee,  I  have  called  thee   by 


thy  name  ;  thou  art  Mine.  When  thou 
passest  through  the  waters,"  <kc.  (Isa, 
xliii.  1,  2). 

Learn  : 

The  advantages  of  written  history. 
The  te«stimony  of  the  Jewish  elders  con- 
cerning the  edict  of  Cyrus  might  have 
been  denied  by  some,  and  by  others 
suspected  of  exaggeration  in  their  own 
favour,  and  in  this  way  the  great  work 
ndght  have  been  again  arrested ;  but 
this  state-document,  found  in  one  of  the 
royal  offices  or  chambers,  was  unim- 
peachable. Tradition  is  variable  and 
uncertain  ;  but  the  record  written  at  the 
time  of  the  events  is  fixed  and  trust- 
worthy. (6).  How  great  should  be  our 
gratitude  for  the  sacred  writings — '*  the 
Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth 
for  ever  "  |  (c). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  religion  of  Christ  might  be  shown 
to  abound  in  circumatances  which  contradict 
and  repel  the  idea  of  a  human  origin.  For 
example,  its  representations  of  the  paternal 
character  of  God  ;  its  inculcation  of  a  universal 
charity  ;  the  stress  which  it  lays  on  inward 
purity  ;  its  substitution  of  a  spiritual  worship 
for  the  forms  and  ceremonies,  which  every- 
where had  usurped  the  name  and  extinguished 
the  life  of  religion  ;  its  preference  of  humility, 
and  the  mild,  unostentatious,  passive  virtues, 
to  the  dazzling  qualities  which  had  mono- 
polised men's  admiration;  its  consistent  and 
bright  discoveries  of  immortality  ;  its  adap- 
tation to  the  wants  of  man  as  a  sinner ;  its 
adaptation  to  all  the  conditions,  capacities, 
and  suflferings  of  human  nature;  its  pure, 
sublime,  yet  practical  morality  ;  its  high  and 
generous  motives;  and  its  fitness  to  form  a 
character,  which  plainly  prepares  for  a  higher 
life  than  the  present ; — these  are  peculiarities 
of  Christianity,  which  will  strike  us  more  and 
more  in  proportion  as  we  understand  distinctly 
the  circumstances  of  the  age  and  country  in 
which  this  religion  appeared,  and  for  which 
no  adequate  human  cause  has  been  or  can  be 
assigned. 

Passing  over  these  topics,  each  of  which 
might  be  enlarged  into  a  discourse,  1  will 
make  but  one  remark  on  this  religion,  which 
strikes  my  own  mind  very  forcibly.  Since 
its  introduction,  human  nature  has  made 
great  progress,  and  society  experienced  great 
changes ;  and  in  this  advanced  condition  of 
the  world,  Christianity,  instead  of  losing  its 
application  and  importance,  is  found  to  be 
more  and  more  congenial  and  adapted  to  man's 
nature  and  wants.  Men  have  outgrown  the 
other  institutions  of  that  period  when  Chris- 
tianity appeared,  its  philosophy,  its  modes  of 

85 


CHAP.  TI. 


HOMJLSTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


warfare,  its  policy,  its  public  and  private 
ecoMomy  ;  but  Christianity  has  never  shrunk 
as  intellect  has  opened,  but  has  always  kept 
in  advance  of  men's  faculties,  and  unfolded 
nobler  views  in  proportion  as  they  have 
ascended.  The  highest  powers  and  affections 
which  our  nature  has  developed  find  more 
than  adequate  objects  in  this  religion.  Chris- 
tianity is  indeed  peculiarly  fitted  to  the  more 
improved  stages  of  society,  to  the  more 
delicate  sensibilitiea  of  refined  minds,  and 
especially  to  that  dissatisfaction  with  the 
present  state,  wliich  always  grows  with  the 
growth  of  our  moral  powers  and  affections. 
As  men  advance  in  civilisation,  they  become 
susceptible  of  mental  sufferings,  to  which  ruder 
ages  are  strangers ;  and  these  Christianity  is 
fitted  to  assuage.  Imagination  and  intellect 
become  more  restless  ;  and  Christianity  brings 
them  tranquillity,  by  the  eternal  and  magnifi- 
cent truths,  the  solemn  and  unbounded  pros- 
pects, which  it  unfolds.  This  fitness  of  our 
religion  to  more  advanced  stages  of  society 
than  that  in  which  it  was  introduced,  to  wants 
of  human  nature  not  then  developed,  seems 
to  me  very  striking.  The  religion  bears  the 
marks  of  having  come  from  a  Being  who 
perfectly  understood  the  human  mind,  and 
had  power  to  provide  for  its  progress.  This 
feature  of  Christianity  is  of  the  nature  of 
prophecy.  It  was  an  anticipation  of  future 
and  distant  ages;  and  when  we  consider 
among  whom  our  religion  sprung,  where,  but 
in  God,  can  we  find  an  explanation  of  this 
peculiarity? — W.  E.  Channing^  D.D. 

(6)  In  Books  lies  the  soul  of  the  whole  Past 
Time ;  tiie  articulate  audible  voice  of  the 
Past,  when  the  body  and  material  substance 
of  it  has  altogether  vanished  like  a  dream. 
Mighty  fleets  and  armieSjharbours  and  arsenals, 
vast  cities,  high  domed,  manyengined, — they 
are  precious,  great :  but  what  do  they  become  ? 
Agamemnon,  the  many  Agamemnons,  Peri- 


cleses,  and  their  Greece;  all  is  gone  now  to 
some  ruined  fragments,  dumb  mournful  wrecks 
and  blocks  :  but  the  Books  of  Qreece !  There 
Greece,  to  every  thinker,  still  very  literally 
lives;  can  be  called  up  again  into  life.  No 
magic  Rune  is  stranger  than  a  Book.  All  that 
mankind  has  done,  thought,  gained,  or  been  : 
it  is  lying  as  in  magic  preservation  in  the 
pages  of  Books.  They  are  the  chosen  posse»- 
sion  of  men. — Thomas  Carlyle. 

(c)  It  is  a  blessed  thought  that  the  words  of 
the  Bible  were  written  for  us — that  the  Spirit 
of  God  looked  along  the  ages,  and  saw  that  in 
such  an  event  or  circumstance  of  life  we 
should  need  just  such  counsel  and  help.  And 
then  He  inspired  a  pen  to  write  it  down.  Not 
for  our  good  only,  but  for  thousands  who  have 
gone  before  and  who  will  come  after.  No 
promise  is  there  that  has  not  been  proved 
thousands  of  times — no  warning,  but  many 
have  taken  it  home.  It  is  like  a  good  chart 
which  has  everything  on  it  that  a  mariner  in 
any  seas  may  need.  Its  truths  never  wear 
out.  Says  one,  who  has  been  a  deep  student 
of  it :  **  The  Bible  will  bear  a  thousand  read- 
ings, and  the  man  who  has  gone  over  it  the 
most  frequently  and  carefully  is  the  surest  of 
finding  new  wonders  there." — The  Study. 

What  a  wonderful  Book  is  the  Bible  !  Just 
let  us  look  at  it.  There  it  lies — a  Book  several 
thousand  years  old — a  Book  at  war  with  all 
the  evil  passions  of  a  wicked  world — a  Book 
dwelling  in  an  enemy's  country  —  a  Book 
exposed  to  every  species  of  assault — a  Book 
that  has  been  shot  at  by  innumerable  archers, 
and  yet  there  it  lies,  unhurt,  invulnerable, 
not  a  crevice  to  be  found  in  its  coat  of  mail, 
not  the  shadow  of  a  genuine  doubt  upon  its 
Divinity,  not  a  speck  upon  its  glorious  robes  I 
Well  may  we  say  as  we  gaze  upon  it,  "  Surely 
God  is  in  this  Book  !  how  dreadful  is  this 
Book  !  it  is  none  else  than  the  Book  of  God  ; 
it  is  the  gate  of  heaven  I  " — Anon, 


The  Decree  of  Darius. 
{Verses  6-12.) 


In  this  royal  edict  we  have  : 
L  A  prohibition.  *' Now  Tatnai,  gov- 
ernor beyond  the  river,  Shetbar-boziiai, 
and  your  C()m[)anions  the  Apharsacbites, 
which  are  beyond  the  river,  be  ye  far 
from  thence  :  let  the  work  of  this  house 
of  God  alone."  All  interference  with 
the  builders  and  the  building  of  the 
Tein[)le  is  here  forbidden  by  the  king. 
Tatnai  and  Shethar-boznai  seem  to  have 
acted  with  conspicuous  fairness  toward 
the  Jews  ;  but  it  is  probable  that  some 
of  their  former  Samaritan  enemies  would 
have  hindered  them  in  their  great  work 
S6 


if  they  could  have  done  so.  Such  hin- 
drance this  edict  imperatively  prohibits. 
IL  An  injunction.  The  royal  decree 
goes  on  to  command  Tatnai  and  his 
com[)anions  in  office  to  help  onward  the 
work  of  the  Jewish  builders. 

1.  They  were  to  allow  the  building  of 
the  Tem,'ple.  "Let  the  governor  of  the 
Jews  and  the  elders  of  the  Jews  build 
this  house  of  God  in  his  place." 

2.  They  were  to  assist  the  building  of 
the  Temple.  "  Moreover,  I  make  a  decree 
what  ye  shall  do  to  the  elders  of  these 
Jews  for  the  building  ol  this  house  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZIUL 


OHAP.  TL 


God :  that  of  the  king's  goods,  of  the 
tribute  beyond  the  river,  forthwith  ex- 
penses be  given  unto  these  men,  that 
they  be  not  hindered." 

3.  The^  were  to  assist  the  worship  of 
the  God  of  the  Temple.  "And  that 
which  they  have  need  of,  both  young 
bnllocks,  and  rams,  and  lambs,  for  the 
burnt  offerings  of  the  God  of  heaven, 
wheat,  salt,  wine,  and  oil,  according  to 
the  appointment  of  the  priests  which 
are  at  Jerusalem,  let  it  be  given  them 
day  by  day  without  fail." 

Notice: 

1.  The  sufficiency  of  this  assistance. 
It  provides  for  the  daily  and  other  burnt 
offerings,  for  the  meat  offerings,  and  for 
other  things  according  to  the  expressed 
requirements  of  the  Jewish  priests. 

2.  The  continuity  of  this  assistance. 
"  Let  it  be  given  them  day  by  day." 

3.  The  urgency  of  the  command  of 
this  assistance.  *'  Let  it  be  given  them 
without  fail ;  ...  let  it  be  done  with 
S[)eed."  In  this  way  unusual  importance 
is  given  to  this  edict  for  helping  for- 
ward the  Temple  and  the  worship  of 
Jehovah.  The  object  of  the  king  in  thus 
aiding  their  worship  is  noteworthy : 
"That  they  may  oi!er  sacrifices  of  sweet 
savours  unto  the  God  of  heaven,  and 
pray  for  the  life  of  the  king,  and  of  his 
Sons."  This  is  a  remarkable  utterance 
from  a  heathen  monarch.  It  reveals — 
(1.)  His  reverence  towards  God.  Twice 
in  tliis  decree  he  speaks  of  Him  as  "the 
God  of  heaven ; "  and  from  his  wish 
that  sacrifices  and  prayers  should  be 
presented  to  Him,  it  is  evident  that  he 
believed  in  His  power  to  aid  and  bless 
men.  (2.)  His  faith  in  the  efficacy  of 
prayer  to  God.  Darius  knew  that  the 
Jews  "  were  a  praying  people,"  says 
Matthew  Henry,  "  and  had  heard  that 
God  was  nigh  to  them  in  all  that  which 
they  called  upon  Him  for.  He  was 
sensible  he  needed  their  prayers  and 
might  receive  benefit  by  them,  and  was 
kind  to  them  in  order  that  he  might 
have  an  interest  in  their  prayers.  It  is 
the  duty  of  God's  people  to  pray  for 
those  that  are  in  authority  over  them, 
not  only  for  the  good  and  gentle,  but 
also  for  the  fro  ward  ;  but  they  are  par- 
ticularly bound  in  gratitude  to  pray  for 


their  protectors  and  benefactors ;  and  it 
is  the  wisdom  of  princes  to  desire  their 
prayers.  Let  not  the  greatest  princes 
despise  the  prayers  of  the  meanest 
saints ;  it  is  desirable  to  have  them  for 
us,  and  dreadful  to  have  them  against 
us."  (a). 

IIL  A  malediction.  "Also  I  have 
made  a  decree,  that  whosoever  shall 
alter  this  word,"  &c.  (vers.  11,  12). 

1.  Severe  penalties  are  denounced 
against  any  who  should  violate  the  de- 
cree, (1.)  The  crucifixion  of  the  offen- 
der.  "  Whosoever  shall  alter  this  word, 
let  timber  be  pulled  down  from  his 
house,  let  him  be  fastened  thereon  and 
crucified."  (2.)  The  consignment  of 
the  memory  of  the  offender  to  shame 
and  loathing.  "And  let  his  house  be 
made  a  dunghill  for  this."  Language 
such  as  this  is  not  unfrequently  em- 
])loyed  by  Orientals  (2  Kings  x.  27 ; 
Dan.  ii.  5  ;  iii.  29).  "  They  imprecate 
all  sorts  of  indignities  and  abominations 
on  the  objects  of  their  dislike,  and  it  is 
not  uncommon  for  them  to  smear  over 
with  filth  what  is  the  object  of  their 
contempt  and  abhorrence.  Thus  when 
the  Caliph  Omar  took  Jerusalem,  at  the 
head  of  the  Saracen  army,  after  ravag- 
ing the  greater  part  of  the  city,  he 
caused  dung  to  be  spread  over  the 
site  of  the  sanctuary,  in  token  of  the 
abhorrence  of  all  Mussulmans,  and  of 
its  being  henceforth  regarded  as  the 
refuse  and  offscouring  of  all  things." 

2.  A  stern  imprecation  is  uttered 
against  any  who  should  attempt  to  injure 
the  Temple.  "And  the  God  that  hath 
caused  His  name  to  dwell  there  destroy 
all  kings  and  people,  that  shall  put  to 
their  hand  to  alter,  to  destroy  this  house 
of  God  which  is  at  Jerusalem."  Where 
his  own  power  was  inadequate  to  pro- 
tect the  Jews  and  their  Temple,  he  in- 
vokes the  hand  of  God  against  those 
who  would  injure  the  sacred  place. 

Conclusion  : 

1.  See  the  force  of  example.  Darius 
was  moved  by  the  example  of  Cyrus  in 
thus  showing  favour  to  the  Jews,  In 
this  case  w^e  have — (1.)  An  example  of 
excellent  character.  The  conduct  of 
Cyrus  towards  the  Jews  was  good  and 
noble.    (6).     (2.)   An  example  of   pos- 

87 


OHAP.  YI. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


thumous  power.  Cyrus  had  been  dead 
for  several  years,  but  the  decree  which 
he  had  made  determined  the  conduct 
of  Darius  towards  the  Jews.  Our 
influence  for  good  or  for  evil  does  not 
cease  with  our  life  upon  earth,  (c).  (3.) 
An  example  nobly  followed.  The  de- 
cree of  Darius  was  even  more  noble  and 
generous  than  that  of  Cyrus. 

2.  See  the  workings  of  Divine  Provi- 
dence. In  this  decree  we  see  that — (1.) 
God  sometimes  uses  unlikely  agents  in 
accomplishing  His  purposes.  Darius, 
king  of  Persia,  was  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant agents  in  rebuilding  the  Temple 
at  Jerusalem,  &c.  (2.)  God  overrules 
the  opposition  of  enemies  for  the  accom- 
plishment of  His  purposes.  We  are  far 
from  saying  that  Tatnai  and  Shethar- 
boznai  were  enemies  to  the  Jews  ;  but 
we  know  that  the  Samaritans  were  bit- 
terly hostile  to  them  ;  and  now,  as  the 
result  of  the  appeal  to  Darius,  all  his 
subjects  west  of  the  Euphrates  are  com- 
manded to  contribute  to  the  Temple  and 
to  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  '*  Surely 
the  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  Thee;  the 
remainder  of  wrath  shalt  Thou  restrain." 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  A  man  who  lives  habitually  near  to  God 
is  like  a  great  cloud  for  ever  dropping  with 
fertilising  showers.  This  is  the  man  wlio  can 
Bay,  "The  earth  is  dissolved;  I  bear  up  the 
pillars  thereof."  France  had  never  seen  so 
bloody  a  revolution  had  there  been  men  of 
prayer  to  preserve  her.  England,  amidst  the 
commotions  which  make  her  rock  to  and  fro, 
is  held  fast  because  prayer  is  put  up  incessantly 
by  ihe  faithful.  The  flag  of  old  England  is 
nailed  to  her  mast,  not  by  the  hands  of  her 
sailors,  but  by  the  prayers  of  the  people  of 
God.  These,  as  they  intercede  day  and  night, 
and  as  they  go  about  their  spiritual  ministry, 
these  are  they  for  whom  God  spareth  nations, 
for  whom  He  permittebh  the  earth  still  to 
exist ;  and  when  their  time  is  over,  and  they 
are  taken  away,  the  salt  being  taken  from  the 
earth,  then  shall  the  elements  dissolve  with 
fervent  heat,  the  earth  also,  and  the  works  that 
are  therein,  shall  be  burnt  up ;  but  not  until 
He  hath  caught  away  the  saints  with  Christ 
into  the  air,  shall  this  world  pass  away. — C. 
H.  Spurgeon. 

(6)  If  the  present  lecturer  has  a  right  to 

consider  himself  a  real  Christian, — if  he  has 

been  of  any  service  to  his  fellow-creatures,  and 

has  attained  to  any  usefulness  in  the  Church 

88 


of  Christ,  he  owes  it,  in  the  way  of  means  and 
instrumentality,  to  the  sight  of  a  companion, 
who  slept  in  the  same  room  with  him,  bending 
his  knees  in  prayer  on  retiring  to  rest.  That 
scene,  so  unostentatious,  and  yet  so  uncon- 
cealed, roused  my  slumbering  conscience,  and 
sent  an  arrow  to  my  heart ;  for,  though  I  had 
been  religiously  educated,  I  had  restrained 
prayer,  and  cast  off  the  fear  of  God.  My  con- 
version to  God  followed,  and  soon  after  my 
entrance  upon  college  studies  for  the  work  of 
the  ministry.  Nearly  half  a  century  has  rolled 
away  since  then,  with  all  its  multitudinous 
events ;  but  that  little  chamber,  that  humble 
couch,  that  praying  youth,  are  still  present  to 
my  imagination,  and  will  never  be  forgotten, 
even  amidst  the  splendours  of  heaven,  and 
through  the  ages  of  eternity. — /.  A.  James, 

(c)  The  truth  is,  that  no  man  or  woman, 
however  poor  their  circumstances  or  mean 
their  lot,  are  without  their  influence  ;  like  an 
electric  spark,  passing  from  link  to  link,  that 
runs  flashing  down  the  chain  of  successive 
generations.  Indeed,  a  man's  life  is  as  im- 
mortal as  his  soul ;  and  by  its  influence,  though 
dead,  he  yet  speaketh  and  worketh.  .  .  . 
Men  live  after  they  are  dead.  Outliving  our 
memory,  and  more  enduring  than  any  monu- 
ment of  brass  or  marble,  our  example  may 
prove  like  the  circle  that  rises  round  the  sink- 
ing stone,  and  growing  wider  and  wider,  em- 
braces a  larger  and  larger  sphere,  till  it  dies 
in  gentle  wavelets  on  the  distant  beach.  It 
reaches  a  distant  shore  ;  your  example  a  dis- 
tant time.  Take  care,  then,  how  you  live. — 
Thomas  Guthrie^  D,D. 

(d)  All  things  are  for  the  best,  by  virtue  of 
no  inherent  power  in  evil  to  develop  good,  for 
evil  must  ever  gravitate  towards  an  increase 
of  itself  ;  but  by  virtue  of  an  overruling  Wis- 
dom bringing  good  out  of  evil,  and  convert- 
ing the  evil  itself  into  the  instrument  of  good. 
This  is  true  of  natural  laws.  The  storm  de- 
structive of  life  and  property  fills  the  atmo- 
sphere with  the  seeds  of  larger  and  freer  life. 
Pestilence  is  the  providential  stimulus  of  sani- 
tary progress.  Difficulties  and  conflicts  are 
the  school  of  all  the  heroic  virtues.  Fortitude, 
self-control,  heroic  force  of  will,  unselfish 
generosity,  a  rational  love  of  liberty,  and 
liberality  tolerant  of  other  men's  opinions,  all 
grow  out  of  this  soil.  They  are  not  hot-house 
exotics,  needing  to  be  stimulated  into  artificial 
life,  but  vigorous  evergreens,  flourishing  only 
in  the  free  air  of  heaven,  and  striking  their 
roots  deep  only  in  their  native  soil.  The 
exercise  of  a  Divine  wisdom  and  power  over- 
ordering  evil  for  good  is  but  the  application 
of  the  same  principle  to  the  higher  sphere  of 
God's  moral  government,  but  another  and  a 
louder  strain  of  the  same  harmonious  music. 
The  past  history  of  the  world  is  one  long  illus- 
tration of  this  truth.  The  experience  of  the 
past  becomes  prophetic,  and  catching  its  lan- 
guage from  the  glowing  pages  of  the  inspired 
Scripture,  sings  its  songs  of  triumphant  hope 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


CHAP.  VL 


for  the  future.  Looking  back  to  the  past  and  promise  peeping  on  tiptoe  into  the  future,  it 
forward  to  the  future,  faith  recognises  that  catches  a  glimpse  of  a  more  glorious  hereafter, 
all  is  best,    from  the  height  of  the  revealed      — Canon  Qarbett. 


A  Believer's  Expenses. 
(Verse  4.) 


*'  Let  the  expenses  he  given  out  of  the 
hinges  house." 

The  times  are  hard.  Expenses  are  very 
well  when  one  is  able  to  meet  them  easily, 
but  they  involve  a  thousand  per{)lexities 
if  the  income  is  insufficient.  The  most 
expensive  living  possible  is  that  of  the 
believer.  It  is  not  difficult  to  satisfy 
the  bare  requirements  of  the  body. 
There  is  more  swallowed  up  by  the  re- 
quirements of  a  man's  position.  But 
the  human  soul  has  the  greatest  needs. 
If  we  speak  of  its  simple  necessities, 
what  a  costly  matter  is  the  sustaining 
of  its  life  !  Think,  however,  of  its  ex- 
pensive enjoyments,  its  superabounding 
luxuries !  From  whence  do  they  all 
come  1  We  are  spiritually  penniless. 
Are  we  not  living  far  beyond  our  in- 
come 'i  No.  Heaven's  exchequer  sup- 
plies bountifully  all  our  requirements 
and  enjoyments. 

I.  What  are  our  expenses?  The 
expenses  referred  to  in  the  text  are 
those  connected  with  the  return  of  the 
Jews  to  their  own  land,  the  rebuilding 
of  the  Temple,  and  its  continual  sacri- 
fices. 

1.  Their  release  from  captivity  was 
doubtless  an  expensive  blessing.  Our 
release  from  the  thraldom  of  sin  in- 
volved enormous  expenditure.  Was 
paid  "  out  of  the  King's  house.*'  Did 
not  God  give  His  Son  ?  Did  not  the 
Son  pay  down  His  blood  and  His  life  ? 
"  Ye  are  not  redeemed  with  corruptible 
things  such  as  silver  and  gold,  but  with 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  What  a 
price ! 

2.  Their  return  to  Jerusalem.  The 
liberated  Jews  in  Babylon  were  pro- 
bably impoverished  by  their  captivity. 
Cyrus  says,  "  Return  to  your  own  land, 
I  will  pay  your  expenses."  The  im- 
portant step  of  public  profession  of 
faith  in  Christ,  and  of  union  with  His 
Church,  need  peculiar  supplies  of  grace. 


It  is  promised  to  you  "  out  of  the  King's 

house." 

3.  The  material  for  a  new  Temple 
was  provided  by  king  Cyrus.  There 
is  much  new  material  to  be  built  up  in 
our  habits  and  life.  Extensive  altera- 
tions must  be  made.  We  require  a  new 
building,  the  material  of  which  shall 
be  faith,  hope,  love,  humility,  chastity, 
self-denial,  &c.  Can  we  obtain  these 
from  our  own  slender  purse  ] 

4.  Wages  for  the  workmen  are  part  of 
these  expenses.  It  was  a  long  job— 
the  Temple-building — and  the  workmen 
must  not  stand  still.  The  Christian 
who  makes  no  progress  in  the  Divine 
life  may  account  for  it — his  source  of 
supplies  has  been  neglected  —  "the 
King's  house." 

5.  The  restoration  of  the  sacred  vessels 
from  Babylon  (ver.  5)  meant  expense. 
Our  bodies  being  temples  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  every  physical  power  and  every 
mental  faculty  should  be  "  a  vessel  unto 
honour,  sanctified  and  meet  for  the 
Master's  use."  But  these,  also,  have 
been  profaned  and  defiled  in  our  capti- 
vity to  sin.  They  must  now  be  restored 
to  their  proper  use,  and  purified. 

6.  The  daily  sacrifices  were  a  fuither 
item  in  the  expenditure  (ver.  9).  (1.) 
Our  hearts  are  altars  whereon  should 
be  ofi'ered  the  sacrifices  of  worship  and 
praise.  (2.)  Our  life  is  an  altar  whereon 
should  be  offered  our  whole  conduct, 
and  our  special  effort  for  Christ. 

II.  Where  shall  we  find  means  to 
meet  these  expenses  ?  There  is  one 
great  treasury  of  light — the  sun — in- 
exhaustible. "  The  King's  house  "  is  an 
inexhaustible  treasury  of  grace. 

1.  The  word  of  His  truth.  Hidden 
mines  of  wealth.  Rich  doctrines,  rich 
examples,  rich  promises,  rich  pledges. 
Our  needs  appeared  big  until  we  saw 
the  supply  here. 

2.  The  throne  of  His  grace,     "  Let 

89 


CHAP.  TI. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


ns   come  boldly,"   (fee.    (Heb.    iv.   16). 

'*  Ask   vvluit   ye   will,"    <kc.     "  Whatso- 
ever ye  shall  ask,*'  <fec. 

**  Thou  art  coraini^  to  a  King, 
Large  pitiiions  with  tliee  bring; 
For  His  grace  and  power  are  such, 
None  can  ever  ask  too  much." 

3.  The  fellowship  of  His  people.  Ei- 
perience  tells  us  of  the  supplies  to  be 
found  here. 

4.  The  dispensation  of  His  providence. 
God's  abundant,  unasked  mercies  every 
day.  Everything  in  nature  is  a  store- 
house of  food  ;  the  clouds  over  our 
heads,  the  clods  under  our  feet,  the 
atmosphere  which  we  breathe.  Every- 
thing in  Providence  su})plies  food  for 
the  believer.  "  We  know  that  all  things 
work  together  for  good,"  &c. 

5.  lite  opposition  of  his  foes.  The 
Persian  monarch  was  naturally  Israel's 
enemy,  yet  God  arranges  that  He  shall 
pay  Israel's  expenses.  Even  the  lions 
we  may  meet  shall  supply  sweet  honey 
for  our  nourishment  and  refreshment, 

6.  The  work  of  His  Son.  This  in- 
cludes all  others.  *'My  God  shall  sup- 
ply all  your  need  according  to  His  riches 
in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  What  is 
there  wanted  that  is  not  to  be  found 
here  ?     **  In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness 


of  the  Godhead."  "Full  of  grace  and 
truth ;  and  of  His  fulness  have  all  we 
received,  and  grace  for  grace.*' 

III.  How  shall  we  act  in  the  pre- 
sence of  such  abundance  ? 

1.  We  need  not  he  afraid  of  exhaust- 
ing Ueaven^s  treasures.  Here  is  grace 
abounding !  We  may  be  prodigals,  for 
our  Father  has  plenty. 

2.  We  dare  not  he  slow  in  availing 
ourselves  of  these  supplies.  Live  up  to 
your  privileges,  or  you  will  suffer,  and 
the  bountiful  King  will  be  insulted. 

3.  We  cannot  help  wondering  at  the 
goodness  of  the  King.  Was  it  not  enough 
that  He  should  liberate  us  from  sin? 
He  *'  crowns  us  with  loving-kindness 
and  tender  mercies." 

4.  We  will  not  forget  to  express  our 
gratitude  to  the  King,  As  He  is  at  all 
the  expense,  He  shall  have  all  the  praise. 
Here  I  will  begin  the  song,  and  when  I 
arrive  at  the  **  King's  house  "  I  shall  in 
richer  language 

"The  gratitude  declare 
That  glows  within  my  ravished  heart." 

5.  We  must  not  he  so  selfish  as  to  hide 
these  glad  tidings.  *'  Tliis  day  is  a  day 
of  good  tidings,  and  we  hold  our  peace." 
— R,  S.  Latimer, 


The  Desire  of  a  Sovereign  and  the  Duty  of  Subjects. 

ijerse  10.) 


I  propose  to  consider  the  words  before 
us  in  a  twofold  point  of  view — 

L  As  the  desire  of  a  heathen 
prince. 

1.  It  was  a  just  and  reasonahle  desire, 
as  the  history  will  clearly  show.  The 
Jews,  by  the  permission  of  Cyrus,  had 
begun  to  rebuild  their  Temple,  <fec. 

Now,  consider  the  obligations  which 
this  benevolent  monarch  was  conferring 
on  the  Jews,  and  then  say  whether  the 
desire  which  he  expressed  was  not  just 
and  reasonahle.  He  had  ordered  that 
*' whatever  they  had  need  of,  young 
bullocks  and  rams  and  lambs,*'  &c. 
(ver.  9).  Was  it  not  reasonable  that  he 
shonld  expect  these  things  to  be  applied 
to  their  distinct  use,  and  that,  when  he 
was  showing  such  a  paternal  regard  for 
90 


the  welfare  of  their  nation,  he  should  be 
remembered  by  them  in  their  devotions, 
and  have  an  interest  in  their  prayers? 
Surely  this  was  the  least  return  which 
they  could  render  to  him  for  his  extreme 
kindness, 

2.  It  was  also  a  wise  and  politic  desire. 
Religion  and  loyalty  are  inseparable.  It 
cannot  be  that  a  man  who  truly  fears 
God  should  fail  essentially  in  honouring 
the  king.  On  the  other  hand,  a  man 
who  has  no  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes, 
has  no  principle  sufficiently  strong  to 
keep  him  faithful  to  his  king,  if  he  be 
drawn  either  by  interest  or  inclination 
to  oppose  him.  Hence,  then,  it  was 
wise  in  Darius,  though  a  heathen  prince, 
to  encourage  piety  amongst  the  Jews. 

Nor  was  he  less  politic  in  desiring  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OXAP.  VI. 


remembrance  in  their  prayers.  Inter- 
cession will  induce  a  habit  of  mind 
friendly  to  the  person  for  whom  it  is 
offered,  and,  if  offered  in  sincerity  by 
a  whole  nation,  would  prove  a  bulwark 
around  the  throne,  stronger  than  all  the 
fleets  and  armies  that  could  be  raised 
for  its  defence. 

II.  As  the  duty  of  a  Christian 
people. 

1.  In  the  service  of  our  heaveidy  King^ 
the  "  offering  of  sacrifices  to  Him  of  a 
sweet  savour"  may  well  be  considered 
as  comprehending  our  duty  to  Him ; 
whether  as  sinners,  who  stand  in  need 
of  His  mercy,  or  as  saints,  who  desire 
to  glorify  His  name.  The  Jewish 
sacrifices  were  presented  as  an  atone- 
ment for  the  sins  of  the  people  ]  and 
they  prefigured  that  "  Lamb  of  God, 
which  in  His  eternal  purpose  was  slain 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
These  we  are  not  required  to  bring; 
because  that  adorable  Saviour,  in  whom 
all  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  Mosaic 
law  were  to  be  fulfilled,  has  come.  "  He 
loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us,  an 
offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a 
sweet  -  smelling  savour"  This  sacrifice 
we  must  ever  bring  before  the  God  of 
heaven  and  earth.  Jesus  is  "the  way, 
the  truth,  and  the  life."  "  His  is  the 
only  name  whereby  any  man  can  be 
eaved. " 

But  there  are  other  sacrifices  also, 
which,  as  saints,  we  are  to  offer,  and 
which  have  a  sweet  savour  before  God. 
Our  whole  person,  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 
is  to  be  presented  to  the  Lord,  as  the 
Apostle  tells  us ;  "I  beseech  you,  by  the 


mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your 
bodies,"  &c.  (Rom.  xii.  1).  And  if  only 
we  come  to  (^od  through  Christ,  there 
is  not  a  service  which  we  can  render  to 
Him  which  shall  not  come  up  with  ac- 
ceptance before  Him,  as  a  sacrifice  of  a 
sweet-smell ino;  savour.  Such  are  our  alma 
(Heb.  xiii.  16) ;  such  our  prayers  (Ps. 
cvii.  22)  ;  such  our  very  sighs  (Ps.  IL 
17);  such  is  our  every  service,  of  what- 
ever kind  (1  Pet.  ii.  5). 

And  do  not  imagine  that  your  atten- 
tion to  this  duty  is  unimportant  as  it  re- 
spects the  welfare  of  the  state.  There  is 
a  far  closer  connection  between  national 
piety  and  national  prosperity  than  men 
generally  imagine.  (Comp.  chap.  viL  23.) 

To  this  must  be  added  your  duty  to 
your  earthly  prince,  to  be  instant  in 
prayer  to  God  on  his  behalf.  This  is 
your  duty ;  for  the  Apostle  says,  "  I 
exhort  that,  first  of  all,  supplications, 
prayers,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  ii.  1-3). 

It  is  your  interest  also;  for  the  wel- 
fare of  every  individual  in  the  nation  is 
bound  up  in  the  welfare  of  the  king. 

Let  us,  from  the  example  of  this  hea- 
then prince,  learn  how  to  employ  our  in- 
fluence.  Let  us  use  it  for  "  the  God  of 
heaven  ; "  let  us  employ  it  to  protect  the 
oppressed,  to  encourage  piety,  and  to 
maintain  the  honour  of  God  in  the  world. 

Let  us  learn  also  how  to  improve  the 
privileges  we  enjoy.  Let  us  abound  in 
praises  to  our  heavenly  Benefactor,  in 
aff'ectionate  loyalty  to  our  earthly  king, 
and  in  every  work,  whereby  God  may  be 
glorified,  and  the  welfare  of  our  fellow- 
creatures  may  be  advanced. — C,  Simeon^ 
M,A, 


The  Completion  of  the  Temple. 
(FmM  13-15.) 


Let  us  consider — 

I.  The  ready  compliance  of  the  Per- 
sian officers  with  the  royal  commands. 

1.  They  carried  out  their  commands 
faithfully.  "  Then  Tatnai,  governor  on 
this  side  the  river,  Shethar-boznai,  and 
their  companions,  according  to  that 
which  Darius  the  king  had  sent,  so  they 
did." 

2.  They  carried  out  their  commands 


readily.  "  So  they  did  speedily." 
They  exhibited  neither  reluctance  nor 
delay  in  carrying  out  the  directions 
which  they  had  received  from  king 
Darius.  We  have  in  this  another  evi- 
dence of  the  freedom  from  prejudice, 
the  impartiality,  and  the  fairness  which 
marked  the  conduct  of  Tatnai  and  She- 
thar-boznai towards  the  Jews. 

II.  The  satisfactory  progress  and 

91 


OBAP.  TL 


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


ultimate  completion  of  the  building  of 
the  Temple.  "  And  the  elders  of  the 
Jews  builded,  and  they  prospered,"  &c. 
(vers.  14,  15).  This  successful  issue  of 
their  important  undertaking  was  accom- 
plished by  the  co-operation  in  various 
ways  of  many  persons  and  powers, 
through  the  good  Providence  of  God. 
Let  us  glance  at  such  of  these  as  are 
here  mentioned. 

1.  The  grand  Authority  for  the  great 
work.  "  They  builded,  and  finished  it, 
according  to  the  commandment  of  the 
God  of  Israel."  The  builders  prosecuted 
their  work  as  "  the  servants  of  the  God 
of  heaven  and  earth"  (chap.  v.  11). 
They  were  summoned  to  their  work  and 
encouraged  in  it  by  the  prophets  of 
Jehovah,  "  in  the  name  of  the  God  of 
Israel "  (chap.  v.  1).  They  were  work- 
ing in  obedience  to  His  express  com- 
mand. And  **  there  would  have  been 
no  command  of  Cyrus  and  Darius  with- 
out God's  command." 

2.  The  royal  promoters  of  the  great 
work.  "And  according  to  the  com- 
mandment of  Cyrus,  and  Darius,  and 
Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia."  Although 
Artaxerxes  had  nothing  to  do  with  the 
erection  of  the  sacred  edifice,  he  is  men- 
tioned by  the  historian  because  of  the 
great  favour  he  showed  to  the  good 
cause  many  years  afterwards.  Each  of 
these  monarchs  had  rendered  valuable 
assistance  to  the  Jews  in  restoring  and 
carrying  on  the  worship  of  Jehovah, 
(1.)  They  gave  permission  for  the  return 
of  the  exiles  and  for  the  rebuilding  of 
the  Temple  (chnps.  i.  1-4;  vi.  1-12; 
vii.  11-13).  (2.)  They  granted  them 
protection  in  rebuilding  the  Temple  (ver. 
7).  (3.)  They  bestowed  upon  them 
liberal  assistance  both  for  their  work 
and  for  their  worship  (chaps,  i.  4—11; 
vi.  8-10;  vii.  14-23). 

3.  The  worthy  leaders  of  the  great 
work.  "And  the  elders  of  the  Jews 
builded."  Tliey  were  forward  in  taking 
up  the  work  when  summoned  thereto 
by  the  prophet  Haggai  (chap.  v.  2),  and 
they  continued  steadfast  and  diligent 
in  the  prosecution  thereof.  By  their 
example  they  encouraged  the  people  in 
their  duty. 

4.  The  inspired  inciters  in  the  great 

92 


worlz.  "And  they  prospered  through 
the  prophesying  of  Haggai  the  prophet 
and  Zechariah  the  son  of  Iddo."  When 
the  people  w  ere  disheartened  and  wearied 
through  diflSculties  and  hindrances,  these 
holy  messengers  of  Heaven  encouraged 
and  strengthened  them  "through  the 
Divine  word  and  in  the  power  of  the 
Divine  Spirit."  With  the  assurances  of 
success  in  their  great  work,  and  of  the 
rich  blessing  of  their  God,  they  stimu- 
lated and  invigorated  the  people  in  the 
prosecution  of  that  work.  (Comp.  Hag. 
ii. ;  Zech.  iv.  6-10.) 

5.  The  tdtimate  completion  of  the  great 
ivork.  '*  And  they  builded  and  finished 
it,"  (fee.  It  was  completed  at  last. 
There  had  been  difficulties  in  the  way 
of  the  work,  and  opposition  to  it,  and 
for  some  time  lack  of  interest  in  it  on 
the  part  of  the  Jews  themselves ;  but  by 
the  several  concurrent  favourable  influ- 
ences, and  especially  by  the  blessing  of 
God,  the  undertaking  was  at  length 
brought  to  a  successful  issue.  And  the 
time  of  its  completion  is  significant, 
"And  this  house  was  finished  on  the 
third  day  of  the  month  Adar,  which 
was  in  the  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of 
Darius  the  king."  Says  Schultz  :  "For 
a  work  of  such  importance  the  date  is 
properly  given.  ...  It  was  now  for 
the  first  the  exactly  right  time.  The 
Temple  was  ready  just  seventy  years 
after  its  destruction,  so  that  the  pro- 
phecy of  the  seventy  years  was  now  ful- 
filled exactly  thereby," 

Conclusion  : 

The  building  of  this  Temple  may  be 
regarded  as  a  figure  of — 

1.  The  building  of  the  temple  of  God 
in  individual  Christians.  "Kn(^w  ye 
not  that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and 
tha.t  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in  youl" 
&c.  (1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17).  "But  ye,  be- 
loved,  building  up  yourselves  on  your 
most  holy  faith,"  &c.  (Jude  20,  21). 
"  Giving  all  diligence,  add  to  your  faith 
virtue,"  &C.  (2  Pet.  I  6-7).  And  build- 
ing  thus,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  this 
edifice  also  shall  be  completed.  "He 
which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you 
will  perform  it  until "  (Alford  :  "  will 
perfect  it  up  to")  "the  day  of  Jesus 
Christ."  (a). 


HOMILETIC  OOMMUNTART :  EZRA. 


OHAF.  XL 


2.  The  building  of  the  temple  of  God 
in  the  world.  A  great  and  glorious 
spiritual  temple  is  being  erected  out  of 
the  ruins  of  fallen  humanity.  The  work 
is  frequently  and  sadly  obstructed ;  the 
adversaries  to  it  are  many ;  the  builders 
at  times  seem  only  half-hearted  in  their 
work;  and  the  progress  appears  to  be 
irregular  and  slow ;  but  the  edifice  shall 
surely  be  brought  to  splendid  comple- 
tion. Opposition,  however  crafty  and 
organised  and  powerful,  can  neither 
frustrate  the  purposes  nor  hinder  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promises  of  God.  Here 
is  the  grand  issue  of  the  work  of  the 
builders  of  the  spiritual  temi)le  :  *'  Be- 
hold the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men, 
and  He  will  dwell  with  them,"  &c.  (Eev. 
xxi.  3,  4).  (6). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  work  of  sanctification  must  go  on 
until  the  saint  can  say,  '*!  and  my  Father 
are  one."  That  is  the  sublime  end  of  Chris- 
tianity. It  is  not  to  multiply  theological  tech- 
nicalities ;  it  is  not  to  build  one  church  spire 
higher  than  another;  it  is  not  to  furnish  a 
grindstone  on  which  pugnacious  bigots  may 
whet  their  little  swords  ;  it  is  to  gather  up  a 
ghattered  and  overthrown  humanity,  to  re- 
burnish  the  living  stones  on  which  the  fire  of 
an  enemy  has  left  traces  of  fury,  to  rebuild 
the  fallen  empire  of  manhood,  until  it  shall 
be  beautiful  and  holy  as  a  palace  built  for 
God. — Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

It  is  tlie  part  of  a  good  workman  not  to 
leave  his  work  imperfect;  a  good  physician 
will  not  forsake  his  patient  when  he  has  done 
but  half  his  cure  ;  the  husbandman  gives  not 
over  when  he  has  sown  but  part  of  his  ground; 
and  he  that  does  but  half  build  a  house  is  but 
half  a  carpenter.  So  he  that  enters  into  the 
way  of  Christianity,  and  stands  still,  is  but 
half  a  Christian — the  greatest  part  of  his  work 
is  yet  behind.  It  is  not  enough  to  begin  well, 
but  to  continue  in  well-doing;  it  is  not  so 
much  the  entrance  into,  as  the  perseverance 
in  goodness  that  is  required.  God  left  not 
the  great  work  of  the  creation  in  the  first  or 
second  day  thereof,  but  in  six  days  finished 
it  to  the  glory  of  His  name  ;  not  as  then  in 
the  generation  of  His  creatures,  but  now  also 
in  their  regeneration  ;  whom  He  loves,  He 
loves  to  the  end ;  and  the  good  work  He  has 
begun  in  any,  shall  be  perfected.  Having, 
then,  so  fair  a  copy  to  write  by,  so  good  an 
example  to  live  by,  let  us  so  run  that  we  may 
obtain  ;  so  sail  in  the  sea  of  this  world  that 
we  may  never  give  over  till  we  arrive  in  the 


desired  haven  ;  so  to  begin  as  to  be  sure  to 
make  an  end  ;  that  it  may  never  be  said  to 
our  great  and  just  reproach,  "This  man  began 
to  build,  but  was  not  able  to  finish  "  (Luke 
xiv.  30).—  WhiUaher. 

(6)  Inasmuch  as  "  all  the  building  is  grow- 
ing in  the  Lord"  (Eph.  ii.  21),  and  according 
to  His  order,  it  will,  in  the  end,  not  only  be 
a  glorious  temple  of  humanity,  but  marvel- 
lously adapted  for  the  indwelling  and  mani- 
festation of  God.  *'  I  will  dwell  in  them, 
and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  My 
people."  I  will  fill  them,  and  they  shall  re- 
present My  fulness.  "The  whole  building," 
the  redeemed  of  every  generation,  growing 
more  and  more  into  unity  with  each  other, 
and  with  Christ,  and  through  Him,  with  all 
the  hidden  powers  of  the  Godhead,  is  a  work 
which  is  every  way  worthy  of  an  Almighty 
Father.  To  what  glory,  to  what  beauty,  will 
the  kingdom  grow  ?  to  what  wisdom  will  its 
members  attain  ?  what  will  be  their  powers  f 
what  their  fellowships  ?  what  their  individual 
freedom  of  action  ?  what  their  service  and  end, 
as  one  empire  in  the  Son,  and  in  the  Father  I 
— John  Puhford. 

Did  you  ever  win  a  soul  to  Christ?  Did  you 
ever  get  a  grip  of  the  hand  of  spiritual  grati- 
tude ?  Did  you  ever  see  the  tear  starting  from 
the  eye  when  the  convert  said,  '*  Bless  you  ! 
I  shall  remember  you  in  heaven,  for  you  have 
brought  me  to  Christ  ? "  Ah,  my  dear  friend, 
you  will  not  be  satisfied  merely  with  this. 
This  is  a  kind  of  food  that  makes  men  hungry. 
Oh,  that  you  had  a  rich  banquet  of  it,  and  yet 
wanted  more  still.  The  Church  will  be  built. 
If  you  and  I  sit  still,  it  will  be  built.  This 
is  a  truth,  though  it  is  often  turned  to  a  mis- 
chievous end — the  Church  will  be  built,  even 
without  us.  But,  oh,  we  shall  miss  the  satis- 
faction of  helping  in  its  building.  Yes,  it  will 
grow  ;  every  stone  will  be  put  in  its  place,  and 
the  pinnacle  will  soar  into  its  predestined 
place,  but  every  stone  from  foundation  to 
pinnacle,  will  seem  to  say  to  you,  '*  Thou 
hadst  nothing  to  do  with  this  !  Thou  hadst 
no  hand  in  thig  I"  When  Cyrus  took  one  of 
his  guests  round  his  garden,  the  guest  admired 
it  greatly,  and  said  he  had  much  pleasure  in 
it.  **  Ah,"  said  Cyrus,  "  but  you  have  not  so 
much  pleasure  in  this  garden  as  I  have,  for  I 
planted  every  tree  in  it  myself."  One  reason 
why  Christ  has  so  much  jdeasure  in  His  Church 
is  because  He  did  so  much  for  it  ;  and  one 
reason  why  some  saints  will  have  a  greater 
fulness  of  heaven  than  others  to  rejoice  in 
will  be  because  they  did  more  for  heaven  than 
others.  By  God's  grace  they  were  enabled  to 
bring  more  souls  there  ;  and  as  they  look  upon 
the  Church  they  may,  without  self-reliance, 
and  ascribing  it  all  to  grace,  remember  what 
they  were  enabled  to  do  in  its  building  up.— 
C.  H.  Spurgeon. 


93 


CBir.TL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


The  Subserviency  of  a  Faithful  Ministry  to  the  Erection  of  God's 

Spiritual  Temple. 

{Verse  14.) 


I.  The  building  of  the  Temple  through 
the  instrumentality  of  the  prophets 
Haggai  and  Zechariah. 

1.    Many   difficulties    obstructed    the 
progress  of  the  work.     Scarcely  was  the 
foundation  laid,  before  an  attempt  was 
made  to  impede  tiie  work  through  the 
hypocrisy   of  prdemJed   friends.      Tiie 
Samaritans   ottered    to   co-operate   with 
the  Jews  in  raising  the  intended  fabric; 
but  their  design  was  to  frustrate,  rather 
than    promote,    the    completion    of    it. 
Many  will   profess  to  desire   the   same 
objects,  and  will  offer  to  concur  in  pro- 
secuting them  to  a  certain  point,  who, 
if  their  offers  were  accepted,  would  only 
defeat  the  ends  proposed.      The  Jews, 
however,  determined  to  prosecute  their 
Work  alone  (chap.  iv.  1-3).    That  device 
having  failed,   they  were   assaulted   by 
tlie  hostility  of  open  eneinies.    Complaints 
were  made  against  them,  and  they  were 
represented    as    plotting   to  gain   their 
liberty  and  independence,  &c.      In  this 
way    the    servants    of    God    have    been 
assailed    in    all    ages  ;     our    Lord    was 
calumniated  as  an  enemy  to  Caesar;  and 
His  apostles  as  "  movers  of   sedition," 
he.       This    plan    succeeded,    the   Jews 
yielded    to   despondency,    and    for  the 
space    of  fifteen    years    suspended    the 
work  (chap.   iv.    23,  24).     A  spirit  of 
indolence  and  su2nnpiiess  soon  prevailed 
among   them,  and  would  have  operated 
to  a  total    dereliction  of  the   work,   if 
God  had  not  sent  His  prophets  to  rouse 
them  from  their  lethargy. 

2.  Tlirough  the  preaching  of  the  pro- 
phets, hoivevery  these  di^culties  were  over- 
come. The  prophet  liaggai  justly  re- 
proved them  for  attending  so  carefully 
to  their  own  accommodation,  &c.  (Hag. 
i.  2-5,  7).  The  prophet  Zechariah  also 
urged  them  to  bear  in  mind  how  awfully 
their  fathers  had  suffered  for  the  neglect 
of  God  (Zech.  i.  1-6)  ;  and  then,  by  a 
variety  of  images  which  he  had  seen  in 
visions,  encouraged  them  with  assur- 
ances of  success  in  their  labours  (Zech. 
U 


i.~iv.).  Thus  were  the  people  stimulated 
to  exertion.  But  no  sooner  did  they 
resume  their  work,  than  their  enemies 
renewed  their  application  to  the  govern- 
ment to  issue  again  their  mandate  to 
discontinue  it  (chap.  v.  1—10).  This 
effort,  however,  was  overruled,  as  similar 
efforts  have  often  been,  for  the  further- 
ance of  the  work  it  was  intended  to 
destroy  (comp.  chap.  vi.  1-10  with  Phil, 
i.  12);  and  in  the  short  space  of  four 
years  the  edifice  was  completed  (ver.  15). 
II.  The  subserviency  of  a  faithful 
ministry  to  the  erection  of  God's 
spiritual  temple.  The  Temple  of  old 
was  a  shadow  of  that  spiritual  temple 
which  is  erected  for  God  in  the  hearts 
of  men  ;  "  being  built  on  the  foundation 
of  theapostles,"  kc.  (Eph.  ii.  20-22).  The 
erection  of  this  — 

1.  Is  connected  with  the  same  difficul- 
ties. Who  that  begins  truly  to  sur- 
render up  his  soul  to  God,  does  not 
find  many  impediments  from  pretended 
friends!  They  will  profess  to  approve 
of  religion,  and  will  propose  to  go  with 
us  to  a  certain  length,  that  so  they  may 
have  the  greater  influence  to  keep  us 
from  "following  the  Lord  fully,"  and 
from  serving  Him  with  our  whole  hearts. 
If  we  are  enabled  to  withstand  their 
efforts,  then  we  shall  be  assailed  by  open 
enemies.  Not  unfrequently  will  they 
become  our  greatest  foes,  who  by  their 
relation  to  us  ought  rather  to  become 
our  firmest  protectors.  And  too  often 
do  timidity  and  sloth  induce  us  to  relax 
our  efforts,  till,  if  God  do  not  by  some 
sptcial  act  of  providence  or  grace  awaken 
us,  we  lose  the  time  for  working,  and, 
like  the  foolish  virgins,  experience  for 
ever  the  fatal  effects  of  our  remissness. 

2.  Is  carried  on  and  perfected  by  the 
same  means.  God  has  established  an 
order  of  men  07i  purpose  to  carry  on  this 
spiritual  building  in  the  world  (Eph. 
iv.  11-13).  The  apostles  maybe  called 
*'  master  builders ; "  but  every  pastor 
and   teacher   is  engaged   in   the   same 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHxr.  fL 


work,  according  to  the  office  that  has 
been  assigned  him.  We  call  yon,  then, 
to  "  consider  your  ways  ;  "  consider  what 
has  hindered  you  hitlierto,  kc.  Consider 
too  the  promises  of  God.     What  assur- 


then,  a!id  be  doing,"  every  one  of  you ; 
and  "  your  God  will  be  with  you.** 
Yield  not  to  discouragements  of  any 
kind,  &c.  Seek  **  as  living  stones  to  be 
built  up  a  s[)iritual  house,"  (kc.  (1   Pet. 


ances  of  success  are  given,  <fec.     "  Up      ii.  4,  5). — G.  Simeon,  M,A, 


The  Dedication  of  the  Temple. 


( Verses 

The  dedication  of  the   Temple   was 
characterised  by — 

I.    Religious  rejoicing.      "And  the 
children  of  Israel,  the  priests,  and  the 
Levites,  and  the  rest  of  the  children  of 
the  captivity,  kept  the  dedication  of  this 
house  of  God  with  joy."     It  would  not 
have  been  very  surprising  if  they  had 
mourned  because  it  was  so  inferior  in 
magnificenceand  splendour  to  the  Temple 
of  Solomon.     It  is  probable  "  that  the 
carving  and  the  gold,  and  other  orna- 
ments   of    Solomon's    Temple    far    sur- 
passed   this,    and    the    pillars    of    the 
portico  and  the  veils  may  all  have  been 
far  more  splendid,  so  also  probably  were 
the  vessels ;  and  all  this  is  what  a  Jew 
would  mourn  over  far  more  than  mere 
architectural  splendour.'*  Moreover,some 
of  the  most  sacred  and  glorious  things 
of  the  first  Temple  were  altogether  absent 
from  this  one,  e.g.,  the  Ark  of  the  cove- 
nant, the  cherubim,  the  Shechinah,  and 
the  Urim  and  Thummim.     Sometimes 
when  we  have  reached  the  end  of  long 
cherished  hopes  and  efforts,  we  are  dis- 
appointed  and    depressed    because    the 
result  does  not  come  up  to  our  ideal  and 
desire.     And  we  should  not,  therefore, 
have  been  surprised  if  the  Jews  had 
looked  upon   their  finished  work  with 
sadness.      But   it  was  not  so.      They 
**kept  the  dedication  of  this  house  of 
God   with  joy."     And  they  had  good 
reasons  for  devout  gladness  ;  e.g. — 

1.  Frotr acted  labours  brought  to  a 
successful  termination. 

2.  The  honour  offered  to  Jehovah  their 
God. 

3.  The  benefits  which  were  likely  to 
accrue  to  men  through  their  sacred  edifice 
and  its  worship.  Joyousness  in  the 
service  of  God  is  a  conspicuous  feature 
of  the  religious  life  in  post  -  exUe 
times.     This  is   especially   manifest  in 


16-18.) 
the  Psalms  of  this  period.  Comp.  Ps, 
cxxxv.,  cxxxvi.,  cxlvi.-cl.,  and  cxviii., 
which,  says  Schultz,  *'  without  doubt 
the  congregation  then  sung,  although 
it  was  really  composed  somewhat 
earlier;  and  especially  did  they  ap- 
propriate with  greatly  agitated  hearts 
the  shout  of  triumph  :  '  The  right  hand 
of  the  Lord  is  exalted,  the  right  hand 
of  the  Lord  doth  valiantly.  .  .  .  Open 
to  me  the  gates  of  righteousness,"  <kc. 
And  we  also  should  "  serve  the  Lord 
with  gladness,  come  before  His  pre- 
sence with  singing,  enter  into  His  gates 
with  thanksgiving,"  <kc.  {a). 

II.  Devout  gratitude.  "  And  offered 
at  the  dedication  of  this  house  of  God 
an  hundred  bullocks,  two  hundred  rams, 
four  hundred  lambs."  In  these  offer- 
ings we  discover — 

1.  An  expression  of  gratitude.  They 
presented  both  burnt  offerings  and  peace 
offerings ;  and  while  both  were  ex- 
pressive of  gratitude,  the  latter  were 
especially  so.  The  peace  offerings  were 
eucharistic.  The  Psalmist  refers  to 
them  when  he  says,  ''I  will  offer  to 
Thee  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving." 
They  had  great  and  strong  reasons  for 
gratitude.  *'  The  Lord  had  done  great 
things  for  them."  And  they  sang,  "The 
Lord  huth  done  great  things  for  us;  we 
are  glad."  {h). 

2.  An  expression  of  their  complete  self' 
dedication  to  God,  The  burnt  offerings 
were  laid  whole  upon  the  altar,  and  there 
consumed  by  fire,  thus  setting  forth  the 
entire  consecration  of  the  offerer  to  God. 
This  was  the  chief  meaning  of  the  burnt 
offerings.  The  dedication  of  churches 
is  acceptable  to  God  only  as  the  wor- 
shippers dedicate  themselves  to  Hinu 
"  The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken 
spirit ;  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart, 
O  God,  Thou  wilt  not  despise."    '*  I  be- 

95 


OlAP.  TL 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


seech  you,  therefore,  brethren,  that  ye 
present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice," 
&c.  (c). 

The  number  of  these  offerings  is  small 
as  compared  with  the  very  large  number 
offered  by  Solomon  at  the  dedication  of 
the  former  Temple.  "  Solomon  offered 
a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings,  which  he 
offered  unto  the  Lord,  two  and  twenty 
thousand  oxen,  and  an  hundred  and 
twenty  thou.^and  sheep."  But  Zerab- 
babel  offered  only  "  an  hundred  bullocks, 
two  hundred  rams,  four  hundred  lambs, 
and  for  a  sin  offering  for  all  Israel, 
twelve  he-goats."  The  total  number  of 
animals  sacrificed  then  was  142,000; 
the  total  now  is  only  712.  Yet  Zerub- 
babel  and  the  people  with  him  offered 
— (1.)  Freely.  (2.)  Liberally,  when  we 
take  into  account  their  small  numbers 
and  reduced  circumstances,  as  compared 
with  those  of  the  time  of  Solomon.  (3.) 
Cheerfully.  And  "  if  there  be  first  a 
willing  mind,  it  is  acce[)ted  according 
to  that  a  man  hath,  not  according  to 
that  he  hath  not." 

IIL  Deep  humility.  "And  for  a 
sin  offering  for  all  Israel,  twelve  he- 
goats,  according  to  the  number  of  the 
tribes  of  Israel."     Consider — 

1.  The  nature  of  this  offering.  "  A 
ain  offering."  This  was  an  acknowledg- 
ment of  sin  on  the  part  of  tliose  for 
whom  it  was  offered,  and  that  the 
sinner  deserved  death  by  reason  of  his 
sin,  but  that  God  in  His  mercy  ac- 
cepted the  death  of  the  victim  as  an 
atonement  for  the  sinner.  And  in  this 
way  the  people  humbly  confess  their 
Bin  before  God.  Sin  had  brought  their 
miseries  upon  them,  had  stripped  them 
of  their  natioiuil  power  and  protection, 
had  been  the  real  cause  of  their  cap- 
tivity. Hence  this  sin  offering  was  ap- 
propriate in  its  relation  to  past  sins,  and 
ft  hopeful  indication  as  to  their  future 
conduct,  (c?), 

2.  T}i€  number  of  the  victims  composing 
this  offering.  "A  sin  offering  for  all 
Israel,  twelve  he-goats,  according  to  the 
number  of  the  tribes  of  Israel."  The 
confession  of  sin  was  intended  for  the 
whole  nation,  and  the  atonement  was 
designed  "  for  all  Israel."  This  was  a 
recognition  on  the  part  of  the  offerers 

96 


of  the  unity  of  all  the  tribes,  an  eyidence 
that  "  the  Temple  was  intended  for  the 
entire  covenant  people,"  and  an  expres- 
sion of  the  hope  that  all  would  return 
to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  and  to  the 
enjoyment  of  the  full  privileges  of  the 
people  of  God. 

IV.  Appropriate  arrangements  for 
its  future  use.  "And  they  set  the 
priests  in  their  divisions,  and  the  Levites 
in  their  courses,  for  the  service  of  God, 
which  is  at  Jerusalem ;  as  it  is  written 
in  the  book  of  Moses."  Thus  arrange- 
ments were  made  for — 

1.  hegular  and  orderly  services.  They 
aimed  at — (1.)  Completeness  in  their  wor- 
ship. Both  priests  and  Levites  were  set 
in  their  respective  spheres  of  work.  No 
duties  were  to  be  neglected.  (2.)  Con- 
tinuity in  their  worship.  They  were  set 
in  classes  and  divisions,  so  that  when 
one  had  fulfilled  its  appointed  term  of 
service  another  would  take  its  place. 
(Comp.  1  Chron.  xxiii.— xxvi.) 

2.  Scriptural  services.  "  As  it  is 
written  in  the  book  of  Moses,"  They 
were  careful  that  their  worship  should 
be  in  accordance  with  the  expressed  will 
of  God.  It  is  well  said  by  Matthew 
Henry  :  **  Though  the  Temple  service 
could  not  now  be  performed  with  so  much 
pomp  and  plenty  as  formerly,  because  of 
their  poverty,  yet  perhaps  it  was  per- 
formed with  as  much  purity  and  close 
adherence  to  the  Divine  institution  as 
ever,  which  was  the  true  glory  of  it. 
No  beauty  like  the  beauty  of  holiness." 

It  is  perha[)s  unnecessary  to  add  that 
the  principal  points  of  this  exposition  are 
applicable  to  the  dedication  of  churches 
in  our  own  day. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  priests  of  old  were  not  to  sully  them- 
selves with  sorrow  when  they  performed  their 
functions,  and  saints  who  are  of  a  higher 
priesthood  should  show  forth  delight  in  their 
approaches  to  their  God.  Angels  sing,  and 
why  not  God's  other  servants,  who  are  a  little 
lower,  and  yet  far  higher  ?  David  danced 
before  the  ark,  which  was  but  a  symbol  of 
Divinity ;  what  ails  us  that  our  heart  bo  sel- 
dom dances  before  the  Lord  Himself  f  The 
old  creation  has  its  sunshine  and  flowers;  its 
lowing  herds  and  bleating  flocks  ;  its  heaven- 
mounting  larks  and  warbling  nightingales ; 
its  rivers  laughing,  and  its  seu  clapping 


HO  M J  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  VL 


hands  ;  is  the  new  creation  of  grace  to  render 
less  happy  worship  to  God  our  exceeding 
joy?  Nay,  rather  let  us  come  into  His  pre- 
sence with  thanksgiving,  and  show  ourselves 
glad  in  Him  with  psalms.  Most  of  the  English 
versions  alter  the  old  hundredth  Psalm  into, 
"Him  serve  with  fear;"  but  for  my  part, 
by  God's  grace  I  mean  to  sing  it  as  it  used  to 
be  and  still  is  sung  in  Scotland — 

**  All  people  that  on  earth  do  dwell, 

Sing  to  the  Lord  with  cheerful  voice  ; 
Him  serve  with  mirth,  His  praise  forth  tell. 
Come  ye  before  Him  and  rejoice." 

— C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

(h)  It  is  an  excellent  thing  when  Christian 
men  know  how  to  sing  as  well  as  to  work,  and 
mingle  holy  music  with  holy  service.  The  best 
music  of  a  Christian  consists  in  thankfulness 
to  God.  Thanks  should  be  rendered  by  the  be- 
liever with  all  the  acts  common  to  men.  Our 
eating,  our  drinking,  our  social  meetings,  our 
quiet  conversings  one  with  another,  in  all  we 
should  give  thanks  unto  God  and  the  Father. 
This  we  should  do  in  the  labours  peculiar  to 
our  vocation.  Whatever  your  trade  and  call- 
ing may  be,  if  you  cannot  sing  aloud,  you  can 
Bing  in  your  hearts  while  your  hands  are  busy  ; 
you  can  ring  out  the  praises  of  God  as  well  to 
the  sound  of  the  hammer  on  the  anvil  as  to 
the  peal  of  the  organ  ;  your  feet  at  the  sewing 
machine  may  beat  time  to  a  sacred  tune  ;  you 
can  as  well  praise  God  while  you  crack  your 
whip  as  when  you  sing  to  a  Psalm  tune.  Why 
not?  If  the  heart  be  right  you  can  mount  up 
to  the  heavens  from  any  place  of  labour. — 
Jbid. 

(c)  It  is  the  end  and  essence  of  all  religion 
to  turn  the  mind  from  self  to  God  ;  to  give  it 
absorbing  views  of  the  Divine  beauty  and  glory; 
to  fill  it  with  Divine  love  and  zeal  ;  to  make 
it  feel  honoured  in  honouring  God,  blessed  in 
blessing  Him  ;  to  make  it  feel  that  nothing  is 
good  enough  or  great  enough  for  Him.  .  .  . 
A  man  thus  inspired  will  no  more  think  of 
inquiring  the  advantages,  the  probable  gain 
of  his  deeds  and  his  adoration,  than  he  would 
think  of  the  profitableness  of  gazing  with 
admiration  on  a  lovely  landscape,  or  regaling 
his  soul  with  the  noble  qualities  of  a  hero  or 
a  martyr.     Such  a  man  has  offered  himself  to 


God  ;  he  has  given  his  own  soul,  with  all  ita 
powers.  His  other  gifts  are  but  results  and 
forms  of  this  first  and  greatest  gift ;  all  other 
offerings  are  virtually  included  in  this.  And, 
in  truth,  this  consecration  of  self  is  the  grand 
and  essential  condition,  the  seminal  principle 
of  all  consecration.  We  have  no  just  thought 
of  God,  no  oneness  of  spirit  with  His  Spirit, 
if  we  look  on  ourselves  simply  as  sacrificers  ; 
we  are  sacrifices  as  well ;  both  sacrificers  and 
sacrifices;  we  have  to  present  ourselves  as 
sacrifices  to  God.  And  if  there  be  this  first 
and  best  offering,  the  offering  of  ourselves,  it 
will  infuse  a  spirit  of  life  and  fulness  into  all 
our  service,  animating  the  form,  quickening 
the  body  of  all  service  ;  a  spirit  of  delight  and 
strength  and  earnestness  ;  a  large  and  enlarg- 
ing, a  noble  and  an  ennobling  spirit.  The 
prudent,  commercial  temper,  in  religion,  ia 
one  of  narrowness  and  pain  and  bondage  ;  we 
never  possess  ourselves  thoroughly  till  we  for- 
get ourselves,  never  realise  our  power  and  in- 
herit our  portion  till  all  spiritual  engagements 
and  acts  cease  to  be  the  mere  meeting  of  a  de- 
mand, the  mere  performance  of  a  condition, 
and  become  the  home  and  rest  and  reward  of 
the  soul. — A.  J.  Morris. 

(d)  The  effect  of  these  views  and  recollec- 
tions (viz.,  those  of  true  Christians)  are  peni- 
tence, contrition,  and  deep  humiliation  of 
soul,  and  by  them  all  their  religious  feelings 
are  pervaded  and  characterised.  When  they 
love  their  God  and  Redeemer,  it  is  with  a 
penitent  love  ;  when  they  rejoice  in  Him,  it 
is  with  a  penitent  joy  ;  when  they  believe  in 
Him,  it  is  with  a  penitent  faith  ;  when  they 
obey  Him,  it  is  with  a  penitent  obedience  ; 
when  they  offer  Him  thanksgivings  and  praises, 
penitence  mingles  with  them  her  humble  con- 
fessions and  contrite  sighs;  and  the  place  on 
earth  which  they  most  covet,  in  which  they 
most  delight,  is  that  of  the  woman  who  stood 
weeping  at  the  feet  of  Christ,  washing  them 
with  her  tears,  and  wiping  them  with  the 
hairs  of  her  head.  Even  while  observing  a 
joyful  festival,  tears,  the  fountain  of  which 
is  supplied  by  godly  sorrow  for  sin,  and  grati- 
tude to  the  Redeemer ;  tears,  which  it  is  de- 
lightful to  shed,  are  seen  on  the  same  coun- 
tenances which  glow  with  love  and  hope,  and 
beam  with  holy  humble  joy  in  God. — E, 
Pay  son,  D.D. 


The  Celebration  of  the  Passover. 
{Verses  19-22.) 


A  few  weeks  after  the  dedication  of 
the  Temple  the  feasts  of  the  Passover 
and  of  unleavened  bread  were  celebrated ; 
and  this  marked  the  beginning  of  the 
new  period  in  which  the  worship  of  God, 
with  its  festivals  and  observances,  was 
regularly  and  fully  carried  un. 


Notice  : 

L  The  personal  preparation  for  these 
sacred  festivals.     This  comprised — 

1.  2^he  purification  of  the  priests  and 
Levites  from  ceremonial  uncleanness, 
"  For  the  priests  and  Levites  had  puri- 
fied themselves  as  one  man,  they  were 

97 


OHAP.  YL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


all  clean,  and  killed  the  Passover  for  all 
the  children  of  the  captivity,  and  for 
their  brethren  the  priests,  and  for  them- 
selves." "  The  purity  of  ministers  adds 
much  to  the  beauty  of  their  ministra- 
tions." They  who  "  bear  the  vessels  of 
the  Lord  "  should  be  clean  (Isa.  lii.  7). 

2.  TJie  separation  of  the  people  from 
heathen  associations  and  immoralities. 
"And  the  children  of  Israel,  which  were 
come  again  out  of  captivity,  and  all  such 
as  had  separated  themselves  unto  them 
from  the  filthiiiess  of  the  heathen  of  the 
land,  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  did 
eat."  And  separation  from  sinners  and 
their  corrupt  practices  is  still  indispen- 
sable to  union  and  communion  with  God. 
*'  Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God  ; 
as  God  hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them, 
and  walk  in  them ;  and  I  will  be  their 
God,  and  they  shall  be  My  people. 
Wherefore  come  out  from  among  them, 
and  be  ye  separate,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  vi.  16- 
18).  We  cannot  meet  with  God  in  holy 
fellowship  unless  we  are  in  a  suitable 
spiritual  condition.  And  as  a  rule,  men 
require  preparation  of  heart  (Job  xi. 
13),  in  order  to  meet  Him  thus.  To 
enjoy  intimate  communion  with  God,  we 
must  turn  aside  from  the  ways  of  dark- 
ness, and  "  walk  in  the  light  as  He  is 
in  the  light "  (1  John  i.  6-7).  (a). 

IL  The  principal  significance  of 
these  sacred  festivals.  It  would  be 
out  of  phice  here  to  enter  at  any  length 
into  a  consideration  of  the  meaning  of 
these  feasts.  But  inasmuch  as  their 
chief  significance  was  emphasised  upon 
this  special  occasion,  it  behoves  us  to 
notice  that  significance. 

1.  The  Passover  was  a  memorial  of 
their  covenant  relation  with  God.  *'  Tiie 
Exodus,"  as  Dr.  Howson  observes,  *'was 
looked  upon  as  the  birth  of  the  nation ; 
the  Passover  M'as  its  annual  birthday 
feast.  Nearly  all  the  rites  of  the  fes- 
tival, if  explained  in  the  most  natural 
manner,  appear  to  point  to  this  as  to  its 
primary  meaning.  It  was  the  yearly 
memorial  of  the  dedication  of  the  people 
to  Him  who  had  saved  their  first-born 
from  the  destroyer,  in  order  that  they 
might  be  made  holy  to  Himself.  This 
was  the  lesson  which  they  were  to  teach 
to  their  children  throughout  all  genera- 
98 


tions.  When  the  young  Hebrew  asked 
his  father  regarding  the  paschal  lamb, 
'  What  is  this  ?  '  the  answer  prescribed 
was,  *  By  strength  of  hand  the  Lord 
brought  ns  out  of  Egypt,'  &c.  (Exod. 
xiii.  14,  15).  Hence,  in  the  periods  of 
great  national  restoration  in  the  times 
of  Joshua,  Hezekiah,  Josiah,  and  Ezra, 
the  Passover  was  observed  in  a  special 
manner,  to  remind  the  people  of  their 
true  position,  and  to  mark  their  re- 
newal of  the  covenant  which  their 
fathers  had  made."  This  covenant  re- 
lation was  originally  based  upon  what 
God  had  done  for  them  in  bringing 
them  out  of  their  bondage  in  Egypt, 
and  in  preserving  their  first-born  from 
the  destroying  angel ;  and  now  the 
grounds  of  that  relation  were  strength- 
ened by  the  deliverance  from  Babylon, 
which  He  had  effected  for  them,  and 
by  the  fact  that  He  had  raised  up  for 
them  such  powerful  and  liberal  friends 
as  Cyrus  and  Darius.  Thus  they  had 
special  reasons  for  celebrating  this  Pass- 
over with  extraordinary  heartiness  and 
devotion.  How  many  and  mighty  are 
the  reasons  which  constrain  us  to  de- 
vote ourselves  to  God  !  (1  Cor.  vi.  19, 
20;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  (5). 

2.  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread  wa^ 
a  solemn  recognition  of  their  obligation 
to  live  holily  unto  God.  "  The  unlea- 
vened bread  signified  the  abiding  state 
of  consecrated  holiness."  "  Through 
the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,"  says 
Schnltz,  "  they  vowed,  in  that  the  strict 
abstinence  from  leaven  was  connected 
therewith,  to  walk  not  in  the  old  leaven 
of  wickedness  and  wantonness,  but  in 
the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and 
truth."  (Comp.  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8.)  "We 
have  far  more  cogent  motives  to  rise 
into  the  new  and  pure  life  of  sincerity 
and  truth."  (c). 

III.  The  special  joy  in  these  sacred 
festivals.  "  And  they  kept  the  feast  of 
unleavened  bread  seven  days  with  joy." 

1.  All  the  ordinary  reasons  for  joy 
were  applicable  upon  this  occasion.  The 
great  facts  commemorated  were  joy- 
inspiring.  So  also  was  the  covenant 
relation  which  arose  from  these  facts, 
with  its  privileges,  <fec. 

2.  There   were    also  special  rea^oit^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAP.  TI. 


for  joy  on  this  occasion.  "  For  the 
Lord  had  made  them  joyful,  and  liad 
turned  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria 
unto  them,  to  strengthen  their  hands  in 
the  work  of  the  house  of  God,  the  God 
of  Israel.*' 

Notice : 

(1.)  The  Author  of  their  joy.  «  The 
Lord  had  made  them  joyful."  They 
regarded  Him  as  the  great  fountain  of 
all  their  blessings.  *'  All  my  springs 
are  in  Thee."  (2.)  The  occasion  of  their 
joy.  That  by  the  favour  and  assistance 
of  Cyrus  and  Darins  they  had  com- 
pleted the  Temple  of  God,  and  were 
able  to  celebrate  all  the  sacred  ordi- 
nances of  their  religion  in  a  becoming 
manner.  (3.)  The  character  of  their  joy. 
It  was  religious  in  its  source,  occasion, 
character,  and  expression.  It  expressed 
itself  in  the  reverent  worship  of  the  holy 
God.  Let  our  joy  be  of  the  same  char- 
acter. "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway : 
again  I  say,  Rejoice."  (cf). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Sequester  yourselves  from  all  earthly 
employments,  and  set  apart  some  time  for 
solemn  preparation  to  meet  God  in  duty. 
You  cannot  come  hot,  reeking  out  of  the 
world  into  God's  presence,  but  you  will  find 
the  influence  of  it  in  your  duties.  It  is  with 
the  heart  a  few  minutes  since  plunged  into 
the  world,  now  at  the  feet  of  God,  just  as  with 
the  sea  after  a  storm,  which  still  continues 
working  muddy  and  disquiet  ;  though  the 
wind  he  laid  and  storm  over,  thy  heart  must 
have  some  time  to  settle.  There  are  few 
musicians  that  can  take  down  a  lute  or  viol, 
and  play  presently  upon  it,  without  some 
time  to  tune  it.  When  thou  goest  to  God  in 
any  duty,  take  thy  heart  aside,  and  say,  "  O 
my  soul,  I  am  now  addressing  myself  to  the 
greatest  work  that  ever  a  cre;iture  was  em- 
ployed about.  I  am  going  into  the  awful 
presence  of  God,  about  business  of  everlasting 
moment." — H.  0.  Salter. 

{h)  Dr.  Doddridge,  on  one  occasion,  inte- 
rested himself  on  behalf  of  a  condemned  cri- 
minal, and  at  length  succeeded  in  obtaining 
his  pardon.  On  announcing  to  him  the  joyful 
intelligence,  he  prostrated  himself  at  the 
Doctor's  feet,  and  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  sir,  every 
drop  of  ray  blood  thanks  you,  for  you  have  had 
mercy  on  every  drop  of  it !  Wherever  you  go, 
I  will  be  yours."  With  how  much  greater  pro- 
priety may  the  Christian  prostrate  himself 
at  the  feet  of  Christ,  and  make  use  of  similar 
language.  — Bihle  Illustrations. 

(c)  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  1 "  where  is  that 


inscription  to  be  stamped  now?    Not  on  the 
vestments  of  any  Levitical  order ;  not  on  plates 
of  sacerdotal  gold,  worn  upon  the  forehead. 
Priest  and  Levite  have  passed  by.     The  Jewish 
tabernacle  has  exfianded  into  that  world-wide 
brotherhood  where  whosoever  doeth  righteous- 
ness is  accepted.    Moridng  has  risen  into  day. 
Are  we  children  of  that  day  ?    For  form,  we 
have  spirit ;  for  Gerizim  and  iZion,  our  common 
scenery.      The  ministry  of  Aaron   is  ended. 
His  ephod,  with  its  gold,  and  blue,  and  purple, 
and  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  and  cunning 
work,  has  faded    and  dropped.     The  curious 
girdle   and  its   chains   of   wreathen  gold  are 
broken.    The  breastplate  of  judgment  that  lay 
against  his  heart,  and  its  fourfold  row  of  triple 
jewels — of  sardines,  topaz,  and  carbuncle — of 
emerald,  sapphire,  and   diamond — of  ligure, 
agate,  and  amethyst — of  beryl,  onyx,  and  jas- 
per— has  been  crushed  and  lost.     The  pome- 
granates are  cast  aside   like  untimely  fruit. 
The  golden  bells  are  silent.     Even  the  mitre, 
with  its  sacred  signet,    and  the  grace  of  the 
fashion  of  it,  has  perished.     All  the  outward 
beauty  and  glory  of  that  Hebrew  worship  which 
the  Lord  commanded  Moses  has  vanished  into 
the  eternal  splendours  of  the  Gospel,  and  been 
fulfilled  in  Ciirist.    What  teaching  has  it  left? 
what  other  than  this  ? — that  we  are  to  engrave 
our  ♦'  Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  first  on  the  heart, 
and  then  on  all  that  the  heart  goes  out  into, 
through  the  brain  and  the  hand  :  on  the  plates 
of  gold  our  age  of  enterprise  is  drawing  up 
from  mines,  and  beating  into   currency  ;  on 
bales  of  merchandise  and  hooks  of  account ;  on 
the  tools  and  bench  of  every  handicraft;  on 
your  weights  and  measures  ;  on  pen  and  plough 
and  pulpit;  on  the  doorposts  of  your  houses, 
and  the  utensils  of  your  table,  and  the  walls  of 
your  chambers  ;  on  cradle  and  playthings  and 
school-books  ;  on  tlie  locomotives  of  enterprise, 
and_  the  bells  of  the  horses,  and  the  ships  of 
navigation;  on  music-halls  and  libraries;  on 
galleries  of  art,  and  the  lyceum  desk  ;  on  all 
of  man's   inventing  and  building,  all   of  his 
using  and  enjoying ;  for  all  these^are  trusts  in 
a  stewardship,  for  which  the  Lord  of  the  ser- 
vants reckoneth. — F.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

{d)  Christianity  is  not  a  sepulchral  thing, 
a  gloomy  life,  a  depressed  condition  of  social 
exisfence.  It  is  impossible  that  it  can  be  so 
as  the  world  brands  it,  with  such  a  prescrip- 
tion as  this  from  an  apostle's  lips,  "Eejoice 
evermore."  True,  the  Christian  has  his  sor- 
rows;  but  these  are  not  unsweetened.  True, 
the  Christian  life  has  its  shadows  and  its 
showers ;  but  these  are  not  unmingled  with 
bright  beams  of  heavenly  light;  and  the  sad- 
dest aspects  of  a  Christian's  daily  life  are  but 
the  April  showers  of  spring  that  usher  in  the 
approaching  bright  and  beautiful  summer— 
the  everlasting  and  the  heavenly  sunshine.. 
Christian  life  is  not  a  penance,  as  the  Romanist 
thinks  it ;  but  a  privilege,  as  God  describes  it. 
It  is  not  a  reluctant  sacrifice  wrung  from  us, 
but  a  joyous  and  freewill  oflfering  gladly  and 
gratefully  rendered  by  us.    And,  therefore,  the 

99 


OHAP.  TL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


light  of  our  life  is  not  a  dim,  but  a  bright 
religious  life.  The  injunction  of  our  Apostle  is, 
**  Rejoice  always  ; "  and  the  prayer  of  the  Apos- 
tle's Lord,  "  Thai  My  joy  misjht  remain  in  you, 
and  that  your  joy  might  be  full."  And  Peter, 
catching  up  the  tiiought  of  his  Lord  still  shin- 
ing with  undiminished  lus  re  on  the  leaves 
of  memory,  answers  in  his  epistle,  '*  Whom, 
having  not  seen,  we  love  ;  in  whom,  though 
now  we  see  Him  not,  yet  believing  we  rejoice 


with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  And 
the  Apostle  Paul,  echoing  the  same  grand 
sentiment,  says,  **  We  joy  in  God,"  *•  Rejoice  ; 
again  I  say,  Rejoice,"  This  shows  us,  that  of 
all  happy  men  upon  earth  the  Christian  should 
be  happiest.  His  sorrows  come  from  sin,  his 
griefs  spring  from  evil  ;  his  sunshine,  hia 
gladness,  and  his  joy  are  the  spontaneous  and 
moral  elements  of  his  true  Christian  and  holy 
life. — John  Cummingy  D,D. 


The  Dedication  of  the  Second  Temple. 
Notes  for  Scripture  Lesson.     {Verses  16-22.) 


The  new  house  at  length  was  ready. 
It  was  larger  than  the  Temple  of  Solomon 
(see  article  on  Second  Temple  in  any  good 
Bible  dictionary),  though  very  far  less 
gorgeous.  Its  size,  however,  was  "  not 
larger  than  an  average  parish  church  of 
the  last  century.  Solomon's  was  smaller." 
(Article,"Templeof  Zerubbabel,"  Smith's 
Bihl.  Diet.)  There  is,  too,  a  very  great 
contrast  between  the  number  of  sacrifices 
at  the  dedication  of  the  two  Temples 
(comp.  Ezra  vi.  17,  with  2  Chron.  vii.  5), 
as  there  is  also  between  the  gorgeous- 
nes3  of  the  ritual  in  one  case,  and 
its  comparative  plainness  in  the  other. 
Each  feature  noted  by  Ezra  is  of  interest 
and  importance. 

I.  The  occasion  was  one  of  joy — 
the  worship  of  God  should  be  joyful. 
Hebrew  and  Christian  worship  are  joy- 
ful, because  believers  worship  a  revealed 
God  of  salvation.  Henthen  worship  is 
a  straining  or  gropitig  of  man  after  God 
(1  Kings  xviii.  26-29).  It  cannot  be 
joyful.  But  we  worship  a  God  of  Love, 
who  revealed  Himself  to  the  Hebrews  in 
sacrifices  and  prophecy,  and  who  reveals 
Himself  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ,  *'  full  of 
beauty,  truth,  an.i  grace."  If  we  would 
see  the  gladsomenet^s  of  the  worship  in 
the  second  Temple,  let  us  turn  to  the 
146th,  147th,  and  148th  Psalms,  which 
were  composed  by,  or  under  the  direc- 
tion of,  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  for  the 
service  of  this  house  of  God.  The 
burden  of  Hebrew  song  is  '*  Rejoice  in 
the  Lord!" 

II.  The  service  was  one  for  which 
all  who  had  to  take  part  in  it  had 
previously  purified  themselves  (ver. 
20).  All  who  liave  to  take  any  part 
in  the  work  of  teaching,  or  worship  of 

100 


God's  house,  should  prepare  themselves 
for  it  by  communion  with  God,  and  a 
renewal  of  the  covenant  with  Him  to 
put  away  all  iniquity. 

IIL  There  were  burnt  offerings  as 
a  token  of  the  consecration  of  the 
people  (see  the  title  of  these  Psalms  in 
the  LXX.),  heart  and  soul  afresh  to 
God  (ver.  17,  1st  part).  Let  us  (1) 
glory  in  what  God  is  to  us,  and  (2)  give 
our  whole  selves  to  God. 

IV.  There  were  sin  offerings  —  "A 
sin  offering  for  all  Israel "  (ver.  17). 
Every  tribe  was  represented.  These 
sin  offerings  were  '*  but  shadows  of  good 
things  to  come "  (see  Heb.  x.  1-12 ; 
John  i.  29).  In  Divine  worship  there 
should  always  be  a  recognition  of  sin, 
and  of  Christ's  having  "  put  away  sin" 
by  the  sacrifice  of  Himself. 

V.  There  was  the  observance  of  the 
Passover  (Exo  J.  xii.).  Doubtless  an  effort 
was  made  to  finish  the  Temple  at  the 
close  of  the  year,  that  the  feast,  which 
celebrated  tlie  great  national  deliverance 
of  the  people,  might  naturally  fall  in 
place  during  the  dedication  ceremonies. 
Their  national  life  was  based  on  redemp- 
tion. They  loved  God,  because  God 
loved  them ;  this  is  the  order  now,  and 
we  cannot  reverse  it  (1  John  iv.  19). 

VL  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread 
was  kept  joyfully  for  seven  days. 
(I)  A  feast  in  token  of  national  unity 
and  fellowship;  (2)  of  unleavened  bread, 
in  token  of  their  desire  to  cultivate 
purity ;  (3)  a  feast  in  which,  as  of  old, 
"the  stranger"  joined,  if  ready  to 
separate  himself  to  Israel's  God  (ver. 
21  ;  Ex..d.  xii.  48,  49). 

VII.  The  new  national  life  thus 
inaugurated  had  far  less  of  pomp  and 


BOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OHAF.  TI. 


show  about  it  than  were  seen  in  the 
days  of  Solomon.  But  there  was  more 
of  spiritual  power  (Hag.  ii.  9).  The 
people  had  been  purified  in  the  furnace 


of  affliction,  and  from  this  time  idolatry 
was  unknown  among  them,  —  C.  CU" 
mance,  D.D, 


The  Dedication  of  the  Temple. 
Outline  of  Scripture  Lesson.     (Whole  Chapter,) 


I.  The  Jews  had  a  truth  to  learn 
which  God  knew  only  captivity  in  a 
strange  land  would  teach  them.  That 
truth  was,  that  national  and  individual 
prosperity  depend  on  the  maintenance 
of  religious  worship.  The  captivity  had 
the  desired  effect;  the  people  traced 
their  fall  to  its  real  source  (Ps.  cxxxvii. 
1,  2).  Ages  before,  they,  on  looking 
back,  had  remembered  other  things 
(Num.  xi.  4,  5),  and  would  willingly 
return  to  the  house  of  bondage  for  the 
sake  of  creature  comforts.  Long  ages 
of  national  discipline  and  Divine  teuch- 
ing  had  taught  them  that  men  do  not 
live  by  bread  alone.  (Com p.  Deut.  viii. 
3  with  Matt.  iv.  4.)  Now  they  remem- 
bered and  sighed  for  the  nourishment  of 
their  higher  life.  Instead  of  recalling, 
with  tears,  the  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey,  and  their  former  political 
greatness,  and  the  glory  of  their  kings 
(as  David  and  Solomon),  they  "  wept 
when  they  remembered  Zion." 

Bring  out  the  province  of  memory, 
and  how  the  character  is  indicated  by 
that  which  memory  recalls  with  most 
of  joy  or  (»f  sorrow.  The  day  will  come 
when  the  memory  of  each  one  will  be 
most  active,  when  the  Lord  will  say  to 
many  an  one,  "  Son,  remember  "  (Luke 
xvi.  25). 

II.  They  showed  how  well  they  had 
learned  this  truth  by  at  once,  on  their 
return,  commencing  the  rebuilding  of 
the  Temple,  and  persevering  with  the 
work,  in  the  midst  of  many  difB.culties 
and  interruptions,  for  twenty  -  one 
years.  Let  the  teacher  bring  out  the 
difierence  between  the  work  of  the  people 
on  coming  out  of  the  Egyptian  house  of 
bondage ;  and  now,  on  returning  from 
the  Babylonian  captivity,  show  how  the 
different  work  is  indicative  of  great  pro- 
gress in  national  sentiment  and  religious 
life.    The  old  work  showed  that  freedom 


was  then  won  by  the  sword ;  this,  that 
the  greatest  freedom  and  happiness  of  a 
people  are  secured  by  the  truth  (John 
viii.  32),  the  central,  liberty -winning 
truth  being.  There  is  one  true  and  ever- 
living  God,  and  that  happy  is  the  people 
whose  God  is  the  Lord  (Ps.  cxliv.  15). 

So  far,  what  has  been  said  may  be 
regarded  as  recapitulatory  exercise. 

III.  Their  persevering,  self-denying 
work  was  crowned  with  success — the 
Temple  was  at  length  finished.  The 
completion  of  great  undertakings  is  a 
time  of  great  interest.  Take,  as  examples, 
some  celebrated  buildings,  palaces,  for- 
tresses, exhibition  buildings,  <fec.  Will 
they  answer  the  purpose  for  which  they 
have  been  erected  ?  Is  the  purpose  one 
that  warrants  the  expectation  of  the 
Divine  blessing  1  If  not  (as  the  Tower 
of  Babel),  the  building  will  presently 
become  a  monument  of  human  folly 
(Ps.  cxxvii.  1). 

Bring  out  the  purpose  of  this  building, 
and  show  its  importance,  relatively,  to 
other  erections.  The  Temple  was  built 
before  the  walls  of  the  city  were  repaired. 
It  was  the  true  rock  of  strength,  the  for- 
tress, the  spiritual  Gibraltar,  the  key  to 
the  possession  of  the  Promised  Land. 
Why?  (See  Ps.  xlvi.;  xviii  2,  3  ;  Ixxi. 
3.) 

IV.  It  was  meet  that  the  opening 
services  should  be  marked  by  the  live- 
liest demonstrations  of  religious  joy. 

1.  For  here  was  a  vast  work,  pursued 
by  a  small  number  of  people  through 
many  interruptions,  and  continued  for 
many  years — (during  which  those  who 
assisted  at  the  foundation,  above  twenty 
years  before,  were  daily  dying  off) — 
brought  to  a  successful  close  ;  while 
enemies  and  difficulties  increased,  the 
stimulating  influence  of  the  presence  of 
the  elders  of  the  people  diminished. 

2.  Not  only  was  there  the  joy  caused 

101 


CHAP.  vn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


by  the  ending  of  the  work,  joy  caused  ing  devoted  to  religious  purposes.  Such 

by  retrospective  glances,  but  joy  inflamed  an  event  is  an  occasion  for  joy  of  the 

by  the  hope  of  the  future.     We  are  ac-  deepest  and  most  holy  kind.     There  is 

customed,  in   the  opening  of  places  of  in  it  the  grateful  memory  of  the  past, 

worship,  to  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  the  and  believing  hopefulness  for  the  future. 

tnitli   that  may  be  there  proclaimed  to  All  places  of  prayer,  and  religious  work 

future  generations.  in  the  world,  are  the  true  successors  of 

3.  It  was  joy  marked  by  feasting  and  this  Temple,  whose  dedication  we  have 
song.  Probably  they  sang  Psalms  cxlvi.,  been  considering.  They  are  designed  to 
cxlvii.,  cxlviii.,  which,  in  the  Septuagint,  conserve  and  to  promulgate  that  salva- 
are  called  Psalms  of  Haggai  and  Zecha-  tion  which  is  of  the  Jews,  and  which, 
riah.  Reference  to  these  Psalms  will  by  type  and  ceremony,  was  first  mani- 
show  that  joy  was  deep  and  religious  ;  fested  by  shadows  in  the  past,  but  which 
that  they  praised  God  as  the  Creator  of  now  with  clearer  light  has  appeared  unto 
the  world,  as  the  God  of  providence,  and  all  men. 

as  the  God  of  Israel,  and  (see  Ps.  cxlviii.  VL  We  are  engaged  in  rearing  a 

11,  12)  that  all  classes  and  ages  were  to  Temple.     It  is  not  built  of  bricks  and 

share  in  the  joy  and  the  song.  stones,  but  of  living  souls.    In  it  are  our 

4.  It  was  joy  marked  by  the  control  sons  and  our  daughters,  polished  after 
of  law  and  order.  It  was  no  wild  bac-  the  similitude  of  a  palace.  (1.)  Have 
chanalian  revelry,  but  devout  and  reve-  we  a  place  therein  1  (2.)  Are  we  doing 
rential  thanksgiving.  There  was  in  it  our  utn)ost  to  luring  others  in  1  (3.)  Let 
the  remembrance  of  former  mercies  (see  us  not  be  content  till  every  one  in  our 
vers.  20-22).  Hence  the  acknowledg-  class  is  built  up  into  this  spiritual  tem- 
ment  of  the  God  of  the  past  as  the  God  pie.  (4.)  Let  us  also  labour  for  the 
of  the  present,  and  the  belief  that  He  whole  school,  and  for  the  world  at  large; 
would  be  the  God  of  the  future.  till,  as  the  glory  of  God  filled  the  Temple 

V.  In  spirit  and  principle,  this  dedi-  of  old,  the  '*  whole  earth  may  be  filled 

cation  of  the  Temple  may  be  applied  with  His  glory  "  in  the  reign  of  love,  and 

in  the  case  of  the  opening  of  any  build-  truth,  and  salvation. — J,  Cowper  Gray, 


CHAPTER  VIL 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Kotfs.]  We  now  enter  upon  the  second  and  concluding  part 
of  this  book,  which  treats  of  the  return  of  certain  Jews  from  liabylon  to  Jerusalem  under 
Ezra,  and  the  reformation  which  he  accomplished  amongst  the  people  (chap.  vii.  10).  The 
first  section  of  this  part  gives  the  history  of  the  return  of  Ezra  and  his  company  from  Babylon 
to  Jerusalem,  with  the  names  of  "tlie chief  of  their  fathers"  and  the  numbers  of  the  respective 
families  (chaps,  vii.  and  viii.).  The  present  chapter  contains — (i.)  The  genealogy  of  Ezra  and 
a  brief  statement  of  his  journey  with  others  to  Jerusalem  (vers.  1-10).  (ii.)  The  commission 
given  by  ArtaxerxiS  the  kiuir  to  Ezra  (vers.  11-26).  (iii.)  Ezra's  praise  to  God  for  the  favours 
received  from  the  king  (vers.  27,  28). 

Ver.  1.  Now  after  these  things]  Fifty-seven  years  had  elapsed  since  the  events  recorded  in 
the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter.  "Such  gaps,"  as  Schuhz  observes,  "the  ancient  sacred 
history  has  again  and  again  ;  it  is  silent  respecting  the  times  between  Joseph  and  Moses, 
respecting  the  time  passed  by  the  generation  rejected  of  God  in  the  wilderness,  respecting  the 
time  of  the  exile.  There  was  lacking  in  these  times  useful  material  calculated  for  the  edifica- 
tion of  the  congregation,"  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia]  Heb.  Artachshasta.  Artnxerxes  Longi- 
manus,  son  of  Xerxes  and  grandson  of  Darius,  is  meant.  Ezra  the  son  of  Seraiah]  "Ezra 
was  probably  tlie  grent -great-grandson  of  Seraiali  ;  for  the  high  priest  Jeshna,  who  had  gone 
to  Jerusalem  seventy-eight  years  before  with  Zerubbabel,  was  a  grandson  of  Seraiah.  One 
hundred  and  thirty  years  had  already  |  assed  since  the  execution  of  the  latter  (2  Kings  xxv. 
18-21)  in  the  year  588." — ^'chultz.  According  to  the  usage  of  the  writers  of  Scripture,  every 
descendant  is  designated  a  "son,"  and  every  progenitor,  a  "father." 

Vers.  1-5]  A  number  of  generations  are  not  mentioned  between  Ezra  and  Aaron.  Three 
names  are  omitted  between  Kzra  ;ind  Seraiah  (ver.  ]),  and  "in  verse  3  six  members  of  the  line 
are  passed  over  between  Azariah  and  Meraioth  (according  to  1  Chron.  vi.  7-10),  without  doubt 
only  for  tlie  sake  of  brevity,  as  is  frequently  the  case  in  the  longer  irenealogies." 

Ver.  6.  A  ready  scribe  in  <,he  law  of  Moses]    "The  word  "I^^D  means  in   older  works 

102 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA,  OHAP.  Til. 


writer  or  secretary  ;  but  even  as  early  as  Jer.  viii.  8,  the  lying  pen  of  the  Dn^jfa  is  spoken  of, 
and  here  therefore  "1B*1D  hns  already  attained  the  meaning  of  one  learned  in  the  Scripture,  one 
who  has  made  the  written  law  a  subject  of  investigation.  Ezra  is,  however,  the  first  of  whom 
the  }.redicate  '^'^b^^  6  ypafifxare^s,  is  used  as  a  title."-  Keil.  Which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel 
had  given]  It  thoroughly  accords  with  tlie  piety  of  Ezra  to  regard  and  speak  of  the  law  as  the 
gift  of  God.  And  the  king  granted  him  all  his  request]  '*  The  question  how  this  favouring  of 
Ezra  is  related  to  the  writing  of  Artaxerxes  given  in  chap,  iv.,  is  best  answered  by  the  fact  that 
Ezra's  journey  occurred  somewhat  later,  that  Artaxerxes,  since  he  had  been  moved  to  that  writing 
by  liis  officials,  had  paid  more  attention  to  the  Jews,  and  that  he  furthered  Ezra's  journey  in  order 
to  strengthen  the  Jewish  con«,negation  ;  perhaps  also  in  order  to  show  thereby  that  he  actually 
was  ready  to  be  as  just  as  possible,  notwithstanding  the  prohibition  issued  respecting  the  walls 
of  the  city.  It  is  shown  then  by  this  approval  that  he  would  perhaps  recall  at  a  suitable  time 
even  that  prohibition  which  indeed  had  been  issued  at  first  only  provisionally." — Schultz. 
According  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God  upon  him]  This  expression  is  foutid  only  here  and 
in  yens.  9,  28  ;  viii.  18  ;  Nel».  ii.  8,  18  ;  and  with  slight  variations  in  chap.  viii.  22,  31 ;  and  it 
signifies,  according  to  the  favour  and  furtherance  which  God  had  granted  to  him. 

Ver.  7.  And  there  went  up  some  of  the  children  of  Israel]  &c.  (Comp.  chap.  ii.  70.) 
Ver.  9.  For  upon  the  first  day  of  the  first  month]  &c.  The  journey  occupied  exactly  four 
month's,  which  seems  an  unnecessarily  long  time.  **Tlie  direct  distance  of  Babylon  from 
Jerusalem,"  says  Rawlinson,  *' is  no  more  than  about  five  hundred  and  twenty  miles;  and  it 
may  therefore  seem  surprisinir  that  the  journey  should  have  occupied  four  months.  But  no 
doubt  the  route  followed  was  that  circuitous  one  by  Carchemish  and  the  Orontes  valley,  which 
was  ordinarily  taken  by  armies  or  large  bodies  of  men,  and  which  increased  the  distance  to 
about  nine  hundred  miles.  Still  the  time  occupied  is  long,  and  must  be  accounted  for  by  the 
dangers  alluded  to  in  chap.  viii.  22,  31,  which  may  have  necessitated  delays  and  rfe^owra  to 
avoid  conflicts."  Moreover,  we  read  of  one  rest  of  three  days  by  the  river  of  Ahava  (chap.  viii. 
15),  and  there  might  have  been  other  rests  during  the  journey. 

Ver.  12.  Artaxerxes,  king  of  kings]  One  of  the  recognised  titles  of  the  Persian  monarchs,  to 
whom  were  subject  a  number  of  tributary  sovereigns.  Perfect  peace]  "  Peace  "  has  been  sup- 
plied by  the  translators  of  the  A.V.,  and  that  improperly,  in  the  opinion  of  some  Hebraists. 
The  explanation  of  "l^Dil  (from  "IDS  =  to  complete)  is  difficult.  Fuerst  says  it  is  the  passive 
participle.  Keil  is  inclined  '*  to  regard  it  as  an  adverb  used  adjectively  :  To  the  scribe  in  the  law 
of  God  perfectly,  for  the  perfect  scribe,  &c.,  corresponding  with  the  translation  of  the  Vulgate, 
doctissimo."  The  correct  meaning  is  probably  that  which  is  given  in  the  margin  of  the  A.V., 
*•  Unto  Ezra  the  priest,  a  perfect  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven."  And  at  such  a  time] 
Rather  :  et  cetera,  and  so  forth.  (Comp.  chap.  iv.  11.)  The  letter  of  the  king  is  given  in  the 
Chaldee  orisinal. 

Ver.  14.  His  seven  counsellors]  constituted  the  supreme  court  of  the  kingdom.  (Comp. 
Esth.  i.  14.)  To  inquire  concerning  Judah]  &c.  "  Probably  the  commission  was  general  to 
inquire  into  the  state  of  the  province.  According  to  Xenophon  {Cyrop.  VIII.,  vi.  16),  it  was  a 
part  of  the  Persian  system  for  the  king  to  send  an  oflicer  once  a  year  into  each  province  to 
inspect  and  report  upon  iV—Rmvlinson.  According  to  the  law  of  thy  God]  &c.  i.e.  ** righte- 
ously and  justly,  according  to  the  principle  of  thy  religion." 

Vers.  15,  16.  And  to  carry  the  silver  and  gold]  &c.  **  Three  kinds  of  offerings  for  the 
Temple  are  here  spoken  of:  1st,  tlie  gifts  of  the  king  and  his  counsellors  for  the  service  of  the 
God  of  Israel  ;  2d,  the  gold  and  the  silver  that  Ezra  should  obtain  in  the  province  of  Babylon, 
i.e.  by  the  collection  which  he  was  consequently  empowered  to  make  among  the  non-Israelite 
population  of  Babylon  ;  3d,  the  freewill  offerings  of  his  fellow-countrymen."— A'ei?. 

Ver.  20.  Oat  of  the  king's  treasure  house]  i.e.  the  royal  treasury.  **  The  Persian  system  of 
taxing  the  provinces  through  the  satraps  involved  the  establishment  in  each  province  of  at  least 
one  local  treasury.  Such  treasuries  are  mentioned  occasionally  in  Greek  history  (see  ArriaUt 
Exp.  Alex.  I.  17  ;  III.  18,  19,  &c.)."—Ra2olinson. 

Ver.  22.  Here  the  limit  is  stated  which  the  treasurers  were  not  to  exceed  in  their  grants  to 
Ezra.  An  hundred  talents  of  silver]  According  to  Bishop  Cumberland's  computation  of  the 
Hebrew  silver  talent,  this  would  amount  to  about  £35,350.  According  to  Dr.  Arbuthnot's 
tables  it  would  amount  to  £3-1,218,  15s.  But  according  to  Mr.  R.  S.  Poole  (**  Diet,  of  the 
Bible,"  articles,  Money,  and  Weights  avd  Measures),  it  would  be  as  much  as  £40,000.  But  it  is 
not  certain  that  the  Hebrew  talent  was  meant.  An  hundred  measures  of  wheat]  Margin : 
Chald.  cors.  Cor  is  the  later  word  for  homer.  It  was  equal  to  ten  ephas  or  baths,  almost  two 
bushels  (1  Kings  v.  11  ;  Ezek.  xlv.  14).  The  bath  was  equal  to  seven  and  a  half  gallons,  accord- 
ing to  Dr.  Arbuthnot ;  but,  according  to  the  Rabbinists,  to  between  four  and  five  gallons, 
while,  according  to  Josephus,  it  was  between  eight  and  nine  gallons.  Wheat,  wine,  oil,  and 
salt]  were  required  by  the  Jews  for  their  meat  offerings  ;  and  "  as  the  Persian  tribute  was  paid 
partly  in  money  and  partly  in  kind,  the  treasuries  would  be  able  to  supply  them  as  readily  aa 
they  could  furnisli  money." 

Ver.  23.  Let  it  be  diligently  done]  Keil  translates,  **  completely  done."  So  does  Schulta 
also.    Why  should  there  he  wrath]  &c.  (Comp.  vi.  10.) 

103 


OBAT.  yn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


Ver.  24.  We  also  certify  you]  or,    "and  to  you  it  is  made  known.*'      "The  treasurers 

which  are  beyond  the  river"  are  still  addressed.  Or  ministersj  Rather,  "and  ministera.** 
*•  'J'he  expression  comprises  any  servants  of  the  Temple  who  might  have  been  omitted  in  the 
classes  enumerated." — Keil.  It  shall  not  be  lawful  to  impose]  &c.  In  this  respect  "  the 
decrr-e  of  Artaxerxes  was  more  favourable  to  the  Jews  than  tliose  of  all  previous  Persian 
moiiarclis."     Toll,  tribute,  or  custom]  (See  notes  on  chap.  iv.  13.) 

Ver.  25.  That  is  in  thine  hand]  ie.  **  which  thou  possessest."  All  the  people  that  are 
beyond  the  river]  is  limited  to  Israelites  or  Jews  by  the  following  clause,  all  such  as  know  the 
laws  of  thy  God.  And  teach  ye  them  that  know  them  not]  These  words  do  "  not  refer  to  the 
heatlien,  but  to  born  Israelites  or  Jews,  who,  living  among  the  heathen,  had  not  hitherto  made 
the  Mosaic  law  the  rule  of  their  lives.  Such  were  the  judges  to  constrain  to  the  observance 
and  obedience  of  the  law. 

**  By  granting  these  privileges,  Artaxerxes  was  not  only  treading  in  the  footsteps  of  Cyrua 
and  Darius  Hystaspes,  but  even  going  beyond  these  princes  in  granting  to  the  Jews  a  jurisdic- 
tion of  their  own." — Keil. 

Vers.  27,  28.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers]  &e.  "  This  abrupt  transition  from 
the  words  of  Artaxerxes  to  those  of  Ezra  may  be  compared  with  the  almost  equally  abrupt 
change  in  vi.  6.  The  language  alters  at  the  same  time  from  Chaldee  to  Hebrew,  continuing 
henceforth  to  be  Hebrew  till  the  close  of  the  book." — Rawlinson. 

Ver.  28.  And  hath  extended  mercy  unto  me  before  the  king]  i.e.  hath  awakened  in  him 
such  a  kind  disposition  towards  me.  And  I  gathered  together]  &c.  Ezra  regards  this  as  a 
result  of  his  being  "strengthened."  Chief  men  to  go  up  with  me]  These  chief  men  being 
heads  of  households,  their  families  would  accompany  them  to  the  land  of  their  fathers. 


Ezra  the  Distinguished. 
(Verses  1-10.) 


In  this  paragraph  Ezra  appears  before 
us  as — 

L  A  man  of  distinguished  ances- 
try. "  Now  after  these  things,  in  the 
reign  of  Artaxerxes,  king  of  Persia, 
Ezra  the  son  of  Seraiah,  the  son  of  Aza- 
riah,  &c.*'  (vers.  1-5).  He  was  able  to 
trace  his  pedigree  up  to  Aaron  the  high 
priest ;  and  he  was  *'  descended  from 
the  heads  of  that  line."  To  have  de- 
scended from  godly  progenitors  is  a 
blessing  of  incalculable  worth.  This 
blessing  comprises — 

1.  The  inspiration  of  noble  examples, 

2.  The  inheritance  of  excellent  consti- 
tutional moral  tendencies,  (a). 

3.  7%e  rich  results  of  parental 
prayers,  (b). 

**  My  boast  is  not  that  I  deduce  my  birth 
From   loins  enthroned,   and  rulers  of  the 

earth ; 
But  higher  far  my  proud  pretensions  rise — 
The  son  of  parents  passed  into  the  skies." 

— Cowper. 

II.  A  man  of  distinguished  attain- 
ments. 

1.  Here  are  distinguished  attairiments. 
**  This  Ezra  was  a  ready  scribe."  This 
does  not  mean  merely  a  ready  writer; 
but,  as  Bishop  Patrick  observes,  "  be 
calls  himself  a  scribe,  from  his  declaring 
and  explaining  the  things  contained  in 
104 


the  Scriptures.  The  word  in  the  ori- 
ginal signifies  one  skilled  and  learned 
in  that  which  was  the  Book  by  way  of 
eminence,  a  teacher  and  expounder  of 
it ;  and  he  was  a  *  ready  scribe,*  because 
he  was  peculiarly  expert  and  under- 
standing in  the  law,  both  in  matters 
which  related  to  the  priesthood,  and  to 
the  civil  authority." 

2.  Distinguished  attainments  in  a 
great  subject,  "  He  was  a  ready  scribe 
in  the  law  of  Moses."  Ezra  was  famous 
for  his  learning  and  skill,  not  in  any 
trivial  matters,  or  in  things  of  inferior 
importance,  but  in  themes  and  things  of 
the  most  vital  and  enduring  interest. 
He  was  "mighty  in  the  Scriptures." 
And,  passing  over  the  Jewish  tradi- 
tions concerning  him  in  this  respect, 
we  may  observe,  quoting  the  words  of 
Bishop  Hervey,  "  that  the  pointed  de- 
scription of  Ezra  (vii.  6)  as  *  a  ready 
scribe  in  the  law  of  Moses,*  repeated  in 
11,  12,  21,  added  to  the  information 
concerning  him  that  *  he  had  prepared 
his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord, 
and  to  do  it,  and  to  teach  in  Israel 
statutes  and  judgments'  (vii.  10),  and 
his  commission  to  teach  the  laws  of  his 
God  to  such  as  knew  them  not  (25), 
and  his  great  diligence  in  reading  the 
Scriptures  to  the  people,  all  give  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CVLki.  tIL 


atmost  probability  to  the  account  which 
attributes  to  him  a  corrected  edition  of 
the  Scriptures,  and  the  circulation  of 
many  such  copies.  The  books  of  Nehe- 
miah  and  Malachi  must  indeed  have 
been  added  later,  possibly  by  Malachi's 
authority."  (c). 

3.  Distinguished  attainments  in  a 
great  subject  by  a  great  Author,  "He 
was  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of  Moses, 
which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had 
given."  In  the  estimate  of  Ezra,  the 
law  was  not  a  human  code  which  origi- 
nated with  Moses ;  the  Scriptures  were 
not  merely  the  richest  treasures  of  their 
national  literature,  which  had  required 
many  ages  for  their  accumulation.  They 
had  God  for  their  author ;  they  were  His 
special  gift  to  His  chosen  people ;  they 
were  sacred  things  to  this  earnest  and 
reverent  student  of  them. 

III.  A  man  in  the  enjo3rment  of  dis- 
tinguished favour.  "This  Ezra  went 
up  from  Babylon,  .  .  .  and  the  king 
granted  him  all  his  request."  It  is  pro- 
bable that  the  officers  of  the  Persian 
government  in  Syria  were  not  faithfully 
and  fully  carrying  out  the  decree  of 
Darius  as  regards  the  grant  of  supplies 
for  the  Jewish  worship  at  Jerusalem 
(chap.  vi.  9,  10),  and  that  Ezra,  repre- 
senting the  elders  of  the  Jews,  requested 
the  king  to  issue  new  commands  con- 
cerning them ;  for  the  commission  of 
Ezra  from  the  king  provides  fully  for 
these  things  (vers.  15-23).  His  request 
seems  also  to  have  been  for  permission 
for  himself  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and 
for  all  such  as  were  disposed  to  accom- 
pany him,  that  they  might  be  allowed 
to  do  so.  And  this  pious  and  'patriotic 
scribe  stood  so  high  in  the  estimation  of 
Artaxerxes  that  "  the  king  granted  him 
all  his  request."  That  he  should  enjoy 
so  much  of  the  confidence  and  favour  of 
such  a  monarch  as  Artaxerxes  is  a  valu- 
able testimony  to  the  worth  of  Ezra. 
"The  king's  favour  is  toward  a  wise 
servant." 

IV.  A  man  of  distinguished  influ- 
ence. *'  And  there  went  up  some  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  and  of  the 
priests,"  &c.  (ver.  7).'  Ezra  was  trusted 
not  only  by  the  king  and  his  counsellors, 
but  by  his  own  countrymen  also,  with 


whom   he   had   great   influence.      Thii 
influence  was  over — 

1.  Various  classes  of  men.  Priests, 
Levites,  people  of  the  other  tribes,  not 
set  apart  for  religious  services,  and 
Nithinim,  accompanied  him  to  Jeru- 
salem from  Babylon. 

2.  Large  numbers  of  men.  Of  all 
classes  there  were  upwards  of  1770 
adult  males  in  the  party  which  went 
up  to  Jerusalem  with  Ezra ;  so  that  the 
total,  including  wives,  children,  and 
servants,  would  probably  be  from  8000 
to  9000  souls,  {d), 

V.  A  man  of  distinguished  success. 
We  have  an  example  of  this  in  his 
journey  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem. 
"  He  came  to  Jerusalem  in  the  fifth 
month,  which  was  in  the  seventh  year 
of  the  king.  For  upon  the  first,"  &c 
(vers.  8,  9).     This  journey  was — 

1.  Long,  About  nine  hundred  miles 
by  the  route  which  they  probably  pur- 
sued. 

2.  Difficult,  It  was  by  no  means  an 
easy  matter  to  conduct  so  large  a  num- 
ber of  persons,  including  many  women 
and  "little  ones,"  through  so  long  a 
journey  in  those  times  and  countries 
(Comp.  chap.  viii.  21.) 

3.  Perilous.  They  were  in  danger  of 
being  attacked  by  Arabian  freebooters, 
by  whom  the  country  through  which 
they  had  to  travel  was  infested.  (Comp. 
chap.  viii.  22,  31.) 

4.  Successful,  "  On  the  first  day  of 
the  fifth  month  came  he  to  Jerusalem, 
according  to  the  good  hand  of  his  God 
upon  him." 

VI.  A  man  of  distinguished  aim. 
"  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek 
the  law  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  (ver.  10). 
We  see  that  he  aimed  at — 

1.  The  acquisition  of  the  highest  know- 
ledge, "  He  had  prepared  " — set  or 
fixed — "  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the 
Lord."  He  resolutely  sought  thoroughly 
to  know  the  Scriptures. 

2.  T/ie  practice  of  the  highest  knouh 
ledge,  "  And  to  do  it."  He  endea- 
voured to  conform  his  life  to  the  law  of 
Jehovah,  (e). 

3.  The  impartation  of  the  highest 
knowledge,  "And  to  teach  in  Israel 
statutes  and  judgments."     By  both  pre- 

106 


OHAP.  TIL 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


cept  and  example  he  strove  to  hring 
the  people  to  know  and  oV^ey  the  Divine 
law.  We  must  know  ourselves  wliat 
we  would  tench  others  ;  and  if  we  would 
teach  with  practical  effect,  we  must  our- 
selves practise  what  we  teacli. 

VII.  A  man  of  distinguished  bless- 
ing. *"  The  king  granted  him  all  his 
request,  according  to  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  his  God  upon  him.  .  .  .  Came 
he  to  Jerusalem,  according  to  the  good 
liand  of  his  God  upon  him." 

1.  The  blessing  of  God  rested  upon 
him.  By  reason  of  it  he  was  protected 
in  journeyings,  and  prospered  in  his 
undertakings. 

2.  The  blessing  of  God  ivas  acknow- 
ledged by  him.  He  tiaced  his  successes 
to  their  First  Cause ;  and  gratefully 
acknowledged  the  gracious  providence 
of  God  in  his  life.  (/). 

We  are  all  recipients  of  the  manifold 
blessings  of  God;  let  us  also  heartily 
recognise  them  as  such,  and  gratefully 
bless  the  Giver. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  If  you  plant  seeds  for  apple-stalks,  you 
are  obliged  to  graft  every  one  of  iliein  ;  but 
if  you  take  from  a  goo<l  apple-tree  a  cutting, 
it  will  grow  up  and  bear  the  same  kind  of 
fruit  wliich  that  tree  bears.  Now,  I  do  not 
Bay  that  literally  there  is  a  transfer  of  qualities 
from  parents  to  children,  as  there  is  a  literal 
transfer  of  fruit  from  the  original  tree  to  the 
tree  whicli  is  produced  from  a  cutting,  so  that 
the  apples  are  j!^reenint:s  or  pip})ins  according 
to  tiie  stock  from  which  they  sprung  ;  but  1 
believe  it  is  sub&tantiaily  like  that.  I  believe 
it  is  in  the  power  of  father  and  mother  to  rear 
the  child  so  thatfr-^m  its  earliest  periods  it  shall 
be  drawn  by  the  Spirit  of  God. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

Your  father  was  a  holy  man,  —  will  you 
undertake  to  break  the  line  of  a  holy  succession 'i 
Ought  not  the  fame  of  his  holiness  to  awaken 
your  own  religious  concern  ?  Are  you  pre- 
pared to  make  yourself  the  turning-point  in 
the  line  of  a  pious  ancestry?  Beware  lest  you 
say  in  efifect,  '*  For  generations  my  fathers 
have  trusted  in  God  and  looked  to  Him  for 
the  light  of  their  lives,  but  now  I  deliberately 
disown  their  worship  and  turn  away  from  the 
God  they  loved."  This  you  can  say  if  you 
be  so  minded.  God  does  not  force  Himself 
upon  you.  You  may  start  a  pagan  posterity 
if  you  please. — Josej^h  Parker^  D.D. 

(5)  Though  God  has  not  bound  Himself  to 

hear  the  prayers  of  any  one  for  the  salvation 

of  the  soul  of  another,  yet  He  frequently  does 

80  ;  and  hence  perhaps,  though  grace  does  not 

106 


run  in  the  blood,  yet  we  frequently  see  it  rung 
in  the  lint.  Many  more  of  the  children  of 
God's  children  prove  gracious  than  those  of 
others. — Dr.  Ryland, 

(c)  Thai  is  a  good  day  in  which  you  learn 
something  new  of  the  Bible.  Do  not  keep 
treading  around  in  just  the  same  place,  reading 
tiie  same  Psalms  of  David  over  and  over  again 
because  they  are  short,  while  you  neglect 
other  portions  of  the  Gospel.  If  your  friend 
writes  you  a  letter  written  on  four  sides  of  a 
letter-sheet,  you  do  not  stop  after  you  have 
read  the  first  page.  You  do  not  treat  him 
well  unless  you  read  the  second  page,  the 
third  page,  and  the  fourth  page,  as  well  as 
the  first.  God  our  Father  has  written  us  a 
very  long  letter,  all  full  of  affection  and 
counsel;  and  what  a  mean  thing  it  is  if  we 
only  read  one  or  two  of  the  pages  when  all  of 
them  demand  our  attention.  How  many  verses 
could  you  quote  to  me  from  OUadiah,  or  Ha- 
bakkuk,  or  Nahum,  or  Leviticus?  Not  one. 
Find  out  what  part  of  the  Bible  you  know  the 
least  about,  and  study  it.  Do  not  spend  your 
entire  time  under  one  tree  when  there  is 
around  about  you  a  great  orchard. — T.  De 
Witt  Talmagcy  D.  D. 

(rf)  The  greatest  works  that  have  been  done, 
have  been  done  by  the  ones.  The  hundreds 
do  not  often  do  much,  the  companies  never 
do  ;  it  is  the  units,  just  the  single  individuals 
that,  after  all,  are  the  power  and  the  might. 
Take  any  Church — there  are  multitudes  in  it ; 
but  it  is  some  two  or  three  that  do  the  work. 
Look  on  the  Reformation! — there  miglit  be 
many  reformers,  but  there  was  but  one  Luther : 
there  might  be  many  teachers,  but  there  was 
but  one  Calvin.  Look  ye  upon  the  preachers 
of  the  last  age,  the  mighty  preachers  who 
stirred  up  the  churches ! — there  were  many 
coadjutors  with  them  ;  but,  after  all,  it  was 
not  Whitefield's  friends,  nor  Wesley's  friends, 
but  the  men- themselves,  that  did  it.  Indi- 
vidual effort  is,  after  all,  the  grand  thing.  A 
man  alone  can  do  more  than  a  man  with  fifty 
men  at  his  heels  to  fetter  him.  Look  back 
through  all  history.  "Who  delivered  Israel 
from  the  Philistines  ? — it  was  solitary  Samson. 
Who  was  it  gathered  the  people  togetlier,  to 
rout  the  Midianites? — it  was  one  Gideon,  who 
cried,  "The  fcword  of  ihe  Lord  and  of  Gideon!" 
Who  was  he  ihat  smote  the  enemy  ? — It  was 
Sliamgar,  with  his  ox-goad  ;  or  it  was  an 
Ehud,  who,  with  his  dagger,  put  an  end  to  his 
country's  tyrant.  Separate  men — Davids  with 
their  slings  and  stones — have  done  more  than 
armies  could  accomplish. — C.  H.  Spurgeon. 

(e)  I  ask  you  to  remember,  at  home,  in  the 
shop,  and  in  the  counting-house,  that  you  are 
epistles  of  Christ ;  and  that  in  your  spirit, 
habits,  and  character,  His  very  thoughts  are 
to  be  translated  into  forms  which  common 
men  can  read  and  understand.  You  would 
condemn  with  heaviest  censure  the  presump- 
tuous hand  which  wilfully  corrupted  the  text 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OtLhl,  TO, 


of  the  printed  book  in  winch  the  acts  and 
thoughts  of  God  are  preserved  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  the  world  ;  you  would  condemn  with 
censure  liardly  less  severe  the  carelessness 
wliich  should  omit  chapter  after  chapter,  and 
give  false  readings  instead  of  true.  Bxxi  you 
are  tlie  living  revelation  of  God  to  mankind. 
Tlirouiih  you  it  is  meant  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
should  speak,  not  in  mere  words,  but  in  acts, 
which  are  more  intelligible  and  emphatic  than 
words.  The  very  life  of  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
intended  to  be  manifest  in  your  conduct,  as 
the  life  of  a  plant  is  manifested  in  the  flower, 
and  the  life  of  a  tree  in  the  fruit.  Are  you 
giving  a  true  revelation  to  mankind,  or  are 
you  perverting,  corrupting,  falsi fyiiig  it? 

Your  religious  emotions  irreligious  men  can 
know  nothing  of,  butyour  virtues  and  vices  are 
a  language  plain  and  familiar  to  tliem  as  their 
mother  tongue.  They  can  read  these  without 
note  or  comment.  Tiiey  can  judge  of  the  Divine 
inspiration  of  these  without  any  argument  from 
miracles.     As  the  style  of  a  great  artist  is  re- 


cognised in  the  drawing  and  colouring  of  his 
pictures  ;  as  the  genius  of  Mozart  or  Beethoven 
may  be  known  at  once  by  the  movement  of  the 
melody  and  the  flowing  sweetness  or  myste- 
rious complexity  of  the  chorus,  so — if  you  are 
really  God's  workmanship — there  ought  to  be 
the  manifested  impress  of  the  Divine  hand  in 
your  character,  and  to  those  who  know  you 
well,  your  life  ought  to  be  plainly  the  revela- 
tion  of  a  Divine  idea.— i2.  W.  Dale,  M.A.,  D.D. 

(/)  When  men  have  had  a  successful  season 
in  merchandise,  they  are  apt  to  attribute  it  to 
their  own  acumen  or  their  partners  in  business. 
When  men  have  had  a  successful  season  in 
husbandry,  they  attribute  it  to  the  phosphates 
used,  or  to  the  agricultural  journal  that  gave 
them  the  right  kind  of  information.  How 
seldom  it  is  that  men  first  of  all  go  to  the 
Lord,  who  is  the  owner  of  the  field,  and  wlio 
presides  over  all  merchandise,  and  who  gives 
us  all  our  worldly  as  weU  as  our  spiritual 
success  \—T,  De  Witt  Talmage,  D.D. 


Studying,  Practising,  and  Teaching  the  Sacred  Scriptures. 

{Verse  10.) 


The  conduct  of  Ezra  as  described  here 
is  eminently  worthy  of  imitation.  Let  us 
contemplate  its  chief  features — 

I.  The  acauisyiiim  of  Divine  truth 
for  himself.  "  For  Ezra  had  prepared 
his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord." 
In  aiming  at  the  attainment  of  a  know- 
ledge of  the  Divine  law,  Ezra  adopted — 

L  The  right  method.  He  sought  for 
the  knowledge  which  he  desired ;  he 
put  forth  efforts  to  acquire  it.  Would 
any  one  attain  a  competent  knowledge 
of  any  science  %  He  must  seek  it ,  he 
must  read,  think, experiment,  &c.  Would 
any  one  "  know  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
wliich  are  able  to  make  him  wise  unto 
salvation  through  faith  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  "  ?  He  must  "  search  the  Scrip- 
tures," &c.  Personal  effort  is  indispen- 
sable. 

2.  The  right  manner.  Ezra  sought 
for  this  knowledge  resolutely  and  ear- 
nestly. '*  He  had  prepared  " — i.e.,  fixed 
01-  set — "  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the 
Lord."  He  who  would  seek  successfully 
must  seek  resolutely.  It  is  the  earnest 
student  who  overcomes  obstinate  diffi- 
culties, disentangles  bewildering  per- 
plexities, and  makes  glorious  discoveries. 
Moreover,  though  it  is  not  mentioned  in 
this  verse,  we  have  abundant  evidence 
of  the  fact  that  Ezra  was  a  devout  stu- 


dent of  the  Scriptures.  In  this  province 
of  investigation,  reverence  is  as  impor- 
tant as  earnestness.  '*  The  meek  will 
He  guide  in  judgment,"  <fec.  "  The 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that 
fear  Him,"  &c. 

3.  The  right  place.  Ezra  sought  "  the 
law  of  the  Lord"  in  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures. Divine  truth  may  be  discovered 
in  the  material  creations  of  God,  in  the 
revolutions  of  human  history,  &c.  But 
he  who  would  acquaint  himself  with 
moral  law,  let  him  "  search  the  Scrip- 
tures ; "  he  who  would  know  the  re- 
demptive truth  of  God,  let  him  study 
the  Bible. 

II.  The  embodiment  of  Divine  truth 
in  his  life.  Ezra  had  set  his  heart  not 
only  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  but 
also  '*  to  do  it."  He  translated  his 
discoveries  into  deeds.  The  truth  which 
he  acquired  by  his  heart  and  mind,  he 
practised  in  his  life.  In  this  also  he  is 
an  example  to  us.  And  the  importance 
of  imitating  him  in  this  respect  will 
appear  if  we  consider  that  knowledge 
misapplied  is — 

1.  Useless.  Knowledge  of  the  laws 
of  nature  benefits  us  only  as  it  leads  us 
to  act  in  harmony  with  those  laws.  And 
knowledge  of  Gospel  truth  becomes  a 
blessing  to  us  only  as  we  receive  it  into 

107 


O&Af .  tSL 


SOMILEfJC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


our  heart  by  faith,  and  give  practical 
expression  to  it  in  our  lives.  "Not 
every  one  that  saith  unto  Me,  Lord, 
Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,"  &c.  (Matt.  vii.  21-27).  It  is 
the  "  doer  of  the  work"  that  is  "blessed 
in  his  deed  "  (Jas.  i.  25).  {a). 

2.  Anoccasion  of  condemnation,  "That 
servant  which  knew  his  lord's  will,  and 
prepared  not  himself,  neither  did  accord- 
ing to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with  many 
stripes,"  &c.  (Luke  xii.  47,  48).  (h), 

III.  The  communication  of  Divine 
truth  to  others.  Ezra  had  set  his  heart 
also  "  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and 
judgments."  A  solemn  obligation  rests 
upon  man  not  only  to  acquire  truth,  but 
also  to  impart  it.  He  who  has  learned 
of  others  must  himself  in  his  turn 
become  a  teacher  of  others.  Here  is 
the  Divine  law  on  the  question  :  "  Freely 
ye  have  received,  freely  give." 

"  Thyself  and  thy  belonginga 
Are  not  thine  own  so  proper,  as  to  waste 
Thyself  upon  thy  virtues,  them  on  thee. 
Heaven  doth  with  us,  as  we  with  torches  do  : 
Not  light  them  for  themselves ;  for  if  our 

virtues 
Did  not  go  forth  of  us,  'twere  all  alike 
As  if  we  had  them  not.  Spirits  are  not  finely 

touched, 
But  to  fine  issues  ;  nor  nature  never  lends 
The  smallest  scruple  of  her  excellence, 
But,  like  a  thrifty  goddess,  she  determines 
Herself  the  glory  of  a  creditor. 
Both  thanks  and  use," — Shakespeare. 

•*  Measure  for  Measure,"  i.  1. 

Ezra  first  learned  the  truth  for  himself, 
then  practised  it  in  his  own  life,  and 
then  taught  it  to  others.  He  taught 
others  l)0th  by  his  speech  and  by  his 
action.  Merely  verbal  teaching  will  not 
bear  comparison  with  that  which  is  also 
of  the  character  and  conduct.  The 
latter  is — 

1.  More  intelligible.  Minds  which 
would  utterly  fail  to  follow  our  argu- 
ments can  understand  our  actions. 

2.  More  continuous.  Instruction  by 
means  of  .serinons  or  lessons  is  neces- 
sarily occasional,  but  the  teaching  of 
the  life  is  constant,  (c). 

3.  More  influential.  "  How  forcible 
are  right  words  !  "  But  how  much  more 
forcible  are  right  works  !  Ezra's  power 
as  an  expository  preacher  was  great,  as 
we  see  from  Neh.  viii.  ;  but  his  power 

108 


as  a  holy  and  zealous  man  was  greater. 
And  it  seems  to  us  that  much  of  his 
power  as  a  preacher  arose  from  the  saint- 
liness  and  strength  of  his  character,  (d). 
Let  all  Christians,  but  especially 
Christian  preachers  and  teachers,  copy 
the  example  of  Ezra,  and  first  study  the 
Scriptures  for  themselves,  then  live  the 
Scriptures  for  themselves,  and  then 
teach  the  Scriptures  to  others. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  As  compared  with  professions,  good 
deeds  are  put  into  ever-lustrous  eminence, 
both  by  their  solid  quality,  and  by  that  grand 
refutation  of  all  talking  hypocrisy  and  cere- 
monial cant,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Judge 
Himself,  **  Not  every  one  that  saith  unto 
Me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of 
My  Father."  We  cannot  be  wrong — if  there 
is  such  a  thing  as  truth  in  God's  universe,  we 
must  be  right — in  esteeming  one  palpable 
and  ponderable  action  in  Christ's  name  before 
a  library  of  dogmatic  credos^  subscription  to 
the  straitest  ecclesiastical  vows,  or  the  hand- 
somest adjustment  of  the  mantle  of  public 
conformity.  If  we  must  have  one  without 
the  other,  an  acre  of  statements  must  be  let  go 
rather  than  an  ounce  of  life. — F.  D.  Hunt' 
ington,  D.D. 

i  beseech  you  more  earnestly  endeavour 
to  reduce  the  things  you  know  to  practice. 
Nothing  can  be  more  absurd  than  to  content 
ourselves  with  only  a  notional  knowledge  of 
practical  matters.  We  should  think  so  in 
other  cases ;  as  if  any  man  should  satisfy 
himself  to  know  the  use  of  food,  but  famish 
himself  by  never  eating  any,  when  he  hath  it 
at  hand  !  Oh,  what  holy  and  pleasant  lives 
should  we  lead  in  this  world,  if  the  temper 
and  complexion  of  our  souls  did  but  corre- 
spond to  the  things  we  know.  The  digesting 
our  food  is  what  God  eminently  calls  for. — 
John  Howe. 

(6)  The  more  any  one  doth  only  notionally 
know  in  the  matters  of  religion,  so  as  that 
the  temper  of  his  spirit  remains  altogether 
unsuitable  to  the  design  and  tendency  of  the 
things  known,  the  more  he  hath  lying  ready 
to  come  in  judgment  against  him  ;  and  if, 
therefore,  he  count  the  things  excellent  which 
he  knows,  and  only  please  himself  with  his 
own  knowledge  of  them,  it  is  but  a  like  case 
as  if  a  man  should  be  much  delighted  to  be- 
hold his  own  condemnation  written  in  a  fair 
and  beautiful  hand  ;  or  as  if  one  should  be 
pleased  with  the  glittering  of  that  sword 
which  is  directed  against  his  own  heart ;  and 
so  little  pleasant  is  the  case  of  him  who  thus 
satisfies  his  own  curiosity  with  the  concerns 
of  eternal  life  and  death,  that  any  serious 
person  would  tremble  on  his  behalf,  at  that 
wherein  he  takes  pleasure,  and  apprehend 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  yiL 


just  horror  in  that  state  of  the  case  whence  he 
draws  matter  of  delight. — Ibid. 

(c)  If  we  distinguish  man  as  a  creature  of 
language,  and  thus  qualified  to  communicate 
himself  to  others,  there  are  in  him  two  sets  or 
kinds  of  language, — one  which  is  voluntary  in 
the  use,  and  one  that  is  involuntary ;  that  of 
speech  in  the  literal  sense,  and  that  expres- 
sion of  the  eye,  the  face,  the  look,  the  gait, 
the  motion,  the  tone  or  cadence,  whicli  is 
sometimes  called  the  natural  language  of  the 
sentiments.  This  natural  language,  too,  is 
greatly  enlarged  by  the  conduct  of  life,  that 
which,  in  business  and  society,  reveals  the 
principles  and  spirits  of  men.  Speech,  or 
voluntary  language,  is  a  door  to  the  soul,  that 
we  may  open  or  shut  at  will  ;  the  other  is  a 
door  that  stands  open  evermore,  and  reveals 
to  others  constantly,  and  often  more  clearly, 
the  tempers,  tastes,  and  motives  of  their 
hearts.  Within,  as  we  may  represent,  is 
character,  charging  the  common  reservoir  of 
influence,  and  through  these  twofold  gates 
of  the  soul,  pouring  itself  out  on  the  world. 
Out  of  one  it  flows  at  choice,  and  whensoever 
we  purpose  to  do  good  or  evil  to  men.  Out 
of  the  other  it  flows  each  moment,  as  light 
from  the  sun,  and  propagates  itself  in  all 
beholders. 

The  door  of  involuntary  communication,  I 
have  said,  is  always  open.  Of  course  we  are 
communicating  ourselves  in  this  way  to  others 
at  every  moment  of  our  intercourse  or  pre- 
sence with  them.  But  how  very  seldom,  in 
comparison,  do  we  undertake  by  means  of 
speech  to  influence  others  !  Even  the  best 
Christian,  one  who  most  improves  his  oppor- 
tunities to  do  good,  attempts  but  seldom  to 
sway  another  by  voluntary  influence,  whereas 
he  is  all  the  while  shining  as  a  luminous 
object  unawares,  and  communicating  of  his 
heart  to  the  world. — H.  Bushnell,  D.D. 


{d)  If  every  disciple  is  to  be  an  **  epistle 
known  and  read  of  all  men,"  what  shall  W6 
expect  but  that  all  men  will  be  somehow 
aflfected  by  the  reading?  Or,  if  he  is  to  be 
a  light  in  the  world,  what  shall  we  look  for, 
but  that  others,  seeing  his  good  works,  shall 
glorify  God  on  his  account?  How  often  is  it 
seen,  too,  as  a  fact  of  observation,  that  one, 
or  a  few  good  men,  kindle  at  length  a  holy 
fire  in  the  community  in  which  they  live,  and 
become  the  leaven  of  a  general  reformation  I 
Such  men  give  a  more  vivid  proof  in  their 
persons  of  the  reality  of  religious  faith,  than 
any  words  or  arguments  could  yield.  They 
are  active  ;  they  endeavour,  of  course,  to  exert 
a  good  voluntary  influence ;  but  still  their 
chief  power  lies  in  their  holiness,  and  the 
sense  they  produce  in  others  of  their  close 
relation  to  God. 

.  .  .  Where  the  direct  or  active  influence 
of  men  is  supposed  to  be  great,  even  this  is 
due,  in  a  principal  degree,  to  that  insensible 
influence  by  which  their  arguments,  reproofs, 
and  persuasions  are  secretly  invigorated.  It 
is  not  mere  words  which  turn  men ;  it  is  the 
heart  mounting  uncalled  into  the  expression 
of  the  features  :  it  is  the  eye  illuminated  by 
reason — the  look  beaming  with  goodness  ;  it 
is  the  tone  of  the  voice,  that  instrument  of 
the  soul,  which  changes  quality  with  such 
amazing  facility,  and  gives  out  in  the  soft, 
the  tender,  the  tremulous,  the  firm,  every 
shade  of  emotion  and  character.  And  so 
much  is  there  in  this,  that  the  moral  stature 
and  character  of  the  man  that  speaks  are 
likely  to  be  well  represented  in  his  manner. 
If  he  is  a  stranger,  his  way  will  inspire  con- 
fidence and  attract  good  will.  His  virtues 
will  be  seen,  as  it  were,  gathering  round  him 
to  minister  words  and  forma  of  thought,  and 
their  voices  will  be  heard  in  the  fall  of  his 
cadences. — Ibid, 


The  Christian  Ministry. 


{Verse 

This  learned  and  pious  priest  is  an 
eminent  model  for  the  study  of  those 
who  are  engaged  in  the  public  service 
of  God.  Born  in  Babylon,  he  neverthe- 
less became  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom 
was  no  guile.  His  zeal  for  the  pure 
worship  of  God — for  the  reformation  of 
social  manners  and  faithful  administra- 
tion of  the  law  ;  his  personal  consecra- 
tion, his  profound  study  of  the  sacred 
writings,  his  deep  views  of  the  evil  of 
Bin,  his  power  with  God  in  prayer,  his 
personal  humility  and  true  nobleness  of 
character,  entitle  him  to  rank  among 
the  most  illustrious  of  God's  worthies 
in  the  ancient  Church, 


10.) 

The  text  points  out  some  indispensable 
qualifications  for  an  able  minister  of  the 
New  Testament. 

I.  Devotedness  to  God's  Word. 

1.  The  minister  is  called  to  this  ]  it 
is  the  indispensable  requirement  of  his 
office. 

2.  Its  inexhaustible  riches  require 
profound  and  constant  research. 

3.  Prayer  is  absolutely  necessary  for 
the  right  understanding  of  the  Scrip- 
tures. 

II.  Personal  religion. 

1.  Without  this  all  other  qualifica- 
tions will  prove  unavailing. 

2.  Its  influence  upon  the  minister's 

109 


CHAP.  TH. 


&OMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


ovMi  heart  and  life  is  necessary  to  his 
success. 

3.   Its  power  over  others. 

III.  Public  instruction. 

1.  Its  subjects.  Scripture  : — God  in 
Christ,  sin,  salvation. 


2.  Its  spirit.  Dependent  on  Divine 
aid,  faithful,  bold. 

3.  Its  manner.  Simple,  unaffected, 
earnest,  practical,  affectionate,  —  The 
Preadier's  Portfolio, 


Divine  Sequence. 
(Verse  10.) 


In  most  operations  due  sequence  is  of 
as  great  importance,  in  order  to  success, 
as  correct  action  or  proper  quality.  To 
transpose  the  order  in  a  succession  of 
processes  is  certain  failure.  How  mani- 
festly fatal  as  to  the  result,  for  a  farmer 
to  sow  before  ploughing,  or  to  harrow 
before  sowing  !  Hiiw  vain  the  black- 
smith's labour  if  he  smite  the  iron  first, 
and  then  make  it  hot!  Everything  in 
its  due  Older  is  a  universal  law.  It 
a})plies  to  Sahbatli  school  teaching  as 
inexorably  as  to  other  matters,  and  to 
ignore  it  is  culpable  foll}^  The  law  of 
true  sequence  in  this  case  is  plainly 
taught  in  the  Word  of  God,  and  is  for- 
cibly illustrated  in  the  conduct  of  Ezra. 

I.  There  must  be  diligent  searching 
for  the  law  of  God.  "Ezia  prepared 
his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord." 
Teachers  must  know  before  they  can 
teach,  and  there  is  need  for  searching  in 
order  to  knowledge.  "  Search  the  Scrip- 
tures "  is  the  first  step  in  the  Divine 
sequence.  *'  Then  shall  we  know,  if  we 
follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  And  for 
effective  teaching,  to  head  -  knowledge 
there  must  be  heart-sympathy. 

II.  There  must  be  a  hearty  doing 
of  the  discovered  will.  Ezra  prepared 
his  heart  not  only  to  seek,  but  "  to  do  " 
the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  this  is  the 
second  process  in  the  Divine  order. 
Alas  !  for  him  who  seeks  to  teach  others 
laws  which  he  does  not  himself  obey, 
and  to  enforce  commands  which  he  him- 
self defies  1     Doing,  moreover,  stands  in 


double  relation  to  knowing  and  teaching. 
*'  If  any  man  will  do  His  will,  he  shall 
know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of 
God"  (John  vii.  17).  Hence  its  im- 
portance in  relation  to  knowledge.  It 
is  also  indispensable  to  true  teaching ; 
for  by  our  lives  we  must  teach,  even 
though  we  be  very  unskilful  with  our 
tongues.  *'  Whosoever  shall  do  and 
teach,  shall  be  called  great  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven"  (Matt.  v.  19). 

III.  Then  may  we  teach  the  law  of 
the  Lord.  This  is  the  last  step  in  the 
Divine  sequence  ;  and  how  firm  a  founda- 
tion will  the  teaching  rest  upon  if  the 
sequence  has  been  duly  observed  !  Know- 
ledge treasured  in  the  heart  and  acted 
in  the  life  will  give  power  and  energy 
to  the  teachings,  such  as  can  in  no  other 
way  be  gained.  How  forcible  will  such 
teaching  be — how  irresistible!  What 
efficacy  the  observance  of  this  Divine 
sequence  gave  to  Ezra's  teaching  may 
be  learned  from  his  subsequent  history, 
for  all  the  congregation  were  by  his 
words  convinced  of  their  sin,  and  truly 
repenting,  they  cried,  "As  thou  hast 
said,  so  must  we  do"  (chap.  x.  12),  and 
they  did  it.  So  will  our  scholars  act,  if 
we  faithfully  fulfil  the  Divine  cojiditions. 
Let  us  give  heed  to  this  sequence.  It 
is  taught  in  many  parts  of  Scripture; 
but  let  Ezra's  embodiment  of  it  make  it 
plain.  Let  his  example  stir  our  emula- 
tion, and  his  success  whet  our  desire  for 
a  like  result. — B.  P.  /*.,  in  The  Sunday 
School  Teacher. 


The  Commission  of  Artaxerxes  to  Ezra, 

{Verses  11-26.) 
I.  The  granting  of  this  commission.  1.  In  answer  to  the  request  of  Ezra. 


This  letter,  conveying  such  large  powers, 
was  given — 
110 


We  see  this  from   ver.   6  :    "  the  king 
granted  him  all  his  request;"  and  from 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CHAP.  VII. 


ver.  28:  God  "liath  extended  mercy 
unto  me  before  the  king  and  his  coun- 
sellors," ifec.  It  was  a  courageous  thing 
for  Ezra  to  make  such  a  request  before 
such  an  assembly  (comp.  Neh.  ii.  2;  Esth. 
iv.  11);  and  the  fact  that  it  was  granted 
is'a  forcible  testimony  to  the  very  high 
esteem  in  which  he  was  held.  ^ 

2.  By  the  supreme  authority  of  the 
empire.     "Thou  art  sent  of  the  king 
and  of  his  seven  counsellors"  (ver.  14). 
"  God    hath  extended  mercy   unto    me 
before  the  king,  and  his  counsellors,  and 
before   all   the   king's   mighty  princes" 
(ver.  28).     Thus  the  commission  carried 
the  ixreatest  weight  and  importance. 
IL  The  articles  of  this  commission. 
1.    Those  which  are  addressed  to  Ezra, 
(1.)    Permission  for  him    to  go  up  to 
Jerusalem  with  as  many  of  his  fellow- 
countrymen    as  wished  to  do   so.       "  I 
make  a  decree,  that  all  they  of  the  people 
of  Israel,"  &c.  (ver.   13).     This  permis- 
sion was  necessary  to  enable  them  to  go 
forth,  because  they  were  captives.     And 
it  was  simply  a  cordial  permission  ;  it 
was  not  a  sentence  of  banishment  from 
Babylon.    The  Jews  were  not  sent  away, 
but  freely  allowed  to  go  if  they  desired 
to  do  so.     (2.)  Authority  to  investigate 
the  affairs  of  those  Jews  who  were  already 
settled  in  their  oivn  land.     "Thou  art 
sent  of  the  kiiiir,  and  of  his  seven  coun- 
sellors, to  inquire,"  &c.  (ver.  14).     The 
subject    of  the   inquiry  is   not  stated; 
and  it  cannot  be  determined  whether  it 
referred  to  their  general  condition  and 
progress,  or  more  particularly  to  their 
religious  condition.      But  the  rule  by 
which  the  inquiry  was  to  be  conducted 
is  clearly  laid  down  :  "according  to  the 
law  of  thy  God  which  is  in  thine  hand." 
Thus  the  Divine  law  was  honoured  by 
the  Persian   monarch  and  his  supreme 
council.     (3.)  Authority  to  receive,  con- 
vey,   and    distribute   money    and    other 
valuables  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah  at 
Jerusalem  (vers.   15-19).     Notice— (i.) 
The  treasures  committed  to  him.      "  The 
silver  and  gold  which  the  king  and  his 
counsellors  freely  offered,"  &c.  (ver.  15). 
The  contributions  of  money  which  the 
non-Israelite  population  in  all  the  pro- 
vince of   Babylon,   and   such   Jews   as 
elected  still  to  remain  in  Babylon,  were 


disposed   freely  to   contribute   for   the 
worship  of  the   God  of  Israel      "And 
all  the  silver  and  gold  that  thou  canst 
find,"  &c.  (ver.  16).    And  certain  vessels 
which   had   been   given   for  use  in    the 
Temple -service    at   Jerusalem.       "The 
vessels  also  that   are   given  thee,"   &c 
(ver.  19).     It  is  probable  that  the  sacred 
vessels  which  Zerubbabel  had  taken  to 
Jerusalem  were  inadequate  to  their  re- 
quirements at  the  great  religious  festivals, 
(ii.)  The  use  to  be  made  of  these  trea- 
sures.    The  vessels  were  to  be  delivered 
up  in  the  Temple  to  the  proper  persons 
for  use  in  its  services.     "The  vessels 
.  .  .  deliver   thou   before  the    God   of 
Jerusalem."      The   money   was    to   be 
employed  in  the    purchase    of   animals 
and  other  things  for  religious  sacrifices. 
"That  thou  mayest  buy  speedily  with 
this   money   bullocks,"    &c.    (ver.    17). 
And  the  residue  of  the  money  was  to  be 
appropriated  to  such  religious  uses  as 
seemed  good  to  Ezra  and  to  his  brethren. 
"And   whatsoever  shall  seem  good   to 
thee  and  to  thy  brethren,"  (fee.  (ver.  18). 
(4.)  Authority  to  obtain  further  needful 
supplies  from  the  royal  treasury  in  Syria. 
"And  whatever  more  shall  be  needful 
for  the  house  of  thy  God,"  (fee.  (ver.  20). 
The   requirements  at   Jerusalem    could 
not  be  fully  known  by  Ezra  until  he 
had  looked    into    the    state    of    affairs 
there ;  hence    this    warrant   concerning 
further  supplies  was  both  thoughtfully 
and    generously    given.     And    such    a 
use  of    royal  revenues   was    both    wise 
and  worthy  in  the  highest  degree.     (5.) 
Authority  to   appoint   magistrates   and 
judges  with  fu  II  judicial  powers.     "And 
thou  Ezra,  after  the  wisdom  of  thy  God 
that  is  in  thine  hand,  set  magistrates 
and  judges,"  (fee.  (vers.  25,  26).  Observe  : 
(i.)     Their    jurisdiction    was    over   the 
Jews  and  the  proselytes  to  the  Jewish 
religion.     They  were  to  "judge  all  the 
people   that  are   beyond  the   river,   all 
such   as  know  the  laws  of  thy  God," 
(fee.      (ii.)  Full   power  was  granted   to 
them  for   maintaining   their   authority 
and   enforcing   their    decisions.      They 
were  authorised  to  inflict  the  severest 
penalties    which    the    law    prescribed. 
"  Whosoever  will  not  do  the  law  of  thy 
God  "(fee.   (ver.  26).     They  were  "re- 

111 


OHAP.  Til. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


sponsible    to    the   king   alone    for   the 
exercise  of  tlieir  authority." 

2.  Those  which  are  addressed  to  the 
Persian  treaaurers  in  Syria.  "And  I, 
even  I  Artaxerxes  the  king,  do  make  a 
decree  to  all  the  treasurers  which  are 
beyond  the  river,"  &c.  (vers.  21-24). 
These  commands  refer  to  two  things — 
1.  7'o  contributions  which  tliey  were  to 
make  to  Ezra,  They  were  to  furnish 
him  with  certain  supplies  for  the  service 
of  the  Temple  of  the  God  of  heaven, 
according  to  his  request.  (1.)  These 
supplies  were  liberal.  *'  Unto  an  hun- 
dred talents  of  silver,"  (fee.  (ver.  22,  and 
see  explanatory  note).  (2.)  These  sup- 
plies were  to  be  quickly  and  fully  fur- 
nished. '*  Whatsoever  Ezra  the  ])riest, 
the  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of 
heaven,  shall  require  of  you,  it  be  done 
speedily.  .  .  .  Whatsoever  is  com- 
manded by  the  God  of  heaven,  let  it  be 
completely  done,"  <fec.  (3.)  The  reason 
assigned  for  furnishing  these  supplies  is 
significant.  "  For  why  should  there  be 
wrath  against  the  realm  of  the  king  and 
his  sons?"  This  inquiry  implies  a  con- 
viction of  several  things  : — e.g.,  that  the 
God  of  heaven  is  almighty ;  that  the 
neglect  of  His  worship  was  likely  to 
awaken  His  anger  ;  that  His  anger  should 
be  earnestly  dreaded  and  deprecated  ; 
and  that  a  liberal  regard  for  His  worship 
was  likely  to  secure  His  favour.  2.  To 
exemptions  from  taxation  which  they  were 
to  make.  Every  minister  of  the  Temple, 
from  the  high  priest  to  the  humblest  of 
the  Nethinim,  was  to  be  entirely  re- 
lieved of  government  taxation.  "  Also 
we  certify  you,  that  touching  any  of  the 
priests  and  Levites,"  <fec.  (ver.  24).  This 
was  at  once  a  liberal  favour  and  an  hon- 
ourable distinction  for  all  those  whom 
it  Concerned. 

This  official  letter  reflects  very  great 
credit  upon  Artaxerxes.  It  is,  as  M. 
Henry  observes,  "  to  the  praise  of  this 
heathen  king,  that  he  honoured  the  God 
of  Israel  though  His  worshippers  were 
a  despicable  handful  of  poor  men,  who 
were  not  able  to  bear  the  charges  of  their 
own  religion,  and  were  now  his  vassals, 
and  that,  though  he  was  not  wrought 
upon  to  quit  his  own  superstitions,  yet 
he  protected  and  encouraged  the  Jews  in 
112 


their  religion,  and  did  not  only  say,  *  Ba 
you  warmed,  and  be  you  filled,'  but  gaye 
them  such  things  as  they  needed." 

III.  The  spirit  of  this  commission. 

The  letter  indicates  clearly  a  spirit 
of— 

1.  Great  reverence  for  God,  Thrice  it 
speaks  of  Him  as  "  the  God  of  heaven," 
thus  showing  that  Jehovah  was  regarded 
by  the  king  not  as  a  mere  local  deity, 
but  as  the  Supreme  Being.  And  the 
inquiry,  "  Why  should  there  be  wrath 
against  the  realm  of  the  king  and  his 
sons?"  implies  (as  we  have  mentioned 
above)  certain  important  convictions  con- 
cerning Jehovah,  God  of  Israel,  (a). 

2.  Profound  respect  for  the  law  of 
God.  "  According  to  the  law  of  thy 
God  which  is  in  thine  hand  "  (ver.  14). 
*'  Do  after  the  will  of  your  God  "  (ver. 
18).  "  Whatsoever  is  commanded  by 
the  God  of  heaven,  let  it  be  completely 
done,"  (fee.  (ver.  23).  Ezra  is  commis- 
sioned to  teach  those  perscms  the  laws 
of  God  who  did  not  know  them  (ver. 
25).  And,  according  to  ver.  26,  the  law 
of  Jehovah  was  made  the  law  of  Ar- 
taxerxes so  far  as  the  Jews  were  con- 
cerned. *'  The  law  of  thy  God,  and  the 
law  of  the  king."  (6). 

3.  Sincere  regard  for  the  worship  of 
God  (vers.  15-24).  The  munificence  of 
the  royal  grant  for  this  worship  indi- 
cates the  depth  and  sincerity  of  his  re- 
gard for  it. 

4.  Hearty  appreciation  of  the  char- 
acter of  a  good  man.  That  this  large 
and  liberal  commission  was  granted  to 
Ezra  in  answer  to  his  request  is  an  evi- 
dence— (1.)  That  the  life  of  Ezra  must 
have  been  distinguished  by  wisdom,  up- 
rightness, and  piety.  (2.)  That  Arta- 
xerxes sincerely  appreciated  the  wisdom 
and  worth  of  Ezra,  for  in  honouring  him 
the  king  seems  to  have  taken  pleasure. 
This  letter  is  greatly  to  the  praise  of 
both  the  monarch  of  Persia  and  the 
scribe  of  the  law  of  Jehovah,  (c). 

Conclusion  : 

The  liberal  gifts  of  Artaxerxes  for  the 
support  of  the  worship  of  God  may  be 
exhibited  as  — 

1.  A  rebuke  to  the  parsimony  of  many 
Christians  in  this  respect, 

2.  An  example  to  all  Christians,  (d). 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAP.  TH. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  How  should  we  reverence  that  God  that 
hath  a  throne  encompassed  with  such  glorious 
creatures  as  angels,  whose  faces  we  are  not 
able  to  behold  though  shadowed  in  assumed 
bodies  1  How  should  we  fear  the  Lord  of 
Hosts,  that  hath  so  many  armies  at  His 
command  in  the  heavens  above,  and  in  the 
earth  below,  whom  He  can  dispose  to  the 
exact  obedience  of  His  will  !  How  should 
men  be  afraid  to  censure  any  of  His  actions, 
to  sit  judge  of  tiieir  Judge,  and  call  Him  to 
an  account  at  their  bar !  How  should  such 
an  earthworm,  a  mean  animal  as  man,  be 
afraid  to  speak  irreverently  of  so  great  a  King! 
Not  to  fear  Him,  not  to  reverence  Him,  is  to 
pull  His  throne  from  under  Him,  and  make 
Him  of  a  lower  authority  than  ourselves,  or 
any  creature  that  we  reverence  more. — S. 
Ckarnocke,  B.D. 

(6)  We  cannot  be  too  strongly  impressed 
with  the  goodness  or  benevolence  of  the  Divine 
law.  Right  and  good  are  correlative  ideas, 
but  we  are  not  equally  affected  by  them.  More 
Bpontaneously  can  we  conclude  that  all  good 
is  right,  than  that  all  right  is  good.  And  we 
more  slowly  confess  the  good  of  law,  because 
we  commonly  regard  law  itself  as  restraint 
rather  than  as  protection.  We  forget  that  it 
is  far  more  restraint  upon  others  than  upon 
ourselves,  and  that  our  protection  is  in  that 
restraint.  Every  interdict  is  on  all,  and  each 
one  obtains  the  benefit.  Every  obligation 
binds  the  whole  race  to  the  security  and  wel- 
fare of  the  individual.  The  best  definition  of 
liberty  is,  protection  from  wrong.  And  if  we 
inspect  the  great  social  law,  what  is  it  but  a 
fence  and  safeguard  thrown  around  our  dearest, 
most  precious,  interests?  Its  heed  holds  back 
that  which  receives  every  denouncement,  when 
we  call  it  lawless.  Its  observance  defends  the 
allegiance  of  our  household,  the  sanctity  of  our 
life,  the  legitimacy  of  our  offspring,  the  posses- 
sion of  our  store,  the  reputation  of  our  char- 
acter, even  to  the  proscription  and  to  the 
driving  from  the  heart  of  any  secret  wish  that 
might  seek  to  injure  us.  It  sets  a  seal  upon 
all.  Our  forbearance  to  aggrieve  others,  which 
must  be  harmful  to  ourself,  is  repaid  by  for- 
bidding any  grievance  against  our  welfare  from 
the  millions  upon  millions  who  might  other- 
wise  inflict  it.  The  duty  which  every  man 
owes  to  love  us  as  himself,  is  a  blessed  and 
rich  return  of  our  duty  thus  ourselves  to  love 
every  man.  The  rule  commands  and  obliges 
every  man  to  love  me,  to  uphold  me, — invests 
him  as  my  brother,  authorises  him  as  my 
keeper,  arms  him  as  my  defender,  pledges 
him  as  my  surety,  adorns  him  as  my  example, 
couples  him  as  my  co-heir.  It  is  the  law  of 
love.  It  is  the  perfect  commutative  justice. 
How  benign  must  be  the  univeral  regulation, 
all  whose  requirements,  bearings,  consequences, 
motires,  aims,  are  falfilled  by  love  1    The  same 


reflections  are  appropriate  with  respect  to  the 
claims  of  the  Deity.  .  .  .  Let  us  honour  law 
as  the  crowning  blessing  of  blessings.  Let  us 
remember  that  intellectual  creatureship  with- 
out it  is  as  inconceivable  as  it  would  be  in- 
supportable. Let  us  acknowledge  it  as  the 
most  sublime  of  ideas,  the  true  exponent  of 
happiness,  the  proper  basis  of  dignity,  the 
exclusive  shield  of  freedom,  the  pure  fountain 
of  goodwill, — inaugurating  truth  in  its  state, 
decking  benevolence  in  its  majesty,  lifting 
right  to  its  throne,  and  then  proclaiming  with 
imperial  authority  that  all  this  is  but  God,  and 
that,  therefore,  there  is  none  good  but  One, 
that  is  God  \—R.  W.  Hamilton,  LL.D.,  D.D. 

(<?)  There  is  something  in  a  holy  life  which 
wonderfully  conciliates  the  minds  of  men.  At 
first,  indeed,  like  a  strong  influx  of  light,  it 
oflfends  their  eyes  ;  and  the  beholders,  unable 
to  bear  the  efi*ulgence  of  its  beams,  turn  away 
from  it,  or  perhaps  desire  its  utter  extinction. 
But  when  it  has  shone  for  a  long  time  before 
them,  and  they  have  had  sufficient  opportunity 
to  contemplate  its  worth,  they  are  constrained 
to  acknowledge  that  **the  righteous  is  more 
excellent  than  his  neighbour  ;"  and  they  begin 
to  venerate  the  character,  whose  virtues  at 
first  were  occasions  of  offence. — C.  Simeon, 
M.A, 

{d)  In  collecting  money  for  the  repairs  of 
the  Temple,  which  Athaliah  and  her  sons  had 
dilapidated,  the  good  priest  did  a  thing  worth 
noticing.  He  had  a  chest  placed  right  along- 
side the  brazen  altar  in  front  of  the  Temple, 
and  in  the  lid  of  the  chest  was  a  hole  bored,  and 
into  the  hole  the  priests,  selected  for  the  purpose, 
dropped  the  coins  which  the  people  brought, 
either  as  their  half-shekel  tax,  or  as  the  offer- 
ing for  vows,  or  as  a  freewill  offering  to  the 
Temple  of  Jehovah.  When  I  read  this  story 
and  then  read  from  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians,  "  Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week** 
(the  Lord's-day,  mind  you  !)  **  let  every  one 
of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  God  hath  pros- 
pered him,"  I  cannot  help  thinking  that  ^m??5r 
is  a  part  of  worship!  Close  alongside  of  the 
altar,  where  the  type  of  the  Lamb  of  God  was 
offered  up,  was  the  money  chest.  How  exalted 
giving  to  the  Lord's  cause  is  in  this  light ! 
And  Paul  calls  it  Suiidav  work,  puts  it  with 
prayer,  and  praise,  and  Bible  instruction,  and 
all  that  is  improving  to  the  soul.  I  take  it 
that  if  all  Christians  in  our  land  would  enter- 
tain the  notion  of  Jehoiada  and  Paul  about 
giving  to  the  Lord  (and  it  is  not  their  notion, 
but  the  Holy  Ghost's),  our  spiritual  temple 
would  not  be  so  dilapidated — thousands  would 
flow  forth  from  willing  hearts  where  now 
hundreds  are  squeezed  out.  Take  the  idea, 
my  brother  with  the  long  purse  ;  yes,  and  my 
brother  with  the  short  purse,  too.  Make  your 
giving  a  part  of  your  worship,  and  then  thank 
Jehoiada  and  Paul,  but  above  all  the  Lord, 
for  making  your  Christian  life  the  happier, — 
Dr.  Crosby^ 


113 


OHAP.  YIl. 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


Reasons  for  Active  Devotbdness  to  the  Cause  of  God. 

(Verse  23.) 


Here  Artaxerxes  issues  a  decree,  gives 
wealth,  displays  great  zeal  for  God,  and 
as  though  ambitious  to  sink  the  monarch 
in  the  preacher,  exhorts  to  diligence  and 
fervour  in  the  work.  "Whatsoever  is 
commanded  by  the  God  of  heaven,"  ckc. 
We  may  well  sit  at  the  feet  of  this  lord 
of  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  pro- 
vinces, and  learn  from  heathen  lips  the 
extent  of  our  duty  and  the  nature  of 
our  obligations.     We  plead  for  missions. 

I.  To  assign  some  reasons  for  active 
devotedness  to  the  cause  of  God  and 
truth  in  the  world. 

1.  From  the  Divine  authority  hy  which 
it  is  enjoined.  It  "is  commanded  by  the 
God  of  heaven."  We  love  to  see  the 
estimate  of  Christian  duties  from  the 
men  of  the  world,  who,  while  they  are 
blind  as  bats  in  discerning  their  own 
defects,  Are  clear-sighted  as  eagles  to 
mark  the  inconsistencies  of  the  professed 
loUowers  of  Christ.  They  often  take 
a  just  measure  of  our  obligations,  and 
reason  with  wonderful  exactness  and 
form  just  conclusions,  from  the  prin- 
ciples which  we  lay  down,  as  to  the 
course  which  we  ought  to  follow, — ^just 
as  Artaxerxes  did  here.  The  text  is 
remarkable  from  the  quarter  whence  it 
conies ;  not  from  the  hovel  of  poverty, 
but  from  the  throne  of  power ;  not  from 
one  who  prophesied  in  sackcloth,  but 
from  one  clothed  in  the  purple  and  fine 
linen  of  royal  houses. 

The  law  of  love  to  the  perishing 
heathen  is  clearly  laid  down.  We  labour 
under  no  uncertainty  upon  the  subject. 
We  are  not  left  to  the  trembling  ifs 
and  conjectures  of  mere  circuitous  and 
inductive  reasoning,  but  the  rule  is  ex- 
press and  final :  "Thou  shalt  open  thine 
hand  wide  unto  thy  brother."  The  same 
law  which  says,  "Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heart," 
says,  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour 
as  thyself."  We  should  like  to  see  in- 
scribed over  all  our  missionary  institu- 
tions the  law,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would 
that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even 
%o  to  them."     The  same  God  who  bids 


us  "believe  In  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ* 
that  we  may  be  saved,  bids  us  "  Go  into 
all  the  world,"  <fec.  God  makes  man  the 
medium  of  His  blessings  to  man.  He 
blesses  us  by  making  us  blessings.  The 
harvest  of  immortal  souls  is  to  be 
gathered  in,  but  human  hands  are  to  be 
employed  in  the  work.  The  scattered 
flock  of  Christ,  wandering  upon  the  dark 
mountains  of  the  Eastern  and  Western 
world,  claim  your  ready  aid,  and  Jesus 
commissions  you  to  bring  them  into  the 
fold. 

2.  From  the  urgent  necessity  which 
exists  for  your  exertions.  "In  Judah 
was  God  known ;  His  name  was  great 
in  Israel ; "  but  His  spiritual  claims 
were  unknown  and  disregarded  every- 
where else.  And  the  Gospel  cannot  be 
proclaimed  in  the  heathen  world  except 
Christians  proclaim  it ;  for  *'  how  shall 
they  call  on  Him  in  whom  they  have 
not  believed?"  <fec.  (Rom.  x.  14,  15). 
We  caimot  plead  ignorance  of  the  state 
of  the  heathen  world,  or  of  the  religious 
destitution  of  the  heathen  without  the 
Gospel.  It  was  never  safe  to  use  this 
plea  as  an  excuse  for  indifference,  but 
it  is  wholly  impossible  to  urge  it  now, 
"  We  know  that  the  whole  world  lieth  in 
wickedness."  "  We  know  that  the  whole 
creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain," 
&c.  The  islands  and  continents  of  the 
kingdoms  under  darkness  have  been 
completely  explored.  The  reports  of 
travellers,  merchants,  missionaries,  and 
scientific  men  only  confirm  the  testimony 
of  Scripture  as  to  the  moral  misery  and 
degradation  of  mankind  without  the 
Gospel.  Where  Christianity  is  not,  the 
race  is  stationary,  if  not  retrograde  ; 
social  life  loses  its  security  and  charm, 
<fec. 

3.  From  the  fearful  conseqiiences  of 
the  neglect  of  this  duty.  "For  why 
should  there  be  wrath  against  the  realm 
of  the  king  and  his  sons  1 "  The  king 
feared  God's  anger,  and  apprehended 
that  the  neglect  of  Zion's  interests  would 
be  fatal.  He  could  not  be  ignorant  of 
the  ruin  that  had  overtaken  the  Pharaohs 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


OHAP.  TO. 


of  Egypt,  Sennacherib  of  Assyria,  and 
the  monarchs  of  Babylon  ;  and  he 
trembled  for  himself,  for  his  sons,  and 
for  the  future  stability  of  the  Persian 
throne. 

It  is  not  safe  for  individuals  to  oppose 
the  kingdom  of  Christ.  They  who  "break 
His  bands  asunder,"  do  it  at  their  own 
peril.  And  there  is  no  neutrality :  not 
to  assist  is  to  oppose ;  not  to  seek  Christ 
is  to  neglect  Him.  Every  one  of  us  is 
taking  a  side — for  Christ  against  Satan, 
or  for  Satan  against  Christ.  It  is  not 
safe  for  churches  to  do  so.  What  has 
become  of  the  Jewish  church  1  of  the 
seven  churches  of  Asia  1  &c.  Their 
golden  lamps  have  been  extinguished. 
It  is  not  safe  for  nations  to  neglect  the 
interests  of  religion.  "  The  nation  and 
kingdom  that  will  not  serve  Thee  shall 
perish,"  whether  that  nation  be  Persia 
or  Judea,  Carthage  or  Rome,  Spain  or 
England.  I  should  tremble  for  Britain's 
safety,  if  she  forgot  her  obligations  to 
the  God  of  the  Bible,  and  failed  to  pay 
some  small  fraction  of  the  mighty  debt 
she  owes  to  the  Providence  that  has 
exalted  her,  by  extending  the  Gospel. 
God  has  not  raised  her  so  high  for  any 
mean  and  ignoble  purpose.  He  has  not 
given  her  the  empire  of  the  seas,  and  a 


voice  among  the  nations  at  which  the 
mightiest  tremble,  and  an  extent  of 
colonial  territory  heretofore  unknown, 
merely  for  purposes  of  national  aggran- 
disement or  personal  pride ;  but  to 
render  us,  as  we  hope,  the  world's  bene- 
factors, the  heralds  of  the  Cross,  the 
willing  harbingers  of  the  onward  triumphs 
of  the  Prince  of  Peace.  Fulfilling  this 
duty,  Britain  stands  :  failing  to  fulfil  it, 
Britain  falls;  for  God's  wrath  will  be 
against  the  realm  of  the  Queen  and  her 
sons. 

4.  From  the  success  which  has  attended 
the  fulfilment  of  this  duty. 

il.  To  offer  some  suggestions  as  to 
the  spirit  and  mode  in  which  this  work 
should  be  carried  on. 

1.  Earnestly^  without  remissness.  "Let 
it  be  diligently  done."  Learn  a  lesson 
from  the  activity  of  the  opposite  party. 
The  infidel  and  socialist  come  into  your 
workshops  and  manufactories.  The 
emissaries  of  the  Papacy  are  not  idle. 
Popery  is  fighting,  not  for  existence,  but 
for  dominion. 

2.  Prayerfully,  without  pride. 

3.  Speedily f  without  delay. 


— Samtiel  Thodey, 


The  Decree  of  Artaxerxes. 
(Verse  2S.) 


The  words  before  us  breathe  a  spirit 
which  we  should  scarcely  have  expected 
to  find  in  a  heathen  prince ;  but  it  is 
remarkable  that  some  of  the  richest 
eff'usions  of  piety  in  the  whole  Scriptures 
proceeded  from  heathen  monarchs,  e.g., 
Darius  and  Nebuchadnezzar.  To  make 
a  due  improvement  of  the  words  before 
us  we  shall  consider  them — 

I.  In  reference  to  the  Jewish 
Church. 

1.  The  state  of  the  Jewish  Church  at 
this  time  is  not  unlike  to  that  in  which 
it  was  in  the  days  of  Ezra.  Though  the 
Temple  worship  was  restored,  it  was 
carried  on  by  the  Jews  without  any  zeal 
for  God's  honour,  or  any  of  that  spiri- 
tuality of  mind  which  is  the  very  essence 
of  all  acceptable  worship.     Nor  was  the 


law  of  God  regarded  amongst  them  with 
any  just  measure  of  submission  ;  for,  in 
direct  opposition  to  its  most  authoritative 
dictates,  they  formed  connections  with 
the  heathen  round  about  them,  &c.  (chap. 
ix.  1-9).  So  at  this  time  the  Jewish 
people  are  at  a  very  low  ebb,  both  in 
respect  of  morals  and  religion.  ...  It 
is  impossible  to  behold  them  in  their 
religious  services,  and  not  see  how  thick 
a  veil  is  yet  upon  their  hearts.  Nor  do 
they  manifest  any  respect  for  their  own 
law  in  its  sublimer  precepts.  Of  real 
holiness  of  heart  and  life  they  are 
ignorant  in  the  extreme. 

2.  But  to  us  is  giveny  no  less  than  to 
Ezra,  a  command  to  advance  their  welfare, 
Ezra  received  a  commission  from  Ar- 
taxerxes to  go  and  rectify  the  abuses 

115 


CHAP.  TD. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


which  obtained  at  Jerusalem,  <fec.  And 
have  we  no  command  to  seek  the  welfare 
of  that  degraded  people  1  Are  we  not 
\c\^.  what  God's  purpose  is  respecting 
iL.'.m;  namely,  to  "raise  up  the  taber- 
iifiele  of  David,"  &c.?  (Amos.  ix.  11). 
This  is  God's  express  command  to  us 
strangers  of  the  Gentiles  :  "  The  sons 
of  strangers  shall  build  up  thy;  walls,** 
&c.  (Isa.  Ix.  10-1 2).  With  their  material 
temple  we  have  nothing  to  do  ;  but  for 
the  erection  of  God's  spiritual  temple 
amongst  them  we  are  bound  to  labour, 
proclaiming  to  them  the  advent  of  their 
Messiah, saying,  "Behold  your  salvation," 
&c.  (Isa.  Ixii.  11;  xl.  9). 

3.  In  this  work  we  should  engage  with 
all  diligence.  It  is  not  to  be  effected 
by  good  wishes  merely,  but  by  great 
exertions.  It  was  .not  without  great 
exertions  on  the  part  of  men  that  the 
Gentiles  were  converted  to  the  faith  of 
Christ ;  and  the  same  kind  of  efforts 
which  the  apostles  made  for  the  conver- 
sion of  the  Gentiles  we  are  to  make  for 
the  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  the  favour 
of  their  God.  This  is  our  duty.  God 
has  told  us  that  He  has  made  us  the 
depositaries  of  His  Gospel,  not  for  our 
benefit  merely,  but  for  the  benefit  of 
His  outcast  people :  "  As  ye  in  times 
past,"  &c.  (Rom.  xi.  30,  31). 

II.  In  reference  to  the  Church  which 
is  amongst  us. 

1.  Ye,  brethren,  need  to  have  God^s 
work  advanced  in  the  midst  of  you.  Ye 
are  God's  house  (Heb.  iii.  6) ;  ye  also 
are  called  tlie  temples  of  God,  in  which 
He  lives  and  dwells  (2  Cor.  vi.  16). 
But  in  whom  is  God  honoured  as  He 
ouobt  to  be  ?  In  whom  are  found 
sacrifices  so  pure,  so  spiritual,  so  abun- 
dant, as  God  calls  for  at  our  hands  ? 
Truly  there  is  much  amiss  in  all  of  us ; 
much  evil  to  be  rectified,  and  much 
defective  to  be  supplied. 

2.  /  call  upon  you,  then,  to  engage  in 
the  Lord! 8  work  with  your  whole  hearts. 
We  will  suppose  that  you  are  built  upon 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  foundation 
which  God  has  laid  in  Zion  (Isa.  xxviii. 
16).  But  no  man  is  contented  with 
having  laid  a  foundation ;  he  proceeds 
to  build  upon  it,  and  never  considers 
his  work  as  finished  till  he  has  brought 

116 


forth  the  top-stone.  So  it  must  be  in 
this  spiritual  building  which  is  begun 
within  us.  We  must  come  to  Christ 
daily  "  as  lively  stones,  that  we  may  be 
built  up,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  ii.  4-6).  To  this, 
then,  would  I  call  you,  &c.  Oh  !  learn 
of  a  heathen  to  venerate  the  Divine 
authority,  and  to  exert  yourselves  to 
the  uttermost  to  prom'ote  the  Divine 
glory. 

Let  me  call  you  to  obey  this  imperial 
mandate — 

\,  In  a  way  of  personal  reformation. 
At  the  time  of  the  Passover,  the  Jews 
swept  every  corner  of  their  houses,  in 
order  to  purge  from  them  every  particle  of 
leaven  which  might  have  escaped  their 
more  general  and  superficial  search.  And 
this  is  what  we  are  called  to  do.  Alas  ! 
there  are  many  evil  dispositions  which 
lurk  within  us,  and  which  a  superficial 
survey  will  not  enable  us  to  detect. 
Pride,  envy,  discontent,  <fec.  Oh,  be 
diligent  in  "  purging  out  this  old  leaven, 
that  ys  may  be  a  new  lump"  (1   Cor. 

2.  In  a  way  of  ministerial  exertion. 
In  this,  persons  of  rank  and  influence 
ought  to  take  the  lead.  Who  can  see  a 
heathen  monarch  thus  interesting  him- 
self for  his  Jewish  subjects,  and  not 
wish  that  all  monarchs  with  "  their 
counsellors"  were  embarked  in  this  holy 
cause  %  In  this  the  clergy,  also,  should 
be  most  distinguished.  Gladly  did 
Ezra  avail  himself  of  the  liberty  accorded 
to  him  of  going  to  Jerusalem  for  the 
purpose  of  remedying  the  evils  which 
obtained  there,  &c.  It  was  an  office  of 
great  labour,  yet  he  willingly  undertook 
it.  And  does  not  this  show,  how  those 
who  are  distinguished  for  rank  and 
learning  amongst  the  clergy  should  em- 
ploy their  talents  and  influence  for  the 
Lord? 

The  readiness  with  which  the  people 
of  Babylon  concurred  in  this  good  work 
shows  how  all  classes  of  the  community 
amongst  ourselves  should  unite  in  the 
work.  They  contributed  no  less  than 
eighty  thousand  pounds  in  silver,  and 
one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds 
in  gold,  besides  a  vast  abundance  of 
wheat,  &c.  This  was  done  by  heathens 
to  honour  the  God  of  the  Jews.     What, 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAF.  Til. 


then,  should  not  be  done  by  us  Chris-      Him  for  all  the  wonders  of  redeeming 
tians,  who  profess  to  serve  the  God  of      love  ? — (7.  Simeon,  M.A, 
the  Jews,  and  to  feel  our  obligations  to 


Exemplary  Praise. 
(Verses  27,  28.) 


L  The  true  offerers  of  praise.     We 

regard  Ezra  as  an  example  of  the  true 
and  acceptable  worshipper.  He  exhibits 
in  these  verses — 

1.  Unafeded  humilit//,  '  There  is  not 
here  the  least  indication  of  self-lauda- 
tion or  self-commendation.  All  thought 
of  his  own  character  and  influence  and 
work  seems  lost  in  his  admiration  and 
thankfulness  for  the  doings  of  God. 
Humility  is  always  becoming  in  man  ; 
but  in  drawing  near  to  the  great  and 
mighty,  the  holy  and  blessed  God, 
humility  is  especially  incumbent  upon 
us.  (a). 

2.  Sincere  piety.  Of  this  here  are 
two  evidences — (1.)  Ezra  traces  all 
good  to  God.  He  looks  above  secon- 
dary causes  to  the  great  First  Cause. 
The  godly  soul  sees  the  hand  of  God 
in  all  the  worthy  purposes  and  kind 
actions  of  men,  and  in  all  that  is  true 
and  good  in  life.  "Every  good  gift 
and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above," 
(fee.  (6).  (2.)  Ezra  delights  in  the 
worship  of  God.  It  was  matter  of  joy 
to  him  that  the  king  designed  "to 
beautify  the  house  of  the  Lord  which 
is  in  Jerusalem."  "We  read  not  of 
any  orders  given  to  paint  or  gild  it,  or 
to  garnish  it  with  precious  stones,  but 
to  be  sure  that  the  ordinances  of  God 
were  administered  there  constantly,  and 
carefully,  and  exactly,  according  to  the 
institution ;  and  that  was  indeed  the 
beautifying  of  the  Temple.'*  When 
God  is  honoured  by  the  erection  of 
beautiful  temples,  and  more,  by  the 
presentation  of  spiritual  and  reverent 
worship,  the  good  man  realises  great  joy 
of  spirit. 

3.  Practical  religiousness.  Ezra's  pious 
feelings  were  expressed  in  consistent 
actions.  He  blessed  God  in  words, 
and  sought  to  bless  Him  in  works  also. 
"And  I  was  strengthened  as  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  my  God  was  upon  me,  and  I 


gathered  together  out  of  Israel  chief 
men  to  go  up  with  me."  The  noblest 
praise  that  we  can  present  to  God  is 
that  of  hearty  conformity  to  His  will. 
"  Thanksgiving  is  a  good  thing ;  thanks- 
living  is  better,  (c). 

IL  The  grand  Object  of  praise. 
"  Blessed  be  Jehovah  God  of  our  fa- 
thers." 

L  The  Supreme  Being,  "Jehovah 
God."  "Jehovah,"  i.e.  the  Self-Exis- 
tent, the  Eternal,  the  Unchangeable 
One.  "  God," — the  primary  idea  of  the 
word  is  the  Strong  One,  the  Almighty. 
The  true  object  of  worship  for  man  is 
the  Omnipotent  and  Eternal,  the  Su- 
premely Great  and  Good. 

2.  The  Supreme  Being  in  covenant 
relation  with  His  worshippers.  "  Jeho- 
vah my  God  "  (ver.  28).  The  Israelites 
had  entered  into  solemn  covenant 
relations  with  God  (Exod.  xxiv.  3-8). 
God  by  the  Psalmist  speaks  of  them 
thus :  "  My  saints ;  those  that  have 
made  a  covenant  with  Me  by  sacrifice." 
Again  He  says :  "  I  will  walk  among 
you,  and  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall 
be  My  people"  (Lev.  xxvi.  3-13).  And 
the  true  worshippers  to-day  are  in  cove- 
nant relation  with  God;  they  have 
embraced  Him  as  their  Supreme  Good, 
and  have  fully  given  themselves  to 
Him. 

3.  The  Supreme  Being  whom  our 
fathers  worshipped.  There  is  pathos  in 
the  expression  "Jehovah  God  of  our 
fathers."  That  they  worshipped  Him 
binds  us  tenderly  yet  tenaciously  to 
His  service.  There  is  inspiration  also 
here.  He  who  proved  Himself  the 
unfailing  Friend  and  Helper  of  our 
fathers  is  worthy  of  our  trust :  He  will 
not  fail  us,  &c 

•*  In  Thee  our  fathers  put  their  trust ; 
Thy  ways  they  humbly  trod  : 
Honoured  and  sacred  is  their  dust^ 
And  still  they  live  to  God. 

117 


OHAP.  TIX. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


Heirs  to  their  faith,  their  hope,  their  prayers 

We  the  same  patli  pursue  : 
Entail  the  blessing  to  our  heirs  ; 

Lord,  show  Thy  promise  true.'* 

— Conder.  (d). 

III.  Good  reasons  for  praise.  *'Blessed 
be  Jehovah  God  of  our  fathers,  which 
hath  put,"  (fee. 

1.  He  inspires  the  worthy  purposes 
of  men.  He  put  it  into  '*  the  king's 
heart  to  beautify  the  house  of  Jehovah 
which  is  in  Jerusalem."  "  The  king's 
heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  as  the 
rivers  of  water ;  He  turneth  it  whither- 
soever He  will.'*  '*  All  holy  desires,  all 
good  counsels,  and  all  just  works  do 
proceed  "  from  Him. 

2.  He  beneficently  influences  the  moral 
judgments  of  men.  "And  hath  ex- 
tended mercy  unto  me  before  the  king, 
and  his  counsellors,  and  all  his  mighty 
princes."  The  influence  of  Ezra  over 
the  sovereign  and  these  mighty  princes 
was  very  great ;  and  to  his  mind  the 
secret  of  it  was  that  God  had  inclined 
them  to  regard  him  with  esteem,  and 
to  give  their  judgment  i'lFi  his  favour. 

3.  He  invigorates  the  heart  and  life 
of  His  servants,  "  And  I  was  strength- 
ened as  the  hand  of  Jehovah  my  God 
was  upon  me,"  <kc.  God  encouraged 
His  servant  in  order  that  he  might 
carry  out  his  sacred  mission,  and  he  at 
once  proceeded  to  do  so.  The  strength 
which  God  gives  must  be  used  in  ac- 
cordance with  His  will,  and  for  His 
glory.  "  If  God  gives  us  His  hand,  we 
are  bold  and  cheerful ;  if  He  withdraws 
it,  we  are  weak  as  water.  Whatever 
service  we  are  enabled  to  do  for  God 
and  our  generation,  God  must  have  all 
the  glory  of  it.  Strength  for  it  is 
derived  from  Him,  and  therefore  the 
praise  of  it  must  be  given  to  Him."  (e). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(o)  Two  men  went  np  into  the  Temple  to 
pray,  the  one  a  very  righteous  man,  as  he 
seemed  to  himself  and  to  others  ;  but  God, 
vho  seeth  not  as  man  seeth,  accounted  the 
unrighteous  man  the  more  righteous  of  the 
two.  So  have  I  seen  two  flowers,  side  by 
side,  the  one  erect,  and  without  a  misgiving, 
looking  up  to  heaven  ;  the  other,  with  its 
head  all  adown  upon  its  breast,  looking  only 
to  the    earth.     But   the  flower  that  looked 

118 


earthward,  as  though  not  worthy  to  look 
heavenward,  Avas  the  more  heavenly  of  the 
two.  Then  said  I,  Pride  and  self-sufficiency 
are  a  miserable  insufficiency ;  but  meekness 
and  self-distrust  are  allied  to  All-sufficiency. 
Question  :  Does  God  always  give  least  to 
those  who  think  themselves  greatest,  and  most 
to  those  who  think  least  of  themselves  ? 
Answer  :  Humility  hath  the  palm. — Joh/n 
Pulsford. 

(6)  As  rivers  empty  their  streams  again  into 
the  bosom  of  the  sea,  whence  they  at  first  re- 
ceived them ;  so  men  give  the  praise  of  what 
they  do  unto  that  by  which  they  do  it.  If 
they  attempt  any  enterprise  with  their  own  wit, 
you  shall  have  them  bring  the  sacrifice  to 
their  own  wit  or  net.  But  faith  teaches  the 
creature  to  blot  out  his  own  name,  and  write 
the  name  of  God  in  its  room  upon  all  he  hath 
and  doth. — W.  Gurnall. 

What  I  have  done  is  worthy  of  nothing  but 
silence  and  forgetfulness  ;  but  what  God  has 
done  for  me  is  worthy  of  everlasting  and 
thankful  remembrance. — Bishop  HalU 

(c)  Holiness  was  meant,  our  New  Testa- 
ment tells  us,  for  everyday  use.  It  is  home- 
made and  home-worn.  Its  exercise  hardens 
the  bone,  and  strengthens  the  muscle  in  the 
body  of  character.  Holiness  is  religion  shin- 
ing. It  is  the  candle  lighted,  and  not  hid 
under  a  bushel,  but  lighting  the  house.  It  is 
religious  principle  put  into  motion.  It  is  the 
love  of  God  sent  forth  into  circulation,  on  the 
feet,  and  with  the  hands,  of  love  to  man.  It 
is  faith  gone  to  work.  It  is  charity  coined 
into  actions,  and  devotion  breathing  benedic- 
tions on  human  suffering,  while  it  goes  up  in 
intercessions  to  the  Father  of  all  pity.  Prayers 
that  show  no  answers  in  better  lives  are  not 
true  prayers.  Of  religion  without  holiness — 
or  the  spurious  pretence  current  under  that 
name — the  world  has  seen  enough  ;  it  has 
more  than  once  made  society,  with  all  its  re- 
forms, go  backward ;  it  has  sharpened  the 
spear  of  the  scorn er,  and  sealed  the  sceptic's 
unbelief.  It  has  hidden  the  Church  from  the 
market.  It  has  gone  to  the  conference  and 
communion-table,  as  to  a  sacred  wardrobe, 
where  badges  are  borrowed  to  cloak  the  ini- 
quities of  trade.  It  has  said  to  many  an  out- 
cast and  oppressed  class,  '*  Stand  by  thyself  ; 
the  Master's  feast  is  for  me,  and  not  for  you." 
It  has  thinned  the  ranks  of  open  disciples, 
and  treacherously  ofiered  to  objectors  the  van- 
tage-ground of  honesty.  My  friends,  get  faith, 
and  then  use  it.  Gain  holiness,  and  wear  it. 
Pray,  and  watch  while  you  pray.  Keep  the 
Sabbath  ;  keep  it  so  carefully  that  it  shall  keep 
you  all  the  week, — a  mutual  friendship.  Come 
to  the  church  ;  come  to  carry  the  church  back 
with  you,  not  in  its  professions  nor  its  external 
credit,  but  its  interior  substance,  into  a  con* 
sistent  holiness. — F.  D.  Huntington^  D.D. 

{d)  The  covenant  made  with  the  Patriarch 
was  made  with  Abraham  and  his  seed  after 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA.  chap.  TIM, 


him.     Throughout  the  Mosaic  period,  children  Prom  the   cheerless  gloom  of  non-existence 

were  included  with  their  fathers  in  all  the  He  waked  us  into  being  ;  He  ennobled  us  with 

blessings  of  the  elder  Testament.     "The  pro-  understanding  ;  He  taught  us  arts  to  promote 

mise  is  unto  you  and  your  cJiildreriy"  is  the  the  means  of  life  ;  He  commanded  the  prolific 

constant    doctrine    tlirough    all    God's    mes-  earth  to  yield  its  nurture ;  He  bade  the  ani- 

sages  to  the  Israelites.    We  are  expressly  told,  mals  to  own  us  as  their  lords.     For  us  the 

that  under  Christ,  in  the  New  Testament,  the  rains  descend  ;  for  us  the  sun  sheddeth  abroad 

same  covenant  is  renewed,  only  expanded  and  its  creative   beams  ;  the  mountains  rise,  the 

deepened.     Throughout,  the  law  of  descent  is  valleys  bloom,  offering  us  grateful  habitation 

carefully  respected.     The  hereditary  tie  is  re-  and  a  sheltering  retreat.     For  us  the  rivers 

cognised.     Offspring,   at  birth,  are  supposed  flow;  for  us  the  fountains  murmur;  the  sea 

to  be  bound  up  in  the  same  bond  of  Christian  opens  its  bosom  to  admit  our  commerce  ;  the 

privileges  and  helps  which  encircles  their  be-  earth   exhausts  its  stores  ;   each  new  object 

lieving  progenitors. — Ibid.  presents  a  new  enjoyment ;  all  nature  pouring 

her  treasures  at  our  feet,  through  the  boun- 

(e)  What  reward  shall   we  give  unto  the  teous  grace  of  Him  who  wills  that  all  be  ours. 

Lord  for  all  the  benefits  He  hath  bestowed  f  — BasU. 


CHAPTER  VIIL 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.]  This  chapter  contains — (i.)  A  list  of  the  heads  of 
houses,  with  the  number  of  adult  males  accompanying  each  of  them,  who  went  with  Ezra  from 
Babylon  to  Jerusalem  (vers.  1-14).  (ii.)  An  account  of  the  encampment  for  three  days  at  the 
river  Ahava,  and  the  doings  there  ;  viz.,  obtaining  ministers  for  the  Temple  service  (vers.  15- 
20) ;  proclaiming  and  observing  a  religious  fast  (vers.  21-23) ;  arranging  for  the  safe  keeping 
during  the  journey  of  the  offerings  and  the  precious  vessels  for  the  Temple  (vers.  24-30).  (iii.) 
A  brief  record  of  their  departure  from  Ahava  and  arrival  at  Jerusalem  (vers.  31,  32) ;  and  (iv. ) 
Of  the  careful  delivery  of  the  treasures  in  the  Temple  (vers.  33,  34),  the  offering  of  sacrifices 
to  God  (ver.  35),  and  delivering  their  commissions  unto  the  king's  lieutenants  (ver.  36). 

Ver.  1.  The  chief  of  their  fathers]  or,  "the  heads  of  their  families."  Keil :  "The  heads 
of  the  houses." 

Vers.  2-1.4]  This  list  is  parallel  with  that  of  chap.  ii.  3-19.  Many  of  th©  family  names 
(or,  as  Keil  calls  them,  "  desio:nations  of  races,"  e.g.  Pharosh,  Pahath-moab,  &c.)  are  common 
to  both  ;  while  some  are  found  in  each  which  are  absent  from  the  other.  The  presence  of  the 
same  family  names  **  in  both  lists  is  to  be  explained  by  the  circumstance  that  portions  of  "  such 
families  or  races  "returned  with  Zerubbabel,  and  that  the  rest  did  not  follow  till  Ezra's 
departure."  The  number  of  families  in  Ezra's  list  is  smaller  than  in  that  of  Zerubbabel,  and 
the  members  of  each  family  less  numerous.  The  total  number  of  adult  males,  including  Levitei 
and  Nethinim  (vers.  18-20),  who  returned  with  Ezra  was  1776,  according  to  this  list. 

Vers.  2,  3]  The  first  member  of  ver.  3  should  probably  be  joined  to  ver.  2:  Of  the  sons  of 
David ;  Hattush,  of  the  sons  of  Shecanlah]  It  is  almost  certain  that  this  is  the  Hattush  of 
1  Chron.  iii.  22,  the  son  of  Shemaiah  and  grandson  of  Shecaniah. 

Ver.  6]  The  Hebrew  text  seems  to  be  imperfect  here  by  reason  of  the  falling  out  of  a  name. 
Keil  suggests  that  the  reading,  as  in  the  LXX.,  should  be,  '*  Of  the  sons  of  Zattu,  Shecaniah, 
the  son  of  Jahaziel."     (Comp.  chap.  ii.  8.) 

Ver.  10]  A  similar  defect  seems  to  exist  in  the  text  of  this  verse.  The  deficiency  is  thus 
Buppiied  in  the  LXX.,  *'And  of  the  sons  of  Bani,  Shelomith,  the  son  of  Josiphiah."  (Comp. 
chap.  ii.  10.)     This  emendation  is  also  accepted  by  Keil. 

Ver.  13.  And  of  the  last  sons  of  Adonikam]  &c.  "  Here,  instead  of  the  name  of  the  head  of 
the  house,  we  read  the  words,  *  last,  and  these  their  names;'  whereupon  three  names  are  given, 
and  not  till  then,  *and  with  them  sixty  males.'  Here,  then,  it  is  not  the  head  of  the  house  who 
is  named,  but  in  bis  place  three  heads  of  families,  amounting  together  to  sixty  males.  Now, 
as  these  three  families  did  not  form  a  house,  these  sixty  sons  of  Adonikam  who  returned 
with  Ezra  are,  with  regard  to  the  six  hundred  and  sixty-six  sons  of  Adonikam  who  returned 
with  Zerubbabel  (chap.  ii.  13),  designated  the  last,  or  last  arrived,  and  thus  comprised  with 
them  as  one  house." — Keil, 

Ver.  15.  The  river  that  ninneth  to  Ahava]  In  vers.  21  and  31 :  "the  river  of  Ahava."  The 
name  both  of  a  place  and  of  a  river.  "The  latest  researches,"  according  to  Mr.  Grove  (^iW. 
Diet.),  **  are  in  favour  of  its  being  the  modern  Hit,  on  the  Euphrates,  due  east  of  Damascus," 
and  north-west  of  Babylon,  from  which  it  was  about  eighty  miles  distant.  The  place  is  famous 
for  its  bitumen  sprinsrs.  "The  river  of  Ahava"  is  a  small  stream  which  here  flows  into  the 
Euphrates.  And  there  abode  we  in  tents  three  days]  From  this  statement,  and  that  of  ver. 
81,  "We  departed  from  the  river  of  Aiiava  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  first  month,"  we  learn 
that  they  arrived  at  Ahava  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  first  month ;  the  journey  from  Babylon 
having  been  commenced  on  the  first  day  of  that  month  (chap.  vii.  9). 

119 


OHAF.  Tin.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


Ver.  17.  Casiphla]  **a  place  of  uncertain  site  on  the  road  between  Babylon  and  Jerusalem." 
— Bibl.  Diet.  **  The  place  Casiphia  is  entirely  unknown,  but  cannot  have  been  far  from  the 
river  Ahava." — Keil,  It  seems  that  both  Levites  and  Nethinim,  the  upper  and  lower  orders  of 
Temple  ministers,  had  settled  in  Casiphia ;  and  that  Iddo  was  the  chief  man  of  the  place,  and 
possessed  considerable  influence  amongst  these  orders. 

Ver.  18.  By  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  us]  (Comp.  chap.  vii.  6,  9,  28.)  A  maa  of 
understanding-]  Heb. :  Ish  sechel.  Keil  regards  this  as  a  proper  name.  But  it  seems  to  us  better 
to  take  it  as  in  the  A.  V.  ;  or  as  Fuerst  renders  it,  **  A  man  of  knowledge."  The  man  of  under- 
standing was  named  Sherebiah  The  )  copulative  {and)  was  probably  "  inserted  by  a  careless 
copyist,"  or,  if  it  be  retained,  it  should  be  translated  even.  **  A  man  of  understanding,  ,  .  . 
even  Sherebiah."     He  is  again  mentioned  in  ver.  24  ;  Neh.  viii.  7  ;  ix.  4,  5  ;  x.  12  ;  xii.  24. 

Ver.  19.  Hashabiah]  is  again  mentioned  in  ver.  24 ;  Neh.  x.  11  ;  xii.  24. 

Ver.  20.  The  Nethinlms]  (See  on  chap.  ii.  43.)  All  of  them  were  expressed  by  name]  t.«. 
Iddo  sent  a  list  of  them  to  Ezra. 

Ver.  21.  A  rig-ht  way]  Fuerst:  An  "even*'  or  "plain  way;"  i.e.  a  prosperous  journey 
(Comp.  Jer.  xxxi.  9  :    "A  straiirht  way,  wherein  they  shall  not  stumble.") 

Ver.  24.  Then  I  separated  twelve  of  the  chief  of  the  priests,  Sherebiah]  &c.  It  seems  from 
the  rendering  of  the  A.V.  that  Sherebiah  and  Hasiiabiah  were  priests ;  but  they  have  been  already 

described  as  Levites  (vers.  18,  19).  The  Heb.  is  il^Il^^p  •  but  in  the  A.V.,  as  in  the  Vulgate, 
^  is  not  translated.  Keil  suggests  that  for  7,  we  should  read  1  and  translate,  "  and  Shere- 
biah ; "  for  this  reason  that  if  we  retain  ?^  and'  translate  "  for  Sherebiah,"  we  "  place  the  priests 
in  a  servile  relation  to  the  Levites,  contrary  to  their  true  position."  We  prefer  to  retain  the 
h  and  to  translate,  "Then  I  separated  twelve  of  the  chief  of  the  priests  to  Sherebiah," &c 
This  would  not  involve  the  subordination  of  the  priests  to  the  Levites;  but  would  mean  that 
Ezra  appointed  twelve  chiefs  of  the  priests  to  act  with  twelve  chief  Levites,  of  whom  Sherebiah 
and  Hashabiah  were  two,  in  keeping  the  offerings  for  the  Temple  during  the  journey. 

Ver.  26.  Six  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  silver]  According  to  Dr.  Arbuthnot's  tables  this 
would  be  equivalent  to  £222,421,  178.  6d.  of  our  money;  and  according  to  Mr.  R.  S.  Poole's 
estimate  {Bibl.  Diet.),  to  about  £260,000.  Of  gold  an  hundred  talents]  or  £547,500  of  our 
money,  according  to  Dr.  Arbuthnot,  and  a  little  over  £1,000,000,  according  to  Mr.  Poole. 

Ver.  27.  Two  vessels  of  fine  copper,  precious  as  gold]  Margin  :  "Heb.,  'yellow,  or  shining 
brass,  desirable  as  gold.'  "  "  Tliey  may  have  been,"  says  Canon  Farrar,  "of  orichalcum,  like 
the  Persian  or  Indian  vases  found  among  the  treasures  of  Darius  (Aristot.  de  Mirab.  Auscult.)." 
— Bibl.  Diet.  Keil  speaks  of  them  thus :  "  Two  brazen  vessels  of  fine  golden  brilliancy,  precious 
as  gold." 

Ver.  29.  The  chambers  of  the  house  of  the  Lord]  (Comp.  1  Kings  vi.  5  ;  Neh.  xiii.  6.) 

Ver.  31.  The  river  of  Ahava]  (See  notes  on  ver.  16.)  He  delivered  us  from]  &c.  (Comp. 
ver.  22.) 

Ver.  32.  Abode  there  three  days]  for  rest  after  the  fatigues  and  trials  of  their  long  journey, 
(Comp.  Neh.  ii.  11.) 

Ver.  33.  Meremoth  the  son  of  Uriah  the  priest]  He  is  mentioned  again  in  Neh.  iii.  4,  21 ;  x. 
6  ;  xii.  3.  Eleazar  the  son  of  Phinehas]  is  probably  the  person  who  is  named  in  Neh.  xii.  42. 
Meremoth  and  Eleazar  were  priests.  Jozabad  the  son  of  Jeshua]  is  mentioned  in  chap.  x.  23  ; 
Neh.  viii.  7.  Noadlah  the  son  of  Binnui]  is  not  named  in  the  subsequent  history.  Jozabad 
and  Noadiah  were  distinguished  Levites. 

Ver.  34.  By  number  and  by  weight]  &c.  The  vessels  were  both  weighed  and  counted  ;  the 
gold  and  silver  were  probably  only  weighed.  And  all  the  weight  was  written  at  that  time] 
"  i.e.  an  authentic  list  was  made  at  the  delivery  which  then  took  place." — Keil. 

Ver.  35.  The  children  of  those  that  had  been  carried  away,  which  were  come  out  of  the 
captivity]  i.e.  those  who  had  returned  with  Ezra.  Offered  burnt  oflerings]  &c.  (Comp.  chap, 
vi.  17  ;  and  see  notes  on  that  verse.) 

Ver.  36.  The  king's  lieutenants]  Keil:  "  The  satraps  of  the  king."  He  says  they  "were 
the  military  chiefs  of  the  province."  Rawlinson  says  they  "  were  the  highest  class  of  the 
Persian  provincial  governors."  The  governors]  were,  according  to  Keil,  "the  heads  of  the 
civil  government."  Rawlinson :  "  It  denotes  a  lower  grade  of  official."  They  furthered  the 
people]  &c.,  or,  **  they  supported  the  people,"  &c. 

The  Assembly  at  Ahava. 

(Verses  1-20.) 

L  The    long   Journey   commenced,  went  up  with  me  from  Babylon,"  &c 

"  These  are  now  the  chief  of  tbeir  fathers,  **  Upon  the  first  day  of  the  first  month  *' 

and  this  is  the  genealogy  of  them  that  (chap,  vil  9)  they  set  out  from  Babylon, 
120 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAF.  Ym. 


and  continued  their  journey  for  several 
days  without  any  lengthened  encamp- 
ment. They  entered  upon  their  journey, 
we  conceive,  with  mingled  feelings  of 
hope  and  fear.  They  were  encouraged  by 
hopes  of  reaching  their  famous  father- 
land, and  of  there  enjoying  the  precious 
privileges  of  their  religion ;  but  the  plea- 
sure of  these  anticipations  was  moderated 
by  the  thought  of  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  of  the  long  journey  that  lay 
before  them.  Moreover,  it  is  almost 
certain  that,  in  leaving  Babylon,  most 
of  them  were  sacrificing  temporal  advan- 
tages, and  breaking  up  treasured  asso- 
ciations, and  severing  themselves  from 
dear  friends,  and  these  things  could  not 
have  been  done  without  much  mental 
Buffering ;  but  at  the  summons  of  duty 
and  the  invitations  of  sacred  privileges, 
they  deliberately  encountered  these  trials, 
and  went  up  from  Babylon.  Their  de- 
parture may  be  looked  at  as  an  illustra- 
tion of  the  exodus  of  the  soul  from  the 
captivity  of  a  life  of  sin  and  its  setting 
out  on  its  upward  pilgrimage. 

II.  An  important  inspection  made. 
"  And  I  gathered  them  together  to  the 
river  that  runneth  to  Ahava ;  and  there 
abode  we  in  tents  three  days  ;  and  I 
viewed  the  people  and  the  priests."  On 
the  ninth  day  of  the  first  month  they 
encamped  at  Ahava,  they  remained  there 
**  in  tents  three  days "  (ver.  16),  and 
then,  "  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  first 
month,"  they  departed  from  the  river  of 
Ahava  to  go  unto  Jerusalem  (ver.  31). 
This  halt  illustrates — 

1.  The  need  of  seasons  of  rest.  The 
company  with  Ezra  needed  rest  after 
the  excitement  and  trials  of  their  depar- 
ture, and  the  toils  of  the  first  stage  of 
their  long  journey.  The  Almighty  re- 
cognised and  provided  for  man's  need 
of  rest  when  He  ordained  the  night  to 
succeed  the  day,  and  in  the  institution 
of  the  Sabbath.  Jesus  Christ  recog- 
nised it,  and  said  unto  His  disciples, 
"  Come  ye  yourselves  apart  into  a  desert 
place,  and  rest  awhile."  In  our  life-pil- 
grimage there  are  times  when  we  need 
to  rest  from  our  labours  for  awhile,  and, 
if  possible,  to  lay  aside  our  cares,  (a). 

2.  The  iLse  of  seasons  of  rest,  Ezra 
employed  the   three  days   which   were 


spent  at  Ahava  in  such  a  manner  that 
great  advantages  to  his  company  resulted 
from  them.  He  reviewed  the  assembled 
people,  &c.  Rest  time  should  not  be 
waste  time.  As  individuals  we  should 
use  our  seasons  of  rest  in  reviewing  the 
way  in  which  the  Lord  hath  led  us,  in 
considering  our  present  condition  and  cir- 
cumstances, and  in  preparing  ourselves 
for  future  work.  And  if  a  church  has 
comparative  rest  for  a  brief  season,  such 
rest  should  be  employed  in  equipping 
its  members  for  more  vigorous  service. 

IIL  A  grave  deficiency  discovered. 
"  I  viewed  the  people,  and  the  priests, 
and  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of 
LevL"  There  were  no  Levites  in  the 
company,  except  such  as  were  priests, 
and  they  had  their  own  proper  duties. 
All  the  priests  were  "  of  the  sons  of 
Levi,"  but  all  "  the  sons  of  Levi "  were 
not  priests,  but  those  only  who  were  of 
the  family  of  Aaron.  Of  the  Levites 
proper,  members  of  the  other  families 
of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  who  ministered  in 
subordination  to  the  priests,  Ezra  could 
not  find  any  in  his  company.  None  of 
them  was  present.  This  was  to  their 
discredit.  They  should  have  been  most 
eager  to  embrace  the  opportunity  of 
going  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  entering 
upon  the  duties  of  their  sacred  calling. 
They  who  are  in  possession  of  sacred 
privileges  and  engaged  in  the  perform- 
ance of  sacred  duties,  are  not  always 
characterised  by  personal  zeal  and  de- 
votedness  in  the  cause  of  God.  Minis- 
ters of  religion  are  sometimes  slow  in 
making  personal  sacrifices  and  rendering 
personal  assistance  even  in  a  good  enter- 
prise. (6).     They  should  be  leaders,  <fec. 

IV.  The  supply  of  the  deficiency 
sought.  *'  Then  sent  I  for  Eliezer,  for 
Ariel,  for  Shemaiah,  and  for  Elnathan," 
(fee.  (vers.  16,  17).  Ezra  was  unwilling 
to  proceed  until  he  had  secured  a  band 
of  Levites  to  go  with  them.  The  means 
which  he  employed  to  obtain  them  are 
worthy  of  notice.     He  sought  them — 

1.  By  means  of  infltiential  men.  He 
called  for  eleven  leading  men  of  his  com- 
pany ;  nine  of  them  are  characterised  as 
"  chief  men,"  and  the  other  two  as  "  men 
of  understanding"  or  wisdom  (ver.  16), 
and  sent  them  to  seek  for  **  ministers  for 

121 


OHAP.  Tm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


the  house  of  God.'*  Such  men  were 
likely  to  succeed  where  men  of  an  in- 
ferior type  would  have  failed.  Important 
affairs  should  be  entrusted  only  to  com- 
petent men. 

2.  By  sending  them  to  the  right  place. 
He  "  sent  them  unto  the  place  Casiphia." 
It  has  been  conjectured  that  there  was 
at  Casiphia  a  college  ^'for  the  educa- 
tion of  priests,  Levites,  and  Nethinim, 
over  which  Iddo  presided ;  where  they 
had  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion, 
and  had  so  comfortable  a  support  that 
they  were  not  inclined  to  remove.  *  It 
is  very  probable  they  had  their  syna- 
gogues or  other  places  where  they  met 
for  religious  worship ;  for  we  find  the 
people  resorting  to  Ezekiel  in  their  cap- 
tivity, and  him  preaching  to  them  the 
Word  of  God,  in  many  places  of  his 
book  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  31),  <fec.  And  Ezra 
in  all  likelihood  was  an  instructor  among 
them.*" — Bishop  Patrick.  But,  apart 
from  conjectures,  it  is  clear  that  a  con- 
siderable number  of  Levites  and  Nethinim 
dwelt  at  Casiphia,  and  that  Ezra  was 
cognisant  of  the  fact ;  therefore  to  that 
place  he  despatched  his  messengers. 

3.  By  sending  them  to  the  right  man. 
Ezra  "sent  them  with  commandment 
unto  Iddo  the  chief,"  (kc  Iddo  was 
probably  a  Levite;  for  the  Nethinim 
being  a  lower  order  of  Temple  servants, 
it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  one  of  their 
number  would  be  "chief"  over  Levites, 
Iddo  was  "  the  chief  at  the  place  Casi- 
phia," was  evidently  disposed  to  further 
the  movement  under  Ezra,  and,  from  his 
sending  a  list  of  the  names  of  those  who 
went  from  Casiphia  (ver.  20),  seems  to 
have  been  a  man  of  methodical  and 
business-like  habits. 

4.  By  sending  them  with  precise  in- 
structions. Ezra  "  told  them  what  they 
should  say  unto  Iddo,"  &c.  Margin : 
"  Heb.,  *I  put  words  in  their  mouth."* 
Thus  this  mission  was  admirably  se- 
lected and  sent  forth,  and  it  deserved 
success,  (c). 

V.  The  supply  of  the  deficiency  ob- 
tained. '*And  by  the  good  hand  of 
our  God  upon  us  they  brought  us  a 
man  of  understanding,*'  <fec.  (vers.  18- 
20).     Notice — 

1.  The  supply  was  sufficient.  About 
122 


forty  Levites  and  two  hundred  and 
twenty  Nethinim  went  from  Casiphia 
and  joined  the  returning  exiles  under 
Ezra. 

2.  The  supply  was  various.  There 
were  Levites,  and  Nethinim  "for  the 
service  of  the  Levites."  Different  grades 
of  ministry  are  necessary  for  the  various 
spheres  of  service  in  the  Church  of  God. 

3.  The  supply  was  remarkable  for  the 
presence  of  at  least  one  man  of  distin- 
guished ability,  "  They  brought  us  a 
man  of  understanding,  of  the  sons  of 
Mahli,  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son  of  Israel, 
even  Sherebiah.**  This  man  afterwards 
rendered  important  service  in  the  history 
of  the  people,  as  we  see  from  ver.  24; 
Neh.  viii.  7 ;  ix.  4,  5 ;  x.  12;  xii.  24. 

4.  The  supply  was  obtained  by  the 
blessing  of  God,  "  By  the  good  hand  of 
our  God  upon  us  they  brought  us,"  <kc. 
Thus  Ezra  traces  the  success  of  this 
mission  to  the  gracious  assistance  of 
God. 

**  Except  the  Lord  conduct  the  plan, 
The  best  concerted  schemes  are  vain, 

And  never  can  succeed  ; 
We  spend  our  wretched  strength  for  nought  I 
But  if  our  works  in  Thee  be  wrought 
They  shall  be  blest  indeed." 

— C.  Wesley. 

"  If,"  says  M.  Henry,  "  where  ministers 
have  been  wanting,  the  vacancies  are 
well  supplied,  let  God  have  the  glory, 
and  His  good  hand  be  acknowledged  as 
qualifying  them  for  the  service,  inclining 
them  to  it,  and  then  opening  a  door  of 
opportunity  for  them." 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  It  will  be  confessed  by  all  men,  even  by 
the  veriest  slaves  to  their  erer-driving  ambi- 
tion, that  physical  rest  is  sometimes  needed. 
The  aching  limb  asks  for  it ;  the  hand  that  is 
so  weary  that  it  cannot  any  longer  hold  pen, 
or  tool,  or  weapon  of  war,  says,  in  its  trembling 
weakness,  '*  Let  me  rest  awhile ;  *'  and  the 
fevered  brain,  over-driven,  excited  almost  to 
madness,  says,  in  its  sleeplessness  and  throb- 
bing and  heat,  **  Let  me  rest  awhile."  Well, 
then,  here  is  so  much  gained.  We  shall  be 
able  to  make  our  way  from  this  low  point  to 
a  much  higher  phase  of  rest,  and  find  our  way 
upward,  from  the  cry  of  the  feeble  and  ex- 
hausted flesh,  to  the  greater,  more  solemn,  and 
urgent  wants  of  our  over-excited  spiritual 
nature  ;  we  shall  understand,  in  some  degree, 
that  our  highest,  divinest  faculties  must  occa- 
sionally pause,  rest,  and  recover  themselves,  if 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OBAP.  Tm. 


they  would  fully,  with  completeness  and  per- 
fcctness,  discharge  uU  the  duties  and  obliga- 
tions which  Almighty  God  has  imposed  upon 
them.  Rest  is  as  necessary  as  lal)Our.  He  is 
not  a  philosopher,  l)ut  a  madman,  who  lights 
the  candle  of  his  life  at  both  ends. — Joseph 
Parher,  D.D. 

{h)  There  is  an  old  proTcrb^  *'The  temple 
mouse  fears  not  the  temple  idol."  It  is  a 
painful  experience,  present  to  the  hearts  of 
most  of  us,  how  different  is  the  awe  of  the 
first  service  in  which  wc  ministered,  and  of 
the  fiftieth  or  hundredth.  At  first,  the  put- 
ting on  of  the  surplice  was  a  dedication — the 
entering  of  the  vestry  was  a  solemnity — the 
opening  Sentences,  the  Exhortation,  tlie  Con- 
fession, read  by  our  lips,  seemed  as  tliough 
they  consecrated  those  lips  tliemselves  to  a 
new  use  and  a  new  religion.  So  was  it  with 
each  function  of  the  iioly  office.  The  first 
reading  of  the  Commandments — the  first  Ser- 
mon— the  first  Communion  in  which  we  fol- 
lowed with  the  Cup — the  first  baptism,  the 
first  wedding — the  first  visit  to  a  sick-room, 
the  first  commendatory  prayer  beside  the 
dying,  the  first  saying  of  the  words,  "Dust  to 
dust,"  by  the  open  grave — each  was  an  event, 
each  was  an  epoch,  of  the  life  within — it  had 
an  effect,  a  spiritual  effect,  upon  the  conscious 
immortal  man.  It  may  be  tliat  we  relied  upon 
this — thought  it  needless  to  impress  the  feel- 
ing, to  turn  emotion  into  principle,  by  prayer 
and  watching — felt  confident  that  the  repeti- 
tion of  the  occasion  would  revive  the  effect 
— trusted  to  this,  and  left  it  there.  A  year 
afterwards  we  could  stand  unmoved  by  the 
grave,  talk  and  laugh  in  the  vestry,  fall  half 
asleep  as  we  read  the  Prayers.  Even  with  the 
best  efforts  made  and  persisted  in,  we  could 
never  reawaken  the  solemnity  of  the  begin- 
ning. Duty  becomes  habit,  habit  becomes 
familiarity,  and  familiarity,  if  it  breeds  not 
contempt,  at  least  forbids  that  kind  of  awe 
which  is  more  nature  than  grace. 

And  some  of  us  make  the  fatal  mistake  of 
expecting  our  Profession  to  make  or  to  keep 
us  spiritual.  Living  always  in  holy  things, 
what  can  we  be  but  holy  ?  We  learn  a  new 
lesson  as  years  advance — and  althougii  we  can 
give  thanks  still  for  the  blessing  of  having 
the  inward  and  the  outward  life  of  one  piece 
and  of  one  colour,  occupied  in  the  same  thoughts 
and  the  samestudies,  mutually  helpful  andsym- 
pathetic  with  each  other — yet  we  feel  more  and 
more  that  there  is  no  security,  in  this  harmony, 
for  holy  living ;  that  there  is  no  royal  road,  but 


that  which  is  open  for  all  wayfarers,  to  the 
saint's  life  and  the  saint's  rest ;  nay,  that  there 
is  even  an  added  risk,  for  tiie  priest  of  God's 
temple,  lest  he  find  that  "common"  to  him 
whicii  is  "holy  "  for  all  besides,  just  because 
he  must  daily  toucli  and  daily  handle,  daily 
prepare  and  daily  dispense,  that  bread  of  life 
which  souls  only  can  digest,  and  which  his 
soul  may,  by  the  very  having,  liave  not.  There 
is  nothing  for  it  but  to  say  to  ourselves,  and 
act  upon  it,  **  Like  people,  like  priest."  Just 
what  they  want,  I  want — just  what  I  bid 
them  do,  I  will  do.  I  will  prepare  for  my 
work,  I  will  do  my  work,  not  as  though  it 
could  sanctify,  not  as  though  it  were  (of  itself) 
either  hither  or  thither  as  to  my  soul's  state, 
but  as  needing,  like  any  commonest  trade  or 
handicraft,  a  soul  at  peace  with  God  before- 
hand, a  soul  in  full  communion  with  God  be- 
forehand, a  soul  preoccupied  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
sought  and  cherished,  a  soul  setting  God  always 
before  it,  by  Him  first  quickened,  then  to  Him 
afterwards  ministering. —  (7.  /.  Vaughan^  D.D. 

(e)  Ministers  will  not  be  found  ready  made, 
and  ministers  cannot  be  made  to  order.  There 
is  no  royal  road  to  the  supply  of  the  ministry. 
There  is  no  climate  in  which  ministers  are 
indigenous.  There  is  no  patent  by  which 
ministers  can  be  manufactured.  Ministry  is 
a  gift,  ministry  is  a  growth,  ministry  is  an 
inspiration.  It  is  not  every  educated  man — 
still  less  is  it  every  uneducated  man — who  is 
even  capable  of  it.  The  minister  is  the  ulti- 
mate product  of  a  long  operation  of  Providence 
and  of  grace,  working  individually,  working 
secretly,  and  giving  no  account  of  itself. 
When  our  Lord  looked  upon  the  vast  shep- 
herdless  multitudes.  He  had  but  one  sugges- 
tion to  make  for  the  ministerial  supply  :  "Pray 
ye  the  Lord  of  the  harvest " — and  He  was  there 
Himself — "that  He  will  send  forth  '* — and  the 
word  is  a  very  strong  one — "labourers  into 
His  harvest."  This  is  the  one  hope  now.  In 
comparison  with  this,  any  other  suggestion 
must  be  timid  and  tentative.  Yet  something 
perhaps  might  be  done  by  a  keen  and  practised 
eye  directed  towards  our  schools  and  homes. 
Young  intelligence,  young  diligence,  young 
devotion,  sought  out  by  the  loving  watchful- 
ness of  master  or  minister,  might  be  fashioned, 
here  and  there,  even  from  a  humble  stock,  by 
a  wise  influence  and  sometimes  a  generous 
bounty,  into  an  eventual  aptitude  for  the 
ministry.  To  foster  this  promise,  but  in  one 
or  two  cases,  into  performance,  is  a  noble  am- 
bition for  any  one  who  cares  for  his  Cliurch'a 
future. — Ibid. 


The  Companions  of  Ezra  on  his  Journey  to  Jerusalem. 

(Verses  1-20.) 

The  following  observations  are   sug-      the  salvation  of  the  Gospel,  they  who 
gested  by  these  verses  : —  obey  the  gracious  call  stand  recorded  in 

L  Whilst  love  of  the  world  and  fear      the  Book  of  Life,  and  will  be  honoured 
of  the  cross  induce  most  men  to  neglect      by  God  Himself  (vers.  1-14). 

123 


OBAF.  vin. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY.  EZRA. 


2.  When  some  of  a  family  embrace 
the  Gospel,  they  who  linger  behind 
may  probably  follow  ;  till  sometimes, 
in  answer  to  fervent  prayers,  the  very 
last  are  brought  in  (ver.  13). 

3.  Alas !  that  professed  ministers, 
who  ought  to  take  the  lead  in  every 
good  work,  are  generally  so  backward 
to  labour,  or  venture,  or  suffer  in  the 
cause  of  God,  and  need  to  be  stirred  up 
by  the  example  and  exhortations  even  of 
their  lay  brethren  !  (ver.  15,  last  part). 

4.  But  such  as  address  them  on  these 
occasions  should  be  "  chief  men,"  or 
**  men  of  understanding;"  lest  they 
should  be  irritated,  instead  of  being  per- 
suaded (vers.  16,  17).     They  must  not, 


however,  be  left  to  their  negligence : 
and  their  superior  brethren,  having 
given  them  a  good  example,  may  send 
or  speak  to  them,  with  more  authority 
and  effect  than  others  can ;  and  often 
those  who  were  before  inattentive  will 
profit  by  meek  and  faithful  admonitions. 
5.  When  ministers  for  the  work  of 
the  house  of  our  God  are  raised  up,  who 
are  men  of  piety  and  understanding,  we 
should  acknowledge  "  the  good  hand  of 
our  God  upon  us,*'  and  give  Him  the 
praise ;  as  we  ought  at  all  times  to  lift 
up  our  prayers  to  Him  for  this  blessing 
to  His  Church  (vers.  18-20). — Arranged 
from  JScoifs  Comm, 


Men  of  Understandino. 
(Verse  18.) 


"  By  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon 
uSf  they  brought  us  a  man  of  understand- 
ing .  .  .  tSherebiah." 

Sherebiah  was  not  merely  a  man  of 
knowledge  and  intelligence,  but  of  wisdom 
and  prudence.  Sechel,  here  rendered 
*' understanding,"  signifies  moral  excel- 
lences as  well  as  mental  abilities,  as 
may  be  seen  from  its  use  elsewhere. 
Tlie  word  rendered  "  them  of  under- 
standing" in  Dan.  xi.  35,  and  "they 
that  be  wise"  in  Dan.  xii.  3,  comes  from 
the  same  verb  as  sechel,  viz.,  sachal. 
"  The  fear  of  the  L(Td  is  the  beginning 
of  wisdom  ;  a  good  understanding  (sechel) 
have  all  they  that  do,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxi.  10). 
"  There  is  no  solid  wisdom  but  in  real 
piety."  (a). 

The  text  teaches  that — 

I.  Men  of  understanding  are  the 
gifts  of  God.  Ezra  traces  the  presence 
of  Sherebiah  amongst  them  to  "  the 
good  hand  of  their  God  upon  them." 
Wise  men  are  God's  gifts,  inasmuch  as — 

1.  They  derive  their  abilities  from 
Him.  He  bestowed  upon  them  the 
faculties  and  capacities  of  their  mental 
and  moral  nature. 

2.  Theg  rightly  develop  their  abilities 
by  His  blessing.  He  inspires  them  to 
every  worthy  purpose,  and  aids  them  in 
its  prosecution. 

3.  They  attain  their  moral  excellences 

124 


by  His  blessing.  They  "  are  His  work- 
manship," &c.  (Eph.  ii.  10).  ''By  the 
grace  of  God  they  are  what  they  are" 
(1  Cor.  XV.  10). 

II.  Men  of  understanding  are  of 
great  worth  amongst  men.  Ezra  per- 
ceived the  value  of  Sherebiah  to  his 
company,  acknowledged  the  goodness 
of  God  in  his  arrival  amongst  them,  re- 
corded his  quality  and  his  coming,  and 
found  him  very  useful  subsequently. 
Men  of  understanding  are  of  great  worth 
in  society  because  — 

1.  Understanding  is  essential  to  tJie 
beneficent  employment  of  other  gifts  and 
powers.  For  example — (1.)  Zeal  with- 
out understanding  is  a  very  perilous 
thing.  "  Zeal  without  knowledge  is  like 
expedition  to  a  man  in  the  dark."  (2.) 
Strength  without  understanding  often 
acts  injuriously.  "  Wisdom  is  better 
than  strength.  .  .  .  Wisdom  is  better 
than  weapons  of  war ;  but  one  sinner 
destroyeth  much  good." 

*'  It  is  excellent 
To  have  a  giant's  strength  ;  but  it  is  tyrannowi 
To  use  it  like  a  giant." — Shakespeare. 

(3.)  Great  gifts  of  any  kind  without  moral 
excellences  are  productive  of  great  evils. 
Without  grace,  great  powers  are  great 
engines  of  mischief  and  ruin,  a  curse 
and  not  a  blessing  to  society.     "Good 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CEAT,  Tin. 


understanding  "  is  needful  to  ensure  the 
usefulness  of  great  abilities. 

2.  The  employment  of  understandivg 
itself  confers  great  benefits  upon  society. 
(1.)  In  restraining  from  unwise  and  sin- 
ful projects.  We  have  an  example  in 
Acts  V.  34-40.  (2.)  In  originating  and 
inciting  to  wise  and  good  projects. 
(3.)  In  devising  appropriate  methods 
for  the  attainment  of  such  })rojects. 
(4.)  And  for  direction  in  life  and  work 
generally.  "  Wisdom  is  profitable  to 
direct."  See  how  useful  Sherebiah  was 
to  the  Jews  (ver.  24 ;  Neh.  viii.  7  ;  ix. 
4,  5  ;  X.  12  ;  xii.  24).  (6). 

Conclusion  :  It  behoves  us — 

1.  To  praise  God  for  men  of  under- 
standing, 

2.  To  prize  such  men.  Too  often 
they  have  been  neglected,  and  frequently 
cruelly  persecuted  while  living,  and 
honoured  after  death.  Let  us  value 
them  highly  while  they  are  yet  with 
us.  (c). 

3.  To  endeavour  to  become  men  of 
understanding.  "  Wisdom  is  the  prin- 
cipal thing :  get  wisdom ;  and  with  all 
thy  getting  get  understanding.*'  "In 
understanding  be  men."  {d), 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  greatest  man  is  he  who  chooses 
right  with  the  most  invincible  resolution  ;  who 
resists  the  sorest  temptation  within  and  with- 
out; who  hears  the  heaviest  burdens  cheerfully; 
who  is  calmest  in  storms,  and  most  fearless 
under  menaces  and  frowns  ;  whose  reliance 
on  truth,  on  virtue,  and  on  Qod  is  most  un- 
faltering.— Seneca. 

Remember  that  he  is  indeed  the  wisest  and 
the  happiest  man  who,  by  constant  attention 
of  thought,  discovers  the  greatest  opportunity 
of  doing  good,  and,  with  ardent  and  animated 
resolution,  breaks  through  every  opposition 
that  he  may  improve  these  opportunities.— 
P.  Doddridge,  D.D. 

(6)  We  cannot  look,  however  imperfectly, 
upon  a  great  man  without  gaining  something 
by  him.  He  is  the  living  light-fountain,  which 
it  is  good  and  pleasant  to  be  near ;  the  light 
which  enlightens,  which  has  enlightened,  the 
darkness  of  the  world ;  and  this,  not  as  a 
kindled  lamp  only,  but  rather  as  a  natural 
luminary,  shining  by  the  gift  of  Heaven  ;  a 
flowing  light-fountain,  as  I  say,  of  native 
original  insight^  of  mi^nhood  and  heroic  noble- 


ness, in  whose  radiance  all  souls  feel  that  it  ii 
well  with  them. — Thomas  Carlyle. 

(c)  Let  us  not  forget  that  if  honour  be  for 
the  dead,  gratitude  can  only  be  for  the  living. 
He  who  has  once  stood  beside  the  grave,  to 
look  back  upon  the  companionship  which  has 
been  for  ever  closed,  feeling  how  impotent, 
iherei  are  the  wild  love  and  the  keen  sorrow, 
to  give  one  instant's  pleasure  to  the  pulseless 
heart,  ©r  atone  in  the  lowest  measure  to  the 
departed  spirit  for  the  hour  of  unkindness, 
will  scarcely  for  the  future  incur  that  debt  to 
the  heart,  which  can  only  be  discharged  to  the 
dust.  But  the  lesson  which  men  receive  as 
individuals,  they  do  not  learn  as  nations. 
Again  and  again  they  have  seen  their  noblest 
descend  into  the  grave,  and  have  thought  it 
enou.:h  to  garland  the  tombstone  when  they 
had  not  crowned  the  brow,  and  to  pay  the 
honour  to  the  ashes  which  they  had  denied  to 
the  spirit.  Let  it  not  displease  them  that  they 
are  bidden,  amidst  the  tumult  and  the  dazzle 
of  their  busy  life,  to  listen  for  the  few  voices, 
and  watch  for  the  few  lamps,  which  God  has 
toned  and  lighted  to  charm  and  to  guide  them, 
that  they  may  not  learn  their  sweetness  by 
their  silence,  nor  their  light  by  their  decay. — 
John  RuskiUy  M.A, 

{d)  If  you  look  at  what  keeps  the  world  astir, 
you  will  at  once  concl  ude  that  most  men  around 
you  are  under  the  actuating  influence  of  a  very 
different  maxim  from  that  presented  in  Prov. 
iv.  7  :  **  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing :  get 
wisdom;  and  with  all  thy  getting,  get  under- 
standing." You  might,  without  being  at  all 
chargeable  with  a  libel,  read,  '^  Money  is  the 
principal  thing;  therefore  get  money;  and 
with  all  thy  getting,  get  a  fortune."  This, 
alas!  is  the  world's  "one  thing  needful."  All 
else  is  postponed  to  this.  The  world's  advice 
to  the  young  is,  **Get  money  first.  Secure  a 
competency"  a  word  of  which  the  limit  is  never 
defined  ;  *'and  when  that  has  been  done,  you 
will  have  leisure  to  think  about  what  good 
folks  call  *  better  things.'  Mind  you  the  main 
chance.  This  world  is  the  one  with  which  we 
have  first  to  do,  as  we  are  placed  first  in  it. 
Thi»  world,  then,  first,  and  then  the  next"  Ah ! 
what  a  delusion  ! — Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D. 

Labour  to  be  men  of  knowledge  and  sound 
understanding.  A  sound  judgment  is  a  most 
precious  mercy,  and  conduces  much  to  sound- 
ness of  heart  and  life.  A  weak  judgment  is 
easily  corrupted ;  and  if  it  be  once  corrupt,  the 
will  and  conversation  will  quickly  follow.  Your 
understandings  are  the  inlet  or  entrance  to  the 
whole  soul  ;  and,  if  you  be  weak  there,  your 
souls  are  like  a  garrison  that  hath  open  or  ill- 
guarded  gates ;  and  if  the  enemy  be  once  let 
in  there,  the  whole  city  will  be  quickly  his  own. 
Ignorance  is  virtually  every  error  ;  therefore, 
let  the  Bible  be  much  in  your  hands  and  hearts. 
—R,  Baxter, 


126 


OHAF.  TUL 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRJU 


Ezra's  Confidbnob  in  God. 
{Verses  2W1^.) 


I  Confidence  in  God  avowed.  "  We 
had  spoken  unto  the  king,  saying,  The 
hand  of  our  God,"  &c.  (ver.  22).  Here 
is  a  declaration  of  faith — 

1.  In  His  providence.  Ezra  believed 
that  God  was  interested  in  human 
affairs ;  that  *'  His  eyes  are  upon  the 
ways  of  man,  and  He  seeth  all  his 
goings  ; "  and  that  His  hand  was  work- 
ing amongst  men,  directing  and  con- 
trolling, rewarding  and  punishing  tliem. 

(4 

2.  In  His  providence  as  efficiently 
promoting  the  interests  of  His  people, 
"  The  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  all  them 
for  good  that  seek  Him."  He  regards 
His  people  with  approval,  guides  their 
footsteps,  guards  them  and  their  in- 
terests, and  makes  "all  things  work 
together  for  good  to  them." 

3.  In  His  providence  as  opposed  to 
those  who  forsake  Him.  "  His  power 
and  His  wrath  are  against  all  them  that 
forsake  Him."  The  power  which  works 
for  righteousness  must  be  hostile  to  the 
workers  of  iniquity.  The  government 
of  a  holy  God  must  set  itself  against 
impiety  and  wickedness. 

II  Confidence  in  God  tested.  A 
long  journey,  which  would  involve 
many  difficulties  and  dangers,  was  be- 
fore Ezra  and  his  great  company ;  and 
he  was  the  responsible  leader  in  that 
journey.  Can  he  trust  in  God  and  in 
His  providence  now]  His  confidence 
was  tested — 

1.  By  their  need  of  guidance.  The 
journey  they  were  entering  upon  was  a 
long  one ;  they  required  some  one  to 
lead  them  in  "  a  right  way."  They  had 
no  visible  symbol  of  the  presence  of 
God  with  them  and  guiding  them,  as 
their  fathers  had  in  the  pillar  of  cloud 
by  day  and  the  pillar  of  fire  by  night. 
Can  Ezra  and  his  companions  trust  the 
invisible  "  hand  of  their  God  "  in  this 
matter  % 

2.  By  their  need  of  protection.  The 
journey  that  lay  before  them  was  a 
perilous  one.  (1.)  There  was  danger 
from  "the  enemy  in  the  way."    The 

126 


country  through  which  they  had  to 
travel  was  infested  with  Arabian  free- 
booters. And  it  seems  probable,  from 
vers.  22  and  31,  that  a  plan  had  been 
arranged  by  some  of  them  for  attacking 
and  plundering  this  company.  (2.) 
This  danger  was  increased  by  the  trea- 
sures which  they  carried  with  them. 
There  was  their  own  "substance,"  and 
the  gold  and  silver  and  precious  vessels 
for  the  Temple  service  ;  the  gold  and 
silver  alone,  according  to  one  computa- 
tion, being  worth  upwards  of  three 
quarters  of  a  million  of  our  money,  and 
according  to  another,  upwards  of  a 
million  and  a  quarter.  What  a  temp- 
tation this  would  be  to  "  the  enemy  in 
the  way."  (3.)  Their  danger  was  also 
increased  by  the  character  and  compo- 
sition of  their  company.  Amongst  them 
were  many  women  and  "little  ones," 
who  in  case  of  an  attack  would  not  be 
able  to  assist  in  repelling  it,  but  would 
themselves  require  defence.  Thus,  if 
they  were  assaulted,  they  would  be  able 
to  offer  only  a  feeble  resistance.  Can 
Ezra  trust  their  defence  to  the  hand  of 
their  God  upon  them  for  goodi  Can 
he  go  forward  towards  "  the  enemy  in 
the  way,"  relying  upon  that  power  which 
is  against  the  wicked]  Or,  will  he 
seek  for  help  elsewhere  1 

m.  Confidence  in  God  maintained. 
Ezra  considered  their  position  and  pros- 
pects, their  difficulties  and  dangers,  and 
their  consequent  needs,  and  he  decided 
to  trust  in  God  for  all,  and  to  give 
practical  proof  of  their  confidence  : 

1.  In  not  seeking  guidance  and,  defence 
from  the  king.  "  I  was  ashamed  to 
require  of  the  king  a  band  of  soldiers 
and  horsemen  to  help  us  against  the 
enemy  in  the  way."  The  terms  of  the 
king's  commission  to  Ezra  leave  no  room 
for  doubt  that  if  he  had  requested  of 
him  a  military  escort,  the  request  would 
have  been  readily  granted ;  but  he  deter- 
mined not  to  do  so.  He  and  his  com- 
panions might  have  adopted  the  words 
of  David,  "The  Lord  will  hear  from 
His  holy  heaven  with  the  saving  strength 


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAF.  ym. 


of  His  right  hand  Some  tnist  In 
chariots,  and  some  in  horses;  but  we 
will  remember  the  Name  of  the  Lord 
our  God  "  (Ps.  XX.  6,  7). 

2.  In  seeking  guidance  and  defence 
from  God,  "  Then  I  proclaimed  a  fast 
there,  at  the  river  of  Ahava,"  <fec.  (ver. 
21).  See  how  they  sought  unto  God 
for  what  they  needed — (1.)  Humbly. 
They  fasted  and  afflicted  themselves 
before  their  God,  in  deep  self-abasement 
and  penitence  on  account  of  sin,  and 
with  a  view  to  its  forgiveness.  (2.) 
Believingly.  They  not  only  fasted 
before  God,  but  they  prayed  unto  Him 
for  a  prosperous  journey.  Their  confi- 
dence in  Him  did  not  lead  them  to 
neglect  prayer  to  Him.  True  faith  in 
God  and  in  His  gracious  providence  is 
not  a  substitute  for  prayer  to  Him,  but 
an  incentive  thereto.  (6).  (3.)  Earnestly  ; 
as  is  indicated  by  their  fasting  and 
prayer,  to  which  for  a  time  they  seem 
to  have  entirely  given  themselves.  "  So 
we  fasted  and  besought  our  God  for 
this." 

Thus  Ezra's  confidence  in  God,  being 
tested,  did  not  fail,  but  was  nobly  main- 
tained and  manifested,  (c). 

IV.  Confidence  in  God  vindicated. 
"  And  He  was  intreated  of  us."  Their 
faith  was  vindicated — 

1.  In  their  inward  assurance.  They 
had  a  firm  conviction  that  their  prayers 
were  heard  and  accepted,  and  that  God 
would  secure  to  them  a  prosperous 
journey. 

2.  In  the  outward  result.  They  were 
led  by  a  right  way ;  they  were  delivered 
from  the  enemy  that  lay  in  wait  for 
them;  they  had  a  prosperous  journey, 
and  arrived  safely  in  Jerusalem.  The 
confidence  in  God  which  they  had  avowed 
and  maintained  was  splendidly  vindi- 
cated by  His  hand  upon  them  for  good 
in  their  journey.  They  who  honour  Him 
with  their  hearty  trust,  He  will  honour 
with  His  great  salvation,  {d), 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  But  what  is  to  be  the  justification  of 
this  implicit  confidence  ?  It  can  only  be  jus- 
tified npon  the  supposition  that  God  is  a  being 
having  particular  powers,  and  of  a  particular 
charaoter.    Confidence  in  Qod,  for  instance, 


would  be  entirely  irrational  if  He  were  con- 
ceived of  as  a  destiny,  as  a  force,  as  a  soul  of 
the  universe, — if  He  were  not  believed  to  be 
a  person  distinct  from  the  universe,  its  ruler, 
and  its  sustainer,  as  well  as  its  creator,  acting 
upon  it  in  the  perfection  of  His  freedom,  and 
without  any  sort  of  limit  to  His  power,  except 
such  limits  as  His  own  moral  nature  may 
impose.  Again,  confidence  in  God  would  be 
misplaced  if  it  were  believed  that  He  is  the 
personal,  the  free,  the  omnipotent  creator ; 
and  yet  if  He  were  imagined  to  act,  as  we 
should  say  in  human  words,  capriciously,  that 
is,  without  reference  to  those  eternal  laws  of 
righteousness  and  truth,  the  traces,  the  echoes 
of  which  we  find  within  ourselves,  and  which 
are  in  their  essence,  and  demonstrably,  not 
fruits  of  His  arbitrary  enactment,  hut  consti- 
tutive parts  of  His  eternal  nature.  Our  Lord, 
therefore,  reveals  God  as  a  Father,  a  revela- 
tion which  assures  us  at  once  of  His  power 
and  His  love.  It  is  the  combination  of  these 
two  facts,  God's  almightiness  and  God's  love, 
which  taken  together  constitute  or  warrant 
what  we  term  His  providence.  His  power,  that 
is,  under  the  guidance  of  his  love  making  pro- 
vision for  the  good  of  His  creatures  generally, 
but  supremely  and  in  particular  of  man,  and, 
among  men,  in  a  yet  more  eminent  degree  of 
His  servants. — Canon  Liddon, 

(b)  **  God's  promises,  by  reason  of  His  un- 
changeableness,  may  be  relied  on  ;  what  occa- 
sion, then,  of  prayer,  seeing  the  thing  pro- 
mised will  come  round  of  its  own  steady 
accord,  whether  you  open  your  lips  or  no?** 
The  answer  is  short  and  simple.  These  pro- 
mises are  made  only  to  those  who  expect,  and 
desire,  and  ask  for  them.  They  are  not  pro- 
mised indifferently,  and  come  out  of  their  own 
accord  at  all,  but  to  such  only  who  have  medi- 
tated them,  and  who  value  them,  and  desire 
them,  and  earnestly  seek  them  ;  being,  in 
truth,  too  valuable  to  be  thrown  about  to  a 
scrambling  mob ;  being  the  high  and  holy 
attractions  by  which  God  intended  to  work 
upon  the  nature  of  man,  and  lead  it  out  of  its 
present  low  and  sunken  estate  into  glorious 
liberty  and  unwearied  ambition  of  every  noble 
excellence.  They  are  prizes  in  the  hand  of 
God  to  stimulate  the  soul's  activities, — more 
glorious  prizes  than  laurel  wreaths,  or  the 
trumpetings  of  fame,  or  principalities  and 
thrones, — and  they  are  yielded  only  to  an 
application  of  faculties,  at  the  least,  as  intense 
and  ardent  as  is  put  forth  in  pursuit  of  human 
ambition.  God  does  not  cheapen  His  promises 
down  to  a  glance  at  them  with  the  eye,  or  a 
mouthing  of  them  with  the  tongue,  but  He 
requireth  of  those  that  would  have  them  an 
admiration  equal  to  that  of  lovers,  an  estima- 
equal  to  that  of  royal  diadems,  and  a  pursuit 
equal  to  that  of  Olympic  prizes. — Ed.  Irving. 

{e)  Suppose  I  were  to  set  out  on  a  pilgri- 
mage to  Jerusalem,  and  before  I  started  were 
to  go  to  Brown  Brothers  &  Co.,  and  obtain 
letters  of  credit  for  the  cities  of  London, 

127 


OHAF.  TnX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY ;  EZRA, 


Jericho,  &c.  Then,  with  these  papers,  which 
a  child  might  destroy,  which  would  be  but 
ashes  in  the  teeth  of  flame,  which  a  thousand 
chances  might  take  from  me,  1  should  go  on 
with  confidence  and  cheer,  saying  to  myself, 
**  As  soon  as  I  come  to  London  1  shall  be  in 
funds.  1  have  a  letter  in  my  pocket  from 
Brown  Brothers  &  Co.  which  will  give  me  five 
hundred  dollars  there ;  and  in  the  other  cities  to 
which  I  am  bound  I  shall  find  similar  supplies, 
all  at  my  command,  through  the  agency  of 
these  magic  papers  and  pen  strokes  of  these 
enterprising  men."  But  suppose  that,  instead 
of  this  confidence,  I  were  to  sit  down  on  ship- 
board, and  go  to  tormenting  myself  in  this 
fashion — *'  Now,  what  am  I  to  do  when  I  get 
to  London  ?  1  have  no  money,  and  how  do  I 
know  that  these  bits  of  paper  which  I  have 
with  me  mean  anything,  or  will  amount  to 
anything?  What  shall  1  do?  I  am  afraid 
I  shall  starve  in  the  strange  city  to  which 
I  am  going."  I  should  be  a  fool,  you 
say ;  but  should  I  be  half  the  fool  that  man 
is  who,  bearing  the  letters  of  credit  of  the 
Eternal  God,  yet  goes  fearing  all  his  way, 
cast  down  and  doubting  whether  he  shall  ever 
get  save  through  his  journey?  No  fire,  no 
Tiolence,  nor  any  chance   can  destroy  the 


cheques  of  the  Lord.  When  He  says,  **  I  will 
never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee,"  and  **  My 
grace  shall  be  sufficient  for  thee,"  believe  it; 
and  no  longer  dishonour  your  God  by  with- 
holding from  Him  the  confidence  which  you 
freely  accord  to  Brown  Brothers  &  Co. — H, 
W.  Beecher, 

(d)  A  heathen  could  say,  when  a  bird 
scared  by  a  hawk  flew  into  his  bosom,  **  I  will 
not  betray  thee  into  the  enemy,  seeing  thou 
fliest  to  me  for  refuge ; "  how  much  less  will 
God  yield  up  a  soul  to  its  enemy  when  it  takes 
sanctuary  in  his  Name,  saying,  **  Lord,  I  am 
hunted  with  such  a  temptation,  dodged  with 
such  a  lust ;  either  Thou  must  pardon  it,  or  I 
am  damned ;  mortify  it,  or  I  shall  be  a  slave 
to  it ;  take  me  into  the  bosom  of  Thy  love,  for 
Christ's  sake ;  castle  me  in  the  arms  of  Thy 
everlasting  strength  ;  it  is  in  Thy  power  to 
save  me  from  or  give  me  up  into  the  hands  of 
my  enemy  ;  I  have  no  confidence  in  myself  or 
any  other ;  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  my 
cause,  myself,  and  rely  on  Thee."  This  de- 
pendence of  a  soul  will  undoubtedly  awaken 
the  almighty  power  of  God  for  his  defence, — 
W,  OumaU, 


Faith  and  Prudence. 
{Verses  21-23.) 


In  the  text  we  find  Ezra  about  to  re- 
turn to  Jerusalem,  and  ashamed  to  ask 
the  king  for  any  military  protection. 
He  had  made  certain  statements  to  Ar- 
taxerxes,  and  he  was  reluctant  to  act  in 
a  manner  which  might  bring  those  state- 
ments into  question.  He  felt,  what 
Christian  people  often  feel,  the  conflict 
between  prudence  and  faith.  Prudence 
dictates  one  line  of  conduct,  Christian 
consistency  seems  to  dictate  another,  and 
the  perplexity  is  sometimes  painfuL 

We  observe — 

I.  That,  as  a  grand  rule  in  the 
Christian  life,  faith  and  prudence  must 
go  together.  The  Scriptures  often  relate 
the  marvellous  helps  which  good  men 
have  found  in  the  days  of  peril,  but  they 
give  no  countenance  to  presumptuous 
reliance  on  supernatural  intervention. 
As  the  rule  of  life,  the  Scriptures  bind 
us  to  take  all  human  precautions  against 
the  various  forms  of  mischief  we  have 
reason  to  apprehend.  In  this  unbeliev- 
ing generation  there  is  not  much  reason 
to  speak  against  excessive  faith,  but 
there  is  some  reason  thus  to  speak.  ^h§ 
128 


workman  gave  as  his  reason  for  not  going 
to  church,  "  That  religious  peo[)le  were 
hypocrites,  because  they  called  the  tem- 
ple God's  house,  and  yet  put  upon  it  a 
lightning  rod."  This  worldly  workman 
could  not  see  that  God's  Church  ought 
to  recognise  God's  law,  and  act  agree- 
ably thereto ;  bnt  he  thought  he  saw  a 
glaring  contradiction  in  this  union  of 
prudence  and  piety.  And  some  noble 
men  in  the  Church  sympathise  with  this 
workman,  and  reject  the  securities  which 
prudence  would  counsel.  They  will  leave 
their  property  uninsured  ;  in  times  of 
disturbance  they  will  not  claim  the  pro- 
tection of  the  magistrate  ;  and  in  time 
of  sickness  they  will  not  call  the  physi- 
cian. This  is,  to  a  large  extent,  a  serious 
mistake.  As  a  rule,  we  are  to  accept 
the  band  of  soldiers  which  Ezra,  in  pecu- 
liar circumstances,  rejected.  We  must 
not  rashly  cast  ourselves  into  peril  on 
the  idea  that  "  angels  have  charge  con- 
cerning us."  We  must  "  not  tempt  the 
Lord  our  God."  We  must  not,  without 
imperative  reason,  leave  the  ship  and 
itep  upon  the  sea,  otherwise,  with  Peter^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  Tns» 


we  must  suffer  disaster.  If  devout  men 
do  not  attend  to  the  dictates  of  prudence, 
they  must  suffer  for  it ;  and  not  only 
so,  but  they  injure  Christianity  likewise. 
The  truth  of  religion  is  based  on  false 
issues,  and  thus  brought  into  suspicion 
or  contempt.  "  The  good  man  guideth 
his  affairs  with  discretion."  Yet  there 
are  times — 

II.  When  faith  in  God  must  super- 
sede the  provisions  of  ordinary  pru- 
dence. When  faith  and  prudence  gave 
different  counsel,  Ezra  chose  to  "  walk 
by  faith,  and  not  by  sight,"  and  we  must 
all  feel  that  he  did  right.  The  question 
is :  When  are  we  to  go  beyond  merely 
prudential  considerations,  and  venture 
all  on  the  unseen  power  of  God  1  An  at- 
tentive consideration  of  Ezra's  situation 
and  conduct  may  throw  some  light  on 
this  delicate  question.  We  are  *'shut 
up  to  faith"  when — 

1.  Prudential  action  would  most  pro- 
hahly  be  construed   as  a   denial  of  the 
Divine  government.     Ezra  had  told  the 
king  that  "the  hand  of  God  was  upon 
all  them  for  good  who  seek  Him."    And 
now  Ezra  considered  that  to  reveal  any 
anxiety  for  a  guard  of  soldiers  would 
appear  to  the  heathen  king  like  a  practical 
denial  of  the  overshadowing  providence 
of  Jehovah.     A  band  of  soldiers  would 
have   hidden   the   Shepherd    of   Israel ; 
Artaxerxes  alone  would  have  been  seen  ; 
and  so  Ezra,  with  a  fine  spiritual  instinct, 
saw  the  hour  for  simple  trust  had  come, 
and  by  declining  the  soldiers  left  open 
the  full  view  of  God,  and  His  gracious 
and   glorious    government.      A  line   of 
action  is  here  marked  out  for  ourselves. 
To  remove  the  scruples  of  the  few  we 
are  not  to  take  the  lio-htninor  conductors 
from    our   temples,    and    essay    similar 
reformations ;   but  we  must  seek  so  to 
act  that  we  satisfy  the  world  generally 
that  we  do  believe  in  the  Divine  super- 
intendence and  care.     A   worldly  man 
believes  only  in  the  band  of  soldiers ; 
and,  to  let  him  know  that  we  believe  in 
something  beyond,  we  must  sometimes 
be  willing   to  act  without  the  band  of 
soldiers    altogether.       Are    we    not    too 
anxious  about  material  helj)S  and  visible 
securities  ?      We    have    boasted   of   the 
power  of  the  Lord's  good  hand,  and  are 


we  then  to  resort  to  sorry  shifts  for  our 
safety  and  success  1  Has  not  the  Church, 
by  clinging  so  feverishly  to  visible  re- 
sources, and  helps,  and  defenders,  given 
some  sanction  to  the  world's  unbelief] 
When— 

2.  Prudential  action  would  cause  us 
to  lean  on  worldly  associations  and  re- 
sources. Artaxerxes  was  an  idolater,  and 
Ezra  was  anxious  not  to  ask  too  much 
at  his  hands.  It  seemed  inconsistent  to 
Ezra  that  he  should  be  soliciting  a  band 
of  pagan  soldiers  to  protect  God's  people 
and  the  treasures  of  God's  Temple. 
Here,  again,  we  have  a  line  of  action 
marked  out  for  us.  We  are  the  con- 
fessed servants  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel, 
and  prudence  must  not  lead  us  to  worldly 
alliances  and  dependence  upon  sinfid 
circles.  In  our  personal  life  we  must 
observe  this.  We  must  beware  of  com- 
promises with  the  world  for  the  sake  of 
our  personal  safety  and  aggrandisement. 
And  in  regard  to  God's  Chu?xh,  we  must 
observe  this.  Policy  would  often  direct 
us  to  expect  great  things  from  the  great- 
ness, wealth,  or  wisdom  of  unregenerate 
men  for  the  Church's  sake.  So  far  from 
seeking  their  assistance,  we  ought  to  be 
shy  of  their  gold  and  patronage.  Thus 
did  Ezra.  And  thus  acted  Paul  and 
Silas  (Acts  xvi.  16-19).  When  pru- 
dence would  lead  us  to  seek  for  much, 
either  for  ourselves  or  for  the  Church, 
at  the  hands  of  unbelieving  men,  we 
must  pause  and  follow  the  path  faith 
indicates.  Let  us  dare  anything,  suffer 
anything,  rather  than  compromise  our 
own  character  and  the  character  of  God, 
in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  by  linking  our 
fortunes  and  the  fortune  of  the  Church 
with  those  who  are  joined  to  idols. 
When— 

3.  Prudential  action  might  embarrass 
the  progress  of  God's  kingdom.  If  Arta- 
xerxes had  detected  any  inconsistency 
in  Ezra,  he  might  have  ceased  to  be 
favourable  to  his  cause,  and  have  pre- 
vented or  delayed  the  return  to  Jeru- 
salem. Rather  than  endanger  the  popu- 
larity and  progress  of  the  cause  of  God, 
Ezra  was  prepared  to  run  great  risks. 
Here  another  line  of  artion  is  marked 
out  for  us.  If  prudence  wcmld  circum- 
scribe,   fetter,    or   destroy  the  work  of 

I  129 


OHA.P.  vm. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


God,    the    time  has  come  to  appeal  to 
loftier  considerations.     Calculating,  cau- 
tious piety  would  condemn  the  act    of 
Ezra    as    imprudent,    and    no    doubt, 
speaking  after  the    manner  of   men,  it 
was  imprudent ;    but   many   imprudent 
things  have  been  done,  or  there  would 
not  have  been  so  much  Christianity  in 
the  world  as  there  is ;  and  many  more 
imprudent  things  will  have  to  be  done 
before  Christianity  fills  the  world.     The 
practical,  calculating  spirit  of   our  age 
invades  the  Church,  and  in  the  adminis- 
tration of  its  affairs  we  frequently  ask 
too  anxiously  about  "  ways  and  means," 
and   are  afraid  to   venture  to  victories 
beyond    unless  we  can  "see    our  way," 
Let  us  remember  that  God's  kingdom  is 
a  supernatural  one,  and  in  its  promotion 
we  must  often  act  with  a  boldness  which 
could  not  be  justified  in  the  court  of 
prudence.       There    is    a    holy    venture- 
someness  in  evangelisation  which  carries 
with  it  a  far  higher  guarantee  of  success 
than    do   the   pondered    schemes   of   a 
rationalising  statesmanship.    Thus,  then, 
there    are   times — times   which  a  true, 
delicate,    noble    spirit  will    not    fail  to 
recognise — when  we  must  renounce  the 
counsellings    of   worldly    wisdom,    and, 
stepping  boldly  into  the  darkness,  cry, 
with  Ezra,  **  Help  us,  0  Lord  our  God, 
for  we  rest  on  Thee  I  ** 


ni.  The  separation  of  faith  f^om 
prudence  must  be  effected  only  in  the 
spirit  of  sincere  and  earnest  depend- 
ence upon  Heaven  (ver.  23).     No  pre- 
cipitancy,   no    levity,    no   presumption. 
By   fasting   and   prayer   they  obtained 
the   sweet   assurance   that    God   would 
honour  their  faith    and  preserve  them. 
"  He  was  entreated  of  us."     Not  lightly 
must  we  discard  ordinary  defences  and 
helps.     When  we  can  do  no  other,  we 
must  humbly,  solemnly  rest  ourselves  in 
the  hand  of  God.     The  times  come  to 
us  all  when  faith  and  policy  give  con- 
tradictory  counsel.     When   such  times 
come,  let  us  not  be  found  wanting  to 
our  profession  and  our  God.     In  many 
circumstances  simple  trust  in  God  will 
prove  the  truest  policy.  .  .  ,  And,  on 
the  contrary,  policy,  leading  God's  people 
to  rest  on  worldly  men,  and  means,  and 
measures,  finally  demoralises  and  betrays 
them.     Hear  how  God  reproaches  Israel 
for  their   lack  of  faith  in  the  Unseen 
Powers;  "Woe  to  them  that  go  down 
to  Egypt  for  help ;  and  stay  on  horses, 
and  trust  in  chariots,  because  they  are 
many;  and  in  horsemen,  because  they 
are  very  strong ;  but  they  look  not  unto 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  neither  seek  the 
Lord.  .  .  .  Now  the  Egyptians  are  men, 
and  not  God,"  &c.  (Isa.  xzxi.  1,  3).— 
W.  L.  Watkinson, 


Ezra  and  his  Times. 
{Verses  21-23.) 


Let  us  see  how  much  is  included  in 
these  words  of  Ezra,  and  endeavour  to 
ascertain  their  bearing  on  our  position 
and  circumstances. 

I.  Ezra's  language  was  in  striking 
contrast  with  the  general  state  of 
opinion  around  him.  He  says,  not 
egotistically, — great  men  have  no  ego- 
tism,— but  he  says,  because  he  cannot 
help  living  when  there  was  a  time  to 
speak,  "  I  was  ashamed  ;  others  can  take 
their  own  course,  but  I  could  not  ask 
our  heathen  but  noble  king  for  a  band 
of  horsemen  and  soldiers  to  help  us  in 
the  way."  Others  might,  and  probably 
did,  feel  that  it  would  only  be  courteous 
to  accept  the  king's  offer;  others,  that 
130 


it  would  look  more  respectable ;  others, 
that  it  would  be  safer  ;  others,  that  they 
would  get  through  their  journey  quicker ; 
and  others,  that  Ezra  was  carrying  things 
rather  too  far,  he  might  have  a  little 
thought  for  timid  women  and  children. 
Such  thoughts  as  these  were  very  current, 
depend  upon  it,  amid  that  motley  crowd. 
He  knows  he  is  right,  and  can  afford 
to  be  singular ;  and,  as  he  can  bide  his 
time,  he  knows  the  people  will  one  day 
thank  him  for  what  they  may  now 
condemn.  And  here  we  see  a  guiding 
principle  for  us.  At  particular  crises  of 
public  opinion,  it  devolves  upon  some 
men  to  go  into  the  land  of  the  enemy, 
that  they  may  bring  truth  out  of  cap- 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAP.  vin. 


tivity.  It  is  a  perilous  and  generally 
a  thankless  task ;  but  it  must  be  done, 
tliat  it  may  be  brought  out  into 
a  glorious  enlargement,  before  men 
shall  see  its  form  or  feel  its  power. 
Such  men  have  no  ultimate  fear  for 
truth  \  they  know  its  vitality  depends 
upon  no  accidental  prosperity,  and  can 
be  destroyed  by  no  accidental  adversity ; 
such  men  never  change  sides ;  they 
have  sometimes  sailed  with  truth  under 
sunny  skies  into  a  secure  haven  ;  they 
have  also  sailed  with  her  through  many 
a  *'  stormy  wind  and  tempest,"  and  they 
have  always  come  right  at  last.  The 
world  wonders  at  their  eccentricity,  and 
recommends  them  to  beg  or  borrow  a 
band  of  soldiers  and  horsemen,  to  assist 
them  in  their  progress ;  but  they  are 
**  ashamed "  to  think  of  such  a  thing ; 
it  hurts  their  consciences,  and  wounds 
there  are  long  in  healing,  and  when 
healed  they  leave  ugly  scars.  If  they 
could  make  truth  successful  to-morrow, 
they  must  do  it  with  truth's  weapons, 
and  her  weapons  only ;  but  they  cannot 
advance  the  liberation  of  truth  by  any 
unworthy  means,  or  by  any  unnatural 
alliance.  "  Christ  for  ever,  and  His 
word,"  cried  Luther,  as  he  left  Wittem- 
berg  with  a  penny  in  his  pocket,  and  a 
threadbare  gown  upon  his  back.  "  Christ 
for  ever,  and  His  word,"  let  every 
modern  Ezra  and  Luther  say,  until  that 
word  shall  enlighten  every  mind  and 
emancipate  every  heart ;  and  this  it  will 
do,  if  we  will  let  truth  do  its  work, 
without  "soldiers  and  horsemen." 

II.  Ezra's  situation  afforded  him  an 
opportunity  for  asserting  this  great 
principle  under  very  trying  circum- 
stances. In  reading  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, it  is  needful  to  call  to  mind  the 
peculiar  political  constitution  of  the 
Jews.  It  was  a  pure  theocracy.  The 
only  one  the  world  has  ever  seen,  or 
is  likely  to  "see.  God  was  their  King, 
and  their  King  was  their  God.  God 
would  defend  them ;  He  would  be  a 
wall  ©f  fire  round  about  them;  He 
would  lead  them  forth  to  battle ;  He 
would  be  their  national  safeguard. 
This  the  Jews  continually  forgot.  Their 
crying  sin  was  departure  from  the  true 
theocratic  idea.     They  trusted  in  every- 


thing but  truth ;  in  every  one  but  God. 
Egypt  and  Assyria  were,  by  turns,  their 
strongholds  of  confidence.  Hence  the 
prophet's  cry,  "Woe  to  them  that  go 
down  to  Egypt  for  help,"  <fec.  (Isa.  xxxL 
1,  &c.). 

But  Ezra  fell  back  upon  the  old  prin- 
ciple of  the  theocracy  What  was  true 
in  Judea,  he  took  to  be  true  in  Babylon, 
That  which  was  true  to  Isaiah  was  true 
to  him  now.  He  could  not  Lee  any  clear 
path  of  safety,  except  in  the  path  of 
duty ;  and  he  would  rather  be  there 
than  in  the  way  of  mere  expediency. 
Others  might  suggest  that,  under  pre- 
sent circumstances,  they  need  not  be  so 
very  precise  ;  they  had  permission  to  re- 
turn to  Jerusalem,  was  not  that  enough  t 
If  the  king,  of  his  own  goodness,  chose 
to  help  them  with  horsemen,  they  could 
accept  his  offer  up  to  the  gates  of  Jeru- 
salem ;  they  were  not  now  in  the  land 
of  the  theocracy,  and  allowance  must  be 
made  for  their  peculiar  circumstances ; 
and  to  be  so  strict  about  an  abstract 
principle  was  being  righteous  overmuch. 
All  that  was  perfectly  incomprehensible 
to  Ezra ;  he  knew  of  no  guiding  star 
but  principle,  and  that  alone  he  resolved 
to  follow. 

And  Christ's  whole  life  illustrates  this 
principle  of  confidence  in  God  and  in 
truth,  once  exhibited  by  Ezra  under 
circumstances  of  great  temptation  ;  a 
principle  we  seek  to  uphold,  as  consti- 
tuting a  very  essential  part  of  a  free, 
a  spiritual  Church  state.  "  How  often 
was  Christ  urged  by  the  impatient  long- 
ings, and  the  worldly  spirit  of  the 
Jews,  to  gratify  their  intense  and  long- 
cherished  hopes,  and  to  establish  His 
kingdom  in  a  worldly  form,  before  the 
last  demand  was  made  upon  Him,  as 
He  entered,  in  the  midst  of  an  enthu- 
siastic host,  the  capital  city  of  God's 
earthly  dominion,  before  His  last  re- 
fusal, expressed  in  His  submission  to 
those  sufferings  which  resulted  in  the 
triumph  of  God's  pure  spiritual  king- 
dom!" 

Thus,  oftentimes,  the  good  man  will 
have  to  strive  against  the  spirit  of  his 
age;  but  obeying  Christ,  and  confiding 
in  Christ,  whilst  doing  so,  his  conflict 
will  lead  to  certain  victory  :  he  will  not 

131 


OHAP.  Tin. 


EOMILETIC  OOMMENTART:  EZRA. 


conquer  by  "  a  band  of  horsemen  and  down  of  strongholds,  in  the  use  of  which 

soldiers,"  but  by  the  exhibition  and  en-  the  Christian  warrior  says,  "Now  thanks 

forcement  of  truth,  by  the  use  of  weapons  be  unto  God,  who  causeth  us  to  triumph 

that  aie  not  carnal,  but  spiritual ;  wea-  in  every  place,  by  Jesus  Christ." — W. 

pons  mighty,  nevertheless,  to  the  pulling  G.  Barrett, 


Ezra  an  Example  in  Business. 


The  circumstances  in  which  Ezra  was 
placed  were  as  difficult  as  can  be  con- 
ceived. He  had  to  contend  with  the 
scorn  and  opposition  of  pagans,  and 
with  the  corruptions  of  Jews.  He  bears 
up  under  his  difficulties  :  he  labours 
through  them ;  he  endures  as  seeing 
Him  who  is  invisible. 


{Verses  21-23.) 

I.  His  humiliation. 

II.  His  faith. 

III.  His  prayer. 
rv.  His  holy  jealousy, 
V.  His  success. 


— i?.  CecU. 


Contrasts. 


(  Verse 

"  The  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  all 
them  for  goody  ^  &c. 

I.  A  contrast  of  human  character. 

1 .  Those  that  seek  God.  To  seek  God 
implies — (1.)  Faith  in  Him.  Seekers 
after  God  believe  in  the  existence  of 
truth,  righteousness,  love  ;  in  the  exist- 
ence of  a  Supreme  and  Perfect  Being; 
they  believe  that  God  is.  (2.)  Desire 
after  Him.  Seekers  after  God  believe 
in  Him  as  the  Supremely  Good  and 
Beautiful — not  only  the  Almighty,  but 
the  All-attractive.  They  do  not  simply 
seek  His  blessing  or  His  favour,  but 
Himself.  The  former  may  be  mean  ;  the 
latter  must  be  noble.  To  seek  Him  is 
to  desire  the  highest  truth  and  righte- 
ousness, goodness  and  beauty,  <fec.  (3.) 
Prayer  to  Him.  They  who  come  to 
God  believe  not  only  that  He  is,  but 
that  *'  He  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that 
diligently  seek  Him."  Out  of  the  faith 
and  longing  of  their  heart  they  petition 
Him  for  His  favour  and  His  presence. 
Their  attitude  and  inclination  is  to- 
wards God. 

2.  TJiose  that  forsahe  God.  Sin  is 
frequently  represented  as  forsaking  God, 
departure  from  Him,  distance  from  Him 
(Isa.  lix.  2;  Jer.  i.  16,  ii.  13;  Luke 
XV.  13  ;  Eph.  ii.  13;  Col.  i.  21,  22).  For- 
saking God  begins  in  the  heart.  Some 
sinful  thought  or  purpose  has  been  che- 

132 


22.) 

rished,  and  so  God  has  been  shut  out  of 
the  heart.  Guilt  has  been  contracted, 
and  the  sinner  has  become  afraid  of  God, 
and  tried  to  escape  from  Him.  (Comp. 
Gen.  iii.  8-10.)  This  forsaking  God 
proceeds  from  the  heart  to  the  conduct. 
God*s  commands  may  be  outwardly 
obeyed  for  a  time  by  one  who  has  for- 
saken God  Himself ;  but  ere  long  the 
commands  also  will  be  set  at  naught. 
When  the  affections  are  estranged  from 
God,  the  actions  will  soon  follow,  <fec. 

Here  then  is  the  contrast  of  character : 
The  one  seeks  God,  draws  ever  nearer  to 
Him,  (fee;  the  other  forsakes  God,  departs 
ever  farther  from  Him,  <fec.  Ask  your- 
self— Which  is  my  character  1  Am  I  a 
seeker  or  a  forsaker  of  God  1 

II.  A  contrast  of  Divine  treatment. 

1.  "  The  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  all 
them  for  good  that  seek  Him."  His  power 
is  exercised  on  their  behalf  ;  His  pro- 
vidence watches  over  and  secures  their 
true  interests.  But  is  this  really  the 
case  ?  Do  we  not  sometimes  find  those 
that  seek  God  in  poverty,  privation, 
and  pain?  Do  they  not  sometimes 
cry,  "  Thy  hand  is  heavy  upon  me "  ? 
not,  Thy  hand  is  upon  me  "  for  good  "  % 
Earthly  parents  see  many  things  to  be 
for  the  good  of  their  children,  which 
appear  unmixed  evils  to  the  children 
themselves.     Does  the   sick  infant  see 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  YltL 


that  the  nauseous  medicine  which  heals 
him  is  for  his  good  1  Does  the  young 
schoolboy  see  that  it  is  for  his  good  to 
master  the  declensions  and  conjugations 
of  grammar  1     And 

«'What  ami? 
An  infant  crying  in  the  night : 
An  infant  crying  for  the  light : 
And  with  no  language  but  a  cry." 

— Tennyson. 

Not  by  any  hasty  conclusions  on  the 
results  of  human  character  and  conduct ; 
not  by  an  induction  formed  from  a  brief 
and  narrow  observation  of  human  ex- 
periences, must  our  judgment  of  the 
Divine  procedure  be  determined ;  but  by 
His  own  revelations  of  His  character  and 
government,  and  by  the  testimonies  of 
the  wise  and  good  amongst  men.  These 
unite  in  assuring  us  that  '*  the  hand  of 
our  God  is  upon  all  them  for  good  that 
seek  Him."  (1.)  For  their  good  tem- 
porally. Being  perfectly  acquainted 
with  the  circumstances,  temperament, 
and  tendencies  of  every  man,  He  gives 
to  each  one  who  seeks  Him  what  will 
really  be  for  his  good.  *'  No  good  will 
He  withhold  from  them  that  walk  up- 
rightly." (2.)  For  their  good  spiritually. 
Many  and  precious  are  the  spiritual 
benefits  which  He  bestows  upon  His 
people,  e.g.f  pardon  and  peace,  purity 
and  power,  grateful  recollections  and 
inspiring  anticipations,  &c.  (3.)  For 
their  good  eternally.  He  is  preparing 
them  for  a  glorious  destiny,  and  endless. 
Our  Lord  has  gone  to  prepare  a  place 
for  us  in  His  Father's  house.  And  as 
He  was  both  guide  and  guardian  to  Ezra 
and  his  compaiiy  from  Babylon  to  Jeru- 
salem, so  is  He  the  guide  and  guardian 
of  all  His  people  to  their  blessed  and 
abiding  home.  They  enter  heaven 
through  Him. 

2.  ^^His  power  and  His  wrath  are 
against  all  them  tJiat  forsake  Him.*'  A 
sentimental  theory  which  ignores  the 
stern  aspects  of  the  character  of  God  is 
very  popular  with  some  people.  There 
is  a  growing  tendency  to  magnify  the 
love  of  God,  and  then  deny  His  wrath, 
&c.  We  rejoice  in  knowing  that  *'  He 
will  have  all  men  to  be  saved  ; "  that 
He  has  "no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the 
wicked,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from 


his  way  and  live ; "  but  we  cannot  ques- 
tion His  wrath.  God  is  tender,  without 
weakness ;  angry,  without  sin.  He  is 
just,  as  well  as  merciful.  Sin  has  been 
punished  by  Him,  is  punished  by  Him, 
and  will  be  punished  by  Him.  (Comp. 
Prov.  xi.  21;  2  Pet.  ii.  4-9;  Rev.  vl 
16,  17).  (a).  "His  power ;"  who  can 
estimate  it  1  It  is  "  against  all  them 
that  forsake  Him."  (6).  Who  can  con- 
ceive "  His  wrath"  ?  It  is  infinite  as 
His  love.  It  is  His  love  flaming  forth 
against  the  incorrigibly  wicked,  (c). 
"  He  is  mighty  in  strength  ;  who  hath 
hardened  himself  against  Him,  and  hath 
prospered  ? " 
CoNCi.usiON  : 

1.  How  solemnly  man's  destiny  is 
in  his  oivn  hands,  or,  more  correctly,  in 
his  own  choice  I  "  Deeds  are  destiny ; 
character  is  fate."  For  our  character 
we  are  each  responsible.  Heaven  or 
hell  is  the  result  of  man's  own  choice 
and  character. 

2.  In  this  world  character  may  he 
changed.  Those  who  have  forsaken  God 
may  return  to  Him,  assured  of  a  joyous 
welcome.  By  the  grace  of  God  sinners 
may  here  and  now  be  converted  into 
saints.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  He 
may  be  found,"  &c.  (Isa.  Iv.  6,  7).  "  O 
Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God," 
(fee.  (Hos.  xiv.  1,  2,  4). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  It  is  very  common  to  separate  the  ques- 
tion of  punishment  from  its  strict  relationship 
to  justice,  and  to  argue  it  on  infinite  goodness. 
What  is  this  proper  view  of  God?  "Good  is 
the  Lord."  But  is  He  good  to  restrain  any 
administration  of  government,  or  to  impede 
any  exercise  of  law  ?  Does  His  goodness  look 
more  indifferently  on  moral  evil  than  His 
justice?  Is  it  not  its  peculiar  province  to 
check  the  consequences  of  sin?  We  know  not 
of  the  goodness  which  exists  only  to  pity  and 
to  spare, — which  is  a  misprison  of  right  and 
holy  principle,  wliich  is  a  connivance  at  every 
moral  perturbation  of  the  universe.  It  is  easy 
to  reduce  this  "awful  goodness"  to  our  de- 
praved wish  and  idea.  .  .  .  "Our  God  is  a 
consuming  fire."  *'He  is  terrible  out  of  His 
holy  place."  "God  shall  destroy  for  ever." 
••The  enemies  of  the  Lord  shall  be  as  the  fat 
of  lambs."  Those  passages  which  speak  of 
His  ire  and  wrath  are  many,  reiterated,  and 
vehement.  Do  they  tell  of  goodness,  partial 
and  fond,  as  it  is  now  presumed  ?  A  mere 
indul£^ence  ?     A  figure,  most  beautiful  and 

133 


CHAP.  Till. 


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


frequent,  does  Holy  Scripture  present.     God  is 
our    Parent.     "Have   we    not   one  Father?" 
It  is  a  figure, — "like  as  a  father."    It  is  argued 
that  all  punishment,  except  for  the  improve- 
ment of  the  child,  would  be  inconsistent  with 
that  relation.     But  may  not  the  case  of  the 
son's   disobedience   be   so    heinous,    that   all, 
under  the  influence  of  the  most  natural  feel- 
ing,  would  justify  a  treatment  the  most  ex- 
treme ?    disownment  ?    disinheritance  ?    final 
separation?    The  paternal  relationship,  though 
not  as  to  its  fact,  yet,  as  to  its  exercise,   may 
be   altered    by  the  conduct  of  the  offspring : 
moral   government   cannot   be   altered.     The 
one  might  be  renounced  :  the  oiher  is  neces- 
sary and  insubvertible.     May  we  not  fear  that, 
in  consequence  of  sin,  the  paternal  favour  is 
withdrawn,  and  the  filial  privilege  forfeited  ? 
Let  that  father  be  the  magistrate.     The  child 
is  now  under  his  jurisdiction  as  well  as  dis- 
cipline.    That  child  may  be  the  transgressor 
of  social  law.     It  is  conceivable  that  his  father 
may    be   called    to   pass  sentence   upon  him. 
Will  not  all,  if  it  be  his  inevitable  duty,  see 
in   its  discharge  a  title  to  their  admiration? 
Without  any  impeachment  of  his  tenderness, 
is   not  such   bearing  truly  great?     Does  not 
history  hallow  it  ?     Has  it  not  saved  common- 
wealths ?    Why  should  not  the  same  suffrage 
be   accorded   to  God  ?     He  is  the  '*  righteous 
Father."    He  sitteth  King  for  ever.    He  reigns 
not  for  a  part,  but  for  the  whole.     His  good- 
ness must  agree  with  universal  justice,  or  with 
that  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  protection 
of  universal  claim  and  interest.  .  .  .  And  if 
this  notion  of  goodness  is  to  be  entertained, 
how   frequently   would    it   have   been    disap- 
pointed !     Had  earlier  creatures  than  ourselves 
been  forewarned  that  our  earth  was  soon  to  be 
formed,  and  our  race  to  be  created,  it  would 
have  seemed  improbable  to  them  that  aught 
but   good    could   be    admitted.      The    entire 
scheme    would    have  demanded  this  expecta- 
tion.    What  evils  do  exist,  moral  and  physical ! 
Then  their  idea  of  that  which  goodness  can 
allow  would  have  been  disappointed.     It  would 
have  been  false.     When  men  have  been  threat- 
ened with  Divine  judgments,  they  have  ima- 
gined a  presumption    against   them    in    the 
Divine    goodness.      To   the   antediluvian    the 
impending  fate  appeared  most  unreasonable  ; 
the  men  of  Sodom  derided  the  fear  of  over- 
throw.    If  they  thought  of  God  at  all,  argu- 
ments like  those  which  we  have  considered  were 
ready.     Goodness  forbids  it.     A  parent  cannot 
do  it^  &c.     Then   their   idea  of   that  which 


goodness  can  allow  was  disappointed.  It  wai 
false.  So  we  may  speculate  concerning  the 
future  state.  Its  punishment  may  affect  our 
views  as  exaggerated  beyond  all  showing  of 
truth,  of  reason,  of  analogy.  We  may  inter- 
pose tiie  Divine  goodness.  We  may  pronounce 
that  this  state  of  things  cannot  be.  But  we 
are  not  placed  more  favourably  to  give  judg- 
ment than  they  who  have  palpably  erred. 
Our  idea  may  be  disappointed.  It  may  be 
false.— i2.  W.  Hamilton,  LL.D.,  D.D. 

(6)  How  miserable  will  all  wicked  rebels  be 
under  this  power  of  God  !  Men  may  break 
His  laws,  but  not  impair  His  arm ;  they  may 
slight  His  sword,  but  cannot  resist  His  power. 
If  He  swear  that  He  will  sweep  a  place  with 
the  besom  of  destruction,  "as  He  hath  thought, 
so  shall  it  come  to  pass  ;  and  as  He  hath 
purposed,  so  shall  it  stand  "  (Isa.  xiv.  23,  21). 
Rebels  against  an  earthly  prince  may  exceed 
him  in  strength,  and  be  more  powerful  than 
their  sovereign  ;  none  can  equal  God,  much 
less  exceed  Him.  As  none  can  exercise  an 
act  of  hostility  against  Him  without  His  per- 
missive will,  so  none  can  struggle  from  under 
His  hand  without  His  positive  will.  He  hath 
an  arm  not  to  be  moved,  a  hand  not  to  be 
wrung  aside.  God  is  represented  on  His 
throne  "like  a  jasper  stone"  (Rev.  iv.  3),  as 
One  of  invincible  power  when  He  comes  to 
judge  ;  the  jasper  is  a  stone  which  withstands 
the  greatest  force.  Though  men  resist  the 
order  of  His  laws,  they  cannot  resist  the  sen- 
tence of  their  punishment,  nor  the  execution 
of  it.  None  can  any  more  exempt  themselves 
from  the  arm  of  His  strength  than  they  can 
from  the  authority  of  His  dominion.  As  they 
must  bow  to  His  sovereignty,  so  they  must 
sink  under  His  force.  A  prisoner  in  this 
world  may  make  his  escape,  but  a  prisoner  in 
the  world  to  come  cannot  (Job  x.  7) :  *'  There 
is  none  that  can  deliver  out  of  Tliine  hand." 
There  is  none  to  deliver  when  He  tears  in 
pieces  (Ps.  1.  22). — S.  CharnocJce,  B.D. 

(c)  Wicked  men  hereafter  M'ill  feel  the  full 
weight  of  God's  wrath.  In  this  world  they 
have  the  wrath  of  God  abiding  on  them,  but 
then  it  will  be  executed  upon  them;  now  they 
are  the  objects  of  it,  but  then  they  will  be  the 
subjects  of  it.  Now  it  hangs  over  them,  but 
then  it  shall  fall  upon  them  in  its  full  weight, 
without  any  alleviation,  or  any  moderation  or 
restraint. — President  Edwa/rd$, 


Seeking  the  Lord,  and  its  Advantages. 


**  The  hand  of  our  God  is  upon  all 
them  for  good  that  seek  Him"  &c.  Our 
text  contains  a  great  scriptural  truth, 
applicable  to  all  ages,  countries,  and 
persons.  It  is  a  truth  which  is  cor- 
134 


{Verse  22.) 

roborated  by  many  parallel  passages, 
and  therefore  expresses  a  subject  of 
more  than  ordinary  importance.  There 
are  two  things  clearly  expressed  in  the 
text,  —  man's    responsibility,    and    the 


HOMILETIO  OOMMBNTART:  EZRA, 


OHA.P.  Tin. 


different  results  of  piety  and  sin.  Qod*8 
hand  shall  be  upon  all  those  who  seek 
Him,  and  that  for  good,  and  His  wrath 
is  against  those  who  forsake  Him. 
Observe,  we  are  directed — 

I.  To  seeking  God,  and  its  advan- 
tages.     Seeking  God  denotes — 

1.  A  consciousness  of  our  need  of 
Him,  Men  in  general  do  not  regard 
God,  He  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts. 
Many  feel  as  Pharaoh  did  when  he 
exclaimed,  *'  Who  is  the  Lord  ]  "  &c. 
But  the  enlightened,  convicted  sinner, 
and  the  true  Christian,  feel  that  God  is 
the  fountain  of  their  existence,  and  the 
only  source  of  their  peace  and  happi- 
ness. "Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but 
Thee,"  <kc.  God  is  all  and  in  all  to 
the  pious  mind ;  and  their  need  of  Him 
is  every  moment's  experience. 

2.  Earnest  and  fervent  prayer  to 
God  (ver.  23.)  Seeking  and  praying 
are  synonymous.  Thus  Christ  taught 
His  disciples.  "Ask,  .  .  .  seek,  .  .  . 
knock,"  &c.  Thus,  too.  Job  says  (xxiii. 
3),  "  Oh  that  I  knew  where  I  might 
find  Him  ! "  &c.  We  cannot  find  God 
but  by  earnest  prayer  and  supplication, 
and  He  is  ever  near  to  all  who  call  upon 
Him.  "  Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the 
name  of  the  Lord,"  &c. 

3.  To  seek  the  Lord  is  to  come  to  Him 
in  the  way  of  His  appointment.  We 
may  seek  anxiously  and  fervently,  but 
what  will  it  avail  if  we  seek  in  the 
wrong  way  1  Thus  heathen  philo- 
sophers laboured  to  know  the  true  God. 
Thus,  too,  many  anxious  pagans.  Many 
are  like  the  devotional  eunuch,  they  read, 
(fee,  but  understand  not.  The  Word 
of  God  is,  however,  explicit  and  full  on 
this  subject.  Christ  is  "the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life.''  "  One  God,  and 
one  Mediator,"  <fec.  "  No  man  cometh 
to  the  Father  but  by  "  Christ. 

4.  To  labour  in  all  things  to  have  His 
approbation.  To  commit  all  to  Him ; 
to  refer  all  to  Him ;  to  acknowledge 
Him  in  all ;  and  seek  His  blessing  upon 
all  our  steps.  To  set  the  Lord  always 
before  us,  and  to  labour  to  walk  well- 
pleasing  in  His  sight. 

Notice  the  advantages  arising  to  those 
who  thus  seek  Him,  "The. hand  of  our 
God  is  upon  all,"  &c. 


(1.)  The  hand  of  His  pardoning  mercy. 
To  those  who  thus  seek  Him,  He  says, 
"  I,  even  I,  am  He  who  blotteth  out  your 
iniquities."  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord,"  <fec. 
Then  it  follows,  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake 
his  ways,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
thoughts,"  <fec. 

(2.)  Ihe  hand  of  His  delivering  power. 
He  delivers  the  souls  of  His  people, 
raises  them  from  the  horrible  pit,  &c. 
Translates  them  from  the  kingdom  of 
darkness,  brings  their  spirits  out  of  the 
prison  of  sin,  and  from  the  dominion 
of  Satan.  Kescues  from  "the  gall  of 
bitterness,  and  the  bond,"  <kc. 

(3.)  The  hand  of  His  providing  good- 
ness. They  that  seek  the  Lord  shall 
not  want  any  good  thing.  He  is  their 
Shepherd,  and  they  shall  not  want. 
He  leads  them  into  green  pastures,  <kc. 
"  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need," 
(fee. 

(4.)  The  hand  of  His  heavenly  guid- 
ance. The  Lord  leads  and  guides  His 
people.  "  He  led  them  by  the  right 
way,"  (fee.  "  The  Lord  shall  lead  thee 
continually,"  &c.  "Thou  shalt  guide 
me  with  Thy  counsel,  and  afterward, 
receive  me  to  glory." 

(5.)  The  hand  of  His  sustaining  grace. 
The  Christian  is  weak  and  feeble ;  of 
himself,  insufficient :  exposed  to  many 
enemies  and  perils.  The  saints  of  the 
Lord  are  therefore  only  absolutely  secure 
in  His  hand.  He  keeps  them  by  His 
mighty  power;  He  preserves  them  for  His 
kingdom  and  glory.     There  is  often — 

(6.)  The  hand  of  His  manifest  provi- 
dence. How  clearly  do  we  see  this  in 
the  history  of  His  Church  and  people  ! 
It  is  said  of  one,  "  So  long  as  he  sought 
the  Lord,  the  Lord  made  him  to  prosper." 
How  many  thousands  have  experienced 
that  "godliness  is  profitable  to  all 
things,"  (fee. 

IL  Forsaking  God,  and  its  atten- 
dant evils.  To  forsake  God  is  the  op- 
posite course  to  that  we  have  described 
in  seeking  the  Lord.  It  is  refusing  Him 
homage  and  veneration.  It  is  to  disobey 
Him  ;  to  live  without  His  fear ;  to  turn 
from  the  way  of  righteousness ;  to  with- 
draw our  hand  from  the  Gospel  plough ; 
to  draw  back;  to  make  shipwreck,  &c. 
Now,    against    these,    His   power   and 


CHAP.  VIII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


wrath  are  declared.  Power  to  punish, 
wnitli  to  inflict  a  fearful  and  eternal 
doom.  Power  and  wrath  of  God  to 
cast  both  body  and  soul  into  hell  fire. 
(See  Heb.  x.  22,  <fec.)  "  A  certain  fear- 
ful looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery 
indignation,  which  shall  devour  the 
adversaries." 

Application.     We  learn : 


1.  The  value  of  true  religion.  The 
good  hand  of  the  Lord  upon  us. 

2.  The  awfulness  of  apostasy  from 
the  Lord. 

3.  The  necessity  of  both  vigilance 
and  perseverance.  (See  Heb.  iii.  12 ; 
iv.  10-13.) 

4.  Urge  the  unconverted  to  seek  the 
Lord,  and  live. — Jabez  Burns,  D,J), 


The  Guardianship  of  the  Sacred  Treasures. 
(Verses  24-30.) 


Having  sought  the  Divine  guidance 
and  protection  in  their  journey,  Ezra 
proceeds  to  make  wise  arrangements  for 
the  safe  conveyance  of  tiie  offerings  for 
the  service  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusalem. 
True  prayer  will  always  be  followed  by 
earnest  effort  in  the  same  direction. 

Notice : 

L  The  treasures  to  be  guarded. 
"  The  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  ves- 
sels, the  offering  of  the  house  of  our 
God,"  &c.  (vers.  26-27).  These  trea- 
sures were — 

1.  Valuable  in  themselves.  "  Six 
hundred  and  fifty  talents  of  silver,"  &c. 
(vers.  26,  27).  (We  have  already  stated 
the  estimated  value  of  these  things  :  see 
Explanatory  Notes  on  ver.  26,  and  homily 
on  **  Ezra's  confidence  in  God,"  vers. 
21-23.) 

2.  Valuable  as  being  consecrated  to 
God.  Mark  how  Ezra  speaks  of  them  : 
"  The  offering  of  the  house  of  our  God  : 
.  .  .  the  vessels  are  holy  also ;  and  the 
silver  and  the  gold  a  freewill  offering 
unto  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers." 
To  every  pious  mind  the  fact  that  they 
were  designed  for  sacred  uses  would 
greatly  enhance  their  worth. 

3.  Valuable  as  being  the  spontaneous 
gifts  of  friends  and  well-wishers.  *'  The 
king,  an^  his  counsellors,  and  his  lords, 
and  all  Israel  there  present,  had  offered 
...  a  freewill  offering  unto  the  Lord 
God  of  your  fathers."  As  expressions 
of  the  good  will  and  kind  feeling  of  the 
donors  to  the  returning  exiles  and  to 
their  religion,  these  treasures  were  very 
precious.  They  were  well  worthy  of 
the  most  wa^^chful  care. 

II.  The  guardians  of  the  treasures. 
i3r, 


"  Then  I  separated  twelve  of  the  chief 
of  the  priests,"  <fec,  (ver.  24).  These 
guardians  were — 

1.  Adequate  in  number.  There  were 
twenty-four  of  them  in  all ;  twelve 
priests  and  twelve  Levites.  It  was  well 
to  have  a  goodly  number  for  the  weighty 
responsibility. 

2.  Appropriate  in  official  character. 
They  were  priests  and  Levites.  Ezra 
*'  said  unto  them,  Ye  are  holy  unto  the 
Lord ;  the  vessels  are  holy  also."  The 
consecrated  things  were  intrusted  to 
consecrated  persons.  This  was  in  har- 
mony with  Divinely-appointed  usage 
amongst  them  (see  Num.  iii.  5-10).  It 
was  also  in  accordance  with  the  charge 
of  God  by  Isaiah  the  prophet :  "  Be  ye 
clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  " 
(Isa.  Iii.  11).  The  principle  is  of  uni- 
versal application,  that  holy  things 
should  be  committed  to  the  charge  of 
holy  persons. 

3.  Distinguished  amongst  their  bre- 
thren. Ezra  selected  *'  twelve  of  the  chief 
priests ; "  and  Sherebiah  and  Hashabiah 
were  eminent  amongst  the  Levites  (see 
on  vers.  18,  19).  By  selecting  eminent 
men  for  this  trust  Ezra  acted  prudently  ; 
for  they  would  be  the  more  likely  to 
keep  it  with  fidelity  than  untried  men. 
He  also  acted  religiously ;  for  he  thus 
honoured  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  the 
Lord  God,  to  whom  these  treasures  had 
been  offered. 

III.  The  charge  to  the  guardians  of 
the  treasures — 

1.  Points  out  the  value  of  the  things 
committed  to  them.  In  three  ways  Ezra 
does  this — (1.)  By  weighing  them  so 
carefully    before   delivering   them   into 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAT.  TUL 


their  hands.  He  *'  weighed  unto  them 
the  silver,"  &c.  (vers.  25-27).  (2.)  By 
reminding  tlieni  of  their  source.  They 
were  the  voluntary  offerings  of  "the 
king,  and  his  counsellors,  and  his  lords, 
and  all  Israel  there  present."  (3.)  By 
reminding  them  of  their  destination. 
They  were  designed  for  the  service  of 
the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers. 

2.  Enjoins  watchful  care  of  these 
things.  "  Watch  ye,  and  keep  them." 
They  were  to  see  to  it  that  they  were 
neither  lost,  nor  stolen,  nor  intermingled 
with  the  other  possessions  of  this  great 
company  during  their  long  journey. 

3.  Indicates  their  responsibility  for 
them.  "  Watch  ye,  and  keep  them, 
until  ye  weigh  them  before  the  chief  of 
the  priests  and  the  Levites,"  &c.  (ver. 
29).  Thus  Ezra  gave  them  to  under- 
stand that  they  would  be  required  to 
deliver  them  up  at  the  end  of  the  jour- 
ney safely  and  accurately.  They  would 
have  to  account  for  them — (1.)  Exactly  : 
"  until  ye  weigh  them."  The  same 
weight  which  had  been  given  to  them 
they  must  deliver  up  at  the  end  of  the 
journey.  (2.)  Unto  the  chief  men  of 
the  nation  :  "  the  chief  of  the  priests 
and  Levites,  and  chief  of  the  fathers  of 
Israel."  (3.)  In  the  chief  place  of  the 
nation :  *'  at  Jerusalem,  in  the  cham- 
bers of  the  house  of  the  Lord."  Thus 
Ezra  impressed  upon  them  the  import- 
ance and  sacredness  of  the  trust  com- 
mitted to  them,  and  the  greatness  of 
their  responsibility. 

IV.  The  acceptance  of  the  guardian- 
ship of  the  treasures.  The  selected 
priests  and  Levites  did  not  seek  to 
excuse  themselves  from  this  trust  and 
its  onerous  obligations ;  they  do  not 
seem  to  have  oflfered  any  demur  in  rela- 
tion to  it,  but  accepted  it  at  once.  '*  So 
took  the  priests  and  the  Levites  the 
weight  of  the  silver,"  <fec.  (ver.  30). 

Conclusion  : 

1.  Our  subject  speaks  to  ministers  of 
the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  How  pre- 
cious and  sacred  is  the  trust  committed 
to  them  1  How  solemn  their  responsi- 
bility !  (1  Cor.  iv.  1,  2;  Tit.  i.  7,  9.) 
By  the  Holy  Ghost  let  them  seek  to  be 
faithful  to  their  glorious,  awful  trust 
(1  Tim.  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim.  i.  14).   (a.) 


2.  To  all  who  have  charge  of  public 
funds  or  the  property  of  others.  Let 
them  copy  the  scrupulous  care  and 
fidelity  of  Ezra,  that  they  may  be  able, 
when  called  upon,  to  give  a  punctual 
and  exact  account  of  the  things  com- 
mitted unto  them. 

3.  To  all  men.  God  has  committed 
some  gift  to  every  man  to  be  used  in 
accordance  with  His  holy  will ;  and  He 
will  call  every  man  to  account  for  such 
gift.  Blessed  are  they  who  will  be  able 
to  render  such  an  account  as  shall  call 
forth  from  Him  the  "  Well  done,  good 
and  faithful  servant  1  *'  (Comp.  Matt. 
XXV.  14-30.)  (6.) 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Brethren,  have  we  at  all  understood 
what  was  done  to  us  when  we  were  ordained 
— that  it  was  an  act  of  exchange  and  of  inter- 
change— we  giving  ourselves  to  Jesus  Christ  j 
He  giving  to  us  a  trust  of  ministry,  on  the 
definite  basis  of  a  Divine  communication  of 
truth  ? 

How  little  have  they  realised  the  good  de- 
posit, who  have  regarded  it  as  nothing  more 
tlian  the  reading  of  services  or  the  preaching 
of  sermons,  out  of  the  resources  of  natural  or 
acquired  knowledge,  and  as  only  a  part  of  the 
life,  of  which  all  other  parts  might  be  just  as 
earthly,  just  as  self-indulgent,  just  as  frivolous, 
as  if  no  transaction  at  all  had  passed  between 
us  and  Jesus  Christ  !  How  many  must  con- 
fess, sorrowfully  and  with  tears,  that  they  were 
not  conscious  then,  if  they  have  ever  awakened 
to  the  consciousness  afterwards,  of  anything 
whatsoever  having  been  put  into  their  hands 
when  they  became  ordained  men  !  Oh,  we  do 
not  blame  them — still  less  would  we  let  them 
despair.  But  surely  it  is  something  to  be 
grieved  for,  that  we  thus  undertook  a  sacred 
office  in  utter  ignorance  of  its  sacredness ; 
that  we  thus  took  it  upon  us  to  tell  men  the 
way  of  salvation,  when  we  scarcely  so  much 
as  knew  what  they  needed  to  be  saved  from, 
or  what  it  was  to  be  saved. 

The  good  deposit.  Let  us  first  of  all  feel  it 
to  be  something.  Let  us  try  to  touch  and  to 
handle  just  one  substantial  ingredient  of  it. 
Let  us  resolve,  let  us  struggle,  let  us  pray, 
that  this  revelation,  this  self-manifestation  of 
God,  which  is  enshrined  in  this  volume  called 
holy,  shall  shine  out  of  it  upon  us.  It  shall 
not  be  a  name,  it  shall  not  be  a  formula,  it 
shall  not  be  a  mere  buzzing  sound — it  shall 
be  a  voice.  If  we  could  make  one  verse  speak, 
if  we  could  make  one  little  sentence  of  the 
Testament  call  us  by  our  name,  and  tell  us  to 
do  something  because  of  it,  it  might  be  **  the 
beginning  of  months  "  to  us.  It  might  be  the 
dawning  of  the  day — it  might  be  the  very 
sunrising  of  an  altered  life  ;  for  then,  cer- 
tainly, wa  never  "ould  rest  till  it  liad  spoken 

137 


0B4F.  Tin. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


again  to  us,  and  again,  and  again.  Then  we 
BJiouId  begin  to  turn  to  it  as  our  adviser,  as 
our  counsellor,  as  our  friend.  Then  we  should 
never  attempt  to  write  or  to  preacli  till  the 
revelation  had  put  a  word  in  our  mouth  ;  we 
should  listen  for  it  in  the  night  watches ;  we 
should  kneel  to  it  as  we  rose  from  our  sleep, 
God-sustained  and  God-commissioned. 

How  serious  should  we  then  be — how  evi- 
dently taken  knowledge  of  as  men  that  had  a 
trust,  and  were  set  and  bent  upon  faithfulness 
to  it !  Men  would  come  then  to  listen  to  us, 
as  to  men  who  were  in  communication  witii 
the  world  out  of  sight — as  men  who  were 
charged,  each  separate  time  of  ministering, 
with  something  special  to  say,  and  with  the 
true  way  of  saying  it. — C.  J.  Vaughairiy  D.D. 

(6)  Obligation  and  capacity  are  commen- 
surate.  God  does  not  desire  to  "reap  where 
He  has  not  sown,  nor  to  gather  where  Fie  has 
not  strawed,"  but  where  He  has  *'  given  much, 
of  them  He  will  expect  the  more."     He  ex- 


pects not  from  a  brute  the  service  of  a  man, 
nor  from  a  man  the  obedience  of  an  angel ; 
He  expects  not  from  him  that  has  one  talent 
the  results  of  five,  nor  from  him  that  has  five 
the  results  of  ten  ;  but  He  does  expect  every- 
where, and  from  all  beings,  tliat  each  shall 
serve  according  to  his  actual  and  "several 
ability." 

With  respect  to  the  power  to  do  some- 
thing for  Christ,  this  differs  in  different  men, 
and  in  the  same  man  at  diflferent  times.  There 
are  diflferences  of  talent,  wealth,  influence, 
station,  opportunity ;  and  there  are  very  fre- 
quently growth  and  accession  in  all  these 
things  as  Christians  advance  and  succeed  in 
life.  It  will  often  be  found,  however,  that 
tlie  most  able  and  endowed  classes  do  the 
]  ast  ;  and  of  certain  individuals  it  is  some- 
t. nies  true,  that  as  their  means  increase  their 
doings  diminish ;  for  it  is  diminution,  if, 
while  Providence  enlarges  power,  the  service 
rendered  is  only  what  it  was. — T,  BinneVt 
LL,D. 


From  Ahava  to  Jerusalem  ;  an  Illustration  of  the  PiLaRiMAGK 

OF  THE  Christian. 


(  Verses 

Notice — 

I.  The  setting   out    from    Ahava. 

"Then  we  departed  from  the  river  of 
Ahava  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  first 
month,  to  go  unto  Jerusalem."  They 
went  forth — 

1.  From  captivity  to  liherti/.  In 
Babylon  they  were  not  in  cruel  bond- 
age, as  their  fathers  bad  been  in  Egypt ; 
and  in  departing  from  Babylon  they  did 
not  go  forth  to  civil  or  political  freedom, 
as  their  fathers  did  when  they  left 
Egypt.  But  in  Babylon  they  were  cap- 
tives. They  could  not  leave  the  places 
in  which  they  were  settled  without  per- 
mission. Their  departure  is  repeatedly 
spoken  of  as  a  going  "  up  out  of  the 
captivity."  And  while  they  wlio  de- 
parted were  still  subject  to  the  Persian 
civil  government,  they  were  allowed  full 
religious  freedom.  The  Christian  pilgrim 
is  emancipated  from  the  captivity  of  sin. 
"Whosoever  committeth  sin  is  the  ser- 
vant of  sin."  But  the  believer  in  Christ 
Jesus  is  "  made  free  from  sin ; "  he  is 
delivered  from  "the  bond  of  iniquity," 
from  the  thraldom  of  evil  habits,  &c. 
"  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the 
truth  shall  make  you  free.  ...  If  the 
Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be 
free  indeed."  (a.) 
138 


31,  32.) 

2.  From  exile  to  their  ancestral  home. 
They  were  going  forth  to  the  land  of 
their  fathers,  which  was  sacred  and  dear 
to  them  by  many  precious  and  glorious 
memories  an  1  associations.  They  were 
going  home.  Christians  are  "strangers 
and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.  They  desire 
a  better  country,  that  is,  an  heavenly," 
&c.  "  Here  have  we  no  continuing  city, 
but  we  seek  one  to  come.'*  "Our  con- 
versation "  (rather,  country  or  citizen- 
ship) "  is  in  heaven."  We,  too,  are  going 
home. 

3.  From  the  land  of  idolatry  to  the 
scene  of  true  worship.  The  priesthood, 
the  altar,  and  the  temple  of  the  true  and 
living  God  were  at  Jerusalem.  The  chief 
reason  of  their  return  to  their  own  land 
was  th'it  there  they  could  more  fully 
and  peikctly  worship  Jehovah,  the  God 
of  Israel.  We  are  travelling  to  the  scene 
of  pure  and  perfect  and  perpetual  wor- 
ship. Our  journey  will  end  in  heaven, 
and  there  every  thought  and  affection, 
every  word  and  action  will  be  sacred. 
(Comp.  Rev.  vii.  15,  xxl  2,  3.)  (6). 

"  There  God  in  Christ  revealed 
In  fulness  of  His  grace 
Shall  we  behold  for  ever, 
And  worship  face  to  face.** 

n.  The  progress   on  the   JoumeT. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CHAP.  VIII. 


**  And  the  hand  of  our  God  was  upon 
us,  and  He  delivered  us  from  tlie  hand 
of  the  enemy,  and  of  such  as  lay  in  wait 
by  the  way."     They  progressed — 

1,  Notwithstanding  enemies.  The  path 
of  the  Christian  pilgrim  is  beset  with 
foes.  His  progress  is  opposed  by — (1.) 
Invisible,  spiritual  enemies.  He  has  to 
contend  against  the  wiles  of  the  devil. 
For  we  wrestle  not  "  against  flesh  and 
blood,  but  against  principalities,"  <fec. 
(Eph.  vi.  10-17).  "Your  adversary 
the  devil,  as  a  roaring  lion,  walketh 
about,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  v.  8,  9).  (2.)  Ene- 
mies in  human  society.  The  allure- 
ments of  the  world;  "the  deceitfulness 
of  riches  j "  the  temptation  to  substitute 
policy  for  principle,  and  to  sacrifice  the 
spiritual  and  eternal  for  the  material 
and  temporal,  <kc.  (3.)  Enemies  in  our 
own  nature.  '*  The  flesh  lusteth  against 
the  spirit,"  (kc.  (Gal.  v.  17).  Carnal 
appetites  contend  against  spiritual  aspi- 
rations, (fee. 

2.  By  reason  of  the  Divine  blessing. 
"  The  hand  of  our  God  was  upon  us, 
and  He  delivered,"  <fec.  He  was  both 
guide  and  guardian  to  Ezra  and  his 
company.  And  He  leads  and  protects 
His  people  in  their  heavenward  journey. 
"  We  are  more  than  conquerors  through 
Him  that  loved  us."  *'  Thanks  be  unto 
God,  which  always  causeth  us  to  triumph 
in  Christ."  '*  He  hath  said,  I  will  never 
leave  thee,  nor  forsake  thee.  So  tliat 
we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  is  my 
helper,"  <fec.  (Heb.  xiii.  5,  6). 

III.  The  arrival  at  Jerusalem. 
"  And  we  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  abode 
there  three  days."  Their  arrival  was 
characterised  by — 

1.  Grateful  rest.  For  three  days  they 
rested  after  their  long  and  toilsome 
journey.  The  rest  would  be  very  wel- 
come, &c.  "There  remaineth  a  rest  to 
the  people  of  God."  In  heaven  the 
Christian  pilgrims  "  rest  from  their 
labours."  (e.) 

**  Best  more  sweet  and  still 
Than  ever  nightfall  gave, 
Our  weary  hearts  shall  fill 

In  the  land  beyond  the  grave,*' 

2.  Joyful  welcome.  Many  of  the  pil- 
grims in  Ezra's  company  had  relatives  in 
Jerusalem,  persons  who  had  gone  up  there 


with  Zerubbabel,  or  the  children  of  such 
persons,  and  heartily  would  they  wel- 
come tlieir  newly-arrived  kinsfolk.  Have 
we  not  kinsfolk  in  the  "  better  country" 
who  wait  to  greet  us  on  our  arrival 
there  ?  We  are  not  journeying  to  a 
strange  land,  but  to  our  "Father's 
house."  Many  of  our  loving  and  be- 
loved ones  are  already  there,  and  wait 
to  welcome  us  into  their  shining  ranks, 
and  sacred  services,  and  delightful  so- 
ciety. And  when  once  we  are  united 
there,  we  shall  part  no  more,  (d,) 

**  0  happy  world  1     0  glorious  place  t 

Where  all  who  are  forgiven 
Shall  find  their  loved  and  lost  below, 
And  hearts,  like  meeting  streams,  shall  floWf 

For  ever  one,  in  heaven." 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  work  of  grace  shall  conquer  the 
work  of  depravity ;  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of 
life  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  set  free  the  soul  from 
the  law  of  sin  and  death.  Nothing  else  could 
do  it,  nothing  external  to  the  soul ;  no  out- 
ward law  of  excellence  could  do  it,  nothing 
that  did  not  work  within  the  soul  as  a  living 
principle  of  life  and  action.  By  this  new 
principle  introduced,  this  new  determination 
of  the  will  in  accordance  with  Divine  grace, 
the  man  is  set  free  from  the  evil  dispositions 
of  the  unregenerate  heart,  from  its  inbred, 
habitual,  long-cherished,  long-growing,  and 
powerful  corruptions ;  he  is  set  at  liberty  to 
serve  God  out  of  love,  no  longer  bound  in 
slavery  to  the  law  of  sin  and  death  in  an  evil 
nature.  This  is  the  great  deliverance  ;  this 
is  freedom  indeed  ;  instead  of  the  death  of 
sin,  a  death  to  sin,  a  redemption  from  its  in- 
dwelling power  by  the  working  of  an  opposite 
power  of  holiness  and  life,  which,  as  Christ's 
own  life,  imparted  to  the  soul,  becomes  the 
habit  of  the  soul.  But  it  is  too  low  an  expres- 
sion when  we  say  imparted  to  the  soul,  for  in 
order  to  work  this  freedom,  this  regeneration, 
this  new  creatureship  in  Christ,  Christ  Him- 
self takes  up  Hi's  abode  within  the  soul,  and 
works  in  it.  So  the  man  says,  this  freeman 
of  Christ,  **  I  live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth 
in  me."  This  new  life  in  the  soul  is  not  only 
a  life  in  Christ,  but  the  life  of  Christ.  "  Now 
the  Lord  is  that  Spirit ;  and  where  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty," — liberty  from 
the  bondage  of  corruption,  from  the  law  of 
sin  and  death,  liberty  of  life,  liberty  of  holi- 
ness, liberty  to  serve  God,  not  as  a  slave  but 
as  a  child,  not  with  the  spirit  of  bondage  to 
fear,  but  with  "  the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby 
we  cry,  Abba,  Father." — 6.  B.  Cheever,  D.I). 

(6)  All  earthly  shrines  shall  pass  away.  The 
beautiful  temples  shall  fade  into  oblivion; 
the  fanes  which  utter  their  silver  melody  as 
each  Sabbath  dawns,  awakening  tiie  sweetest 

139 


CHAP.  vin. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


associations  of  tlie  soul,  and  calling  man  from 
cares  and  sorrow  to  God  and  peace, — all,  all 
shall  depart.  The  music,  so  subtle  and  deep 
and  elevating,  shall  sink  into  silence  ;  the 
prayers,  so  eloquent  and  importunate  and 
fervid,  shall  cease;  the  call  to  dying  sinners, 
and  neglecters  and  despisers  of  Jesus,  shall  no 
lonirer  be  heard.  Altars  and  priests  shall  be 
no  more.  And  instead  shall  come  the  holiest 
worship  and  the  purest  homage,  and  the 
cleansed  heart  and  the  immortal  body,  and 
man  shall  walk  in  that  region  which  sin  can- 
not enter,  and  death  cannot  shadow,  and  pain 
cannot  touch,  amid  scenes  of  beauty  and  un- 
decaying  sweetness,  and  in  that  realm  whose 
King  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  whose  subjects 
are  the  obedient  servants  of  their  lawful 
Monarch,  and  the  willing  children  of  their 
Royal  Parent.  And  instead  of  temples  for 
the  hymn  of  homage,  and  the  prayer  of  faith, 
and  the  voice  of  persuasion,  there  shall  be  the 
spiritual  worship  of  redeemed  souls,  and  an- 
gelic beings  uttering  a  deeper  language  than 
ever  was  heard  on  earth,  and  breathing  a  more 
liquid  hymn  of  tenderness  than  ever  rose  from 
ati  earthly  pile,  and  the  soft  and  exquisite  ex- 
pression shall  be  fully  realised:  **1  saw  no 
temple  therein." — J.  W.  Lester^  D.D, 

Sublime  beyond  the  reach  of  words  to  ex- 
press is  the  choral  service  of  the  heavenly 
Temple.  Inspiring  and  thrilling  are  the 
strains  that  rise  from  that  mysterious  mount 
on  which  stands  the  collective  Church  of  the 
First,-born,  and  whose  praise  swells  and  flows 
triumphantly  away,  till  the  universe  is  filled 
with  the  harmony  which  comes  "rolling  back 
full  on  the  throne  of  God." — R.  Ferguson^  LL.D. 

(c)  Peace  is  the  very  highest  mode  of  joy. 
It  is  the  joy  of  rest ;  and  this  rest  partakes 
the  repose  of  the  Divine  nature.  It  is  on 
God  that  the  soul  is  fixed,  and  hence  she  can- 
not but  enjoy  the  calm  and  the  quiet  of  Infinite 
Perfection. 

"As  the  wave  a  ray  of  light  receives, 
And  rests  unbroken  ;  " 

BO  it  is  the  fact  of  each  nature  being  in  im- 


mediate union  with  God  and  of  His  fulness 
flowing  into  it.  which  insures  its  everlasting 
re/.  In  such  a  case,  unrest  is  impossible. 
Here  we  may  see  a  ripple  on  the  bosom  of 
the  most  placid  lake,  but  there  every  breast 
is  soothed  into  unruffled  peace.  The  gentle 
words  of  the  Saviour — Fear  not — addressed 
to  the  spirit  as  she  was  passing  through  the 
waters  of  death,  have  there  deepened  into  the 
tranquillity  of  a  sinless  nature,  and  on  the 
bosom  of  her  God  she  will  recline  for  ever. 

This  deep  repose  of  soul  in  the  world  of 
glory  is  not  incompatible  with  the  loftiest  and 
the  most  unwearied  activity.  Rest  is  often 
confounded  with  sloth,  and  repose  with  indo- 
lence. But  neither  indolence  nor  sloth  can 
exist  in  heaven,  where  the  purity  of  each 
individual  nature  involves  a  corresponding 
vitality,  and  the  vitality  a  corresponding  acti- 
vity. It  is  true  that  the  motion  of  the  soul 
there  is  ever  towards  rest;  but  it  is  no  less 
true  that  the  rest  is  ever  towards  motion.  In 
seeking  the  one  only  centre  of  her  life,  it  is 
that  the  soul  may  come  back  replenished  and 
filled  unto  the  fulness  of  God,  and  thus  be 
prepared  to  enter  on  new  and  still  higher 
spheres  of  service.  In  her  moments  of  most 
profound  quiet,  her  every  power  is  on  the 
utmost  stretch  and  reach  of  effort. — Ibid. 

{d)  Thy  dead  men  shall  live ;  that  decaying 
dust  shall  rise  again.  Weep  not  as  though 
thou  hadst  cast  thy  treasure  into  the  sea,  where 
thou  couldst  never  find  it ;  thou  hast  only  laid 
it  by  in  a  casket,  whence  thou  shalt  receive  it 
again  brighter  than  before.  Thou  shalt  look 
again  with  thine  own  eyes  into  those  eyes 
which  have  spoken  love  to  thee  so  often,  but 
which  are  now  closed  in  sepulchral  darkness. 
Thy  child  shall  see  thee  yet  again  ;  thou  shalt 
know  thy  child;  the  selfsame  form  sliall  rise. 
Thy  departed  friend  shall  come  back  to  thee, 
and  having  loved  his  Lord  as  thou  dost,  thou 
shalt  rejoice  with  him  in  the  land  where  they 
die  no  more.  It  is  but  a  short  parting  ;  it 
will  be  an  eternal  meeting.  For  ever  with 
the  Lord,  we  shall  also  be  for  ever  with  each 
other.  Let  us  comfort  one  another,  then, 
with  these  words. — C.  U.  Spurgeon. 


At  Jerusalem  :  The  Faithful  Surrender  of  Important  Trusts. 

{Verses  33-36.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  A  sacred  trust  faithfully  dis- 
charged. "  Now  on  the  fourth  day 
was  the  silver  and  the  gold  and  the 
vessels  weighed  in  the  house  of  our 
God,"  &c.  (vers.  33,  34).  This  trust 
was  discharged — 

1.  With  minute  accuracy  and  reverent 
care.  Notice — 1.  The  particular  accu- 
racy with  which  everything  was  ac- 
counted for.  Everything  was  —  (I) 
140 


weighed.  "  The  silver  and  the  gold 
and  the  vessels  were  weighed,"  (fee. 
**  By  weight  of  every  one."  (2.)  Num- 
bered. "By  number  and  by  weight 
of  every  one."  (3.)  Inventoried.  "  And 
all  the  weio-ht  was  written  at  that  time." 
2.  The  reverent  care  with  which  these 
treasures  were  delivered  up.  This  is 
indicated — (1.)  In  the  sacred  place  in 
which  they  were  delivered.  '*In  the 
house  of  our  God."     (2.)  By  the  conse- 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


OHAP.  VllL 


crated  persons  to  whom  they  were  de- 
livered. "  By  the  hand  of  Meremoth 
the  son  of  Uriah  the  priest,"  <fec.  It 
appears  from  ver.  29  that  *'  the  chief  of 
the  priests  and  Levites  and  the  chief  of 
the  fathers  of  Israel  "  were  also  present 
at  the  time,   (a.) 

2.  With  a  grateful  sense  of  relief  It 
seems  to  us  that  the  twelve  priests  and 
the  twelve  Levites,  who  had  charge  of 
these  treasures  during  the  long  and 
perilous  journey,  must  have  felt  relieved 
and  thankful  when  tlie  journey  was  con- 
cluded in  safety,  and  the  treasures  were 
surrendered  entire  and  inviolate.  Blessed 
is  he  who,  in  relation  to  the  trusts  of  life, 
will  be  abJe  to  render  as  satisfactory  an 
account  as  this  !  Blessed  who  at  the 
end  of  life's  journey  will  be  able  to  say, 
**  Lord,  Thou  deliveredst  unto  me  five 
talents,'^  &c.  (Matt.  xxv.  20,  21).  Or, 
with  St.  Paul,  *'I  have  fought  a  good 
fight,"  &c.  (2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8).  (6.) 

II.  Divine  worship  devoutly  offered. 
"  The  children  of  those  that  had  been 
carried  away,  which  were  come  out  of 
the  captivity,  offered  burnt  offerings 
unto  the  God  of  Israel,"  &c.  In  these 
sacrifices  there  was — 

1.  An  acknowledgment  of  sin  and  of 
the  need  of  atonement  with  God.  They 
"  offered  twelve  he  -  goats  for  a  sin 
offering." 

2.  An  expression  of  thankfulness  and 
self-consecration.  They  *'  offered  twelve 
bullocks  for  all  Israel,  ninety  and  «ix 
rams,  seventy  and  seven  lambs;  all  this 
was  a  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord." 

3.  ^7^  indication  of  the  unity  of  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  A  sin  offering 
and  a  burnt  offering  was  offered  for  each 
of  the  twelve  tribes.  "  Offered  burnt 
offerings  unto  the  God  of  Israel,  twelve 
bullocks  for  all  Israel,  ninety  and  six 
(8  X  12)  rams,  twelve  he-goats  for  a  sin 
offering."  (For  further  notes  on  the 
significanceof  these  sacrifices,  seehomilies 
on  chaps,  iii.  1-3,  vi.  16-18;  and  for 
illu.strati(ms,  see  those  accompanying  the 
above-mentioned  homilies.) 

III.  The  royal  letters  duly  delivered. 
"  And  they  delivered  the  king's  commis- 
sions unto  the  king's  lieutenants,"  <fec. 

1 .  The  delivery  of  these  letters  was  an 
evidence  of  loyalty  to  the  Persian  govern^ 


ment.  It  was  an  acknowledgment  of  the 
authority  of  Artaxerxes  the  king,  and  of 
his  officers  west  of  the  Euphrates.  The 
same  Word  whicli  commands  us  to  "fear 
God  "  commands  us  also  to  *'  honour  the 
king"(l  Pet.  ii.  13-17).  "Put  them 
in  mind  to  be  subject  to  principalities 
and  powers,  to  obey  magistrates."  "  Let 
every  soul  be  subject  unto  the  higher 
powers,"  (fee.  (Rom.  xiii.  1-7). 

2.  The  time  of  their  delivery  was  an 
evidence  of  their  supreme  regard  for 
Jehovah  their  God.  First,  they  gave  up 
the  sacred  vessels  and  treasures  for  the 
worship  of  Jehovah  ;  then  they  presented 
to  Him  their  humble  and  grateful  sacri- 
fices, and  then  they  delivered  the  king's 
commissions  unto  the  king's  oflficers. 
Our  loyalty  to  the  earthly  sovereign 
must  be  subordinate  to  our  reverence 
for  God.  To  Him  must  be  given  our 
highest,  holiest  affections,  and  our  con- 
stant and  complete  obedience. 

IV.  Valuable  help  promptly  ren- 
dered. "The  king's  lieutenants  and 
governors  on  this  side  the  river  fur- 
thered the  people,  and  the  house  of 
God."  They  carried  out  the  behests  of 
the  king  expressed  in  the  letters  which 
Ezra  delivered  to  them.  Thus  the  journey 
of  Ezra  came  to  a  very  satisfactory  and 
successful  issue. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(o)  Many  fill  their  life  with  regrets  for  being 
confined  to  such  a  narrow  sphere  of  usefulness. 
If  they  only  were  in  the  ministerial  office,  or 
had  millions  of  money,  they  would  do  so  and 
so ;  but  what  can  an  ordinary  labourer,  a  poor 
Sunday-school  teacher,  accomplish?  Friend, 
be  content  to  serve  God  where  He  has  placed 
you  ;  for  there  precisely  you  can  accomplish 
the  most.  It  is  better  to  make  the  best  of 
what  you  have  than  to  fret  and  pout  for  what 
you  have  not.  The  man  with  one  talent  is 
never  accountable  for  five  ;  but  for  his  one  he 
must  give  as  strict  an  account  as  the  other 
for  his  five.  It  may  require  more  humility  to 
husband  one  talent  than  five  ;  and,  so  far  as 
the  improvement  or  misimprovement  of  either 
is  concerned,  they  are  both  equally  important 
in  the  sight  of  God.  The  king's  million  and 
the  widow's  mite  are  worth  the  same  with  the 
Eternal.—  Diet,  oflllttst. 

{b)  **  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant, 
enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord."  Oh 
blissful  sentence  !  Words  of  unutterable,  in- 
conceivable import  t    Language  of  condescend- 

141 


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


ing  grace,  not  now  to  be  comprehended  !     To  the  most  obscure,  and  illiterate,  and  humble 

be   acknowledged   before   the  assembled  uiii-  Christians  on  earth.     It  is  not  the  service  of 

verse,  not  only  as  His  servants,  but  His  good  official  station  merely  that  is  alluded  to,  but 

and  faithful  servants.     To   be  told   tliat  we  the  service  of  personal  religion.     Christ  is  as 

have  served  Him  faithfully,  and  told  it  from  truly   served  by   the   most    retired    believer, 

the  throne  of  His  glory  !     To  hear  Uim  say  though  not  as  publicly,  nor  as  extensively,  at 

"Well  done!"    and  have  the   plaudit  rever-  by  the  most  popular  and  successful  preacher, 

berated  in   ten  tliousand  timt  s  ten  thousand  It  is  the  service  of  faith,  patience,  self-denial, 

echoes  from  the  lips  of  admiring  and  adoring  svifFering,  mortification,  that  is  to  be  rewarded  ; 

angels,  till  heaven  rings  with  the  sound,  "Well  the  service  of  a  devoted  heart  and  a  holy  life 

done,  well  done,  thou  faithful  servant  of  the  that  is  to  be  thus  honoured  and  blessed,  whe- 

Lambl"     Nor  is  this  all.     "Enter  thou  into  ther  the  man  who  performs  it  follows  Christ 

the  joy  of  thy  Lord."     *'  Come  into  the  same  in  the  retirement  of  a  private  or  the  activities 

place,   yea,    into   the   same  joy.     Come   and  of  a  public  station.     It  is  true  the  reward  will 

dwell  with  Me,  and  have  one  felicity  common  be  in  proportion  to  the  service,  and  the  degrees 

to  both."  of  glory  according  to  the  degrees  of  grace; 

This   reward   will   be  bestowed  on  all  His  but  all  faithful  servants  will  be  rewarded  by 

faithful  servants  without  exception.  It  belongs  admission   to   the  presence    and  service   and 

not  to   apostles  merely,   nor  to  martyrs,  re-  enjoyment  of  Christ  in  heaven, — /.  A,  James, 
formers,  missionaries,  and  ministers;  but  to 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.]  We  now  come  to  the  social  and  religious  reformation 
effected  by  Ezra  amongst  the  Jews  who  had  previously  returned  to  their  own  land  (chaps,  ix. 
and  X.).  And  in  this  chapter  we  have — (i.)  The  complaint  of  the  princes  to  Ezra  concerning 
the  mingling  of  the  people  of  Israel  with  the  idolatrous  people  of  the  lands  (vers.  1  and  2). 
(ii.)  The  great  amazement  and  grief  of  Ezra  because  of  this  (vers.  3  and  4).  (iii.)  The  con- 
fession and  prayer  of  Ezra  for  the  people  of  Israel  (vers.  5-15). 

Ver.  1.  Now  when  these  things  were  done]  Some  time  seems  to  have  elapsed  between  the 
events  recorded  in  chap.  viii.  and  those  narrated  in  chap.  ix.  Ezra  and  his  company  arrived 
in  Jerusalem  "on  the  first  day  of  the  fifth  month"  (chap.  vii.  9),  and  on  the  fourth  day  of 
that  month  they  delivered  up  the  treasures  in  the  Temple,  and  ofiered  burnt  oflferings  and  sin 
offerings  unto  the  Lord  God  (chap.  viii.  32-35).  The  next  note  of  time  is  in  chap.  x.  9  :  **  It 
was  the  ninth  month  and  the  twentieth  day  of  the  month  "when  the  great  assembly  took  place 
at  Jerusalem.  This  assembly  had  been  summoned  three  days  previously.  So  that  there  seems 
to  have  been  an  interval  of  more  than  four  months  between  the  arrival  at  Jerusalem  and  the 
events  related  in  chaps,  ix.  and  x.  Probably  some  portion  of  this  time  was  occupied  in  making 
arrangements  with  the  king's  satraps  and  governors  (chap.  viii.  36).  The  people  of  the  lands] 
are  the  dwellers  in  the  adjacent  districts,  who  are  afterwards  mentioned.  Doing  according  to 
their  abominations]  It  is  better  to  omit  "doing,"  which  has  been  unnecessarily  supplied  by 
the  translators  of  the  A.V.  "  Have  not  separated  themselves  from  the  people  of  the  lands, 
according  to  their  abominations,  (even)  of  the  Canaanites,"  &c.  Or,  "in  respect  of  their 
abominations,  (even)  of,"  &c.  The  Canaanites,  the  Hittites,  the  Perizzites.the  Jebusites]  were 
descendants  of  the  ancient  Canaanites,  whom  Israel  failed  to  exterminate,  and  who  were  not 
carried  into  captivity  with  the  Israelites,  but  remained  in  some  parts  of  Palestine.  The  Am- 
monites, the  Moabites]  dwelt  on  the  east.     The  Egyptians  and  the  Amorites]  on  the  south. 

Ver.  2.  The  holy  seed]  The  expression  is  probably  taken  from  Isa.  vi.  13.  By  calling,  by 
covenant,  and  by  profession  the  Israelites  were  a  separate  people,  a  holy  people  (see  Exod.  xix. 
5-8  ;  xxxiii.  16  ;  chap.  vi.  20,  21).  Have  mingled  themselves  with  the  people  of  the  lands] 
thus  violating  an  express  command  of  the  Lord  their  God  (Deut.  vii.  1-4).  Yea,  the  hand  of 
the  princes  and  rulers  have  been  chief]  &c.,  i.e.  the  upper  classes  were  the  first  to  transgress 
in  this  respect. 

Ver.  3.  I  rent  my  garment  and  my  mantle]  As  an  indication  of  his  great  grief  and  horror, 
he  rent  both  his  outer  and  inner  garments.  The  custom  was  a  very  ancient  and  a  very  common 
one  for  expressing  sorrow,  and  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Bible  (see  Gen.  xxxvii,  29,  34; 
Josh  vii.  6  ;  1  Sam.  iv.  12  ;  2  Sam.  i.  11  ;  2  Kings  ii.  12  ;  Job  i.  20,  et  at.)  And  plucked  off 
the  hair  of  my  head  and  of  my  beard]  This  also  was  expressive  of  grief,  horror,  and  moral 
indignation.  To  shave  the  head  in  great  sorrow  was  not  unfrequent  amongst  the  Jews  (Job  i. 
20)  ;  but  this  is  the  only  example  in  the  canonical  Scriptures  of  a  person  plucking  out  his 
own  hair  by  the  roots  in  grief  and  indignation.  And  sat  down  astonied]  or  "benumbed, 
stunned." — Fuerst. 

Ver.  4.  Every  one  that  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  God  of  Israel]  &c.  They  trembled 
in  their  alarm  because  of  the  punishments  threatened  in  the  law  of  God  for  such  transgressioni 
a&  had  been  committed.  I  sat  astonied  until  the  evening  sacrifice]  luasmu.ch  as  busineu 
U2 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA,  chap  ix. 


is  generally  transacted  in  tlie  morning  in  the  East,  the  princes  in  all  probability  made  theif 
complaint  to  Ezri  in  tlie  forenoon,  in  wliicli  case  he  sat.  stunned  and  silent  for  several  hours. 

Ver.  6.  I  arose  up  from  my  heaviness]  Rather,  as  in  margrin  :  "affliction."  Fuerst : 
"self-affliction."  Keil  :  *' mortilication,  or  humiliation."  And  having  rent  my  garment 
and  my  mantle]  This  does  not  refer  to  the  former  rending  (ver.  3).  For  the  second  time 
lie  expresses  his  grief  and  horror  in  this  manner. 

Ver.  6.  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up  my  face]  &c.  Keil  :  "I  am  ashamed,  and 
am  covered  wit^h  shame,  to  lift  up,"  &c.  Tlie  same  words  are  used  together  in  Isa.  xlv.  16; 
Jer.  xxxi.  19  ;  and  other  places.  Our  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens]  Margin  :  **  our 
guiltiness."  Keil:  "  our  guiltiness  is  great,  (reaching)  unto  the  heavens."  (Comp.  2  Chron. 
xxviii.  9.) 

Ver.  7.  Since  the  days  of  our  fathers]  This  expression  may  be  taken  as  reaching  back  to 
the  time  when  their  fathers  came  out  of  Eirypt ;  but  it  seems  probable  that  Ezra  meant  by  it, 
since  the  time  when  under  tlieir  kings  idolatry  and  idolatrous  customs  were  practised  amongst 
them.  To  confusion  of  face]  (comp.  2  Cliron.  xxii.  21 ;  Dan.  ix.  7,  8).  As  it  is  this  day] 
They  were  then  in  subjection  to  Artaxerxes. 

Ver.  8.  For  a  little  space]  or,  a  "  little  moment."  The  eighty  years  that  had  elapsed  since 
the  emancipation  by  Cyrus  he  speaks  of  as  "a  little  moment,"  as  compared  either  "with  the 
long  period  of  suffering  from  the  times  of  the  Assyrians  (comp.  Neh.  ix.  32)  till  the  reign  of 
Cyrus"  (Keil),  or  with  "the  long  enjoyment  of  Divine  favour  from  Abraham  to  Zedekiah  ** 
(Rawlinson).  A  remnant  to  escape]  Keil  :  "  rescued  remnant."  Those  who  had  returned  to 
the  land  of  their  fathers  were  but  "  a  remnant "  as  compared  with  the  numerous  population  of 
former  days.  And  to  give  us  a  nail  in  His  holy  place]  Margin  :  "or,  a  pin  :  that  is  a  con- 
stant and  sure  abode."  Fuerst:  "  in'' =  a  peg,  nail,  driven  into  the  wall  (Isa.  xxii.  26; 
Ezek.  XV.  3) ;  a  tent  pin,  to  which  a  tent  is  fastened  (Judg.  iv.  21  ;  Exod.  xxvii.  19) ;  the  fasten- 
ing beinir  used  as  an  image  of  being  established  (Isa.  xxii.  23) ;  of  remaining  (Ezra  ix.  8).  for 
which  *T15  stands  in  ix.  9."  Ezra  seems  to  have  regarded  the  Temple  as  a  pledge  of  their  per- 
manence, and  a  means  of  increased  life  and  vigour ;  for  he  goes  on  to  say  :  that  our  God  may 
lighten  our  eyes]  &c. 

Ver.  9.  For  we  were  bondmen]  Rather,  "  we  are  bondmen."  They  were  still  subject  to 
the  Persian  king.  Only  as  regards  the  exercise  of  their  religion  were  they  granted  independ- 
ence. And  to  give  us  a  wall]  &c.  This  must  be  understood  figuratively  ;  for  the  walls  of 
Jerusalem  were  not  yet  rebuilt  (see  Neh.  i.  3 ;  ii.  13).  God  had  disposed  the  Persian  kings, 
Cyrus,  Darius,  and  Artaxerxes,  to  protect  them  in  the  possession  of  their  country  and  capital. 
The  wall  is  a  figure  of  defence,  safety,  and  continuance. 

Vers.  11,  12.  Which  Thou  hast  commanded  by  Thy  servants  the  prophets,  saying,  The 
land]  &c.  This  is  not  a  verbal  quotation,  but  a  statement  which  correctly  represents  many 
passages  of  Scripture  (see  Exod.  xxiii.  32,  33,  xxxiv.  12-16  ;  Lev.  xviii.  2i-30  ;  Deut.  vii.  1-4, 
xxiii.  6,  et  al.) 

Ver.  13.  Hast  punished  us  less  than  our  iniquities  deserve]  The  last  word  is  supplied 
by  the  translators  of  the  A.V.  Margin:  "  Heb.  *  hast  withlield  beneath  our  iniquities.*** 
Fuerst :  "  Thou  hast  delivered  (us)  below  our  iniquities,  i.e.  undervaluing  our  iniquity."  Keil: 
"Thou  hast  spared  us  more  than  our  iniquity  deserved."  Or,  "Thou  hast  checked,  hast 
stopped,  beneath  our  iniquities."  Though  not  a  close  rendering  of  the  Hebrew,  the  A.V. 
gives  the  meaning  of  it.  And  hast  given  us  such  deliverance  as  this]  Rather,  "  Thou  hast 
given  us  (such)  a  remnant  as  this." 

Ver.  15.  Thou  art  righteous]  "Ezra  appeals  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  .  .  .  to  rouse 
the  conscience  of  ihe  community,  to  point  out  to  them  what,  after  this  relapse  into  their  old 
abominations,  they  had  to  expect  from  the  justice  of  God." — Keil.  Or,  he  acknowledges  the 
justice  of  God  in  His  dealings  with  them,  by  which  they  were  reduced  to  amere  remnant.  For 
we  cannot  stand  before  Thee  because  of  this]  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxvi.  7  ;  cxxx.  3). 

The  Good  Man's  Sorrow  over  the  People's  Sm. 

{Verses  1-4.) 

Notice  :  selves   from  the   people   of  the    lands, 

I.  The  painful  communication  made  according  to  their   abominations,"   <fec. 

to    Ezra.      "  Now    when    these    things  The  men  of  Israel  had  taken  wives  of 

were  done,  the  princes  came  to  me,  say-  the    idolatrous    Canaanites    and    other 

ing,"  &c.  (vers.   1,  2).     Information  is  heathen  peoples.     (1.)  This  was  a  posi- 

here  given  to  Ezra —  tive  transgression   of  a  plain  and   oft- 

1.   0/ a  great  sin  committed.     "The  repeated    command    (see    Exod.    xxiii. 

people  of  Israel,  and  the    priests,  and  31-33,  xxxiv.   12-16;  Deut.  vii.  1-4; 

the  Levites,  have  not  separated   them-  Josh,  xxiii.  12,  13).     (2.)  It  was  a  peri- 

143 


OHAP.  IZ. 


HOhilLETW  COMMENTAK  7:  EZRA. 


lous  transgression.  Every  sin  is  peri- 
lous. But  this  one  was  especially  so. 
The  foreign  and  idolatrous  wives  were 
likely  to  lead  their  husbands  into  their 
sinful  customs ;  and  yet  more  likely  to 
tra''  i;p  their  children  in  tiiem.  This 
w?j  expressly  pointed  out  to  them  by 
Moses :  "  They  will  turn  away  thy  son 
from  following  Me,  that  they  may  serve 
other  gods,"  <fec.  (Deut.  vii.  4).  Their 
previous  history  contained  evidence  pain- 
fully abundant  and  conclusive  of  the 
danger  of  these  prohibited  marriages. 
Even  Solomon,  notwithstanding  his  great 
wisdom  and  that  he  was  so  richly  blessed 
by  God,  erred  greatly  and  sadly  through 
the  influence  of  heathen  wives.  "  His 
wives  turned  away  his  heart  after  other 
gods"  (1  Kings  xi.  1-13).  And  this 
sin  the  Jews  who  had  returned  to  their 
own  land  were  guilty  of. 

2.  0/  the  prevalence  of  this  sin.  No 
class  of  the  community  was  free  from 
it.  **  The  people  of  Israel,  and  the 
priests,  and  the  Levites"  (ver.  1)  were 
all  guilty  of  it.  The  evil  was  general 
in  the  community. 

3.  Of  the  aggravations  of  their  sin, 
(1.)  "  The  priests  and  the  Levites  "  (ver. 
1),  whose  business  it  was  to  teach  the 
law  and  promote  obedience  to  it,  were 
themselves  guilty  of  violating  it  in  this 
respect.  The  law  for  the  regulation  of 
the  marriages  of  priests  was  particularly 
strict  (Lev.  xxi.  7,  13,  14) ;  and  by 
reason  of  this  and  of  their  sacred  char- 
acter and  calling,  their  marriages  with 
heathen  wives  were  especially  reprehen- 
sible. (2.)  The  princes  and  rulers  were 
forenioist  in  the  offence.  "  Yea,  the 
hand  of  the  princes  and  rulers  hath  been 
chief  in  this  trespass."  It  was  their 
duty  to  have  maintained  and  enforced 
the  observance  of  the  law,  yet  they  took 
the  lead  in  violating  it.  Other  and 
greater  princes  had  done  the  same  evil 
thing;  e.g.j  Solomon,  Ahab,  et  al. 
Again,  the  eminence  of  their  position 
would  impart  great  force  to  their  ex- 
ample, and  it  was  their  duty  to  see  that 
the  excellence  of  the  latter  corresponded 
with  the  eminence  of  the  former;  but 
it  was  the  opposite  of  this.  In  this 
matter,  at  least,  their  example  was  as 
pernicious  as   it    was   infliientiaL     (a.) 

144 


This  distressing  communication  was 
made  to  Ezra  by  persons  of  unimpeach- 
able credibility.  They  were  in  respon- 
sible positions  —  "  princes  ;  " — and  in 
making  this  statement,  if  they  did  not 
impeach  themselves,  they  certainly  im- 
peached their  order.  It  is  probable 
that  they  had  been  stirred  up  to  do  so 
by  the  influence  of  Ezra.  During  the 
four  months  which  had  passed  since  his 
arrival  at  Jerusalem,  he  had  been  in- 
quiring into  the  condition  of  the  people 
(comp.  chap.  vii.  14),  and  the  adminis- 
tration of  justice,  and  the  measure  of 
their  acquaintance  with  the  law  (comp. 
chap.  vii.  2,5,  26) ;  he  had  also  pro- 
bably been  expounding  and  applying  the 
law  ;  and  the  result  was,  that  the  minds 
of  these  princes  were  enlightened,  their 
consciences  were  aroused  to  a  sense  of 
the  sin  which  had  been  committed,  and 
they  went  to  Ezra  and  made  known  to 
him  the  sin  which  was  so  general  in  the 
community. 

II.  The  effect  which  this  communi- 
cation produced  upon  Ezra.  "And 
when  I  heard  this  thing,  I  rent  my  gar- 
ment and  my  mantle,"  &c.  (ver.  3). 
The  statement  caused  Ezra — 

1.  Great  amazement  "I  sat  down 
astonied" — stunned.  Domestic  life  in 
the  East  is  characterised  by  great  pri- 
vacy ;  so  that  Ezra  in  making  inquiries 
into  the  state  of  the  people  might  well 
have  been  ignorant  as  to  the  occupant? 
of  the  apartments  of  the  women.  The 
statement  of  the  princes  was  quite  a 
revelation  to  him,  and  filled  him  with 
bitter  astonishment.  The  sins  of  reli- 
gious people  in  our  day  might  well  utterly 
amaze  a  really  godly  man. 

2.  Deep  grief.  "  I  rent  my  garment 
and  my  mantle."  The  usual  mode  of  ex- 
pressing sorrow  amongst  Eastern  peoples 
was  by  tearing  the  garment.  The  tear- 
ing both  the  outer  and  the  inner  garments 
may  betoken  the  intensity  of  Ezra's  dis- 
tress. The  prevalence  of  iniquity  is  ever 
a  source  of  pain  to  the  godly.  It  was  so 
to  the  Psalmist :  "  I  beheld  the  trans- 
gressors, and  was  grieved ;  because  they 
kept  not  Thy  word.  Rivers  of  waters 
run  down  mine  eyes,"  <kc.  (Ps.  cxix.  158, 
136).  And  to  Jeremiah  :  "  Oh  that  my 
head  were  waters,"  <fec.  (Jer.  ix.  1  ;  xiv. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


CRAP.  IX. 


17).  Ill  fares  it  with  the  soul  when  we 
can  contemplate  sin  without  sorrow. 

3.  Intense  moral  indignation.  "  I  rent 
my  garment  and  my  mantle,  and  plucked 
off  the  hair  of  my  head  and  of  my  beard, 
and  sat  down  astonied."  Thus  he  ex- 
pressed not  only  his  surprise  and  grief, 
but  also  his  utter  abhorrence  of  the  sin 
of  which  they  were  guilty.  God  has 
declared  His  hatred  of  sin  (Jer.  xliv.  4); 
and  as  His  servants  grow  in  likeness  to 
Him,  their  hatred  of  sin  will  also  grow. 
We  may  not  hate  the  sinner ;  while  we 
condemn  we  may  also  pity  him ;  but  it 
behoves  us  to  regard  sin  with  repugnance 
and  anger. 

III.  The  effect  of  Ezra's  grief  upon 
others.  "  Then  were  assembled  unto 
me  every  one  that  trembled  at  the  words 
of  the  God  of  Israel,*'  &c.  Thus  the 
distress  of  Ezra — 

1.  Excited  their  alarm.  They  **  trem- 
bled at  the  words  of  the  God  of  Israel, 
because  of  the  transgression  of  those 
that  had  been  carried  away."  They 
were  filled  with  fear  lest  the  judgments 
pronounced  upon  those  who  were  guilty 
of  this  sin  should  be  inflicted  upon  them. 
They  could  not  do  otherwise  than  regard 
with  consternation  that  which  afflicted 
Ezra  with  so  much  distress. 

2.  Attracted  them  unto  him.  Every 
one  who  thus  trembled  at  the  words  of 
God  assembled  unto  Ezra.  Some  might 
have  been  drawn  to  him  by  curiosity  ; 
but  certainly  they  who  were  alarmed 
because  of  the  threatened  punishments 
were  not  of  the  number.  They  came  to 
him  moved  by  deep  concern  on  account 
of  the  guilt  contracted,  and  by  sympathy 
with  his  sorrow  because  of  it.  And  he 
and  they  remained  apparently  speechless 
for  a  considerable  time — probably  for 
three  or  four  hours.  Emotions  are  some- 
times too  deep  to  find  expression  in  words. 
At  such  times  silence  is  more  expressive 
than  even  the  most  mighty  and  moving 
words  (comp.  Job  ii.  13).  Mark  the 
power  of  one  true  and  good  man  to  in- 
fluence others  beneficially.  The  sorrow 
of  such  a  man  is  deeply  impressive ;  it 
awakens  serious  reflection,  &c.  And 
his  moral  indignation  goes  far  to  carry 
conviction  of  the  sinfulness  of  that  which 
enkindles  it.  (6). 


Conclusion  : 

1.  Separation  from  the  world  is  obli- 
gatory upon  the  true  Christian.  We  do 
not  by  this  mean  neglect  of  the  secular 
duties  of  life.  "  Let  every  man  abide  in 
the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called." 
"  Diligent  in  business."  In  business  the 
Christian  must  associate  with  the  worldly. 
Nor  do  we  mean  separation  from  political 
parties  and  pursuits.  As  citizens  we 
have  duties  which  we  may  not  neglect 
without  sin.  Nor  yet,  retirement  from 
the  world  into  seclusion.  "  I  pray  not," 
said  our  Lord,  "That  thou  shouldest  take 
them  out  of  the  world,"  &c.  We  mean 
separation  from  the  aims,  principles, 
s{)irit,  and  society  of  the  world.  And 
this  not  from  any  Pharisaic  conceit  of 
our  moral  superiority,  but  for  our  own 
safety  and  usefulness,  and  for  the  honour 
of  God.  *' Wherefore  come  out  from 
among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,"  (fee. 
(2  Cor.  vi.  14-18).  (c). 

2.  Sin  in  others  should  he  regarded  hy 
the  true  Christian  with  unfeigned  sorrow^ 
and.  reprobation  of  the  sin.  See  how 
Ezra  grieved  !  how  our  Lord  wept  over 
guilty  Jerusalem !  {d). 

3.  Sin  in  the  avowed  people  of  God  is 
especially  heinous  and  mournful.  Their 
privileges  are  greater  than  those  of  the 
world,  consequently  their  obligations 
also  are  greater,  and  their  sin  involves 
a  darker  guilt.  It  is  a  greater  dishonour 
to  God  ;  it  checks  the  progress  of  His 
cause  and  kingdom,  (fee. 

4.  Therefore  it  behoves  Christians  to 
give  all  diligence  to  walk  holily  and  un- 
blamahly  before  God  and  before  men. 
*'  Ye  are  My  witnesses,  saith  the  Lord." 
Let  us  take  heed  that  we  be  not  found 
false  witnesses.  '*  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the 
earth,"  (fee.  (Matt.  v.  13-16).  (e). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  If  a  man  could  be  wicked  and  a  villain 
to  himself  alone,  the  mischief  would  be  so 
much  the  more  tolerable.  But  the  case  is 
much  otherwise.  The  plague  flies  abroad  and 
attacks  the  innocent  neighbourhood.  The 
guilt  of  the  crime  lights  upon  one,  but  the 
example  of  it  sways  a  multitude,  especially  if 
the  criminal  be  of  any  note  or  eminence  in 
the  world.  For  the  fall  of  such  an  one  by  any 
temptation  (be  it  never  so  plausible)  is  like  that 
of  a  principal  stone,  or  stately  pillar,  tumbling 
f/om  a  lofty  edifice  into  the  deep  mire  of  the 

K  145 


CHAP.  IX. 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


street :  it  does  not  only  plunge  and  sink  into 

the  black  dirt  itself,  but  it  also  dashes  and  be- 
spatters all  that  are  about  or  near  it  when  it 
falls.  Was  it  not  thus  with  Samson,  who,  of 
a  judge  of  Israel,  and  a  terror  to  his  enemies, 
a  man  all  made  up  of  miracle,  rendered  him- 
self both  the  shame  of  the  former  and  the 
contempt  of  the  latter  ;  a  scoff  and  a  by  word 
to  all  the  nations  round  about  him  (as  every 
vicious  and  voluptuous  prince  must  needs  be); 
and  all  this  by  surrendering  up  his  strength, 
his  reason,  and  his  royal  trust  to  the  ciiarms 
of  a  brutish  temptation,  which  quickly  trans- 
formed and  made  him  a  more  stupendous 
miracle  of  folly  and  weakness  than  ever  he 
had  been  of  strength ;  and  a  greater  disgrace 
to  his  country  than  ever  he  had  been  a  defence ; 
or,  in  a  word,  from  a  judge  of  Israel,  a  woeful 
judgment  upon  it?  And  was  it  not  thus  also 
with  David?  This  was  the  worst  and  most 
killing  consequence  of  the  temptation  which 
he  fell  by  (2  Sam.  xii.  14),  that  he  had  by  that 
enormous  act  "given  great  occasion  to  the 
enemies  of  the  Lord  to  blaspheme."  And  no 
doubt  the  religion  he  professed,  as  well  as  the 
sin  he  had  committed,  was  thereupon  made 
"  the  song  of  the  drunkards ; "  and  many  a 
biting  jeer  was  obliquely  cast  at  one,  as  well 
as  directly  levelled  at  the  other. — R.  South, 
D.D. 

(6)  The  Christian  ought  to  clear  a  space  for 
himself  wherever  lie  goes.  Little  children, 
humble  hearts,  mourning  souls,  reverent, 
noble,  heavenly  -  minded  persons  ought  to 
come  round  him  and  say,  "  Welcome  in  God's 
name.  Don't  leave  us ;  abide  with  us  a  long 
wiiile."  But  knaves  and  hypocrites,  people 
who  are  rolling  iniquity  under  their  tongue  as 
a  sweet  morsel — masked  people — ought  to  feel 
terribly  uncomfortable  wiien  a  Christian  man 
comes  among  them.  They  ought  to  know 
him  from  afar.  There  should  be  surrounding 
him  a  kind  of  atmospliere  in  which  men  that 
are  evil  cannot  breathe  and  live — the  knave 
should  shrink  away  from  his  sight ;  the  coward 
should  hide  himself  in  the  lowest  and  vilest 
dust;  and  the  man  who  was  contemplating 
some  keen,  clever  stroke,  in  which  there 
should  be  dishonour  and  injustice,  should  feel 
himself  paralysed,  disabled,  half-damned,  in 
the  presence  of  a  man  whose  soul  is  afire  with 
Divine  truth. — Joseph  Parker,  D.D. 

[c)  The  Jewish  law  shadowed  out  an  ever- 
lasting truth.  God's  people  are  an  exclusive 
nation  ;  God's  Ciiurch  is  for  ever  separated 
from  the  world.  This  is  her  charter,  '*  Come 
out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate, 
saith  the  Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean 
thing  ;  and  I  will  receive  you,  and  will  be  a 
Father  unto  you,  and  ye  shall  be  My  sons  and 
daughters,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty."  God's 
people  may  break  that  charter,  but  they  do  it 
at  their  own  peril.  And  we  maj'  be  very  sure 
of  this,  when  a  religious  person  begins  to  feel 
an  inclination  for  intimate  communion  with 
the   world,  and    begins  tq   break  d^wji  tha^t 

14G 


barrier  which  is  the  line  of  safety,  the  first 
step  is  made  of  a  series  of  long,  dark  wander- 
ings from  God.  We  are  to  be  separate, 
brethren,  from  the  world.  Mistake  not  the 
meaning  of  that  word.  The  world  changes 
its  complexion  in  every  age.  Solomon's  world 
was  the  nations  of  idolatry  lying  round  Israel. 
Our  world  is  not  that.  The  world  is  that 
collection  of  men  in  every  age  who  live  only 
according  to  the  maxims  of  their  time.  The 
world  may  be  a  profligate  world,  or  it  may  be 
a  moral  world.  All  that  is  a  matter  of  acci- 
dent. Our  world  is  a  moral  world.  The  sons 
of  our  world  are  not  idolaters,  they  are  not 
profligate,  they  are,  it  may  be,  among  the  most 
fascinating  of  mankind.  Their  society  is 
more  pleasing,  more  lively,  more  diversified 
in  information  than  religious  society.  No 
marvel  if  a  young  and  ardent  heart  feels  the 
spell  of  the  fascination.  No  wonder  if  it  feels 
a  relief  in  turning  away  from  the  dulness  and 
the  monotony  of  home  life  to  the  sparkling 
brilliancy  of  the  world's  society.  .  .  .  And 
yet  now,  pause.  .  .  .  The  Christian  must 
leave  the  world  alone.  His  blessedness  lies 
in  quiet  work  with  the  Israel  of  God.  His 
home  in  that  deep,  unruffled  tranquillity 
which  belongs  to  those  who  are  trying  to 
know  Christ. — F.  W»  Robertson,  M.A. 

{d)  You  must  learn  to  be  good  haters — but 
not  of  men.  You  do  not  need  anything  to 
instruct  you  on  that  point.  You  are  too  good 
in  that  already.  You  are  to  abhor  evil.  Ah  ! 
there  are  hundreds  of  men  that  know  how  to 
hate  men,  where  there  is  one  that  knows  how 
to  love  a  man  and  hate  evil.  Because  evil  is 
offensive  to  God,  because  it  is  repugnant  to 
the  innate  delicacy  of  every  moral  sentiment, 
because  it  wastes  you,  because  it  wastes  your 
neighbour,  because  it  is  hurtful  to  society, 
because  every  benevolent  instinct  requires  that 
you  should  hate  that  which  is  the  common  foe 
of  all  mankind,  therefore  you  should  hate  evil. 
We  are  to  hate  all  qualities  and  actions  which 
corrupt  the  individual,  which  injure  manhood 
in  man;  all  that  creates  sorrow  or  suffering, 
or  tends  to  do  it.  In  short,  we  are  to  take  our 
beginning  in  the  law  of  God  ;  and  being  filled 
with  goodwill  toward  every  living  creature, 
that  spirit  breathing  itself  like  summer 
throughout,  we  are  to  hate,  come  from  what 
quarter  it  may,  everything  that  injures  society, 
that  injures  men  in  the  mass,  or  that  injures 
men  in  their  individual  capacity.  Whether 
it  be  in  their  bodies,  their  sou's,  or  their  estate, 
whatever  works  mischief  to  mankind,  you  are 
to  be  its  enemy.  The  want  of  this  moral  re- 
boimd,  and  of  this  indignation,  will  be  found 
to  be  ruinous.  The  presence  of  it  is  whole- 
some. The  absence  of  it  is  effeminating.  It 
destroys  the  individual  to  whom  it  is  lacking, 
and  it  is  mischievous  to  the  community  la 
which  it  is  lacking. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

(e)  It  is  recorded  of  Alexander  the  Great^ 
that  a  soldier  was  reported  to  him  as  having 
betrayed  great  coward'ce  on  a  particular  occa- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


CHAP.  rx. 


■ion,  on  which  Alexander  called  him  to  him 
and  asked  his  name.  On  hearing  that  his 
name  was  Alexander,  he  upbraided  him  with 
the  dishonour  that  he  brought  on  such  a 
name,  and  entreated  him  either  to  change  his 
manners  or  to  cliange  his  name,  asking  him 
how  lie  could  dare,  while  known  as  Alexander, 
to  act  unworthily  ?  And  sliall  not  the  Chris- 
tian remember  the  high  and  holy  name  by 
which  he  is  called,  and  dread  encountering 


the  guilt  and  meanness  of  dishonouring  hia 
Head,  who  was  **  holy,  harmless,  undefiled, 
separate  from  sinners"?  That  name,  in  its 
very  signifi'"  ition,  tells  him  that  he  is  related 
to  the  anointed  One,  and  that  (as  the  name 
implies)  all  His  members,  in  their  measure 
and  degree,  are  anointed  ones.  How  shall 
they  who  take  this  sacred  unction  upon  them 
dare  to  dishonour  this  name,  and  so  sin  against 
Christ !— //.  0.  Salter. 


The  Good  Man's  Confession  of  the  People's  Sin. 

(Verses  5-15.) 


We  have  here — 

I.  Deep  personal  shame  and  sorrow 
on  account  of  the  sins  of  the  people. 

These  feelings  Ezra  expresses  by — 

1.  A  symbolical  action.  *' And  at  the 
evening  sacrifice  I  arose  up  from  my  heavi- 
ness, and  rent  my  garments  and  my  man- 
tle." Thus  before  the  assembled  people 
he  proclaims  the  grief  and  moral  indig- 
nation with  which  he  regarded  their  sin. 

2.  A  suggestive  attitude.  "  I  fell  upon 
my  knees,  and  spread  out  my  hands 
unto  the  Lord  my  God."  The  posture 
indicates  deep  humiliation  before  God 
and  earnest  supplication  unto  Him. 

3.  An  explicit  avowal.  Ezra  said, 
**  O  my  God,  I  am  ashamed  and  blush 
to  lift  up  my  face  to  Thee,  my  God." 
In  this  avowal  notice — (1.)  The  shame- 
fulness  of  sin.  "  Sin  is  a  reproach  to 
any  people."  It  is  an  "  abominable 
thing."  (2.)  The  good  man  is  ashamed 
because  of  the  sin  of  others.  He  feels 
the  dishonour  which  is  offered  by  it 
to  God,  and  the  ingratitude,  folly,  and 
wickedness  of  those  who  commit  it. 
He  cannot  be  an  unmoved  spectator  of 
the  workers  of  iniquity.  The  know- 
ledge of  human  wickedness  affects  him 
as  it  did  Ezra,  or  le.ids  him  to  cry  with 
the  Psalmist,  "  Horror  hath  taken  hold 
upon  me  because  of  the  wicked  that 
forsake  Thy  law."  (3.)  The  good  man 
is  specially  conscious  of  the  shaniefulness 
of  sin  when  he  draws  near  to  God  in 
worship.  In  the  light  of  His  presence 
the  exceeding  deformity  and  heinous- 
'le.-s  of  sin  are  painfully  clear  :  and  the 
goilly  soul,  burdened  in  feeling  with  the 
iniquities  of  others,  is  ashamed  to  lift  up 
his  face  to  God.   (Conip.Lsa.  vi.  1-5.)  (a). 

II.  Humble  confession  of  the  sins  of 
the  people.     Ezra  confesses — 


1.  The  great  accumulation  of  their 
sins.  '*  Our  iniquities  are  increased 
over  our  head,  and  our  trespass  is  grown 
up  into  the  heavens."  The  idea  seems 
to  be  that  their  iniquities,  like  waves 
of  the  sea,  rolled  over  them  threatening 
to  overwhelm  them ;  and  their  guilt 
was  piled  up  to  the  very  heavens.  The 
confession  of  the  Psalmist  is  similar : 
"  Mine  iniquities  are  gone  over  mine 
head,"  &c.  (Ps.  xxxviii.  4).  "  Mine 
iniquities  have  taken  hold  upon  me," 
<kc.  (Ps.  xl.  12). 

2.  The  long  continuance  of  their  sins. 
"  Since  the  days  of  our  fathers  have  we 
been  in  a  great  trespass  unto  this  day." 
From  generation  to  generation  they  had 
been  a  perverse  and  rebellious  people. 
A  sad  continuity  in  sin  characterised 
their  history. 

3.  The  sore  aggravations  of  their  sins, 
(1.)  That  they  had  been  committed  not- 
withstanding the  Divine  judgments. 
"  For  our  iniquities  have  we,  our  kings 
and  our  priests,  been  delivered  into  the 
hands  of  tlie  kings  of  the  lands,  to  the 
sword,  to  captivity,  and  to  a  spoil,  and 
to  confusion  of  face,  as  it  is  this  day." 
God  had  visited  them  with  heavy  judg- 
ments, but  tliey  had  not  turned  from 
their  iniquities.  He  had  severely  re- 
proved them,  but  they  were  not  re- 
formed. As  a  people  they  had  suffered 
long  and  sorely  for  their  sins,  and  yet 
they  were  still  guilty  of  those  sins. 
(2.)  Tiiat  they  had  been  committed  not- 
withstanding the  Divine  mercies.  Of 
these  several  are  mentioned  by  Ezra, 
(i.)  Mercy  in  the  measure  of  the  punish- 
ment inflicted  upon  them.  "Thou  our 
God  hast  punished  us  less  than  our  ini- 
quities deserve."  God  might  justly 
have   entirely   forsaken    them,    or   have 

147 


OBAP.  IX. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


made  an  utter  end  of  them  ;  but  in  His 
wrath  He  had  remembered  mercy,  (ii.) 
Mercy  in  disposing  the  Peisi;ui  mou- 
archs  to  treat  them  with  so  much  o-ene- 
rosity.  "For  we  were  bondmen,  yet 
our  God  hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our 
bondage,  but  liath  extended  mercy  unto 
us  in  the  sight  of  the  kings  of  Persia," 
(fee.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  sjiirit 
of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia "  (cliap.  i.  1) 
to  grant  them  permission  to  return  to 
their  fatheHand.  He  inclined  the  heart 
of  Darius  to  treat  them  so  favourably. 
And  it  was  by  His  good  hand  upon 
Kzra  that  Artaxerxes  "granted  him  all 
his  request"  (chap.  vii.  6).  (iii.)  Mercy 
in  bringing  a  rescued  remnant  to  their 
own  land  a^ain.  "  And  now  for  a  little 
space  grace  hath  been  showed  from  the 
Lord  our  God,  to  leave  us  a  remnant 
to  escape,"  &c.  A  considerable  remnant 
of  the  people  had  been  safely  restored  and 
comfortably  settled  in  the  country  given 
by  God  to  their  fathers,  (iv.)  Mercy 
in  enabling  them  to  rebuild  the  Temi)le 
of  their  God.  "To  give  us  a  nail  in 
His  holy  place,"  <fec.  "  To  set  up  the 
house  of  our  God,  and  to  repair  the 
desolations  thereof."  For  a  people  in 
their  circumstances  this  was  a  great 
achievement,  and  a  great  mercy  from 
the  Lord  their  God.  To  the  pious 
amongst  them  it  would  be  the  crowning 
blessing  that  the  Temple  was  restored, 
and  that  the  ordinances  of  their  holy 
religion  were  regularly  and  becomingly 
celebrated,  (v.)  Mercy  in  granting  them 
security  in  their  own  land.  Two  ex- 
pressions seem  to  suggest  this :  "  To 
give  us  a  nail  in  H  is  holy  place."  Mar- 
gin :  "Or,  'a  pin;'  that  is,  a  constant 
and  sure  abode."  "  And  to  give  ns  a 
wall  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem  ;  '^  not  a 
literal  wall,  for  as  yet  the  walls  of  Jeru- 
salem were  not  restored ;  but  a  shield 
and  shelter,  peace  and  protection.  Their 
Samaritan  enemies  were  restrained,  and 
did  not  trouble  them.  And  the  officers 
of  the  Persian  government  favoured  and 
supported  them  and  the  house  of  God. 
Yet  despite  all  these  mercies,  they  were 
now  living  in  the  regular  practice  of  sin 
a,iainst  their  gracious  God.  How  black 
the  ingratitude  of  such  conduct !  Ajid 
how  foolish,  for  their  sins  might  lead 
US 


Him  to  withdraw  His  favour  from  them. 
Neither  judgments  nor  mercies  had 
availed  to  restrain  them  from  heinous 
transgression.  (3.)  That  they  had  been 
committed  against  plain  and  positive 
commands.  "And  now,  O  our  God, 
what,  shall  we  say  after  this  ?  for  we 
have  forsaken  Thy  commandments, 
which  Thou  hast  commanded  by  Thy 
servants,  the  prophets,"  <kc.  (vers.  10- 
12,  and  see  Explanatory  Notes  on  them). 
They  could  not  plead  ignorance  or  un- 
certainty of  the  law  as  an  excuse  for 
their  evil  doings.  (4.)  That  they  had 
been  committed  against  commands  the 
reasons  of  which  had  been  clearly  set 
before  them.  It  had  been  shown  to 
them  that  obedience  to  these  commands 
was  necessary  for — (i.)  The  maintenance 
of  their  power,  "  That  ye  may  be 
strong."  (Comp.  Deut.  xi.  8.)  As  they 
mingled  with  the  heathen  they  lost 
strength  and  courage,  (ii.)  Their  en- 
joyment of  the  produce  of  the  land. 
"  And  eat  the  good  of  the  land."  (Comp. 
Isa.  i.  19.)  They  should  eat  it,  and  not 
strangers.  They  should  eat  it  in  peace 
and  happiness,  (iii.)  Their  continued 
possession  of  the  land.  "And  leave  it 
for  an  inheritance  to  your  children  for 
ever."  (Comp.  Deut.  xi.  9  ;  Pro  v.  xiii. 
22  ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  25.)  Their  separa- 
tion from  the  heathen  was  necessary  to 
their  secure  possession  of  their  country. 
Thus,  these  commands  were  not  arbi- 
trary, but  reasonable;  and  the  reasons 
for  them  w^ere  stated.  Obedience  would 
have  been  both  rational  and  advanta- 
geous; it  was  both  their  duty  and  their 
interest.  Yet  they  transgressed  these 
commands.  No  obligation  seemed  strong 
enough  to  bind  them  to  their  duty  in 
this  respect;  no  motive  adequate  to 
constrain  them  to  obedience.  Most 
persistent  and  most  aggravated  were 
their  sins.      (6), 

III.  A  solemn  anticipation  of  the 
consequence  of  the  continuance  of  the 
sins  of  the  people.  "  And  after  all  that 
is  come  upon  us  for  our  evil  deeds, 
and  for  our  great  trespass,"  <kc.  (vers. 
13-15). 

1.  Contimutnce  in  sin  would  lead  to 
their  utter  end  as  a  community.  "  And 
after  all  that  is  come  upon  us  for  our 


nOMTL  ETIC  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :  EZRA . 


CHAP.  tZ. 


evil  deeds,  and  for  our  great  trespass, 
seeing  that  Thou  our  God  iiast  punished 
us  less  than  our  iniquities  deserve,  and 
l»ast  given  us  such  deliverance  as  this; 
sht)uld  we  again  break  Tiiy  command- 
ments, and  join  in  atiiuity  with  the 
people  of  these  abominations,  wonkiest 
not  Thou  be  angry  with  ns  till  Thou 
hadst  consumed  us,  so  that  there  should 
be  no  remnant  nor  escai)ing?"  This  in- 
quiry does  not  denote  doubt,  but  cer- 
tainty. L(»oking  at  God's  commands  to 
them,  atid  His  past  dealings  with  them, 
Kzra  was  convinced  that  if  they  persisted 
in  these  sinful  alliances  God  would  bring 
them  to  an  utter  end. 

2.  That  such  a  consequence  of  continu- 
ance in  sin  would  he  just.  "  O  Lord 
God  of  Israel,  Thou  art  righteous,"  &c. 
(ver.  15).  In  His  past  dealings  with 
tht-m  God  had  been  just  and  meiciful. 
He  would  still  be  just  towards  them. 
They  were  guilty  before  Him  ;  they  had 
nothing  to  plead  in  extenuation  of  their 
sins,  but  must  leave  themselves  in  His 
hands. 

3.  That  such  a  consequence  of  continu- 
ance in  sin  was  to  be  dreaded.  This  is 
quite  clear  from  the  close  of  Ezra's 
humble  appeal  to  God  (vers.  13-15). 
If  sin  be  not  truly  repented  of  its  con- 
sequences will  be  found  to  be  dreadful. 
*'  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth 
death."  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh 
shall  of  the  flesh  reap  corruption."  *'  The 
wicked  is  driven  away  in  his  wicked- 
ness. 

Li  ARN: 

1.  The  great  evil  of  sin.  It  is  evil  in 
itseif ;  it  is  a  great  wrong  against  God  ; 
it  is  terrible  in  its  consequences,  (fee.  (c). 

2.  The  grand  hope  of  the  sinner.  God 
is  merciful  as  well  as  just.  The  greatest 
sinner,  being  penitent,  may  approach 
unto  Him,  and,  confessing  his  sin,  may 
obtain  full  and  free  forgiveness.  "  There 
is  forgiveness  with  Thee,"  <fec.  (Ps.  cxxx. 
3,  4,  7).  "  If  we  confess  our  sins,"  <fec. 
(1  John  i.  9).  (d). 

3.  The  right  relation  of  the  good  man 
to  sin.  Like  Ezra,  he  should  hold  it  in 
aV>l>()rrence,  should  be  burdened  in  feel- 
ing because  of  its  prevalence  in  others, 
should  exhibit  to  them  its  heinousness, 
and  should  humbly  confrss  it  before  God. 


When  iniquity  abounds,  let  God's  faith- 
ful people  *'  weep  between  the  porch  and 
the  altar,  and  let  them  say,  Spare  Thy 
people,  O  Lord,"  &c.  (Joel  ii.  17).  («), 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Our  whole  lives  present  one  unbroken 
series  of  duties  neglected,  of  favours  not 
acknowledged.  And,  oh  !  how  do  they  appear, 
when  we  review  them  in  the  light  ot  God's 
countenance  !  When  we  see  hefore  us  our 
Creator,  our  Preserver,  our  Bei»etaetor,  our 
Sovereign,  and  our  Heavenly  Father ;  when 
we  see  in  Him,  to  whom  all  th<  se  titles  he- 
long,  infinite  excellence,  perfection,  glory,  and 
beauty ;  when  we  see  with  what  profound 
veneration,  with  what  raptures  of  holy,  grate- 
ful aft'ection  He  is  regarded  and  served  hy  all 
the  hright  armies  of  heaven  ; — and  then  turn 
and  contemplate  our  past  lives,  and  reflect 
how  they  must  appear  in  His  sight,  can  we 
refrain  from  exclaiming  with  Job,  **  We  have 
heard  of  Ttiee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but 
now  our  eyes  see  Thee  :  wherefore  we  abhor 
ourselves,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes"? 
Must  not  each  of  us  say  with  the  Psalmist, 
**  Innumerable  evils  hare  compassed  me  about; 
mine  iniquities  have  taken  hold  upon  me,  so 
that  I  am  not  able  to  look  up  ;  they  are  mort 
than  the  hairs  of  mine  head  ;  therefore  my 
heart  faileth  me"?  Nay,  more,  when  you  8<ie 
what  God  is,  and  how  He  is  worshipped  in 
heaven,  and  then  look  at  the  coldness,  the  f')r- 
mality,  the  want  of  reverence  with  which  jou 
have  often  approached  Him  in  prayer,  and 
listened  to  His  word,  must  you  not  feel  con- 
scious that  should  He  call  you  into  judgment 
you  could  not  answer  for  one  in  a  thousanii  of 
the  iniquities  which  have  stained  your  holy 
things,  your  religious  duties? — E.  Payson^D.D, 

(6)  The  criminality  of  any  sin  ig  in  propor- 
tion to  the  motives  and  obligations  which 
opposed  its  commission.  To  sin  against  many 
and  powerful  motives  indicates  greater  de- 
pravity, and  is,  of  course,  more  criminal  than 
to  sin  against  few  and  feeble  motives.  Sup- 
pose a  person  is  informed  that  if  he  commits 
a  certain  crime  he  shall  be  imprisoned.  If, 
notwithstanding  the  threatening,  he  perpe- 
trates the  crime,  he  shows  that  he  loves  the 
crime  more  than  he  loves  liberty.  Again, 
suppose  him  to  be  assured  that  if  he  commits 
the  crime  he  shall  be  put  to  death.  Should 
he  after  that  commit  the  crime,  it  would  indi- 
cate  greater  depravity  than  before,  it  would 
show  that  he  loved  the  crime  more  than  life. 
But  the  Word  of  God  threatens  sinners  with 
everlasting  misery  if  they  persist  in  sin,  and 
promises  them  everlasting  happiness  if  they 
will  renounce  it.  1  need  not  tell  you  that 
what  is  everlasting  is  in  one  respect  infinite, 
viz.,  in  duration.  Here,  then,  are  two  in- 
finitely powerful  motives  presented  to  the 
sinner  to  deter  him  from  sin — infinite  happi- 
ness and  infinite   misery.      Everv  one,  then, 

149 


CBAP.  IX. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY'  EZRA. 


who  persists  in  sin,  notwithstanding  these 
motives,  shows  that  he  loves  sin  more  than 
everlasting  happiness,  that  he  hates  holiness 
more  than  he  dreads  everlasting  misery.  His 
attachment  to  sin,  and,  of  course,  his  depravity 
and  criminality,  are  therefore  boundless  or 
infinite. — Ihid. 

(c)  Every  sin  is  a  violation  of  an  infinitely 
perfect  law.  It  will  readily  be  allowed  that 
to  violate  a  good  law  is  a  greater  evil  than  to 
violate  a  law  the  goodness  of  which  is  doubt- 
ful. It  will  also  be  allowed  that  if  there  were 
any  law  made  by  human  governments,  on 
obedience  to  which  the  honour,  the  welfare, 
and  even  the  existence  of  a  nation  depended, 
' — to  violate  that  law  would  be  the  greatest 
crime  which  a  subject  could  commit.  Now 
the  law  of  God  is  perfectly  holy,  just,  and 
good.  If  it  were  universally  obeyed,  universal 
and  endless  happiness  would  be  the  conse- 
quence. But  disobedience  to  this  law  tends 
10  produce  universal  and  endless  misery.  Take 
away  the  law  and  the  authority  of  God,  there 
would  be  no  right  but  that  of  the  strongest; 
violence,  discord,  and  confusion  would  fill  the 
universe  ;  sin  and  misery  would  overspread 
the  earth,  would  ascend  to  heaven,  subvert  the 
throne  of  Jehovah,  and  compel  Him  to  live  in 
the  midst  of  a  mad,  infuriated  mob,  the  mem- 
bers of  which  were  continually  insulting  Him 
and  injuring  each  other.  Now  every  violation 
of  God's  law  tends  to  produce  this  effect. — 
Ihid. 

Others  may  throw  garlands  upon  sin, 
picturing  the  overhanging  fruits  which  drop 
in  her  pathway,  and  make  every  step  graceful 
as  the  dance  ;  but  we  cannot  be  honest  with- 
out presenting  it  as  a  giant,  black  with  the 
soot  of  the  forges  where  eternal  chains  are 
made,  and  feet  rotting  with  disease,  and 
breath  foul  with  plas^ues,  and  eyes  glaring 
with  woe,  and  locks  flowing  in  serpent  fangs, 
and  voice  from  which  shall  rumble  forth  the 
blasphemies  of  the  damned.  —  T.  De  Witt 
7'almage,  D.D. 

(d)  Confession  is  a  necessary  basis  of  for- 
giveness. Confession  is  not  a  simple  act. 
Confession  is  in  reality  a  multitudinous  act ; 
it  is  many  acts  in  one  ;  it  is  a  convergence  of 
right  judgment,  right  feeling,  and  right  action. 
There  are  kinds  of  confession  which  are 
wholly  unavailing.  .  .  .  This  is  not  the  con- 
fession in  which  David  poured  out  his  soul ; 
his  words  are  full  of  heart.  His  language 
seems  to  be  baptized  with  tears.  Every  word 
is  a  groan  from  the  soul  ;  and  consequently 
his  confession  comes  within  the  assurance  of 


that  world-enclosing  and  most  blessed  promise, 
that  if  we  confess  our  sins,  God  will  erase 
them  from  His  book,  and  remember  them  no 
more  for  ever.  Think  of  God  forgetting. 
Think  of  the  Infinite  casting  aught  behind 
His  back  I  Back  of  the  Infinite!  Where  ii 
that?  He  will  put  our  sins  away  from  Him, 
as  far  as  the  East  is  from  the  West.  What 
geometrician  can  set  forth  in  lines  that 
distance,  or  tell  in  words  the  vastness  of  that 
immensity  ? — Joseph  Parker^  D,D, 

(c)  Abhorrence  of  evil  is  indispensable  to 
the  purity  of  a  man's  own  self  who  is  in  the 
midst  of  "a  perverse  and  crooked  generation." 
I  do  not  believe  any  man  can  avoid  the  forma- 
tion of  feeling,  and  to  a  certain  extent  the 
expression  of  it,  and  maintain  himself  in- 
corrupt. It  is  unnatural.  What  would  you 
give  for  a  man's  humanity  who  could  stand  by 
and  see  a  little  boy  deliberately  tortured,  and 
maintain  a  sweet  and  smiling  face,  and  perfect 
equanimity,  saying,  "It  is  neither  my  child, 
nor  the  child  of  anybody  that  I  know  any- 
thing about;"  and  saying,  "It  is  wrong;  I 
suppose  it  is  wrong ;  but  there  is  no  use  of 
being  excited  about  it"?  What  would  you 
think  of  a  man  that  could  stand  and  look 
upon  wickedness  and  not  feel  all  his  nature 
rebound  at  it  ?  You  cannot  see  a  man  steal 
(provided  it  is  not  yourself !)  without  the 
utmost  horror.  You  never  see  a  mean  thing 
done  (if  it  is  only  done  by  another)  without 
some  sensibility  in  regard  to  it. 

Now,  the  expressions  of  these  feelings  are, 
by  reaction,  the  modes  in  which  moral  sense, 
the  repugnance  to  wickedness,  to  evil,  is 
strengthened.  And  if  you,  for  any  reason, 
forbear  to  give  expression  to  the  feeling,  it 
goes  out  for  want  of  expression.  It  is  like  fire 
that  is  smothered.  And  the  man  who  is  so 
extremely  prudent  that  he  never  does  give 
utterance  to  his  feelings  of  indignation  against 
great  wrongs,  is  a  man  that  emasculates  him- 
self ;  and  he  becomes  a  moral  eunuch.  A 
man  is  not  worthy  of  the  name  of  man  who 
has  no  power  of  indignation.  A  man  is  not 
worthy  of  being  ranked  in  the  roll  of  manhood 
who  does  not  know  how  to  issue  soul-thunder. 

The  feeling,  and  suitable  expression,  of  in- 
dignation, then,  is  not  only  salutary  as  a  mode 
of  penalty,  and  of  restraint  to  the  wickedness 
of  society,  but  it  is  quite  indispensable,  also, 
to  the  moral  purity  of  the  individual,  the 
spectator,  himself.  It  is  one  of  those  exercises 
by  which  the  very  moral  sense  itself,  the  judge 
and  test  of  all  things  right  or  wrong,  is  kept 
in  tone. — H.  W,  Beecher, 


Ezra's  Humiliation  for  the  Sins  of  his  People, 

{Verses  5-6.) 


L  The  reason  of  his  sorrow.    Many  of 
the  people  bad  connected  themselves  in 
marriage  both  with   the  Canaanites  and 
150 


other  heathens  around  them.     This  h« 
justly    regarded    as    a    most    heinous 

evil. 


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OfiAP.  U. 


\.  As  being  a  violation  of  an  express 
command.  Ezra  himself  speaks  of  it  in 
this  view  (comp.  vers.  10—12  with  Dent, 
vii.  2.  3).  It  is  possible  that,  wliilst 
the  generality  sought  only  the  gratifica- 
tion of  their  own  corrupt  appetites, 
"  the  princes  and  rulers,  who  were  chief 
in  this  matter,"  justified  their  conduct 
on  the  ground  of  policy.  They  might 
urge  that,  being  few  in  number,  it  was 
desirable  for  their  own  preservation  to 
make  alliances  with  those  whose  hostility 
they  feared.  In  this  way  many  set  their 
own  reasonings  in  opposition  to  God's 
revealed,  will.  But  reason  is  altogether 
out  of  place  on  such  occasions.  We  are 
not  at  liberty  to  sit  in  judgment  on  God's 
commands,  and  to  determine  how  far  it 
is  expedient  to  obey  them,  &c. 

2.  As  having  an  evident  tendency  to 
bring  the  people  back  to  idolatry.  It 
was  for  their  idolatiies  that  the  nation 
had  been  sent  into  captivity  ;  and  a 
recurrence  of  the  same  evil  was  likely 
to  result  from  so  intimate  a  connection 
with  idolaters.  (Comp.  Dent.  vii.  4.) 
Their  disregard  of  this  danger  showed 
how  little  they  had  profited  by  the 
judgments  that  had  been  inflicted  on 
them,  or  the  mercies  that  had  been 
vouchsafed  unto  them.  But  thus  it  is 
with  all  who  seek  the  friendship  of  the 
world  :  God  has  told  them  that  "  friend- 
ship with  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  " 
(Jas.  iv.  4) ;  that  it  is  impossible  to 
maintain  communion  with  both  (Matt, 
vi.  24;  2  Cor.  vi.  14,  15);  and  that 
therefore  all  who  cultivate  the  friendship 
of  the  world  will  be  regarded  and  treated 
as  the  enemies  of  God  (1  John  ii.  15-17); 
yet  they  will  run  the  risk,  and  for  the 
sake  of  gratifying  their  corrupt  wishes, 
will  endanger  the  everlasting  salvation 
of  their  souls. 

IL  The  expressions  of  his  sorrow. 

1.  The  expression  of  his  grief  the  instant 
he  was  informed  of  their  misconduct. 
This  was  more  violent  than  any  of  which 
we  read  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Often 
have  men  rent  their  mantle  and  their 
garments ;  but  of  him  alone  we  are  told 
that  "  he  plucked  off  the  hair  of  his  head 
and  of  his  beard.'*  He  was  almost  dis- 
tracted ;  he  was  so  overwhelmed  as  to 
be  incapable  of  speech  or  action ;  "  he 


sat  down  astonied,"  <kc.  Shall  we  think 
all  this  extravagant  ?  No  truly,  if  we 
duly  estimate  the  evil  they  had  com- 
mitted, and  the  danger  to  which  tlie 
whole  nation  was  reduced.  We  are 
told  of  David,  that  "  horror  took  hold 
upon  him,"  and  that  "  rivers  of  tears 
ran  down  his  cheeks,"  (fee.  St.  Paul 
appeals  to  God,  that  he  had  "great 
sorrow  and  continual  heaviness  in  his 
heart,"  &c. 

2.  His  humiliation  before  God  more 
particularly  demands  our  attention.  "At 
the  time  of  the  evening  sacrifice,"  as  if 
revived  and  encouraged  by  the  considera- 
tion of  the  great  atonement,  "  he  arose 
from  his  heaviness,  and  fell  upon  his 
knees,"  and  confessed  with  shame  and 
anguish  of  heart  both  his  own  sins  and 
the  sins  of  all  the  people.  What  a 
just  view  had  he  of  national  transgres- 
sions. Many  would  have  thought  that 
because  he  disapproved  of  the  evils  that 
had  been  committed,  he  had  no  share 
in  the  guilt,  nor  any  occasion  to  humble 
himself  before  God  on  account  of  them  ; 
but  the  members  of  the  body  politic 
are,  in  their  corporate  capacity,  like  the 
members  of  the  natural  body,  all  to  a 
certain  degree  responsible  for  those  evils 
which  generally,  though  not  universally, 
prevail  among  them.  At  the  day  of 
judgment  indeed,  none  will  have  to 
answer  for  anything  but  what  they 
themselves  were  personally  guilty  of ; 
but  in  this  world,  where  alone  nations 
can  be  dealt  with  as  nations,  we  should 
consider  ourselves  as  participating  in 
whatever  relates  to  the  nation  at  large. 
Oh  that  we  felt  for  our  own  sins  as  he 
felt  for  the  sins  of  others !  We  are  told 
plainly  enough  what  is  that  repentance 
which  godly  sorrow  will  produce  (2  Cor. 
vii.  10,  11);  let  us  therefore  look  to  it 
that  we  "approve  ourselves  to  be  clear 
in  this  matter,*' 

Application  : 

And  now  the  evening  sacrifice  is  just 
offered ;  "  now  once  in  the  end  of  the 
world,  hath  Christ  appeared,"  <kc.  (Heh, 
ix.  26.)  Let  us  spread  before  Him  both 
our  national  and  personal  transgressions; 
not  doubting  but  that  "  if  we  confess 
our  sins,  God  is  faithful,"  <fec.  (1  John  i 
9). — G.  Simeon^  M,A, 


tmAt.  VL. 


nOMlLKTlC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


Ezra's  Address. 
(Verse  8.) 


Israel  had  often  suffered  for  their  sins, 
especially  for  idolatry.  Worsted  by  ene- 
mies—  latterly  carried  into  captivity. 
Now,  after  seventy  years,  restored.  Now 
Ezra  relates  his  experience.  Deej)  sorrow 
and  shame  for  their  sins  (ver.  2,  &c.). 
His  distress,  prayer,  and  confessi(ni,  &c. 
In  the  midst  of  this  comes  our  text,  full 
of  instruction,  counsel,  &c  The  subject 
shows — 

I.  The  grace  they  had  experienced. 

Observe — 

1.  In  bondage.  Not  desert,  but  grace 
— undeserved  favour. 

2.  Grace  from  Jehovah^  their  covenant 
God. 

3.  Grace  to  preserve.  "  A  remnant." 
Seventy  years'  captivity.  Not  all  extin- 
guished. Some  kept,  sustained — and  a 
remnant  only. 

4.  To  he  restored  to  their  land — nation 
—  city  —  worship  —  inheritances  —  and 
home. 

II.  The  exalted  position  to  which 
they  had  been  raised. 

1.  *'-4  nailj^  or  pin — these  were  in- 
serted in  the  building  of  the  place.  De- 
signed— (1.)  For  ornament.  (2.)  For  use- 
fulness. (3.)  For  permanence.  So  Christ, 
the  Messiah  (Isa.  xxii.  23).  Levites  were 
nails,  pins.  The  priests — the  high  priest 
— an  exalted  place.     The  musicians. 

2.  In  the''*'  holy  place  "  of  God.  Taber- 
nacle— Church  of  the  old  covenant.  Not 
in  palaces — schools  of  learning — halls  of 
science — academies  of  philosophy;  but 
in  the  far  higher,  holier  Church  of  the 
living  God.  Observe  this  is  expressive 
■ — (1.)  Of  their  honour — true  dignity. 
^.)  Of  their  security.  (3.)  Of  their 
[)rivi leges  and  favours. 

III.  The  blessings  connected  with 
these  privileges. 


And  here  there  is  reference — 

1.  To  spiritual  illuminalion.  "God 
may  lighten,"  <fec.  (Ps.  xiii.  3  ;  xxxiv.  5). 
(1.)  Eyes  to  see  their  own  unworthiness. 
(2.)  Their  own  helplessness.  (3.)  The 
Lord's  goodness.  (4.)  The  Lord's  will 
and  ways. 

2.  Spiritual  reviving.  Rekindling  of 
the  fire — stirring  up — re-inspiring — re- 
strengthening — reviving.  Faith — hope 
— zeal — love — obedience. 

3.  Gratefulness  for  deliverances.  In 
our  bondage — that  God  should  show 
grace.  Deliverance  from  it,  <kc.  And 
now  gratefully  reviewed,  <fec. 

4.  The  brevity  of  these  signal  mercies 
— "a  little  space."  For  working — fight- 
ing— building  up  ourselves.  Also  the 
Church — "a  little  space."  We  are  re- 
minded of  this — (1.)  By  those  who  have 
passed  away.  The  fathers,  <fec.  Those 
we  have  known — succeeded.  (2.)  By 
the  advance  we  have  made  in  life.  Look 
back  to  childhood — youth,  <kc.  How 
changed  !  (3.)  By  the  uncertain,  frag- 
mentary remains,  we  can  only  possess. 
"  Time  is  short,"  <fec.  **  We  spend  our 
years  as  a  tale  that  is  told."  The  Judge 
at  the  door.  "  I  must  work  the  works 
of  Him  that  sent  me  while  it  is  day," 
&c.  '*  Whatsoever  thy  hand  findeth  to 
do,"  <fec.     Let  the  subject  be — 

1.  A  test  of  character.  Are  we  of 
the  remnant  1  Called — the  chosen — 
the  faithful. 

2.  An  appeal  as  to  our  position.  In 
the  Church,  "  a  nail "  or  pin — some- 
where. 

3.  A  question  as  to  our  desires.  Are 
we  seeking  the  reviving  1 

4.  An  exhortation.  Appeal  to  those 
outside  the  Church  to  come  with  us,  <fec. 
— Jabez  Burns,  D,D, 


Forbidden  Marriages. 

(Verse  12.) 

**Give  not  pour  daughters  unto  their  bited    from  taking  heathen  women  for 

sonf!,   neither   take  their  daughters  unto  their    wives,    and    from    giving    their 

your  sons."     The  Israelites  were  prohi-  Hauofhters   in  marriage   to  the  heathen. 
152 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  EjSRA. 


CBkt.  IJL 


And  true  Christians  are  commanded 
not  to  marry  those  who  are  not  Chris- 
tians. What  are  the  reasons  why  such 
marriages  should  not  be  contracted  1 
Because — 

I.  They  are  opposed  to  the  express 
command  of  God.  "  Be  ye  not  unequally 
yoked  together  with  unbelievers,"  <fec. 
(2  Cor.  vi.  14).  "There  is,"  says 
Birnes,  "  a  difference  between  Chris- 
tians and  those  who  are  not  so  great 
as  to  render  such  unions  improper  and 
injurious.  The  direction  here  refers, 
doubtless,  to  all  kinds  of  improper  con- 
nections with  those  who  were  unbe- 
lievers. It  has  been  usually  supposed 
by  commentators  to  refer  particularly 
to  marriai^e.  But  there  is  no  reason 
for  confining  it  to  marriage.  It  doubt- 
less includes  that/'  And  M.  Henry : 
"  Those  relations  that  are  our  choice 
must  be  chosen  by  rule ;  and  it  is  good 
for  those  who  are  themselves  the  chil- 
dren of  God  to  join  with  those  who  are 
so  likewise  ;  for  there  is  more  danger 
that  the  bad  will  damage  the  good  than 
hope  that  the  goodwill  benefit  the  bad." 
Again,  St.  Paul  writes  that  Christians 
are  to  marry  *'  only  in  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor. 
vii.  39);  which  Alford  explains  thus: 
**  i.e.^  within  the  limits  of  Christian  con- 
necticm — in  the  element  in  which  all 
Chi  istians  live  and  walk — *  let  her  marry 
a  Christian.''  So  Tertull.,  Cypr.,  Am- 
bros.,  Jerome,  Grot.,  Est.,  Bengel, 
Rosenm.,  Olsh,,  Meyer,  De  W."  Whit- 
by: "She  must  marry  a  believer,  one 
who  is  in  Clirist  by  faith  and  profession." 
And  Barnes  :  *'  That  is,  only  to  one  who 
is  a  Christian,  with  a  proper  sense  of  her 
obligations  to  Christ,  and  so  as  to  pro- 
mote His  glory."  (a). 

II.  They  are  inconsistent  with  the 
most  sacred  aspects  and  ends  of  mar- 
riage. Marriage  was  instituted  by  God 
(Gen.  ii.  20-24;  Matt.  xix.  4-6);  and 
it  was  intended  by  Him  to  be  a  union 
of  persons  not  merely  as  regards  their 
temporal  interests,  but  in  their  spiritual 
sympathies.  In  its  best  aspect  marriage 
is  a  union  of  souls.  (6).  They  who  are 
thus  united  have  sympathy  with  each 
other  in  their  deepest,  highest,  and 
holiest  experiences.  They  are  one  in 
soul,  one  in  Christ,  and    one  for  ever. 


The  marriage  which  is  not  a  union  of 
souls  is  defective,  and  it  degrades  the 
Divine  institution.  One  of  the  ends 
contemplated  in  the  institution  of  mar- 
riage was  that  they  who  are  joined  in 
this  relation  should  be  mutual  helpers. 
Woman  was  created  to  be  "  an  help 
meet  for  "  man.  And  this  must  surely 
hold  good  in  relation  to  the  highest  and 
most  important  concerns  of  life,  viz.,  the 
salvation  of  their  souls,  or  their  life, 
health,  and  progress  as  spiritual  beings. 
Husbands  and  wives  should  aid  each 
other  in  their  upward  and  heavenward 
path.  But  how  can  they  do  this  if  the 
genuine  Christian  is  mated  with  one 
who  is  not  a  Christian  ?  (c).  The  ab- 
sence of  this  high  and  holy  union  is 
sometimes  mournfully  manifest  in  mar- 
ried life.  How  inexpressibly  sad  it  is 
when  in  the  sore  troubles  of  life  hus- 
band and  wife  look  to  different  quarters 
for  relief,  and  consolation,  and  help ! 
The  true  Christian  looks  to  the  Heavenly 
Father,  and  obtains  calmness  and  peace 
and  hope,  to  which  the  unbelieving  part- 
ner is  a  stranger.  When  their  union 
should  be  most  closely  and  preciously 
realised,  the  gulf  which  separates  them 
is  most  painfully  felt.  In  like  manner 
the  unbeliever  is  utterly  unable  to 
enter  into  the  tenderest,  holiest,  and 
most  cherished  experiences — those  of 
the  religious  life  —  of  the  Christian 
partner. 

Ill  They  imperil  the  salvation  of 
the  soul.  The  believing  husband  or 
wife  mnj  be  successful  in  leading  the 
unbelieving  partner  to  real  trust  in 
Christ  pnd  hearty  consecration  to  Him. 
But  ill  very  many  instances  the  actual 
result  IS  the  opposite  of  this.  "  Did  not 
Solomon  king  of  Israel  sin  by  these 
things'?  yet  among  many  nations  was 
there  no  king  like  him,  who  was  be- 
loved of  his  God,  and  God  made  him 
king  over  all  Israel ;  nevertheless  even 
him  did  outlandish  women  cause  to  sin  *' 
(Neh.  xiii.  26).  "  There  is  far  greater 
ground  of  fear  that  they  shall  pervert 
you,  than  there  is  ground  of  hope  that 
you  shall  convert  them."  The  risk  of 
this  kind  which  such  marriages  involve 
is  one  which  no  Christian  is  justified  in 
deliberately  encountering.  ((/). 

153 


ankv.  Tx. 


ffOMlLETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


**  Maid,  choosing  man,  remember  this  : 
You  take  his  nature  with  his  name  ; 
Ask,  too,  what  his  religion  is, 

For  you  will  soon  be  of  the  same." 

IV.  They  are  inimical  to  wise  and 
harmonious  home  government.  In  such 
marriages  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion 
as  to  the  ends  to  be  sought  and  the 
methods  to  be  employed  in  the  govern- 
ment of  the  family  ;  and  as  to  the  spirit 
which  should  pervade  the  home ;  and, 
further,  as  to  the  course  of  life  to  be 
pursued  therein.  Such  differences  must 
militate  against  the  order  and  harmony 
which  should  characterise  family  life. 

V.  They  are  detrimental  to  the 
best  interests  of  the  children  of  the 
marriage.  One  of  the  objects  contem- 
plated in  the  institution  of  marriage  was 
the  production  of  "  a  godly  seed  "  (Mai. 
ii.  15),  and  in  the  marriages  which  are 
Divinely  forbidden  this  object  is  likely 
to  be  frustrated.  The  diversity  of  spirit, 
principles,  aims,  and  methods,  which 
exists  where  one  parent  is  really  a  Chris- 
tian and  the  other  is  not,  must  exert  an 
injurious  influence  upon  the  children.  («). 
How  many  and  forcible,  then,  are  the 
reasons  why  Christians  should  marry 
"  only  in  the  Lord  "  ! 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  They  that  enter,  or  think  of  entering, 
into  the  married  state,  are  required  to  do 
it  in  the  Lord,  as  an  only  thing.  Marry  they 
may,  **  only  in  the  Lord."  But  when  they 
neglect  this,  they  leave  out  the  only  thing 
that  can  make  a  blessed  marriage ;  which 
certainly  must  argue  a  very  profane  mind, 
when  men  and  women  dare  venture,  and  rush 
upon  a  matter  of  so  great  importance  as  that, 
and  leave  out  the  rery  only  thing  that  con- 
cerns them  in  it. — John  Howe. 

(6)  The  relation  of  which  we  now  treat, 
instituted  by  the  benevolent  Creator  Himself, 
is  the  closest,  the  most  intimate  and  tender, 
of  all  earthly  connections.  Its  closeness  and 
endearing  intimacy  were  evidently  meant  to 
be  indicated  by  two  circumstances  : — (1.)  The 
manner  of  the  formation  of  the  first  woman  ; 
not,  as  the  man  himself  had  been,  from  *'  the 
dust  of  the  ground,"  but  from  a  bone  of  his 
own  body  ;  and  that  hone  one  of  the  safe- 
guards of  the  most  important  and  vital  organi 
of  his  frame,  being  part  of  the  protecting 
bulwarks  of  his  heart — the  fountain  of  life 
to  his  whole  frame,  and  the  seat  of  all  hi> 
affections.  I  dare  not  for  a  moment  doubt 
the  emblematic  significance  of  thia  remark- 
154 


able  fact.  It  is  as  far  as  possible  from  being 
fanciful.  Adam  himself  perceived,  and  felt, 
and  expressed  it,  when,  on  the  delicate  and 
lovely  counterpart  of  himself  being  brought 
to  him  by  the  Divine  Maker,  he  exclaimed, 
with  new,  and  delightful,  and  sinless  emotion  : 
"This  is  now  bone  of  my  bone,  and  flesh 
of  my  flesh  ;  she  shall  be  called  woman,  be- 
cause she  was  taken  out  of  man."  In  our 
language  the  sentiment  is  not,  and  cannot 
be,  correctly  transfused.  In  the  original  the 
name  for  woman  is  simply  that  for  man,  with  a 
feminine  termination,  which,  from  the  struc- 
ture of  our  language,  we  cannot  imitate.  The 
nearest  approximation  to  it  would  be  she-man; 
but,  unfortunately,  it  sounds  too  ludicrously  to 
be  at  all  sufferable.  To  this  original  forma- 
tion of  woman  Paul  beautifully  alludes,  when 
he  describes  the  very  thing  of  which  we  have 
been  representing  it  as  significant  of  the  tender 
care  with  which  husbands  should  regard  and 
cherish  the  chosen  partners  of  their  lives. 
'*  So  ought  men  to  lore  their  wives,"  &c.  (Eph. 
V.  28-30).  (2.)  The  second  thing  by  which 
this  was  indicated  was  the  pronouncing  of  this 
relation,  by  Jehovah  Himself,  superior  in  its 
imperative  requisitions  to  every  other.  The 
relation  of  child  to  parent  is  specially  tender 
and  powerful ;  yet  it  must  give  way  before 
the  obligation  under  which  that  child,  when 
he  becomes  a  husband,  is  laid  to  the  "wife  of 
his  youth : "  "  For  this  cause  shall  a  man 
leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  shall 
cleave  unto  his  wife."  It  is  the  only  one  of 
life's  relations  that  is  represented  as  consti- 
tuting a  species  of  identity — a  dual  unit : 
"Wherefore  they  are  no  more  twain,  but 
one  flesh.  What  therefore  God  hath  joined 
together,  let  no  man  put  asunder." — R, 
Wa/rdlaw,  D.D. 

(c)  Husband  and  wife  should  be  as  the 
milch-kine,  which  were  coupled  together  to 
carry  the  ark  of  God  ;  or  as  the  two  cherubim, 
that  looked  upon  one  another,  and  both  upon 
the  mercy-seat ;  or  as  the  two  tables  of  stone, 
on  each  of  which  were  engraven  the  laws  of 
God.  In  some  families  married  persons  are 
like  Jeremiah's  two  baskets  of  figs,  the  one 
very  good,  the  other  very  evil ;  or  like  fire  and 
water,  whilst  the  one  is  flaming  in  devotion, 
the  other  is  freezing  in  corruption.  There  is 
a  twofold  hindrance  in  holiness  :  first,  on  the 
right  side ;  secondly,  on  the  left.  On  the  right 
side  :  when  the  wife  would  run  in  God's  way, 
the  husband  will  not  let  her  go  :  when  the 
fore-horse  in  a  team  will  not  draw,  he  wrongs 
all  the  rest ;  when  the  general  of  an  army 
forbids  a  march,  all  the  soldiers  stand  still. 
Sometimes  on  the  left  :  how  did  Solomon's 
idolatrous  wives  draw  away  his  heart  from 
heaven?  A  sinning  wife  was  Satan's  first 
ladder,  by  which  he  scaled  the  walls  of  Para- 
dise, and  took  away  the  fort-royal  of  Adam's 
heart  from  him.  Thus,  she  that  should  have 
been  the  kelp  of  his  fleshy  was  the  hurt  of  his 
faith:  his  nature' »  under pro'pperhQQOxne^  his 
grae^i  under  miner ;  and  she  that  should  be 


HOMTLETJG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


0«AF.  IX. 


K  crown  on  the  heady  is  acro»«  on  the  ahoulden. 
The  wife  is  often  to  the  husband  as  the  ivy 
is  to  the  oak,  which  draws  away  his  sap  from 
him. — W.  Seeker. 

{d)  Such  unlawful  unions  have  been  usually 
advocated  thus  : — The  godly  party  pretends  to 
make  no  doubt,  but  tiiat  the  other  pari}'  may 
be  converted  :  "God  can  easily  convert  men 
when  He  will ;  and  if  tliere  be  but  love, 
persons  are  easily  won  over  to  the  same  mind 
with  those  they  love."  Answer — (1.)  Then  it 
seems  because  you  love  an  ungodly  person, 
you  will  be  easily  turned  to  be  ungodly.  If 
so,  you  are  not  much  l)etter  already.  If  love 
will  not  draw  you  to  their  mind  to  be  ungodly, 
why  should  you  think  love  will  draw  them  to 
your  mind  to  be  godly  ?  Are  you  stronger  in 
grace  than  they  are  in  sin  ?  (2.)  If  you  knew 
well  what  grace  is,  and  what  a  sinful,  unre- 
newed soul  is,  you  would  not  think  it  so  easy 
a  matter  to  convert  a  soul.  Why  are  there  so 
few  converted,  if  it  be  so  easy  a  thing  If  You 
cannot  make  yourselves  better  by  adding 
higher  degrees  to  the  grace  you  have ;  much 
less  can  you  make  others  better  by  giving 
them  the  grace  which  they  have  not.  (3.) 
It  is  true  that  God  is  able  to  convert  them 
when  He  will ;  and  it  is  true  that,  for  aught 
I  know,  it  may  be  done.  But  what  of  that  ? 
Will  you  in  so  weighty  a  case  take  up  with  a 
mere  possibility  ?  God  can  make  a  beggar 
rich,  and  for  aught  you  know  to  the  contrary, 
He  will  do  it ;  and  yet  you  will  not  therefore 
marry  a  beggar;  nor  will  you  marry  a  leper, 
because  God  can  heal  him  ;  why  then  should 
you  marry  an  ungodly  person,  because  God 
can  convert  him  ?  See  it  done  first,  if  you 
love  your  peace  and  safety. — R.  Baxter. 

A  consistent  Christian  young  man  became 
attached  to  a  pleasure-loving  and  gay  young 


lady,  and  married  her  against  the  advice  of 
his  brethren.  Her  influence  silenced  his 
prayers,  estranged  him  from  the  house  of 
God,  and  led  him  to  her  ways  of  pleasure. 
Sickness  called  his  attention  back  to  religion. 
Twice  his  wife  had  driven  him  from  his  <iuty. 
Now,  in  agony  and  remorse,  with  a  fearful 
eternity  before  him,  he  gazed  upon  her  and 
cried,  "Rebecca,  Rebecca,  you  are  the  cause 
of  my  eternal  damnation  I  "  and  died. — Diet. 
of  Rlust. 

(e)  Hannah  vows,  if  the  Lord  will  give  her 
a  son,  by  bearing  him,  she  will  return  that 
son  to  the  Lord  bj'  serving  Him  (1  Sam.  i.  11). 
A  spouse  should  be  more  careful  of  her  chil- 
dren's breeding  than  she  should  be  fearful  of 
her  children's  bearing.  Take  heed  lest  these 
flowers  grow  in  the  devil's  garden.  Though 
you  bring  them  out  in  corruption,  yet  do  not 
bring  them  up  to  damnation.  Those  are  not 
mothers,  but  monsters,  that  whilst  they  should 
be  teaching  their  children  the  way  to  heaven 
with  their  lips,  are  leading  them  the  way  to 
hell  with  their  lives.  Good  edueation  U  the 
best  livery  you  can  give  them,  living ;  and  it  is 
the  best  legacy  you  can  leave  them  dying.  You 
let  out  your  cares  to  make  them  great.  Oh  lift 
up  your  prayers  to  make  them  good;  that 
before  you  die  from  them,  you  may  see  Christ 
live  in  them.  Whilst  these  twigs  are  green 
and  tender,  they  should  be  bowed  towards 
God.  Children  and  servants  are  in  a  family 
as  passengers  are  in  a  boat ;  husband  and 
wife,  they  are  as  a  pair  of  oars  to  row  them  to 
their  desired  haven.  Let  these  small  pieces 
of  timber  be  hewed  and  squared  for  the 
celestial  building.  By  putting  a  sc^tre  of 
grace  into  their  hands,  you  will  set  a  crown  of 
glory  upon  their  heads. — W.  Seeker, 


Use  of  God's  Diversified  Dispensations. 
(Verses  13,  14.) 


L  God's  diversified  dispensations 
towards  ns.  God  visited  His  people  of 
old  with  alternate  mercies  and  judg- 
ments ;  and  thus  He  has  dealt  with  tis 
also. 

1.  He  has  visited  our  sins  with  judg- 
ments. And  it  is  of  the  utmost  import- 
ance that  we  should  acknowledge  the 
hand  of  God  in  them.  They  spring  not 
out  of  the  dust,  <fec.  God  uses  men  as 
instruments,  just  as  He  did  the  Assyrians 
and  Chaldeans,  to  punish  His  people ; 
but  still  it  is  His  hand  alone  that  inflicts 
the  stroke  (Ps.  xvii.  13;  Isa.  x.  6-7, 
13-15,  xxxvii.  24-26;  Gen.  xlv.  8). 
We  must  confess,  however,  that  our 
sufferings  have  by  no  means  equalled 


our  deserts  (Ps.  ciii.  10).  Take  any 
one  of  our  national  sins,  &a  If  God 
had  proceeded  against  ns  according  to 
the  tremendous  aggregate  of  our  iniqui- 
ties, we  should  have  been  made  as  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah. 

2.  He  has  also  vouchsaved  us  a  deliver- 
ance. The  *'  deliverance  "  granted  to 
the  Jews  on  their  return  from  Babylon 
was  not  inferior  to  that  which  they  had 
formerly  experienced  in  their  departure 
from  Egypt.  And  has  not  ours  also 
been  exceeding  great  ?  ...  In  this  too 
must  we  view  the  hand  of  God.  Who- 
ever were  the  means,  God  was  the  author 
of  it.  It  is  He  who  produces  all  the 
changes  in  the  state  of  individuals  (1 

155 


CHAP.  X. 


UOUIIETJC  COMMENT  ART:  EZRA. 


Sam.  ii.  6-8),  or  of  kingdoms  (Jer.  xviii. 
6,  7,  9).  And  as  the  discerning  of  His 
agency  in  our  nfflictions  is  necessary  to 
effect  our  humiliation,  so  the  beholding 
of  it  in  our  mercies  is  necessary  to  excite 
our  gratitude. 

II.  The  effect  they  should  have  upon 
us.  If  the  destruction  of  sin  be  the  end 
which  God  proposes  to  Himself  in  all 
His  conduct  towards  us,  then  we  should 
endeavour  to  make  everything  subser- 
vient to  that  end.  The  pointed  interro- 
gation in  the  text  strongly  shows  in 
what  light  we  should  view  a  renewed 
violation  of  God's  commandments,  after 
He  has  taken  such  pains  to  enforce  the 
observance  of  them. 

1.  How  unreasonable  would  it  he!  No 
man  can  read  the  account  of  Pharaoh's 
obstinacy  in  the  midst  of  all  his  suc- 
cessive judgments  and  deliverances,  and 
not  stand  amazed  at  his  more  than 
brutish  stupidity.  Yet  it  is  thus  that 
we  shall  act,  if  we  do  not  now  put  away 
our  sins,  &c.  And  how  irrational  such 
conduct  would  be  God  Himself  tells  us  : 
He  even  calls  heaven  and  earth  to  ex- 
press their  astonishment  at  it,  &c.  (Isa. 
i.  2,  3).  And  if  we  be  guilty  of  it,  He 
will  justly  vent  His  indignation  against 
us,  as  He  did  against  His  people  of  old: 
"They  are  a  perverse  and  crooked  genera- 
tion," ko..  (Deut.  xxxii.  5,  6). 

2.  How  ungrateful!  Ingratitude  is 
considered  as  one  of  the  greatest  aggrava- 
tions that  can  be  found  in  any  offence 
of  man  against  his  fellow-man  ;  and  how 
much  more  must  it  enhance  the  guilt 


we  contract  in  our  disobedience  to  God ! 
See  what  a  stress  God  Himself  lays  upon 
this  in  the  transgressions  of  David  (2 
Sam.  xii.  7-9),  and  Solomon  (I  Kings 
xi.  9),  and  Hezekiah  (2  Chron.  xxxii. 
25) ;  and  will  it  not  stanjp  a  tenfold 
malignity  also  on  our  offences?  (Comp. 
Jer.  vii.  9,  10.) 

3.  How  dangerous  !  This  is  particu- 
larly noticed  by  Ezra,  in  the  words 
following  the  text ;  and  the  state  of  the 
Jews  at  this  moment  is  an  awful  com- 
ment upon  it.  God  tells  us  that,  as 
the  impenitence  of  the  Jews  was  the 
reason  of  His  continuing  to  afflict  them 
(Isa.  ix.  12,  17,  21  ;  x.  4),  so  He  will 
"  punish  us  seven  times  more  for  our 
sins"  (Lev.  xxvi.  18,  21,  24,  28)  if  we 
now  continue  in  them.  To  what  a  state 
of  misery  we  may  in  that  case  expect  to 
be  reduced,  we  may  judge  from  what 
was  actually  exj^erienced  by  the  Jewish 
nation  (Judg.  x.  11—14). 

Address  : 

Remember  that  God  is  not  an  in- 
different spectator  of  our  conduct.  Sin 
is  that  "abominable  thing  which  His 
soul  hateth "  (Jer.  xliv.  4) ;  and  He 
will  surely  destroy  either  it  or  him  that 
retains  it.  And  if  His  judgments  be 
not  inflicted  on  the  sinner  in  this  life, 
there  still  is  a  future  day  of  retribution, 
when  every  man  shall  give  account  of 
himself  to  God,  and  receive  the  just 
recompense  of  all  his  actions.  Let  every 
one  of  us  shudder  at  the  thought  of  ever 
again  breaking  the  least  of  God's  com- 
mandments.— G.  Simeon^  M.A. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Critical  and  Explanatory  Notes.]  In  this  chapter  we  have  the  account  of — (i.)  Shechaniah*! 
proposal  to  put  away  the  strange  wives  (vers.  1-5).  (ii.)  Ezra's  fast  because  of  the  people's  sin 
(ver.  6).  (iii.)  The  proclamation  calling  upon  all  the  Jews  to  assemble  at  Jerusalem  witiiin 
three  days  (vers.  7,  8).  (iv.)  The  coming  together  of  the  people  at  Jerusalem,  and  their  accept- 
ance  of  the  proposal  to  put  away  the  strange  wives  (vers.  9-14).  (v.)  Tlie  opposition  of  Jona- 
than the  son  of  Asahel  and  others  (ver.  15).  (vi.)  The  carrying  out  of  the  proposal  (vers.  16, 
17).     (vii.)  The  names  of  the  men  who  had  taken  strange  wives  (vers.  18-44). 

Ver.  1.  Now  when  Ezra  had  prayed,  and  when  he  had  confessed]  Rather,  **  Now  whilst 
Ezra  prayed  and  whilst  he  confessed."  Before  the  house  of  God]  i.e.  in  the  court  of  the 
Temple. 

Ver.  2.  Jehiel]  Perhaps  the  Jehiel  whose  name  occurs  in  ver.  26,  as  having  married  a 
heathen  wife.  Now  there  is  hope  in  Israel]  Rather,  "for  Israel."  He  came  to  this  conclu- 
sion because  the  people  were  sensible  of  their  sin  and  sorrowing  l>y  reason  of  it. 

Ver.  3.  According  to  the  counsel  of  my  lord]  Keil  :  "the  Lord."  Ezra  had  given  no 
advice  in  the  matter  as  yet.  But  Shechaniah  might  have  inferred  what  Ezra  would  counsel 
from  his  words  and  actions  (chap.  ix.  3-15). 

Ver.  6.  According  to  this  word]  i.e.  according  to  the  proposal  of  Shechaniah. 
Ida 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA.  chap.  t. 

Ver.  6.  Went  into  the  chamber]  (Comp.  1  Kings  vi.  6 ;  chap.  viii.  29 ;  Neh.  xiii.  4,  6.) 
Of  Johanan  the  son  of  Eliashib]  We  cannot  arrive  at  any  certain  conclusion  as  to  who  this 
Johanan  was.  According  to  Mr.  Aldis  Wright,  he  was  one  of  the  chief  Levites  (Neh.  xii.  23). 
From  a  comparison  of  Neh.  xii.  22,  23,  with  vers.  10  and  11  of  the  same  chapter,  Rawlinson  con- 
cludes that  he  was  the  grandson  of  Eliasiiih  the  high  priest.  Keil  says,  "Johanan,  the  son  of 
Eliashib,  cannot  actually  be  Joh;inan-ben-Eliashib  (Neh.  xii.  23)  the  high  priest.  .  .  .  For  the 
high  priest  Eliashib  was  a  contemporary  of  Nehemiah,  and  the  high  priest  Johanan  was  not  the 
son,  but,  according  to  the  definite  statement  (Neh.  xii.  10),  the  grandson  of  Eliashib,  and  the 
son  of  Joiada  (tiie  correct  reading  of  Neh.  xii.  11  being,  Joiada  begat  Johanan  and  Jonathan). 
Now  a  chamber  of  the  Temple  could  not  in  Ezra's  time  have  been  as  yet  called  after  a  grandson 
of  Eliashib,  the  contemporary  of  Nehemiah  ;  and  both  Johanan  and  Eliashib  being  names 
which  frequently  occur  (comp.  vers.  24,  27,  36),  and  one  of  the  twenty-four  orders  of  priestg 
being  called  after  the  latter  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  12),  we,  with  Ewald  {Gesck.,  iv.  p.  228),  regard  the 
Johanan-ben-Eliashib  here  mentioned  as  an  individual  of  whom  nothing  further  is  known, — 
perhaps  a  priest  descended  from  the  Eliashib  of  1  Chron.  xxiv.  12,  and  who  possessed  in  the 
new  Temple  a  chamber  called  by  his  name."  He  did  eat  no  bread  nor  drink  water]  He  fasted 
strictly.  Fasts  of  this  strictness  were  not  common.  A  few  cases  are  recorded  (see  Exod.  xxxiv. 
28;  Dent.  ix.  9,  18;  Jon.  iii.  7). 

Ver.  7.  And  they  made  proclamation]  &c.  Lit.,  '*  And  they  caused  a  voice  to  pass  through- 
out," &c.,  i.e.  they  proclaimed  by  heralds.     (Comp.  chap.  i.  1.) 

Ver.  8.  Forfeited]  Margin:  **  Heb.,  devoted,"  i.e.  appropriated  to  the  treasury  of  the 
Temple. 

Ver.  9.  The  ninth  month]  was  named  Chisleu,  and  nearly  corresponds  with  our  December. 
In  the  street]  3in"1  =  a  wide  space,  a  large,  open  place.  Probably  here  it  means  the  great 
court  before  the  Temple.  For  the  great  rain]  Chisleu  was  in  the  rainy  season.  **  During 
the  months  of  November  and  December  the  rains  fall  heavily,  but  at  intervals." — Bi^l.  Diet. 

Ver.  10.  Have  taken  strange  wives]  Lit.,  **  Have  caused  strange  wives  to  dwell,"  i.e.  have 
taken  them  to  live  with  you. 

Ver.  14.  Let  now  our  rulers  of  all  the  congregation  stand]  or,  as  Keil,  "  Let  then  our  rulers 
■tand  for  the  whole  connregation,"  i.e.  for  the  good  of  the  congregation,  and  transact  its  busi- 
ness. With  them  the  elders  of  every  city  and  the  judges]  as  being  acquainted  with  the  several 
cases.  For  this  matter]  Margin:  *'Till  this  matter  (be  despatched)."  Keil:  "As  long  as 
this  matter  lasts."  The  rulers  Mere  to  continue  to  judge  the  accused  as  long  as  the  matter 
lasted.  The  latter  part  of  the  verse  would  run  thus  :  '*  Until  the  fierce  wrath  of  our  God  be 
turned  from  us,  as  long  as  this  matter  lasts."  The  last  words  define  more  exactly  the  leading 
idea  of  the  verse. 

Ver.  16.  Were  employed  about  this  matter]  Rather,  **  Stood  up  against  this  (matter),"  as 
in  1  Chron.  xxi.  1  ;  2  Chron.  xx.  23;  Dan.  viii.  25,  xi.  14.  Meshullam  is  probably  identical 
with  the  Meshullam  of  ver.  29,  wiio  had  taken  a  heathen  wife. 

Ver.  16.  And  the  children  of  the  captivity  did  so]  Notwithstanding  the  opposition  of 
Jonathan  and  his  companions,  ihe  people  carried  out  tlie  determination  which  they  had  ex- 
pressed. With  certain  chief  of  the  fathers,  after  the  house  of  their  fathers]  Keil  translates, 
*'  And  men,  heads  of  houses  according  to  their  houses."  The  meaniiig  is,  that  each  recognised 
house  or  family  was  represented  on  the  commission  by  its  head.  And  all  of  them  by  their 
names]  or,  "and  they  all  by  names."  A  list  of  their  names  was  written  (comp.  chap.  viii.  20). 
Were  separated]  or,  selected  for  this  business.  The  tenth  month]  i.e.  Tebeth,  which  nearly 
answers  to  our  January. 

Ver.  17.  The  first  month]  i.e.  Nisan,  which  nearly  corresponded  to  our  April.  The  com- 
mission sat  for  three  months,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  they  had  completed  their  business. 

Ver.  18.  The  sons  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak]  Tliis  is  Jeshua  the  high  priest  who  came 
up  from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel. 

Ver.  19.  They  gave  their  hands]  i.e.  **  bound  themselves  by  shaking  hands,  to  put  away 
their  wives,  i.e.  to  dismiss  them,  and  to  sever  them  from  tlie  congregation  of  Israel." — Keil. 
And  being  g^ty  they  offered  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  trespass]  The  Heb.  is  simply, 
**  And  guilty,  a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  trespass ;"  which  is  explained  by  Keil  that  they  were 
condemned  to  bring  a  ram  as  a  trespass  offering  (Lev.  v.  14-16).  Fuerst :  ^^  And  the  guilty 
(gave  their  hands  to  bring)  a  ram  for  their  trespass.^* 

Vers.  20-22.  Of  the  sons  of  Immer,  Hanani]  &c.  "By  comparing  chap.  ii.  36-39,  we 
perceive  that  not  one  of  the  orders  of  priests  who  returned  with  Zerubbabel  was  free  from 
participation  in  this  transgression," — Keil. 

Ver.  25.  The  singers  and  the  porters]     (Comp.  chap.  ii.  41,  42.) 

Ver.  26.  Moreover  of  Israel]  "  As  distinguished  from  priests  and  Levites,  ie.  of  the  laity." 
^Keil. 

Ver.  44.  And  some  of  them  had  wives  by  whom  they  had  children]  Rather,  **  And  there 
were  among  them  wives  who  had  brought  forth  sons."  This  fact  is  mentioned  probably  to  show 
how  thoroughly  this  reformation  was  efl'ected.  It  would  be  more  difficult,  for  several  reasons, 
to  put  away  a  wife  who  had  given  birth  to  children  tlian  to  put  away  a  childless  wife  ;  but  the 
dittioulties  did  not  prevent  the  execution  of  the  duty. 

167 


CHAP.   X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


The  Reformation  Proposed. 


( Verses 

Three  principal  points  require  atten- 
tion— 

I.  The  proposal  of  reformation  pre- 
pared for.  "  Now  when  Ezra  had 
prayed,  and  when  he  had  confessed, 
weeping  and  casting  himself  down  be- 
fore the  house  of  God,  there  assembled 
unto  him  out  of  Israel,"  <kc.  (ver.  1). 
Ezra's  great  distress,  and  humble  con- 
fession, and  earnest  appeal  to  God,  had 
influenced  the  people  in  such  a  manner 
and  to  such  an  extent  as  to  prepare  them 
for  such  a  proposal  as  that  made  by 
Shechaniah.  The  impression  which  Ezra's 
condition  and  conduct  by  reason  of  their 
sin  produced  upon  the  people  was — 

1.  Sympathetic.  His  horror  and  self- 
abasement  on  account  of  their  sin  aroused 
their  consciences  to  a  sense  of  their  own 
guilt.  His  great  sorrow  awakened  grief 
in  them,  and  they  "  wept  very  sore." 

2.  Extensive.  It  seems  that  the  fact 
of  his  grievous  distress  wms  widely  made 
known,  and  all  the  city  was  stirred  by  it. 
Very  many  were  moved  by  his  grief  and 
penitence.  "  There  assembled  unto  him 
out  of  Israel  a  very  great  congregation 
of  men  and  women  and  children."  The 
fact  that  both  men  and  women,  and  so 
many  of  them,  were  much  affected  is 
important  as  indicating  preparedness  for 
reformation. 

3.  Deep.  The  people  in  the  great 
assembly  before  the  house  of  God  were 
very  much  moved.  The  impression  was 
profound  as  well  as  extensive.  "The 
people  wept  very  sore;"  or  "wept  a 
great  weeping."  Ezra's  influence  for 
good  in  this  respect  was  very  great. 
The  distress  which  he  manifested  was 
contagious,  and  spread  rapidly,  widely, 
and  powerfully  amongst  the  Jews  at  Jeru- 
salem. Now  this  was  indispensable  as 
a  condition  for  the  proposal  of  any  real 
reformation  with  a  reasonable  prospect 
of  success.  Until  the  sinfulness  of  these 
marriages  was  realised,  and  genuine  con- 
cern in  relation  to  them  was  experienced 
by  the  people,  it  would  have  been  vain 
to  have  suggested  measures  for  their 
abolition.     But   now  this  "very   great 

158 


1-25.) 

congregation"  was  In  a  condition  to 
consider  such  measures,  and  probably  to 
adopt  and  enforce  them. 

II.  The  proposal  of  reformation  made. 

"  Then  Shechaniah  the  son  of  Jehiel,  of 
the  sons  of  Elam,  answered  and  said  unto 
Ezra,"  (fee.  (vers.  2-4).  In  this  wise  and 
brave  address  Shechaniah  — 

1.  Frankly  acknowledges  the  sin, 
"  We  have  trespassed  against  our  God, 
a!id  have  taken  strange  wives  of  the 
people  of  the  land."  We  do  not  find 
his  name  amongst  those  who  had  sinned 
in  this  thing ;  but,  like  Ezra  (chap.  ix. 
5-15),  he  includes  himself  amongst  the 
offenders.  He  does  not  attempt  either 
to  extenuate  or  palliate  or  excuse  the 
sin,  but  ingenuously  confesses  it.  This 
was  important.  The  disease  must  be 
discovered  before  it  can  be  remedied. 
The  sin  must  be  perceived  and  acknow- 
ledged before  it  can  be  forgiven  and  done 
away.  There  could  be  no  true  reforma- 
tion without  a  clear  perception  and  a 
humble  confession  of  the  sin.  (a). 

2  Discovers  reasons  for  hope.  "Yet 
now  there  is  hope  for  Israel  concerning 
this  thing."  As  M.  Henry  observes : 
"The  case  is  sad,  but  it  is  not  desperate; 
the  disease  is  threatening,  but  not  in- 
curable. There  is  hope  that  the  people 
may  be  reformed,  the  guilty  reclaimed, 
a  stop  put  to  the  spreading  of  the  con- 
tagion ;  and  so  the  judgments  which  the 
sin  deserves  may  be  prevented,  and  all 
will  be  well.  '  Now  there  is  hope ;  * 
now  that  the  disease  is  discovered,  it  is 
half  cured.  Now  that  the  alarm  is  taken, 
the  people  begin  to  be  sensible  of  the 
mischief,  and  to  lament  it ;  a  spirit  of 
repentance  seems  to  be  poured  out  upon 
theui,  and  they  are  all  thus  humbling 
themselves  before  God  for  it,  '  now  there 
is  hope  '  that  God  will  forgive  and  have 
mercy.  *The  valley  of  Achor'  (that  is, 
of  trouble)  is  the  'door  of  hope'  (Hos, 
ii.  15);  for  the  sin  that  truly  troubles 
us  shall  not  ruin  us.  There  is  hope  now 
that  Israel  has  such  a  prudent,  pious, 
zealous  governor  as  Ezra  to  manage  this 
affair." 


EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  T :  EZRA .  chap.  x. 


3.  Proposes  the  abolition  of  the  sin.  proposal  would  commend  itself  to  them. 
<*  Now  therefore  let  us  make  a  covenant  Their  recommendation   of   his   measure 
with  our  God,"  &c.  (ver.  3).     His  pro-  would  contribute  to  its  general  accept- 
posal  was  to  the  effect  that  they  should  ance.       (3.)     In    accordance    with    the 
enter  into  a  solemn  covenant  with  God  commands   of  God.       "  And    let   it  be 
to  make  an  end  of  this  sin,  and  to  make  done  according  to  the  law."     I  am  not 
a!i  end  of  it— (1.)    Completely.      "  To  aware  of  any  express  command  to  put 
put  away  all  the  wives,  and  such  as  are  away  heathen  wives,  to  which  Shecha- 
born  of  them."     Marriage  with  idolaters  niah   can   refer ;    but   the  spirit  of  the 
was  prohibited  as  a  preventive  of  ido-  law,  which  repeatedly  and  solemnly  pro- 
latry    and  its    associated   abominations  hibited  such  marriages,  seemed  to  require 
(Exod.  xxxiv.  11-17;  Deut.   vii.   1-6;  their  divorcement.     "  Divorces  were  per- 
1  Kings  xi.   1-8 ;    Neh.  xiii.    23-28) ;  mitted  to  the  Israelites,  hy  the  judicial 
and  the  presence  of  the  idolatrous  wives  law,  to  prevent  worse   consequences;" 
was  a  continual  temptation  to  the  sin.  but    there    could    be    no    consequences 
The  Jews  had  done  wrong  in  marrying  worse  than  the  seduction  of  the  husbands 
such    women  ;    and   Shechaniah  would  and  the  training  of  the  children  to  ido- 
have  them  undo  that  wrong  as  far  as  latry.     Moreover,  the   law  which   corn- 
possible  by   putting  away  such  wives.  raanded   the   Israelite   to  put  to  death 
The  true  penitent  abandons  the  sin  for  any  one  enticing  him  to  idolatry,  even 
which   he   grieves,  even  though  its  re-  if  the    enticer  were  his  '*  brother,   the 
nunciation   be   very  painful       '*If  thy  son   of  his   mother,  or  his  son,  or  his 
right  eye  offend  thee,  pluck  it  out,"  <fec.  daughter,  or  the  wife  of  his  bosom,  or 
(Matt.  V.  29,  30).     It  is  better  that  the  the  friend,  which  was  as  his  own  soul " 
surgeon  should  amputate   the   diseased  (Deut.  xiii.  6-11),  would  surely  sanction 
limb,  than  that  we  should  retain  it  and  the  putting  completely  away  of  heathen 
by  so  doing  imperil  the  life  of  the  body.  wives.     If  a  Christian  sin  by  marrying 
So  must  sin  be  renounced  even  at  the  an   unbeliever,  he   may   not   adopt  the 
cost  of  sharp  sufferings.     Moreover,  the  course    recommended    by    Shechaniah. 
true  penitent  seeks  to  repair  if  possible.  The  rule  for  him,  or  for  her,  as  the  case 
and  as  far  as  may  be,  the  injury  he  has  may  be,  is   laid   down   in    1    Cor.    vii. 
done.     Kepentance  leads  to  restitution.  12-14. 

"  What  has  been  unjustly  got  cannot  be  4.  Summons  Ezra  to  take  the  lead  in 

justly  kept,  but  must  be  restored."     It  abolishing  it.     "Arise;  for  this  matter 

is  one  of  the  sorest  sorrows  of  the  peni-  belongeth  unto  thee,"  &c.  (ver.  4).     In 

tent  soul  that  complete  restitution  for  this   appeal   of  Shechaniah  to  Ezra  we 

sin  cannot  be  made;  that  the  evil  done  have — (1.)  An  assertion  that  the  work 

can  never  be  undone ;  that  the  false  or  pertained  to  him.     It  was  the  lousiness 

malignant    speech    may    be    afterwards  of  Ezra  to  take  this  matter  in  hand,  for 

contradicted  by  him  who  uttered  it,  but  two    reasons  :     First,    his    commission 

he    can    neither   unsay  it,    nor   totally  authorised  him  to  do  it  (see  chap,  vii 

annul  its  effects.     Now,  it  was  in  this  26).       He  was  sent  by   Artaxerxes  to 

spirit,  which  seeks  to  repair  the  wrong  enforce   obedience  to   the   law  of  God. 

done  and  to  remove  the  temptation  to  And,  second,  his  character  qualified  him 

do  it  again,  that  Shechaniah  proposed  for  doing  it.       His  acquaintance  with 

**  to  put  away  all  the  wives  and  "  their  the  law  of  God,  his  practical  conformity 

children,  {b).     (2.)  In  accordance  with  to  that  law,  his  position  as  a  teacher  of 

the  counsel  of  the  godly.     ''According  it,   and    his    great    influence    with    the 

to  the  counsel  of  my  lord,  and  of  those  people,  all  combined  to  qualify  him  for 
that  tremble  at  the  commandment  of  taking  the  lead  in  effecting  this  reforma- 
our  God."  It  does  not  appear  that  tion.  (2.)  A  call  to  courage  in  respect 
Ezra  and  they  who  sympathised  with  to  this  work.  "Be  of  good  courage." 
him  had  as  yet  advised  this  or  any  Perhaps  Ezra  took  too  dark  a  view  of 
other  line  of  action  ;  but  from  their  the  case,  and  was  too  despondent  con- 
distress   Shechaniah   inferred    that   his      cerning  it,  and  required   this  hopeful 

169 


OHAP.  Z. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


and  earnest  call  to  courage.  The  de- 
spondent would  never  succeed  in  carry- 
ing out  such  a  reformation  ;  the  business 
imperatively  required  a  brave  and  reso- 
lute spirit.  (3.)  A  summons  to  action. 
"  Arise,  ...  be  of  good  courage,  and 
act."  It  was  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  seize  the  present  favourable  oppor- 
tunity for  beginning  the  reformation. 
In  their  present  state  of  sore  distress  on 
account  of  the  sin,  the  people  of  this 
great  assembly  would  be  ready  to  enter 
upon  any  possible  course  for  making  an 
end  of  that  sin.  Therefore  it  behoved 
Ezra  to  arise  from  his  deep  grief,  and 
begin  the  reformation.  Let  his  deep 
feelings  now  impel  him  into  earnest 
action,  and  the  deep  feelings  of  the 
people  will  impel  them  to  unite  with 
him.  The  case  demanded  immediate 
and  resolute  action  (comp.  Josh.  vii. 
10-15). 

5.  Promises  co-operation  in  abolishing 
it,  "  We  also  will  be  with  thee." 
Shechaniah  thus  takes  the  place  of 
spokesman  for  the  '*  very  great  congre- 
gation "  assembled  before  the  house  of 
God ;  and  pledges  them  to  stand  by 
Ezra  and  to  work  with  him  in  effecting 
the  great  reformation.  The  co-operation 
of  such  an  assembly  in  this  undertaking 
would  go  far  to  guarantee  its  success,  (c). 

III.  The  proposal  of  reformation 
accepted.  '*  Then  arose  Ezra,  and  made 
the  chief  priests,  the  Levites,"  (kc. 
(ver.  5). 

1.  It  was  accepted  influentially,  *'The 
princes,  the  priests,  the  Levites,"  the 
men  of  the  most  eminent  position  and 
commanding  influence,  gave  in  their 
adhesion  to  the  movement. 

2.  It  ivas  accepted  extensively.  "And 
all  Israel."  All  that  great  multitude 
which  had  assembled  unto  Ezra  out  of 
Israel,  pledged  themselves  to  co-operate 
in  carrying  out  the  proposal  of  Shecha- 
niah. The  party  of  reformation  was 
strong  both  in  the  number  and  in  the 
power  of  its  adherents. 

3.  It  was  accepted  solemnly.  Ezra 
made  them  "to  swear  that  they  should 
do  according  to  this  word;  and  they 
sware."  When  the  keenness  of  their 
present  distress  had  abated,  if  any  of 
them  had  been  tempted  to  draw  back, 

160 


they  would  have  been  prevented  from 
doing  so  by  the  solemnity  with  which 
they  had  pledged  themselves  to  the 
undertaking. 

Conclusion  : 

The  lessons  suggested  by  this  subject 
are  many  and  important.  Let  us  attend 
to  the  principal  ones. 

1 .  The  manifestation  of  intense  feeling 
is  sometimes  commendable^  and  very  in- 
fluential for  good  {y^T.  1). 

2.  A  deep  feeling  of  the  guilt  of  sin  is 
a  strong  encouragement  to  hope  for  for- 
giveness^ amendment,  <fec.  (ver.  2).  (d), 

3.  That  repentance  only  is  genuine 
which  leads  to  restitution  and  reformat 
tion  (ver.  3).  (e). 

4.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to 
translate  religious  feeling  into  corres- 
ponding action  without  delay  (vers.  3, 

5.  Great  leaders  may  receive  valuable 
aid  from  even  their  humblest  followers. 
Shechaniah,  apparently  an  able  man, 
suggested  the  reformation  and  urged 
Ezra  to  attempt  it  at  once ;  but  even 
the  obscurest  person  in  that  "  very  great 
congregation,"  by  swelling  the  tide  of 
penitent  feeling,  helped  to  set  the  pro- 
ject of  reformation  well  afloat. 

6.  It  is  sometimes  wise  to  fortify  good 
resolutions  by  a  solemn  covenant  with 
Gody  or  by  a  serious  pledge  to  man 
(vers.  3,  6). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(o)  Let  us  strive  after  God's  view  of  sin. 
To  Him  sin  is  infinitely  hateful ;  He  cannot 
tolerate  it  with  the  least  degree  of  allowance  ; 
it  troubles  His  otherwise  perfect  and  happy 
universe;  it  despoils  human  nature;  it  over- 
throws all  that  is  Divine  in  manhood  ;  it  calls 
into  existence  the  worm  that  gnaws  for  ever ; 
it  is  the  cause  of  deatli  and  the  source  of  hell. 
To  under-estimate  the  heinoiisiiess  of  sin  is  to 
put  ourselves  out  of  the  line  of  God's  view  ;  to 
understand  sin  is  to  understand  redemption. 
Sin  interprets  the  Cross;  sin  shows  what  ia 
meant  by  God's  love.  We  cannot  be  right  in 
our  relation  to  Jesus  Christ,  we  cannot  be  just" 
to  His  holy  Cross,  until  we  regard  sin  with 
unutterable  repugnance,  until  we  rise  against 
it  in  fiery  indignation,  fighting  it  wih  all  the 
energy  of  wounded  love,  and  bringing  upon  it 
the  damnation  of  concentrated  and  implacable 
anger.  1  am  not  speaking  of  what  are  called 
great  sins;  I  am  not  thinking  of  murder,  of 
commercial  plunder,  of  adultery,  drunkenness, 
or  theft ;  1  am  speaking  of  sin   as  sin,  gin 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


omAT.  z. 


nestling  secretly  in  the  heart,  sin  rolled  under 
the  tongue  as  a  sweet  morsel,  sin  indulged  in 
secret  places,  sin  perverting  the  thought,  sin 
poisoning  the  love,  sin  sucking  out  the  life- 
blood  of  the  soul ;  I  am  thinking  of  sin,  not  of 
tins — of  the  fact,  not  of  the  details;  and  I  ask, 
with  passionate  yet  well-considered  pointed- 
ness,  Have  we  not  been  led  to  under-estimate 
the  guilt  of  sin  ? — Joseph  ParJcer,  D.D. 

(6)  There  is  often,  when  men  repent,  the 
necessity  of  a  reparation.  A  man  that  in  his 
past  life  has  been  inflicting  wrong  may  not  be 
able  to  make  all  the  reparation.  A  man  whoso 
distributive  gains  have  been  flowing  in  from  a 
hundred  sources,  and  varying  every  year,  may 
not  be  able  to  carry  back  the  tribute  and  re- 
bestow  it  where  he  fraudulently  or  wickedly 
obtained  it.  Yet  while  this  is  the  case  fre- 
quently in  respect  to  gains,  there  are  many 
things  which  a  man  may  repair.  A  man  may 
have  wronged  a  fellow-man  by  his  tongue, 
and  it  is  necessary,  if  he  is  going  to  be  a 
Christian,  that  that  shall  be  all  repaired.  A 
man  may  have  a  quarrel  on  his  hands,  and  if 
he  is  going  to  be  a  Christian,  that  quarrel  must 
come  to  an  end.  A  man  may  be  high  and 
obstinate,  and  that  man,  if  he  is  going  to  be  a 
Christian,  must  come  down  and  confess,  '*  I 
was  wrong,  and  I  give  up  the  transgression 
wholly,  absolutely."  It  may  be  that  a  man 
has  been  living  on  ill-gotten  gains.  It  may  be 
orphan's  property.  No  matter  if  it  makes  a 
beggar  of  him,  the  man  who  is  living  on 
fraudulent  gains,  if  he  is  going  to  be  a  Chris- 
tian, must  make  reparation,  and  give  them 
up.  If,  for  proper  and  suitable  reasons,  he 
finds  that  he  cannot  give  them  up,  he  must  at 
least  confess ;  for  although  everybody  knows 
his  sin,  everybody  does  not  know  that  he  knows 
it — at  any  rate  they  do  not  know  that  he  knows 
it  in  such  "^  way  that  he  is  willing  to  confess 
it.  Confession  is  a  testimony  to  the  power 
of  God,  and  to  the  power  of  the  new-found 
virtue  in  his  soul. — H.  W.  Beecher. 

(c)  The  social  element  in  religious  move- 
ments— that  which  men  often  decry  in  revivals 
— is  apt  to  infuse  a  generous  enthusiasm,  a 
largeness,  into  men's  minds.  There  are  times 
when  men  cannot  alone  do  noble  things  ;  but 
if  there  be  scores  and  hundreds  of  men  that 
seem  at  the  same  time  to  be  filled  with  the 
same  influence,  then  they  rise  to  heroic  pro- 
portions, and  are  able  to  do  easily  things  that 
would  overtax  their  individual  power. 

This  seems  to  have  been  one  of  those  eases 
where  men  were  seized,  not  simply  with  a 
conviction  of  sin  and  with  a  disposition  to 
repent ;  but  with  a  disposition  to  repent  in  a 
manner  that  should  be  heroic,  and  should  stamp 
both  their  sense  of  iniquity  and  transgression, 
and  their  sense  of  the  genuineness  of  their 
repentance  and  conversion. — Jbid. 

{d)  The  essence  of  repentance  is  sorrow, 
sorrow  for  our  sin.  Sorrow  is  painful,  and  we 
shrink  from  pain  ;  we  avoid  it.    To  those  that 


have  not  felt  the  evil  that  repentance  cures, 
how  dark  and  bitter  a  thing  it  is  to  be  away 
from  God,  homeless,  fatherless,  an  orphan, 
and  made  so  by  selfish  ingratitude, — to  those  it 
will  not  seem  a  good.  It  is  a  good  only  to 
those  who  feel  the  evil  it  delivers  them  from, 
the  nobler  peace  it  brings  them  to.  We  know 
there  is  one  thing  worse  than  pain  ;  the  pain- 
less disease  that  kills ;  the  slow,  insidious, 
fatal  malady  that  eats  away  the  springs  and 
energies  of  life,  without  giving  the  warnings 
of  bodily  distress.  To  stop  that,  to  heal  that, 
we  gladly  go  in  search  of  pain.  We  tell  the 
surgeon  to  hurt  us  that  we  may  live.  Physical 
vitality  is  often  undermined  unconsciously. 
To  avert  that  process  by  a  pang,  by  a  period 
of  needful  and  saving  agony,  we  account  a 
blessing.  After  the  first  stages  of  suffocation, 
the  drowning,  on  their  own  testimony,  pass 
into  a  state  of  insensibility  to  suffering,  or 
even,  as  many  maintain,  of  positive  and  ex- 
quisite pleasure.  Adam  Clarke,  who  went 
through  it,  says,  in  his  autobiography,  it  was 
like  being  borne  gently  through  the  most 
luxurious  tropical  verdure,  the  keenest  enjoy- 
ment. And  when  this  swift,  easy  passage 
to  destruction  is  interrupted,  and  friendship 
applies  restoratives,  there  are  spasms,  tortures; 
the  sufferer  begs  to  be  let  alone,  to  die.  It  is 
not  otherwise  with  the  spiritual  sensibilities. 
It  is  their  coming  back  from  death  to  life  that 
makes  their  distress.  But  no  wise  man,  only 
the  demented  man,  regrets  that  distress.  Paul, 
with  his  singular  exactness  of  expression,  says 
that  the  sorrow  that  is  unto  life,  the  price  of 
living  for  ever,  needeth  not  to  be  repented  of, 
not  to  be  sorrowed  for.  The  pain  that  rescues 
life  is  a  good. — F,  J).  Huntington^  D.D. 

(e)  Reformation  is  just  as  essential  as  re- 
pentance. That  is,  it  is  just  as  essential  that 
you  should,  up  to  your  power,  do  the  deeds  of 
a  good  man  or  woman,  as  that  you  should  take 
the  resolution  to  be  a  good  man  or  woman.  If 
you  are  heartily  sorry  for  misspent  years,  you 
will  make  it  your  business  to  spend  your  future 
years  wisely.  If  you  are  called  to  renounce  an 
undevout  heart,  the  same  Lord  calls  you  to 
work  with  holy  hands.  In  whatever  the  past 
has  been  irreligious  and  mean,  the  future  must 
be  sanctified  and  noble.  Despising  your  selfish- 
ness, you  must  go  on  to  generosity.  Renounc- 
ing a  paltry  ambition,  you  must  serve  humanity 
and  truth  for  their  own  immortal  sake.  The 
invisible  energy  that  makes  the  acorn  vital  is 
nothing,  unless  you  give  it  soil  and  air  for 
growth  and  expansion  into  the  fair  proportions 
of  the  oak. 

Thus,  in  fact,  reformation  becomes  the  test 
of  repentance,  proving  its  sincerity  and  its 
worth.  "We  infer  that  a  miser  is  penitent, 
when  we  see  him  giving  liberally  to  the  poor, 
or  to  spreading  the  Gospel.  A  sensualist  may 
profess  to  have  repented  ;  but  we  are  not  sure, 
till  we  see  him  forsaking  dissipation,  and  living 
temperately  and  chastely.  A  rain,  frivolous 
girl  deserves  small  confidence  as  repenting,  till 
her  whole  appearance  reveals  a  constant  life 

L  161 


CHAP.   X. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAKY :  EZRA, 


bidden  with  Christ  in  God,  and  the  dignity  of 
a  sober  derotion  to  the  welfare  of  others.  It 
is  not  to  be  believed  that  a  sullen  or  angry 
tomper  has  been  actually  repented  of,  till  the 
countenance  loses  its  unhallowed  fire,  and  the 
voice  its  asperity,  and  the  words  come  gently, 
like  His,  who,  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled 
not  again. — Ihid. 

(/)  It  is  a  perilous  thing  to  separate  feeling 
from  acting;  to  have  learnt  to  feel  rightly 
without  acting  rightly.  It  is  a  danger  to 
which,  in  a  refined  and  polished  age,  we  are 
peculiarly  exposed.  The  romance,  the  poem, 
and  the  sermon  teach  us  how  to  feel.  Our 
feelings  are  delicately  correct.  But  the  danger 
is  this  : — feeling  is  given  to  lead  to  action  ;  if 
feeling  be  suffered  to  awake  without  passing 
into  duty,  the  character  becomes  untrue. 
When  the  emergency  for  real  action  comes, 


the  feeling  ii  as  usual  produced  :  but  ac- 
customed as  it  is  to  rise  in  fictitious  circum- 
stances without  action,  neither  will  it  lead  on 
to  action  in  the  real  ones.  "We  pity  wretched- 
ness and  shun  the  wretched."  We  utter  senti- 
ments, just,  honourable,  refined,  lofty ;  but 
somehow,  when  a  truth  presents  itself  in  the 
shape  of  a  duty,  we  are  unable  to  perform  it. 
And  80  such  characters  become  by  degrees  like 
the  artificial  pleasure  grounds  of  bad  taste,  in 
which  the  waterfall  does  not  fall,  and  the  grotto 
offers  only  the  refreshment  of  an  imaginary 
shade,  and  the  green  hill  does  not  strike  the 
skies,  and  the  tree  does  not  grow.  Their  lives 
are  a  sugared  crust  of  sweetness  trembling  over 
black  depths  of  hollowness  ;  more  truly  still, 
**  whited  sepulchres" — fair  without  to  look 
upon,  "  within  full  of  all  uncleannesa.** — 
F.  W.  Robertsm,  MJU 


True  Loyalty. 
(Verse  4.) 


The  word  **  loyalty  "  is  much  used  in 
these  days.  A  picture  here  of  the 
thing.  The  spirit  which  was  animating 
many  in  Israel  at  this  juncture  finds 
utterance  here  from  the  lips  of  one.  He 
speaks  in  the  name  of  others.  The 
issue  shows  he  had  warrant  for  so  doing. 
We  also  see  that  he  speaks  well.  By 
examining  his  language  we  shall  find 
that  true  loyalty  is  marked — 

L  By  genuine  respect.  In  the 
commonwealth  of  Israel  at  that  time 
there  was  great  need  of  reform.  The 
people  had  not  long  returned  from  cap- 
tivity. They  were  powerless  and  few. 
Yet  the  very  evil  which  had  previously 
occasioned  their  captivity  had  begun  to 
reappear.  Steps  had  been  taken  which, 
if  not  retraced,  would  certainly  bring 
that  evil  about.  Many  in  high  places — 
some  of  the  speaker*s  own  relatives — 
were  in  fault  (see  ver.  26).  The  matter 
therefore  was  pressing.  He  felt  it  so. 
He  desired  reform  very  earnestly;  he 
recommended  it  very  strongly  (see  vers. 
2,  3).  Yet  he  would  not  take  upon 
him  to  be  the  first  to  move  in  this 
matter.  He  would  not  set  aside  those 
whose  oflSce  it  was  to  do  this.  "  Arise  ; 
for  this  matter  belongeth  unto  thee." 
You  see  exactly  the  state  of  his  mind. 
Notwithstanding  the  depth  of  his  zeal 
and  convictions,  he  would  sooner  do 
nothing  than  be  disrespectful  to  Ezra. 
162 


No  change,  in  his  judgment,  would  be 
proper  reform  that  should  set  proper 
authority  on  one  side. 

II.  By  sincere  sympathy.  This  is 
shown  here  in  the  words  that  come 
next :  "  We  also  will  be  with  thee ;  be 
of  good  courage,  and  do  it."  It  is 
possible  to  defer  to  authority  in  a  very 
cold  and  unfriendly  spirit,  to  leave  too 
much  on  the  hands  of  our  rulers,  and  to 
fail  in  taking  our  proper  share  of  odium 
and  labour  in  supporting  them  and  their 
measures.  We  do  well,  therefore,  to 
note  from  this  language  that  we  owe 
much  to  them  in  both  these  respects. 
If  we  wish  to  be  truly  loyal,  we  are 
bound  to  encourage  them  openly  in  their 
righteous  efforts.  We  are  bound  also 
to  promise  them  our  support  and  assist- 
ance. In  fact,  to  do  otherwise  is  covert 
rebellion.  Not  to  encourage  is  to  hinder 
in  a  taciturn  way.  Not  to  assist  is,  in 
an  indolent  fashion,  to  oppose.  How 
could  Ezra  have  moved  at  all  in  this 
matter,  how  could  he  have  moved  to 
good  purpose,  but  for  this  language  of 
Shechaniah  ? 

We  may  apply  these  lessons — 
1.  To  the  laws  of  our  land.  Except 
where  religious  principle  is  in  question, 
these  should  be  the  laws  of  our  lives. 
It  is  the  object  of  the  "criminal  classes** 
to  try  and  evade  them.  It  should  be 
the  object  of  God-fearing  persons  to  try 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAF.  X. 


and  observe  them.  "  Render  unto  Caesar 
the  things  which  are  Caesar's"  (Matt, 
xxii.  21  ;  see  also  Rom.  xii.  1,  2,  7). 
All  this  should  be  regarded  by  us  as 
part  of  our  duty  towards  God.  This 
also  should  be  applied  by  us  carefully 
to  all  the  points  it  embraces ;  e.g.^  our 
income-tax  returns ;  our  action  towards 
contraband  trade;  our  respect  for  the 
administrators  of  justice ;  our  support 
of  its  officers,  and  so  on.  A  bad  citizen 
will  never  make  a  good  Christian.  A 
good  Christian,  in  these  matters,  would 
rather  exceed  than  fall  short,  after  the 
example  of  Christ  Himself  (Matt.  xvii. 
24-27). 

2.    To  the  laws  and  officers  of  our 
Church,     Ezra  was  acting  here  ecclesi- 


astically as  much  as  politically  ;  of  the 
two,  perhaps  rather  more  so.  So  of 
our  Lord  in  paying  the  di-drachma,  or 
Temple  tribute,  as  above  (see  also  Matt, 
xxiii.  2,  3).  In  all  things,  therefore,  in 
regard  to  which  a  Church  hath  power  to 
ordain,  in  all  matters  where  its  ministers 
have  a  right  to  be  consulted,  let  us  not 
only  acquiesce,  but  encourage  ;  not  only 
encourage,  but  support.  Yet  let  us 
do  it  without  interference,  and  without 
taking  their  proper  work  from  their 
hands.  The  English  word  "leader" 
signifies  both  a  commander  and  a  guide. 
Therefore  never  be  many  steps  behind 
your  leader ;  never  be  one  step  in  front. 
— W,  S.  Lewis,  M.A,  in  The  Clergy- 
tnan^s  Magazine, 


The  Reformation  DEoroED  Upon. 
(Verses  6-12.) 


Notice : 

L  The  summons  to  the  people  to 
assemble  at  Jerusalem.  Proclamation 
was  made  throughout  that  part  of  the 
country  in  which  the  returned  Jews  had 
settled,  requiring  them  to  come  to  Jeru- 
salem within  a  specified  time,  and 
announcing  severe  penalties  in  case  any 
one  failed  to  do  so.  Concerning  this 
summons,  notice — 

1.    The    circumstances    in    which    it 
originated.     When  the  proposal  of  She- 
chaniah  was  adopted  by  the  great  con- 
gregation assembled  before  the  house  of 
God,  **  Then  Ezra  rose  up  from  before 
the  house  of  God,  and  went   into  the 
chamber  of  Johanan,  the  son  of  Elia- 
shib  ;  and  when  he  came  thither,  he  did 
eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water;  for  he 
mourned  because  of  the  transgression 
of  them  that  had  been  carried  away." 
Here  in  this   chamber  Ezra   seems  to 
have  consulted  the  chief  men,  the  princes, 
the  elders,  and  the  priests,  as  to  the  best 
measures  for  carrying  out  the  resolution 
which  had  been  so  solemnly  made.    And 
his   consultations    were   in  a  spirit   of 
profound  penitence  and  earnest  piety, 
which  was  manifested  by  his  fasting  and 
mourning, 

2.   The  persons  to  whom  it  was  ad- 


dressed, "  They  made  proclamatfon 
throughout  Judah  and  Jerusalem  unto 
all  the  children  of  the  captivity."  The 
summons  was  issued  to  all  the  adult 
male  population  of  the  Jews,  who  out 
of  exile  had  returned  to  their  own  land. 
It  applied  to  the  entire  Jewish  com- 
munity in  Palestine. 

3.  The  authority  by  which  it  was 
issued.  "  They  made  proclamation  .  .  . 
according  to  the  counsel  of  the  princes 
and  the  elders."  Not  by  Ezra  alone 
was  the  summons  sent  forth,  but  by 
him  in  connection  with  the  recognised 
and  rightful  heads  of  the  community. 
The  authority  of  the  mandate  was  un- 
questionable. 

4.  The  speedy  obedience  which  it  re- 
quired. "  That  they  should  gather 
themselves  together  unto  Jerusalem 
.  .  .  within  three  days."  "  The  limits 
of  Judea  at  this  time,"  says  Rawlinson, 
"appear  to  have  been  Bethel  on  the 
north,  Beersheba  on  the  south,  Jericho 
on  the  east,  and  the  Mediterranean  upon 
the  west.  As  the  frontier  was  nowhere 
much  more  than  forty  miles  from  Jeru- 
salem, three  days /rom  the  day  that  they 
heard  the  proclamation  would  be  suffi- 
cient time  to  allow  all  the  able-bodied 
men  to  reach  the  capital"     No  time 

163 


OHAT.  Z. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


was  granted  for  hesitation  or  delay. 
Resolute  and  quick  obedience  was  de- 
manded of  alL 

5.  The  penalties  by  which  it  was  en- 
forced. "  And  that  whosoever  would 
not  come  within  three  days,  according 
to  the  counsel  of  the  princes  and  the 
elders,"  (fee.  (ver.  8).  Should  any  one 
prove  a  defaulter,  he  is  here  threatened 
with  a  twofold  penalty  —  (1.)  The 
forfeiture  of  his  entire  property  to  the 
Church.  '*  All  his  substance  should 
be  forfeited ;  '*  or,  as  in  the  margin, 
"  devoted  "  (comp.  Lev.  xxvii.  28).  Ezra 
was  authorised  by  the  Persian  monarch 
to  inflict  this  penalty  (comp.  chap.  vii. 
26).  (2.)  Personal  exclusion  from  the 
community.  "And  himself  separated 
from  the  congregation  of  those  that  had 
been  carried  away."  He  would  be  de- 
prived of  all  the  rights  and  privileges 
which  pertained  to  him  as  a  member  of 
that  community. 

n.  The  assembly  of  the  people  at 
Jerusalem  in  obedience  to  this  sum- 
mons.    Notice : 

1.  The  universal  attendance  at  the 
assembly.  *'  Then  all  the  men  of  Judah 
and  Benjamin  gathered  themselves  to- 
gether within  three  days."  There  seems 
to  have  been  no  defaulters.  If  any  were 
inclined  to  disregard  the  summons,  the 
severe  penalties  proclaimed  against  ab- 
sentees constrained  them  to  obey  it.  And 
all  were  present  within  the  appointed 
time. 

2.  The  felt  importance  of  the  assembly. 
The  historian  seems  to  have  regarded  it 
as  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  com- 
munity ;  for  he  carefully  records  the 
date  of  its  occurrence.  "  It  was  the 
ninth  month,  on  the  twentieth  day  of 
the  month."  The  importance  of  the 
great  and  solemn  meeting  was  doubtless 
felt  by  most,  if  not  by  all  the  people. 

3.  The  depressed  spirit  of  the  assembly. 
**  All  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the 
house  of  God,"  <kc.  (ver.  9).  They  were 
troubled  and  alarmed  because  of — (1.) 
The  sin  by  reason  of  which  they  had 
been  called  together.  "  Trembling  be- 
cause of  this  matter."  The  consciousness 
of  guilt  distressed  them,  and  made  them 
fearful.  (2.)  The  extraordinarily  heavy 
rain    which    was    falling   at   the   time. 


"And  for  the  great  rain."  This  great 
gathering  took  place  in  the  rainy  season ; 
but  the  showers  at  this  time  were  evi- 
dently of  unusual  severity,  and  were  in 
the  mind  of  the  people  associated  with 
the  fact  of  their  grievous  trespass.  How 
impressive  and  melancholy  a  spectacle  I 
The  vast  multitude  seated  befoie  the 
Temple  of  God,  tired,  troubled,  and 
trembling,  beneath  the  dark  canopy  of 
heavy  clouds,  with  the  rain  falling  down 
upon  them  in  torrents  ! 

Ill  The  address  of  Ezra  to  the 
assembled  people.  "And  Ezra  the 
priest  stood  up,  and  said  unto  them," 
&c.  (vers.  10,  11).  This  address  com- 
prises— 

1.  A  declaration  of  their  sin,  "  Ye 
have  transgressed  and  have  taken  strange 
wives,  to  increase  the  trespass  of  Israel." 
A  decided  recognition  of  the  sin  was  in- 
dispensable to  reformation.  By  these 
marriages  they  had  augmented  greatly 
the  guilt  of  the  community. 

2.  An  exhortation  to  repentance.  He 
calls  upon  them  to  discharge  two  of  the 
principal  duties  of  repentance.  (1.)  Con- 
fession of  sin.  "  Now  therefore  make 
confession  unto  the  Lord  God  of  your 
fathers,  and  do  His  pleasure."  Confes- 
sion of  sin  is  a  relief  to  the  penitent 
souL  (a).  It  is  also  an  essential  con- 
dition of  forgiveness.  (6).  *'  Whoso 
covereth  his  sins  shall  not  prosper ;  but 
whoso  confesseth  and  .forsaketh  them 
shall  have  mercy."  "  If  we  confess  our 
sins.  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive 
us  our  sins,"  (fee.  "  I  acknowledged  my 
sin  unto  Thee,"  <fec.  (Ps.  xxxii.  6).  (2.) 
Abandonment  of  sin.  "  And  separate 
yourselves  from  the  people  of  the  land, 
and  from  the  strange  wives."  This  is 
an  essential  element  in  true  repentance. 
"  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,"  <fec. 
(Isa.  Iv.  7).  "  Whoso  confesseth  and 
forsaketh  his  sins  shall  have  mercy.*' 
"  Repentance,"  says  Shakespeare,  "  is 
heart's  sorrow,  and  a  clear  life  ensu- 
ing."  (c). 

IV.  The  declaration  of  the  assem- 
bled people.  '*  Then  all  the  congrega- 
tion answered  and  said  with  a  loud 
voice.  As  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we 
do."  Thus  they  announced  their  deter- 
mination to  follow  the  counsel  of  Eznu 


UOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZRA. 


OttAP.  X. 


Notice — 

1.  I'he  unanimity  of  their  determina- 
tion, "  All  the  congregation  answered 
and  said,"  &c.  This  augured  well  for 
tlie  success  of  tlie  movement. 

2.  The  earnestness  of  their  determina- 
tion. **  Answered  with  a  loud  voice." 
This  was  not  a  half-hearted  or  reluctant 
assent,  but  a  free  and  whole-hearted 
resolution. 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  As  the  frank  and  dutiful  child,  when  he 
has  committed  a  fault,  does  not  wait  till 
another  goes  and  tells  his  lather,  or  till  tiie 
father  discovers  hy  his  frowning  countenance 
that  it  has  come  to  his  ear;  but  freely,  and 
of  his  own  accord,  goes  pleasantly  to  hia 
father,  and  eases  his  aching-  heart  by  a  free 
and  full  confession  ;  and  this  witli  sucli  plain- 
heariedness,  giving  his  offence  the  weight  of 
every  aggravating  circumstance,  so  tiiat  if  the 
devil  himself  should  come  after  him,  to  glean 
up  what  he  hath  left,  he  should  hardly  find 
wherewithal  to  make  the  case  appear  blacker ; 
—  tiiiis  does  the  sincere  soul  to  God;  adding 
to  his  simplicity  in  the  confession  of  his  sin 
Bucli  a  flow  of  sunow,  that  God,  seeing  His 
dear  child  in  danger  of  heing  carried  down 
towards  despair,  it  good  news  from  Him  do 
not  sjieedily  stay  him,  cannot  but  tune  His 
voice  rather  into  a  strain  of  comforting  him 
in  his  mourning,  than  chiding  him  for  his 
sin.  —  W.  Gurnall. 

(6)  It  is  impossible  for  the  Almighty  Him- 
self to  forgive  men  unless  men  come  to  Him 
with  contrition,  with  repentance  towards  Him- 
self, and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Be- 
lieve me,  there  is  no  action  so  difficult  as  the 
action  ot  iorgiveness.  There  is  no  action  so 
complicated  as  the  action  of  pardon.  It  seems 
a  very  simple  thing  to  say,  *'  I  forgive  you  ;  say 
no  more  about  it ;  there  is  an  end  of  the  whole 
affair  :  away  vou  go."  He  who  could  speak 
so,  is  immoral.  He  who  could  talk  so,  is  not 
to  be  trusted.  If  a  man  could  treat  the  moral 
relationships  of  life  so,  it  would  but  prove  that 
his  conscience  had  been  drugged,  that  his 
judgment  had  been  hoodwinked,  and  that 
there  was  nothing  morally  permanent  in  the 
quality  of  his  soul  but  corruptness.—  Joseph 
Parker,  D.D. 

(c)  Convince  a  man  that  the  only  way  to 
save  his  life  is  to  part  with  his  limb,  and  he 
does  not  hesitate  an  instant  between  living 
with  one  limb  and  being  buried  with  two. 
Borne  into  the  operating  theatre,  pale,  yet 
resolate,  he  bares  the  diseased  member  to  the 


knife.  And  how  well  does  that  bleeding, 
fainting,  groaning  sufferer  teach  us  to  part 
with  our  sins  rather  than  with  our  Saviour.  If 
life  is  better  than  a  limb,  how  much  better  is 
heaven  than  a  sin  1 

Two  years  ago  a  man  was  called  to  decide 
between  preserving  his  life,  and  parting  with 
the  gains  of  his  lifetime.  A  gold-digger, 
he  stood  on  the  deck  of  a  ship  that,  coming 
from  Australian  shores,  had  —  as  some  all 
but  reach  heaven — all  but  reached  her  har- 
bour in  safety.  The  exiles  had  been  coast- 
ing along  their  native  shores  ;  and  to-morrow, 
husbands  would  embrace  their  wives,  children 
their  parents,  and  not  a  few  realise  the 
bright  dream  of  returning  to  pass  the  even- 
ing of  their  days  in  happiness  amid  the 
loved  scenes  of  their  youtii.  But  as  the 
proverb  runs,  there  is  much  between  the  cup 
and  the  lip.  Night  came  lowering  down  ;  and 
with  the  night  a  storm  that  wrecked  ship,  and 
hopes,  and  fortunes  all  together.  The  dawn- 
ing light  but  revealed  a  scene  of  horror — death 
staring  them  in  the  face.  The  sea,  lashed  into 
fury,  ran  mountains  high  ;  no  boat  could  live 
in  her.  One  chance  still  remained.  Pale 
women,  weeping  children,  feeble  and  timid 
men  must  die  ;  but  a  stout,  brave  swimmer, 
with  trust  in  God,  and  disencumbered  of  all 
impediments,  might  reach  the  shore,  where 
hundreds  stood  ready  to  dash  into  the  boiling 
surf,  and,  seizing,  save  him.  One  man  was 
observed  to  go  below.  He  bound  round  his 
waist  a  heavy  belt,  filled  with  gold,  the  hard 
gains  of  his  life  ;  and  returned  to  the  deck. 
One  after  another,  he  saw  his  fellow-passengers 
leap  overboard.  After  a  brief  but  terrible 
struggle,  head  after  head  went  down — sunk 
by  the  gold  they  had  fought  hard  to  gain,  and 
were  loth  to  lose.  Slowly  he  was  seen  to  un- 
buckle his  belt.  His  hopes  had  been  bound 
up  in  it.  It  was  to  buy  him  land,  and  ease, 
and  respect — the  reward  of  long  years  of  hard 
and  weary  exile.  What  hardships  he  had 
endured  for  it  !  The  sweat  of  his  brow,  the 
hopes  of  day,  and  the  dreams  of  night  were 
there.  If  he  parts  with  it,  he  is  a  beggar; 
but  then  if  he  keeps  it,  he  dies.  He  poised  it 
in  his  hand  ;  balanced  it  for  a  while  ;  took  a 
long,  sad  look  at  it  ;  and  then  with  one  strong, 
desperate  eflbrt,  flung  it  far  out  into  the  roar- 
ing sea.  Wise  man  !  It  sinks  with  a  sullen 
plunge  ;  and  now  he  follows  it — not  to  sink, 
but,  disencumbered  of  its  weight,  to  swim  ; 
to  beat  the  billows  manfully;  and,  riding  on 
the  foaming  surge,  to  reach  the  shore.  Well 
done,  brave  gold-digger  !  Ay,  well  done,  and 
well  chosen  ;  but  if  "a  man,"  as  the  devil 
said,  who  for  once  spoke  God's  truth,  **will 
give  all  that  he  hatli  for  his  life,"  how 
much  more  should  he  give  all  he  hath  for  his 
soul  ?  Better  to  part  with  gold  than  with 
God  ;  to  bear  the  heaviest  cross  than  miss  a 
heavenly  crown  1 — Thomas  Guthrie,  D.D 


166 


CHAP.  X. 


BOM  I  LET W  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


A  Great  and  Troubled  Assembly. 


(  Verse 

How  mucli  good  one  man  may  do 
who  has  the  grace  of  God  in  his  heart 
and  the  fear  of  God  before  his  eyes ! 
"One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good;" 
one  saint  may  accomplish  much.  He 
may  be  a  centre  of  gracious  influences 
to  the  Church  and  the  world,  a  terror  to 
the  bad,  a  tower  of  strength  to  the  good. 
The  world  owes  much  to  its  great  men, 
more  to  its  good  ones.  Ezra  was  one  of 
these.  He  was  the  means  of  bringing 
part  of  the  Church  out  of  captivity,  and 
of  renewing  the  faded  splendours  of 
holiness  and  devotion  which  it  had  lost. 
He  stood  in  the  line  of  illustrious  re- 
formers, and  was  considered  in  the  Jewish 
Church  a  second  Moses. 

The  Book  of  Ezra  closes  with  an  ac- 
count of  their  national  humiliation  for 
the  sin  of  taking  foreign  wives,  and  the 
measures  taken  for  putting  them  away. 
Public  proclamation  had  been  made  for 
this  purpose.  The  text  shows  the  re- 
sult.    It  teaches — 

I.  That  it  is  the  tendency  of  sin  to 
produce  sorrow  and  consternation  of 
soul.  "  All  the  people  sat  in  the  street 
of  the  house  of  God,  trembling  because 
of  this  matter,  and  for  the  great  rain." 
The  matter  spoken  of  was  the  sin  of 
marrying  strange  or  foreign  wives.  It 
was  of  great  consequence  that  this  evil 
should  be  corrected  at  this  time,  that 
their  genealogies  might  be  kept  pure, 
that  their  estates  might  descend  in  the 
right  direction,  and,  above  all,  that  the 
line  of  the  Messiah  might  be  preserved 
in  the  chosen  tribe.  The  deep  grief  of 
Ezra  and  the  ready  submission  of  the 
princes  and  people  show  its  importance 
in  a  national  point  of  view.  They  all 
partook  of  the  feelings  of  shame  and 
consternation.  They  sat  trembling  in 
the  open  street.  "  And  for  the  great 
rain."  They  probably  thought  there  was 
something  ominous  or  judicial  in  this, 
designed  to  put  an  accent  of  terror  upon 
God's  displeasure  at  their  sin. 

Learn,  then,  that  it  is  the  tendency 
of  sin  to  produce  sorrow,  and  that  the 
providences  of  God  often  give  a  voice 
166 


9.) 

to  conscience,  and  produce  an  inward 
agony  which  none  but  the  sinner  him- 
self can  know.  There  is  a  scorpion 
sting  in  remembered  guilt,  when  out- 
ward troubles  and  inward  fears  meet 
together,  Joseph's  brethren  :  "  We  are 
verily  guilty  concerning  our  brother," 
&c.  (Gen.  xlii.  21).  The  sight  of  Elijah 
agonised  the  mourning  mother :  **  Art 
thou  come  unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to 
remembrance,  and  to  slay  my  son  1 " 
(1  Kings  xvii.  18).  Sin  often  begins 
with  gladness  and  ends  in  terror.  Grace 
begins  with  tears  and  ends  with  triumph. 
"  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his 
infirmity,  but  a  wounded  spirit  who  can 
bear  ? "  The  spirit  can  bear  temporal 
ills  with  much  fortitude,  and  arm  itself 
against  outward  or  inward  affliction  ;  but 
a  wounded  spirit,  pierced  and  wounded 
by  those  arrows  of  the  Almighty's  quiver, 
which  find  their  way  to  the  heart,  is  in- 
tolerable. By  a  wounded  spirit — here 
described  as  a  spirit  of  *' trembling" — 
we  apprehend  a  spirit  convinced  of  sin 
under  the  terrors  of  the  law,  led  to  a 
full  and  just  view  of  its  own  condition 
and  condemnation.  This  is  the  disposi- 
tion to  which,  under  the  efficacious  infl^u- 
ence  of  Divine  grace,  all  "  the  vessels  of 
mercy "  are  sooner  or  later  led,  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree,  because  the  con- 
viction of  sin  is  the  very  beginning,  lies 
at  the  foundation  of  genuine  godliness. 
Sins  overlooked  and  forgotten  now  ap- 
pear in  their  true  light.  Conscience 
once  asleep  is  now  awakened.  The 
thunders  of  the  law  are  heard,  and  there 
are  fearful  apprehensions  of  deserved 
wrath.  "  The  people  wept  very  sore." 
They  could  not  "  wash  their  hands  in 
innocency,"  and  therefore  they  bathed 
their  eyes  with  tears.  A  deluge  of  ini- 
quity in  the  heart  may  well  produce  a 
deluge  of  grief  in  the  conscience.  Jere- 
miah wished  "  that  his  head  were  waters, 
and  his  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,"  &c. 
(Jer.  ix.  1).  And  Ezra  himself,  though 
not  a  partaker  of  the  scandalous  guilt  of 
those  who  had  taken  foreign  wives,  ex- 
hibits much  more  earnestness  and  intea- 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZRA, 


OHAP.  S. 


sity  than  many  who  had.  The  practice 
of  sin  liardened  their  consciences ;  the 
sight  of  sin  softened  his  (chap.  ix.  3-6). 
II.  That  God  marks  with  peculiar 
interest  the  time  in  which  repentance 
unto  life  begins  in  the  soul.  "  It  was 
the  ninth  month,  on  the  twentieth  day 
of  the  month."  No  breath  of  j)rayer, 
no  exercise  of  faith,  no  sigh  of  repent- 
ance can  ever  escape  Him.  God  is 
very  attentive  to  times  and  dates.  The 
dates  of  the  commencement  of  carrying 
out  the  reformation  and  of  its  comple- 
tion are  preserved  (vers.  16,  17).  The 
day  in  which  the  three  thousand  were 
converted  is  distinctly  recorded  :  "  When 
the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come " 
(Acts  ii.  1).  The  day  in  which  the 
foundation  of  the  second  Temple  was 
laid  was  memorised :  "  Consider  now 
from  this  day  and  upward,  from  the 
four  and  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth 
month,  even  from  the  day  that  the 
foundation  of  the  Lord's  Temple  was 


laid,  consider"  (Hag.  ii.  18).  And  is 
He  less  attentive  to  the  building  of  tlie 
spiritual  temple  in  the  soul  ?  The  mo- 
ment Saul  of  Tarsus  began  to  pray  was 
a  memorable  season  in  the  calendar  of 
Heaven  (Acts  ix.  11).  And  the  prayer 
of  faith  and  penitence  does  wonders. 

III.  That  repentance,  where  it  is 
real,  will  be  attended  with  its  appro- 
priate fruits.  The  people  put  away 
the  strange  wives  (vers.  11,  12,  16,  17). 
*'  Bring  forth  therefore  fruits  worthy  of 
repentance,"  &c.  (Luke  iii.  8-14). 

IV.  That  the  names  and  persons  of 
genuine  penitents  are  for  ever  pre- 
cious to  God  and  recorded  in  His  book, 
*'  And  among  the  sons  of  the  priests 
there  were  found  that  had  taken  strange 
wives  :  of  the  sons  of  Jeshua  the  son 
of  Jozadak,"  &c.  (vers.  18-44).  They 
were  held  up  as  patterns  of  sin  repented, 
sin  forsaken,  and  sin  forgiven. — Samuel 
Thodey, 


The  Eeformation  Effected. 
{Verses  13-17.) 


The  great  assembly  having  earnestly 
decided  that  the  strange  wives  should 
be  put  away,  the  next  consideration  was 
as  to  the  mode  by  which  this  decision 
might  be  carried  out  It  is  frequently, 
and  especially  in  a  popular  assembly, 
much  easier  to  resolve  that  a  thing 
shall  be  done,  than  to  devise  a  pru- 
dent and  practicable  method  of  doing 
it.  In  the  paragraph  now  before  us 
we  see  how  the  great  reformation  was 
carried  out.     It  was  effected — 

I.  Notwithstanding  difficulties. 
Two  difficulties  are  suggested  in  the 
thirteenth  verse  : — 

1.  The  greatness  of  the  undertaking. 
''  Neither  is  this  a  work  of  one  day  or 
two ;  for  we  are  many  that  have  trans- 
gressed in  this  thing."  The  cases  being 
numerous,  considerable  time  would  be 
required  to  deal  with  them  satisfac- 
torily. Moreover,  some  of  the  cases 
would  probably  need  very  careful  con- 
sideiration.  Amongst  the  foreign  wives 
some  perhaps  had  become  proselytes  to 
the  Jewish  religion ;  and  amongst   the 


children  of  these  marriages  some  of  the 
sons  had  perhaps  been  circumcised,  and 
these  wives  and  sons  could  not  be  put 
away.  It  was  necessary  that  an  im- 
partial and  sufificient  investigation  of 
each  case  should  be  made,  and  the  cases 
were  many,  so  that  the  task  to  be  per- 
formed was  not  by  any  means  a  light 
or  easy  one. 

2.  The  inclemency  of  the  weather, 
"  But  the  people  are  many  and  it  is  a 
time  of  much  rain,  and  we  are  not  able 
to  stand  without."  The  reformation 
could  not  be  carried  out  by  a  great 
popular  assembly,  such  as  that  gathered 
before  the  Temple ;  and,  even  if  it  had 
been  practicable  in  other  respects,  the 
drenching  showers  would  have  prevented 
it.  The  assembly  could  not  have  con- 
tinued to  sustain  those  showers;  and 
there  Mas  no  building  in  the  country 
that  could  have  sheltered  so  vast  a 
multitude. 

Learn  :  T'o  eradicate  sin  is  a  task  of 
the  greatest  difficulty.  How  hard  it  is 
to  overcome  a  sinful  habit  in  ourselves  ! 

167 


dfiAP.  X. 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


Only  the  most  patient,  persistent, 
piayerful,  and  believing  effort  has  any 
cliance  of  success  in  such  an  attempt. 
How  difficult  it  is  to  eradicate  an  evil, 
whether  of  belief  or  of  practice,  from 
the  Church  of  God !  It  is  a  task  re- 
quiring the  zeal  of  an  enthusiastic  re- 
former, the  piety  of  a  devoted  saint, 
and  the  wisdom  of  a  profound  sage. 
Nothing  is  easier  than  the  propagation 
of  moral  evil ;  but  its  eradication  is 
supremely  difficult,   (a). 

II.  Notwithstanding  opposition. 
"  Only  Jonathan  the  son  of  Asahel  and 
Jahaziah  the  son  of  Tikvah  stood  up 
against  this  ;  and  Meshullam  and  Shab- 
bethai  the  Levite  helped  them,"  that  is, 
in  their  opposition  to  this  measure  of 
reform  (see  Explanatory  Notes  on  ver. 
15).  It  is  not  surprising  that  opposi- 
tion should  have  been  offered  to  this 
matter.  The  severance  of  these  mar- 
riage ties  must  have  been  very  painful 
to  most  of  the  persons  concerned  there- 
in. And  very  plausible  objections  might 
have  been  urged  against  their  severance. 
The  examples  of  distinguished  Israelites 
might  have  been  pleaded  as  precedents 
in  favour  of  such  marriages.  Joseph  • 
had  married  an  Egyptian  (Gen.  xli.  45) ; 
Moses,  a  Midianite  (Exod.  ii.  16,  21), 
and  afterwards  a  Cushite  (Num.  xii.  1) ; 
Boaz,  Ruth,  a  Moabitess  (Ruth  iv.  9— 
13) ;  David,  Maacah  a  Geshurite  (2 
Sam.  iii.  3) ;  Solomon,  an  Egyptian 
princess  (1  Kings  iii.  1,  vii.  8).  These 
cases  might  have  been  adduced  and 
urgeid  as  making  against  the  rigorous 
measure  proposed  at  the  present  time. 
It  would  have  been  passing  strange  if 
there  had  been  no  opposition  to  tiiis 
unsparing  reformation.  It  is  surpris- 
ing tliat  the  opposition  was  not  more 
extensive. 

Learn  :  In  effecting  any  great  reforma- 
tion opposition  is  to  be  expected.  Such 
reformations  injure  the  secular  interests 
of  some  persons,  run  counter  to  the  pre- 
judices of  others,  make  war  upon  the 
practices  of  others,  and  so  awaken  re- 
sistance. Great  reformations  are  gene- 
rally carried  out  despite  determined  op- 
position.  (6). 

III.  With  exemplary  wisdom  and 
fairness.     "Let  now  our  rulers  oi  ail 

1G8 


the  congregations  stand,  and  let  all  them 
which  have  taken  strange  wives  in  our 
cities  come  at  appointed  times,"  <fea 
(vers.  14,  16).  Thus  this  reformation 
was  effected — 

1.  By  the  proper  authorities.  The 
"  rulers  of  all  the  congregation,"  i.e.^ 
the  princes  and  eiders  of  the  people, 
were  proposed  as  a  judicial  commission 
to  conduct  this  matter.  "  And  Ezra 
the  priest,  with  certain  chief  of  the 
fathers,  after  the  house  of  their  fathers, 
and  all  of  them  by  their  names  were 
separated,  and  sat  down  to  examine  the 
matter."  The  cases  were  investigated 
and  determined  by  the  rightful  judicial 
authorities  of  the  community,  with  Ezra 
as  their  president. 

2.  With  competent  and  reliable  wit- 
nesses. "  And  with  them  the  elders  of 
every  city,  and  the  judges  thereof." 
"  With  the  accused  were  to  come  the 
elders  and  judges  of  every  city,  to  fur- 
nish the  necessary  explanations  and 
evidence."  They  would  be  likely  to 
possess  the  requisite  information  as  to 
the  cases  in  their  respective  cities,  and 
their  character  and  position  would  give 
increased  weight  to  their  testimony. 

3.  In  the  presence  of  the  accused. 
"  Let  all  them  which  have  taken  strange 
wives  come  at  appointed  times  "  to  Jeru- 
salem for  trial.  No  one  was  condemned 
in  his  absence,  or  without  being  allowed 
an  opportunity  of  pleading  his  cause  if 
he  wislied  to  do  so. 

4.  With  due  regard  for  the  conveni- 
ence of  the  people.  It  was  arranged 
that  the  cases  from  each  city  or  locality 
should  be  taken  by  themselves  "  and 
at  appointed  times,"  and  not  be  mixed 
with  the  cases  from  other  localities.  By 
this  plan  the  Jews  from  the  provinces 
would  not  be  unnecessarily  detained  in 
Jerusalem  ;  but  having  answered  the 
summons  to  appear  there,  the  cases  from 
their  locality  would  be  taken  consecu- 
tively until  they  were  all  adjudicated, 
and  then  they  would  be  at  liberty  to 
return  to  their  homes  and  duties. 

5.  With  careful  inquiry.  The  time 
during  which  the  judicial  commission 
sat,  and  the  probable  number  of  cases 
investigated,  furnish  evidence  of  patient 
examination    into    the   cases.     The   in- 


nOMlLETW  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  I. 


quiry  lasted  for  three  months.  They 
"  sat  down  in  the  first  day  of  the  tenth 
month  to  examine  the  matter.  And 
they  made  an  end  with  all  the  men  that 
had  taken  strange  wives  by  the  first  day 
of  the  first  month."  It  is  probable  that 
they  sat  for  seventy-five  or  seventy-six 
days,  and  it  seems  to  us  that  they  may 
have  investigated  an  average  of  three 
cases  a  day.  One  hundred  and  thirteen 
persons  were  found  to  have  taken  foreign 
wives;  and,  in  accordance  with  the  de- 
cision of  the  judges,  they  put  them 
away.  Evidently  the  examination  was 
not  hurried  and  superficial,  but  patient 
and  thorough. 

Learn  : 

The  imjwrtance  of  combining  prudence 
of  method  ivith  earnestness  of  purpose  in 
carrying  out  great  reformations.  Zeal 
in  a  good  cause  should  be  guided  and 
regulated  by  sound  judgment.  A  noble 
aim  should  be  pursued  by  wise  and 
worthy  methods,  or  it  may  never  be 
attained,  or  attained  with  needless  loss 
and  trouble.  "  Wisdom  is  profitable  to 
direct."  (c). 

IV.  Thoroughly.  "And  they  made 
an  end  with  all  the  men  that  had  taken 
strange  wives."  They  completely  abo- 
lished the  evil  from  the  community.  It 
was  most  desirable  and  important  for 
the  people  themselves  that  the  wrong 
should  be  courageously  grappled  with 
and  utterly  done  away.  If  a  surgeon 
lias  to  remove  diseased  flesh  from  his 
patient,  he  must  cut  it  completely  away, 
or  he  is  neither  skilful  in  his  practice 
nor  kind  to  his  patient.  Sin  is  very  tena- 
cious in  its  hold,  and  though  checked 
for  a  time,  springs  forth  into  new  and 
active  development.  Checking  is  not 
enough,  it  must  be  killed.  Notwith- 
standing the  complete  abolition  of  the 
foreign  wives  from  the  community  at 
this  time,  the  evil  reappeared  and  had 
to  be  dealt  with  by  Nehemiah  (Neh.  xiii. 
23-28). 

Learn  : 

The  importance  of  maJcing  an  end  of 
sin  when  we  are  battling  with  it.  Let 
us  put  it  utterly  away,  cut  off  all  occa- 
sions of  it,  and  shun  every  temptation 
to  it.  {d).  And  a  yet  more  effective 
safeguard  and  surety  against  it,  is  the 


cultivation  of  the  opposite  virtues.  Let 
the  avaricious  cultivate  generosity,  and 
the  proud  man  seek  after  humility,  <fec. 
And  let  every  one  cry  unto  God,  "  Hold 
Thou  me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe.** 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  Sometimes  this  separation  from  familiar 
evil  IS  a  struggle  as  between  life  and  death, 
shaking  the  whole  soul,  and  tearing  its  shrink- 
ing quick  in  torture.  It  is  like  the  sword 
that  pierceth  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  tho 
joints  and  marrow.  And  yet,  such  is  the 
power  of  the  conviction  of  the  Spirit  of  truth 
when  humility  has  once  begun  its  holy  and 
honest  work  within  us,  how  many  even  go  out 
to  meet  that  saving  sorrow  !  Indeed,  when 
the  heart  has  slept  too  long  in  the  lap  of  in- 
dulgence, there  often  creeps  upon  it,  I  believe, 
an  undefined  feeling  that  before  long  this  rest 
must  be  ended  ;  the  foreshadow  of  some  darker 
angel  cast  across  the  path.  And  if  the  ear  of 
our  sympathy  were  quicker  and  finer  than  it 
is,  we  should  doubtless  often  overhear,  in  the 
tones  tiiat  breathe  around  us,  the  sadness  and 
the  prayer  of  an  unsatisfied  spirit  striving 
against  the  evil  in  it !  Blessed  is  the  mind 
that  springs  with  alacrity  and  thanksgiving 
to  its  better  ministry  ! 

For  all  true  souls  really  touched  with  the 
spirit,  and  consecrated  to  the  fellowship,  of 
Christian  obedience  will  be  ready  for  this 
sacrifice.  Not  all  equally  ready.  The  bonds 
of  past  practice  and  attachment  hang  unequal 
weights  about  our  necks.  But  what  awakened 
soul  will  not  willingly  be  drifted  away  from 
the  accustomed  repose,  if  it  is  thereby  brought 
nearer  to  the  righteousness  and  charity  of 
Christ  ?  This,  in  fact,  is  the  test  of  the 
sincerity  of  faith  ;  the  willingness  to  give  up 
all  that  has  been  precious  but  not  holy,  and 
launch  out  upon  the  future,  trusting  only  to 
the  Unseen  Hand  —  like  the  Patriarch,  of 
whom  that  beautiful  thing  is  written,  that 
when  he  was  called  to  go  out  into  a  place 
which  he  should  after  receive,  he  obeyed,  and 
went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he  went,  dwell- 
ing in  the  land  of  "  promise,'*  and  looking  for 
a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder 
and  maker  is  God,  Great  difficulties  will 
threaten  every  such  obedient  foot — the  wilder- 
ness before,  the  bondage  to  evil  behind ;  but 
God  is  mightier  than  they — a  pillar  of  fire 
for  the  night,  and  of  bright  cloud  by  day  : 
•*  Greater  He  that  is  for  us  than  they  that  are 
against  us."  Outside  our  private  battle,  society 
exposes  gigantic  wrongs  to  be  redressed  ;  but 
the  right  which  is  to  redress  them  is  sure,  and 
the  prophetic  ear  of  hope  hears  the  sound  of 
its  footsteps  from  afar.  There  are  changed 
faces,  disappointed  companions,  an  angry  class 
or  denomination  forsaken,  sneers,  imputations, 
false  charires,  and  criticisms  —  such  feeble 
weapons  of  tlie  modern  world's  inquisitions  as 
betray  the  cowardice  of  persecution,  without 
its  positive  creed  or  its  power.     But  these  are 

169 


OHAF.  Z. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


not  a  terror  to  him  who  hears  the  voice  say, 
"Awake,  arise,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee 
light  1  ''—P.  D.  Huntington,  D.D. 

(6)  It  is  a  remarkable,  but  awful,  fact  that 
liberty  and  religion  both  have  arisen  to  pros- 
perity in  the  world  on  successive  stages  of 
blood.  Blood  nurtured  the  tree  of  Grecian 
and  of  Roman  freedom.  With  bloody  swords 
our  fathers  in  the  puritanic  and  covenanting 
days  gained  our  civil  and  religious  victories. 
Through  a  shower  of  blood  came  down,  in 
1789  and  the  after  years,  the  genius  of  liberty 
to  the  continental  shores.  Even  while  we 
writ©  (1859),  the  blood  of  John  Brown  of 
Virginia  is  dropping  into  the  dust,  to  rear  a 
glorious  and  a  terrible  harvest  of  freedom  to 
his  black  countrymen.  And  the  religion  of 
Jesus,  need  we  say,  arises  from  the  root  of  a 
blood-sprinkled  cross.  This  springs,  doubt- 
less, in  part  from  the  Divine  plan  and  purpose, 
but  it  augurs  also  something  dreadfully  wrong 
in  the  present  system  of  things.  Through 
the  dominion  of  the  evil  power  men's  minds, 
in  every  age,  have  been  steeped  in  selfishness, 
besotted  with  lies  ;  and  when  truth  and  good 
try  to  stir  them,  they  succeed,  but  the  stir 
they  produce  is  that  of  rage  and  resistance. 
The  darkness  comprehends  them  not,  but 
apprehends  and  destroys  their  votaries,  and 
many  of  the  followers  of  the  prince  of  evil 
perish  in  the  strife,  too,  and  thus  '*  blood 
toucheth  blood."  Nor  can  we  conceive  the 
final  contest  of  the  world  decided  without  a 
"  great  slaughter  "  among  the  "multitudes — 
the  multitudes  in  the  valley  of  decision;" 
and  even  the  gorgeous  Flora  of  the  millennial 
meadows  shall  derive  its  glory  from  transmuted 
and  transfigured  blood. — 0.  GUJillan,  M.A. 

(c)  The  property  of  cords  contracting  their 
length  by  moisture  became  generally  known, 
it  is  said,  on  the  raising  of  the  Egyptian 
obelisk  in  the  square  facing  St.  Peter's,  at 
Rome,  by  order  of  Pope  Sixtus  V.     The  great 


work  was  undertaken  in  the  year  1586  ;  and 
the  day  for  raising  the  obelisk  was  marked 
with  great  solemnity.  High  mass  was  cele- 
brated at  St.  Peter's ;  and  the  architect  and 
workmen  received  the  benediction  of  the  Pope. 
The  blast  of  a  trumpet  was  the  given  signal, 
when  engines  were  set  in  motion  by  an  in- 
credible number  of  horses  ;  but  not  until  after 
fifty-two  unsuccessful  attempts  had  been  made, 
was  the  huge  block  lifted  from  the  earth.  As 
the  ropes  which  held  it  had  somewhat  stretched, 
the  base  of  the  obelisk  could  not  reach  the 
summit  of  the  pedestal ;  when  a  man  in  the 
crowd  cried  out,  "  TF«i  tht  ropes  t^^  This 
advice  was  followed ;  and  the  column,  as  of 
itself,  gradually  rose  to  the  required  height, 
and  was  placed  upright  on  the  pedestal  pre- 
pared for  it. — Biblical  Treasury. 

{d)  Clip  the  hairs  abort,  yet  they  will  grow 
again,  because  the  roots  are  in  the  skull.  A 
tree  that  is  but  pruned,  shred,  topped,  or 
lopped,  will  sprout  again ;  root  it  up,  and  it 
shall  grow  no  more.  What  is  it  to  clip  the 
outward  appearances,  and  to  lop  the  superfluous 
boughs  of  our  sins,  when  the  root  is  cherished 
in  the  heart  ? — Thomas  Adams,  D.D. 

How  grand  a  thing  to  get  a  passion  down 
and  hold  it  by  the  throat,  strangling  it  de- 
spite its  struggles  !  It  is  tine  work  to  hang 
up  some  old  sin  as  an  accursed  thing  before 
the  Lord,  just  as  they  hung  up  the  Canaanitish 
kings  before  the  face  of  the  sun  ;  or  if  you 
cannot  quite  kill  the  lust,  it  is  honourable 
work  to  roll  a  great  stone  at  the  cave's  mouth, 
and  shut  in  the  wretches  till  the  evening 
comes,  when  they  shall  meet  their  doom.  It 
is  a  joyous  thing  when  by  God's  grace  under 
temptation  you  are  kept  from  falling  as  you 
did  on  a  former  occasion,  and  so  are  made 
conquerors  over  a  weakness  which  was  your 
curse  in  past  years.  It  is  a  noble  thing  to  be 
made  strong  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
BO  as  to  overcome  sin. — C,  H,  Spurgcon, 


The  List  of  Offenders. 


{Verses 

For  what  purpose  is  this  catalogue  of 
names  inserted  here?  The  list  is  pro- 
bably the  final  record  or  report  of  Ezra 
and  his  fellow  -  commissioners,  and 
brought  their  duties  in  this  matter  to 
an  end.  But  why  is  it  preserved  here 
in  the  sacred  Book?  Has  it  any  moral 
significance?  Is  it  of  any  permanent 
value?  And  if  so,  in  what  way  is  it 
valuable  1     We  suggest,  in  reply — 

L  As  a  warning  against  sin.  This 
catalogue  sliows  us — 

I.  Sin  extending  to  all  classes.  Here 
are  the  names  of  seventp^n  priests  (vers. 
170 


18-44.) 

18-22)  who  had  committed  the  sin  of 
marrying  foreign  wives,  and  four  of 
them  belonged  to  the  family  of  the 
high  priest, '' Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak." 
They  had  transgressed  in  this  matter 
notwithstandinor  their  sacred  callins;,  and 
that  they  had  received  commands  im- 
posing special  restrictions  as  to  their 
marriages  (Lev.  xxL  7).  Again,  we 
have  the  names  of  ten  Levites  of  three 
different  classes,  viz.,  assistants  of  the 
priests,  singers,  and  porters  (vers.  23, 
24).  And  besides  these  there  are  the 
names  of  eighty-six  laymen.     A  sacred 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


CHAP.  X. 


calling,  with  its  hallowed  associations 
and  solemn  obligations, affords  no  exemp- 
tion either  from  temptation  to  sin  or 
from  tlie  liability  to  yield  to  temptation. 
Let  Christian  ministers  and  teachers 
heed  well  this  fact.  Sin  is  not  confined 
to  certain  classes  or  callings.  It  is 
found  amongst  all  classes — the  rich  and 
the  poor,  the  learned  and  the  ignorant, 
&c.      "  All  have  sinned."  {a). 

2.  Sin  injuring  the  reputation.  The 
names  of  these  offenders  "are  here  re- 
corded to  tlieir  perpetual  reproach." 
"  Sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."  Sin 
has  covered  witli  infamy  many  a  name, 
which  but  for  it  would  have  been  eminent 
and  illustrious  for  great  gifts  and  noble 
achievements. 

3.  Sin  corrupting  tht  influence.  This 
must  have  been  true  of  every  one  of 
these  offenders.  The  example  of  each 
one  would  be  morally  pernicious,  tending 
to  extend  the  offence  of  marrying  these 
foreign  wives.  But  this  was  especially 
true  in  the  case  of  the  priests.  Their 
participation  in  this  sin  would  cause  it 
to  appear  in  the  eyes  of,  at  least,  some 
of  the  people  as  no  sin  at  all,  but  quite 
consistent  with  duty  and  piety.  In  this 
way  their  influence,  which  should  have 
been  morally  purifying  and  invigorating, 
became  corrupt  and  injurious.  Thus 
this  catalogue  remains  as  a  warning 
against  sin. 

II.  As  an  example  of  genuine  repent- 
ance. Three  characteristics  of  true  re- 
pentance marked  the  conduct  of  these 
offenders — 

1.  They  confessed  their  sin  with  sorrow. 
*'  The  people  wept  very  sore.  And 
Shechaniah  answered  and  said  unto  Ezra, 
We  have  trespassed  against  our  God, 
and  have  taken  strange  wives  of  the 
people  of  the  land."  When  Ezra  said 
to  the  assembled  people,  "Now  there- 
fore make  confession  unto  the  Lord 
God  of  your  fathers  ...  all  the  con- 
gregation answered  and  said  with  a 
loud  voice.  As  thou  hast  said,  so  must 
we  do."  Sincere  and  sorrowful  confes- 
sion of  sin  is  a  mark  of  true  repent- 
ance, and  a  condition  of  Divine  for- 
giveness. "  I  acknowledged  my  sin 
unto  Thee,"  &c.  (Ps.  xxxii.  5).  "  If 
we  confess  our  sins,  He  is  faithful  and 


just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,"  <fcc.  (1  John 
i.  9). 

2.  They  offered  sacrifice  on  account  of 
the  sin.  "  And  being  guilty,  they  offered 
a  ram  of  the  flock  for  their  trespass." 
This  trespass  offering,  as  Keil  observes, 
"  was  imposed  upon  them  according  to 
the  principle  of  the  law  (Lev.  v.  14—19), 

because  they  had  committed  a  /'VP  (tres- 
pass) against   the   Lord,   which  needed 
expiation."      The   presentation   of   this 
offering  was  not    limited    to    the   four 
priests  who   "  gave   their   hands "  as  a 
pledge  that  they  would  make  it.     "  The 
same  obligations,  namely,  the  dismissal 
of  their  strange  wives,  and  the  bringing 
of  a  trespass  offering,  were  imposed  on  " 
all  the  other  guilty  persons ;  but  these 
obligations,  having  been  once  stated,  it 
was  not    deemed    necessary  to  repeat. 
Every  offender  was  required  to  bring  his 
sacrifice,   and  every  one  did  so.      And 
now  forgiveness  is  offered  freely  to  the 
penitent   sinner   through   the   blood   of 
Jesus  Christ.      "We  have  redemption 
through  His   blood,  the   forgiveness  of 
sins."     Eepentance  is  the  condition  of 
forgiveness,  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  medium  through  which  it 
is  attained.  (6).     Where   there   is   true 
repentance    the    need    of    reconciliation 
with  God  will  be  deeply  felt,  and  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Cross  will  be  accepted 
with  thankful  joy.  (c). 

3.  lliey  forsook  the  sin.  All  the 
offenders  put  away  their  strange  wives. 
Even  when  children  had  been  born  of 
these  marriages,  rendering  the  removal 
of  the  wives  and  mothers  much  more 
difficult  and  painful,  the  difficulties  were 
overcome,  the  pain  was  borne,  and  the 
wives  were  put  away.  True  repentance 
involves  practical  reformation — change 
of  conduct,  {il).  Thus  the  men  whose 
names  are  here  recorded  are  examples  of 
genuine  repentance. 

III.  As  an  encouragement  to  genuine 
repentance.  Their  repentance  was  ac- 
cepted by  God,  and  as  a  result — 

1.  Their  sin  was  forgiven.  If  the 
sinner  "  turn  from  his  sin,  and  do  that 
which  is  lawful  and  right ; "  &c.  (Ezek. 
xxxiii.  14-16). 

2.  The  Divine  favour  was  vouchsafed-. 
The  wrath  of  their  God  for  this  matter 

171 


OBAP.  X. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZRA, 


was  turned  from  them  (ver.  14).  He 
approved  their  penitence  and  blessed 
tliem  in  their  obedience. 

Let  sinners  take  encouragement  to 
seek  true  repentance.  *'  Seek  ye  the 
Lord  wiiile  He  may  be  found  ;  call  ye 
upon  Him  wiiile  He  is  near:  Let  the 
wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  un- 
righteous man  his  thoughts,"  &c.  (Isa. 
Iv.  6,  7).  *'  There  is  forgiveness  with 
God.  .  .  .  With  the  Lord  there  is  mercy, 
and  with  Him  is  plenteous  redemption." 
"  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that 
pardon eth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the 
transgression  of  the  remnant  of  His 
heritage  1  He  retaineth  not  His  anger 
for  ever,  because  He  delighteth  in  mercy. 
He  will  turn  again,  He  will  have  com- 
passion upon  us ;  He  will  subdue  our 
iniquities ;  and  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their 
sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  (e). 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

(a)  The  world  over,  in  its  serious  hours  the 
lieart  longs,  sighs,  groans,  and  travails  with 
Borrows  that  cannot  be  uttered,  to  be  delivered 
from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  death.  The 
Scripture  has  no  other  doctrine  of  the  matter 
on  any  of  its  pages,  and  scarcely  one  page 
where  this  is  not.  Read  the  burning  confes- 
sions of  the  fifty-first  Psalm,  and  of  many 
another  before  and  after  it,  where  the  fire  of 
remorse,  which  is  only  the  lurid  reflection  of 
sin,  almost  visibly  scorches  tlie  Psalmist's 
he«irt  ;  read  tiie  terrible  descriptions  of  that 
state  of  man  without  his  Redeemer  written 
by  Paul  to  the  Romans  ;  or  the  tragic  picture 
of  Paul's  own  fearful  struggles  with  the  law 
of  his  members;  or  the  awful  prophecies  of 
a  society  forgetting  its  Lord,  given  in  Jude. 
Recall  the  narratives  of  depravity  in  Scripture 
history,  and  the  denunciations  upon  it  by  pro- 
phets, and  the  thrilling  exhortations  against 
it  by  apostles.  Remember  that  the  Bible 
begins  with  the  first  inroad  of  sin,  and  finishes 
witli  warnings  of  its  punishments.  Above 
all,  remember  that  the  first  word  of  the  new 
dispensation  was  *'  Repent,"  and  its  consum- 
mation was  the  cross  built  on  Calvary  to  assure 
forgiveness  to  "repentance  toward  God  and 
faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; "  and 
you  will  hardly  need  to  multiply  these  con- 
vincing tokens  that  all  the  ministrations  of 
our  religion  to  the  human  soul  presuppose 
that  we  all  have  sinned, — are  sinners  still. 
If  any  of  you  are  disposed  to  complain  that 
there  is  too  much  preaching  against  sin,  apply 
your  criticism  to  the  Bible.  The  Christ  whom 
we  preach  came  to  be  a  Saviour  from  sin,  did 
He  not?  How  much  better  to  think  and  feel 
thoroughly  what  sin  is  now,  than  when  the 
"space  for  repentance"  ia  exchanged  for  the 

172 


determination  of  the  judgment  1  —  P.  D, 
Huntington,  D.D. 

(h)  Repentance  is  necessary  to  forgiveness 
— a  sine  qua  non — a  condition,  though  not  in 
any  respect  in  the  sense  of  desert,  yet  in  the 
sense  of  indispensable  existence  or  of  being 
something  without  which  tlie  blessing  cannot 
be  enjoyed.  This  is  a  truth,  a  Bible  truth. 
But  it  is  not  tiie  ground  of  pardon,  or  in  any 
way  its  meritorious  cause.  That  is  the  atone- 
ment. And,  according  to  the  Bible,  instead 
of  repentance  being  the  ground  of  forgivenesa-i 
that  which  is  the  ground  of  forgiveness  i» 
itself  the  motive,  or  inducement,  or  persua- 
sive, to  repentance.  It  is  that  consideration 
V)y  which  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  Word  is 
ever  urging  sinners  to  repent  and  turn  unto 
God.  .  .  .  Moreover,  that  repentarjce  is  suffi- 
cient to  obtain  forgiveness,  there  is  nothing 
in  the  analogy  of  Providence  that  warrants  us 
to  conclude.  There  is  much  to  the  contrary. 
Repentance  and  reformation  do  not,  in  point 
of  fact,  in  the  present  experience  of  mankind, 
place  transgressors,  with  regard  to  the  temporal 
effects  of  their  sins,  in  the  same  state  as  if 
they  never  had  offended.  The  ruined  health 
and  fortune  of  the  intemperate  and  profligate 
are  not  retrieved  the  instant  they  repent  and 
reform.  Nor  is  there  anything  in  reason  to 
sustain  the  position.  It  is  very  manifest,  that 
present  obedience  can  only  fulfil  present  obli- 
gation. There  is,  as  has  often  been  observed, 
just  as  good  ground  for  affirming  that  former 
obedience  atones  for  present  sins,  as  there  is 
for  aflcirming  that  present  obedience  atones 
for  former  sins.  Repentance  neither  alters 
the  nature  nor  obliterates  the  guilt  of  what  is 
past ;  and  present  duty,  even  were  it  free  from 
all  mixture  and  imperfection,  can  do  no  more 
than  answer  for  itself.  Il  cannot  possess,  for 
our  former  selves  any  more  tlian  for  others, 
aught  of  the  nature  or  efflcacy  of  works  of 
supererogation.  Tliere  will  be  no  sucli  worlca 
kiiDwn  at  the  bar  of  God. — Ralph  Wardlaw, 
D.D. 

(c)  Our  want  is  deliverance  from  our  evil, 
including  both  forgiveness  for  the  past  and 
strength  now;  something  to 

**Be  of  sin  the  double  cure, — 

Cleanse  us  from  its  guilt  and  power." 

Manifestly  this  cannot  come  from  ourselvet. 
It  must  come  from  Him  whom  our  ingratitude 
has  offended  ;  from  the  Ruler  whom  our  sel- 
fish wickedness  has  wronged.  It  must  come 
from  God.  Look  closely  at  this  want  ;  for  it 
is  that  vital  spot  in  all  humanity  where  sorrow 
is  most  keen,  and  where  relief  is  most  joyful. 
The  sure  result  of  evil  is  pain  ;  of  persistent 
sin  is  death.  Hence  the  voluntary  surrender 
to  pain,  pain  even  unto  the  body's  death,  is 
felt  and  has  been  ever  felt,  to  be  the  natural 
expression  of  a  penitent  soul.  It  is  propitia- 
tion ;  not  because  God  takes  pleasure  in  His 
children's  suffering,  but  because  that  is  the 
soui'a  fitting  tribute  to   the  just  majesty  of 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZRA. 


OHAP.  z. 


goodness  and  the  holy  authority  of  Right. 
Government  without  penalty  is  gone,  and  all 
its  blessed  protections  are  dissolved.  Hence 
the  honest  heart  cries  out  in  its  shame  and 
fear,  "Let  me  suffer  for  my  sin,"  Suffering 
for  it  there  must  be  somewhere  ;  transgression 
is  a  costly  business  ;  so  it  must  always  be  and 
always  look  ;  right  must  stand  at  any  rate  ; 
law  must  be  sacred,  or  ail  is  gone  ;  and  since 
nothing  is  so  dear  as  life,  and  blood  is  the 
element  of  life,  life  itself  must  be  surrendered, 
and  "  without  the  shedding  of  blood  is  no 
remission."  Take  the  next  step.  Just  be- 
cause this  life  is  so  dear.  He  who  loves  us 
infinitely,  and  to  whom  it  is  dearer  than  to 
us,  will  be  willing  to  lay  down  for  us  His 
own.  He  will  not  even  wait  for  our  consent ; 
but  in  the  abundance  of  that  unspeakable 
compassion,  in  the  irresistible  freedom  of  that 
goodness,  He  will  do  it  beforehand — only  ask- 
ing of  us  that  we  will  believe  He  has  done  it, 
and,  accepting  our  pardon,  be  drawn  by  that 
faith  into  the  same  self-sacrificing  spirit. 
Herein  is  love  indeed.  Sufiering  for  our 
peace  I  Sacrifice,  not  that  our  service  may 
profit  and  pay  Him,  but  that  our  transgres- 
sion of  a  perfect  law  may  be  pardoned, 
and  the  noble  life  of  disinterested  goodness 
may  be  begotten  in  ourselves. — P,  D,  Hunt' 
ingtoUf  JD.D. 

{d)  Some  confess  their  sins  without  so 
much  as  intending  to  forsake  them.  Mar- 
vellous delusion  I  As  if  it  were  possible  to 
impose  upon  the  Almighty  Himself.  As  if 
the  hollow  confession  of  the  lips  availed  any- 
thing against  the  stubborn  impenitence  of  the 
heart !  Very  beautiful  is  that  liturgy  of  the 
Established  Church.  Yet  how  many  are  there 
who  have  knelt  in  silks  and  satins  to-day,  and 
found  a  certain  anodyne  for  conscience  in  the 
mere  repetition  of  the  cry,  "0  God,  the  Father 
of  heaven,  have  mercy  upon  us  miserable  sin- 
ners "  ?  Or,  not  to  look  abroad  for  examples 
which  may  be  found  at  home,  how  many  of 


ns  within  these  walls  have  moved  the  lips  and 
bent  the  knee,  while  locked  up  inviolate  in  a 
secure  corner  of  the  heart  has  lurked  all  the 
while  that  evil  thing  which  the  lips  have 
professed  to  expel.  That  is  not  repentanoe. 
Rather,  it  resembles  a  contrivance  for  begin- 
ning the  world  upon  a  new  score,  because  the 
old  has  grown  inconveniently  long.  True 
repentance  has  always  an  eye  to  the  future  as 
well  as  to  the  past ;  and  to  confess  those  sins 
which  you  secretly  intend  to  repeat,  or  which 
it  is  not  your  settled  purpose  to  abandon,  is 
to  cheat  conscience  and  to  mock  Qod. — /.  0. 
Pigg,  B,A. 

(e)  You  cannot  believe  too  much  in  God's 
mercy.  You  cannot  expect  too  much  at  His 
hands.  He  is  **  able  to  do  exceeding  abun- 
dantly above  all  that  we  ask  or  think."  ^o 
sin  is  so  great  but  that,  coming  straight  from 
it,  a  repentant  sinner  may  hope  and  believe 
that  all  God's  love  will  be  lavished  upon  him, 
and  the  richest  of  God's  gifts  granted  to  his 
desires.  Even  if  our  transgression  be  aggra- 
vated by  a  previous  life  of  godliness,  and  have 
given  the  enemies  great  occasion  to  blaspheme, 
as  David  did,  yet  David's  penitence  may  in 
our  souls  lead  on  to  David's  hope,  and  the 
answer  will  not  fail  us.  Let  no  sin,  however 
dark,  however  repeated,  drive  us  to  despair  of 
ourselves,  because  it  hides  from  us  our  loving 
Saviour.  Though  beaten  back  again  and 
again  by  the  surge  of  our  passions  and  sins, 
like  some  poor  shipwrecked  sailors  sucked 
back  with  every  retracing  wave  and  tossed 
about  in  the  angry  surf,  yet  keep  your  face 
towards  the  beach  where  there  is  safety,  and 
you  will  struggle  through  it  all,  and  though 
it  were  but  on  some  floating  boards  and  broken 
pieces  of  the  ship,  will  come  safe  to  land. 
He  will  uphold  you  with  His  Spirit,  and  take 
away  the  weight  of  sin  that  would  sink  you, 
by  His  forgiving  mercy,  and  bring  you  out  of 
all  the  weltering  waste  of  waters  to  the  solid 
shore.— -4 ^ea;.  Maclaren,  D.D, 

173 


HOMILETIOAL  INDEX. 


CHAPTER  L 

The  Fulfilment  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord, 

Resemblance  between  the  Proclamation  of  Cyrus  and  the  Gospel, 

Tlie  Edict  of  Cyrus,       ...... 

The  Proclamation  of  Cyrus,       .  .  .  •  . 

God  with  us,       .  .  ,  •  •  •  • 

The  Release  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  an  Illustration  of  the  Redemp- 
tion of  Man  from  Sin,     ..... 

The  Return  of  the  Exiles,  .  .  .  •  • 

The  Results  of  the  Captivity,     .  .  .  •  • 

The  Restoration  of  the  Sacred  Yesstlt, .  •  •  • 


PAGB 

6 

8 

9 

11 

12 

14 
16 
19 
19 


CHAPTER  XL 

Going  up  out  of  Captivity,         ,  .  • 

A  Suggestive  Record,     .  .  .  , 

Religious  Service,  .  .  .  • 

The  Importance  of  a  Clear  Spiritual  Pedigree,  • 
Possessions  and  Offerings,  .  .  • 


22 

25 
27 
29 
32 


CHAPTER  IIL 

The  Rebuilding  of  the  Altar :  Exemplary  Features  of  Divine  Worship, 

The  Celebration  of  the  Sacred  Festivals  Resumed, 

The  Work  of  the  Day  done  in  the  Day, 

The  Preparations  for  Rebuilding  the  Temple, 

Laying  the  Foundation  of  the  Temple, . 

The  Building  of  the  Temple, 

The  Altar  and  the  Foundation  of  the  Temple, 


36 
39 
42 
44 
46 
49 
51 


176 


UOMILETWA  L  INDEX, 


■    CHAPTER  IV. 

rAOB 

The  Proposal  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews,     .             .             •             ,  64 

The  Proposals  of  the  Wicked  and  how  to  Treat  them,  ...  57 

The  True  Builders  of  the  Spiritual  Temple  of  God,       ...  59 

The  Hostility  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews,    ....  61 

The  Antagonism  of  the  World  to  the  Church,  ....  63 

Good  Cause  for  Great  Zeal,        .  .  .  .  .  .65 

The  Success  of  the  Subtle  Scheme  of  the  Samaritans,  or  the  Temporary 

Triumph  of  the  Wicked,             .....  68 


CHAPTER  V. 

The  Great  Work  Resumed, 

The  Great  Work  Investigated  and  Continued, 

The  Letter  to  the  King  concerning  the  Work, 

The  Supremacy  of  Gud, 

Arguments  against  Sinning,      .  . 


71 

73 
75 
78 
80 


CHAPTER  VI. 

A  Thorough  Search  and  an  Important  Discovery,  . 

The  Decree  of  Darius,    ..... 

A  Believer's  Expenses,  .  .  .  .  . 

The  Desire  of  a  Sovereign  and  the  Duty  of  Subjects,     . 

The  Completion  of  the  Temple, 

The  Subserviency  of  a  Faithful  Ministry  to  the  Erection  of  God' 

Spiritual  Temple,  .... 

The  Dedication  of  the  Temple,  .... 
The  Celebration  of  the  Passover,  .  •  , 

The  Dedication  of  the  Second  Temple,  .  ,  • 

The  Dedication  of  the  Temple,  .  •  • 


84 

86 
89 
90 
91 

94 

95 

97 

100 

101 


CHAPTER  Vn. 

Ezra  the  Distinguished,  .... 

Studying,  Practising,  and  Teaching  the  Sacred  Scriptures, 
The  Christian  Ministry, 

Divine  Sequence,  .... 

Tlie  Commission  of  Artaxerxes  to  Ezra, 
Reasons  for  Active  Devotedness  to  the  Cause  of  God, 
The  Decree  of  Artaxerxes, 
Exemplary  Praise,  .  ,  .  , 

176 


104 
107 
109 
110 
110 
114 
115 
117 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  Assembly  at  Ahava,            ..... 

PAOB 

120 

The  Companions  of  Ezra  on  his  Journey  to  Jerusalem^ 

123 

Men  of  Understanding,               •            •            .            •            . 

124 

Ezra's  Confidence  in  God,          •            •            •            •            • 

126 

Faith  and  Prudence,      •            •            •            •            ^            • 

128 

Ezra  and  his  Times,       .••••• 

130 

Ezra  an  Example  in  Business,    •            •            •            •            • 

132 

Contrasts,           ....... 

132 

Seeking  the  Lord  and  its  Advantages,  .            •            •            . 

134 

The  Guardianship  of  the  Sacred  Treasures, 

136 

From  Ahava  to  Jerusalem  :  an  Illustration  of  the  Pilgrimage 

of  the 

Christian,             ...... 

138 

At  Jerusalem :  the  Faithful  Surrender  of  Important  Truitf,     • 

140 

CHAPTER  IX. 

The  Good  Man's  Sorrow  over  the  People's  Sin,             •            • 

143 

The  Good  Man's  Confession  of  the  People's  Sin,            .            • 

147 

Ezra's  Humiliation  for  the  Sins  of  his  People,  .            •            • 

150 

Ezra's  Address,  ...•••• 

152 

Forbidden  Marriages,     ....•• 

152 

Use  of  God's  Diversified  Dispensations,             •            •            • 

155 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Reformation  Proposed,       .            .                        ,           , 

158 

True  Loyalty,     ....... 

162 

The  Reformation  Decided  Upon,           .             .            .             . 

163 

A  Great  and  Troubled  Assembly,           •            •            •            . 

166 

The  Reformation  Effected,         .            •            •            •            . 

167 

The  List  of  Offenden,    ••••*. 

170 

177 


INDEX  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FA6B 

Abandoned,  sin  must  be       ,        .         .165 

Abhorrence  of  sin  essential  to  moral  purity  150 

Accountability,  the  measure  of  our,      138,  141 
Acknowledgment    of     God's    goodness, 

thankful 118 

Acting,  the  danger  of  separating  feeling 

from 162 

Agent  in  every  good  work,  God  the  chief,  73 
Aggravations  of  the  guilt  of  sin  .  .  149 
Almightiness  of  God  guarantees  the  ful- 
filment of  His  word,  the  .  .  7 
Ancestry,  blessing  of  a  pious  .  .  ,  106 
Association  with  the  wicked,  danger  of.  58 
Association  with  the  wicked  is  allowed, 

what 58 

Assurance  and  faith        ....  31 
Assurance  is  not  always  enjoyed  by  true 

Christians        .....  31 

Atonement,  felt  need  of  the    ...  88 
Atonement  felt  by  the  penitent  soul,  the 

need  of 172 

Authority  of  God,  the  sovereign     ,        .  11 

Benevolence  of  the  Divine  law,  the      .  113 

Bible  an  inexhaustible  book,  the     .         .  86 

a  wonderful  book,  the          ...  86 

should  be  studied,  the  whole       .         .  106 

Books,  the  past  preserved  iu  .        .        .86 

Gapaoitt  the  measure  of  obligation        .  138 

Certainty  of  the  punishment  of  sin,  the  .  133 

Character  of  holy  men,  appreciation  of  the  113 
Children  of  the  godly  are  included  in  the 

Divine  covenant,  the        .         .         .118 
Children  to  be  trained  for  God        .         .  155 
Christ  a  Redeemer  from  the  slavery  of  sin  16 
on  the  Cross  an  example  of  self-con- 
secration         ....  38 
the  sure  foundation     .         •        •         •  60 
Christian,  influence  of  a          •        .         .  146 
life,  joy  fulness  of  the  ....  99 
should  hate  sin,  the     .         .         .         .146 
should  marry  *'  only  in  the  Lord  **       .  154 
Christianity  bears  marks  of  its  Divine 

origin 85 

Christians  should  be  separate  from  the 

world 146 

should  honour  the  Name  which  they 

bear 146 

should  reveal  God  to  men   .        .        .106 

Church  may  win  new  victories,  how  the  74 
reproached   because   of  the  fiftults  of 

some  of  its  members,  the         •        •  69 
178 


FAO« 

Church,  certainty  of  the  progress  of  the  ,  1^3 
the  joy  of  helping  to  build  the     ,          ,  93 
Communication,  voluntary  and  involun- 
tary           109 

Confession  of  sin  an  essential  condition  of 

forgiveness       .....  165 

of  sin  a  relief  to  the  penitent       .         .  165 
of  sin  is  followed  by  its  renunciation, 

true 173 

of  sin,  unreal 173 

what  it  is 150 

Confidence  in  God  secures  His  protection  128 

in  God  should  be  exercised .         ,         .  127 

in  God,  the  warrant  for       .         .         .127 

Conquest  of  sin  a  grand  thing,  the          .  170 

Consecration  to  Christ,  gratitude  a  motive 

to  self. 38 

to  Christian  work,  the  noblest  worship, 

self-         ......  38 

to  God,  self- 97 

Consequences  of  sin  in  eminent  persons, 

the  injurious 145 

Courage  indispensable  to  success  in  Chris- 
tian work 27 

Covenant    is   with    believers  and    their 

children,  the  Divine         .         .         .  118 

of  God  with  His  people,  the         .         .  13 
Creation  admonishing  us  of  the  flight  of 

time         ......  41 

Cyrus  acknowledges  the  supreme  autho- 
rity of  Jehovah       ...  10, 11 

a  great  conqueror  raised  up  by  Jehovah  11 

the  character  and  mission  of        .         .  7 

Dangeu  of  separating  feeling  from  action  162 
Decision  in  resisting  temptation,  the  im- 
portance of      .        .        .        .        .67 

Deeds  better  than  correct  creeds,  good   .  108 
Definitions  of  holiness     .         .         .         .118 

Dependence  and  Divine  defence,  human  128 
Doing  good,  the  true  method  of      .         .60 

Doubters  to  be  respected,  honest    .        .  77 

Duty,  the  faithful  discharge  of  present  .  72 

Eminent  persons,   the  injurious  conse- 
quences of  sin  in      .         .         .        .  145 
Epistles  of  Christ,  Christians  should  be  .  106 
Eradicated,  sin  must  be           .         .         .170 
Evil  of  terrible  enormity,  sin  an     •        •  150 
the  good  man  must  abhor    .         .         •  150 
Example,  the  power  of    .        .        .        .88 
continues  after  our  death,  the  power  of 
our 88 


INDEX  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS, 


PAGE 
Failure  is  sometimes  real  success,  ap- 
parent     ......  69 

Faith  and  assurauce         ....  31 

Fa  t!ifuliiess,  the  reward  of     .         .         .  141 
Feeling  from  action,  the  danger  of  sepa- 
rating     ......  162 

Flight  of  time,  the  swift           ...  42 
Forbearance  of  God  with  the  wicked      .  63 
Forgiveness,  confession  an  essential  con- 
dition of.         ....     150,  165 

repentance  an  essential  condition  of     .  172 

Freedom  from  sin  by  Jesus  Christ .         .  139 

Gifts  determined  by  the  disposition  of 

the  giver,  the  value  of     .         .         .33 

Giving  is  a  part  of  worship      .         .         .  113 

our  best  to  the  Lord  heartily       .         .  34 

proportionate       .....  33 

with  liberality  and  cheerfulness  .         .  42 
God  acknowledged  as  the  great  source  of 

all  good   ......  118 

against  the  wicked,  the  power  of          .  134 

for  all  His  benefits,  praise  ascribed  to  119 

gives  Himself  to  His  people         .        .  13 
reverence  towards        .         .         .         .113 

upon  the  wicked,  the  execution  of  the 

wrath  of          ....         *  134 

God's  view  of  sin 160 

Gratitude  due  to  the  living     .         ,         .  125 

Great  man  a  light- fountain,  the      .         .  125 
Greatness,  size  is  no  criterion  of      .         .27 

true 125 

Guilt  of  sin,  aggravations  of  the       .         .  149 

Hatred  of  sin.  a  Christian  duty     .        .  146 

of  the  world  to  the  Church           .         .  66 

Heaven,  rest  of 140 

re-union  in                    ....  140 

worship  of 139,  140 

Heinousness  of  sin  in  the  light  of  God*s 
presence,  the  exceeding   . 

Helpers 

Holiness  defined      .... 
is  for  everyday  wear    . 
should  characterise  the  whole  life 

Home,  love  makes  a        .         .         . 
sacredness  of       ...         . 

Hope,  the  sorrow  of  repentance  inspires 

Humility  and  pride  contrasted 


149 

46 

118 

118 

99 

34 

24 

1€1 

118 


Imitation  of  the  wealthy  and  powerful, 

servile 73 

Individuals,  the  power  of        .         .         .  106 
Influence,  the  continuousness  of  involun- 
tary        .                 ....  109 
the  power  of  involuntary      .         .         .  109 
Influence  of  a  Christian,  the,  .         .         .  146 
of  Christian  lives,  the  attractive, .          31,  32 
of  God  and  the  freedom  of  man,  the,   .  8 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  the  spirit  of 

man,  the 7|  18 

Inspiration  of  all  goodness  in  man  is  from 

God,  the, 73 

Interest    in    His     people    individually, 

God's, 26 


Jewels,  Jehovah*!, 


20 


paob 

Jews  after  the  captivity,  monotheism  of 

the,           ......  56 

Joy  and  grief  mingled  in  human  life,        .  49 

Joyfulness  in  the  worship  of  God,    .         .  96 

of  the  Cliristian  life,  the,      ...  99 

Joys,  incompleteness  of  human,  .  .  46 
Judaism  towards  foreigners,  the  attitude 

of, 4« 

Judgment,  importance  of  a  sound,  .         .  126 

Knowledge  not  acted  upon  an  occasion 

of  condemnation,  religious,        ,         .  108 

of  His  people,  God's,  ....  26 

Language,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  .  109 
Law,  benevolence  of  the  Divine,  .  .113 
Leadership,  qualification  for,  .         .         ,24 

Living,  gratitude  due  to  the,  .         .         ,  125 

Luminary,  the  great  man  a,     •         •         .  126 

Man,  the  greatest,  .        .        •        •        .  126 

the  wisest, 126 

Marriage  of  the  godly  with  the  ungodly 

is  perilous,  the,  .         .         .         .156 

should  be  contracted  with  a  view  to 

mutual  help  in  holiness,    .        .         .  164 
tie,    the   closeness   and   tenderness  of 

the,          ......  164 

to  the  training  of  children,  the  relation 

of, 155 

Marry  **only  in  the  Lord,"  the  Christian 

should, 154 

Mercy  of  God  an  encouragement  to  re- 
pentance, the, 173 

Minister,  the  true,  .  ....  32 
Ministers,  how  to  maintain  the  supply 

of, 123 

the  spiritual  needs  of,  .         .         .         .123 

the  spiritual  perils  of,  ....  123 

Ministry  a  solemn  trust,  the  Christian,    .  137 

Need  of  atonement  and  grace,  our  daily,  39 
of  atonement  felt  by  the  penitent  soul, 

the, 172 

of  rest,  man's,      .         .        •        ,        .  (22 

Obedience,  complete,     ....  80 

hearty 80 

joyful, 80 

Obligation,  capacity  the  measure  o^        .  138 

Omniscience  of  God,        ....  74 

Opposition  ofi^ered  to  great  reformations,.  170 

Oversight  of  God  an  inspiration,  the,       .  76 

Painful,  separation  from  sin  is      .        .169 

Parentage,  the  blessing  of  godly      .         ,  106 

Parental  obligations       ....  155 

prayers  answered  ....  106 
Penitence    in    the    experiences    of    the 

Christian         .....  97 

Penitent  soul,  confession  a  relief  to  the  .  166 
Perfection  of  humanity,  Christianity  aims 

at  the 93 

Perilous,  the  marriage  of  the  godly  with 

the  ungodly  is  .         .         .         .165 

Persecutions  of  the  Protestant  dissenters  38 

1V9 


INDBX  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PAGE 

Perseverance  to  the  end  required  of  the 

Christian 93 

Power  of  God  is  against  the  wicked,  the  134 

of  single  individuals,  the      .         .         .  106 

of  the  social  element  in  religious  move- 
ments, the        .....  161 
Practice    is    more   important  than   mere 

profession  .  .  .         .  .108 

Praise  and  prayer   .....  48 

ascribed  to  God  for  all  His  benefits      .  119 

God  for  His  goodness,  the  obligation  to  41 
Praj'er,  God's  promises  an  encouragement 

to 127 

and  praise   ......  48 

Prayers  of  parents  answered,  the     .         .  106 

of  the  godly  preserve  nations,  the        ,  88 

Preparation  for  communion  with  God     .  99 

Presence  of  Christ  with  His  people          .  14 

of  God,  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  .         ,  14 

Pride  and  humility  contrasted         .         .  118 

Principal  thing,"  "  wisdom  is  the  .         .  125 

Professing  Christ     .....  77 

Profession  is  worthless  without  practice  .  108 
Promises  an   encouragement  to  prayer, 

God's 127 

of  God  should  be  trusted,  the       .        .127 

Protection  of  God,  the  omniscient  .        .  76 

Providence  brings  good  out  of  evil.  Divine  88 

Prudence  a  necessary  virtue    ...  77 

in  work,  the  importance  of  .         .         .170 

Punishment  of  sin,  the  certainty  of  the   .  133 

Redemption  enhances  the  claims  of  God 

upon  man 79 

Reflections  of  the  aged  .  .  .  .49 
Reformation  essential  to  true  repentance  161 
Reformations  meet  with  fierce  opposition, 

great 170 

Remained  in  Babylon,  why  many  of  the 

Jews 18 

Reparation  must  follow  repentance  .        .161 
Repentance  an  essential  condition  of  for- 
giveness   172 

leads  to  reparation,  true  .  •  .161 
painful  and  hopeful  .  .  •  •  161 
reformation  the  test  of  .  .  .  161 
the  mercy  of  God  an  encouragement  to  173 
Repulsiveness  of  sin,  the  .  .  .150 
Resistance   of  temptation,    prompt   and 

resolute 59 

Respect  for  sacred  things  ...  20 
Rest,  man's  need  of        .        .        .        .122 

of  heaven 140 

Restitution  of  all  things  in  Christ  .  .  20 
Reunion  in  heaven  .        .        .        .140 

Reverence  due  to  God  ....  113 
Reward  of  faithfulness,  the  .  .  .  141 
Risk  of  ministers,  the  spiiitual        .        •     123 

Satett  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  the       .  65 

of  the  Saints,  the         ....  20 

Balvation  by  grace 16 

Satan  transformed  into  an  angel  of  light  56 
Separation  from  sin,  the  difficulty  of       .169 
from  the  wicked  incumbent  upon  the 

good 56 

firom  the  world  a  Christian  duty .        .  146 
180 


Sermon,  the  best     .... 
Service  for  every  Christian,  a  sphere  of 

in  the  Church  of  Christ  is  honourable, 
the  humblest  .... 

not  the  exclusive  prerogative  of  any 
class,  Christian         .         .         , 
Sin,  aguravations  of  the  guilt  of      , 

a  grand  thing  to  conquer    .         , 

an  evil  of  great  enormity     .         . 

a  power       ..... 

deprives  man  of  courage      .        , 

freedom  from      .         .         •         • 

grieves  God         .... 

in  eminent  persons,  the  injurious  eon 
sequences  of    . 

is  painful,  separation  from  . 

its  exceeding  sinfulness  in  the  light  of 
God's  presence         .         •         . 

must  be  abandoned     .         •         . 

must  be  eradicated      •         .         • 

provokes  God  to  anger        .         . 

should  be  hated  by  the  Christian 

the  certainty  of  the  punishment  of 

the  loathsomeness  of  . 

to  be  viewed  with  utter  repugnance 
Sinned,  all  have      .... 
Sins,   even   when   pardoned,   leave    sad 
traces       

of  the  fathers  risited  upon  the  children 
Slavery  of  sin,  the  .... 

of  sin,  sinners  sometimes  unconscious 

of  the 

Social  element  in  religious  movements, 

the  power  of  the      ... 
Sorrow  of  repentance  is  hopeful,  the 
Sovereignty  of  God,  the . 

of  God,  the  ground  of  the  .         . 

of  God,  the  universality  of  the    . 
Sphere  of  service  for  every  Christian,  a 
Success  to  secondary  causes,  attributing 
Supply  of  ministers,  the .        •        . 

Talent  to  be  used  well,  one  •        • 
Talents  and  responsibilities     . 
Temple  is  built,  the  materials  of  which 
the  spiritual     .... 
the  redeemed  are  growing  into  »  glori 

ous 

Temptations  to  sin,  plausible  .         . 
Tenderness  of  the  marriage  relation,  the 
Thankfulness  to  God  in  all  things,  the 

Christian's       .... 
Trust  in  God,  the  justification  of    . 
the  Christian  ministry  a  solemn  . 
Trusting  in  God's  promises     . 

Understanding  to  be  sought,  sound 
Union  is  strength   .... 
Universality  of  sin  in  this  world,  the 
Use  well  the  talent  you  have  .        . 

Yabious  ways  of  working  in  the  caoso 

of  God • 

Veneration  of  holy  character  .        .        . 

Warrant  for  confidence  in  God,  th« 
Weeping  in  heaven,  no  •        •        •        • 


FAOB 

82 

28 


46 
113 

127 
49 


INDEX  OP  AUTHORS  QUOTED. 


PAGE 
Wicker),  the  execution  of  the  wrath  of 

Goil  upon  the  .....  134 

the  power  of  God  is  against  the  .         .  134 

Wisdom  and  goodness  are  inseparable     .  125 

in  work,  the  importance  of           .         .  170 

"Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing  "   .         .  125 

Woiks,  the  incompleteness  of  human      .  45 
World,    Christians    should    be   separate 

from  the 146 


PAOB 

Worldliness  injurious  to  Christian  char- 
acter and  influence  ....       31 
the  su<>tle  and  ruinous  power  of  .         .       73 
Worship,  giving  is  a  part  of   .         ,         .113 
of  heaven,  the      .         .         .         .139,140 
of  wealth,  the      .  ...       62 

Worthy  of  the  Name  which  they  bear, 

Christians  should  walk     .         .         .     146 
Wrath  of  God  upon  the  wicked,  the  execu- 

tion  of  the       •        •        •        •        •     134 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS  QUOTED. 


Adams,  Dr.  lliomas,  59,  170. 
Alford,  Dean,  153. 
Allon,  Dr.  H.,  49. 
Anon.,  42,  86. 

Bailkt,  p.  J.,  15. 

Barnes.  Dr.  A.,  49,  60,  168 

Barrett,  W.  G.,  132. 

Basil,  119. 

Baxter,  Richard,  45,  125,  155. 

Beecher,  H.  W.,  7,  27,  31,  32,  46,  49,  73,  77, 

106,  128,  146,  150,  161. 
"  Bible  Illustrations,"  99. 
"Biblical  Treasury,"  170. 
Binney,  Dr.  T.,  138. 
B.  P.  P.,  110. 
Brooks,  George,  8. 
Brown,  J.  Baldwin,  46,  69. 
Burns,  Dr.  Jabez,  136,  152. 
Bushnell,  Dr.  H.,  27,  42,  61,  78,  109. 

Carltlk,  Thomas,  86,  125. 

Cecil,  R.,  132. 

Channing,  Dr.  W.  E.,  38,  86. 

Charnocke,  Stephen,  11,  13,  18,  26,  41,  63,  76, 

79,  80,  82,  113,  134. 
Cheever,  Dr.  G.  B.,  139. 
Clemance,  Dr.  C,  101, 
Cotton,  Dr.  C.  C,  68. 
Conder,  J.,  118. 
Cowper,  W.,  104. 
Crosby,  Dr.,  113. 
Gumming,  Dr.,  100. 
Cuyler,  Dr.  T.  L.,  78. 

Dalb,  Dr.  R.  W.,  107. 

Dewart,  E.  H.,  49. 

'♦IJict.  of  Illustrations,"  34,  77,  141,  166. 

'•Diet,  of  the  Bible,"  Dr.  Smith's,  82. 

Doddridge,  Dr.  P.,  31,  126. 

Downame,  53,  73. 

Edwards,  Pres.  184. 

Ferguson,  Dr.  R.,  140. 
Fuerst,  Dr.  Julius,  4,  68. 
Fuller,  Andrew,  69. 

Garbktt,  Canon,  89. 


Gilfillan,  George,  170. 

Gray,  J.  Com  per,  102. 

Gurnall,  W.,  65,  80,  82,  118,  128,  ICflL 

Guthrie,  Dr.  T.,  57,  88,  165. 

Hall,  Bishop,  27,  118. 
Hamilton,  Dr.  R.  W.,  113,  184. 
Harris,  Dr.  John,  42,  63. 
Hemans,  Mrs.,  17,  33. 

Henry,  Matthew,  47,  64,  87,  96,  112, 168, 158. 
Hervey,  Bishop,  2,  52. 
Hervey,  T.  K.,  48. 
Howe,  John,  20,  108,  164. 
Howson,  Dean,  98. 

Huntington,  Dr.  F.  D.,  33,  66,  68,  74,  77,  99, 
108,  118,  161,  170,  172,  173. 

Irving,  Edward,  127. 

James,  J.  A.,  88,  142. 
Jay,  William,  43. 
Jones,  Harry,  49. 

Keil,  Dr.  C.  F.,  1,  35,  36,  62, 108,  119,  167. 

Kitto,  Dr.  John,  8,  10,  11. 

Lattimer,  R.  S.,  90, 
Lester,  Dr.  J.  W.,  140. 
Lewis,  W.  S.,  163. 
Liddon,  Canon,  127. 
Longfellow,  H.  W.,  44. 

Maoaulat,  Lord,  38, 
Maclaren,  Dr.  A.,  178. 
Magirus,  John,  31. 
Man  ton.  Dr.,  58. 
Martin,  Samuel,  34. 
Martineau,  Dr.  James,  72. 
Milman,  Dean,  5,  56. 
Milton,  John,  68. 
Montaigne,  Michel  de,  73. 
Morris,  A.  J.,  15,  16,  97. 
Mursell,  Arthur,  24. 

Parker,  Dr.  Joseph,  7,  8,  11,  14,  20,  24,  9% 

75,  81,  93,  106,  123,  146,  150,  161,  165. 
Patrick,  Bishop,  122. 
Payson,  Dr.  E.,  14,  97,  149,  160. 
Perowne,  Dean,  70. 

181 


INDEX  OF  AUTHORS  QUOTED. 


Pigg,  J.  G.,  173. 
Pulsford,  John,  21,  93,  118. 
Punshon,  Dr.  W.  M.,  29,  34. 
Preacher's  Portfolio,"  "The,  110. 

Rawltnson,  Canon,  103,  104,  163. 
Reynolds,  Dr.  H.  R.,  46. 
Robertson,  F.  W.,  16,  69,  146,  162. 
Ruskin,  John,  24,  125. 
Ryland,  Dr.,  106. 
Ryle,  Bishop,  31. 

Salter,  H.  G.,  31,  80,  147. 

Schultz,  Prof.  F.  W.,  4,  6,  17,  40,  56,  84,  92, 

95,  103. 
Scott,  Sir  Walter,  49. 
Scott,  Thomas,  18,  68,  124. 
Seeker,  Williani,  165. 
Seneca,  125. 

Shakespeare,  William,  81,  108,  124. 
Simeon,  Charles,  50,  91,  95, 113, 117, 161, 150. 


Sleigh,  William,  12 
South,  Dr.  Robert,  146. 
Speaker's  Commentary,"  "The,  35. 
Spurgeon,  C.  H.,  8,  16,  20,  29,  38,  39,  42,  46, 
65,  67,  69,  80,  88,  93,  97,  106,  140,  170. 
Study,"  *'The,  86. 
Sunday  School  Teacher,"  "The,  14,  110. 

Talmaqe,  Dr.,  24,  106,  107,  160. 
Thodey,  Samuel,  116,  167. 
Thomas,  Dr.  David,  69. 
Tuck,  Robert,  52. 

Vaughan,  Dean,  123,  188. 

Wardlaw,  Dr.  R.,  154,  172, 
Watkinson,  W.  L.,  130. 
Wesley,  Charles,  122. 
Westcott,  B.  F.,  19. 
Whittaker,  93. 
Wordsworth,  Wilii»m,  81. 


182 


ANALYTICAL    INDEX. 


•*  A  book  and  an  index  are  to  be  made  on  opposite  principles.  A  good  book  cannot  be  too 
concise.  A  good  index  can  hardly  be  too  prolix.  Repetitions  are  to^be  avoided  in  the  former. 
In  the  latter  they  should  abound." — Lord  Brougham. 


C 


PAOB 

Address,  Ezra's,    •        •        •        •        .152 
i.  The  grace  they  had  received,  ,         .  152 
ii.  The  exalted  position  to  which  they 

had  been  raised,         .          ,  .   152 

iii.  The  blessings  connected  with  these 

privileges,  ....  152 

Ahava,  the  assembly  at  (See  Assembly),    120 
Ahavato  Jerusalem,  from  ;  an  illustration 
of   the  pilgrimage  of   the    Christian 
(See  Pilgrimage),   ....  138 
Altar  and  the  foundation  of  the  Temple, 

the, 51 

i.  The  true  order,      .         .         .         .51 
ii.  The  mingled  feelings,     ,         .         .61 
Altar,  the  rebuilding  of  the :  Exemplary 
features    in     Divine    worship     (See 

Worship), 36 

Antagonism  of  the  world  to  the  Church, 

the,  ......     63 

L  Persistent, 63 

ii.  Authoritative,         ,        ,         ,         .63 

iii.  Combined, 64 

iv.  Unscrupulous,        .         •         •         .64 
V.  Plausible,        .....     64 
Arguments  against  sinning,     •         .         .80 
i.  Sin  provokes  God,  ,         .         .80 

it  It  deprives  the  sinner  of   His  pro- 
tection,    .....     81 
iii.  It  strips  the  sinner  of    power  to 

battle  with  his  foes,  .  .  .81 
Artaxerxes,  the  decree  of  (See  Decree),  115 
Artaxerxes  to  Ezra,  the  commission   of 

(See  Commission),    .         .        .         .110 
Assembly,  a  great  and  troubled,      .         .   166 
i.  It  is  the  tendency  of  sin  to  produce 

sorrow  and  consternation  of  soul,   166 
ii.  God  marks  with  peculiar  interest  the 
time  in  which  true  repentance 
begins  in  the  soul,     .         .         .  167 
iii.  True   repentance  will   be   attended 

with  its  appropriate  fruits,         .  167 

ir.  The  names  and  persons  of  genuine 

penitents  are  precious  to   God 

and  recorded  in  His  book,  .  167 

Assembly  at  Ahava,  the,  .         .         ,120 

L  The  long  journey  commp'-ced,        ,  120 


PAOB 

iL  An  important  inspection  made,        .  121 

iii.  A  grave  deficiency  discovered,  .   121 

iv.  The  supply  of  the  deficiency  sought,  121 

T.  The  supply  obtained,       .         .         .122 

Believer's  Expenses,  a  (See  Expenses),  89 
Builders  of  the  spiritual  temple  of  God, 

the  true,  .         .         .         .         .59 

The   true  spiritual   Israelites,  because 

they  alone  will  build— 
i.  On  the  true  foundation,  .         ,59 

ii.  With  the  true  materials,  .         .     59 

iii.  In  accordance  with  the  true  plan,  .     59 
iv.  With  the  true  aim,  .         .         .60 

V.  In  the  true  spirit,   .         .         .         .60 
Building  of  the  Temple,  the,  .         .     49 

i.  What  there  was  at  that  time  to  call 
forth   such   strong  and  widely- 
different  emotions,    .         .         .49 
Laying    the    foundation    of    the 
Temple  was — 

1.  To  some  an  occasion  of  exalted 

joy, 49 

2.  To  others,  of  the  deepest  sorrow,     50 
ii.  How  far  similar  emotions  become  us 

at  the  present  day,    .          .  .50 

1.  There  is  great  occasion  for  joy,   .     50 

2.  There  is  abundant  occasion  for 
grief  also,  .         .         .         •50 

Captivity,  going  up  out  of  (See  Going),  22 
Captivity,  the  results  of  the  (See  Results),  19 
Cause  for  great  zeal,  good  (See  Zeal),  .  65 
Cause  of  God,  reasons  for  active  devoted- 

ness  to  the  (See  Devotedness),         .114 
Celebration  of  the  Passover,  the      .         ,     97 
i.  The  personal  preparation  for  these 

sacred  festivals,  .         .         .97 

1.  As  regards  the  priests  and  Lerites,     97 

2.  As  regards  the  people,         .         .     98 
ii.  The  principal  significance  of  these 

sacred  festivals,  .         .         .     98 

1.  The  Passover  was  a  memorial 
of  their  covenant  relation  with 
God, 98 

2.  That  of  unleavened  bread  was  a 

18S 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


PAGE 

■olemn  recognition  of  their  obli- 
gation to  live  holily  unto  God,  .     98 
iii  The  special  joy  in  these  sacred  fes- 
tivals,         98 

1.  There  were  the  ordinary  reasons 

for  joy, 98 

2.  There  were  also  special  reasons 

for  joy,     .....     98 
Celebration   of    the   sacred  festivals  re- 
sumed, the,      .....      39 
i.  The  commemoration  in  Divine  wor- 
ship of  national  experiences  and 
blessings,  .         .         .          .         .39 
ii.  The  celebration  in  religious  worship 

of  the  natural  divisions  of  time,      40 

1.  To  impress  them  with  the  value 

of  time,     .         .         .         .         .40 

2.  To  assist  them  to  form  a  correct 

estimate  of  their  life  upon  earth,     41 
8.  To  arouse  them  to  make  a  wise 
use  of  the  time  which  remained 

to  them 41 

iii.  The  presentation  in  Divine  worship 

of  personal  voluntary  offerings,       41 
Church,  the  antagonism  of  the  world  to 

the  (See  Antagonism),     .         .        .63 

Commission  of  Artaxerxes  to  Ezra,  the   .   110 

i.  The  grant  of  this  commission,  .  110 

1,  In    answer   to    the    requegt    of 
Ezra, 110 

2.  By  the  supreme  authority  of  the 
empire, Ill 

ii.  The  articles  of  this  commission,       .  Ill 

1.  Those  addressed  to  Ezra,    .         .111 

2.  Those  addressed  to  the  Persian 
treasurers,  .         .  .  .112 

iii.  The  spirit  of  this  commission  .  112 

1.  Reverence  for  God,    .         .         .112 

2.  Respect  for  the  law  of  God,         .  112 

3.  Regard  for  the  worship  of  God,  .  112 

4.  Appreciation  of  the  character  of 

a  good  man,      .         .         •         .112 
Companions  of   Ezra  on  his  journey  to 

Jerusalem,  the,         .         .         .         .123 
Completion  of  the  Temple,  the,       .         .     91 
i.  The  ready  compliance  of  the  Per- 
sian officers  with  the  royal  com- 
mands,       91 

ii.  The  satisfactory  progress  and  ulti- 
mate completion  of  the  building 
of  the  Temple, .         .         .         .91 

1.  The    grand    Authority   for    the 

great  work,        .         ,         .         .92 

2.  The  royal  promoters  of  the  great 
work,        .         .         .         .         .92 

8.  The  worthy  leaders  of  the  great 
work, 92 

4.  The  inspired  inciters  in  the  great 
work,         ....  .92 

5.  The  ultimate  completion  of  the 

great  work,         .         .         .         .92 
A  figure  of  the  building  of  the 
Temple  of  God  in — 

1.  The  individual  Christian,  .         .     92 

2.  The  world,         .         .         .         .93 
Confession  of  the  people's  sin,  the  good 

man's, 147 

184 


PAOB 

i.  Deep    personal   shame  and   sorrow 
on   account  of  the  sins  of  the 

people, 147 

Expressed  by — 

1.  A  symbolical  action,  .          .         .147 

2.  A  8u<i;gestive  attitude,         .          .   1  47 

3.  An  explicit  avowal,    .         .         .  147 
ii.  Humble   confession  of   the  sins  of 

the  people 147 

1.  The  great  accumulation  of  their 

sins, 147 

2.  The   long  continuance   of   their 

sins, 147 

8.  The  sore   aggravations  of   their 

sins, 147 

iii.  Solemn  anticipation  of  the  conse- 
quence of  the  continuance  of 
the  sins  of  the  people,        .         .148 

1.  Their  utter  end  as  a  community,    148 

2.  Such   a  consequence  would    be 
just,  .         .         .         .         .  149 

3.  Such  a  consequence  was  to  be 
dreaded,    .         .         .         .         .149 

Learn — 

1.  The  great  evil  of  sin,  .         ,  149 

2.  The  grand  hope  of  the  sinner,     .   149 

3.  The  right  relation  of  the  good 
man  to  sin,        ....  149 

Confidence  in  God,  Ezra's       .         •         .  126 
i.  Avowed, 126 

1.  In  His  providence,     .         .         .126 

2.  As    protecting   the   interests   of 
His  people,        ....  126 

3.  As  opposed  to  those  who  forsake 

Him, 126 

ii.  Tested 126 

1.  By  their  need  of  guidance,  .  126 

2.  And  protection,  .         .         .  126 
iii.  Maintained,    .....  126 

1.  In  not  seeking  guidance  and  de- 

fence from  the  king,  .         ,   126 

2.  In  seeking  them  from  God,        .  127 
iv.  Vindicated,     .         .         ,         .         .127 

1.  In  their  inward  assurance,  .  127 

2.  In  the  outward  result,        .         .  127 
Contrasts,        .         .         .         .         ,         .132 

i.  A  contrast  of  human  character,  .   132 

1.  Those  that  seek  God,  .  .132 

2.  Those  that  forsake  Him,     .  ,132 
ii.  A  contrast  of  Divine  treatment,  .  132 

1.  God's  hand  is  upon  them  for  good 
that  seek  Him,  .          .         .   132 

2.  His  power  and  wrath  are  against 

them  that  forsake  Him,     .         .  133 
Cyrus,  the  edict  of  (See  Edict),       .         .       9 
Cyrus,  the  proclamation  of  (See  Proclama- 
tion),        11 

Darius,  the  decree  of  (see  Decree),        .     86 
Day  done  in  the  day,  the  work  of  the  (See 

Work), 42 

Decided  upon,  the  reformation  (See  Re- 
formation),      163 

Decree  of  Artaxerxes,  the,       .         .         ,115 
i.  In  reference  to  the  Jewish  Church,    116 
ii.  In  reference  to  the  Church  amongst 

ufl,    .         •        •        •        .        •  116 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX, 


PAGE 
Call  for  obedience  to  this  mandate — 

1.  In  a  way  of  personal  refonna-      . 

tion, 116, 

2.  In  a  way  of  ministerial  exertion,    lib 
Decree  of  Darius,  the,     .         .         •  .86 

i.  A  prohibition,         .         .         •         .80 
iL  An  injunction,         .         ,         .         .     oo 

1.  To   allow   the   building    of    the 
Temple, ^^ 

2.  To   assist  the   building    of    the 

Temple, ^^ 

8.  To  assist  the  worship  of  God,       .     87 
iii.  A  malediction,         .         •         •         .87 

1.  Severe  penalties  are  denounced,  .     87 

2.  A  stern  imprecation  is  uttered,  .     87 
Dedication  of  the  second  Temple,  the,      .   100 

i.  The  occasion  was  one  of  joy,  .          .100 
ii.  They  who  took  part  in  the  service  had 

previously  purified  themselves,  .    100 
iii.  There    were   burnt   offerings    as    a 
token  of  the  consecration  of  the 
people,       .         .         •         •         .100 
iv.  There  were  sin  offerings,  .          .   100 

V.  Tbere    was   the   observance   of  the 

Passover,  .         .         .         •         .100 
vi.  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread  was 

kept  joyfully,   .         .         .         .  100 
siL  The  new  national  life  thus  inaugu- 
rated had  less  of  pomp  and  show 
than  were  seen  in  the  days  of 

Solomon, 100 

Dedication  of  the  Temple,  the,         .         •     95 

Was  characterised  by — 

i.  Religious  rejoicing,  •         •         .95 

ii.  Devout  gratitude,  •         •         •         .95 

iii.  Deep  humility,       .         .         .         .96 

iv.  Appropriate   arrangements    for    its 

future  use,         •         .         .         .96 
Dedication  of  the  Temple,  the,        ,         .   101 
i.  The  captivity  was  designed  to  teach 

the  Jews  an  important  truth,     .   101 
ii.  They  showed  that  they  had  learned 
this  truth  by  their  conduct  on 
their  return,      .         •         .         .101 
iii.  Their  great  work  was  crowned  with 

success — the  Temple  was  finished,  101 
iv.  It  was  meet  that  the  opening  ser- 
vices should  be  marked  by  de- 
monstrations of  religious  joy,     .  101 
▼,  The  spirit  and  principle  of  this  dedi- 
cation   may  be   applied  to  the 
opening  of  any  building  for  reli- 
gious purposes,  .  •         .102 
▼i.  We  are    rearing  a  temple  of  living 

souls,         .....  102 
Desire  of  a  sovereign  and   the  duty  of 

subjects,  .  .         .         .          .90 

L  The  desire  of  a  heathen  prince,        .     90 

1.  It  was  just  and  reasonable,  .     90 

2.  It  was  wise  and  politic,       .         .     90 
ii.  The  duty  of  a  Christian  people,       .     91 

1.  To  offer  sacrifices  to  our  Heavenly 
King,        .         .         .         .         .     91 

2.  To  pray  for  our  earthly  sovereign,     91 
Devotedness  to  the  cause  of  God,  reasons 

for  active,         .         .         .         .         .114 
i.  Reasops  for  aptive  devotedness  to  tUe 


PAOS 
cause  of  God  and  truth  in  the 
world,        .         .         .         .         .  114 

1.  Tiie  Divine  authority  by  which 

it  is  enjoined,    .         .  .  .114 

2.  The  urgent  necessity   for  your 
exertions,  .         .         .         .114 

3.  The  fearful  consequences  of  the 
neglect  of  this  duty,  .         .   114 

4.  The  success  which  has  attended 

its  fulfilment,    ....   115 
ii  Suggestions  as  to  the  spirit  and  mode 
in  which  this  work   should   be 
carried  on,         ,         .          .          .115 

1.  Earnestly,  without  remissness,  .  115 

2.  Prayerfully,  without  pride,         .  115 

3.  Speedily,  without  delay,    .     ^    .  115 
Discovery,  a  thorough  search  and  an  im- 

important  (See  Search),  .         .         .     84 
Dispensations,  use  of  God's  diversified,    .   155 
i.  God's  diversified  dispensations  to- 
wards us,  ....  155 

1.  He  has  visited  our  sins  with  judg- 
ments,      .         .         .         .         .155 

2.  He  has  vouchsafed  us  deliverance,  155 
ii.  The  effect  they  should  have  upon  us,  156 

They  should  restrain  us  from  renewed 
disobedience,  as  being — 

1.  Unreasonable,   .         .         •         •  156 

2.  Ungrateful,        .         .         •         .156 

3.  Dangerous,         .         .         .         .156 
Distinguished,  Ezra  the  (See  Ezra),         .  104 
Duty  of  subjects,  the  desire  of  a    sove- 
reign and  the  (See  Desire),     •         •    90 

Edict  of  Cyrus,  the,        ....      9 
i.  The     devout    acknowledgment     of 

God's  sovereignty,      .        .       .  •       ^ 

1.  In    the  bestowment     of      His 
favours,      .....       9 

2.  In   the    authority  of    His  com- 
mands,       .        .        .        .        •       «' 

ii  The  magnanimous  emancipation  of 

God's  people,      ....       9 

1.  The  spirit  in  which  it  was  made,       9 

2.  The   purpose  for  which  it  waa 

made,  .         .         .         .         .       9 

iii.  The  generous  exhortation  to  assist 

God's  people,      .         .         ,         .       9 

1.  The  purport  of  this  exhortation,       9 

2.  The  persons  to  whom  it  was  ad- 

dressed,     .         .         .         .         .10 

3.  The  pattern  by  which  it  was  en- 

forced,         10 

Effected,  the  Reformation  (See  Reforma- 
tion),       167 

Erection  of  God's   spiritual  temple,  the 
subserviency  of  a  faithful  ministry  to 
the,   .......     94 

i.  The  building  of  the  Temple,    .         .     94 

1.  Was  obstructed  by  many  diffi- 
culties,     .....     94 

2.  Through  the  preaching  of  the 
prophets  these  difficulties  were 
overcome,  .         .         .         .94 

ii  The  subserviency  of  a  faithful  nini- 
stry   to   the   erection   of   God's 
spiritual  temple,        ,         •         .94 
185 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


PAGB 

The  erection  of  this  is — 

1.  Connected  with  the  same   diffi- 
culties,     .         .         .         .         .94 

2.  Carried  on  and  perfected  by  the 
same  means,      .          .  .  .94 

Exemplary    features   of    Divine    worship 

(See  Worship),        .         .         .        .36 

Exemplary  praise  (See  Praise),       .         .117 

Exiles,  the  return  of  the  (See  Return),        16 

Expt^iises,  a  believer's,     .  .          .  .89 

i.    Wiiat  are  our  expenses  ?  .         .     89 

ii.   Where  shall  we  find  means  to  meet 

them? 89 

iii.  How  shall  we  act  in  the  presence  of 

such  abundance  ?       ,         .         ,90 
Ezra  and  his  times,  .         .         .         .130 

i  The  principle  which  Ezra  asserted 
was  in  striking  contrast  with  the 
general  state  of  opinion  around 

him, 130 

ii  Ezra's  situation  aflforded  him  an  op- 
portunity for  asserting  this  great 
principle  under  very  trying  cir- 
cumstances,      .         .         •         ,131 
Ezra  an  example  in  business,  ,         •         •  132 
i.  His  humiliation,      .         •         •         •  132 
ii.   His  faith,        .         •         •         •         .  132 
iii.   His  prayer,     .         •         •         •         .  132 
iv.   His  holy  jealousy,  •         •         •         .  132 
V.  His  success,    .         ,         ,         .         .132 
Ezra  on  his  journey  to  Jerusalem,   the 

companions  of,          ...»  123 
Ezra's  address  (See  Address),         .         .  162 
Ezra's   confidence  in   God    (See    Confi- 
dence),     126 

Ezra's   humiliation   for  the   sins   of   the 

people  (See  Humiliation),       .        .  150 
Ezra,  introduction  to  the  Book  of,  •       1 

Analysis  of  its  contents,  .  •  •  2 
Its  authoiship,  •  •  .  •  •  2 
Its  canonicity,  •  •  •  •  •  2 
Its  date,       ..••••       2 

Its  design, 1 

Its  nature,  ...•••        1 

Ezra  the  distinguished,  .         •         •         •  104 

A  man  of  distinguished^ 

i.  Ancestry,         .         •         •         •         •  104 

ii.  Attainments,  •         •         •         •         •  104 

iii.  Favour,  •         ,         •         ,         •         .105 

iv.  Influence,        ,         ,         •         •         ,105 

V.  Success,  •         •         •         •         •   105 

vi.  Aim,       ,         •         .         •         .         ,  105 

▼ii.   Bleosing,  •         •         •         .         .  106 

Faith  and  prudence,       •        •        ,        .  128 
i.  As  a  grand  rule  in  the   Christian 
life,  faith  and  prudence  must  go 
together,  .         .         ,         .         .128 
iL  Yet  there  are  times  when  faith  in 
God  must  supersede  the  provi- 
sions of  ordinary  prudence,         .  129 
E.g.  when  prudential  action — 

1,  Would  probably  be  construed  as 

a  denial  of  the  Divine  govern- 
ment,         129 

2.  Would  cause  us  to  lean  on  worldly 
associations  and  resources,  .  129 
186 


PAQl 


11. 


111. 


3.  Might  embarrass  the  progress  of 
God's  kingdom, 
iii.  The  separation  of  faith  from  pru 
dence  must  be  effected  only  in 
the  spirit  of  dependence    upon 
Heaven,    .... 
Foundation  of  the  Temple,  laying  the, 
i.   The  work  already  done,  . 

1.  Something   was   already   accom 

plished,     .... 

2.  Arrangements    were    made    for 
carrying  on  the  work,         , 

The  worship  offered,        ,         , 

1.  Its  manner,         .         ,         , 

2.  Its  character,     »         ,         • 

3.  Its  occasion,       .         ,         , 

4.  Its  spirit,  .         ,          ,         , 
The  emotions  excited,     ,         , 

1.  Great  joy,  .         ,  • 

2.  Great  sorrow,     . 

3.  Great    joy    and    great     sorrow 

mingled,  .... 
Foundation  of  the  Temple,  the  altar  and 

the  (See  Altar), 
Fulfilment  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  the 
i.  The  regard  of  God  for  his  Word, 
ii.  The  mercy  of  God  to  His  people, 

1.  In  the  design  and  effect  of  the 
captivity, 

2.  In  their  release  from  captivity, 
iii.  The  influence  of  God  upon  the  spirit 

of  man,         .         ,         ,         , 

1.  Its  nature,  •         •         • 

2.  Its  subject,        ,         ,         , 

3.  Its  design,  ,         , 
iv.  The  suitable  response  of  man  to  the 

influence  of  God, 


129 


130 
46 
46 

46 

47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 
47 

48 

51 
5 
6 
5 

5 
6 


God's   diversified   dispensations,   use    of 

(See  Dispensations),  .     .         .         .  155 

God,  the  supremacy  of  (See  Supremacy),     78 

God  with  us,  .....     12 

i.   The  devout  wish  expressed,    .         .12 

1.  Personat  relation  to  God,  .         .     12 

2.  Realisationof  the  presence  of  God,    12 
ii.  The  kind  expression  of  the  wish,     .     13 

1.  Indicates  reverence  towards  God,     13 

2.  And  kindness  towards  the  captives,  13 
Going  up  out  of  captivity,       .         .         .22 

L  The  deliverance  from  captivity        .     22 

1.  Originated  in  the  favour  of  God,     23 

2.  Was  effected  by  an  unlikely  agent,   23 

3.  Was  permissive,  not  compulsory,     23 
iL  The  journey  home,  .         .         .23 

1.  Was  a  restoration,      .         .         .23 

2.  A  restoration  to  their  own  home,      23 

3.  And  to  religious  privileges,         .     23 
iii.  The  subordination  to  leaders,  .         .     33 

1.  Was  needful  for  maintaining  order,  23 

2.  For  insuring  progress,  .         .     23 

3.  And  because  of  the  differences  in 

the   characters  and  abilities  of 
men,         .....     28 
Gospel,  resemblance  between  the  procla- 
mation of  Cyrus  and  the  (See  Reskm- 

BLANCli), 8 

Guardianship  of  the  sacred  treasures,  the,  136 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


PAQE 

L  The  treasures  to  be  guarded  were 

valuable —  ....  136 

1.  In  themselves,  ....   136 

2.  As  being  consecrated  to  God,     .  136 

3.  As  being  the  free  gifts  of  friends 
and  well-wishers,       ,          .          .   136 

ii.  The     guardians    of     the    treasures 

were    ......  136 

1.  Adequate  in  number,  .         .  136 

2.  Appropriate  in  ofi&cial  character,   136 

3.  Distinguished  amongst  their  bre- 
thren,       .....   136 

iii.  The  charge  to  the  guardians  of  the 

treasures       .....   136 

1.  Points    out    the    value    of    the 

things  committed  to  them,         .  136 

2.  Enjoins  watchful  care  of  these 
things,      .....  137 

8.  Indicates  their  responsibility  for 
them,        .....   137 
It.  The  acceptance  of  the  guardianship 

of  the  treasures,   .         .        •         .137 

Hostility  of  the  Samaritang  to  the  Jews, 

the, 61 

i.  The  tactics  of  the  wicked,  .  .61 
ii  The  venality  of  the  wicked,  .  .  61 
iii.  The     temporary    triumph    of    the 

wicked,     •         ....     62 
It,  The  freedom  allowed  by  God  to  the 

wicked,     .         .         .         .         .62 
Humiliation  for  the  sins  of  his  people, 

Ezra's, .150 

L  The  reason  of  his  sorrow,         .         .150 
The  marriages  of  the  Jews  with  the 
Cauaanites,  which  was — 

1,  A  violation  of  an  express  com- 
mand,      .....  151 

2,  Had  a  tendency  to  lead  the  Jews 

back  to  idolatry,       .         .         ,151 
VL  The  expressions  of  his  sorrow,  .  151 

1.  The   violent  and    instantaneous 
expression  of  his  grief,       .         ,161 

2.  His  humiliation  before  God,       .  151 

Impobtance  of  a  clear  spiritual  pedigree, 

the  (See  Pedigree),         .         .        .29 

Investigated  and  continued,  the  work 
(See  Work) 73 

Jerusalem,  at:   the  faithful  surrender 

of  important  trusts  (See  Surrender),  140 

Letter  to  the  king  concerning  the  work, 

the,     .     .         .         .         .         .         .75 

L  The     inquisition    of    the    Persian 

authorities,        .         .         .         .75 

1.  The    observations    which     they 
made,       .         .         ,         .         .75 

2.  The  inquiries  which  they  pro- 

posed,       76 

U.  The  reply  of  the  Jewish  leaders,      .     76 
That  the  work  was — 

1.  Not  a  mere  human  enterprise, 

but  a  Divine  commission,  .         .     76 
8,  Not  an  innovation,  but  a  resto- 
ration,       76 


PAQE 

8.  Not  in  a  spirit  of  presumption 
and  pride,  but  of  obedience  and 
humility, 76 

4,  Not  in  opposition  to,  but  in  con- 
formity with,  royal  authority,    .      76 

5.  Not  political,  but  religious  in  its 
character,  .  .          .          .76 

iii.  The  appeal  of  the  Persian  authori- 
ties to  the  king,         .         .         .76 

1.  To  ascertain  whether  Cyrus  au- 
thorised the  work,     .         .         .77 

2.  To  issue  instructions  for  their 
guidance,  .  .  .         .77 

Lord  and  its  advantages,  seeking  the  (See 

Seeking), 134 

Loyalty,  true, 162 

i.  Is  marked  by  genuine  respect,         ,  162 
ii.  By  hearty  sympathy,       .         ,         ,  162 
Apply  these  lessons — 

1.  To  the  laws  of  our  land,    .         .  162 

2.  To  the  laws  and  officers  of  our 
Church, 163 

Marriages,  forbidden    ....  162 
Between  Christians  and  those  who  are 

not  Christians,  because — 
i.  They  are  opposed   to  the   express 

command  of  God,      .         .         ,153 
ii.  They  are  inconsistent  with  the  most 
sacred  aspects  and  ends  of  mar- 
riage,          153 

iii.  They  imperil  the  salvation  of  the 

soul, 153 

iy.  They  are  inimical  to  wise  and  har- 
monious home  government,       .   154 
T.  They   are  detrimental   to  the  best 
interests  of  the  children  of  the 

marriage, 154 

Men  of  understanding,    ,         .         •         .  124 
i.  Are  the  gifts  of  God,      .         ,         .124 

1.  They  derive  their  abilities  from 
Him, 124 

2.  They  rightly  develop  their  abili- 
ties by  His  blessing, .         •         .  124 

8,  They  attain  their  moral  excel- 
lences by  His  blessing,       ,         .  124 
ii.  Are  of  great  worth  amongst  men,    ,  124 

1,  Understanding  is  essential  to  the 
beneficent  employment  of  other 
gifts  and  powers,       .         .         .  124 

2,  The  employment  of  understand- 
ing itself  confers  great  benefits 
upon  society,    ....  125 

Ministry,  the  Christian, ,         .         ,         ,109 
Essential  characteristics  of  the  ministry 

are — 
L  Devotedness  to  God's  Word,  .         .  109 
ii.  Personal  religion,   ....  109 
iii.  Public  instruction,  .         .         ,  110 

Ministry  to  the  erection  of  God*s  spiritual 
temple,  the  subserviency  of  a  faithful 
(See  Erection),       .        ,        .        .    94 


Offenders,  the  list  of,  ,        •        •  .170 

i.  A  warning  against  sin,    .         .  .170 

1.  Sin  extending  to  all  classes.  .  170 

2.  Sin  injuring  the  reputation,  •  171 

187 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX. 


PAOB 

3.   Sin  corrupting  the  influence,      .  171 
li   An  example  of  genuine  repentance,    171 

1.  They    confessed    their   sin    with 
sorrow,      .          .         ,         ,  .171 

2.  They  offered   sacrifice   for  their 
sin, 171 

3.  Tiiey  forsook  their  sin,        .  .   171 
iii.   An   encouragement  to  genuine   re- 
pentance,           ....   171 

1.  Their  sin  was  forgiven,       .          .   171 

2.  Tbe    Divine   favour  was  vouch- 
safed,        .....   171 

Offerings,   possessions  and  (See  PoisSES- 

SIONS) 32 


Passover,   the  celebration   of   the   (See 

Passover), 97 

Pedigree,  the  importance  of  a  clear  spi- 

.  ritual, 29 

i.  The  doubtful  pedigree  amongst  the 
people  an  illustration  of  uncer- 
tainty as  to  our  spiritual  state,  .     29 

1.  It  may  consist  with  association 
with  the  people  of  God,     .         .     29 

2.  It  must  involve  spiritual  loss,     .     29 
ii.  The  doubtful  pedigree  amongst  the 

priests  an  illustration  of  uncer- 
tainty as  to  our  ministerial  call- 
ing and  condition,      .         .         .30 

1.  A  ministerial  pedigree  may  be 
lost  by  worldliness,     .         ,  30 

2.  The  loss  of  ministerial  pedigree 
involves  a  corresponding  loss  of 
ministerial  power  and  reward,    .     30 

S.  The  final  decision  as  to  the  stand- 
ing of  a  minister  of  uncertain 
pedigree  must  be  given  by  God 

Himself, 30 

Pilgrimage  of  the  Christian,  from  Ahava 
^  to  Jerusalem,  an  illustration  of  the,     138 
i.  The  setting  out  from  Ahava,  .         .138 

1.  From  captivity  to  liberty,  .         .138 

2.  From  exile  to  their  ancestral 
liome, 138 

3.  From  the  land  of  idolatry  to  the 
scene  of  true  worship,        .         .  138 

ii.  The  progress  on  the  journey,  .         .   138 

1.  Notwithstanding  enemies,  .         .    139 

2.  By  reason  of  the  Divine  blessing,   139 
iii.  The   arrival   at   Jerusalem — charac- 
terised by,         .         ,         .         .139 

1.  Grateful  rest,     .         .         .         .139 

2.  Joyful  welcome,  .         ,         ,139 
Possessions  and  offerings,         .          ,         ,32 

i.  The  completion  of  their  journey,     ,     32 

ii.  The  extent  of  their  possessions,        .     32 

iii.  The  presentation  of  their  offerings,       32 

1.  Tbe  object  of  their  offerings,       .     32 

2.  The  spirit  of  their  offerings,        .     33 

3.  The  measure  of  their  offerings,  .     38 
iv.  The  settlement  in  their  cities,  ,     33 

1.  Home  after  exile,        .         .         ,33 

2.  Rest  after  a  long   and    tedious 
journey, 33 

Praise,  exemplary,  .  ,          ,         .117 

t  The  true  offerem  of  praiM,       ,         ,  )  17 


11. 


ui. 


1.  Are  characterised  by  unaffected 
humility, 117 

2.  bnicere  piety,     .          .         ,         ,117 

3.  Practical  religiousness,        .         ,   I17 
The  grand  object  of  praise,      .  .   II7 

1.  The  Supreme  Being,  ,         .   II7 

2.  In  covenant  relation  with    His 
worshippers,      .         .         .         .117 

3.  And    whom    our    fathers    wor- 

^     slapped, 117 

Good  reasons  for  praise,  .         .         .118 

1.  God   inspires   the   worthy   pur- 
poses of  men,    .         .         ,         ^118 

2.  He    beneficially  influences  the 
moral  judgments  of  men,  .         .118 

3.  He    invigorates   the  heart    and 
life  of  His  servants,  .         .         ,118 

Preparations  for  rebuilding  the  Temple, 

^^®»          •         .         •         ,         .  44 
L  The  great  work  yet  to  be  accom- 
plished,      44 

An  illustration  of — 

1.  The  incompleteness    of    human 
joys, 44 

2.  The   incompleteness    of    human 
works, 44 

8.  The  obligation  of  the  Church  of 

God, 44 

ii.  The    prompt  preparations  for    the 

accomplishment  of  this  work,    .     44 

1.  The  variety  of  service  and  the 
unity  of  design,         .         .         .44 

2.  The  co-operation  of   Jews  and 

Gentiles, 44 

Proclamation  of  Cyrus  and  the  Gospel, 
resemblance      between     the       (See 
Resemblance),        .        ,        ,        .      8 
Proclamation  of  Cyrus,  the,    .         .         .11 
L  In  a  way  of  literal  interpretation,    .     11 

1.  The   person   by  whom    it    was 
issued, 11 

2.  The  proclamation  itself,     .         .11 
iL  In  a  way  of  spiritual  improvement,      12 

1.  What  a  sad  state  men  of  the  world 

are  in, 12 

2.  What  an  invaluable  blessing  the 

Gospel  is, .         ,         .        ,        .12 

3.  What  is  necessary  to  obtain  what 

it  offers? 12 

4.  What  is  our  duty  when  it  has 

become  effectual  for  our  good  ?       12 
Proposal  of  the  Samaritans  to  the  Jews, 

.  the 54 

i.  The  proposal  made  by  the  Samari- 
tans,   54 

1.  Plausible  in  its  form,  ,         .     64 

2.  Evil  in  itself,     .         .         .         .54 
ii.  The  proposal  rejected  by  the  Jews,      65 

1.  An  exclusive  obligation  in  rela- 
tion to  the  work  is  asserted,       .     65 

2.  The  alleged  similarity  of  worship 

is  denied, 55 

8.  The  command  of  King  Cyrus  is 

adduced, 55 

4.  The  rejection  of  the  proposal  was 

unanimous,  .  .  ,  .65 
6.  It  was  prompt  and  decided,       .    ^6 


ANALYTICAL  INDBX. 


PAGE 

Proposals  of  the  wicked  and  how  to  treat 

them,  the,        .         .         .         .  .57 

L  The  wicked  often  propose  to  enter 

into  alliance  with  the  good,        .     57 
ii.  These  proposals  are  often  supported 

by  plausible  reasons, .         .         .57 
iiL  These  proposals  are  always  perilous 

to  the  good,       .         .         .         .57 
vi.  These   proposals  should  always    be 

firmly  rejected,  .         .         .58 

Proposed,  the  reformation  (See  RfirOR- 

MATION,    ....••   158 
Prudence,  faith  and  (See  Faith),    .         .  128 


Rebuilding  the  Temple,  the  preparationt 

for  (See  Preparations),  .        .         .44 
Record,  a  suggestive,       .         .         .         .26 
L  The  significance  of  the  fact  of  the 

record,      .        .         .         .         •     25 

1.  It  was  an  honour  to  those  who 
returned,  .....     25 

2.  It  is  an  illustration  of  the  Divine 
record  of  God's  spiritual  Israel,       25 

8.  It  suggests  that  every  one  of  His 
people  is  precious  in  the  sight  of 

God, 25 

U.  The  significance  of  the  content*  of 

the  record,         .         •         •         .25 

1.  Significant  persons,   .         •         ,25 

2.  A  significant  place,    .         •         .25 
8.  Significant  numbers, .         .         .25 

Redemption  of  man  from  sin,  the  release 
of  the  Jews  from  Babylon  an  illustra- 
tion of  the,      .         .         .        •         .     14 

L  The  subjects, 14 

ii.  The  agents, 14 

1.  Both  were  called  of  God,   .         .14 

2.  Both  eflfected  this  work  by  over- 
coming the  oppressors,      .         .14 

iii.  The  source,     .        ...»     14 
iv.  The  extent,     .        .         .         •         .15 

1.  It  is  offered  to  all,      .         .         .15 

2.  It  is  accepted  only  by  some,       .     15 
T.  The  object,     .         .        .         .         .15 

1.  The  universal  realisation  of  the 

presence  of  God,       .         .         .15 

2.  The   universal    presentation    of 
worship  to  God,        .         .         .15 

Reformation  decided  upon,  the,       .         .  163 
L  The    summons    to    the    people    to 

assemble  at  Jerusalem,      .         .  163 

1.  The  circumstances  in  which  it 
originated,         .         .         .         .163 

2.  The    persons   to   whom   it   was 
addressed,  .         .  .         .163 

8.  The  authority  by  which  it  was 
issued,       .....  163 

4.  The  speedy  obedience  which  it 
required,  .         .         .         .         .163 

6.  The  penalties  by  which  it  was 
enforced,  .....   164 
ii.  The  assembly  of  the  people  at  Jeru- 
salem in  obedience  to  this  sum- 
mons,      .....  164 

1.  The  universal  attendance  at  the 
assembly 164 


PAttl 


164 


164 


2.  The    felt    importance     of     the 

assembly, .... 
8.  The     depressed    spirit    of    the 
assembly,  .... 

iii.  The  address  of  Ezra  to  the  assem- 

bled  people,      ....  164 

1.  A  declaration  of  their  sin,.  .   164 

2.  An  exhortation  to  repentance,    .   164 
iv.  The   declaration   of   the   assembled 

people,      .         .         .         .         •  164 

1.  The  unanimity  of  their  determi- 

nation,     .         .         .         »         •  165 

2.  The  earnestness  of  their  deter- 
mination, .         •         .         •  165 

Reformation  effected,  the,       .         •         .167 
i.  Notwithstanding  difficulties,   .         .167 

1.  The  greatness  of  theundertaking,  167 

2.  The  inclemency  of  the  weather,     167 
ii.  Notwithstanding  opposition,   .         .  168 

iii.  With  exemplary  wisdom  and  fair- 
ness,   168 

1.  By  the  proper  authorities,  .  168 

2.  With  competent  and  reliable  wit- 

nesses,     .....  168 

3.  In  the  presence  of  the  accused,  .  168 

4.  With  due  regard  for  the  conve- 
nience of  the  people,         •         .168 

6.  With  careful  inquiry,  .         .  168 

iv.  Thoroughly,  .         .  .         .169 

Reformation  proposed,  the,     ,         .         .  1 58 
L  The   proposal   of    reformation   pre- 
pared for,  ....  158 
This  was  by  the  impression  which 
Ezra's  conduct  produced,  which 
was — 

1.  Sympathetic,     .         •         •        *  158 

2.  Extensive,  •  .  .  .158 
8.  Deep,         .         .         •         .         .   158 

ii.  The  proposal  of  reformation  made,  .  158 

1.  It  frankly  acknowledges  the  sin,   158 

2.  Discovers  reasons  for  hope,  .  158 
8.  Proposes  the  abolition  of  the  sin,  159 
4.  Summons  Ezra  to  take  the  lead 

in  abolishing  it,  .         .         .  159 

6.  Promises   co-operation    in    abo- 
lishing it,  ....   160 
iii  The  proposal  of  reformation  accepted,  160 

1.  It  was  accepted  influentially,      .  160 

2.  Extensively,       .         .         .         .160 

3.  Solemnly,  .         .         .         .160 
Release  of  the  Jews  from   Babylon  an 

illustration  of  the  redemption  of  man 
from  sin  (See  Redemption),       .        .     14 
Religious  service  (See  Service)        .         .     27 
Resemblance  between  the   proclamation 
of  Cyrus  and  the  Gospel,     ...       8 
i.  In  the  disposition  from  which  it  ori- 
ginated,       .....       8 

ii.  In   the   deliverance   which    it    an- 
nounced,     .....       8 

iii.  In  the  terms  which  it  specified,       .       8 

iv.  In  the  universality  of  its  offers,        .       8 

V.  In  the  aids  it  promised,  ...       8 

Restoration  of  the  sacred  vessels,  the,     .     19 

i.  The  preservation  of  the  sacred  yes- 

sels,     ......     19 

ii.  The  numeration  of  the  sacred  vessels,     20 

189 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX, 


iii.  The  restoration  of  the  sacred  vessels, 

1.  A  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  . 

2.  An  illustration  of  the  restoration 
of  perverted  things  to  their  true 
uses,  ..... 

Results  of  the  captivity,  the,  . 

i.  The  lesson  of  the  kingdom  was  com- 
pleted by  it,      . 
ii.   It  was  both  the  punisliment  and  the 

limit  of  their  idolatry, 
iii.  The  organisation  of  the  outward 
Church  was  connected  with  the 
purifying  of  doctrine,  and  served 
as  the  form  in  which  the  truth 
might  be  realised  by  the  mass,  . 
iy.  The  bond  by  which  the  people  was 
held  together  was  felt  to  be  reli- 
gious, not  local,  nor  even  pri 
marily  national,  .         . 

Resumed,  the  great  work  (See  Work), 
Return  of  the  exiles,  the, 

i.  The  company  who  returned,  . 

1.  They  were  of  various  classes, 

2.  Of  noble  character,    . 

3.  Exalted  in  purpose,   , 

4.  Comparatively  few  in  number, 
ii.  The  assistance  which  they  received 

1.  Was  general,      .         . 

2.  Spontaneous,     .         . 

3.  Honourable  to  both  givers  and 
receivers,  ..... 


PAGE 

20 
20 


20 
19 

19 

19 


19 


19 
71 
16 
16 
16 
17 
17 
17 
17 
17 
17 

17 


Samaritans,  the  success  of  the  subtle 
scheme  of  the,  or  the  temporary 
triumph  of  thevncked  (See  Triumph),     68 

Samaritans  to  the  Jews,  the  hostility  of 
the  (See  Hostility),        .         .         .61 

Samaritans  to  the  Jews,  the  proposal  of 

the  (See  Proposal),  .         .         .54 

Scriptures,  studying,  practising,  and  teach- 
ing the  (See  Studying),   .         .         .  107 

Search,    and   an  important  discovery,   a 

thorough,         .         .         .         .         .84 
i.  The  search  for  the  decree  of  Cyrus,      84 

1.  Was  thorough,  .  .         .         .84 

2.  And  successful,  .         .         .84 
Honest  iand  thorough  investigation 

promotes  the  interests  of  religion,     84 
ii.  The  discovery  of  the  decree  of  Cyrus,     84 

1.  That  the  Temple  should  be  re- 
built,        .         .         .         .         .84 

2.  That  the  expenses  begranted  from 
the  royal  revenues,    .         .         .85 

3.  That  the  sacred  vessels  be  restored,    9)5 
The  advantages  of  written  history,    85 

Seeking  the  Lord,  and  its  advantages,      .   134 
i.   Seeking  God,  and  its  advantages,     .   135 

1.  What  seeking  God  denotes,         .   135 
(1.)  A  consciousness  of  our  need 

of  Him,  .  .  .  .135 
(2.)  Earnest  prayer  to  Him,  .  135 
(3. )  To  come  to  Him  in  the  way 

of  His  appointment,  .  .135 
(4.)  To  labour  in  all  things  for 

His  approbation,         .         .  135 

2.  What  areithe  advantages  of  seek- 
ing God,  .         •        .         •         .  135 
190 


rAOB 

His  hand  upon  us  for  our  good,     135 
ii.  Forsaking  God,  and  its  evils,  .         .135 

1.  What  it  is  to  forsake  God,  .   135 

2.  What  are  the  evils  of  so  doing,  .   1 36 
Sequence,  Divine,  .  .  .  .  .110 

i.  Diligent  searching  for  the  law   of 

God, 110 

ii.   A  hearty  doing  of   the  discovered 

will, 110 

iii.  Then  may  we  teach  the  law  of  the 

Lord, 110 

Service,  religious,    .         .         .         .         .27 
i.   There  are  various  spheres  of  service 

in  the  Church 27 

ii.   The  humblest  of  these  is  a  place  of 

privilege  and  honour,         .  .     28 

iii.  The  privilege  of  this  service  is  not 
limited  to  any  particular  races  or 
classes  of  men, .  .         .         .     28 

Sin,   the  good   man's  confession   of   the 

people's  (See  Confession),       .        .147 
Sin,    the    good    man's  sorrow   over   the 

people's  (See  Sorrow),     .        .        .  143 
Sinning,   arguments  against  (See  Argu- 
ments),     80 

Sorrow  over  the  people's  sin,  the  good 

man's 143 

i.  The  painful  communication  made  to 

Ezra 143 

1.  Of  a  great  sin  committed, .         .143 

2.  Of  the  pre  valence  of  this  sin,      .  144 

3.  Of  the  aggravations  of  the  sin,  .  144 
ii.  The  effect  of   this  communication 

upon  Ezra,         .         .         .         .144 

1.  Great  amazement,      .         •         .144 

2.  Deep  grief,         .         .         ,         .144 

3.  Intense  moral  indignation,  .  145 
iii  The    effect    of    Ezra's    grief    upon 

others,      .         .         .         ,  .146 

1.  It  excited  their  alarm,        .  ,145 

2.  It  attracted  them  to  him,  .  .  145 
Sovereign  and  the  duty  of  subjects,  the 

desire  of  a  (See  Desire),  .         .         .90 
Studying,    practising,   and   teaching  the 

Sacred  Scriptures,    ....  107 
i.  The  acquisition  of  Divine  truth  for 

himself 107 

ii  The  embodiment  of  Divine  truth  in 

his  life, 107 

iii.  The  communication  of  Divine  truth 

to  others,  .         ,         .         .108 

Suggestive  record,  a  (See  Rboord),  .     25 

Supremacy  of  God,  the,  .         .         .78 

i.  The  supremacy  of  God,   .         .         .78 

1.  Its  ground,         .         •         •         .78 

2.  Its  extent,  .         •         •         .78 
ii.  The  obligation  of  man,   •        .        .79 

To  obey  Him — 

1.  Completely,       .         •         •         .79 

2.  Perpetually,       •         .         •         .79 

3.  Heartily 79 

4.  Joyously,  .         •         •         •         .     79 
iii  The  privilege  of  man,     .         ,         .79 

Surrender  of  important  trusts,  the  faith- 
ful,   140 

i    A     sacred     trust     faithfully    die- 

oharged, 140 


ANALYTICAL  INDEX, 


FAOE 

1,  With  minute  accuracy  and  rever- 
ent care, ^^^ 

2.  With  a  grateful  sense  of  relief,  .   141 
ii.   Divine  worship  devoutly  offt-red,     .   141 

1.  An  acknowledgment  of  sin,  .   141 

2.  An  expression  of  thankfulness,   .  141 

3.  An  indication  of  the  unity  of  the 
twelve  tribes,    ....   141 

iii.  The  royal  letters  duly  delivered,      .   141 

1.  An    evidence   of   loyalty  to  the 
Persian  government,  .          .   14:1 

2.  An  evidence  of  their  supreme  re- 

gard for  Jehovah,      .  .  .141 

IV.   Valuable  help  promptly  rendered,      141 

Teaching  the  Scriptures,  studying,  prac- 
tising, and  (See  Studying),      .         .  107 

Temple,  laying  the  foundation  of  the  (See 
Foundation),  .        •        •        .46 

Temple  of  God,  the  true  builders  of  the 

spiritual  (See  Builders),  .         .     59 

Temple,  the  building  of  the  (See  Build- 
ing),         ^^ 

Temple,  the  completion  of  the  (See  Com- 
pletion),   91 

Temple,  the  dedication  of  the  (See  Dedi- 
cation),   95,  101 

Temple,  the  dedication  of  the  second 
(See  Dedication),    .        .        .     _   •  100 

Temple,  the  preparations  for  rebuilding 

(See  Preparations),        .         .         .     44 

Temple,  the  subserviency  of  a  faithful 
ministry  to  the  erection  of  God's 
spiritual  (See  Erection),  .         .     94 

Times,  Ezra  and  his  (See  Ezra),      .         .  130 

Triumph  of  the  wicked,  the  temporary, 
the  success  of  the  subtle  scheme  of 
the  Samaritans,  or,  ...     68 

L  The  letter  of  the  king,    ...     68 

1.  Suggests  that  the  subtlety  of  the 
wicked  frequently  obtains  a  tem- 
porary triumph  over  the  good,  .     68 

2.  That  one  generation  frequently 
suffers  through  the  sins  of  an- 
other,         68 

3.  That  the  cause    of   God   is  fre- 

quently reproached  and  hindered 
by  the  evil  conduct  of  some  of 
its  adherents,    .  .         .         .68 

ii.  The  action  of  the  Samaritans,  .         .68 

1.  Was  prompt,      .         .         •         .69 

2.  Personal,   .         .          .         •  .69 

3.  Powerful, 69 

Understanding,  men  of  (See  Men),       .  124 

Vessels,  the   restoration   of  the   sacred 

(See  Restoration),  ,         .         .         .19 

Wicked,  and  how  to  treat  them,  the  pro- 
posals of  the  (See  Proposals),  .     57 
Word  of  the  Lord,  the  fulfilment  of  the 

(See  Fulfilment),  ....       5 

Work   investigated   and    continued,    the 

great,       ......     73 

i  The  sacred  work  investigated  by  the 

secular  authorities,    .         .         .73 


FA«1 

1.  The  nature  of  the  investigation,      73 

2.  The  spirit  of  the  investigation,   .     73 
ii.  The  sacred  work  carried  on  through 

the  Divine  blessing,  .  .  .74 

1.  The  Divine  interest  in  the  work,     74 

2.  The    Divine    oversight    of    the 
work,        .         .         .         .         .74 

8.  The   Divine   inspiration   of    the 

workers,    .  .  .  .  .74 

4.  The    Divine    protection   of    the 

workers,    .....     74 

Work  of  the  day  done  in  the  day,  the      .     42 

Applicable  to — 

i.  Life  in  general,       .         .         .         .42 

ii.  Prosperity,       .         .         •         •         •     42 

iii.   Adversitv,       .         •         •         •         .43 

iv.   The  Sabbath,  ....     43 

V.   To  every  day,  .          •         .         .43 

Werk  resumed,  the  great         .         .         .71 

i.  The  inciters  to  the  work,  .        .•     71 

1.  Want  of  interest  in  the  work  is 

implied,    .  .         .          •         .71 

2.  Obligation  to  perform  the  work 

is  implied,         .         .         .         .71 

3.  Exhortations  to  resume  the  work 

are  given,  .         .         .         .71 

ii.  The  leaders  in  the  work,  .         .     71 

1.  They  resumed  the  work  readily,      71 

2.  They  led  the  work  appropriately,     71 
iii.  The  helpers  in  the  work,  .         .         .72 

The  prophets  assisted  by — 

1.  Exhortations  to  vigorous  prose- 

cution of  the  work,  .         .         .72 

2.  Assurances   of    the   presence   of 

God  with  them,         .         .         .72 

3.  Promises  of  blessings  from  God 

to  them, « 2 

iv.  The  great  first  cause  of  the  work,    .     72 
Work,  the  letter  to  the  king  concerning 

the  (See  Letter),     .         .         .   ^      .     75 
Worship,  exemplary  features  of  Divine ; 

the  rebuilding  of  the  Altar,       ,         .     36 

i.  Unanimity  and  zeal,        .         .         .36 

ii.   Sacrifice, ^^ 

1.  Man's  need  of  atonement  with 

God,  .         .         .         .         .     36 

2.  Man's  duty  of  self-consecration 

to  God, 37 

iii.  Respect  for  precedent,     .         .         .37 
iv.  Conformity  to  Scripture,  .         .     37 

V.  Fear  of  enemies,       .          .         .         .37 

1.  Should  not  intimidate  us  from 
worship,   .         ...»     37 

2.  Should  impel  us  to  worship,       .     37 
vi.  Regularity,     .         .         .         .         .37 

1.  Our    daily   need   of    atonement 
with  God,  .         .         .         .37 

2.  Our  daily  need  of  renewed  con- 
secration, .         .         .         •         ,38 

3.  And  of  renewed  blessings,  .         ,38 

Zeal,  good  cause  for  great,      .         .  .65 

i.  We  acknowledge  a  gracioUB  fact,  .     65 

ii.  A  duty  recognised, .         .         .  *     ^5 

iii.  A  course  of  action  pursued,     .  •     o7 


in 


A 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THB 


BOOK    OF    NEHEMIAH. 

(CHAPTERS   I.  TO   VI.) 


BY 

REV.  W.  H.   BOOTH,  REV.  J.   H.   GOODMAN. 

AND 

REV.  S.   GREGORY. 


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1892 


PREFACE. 

This  book  is  one  of  a  series  on  the  Old  Testament,  projected  by 
Mr.  R.  D.  Dickinson  of  Farringdon  Street.  The  object  of  the 
series  is  to  lend  occasional  aid  to  busy  men.  If  the  following 
pages  should  help  such  in  the  homiletic  treatment  of  an  unread 
Book  of  the  Bible,  they  will  have  accomplished  their  purpose. 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY 


OH 


NEHEMIAH. 


INTRODUCTION. 


I.  Biographical  Sketch.  Nehemiah  was  the  son  of  Hachaliah  (ch.  i.  1),  and 
brother  of  Hanani  (ch.  vii.  7).  His  father  had  not  availed  himself  of  the  permission 
to  return  to  his  fatherland,  withheld  probably  by  possessions  and  honours  acquired 
in  the  land  of  captivity.  He  was  apparently  of  the  tribe  of  Judab,  since  his 
fathers  were  buried  at  Jerusalem,  and  Hanani  his  kinsman  seems  to  have  been  of 
that  tribe  (ch.  ii.  3  ;  vii.  2).  Some  think  he  was  of  priestly  descent,  because  his 
name  appears  at  the  head  of  a  list  of  priests  in  Neh.  x.  1 — 8  ;  but  it  is  obvious 
from  ch.  ix.  38,  that  he  stands  there  as  a  prince,  and  not  as  a  priest.  The 
expression  in  v.  18,  that  Nehemiah  "offered  sacrifice,"  impKes  no  more  than  that 
he  provided  the  sacrifices.  Whilst  acting  as  cupbearer  in  the  royal  palace  at 
Shushan,  in  the  20th  year  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus,  or  b.  c.  446,  he  received 
tidings  of  the  mournful  and  desolate  condition  of  the  returned  colony  in  Judea, 
and  obtained  permission  of  the  king  to  make  a  journey  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  to 
act  as  lieutenant  or  governor.  Being  furnished  with  this  high  commission,  which 
included  letters  to  the  satraps  and  subordinates,  and  enjoying  the  protection  of  a 
military  escort  (ii.  9),  Nehemiah  reached  Jerusalem  in  the  year  b.  c.  446,  and 
remained  there  till  B.  c.  434,  being  actively  engaged  for  12  years  in  promoting 
the  public  good  (v.  14).  During  this  time  Nehemiah  refused  to  receive  his  lawful 
allowance  as  governor,  in  consideration  of  the  poverty  of  the  people,  and  moreover 
maintained  at  his  own  expense  a  table  for  150  Jews,  at  which  any  who  returned 
from  captivity  were  welcome.  He  returned  to  Persia  B.  c.  434,  but  hearing  of 
new  abuses  having  crept  in  during  his  absence  revisited  Judea,  where  he  effected 
various  reforms.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  he  remained  at  his  post  until  about  b.  c. 
405,  towards  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Darius  Nothus.  That  he  lived  to  be  an  old 
man  is  thus  quite  probable  from  the  sacred  history,  and  this  is  expressly  declared 
by  Josephus,  who  states  that  he  died  at  an  advanced  age.  Of  the  place  and  year 
of  his  death  nothing  is  known. 

II.  Authorship  of  Book.  Generally  attributed  to  Nehemiah.  Tlie  central  part 
(vii.  0 — xii.  31)  is  somewhat  different  in  style.     The  writer  does  not  speak  in  the 


INTRODUCTION, 


first  person  as  elsewhere,  and  there  seems  to  be  a  different  use  of  the  Divine  names, 
Jehovahy  Adonai,  Elohim.  These  differences  are  no  proof  against  Nehemiah's 
authorship.  The  same  feature  occurs  in  Daniel.  All  Old  Testament  writers  use 
documents  of  which  they  were  not  the  authors.  Chap,  vii.  6 — 73  is  professedly  a 
register  which  Nehemiah  found  and  inserted.  Chap,  viii — xi.  30,  may  have  been 
composed  by  Ezra  and  incorporated  by  Nehemiah  into  his  work.  Chap.  ix.  5 — 38 
is  a  prayer  probably  composed  by  Ezra,  and  chaps,  x.  1 — 27  ;  xi.  3 — 26  contain 
lists  of  names  doubtless  extracted  from  public  annals.  Chaps,  viii.,  ix.  3,  and  x. 
28,  xi.  2,  may  have  been  written  either  by  Nehemiah  or  some  contemporary 
Levite.  They  relate  to  priestly  matters  in  which  the  civil  governor  could  not 
appear  as  the  most  prominent  person. 

III.  Date  of  Book.  Probably  compiled  by  Nehemiah  after  the  32nd  year  of 
Artaxerxes.  Supposing  him  to  have  written  it  about  10  years  before  his  death, 
and  about  thirty  years  after  his  first  visit  to  Jerusalem,  we  arrive  at  the  year  b.  o. 
415,  at  which  time  it  would  be  possible  for  him  to  relate  and  describe  all  that  is 
contained  in  the  canonical  Book  of  Nehemiah. 

IV.  Object  of  Book.  Briefly  to  describe  what  Nehemiah  effected  at  one  time  by 
direct  personal  effort,  at  another  in  conjunction  with  Ezra.  As  Nehemiah's  efforts 
for  the  civil  welfare  of  the  people  were  but  a  continuation  of  those  by  which 
Zerubbabel  the  prince,  Joshua  the  high-priest,  and  Ezra  the  scribe  had  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  community  of  returned  exiles,  so  does  his  Book  form  the 
continuation  and  completion  of  that  of  Ezra,  and  may  be  regarded  as  its  second 
part  and  sequel.  It  is  not  only  similar  in  style,  but  has  the  same  historical  object, 
viz, — to  show  how  the  people  of  Israel  after  their  return  from  the  Babylonish 
captivity,  were,  by  the  instrumentality  of  Nehemiah,  fully  re-established  in  the 
Land  of  Promise. 

V.  Canonicity  of  Book.  Never  seriously  disputed.  Nowhere  quoted  in  the 
New  Testament.     Generally  included  in  the  Book  of  Ezra. 

VI.  Language  and  Style.  Similar  to  that  of  the  Chronicles  of  Ezra.  Some 
few  words  and  forms  are  not  found  elsewhere  in  Scripture,  but  the  general  Hebrew 
is  exactly  that  of  books  purporting  to  be  of  the  same  age.  Several  words  occur 
only  in  this  Book  as,  Sahvar  (to  inspect),  Mogal  (a  lifting  up),  Talialukak  (a 
procession),  Mikrah  (reading),  and  a  few  more.  The  text  of  Nehemiah  is  generally 
pure  and  free  from  corruption,  except  in  the  proper  names,  in  which  there  is 
considerable  fluctuation  in  the  orthography,  both  as  compared  with  other  parts  of 
the  same  Book,  and  with  the  same  names  in  other  parts  of  Scripture. 

VII.  Contemporaneous  History.  Samaritan.  The  Samaritans  were  nut 
descendants  of  the  ten  tribes,  but  a  purely  heathen  people  who  at  first  included 
Jehovah  in  the  number  of  their  gods,  and  by  degrees,  under  the  influence  of  their 
relations  with  the  Jews,  came  to  worship  him  as  the  only  true  God.  They  were 
not  however  recognized  by  the  Jews  as  having  any  part  in  God's  inheritance. 
Their  attitude  was  bitterly  hostile  to  the  Hebrews,  and  their  power  to  hinder 


INTRODUCTION. 


increased  by  the  fact  that  as  native  heathen  they  would  be  trusted  by  the  Persian 
monarch.  Sanballat  was  their  chief  at  this  time.  Hebrew,  Judea  was  thinly 
populated  by  the  returning  exiles.  Jerusalem,  an  open  village,  exposed  to  all  the 
attacks  of  its  neighbours.  The  temple  rebuilt  by  Ezra  was  still  unfinished.  A 
few  isolated  dwellings  existed  amidst  the  rubbish  which  lay  in  such  great  heaps 
about  the  city  that  the  way  round  it  was  impassable.  The  prophet  Malachi  closed 
the  Old  Testament  canon  towards  the  end  of  Nehemiah's  life.  Persian. 
Artaxerxes  I.  (surnamed  Longimanus,  on  account  of  his  long  hands)  was  king. 
Persia  was  in  its  zenith  of  splendour  and  power,  although  the  elements  of  decay 
were  already  beginning  to  work  in  the  empire.  Artaxerxes  had  come  to  the 
throne  through  the  assassination  of  his  father  Xerxes  by  Artabanus  the  chief  of 
the  guard.  At  the  instigation  of  Artabanus  he  put  his  brother  Darius  to  death  as 
the  murderer  of  his  father,  but  on  discovering  the  designs  of  Artabanus  against 
himself  he  slew  the  double  traitor.  He  then  subdued  a  revolt  headed  by  his 
brother  Hystaspes,  reduced  rebellious  Egypt,  and  made  peace  with  Greece.  The 
empire  then  enjoyed  a  period  of  quiet  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  culminating 
point  of  its  glory,  during  which  the  events  of  Nehemiah's  history  occurred. — 
Lange.  Roman.  Herodotus  flourished  B.  o.  450.  Rome  governed  by  Censors, 
and  Peloponnesian  war  b.  c.  431.  Roman  empire  was  rising  into  power.  Grecian. 
Pericles  flourished  at  Athens,  b.  o.  461 — 429.  Socrates,  Xenophon,  and 
Thucydides  were  contemporaneous  with  Nehemiah.  Plato  was  born  b.  o.  429, 
the  year  in  which  Pericles  died,  and  about  fourteen  years  before  Kehemiah's 
probable  death. 

VIII.  Contents  of  Book. 

1.  Analysis. 

(i)  Preparation  for  the  wall  building, 

1.  Nehemiah's  grief  and  prayer  (ch.  i.). 

2.  Nehemiah's  petition  to  the  king  (ch.  ii  1 — 8). 

3.  Nehemiah's  journey  (ch.  ii  9 — 11). 

4.  Nehemiah's  inspection  and  appeal  (ii  12 — 20). 

(ii)  77ie  wall  building. 

1.  The  stations  (ch.  iii.). 

2.  The  opposition  from  without  (ch.  iv.). 

3.  The  opposition  from  within  (ch.  v.), 

4.  The  craft  of  the  enemies  (ch.  vi.). 

6.  The  guarding  of  the  gates  (ch.  vii.  l^-4)» 
6.  The  genealogy  (ch.  vii  5 — 73). 

(iii)  Discipline  of  the  new  community. 

1.  The  public  reading  of  the  law  (ch.  viii  1 — 12), 

2.  The  preparations  for  the  feast  of  tabernacles  (ch.  viii  13 — 11). 

3.  The  feast  of  tabernacles  (ch.  viii.  17,  18). 

b2 


INTRODUCTION, 


4.  The  special  fast  (ch.  ix.,  x.). 

5.  The  distribution  of  the  inhabitants  (ch.  xi.). 

6.  The  Levitical  genealogy  (ch.  xii.  1 — 26). 

7.  The  dedication  of  the  walls  (ch.  xiL  27 — 43). 

(iv.)  Later  reforms. 

1.  Levitical  apportionments  (ch.  xii.  44 — 47). 

2.  Separation  from  strangers  (ch.  xiii.  1 — 3). 

3.  Nehemiah's  reforms  12  years  later  (ch.  xiii.  4 — 31). 

2.  Incidental  References, 

We  learn  incidentally  the  prevalence  of  usury,  and  of  slavery  as  its  consequence  ; 
the  judicial  use  of  corporal  punishment  (xiii.  25);  the  continuance  of  false 
prophets  (vi.  7,  12,  14);  the  restitution  of  the  Mosaic  provision  for  the  main- 
tenance of  the  priests  and  Levites,  and  the  due  performance  of  the  Temple  service 
(xiii.  10) ;  the  freer  promulgation  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  by  the  public  reading  of 
them  (viii.  1) ;  and  the  more  general  acquaintance  with  them  arising  from  their 
collection  into  one  volume,  and  the  general  stimulus  given  to  the  art  of  reading 
among  the  Hebrews  daring  their  residence  in  Babylon ;  the  reviving  trade  with 
Tyre  (xiii.  16)  ;  the  agricultural  pursuits,  and  wealth  of  the  Jews  (v.  11  ;  xiii.  5)  ; 
the  tendency  to  take  heathen  wives,  indicating  possibly  a  disproportion  in  the 
number  of  Jewish  males  and  females  (x.  30  ;  xiii.  3) ;  the  danger  the  Hebrew 
language  was  in  of  being  corrupted  (xiii.  24) ;  the  hereditary  crafts  practised  by 
certain  priestly  families,  e.  g.  the  apothecaries,  or  makers  of  sacred  ointments  and 
incense  (iii.  8),  and  the  goldsmiths,  whose  business  it  probably  was  to  repair  the 
sacred  vessels  (iii.  8/,  and  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  ancestors  of  the  money- 
changers in  the  Temple  (John  ii.  14) ;  and  statistics,  reminding  us  of  Domesday- 
Book,  concerning  not  only  the  cities  and  families  of  the  returned  exiles,  but  the 
number  of  their  horses,  mules,  camels,  and  asses  (vii.) — Smith.  The  list  of  returned 
captives  who  came  under  different  leaders  from  the  time  of  Zerubbabel  to  that  of 
Nehemiah  (amounting  in  all  to  only  42,360  adult  males,  and  7,337  servants),  which 
is  given  in  ch.  vii.,  conveys  a  faithful  picture  of  the  political  weakness  of  the 
Jewish  nation  as  compared  with  the  times  when  Judah  alone  numbered  470,000 
fighting  men  (1  Chron.  xxL  5).  This  explains  the  great  difficulty  felt  by  Nehemiah 
in  peopling  Jerusalem  with  a  sufficient  number  of  inhabitants  to  preserve  it  from 
assault  (vii.  3;  xi.  1).  It  is  an  important  aid  too,  in  understanding  the  subse- 
quent history,  and  in  appreciating  the  valour  and  patriotism  by  which  they  attained 
their  independence  under  the  Maccabees.  The  account  of  the  wall-building  contains 
the  most  valuable  materials  for  settling  the  topography  of  Jerusalem  to  be  found  in 
Scriptiire» 


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEEEMIAH, 


CHAPTEK  L 

Explanatory  Notes.]  1.  The  words]  (Heb.  Divray).  See  1  Kings  xi.  41,  where  the  same 
word  is  rendered  **  acts."  Hachaliah]  His  ancestral  home  was  Jerusalem  (ii.  3).  Hence  he  was 
probably  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Having  amassed  a  fortune,  and  gained  a  position  at  Susa,  he  was 
unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the  permission  to  return  to  his  fatherland.  By  his  influence  he  bad 
probably  opened  a  way  for  the  advancement  of  his  still  more  distinguished  son.  Chisleu]  The  third 
month  of  the  civil,  and  ninth  of  the  ecclesiastical  year,  coinciding  with  parts  of  our  November  and 
December.  In  the  twentieth  year]  That  is,  of  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  I.,  surnamed  Longimanus 
(Long-handed),  e.  c.  446.  Shushan]  Sometimes  called  Susa  or  Suses,  the  capital  of  Persia, 
situated  in  the  plains  of  the  Tigris,  was  from  the  time  of  Cyrus  the  winter  palace  of  the  king,  and 
residence  of  the  Court.  Xenophon,  Plutarch,  and  others,  mention  both  Babylon  and  Ecbatana  as  its 
seat  during  some  part  of  the  year.  The  province  of  Susiana  is  now  called  Kusistan.  Shuster,  its 
capital,  contains  15,000  inhabitants.  The  Susian  palace  was  a  magnificent  building,  remarkable  for 
its  "  pillars  of  marble,  its  pavement  of  blue,  red,  white,  and  black,  and  its  hangings  of  white,  green, 
and  blue,  which  were  fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and  purple  to  the  pillars"  (Kst.  i.  6).  The 
palace  was  furnished  with  couches  of  gold  and  silver,  on  which  the  guests  reclined  when  they 
banqueted.  The  drinking  vessels  were  also  of  solid  gold  (v.  7).  The  present  ruins  of  Susa  cover  a 
space  a  mile  square,  the  portion  of  which  near  the  river  Shapur  is  probably  "  Shushan  the  palace." 

2.  Hanani]  Brother  by  blood  relationship  (vii.  1),  afterwards  appointed  one  of  the  assistant 
governors  of  Jerusalem  (vii.  2).  That  had  escaped]  They  had  been  allowed  to  return  by  the  edict 
of  Cyrus  (Ezra  i.).  Came]  The  distance  from  Jerusalem  to  Susa  is  more  than  1000  miles,  and  at 
the  usual  rate  of  travelling  would  occupy  45  days.  In  winter  it  would  occupy  at  least  2  months. 
Ezra  with  his  caravan  was  four  months  on  his  journey  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  (Ezra  vii.  9). 

3.  The  wall  of  Jerusalem  is  broken  down]  In  ruins,  not  utterly  razed,  or  it  could  not  have  been 
built  in  52  days.  Nebuchadnezzar  had  broken  it  down  142  years  before  (2  Kings  xxv.  10),  and  tho 
attempt  to  rebuild  had  been  stopped  by  Smerdis  76  years  before  this  date.  4.  God  of  heavenj 
(Elohe-hash-shamayim),  a  phrase  not  confined  to  writers  of  Babylonish  period  (Gen.  xxiv.  3,  7  ; 
Jonah  i.  9).  It  distinguished  Jehovah  from  the  gods  of  earth  formed  of  material  substances.  The 
style  is  repeated  in  Rev.  xi.  13  (6  Qtoq  tov  ovpavov).  5.  Terrible]  Awe-inspiring  (Heb.  Norali). 
That  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy]  Lit.  "  that  keepeth  the  covenant  of  mercy,"  "  The  great  and 
terrible  God,"  is  borrowed  from  Dent.  vii.  21,  and  "  that  keepeth,"  &c.  from  Deut.  vii.  9.  6.  Let 
thine  ear  be  attentive,  &c.]  A  phrase  derived  from  Solomon's  prayer  fl  Kings  viii.  29).  Refers 
to  the  greater  attention  paid  by  the  ear  when  the  eyes  are  open  towards  the  source  of  the  sound. 
8.  The  word  which  thou  commandedst  thy  servant  Moses]  Not  the  words,  but  the  spirit  of  the 
promise,  is  given  (Lev.  xxvi.  39—42).  11.  The  king's  cupbearer]  (Heb.  Mashkeh,  one  who  gives 
to  drink.  Greek  qivoxoqq,  wine-pourer).  The  office  one  of  great  honour  and  confidence,  since  it 
gave  an  opportunity  of  being  near  the  king's  person.  It  gave  Nehemiah  an  opportunity  of 
increasing  his  fortune,  a  circumstance  which  afterwards  very  much  facilitated  iiis  mission.— 
Hengstenberg.  The  chief  butler  or  cupbearer  to  the  king  of  Egypt  was  the  means  of  raising 
Joseph  to  his  high  position.  Rabshakeh,  who  was  sent  by  Sennacherib  to  Hezekiah,  appears  from 
his  name  to  have  fulfilled  a  like  office  in  the  Assyrian  court. — Gesenius.  Cupbearers  are  also 
mentioned  as  amongst  the  attendants  of  Solomon  (I  Kings  x.  5  ;  2  Cliron.  ix.  4). 

HOMILETICAL  COJ^TENTS  OE  CHAPTER  I. 


Ver.  1 — 11.  Characteristics  of  a  True  Reformer. 

„  1.  Goodness  superior  to  Circumstances. 

„  2.  Aggressive  Benevolence. 

„  3.  The  baneful  consequences  of  Sin. 

„  4.  Unselfish  Sorrow. 

,,  4.  Fasting. 

,,  5 — 11,  Intercessory  Prayer. 

„  6 — 11.  Prayer  for  Church  Revival. 

„  6.  The  Majesty  and  Mercy  of  God. 


Ver.  6.  Importunity  in  Prayer. 

,,  7.  Forgotten  Sins  remembered. 

,,  8.  God's  Memory. 

,,  8,  9.  Punishment  and  Penitence. 

„  10.  Electing  Grace. 

„  10.  Modest  Goodness. 

„  11.   Unanswered  Prayers. 

„  11.  Man's  Equality  before  God. 


Characteristics  of  a  True  Reformer. 

i.  1 — 11.     The  words  of  Nehemiahy  the  son  of  Hachaliah, 

Nehemiah  the   civilian,   as   contrasted   with   Ezra   the   ecclesiastic,   is   brought 
lorward  in  this  Book  as  the  patriot  deliverer  of  his  people,     liis  training  had  fully 


6  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  i. 

qualified  him  for  the  onerous  position  he  was  called  to  occupy.  He  may  be 
regarded  as  a  typical  reformer.  No  blot  can  be  found  on  his  character,  no  guile  in 
his  spirit.     Note  concerning  this  typical  reformer  : 

I.  His  motives  are  pure.  Personal  ambition  is  sunk  in  desire  for  the  public 
good.  Selfish  motives  are  abandoned  for  generous  impulses.  Reward  is  un thought 
of.  Truth  and  freedom  are  sought  for,  oblivious  of  personal  gain.  1.  He  accepts 
royal  distinction  that  lie  may  advance  his  people^ s  interests.  He  had  risen  from  an 
exUe  captive  to  be  a  royal  cupbearer  by  the  force  and  moral  worth  of  his  character, 
in  spite  of  jealousy  and  an  alien  creed.  The  title  "  Tirshatha,"  or  commander,  had 
been  given  him,  and  he  became  one  of  the  most  powerful  subjects  of  the  Persian 
monarch.  This  honour,  though  won  by  personal  merit,  is  not  employed  in  the 
service  of  personal  ambition,  but  in  the  interests  of  his  oppressed  kinsmen  and 
fellow-citizens.  Royal  distinction  may  only  be  accepted  by  a  true  reformer 
conditionally,  (1)  That  no  vital  principle  is  sacrificed.  The  Jew  must  not  become 
a  heathen  either  m  morals  or  worship.  The  mandates  of  a  monarch  must  not 
override  the  monitions  of  conscience.  Truth  must  not  bow  to  expediency.  The 
knee  must  not  bend  to  either  Baal  or  Dagon.  The  *'  Golden  Image  "  cannot  be 
recognized,  even  though  the  fiery  furnace  be  the  alternative.  Nehemiah  sacrificed 
no  vital  principle  in  accepting  royal  favour.  He  remained  true  to  his  nation 
and  loyal  to  his  God.  He  was  known  as  a  sympathizer  with  the  cause  of  the 
oppressed  exiles.  The  deputation  from  Judea  came  to  him  openly  at  the  royal 
palace,  fearing  no  molestation.  Openly  he  received  and  welcomed  them.  Con- 
ditionally, (2)  That  it  is  made  subservient  to  his  people's  good.  Apart  from  this, 
Nehemiah's  exalted  separation  from  his  oppressed  fellow-countrymen  would  have 
been  unpatriotic  and  selfishly  mercenary.  At  Shushan  he  was  really  serving 
them  better  than  he  could  have  done  at  Jerusalem.  For  (1)  he  was  learning  the 
principles  of  government  at  the  very  seat  and  centre  of  the  most  powerful 
government  of  the  world.  In  the  royal  palace,  and  under  a  right  royal  sovereign, 
he  was  gaining  a  royal  spirit.  Thus  had  God  prepared  other  great  leaders  for 
their  life  work.  Joseph  and  Moses  in  the  court  of  Pharaoh  learned  lessons  which 
were  invaluable  to  the  chosen  seed.  (2)  He  had  access  to  the  monarch  himself. 
Such  a  boon  was  no  small  privilege,  and  eventually  led  to  events  of  the  utmost 
importance.  2.  He  employs  what  influence  he  may  possess  for  the  benefit  of  his 
people's  cause.  His  position  gave  him  considerable  influence  at  Court,  which  he 
wielded,  not,  as  most  would  have  done,  for  his  own  personal  aggrandizement,  but 
for  the  benefit  of  his  people's  cause.  Thus,  like  Joseph  and  Esther,  he  was  able  to 
influence  royal  decrees  in  favour  of  the  Hebrew  exiles.  Most  of  the  Jews  were 
unable  to  approach  Artaxerxes'  person,  but  the  office  of  Nehemiah  gave  him  an 
introduction  which  he  was  not  slow  to  use  for  his  country  and  people.  Some  have 
opportunities  of  usefulness  denied  to  others.  They  have  the  eye,  the  ear,  the 
favour  of  the  great.  They  should  use  these  not  for  selfish  purposes;  but  to 
mention  truths  which  elevated  persons  seldom  hear,  to  recommend  religion  which 
they  generally  misunderstand,  to  plead  for  those  who  are  seldom  represented  in 
royal  circles.  Personal  influence  is  one  of  the  talents  for  which  we  are  responsible 
to  God.  How  are  we  using  it  1  Jerome  tells  us  that  Nebridius,  though  a  courtier 
and  nephew  to  the  empress,  never  made  suit  but  for  the  relief  of  the  poor  afflicted. 
Terence,  one  of  the  generals  of  the  emperor  Valens,  being  bidden  to  ask  what  he 
would,  asked  nothing  but  that  the  Church  might  be  delivered  from  her  Arian  foes. 
Thereupon,  says  Theodoret,  the  emperor  tore  into  shreds  his  petition  and  bid  him 
ask  again,  when  he  replied  he  would  never  ask  anything  for  himself  if  he  might 
not  prevail  for  the  Church.  3.  He  is  always  7xady  to  relinquish  personal  luxury 
for  the  public  good.  If  he  enjoys  honour  and  emolument  on  his  brethren's  behalf, 
the  moment  their  interests  demand  their  surrender  the  sacrifice  must  be  made. 
Herein  consists  difference  between  genuine  and  spurious  patriotism.  The  one 
delights  ia  self-sacrifice  ;  the  other  feeds  on  ambition.     Such  self-denial  is  required 


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTABY:  NEHEMIAH, 


(1)  if  the  suffering  can  be  the  better  served.  Hitherto  it  had  not  been  so.  The 
time  had  now  come  when  Nehemiah  can  only  serve  them  by  coming  amongst 
them.  Duty  summoned  him  from  the  ease  and  luxury,  to  the  privation  and 
ceaseless  toil  of  Jerusalem,  and  he  "  conferred  not  with  flesh  and  blood,"  but  gave 
up  all  at  once.  Such  self-denial  is  required  (2)  if  personal  honour  be  associated 
with  the  people's  oppression.  The  true  patriot  cannot  serve  two  master-^,  or  be 
loyal  to  two  antagonistic  principles.  If  the  sovereign  be  a  tyrant,  his  place  is 
with  the  people.  The  side  of  the  oppressed  is  alike  the  side  of  justice  and  of 
mercy.  The  bread  of  luxury  is  then  mildewed  with  the  tears  of  the  slave,  and 
the  wine  of  the  banquet  mingled  with  the  blood  of  the  rack.  Thus  are  all  faithful 
servants  of  God  called  upon  to  lay  down  their  goods,  and  their  lives,  if  need  he^  in 
defence  of  the  Church.  For  this  cause  Isaiah  gave  his  body  to  be  sawn  asunder. 
For  this  cause  Jeremiah  was  cast  into  a  filthy  dungeon,  and  Daniel  into  a  den  of 
lions.  For  this  cause  Paul  pleaded  his  cause  in  chains  at  Jerusalem  and  Rome 
before  Festus,  Felix,  and  Agrippa  ;  and  Jesus  before  Annas,  Caiaphas,  Herod, 
and  Pilate ;  and  for  this  cause  John  the  Baptist  lost  his  head.  He  that  will  lose 
his  life  thus  shall  certainly  find  it.  In  this  respect  Nehemiah  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
who  *'  though  he  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  became  poor,  "  &c.  (2  Cor.  viii.  9). 

Illustration : — Turner,  the  greatest  of  English  landscape  painters,  had  a  generous  nature.  He 
was  one  of  the  hanging  committee  of  the  Royal  Academy.  The  walls  were  full,  when  Turner's 
attention  was  attracted  by  a  picture  sent  in  by  an  unknown  provincial  artist.  "A  good  picture," 
he  exclaimed,  "it  must  be  hung  up  and  exhibited."  "Impossible,"  responded  the  committee. 
"  The  arrangement  cannot  be  disturbed ;  quite  impossible,"  "  A  good  picture,"  reiterated  Turner, 
"  it  must  be  hung  up ; "  and  finding  his  colleagues  as  obstinate  as  himself,  he  took  down  one  of  his 
own  pictures  and  hung  up  this  in  its  place. 

II.  His  sympathies  are  generous.     1.  His  ear  is  open  to  the  cry  of  distress. 
Though  rich  he  listens  attentively  to  the  story  of  woe  :  though  occupying  a  high 
position  he  gives  heed  to  the  wants  of  his  poorer  brethren.      Communion  and 
sympathy  are  the  instincts  of  a  true  and  genuine  patriotism.     Nehemiah  was 
not  a   mere  passive   listener,   for  he  "  asked  them  concerning   the   Jews."     He 
entered   into    particulars,    and   was   minute   in  his   inquiries.      The   inquiry   of 
an    uninterested    or    half-interested    person,    would    have    been   alike   curt   and 
cursory.     Court  life  and  duties  had  not  deadened  his  human  sympathy.     *'  The 
good  man  heareth  the  cause  of  the  poor,"  says  Solomon  (Prov.  xxix.).     The  duty 
of  every  good  man  to  consider  his  complaint,  and  pity  and  help  him.     2.  His 
heart  is  deeply  affected  by  the  tidings  ivhich   he   receives.      "  The   remnant   are 
in  great  affliction  and  reproach,"   &c.      The  tidings  were  not  entirely  new,  but 
probably   sadder    than   he   had    anticipated.      Hence    his   great   distress.       His 
patriotism  not  a  mental  deduction  only,  but  a  mighty  passion  of  the  soul.     He  is 
not  only  a  human,  but  a  humane  being.     A  prince,   a  commander  he  may  be ; 
put  pre-eminently  a  man  and  a  brother.      "  The  enthusiasm  of  humanity  "  was  not 
unknown  even  in  this  remote  age.     Here  is  (1)  a  sudden  outburst  of  generous 
sympathy  and  sorrow.     "  I  sat  down  and  wept."     Passionate  grief  usually  the  least 
enduring.     Not  so  this.     (2)  Sorrow  increasing  rather  than  diminishing  as  time 
wears  on.     *'  I  mourned  certain  days,"  i.  e.  four  months,  from  November  to  April. 
Here  is  another  Eachel  weeping,  &c.  ;  another  Jeremiah  exclaiming  "  Oh  that  my 
head  were  waters,"  &c.  (Jer.  ix.  1).     (3)  Sorrow  accompanied  by  abstinence  from 
food.     *'  And  fasted."     This  another  mark  of  the  reality  and  pungency  of  his  grief. 
Ahab  may  go  to  the  mountain-top  to  eat  and  be  merry.     Elijah  must  go  into 
solitude,  and  pour  out  his  complaint  to  God.     David  finds  '*his  heart  is  smitten 
and  withered  like  grass,  so  that  he  forgets  to  eat  his  bread  "  (Ps.  cii.  4).     A  sorrow 
that  rolls  in  luxury  and  revels  in  delightsome  pleasure  and  appetizing  food  is  but  a 
poor  counterfeit.     3.  He  resolves  to  identify  himself  with  the  came  of  the  oppressed. 
His  sympathy  does  not  effervesce  in  tears.     His  will  is  won,  and  he  at  once  sets 
about  planning  their  relief.     A  true  reformer  must  not  stand  aloof.     Isolation  is 


6  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap,  i 

the  law  of  selfishness.  Association  is  the  secret  of  influence.  The  plans  he  forms 
may  involve  the  sacrifice  of  all,  a  long  and  perilous  journey,  and  even  the  monarch's 
frown,  but  he  shrinks  from  nothing  that  can  advance  his  people's  cause. 

Illustrations : — At  the  siege  of  Mons,  during  the  career  of  the  great  Marlborough,  the  Duke  of 
Arj^yle  joined  an  attacking  corps  when  it  was  on  the  point  of  shrinking  from  the  contest ;  and  push- 
ing them  open-breasted  he  exclaimed,  "  You  see,  brothers,  I  have  no  concealed  armour :  I  am 
equally  exposed  with  you:  I  require  none  to  go  where  I  refuse  to  venture.  Remember  you  fight  for 
the  liberties  of  Europe,  which  shall  never  suffer  by  my  behaviour."  This  spirit  animated  the 
soldiers.  The  assault  was  made,  and  the  work  was  carried. — Fercy.  "  Sympathy  is  a  debt  we  owe 
to  sufferers.  It  renders  a  doleful  state  more  joyful.  Alexander  the  Great  refused  water  in  a  time 
of  great  scarcity,  because  there  was  not  enough  for  his  whole  army.  It  should  be  amongst  Chris- 
tians, as  amongst  lute-strings,  when  one  is  touched  the  others  tremble.  Believers  should  be  neither 
proud  flesh,  nor  dead  flesh." — Seeker. 

III.  His  spirit  is  devout.  Nehemiah  no  godless  reformer  seeking  for  his  country- 
men emancipation  from  an  alien  yoke  and  nothing  more.  He  sought  the  moral,  as 
well  as  the  material  welfare  of  the  chosen  seed.  1.  He  recognizes  the  existence  and 
authority  of  the  icoiid's  Guardian  and  Governor.  He  who  seeks  to  eliminate  God 
from  human  affairs  is  no  true  patriot.  This  not  a  mere  dogma,  but  a  regulative 
principle  with  Nehemiah.  Divine  sovereignty  not  fiction,  but  solemn  fact.  He 
believed  in  a  God  of  Providence.  *'  To  own  God  as  fashioning  every  link  in  the 
complicated  chain  of  our  history  ;  to  discern  his  hand  in  the  least  as  well  as  in  the 
greatest ;  to  realize  a  Providence  which  overrules  what  is  evil,  as  well  as  orders 
what  is  good,  a  Providence  which  restrains  the  unwilling  whilst  it  leads  the 
obedient,  a  Providence  so  transcendent,  that  none  and  nothing  can  thwart  it,  so  minute, 
that  none  and  nothing  can  escape  it,  a  Providence  which  directs  the  insect's  wing 
and  the  atom's  flutter,  as  well  as  the  planet's  course  and  the  archancrel's  flight,  to 
do  this  clearly,  constantly,  experimentally,  is  an  attainment  in  the  Divine  life  as 
rare  as  it  is  precious.  AVe  must  interweave  these  assurances  with  the  tissue  and 
texture  of  our  lives  ;  they  must  enter  as  an  essential  element  into  the  formation  of 
our  purposes,  and  into  the  conduct  of  our  pursuits.  It  is  thus  that  we  must 
'walk  with  God.'" — Stowell.  2.  He  acknowledges  Divine  aid  to  be  superior  to  all 
other.  (1)  As  the  most  powerful  of  all.  If  Omnipotence  be  on  his  side  nothing 
can  withstand.  So  reasoned  l^ehemiah.  Hence  he  flies  to  the  source  and  fountain- 
head  of  all  power.  He  appeals  to  the  throne  of  the  universe  before  appealing  to 
any  lower  tribunal.  He  who  enlists  the  aid  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth  commands 
not  only  myriads  of  ministering  spirits,  but  all  the  forces,  destructive  and  benignant, 
of  the  universe.  (2)  As  controlling  all  other  aid.  Nehemiah  will  presently  approach 
the  earthly  monarch,  whose  spirit  is  in  the  hands  of  the  King  of  kings.  This  he 
knows,  hence  seeks  Divine  assistance  in  makinj.r  successful  suit.  He  desires  God's 
aid  that  he  may  ask  (a)  for  the  right  thing,  (b)  at  the  right  time,  (c)  in  the  right  manner. 
He  who  thus  seeks  human  interposition  through  Divine  agency  will  find  the  Divine 
Avill  working  in  his  favour  through  human  instrumentality.  No  aid  can  be  so 
effectual  as  that  of  Omnipotence.  3.  He  regards  prayer  as  the  appointed  means  by 
which  Divine  aid  is  to  be  secured.  Does  not  make  his  belief  in  the  omniscience  of 
Divine  Providence  a  ground  for  personal  indolence,  or  restraining  prayer.  The  true 
patriot  no  fatalist.  By  prayer  and  supplication  he  makes  known  his  request  unto 
God  (Phil.  iv.  6).  This  prayer,  recorded  for  our  instruction,  is  one  of  the  model 
prayers  of  the  Bible.  (1)  Reverent  in  its  attitude  towards  God  (v.  5).  (2)  Per- 
sistent in  pressing  its  suit  (v.  6).  (3)  Penitent  in  tone  and  temper  (v.  6,  7). 
(4)  Scriptural  in  argument  (v.  8,  9).  (5)  Child-like  in  spirit  (v.  10,  11). 
(6)  Definite  in  aim  (v.  11). 

Illustrations  : — Augustus  Caesar  possessed  such  an  attachment  to  his  country  that  he  called  it  his 
own  daughter,  and  refused  to  be  called  its  master,  because  he  would  rule  it  not  by  fear,  but  by  love. 
After  his  decease,  his  disconsolate  people  lamented  over  him,  saying,  "  0  would  to  God  that  he  had 
never  lived,  or  that  he  had  never  died."  A  Lacaedemonian  mother  had  five  sons  in  a  battle  that 
was  fought  near  Sparta,  and  seeing  a  goldier  that  had  left  the  scene  of  action,  eagerly  in(juired  of 


CHAP.  I.]               HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    NEUEMIATI.  9 

him  how  affairs  went  on.  **  All  your  five  sons  are  slain,"  said  he.  "  Unhappy  wretch ! "  replied 
the  woman  :  "  I  ask  thee  not  of  what  concerns  my  children,  but  of  what  concerns  ray  country." 
'•  As  to  that  all  is  well,"  said  the  soldier.  "Then,"  said  she,  *' let  them  mourn  that  are  miserable. 
My  country  is  prosperous,  and  I  am  happy."     {a)  A  great  chasm  opened  in  the  Roman  Forum, 

wAiich  the  "soothsayers  said  could  not  be  ^ed  but  by  that  which  was  most  valuable  to  the  State. 

Marcus  Curtius,  an  eminent  soldier,  mounted  his  war-horse,  and  full-armed  rode  into  the  gulf,  a 
noble  sacrifice  for  his  country. 

Goodness  Superior  to  Circumstances. 

i.  1.     /  was  in  Shushan  the  palace. 

I.  High  social  positions  are  not  the  ebb  of  disappointment  than  the  flood- 
generally  favourable  to  eminent  piety,  tide  of  success.  Most  reason  to  watch 
1 .  Because  luxury  and  liberty  tend  to  when  we  think  ourselves  most  secure.  A 
lust  and  licence.  Court  morals  are  pro-  poor  Christian  remarked  when  receiving 
verbially  corrupt.  When  wealth  to  unexpected  relief,  **  Oh  !  what  a  blessed 
purchase  is  united  with  authority  to  thing  it  is  to  be  poor,  that  one  may  see 
command,  selfish  ambition  and  sensual  the  hand  of  God  so  plain."  The  hand 
indulgence  too  often  ensue.  In  high  life  of  God  often  concealed  from  the  rich  in 
the  temptations  to  self-pleasing  are  the  very  affluence  of  its  gifts ;  whUst  to 
generally  too  strong  for  unaided  human  the  pious  poor  quite  naked.  Hezekiah 
nature.  Long  prosperity  breeds  a  plague  was  humbly  grateful  when  he  exclaimed 
of  dust,  as  does  prolonged  fair  weather  after  the  slaughter  of  the  hosts  of  Senna- 
in  the  Italian  valleys.  Dust  that  blinds  cherib,  "  The  living,  the  living,  he  shall 
the  eyes  of  the  soul,  and  chokes  the  spirit  praise  thee,  as  I  do  this  day"  (Isa. 
with  earthly  cares.  2.  Because  the  pride  xxxviii.  19);  yet  the  sad  record  of  his 
of  human  pomp  is  inimical  to  the  spirit  after  days  is,  "  But  Hezekiah  rendered 
of  true  religion.  Palaces  are  above  most  not  unto  the  Lord,  according  to  the 
places  theatres  of  human  exaltation  and  benefit  done  unto  him :  for  his  heart 
proud  display.  Eeligion  does  not  flourish  was  lifted  up"  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  25). 
amidst  human  pomp  and  pride.  By  the  "  It  was  as  much  as  we  could  do  to 
lowly  birth  of  the  Son  of  God,  heaven  keep  our  feet  upon  the  splendid  mosaic 
has  poured  its  contempt  upon  the  mere  floor  of  the  palace  Giovanelli,  at  Venice ; 
accidentals  of  greatness.  True  religion  is  but  we  found  no  such  difficulty  in  the 
by  the  very  humdity  of  its  nature  anta-  cottage  of  the  poor  glass-blower  in  the 
gonistic  to  the  spirit  of  the  world,  rear.  Observation  shows  that  there  is  a 
Nebuchadnezzar  could  not  withstand  fascination  in  wealth  which  renders  it 
this  spirit.  In  his  prosperity  and  pride  extremely  difficult  for  the  possessors  of 
he  exclaimed,  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon  it  to  maintain  their  equilibrium  ;  and 
that  I  have  built,"  &c.  (Dan.  iv.  30).  this  more  especially  where  wealth  has 
In  his  humiliation  he  regained  that  been  suddenly  acquired ;  then,  unless 
religion  which  he  had  lost  in  his  exalta-  grace  prevent,  pride,  aff'ectation,  and 
tion.  3.  Because  affluence  is  apt  to  beget  other  mean  vices,  stupefy  the  brain  with 
independence  of  God.  When  Jeshurun  their  sickening  fumes,  and  he  who  was 
waxed  fat  he  kicked  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  respected  in  poverty  becomes  despised  in 
When  God's  chosen  people  prospered  prosperity.  What  man  can  help  slipping 
they  forgot  God  (Isa.  li.  13  ;  Judg.  ill.  when  everybody  is  intent  on  greasing 
7).  A  sense  of  need  brings  men  near  his  ways,  so  that  the  smallest  chance  of 
to  God.  When  the  lap  is  full,  God  is  standing  is  denied  him.  The  world's 
forgotten.  Hence  the  words  of  Christ,  proverb  is,  **  God  help  the  poor,  for  the 
"  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  rich  can  help  themselves ; "  but  it  is  just 
riches,"  &c.  (Mark  x.  23).  Eich  men  the  rich  who  have  most  need  of  Heaven's 
have  often  to  be  made  poor  before  they  help.  Dives  in  scarlet  is  worse  ofi"  than 
will  acknowledge  God.  Merchant  has  Lazarus  in  rags,  unless  Divine  love  shall 
most  reason  to  watch  and  pray  in  the  uphold  hijii.'—Spurgeon.  4.  Because  the 
day  of  his  prosperity.     Easier  to  bear  multiplication  of  cares  tends  to  deaden 


10 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  I. 


spirituality.  Increase  of  wealth,  means 
increase  of  anxiety.  Milton  has  taught 
us  by  his  picture  of  the  man  with  the 
rauck-rake  that  secular  cares  readily 
become  all-engrossing,  and  turn  the  eyes 
away  from  the  crown  of  life.  The 
Hebrew  word  for  riches  signifies 
" heavy"  for  riches  are  a  burden,  and 
they  that  will  be  rich  do  but  load  them- 
selves with  thick  clay.  "There  is  a 
burden  of  care  in  getting  them,  of  fear 
in  keeping  them,  of  temptation  in  usifig 
them,  of  guilt  in  abusing  them,  of  sorrow 
in  losing  them,  and  a  burden  of  accounts 
at  last  to  be  given  up  concerning  them." 
— Henry.  "  As  poison  works  more 
furiously  in  wine  than  in  water,  so 
corruptions  betray  themselves  more  in 
a  state  of  plenty  than  in  a  state  of 
poverty." — Seeker.  Mr.  Cecil  called  to 
see  a  rich  hearer,  and  said,  "  I  under- 
stand you  are  very  dangerously  situated." 
The  man  replied,  "  I  am  not  aware  of  it." 
"  I  thought  it  probable  you  were  not, 
and  therefore  called  upon  you.  I  hear 
you  are  getting  rich  ;  take  care,  for  it  is 
the  road  by  which  the  devil  leads 
thousands  to  destruction."  5.  Because 
the  commands  of  an  earthly  monarch 
are  liable  to  clash  with  the  mandates  of 
Jehovah.  The  earthly  king  who  has  no 
fear  of  God  before  his  eyes,  will  not  be 
likely  to  respect  the  claims  of  a  Higher 
Court.  He  will  consequently  have  no 
conscience  for  sacred  things,  and  wiU  be 
likely  to  ignore  such  conscience  in  his 
subjects.  But  the  servant  of  Jehovah 
has  no  choice.  He  must  say  with  the 
noble  three,  *'We  will  not  serve  thy 
god  "  (Dan.  iii.  18);  and  with  Peter  and 
John,  "  Whether  it  be  right  in  the  sight 
of  God  to  hearken  unto  you  more  than 
unto  God,  judge  ye"  (Acts  iv.  19). 
With  Daniel  and  John  the  Baptist  he 
must  obey  God  rather  than  man,  though 
death  be  the  consequence.  Thus  is  the 
path  of  the  just  beset  with  perils  in  the 
high  places  of  power  and  pomp. 

Illustration  : — "  Philip,  Bishop  of  Heraclea, 
in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century  was 
dragged  by  the  feet  through  the  streets,  severely 
scourged,  and  then  brought  before  the  governor, 
who  charged  him  with  obstinate  rashness  in 
disobeying  the  imperial  decrees ;  but  he  firmly 
answered,  *  My  present  behaviour  is  not  the  result 
of  rashness,  but  proceeds  from  my  love  and  fear 


of  God,  who  made  the  world,  and  whose  com- 
mands I  dare  not  transgress.  I  have  hitherto 
done  my  duty  to  the  emperors,  and  am  always 
ready  to  comply  with  their  just  orders,  according 
to  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  but  I 
am  obliged  to  prefer  heaven  to  earth,  and  to 
obey  God  rather  than  man.'  The  governor  on 
hearing  this  speech  immediately  passed  sentence 
on  him  to  be  burnt,  and  the  martyr  expired, 
singing  praises  to  God  in  the  midst  of  the 
flames." 

II.  Piety  is  not  impossible  in  any 
position  of  life.  1.  Inward  grace  is 
stronger  than  outward  circumstances. 
The  temptations  to  slothful  ease  and  self- 
indulgence  may  be  fearfully  strong,  but 
not  stronger  than  Divine  grace.  The 
seductions  of  luxury  and  the  witchery 
of  pleasure  may  charm  with  enticing 
subtlety,  but  cannot  ensnare  the  man 
who  is  faithful  to  his  God,  and  like 
N'ehemiah  recognizes  "  the  good  hand  of 
his  God."  *'  Greater  is  he  that  is  in 
you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world  "  (1  Jno. 
iv.  4).  "In  the  world  ye  shall  have 
tribulation,  but  in  me  ye  shall  have 
peace "  (Jno.  xvi.  1 3).  Illustrate  by 
Bunyan's  picture,  in  the  Interpreter's 
house,  of  fire  on  which  Satan  poured 
water  and  Christ  oil.  *'  If  a  letter  were 
to  be  addressed  to  that  most  influential 
word,  circumstances,  concluding  thus : — 
*I  am.  Sir,  your  very  obedient,  humble 
servant,'  the  greater  part  of  the  world 
might  subscribe  it." — Horace  Smith.  2. 
The  God  of  providence  is  also  the  God  of 
grace.  Where  he  places,  there  he  can  and 
will  sustain.  If  God  puts  ITehemiah  into 
the  Persian  palace,  he  will  support  him 
there.  !N'owhere  are  faithful  witnesses 
more  needed  than  in  the  high  places  of 
the  earth.  The  nearer  the  fount  of  social 
influence,  the  greater  the  power  for  good 
or  evil.  Grace  is  adapted  to  providential 
circumstances. 

Illustration  : — The  trees  are  adapted  to  the 
demands  of  their  position.  The  fir  of  the 
northern  hills  defies  the  wintry  blast  by  reason 
of  its  strong  roots  which  penetrate  the  crevices 
of  the  soil.  The  tall  palms  send  their  roots 
down  three  feet  into  the  earth,  and  then  spread 
out,  securing  a  firm  anchorage,  and  are  able  to 
stand  the  sweep  of  the  desert  winds.  The  roots 
of  the  pine  are  spread  over  the  surface,  but  it 
grows  in  less  exposed  situations.  The  mangrove 
which  fringes  the  estuaries  and  lagoons  of  the 
tropics,  exposed  to  the  tides,  on  a  shifting  soil, 
supports  itself  by  sending  roots  from  its  trunk 
and  lower  branches  down  into  the  muddy  groondi 


CHAP.  I.] 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


11 


so  that  the  whole  has  the  appearance  of  a  tree 
propped  up  by  artificial  stakes.  We  may  infer 
that  a  like  adjustment  of  strength  to  situation 
pervades  the  moral  world. 

3.  Many  of  the  holiest  characters  in 
history  have  been  found  in  the  most 
unfavourable  situations.  Jov«?epli  in 
Pharaoh's  court  with  an  adulterous 
queen ;  Moses  in  the  same  court ; 
Obadiah  under  Jezebel  and  Ahab; 
David  exposed  to  the  evil  influence  of 
Saul;  Daniel  and  Mardocheus  in  the 
court  of  Ahasuerus ;  all  served  God  faith- 
fully though  exposed  to  the  most  trying 
ordeals.  In  the  ]^ew  Testament  we 
find  Christians  in  every  station  of  life ; 
Zenas  the  lawyer,  Erastus  the  chamber- 
lain, Paul  the  tent-maker,  Luke  the 
physician,  Zaccheus  the  tax-gatherer, 
Peter  the  fisherman,  and  Joseph  the 
carpenter.  Learn  from  this  fact,  (1)  not 
to  condemn  bodies  and  professions  of 
men  indiscriminately.  (2)  J^ot  to  make 
our  business  an  excuse  for  ungodliness. 
Some  lines  of  life  are  indeed  much  less 
favourable  to  morality  and  religion  than 
others ;  they  afibrd  fewer  helps  and 
more  hindrances  than  others ;  and  this 
consideration  should  powerfully  influence 
those  who  have  the  disposal  of  youth. 
But  where  .the  providence  of  God  places 
us,  the  grace  of  God  can  keep  us. 
"These,'*  says  God,  "had  the  same 
nature,  were  partakers  of  the  same 
infirmities,  and  placed  in  the  same 
circumstances  with  yourselves.  But 
they  escaped  *  the  corruption  that  is  in 
the  world,  through  faith.*  They  found 
time  to  serve  me.  *  Go  thou  and  do 
likewise.' "  —  Stowell.  "  Amidst  the 
sternest  trials,  the  most  upright 
Christians  are  reared.  The  Divine  life 
within  them  so  triumphs  over  every 
difiiculty  as  to  render  the  men,  above 
all  others,  true  and  exact.  What  a  noble 
spectacle  is  a  man  whom  nothing  can 
warp,  a  firm,  decided  servant  of  God, 
defying  hurricanes  of  temptation  I  *' — 
Spurgeon.  Grace  makes  itself  equally 
at  home  in  the  palace  and  in  the 
cottage.  No  condition  necessitates  its 
absence,  no  position  precludes  its  flourish- 
ing. One  may  compare  it  in  its  power 
to  live  and  blossom  in  all  places,  to  the 
beautiful  blue-bell  of  Scotland,  of  which 
the  poetess  sings  : — 


"  No  rock  is  too  high,  no  vale  too  low, 
For  its  fragile  and  tremulous  form  to  grow  : 
It  crowns  the  mountain  with  azure  bells, 
And  decks  the  fountain  in  forest  dells  : 
It  wreathes  the  ruins  with  clusters  grey, 
Bowing  and  smiling  the  livelong  day." 

III.  Positions  perilous  to  piety 
should  be  avoided  except  at  the 
special  call  of  Providence.  1.  Material 
prosperity  should  always  be  regarded  as 
subordinate  to  spiritual  vitality.  (1)  It 
really  is  so.  It  matters  little  what  be 
our  position  in  this  world.  It  matters 
everything  what  is  our  position  in  the 
next.  "What  shaU  it  profit,"  &c. 
(Mark  viii.  36).  Things  which  are  seen 
are  temporal,  things  which  are  not  seen 
are  eternal "  (2  Cor.  iv.  18).  What  man 
thinks,  of  no  consequence  ;  what  God 
thinks,  everything.  The  life  of  earth, 
whatever  be  its  character,  soon  termin- 
ates ;  the  life  of  eternity  never.  (2)  He 
who  acts  upon  this  principle  gains  in  the 
end.  Lot  chose  the  fertHe  plain  of  Sodom, 
and  preferriQg  temporal  gain  lost  all. 
Moses  "  chose  rather  to  sufier  affliction 
with  the  people  of  God,"  &c.,  and  be- 
came their  chosen  leader  (Heb.  xi.  25). 
Solomon  asked  neither  long  life  nor 
riches,  but  he  lost  neither  in  choosing 
religion  (1  Kings  iii.  11).  (3)  Through 
neglecting  to  act  upon  this  principle  piety 
has  often  been  lost.  Many  a  worldly 
marriage  has  ruined  a  promising 
Christian.  Many  a  hopeful  life  has 
been  wrecked  upon  the  rocks  of  un- 
curbed ambition.  He  who  places  the 
world  first  and  heaven  second  will  soon 
make  ambition  everything  and  religion 
nothing.  "  Caligula  with  the  world  at 
his  feet  longed  for  the  moon,  and  could 
he  have  gained  it,  would  have  coveted 
the  sun.  It  is  in  vain  to  feed  a  fire 
which  is  the  more  voracious  the  more 
it  is  supplied  with  fuel.  He  who  seeks 
to  satisfy  his  ambition  has  before  him 
the  labours  of  Sisyphus,  who  rolled  up  a 
hill  an  ever-rebounding  stone,  and  the 
task  of  the  daughters  of  Danaus,  who  are 
condemned  for  ever  to  fill  a  bottomless 
vessel  with  buckets  full  of  holes.  Could 
we  know  the  secret  heart-breaks  of 
those  who  have  forsaken  religion  for  the 
sake  of  gratifying  ambition,  we  should 
need  no  Wolsey's  voice  crying,  *  Fling 
away  ambition,'  but  should  flee  from  it 


IS 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY :   NE BE  Ml  AH, 


[chap.  I. 


as  from  the  most  accursed  blood-sucking 
vampire  which  ever  uprose  from  the 
caverns  of  hell."  —  Spurgeon.  Pope 
Adrian  VI.  had  this  inscription  on  his 
monument,  "  Here  lies  Adrian  VI.,  who 
never  was  so  unhappy  in  any  period  of 
his  life  as  at  that  in  which  he  was  a 
prince."  2.  No  one  has  a  right  to  tempt 
God  by  unnecessarily  exposing  himself 
to  temptation.  This  sin  of  presumption, 
against  which  Paul  warned  Corinthians 
(1  Cor.  X.  9).  Christ  met  it  in  the 
wilderness  in  the  form,  "  Cast  thyself 
down."  God  wiU  not  protect  those  who 
rashly  presume  upon  his  guardianship. 
Mockery  to  pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into 
temptation,"  if  we  run  into  it  unbidden. 
When  we  needlessly  expose  ourselves 
we  entice  sin  and  court  failure. 
"  Temptations  are  enemies  outside  the 
castle,  seeking  entrance."  If  there  be  no 
false  retainer  within  who  holds  treach- 
erous parley,  there  can  scarcely  be  even 
an  offer.  No  one  would  make  overtures 
to  a  bolted  door,  or  a  dead  wall.  It  is 
some  face  at  the  window  that  invites 
proffer.  The  violence  of  temptation 
addressed  to  us  is  only  another  way  of 
expressing  the  violence  of  the  desire 
within  us.  It  costs  nothing  to  reject 
that  which  we  do  not  wish  :  and  the 
struggle  required  to  overcome  temptation 
measures  the  strength  in  us  of  the 
temptable  element.  Men  ought  not  to 
say,  **How  powerfully  the  devil 
tempts ! "  but,  "  How  strongly  I  am 
tempted."  —  Beecher.  3.  Providence 
will  protect  those  whom,  it  calls  to 
perilous  duty.  (1)  The  path  of  duty 
is  sometimes  a  path  of  danger.  Chris- 
tian visitors  at  home  endanger  their 
lives  amongst  the  poor,  and  Christian 
missionaries  abroad  amongst  the  heathen. 
Not  only  bodies,  but  souls  are  endangered 
through  the  prevalence  of  surrounding 


vice,  which  Christian  workers  must  come 
into  contact  with.  (2)  Special  guardian- 
ship is  exercised  over  those  whose 
providential  path  is  one  of  danger. 
God  wiU  not  leave  them.  Disciples 
in  storm  were  not  deserted  because  they 
had  gone  at  Christ's  bidding.  Nehemiah, 
Daniel,  Joseph  were  untainted  by  court 
life  because  they  were  surrounded  by 
Jehovah's  Shield.  (3)  We  should  be 
careful  not  to  mistake  presumption  for 
providential  guidance.  Many  have  done 
so  and  fallen.  Peter  walking  on  the 
water  an  instance. 

Illustration  : — A  gentleman  who  wished  to 
test  the  character  of  some  men  who  had  offered 
themselves  for  the  situation  of  coachman,  took 
them  to  a  narrow  road  which  bordered  on  a  deep 
precipice,  and  inquired  of  them  how  near  to  the 
dangerous  verge  they  could  drive  without  fear. 
One  named  a  few  inches,  another  still  fewer. 
The  gentleman  shook  his  head,  and  dismissed 
them.  He  could  not  risk  his  life  with  them.  A 
third  was  asked,  "  How  near  this  edge  can  you 
drive  in  safety?'*  He  drew  back  replying,  "  I 
should  drive  as  far  from  it  as  possible.  The 
place  is  dangerous.  I  should  avoid  it  alto- 
gether." He  was  employed,  because  he  could  be 
trusted  not  to  run  into  needless  peril. 

Illustration  : — A  soldier  named  Miller  felt  a 
strong  desire  to  be  a  minister  though  still  uncon- 
verted. After  his  conversion  he  felt  a  renewal 
of  this  desire.  In  the  battle  of  Wilderness  he 
was  badly  wounded,  and  remained  24  hours  on 
the  field.  The  surgeon  refused  to  operate  upon 
him,  because  death  was  inevitable.  He  was 
removed  to  Fredericksburg,  again  examined,  and 
his  wounds  pronounced  fatal.  To  a  friend  he 
said,  *'  The  surgeon  says  I  must  die  ;  but  I  do 
not  feel  that  my  work  is  done  yet.  When  I  gave 
myself  up  to  God  last  winter  I  promised  him  that 
I  would  labour  for  his  cause  in  the  Gospel 
ministry.  I  feel  that  he  has  a  work  for  me  to 
do,  and  that  man  is  immortal  until  his  work  is 
done. "  A  few  days  after  a  third  consultation  of 
doctors  was  held,  whose  decision  was,  "  You  will 
recover ;  but  it  is  the  most  miraculous  escape  we 
have  ever  seen."  After  many  months'  confine- 
ment he  was  able  to  begin  his  preparation  for  the 
ministry. 


Aggressive  Benevolencb. 
i.  2.     /  asked  them  concerning  the  Jews,  ^c. 


I.  True  Benevolence  is  an  active 
principle.  1.  It  seeks  that  it  may  save 
the  lost.  Not  content  with  remaining 
at  home,  it  goes  after  the  suffering. 
Xehemiah  not  altogether  ignorant  of 
state  of  Jews,  nor  accurately  acquainted 


with  it.  He  solicits  particulars.  Goes 
out  of  his  way  to  discover  need  that  he 
may  assist  it.  The  close  cross-examina- 
tion to  which  deputation  were  subjected 
proved  the  thorough  earnestness  of 
questioner.     Christ    great   example    of 


OHAP.    I.] 


IIOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAH, 


13 


active  benevolence,  alike  in  the  whole 
work  of  redemption,  and  the  details  of 
his  mortal  life.  The  Church  works  in 
same  spirit.  It  comes  "not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  b  it  to  minister."  The 
true  Christian  cries  out,  "  The  love  of 
Christ  d  )th  me  constrain,  to  seek  the 
wretched  sons  of  men,"  2.  Its  motive 
therefore  is  love  rather  than  duty. 
Benevolence  without  love  is  cold  as 
ashes.  Uncharitable  charity  a  ghastly 
mockery.  Stern  duty  seldom  prompts 
true  charity.  This  must  spring  from 
love  alone.  Benevolence  follows  the 
example  of  him  who  "  was  rich,  but 
for  our  sakes  became  poor,"  &c.  A 
child  lookinof  into  the  face  of  a  lady 
who  had  relieved  and  nursed  her  in 
sickness  artlessly  asked,  *'  Are  you 
G-od's  wife "? "  God  is  love,  and  true 
benevolence  is  lovin<]jly  God-like. 

n.  True  Benevolence  is  not  deterred 
from  painful  investigation  throug^h 
fear  of  possible  sacrifices.  1.  It  seeks 
to  hnow  the  worst.  Nehemiah  not 
satisfied  with  superficial  knowledge. 
He  probed  the  national  sore.  True 
bimevolence  acts  in  the  same  spirit.  It 
fathoms  the  abyss  that  it  seeks  to  close ; 
it  probes  the  wound  it  seeks  to  heal. 
(1)  Philanthropy  deals  with  the  worst 
human  ailments.  It  shrinks  from  no 
contagion,  and  shuns  no  patient  however 
loathsome.  Its  home  is  the  hospital  and 
fever  ward.  (2)  It  grapples  with  the 
blackest  facts  of  human  history,  and 
sheds  light  upon  darkest,  foulest  blots 
in  human  nature.  Nothing  daunts, 
nothing  drives  it  to  despair.  For  the 
most  hopeless  there  is  hope ;  for  the 
worst  there  is  mercy.  (3)  It  seeks  to 
alleviate  the  direst  sufferings  of  the 
Church.  No  breach  too  wide  to  be 
healed.  No  Church  too  dead  to  be 
revived.  No  persecutions  too  cruel  to 
be  endured.  It  seeks  not  to  heal  lightly 
or  suddenly,  but  thoroughly.  2.  It 
shrinks  from  no  sacrifice.  Nehemiah 
was  aware  that  he  could  not  relieve  his 
brethren  without  great  personal  sacrifice. 
Not  only  wealth,  but  probably  position, 
and  perhaps  even  life,  would  have  to  be 
surrendered.  This  did  not  deter  him. 
Self-sacrifice  the  mark  of  true  benevo- 
lence.    Hireling  charity  shuns  this  test. 


(1)  Money,  (2)  Time,  (3)  Personal  am- 
bition all  freely  given  up  for  the  sake 
of  the  suffering  Church. 

Illustration  : — When  a  teacher  was  wanted  by 
Dr.  Mason  of  Burraah  for  the  war-like  Bghais, 
he  asked  his  boatman,  Sbapon,  if  he  would  go ; 
and  reminded  him  that  instead  of  the  fifteen 
rupees  a  month  which  he  now  received,  he  could 
only  have  four  rupees  a  month  as  teacher.  After 
praying  over  the  matter  he  came  back ;  and  Dr. 
Mason  said,  "Well,  Shapon,  what  is  your  de- 
cision ?  Can  you  go  to  the  Bghais  for  four  rupees 
a  month  ?"  Shapon  answered,  *'No,  teacher  :  I 
could  not  go  for  four  rupees  a  month  ;  but  /  can 
do  it  for  Christ.''    And  for  Christ's  sake  he  went. 

III.  True  Benevolence  is  not  easily 
discouraged.  1.  It  regards  no  case 
as  ahsohdely  hopeless.  Jerusalem  and 
its  inhabitants  were  in  a  pitiable  plight, 
yet  Nehemiah  did  not  sit  down  in 
despair.  He  wopt,  it  is  true,  but  he 
prayed,  and  for  four  months  he  continued 
to  pray  with  an  importunity  that  nothing 
could  discourage.  Humanity  may  be 
very  corrupt,  but  not  hopelessly  so.  The 
Church  may  be  at  a  low  ebb,  but  the 
lowest  ebbing  point  is  nearest  the 
flowing  point.  The  night  was  very  dark, 
but  'tis  ever  darkest  before  the  dawn. 
Benevolence  knows  that  what  is  impos- 
sible with  man,  is  possible  with  God. 
(1)  It  helps  not  only  the  needy,  but  the 
most  needy.  (2)  It  believes  in  the 
possible  regeneration  of  human  nature, 
however  degraded.  (3)  It  believes  in 
the  possible  revival  of  the  Church,  how- 
ever encrusted  with  superstition  or 
formalism.  2.  It  recognizes  the  infinite 
resources  of  Jehovah.  If  looked  earth- 
ward only,  been  discouraged.  Would 
have  exclaimed  mournfully,  *'  Who  is 
sufficient,"  &c.  But  looking  heavenward 
its  eye  rests  upon  the  unspeakable  riches 
of  God  in  Christ.  Eemembering  the 
Divine  omnipotence  it  has  no  fear.  It 
remembers  the  infinite  resources,  (1)  of 
Divine  pity,  (2)  of  Divine  power,  (3)  of 
Divine  pardon.  None  need  despair,  even 
when  enojacjed  in  the  most  arduous  work 
for  such  a  master  as  God.  (a)  His 
wealth  is  boundless.  The  universe 
belongs  to  him.  (6)  This  infinite  wealth 
is  treasured  up  for  the  benefit  of  his 
needy  servants.  (c)  This  boundless 
wealth  is  accessible  to  all  who  need  it, 
and  apply  in  faith. 


14 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    Nt:HEMtAB. 


[OHA^.  1. 


Illustrations: — (a)  "It  is  said  of  the  Lace- 
daemonians, who  were  a  poor  and  homely  people, 
that  they  offered  lean  sacrifices  to  their  gods;  and 
that  the  Athenians,  who  were  a  wise  and  wealthy 
people,  oflfered  fat  and  costly  sacrifices ;  and  yet 
in  their  wars  the  former  always  had  the  mastery 
over  the  latter.  Whereupon  they  went  to  the 
oracle  to  know  the  reason  why  those  should  speed 
worst  who  gave  most.  The  oracle  returned  this 
answer  to  them — That  the  Lacedaemonians  were 
a  people  who  gave  their  hearts  to  their  gods,  but 
that  the  Athenians  only  gave  their  gifts  to  their 
gods."  Thus  a  heart  without  a  gift  is  better 
than  a  gift  without  a  heart. — Seeker. 

St.  Theresa,  when  commencing  her  homes  of 
mercy  with  only  three  half-pence  in  her  pocket, 
said, "  Theresa  and  three  half-pence  can  do  nothing, 
but  God  and  three  half-pence  can  do  everything." 
Dr.  Judson  laboured  diligently  for  six  years  in 
Eurmah  without  baptizing  a  convert.  At  the 
end  of  three  years,  he  was  asked  what  evidence 
he  had  of  ultimate  success.  He  replied,  "  As 
much  as  there  is  a  God  who  will  fulfil  all  his 
promises."  A  hundred  churches  and  thousands 
of  converts  already  answer  his  faith.  We  will 
suppose  that  some  opulent  person  makes  the  tour 
of  Europe.  If  his  money  fall  short  he  comforts 
himself  with  the  reflection  that  he  has  a  sufficient 
stock  in  the  bank,  which  he  cau  draw  out  at  any 
time  by  writing  to  his  cashiers.  This  is  just  the 
case  spiritually  with  God's  elect.  They  are 
travellers  in  a  foreign  land  remote  from  home. 
Their  treasure  is  in  heaven,  and  God  himself  is 


their  banker.  When  their  graces  seem  to  be 
almost  exhausted,  when  the  barrel  of  meal  and 
cruse  of  oil  appear  to  be  failing,  they  need  but 
draw  upon  God  by  prayer  and  faith  and  humble 
waiting.  The  Holy  Spirit  will  honour  their  bill 
at  first  sight;  and  issue  to  them  from  time  to 
time  sufficient  remittances  to  carry  them  to  their 
journey's  end.  *' I  have  heard  of  a  Spanish 
ambassador,  who,  coming  to  see  the  treasury  of 
Saint  Mark  in  Venice,  fell  a-groping  at  the 
bottom  of  the  chests  and  trunks,  to  see  whether 
they  had  any  bottom  ;  and  being  asked  the 
reason  why  he  did  so,  answered,  "  My  Master's 
treasure  differs  from  yours,  and  excels  yours  in 
that  his  have  no  bottom,  and  yours  have."  All 
men's  mints,  bags,  purses,  and  coffers  may  be 
quickly  exhausted  and  drawn  dry ;  but  God  is 
such  an  inexhaustible  portion  that  he  can  never 
be  drawn  dry:  all  God's  treasures,  and  his  mints 
and  his  bags,  are  bottomless.  Thousands  of 
millions  in  heaven  and  earth  feed  upon  him  every 
day,  and  yet  he  feels  it  not :  he  is  still  giving, 
and  yet  his  purse  is  never  empty  :  he  is  still 
filling  all  the  court  of  heaven,  and  all  the 
creatures  on  earth,  and  yet  he  is  a  fountain  that 
still  overflows.  There  are  some  who  say,  that  it 
is  most  certainly  true  of  the  oil  at  Rheims,  that 
though  it  be  continually  spent  in  the  inauguration 
of  the  kings  of  France,  yet  it  never  wastes  :  but 
whatever  truth  is  in  this  story,  of  this  I  am  most 
sure,  that  though  all  the  creatures  in  both  worlds 
live  and  spend  continually  on  Christ's  stock,  yet 
it  never  wasteth. — Brooks. 


The  Baneful  Consequences  of  Sin. 
L  3.     The  remnant  that  are  left  .  .  .  are  in  great  affliction  and  reproach^  ^c. 


This  state  of  things  would  never  have 
come  to  pass,  but  for  the  disobedience 
and  idolatry  of  the  children  of  Israel.  It 
was  the  natural  and  inevitable  fruit  of 
their  own  sin.  Not  mere  unfortunate 
calamity,  but  punitive  and  penal  dis- 
cipline.    From  the  text  we  learn, — 

I.  That  sin  brings  misery  upon 
human  souls.  *'In  great  affliction," 
i.  e.  misery,  want,  privation.  Suffering 
always  follows  sin  in  the  nature  of 
things.  1.  BecaiLse  sin  is  a  violation  of 
law.  Sin  transgresses  the  eternal  law  of 
righteousness,  which  cannot  be  broken 
with  impunity.  Its  penalty  is  pain,  and 
eventually  death.  Law-breakers  every- 
where must  suffer.  (I)  See  this  in 
relation  to  laws  of  health.  Violate  those 
laws  by  unwholesome  food,  self-indulgent 
excesses,  absorption  of  poison,  and  de- 
rangement or  death  will  ensue.  (2)  See 
this  in  relation  to  the  laws  of  society. 
Ill-manners  provoke  exclusion.  None 
defy  these  rules  without  paying  penalty. 


(.3)  See  this  in  relation  to  national  laws. 
What  mean  our  courts  of  justice,  our 
prisons  and  penal  settlements,  but  that 
law  cannot  be  transgressed  without 
suffering  (jS).  2.  Because  sin  separates 
from  God.  Its  very  nature,  essence,  is 
antagonism  to  God.  Wherever  it  reigns 
it  produces  tastes  and  dispositions 
contrary  to  the  will  of  God.  Now  God 
is  the  author  of  all  happiness.  The 
opposite  of  happiness  is  misery.  Man 
severed  from  God  like  branch  cut  from 
tree,  or  limb  torn  from  body.  The  man 
who  has  not  made  peace  with  God  can- 
not be  happy,  because  the  "  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him."  No  real  peace 
when  hostile  to  God.  3.  Because  sin 
creates  discord.  Where  there  is  discord 
there  is  misery.  Sin  works  discord — 
(I)  In  the  individual.  It  stirs  up  evil 
passions  against  the  reign  of  conscience. 
No  internal  peace  until  the  Stronger  has 
cast  out  the  strong  man  armed  who 
usurps  his  place  in  the  heart.     Chiist 


CHAf.    I.J 


UoMtLETlC  COMMENTARY :    NEHEMIAB, 


15 


alone  can  "  say  to  our  warring  passions, 
peace."  (2)  In  the  Church.  It  provokes 
ei^mity  between  man  and  man,  and 
different  secti(ms  of  the  one  great  body  of 
Christ.  (3)  In  the  world.  It  lifts  up 
tlie  war  sign,  and  mingles  nations  in  the 
bloody  embrace  of  strife.  When  sin 
comes  to  an  end  men  shall  learn  war  no 
more.  Want  of  harmony  always  painful. 
Inharmonious  colours  pain  the  eye,  and 
inharmonious  sounds  jar  upon  the  ear. 
All  discord  is  the  enemy  of  peace  and 
pleasure. 

II.  Sin  brings  reproach  upon  the 
Church.     "  In   great  affliction  and^  re- 
proach.''    The  Jews  were  not  only  in  a 
desolate  condition,  but  were  taunted  by 
the  Samaritans  with  being  in  that  con- 
dition.    "  Sin  a  reproach  to  any  people  " 
(Prov.  xiv.  34),  especially  to  the  Church 
— for,   1.  It  destroys    her  power,  and 
paralyzes  her  efforts.    Spirituality  secret 
of  Church's  power.     Stripped    of  this, 
she  is  like  Samson  shorn  of  his  locks. 
An  unholy  Church  is  a  mournful  spec- 
tacle, a  miserable  ruin.     The  Church  at 
Jerusalem  was  now  demoralized  through 
her   unspirituality  and  want   of   faith. 
2.  It  provokes  the  taunts  of  blasphemy. 
Church's  enemies  always  vigilant.^    Did 
not  hesitate  to  throw  insinuation  in  her 
teeth.     "Where  is   now   their   GodT' 
"  As  it  is  a  pitiful  sight  to  see  a  prince 
or  nobleman  cast  from  his  dignity,  spoiled 
of  his  honour,  lands,    and   goods,  and 
forced  to  become  a  carter,  and  drive  the 
plough,  or  lie  in  prison;  so  surely  it 
must  needs  move  any  heathen  man,  to 
see  the  city  where  he  and  his  elders  were 
born  and  buried  to  be  overthrown,  lie 
open  to  all  enemies,  unfenced  with  waUs 
or  gates,  and  inhabited  only  by  a  few 
cottagers,  and  no  better  than  the  poorest 
ragged  hamlet  in  the  country." — Pilking- 
ton.      3.  It  encourages   the  growth   of 
infidelity.  Sceptics,  both  intellectual  and 
sensual,  not  slow  to  point  to  Church's 
failure  in  support  of  their  boastful  pre- 
tensions.   Perhaps  the  Church's  failures 
and     discords     have     done      more    to 
strengthen  atheism  than  any  books  or 
arguments  levelled  against  religion. 

III.  Sin  removes  national  defences. 
'  The  walls  are  broken  down."  This 
material  dismantling  only  a  type  of  the 


national  demoralization  which  had  taken 
place.     1.    Unity  is  a  national  defence. 

(1)  A  nation  divided  against  itself  can 
no  more  stand  than  a  city,  whereas  a 
thoroughly  united  people  can  resist  al- 
most any  attack  from  without.  (2)  Sin 
undermines  national  unity  by  sowing 
discord  and  jealousy,  and  creating  party 
feeling.  It  sets  all  the  classes  of  society 
against  each  other  (masters  and  servants, 
landowner  and  labourer),  and  seeks  to 
stifle  charity  and  forbearance.  2.  Bodily 
vigour  is  a  national  defence.  (1)  It 
saves  from  poverty  in  time  of  peace. 
Strong  manhood  a  security  against  penury 
if  united  with  temperance  and  industry. 

(2)  It  enables  resistance  to  become  effect- 
ual in  time  of  war.     Sensuality  under- 
mines manhood,  and  unfits  for  arduous 
toil  in  peace  or  war.     Eefer  to  Franco- 
German  war  as  instance.     French  people 
were     socially     demoralized     by    vice. 
Their  manhood  was  undermined.      Ee- 
ligion  teaches  the  sanctity  of  the  human 
body,  and  thus  preserves  it  from  prema- 
ture corruption.     3.  Domestic  purity  is 
a  national  defence.     What  the  family 
life  is,  the  national  life  will  soon  become. 
Domestic  fidelity  begets  a  sense  of  re- 
sponsibility.   It  promotes  healthy  moral 
tone.     This,    backbone    of    a    nation's 
vi^^our.     Sin  encourages  lust  and  breaks 
down  all  social  barriers,  and  thus  robs  a 
nation  of  one  of  its  most  powerful  bul- 
warks.     4.  Force    of   character    is    a 
national  defence.     This  made  England 
what  she  is,  and  America.      It  is  this 
which  gives  weight  to  our  words  and 
actions  in  foreign  courts  and  countries. 
Force    impossible    where     sin    reigns. 
Why  1    Because  no  true  cohesion  where 
no  godliness.     An  unholy  life  is  under 
no    regulating    principle,    but    at    the 
mercy  of  passions  and  desires.    Where 
there  is  internal  anarchy,  and  no  central 
principle  of  rectitude  ruling  the  conduct, 
there  can  be  no  true  decision  or  moral 
force  in  the  life,  (a) 

IV.  Sin  dishonours  national  govern- 
ment. "  The  gates  thereof  are  burned 
with  fire."  City  gates  not  only  for  re- 
sistance, but  also  the  seat  of  government. 
There  the  assembly  of  chiefs  gathered ; 
there  criminals  were  tried  ;  there  justice 
was  administered,  and  important  subjects 


16 


riOMlLETlU  COMMENTARY:    NEiTEMlAH. 


[OHA^.   t. 


discussed.  Compare  "  Ottoman  Porte," 
where  word  for  gate  is  synonym  for 
government ;  also,  "  on  this  rock  will  I 
huild  my  church,  and  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  prevail  against  it."  Here 
"gates"  equivalent  to  kingdom.  The 
demolition  of  the  city  gates  suggests — 
1 .  Tliat  the  administration  of  justice  was 
neglected.  Crime  ran  riot.  There  was 
no  security,  no  confidence,  no  defence, 
therefore  none  dare  seek  redress  where 
none  could  be  obtained.  Bribery  and 
terrorism  the  offspring  of  lax  morality. 
The  moral  sense  deadened,  justice 
impossible.  2.  That  the  inroads  of 
enemies  were  unchecked.  No  barriers 
to  midnight  marauders.  Whole  nation 
manifestly  paralyzed  and  dispirited. 
National  honour  and  independence 
trodden  in  the  dust.  "  The  walls  are 
destroyed,  and  the  gates  burned,"  when 
the  rulers  and  ministers  do  not  their 
duty,  but  care  for  other  things.  And 
as  this  wretched  people  had  justly,  for 
their  disobedience,  neither  walls  left  to 
keep  out  the  enemy,  nor  gates  to  let  in 
their  friends,  but  were  all  destroyed ; 
so  shall  all  godless  people  be  left  with- 
out godly  magistrates  to  govern  them, 
and  live  in  slavery  under  tyrants  that 
oppress  them,  and  be  led  by  blind 
guides  that  deceive  them. — Pilkington. 
The  Jews  to  this  day  when  they  build 
a  house  (say  the  Rabbins)  leave  one  part 
of  it  unfinished  in  remembrance  that 
Jerusalem  and  the  temple  are  at  present 
desolate ;  or  they  leave  about  a  yard 
square  unplastered  on  which  they  write 
the  words  of  the  Psalmist,  "  If  I  forget 
Jerusalem,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxxxvii.) ;  or  else 
the  words,  "  Zechor  Lechorbon,"  "  The 
memory  of  the  desolation." 


V.  Sin  brings  a  blight  npon  the 
whole  land.  When  Adam  sinned,  the 
earth,  which  was  before  decked  with 
fruits,  brought  forth  weeds.  The  wicked- 
ness of  Sodom  punished  not  only  by  the 
destruction  of  its  inhabitants,  but  by 
the  desolation  of  the  land,  so  that  even 
the  air  is  so  pestilent  that  birds  fall  dead 
as  they  fly  over  it.  The  whole  country 
of  Palestine,  "  a  land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey,"  for  the  sins  of  the  Jews  has 
become  barren,  as  David  said,  "The  Lord 
turneth  a  fruitful  ground  into  a  barren, 
for  the  wickedness  of  the  dwellers  in  it" 
(Ps.  cvii.).  Jerusalem  was  not  only 
destroyed  now,  but  afterwards  by  Ves- 
pasian, whose  general,  Titus,  left  not 
"  one  stone  standing  on  another  "  (Matt. 
xxiv.  2).  "Herein  behold  the  vileness 
of  sin,  that  not  only  man,  but  the  earth, 
stones,  cities,  trees,  corn,  cattle,  fish,  fowl, 
and  all  fruits  are  perished,  punished  and 
turned  into  another  nature,  for  the  sin  of 
man  :  yea,  and  not  only  worldly  things, 
but  his  holy  temple,  law,  the  ark,  the 
cherubims,  mercy-seat,  Aaron's  rod,  and 
holy  jewels,  are  given  into  the  hands  of 
a  heathen  king,  because  of  the  disobedi- 
ence of  his  people." — Pilkington. 

Illustrations  : — (a)  When  Nicephoriis  Phocas 
had  built  a  wall  about  his  palace  for  his  own 
security  in  the  night-time,  he  heard  a  voice  crying 
to  him,  "  Oh  !  emperor,  though  thou  build  thy 
walls  as  high  as  the  clouds,  yet  if  sin  be  within 
it  will  overthrow  all." 

(j(3)  "  Suppose  I  were  going  along  the  street, 
and  were  to  dash  my  hand  through  a  large  pane 
of  glass,  what  harm  should  I  receive .''  You 
would  be  punished  for  breaking  the  glass.  Would 
that  be  all  the  harm  that  I  should  receive  ?  No, 
you  would  cut  your  hand  with  the  glass.  So  it 
is  with  sin.  If  you  break  God's  laws,  you  will 
be  punished  for  breaking  them ;  and  your  soul 
is  hurt  by  the  very  act  of  breaking  them." 


Unselfish  Sorrow. 
i.  4.     I  sat  down  and  wepty  and  mourned  certain  days. 


I.  The  occasion  of  his  grief.  "  When 
I  heard  these  words  I  sat,"  &c.  1.  Not 
personal  loss.  Men  mourn  when  death 
enters  the  home  and  robs  them  of  their 
loved  ones ;  when  privation  comes  and 
strips  them  of  their  luxuries  ;  when  dis- 
appointment blights  their  ambition; 
when  disease  or  accident  deprive  them 


of  vigorous  health.  NehemiaVs  grief 
not  caused  by  any  of  these  things.  He 
was  in  no  danger  at  present  of  losing 
either  friend,  or  substance,  or  good  name. 
Nor  would  he  thus  have  mourned  if  he 
had.  2.  Not  spiritual  despair.  He  cer- 
tainly discovered  imperfections  in  his  life 
not  before  observed,  but  nothing  to  drive 


CHAP.  I.] 


IIOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


17 


him  to  religious  despair.  Condemnation 
and  shame  follow  the  awakening  of  con- 
science. His  not  asleep.  Religious 
declension  had  not  estranged  him  from 
God.  He  had  walked  with  God  even 
in  the  palace,  3.  But  public  calamity. 
*'  When  I  heard  these  words  I  sat  down 
and  wept."  What  words  1  Those  by 
which  his  brother  had  just  described  the 
"  affliction  and  reproach "  into  which 
the  Church  at  Jerusalem  had  fallen. 
(1)  His  brethren  were  in  distress.  His 
human  sensibilities  not  bluJited  by  the 
formalities  of  court  life.  Poor  relations 
not  to  be  forgotten  when  fortune  favours 
us.  (2)  The  Church  was  desolate.  This 
as  important  to  a  good  man  as  if  his  own 
home  was  burnt  or  wrecked.  (3)  The 
holy  city  was  in  ruins.  Other  cities  had 
been  razed  to  the  ground,  and  he  felt 
no  grief  like  this.  Babylon,  a  much 
greater  city,  had  been  taken  by  Cyrus  not 
long  before ;  Samaria,  their  neighbour, 
by  Sennacherib  and  Shalmaneser.  But 
this  was  "the  holy  city"  (Matt.  iv.). 
Over  its  final  destruction  Christ  wept 
(Luke  xix.).  It  had  been  beautified 
with  temple,  priests,  and  holy  ordinances; 
and  strengthened  by  many  worthy 
princes  and  laws,  and  was  a  wonder  to 
the  world.  Its  fall  was  synonymous 
with  the  disgrace  of  true  religion. 
(4)  Sin  was  triumphant.  The  sin  of 
unbelief  and  moral  impotence  within, 
and  of  blasphemy  and  boastful  arrogance 
without.  Persecution  and  poverty  are 
the  Church's  glory ;  but  impotence  and 
discord  her  eternal  shame.  "  Where  is 
the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  1 "  her  enemies 
asked ;  and  in  bitter  irony  are  ever 
ready  to  exclaim,  '*  See  how  these 
Christians  love  one  another  ! "  When 
God's  cause  languishes  and  his  Church 
is  dishonoui'ed  it  is  time  for  good  men  to 
weep.  In  time  of  common  calamities 
**  Should  we  then  make  mirth'?  "  (Ezek. 
xxi.  10). 

Illustrations  : — "The  Romans  severely  pun- 
ished one  that  showed  himself  out  of  a  window 
with  a  garland  on  his  head  in  the  time  of  the 
Punic  war,  wlien  it  went  ill  with  the  common- 
wealth. Justinus,  the  good  emperor  of  Constan- 
tinople, took  the  downfall  of  the  city  of  Antioch 
hy  an  earthquake  so  much  to  heart  that  it  caused 
him  a  grievous  sickness,  a.  d.  527.  When  Pope 
ClemeDt  and  bis  cardinals  were  imprisoned  hy 


the  duke  of  Bourhon  in  St.  Angelo,  Caesar  in  Spain 
forhade  all  interludes  to  be  played.  In  England 
the  king  was  exceedingly  sorry,  and  Cardinal 
Wolsey  drained  the  land  of  twelvescore  thousand 
pounds  to  relieve  and  ransom  the  distressed  pope, 
for  whom  he  wept  grievously." — Trapp. 

II.  The  characteristics  of  Ms  gfrief. 

1.  It  was  intense.  "  I  sat  down  and 
wept."  Probably  he  had  stood  to  hear 
their  story.  Now  his  heart  melts  like 
wax.  His  grief  is  overwhelming.  Fall- 
ing into  his  seat  he  gives  vent  to  a  flood 
of  weeping.  Not  the  transitory  ruffling 
of  the  emotions,  nor  mere  sentimental 
sympathy  elicited  by  a  tale  of  woe. 
His  brethren's  sorrows  became  his  own. 
Jeremiah's  prayer  answered,  "  Oh  that 
my  head  were  waters,"  &c.  (Jer.  ix.  1). 
With  David,  he  "watered  his  couch  with 
his  tears."  The  sins  of  his  people  became 
in  some  measure  his  own.  In  this  see 
faint  type  of  Christ,  who  "  bore  our 
griefs,"  &c.  Faint  anticipation  of  that 
"  man  of  sorrows,"  who  "  offered  up 
prayers  and  supplications  with  strong 
crying  and  tears"  (Heb.  v.  7)  in  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane.  2.  It  was  en- 
duinng.  "And  mourned  certain  days." 
Not  the  evanescent  passion  of  superficial 
sorrow,  but  the  deep  soul-stirring  grief  of 
a  noble  and  generous  nature.  Blind  and 
violent  sorrow  generally  dies  away  like 
the  noisy  crackling  of  thorns  in  the  fire. 
Its  very  intenseness  makes  its  brevity. 
Grief  that  has  a  deep  and  abiding 
provocation  dies  not  thus.  It  contem- 
plates the  future  as  well  as  the  present. 
The  past  it  mourns,  but  seeks  help  for 
the  future.  Nor  can  it  be  appeased 
until  the  disgrace  is  wiped  away,  and 
deliverance  found.  Like  Mary,  it  waits 
at  the  sepulchre  until  the  angel  appears 
to  assure  it  of  the  resurrection  of 
buried  hopes.  3.  It  was  self-denying. 
"  And  fasted."  Not  the  comfortable  and 
self-indulgent  grief  that  makes  the  very 
sorrow  an  excuse  for  sottish  excess. 
All  such  grief  bears  a  lie  upon  its  face. 
The  mind  affects  the  body.  Severe 
mental  strain,  whether  of  agony  or 
rapture,  weakens  appetite  and  kiUs 
desire.  Real  heart-pain  is  alioays 
ascetic  in  its  bodily  aspect.  The  grief 
of  the  hypocrite  or  half-hearted  is  self- 
indulgent  and  short-lived  because  super- 
ficial.    The  grief  of  an  earnest  man  of 


18 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  r. 


truth  is  terrible  and  irresistible  because 
of  its  self-forgetfulness.  Fasting  is 
(1)  Often  associated  with  profound  grief 
in  Scripture  (2  Sam.  i.  12;  xii.  16 — 
— 21;  Ps.  XXXV.  13;  Ixix.  10;  Dan. 
vi.  8  ;  Jonah  iii.  5).  (2)  May  be  the 
natural  attendant  of  grief,  or  the  outward 
symbol  of  its  presence.  (3)  Is  recognized 
and  commended  in  Scripture  as  a  reli- 
gious exercise  (1  Sam.  vii.  6  ;  Jer.  xxxvi. 
9;  Matt.  vi.  17;  Acts  x.  30;  1  Cor. 
vii.  5). 

III.  The  issue  of  his  grief.  "  And 
prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven." 
Herein  consists  difference  between  godly 
and  selfish  sorrow.  The  one  ends  in 
blank  despair,  the  other  finds  relief  in 
prayer.  The  passionate  writhing  of  a 
rebellious  heart  dares  not  look  up.  It 
leads  to  suicide  and  madness.  ^Note,  1. 
Grief  is  sanctified  by  prayer.  Pain 
no  inherently  sanctifying  or  softening 
virtue.  Only  when  borne  in  faith  and 
godly  resignation  does  it  leave  a  blessing. 
It  then  becomes  sacred,  and  softens  the 
heart,  like  dew  upon  mown  grass,  or 
showers  on  the  thirsty  soil.  Submissive 
and  prayerful  sorrow  one  of  the  most 
gracious  experiences  that  can  happen  to 
man.  2.  Grief  is  relieved  by  prayer. 
"  Be  careful  for  nothing,  but  in  every- 
thing by  prayer  and  supplication,"  &c. 
(Phil.  iv.  6).  In  prayer  the  burden  is 
cast  upon  One  who  is  able  and  willing 


to  bear  it.  If  men  find  their  burdens 
and  anxieties  lighter  when  they  speak 
of  them  to  their  fellows,  surely  the  relief 
must  be  greater  when  they  unburden 
their  mind  to  God,  who  is  not  only 
willing,  but  able  to  succour.  Pent  up 
mountain  torrents  are  turbulent  and 
furious ;  open  streams  are  calmer,  and 
more  placid  in  their  flow.  3.  Grief  is 
made  fruitful  by  prayer.  Sorrow  with- 
out an  outlet  produces  not  good,  but 
harm.  It  renders  the  spirit  morose,  and 
comforts  no  mourner.  Only  when  grief 
is  poured  into  the  ear  of  God  can  it 
bear  any  good  fruit.  A  saint's  tears  are 
better  than  a  sinner's  triumphs.  Bernard 
saith  :  "  Lachrymse  poenitentium  sunt 
vinum  angelorum."  "  The  tears  of  pe- 
nitents are  the  wine  of  angels."  St. 
Lawrence  Justinian,  Patriarch  of  Venice, 
says  :  "  He  cannot  help  sorrowing  for 
other  people's  sins,  who  sorrows  truly  for 
his  own."  St.  Augustine  :  "  We  mourn 
over  the  sins  of  others,  we  suffer  violence, 
we  are  tormented  in  our  minds."  St. 
Chrysostom  :  "  Moses  was  raised  above 
the  people  because  he  habitually  deplored 
the  sins  of  others.  He  who  sorrows  for 
other  men's  sins,  has  the  tenderness  of 
an  apostle,  and  is  an  imitator  of  that 
one  who  said  :  "  Who  is  weak,  and  I 
am  not  weak]  Who  is  offended,  and  I 
bum  not  r'  (2  Cor.  xi.  29). 


Fasting. 
i  4.  And  fasted. 


I.  Occasions  of  fasting.  1.  Afflic- 
tions of  the  Church  (Nehemiah).  2. 
National  judgments  (Joel).  3.  Domes- 
tic bereavement  (David).  4.  Imminent 
danger  (Esther).  5.  Solemn  ordinances 
(Paul  and  Barnabas  set  apart). 

II.  The  design  of  fasting.  1.  To 
assist  penitence.  ''  To  afflict  the  soul," 
a  phrase  often  employed  in  connection 
with  abstinence  (Lev.  xvi.  29 ;  Isa. 
Iviii.  5).  Without  spiritual  repentance 
bodily  mortification  worthless,  and 
meaningless.  2.  To  mortify  bodily  lusts 
and  promote  heart  purity.  Fasting  not 
end,  but  means.  Not  essential  to  holi- 
ness;  only  an  accidental  of  our  fallen 
state.     No   fasting  in   heaven,  because 


no  fleshly  corruptions.  Without  falling 
into  Manichean  heresy,  which  makes  sin 
necessarily  inherent  in  the  human  body, 
we  must  regard  the  body  as  an  enemy 
to  spirituality.  Paul  did ;  hence,  *'  I 
keep  under  my  body,"  &c.  (1  Cor.  ix.  27). 
3.  To  humble  and  give  sympathy  loifh 
the  poor.  Opulent  classes  sympathize 
too  little  with  struggling  poor,  because 
do  not  understand  meaning  of  want.  If 
practise  occasional  abstinence,  and  really 
siiffer  hunger,  can  better  understand 
what  others  suffer  constantly. 

III.  The  duty  of  fasting.  1.  Forms 
part  of  general  principle  of  self-denial 
essential  to  true  discipleship.  "  If  any 
man  wUl  be  my  disciple  let  him  take 


CHAP.   I.] 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


19 


up  his  cross  daily,"  &c.  (Luke  ix.  23). 
This  duty  not  to  be  despised  because 
some  abuse  it.  Because  some  make  it 
meritorious,  no  reason  why  we  should 
neglect  it  altogether.  Most  sacred 
ordinances  (Lord's  Supper)  have  been 
most  grossly  jierverted,  and  most  gracious 
privileges  most  grossly  abused.  Counter- 
feits only  prove  the  value  of  true 
coin.  2.  ImpUedj  and  therefore  en- 
joined, by  words  of  Christ.  "This 
kind  goeth  not  out  but  by  prayer 
and  fasting"  (Matt.  xvii.  21).  3.  En- 
forced hj  the  example  of  Christ.  In  all 
things  he  our  pattern.  What  Christ 
sanctioned  by  his  own  act  cannot  be 
considered  as  either  superfluous,  or  super- 
stitious. Point  all  objectors  to  him.  4. 
Associated  in  Scripture  with  the  bestowal 
of  great  blessings.  Mneveh  spared  when 
the  inhabitants  prayed,  and  mourned, 
fasting  (Jonah  iv.  11).  Ahab  pardoned 
when  he  humbled  himself  with  fasting 
(1  Kings  xxi.  29).  Christ  promises 
heavenly  reward  to  those  whose  fasting 
is  sincere  (Matt.  vi.  16). 

IV.  The  manner  and  degree  of 
fasting.  1.  Sometimes  total  abstinence 
from  food  for  a  time  (Esther  iv.  16).  2. 
More  often  abstinence  from  superfluous 
food  (Dan.  x.  3). 

V.  The  spirit  in  which  to  fast.  1. 
With  sincere  humility.  Ostentation 
condemned  by  Christ  (Matt.  vi.  16). 
Uncharitableness  or  peevishness  often 
accompany  the  exercise  and  deprive  it 
of  all  sweetness  and  profit.  It  may 
become  a  source  of  pride  and  a  cover 
for  sin.  2.  With  true  repentance.  This 
the  essential  principle  of  all  abstinence. 
The  sacrifice  of  the  will  is  the  truth 
forthshadowed.  This  only  one  outward 
sign  of  the  complete  surrender  of  the 
will  in  all  things.  ^Nothing  meritorious. 
Only  means  to  an  end.     That  end  the 


complete  subjection  of  flesh  to  spirit,  of 
the  carnal  nature  to  the  spiritual.  If  it 
be  objected,  "  You  should  pay  attention 
to  the  weightier  matters  of  morality 
and  benevolence,"  we  reply  :  *'  These 
ought  ye  to  do,  and  not  to  leave  the 
others  undone."  These  outward  things, 
as  kneeling,  weeping,  and  fasting,  are 
good  helps  and  preparations  unto  prayer. 
As  Sarah  continued  three  days  in  fasting 
and  prayer,  that  the  Lord  would  deliver 
her  from  her  shame  (Tobit  iii.) ;  so 
Tobias  maketh  it  a  general  rule,  saying  : 
"  Prayer  is  good  joined  with  fasting." 
Ecclesiasticus  says  (xxx.  5) :  "  The 
prayer  of  him  that  humbleth  himself 
pierceth  the  clouds,  and  she  will  not  be 
comforted  until  she  come  nigh,  nor  go 
her  way  until  the  highest  God  have 
mercy  upon  her." 

Illustrations : — Keander  says,  '^Although  the 
early  Christians  did  not  retire  from  the  business 
of  life,  yet  they  were  accustomed  to  devote  many 
separate  days  entirely  to  examining  their  own 
hearts,  and  pouring  them  out  before  God,  while 
they  dedicated  their  lives  anew  to  him  with 
uninterrupted  prayers,  in  order  that  they  might 
again  return  to  their  ordinary  occupations  with 
renewed  zeal  and  earnestness.  These  days  of 
holy  devotion,  days  of  prayer  and  penitence, 
which  individuals  appointed  for  themselves,  were 
often  a  kind  of  fast  days.  They  were  accus- 
tomed to  limit  their  corporal  wants  on  those 
days,  or  to  fast  entirely.  That  which  was  spared 
by  their  abstinence  was  applied  to  the  support  of 
their  poorer  brethren." 

"There  are  Christians  whose  'flesh,*  whether 
by  its  quantity,  or  natural  temperament,  renders 
them  sluggish,  slothful,  wavering,  and  physically 
by  far  too  fond  of  the  *  good  things '  of  the 
table  and  the  wine-cellar.  That  sort  of  Chris- 
tian pressingly  needs  fasting,  ay,  thorough  fasting. 
Brave,  large-hearted  Martin  Luther  nobly  con- 
fessed his  need,  and  nobly  acted  it  out,  not 
without  strife  and  *  lusting.'  Of  fasting  as  a 
whole,  and  as  applying  to  all,  it  may  be  said 
that  while  it  has  been  perverted  into  a  pestilent 
superstition,  yet,  in  the  words  of  Bishop 
Andrews,  'There  is  more  fear  of  a  pottingerfiU. 
of  gluttony,  than  of  a  spoonful  of  superstition.* " 
— Grosart. 


Intercessory  Prayer. 

i  5 — 11.     And  prayed  before  the  God  ofheavm. 

Prayer  variously  designated  invocation^  petition,  supplication,  or  intercession, 
according  to  the  aspect  in  which  it  is  regarded.  The  subject  of  this  paragraph  is 
intercessory  prayer,  i.  e.  prayer  offered  by  one  human  being  on  behalf  of  another. 
That  such  intervention  is  admissible,  and  effectual  in  the  Divine  economy,  is  evident 
from  the  teaching  of  Scripture.  1.  It  is  frequently  enjoined  (Numb.  vi.  23—26  ; 
Job  xlii.  8;  Ps.  cxxii.  6;  Jer.  xxix.  7;  Joel  ii.  17;  Matt.  v.  44;  Ephes.  vi  18; 

o2 


20  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  i. 


1  Tim.  ii.  1  ;  Jas.  v.  14;  1  Jno.  v.  16).  2.  Illustrations  of  its  efficacy  abound. 
Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  18 — 20 ;  xviii.  23  ;  xx.  7 — 18).  Moses  (Exod.  viii.  12—31  ; 
ix.  33;  xvii.  11 — 13;  xxxii.  11 — 34).  Jacob  (Gen.  xlvii.  7;  xlix.).  David 
(2  Sam.  xii.  16).  Ezra  (ix.  3—15).  Job  (i.  5  ;  xlii.  10).  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii. 
20—23).    Peter  (Acts  ix.  40).     Paul  (Acts  xxviii.  8). 

I.  Here  is  intercessory  prayer,  based  upon  a  true  conception  of  the  Divine 
character.  1.  It  regards  him  as  the  majestic  rider  of  the  world.  "  0  Lord  God 
of  heaven,  the  great  and  terrible  God."  Great  in  power  and  government.  Terrible 
in  judgment  and  punishment.  Such  views  of  the  Divine  majesty  calculated  to 
inspire  reverence  and  wholesome  fear.  Would  check  any  tendency  to  presumption, 
and  place  the  suppliant  in  a  true  position  at  the  Divine  footstool  (Ps.  xcix.  5  ; 
cxxxii.  7).  ^.  It  regards  him  as  the  faithful  and  compassionate  Father  of  his 
children.  (1)  Faithful,  "  that  keepeth  covenant."  Some  parts  of  covenant  uncon- 
ditional; a  promise  concerning  seasons  (Gen.  viii.  22);  destruction  of  the  world 
(Gen.  ix.  14 — 17).  Some  conditional  upon  moral  conduct  (Josh.  vii.  11;  xxiii.  16). 
(2)  Compassionate,  '*and  mercy"  (Exod.  xx.  6).  (3)  To  his  children.  "Them 
that  love  him,  and  keep  his  commandments."  This,  beautiful  description  of  filial 
spirit.  The  motive  principle  and  the  manifest  conduct  both  indicated.  First, 
inward  affection,  "  that  love  him ; "  then,  outward  obedience,  "  that  keep  his  com- 
mandments." The  first  revealing  itself  by  the  second.  The  second  the  offspring 
of  the  first.  "  That  he  may  at  once  both  tremble  before  him,  and  trust  upon  him  ; 
he  describeth  God  by  his  goodness  as  well  as  by  his  greatness,  and  so  helpeth  his 
own  faith  by  contemplating  God's  faithfulness  and  loving-kindness." — Trapp. 

II.  Here  is  intercessory  prayer,  untiring  in  its  importunity  and  unselfish 
in  its  benevolence.  1.  Unwearied  in  its  importunity.  ''Which  I  pray  before 
thee  now  day  and  night "  (v.  6).  Four  months  elapsed  between  the  commencement  of 
his  intercession  in  Chisleu  (i.  1),  and  the  beginning  of  its  fulfilment  in  Nisan  (ii.  1). 
Night  and  day,  ^.  e.  unceasingly,  did  Nehemiah  press  his  suit.  Such  importunity 
sure  to  prevail.  Inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  commended  by  the  Saviour,  and 
encouraged  by  the  word  of  God,  it  cannot  fail  eventually  (Acts  xii.  5  ;  2  Cor.  xii. 
8  ;  1  Thess.  iii.  10).  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,"  &c.  (Matt.  xi. 
12).  Parable  of  the  unjust  judge  (Luke  xviii.  5).  Perseverance  necessary  not 
because  God  reluctant  to  hear,  but  because  men  are  slow  to  value  his  gifts.  When 
we  rightly  appreciate  God's  mercies  he  bestows  them  freely,  not  before.  The 
"Jews  divide  their  day  into  prayer,  work,  and  repast;  neither  will  they  omit 
prayer  for  their  meat  or  labour.  The  Mahommedans,  what  occasion  soever  they 
have,  either  by  profit  or  pleasure,  to  divert  them,  will  pray  five  times  every  day ; 
and  upon  the  Friday  (which  is  their  Sabbath)  six  times.  How  few  and  feeble 
are  our  prayers  in  comparison,  either  for  ourselves  or  our  brethren  in  distress." 
2.  Unselfish  in  its  benevolence.  Much  anguish  of  mind,  and  self-sacrifice,  accompanied 
the  urging  of  this  prayer.  Rest  forsook  his  frame  and  slumber  his  eyelids  (Ps. 
cxxxii.  4 ;  Prov.  vi.  4).  His  whole  soul  so  thoroughly  stirred  that  he  cared 
neither  for  sleep  nor  food.  Such  intercession  has  all  the  marks  of  sincerity,  and 
every  probability  of  success. 

III.  Here  is  intercessory  prayer,  accompanied  by  self-abasement  and 
contrition.  "  And  confess  the  sins  of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  we  have  sinned 
against  thee ;  both  I  and  my  father's  house  have  sinned  "  (v.  6).  From  the  spirit 
and  language  of  this  prayer  we  learn — 1.  Tliat  close  approaches  to  God  reveal 
unsuspected  moral  defects  in  the  character  even  of  good  men.  "  I  and  my  father's 
house  have  sinned."  Though  a  sincere  believer  and  servant  of  Jehovah,  Nehemiah 
now  discovered  and  remembered  personal  and  family  sins  which  bowed  him  to  the 
earth  in  sorrow.  The  more  closely  he  approaches  the  "  Holy  One  who  cannot  look 
upon  sin"  (Heb.  i.  13),  the  more  distinctly  and  painfully  does  he  perceive  his 
un worthiness  and  demerit.  Thus  was  it  with  Manoah  (Judg.  xiii.),  and  Isaiah 
(Isa.  vi.),  and  St.  John  (Eev.  i).     When  want  real  power  in  times  of  urgent 


CHAP.  I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  21 

need  they  discover  their  weakness.  When  darinf^  suppliants  press  up  to  the  steps 
of  the  mercy-seat  they  discover  stains  previously  unsuspected.  Comparatively 
innocent  they  may  be  (as  Nehemiah  was),  but  not  without  sin,  and  such  as  needs 
to  be  confessed  and  pardoned.  2.  That  the  disccvery  of  moral  defects  teaches  good 
men  their  common  depravity  and  mutual  need  of  Divine  mercy.  "  Confess  the  sins 
of  the  children  of  Israel  which  we  have  sinned  "  (v.  6).  He  discovers  that  in  God's 
sisjht  there  is  "  no  difference."  He  needs  mercy  and  deserves  wrath  as  much  as  they. 
Their  sins  are  identified  with  his  own.  The  suppliant  who  pleads  for  others'  sins, 
as  though  he  had  real  contact  with  them,  and  felt  their  burdensomeness,  will 
prevail.  He  who  pharisaically  thanks  God  that  he  is  not  as  other  men,  in  his 
prayers  will  not  succeed  much.  When  we  can  say,  "  of  whom  I  am  chief,"  God 
will  pardon  both  us  and  those  for  whom  we  intercede.  3.  Tliat  the  discovery  of 
moral  defects  deprives  good  men  of  all  right  to  intercede  for  others  on  the  ground  of 
their  own  merit.  The  holiest  may  not  approach  the  throne  of  Mercy  in  his  own 
name,  or  make  his  relationship  to  God  a  ground  of  appeal.  Only  one  name,  one 
plea,  wiU  avail.  The  name  and  blood  of  Christ  are  our  grounds  of  appeal.  The 
promise  and  character  of  God  were  theirs  of  old.  "  For  thy  name's  sake  "  was  the 
Old  Testament  form  of  '*  For  Christ's  sake  "  in  the  New.  When  ive  have  done  our 
utmost  we  are  only  unprofitable  servants  dependent  upon  Divine  forbearance,  and 
can  perform  no  works  of  meritorious  supererogation.  4.  That  the  discovery  of  moral 
defects  brings  good  men  into  that  state  of  humility  which  is  essential  to  success  in 
prayer.  "  To  that  man  will  I  look  ;  even  to  him  that  is  poor  and  of  a  contrite 
spirit,  and  trembleth  at  my  word"  (laa.  Ixvi.  2).  Self-sufficiency  renders  God's  arm 
powerless  to  hear  or  help.  Self-despair,  which  casts  itself  at  the  feet  of  God,  saying, 
"  If  thou  canst  do  anything,  have  compassion,"  is  sure  to  meet  with  a  ready 
response.  Human  weakness  commends  itself  to  Divine  omnipotence  and  compas- 
sion.    Our  impotence  is  our  strongest  recommendation  to  God. 

IV.  Here  is  intercessory  prayer  fortifying  itself  with  strong  arguments,  and 
appealing  to  the  most  powerful  motives.  1.  It  makes  the  promise  of  God  its 
ground  of  appeal.  "  Eemember,  I  beseech  thee,  the  word  which  thou  commandedst 
thy  servant  Moses"  (v.  8;  Deut.  iv.  25 — 31;  xxx.  1 — 10).  No  argument  so 
powerful  with  God  as  '*  Remember.^'  When  men  honour  God^s  Wordy  he  wiU  not  be 
slow  to  hear  their  words.  When  the  prayer  of  faith  builds  upon  the  word  of 
promise  it  rests  upon  a  sure  foundation.  "  God  not  a  man  that  he  should  lie,  or 
the  son  of  a  man  that  he  should  repent"  (Numb,  xxiii.  19).  2.  It  regards  the  verifi- 
cation of  one  word  as  a  reason  for  expecting  the  fulfilment  of  another.  "If  ye 
transgress,  I  will  scatter  you  ...  If  ye  turn,  I  will  gather  you"  (v.  8,  9). 
Half  the  prophecy  had  been  carried  out ;  Nehemiah  claims  the  fulfilment  of  the 
other  half.  "  All  the  promises  of  God  are  yea"  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  "No  variableness 
or  shadow  of  turning  with  God  "  (Jas.  i.  17).  He  who  kept  his  covenant  with  Noali 
will  keep  it  with  his  posterity  to  the  end  of  time.  3.  It  regards  the  verification 
of  maledictions  as  aground  for  expecting  the  still  more  certain  fulfilment  of  bene- 
dictions. If  the  curses  were  literally  carried  out,  how  much  more  willingly  will 
the  great  Father  bestow  the  promised  blessings.  If  in  chastising  he  was  faithful, 
surely  he  will  not  be  less  so  in  healing  and  restoring.  T\iq  fact  of  their  dispersion 
becomes  the  basis  of  his  claim  for  their  restoration.  He  who  is  faithful  in  that 
which  he  does  unwillingly,  will  not  be  less  faithful  in  that  which  he  delights  to  do. 
If,  because  of  his  word,  he  punished,  because  of  his  word  he  will  show  mercy.  4.  It 
appeals  to  the  relationship  existing  between  God  and  his  chosen  people.  "  These  are 
thy  servants,  and  thy  people"  (v.  10).  Can  he  who  has  borne  with  them  so  long 
and  so  tenderly  desert  them  nowl  The  paternal  heart  is  appealed  to.  If  an 
earthly  parent  acknowledges  this  as  the  most  powerful  sentiment  in  his  nature,  how 
much  more  the  heavenly.  Had  he  not  said,  "  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking 
child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb  ?  Yea,  they 
may  forget,  yet  will  I  not  forget  thee"  (Isa.  xlix.  15).    5.  It  repudiates  a  disloyal 


W  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  [chap.  1. 

or  presumptuous  motive.  "  Thy  servants,  who  desire  to  fear  thy  name "  (v.  11). 
Not  that  they  might  boast  and  defy  the  God  who  had  delivered  them,  as  their 
fathers  had  done  ;  not  that  they  might  free  themselves  from  a  heathen  yoke  only  ; 
but  that  they  might  fear  and  worship  the  God  of  Israel.  Blessings  that  are  to  be 
laid  on  God's  altar  when  received  will  not  be  long  withheld.  6.  It  makes  jjast 
deliverance  the  ground  of  present  expectation.  "  Whom  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy 
great  power,  and  by  thy  strong  hand."  The  memory  of  the  exodus  from  Egypt, 
and  the  victories  of  the  wilderness  and  Canaan,  excites  tlie  hope  that  God  will 
again  interfere  on  behalf  of  his  people.  The  remembrance  of  those  years  of  the 
right  hand  of  the  Most  High,  stimulates  Nehemiah's  prayer.  Thus  should  the 
past  ever  instruct  the  present.  He  who  studies  the  Church's  history  will  find 
ample  material  for  the  nourishment  and  strengthening  of  his  faith  in  God. 

V.  Here  is  intercessory  prayer  accompanied  by  diligence  in  the  performance 
of  daily  duties.  "  And  grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this  man.  For  I  was 
the  king's  cupbearer"  (v.  11).  The  most  earnest  supplication  not  exonerate  from 
personal  efibrt,  and  the  discharge  of  necessary  duties.  Prayer  not  to  be  made  a 
substitute  for  work.  The  suppliant  must  relax  no  painstaking  efibrt,  and  watch 
for  the  openings  of  Providence.  Every  step  must  be  taken  as  though  all  depended 
on  our  own  effort,  and  yet  in  entire  dependence  on  Divine  guidance.  Thus  may 
we  in  a  sense  answer  our  own  prayers.  iN'ot  necessary  to  leave  ordinary  spheres 
of  work.  Nehemiah  asks  Divine  guidance  in  regular  duty,  that  the  monarch  may 
be  induced  to  grant  him  the  petition  which  he  was  anxious  to  present  at  the  first 
favourable  opportunity. 

Illustrations  : — One  of  the  holiest  and  most  devoted  of  modern  missionaries,  who  after  surmount- 
ing almost  insuperable  obstacles,  at  length  completed  his  translation  of  the  Scriptures  into  a 
language  of  surpassing  difficulty,  inscribed  upon  the  last  page  of  his  manuscript  these  words  : — ''  I 
give  it,  as  the  result  of  long  experience,  that  prayer  and  pains,  with  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  will 
enable  a  man  to  do  anything." 

JEschylus  was  condemned  to  death  by  the  Athenians,  and  about  to  be  executed.  His  brother 
Amyntas  had  signalized  himself  at  the  battle  of  Salamis,  where  he  lost  his  right  hand.  He  came 
into  court,  just  as  his  brother  was  condemned,  and  without  saying  a  word,  held  up  the  stump  of  his 
right  arm  m  the  sight  of  all.  The  historian  says  that,  "  when  the  judges  saw  this  mark  of  his 
sufferings,  they  remembered  what  he  had  done,  and  for  his  sake  pardoned  the  brother  whose  life  had 
been  forfeited." 

"At  the  time  the  Diet  of  Nuremberg  was  hold,"  says  Tholuck,  "Luther  was  earnestly  praying 
in  his  own  dwelling ;  and  at  the  very  hour  when  the  edict  was  issued,  granting  free  toleration  to  all 
Protestants,  he  ran  out  of  his  house,  crying  out,  '  "We  have  gained  the  victory.'  " 

Rev.  Charles  Simeon  wrote  to  a  friend:  "With  the  hope  of  ultimate  acceptance  with  God,  I 
have  always  enjoyed  much  cheerfulness  before  men ;  but  1  have  at  the  same  time  laboured  incessantly 
to  cultivate  the  deepest  humility  before  God.  I  have  never  thought  that  the  circumstances  of  God 
having  forgiven  me,  was  any  reason  why  I  should  forgive  myself ;  on  the  contrary,  I  have  ahyays 
judged  it  better  to  loathe  myself  the  more,  in  proportion  as  I  was  assured  that  God  was  pacified 
toward  me  (Ezek.  xvi.  63).  Nor  have  I  been  satisfied  with  viewing  my  sins,  as  men  view  the 
stars  on  a  cloudy  night,  one  here,  and  another  there,  with  great  intervals  between ;  but  have 
endeavoured  to  get,  and  to  preserve  continually  before  my  eyes,  such  a  view  of  them  as  we  have  of 
the  stars  in  the  brightest  night :  the  greater  and  the  smaller  all  intermingled,  and  forming  as  it 
were  one  continuous  mass.  There  are  but  two  objects  that  I  have  desired  for  these  forty  years  to 
behold  ;  the  one  is  my  own  vileness,  the  other  is  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
I  have  always  thought  that  they  should  be  viewed  together,  just  as  Aaron  confessed  all  the  sins  of 
the  children  of  Israel,  whilst  he  put  them  on  the  head  of  the  scape-goat.  The  disease  did  not  keep 
him  from  applying  the  remedy ;  nor  the  remedy  from  feeling  the  disease," 

Prayer  for  Church  Kevival. 

L  5 — 11.  And  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven,  S^c. 

I.  Prompted  by  love  for  the  Church.  1.  Therefore  persistent.  "Day  and 
night."  This  love  not  fickle,  or  easily  discouraged.  "■  Many  waters  cannot  quench 
love  "  (Cant.  viii.  7).  JS'ot  fruitless  emotion,  but  practical  in  its  aim.  2.  Tliere- 
fore  ferveiit,    "  Wept  and  mourned."    The  love  deep,  not  superficial  \  therefore  the 


OHAP.  I.]  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NE HE  MI  AH,  23 


prayer  was  fervent.    This  love,  previously  slumbering,  now  fully  awakened ;  there- 
fore prayer  intense.    This  love,  now  sorely  tried ;  therefore  fervent  prayer  required. 

II.  Recognizes  the  personal  nnworthiness  of  the  petitioner.  "  Both  I  and 
my  father's  house  have  sinned."  This  confession  consistent  with  the  priestly 
intercession  of  those  who  stand  before  God  in  the  people's  name.  Jewish  high 
priests  "  offered  sacrifice  first  for  their  oivnsins,  and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  people" 
(Heb.  vii.  27).  Must  come  not  as  having  any  right  to  intercede,  but  as  magnifying 
God's  mercy. 

III.  Is  full  of  faith.  "Eemember  the  word"  (v.  8).  1.  Notwithstanding  the 
Church's  declension.  Sin  not  overlooked,  or  ignored ;  but  viewed  in  the  light  of 
Divine  mercy.  Confessed,  pardoned,  and  forsaken,  it  no  longer  becomes  a  hindrance. 
God  will  not  remember  against  them  his  people's  sin  when  they  repent  thereof.  2. 
Because  of  the  veracity  of  the  Divine  promise.  "  I  will  gather."  This,  basis  of  all 
hope  then  and  now.  When  pleading  the  promises,  should  do  so  in  faith,  nothing 
doubting,  for  "  God  hath  magnified  his  word  above  all  his  name  "  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  2). 
This  promise  embraces — (1)  The  assurance  of  mercy  after  chastisement.  "I  will 
scatter  ...  I  will  gather"  (viii.  9).  (2)  The  renewal  of  former  kindness. 
"  Whom  thou  hast  redeemed  by  thy  great  power,  and  by  thy  strong  hand  "  (v.  10). 
(3)  The  vindication  of  the  Divine  name  and  honour.  '*  These  are  thy  servants, 
and  thy  people"  (v.  10). 

Illustrations  : — It  is  related  of  an  ancient  king  that  he  never  granted  a  petition  that  was  offered 
with  a  trembling  hand,  because  it  marked  a  want  of  confidence  in  his  clemency.  "  Have  faith  in 
God"  (Mark  xi.  22). 

A  pious  sick  man  in  the  western  part  of  New  York,  used  to  pray  for  the  preachers  and  the 
churches  of  his  acquaintance  daily  at  set  hours.  In  his  diary  were  found  entries  like  this,  "  I  have 
been  enabled  to  offer  the  prayer  of  faith  for  a  revival  in  such  a  place."  So  through  the  list.  It  is 
said  that  each  church  was  soon  enjoying  a  revival,  and  nearly  in  the  order  of  time  named  in  the 
diary. 

The  Majesty  and  Mercy  of  God. 

i.  5.  The  great  and  terrible  God,  that  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy. 

From    this    sublime    invocation   we  salvation.     Salvation  as  much  an   act 

gather —  of  justice  as   of   mercy.     The  holiness 

I.  That  there  is  perfect  harmony  in  of  God  an  important  factor  in  the 
the  attributes  of  the  Divine  nature,  production  of  both  repentance  and  re- 
God  is  one.  His  nature  indivisible,  generation.  By  the  view  of  holiness,  sin 
Men  speak  as  though  justice  were  is  discovered  in  its  true  colours.  By 
necessarily  opposed  to  mercy.  No  the  indwelling  of  the  spirit  of  holiness, 
necessary  antagonism.  A  God  all  mercy  sin  is  destroyed  and  eradicated.  '*  Mercy 
would  be  a  God  not  only  unkind,  but  and  truth  are  met  together "  (Ps.  Ixxxv. 
unjust.  Mistake  to  speak  of  mercy  10).  Hence  Watts  has  truthfully 
triumphing  over  justice.      Mercy   har-  sung — 

monizes  with  justice,  never  annihilates  ^.jjere  the  whole  Deity  is  known ;  nor  dares  a 

it.     God  is  just,  and  "  yet  the  justifier  creature  guess, 

of  him  that  believeth "  (Rom.  iii.  26).  Which  of  the  glories  brightest  shone ;    the 

In  the  pardon  of  a  sinner  we  see  the  ^'''^^'^  ^^  *^^  g^^^«-" 

vindication  of  Divine  justice  no  less  than  III.    That    the    harmony    of    the 

the  magnifying  of  Divine  mercy ;  and  Divine  nature  is  the  only  true  basis 

Divine  mercy  unites  with  Divine  justice  of  moral  goodness.     1.   The  contempla- 

in  the  destruction  of  the  finally  impeni-  tion  of  Divine  compassion  alone  tends  to 

tent.     No  wrath  so  fearful  to  contem-  antinomianism.  Mercy  may  be  magnified 

plate   as   *'  the   wrath   of    the   Lamb "  at  the  expense  of  the  moral  law.     God 

(Rev.  vi.  16).  willing  to  forgive,  but  equally  willing  to 

II.  That  the  Divine  attributes  are  defend  against  and  deliver  from  sin 
eq^ually  enlisted  in  the  work  of  human  itself.      Guard    against    danger  of    so 


24 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEEEMIAH, 


[chap.  I. 


magnifying  Divine  mercy  as  to  make 
sin  a  light  offence.  God's  law  is,  "  Sin 
bliall  not  have  dominion  over  you." 
*'  Eeckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  dead  unto 
sin"  (Eom.  vi.).  Then,  as  a  merciful 
provision,  ''  If  any  man  sin  we  have  an 
advocate,"  &c.  (1  Jno.  i.).  2.  The  con- 
templation of  the  Divine  holiness  alone 
tends  to  legalism.  By  viewing  the 
spotless  purity  of  the  Divine  character, 
and  the  rigid  requirements  of  Divine 
law,  apart  from  the  gracious  promises  of 
Divine  mercy,  a  spirit  of  legal  bondage,  or 
self-righteous  asceticism,  is  engendered. 
Hence  spring  meritorious  works,  pen- 
ances, and  self-inflicted  flagellations  and 
other  useless  tortures.  "  Not  by  works 
of  righteousness  which  we  have  done, 
but  according  to  his  mercy  he  hath 
saved  us  "  (Tit.  iii.  5).  3.  The  contem^ 
plat  ion  of  the  unity  of  the  Divine  nature 
is  essential  to  the  formation  of  a  true 
moral  character.  The  spotless  purity 
and  immaculate  holiness  of  the  Divine 
nature  deter  from  iniquity,  and  the 
violation  of  God's  law  j  whilst  the 
tender  mercy  and  loving-kindness  of 
his  nature  encourage  the  penitent  to 
crave  pardon  and  grace. 

IV.  That  the  harmony  of  the  Divine 
nature  furnishes  the  only  true  ideal 
of  moral  goodness.  1.  Human  good- 
ness is  at  best  one-sided.  Some  virtues 
developed  at  expense  of  others.  Few 
Christians  are  fully  and  evenly  matured. 
One  aspect  of  moral  goodness" cultivated 
to  the  exclusion  of  others.  Men  follow 
too  much  their  natural  disposition  in 
this.  The  gentle  are  apt  to  cultivate 
the  passive  graces  alone,  whilst  the  bold 
forget  to  clothe  themselves  with  the 
meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ.  2. 
Divine  goodness  alone  is  perfectly  impar- 
tial. God  both  majestic  and  merciful; 
infinitely  high,  yet  infinitely  condescend- 
ing. No  exaggeration,  nor  inequality, 
nor  partiality  characterizes  his  nature  or 
his  government.  His  purity  unsullied, 
his  peace  unruffled,  his  dignity  uncom- 
promised,  his  fidelity  unchallenged,  &c. 

V.  That  notwithstanding^  the  har- 


mony of  the  Divine  nature,  men  come 
into  contact  with  different  aspects  of 
that  nature  according  to  their  moral 
condition.  As  the  magnet  draws  to 
itself  certain  metals  similar  in  nature, 
and  rejects  certain  others  alien  from  it ; 
so  do  men  in  their  various  characters 
attract  diff'erent  phases  of  God's  nature. 
1.  A  2)enitent  spirit  is  necessary  to  the 
experience^  of  Divine  mercy.  Only  such 
will  seek  it;  only  such  require  it :  only 
such  are  capable  of  receiving  and  living 
in  the  enjoyment  of  it.  2.  An  obedient 
spirit  is  necessary  to  the  continued 
experience  of  God's  favour.  Paternal 
benedictions  only  promised  to  those  who 
possess  a  filial  spirit.  "If  ye  love  me, 
keep  my  commandments,  and  I  will 
pray  the  Father,"  &c.  (Jno.  xiv.  15). 
Disobedience  always  incurs  Divine  dis- 
pleasure, and  obscures  the  light  of  the 
Father's  countenance.  3.  A  rebellious 
spirit  will  infallibly  provoke  the  exercise 
of  Divine  wrath.  "The  soul  that  sinneth, 
it  shall  die "  (Ezek.  xviii.  4).  "  God 
cannot  look  upon  iniquity  "  (Deut.  xxxii. 
4).  His  character  is  pledged  to  active 
antagonism  to  evil.  Sin  not  punished 
now  as  it  deserves,  because  this  is  "  the 
day  of  salvation  ;  "  and  the  mediatorial 
intercession  of  Christ  holds  back  the 
thunderbolts  of  righteous  anger. 

Illustrations :~ A  Jew  entered  a  Persian 
temple,  and  saw  there  the  sacred  fire.  He  said 
^How  do  you  worship  fire.?"  He  was  told* 
Then  the  Israelite  replied,  "  You  dazzle  the  eye 
ot  the  body,  but  darken  that  of  the  mind  ;  in 
presenting  to  them  the  terrestrial  light,  you  take 
away  the  celestial."  The  Persian  then  asked, 
"How  do  you  name  the  Supreme  Being?" 
"  We  call  him  Jehovah  Adonai ;  that  is,  the 
Lord  who  was,  who  is,  and  who  shall  be.'* 
"Your  word  is  great  and  glorious;  but  it  is 
terrible,'  said  the  Persian.  A  Christian  ap- 
proaching, said,  "We  call  Him  Abba,  Father/' 
Then  the  Gentile  and  the  Jew  regarded  each 
other  with  surprise,  and  said,  "  Your  word  is 
the  nearest  and  the  highest ;  but  who  gives  you 
courage  to  call  tEe  Eternal  thus?"  "The 
Father  Himself,"  said  the  Christian,  who  then 
expounded  to  them  the  plan  of  redemption. 
Then  they  believed,  and  lifted  up  their  eyes  to 
heaven,  saying,  "  Father,  dear  Father  ;  "  and 
joining  hands,  called  each  other  biethren.— 
Arummacher, 


OBAP.  I.] 


nOMlLETlO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


26 


Importunity  in  Prayer. 
L  6.     /  pray  he/ore  thee  now  day  and  night. 


I.  Natural.  1.  If  it  he  the  expression 
of  real  need.  When  children  want,  they 
ask;  when  they  feel  deeply,  they  ask 
earnestly.  This  prayer  protracted 
through  four  months;  yet  not  mere 
repetition  of  words.  Difference  "between 
real  and  artificial  want  :  one  listless  in 
prayer,  the  other  importunate.  Con- 
scious want  asks  and  asks  again.  Prayer 
not  to  be  regarded  as  end,  but  means. 
Many  reverse  this  order.  Nehemiah  did 
not  pray  for  sake  of  prayer,  but  for  sake 
of  object  sought.  2.  If  it  he  the  expres- 
sion of  urgent  need.  When  we  suffer 
pain  we  cry  out.  Starving  man  always 
importunate.  The  more  needy  the  more 
earnest.  Sinners  under  conviction  of 
sin,  groan  and  wrestle  in  agonizing  im- 
portunity until  they  find  relief.  Chris- 
tians wrestle  with  "strong  crying  and 
supplications"  until  they  prevail. 
Sailors  in  a  sinking  vessel  and  miners 
in  the  prospect  of  certain  death  pray  with 
real  importunity  because  they  are  in 
urgent  extremity.  In  the  same  spirit 
should  we  approach  the  throne  of  grace ; 
for  our  need  is  the  same,  though  we  may 
not  feel  it.  3.  If  it  he  the  expression  of 
hopeful  need.  None  can  persevere 
earnestly  in  a  cause  known  to  be  hope- 
less. Hope  cheers  on  the  most  despairing. 
Without  hope  nothing  arduous  could  be 
undertaken.  This  inspires  prayer.  It 
looks  to  the  goal,  and  anticipates  event- 
ual success.  This  hope  must  have  a  true 
foundation,  and  not  rest  on  desire  or 
possibility  only.  The  word  of  God  is 
the  only  secure  foundation  on  which  it 
can  build  (v.  8). 

II.  Necessary.  1.  In  order  that  the 
suppliant  may  he  rightly  affected.  No- 
thing truer  than  that  success  in  prayer 
depends  on  spirit  of  suppliant.  Impor- 
tunity promotes — (1)  Tenderness,  (2) 
Spirituality,  (3)  Humility,  (4)  Zeal. 
Often  the  petitioner  is  not  morally  fit  to 
receive  the  grace  or  gift  desired.  Prayer 
purifies  the  heart,  sanctifies  the  will,  and 
removes  hindrances  out  of  the  way.  2. 
In  order  that  the  gifts  may  he  rightly 
appreciated,      God   will  not   cast    his 


pearls  before  swine.  He  will  only  give 
when  his  gifts  are  valued.  What  we 
seek  for  long  and  earnestly,  we  value 
highly  when  we  gain.  What  easily 
won,  lightly  esteemed  and  easily  lost. 
This  true  of  money,  lands,  home,  child, 
&c.  The  more  hardly  money  is  earned, 
the  more  carefully  it  is  used.  Those 
who  have  never  earned,  but  inherited 
wealth,  generally  become  spendthrift, 
because  ignorant  of  value  of  money. 
Home  only  possesses  its  full  significance 
to  those  who  have  crossed  oceans  and 
continents,  and  endured  perils  on  land 
and  sea  to  reach  it.  That  life  the  most 
precious  to  the  parent  which  has  been 
oftenest  snatched  from  the  jaws  of 
death.  Gifts  nearly  lost,  or  dearly 
bought,  are  counted  to  be  most  precious 
and  priceless.  3.  In  order  that  Godds 
conditions  may  he  fulfilled.  (1)  Faith 
required.  "  He  that  cometh  unto  God," 
<fec.  (Heb.  xi.  6).  (2)  Whole-hearted 
earnestness  required.  "  When  they  seek 
me  with  their  whole  heart "  (Ps.  cxix. 
2).  (3)  Submission  to  the  Divine  will 
required.  "  Thy  will  be  done."  All  these 
conditions  are  promoted  by  continued 
importunity. 

III.  Scriptural  1.  The  Bihle  enjoins 
it  hy  precepts  the  most  explicit.  (Deut. 
iv.  7.  1  Ch.  xvi.  11.  2  Ch.  vii.  14. 
Job  viii.  5.  Ps.  1.  15;  Ixxxi.  10;  cxlv. 
18.  Prov.  ii.  3.  Isa.  xxx.  19;  Iviii.  9. 
Jer.  xxxi.  9.  Lam.  ii.  19.  Matt.  vii.  7. 
Luke  xviii.  1.  Eom.  xii.  12.  Phil, 
iv.  6.  1  Thess.  v.  17.)  2.  The  Bihle 
encourages  it  hy  examples  the  most 
striking.  (Gen.  xviii.  32 ;  xxxii.  26. 
Exod.  xxxii.  32.  Deut.  ix.  15.  Judges 
vi.  39.  1  Sam.  i.  10 ;  xii.  23.  Ezra  ix. 
5.  Ps.  xvii.  1 ;  xxii.  2.  Dan.  vi.  10; 
ix.  3.  Matt.  XV.  23 ;  xx.  31.  Acts  vi. 
4 ;  xii.  5.  2  Cor.  xii.  8.  1  Thess.  iii. 
10. 

IV.  Successful.  Though  long  delayed 
the  answer  came,  and  Nehemiah's  impor- 
tunity was  amply  rewarded.  1.  Not  in 
the  sense  that  God's  will  can  he  affected 
hy  man's  importunity.  That  will  is 
perfect  and  immutable.     "  I  am  God,  I 


26 


HOMILETIG  QOMMENTARY:  NMBEMIAH, 


[OHAl^.  t. 


change  not"  (Mai.  iii.  6).  If  that  will 
were  variable  there  could  be  no  confid- 
ence amongst  men.  The  government 
of  the  world  would  rest  upon  no  firm  and 
solid  foundation.  Whilst  the  Divine 
will  can  never  be  changed,  the  exercise 
of  that  will  may  be  affected  by  human 
conditions.  The  Father's  will  is  to  save 
the  whole  race  ;  for  "  he  willeth  not  the 
death  of  the  sinner ; "  but  according  to 
the  laws  which  he  has  appointed  for 
man,  his  will  is  limited  by  certain  con- 
ditions which  must  be  fulfilled  before  he 
can  exercise  that  will.  The  same  occurs 
in  earthly  relations.  A  wise  father  has 
a  spendthrift  son,  whom  he  loves  and 
would  gladly  treat  with  lavish  gener- 
osity, but  that  he  knows  it  would  be  his 
ruin.  That  son  becomes  reformed,  and 
(not  the  father's  will,  for  that  has  re- 
remained  the  same,  but)  the  father's 
treatment  of  his  son  is  altered  accord- 
ingly. He  can  now  do  what  he  had 
the  heart  and  will  to  do  before,  but  not 
the  judgment.  2.  Not  in  the  sense  that 
God  is  reluctant,  and  can  he  overcome 
hy  human  persuasion.  This,  a  common 
error.  Seen  not  so  much  in  distinct 
affirmation  as  in  public  prayers,  religious 
literature,  and  devout  conversation.  For 
our  sakes,  not  for  God's  sake,  impor- 
tunity required.  Parable  of  unjust 
judge  only  designed  to  teach  one  salient 
truth,  viz.  the  necessity  for  unwearying 
devotion  in  prayer,  not  the  unwilling- 
ness of  God  to  hear.  The  Old  Testament 
passages  (Gen.  xviii.  32  ;  Exod.  xxxii. 
32),  which  represent  God  as  apparently 
reluctant,  and  eventually  persuaded,  are 


anthropomorphic.  God's  actual,  practical 
government  of  the  universe  is  amenable 
to  the  intercessions  of  the  righteous. 
Certain  blessings  are  promised  only  in 
answer  to  *' effectual  fervent  prayer" 
(Jas.  V.  16).  3.  In  the  sense  that  im- 
portunity and  prevalence  are  mysteri- 
ously, hut  certainly,  connected.  The 
*'how"  we  may  not  be  able  to 
define;  but  the  fact  we  cannot  deny. 
The  process  here  as  elsewhere  is  mys- 
terious, but  the  result  is  patent  to  all 
thoughtful  and  devout  minds.  Who  can 
explain  the  connection  between  the  seed 
and  the  plant,  or  between  mind  and 
matter  1  The  presence  of  a  mystery  does 
not  destroy  our  faith  in  the  fact.  "  Elias 
was  a  man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we 
are;  yet  he  prayed,"  &c.  (Jas.  v.  17).  Let 
them  deny  the  facts  who  can ;  and  they 
are  worth  many  arguments. 

Illustrations : — Prayer  pulls  the  rope  below, 
and  the  great  bell  rings  above  in  the  ear  of  God. 
Some  scarcely  stir  the  bell,  for  they  pray  so 
languidly  ;  others  give  an  occasional  pluck  at 
the  rope :  but  be  who  wins  with  heaven  is  the 
man  who  grasps  the  rope  boldly,  and  pulls 
continuously  with  all  his  might. — Spurgeon. 

"  If  from  the  tree  of  promised  mercy  thou 
Wouldst  win   the  good  which    loadeth  every 

bough, 
Then  urge  the  promise  well  with  pleading  criei, 
Move  heaven  itself  with  vehemence  of  sighs ; 
Soon  shall  celestial  fruit  thy  toil  repay — 
'Tis  ripe,  and  waits  for  him  who  loves  to  pray. 
What  if  thou  fail  at  first,  yet  give  not  o'er, 
Bestir  thyself  to  labour  more  and  more  ; 
Enlist  a  brother's  sympathetic  knee, 
The  tree  will  drop  its  fruit  when  two  agree ; 
Entreat  the  Holy  Ghost  to  give  thee  power. 
Then  shall  the  fruit  descend  in  joyful  shower." 


Forgotten  Sins  Remembered. 
L  6.  Both  I  and  my  father^ s  house  have  sinned. 


I.  Sins  forgotten  are  not  necessarily 
sins  forgiven.  1.  Wicked  men  soon 
forget  their  sins.  This  arises  from  in- 
dili'erence  to  the  nature  and  consequences 
of  sin.  Sin  becomes  a  trifling  matter 
easily  committed,  readily  forgotten.  Not 
therefore  either  forgotten  or  forgiven  by 
God.  "  I  have  spilled  the  ink  over  a 
bill,  and  so  have  blotted  it  till  it  can 
hardly  be  read,  but  this  is  quite  another 
thing  from  having  it  blotted  out,  for  that 
cannot  be  till  payment  is  made.     So  a 


man  may  blot  his  sins  from  his  memory, 
and  quiet  his  mind  with  false  hopes,  but 
the  peace  which  this  will  bring  him  is 
widely  different  from  that  which  arises 
from  God's  forgiveness  of  sin  through 
the  satisfaction  which  Jesus  made  in  his 
atonement.  Our  blotting  is  one  thing, 
God's  hlotting  out  is  something  far 
higher." — Spurgeon.  2.  Good  men  may 
forget  their  sins.  They  often  do.  Nehe- 
miah  had  done.  Not  heinous  and  wilful 
sins,  for  such  they  do  not  commit.    **  Ho 


OIUP.  I.] 


no  MT LET  to  COMMENTARY:   NEUEMIAB. 


tl 


that  committeth  sin  is  of  the  devil  " 
(1  John).  Sins  of  ignorance  and  of 
inadvertence,  as  well  as  of  unbelief,  &c., 
may  be  committed  even  by  believers,  and 
then  forgotten — (1)  Through  neglecting 
faithful  self-examination,  (2)  Through 
an  uneducated  or  half-enlightened  con- 
science, (3)  Through  a  low  moral  sense. 

II.  Forgotten  sins  often  hinder 
prayer.  They  did  so  in  Nehemiah's 
case.  Not  until  his  own  and  his  father's 
sins  had  been  acknowledged  and  par- 
doned could  he  prevail  in  prayer.  What 
earnest  Christian  not  had  similar  experi- 
ence ?  The  spirit  of  prayer  mysteriously 
absent;  oft  repeated  requests  strangely 
unanswered.  On  carefully  searching 
have  found  the  hidden  sin  and  put  away 
the  hindrance.  (1)  They  deprive  the 
soul  of  the  spirit  of  suppKcation.  (2) 
They  act  as  barriers  preventing  access 
to  God. 

III.  Forgotten  sins  often  interfere 
with  Church  prosperity.  No  blessing 
for  the  Church  at  Jerusalem  until  these 
sins  and  theirs  had  been  confessed  and 
put  away.  Achan  and  his  wedge  of 
gold  brought  shame  and  defeat  upon  the 
armies  of  Israel.  Secret  evils  cherished 
often  cause  great  disaster  and  moral 
feebleness  to  the  Church.  1.  By  de- 
primng  her  of  that  joy  which  is  her 
strength.  *^  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your 
strength."  Without  the  clear  assurance 
of  the  Divine  favour  joy  impossible. 
When  Church  depressed  and  doubting, 
her  work  languishes.     2.  By  hindering 


God^s  blessing  from  attending  her  efforts. 
Without  his  benedictions  all  the 
Church's  enterprises  must  fail.  Paul 
may  plant,  Apollos  may  water,  but  God 
gives  the  increase. 

IV.  Forgotten  sins  are  often  re- 
membered in  seasons  of  gracious 
visitation.  When  God  comes  near  and 
manifests  himself  as  refiner's  fire,  his 
servants  are  quick  to  discern,  and  sensi- 
tive to  feel  their  most  hidden  faults,  for 
— 1.  Revivals  of  religion  promote  self- 
examination  and  abasement.  2.  Re- 
vivals of  religion  create  a  higher  moral 
sense. 

V.  Forgotten  sins  must  be  confessed 
when  brought  to  remembrance.  1. 
Vicariously.  Not  only  own  sins  but 
sins  of  brethren  and  family,  and  Church. 
If  we  pray  for  them  God  will  give  them 
repentance  and  they  will  be  saved. 
**  They  shall  be  made  willing  in  the  day 
of  his  power."  2.  Separately.  As,  in 
the  text,  Nehemiah  confesses  their  sins 
by  name,  so  should  all  earnest  suppliants 
acknowledge  their  failures,  not  in  general 
terms  only,  but  in  detail  and  separately. 
This  will  produce  clear  views  of  sin  in 
all  its  reality,  and  will  deepen  the  sorrow 
of  a  sincere  repentance.  3.  Accompanied 
by  prayer  for  mercy.  This,  great  end  of 
confession,  viz.  that  guilt  be  cancelled, 
and  sins  remitted.  Confession  in  itself 
no  virtue,  unless  it  spring  from  a  desire 
for  pardon,  and  a  determination  to  shun 
the  cause  of  sin  in  the  future. 


God's  Memory. 
i  8.   Remember,  I  beseech  thee,  the  word  that,  ^c. 


I.   God's     memory    is     infallible. 

1.  Its  records  are  accurate.  No  hu- 
man records  are  so.  Errors  in  every- 
thing human.  Memory  of  man  fails, 
and  deceives  him.  God's  memory  abso- 
lutely infallible,  because  he  alone  can 
see  things  as  they  really  are.  2.  Its 
records  are  impartial.  Prejudice  and 
personal  bias  enter  into  all  human  his- 
tories. This  bias  often  quite  unconscious 
and  unavoidable.  Perfect  disinterested- 
ness impossible  under  existing  limit- 
ations of  human  life.  God  only  can 
look  down  from  the  serene  heights  of 


immaculate  purity,  and  impartially  record 
the  transactions  of  men.  3.  Its  records 
will  form  the  basis  of  man's  acquittal  or 
condemnation  at  the  Day  of  Judgment. 
The  verdict  pronounced  by  Christ  in  the 
case  of  the  seven  Asian  churches,  a  pre- 
lude of  the  General  Judgment  of  all 
churches  and  peoples.  Each  letter  com- 
mences with,  "  I  know  thy  works " 
(Eev.  ii.),  implying  that  the  judgment 
pronounced  is  infallibly  true.  Such 
momentous  issues,  as  eternal  life  and 
eternal  death,  could  not  depend  upon 
anything  less  than  an  infallible  record 


28 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap. 


of  the  whole  period  of  earthly  prohation  ; 
and  none  hut  God  can  furnish  such  a 
record.  JSTot  one  shall  be  unrighteously 
condemned.  No  miscarriage  of  justice 
can  possibly  occur  at  that  tribunal. 

II.  God's  memory  is  omniscient. 
Hence  the  appeal,  "Eememher."  1.  // 
takes  cognisance  of  the  most  obscure 
events  as  well  as  the  most  public.  No 
deed  of  darkness  or  act  of  cruelty  un- 
ohserved.  No  cup  of  water  or  widow's 
mite  given  without  the  notice  of  at  least 
One  Eye.  "  What  was  done  in  secret 
shall  one  day  he  proclaimed  on  the 
housetop."  "  All  things  are  naked  and 
open  to  the  eyes  of  him."  '*  Hell  is 
naked  hefore  him,  and  destruction " 
(Job  xxvi.  6).  2.  It  is  acquainted  with 
the  most  microscopic  details  of  human 
life.  Not  only  does  he  ohserve  and  re- 
gulate suns  and  starry  systems  in  their 
orbits,  hut  the  most  infinitesimal  ani- 
malculse  live  and  move  and  have  their 
heing  under  his  eye.  If  he  he  any- 
where, he  is  everywhere ;  if  he  he  in 
anything,  he  is  in  everything.  If  he 
order  the  seraph's  flight,  he  ordains  the 
sparrow's  fall :  if  he  tells  the  numher  of 
the  stars,  he  numhers  the  very  hairs  of 
the  heads  of  his  saints.  The  minute- 
ness of  Providence  its  perfection.  Since 
he  is  ahove  all,  and  through  all,  and  in  all, 
let  us  look  to  him /or  all,  let  us  look  to 
him  in  all.  3.  It  fathoms  the  most  secret 
thoughts  and  motives.  "  Thou  compassest 
my  path,"  &c.;  "for  there  is  not  a  word  in 
my  tongue,  but  lo,  0  Lord,  thou  knowest 


it  altogether  "  (Ps.  cxxxix.).  Thoughts 
unhreathed  in  word  are  recorded  in  his 
memory  ;  and  motives  unsuspected  by 
the  most  intimate  friend  are  there  written 
down. 

III.  God  loves  to  be  reminded  of 
his  word.  *'  Eemember,  I  beseech  thee, 
the  word  which  thou  commandedst  thy 
servant  Moses"  (v.  8).  1.  Not  that  he 
needs  to  be  reminded  of  it  Strictly 
speaking  God  can  neither  remember  nor 
forget,  for  all  things  are  present  with  him. 
Figuratively  he  is  said  to  do  both  (Isa. 
Ixii.  6,  7).  2.  Not  that  he  desires  to 
forget.  He  delights  to  honour  the  word 
of  his  promise,  and  is  "  not  slow  con- 
cerning his  promise,  as  some  men  count 
slackness  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  9).  3.  But  because 
he  loves  to  see  his  children  believing  his 
word.  All  men  love  to  be  trusted. 
Parents  especially  delight  to  see  their 
children  exercise  the  most  implicit  trust 
in  their  veracity.  God  also  seeks  to  be 
trusted,  and  is  pleased  when  his  word  is 
believed.  Christ's  upbraiding  couched 
in  these  words :  *'  O  slow  of  heart  to 
believe  "  (Luke  xxiv.  25). 

Illustration  : — "  There  is  a  recent  application 
of  electricity  by  which,  under  the  influence  of 
its  powerful  light,  the  body  can  be  so  illuminated 
as  that  the  workings  beneath  the  surface  of  the 
skin  may  be  seen.  Lift  up  the  hand,  and  it  will 
appear  almost  translucent,  the  bones  and  veins 
clearly  appearing.  It  is  so  in  some  sense  with 
God's  introspection  of  the  human  heart.  His 
eye,  which  shines  brighter  than  the  sun,  searches 
us,  and  discovers  all  our  weakness  and  infirmity." 
— Filkington. 


Punishment  and  Penitence. 

i  8,  9.  i/'  ye  transgressy  I  will  scatter  you,  &c. 

Here  we  trace  that  sequence  which  is  everywhere  taught  in  Bible,  viz. : 
I.  That  sin  is  invariably  followed  by  punishment.  1.  Sometimes  with  loss  of 
temporal  good.  *'  I  will  scatter  you  abroad."  The  loss  of  national  status  and  social 
integrity  followed  loss  of  God's  favour.  They  are  to-day  a  standing  witness  to  all 
the  world  of  the  faithfulness  of  Jehovah's  word.  Josephus  says  that  in  his  time 
they  had  grown  so  wicked,  that  if  the  Romans  had  not  destroyed  and  dispersed 
them,  without  doubt  either  the  earth  would  have  swallowed  them  up,  or  fire  from 
heaven  would  have  consumed  them.  This  kind  of  punishment  not  always  inflicted. 
Wicked  men  flourish  and  grow  rich,  yet  their  end  is  miserable  enough.  2.  Always 
with  loss  of  spiritual  blessing.  "  Friendship  of  world  enmity  against  God."  God's 
favour  only  secured  and  continued  by  separation  from  sin.  Withdrawal  of  Divine 
approval  must  follow  deviation  from  path  of  Divine  precepts.  3.  Hereafter  with 
the  loss  of  all  good.  Hell  is  most  frequently  referred  to  as  a  loss,  the  negation  of  all 
that  is  dear  and  sweet  and  to  be  desired ;  loss  of  heaven,  of  peace,  of  God's  presence, 


CHAP. 


I.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHBMIAB.  29 


of  opportunity,  of  c^racious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  word,  the  loss  of  the  soul 
The  loss  of  hope  bitterest  ingredient  in  cup  of  despair.  Sin  not  always  manifestly 
punished  in  this  world  ;  hut  always  really  so.  In  the  next  life,  the  punishment 
will  he  manifest  to  all  the  universe.  Sin  shall  not  go  unpunished.  The  thought 
of  the  future  punishment  for  the  wicked  which  the  Bible  reveals  is  enough  to  make 
an  earthquake  of  terror  in  a  man's  mind.  I  do  not  accept  the  doctrine  of  eterna 
punishment  because  I  deliglit  in  it.  I  would  cast  m  doubts  if  I  could,  till  I  had 
filled  hell  up  to  the  brim  :  I  would  destroy  all  faith  m  it  :  but  that  would  do  me 
no  good  ;  I  could  not  destroy  the  thing.  Nor  does  it  help  me  to  take  the  wonl 
*  everlasting,'  and  put  it  into  a  rack  like  an  inquisitor,  until  I  make  it  shriek  out 
some  other  ineaning  ;  T  cannot  alter  the  stern  fact."  -  The  pea  contains  the  vine 
and  the  flower,  and  the  pod  in  embryo  :  and  I  am  sure  when  T  plant  it  that  it  will 
produce  them  and  nothing  else.  I^ow  every  action  of  our  lives  is  embryonic  and 
according  as  it  is  right  or  wrong,  it  will  surely  bring  forth  the  sweet  flowers  of  joy, 
or  the  poison  fruits  of  sorrow.  Such  is  the  constitution  of  this  world ;  and  tho 
Bible  assures  us  that  the  next  world  only  carries  it  forward.  Here  and  hereafter 
'  whatsoever  a  man  sows,  that  shall  he  also  reap.'  ''—Beecher  ^^  ^  ^  ., 

II  That  true  penitence  is  invariably  followed  by  pardon.  But  if  ye  turn 
unto' me,  and  keep  my  commandments,"  &c.  The  sequence  carried  out  m  this 
history  National  repentance  was  followed  by  national  restoration  to  (:rod  s  tavour 
and  forfeited  privileges.  1.  True  repentance  implies  the  forsaking  of  evil  This, 
first  step  Greek  words  (metameleia,  and  metanoya)  signify  change  of  purpose,_  and 
chano-e  of  thouoht.  Not  mere  desire  or  emotional  sorrow  :  but  deep  contrition 
resultincr  from  clear  view  of  heinous  character  of  sin.  Only  when  Jews  abandoned 
idolatry^'and  heathen  associations  could  they  be  received  again  as  God's  heritage. 
2  True  repentance  implies  turning  to  God.  By  sin  do  men  turn  from  God  :  by  repent- 
ance they  return  and  cleave  to  Mm.  Judas  an  instance  of  insincere  repentance  ;  he 
turned  from  his  sin,  but  turned  not  to  God,  but  went  straight  into  arms  of 
despair.  Peter's  true  repentance  urged  to  the  feet  of  his  ofl'ended  Saviour,  where 
he  found  mercy.  3.  True  repentance  includes  a  determination  of  future  obedience. 
This  mentioned  as  a  condition  in  God's  promise,  and  quoted  in  Nehemiah's  prayer, 
''  if  ye  turn  unto  me,  and  keep  my  commandments,"  ^c.  Evangelically  keep  them, 
for  with  a  legal  obedience  none  can  do  so.  The  penitent  must  have  at  least  an 
earnest  desire  and  firm  resolve  to  do  them  as  far  as  he  can  by  God's  grace.  4.  Pardon 
is  as  certain  to  follow  true  penitence  as  punishment  sin.  Both  rest  upon  God's  "  / 
ivill  "  His  threatenings  and  his  promises  both  stand  true.  If  he  fulfil  the  curses, 
he  will  certainly  fulfil  the  benedictions.  If  punishment  has  foUowed  sm,  we  may 
confidently  look  for  mercy  to  follow  the  forsaking  of  sin.  God  not  less  ready  to 
restore  than  to  scatter.  5.  Pardon  is  accompanied  by  the  restoration  of  forfeited 
privileges  "  Yet  will  1  gather  them  from  thence,  and  will  bring  them  into  the  place 
which  I  have  chosen,  to  set  my  name  there  "  (v.  9).  Not  only  would  they  be 
redeemed  from  exile  and  captivity,  but  re-established  in  Jerusalem,  and  enjoying  all 
the  privilecres  of  God's  special  providence  and  protection.  When  sinners  turn  to 
God  they  receive  all  the  evangehcal  blessings  of  the  New  Testament  Covenant 
through  Christ.  Adoption,  assurance,  sanctification,  heirship,  heaven,  are  all  theirs, 
through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

Illustrations  •— "  '  Let  him  take  hold  of  my  strength,  that  he  may  make  peace  with  me :  and  he  shall 
make  neace  with  me.'  I  think  I  can  convey  the  meaning  of  this  passage  hy  what  took  place  in  ray 
own  family  within  these  few  days.  One  of  ray  children  had  committed  a  fault,  for  which  I  thought 
it  mv  duty  to  chastise  him.  I  called  him  to  rae,  expkined  to  hmi  the  evil  of  what  he  had  done,  and 
told  him  how  grieved  I  was  that  I  must  punish  him  for  it.  He  heard  rae  m  silence,  and  then  rushed 
into  rav  arras,  and  burst  into  tears.  I  could  sooner  have  cut  off  my  arm  than  have  struck  him  for 
Qis  fault  •  he  had  taken  hold  of  my  strength,  and  had  made  peace  with  me.  —B.  Tolls.        ^      ^ 

The  first  physic  to  recover  our  souls  is  not  cordials,  but  corrosives  ;  not  an  immediate  stepping  into 
heaven  by  a  present  assurance,  but  mourning  and  lamentations,  and  a  bitter  bewailing  of  our  former 


80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[OHAP.   I. 


transgressions.      With  Mary  Magdalene,  we  must   wash  Christ's  feet  with  our  tears  of  sorrow, 
before  we  may  anoint  his  head  with  **  the  oil  of  gladness." — Browning. 

Like  Jamis  Bifrons,  the  Roman  god  looking  two  ways,  a  true  repentance  not  only  bemoans  the 
past,  but  takes  heed  to  the  future.  Repentance,  like  the  lights  of  a  ship  at  her  bow  and  her  stern, 
not  only  looks  to  the  track  she  has  made,  but  to  the  path  before  her.  A  godly  sorrow  moves  the 
Christian  to  weep  over  the  failure  of  the  past,  but  his  eyes  are  not  so  blurred  with  tears,  but  that  he 
can  look  watchfully  into  the  future,  and,  profiting  by  the  experience  of  former  failures,  make  straight 
paths  for  his  feet. — Filkington,  Repentance  without  amendment  is  like  continual  pumping  at  a  ship, 
without  stopping  the  leak. 

Electing  Grace. 


L  9 — 10.     Noiv  these  are 

I.  A  chosen  place.  *'  The  place  that 
I  have  chosen  to  set  my  name  there." 
1.  Historically y  Jerusalem.  By  God's 
appointment  this  city  is  called  the  "holy 
city ; "  because  he  chose  it  for  the 
dwelling-place  of  his  people,  and  the  site 
for  his  temple.  Hence  the  Psalmist : 
"  The  Lord  hath  chosen  Zion,  he  hath 
chosen  it  for  a  dwelling-place  for  himself : 
this  is  my  resting-place  for  ever  :  here 
will  I  dwell,  because  I  have  chosen  it " 
(Ps.  cxxxii.).  For  this  reason  it  was 
holy,  though  the  people  by  their  wicked- 
ness had  defiled  it.  Other  towns  and 
countries  have  been  chosen  by  God  to 
play  an  important  part  in  working  out  his 
gracious  purposes  in  the  redemption  of 
man,  as  Bethlehem,  Nazareth,  Babylon, 
Rome,  &c.  Jerusalem  exalted  above  all 
other  cities.  The  place,  however,  can 
make  no  one  holy  or  acceptable  before 
God :  for  *^  he  chose  not  the  man  for 
the  place's  sake,  but  the  place  for  the 
man's  sake." — Filkington.  2.  Typically^ 
the  Church  militant.  The  Christian 
Church  is  now  to  the  world  what  the 
holy  city  was  of  old.  There  God  dwells, 
and  appoints  his  ordinances  and  mani- 
fests his  glory.  As  in  the  holy  city  so 
in  the  Christian  Church,  there  may  be 
worldlings  and  aliens  who  nominally 
belong  to  the  Church,  but  really  have  no 
right  or  portion  therein.  Membership  in 
the  Church  does  not  necessarily  involve 
spiritual  life  in  the  New  Testament  any 
more  than  it  did  m  the  Old  Testament 
dispensation.  "  The  Church  is  God's 
workshop,  where  his  jewels  are  polishing 
for  his  palace  and  house ;  and  those  he 
especially  esteems,  and  means  to  make 
most  resplendent,  he  hath  oftenest  his 
tools  upon." — Leighton.  "  Hypocrites 
are  not  real  members,  but  excrescences 
of  the  Church,  like  falling  hair  or  the 


thy  sei'vantsy  and  thy  people, 

parings  of  the  nails  are  of  the  body." — 
Salter.  3.  The  Church  triumphant. 
The  Church  militant  and  the  Church 
triumphant  really  one  ;  like  a  city  built 
on  both  sides  of  a  river.  There  is  but  a 
stream  of  death  between  grace  and  glory. 
Heaven  is  the  final  home  of  God's  chosen 
people.  There  he  has  recorded  his  name, 
and  there  doth  he  dwell  in  unclouded 
light.  Often  called  the  Neio  Jerusalem. 
II.  A  chosen  people.  "These  are 
thy  servants  and  thy  people."  His  by 
separation  from  the  surrounding  heathen, 
by  redemption  from  Egypt,  by  special 
and  unnumbered  favours.  From  these 
words  we  may  gather  who  are  God's 
elect.  1.  God^s  elect  are  they  who 
recognize  him  as  Lord.  "  Thy  servants." 
Entering  his  service  they  obey  his  be- 
hests, and  in  all  things  submit  to  his 
will.  As  servants  who  are  diligent 
and  dutiful  have  a  right  to  the  care  and 
protection  of  their  masters,  so  Jehovah's 
servants  may  reckon  upon  his  providence 
and  grace.  Let  the  obedience  and  joy- 
fulness  of  our  lives  proclaim  the  character 
of  the  God  we  serve,  else  the  world  may 
say  of  us,  as  Aigoland,  king  of  Saragossa, 
said  of  certain  lazars  and  poor  people, 
whom  he  saw  at  the  table  of  Charlemagne 
when  he  came  to  be  baptized,  "  that  he 
would  not  serve  a  God  who  did  no  more 
for  his  servants  than  had  been  done  for 
those  poor  wretches."  2.  God's  elect 
are  they  who  recognize  him  as  their  king. 
"  And  thy  people."  As  such  they  render 
him  regal  homage,  and  honour  all  his 
laws,  because  they  love  his  person.  And 
as  earthly  subjects  look  up  to  their 
monarch  and  his  government  for  protec- 
tion and  relief,  so  do  the  subjects  of  the 
King  of  kings  look  up  to  him  for  assist- 
ance and  deliverance  in  their  extremity. 
3.  God^s  elect  recognize  him  as  their  great 


CHAP.   I.] 


nOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


31 


Redeemer.  "  Whom  thou  hast  redeemed," 
&c.     Israel   only  thus  redeemed,  none 
others  could  claim  this  mark  of  electing 
grace.     If  not  redeemed,  then  non-elect. 
Same  mark  of  Divine  election  still  holds 
good.    Whatever  men  juay  imagine,  only 
those  are  elect  who  show  by  their  life 
tliat   they   have   come  out  of   spiritual 
bondage.    N'ote  concerning  this  redemp- 
tion, (1)  That   it   was    a   Divine  work. 
"  TJwu  hast  redeemed."    An  act  worthy 
of  God  :  impossible  to  any  one  but  God : 
reflecting  highest  glory  on  the  character 
of  God.  Nothing  less  than  Divine  power, 
joined  with  infinite  love  and  unerring 
wisdom,   could  have  accomplished  the 
world's  redemption  through  the  atone- 
ment of  Christ.    (2)  That  it  was  a  work 
of  surpassing  dificnity.     "  By  tliy  great 
power  and  by  thy  strong  liandT     The 
redemption    from    Egypt    was    difficult 
because    of    the   waywardness    of    the 
Israelites,  and  the  opposition  of  Pharaoh. 
The  ransom  of  tlie  race  from  the  penalty 
of  sin  still  more  difficult,  on  account  of 
the  depravity  of  fallen   humanity,  and 
on  account  of  the  claims  of  God's  inviol- 
able law.    The  provision  and  subsequent 
government  of  Israel  a  work  of  gigantic 
and  humanly  insurmountable  difficulty. 
Yet  as  Jehovah  fed  and  led,  and  settled 
his  people  not  only  in  the   wilderness 
but  in  Canaan,  so  will  he  supply  all  the 
need  of  all  his  children.     "  He  is  able 
to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,  that  come 
unto    God    by    him"    (Heb.    vii.    25). 
(3)  That  it  was  a  work   accomplished 
through  human  agency.     Moses  was  the 
leader  and  deliverer  of  Israel  under  God's 
direction.      **  Thy  strong  hand  "  may  re- 
fer to  his  agency,  as  ''thy  great  power" 
indicates  the  source  of  his  strength.    The 
s(^cond    redemption   required    a    human 
H,-ent.     Christ  came  as  God's  "  strong 
hand"  to  lift  up  and  lead  out  of  captivity 
the  enslaved  human  race. 

Illustrations  ;— A  senator  related  to  his  son 
the  account  of  the  book  containing  the  names  of 
illustrious  members  of  the  commonwealth.  The 
Bon  desired  to  see  the  outside.  It  was  glorious 
to  look  upon.     '*  Oh  I  let  me  open  it,"  said  the 


son.  "Nay,"  said  the  father,  "'tis  known  only 
to  the  Council."  "  Then,*'  said  the  son,  **  tell 
me  if  my  name  is  there."  ''And  that," said  the 
father,  "  is  a  secret  known  only  to  the  Council, 
and  it  cannot  be  divulged."  Then  he  desired  to 
know  for  what  achievements  the  names  were 
inscribed  in  that  book.  So  the  father  told  him; 
and  related  to  him  the  achievements  and  noble 
deeds  by  which  they  had  eternized  their  names. 
"  Such,"  said  he,  **  are  written,  and  only  such 
are  written  in  this  book."  '*  And  will  my  name 
be  there,"  asked  the  son.  "  I  cannot  tell  thee," 
said  the  father;  "if  thy  deeds  are  like  theirs, 
thou  shalt  be  written  in  the  book  ;  if  not,  thou 
shalt  not  be  written."  And  then  the  son 
consulted  with  himself ;  and  he  found  that  his 
whole  deeds  were  playing,  and  singing,  and 
drinking,  and  amusing  himself;  and  he  found 
that  this  was  not  noble,  nor  temperate,  nor 
valiant.  And  as  he  could  not  read  as  yet  his 
name  he  determined  to  make  "  his  calling  and 
election  sure." 

We  may  adopt  Archbishop  Leighton's  beauti-| 
ful  illustration  of  a  chain,  which  he  describes  asj 
having  its  first  and  last  link, — election  andl 
final  salvation, — in  heaven,  in  God's  own  ha  ids; 
the  middle  one — efi"ectual  calling — being  let  d  )wn 
to  the  earth  into  the  hearts  of  his  children ;  and 
they  laying  hold  of  it,  have  sure  hold  of  the 
other  two,  for  no  power  can  sever  them. 

"Though  the  mariner  see  not  the  pole-star, 
yet  the  needle  of  the  compass  that  points  to  it, 
tells  him  which  way  he  sails.  Thus,  the  heart 
that  is  touched  by  the  loadstone  of  Divine  love, 
trembling  with  godly  fear,  and  looking  towards 
God  in  fixed  believing,  points  at  the  love  of 
election,  and  tells  the  soul  that  its  course  is 
heavenward,  towards  the  haven  of  eternal  rest. 
He  that  loves  may  be  sure  that  he  was  loved  first; 
and  he  that  chooses  God  for  his  delight  and 
portion,  may  conclude  confidently  that  God  hath 
chosen  him  to  be  one  of  those  that  shall  enjoy 
him  for  ever ;  for  that  our  love,  and  electing  of 
him,  is  but  the  return  and  re-percussion  of  the 
beams  of  his  love  shining  upon  us." — Salter. 

Suppose  a  rope  cast  down  into  the  sea  for  the 
relief  of  a  company  of  poor  shipwrecked  men 
ready  to  perish,  and  that  the  people  in  the  ship, 
or  on  the  shore,  should  cry  out  unto  them  to  lay 
hold  on  the  rope  that  they  may  be  saved  ;  were 
it  not  unreasonable  and  foolish  curiosity  for  any 
of  those  poor  distressed  creatures,  now  at  the 
point  of  death,  to  dispute  whether  the  man  who 
cast  the  rope  did  intend  and  purpose  to  save  them 
or  not,  and  so  minding  that  which  helpeth  not, 
neglect  the  means  of  safety  offered  }  Thus  it  is 
that  Christ  holdeth  forth,  as  it  were,  a  rope  of 
mercy  to  poor  drowned  and  lost  sinners.  It  is 
our  duty  then,  without  any  further  dispute,  to 
look  upon  it  as  a  principle  afterwards  to  be  made 
good,  that  Christ  hath  gracious  thoughts  towards 
us ;  but  for  the  present  to  lay  hold  on  the  r<^e,— 
Rutherford, 


32 


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[CIIAP.    I. 


Modest  Goodness. 
i.  11.     Thy  servants^  who  desire  to  fear  thy  name. 


I.  It  counts  it  an  honour  to  serve 
God  in  any  capacity.  "  Thy  servants.*' 
1.  It  regards  God  as  Master  as  well  as 
Father.  Dutiful  obedience  to  explicit 
commands,  required  no  less  than  filial  to 
devotion.  It  surrenders  not  only  affec- 
tion, but  will.  2.  It  regards  the  meanest 
task  in  God^s  service  as  an  unspeakable 
honour.  The  lowest  office  in  the  court 
of  an  earthly  monarch  is  a  post  of  honour ; 
how  much  more  so  the  lowest  footstool 
in  the  house  of  the  King  eternal.  The 
service  not  a  task,  because  offspring  of 
love,  (a) 

II.  It  makes  very  humble  profes- 
sions before  God.  *'  Who  desire  to  fear 
thy  name."  1.  It  dares  not  mention 
faultless  conduct.  With  Abraham  it 
says,  "I, that  am  but  dust  and  ashes,  have 
taken  upon  me  to  speak  unto  the  living 
God"  (Gen.  xviii.  27);  with  Jacob,  "I 
am  not  worthy  of  the  least  of  all  the 
mercies  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  10) ;  with  Asaph, 
"So  foolish  was  I,  and  ignorant,  I 
was  as  a  beast  before  thee "  (Ps. 
Ixxiii.  22) ;  and  with  Paul,  '*  I  am 
less  than  the  least  of  all  saints  "  (Eph. 
iii.  8).  The  Pharisee  appealed  to  his 
virtuous  conduct,  and  was  rejected  ;  the 
publican,  to  his  unworthiness,  and  was 
accepted.  This,  a  sphere  of  action  and 
of  trial,  rather  than  of  rapture  and 
triumph.  "Blessed  is  the  man  that 
feareth  always."  2.  It  makes  prof ession 
only  of  good  intentions.  "  Who  desire 
to  fear  thy  name."  Even  Nehemiah  can 
boast  of  nothing  higher.  The  whole 
life  of  a  Christian  is  nothing  else  but 
sanctum  desiderium,  a  holy  desire ; 
seeking  that  perfection  which  cannot  be 
fully  attained  on  earth  (Phil.  iii.  12). 
3.  It  does  not  remain  satisfied  with  good 
desires.  Many  there  are  who  cannot 
speak  with  assurance  of  any  higher 
experience  than  the  presence  of  holy 
purposes  and  intentions.  They  cannot 
yet  say  they  do  fear,  or  love  him,  but 
that  they  desire  to  do  so.  Encouraging 
promise  for  all  such  : — "  Blessed  are  they 
that  do  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteous- 
ness," &c.  (Matt.  v.).     These  desires  are 


proofs  of  something  good,  and  pledges  of 
something  better.  They  are  evidences 
of  grace,  and  forerunners  of  glory.  They 
are  the  pulse  of  the  soul,  indicating  the 
state  of  spiritual  health.  But  these 
desires  must  be  active  ones,  issuing  in 
realized  power  and  purity,  and  Christ- 
like gentleness.  Desires  which  issue 
in  no  effort  to  attain  them  are  like  the 
vain  prayer  of  Balaam,  who  could  say, 
"  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous, 
and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his  "  (Num. 
xxiii.  10);  but  who  had  no  concern  to 
live  their  life.  Herod  wished  to  see  our 
Saviour  work  a  miracle,  but  would  not 
take  a  journey  for  the  purpose.  Pilate 
asked,  "  What  is  truth  ]"  and  would  not 
wait  for  an  answer.  Desires  are  nothing 
without  endeavours.  (/3) — Jay. 

III.  It  cherishes  a  reverent  fear  of 
God.  "  Who  desire  to  fear  thy  name." 
1.  Not  fear  of  punishment.  Such  fear 
cast  out  by  love.  AU  fear  that  hath 
torment  eradicated  in  the  believer  by  the 
"expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection." 
(y)  2.  Tlie  filial  fear  of  grieving  an 
infinitely  tender  Father.  "  God  has  three 
sorts  of  servants  in  the  world  ;  some  are 
slaves,  and  serve  him  from  a  principle  of 
fear  ;  others  are  hirelings,  and  serve  him 
for  the  sake  of  wages  ;  and  the  last  are 
sons,  and  serve  him  under  the  influence 
of  love." — Seeker. 


Illustrations  :  (a)  When  Calvin  was  banished 
from  ungrateful  Geneva,  he  said,  "Most  assur- 
edly if  I  had  merely  served  man,  this  would 
have  been  a  poor  recompense ;  but  it  is  my 
happiness  that  I  have  served  Him  who  never  fails 
to  reward  his  servants  to  the  full  extent  of  hia 
promise." 

(j3)  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  like  many  other  dis- 
tinguished persons,  was  never  satisfied  with  his 
own  efforts,  however  well  they  might  satisfy 
others,"  When  M.  Mosnier,  a  French  painter, 
was  one  day  praising  to  him  the  excellence  of  one 
of  his  pictures,  he  replied,  "Alas,  Sir!  I  can 
only  make  sketches,  sketches." 

Virgil,  who  was  called  the  prince  of  the 
Latin  poets,  was  naturally  modest,  and  of  a 
timorous  nature.  When  people  crowded  to  gaze 
upon  him,  or  pointed  at  him  with  the  finger 
in  raptures,  the  poet  blushed,  and  stole  away 
from  them,  and  often  hid  himself  in  shops  to 
escape   the  curiosity  and  admiration  ot    tho 


CHAP.   L] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAB. 


33 


public.  The  Christian  is  called  upon  to  "let 
his  light  shine  before  men  : "  but  then  it  must 
be  with  all  meekness,  simplicity,  and  modesty. 

(y)  Pagan  nations  have  always  stood  in  awe 
of  deities,  whose  wrath  they  have  deprecated, 
and  whose  love  they  have  never  hoped  for. 
Their  worship  is  one  of  slavish  joy -killing  dread. 
In  the  East  India  Museum,  in  London,  there  is 
an   elaborately  carved  ivory  idol   from   India, 


with  twelve  hands,  and  in  every  hand  a  different 
instrument  of  cruelty.  On  the  door  of  the 
Cathedral  of  St.  Nicholas,  in  Friburg,  Switzer- 
land, is  a  notice  requesting  the  prayers  of  the 
charitable,  for  the  souls  of  the  departed,  who 
are  represented  as  being  surrounded  by  purga- 
torial flames.  Underneath  is  a  contribution-box 
with  this  inscription,  "  Oh !  rescue  us ;  you  at 
least  who  are  our  friends." 


Unanswered  Prayers. 
ill.     Prosper,  I  pi-ay  thee,  thy  servant  this  day^  ^c. 


Here  is  help  urgently  needed,  earnestly 
solicited,  yet  unaccountably  delayed. 
The  prayer  does  not  seem  to  have  been 
answered  until  four  months  later,  though 
offered  continually.  Prayer  may  remain 
unanswered — 

I.  Throug-h  some  defect  in  the  spirit 
of  the  suppliant.  1.  Want  of  submis- 
sion. The  Lord's  prayer  is  the  model 
for  all  prayer.  There  we  find  three  con- 
ditions preceding  the  only  petition  for 
temporal  good,  viz.  ''  Hallowed  be  thy 
name  ;  thy  kingdom  come  ;  thy  will  be 
done,"  &c.  These  implicitly  precede  all 
true  prayer.  Unsubmissive  prayers  some- 
times answered  to  teach  men  their  folly 
in  choosing  their  own  way  in  preference 
to  God's.  Payson  was  asked,  when 
under  great  bodily  affliction,  if  he  could 
see  any  particular  reason  for  this  dispens- 
ation. **  JSTo,"  he  replied,  "  but  I  am 
as  weU  satisfied  as  if  I  could  see  ten 
thousand  ;  God's  will  is  the  very  perfec- 
tion of  all  reason."  It  is  said  that  Dove, 
the  Leeds  murderer,  was  preserved  from 
what  appeared  to  be  the  certain  fatal 
termination  of  an  illness,  by  the  passion- 
ately unsubmissive  prayers  of  his  mother, 
who  lived  to  see  her  son  led  to  the 
gallows.  2.  Weahieas  of  faith.  "  He 
that  cometh  unto  God  must  believe," 
&c.  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God"  (Heb.  xi.  6).  This  truth 
illustrated  by  most  of  Christ's  miracles. 
3.  Self-seelcing  motives.  God  regards 
the  spirit,  and  will  grant  nothing  to 
gratify  unhallowed  and  selfish  ambition. 
We  ask  amiss  if  we  seek  for  good  that 
we  may  consume  it  on  our  lusts  (Jas.  iv. 
3).  Thus  did  Simon  Magus  desire  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  sake  of 
personal  gain  and  fame,  but  was  detected 
and   punished    (Acts  viii.   9 — 13).  (a) 


i.  An  unforgiving  spirit.  "  Let  us  lift 
up  holy  hands,  without  wrath^^  &c. 
(1  Tim.  ii.  8).  An  uncharitable  spirit 
condemns  itself  whenever  it  repeats  the 
words,  "  Forgive  us  our  trespasses  as 
loe forgive  them  that  trespass  against  us." 
"  If  we  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart  God 
will  not  hear  us"  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).  The 
importance  of  a  forgiving  spirit  in  ap- 
proaching the  throne  of  mercy  is  fully 
and  clearly  expressed  in  the  opening 
sentences  of  the  Communion  Service. 
"  Ye  that  do  truly  and  earnestly  repent 
of  your  sins,  and  are  in  love  and  charity 
with  your  neighbours,  draw  near,"  &c. 
5.  A  superficial  sense  of  want.  God 
only  promises  to  satisfy  real,  not  fancied 
wants.  Until  we  come  to  feel  the  pain 
of  want,  not  able  fully  to  value  heavenly 
gifts.  God  bestows  few  blessings  where 
not  wanted,  or  not  valued. 

II.  Through  some  defect  in  the 
nature  of  the  petition.  1.  It  may  he 
unsuitable.  This,  not  cause  of  delay  in 
Nehemiah's  case.  The  king's  favour  was 
necessary  to  the  success  of  his  enterprise. 
Good  men  err  in  judgment.  God  may 
answer  prayer,  but  not  as  we  expected. 
The  means  desired  may  not  be  the  most 
suitable  for  the  attainment  of  the  end 
contemplated.  2.  It  may  be  harmful. 
Child  may  ask  for  a  razor  to  play  with. 
Father  refuses  because  life  would  be 
endangered.  Our  Father  loves  his 
children  too  well  to  grant  them  what 
he  knows  would  ruin  both  body  and 
soul.  3.  It  may  be  impracticable. 
Whilst  true  that  nothing  is  impossible 
with  God,  also  true  that  he  has  chosen 
to  govern  the  moral  and  material  universe 
by  certain  fixed  laws,  some  of  which  he 
never  interferes  with,  and  others  only 
for    very    momentous    reasons.      Our 


34 


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


[chap,  l 


prayers  may  require  the  over-riding  of 
these  laws  on  insufficient  grounds  ;  hence 
their  failure.  This  he  will  make  known 
to  the  sincere  suppliant  by  the  inspiration 
and  illumination  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

III.  Through  immaturity  in  the 
conditions  required  to  give  full  value 
to  the  blessing  sought.  This  probably 
the  cause  of  the  delay  in  Nehemiah's 
case.  He  was  a  good  and  upright  man, 
and  his  petition  was  unimpeachable,  for 
it  was  eventually  granted.  Circum- 
stances were  not  ripe.  Answers  are 
sometimes  delayed  :  1.  Because  God^s 
agents  are  not  yet  in  full  sympathy  with 
the  work.  King  not  yet  in  favourable 
mind,  people  not  yet  driven  to  ex- 
tremity. All  God's  agents  are  to  be 
educated  in  his  school  for  his  work. 
When  their  training  complete  he  brings 
them  forth  and  uses  them,  not  before. 
Thus  Moses,  David,  Paul,  &c.  were 
educated.  2.  Circumstances  are  not  yet 
congenial.  Every  great  enterprise  needs 
favourable  surroundings  for  its  inception, 
as  much  as  the  seed  requires  good  soil. 
Bury  the  acorn  in  the  sand,  and  it 
remains  barren.  Cast  the  corn-seed  into 
the  ocean,  and  it  produces  no  harvest. 
Even  so,  the  most  laudable  enterprise, 
the  most  desirable  reformation,  planted 


in  the  midst  of  unfriendly  circumstances 
wUl  come  to  nought.  Germany  was 
ready  for  Luther,  England  for  Wesley, 
Scotland  for  Moody,  hence  their  success 
where  others  failed.  3.  Because  the  time 
was  not  opportune.  The  hour  had  not 
yet  come.  God's  times  are  in  his  own 
hands.  Of  the  times  and  seasons  know- 
eth  no  man.  Having  done  all,  it  is  our 
duty  to  wait  the  moving  of  the  pillar. 
At  the  right  moment  God  will  manifest 
himself,  and  appear  on  behalf  of  his 
people. 

Illustration :  —  (a)  It  is  recorded  of  an 
architect  of  the  name  of  Cnidus,  that  having 
built  a  watch-tower  for  the  king  of  Egypt,  to 
warn  mariners  from  certain  dangerous  rocks,  he 
caused  his  own  name  to  be  engraved  in  large 
letters  on  a  stone  in  the  wall,  and  then  having 
covered  it  with  plaster,  he  inscribed  on  the 
outside,  in  golden  letters,  the  name  of  the  king 
of  Egypt,  as  though  the  thing  were  done  for 
his  glory.  He  was  cunning  enough  to  know 
that  the  waves  would  ere  long  wear  away  the 
coat  of  plastering,  and  that  then  his  own  name 
would  appear,  and  his  memory  be  handed  do\vi\ 
to  successive  generations.  How  many  are  there 
who,  whilst  affecting  to  seek  only  the  glory 
of  God  and  His  Church,  are  really  seeking 
whatever  is  calculated  to  gratify  self-love. 
Could  the  outer  coat  of  their  pretences  be 
removed,  we  should  see  them  as  they  really  are, 
desirous  not  of  God's  glory,  but  of  their  own  — 
Trench. 


Man's  Equality  before  God. 
i.  11.     In  the  sight  of  this  man. 


The  familiar  way  in  which  Nehemiah 
speaks  of  the  king  before  God  suggests — 

I.  That  the  greatest  earthly  poten- 
tates are  themselves  subjects  of  a 
higher  King.  They  equally  under  his 
laws  and  subject  to  his  will,  (a)  They 
and  their  meanest  subjects  on  a  perfect 
level  in  the  heavenly  court.  God  no 
respecter  of  persons.  This  thought  should 
enable  us  to  conquer  the  fear  of  man. 
This  thought  should  make  us  satisfied 
with  our  lot.  Their  Master  and  Judge 
and  ours  the  same.  (/3) 

II.  That  the  most  powerful  mon- 
archs  are  but  men.  ^'  This  man." 
1.  Falleii  men.  "All  we  like  sheep," 
&c.  "There  is  no  difference,"  &c. 
"  None  righteous,  no  not  one"  (Ps.  xiv. 
2  ;  Bom.  iii.  9 ;  Isa.  liii.  6 ;  Ps.  cxliii. 


2.  All  needing  the  same  mercy;  all 
requiring  to  seek  it  in  the  same  way 
(humbly),  and  on  the  same  terms  (re- 
pentance and  faith).  "  All  stand  before 
judgment-seat  of  Christ"  (Rom.  xiv. 
10  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10).  2.  Suffering  men. 
Liable  to  same  pains,  infirmities,  be- 
reavements, accidents,  &c.  One  touch 
of  nature  makes  all  the  world  akin. 
One  pang  of  suffering  too.  3.  Dying 
men.  All  amenable  to  king  of  terrors. 
He  enters  the  palace  as  well  as  poor- 
house.  Queen  Elizabeth  begged  for 
another  hour  to  live,  but  death  was  in- 
exorable. It  lays  the  monarch  low  with 
the  same  stroke  that  smites  his  meanest 
subject.  Honours  thus  fleeting  not  to 
be  compared  with  the  everlasting  joys 
which  are  at  God  s  right  hand. 


CHAP.  L] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAB, 


S5 


III.  That  God  is  no  respecter  of 
human  distinctions.  I.  Not  that  he 
disapproves  of  the  ordinary  distinctions 
of  social  position.  This  inevitable.  If 
all  men  made  equal  to-day,  some  would 
have  risen  and  others  have  fallen  by 
to-morrow.  Masters  and  servants, 
monarchs  and  subjects,  teachers  and 
taught,  there  must  of  necessity  be  as 
long  as  human  society  exists.  The 
ideas  of  the  socialist  contrary  alike  to 
Divine  law  and  practical  utility.  Only 
before  God  are  men  in  any  sense  equal. 
2.  But  that  he  regards  character  as 
everythinc/;  the  accidentals  of  social 
position  as  nothing.  What  a  man  is, 
not  what  he  haSy  commends  him  to 
God.  (y) 

IV.  That  the  best  means  of  influ- 
encing earthly  monarchs  is  to  secure 
the  aid  of  Jehovah.  So  did  Nehemiah. 
The  propriety  of  this  act  seen  in  his 
management  of  the  undertaking.  Inter- 
course with  God  will  best  prepare  for 
dealings  with  men.  When  we  thus 
address  ourselves  to  God,  difficulties 
vanish.  "  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all." 
Every  event  under  his  direction ;  every 
character  under  his  control.  When 
Herod  imprisoned  Peter,  the  Church 
assembled  together,  not  to  draw  up  a 
petition  and  address  it  to  the  king  ;  but 
to  seek  God's  interposition.  They  ap- 
plied, not  to  the  servant,  but  the  master ; 
to  one  who  had  Herod  completely  under 
check :  '*  Prayer  was  made,  without 
ceasing,  of  the  Church  unto  God  for 


him."  What  was  the  consequence? 
**  When  Herod  would  have  brought  him 
forth,'*  &c.  (Acts  xii.  6).  Solomon  says, 
"  The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
Lord,  as  the  rivers  of  water  :  he  turneth  it 
whithersoever  he  will"  (Prov.  xxi.  1). 
Eastern  monarchs  were  absolute;  yet  God 
had  them  more  under  his  command  than 
the  husbandman  has  a  direction  of  the 
water  in  a  meadow.  There  is  a  two-fold 
dominion  which  God  exercises  over  the 
mind  of  man.  1.  By  the  agency  of  his 
grace,  as  in  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus. 
From  a  furious  persecutor,  he  becomes 
at  once  an  apostle.  2.  By  the  agency  of 
his  providence.  History  is  full  of  this. — 
Jay, 

Illustrations  ."—-(a)  What  are  they  when  they 
stand  upon  the  highest  pinnacles  of  world]  y 
dignities,  but  bladders  swelled  up  with  the  breath 
of  popularity  ?  nothings  set  astrut ;  chessmen, 
that  on  the  board  play  the  kings  and  nobles,  but 
in  the  bag  are  of  the  same  material,  and  rank 
with  others. — Bp.  Sopkins. 

(/3)  King  Canute  was  one  day  flattered  by  his 
courtiers  on  account  of  his  power.  Then  he 
ordered  his  throne  to  be  placed  by  the  sea-side. 
The  tide  was  rolling  in,  and  threatened  to  drown 
hira.  He  commanded  the  waves  to  stop.  Of 
course  they  did  not.  Then  he  said  to  his  flatterers, 
**  Behold  how  small  is  the  might  of  kings." 

(y)  With  God  there  is  no  freeman  but  his 
servant,  though  in  the  galleys  ;  no  slave  but  the 
sinner,  though  in  a  palace ;  none  noble  but  the 
virtuous,  if  never  so  basely  descended  ;  none  rich 
but  he  that  possesseth  God,  even  in  rags ;  none 
wise  but  he  that  is  a  fool  to  the  world  and  him- 
self ;  none  happy  but  he  whom  the  world  pities. 
Let  me  be  free,  noble,  rich,  wise,  happy  to  God. 
—Bp,  Hall, 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  L 


L  3.     Sin  ruins  a  Kinqdom. 

I.  If  there  be  a  moral  governor  of  shall  not  stand  in  his  sight ;  he  hateth 
the  universe,  sin  must  provoke  him.  aU  workers  of  iniquity."  And  this  is 
A  righteous  God  must  love  righteous-     essential  to  every  lovely  and  reverential 


ness ;  a  holy  God,  holiness ;  a  God  of 
order,  order;  a  God  of  benevolence, 
benevolence;  and  accordingly  he  must 
abhor  all  that  is  opposite  to  these. 
Hence,  it  is  said,  that  "  God  is  angry 


view  we  can   take  of   God.     For  who 
could  adore  a  being  who  professed  to 
govern    the   world,   and    suffered    the 
wicked  to  go  on  with  impunity. 
II.  If  sin  provoke  God,  he  is  able 


with  the  wicked  everv  day ;  the  wicked     to  punish  it.  He  is  "  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  1. 


the  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  the  Lord 
mighty  in  battle."  All  the  elements 
are  his.  Every  creature  obeys  his  nod, 
from  an  archangel  to  a  worm.  How 
idle  therefore  to  talk  of  armies,  navies, 
and  alliances,  and  say  after  comparing 
force  with  force,  "  Oh  !  the  enemy 
cannot  come  !  "  He  cannot  come  unless 
God  send  him ;  but  he  can  come  easily 
enough  if  he  should.  Is  anything  too 
hard  for  the  Lord,  when  he  would  either 
show  mercy  or  execute  wrath. 

III.  Bodies  of  men  are  punishable 
in  this  world  only.  In  eternity  there 
are  no  families,  churches,  nations.  If 
therefore  a  country  is  to  be  destroyed, 
it  is  tried,  condemned,  and  executed 
here.  When  we  see  an  individual 
sinner  prospering  in  the  world,  and  not 
immediately  punished,  our  faith  is  not 
staggered  ]  for  we  know  that  '*  his  day 
is  coming."  But  if  a  wicked  people  were 
allowed  to  escape,  we  should  be  con- 
founded, we  should  ask,  "  Where  is  the 
God  of  Judgment  % "  For  in  this  case 
they  are  not  punished  now ;  and  they 
cannot  be  punished  hereafter. 

IV.  There  is  a  tendency  in  the  very 
nature  of  sin  to  injure  and  ruin  a 
country.  It  violates  all  the  duties  of 
relative  life.  It  destroys  subordination. 
It  relaxes  the  ties  which  bind  mankind 
together,  and  makes  them  selfish  and 
mean.  It  renders  men  enemies  to  each 
other.  Social  welfare  cannot  survive 
the  death  of  morals  and  virtue. 

V.  God's  dealings  with  guilty 
nations  are  confirmed  both  by  his 
word  and  all  human  history.  He  has 
invariably  punished  them  in  due  time. 
Witness  the  state  of  Mneveh,  Babylon, 
and  others.  Thus  the  nation  Samuel 
addressed  put  his  declaration  to  the 
trial  and  found  it  true.  A  succession 
of  severe  judgments  befell  them,  till  at 
last  wrath  came  upon  them  to  the  utter- 
most, and  '*  the  Romans  came  and  took 
away  both  their  place  and  nation." 

VI.  God  always  gives  previous 
intimation  of  his  coming  to  judge  a 
nation.  So  that  were  men  not  blind 
and  deaf,  they  must  see  and  hear  his 
coming.  When  you  see  the  body 
wasting  away  by  disease,  and  every 
complaint  growing  more  inveterate,  you 


suspect  that  death  will  be  the  conse- 
quence ;  it  is  already  begun.  Christ 
said,  **  When  ye  see  a  cloud  rise  out  of 
the  west,  straightway  ye  say.  There 
Cometh  a  shower ;  and  so  it  is  .  .  .  Ye 
hypocrites  !  ye  can  discern  the  face  of 
the  sky,  and  of  the  earth  ;  but  how  is 
it  that  ye  do  not  discern  this  time  % " 

VII.  If  God  has  favoured  a  nation 
with  the  revelation  of  his  will,  their 
sins  are  aggravated  by  means  of  this 
light.  "Where  much  is  given,  much 
wiU  be  required."  "  He  that  knew  his 
Lord's  will,  and  did  it  not,  shall  be 
beaten  with  many  stripes."  Thus,  a 
heathen  country  committing  the  very 
same  sins  with  a  country  enlightened 
with  the  Gospel,  is  far  less  criminal. 
A  country  overspread  with  superstition, 
where  the  Bible  is  scarcely  known, 
would  be  far  less  guilty  than  a  country 
favoured  with  a  purer  worship,  and 
where  evangelical  instruction  is  open  to 
all. 

VIII.  When  God  has  distinguished 
a  people  by  singular  instances  of  his 
favour,  that  people  will  be  propor- 
tionally criminal,  unless  they  dis- 
tinguish themselves  by  their  devoted- 
ness  to  him.  Thus  God  from  time  to 
time  aggravated  the  sins  of  the  Jews. 
"  He  made  them  ride  upon  the  high 
places  of  the  earth,"  &c.  **  But  Jeshu- 
run  waxed  fat,  and  kicked,"  &c. 

IX.  When  a  nation  is  under  the 
corrections  of  the  Almighty,  they  are 
eminently  sinful  if  they  disregard  the 
tokens  of  his  wrath.  Hence  Isaiah 
says,  "  In  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of 
Hosts  call  to  weeping  and  to  mourning, 
&c.,  and  behold  joy  and  gladness  ;  let  us 
eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we  die." 
Jeremiah  also  says,  ''  Thou  hast  stricken 
thera,  but  they  have  not  grieved ;  thou 
hast  consumed  them,  but  they  have 
refused  to  receive  correction  ;  they  have 
made  their  faces  harder  than  a  rock ;  they 
have  refused  to  return." 

X.  Shameless  sinning  is  a  sure 
proof  of  general  corruption.  And 
where  is  there  a  man  who  is  not  more 
ashamed  of  a  threadbare  coat  than  a 
dishonest  action  *?  To  fail  in  business, 
and  defraud  innocent  sufferers  of  their 
lawful  property,  is  no  longer  scandalous. 


CHAP,  l] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHKMIAB. 


87 


rmpnrity    is    tolerated.       Behold    the  2.  mo  is  the  hest  fnend--^^.  M^^^^ 

BxiLiments   which    fashion    has  tried  "  ^y  the  hlessmg  of  the  uprig^^^^^^ 

upon  thereserve,  the  decency,  the  purity  is  exfed:  but  it  is  overthrown  b^^ 

of  woman!      Learn-1.    Who   is   the  mouth  of  the  wicked. -/ay,  a&n^iflrerf. 
worst  enemy  of  his  country — the  sinner, 

i  7.    Forgotten  Sins  Rembmbbbed. 


I.  We    are   all    chargeable    with 
faults.      Testimony   of    Scripture   and 
conscience  are  both  against  us.     "  There 
is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,  that  doeth 
good  and  sinneth  not."     "  They  are  all 
gone  out  of  the  way  :  there  is  none  that 
doeth  good,  no,  not  one."     (Eccl.  vii. 
20;  Rom.  iii.  12).     David  feared  God, 
and   hated   evil,   yet  needed    to   pray, 
*'  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults  " 
(Ps.  xix.  12).    James,  though  an  apostle, 
affirms,  '*  In  many  things  we  offend  all." 
John  was  beloved  above  all  the  apostles, 
and  bore  most  of  his  Master's  image,  yet 
he  declares,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves  "  (1  Jno.  i.  8). 
"  All  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the 
glory  of  God."     This  fact  is  confirmed 
by  everything  we  feel  within  us,  and 
observe  without  us.    What  faults  1    We 
have  forgotten  the  Son  of  God,  the  Lord 
of  life  and  glory.     We  are  chargeable 
with  ingratitude,  not  against  an  earthly 
benefactor,  but  a  heavenly  one.     Every 
forbidden   action  that   we   have   done, 
every  sinful  word  that  we  have  spoken, 
every  irregular  thought   that  we  have 
entertained,  or  unhallowed  wish  that  we 
have  harboured  in  our  breast,  accumulates 
our  load  of  guilt. 

II.  We  are  liable  to  forget  our 
fa  alts.  Men  have  convictions  of  sin, 
but  they  stifle  them.  Amidst  the 
pleasures  or  employments  of  time,  they 
lose  even  the  recollection  of  their  guilt ; 
and  go  forward  in  the  same  course, 
suspecting  no  danger,  till  utter  destruc- 
tion overtakes  them.  1.  Through  ignor- 
ance of  the  true  nature  of  sin.  Its 
malignity  is  not  properly  understood. 
Men  think  of  sin  as  a  light  matter  :  if 
it  inconvenience  them,  they  exclaim 
against  it ;  if  not,  they  practise  it  with 
little  compunction  or  concern.  They  do 
not  reflect  on  what  sin  is  in  the  sight  of 
God,  nor  think  as  they  ought  of  its 
result   in   ^  future   world;  and   heuco 


they   forget   it.      2.   Through   self-love. 
Self-love  when  regulated  is  laudable  and 
useful ;  because  it  leads  to  the  hatred  of 
what  is  evil,  and  to  the  pursuit  of  what 
is  good.      But  that  love  of  self  which 
possesses  and  actuates  thousands,  is  little 
different  from  the  love  of  sin ;  they  love 
indolence,  sensual  gratification,  and  ease  ; 
they  resemble  a  man  with   a  diseased 
limb,  who  chooses  death  by  fatal  degrees, 
rather   than   amputation.     3.    Through 
hurry  of  business.    4.  Tlirough  elevation 
in  worldly  circumstances.     Great  num- 
bers, from  the  pressing  importunity  of 
their  secular  concerns,   from  the  eager 
desire  of  getting  forward  in  the  world, 
forget  their  souls,  forget  their  sins,  for- 
get the  Saviour,  and  abide  in  the  most 
dangerous  state  of  folly  and  insensibility. 
III.    Various     circumstances     are 
adapted  to  remind  us  of  our  faults. 
1.     Providential     occurrences.       These 
regard   ourselves,  the   affliction  of  our 
persons,  or  our  immediate  connections. 
The  case  of  the  widow  of  Zarephath  an 
illustration.       She   had    one   son;    the 
prophet  Elijah  resided  in  her  house  ;  no 
affluence  was  there:  but   by  him,  the 
Lord  made  her   barrel  of  meal  not  to 
waste,  and  her  cruse  of  oil  not  to  fail. 
Suddenly  her  son  was  taken  from  her 
by  the  stroke  of  death ;  hear  what  she 
said  to  the  prophet,   "Art  thou  come 
unto  me  to  call  my  sin  to  remembrance, 
and  to  slay  my  son  V '  (1  Kings  xvii.  1 8) . 
Had    her   son    lived,    and    Providence 
cc;itinued  to  smile,  probably  her  con- 
victions would   have   remained   asleep. 
Other  providential  occurrences  regard  the 
condition  of  those  about  us,  and  thus 
strike    our    observation.       We    witness 
sometimes  the  difficulties  in  which  others 
are  involved ;  we  think  of  what  occa- 
sioned such  difficulties,  and  are  remiaded 
of   similar   causes   in    ourselves,  which 
might    have    produced    similar   effects. 
An  idle  man  sees  in  another  the  effects  of 


88 


HOMILETIC  COMMMNTART:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  t. 


indolence, — that  he  is  reduced  to  poverty, 
and  clothed  in  rags ;  a  drunkard  observes 
in  another  the  effects  of  intemperance, — 
that  his  health  is  impaired  his  circum- 
stances embarrassed,  and  his  character 
ruined.  These  things  are  adapted  to 
awaken  conviction,  to  bring  a  man's 
own  faults  to  remembrance.  Illustration 
furnished  by  the  account  of  "  the  wo- 
man taken  in  adultery "  (Jno.  viii. 
7 — 9);  Joseph's  interview  with  his 
brethren  (Gen.  xlii.  21),  and  Belshazzar's 
feast  (Dan.  v.  1 — 7).  In  each  case  the 
men  remembered  their  faults.  2.  The 
ministry  of  God's  word.  This  word  is 
profitable  not  only  for  "  doctrine  and 
instruction,"  but  also  for  "correction 
and  reproof."  See  this  in  the  case  of 
the  Jews  who  stoned  Stephen.  "  They 
were  cut  to  the  heart"  (Acts  vii.  45). 
The  case  of  Felix  also  another  illustra- 
tion in  point.  Whilst  Paul  *'  reasoned 
of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judg- 
ment to  come,  Felix  trembled "  (Acts 
xxiv.  25).  When  Peter  preached  on 
the  day  of  Pentecost,  "  they  were  pricked 
in  their  hearts,  and  said  unto  Peter,  and 
to  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  Men  and 
brethren,  what  shall  we  do*?"  (Acts  ii. 
37).  David  and  Nathan  (2  Sam.  xii. 
7 — 12).  "  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge 
of  sin"  (Rom.  iii.  20). 

IV.  When  we  are  reminded  of  our 
faults  we  should  be  ready  to  confess 
them.  "  Confess  your  faults  one  to 
another"  (Jas.  v.  16).  This  gives  no 
countenance  to  the  arbitrary  practice  of 
popish  confessions ;  for  according  to 
this  passage  the  people  have  as  much 
right  to  demand  confession  from  the 
priests,  as  the  priests  have  from  the 
people.  It  enjoins  candour,  and  open 
confession  of  blame,  when  professing 
Christians  have  offended  one  another. 
Confession  also  must  be  made  to  God. 


"He  that  covereth  his  sins  shall  not 
prosper ;  but  whoso  confesseth  and  for- 
saketh  them  shall  have  mercy"  (Prov. 
xxviii.  13).  This  clearly  implies  that 
they  can  have  no  mercy  who  do  not 
confess  their  sins.  Let  a  man  proudly 
persist  in  maintaining  his  innocency ; 
let  him  think  highly  of  what  he  calls 
his  moral  rectitude;  let  him  vainly 
imagine  that  his  good  deeds  outweigh 
his  bad  ones ;  or  let  him  sink  into  a 
state  of  obstinate  indifference — that  man 
is  certainly  not  in  the  way  of  mercy. 
"  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we 
deceive  ourselves."  "  If  we  confess  our 
sins,  God  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive 
us  our  sins"  (1  Jno.  i.  8,  9).  What 
sins  ?  Lament  before  God  a  hard  heart, 
a  proud  heart,  a  corrupt  heart.  Lament 
before  him  a  fretful  temper,  a  peevish, 
a  passionate  temper.  Lament  the  weak- 
ness of  your  faith,  the  deadness  of  your 
hope,  the  languor  of  your  love,  the 
coldness  of  your  zeal,  the  inefficiency  of 
all  your  desires  and  resolutions. 

V.  Confession  of  faults  should  always 
be  attended  with  real  amendment. 
This  is  an  incumbent  duty ;  for  what  is 
repentance'?  It  includes  a  disposition 
to  undo  all  the  evil  which  we  have  done. 
Zaccheus*  repentance  was  of  the  right 
kind,  for  he  offered  to  make  restitution. 
*'  Lord,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  to 
the  poor ;  and  if  I  have  taken  anything 
from  any  man  by  false  accusation  I 
restore  him  fourfold "  (Luke  xix.  8). 
Eepentance  is  nothing  without  reforma- 
tion; and  reformation,  in  many  instances, 
is  a  mere  name  without  restitution : 
"  Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God, 
I  have  borne  chastisement,  /  will  not 
offend  any  more.  If  I  have  done  in- 
iquity, I  wUl  do  no  more  "  (Job  xxxiv. 
31,  32). — Kiddf  abridged. 


i.  10.     An  Elect  People. 


I.  True  believers  are  the  objects  of 

a  special  choice.  Note — 1.  Its  author. 
**  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen 
you  to  salvation."  We  cannot,  without 
contradicting  Scripture,  dispute  the  fact 
that  God's  people  are  a  chosen  people- 


term  ;  remember  where  you  find  it ;  seek 
rather  to  understand  the  subject,  and 
objections  will  subside.  Whilst  God 
injures  none,  surely  he  may  confer  special 
benefits  on  some.  Let  it  be  granted  that 
the  choice  of  some  implies  that  others  are 


chosen  of  God.     Do  not  object  to  the     not  chosen;  yet  who  can  gainsay  the 


CHAP.  I.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


39 


language  of  St.  Paul,  "  Nay  but,  0  man, 
who  art  thou  that  repHest  against  God  % " 
&c.  (Rom.  ix.  20).  "  Sliall  not  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  1 " 
Doubtless  he  shall ! — of  this  we  may  rest 
assured  :  "  The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all 
his  ways,  and  holy  in  all  his  works." 
2.  The  date  of  this  choice.  "  From  the 
beginning."  This  expression  must  be 
explained  by  similar  passages  which 
relate  to  the  same  subject.  St.  Peter 
says,  ''  Ye  are  a  chosen  generation,  elect 
according  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  " 
(1  Pet.  ii.  9  ;  i.  2).  St.  Paul,  "whom 
he  did  foreknow,  he  also  did  predes- 
tinate." Foreknowledge  leads  us  back 
to  some  period  previous  to  the  existence 
of  those  persons;  and  there  is  no  text 
more  explicit  than  that  which  occurs  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  "According 
as  he  hath  chosen  us  in  him  (Christ), 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.'^ 
1^0 w,  what  was  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  must  have  been  in  eternity; 
for  we  cannot  conceive  a  point  of  time, 
before  time  commenced.  Time  is  a 
parenthesis  in  eternity  ;  a  limited  dura- 
tion which  regards  creatures.  Here  then 
is  taught  the  freeness  of  this  choice.  If 
it  was  from  the  beginning,  it  was  before 
man  had  his  being  :  consequently  there 
could  be  no  worthiness  in  us,  or  any  of 
our  race,  influencing  the  Most  High  to 
such  a  choice.  3,  The  end  of  this  choice. 
"  To  salvation."  The  Israelites  as  a 
nation  were  chosen  of  God,  but  not  all 
of  them  to  salvation,  for  many  fell ;  and 
we  are  admonished  to  take  heed  lest  we 
"  fall  after  the  same  example  of  unbelief " 
(Heb.  iv.  11).  The  twelve  were  chosen 
to  the  office  of  apostleship,  but  not  all  of 
them  to  salvation,  for  Judas  was  of  their 
number.  "  Have  not  I  chosen  you 
twelve,  and  one  of  you  is  a  devil  1 "  (Jo. 
vi.  70).  Do  you  ask,  *'  What  is  salva- 
tion 1 "  It  is  heaven.  It  includes  the 
complete  deliverance  from  all  evil,  and 
the  full  possession  of  all  good ;  it  includes 
an  entire  freedom  from  sin,  and  the 
constant  enjoyment  of  purity  and  peace  ; 
it  includes  an  everlasting  release  from  all 
that  is  painful  and  distressing,  and  the 


endless  fruition  of  whatever  can  satisfy 
and  exalt  the  immortal  mind,  the  eternal 
fruition  of  God  himself. 

II.  True  believers  are  persons  of  a 
peculiar  character.  The  people  of  God 
are  "  predestinated  to  be  conformed  to 
the  image  of  his  Son."  They  are  chosen 
in  Christ  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  "  that  they  should  be  holy  and 
without  blame  before  him  in  love" 
(Ephes.  i,  4).  1.  They  are  believers  of 
the  truth.  Chosen  to  salvation,  "through 
belief  of  the  truth. "  Not  possible  to  give 
a  more  concise  definition  of  faith  than 
here — ^'the  truth  ;  "  hence  our  Lord  said, 
"  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth 
shall  make  you  free."  Believing  the 
truth  is  receiving  it  as  the  record  of  God, 
in  such  a  way  as  to  feel  affected  and  in- 
fluenced by  it  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  things  which  it  regards.  Are  we 
believers  of  the  truth  ?  If  not,  we  have 
no  Scriptural  evidence  of  our  election 
of  God  to  salvation.  2.  They  are  par- 
takers of  the  Spirit,  "  If  any  man  have 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  he  is  none  of 
his"  (Rom.  viii.  9).  A  man  is  not  born 
again  but  of  the  Spirit ;  and  the  new 
birth  or  regeneration  is  the  commence- 
ment of  the  new  life.  "  Know  ye  not 
that  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  dweUeth  in  you  "  (1 
Cor.  iii.  16).  Not  without  reason  are 
we  admonished,  "Quench  not  the  Spirit." 
3.  They  ai^e  the  subjects  of  sanctification. 
The  Holy  Spirit  produces  it,  and  gradu- 
ally promotes  it ;  they  are  chosen  to  sal- 
vation "  through  sanctification  of  the 
Spirit."  Sanctification  is  holiness,  and 
there  is  no  way  of  attaining  holiness  but 
by  "  the  Spirit  of  Holiness."  Sanctifica- 
tion is  the  best  evidence  of  faith ;  it  is 
also  the  best  possible  mark  of  election  to 
salvation.  We  have  proof  that  we  are  "of 
God,"  only  so  far  as  we  are  like  God.  Is 
he  our  Father*?  Where  then  is  resem- 
blance to  him  1  If  multitudes  of  profess- 
ors examine  themselves  by  this  test,  it  is 
to  be  feared  they  will  have  little  hope 
left  of  their  interest  in  everlasting  love. 
—Kidd, 


40 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMlAH. 


[OHAP.  L 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Benevolence.  1.  It  is  said  of  Lord  Chief 
Justice  Hale,  that  he  frequently  invited  his  poor 
neighbours  to  dinner,  and  made  them  sit  at  table 
with  himself.  If  any  of  them  were  sick,  so  that 
they  could  not  come,  he  would  send  provisions  to 
them  from  his  own  table.  He  did  not  confine 
his  bounties  to  the  poor  of  his  own  parish,  but 
diffused  supplies  to  the  neighbouring  parishes  as 
occasion  required.  He  always  treated  the  old, 
the  needy,  and  the  sick  with  the  tenderness  and 
familiarity  that  became  one  who  considered 
they  were  of  the  same  nature  with  himself,  and 
were  reduced  to  no  other  necessities  but  such  as 
he  himself  might  be  brought  to.  Common 
beggars  he  considered  in  another  view.  If  any 
of  these  met  him  in  his  walks,  or  came  to  his 
door,  he  would  ask  such  as  were  capable  of  working, 
why  they  went  about  so  idly.  If  they  answered, 
it  was  because  they  could  not  get  employment, 
he  would  send  them  to  some  field,  to  gather  all 
the  stones  in  it,  and  lay  them  in  a  heap,  and  then 
paid  them  liberally  for  their  trouble.  This  being 
done,  he  used  to  send  his  carts,  and  cause  the 
stones  to  be  carried  to  such  places  of  the  highway 
as  needed  repair.  2.  "  I  often  think,"  says 
Coleridge,  "  with  pleasure,  of  the  active  practical 
benevolence  of  Salter.  His  rides  were  often 
sixty,  averaging  more  than  thirty  miles  a  day, 
over  bad  '-oads,  and  in  dark  nights ;  yet  not  once 
was  he  known  to  refuse  a  summons,  though 
quite  sure  that  he  would  receive  no  remuneration ; 
nay,  not  sure  that  it  would  not  be  necessary  to  sup- 
ply wine,  or  cordials,  which,  in  the  absence  of 
the  landlord  of  his  village,  must  be  at  his  own 
expense.  This  man  was  generally  pitied  by  the 
affluent  and  the  idle,  on  the  score  of  his  constant 
labours,  and  the  drudgery  which  he  almost  seemed 
to  court  ;  yet  with  little  reason,  for  I  never  knew 
a  man  more'to  be  envied,  or  more  cheerful,  more 
invariably  kind,  or  more  patient ;  he  was  always 
kind  from  real  kindness  and  delicacy  of  feeling, 
never  being  even  for  a  moment  angry. 

Prayer  must  be  submissive.  1.  A  Christian 
widow  in  London  saw,  with  great  alarm,  her 
only  child  taken  dangerously  ill.  As  the  illness 
increased  she  became  almost  distracted  from  a 
dread  of  losing  her  child ;  at  length,  it  became 
so  extremely  ill,  and  so  convulsed,  that  she 
kneeled  down  by  the  bed,  deeply  affected,  and  in 
prayer  said,  *'  Now,  Lord,  thy  will  be  done." 
From  that  hour  the  child  began  to  recover,  till 
health  was  perfectly  restored.  2.  Lord  Boling- 
broke  once  asked  Lady  Huntingdon  how  she 
reconciled  prayer  to  God  for  particular  blessings, 
with  absolute  resignation  to  the  Divine  will. 
**Very  easily,"  answered  her  ladyship,  "just  as 
if  I  were  to  offer  a  petition  to  a  monarch,  of 


whose  kindness  and  wisdom  I  had  the  highest 
opinion.  In  such  a  case  my  language  would  be, 
— I  wish  you  to  bestow  on  me  such  or  such  a 
favour  ;  but  your  Majesty  knows  better  than  I, 
how  far  it  would  be  agreeable  to  you,  or  right  in 
itself,  to  grant  my  desire.  I  therefore  content 
myself  with  humbly  presenting  my  petition,  and 
leave  the  event  of  it  entirely  to  you."  3.  The 
late  Mr.  Kilpin  of  Exeter  writes,  **I  knew  a 
case  in  which  the  minister  praying  over  a 
child  apparently  dying,  said,  "If  it  be  thy  will 

spare "     The  poor  mother's  soul,  yearning 

for  her  beloved,  exclaimed,  "  It  must  be  his  will, 
I  cannot  bear  »/s."  The  minister  stopped.  To 
the  surprise  of  many  the  child  recovered  ;  and  the 
mother,  after  almost  suffering  martyrdom  by  him 
while  a  stripling,  lived  to  see  him  hanged  before 
he  was  twenty-two  !  It  is  good  to  say,  *'  Not 
my  will,  but  thine  be  done." 

Modest  goodness.  1.  Two  or  three  years  before 
the  death  of  John  Newton,  when  his  sight  was 
so  dim  that  he  was  no  longer  able  to  read,  an 
aged  friend  and  brother  in  the  ministry  called  on 
him  to  breakfast.  Family  prayer  succeeded.  It 
was  the  good  man's  custom  to  make  a  few  remarks 
upon  the  passage  read.  After  the  reading  of  the 
text,  '*  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am," 
he  paused  for  some  moments,  and  then  uttered 
the  following  affecting  soliloquy  : — •*  I  am  not 
what  I  ought  to  be  !  Ah,  how  imperfect  and 
deficient.  I  am  not  what  I  wish  to  be.  I  am 
not  what  I  hope  to  be.  Soon,  soon,  I  shall  put 
off  mortality,  and  with  mortality,  all  sin  and 
imperfection.  Yet  though  I  am  not  what  I 
ought  to  be,  nor  what  I  wish  to  be,  nor  what  I 
hope  to  be,  I  can  truly  say  I  am  not  what  I  once 
was,  a  slave  to  sin  and  Satan,  and  I  can  heartily 
join  with  the  apostle  and  acknowledge,  *  By  the 
grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am.'  Let  us  pray." 
2.  "  An  individual,"  says  a  missionary,  "  em- 
ployed in  the  translation  of  the  Scriptures  at  a 
station  where  I  resided,  on  arriving  at  the  passage, 

*  Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God '  (1  Jno.  iii.  2), 
came  running  to  me  in  great  haste,  exclaiming. 
No,  no,  it  is  too  much  ;  allow  me  to  render  it, 

*  Now  are  we  permitted  to  kiss  his  feet.'  A 
simple  and  beautiful  representation  of  those  feel- 
ings with  which  Christians  should  ever  contemplate 
the  dignity  of  their  character,  and  the  honour 
conferred  upon  them."  3.  Dr.  Lathrop  was  a 
man  of  generous  piety,  but  much  opposed  to  the 
noisy  zeal  that  seeketh  the  praise  of  men.  A 
young  divine,  who  was  much  given  to  enthusiastic 
cant,  one  day  said  to  him,  "  Do  you  suppose  you 
have  any  real  religion  f  "  "  None  to  apeak  of," 
was  the  excellent  reply. 


^   1 


CHAP.   II.] 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH. 


41 


CHAPTER  IL 

Explanatory  Notes.]  1.  Nisan]  Called  Abib  in  Exod.  xiii.  4,  first  month  in  Hebrew  national 
year.  Corresponds  to  parts  of  our  March  and  April.  3.  Let  the  king  live  for  ever]  (Heb.  ham- 
melek  I'olam  yihyeh.)  (Conip.  1  Kings  i.  31  ;  Dan.  ii.  4  ;  vi  6 — 21.)  The  mere  formula  of 
address,  like  our  "God  save  the  Queen."  Even  Daniel  used  it  without  compunction.  The  place  of  my 
fathers'  sepulchres]  The  Persians  regarded  their  burial-places  as  peculiarly  sacred.  6.  The  queen 
also  sitting  by  him]  Some  have  thought  this  was  Esther,  but  *'  Shegal"  refers  to  the  principal 
wife  of  the  king.  Damaspia  was  the  name  of  the  chief  wife  according  to  Ctesias.  7.  The  governors] 
(Heb.  pahawoth,  modern  pacha.)  Oriental  name  for  viceroy.  Beyond  the  river]  i,  e.  Euphrates. 
8.  Asaph,  the  keeper  of  the  king's  forest]  may  have  been  a  Jew.  Name,  Hebrew.  Word  trans- 
lated ^^ forest"  is  ^^ pardes^'^  our  "  paradise."  It  signifies  a  walled  round  place^  a  preserve  of  trees. 
Probably  a  royal  park  of  which  Asaph  was  keeper.  The  palace  which  appertained  to  the  house] 
Probably  Solomon's  palace,  situated  at  the  south-east  corner  of  the  temple-area,  was  next  to  the  house  ; 
i.  e.y  the  temple  as  the  house  of  God  (2  Chron,  xxiii.  12—15).  The  house  that  I  shall  enter  into] 
Some  think  this  refers  also  to  the  temple,  which  Nehemiah  would  enter  into  to  inspect;  more 
probably  the  house  where  he  would  dwell  during  his  stay  in  Jerusalem.  10.  Sanhallat  the  Horonite] 
(Beth-horon,  in  full.)  Two  Horons  in  Palestine,  a  few  miles  north  of  Jerusalem  ;  also  Horonaim  in 
Moab.  Sanballat,  probably  a  native  of  the  last  mentioned,  was  a  Moabite  ;  and  satrap  of  Samaria 
under  the  Persians.  Tobiah,  his  vizier  or  chief  adviser.  Origin  of  name  Sanballat  uncertain. 
Tohiah,  the  servant,  the  Ammonite]  Tobiah,  a  Jewish  name  (Ezra  ii.  60  ;  Zech.  vi.  10).  Probably 
a  renegade  Jew,  who  had  become  a  slave,  and  had  risen  by  his  talents  and  cunning  to  be  Sanballat's 
chief  officer,  hence  the  epithet,  **  Tobiah,  the  slave."  13.  The  gate  of  the  valley]  (Heb.  Sha'or  hag- 
gai.)  Probably  overlooking  valley  of  Hinnom,  called  in  Jer.  ii.  23  simply  *' the  valley."  It  was 
about  1200  feet  south  of  the  present  Jafi'a  gate.  The  Septuagint  calls  it  Portam  Galilee  ;  the  gate  of 
dead  men's  skulls,  because  that  way  they  went  to  Golgotha.  The  dragon  well]  So  called  either 
because  some  venomous  serpent  had  been  found  there,  or  because  the  waters  ran  out  of  the  mouth 
of  a  brazen  serpent.  (Heb.  Fountain  of  the  sea-monster.)  The  dung  port]  (Rather,  Rubbish-gate.) 
The  gate  near  which  the  refuse  of  the  city  was  cast,  and  burned.  Directly  before  that  part  of  Hinnom 
known  as  Tophet  (Jer.  vii.  31,  32;  xix.  6 — 14).  14.  The  gate  of  the  fountain]  A  gate  in  front 
of  the  pool  of  Siloam  (ch.  iii.  15).  The  king's  pool]  (Berechath  hammelek.)  The  pool  of  Siloani, 
80  called  because  it  watered  the  king's  garden.  There  was  no  place  for  the  beast  that  was  under 
me  to  pass]  The  ruin  was  great,  and  the  rubbish  so  accumulated,  that  Nehemiah  could  not  pursue 
his  course  along  the  wall  any  further,  but  was  obliged  to  go  down  into  the  valley  of  the  brook  Kidron 
(Nachal,  the  brook.)  16.  And  viewed  the  wall]  That  which  was  left  of  it,  16.  The  rulers] 
A  Persian  word  (Seganim)  signifying  the  executive  officers  of  the  colony.  Nor  to  the  nobles]  (Heb. 
white  ones.)  Among  the  Jews  great  men  robed  in  white,  as  among  the  Romans  in  scarlet  or  purple. 
Herod  and  Christ  (Luke  xxiii.  11  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  28).  19.  Geshem  the  Arabian]  Lieutenant 
of  Arabia  under  the  king  of  Persia,  or  chief  of  those  Arabs  whom  Sargon  had  settled  in  Samaria 
(Rawlinson's  Anc.  Mon.,  vol.  ii.  p.  146). 


HOJMILETIC  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTEE  IL 


Ver.  1 — 8.  Divine  Interposition. 
,,      1 — 8,  Disinterested  Love  for  a  suffering 

Church. 
„      1,  2.  Subject  and  Sovereign. 
„      4.  Spiritual  Recollectedness. 
„      6.  Ejaculatory  Prayer. 
„      7,  8.  Religious  Prudence. 
„      8.  The  Hand  of  God. 
,,      9 — 20.  The   Incipient  Stages  of  a  great 

Reformation. 
„      9.  Secular  Aid  for  Spiritual  Work. 


Ver.  10.  First  Hindrance. — Secret  Jealousy. 
„     11.  Preparatory  Retirement. 
„     1 2—16.  The  Walls  inspected. 
„     12.  A  Time  for  Silence. 
„     17,  18.  An  Appeal  for  Help. 
„     18.  The  Strength  of  Unity. 
„      19,  Second  Hindrance. — Open  Derision, 
„     20.  Confidence    in   God,  an  Incentive  to 

Work. 
„     20.  The  miserable  condition  of  the  Church's 
enemies. 


Divine  Interposition. 

ii.  1 — 8.     And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  month  Nisan,  ^c. 

The  first  chapter  occupied  with  account  of  state  of  Jerusalem  and  Nehemiah's 
grief  and  prayer.     This  opens  with  the  relation  of  those  circuiustances  which  led 


42  HOMILETtC  COMMKNTARY:    NEHEMIAH.  ciiai>.  u. 


to  the  fulfilment  of  his  desires,  and  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes.     We  learn 
from  text — 

I.  That  God's  interposition  was  opportune.  "  It  came  to  pass  in  the  month 
Nisan  "  {v.  1).  The  best  month,  because  the  one  chosen  by  God.  Chosen  by  God 
because  the  best.  Note — 1.  That  God's  plans  are  worked  out  with  the  utmost 
precision.  Trace  this  in  Bible.  Often  find  expressions  such  as — "  In  due  time," 
"  Fulness  of  time,"  "  Appointed  time,"  ''  Mine  hour  is  not  yet  come,"  "  A  set  time," 
&c.  God's  timepiece  never  gains  or  loses.  All  his  plans  carried  out  with  unfailing 
accuracy.  He  is  neither  slack,  "  as  some  men  count  slackness,"  in  f  ulfilUng  his 
threats  or  his  promises.  Many  details,  apparently  insignificant,  combine  to  work  out 
the  most  magnificent  plans.  A  loop  is  a  small  thing,  yet  most  gorgeous  tapestry 
woven  in  single  loops.  A  link  a  small  thing,  yet  chain  depends  on  support  of 
every  link.  Trifles  are  links  in  the  chain  of  God's  providential  government,  or 
rather  there  are  no  trifles.  Illustrate  by  complex  machinery  of  Lancashire  cotton, 
or  Coventry  silk,  or  Kidderminster  carpet  machinery,  which  whilst  wonderfully 
intricate,  works  out  the  appointed  pattern  with  utmost  precision  and  accuracy.  Yet 
all  human  exactness  fails  in  comparison  with  God's  perfect  accuracy.  2.  That  God 
often  interferes  on  his  people's  behalf  when  they  least  expect  it.  Through  not  dis- 
cerning God's  methods  of  working,  they  get  discouraged,  and  think  themselves  over- 
looked. Whilst  we  look  for  hiiu  to  appear  in  one  way  he  comes  in  another,  and 
whilst  we  mournfully  strain  our  eyes  down  one  path,  lo,  he  comes  by  another.  Our 
most  unlikely  times  are  God's  most  favourable  ones.  3.  TJiat  God  generally  inter' 
feres  on  his  people's  behalf  in  their  most  urgent  extremity.  It  was  so  here.  Nehemiah 
so  distressed  that  his  countenance  Avas  sad  for  first  time.  The  case  of  the  Jews  was 
becoming  desperate.  God  interferes  in  their  extremity  as  he  had  done  on  the  shores 
of  the  Eed  Sea— (1)  To  try  their  faith,  (2)  To  elicit  their  gratitude,  (3)  To 
impress  upon  them  their  dependence  upon  him.     The  text  suggests — 

II.  That  God's  interposition  required  human  co-operation.  God's  agents  are 
of  two  kinds,  willing  and  unwilling,  allied  and  non-allied.  Both  of  these  found 
in  this  history.  1.  Allied.  As  Esther  came  to  the  kingdom,  so  Nehemiah  to  his 
office,  for  such  a  time  as  this  (Esth.  iv.  1 4) .  Though  he  was  a  prisoner,  a  stranger, 
of  an  alien  religion,  yet  is  he  God's  agent  as  well  as  the  king's  servant.  Note  con- 
cerning him, — (1)  That  he  was  duly  qualified  for  his  appointed  work.  Mentally  he 
possessed  forethought  (ch.  ii.  5),  tact  (ch.  v.  5),  and  ingenuity  (ch.  iii.).  His  address 
to  Artaxerxes  a  marvel  of  clever  pleading.  Words  carefully  chosen,  respect  humbly 
paid  to  rank,  superstitious  reverence  for  burial-grounds  introduced.  No  argument 
more  powerful  with  an  Eastern  monarcli.  Spiritually^  he  was  richly  endowed 
with  every  grace  required  in  so  difficult  a  work.  Courage,  sympathy,  generosity, 
and  profound  piety  all  combined  to  make  him  an  eminently  spiritual  man.  Such 
agents  God  chooses  for  important  enterprises,  utiHzing  great  endowments  for  arduous 
tusks.  Note,  (2)  That  he  was  favowably  situated.  When  God  has  work  for  his 
servants  to  do,  he  by  his  providence  places  them  where  they  can  do  it.  Nehemiah 
evidently  a  favourite  with  Artaxerxes,  from  fact  of  his  having  chosen  him  to  this 
important  office,  over  the  heads  of  the  Persian  nobles.  Had  he  been  otherwif^e 
situated,  or  appointed  to  any  other  office,  he  would  not  so  readily  have  found  access 
to  the  king's  ear.  God  appoints  our  lot  and  circumstances,  and  requires  us  to  make 
the  best  of  them,  and  not  seek  to  leave  them,  with  the  idea  that  we  can  best  serve 
him  elseAvhere.  Note,  (3)  That  he  was  rightly  actuated.  No  personal  ambition 
inspired  his  petition,  but  pure,  unalloyed,  unselfish  desire  for  the  prosperity  of  God's 
Church,  and  the  holy  City.  No  desire  for  gain,  for  he  used  his  fortune  in  feeding 
the  poor,  and  entertaining  the  returning  exiles  in  his  own  house  at  Jerusalem. 
They  who  are  engaged  in  God's  work  must  lay  aside  all  thoughts  of  worldly  gain 
or  personal  honour.  Eeward  there  is,  but  not  usually  of  a  worldly  sort.  2.  Un- 
allied.  God  employs  unconscious  agents  as  well  as  willing  ones.  **  As  he  put 
email  thoughts  into  the  heart  of  Ahasuerus  for  great  purposes  "  (Esth.  vi.  1),  so  hero 


CHAP.  Ilj  HOMILETIC  QOMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH.  43 

he  caused  a  heathen  prince  to  favour  a  hostile  religion,  and  to  defend  a  people 
whom  his  subjects  hated.  God  even  employs  his  enemies  (though  not  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  he  employs  his  friends),  to  carry  out  his  purposes.  Pharaoh, 
Philistines,  Chaldeans,  Pomans,  &c. 

III.  That  God's  interposition  was  accompanied  by  providential  coincidences. 
All  these  known  to  Divine  omniscience  and  taken  into  account.  1.  NeliemiaJi  was 
unusually  sad.  "I  had  not  been  beforetime  sad  in  his  presence."  JSTo  mourner 
might  be  seen  in  Ahasuerus'  court  (Esth.  iv.  4).  Momus  wished  that  men  had 
windows  in  their  breasts,  that  their  thoughts  might  be  seen.  This  not  necessary, 
fur  "  a  merry  heart  maketh  a  glad  countenance  ;  but  by  sorrow  of  heart  the  spirit 
is  broken"  (Prov.  xv.  13).  Nehemiah  had  been  afflicting  his  soul  for  four  months. 
No  wonder  he  betrayed  it  in  his  countenance.  The  Hebrews  say  that  a  man's  inside  is 
turned  out,  and  discovered  in  oculis,  in  loculis,  in  poculis,  in  his  eyes,  purse,  and  cup. 
2.  The  Mug  was  unu,sually  friendly.  Most  Eastern  monarchs  would  have  condemned 
him  at  once  either  to  banishment  or  death.  Artaxerxes  might  have  done  so  at 
another  time.  Sad  looks  were,  in  their  eyes,  had  looks,  and  savoured  of  assassina- 
tion :  but  love  thinketh  no  evil,  and  the  king  had  confidence  in  his  servant.  3.  The 
queen  also  was  present.  Not  Esther,  the  queen-mother,  for  Hebrew  word  signifies 
wife.  "  Because  '  the  queen  sat  by,'  it  is  probable  that  there  was  some  solemn  feast 
that  day ;  for  the  queens  of  Persia  used  not  to  come  into  the  king's  presence,  but 
when  they  were  called  by  name,  as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Esther."  This 
might  be  the  cause  of  Nehemiah's  great  fear :  but  would  also  be  in  his  favour. 
The  presence  of  a  woman,  even  without  her  personal  intercession,  would  temper  any 
harshness  the  king  might  feel,  and  thus  aid  the  suppliant's  suit. 

Disinterested  Love  for  a  Suffering  Church. 

ii.  1 — 8.     And  it  came  to  pass,  ^c. 

I.  Its  sorrow.  "Why  is  thy  countenance  sad?"  &c.  (v.  2).  1.  In  spite  of 
personal  prosperity.  This  often  hardens  heart  and  deadens  sympathies.  So  long 
as  their  own  homes  are  flourishing  many  care  little  how  God's  house  fares.  This 
cannot  satisfy  a  truly  good  man  who  has  the  welfare  of  God's  cause  at  heart.  No 
measure  of  personal  prosperity  will  compensate  for  spiritual  dearth  and  deadness  in 
the  Church.  2.  In  the  very  midst  of  social  festivities.  The  revelry  of  the  banquet 
could  not  repress  the  wretchedness  of  his  heart,  for  whilst  he  was  in  the  midst  of 
rejoicing  and  mirth  his  spirit  was  not  there.  The  inward  grief  was  stronger  than 
outward  surroundings,  and  broke  through  all  restraint.  The  wound  of  a  broken 
heart  cannot  be  healed  by  any  outward  gaiety  of  circumstance. 

II.  Its  confession.  "Why  should  not  my  countenance  be  sad  1 "  (v.  3).  1.  It 
is  not  ashamed  of  the  people  of  God.  "  The  city  the  place  of  my  father's  sepulchres." 
Sui rounded  by  Persian  nobles  not  an  easy  matter  to  thus  avow  friendship  for  an 
alien  and  oppressed  people.  Many  temptations  to  expedient  silence  would  have  to 
be  overcome.  Much  was  risked  by  this  avowal.  Much  probably  to  be  gained  by 
ignoring  them.  True  piety  is  courageous.  It  says,  "  Thy  people  shall  be  my  people  " 
(Ruth  i.),  for  richer  for  poorer,  for  better  for  worse,  at  all  hazards  and  in  all  times.  "  A 
friend  loveth  at  all  times,  and  a  brother  is  born  for  adversity"  (Prov.  xvii.  17). 
"  There  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother  "  (Prov.  xviii.  24).  2.  Not 
ashamed  of  poor  relations.  When  men  rise  from  a  low  estate  into  high  circles  they 
readily  forget  those  who  once  were  equals,  unwilling  to  betray  their  humble  origin. 
Such  pride  always  despicable  as  useless.  No  disgrace  to  have  poor  relations.  The 
disgrace  is  in  disowning  them.  Nehemiah  not  guilty  of  such  folly  or  cowardice. 
He  not  only  acknowledges,  but  pleads  for  them.  3.  Not  afraid  of  perscmal  danger. 
Royal  displeasure  no  trifle  under  the  sway  of  Oriental  despots.  Witness  recent  events 
in  Turkey.   Thrones  overturned  by  plots  and  intrigues  contimiaUy.   The  nearer  the 


44  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  [ohap.  n. 


throne,  the  more  likely  to  incur  suspicion.  Artaxerxes  had  come  to  the  kingdom 
through  intrigue  and  bloodshed.  Would  be  naturally  vigilant  and  wary  on  this 
account.  Hence  the  danger  incurred  by  one  even  so  favoured  as  Nehemiah,  when 
he  dared  to  avow  sympathy  with  a  captive  and  recently  conquered  people  inhabiting 
a  neighbouring  province.  Fervent  love  always  self-forgetfid.  It  confers  not  with 
flesh  and  blood,  but  willingly  incurs  danger  for  sake  of  its  object.  This,  type  of 
Christ's  love  for  his  Church. 

III.  Its  petition.  *'  And  I  said  unto  the  king,"  &c.  (v.  5).  1.  It  seeks  help  from 
God.  "I  prayed  unto  the  God  of  heaven  "  (v.  5).  This,  first  step.  God  has  more 
interest  in  his  Church  than  any  other,  and  can  do  more.  If  his  aid  be  secured,  it 
matters  little  who  else  fails.  If  his  denied,  none  can  do  much.  2.  It  craves  human 
assistance.  "  If  it  please  the  king,  let  letters  be  given  me,"  &c.  (v.  7).  Eecognizes  the 
principle  that  God  always  works  by  human  agency,  and  helps  man  by  man,  to 
teach  him  lessons  of  mutual  sympathy  and  mutual  dependence.  3.  It  asks  per- 
mission  to  give  its  own  aid,  and  that  with  self-denial.  ISTehemiah  not  one  who  would 
only  work  at  others'  expense.  J^o  bargain  for  costs  or  travelling  expenses.  He 
asks  that  he  may  be  permitted  to  engage  in  an  enterprise  that  will  considerably 
diminish  his  private  resources,  and  involve  constant  and  heavy  personal  sacrifices. 
If  we  desire  success  in  great  reformations  we  must  be  prepared  to  make  great  sacrifices. 
Our  gifts  joined  with  God's,  will  accomplish  almost  anything.  We  have  no  right 
to  expect  God  to  render  his  assistance  where  we  withhold  our  own. 

IV.  Its  joy.  ''So  it  pleased  the  king  to  send  me  "  (v.  6).  1.  Its  prayer  is 
granted.  Both  Jehovah  and  Artaxerxes  looked  favourably  upon  his  request. 
When  prayer  is  thus  graciously  answered,  men  should  rejoice  and  speak  good  of  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  Thus  did  the  royal  Psalmist  often  extol  Jehovah's  name. 
2.  Its  way  is  providentially  opened.  And  this  more  prosperously  than  he  could 
have  anticipated.  !N"ot  only  permission  granted  to  leave  Persia  for  a  time,  but  also 
to  take  with  him  an  escort ;  and  full  authority  to  build,  and  command  supplies,  when 
he  arrived  at  Jerusalem  (v.  7,  8).  Thus  does  God  cause  our  cup  to  overflow  with 
mercy,  giving  us  far  more  than  we  deserve,  and  more  than  we  either  asked  or  had 
reason  to  expect.  Not  only  out  of,  but  according  to,  his  riches  in  glory,  does  he 
supply  his  children's  wants.  A  miilionnaire  might  give  a  penny  out  of  his  abund- 
ance ;  but  not  if  he  gave  according  to  (in  proportion  to)  his  riches.  Then  must 
he  give  what  would  be  a  fortune  to  a  poor  man.  Even  so,  God  gives  not  grudgingly, 
or  stintedly,  but  royally.  "  It  was  but  ask,  and  have ;  and  so  it  is  betwixt  God 
and  his  people.  When  there  was  a  discussion  amongst  some  holy  men  as  to  which 
was  the  most  profitable  trade,  one  answered,  beggary ;  it  is  the  hardest,  and  the 
richest  trade.  Common  beggary  is  the  commonest  and  easiest,  but  he  meant  prayer. 
A  courtier  gets  more  by  one  suit  often  than  a  tradesman  or  merchant  haply  with 
twenty  years'  labour  ;  so  doth  a  faithful  prayer." — Trapp. 

Subject  and  Sovereign. 

ii.  1,  2.     And  I  took  up  wine,  and  gave  it  to  the  king,  ^c, 

I.  He  did  not  allow  his  duty  to  God  otherwise.     So  lived  Pharaoh,  Daniel, 

to  clash  with  his  duty  to  his  sovereign.  Mardocheus,  Ezra,  and  others.   Jeremiah 

His  religion  not  diminish  his  civility,  and  Baruch  taught   the  Jews  thus   to 

"If  it  please  the  king."     "Eear  God,  pray  for  those  under  whose  sway  they 

and  honour  the  king,"  both  enjoined  in  were  living  as  captives,  "  Pray  for  the 

apostolic  precept.     He  had  been  taken  life  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  Belshazzar 

from  his  native  land  and  placed  under  his  son  ;  seek  the  peace  of  that  country 

another  king,  whom  it  was  his  duty  to  whither  ye  be   carried  away  captives " 

serve   and   obey,  in   all   quietness   and  (Jer.    xxix. ;    Baruch    i.).      St.    Peter 

meekness,   untU   God  ordered    his   lot  taught    the    Christians    that    servants 


CHAP.    II.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEnE3IIAli, 


45 


should  not  forsake  their  masters,  though 
they  did  not  believe  (1  Pet.  ii.).  Both 
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  command  the 
faithful  wife  to  ahide  hy  her  unfaithful 
hushand  (1  Cor.  vii.  ;  1  Pet.  iii.).  The 
Scriptures  enjoin  faithfulness,  duty,  and 
obedience  toward  all  men,  so  far  as  we 
offend  not  God  thereby.  Duty  to  God 
and  duty  to  man  ^wo  aspects  of  same 
life.  One  requires  the  other.  Each 
incomplete,  being  alone.  The  more 
efficiently  we  discharge  one,  the  more 
perfectly  do  the  other.  Neither  may 
be  made  a  substitute  for  the  other. 
''  This  ought  ye  to  have  done,  and  not  to 
leave  the  other  undone." 

II.  He  did  not  allow  spiritual 
exercises  to  interfere  with  the  dis- 
charge of  secular  duties.  He  prayed 
incessantly,  yet  failed  not  in  discharge 
of  duties  as  cupbearer.  The  believer 
should  be  "  diligent  in  business,"  as  well 
as  "fervent  in  spirit,"  lest  he  bring 
reproach  upon  religion.  Spiritual 
activity  no  excuse  for  neglecting  secular 
duty.  To  be  slothful  in  business  will 
quench  devotion  as  fatally  as  to  pur- 
sue business  with  inordinate  affection. 
The  hardiest  devotion  healthiest.  The 
devotion  of  the  cloister,  for  the  most 
part,  like  the  ghastly  light  that  hovera 
over  decomposition  and  decay  ;  the 
devotion  which  characterizes  the  diligent, 
spiritually-minded  man  of  business, 
resembles  the  star  which  shines  on  in  the 
storm  as  in  the  calm,  when  the  sky  is 
clouded  as  when  it  is  serene. 

III.  He  regarded  the  path  of  duty 
as  the  path  of  providential  blessing. 
Not  forsaking  the  common  duties  of  his 
daily  calling,  he  waited  for  the  opening 
of  his  providential  path.     The  faithful 


discharge  of  duty  itself  a  blessing.  This, 
the  channel  through  which  special  grace 
most  likely  to  flow.  Men  need  not  leave 
the  world  to  find  the  secret  of  holiness  ; 
or  their  ordinary  sphere  of  work  to  find 
the  secret  of  blessing.  The  patient, 
conscientious  discharge  of  life's  ordinary 
tasks,  always  the  safest  path  to  pur- 
sue, (a) 

IV.  He  found  the  fkvour  of  his 
so  /ereign  of  great  service  in  carrying 
out  the  work  of  God.  His  civility  and 
humble  demeanour  had  won  the  con- 
fidence and  esteem  of  his  royal  master. 
This  friendship  now  stood  him  in  good 
stead.  Yet  he  presumes  not  upon  this 
regard,  but  approaches  the  throne 
tremblingly,  as  a  subject  should,  even 
the  most  favoured.  Monarchs  like  not 
presumption  even  in  their  courtiers. 
Diogenes  says,  "  A  man  should  use  his 
prince  or  peer,  as  he  would  do  the  fire. 
The  fire  if  he  stand  too  near  it  will  burn 
him ;  and  if  he  be  too  far  off  he  will  be 
cold.  So  to  be  over-bold,  without  blush- 
ing or  reverence,  bringeth  into  discredit  of 
both  sides  ;  for  the  king  will  think  him 
too  saucy,  and  the  subject  will  forget  his 
duty."  Courteous  and  kindly  behaviour 
has  nothing  to  lose,  and  much  to  gain. 
Civility  costs  little,  and  is  often  worth 
much. 

Illustration  : — (a)  Mr.  Carter,  a  pious  minis- 
ter, once  coming  softly  behind  a  religious  man  of 
his  own  acquaintance,  who  was  busily  engaged 
in  tanning  a  hide,  and  giving  him  a  tap  on  the 
shoulder,  the  man  started,  looked  up,  and  with  a 
blushing  countenance  said,  "  Sir,  I  am  ashamed 
that  you  should  find  me  thus."  To  whom  Mr. 
Carter  replied,  "  Let  Christ,  when  he  cometh, 
find  me  so  doing.''  "What!"  said  the  man, 
'•doing  thus?"  "Yes,"  said  Mr.  Carter, 
"  faithfully  performing  the  duties  of  my  calling." 


Spiritual  Recollectedness. 
ii.  4.   So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven. 


This,  a  remarkable  illustration  of 
religious  presence  of  mind. 

I.  The  outcome  of  a  consecrated 
life.  Unless  he  had  been  in  the  habit 
of  making  everything  a  matter  of  prayer, 
would  not  have  been  able  thus  to  collect 
himself  whilst  trembling  with  excite- 
ment, fear,  and  suspense  before  the  king. 


Having  formed  the  habit  of  doing 
nothing  without  consulting  God,  had  no 
difiiculty  in  acting  upon  it.  Agitated 
and  afirighted,  it  would  have  been 
perfectly  natural  for  him  to  have 
stammered  forth  his  appeal  in  some 
incoherent  manner.  But  here  the 
irrepressible   spirit  of  devotion,   which 


46 


nOMILETlO  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


LCHAP.  II. 


permeated  his  whole  life,  revealed  itself. 
If  a  man  never  prays  anywhere  save  at 
stated  times,  and  on  public  occasions, 
there  is  reason  to  fear  that  he  never 
prays  at  all.  If  a  man  lives  in  the 
spirit  of  prayer,  sudden  emergency  will 
spontaneously  summon  the  familiar 
habit  to  his  aid.  Special  prayer  should 
be  the  outcome  of  constant  prayer-fulness. 
The  way  to  have  the  heart  in  harmony 
with  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary,  is 
never  to  suffer  its  chords  to  be  jarred. 
It  was  said  of  a  distinguished  Christian 
that  he  lived  on  the  steps  of  the  mercy- 
seat.  It  was  said  of  a  recent  Bishop, 
who  was  sent  to  Western  Africa,  that 
"  he  lived  upon  his  knees."  This  is  to 
live  safely.  This  is  to  live  in  the  porch 
of  heaven.  Hence  it  was  said  of  a 
dying  saint,  '*I  am  changing  my  place, 
but  not  my  company."  Like  Enoch, 
he  had  walked  with  God,  and  death 
was  to  him  only  like  passing  out  of  the 
vestibule  into  the  inner  sanctuary. 

II.  The  result  of  long  habit.  Holy 
recollectedness  not  come  naturally,  nor 
easily,  even  to  good  men.  Eepeated 
action  becomes  habit.  Practice  makes 
perfect  in  this,  as  in  other  things. 

III.  A  mark  of  self-distrusting* 
humility.  He  dared  not  ask,  without 
seeking  wisdom  higher  than  his  own,  in 
matter  of  such  momentous  issues.  Self- 
diffidence  impelled  him  to  cast  the 
burden  of  his  responsibility  upon  one 
who  was  an  unerring  counsellor. 
"  Travellers  make  mention  of  a  bird  so 
timid  in  disposition,  and  so  liable  to  the 
assaults  of   unnumbered   enemies,  that 


she  almost  lives  in  the  sky,  scarcely  ever 
venturing  to  rest  her  wings ;  and  even 
when  forced  through  very  weariness  to 
repose,  she  seeks  the  loftiest  rock,  and 
there  still  keeps  her  eyes  only  half  shut, 
and  her  pinions  only  half  folded,  in 
readiness,  on  the  first  sign  of  danger,  to 
spread  her  win  as,  nnd  soar  away  to  the 
heavens  for  safety."  True  emblem  of 
how  the  child  of  God  should  "  pass  the 
time  of  his  sojourning  here  in  fear." 
Seldom  shoidd  the  wing  of  his  devotion 
droop,  or  the  eye  of  his  watchful '>e.ss 
close  ;  and  even  when  he  must  Te[)oso  it 
should  ever  be  in  an  attitude  of  vigilance 
and  prayerfulness." — ^toive/l. 

IV.  A  source  of  incalculable  bless- 
ing. 1.  It  imparts  confide] ice.  '  lie 
that  believeth  shall  not  make  hnste  " 
(Isa.  xxviii.  16).  He  shall  not  be  afraid 
of  evil  tidings,  whose  heart  is  fixed, 
trusting  in  the  Lord.  "  Thou  wilt  keep 
him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is 
stayed  upon  thee,"  &c.  The  calmness 
which  comes  from  reliance  upon  a  wisdom 
that  is  superhuman ;  the  consciousness 
of  Divine  support.  2.  It  preserves  from 
missing  the  ^providential  path.  The  God 
of  providence  will  direct  those  who  cast 
themselves  upon  his  care.  Such  *'  shall 
not  full  direction  need  ;  nor  miss  their 
providential  way."  3.  It  conduces  to 
the  accomplishmetit  of  God's  will.  When 
everything  is  submitted  to  that  will, 
and  r.he  stumbling-blocks  of  self-will, 
pride,  ambition,  &c.  ar3  removed,  nothing 
can  hinder  the  fulfilment  of  the  purposes 
of  Jehovah. 


Ejaculatory  Prayer. 
IL  4.     So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven. 


I.  It   was    suddenly  required.     A 

question  addressed  to  JSTehemiah  by  the 
king,  point-blank,  upon  which  hung, 
possibly,  not  only  issues  of  life  and 
death,  but  the  success  or  failure  of  his 
long-prayed-for  object.  Great  emergency. 
Great  benefit  to  be  able  to  seek  aid  of 
Omnipotence.  Long  formula  impossible. 
No  audible  petition  could  be  offered. 
Quick  as  thought  the  silent  prayer  of  the 
heart  flew  to  the  ear  of  God,  and  not  in 


vain.  *'  He  will  fulfil  the  desire  of  them 
that  fear  him"  (Ps.  cxlv.  19).  "The 
devout  spirit,  like  the  well-strung  Eolian 
harp,  not  only  gives  out  sweet  sounds 
when  woke  by  the  gentler  breathings 
that  steal  over  its  chords,  but  when 
vibrating  under  the  ruder  blasts  that 
sweep  across  its  strings."  "  On  many 
occasions  the  servant  of  God  requires 
special  assistance,  care,  and  counsel. 
Men  of   business  are  frequently  called 


OHAP.  nj 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


47 


upon  to  decide  summarily  on  questions 
big  with  importance,  to  make  up  their 
judgment  at  once  on  measures  the  issues 
of  which  they  can  neither  over-estimate 
nor    foresee.       How   commonly   is   the 
physician  forced  to  form  his  conchisions 
in  a  moment;   yea,  to  form  them    on 
uncertain   grounds,    and    indeterminate 
symptoms.     Yet  a  mistaken  conchision 
may  endanger  the  life  of   his  patient. 
J^ow  if  in  such  circumstances  the  medical 
man,  or  the  merchant,  rely  simply  on 
his  own  skill,  and  confer  simply  with 
his  own  judgment,   to   the   neglect   of 
calling  in  the  wisdom  and   blessing  of 
the  iUmighty,  what  a  fearful  risk  and 
burden   does   he    bring  upon    himself ! 
But    let    his   heart   breathe   forth   the 
aspiration  to  God  —  'Lord,  direct  me.' 
Will  he  not  then,  having  cast  his  burden 
on  the  Lord,  having  invoked  unerring 
skill,  be  able  to  act  with  faith,  and  nerve, 
and  calmness  ?     Call  ye  this  fanaticism  \ 
The  grossest  fanaticism  is  that   which 
leaves  out  God." — Stowell.  (a) 

II.  It  was  silently  offered.  No 
opportunity  for  audible  vocal  prayer. 
This,  good  when  alone,  or  in  public 
assembly  for  worship,  but  not  possible 
now.  A  sudden  and  secret  desire  darted 
up  to  heaven.  Thus  Moses  cried  unto 
God,  yet  said  nothing  (Exod.  xiv.  15). 
Hannah  was  not  heard,  yet  she  prayed 
(1  Sam.  i.).  Austin  reports  it  to  be  the 
custom  of  the  Egyptian  Churches  to 
pray  frequently  and  fervently,  but 
briefly  and  by  ejaculation,  lest  their 
fervour  should  abate.  It  is  the  praying 
and  crying  of  the  heart  that  God  delights 
in.  Let  no  man  then  excuse  himself 
and  say  he  cannot  pray;  for  in  all 
places  he  may  lift  up  his  heart  to  God, 
though  in  the  market,  or  on  the  moun- 
tain. (/3) 

III.  It  was  suitably  addressed. 
"To  the  God  of  heaven."  Ezra  had 
previously  used  this  expression.  (See 
explanatory  notes).  It  recognized  the 
supremacy  of  Jehovah,  and  his  power 


over  human  hearts  and  events.  Thus 
calculated  to  impart  confidence,  and 
destroy  the  fear  of  raan.  The  expression 
is  similar  in  meaning  to  *'Lord  of 
Sabaoth,"  or  "Lord  of  Hosts."  "  AU 
power  is  given,"  &c. 

IV.  It  was  very  brief.  Yet  quite 
long  enough.  Not  time  for  much.  A 
question  had  been  asked  and  an  answer 
was  required.  Yet,  between  question 
and  answer,  wa-s  ample  time  for  sending 
prayer  to  heaven,  and  receiving  a  reply. 
Length  no  virtue  in  prayer.  Faith  and 
fervour  the  two  principal  elements  of 
success.  St.  Augustine  says,  "  He  that 
carrieth  his  own  temple  about  with  him, 
may  go  to  prayer  when  he  pleaseth." 
How  quickly  thought  can  fly!  many 
thousands  of  miles  in  a  minute.  Prayer 
can  travel  as  rapidly  as  thought  towards 
heaven. 

V.  It  was  completely  successful. 
1.^  In  that  wisdom  to  ask  arigld  was 
given.  JSTehemiah's  petition  was  marked 
by — (1)  Becoming  humility,  "  If  it 
please  the  king."  {2)  Tact,  "The  place 
of  my  fathers'  sepulchres."  (3)  Fore- 
thought. "Let  letters  be  given  me." 
2.  In  that  the  king's  heart  was  favourably 
disposed  towards  him.  "  And  the  king 
granted  me,"  &c.  This,  God's  doing,  in 
direct  answer  to  prayer.  JSTehemiah 
confesses  this  when  he  adds,  "  according 
to  the  good  hand  of  my  God  upon  me." 

Illustrations  :  —  (a)  **  Sudden  extremity  is  a 
notable  trial  of  faith,  or  any  other  disposition  of  the 
soul.  For  as,  in  a  sudden  fear,  the  blood  gathers 
suddenly  to  the  heart,  for  guarding  of  that  part 
wkich  is  principal ;  so  the  powers  of  the  soul 
combine  themselves  in  a  hard  exigent,  that  they 
may  be  easily  judged  of." — Bp.  Hall. 

(/3)  "As  the  tender  dew  that  falls  during  the 
silent  night  makes  the  grass,  and  herbs,  and 
flowers  to  flourish  and  grow  more  abundantly 
than  great  showers  of  rain  that  fall  in  the  day, 
80  secret  prayer  will  more  abundantly  cause  the 
sweet  herbs  of  grace  and  holiness  to  flourish  and 
grow  in  the  soul,  than  all  those  more  public  and 
open  duties  of  religion,  which  too  often  are 
mingled  with  the  sun  and  wind  of  pride  and 
hypocrisy." — Brooks, 


Beligious  Prudence. 

ii.  7.    Moreover^  I  said  unto  the  king,  ^c. 

Not  satisfied  with  bare  permission  to     Jerusalem,  he  makes   provision  for  ah 
go  to  the  relief  of  his  co-religionists  at     contingencies,     and     anticipates    every 


48 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.    II. 


difficulty  that  is  likely  to  arise.     From 
this  learn : — 

I.  That    prudent    forethought    is 
essential  to  success  in  spiritual  as  in 
secular  enterprises.     For,  1.   God  has 
noiohere  commended  rashness.     The  re- 
verse of  this  enjoined  and  approved  in 
word    of    God.     *'He   will    guide   his 
affairs  with   discretion"   (Ps.    cxii.    5). 
"  The  fool  shall  be  servant  to  the  wise 
of  heart,"  (Prov.  xi.  29).     **  A  prudent 
man,"    &c.    (Prov.   xii.   23 ;    xiv.    15). 
"  He  that  handleth  a  matter  wisely  shall 
find  good"  (Prov.  xvi.  20).     ''  Give  not 
that   which   is   holy"    (Matt.    vii.    6). 
"  Which  of  you  intending  to  build,"  &c. 
(Luke    xiv.    28).      Examples. — Jacob 
(Gen.  xxxii.).  Joseph  (Gen.  xli.).  Jethro 
(Exod.  xviii.).      David  (1   Sam.  xvii.). 
Abigail  (1  Sam.  xxv.).    Paul  (Acts  xvi.). 
Town-clerk    of    Ephesus    (Acts    xix.). 
2.  Pains-taking  effort  is  at  the  foundation 
of  all  human  success.     "  By  the  sweat 
of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat  thy  bread " 
(Gen.  iii.   19),  is  the  curse  pronounced 
upon  all  human  labour.    Even  the  curse 
turned  into  blessing,  for  labour  is  not 
necessarily  an  evil.     "  No  gains  without 
pains/'  under  present  social  laws.     No 
reaping  without  sowing.    No  permanent 
and  substantial  success  in  business,  or 
art,    or   literature,   or  religion,  without 
earnest,    patient,  -  unremitting   diligence 
(2  Pet.  i.    10).      This  inexorable   law 
reigns  in  the  spiritual  realm  as  in  the 
secular,  for — 3.  Spiritual  work  as  well  as 
secular   is   amenable    to    natural    law. 
Miracles   wrought    now   in    the   moral 
rather  than  in   the   physical   universe. 
Not  obsolete  in  the  latter,  more  frequent 
in    the    former.       Natural    law   is    no 
respecter  of  persons.     It  demands  alle- 
giance from  the  saint  and  sinner  alike. 
Errors  in  spiritual  work  are  as  surely 
followed    by  penalties    as    in   secular. 
Sloth  and  senility  undermine  the  success 
of  religious  as  certainly  as  profane  enter- 
prises.   Here,  as  elsewhere,  "  whatsoever 
a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 

II.  That  prudent  forethought  is 
not  opposed,  but  helpful,  to  spiritual 
faith.  1.  It  furnishes  a  rational  basis 
for  expecting  success.  No  right  to  expect 
success,  merely  because  we  hope  for  and 
earnestly  desire  it.     "  We  are  saved  by 


hope ; "  but   it   must   rest   on   a   solid 
foundation.    Hope  without  faith  is  dead. 
If  there  is  a  living,  there  is  a  dead,  hope 
(1  Pet.  i.  3).     The  one  stimulates,  the 
other    seduces.      Faith    must    have    a 
rational    basis   to   distinguish   it    from 
credulity.      The   basis  may   appear   ir- 
rational to  men  who  do  not  acknowledge 
God   or   the   supernatural.     2.  It   acts 
upon  the  supposition  that  mental  potvers 
were  given  to  be  employed  in  the  service 
of  God.     The  use   of  this  faculty  no 
more  opposed  to  strong  faith  and  intense 
spirituality,  than  the  use  of  other  mental 
powers,   as    memory,    imagination,    per- 
ception, &c.     All  powers  are  to  be  con- 
secrated to  holy  purposes,  and  diligently 
employed  in  assisting  faith.     3.  It  takes 
no  step  without  seeking  Divine  guidance 
and  approval.     Nehemiah   used   every 
precaution  to  ensure  success,  and  made 
every  needful  arrangement  beforehand, 
but  not  without  previous  thought  and 
earnest  prayer.     Even  so  must  we  take 
each  step,  in  religious  work  especially, 
depending  on  the  Holy  Ghost  for  direc- 
tion.    He  committed  himself  to   God ; 
yet   petitions   the  king   for  a  convoy; 
teaching  that  in  all  our  enterprises  God 
is  so  to  be  trusted  as  if  we  had  used  no 
means ;  and  yet  the  means  are  so  to  be 
used  as  if  we  had  no  God  to  trust  in. 


Illustrations  : — As  the  hermits  were  commun- 
ing together,  there  arose  a  question  as  to  which 
of  all  the  virtues  was  most  necessary  to  perfection 
One  said,  chastity  ;  another,  humility  ;  a  third, 
justice.  St.  Anthony  remained  silent  until  all 
had  given  their  opinion :  and  then  he  spoke. 
"  Ye  have  all  said  well,  but  none  of  you  have  said 
aright.  The  virtue  most  necessary  to  perfection 
is  prudence ;  for  the  most  virtuous  actions  of 
men,  unless  governed  and  directed  by  prudence, 
are  neither  pleasing  to  God,  nor  serviceable  to 
others,  nor  profitable  to  ourselves."  Juvenal 
speaks  to  the  same  effect  :  "  No  other  protection 
is  wanting,  provided  you  are  under  the  guidance 
of  prudence."  Bishop  Hacket  bears  similar 
testimony  : — "  He  that  loves  to  walk  dangerous 
ways  shall  perish  in  them.  Even  king  Josiah, 
one  of  the  most  lovely  darlings  of  God's  favour 
among  all  the  kings  of  Judah,  fell  under  the 
sword  for  pressing  further  against  his  enemies 
than  tlie  word  of  the  Lord  did  permit  him.  The 
ancient  Eliberitan  Council  enacted,  that  all  those 
who  plucked  down  the  idols  or  temples  of  the 
heathen  should  not  be  accounted  martyrs,  though 
they  died  for  the  faith  of  Christ,  because  they 
plucked  persecution  upon  themselves,  and  pro- 
voked their  own  martyrdom. " 


CHAP.    U.] 


HOMLLETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


49 


The  Hand  of  God. 
{{.  8.     According  to  the  good  hand  of  my  God  upon  me. 


The  hand  sometimes  used  in  an  ill 
sense,  for  inflicting  punishments  (Ruth 
i.  13;  Jer.  xv.  17\  for  we  strike  with 
the  hand.  Sometimes  in  a  good  sense, 
for  helping  others,  for  we  bestow  favours 
with  the  hand.  In  Psalm  Ixxxviii.  6, 
**  Cut  off  from  thy  hand,"  means  fallen 
from  thy  favour.  Pindar  uses  the  ex- 
pression, *'  0fw  avv  TraXcltju^,"  in  the  sense 
of  *'by  the  aid  of  God."  Thus 
Nehemiah  is  to  be  understood.  By  the 
Divine  favour,  which  inclined  the  king 
to  do  what  he  desired,  his  suit  had 
prevailed. 

I.  The  hand  of  God  is  with  his 
people  for  protection.  Nehemiah's  life 
was  in  jeopardy  in  God's  service.  Hence 
God's  special  protection.  1.  He  was 
protectpd  from  the  wrath  of  the  king. 
Had  the  king  been  in  an  angry  mood 
Nehemiah  might  have  paid  for  his 
temerity  with  his  life.  "  The  wrath  of 
man  "  doth  he  restrain.  David  delivered 
from  the  outburst  of  Saul's  murderous 
anorer.  Nehemiah  saved  from  the  out- 
bursting  of  Artaxerxes'.  God  will  ever 
defend  those  who  trust  him  and  seek 
his  glory,  from  the  malice  of  evil  op- 
pressors. 2.  He  was  protected  from  the 
hostility  of  his  enemies.  The  Samaritans 
and  surrounding  heathen  would  have 
not  only  hindered  his  work,  but  probably 
taken  his  life,  but  for  the  military  guard 
which  the  king  granted,  through  God's 
gracious  influence.  Thus  will  the  Lord 
"  make  a  hedge  about  his  people  "  (Job 
ii.),  for  "  the  angel  of  the  Lord  encamp- 
eth  round  about  them  that  fear  him  " 
(Ps.  xxxiv.). 

II.  The  hand  of  God  is  with  his 
people  for  providential  guidance. 
1.  21ie  hand  of  God  guided  Nehemiah 
to  the  Persian  court.  2.  To  the  official 
position  which  brought  him  into  the 
presence  of  the  king.  3.  The  providence 
of  God  directed  him  when  to  speak,  and 
4.  luhat  to  say.  "  If  it  please  the  king," 
&c.  '•'  Silken  words  must  be  given  to 
kings,  as  the  mother  of  Darius  said 
(^  ^KTia,  1]  iJKKTTo.)',  neither  must  they  be 
rudely  and  roughly  dealt  with,  as  Joab 


dealt  with  David  (2  Sam.  xix.  5),  who 
therefore  could  never  well  brook  him 
afterward,  but  set  another  in  hisplace." — 
T7'app. 

III.  God's  servants  should  thankfully 
acknowledge   the   good  which    they 
receive  from  him.     Nehemiah  does  not 
take  any  credit  to  himself,  but  gives  all 
glory  to  God.     This  conduct  requires — 
1.   Genuine  humility.     He  might  have 
boasted  of  his  services  to  the  king,  of 
his  place  and  authority  in  the  Persian 
Court,    and   arrogated    to    himself    the 
credit  of  success  ;  but  he  was  of  another 
spirit,   and  ascribed  all   to    the  "  good 
hand  of  his  God."     Ingratitude  is  the 
child  of   pride ;    thankfulness   the  off- 
spring of  humility.     A  proud  man  will 
never  be  truly  grateful ;  a  humble  man 
possesses  the  first  element  of  gratitude. 
Benefit  a  vain  man,  and  he  will  ascribe 
the  service  to  his  own  desert,  he  will 
regard  it  as  no  more  than  a  just  tribute 
to  his  excellence  ;  but  serve  a  lowly  man, 
and  he  will  attribute  the  service  to  the 
kindness  of  his  benefactor.     A  proud 
child  thinks  that  he  has  laid  his  parents 
under  obligation;    a  lowly  child   feels 
that  he  can  never  liquidate  the  debt  of 
gratitude  he  owes  to  them.     The  same 
holds    good   in   relation   to    God.     We 
must  be  lowly  to  be  grateful.     The  lark 
hides  her  nest  in  the  grass,  but  her  flight 
is  far  up  in  the  heavens.     This  spirit 
continually  exclaims,  "It  is  of  the  Lord's 
mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed,"  &c. ; 
and,  "  I  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  his 
mercies  "  (Lam.  iii.  22).    Paul  a  striking 
illustration  of  it :  **  To  me,  who  am  less 
than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace 
given,"  &c.     David  also  exclaims  when 
the  splendid  offerings  had  been  collected 
for  the  erection  of  God's  house  :  "  Thine, 
0  Lord,  is  the  greatness,"  &c.  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  11).    2.   True  faith.    The  believer 
in  chance  who   ascribes  everything   to 
fortune,  or  fatality,  cannot  own  a  Divine 
hand.      Faith,  discerning  the  Almighty 
hand  within  the   machinery   of  second 
causes,  actuating,  controlling,  determin- 
ing all,  is  the  parent  of  sincere  gratitude. 


50 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  II. 


Men  of  business,  from  the  very  nature 
of  their  occupations,  specially  liable  to 
lose  the  lively  exercise  of  this  practical 
faith.  "  Hard  by  the  altar  of  incense 
in  the  ancient  temple,  stood  the  altar  of 
burnt-offering.  As  the  one  signified  the 
atonement  to  be  made  by  Christ,  and 
the  other  the  fragrant  merits  of  that 
atonement ;  so  did  the  latter  represent 
also  the  offering  of  prayer  to  God  through 
Christ's  mediation  by  his  faithful  people, 
and  the  former  the  oblation  of  praise, 
presented  through  the  same  interces- 
sion, as  a  sweet-smelling  savour  to  God. 
Prayer  and  praise  are  twin  services. 
They  should  always  go  hand  in  hand. 
Praise  is  the  fragrance  breathed  from  the 
flower  of  joy.  He  is  happiest  who  is 
thank  fullest.  This  lesson  taught  by  the 
brute  creation.  Morose  and  unkindly 
animals  express  as  little  of  enjoyment 
as  they  do  of  gratefulness  by  their 
snarling  and  growling  sounds.  The 
beasts  and  birds  of  night  are  rarely  glad- 
some. But  the  lambs  which  sport  and 
gambol  in  their  green  pastures,  and  the 
birds  which  in  the  early  morning  wake 


the  echoes  of  the  woodland  with  their 
songs,  all  tell  most  unmistakeably  that 
they  are  happy.  How  much  more  then 
must  it  be  the  blessedness  of  man  *  to 
look  through  nature,  up  to  nature's  God,' 
and  glorify  the  giver  in  all  his  varied 
gifts." — StoweJl.     (See  Addenda.) 


Illustrations  : — "  Your  father  had  a  battle  with 
ApoUyon,"  said  Great-heart  to  Samuel,  "at  a 
place  yonder  before  us,  in  a  narrow  passage,  just 
beyond  Forgetful  Green.  And  indeed  the  place 
is  the  most  dreadful  place  in  all  these  parts ;  for 
if  at  any  time  pilgrims  meet  with  any  brunt,  it 
is  when  they  forget  what  favours  they  have  re- 
ceived, and  how  unworthy  they  are  of  them. 
This  is  the  place,  also,  where  others  have  been 
hard  put  to  it." — Bimyan. 

Luther  said  when  he  heard  a  little  bird  sing, 
when  he  was  out  in  the  fields  one  morning, 
"  The  bird  had  no  storehouse  or  barn,  and  did 
not  know  of  any  provision  for  the  future,  and  yet 
it  seemed  to  sing,  '  Mortal,  cease  from  toil  and 
sorrow,  God  provideth  for  the  morrow.'  We  do 
not  find  any  sparrows  with  large  storehouses,  or 
any  swallows  with  a  great  quantity  of  grain  laid 
by  for  the  morrow ;  yet  never  find  a  sparrow 
starved  to  death,  or  a  swallow  that  has  perished 
from  cold.  God  'careth  for  them,  and  are  ye 
not  much  better  than  they  ? '  " 


The  Initial  Stages  of  a  Great  Reformation. 
ii.  9 — 20.     Then  I  came  to  the  governors^  ^c. 

I.  Great  reformations  often  have  an  insignificant  commencement,  and  are 
slow  in  developing  their  true  proportions.  Who  would  have  expected  such 
great  things  to  spring  from  that  interview  in  the  palace,  and  now  from  the  visit  of 
this  one  man  to  Jerusalem  1  Yet  who  dare  "  despise  the  day  of  small  things  "  ] 
How  slight  the  first  streak  of  daw^n !  How  minute  the  grain  of  mustard-seed  ! 
Some  of  the  noblest  exploits  of  the  Church  have  had  the  feeblest  beginnings.  A 
few  Christian  men  met  together  in  the  vestry  of  a  plain  chapel ;  they  pondered 
and  prayed  over  the  state  of  the  heathen  world ;  they  conceived  and  planned  the 
glorious  enterprise  of  evangelizing  all  pagan  lands.  They  arose  and  built.  The 
Church  Missionary  Society  is  the  result.  Not  only  small  at  beginning  but  slow  in 
developing.  May  travel  rapidly  on  land  or  by  sea,  bat  in  morals  must  be  content 
to  proceed  gradually.  Deep-rooted  evils,  profligate  and  abandoned  habits,  not  to  be 
eradicated  in  a  moment ;  nor  are  excellent  characters  manufactured  in  a  moment, 
as  a  piece  of  work  from  the  loom.  The  restoration  of  God's  image  rather  resembles 
the  growing  likeness  to  its  beautiful  original  in  the  canvas  of  the  artist.  At  first 
the  outline,  and  slowly  the  form  and  features,  of  the  human  face  appear ;  gradually 
they  assume  more  distinctness  and  expression,  and  the  likeness  stands  confessed. 
So  does  the  Holy  Ghost  restore  the  waste  places  of  Christ's  Church,  and  the  moral 
deformities  of  his  children. 

II.  Keformation  work  requires  a  vigorous  leader.  Nehemiah  eminently 
qualified  for  the  post,  for — 1.  He  occupied  a  commanding  social  position.  The  office 
of  cupbearer  a  very  honourable  one  with  the  Persians.  A  son  of  Prexaspes,  a 
distinguished  person,  was  made  cupbearer  to  Cambyses.     The  poets  make  Gany* 


CHAP.  II.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEUEMIAH,  61 


medes  to  be  cupbearer  to  Jupiter,  and  even  Vulcan  himself  is  put  into  this  office. 
It  gave  him  influence  with  king  and  court,  and  status  amongst  even  Persian  nobles. 

2.  He  was  inspired  with  intense  enthusiasm.  Without  this  fire  no  hearts  melt, 
no  great  work  accomplished.  It  burns  up  all  evil  sordid  desires,  and  kindles  all 
goodness,  Jeremiah  was  influenced  by  it.  Kept  silence  for  a  time,  but  was 
constrained  to  break  out  again,  saying  the  word  within  him  was  like  burning  fire 
(Jer.  XX.).  To  the  same  eff'ect  Elijah  cries  out :  "  I  am  very  zealous  for  the  Lord 
of  Hosts  "  (1  Kings  xix.).  Moses  prayed  to  be  blotted  out  of  God's  book,  rather  than 
his  people  should  be  destroyed  (Exod.  xxxii.).  St.  Paul  *'  counted  not  his  life  dear 
unto  liim,"  &c.  (Acts  xx.).  Phineas,  when  none  else  would  take  the  sword  to  vindi- 
cate the  outraged  laws  of  Jehovah,  himself  slew  the  ofl'enders  (Numb.  xxv.).  Our 
Lord  himself,  moved  witli  indignation,  drove  out  the  profaners  of  his  sanctuary 
(John  ii.).  Such  holy  enthusiasm  glowed  in  Nehemiah's  heart,  and  urged  him  to 
undertake  this  difficult  and  dangerous  work.  3.  He  possessed  unwearied  energy 
and  perseverance.  His  enthusiasm  not  fitful,  but  patient.  He  had  calculated  the 
difficulties  of  his  undertaking,  and  was  prepared  to  carry  it  through.  No  great 
work  will  succeed  without  plodding.  A  great  statesman  once  answered  a  friend 
who  inquired  to  what  he  attributed  his  great  success  in  life,  thus — "  /  know  how  to 
plod."  Without  this  virtue  Nehemiah  must  have  succumbed  to  the  almost  over- 
whelming difficulties  that  beset  his  path. 

III.  Reformation  work  should  not  be  undertaken  without  a  deliberate 
estimate  of  its  magnitude  and  difficulty.  Blind  courage  that  counts  no  costs 
always  short-lived.  This  stood  the  tests  which  it  had  to  endure  because  founded 
upon  intelligent  and  mature  conviction.  1.  Nehemiah  forestalled  opposition.  An 
escort  had  been  asked  for  and  granted  (v.  10).  Forewarned  is  forearmed.  Thus 
did  he  fortify  himself  against  failure  from  this  quarter.  Christian  soldiers  "  must 
put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God"  (Eph.  vi.  11),  and  expect  to  be  assailed.  No 
mistake  greater  than  presumption.  To  despise  or  ignore  an  enemy  sure  sign  of 
weakness.  2.  He  carefully  examined  the  work  to  he  done.  "  And  I  arose  in  the 
night,"  &c.  (v.  12).  Wise  proceeding  before  engaging  in  a  work  that  might  prove 
to  be  impracticable.    Accurate  knowledge  helps  the  judgment  and  stimulates  courage. 

3.  He  weighed  the  matter  hef ore  proceeding  to  action,  "  So  I  came  to  Jerusalem, 
and  was  there  three  days  "  (v.  11).  Days  spent  in  seclusion  not  spent  in  vain,  if 
time  be  occupied  in  thought  and  prayer.   (See  outline  on  ''  Preparatory  Eetirement.") 

IV.  Reformation  work  in  its  initial  stages  is  almost  certain  to  provoke 
opposition.  "  When  Sanballat  the  Horonite,"  &c.  (v.  10).  1.  This  often  proceeds 
from  a  misconstruction  of  the  nature  of  theioork.  "  Will  ye  rebel  T'  (v.  19).  Bad 
men  aLvays  ready  to  attribute  evil  motives.  Sometimes  springs  from  ignorance, 
more  often  from  wilful  malice.  Charges  of  treason  more  frequently  brought  against 
reformation  work  than  any  other.  Insinuation  often  more  deadly  in  its  operation 
than  open  calumny.  2.  This  often  springs  from  aversion  to  self-sacrifice.  For  this 
reason  the  men  of  Jabesh-Gilead  stood  aloof  when  Benjamin  was  to  be  punished ; 
and  were  afterwards  destroyed  for  their  neutrality  (Judges  xxi.).  Work  that  requires 
self-denial  and  hard  toil  cannot  be  good  in  the  eyes  of  those  who  have  no  love  for 
any  but  themselves. 

V.  Reformation  work  cannot  be  carried  on  without  mutual  co-operation. 
"  So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  this  good  work  "  (v.  18).  Necessary  as  a 
security  against  discouragement.  Individual  workers  labouring  in  isolation  always 
liable  to  discouragement.  **  Not  good  for  man  to  be  alone."  Christ  recognized 
this  principle  in  religious  work,  when  he  sent  his  disciples  by  twos.  Mutual  sym- 
pathy and  counsel  will  often  cheer  faltering  courage,  and  strengthen  failing  hope. 
2.  Necessary  as  a  safeguard  against  combined  opposition.  Good  men  must  combine, 
and  present  a  united  front  to  the  combined  forces  of  wickedness  and  opposition. 
Unity  is  strength  in  all  work,  and  in  all  conflict. 

VI.  Reformation  work  cannot  succeed  without  the  Divine  blessing.     "  The 

s  2 


52  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  [chap.  ii. 

God  of  heaven,  he  will  prosper  us  "  (v.  20).  When  every  precaution  has  been 
taken,  and  all  available  human  aid  enlisted,  still  all  depends  on  God  for  success. 
1 .  Because  the  forces  of  evil  are  too  strong  for  the  unaided  powers  of  man.  Melancthon 
found  this  by  experience,  when  he  thought  to  convert  the  world  to  Christianity  in 
a  very  short  time.  "  Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by 
power,"  &c.  2.  The  blessing  of  God  will  compensate  for  any  amount  of  opposition. 
"  If  God  be  for  us,"  &c.     "  Greater  is  he  that  is  in  you,"  &c. 

Illustrations : — (a)  The  artist  Correggio,  when  young,  saw  a  painting  by  Raphael.  Long  and 
ardently  did  the  thoughtful  boy  gaze  on  that  picture.  His  soul  drank  in  its  beauty  as  flowers  drink 
moisture  from  the  mist.  He  waked  to  the  consciousness  of  artistic  power.  Burning  with  the 
enthusiasm  of  enkindled  genius,  the  blood  rushing  to  his  brow,  and  the  fire  flashing  from  his  eyes, 
he  cried  out,  **  I  also  am  a  painter  !  "  That  conviction  carried  him  through  his  initial  studies  ;  it 
blended  the  colours  on  his  palette ;  it  guided  his  pencil ;  it  shone  on  his  canvas,  until  the  glorious 
Titian,  on  witnessing  his  productions,  exclaimed,  "  Were  I  not  Titian,  I  would  wish  to  be  Correggio." 

(j3)  In  the  museum  at  Rotterdam  is  the  first  piece  painted  by  the  renowned  Rembrandt,  It  ia 
rough,  without  marks  of  genius  or  skill,  and  uninteresting,  except  to  show  that  he  began  as  low  down 
as  the  lowest.  In  the  same  gallery  is  the  masterpiece  of  the  artist,  counted  of  immense  value. 
What  years  of  patient  study  and  practice  intervene  between  the  two  pieces !  If  all  have  not  genius, 
all  have  the  power  to  work  ;  and  this  is  greater  than  genius. 

(y)  Coleridge,  one  day  when  some  one  was  enlarging  on  the  tendency  of  some  good  scheme  to 
regenerate  the  world,  threw  a  little  thistle-down  into  the  air,  which  he  happened  to  see  by  the  road- 
side, and  said,  "  The  tendency  of  this  thistle-down  is  towards  China !  but  I  know,  with  assui-ed 
certainty,  it  will  never  get  there ;  nay,  it  is  more  than  probable,  that  after  sundry  eddyings  and 
gyrations  up  and  down,  backwards  and  forwards,  it  will  be  found  somewhere  near  the  place  where 
it  grew."  Such  is  the  history  of  grand  schemes  of  reformation  apart  from  Divine  power  and  bene- 
diction. 

{d)  William  Rufus,  having  seen  the  coast  of  Ireland  from  some  rocks  in  North  Wales,  is  reported 
to  have  said,  "  I  will  summon  hither  all  the  ships  of  my  realm,  and  with  them  make  bridge  to 
attack  that  country."  This  threat  being  reported  to  Murchard,  Prince  of  Leinster,  he  paused  a 
moment,  and  then  said,  "  Did  the  king  add  to  this  mighty  threat,  if  God  please  ?"  and  being  assured 
he  made  no  mention  of  God  in  his  speech,  he  replied,  rejoicing  in  such  a  prognostic,  "  Sure,  that 
man  puts  his  trust  in  human,  not  in  Divine  power,  I  fear  not  his  coming." 

Secular  Aid  for  Spiritual  Work. 
ii  9.     Now  the  king  had  sent  captains  of  the  army,  ^c. 

This     martial     escort     granted     to  with  righteousness,  the  believer  may  con- 

Nehemiah  in  response  to  his  own  request,  fidently  cast  himself  upon  the  protection 

As  an  official   dignitary,  had  right   to  of  Jehovah.     "  When   my   father  and 

public  honour  and  body-guard.    Learn —  mother  forsake  me,"  &c.      Under  such 

I.  That    the    Church  may   employ  circumstances   the  three   Hebrews  and 

secular  power   for   purposes   of  pro-  Daniel   committed  their  case   to   God. 

tection.     When  one  has  suitable  means  '*  This  poor  man  cried,   and  the  Lord 

at  hand  for  avoiding  danger,  he  must  not  heard  him  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.). 
despise  them  (Josh.  ii.  15;  2  Cor.  xi.         II.  That     the     Church     may    not 

33).     1.  Every  law-abiding  subject  has  employ  secular  power  in  matters  of 

a  right   to   claim  the  law's  protection,  faith.      Ezra's   work    had    been   more 

This  holds  good  except  in  the  case  of  purely  spiritual  than  Nehemiah's  now 

conduct  which  is  likely  to   provoke  a  was,  hence  he  sought  no  such  aid  as 

breach  of  the  peace.     2.  It  is  a  good  this.    Both  sought  the  religious  reforma- 

ma7i's  duty    to  seek   the  protection   of  tion  of  the  people,  but  Nehemiah's  chief 

secular  power    rather    than   rashly    to  mission  was  to  restore  the  city  of  Jeru- 

expose  himself  to  danger.     Paul  sought  salem  and  rebuild  the  walls.      1.   God 

the  shield  of  the  law  when  certain  men  has  never  authorized  the  use  of  any  but 

had   taken  an  oath  to  kill  him   (Acts  moral   means  in   spiritual   work.      All 

xxiii.).     3.    When  secular  aid  is  denied,  coercion  inadmissible.      *' My  kingdom 

or  granted  only  on   terms  inconsistent  is  not  of  this  world."     "Go  ye  into  all 


CHAP.   II.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NE  HEM  I  AH. 


53 


the  world,"  is  the  commission  which 
follows  upon  the  proclamation  of  Divine 
sovereignty.  '*  All  power,"  &c.  "  He 
that  winneth  souls  is  wise."  The  fire 
and  the  rack  may  command  submission, 
but  will  never  win  the  heart,  or  convince 
the  conscience.  (/3)  2.  The  employment 
of  secular  poiver  in  matters  of  faith  has 
always  been  'productive  of  disastrous 
results.  This  method  predominated 
over  all  others  in  the  dark  or  mediaeval 
ages.  Hence  the  war  and  bloodshed, 
strife  and  controversy,  hatred  and  heresy 
that  prevailed.  A  notable  exception 
was  Stephen,  king  of  Poland,  who  when 
urged  by  some  of  his  subjects  to  con- 
strain certain  who  were  of  a  ditferent 
religion  to  embrace  his  creed,  nobly 
answered,  "  I  am  king  of  men,  and  not 


of  conscience.       The  dominion  of  con- 
science belongs  exclusively  to  God." 

Illustrations : — (a)  An  old  lady  taking  a  long 
railway  journey,  prayed  almost  all  the  time  that 
God  would  protect  her  from  harm.  When  she 
reached  the  last  platform,  and  was  hut  a  few 
minutes  walk  from  her  home,  she  felt  that  now 
she  could  take  care  of  herself;  but  just  here  she 
fell,  and  received  an  injury  from  which  she  was 
a  long  time  recovering.  We  must  trust  in  God 
at  all  times. 

(/3)  The  missionaries  to  the  Fiji  islands  were 
threatened  with  destruction  by  the  enraged 
natives,  and  had  no  means  of  defence  except 
prayer.  Their  enemies  heard  them  praying, 
became  fearful,  and  fled.  The  reason  was  given 
by  one  of  themselves.  "  They  found  you  were 
praying  to  your  God,  and  they  know  your  God 
is  a  strong  God;  and  they  are  gone."  St. 
Augustine  was  saved  from  death  by  a  mistake  of 
his  guide,  who  lost  the  usual  road,  in  which  the 
Donatists  had  laid  wait  to  murder  him. 


First  Hindrance. — Secret  Jealousy. 
ii.  10.      When  Sanhallat  the  Horonite,  and  Tobiah,  <^c. 


The  name  Sanballat  signifies  a  pure 
enemy  ;  for  he  belonged  to  a  spiteful 
people  who  had  always  been  troublesome 
to  the  children  of  Israel,  and  did  con- 
stantly vex  and  provoke  them  to  evil 
(Numb.  xxii.  .3,  4). 

I.  Here  is  jealousy  tyrannical  in  its 
spirit.  The  Hebrews  in  Palestine  had 
been  hitherto  poor  and  helpless.  They 
were  anxious  to  improve  their  condition, 
but  these  enemies  were  eager  to  keep 
them  poor  that  they  might  be  able  to 
oppress  and  plunder  them.  Jealousy 
naturally  cruel,  inasmuch  as  it  feeds  upon 
the  poverty  and  destitution  of  others, 
and  fears  their  prosperity,  lest  it  should 
lose  its  food.  They  probably  heard  of 
this  new  enterprise  through  their  wives, 
who  might  be  Jewesses.  Among  the 
Turks  every  vizier  used  to  keep  a  Jew 
as  private  counsellor,  whose  malice  was 
thought  to  have  had  much  to  do  with 
the  Turks'  bitter  persecution  of  Chris- 
tianity. 

II.  Here  is  jealousy  anti-religious 
in  its  attitude.  Grieved  that  any  should 
"  seek  the  welfare  of  the  children  of 
Israel "  (v.  10).  Their  opposition 
doubled  by  the  fact  that  this  was  God's 
■work,  and  these  were  his  people.  They 
hated  the  name  and  worship  of  Jehovah. 


The  malice  of  unbelievers  and  scoffers 
against  the  kingdom  of  God  can  never 
be  satisfied.  If  envy  had  not  blinded 
these  men,  they  might  have  seen  that 
they  meant  them  no  harm.  As  the  build- 
ing of  this  Jerusalem  had  many  enemies, 
so  the  repairing  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem 
(the  Church)  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  hath  many  more. — Pilkingfon. 

III.  Here  is  jealousy  covetously 
selfish  in  its  motives.  Samaria  had 
become  the  leading  state  west  of  Jordan, 
and  any  restoration  of  Jerusalem  might 
interfere  with  this  predominance.  The 
fear  of  losing  their  gains  had  much  to 
do  with  the  acrimony  of  their  opposition. 
Hippocrates  in  his  epistle  to  Crateva 
gives  him  this  good  counsel  ;  that  if  it 
were  possible,  amongst  other  herbs,  he 
cut  up  that  weed  covetousness  by  the 
roots,  that  there  be  no  remainder  left ; 
and  then  know  certainly  that  together 
with  the  bodies,  he  would  be  able  to 
cure  the  diseases  of  the  mind. 

IV.  Here  is  jealousy  self -torturing 
in  its  effects.  "  It  grieved  them  exceed 
ingly"  (v.  10).  The  expression  a  very 
strong  one.  (Compare  Ps.  cxii.)  "  The 
wicked  shall  see  it,  and  be  grieved;  he 
shall  gnash  with  his  teeth^  Keen 
mental  torture  implied.    Envy  compared 


54 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  11. 


to  a  poisonous  serpent.  Because  it  can- 
not feed  upon  other  men's  hearts  it 
feedeth  upon  its  own,  drinking  up  the 
most  part  of  its  own  venom,  and  is 
therefore  like  the  serpent  Porphyrius, 
which  w^as  full  of  poison,  but  wanting 
teeth,  hurt  none  but  itself.  Austin 
describes  it  as  a  "  madness  of  the  soul ; " 
Gregory,  as  "  a  torture  ; "  Chrysostom, 
"an  insatiableness ; "  Cyprian,  "blind- 
ness, a  plague  subverting  kingdoms  and 
families,  an  incurable  disease."  A  disease 
that  neither  Esculapius  nor  Plutus  could 
cure  ;  a  continual  plague  and  vexation 
of  spirit,  an  earthly  hell. 

Illustrations  : — The  poets  imagined  that  Envy 
dwelt  in  a  dark  cave ;  being  pale  and  lean, 
looking  asquint,  abounding  with  gall,  her  teeth 
black,  never  rejoicing  but  in  the  misfortunes  of 
others,  ever  unquiet  and  careful,  and  continually 
tormenting  herself.     (See  Addenda.) 

♦*The  Bible  abounds  with  instances  of  this  sin. 


We  find  it  in  Cain,  the  proto-murderer,  who 
slew  his  brother  in  a  fit  of  jealousy.  We  find  it  in 
the  dark  and  gloomy  and  revengeful  spirit  of  Saul, 
who  under  the  influence  of  jealousy  plotted  for 
years  the  slaughter  of  David.  We  find  it  in  the 
king  of  Israel  when  he  pined  for  the  vineyard 
of  Naboth,  and  shed  his  blood  to  gain  it.  Yea,  it 
was  envy  that  perpetrated  that  most  atrocious 
crime  ever  planned  in  hell  jr  executed  on  (arth, 
on  which  the  sun  refused  to  look,  and  at  which 
nature  gave  signs  of  abhorrence  by  rending  the 
rocks  ;  I  mean  the  crucifixion  of  Christ ;  for  the 
Evangelist  tells  us,  that  for  envy  the  Jews 
delivered  our  Lord." — /.  A.  James. 

The  infatuated  Caligula  slew  his  brother, 
because  he  was  a  beautiful  young  man.  Mutius, 
a  citizen  of  Rome,  was  reputed  to  be  of  such  an 
envious  and  malevolent  disposition,  that  Publius, 
one  day  observing  him  to  be  very  sad,  said, 
"  Either  some  great  evil  hath  happened  to  Mutius, 
or  some  great  good  to  another."  "  Dionysius  the 
Tyrant,"  says  Plutarch,  "out  of  envy  punished 
Philoxenius  the  musician,  because  he  could  sing  ; 
and  Plato,  the  philosopher,  because  he  could 
dispute  better  than  himself."  Cambyses  killed 
his  brother  Smerdis,  because  he  could  draw  a 
stronger  bow  than  himself  or  any  of  his  party. 


Preparatory  E-etirement. 
ii.  11.     So  I  came  to  Jerusalem^  and  was  there  three  days. 


God's  servants  frequently  thus  retired 
for  deliberation  before  entering  upon 
arduous  tasks.  Moses  had  a  forty-years 
half-involuntary  preparation  for  his  life 
work,  in  the  wilderness  of  Midian. 
Paul  spent  three  years  in  Arabia  before 
commencing  his  career  as  a  missionary. 
The  disciples  were  commanded  "  to  tarry 
at  Jerusalem  until,"  &c.  Our  Lord  him- 
self, at  the  commencement  of  his  public 
ministry,  was  "  led  of  the  spirit  into  the 
wilderness  to  be  tempted."  And  here 
we  see  Nehemiah  spending  three  days  in 
retirement,  before  entering  upon  a  work 
that  would  tax  all  his  powers  and  graces 
to  the  very  utmost.  Consider  the  reason 
of  this — 

I.  It  gave  Mm  time  to  look  round. 
Jerusalem  altogether  strange  to  him. 
Unacquainted  with  the  exact  state  of 
affairs  or  parties  in  the  city.  To  have 
rushed  headlong  without  premeditation 
into  so  gigantic  an  enterprise  would 
have  been  madness.  Probably  made 
secret  inquiries  as  to  vigilance  of  foes, 
and  spirit  of  people,  as  well  as  their 
numbers,  character,  and  wealth.  Know- 
ledge always  source  of  power  to  workers 


and  leaders.  Knowledge  of  human 
nature,  human  history,  and  character,  of 
great  service  in  Christian  work. 

II.  It  gave  him  time  to  look  for- 
ward. Evidently  a  man  of  wise  fore- 
sight. Could  see  both  difficulties  and 
the  way  to  meet  and  overcome  them. 
Careful,  yet  not  over-anxious,  because 
made  God  his  counsellor  and  guide. 
Neither  optimist  nor  pessimist.  By 
anticipating  difficulties  we  may  obviate 
them,  and  so  make  them  comparatively 
harmless  when  they  do  come.  Guard 
against  other  extreme,  of  making  them 
when  there  are  none,  and  magnifying 
them  when  they  are  insignificant.  Such 
pre-vision  not  inspiriting,  but  dis- 
heartening. 

III.  It  gave  him  time  to  look 
within.  Now  was  the  time  for  self-ex- 
amination. Motives  tested,  heart  probed. 
Trying  moment  to  faith.  Looking  at 
self  alone  drives  to  despair.  "  Who  is 
sufficient  for  these  things  '\ "  the  cry  of 
one  burdened  with  such  tremendous 
responsibility.  Luther  spent  the  night 
before  the  Diet  of  Worms  on  the  floor 
of  his  little  chamber^  humbling  himself 


CHAP.   II.] 


HOMILETIO  COMMEyTAnr:  NEIIEMIAH, 


65 


before  God,  and  laying  hold  on  Divine 
strength.     No  wonder  he  triumphed. 

IV.  It  gave  him  time  to  look  up- 
ward. The  contemplation  of  his  own 
faults  and  frailty  alone  would  have 
completely  unnerved  him  for  the  work 
he  had  come  to  accomplish.  His  eye 
would  turn  from  personal  demerit  to 
infinite  perfection ;  from  personal  im- 
potence to  infinite  strength.  From 
penitence  to  prayer  a  single  step,  thence 
to  confidence  and  hope.  Such  prepara- 
tion necessary  for  all  who  would  achieve 
great  works  for  God.  Careless  self- 
confidence  as  sure  to  meet  with  failure 
as  humble  and  contrite  faith  to  be 
crowned  with  success.     (See  Addenda.) 

Illustrations  : — "  Domitian,  about  the  begin- 


ning of  his  reign,  usually  sequestered  himself 
from  company  an  liour  every  day  ;  but  did 
nothing  the  while  but  catch  flies,  and  kill  them 
with  a  penknife.  God's  people  can  better  em- 
ploy their  solitariness,  and  do  never  want  com- 
pany, as  having  God  and  themselves  to  talk  with. 
And  tliese  secret  meals  are  those  that  make  the 
soul  fat.  It  was  a  wise  speech  of  Bernard,  that 
'*  Christ,  the  soul's  spouse,  is  bashful,  neither 
willingly  cometh  to  his  bride  in  the  presence  of 
a  multitude." — Trapp. 

The  noblest  works,  like  the  temple  of  Solomon, 
are  brought  to  perfection  in  silence. — Sir  A. 
Helps. 

Solitude  hath  been  the  custom  not  only  of 
holy  men,  but  of  heathen  men.  Thus  did  TuUy, 
and  Anthony,  and  Crassus,  make  way  to  that 
honour  and  renown  which  they  afterwards 
obtained  by  their  eloquence ;  thus  did  they  pass 
a  solitudine  in  scholas,  ascholis  in  foruMy  "  from 
their  secret  retirement  into  the  schools,  and  from 
the  schools  into  the  pleading  place." — Farindon. 


The  Walls  Inspected. 
ii.  12.     And  I  arose  in  the  nighty  ^c. 


I.  A  work  involving  considerable 
danger.  1.  From  the  ruined  state  of 
the  walls  (v.  13 — 15).  No  safe  path. 
Stones  scattered  along  road  made  travel- 
ling dangerous.  God's  servants  often 
required  to  traverse  perilous  roads. 
Missionaries  often  wonderfully  preserved 
when  journeying.  2.  Fro77i  the  enmity 
of  the  Samaritans.  Had  they  known 
would  probably  have  waylaid  so  small 
and  defenceless  a  company.  Exposed 
to  the  midnight  marauders  who  lurked 
about  the  city,  taking  advantage  of  its 
open  condition.  This  danger  did  not 
deter.  God  often  protected  his  servants 
from  malice  and  bloodthirstiness  of 
hostile  nations.  Missionary  annals  of 
Church  furnish  many  instances  of  sub- 
limest  heroism  and  hair-breadth  escapes 
from  threatened  destru'  tion. 

II.  A  work  requiring  personal 
sacrifice.  1.  He  gave  up  his  much- 
needed  rest.  The  physician  will  watch 
by  his  patient  all  night.  The  captain 
will  not  think  of  sleep  if  his  vessel  be 
in  danger.  So  should  the  Christian 
forego  his  rest  in  times  of  danger,  that 
he  may  call  upon  God  in  faithful  prayer. 
David  *'rose  at  midnight  to  give 
praise  "  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord  (Ps. 
cxix.).  Our  mortal  enemy,  Satan,  sleep- 
eth   not  night  or  day,  but  continually 


"  goeth  about  like  a  roaring  lion,  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour  j "  and  had  we  not 
an  equally  vigilant  watchman  we  should 
be  destroyed.  **  Behold,  he  neither 
slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  that  is  the 
watchman  of  Israel"  (Ps.  cxxi.).  Christ 
himself  set  us  an  example  of  self-denying 
vigilance ;  prayed  the  whole  night  be- 
fore sending  forth  his  disciples  (Luke 
vi.).  Joshua  marched  all  night  to 
conquer  the  Aniorites  (Josh.  x.).  Gideon 
arose  in  the  night  to  pull  down  the  altar 
of  Baal  (Judg.  vi.).  2.  He  laid  aside 
his  official  dignity.  Might  have  sent  a 
deputy,  or  gone  attended  by  strong  escort, 
or  numerous  retinue ;  but  preferred  to 
go  himself,  to  teach  us  that  nothing 
should  be  painful  or  degrading  to  any 
man,  however  exalted  his  station,  whicli 
concerns  the  prosperity  of  God's  City 
and  Church  David,  when  the  ark  was 
brought  out  of  Abinadab's  house,  played 
on  instruments,  and  after  casting  off  his 
kingly  apparel,  danced  before  the  ark  in 
his  ephod.  Michal  mocked,  and  was 
punished ;  but  David  declared  that  he 
would  yet  "more  lowly  cast  himself 
down,"  and  was  blessed  oi  the  Lord  (2 
Sam.  vi.).  Moses  foisook  the  dignity 
and  pleasure  of  Pnaraoh's  court  to  be- 
come a  tender  of  sheep,  that  he  might 
serve    the   cause    of    God    (Heb.  xi.). 


56 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  II. 


Christ  washed  the  disciples*  feet,  and 
Immbled  himself  to  the  death  of  the 
cross,  that  he  might  effect  our  redemp- 
tion. Such  humble  self-abasement  is 
the  greatest  honour  that  can  come  to  a 
man.  Pride  has  its  own  reward,  and  a 
paltry  one  it  is  j  but  humility  shall  be 
rewarded  by  the  great  Father  in  heaven. 

III.  A  work  requiring  great  moral 
courage.  The  view  of  such  a  wreck 
likely  to  dishearten.  The  magnitude  of 
the  task  would  appear  all  but  over- 
whelming. Would  serve  to  impress  him 
with  a  sense  of  personal  insufficiency  for 
so  gigantic  a  work.  Ezekiel,  surrounded 
by  the  valley  of  bleached  bones,  when 
suddenly  asked,  "  Son  of  man,  can  these 
bones  live  "^ "  in  despair  could  only  reply, 
"  0  Lord  God,  thou  knowest."  Nehe- 
miah,  surrounded  by  a  ruin  equally  hope- 
less, can  only  cast  himself  and  his  work 
upon  the  strength  of  the  Omnipotent,  (a) 

IV.  A  work  which  had  an  import- 
ant bearing  upon  subsequent  opera- 
tions. 1.  It  furnished  accurate  inform- 
ation uf  the  work  to  he  done.  Some 
r«-nder  the  words,  "  viewed  the  walls," 
*'  broke  the  walls  "  (^.  e.  broke  off  a  piece 
of  the  wall),  to  try  the  soundness  of  it, 
that  he  might  know  whether  it  required 
to  be  pulled  down  entirely,  or  might 
be  repaired  on  the  same  foundation. 
Must  have  been  moonlight,  or  could  not 
have  seen  to  do  this ;  as,  to  have  carried 
torches  or  lamps  would  have  betrayed 
their  presence.  Knowledge  obtained  by 
personal  investigation  always  most 
valuable.  Illustrate  this  in  the  case  of 
pastors,  sick  visitors,  and  Sunday  School 


teachers.  They  who  come  into  personal 
contact  with  human  nature  in  its  varied 
phases  know  best  how  to  remedy  its  ills, 
repair  its  losses,  and  alleviate  its  woes. 
In  all  religious  work  knowledge  is  power. 
2.  If  kindled  his  enthusiasm  for  the 
performance  of  the  ivork.  The  greater 
the  ruin,  the  greater  the  work  of  restora- 
tion. Small  works  require  common- 
place zeal ;  but  great  enterprises  demand 
extraordinary  grace.  Two  truths  brought 
home  to  him  by  sight  of  ruins.  (1)  How 
faithful  God  is.  He  threatened  that 
Jerusalem  should  become  a  heap  (Isa. 
XXV.  2).  Here  was  the  manifest  fulfil- 
ment of  the  threat.  Surely,  if  God  be 
fathful  in  punishing,  he  will  not  be  less 
faithful  in  healing.  (2)  How  vile  sin  is. 
This  desolation  the  result  of  Israel's  dis- 
obedience. The  restoration  of  the  city 
should  be  a  sign  of  Israel's  return  to 
obedience  ;  these  thoughts  would  serve 
to  inflame  I^ehemiah's  zeal.  The  same 
thoughts  are  calculated  to  stimulate  all 
Christian  effort. 

Illustration  :—{a)  As  Luther  drew  near  to  the 
door  which  was  about  to  admit  him  to  the  Diet 
of  Worms,  he  met  a  valiant  knight,  the  celebrated 
George  of  Freundsberg,  who  four  years  later 
drove  the  French  into  the  Ticino.  The  brave 
general,  seeing  Luther  pass,  tapped  him  on  the 
shoulder,  and  shaking  his  head,  blanched  in 
many  battles,  said  kindly :  "  Poor  monk,  poor 
monk !  thou  art  now  going  to  make  a  nobler 
stand  than  I  or  any  other  captain  have  ever 
made  in  the  bloodiest  of  our  battles.  But  if  thy 
cause  is  just,  and  thou  art  sure  of  it,  go  forward 
in  God's  name,  and  fear  nothing.  God  will  not 
forsake  thee."  He  went  forward  and  won  a 
glorious  victory. 


A  Time  for  Silence. 
ii.  12.     Neither  told  I  any  man  what  God,  ^c. 


There  is  a  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a 
time  to  speak  (Eccl.  iii.  7).  Taciturnity 
in  some  cases  an  eminent  virtue.  He  is 
a  wise  man  who  can  discern  the  proper 
season  for  its  exercise.  Jerome  says, 
*'  Let  us  first  learn  not  to  speak,  that  we 
may  afterwards  open  our  minds  with 
discretion."  Solomon  puts  silence  be- 
fore speech,  as  a  virtue  rarer  and  more 
precious.     Learn — 

I.  Good  intentions  are  best  kept 


secret  until  they  are  ascertained  to  be 
practicable.  Nehemiah  would  only 
have  marred  his  work  by  disclosing  his 
intention  before  he  was  sure  it  was  worth 
disclosing.  Ideas  are  prolific  as  insects, 
but  few  of  them  are  fit  to  live.  When 
Nehemiah  had  viewed  the  walls,  he  was 
able  to  render  a  reason,  and  expound  his 
plan  for  their  restoration.  A  good  rule 
for  all  who  contemplate  any  work  of 
importance.     They  should  first  consider, 


OHAP.  n.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH, 


bl 


then  speak.  Rashly  to  enter  upon  a 
crude  enterprise  is  to  court  failure.  A 
wise  man  will  not  open  his  mouth  to 
others  until  he  has  formed  some  plan  for 
the  accomplishment  of  his  purpose. 
Guard  against  other  extreme  of  obstin;ite 
persistence  in  a  course  condemned  by 
others  as  unpractical. 

II.  Good  intentions  are  best  kept 
secret  until  they  can  be  carried  out 
with  decisive  energy.  Great  enter- 
prises demand  great  faith,  and  intense 
enthusiasm.  Many  a  grand  reform  has 
prematurely  failed  through  the  half- 
heartedness  of  its  chief  supporters.  Had 
Luther  been  less  bold  he  would  have 
been  unfit  for  the  work  which  God 
entrusted  to  him.  Courage  is  contagious, 
and  cowardice  too. 

III.  Good  intentions  are  best  kept 
secret  from  those  who  are  likely  to 
oppose  them.  Nehemiah  aware  of  the 
vigilance  and  enmity  of  Sanballat  and 
his  party.  Careful  to  avoid  betraying 
his  purpose  to  those  who  were  related  to 
them  by  inter-marriage.  Herein  we  see 
the  prudence  of  this  great  man.  In  this, 
worthy  of  our  imitation,  who  are  engaged 


in  good  works  for  God.  Take  no  counsel 
with  scoffers,  nor  give  them  any  advan- 
tage in  their  profane  opposition.  Caution 
and  forethought  as  necessary  in  this 
warfare  as  in  carnal.  We  must  not  cast 
pearls  before  swine. 

IV.  Good  intentions  are  best  kept 
secret  until  the  co-operation  essential 
to  success  can  be  relied  on.  This  work 
impossible  without  co-operation.  Useless 
to  attempt  it  until  this  secured.  By 
personal  effort  and  interview  we  prepare 
the  way  for  united  action  and  ultimate 
success.  The  soldiers  must  be  enlisted 
one  by  one,  then  the  battle-cry  may  be 
sounded.  Workers  in  the  Church  must 
be  secured  one  by  one,  then  the  work 
may  be  openly  announced.  This  pre- 
paratory work  done  in  silence  and  secresy, 
afterwards  declared  openly. 

Illustration:  —  "When  Homer  makes  his 
heroes  to  march,  be  gives  them  silence  for  their 
guide ;  on  the  contrary,  he  makes  cowards  to 
babble  and  chatter  like  cranes.  The  one  pass 
along  like  great  rivers,  letting  their  streams  glide 
softly  with  silent  majesty  ;  the  others  only 
murmur  like  bubbling  brooks.  A  sign  of  not 
being  valiant  is  to  strive  to  seem  valiant." 


An  Appeal  for  Help. 
ii.  17.     Then  said  I  unto  theniy  ^c. 


I.  The  ground  of  the  appeal.  "Ye  see 

the  distress  that  we  are  in  "  (v.  17).  An 
appeal  to  their  patriotism^  their  pity, 
and  their  piety.  God's  city  is  desolate, 
your  city  is  in  ruins.  "  We  (putting 
himself  along  with  them)  are  in  distress." 
A  reproach  to  the  Church,  an  object  of 
derision  to  the  world,  shall  we  rest 
satisfied  where  we  are  ]  "  Te  see,"  The 
fact  is  patent,  it  cannot  be  concealed. 
No  need  to  expatiate  on  this  point,  for 
you  are  mourning  on  account  of  it  every 
day.  See  here  model  for  all  Christian 
appeals.  Shame  a  powerful  motive.  To 
this  Nehemiah  appealed.  What  incon- 
sistency in  their  conduct ! — that  they  who 
boHsted  of  the  greatness  and  goodness  of 
their  God  should  be  living  in  this 
miserable  plight,  as  though  he  could  not 
or  would  not  deliver  them  !  For  very 
shame  we  should  arise  and  build  the 
waste  places  of  Zion;   strengthen  her 


stakes,  and  lengthen  her  cords  j    then 
shall  her  converts  be  multiplied. 

II.  The  nature  of  the  appeal.  "Come, 
and  let  us  build. "  1 .  It  solicited  personal 
effort;  "  let  us  build."  Time  for  debating 
and  discussing  past.  Time  for  work  had 
come.  I^eliemiah  not  satisfied  with  their 
good  wishes,  or  money,  or  prayers ;  but 
sought  their  personal  assistance.  Every 
Christian  is  called  upon  to  take  his  share 
of  work  in  the  Church.  Not  all  adapted 
for  same  kind  of  work.  All  kinds  of 
work,  intellectual  and  manual,  may  be 
sanctified  to  the  cause  of  God.  In 
Israel's  battle  with  Midian,  when  Sisera 
was  defeated  and  slain,  we  find  all  kinds 
of  work  recorded  and  commended 
(Judges  V.  14).  Meroz  was  cursed  for 
its  cowardly  neutrality.  We  may  not 
substitute  money,  or  prayers,  or  good 
wishes  for  work.  "Every  man's  loork 
shall  be  tried,"  &c.     "  Let  your  light  so 


58 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:    NEIIEMIAH, 


[CHAP.  II. 


shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  youi 
good  works"     "Well   done,  good   and 
faithful  servant."     The    child  and  the 
invalid,  the  school-girl  and  maidservant, 
the  merchant  and  his  errand-boy,  have 
all  some  work  to  do  for  God.     To  every 
believer  he  says,   "  Go  work  to-day  in 
my  vineyard."     At  our  peril  do  we  say 
"I  go,"    and  go  not.     2.  It  promised 
personal  aid.     "  Let  us  build."     Not  go, 
but  ''come  : "  not  go  ye,  but  come,  " let 
lis  build."    An  example  as  noble  as  rare, 
to  see  a  courtier  leave  that  wealth,  and 
ease,  and  authority  in  the  midst  of  which 
he  was  living,  and  go   to  dwell  so   far 
from  court  in  an  old,  torn,  and  decayed 
city,  where  he  should  not  live  quietly, 
but  toil  and  drudge  like  a  day-labourer, 
in  dread  and  danger  of  his  life.     Yet 
they  who  are  earnest  in  God's  work  think 
not  of  ease,  and  bid  none  go  where  thev 
are  unwilling  to  go  themselves,  or  do 
work  which  they  are  too  proud  to  touch. 
Personal  example  in  workers,  and  soldiers 
especially,  far  more  powerful  than  per- 
sonal  authority.       Come,  always  more 
successful  than  go. 

III.  The  motive  urged.  *'  That  we 
be  no  more  a  reproach  "  (v.  17).  Here 
we  see  the  misery  they  were  in  urged  as 
a  motive  for  action.  Several  years  had 
elapsed  since  Cyrus  gave  them  permission 
to  return,  and  yet  hitherto  they  had  been 
unable  to  rebuild  the  walls.  This  plea 
often  occurs  in  the  Bible.  "■  For  thy 
great  Name's  sake,"  an  argument  often 
employed  by  eminent  pleaders.  (2 
Kings  xix.  4;  Ps.  xlii.  10;  Ixxiv.  18; 
Ixxix.  12;  Ixxxix.  51  ;  Pro  v.  xiv.  31  ; 
1  Kings  viii.  41,  42  ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  24  ; 
Ps.  XXV.  11;  Ps.  Ixxiv.  10;  Jer.  xiv. 
7.)  Jehovah  jealous  for  his  name,  and 
will  vindicate  his  character.  When  his 
Church  is  reproached  and  scorned  he  is 
assailed,  and  in  jealousy  for  his  honour 
will  defend  his  own.  Christ  said  to  Saul 
of  Tarsus,  "  Why  persecutes t  thou  me  1 " 
The  wounds  inflicted  upon  the  members 
of  his  body  on  earth,  were  felt  by  him, 
the  living  head,  in  heaven. 

IV.  The  encouragement  offered. 
'*  Then  I  told  them  of  the  hand  of  my 
God,"  &c.  (v.  18).  The  time  for  silence 
now  past,  and  the  time  for  speech  come. 
The  walls  inspected,  the  work  carefully 


planned  and  thoroughly  resolved  upon, 
it  only  remained  to  make  a  bold  appeal 
for  immediate  help,  and  commence  forth- 
with,  before  the  enemy   could   muster 
their  forces  or  mature  their  plans.  Note, 
promptness  in  religious  work  will  often 
sweep  away  like  a  tornado  all  obstacles, 
and  baffle  all  opponents.     He  assured  his 
co-patriots— 1.   That  God  loas  the  insti- 
gator  of  the  work.     "  I  told  them  of  the 
hand  of  my  God,  which  was  good  upon 
me  "  (v.  18).     In  previous  verse  the  law 
was  preached,  here  the  gospel.    First,  he 
set  forth  their  misery,  then  encouraged 
them  by  the  promise  of  God's  mercy. 
This  order  the  true  one  for  all  teachers 
and     ministers.      They    are    the    best 
scholars    who   will   work    without   the 
rod  :  yet  none  so  good  but  need  the  rod 
sometimes.     A   wise  schoolmaster   will 
make  such  use   of  both  gentleness  and 
severity  as  to  gain  his  point  with  the 
least  possible  friction.     2.   That  the  king 
ap2?roved  of  the  work.     "  Also  the  king's 
words  that  he   had  spoken   unto  me." 
God  had  given  him  such  favour  in  the 
king's  sight,  that  as  soon  as  he'  asked 
licence  to  go  and  build  the  city,  where  his 
fathers  lay  buried,  it  was  granted ;  and 
the  liberality  and  goodwill  of  the  king 
were  so  great  that  he  granted  him  sol- 
diers to  conduct  him  safely  to  Jerusalem, 
and  commission  to  his  officers  for  timber 
to  build  with.     Why  should  they  mis- 
trust or  doubt?     With  both   God  and 
the  king  on  their  side,  what  needed  they 
more?     God's   servants   should   always 
seek  to  make  themselves  agreeable   to 
those   in  high   station,   that  they  may 
receive  their  help  in  doing  his  work. 
Learn   to   be   thankful    for    wise    and 
benevolent   rulers,    and   pray  for   their 
conversion  (1  Tim.  ii.  2). 

V.  The  success  of  the  appeal.    ''And 
they  said,  Let  us  rise  and  build  "  (v.  18). 

1.  The  response  was  prompt.  Without 
delay  or  discussion  they  entered  with 
spirit  upon  the  work  there  and  then. 
Would  that  all  congregations  were 
equally  prompt  in  accepting  the  invita- 
tions of  the  Gospel!  "Now  is  the 
accepted  time,  behold,  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  2).  Would  that 
all  Christians  were  as  ready  to  work  ! 

2.  The  resptonse  was  practical.    "  Let  us 


CHAP,  n.] 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:   NEIIEMIAH, 


69 


rise  and  build.**  Not  propose  substitute, 
or  alternative,  but  undertook  the  work 
required  of  them.  Example  for  all 
Christian  workers,  not  to  go  round  diffi- 
culties, but  meet  them  in  the  face. 
Practical  work  must  be  done  in  a 
practical  way.  Fancy  and  flimsy 
methods  break  down,  whilst  simple  and 
personal  effort  accomplish  great  results. 


3.  The  response  was  unanimous.  *'  Let 
us  rise  and  build."  Even  the  listless 
were  stirred  for  the  time  (Eliasliib  for 
instance).  All  with  one  accord  under 
took  to  carry  out  the  work  by  God'a 
blessing,  and  the  king's  favour.  Co- 
operation necessary  to  the  success  of  any 
large  undertaking.  World  never  con- 
verted until  the  churches  are  united. 


The  Strength  of  Unity. 
ii.  18.     So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  this  good  work. 


I.  Consists  in  its  power  to  protect 
individual  workers  against  dis- 
couragement. 1.  Isolated  workers  are 
always  liable  to  depression.  This,  the 
result  of  bearing  alone  the  burden  of  care 
and  duty  incident  to  their  work.  Few 
men  have  the  indomitable  courage  of  a 
Nehemiah,  a  Paul,  a  Luther.  Most 
spirits  quail  when  unsupported  by  the 
aid  and  sympathy  of  kindred  workers. 
2.  Mutual  sympathy  and  conference  re- 
lieve mental  strain,  and  renew  exhausted 
energy.  "  Iron  sharpeneth  iron,  so  a 
man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his 
friend"  (Prov.  xxvii.  17).  Burdens 
confessed  are  half  removed.  Mutual 
counsel  will  cheer  the  drooping  spirit, 
and  stimulate  to  increased  effort.  Christ 
recognized  this  when  he  sent  out  his 
disciples  two  and  two.  It  is  not  good  for 
man  to  be  alone.  *'  Where  no  counsel  is 
the  people  fall"  (Prov.  xi.  14).  "Two 
are  better  than  one,  for  if  they  fall,  the 
one  will  lift  up  his  fellow  ;  but  woe  to 
him  that  is  alone  when  he  falleth  "  (Eccl. 
iv.  9,  10). 

Illustration: — There  are  stragglers  in  the 
Church  as  well  as  in  the  array,  who  fall  out  of 
the  ranks  and  are  lost.  Sometimes  they  manage 
to  subsist  for  a  while,  living  on  the  charity  of  the 
people  and  the  scraps  left  by  those  in  camp,  but 
generally  fall  a  prey  to  their  isolation  and 
exposure.  One  such  found  his  way,  during  the 
American  war,  to  the  hospital  at  Sedalia.  He 
was  dying  then,  and  could  not  give  his  name  or 
regiment.  He  was  a  mere  boy,  and  unequal  to 
the  toil  of  marching.  He  was  wet  and  cold  and 
weary,  and  in  a  few  hours  died,  and  was  buried 
in  a  nameless  grave.  So  do  many  fall  out  of  the 
Church's  ranks,  and  soon  faint  by  the  way. 
Pliny  writes  of  a  stone  in  the  island  of  Scyros, 
that  if  it  be  whole,  though  a  large  and  heavy 
one,  it  swims  above  water,  but  being  broken  it 
Binks.     So  long  as  saints  keep  whole,  nothing 


shall  sink  them ;  but  if  they  break  up,  and 
divide,  they  are  in  danger  of  going  down. 

II.  Consists  in  its  power  of  resisting 
combined   opposition    from    without. 

1.  The  full  force  of  individual  strength 
only  awakened  by  the  enthvMasm  of 
miited  action.  Men  are  like  the  stone 
pyrites,  which  is  cold  and  dull  until  well 
rubbed  ;  then  it  becomes  so  brilliant  and 
hot  as  to  burn  the  hand.  Intense  earn- 
estness only  kindled  by  the  contagion 
of  glowing  spirits.  Coals  need  to  be 
pressed  together  to  become  thoroughly 
hot.  So  do  souls  require  to  be  brought 
into  very  close  contact,  and  inspired  by 
one  common  impulse,  to  be  fully  roused 
to  fervour  and  self-sacrificing  devotion, 

2.  In  unity,  the  full  force  of  individual 
strength  is  dh^ected  against  the  common 
enemy.  I^ot  as  separate  individuals, 
but  as  forming  one  combined  and 
glowing  mass.  Such  union  is  resistless 
as  a  stream  of  glowing  lava. 

Illustrations: — The  sand-reed,  which  grows  on 
the  sandy  shores  of  Europe,  represents  the  influ- 
ence of  religion  and  the  Church  upon  society. 
Its  roots  penetrate  to  a  considerable  depth,  and 
spread  in  all  directions,  forming  a  net-work 
which  binds  together  the  loosest  sands ;  whilst 
its  strong  tall  leaves  protect  the  surface  from 
drought,  and  afford  shelter  to  small  plants,  which 
soon  grow  between  the  reeds,  and  gradually  form 
a  new  green  surface  on  the  bed  of  sand.  But  for 
the  sand-reed,  the  sea-wind  would  long  since  have 
wafted  the  drift-sand  far  into  the  interior  of  the 
country,  and  have  converted  many  a  fruitful  acre 
into  a  waste ;  but  that  invaluable  grass  opposes 
its  stubborn  resistance  to  the  most  furious  gale. 
So  does  the  united  front  of  Church  organization 
present  an  insuperable  barrier  to  the  aggressions 
of  profanity  and  unbelief. 

Standing  one  day  before  a  beehive,  Gotthold 
observed  with  delight  how  the  little  honey-birds 
departed  and  a,rriYedt  and  from  time  to  tim* 


90 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  n. 


returned  home  laden  with  the  spoils  of  the 
flowers.  Meanwhile  a  great  yellow  hornet,  the 
wolf  among  bees,  came  buzzing  up  in  eager 
quest  of  prey.  As  it  was  evening-tide,  and  the 
bees  after  the  heat  of  the  day  had  settled  about 
the  mouth  of  the  hive  to  breathe  the  cool  air,  it 
was  amusing  to  observe  that  their  fierce  adver- 
sary lacked  courage  to  attack  their  combined 
host  and  serried  ranks.  True,  he  often  advanced 
for  the  purpose,  but  seeing  how  densely  and 
compactly  they  were  sitting,  was  forced  to  retreat 
empty-handed.  At  last,  a  bee,  somewhat  belated, 
arrived  by  itself ;  and  on  this  straggler  he 
instantly  seized,  fell  with  it  to  the  earth,  and 
instantly  devoured  it. 

III.  Consists  in  its  power  to  cope 
with  the  inherent  difficulties  of  the 
work,  which  otherwise  would  be  in- 
surmountable. 1.  Work  which  cannot 
he  done  by  few  may  be  accomplished  by 
many.  This  true  of  the  wall-building. 
A  small  company  of  workers,  however 
willing,  would  have  been  altogether  in- 
adequate for  the  work  to  be  done.  True 
of  many  other  large  Christian  under- 
takings. Especially  true  of  church  or 
chapel  building  where  the  workers  are 
mostly  poor.  2.  Work  which  cannot  be 
done  by  many  acting  separately,  may  be 
accomplished  by  the  same  acting  in 
unison.  Unity  is  strength.  It  doubles 
the  capacity  of  each  individual  worker. 
A  hundred  separate  links  or  threads  will 


accomplish  nothing;  but  join  into  a 
chain  or  a  cable,  and  they  may  save  a 
hundred  lives. 

Illustrations  : — "  Separate  the  atoms  which 
make  the  hammer,  and  each  would  fall  on  the 
stone  as  a  snow-flake ;  but  welded  into  one,  and 
wielded  by  the  firm  arm  of  the  quarryman,  it  will 
break  the  massive  rocks  asunder.  Divide  the 
waters  of  Niagara  into  distinct  and  individual 
drops,  and  they  would  be  no  more  than  the  falling 
rain ;  but  their  united  body  would  quench  the 
fires  of  Vesuvius,  and  have  some  to  spare  for 
other  volcanoes." — Guthrie. 

"  Union  is  power.  The  most  attenuated 
thread  when  sufficiently  multiplied  will  form  the 
strongest  cable.  A  single  drop  of  water  is  a  weak 
and  powerless  thing ;  but  an  infinite  number  of 
drops  united  by  the  force  of  attraction  will  form 
a  stream,  and  many  streams  combined  will  form 
a  river ;  till  rivers  pour  their  water  into  the 
mighty  oceans,  whose  proud  waves,  defying  the 
power  of  man,  none  can  stay  but  he  who  formed 
them.  And  thus,  forces  which,  acting  singly,  are 
utterly  impotent,  are,  when  actingin  combination, 
resistless  in  their  energies  and  mighty  in  power." 
— Salter. 

"  A  thousand  grains  of  powder,  or  a  thousand 
barrels,  scattered,  a  grain  in  a  place,  and  fired  at 
intervals,  would  burn,  it  is  true,  but  would  pro- 
duce no  concussion.  Placed  together  in  effective 
position,  they  would  lift  a  mountain,  and  cast  it 
into  the  sea.  Even  so,  the  whole  Church,  filled 
with  faith,  and  tired  by  the  Holy  One  who  gave 
the  tongues  of  fire  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  will 
remove  every  mountain,  fill  up  every  valley,  cast 
up  the  highway  of  the  Lord,  and  usher  in  the 
jubilee  of  redemption." — Boardman, 


Second  Hindrance — Open  Derision. 
ii.  19.     They  laughed  us  to  scorn,  and  despised  us. 


I.  Here  is  an  attempt  to  stop  the 
work  of  God  by  the  combined  opposition 
of  wicked  men,  "  When  Sanballat  the 
Horonite,  and  Tobiah,"  &c.  1.  The 
work  of  God  is  sure  to  meet  with  oppo- 
sition from  wicked  men.  They  must 
hate  and  hinder  it,  because  they  are 
opposed  to  all  that  is  good  or  godly. 
The  triumph  of  good  means  the  over- 
throw of  evil.  They  will  find  some 
excuse  for  their  oppression,  and  thus 
endeavour  to  make  their  conduct  appear 
reasonable.  2.  The  xoork  of  God  will 
often  provoke  the  combined  hostility  of 
those  who  have  nothing  else  in  common. 
Thus  did  the  Canaanites,  Hittites, 
Hivites,  Perizzites,  &c.,  combine  for  the 
destruction  of  Israel,  but  in  vain,  for 
Jehovah  brought  to  nought   their  evil 


counsels.  Such  opposition  Luther  met 
with  when  he  began  to  reform.  The 
pope  excommunicated  him  ;  the  emperor 
proscribed  him ;  Henry,  king  of  England, 
and  Lewis,  king  of  Hungary,  wrote 
against  him ;  but  the  work  prospered, 
because  it  was  of  God. 

II.  Here  is  an  attempt  to  stop  the 
work  of  God  by  pouring  contempt  upon 
it.  '*  They  laughed  us  to  scorn."  1. 
They  despised  the  workers.  "  As  a 
company  of  fools,  who  could  never  effect 
what  they  attempted.  So  Erasmus  and 
Sir  Thomas  More  thought  to  ridicule 
the  Lutherans  out  of  their  religion. 
This  the  Scripture  calls  cruel  mocking 
(Heb.  xi.  36),  and  ranks  it  with  bloody 
persecution.  The  bitterest  persecution 
which  man  can  inflict  is  that  of  cruel 


CHAP.    11. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


61 


taunts  and  scurrilous  invectives  :  but  the 
least  harmful  also.  Jude,  Peter,  and 
Paul,  all  foretold  that  in  the  last  days 
there  should  come  mockers  (2  Pet.  iii.  ; 
2  Tim.  iii. ;  Jude).  Christ  thus  spite- 
fully treated  by  Herod,  Pilate,  the 
priests,  and  the  people.  Solomon  says, 
*'He  that  mocketh  shall  be  mocked" 
(Prov.  iii).  David  thus  describes  the 
reward  of  mockers,  "  He  that  dwelleth 
in  the  heavens  shall  mock  them,  and  the 
Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision  "  (Ps. 
ii.).  Michal  was  childless  all  her  life  as 
a  punishment  for  mocking  David  (2 
Sam.  vi.).  The  children  that  mocked 
Elisha  were  devoured  by  bears  (2  Kings 
ii.).  Belshazzar,  king  of  Babylon,  was 
destroyed  with  his  kingdom  when  he 
despised  the  warnings  of  God  (Dan.  v.). 
2.  They  ridiculed  the  ivorh.  "  What  is 
this  thing  that  ye  do  ^ "  Scoffingly  they 
asked  the  question,  as  Pilate  asked, 
<*What  is  truth]"  Wicked  men  will 
never  be  fast  for  a  taunt.  If  the  Church's 
character  be  above  reproach,  the  Church's 
work  is  ridiculed  as  impossible  or 
useless. 

III.  Here  is  an  attempt  to  stop  the 
work  of  God  by  insinuating  an  evil 
design.  "  Will  ye  rebel  against  the 
king  1 "  1 .  When  a  good  work  cannot 
otherwise  he  hindered  an  evil  motive  is 
sure  to  he  suggested.  The  work  is  open, 
the  motive  secret.  More  easy  to  explain 
and  defend  former  than  latter.  Men 
fear  what  is  secret.  Wicked  men  em- 
ploy this  dread  for  their  own  ends.  2. 
Disloijalty  to  the  State  has  always  heen 
a  favourite  charge  with  the  Church's 
enemies.  Elijah  is  accused  by  Ahab  of 
being  a  troubler  of  Israel  (1  Kings 
xviii.).  David  was  persecuted  by  Saul 
because  the  people  sung,  "Saul  hath 
slain  his  thousands,  and  David  his  ten 
thousands  "  (1  Sam.  xviii.).  Daniel  was 
accused  of  disobedience,  and  consigned  to 
the  lions'  den,  because  he  prayed  to  the 
God  of  heaven  (Dan.  vi.).  The  Israelites 
were  persecuted  in  Egypt  lest  they  should 
rebel  against  Pharaoh  (Exod.  i.).  Herod 
sought  to  slay  the  infant  Christ,  lest  He 
should  dethrone  him  (Matt.  ii.).  Christ 
was  accused  and  executed  as  a  malefactor 
guilty  of  treason  (Jno.  xviii.).  The 
Apostlee  were  accused  of  teachiiig  sedi- 


tion, and  subverting  the  commonwealth 
(Acts  v.).  St.  Paul  was  charged  with 
the  same  crime  at  Athens  (Acts  xvii.). 
Luther  was  called  a  "trumpeter  of 
rebellion."  To  excuse  the  shameful 
massacre  of  St.  Bartholemew,  a  medal 
was  struck  with  the  inscription.  Valour 
against  the  rehels,  on  one  side,  and  on 
the  reverse,  Piety  hath  excited  Justice. 

IV.  Here  is  an  attempt  to  stop  the 
work  of  God  utterly  frustrated. 
"  Then  answered  I  them,  and  said,"  &c. 
(v.  20).  The  boastful  arrogance  of 
Sanballat  nothing  daunted  Nehemiah; 
and  as  they  were  not  ashamed  to  charge 
him  and  his  people  unjustly,  so  he  is  not 
ashamed  to  step  forth  boldly  in  defence 
of  the  work  they  had  undertaken.  Thus 
Moses  bearded  Pharaoh  ;  thus  Jephthah 
withstood  the  Ammonites  (Judg.  xi.); 
thus  Hezekiah  defended  the  Jews  from 
the  blasphemies  of  Eabshakeh ;  thus 
David  stood  up  against  Goliath  (1  Sam. 
xvii.);  thus  did  Moses  and  Aaron  with- 
stand the  reviling  and  calumny  of  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram  (Numb.  xvi.). 
Nehemiah.  here  in  the  same  spirit  ap- 
peals to  God  as  the  ground  of  his  hope, 
and  the  source  of  his  confidence. 
Balak,  the  king  of  Moab,  hated  the 
camp  of  Israel,  and  bribed  Balaam,  a 
prophet,  to  curse  them.  Just  so  does 
the  world  hate  the  Church,  and  is  never 
happier  than  when  it  can  hire  the 
ministers  of  the  Church  to  turn  against 
it,  and  betray  its  interests.  But  it  can 
no  more  succeed  by  its  curses  than  the 
wicked  Balak  could ;  it  must  seduce 
Christians  to  sin,  and  then  it  prevails ; 
not  by  its  own  power,  but  by  tempting 
the  Church  to  provoke  the  anger  of 
God.     (See  Addenda.) 

Illustrations  :—{a)  Pliny,  governor  of  Pontus, 
under  the  emperor  Trajan,  was  appointed  to 
punish  the  Christians,  but  seeing  their  great 
number  he  doubted  what  he  should  do,  and 
eventually  wrote  to  the  emperor  that  ''  he  found 
no  wickedness  in  them,  but  that  they  would  not 
worship  images,  and  that  they  would  sing  psalms 
bef  >re  day-light  unto  Christ  as  God,  and  did 
forbid  all  sins  to  be  used  among  them.''  The 
emperor  hearing  this  became  a  great  deal  more 
gentle  to  them  (Euseb.  Lib.  iii.  cap.  33).  Sallust, 
tormenting  Theodorus,  a  Christian,  in  various 
ways,  and  for  a  long  time,  to  make  bim  forsake  his 
faith,  but  all  in  vain,  went  to  the  emperor  Julian, 
and  told  him  what  he  bad  done,  counselling  him 


62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  11. 


that   "lie  should  prove  that  way  no  more  by 
cruelty,  for  they  got  glory  by  suffering  patiently, 


and  he  got  shame  in  punishing  so  sharply," 
because  they  would  not  yield  to  him. 


Confidence  in  God  an  Incentive  to  Work. 


ii.  20.     The  God  of  heaven^  he 

"Knowledge  is  power/'  says  the 
philosopher  ;  "  faith  is  power,"  says  the 
saint.  And  what  is  faith  %  Confidence 
in  God,  in  his  almighty  power  and  faith- 
fulness ;  a  confidence  which  nerves  the 
soul  for  every  task.  ISTo  principle  can 
brace  a  man  like  the  principle  of  implicit 
trust  in  God.  It  leads  not  to  indolence, 
but  to  effort,  because — 

I.  It  suggests  almighty  protection. 
''The  God  of  heaven."  1.  It  regards 
Jehovah  as  King  of  the  celestial  universe. 
'*  Lord  of  Hosts,"  one  of  God's  most 
frequent  names  (Ps.  xlvi.  7 ;  Isa.  i.  24  ; 
Jer.  xlvi.  18 ;  Zech.  i.  6 ;  Mai.  i. 
14).  "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in 
heaven  "  (Matt,  xxviii.).  When  the  God 
*'  who  rolls  the  stars  along,"  and  "  up- 
holdeth  all  things  by  his  word;"  the 
God  who  doeth  according  to  his  will 
amongst  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  con- 
trols the  hidden  forces  of  the  universe ; 
the  God  who  is  Almighty,  and  Omni- 
scient, and  Eternal,  to  whom  every  celes- 
tial knee  bows  in  willing  homage  and 
adoration ;  when  this  God  is  on  our  side, 
who  can  be  afraid  % — what  can  hinder  ? 
2.  It  regards  Jehovah  as  the  providential 
ruler  of  the  terrestrial  universe.  This 
implied  rather  than  expressed.  "All 
power  is  given  to  me  in  heaven  and  in 
earth.'^  In  earth  because  in  heaven. 
All  destinies  in  his  hand,  all  events 
under  his  control. 

II.  It  suggests  providential  direc- 
tion. "He  will  prosper  us."  1.  The 
way  may  he  darky  hut  God  will  unfold  it. 
When  we  have,  like  Nehemiah,  done  our 
best,  and  given  our  utmost,  then  we  may 
safely  commit  our  cause  to  God  and 
patiently  await  the  issue.  Thus  Abra- 
ham followed  the  leadings  of  Providence 
(Gen.  xii.).  Thus  confidingly  did  he 
place  his  son  Isaac  on  the  altar  (Gen. 
xxii.),  saying,  "  God  will  provide  himself 
a  sacrifice."  Thus  the  apostles  went 
at  the  Saviour's  bidding  without  scrip, 
&c.  (Luke  xxii.).  In  this  spirit  let  all 
who  fear  God  boldly   begin  his  work. 


will  -prosper  us,  therefore,  ^c. 

and  continue  it  steadfastly,  looking  for 
his  guidance,  and  they  shall  not  be 
disappointed. 

Illustration  : — A  Swiss  chamois  hun+.er,  cross- 
ing the  Mer  de  Glace,  fell  into  one  of  the  enor- 
mous crevasses  that  rend  the  ice  in  maay  places. 
He  fell  a  hundred  yards  without  serious  injury; 
but  his  situation  seemed  hopeless.  He  could 
not  climb  out ;  and  the  cold  would  so(»n  freeze 
him  to  death.  A  stream  of  water  ran  down  the 
crevasse ;  he  followed  it,  wading,  stooping, 
crawling,  or  floating  as  best  he  could.  A  %  length 
he  reached  a  vaulted  chamber  from  which  there 
was  no  visible  outlet.  The  water  heaved  threat- 
eningly. Retreat  was  impossible.  Delay  was 
death.  Commending  himself  to  God  the  nunter 
plunged  into  the  whirling  flood.  Then  followed 
a  moment  of  darkness  and  terror ;  then  he  was 
thrown  up  amid  the  flowers  and  hay-fields  of 
the  vale  of  Chamouni.  Thus  mysteriously  are 
we  led  by  a  gracious  Providence  to  safety  and 
success. 

2.  The  way  may  be  crowded  with  diffi- 
culties, hut  God  will  remove  them.  "  He 
will  prosper  us."  Difficulties  as  many 
as  Nehemiah  encountered  may  beset  our 
path  and  Avork,  but  not  more  or  mightier 
than  God  can  remove.  How  deliverance 
shall  come  we  know  not,  and  must  leave 
to  God.  All  we  know  is  that  it  will 
come  in  due  time.  On  one  occasion 
Luther  was  very  importunate  at  the 
throne  of  grace  to  know  the  mind  of 
God,  and  it  seemed  to  him  as  if  God 
spoke  aloud  and  said  :  "  /  am  not  to  he 
traced.'^  We  can  trust  where  we  cannot 
trace.  The  Almighty  has  his  "  times 
and  seasons."  An  eminent  saint  thus 
wrote  to  a  friend  :  "  It  has  frequently 
been  with  my  hopes  and  desires  in 
regard  to  providence,  as  with  my  watch 
and  the  sun.  My  watch  has  often  been 
ahead  of  true  time ;  I  have  gone  faster 
than  providence,  and  have  been  forced 
to  stand  still  and  wait,  or  I  have  been 
set  painfully  hack.''  Flavel  says,  "  some 
providences  are  like  Hebrew  letters, 
they  must  be  read  backwards." 

III.  It  suggests  Divine  benediction. 
''He  will  prosper  us."  1.  It  matters 
not  how  men  may  hinder  if  God  prosper 


CHAP,  n.] 


HOMILETJQ  COMMENTARY :   NEIIEMIAH. 


63 


the  work.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can 
be  against  us  1 "  2.  It  matters  not  lioio 
the  king's  favour  may  fluctuate  if 
JehovaWs  remain  the  same.  He  is  the 
Unchangeable  One.  Man's  favour  may 
be  fickle,  and  therefore  little  to  be 
relied  upon.  God's  never  fails,  therefore 
with  confidence  his  saints  may  say,  "  He 
ivill  prosper  us." 

IV.  It  anticipates  ultimate  success. 
"He  ^'A\ prosper  us."  1.  It  concludes  that 
what  God  initiates  he  intends  to  complete. 
A  good  beginning  is  a  strong  reason  to 
persuade  a  man  that  God  will  grant 
good  success  in  the  end.  David  com- 
forted himself  when  he  met  Goliath  by 
the  thought  that  he  who  had  delivered 
him  from  the  lion  and  the  bear,  would 
now  continue  his  gracious  interposition. 
God's  plans  never  fail.  2.  It  concludes 
that  what  God  commences  he  is  able  to 
consummate.  When  God  said  to  Paul 
that  all  the  souls  with  him  should  be  safe, 
there  were  various  means  used  ;  all  were 
not  able  to  swim  to  the  shore,  and  the 
ship  was  not  able  to  bring  them  all  to 
shore,  but  yet  by  broken  boards  and  by 


one  means  or  other,  all  got  to  shore. 
So  the  Lord  brings  things  to  pass  in  a 
strange,  but  a  sure  manner ;  sometimes 
by  one  way,  sometimes  by  another.  He 
breaks  in  pieces  many  ships,  that  we 
think  should  bring  us  to  shore,  but  then 
he  casts  us  on  such  planks  as  wUl  event- 
ually bring  us  there. 

Illustration  : — "  I  looked  upon  the  wrong  side 
of  a  piece  of  tapestry,  and  it  seemed  to  me  a  con- 
tinued nonsense.  There  was  neither  head  nor 
foot  therein,  a  company  of  thrums  and  threads, 
with  many  pieces  and  patches  of  several  sorts, 
sizes,  and  colours,  all  which  signified  nothing  to 
my  understanding.  But  then  looking  on  the 
reverse,  or  right  side,  all  put  together  did  spell 
excellent  proportions,  and  figures  of  men  and 
cities  ;  so  that  indeed  it  was  a  history,  not  wrote 
with  a  pen,  but  wrought  with  a  needle.  So,  if 
men  look  upon  some  of  God's  providential  deal- 
ings with  a  mere  eye  of  reason,  they  will  hardly 
find  any  sense  therein.  But  alas !  the  wrong 
side  is  before  our  eyes,  whilst  the  right  side  is 
presented  to  the  God  of  heaven,  who  knoweth 
that  an  admirable  order  doth  result  out  of  this 
confusion ;  and  what  is  presented  to  him  at 
present,  may  liereafter  be  so  showed  to  us  as  to 
convince  our  judgments  of  the  truth  thereof."— 
T.  Fuller. 


The  Miserable  Condition  of  the  Church's  Enemies. 

ii.  20.     Ye  have  no  portion ^  nor  right,  nor  memorial^  cj'c. 


I.  They  are  excluded  from  the 
Church's  pale.  1.  Jerusalem  a  type  of 
the  Church  militant  and  the  Church 
triumphant.  There  God's  name  recorded. 
2.  Froiin  which  sinners  are  self-excluded. 
By  their  country,  creed,  and  conduct 
Sanballat  and  his  friends  were  excluded 
from  communion  with  the  true  Israelites. 
Scoffers  by  their  own  conduct  condemn 
themselves  to  separation  from  the  true 
spiritual  Church  of  God.  Idolaters  can 
have  no  part  with  those  who  worship  the 
true  (xod,  for  he  will  be  wor.-hipped  in 
"  spirit  and  in  truth." 

II.  They  are  cut  off  from  the 
Church's  privileges.  1.  The  privilege 
of  Church  membership.  "  No  portion." 
This  a  privilege  which  many  ignore.  If 
the  Church  is  the  Body  and  the  Bride 
of  Christ,  surely  it  must  be  an  honour 
to  belong  to  it.  2.  Privilege  of  Church 
support.  **  Nor  right."  To  the  poor 
and  afflicted  this  a  great  boon.    As  in  the 


Apostles'  days,  so  now  the  Church  under- 
takes to  care  for  its  poor.  3.  Privilege 
of  ancestral  reputation.  "  Nor  memorial." 
The  Samaritans  endeavoured  to  claim 
Jewish  ancestry,  but  unsuccessfully. 
Saints  are  held  in  sweet  remembrance  in 
the  Church.  Their  name  is  often  "  as 
ointment  poured  forth."  This  honour 
denied  to  the  families  of  those  who  have 
no  fellowship  with  the  Church. 

III.  They  are  forbidden  to  partici- 
pate in  the  Church's  work.  As  they 
feared  not  their  threats,  so  now  they 
would  have  none  of  their  help.  "Be 
ye  not  unequally  yoked,"  &c.  God's 
servants  are  knit  together  by  two  bonds ; 
the  one  is  Christ  their  head  ;  the  other, 
brotherly  love.  Neither  of  these  exist 
amongst  idolaters.  This  work  is — 1.  The 
most  exalted  in  ivhich  any  human  being 
can  engage.  Work  for  God,  for  human 
souls,  for  the  Church  which  Christ  has 
redeemed    by  his  own  blood,   for  all 


64 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap,  il 


eternity,  cannot  but  exalt  and  ennoble 
those  who  take  part  in  it.  2.  The  most 
remunerative  in  which  any  human  being 
can  engage.  All  is  pure  gain  without 
any  loss.  The  gain  is  not  temporal,  but 
eternal.  The  reward  is  found  in  the 
glory  that  is  brought  to  Christ,  the 
salvation  that  is  brought  to  men,  and 


the  reflex  benefit  which  descends  upon 
the  soul  of  the  worker.  3.  Work  which 
requires  moral  qualifications  possessed 
only  by  the  true  servants  of  God.  Hence 
the  unfitness  of  the  Samaritan  un- 
believers. God  never  sends  men  out  into 
the  world  as  apostles  until  they  have 
become  true  disciples  in  heart  and  life. 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  IL 


ii.  8.     The  Hand  of  God, — Thanksgiving. 


I.    The     duty     of     thanksgiving. 

"  Giving  thanks,"  a  duty  commamled 
(Eph.  V.  20).  When  thanks  are  given 
thankfulness  is  implied,  o.r  it  is  mere 
fonnality.  The  seat  of  thankfulness  is 
tlie  heart;  there  it  ouglit  to  be  cherished 
with  the  utmost  care,  and  every  motive 
remembered  by  which  it  is  enlivened 
and  increased.  If  the  heart  be  thankful, 
it  is  perfectly  reasonable  and  proper  that 
its  feelings  be  expressed.  The  most 
poAverful  arguments  enforce  this  duty. 
1.  Its  antiquity.  It  is  as  old  as  the 
creation.  No  sooner  did  intelligent  be- 
ings exist  than  gratitude  was  expressed : 
"the  morning  stars  sang  together,  and 
all  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy" 
(Job  xxxviii.  7).  Paradise  was  the  seat 
of  thanksgiving  before  man  fell ;  and 
consequently  before  the  voice  of  prayer 
was  heard,  or  the  sigh  of  penitence  was 
known.  2.  Its  perpetuity.  It  not  only 
commenced  sooner,  but  will  continue 
longer  than  other  duties ;  it  will  survive 
most  other  acts  of  service.  Prayer  will 
cease  ;  repentance  will  be  no  more ;  faith 
and  hope,  as  to  their  present  use,  will 
terminate;  but  thanksgiving  will  be 
the  delightful  business  of  the  upper 
world,  and  will  extend  to  the  countless 
ages  of  eternity.  3.  Express  injunc- 
tions to  give  thanks  are  numerous  in 
Holy  Scripture.  *'  0  give  thanks  unto 
the  Lord,  for  he  is  good"  (Ps.  cvii.  1). 
"Praise  ye  the  Lord,  for  it  is  good  to 
sing  praises  unto  our  God  "  (Ps.  cxlvii. 
1).  4.  Example  of  the  best  men.  What 
good  men  have  lived  without  gratitude  1 


What  eminent  characters  are  recorded 
in  the  Bible  who  abound  not  in  thanks- 
giving'? Nature  conspires  to  engage 
us  in  this  employment.  "  All  thy  works 
praise  thee,  0  Lord,  and  thy  saints  shall 
bless  thee."  "  Bless  the  Lord,  all  his 
works,  in  all  places  of  his  dominion  ; 
bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul." 

II.  To  whom  thanksgiving  is  to  be 
offered.  1.  To  men.  We  ought  to 
give  thanks  to  men  for  the  favours  we 
receive  from  them.  So  far  as  they  are 
our  benefactors  they  are  entitled  to 
grateful  acknowledgments,  and  ingrati- 
tude is  justly  marked  as  one  of  the 
worst  of  crimes,  and  as  evidencing  the 
basest  disposition  of  heart.  2.  To  God. 
He  is  our  greatest  benefactor :  every 
other  is  but  his  instrument  and  agent. 
The  Most  High  is  our  best  Friend ;  for 
other  friends  we  are  indebted  to  him, 
and  they  are  all  of  his  sending.  Hence 
the  injunction,  "  Offer  unto  God  thanks- 
giving; and  pay  thy  vows  unto  the 
Most  High"  (Ps.  1.  14).  "Giving 
thanks  unto  God,  even  the  Father." 
Here  we  are  reminded  of  his  paternal 
character.  He  has  the  heart  of  a  father, 
the  tenderest  feeling,  the  kindest  affec- 
tion. "  Like  as  a  father,"  &c.  Such  is 
the  God  to  whom  our  thanksgivings  are 
offered. 

III.  The  time  when  thanksgiving 
is  seasonable.  1.  When  we  enter  the 
tanctuary.  "Enter  his  gates  with 
thanksgiving,  and  his  courts  with  praise." 
2.  When  we  are  the  recipients  of  abound- 
ing mercies.     And  who    is  not?    He 


CHAP.    II.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTAdY:  NEHEMIAH. 


65 


dailu  loadeth  us  with  benefits.  3.  When 
we  have  received  some  special  favour^  or 
heen  delivered  from  some  great  calamity. 
Hannah  prayed  and  wept,  and  returned 
to  offer  thanksgiving  in  the  place  where 
she  had  prayed  (1  Sam.  i.).  The  lepers 
were  reproached  by  Christ  for  not  re- 
turning thanks  for  their  mira<tulous  cure. 
Nehemiah  acknowledged  ''the  good  hand 
of  God,"  whi(;h  had  been  over  him  for 
good,  opening  alike  the  king's  heart,  and 
his  own  providential  path.  4.  Always. 
"  Giving  thanks  always."  "  I  thank  my 
God  alivay,  on  your  behalf."  "  I  will 
bless  the  Lord  always;  his  praise  shall 
continually  be  in  my  mouth"  (Ps.  xxxiv. 


1).  Saints  are  not  to  be  always  singing 
praises,  or  with  their  lips  expressing 
gratitude  ;  yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
they  are  always  to  be  "  giving  thanks." 
They  ought  to  cherish  a  thankful  heart, 
a  disposition  of  gratitude  ;  and  should 
frequently  take  occasion,  by  every  suit- 
able means,  to  manifest  and  express  it. 
Thanksgiving  should  therefore  be  offered 
to  the  end  of  life,  and  in  every  changing 
circumstancQ  of  life.  "  In  everything 
by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanks- 
giving," &c.  (Phil.  iv.  6).  This  service 
is  never  unseasonable ;  and  sometimes 
it  is  peculiarly  appropriate. — Kidd. 


ii.  11.     Preparatory  Retirement. 


The  pleasures  and  advantages  of 
solitude  have  been  often  admired,  and 
recommended.  All  love  the  world  ;  yet 
all  complain  of  it ;  and  whatever  schemes 
of  happiness  are  devised,  the  scene  is 
always  laid  in  a  withdrawment  from  it. 
It  is  there  the  warrior  feeds  his  courage, 
and  arranges  the  materials  of  victory. 
It  is  there  the  statesman  forms  and 
weighs  his  plans  of  policy.  There  the 
philosopher  pursues  his  theories  and 
exj^eriments.  There  the  man  of  genius 
feels  the  power  of  thought,  and  the  glow 
of  fancy.  And  retirement  is  friendly 
to  communion  with  God.     Consider — 

I.  The  duty  of  retirement.  Premise 
two  things — 1.  The  place  is  indifferent. 
It  matters  not  whether  it  be  a  private 
room,  or  an  open  field.  2.  It  is  not  a 
state  of  absolute  retirement.  Man  was 
made  for  society  as  well  as  solitude.  A 
great  part  of  our  religion  regards  our 
fellow-creatures,  and  can  only  be  dis- 
charged by  intermixing  with  them. 
What  our  Saviour  thought  of  hiding  in 
woods  and  cells,  appears  obviously  from 
his  words,  "  Ye  are  the  light  of  the 
world.  Let  your  light  so  shine  before 
men,"  &c.  It  is  therefore  possible  for  a 
Christian  to  be  alone,  when  he  ought  to 
be  abroad.  It  may  be  much  more 
pleasing  often  to  sit  alone,  readin<y  or 
reflecting,  than  to  be  called  forth  to  give 
advice  or  to  visit  the  afflicted.  What 
God  requires  is  comparative   and  occa- 


sional secession  for  moral  and  spiritual 
purposes.  "  Stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not ; 
commune  with  your  own  heart  upon 
your  bed,  and  be  still."  "Enter  into 
thy  closet,  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy 
door,  pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in 
secret."  This  duty  enjoined  by  example 
as  well  as  by  precept.  "  Isaac  went  out 
into  the  field  at  eventide  to  meditate." 
"  Jacob  was  left  alone,  and  there 
wrestled  with  him  a  man,  until  the 
dawning  of  the  day."  "  Then  went  king 
David  in,  and  sat  before  the  Lord,  and 
he  said,  Who  am  I,  0  Lord  God,  and 
what  is  my  house,"  &c.  Daniel  retired 
three  times  a  day.  Peter  went  up  to 
the  house-top  to  pray  about  the  sixth 
hour,  and  received  a  Divine  communica- 
tion. Of  our  Saviour,  whose  life  has  the 
force  of  a  law,  it  is  said,  "  In  the  morn- 
ing, rising  up  a  great  while  before  day, 
he  went  out,  and  departed  into  a  solitary 
place,  and  there  prayed."  At  another 
time,  "  he  went  out  into  a  mountain  to 
pray,  and  continued  all  night  in  prayer  to 
God."  The  Sabbath  brings  us  immedi- 
ately into  the  presence  of  God,  and  gives 
us  an  opportunity  to  examine  our  charac- 
ter and  condition,,  such  as  cannot  be 
obtained  during  the  dx  days  of  toil.  It 
renews  those  pious  impressions,  which 
our  intercourse  with  the  things  of  time 
and  sense  is  continually  wearing  off. 
This  retirement  often  enforced  by  the 
dispensations  of  Providence*     Affliction 


V 


66 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMTAIL 


[chap.  ir. 


both  disinclines  us  to  social  circles,  and 
disqualifies  us  for  them.  Sickness 
separates  a  man  from  the  crowd,  and 
confines  him  to  his  bed  that  he  may  ask, 
"  Where  is  God  my  maker,  who  giveth 
songs  in  the  night  ^  "  A  reduced  con- 
dition will  diminish  your  associates.  It 
will  drive  away  the  selfish  herd,  who 
think  that  a  friend  is  born  for  prosperity. 
I'his  retirement  produces — 1.  A  devo- 
tional temper.  There  we  can  divulge 
what  we  could  not  in  the  presence  of 
the  dearest  earthly  friend.  2.  A  desire 
to  rise  above  the  loorld.  This  will  induce 
a  man  to  retire.  Where  is  the  world 
conquered]  In  a  crowd?  No — but 
alone.  In  the  midst  of  its  active  pur- 
suits 1  No — but  viewed  in  the  presence 
of  Jehovah,  and  in  the  remembrances  of 
eternity.  Then  its  emptiness  appears. 
Tlien  the  fascination  is  dissolved.  Then 
we  look  upward,  and  say,  "  Now  what 
wait  I  for^  my  hope  is  in  thee."  3.  A 
wish  to  obtain  self-knowledge.  Only 
when  alone  can  he  examine  his  state, 
estimate  his  attainments,  explore  his 
defects,  discern  the  source  of  past  danger, 
or  set  a  watch  against  future  temptations. 
4.  Love  to  God.  When  we  are  supremely 
attached  to  a  person,  his  presence  is  all 
we  want ;  he  will  be  the  chief  attraction, 
even  in  company.  Friendship  deals 
much  in  secrecy ;  kindred  souls  have  a 
thousand  things  to  hear  and  to  utter 
that  are  not  for  a  common  ear.  This 
pre-eminently  the  case  with  the  intimacy 
subsisting  between  God  and  the  believer. 
"  The  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness, 
and  a  stranger  intermeddleth  not  with 
his  joy."  *'  Behold,  I  will  allure  her, 
and  bring  her  into  the  wilderness,  and 
there  will  I  speak  comfortably  unto  her." 
II.  The  advantages  of  retirement. 
1.  It  furnishes  opportunity  for  com- 
munion with  God.  "  Arise,  go  forth 
into  the  plain,  and  I  will  there  talk  with 
thee"  (Ezek.  iii.  22).  We  admire  the 
nobleman  that  kindly  notices  a  peasant ; 
and  the  sovereign  who  deigns  to  converse 
with  one  of  his  poorer  subjects.     But 


here  is  the  Creator  talking  with  his 
creature.  Some  of  us  cannot  aspire 
after  intercourse  with  many  of  our 
fellow-creatures  by  reason  of  our  con- 
dition, and  our  talents.  But  whatever 
be  our  condition,  or  our  talents,  we  have 
a  free  and  invited  access  to  God.  The 
subject  of  this  communion  is  variously 
called  "  his  secret,"  and  "  his  covenant." 
"The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them 
that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show  them 
his  covenant."  "  He  will  speak  peace 
unto  his  people."  "  The  meek  will  he 
teach  his  way."  The  inode  of  this 
communion  is  not  supernatural,  as  of 
old.  God  talked  with  Moses,  as  a  man 
talketh  with  his  friend.  It  is  mere 
fanaticism  to  expect  God  to  commune 
with  us  in  dreams,  visions,  sudden  im- 
pulses, and  audible  sounds.  He  opens 
our  understandings  in  the  Scriptures. 
He  leads  us  into  all  truth.  He  applies 
the  doctrines  and  promises  of  his  word 
by  his  Spirit.  The  result  and  evidence 
of  this  communion  will  be  that  our 
hearts  will  burn  within  us.  Other 
efi'ects  produced  by  this  communion  are — 
1.  A  deep  and  solemn  sense  of  our  vanity 
and  vileness.  Fellowship  with  God, 
instead  of  encouraging  unhallowed 
presumption,  gives  a  man  such  intimate 
views  of  the  peculiar  glory  of  God  as 
fill  him  with  godly  fear.  Thus  was  it 
with  Jacob,  Moses,  Elijah,  Job,  Isaiah, 
and  Peter.  2.  A71  unquenchable  desire 
for  closer  communion.  That  which  con- 
tents the  believer  makes  him  insatiable. 
He  desires  no  more  than  God  ;  but  he 
desires  more  of  him.  3.  An  ever-in- 
creasing likeness  to  God.  "  He  that 
walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise." 
Some  boast  of  being  much  with  God  ; 
but  so  censurable  are  their  conduct  an- 1 
temper,  that  fear  of  their  fellow-creatures 
would  like  to  have  much  to  do  with 
them.  "  The  wisdom  that  is  from  above 
is  first  pure,  then  peaceable,  gentle,  and 
easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of  mercy  and 
good  fruit  s,  without  partiality,  and  with- 
out hypocrisy." — Jay. 


OHAP.   II.j 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAR. 


%'i 


ii.  19.     Open  Derision. 


I.  The  sin  of  mocking  weakens 
every  virtuous  restraint.  There  are 
restraints  of  education,  of  example,  of 
regard  to  reputation.  But  when  a  man 
becomes  a  mocker,  such  restraints  are 
relaxed  ;  they  gradually  L^se  their  hold. 
With  every  advance  in  levity  and  jest- 
ing, a  sense  of  shame  subsides,  the  fear 
of  incurring  censure  abates,  respect  for 
the  authority  of  parents  and  for  the 
opinion  and  expostulation  of  friends 
declines,  custom  degenerates  intc  nabit, 
and  habit  becomes  settled  and  easy. 

II.  The  sin  of  mocking  strengthens 
vicious  propensities.  This  naturally  re- 
sults from  the  preceding.  As  the  one 
declines  the  other  gains  ground.  Let 
a  man  become  indifferent  to  what  is 
right,  and  he  will  practise  what  is  wrong; 
let  him  cease  to  do  good,  and  he  learns 
to  do  evil.  Is  a  bad  temper,  for  instance, 
which  is  never  repressed,  no  worse  after 
years  of  indulgence'?  Does  harmless 
mirth  never  proceed  to  profaneness  ? 
Does  the  habit  of  loose  talking  never 
lead  to  falsehood,  nor  settle  in  deceit] 
You  cannot  mock  at  the  Bible  without 
your  regard  for  the  sacred  Book  sinking 
in  proportion.  You  cannot  mock  at  sin 
but  your  aversion  to  sin  dies  and  your 
love  to  sin  revives. 

III.  The  sin  of  mocking  gives  great 
advantage  to  your  worst  enemies. 
Such  are  improper  companions.  Go 
with  them  one  mile,  and  they  will  easily 
induce  you  to  go  two.  Every  compli- 
ance only  emboldens  their  demands,  and 
facilitates  their  conquest;  and  every 
victory  they  gain  only  throws  you  more 
completely  into  their  power.  Walk  in  the 
counsel  of  the  ungodly,  and  stand  in  the 
way  of  sinners,  and  ere  long  you  will 


dt  "  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful."  But 
there  is  a  worse  enemy  than  these  ;  "  the 
spirit  which  now  worketh  in  the  children 
of  disobedience,"  "  that  old  serpent, 
called  the  Devil,  and  Satan,  which 
deceiveth  the  whole  world."  Resist 
him,  and  he  will  flee  from  you ;  but 
invite  his  attacks,  and  you  inevitably 
fall  into  his  hands.  We  read  of  those 
"  who  are  taken  captive  by  him  at  his 
will."  These  are  they  who  indulge  the 
tempers  he  would  have  them  indulge, 
who  practise  the  works  which  he  instigates 
and  approves. 

IV.  The  sin  of  mocking  exposes  to 
peculiar  marks  of  God's  displeasure. 
Witness  the  destruction  of  the  youths 
who  mocked  Elisha  (2  Kings  ii.  23). 
Some  who  have  scoffed  at  the  Bible  and 
blasphemed  its  author  have  been  struck 
dead  in  a  moment.  Persistence  in  sin 
has  more  often  been  followed  by  judicial 
hardness.  Men  who  have  begun  with 
jesting  at  the  things  of  God,  and  sporting 
with  their  own  iniquity,  have  been  given 
up  to  strong  delusions  and  final  impeni- 
tence. 

V.  The  sin  of  mocking  terminates 
in  remediless  ruin.  There  is  a  world 
beyond  the  pre«?ent.  There  mockers  of 
every  class  have  their  full  recompense. 
"  They  have  chosen  their  own  ways,  and 
their  soul  delighteth  in  their  abomina- 
tions ;  I  also  will  choose  their  delusions, 
and  will  bring  their  fears  upon  them." 
"  Ye  have  set  at  nought  my  counsels, 
and  would  none  of  my  reproof ;  I  also 
will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock 
when  your  fear  cometh."  "  Behold,  ye 
despisers,  and  wonder,  and  perish " 
(Isa.  Ixvi.  3,  4;  Prov.  i.  25,  2Q),—Kidd, 


fi 


68 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  II. 


ILLUSTEATIONS. 


The  hand  of  God.  Froteetion.  1.  John  Knox, 
the  celebrated  Scotch  reformer,  had  many  re- 
markable escapes  from  the  malicious  designs  of 
his  enemies.  He  was  accustomed  to  sit  at  the 
head  of  the  table  in  his  own  house,  with  his  back 
to  the  window ;  but  on  one  particular  evening  he 
would  neither  himself  sit  in  his  chair,  nor  allow 
any  one  else  to  do  so.  That  very  evening  a 
bullet  was  shot  through  the  window,  purposely 
to  kill  him  ;  it  grazed  the  chair  in  which  he 
usually  sat,  and  made  a  hole  in  the  foot  of  the 
candlestick.  2.  Posidonius,  in  the  Life  of  Augus- 
tine, relates  that  this  good  man,  going  on  one 
occasion  to  preach  at  a  distant  town,  took  with 
him  a  guide  to  direct  him  in  the  way.  This 
man,  by  some  unaccountable  means,  mistook  the 
usual  road,  and  fell  into  a  by-path.  It  after- 
wards proved  that  in  this  way  the  preacher's  life 
had  been  saved,  as  his  enemies,  aware  of  his 
journey,  had  placed  themselves  in  the  proper 
road  with  a  design  to  kill  him. 

Envy.  *'  Dionysius  the  tyrant,"  says  Plu- 
tarch, "out  of  envy,  punished  Philoienius  the 
musician,  because  he  could  sing,  and  Plato  the 
philosopher,  because  he  could  dispute  better  than 
himself."  Cambyses,  king  of  Persia,  slew  his 
brother  Smerdis,  out  of  envy,  because  he  could 


draw  a  stronger  bow  than  himself  or  any  of  his 
followers;  and  the  monster  Caligula  slew  his 
brother  because  he  was  a  beautiful  young  man. 

"  Base  envy  withers  at  another's  joy, 
And  hates  that  excellence  it  cannot  reach." 

Derision.  A  poor  man  who  had  heard  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  to  whom  it  had  been 
greatly  blessed,  was  the  subject  of  much  profane 
ridicule  and  jesting  amongst  his  neighbours.  On 
being  asked  if  these  persecutions  did  not  some- 
times make  him  ready  to  give  up  his  profession 
of  religion,  he  replied,  "No.  I  recollect  that  our 
good  minister  once  said  in  his  sermon,  that  if  we 
were  so  foolish  as  to  permit  such  people  to  laugh 
us  out  of  our  religion,  till  at  last  we  dropped 
into  hell,  they  could  not  laugh  us  out  again." 
Admiral  Colpoys  relates  that  when  he  first  left 
his  lodgings  to  join  his  ship  as  a  midshipman, 
his  landlady  presented  him  with  a  Bible  and  a 
guinea,  saying,  *'  God  bless  you,  and  prosper 
you,  my  lad ;  and  as  long  as  you  live  never 
suffer  yourself  to  be  laughed  out  of  your  money 
or  your  prayers."  The  young  sailor  carefully 
followed  this  advice  through  life,  and  had  reason 
to  rejoice  that  he  had  done  so. 


CHAPTEE  IIL 


Explanatory  Notes.]  1.  Eliashib]  The  grandson  of  Jeshua,  and  the  first  high  priest  after 
the  return  from  Babylon.  No  reason  to  doubt  that  the  same  Eliashib  is  referred  to  in  Ezra  x.  6. 
The  sheep  gate]  In  regard  to  the  gates  of  ancient  Jerusalem  much  uncertainty  prevails.  The  sheep 
gate  probably  the  irpo^ariKri  of  John  v.  2,  translated  in  E.  V.  "  sheep  market."  Modern  topo- 
graphers seek  it  near  the  present  St.  Stephen's  gate,  through  which  the  Bedouins  to  this  day  drive 
sheep  into  the  town  for  sale.  Near  the  temple  area.  Sanctified]  Consecrated  it  by  special  cere- 
monies. "  It  was  the  first-fruits,  and  therefore,  in  the  sanctificatiou  of  it,  the  whole  lump  and 
building  was  sanctified." — Poole.  The  tower  of  Meah,  the  tower  of  Hananeel]  Meah  is  the 
Hebrew  word  for  "  a  hundred."  Fuerst  translates  it  the  giant  tower.  Whence  the  names  of  these 
towers  were  derived  is  unknown.  2.  And  next  unto  him]  Lit.  And  at  his  hand.  The  wall  was 
divided  into  portions,  one  of  which  was  assigned  to  each  of  the  great  families.  3.  The  sons  of 
Hassenaah]  Rather,  the  sons  of  Senaah  (see  Ezra  ii.  35).  Senaah  was  a  city  or  perhaps  a  district. 
6.  The  old  gate]  Keil  reads,  "gate  of  the  old  wall,"  as  referring  to  the  old  wall  in  distinction 
from  '*  the  broad  wall,"  which  was  newer.  8.  The  broad  wall]  "or  double  wall,  formerly  broken 
down  by  Joash,  afterwards  rebuilt  by  Uzziah,  who  made  it  so  strong  Chaldeans  left  it  standing." 
— Jamieson.  9.  The  ruler  of  the  half  part]  A  half  district ;  the  district  being  divided  into  two 
that  it  might  be  managed  more  easily  (comp.  vers.  12,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18).  13.  Zanoah]  The  name 
of  two  towns  in  the  territory  of  Judah.  14.  Beth-haccerem]  From  Jeremiah  vi.  1  we  find  that  it 
was  used  as  a  beacon-station,  and  that  it  was  near  Tekoa.  Supposed  to  be  now  occupied  by  Bethu- 
lia  on  the  hill  called  by  Europeans  "  The  Frank  Mountain."  16.  The  sepulchres  of  David,  &c.] 
i.e.  along  the  precipitous  cliffs  of  Zion. — Barclay.  19.  At  the  turning  of  the  wall]  i.e.  the 
wall  across  the  Tyropseon  being  a  continuation  of  the  first  wall,  connectmg  Mount  Zion  with  the 
temple  wall. — Barclay.  25.  The  tower  which  lieth  out  from  the  king's  high  house]  Solomon's 
palace  doubtless  occupied  the  south-east  corner  of  the  present  Haram.  26.  The  Nethinims]  The 
Nethinim  were  a  servile  and  subject  caste.  "  Not  only  the  priests  and  the  Levites,  but  the  meanest 
persons  that  belonged  to  the  house  of  God  contributed  to  the  work." — Bishop  Fatrich. 


CHAP,  ni.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  NEIIEMIAE. 


69 


HOMILETIC  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  III. 


Ver.  1 — 32.  The  Moral  Significance  of  Names. 
1 — 32.  Life's  Masonry. 
1 — 32.  A  Suggestive  Church  Record. 
1.  Priesthood. 
1.  Ministerial  Adaptability. 
2,  3.  System  and  Detail  in  work. 
5.  Kival  Classes. 


Ver. 


>» 


)» 


6.  The  Old  Gate. 
8.  The  Broad  Wall. 
Family  Zeal. 

High  Men  at  Lowly  Tasks. 
15,  16.   David,  the  National  Hero. 
20—32.  The  Workmen's  Day-Book. 


12. 
„     13-19. 


The  Moral  Significance  of  Names. 

A  CHAPTER  of  names.  To  be  passed  over  by  the  bulk  of  Bible  readers.  But  the 
names  are  biblical.  The  chapters  of  names  are  a  noticeable  part  of  the  Book  of 
Nehemiah,  as  they  are  of  the  Bible. 

I.  The  meaning  of  individual  names.  The  origin  of  language  is  mysterious:. 
But  in  earliest  times  amongst  all  nations — our  own  not  excepted — names  meant 
things.  Specially  true  of  the  Jewish  nation.  Names  were  not  given  from  caprice 
or  because  others  bore  them.  They  shadowed  forth  the  character,  or  commemorated 
a  circumstance,  or  prophesied  a  future. 

Abel  signified  breath,  vapour — a  sie^n  of  the  transitoriness  of  liis  life.  David 
meant  dearly-beloved.  Enoch,  disciplined.  Elijah,  God  the  Lord,  or  the  strong 
Lord.  Elisha,  "  to  whom  God  is  salvation."  Abraham,  "the  f^xther  of  a  multi- 
tude," and  Moses,  "drawn  out  of  the  water,"  were  commemordtive.  8  >metimes 
the  name  was  a  protest.     Amittai,  a  veracious  man  living  in  a  time  of  laxity. 

Eliashib's  name  (ver.  1)  perpetually  reminded  him  that  "  God  was  in  heaven,  and 
governed  the  world  he  created."  Nehemiah  could  not  have  borne  a  name  better 
adapted  for  a  work  so  arduous  as  his.  Nehemiah  means,  ''  whom  God  comforts." 
Meremoth  (ver.  4),  if  true  to  his  name,  should  be  a  firm  man.  Jehoiada  (ver.  G) 
needed  no  priest  to  remind  him  that  he  was  known  of  God.  Uzziel  (ver.  8)  might 
work  fearlessly,  for,  said  his  name,  "God  is  my  strength."  Malchijah  (ver.  11) 
would  hardly  be  afraid  of  Sanballat's  anger  or  Tobiah's  scorn.  "  Am  not  I  Mal- 
chijah," he  would  say,  "  and  does  not  that  tell  me  that  God  is  my  king  % "  The 
Nethinims  (ver.  26)  were  the  dedicated  ones. 

In  other  languages  the  same  law  prevailed.  A  man  bearing  the  name  of  Andrew 
was  courageous,  and  an  Augusta  majestic.  Arthur  was  a  strong  man.  She  who 
was  honoured  with  the  name  Agnes  was  chaste.  An  Alice  was  noble,  and  a  Louisa 
modest. 

In  more  artificial  times  names  lost  their  meaning.  When  the  mother  of  John 
Baptist  declared  that  he  should  be  called  John,  her  friends  said,  "  There  is  none  of 
thy  kindred  that  is  called  by  this  name."  Names  were  losing  their  meaning.  Here 
was  a  man  born  into  the  world  filled  with  the  grace  of  God — what  shall  his  name 
be  ]  "  Zacharias,"  they  say  ;  "  that  is  his  father's  name."  Tiiey  ask  the  duuib 
father,  and  he  writes  "John."  Now-a-days  a  man  may  have  the  name  of  John 
and  be  graceless  enough.  We  have  no  proof  that  Charles  will  be  noble.  We  give 
our  children  fancy  names.  Family  names  are  reasonable  ;  fancy  names  are  foolish. 
Except  that  they  are  given  thoughtlessly,  their  morality  would  be  doubtful.  Our 
true  name  is  our  Christian  name. 

II.  The  solemn  significance  of  names.  A  name  is  a  key  to  the  nature  or 
history  of  the  thing  which  bears  it.  In  the  history  of  the  creation  we  read  that 
'*  God  formed  every  beast  of  the  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air ;  and  brought 
them  unto  Adam  to  see  what  he  would  call  them  ;  and  whatsoever  Adam  called 
every  living  creature,  that  was  the  name  thereof."  And  so  it  has  been  well  said  by 
Carlyle  that  not  only  all  common  speech,  but  science,  poetry  itself,  is  no  other  than 


70  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  hi. 


a  right  naming.  Some  languages  have  the  same  expression  for  word  and  thing. 
Jesus  Christ  said,  "Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh  " 
(Matt.  xii.  34).  "As  a  man  thinketh  in  his  heart,  so  is  he"  (Pro v.  xxiii.  7). 
"  Lie  not  one  to  another  " — not  because  you  will  not  be  trusted,  but  because — 
"  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds  "  (Coloss.  iii.  9).  Wise  men  say  that 
you  can  tell  the  character  of  any  nation  by  its  language.  "  There  was  a  time  in 
the  history  of  Europe  when  the  controversy  about  what  a  name  represents  involved 
issues  so  grave  that  men  were  burnt  for  taking  what  was  considered  the  heretical 
side  of  this  controversy." — R.  W.  Dale.  "  Our  general  terms,  man,  tree,  insect, 
flower,  are  the  names  of  paiticular  or  single  specimens  extended,  on  the  ground  of 
a  perceived  similarity,  to  kinds  or  species.  They  come  in  this  manner  to  stand  for 
millions  of  particular  men,  trees,  insects,  flowers  that  we  do  not  and  never  can 
know.  They  are,  to  just  this  extent,  words  op  ignorance  ;  only  we  are  able,  in 
the  use,  to  hold  right  judgments  of  innumerable  particulars  we  do  not  know,  and 
have  the  words  so  far  as  words  of  wisdom." — Horace  Bushnell.  Eeality  is  a 
cardinal  virtue.  Speech  is  not  given  us  to  hide  our  thoughts.  What  is  truth  but 
the  correspondence  of  words  with  things,  of  life  with  speech  1  "  By  thy  words 
thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt  be  condemned"  (Matt, 
xii.  37). 

III.  The  relation  of  the  individual  to  the  race.  Names  perpetuate  memories. 
William  is  named  to-day  after  a  William  of  sixty  years  ago.  Of  this  latter  there 
is  only  a  name.  "  One  generation  passeth  away,  and  another  generation  cometh  " 
(Eccles.  i.  4).  The  day  of  judgment  will  harmonize  names  and  things.  "  Then 
shall  the  King  say,"  &c.  (Matt.  xxv.  34—46). 

ILLUSTEATIONS. 

Hebrew  names,  "  The  Hebrew  names  were  nearly  all  significant.  Sometimes  commemoration 
was  in  a  name.  Sometimes  it  uttered  a  testimony.  Sometimes  a  prophecy  stirred  in  it.  The  very 
name  of  a  man  sometimes  shone  like  a  burning  lamp  in  the  darkness  of  an  evil  time.  "When  need 
was,  a  new  name  was  taken  or  given,  in  addition  to,  or  in  place  of,  the  original  one,  and  borne  as 
men  bear  a  banner  or  speak  a  watchword." — Alexander  Raleigh,  D.D. 

Names  and  periods  in  Hebrew  history.  "  What  signifies  a  name }  In  these  days,  when  names 
are  only  epithets,  it  signifies  nnthina-.  '  Jehovali,  Jove,  or  Lord,'  as  the  '  Universal  Prayer'  insinuates, 
are  all  the  same.  Now,  to  assert  that  it  matters  not  whether  God  be  called  Jehovah,  Jove,  or  Lord 
is  true,  if  it  mean  this,  that  a  devout  and  earnest  heart  is  accepted  by  God,  let  the  name  be  what  it 
will  by  which  he  is  addressed.  But  if  it  mean  that  Jove  and  Jehovah  express  the  same  Being — 
that  the  character  of  him  whom  the  pagan  worshipped  was  the  same  as  the  character  of  him  whom 
Israel  adored  under  the  name  of  Jehovah — that  they  refer  to  the  same  group  of  ideas — or  that 
ALWAYS  names  are  but  names,  then  we  must  look  much  deeper. 

"  In  the  Hebrew  history  are  discernible  three  periods  distinctly  marked,  in  which  names  and  words 
bore  very  different  characters.  These  three,  it  has  been  observed  by  acute  philologists,  correspond  to 
the  periods  in  which  the  nation  bore  the  three  diffi;rent  appellations  of  Hebrews,  Israelites,  Jews. 

*'  In  the  first  of  these  periods  names  meant  truths,  and  words  were  the  symbols  of  realities.  The 
characteristics  of  the  names  given  then  were  simplicity  and  sincerity.  They  were  drawn  from  a  few 
simple  sources  :  either  from  some  characteristic  of  the  individual,  as  Jacob,  the  supplanter;  or  Moses, 
drawn  from  the  water;  or  from  the  idea  of  family,  as  Ben-jamin,  the  son  of  my  right  hand  ;  or  from 
the  conception  of  the  tribe  or  nation,  then  gradually  consolidating  itself;  or,  lastly,  from  the  religious 
idea  of  God.  But  in  this  case  not  the  highest  notion  of  God  ;  not  Jah,  or  Jehovah,  but  simply  the 
earlier  and  simpler  idea  of  Deity:  El — Israel,  the  prince  of  El;  Peniel,  the  face  of  El.  In  these 
days  names  were  real,  but  the  conceptions  they  contained  were  not  the  loftiest. 

*'  The  second  period  begins  about  the  time  of  the  departure  from  Egypt,  and  it  is  characterized  by 
unabated  simplicity,  with  the  addition  of  sublimer  thought  and  feeling  more  intensely  religious. 
The  heart  of  the  nation  was  big  with  mighty  and  new  religious  truth,  and  the  feelings  with  which 
the  national  heart  was  swelling  found  vent  in  the  names  which  were  given  abundantly.  God,  under 
his  name  Jah,  the  noblest  assemblage  of  spiritual  truths  yet  conceived,  became  the  adjunct  to  names 
of  places  and  persons,     Oshea's  name  is  changed  into  Je-hoshua. 

"  Observe,  moreover,  that  in  this  period  there  was  no  fastidious,  over-refined  chariness  in  the  use  of 
that  name.  Men  conscious  of  deep  and  real  reverence  are  not  fearful  of  the  appearance  of  irre- 
verence.  The  word  became  a  common  word,  as  it  always  may,  so  long  as  it  is  fblt,  and  awe  is 
BBAL.     A  mighty  cedar  was  called  a  cedar  of  Jehovah ;  a  lofty  mountain,  a  mountain  of  JehoTah, 


CHAP,  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEIIEMIAH.  71 


Human  beauty  even  was  praised  by  such  an  epithet.  Moses  was  divinely  fair,  beautiful  to  God. 
The  eternal  name  became  an  adjunct.  No  beauty,  no  greatness,  no  goodness  was  conceivable  except 
as  emanating  from  him  :  therefore  his  name  was  freely  but  most  devoutly  used. 

**  Like  the  earlier  period,  in  this  too  words  meant  realities  ;  but,  unlike  the  earlier  period,  they  ar« 
impregnated  with  deeper  religious  thought. 

"  The  third  period  was  at  its  zenith  in  the  time  of  Christ :  words  had  lost  their  meaning,  and  shared 
the  hollow,  unreal  state  of  all  things.  A  man's  name  might  be  Judas,  and  still  he  might  be  a  traitor. 
A  niiin  might  be  called  Pharisee,  exclusively  religious,  and  yet  the  name  might  only  cover  the 
hollowness  of  hypocrisy;  or  he  might  be  called  most  noble  Festus,  and  be  the  meanest  tyrant  that  ever 
sat  upon  a  pro-consular  chair.  This  is  the  period  in  which  every  keen  and  wise  observer  knows  that 
the  decay  of  national  religious  feeling  has  begun.  That  decay  in  the  meaning  of  words,  that 
lowering  of  the  standard  of  the  ideas  for  which  they  stand,  is  a  certain  mark  of  this.  The  debase- 
ment of\  language  is  a  sure  mark  of  the  debasement  of  a  nation.  The  insincerity  of  a  language  is  a 
proof  of  the  insincerity  of  a  nation  :  for  a  time  comes  in  the  history  of  a  nation  when  words  no  longer 
stand  for  things ;  when  names  are  given  for  the  sake  of  an  euphonious  sound ;  and  wnen  titles  are 
but  the  epithets  of  unmeaning  courtesy ;  a  time  when  Majesty,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  Most  Noble, 
Worshipful,  and  Honourable  not  only  mean  nothing,  but  do  not  flush  the  cheek  with  the  shame  of 
convicted  falsehood  when  they  are  worn  as  empty  ornaments." — F.  W.  Robertson. 

Origin  of  language,  "The  opinions  about  the  origin  of  language  may  be  divided  into  three 
classes,  as  follows  : — 

"  {a)  The  belief  that  man  at  his  creation  was  endowed  with  a  full,  perfect,  and  copious  language, 
and  that  as  his  faculties  were  called  forth  by  observation  and  experience,  this  language  supplied  him 
at  every  step  with  names  for  the  various  objects  he  encountered.  In  this  view,  which  has  found 
many  able  advocates,  speech  is  separated  from  and  precedes  thought ;  for  as  there  must  have  been 
a  variety  of  phenomena,  both  outward  and  in  his  mind,  to  which  the  first  man  was  a  stranger, 
until  long  experience  gradually  unfolded  them,  their  names  must  have  been  intrusted  to  him  long  before 
the  thoughts  or  images  which  they  were  destined  ultimately  to  represent  were  excited  in  his  mind. 

*  {b)  The  belief  that  the  different  families  of  men,  impelled  by  necessity,  invented  and  settled  by 
agreement  the  names  that  should  represent  the  ideas  they  possessed.  In  this  view  language  is  a 
human  invention,  grounded  on  convenience.  But  to  say  that  man  has  invented  language  would  be 
no  better  than  to  assert  that  he  has  invented  law.  To  make  laws,  there  must  be  a  law  obliging  all 
to  keep  them ;  to  form  a  compact  to  observe  certain  institutes,  there  must  be  already  a  government 
protecting  this  compact.  To  invent  language  presupposes  language  already,  for  how  could  men  agree 
to  name  different  objects  without  communicating  by  words  their  designs.?  In  proof  of  this  opinion- 
appeal  is  made  to  the  great  diversity  of  languages.  Here  it  is  supposed  again  that  thought  and 
language  were  separate,  and  that  the  former  had  made  some  progress  before  the  latter  was  annexed 
to  fc. 

"  {c)  The  third  view  is,  that  as  the  Divine  Being  did  not  give  man  at  his  creation  actual  know- 
ledge, but  the  power  to  learn  and  to  know,  so  he  did  not  confer  a  language,  but  the  power  to  name 
and  describe.  The  gift  of  reason,  once  conveyed  to  man,  was  the  common  root  from  which  both 
thought  and  speech  proceeded,  like  the  pith  and  the  rind  of  the  tree,  to  be  developed  in  inseparable 
uni<m.  With  the  first  inspection  of  each  natural  object  the  first  imposition  of  a  name  took  place 
(Gen.  ii.  19).  In  the  fullest  sense  language  is  a  Divine  gift;  but  the  power,  and  not  the  results  of  its 
exercise,  the  germ,  and  not  the  tree,  was  imparted.  A  man  can  teach  names  to  another  man,  but 
nothing  less  than  Divine  power  can  plant  in  another's  mind  the  far  higher  gift,  the  faculty  of  naming. 
From  the  first  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  functions  of  thought  and  language  went  together. 
A  conception  received  a  name  ;  a  name  recalled  a  conception ;  and  every  accession  to  the  knowledge 
of  *;hings  expanded  the  treasures  of  expression.  And  we  are  entangled  in  absurdities  by  any  theory 
which  assumes  that  either  element  existed  in  a  separate  state  antecedently  to  the  other." — Arch' 
bishop  of  York. 

"  We  do  not  make  words;  they  are  given  to  us  by  One  higher  than  ourselves.  Wise  men  say  that 
you  can  tell  the  character  of  any  nation  by  its  language,  by  watching  the  words  they  use,  the  names 
they  give  to  things  ;  for  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaks.  It  is  God,  and  Christ, 
the  Word  of  God,  who  gives  words  to  men,  who  puts  it  into  the  hearts  of  men  to  call  certain  things 
by  certain  names  ;  «.nd  according  to  a  nation's  godliness,  and  wisdom,  and  purity  of  heart  will  be  its 
power  of  using  words  discreetly  and  reverently.  That  miracle  of  the  gift  of  tongues,  of  which  we 
read  in  the  New  Testament,  would  have  been  still  most  precious  and  full  of  meaning  if  it  had  had 
no  other  use  than  this — to  teach  men  from  whom  words  come.  When  men  found  themselves  all  of 
a  sudden  inspired  to  talk  in  foreign  languages  which  they  had  never  learnt,  to  utter  words  of  which 
they  themselves  did  not  know  the  meaning,  do  you  not  see  how  it  must  have  made  them  feel  that  all 
language  is  God's  making  and  God's  giving  ?  Do  you  not  see  how  it  must  have  made  them  feel 
what  awful,  mysterious  things  words  were,  like  those  cloven  tongues  of  fire  which  fell  on  the  apos- 
tles }  The  tongues  of  fire  signified  the  difficult  foreign  languages  which  they  suddenly  began  to 
speak  as  the  Spirit  gave  them  utterance.  And  where  did  the  tongues  of  fire  come  from  ?  Not  out 
of  themselves,  not  out  of  the  earth  beneath,  but  down  from  the  heaven  above,  to  signify  that  it  is  not 
from  man's  flesh  or  brain,  or  the  earthly  part  of  him,  that  words  are  bred,  but  that  they  come  down 
from  Christ,  the  Word  of  God,  and  are  breathed  into  the  minds  of  men  by  the  Spirit  of  God,'*— 
Charles  Kingaley, 


7a  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  hi. 


Life's  Masoney. 

Introduction.  —  The  Scriptural  figures  of  life's  work  as  a  building.  St 
Peter's  description  of  God  as  building  up  a  fabric  of  "lively  stones"  (1  Petei 
ii.  4,  5).  It  is  his  remembrance  of  the  Saviour's  own  use  of  the  figure  in 
Matt.  xvi.  18  :  "Upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church."  St.  Paul's  description 
of  his  own  apostolic  life  as  that  of  a  "  wise  master-builder  " — a  spiritual  Nehemiah 
(1  Cor.  iii.  10—15). 

I.  Every  one  to  contribute  his  life-toil  to  the  building  up  of  the  city  of 
God.  1.  True  of  the  individual  character — the  fallen,  ruined  "city  of  Man  soul." 
Not  what  we  rake  together  of  earthly  things,  but  what  we  rear  in  the  edifice  of 
our  personal  character,  our  true  work.  2.  True  of  society.  The  history  of  the 
world  a  history  of  the  restless  reconstructions  of  society.  The  reformers  and 
teachers  of  every  age,  scanning  the  desolations  of  their  time,  have  said,  ''Let  us 
arise  and  build  1  "  and  with  none  of  Babel's  profanity  have  said  in  hope,  "  Go  to, 
let  us  build  a  tower  whose  top  shall  reach  to  heaven  ! "  That  is  what  the  piled- 
up  fruit  of  generations  of  toil  shall  be. 

II.  Every  man  has  his  own  appointed  sphere  and  kind  of  work.  1.  The 
manifold  division  of  labour  in  the  erection  of  a  great  edifice  may  become  to  us  a 
parable  of  the  various  uses  of  human  character  and  ability.  To  some  the  strong 
work — the  foundations  and  buttresses — plain,  practical  usefulness.  To  others 
there  is  given  work  at  the  gates  of  knowledge  and  intercourse.  To  some  it  is  the 
task  to  beautify  and  embellish  life  and  its  surroundings,  to  sculpture  bright  things 
and  thoughts.  To  the  sagacity  of  others  is  committed  the  towers  of  outlook  and 
defence  for  human  society.  2.  Every  man  to  find  his  own  task.  Providential 
circumstances  and  the  bent  of  wise  inclination  point  us  to  our  share  of  the  wall. 
The  ruin  lying  nearest  our  feet,  the  weak  place  nearest  our  own  home,  is  our  task- 
work. 3.  Every  man  to  be  content  with  his  oivn  task.  Who  does  not  at  times 
sigh  in  envy  of  his  brother's  portion  in  life's  great  enterprise !  We  think  we 
could  work  with  less  moiling,  and  get  the  lines  truer,  if  we  were  working  on 
some  other  piece  of  ground.  It's  better  as  it  is.  "To  every  man  his  work" 
(Mark  xiii.  34). 

III.  Every  man  contributes  but  a  fragment  to  the  great  whole.  All  each 
builder  does  is  to  contribute  so  many  feet  of  the  great  girdle  of  masonry ;  but  it  is 
the  multiplication  of  these  small  piles  which  completes  the  circumference.  1. 
Individual  life.  Do  not  judge  of  experiences  singly  and  alone.  Life  is  a  com- 
plex and  mingled  process,  and  that  which  seems  to  have  no  uses  of  edification 
may  be  one  of  many  powers  which  uplift  the  character.  Our  life  is  a  great  whole. 
We  "  walk  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  the  third  day  we  are  perfected." 

'*  If  sad  thy  present,  fancy  not 
The  whole  of  life  is  in  to-day ; 
To  past  and  future  look  away ; 
Thy  Ufe  is  not  thy  present  lot.** 

2.  Socially.  Do  not  judge  a  life  with  regard  to  society  in  its  mere  isolation  or  as  a 
disconnected  unit;  it  is  a  length  of  fabric  to  join  on  with  some  one  else's  work. 

Moses  bursts  out  of  Egypt ;  Joshua  leads  through  Jordan  into  Canaan ;  David 
prepares  for  a  consolidated  nation ;  Solomon  ushers  in  the  rest  and  magnificence  of 
peace :  each  builds  his  own  layer  and  length  of  the  history. 

One  man  toils  to  feed  the  people ;  another  gives  them  garments  ;  another  settles 
their  quarrels ;  another  tells  them  the  story  of  the  day's  life  ;  another  teaches  them 
knowledge ;  another  pleads  with  them  for  God  ;  another  heals  their  sickness ; 
another  goes  out  to  sea  for  their  merchandise ;  another  gives  them  a  book  of  cheer- 


CHAP,  m.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH,  73 

ing  song ;  and  each  contributes  to  the  walls  and  gates  and  towers  of  man's  life 
below. 

Each  is  but  a  small  length,  but  all  make  the  mighty  ring. 

IV.  Every  man  to  work  in  harmonious  aim  with  his  fellow  builders.     1. 

Recognizing  the  one  reigning  purpose — the  edification  of  a  city  of  God;  to  make 
Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth  and  a  city  of  the  great  King.  2.  Recognizing  the 
worth  of  his  brother's  icork.  He  has  his  own  task,  and  has  not  to  work  by  our 
piece  of  the  plan.  3.  Eccentric  people  who  will  pile  their  stones  in  other  people! s 
way,  and  blind  other  people  with  their  chippings  and  the  bespatterings  of  their 
mortar.     Do  not  hinder  your  "  brother  mason." 

V.  The  united  work  is  superintended  by  the  great  Architect.  1.  He  only 
understands  the  whole  of  the  great  intricate  plan  of  life.  He  has  surveyed  the 
whole  field,  and  has  appointed  each  one  his  place.  To  understand  our  own  section 
and  task,  and  to  trust  to  the  great  unifying  power  above,  is  all  we  can  do.  These 
broken,  incomplete  piles  rising  in  their  f ragmen tariness  will,  under  his  direction, 
circle  into  the  order  of  his  great  will.  The  full  plan  of  life  is  only  seen  and 
understood  in  heaven,  but  it  is  understood  there.  2.  He  is  near  us  with  direc- 
tions. In  their  straits  these  amateur  masons  must  have  often  summoned  Nehemiah 
as  he  rode  round  among  the  workers.  In  all  perplexities  we  can  call  in  Divine 
direction.  "  If  any  man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God  "  (James  i.  5).  3.  Let 
the  thought  "thou  God  seest  me"  animate  us  at  our  toil,  (a)  It  is  a  cheering 
thought.  !N"o  eye  can  look  so  indulgently  as  his.  "He  knoweth  our  frame,"  &c. 
(Ps.  ciii.  14).  (&)  It  is  an  admonitory  thought.  He  will  have  true  work;  anl 
all  the  wrong  that  we  pile  up  he  will  push  down. 

"  As  ever  in  my  great  Taskmaster's  eye." 

Conclusion.  —  What  this  finished  work  shall  be  we  read  in  the  closing 
chapters  of  the  Bible.  The  New  Jerusalem  is  man's  work  transfigured  by  the 
glory  of  God. 

The  rude  foundations  we  have  put  in  with  weariness  and  toil  shall  show  them- 
selves "  garnished  with  all  manner  of  precious  stones."  The  gates  so  clumsily 
made  will  shine  "  every  several  gate  of  one  pearl."  The  building  of  the  wall 
shall  be  "  as  jasper,"  and  the  shapeless,  disjointed  masses  shall  be  all  joined  and 
balanced  :  "  the  length  of  it,  and  the  breadth  of  it,  and  the  height  of  it  equal." 

"  And  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  shall  be  in  it.  And  there  shall  be 
no  night  there ;  for  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light :  and  they  shall  reign  for  ever 
and  ever," 

ILLUSTKATiONS. 

Sacredness  of  labour.  "  Two  men  I  honour,  and  no  third.  First,  the  toil-worn  craftsman  that 
with  earth-made  implement  laboriously  conquers  the  earth,  and  makes  her  man's.  Venerable  to  me 
is  the  hard  hand — crooked,  coarse  ;  wherein  notwithstanding  lies  a  cunning  virtue,  indefeasibly  royal, 
as  of  the  sceptre  of  this  planet.  Venerable  too  is  the  rugged  face,  all  weather-tanned,  besoik'd, 
with  its  rude  intelligence  ;  for  it  is  the  face  of  a  man  living  man-like.  0,  but  the  more  venerable 
for  thy  rudeness,  and  even  because  we  must  pity  as  well  as  love  thee !  Hardly  entreated  brother  ! 
for  us  was  thy  back  so  bent,  for  us  were  thy  straight  limbs  and  fingers  so  deformed  :  thou  wert  our 
conscript,  on  whom  the  lot  fell,  and  fighting  our  battles  wert  so  marred.  For  in  thee  too  lay  a 
God-created  form,  but  it  was  not  to  be  unfolded;  encrusted  must  it  stand  with  the  thick  adhesions 
and  defacements  of  labour;  and  thy  body,  like  thy  soul,  was  not  to  know  freedom.  Yet  toil  on, 
toil  on  :  THou  art  in  thy  duty,  be  out  of  it  who  may ;  thou  toilest  for  the  altogether  indispensable, 
for  daily  bread. 

**  A  second  man  I  honour,  and  still  more  highly  :  him  who  is  seen  toiling  for  the  spiritually 
indispensable ;  not  daily  bread,  but  the  bread  of  life.  Is  not  he  too.  in  his  duty ;  endeavouring 
towards  inward  harmony ;  revealing  this,  by  act  or  by  word,  through  all  his  outward  endeavours,  be 
they  hi^h  or  low  ?  Highest  of  all  when  his  outward  and  inward  endeavours  are  one  ;  when  we  can 
name  hira  artist ;  not  earthly  craftsman  only,  but  inspired  thinker,  who  with  heaven-made  imple- 
ment conquers  heaven  for  us !    If  the  poor  and  humble  toil  that  we  have  food,  must  not  the  high 


74 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  III. 


and  glorious  toil  for  him  in  return,  that  he  have  light,  have  guidance,  freedom,  immortality  ? 
These  two,  in  all  their  degrees,  I  honour:  all  else  is  chaflf  and  dust,  which  let  the  wind  blow 
whither  it  listeth. 

"  Unspeakably  touching  is  it,  however,  when  I  find  both  dignities  united,  and  he  that  must  toil 
outwardly  for  the  lowest  of  man's  wants  is  also  toiling  inwardly  for  the  highest.  Sublimer  in  this 
world  know  I  nothing  than  a  peasant  saint,  could  such  now  anywhere  be  met  with.  Such  a  one 
will  take  thee  back  to  Nazareth  itself;  thou  wilt  see  the  splendour  of  heaven  spring  forth  from  the 
humblest  depths  of  earth,  like  a  light  shining  in  great  darkness." — Carlyle. 

Work  is  the  common  duty  of  all.  *'  It  would  be  very  strange  if  it  were  not  so.  The  first 
tlimg  we  read  of  God  doing  for  man  when  he  made  him  was  to  assign  him  work.  Before  he  gave 
him  a  right  to  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the  trees,  '  he  put  him  into  the  garden  of  Eden  to  dress  it  and 
to  keep  it'  (Gen.  ii.  15).  "When  man  is  translated  to  the  heavenly  Eden  it  is  not  to  idleness: 
*  they  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple.'  The  wise  man  when  he  looked  abroad  on  the 
world  made  this  deep  reflection  :  '  All  things  are  full  of  labour.'  The  calm  stars  are  in  ceaseless 
motion,  and  every  leaf  is  a  world  with  its  busy  inhabitants,  and  the  sap  coursing  through  its  veins 
as  the  life-blood  through  our  own.  He  who  made  all  worlds  has  said,  '  My  Father  worketh  hitherto, 
and  I  work.'  "—John  Ker,  D.JD. 

All  the  workers  shall  he  rewarded.  '*  Each  shall  find  that  he  has  a  share  in  the  completed 
results,  where  the  labours  of  all  are  represented.  What  does  it  matter  in  which  stage  of  the  great 
process  our  co-operation  has  been  enlisted  ?  Every  man  that  has  had  a  part  in  the  building  shall 
have  a  share  in  the  glory.  What  does  it  matter  whether  we  have  been  set  to  dig  out  the  foundation, 
working  amongst  mud  and  wet,  or  have  laid  the  lowermost  courses,  which  are  all  covered  up  and 
forgotten,  or  happen  to  have  been  amongst  those  who  bring  forth  the  head-stone  with  shoutings  ?  We 
are  all  builders  all  the  same.  The  main  thing  is  that  we  have  some  work  there.  Never  mind 
whereabouts  it  is-.  Never  mind  whether  it  be  visible  or  no.  Never  mind  whether  your  name  is 
associated  with  it.  You  may  never  see  the  issues  of  your  toils.  If  you  can  see  them  they  will 
generally  not  be  worth  looking  at.  We  work  for  eternity.  We  may  well  wait  for  the  scafi'olding 
to  be  taken  away.  Then  we  shall  find  that  preparatory  work  is  all  represented  in  the  final  issue  ; 
even  as  the  first  film  of  alluvium,  deposited  in  its  delta  by  some  mighty  stream,  is  the  real 
foundation  for  the  last,  which,  long  ages  after,  rise  above  the  surface  and  bear  waving  corn  and 
the  homes  of  men." — Alexander  Maclaren,  D.I). 


A  Suggestive  Church  Record. 


I.  The  potency  of  personal  influ- 
ence. Nehemiah  created  a  spirit  of 
enthusiasm  which  set  all  this  train  of 
exertion  in  motion. 

II  The  force  of  example.  The 
priests  took  the  lead  in  the  common 
labour. 

III.  Advantages  of  systematic  or- 
ganization. Each  volunteer  made  re- 
sponsible for  some  limited  portion  of 
work. 

IV.  The  gigantic  results  achievable 
by  individual  action.     Like  coral  in 
sects  at  work,  the  multitude  of  builders 
each  did  his  part  of  the  whole. 

V.  The  diversity  of  disposition 
revealed  by  a  great  emergency.  1. 
Enthusiastic  work.  2.  Refusal  to  put 
the  neck  to  the  yoke. 

VI.  The  consentaneity  of  purpose 


and  effort  which  a  great  emergency 
demands  and  is  calculated  to  bring 
about.  All  rivalries  forgotten  in  the 
great  aim — to  again  rebuild  Jerusalem. 

VII.  The  diversity  of  gifts  which 
a  great  emergency  calls  into  req[u:si- 
tion. 

Illustrations  : — 

"  No  life  is  waste  in  the  great  Worker's  hand. 
The  gem  too  poor  to  polish  in  itself 
Is  ground  to  brighten  others." — P.  J.  Bailey. 

"Do  your  work,  and  I  shall  know  you.  Do 
your  work,  and  you  shall  reinforce  yourself." — 
Emerson. 

"The  body  is  not  one  member,  but  many" 
(1  Cor.  xii.  4—27). 

'*  Clouds  when  full  pour  down,  and  the  presses 
overflow,  and  the  aroraatical  trees  sweat  out 
their  precious  and  sovereign  oils  ;  and  every 
learned  scribe  must  bring  out  his  treasure  for 
the  Church's  behoof  and  benefit. " — John  Trapp. 


CHAP.  III.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


75 


Priesthood. 

iii.  1.  Then  EUashih  the  high  priest  rose  up  with  his  brethren  the  priests,  and  the?/ 
huilded  the  sheep  gate;  they  sanctified  it,  and  set  up  the  doors  of  it;  even  unto 
the  tower  of  Meah  they  sanctified  it,  unto  the  tower  of  Hananeel. 


Introduction.  —  Priest  and  king 
amongst  the  most  terrible  words  in 
language.  War,  oppression,  rapine  have 
come  at  their  call.  1.  Mlevatlon  is 
dangerous.  Separateness  from  sympa- 
thies and  ways  of  common  men  a  mis- 
fortune. Men  easily  enslave  those  whom 
they  see  to  be  lower  than  themselves. 
2.  Privilege  and  responsibility  are 
co-extensive.  Shepherd  feeds  and  guards 
flock.  King  lives  for  subjects.  Priest 
must  think,  speak,  and  act  for  his  fel- 
lows. Noblesse  oblige.  What  is  true 
priesthood  ] 

I.  A  true  priest  identifies  himself 
with  men.  Institution  and  consecration 
(Exod.  xxviii.,  xxix.).  Interpretation 
(Heb.). 

1.  Called  from  amongst  men  (Heb. 
v.  1). 

2.  Offers  gifts  and  sacrifices  (v.  1). 

3.  Compassionates  weakness  and  ig- 
norance (v.  2). 

,4.  Comes  between  men  and  God.  (a) 
To  present  intercessions,  (b)  To  reveal 
God's  will. 

A  priesthood  is  necessary.  "You 
tell  me,  my  sceptical  friend,  that  religion 
is  the  contrivance  of  the  priest.  How 
came  the  priest  into  being  1  What  gave 
him  his  power  1 " — Channing.  \^See  illus- 
tration below,  "  Christian  worship."^ 

Priest's  dress,  robes,  &c.  stand  for  a 
NEEDED  and  SUPPOSED  sauctity.  If  not 
sacred,  all  the  worse  for  the  priest. 
Must  come  to  his  work  from  a  higher 
ground.  Of  the  people,  but  above  the 
people.  More  thoughtful,  not  less 
saintly.  Manhood  first,  priesthood 
afterwards. 

II.  A  true  priest  identifies  thought 
with  life.  The  wall-building  was  Ne- 
hemiah's  thought.  Eliashib  and  his 
brothers  helped  to  make  it  reality. 

Priest  makes  God's  thoughts  man's 
life.    "  Be  ye  holy  "  (Lev.  xi  44;  1  Pet. 


i.  15),  God's  thought.  How  to  become 
holy,  priest's  life-work.  A  sinless,  and 
sorrowless  world,  God's  thought.  How 
to  approximate  to  this  a  priest's  work. 
Obedience  to  Divine  laws,  God's  pur- 
pose ;  enunciations  of  these  and  incite- 
ments to  keep  them,  priest's  work. 

1.  Harmonizes  ideal  and  actual. 

2.  Harmonizes  thought  and  practice. 

3.  Harmonizes  inclination  and  con- 
science. 

III.  A  true  priest  identifies  the 
lower  with  the  higher,  the  common 
with  the  sacred,  earth  with  heaven. 
Priests  "  sanctified  the  wall ; "  built 
near  the  temple.  God's  house  and  city 
wall  both  SACRED.  Sanctity  is  relative 
or  real.  The  temple ;  the  temple  utensils. 
Churches  (e.  g.  Corinth)  with  unholy 
members  in  them  are  sanctified  or  holy 
relatively.  Only  individual  believers 
really  sanctified.  Broad  distinctions 
between  sacred  and  secular  not  well. 
Sabbath  sacred ;  make  all  days.  God's 
house  is  sacred ;  so  is  your  own.  Bible 
sacred ;  read  nothing  impure. 

Illustrations  : — Christian  worship.  "  There 
have  been  those  who  have  sought  to  disparage 
v^orship  by  representing  it  as  an  arbitrary, 
unnatural  service,  a  human  contrivance,  an  in- 
vention for  selfish  ends.  I  will  meet  the  objec- 
tion by  a  few  remarks  drawn  from  history. 
There  have  been,  indeed,  periods  of  history  in 
which  the  influence  of  the  religious  principle 
seems  to  have  been  overwhelmed ;  but  in  this  it 
agrees  with  other  great  principles  of  our  nature, 
which  in  certain  stages  of  the  race  disappear. 
There  are  certain  conditions  of  society  in  which 
the  desire  of  knowledge  seems  almost  extinct 
among  men,  and  they  abandon  themselves  for 
centuries  to  brutish  ignorance.  There  are  com- 
munities in  which  the  natural  desire  of  reaching 
a  better  lot  gives  not  a  sign  of  its  existence,  and 
society  remains  stationary  for  ages.  There  are 
some  in  which  even  the  parental  affection  is  so 
far  dead  that  the  new-born  child  is  cast  into  the 
stream  or  exposed  to  the  storm.  So  the  religious 
principle  is  in  some  periods  hardly  to  be  dis- 
cerned; but  it  is  never  lost.  No  principle  is 
more  universally  manifested.     In  the  darkest 


76 


EOMILETIQ  QOMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.    Ill 


ages  there  are  some  recognitions  of  a  superior 
Power.  Man  feels  that  there  is  a  Being  above 
himself,  and  he  clothes  that  Being  in  what  to 
his  rude  conceptions  is  great  and  venerable.  In 
countries  where  architecture  was  unknown  men 
chose  the  solemn  wood  or  the  monn tain  top  for 
worship  ;  and  when  this  art  appeared  its  monu- 
ments were  temples  to  God.  Before  the  inven- 
tion of  letters  hymns  were  composed  to  the 
Divinity,  and  music,  we  have  reason  to  think, 
was  the  offspring  of  religion.  Music  in  its 
infancy  was  the  breathing  of  man's  fears,  wants, 
hopes,  thanks,  praises  to  an  unseen  power.  You 
tell  me,  my  sceptical  friend,  that  religion  is  the 
contrivance  of  the  priest.  How  came  the  priest 
into  being  ?  What  gave  hira  his  power  }  Why 
was  it  that  the  ancient  legislator  professed  to 
receive  his  laws  from  the  gods }  The  fact  is  a 
striking  one,  that  the  earliest  guides  and  leaders 
of  the  human  race  looked  to  the  heavens  for 
security  and  strength  to  earthly  institutions,  that 
they  were  compelled  to  speak  to  men  in  a  higher 
name  than  man's.  Religion  was  an  earlier  bond 
and  a  deeper  foundation  of  society  than  govern- 
ment. It  was  the  root  of  civilization.  It  has 
founded  the  mightiest  empires ;  and  yet  men 
question  whether  religion  be  an  element,  a  prin- 
ciple of  human  nature  ! 

"In  the  earliest  ages,  before  the  dawn  of  science, 
man  recognized  an  immediate  interference  of  the 
Divinity    in    whatever    powerfully    struck    his 

senses Every  unusual    event    was    a 

Iniracle,   a   prodigy,   a  promise  of    good   or   a 

menace    of    evil   from  heaven The 

heavens,  the  earth,  the  plant,  the  human  frame, 
now  that  they  are  explored  by  science,  gpeak  of 
God  as  they  never  did  before.  His  handwriting 
is  brought  out  where  former  ages   saw    but   a 

blank The  profoundest  of   all  human 

wants  is  the  want  of  God.  Mind,  spirit  must 
tend  to  its  source.  It  cannot  find  happiness  but 
in  the  perfect  Mind,  the  infinite  Spirit.  Worship 
has  survived  all  revolutions.  Corrupted,  dis- 
honoured, opposed,  it  yet  lives.  It  is  immortal 
as  its  object,  immortal  as  the  soul  from  which  it 
ascends." — W.  E.  Channingy  D.D. 

The  origin  of  the  Christian  clergy.  "  Amongst 
the  gifts  which  our  blessed  Lord  gave  to  numkind 
during  his  life  on  earth,  the  Christian  ministry 
as  we  now  possess  it  was  not  one  of  them.  The 
twelve  apostles  whom  he  chose  had  no  successors 
like  them.  The  seventy  disciples  also,  who  went 
forth  at  the  Lord's  command  to  preach  the 
gospel,  they,  too,  were  soon  buried  in  their 
graves,  but  no  order  of  the  same  kind,  or  of  the 
same  number,  came  in  their  stead. 

''  Yet  there  was  another  sense  in  which  the 
Christian  ministry  was  the  gift  of  their  Divine 
Master,  and  it  was  that  which  St.  Paul  so  well 
expresses  :  '  When  he  ascended  up  on  high  he 
gave  gifts  unto  men.  And  he  gave  some,  apostles  ; 
and  some,  prophets;  and  some,  evangelists ;  and 
some,  pastors  and  teachers.*  Now  what  was  it 
that  was  meant  by  this  statement — this  very 


pointed  statement — that  it  was  only  after  hii 
ascension,  after  his  withdrawal  from  earth,  that 
he  gave  those  gifts  to  men,  and  amongst  those 
gifts  were  the  various  offices,  of  which  the  two 
last  named  contained  the  germ  ot  all  the  future 
clergy  of  Christendom  ?  What  was  meant  was 
surely  this,  that  not  in  his  earthly  life,  not  in 
his  direct  communication  with  man,  not  as  a 
part  of  the  original  manifestation  of  Christianity, 
but  as  the  result  of  the  complex  influences  which 
were  showered  down  to  the  earth  after  its  Founder 
had  left,  as  part  of  the  vast  machinery  of  Christian 
civilization,  created  by  the  spirit  of  Christ  for 
filling  up  the  void  of  his  absence,  were  the 
various  gifts  and  professions  of  Christian  forms, 
and  amongst  these  were  the  great  vocation,  the 
sacred  profession  of  the  Christian  ministry.  Look 
at  the  gradual  growth  of  the  Christian  ministry. 
In  no  single  instance  did  the  order  of  clergy  now 
resemble  what  it  was  in  the  first  century  or  even 
the  second.  The  deacons  of  every  existing 
Church  were  very  different  from  the  seven  deacons 
of  the  apostolic  age.  The  presbyters  of  every 
Church  were  either  in  themselves  or  in  their 
relations  to  their  brethren  very  different  to  the 
presbyters  of  the  first  or  second  century.  Take 
the  bishops ;  in  many  important  respects  they 
differed  essentially  from  those  who  bore  that  title 
seventeen  hundred  years  ago.  They  all  varied 
in  each  age  and  country,  according  to  the  varieties 
of  the  age  and  country ;  according  to  the  civil 
constitutions  under  which  they  lived  ;  according 
to  the  geographical  area ;  according  to  the 
climates  and  customs  of  east,  west,  north,  and 
south  ;  in  regard  to  their  election,  whether  by 
breathing,  by  popular  election,  by  internal  elec- 
tion, by  ministerial  election,  by  ordination,  by 
sacred  relics,  by  the  elevation  of  hands,  by  the 
imposition  oif  hands  ;  spheres  more  or  less  limited, 
a  humble  country  village,  a  vast  town  population, 
or  a  province  as  large  as  a  kingdom.  These 
variations  were  not  a  condemnation,  but  a  justi- 
fication rather,  of  their  existence.  They  showed 
that  the  order  of  the  Christian  clergy,  instead  of 
remaining  a  stiff  and  useless  relic  of  the  past, 
had  grown  with  the  growth  and  varied  with  the 
variations  of  Christian  society.  This,  therefore, 
was  at  once  the  Divine  and  the  human  origin 
of  the  Christian  ministry;  Divine,  because  it 
belonged  to  and  formed  an  important  link  in  the 
inevitable  growth  of  all  Christian  communities, 
of  Christian  aspirations,  and  of  Christian  sym- 
pathies ;  human,  because  it  arose  out  of  and  was 
subject  to  the  necessities  and  vicissitudes  of 
human  passions  and  human  infirmities,  and  in  so 
far  as  it  was  of  a  permanent  and  Divine  character, 
having  a  pledge  of  an  immortal  existence  so  long 
as  Christian  society  exists ;  in  so  far  as  it  was  of 
human  character,  needing  to  accommodate  itself 
to  the  want  of  each  successive  age,  and  needing 
the  support,  the  sympathy,  and  the  favour  of  all 
the  other  elements  of  social  intercourse  by  which 
it  was  surrounded." — Dean  Stanley, 


fifTAP,  m.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAEY :  NEHEMIAH,  77 


Ministerial  Adaptability. 
iii.  1.     Then  EUashib  the  high  priest  rose  up,  &c. 

I.  The  priests  sharing  the  interests    teth  forth  his  own  sheep  he  goeth  before 
and  toils  of   common  manhood.      A    them "  (John  x.  4). 

minister's    power   lies   not   in    that   in  III.  Sacredness   of  work   depends 

which  he  differs  from  others,  but  in  that  not  on  its  nature,  but  on  its  purpose 

in  which   he   is  like  i\iQm  —  '' brother-  and  spirit.   "  They  sanctified  "  a  co?w7iow 

hoodr     He  shares  their  weaknesses.   He  wall.     They  were  toiling  for  hearth  and 

knows  headache  and  heartache,   weari-  home,   for  the  city  of  their  fathers  and 

ness  and  worry,  trouble  and  temptation  ;  the  temple  of  their  God.     Our  work  in 

and  just  in  proportion  as  he  is  a  man  the  world  not  important ;  the  spirit  in 

will  his  ministry  be  sometimes  powerful  which  we  do  it  the  main  consideration, 

and  sometimes  powerless.     At  times  he  A  mother  who  represents  Christ  to  her 

will  wish  himself  in  the  most  distant  children,  who    becomes   to   them   their 

seat    in    the    Church ;    at   other    times  idea  of  what  God  must  be,  is  as  sacredly 

speech  will   be   like   the    upliftings   of  engaged  as  some  woman  of  genius  whose 

angels,  and  the  declaration  of  the  gospel  fame  fills  a  hemisphere.     The  blood  and 

as  admission  into  the  paradise  of  God.  bones   of  the   man   who   digs   out  the 

A  white  tie,  a  black  coat,  and  conven-  foundation    are    as    necessary    as    the 

tional  manners  do  not  make  a  minister ;  architect's  skill.     In  building  Solomon's 

let  him  come  and  say,  "  Brethren,  I  am  temple  the  noise  and  dust  of  cutting  and 

as  ye  are."                  ^  polishing  the  stones  were  confined  to  the 

II.  The  priests  an  example  to  the  quarry ;  in  the  temple  all  was  calm. 
people.     The  high  priest  and  his  sub-  In  this  world  of  striving  and  unattain- 
ordinates  were  the  first  to  build.     Then  ment,  of  sin  and  sorrow,  we  do  not  see 
common  people  tied  on  their  aprons  and  the  plan.     That  is  in  the  mind  of  the 
took  trowel  in  hand.  great  Architect.     Out  of  confusion   he 

There   must  be   leaders;   then  there  will   educe   order.      "Whatsoever    thy 

will   be   followers.     Simon   Peter  said,  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it"  (Eccles.  ix. 

"I  go  a  fishing."     The  rest   say   unto  1^)- 

him,    "We    also    go  with   thee"    (John  Illustration: — "  Man,  it  is  not  thy  works,  which 

xxi.).     The  rank  and  file  will  ride  into  are  all  mortal,  infinitely  little,  and  the  greatest 

^^^\.^Mr.^  «f  Ar.^^\.   ;4?  +1.^  r.m  HO  STeditQY  than  the  least,  but  only  the  spirit  thou 

any  vaUey  of  death  if  the  officers  say,  ^^^^^^^  ^^^  that  can  have  worth  or  continuance." 

"  Comrades,  come  on.      When  he  "  put-  —Carlyle. 

System  and  Detail  in  Work. 

iii.  2,  3.  And  next  unto  EUashib  builded  the  men  of  Jericho,  And  next  to  them 
builded  Zaccur  the  son  of  Imri.  But  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons  of  Hassenaah 
buildy  who  also  laid  the  beams  thereof  and  set  up  the  doors  thereof  the  locks 
thereof  and  the  bars  thereof. 

'*'  "We  live  not  to  ourselves,  our  work  is  life ; 
In  bright  and  ceaseless  labour  as  a  star 
Which  shine th  unto  all  worlds  but  itself." 

Then  life  is  a  vocation.  *'  I  beseech  you  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  ye  are  called"  (Ephes.  iv.  1).  "Your  calling"  (Ephes.  iv.  4).  "Let 
every  man  abide  in  the  same  calling  wherein  he  was  called  "  (1  Cor.  vii.  20).  In 
modern  phrase,  a  man's  trade  or  profession  is  his  calling.  .  This  gives  work 
dignity.  Labourer,  carpenter,  mason,  sailor,  surgeon,  preacher,  schoolmaster, 
newspaper  editor,  thou  art  called.     A  hand  not  thine  own  placed  thee  where  thou 


1 


78  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  [chap.  hi. 


art.  Every  man's  work  should  have  a  Pentecost.  Manual  labour  is  honourable. 
It  must  be  redeemed  from  a  spurious  disregard.  Indolence  is  degrading;  dis- 
honesty is  ruinous ;  honest  toil  need  fear  no  shame. 

"  None  of  us  liveth  to  himself  "  (Eom.  xiv.  7).  Then  life  is  a  ministry.  This 
redeems  it  from  selfishness.  "  My  servants "  (John  xviii.  36).  *'  Let  a  man  so 
account  of  us  as  of  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God  " 
(1  Cor.  iv.  1).  Not  Paul,  Peter,  and  Apollos  only.  Judgment-day  decisions  turn 
on  this — "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done,"  or,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  not  to  the  brethren  " 
(Matt.  XXV.).  Ban  or  blessing  each  man  carries  in  himself.  Influence  is  conscious, 
direct,  and  intentional ;  then  it  is  occasional,  and  often  fails.  Influence  is  uncon- 
scious, indirect,  and  streams  on,  like  light  from  the  heavens ;  then  it  is  constant 
and  all-pervasive.  Life  is  more  solemn  than  death.  A  man's  daily  work  is  not 
only  religious,  it  is  his  religion.  There  he  fights  and  conquers,  or  fights  and  falls. 
Well  for  him  if  he 

'*  be  up  and  doing, 

"With  a  heart  for  any  fate  ; 
Still  achieving,  still  pursuing, 

Learn  to  labour  and  to  wait." 

On  the  work  of  life  let  Nehemiah  and  his  noble  band  teach  us  somewhat. 

I.  A  great  work  can  only  be  planned  by  a  great  mind.  Many  saw  the 
desolations  of  the  city ;  some  wept  over  them.  Nehemiah  only  had  a  vocation  and 
talents  to  "  build  the  old  wastes  and  repair  the  desolations  of  many  generations  " 
(Isa.  Ixi.  4).  An  equality  is  impossible.  In  any  circle  of  twelve  there  will  be  a 
Peter  to  lead.  These  are  Kings  by  Divine  right.  The  laureate's  wreath  is  only 
green  on  the  brows  of  him  who  utters  nothing  base.  Nehemiahs  have  comprehen- 
sive minds,  like  some  insects  that  put  out  *'  feelers  "  on  all  sides.  Insight  is  a 
dangerous  gift,  hence  granted  only  to  the  elect  ones.  Nehemiah  rebuilds  Jerusalem ; 
Augustine  governs  a  period ;  Wesley  organizes  a  society ;  Shakespeare  Shakespear- 
izes  a  language  : — they  are  "  born  to  command." 

II.  A  great  work  can  only  be  carried  out  by  division  of  labour.  Nehemiah's 
organizing  brain  needed  the  hands  of  the  men  of  Jericho.  Farmer  requires  plough- 
man, horsekeeper,  diggers,  and  delvers.  Architect,  clerk  of  works,  mason,  carpenter, 
stone-cutter,  hod-man.  Writer,  an  amanuensis,  a  printer,  binder,  bookseller.  How 
long  it  would  take  one  man  to  make  a  pin ;  by  dividing  the  work  they  are  counted 
by  millions.  Miner,  sailor,  soldier  hazard  their  lives  for  the  general  good.  One 
goes  abroad,  another  stays  at  home  ;  this  man  works  with  the  hand,  that  with  the 
brain ;  the  husband  rules  without,  the  wife  rules  within  ;  all  obeying  the  same 
law,  the  needs  be  that  into  the  world's  mill  each  one  casts  some  corn. 

III.  A  great  work  can  only  be  accomplished  by  attention  to  details.  "  Bars 
and  locks.'*  Gates  and  doors  without  bars  and  locks  useless.  "There  must  be 
detail  in  every  great  work.  It  is  an  element  of  effectiveness  which  no  reach  of 
plan,  no  enthusiasm  of  purpose,  can  dispense  with.  Thus,  if  a  man  conceives  the 
idea  of  becoming  eminent  in  learning,  but  cannot  toil  through  the  million  of  little 
drudgeries  necessary  to  carry  him  on,  his  learning  will  be  soon  told.  Or,  if  a  man 
undertakes  to  become  rich,  but  despises  the  smaU  and  gradual  advances  by  which 
wealth  is  ordinarily  accumulated,  his  expectations  will,  of  course,  be  the  sum  of 
his  riches.  Accurate  and  careful  detail,  the  minding  of  common  occasions  and 
small  things,  combined  with  general  scope  and  vigour,  is  the  secret  of  all  the 
efficiency  and  success  in  the  world." — Bushnell.  1.  Young  man  carving  cut  his 
fortunes.  "  By  little  and  little."  "  Take  care  of  the  pence,"  &c.  Trifling 
delinquencies ;  white  lies  are  the  unlocked  gates  through  which  "  seven  spirits 
worse "  than  these  enter.  Regard  to  minor  courtesies,  use  of  spare  moments, 
buying  up  opportunities,  lead  on  to  honour  always,  to  fortune  sometimes.  2. 
Church  work.  Sunday  schools,  mission  bands,  tract  distributors,  missionary 
collectors  are  needed.     Churchwardens,  sidesmen,  deacons,  stewards,  let  each  fill 


OHAP.  III.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  79 

his  place  and  attend  to  the  duty  specially  allotted  him.  Hast  thou  a  contracted 
rijjhere  ?  Thou  mayest  fill  it  better.  Is  thy  work  humble  %  It  is  not  of  necessity 
mean. 

"  Forth  in  thy  name,  0  Lord,  I  go, 

My  daily  labour  to  pursue; 

Thee,  only  thee,  resolved  to  know 

In  all  I  think,  or  speak,  or  do." 

IV.  A  great  work  brings  out  special  adaptations.  The  men  of  Jericho  built 
the  wall.  But  the  fish  gate  with  its  locks  and  bars  did  the  sons  of  Hassenaah 
build. 

The  disciples  of  Christ.  Prophecy-reading  Philip  finds  prophecy-reading 
Nathaniel  (John  i.  43 — 51).  Peter  speaks  and  acts  impetuously,  and  dies  courage- 
ously (John  xxi.).  John,  with  a  piercing  insight,  writes  the  angelic  Gospel,  and 
waits  to  see  and  war  against  rising  error  (John  xxi. ;  Epistles  of  John ;  Revela- 
tion). 

Does  the  hero  mould  the  age,  or  the  age  mould  the  hero  ?    Partly  both. 

In  the  Church  "  every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God^  one  after  this  manner, 
and  another  after  that"  (1  Cor.  vii.  7).  The  eloquent  Apollos  expounds  the 
Scriptures  ;  the  deft-handed  Dorcas  clothes  the  naked  ;  the  man  of  wealth  sustains 
the  charities  ;  the  strong  minister  to  weakness ;  the  wise  enlighten  the  ignorant. 
*'  There  is  a  different  colour  of  beauty  in  different  stones  that  are  all  of  them 
precious.  One  man  may  be  burnishing  to  the  sparkle  of  the  diamond,  while 
another  is  deepening  to  the  glow  of  the  ruby.  For  this  reason  there  are  such 
different  temperaments  in  Christian  character  and  varying  circumstances  in  Chris- 
tian life,  that  the  foundations  of  the  wall  of  the  city  may  be  garnished  with  all 
manner  of  precious  stones.  Each  Christian  has  his  own  place  and  lustre  in  that 
temple,  and  therefore  there  is  no  ground  to  disparage  our  neighbour,  and  none  to 
despair  of  ourselves,  if  we  are  both  in  the  hand  of  Christ." — Ker. 

V.  A  great  work  must  have  regard  to  practical  utility.  The  fish  gate  as 
necessary  as  the  repairing  of  temple  wall.  Began  at  the  temple,  but  did  not  stop 
there.  What  is  it  for  1  to  be  asked  of  every  man's  work.  Does  it  begin  and 
end  in  itself.  True  work  should  brighten  somebody's  dark  life,  cast  out  the 
stones  from  the  rugged  road  along  which  some  brother's  stumbling  feet  must  go, 
expel  some  one  of  the  legion  of  demons  that  possess  men. 

VI.  A  great  work  must  be  inspired  by  a  lofty  purpose.  Nehemiah  and  his 
fellows  were  rebuilding  the  city  of  David  (ver.  15).  Milton  chose  *  Paradise  Lost,' 
and  aimed  to  justify  the  ways  of  God  to  men.  The  painters  find  the  sufferings  of 
Christ  an  inexhaustible  subject.  A  great  religious  reformer  desired  to  spread 
holiness  throughout  the  land.  Man,  art  thou  moved  by  a  lofty  motive  inspired  by 
God's  good  Spirit  to  take  unto  thee  thy  office  in  the  world  and  Church  % 

VII.  A  great  work  must  look  on  to  the  future.  It  must  have  in  it  the 
element  of  permanence.  They  were  rebuilding  the  chosen  city — the  city  of  the 
future,  as  they  fondly  hoped. 

Conclusion. — In  heaven  "they  have  no  rest  day  nor  night"  (Rev.  iv.  8). 
Two  worlds,  but  only  one  law.  Here  from  grace  to  grace,  there  from  glory  to 
glory.  Here  "faithful  in  that  which  is  least"  (Luke  xvi.  10),  there  *' ruler  over 
many  things  "  (Matt.  xxv.  23).  The  first  word  is,  Be  faithful ;  and  the  second,  Be 
faithful ;  and  the  third,  Be  faithful. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Verse  3.  "  If  a  man  would  stand  on  figures  and  allegories,  this  gate  may  well  signify  Christ,  who 
made  Ins  apostles  and  preachers  fishers  of  men,  who  by  him  brought  and  daily  bring  them  into  this 
spiritual  Jerusalem;  for  he  is  only  the  door  whereby  all  must  enter  into  the  Lord's  city.  These 
men,  like  good  builders,  leave  nothing  undone  that  might  fortify  that  gate;  for  they  set  on  not  only 
the  doors,  but  also  bolts  and  locks.     So  must  God's  Church  be  made  strong  by  laws,  discipline,  and 


80  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  iH. 


autliority,  that  ravening  lions  and  filthy  swine  rush  not  in  and  disquiet  or  devour  God's  people  ;  and 
the  wholesome  doctrine  must  be  confirmed  with  strong  arguments  and  reasons  against  false 
teachers. " — Filkington. 

jrorking  for  the  unknown  future.  *'  An  old  tattered  volume  found  among  his  father^s  books, 
Bunny's  '  Resolutions,'  aroused  Richard  Baxter  to  concern ;  and  Sibb's  *  Bruised  Reed  '  led  him  to 
the  Saviour.  From  Baxter's  pen  proceeded  *  The  Call  to  the  Unconverted,'  which,  in  addition  to 
its  most  extensive  circulation  elsewhere,  was  given  by  a  beggar  at  the  door  where  Philip  Doddridge 
lived.  It  was  the  voice  of  God  to  the  youthful  reader,  who  became  the  author  of  *  The  Rise  and 
Progress  of  Religion  in  the  Soul ' — a  book  which  gave  the  first  impression  to  William  Wilberforce. 
He  became  the  author  of  *  A  Practical  View  of  Christianity,'  which  was  blessed  to  the  conversion  of 
Leigh  Richmond,  a  successful  minister,  and  author  of  *  The  Dairyman's  Daughter '  and  *  Young 
Cottager,'  little  works  that  have  had  many  seals  in  souls  won  to  God.  The  *  Practical  View'  was 
also  instrumental  in  the  saving  change  of  Dr.  Chalmers,  whose  works  are  world-wide,  and  whose 
labours  were  so  eminently  owned  for  the  revival  of  religion  in  the  ministry  and  people  of  Scotland." 
~Br.  Steel. 

Rival  Classes. 

iii.  6.     And  next  trnlo  them  the  Tekoites  repaired ;  but  their  nobles  put  not  their 

necks  to  the  work  of  their  Lord. 

The  rivalry  of  classes  in  all  history.  1.  Use  of  this  rivalry.  The  mutual 
suspicion  and  watchfulness  of  classes  serves  to  put  all  on  their  hest  behaviour ; 
one  is  as  a  goad  to  the  other  for  exertion  in  industry  and  excellence.  2.  Abase  of 
this  rivalry.     All  the  hatreds  and  bigotries  and  wars  of  mankind. 

I.  Rival  classes.  1.  A  noble  peasantry.  *'The  Tekoites."  (1)  Simplicity. 
Lowly  life  is  favourable  to  simplicity  of  aim  and  endeavour.  Among  the  poor  you 
find  the  most  faithful  servants  ;  among  the  poor  the  Church  finds  her  most  diligent 
workers.  Men  who  have  been  grinding  at  the  tread-mill  of  hard  labour  all  the 
week  are  the  men  who  work  the  wheels  of  Christian  service  on  a  Sunday.  Among 
the  "better  people"  of  religious  communions  *' the  labourers  are  few."  (2) 
Devotion.  Steady  adherence  to  great  principles  is  more  often  found  amongst  the 
poor.  There  is  something  in  the  saying  about  ignorance  being  the  mother  of 
devotion.  Not  in  the  cynical  sense.  Bat  those  who  see  only  the  hard  realities  of 
life  are  often  capable  of  deep  attachment  to  friends  and  to  G-od  and  to  a  great 
cause,  while  the  dilettante  "feels  no  interest"  in  anything  human  or  Divine. 
Enthusiasm  is  a  popular  quality.  2.  An  effeminate  aristocracy.  (1)  Selfishness. 
i!^ot  confined  to  one  class,  but  in  its  hardest  manifestations  to  be  found  among  the 
gay  and  worldly,  who  have  multiplied  their  natural  wants  by  a  thousand  artificial 
needs.  To  expect  a  burst  of  noble-hearted,  generous  enthusiasm  from  the  frozen 
circle  of  worldly  society  is  to  look  for  grapes  on  thorns  and  figs  from  the  thistle- 
stalk.  [Of  course  in  all  this  contrast  we  are  only  keeping  in  mind  the  really 
worldly  circle,  and  are  not  forgetting  the  fact  that  in  Jerusalem's  rebuilding  and 
in  the  reconstructions  of  English  history  the  noble  have  nobly  stood  to  the  front.] 
(2)  Pride.  Beautiful  is  the  way  in  which  modern  society  is  returning  in  many 
respects  to  humility  in  regard  to  practical  things.  A  Prince  of  Wales  sends  his 
boys  to  the  routine  of  a  sailor  apprenticeship ;  a  Duke  of  Argyle  sends  his  son  to 
a  house  of  business  ;  a  gentleman's  son  doffs  his  neat  coat  and  stoops  down, 
hammer  in  hand,  in  the  engineer's  yard.  In  this  there  is  a  more  hopeful  sight 
than  when  the  proud  nobles  of  Jerusalem  disdained  the  rough  work  which  the 
God-inspired  Nehemiah  designed. 

II.  Rival  views.  1.  Popular  desire  for  reform.  (1)  Politically.  Trace 
course  of  national  history.  Instance  the  case  of  the  Corn  Laws,  with  its  mechanic 
poet  Ebenezer  Elliott.  (2)  Ecclesiastically.  Nothing  is  so  fatal  to  a  Church  as  for 
the  people  to  let  Church  government  alone  and  leave  it  to  professional  men.  The 
sheep  are  for  the  sake  of  the  shepherd  in  farming  ;  but  Christ's  shepherds  are  for 
the  sake  of  the  flock.  In  our  Lord's  time  "  the  common  people  heard  him  gladly" 
(Mark  xiL  37) ;  but  it  was  asked  as  an  incredible  thing,  "  Have  any  of  the  rulers 


OHAP.  m.]  HOMILETIO  OOMMEifTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  81 

or  of  the  Pharisees  believed  on  him  ?  '*  (John  vii.  48).  The  Reformation  was  a 
rei)ly  to  tlw  people,  who  groaned  by  reason  of  the  afflictions  wherewith  the  task- 
masters afflicted  them.  (3)  Theologically.  The  popular  sentiment  is  the  curb  of 
theological  opinion.  What  men,  as  men^  think  and  feel  are  the  governor-halls  of 
tlie  great  logic-engine  of  systematic  theology.  The  mother's  heart  in  the  theologian 
adjusts  his  harsh,  cold  views  of  God.  2.  Reform  cried  down  by  the  nobles.  The 
doctrine  of  standing  still  is  only  preached  by  the  few  who  find  the  place  comfort- 
able ;  the  "  noble  discontent "  which  spurs  on  the  needy  and  oppressed  is  the 
animation  of  all  reform  in  State  or  Church. 

**  111  fares  tlie  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
Where  wealth  accumulates,  and  men  decay  : 
Princes  and  lords  may  flourish  or  may  fade  ; 
A  breath  can  make  them,  as  a  breath  has  made ; 
But  a  bold  peasantry,  their  country's  pride, 
Whin  onci  dtstroyed,  can  never  be  supplied." 

Goldsmith's  '^ Deserted  Village* 

Application.  1.  Beware  of  luxurious  aspirations.  Think  not  merely  of  the 
pleasures  of  greatness,  but  of  its  enervating  perils.  2.  Remember  that  the  duties  of 
individual  manhood  and  the  sources  of  happiness  in  the  individual  character  remain 
the  same  under  all  changes  of  costume  and  title.  A  man  is  never  more  or  less  than 
a  servant  of  the  great  Taskmaster,  and  a  fellow-labourer  with  others  in  the  ruined 
city  of  Mansoul.  3.  Beware  of  indolence  and  prides  and  do  thy  task  for  God  and 
man. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

A  life  of  idleness.  "  And  who  art  thou  that  braggest  of  thy  life  of  idleness ;  complacently 
showest  thy  bright  gilt  equipages,  sumptuous  cushions,  appliances  for  folding  of  the  hands  to  mere 
sleep  ?  Looking  up,  looking  down,  around,  behind,  or  before,  discernest  thou,  if  it  be  not  in  May- 
fair  alone,  any  idle  hero,  saint,  god,  or  even  devil  ?  Not  a  vestige  of  one.  In  the  heavens,  in  the 
earth,  in  the  waters  under  the  earth  is  none  like  unto  thee.  Thou  art  an  original  figure  in  this 
creation,  a  denizen  in  Mayfair  alone,  in  this  extraordinary  century  or  half-century  alone!  One 
monster  there  is  in  the  world — the  idle  man." — Carlyle. 

Rich  and  poor.  *'  Let  not  the  rich  misread  the  signs  of  the  times,  or  mistake  their  brethren  ; 
they  have  less  and  less  respect  for  titles  and  riches,  for  vestments  and  ecclesiastical  pretensions  *  but 
they  have  a  real  respect  for  superior  knowledge  and  superior  goodness ;  they  listen  like  children  to 
those  whom  they  believe  to  know  a  subject  better  than  themselves.  Let  those  who  know  it  say 
whether  there  is  not  something  inexpressibly  touching  and  even  humbling  in  the  large,  hearty, 
manly  English  reverence  and  love  which  the  working-men  show  towards  those  who  love  and  serve 
them  truly,  and  save  them  from  themselves  and  from  doing  wrong.  Alas  !  we  have  been  very  ready 
to  preach  submission.  For  three  long  centuries  we  have  taught  submission  to  the  powers  that  be,  as 
if  that  were  the  only  text  in  Scripture  bearing  on  the  relations  between  the  ruler  and  the  ruled. 
Rarely  have  we  dared  to  demand  of  the  powers  that  be  justice;  of  the  wealthy  man  and  the  titled 
duties.  We  have  produced  folios  of  slavish  flattery  upon  the  Divine  right  of  power.  Shame  on  us  ! 
we  have  not  denounced  the  wrongs  done  to  weakness,  and  yet  for  one  text  in  the  Bible  which 
requires  submission  and  patience  from  the  poor,  you  will  find  a  hundred  vs^hich  denounce  the  vices  of 
the  rich  ;  in  the  writings  of  the  noble  old  Jewish  prophets,  that,  and  almost  that  only  ;  that  in  the 
Old  Testament,  with  a  deep  roll  of  words  that  sound  like  Sin;ii  thunders  ;  and  that  in  the  New 
Testament  in  words  less  impassioned  and  more  calmly  terrible  from  the  apostles  and  their  Master; 
and  woe  to  us,  in  the  great  day  of  God,  if  we  have  been  the  sycophants  of  the  rich  instead  of  the 
redressers  of  the  poor  man's  wrongs." — F,   W,  Robertson. 

What  the  poor  have  done.  "  Thomas  Cranfield,  a  tailor,  established  a  prayer-meeting  among  the 
brickmakers  in  Kingsland,  which  was  held  every  morning  at  Jive  o'clock.  He  established  schools  at 
Rotherhithe,  Tottenham,  Kent  Street,  Southwark,  the  Mint,  Garden  Row,  St.  George's,  Rosemary 
Lane,  and  Kennington.  John  Pounds,  a  Portsmouth  cobbler,  was  the  founder  of  ragged  schools. 
Harlan  Page  consecrated  letter-writing  to  the  highest  end— the  salvation  of  souls." — Dr.  Steel. 

Handicraft.     '*  It  is  not  a  mean  thing  to  labour  with  the  hand.    There  is  a  dignity  in  every  duty, 
and  especially  in  this.     Since  the  Carpenter  of  Nazareth  toiled  at  his  bench  and  made  tools  for 
Galilean  peasants,  labour  has  had  a  dignity,  and  artisans  an  elevation,  and  workshops  a  consecration. 
After  this,  the  lantern-making  of  King  iEropus,  the  ship-building  of  the  Czar  Peter,  or  the  watch 
making  «f  the  Smptror  CharlM  Y.,  omld  do  littl*  U  •xalt  ii  "—i)r.  SteeL 

« 


82 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[OHAP.   IIL 


**  Let  not  ambition  mock  their  useful  toil, 
Their  homelv  joys,  and  destiny  obscure; 
Nor  grandeur  hear  with  a  disdainful  smile 
The  short  and  simple  annals  of  the  poor." 

Gray's  Elegjf, 

Thf  Old  Gate. 
iiL  6.     Moreover  the  old  gate  repaired  JeJioiada,  &c. 


Memory  needs  to  be  awakened.  For- 
getting may  be  impossible,  but  we  can- 
not always  recollect. 

Blmtration: — "  I  ara  convinced  that  the  dread 
book  of  account  which  the  Scriptures  speak  of  is, 
in  fact,  the  mind  itself  of  each  individual.  Of 
this  at  least  I  feel  assured,  that  there  is  no  such 
thing  2i9,  forgetting  possible  to  the  mind;  a 
thousand  accidents  may  and  will  interpose  a 
veil  between  our  present  consciousness  and  the 
secret  inscriptions  on  the  mind  ;  accidents  of  the 
same  sort  will  also  rend  away  this  veil ;  but 
alike,  whether  veiled  or  unveiled,  the  inscription 
remains  for  ever,  just  as  the  stars  seem  to  with- 
draw before  the  common  light  of  day,  whereas, 
in  fact,  we  all  know  that  it  is  the  light  which  is 
drawn  over  them  as  a  veil,  and  that  they  are 
waiting  to  be  revealed  when  the  obscuring  day- 
light shall  have  withdrawn."—  Be  Quincey. 

I.  The  old  gate  brought  up  memories 
of  the  PAST.  The  past  is  valuable. 
God  does  not  work  instantaneously. 
Instance  the  seasons.  Jewish  law  that 
the  land  should  rest  (Lev.  xxv.).  Our 
fathers  made  the  roads,  built  the 
churches,  founded  schools,  started  com- 
merce. Art,  science,  mechanical  inven- 
tions are  improvements.  We  build  upon 
the  past  as  on  a  bed  of  rock.    "  Custom 


passes  into  law  from  precedent  to  pre- 
cedent." Civilization  does  not  grow  up 
in  a  night,  like  Jonah's  gourd.  Right 
and  wrong  are  as  old  as  the  creation. 

Illustration  ;— "  Every  master  has  found  his 
materials  collected.  What  an  economy  of  power! 
and  what  a  compensation  for  the  shortness  of 
hfe  !  All  is  done  to  his  hand.  The  world  has 
brought  him  thus  far  on  his  way.  The  human 
race  has  gone  out  before  him,  sunk  the  hills, 
filled  the  hollows,  and  bridged  the  rivers.  Men, 
nations,  poets,  artisans,  women,  all  have  worked 
for  him,  and  he  enters  into  their  labours." — 
Emerson. 

II.  The  old  gate  was  an  incentive 
to  exertion  in  the  PEESENT.  Owr 
fathers'  gaM.  Patriotism  fired  their 
blood. 

III.  The  old  gate  was  a  dumb 
prophet  of  the  FUTURE.  The  builders 
were  gone,  but  their  work  abode.  So 
would  theirs.     So  wiU  ours. 

Application.  1.  Work,  for  Heaven  so 
wills.  2.  Work,  under  the  recollection 
that  you  are  treading  in  the  steps  of  the 
true  nobility  of  the  past.  3.  Work,  he- 
cause  the  day  is  passing.  4.  Work,  and 
eternity  shall  rewa/rd  you. 


The  Broad  Wall, 
iii.  8.     The  broad  loall. 


Around  Jerusalem  in  her  days  of 
splendour  there  was  a  broad  wall,  her 
defence  and  glory.  Jerusalem  is  a  type 
of  the  Church. 

A  broad  wall  suggests  separation, 
SECURITY,  and  enjoyment. 

I.  Separation.  1.  Every  Christian 
should  be  more  scrupulous  than  other  men 
in  his  dealings.  2.  By  his  pleasures  the 
Christian  should  he  distinguished.  3.  In 
everything  that  affects  the  Christian;  e.  g. 
home  business ;  going  in  and  coming  out; 
staying  a  night  in  a  friend's  house.     4. 


Most  conspicuously  in  the  spirit  of  his 
mind. 

The  wall  should  be  very  broad.  1. 
There  should  he  a  broad  distinction 
between  you  Christians  and  uyiconverted 
people,  2.  Our  Lord  Christ  had  a 
broad  wall  between  him  aitd  the  ungodly. 
3.  A  broad  wall  is  abundantly  good  for 
yourselves.  4.  You  loill  do  more  good  to 
the  world  thereby. 

II.  Safety.  1.  The  Christian  is  sur- 
rounded by  the  broad  wall  of  God's 
power.     2.  By  the  broad  wall  of  God'd 


OHAP.  in.] 


HOMILETIQ  QOMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


83 


love.  3.  By  the  broad  wall  of  Oo(JCs  law 
and  justice.  4.  By  the  broad  wall  of 
God's  immuf ability.  5.  By  the  broad  wall 
of  God's  electing  love.  6.  By  the  broad 
wall  of  God's  redeeming  love.  7.  The  work 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  broad  wall.  8. 
Every  doctrine  of  grace  is  a  broad  wall. 


9.  TJie  honour  of  Christ  is  a  broad  wall. 
III.  Enjoyment.  On  the  walls  of 
Mneveh  and  Babylon  men  drove, 
walked,  chatted  at  sunset.  Broad  walls 
at  York.  1.  Eest.  2.  Gommunion. 
3.  Prospects  and  outlook.  The  god- 
less ! — Spurgeon,  abridged. 


Family  Zeal. 
iii.  12.     Shallum  repaired — he  and  his  daughters. 


"Women  building  stone  walls.  Per- 
haps they  were  heiresses  or  rich  widows, 
who  undertook  to  defray  the  expense 
of  a  portion  of  the  wall.  Perhaps ! 
perhaps  not.  In  crises  women  have 
donned  armour  —  why  may  not  these 
have  wrought  at  the  walH  When 
men  have  shown  the  white  feather, 
women  have  turned  bold.  "  Women's 
rights."  The  story  of  women's  wrongs 
has  not  yet  been  told.  Woman's  in- 
fluence a  practical,  ever-pressing  ques- 
tion. 

1.  Notable  women.  1.  Within  the 
circle  of  Biblical  story.  "In  redemp- 
tion's history  we  have  Sarah's  faith,! 
Ruth's  devotion,  Abigail's  humility,! 
Shunammite's  hospitality,  Esther's  pa-i 
triotism,  penitence  of  her  anointing- 
Christ,  Canaanite's  importunity,  Mary  •; 
of  Bethany's  love,  Lydia's  confidence, ; 
Dorcas'  benevolence,  Phoebe's  kindness,  ] 
Priscilla's  courage,  Tryphena  and  Try -I 
phosa's  diligence,  and  Persis'  afifection — .• 
honoured  of  God." — Van  Dor  en.  » 

Most  books  of  the  Bible  canonize 
women.  Genesis,  Eve,  Rebekah,  Rachel. 
Exodus,  Miriam.  Judges,  Jephthah's 
daughter  and  the  poetess  Deborah. 
Solomon  sings  the  praises  of  a  good 
woman ;  and  the  Gospels  of  Jesus  contain 
Marys,  Martha,  and  the  unnamed  who 
ministered  to  him.  The  Epistles  teach 
women  their  duties,  and  reveal  the 
depth  of  their  influence  and  the  width 
of  their  power. 

2.  In  history.  The  mother  of  the 
Gracchi;  the  mother  of  the  Wesleys ; 
the  mother  of  St.  Augustine;  the 
mother  of  George  Washington.  Mar- 
tyred women;  songstresses.  Elizabeth 
Fry,   who  never  forgot  the  mother  in 


o  2 


the  philanthropist.  Madame  Guyon, 
whose  faith  she  thus  expressed  : 

'♦  To  me  remains  nor  place  nor  time, — 
My  country  is  in  every  clime  ; 
I  can  be  calm  and  free  from  care 
On  any  shore,  since  God  is  there." 

Countess  of  Huntingdon;  Lady  Mary 
Wortley  Montagu ;  and  time  would 
fail  us  to  tell  of  "  the  nameless"  whose 
records  are  on  high. 

II.  Woman's  influence.  1.  For  evil. 
Jezebel ;  Solomon's  wives ;  devotees  of 
fashion ;  women  who  spend  their  all  at 
the  gin-palace,  and  leave  their  children 
in  dirt  and  destitution.  A  man  must 
toil  without ;  a  woman  must  guard 
within.     2.  For  good. 

Application.  1.  Influence  is  not 
measurable  by  its  circumference.  May 
be  no  larger  than  a  house,  no  wider  than 
a  workshop.  2.  Every  mother  should 
be  a  missionary  to  her  children.  She 
may  save  her  husband  (1  Cor.  vii.  16). 
She  has  her  children  before  teachers  and 
ministers  can  influence  them.  To  them 
she  should  represent  God's  care  and 
Christ's  mind,  not  by  her  words  only, 
but  in  her  life.  ITothing  can  supersede 
the  religion  of  the  hearth. 

Illustrations:  —  *' One    third    more    females ^ 
church -members  than  males." — Edwards. 

"  The  commonest  and  the  least  remembered  of 
all  great-little  heroisms  is  the  hei-oism  of  an 
average  mother.  Ah,  when  I  think  of  that  last 
broad  fact  I  gather  hope  again  for  poor 
humanity,  and  this  dark  world  looks  bright, 
this  diseased  world  looks  wholesome  to  me  once 
more,  because,  whatever  it  is  or  is  not  full  of,  it  is 
at  least  full  of  mothers." — Charles  Kingsley. 

"  Be  good, .  sweet  maid,  and  '  let  who  can  be 
clever ; 
Do  lovely  things,  not  dream  them,  all  day  long ; 
And  so  make  life,  death,  and  that  vast  for  ever 
One  grand,  sweet  song." 

Charles  Kingalejf  to  his  niece. 


84 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


LoiiAP.  ni. 


High  Men  at  Lowly  Tasks. 
iii  13 — 19.     The  valley  gate  repaired  Hanurif  &c. 


The  fvsim  of  classes.  Ordinarily 
society  builds  a  broad  wall  betwixt  class 
and  class.  But  in  the  presence  of  a 
common  danger,  or  under  the  inspira- 
tion of  a  common  resolve,  men  break 
down  all  barriers,  and  stand  side  by 
side.  Too  often  ''the  kings  of  the  earth 
and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together 
against  the  cause  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  ii.) ; 
but  the  word  of  God  standeth  for  ever. 
"Kings  shall  see  and  arise,  princes  also 
shall  worship.  .  .  .  Kings  shall  be  thy 
nursing  fathers,  and  queens  thy  nursing 
mothers"  (Isa.  xlix.). 

I.  The  differences  and  unities  of  the 
race.  We  make  too  much  of  distinc- 
tions ;  e.  g.  rich  and  poor,  learned  and 
ignorant,  toilers  and  thinkers,  manufac- 
turers and  hands,  up-town  and  down- 
town. West-end  and  East-end.  One 
God  created  us,  one  cross  redeems  us, 
one  Spirit  inspires  us  ;  the  same  book 
teaches  us,  similar  demons  tempt  us, 
similar  sorrows  confront  us,  a  common 
grave  awaits  us,  the  same  heaven  is 
open  to  us.  Society  rings  itself  round. 
The  aristocracy  of  birth  says  of  the  aris- 
tocracy of  money,  "  Only  a  merchant." 
Better  that  emperor's  wife  who  often 
said  to  her  husband,  "  Remember  what 
you  were,  and  what  you  now  are,  and 
then  you  will  be  always  thankful  to 
God." 

II.    Historical  illustrations.      The 
Romans  called  rulers  ^^ fathers  of  their 
country^      The    Greeks    styled     them 
*'  shepherds  of  their  people."    Most  revo- 
lutions in  Church  and  State  have  ranged 
high  and  low  side  by  side.     Paul  was 
aided  by  "Erastus,  the  city  chamberlain" 
(Rom.   xvi.   23),  "  and  they  of  Caesar's 
household"    (Phil.    iv.    22).      The   Re- 
formation  was  indebted  to  the  Elector 
Frederick.      Lord    Cobham's    castle   af- 
forded   shelter    to    Lollard    preachers. 
England  owes  a   debt   of  gratitude   to 
"  Albert  the  Good  "  for  his  devotion  to 
science   and   art,   and   whatever   would 
ameliorate  the  people's  conditions. 


III.  Practical  purport.  1.  With 
honour  comes  responsibility.  May  I  not 
do  what  I  will  with  mine  own  %  No ; 
thou  art  only  a  steward.  Hast  thou 
wealth  %  The  poor  shall  never  cea.'^e  out 
of  the  land ;  they  are  lawful  claimants 
on  thy  sympathy.  Hast  thou  wisdom  ] 
Teach  the  ignorant,  guide  the  perplexed. 
Art  thou  elevated]  Stoop  to  those  who 
are  low,  lift  down  a  helping  hand  to 
those  who  have  stumbled  and  fallen. 

*'  Heaven  does  with  us  as  we  with  torches  do; 
Not  light  them  for  themselves;  for  if  our  virtues 
Did  not  go  forth  of  us,  'twere  all  alike 
As  if  we  had  them  not.     Spirits  are  not  finely 

touch'd 
But  to  fine  issues  ;  nor  Nature  never  lends 
The  smallest  scruple  of  her  excellence, 
But,  like  a  thrifty  goddess,  she  determines 
Herself  the  glory  of  a  creditor — 
Both  thanks  and  use." 

2.    Be    not    deceived    by   appearances. 
Not  what  a  man  hath^  but  what  a  man 
isy  determines  his  worth.    It  is  the  cause, 
not  the   suffering,   makes   the   martyr. 
The  motive  decides  the  action.     Pierce 
beneath  the  surface,  plant  thy  foot  on 
the  rock  of  reality.     3.   Gather  courage 
and  patience  from  the  thought  of  the 
future.     Look  unto  Jesus,  who  for  the 
joy  that  was  set  before  him  endured,  &c. 
(Heb.  xii.  2).    Remember  Moses  (Heb. 
xi.  26).     Whose  names  were  in  the  foun- 
dations of  the  city  of  vision  1    Not  the 
leaders  only  (Peter,  James,  and  John), 
but  "the  twelve  apostles"  (Rev.  xxi.  14). 
'*The  Holy  Ghost  hath  registered  unto 
us    the    names   and    diligence   of    the 
builders  of  this  earthly  city  Jerusalem, 
by  the  pen  of  his  faithful  servant  Nehe- 
miah,  for  our  comfort ;  and  to  teach  us 
that  much  more  he  hath  registered  the 
names  of  the  builders  of  the  spiritual 
Jerusalem  in  the  book  of  life,  where  no 
devil  can  scrape  them  out,  but  shall  be 
the   dear   children   of    the   Lord   God, 
defended  by  him  from  all  ill.     Let  us 
therefore  cast  away  this  slothful  sluggish- 
ness wherein  we  have  lain  so  long,  rise 
up  quickly,  work  lustily,  spit  on  oui 


CHAP.  III.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  85 


hands  and  take  good  hold,  that  we  fall    house  than  to  live  the  easiest  life  that 
not  back  again  from  our  Lord  God.     It    the  world  can  give." — Pilkington. 
is  more  honour  to  be  a  workman  in  thig 

David  the  National  Hero. 
iii.  15.     The  city  of  David,     iii.  16.    The  sepulchres  of  Dmid, 

They  were  working  on  sacred  ground.  Hence  their  enthusiasm.  Effort  must 
have  inspiration.  This  city  David  conquered ;  he  beautified  it ;  here  he  reigned  ; 
here  he  sleeps.  They  did  not  stay  to  shape  such  thoughts  as  these.  They  were 
instincts.  Patriotism  lives  not  by  bread  only,  but  by  sentiments,  by  every  word 
that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  good  king  and  wise  teacher  in  the  ages  past. 
Theme,  David's  life-work  the  basis  of  national  hero-worship. 

I.  Preparing  for  a  throne.  '*  He  that  is  born  is  listed ;  life  is  war."  "  The 
foundation  of  David's  character  is  a  firm,  unshaken  trust  in  Jehovah,  a  bright  and 
most  spiritual  view  of  creation  and  the  government  of  the  world,  a  sensitive  awe 
of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  a  striving  ever  to  be  true  to  him,  and  a  strong  desire 
to  return  after  errors  and  transgressions." — Ewald.  Ps.  Ixxviil  70  tells  how 
David  was  God's  elected  king.  The  prophet  Samuel  shaped  the  character  of  the 
period.  His  work  was  long  developing.  Takes  months  for  common  seed  to  grow. 
Samuel  cast  seed  into  God's  world-field ;  David  and  Solomon  put  in  the  sickle  and 
reaped.  What  of  thati  Sower  and  reaper  equally  indispensable  (John  iv. 
36 — 38).  David  had  a  creative  faculty — he  was  the  poet  of  song.  We  have 
"  the  book  of  the  chronicles  "  of  King  David  ;  we  have,  too,  the  books  of  psalms, 
hymns,  and  spiritual  songs  he  sang  and  wrote.  Saul's  fatal  day  not  the  day  of 
the  battle  of  Gilboa,  but  the  day  of  the  battle  with  Amalek ;  not  the  day  when 
Saul  died,  but  the  day  when  Saul  disobeyed,  led  to  David's  election  and  anointing. 
The  story  is  told  in  the  Book  of  Samuel  (I.  xvi.).  Eliab  is  rejected.  The  height  of 
a  man's  stature  and  the  beauty  of  his  countenance  shall  not  henceforth  be  signs  in- 
fallible that  God  has  endowed  that  man  with  kingly  qualities.  God-elected  shall 
be  God-endowed.  That  day  David  anointed,  but  God's  hand  had  been  upon  him 
in  the  pastures  of  Bethlehem.  There  he  thought  out,  if  he  did  not  write,  Ps.  xxiii. 
There  he  discerned  a  presence  which  beset  him  behind  and  before  (Ps.  cxxxix.). 
To  him  the  heavens  declared  God.  How  perfect  God's  law  was,  and  what  God's 
fear  meant,  he  was  being  taught  by  the  order  of  God  in  nature;  how  guilty  and 
feeble  he  was,  he  was  being  taught  by  the  voice  of  God  in  his  own  conscience 
(Ps.  xix.).  David's  God  was  a  living,  ever-present,  helping  God  (Ps.  xxvii.). 
Froon  the  sheepfolds  David  came  to  encounter  Goliath.  From  the  sheepfolds  he  was 
summoned  to  he  ha/rp-player  to  King  Saul.  He  was  anointed,  but  not  enthroned. 
He  must  learn  to  wait.  God  never  extemporizes.  "  Soon  ripe,  soon  rot."  Moses 
eighty  years  of  preparation.  Elijah  a  full-grown  man  before  he  appears  in  sacred 
history.  Jesus  Christ  eighteen  quiet,  uneventful  years  after  seeing  the  holy  city, 
and  afterwards  forty  days  in  wilderness.  The  harvest  of  God  in  human  souls  ripens 
slowly.  As  David  thought  of  his  great  work,  and  felt  himself  a  child  with  a  giant's 
task,  he  said,  "  0  Lord,  our  Lord,  how  excellent  is  thy  name  in  all  the  earth !  who 
hast  set  thy  glory  above  the  heavens.  Out  of  the  mouth  of  babes  and  sucklings 
hast  thou  ordained  strength"  (Ps.  viii.).  He  recollected  the  storms  he  had  witnessed 
as  he  watched  the  sheep  when  he  wrote  Ps.  xxix.  But  after  the  longest  night  the 
morning  breaks.  David  was  called  to  the  court  as  harp-player  to  King  Saul. 
Saul's  servants  described  David  to  the  king  as  **  a  son  of  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite, 
that  is  cunning  in  playing"  (1  Sam.  xvi.  18).  David  was  an  artist,  as  we  now 
speak.  In  Eastern  lands  shepherd-life  and  songs  have  always  gone  together.  The 
elected  king  is  harpist  to  the  enthroned  king.  How  slowly  David  ascended  the 
steps  to  the  throne.  We,  who  look  back,  see  some  reasons  why  ascent  was  gradual. 
In  the  pastures  he  had  time  to  think;  m  the  oourt  h«  had  opportunity  to  obsm-ve. 


86  BOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEBEMIAH.  [oHA^.  m. 


David's  harp  quieted  Saul's  excitement  (1  Sam.  xvi.  23)  ;  David's  harp  helped  him 
to  compose  his  Psalms  for  the  song-life  of  the  Church  universal.  His  chequered  life 
fore-shadowed  in  Saul's  court.  To-day  the  king's  bosom  friend,  to-morrow  the  butt 
for  the  king's  javelin.  The  love  of  David  and  Jonathan  the  one  bright  and  beauti- 
ful thing.  Purer  and  more  constant  friendship  was  never  known.  "With  his 
escape  from  Saul's  court  began — 

II.  The  work  and  warfare  of  David's  life.  1.  As  a  freebooter.  2.  As  king. 
1.  As  a  freebooter  Cave  of  Adullam  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1,  2).  Wild  wilderness  life. 
Hunted  by  Saul  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  25 — 29 ;  xxiv.  8 — 22).  Saul's  hope  failed  him 
in  the  hour  of  need,  and  he  fell  on  Gilboa's  fatal  field.  2.  David  was  king.  Pirst 
over  Judah,  then  over  all  Israel.  David's  reign  was  one  of  creation ;  Solomon's 
was  one  of  consolidation.  A  brilliant  reign  of  a  great  and  good  man ;  but,  like 
all  things  human,  not  without  fault  (2  Sam.  xi. ;  1  Chron.  xxi.).  The  fifty-first 
Psalm  the  cry  of  this  kingly  penitent.  But  did  "  the  free  spirit  "  ever  come  back 
again  as  in  the  earlier  days  1  However,  Carlyle's  words  are  both  wise  and  chari- 
table. "  Who  is  called  '  the  man  after  God's  own  heart '  ?  David,  the  Hebre  vv 
king,  had  fallen  into  sins  enough — blackest  crimes — there  was  no  want  of  sin ; 
and  therefore  the  unbelievers  sneer,  and  ask,  *  Is  this  your  man  according  to  God's 
heart  % '  The  sneer,  I  must  say,  seems  to  me  but  a  shallow  one.  What  are  faults, 
what  are  the  outward  details  of  a  life,  if  the  inner  secret  of  it,  the  remorse,  tempt- 
ations, the  often-baffled,  never-ended  struggle  of  it  be  forgotten  %  David's  life  and 
history,  as  written  for  us  in  those  Psalms  of  his,  I  consider  to  be  the  truest  emblem 
ever  given  us  of  a  man's  moral  progress  and  warfare  here  below.  All  earnest  souls 
will  ever  discern  in  it  the  faithful  struggle  of  an  earnest  human  soul  towards  what 
is  good  and  best.  Struggle  often  baffled,  sore  baffled,  driven  as  into  entire  wreck  ; 
yet  a  struggle  never  ended,  ever  with  tears,  repentance,  true,  unconquerable  purpose 
begun  anew."  He  died  full  of  age  and  honours,  and  his  sepulchre  Nehemiah  looked 
upon  with  reverence,  Peter  the  apostle  spoke  of  with  exultation,  and  to  it  the  feet 
of  countless  thousands  of  weary  pilgrims  have  been  directed, 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

A  true  man.—  "  Every  true  man  is  a  cause,  a  country,  and  an  age ;  requires  infinite  spaces  and 
numbers  and  time  fully  to  accomplish  his  design  ;  and  posterity  seem  to  follow  his  steps  as  a  train 
of  clients.  A  man  Caesar  is  born,  and  for  ages  after  we  have  a  Eoman  empire.  An  institution  is 
the  lengthened  shadow  of  one  man  :  as  monachism  of  the  hermit  Antony  ;  the  Reformation,  of 
T.uther ;  Quakerism,  of  Fox  ;  Methodism,  of  Wesley  ;  Abolition,  of  Clarkson.  Scipio,  Milton  called 
'  the  height  of  Rome ; '  and  all  history  resolves  itself  very  easily  into  the  biography  of  a  few 
stout  and  earnest  persons." — Emerson. 

Sepulchres. — *'  Next  to  the  wells  of  Syria,  the  most  authentic  memorials  of  past  times  are  the 
sepulchres,  and  partly  for  the  same  reason.  The  tombs  of  ancient  Greece  and  Rome  lined  the 
public  roads  with  funeral  pillars  or  towers.  Grassy  graves  and  marble  monuments  fill  the  church- 
yards and  churches  of  Christian  Europe.  But  the  sepulchres  of  Palestine  were  like  the  habit- 
ations of  its  earliest  inhabitants,  hewn  out  of  the  living  limestone  rock,  and  therefore  in- 
destructible as  the  rock  itself.  In  this  respect  they  resembled,  though  on  a  smaller  scale,  the 
tombs  of  Upper  Egypt ;  and  as  there  the  traveller  of  the  nineteenth  century  is  confronted  wiih 
the  names  and  records  of  men  who  lived  thousands  of  years  ago,  so  also  in  the  excavations  of  the 
valleys  which  surround  or  approach  Shiloh,  Shechem,  Bethel,  and  Jerusalem  he  knows  that  he 
sees  what  were  the  last  resting-places  of  the  generations  contemporary  with  Joshua,  Samuel,  and 
David,  And  the  example  of  Egypt  shows  that  the  identification  of  these  sepulchres  even  with  their 
individual  occupants  is  not  so  improbable  as  might  be  otherwise  supposed.  If  the  graves  of 
Rameses  and  Osirei  can  still  be  ascertained,  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  thought  that  the 
tombs  of  the  patriarchs  may  have  survived  the  lapse  of  twenty  or  thirty  centuries.  The  rocky  cave 
on  Mount  Hor  must  be  at  least  the  spot  believed  by  Josephus  to  mark  the  grave  of  Aaron.  The 
tomb  of  Joseph  must  be  near  one  of  the  two  monuments  pointed  out  as  such  in  the  opening  of  the 
vale  of  Shechem.  The  sepulchre  which  is  called  the  tomb  of  Rachel  exactly  agrees  with  the 
spot  described  as  *  a  little  way '  from  Bethlehem.  The  tomb  of  David,  which  was  known  with 
certainty  at  the  time  of  the  Christian  era,  may  perhaps  still  be  found  under  the  mosque  which  bears 
his  name  in  the  modern  Zion.  Above  all,  the  cave  of  Machpelah  is  concealed,  beyond  all  reasonable 
doubt,  by  the  mosque  at  Hebron.  But,  with  these  exceptions,  we  must  rest  satisfied  rather  with  the 
general  than  the  particular  int«rest  of  the  tombs  of  Palestine."— /5<a«%'«  *  Sinai  and  Falettine.' 


OHAP.  III.] 


HOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


87 


The  Workmen's  Day-Book. 
iil  20—32.     After  him  Ba/ruch  the  son  of  Zabhai,  &c. 


I.  Every  man  is  carefully  credited 
with  his  own  tasks  and  achievements. 

Rulers,  priests,  slaves  (N"ethinini3),  men, 
women  (ver.  12).  Nobody  is  forgotten. 
The  humblest  not  passed  by  in  con- 
temptuous silence. 

II.  Special  honour  is  accorded 
ppecial  work.  Levites  and  priests 
began  at  the  temple,  but  did  not  stop 
there  (vers.  22, 28).  Zabbai,  who  earnest- 
ly repaired  a  second  piece,  having  com- 
pleted his  task  did  not  fold  his  arms, 
but  went  with  open  eyes  and  willing 
hands  to  seek  another  task.  The  gold- 
smiths and  the  temple  traders  came 
down  to  the  wall  not  to  inspect,  but 
labour  (vers.  31,  32). 

III.  Regard  is  had  to  the  men  of 
practical  wisdom.  Benjamin  and  others 
built  over  against  their  house  (vers.  23, 28, 
29).  MeshuUam  built  over  against  his 
chamber  (ver.  30).      Perhaps  he  was  a 


lodger,  (a)  They  were  men  of  practical 
sense.  Work  was  near  at  hand ;  why  go 
abroad  1  "  There  are  many  Christians 
who  can  never  find  a  place  large  enough 
to  do  their  duty.  Some  Churches  seem 
to  feel  that  if  anything^  is  to  be  done 
some  great  operation  must  be  started. 
They  cannot  even  repent  without  con- 
cert and  a  general  ado," — Bushnell. 
(b)  These  men  found  here  an  inspiration 
for  effort — tJie  defence  of  home.  With 
practical  enthusiasm,  Hananiah  and 
others  built  "  another  piece."  All  can- 
not keep  the  same  pace,  but  all  can 
build. 

Let  us  hear  the  conclusion  of  the 
whole  matter.  **  The  Son  of  man  shall 
come  .  .  .  and  then  he  shall  reward 
every  man  according  to  his  works " 
(Matt.  xvi.  27).  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I  wUl  give  thee  a  crown  of 
Ufe"  (Rev.  ii.  10). 


ADDENDA  TO  CHAPTER  IIL 

Topography  op  the  Book  of  Nehemiah. 

^  The  only  description  of  the  ancient     Nehemiah,  and   although  it   is  hardly 
city  of  Jerusalem  which  exists  in  the     sufficiently  distinct  to  enable  us  to  settle 


FISH  CAT E 


OLD  XGATE 


GATE  OF/EPHRAIM 


TOWER  OF^ANANEEL 
TOWER  Or-MEAH 


BROAD   WALL 


iTOWER  OF  FURNACES 


VALLEy  ysGATE 


SHEEP  \GATE 


PIS  ON  GATE 


STAfRS  OF  CITY  OF 
/    WATER  GATE 


FOUNTAIN/GATE 


QUNO  )/CATE 


Bible  so  extensive  in  form  as  to  enable  all  the  moot  points,  it  contains  such 
us  to  follow  it  as  a  topographical  de-  valuable  indications  that  it  is  well 
scnption  is  that  found  in  the  Book  of     worthy  of  the  most  attentive  examina 


88  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEEEMIAR.  [ohap.  nr 


tion.     The  easiest  way  to  arrive  at  any  Between  these  last  two  places  we  find 

correct  conclusion  regarding  it,  is  to  take  mention  made  of  the  pool  of  Siloah  and 

first  the  description  of  the  dedication  of  the  king's  garden,  so  that  we  have  long 

the    walls   in   ch.    xii.    (31 — 40),   and,  passed  the  so-called  sepulchre  of  David 

drawin<y   such    a   diagram   as   this,    we  on   the   modern    Zion,  and    are  in  the 

easily  get  at  the  main  features  of  the  immediate    proximity   of    the    temple  ; 

old  wall  at  least.  most  probably  in  the  valley  between  the 

The  order  of  procession  was  that  the  city  of  David  and  the  city  of  Jerusalem, 

princes  of  Judah  went  up  upon  the  wall  What  follows  is  most  important  (ver. 

at   some    point    as   nearly  as   possible  16):    "After    him   repaired   Nehemiah 

opposite  to  the  temple,  and  one  half  of  the  son  of  Azbuk,  the  ruler  of  the  half 

them  turning  to  the  right  went  towards  part  of   Bethzur,  unto   the   place  over 

the   dung  gate,  "  and   at   the   fountain  against  the  sepulchres  of  David,  and  to 

crate,  which  was  over  against  them  "  (or,  the  pool  that  was  made,  and  unto  the 

in  other  words,  on  the  opposite  or  temple  house  of   the    mighty."     This   passage, 

side  of  the  city),  "  went  up  by  the  stairs  when  taken  with  the  context,  seems  in 

of  the  city  of  David  at  the  going  up  of  itself  quite  sufficient  to  set  at  rest  the 

the   wall,   above   the  house   of   David,  question  of  the  position  of  the  city  of 

even  unto  the  water  gate  eastward."  The  David,  of  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings, 

water  gate,  therefore,   was   one   of   the  and   consequently   of    Zion,   all   which 

southern  gates  of  the  temple,  and  the  could  not  be  mentioned  after  Siloah  if 

stairs  that  led  up  to  it  are  here  identified  placed     where    modern    tradition     has 

with  those  of  the  city  of  David,  and  located  them, 
consequently  with  Zion.  If  the   chapter  ended  with  the  six- 

The  other  party  turned  to  the  left,  or  teenth  verse  there  would  be  no  difficulty 

northwards,  and  passed  from  beyond  the  in  determining  the  sites  mentioned  above, 

tower  of  the  furnaces  even  "unto  the  but   unfortunately  we   have,   according 

broad   wall,"   and   passing  the   gate  of  to   this   view,  retraced   our   steps  very 

Ephraim,  the  old  gate,  the  fish  gate,  the  nearly   to    the    point    from   which   we 

towers  of  Hananeel  and  Meah,  to  the  started,  and  have  got  through  only  half 

sheep  gate,  '*  stood  still   in  the  prison  the  places  enumerated.    Two  hypotheses 

gate,"   as    the   other   party  had  in  the  may  be  suggested   to  account   for  this 

water  gate.     "  So  stood   the  two  com-  difficulty  :  the  one,  that  there  was  then, 

panies  of  them  that  gave  thanks  in  the  as  in   the  time  of   Josephus,  a  second 

house  of  God."  wall,    and     that   the   remaining   names 

If  from  this  we  turn  to  the  third  refer  to  it ;  the  other,  that  the  first  six- 
chapter,  which  gives  a  description  of  the  teen  verses  refer  to  the  walls  of  Jerusa- 
repairs  of  the  wall,  we  have  no  difficulty  lem,  and  the  remaining  sixteen  to  those 
in  identifying  all  the  places  mentioned  of  the  city  of  David.  An  attentive 
in  the  first  sixteen  verses  with  those  consideration  of  the  subject  renders  it 
enumerated  in  the  twelfth  chapter.  The  almost  certain  that  the  latter  is  the  true 
repairs  began  at  the  sheep  gate  on  the  explanation  of  the  case.  In  the  enumer- 
north  side,  and  in  immediate  proximity  ation  of  the  places  repaired,  in  the  last 
with  the  temple,  and  all  the  places  part  of  the  chapter,  we  have  two  which 
named  in  the  dedication  are  again  named,  we  know,  from  the  description  of  the 
but  in  the  reverse  order,  till  we  come  to  dedication,  really  belonged  to  the  temple, 
the  tower  of  the  furnaces,  which,  if  not  The  prison  court  (iii.  25),  which  must 
identical  with  the  tower  in  the  citadel,  have  been  connected  with  the  prison 
so  often  mistaken  for  the  Hippicus,  must  gate,  and,  as  shown  by  the  order  of  the 
at  least  have  stood  very  near  to  it.  dedication,  to  have  been  on  the  north 
Mention  is  then  made,  but  now  in  the  side  of  the  temple,  is  here  also  connected 
direct  order  of  the  dedication,  of  "  the  with  the  king's  high  house ;  all  this 
valley  gate,"  the  "  dung  gate,"  the  clearly  referring,  as  shown  above,  to  the 
"  fountain  gate ; "  and  lastly,  the  "  stairs  castle  of  David,  which  originally  occu- 
that  go  down  from  the  city  of  David."  pi«d  th«  site  of  the  Turris  Antonia.  We 


CHAP,  m.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTABY:  NEHEMIAH,  89 

have  on  the  opposite    side  the  "  water  whether  the  order  of  description  of  the 

gate,"  mentioned   in  the  next  verse  to  places  mentioned  after  ver.  16  proceeds 

Ophel,    and     consequently    as     clearly  along  the  northern  face,  and  round  by 

identified  with  the  southern  gate  of  the  Ophel,  and  up  behind  the  temple  back 

temple.     We  have  also  the  horse  gate,  to   the    sheep  gate ;    or   whether,  after 

that  by  which  Athaliah  was  taken  out  crossing  the  causeway  to  the  armoury 

of  the  temple  (2  Kings  xi.  16;  2  Chron.  and   prison,  it  does  not  proceed  along 

xxiii.  15),  which  Josephus  states  led  to  the  western  face  of  the  temple  to  Ophel 

the  Kedron,  and  which  is  here  mentioned  in  the  south,  and  then,  along  the  eastern 

as  connected  with  the  priests'  houses,  face,  back   along   the   northern,  to  the 

and   probably,  therefore,  a  part  of  the  place  from  which  the  description  started, 

temple.     Mention  is  also  made  of   the  The    latter   seems    the    more    probable 

house  of  Eliashib  the  high  priest,  and  hypothesis,  but  the  determination  of  the 

of  the  eastern  gate,  probably  that  of  the  point  is  not  of  very  great  consequence, 

temple.     In  fact,  no  place  is  mentioned  It  is  enough  to  know  that  the  description 

in  these  last   verses  which    cannot   be  in   the   first   sixteen   verses   applies  to 

more  or  less  directly  identified  with  the  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  last  sixteen  to 

localities  on  the  temple  hill,  and  not  one  Zion,  or  the  city  of   David,  as  this  is 

which  can  be  located  in  Jerusalem.   The  sufficient  to  explain  almost  all  the  diffi- 

whole  of  the  city  of  David,  however,  cult    passages    in   the   Old    Testament 

was  so  completely  rebuilt  and  remodelled  which  refer  to  the  ancient  topography 

by  Herod  that  there  are  no  local  indi-  of  the  city. — Fergusson  in  Smith! s^  Bible 

cations    to    assist    us    in    ascertaining  Dictionary* 

MoDEBN  Jerusalem. 

The  first  sight  of  Jerusalem  as  seen  of  David  and  Isaiah,  were  not,  as  in 
from  the  south,  the  first  moment  when  Greece,  the  ofispring  of  oracular  clifis 
from  the  ridge  of  hills  which  divide  the  and  grottos,  but  the  simple  outpouring 
valley  of  Rephaim  from  the  valley  of  of  souls  which  thought  of  nothing  but 
Bethlehem  one  sees  the  white  line  God  and  man.  It  is  not,  however,  in- 
crowning  the  horizon,  and  knows  that  it  consistent  with  this  view  to  add,  that 
is  Jerusalem,  is  a  moment  never  to  be  though  not  romantic,  though  at  first 
forgotten.  But  there  is  nothing  in  the  sight  bare  and  prosaic  in  the  extreme, 
view  itself  to  excite  your  feelings.  Nor  there  does  at  last  grow  up  about  Jera- 
is  there  even  when  the  Mount  of  Olives  salem  a  beauty  as  poetical  as  that  which 
heaves  in  sight,  nor  when  "  the  horses'  hangs  over  Athens  and  Rome.  First, 
hoofs  ring  on  the  stones  of  the  streets  of  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  venerable. 
Jerusalem."  Nor  is  there  in  the  sur-  Modern  houses  it  is  true  there  are ;  the 
rounding  outline  of  hills  on  the  distant  interiors  of  the  streets  are  modern.  The 
horizon.  Nebi-Samuel  is  indeed  a  high  old  city  itself  (and  I  felt  a  constant 
and  distinguished  point,  and  Ramah  and  satisfaction  in  the  thought)  lies  buried 
Gibeah  both  stand  out,  but  they  and  twenty,  thirty,  forty  feet  below  these 
all  the  rest  in  some  degree  partake  of  wretched  shops  and  receptacles  for  Anglo- 
that  featureless  character  which  belongs  Oriental  conveniences.  But  still,  as  you 
to  all  the  hills  of  Judaea.  look  at  it  from  any  commanding  point. 

In  one  respect  no  one  need  quarrel  with  within   or  without  the  walls,  you   are 

this  first  aspect  of  Jerusalem.     So  far  as  struck  by  the  gray  ruinous  masses  of 

localities  have  any  concern  with  religion,  which  it  is  made  up ;  it  is  the  ruin,  in 

it  is  well  to  feel  that  Christianity,  even  fact,  of  the  old  Jerusalem  on  which  you 

in  its  first  origin,  was  nurtured  in  no  look — the  stones,  the  columns ;  the  very 

romantic  scenery ;  that  the  discourses  in  soil  on  which  you  tread  is  the  accumu- 

the  walks  to  and  from  Bethany,  and  in  lation  of  nearly  three  thousand  years, 

earlier  times  the  psalms  and  prophecies  And  as  with  the  city,  so  it  is  with  the 


90  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  ni. 

view  of  the  country  round  it.     There  is,  for  here  it   is  not   merely  the  fortress 

as  I  have  said,  no  beauty  of  form  or  but  the  city,  which  is  thus  surrounded 

outhne,  but  there  is  nothing  to  disturb  and  entangled  with  natural  fosses  •  and 

tlie  thought  of  the  hoary  age  of  those  this  when  seen  from  the  walls  esoeciallv 

ancient  hills;   and  the  interest  of  the  from   the   walls  on  the  northern  side 

past,  even  to  the  hardest  mind,  will  in  and  when  combined  with  the  lisht  and 

spite  of  themselves  invest  them  with  a  shade  of  evening,  gives  the  whole  place 

glory  of  their  own  ,..  ^  ^""^'J  "f  colour  and  of  level  Lly 

Ihe  view  of  the  Moab  mountains  is  sufficient  to  relieve  the  monotony  which 

constantly  intermingle.!  with  the  views  else  it  would  share  with  other  Eastern 

of  Jerusalem  Itself.     From  almost  every  cities.     And,  thirdly,  it  must  be  remem 

point  there  was  visible  that  long  purple  bered  that  there  is  one  approach  whidr 

wal      rising  out    of    its   unfathomable  is   really  grand,  namely,   from  Jericho 

fbL  f    i^    "l/TT    T^^    interesting  and  Bethany.     It  is  the  approach  by 

than  to  the  old  Jebusites  or  Israelites,  which  the  army  of  Pompey  advanced  - 

They  knew  the  tribes  who  lived  there;  the  first  European  army  tLt  ever  co- 

BuTto  thpTr  K^r^'J  '^r  ^^^'^^f^^-  ^^"'^-^  ^''-^^^  '*  ^^  the  approach  of  the 

But  to  the  inhabitants  of  modern  Jem-  triumphal  entry  of  the  gospels.  Probablv 

salem,  of  whom  comparatively  few  have  the  first  impression  of  every  onf  comin^ 

ever  visited  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan,  from  the  north,  the  west,  and  the  sS 

It  IS  the  end  of  the  world  ;  and  to  them,  may  be  summed  up  in  the  simple  ex- 

to  us  these  mountains  have  almost  the  pression   used   by  one  of  the   modem 

effect  of  a  distant  view  of  the  sea ;  the  travellers,  "  I  am  strangely  affectTd  but 

hues  constantly  changing,  this   or  that  greatly  disappointed."  °  But  no  human 

precipitous  rock  coming  out  clear  in  the  being  could   be  disappointed  who  fiS 

morning  or   evening  shade-there   the  saw  Jerusalem    from    the    east       The 

form  of  what  may  possibly  be  Pisgah,  beauty  consists  in  this,  that  vou  then 

dmily  shadowed    out    by  surrounding  burst  at  once  on  the  t;o  ^eatTavTnes 

oZ^\         Moab   and   fortress   of    the  ing  table-land,  and  that  then  only  you 

,n  r  T"'!^  *""  "'  *''"*'  "11  ^"^"P'  ^"^^^  ^  "o^Pl^te  view  of  the  mosq^ue^ o" 

he  vaUev 'of  tt  """f '^^'^^,°7*?"ging  Omar.  The  other  buildings  of  Jerusalem 

aUtheZrlt   t-     %    '  of  death,  and  which  emerge   from  the  mass  of  gray 

w  th  tb^l  "^  ^""^  ^^'"  ""f'"^^  ™'"  ^""^  ^'"te  stones  are  few,  and  for 

Mis    and  7r  J  ^'""^  "'^'^rJ  *u  '^'  """'  P"'  unattractive,     lie  white 

which  vou  ca^h  ;r  r""     '    fT^^  "'^^  "*  ^^^  ^™''"'""  '"^^^^^  on  the 

Next  tC  11^        ^f™P''.  1  *1'T-  T^^'  ^"'^  *^  •l'""^  °f  th«  ^0B<i»e  of 

Thk  ;!    f     "-^^'he  ravines  of  the  city.  David;  the  castle,  with  Herod's  tower 

St  pL'n^        ,"''"'".  /^'^^  ^r  °^    °"    the   south-west   comer;    the      wo 
thn,fX  T  °'""'  observed  to  me  that  he     domes,  black  and  white,  which  surmount 

alem  iL  siZr  ^"^a'"^'  \'  ^^^  ^''^'-  '^'  ^"^^  Sepulchre  and  the  Bas  Hca  o 
xtent^t  s  T  d  ^  "°  ^  f,  "7"^^  Constantine ;  the  green  com-fleld  which 
ravines  of  Tel  1  "  •"«*"  «iat  the  covers  the  ruins  of  the  palace  of  the 
abruDt  a,  fZ  f'r^'^  ^J"'"^  t"^  ^"'S^^*^  °f  «'•  J°h»;  'he  long  yellow 
therfi,?,,"  °^  Luxembourg,  but  mass  of  the  Latin  consent  at  the  north- 
baldness  otheT  T  ""'  Y'T''  '^^  '"''^  '°''"'''  ^"<1  the  gray  tower  of  the 
baldness  of  the  level  approach,  the  walls  mosque  of   the  Dervishes  on   the   tra- 

taWe  kn^  'f '/".T  °^^  "^^'  "^  *^  -ll*'-"^!  '"«   of  the   palace   of    Herod 

rav  ne     of    ffii       "   '^\^u\  ^'T'  ^"^^P^'  '°  '^^  ""^'■^'^'^^t  'corner;  these 

open  nl  betw^  nT,  '".  ,  J«l>°f  ^^^P^at  are  the  only  objects  which  break  from 

ZTn    thp   ?      ^1       °'l  *^  ""y-  ^""^  ^""°»^  Po»ts  the  sloping  or  level  lines 

San  s   to   the   nZ    TT'    "'''  of  the  city  of  the  CrusideS  and  Saracens 

fatl^secLc-  thl  citvT.f     T^y^P."^""-  ^»t  "one  of  these  is  enough  to  elevate 

inwrsecting  the  city  itself.     In  this  re-  its    character.      What,   however    these 

epeet  I  ueyer  saw  a  town  so  situated,  faU  to  effect  i«  ia  on;  insist  kected 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIG  GOMMENTABY:  NEHEMIAH,  91 


by  a  glance  at  the  mosque  of  Omar,  like  ghosts  up  and  down  the  green  slope, 
From  whatever  point  that  graceful  dome  or  by  the  turbaned  heads  bowed  low  in 
with  its  beautiful  precinct  emerges  to  the  various  niches  for  prayer, — this  is 
view,  it  at  once  dignifies  the  whole  city,  the  mosque  of  Omar,  the  Haram  es- 
And  when  from  Olivet,  or  from  the  Shertf,  "  the  noble  sanctuary ; "  the 
governor's  house,  or  from  the  north-east  second  most  sacred  spot  in  the  •  Ma- 
wall,  you  see  the  platform  on  which  it  hometan  world — that  is,  the  next  after 
stands,  it  is  a  scene  hardly  to  be  sur-  Mecca;  the  second  most  beautiful 
passed.  A  dome  graceful  as  that  of  St.  mosque — that  is,  the  next  after  Cor- 
Peter's,  though  of  course  on  a  far  smaller  dova.  I,  for  one,  felt  almost  disposed 
scale,  rising  from  an  elaborately-finished  to  console  myself  for  the  exclusion  by 
circular  edifice;  this  edifice  raised  on  a  the  additional  interest  which  the  sight 
square  marble  platform  rising  on  the  derives  from  the  knowledge  that  no 
highest  ridge  of  a  green  slope,  which  European  foot,  except  by  stealth  or 
descends  from  it  north,  south,  and  east  favour,  had  ever  trodden  within  these 
to  the  walls  surrounding  the  whole  precincts  since  the  Crusaders  were  driven 
enclosure ;  platform  and  enclosure  di-  out,  and  that  their  deep  seclusion  was  as 
versified  by  lesser  domes  and  fountains,  real  as  it  appeared.  It  needed  no  sight 
by  cypresses,  and  olives,  and  planes,  of  the  daggers  of  the  black  Dervishes 
and  palms ;  the  whole  as  secluded  and  who  stand  at  the  gates  to  tell  you  that 
quiet  as  the  interior  of  some  college  or  the  mosque  was  undisturbed  and  i» 
cathedral  garden,  only  enlivened  by  the  violably  sacred. — Dean  Stanley. 
white  figures  of  veiled  women  stealing 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ExPLANATOBY  NoTES.]  Vers.  1 — 6  are  in  the  Hebrew  vers.  33 — 38  of  chap.  iii.  1.  Sanballat] 
See  on  chap.  ii.  10.  That  we  builded  the  wall]  That  we  were  building  it  (participle  expresses 
not  merely  resolve,  but  act  of  commencing).  Mocked]  Afraid  to  use  violence.  2.  Before  his 
brethren]  i.  e.  Tobiah  and  his  brethren  in  council.  The  army  of  Samaria]  It  is  likely  that 
Sanballat  had  brought  an  armed  force  in  sight  of  the  city.  What  do  these  feeble  Jews  ?  «fec.] 
Keil  makes  two  pairs  of  questions.  Will  they  leave  the  building  of  the  fortified  walls  to  them- 
selves? i.  e.  Do  they  think  they  are  able  with  their  poor  resources  to  carry  out  this  great  work.^ 
Will  they  sacrifice  ?  i.  e.  bring  sacrifices  to  obtain  God's  miraculous  assistance  ?  Sanballat  casts 
scorn  upon  the  Jews'  ability  and  upon  their  faith  in  God.  Second  pair  of  questions :  Will  they 
finish  the  work  to-day,  directly  ?  Have  they  even  the  requisite  materials }  Will  they  revive  ?  &c. 
The  building-stone  of  Jerusalem  was  limestone,  which,  softened  by  fire,  loses  its  vitality.  3.  Tobiah] 
See  on  chap.  ii.  10.  If  a  fox  go  up]  Foxes  in  great  numbers  infested  the  ruined  and  desolate 
places  in  the  mount  and  city  of  Zion  (Lam.  v.  18).  4.  Hear,  0  our  God]  An  imprecatory  prayer 
anticipating  God's  justice.  5.  Covernot]  «.  <?.  forgive  not  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  2).  6.  All  the  wall  was  joined 
together  unto  the  half  thereof]  Completed  to  the  half  of  the  intended  height.  7.  The  Arabians] 
Those  in  Samaria.  See  on  chap.  ii.  19.  The  Ammonites]  Incited  by  their  countryman  Tobiali. 
Ashdodites]  Inhabitants  of  Ashdod,  a  Philistine  city  destroyed  three  hundred  years  iifter.  That 
the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were  made  up]  Lit.  that  a  bandage  was  applied  to  the  walls  of  Jerusalem. 
A  Biblical  expression  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  13;  Jer.  viii.  22;  xxx.  17;  xxxiii.  6).  9.  We]  Nehemiah 
and  the  superintendents  of  the  work.  10.  Judah  said,  &c.]  The  labour  is  beyond  our  power.  12. 
Ten  times]  i.  e.  frequently.  13.  Therefore  set  I,  &c.]  Nehemiah  placed  detachments  properly  armed 
at  such  points  of  the  walls  as  had  attained  the  least  height,  and  were  most  exposed  to  attack. — Crosby. 
14.  And  I  looked,  &c.]  These  words  can  only  mean,  When  I  saw  the  people  thus  placed  with  their 
weapons,  I  went  to  them,  and  said  to  the  nobles,  &c.,  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  "  (the  enemies) :  "remember 
the  Lord,  the  great  and  the  terrible,"  who  will  fight  for  you  against  your  enemies  (Deut.  iii.  22  ; 
XX.  4  ;  xxxi.  6),  and  fight  ye  for  your  brethren,  your  sons  and  daughters,  wives  and  houses,  whom 
the  enemies  would  destroy. — Keil.  15.  God  had  brought  their  counsel  to  nought]  Although  by 
natural  means.  16.  My  servants]  Nehemiah's  personal  retinue.  Habergeon]  Old  English  for 
"coat  ol  mail/'     Tho  rulers,  &c.J  t.  e,  each  was  behind  his  own  people  who  were  employed  on  the 


92 


HOMILETIC  GOMMENTABr:  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  iv. 


work  to  encourage  them  in  their  labour,  and  in  case  of  attack  to  lead  them  against  the  enemy.  17. 
They  which  builded,  &c.  ]  The  burden-bearers  worked  with  one  hand  and  held  a  weapon  with  the 
otlior,  18.  The  builders,  &c.]  Needing  both  hands  for  their  work,  had  swords  girt  to  their  sides. 
22  Lodge  within  Jerusalem]  Those  that  had  their  homes  in  the  villages  and  distant  towns  should 
no>v  continue  night  and  day  in  the  city.  23.  Saving  that  every  one  put  them  off  for  washing] 
A  puzzlino"  sentence.  Conjectures  and  emendations  have  been  resorted  to.  The  idea  of  the  whole 
verse  is  clear — unceasing  watchfulness. 

HOIMILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  1 — 23.  An  Undaunted  Heart. 

^^  1 — 23.  Active  Hostility  frustrated. 

„  1—23.  The  Soldier  Builders. 
^^        1 — 3.  The  Laws  of  Opposition. 
„  1.  Anger. 

„  2.  The  Day  of  Small  Things. 

„       4—9.  Praying  and  Working. 


Ver.      4,  5.  Imprecations. 
„  11.  The    Craft    and    Cruelty    of    the 

Church's  Adversaries. 
„  11.  Satanic  Subtlety. 

„  15.  A  Pause  in  the  Work. 

„     17,  18.  The  Work  and  Warfare  of  Life. 


An  Undaunted  Heaet. 

Chap.  iv. 

The  childlike  piety  and  the  white  integrity  of  Nehemiah  not  more  marked  than  his 
heroic  undauntedness.  Recapitulate  his  progress  from  the  first  resolution  : — silent 
cherishing  of  his  purpose  ;  maturing  of  his  plans ;  organized  schemes  and  allotments 
of  labour ;  vigilant  precautions ;  cheery  "  Fear  not  ! "  "  Be  not  ye  afraid  "  (ver. 
14).     A  model  to  the  Christian  workman  and  soldier. 

I.  Reasons    for   fear.     1.  Ridicule   (vers.   1 — 3).     "Mocked."     Jesus   Christ 
mocked  and  spitted  on.     And  it  is  enough  for  the  disciple  that  he  be  as  his  Master 
(John  ix.   28).     "Foolishness"  of  apostolic   preaching.     Greek  philosophy  and 
Roman  civilization,  scorn  and  reviling  of  the  Nazarenes.     Religion  not  the  only 
department  in  which  the  right  has  been  reviled  by  the  wrong.     Science  has  always 
be<:;un  to  'climb  upward   amid   the   laughter  of  circling  ignorance.     Most  great 
principles  have  had  a  point  in  their  history  when  they  were  believed  in  by  one  and 
ridiculed  by  all  the  rest.     Instance — George  Stephenson  and  the  railway  enterprise, 
(a)  Don't  be  ashamed  of  your  Christian  faith ;  let  Sanballat  and  Tobiah   laugh 
themselves  hoarse  ;  follow  thou  after  life  !     (6)  Don't  be  ashamed  of  your  Christian 
work.     It  is  easy  for  a  keen  witling  to  pull  out  his  cigar  and  point  to  a  humorous 
element  in  your  little  tasks.     "  What  do  these  feeble  Christians  ?    Will  they  revive 
the  stony  hearts  of  fallen  men,  and  rear  a  dwelling-place  for  truth  and  peace  amid 
the  rubbish  of  the  world  % "     They  will,  God  being  their  helper  !     2.   Guile.     In 
chap.  vi.  are  accounts  of  strategy  adopted  b}^  Nehemiah's  opponents  where  it  required 
a  wise  head  to  keep  the  heart  firm.     Plausible  pretences  of  enemies  and  feigned 
friendship  were  of  no  avail  to  bend  the  iron  purpose  of  the  Jewish  liberator, 
^ehemiah's  enemies  bade  him  join  them  for  a  conference  in  order  to  trap  and 
hinder  him  (vi.    2,  3) ;  they  warned  him  to  beware  of   his  reputation   (vi.   6) ; 
they  urged  him  to  "  show  the  white  feather"  (vi.  11).     "  Satan  is  transformed  into 
an  angel  of  light"  (2  Cor.  xi.  14).     (a)  How  many  plausible  excuses  a  treacherous 
heart  and  a  worldly  friend  can  coin  for  postponement  of  religious  decision  and 
devotion.     (6)  How  many  reasons  might  not  every  one  find  in  the  world's  opinion 
for  leaving  his  Christian  work  undone.     "  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents  "  (Matt.  x.  16). 
3.  Force  (iv.  8).     The  conspiring  rabble  around  the  rebuilders  of  Jerusalem  but  an 
emblem  of  the  circling  forces  which  press  upon  the  servant  of  God.     Our  way  is 
like   the  way  of  Paul's  mariners,    against    "contrary  winds."     Our   progress   is 
disputed   "inch  by  inch."     (1)  The  oppositions  to  the  culture  of  the  Christian 
character  are  manifold.     A  false  heart  within;  a  sin-maximed  world  without; 
break-downs  and  discouragements  in  experience.         (2)  So  of  the  oppositions  to 
Christian  work.     You  must  rebuild  your  fallen  fellows  into  society  not  because 
you  are  invited  to  do  it,  but  in  face  of  oppositions ;  nay,  "  the  very  stones  wiU  cry 


CHAP.  IV.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


93 


w;     *^^P^Pl^yo^^  ^f  !^t  to  hft  np  win  try  in  this  to  throw  you  down    or  at 
least  will  "conspire  to  hinder."     -  But  consider  him  !"  (Heh  xii   3) 

II.  Motives  for  conrage.     1.  The  power  of  God  (iv.  14,  15).     The  courage  of 
Moses  based  on  the  "Certainly  I  wiU  be  with  thee"  of  God   (ExodT^lS) 
David  s  fearlessness  rested  on  the  "  Some  trust  in  chariots,  and  somlln  horses  •  but 
we  will  remember  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  "  (Ps.  xx   7).     The  tLee  Hebrew 

tf^"^  T'  !r  ^'^'T  "^^^  ^^d  i«  -^1-  t-  deliver  us  "  (Dan^fl  7)      S 
undaunted  apostles  were  fixed  on  the  same  centre  (Acts  iv.  29,  30). 

"And  were  this  worJd  all  devils  o'er, 

And  watching  to  devour  us, 
We  lay  it  not  to  heart  so  sore ; 
Not  they  can  overpower  us. 
And  let  the  prince  of  ill 
Look  grim  as  e'er  he  will, 
He  harms  us  not  a  whit. 
For  why  ?    His  doom  is  writ ; 
word  shall  quickly  slay  him." 

2.  7%6  strength  of  ri^ht.     «  Thrice  is  he  armed  who  hath  his  quarrel  ju8t.'» 

"  My  strength  is  as  the  strength  of  ten, 
Because  my  heart  is  pure." 

"Great  is  truth,  and  shaU  prevail."    All  such  maxims  of  the  ancient  and  the 
modern  world  bear   he  popular  faith  that  mOHT  is  might.     "The  world  passeth 

aTo'hnl   m  '"T^'r"';.^."'  ^  *'^^*  '*°''*^  ^'^'^  ^  "f  God  abidlth  forTver  " 
tript  steel.      ^'  testimony,  that  we  please  God,"  is  to  be  clad  in 

III.  Expedients  of  the  imperilled.    1    Prmer  (veri  i  q^     «  w.,      ^ 
ST"  n^!f;:     "'  '''''  ""*«  '''  Lord"Tt£rChr1'sSn-s  ex^^aratuTf 

"  Hear  the  victors  that  o'ercame, 
Still  they  mark  each  warrior's  way, 
All  with  one  sweet  voice  exclaim, 
"Watch  and  pray." 

S    Hope  (ver.  20).     "  Our  God  shall  fight  for  usJ'     Giant  Despair  is  a  sad  foe  of 
Christian  souls.     The  stroke  of  despondency  stuns  us  like  a  blow  on  the  head ; 

andtT2y  "^    '^'"  ^^  ^^''''  ^'  ^^'     ^'  P'^^'^'^^^oe  (ver.  21 

Application.     In  Christian  life  and  in  Christian  work  take  as  a  motto  Polv- 
carp  s  words  to  his  pupil—"  Stand  thou  firm  as  an  anvil  that  is  beaten," 

"Write  on  thy  heart  this  holy  principle, 
Nobly  resolve  and  do  as  thou  resolvest. 
Thou  shalt  not  die  till  victory  crown  thy  brows." 

Active  Hostility  Frustrated. 
Chap.  iv. 
Various  forms  of  active  hostility  frustrated  through  the  combined  vidlance  and 

(1  bam  11.  10).  Whenever  a  door  of  usefulness  is  opened  there  are  m^^nv 
adversaries  (1  Cor  xvi.  9).  Stand  firm  and  fearless,  "  L  nothb^t  ter  LThv 
your  adversaries"  (Phil.  i.  28).  "Be  not  ye  afraid'of  them:  remember  th^ 
Lord  !  (a)  Eemember  the  Lord  God,  who  has  been  described  as  All-eve  Let 
thi8  encourage.    He  knows  aU  the  details  of  individuallives.    Let  this  warn.     He 


94  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH,  [chap.  iv. 

scrutinizes  all  thoughts  and  deeds,      (h)  Eemember  the  Lord  Christ.     "  All  his 
adversaries  were  ashamed  "  (Luke  xiii.  17). 

I.  Hostility  to  the  work  of  God  assuming'  phases  of  growing  intensity.  L 
Rage.  Sanballat  had  laughed  (ii.  19);  now  he  is  enraged  (ver.  1).  2.  Mockery 
(ver.  2).  Tobiah  was  only  Sanballat's  echo  (ver.  3).  3.  Conspiracy  (vers.  7,  8).  This 
opposition  a  sign  of  success ;  an  honour  paid  to  truth.  When  Dr.  Johnson  wrote 
anything  that  was  not  vilified  he  said,  "  I  did  not  strike  hard  enough,  or  the  blow 
would  rebound."  "  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  shall  speak  well  of  you ! " 
(Luke  vi.  26). 

II.  The  Church  fortifying  herself  against  expected  assault.  1.  By  appealing 
to  God  (vers.  4,  5).  **  Eight  times  in  this  book  Nehemiah  interjects  a  prayer.  They 
are  prayers  while  writing,  not  while  acting.  The  grounds  of  this  prayer  are — (1) 
God's  people  are  despised;  (2)  excited  to  fear  by  the  enemy." — Crosby.  "  Prayer 
is  a  sure  anchor  in  all  storms ;  and  they  never  perish  that  humbly  fly  unto  it  and 
cleave  unto  it.  Prayer  is  a  salve  for  all  sores  ;  yea,  it  healeth  not  only  body  and 
soul,  but  even  hard  stony  walls.  No  kind  of  earthly  physic  that  God  hath  made 
is  good  for  all  kind  of  folk  at  all  times,  and  all  kind  of  diseases ;  but  this  heavenly 
physic  of  prayer,  in  wealth  and  woe,  in  plenty  and  poverty,  in  prosperity  and 
adversity,  in  sickness  and  in  health,  in  war  and  peace,  in  youth  and  age,  in  life 
and  death,  in  mirth  and  sadness,  yea,  in  all  things  and  times,  in  the  beginning, 
midst,  and  ending,  prayer  is  most  necessary  and  comfortable.  Happy  is  that  man 
that  diligently  useth  it  at  all  times." — Pilkington.  2.  By  redoubled  activity  in 
prosecuting  the  work.  **  So  built  we  the  wall,"  &c.  (ver.  6).  "  Prayer  did  not 
slacken  the  energy  of  the  Jews.  They  experienced  the  redoubled  zeal  and  activity 
which  all  true  prayer  produces.  They  made  their  prayer  to  God,  and  set  a  watch 
against  their  foes  day  and  night.  All  the  natural  means,  whether  of  mind  or 
matter,  form  channels  through  which  God  conveys  his  grace  in  answer  to  prayer. 
To  stop  these  channels  is  to  cancel  prayer.  Prayer  was  never  intended  to  foster 
idleness  or  diminish  responsibility." — Crosby.  3.  By  organized  vigilance  (ver.  9). 
4.  By  defensive  preparations  (ver.  13).  "The  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Wherefore 
criest  thou  unto  me  1  speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  go  forward " 
(Exod.  xiv.  15).  There  is  a  time  to  pray  and  a  time  to  prepare  to  fight.  Let 
the  farmer  sow  his  seed,  and  then  pray  for  rain  and  sunshine.  5.  By  mutual 
encouragement  (ver.  1 4).  Workers  tire ;  warriors  flee  when  hope  dies.  6.  By 
self-denying  assiduity  (vers.  16,  21 — 23). 

III.  The  evil  counsels  of  the  Church's  adversaries  frust  atei  by  Divine 
interposition.  "God  brought  their  counsel  to  nought"  (ver.  15).  "Our  God 
shall  fight  for  us."  There  are  laws ;  is  there  not  a  law-giver  1  There  are  agencies  ; 
point  they  not  to  an  agent  ]  Will  our  modern  magicians  never  say,  like  those  of 
Egypt  (Exod.  viii.  19),  "This  is  the  finger  of  God." 

"  Oft  in  danger,  oft  in  woe, 
Onward,  Christians,  onward  go ; 
Fight  the  fight,  maintain  the  strife, 
Strengthened  with  the  bread  of  life. 

Onward,  then,  to  glory  move, 
More  than  conquerors  ye  shall  prove  ! 
Though  opposed  by  many  a  foe, 
Christian  soldiers,  onward  go." 

The  Soldier  Builders 
Chap.  iv. 

Energy,  unity,  and  perseverance  (chap,  iii.)  give  way  to  discouragement  within 
and  conspiracy  without. 
I.  Combination  of  prayer  and  watchfulness  (ver.  9).     Prayer  without  watch- 


CHAP.  IV.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


95 


fulness  is  hypocrisy ;  watchfulness  without  prayer  is  presumption.  An  old  writer, 
speaking  of  men  as  stewards,  urges  wise  trading.  Their  warehouse  {i.  e.  heart  and 
memory)  must  store  up  precious  things — holy  afifections,  grateful  remembrances, 
celestial  preparations.  Their  workhouse  (or  their  actions),  wherein  they  retail  to 
others.  Their  clock-house  (e.  g.  their  speech),  which  must  speak  the  truth.  Their 
COUNTING-HOUSE  (or  couscicnce),  which  should  be  scrupulously  kept,  or  everything 
else  will  fail. 

II.  Combination  of  precept  and  example.  Nehemiah  **  looked,  and  rose  up, 
and  said  unto  the  nobles,  and  to  the  rulers,  and  to  the  rest  of  the  people.  Be  not  ye 
afraid,"  &c.  (ver.  14).  But  he  was  not  content  with  that.  "We  returned  to  the 
wall  "  (ver.  15).     "  He  that  sounded  the  trumpet  was  hy  me  "  (ver.  18). 

III.  Every  builder  was  also  a  soldier.  "  They  which  builded  on  the  wall, 
and  they  that  bare  burdens,  with  those  that  laded,  every  one  with  one  of  his  hands 
wrought  in  the  work,  and  with  the  other  hand  held  a  weapon.  For  the  builders, 
every  one  had  his  sword  girded  by  his  side,  and  so  builded  "  (vers.  17,  18). 

IV.  A  mutual  co-operation  went  hand  in  hand  with  personal  work  and 
responsibility.     "  Every  one  unto  his  work  "  (ver.  15). 

(Abridged  from  Rev,  J,  M.  BomdalVs  *  Nehemiahy  his  Times  and  Lessons  J) 


The  Laws  op  Opposition. 
iv.  3.     But  it  came  to  pass,  &c. 


The  unconscious  working  of  men's 
minds  is  a  servant  of  law.  There  is  a 
reign  of  law.  Distinguished  Christian 
thinkers  hold  that  the  great  scientific 
doctrine  of  evolution  ''ratifies  all  that  is 
highest  and  holiest  in  the  nature  of 
man,"  and  makes  out  a  new  **  claim  to 
reverent  acceptance  of  supernatural 
tiuths."  There  is  a  Divine  government 
of  the  passions  of  men.  "  Surely  the 
wrath  of  men  shall  praise  thee,"  &c. 
(Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  "The  emotions  ex- 
cited by  the  passions  in  our  senses  are 
not  free.  An  angry  man  is  carried  be- 
yond himself  in  spite  of  himself.  These 
emotions  are  not  proportional.  A 
timorous  man  turns  as  pale  at  the  sight 
of  a  fanciful  as  of  a  real  danger.  These 
emotions  do  not  obey  the  orders  of  our 
will.  The  movement  is  not  a  gentle 
stream,  but  a  rapid  flood."  —  Saurin. 
Sanballat  was  angry  ;  Tobiah  was  scorn- 
ful. 

I.  Men  seek  in  others  what  they 
find  in  themselves.  The  old  maxim  of 
English  law.  Every  man  is  to  be  deemed 
honest  until  he  is  proved  to  be  a  rogue  ; 
the  dishonest  the  reverse.  Cowards  dis- 
believe in  bravery.  There  is  a  moral 
obliquity  of  vision.  The  unjust  cannot 
appreciate  justice.  Impure  men  suspect 
impurity  everywhere.     The  compact  of 


the  wicked  is  not  binding.  Judas  and 
the  priests.  *'  I  have  sinned."  *'  What 
is  that  to  usT*  (Matt,  xxvii.  4 — 6). 
They  cast  off  Judas  when  he  had  served 
their  purpose,  and  took  back  their  own 
accursed  coins.  All  wrong  -  doing  is 
blunder  as  well  as  crime.  Marvellou.4y 
deep  and  philosophic  are  the  prophet's 
words  :  *'  Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money 
for  that  which  is  not  bread  'i "  (Isa. 
Iv.  2). 

II.  All  the  branches  of  opposition 
grow  out  of  the  great  trunk  of  selfish- 
ness. Sanballat  the  Samaritan  and 
Tobiah  the  Ammonite  rejoiced  in  the 
laying  waste  of  Jerusalem.  Its  loss 
was  their  gain.  *'  Our  gain  "  explains 
many  facts  of  history  in  ancient  and 
modern  times.  Selfish  gain  has  entered 
temples,  disgraced  senate  houses,  tar- 
nished otherwise  fair  reputations.  Gain 
has  been  England's  g(jd.  Speculation 
has  been  a  species  of  madness.  *'  Look 
not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but 
every  man  also  on  the  things  of  others," 
is  a  peculiarly  Christian  iujunction. 

III.  Great  work  is  generally  accom- 
plished by  a  committee  of  one.  There 
was  one  Nehemiah  against  Sanballat, 
Tobiah,  men  of  Arabia,  &c.  (ver.  7) ;  one 
I/uther  against  Rome,  the  monks,  and 
the    schoolmen;    one    Tindal    against 


9G 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[OHAP.  IV. 


Bishop  Tonstal  and  Sir  Thomas  More. 
John  Evangelist  Gossner  was  a  solitary 
worker  —  "  One  -  in  -  hand  "  somebody- 
styled  him.  *'  It's  quite  true,"  he  said, 
laughing,  when  it  came  to  his  ears  ; 
"  and  yet  old  '  One-in-hand  '  carries 
more  passengers  than  your  Four." 
Organize,  organize — that  is  welL  But 
individuality  is  lost  in  the  mass. 

Application.  1.  "  We  mortal  millions 
dwell  alone."  2.  T/ie  way  of  sorrow 
leadeth  -to  the  city  of  God.  3.  Whatever 
has  valtie  is  bought  at  a  high  price. 

Illustrations : — The  spirit  of  cynicism.  "  The 
Cynics  were  a  sect  of  philosophers  among  the 
Greeks,  founded  by  Antisthenes,  who,  on  account 
of  his  snappish,  snarling  propensities,  was  fre- 
quently called  '  the  dog ; '  and  probably  enough 
it  may  have  been  on  account  of  this  that  his 
school  of  philosophy  was  called  the  Cynic  or  Dog 
school  He  was  stern,  proud,  and  unsympathetic. 
He  taught  that  all  human  pleasure  was  to  be 
despised.  He  was  ostentatiously  careless  as  to 
the  opinions,  the  feelings,  and  the  esteem  of 
others.  He  used  to  appear  in  a  threadbare 
dress,  so  that  Socrates  once  exclaimed,  *  I  see 
your  pride,  Antisthenes,  peeping  through  the 
holes  in  your  cloak ! '  His  temper  was  morose, 
and  his  language  was  coarse  and  indecent.  It  is 
from  this  old  school  of  philosophy  that  we  derive 
the  term  cynicism ;  and  we  commonly  apply  it 
now-a-days  to  that  mood  or  habit  of  mind  which 
looks  out  upon  mankind  with  cold  and  bitter 
feeling,  which  finds  little  or  nothing  to  admire 
ill  human  character  and  action,  which  systematic- 
ally depreciates  human  motives,  which  rejoices 
to  catch  men  tripping,  which  sneers  where  others 
reverence,  and  dissects  where  others  admire,  and 
is  hard  where  others  pity,  and  suspects  where 
others  praise.  Distinguish  between  cynicism  and 
satire.  No  doubt  the  cynic  is  often  satirical; 
satire  is  just  the  kind  of  weapon  that  comes 
ready  to  his  hand.     But  the  same  weapon  may 


be  wielded  by  very  different  hands,  and  in  very 
different  causes;  and  satire  may  often  be  em- 
ployed by  men  who  are  anything  but  cynical. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  genial  satire— the  light 
and  even  humorous  play  of  irony  or  sarcasm 
around  some  venial  fault,  or  some  peculiar  ex- 
crescence  of  character.  Then  there  is  also  the 
satire  of  moral  indignation,  which  applies  the 
stinging  lash  to  manifest  vices,  or  pours  the  vials 
of  scorn  on  some  detestable  meanness,  in  order 
to  make  the  shameless  ashamed,  or  to  infuse  a 
healthy  contempt  of  vice  into  the  souls  of  those 
who  are  still  uncontaminated  by  it.  The  old 
Hebrew  prophets  knew  how  to  wield  this  weapon, 
and  even  in  the  pages  of  the  New  Testament  it 
finds  its  fitting  place.  In  fact,  all  such  satire  as 
this — whether  of  the  genial  or  the  vehement 
type — is  often  used  by  men  who  are  passionate 
admirers  of  human  excellence,  and  who  are  not 
only  warmly  attached  to  individuals,  but  also 
earnest  lovers  of  their  race.  Whereas  it  is  the 
very  characteristic  of  cynicism  that  it  lacks 
earnestness.  It  knows  nothing  of  a  noble 
scorn.  Its  satire  is  neither  genial  nor  vehement. 
Even  its  humour  is  always  sardonic.  Its  very 
bitterness,  although  intense,  is  unimpassioned. 
It  is  a  kind  of  acrid  gelatine.  The  fully-deve- 
loped cynic  prides  himself  on  his  indifferentism. 
Remorselessly  he  dissects  and  analyzes  human 
character  and  action;  for,  like  lago,  he  *is 
nothing,  if  not  critical ; '  but  his  criticism  has 
no  useful  end  in  view;  he  is  not  seeking  to  make 
others  wiser  or  better.  He  is  scarcely  earnest 
enough  even  to  care  about  his  success  in  stinging 
and  wounding  ?  It  is  simply  his  *  way '  to  pick 
faults  and  to  sneer.  We  find  the  culmination  of 
this  cynicism  in  Goethe's  *  Mephistopheles ; '  and 
indeed  the  word  'devil'  itself  means  'accuser' 
— the  slanderer  of  God  and  man." — Finlayson. 

"  Let  us  keep  our  scorn  for  our  own  weaknesses, 
our  blame  for  our  own  sins,  certain  that  we  shall 
gain  more  instruction,  though  not  amusement, 
by  hunting  out  the  good  which  is  in  anything 
than  by  hunting  out  tlie  evil."—  Kingsley. 

"Sarcasm  I  now  see  to  be,  in  general,  the 
language  of  the  devil;  for  which  reason  I  have 
long  since  as  good  as  renounced  it." — Carlyle, 


Anger. 
iv.  1.     Sanhallat  was  wrothy  and  took  great  indignation. 


It  is  not  a  sin  to  be  angry,  but  hard 
not  to  sin  when  we  are  angry.  Anger 
is  a  tender  virtue,  and  such  as  by  reason 
of  our  unskUfulness  may  be  easily 
corrupted  and  made  dangerous.  He 
that  in  his  anger  would  not  sin,  must 
not  be  angry  at  anything  but  sin.  Our 
Saviour  was  angry  with  Peter,  and 
angry  with  the  Pharisees  for  the  hard- 
ness of  their  hearts  (Matt.  xvi.  23  ;  Mark 
iii.  5).  Moses  was  even  blown  up  with 
holy  anger  at  the  people  for  the  golden 
oalf.     <<Do  not  I  hate  them  that  hate 


theel  I  hate  them  with  a  perfect 
hatred,"  saith  David ;  "I  count  them 
mine  enemies"  (Ps.  cxxxix.  21).  This 
is  the  anger  of  zeal,  found  in  Phinehas, 
Elijah,  Elisha,  our  Saviour,  John  ii.  17; 
and  should  have  been  found  in  Adam 
towards  his  wife,  in  Eli  towards  his 
sons,  in  Lot  towards  his  servants  (Gen. 
xiii.  7).  It  must  have  a  good  rise  and  a 
good  end,  saith  Bucer,  else  it  becomes  a 
mortal,  not  a  venial,  sin,  as  the  Papists 
fondly  conclude  from  Matt.  v.  22 : 
"  Wboioefver  is  angiy  with  his  brother 


CHAP.  IV.]             HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  07 

without  a  cause,"  Szo.     There  is  a  Just  not.     The  less  any  man  strives  for  him- 

cause  then  of  anpjer;  sin,  as  an  offence  self,   the   more   is   God   his   champion, 

to    God.     And   there   must   he   a  just  Anger  is  a  short  devil,  saith  Chrysostom; 

measure  observed,  that  our  anger  for  sin  the  fury  of  the  unclean  spirit.     "  Wrath 

render  us  not  unfit  either  to  pity  the  killeth   the    foolish  man"   (Job  v.   2), 

sinner  (as  our  Saviour  in  his  anger  did  delivers  him  to  the  destroyer,  if  it  rest 

the  obstinate  Pharisees)   or  to  pray  for  in   his  bosom   especially,   and   lodge  a 

him  (as  Moses   for  those  idolaters   he  night  with   him,  which   is   the   second 

was    so    enraged    at — Exod.  xxxii.  31,  degree  above  mentioned. 

32).     Anger  that  is  not  thus  bounded  "  Let  not  therefore  the  sun  go  down 

is  but  a  "  momentary  madness,"  saith  upon  your  wrath  ; "  for  that  is  all  one  as 

the  heathen ;  it  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  to  give  place  to  the  devil,  who  hereby 

fools,    saith    Solomon,    whether    it    be  entereth  the  heart  and  takes  possession. 

an;^er,  wrath,  or  hatred  (for  into  those  Many  there  are  that  suffer  the  sun  not 

three  degrees  Damascen  distinguisheth  only  to  go  down  upon  their  anger,  but 

it).     The  one,  saith  he,  hath  beginning  to  run  his  whole  race,  yea,  many  races, 

and  motion,  but  presently  ceasetb  ;  the  ere   they   can   be   reconciled ;    whereby 

other  taketh  deep  hold  in  the  memory ;  their  anger  becomes  inveterate,  and  turns 

the  third  desisteth  not  without  revenge,  into  malice,  for  anger  and  malice  differ 

Clichloveus  compareth  the  first  to  fire  in  but  in  age.     Now  ^'  cursed  be  this  anger, 

stubble ;  the  second  to  fire  in  iron ;  the  for  it  is  fierce  ;  and  this  wrath,  for  it  is 

third    to    fire   that   is   hid   and    never  cruel "  (Gen.  xlix.  7).     It  is  the  murder 

bewrayeth  itself,  but  with  the  ruin  of  of  the  heart  (Matt.    v.    21    seq.)'j  the 

the    matter   wherein   it    hath    caught,  fountain   of   the   murder   both   of   the 

Some  are  sharp,  some  are  bitter,  a  third  tongue  and  hand.    Hence  it  is  said,  "  He 

kind    are    implacable,    saith    Aristotle,  that  hateth  his  brother  is  a  man-slayer " 

The  first  are  the  best,  that,  as  children,  (1  John  iii.  15).     He  is  so  in  desire,  he 

are    soon   angry   and   as   soon   pleased  would  be  so  in  deed  if  he  durst.     There 

again.       "Be   ye    children   in   malice"  is  a  passion  of  hatred  and  there  is  the 

(1     Cor.     xiv.     20).      Of     Beza,     his  habit  of  it.     The  former  is  a  kind  of 

colleagues  would    often   say  that,   like  averseness  and  rising  of  the  heart  against 

the  dove,  he  was  without  a  gaU.     Giles  a  man  when  one  sees  him,  so  that  he 

of    Brussels,    martyr,    when   the   friars  cannot  away  with  him,  nor  speak  to  nor 

(sent  to  reduce  him)  did  any  time  mis-  look  courteously  or  peaceably  upon  him, 

call  him,  he  ever  held  his  peace,  inso-  but  one's  countenance  falls  when  he  sees 

much  that  those  blasphemers  would  say  him,  and  he  even  turns  away,  and  by 

abroad  that  he  had  a  dumb  devil  in  his  good  will  would  have  nothing  to  do 

him.      Cassianus  reports   that  when  a  with  him :  this  is  the  passion  of  hatred, 

certain  Christian  was  held   captive  of  The  habit  of  it  is  when  the  heart  is  so 

infidels,    tormented   with    divers   pains  settled  in  this  alienation  and  estrange- 

and  ignominious  taunts,  being  demanded  ment  that  it  grows  to  wish  and  desire 

by  way  of   scorn  and    reproach,  "  TeU  and  seek  his  hurt.      This  is  that   third 

us  what  miracle  thy  Christ  hath  done  ? "  and  worst  sort  of  anger.     Are  we  mortal, 

he  answered,  "He  hath  done  what  you  and  shall  our  anger  be  immortal?     To 

see,  that  I  am  not  moved  at  all   the  be  revenged  is  more  honourable  than  to 

cruelties  and  contumelies  you  cast  upon  be  reconciled,  saith  Aristotle.     This  is 

me."     Christ  did  "not  strive,  nor  cry,  the  voice  of  nature.     Thus  "the  spirit 

nor  did  any  man  hear  his  voice  in  the  that  is  in  us  lusteth  to  envy."     But  God 

streets;"  who,  "when  he  was   reviled,  giveth  more  grace.     1.    Cease  therefore 

reviled  not  again  ;  when  he  suffered,  he  from  cmger  and  refrain  strife.      "  Fret 

threatened  not ;  but  committed  himself  not  thyself  in  any  wise  to  do  evil "  (Ps. 

to  him  that  judgeth  righteously  "  (Matt,  xxxvii.  8).     When  thou  findest  thyself 

xii.  19;  1   Pet.  ii.  23).     So  did   Moses  incensed  and  chafing  ripe,  presently  lay 

when  murmured  against  by  Aaron  and  a  necessity  of  silence  upon  thyself;  as 

Miriam.    He  was  meek,  and  complained  Ahasuenis  walked  a  while  in  his  garden 

a 


98 


HOMILFjTIC  COMMENTAMY :   NETTEMIAH. 


[chap.  rv. 


ere  he  would  pass  sentence  upon  Haman. 
Another  Kipeated  the  Greek  alphabet  ere 
he  would  say  or  do  anything  in  his 
anger.  He  doth  better  that  repeateth 
some  grave  sentences  of  Scripture,  such 
as  these:  "Be  angry,  but  sin  not;  be 
slow  to  wrath;  avenge  not  yourselves, 
but  give  place  to  wrath ;  submit  to  God  ; 
resist  the  devil,  and  he  will  fly  from  you." 
This  devil  of  anger,  if  thus  resisted  by 
Scripture,  will  surely  fly;  he  cannot  bide 
by  it ;  especially  if  we  set  ourselves  to 
pray  it  down.  2.  Get  thy  hea/rt  purified 
by  faith,  for  faith  makes  patience.  When 
the  disciples  heard  that  they  must  for- 
give till  seventy  times  seven  times  in  a 
day,  they  prayed,  *' Lord,  increase  our 
faith"  (Luke  xvii.  5).  The  wisdom 
from  above  is  first  pure,  then  peaceable 
(James  iii.  17).  Unrepentant  David 
was  cruel  to  the  Ammonites.    The  devils 


are  most  impure,  and  therefore  most 
malicious;  Christ,  on  the  other  side,  most 
pure,  and  therefore  most  gentle.  3. 
Study  to  be  quiet  and  do  your  own 
business.  Seldom  is  a  patient  man 
inquisitive,  or  an  inquisitive  man  patient. 
It  doth  require  much  study  to  live 
quietly.  4.  Consider  the  deformity,  dis- 
grace, and  danger  of  anger.  Plato  and 
Seneca  have  advised  the  angry  man  to 
look  at  his  face  in  a  glass.  Anger 
hurteth  not  great  minds.  5.  Consider 
wisely  of  God^s  providence,  "presence^ 
patience.  Set  God  before  thy  passions, 
and  they  will  be  soon  hushed.  6.  Add 
a  constant  endeavour  to  be  loidy.  Keep 
the  strict  watch  of  the  Lord  over  your 
heart ;  pray  down  your  passions.  Your 
labour  will  not  be  in  vain. 

{From    Trapp's   ^Marrow    of  many 
good  Author sf) 


The  Day  op  Small  Things. 
iv.  2.     What  do  these  feeble  Jews  t 


Two  great  events  in  the  history  of  the 
returned  captives  from  Babylon  :  build- 
ing the  second  temple  ;  rebuilding  and 
fortifying  the  city.  Subject — That  God 
produces  great  events  by  compa/ratively 
feeble  means. 

I.  As  it  relates  to  the  objects  of 
personal  religion.  "What  do  these 
feeble  Jews  1 "  Zechariah  said,  Who  hath 
despised  the  day  of  small  things  1  (iv. 
10).  We  may  ask.  Who  hoM  not  ?  All 
do.  It  is  quite  to  the  taste  of  human 
nature  in  its  search  after  that  which  is 
great  to  overlook  that  which  is  small. 
The  captives  did  so  as  well  as  their 
heathen  persecutors ;  they  wept  when 
they  saw  the  foundation  (Ezra  iii.  12). 
Zerubbabel  and  Zechariah  probably  did 
too.  *'Not  by  might!"  (Zech.  iv. 
6).  Good  men  do,  both  in  judging 
of  their  own  religion  and  that  of  other 
people.  It  is  possible  to  err  on  the  side 
of  despondency  as  well  as  on  that  of 
presumption.  We  dishonour  God  as 
much  by  denying  the  grace  we  have  as 
by  boasting  of  the  grace  we  have  not. 
We  ought  not  to  despise  it  because  it  is 
day.  (o)  A  day  which  God  originates  ; 
(/3)  the  day  of  Christ's  power ;  (y)  a  day 


which  must  advance  to  its  perfection, 
and  shall  never  know  a  night.  Though 
man  despises  it,  God  does  not.  He  sees 
the  flower  in  the  bud,  the  pearl  in  the 
shell,  the  man  in  the  infant,  the  heir  of 
glory  in  the  child  of  grace.  He  sees  not 
only  what  they  are,  but  what  they  shall 
be.  Remember  that  God  accomplishes 
his  greatest  designs  by  apparently  slight 
and  inconisiderable  means.  (a)  In 
nature.  (b)  In  providence.  (c)  In 
grace.  The  birth  of  an  infant  child  in 
the  manger  at  Bethlehem  seemed  a  very 
ordinary  occurrence,  but  it  was  an  event 
on  which  the  salvation  of  the  world  was 
made  to  turn.  The  cro.^s  of  Christ  is  to 
them  that  perish  foolishness ;  to  the 
saved  it  is  the  power  of  God  (1  Cor. 
i.  18).  The  rod  of  Moses;  Gideon's 
lamps,  pitchers,  and  trumpets  ;  the  rams' 
horns  at  Jericho;  David's  sling  and  stone, 
worked  wonders.  Pharaoh's  dreams 
were  made  the  means  of  Joseph's  ad- 
vancement. The  ark,  though  small, 
saved  the  heirs  of  a  shipwrecked  world. 
Zoar,  a  little  city,  saved  Lot  from  the 
shower  of  fire.  The  mantle  of  Elijah 
divided  the  waters  of  Jordan.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  grain  of 


CHAP.  rv.J 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEIIEMIAH. 


99 


mustard  seed  (Matt.  xiii.  31,  32).  The 
stone  which  the  builders  rejected  was 
made  the  head  of  the  corner.  This  is 
the  Lord's  doing !  (Matt.  xxi.  42.) 

II.  That  God  accomplishes  great 
events  by  small  means  encourages 
in  all  our  efforts  to  promote  the  good 
of  others.  1.  To  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  at  Jiome  am^d  the  diffusion  of  the 
gospel  abroad.  "  We  have  this  treasure 
in  earthen  vessels  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  7).  We 
are  often  discouraged.  The  dispropor- 
tion between  the  means  and  the  end ; 
the  slow  progress  of  the  renovating 
principle.  We  would  recognize  the 
presence  and  advance  of  the  kingdom  of 
God.      Where    is    the    Lord    God    of 


Elijah]  (2  Kings  ii.  14).  Where  are 
the  kings  for  nursing  fathers'?  (Isa. 
xlix.  23).  Where  are  the  great  masters 
of  science  and  literature"?  Where  are 
the  nations  born  in  a  day  *?  The  con- 
federacies of  guilt  are  still  powerful,  and 
the  enemies  of  the  truth  replete  with 
confidence.  The  answer  to  all  this  is, 
God's  ways  are  not  our  ways.  That  we 
can  clothe  our  exertions  with  a  power 
not  our  own.  Eemember,  the  most 
weak  and  uninfluential  may  be  made  to 
effect  great  things,  as  Naaman's  little 
maid.  A  mite  cast  into  the  treasury  of 
God  is  not  overlooked.  It  may  produce 
ten  talents.  2.  The  parent  a/nd  Sunday 
school  teacher, — Anonymous. 


Praying  and  Workinq. 
iv.  4 — 9.     Hear,  0  our  God  ;  for  we  are  despisedy  &c. 


The  man-ward  side  of  prayer. 

I.  It  narrows  the  conditions  of  the 
strife.  Who  are  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  'i 
Men  of  position,  ranging  under  them 
Arabians,  Ammonites,  and  Ashdodites — 
a  crowd  of  warriors.  Who  is  Nehe- 
miah]  A  chieftain  of  a  handful  of 
"  feeble  Jews."  "  Hear,  0  our  God  !  " 
The  cause  is  thine.  "  Let  thy  work  ap- 
pear unto  thy  servants,  and  thy  glory 
unto  their  children.  Establish  thou 
the  work  of  ou/r  hands  upon  us"  (Ps. 
xc.  16,  17).  When,  like  *' Moses  the 
man  of  God,"  any  man  of  God  discovers 
that  God's  work  and  his  work  are  one 
and  the  same  thing,  the  aspect  of  affairs 
is  changed.  The  contest  is  then  spiritual. 
The  forces  arrayed  are  light  and  dark- 
ness, truth  and  error,  God  and  the 
devil. 

II.  It  inspires  energy.  **So  built 
we  the  wall,"  &c.  (ver.  6).  *'  Neverthe- 
less we  made,"  &c.  (ver.  9).  Neverthe- 
less !  The  foes  were  many,  powerful, 
determined,  bloodthirsty.  Nevertheless 
God  was  approachable.  Work  was 
possible,  pressing,  needing  earnest  minds 
and  willing  hands. 

III.  It  awakens  faith.  Prayer  first, 
then  work,  in  the  assurance  that  the 
prayer  will  be  answered  and  the  work 
successful. 


h2 


*'  Patience !  have  faith,  and  thy  prayer  will  be 

answered. 
Look  at  this  delicate  plant  that  lifts  its  head 

from  the  meadow, 
See  how  its  leaves  all  point  to  the  north  as 

true  as  the  magnet ; 
It  is  the  compass-flower,  that  the  finger  of  God 

has  suspended 
Here  on  its  fragile  stalk,  to  direct  the  traveller's 

journey 
Over  the  sea-like,  pathless,  limitless  waste  of 

the  desert. 
Such  in  the  soul  of  man  is  faith." 

Illustrations : — **  * Ora  et  lahora*  writes  Dr. 
Wichern  in  one  of  his  pleasant  papers,  *is 
carved  on  a  peasant's  house  in  the  Vierland.  ♦*  It 
must  be  French,"  said  a  neighbour's  wife,  as  I 
stood  looking  at  the  legend  ;  "  but  you  know  it 
just  means — 

With  this  hand  work,  and  with  the  other  pray, 
And  God  will  bless  them  both  from  day  to  day."  * 

"  Ora  et  lahora  is  the  legend  of  the  Christian'a 
faith,  and  the  plan  of  his  life.  His  fervent 
prayer  begets  honest,  manly,  unshrinking  work  ; 
his  work,  as  it  is  faithful,  and  it  is  faithful  in 
proportion  as  he  realizes  it  is  for  God,  throws 
him  back  upon  prayer.  It  is  true  that  this  con- 
nection is  regarded  with  some  suspicion.  It  is 
associated  with  the  failure,  and  worse,  of  mo- 
nastic life.  Ora  et  lahora  was  the  monkish 
watchword  with  which  men  went  into  the 
wilderness,  and  builded  up  their  lonely  cells,  and 
toiled  at  their  simple  gardens,  and  knelt  in 
solemn  thought  of  the  world  behind  tliem, 
through  long  fastings  and  wakeful  nights.  But 
on  their  lips  it  was  a  profound  mistake.  They 
had  cut  themselves  off  from  brotherly  sympathies 
and  social    duties,   from  the  entire  sphere  ot 


100 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  rv. 


Christian  work.  They  had  thrown  themselves 
upon  the  selfishness  of  lonely  hours  and  solitary 
tlioughts.  Their  ora,  earnest  and  well  meant  at 
first,  became  mechanical  and  unreal ;  their  labora 
was  a  fiction.  They  had  no  right  to  their  motto. 
And  remembering  the  hoUowness  and  hypocrisy 
to  which  their  system  brought  them,  its  utter 
worth lessness,  its  world-wide  scandal,  men  have 
shrunk  with  fear  from  the  truth  they  misused. 
Nor  are  they  alone  guilty.  Those  who  by  prac- 
tice or  speech  arrogate  to  prayer  the  time  and 
place  of  ordinary  duties  are  in  the  same  error. 
Divorced  from  the  common  charities  of  life, 
prayer  must  become  mechanical  and  untrue.  If 
it  be  used  to  set  some  apart,  on  some  sacred  and 
haughty  height  above  the  rest  and  the  ordinary 
obligations  of  society,  if  it  only  make  them  more 
rigid  censors  of  others,  while  they  themselves  are 
less  kindly,  less  helpful,  less  useful,  who  can 
wonder  that  the  world  revolts,  or  that  the  more 
thoughtful  and  reverent  minds  are  carried  to  the 
other  extreme,  and  boldly  say  that  work  is 
prayer  ?    Work  is  no  more  prayer  than  prayer 


is  work,  although  the  looseness  of  the  expression 
is  often  forgiven  for  the  deeper  truth  of  the 
thought.  Work  is  no  more  prayer  than  a  walk 
in  the  fields  is  religious  worship.  To  the 
devout  man  both  are  devout ;  to  the  undevout 
man  they  are  nothing.  Nay,  work  without 
prayer  is  as  dangerous,  ay,  and  more,  than  prayer 
without  work.  It  is  the  practical  ignoring  of 
God,  of  a  spiritual  world  and  spiritual  laws.  It 
is  the  start  downwards  to  the  grossest  and  most 
superstitious  materialism.  It  is  a  clear  peril  of 
our  present  time.  We  do  not  want  to  be  re- 
minded of  the  need  and  dignity  and  sacredness  of 
work  ;  tbje  whole  century  is  preaching  that ;  but 
we  do  want  to  be  taught  the  need  and  sacred- 
ness of  prayer,  and  that  it  is  a  force,  of  which 
though  the  world  knows  nothing,  yet  it  estab- 
lishes greater  than  the  world's  works." — Steven- 
son. 

"  Prayer  is  a  strong  wall  and  fortress  of  the 
Church.  It  is  a  godly  Christian's  weapon,  which 
no  man  knows  or  finds  but  only  he  who  has  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  of  prayer." — Luth$r. 


Imprecations. 
iv.  4,  5.     Hear,  0  our  God;  for  we  are  despised^  &c. 


This  prayer  takes  its  tone,  form,  and 
expression  from  the  imprecations  in  the 
Psalms  —  the  "  Cursing  Psalms ^^  as 
some  have  styled  them.  Consider  we 
then  some  specimens  of  such  Psalms, 
that  we  may  know  where  the  difficulty 
lies  ;  and  in  what  way,  if  any,  this  diffi- 
culty may  he  solved. 

I.  The  following  are  fair  specimens  : — 

Ps.  V.  10.  **  Destroy  thou  them,  0  God  ;  let 
them  fall  by  their  own  counsels ;  cast  them  out 
in  the  multitude  of  their  transgressions  ;  for 
they  have  rebelled  against  thee." 

Ps.  X.  15.  "  Break  thou  the  arm  of  the 
wicked  and  the  evil  man  :  seek  out  his  wicked- 
ness till  thou  find  none." 

Ps.  xxviii.  4.  "  Give  them  according  to  their 
deeds,  and  according  to  the  wickedness  of  their 
endeavours  :  give  them  after  the  work  of  their 
hands  ;  render  to  them  their  desert." 

Ps.  xl.  14.  "  Let  them  be  ashamed  and  con- 
founded together  that  seek  after  my  soul  to 
destroy  it;  let  them  be  driven  backward  and 
put  to  shame  that  wish  me  evil." 

Ps.  Ixviii.  2.  "  As  smoke  is  driven  away,  so 
drive  them  away  :  as  wax  melteth  before  the 
fire,  so  let  the  wicked  perish  at  the  presence  of 
God."  ^ 

Ps.  Ixxxiii.  9—17.  "  Do  unto  them  as  unto 
the  Midianites  ;  as  to  Sisera,  as  to  Jabin,  at  the 
brook  of  Kison  :  which  perished  at  Endor  :  they 
became  as  dung  for  the  earth.  Make  their 
nobles  like  Oreb,  and  like  Zeeb :  yea,  all  their 
princes  as  Zebah,  and  as  Zalmunna.  0  my  God, 
make  them  like  a  wheel ;  as  the  stubble  before 
the  wind.    As  the  fire  borneth  a  wood,  and  as  the 


flame  setteth  the  mountains  on  fire  ;  so  persecute 
them  with  thy  tempest,  and  make  them  afraid 
with  thy  storm.  Fill  their  facee  with  shame  ; 
that  they  may  seek  thy  name,  0  Lord.  Let 
them  be  confounded  and  troubled  for  ever  ;  yea, 
let  them  be  put  to  shame,  and  perish." 

Ps.  cix.  6—15.  "  Set  thou  a  wicked  man 
over  him  :  and  let  Satan  stand  at  his  right  hand. 
When  he  shall  be  judged,  let  him  be  condemned  : 
and  let  his  prayer  become  sin.  Let  his  days  be 
few ;  and  let  another  take  his  office.  Let  his 
children  be  fatherless,  and  his  wife  a  widow.  Let 
his  children  be  continually  vagabonds,  and  beg  : 
let  them  seek  their  bread  also  out  of  their  deso- 
late places.  Let  the  extortioner  catch  all  that  he 
hath ;  and  let  the  strangers  spoil  his  labour.  Let 
there  be  none  to  extend  mercy  unto  him  : 
neither  let  there  be  any  to  favour  his  fatherless 
children.  Let  his  posterity  be  cut  off;  and  in 
the  generation  following  let  their  name  be  blotted 
out.  Let  the  iniquity  of  his  fathers  be  remem- 
bered with  the  Lord ;  and  let  not  the  sin  of 
his  mother  be  blotted  out.  Let  them  be  before 
the  Lord  continually,  that  he  may  cut  off  the 
memory  of  them  from  the  earth." 

Ps.  exxxvii.  7 — 9.  "  Remember,  0  Lord, 
the  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem  ; 
who  said,  Rase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation 
thereof.  0  daughter  of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be 
destroyed;  happy  shall  he  be,  that  rewardeth 
thee  as  thou  hast  served  us.  Happy  shall  he  be, 
that  taketh  and  dasheth  thy  little  ones  against 
the  stones." 

These  passages  seem  to  breathe  a 
vindictive  spirit ;  they  seem  to  be  op- 
posed to  the  spirit  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 


CHAP.  IV.]               IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH.  101 

IT.  In  what  way  is  the  difficulty  to  be  justice.  (6)  Punishment  fa  right  when 
solved?  1.  Whatever  difficulty  there  exists  properly  inflicted.  (c)  Arrangements 
is  created  hy  the  Bible  itself.  It  cannot  be  are  made  in  every  community  for  detect- 
said  that  the  writers  indulged  in  feelings  ing  and  punishing  crime,  (d)  A  judge 
which  they  were  unwilling  to  record,  who  prays  that  he  may  discharge  his 
The  Bible  is  thus  a  book  of  candour,  duty  has  no  vindictive  feeling.  6. 
Thftre  was  some  reason  for  making  the  There  is  another  solution  of  the  diffi- 
record.  2.  It  may  he  a  fair  subject  of  culty.  These  expressions  are  a  mere 
inquiry  how  much  of  what  is  charged  record  of  what  actually  occurred  in 
as  wrong^  harsh,  and  vindictive  belongs  the  mind  of  the  Psalmist,  and  are  pre- 
to  the  spirit  of  the  age.  To  know  how  served  to  vs  as  an  illustration  of  hvm,a// 
much  words  express,  we  must  under-  nature  when  partially  sanctified.  If 
stand  the  customs  and  habits  of  the  such  is  a  just  view  of  the  matter,  then 
times.  The  strong  language  used  by  all  that  inspiration  is  responsible  for 
a  Covenanter  or  a  Puritan  may  have  is  the  correctness  of  the  record ;  the 
expressed  no  other  internal  emotion  than  authors  of  the  Psalms  actually  recorded 
would  be  expressed  by  the  milder  Ian-  what  was  passing  in  their  own  minds, 
guage  which  we  should  use.  3.  Pa/rt  They  gave  vent  to  their  internal  emo- 
of  these  passages  may  undoubtedly  be  tions.  They  state  feelings  which  men 
regarded  as  prophetic  :  expressing  what  have  actually  had.  They  do  not  apolo- 
ivould  be,  rather  than  indicathig  any  gize  for  it ;  they  do  not  pause  to  vindi- 
wish  that  such  things  should  be.  Part —  cate  it ;  they  offer  no  word  in  extenu- 
not  aU.  4.  Som,e  of  the  expressions  a/re  ation  of  it,  any  more  than  other  sacred 
a  mere  record  of  the  feelings  of  others,  writers  did  when  they  recorded  the 
The  inspired  writer  is  only  responsible  facts  about  the  errors  in  the  lives  of  the 
for  the  fairness  of  the  record;  e.  g.  patriarchs,  of  David,  and  of  Peter.  In 
cruelty  of  sons  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxiv.  some  of  these  ways  it  is  probable  that 
25 — 29 ;  xlix.  6,  7),  David  (2  Sam.  xii.  all  the  difficulties  with  regard  to  "  im- 
31),  Joab,  Ahithophel,  Ahab.  In  Ps.  precations  *'  in  the  Bible  may  be  met. 
cxxxvii.  8,  9  the  pleasure  which  they  Those  who  deny  the  inspiration  of  the 
would  actually  feel  who  should  wreak  records  that  contain  them  should  be 
vengeance  on  Babylon  is  described.  6.  able  to  show  that  these  are  not  proper 
Can  such  imprecations  ever  be  right  ?  explanations  of  the  difficulty ;  or  that 
(a)  David  was  a  magistrate,  a  king.  As  a  they  are  not  consistent  with  any  just  no- 
magistrate,  he  represented  the  state,  the  tions  of  inspiration. — Barnes,  abridged. 
majesty   of   the   law,    the   interests   of 

The  Craft  and  Cruelty  op  the  Churches  Adversaries. 

iv.  11.     And  our  adversaries  said,  They  shall  not  know,  neither  see,  till  we  come  in 
the  midst  among  them,  and  slay  them,  and  came  the  work  to  cease, 

Chapter  gives   view   of   Nehemiah's  combined  in.     "  To  cause  the  work  to 

discouragements.      Like   waves   of   the  cease.^* 

sea  breaking  upon  him,  he  an  unshaken  III.    A  bloody  means  propounded. 

rock.     Like  Job's  messengers,  one  hard-  "  Slay  them." 

ly   gone  before  another  comes.     Like  IV.  A  subtle  way  projected  for  the 

Ezekiel's  prophecy,  mischief  upon  mis-  eflfecting  of  this.    "  Secretly,  suddenly." 

chief.  Sum^of  the  whole.     The  great  design 

First  verse :  adversaries'  rage.    Second  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church  is  by  craft 

verse  :  venting  itself  in  foam.     But  this  or  cruelty,  or  both,  to  hinder  any  work 

is  cool :  it  reaches  blood-heat  (vers.  7,  8).  that  tends  to  the  establishment  or  pro- 

I.  A   strong   combination  against  moting  of  the  Church's  good. — Matthew 
the  Church  of  God.     ''  Adversaries."  Newcomen,  1642. 

II.  A  wicked   design  they  were 


102  EOMILETtC  COMMENTARY:  IslEHEMIAH.  [chap.  IV. 


Satanic  Subtlety. 

iv.  11.     And  mr  adversaries  said.  They  shall  not  know,  netther  see,  till  we  come  in 
ths  midst  among  them,  and  slay  them,  and  cause  the  work  to  cease. 

The  malice  of  Satan  by  his  members  pect  any  such  thing.     This  is  the  nature 

is  so  great  against  the  building  of  God's  of  wicked  men,  so  craftily  to  undermine 

city,  that  by  all  means,  inward  enemies  the  godly. 

and  outward,  fair  words  and  foul,  sword,  2.  The  next  property  of  the  serpent 

fire  and  faggot,  war  and  peace,  in  teach-  that  appeareth  in  these  wicked  men  is, 

ing  or  holding  their  tongue,  knowledge  that    they    mercilessly    would    murder 

or   ignorance,  undermining  or  conspir-  them  when  they  had  once  thus  suddenly 

acies,  and  all  other  devices  whatsoever,  invaded  them.     Satan  was  **a  murderer 

they  let  none  slip,  but  try  all,  that  they  from  the  beginning,"  as  St.  John  saith  ; 

may  overthrow  all,  and  not  so  much  to  and  therefore  no  marvel  if  his  children 

do  themselves  good  as  to  hinder  others  ;  be  bloodsuckers,  like  unto  the  father, 

to  set  up  themselves  in  the  sight  of  the  When  he  would  not  spare  the  innocent 

world,  and  to  deface  the  glory  of  God ;  Lamb  of  God,  Jesus  Christ,  but  most 

but  in  the  end  all  is  in  vain,  and  our  cruelly  crucified   him,   why  should  we 

God  shall  have  the  victory.     They  will  marvel  to  see  him  by  his  wicked  chil- 

not  yet   use   any   open  violence,   but  dren  so  greedily  seek  to  shed  innocent 

cunningly  come  on  them  unawares.  blood  still  % 

I.    In    this    serpentine,   crafty,   and  S.  The  last  property  of  Satan  appeareth 
malicious  dealing  of  these  wicked  men  here  most  plainly  in  these  wicked  men,  in 
appeareth  the  old  serpentine  nature  and  that  they  would  so  gladly  overthrow  this 
malice   of  Satan,   that   old   enemy   of  building  of  Jerusalem,   that   it  should 
God  and  man  from  the  beginning.     God  never  he  thought  on  any  more.     Satan  is 
said  to  the  serpent  that  the  seed  of  the  "  the  prince  of  this  world,"  and  there- 
woman  should  tread  upon  his  head,  and  fore  cannot  abide  another  king  to  reign, 
the  serpent  should  tread  upon  his  heel  nor  any  kingdom  to  be  set  up  but  his 
(Gen.  iii.).      Crafty   and   subtle    men,  own;   and  for   maintaining  of  that  he 
when   they   will   work   a   mischief,  go  will  strive  by  his  members  unto  death, 
privily  about   it,  to  deceive  the   good  And  as  it  falleth  out  thus  generally  in 
man.     God  endued  man,  when  he  made  the   building  of  God's  spiritual   house 
him,  with  such  a  majesty  in  his  face,  and  city  that  all  sorts  of  enemies  most 
afore  he  fell  to  sin,  that  all  creatures  did  diligently  apply  themselves,  their  labour, 
reverence  and  fear  him ;  and  although  wit,   power,    policy,  and   friendship    to 
sin  hath  much  defaced  and  blotted  out  overthrow  the  true  worship  of  God,  so 
that  noble  majesty  and  grace  that  God  particularly  ''  Satan  goeth  about  like  a 
endued  him  with,  yet  it  is  not  utterly  roaring   lion,    seeking    whom   he    may 
disgraced   and   taken   away,  but   some  devour,"  and  therefore  every  man  hath 
spark  and  relic  remaineth  at  this  day,  great  need  to  be  wary  and  circumspect, 
that  no  wild  nor  venomous  beast  dare  that  he  be  not  suddenly  overthrown,  but 
look  a  man  in  the  face  boldly  and  hurt  let  him  watch  and  put  on  "  the  whole 
A    but  will  give  place  for  the  time,  armour  of  God"  (Ephes.  vi.   13—18), 
and  seek  how  he  may  privily  wound  or  that  he  may  stand  stoutly  in  the  day  of 
hurt  him  when  he  seeth  him  not.    These  battle,  and  through  the   might  of   his 
crafty  and  subtle  foxes,  therefore,  Hke  God  get  the  victory.     The  devil  never 
the  seed  of  the  serpent,  would  not  openly  ceaseth,  for  if  he  cannot  overthrow  the 
invade  nor  gather  any  great  power  of  whole  Church,  yet  he  would  be  glad  to 
men  against  them,  but  at  unawares  steal  catch   any  one  that  belongeth   to   the 
on  them  privily,  afore  they  should  bus-  Lord  if  he  Qovldi,— Bishop  Pilkington, 


CHAP.  IV.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  NEHBMIAH. 


103 


A  Pause  in  the  Work. 
iv.  16.     We  returned  all  of  us  to  the  wall,  every  one  unto  his  work. 


A  dangerous  pause.  Judak  had  be- 
come faint  -  hearted  (ver.  10).  The 
opponents  were  gaining  strength  (ver. 
11).  Terror  had  taken  hold  upon  the 
neighbouring  Jews  (ver.  12.)  An  armed 
outlook  was  necessary  (ver.  13).  Nehe- 
miah  encouraged  the  workers  to  wait 
the  issue  (ver.  14).  The  enemy  noted 
the  attitude  and  saw  that  God  had 
brought  their  counsel  to  nought  (ver. 
15).  The  pause  was  over.  Once  again 
to  the  work.  There  is  the  truth  of  life 
ill  this  parable. 

I.  A  period  of  preparation  is  essen- 
tial to  successful  work.  Lightly  begun 
means  easily  discontinued.  Count  the 
cost  (Luke  xiv.  28 — 33).  Eaw  haste  is 
sister  to  undue  delay.  Find  thy  task, 
calculate  thy  strength,  and  rest  not  until 
the  evening.  Impetuous  natures  need 
patience  and  perseverance ;  fearful  and 
timid  natures  need  courage  and  self- 
reliance  ;  all  need  encouragement.  Moses 
— '^  Who  am  I,  that  I  should  go  unto 
Pharaoh  r' (Exod.  iii.  11—22).  Joshua 
— "Be  strong  "  (Josh.  i.  1 — 9).  Jeremiah 
— '^I  am  a  child"  (Jer.  i.  4—10). 
Ezekiel  —  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them " 
(Ezek.  ii.  3 — 8).  Nehemiah's  work- 
men —  "Be  not  ye  afraid"  (iv.  13, 
14). 

II.  Joyous  acceptance  of  the  al- 
lotted task  is  a  great  element  of 
strength.  Duty  as  duty,  or  duty 
joyously  done,  how  different !  Love 
thy  task.  Do  it  for  its  own  sake,  and 
it  will  become  easier.  Such  service  is 
perfect  freedom.  Men  see  what  most 
interests  them.  An  artist  on  entering 
a  room  sees  pictures  ;  a  student  books ; 
an  architect  decorations. 


**  The  wide  world 
Is  full  of  work,  and  everything  therein 
Finds  in  it  its  best  blessedness.     The  bee 
Sings  at  his  task  throughout  the  summer  day." 

III.  Earnest  work  is  sure  to  pro- 
voke opposition.  Eidlcule  (ver.  1), 
compromise  (vi.  2),  misrepresentation 
(vi.  7),  attack  (iv.  8). 

IV.  Work  is  instrumental  in  de- 
veloping personal  character.  What 
canst  thou  do?  Nehemiah  proved  his 
men  by  trial. 

V.  lluctuation  in  the  success  of  an 
undertaking  is  no  reason  for  relin- 
quishing it  (vers.  10—15). 

George  Stephenson's  motto  was  "  per- 
severe." ''  Go  on,  sir,  go  on,"  was 
DAlembert's  advice  to  a  young  dis- 
couraged student.  John  Wesley,  interro- 
gated as  to  the  remarkable  success  of  his 
followers,  said,  **  They  are  all  at  it,  and 
always  at  it." 

VI.  The  power  of  combined  action 
in  meeting  a  common  foe  (vers.  13, 
23).  Nelson  the  day  before  Trafalgar 
took  two  officers  who  were  at  variance 
to  the  spot  where  they  could  see  the  fleet 
opposed  to  them.  "  Yonder,"  he  said, 
"  are  your  enemies  ;  shake  hands  and  be 
friends,  like  good  Englishmen." 

**  Oh !  ye  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  stewards 
of  his  truth, 
Lead  ye  the  band,  all  vigorous  in  faith's  im- 
mortal youth. 
But  not  alone  shall  ye  repair. 
For  all  must  aid  in  toil  and  prayer. 
Then  let  them  say  the  work  is  nought,  to  scoff 

us  into  fear. 
What  is  the  answer  we  must  make  ?     Calmly 
the  walls  to  rear ; 
Building  with  weapons  girded  on  ; 
Warriors  until  the  work  is  done." 

Enlarged  from  *  Scenes  from  the  Life  of 
Nehemiah* 


The  Work  and  Warfare  of  Life. 

iv.  17,  18.     They  which  huilded  on  the  wally  and  they  that  bare  burdens,  with 

those  that  laded,  every  one,  &c. 


Nehemiah  iv.  one  of  the  Bible  scenes 
that  has  indelibly  impressed  itself  upon 
the    popular    imagination.       Like    the 


^'  lamps,  pitchers,  and  trumpets "  of 
Gideon's  army,  the  "  sword  and  trowel" 
of  Nehemiah's  army  has  passed  into  a 


104 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  rv. 


proverb.  Only  scenes,  books,  pictures, 
sculptures  become  popular  that  present 
the  elementary  conditions  of  human 
life,  that  go  down  to  the  rock  on  which 
the  structure  of  human  society  rests, 
e.  g.  the  parables  of  Jesus,  Bunyan's 
'  Pilgrim's  Progress,*  Nehemiah  iv.  a 
picture  of  the  work  and  warfare  of 
life. 

I.  The  conditions  of  the  conflict.    1 . 
Against    the  solicitations  of  self-indul- 
gence.     *'  The  people   had   a   mind   to 
work  "  (ver.  6).     Not  always  so.     The 
spirit  is  not  always  willing.     And  when 
the  spirit  is  willing  the  flesh  is  often 
weak.     True  (a)  of  the  cultivation  of 
personal  character.     To  conquer   pride, 
subdue  passion,  root  out  evil  dispositions, 
to  *'  grow  in  grace,"  not  an  easy  thing. 
In  this  sense  **  flesh  and  blood  cannot 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."     A  Chris- 
tian does  not  always  "sail  with  a  straight 
course,"  as  did  Paul  on  his  first  voyage 
to  Europe  (Acts  xvi.  11).     Oftener,  like 
the  same  apostle  on  a  later  voyage,  he 
"  sails  slowly "   (Acts  xxvii.  7),  or  the 
"  ship  sticks  fast  and  remains  unmove- 
able "  (Acts  xxvii.  41).     Speak  to  the 
children  of  Israel  that  they  go  forward,  is 
God's  message  to  the  inspired  leaders  of 
every  age.   What  doest  thou  here?  is  his 
question  to  every  dispirited  and  inactive 
Elijah.    Jonah  may  sit  for  awhile  under 
the  shadow  of  the  gourd,  but  when  the 
morning  calls  him  to  his  work  and  to  his 
labour  the  gourd  perishes.     True  (6)  of 
working  for  one's  fellows.     Social  and 
philanthropic  work.    How  little  response 
of  gratitude  from  those   to  whom  you 
give,  from  those  whom  you  toil  to  raise. 
Religious  teaching  and  influence.    Mani- 
fold are  difiiculties  and  discouragements. 
Unless  work  be   its   own  reward,  who 
shall  continue  %     No  motive  lower  than 
the  stars,  no  inspiration  less  stable  than 
trust  in  God,  will  enable  a  man  to  war 
against  the  lust  of  self-indulgence.     2. 
Against  foes,     (a)  Foes  may  be  violent 
and   pronounced  as  Sanballat    (ver   1). 
With  such  as  these  a  man  can  count. 
Eouse  a  lion,  and  the  consequences  are 
clear.     The  arch  foe  and  many  of  his 
emissaries  are  not  unwilling  to  show  a 
bold  front  to  a  servant  of  God.     Speci- 
ally if  it  can  be  said  of  him — 


**  Servant  of  God,  well  done  ! 
"Well  done !  thy  words  are  great  and  bold ; 
At  times  they  seem  to  me 
Like  Luther's  in  the  days  of  old. 
Half  battles  for  the  free  !  " 

Words   for    freedom,    for  brotherhood, 
against  oppressors,  against  shams,  must 
count  the  cost.    Reformers,  Covenanters, 
Puritans  "  resisted  unto  blood,  striving 
against  sin"   (Heb.   xii.   4).     (b)   Foes 
may  be  subtle  and  plot  in  secret  (ver. 
11).    Against  these  we  are  comparatively 
defenceless.     It  is  dastardly  to  stab  in 
the  dark.    But  the  assassin  is  dastardly* 
Guilt   makes   cowards,      (c)  Foes  have 
the  advantage  of  numbers  and  posses- 
sion (ver.  7).     They  were  on  the  ground. 
Neheraiah  and  his  compatriots'  loss  was 
their   gain.      *'  They    conspired   all    of 
them  together,"  &c.  (ver.  8).     The  good 
have   always   been    a    minority.      The 
great  have  too  often  been  on  the  side  of 
the  majority.  "Not  many  wise,  not  many 
mighty,"  &c.  (1  Cor.  i.  26—29).      •'  We 
wrestle  not    against  flesh   and   blood  " 
only,  "but  against  principalities,"  &c. 
(Ephes.  vi.  12,  13).      3.  Against  friends, 
(a)  Half-hearted  friends  (ver.  12).  They 
had  patriotism  enough  to  warn  li^ehe- 
miah  of  danger.     But  they  dwelt  near 
the  adversaries.      A  decided  foe  better 
than  a  doubtful  friend.     Gideon's  300, 
who  had  not  time  to  kneel  to  drink, 
better  than   countless   crowds    of  self- 
indulgent  people  (Judges  vii.).      "  Art 
thou  for  US'?"  said  Joshua  to  the  angel- 
captain  (Josh.   v.).      For  or  against  is 
understood.     But  half-heartedness  never 
won  a  battle,  never  gained  a  victory,  (b) 
Dispirited  friends  (ver.  10).      The  wall 
was   built   somewhat,  but   they  feared 
their  strength   would    give   out.     Fear 
and  faith  are  antagonists.     Trust  in  thy 
cause,  trust  in  the  God  of  thy  cause, 
cures  for  dispiritedness. 

"  I  know  not  what  the  future  hath 

Of  marvel  or  surprise, 
Assured  alone  that  life  and  death 

His  mercy  underlies. 
And  if  my  heart  and  flesh  are  weak 

To  bear  an  untried  pain, 
The  bruised  reed  he  will  not  break. 

But  strengthen  and  sustain." 

II.  The  conditions  of  victory.  I.  All 
at  it  (ver.  13).  Every  man  at  work. 
Every  man  at  his  own  work.    Every  man 


CHAP,  IV.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


105 


under  discipline — imder  the  rulers  (ver. 
14),  under  Nehemiah  (vers.  18 — 20). 
Generalize  these  particulars.  Nobody 
can  do  my  work.  My  task  is  my  own. 
1^0  man  can  lift  responsibility  off  his 
own  shoulders.  There  is  a  cry  to  every 
man  from  some  helpless  man,  or  mass  of 
men,  "  Come  over  and  help  us."  The 
unnamed  disciple  of  John  xx.  did  outrun 
Peter,  and  came  first  to  the  sepulchre ; 
but  Peter  first  went  into  the  sepulchre. 
Had  he  more  courage  or  less  reverence? 
Never  mind — each  left  the  other  scope 
to  work.  St.  John  has  left  a  greater 
name  than  his  brother  James.  But 
James  died  for  the  truth.  In  this  holy 
war  men  call  life  the  feeble  cannot  be 
dispensed  with.  Nehemiah  conferred 
with  the  nobles  (ver.  14).  Nehemiah 
needed  the  bearers  of  burdens  (ver.  17). 
2.  Unslumbering  vigilance.  We  "set  a 
watch "  (ver.  9).  "I  set  the  people," 
&c.  (ver.  13).  **  And  it  came  to  pass," 
&c.  (ver.  16).  There  is  a  lesson  of  life 
in  the  heading  of  this  chapter  in  our 
Bibles — "  Nehemiah  prayeth  and  con- 
tinueth  the  work."  Patient  waiting  is 
a  grace  j  perseverance  is  a  virtue.  Men 
are  sometimes  enervated  by  success. 
They  become  unwatchful.  ''Doctor," 
said  his  wife  to  Martin  Luther  one  day, 
*'  how  is  it  that,  whilst  subject  to  papacy, 
we  prayed  so  often  and  with  such  fer- 
vour, whilst  now  we  pray  with  the 
utmost  coldness  and  very  seldom  ? " 
"Every  one  with  one  hand  held  a 
weapon  "  (ver.  17).  "He  that  sounded 
the  trumpet  was  by  me  "  (ver.  18).  "In 
what  place  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the 
trumpet,  resort  ye  thither  unto  us  "  (ver. 
20).  These  are  only  the  dictates  of 
worldly  prudence.  So  true  is  it  that 
"  the  children  of  this  world  are  in  their 
generation  wiser  than  the  children  of 
light"  (Luke  xvi.  8).  What  said  the 
greatest  Christian  Teacher  ]  "  The  Son 
of  man  is  as  a  man  taking  a  far  journey, 
who  left  his  house,  and  gave  to  every 
man  his  work,  and  commanded  the 
porter  to  watch.  Watch  ye  therefore. 
What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all, 
Watch  "  (Mark  xiu.  34,  35,  37). 


niusiration  : — "  That  man  is  happy  who  can 
combine  work  and  watching  in  perfect  harmony 
— who  has  Stephen's  life  of  labour  and  Stephen's 
vision  in  the  end.  In  every  soul  there  should  be 
the  sisters  of  Bethany,  active  effort  and  quiet 
thought,  and  both  agreeing  in  mutual  love  and 
help.  But  Mary  no  longer  sits  at  the  feet  of 
Christ  and  looks  in  his  face ;  she  stands  at  the 
door  and  gazes  out  into  the  open  sky  to  watch 
the  tokens  of  his  coming,  while  in  this  hope  her 
sister  in  the  house  still  works.  In  due  time 
he  will  be  here  to  crown  every  humble  eflfort 
with  overflowing  grace,  to  satisfy  the  longing 
soul  that  looks  for  him,  and  to  raise  all  the 
dead  for  whom  we  weep." — Dr.  Ker. 

3.  Resort  to  the  unseen  Refuge. 
"Hear,  0  our  God"  (ver.  4).  "Be 
not  ye  afraid :  remember  the  Lord " 
(ver.  14).  "Our  enemies  heard  that 
God  had  brought  their  counsel  to 
nought"  (ver.  15).  "Our  God  shall 
fight  for  us  "  (ver.  20).  Our  God— the 
attestation  of  experience.  "He  shall 
deliver  thee  in  six  troubles:  yea,  in 
seven  there  shall  no  evil  touch  thee " 
(Job  V.  19).  The  Apostle  Paul  ap- 
pealed from  Festus  unto  Caesar. 
Nehemiah  appealed  from  Sanballat  to 
God.  In  the  miracle  of  feeding  our 
Lord  turned  an  inward  look  upon  the 
troubled,  calculating  thoughts  of  his  dis- 
ciples, though  "  he  himself  knew  what 
he  would  do."  He  turned  an  outward 
look  upon  the  hungry,  trustful  crowd  : 
"  Make  the  men  sit  down."  He  directed 
an  upward  look  to  God  :  "  When  he  had 
taken  the  five  loaves  and  the  two  fishes 
he  looked  up  to  heaven."  The  inward 
look  revealed  distrust ;  the  outward  look 
revealed  need  ;  the  upward  look  re- 
veal 3d  strength  and  supply.  A  parable 
of  life.  Look  abroad  —  the  work  is 
great ;  look  within — calculate  resources; 
look  up — "  Thy  God  hath  commanded 
thy  strength."  "  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord, 
not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give 
glory,  for  thy  mercy,  and  for  thy  truth's 
sake.  The  Lord  hath  been  mindful  of 
us:  he  will  bless  us.  He  will  bless 
them  that  fear  the  Lord,  both  small 
and  great.  We  wiU  bless  the  Lord  from 
this  time  forth  and  for  evermore.  Praise 
the  Lord  "  (Ps.  cxv.). 


106 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH. 


[OHAP.  IV. 


ADDENDA   TO    CHAPTER   IV. 

Sentences  feom  Old  Writers. 


Sanballafs  opposition  (vers.  1,  2). 
"The  devil  and  his  servants  have  ever 
been  utter  enemies  to  reformation. 
Jabesh-gilead  would  send  in  none  to 
help  the  Lord  against  the  mighty 
(Judges  xxi.  9) ;  no  more  would  Meroz 
(Judges  V.  23).  Josiah  met  with  much 
opposition;  so  did  St.  Paul  wherever 
he  came  to  set  up  evangelical  and 
spiritual  worship,  which  is  called  a 
reformation  (Heb.  ix.  10).  All  the 
world  was  against  Athanasius  in  his 
generation,  and  Luther  in  his ;  rejecting 
what  they  attempted  with  scorn  and 
slander.  Nehemiah  and  his  Jews  were 
not  more  busy  in  building  than  the 
enemies  active  in  deriding,  conspiring, 
practising  to  hinder  and  overthrow 
them."  "If  thou  hast  not  the  favour 
of  men,  be  not  grieved  at  it ;  but  take 
this  to  heart,  that  thou  dost  not  behave 
thyself  so  warily  and  circumspectly  as 
it  becometh  the  servant  of  God  and  a 
devout,  religious  man."  "  Why  art  thou 
troubled  when  things  succeed  not  as 
thou  wouldest  or  desirest]  For  who  is 
he  that  hath  all  things  according  to  his 
mind]" 

Tobiah's  scorn  (ver.  3).  "  Say  not, 
*  Should  I  suffer  these  things  from  so 
contemptible  a  fellow  as  thisV  Yes, 
truly ;  in  consideration  of  that  patient 
and  meek  spirit  which  was  in  Christ. 
No  man  will  ever  be  reconciled  by  wrath 
or  revenge.  Victory  consists  in  virtue, 
not  in  vice."  "One  devU  does  not 
drive  out  another."  "  We  chiefly  seek 
God  for  our  inward  witness,  when  out- 
wardly we  be  contemned  by  men,  and 
when  there  is  no  credit  giyen  unto  us." 
"Thou  canst  not  have  two  paradises." 
"  Christ  was  willing  to  suffer  and  be 
despised;  and  darest  thou  complain  of 
any  man]"  "Let  thy  thought  be  on 
the  Highest."  "  Whom  God  will  keep 
no  man's  perverseness  shall  be  able  to 
hurt."  "Have  a  good  conscience,  and 
God  will  well  defend  thee." 

Nehemiah's  prayers  (vers.  4,  5,  9). 
"Nehemiah  hateth   not  the  men,   but 


their  wickedness ;  so  we  learn  to  put  a 
difference  betwixt  the  man  and  the  sin 
of  man,  and  pray  for  mercy  to  the  one 
and  justice  to  the  other.  Man  is  God's 
good  creature,  and  to  be  beloved  of  all 
sorts;  sin  is  of  the  devil,  and  to  be  fled 
of  all  sorts."  "  His  prayer  is  not  long, 
but  full."  "Faithful  prayer  is  never 
ineffectual.  So  built  we  the  wall.  This 
followed  upon  Nehemiah's  prayer  as  a 
gracious  answer  to  it ;  the  people  were 
encouraged,  and  the  wall  finished." 
"Beware  of  hating  the  person  whilst 
thou  abhorrest  his  sin."  "  Prayer  is  the 
key  of  heaven  ;  the  pillar  of  the  world  ; 
the  fire  of  devotion ;  the  light  of  know- 
ledge ;  the  repository  of  wisdom ;  the 
strength  of  the  soul ;  the  remedy  against 
faint-heartedness ;  the  forerunner  of 
honour ;  the  nurse  of  patience ;  the 
guardian  of  obedience ;  the  fountain  of 
quietness  ;  the  comfort  of  the  sorrowful ; 
the  triumph  of  the  just ;  the  helper  of 
the  oppressed ;  the  refreshment  of  this 
life ;  the  SAveetening  of  death  ;  and  the 
foretaste  of  the  heavenly  life."  "  God 
prevents  our  prayers,  meets  us  (as  it 
were)  half-way,  and  courts  our  friend- 
ship, being  a  thousand  times  more  ready 
to  give  than  we  are  to  receive." 

Nehemiah's  watchfulness  (ver.  9). 
"  It  is  not  sufficient  to  pray  and  then 
to  neglect  such  means  as  God  hath  ap- 
pointed us  to  use  for  our  defence  and 
comfort,  no  more  than  it  is  to  say,  when 
he  hath  prayed,  I  will  live  without  meat 
and  drink,  and  God  himself  shall  feed 
me.  For  as  the  Lord  hath  taught  us  to 
pray,  '  Give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread,' 
so  he  hath  commanded  us  to  work  for  it, 
and  saith,  '  If  any  will  not  work,  neither 
shall  he  eat.'"  "  Sin  opens  the  door  to 
the  devil."  "  Awaken  us,  0  God,  that 
we  may  watch  ;  draw  us  to  thee,  and  we 
will  run  the  straight  way,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord." 

Judah's  defection  (ver.  10).  "  It  is 
an  easy  matter  to  begin  a  good  work, 
but  a  special  gift  to  stand  in  all  storms 
and  continue   to  the   end."     "  Judah's 


CHAP.   IV.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAIL 


107 


escutcheon  was  a  lion,  but  here  he  is 
unlike  himself."  "  Nehemiah  might  well 
have  said  to  these  men  of  Judah,  as 
Alexander  once  did- to  a  faint-hearted 
soldier  of  his  that  was  of  his  own  name, 
*  Either  leave  oif  the  name  of  Alexander, 
or  be  valiant.'  So  either  hold  out  and 
bear  up  under  your  burdens,  or  be  Judah 
no  more.  Never  was  anything  too  hard 
for  Alexander,  because  he  never  held 
anything  impossible  to  be  effected." 

Nehemiah's  policy  and  appeal  (vers. 
11 — 14).  "  Their  brethren  from  abroad 
gave  the  workmen  intelligence ;  and  this 
was  a  friendly  office,  for  premonition  is 
the  best  means  of  prevention."  '*  It  was 
their  duty  to  have  come  home,  stood  in 
storms,  and  help  to  build  Jerusalem. 
But  God,  which  turneth  our  negligence 
and  foolishness  to  the  setting  forth  of 
his  wisdom  and  goodness,  gave  them  a 
good  will  and  boldness  to  further  that 
building  as  they  might."  "  Away  with 
that  cowardly  passion  which  unmans  a 


man.  Remember  the  Lord,  whom  he 
that  feareth  needs  fear  none  else."  "  God 
and  the  world  cannot  be  friends ;  and 
that  maketh  so  few  courtiers  to  tread 
this  road." 

Soldier  -  builders  (vers.  15  —  23). 
"  Courage  and  strength  without  wisdom 
is  foolish  rashness,  and  wisdom  without 
courage  and  strength  is  fearful  cowardli- 
ness." **  Nehemiah  was  an  active  man, 
trading  every  talent.'*  "  In  the  Chris- 
tian's panoply  there  is  no  mention  of 
armour  for  the  back,  though  there  is  for 
the  breast,  because  a  Christian  soldier 
should  never  fly."  "  In  God's  cause  a 
man  must  be  bold  and  blush  not." 
"Fear  of  the  enemy  did  not  weaken 
them,  but  waken  them."  "Time  was 
precious,  and  they  redeemed  and  im- 
proved it.  The  common  complaint  is, 
We  want  time;  but  the  truth  is,  we 
do  not  so  much  want  as  waste  it." 
"Nehemiah  said  not  to  his  men,  Go 
YE,  but,  Go  WE." 


CHAPTER  V. 


Explanatory  Notes.]  1.  Against  their  brethren] ».  e.  the  richer  portion  (ver.  7).  2 — 4.  There 
were  that  said]  Keil  divides  into  three  classes.  («)  The  workers,  who  had  no  property,  {b) 
Those  who  had  mortgaged  their  fields,  vineyards,  and  houses.  (<?)  Those  who  had  borrowed  money 
for  the  king's  tribute  upon  their  fields  and  vineyards.  2.  "We  take  up  corn]  Not  by  force.  The 
words  mean,  We  desire  that  corn  may  be  provided.  3.  Because  of  the  dearth]  Probably  Sanballat 
and  his  army  intercepted  the  supplies.  4.  For  the  king's  tribute]  We  have  made  our  fields  and 
our  vineyards  answerable  for  money  for  the  king's  tribute  (Bertheau),  i.  e.  We  have  borrowed  money 
upon  our  fields  for  tribute.  This  they  could  only  do  by  pledging  the  crops  (comp.  the  law,  Lev. 
XXV.  14,  17).  6.  "  Our  brethren  "]  The  richer  Jews.  The  sense  of  the  first  half  of  the  verse  is, 
We  are  of  one  flesh  and  blood  with  these  rich  men.  The  law  not  only  allowed  to  lend  to  the  poor  on 
a  pledge  (Deut.  xv.  8),  but  also  permitted  Israelites,  if  they  were  poor,  to  sell  themselves  (Lev.  xxv. 
39),  and  also  their  sons  and  daughters,  to  procure  money.  It  required,  however,  that  they  who  were 
thus  sold  should  not  be  retained  as  slaves,  but  set  at  liberty  without  ransom,  either  after  seven  years 
or  at  the  year  of  Jubilee  (Lev.  xxv.  39 — 41 ;  Exod.  xxi.  2  seq.).  It  is  set  forth  as  a  special  hardship 
in  this  verse  that  some  of  their  daughters  were  brought  into  bondage  for  maidservants.  — Keil.  Neither 
is  it  in  our  power]  Lit.  Our  hand  is  not  to  God  (Gen.  xxxi.  29)  Keil  explains  thus  :  The  power  to 
alter  it  is  not  in  our  hand.  Our  fields  and  our  vineyards  are  in  the  hands  of  others.  7.  I  consulted 
with  myself]  My  heart  took  counsel  upon  it.  Ye  exact  usury]  Usury  and  injustice  are  closely  allied. 
8.  We  redeemed.  Ye  sell]  Strong  contrast.  The  sale  of  their  brethren  for  bondservants  forbidden 
(Lev.  xxv.  42).  11.  Hundredth  part]  Probably  a  monthly  interest.  12.  I  called  the  priests]  To 
witness  the  oath.  13.  I  shook  my  lap]  A  symbolical  action.  '*  The  lap  of  the  garment,  in  which 
things  are  carried  (Isa.  xlix.  22),  where  alone  the  word  is  again  found." — Keil.  See  for  this 
significant  action  Acts  xviii.  6.  14.]  Crosby  says  this  verse  and  those  which  follow  form  an 
ii.terruption  of  the  narrative.  They  show  that  Nehemiah  was  for  twelve  years  governor  of  Judah, 
and  did  not  write  this  history  till  the  expiration  of  that  time.  The  bread  of  the  governor]  The  food 
and  wine  with  which  the  community  had  to  furnish  him.  15.  Even  their  servants  bare  rule] 
Arbitrary,  oppressive  rule.  Abuse  of  power  for  extortions.  17.  The  rulers]  The  heads  of  the  diff'erent 
houses  of  Judah.    19.  Think  upon  me]  (Corap.  xiii.  14  and  31). 


108 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


[chap.  v. 


HOMILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTEE  V. 


Ver.  1—19.  Greed  corrected. 
»     1 — 19.  Godless  Rich  Men. 
„     1 — 13.  A  Great  Schism  averted. 
„  1.  The  Accusing  Cry  of  Humanity. 

„       3—6.  The  Miseries  of  Debt. 
))  6.  Righteous  Anger. 

ti  7.  Introspection. 

n  7.  An    Assembly    convoked    against 

Sinners. 
f»  8.  Inconsistency  without  Excuse. 

91  9.  God's  People  under  the  Eye  of  a 

Critical  World. 


Ver. 


»> 


10.  What  Others  do  no   Excuse  for  My 
doing.  ' 

12.  Clenching  a  Good  Resolution. 

13.  The  Terrors  of  the    Lord  persuadin* 

Men.  ^ 

U.  A  Man  foregoing  his  Rights  for  the 

sake  of  his  Duties. 
15.  A  Motto  for  a  Manly  Life. 
19.  Conscious  Integrity. 
19.  The  Saint's  Support. 
19.  The  Remembrance  of  Good  Deeds  a 

Pillow  of  Rest  for  a  Good  Man. 


Gbeed  Ooerbctbd. 
Chap.  V. 

The  chapter  is  complete  in  itself.     It  is  not  only  a  story,  but  a  paraole  of  everlastina 
suggestiveness.     In  the  history  of  every  generation  we  find  some  situatLn  3 
to  the  one  recorded  here.     The  great  humanness  of  the  Bible  is  not  less  sSin. 
han  Its  dmmty.     God^shooki.  sublimely  crowded  with  pathetic  Lterest  in '^^^^^^^^ 
•^T    r^    %  ''  ?  Fcture  of  the  desolations  of  greed  and  their  correction 
•    \  The  desolations  Of  greed.     The  cry  of  the  people  in  the  first  verse  is  a  nofp 
m  the  "still,  sad  music  of  humanity"  which  has  ran|out  in  every  Z     The  crv 
ri^dtr^i'  '""  *^l.^T  ^^^^^^^  ^2/m;^^^2/;  the  wail  of  natio/s  in  the  priest^ 
ridden  dark  ages ;  th^  lamentations  of  the  negro  race  in  the  slaveries  of  the  W 
century  ;  the  shnek  of  the  despised  people  prior  to  the  bloody  struggle  of  the  i^^^^^^^^^^^ 
RevoluHon;  the  clamour  of  the  English  poor  in  the  days  of  the  cSawsJ^lTl 
re-echoes  of  this  old  cry.     "  So  I  returned,  and  considered  all  the  oppreslnsTat 
are  done  under  the  sun :  and  behold,  the  tears  of  such  as  were  opprS  3  fW 
had  no  comforter;  and  on  the  side  of  their  oppressors  therrsTower    buf  tZ 
had  no  comforter'' (Ecclesiv.  1).     Such  was  the  melanchr;^rwhich  ^e 

6);  and  ke  did  Zl  "X'aZl  1  A  tTif  t'"'!}  ^'l'"' f' "  ^''''- 
cry  I't  fhni  //.   h    4J.    ''\^^/^^''9^y'     -i-    WANT.     Bread/   bread/  bread/  what  a 

pinchuigpoTertv"  "V^T^'  ■,u?^  '^^'^  "''  ^"^^  ^^^  Walton,  "from 
Lnl^^  olden  ^davs  Bv  SZ  /  ''\  "".''ven  ent  for  me,"  meekly  said  the  good 
^^^^^ZMlLuulfthtfZ  ""J^^Jraahty  let  us  oifer  this  prayer."  2. 
will  not  tClZll  "^e^^lt  of  this  want.  Great  are  thy  temptations,  0  Poverty    What 

slaveix  to  his  pi^nc  n^  llLn  J  T  *  ""'"'  ^'  ^  """^  ^'^"^  he  is  kept  in 
pmcmng  need  1     Again  let  the  woe,  woe,  woe  go  forth  upon  those 


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  109 


whose  selfish  greed  breaks  the  staff  of  bread  for  the  people.    3.  Hopelessness.    Here 
is  a  picture  from  one  of  Thomas  Carlyle's  graphic  books.     "  Passing  by  the  work- 
house of  St.  Ives  in  Huntingdonshire,  on  a  bright  day  last  autumn  "  (about  1840),  *'  I 
saw  sitting  on  wooden  benches,  in  front  of  their  Bastille,  and  within  their  rino--wall 
and  its  railings,  some  half  hundred  or  more  of  these  men.     Tall,  robust  figures  ;  younf^ 
mostly,  or  of  middle  age ;  of  honest  countenance  ;  many  of  them  thoughtful  and  even 
intelligent-looking  men.     They  sat  there,  near  by  one  another  ;  but  in  a  kind  of 
torpor,  especially  in  a  silence,  which  was  very  striking.     In  silence  ;  for,  alas,  what 
word  was  to  be  said  ?     An  earth  all  lying  round,  crying.  Come  and  till  me,  come 
and  reap  me  ; — yet  we  here  sit  enchanted  !     In  the  eyes  and  brows  of  these  men 
hung  the  gloomiest  expression,  not  of  anger,  but  of  grief,  and  shame,  and  manifold, 
inarticulate  distress,  aiid  weariness.     They  returned  my  glance  with  a  glance  that 
seemed  to  say,  *  Do  not  look  at  us.     We  sit  enchanted  here ;  we  know  not  why.' 
There  was  something  that  reminded  me  of  Dante's  hell  in  the  look  of  all  this,  and 
I  rode  swiftly  away."     What  a  dark  outlook  utter  want  has  !  what  a  dreary  night- 
mare to  lie  on  a  human  spirit  !     In  the  poor  wretches  whose  condition  stirred 
Nehemiah's  anger  with  their  want  and  their  hopeless  debt  and  their  heart-breaking 
family  separations,  as  son  and  daughter  went  in  pawn  for  bread,  there  is  a  scene  to 
smite   the  buried   conscience  of  the  grinding  oppressor,  and  to  call  forth  some 
natural  tears  from  the  eyes  of  onlooking  philanthropists.     "  Man's  inhumanity  to 
man  makes  countless  thousands  mourn." 

II.  The  corrections  of  philanthropy.     Like  a  Howard  moved  with  pity  and 
shame  for  the  prisoner  as  if  he  had  been  his  own  mother's  son,  or  a  Wilberforce 
making  his  vow  to  break  the  iron  chain  of  the  negro,  Nehetniah  rose  up  to  mend 
the  evil.     It  was  a  monster  that  would  have  frightened  back  to  Persia  a  less 
dauntless   man,  hut  fear  and   discouragement   were   his   playmates.      i^ehemiah 
proceeded  to  correct  this  evil  by  his  exhortation  and  by  his  example.     1.  Exhorta- 
tion.     He   rebuked   the   greed    of  gain.      In  vers.    6  —  8  we   have   the   grand 
outpouring  of  his  aroused  sympathies.     **  Then  they  held  their  peace,  and  found 
nothing  to  answer."     Eead  from  verse  12  to  13,     Knowing  how  subtle  is  the  devil 
of  greed,  N'ehemiah  called  the  j^riests  to  a  religious  solenmity,  that  the  promise  of 
the  repentant  oppressors  might  as  it  were  he  written  down  in  the  great  doom-hook  of 
God,  so  that  each  man  might  go  back  to  his  money-bags  with  his  own  Amen !  with 
the  curse  on  greed  ringing  in  his  ears.     Here  is  an  example.     What  is  good  to  be 
done  should  be  done  in  the  solemn  name  of  God.     Strike  the  iron  of  a  good 
resolution  while  it  is  hot.     Second  thoughts  are  selfish  thoughts  in  all  Divine  things. 
Bind  the  soul  while  it  is  willing  fast  to  God's  altar.     Pledges,  vows,  oaths ;  let  those 
mock  these  who  will.    Our  evil  nature  is  a  Samson,  who  snaps  cords  like  tow ;  nay,  a 
demoniac  whom  no  man  can  bind,  no,  not  with  chains.     If  the  obligations  of  a 
solemn  pledge  to  God  can  do  it,  let  it  be  done.    "  I  called  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath 
of  them,  that  they  should  do  according  to  this  promise."     You  who  are  meditating 
surrender  to  Christ,  or  reformation  from  drunkenness,  or  abandonment  of  some  evil 
thing  or  associate,  go  and  do  likewise.      2.  Example.     Grand  as  was  Nehemiah's 
exhortation,  his  example  is  still  grander.     He  enforced  his  sermon  by  living  it  out 
hefore  his  congregation.     The  perquisites  of  his  office  he  abandoned  for  the  sake  of 
example  (ver.  15)  ;  what  he  might  have  regarded  as  a  right  he  surrendered  in  ordeir 
to  be  himself  a  type  of  unselfishness.     His  chances  of  gain  were  many.     He  knew 
what  his  plans  were,  and  could  have  invested  well  in  the  new  city ;  but,  says  he, 
"  Neither  bought  we  any  land,"  a  suggestion  topuhlic  persons  tohose  office  gives  them 
the  chances  of  gain.     "  I  took  no  advantage  of  my  opportunites."     Besides  his 
servants,  he  maintained  himself.     The  men  he  had  brought  to  do  the  noble  work 
of  renovation  were  men  who  had  claim  to  reward  ;  and  what  was  needful  Nehemiah 
gave  them  out  of   his  own  private  means.     He  wanted  to  build  Jerusalem  as 
Michael  Angelo  said  he  would  build  St.  Peter's — *'  for  the  glory  of  God." 

Application.     1.  Have  an  ear  for  the  cry  of  the  poor  and  oppressed.     Keep  a 


no  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  v. 


heart  alive  for  such  as  be  prostrate.  2.  Emulate  NehemidKs  self-sacrifice.  Do  not 
say,  "  He  was  a  hero."  His  character  made  him  a  hero.  His  sublime  fear  of  God 
and  pity  for  man  did  not  flow  from  his  heroism  so  much  as  make  it.  He  was  but 
a  cupbearer  to  the  king,  and  had  a  snug  birth  and  a  good  stipend  and  great 
exT)ectations,  but  these  were  chaff  when  compared  with  an  opportunity  of  making  a 
good  mark  in  his  generation,  and  of  writing  his  name  in  the  book  of  life.  **  By 
faith  he  obtained  a  good  report ! " 

Illustrations  : — **  Every  grain  of  riches  hath  a  vermin  of  pride  and  ambition  in  it."  "  Oppression  is 
a  bony  sin  "  (Amos  v.  12,  13).  **  As  God  hath  enlarged  any  man  in  his  outward  estate,  he  must  be 
answerably  enlarged  in  works  of  mercy."  "  It  is  one  thing  to  be  rich  in  this  world,  and  another 
thino-  to  be  rich  towards  God,  as  our  Saviour  phraseth  it ;  to  be  rich  in  knowledge,  as  St.  Paul  hath 
it  •  rich  in  faith,  as  St.  James."  "  Plighmindedness,  causing  men  to  think  great  things  of  themselves, 
and  to  seek  great  things  for  themselves,  is  a  blab  that  the  devil  will  easily  blow  up  in  rich  misers,  to 
think  themselves  simply  the  better  men  because  richer  than  others,  which  is  all  one  as  if  the  silly 
ant,  the  higher  she  gets  upon  her  hillock,  the  greater  she  should  conceitherself  "— Trofip.  *'  Poverty," 
it  has  been  said,  "  hts  many  wants  ;  but  avarice  is  in  want  of  everything." 

*'  The  sense  to  value  riches,  with  the  art 
T' enjoy  them,  and  the  virtue  to  impart. 
Not  meanly  nor  ambitiously  pursued, 
Not  sunk  by  sloth,  nor  raised  by  servitude  ; 
To  balance  fortune  by  a  just  expense, 
Join  with  economy,  magnificence  ; 
With  splendour,  charity  ;  with  plenty,  healthy 
0  teach  us." — Alexander  Fope» 

Godless  Rich  Men. 
Chap.  V. 

This  is  not  the  only  page  of  the  Bible  on  which  the  sins  of  covetousness,  oppression, 
and  luxury  are  linked  together  and  denounced.  Isaiah  represents  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  looking  for  judgment,  but  behold  oppression;  for  righteousness,  but  behold  a 
cry  ;  and  then  hurls  a  Divine  woe  against  those  that  join  house  to  house,  that  lay  field 
to  field,  till  there  be  no  place,  that  they  may  be  placed  alone  in  the  midst  of  the 
earth ;  that  rise  up  early  in  the  morning  that  they  may  follow  strong  drink,  &c. 
(Isa.  V.  7 — 12).  Amos  speaks  of  those  who  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  come 
near,  that  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory  (Amos  vi.  3,  4).  Micah  utters  a  woe  against 
those  who  covet  fields  and  houses,  and  take  them  by  violence  (Micah  ii.  2).  Even 
Ohrist  takes  up  his  parable  against  those  who  devour  widows'  houses  (Matt,  xxiii. 
14).  The  apostles  follow  his  example.  But  they  remind  us  that  other  gifts  may 
be  misused — power,  beauty,  any  gift  of  God. 

I.  The  value  of  wealth.  The  word  of  God  does  not  despise  wealth.  The 
references  to  riches  and  rich  men  are  no  fewer  than  one  hundred  and  seventy — 
descriptive,  regulative,  corrective.  1.  Riches  are  God^s  gift.  Not  invariably.  He 
has  not  ordained  that  right  and  riches  should  be  inseparable,  or  that  wrong  and  want 
should  be  invariably  cause  and  effect.  Still  it  is  true  that  "  the  Lord  maketh  poor 
and  maketh  rich."  "  Eiches  and  honours  come  of  him."  "  The  earth  is  full  of  his 
riches."  The  virtuous  he  "  maketh  fat  and  flourishing."  He  has  not  made  poverty 
the  outward  and  visible  sign  of  his  displeasure,  nor  wealth  of  his  favour.  Had  he 
done  so  the  Church  would  have  been  sectional.  Large  d  umbers  would  have  been 
shut  out  by  circumstances.  It  would  have  been  in  antagonism  to  human  weal. 
There  is  a  working  force  and  a  conserving  force.  2.  Wealth  is  man^s  glory.  With 
it  he  can  surround  himself  with  all  that  is  ennobling  in  science  and  art,  the  con- 
veniences of  life.  With  it  he  can  rule  men.  It  elevates.  Prosperous  families  and 
prosperous  nations  become  refined. 

IL  The  responsibility  of  wealth.     We  take  this  responsibility  to  be  personal 


CHAP.  V.J  HOMILETIQ  QOMMENTART:  NEHEMIAH.  Ill 


and  relative.     1.   A  man  otves  a  duty  to  himself.     The  first  contrast  here  is  between 
getting  and  covetous  hoarding.     The  Bible  preaches  no  Crusade  against  getting. 
It  does  not  say,  "Take  no  care  for  the  morrow."     It  does  say,  "Take  not  anxious, 
boding    thought."     Christianity  is  a  system  of  prudence.     It  imposes  restraint 
because  license  leads  to  ruin.     It  gives  a  premium  to  diligence.     Idleness  is  treated 
with  scorn  by  the  inspired  writers.     The  sun  shines  on  no  fairer  prospect  than  a 
diligent  person  ;  whatever  his  station,  whatever  his  aim,  the  first  condition  of  success 
is  toil,  the  second  is  toil,  the  third  is  toil.     But  the  crucial  test  is,  "  Are  we  getting 
to  live  •? "  or,  "  Are  we  living  to  get  ?  "     Do  we  lay  up  or  lay  out  1     At  every  step 
in  our  inquiry  we  are  upon  the  horns  of  a  dilemma.     The  breakers  are  on  every 
side.     The  vessel  needs  careful  piloting.     Laying  up  is  not  wrong,  and  nature  as 
well  as  revelation  teaches  that  he  that  does  not  provide  for  his  own  house  is  worse 
than  an  infidel.   "Naked  came  we  into  this  world,  and  naked  shall  we  return  thither;" 
but  we  do  not  read  that  we  must  leave  those  naked  whom  we  leave  behind.     For  the 
majority  this  must  be  so.     The  law  of  life  for  most  is  from  hand  to  mouth.     Very 
literally  their  prayer  is  answered,  "  Give  us  this  day  our  daih/  bread."     But  for 
the  middle  and  upper  classes  John  Wesley's  famous  rules  apply.  '   "  Get  all  you  can, 
save  all  you  can,  give  all  you  can."     At  eighty  years  of  age  he  thus  narrated  his 
own  experience.     "  Two-and-forty  years  ago  I  wrote  many  books.     Some  of  these 
had  such  a  sale  as  I  never  thought  of,  and  by  this  means  I  unawares  became  rich. 
I  gain  all  I  can  without  hurting  either  my  soul  or  body.     I  save  all  I  can,  not 
willingly  wasting  anything,  not  a  sheet  of  paper,  or  a  cup  of  water.     I  do  not  lay 
out  anything,  not  a  shilling,  unless  as  a  sacrifice  to  God.     Yet  by  giving  all  I  can 
I  am  effectually  secured  from  laying  up  '  treasures  upon  earth.'     And  f  am  secured 
from  either  desiring  or  endeavouring  it  as  long  as  I  give  all  I  can.     But  my  own 
hands  will  be  my  executors."     Generally  no  better  executors  can  be  found.     The 
Peabodys  and  Burdett-Coutts  act  on  this  principle,  and  their  memorial  remains  in 
model  cottages  and  Christian  sanctuaries.     Howard's  rule  was  "  that  our  superfluities 
give  way  to  other  men's  conveniences ;  that  our  conveniences  give  way  to  other 
men's  necessities  ;  and  that  even  our  necessities  sometimes  give  way  to  other  men's 
extremities."     "  Charity,"  says  Chrysostom,  "  is  the  scope  of  all  God's  commands  " 
2.  A  man  owes  a  duty  to  others.     "  I^o  man  liveth  to  himself."     (a)  We  'have 
spoken  of  the  kingly  rule  of  wealth.     A  king's  is  a  noble  office.     But  sometimes 
kingship  becomes  kingcraft.     Kingship  rules  for  the  good  of  the  subject ;  kingcraft 
rules  for  personal  ends,  and  then  power  becomes  tyranny.     To  rule  well  is  a  difficult 
task.    In  most  men  the  love  of  power  is  a  ruling  passion.     In  no  form  is  itstrono-er 
than  m  ruhng  men.     The  pages  of  history  are  stained  with  the  blood  shed  by  the 
oppressor.     But  there  are  other  thrones    than  that  on  which  the  monarch  sits 
Every  master  is  a  king.     Let  him  never  forget  that  kingly  honours  imply  kingly 
reponsibilities.     "Bead  the    indictment   in   Epistle    of  James    v.    1—6"     The 
''labourers  "  are  dependent  on  you— their  masters.    The  moral  claim'is  stronger  than 
the  legal.     There  are  forms  of  oppression  which  are  too  subtle  for  the  coarse 
instruments  of  law.     But  God  has  a  special  controversy  with  the  oppressor      "  He 
raiseth  up  the  poor  out  of  the  dust."    "  The  poor,  and  him  that  hath  no  helper,"  find  a 
helper  in  God.     One  duty  of  a  Queen's  Counsel  is  to  plead  the  cause  of  the  queen's 
subject,  who  would  otherwise  be  defenceless.     The  queen  is  the  defender  of  the  weak 
"Now  will  I  arise,"  saith  the  Lord,  "  for  the  oppression  of  the  poor,  for  the  sighin^ 
of  the  needy     (Ps.  xii.  5)  ;  "  He  shall  judge  the  poor  of  the  people  "  (Ps  Ixxii  iy 
f,'    'o'''^^*'^  "^"f^^  passages,  he  is  the  Advocate  of  the  poor,  the  Elevator  of  the  pooV 
the  Satisfier  of  the  poor,  the  Deliverer  of  the  poor.    The  sin  of  oppression  is  the  child 
o±  covetousness.    Ye  exact  usury  !     Sins  which  are  passed  by  because  of  the  power  of 
those  who  commit  them,  or  passed  by  because  of  the  poverty  and  powerlessness  of 
those  who  suffer  from  them,  are  said  to  cry  to  God.     There  are  many  species  of 
slavery  below  the  actual  thing.     When  we  get  from  our  servants  more  than  they 
are  well  able  to  do,  when  remuneration  is  insufficient,  when  in  any  way  we  prey 


112  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  v. 


upon  their  necessities  toe  are  slaveholders  in  all  hut  the  name.  Remember,  "  the 
Lord  of  Hosts  "  is  the  poor's  Avenger.  What  hosts  he  can  send  against  us.  Wilt 
thou  contend  with  God  1  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living 
God"  (Heb.  x.  3.1).  It  is  hard  to  possess  riches  wfthout  sin.  They  are  called 
"  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness."  They  are  often  possessed  by  the  wicked,  much 
admired  by  them,  and  not  seldom  gained  by  fraud.  Many  a  fortune  is  built  on 
wroncy,  and  wrong  is  a  foundation  of  sand.  It  is  not  easy  to  have  them  and  not  be 
hindered  by  them.  A  ship  that  takes  in  too  much  cargo  is  liable  to  sink.  Many 
rich  men  bend  under  their  mountain  of  gold.  A  man  who  should  bear  this  burden 
should  be  a  very  Atlas  for  moral  strength.  The  beasts  become  fierce  when  well  fed. 
And  it  is  hard  for  the  pui'se-full  to  be  other  than  purse-proud.  God  can  best  be 
served  by  a  mean,  "  Give  me  not  riches,  lest  I  be  full  and  deny  thee,  and  say.  Who 
is  the  Lord '?  "  "  Give  me  not  poverty,  lest  I  take  the  name  of  God  in  vain."  If 
riches  increase,  set  not  thine  heart  upon  them.  "  Possess  them  ;  let  them  not 
possess  you."  *'  God  gives  riches  to  the  good  lest  they  should  be  thought  evil ;  he 
gives  them  to  the  bad  lest  they  should  be  thought  the  only  good."  It  is  not 
impossible  for  a  rich  man  to  be  virtuous.  Abraham  and  Job  were  the  wealthiest  men 
of  the  East.  In  the  highest  circles  the  fair  flower  of  piety  flourishes.  Those,  how- 
ever, who  have  so  much  to  keep  them  here  may  well  find  it  difficult  to  be  absorbed 
in  the  contemplation  of  a  hereafter.     Prosperity  begets  security. 

III.  The  punishment  of  misused  wealth.     Kehemiah  cites  them,  as  it  were,  to 
God's  judgment-seat.    They  are  called  upon  to  plead  their  cause.    1.  T/ie  punishment 
is  self-caused.     "  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together  for  the  last  days,"  as  the  Now 
Testament  apostle  teaches  (James  v.).     The  punishment  grows  out  of  the  gain.    The 
wind  shakes  the  tallest  trees.     The  willow  bends  under  the  storm  and  rises  when 
the  gust  is  over ;  the  oak  stands  until  endurance  is  no  longer  possible.    Men  fall  from 
eminences.     He  who  keeps  on  the  ground  has  generally  secure  foothold.     2.   The 
punishment  is  self -inflicting.     All  speech  is  translatable  by  God.     The  young  lions' 
cry  for  prey  is  an  appeal  to  God,  and  he  gives  scent  and  swiftness.     The  parched 
ground  speaks  to  him  and  pleads  that  the  windows  may  be  opened,  and  the  rain-drops 
fall  from  the  closed  storehouse.     There  is  something  terribly  suggestive  in  the  rust 
of  wrongly-withheld  gain,  and  the  helpless  cries  of  the  defrauded  poor  passing  up 
through  distant  space  and  taking  their  case  to  the  highest  tribunal,  pleading  with 
an  earnestness  akin  to  that  of  the  woman  who  came  to  the  unjust  judge,  but,  unlike 
her,  pleading  with  the  Judge  of  the  whole  earth,  the  only  absolutely  righteous  Judge, 
who  will  surely  avenge  his  own  elect.    Heard  by  God,  it  becomes  the  instrument  of  the 
punishment.     "  The  canker  and  rust  shall  witness  against  you."     "Miseries  shall 
come  upon  you."     Calamities  everywhere  attended  the  Jews  soon  after  the  ascension 
of  Christ.     Proverbial  for  their  wealtli,  they  were  ransacked  and  punished.     From 
then  till  now  they  have  been  a  persecuted  people,  and  mainly  through  their  wealth. 
Every  one  remembers  Shakespeare's  Shylock,  and  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Isaac  of  York. 
Covetousness  brings  God's  curse  on  our  estates.     He  sends  putrefaction,  the  rust,  and 
the  moth.     Ill  gains  are  equivalent  to  losses,  because  providence  often  scatters  them. 
There  is  a  "  withholding  that  tends  to  poverty."     "  He  that  will  save  must  lose  " 
is  the  gospel  riddle.     The  best  way  of  bringing  in  is  laying  out.    What  is  given  to 
the  poor  is  lent  to  God,  and  he  is  a  safe  banker  ;  he  repays  with  interest.     God  can 
easily  corrupt  that  which  we  lay  up,  and  make  the  worm  breed  in  manna.     God  is 
in  no  lack  of  servants  to  carry  information  or  effect  his  purposes.     Corruption, 
canker,  moth,  all  are  at  his  beck  and  call.     Some  rise  from  within,  as  corruption  ; 
some  attack  from  without,  as  the  moth;  the  rust  corrupts  the  substance,  eats  it  away. 
He  can  arm  the  elements  of  fire,  wind,  and  water.     He  can  take  the  lightning  into 
his  hand.     The  stormy  wind  and  vapour  fulfil  his  word,  and  these  he  can  bring  at 
last  as  witnesses  against  us.    Sealed  volumes.    God  breaks  the  seal,  and  each  circum- 
stance becomes  an  unbribed  witness.    Many  things  now  fair-seeming  will  show  rotten- 
ness in  the  day  of  judgment.     Vividly  does  the  prophet  tell  us  of  the  houses  buUt  by 


OHAP.  v.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   NEIIEMIAH.  113 

oppression  coming  as  witnesses  against  the  owners.  "  The  stone  shall  cry  out  of 
the  wall,  and  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  shall  answer  it."  The  stones  will  say, 
"  We  were  hewn  by  violence,"  and  the  timbers,  "  We  were  inlaid  by  fraud."  Many 
of  the  great  works  of  ancient  times,  i.  e.  the  pyramids,  many  colossal  fortunes  and 
magnificent  mansions  of  modern  times,  were  built  with  bones  and  cemented  with 
blood — the  blood  and  bones  of  the  men  who  built  them,  or  the  men  from  whom  the 
wealth  was  obtained.  The  circumstances  of  sin  are  so  many  memorials  to  put  us 
in  mind  of  guilt  and  to  put  God  in  mind  of  vengeance.  Conscience  writes  when  it 
does  not  speak.  There  is  a  book  of  remembrance.  All  conceptions  of  torment 
indicate  a  relation  between  sin  and  punishment  not  only  in  justice  and  duration,  but 
in  kind.  In  this  world  each  sin  has  its  own  avenger ;  many  sins  are  their  own 
avengers.  Anger — the  agitation  and  unrest,  are  not  they  like  whips  whose  lashes 
are  weighted  with  lead  % 

Application.  1.  Let  its  learn  to  weep  tears  of  penitence,  that  we  may  not  have  to 
shed  tears  of  remorse.  After  great  showers  the  air  is  clear.  It  is  better  to  weep  in 
a  way  of  duty  than  to  weep  in  a  way  of  judgment.  2.  Let  us  learn  the  secret  of 
happiness.  The  saint  in  the  Old  Testament  commanded  his  soul  to  be  merry  because 
God  was  the  light  of  his  countenance  ;  the  fool  in  the  gospel  because  he  had  much 
goods  laid  up  for  many  years.  3.  Let  us  learn  to  provide  ourselves  hags  ivhich  wax 
not  old,  a  treasure  in  the  heavens  that  falleth  not,  where  no  thief  approacheth  nor  moth 
corrupteth.  For  all  that  is  in  the  world  is  not  of  the  Father.  And  the  world 
passeth  away,  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever. 

ILLUSTEATIONS. 

The  rich  man^s  empire. — "  The  empire  wVic^  a  rich  man  exercises  finds  no  nation  or  tribe  that 
wishes  to  resist  it.  It  commands  the  services  of  man  wherever  man  can  be  reached,  because  it  offers 
to  the  desires  of  man  the  power  of  acquiring  whatever  objects  of  external  enjoyment  he  is  most  eager 
to  acquire.  From  the  north  to  the  south,  from  the  east  to  the  west,  everything  that  can  be  rendered 
active  is  put  in  motion  by  him,  who  remains  tranquilly  at  home,  exciting  the  industry  of  those  of 
whose  very  existence  he  is  ignorant,  and  receiving  the  products  of  labour  for  his  own  use  without 
knowing  from  whom  he  receives  them.  It  is  almost  as  in  the  magic  stories  of  romance,  in  which  the 
hero  is  represented  as  led  from  the  castle-gate  by  hands  that  are  invisible  to  him,  ushered  to  a  splen- 
did banquet,  where  no  one  seems  present,  where  vdne  is  poured  into  the  goblet  before  him  at  his  very 
wish,  and  luxurious  refreshment  after  refreshment  appears  upon  the  board,  but  appears  as  if  no  hand 
had  brought  it.  To  the  rich  man,  in  like  manner,  whatever  he  wishes  seems  to  come  merely  because 
he  wishes  it  to  come.  "Without  knowing  who  they  are  who  are  contributing  to  his  idle  luxury,  he 
receives  the  gratification  itself,  and  receives  it  from  hands  that  operate  as  invisibly  as  the  fairy  hands 
at  the  banquet.  He  gathers  around  him  the  products  of  every  sea  and  every  soil.  The  sunshine  of 
one  climate,  the  snows  of  another,  are  made  subsidiary  to  his  artificial  wants  ;  and  though  it  is  im- 
possible to  discern  the  particular  arms  which  he  is  every  instant  setting  in  motion,  or  the  particular 
efforts  of  inventive  thought  which  he  is  every  instant  stimulating,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  such  a 
relation  truly  exists,  wliich  connects  with  his  wishes  and  with  his  power  the  industry  of  those  who 
labour  on  the  remotest  corner  of  the  earth  which  the  enterprising  commerce  of  man  can  reach." — Dr. 
Thomas  Brown. 

Possessions. — Possessions  distinguish  man  from  the  brute,  and  civilized  man  from  the  savage. 
Labour  finds  in  possessions  its  normal  fruit;  possessions  are  labour  as  having  become  reality.  The 
brute  is  possessionless  because  he  does  not  labour.  In  property  man  ceases  to  be  a  mere  isolated  indi- 
vidual of  his  species  ;  he  creates  for  himself  a  world  about  himself  which  he  can  call  his  own  ;  his 
property  is  the  outward  manifestation  of  his  inward  peculiarity.  The  fact  that  he  who  possesses  much 
is  also  much  regarded  and  esteemed  in  the  world  is  indeed  often  very  hollow  and  baseless,  though  in 
reality  it  springs  from  the  correct  consciousness  that  possessions  are  the  fruit  of  labour,  the  result  of 
moral  effort.  He  who  acquires  nothing  for  himself  passes  in  the  world,  not  without  reason,  for  un- 
respectable.  Of  a  special  virtue  of  possession-despising,  as  with  the  mendicant  monks,  there  can, 
in  the  ante-sinful  state,  be  no  question  ;  and  even  after  the  fall  possessions  are  presented  as  a  perfectly 
legitimate  end  of  moral  effort,  and  their  being  increased  as  a  special  Divine  blessing.  Cain  and  Abel 
possess  already  personal  property  ;  and  the  God-blessed  possessions  of  the  patriarchs  occupy  a  very  large 
place  in  their  morally  religious  life  [Gen.  xii.  5,  16;  xiii.  2;  xiv.  14;  xxiv.  22,35,53;  xxvi.  13, 
14 ;  xxvii.  28 ;  xxx.  27,  30,  43  ;  xxxi.  42  ;  xxxii.  5,  10,  13  sqq.  ;  xxxiii.  11  ;  xxxix.  6  ;  xlix.  25  ; 
Exod.  xxiii.  25;  Lev.  xxv.  21;  Deut.  ii.  7;  vii.  13;  xv.  14  sqq.  ;  xvi.  15,  17;  xxviii.  3  sqq.; 
xxxiii.  IS  sqq.  ;  xxiv.  26  :  comp.  1  Kings  iii.  13  ;  Ps.  cvii  38  ;  exii.  2,  3  ;  cxxxii.  15].  Property 
being  the  enlarged  life-sphere  ot  the  moral  person, — in  some  sense  his  enlarged  personality  itself,— 

1 


114 


HOMfLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEEEMIAH. 


[OHAP.  V. 


the  moral  phase  thereof  lies  not  merely  in  its  antecedent  ground,  namely,  labour,  but  also  in  its  moral 
use  and  application.  To  its  enjoyment  man  has  a  moral  right,  as  such  enjoyment  is  the  reward  of 
labour ;  but  to  the  exclusive  enjoyment  of  it  for  himself  alone  he  has  no  moral  right,  seeing  that  he 
is  bound  to  other  men  by  love,  and  love  manifests  itself  in  communicative  distribution." — Wuttke's 
*  Christian  Ethics.' 


A  Great  Schism  Averted. 
V.  1 — 13.     And  there  was  a  great  cry  of  the  people^  &c. 


The  paragraph  teaches — 

I.  That  social  injustice  may  exist 
even  amongst  fellow-workers  in  a 
great  and  good  cause  (vers.  1 — 6). 
The  complaint  of  the  poor  was  forced 
from  them.  Wrong  may  be  long  en- 
dured ;  but  it  will  find  a  voice,  a  cry 
"  not  loud,  but  deep." 

II.  That  social  injustice,  if  not  cor- 
rected, will  undermine  the  stability 
of  any  cause,  however  righteous. 
Sanballat's  army  less  fatal  than  the 
nobles'  avarice. 

III.  That  social  injustice  should  be 
regarded  by  all  good  men  with  feel- 
ings of  righteous  indignation  (ver.  6). 
From  a  realization  of  the  brotherhood 
of  men;  of  interdependence ;  of  a  Divine 
purpose  in  the  elevation  of  the  down- 
trodden. 


V.  That  social  injustice,  whenever 
discovered,  should  be  calmly  yet 
promptly  dealt  with  (ver.  7).  Tiie 
prudent  Nehemiah  brought  a  moral 
force  to  bear  upon  the  offenders.  *'  Set  an 
assembly."  The  courageous  Nehemiah 
rebuked  the  offenders,  albeit  they  were 
highest  in  name  and  station.  The  far- 
seeing  Nehemiah  discerned  ruin  if  inter 
nal  wrongs  remained  unredressed. 

V.  That  conciliatory  appeals  are 
sometimes  more  efficacious  than  coer- 
cive measures  in  dealing  with  social 
injustice  (vers.  8 — 13).  Nehemiahused 
persuasive  arguments.  1.  The  efforts 
already  made  to  redeem  their  captive 
brethren  (ver.  8).  2.  The  exposure  of 
the  national  cause  to  reproach  (ver.  9). 
3.  His  own  unblemished  life  and  fit 
example  (ver.  10). 


The  Accusing  Cry  of  Humanity. 

V.  1.     There  was  a  great  cry  of  the  people  and  of  their  wives  against  their 

brethren. 


The  aoousers. — "The  many"  who 
lack  bread  (ver.  2).  The  accused. — 
"  Their  "  richer  **  brethren,"  "  the  nobles 
and  the  rulers"  (vers.  1,  7).  The  accus- 
ation.— "Ye  exact  usury.  Ye  have 
our  lands  and  vineyards."  A  story  of 
the  olden  time  of  ever-new  significance. 
A  twice  twenty-times  told  tale. 

I.  The  unending  struggle.  Wealth 
and  poverty,  knowledge  and  ignorance, 
brain  and  brawn,  capital  and  labour — 
when  in  all  the  ages  have  not  these 
come  into  collision'}  Communists, 
SociaHsts,  Nihilists — are  not  these  to- 
day voices  from  many  lands  (whether 
rightly  or  wrongly)  ;  the  "  great  cry  "  of 
the  poor  of  many  nationalities  against 
their  richer  brethren"?  The  prayer  of 
the  philanthropists  of  every  age  has 
been  expressed  by  a  poet  of  our  own : — 


"  Eing  out  the  false,  ring  in  the  true ; 
..... 

Ring  out  the  darkness  of  the  land  ; 
•  .  •  .  . 

Ring  out  the  feud  of  rich  and  poor ; 
Ring  in  redress  to  all  mankind ; 

Ring  out  the  want,  the  care,  the  sin, 
The  faithless  coldness  of  the  times  ; 

•  •  •  •  • 

Ring  in  the  love  of  truth  and  right ; 
Ring  in  the  common  love  of  good." 

The  Hebrew  prophets  declare  that 
they  that  be  slain  with  the  sword  are 
better  than  they  that  be  slain  with 
hunger;  for  these  pine  away,  stricken 
through  for  want  of  the  fruits  of  the 
field  (Lam.  iv.  9).  They  tell  how 
God's  judgments  came  upon  the  land 
because  the  righteous  were  sold  for 
silver,  and  the  poor  for  a  pair  of  shoes 
(Amos  ii  6).      The  scathing  words  of 


OHAP.  v.] 


JIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


115 


Jesus  Christ  were  reserved  for  those 
wlio  used  the  pride  of  place  to  oppress 
the  poor  and  him  that  hath  no  helper. 
The  EARLY  PERIOD  of  English  history 
is  associated  with  William  the  Conqueror. 
The  DARK  AGES  had  light  enough  to 
show  the  few  how  to  prey  upon  the 
many.  Through  much  tribulation 
NATIONS  have  emerged  into  the  light, 
and  CLASSES  burst  the  shackles  of 
slavery  and  proclaimed  their  freedom. 
With  a  great  sum  England  obtained 
the  freedom  of  the  West  Indies.  The 
blood  of  America's  sons  wiped  out  the 
stain  of  slavery  which  disgraced  the 
greatest  republic  the  world  has  seen. 
A  great  cry  has  gone  up  to  God  as  our 
poor  world  has  struggled  on  towards 
knowledge  and  liberty. 

II.  Elements  of  bitterness  in  this 
struggle.  1.  On  the  side  of  the  op- 
pressors there  is  power.  They  are  "  the 
nobles  and  the  rulers"  (ver.  7).  "The 
names  of  king  and  priest  are  the  most 
appalling  in  history."  So  perverted 
have  they  become.  Anciently  to  rule 
was  also  to  feed  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  71,  72). 
A  bishop  is  a  shepherd.  The  pastoral 
staff  is  the  shepherd's  crook.  2.  The 
oppressed  are  the  brethren  of  the  op- 
pressors. "  Our  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of 
our  brethren,  our  children  as  their  chil- 
dren." Same  blood,  same  love  of  chil- 
dren, same  sensitiveness  to  pain.  Hath 
not  a  poor  man  eyes,  hands,  organs, 
dimensions,  senses,  affections,  passions'? 
Is  he  not  fed  with  the  same  food,  hurt 
with  the  same  weapons,  subject  to  the 
same  diseases,  healed  by  the  same  means, 
warmed  and  cooled  by  the  same  winter 
and  summer  as  a  rich  man  ?  If  you 
prick  a  poor  man,  will  he  not  bleed  1  if 
you  tickle  him,  will  he  not  laugh]  if 
you  poison  him,  will  he  not  die]  3. 
They  were  engaged  in  a  common  cans 
—  rebuilding  God's  chosen  city.  To 
make  this  world  a  paradise ;  to  compel 
all  kings  to  recognize  the  King  of 
kings ;  to  set  up  a  kingdom  of  right- 
eousness and  peace,  is  not  this  the  task 
given  to  humanity,  the  goal  toward 
which  our  world  should  move  ] 

III.  Light  in  the  darkness.  "  Watch- 
man, what  of  the  night  ]  The  watchman 
said,  Th^  morning  cometh"     1.  Christ- 


i2 


came  to  proclaim  the  brotherhood  of 
humanity.  His  Beatitudes  direct  men 
to  look  to  character,  not  to  position,  for 
Divine  approval.  The  strait  gate  must 
be  passed  through  by  rich  and  noble 
as  well  as  by  poor  and  unknown.  Jesus 
spoke  to  the  poor,  felt  for  the  degraded, 
raised  hope  in  the  oppressed.  2.  Sig?^s 
of  the  times.  The  *'many"  (ver.  2) 
are  not  unheard ;  their  influence  not 
unfelt.  There  is  wrong,  but  society 
tends  towards  redress.  Ignorance 
abounds,  but  the  teacher  is  abroad. 
Many  rich  forget  their  duties — not  all. 
Tennyson's  Sir  Walter  Vivian  is  not 
the  creation  of  a  poet's  fancy. 

"  Sir  Walter  Vivian  all  a  summer's  day- 
Gave  his  broad  lawns  until  the  set  of  sun 
Up  to  the  people  :  thither  flocked  at  noon 
His  tenants,  wife  and  child,  and  thither  half 
The  neighbouring  borough,  with  their  Institute, 
Of  which  he  was  the  patron. 

"Why  should  not  these  great  Sirs 
Give  up  their  parks  some  dozen  times  a  year 
To  let  the  people  breathe  ?  " 

Tennyson's    vision    will    one    day   be 
actualized. 

**  I  dipt  into  the  future,  far  as  human  eye  could 

see, 
Saw  the  vision  of  the  world,  and  all  the  wonder 

that  would  be ; 
Saw  the  havens  fill  with  commerce,  argosies  of 

magic  sails, 
Pilots  of  the  purple  twilight,  dropping  down 

with  costly  bales ; 
Heard  the  heavens  fill  with  snouting,  and  there 

rain'd  a  ghastly  dew 
From  the  nations'  airy  navies  grappling  in  the 

central  blue ; 
Far  along  the  world-wide  whisper  of  the  south 

wind  rushing  warm, 
With  the  standards  of   the  peoples  plunging 

through  the  thunder-storm ; 
Till  the  war-drum  throbb'd  no  longer,  and  the 

battle-flags  were  furl'd 
In  the  parliament  of  man,  the  federation  of  the 

world. 
There  the  common  sense  of  most  shall  hold  a 

fretful  realm  in  awe, 
And  the  kindly  earth  shall  slumber,  lapt  in 

universal  law," 

"  How  long,  0  Lord  ?  " 

ILLUSTRATION. 

The  passion  for  power. — •'Christianity  has 
joined  with  all  history  in  inspiring  me  with  a 
peculiar  dread  and  abhorrence  of  the  passion  for 
power,  for  dominion  over  men.  There  is  nothing 
in  the  view  of  our  Divine  Teacher  so  hostile  to 
his  Divine  spirit  as  the  lust  of  domination.  This 


116 


EOMiLETW  (JOMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH, 


[OHAi*.   > 


we  are  accustomed  to  regard  as  eminently  the 
sin  of  the  arch-liend.  '  By  this  sin  fell  tlie 
ano-els.'  It  is  the  most  Satanic  of  all  human 
passions,  and  it  has  inflicted  more  terrible  evils 
on  the  human  family  than  all  others.  It  has 
made  the  names  of  king  and  priest  the  most 
appalling-  in  history.  There  is  no  crime  which 
has  not  been  perpetrated  for  the  strange  pleasure 
of  treading  men  underfoot,  of  fastening  chains 
on  the  body  or  mind.  The  strongest  ties  of 
nature  have  been  rent  asunder,  her  holiest  feel- 
ings smothered,  parents,  children,  brothers  mur- 
dered to  secure  dominion  over  man.  The  people 
have  now  been  robbed  of  the  necessaries  of  life, 
and  now  driven  to  the  field  of  slaughter  like 


flocks  of  sheep  to  make  one  man  the  master  of 
millions.  Through  this  passion  government, 
ordained  by  God  to  defend  the  weak  against  the 
strong,  to  exalt  right  above  might,  has  up  to 
this  time  been  the  great  wrong-doer.  Its  crimes 
throw  those  of  private  men  into  the  shade.  Its 
murders  reduce  to  insignificance  those  of  the 
bandits,  pirates,  highwaymen,  assassins  against 
whom  it  undertakes  to  protect  society.  Power 
trampling  on  right,  whether  in  the  person  of 
king  or  priest,  or  in  the  shape  of  democracies  or 
majorities,  is  the  saddest  sight  to  him  who 
honours  human  nature  and  desires  its  enlarge- 
ment and  happiness." —  W.  E.  Channing. 


The  Miseries  op  Debt. 
V.  3 — 5.     Some  also  there  were  that  saidy  &c. 


Dr.  Jamieson,  the  Bible  interpreter, 
thus  writes  on  this  passage  : — '*  The  poor 
made  loud  complaints  against  the  rich 
for  taking  advantage  of  their  necessities, 
and  grinding  them  by  usurious  exactions. 
Numbers  of  them  had,  in  consequence 
of  these  oppressions,  been  driven  to  such 
extremities  that  they  had  to  mortgage 
their  lands  and  houses  to  enable  them  to 
pay  the  taxes  to  the  Persian  Government, 
and  ultimately  even  sell  their  children 
for  slaves  to  procure  the  means  of  sub- 
sistence." Generalizing  this  particular 
instance,  we  have  the  subject  of  debt 
and  its  miseries. 

I.  Mental  unrest.  Credit  is  necessary. 
The  world's  business  could  not  otherwise 
be  carried  on.  The  every -day  word  trust 
is,  like  most  every-day  words,  suggestive. 
It  is  confidence  between  man  and.  man. 
It  supposes  an  honourable  undertaking. 
Faith  is  not  only  a  theological  word ;  it 
is  a  force  in  this  working-day  world. 
No  man  ought  to  receive  credit  without 
a  prospect  of  being  able  to  pay.  The 
violation  of  this  rule  is  dishonest.  To 
take  a  man's  purse  is  stealing.  So  is 
taking  up  goods  without  paying  for  them, 
and  receiving  wages  for  which  the 
stipulated  labour  has  not  been  given. 
Unless  hardened  through  a  long  series 
of  dishonesties,  a  man  cannot  be  con- 
tented who  does  not  obey  the  New 
Testament  law,  "Owe  no  man  any- 
thing." 


II.  Social  degradation.  It  is  pro- 
verbial that  to  be  in  debt  is  to  be  in 
danger;  danger  of  detection  and  ex- 
posure. Do  not  pretend  to  be  what  you 
are  not ;  do  not  keep  up  a  style  and 
scale  of  cost  beyond  your  means. 

III.  Family  ruin.  A  man  owes  a 
first  duty  to  his  own  house.  The  help- 
less hang  on  him.  He  may  bring  ruin 
through  extravagance. 

IV.  A  disregard  of  a  Divine  com- 
mand. "Thou  shalt  not  steal"  was 
written  with  the  finger  of  God.  This 
law  has  not  been  abrogated. 

Application.  1.  Christians  should  set 
the  world  an  example.  2.  Watch  the 
beginnings  of  extravagance.  3.  In  small 
things  as  well  as  in  greater  act  on  Chris- 
tian principle.  "  He  that  is  faithful  in 
that  which  is  least  is  faithful  also  in 
much ;  and  he  that  is  unjust  in  the  least 
is  unjust  also  in  much." 

Illustrations : — *'  The  Persians  reckoned  these 
two  very  great  sins.  1.  To  be  in  debt.  2.  To 
tell  a  lie  ;  the  latter  being  often  the  fruit  of  the 
former." 

"  By  the  twelve  tables  of  Rome,  he  that  owed 
much,  and  could  not  pay,  was  to  be  cut  in  pieces, 
and  every  creditor  was  to  have  a  piece  of  him 
according  to  the  debt." 

"  We  read  of  a  certain  Italian  gentleman  who, 
being  asked  how  old  he  was,  answered  that  he 
was  in  health ;  and  to  another  that  asked  how 
rich  he  was,  answered  that  he  was  not  in  debt. 
He  is  young  enough  that  is  in  health,  and  rich 
enough  that  is  not  in  debt."— 2V<?Rp. 


CHAP,  v.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    NEHFMIAH. 


117 


Righteous  Anger. 
V.  6.     And  I  was  very  angry  when  I  heard  their  cry  and  these  words. 


"Ezra  and  Nehemiah  were  both  of 
them  very  wise,  good,  useful  men ;  yet 
in  cases  not  unlike  theirs  there  is  a 
great  deal  of  difference  between  their 
management.  When  Ezra  was  told  of 
the  sin  of  the  rulers  in  marrying  strange 
wives  he  rent  his  clothes  and  wept,  and 
prayed,  and  was  hardly  persuaded  to 
attempt  a  reformation,  fearing  it  im- 
practicable ;  for  he  was  a  man  of  a  mild, 
tender  spirit.  When  Nehemiah  was 
told  of  as  ill  a  thing  he  warmed  pre- 
sently, fell  foul  upon  the  delinquents, 
incensed  the  people  against  them,  and 
never  rested  till,  by  all  the  rough 
methods  he  could  use,  he  forced  them 
to  reform ;  for  he  was  a  man  of  a  hot 
and  eager  spirit.  Very  holy  men  may 
differ  much  from  each  other  in  their 
natural  temper,  and  in  other  things  that 
result  from  it.  Again,  God's  work  may 
be  done,  well  done,  and  successfully, 
and  yet  different  methods  taken  in  doing 
it ;  which  is  a  good  reason  why  we  should 
neither  arraign  others'  management  nor 
make  our  own  a  standard.  There  are 
diversities  of  operation,  but  the  same 
spirit." — Matthew  Henry,  Nehemiah's 
soul  was  stirred  within  him  as  he  saw 
the  oppression  of  his  voiceless  brethren. 
But  they  who  were  not  able  to  help 
themselves  were  not  therefore  to  remain 
unhelped. 

"  The  voice  of  their  indignation 
Eose  up  to  the  throne  of  God." 

They  bore  long,  until  suffering  was  no 
longer  endurable ;  and  then  they  ap- 
pealed from  Festus  unto  Caesar,  from 
the  nobles  and  rulers  who  were  set  over 
them  to  Nehemiah  under  whom  they  all 
served.  The  longer  !N'ehemiah  mused 
the  more  fiercely  the  fire  of  his  anger 
burned.  There  cannot  be  supreme  love 
of  right  without  bitterest  hatred  of 
wrong.  Admiration  of  virtue  and  scorn 
of  vice  are  correlative.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  righteous  anger. 

I.  The  righteousness  of  anger  de- 
pends upon  its  cause  and  occasion. 


"  What  is  anger  1  It  is  displeasure  felt 
in  a  high  degree ;  a  feeling  which  is  awak- 
ened when  we  think  ourselves  injured. 
It  is  usually  attended  with  a  restless  un- 
easiness of  mind,  and  frequently  with 
something  worse.  But  is  anger  in  no 
case  allowable  ?  Perhaps  it  is.  *  God 
is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  ' 
(Ps.  vii.  11);  that  is,  he  is  highly 
displeased  with  their  sinful  conduct, 
and  resolved  to  punish  them  on  its 
account ;  yet  anger  in  God  is  infinitely 
remote  from  anything  of  turbulence  and 
malevolence.  We  read  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  looking  round  on  the  people,  par- 
ticularly on  the  Pharisees,  'with  anger, 
being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their 
hearts '  (Mark  iii.  5) ;  but  this  anger  was 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  purest 
benevolence,  with  the  tenderest,  the 
most  disinterested  kindness.  Anger  in 
depraved  creatures  is  certainly  very 
different  from  what  it  is  in  God,  and 
from  what  it  was  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
we  should  be  cautious  how  we  give  the 
least  allowance  to  so  dangerous  a  passion. 
It  has  been  judiciously  remarked,  when 
anger  'proceeds  from  pride,  or  from  selfish- 
ness; when  it  rises  high,  or  continues 
long ;  and  when  it  is  accompanied  by 
anything  like  hatred  or  ill-will  towards 
the  person  who  is  its  object,  then  it  is 
sinful  and  hurtful.  But  whatever  we 
may  think  of  the  lawfulness  or  unlaw- 
fulness of  anger  in  itself,  and  how 
difficult  it  may  be  to  ascertain  in  what 
cases  and  in  what  degree  it  is  allowable, 
one  thing  is  evident — we  cannot  be  too 
cautious  of  yielding  to  its  influence. 
It  is  a  passion  so  difficult  to  be  regulated 
and  so  dreadful  often  in  its  effects ;  so 
destructive  of  that  meekness,  gentleness, 
and  love  which  form  the  very  essence 
of  the  Christian  character  ;  so  expressly 
forbidden  in  various  passages  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  so  carefully  guarded  even 
in  those  where  it  seems  to  be  in  some 
measure  allowed,  that  we  have  much 
more  reason  to  restrain  than  to  encourage 
it  even  in  the  smallest  degree.*     There 


11«                        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAH.  [ciiAr.  V. 

is  one  object  against  which  anger  may  brethren,  seeing  he  is  God's  lieutenant, 
be  innocently  directed,  and  this  object  is  and  hath  the  sword  and  law  in  his  hand 
sin;  either  sin  in  ourselves,  or  sin  in  to  bridle  such  ill-doers,  and  must  not 
others.  Peter  was  angry,  exceedingly  for  favour,  gifts,  nor  fear  suffer  it  un- 
<lispleased  with  himself,  when,  at  the  amended;  else  he  doeth  not  his  duty 
recollection  of  his  sin  in  denying  his  unto  the  mighty  Lord,  who  set  him  in 
blessed  Lord,  'he  went  out  and  wept  that  place,  gave  him  the  authority,  and 
bitterly.'  The  brethren  of  Joseph  were  will  ask  a  strait  account  how  he  hath 
angry  with  themselves,  displeased  at  used  it  to  the  relief  of  the  oppressed, 
their  base  behaviour,  when  convinced  of  Some  be  of  opinion  that  a  magistrate 
their  cruelty  towards  an  unoffending  should  not  be  moved  with  anger  in  doing 
brother ;  and  doubtless  the  feeling  was  his  office,  but  give  every  man  fair  words, 
laudable.  The  soul  of  righteous  Lot  pass  over  matters  slowly,  please  all  men, 
was  *  vexed ; '  he  was  angry  with  the  though  he  do  them  little  good ;  but, 
filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked  among  the  truth  being  well  considered,  it  may 
whom  he  dwelt;  and  as  we  dwell  be  judged  otherwise.  Lactantius  writeth 
among  a  people  of  unclean  lips  and  a  book  wherein  he  proveth  that  God 
unholy  conduct,  our  blame  would  be  himself  is  angry,  and  every  anger  is  not 
great  if  we  felt  not  displeasure  at  what  sin.  If  God  then  be  angry  against  sin, 
we  hear  and  witness." — Kidd.  We  read  why  may  not  a  good  man  in  God's  cause 
of  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  when  then  do  the  same?  Hate  not  the  man, 
Israel  joined  himself  unto  Baal-Peor  but  his  ill-doing ;  be  not  angry  without 
(Num.  XXV.  1—9).  Pronounced  upon  a  just  cause  unadvisedly ;  keep  not  thy 
disobedience  (Deut.  xxix.  20).  When  anger  long,  that  it  grow  not  into  hatred ; 
Jesus  Christ  looked  upon  his  spying  let  it  be  no  more  nor  no  less  than  the 
enemies  with  anger,  being  grieved  for  fault  deserveth,  and  let  it  be  without 
the  hardness  of  their  hearts,  which  pre-  raging,  fuming,  fretting,  swelling,  and 
dominated,  the  anger  or  the  grief]  raving  and  disquieting  of  body  or  mind ; 
(Contrast  the  anger  of  Sanballat  (chap,  not  for  malice  of  revenging,  but  for  pity 
iv.)  with  the  anger  of  Nehemiah  (chap,  or  justice  to  correct  and  amend  ;  and 
V.)  ;  how  different  the  occasion,  how  anger  well  qualified  is  not  ill.  This  is 
unlike  the  cause.  For  a  good  work  not  spoken  to  give  liberty  to  anger,  for 
Sanballat  was  prepared  to  stone  the  we  are  too  ready  to  it  by  nature ;  but 
Jews ;  for  an  evil  act  of  oppression  rather  to  bridle  it,  seeing  it  standeth  on 
Nehemiah  rose  up  to  rebuke  the  nobles,  so  narrow  a  point  to  keep  measure  in. 
Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not  in  reference  to  This  qualifying  of  anger  is  declared  in 
cause.  the  Scripture  as  that  it  should  not  con- 
II.  The  righteousness  of  anger  de-  tinue.  St.  Paul  saith, '  Let  not  the  sun 
pends  upon  its  spirit  and  limitations,  set  upon  your  anger ; '  and  that  it  should 
Note,  especially,  the  anger  of  Jesus  Christ  not  be  rashly,  without  cause,  nor  more 
had  reference  to  the  evil,  the  hardness  than  the  cause  requireth.  The  gospel 
of  their  hearts.  Righteous  anger  is  teacheth,  saying,  '  He  that  is  angry 
against  wrong,  not  against  wrong-doers,  with  his  brother  without  a  just  cause  is 
Must  have  in  it  no  personal  malice,  no  guilty  of  judgment.'  This  anger  of 
spleen.  Must  not  cross  the  line  to  Nehemiah  was  just  in  all  circumstances, 
revenge.  Anger  is  the  basis  of  magis-  and  kept  the  rule  of  St  Paul,  '  Be  angry 
tracy,  the  support  of  laws,  and  the  pillar  and  sin  not,'  which  is  a  hard  point  to 
of  decency  and  right  conduct.  "Magis-  keep." — Pilkington.  He  who  hates  sin 
trates  are  mortal  gods,  and  God  is  an  wiU  escape  it.  An  extreme  sentiment- 
immortal  magistrate ;  therefore,  as  the  alism  would  make  all  virtue  consist  in 
merciful  God  heareth  in  his  holy  habit-  amiability.  Men  have  proclaimed  the 
ation  in  heaven  the  cry  of  the  miserable,  love  of  God  as  if  it  denied  his  justice, 
oppressed  people  in  earth,  so  should  "  God  is  love."  "  Our  God  is  a  consum- 
eyery  godly  ruler  hear  and  relieve  the  ing  fire."  The  two  poles  of  the  Divine 
pitiful  cry  of  the  oppressed,  being  his  character. 


OHAP.    v.] 


IIOMrLETTC   COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


119 


Application.  1.  Temperamental  anger 
to  he  subdued  hy  holy  thought,  prayer, 
and  effort.  Lay  aside  every  weight, 
and  the  sin  that  doth  so  easily  be- 
set. 2.  Distinguish  between  the  vrrong 
and  the  wrong-doers.  Vengeance  is 
mine  ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.  3. 
Remember  Christian  doctrine  of  forgive- 


ness. If  thy  brother  trespass  against 
thee  and  return,  saying,  Eepent,  forgive 
him.  Let  the  daily  prayer  be.  Forgive 
us  our  trespasses,  and  help  us  to  forgive 
them  that  trespass  against  us.  For  this 
doctrine  of  forgiveness  is  one  of  the 
hard  sayings  of  Jesus  Christ. 


Introspection. 
V.  7.     Then  I  consulted  with  myself. 


The  position  was  perilous.  The 
nobles  and  the  rulers  were  powerful; 
their  services  were  needed.  The  toilers 
were  embittered ;  the  common  cause 
endangered.  Too  little  courage  or  too 
much  prudence,  cowardice  or  temporiz- 
ing, would  prove  fatal.  ''Then  I  con- 
sulted with  myself."  His  heart  took 
counsel  upon  the  injustice.  From  this 
instance  of  introspection  or  self-commu- 
nion let  us  consider  self-communion 
generally. 

I.  The  value  of  self-communion. 
Thought  comes  in  solitude.  Character 
is  formed  by  self  -  communings.  A 
preacher  must  return  sometimes  to 
"fructifying  silence."  We  are  not 
enough  alone.  Our  age  is  restless.  It 
craves  results — speedy  and  sure.  Too 
much  bustle  and  hurry.  Duty  treads 
upon  the  heels  of  duty.  Moses,  Elijah, 
John  Baptist,  Paul,  yes,  and  Christ 
himself,  lived  in  the  wilderness  alone 
with  God.  Cecil,  Scott,  Newton,  Wes- 
ley, the  spiritual  giants,  were  men  of 
solitary  hours.  Too  much  familiarity 
with  men  breeds  contempt  and  distrust. 
Know  thyself!  ''Come  ye  yourselves 
apart,"  said  Jesus  to  disciples  flushed 
with  success  (Mark  vi.).  Need  of  rest 
and  self-communion  evident  in  all  spheres 
of  life.  Restlessness  characterizes  most 
men.  Space  and  time  are  nearly  anni- 
hilated. Parliamentary  speech  spoken 
in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning  is 
printed  and  transmitted  to  the  breakfast- 
table.  Markets  of  Odessa,  Alexandria, 
New  York,  Calcutta,  and  Sydney  hardly 
closed  ere  the  electric  current  has  flashed 
the  quotations.  Eest  and  time  to  think 
almost  denied  many  commercial  and 
professional   men.     It   was   the  sin  of 


Israel.     "  My  people  doth  not  consider." 
"  Consider  your  ways  " — there  speaks  a 
prophet.     "Think  on  these  things"— 
there  speaks  an  apostle.     "  Hear  ye  the 
word  of  the  Lord"  ushers  in  the  Old 
Testament.     "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear 
let  him  hear  "  introduces  the  New.     He 
who  pleads  the  pressure  of  business  has 
too   much   business.      Men   must   find 
time  to  prepare  for  eternity.     Too  much 
religious  work  dangerous.     "  They  made 
me   the  keeper  of   the  vineyards,   but 
mine  own  vineyard  have  I  not  kept" 
(Song   of    Solomon).     "  I   keep   under 
my  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection ; 
lest  that  by  any  means,  when  I  have 
preached  to  others,  I  myself  should  be 
a  castaway"  (Paul).     "Nothing   is   so 
important  as  to  keep  an  exact  proportion 
between  the  interior  source    of   virtue 
and  the  external  practice  of  it,  else,  like 
the  foolish  virgins,  we  shall  find  that 
the  oil  in  our  lamps  is  exhausted  when 
the   bridegroom  comes"   (Chrysostom). 
Is  this  the  meaning  of  our  Lord's  solemn 
words,   "Many  will   say   to   me,"    &c. 
(Matt.  vii.  22,  23)  ?     Christian  charity 
begins  at  home.     It  is  possible  to  build 
reformatories    and    be    ourselves    unre- 
formed;   possible  to  send  the  Bible  to 
others  and  ourselves  forget  to  read  it; 
possible   to   lay  costly  gifts   on    God's 
altar  and  not  bow  in  penitence  at  his 
footstool.     The  Christian  life  a  groicth. 
It  is  the  burden  of  direct  precept.   ' '  Grow 
in  grace  and  in  knowledge  "  (2  Pet.  iii. 
18).     "  Add  to  your  faith  "  (2  Pet.  i.  5). 
It  is  variously  illustrated.     "  The  right- 
eous shall  hold  on  his  way,  and  he  that 
hath  clean  hands  shaU  be  stronger  and 
stronger"   (Job   xvii.    9).      "He   shall 
be  like   a  tree  planted   by  the  waters, 


120  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  v. 


and   that   spreadeth   out    its   roots  by  name  is  erased  from  the  book  of  life. 

the   river"    (Jer.    xvii.    8).     It   is   the  2.  Out   of  undue  self-communion  arose 

subject  of  apostles'  joy  when  Christians  asceticism  of  middle  ages  ;  arises  some 

''stand  fast  in  the  Lord"  (Phil.  iv.  1).  conventual  tendencies  of  our  own.  Dream 

Can  this  be  effected  without  time  and  not  of  becoming  unworldly  by  escaping 

thought?     Does  not  the  garden  of  the  from   duty.      '*  I   pray   not   that   thou 

soul  require  culture?     Do   the  flowers  shouldest  take  them  out  of  the  world, 

of    humility    and   charity   grow   wild  ?  but  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from 

Does  business  demand  application,  but  the  evil"  (John  xvii.  15). 

the  soul's  commerce  none  ?     Must  the         III.  The  safe-guards  of  self-commu- 

children's  minds  be  educated  and  their  nion.      L    Action.     From   the   temple 

hearts   remain   untrained  1     Each  must  to  the  city. 

come  into  some  desert  place  and   rest  ..jm  .  ^., 

o«ri,ii^  «rifl.  ni.,.;of  iwixt  the  mount  and  multitude, 

awhile  with  Christ.  ^  Doing  or  receiving  good." 

II.  The  dangers  of  self-communion. 

1.  Morbid  religion.      Don't  be   always  Thought    the   basis   of    action.       Acts 

a   spiritual   anatomist.       Too    frequent  become   habits.       "  I   must    work    the 

looking  within  brings  depression.     Re-  works  of  him  that  sent  me  "  (John  ix. 

ligious   depression  arising  from  neglect  4).     "  As  the  Father  hath  sent  me  into 

of  duty  or  commission  of  sin  cannot  co-  the  world,  even  so  have  I  sent  them  into 

exist  with  spiritual  life.     But  very  much  the  world"  (John  xvii.    18;   xx.    21). 

depression   is  needless  or  self -induced.  Do   not  put   asunder   what   God   hath 

We  may  say  sometimes,  **  Why  art  thou  joined  together.    Different  temperaments 

cast  down,  0  my  soul?"  (Ps.  xlii.  11).  will  give  varying  prominence  to  contem- 

A  man   feels  forsaken,  and,  projecting  plation  and  action ;  the  inward  and  the 

his  own  feelings,  imagines  God  has  for-  outward.     But  woe  to  those  who  neglect 

saken  him.     Do  not  rashly  imagine  that  either.      A  pure  heart  the  indispensable 

because  you  cannot  every  hour  "  read  condition  of  a  noble  life.    2.  God's  word. 

your  title   clear "   that    therefore   your  Make  that  the  only  guide. 

An  Assembly  convoked  against  Sinners. 

V.  7.     And  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  them. 

Partly    because    persons    implicated  good  men  is  meant  men  whom  God  will 

were  numerous  and  powerful  to  show  acknowledge  to  be  good, 
them  that  greater  numbers  disapproved  „  ^y  ^j^^        4  ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^ 

and  partly   to   cause   such  shame  and  y^^^      These  compose  an  assembly  far 

emorse  as  might  lead  them  to  renounce  exceeding    in    nunAer    all     the     good 

their  cnmma    practices.     The  measure  ^^„  ^^^^^.^  ^^^^  ^U^^      ^^^j  ^^^^^^ 

was  successful      Show  impemtent  sin-  j^„^^     Abraham,   Moses,  Elijah,   John 

ners  how  great  an  asseinbly  msLY  he  set  -n^^i.-  x   j--ifT  inu- 

ao-ainst  the         S*  ]  h  '  Baptist,  disciples  of  Jesus,  early  Chris- 

,.f„-    •.        rp{^  J     -jji  ^^?  tians,  martyrs,  reformers,  men  of  '  May- 

niajority.     ihey  are  decidedly  superior  -pi     *     »     '^ 

to  the  servants  of   God  ;  not   only  in  ^^^* 

number,  but  in  wealth  and  power  and  in-         HI-   All  the  writers  of  the  Old  and 

fluence.     Were  the  great  question  What  New  Testaments.     They  are  good  men ; 

is  truth  1  to  be   decided   by   numbers,  they  are  more — they  are  inspired  men. 

they  could  easily  determine  it  in  their  Being  taught  by   the  eternal  Spirit   of 

own  favour.     Show   that   those   whose  God,  with  one  voice  they  cry.  Woe  to 

opinions  and  approbation  are  more  im-  ^^^  wicked ;  it  shall  be  ill  with  him  ! 

portant  are  against  them.  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but 

I.  The  good  men  now  in  the  world,  ^^^'s  words  never. 

Not  necessarily  professors  of  religion.  IV.     The    holy   angels.       Consider 

Many  professors  not  good  men.      By  number,  character,  and  intellectual  rank. 


CHAP,  v.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTAMY :  NEHEMIAH.  121 

Perhaps  exceed  in  number  the  human  Judge,  who  will  pronounce  a  sentence 

race.     "  An  innumerable  company."    In  on  both. 

com})arison  with    the    least    angel    the         VI.  God  the  Father.     Sinners  strive 

wisest    human  pliilosopher  is   a   child,  with  their    Maker.     Survey  the  whole 

Their  holiness  is  perfect,  spotless.     They  assembly  which  is  arrayed  against  evil 

execute  the  will  of  God.  and    evil-doers.       Terrible    to    sinners  ; 

V.    The  Lord   Jesus   Christ.       The  consolatory  to  Christians. — Dr.  Pay  son, 

Lord  of  angels  and  men,  the  appointed  abridged. 

Inconsistency  without  Excuse. 

V.  8.   And  I  said  unto  them,  We  after  our  ability  have  redeemed  ovr  brethren  the  Jews, 
which  were  sold  unto  the  heathen  ;  and  will  ye  even  sell  your  brethren  1  or  shall 

they  be  sold  unto  us  ?  Then  held  they  their  peace,  and  found  nothing  to  answer. 

They  found  nothing  to  answer.     For  In  business,  in  pleasure,  at  home,  abroad, 

what   answer   could   be  given?     They  through   the   week  as  well  as  on   the 

which  heard  Nehemiah's  accusation  were  Sabbath,  be  consistent, 
convicted    by    their    own    conscience.         II.    The   inexcusableness  of  incon- 

Brotherhood,  memories  of  bondage,  the  sistency.     Has  nothing  to  recommend 

great  price  at  which  they  had  redeemed  it.     Nothing  gained.     Brings  discredit 

their   brethren    from    Persian    masters,  upon  any  cause.     The  inconsistent  man 

the  inspiration  of  their  journey  to  the  has  no  faith  in  his  position.     An  incon- 

decayed  city,  the  work  God  had  given  sistent  Christian  may  profess  but  does 

them  to  do — these  rose  up  like  prophets  not  possess  a  good-  creed.     The   creed 

of   evil    tidings    to    second   the    noble  which   influences    conduct   is  not  that 

censures  of  :N'ehemiah.    Their  inconsist-  which  a  man  holds,  but  that  which  holds 

ency  was  without  excuse.  him.     Life  is  the  expositor  of  doctrine. 

I.  The  admirableness  of  consistency.  Nehemiah's  nobles  called  the  workmen 

It  is  manly.     Everybody  reverences  it.  brethren.     But  that  was  only  a  word  of 

Even  in  an  unworthy  cause  it  extorts  the   lip.     The   deed    of  the  life  made 

a  momentary  recognition.    In  a  worthy  them  slaves  and  foreigners.     For  a  time 

cause  all  bow  the  knee  and  do  it  homage,  the   nobles  prospered.     Success  smiled 

The  heroes  of  history  by  flood  and  field,  upon  oppression.    But  a  reckoning  day 

the  redressers  of  human  wrongs  at  home  came.     Summoned  to  Nehemiah's  bar, 

and  abroad,  the  characters  of  Bible  story,  they    "  found   nothing  to  answer."     A 

were  consistent.     They  had  a  purpose  IsTew    Testament    parable    is    recalled, 

and   stuck   to   it.      Despised    of   men.  The  man  who  had  not  on  a  wedding 

mocked  at  by  demons,  are  those  whom  garment  was  "speechless"  (Matt,  xxii^ 

the  inspired  apostle  describes  as  "  waver-  1  —  14).       Profession    and   possession, 

ing  like  a  wave  of  the  sea  driven  with  reality  and   hypocrisy,  are  not   always 

the  wind  and  tossed ;  the  double-minded,  distinguishable  here  and  now.     Parable 

who    are  unstable  in  all   their  ways"  of  tares  :  "  Let  both  grow  together  until 

(James  i.  6—8).     Dignity  is  robbed  of  the  harvest "  (Matt.  xiii.  24—30).     In 

its  excellency  and  power  of  its  strength  in  earlier  times  men  strove  for  a  p  ure  visible 

the  Reubens  who  are  "unstable  as  water"  Church.     That   impossible.      Our  eyes 

(Gen.  xlix.  3,  4).     Be  persistent.     Be  cannot  distinguish   true  from   false   in 

consistent.     Is  it  consistent  for  Chris-  every   instance.      By-and-by   inconsist- 

tian  men  to  enter  into  partnership  with  ency    will    stand    self- convicted.     At 

those  who  work  without  a  conscience?  heaven's  judgment-seat  every  one  must 

Ought  Christian  parents  to  consult  first  give  an  account. 

and  foremost  the  worldly   convenience         Application.    1.   The  supreme  import- 

and  advantage   of  their   children]     If  ance  of  character.    *' As  a  man  thinketh 

religion  be   true,  should  it   not  decide  in  his  heart,  so  is  he  "  (Prov.  xxiii.  7). 

tho  just  weight  and  the  true  measure  %  "  Keep   thy   heart  with  all  diligence ; 


122 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  y. 


for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life " 
(Prov.  iv.  23).  2.  The  value  of  self- 
reliance.  Wrong-doing  is  contagious. 
One  noble  imitated  another  in  exacting 
usury.  Those  who  were  half  conscious 
that  they  were  doing  wrong  were  en- 
couraged by  the  evil  example  of  others. 
Trust  thyself  when  thou  hast  the  approval 
of  thy  own  conscience.  3.  Remember 
the  bar  of  God.  He  who  made  Nehe- 
miah  upright  "  is  a  God  all  whose  ways 
are  judgment :  a  God  of  truth  and  with- 
out iniquity  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  4).  "  He 
that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  % 
he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not 
see?"  (Ps.  xciv.  9). 


Same  Theme. 

The  marvellous  personal  power  of 
Nehemiah.  Great  individuality  tri- 
umphs over  all  things.  Napoleon 
laughed  away  the  pretensions  of  rank 
by  saying,  "  I  am  an  ancestor."  The 
force  of  personal  character  makes  all 
other  forces  give  way.  Especially 
when  the  individuality  is  a  good  indi- 
viduality;  when  the  strength  of  man- 
hood is  backed  by  the  strength  of  right. 
Illustration  of  this  in  the  text,  where 
the  dumbfounded  nobles  stand  ashamed 
before  the  challenge  of  the  man  who  has 
come  to  spy  out  their  faults  and  to  mend 
them  at  all  costs  to  himself.  Subject, 
the  inexcusahleness  of  inconsistency. 

I.  The  inconsistency.  Define  in- 
consistency. Want  of  harmony  in  the 
parts  of  a  man's  life.  The  presence  in  a 
man's  being  of  two  things  which  cannot 
be  together.  A  man  who  swears  the 
British  oath  of  allegiance  and  takes  the 
pay  of  the  English  state  would  be  an 
mconsistent  man  if  he  betrayed  state 
secrets  to  a  hostile  country,  or  gave 
guidance  to  an  invading  foe.  That 
would  be  treason.  Eeligious  incon- 
sistency is  treason  against  the  King  of 
kings— treason    and   treachery    against 

w  1*.?*^-  ^'  ^^^^%  inconsistency. 
Worldly  men  point  sneeringly  to  any 
little  deviation  from  consistency  in 
Christian  people;  but  if  Christian  charity 
(lid  not  forbid  the  sneer  might  be  re- 
turned. The  cant  and  pretence  and 
eeltish  departure  from  avowed  principles 


which  fills  the  life  of  the  children  of 
this  world  may  well  creep  a  little  into 
the  Church.     A   politician    who   loves 
liberty,  and  is  at  the  same  time  a  tyrant 
m  his  household  and  to  his  servants; 
a  man  who   loves  to  read  and  to  talk 
fine  sentiment,  and  whose  common  life 
runs  along  a  low  level  of  worldly  mean- 
ness, are  examples  of  inconsistency.    The 
world  had  need  to  pluck  the  beam  out 
of  its  own  eye  before  meddling  with  the 
mote  in  the  eye  of  the  Church.     2.  Re- 
ligious    inconsistency.       Example      of 
Balaam,  who  prayed,  ''  Let  me  die  the 
death  of  the  righteous,"  and  who  died 
with  a  sword  drawn  against  God  ;  the 
Puritan,  who  fought  for  liberty  to  wor- 
ship God,   and   then  would   not  grant 
toleration  to    his   brother's    creed;  the 
professing  Christian  of  even  late  years, 
who  bought  and  sold  men,  women,  and 
children  as  slaves,  are  glaring  instances 
of  contradictions  in  character  and  con- 
duct.      Enumerate   common   forms    of 
inconsistency    in    the    ordinary  life    of 
professedly  Christian  people.    3.  Injuri- 
ous effects  of  inconsistency,     (a)  To  self. 
It  blunts  the  conscience,  and  so  damages 
the   finer   spiritual    perceptions    as    to 
deprive  the  soul  of  the  perfect  peace  of 
those  who  are  in  perfect  truth.     (/3)  To 
others.      It   seems   a   contradiction    of 
religion,  a  confession  of  its  inadequacy 
to  master  the  sin  in  a  man,  and  shakes 
the  faith  of  an  onlooking  world  in  the 
power  of  the  gospel. 

II.     The    inexcusahleness.     With 
heads  hanging  like  bulrushes  the  dumb- 
founded men  stood  before  N'ehemiah,  as 
now  the  inconsistent  stands  before  the 
convictions    of    God's    Spirit   and    the 
reproach  of  the  world.      1.   Infirmity  is 
often  pleaded  as  an  excuse.     The  fol- 
lower of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus  so 
excuses  his  outbursts  of  violent  passion. 
The  man  who  hides  his  convictions  in  a 
worldly  circle  so  excuses  his  want  of 
religious  courage.     The  man  who  grasps 
at  some  questionable  advantage  of  the 
world    so  covers   the  selfishness  which 
has    shown    itself    mightier    than    his 
Christian  self-denial.    It  is  dangerous  to 
so  shake  hands  with  our  own  infirmity. 
2.  Ignorance  ia  another  eoccuse.     Want 
of  true  perception  of  God's  law  and  lack 


CHAP,   v.] 


HOMILETIG  OOMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


123 


of  thoughtfulness  concerning  the  true 

significance   of  his  own  actions  are  a 

reason,   but   not   an   excuse,  for   much 

inconsistency     among     the     professed 

servants  of  God.     As  some  uninstructed 

persons  are  not  sure  of  the  difference 

between  green  and  blue,   and  are  not 

pained  by  want  of  harmony  in  colours 

that  are  joined  but  not  reconciled  to  each 

other,  so  a  blunt  moral  sense  may  not 

detect  all  the  contradictions  of  his  own 

religious  character.   3 .  But  infirmity  may 

he  strengthened  and  ignorance  may  he 

instructed.     These     are     not     excuses. 

"  Truth  in  the  inward  parts "   is   the 


requirement  of  him  "  whose  we  are,  and 
whom  we  serve."  To  be  sanctified 
wholly  (not  one-sidedly  or  partially)  is 
the  Christian's  prayer — body,  soul, 
and  spirit  all  penetrated  through  and 
through  with  holiness. 

Application.  1.  Do  not  leave  to  others 
the  task  of  detecting  your  inconsistency. 
Find  it  out  yourself.  2.  Do  not  lueakly 
reconcile  yourself  to  things  which  can 
have  no  place  in  a  complete  Christian 
character.  3.  Seek  more  of  that  freedom 
of  the  truth  which  liberates  a  man  from 
these  reproaching  faults. 


God's  People  under  the  Eye  op  a  Critical  World. 
V.  9.     Also  I  said,  It  is  not  good,  &c. 


The  world  has  a  spleen  against  the 
Church.  The  Church  is  an  incarnate 
condemnation  of  the  world.  "I  have 
saved  them  out  of  the  world."  However 
full  of  charity  the  elect  of  God  may  be, 
they  stand  rank  on  rank,  by  their  creed 
and  their  practice,  witnessing  with  silent 
censure  against  all  ungodliness.  Hence 
in  self-defence  the  world  watches  for 
the  Church's  faults,  "  rejoicing  in  in- 
iquity " — the  discovered  iniquity  of  the 
professedly  good.  Our  religious  self- 
government  is  watched  by  a  critical 
**  opposition,"  ever  ready  with  its  "  re- 
proach." ]!^ehemiah  asks  a  fair  question : 
"  Ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of 
God  because  of  the  reproach  of  the 
heathen  our  enemies'? " 

I.  The  reproach  of  the  enemy.   The 
world's  criticism  of  God's  people  is  very 
merciless  and  very  unfair.    It  makes  no 
allowances.      It   does   not   "remember 
that  we  are  dust."     It  has  no  place  for 
the  extenuations  of  charity.    The  world 
will  not  under-rate,  but  over-rate,  the 
defects  of  the  good.     Malicious  rumour 
makes   a  mountain  out  of  a  molehill; 
like  photography,  it  exaggerates  every 
freckle  or  scar  on  the  countenance  of  a 
good  man's  life.  Beware  of  the  reproach 
of  the  world  our  enemy.       1.   Accept 
this  condition  of  life.     It  is  useless  to 
kick  against  the  pricks.     We  may  be 
moved  to  scorn  by  the  mean  carping  of 
the  foe;  but  it  flings  back  its  motto, 


"All's  fair  in  war."     If  you  contend 
with  an  uncivilized  enemy  you  get  ready 
for  uncivilized  deeds.     Give  mercy,  but 
expect  none.     Do  not   call   the  world 
hard  names;   the  world   is  simply  the 
world,  and  no  more.     "  Fret  not  thyself 
because  of  evil-doers,"  nor    because   of 
their   evil  tongues.     2.  Do  not  despise 
this  po2oer  of  enmity,     (a)  There  is  a 
noble  scorn  of  the  evil-tongued  society. 
Here  is  an  old  motto  of  an  independent 
mind.       "They  say!      What  do   they 
say  ?      Let   them  say  ! "      Do   not   be 
afraid  to  live.     Let  us  not  creep  apolo- 
getically through  the  world.     We  owe 
no  one  an  apology  for  our  fear  of  God. 
It  is  they  who  are  wrong,  and  most  of 
them  know  it  very  well.     If  you  carry 
the  Christian  flag  as  if  ashamed  of  it 
the  world  wUl  despise  you  all  the  more. 
It  likes  out  and  out  manhood.     Do  not 
"  liberalize  "  your  creed,  or  conceal  your 
conviction,  or  blush  at  your  good  deeds 
for  fear  of  reproach.     "Whosoever  is 
ashamed  of  me  and  of  my  words,   of 
him  will  I  be  ashamed."     Be  no  "reed 
shaken  with  the  wind."     (/3)  But  there 
is  an  unwise  scorn  of  the  world's  opinion. 
A  thing  lawful  for  me  as  a  man  may  be 
inexpedient  for  me  as  a  Christian  man. 
Many   good    men    are  doing    hurt   to 
Christ's  cause   by  a   reckless   bravado, 
which   flows   out   of    an    uncontrolled 
independence  or  out  of  an  unthinking 
foolishness.     A   man  in  ambush   may 


124  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  NEEEMIAH,  [chap,  v 


show  he  is  no  coward  by  exposing  him-  me  !  "     If  clear  of  his  reproach,  the  re- 
self  to  danger  before  the  enemy,  but  he  preach  of  the  enemy  shall  be  but  as  a 
may  show  that  he  is  a  fool  by  revealing  hailstone  against  the  flint,    (fi)  Be  rigor- 
the  position  of  his  comrades  and  involv-  ous  in  self-condemnation.    Be  charitable 
ing  them  in  peril.   "  Walk  circumspectly,  in  judging  others;  he  just  in  judging 
not  as  fools,  but  as  wise."     3.   For  the  thyself.     If  you  are  lax,  let  it  not  be 
world's  own   sake  have   a  care  of  the  with  self.     For  your  own  sake  be  what 
world's  reproach.     (1)  You  may  make  you  would  seem.     Above  all  fear  of  the 
the  evil  man  doubt  the  God  you  fear,  world's  reproach,  fear  the  reproach  of  an 
"  Another  saint  unmasked,"   says   the  indignant  self.     "  To  thine  own  self  be 
world,  as    it  exults  over  the  declared  true,  and  it  shall  follow,  as  the  night  the 
inconsistency  of  a  Christian.     "  By  one  day,  thou  canst  not  then  be  false  to  any 
judge  all,"  says  the  critic.     You  cast  a  man."     2.  Spheres  of  caution,     (a)  Per- 
veil  over  God's  face,  and  put  truth  at  sonal  life.     In  all  those  elements  of  life 
the  bar  "on  suspicion,"  when  you  do  which  are   "your  own  business,"  and 
not  walk  before  the  enemy  in  the  fear  not  the  world's  affair,  be  on  your  guard, 
of  God.     (2)  You  may  hurt  the  con-  Reverent    behaviour,    amiable    temper, 
science  of  the  worldly  man.     To  let  him  truth  and  kindness  of  tone  and  speech 
see  his  own  fault  in  you  is  to  justify  in  conversation,  godly  direction  of  your 
his  fault  to  his  pliant  conscience.   When  habits  and  your  household — let  these  be 
you  do  an  ill  thing  you  endorse  the  ill  above  suspicion.     Your  habits  are  the 
things    another   does.       (3)    You   cast  atmosphere  and  your  home  the  environ- 
away   your  influence    for   good.       All  ment  of  yourself ;  let  them  become  you. 
things  are  possible  to  you  if  the  world  (/3)  Public  life.  Though  in  Rome,  despise 
believes  in  you.     You  can  cast  out  its  the  ill-doer's  motto.      In  the  world  ;  be 
devils   and   tread   on   its  serpents  and  not   of  it.     Where   association    makes 
scorpions,   and   nothing   shall   by   any  you  unable  to  prevent  be  no  advocate  of 
means  hurt  you.     But  if  you  cast  away  evil.      Do  the  world's  work  and  change 
the    confidence    of    your    unconverted  the  world's  gold  with  Christian  fingers, 
brother  you  can  do  nothing  with  him  (y)  Church  life.     Remember  that  in  all 
because  of  his  unbelief.     We  want  to  Church  life  higher  maxims  aud  nobler 
have   faith   in   God   and  to  make  the  usages  than  those  of  the  world  should 
world  have  faith  in  us.  predominate.       Do   not   blare    out   the 
II.    The    caution    of    the     godly,  faults  of  fellow  Christians.     For  Christ's 
"  Sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts  :  sake,  for  the  world's  sake,  cast  a  cloak 
.  .  .  having   a   good  conscience ;    that,  of  charity   over  the  misunderstandings 
whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you,  as  of  evil-  and  the  misunderstandable  doings  of  the 
doers,  they  may  be  ashamed  that  falsely  household  of  faith.     Do  not  tell  your 
accuse  your  good  conversation  in  Christ."  enemy  hoAV  weak  your  own  brother  is. 
1.  Elements  of  caution,  (a)  Be  strong  in  In  private  life,  in  public  life,  in  Church 
the  fear  of  God.    Let  the  solemn  thought  life,  walk  in  the  fear  of  God  because  of 
of  his  watchfulness  guide  your   steps,  the  reproach  of  the  heathen  our  enemies. 
Remember  the  one  omnipresent  Witness  Application.       1.     Pray.     "  Who  is 
whose  eye   shines  like  a  star  over  the  sufficient   for    these    things  T'      Draw 
darkest  gloom  of  secrecy.     *'  Fear  him,  deep  inspirations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of 
ye  saints,  and  ye  shall  then  have  nothing  God.     2.   Watch.     Keep  open  eyes  on 
else  to  fear."     Cultivate  the  sentiment  yourself  and  on  your  temptations, 
of  that  ancient  saying,  "  Thou  God  seest 

What  Others  do  no  Excuse  for  My  doing. 

V.  10.     /  likewise f  and  my  brethren^  and  my  servants,  mighty  &c. 

Nehemiah's  great  strength  of   good-  him  in  his  historic  conduct  a  law  unto 

ness  and  his  nobleness  of  inind  made  himself.     1.   He  rose  above  all  example. 


CHAP,   v.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEFIEMIAII. 


125 


The  contrast  between  Jiimself  and  the 
common  run  of  his  contemporaries  is 
evident  throughout  the  story.  "He 
heard  a  voice  they  could  not  hear." 
2.  He  rose  above  all  the  hare  require- 
ments of  law.  "Is  it  so  nominated  in 
the  bond  ? "  is  never  the  question  of  a 
heroically  good  man.  Not  what  I  am 
required  to  do,  but  what  I  am  able  to 
do  ;  not  what  I  am  commanded,  but 
what  I  can,  is  his  rule  of  action.  3.  His 
generous  goodness  made  him  a  law  unto 
himself.  See  this  illustrated  in  the 
text.  What  others  do  is  no  excuse  for 
my  doing  the  same.  "  I  might  exact  of 
them." 

I.  Common  contravention  of  this 
rule.  1.  A  common  reason  for  wrong- 
doing is  that  others  do  it.  Easy  to  find 
precedent  and  example  for  anything  we 
wish  to  do.  In  the  practices  of  the 
world  and  in  the  faults  of  good  men  we 
can  find,  if  we  are  perverse  enough, 
plenty  of  examples  of  evil.  2.  A  more 
poimrful  reason  still  is  the  fact  that  it 
will  he  donCf  so  I  may  as  well  do  it,  and 
have  the  benefit  of  it.  This  will  justify 
anything  to  a  man.     The  schoolboy  in 


Cowper's  story  robs  the  orchard  because 
his  companions  will  go  even  if  he  should 
remain  away.  The  business  man  con- 
tents himself  with  iniquitous  action 
because  others  would  do  it  in  any  case, 
and  he  may  as  well  have  the  benefit  as 
another.  The  legislator  enacts  an  un- 
righteous statute  or  favours  an  unholy 
conquest  because  these  things  will  be 
done. 

II.  Vindication  of  this  rule.  1.  Not 
another'' s conscience,  but  his o^vn  conscience, 
is  a  man's  guide.  If  every  one  descended 
to  the  lower  level  of  his  neighbour,  the 
world  would  go  with  swift  slide  into 
the  bottomless  pit.  To  stand  faithful 
where  others  fail  is  the  glory  of  the 
servant  of  the  Lord.  "  They  do  it,  and 
will  do  it : — let  them  do  it ;  I  will  not." 
2.  The  evil  doings  of  others  will  not 
save  a  man  from  the  doom  of  his  own 
wrong-doing.  "  Thou  hast  delivered  thy 
soul."  That  surely  is  some  consolation 
for  the  man  who  stands  aloof  from  evil. 
"  I  likewise,  and  my  brethren,  and  my 
servants,  might  exact  of  them  money 
and  corn,"  if  this  wrong  exaction  by 
others  might  justify  it  in  us. 


Clenching  a  Good  Kesolution. 
V.  12.     Then  said  they.  We  will  restore^  &c. 


**  In  a  time  of  danger  we  understand 
a  general  interest.  Every  one  is  called 
in  to  take  a  part  in  the  struggles  that 
we  make  for  liberty.  And  yet  when 
the  toil  was  a  little  over  some  of  them 
acted  as  if  they  thought  that  Providence 
was  not  a  public  friend,  but  only  a  sort 
of  a  factor  to  a  few  private  families.  It 
is  a  misrepresentation  of  him  who  gives 
us  the  mercy  if  we  do  not  make  it 
extensive.  He  accepts  not  the  persons 
of  princes  nor  regards  the  rich  more 
than  the  poor,  for  they  are  aU  the  work 
of  his  hands.  You  must  not  think  he 
is  so  lavish  of  his  bounty  to  the  great 
men  of  the  earth  merely  that  they  may 
glitter  upon  a  throne,  but  be  his  minis- 
ters for  good ;  and  this  they  cannot  be 
if  they  resolve  to  confine  their  influence. 
Princes  love  to  be  called  God's  repre- 
sentatives, but  they  usually  understand 
it  in  no  other  attribute  than  his  power  j 


whereas  that  is  incommunicable ;  it  is  a 
glory  that  he  never  gives  to  another. 
The  chief  titles  in  which  he  would  be 
represented  by  them  are  those  of  justice 
and  mercy."  These  strong,  brave,  and 
true  words  were  written  by  Thomas 
Bradbury  more  than  a  century  and  a 
half  ago,  and  applied  to  his  own  times. 
The  human  heart  is  the  same  in  all  ages. 
It  is  treacherous.  Nehemiah  knew  this. 
The  words  of  the  oppressors  were  fair- 
seeming.  "We  will  restore."  "We 
will  require  nothing  of  them."  "We 
will  do  as  thou  say  est."  But  the  very 
greatness  of  the  promise  constitutes  its 
danger.  It  is  too  good  to  be  true; 
needs  binding  force.  The  priest's  pre- 
sence will  give  the  oath  "  legal  validity 
for  judicial  decisions."  It  will  also 
impart  solemnity.  If  tempted  to  op- 
press again  the  awful  oath  will  rise  to 
recollection.     There  is  the  truth  of  life 


126  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  v. 


in  this  old-world  scene.     Men  need  all  Any  system  of  spiritual  mnemonics  is 

the  helps  they  can  get.  valuable.     What  is  wanted  is  quickness 

I.  In  the  resistance  of  temptation,  to  discover  temptation,  and  firmness  to 

The  balance  of  our  lives  has  need  of  resist  it.     **Thy  word  have  I  hid  in 

one  scale  of  reason  to  poise  another  of  mine  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  against 

passion.     The  proverbs  of  many  peoples  ,  thee"  (Ps.  cxix.  11).     *'It  is  written  !  " 

speak  of  the  fragile  nature  of  promises  Jesus  answered  and  said  to  the  tempter 

and  vows.     He  who  stands  on  his  un-  (Matt.   iv.).     '*'  Watch  and  pray,  that 

aided  resolution   has   insecure   footing,  ye  enter  not  into  temptation"   (Matt. 

Forgetting    is   easy.       Self-interest   is  xxvi.    41).      All   inspirations   that   are 

powerful.      The   present   moment   out-  available  are  needed, 

weighs   the   future   hour.      Philosophy  II.    In  the   performance   of  duty. 

would  teach  us  to  forego  a  moment's  Doing   good  is  a  more  comprehensive 

rapture  for  lifelong  peace ;   but  we  are  phrase  than  easy  task.     "  Virtue  is  its 

not  all  philosophical.     The  now  is  here,  own  reward."     Possibly,  but  not  always 

the   rapture  is  possible ;  the  future  is  so   regarded.     A   hard   task   trying   to 

uncertain,  the  peace  is  contingent.     All  help  those  who  hinder.     He  who  will 

experience  of  life  teaches  that  men  will  serve  must  suffer.     Let  him  despise  not 

barter   future    blessedness   for    present  the  smallest  strength  from  any  quarter, 

happiness.     "The  things  which  are  seen"  Bind  thyself  to  God's  altar  with  any 

bulk  larger  in  the  eyes  of  men  than  cords  thou  may  est  obtain.     Eeliance  on 

**the  things  which  are  not  seen."     We  God  will  bring  the  only  safe  self-reliance, 

cannot  afford   to  neglect   {a)  the  daily  For  each  day's  task  God  has  promised 

reading  of  the  word  of  God ;  {h)  private  daily  strength.     For  rugged  paths  he 

and  ejaculatory  prayer ;  (c)  covenant  en-  has  provided  wear-resisting  shoes.     Lift 

gagements  with  God.     Many  Christians  up  thy  burden.     Put  thy  foot  forward 

have  found  it  helpful  to  enter  into  a  along   the  path  God  has  marked  out. 

written   covenant.     The   signature   has  "Trust  in  the  Lord  and  do  good."    ^^  Thy 

had  the  same  effect  as  Nehemiah's  oath,  God  hath  commanded  thy  strength." 

The  Terrors  op  the  Lord  persuading  Men. 

V.  13.     Also  I  shook  my  lap,  and  said,  &c. 

This   text  describes  a  solemn  scene,  rolled  back  in  acceptance  of  the  stern 

A  reformer  with  a  stern,  hard  nerve  of  alternative  —  obedience    or    the    curse. 

righteousness  arraigning  a  guilty  band  Twelve  times   over  from  the  slopes  of 

of   fellow   mortals    before   God.       The  Ebal  rang  the  "  Cursed  be  he "  of  the 

nobles   feel   the   spell   of    ISTehemiah^s  officiating  Levite,  and  twelve  times  was 

strong  conscience  and  the  still  stronger  flung  back  the  united  Amen  of  Israel.   In 

spell  of  Jehovah's  threatening,  and  have  a  similar  spirit  Nehemiah  extemporized 

promised  to  reform  their  deeds.     Their  this  solemn   binding  ceremony   of   the 

ruthless  friend^  having  compelled  them  text. 

to  swear  to  their  resolves,  turning  upon  I.  The  doom  of  unrighteousness  ac- 

them,  exclaims,  "Now  you  are  committed  knowledged.     Amen  in  one  significance 

to  your  course.'^    **  I  shook  my  lap,  and  means  "  verily,"  "  truly,"  "  so  it  is  and 

said,  So  God  shake  out  every  man  that  shall   be."     The   Lord  will    shake  out 

performeth  not  this  promise.     An(^  all  from  his   lap    the  wicked  like   a  man 

the  congregation  said.  Amen."   A  similar  shaking  the   worthless   dust   from   his 

scene    is    recorded     in    Deut     xxvii.,  garment.     It  is  even  so.     Amen  I    Say 

where  the  curses  of  God  were  read  as  to    the   wicked.    It   shall  be    ill    with 

the  doom  of  those  who  broke  the  laws  him.     1.  Natural  instinct  asserts  this. 

solemnly  repeated  before  the  people,  and  P>y  natural  instinct  one  holds  no  precise 

where,  like  the  murmur  of  a  surge  on  philosophical   dogma.     This  is  enough 

the  coast,  the  deep  Amen  of  the  people  for  our  purpose      Every  rational  mind 


CHAP,   v.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


127 


in  a  land  of  light  and  knowledge  has 
tlie  deepy  inwrought  conviction  that 
(loom  must  follow  misdoing.  Fiery 
sentences  asserting  this  are  written  in 
legends  of  the  heathen  world.  Nemesis, 
like  a  bloodhound,  follows  the  wrong- 
doer. Ancient  poetry  grows  terrible  in 
its  tragic  representations  of  this  great 
belief.  "  Our  heart  condemns  us."  God's 
warning  words  are  answered  by  the 
soul's  Amen!  It  is  even  so!  2.  The 
operation  of  natural  law  exhibits  this 
great  principle,  that  God  must  one  day 
shake  away  the  worthless.  '*  Nature 
gives  us  a  word  and  a  blow,  and  the  blow 
hrst."  Excess  or  transgression  of  phy- 
sical law  threatens  us  as  with  fixed 
bayonets.  Put  a  bound  upon  thy  lust 
and  appetite,  or  beware,  is  the  voice  of  all 
experience.  No  less  a  human  than  a 
Divine  proverb  is  the  saying,  *'  He  that 
breaketh  the  hedge,  the  serpent  shall  bite 
him."  The  sensual,  who  has  lost  his 
health  ;  the  drunkard,  who  has  pulled 
down  the  pillars  of  his  home;  the  dis- 
honest, who  is  cast  out  a  despised  and 
characterless  thing,  all  point  one  way. 
It  is  nature's  Amen  to  the  Bible  curse — 
It  is  so.  3.  History  Jills  her  picture- 
galleries  loith  illustrations  of  this  point. 
The  history  of  nations  is  a  story  of  well- 
doing and  its  reward,  prosperity,  and  of 
ill-doing  and  its  sure-footed  vengeance. 
History  puts  her  brazen  trumpet  to  her 
lips  and  blows  out  an  assenting  Amen  I 
It  is  so.  God  will  shake  out  as  he  has 
shaken  out  the  wicked.  You  cannot 
argue  with  or  alter  this  stable  law  of 
life.  You  may  lay  an  unbelieviug  hand 
upon  the  letters  of  doom,  you  may  cast 
doubt  after  doubt  into  the  bottomless 
pit,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the 
world's  law  which  is  God's  law  can  be 
affected  thereby.  "  Be  sure  your  sin 
will  find  you  out." 

II.  The  doom  of  unrighteousness 
accepted.  Amen  not  only  means  "It 
is  so,"  but,  ''So  let  it  he."  By  their 
Amen  the  people  signed  their  agreement 
to  the  conditions,  their  acceptance  of 
the  pains  and  penalties  of  the  trans- 
gressor. The  repentant  people  said 
Amen  to  the  curse.  They  indignantly 
denounced  their  baser  self  "  If  I  could 
be  so  base  as  to  neglect  my  vow  to  God, 


let  it  be  even  thus — let  me  be  shaken 
out  of  God's  lap  of  rest  and  blessed- 
ness." That  is  the  significance  of  their 
Amen  !  1.  Yet  it  is  dangerous  to  mis- 
understand this.  Many  a  struggling 
man,  after  being  repeatedly  vanquished 
by  a  bad  habit,  has  in  an  hour  of  de- 
spair clutched  at  something  like  this  as 
if  to  frighten  his  own  soul.  He  has 
invoked  a  conditional  curse  upon  his 
head.  *'  If  I  repeat  this  let  me  perish 
by  it ! "  has  gone  from  the  half-mad- 
dened mind  in  the  hour  of  self-disgust. 
Then  there  has  come  the  repetition  of 
the  sin,  "for  the  strongest  oaths  are 
straw  to  the  fire  in  the  blood,"  and  the 
poor  sinner  has  settled  down  with  the 
thought  that  his  doom  is  sealed.  TJiere 
is  not  a  little  of  this  practical  fatalism. 
Avoid  it !     "  That  way  madness  lies  1 " 

2.  But  there  is  no  need  to  pray  for  a 
curse.  If  we  sin  the  curse  is  sure  ;  and 
the  Amen  of  the  repentant  soul,  whose 
only  wish  is  for  well-doing,  is  merely 
a  waking  up  of  the  conscience  to  this 
gloomy  fact.  Let  it  sink  into  the  soul. 
Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,  therefore 
know  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lord."  We 
may  look  at  the  mild  glories  of  mercy 
until  we  forget  the  sterner  side  of  life. 
Brace  the  soul  by  meditations  on  the 
deep,  inexorable  sternness  oi  offended  law. 

3.  When  engaging  in  formal  covenant 
with  God,  when  taking  the  pledge  of 
conversion,  lohen  engaging  in  the  solemn- 
ities of  public  or  private  worship,  we 
virtually  hind  our  souls  with  this  curse. 
To  give  ourselves  up  to  blessing  is  to 
denounce  upon  our  backsliding  self  the 
curse.  When  a  soldier  takes  his  oath 
he  insures  his  fidelity  of  the  reward  and 
prospective  promotion,  and  by  that  same 
act  says  Amen  to  the  law,  "  Thou  shalt 
be  shot  for  desertion  or  for  treachery  !  " 
It  is  the  same  in  citizenship.  All  well- 
doing, right-loving  citizens  agree  to  the 
pains  and  penalties  which  await  their 
possible  malefactions.  It  is  thus  that 
life  is  girdled  with  a  deep  gulf  of  doom. 
Evil  to  the  evil-doer  is  the  proposition. 
It  is  so.  Amen  !  says  every  voice  that 
can  argue  with  man.  So  he  it.  Amen  I 
says  the  soul  that  rises  up  to  follow 
good. 

III.  The  doom  of  unrighteousness 


128  HOMILETIG  GOMMENTARY :  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  v. 


avoided.     ''  And  the  people  did  accord-  The   commandment   often   arouses   the 

ing   to    their   promise."     1.    The   good  contrary  desire.     3.  '' My  grace  is  suf- 

man   shuts  himself  up   to   his  course,  ficient  for  thee"     The  vow  of  the  soul  is 

Like  Simon  Peter,  he  can  turn  nowhere,  its  warrant  of  sincerity ;  the   steadfast 

"  To  whom  shall  we  go  "  but  unto  Thee,  faith  of  the  soul  in  the  grace  of  Jesus 

No  turning,  like  Lot's  wife.    The  fire  of  Christ  is  its  defence  against  temptations 

doom  is  the  end  of  all  backward  steps,  to  desertion  and  disobedience. 

Paul-like,  let  us  ''leave  the  things  that  Application.    1.  Ponder  the  inevitable 

are  behind."  2.   The  good  man  must  not  terrors  of  the  Lord  against  all  unright- 

depend  upon  the  mere  binding  force  of  eousness.     2.   Vow  solemnly  the  vow  of 

his  oath.     Pledges  and  prisons  are  but  repentance  and  reformation.     3.   Pray 

geeen  withes  on  the  strong  man  of  sin  if  for  hourly  strength  to  do  according  to 

there  be  no  other  bond.     Goodness  by  this  promise. 
the  ROD  is  not  safe  or  real  or  lasting. 

A  Man  foregoing  his  Rights  for  the  Sake  of  his  Duties. 

V.  14.     Moreover  from  the  time  that  I  was  appointed,  &c. 

Nehemiah  was  a  law  unto  himself,  escape  if  we  have  neglected  our  duties. 
Eef  used  to  be  guided  by  others' example.  It  was  such  considerations  as  these 
"  I  might  exact  of  them  money  and  which  swayed  the  Jewish  liberator, 
corn^  (v.  10).  Rose  superior  to  insist-  IV.  The  due  adherence  to  this  prin- 
ence  on  his  own  rights.  ''  The  former  ciple  is  the  self-sacrificing  spirit  of 
governors  were  chargeable  unto  the  Christianity.  "The  Son  of  man  came 
people"  (v.  15).  The  principle  is  this  :  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  niin- 
— A  man  must  sometimes  forego  his  ister."  The  crowning  glory  of  the  re- 
rights  for  the  sake  of  his  duties.  demptive   life  of  Jesus   is,  that  though 

I.  Rights  must  be  asserted.  It  will  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our  sakes  he  became 
not  do  to  weakly  allow  selfishness  to  poor.  In  the  second  chapter  of  the 
trample  upon  the  too  submissive  soul.  Philippian  Epistle  we  have  the  Christian 
St.  Paul's  insisting  on  his  privileges  as  a  setting  of  this  doctrine.  The  example 
Roman  citizen  an  example.  of    Nehemiah,    who    came   among   the 

II.  Rights  must  not  be  pressed  too  miserly,  selfish  Jews,  and  flung  back  to 
far.  A  man  has  prejudiced  views  of  the  people  even  the  dues  and  monies 
his  own  worth  and  deserts.  According  which  were  properly  his,  in  the  great- 
to  his  self-importance  will  be  the  large-  ness  of  his  self-sacrifice  shrinking  from 
ness  of  his  views  of  his  own  rights,  insistence  on  his  own  rights  as  he  would 
"  The  rights  of  man "  is  frequently  a  from  sin,  was  like  an  incarnation  of 
hollow  cry  of  selfishness.  nobleness  for  the  fallen  minds  of  his 

III.  Rights  must  be  tempered  by  contemporaries  to  look  at  and  emulate. 
considerations  of  duty.  Duty  is  a  In  the  sweet  story  of  old  this  same  grand 
grand  governing  word.  It  sways  men  law  is  carried  higher.  In  the  life  of  St. 
more  than  we  think.  The  holiday-  Paul  it  is  repeated.  In  the  story  of 
maker  is  restless  after  a  while  to  get  missionaries  and  martyrs  there  is  a  pro- 
back  to  the  routine  of  his  duties.  Duty  longation  of  this  line  of  light.  Blessed 
is  our  home ;  pleasure  is  the  place  we  are  they  who  reflect  its  blaze  and  join 
take  a  trip  to  now  and  then.    Ourhappi-  this  glorious  succession. 

ness  is  more  bound  up  with  our  duties  Application.     1.   Guard   against    the 

than  with  our  rights.      We  can  survive  selfish  spirit  of  the  world.     2.  Seek  and 

being  cheated  of  a  right,  but  we  cannot  show  the  unselfish  spirit  of  Christ, 


OHAP.  v.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEM1AB 


129 


A  Motto  for  a  Manly  Life. 
V.  15.     So  did  not  /,  becatise  of  the  fear  of  God, 


There  is  a  motto  for  a  manly  life. 
The  key-note  of  his  character  was  not 
fear  of  the  crowds  but  fear  of  his  own 
co7isclence.  What  a  noble  thing  is  the 
iron  sense  of  duty.  This  was  the  strong 
sinew  of  the  Duke  of  "Wellington's  great 
nature.  Whether  in  the  Church  or  the 
world,  every  circle  feels  the  presence  and 
reverences  the  career  of  one  who  bears 
this  hall-mark  of  duty.  So  will  not  lyfor 
conscience^  sake.  Briefly  sketch  the  story 
of  Nehemiah,  as  illustrating  his  adher- 
ence to  his  self-chosen  motto.  It  was  the 
banner  of  his  whole  life-battle,  and  he 
lield  it  with  a  clenched  hand  in  every 
high  place  of  temptation. 

I.  The  regulative  power  of  a  lofty 
motive.  In  manifold  forms  the  firm 
and  heroic  have  ruled  their  Jives  by  a 
power  superior  to  their  own  lower  nature. 
1.  ''The  fear  of  God"  is  Nehemiah's 
phrase.  That  reverential,  loving  awe  of 
the  all-holy  Father  and  Ruler  of  men.  2. 
''The  love  of  Christ"  is  the  warmer 
sentiment  which  corresponds  to  this  in 
Paul's  phraseology.  Fuller  light  brought 
a  deeper  sentiment.  The  thought  of 
Christ's  love  awakening  love  for  Christ, 
and  becoming  in  man  an  incarnation  of 
heavenly  inspiration.  3.  "Religious 
principle  "  is  another  colder,  broader,  yet 
noble  expression  of  the  same  animator 
of  good  men.  4.  "Consciences''^  "the 
sense  of  duty^^  "  the  instinct  of  right " 
are  less  precise  variations  of  the  motives 
which  sway  all  whose  lives  are  redeemed 
from  the  ignoble. 

II.  The  courage  to  be  singular  is 
implied  in  this  motto  of  the  Jewish 
liberator.  1.  Let  there  he  no  singularity 
for  singularity's  sake.  Opposition  may 
be  our  misfortune^  but  must  not  be  our 
ambition.  To  sing  out  of  tune  for  the 
sake  of  having  your  voice  heard  is 
weakness,  not  strength.  2.  Yet  this 
world  has  always  rested  as  on  granite 
pillars  on  men  who  could  be  singular. 
Moses  refusing  to  be  identified  with  the 
godless  nationality  of  Egypt.  The  three 
Hebrew   children   standing    upright   in 


Babylon  like  watch-towers  of  truth. 
Peter  and  John  giving  their  summary 
answer  to  the  council :  "  We  ought  to 
obey  God  rather  than  man. "  Luther  at 
Worms  crying  out,  "  It  is  not  wise  or  safe 
for  a  man  to  do  anything  against  his  con- 
science." These  men  and  their  heroic 
brethren  in  resistance  have  all  glorified 
their  lives  by  this  motto :  "So  did 
not  I." 

III.  Applications  of  this  principle 
in  the  commonplace  life  of  all  men. 
1.  To  HIMSELF  a  man  must  say  no  ! 
"  Let  him  deny  himself"  is  a  precept  we 
must  practise  if  we  would  even  live.  It 
is  also  a  necessity  of  our  happiness. 
"  True  quietness  of  heart  is  gotten  not 
by  obeying  our  passions,  but  by  resisting 
them."  It  is  essential  to  our  self-respect 
in  "the  struggle  of  the  instinct  that 
enjoys  with  the  more  noble  instinct 
which  aspires."  The  mastery  of  self  is 
the  foundation- victory.  "  To  thine  own 
self  be  true,  and  it  shall  follow,  as  the 
night  the  day,  thou  canst  not  then  be 
false  to  any  man."  2.  To  the  world 
a  man  must  say  no  !  Prevalency  of 
temptations  for  a  man  to  let  himself  do  ivn, 
to  barter  purity  for  pleasure  and  honour 
for  gold.  How  many  poor  men  sell 
their  birthright  of  immortality  for  some 
animal  gratification !  How  many  sell 
their  Lord  for  tliirty  pieces  of  silver y  more 
or  less.  3.  "So  did  not  I"  is  the  youth's 
motto.  "  If  sinners  entice  thee,  consent 
thou  not."  It  is  a  manlier  and  a  stronger 
thing  to  go  right  than  to  go  wrong. 
"  Stand  thou  firm  as  an  anvil  that  is 
beaten." 

IV.  The  simplicity  and  directness 
of  this  life-motto.  Nehemiah's  reason 
for  his  nonconformity  was  a  very  simple 
one.  "  In  my  view  this  practice  is  not 
right !  "  You  cannot  be  always  arguing 
a  thing.  You  cannot  be  "  seeking  truth  " 
(to  quote  the  worlds  cant  expression  for 
moral  irresolution)  all  your  life.  Find 
it  quickly,  and  stick  to  it  always.  Pro- 
viding a  man's  heart  is  bad  enough,  his 
head  will  usually  be  clever  enough  to 


130 


ROMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


[OHAP.  T 


argue  for  his  defence.  The  devil  is  said 
eo  be  the  best  of  advocates,  and  can  quote 
Scripture  to  his  purpose.  But  in  plain 
matters  of  right  and  wrong  **  there  is  a 
spirit  in  man,  and  the  inspiration  of  the 
Almighty  giveth  him  understanding." 
ISTehemiah's  reason  for  not  pocketing  the 
money  as  others  had  done  was  a  very 
simple  answer — '■^  I  fear  God.^"* 

V.  This  motto  is  our  guide  in 
doubtful  matters.  Many  bad  things 
are  doubtful  for  want  of  a  sensitive 
nerve  in  the  soul.  That  which  to  one 
is  "  but  a  choleric  word,  to  another  is 
flat  blasphemy."  To  Nehemiah's  con- 
temporaries and  predecessors  this  prac- 
tice of  money-making  had  seemed  a 
lawful  one,  but  Nehemiah  said  that  it 
was  one  in  which  a  man  could  not  keep 
clean  hands.  The  scrupulous  has  the 
solution  of  his  difficulties  in  his  own 
conscience.  Forego  the  doubtful  for 
God^s  sake.  Make  your  self-denial  in 
that  matter  a  sacrifice  to  God,  and  it 
shall  be  to  him  as  the  odour  of  incense. 

Application.  1.  Let  us  understand 
and  acquire  this  great  life-principle. 
The  fear  of  God  is  not  fear  or  dread  of 
a  Being  outside  us,  but  reverence  and 
submission  to  a  holy  Spirit  within.  2. 
Let  it  be  our  strife,  at  whatever  sacrifice^ 
to  reverence  this  powerful  sentiment. 
"  Hear  the  conclusion  of  the  whole 
matter :  Fear  God,  and  keep  his  com- 
mandments: for  this  is  the  whole  duty 
of  man." 

Illustrative  Poem  : — 

**  P)roth{T,  up  to  the  breach 
For  Christ's  freedom  and  truth; 
Let  us  act  as  we  teach, 
With  the  wisdom  of  age  and  the  vigour  of  youth. 
Heed  not  their  cannon-balls, 
Ask  not  who  stands  or  falls, 
Grasp  the  sword 
Of  the  Lord, 
And  forward ! 

Brother,  strong  in  the  faith 
That  "  the  right  will  come  right," 
Never  tremble  at  death, 
Never  think  of  thyself  'mid  the  roar  of  the  fight. 
Hark  to  the  battle  cry 
Sounding  from  yonder  sky ! 

Grasp  the  sword 

Of  the  Lord, 

And  forward ! 


Brother,  sing  a  loud  psalm  ; 
Our  hope's  not  forlorn. 
After  storm  comes  the  calm, 
After  darkness  and  twilight  breaks  forth  the 
new  morn. 
Let  the  mad  foe  get  madder ; 
Never  quail  I  up  the  ladder 

Grasp  the  sword 

Of  the  Lord, 

And  forward  ! 

Brother,  up  to  the  breach 
For  Christ's  freedom  and  truth  ; 
If  we  live  we  shall  teach. 
With  the  strong  faith  of  age  and  the  bright 
hope  of  youth. 
If  we  perish,  then  o'er  us 
Will  nng  the  loud  chorus  : 
Grasp  the  sword 
Of  the  Lord, 
And  forward ! — Norman  MaeLwd. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Singularity. — "We  must  leani  to  say  'No.' 
We  must  dare,  if  need  be,  to  be  singular.  Like 
the  young  Joseph,  when  you  are  tempted  astray 
by  seducing  voices,  let  your  answer  be,  *How 
can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against 
God?  *  Like  the  young  Daniel,  when  forbidden 
pleasures  and  questionable  delights  are  urged 
upon  your  appetites,  be  'purposed  in'  your 
'  heart  that  *  you  *  will  not  defile '  yourself 
with  them,  and  choose  pulse  and  water  with  the 
relish  of  a  good  conscience  rather  than  such 
dainties.  Like  the  same  Daniel,  when  the 
crowd  are  flocking  at  the  sound  of  the  sackbut 
and  psaltery  to  worship  some  golden  image, 
keep  your  knees  unbent  amidst  the  madness, 
learn  to  stand  erect  though  you  alone  are  up- 
right in  the  midst  of  a  grovelling  multitude, 
and  protest,  'We  will  not  serve  thy  gods  nor 
worship  the  golden  image  which  thou  hast  set 
up.*  Like  Nehemiah,  dare  to  lose  money  rather 
than  adopt  sources  of  profit  which  others  may 
use  without  a  thought,  but  which  your  con- 
science shrinks  from  ;  and  to  all  the  various  en- 
ticements of  pleasure,  and  gain,  and  ease,  and 
popular  loose  maxims  for  the  conduct  oppose 
immovable  resistance,  founded  on  a  higher  law 
and  a  mightier  motive.  *  So  did  not  I,  because 
of  the  fear  of  God.'  "— ^.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  mighty  motive.  "  So  did  not  I,  because  of 
the  fear  of  God."  "  The  heart  cannot  be  pre- 
vailed upon  to  part  with  the  world  by  a  simple 
act  of  resignation.  But  may  not  the  heart  be 
prevailed  upon  to  admit  into  its  preference 
another,  who  shall  subordinate  the  world,  and 
bring  it  down  from  its  wonted  ascendancy  ?  It 
the  throne  which  is  placed  there  must  have  an 
occupier,  and  the  tyrant  that  now  reigns  has 
occupied  it  wrongfully,  he  may  not  leave  a 
bosom  which  would  rather  detain  him  than  be 
left  in  desolation.  But  may  he  not  give  way  to 
the  lawful  sovereign  ?  " — Chalmers. 

"  By  his  place  Nehemiah  had  an  advantage 
of  oppressing  his  brethen,  if  he  durst  have  been 
so  wicked ;  and  from  those  that  had  before  him 


OHAP.T.]  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEBEMIAH. 


T31 


been  honoured  with  that  office  he  had  example,  »PP;-«;j  «f;tS„„trto  ^tf  £e' 

of  such  as  could  not  only  swal  ow  the  common  they  were  not  ma  conmt            v^,^  ^^^  ^^^ 

allowance   of    the  g»J<=™'''  '^''^out  rmng  m  f°;^^JX7h","a\'2andman,  that  hath  driven 

their  consciences,  which    showed    a/'Sff  "-J  his  land  and  sucked  out  the  heart  of  it,  casts  it 

strong  enough,  considering  the  peeled  state  of  his  '"""^ »""  ™''^°.        j;,,   ■^^  recovers  its  lost 

the  J"ews  at^hat  «-J,»\«nSi^^^^^^^  2.^:J''k^2lJL  spare  this  oppressed 

:rsu  f treti^o^'o^i^  ^'^'^p^rraiso  .hy  p^li/if :a,vs\:?l'  f  ^-:rv! 

illegal  exactions  ,  so  that  Nehemiah  coming  t.m  f™™  d^ing  »  '^e  "st  ha  ^  ^^  ^.^  ^^^ 
after  such  oppressors,  if  he  had  taltei.  h.s  allow-  f «.  ^"^J.^^ V,\„  „{  the  Lord.'  The  man 
ance,  and  but  eased  them  of  '^e»'h«  burdens     ^^«««^^  ^^^  j  \\f ^^^^^^^        with  a  sincere  fear 

s  r  ^^  'st;rth:SgLr  BuYh:  :A  .^d  *«»  kept «» right."-««r««». 

durst  not  go  so  far.    A  man  may  possibly  be  an 

Conscious  LrrEaBiTT. 

T.  19.     mnh  upon  me,  my  Ood,M  good,  according  to  all  tMilham  d^for 

this  people. 
.  v»  „i   ♦«  Pnrl    fo  dpal    another    full    of    m<yral    eccentricities. 

his  me  IS  several       ,,  ^_  l^j  the  people     them   a   continual   perplexity  to   their 

God-fearing,  faithful,  and  unselfish,   in     ^^  ^^^^  ^.^^  Edmund  Burke,  whose  genius  was 

every  step  he  could  boldly  look  back  ^^^^ 

upon  his  progress  and  take  the  satis-        We  scarcely  can  praise  it  or  blame  it  too  mucn. 

|£\:L:?MnTr5tVZ:Cg  yet  when  we  consider  how  anl^.^s 
iHere  is  someum  H  .    -^^  ^^^^  ^  ^^^^'^  ^^rtue,  how  by 

'TSabS  orSteousness.  To  {ne  erro/or  sin  you  ^ay  put  back  your 
.n™;  men  it  is  riven  to  possess  great  nature  or  your  work  more  than  you 
^:r^To}fhafaZ,  toothers  it  is     promote  it  by  many  exceUe"ces    it j 

sigglsiSpsg 

deeds,  but  now  and  then  tneir  wotk  is     w  vt     ,        ^^  ^  ^^ 

weakened  by  the  mistakes  found  therein ;     way  m  me       bee  ver.  y  .     ^ ",§      ^ 

S'  \Se  (saj:  N^buhr),  the  only     Holy  Ghost"  is  *e  r-tra;nmg  th^^^^^^^^^^ 
aeneral  in   whose   conduct  of  war  we     to  keep  us  from  fault         ihe  blood  ot 


132 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  v. 


which  he  must  leave  behind  him.  3. 
At  the  same  time,  cover  with  charity  and 
hear  with  patience  the  failures  of  weak 
human  nature.  You  cannot  measure 
the  greatness  of  his  inward  difficulties. 

"  What's  done  you  partly  may  compute, 
But  never  what's  resisted." 

Be  severe  on  your  own  fault ;  be  gentle 
with  the  fault  of  your  brother. 

II.  The  noble  refage  of  the  right- 
eous. A  little  poem,  whose  every  line  is 
a  thread  of  gold,  speaks  of  the  man 
"  whose  conscience  is  his  strong  retreat." 
In  every  circumstance  and  crisis  of  life 
this  is  a  safe  place  for  the  thoughts  to 
dwell.  1.  In  prosperity.  It  is  a  joy 
to  know  that  good  has  come  by  good 
means.  The  rich  man  whose  money- 
bags are  all  witnesses  of  iniquity,  whose 
every  gain  signifies  dishonour,  must 
have  a  wasp-sting  in  every  fruit  he 
tastes.  Accumulated  wealth  is  but  an 
accumidation  of  doom  to  the  man  who 
prospers  wrongfully.  But  to  have  a 
good  conscience  as  the  companion  of  good 
fortune  is  to  drink  of  the  sweetest  cup 
of  earthly  happiness.  2.  In  adversity. 
When  other  miseries  are  upon  a  man  it 
is  glorious  to  be  free  from  that  arch- 
angel of  misery y  a  guilty  conscience.  The 
drunkard,  who  looks  upon  the  desolation 
of  his  family,  and  who  knows  that  his 
own  trembling  hands  have  pulled  down 
the  pillars  of  his  home  ;  the  extravagant 
and  reckless,  who  see  in  their  ruin  the 
ripe  harvest  for  which  they  sowed,  sit 
in  the  dark  place  with  no  consolatory 
light  at  all.  If  I  am  bereft  of  my 
integrity  I  am  bereaved.  Sweet  it  is  in 
adversity  to  sit  without  the  whips  and 
scorns  of  self-accusation.  3.  In  the 
relationships  of  life.  To  know  I  have 
not  wilfully  hurt  the  health,  or  con- 
science, or  happiness  of  my  fellow  is 
an  angel  remembrance  as  life's  evening 
comes  on.     Guilty  men  have  repented 


and  found  a  Saviour^s  mercy  before  now 
whose  after-thoughts  have  been  gloomy 
with  remembrance  of  injuries  done  to 
their  fellows.  So  St.  Paul  meekly 
sorrows  over  the  madness  which  had  in 
former  days  damaged  the  flock  of  God. 
4.  In  death.  0  death,  where  is  thy 
sting  if  the  soul  is  found  in  Christ,  and 
the  memory  plays  like  a  setting  sun  on  a 
well-spent  life  %  "  All  that  I  have  done 
for  this  people."  The  good  deeds  of  a 
well-spent  life  are  shining  companions  to 
the  soul  as  it  goes  through  the  windings 
of  the  last  dark  valley.  Contrast  with 
all  this  the  guilty  thoughts  of  the  bad 
king. 

"  I  have  lived  long  enough ;  my  way  of  life 
Is  fallen  into  the  sear,  the  yellow  leaf; 
And  that  which  should  accompany  old  age 
I  must  not  look  to  have ;  but  in  their  stead 
Curses,  not  loud  but  deep,  moutii-honour  breath 
Which  the  poor  heart  would  fain  deny,  but 
dare  not." 

III.  The  dangers  of  the  righteous. 

To  stand  upon  our  righteous  habits  is 
to  select  a  wrong  basis.  Goodness  is 
rather  the  buttress  of  the  wall  than  its 
foundation. 

"  Nor  alms  or  deeds  that  I  have  done 
Can  for  a  single  sin  atone ; 
To  Calvary  alone  I  flee ; 
0  God,  be  merciful  to  me." 

Self-righteousness  brings  pride  and 
uncharitableness.  When  Archbishop 
Whateley  lay  dying  some  one  said,  "  It 
is  the  greatness  of  your  lordship's  mind 
that  supports  you."  "  No,  it  is  not  "  (he 
said) ;  **  it  is  faith  in  Christ  that  sup- 
ports me."     That  is  the  Rock  of  ages. 

Application.  1.  Strive  after  such 
integrity  as  will  bring  satisfaction  to  the 
soul  in  the  great  review  at  the  last.  2. 
Let  no  thought  of  your  own  goodness 
come  as  a  shadow  in  front  of  the  cross  to 
rob  the  Redeemer  of  the  glory  of  his  sal- 
vation. 


The  Saint's  Support. 

▼.  19.     Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good,  according  to  all  that  I  have  done  for 

this  people. 

Two  motives  induced  Nehemiah  to  state  j  the  many  great  and  desperate 
pray  thus :  the  many  great  and  good  dangers  he  had  already  met  with,  and 
things  he  had  done  for   Church  and     would  still  have  to  encounter.     There 


CHAP,  v.] 


HOMILETia  Q0MMENTAR7 :  NEHEMIAH. 


I3j 


were  three  solemn  comings  of  three 
famous  persons  to  Jerusalem — Zerub- 
babel,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah.  The  secret 
of  N'ehemiah's  courage — his  heart  was 
on  his  God. 

First y  of  the  sense  of  the  text,  "  Think," 
properly  "  remember."  To  remember  is 
(a)  to  keep  and  hold  fast  in  memory; 
opposed  to  forgetting.  (6)  To  call  to 
mind  forgotten  things.  A  word  derived 
from  this  root  is  put  for  a  memorial 
(Exod.  xxviii.  12)  and  for  records 
(Esther  vi.  1).  Remembering  is  in 
Scripture  applied  to  (1)  God  and  (2) 
man.  To  God  properly  in  first  signifi- 
cation. God  never  forgets.  "Known 
unto  him  are  all  his  works "  (Acts  xv. 
18).  Remembrance  is  also  applied  to 
God  in  the  second  signification  (Job 
vii.  7 ;  x.  9 ;  xiv.  3).  He  has  a  book 
of  remembrance  (Mai.  iii.  16).  These 
are  to  be  taken  "  tropically,"  by  way  of 
similitude.  Nehemiah's  "  remember  " 
means,  "May  I  have  assurance  and 
others'  evidence."  "  My  God, "  an  ap- 
propriating particle  ("  God "  —  Heb. 
Elohim),  a  plurality  of  persons,  a  unity 


of  nature.     "  For  good,"  i.  e.  goodness. 
The  sainfs  support  is  God. 

1.     The  person  petitioned,     2.     The 
point  prayed  for. 

I.  The  person.      1.    General  title. 
"God."     2.  Special  relation.     "My." 

II.  The  point  prayed  for.  1.  The 
kind  of  it.  2.  The  end  of  it.  1.  The 
kind.  (1)  An  act  desired  of  God. 
"Think  upon."  (2)  The  special  object 
"Me."  2.  The  end.  (1)  Generally. 
"For good."  (2)  Particularly,  (a)  The 
ground — "  that  I  have  done."  \h)  Tlie 
rule — "according  to."  (c)  The  extent 
— "  all."  (d)  The  limitation—"  for  this 
people."  Observations  hence  arising. 
1.  God  the  support  of  his  saints.  2.  Pe- 
culiar God  to  believer,  ^' My."  3.  God 
hath  remembrancers,  4.  God  is  soonest 
drawn  to  his  own.  5.  Prayer  proper 
for  one^s  own  good.  6.  Works  may  be 
pleaded  before  God.  7,  Man^s  works 
are  the  rule  of  God-s  reward,  8.  Every- 
thing well  done  shall  be  rewarded.  9. 
Good  done  to  God*8  people  is  most 
acceptable, — Dr,  Wm.  Gouge,  1642. 


The  Kemembrance  of  Good  Deeds  a  Pillow  of  Rest  for  a  Good  Man. 

V.  19.     Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good,  according  to  all  that  I  have  done  for 

this  people. 


"Nehemiah's  soul  was  frank  with 
God.  There  is  freedom  of  access  to  a 
throne  of  grace  for  every  believer  (Heb. 
iv.  16).  *  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for 
good,  according  to  all  that  I  have  done 
for  this  people,'  is  not  a  presumptuous 
conceit,  but  a  childlike  simplicity.  The 
^ross  mind  of  the  world  would  confound 
tie  two.  Where  we  know  that  God 
liiis  led  us  in  paths  of  righteousness, 
we  may  well  use  that  knowledge,  and 
encourage  our  souls  by  it.  Nehe- 
iiiiah  had  but  few  around  him  who 
could  reach  high  enough  to  sympathize 
fully  with  him;  and  it  was  thus  his 
great  comfort  to  pour  out  his  soul, 
according  to  truth,  before  the  God 
whose  good  hand  had  guided  him.  God 
wishes  no  mock  modesty  from  us.  His 
grace  in  our  hearts  and  lives  should  be 
acknowledged  (comp.  1  Tim.  i.  12)." — 
Crosby,     The  personal  pronoun  is  very 


prominent  in  David's  autobiography. 
"  I  have  preached."  "  I  have  not  refrained 
my  lips  "  (Ps.  xl.).  "  My  defence  is  of 
God  "  (Ps.  vii.).  "  Thou  hast  tried  me, 
and  shalt  find  nothing"  (Ps.  xvii.). 
St.  Paul  boldly  cites  his  own  example. 
Readers  of  his  epistles  note  his  self- 
consciousness.  "  Whatsoever  things  ye 
have  learned,  and  received,  and  heard, 
and  seen  in  me,  do"  (Phil.  iv.  9). 
"  Brethren,  be  followers  together  of  me  " 
(Phil.  iii.  17).  "I  beseech  you  be  as  I 
am"  (Gal.  iv.  12).  "These  hands  have 
ministered  to  my  necessities  "  (Acts  xx. 
34).  "I  have  fought  a  good  fight"  12 
Tim.  iv.  7). 

I.  Life's  review  will  be  a  review  of 
the  whole  of  life.  Its  good  as  well  as 
its  evil.  When  "  backward  are  our 
glances  bent  "  we  shall  need  the  recol- 
lection of  every  pure  thought,  guiding- 
word,  kindly  deed.    When  we  lie  down 


134  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [ohap.  vi. 


in  the  long  sleep  men  call  death  may  ness  of  works.     "We  must  all  appear 

no  pleasant  dreams  come  %  hefore  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  that 

II.  Life's  reward  will  be  rendered  every  one  may  receive  the  things  done 

according  to  its  deeds.     God  will "  give  in  his  body  "  (2  Cor.  v.  10).     "  Blessed 

every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  are  the   dead  which   die  in  the  Lord ; 

be"  (Eev.  xxii.  12).     We  are  saved  by  their  works  do  follow  them"  (Rev.  xiv. 

grace,  "looking   for  the  mercy  of  our  13).     "We  carry  nothing   out  of  the 

Lord   Jesus  Christ   unto  eternal   life"  world  with  us  but  the  conscience  and 

(Jude  21).     But  there  is  a  rewardable-  comfort  of  what  we  have  done  for  God." 


CHAPTER  VI. 

ExFLANATOBT  NoTES.]  "WTien  Sanballat  and  the  enemies  associated  with  him  were  unable 
to  obstruct  the  building  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  by  open  violence,  they  endeavoured  to  ruin 
Nehemiah  by  secret  snares.  They  invited  him  to  meet  them  in  the  plain  of  One  (vers.  1,2);  but 
Nehemiah,  perceiving  that  they  intended  mischief,  would  not  come.  After  receiving  for  the  fourth 
time  this  refusal,  Sanballat  sent  his  servant  to  Nehemiah  with  an  open  letter,  in  which  he  accused 
him  of  rebellion  against  the  king  of  Persia.  Nehemiah  repelled  this  accusation  as  the  invention  of 
Sanballat  (vers.  3 — 9).  Tobiah  and  Sanballat  hired  a  false  prophet  to  make  Nehemiah  flee  into  the 
temple  from  fear  of  the  snares  prepared  for  him,  that  they  might  then  be  able  to  calumniate  him 
(vers.  10 — 14).  The  building  of  the  wall  was  completed  in  fifty-two  daj-s,  and  the  enemies  were 
disheartened  (vers.  15,  16),  although  at  that  time  many  nobles  of  Judah  had  entered  into  epistolary 
correspondence  with  Tobian  to  obstruct  the  proceedings  of  Nehemiah  (vers.  17 — 19)." — Eeil. 

1.  When  Sanballat    ....     heard]  "  In  the  indefinite  sense  of  it  came  to  his  ears.    The 
use  of  the  passive  is  more  frequent  in  later  Hebrew ;  comp.  vers.  6,  7 ;  xiii.  27." — Keil.     The  rest 
of  our  enemies]  See  iv.  7.     2.  Come,  let  ns  meet  together]  for  a  discussion  =  Let  us  take  counsel 
together  (ver.  7).     One]  According  to  1  Chron.  viii.  12,  situated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lod 
(Lydda),  and  is  therefore  identified  by  Van  de  Velde  and  Bertheau  with  Kefr  Anna,  one  and  three- 
quarter  leagues  north  of  Ludd.     Roediger  compares  it  with  Beit  Unia,  north-west  of  Jerusalem, 
not  far  from  Bethel.     There  may  have  been  two  places  of  the  same  name.     They  thought  to  do 
me  mischief]  Probably  they  wanted  to   make  him  a  prisoner,  perhaps  even  to  assassinate  him. 
3.  I  am  doing  a  great  work  :  I  cannot  come  down]  Could  not  undertake  the  journey  because  his 
presence  in  Jerusalem  was  necessary  for  the  uninterrupted  prosecution  of   the  work  of  building. 
4]  They  sent  unto  him  four  times   in   the  same  manner,  and  Nehemiah  gave  them   the  same 
answer,     6.  An  open  letter]  That  its  contents  might  alarm  all  the  Jews  and  create  opposition 
to  Nehemiah.     In  Western  Asia  letters,  after  being  roUed  up  like  a  map,  are  flattened,  and,  instead 
of  being  sealed,  are  pasted  at  the  ends.     In  Eastern  Asia  the  Persians  make  up  their  letters  in  form 
of  a  roll,  with  a  bit  of  paper  fastened  round  it.     Letters  were  and  are  still  sent  to  persons  of  dis- 
tinction in  a  bag  or  purse,  and   to  equals  inclosed ;  to  inferiors,  or  to  express  contempt,  open. 
6.  It  is  reported]  Sanballat  throughout  makes  no  accusation,  but  refers  to  rumour.     Nehemiah's 
answer  is,  "  There  is  not  according  to  these  words  which  thou  sayest;"  i.e.  there  is  no  such 
rumour  (ver.  8).     7.  Thou  hast  appointed  prophets  to  preach  of  thee]  To  proclaim  concerning 
thee  in  Jerusalem,  saying,  King  of  Judah.     8.  Thou  feignestj  Nehemiah  charges  his  enemy  with 
devising  a  wicked  slander.     9.  "*For* — adds  Nehemiah,  when  writing  of  these  things— 'they 
all  desired  to  make  us  afraid,  thinking,  Their  hands  will  cease  from  the  work,  that  it  be  not 
done'"]  Keil.     Strengthen  my  hands]   Taken  from  Nehemiah's  journal  kept  at  the  time  of 
building.     Quotes  to  show  where  his  dependence  was  at  that  trying  time.     10.  Shemaiah]  "  A 
false  prophet  hired  by  Tobiah  and  Sanballat,  who  sought  by  prophesying  that  the  enemies  of  I^  ehe- 
miah  would  kill  him  in  the  night  to  cause  him  to  flee  with  him  into  the  holy  place  of  the  temple, 
and  to  protect  his  life  from  the  machinations  of  his  enemies  by  closing  the  temple  doors.     His  pur- 
pose was,  as  Nehemiah  subsequently  learned,  to  seduce  him  into  taking  an  illegal  step,  and  so  give 
occasion  for  speaking  evil  of  him." — KeiL     The  gift  of  prophecy  did  not  prevent  a  man  from  selling 
himself  to  lie  for  others  (see  1  Kings  xxii.  22).     Shut  up]  Perhaps  in  performance  of  a  vow, 
or  as  a  mere  pretence.     "  Your  foes  are  my  foes.     Let  us  escape  together."    In  the  house  of  God, 
within  the  temple]  Within  the  holy  place,  where  no  layman  was  allowed  to  enter.     And  let  us 
shut  the  doors,  &c.]  "  He  seeks  to  corroborate  his  warning  as  a  special  revelation  from  God  by 
making  it  appear  that  God  had  not  only  made  known  to  him  the  design  of  the  enemies,  but  also  the 
precise  time  at  which  they  intended  to  carry  it  into  execution." — Keil.     11.  Should  such  a  man  as 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMTLETia  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH. 


135 


I  fleel]  Ncliemiah  had  anxiety  and  alarm,  but  no  cowardice.  To  save  his  life]  "'That  he  may 
live.'  May  mean  '  to  save  his  life  ; '  or, '  and  save  his  life.'  Not  expiate  sucii  a  transgression  of  tlie 
law  with  his  life."— X^iY.     14.  The  prophetess  Noadiah,  and  the  rest  of  the  prophets]  Vers.  10 

13  only  a  specimen  case.      Nothing  more  is  known  of  Noadiah.     15.   Elul]  The  sixth  month. 

Parts  of  August  and  September.  16.  They  perceived  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  our  God] 
Accomplished  in  so  short  a  space  of  time.  17—19.]  A  supplementary  remark  that  in  those  (hiys 
even  nobles  of  Judah  were  in  alliance  and  active  correspondence  with  Tobiah  because  he  had  maniid 
into  a  respectable  Jewish  family.  19.  His  good  deeds]  ''Good  qualities  and  intentions."— iJcr- 
theau.  They  were  trying  to  effect  an  understanding,  Bertheau  and  Keil  think.  Or  were  they  not 
traitors  ? 

HOIVIILETICAL  CONTENTS  OF  CHAPTER  VL 


Ver.  1 — 19.  The  Perils  of  Greatness. 

^  1 — 4.  Persistency. 

„  I,  2.  Old  Foes  with  New  Faces. 

„  3.  The  Great  "Work.  ^ 

„  3.  Hindrances  to  Revivals. 

„  6 — 8.  Slander. 

„  6.  Rumour. 

„  8.  Boldness. 

„  9.  Fear  and  Faith. 

„  9.  Felt  Weakness. 

„  10—13.  Panic. 

„  10.  Lying  Prophets. 

„  11.  Personal  Responsibility. 


Ver.         11.  Self-respect. 
„  11.  Christian  Firmness, 

„  12.  Human  Prescience, 

„  13.   Bribery. 

„  15.  Fifty-two  Days"Work. 

„  16.  The  God  ward  Side  of  Things. 

„  16.  The  Overruling  God. 

„  16.  The  World's  Acknowledgment 

God. 
,,    17—19.  The  Oppositions  of  Influence, 
„     17,  18.  Deserters. 
„  19.  The  Bad  Man  piaised. 


of 


The  Perils  op  Greatness. 

Chap.  vL 

The  interest  of  the  history  centres  in  the  man.  All  history  is  the  biography  of 
the  most  eminent  men.  "Men  of  the  time"  make  the  time.  We  have  met 
Nehemiah  before,  but  under  different  conditions.  The  accidents  of  men's  lives 
change ;  the  character  remains.  Not  in  what  a  man  does,  but  in  what  a  man  is, 
look  we  for  permanence.  Nehemiah  the  Persian  cup-bearer  becomes  the  reformer 
of  abuses  and  rebuilder  of  the  decayed  city  of  God.  Nehemiah,  to-day  confronted 
by  visible  armies,  is  to-morrow  confronting  the  unseen  foes  of  stratagem  and 
deception.  "  Sanballat  and  Geshem  sent  unto  me,  saying,  Come,  let  us  meet 
together.  But  they  thought  to  do  me  mischief"  (ver.  2).  "It  is  reported  among 
the  heathen  that  thou  and  the  Jews  think  to  rebel ;  it  is  reported  that  thou  hast 
appointed  prophets  to  preach  of  thee  at  Jerusalem,  saying,  There  is  a  king  in 
Judah.  Come,  let  us  take  counsel. — There  are  no  such  things  done  as  thou  sayest " 
(vers.  6 — 8).  "  Shemaiah  was  hired,  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  sin "  (vers. 
10 — 14).  "The  nobles  of  Judah  reported  Tobiah's  good  deeds  before  me,  and 
uttered  my  words  to  him.  And  Tobiah  sent  letters  to  put  me  in  fear  "  (vers.  17 — 19). 
The  Book  written  by  inspired  men  gives  the  teaching  of  observation  and  experi- 
ence when  it  says  in  every  variety  of  expression,  and  with  all  the  cumulative 
force  of  its  progressive  teaching,  "Be  watchful.  The  conditions  of  the  conflict 
of  life  change ;  the  conflict  never  ceases.  In  this  battle  there  is  no  truce.  He 
that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved." 

I.  The  perils  of  greatness.  High  places  are  dangerous  places,  as  poets,  moral- 
ists, and  preachers  have  told  us  with  perhaps  wearisome  iteration.  That  each  man 
should  do  his  duty  in  that  state  of  life  in  which  God  has  placed  him  used  to  bo  a 
favourite  text  with  many.  The  laws  of  self-help  are,  if  not  of  recent  date,  at  least 
of  recent  definition.  That  the  battle  be  to  the  strong  and  the  race  to  the  swift ; 
that  all  be  unhelped  and  all  unhindered,  is  historically  of  recent  date.  We  must 
not  forget  to  proclaim  that  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God.  There  may  be 
insanity  in  hero-worship  over-much ;  but  it  is  idiotic  to  refuse  to  recognize  the  hero. 
The  celebrated  valet  sees  no  genius  in  his  master.     Is  it  because  he  is  too  near,  or 


130  nOMILETlC  COMMENTATIT:  KEHEMTAH.  [chap,  tl 


because  he  is  too  ignorant?  That  there  be  men  of  Nehemiah's  stamp  occupying 
Nehemiah's  station  is  indispensable.  The  world  must  have  leaders  who  can  infuse 
their  own  courage  into  their  followers.  Nehemiah's  men  were  devoted — but  only  in 
his  presence  and  under  his  inspiration.  They  were  liable  to  panic  and  subject  to 
craven  fear.  In  doing  the  world's  work  there  must  be  some  who  have  opportunities 
for  clearer  vision  and  deeper  knowledge.  The  general  on  the  heights,  not  the  private 
in  the  thick  of  the  fight,  gives  the  word  of  command.  To  the  captain  the  charts  are 
an  alphabet  employed  without  distinct  consciousness  ;  leave  to  him  the  steering, 
whilst  you  walk  or  sleep.  Kings  have  committed  acts  of  folly  ;  but  has  King  Mob 
been  always  a  Solomon  ?  There  is  a  needs-be  for  tlie  king  on  his  throne,  the  senator 
in  the  council-room,  the  judge  on  the  bench,  the  barrister  at  the  bar,  the  poet 
in  the  study,  the  painter  in  the  grove,  the  preacher  in  the  pulpit,  the  teacher  at 
his  desk.  But  let  none  dream  that  these  offices  are  sinecures,  or  that  the  men  who 
hold  them  are  free  from  the  thousand  ills  to  which  flesh  is  heir.  It  is  a  fierce 
light  that  beats  upon  a  throne.  No  man  yet  climbed  the  heights  without  the 
dogs  of  envy,  hatred,  and  malice  barking  at  his  heels.  Not  Nehemiah's  labourers, 
but  Nehemiah,  was  the  object  of  Sanballat's  force  and  fraud.  Strike  him,  and  all 
are  struck.  The  most  eminent  men  are  the  best-hated  men.  In  any  task  the 
responsibility  of  the  second  man  is  proverbially  easier  than  that  of  the  first.  It 
is  not  always  needful  to  point  out  the  moral  that  adorns  the  tale  of  human  life. 

II.  The  deportment  of  the  imperilled.  The  great  thing  to  be  desired  for 
those  who  hold  high  office  in  our  world  is  the  conviction  that  God  has  appointed 
their  station,  set  the  bounds  of  their  habitation,  and  allotted  their  task.  In  this 
conviction  there  is  power  ;  from  it  courage  springs.  This  was  Nehemiah's  strength. 
''  lam  doing  a  great  work.''  And  he  explains  the  ''  I.''  ^^  This  work  was  wrought  of 
our  God.''"'  Hence  the  sublime  trust  of  Moses  in  the  day  of  God's  anger.  ''  Let  thy 
work  appear  unto  thy  servants"  (Ps.  xc. ).  When  neither  sun  nor  stars  in  many  days 
appeared,  and  men's  hearts  failed  them  for  fear,  Paul  strengthened  himself  in  the 
recollection  of  his  mission.  "  There  stood  by  me  this  night  the  angel  of  God, 
whose  I  am,  and  whom  I  serve^''  (Acts  xxvii. ).  In  the  darkest  hour  of  Luther's 
life  he  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  God  and  cried,  "  It  is  not  my  cause,  hut  thine.'' ^  "  Not 
unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  be  the  glory  of  the  strength 
and  endurance  we  have  manifested,"  is  the  substance  of  the  impassioned  utterances 
of  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  workers,  and  warriors  from  the  days  of  Abel  down 
to  the  last  hours  of  the  sainted  sufferer  who  but  yesternight  went  home  to  God. 
The  truest  self-reliance  rests  upon  the  rocky  foundations  of  trust  in  God.  That 
thousands  of  professedly  Christian  and  Bible -reading  people  are  little  bettered, 
but  rather  grow  worse  in  temper  and  character,  needs  no  proof — it  is  evident  to  the 
all  but  blind  ;  but  that  the  Christian  and  Bible-reading  nations  are  immeasurably 
superior  to  the  peoples  that  sit  in  the  darkness  of  nature  and  the  shadow  of 
heathenism  is  indisputable.  Any  man  who  would  be  in  any  measure  faithful 
to  himself  and  equal  to  his  life-task  must  "  believe  that  God  is,  and  that  he  is  a 
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  him.''''  This  is  not  a  blind,  unreasoning  trust  ; 
not  a  reliance  on  another  to  do  what  the  man  can  do  himself.  Nehemiah  threw 
all  his  soul  into  those  two  little  words  in  the  fourteenth  verse,  "  my  God."  But  he 
did  not  neglect  to  be  watchful.  "  They  thought  to  do  me  mischief "  (ver.  2).  He  was 
anxious  to  discover  the  truth,  and  sought  out  the  origin  even  of  misrepresentation. 
*'  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  sent  the  prophet  ;  Tobiah  and  Sanballat  had  hired 
him"  (ver.  12).  He  recognized  the  appointed  channels  of  God's  revelation.  "  I 
came  unto  Shemaiah  the  prophet' '  (ver.  1 0) .  He  was  fearless  in  denouncing  wrong- 
doers, albeit  they  sat  in  high  places.  ' '  There  are  no  such  things  done  as  thou  sayest, 
but  thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart"  (ver.  8).  Above  all,  he  renewed  his 
strength  by  waiting  upon  God.  *'  Now  therefore,  0  God,  strengthen  my  hands" 
(ver.  9).  From  God  came  his  task  ;  from  God  must  come  the  strength  to  accomplish 
it.     A  great  historian,  after  telling  the  tale  of  the  life  of  a  king  of  France,  adds. 


CHAP.    VI.] 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEIIEMIAU. 


137 


^*  Let  no  meanest  man  lay  flattering  unction  to  liis  soul.  Louis  was  a  ruler,  but 
art  not  thou  also  one  ?  His  broad  France  looked  at  from  the  fixed  stars  is  no  wider 
than  thy  narrow  brick-field,  in  which  thou  too  didst  faithfully  or  didst  unfaithfully.^^ 
Brother,  thy  task  is  not  Nehemiah's,  nor  Paul's,  nor  Luther's,  nor  John  Wesley's, 
nor  Calvin's,  but  it  is  tJaj  task  ;  and  if  thou  strivest  faithfully  thou  wilt  find  it  thy 
task.  The  work  of  a  man's  life  is  no  child's  play.  Do  not  sport  with  everything 
It  is  said  that  when  Cailyle  was  shown  a  Comic  History,  he  inquired  when  we  were 
to  have  a  Comic  Bible.  To  such  a  man  the  word  of  God  and  the  life  of  man  were 
terribly  earnest.  To  all  earnest  men  their  daily  task  is  earnest.  The  humblest  is 
a  witness  to  the  power  of  his  own  convictions  of  what  he  is,  where  he  is,  and  whore 
he  serves.  Let  him  take  care  to  bear  a  constant,  unfalteriner,  and  ever-ffrowinir 
testimony.  Let  him  be  more  anxious  to  be  great  than  to  do  some  great  thing.  Let 
him  be  more  concerned  to  work  faithfully  than  to  work  successfully,  and  by  and 
by  to  the  question,  "  Is  all  well  '\ "  he  shall  give  the  answer,  "  All  is  well  1 "  "  Let 
your  light  shine  before  men  "  (Matt.  v.  16), 


Illustration  : — Grown  great, 

"  Some  divinely  gifted  man, 
Whose  life  in  low  estate  began, 
And  on  a  simple  village  green ; 
Who  breaks  his  birth's  hividious  bar, 
And  grasps  the  skirts  of  happy  chance, 
And  breasts  the  blows  of  circumstance, 
And  grapples  with  his  evil  star ; 
Who  makes  by  force  his  merit  known, 
And  lives  to  clutch  the  golden  keys. 
To  mould  a  mighty  state's  decrees, 
And  shape  the  whisper  of  the  throne ; 
And  moving  up  from  high  to  higher, 
Becomes  on  fortune's  crowning  slope 
The  pillar  of  a  people's  hope, 


The  centre  of  a  world's  desire ; 
Yet  feels,  as  in  a  pensive  dream. 
When  all  his  active  powers  are  still, 
A  distant  dearness  in  the  hill, 
A  secret  sweetness  in  the  stream, 
The  limit  of  his  narrower  fate, 
While  yet  beside  its  vocal  springs 
He  play'd  at  counsellors  and  kings, 
With  one  that  was  his  earliest  mate ; 
Who  ploughs  with  pain  his  native  lea 
And  reaps  the  labour  of  his  hands, 
Or  in  the  furrow  musing  stands ; 
*  Does  my  old  friend  remember  me  ?  "* 

Tennyson. 


Peesistenct. 

vi.  1 — 4.     Now  it  came  to  jpasSy  when  Sanhallaty  and  Tohiah,  and  Geshem  the 

Arabian^  heard ^  &c. 


To  do  a  thing  and  see  it  all  frustrated, 
and  to  begin  again  coolly,  calmly,  quietly, 
and  repeat  the  action,  that  is  a  very 
necessary  power  in  this  world.  In  your 
summer  idleness  you  break  a  spider's 
web  with  your  stick  or  disturb  an  ant- 
hill, and  the  tiny  operatives,  without 
wasting  one  moment,  steadily  begin  again 
and  repair  their  damaged  property. 
These  illustrate  a  grand  faculty  of  man. 
In  life  you  want  the  power  to  begin 
again  and  to  keep  on  in  spite  of 
whatsoever  break  -  down  or  hindrance. 
Nehemiah  gives  grand  example  of  this. 
Our  text  is  a  text  on  persistency — 
persistency  of  opposition,  persistency  of 
endeavour.  The  opponents  of  this  Jewish 
Garibaldi  try  one  move  more  to  check- 
mate and  hinder  the  great  Liberator, 
and,  like  the  moon  when  the  watch-dog 


barks,  he  simply  keeps  on  doing  what 
he  was  doing,  unterrified,  unmoved.  [ 
cannot  meet  you  for  conference  (he 
said);  I  am  too  busy,  and  cannot  stop 
the  work  for  you  or  for  any  one  or  for 
anything.  He  had  no  time  to  say  this 
in  person ;  he  "  sent  messengers  "  '*  four 
times  after  this  sort." 

I.  This  principle  of  persistency  is 
illustrated  in  all  the  circle  of  nature 
and  life.  1.  Everywhere  there  is  ex- 
hibition of  hostile  force.  Universal 
life  is  a  conflict.  The  ''  Peace  Society,'' 
who  have  the  noblest  of  all  objects,  the 
suppression  of  strife,  have  but  few 
clients  in  inferior  nature.  All  natural 
forces,  all  life,  energy,  creop  to  their 
goal  as  the  wave  creeps  to  the  shore 
after  many  a  rebuff  and  after  many  a 
spurning.     The  seed  struggling  up  from 


138 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  VI. 


its  grave,  the  sapling  bending  through 
the  crevice  in  the  ruin,  the  tree  battling 
with  the  sweep  of  the  tempest — all  are 
persistent  fighters  of  opposition.  The 
insect  striving  with  its  mortal  foe  in  the 
cup  of  a  tiny  flower,  the  bird  with 
vigilant  eye  watching  foes  below  and 
above,  the  beast  of  the  forest  amid  its 
dangers,  are  all  showing  us  on  what 
terms  a  place  is  to  be  found  on  earth — 
dinging  pertinacity.  You  must  not  be 
tempted  or  coerced  from  your  aim  by 
hostility.  2.  It  is  so  with  man  in  all 
social  life.  The  boy  at  school  wrestling 
with  competitors  for  his  prizes  or  his 
juvenile  influence,  the  man  of  business 
watching  the  mischances  and  the  ad- 
versaries of  his  success,  the  popular 
character  striving  against  the  envious 
among  his  contemporaries  and  the 
changefulness  of  the  people,  show  us 
under  what  tenure  the  prizes,  noble  and 
ignoble,  of  social  life  are  held.  *'  To 
him  that  overcometh"  the  crown  of 
life  is  given.  3.  Consistently  with  this 
analogy  of  nature,  the  Bible  represents 
all  moral  victory  as  against  deep  and 
persistent  hostility.  A  legion  of  devils, 
from  without,  a  legion  of  lusts  within 
seek  to  snare  and  to  frighten  the  soul 
from  its  work.  The  Bible  moves  and 
stirs  in  eagerness  to  warn  and  to  inspirit 
the  threatened  soul. 

II.  This  principle  of  persistency 
is  illustrated  in  the  general  history 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.  1.  The  Bible 
is  one  long  history  of  God's  controversy 
with  his  opponents.  From  one  gener- 
ation to  another,  through  millenniums 
of  history,  the  Almighty  Sovereign  of 
the  world  is  battling  with  opposition. 
Physically  speaking,  God  can  do  what- 
ever he  will ;  but  morally  speaking,  God 
must  do  what  he  can  against  the  wills 
of  moral  creatures  who  '^dare  defy  the 
Omnipotent  to  arms.'^  And  our  Bible 
is  the  Iliad  of  heaven  against  earth. 
The  clash  of  battle  rings  through  its 
mighty  leaves.  This  is  the  value  of  Old 
Testament  history — it  is  GoJ  saving  men 
in  spite  of  the  resistance  of  the  men  he 
seeks  to  save.  Hence  the  history  of  one 
chosen  people  has  become  the  world's 
parable  of  life  and  salvation.  Jewish 
history  is  An  immortal   text-book  con- 


cerning this  Divine  controversy  and 
conflict.  2.  Christian  history  is  in  the 
same  tone,  {a)  The  Captain  of  our 
salvation  is  set  forth  in  the  gospel  story 
as  in  warfare  with  the  obstinate  and 
prejudiced  all  the  way  to  his  transcend- 
ent triumph.  "  /  would  and  ye  ivould 
not "  is  the  burden  of  the  solemn  story. 
(b)  Apostolic  history  makes  a  harmony 
with  what  has  gone  before.  The  chosen 
apostles  and  all  who  took  up  their  great 
watchword,  Christ,  were  gladiator's  in 
the  great  arena  of  the  world;  "of  all 
men  most  miserable  "  unless  their  cause 
were  Divine  and  eternal.  And  the 
closing  words  of  God's  Testament  fade 
away  in  St.  John's  Apocalyptic  visions 
of  wars  in  heaven,  and  the  noise  of  him 
who  goes  forth  conquering  and  to  con- 
quer, (c)  Nor  have  we  seen  the  end 
The  Church  is  a  "militant  Church" — 
every  saint  a  soldi&r ;  and  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil  set  in  battle 
array.  Heathen  creeds,  worldly  maxims, 
carnal  forces,  all  opposing  the  will  of 
the  redeeming  Lord. 

III.  It  is  the  same  with  regard  to 
Tils  principle  of  persistency  in  in- 
dividual salvation  and  work.  1.  To 
save  your  own  soul  is  "a  great  ivork " 
— a  work  that  is  hindered.  This  is  why 
the  gate  of  life  is  strait ;  not  that  it  is 
narrow  in  itself,  but  it  is  narrowed  by 
the  throng  of  foes  that  block  it  to  the 
soul.  John  Bunyan  saw  in  his  dream  a 
gate  leading  to  a  beautiful  palace.  At 
the  gate  sat  a  man  with  a  book  to 
record  the  names  of  such  as  would 
enter.  Around  the  gate  stood  armed 
foes  to  drive  back  all  who  came.  At 
length  a  man  with  "a  stout  coun- 
tenance "  came,  and  said  to  the  recorder, 
*'  Set  down  my  name,  sir ! "  and  then, 
girding  on  his  sword,  he  set  to  and  fought 
his  way  in,  "  but  not  before  he  had  given 
and  received  many  wounds."  It  is 
thus  that  most  of  us  enter  into  life. 
Persistent  opposition  beaten  back  by 
persistent  determination.  This  is  what 
the  Saviour  means  by  those  who  are 
worthy  of  him,  those  who  will  have 
him.  The  elect  are  the  select  spirits 
who  must  enter  into  life  because  the 
must  is  in  their  wiU.  They  will  go 
in,  though  hell   move  from  beneath  to 


OHAP.    VI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEUEMIAH. 


139 


oppose.  If  you  are  about  this  purpose, 
the  one  purpose  of  man,  you  are  doing 
a  great  work,  and  cannot  come  down 
from  that,  or  you  fail.  2.  To  he  instru- 
ments of  salvation  to  others  is  a  great 
work  that  is  hindered,  hut  must  not  cease. 
The  parent  lovingly  battling  with  the 
wills  of  his  children,  the  Sunday  School 
teacher  bearing  with  the  waywardness 
of  a  circle  of  opposing  spirits,  the 
minister  standing  as  God's  watchman  in 
his  congregation,  the  man  of  business 
striving  to  live  without  damage  to  the 
soul  of  his  brother,  and  to  live  with 
good  influence  upon  those  who  meet 
him  in  life's  conflict,  are  Nehemiahs  all 
of  them.    He  toiled  on  amid  the  stones  of 


Jerusalem,  they  amid  the  living  stones 
of  a  better  city  of  God.  But  the  story  is 
one  story — the  world-wide  story  of  good 
hindered  and  opposed,  but  triumphant. 
Application.  Helps  to  persistency.  1. 
Do  not  magnify  your  foes.  Right  is 
itself  "  a  big  battalion."  Greater  is  he 
that  is  for  us  than  all  that  can  be  against 
us.  2.  Do  not  under  -  estimate  your 
work.  All  good  work  is  "a  great 
work."  Let  its  loftiness  fill  and  inflame 
you.  3.  Do  not  fail  in  hope.  Hope 
on,  hope  ever.  "Hope  thou  in  God." 
On  this  rock  of  Peter-courage  and  in- 
flexibility Christ  will  build  his  Church, 
"  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail 
against  it." 


Old  Foes  with  New  Faces. 


vi.  1,  2.  Now  it  cam^  to  pass ,  when  Sanhallaty  and  Tohiah,  and  Gsehem  the  Arabian, 
and  the  rest  of  owr  enemies,  hea/rd  that  I  had  huilded  the  wally  and  that  there 
was  no  breach  left  therein  ;  {though  at  that  time  I  had  not  set  up  the  doors  upon 
the  gates ;)  that  Sanhallat  and  Geshem  sent  unto  me^  '*zying,  Come,  let  us  meet 
together  in  some  one  of  the  villages  in  the  plain  of  Ow.  But  they  thought  to  do 
me  mischief. 


The  enemies  of  reformation  in  Nehe- 
miah's  day  were  fertile  in  resources  as 
well  as  persistent  in  opposition.  When 
mockery  failed  to  dishearten,  and  threats 
to  drive  Nehemiah  from  his  task,  Sanhal- 
lat, Tobiah,  and  Geshem  tried  the  art  of 
deception.  The  same  men,  with  purpose 
unchanged,  but  masked  faces.  "The 
voice  is  Jacob's  voice,  but  the  hands  are 
the  hands  of  Esau." 

*'My  son,  thou  art  never  secure  in 
this  life,  but  as  long  as  thou  livest  thou 
shalt  always  need  spiritual  armour. 
Thou  dwellest  among  enemies."  This 
golden  sentence  from  the  lips  of  Thomas 
k  Kempis  contains  the  moral  application 
we  may  make  of  this  historical  passage. 

I.  Faults  of  character.  **The  na- 
tural man"  is  in  Biblical  language  distin- 
guished from  "the  spiritual  man."  "The 
past  of  our  life ; " — "  the  rest  of  our 
time."  The  dividing  line  we  popularly 
call  conversion.  *'  If  any  man  be  in 
Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature  :  old  things 
are  passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  are 
become  new."  That  is  the  ideal ;  does 
not  become  the  actual  in  a  day.     The 


life  religious  is  a  growth.  A  man  be- 
comes a  Christian ;  supposes  that  con- 
version makes  all  things  new ;  is  soon 
disabused.  He  was  before  an  angry  man ; 
he  blazes  up  again  in  an  unwatchful 
moment.  He  was  full  of  health  and 
vigour ;  animalism  ruled  him ;  he  dis- 
covers that  he  needs  to  lay  a  strong  hand 
upon  himself.  Temptability  remains. 
"The  vsnake  is  scotched,  not  killed." 
The  natural  prayerlessness  of  men  creeps 
insensibly  upon  an  unwatchful  Christian. 
A  principal  will  connive  at  the  doubtful 
deeds  of  an  agent — deeds  which  he  him- 
self would  not  stoop  to  do.  There  is  a 
moral  obliquity  of  vision.  "  If  the  light 
that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is 
that  darkness."  "  Can't  see"  is  pitiable ; 
"won't  see  "is  criminal.  An  under-current 
is  often  fatal  when  a  hurricane  would 
have  been  harmless.  Against  the  second 
the  captain  would  provide;  of  the  first 
he  might  have  no  knowledge.  The 
signing  of  the  pledge  does  not  of  itself 
quench  the  burning  thirst.  The  Churcli 
roll  does  not  make  defection  impossible. 
Every  man  has  one  great  foe — himself. 


140 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMlAh, 


|_OHAP.  VI. 


"  Worse  than  all  my  foes  I  find 

The  enemy  within, 
The  evil  heart,  the  carnal  mind, 

My  own  insidious  sin : 
My  nature  every  moment  waits 

To  render  me  secure, 
And  all  my  paths  with  ease  besets. 

To  make  my  ruin  sure.'' 

Faults  of  character  are  foes  to  interest. 
Nobody  has  a  fault  that  is  not  injurious. 
"  There  is  a  hut  in  every  man's  fortunes, 
because  there  is  a  hut  in  every  man's 
character." — Maclaren.  A  good  cause  is 
sometimes  injured  by  the  intemperance 
of  its  advocates;  more  often  by  their  in- 
consistency. Creed  and  conduct  are  not 
always  equal.     Beware  of  little  sins. 

II.  Foes  to  progress.  Nehemiah  was 
reforming,  uplifting  the  nation.  Sanbal- 
lat,  Tobiah,  and  Geshem  were  advocates 
of  things  as  they  were.  Indolence  and 
selfishness  of  individuals  are  aggregated. 
In  tlie  movements  of  history  there  has 
been  presented  the  spectacle  of  men  flee- 
ing from  persecution  to  become  perse- 
cutors in  their  turn.  Presbyter  was 
priest  writ  large.  Human  nature  is 
much  the  same  under  aU  conditions. 
Luther  overthrew  the  Pope's  infallibility 
to  meet  claimed  infallibility  in  his  own 
followers.  Only  to  patient  faith  is  the 
prize  sure.     They  who  work  for  eternity 


can  afford  to  listen  calmly  to  the  bab- 
blings of  contemporary  opinion.  Utter 
no  rebuking  word,  although  the  "meet- 
ening  for  the  inheritance"  and  the 
unsuccess  of  your  toils  require  you  to 
possess  the  patience  of  God.  "  One  day 
is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years, 
and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day." 

"  Christian !  seek  not  yet  repose, 
Cast  thy  dreams  of  ease  away  ; 
Thou  art  in  the  midst  of  foes ; 
Watch  and  pray. 

Principalities  and  powers, 
Mustering  their  unseen  array, 
Wait  for  thy  unguarded  hours ; 
Watch  and  pray. 

Gird  thy  heavenly  armour  on, 
Wear  it  ever  night  and  day ; 
Ambushed  lies  the  evil  one  ; 
Watch  and  pray. 

Hear  the  victors  who  o'ercame ; 
Still  they  mark  each  warrior's  way; 
All  with  one  sweet  voice  exclaim, 
Watch  and  pray. 

Hear,  ahove  all,  hear  thy  Lord, 
Him  thou  lovest  to  obey; 
Hide  within  thy  heart  his  word ; 
Watch  and  pray. 

Watch,  as  if  on  that  alone 
Hung  the  issue  of  the  day ; 
Pray  that  help  may  be  sent  down ; 
Watch  and  pray." 


The   Geeat  Work. 

vi.  3.  And  I  sent  messengers  unto  them^  saying^  I  ami  doing  a  great  worky  so  that 
I  cannot  come  down :  why  should  the  work  cease^  whilst  Heave  it,  and  come  down 
to  you  f 

Eeligion  the  most  momentous  and  important  matter  that  can  possibly  engage 
the  attention.  Either  the  veriest  dream  of  superstition,  or  the  most  stupendous  as 
well  as  the  most  interesting  subject.     This  is  the  great  work. 

I.  The  great  work  in  which  Nehemiah  was  engaged.  Eepairing  the  wall 
and  setting  up  the  gates  around  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  He  had  many  powerful 
enemies.  They  first  tried  to  ridicule  him  and  his  brethren  out  of  the  undertaking  ; 
and  this  failing,  they  endeavoured  to  terrify  them ;  and  not  succeeding  in  this,  they 
had  recourse  to  craft  and  stratagem.  In  the  verse  preceding  Nehemiah  says, 
*'  Sanballat  and  Geshem  sent  unto  me,"  &c.  And  in  the  verse  following  Nehemiah 
tells  us  that  they  sent  unto  him  four  times,  after  the  same  sort,  and  he  answeied 
them  after  the  same  manner.  What  is  fortifying,  defending,  and  preserving  a  city 
when  compared  with  the  salvation  of  our  immortal  soul  1  If  we  are  really  on  the 
Lord's  side  we  shall  assuredly  be  opposed  as  he  was,  and  perhaps  more  strenuously, 
by  ridicule,  stratagem,  and  force.  To  all  opposition  let  us  reply,  "  I  am  doing  a 
great  work."  Some  say  the  business  of  salvation  so  far  as  we  are  concerned  is  no 
work  at  alL     Qnielj /aith  and  love  have  something  to  do  with  salvation;  and 


CHAP    VI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  141 

although  these  graces  of  the  Spirit  may  apparently  be  the  farthest  removed  from 
what  may  be  termed  a  work,  yet  we  read  in  Scripture  of  "  the  work  of  faith,  anc 
the  labour  of  love."  Yes,  faith  worketh  by  love.  True,  as  far  as  merit  is  con 
cerned,  salvation  is  not  of  works  ;  yet  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we  are  to  **  worJ 
out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  for  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  uh 
both  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  his  good  pleasure."  The  believer  "  fears  the 
Lord  and  his  goodness."  He  fears  to  offend  against  infinite  holiness,  or  to  "  grieve 
the  Holy  Spirit."  He  fears  to  bring  guilt  upon  his  conscience.  And  he  trembles 
to  be  found  "an  unprofitable  servant."  Faith  enables  the  believer  to  see  the  path 
of  obedience,  and  love  constrains  him  cheerfully  to  walk  therein.  The  work  of 
Christ,  so  far  from  freeing  us  from  obedience,  lays  us  under  greater  obligations  to 
devotedness. 

II.  The  opposition  Nehemiah  had  to  encounter  in  his  undertaking.  1.  He 
was  assailed  hy  ridicule  (see  chap.  ii.  19  ;  iv.  1 — 3).  You  may  profess  what  you 
please  without  molestation,  but  if  you  proceed  to  act  up  to  your  profession  you 
will  certainly  not  escape  opposition.  How  did  Nehemiah  meet  the  scoffs  of  his 
enemies'?  He  did  not  desist  from  his  purpose,  nor  did  he  take  the  matter  of 
revenge  into  his  own  hands.  2.  Nehemiah! s  enemies  attem^pted  also  to  assail  him 
by  force  (iv.  7,  8).  We  ought  to  give  all  due  obedience,  in  things  lawful,  to 
those  who  in  the  providence  of  God  may  have  control  over  us,  but  there  is  a  point 
beyond  which  to  yield  would  be  sin.  When  human  authority  is  exerted  contrary 
to  the  Divine  command  we  ought  not  a  moment  to  hesitate  to  "  obey  God  rather 
than  man."  3.  Nehemiah^s  enemies  assailed  him  also  with  craft  and  cunning. 
"  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  sent  unto  me,  saying,"  &c.  More  persons  are  enticed  and 
allured  into  sinful  compliances  by  plausible  inducements  than  by  any  other  means. 
Never  expect  any  spiritual  advantage  from  the  proposal  of  a  confederacy  with 
worldly  men.  4.  When  Sanballat  could  not  succeed  by  stratagem^  he  endeavoured 
to  effect  his  purpose  by  putting  Nehemiah  in/ear.  Eaised  false  reports  against  him, 
representing  that  he  was  building  the  wall  that  he  might  set  up  himself  as  a  king 
and  rebel  against  his  Persian  master.  Expect  misrepresentation.  It  was  said  of 
the  apostles  of  old,  '*  These  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down  are  come 
hither  also."  Think  it  not  strange  if  modern  Christians  be  accused  of  being 
enemies  to  the  peace  of  society.  When  we  see  Sanballat  not  only  falsely  accusing 
Nehemiah,  but  also  hiring  the  professed  prophets  of  God  to  endeavour  to  turn  him 
from  the  work  in  which  he  was  engaged,  let  us  learn  the  great  need  of  watchful- 
ness, caution,  and  circumspection.  "Be  ye  wise  as  serpents."  If  an  angel  from 
heaven  should  speak  anything  contrary  to  the  doctrine  of  godliness,  shun  his 
counsel.  Even  Satan  can  transform  himself  into  the  appearance  of  an  angel  of 
light,  and  his  angels  imitate  his  example.  "  Prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that 
which  is  good."  Nehemiah  went  to  Shemaiah  for  godly  counsel  and  advice,  little 
expecting  that  he  was  in  the  service  of  his  great  enemy  (vers.  10 — 14).  God  will 
expose  the  snares  and  bring  to  nought  the  devices  planned  against  his  faithful 
servants.  "  I  perceived,"  saith  Nehemiah,  "  that  God  had  not  sent  him."  And  as 
before  he  answered  the  rumours  of  Sanballat  by  saying,  '*  There  are  no  such  things 
done  as  thou  sayest,  but  thou  feignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart ;  "  so  now  he 
boldly  answ^ers  the  counsel  of  the  lying  prophet  who  would  have  him  shamefully 
neglect  his  duty,  and  shut  himself  up  in  the  temple  to  save  his  life,  by  saying, 
"  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee — I  on  whose  presence  at  the  building  of  the  wall 
so  much  depends,  and  who  believe  and  have  professed  that  God  will  protect  and 
defend  me^"  When  we  are  tempted  to  make  sinful  compliance,  let  us  call  to 
mind  the  noble  answer  of  Nehemiah,  and  adopt  similar  language ;  let  us  say  to 
every  temptation  to  evil,  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I,  who  profess  to  be  a  dis- 
ciple of,  yea,  a  joint-heir  with,  Christ,  a  son  of  God,  and  an  heir  of  immortality — 
should  such  an  one  as  I  condescend  to  bring  disgrace  upon  my  profession, 
and  thus    dishonour  God    and    sin    against   my   own   soul  ? "      Or  with  Joseph 


142 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAE, 


[chap,  vt 


let  us  ask  our  own  conscience,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin 
against  God?  " 
III.  The  magnitude  of  the  work  required  that  Nehemiah  should  not  cease 

It  was  a  great  work,  for  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  extended  some  miles  round  th 
city ;  and  it  was  a  very  necessary  work  to  be  completed  for  the  defence  of  th 
inhabitants.  Of  what  momentous  importance  is  the  salvation  of  a  man  !  The  destruc- 
tion of  the  temple  and  city  of  Jerusalem  is  said  to  have  forced  tears  from  the 
eyes  of  its  heathen  conqueror ;  but  what  is  a  flaming  temple  or  the  destruction  of  a 
city  to  the  destruction  of  an  immortal  spirit  1  Let  your  careful  and  constant  attention 
be  given  to  the  one  thing  needful.  *'  For  it  is  not  a  light  thing,  because  it  is  your 
life."  Nehemiah  succeeded  in  accomplishing  the  work  he  had  in  hand  by  prayer, 
watchfulness,  and  painstaking  diligence  (vers.  15,  16).  So  will  all  the  enemies  of 
God's  truth  be  finally  cast  down  in  their  own  eyes  ;  they  will  be  utterly  ashamed 
and  confounded,  while  they  wiU  be  constrained  to  confess  that  the  salvation  of  the 
righteous  is  of  the  Lord.  The  wall  was  built  in  troublous  times,  and  we  often 
find  Nehemiah  supplicating  help  from  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob,  like  Jehoshapbat, 
who  said,  "  Lord,  we  know  not  what  to  do,  but  our  eyes  are  toward  thee ; "  and 
while  he  was  unceasing  and  fervent  in  prayer,  he  was  also  watchful  and  diligent  in 
the  work. — Rev,  James  Shores  M.A.,  abridged. 


Hindrances  to  Revivals. 
vi.  3.     /  am  doing  a  great  work,  &c. 


Sanballat's  opposition  —  threatened  ; 
complained;  insisted  that  Nehemiah's 
design  was  not  pious,  but  political. 
Nehemiah  went  on. 

I.  A  revival  of  religion  is  a  great 
work.  It  is  a  great  work  because  in  it 
great  interests  are  involved.  In  a  re- 
vival of  religion  are  involved  both  the 
glory  of  God,  so  far  as  it  respects  the 
government  of  this  world,  and  the  sal- 
vation of  men.  The  greatness  of  a 
work  is  to  be  estimated  by  the  greatness 
of  the  consequences  depending  on  it. 
And  this  is  the  measure  of  its  importance. 

II.  Several  things  may  put  a  stop 
to  a  revival.  A  revival  is  the  work  of 
God,  and  so  is  a  crop  of  wheat ;  and 
God  is  as  much  dependent  on  the  use  of 
means  in  one  case  as  the  other.  1.  A 
revival  will  stop  whenever  the  Church 
believe  it  is  going  to  cease.  No  matter 
what  the  enemies  of  the  work  may  say 
about  it,  predicting  that  it  will  all  run  out 
and  come  to  nothing,  they  cannot  stop 
it  in  this  way.  But  the  friends  must 
labour  and  pray  in  faith  to  carry  it  on. 
2.  A  revival  will  cease  when  Cliristians 
consent  that  it  should  cease.  When 
Christians  love  the  work  of  God  and 
the  salvation  of  souls  so  well  that  they 
are  distressed  at  a  mere  apprehension  of 


a  decline,  it  will  drive  them  to  agony 
and  efibrt  to  prevent  its  ceasing.  3.  A 
revival  will  cease  whenever  Christians 
suppose  the  work  will  go  on  ivithout 
their  aid.  The  Church  are  co-workers 
with  God  in  promoting  a  revival,  and 
the  work  can  be  carried  on  just  as  far  as 
the  Church  will  carry  it  on,  and  no 
farther.  4.  A  revival  loill  cease  when 
CJiristia.ns  begin  to  proselyte.  Do  not 
raise  selfish  strife,  and  drive  Christians 
into  parties.  5.  WJien  the  Church  in 
any  way  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit.  6. 
When  Christians  lose  the  spirit  of 
brotherly  love.  7.  A  revival  will  de- 
cline and  cease  unless  Christians  are  fre- 
quently reconverted. 

III.  Things  which  ought  to  be 
done  to  continue  a  revival.  1.  Minis- 
terial hunfiiliation.  Ministers  must  not 
only  call  upon  the  people  to  repent; 
they  must  be  ensamples  to  the  flock. 
2.  Churches  which  have  opposed  revivals 
must  repent.  3.  Those  who  promote 
the  work  of  revivals  must  repent  their 
mistakes.  There  is  a  constant  tendency 
in  Christians  to  backsliding  and  declen- 
sion. Let  us  mind  our  work,  and  let 
the  Lord  take  care  of  the  rest ;  do  our 
duty,  and  leave  the  issue  to  God. — 
Finney^  abridged. 


CHAP.  VI.J 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


143 


Slander. 
yi.  5 — 8.     Then  sent  Sanballat  his  servant  unto  me,  &c. 


An  attempt  to  frustrate  Nehemiah  by 
a  false  report  concerning  his  intentions 
is  described  in  these  verses.  This  petty 
wasp  of  slander  may  sting  the  even- 
minded  Keformer,  and  make  him  swerve 
from  his  steadiness.  Sanballat  sent  to 
say  that  it  was  a  "  common  report " 
that  Nehemiah  was  meditating  the 
ambitious  project  of  becoming  a  king ; 
and  to  make  the  matter  circumstantial, 
Gashmu  was  quoted  as  the  authority 
for  this  information.  JS'ehemiah,  with 
noble  indifference,  brushed  away  the 
wasp — sent  a  short,  sharp  answer  back 
— and  then,  dismissing  the  matter^  went 
on  with  his  work. 

I.  The  slander.  Isaac  Barrow's 
biographer  quaintly  wishes  he  could 
find  an  enemy  of  his  hero,  that  he  might 
have  the  honour  of  defending  the 
memory  of  the  great  divine.  All  men 
are  not  so  fortunate.  The  faultless  have 
some  fault  found  with  them,  and  the 
faulty  have  their  faults  exaggerated. 
Let  the  most  blameless  man  in  the  town 
offer  himself  ascandidate  for  parliament, 
and  the  organ  of  the  rival  political  party 
will  give  a  picture  astounding  to  the 
friends  of  the  good  man.  Shimei  finds 
foul  things  to  say  about  David,  and 
Gashmu  knows  a  damaging  thing  about 
Nehemiah,  In  this  example  of  the 
text  there  are  three  stages  of  slander. 
1 .  The  common  report.  "  It  is  com 
monly  reported  among  the  heathen  that 
thou  and  the  Jews  think  to  rebel." 
Who  got  up  that  report  ?  is  a  common 
question  al30ut  similar  matters  now-a- 
days.  Who  was  the  man  in  the  iron 
mask  ]  Who  executed  Charles  1. 1  Who 
invents  the  lie  that  sings  in  the  air 
about  some  faultless  manl  These  are 
conundrums  to  "  give  up."  Where  all 
the  gnats  come  from  that  fill  the  window- 
pane  was  a  puzzle  to  our  childhood. 
Where  all  the  lies  come  from  that  buzz 
round  our  neighbourhoods  is  a  puzzle  to 
our  later  life.  *'  It  is  commonly  re- 
ported I "  Woe  to  the  tongue  ingenious 
in  this  art  1     For  our  own  part,  let  us 


beware  of  giving  our  jealousies  and 
suspicions  wings.  Let  them  die  in  the 
Qgg.  Keep  the  door  of  the  lips, 
especially  when  conversing  with  a  foo]. 
And  equally  necessary  is  it  to  beware  of 
eager  listening  to  groundless  suggestions, 
born  of  malice  and  envy  and  uncharita- 
bleness.  The  demand  creates  the  supply. 
Send  these  hawkers  of  mischief  away 
from  the  door.  Keep  the  door  of  tli.' 
ears.  2.  The  authority  for  the  ^^  fact.'' 
"Gashmu  saith  it."  Who's  Gashmu  ? 
A  very  common  authority  on  thos- 
matters.  He's  very  often  a  myth. 
There  is  no  Gashmu  at  all.  Try  to  lin  1 
him,  and  he  is  always  "removed.' 
Tracking  a  slander  is  often  like  seeking;' 
a  grasshopper.  It  chirps  here  and  there 
and  everywhere,  except  on  the  handful 
of  grass  you  lay  your  hand  on.  Looking 
for  Gashmu  is  like  hunting  the  cuckoo 
— it's  "  a  voice,  a  mystery."  Gashmu  ! 
He  is  not,  or  you  find  him  not.  Some- 
times Gashmu  is  real  enough.  If  you 
hear  the  report,  you  need  not  be  told 
where  it  came  from.  Gashmu  "  h-s 
mark  "  is  on  the  forehead  of  the  slander. 
He  sits  in  his  window  blowing  peas  at 
all  pas-iers-by.  There  are  human  crea- 
tures who  delight  in  this  kind  of 
cowardly  damage  of  other  men's  reput- 
ations. For  some  wise  end  they  were 
created — all  things  are.  The  nettle 
and  the  hornet  and  the  slanderer — per- 
haps these  have  their  part  to  play. 
"  Gashmu  "  might  he  cai^ved  on  some  of 
the  graves — "  Here  rests  one  who  never 
let  any  one  else  rest.  ""^  3.  The  informant. 
Sanballat  sent  the  letter.  These  are  the 
three  steps  :  "  Common  report "  — 
"  Gashmu  "— ''  Sanballat."  An  illustra- 
tion of  the  development  theory  !  The 
slander  is  born  out  of  nothing  ;  it  is 
generated  in  that  inorganic  matter  of 
lies  which  fills  the  atmosphere  of  the 
globe;  it  takes  form  and  organization  in 
Gashmu,  in  him  it  becomes  a  real  thing; 
then  Sanballat  conducts  it  to  its  goal. 
Sanballat,  who  writes  the  letter  of 
information,  or  whispers  the  thing  in 


144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  VI. 


confidence,  is  often  the  mischievous 
originator  of  the  whole  mystery  of  lies 
— the  predecessors  are  but  imaginary. 
Sometimes  he  is  "not  a  knave,  but  a 
fool "  merely,  some  one  who  means  well, 
a  friend  who  thinks  it  is  a  part  of 
friendship  to  do  things  like  this.  But 
for  him  the  slander  would  be  unknown 
and  harmless ;  it  is  his  work  to  post  up 
the  information  in  the  window.  The 
ill  that  is  wrought  for  want  of  thought  ! 
It  is  only  thinking  that  can  stop  that. 

II.  Treatment  of  slander.     1.  Give 
it  no  foundation  in  yourself.     Such  a 
thing    is    said   of    you  !    exclaimed    a 
zealous    friend   once.     Ah !    coolly  an- 
swered the  victim,  and  the  worst  of  it,  ifs 
true.      "  Be   ye   wise   as   serpents    and 
harmless  as  doves."     There  is  a  spirit  of 
slumbering  fairness  in  society.     Do  not 
ftay  in  your  "  haste,  all  men  are  liars." 
It  is  not  so.     Do  not  be  soured  by  the 
abundance  of  mischief  and  the  super- 
fluity of  naughtiness  among  men.     But 
at  the  same  time  beware  !     Avoid  the 
appearance  of  evil.     Like  Caesar's  wife, 
be    "  above    suspicion."     Do    not    be 
content  with  such  integrity  as  will  go 
with  the  average ;  let  your  white  be  snow- 
wh  its.     [Illustrate  by  tho  grand  integrity 
of   Nehemiah.]     Not    in    fear   of    the 
slander,  but  in  love  of  what  is  right  and 
f^ood,   seek   the   lofty  character  of  the 
righteous  man.     Whatsoever  things  are 
true  and  lovely  and  of  good  report  take 
as  the  garb  of  your  character.     2.   Take 
no  notice  of  it.     As  the  children  say, 
"  Don't   believe   it !  "     See    the   grand 
style  of  verse  8  :    "  Then  I  sent  unto 
him,  saying.  There  are  no  such  things  as 
thou  sayest,  but  thou  feignest  them  out 
of   thine  own  heart"  —  a  message  for 
Sanballat  to  think  about.     To  have  his 
elaborate  slander  crumpled  up  and  flung 
at  his  head  with  the  label  "  lies  "  on  it 
would  be  disappointing  to  this  officious 
person.     Silence  is  the  best  reply  as  a 
rule.     We    cannot    waste   the   day   in 
explanations.     "  When  I  have  written 
an  angry  reply  to  a  letter,  I  never  send 
it  off  at  once.     I  read  it  over.     I  often 
re-write  it,  and  put  more  sting  into  the 
sentences.     Then  I  argue   thus.     This 
letter  will  do  if  I  send  it  in  twenty-four 
houn.     It  shall  not  go  earlier  on  any 


consideration.      To    reserve    my   reply 
will  show  I  was  not  annoyed  much,  and 
that  I  am  a  tranquil  master  of  myself. 
I  consequently  lock   up  my  letter,  all 
sealed  and  addressed.     And  at  the  end 
of  the  twenty-four  hours  I  take  out  the 
letter,  and  without  reading  it  throw  it  on 
the  fire.     That   has   always    been    my 
course  since  I  once  wrote  and  posted 
immediately  one  of  those   replies.     It 
proved  to  be  a  mistake.     Since  then  I 
have  done  as  I  have  said.     It  always 
relieves  me — serves  as  a  waste-pipe — and 
I  never  have  to  repent  of  harsh  corre- 
spondence."    3.   Go  on  with  your  work. 
Slander  as  a  rule  does  the  good  man  no 
harm,  unless  it  stop   him  in  his  work 
and  make  him  lay  down  his  enterprise 
in  disgust.     Many  a  man  has  given  up 
his   Master's   ivork   of    *'  doing   good " 
because  his   good  was  evil   spoken  of. 
[Illustrate    from    the    life    of    Jesus.] 
When  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard  coraeth 
and   asks,    "  Why   did   you    leave   my 
work  1 "  what  can  you  say  ]     At  your 
peril  keep   to   the  good   course.     This 
sharp-shooting  of  criticism  is  to  try  the 
soldier.     Endure  as  seeing  Him  who  is 
invisible.     "  They  say  1    What  do  they 
say  1    Let  them  say."    Many  a  man  has 
given   up  the  good  work  of  his  soul's 
salvatio7i  for  a  similar  reason.     It  some- 
times falls  to  the  lot  of  a  minister  to  be 
sent  for  to  some  dying  man,  and  this  is 
the  story  which  comes  from  the  depart- 
ing deserter.     *'  I  was  once  a  member  of 
such  and  such  a  church,  and  there  I  was 
not  treated  as,  &c.,  &c. ;  I  took  offence, 
and    have   liardly   been   in  a  place  of 
worship   since.     It  is  ten    years  ago." 
*'  My    brother,"    thinks     the    minister 
though  he  takes  care  not  to  say  it,  "  do 
you  think  tJiat  excuse  will  cover  those 
ten  wasted  years  1 "     Tou  are  responsible 
for  the  effect  of  the  slander ;  another  may 
have  a  heavy  score  to  pay  on  account  of 
its  origin. 

Application.  1.  Live  for  the  approval 
of  the  Lord  of  all.  Do  not  root  yourself 
on  the  shallow,  changing  opinion  of  man. 
Seek  a  higher  basis  for  endeavour, 
animated  by  the  solemn  fear  of  God. 
2.  Consider  the  importance  of  life  and 
its  work.  Do  not  suppose  you  may 
please  yourself  whether  you  keep  your 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETTO  COMMENT  ART:   NEHEMIAH. 


145 


hand  on  the  plough  or  not.  Woe  to 
Jonah,  whatever  be  the  cause  of  his 
flight  from  his  God-appointed  task.  3. 
Accept  criticism — as  an  instructive  cor- 
rector; and  slander— as  a  discipline  of 
patience  and  firmness. 


"  Lord,  I  adore  thy  j^racious  will, 
Throuf^h  every  instrument  of  ill 

My  Father's  goodness  see  ; 
Accept  the  complicated  wrong 
Of  Shimei's  hand  and  Shimei's  tongue 
As  kind  rebukes  from  thee.*' 


EUMOUR. 


vi.  6.  It  is  reported  among  the  heathen,  and  Gashmu  saith  it,  that  thou  and  the 
Jeios  think  to  rebel :  for  which  cause  thou  huildest  the  wall,  that  thou  mayest  he 
their  king,  according  to  these  words. 


Matthew  Henry  well  expresses  the  his- 
torical sense  of  this  passage.  ''  Sanballat 
endeavours  to  possess  Nehemiah  with  an 
apprehension  that  his  undertaking  to 
build  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  was  gener- 
ally represented  as  factious  and  seditious, 
and  would  be  accordingly  resented  at 
court.  The  best  men,  even  in  their  most 
innocent  and  excellent  performances, 
have  lain  under  this  imputation.  This 
is  written  to  him  in  an  open  letter,  as  a 
thing  generally  known  and  talked  of ; 
that  it  was  reported  among  the  nations, 
and  Gashmu  will  aver  it  for  truth,  that 
Nehemiah  was  aiming  to  make  himself 
king,  and  to  shake  off  the  Persian  yoke. 
Observe,  it  is  common  for  that  which  is 
the  sense  only  of  the  malicious,  to  be 
falsely  represented  by  them  as  the  sense 
of  the  many."  From  this  particular 
instance  let  us  consider  generally  the 
tongue,  its  use  and  abuse. 

i.  Use  of  the  tongue.  1.  To  express 
thought  and  emotion.  A  word  is  the 
incarnation  of  a  thought.  It  lay  hidden 
and  formless  in  the  thinker's  mind.  The 
word  is  the  body  prepared  for  it.  The 
thought  stands  out  clear  to  the  gaze  of 
others.  There  is  a  language  understood 
by  the  animals.  A  child  speaks  because 
of  the  necessity  it  feels  to  express  its 
thought.  It  understands  before  it  can  ex- 
press itself.  The  first  dawn  of  intelligence 
is  in  a  child's  smile  ;  it  enters  into  a  new 
world  when  it  utters  \h<d  first  word.  The 
fountains  of  the  great  deep  of  intelligence 
are  broken  up.  The  child  performs  "  the 
miracle  of  speech."  Were  thought  pent 
up  in  our  minds  without  the  medium  of 
expression  which  words  give,  each  one 
would  live  in  a  world  of  his  own.     We 


cannot  conceive  of  a  family,  a  social  state, 
a  nation  without  language.  "  Speak, 
that  I  may  see  thee,"  said  one  to  i 
fair-haired  youth.  As  "  we  know  metals 
by  their  tinkling,"  so  we  know  men  by 
their  speech.  Dumbness  excites  pity. 
Expression  is  the  first  and  simplest  use  of 
the  tongue.  2.  To  glorify  God.  "  Ther>3- 
with  bless  we  God."  We  are  not  alone 
in  this.  "The  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God;  and  the  firmament  showeth  his 
handywork.  Day  unto  day  uttereth 
speech,  and  night  unto  night  showe  li 
knowledge."  God  is  known  by  the 
works  of  his  hands.  But  it  is  our  pro- 
vince explicitly  to  bless  God.  The  glory 
of  the  heavens  is  the  glory  of  inference ; 
our  glory  is  the  glory  of  reference.  "  Tlie 
whole  creation  is  as  a  well-tuned  instru- 
ment, but  man  maketh  the  music."  Men 
of  science  reduce  the  myriad  things  in 
nature  to  laws ;  and  these  to  still  fewer  ; 
until  all  causes  resolve  themselves  into 
the  Cause  of  causes — God.  To  him  all 
things  tend.  From  him,  as  a  fountain, 
all  streams  flow  ;  to  him,  as  a  sea,  they  all 
return.  3.  To  fan  the  flame  of  devotion 
in  others.  "  Death  and  life  are  in  the 
power  of  the  tongue."  Words  have  moved 
the  world.  Pulpits,  senates,  law  courts  are 
centres  from  which  words  proceed.  Men 
of  words  as  necessary  as  men  of  action. 
Armies,  nations  have  been  stirred  by 
eloquent  speech.  Possibilities  of  speech 
should  make  us  humble,  if  not  make  us 
tremble.  Words  escape  our  lips  big  with 
eternal  issues.  "  By  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  justified,  and  by  thy  words  thou  shalt 
be  condemned."  "  Foolish  talking  "  is 
condemned  as  well  as  "  filthy  communi- 
cation." 


146 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   NEUEMIAH. 


[OHAP.  VI. 


II.  The  abuse  of  the  tongue.  "  Take 
heed,"  says  an  Arabian  proverb,  "  thy 
tongue  cut  not  thy  throat."  1.  Self- 
misrepresejitation.  ( I )  Understatement. 
Half  -  truths  ;  concealing  some  material 
thing.  We  are  not  bound  to  satisfy 
everybody's  curiosity.  Two  legitimate 
times  for  speaking — when  God  would 
be  glorified  or  man  benefited.  But  having 
professed  to  tell  and  then  conceal  is  de- 
ception. There  are  spoken  lies  and  acted 
lies.  (2)  Over-statement.  Speaking  in 
superlatives.  A  habit  easily  contracted. 
"  All  his  geese  are  swans."  (3)  False 
statement.  God  and  men  hate  lying. 
You  may  be  clever,  amiable,  attractive ; 
but  if  you  lie,  the  swift,  sure,  terrible 
Nemesis  is,  you  will  never  again  be 
trusteil.  For  this  there  is  no  place  of 
repentance,  though  you  seek  it  carefully 
with  tears.  Lying  is  a  sin  of  which  it  is 
peculiarly  true  —  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will 
find  you  out."  2.  Defamation  of  others. 
Grosser  forms — evil  speaking  with  malice 
aforethought ;  bearing  false  witness ; 
slander.  A  form  of  this  punishable  by 
law.  But  some  of  the  keenest  slanders 
elade  law.  '•'  A  good  name  is  great 
riches."  It  is  to  be  desired.  We  must  not 
superciliously  discard  the  good  opinion 
of  others  ;  we  need  not  fawningly  seek 
it.  To  some  a  good  name  is  all  they  have ; 
e.  g.  domestic  servants,  professional  men. 
Studied  wickedness  is  worst  of  all.  "  I 
saw,"  said  Augustine,  "  a  little  child  pale 
with  envy."  How  many  town  scandals 
would  have  been  avoided,  how  many 
Church  quarrels  prevented,  had  men  acted 
on  that  golden  rule — "  If  thy  brother 
shall  trespass  against  thee,  go  and  tell  him 
his  fault  between  thee  and  him  alone.'* 
Be  patient  under  detraction.  "  Blessed 
are  ye  when  men  shall  say  all  manner 
of  evil  against  you  falsely." 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Silence  and  speech.  "  Why  tell  me  that  a 
man  is  a  fine  speaker  if  it  is  not  the  truth 
that  he  is  speaking  .^t  Phocion,  who  did  not 
speak  at  all,  was  a  great  deal  nearer  hitting 
the  mark  than  Demosthenes.  He  used  to  tell 
the  Athenians,  '  You  can't  fight  Philip.  You 
have  not  the  slightest  chance  with  him.  He  is 
a  man  who  holds  his  tongue ;  he  has  great  dis- 


ciplined armies  ;  he  can  brag  anybody  you  like 
in  your  cities  here ;  and  he  is  going  on  steadily 
with  an  unvarying  aim  towards  his  object ;  and 
he  will  infallibly  beat  any  kind  of  men  such  as 
you,  going  on  raging  from  shore  to  shore  with 
all  that  rampant  nonsense.'  Demosthenes  said 
to  hira  one  day,  '  The  Athenians  will  get  mad 
some  day  and  kill  you.'  *  Yes/  Phocion  says, 
*  when  they  are  mad ;  and  you,  as  soon  as  they 
get  saae  again.'  It  is  told  about  him  going  to 
Messina  on  some  deputation  that  the  Athenians 
wanted  on  some  kind  of  matter  of  an  intricate  and 
contentious  nature,  that  Phocion  went  with  some 
story  in  his  mouth  to  speak  about.  He  was  a 
man  of  few  words — no  unveracity ;  and  after  he 
had  gone  on  telling  the  story  a  certain  time,  there 
was  one  burst  of  interruption.  One  man  inter- 
rupted with  something  he  tried  to  answer,  and 
then  another,  and,  finally,  the  people  began  brag- 
ging and  brawling,  and  no  end  of  debate,  till  it 
ended  in  the  want  of  power  in  the  people  to  say 
any  more.  Phocion  drew  bick  altogether,  struck 
dumb,  and  would  not  speak  another  word  to  any 
man,  and  he  left  it  to  them  to  decide  in  any  way 
they  liked.  It  appears  to  me  there  is  a  kind  of 
eloquence  in  that  which  is  equal  to  anything 
Demosthenes  ever  said.  '  Take  your  own  way,  and 
let  me  out  altogether.'  " — Carlyle. 

Slander.  "In  St.  James's  day,  as  now,  it  would 
appear  that  there  were  idle  men  and  idle  women, 
who  went  about  from  house  to  house,  dropping 
slander  as  they  went,  and  yet  you  could  not  take 
up  that  slander  and  detect  the  falsehood  there. 
You  could  not  evaporate  the  truth  in  the  slow  pro- 
cess of  the  crucible,  and  then  show  the  residuum  of 
falsehood  glittering  and  visible.  You  could  not 
fasten  upon  any  word  or  sentence  and  say  that  it 
was  calumny ;  for  in  order  to  constitute  slander 
it  is  not  necessary  that  the  word  spoken  should 
be  false — half  truths  are  often  more  calumnious 
than  whole  falsehoods.  It  is  not  even  necessary 
that  a  word  should  be  distinctly  uttered  ;  a 
dropped  lip,  an  arched  eyebrow,  a  shrugged 
shoulder,  a  significant  look,  an  incredulous  ex- 
pression of  countenance,  nay,  even  an  emphatic 
silence,  may  do  the  work  ;  and  when  the  light 
and  trifling  thing  which  has  done  the  mischief  has 
fluttered  ofi",  the  venom  is  left  behind,  to  work  and 
rankle,  to  inflame  hearts,  to  fever  human  exist- 
ence, and  to  poison  human  society  at  the  fountain 
springs  of  life.  Very  emphatically  was  it  said 
by  one  whose  whole  being  had  smarted  under 
such  affliction,  *  Adders'  poison  is  under  their 
lips.'"— i?.  IF.  Robertson. 

*'  We  have  no  right  to  spread  an  injurious  report 
merely  because  somebody  brought  it  to  us.  It  is 
a  crime  to  pass  bad  money  as  well  as  to  coin  it. 
We  are  bound  to  consider  whether  the  person 
from  whom  we  heard  the  report  had  oppor- 
tunities of  knowing  the  truth,  was  likely  to  form 
a  sound  judgment  of  the  facts  which  came  under 
his  knowledge,  and  whether  we  should  have 
believed  him  if  he  had  said  the  same  thing  to  us 
about  some  person  to  whom  we  bore  no  ill-will. 
There  would  be  very  much  less  scandal  manu- 
factured if  there  were  less  dispositioa  to  circulate 
it."— 5.  W.  Dale, 


OHAP.  VI.]  HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAE.  147 


abomination  to  the  wicked."  But  then 
Same  Theme.  ^^  should  first  and  most  abominate  our- 
selves for  sin ;  this  very  hatred  and 
One  great  sin  wherein  the  corruption  abhorrence  should  begin  at  home,  and 
of  human  nature  bewrayeth  itself  is  we  should  be  most  odious  to  ourselves 
detraction,  or  depriving  others  of  a  good  tor  sin,  for  we  know  more  sin  by  our- 
repute.  Here  I  shall  show —  selves  than  we  can  do  by  another.  But 
I.  What  is  detraction.  1.  The  for  the  hatred  of  enmity,  which  is  oppo- 
nature  of  it  in  general.  It  is  an  un-  site  to  the  love  of  benevolence,  that 
just  violation  of  another's  fame,  reputa-  should  be  quite  banished  out  of  the 
tion,  or  that  good  report  which  is  due  to  heart  of  a  Christian.  (/3)  It  comes 
him.  God,  that  hath  bidden  me  to  love  from  uncharitable  credulity,  whereby 
my  neighbour  as  myself,  doth  therein  men  easily  believe  a  false  report,  and 
bid  me  to  be  tender  not  only  of  his  so  propagate  and  convey  it  to  others, 
person  and  goods,  but  of  his  good  name.  Jer.  xx.  10:  "I  have  heard  the  de- 
And  indeed  one  precept  is  a  guard  and  faming  of  many.  Report,  say  they,  and 
fence  to  another.  I  cannot  be  tender  of  we  will  report  it."  If  any  will  raise  a 
his  person  and  goods  unless  I  be  tender  report  tending  to  the  discredit  of  another, 
of  his  fame  ;  for  every  man  liveth  by  some  will  foster  it ;  and  it  loseth  nothing 
his  credit.  (1)  It  is  a  sin  against  God,  in  the  carriage,  till  by  additions  and 
who  hath  forbidden  us  to  bear  false  misconstructions  it  growetli  to  a  down- 
witness  against  our  neighbour,  and  to  right  and  dangerous  infamy.  (y)  It 
speak  evil  of  others  without  a  cause,  comes  through  rashness  and  unruhness 
Eph.  iv.  31  :  "  Let  all  evil-speaking  be  of  tongue.  Some  men  never  learned  to 
far  from  you."  By  evil- speaking  is  bridle  their  tongues,  and  the  Apostle 
meant  there  disgraceful  and  contume-  James  telleth  us  that  "  therefore  their 
lious  speeches,  whereby  we  seek  to  stain  religion  is  vain"  (James  i.  26).  Till 
the  reputation  of  others.  (2)  It  is  a  we  make  conscience  of  these  evils,  as 
wrong  to  man,  because  it  robbeth  him  well  as  others,  we  content  ourselves 
of  his  good  name,  which  is  so  deservedly  with  a  partial  obedience,  and  therefore 
esteemed  by  all  that  would  do  anything  cannot  be  sincere.  Whisperers  must  be 
for  God  in  the  world.  **  A  good  name  talking.  {I)  It  comes  from  carnal  zeal, 
should  rather  be  chosen  than  great  which  is  nothing  else  but  passion  for  our 
riches"  (Prov.  xxii.  1).  Therefore,  as  he  different  interests  and  opinions.  Many 
himself  should  not  prostitute  his  good  lies  walk  under  the  disguise  of  religion, 
name,  so  others  should  not  blast  it  and  Is  all  speaking  evil  of  another  unlawful? 
blemish  it ;  for  it  is  a  greater  sin  than  I  cannot  say  so,  but  yet  it  is  hard  to 
to  steal  the  best  goods  which  he  hath,  keep  it  from  sin.  1.  He  that  doth  it 
and  it  is  such  an  evil  as  scarce  admits  without  just  cause  is  plainly  a  detractor, 
any  sound  restitution ;  for  the  imputa-  and  so  a  grievous  sinner  before  God. 
tion  even  of  unjust  crimes  leaveth  a  God  doth  not  only  reject  the  liars  for 
scar  though  the  wound  be  healed.  (3)  hypocrites,  but  also  the  backbiters  and 
The  causes  it  proceedeth  from  are  these,  slanderers.  2.  He  that  doth  but  speak 
(a)  Malice  and  ill-will,  which  prompteth  what  he  hath  heard  from  others,  with- 
us  to  speak  falsely  of  others,  so  to  make  out  any  assertion  or  asseveration  of  his 
them  odious,  or  do  them  wrong  or  hurt,  own,  as  not  knowing  the  truth  of  the 
To  hate  our  brother  in  our  heart  is  no  report,  can  hardly  be  excused  from  sin. 
way  consistent  with  that  charity  which  He  reporteth  those  things  which  may 
the  impression  of  the  love  of  Christ  induce  the  hearers  to  think  ill  of  another, 
should  beget  in  us.  The  hatred  of  and  if  without  just  cause  he  is  in  part 
offence,  which  is  opposite  to  the  love  of  accessory.  3.  He  that  doth  speak  thit 
complacency,  may  be  justified  as  to  the  which  is  true,  but  tendeth  to  the  infamy 
wicked.  Prov.  xxix.  27  :  "  An  unjust  of  another,  may  be  guilty  of  sin  if  he 
man  is  an  abomination  to  the  just,  and  have  not  a  sufficient  call  and  warrant. 
he   that   is  upright  in   the  way  is  an  If  it  be  a  matter  we  have  nothing  to  do 

l2 


148                         HOMILETia  QOMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vi. 

with  but  only  speak  of  their  faults  for  beams  of  motes,  and  mountains  of  mole- 
talk  5ake.  If  we  aggravate  things  be-  hills.  We  should  lessen  siiis  all  that 
yond  their  just  size  and  proportion.  If  we  can ;  I  mean  the  sins  and  faults  of 
we  urge  their  crimes  and  deny  their  others.  By  imposing  false  crimes.  The 
graces.  Is  there  no  good  amongst  all  most  godly  and  innocent  persons  cannot 
this  evill  2.  The  kinds  of  detraction,  escape  the  scourge  of  the  tongue,  and 
(1)  Whispering,  which  is  privy  defam-  unjust  calumnies, 
ation  of  our  brother,  to  bring  him  into  II.  The  heinousness  of  the  sin.  1. 
disfavour  and  disrespect  with  those  In  general,  that  is  evident  from  what  is 
that  formerly  had  a  better  opinion  of  said  already.  Two  arguments  more  I 
him.  Herein  whispering  differeth  from  shall  urge.  (1)  Men  shall  be  called  to 
backbiting,  because  the  whisperer  sting-  an  account  for  these  sins  as  well  as 
eth  secretly,  but  the  other  doth  more  others.  (2)  It  is  the  property  of  a 
openly  attack  our  credit.  Now  this  citizen  of  Zion — one  that  shall  be  not 
whispering  is  a  great  sin;  it  is  reckoned  only  accepted  with  G-od  now,  but  dwell 
among  the  sins  which  reigned  among  with  God  for  ever — not  to  be  given  to 
the  heathen,  and  God  hath  expressly  backbiting  (Ps.  xv.).  2.  More  parti- 
f orbidden  to  his  people.  Lev.  xix.  1 6  :  cularly,  it  is  the  more  heinous,  ( I ) 
"  Thou  shalt  not  go  up  and  down  as  a  Partly  from  the  person  against  whom  it 
tale-bearer  among  thy  people."  It  is  is  committed  ;  e.  g.  the  godly ;  public 
against  natural  equity,  because  they  do  persons.  (2)  From  the  persons  before 
that  to  others  which  they  would  not  whom  the  slander  is  brought,  as  suppose 
have  done  to  themselves  It  is  a  grief  kings  and  princes ;  so  that  they  are 
to  the  party  wronged,  and  a  cause  of  deprived  not  only  of  private  friend- 
much  debate  and  strife.  (2)  Backbiting  ships,  but  the  favour  and  countenance  of 
is  a  more  public  speaking  evil  of  our  those  under  whose  protection  they  have 
absent  brother,  to  the  impairing  of  his  their  life  and  service.  (3)  From  the 
credit.  iN'ow  this  may  be  done  two  end  of  it.  If  it  be  done  with  a  direct 
ways.  With  respect  to  the  good  things  intention  of  hurting  another's  fame,  it 
found  in  him,  and  with  respect  to  the  is  worse  than  if  out  of  a  rash  levity  and 
evil  supposed  to  be  committed  by  him.  loquacity.  Some  men  have  no  direct 
With  respect  to  the  good  things  found  intention  of  mischief,  but  are  given  to 
in  him: — When  we  deny  those  good  talking;  others  sow  discord.  (4)  From 
things  which  we  know  to  be  in  another,  the  great  hurt  that  foUoweth,  be  it  loss 
When  we  lessen  the  gifts  and  graces  of  of  estate  or  general  trouble.  When 
others.  When  we  own  the  good,  but  men's  good  names  are  buried,  their  per- 
deprave  it  by  supposing  a  sinister  inten-  sons  cannot  long  subsist  afterward  with 
tion.  When  we  have  just  occasion  to  any  degree  of  service.  And  all  this 
speak  of  a  man's  due  commendation,  but  may  be  the  fruit  of  a  deceitful  tongue, 
enviously  suppress  it.  As  to  evil  sup-  The  use  is,  to  show  how  good-natured 
posed  to  be  committed  by  them : — When  Christianity  is,  and  befriendeth  human 
we  publish  their  secret  slips,  which  in  societies ;  it  condemneth  not  only  sins 
charity  we  ought  to  conceal.  Prov.  xi.  against  God,  but  sins  against  our  neigh- 
13:  "A  tale-bearer  revealeth  secrets."  hour.  Let  us  not  speak  evil  of  others 
When  a  man  intrudeth  himself  into  behind  their  backs,  but  tell  them  their 
the  mention  of  things  faulty,  which  he  faults.  Remembering  our  own  faults, 
might  with  better  manners  and  more  looking  at  home,  will  not  only  divert  us 
honesty  conceal,  it  is  the  effect  of  a  from  slandering  of  others,  but  make  us 
base  heart.  When,  in  relating  any  evil  compassionate  towards  them,  and  breed 
action  of  another,  we  use  harder  terms  comfort  in  our  own  souls. — Manton, 
than  the  quality  of  the  fact  requireth,  abridged, 
and  make  evils  worse  than  they  are, 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


149 


Boldness. 

▼i.  8.    Then  I  sent  unto  Mm,  saying,  There  are  no  such  things  done  as  thou  sayest, 
hut  thoufeignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart. 


A    bold  word    this   to    fling   in   the 
teeth  of  authority. 

I.  Men  of  courage  are  men  of  con- 
victions. Xeliemiah's  consciousness 
that  he  was  doing  a  great  work  made 
him  bold.  Physical  courage  is  a  thing 
of  blood  and  nerve.  The  morally 
courageous  man  may  be  nervous,  shrink- 
ing, fearful.  He  is  self-reliant  because 
reliant  on  God.  The  men  without  con- 
victions, what  have  they  done  %  Those 
who  tell  us  it  is  doubtful  if  there  be  a 
God,  religion  is  the  poetry  of  con- 
science, the  Bible  is  a  fetish,  whom 
have  they  blessed  1  for  whom  have 
they  agonized  '\  Has  the  world's  suffer- 
ing wrung  from  them  any  great  sweat 
of  blood  ?  The  world's  hard  work  has 
never  been  done  by  the  mealy-mouthed. 
Great  reformations  have  not  been  accom- 
plished by  the  nerveless  souls  without 
strong  convictions  for  or  against.  Men 
of  one  idea  have  made  mistakes,  but  not 
the  mistake  of  leaving  the  work  undone. 
This  Jewish  Reformer  and  Liberator 
reminds  us  of  Martin  Luther,  the  stories 
of  whose  boldness  have  passed  into 
proverbs;  and  of  John  Knox,  whom 
Scotland  delights  to  honour.  Of  him 
Carlyle  tells  the  following  story  in  his 
own  inimitable  way : — "  In  the  galleys 
of  the  river  Loire,  whither  Knox  and 
the  others,  after  their  castle  of  St. 
Andrew's  was  taken,  had  been  sent  as 
galley  slaves,  some  officer  or  priest  one 
day  presented  them  an  image  of  the 
Virgin  Mother,  requiring  that  they,  the 
blasphemous  heretics,  should  do  it  rever- 
ence. *  Mother  !  mother  of  God  !  * 
said  Knox,  when  the  turn  came  to  him. 
*  This  is  no  mother  of  God  ;  this  is  *'  a 
pented  bredd  " — a  piece  of  wood,  I  tell 
you,  with  paint  on  it.  She  is  fitter  for 
swimming,  I  think,  than  for  being  wor- 
shipped,' added  Knox,  and  flung  the 
thing  into  the  river,"  Rather  dangerous 
sport-  that !  *'  The  courage  of  his  con- 
victions "  makes  a  man  a  hero.  There 
was  a  sacred  must  in  the  highest  life. 
**I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that 


sent  me."  "  He  steadfastly  set  his  face 
to  go  to  Jerusalem.'*  Another  story 
which  Carlyle  tells  of  John  Knox  will 
illustrate  how  these  elect  spirits  shrank 
from  the  tasks  laid  upon  them.  *'In 
an  entirely  obscure  way  Knox  had 
reached  the  age  of  forty ;  was  with  the 
small  body  of  Reformers  who  were 
standing  siege  in  St.  Andrew's  Castle, 
when  one  day  in  their  chapel  the 
preacher,  after  finishing  his  exhortation 
to  these  fighters  in  the  forlorn  hope, 
said  suddenly,  that  there  ought  to  be 
other  speakers,  that  all  men  who  had  a 
priest's  heart  and  gift  in  them  ought 
now  to  speak ; — which  gifts  and  heart 
one  of  their  own  number,  John  Knox 
the  name  of  him,  had.  Had  he  not*?  said 
the  preacher,  appealing  to  all  the  audi- 
ence. What  then  is  his  duty"?  The 
people  answered  affirmatively ;  it  was  a 
criminal  forsaking  of  his  post  if  such  a 
man  held  the  word  that  was  in  him 
silent.  Poor  Knox  was  obliged  to 
stand  up ;  he  attempted  to  reply,  he 
could  say  no  word  ;  burst  into  a  flood 
of  tears,  and  ran  out."  "  Carlstad,"  said 
Luther,  "  wanted  to  be  the  great  man, 
and  truly  I  would  willingly  have  left 
the  honour  to  him,  so  far  as  it  had  not 
been  against  God.  For,  I  praise  my 
God,  I  was  never  so  presumptuous  as  to 
think  myself  wiser  than  another  man. 
When  at  first  I  wrote  against  indulg- 
ences, I  designed  simply  to  have  opposed 
them,  thinking  that,  afterwards,  others 
would  come  and  accomplish  what  I  had 
begun."  To  be  out  of  the  roll  of  com- 
mon men  is  not  desirable.  But  when 
self-will  and  God's  will  come  into 
collision,  the  will  of  the  Lord  be  done. 
Don't  be  a  straw  upon  the  stream.  Get 
convictions.  Hold  them.  Search  the 
Scriptures.  Be  loyal  to  conscience. 
Obey  God.  Spheres  are  narrow  or 
wide.  What  matters  thati  In  the 
narrowest  men  may  fail ;  in  the  widest 
they  can  but  be  faithful.  Reverence 
**  the  sacred  must  '*  in  thy  life  and 
work. 


150 


HOMFLETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  yi. 


II.  Applications  of  this  principle. 

1.  A  man's  real  fue  is  himself.  "No- 
thing," says  St.  Bernard,  "  can  work 
me  damage   except    myself;    the   harm 


that  I  sustain  I 
me,  and  never  am 
by  my  own  fault." 
position    or    skilful 


carry    about    with 
a  real    sufferer  but 
The  powerful  op- 
deception    of    the 


Sanballats  and  Gashmus  within  my 
sphere  may  make  my  duty  more  difficult, 
but  cannot  wholly  prevent  my  perform- 
ance of  it.  There  is  such  a  thing  as 
self-degradation.  This  position  is  not 
uncommon — to  do  our  duty  and  suffer  : 
to  leave  it  undone  and  escape  the  suffer- 
ing. But  to  do  the  latter  is  to  degrade 
oneself.  2.  Not  such  boldness,  hut  some 
boldness  is  required  of  us  all.  We  may 
have  opportunities  of  speaking  the  truth 
in  love  ;  we  must  not  shrink  from  the 
responsibility  of  speaking  the  truth. 
Force,  fraud,  falsehood  were  arrayed 
against  Nehemiah,  are  arrayed  against 
us.  The  holy  war  arises  out  of  an 
enmity  of  long  standing.  3.  Pay 
homage  to  thy  convictions.     Honour  the 


grey-headed  truths  in  the  faith  of  which 
apostles,  martyrs,  and  saints  have  lived 
and  died.  God's  love,  Christ's  atone- 
ment, your  pardon  and  need  of  renewal 
— hold  fast  these  convictions.  "Take 
unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that 
ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  in  the  evil 
day" — the  conquered  soldier  can  do 
that ;  "  and  having  done  all  to  stand  " 
— only  the  conquering  soldier  can  do 
that.  So  thou  soldier  of  God.  4.  Do 
the  task  allotted  thee.  "  Work,  in 
every  hour,  paid  or  unpaid ;  see  only 
that  thou  work,  and  thou  canst  not 
escape  the  reward ;  whether  thy  work 
be  fine  or  coarse,  planting  corn  or  writ- 
ing epics,  so  only  it  be  honest  work, 
done  to  thine  own  approbation,  it  shall 
earn  a  reward  to  the  senses  as  well  as  to 
the  thought ;  no  matter  how  often  de- 
feated, you  are  born  to  victory.  The 
reward  of  a  thing  well  done  is  to 
have  done  it." — Emerson.  Nehemiah 
sent  his  message,  and  then  went  on 
with  his  work.  "  So  the  wall  was 
finished." 


Fear  and  Faith. 

vL  9.     For  they  all  made  us  afraid,  saying.  Their  hands  shall  he  weakened  from 
the  work,  that  it  be  not  done.     Now  therefore,  0  God,  strengthen  my  hands. 

The  words  come  after  the  story  of  a  new  scare  to  Nehemiah.  [Describe  his 
anxieties  from  various  forms  of  enmity.]  Words  suggest  two  companion  topics, 
Fear  and  Faith. 

I.  Fear.  ^^  For  they  all  made  us  afraid.'^  Man  is  accompanied  through  life  by 
foes  and  fears.  In  some  cases  the  fears  are  more  numerous  than  the  foes. 
Frequently  the  only  thing  to  he  afraid  of  is  our  own  fear.  There  are  foes  of  us  all, 
however,  who  "  make  us  afraid."  To  have  an  iron  spirit  not  easily  quailed  is  a 
great  gift,  and  to  have  a  spirit  like  a  sensitive  plant,  which  curls  at  every  touch  and 
interrupts  its  functions,  is  a  great  misery.  We  may  allow  fears  to  grow  upon  us, 
until  they  become  an  atmosphere  to  the  soul.  1.  Causes  of  fear.  With  JNTehemiah 
there  were  causes  enough — real  flesh  and  blood  foes,  who  made  his  career  in 
Jerusalem  one  long  vigil,  always  listening  for  the  loud  alarum  of  strife.  Similarly 
with  most  men  in  most  of  life's  enterprises.  The  soul  has  its  foes  ;  "  they  are 
lively  and  they  are  strong."  All  religious  work  is  done  against  obstacles  which 
"  make  ns  afraid."  (a)  The  devil  is  a  downright  foe.  We  are  not  so  much 
alarmed  at  him  now  as  in  days  of  superstition.  Luther  threw  his  ink-pot  at  the 
arch-enemy  of  his  soul,  and  we  smile  at  the  picture  of  the  rough  student  rising 
from  his  Bible  and  casting  such  a  very  material  defiance  at  such  a  very  immaterial 
foe.  We  have  refined  the  devil  since  then  to  a  "  general  expression  for,"  &c.  But 
was  not  the  mistaken  Eeformer  nearer  right  than  ourselves  ?  "  Your  adversary  tlie 
devil "  is  not  a  mere  generalization,  (p)  Foes  hide  themselves  or  show  themselves  in 
our felloW'm£n.  The  man  who  hinders  my  work  for  God  is  my  foe,  whether  he  scare 
me  by  opposition,  or  interrupt  me  by  an  unprofitable  friendship.     The  foe  who 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  151 

pushes  me  down  the  precipice,  and  the  foe  who  persuades  me  to  go  to  sleep  in  the 
sun,  are  alike  reasons  for  fear,  (y)  The  sinful  nature  in  myself  is  my  enemy.  "  No 
one's  enemy  but  his  own  "  is  a  common  form  of  speech.  Every  man  is  a  ship  with 
a  mutinous  crew  on  board,  and  destruction  is  averted  only  by  the  masterful 
assertion  of  my  better  self  against  my  lower  self,  of  my  conscience  against  my 
passions,  of  the  grace  of  God  against  the  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me. 

"  Christian,  seek  not  yet  repose, 
Cast  thy  dreams  of  ease  away  ; 
Thou  art  in  the  midst  of  foes ; 
Watch  and  pray." 

2.  Effects  of  fear,  (a)  Exaggeration  of  peril.  Life  grows  very  gloomy  when 
the  soul  is  afraid.  Fear  is  a  fearful  thing.  The  palpitating,  perspiring  rustic  in 
the  dark  lane  misinterprets  every  shadow,  and  hears  a  voice  of  threatening  in 
every  sound,  when  once  anything  like  superstitous  terror  has  seized  him.  When 
you  are  frightened  you  are  not  in  a  position  to  judge  of  your  situation.  Allow  for 
the  enlargements  of  fear.  Sometimes  when  we  hear  a  sensational  story  we  say, 
Ah,  Mr.  Superlative  told  you  that ;  take  off  ninety  per  cent.  Kow  if  we  could 
so  deal  with  the  alarming  suggestions  of  our  own  fears  it  would  be  well.  They 
deceive  us.  When  the  disciples  saw  Jesus  walking  on  the  sea,  they  were  troubled, 
and  supposed  that  they  had  seen  a  spirit ;  but  he  said,  "  Be  not  afraid  ;  it  is  I  !  " 
(j3)  Paralysis  of  strength.  *'  The  hearts  of  the  people  melted  and  became  as  water  " 
— not  much  lion-work  of  fighting  for  them.  A  child  can  take  the  sword  of  a 
frightened  man.     Be  very  courageous  if  you  would  be  very  strong. 

II.  Faith.  "  Now  therefore,  0  God,  strengthen  my  hands.'"  "  What  time  I  am 
afraid  I  will  trust  in  the  Lord."  The  word  of  God  is  full  of  presuppositions  oj 
man's  timorousness  and /ear.  It  speaks  gently,  and  as  to  a  child,  and  bids  its  orgam 
be  soft.  "  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem  !  "  Fear  not,  Abraham,  I  am  thy 
shield!  Fear  not,  Moses— Joshua — David — Daniel:  all  through  the  story  of 
man's  struggle  God's  ringing  cry  of  Fear  not  !  falls  upon  him  from  heaven.  Do  not 
over-chide  yourself  if  you  are  of  a  timorous  make,  for  why  should  there  be  chapter 
after  chapter  of  bugle-calls  to  courage,  except  that  men  never  have  been  overstocked 
with  that  grace.  After  faith  in  St.  Peter's  teaching  comes  courage  :  "Add  to  your 
faith  virtue"  (courage).  Now  faith  stands  as  the  counterpart  of  fear.  1.  In  causes 
of  fear.  Against  our  array  of  foes  it  brings  into  view  the  presence  of  God.  We 
should  strive  to  think  God  as  real  as  our  foes  are,  whereas  we  commonly  in  our 
panic  see  only  the  peril,  and  not  the  Saviour.  At  Waterloo  the  French  were 
ranged  on  one  side  of  a  valley  in  brilliant  force,  while  on  the  other  side  of  the 
valley  waited  the  army  that  was  to  conquer — an  army  mostly  hidden.  It  is  thus 
in  religious  life.  2  Kings  vi.  15 — 17  gives  a  beautiful  illustrative  story.  Those 
"  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  round  about  Elisha  "  were  hidden  to  the  servant,  though 
seen  by  the  clear-eyed  faith  of  his  master.  ^'  Elisha  prayed,  and  said  unto  the  Lord, 
I  pray  thee,  open  his  eyes,  that  he  may  see."     Look  not  on  the  foes  only,  but  see 

"  Hell  is  nigh,  but  God  is  nigher, 
Circling  us  with  hosts  of  fire." 

2.  Against  the  effect  of  fear  [despair)  let  us  set  the  spirit  of  hope.  "  Take  for  a 
helmet  the  hope  of  salvation."  That  will  prevent  you  being  stunned  by  fear. 
What  incitements  to  hope  we  find.  ( 1 )  In  the  history  of  God's  help.  Dealings  with 
faithful  in  all  generations.  (2)  In  experience oi  God's  help.  Our  own  remembered 
deliverances.  Read  St.  Paul's  grand  defiance  of  all  foes,  visible  and  invisible, 
present  and  to  come,  in  his  glorious  burst  at  end  of  the  eighth  of  Romans  :  '*  Who 
shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of  Christ"  (Rom.  viii.  35 — 39)] 

Application.     1.  Be  aware  of  your  foes.     2.  Do  not  make  too  much  of  them,. 

3.  Rememher  that  it  is  not  your  own  strength  that  wins,  hut  the  God  who  strengthens 
your  hands,     4.  N&ver  despair. 


162 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  vi. 


Felt  Weakness. 
vi.  9.   0  God,  strengthen  my  hands. 


Introduction. — Outline  N'eheniiah's 
position  : —  fierceness  of  foes ;  fear  of 
friends ;  work  endangered ;  his  own 
heart  failing  him  for  fear.  A  critical 
moment,  requiring  instantaneous  de- 
cision. Felt  weakness  casting  itself  on 
God. 

I.  The  habit  of  devotion.  This 
prayer  not  uttered  whilst  writing.  He 
recalls  his  experiences  in  that  time  of 
danger.  Such  a  trial-hour  would  stamp 
itself  in  the  memory.  Nehemiah  is 
remarkable  for  his  ejaculatory  prayers. 
They  were  the  habit  of  his  life.  You 
cannot  be  always  devotional,  if  you 
mean  by  that  engaged  in  acts  of  devo- 
tion. Habit  will  make  you  ready  for 
occasion.  A  school-boy  cannot  be  all 
day  long  repeating  his  father's  name; 
enough  if  when  a  temptation  arises  to 
do  what  would  offend  his  father  he 
refuses.  Bible  precepts  cannot  be  al- 
ways on  the  tongue's  end,  but  a  Christian 
man  should  be  so  under  the  influence 
of  Biblical  principles  that  he  will  shrink 
instinctively  from  wrong  -  being  and 
wrong-doing. 

"  I  want  a  principle  within 

Of  jealous,  godly  fear, 
A  sensibility  of  sin, 

A  pain  to  feel  it  near ; 
I  want  the  first  approach  to  feel 

Of  pride,  or  fond  desire. 
To  catch  the  wandering  of  my  will, 

And  quench  the  kindling  fire. 

That  I  from  thee  no  more  may  part, 

No  more  thy  goodness  grieve, 
The  filial  awe,  the  fleshy  heart, 

The  tender  conscience  give. 
Quick  as  the  apple  of  an  eye, 

0  God,  my  conscience  make ! 
Awake  my  soul  when  sin  is  nigh, 

And  keep  it  still  awake." 

Some  ask  only  for  a  sentiment.  That 
is  insufficient.  Devotion  must  reach 
the  core  of  our  being.  We  must  be 
*'  throughout  Christian."  Habit  implies 
formation.  Not  by  a  sudden  bound  do 
men  reach  perfection.  Halting  and 
stumbling  characterize  a  Christian's  first 
efforts  to  walk  alone.  God  regards  the 
bent  of  the  will,  the  direction  of  the 


desires,     "  He  knoweth  our  frame  ;  he 
remembereth  that  we  are  dust."     Don't 
be    discouraged    by    failure,     repeated 
failure.     Begin  again.     Learn  to  pray. 
Habituate  thyself  to  devotional  exercises. 
II.  The  limits  of  solitariness.     "  0 
God,  strengthen  my  hands."    The  hands 
of  the  workers  needed  to  be  strengthened. 
But  on  Nehemiah  rested   the  responsi- 
bility.    He  stood  alone.   If  his  strength 
should  fail  in  the  day  of  adversity,  all 
would   be   lost.     The  tallest  trees  feel 
the  stress  of  the  blast.     Highly-wrought 
natures  are  subject  to  influences  unfelt 
by  coarser  minds.     Christ  is  the  great 
champion  here — the  loneliest  man  that 
ever  lived.   You  cannot  read  the  Gospels 
without  feeling  how  far  apart  from  him 
even  the  disciples  were.     The  best  of 
the  outside  world  had  so  little  in  com- 
mon with  him.     And  through  the  ages 
men  have  had  to  thank   God  for  the 
lonely   spirits.      The   noblest   work   is 
achieved    by    personal    and    lonesome 
effort.     Sunday  schools,  prison  reforms, 
hospital     management,     religious     re- 
vivals, revolutions  in  Church  and  State 
are  the  result  of  the  genius  and  energy 
of  individual  men  and  women.     They 
strike  out  the  path  along  which  the  less 
gifted,  but  not  less  earnest,  travel.  Doubt- 
less there  are  times  when  the  terrible 
loneliness  of  their  position  startles  such 
men.     Such  a  time  came  to  Nehemiah, 
and  he  cried  unto  God.     And   in   the 
commonplace  life  of  all  of  us  there  is 
solitariness.      For  the  value   of  a   life 
does  not  depend   upon  externals.     To 
himself  the  life  of  a  peasant  is  as  im- 
portant as  is  the  life  of  a  prince.     No 
second  life  is  given.     Great  and  small 
are  relative  terms,  be   it  remembered. 
None  is  alone  who  has  God  with  him. 
"  Jesus  said.  Behold,  the  hour  cometh, 
yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  leave  me 
alone  :  and  yet  /  am  not  alone,  because 
the  Father  is  with  me." 

III.  The  value  of  certitude.     "0 
God,  strengthen  my  hands." 

«  I  am  weak,  but  thou  art  mighty, 
Hold  me  with  thy  powerful  hand." 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


158 


That  was  about  all  N'ehemiah  knew. 
His  creed  was  short,  but  he  held  it  firmly. 
Sanballat  and  Gashmu  might  gather 
fresh  forces  or  bribe  Nebemiah's  body- 
guard ;  one  thing  was  clear  amid  the 
haze  of  others,  God  was  Almighty,  and 
always  approachable.  We  have  a  fuller 
creed ;  have  we  a  sublimer  trust  1  A 
motto  of  the  Apostle  Paul — "  We  know." 
Kor  is  St.  John  one  whit  behind  his 
brother-apostle.  The  circle  of  religious 
knowledge  might  be  almost  completed 
from  his  First  Epistle  alone.  "  We  know 
that  the  Son  of  God  is  come."  "  We 
know  that  we  are  of  God."  "We 
know  that  we  know  him."  *'  We  know 
that  we  are  in  him."  "  We  know  that 
he  abideth  in  us."  *'We  know  the 
Spirit  of  truth  and  error."  "We  know 
that  he  heareth  us."  "  We  know  that 
when  he  shall  appear  we  shall  be  like 
him.' '  That  which  we  have  experienced 
becomes  certain.  "  We  speak  that  we 
do  know."  "  One  thing  I  know,  that 
whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see." 

IV.  The  secret  of  steadiness.  "They 
all  made  us  afraid,  saying.  Their  hands 
shall  be  weakened  from  the  work,  that 
it  be  not  done.  Now  therefore,  0  God, 
strengthen  my  hands.  So  the  wall  was 
finished.'^  "  Unbelief,"  says  Gurnall, 
"is  a  soul -enfeebling  sin.  It  is  to 
prayer  as  the  moth  is  to  the  cloth ;  it 
wastes  the  soul's  strength,  so  that  it 
cannot  look  up  to  God  with  any  hope. 
*  They  made  us  afraid,  saying,  Their 
hands  shall  be  weakened.'  Eesist,  there- 
fore, Satan  ;  be  steadfast  in  the  faith. 
Never  let  thy  heart  suffer  the  power, 
mercy,  or  truth  of  God  to  be  called  in 
question ;  thou  hadst  as  good  question 
whether  he  can  cease  to  be  God." 

Application.  1.  In  striving  to  attain 
personal  excellence  he  patient.  Effort 
and  failure  mark  much  of  our  life.  The 
task  we  have  in  hand  is  herculean ;  the 
opponents  are  numerous  and  powerful. 
2.  In  any  form  of  Christian  enterprise 
moderate  your  expectations.  Opposition 
will  arise  when  least  expected.  Those 
for  whom  you  toil  will  seldom  appreciate 
your  motives.  Success  may  linger.  3. 
Make  the  secular  sacred  by  infusing  into 
it  a  sacred  spirit.  Eef use  to  call  any- 
thing common  and  unclean. 


ILLUSTEATIONS. 

Ejaculatory  prayer.  —  "Ejaculatory  prayer  is 
prayer  darted  up  from  the  heart  to  God,  not  at 
stated  intervals,  but  in  the  course  of  our  daily 
occupations  and  amusements.  The  word  *  ejacu- 
latory '  is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  for  a 
dart  or  arrow,  and  there  is  an  idea  in  it  which 
one  would  be  loath  indeed  to  forfeit.  Imagine 
an  English  archer,  strolling  through  a  forest  in 
the  old  times  of  Crecy  and  Agincourt,  when  the 
yeomen  of  this  island  were  trained  to  deliver 
their  arrows  with  the  same  unfailing  precision 
as  '  a  left-handed  Gibeonite '  discharging  a  stone 
bullet  from  his  sling.  A  bird  rises  in  the  brush- 
wood under  his  feet,  a  bird  of  gorgeous  plumage 
or  savoury  flesh.  He  takes  an  arrow  from  his 
quiver,  draws  his  bow  to  its  full  stretch,  and 
sends  the  shaft  after  the  bird  with  the  speed  of 
lightning.  Scarcely  an  instant  elapses  before 
his  prey  is  at  his  feet.  It  has  been  struck  with 
unerring  aim  in  the  critical  part,  and  drops  on 
the  instant.  Very  similar  in  the  spiritual  world 
is  the  force  of  what  is  called  ejaculatory  prayer. 
The  Christian  catches  suddenly  a  glimpse  of 
some  blessing,  deliverance,  relief,  a  longing  after 
which  is  induced  by  the  circumstances  into 
which  he  is  thrown.  Presently  it  shall  be  his. 
As  the  archer  first  draws  the  bow  in  towards 
himself,  so  the  Christian  retires,  by  a  momentary 
act  of  recollection,  into  his  own  mind,  and  there 
realizes  the  presence  of  God.  Then  he  launches 
one  short,  fervent  petition  into  the  ear  of  that 
awful  Presence,  throwing  his  whole  soul  into 
the  request.  And  lo !  it  is  done !  The  blessing 
descends,  prosecuted,  overtaken,  pierced,  fetched 
down  from  the  vault  of  heaven  by  the  winged 
arrow  of  prayer." — Goulburn, 

"  Ejaculations  take  not  up  any  room  in  the 
soul.  They  give  liberty  of  callings,  so  that  at 
the  same  instant  one  may  follow  his  proper 
vocation.  The  husbandman  may  dart  forth  an 
ejaculation,  and  not  make  a  balk  the  more.  The 
seaman,  nevertheless,  steers  his  ship  right  in  the 
darkest  night.  Yea,  the  soldier  at  the  same 
time  may  shoot  out  his  prayer  to  God,  and  aim 
his  pistol  at  his  enemy,  the  one  better  hitting 
the  mark  for  the  other.  The  field  wherein  bees 
feed  is  no  Avhit  the  barer  for  their  biting ;  when 
they  have  taken  their  full  repast  on  flower  or 
grass,  the  ox  may  feed,  the  sheep  fatten  on  their 
reversions.  The  reason  is,  because  those  little 
chemists  distil  only  the  refined  part  of  the  flower, 
leaving  the  grosser  substance  thereof.  So  ejacu- 
lations bind  not  men  to  any  bodily  observance, 
only  busy  the  spiritual  half,  which  makes  them 
consistent  with  the  prosecution  of  any  other 
employment." 

"  In  hard  havens,  so  choked  up  with  the 
envious  sands  that  great  ships  drawing  many 
feet  of  water  cannot  come  near,  lighter  and 
lesser  pinnaces  may  freely  and  safely  arrive. 
When  we  are  time-bound,  place-bound,  so  that 
we  cannot  compose  ourselves  to  make  a  large, 
solemn  prayer,  this  is  the  right  instant  for  ejacu- 
lations, whether  orally  uttered  or  only  poured 
forth  inwardly  in  the  heart." — Fuller. 


154 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   NEHEMIAH. 


[chap.  VI. 


Panic. 
tL  10 — 13.     Afterward  I  came  unto  the  house  of  Shemaiah,  &c. 


In  the  varying  romance  of  N'ehemiah's 
brave  struggle  with  difficulties  occurs  an 
instance  of  paniCy  or  of  what  might  have 
been  panic  to  a  less  steadfast  soul.  A 
man  was  shutting  himself  up  in  alarm — 
real  or  assumed — and  endeavoured  to 
persuade  Nehemiah  to  do  the  like,  to 
turn  the  temple  into  a  fortress,  and  to 
make  the  open  porch  of  God's  house  a 
shelter  for  merely  personal  fear.  But 
Nehemiah  (as  always)  was  ''  steadfast, 
unmoveable.'^  His  resolute,  fearless  ^'  I 
will  not  go  in  I "  settled  the  matter,  which 
after  all  turned  out  to  be  a  mere 
theatrical  scare,  got  up  to  order  in  the 
interest  of  Tobiah  and  Sanballat.  Panic 
is  our  subject  —  its  effect  and  its  cor- 
rectives. 

I.  Panic.  Originally  suggestive  of 
Pan^  the  god  of  the  woods.  To  ignorant 
men  the  deep  solemn  shades  of  the 
virgin  forests  were  fraught  with  awe,  and 
full  of  causes  for  sudden  alarm.  Un- 
reasoning, helpless  fright  is  tlie  idea. 
1.  National  ptanic.  A  people  suddenly 
exaggerating  a  state  danger,  and  acting 
in  a  way  to  be  sorry  for  afterwards.  2. 
Business  panic.  A  trading  community 
or  firm  scared  out  of  its  even  regularity 
into  some  wild  action.  3.  Personal 
panic.  Sudden  trouble  not  bravely  met 
with  a  breastplate  of  patience  and  a 
helmet  of  hope,  but  with  helpless  alarm. 
4.  Spiritual  panic.  Those  soul-shiver- 
ings  which  are  like  fits  in  religious  life. 
These  are  common  familiar  forms. 
Panic  is  commonly  groundless.  That  is, 
the  wave  is  not  so  high  as  it  seems  to 
the  retreating  bather,  who  hears  its  hiss 
behind  him.  No  man  is  so  bad  as 
sudden  indignation  paints  him,  and  few 
crises  in  man's  history  are  so  alarming 
as  to  the  alarmed  they  appear.  The 
downfall  of  the  state — the  end  of  the 
world — the  collapse  of  trade — the  ruin 
of  a  house — the  overthrow  of  good — 
these  are  often  only  scares. 

II.  The  effect  of  panic.  To  gather 
all  the  selfishness  of  man  to  a  focus  or 
to  substitute  a  brief  madness  for  calm 


thoughtfulness  and  decision.  1.  It 
makes  a  man  behave  unworthily  of  him- 
self. The  leader  shows  his  flying  form 
as  a  scoff  to  the  after-judgment  of  men. 
*'  Unsold ierly  conduct  in  presence  of  the 
enemy."  Shall  that  be  Sdid  of  the 
pillars  of  the  state,  or  of  the  strong 
support  of  the  home,  or  of  the  Christian 
soldier  in  his  discouraging  battle  with 
sini  Shall  Nehemiah  be  hidden  in 
some  corridor  of  God's  temple,  or  peep 
in  alarm  from  the  shut  window  of  Zion  % 
2.  It  makes  a  man  behave  unworthily 
toioard  his  felloios.  The  man  who 
tramples  upon  the  woman  in  a  burning 
theatre  ;  the  craven  who  sinks  the  boat 
which  might  have  saved  *'  all  hands  " 
in  his  eagerness  for  personal  security ; 
the  soldier  who  deserts  the  companions 
whom  he  might  have  helped  to  con- 
quest— these  are  all  exhibitions  of  the 
unlovely  possibilities  of  human  nature. 
Is  Nehemiah  to  imperil  the  Jews  by 
scrambling  for  a  place  a  sword-length 
away  from  danger  ?  3.  It  makes  a  man 
behave  unworthily  of  his  God.  Is  not 
God  FOR  the  hour  of  peril  ?  Am  I  to 
trust  in  Providence  up  to  the  dangerous 
moment,  and  then  become  my  own  provi- 
dence ?  Is  God's  house  to  be  a  robber's 
den  for  timorous  culprits  to  shelter 
in?  Let  a  man  die  in  God's  hands, 
not  "  fleeing  from  the  presence  of  the 
Lord." 

III.  The  correctives  of  panic. 
"  Prevention,  not  cure,"  is  the  motto. 
1 .  Remembrance  of  a  man's  oivn  dignity. 
*'  I  said,  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ? 
and  who  is  there,  that,  being  as  I  am, 
would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his 
life  %  I  will  not  go  in. "  For  a  man's 
self  to  fall  is  worse  than  to  fall  before  a 
foe.  Let  not  the  supreme  fear  be 
personal  fear,  "  fear  of  them  that  can 
kill  THE  •BODY."  Moral  degradation  is 
worse  than  physical  death.  2.  Remem- 
brance of  others.  Carry  the  alarms  of 
others  as  corrective  of  your  own.  Fear 
for  others,  lest  your  own  fear  become  too 
great.      Nehemiah    hears    the    cry    of 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:    NEHEMIAH. 


155 


helpless  Jews,  and  he  will  not  fly  and 
leave  them.  3.  Remembrance  of  God. 
Neheraiah's  book  shows  how  the  idea  of 
*' ?n?/  God'^  had  become  part  of  his 
mental  habit.  His  "  heart  was  fixed, 
trusting  in  the  Lord."  Eead  Ps.  xlvi. 
at  the  first  murmur  of  unworthy  alarm — 
"  God  is  our  refuge,"  &c.  The  iron 
nerve  of  Luther's  hymn  is  a  cry  to  turn 
the  tide  of  warring  fears.  Paul  is  serene 
in  the  danger  of  shipwreck — nay,  in  the 


certainty  of  it — ^because  of  the  forewarn- 
ing of  the  Angel  of  the  Lord,  **  whose  I 
am,  and  whom  I  serve."  That  "  Fear 
not,  Paul !  "  made  him  deaf  to  the  roar 
of  the  threatening  sea.  Cultivate  a 
habit  of  confidence  in  God.  Man's 
extremity  is  God's  opportunity. 

Application.  Keep  a  short  account 
with  conscience,  and  you  will  he  able  to 
make  small  account  of  panic. 


Lying  Prophets. 
vi.  10.     Afterward  I  came  unto  the  house  of  Shemaiah,  &c. 


"  Shemaiah  was  such  a  common  name 
among  the  Jews,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
identify  this  prophet  with  any  other 
person  of  his  name.  He  must,  how- 
ever, have  been  a  man  of  prominence, 
and  one,  too,  who  had  been  in 
Nehemiah's  confidence,  or  else  the 
attempt  would  never  have  been  made 
by  Tobiah  and  Sanballat  through  him. 
It  may  have  been  the  high  position  and 
reputation,  of  Shemaiah  that  led  the 
prophetess  Noadiah  and  the  rest  of  the 
prophets  (ver.  14)  into  the  false  dealings 
with  Nehemiah." — Dr.  Crosby. 

I.  Great  gifts  may  be  dissociated 
from  pure  life.  Shemaiah  lied.  The 
gift  of  God  in  Shemaiah,  Noadiah,  and 
the  rest  of  the  prophets  had  been  sold 
for  money.  Two  lists  of  prophets  may 
be  compiled  from  "  the  Book  "  —  the 
true,  the  false.  Of  the  latter — Balaam 
(Num.  xxiii.),  the  old  prophet  (1 
Kings  xiii.),  Zedekiah  and  the  rest  who 
seduced  Ahab  to  his  destruction  (1 
Kings  xxii.),  Hananiah  (Jer.  xxviii.). 
Character  is  primal  element  of  a  concep- 
tion of  true  prophet.  "  A  grace  does 
not  differ  from  a  gift  in  this,  that  the 
former  is  from  God,  and  the  latter  from 
nature.  As  a  creative  power  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  nature ;  all  is  God's.  A 
grace  is  that  which  has  in  it  some  moral 
quality  ;  whereas  a  gift  does  not  neces- 
sarily share  in  this.  Graces  are  what 
the  man  is;  but  enumerate  his  gifts, 
and  you  only  know  what  he  hasJ' — 
F.  W,  Robertson.  Gifts  are  sacred.  We 
speak  of  gifted  men  as  men  of  talent. 
That  word  talent  was  probably  borrowed 


from  our  Saviour's  parable  of  the  man 
who  was  travelling  into  a  far  country, 
who  called  his  servants  and  delivered 
unto  them  his  goods.  Unto  one  he  gave 
five  talents,  to  another  two,  and  to 
another  one  :  to  every  man  according  to 
his  several  ability,  and  straightway  took 
his  journey.  Unfortunately  gifts  may 
be  abused.  They  have  been  abused. 
They  have  been  used  as  instruments  of 
oppression.  And,  shuddering  at  their 
abuse,  Christian  people  have  often 
condemned  them  as  if  they  were  the 
devil's  gifts,  not  God's.  Now  this  course 
is  unwise ;  it  is  dangerous.  We  rob 
ourselves  of  so  much  power  by  re- 
fusing to  enlist  into  the  service  of  God 
whatever  is  good.  In  the  early  Church 
the  gifts  of  prophecy,  of  healing,  of 
miracles  were  abused.  St.  Paul  de- 
nounces the  abuse,  but  not  the  gift. 
On  the  contrary,  he  enumerates  them  ; 
he  states  their  relative  importance  ;  he 
calls  them  emphatically  ,9/)mY?^a?  (1  Cor. 
xii.,  xiv.).  The  gifts  of  our  age  are 
spiritual ;  the  talented  men  of  our  time 
are  inspired.  Knowledge  is  power,  but 
it  is  not  piety.  The  poets  of  ethereal 
intellects  have  not  always  been  men  of 
etherealized  lives. 

II.  Great  gifts  may  lead  to  deterior- 
ation of  character.  Shemaiah  had 
been  a  true  prophet,  whom  Nehemiah 
had  found  trustworthy.  The  hypocrite 
pays  unconscious  homage  to  virtue. 
Prophets  and  prophetess  had  gone  from 
bad  to  worse  through  Sanballat's  gold. 
The  qualifications  which  the  Jewish 
doctors    deemed    indispensable     to    a 


166 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[chap,  vl 


prophet  were  "  true  probity  and  piety." 
"  That  God  may  choose  of  men  whom  he 
pleaseth,  and  send  him,  it  matters  not 
whether   he    be    wise   and   learned,   or 
unlearned  and  unskilful,  old  or  young  ; 
only  that  this  is  required,  that  he  be 
a  virtuous,  good,  and  honest  man  ;  for 
hitherto  there  was  never  any  that  could 
say   that   God   did   cause    the   Divine 
majesty  to  dwell  in  a  vicious  person, 
unless  he  had  first  reformed  himself." 
— Maimonides.    The  "lying  spirit"  en- 
tered into  them  and  they  fell.     "  Now 
these  things  were  our  examples."     Use 
your  gifts,  not  display  them.     Be  not 
vain  of  them.     Has  God  given  thee  a 
clear  judgment,    penetration,  retentive 
memory,  or  an  eloquent  tongue,  thank 
him  by  cultivating  it.     Has  he  endowed 
thee  with  health,  thank  him  for  it  by 
preserving    it.       Has    he    given    thee 
mechanical   skill  or   business  aptitude, 
recognize  the  Giver  by  turning  it  to  best 
advantage.     As  God  has  appointed  to 
every  man  his  work,  so  he  has  given 
to  every  man  his  gift.     The  sacred  call 
of  duty  is  heard  along  all  the  ranks  of 
existence.       Let      not     the     humblest 
amongst  us  imagine  that  his  gifts  are 
unnecessary  or  valueless — they  are  his. 
The  drop  of  water  in  which  the  animal- 
culae  live  is  to  them  what  the  sea  is  to 
behemoth.     The  falling  leaf  is  as  great 
a  catastrophe  to  the  insect  that  feeds 
upon  it  as  is  a  burning  world  to  an 
angel.     Dost    thou    scorn     the     lesser 
gifted]     Bethink     thyself.     The     God 
who  endowed  thee  endowed  them;  the 
Spirit  who  inspired  thee  inspires  them. 
**  Who    maketh    thee    to    differ    from 
another?  and  what  hast  thou  that  thou 
didst  not  receive  1  "     Are  you  discon- 
tented with  your  gifts,  and  envious  of 
the  more  highly  endowed  1     Forget  not 
that  God  who  lights  the  sun  lights  the 
stars.     He  does  not  disown  the  meanest 
flower  that  blows.     The  seraph  nearest 
to   his  throne  does  not   cause  him   to 
forget  the  humblest  missionary  toiling  in 
some  island  of  the  Southern  Seas.     1. 
Accept    thy    position.     God,    who    has 
appointed  the  bounds  of  our  habitation, 
has  fixed  the  limits  of  our  power.     2. 
Cultivate  your  gifts.     Be  not  contented. 
Do  not  repine.     3.  Remember  that  gifts 


are  not  graces.  **  Though  I  speak  with 
the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  and 
have  not  charity,  I  am  become  as 
sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal. 
And  though  I  have  the  gift  of  prophecy, 
and  understand  all  mysteries,  and  all 
knowledge  ;  and  though  I  have  all  faith, 
so  that  I  could  remove  mountains,  and 
have  not  charity,  I  am  nothing."  The 
only  undying  faculties  are  the  affections ; 
the  only  permanent  work  is  that  we  do 
for  others. 

ILLUSTEATIONS. 

Ahab^s  lying  prophets  (1  Kings  xxii.).  "  Ahab 
consulted  all  his  false  prophets  as  to  whether  or 
not  he  should  go  to  attack  the  Syrians  at  Ramoth- 
Gilead.  They  knew  what  to  say ;  they  knew 
that  their  business  was  to  prophesy  what  would 
pay  them — what  would  be  pleasant  to  hira. 
They  did  not  care  whether  what  was  said  was 
true  or  not ;  they  lied  for  the  sake  of  gain,  for 
the  Lord  had  put  a  lying  spirit  into  their  mouths. 
They  were  rogues  and  villains  from  the  first. 
They  had  turned  prophets,  not  to  speak  God's 
truth,  but  to  make  money,  to  flatter  King  Ahab, 
to  get  themselves  a  reputation.  We  do  not  hear 
that  they  were  all  heathens.  Many  of  them  may 
have  believed  in  the  true  God.  But  they  were 
cheats  and  liars,  and  so  they  had  given  place  to 
the  devil,  the  father  of  lies ;  and  now  he  had 
taken  possession  of  them  in  spite  of  themselves, 
and  they  lied  to  Ahab,  and  told  hira  that  he 
would  prosper  in  the  battle  at  Ramoth-Gilead. 
It  was  a  dangerous  thing  for  them  to  say ;  for  if 
he  had  been  defeated,  and  returned  disappointed, 
his  rage  would  have  most  probably  fallen  on  them 
for  deceiving  him.  And  as  in  those  Eastern 
countries  kings  do  whatever  they  like,  without 
laws  or  parliaments,  Ahab  would  have  most 
likely  put  them  all  to  a  miserable  death  on  the 
spot.  But  however  dangerous  it  might  be  for 
them  to  lie,  they  could  not  help  lying.  A  spirit 
of  lies  had  seized  them,  and  they  who  began  by 
lying  because  it  paid  them,  now  could  not  help 
doing  so  whether  it  paid  them  or  not," 

Prophets  of  to-day  "  Do  not  fancy  that  there 
are  no  prophets  in  our  days,  unless  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  promised  to  all  who 
believe,  be  a  dream  and  a  lie.  There  are  pro- 
phets now-a-days — yea,  I  say  unto  you,  and 
more  than  prophets.  Is  not  the  Bible  a  prophet  .> 
Is  not  every  holy  and  wise  book,  every  holy  and 
wise  preacher  and  writer,  a  prophet,  expounding 
to  us  God's  laws,  foretelling  to  us  God's  opinions 
of  our  deeds,  both  good  and  evil }  Ay,  is  not 
every  man  a  prophet  to  himself.?  That  'still 
small  voice ' — is  not  that  a  prophecy  in  a  man's 
own  heart }  Truly  it  is.  It  is  the  voice  of  God 
within  us,  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  striving  with 
our  spirits,  whether  we  will  hear,  or  whether  we 
will  forbear— setting  before  us  what  is  righteous, 
and  noble,  and  pure,  and  what  is  manly  and 
godlike  ;  to  see  whether  we  will  obey  that  voice, 
or  whether  we  will  obey  our  own  selfish  lusts, 


CHAP.  VI.]  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  157 


^vrbich  tempt  us  to  please  ourselves— to  pamper  himself,  he  who  goes  to  the  Bible  full  of  sclf- 

ourselves,  our  (greediness,  covetousness,  ambition,  conceit  and  selfishness,  wanting  the  Bible  to  tell 

or  self-conceit.     And  if  you  ask  me  liow  to  try  him  only  just  what  he  likes  to  hear,  will  only 

the  spirits,   how   to   know   whether  your  own  find  it  a  sealed  book  to  him,  and  will  very  likely 

thoughts,  whether  the  sermons  which  you  hear,  wrest  the  Scriptures   to   his   own   destruction, 

the  books  which  you  read,  are  speaking  to  you  Take  up  your  Bible  humbly,  praying  to  God  to 

God's  truth,  or  some  lying  spirit's  falsehood,  I  show  you  its  meaning,  whether  it  be  pleasant  to 

can  only  answer  you,  '  To  the  law  and  to  the  you  or  not,  and  then  you  will  find  that  God  will 

testimony' — to   the  Bible;    if  they   speak  not  show  you  a  blessed  meaning  in  it ;  he  will  open 

according  to  that  word,  there  is  no  truth  in  them.  your  eyes,  that  you  may  understai^d  the  wondrous 

But  how  to  understand  the  Bible  ?  for  the  fleshly  things  of  his  law  ;  he  will  show  you  how  to  try 

man  understands  not  the  things  of  God.     The  the  spirit  of  all  you  are  taught,  and  to  find  out 

fleshly  man,  he  who  cares  only  about  pleasing  whether  it  comes  from  God." — Charles  Kingsley. 

Personal  Eesponsibility. 

vi.  11.     Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ? 

Character,  position,  recollection,  Nehemiah  opposed  to  ShemaiaVs  cowardly 
proposal.  Personal  responsibility  overpowered  all  considerations  of  expediency. 
Let  the  instance  suggest  the  wider  theme.  "  We  mortal  millions  dwell  alone." 
"  Every  one  of  us  shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God." 

I.  A  law  of  the  Divine  procedure.  God  has  not  dealt  with  men  in  the  mass. 
He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us.  1.  Law  implies  individual  responsibility.  The 
word  contains  the  idea  of  pointing  out,  directing,  leading ;  hence  a  rule  of  conduct. 
National  law  does  not  treat  men  as  a  society,  but  as  a  mass  of  responsible  units. 
All  our  jurisprudence  is  based  on  this.  The  Bible  axiom  that  every  man  shall 
give  account  of  himself  has  been  brought  into  the  sphere  of  political  life.  Moral 
law  rests  on  the  same  foundation.  Its  violation  is  sin  ;  its  honour  is  righteousness. 
In  this  none  can  be  surety  for  his  brother.  Laws  are  for  the  safe-conduct  of 
individual  lives.  The  general  good  is  contained  in  that  of  the  individual.  The 
true  communism  is  not  that  which  would  adopt  the  impossible  expedient  of 
dividing  to  all  alike,  but  that  which  shall  secure  to  every  individual  the  scope  for 
working  out  his  responsibility  as  a  man,  a  citizen,  and  a  Christian.  2.  The  history 
of  God's  dealings  is  in  harmony  with  this.  Angels — so  far  as  the  Bible  and 
analogy  lead  us  to  infer — are  subject  to  a  similar  moral  government.  They  had 
their  testing-time.  They  stood  in  probation  as  individuals.  The  most  exalted 
spirits  in  the  universe  are  amenable  to  God.  There  can  be  only  one  Supreme. 
They  fell  as  individuals.     Satan  is  distinctive. 

"He,  above  the  rest 
In  shape  and  gesture  proudly  eminent, 
Stood  like  a  tower  ;  his  form  had  not  yet  lost 
All  her  original  brightness,  nor  appeared 
Less  than  archangel  ruined." 

But  they  were  all  *' fellows  of  his  crime."  He  only  "  led  the  embattled  seraphim 
to  war."  "His  angels  were  cast  out  with  him."  They  are  "the  angels  that 
sinned."     "  By  ambition  fell  the  angels." 

"  Of  their  names  in  heavenly  records  now 
Be  no  memorial,  blotted  out  and  razed 
By  their  rebellion  from  the  book  of  life." 

The  rest  stand  as  individuals  having  kept  their  first  estate.  Their  past  faithfulness 
insures  the  future.  Michael,  Gabriel,  Uriel,  the  Prince,  the  Archangel,  whether  they 
are  personal,  or  like  thrones,  dominions,  principalities,  and  powers,  representative 
of  ranks,  are  distinctive.  For  if  not  inlividual  in  themselves,  they  represent  the 
ministry  and  defence  of  the  angels.  Nations.  The  Israelites  were  elected  as  a 
nation ;   but  they  fell  as  individuals.     One  terrible  verse  sums  up  all.     "  Their 


168  aOMlLETia  QOMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH,  [chap,  vi 


carcasea  fell  in  the  wilderness."  History  confirms  this.  When  honour  is  lost  in 
public  men,  when  domestic  ties  are  violated,  nations  fall.  A  man's  great  enemy- 
is  himself ;  a  nation's  great  enemy  is  itself.  Truth  and  justice,  law  and  order,  the 
bond  of  a  nation.  The  enemy  without  does  not  knock  at  the  gates  for  admission 
until  the  enemy  within  has  prepared  the  way  for  conquest.  Churches.  The 
Churches  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  are  typical.  There  is  a  common  danger. 
"  He  that  overcometh ! "  belongs  to  Smyrna  and  Pergamos,  to  Ephesus  and 
Sardis,  to  Philadelphia,  Thyatira,  and  Laodicea.  But  right  and  wrong  are  not 
massed.  l5eclension,  false  doctrine,  seduction,  semblance,  are  severally  con- 
demned. Hatred  of  evil,  whether  in  doctrine  or  conduct,  endurance,  adherence 
to  truth,  charity,  undefiledness,  are  severally  praised.  So  with  individual  lives. 
The  stern-souled  prophet  and  the  confiding  Mary ;  the  martyr  Stephen  and  the 
traitor  Judas ;  the  impressible  Herod  and  the  unmoved  Baptist ;  the  faithful 
James  and  the  faithless  Peter :  each  stood  alone — alone  in  relation  to  God,  alone 
in  relation  to  duty.  3.  Christianity  recognizes  personal  responsibility.  Christ 
dealt  with  men  as  individuals.  In  his  teaching,  miracles,  sympathies.  One 
woman  elicited  his  best  teaching ;  one  family  found  his  great  love ;  one  widow 
sufficient  to  move  his  miraculous  arm.  Acceptance  of  Christianity  personal. 
Repentance,  faith,  forgiveness.  Exhibition  of  Christianity  personal.  Cross-bear- 
ing, truth-speaking,  forgiveness,  humility,  unselfishness,  generosity,  work.  The 
Church  is  a  body  fitly  joined  together.     Every  man  hath  his  proper  gift  of  God. 

II.  A  fact  in  hmnan  experience.  As  every  leaf  among  the  myriad  leaves  of 
the  forest  is  governed  by  the  laws  of  growth,  and  yet  in  its  conformation  is  distinct, 
so  every  man  is  subject  to  the  general  laws  of  Divine  procedure  and  the  special 
which  apply  only  to  himself,  ^o  two  men  are  exactly  alike  in  character  or  cir- 
cumstances. 1.  JResponsibility.  Each  is  required  to  work  out  his  destiny.  The 
foundation  of  a  noble  life  is  Christ,  but  every  man  must  take  heed  how  he  buildeth 
thereupon.  Alone  each  must  return  his  Lord's  money.  Every  one  will  be  brought 
unto  hiuL  It  will  not  be  important  how  much  we  return,  but  what  is  the  measure 
of  increase.  If  to  the  two  talents  by  wise  use  of  opportunities  we  add  other  two, 
we  shall  receive  the  same  commendation  as  those  who  to  the  five  talents  add  other 
five.  2.  Mystery.  There  is  a  strange  mixture  of  good  and  evil  in  us.  Our  feet 
stand  on  the  earth  and.  our  head  points  toward  heaven,  as  if  significant  of  our 
heavenly  aspirations  and  earthly  tendencies.  We  can  talk  of  the  beauty  of  virtue 
whilst  deliberately  indulging  in  vice.  Pilate-like,  we  can  wash  our  hands  in 
aff'ected  innocency  whilst  the  guilt  of  blood  rests  upon  us.  A  business  loss,  a 
bereavement,  a  change  in  circumstances,  and  all  a  man's  fine  talk  about  superiority 
to  circumstances,  the  vanity  of  riches,  and  futility  of  earthly  things  avails  nothing. 
The  mystery  of  the  future  is  sometimes  agonizing.  3.  Guilt.  We  cannot  shift 
upon  the  first  sinner  the  guilt  of  our  iniquity.  "  My  sin  is  ever  before  me  "  is  the 
wail  of  every  kingly  soul.  Nor  can  we  cast  our  guilt  upon  circumstances.  No 
man  is  forced  to  violate  his  conscience.  Where  there  is  no  will  there  is  no  guilt. 
A  man  must  rule  his  circumstances,  not  be  ruled  by  them.  4.  Faith.  Creeds 
and  Churches  will  not  save  us.  They  presuppose  our  salvation.  The  reason  why 
the  faith  of  so  many  is  feeble  is  that  they  have  never  tested  it.  It  is  an  unproved 
armour,  and  when  the  hour  comes  to  encounter  Goliath  they  are  afraid.  Every 
man  must  come  into  contact  with  God.  "  0  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good." 
One  real  wrestle  with  God  will  teach  more  about  prayer  than  a  treatise  on  it. 
Faith  in  God  in  an  hour  of  real  danger  better  explains  it  than  a  sermon  on  its 
philosophy.  "  Search  the  Scriptures."  "  Prove  all  things,"  that  you  may  "  hold 
fast  that  which  is  good."  5.  Temptation.  From  this  there  can  be  no  escape. 
Were  we  able  to  say  as  Christ  did,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath 
nothing  in  me,"  temptation  would  be  powerless.  Not  here,  but  yonder,  will  the 
sons  of  God  present  themselves  before  the  Lord  and  Satan  not  come  among  them. 
6.  SojTOW.     "  The  heart  knoweth  his  own  bitterness." 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETIQ  Q0MMENTAR7:  NEHEMIAH. 


159 


III.  A  prophecy  of  destiny.  1 .  What  a  man  is  now,  that  he  will  he  here- 
after. God  will  judge  every  man  according  to  his  works,  as  these  are  the 
evidences  of  the  man.  Heaven  may  be  a  chansje  of  locality  and  circumstances, 
but  not  character.  This  is  indestructible.  2.  Tliere  is  no  injustice,  because  each 
man  is  judged.  To  one  he  gives  five  talents,  to  another  two,  and  to  another  one ; 
to  every  man  according  to  his  several  ability ;  and  he  will  expect  a  proportionate 
return.  The  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  is  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal. 
Unto  every  one  of  us  is  given  grace.  God  is  not  a  hard  master,  reaping  where  he 
has  not  sown,  and  gathering  where  he  has  not  strawed.  3.  We  are  now  fuelling 
the  revealing  fire — a  fire  that  shall  try  every  mavUs  work  of  what  sort  it  is.  Nothing 
ends  in  this  world.  Thoughts  become  incarnated  as  soon  as  we  express  them. 
Words  live  in  those  who  hear  us.  Deeds  have  an  undying  influence.  God  will 
gather  up  the  fragments  of  our  daily  lives,  that  nothing  be  lost.  And  the  day 
shall  declare  every  man's  work. 


Selp-Respect. 

vi.  11.     Should  such  a  man  as  I  fiee?  and  who  is  there,  that,  being  as  I  am, 
would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his  life  ?    /  will  not  go  in. 


Nehemiah  would  not  run  away,  be- 
cause he  could  not  fancy  himself  doing 
anything  of  that  sort.  *'  Should  such  a 
man  as  I  flee  r'  Our  theme  then  is 
self-respect.  Eeligion,  though  it  brings 
with  it  humility, — an  WTznatural  grace  of 
character,  an  exotic  from  the  gardens 
of  the  skies  planted  on  earth  by  Divine 
hands, — though  religion  induces  humil- 
ity, it  promotes  self-respect.  The  eighth 
Psalm  teaches  not  merely  the  littleness 
of  man,  but  his  greatness.  Throughout 
the  book  of  Nehemiah  the  Jewish  patriot 
is  not  wanting  in  manly  self-respect. 

I.  The  ground  of  self-respect.  1. 
False  grounds,  (a)  Money.  The  vul- 
garest  form  of  human  conceit.  To  be  a 
money-bag,  and  nothing  else  !  (b)  Birth. 
A  by  no  means  contemptible  ground,  if 
the  greatness  from  which  a  man  is  born 
is  bred  into  his  own  character,  (c) 
Intelligence.  Too  frequently  a  reason 
for  the  smallest  vanity.  Vanities  of 
auiliors  and  pride  of  bookmen,  (d) 
Office  and  association.  These  are  no 
necessary  reasons  for  self-pluming,  but 
may  be  the  merest  accidents.  2.  True 
grounds.  Moral  worth.  Personal  noble- 
ness and  sincerity  of  character  and  life. 
Under  the  eye  of  God,  and  in  view  of  a 
Christian  relation  to  God,  a  man  may 
stand  upright  before  the  world,  (a) 
Sonship  with  God.  "That  we  should 
be  called  the  sons  of  God  "  is  a  ground 
for  dignity — to  be  of  the  inner  elect 
family  of   God.     (5)  Brotherhood  with 


the  good.  To  be  in  the  bead-roll  of 
that  long  line  of  Divine  heroes  of  all 
ages  —  following,  but  not  with  equal 
steps — that  stirs  the  blood.  "  Brothers, 
we  are  treading  where  the  saints  have 
trod."  (o)  Service  in  righteousness.  The 
great  cause  of  God  gives  dignity  to  the 
meanest  servant.  "I  had  rather  be  a 
doorkeeper,"  &c.  {d)  Heirship  with  the 
skies.  The  celestial  expectations  of  the 
good  give  grandeur  to  their  earthly 
being. 
II.   The  influence  of  self-respect. 

1.  Negatively,  (a)  Not  i^e^^y,  strutting 
pride.  "  Not  I,  but  Jesus  Christ  that 
dwelleth  in  me."  The  dignity  of  the 
child  of  God — in  its  possessions  and 
honours  and  hopes — is  too  tremendous 
to  be  proud  of.  (b)  Not  contempt  of 
others.  "  He  that  is  greatest  among 
you,  let  him  be  your  servant."  Jesus 
has  a  name  above  every  name,  because 
"he  took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant." 

2.  Positively,  (a)  The  effect  of  self-re- 
spect in  duty.  To  exalt  all  duty  into 
the  sublime,  and  to  do  it,  beyond  all  its 
temporal  and  transitory  purposes,  "as 
unto  the  Lord."  (b)  In  temptation. 
To  make  sin  beneath  a  man.  *'  He 
cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born  of  God  " 
—  as  a  spotless  Washington  "cannot 
lie."  Joseph's  indignant  "  How  can  I 
do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin  against 
God?"  (c)  In  trouble.  It  prevents  a 
man  becoming  unworthy  of  himself. 
"  I  know  how  to  be  abased"    "  If  thou 


160  BOMILETIO  GOMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


[OHAP.  VI. 


faint  in  the  day  of  adversity,  thy  strength 
is  small."  In  worldly  scenes  and  senses 
pride  is  a  great  restrainer  of  weakness. 
*'  Burning  pride  and  liigh  disdain  for- 
bad the  rising  tear  to  flow."  So  in  the 
spiritual  life  the  man  of  God  chides  his 
trembling  soul :  "  Why  art  thou  cast 
down,  0  my  soul  % " 


Application.  Know  thyself/  1.  A 
child  of  God,  Are  you  a  child  of  God  ? 
2.  Then  rightly  view  the  dignity  of  your 
being.  On  the  hwnian  side,  a  vessel  of 
clay,  brief  in  life,  weak  in  powers, 
limited  by  worldly  accidents  ;  but  on 
the  Godward  side,  an  heir  of  God  and 
a  joint  heir  with  Christ. 


Christian  Firmness. 

<ri.  11.     And  I  said,  Should  such  a  man  as  1  flee  1  and  who  is  there,  that,  being  as 
I  am,  would  go  info  the  temple  to  save  his  life  1     I  will  not  go  in. 


Whoever  examines  the  character  of 
the  primitive  saints  will  see  how  religion 
dignifies  and  ennobles  the  mind  of  man. 
Nehomiah  had  engaged  in  an  arduous 
work.  In  this  he  was  opposed.  From 
Shemaiah,  a  prophet,  he  might  have 
expected  better  things. 

I.  The  subtlety  with  which  our 
great  adversary  will  assault  us.  How 
specious  was  the  proposal  made  to  Nehe- 
miah.  Our  adversary  will  propose  to 
us — 1.  To  neglect  our  social  duties  to 
further  our  sjdritual  welfare.  A  com- 
mon temptation  and  specious.  Apprentice 
and  servant  neglecting  duty  to  attend 
religious  ordinances.  "  Those  ought  ye 
to  have  done,  and  not  to  leave  the  other 
undone."  2.  To  conform  to  the  world, 
with  a  view  to  conciliate  their  regard. 
By  conforming  to  the  world  we  shall 
confirm  them  in  their  persuasion,  that 
religion  does  not  require  that  measure 
of  spirituality  which  the  saints  of  old 
maintained.  3.  To  use  undue  means 
with  a  view  to  obtain  some  desirable  end. 
Safety  M'as  desirable  to  Nehemiah,  but 
secretion  not  a  desirable  way  to  o1)tain 
it.  Many  objects  are  desirable,  but 
must  not  be  sought  by  any  sacrifice  of 


duty  or  conscience.  The  greater  the 
subtlety  of  Satan  is,  the  greater  should 
be  our  vigilance,  and  the  more  immov- 
able. 

II.  The  firmness  with  which  we 
should  resist  him.  "  Shall  such  a  man 
as  I  flee — a  man  invested  with  authority, 
a  man  engaged  for  the  Lord,  a  man  in 
whom  any  act  of  cowardice  will  be  pro- 
ductive of  injurious  efiects*?"  Thus 
should  we  set  the  Lord  ever  before  us, 
bearing  fully  in  mind — 1.  Our  relation 
to  him.  A  servant  of  the  living  God. 
A  child  of  the  Father  in  heaven.  My 
calling.  2.  Our  obligaiions  to  him. 
Shall  I  offend  Godl  I  will  render  unto 
the  Lord  according  to  the  benefits  he 
has  conferred  upon  me.  3.  Our  expect- 
ations from  him.  For  eternity  I  have 
been  redeemed,  sanctified;  and  for 
eternity  alone  will  I  both  live  and  die. 
4.  The  interest  which  God  himself  has 
in  the  whole  of  our  conduct.  God's 
enemies  endeavour  to  beguile  us,  in 
Older  that  they  may  triumph  over  us 
and  exult  in  our  shame.  On  review  of 
the  subject — 1.  Expect  temptation.  2. 
In  every  circumstance  place  your  entire 
confidence  in  God. — Simeon,  abridged. 


Human  Prescience 


vi.  12.     And,  lo,  I  perceived  that  God  had  not  sent  him. 


"  Because,"  says  Gill,  "  he  advised  to 
that  which  was  against  the  cause  of 
God  and  true  religion."  That  helped 
Nehemiah  to  discern  Shemaiah's  trea- 
chery 'y  but  was  that  all '?  The  treachery 
was   not    yet    discovered.     Afterwards 


Nehemiah  learned  that  **  Tobiah  and 
Sanballat  had  hired  him."  Is  there  not 
a  spirit  in  man — a  spirit  of  divination  ] 
What  do  observation  and  experience 
teach  %  Are  not  men  and  women 
continually  sitting  in  judgment  upon  one 


^tlAT.    VI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH, 


161 


another  1  "  To  two  states  of  soul  it  is 
given  to  detect  the  presence  of  evil, 
states  the  opposite  of  each  otlier — 
innocence  and  guilt.  It  was  predicted 
of  the  Saviour  while  yet  a  child  tliat  by 
him  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  ^]lould 
be  revealed ;  the  fulfilment  of  this  was 
the  history  of  his  life.  He  went  through 
the  world,  by  his  innate  purity  detecting 
the  presence  of  evil,  as  he  detected  the 
touch  of  her  who  touched  his  garment  in 
the  crov^d.  Men,  supposed  spotless 
before,  fell  down  before  him  crying, 
'Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man, 
O  Lord  ! '  This  in  a  lower  degree  is 
true  of  all  innocence.  You  would  think 
that  one  who  can  deeply  read  the  human 
heart  and  track  its  windings  must  be 
himself  deeply  experienced  in  evil.  But 
it  is  not  so  —  at  least  not  always. 
Puril}'^  can  detect  the  presence  of  the 
evil  which  it  does  not  understand.  Just 
as  the  dove  which  has  never  seen  a 
hawk  trembles  at  its  pr«^sence,  and 
just  as  a  horse  rears  uneasily  when  the 
wild  beast  unknown  and  new  to  it  is 
near,  so  innocence  understands,  yet 
understands  not,  the  meaning  of  the 
unholy  look,  the  guilty  tone,  the  sinful 
manner.  It  shudders  and  shrinks  from 
it  by  a  power  given  to  it,  like  that  which 
God  has  conferred  on  the  unreasoning 
mimosa.  Sin  gives  the  same  power,  but 
differently.  Innocence  appiehends  the 
approach  of  evil  by  the  instinctive  tact 
of  contrast ;  guilt  by  the  instinctive 
consciousness  of  similarity."  —  F.  W. 
Robertson.  Faces  never  lie,  it  is  said. 
Falsehood  has  not  a  clear,  calm  gaze. 
The  grosser  vices  leace  flieir  mar^i  upon 
the  countenance.  The  drunkard,  the 
libertine,  the  deceiver  write  the  story 
of  their  lives  upon  the  fleshly  table  of  the 


body.  The  laws  of  God  are  written  in 
the  nature  of  things  as  well  as  in  the 
Scripture  of  truth.  Mahomet  said, 
"  Paradise  is  under  the  shadow  of 
swords."  All  men  pay  the  penalty  of 
their  position.  A  good  gained,  an  ill 
averted,  must  reckon  with  the  sweat  of 
the  brow  or  the  sweat  of  the  brain. 
Wise  men,  who  are  they  but  the  far- 
seeing,  the  foresighted?  As  those  chil- 
dren of  Issachar  to  whom  is  given 
honourable  mention,  as  being  "men  that 
had  understanding  of  the  times  to  know 
what  Israel  ought  to  do  "  (1  Chron.  xii. 
32).  Nehemiah  "saw  through"  She- 
maiah.  It  needed  no  miracle  to  reveal 
his  fraud. 

Learn — I.  The  supreme  importance 
of  truth  and  uprightness.  The  Bible 
revelation  does  not  make  truth,  truth  ; 
falsehood,  falsehood ;  it  only  declares 
what  they  are.  Close  your  Bible,  and 
still  deception  wiU  bring  disgrace,  dis- 
honesty will  not  be  the  best  policy, 
judgment  will  track  the  wrong-doer. 
"  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out "  is 
written  in  history  and  biography. 

See — II.  An  evidence  of  the  Bible. 
The  book  does  not  stand  alone.  The 
heavens  above  and  the  earth  beneath, 
the  nature  and  constitution  of  man, 
confirm  its  truth. 

Mark — III.  Confirmation  of  the  doc- 
trine of  a  judgment  to  come.  Men 
are  being  judged.  A  book  of  remem- 
brance each  of  us  is  writing.  In  the 
failure  of  falsehood  and  deception,  in 
the  discovery  and  condemnation  of  every 
unrighteous  compact,  in  the  fall  of 
dynasties  resting  upon  oppression  and 
bloodshed,  in  the  histories  recorded  by 
the  daily  press,  see  you  not  premonition 
of  a  day  of  judgment  % 


Bribery. 


vi.  13.  Therefore  was  he  hired,  that  I  should  be  afraid,  and  do  so,  and  sin,  and 
that  they  might  have  matter  for  an  evil  report,  that  they  might  reproach  me. 

In  this  paragraph  Nehemiah    dwells  exalted  into  the  originals  of  mischief  in 

upon  the  hirelings  who  were  paid  to  do  contrast  with  the  ready  agents  who  did 

nim  mischief.     The  wrong-doer  becomes  the  mischief  for  money.     Bribery. 

dignified  by  association  with  his  petty  I.     Its    existence    and    varieties, 

tools,    and   Tobiah    and    Sanballat   are  Among  heathen  states  and  in  the  godless 

M 


162 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  NEUEMIAH. 


f  CHAP.  VI. 


associations  of  the  world  this  guilt  is  not 
unnatural,  but  alas  for  its  commonness 
in  Christian  times.  From  Judas,  who 
took  the  bribe  of  thirty  pieces  of  silver, 
down  to  the  last  transaction  of  the  kind 
yesterday,  the  world  is  full  of  it.  1 .  In 
statecraft.  This  golden  key  finds  the 
wards  of  more  locks  than  we  know  of; 
it  buys  eloquence  in  debate,  and  logic 
in  the  newspapers,  and  valour  or 
cowardice  in  the  field.  2.  In  tj^ade. 
Talk  to  any  business  man  about  his 
particular  avocations,  and  get  him  into 
the  anecdotal  strain,  and  you  will  find 
out  among  what  snares  an  honourable 
man  is  compelled  to  walk  day  by  day. 
Tlie  business  man  has  to  battle  every- 
where with  an  underground  foe.  3.  In 
morals  and  religion.  For  fear  of  seeming 
cynicism  let  us  .not  pursue  this  theme. 
But  the  purchase  system  has  no  respect 
for  sacred  things,  and  the  modern  temple, 
like  the  ancient  temple,  has  its  herd  of 
traffickers,  which,  if  driven  out  with  a 
whip  of  cords,  would  leave  the  Church  of 
God  purer  and  the  homes  of  England 
safer.  In  Nehemiah's  case  the  prophets 
were  bought,  and  the  so-called  messengers 
of  God  were,  Balaam-like,  guided  not  by 
a  star  from  heaven,  but  by  the  glitter  of 
golden  coins. 

II.  Its  effects.  1.  Personal  degrad- 
ation. To  buy  a  man  in  a  slave-market 
is  to  make  him  but  half  a  man  ;  but  to 
buy  a  man's  soul  in  a  conscience-market 
is  to  degrade  him  from  manhood  alto- 
gether, "  for  in  the  image  of  God  njade 
he  man."  To  buy  from  some  poor  man 
his  birthright  of  honour,  to  take  away 
a  man's   Christ  and  leave  him  thirty 


pieces  of  silver  as  an  equivalent — that  is 
devil's  work  in  the  doer,  and  it  is  damn- 
ation in  him  in  whom  the  thing  is  done. 
2.  General  disorganization.  The  great 
laws  of  this  world  are  just,  and  all 
departure  from  them  must  work  down- 
fall. Violation  of  the  laws  of  health  is 
a  wandering  towards  death.  Corruption 
and  jobbing  in  the  state  means  rottenness 
and  downfall  of  a  nation.  Bribery  in 
trade  is  "  a  missing  of  the  mark,"  a  sin 
against  the  true  end  of  trade,  and  its 
revenge  is  sure.  3.  Hindrance  of  all 
good.  The  Aclian  gold-ingot  in  the 
tent  makes  God's  army  of  righteousness 
weak.  "  Neither  will  I  be  with  you 
any  more,  except  ye  destroy  the  accursed 
from  among  you." 

III.  Its  cure.  1.  The  first  ingredient 
of  the  cure  is  self-denial.  "  They  all  do 
it "  is  no  matter ;  you  had  better  not. 
We  can  only  win  in  this  fight  by  having 
the  courage  to  lose  (1  Sam.  xii.  2 — 5)» 
2.  The  second  is  resolute  unmercifulness 
to  the  hriher.  For  the  good  of  the 
community  and  the  glory  of  God  let 
the  briber's  head  be  stuck  on  a  pole.  3. 
The  third  is  trust  in  God  and  faith  in 
right.  God  is  strong,  and  if  we  will 
honour  him.  he  will  honour  us.  He  that 
sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  at  the 
petty  power  of  bribery.  ''  Great  is  truth, 
and  shall  prevail,"  is  not  a  motto  to  be 
illuminated  on  a  card,  but  to  be  illus- 
trated in  a  life. 

Application.  "  Seek  first  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  his  righteousness." 
Let  that  be  the  guiding  law  of  life  and 
have  faith  in  its  success,  and  it  shall 
succeed. 


Fifty-two  Days'  Work. 
vi  15.  So  the  wall  was  finished  in  fifty  and  two  days. 


To  draw  a  circumference  of  fortifica- 
tions of  such  dimensions  in  such  short 
time  was  no  doubt  a  great  engineering 
feat.  The  pluck,  decision,  promptness, 
and  laborious  industry  and  despatch  of 
such  a  task  are  very  stimulating  to  read 
of.  Let  us,  however,  make  a  jxxrable  of 
the  story,  and  use  the  text  as  a  motto  of 
a  deeper  theme.  The  circling  year  furn- 
ishes us  with  fifty-two  days  of  special 


work  for  God.  The  wall-building  of 
Christian  Nehemiahs  in  the  spiritual 
city  of  God  is  mainly  done  on  Sundays, 
of  which  the  year  supplies  fifty-two  or 
thereabouts.  Of  that  fifty -two  days  and 
of  their  work  let  us  speak.  Fifty-two 
Sundays. 

I.  How  quickly  they  pass !  To  a 
child  how  slow  the  movement  from 
Sunday  to  Sunday — what  a   space  in 


OHAP.   VI.] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


163 


the  great  time-field  !  But  to  a  worn, 
worried,  work-wearied  man  a  week  is 
but  a  quick  flash  of  days,  "  swifter  than 
a  weaver's  shuttle."  Monday  with  its 
yawnings  and  stretchings,  Tuesday  with 
its  markets,  Wednesday  with  its  solid 
tasks,  Thursday  with  its  deeper  toil, 
Friday  with  its  haste  **  to  get  it  done," 
Saturday  with  its  summing  up  and  its 
payments,  and  then  the  Sabbath  bell 
and  all  the  associations  of  the  house 
of  God.  It  is  a  quick  passage  from 
Sunday  to  Sunday.  We  soon  round  a 
circle  of  fifty-two.  The^r^^  Sunday  of 
she  year,  with  its  cheery,  greeting  sermon 
of  hope,  and  then  in  a  little  while  the 
last  Sunday,  with  its  solemn  review  and 
reflection.  It  soon  goes,  this  year  of 
Sundays.  1.  How  many  circles  have 
you  passed  ?  2.  How  many  more  do  you 
look  for  ? 

II.  What  opportunities  they  furnish! 
1.  What  opportunities  of  rest  !  The 
glory  of  the  Sabbath  as  a  rest  day,  the 
pillow  of  the  work-wearied  world.  The 
RIGHTS  of  MAN  in  this  matter.  2.  What 
opportunities  of  spiritual  friendship! 
The  Sabbath  a  great  holiday  and  reunion 
of  kindred  hearts.  The  gathering  of 
the  brotherhood  of  Christians  in  their 
souls'  home.  3.  What  opportunities  of 
Divine  instruction  1    The  lessons  rubbed 


off"  the  slate  during  the  week,  or  rubbed 
into  indefinite  blurs ;  the  new  writing  of 
God's  word  on  the  tablets  of  the  heart. 
4.  WTiat  opportunities  of  moral  renewal ! 
The  religious  recreative  power  of  Sab- 
bath thoughts  and  engagements.  5. 
What  opportunities  of  refreshing  hope  ! 
God's  promises  breaking  like  stars  upon 
the  soul  escaped  from  the  glare  of  the 
world's  gas -lamps.  God's  heaven  de- 
scending upon  the  eye  of  meditation, 
like  the  New  Jerusalem  which  John  saw. 
End  your  Sabbath  with  St.  John's  vision 
at  the  close  of  Eevelation.  Fifty-two 
Sundays  I  what  golden  coins  from  God's 
mint. 

III.  What  results  they  leave  \  \.  In 
memory,  (a)  Truths  taught,  (b)  Me- 
mories cherished.  2.  In  life,  (a)  If 
improved.  Growing  Christian  character 
— another  ring  of  fortification  against 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  (b) 
If  unimproved.  A  hardening  of  the 
moral  sense,  a  deadening  of  the  power  of 
truth,  a  deepening  of  the  fatal  work  of 
worldliness.  3.  For  judgment.  (a) 
Condemnation,  if  abused,  (b)  Safety,  if 
used. 

Application.  1.  Thank  God  for  the 
day  of  days.  2.  Use  each  day  as  it 
comes.  3.  Determine  upon  a  rounded 
result  far  each  cycle  of  fifty-two. 


The  Godwaed  Side  of  Things. 
vi.  16.     They  perceived  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  our  God, 


An  outer  and  an  inner  view.  "  They 
all  made  us  afraid,  saying,  TTieir  hands 
shall  be  weakened  from  the  work,  that  it 
be  not  done  "  (ver.  9).  The  work  went 
on ;  the  wall  was  finished.  "  And  it 
came  to  pass,  that  when  all  our  enemies 
heard  thereof,  and  all  the  heathen  that 
were  about  us  saw  these  things,  they 
were  much  cast  down  in  their  own  eyes : 
for  they  perceived  that  this  loork  was 
torought  of  our  God"  (ver.  16).  There 
is  an  upper  and  an  under  side  to  many 
things.  Work  man-ward  or  work  God- 
ward. 

I.  Work  Divinely  inspired.  "  The 
good  hand  of  God  that  was  upon  him," 
Nehemiah  is  never  tired  of  recognizing. 
"  I  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  saying, 


Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  wUl  go  for 
us  %  Then  said  I,  Here  am  I ;  send  me." 
— Isaiah.  **The  word  of  the  Lord  came 
unto  me,  saying,  I  have  ordained  thee  a 
prophet  unto  the  nations.  Then  said  I, 
Ah,  Lord  God  !  behold,  I  cannot  speak  : 
for  I  am  a  child.  But  the  Lord  said 
unto  me.  Say  not,  I  am  a  cMld  :  for 
thou  shalt  go  to  aU  that  I  shall  send 
thee,  and  whatsoever  I  command  thee 
thou  shalt  speak." — Jeremiah.  **  I  was 
no  prophet,  neither  was  I  a  prophet's 
son ;  but  I  was  an  herdman,  and  a 
gatherer  of  sycamore  fruit :  and  the 
Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock, 
and  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Go,  prophesy 
unto  my  people  Israel." — Amos.  "I 
must  work  the  works  of  him  tliat  sent 


M  2 


164 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTAMY:  NEHEMIAB, 


[chap.  VI. 


me."  *'  As  my  Fatlier  hath  sent  me, 
even  so  send  I  you." — Jesus.  "The 
Lord  spake  to  Paul  in  the  night  by  a 
vision,  Be  not  afraid,  but  speak,  and 
hold  not  thy  peace." — Acts  of  Apostles. 
"  I  was  in  the  Spirit,  and  heard  behind 
me  a  great  voice,  saying.  What  thou 
seest,  write." — St.  John.  More  to  the 
same  tune  and  words  in  biography  of 
martyr  and  missionary  saint  and  apostle 
of  modern  times.  "  These  great  master 
spirits  of  the  world  are  not  so  much 
distinguished,  after  all,  by  the  acts  they 
do,  as  by  the  sense  itself  of  some 
mysterious  girding  of  the  Almighty 
upon  them,  whose  behests  they  are  set 
on  to  fulfil.  And  all  men  may  have 
this ;  for  the  humblest  and  commonest 
have  a  place  and  a  work  assigned  them, 
in  the  same  manner,  and  have  it  for 
their  privilege  to  be  always  ennobled  in 
the  same  lofty  consciousness.  God  is 
girding  every  man  for  a  place  and  a 
calling."  "  Every  human  soul  has  a 
complete  and  perfect  plan  cherished 
for  it  in  the  heart  of  God — a  Divine 
biography  marked  out,  which  it  enters 
into  life  to  live.  This  life,  rightly 
unfolded,  will  be  a  complete  and  beau- 
tiful whole ;  an  experience  led  on  by 
God  and  unfolded  by  his  secret  nurture, 
as  the  trees  and  the  flowers  by  the 
secret  nurture  of  the  world;  a  drama 
cast  in  the  mould  of  a  perfect  art,  with 
no  part  wanting;  a  Divine  study  for  the 
man  himself,  and  for  others — a  study 
that  shall  for  ever  unfold,  in  wondrous 
beauty,  the  love  and  faithfulness  of 
God  ;  great  in  its  conception,  great  in 
the  Divine  skill  by  which  it  is  shaped  ; 
above  all,  great  in  the  momentous  and 
glorious  issues  it  prepares.  What  a 
thought  is  this  for  every  human  soul  to 
cherish  !  What  dignity  does  it  add  to 
life  1  What  support  does  it  bring  to 
the  trials  of  life!  What  instigations 
does  it  add  to  send  us  onward  in  every- 
thing that  constitutes  our  excellence ! 
We  live  in  the  Divine  thought.  We 
fill  a  place  in  the  great  everlasting  plan 
of  God's  intelligence.  We  never  sink 
below  his  care,  never  drop  out  of  his 
counsel. " — Bushnell, 

II.  Workers  Divinely  helped.     "  It 
is  not  strange  that  Sanballat  saw  that 


the  wall-building  was  wrought  of  Israel's 
God.  The  trouble  with  God's  enemies 
is  not  that  their  knowledge  is  defective, 
but  that  their  hearts  are  alienated. 
Evidences  are  multij>lyiiig  constantly 
before  them,  but  produce  no  change  in 
their  opposition.  Sanballat  was  vexed 
because  he  was  thwarted  by  the  Loid 
God  of  Israel.  Those  fifty-two  days  of 
wall-building  were  clearly  to  his  mind  a 
token  of  Divine  assistance ;  but  this 
knowledge  did  not  stop  his  opposition." 
• — Crosby.  Nevertheless  the  work  was 
hastened ;  the  opposition  was  resisted ; 
then  all  was  finished.  God  is  at  work 
where  he  is  needed.  Our  God  is  a 
living  God.  He  is  a  present  God.  He 
is  a  God  who  inspires  men  to-day.  He 
is  as  mindful  of  us  as  was  Jesus  of  the 
hungry,  shepherdless  crowds  of  Judaea 
(Matt.  X.  36  ;  xiv.  14—16).  God  is  at 
work  when  he  is  not  perceived.  The 
fabric  cannot  be  judged  in  the  loom. 
Our  life  is  sectional.  God  sees  the  end 
as  well  as  the  beginning.  There  may 
be  periods  of  life  when  the  thought  of 
God  is  not  forced  in  upon  us.  But 
when  life  becomes  only  a  consciousness 
of  sufieriug,  what  then^ 

"  Be  near  me  when  my  light  is  low, 
When  the  blood  creeps,  and  the  nerves  prick 
And  tingle,  and  the  heart  is  sick, 
And  all  the  wheels  of  being  slow." 

When  duty  is  plain,  but  the  will  is 
wanting,  there  is  stimulus  in  the  remem- 
brance of  "  God  which  worketh  in  you 
both  to  will  and  to  do."  When  the 
spirit  is  willing  and  the  flesh  is  weak, 
then  may  we  hear  the  still,  small  voice 
of  promise:  "My  strength  is  made  per- 
fect in  weakness."  And  when  the 
tasks  of  life  are  completed  we  shall 
perceive  that  "  the  work  was  wrought 
of  our  God." 

Illustrative  Poem. 

THE  BUILDERS. 

"  All  are  architects  of  Fate, 

Working  in  these  walls  of  Time  ; 
Some  with  massive  deeds  and  great. 
Some  with  ornaments  of  rhyme. 

Nothing  useless  is,  or  low ; 

Each  thing  in  its  place  is  best ; 
And  what  seems  but  idle  show, 

Strengthens  and  supports  the  rest, 


CttAP.   VI.] 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAIL 


1G5 


For  the  structure  that  we  raise, 
Time  is  with  materials  filled  ; 

Our  to-days  and  yesterdays 
Are  the  blocks  with  which  we  build. 

Truly  shape  and  fashion  these  ; 

Leave  no  yawning  gaps  between  ; 
Think  not,  because  no  man  sees, 

Such  things  will  remain  unseen. 

In  the  elder  days  of  Art, 

Builders  wrought  with  greatest  care, 
Each  minute  and  unseen  part ; 

For  the  Gods  see  everywhere. 

Let  us  do  our  work  as  well, 
Both  the  unseen  and  the  seen  ; 


Make  the  house,  where  Gods  may  dwoll, 
Beautiful,  entire,  and  clean. 

Else  our  lives  are  incomplete, 
Standing  in  these  walls  of  Time, 

Broken  stairways,  where  the  feet 
Stumble  as  they  seek  to  climb. 

Build  to-day,  then,  strong  and  sure, 
With  a  firm  and  ample  base ; 

And  ascending  and  secure 

Shall  to-morrow  find  its  place. 

Thus  alone  can  we  attain 

To  those  turrets,  where  the  eye 

Sees  the  world  as  one  vast  plain, 
And  one  boundless  reach  of  sky.'* 

Longfelloic. 


The  Overruling  God. 

H,  16.  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  lohen  all  our  enemies  heard  thereof ^  and  all 
the  heathen  that  were  about  us  saw  these  things,  they  were  much  cast  down  in  their 
own  eyes  :  for  they  perceived  that  this  work  vms  wrought  of  our  God. 

If  we  consult  the  Jewish  history,  we  soon  understand  what  the  work  was  which 
is  here  confessed  (thouo^h  unwillingly,  it  seems)  to  have  been  wrought  of  God  ;  it 
was  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  upon  the  return  of  that  people  to  their  own  land, 
after  a  total  destruction  of  the  one,  and  a  grievous  captivity  of  the  other,  by  a  cruel 
and  unrelenting  conqueror.  This  great  and  surprising  event  (a  bondage  of  seventy 
years  having  worn  out  all  their  hopes,  and  left  them  no  reasonable  prospect  (»f 
deliverance)  must  have  been  brought  about  in  a  way  very  wonderful  indeed,  and 
sufficiently  astonishing,  since,  according  to  the  text,  whatever  favourable  circum- 
stances might  appear,  or  second  causes  be  instrumental  in  it,  the  hand  of  God  was 
owned  apparently  to  give  effect  unto  it  by  enemies,  whose  malice  sought  the  ruin 
of  their  state ;  by  heathens,  whose  religion  abhorred  the  object  of  their  worsliip. 
What  occasioned  an  acknowledgment  so  just  and  so  ingenuous,  when  we  consider 
what  was  wrought ;  so  strange  and  unusual,  when  we  reflect  upon  the  temper  and 
interests  of  those  who,  to  their  shame  and  disappointment,  made  it,  may  be 
learned,  I  conceive,  from  that  prevailing  instinct  in  mankind  which  disposes  us  to 
look  up  for  an  overruling  cause  when  any  extraordinary  accidents  happen  here 
below.  And,  indeed,  if  we  do  confess  any  miraculous  alterations  in  the  natural, 
we  are  obliged  to  conclude  a  Divine  Power  immediately  directing  the  great 
revolutions  of  the  civil,  world, 

I.  God  is  truly  Lord,  and  Ms  kingdom  ruleth  over  all  the  earth.  Now 
Christians  we  know  are  to  suppose  this  article  to  be  true  as  having  the  Word  of 
God  himself  a  voucher  for  it ;  because  with  them  at  least  no  human  argument 
ought  to  dispute  against  his  authority.  The  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament 
prove  a  Divine  prescience,  and  the  promises  of  the  New  allow  God  to  be  concerned 
for  his  Church.  It  follows  then  that  no  contingencies  can  escape  his  observation, 
nor  contrivances  disappoint  his  designs.  Would  we  appeal  to  reason,  testimony, 
or  experience,  more  to  satisfy  the  scruples  or  to  silence  the  petulancy  of  other 
men  than  to  obtain  and  secure  the  belief  of  this  point  unto  ourselves,  here  also 
we  are  safe.  1.  Why  so  profuse  a  loaste  of  wisdom  and  of  power  in  the  formation 
and  contrivance  of  the  world,  if  it  might  not  deserve  his  future  care,  who  at  first 
condescended  to  the  making  of  it  ?  Or,  how  indeed  could  it  continue  to  exist  in 
all  that  beauty  and  order  which  we  so  much  admire  had  he  ever  withdrawn  his 
hand,  upon  whom  it  always  must  depend,  because  it  was  created  by  him.  Hen-  e, 
if  man  be  the  noblest  part,  he  is  the  peculiar  object  of  the  Divine  care,  nay,  he 
seems  to  need  it  most ;  and  then  from  the  goodness  of  God  we  conclude  him 


166  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vi. 

entitled  to  the  distinguishing  protection  of  it.  This  cannot  be  expressed  or  turned 
to  our  use  unless  all  events  are  under  his  eye,  and  all  our  counsels  are  submitted 
to  his  rule  ;  considering  how  little  we  can  foresee  of  what  is  to  come,  able  less  to 
provide  against  it ;  how  much  we  are  in  the  dark  as  to  consequences  from  the 
management  of  other  men,  and  at  a  loss  what  to  promise  even  from  ourselves. 
This  way  of  reasoning  holds  stronger  yet  with  regard  to  public  communities  than 
to  private  persons  ;  here  in  this  life  are  they  only  to  be  taken  notice  of,  here  only, 
in  the  visible  scenes  of  human  occurrences,  can  Providence  appear  concerned  for 
them.  And  though  government  be  an  ordinance  and  a  blessing  too  from  God,  yet 
how  often  without  are  fightings  and  within  are  fears  1  And  who  can  prevent  or 
compose  these  disorders  but  he  alone  who  restraineth  the  spirit  of  princes  and 
stilleth  the  madness  of  the  people.  Then  when  God  giveth  quietness  who  can 
give  trouble  1  "Whether  it  be  done  for  or  against  a  nation  or  a  man  only.  2. 
Whatever  difficulties  the  metaphysical  considerations  of  a  few^  whatever  disgrace 
th*  mperstitious  abuses  of  more,  have  brought  upon  it,  yet  the  solemnity  of  jmhlic 
Worship  and  the  sincerity  of  private  prayer,  the  allowed  obligations  of  an  oath,  and 
the  unavoidable  effects  of  conscience,  declare  mankind  subscribing  to  this  truth. 
In  fact,  the  most  desperate  and  independent  tempers,  upon  some  unusual  emergencies, 
have  been  subdued  to  a  confession  of  it.  To  this  copious  and  instructive  theme 
do  we  owe  all  those  noble  sentiments  of  heathen  philosophy  which  advance  human 
nature  above  the  casualties  of  fortune,  and  support  the  efforts  of  virtue  against  the 
tyranny  of  fate.  From  hence  did  ancient  tragedy  dress  its  awful  scenes  and  take 
its  affecting  images,  to  represent  a  superior  dominion  over  all ;  which  may 
mysteriously  perplex  for  a  while,  yet  at  last  conducts  the  puzzling  incidents  to  an 
end,  confessing  equity  and  right.  What  in  truth  is  history  but  a  long  detail  of 
God's  interfering  providence  %  3.  We  ourselves  are  living  loitnesses.  If  any  of  us 
have  ever  at  a  venture  drawn  our  bow,  and  hit  at  once  surprisingly  a  mark  that 
others  with  the  most  likely  skill  have  often  sought  to  touch  in  vain,  who  directed 
our  arrow?  If  ever  the  race  is  not  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle  to  the  strong,  who 
caused  our  feet  to  stumble,  and  gives  success  unto  the  weak  1  Second  causes  are 
the  servants  of  his  will,  who  is  truly  Lord  of  what  we  call  nature  or  mistake  for 
chance. 

II.  We  may  inquire  by  what  characters  a  work  such  as  the  text  is  speaking 
of  may  be  perceived  to  be  wrought  of  our  God.  It  is  not  always  easy  nor  even 
safe  boldly  to  point  out  what  God  has  done.  Yet  he  does  sometimes  so  show 
himself  as  that  we  may  perceive  his  hand.  We  are  often  called  upon  to  see  the 
wonderful  operations  of  it.  Wliere  any  event  comes  to  pass  beyond  the  reasonable 
expectations  of  mankind,  or  any  effect  is  produced  by  7neans  altogether  unequal  to 
it,  an  invisible  Mind  is  plainly  concerned  in  the  one,  and  a  supernatural  Cause 
actually  gives  birth  unto  the  other.  If  an  event  thus  strangely  brought  abo2it 
eminently  consults  the  honour  of  God's  holy  name  and  the  maintenance  of  true  religion 
and  the  prosperity  of  the  people,  in  these  instances  God  appears.  Upon  such 
occasions,  doubtless,  we  may  say  the  arm  of  the  Lord  has  been  revealed,  and  we 
have  seen  the  salvation  of  our  God. — Ross  Ley,  1727. 


The  World's  Acknowledgment  of  God. 
vi.  16.     And  it  came  to  pass,  that  when  all  our  enemies  heard,  &c. 

The  success  of  Nehemiah  against  such  I.  World's  past  acknowledgment  of 

odds  proved  the  success  to  be  Divinely  God.     1.  Biblical  instances.     The  Bible 

given.      They,    the    enemies,  perceived  story  is  the  story  of  God's  works  and 

that   this  work  was  wrought  of   God.  wonders  of  salvation,  and   all  through 

World's  acknowledgment  of  God.  that   story   we    see   this  :  —  the   world 


CHAP.  V  .] 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH. 


167 


struggling  like  a  maniac  in  paroxysms  of 
wickedness,  but  now  and  again  bowing 
down  and  crying,  "  It's  no  use ;  the  Lord 
he  is  God,  the  Lord  he  is  God  !  "  The 
magicians  in  Egypt  threw  down  their 
conjuring  tools,  and  exclaimed  of  God's 
miracles  by  Moses,  "  This  is  the  finger 
of  God."  The  heathen  peoples  of  whom 
we  read  in  the  book  of  Daniel  now  and 
then  confess  the  living  God,  and  sob 
like  resisting  children  whose  spirits  are 
broken,  "  that  he  is  the  living  God,  and 
steadfast  for  ever."  The  sailors  in  the 
book  of  Jonah  exemplify  the  same 
thing.  The  people  around  the  cross 
"  smite  their  breasts  "  and  own,  **  Truly 
this  was  the  Son  of  God."  The  magis- 
trates and  rulers  in  the  book  of  Acts 
make  tacit  or  open  confessions  of  the 
same  thing.  All  through  the  Bible 
story  we  have  illustrations  of  this  text. 
2.  Later  instances.  Early  Church  his- 
tory, martyr  stories,  stories  of  heathen 
lands  submitting  to  the  gospel,  confes- 
sions of  men  who  thought  themselves 
infidels,  but  who  were  forced  like  the 
brute  in  Balaam's  story  to  speak  for 
God — these  furnish  exempli tications  of 
this  great  principle,  a  rebellious  world 
owning  God's  presence  and  power. 

II.  World's  present  acknowledgment 
of  God.  1.  Unconscious  acknoivledg- 
ment.  Think  of  the  way  Christianity 
penetrates  the  life  of  our  modern  world; 
take  England  for  example.  Our  throne 
is  based  on  God's  word.  A  representa- 
tive of  the  Christian  religion  gives  the 
Queen  her  crown.  Our  legal  oath  is 
taken  on  God's  gospel ;  that  little  book 
is  "  kissed  "  by  the  villain  in  our  law 
courts,  and  it  is  supposed  that  if  he  ever 
did  speak  the  truth,  he  will  with  that 
"  book  "  before  him.     A  seventh  part  of 


our  time  is  devoted  to  education  con- 
cerning God.  Our  books,  our  pictures, 
our  music  are  full  of  him.  The  world 
gives  an  unconscious  chorus  of  acknow- 
ledgment. 2.  Unwilling  acknow^dg- 
ment.  The  testimony  of  sceptics  to  the 
morals  of  Christianity.  John  Stuart 
Mill  would  have  the  life  of  Jesus  taught 
in  our  schools.  The  "  new  lights  "  of  our 
time  steal  their  oil  from  Hebrew  seers 
and  lawgivers  and  from  Christian 
apostles,  and  strike  their  matches  on  tlie 
covers  of  the  Bible,  and  then  run  out 
with  their  paper  lanterns  of  essays  and 
theories.  Oh,  the  blindness  of  the 
fools  who  are  trying  to  illuminate  the 
world  on  new  systems,  and  who  pretend 
not  to  know  that  the  world  can  see 
God's  word  to  be  the  "  main  pipe  "  of 
their  illuminations.  3.  Frank  acknow 
ledgment.  How  many  worldlings  dare 
deny  God]  When  Christianity  takes 
them  by  the  button  they  say,  "You  are 
right,  and  we  are  wrong,  and  we  shall 
perhaps  come  round  to  you  when  wc 
have  had  our  fling."  "  They  are  cast 
down  in  their  own  eyes,  for  they  per- 
ceive that  this  work  is  wrought  of  our 
God." 

III.  The  world's  future  acknowledg- 
ment. 1.  Willing.  How  prophecy 
lights  up  the  world's  future.  Men 
shall  confess  God.  Instance  prophecies 
of  this.  2.  Enforced.  The  tremendous 
confession  of  the  last  day :  "  Behold,  he 
cometh  in  the  clouds,  and  every  eye 
shall  see  him,"  &c.  What  a  melancholy 
thought  that  men  shall  fight  against  God 
until  he  has  built  the  wall  which  fences 
them  out  of  hope. 

Application.  1.  Make  acknowledg- 
ment of  God.  2.  Now.  "  Choose  yt 
this  day." 


Oppositions  op  Influence. 
vi.  17 — 19.     Moreover  in  those  days  the  nobles  of  Judah^  &c 

Tobiah,  the  foe  outside  i^ehemiah's  ranks,  and  *'  the  nobles  of  Judah  '*  inside, 
were  eminent  and  influential  persons,  who  were  a  sore  thorn  to  the  good  man.  He 
fought  against  an  influential  opposition,  and  suggests  to  us  other  oppositions  of 
influence. 

I.  Influence  is  opposed  to  God's  work.  Influence  and  respectability  !  A  man 
with  a  hundred  a  year  may  be  orthodox  in  belief,  and  diligent  in  Christian  work, 
as  in  the  Sunday-school  and  in  the  prayer-meeting,  but  this  man  perhapa  invents 


:68  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEHEMIAH.  [chap.  vi. 


A  new  Y\m\  of  blacking,  and  makes  £2000  a  year  by  it,  or  his  aunt  dies  and  leaves 
liim  £5000  a  year :  the  man  is  the  same  man,  but  his  income  is  changed,  and  you 
do  not  find  him  in  the  Sunday-school  any  more ;  the  night  air  is  dangerous,  so  he 
absents  himself  from  the  prayer-meeting.  Is  not  this  a  true  story"?  The  man  has 
become  an  influential  man.  Eespectability  !  In  one  of  our  law  trials  a  man 
described  another  as  "respectable."  ''What  do  you  mean  by  respectable  T'  said  the 
judge.  "  Why,"  explained  the  witness,  "  he  kept  a  gig  !  "  Now  it  is  a  fact  that 
such  a  man's  sneer  at  religion  has  weight.  If  he  had  no  "  gig  "  I  should  think  him 
a  fool  to  say  what  he  says ;  but  he  has  a  "  gig,"  and  his  opinion  is  not  to  be  set  aside. 
I  know  a  man  who  worked  as  a  schoolmaster  for  £100  per  annum,  and  he  fought 
Christ's  battle  then  in  a  ragged  school ;  but  he  got  a  berth  at  £850  per  annum  as  a 
school  inspector,  and  five  months  later  resigned  the  ragged  school  and  became 
"  broad  "  in  his  views.  This  is  the  kind  of  influence  most  of  us  come  in  contact 
with,  and  this  is  its  natural  history. 

II.  Influence  is  contemptible  in  its  opposition.  "  The  kings  of  the  earth  set 
tlu-mselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together,  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his 

anointed He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  ;    the  Lord  shall 

have  them  in  derision.''^  1.  Their  power  is  contemptible.  Crowns,  sceptres,  swords, 
cannons,  thrones,  statutes,  put  these  in  one  scale,  and  then  put  the  short,  uncertain 
life  of  man  which  a  pin-prick  can  destroy  in  the  other  scale.  Look  through  the 
drapery  at  the  man,  and  who  is  he  among  these  everlasting  hills  of  earth,  and  these 
rolling  histories  of  the  human  race,  and  these  solemn  eternities  of  God  ?  What  a 
manikin  to  play  such  fantastic  tricks  before  high  heaven !  Cash-boxes  and  "  gigs  " 
and  villas — ah  me !  as  the  Chelsea  sage  would  say,  what  things  these  are  to  sway 
the  immortal  minds  of  men  !  Death  breathes  on  *^  influence,"  and  then  we  have 
a  white  marble  stone  with  some  poetry  on  it,  and  that  is  the  last  of  influence.  2. 
Their  opposition  is  contemptible.  A  Galilean  sat  down  on  a  green  hill- side  and 
talked  "  golden  rules  "  to  a  crowd  of  country-folk,  that  was  how  it  began.  And 
"  Influence  "  has  drawn  its  sword  and  bent  its  bow  against  Christianity  for  near 
2000  years,  and  now  it  gives  colour  to  every  lofty  thing  among  the  first  nations 
of  earth,  and  millions  crowd  in  fear  to  own  its  divinity  every  Sabbath  day,  and  like 
a  stone  down  a  mountain-side  it  rolls  on  its  omnipotent  course.  Do  not  let  us 
exaiigerate  "  influence." 

III.  Influence  has  to  be  dealt  with.  1.  Do  not  let  us  provoke  it  If  the  lion 
is  asleep  and  you  can  pass  the  den  without  waking  it,  let  it  sleep  on.  Do  not  make 
martyrdoms.  As  a  rule,  let  the  martyr's  crown  come  like  other  honour,  unsought. 
But  if  it  come  hail  it  with  a  doxology.  2.  Do  not  let  us  be  afraid  of  it.  [a)  Its 
power  is  often  holloio.  The  godless  judge  who  tries  the  prisoner  "  trembles  and 
says.  Go  thy  way  for  this  time  ; "  the  King  Agrippa  of  this  world  says  in  dainty  jest 
(with  a  grim  reality  concealed),  "Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian  ! " 
"  Influence  "  sneers  at  you,  and  then  goes  to  bed  and  lies  awake  all  night  wondering 
if  you  are  not  right  after  all.  {b)  Do  not  let  it  sway  your  convictions.  The  bare 
stern  front  of  God's  truth  must  be  more  potent  with  us  than  any  form  which 
presents  itself  to  our  eye  or  oar  imagination.  Let  no  man's  life  or  opinion  be  a 
necessary  factor  with  us  as  we  sit  solitary,  making  up  the  great  reckoning  of  life. 
Do  not  copy  from  another's  slate.  You  have  to  do  the  sum  yourself,  (c)  Do  not 
let  it  damp  your  hojje.  God  is  strong.  Truth  is  mighty.  To  Jesus  Christ  "  all 
power  is  given  in  heaven  and  on  earth."  The  crash  of  fallen  "  influence  "  in 
history  is  but  a  feeble  prophecy  of  the  downfall  of  it  hereafcer.  "  He  must  reign 
until  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet." 

Application.  1.  Rightly  estimate  the  worth  and  toeight  of  things  temporaU 
2.  Duly  ponder  the  eternal  life  and  power  of  things  Divine.  3.  Trust  simply  in 
God. 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMLLETW  COMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


169 


Deserters. 

vi.  17,  18.  Moreover  in  tJiose  days  the  nobles  of  Judah  sent  many  letters  unto 
Tohiah,  and  the  letters  of  Tohiah  came  unto  them.  For  there  were  many  in 
Judah  sioorn  unto  Mm,  because  he  was  the  son  in  law  of  Shechaniah  the  son  of 
Arah  ;  and  his  son  Johanan  had  taken  the  daughter  of  Meshullam  the  son  of 
Bereohiah. 


^^ Meshullam  ^^  wrought  well  at  the 
wall-building  (iii.  4) ;  but  he  ensnared 
himself.  "  The  nobles  "  had  not  retained 
a  pure  faith  and  an  unfaltering  patriotism. 
Under  the  influence  oi  personal  interests 
they  forgot  the  commonwealth. 

I.  The  secret  of  desertion.  Lot 
went  down  to  Sodom  under  the  impulse 
of  a  worldly  choice ;  and  its  consequences 
were  that  he  left  part  of  his  family 
there  to  encounter  the  doom-storm,  and 
with  the  rest  brought  away  the  taint  of 
a  worldly  spirit  (Gen.  xix.).  "  Demas 
hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this 
l)resent  world"  (2  Tim.  iv.  10).  Thus 
patriarch  and  apostle  bridge  the  gulf  of 
centuries  by  a  similar  experience  of  the 
fatal  consequences  of  worldly  alliances  ; 
Old  Testament  and  New  proclaim  the 
need  of  nonconformity.  The  nobles 
were  not  outwardly  at  feud  with  Nehe- 
miah.  Their  duplicity  made  them  dan- 
gerous. Hand  and  tongue  were  seem- 
ingly engaged  in  the  good  cause  ;  heart 
had  long  since  deserted  it.  In  soul 
they  were  men  of  the  world,  who  had 
their  portion  in  this  life.  1.  In  self- 
cultivation  the  graver  danger  is  from 
within.  To  repress  passion  harder  than 
to  resist  tempter.  "  The  prince  of  this 
world  Cometh  and  hath  nothing  in  me." 
Could  we  say  that  temptation  would  be 
powerless.  "  Every  man  is  tempted 
when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own 
lust,  and  enticed."  When  the  tree  is 
*'  desired "  it  needs  hardly  a  serpent's 
voice  to  cause  us  to  "eat  of  the  fruit 
thereof."  2.  In  the  prosecution  of  any 
good  task  fear  most  friends^  treachery. 
The  untiring  opposition  of  foes  may  be 
met  by  sleepless  vigilance ;  the  luke- 
warmness  of  friends  is  fatal  to  progress. 
We  are  dependent  on  co-operation. 

II.  Practical  unworldliness.  "Be 
ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with 
unbelievers:  for  what  fellowship  hath 


righteousness  with  unrighteousness " 
(2  Cor.  vi.  14)  ■?  "Have  no  fellowship 
with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness  " 
(Ephes.  V.  11).  In  some  soils  the  plant 
of  piety  cannot  thrive.  Men  pray  to  be 
kept  from  temptation  and  then  boldly 
enter  into  it.  If  in  any  society  I  cannot 
retain  my  purity,  if  under  any  set  of 
circumstances  I  am  unable  to  niaintain 
my  integrity,  let  me  forsake  that  com- 
panionship, avoid  that  position.  Where 
duty  calls  follow  the  sacred  voice,  and 
God  shall  give  his  angels  charge  con- 
cerning thee.  But  if  pleasure  or  [)a3sion 
or  curiosity  bid  thee  enter,  beware.  That 
way  ruin  lies.  Moral  deterioration  lias 
begun.  "  Enter  not  into  the  patli  of 
the  wicked,  and  go  not  in  the  way  of 
evil  men.  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it, 
turn  from  it,  and  pass  away  "  (Pro v.  iv. 
U,  15). 

Illustrations : — "What  Paul  writes  concerning 
false  brethen  (2  Cor.  xi.  26),  that  has  Nehemiah 
also  experienced  for  his  portion.  And  it  is 
indeed  one  of  the  heaviest  griefs  of  the  true 
servants  of  God,  when  they  must  see  that  those 
connected  with  them  in  religion,  yes,  indeed,  at 
times  their  colleagues,  who  labour  with  them  in 
the  same  work,  stand  in  prejudicial  intercourse 
with  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  Church,  and 
yet  wish  to  be  considered  as  co-members,  striving 
for  the  honour  of  God.  Those  whom  God 
awakens  for  spiritual  building  should  conduct 
themselves  circumspectly  and  courageously 
against  the  snares  of  the  enemy,  and  not  allow 
themselves  to  be  frightened  off  by  their  slander, 
but  cheerfully  proceed.  In  the  end  the  enemy 
will  be  cast  down  with  fear  in  their  consciences, 
and  must  acknowledge  that  the  work  is  of  God 
(Acts  V.  39).  When  we  wander  in  the  midst  oi 
anxiety  God  refreshes  us,  and  stretches  his  hand 
over  the  rage  of  his  enemies,  and  helps  us  with 
his  right  hand  (Ps.  xcvii.  10) ." — Starke. 

"  I  care  not  at  all  for  an  open  enemy  of  the 
Church,  such  as  the  Papists,  with  their  power 
and  persecutions ;  1  regard  them  not,  for  l)y 
them  the  true  Church  cannot  receive  hurt,  nor 
can  they  hinder  God's  word ;  nay,  the  Church, 
through  their  raging  and  persecution,  rather 
increases.  But  it  is  the  inward  evil  of  false 
brethren  that  will  do  mischief  to  the  Church. 
Judas  betrayed  Christ;  the  false  apostles  con- 


170 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  NEEEMIAH. 


[chap.  VI. 


fused  and  falsified  tbe  gospel.  Such  are  the 
real  fellows  through  whom  the  devil  rages  and 
spoils  the  Church." — Luther. 

"  What  every  one  is  in  God's  sight,  that  is  he, 
and  no  more." — St.  Francis  of  Assist. 

"The  fervent  and  diligent  man  is  prepared  for 
all  things.  It  is  harder  to  resist  vices  and 
pjissions  than  to  toil  in  bodily  labours.  Be 
watchful  over  thyself,  stir  up  thyself,  warn 
thyself,  and  whatsoever  becomes  of  others,  neg- 
lect not  thyself." — Thomas  a  Kempis. 

"  Some  professors  of  religion  resemble  trees, 
the  leaves  of  which  fall  off  when  winter  ap- 
proaches, but  appear  again  when  the  season 
becomes  more  favourable  and  mild ;  for  in  the 


winter  of  adversity  they  conceal  their  lusts, 
and  restrain  their  sinful  propensities  ;  but  when 
prosperity  smiles  upon  them  they  break  out 
again,  as  at  the  first,  and  recruit  themselves 
with  further  supplies  of  folly  and  of  vanity. 
This  is  a  genuine  evidence  of  hypocrisy ;  for 
nothing  is  more  hateful  to  a  real  Christian  tiian 
such  conduct,  who  in  all  circumstances,  and 
under  very  vicissitude,  whether  public  or  private, 
is  always  the  same,  and  remains  unalterably 
fixed  in  his  God.  He  preserves  an  uniform 
piety  both  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  in  poverty 
and  in  affluence,  steadily  cleaving  to  God,  and 
meeting  with  resignation  every  affliction  that 
Providence  lays  upon  him." — John  Arndt. 


The  Bad  Man  praised. 
vi  19.     They  reported  Ms  good  deeds  hefore  me. 


The  nobles  of  Judah  reporting  Tobiah's 
"  good  deeds  "  to  Nehemiah  is  a  piece  of 
humorous  irony  often  repeated.  What 
heroes  this  world  does  select !  "  Not  this 
man,  but  Barabbas  1 "  Historians  have 
made  rose-coloured  villains  into  heroes. 
Poets  have  set  to  bewitching  music 
names  that  ought  to  '*  blister  the  tongue." 
Preachers  have  written  original  and 
beautiful  sermons  to  whitewash  poor 
Cain  and  Judas  and  Pilate,  and,  like  the 
Scotch  minister  of  the  story,  have  looked 
with  almost  admiration,  at  least  with 
sympathy,  on  the  *'poor  deil."  Some- 
times this  is  mawkish  perverted  senti- 
ment, sometimes  cant.  The  bad  man 
praised. 

I.  Bad  men  do  get  praised.  1. 
Sometimes  this  pi^aise  is  real,  (a)  No 
man  without  some  trait  of  good.  A 
hand  strewed  flowers  on  Nero's  grave. 
The  dark  rock  of  guilt  may  be  streaked 
with  a  thread  of  gold  or  sparkle  with 
some  spot  of  crystal.  This  is  the 
handle  for  the  man's  redemption,  but 
not  a  peg  on  which  to  hang  draperies  to 
hide  real  evil.  {i>)  A  lad  habit  of  life 
may  be  broken  by  occasional  goodness. 
The  miser  gives  money  away,  the  merci- 
less has  a  tender  thought,  the  bad  does 
a  good  action  contrary  to  all  the  common 
strain  of  his  life.  These  do  not  com- 
pound for  the  evil,  but  are  God's  calls 
and  strivings  asserting  and  demonstrat- 
ing themselves.  2.  Somefi'mes  this 
praise  is  mistaken,  (a)  The  bad  seldom 
sJwws  a  bold  front  of  hardness,  but  winds 
a  rose  garland  round  his  sin  and  covers 


it  with  hypocritical  pretensions.  A 
man  can  generally  give  a  virtuous  ex- 
planation of  vice,  or  at  least  an  explan- 
ation that  leans  toward  virtue.  The 
"  cajit  "  of  goodness,  of  which  the  world 
speaks  bitterly  at  times,  is  nothing  com- 
pared with  the  "  cant  "  of  badness,  {b) 
Courteous  conciliation  of  persons  often 
throws  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  A 
man  who  bows  gracefully  to  me  is  in 
danger  of  compelling  a  too  favourable 
interpretation  of  his  deeds  to  others. 
Let  us  not  French- polish  wickedness. 
Softened  names  of  things,  graceful 
euphemisms  for  bad  things  in  place  of 
the  "  sword-cuts  of  Saxon  speech,"  have 
often  made  blame  sound  very  like  praise. 
3.  Sometimes  this  praise  is  fictitious 
altogether,  (a)  In  eulogizing  a  bad 
man  other  men  are  frequently  praising 
their  own  likeness,  {b)  Eulogy  of  the 
evil  man  is  often  a  subtle  way  of  reflect- 
ing suspicion  on  moral  standards. 

II.  Bad  men  are  anxious  for  praise. 
No  bad  man  wishes  to  be  considered 
bad.  1.  In  this  there  is  a  sentence  of 
condemnation.  In  hunting  for  false 
praise  an  evil  man  is  but  subpoenaing 
witnesses  against  his  own  real  inner 
self.  Every  sound  of  undeserved  praise 
is  a  sentence  against  the  "hidden  man 
of  the  heart."  2.  In  this  there  is  an 
indirect  homage  to  virtue.  You  do  not 
believe  evil  to  be  good;  you  want  the 
evil  to  be  called  a  good  that  it  is  not. 
To  waft  the  incense  of  praise  to  a  bad 
man  is  to  confess  there  is  a  noble  style 
of   manhood  worthy  of   praise.     3.  In 


CHAP.  VI.] 


HOMILETIQ  QOMMENTARY:   NEHEMIAH. 


171 


this  anxiety  for  praise  the  had  man  is 
frequently  at  as  much  trouble  as  it  would 
cost  him  to  gain  the  goodness  he  seeks 
credit  for.  To  pretend  is  nearly  as 
difficult  a  task  as  to  he.  If  self-defence 
could  kneel  down  and  become  prayer, 
if  seeming  could  break  its  bonds  and 
strive  for  reality,  the  bad  man  might 
deserve  the  character  he  would  like  to 
hold  in  the  estimation  of  the  world. 

III.  Bad  men  are  not  hidden  by 
the  praise  of  the  world.  1.  Good  men 
detect.  There  is  a  subtle  power  of 
penetration  in  goodness.  As  the  calm 
eyes  of  honesty  look  into  the  blinking 
eyes  of  the  liar,  the  lie  stands  exposed. 
And  this  is  a  sore  trouble  to  the  evil 
man.  He  forgets  the  praise  of  fifty 
fools  while  reflecting  on  the  unspoken 
censure  of  one  wise  man.  Caesar  com- 
plains in  the  poem  of  "  that  spare 
Cassias "  who  "  looks  quite  through 
the  deeds  of  men."     Haman  finds  that 


all  this  honour  "  availeth  him  nothing  " 
so  long  as  Mordecai  sits  with  his  still 
dark  eye  to  look  into  his  real  soul.  2. 
God  detects.  1.  Now.  Amid  the  music 
of  men's  flattery  comes  the  boom  of 
God's  censure.  In  the  banqueting 
chamber  the  fingers  of  God  write  fiery 
sentences  to  be  read  in  the  pauses  of 
the  revel.  2.  Hereafter.  "  Every  man 
must  give  account  of  himself  to  God." 
The  ears  will  soon  be  stopped  to  men's 
praise,  the  eye  will  have  no  power  to 
look  on  the  fawning  smile  of  the  flatterer 
any  more ;  one  voice  will  fill  the  ear, 
one  sight  fix  the  eye — God — God — God 
— the  "  most  worthy  Judge  eternal." 

Application.  1.  Do  not  he  discouraged 
hy  this  misdirected  praise.  Live  for 
God's  praise.  "  Be  thy  praise  my 
highest  aim,  be  thy  smile  my  chief 
delight."  2.  Do  not  he  deceived  into 
any  lowering  of  the  standard  of  right- 
eousness. 


ADDENDA    TO    CHAPTER   VI. 
Sentences  from  Old   Writers. 


I.  Opponents  (vers.  1 — 4).  "An- 
other let  to  the  good  work  in  hand. 
That  in  the  fourth  chapter  was  external 
only ;  that  in  the  fifth  internal  only ; 
this  here  is  mixed,  that  is,  partly  cast  in 
by  the  enemies  without  (those  cruel 
crafties),  and  partly  helped  on  by  the 
perfidious  prophets  and  ignobles  within, 
conspiring  with  the  enemy  against  the 
good  of  their  own  country."  The  rest  of 
our  enemies.  *'The  Church's  enemies 
are  not  a  few  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9).  She  is 
like  unto  a  silly  poor  maid,  saith  Luther, 
sitting  in  a  wood  or  wilderness,  com- 
passed about  with  hungry  wolves,  lions, 
boars,  bears,  assaulting  her  every  moment 
and  minute.  The  ground  of  all  is  that 
old  enmity  (Gen.  iii.  15)."  Sanhallat 
and  GesJiem  sent  unto  me.  "As  if 
solicitous  of  my  safety,  and  careful  of 
the  common  good,  i^ehemiah  weU 
knew  that  all  this  pretended  courtesy 
was  but  dross  upon  dirt,  a  fair  glove 


drawn  upon  a  foul  hand,  a  cunning 
collusion  to  undo  him.  He  therefore 
keeps  aloof."  "  Our  deceitful  hearts  do 
too  often  draw  us  away  from  the  prose- 
cution of  good  purposes,  by  casting 
many  other  odd  impertinent  matters  in 
our  way."  "  ISTehemiah  went  not,  but 
sent.  This  was  to  be  wise  as  a  serpent. 
God  calleth  us  not  to  a  weak  simplicity, 
but  alloweth  us  as  much  of  the  serpent 
as  of  the  dove,  and  telleth  us  that  a 
serpent's  eye  in  a  dove's  head  is  a 
singular  accomplishment."  "  ^N'ehemiah 
was  the  driver-on  of  the  business.  His 
hands  were  full  of  employment.  Let 
the  tempter  ever  find  us  busy,  and  he 
will  depart  discouraged;  as  Cupid  is  said 
to  do  from  the  Muses,  whom  he  could 
never  take  idle.  An  industrious  Nehe- 
miah  is  not  at  leisure  to  parley  with 
Sanhallat,  lest  if  he  let  any  water  go 
beside  the  mill  he  should  be  a  great 
loser  by  it.     His  employment  is  as  a 


172 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  NEEEMlAh. 


[CHAP.  VI. 


guard  or  good  angel,  to  keep  him  both 
right  and  safe."  They  sent  unto  me  four 
times.  "  As  thinking  to  prevail  by  their 
importunity.  Sin  hath  woaded  an  im- 
pudency  in  some  men's  faces."  "  We 
may  style  Nehemiah  as  one  doth 
Athanasius,  the  bulwark  of  truth,  the 
Church's  champion."  "  True  love  teaches 
us  to  be  angry  with  none  but  ourselves. 
True  peace  consists  not  in  having  much 
wealth,  but  in  bearing  patiently  what- 
ever goes  against  our  nature."  "  If  thou 
canst  be  silent  and  suffer,  without  doubt 
thou  shalt  see  that  the  Lord  will  help 
thee."  "  Regard  not  much  who  is  for 
thee,  or  against  thee;  but  mind  what 
thou  art  about,  and  take  care  that  God 
may  be  with  thee  in  everything  thou 
doest."  "  It  belongs  to  God  to  help, 
and  to  deliver  from  all  confusion." 

II.  The  tongue  (vers.  5 — 9).     It  is 
reported.     "  And  therefore  must  be  true. 
But  who  knows  not  that  rumour  is  a 
loud  liar,  and  that  every  public  person 
needeth  carry  a  spare  handkerchief  to 
wi[)e  ofif  dirt  cast  upon  him  by  disaffected 
persons,  that  seek  to  fly-blow  their  reput- 
ation and  to  deprave  their  best  actions." 
Gashmu  saith  so.     "A  worthy  wight,  a 
credible  witness  !     He  was  known  to  be 
.•»ne  that  had  taught  his  tongue  the  art 
of    lying."     "  Any  author  serves    San- 
ballat's  turn,  who  for  a  need  could  have 
sucked  such  an  accusation  as  this  out  of 
his  own  tinsrers."     "  If  dirt  will  stick  to 
a  mud  wall,  yet  to  marble  it  will  not." 
'*  Nehemiah  is  not  over- careful  to  clear 
himself.     This  was  so  transparent  a  lie 
that  a  man  might  see  through  it,  and 
was,  therefore,  best   answered   with   a 
neglective   denial.      It   falls   out   often 
that    plain   dealing   puts   craft   out    of 
countenance."      "  Faith    quelleth    and 
killeth  distrustful  fear."     "  These  men 
first    mock   the   Jews,    and   scornfully 
despise  them  for  enterprising  this  build- 
ing, thinking  by  this  means  to  discourage 
poor  souls,  that  they  should  not  go  for- 
ward  in    this    work ;    after   that   they 
charge  them  with  rebellion.     These  two 
be   the    old  practices  of   Satan  in  his 
members    to    hinder    the    building   of 
God's   house   in   all    ages."      "  Empty 
vessels    are    fuU    of    sound ;     discreet 
silence,  or  a  wise  ordering  of  speech,  is 


a  token  of  grace."  "Better  a  mountain 
fall  upon  you  than  the  weight  of  your 
own  tongue."  "A  pure  heart  is  the 
tongue's  treasury  and  storehouse."  *'  It 
is  observable,  that  when  the  apostle 
giveth  us  the  anatomy  of  wickedness  in 
all  the  members  of  the  body,  he  stayeth 
longest  on  the  organs  of  speech,  and 
goeth  over  them  all  :  '  Their  throat  is  an 
open  sepulchre  ;  with  their  tongues  they 
have  used  deceit ;  the  poison  of  asps  is 
under  their  lips  :  whose  mouth  is  full  of 
cursing  and  bitterness.' "  *'  One  reck- 
on eth  up  twenty-four  several  sins  of  the 
tongue."  "  Light  words  weigh  heavy  in 
God's  balance."  "  God  in  nature  would 
show  that  he  hath  set  bounds  to  the 
tongue,  he  hath  hedged  it  in  with  a  row 
of  teeth.  Other  organs  are  double  ;  we 
have  two  eyes,  two  ears,  but  one  tongue." 
"  Christianity  doth  not  take  away  the 
use  of  speech,  but  rule  it."  "  Slanderers 
are  the  devil's  slaves."  *'  Covetousness 
sold  Christ,  and  envy  delivered  him." 
"  Contemplate  the  life  of  Jesus,  who  did 
not  so  much  as  open  his  mouth  against 
his  enemies,  nor  pour  forth  any  bitter 
and  vehement  speeches,  but  gave  bless- 
ing and  life  to  those  that  hated  him." 
"  Oftentimes  I  could  wish  that  I  had 
held  my  peace  when  I  have  spoken." 
"  It  is  easier  not  to  speak  a  word  at  all 
than  not  to  speak  more  words  than  we 
should." 

III.  False  prophets  (vers.  10—14). 
Shemrdah.  "  Fallen,  as  a  star  from 
heaven  !  Blazing  stars  were  never  but 
meteors.  Demas  not  only  forsook  Paul, 
but  became  a  priest  in  an  idol's  temple 
at  Thessalonica,  if  Dorotheus  may  be 
believed.  A  priest  Shemaiah  Avas,  and 
would  seem  to  be  a  prophet;  but  he 
proved  not  right  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  6).  All 
is  not  gold  that  glitters."  *'  Nehemiah 
went  to  Shemaiah's  house  to  know  what 
was  the  matter,  supposing  him  to  be  a 
friend,  but  finding  him  suborned  by  the 
enemy."  "  Nothing  betrays  a  man 
sooner  than  his  causeless  fear.  God 
helpeth  the  valiant."  Should  such  a 
man  as  I  flee  2  *'  To  the  dishonour  of 
God,  and  the  discouraging  of  the  people  ] 
to  the  scandal  of  the  weak,  and  the  scorn 
of  the  wicked  ?  There  is  a  comeliness, 
a  seemliness,  a  suitableness  appertains 


OHAP.  Vl.] 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTART:  NEIIEMIAB. 


Its 


to  every  calling  and  condition  of  life; 
and  nature  hath  taught  heathens  them- 
selves to  argue  from  dignity  to  duty,  and 
to  scorn  to  do  anything  unworthy  of 
themselves."  "  The  heavens  shall  sooner 
fall  than  I  will  forsake  the  truth,"  said 
a  martyr.  "Life  in  God's  displeasure 
is  worse  than  death;  as  death  in  his 
true  favour  is  true  life."  /  perceived 
that  God  had  not  sent  him.  "  By  my 
spiritual  sagacity  I  smelt  him  out;  as 
having  my  inward  senses  habitually 
exercised  to  discern  good  and  evil. 
What  though  we  have  not  received  the 
spirit  of  the  world  (we  cannot  cog  and 
comply  as  they  can,  yet),  we  have 
received  a  better  thing,  the  Spirit  of  God, 
the  mind  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  ii.  12,  16)." 
He  pronounced  this  prophecy  against  me. 
"  To  make  my  righteous  soul  sad  with 
his  lies,  and  to  bring  me  to  disgrace  and 
danger.  Luther  was  wont  to  advise 
preachers  to  see  that  these  three  dogs 
did  not  follow  them  into  the  pulpit : 
pride,  covetousness,  and  envy."  Tohiah 
and  Sanhallat  had  hired  him.  "A 
minister,  as  he  should  have  nothing  to 
lose,  so  he  should  have  as  little  to  get  j 


he  should  be  above  all  price  or  sale." 
Therefore  was  he  hired  that  I  should  he 
afraid,  "  But  they  were  much  mistaken 
in  their  aims ;  this  matter  was  not 
malleable.  Kehemiah  was  a  man  of  a 
Caleb-like  spirit ;  he  was  full  of  spiritual 
mettle,  for  he  knew  whom  he  had 
trusted."  "  Nehemiah  feared  nothing 
but  sin,  and  the  fruit  thereof,  shame 
and  reproach,  so  great  was  his  spirit,  so 
right  set  were  both  his  judgment  and 
affections."  "  We  should  so  carry  our- 
selves that  none  might  speak  evU  of 
us  without  a  manifest  lie."  The  rest  of 
the  prophets.  "  Multitude  and  antiquity 
are  but  ciphers  in  divinity." 

IV.  Foes  foiled  (vers.  15—19).  So  the 
wall  was  finished.  "  Though  with  much 
ado,  and  maugre  the  malice  of  all  foreign 
and  intestine  enemies.  So  shall  the 
work  of  grace  in  men's  hearts ;  it  is 
perfected  there  by  opposition,  and  grows 
gradually,  but  constantly  and  infallibly." 
"  God  was  much  seen  herein,  and  the 
enemies'  courage  much  quailed."  ^'  Envy 
is  the  devil's  disease,  and  those  that 
are   troubled  with  it  can  never   want 


woe. 


n 


EI^D  OF  VOL.    IX, 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  21020  7905 


//////////^^•//^//A 


■,^///////////y 


'  Ct^l'l' At//. A\l\x.l'//t' / /////. l\'.d 


yy//////////////////////////. 


4'!-'V/>v<''>''%y/AV/.:/vvv/Ay 


•VACV// ///////•  V//iV//  fV///  •'- '//'/. 

.v///jV/Ay//iVjV////////..v//////4 

/v^V>VAV//.,V.,V.,V/////////..V/.V/-////. 


