


€mu\\ ^mzmii ^Wstm^ 



THE GIFT OF 



lAJ.}. 




A v )..H2 ^^o\ H.bli^ 



Cornell University Llbrarv 

arV15091 

Preaching to the spirits in prison, I Pe 



,. 3 1924 031 695 434 

olin.anx 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924031695434 



THE PREACHING 



TO 



THE SPIRITS IN PRISON 



1 Pbtek III. 18-20 



BY 

W. KELLY 



LONDON 

T. WESTON, 5 PATERNOSTER ROW 

1900 



A. i^-i-^bi 



THE PREACHING 

TO 

THE SPIRITS IN PRISON 



TT may interest, and I trust also profit, the reader, if 
-*- we not only examine this scripture but review the 
questions raised on it for ages. Here many a Christian 
finds perplexity, rejecting what does not fall in with 
the analogy of faith, yet unwilling to doubt what 
seems intimated by the letter of the word. He is 
ready to suspect himself of failure in spiritual intelli- 
gence, and to question whether there might not be 
some unconscious insubjection of heart and mind to the 
perfect revelation of God. The chief at least of the 
speculations in which men of reputation have indulged 
in ancient and modern times will claim a notice, in the 
hope of satisfying the believer that human thoughts 
are ever worthless, and that divine writ is clothed by 
the Spirit with self-evidencing light and power for all 
who have their hearts opened to the Lord and are self- 
judged in His sight. 

It will be seen, too, by a full enough examination, 



4 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

that the most exact criticism in the details of the 
clauses confirms the general scope derived from the 
context as a whole, and that grammatical precision 
points with equal force in the same direction. Thus 
from every point of view the truth comes out with a 
fulness of proofs proportioned to the closeness of our 
investigation, once we have the right object and aim of 
the passage clearly ascertained and held firmly before 
our eyes. There is no ground in the passage for any 
action of Christ in the intermediate state for saints or 
sinners, nothing to hold out a hope for those who die 
in unbelief and their sins. How could there be, if all 
His words are true ? 

The true text is on Kai ^piarTO^ aira^ vepi a/j.apTioov 
eiraQev* SiKOios inrep aSiKwv, 'iva ^/xoy Tr/socrayayfl tw 
0660, Oavaroodetf fiev crapKi ^woiroiiOeh Se 'firvevfxaTi, ev 
ip Kai TOi^ ev <pv\aKri irvevfiaaiv iropevden sKijpv^ev, 
onreiOijcraa-iv Trore ore OTre^e^exero | ^ rov Qeov 
fxaKpoOvfiia €v ^/nepaig Nwe KaracrKeva^Ofievrii ki/3ootov, 
ei'y ^V dX/yot,§ tout' eariv oktw yfrvxat, Siea-wOrjo-av 6i 

* Airidavev (" died ") is the reading of X A C, more than a dozen 
cursives, Vulg., Syrr., Memph., Arm., Aeth., with several Greek and 
Latin fathers ; while the common text is supported by B K L P, the 
mass of cursives, and some of the same fathei-s. 

+ Ty before irv. is the received reading on the strength of a few 
cursives, contrary to all the uncials, the great majority of the cursives, 
and all the Greek fathers, not even excepting Epiphanius who 
elsewhere does give the article. There need be no hesitation in 
accepting the anarthrous form, which cannot mean "His" Spirit. 

X &Te^eS4xfTo is unquestionably correct, of the uncials K alone 
being adverse according to Matthai, and of the cumves not one 
supporting the reading of Stephens, Beza, and the Elzevir editions. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 5 

iiSaroi. "Because Christ also once suffered for sins, 
Just for unjust, that He might bring us to God, put to 
death indeed in [the] flesh but made alive in [the] 
Spirit, in which also He went and preached to the 
spirits in prison, disobedient aforetime when the long- 
suffering of God was awaiting in Noah's days while an 
ark was being prepared, in which few, that is, eight 
souls, were brought safe through water." 

Though the original text is not doubtful but sure, 
the interpretations of ancients and moderns are for the 
most part precarious and misleading. Why was this ? 
It may be helpful, and it is instructive, to note the 
unusual uncertainty of the ancient versions. The 
Greek is linguistically plain, the construction gram- 
matically clear: why, then, should the rendering be 
variant and confused but by ideas imparted from 
without ? So early was the tendency to bad interpret- 
ation instead of faithful translation. Thus the Vulgate 
has, without authority, " erant " in verse 19, and " qui " 
in 20, but the atrocity of "expectabamt Dei patien- 
tiain," which misled so many Eomanists into error in 

It seems to be a mere conjecture of Erasmus, who in his first edition 
gave ilTa^ id^xero (so K), in the rest fiiraj 4^£d4xeTo. In fact, it is hard 
to comprehend how the adverb could be used with the imperfect, 
though it might be with any other tense. It is remarkable that 
though Erasmus read the l)lundering ottoJ in the text of all his five 
editions, he gave the correct word in his notes, even before it was 
published in the Complutensian Polyglott. 

§ The question between d\lyoi. (N A B, six cursives, Origen, Cyprian, 
Augustine) and 6\lyai (C K L P, most cursives and fathers) is more 
delicate, and less decided. It is the only case in which the text as 
given above differs fi-om the Complutensian edition. 



6 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the Middle Ages and to the present day; for so it 
stands in the Tridentine standard of authentic Scrip- 
ture, impudently false, yet unabashed in its open 
inconsistency with the passage itself. The Pesch. Syr. 
was similarly unfaithful in the first errors of the Latin, 
renders 0. by " Sheul," and falsely paraphrases the rest 
thus, " while the long-suffering of God commanded that 
he (Noah) should make the ark upon the hope of their 
conversion, and eight souls only entered therein and 
were saved in the waters." The Philox. or Harcleian 
Syr. is much nearer the truth, as it avoids the error 
in 19, though not correct in the slighter case at the 
beginning of 20. As to the Memphitic V., Wilkins 
gives " living " for " quickened " in 18, and its rendering 
of 19 as "In this to the imprisoned spirits also He 
went. He evangelised," which is sufficiently loose, 
though not in quite the same way. But verse 20 is 
well translated except in giving a finished instead of a 
continuous force to the preparation of an ark. Again, 
the Aeth. adds "Holy" to "Spirit" in 18, and like 
Pesch. Syr. adds "held" or "shut up" to 19. The 
Erpenian Arabic is everywhere free, and seems peculiar 
in " departed to the spirits which were shut up," which 
goes beyond and verges into interpretation, if not mis- 
interpretation. One may remark here that Trop. in 
verse 22 has etV ovpavov, whereas in verse 19 there is a 
careful avoidance of eh aSov or any equivalent, which 
has been overlooked by those who have argued for the 
force of 19 from 22. In the Armenian there is little 
or nothing that calls for notice here. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 7 

N'or is the meaning doubtful. The apostle of the 
circumcision is eminently plain and practical, fervent 
and forcible. He does not, like Paul, penetrate into 
root principles or rise into the vast circle of the 
divine counsels, " wherein are some things hard to be 
understood." He is not like John, profoundly con- 
templative on the divine nature as revealed in the Son 
of God. Peter is so simple and direct, that the 
interpreters err greatly who fancy that his words 
convey what their own speculations import. He 
would not have the Christian suffer for evil but for 
well-doing; and this, not for moral reasons only, but in 
a touching appeal to Him who suffered atoningly on 
the cross : — " Because Christ also once suffered for sins, 
Just for unjust ones, that He might bring us near to 
God." Let it be ours, objects of His saving grace, to 
suffer only for righteousness and for His name. If it 
cost Him everything here up to death, God vindicated 
Him by resurrection, " put to death indeed in fiesh, but 
quickened in Spirit" (or, as in 1 Tim. iii. 16, "justified 
in Spirit ") ; in which [Spirit] also having proceeded 
He preached to the imprisoned spirits, disobedient as 
they were aforetime when the long-suffering of God 
was waiting in Noah's days. As the Holy Spirit raised 
Him from the dead,* so not personally but in the same 
Spirit also He went and preached to the spirits in 
prison because of their disobeying the word in Noah's 
time, when preached by him. 

* This is far from excluding the Father's part (Rom. vi. 4), or yet 
the Son's (John ii. 19; x. 18) ; but it adds the Spirit's agency: all the 
Godhead shared in it. 



8 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

It is an evident and striking reference to Gen. vi. 3, 
"And Jehovah said, My Spirit shall not always strive 
with man, for he indeed is flesh ; but his days shall be 
a hundred and twenty years." So long would His 
long-suffering wait; and in result only the patriarch's 
family were brought safely through. Thus the persons 
who then perished, and whose spirits are in ward for 
judgment at the end of all things, are no less clearly 
defined than the time in question, and the specific sin 
of insubjection to the Divine Spirit which wrought in 
Noah's preaching. The more accurately the words are 
examined, in textual criticism or in grammar, the more 
certainly it will be found that in strict exegesis they 
admit only of the meaning here assigned, and this in 
the full harmony of the New Testament with the Old. 

The connection and scope is evident. The apostle is 
exhorting the believers to a patient life of suffering so 
as to fill with shame those who vented their spite on 
their good behaviour in Christ. Who could gainsay 
that it was better, did the will of God so will, to suffer 
while doing well than doing ill; and this because 
Christ also suffered (but He suffered once, once for all) 
for sins ? This should be enough : we should suffer 
not for sins, but only for righteousness or for Christ's 
name sake. It was His to suffer for us, this once and 
for ever, Just for unjust persons (for such were we), 
that He might bring us to God. It is ours to suffer at 
times especially, but in principle always while in this 
present evil world. The koll connects Christ and us as 
suffering, but the contrast is as striking as it is morally 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 9 

suggestive. To understand with some -Kepi afiapriwv 
as a point of comparison between Him and us under 
such a junction is to miss the reasoning utterly, not to 
speak of failure in reverence towards the Saviour in 
that work which stands far above all comparison. 
This ought to have been too plain to need further 
reproof from SUaiog virep aScKwv, where His solitary 
and unapproachable place is set out. It was His alone 
thus to bring us near to God. The participles that 
follow tell us how this was done : " Put to death in 
flesh but made alive in [the] Spirit." 

But here a very important question arises. The 
article is certainly to be eliminated : what is the 
bearing of its absence on the meaning ? If the 
articles were inserted, Ttj aapKi and tw ttc, these 
would be the contrast of the two parts of our Lord's 
being as man, the outer and the inner ; were it rhv rr. 
and TO irv., it would be the utterly false thought that 
His Spirit as man was the object of quickening. The 
anarthrous form points to the chai-ader of the acts 
specified ; but so far is it from denying the agency of 
the Holy Ghost in the quickening spoken of, that the 
presence of the article would be more consistent with 
Christ's Spirit as a man. No doubt, when it is in- 
tended to present the Holy Spirit objectively or ex- 
trinsically, the article is required and, as far as I can 
mark the usage, the prep. eV or utto; it is excluded 
where the manner of His action is meant. On the 
other hand, wherever the spirit either of Christ as 
man or of any other is to be expressed, the article is 



10 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

indispensable, as may be seen in Matt. v. 3 ; xxvL 41 ; 
xxvii. 50 ; Mark xiv. 38 ; Luke x. 21 ; John xi. 33 ; 
xiii. 21; xix. 30; Acts xix. 21; xx. 22; 1 Cor. v. 
3, 5, etc. 

Again, the following cases without the article clearly- 
mean the Holy Spirit, but characterising the action 
rather than specifying the person, though He must 
ever be a person : Matt. xxii. 43 ; John iii. 5 ; iv. 23, 
24 ; Eom. viii. 1, 4, 9, 13 ; 1 Cor. xii. 13 ; Gal. iii. 2, 15, 
16, 18, 25 ; Eph. ii. 22 ; iii. 5 ; v. 18 ; vi. 18 ; Col. i. 8 ; 
1 Tim. iii. 16 ; 1 Peter iv. 6 ; Eev. i. 10 ; iv. 2 ; xvii. 3 ; 
xxi. 10. The attentive reader of these instances will 
see that the turning-point is not the presence or 
absence of a preposition, as some scholars have 
thought. Words after a preposition follow the ordi- 
nary rules. Only, after prepositions capable of usage 
with a statement of manner (as /cara, e/c, kv, /c.t.X.), the 
anarthrous form is of course more common. Thus h> 
■KVixijxaTi would mean in the power of the Spirit, the 
manner of being, or of being carried, buUt, justified, 
or of blessing, preaching, or whatever else may be 
in question. 

Hence the meaning here seems to be that Christ 
was put to death in respect of flesh, but quickened 
or made alive in respect of Spirit, in the power of 
which He went and preached to the spirits in prison. 
The kv w falls in with the Holy Spirit still more as 
that wherein Christ acted in testimony. It is not 
said that He went to the prison and there preached 
to the spirits ; but that in the power of the Spirit He 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 11 

went and preached to the spirits that are there. For 
it is certain that toj? h (pvXuK^ Trvevixaa-Lv can signify 
"that are in prison" as naturally at least as "that 
were" there: only the necessity of the context could 
really justify the latter sense. But if the context 
favour "that are," it is the simple unforced bearing of 
the phrase. And that it does favour it should be 
plain from a-n-eidrio-a^iv irore ore, k.t.X., which points 
to an antecedent time of guilt as the ground of their 
being now imprisoned. 

It may be doubted then whether quickened " by the 
Spirit" best gives the meaning of the apostolic state- 
ment : for that would most naturally suppose the 
Spirit as an exterior agent. Still the anarthrous 
construction, as is certain from the numerous places 
cited, does not at all exclude the Holy Spirit: only 
it expresses the manner of the quickening, not the 
personal agent. But the thought of His power is 
conveyed by the phrase that follows, iv &, wherein 
Christ is said to have gone and preached, etc. Thereby 
it is pointedly contradistinguished from -n-opevQeh in 
verse 22, which is not qualified by ev & or ev Trveu/uLan, 
but left in its strict sense of a personal change of 
locality to heaven. Thus it is excessively rash to 
say that the rendering of the English version here is 
wrong either grammatically or theologically, though 
it is more correct to cleave as closely as our language 
permits to the Greek style of expressing "Spirit" as 
the character rather than agent of the quickening of 
Christ, though agent too He was beyond doubt. 



12 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Bishop Middleton wrote with great force on the 
insertion of the article, but he was not equally suc- 
cessful in accounting for its omission. Prepositions 
,he treated as exceptions to rule, and anarthrous cases 
like crapKi, Tneu/maTi, as practically adverbiaL Hence 
in our passage, he held the apostle to mean that 
" Christ was dead carnally but alive spiritually "; as 
indeed he thought would flow from tu> ttv. if the 
article had been authentic. {Doctrine of the Greek Art., 
p. 430, Kose's Ed., 1855.) The only difference is, he 
thought, that by retaining the article we destroy the 
form of the antithesis between a. and ttc. But 
instances already given show how imperfect this 
able treatise is in requiring either the article or 
a preposition to accompany -kv. in the gen., dat., 
or accus., in order to mean the Spirit of God. 
Eomans viii. 13, to which he himself refers, refutes 
his position. 

Here Dean Alford, who is so strong against "by 
the Spirit" in 1 Peter iii. 18, translates the same 
word exactly in the way condemned: "but if ly the 
Spirit ye slay the deeds of the body, ye shall live. 
For as many as are led hy the Spirit of God, these 
are sons of God." So on Gal. v. 5, Alford expressly 
remarks on irvev[j.aTi " not ' mente ' [Fritz] nor 
'spiritually,' Middleton, al., but by the [Holy] Spirit, 
[reff.] as opposed to a-." the very rendering he after- 
wards treats as wrong grammatically and theologically. 
Again, on verse 16 he particularly observes that irv. 
without the article may and does here mean " by 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 13 

the Spirit" [i.e. of God]. His reason, probably after 
Winer or the like, is invalid; for it is not because 
it is a sort of proper name, but because it is employed 
characteristically. There is no need to multiply proofs 
against the comments on tti/. in 1 Peter iii. 18 — proofs 
equally at least against Middleton. Consequently 
Barrow, Hall, Leighton, Pearson, Ussher, etc., the 
divines who denied the applicability of the passage 
to Christ's descent to hades, were not mistaken, as 
thinks Dr. E. H. Browne, the late Bishop of Ely. 
They contend that the true meaning of the text is 
that our Lord by the Spirit in Noah preached to the 
antediluvians, who are now for their disobedience 
imprisoned in hades. 

"This interpretation of the passage," says the 
Bishop, "depends on the accuracy of the English 
version. That version reads in the eighteenth verse, 
' quickened by the Spirit.' It is to be noted, however, 
that all the versions except one (the Ethiopic) seem 
to have understood it 'quickened by the Spirit': and 
it is scarcely possible, upon any correct principles 
of interpretation, to give any other translation to 
the words. If, therefore, we follow the original, in 
preference to the English version, we must read the 
passage thus : ' Christ suffered for us, the Just for the 
unjust, that He might bring us to God ; being put to 
death in the flesh, but quick in His Spirit ; by which 
(or in which) He went and preached (or proclaimed) to 
the spirits in safe keeping,' etc.'' (An Eoffposition of the 
Thirty-nine Articles, etc., 1868, pp. 94, 95.) 



14 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

I confess to surprise at such a rendering of fwoTrot^- 
0e!? TTvevfjLaTi as "quick in His Spirit." For, first, 
though there is an occasional looseness in the LXX., 
it is certain that the New Testament strictly and 
exclusively employs ^aioyovew for keeping alive, 
fcooTTOieo) for making alive. Secondly, is it not 
singular to reason from a non-authentic lection as 
the original ? And the Bishop of Ely (see note, 
p. 94) knows that the best critics reject the article 
before ttv. If absent, it is impossible for tti/. to mean 
"in His Spirit." 

Besides, the resulting theology is as strange as the 
grammar; for he proceeds, "There is, it will be 
observed, a marked antithesis between ' flesh ' and 
'spirit.' In Christ's Flesh or Body He was put to 
death. Men were 'able to kill the body,' but they 
could not kill His soul. He was therefore alive in 
His Soul, and in or by that He went to the souls 
who were in safe custody (eu (pvKaKri); His Body 
was dead, but His Spirit or Soul went to their spirits 
or souls. This is the natural interpretation of the 
passage; and if it ended here, it would contain no 
difficulty, and its sense would never have been 
doubted. It would have contained a simple assertion 
of our Lord's descent to the spirits of the dead." 
To my mind such a sense must seem far below 
scripture. For what a poor inference that men could 
not kill Christ's soul ! Why, they could not kill the 
soul of the least of His saints, nay, nor of the most 
wretched of His enemies. Indeed, "kill the soul" 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 15 

in any case is a singular phrase to use of anyone, 
most of all to feel it worth while denying it in the 
case of our Lord Jesus. How diiferent His language ! 
"Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after 
that have no more that they can do. But I will 
forewarn you whom ye shall fear. Fear him, which 
after he hath killed hath power to cast into hell ; 
yea, I say unto you, Fear him." "He was therefore 
alive in His soul" is a feeble platitude for the issue 
of the clause; as surely as it supposes a wrong sense 
given to fwoTroi^Se!?, not to speak of the confusion 
of the soul with the spirit in a way foreign to all 
exact speech. The interpretation, therefore, would be 
in every respect unnatural even if it ended here. 

When we follow, the gulf widens which severs truth 
from error. " But it is added that He not only went 
to the spirits in safe keeping, but that He went and 
'preached to them. Hence the passage has appeared to 
savour of false doctrine, and hence its force has been 
explained away. But the word 'preached,' or 'pro- 
claimed,' by no means necessarily infers that He 
preached either faith or repentance. Christ had just 
finished the work of salvation, had made an end of 
sin, and conquered hell. Even the angels seemed not 
to be fully enlightened as to all the work of grace 
which God performs for man. It is not likely then 
that the souls of the departed patriarchs should have 
fully understood or known all that Christ has just 
accomplished for them. They indeed may have 
known, and no doubt did know, the great truth that 



16 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

redemption was to be wrought for all men by the 
suffering and death of the Messiah. But before the 
accomplishment of this great work, neither angels nor 
devils seem fully to have understood the mystery of it. 
If this be true, when the blessed Soul of our crucified 
Eedeemer went among the souls of those whom He 
has just redeemed, what can be more probable than 
that He sh ^i have 'proclaimed' {sKripv^ev) to them 
that their redemption had been fully effected, that 
Satan had been conquered, that the great sacrifice had 
been offered up ? If angels joy over one sinner that 
repenteth, may we not suppose paradise filled with 
rapture when the Soul of Jesus came among the souls 
of His redeemed, Himself the herald {kyipv^) of His 
own victory ? " 

It is certain, however, that the preaching of which 
the apostle here speaks was addressed neither to angels 
nor to devils, nor yet to patriarchs, but expressly to 
those who did iiot hearken to it in the days of the 
divine long-suffering, just before the deluge. The text 
itself therefore dissolves the airy fabric we have just 
seen, and proves that the preaching was addressed, 
like all other proclamations of the truth, to faith, but, 
as in this world habitually, met with unbelief and 
insubjection of heart in those who heard. Indeed, 
in p. 96 Dr. B. confesses that the proof-text is not 
favourable to the point they would make it prove. 
" The only (?) difficulty in this interpretation of this 
difficult passage, is in the fact that the preaching is 
specially said to have been addressed to those who had 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 17 

once been disobedient in the days of ISToah. That 
many who died in the flood may yet have been saved 
from final damnation seems highly probable, and has 
been the opinion of many learned divines. The flood 
was a great temporal judgment, and it follows not 
that 'all who perished in the flood are to perish 
in the lake of fire.' But the real difficulty con- 
sists in the fact that the proclamation of Jjie finishing 
of the great work of salvation is toj^iesented by 
St. Peter as having been addressed to those ante- 
diluvian penitents (?), and no mention is made of the 
penitents of later ages, who are equally interested in 
the tidings." 

The really important thing for all to weigh is that 
this difficulty is created by the interpretation that 
Christ went in His soul and preached to the spirits in 
the separate state. The text itself speaks of His 
preaching to such as had been once disobedient in 
Noah's days. The only unforced inference is that 
these are in prison because of their disobedience of 
old, not that being in prison they obeyed Christ's 
preaching in hades. Nor is there the smallest hint 
that, having perished in that great temporal judgment, 
they were alleviated by any subsequent preaching of 
our Lord, but rather that they are kept waiting for 
a still more tremendous, because an eternal, judgment 
before the great white throne. They despised Noah, 
the preacher of righteousness, yet not with impunity, 
for the flood took them all away; but worse remains 
than the flood brought in upon the world of the 



18 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

ungodly. They are kept for judgment like such angels 
as sinned. 

" It must be confessed," continues Dr. B., " that this 
is a knot which cannot be easily untied. Yet should 
not this induce us to reject the literal and grammatical 
interpretation of the passage, and to fall back upon 
those forced glosses which have been coined in order to 
avoid, instead of fairly meeting and endeavouring to 
solve," the acknowledged difficulty. To my conviction 
there is nothing to untie, where one cleaves to the 
strict language of the apostle and the real bearing 
of his argument. For he is exposing indirectly the 
Jewish unbelief, which would have nothing but a 
Messiah visibly reigning in power and glory, to the 
exaltation of the chosen people and the confusion of 
their enemies. The faith of the believing or Christian 
Jews in Him, dead, risen, and gone to heaven, exposed 
them to the derision of their brethren after the flesh, 
who felt not their sins, and cared not for the grace 
of God displayed in redemption by the blood of Jesus. 
He had preached, not as present, but rendering testi- 
mony by virtue of the Spirit. Hence the importance 
of pointing to His testimony by Noah, a testimony 
to man as such, like the gospel of Christ; for it was 
before the days of Israel or even Abraham, and the 
most striking epoch and also period of preaching to 
men in all the Old Testament. 

This is as we saw confirmed by Genesis vi. 3, where 
Jehovah said, " My Spirit shall not always strive with 
man, for that he also is flesh; yet his days shall be 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 19 

a hundred and twenty years." Then the ark was 
preparing, the space of God's long-suffering; and 
" the waters of Noah came," and man was destroyed 
from the face of the earth. And as it was in the 
days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of the 
Son of man ; for the days of the gospel are pre- 
eminently of testimony, as were those before the 
deluge, during which Noah prepared an ark to the 
saving of his house, and became heir to the righteous- 
ness which is by faith. Again, he was not a believer 
only, but a preacher of righteousness, more emphatic- 
ally than we find it said of any other in Old Testament 
times. The preaching was in the power of the Spirit, 
and hence attributed to the Spirit of Christ, who is 
ever the active person in the Godhead, as is well 
known in each visitation of man before the incarnation, 
preparing both the way and mind for it. Compare 
"the Spirit of Christ" which was in the prophets of 
old (1 Peter i. 11). 

This then yrould encourage the believing Jews, as 
it might well admonish their despisers. It is a 
question of preaching to the world still in the Holy 
Spirit, not yet of the public reign and government 
of the Lord. So Christ wrought by the Spirit then ; 
and so He does now. As the flood came on those 
heedless of the preaching of old, so it will be when 
He comes in judgment, for He is ready to judge quick 
and dead. And if they taunt the believers with being 
so few compared with the masses that believe not, let 
them not forget that but eight souls were then saved 



20 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

through water; which figure now saves, baptism, on one 
side of it death, and on the other, resurrection. Christ 
has passed through actually for us, as we also in spirit 
by faith, having a good conscience before God through 
Him who is not only risen but at the right hand of 
God in heaven, where the highest and mightiest of 
creatures are subjected to Christ ; who is therefore as 
full of assured security for His own as of irremediable 
ruin for all who slight the warning. 

In thus tracing the links of the apostolic thought 
and word, I am greatly mistaken if the least strain 
is put on any part, as without doubt the true text and 
the exact version have been already given. It is not 
so with those who have flattered themselves that they 
adhere most closely to the words of the apostle and 
their plain sense. 

Thus when Bishop Middleton considers the true 
meaning to "be dead carnally, but alive spiritually," 
almost every word is misrepresented. For, to bear 
such a translation, the sentence should have been 
Qavuiv fji.ev aapKiKwg, ^S>v Se Trvev/naTiKcos, though one 
might call such a statement absurd and heterodox. I 
deny that we must or can render Oavarwdeh /ulw a-apKi 
^woTToiriQeh <5e Trvev/uLart in any such fashion. Bishop 
Browne is as wrong in adopting such a thought in the 
note to p. 95, as he is in giving " quick in His Spirit " 
in the text of p. 95, or in expounding it as Christ alive 
in His soul, in or by which He went to the souls ev <p. 
All this in my judgment is as loose in grammar as in 
philosophy, if they allude to this ; and as faulty also 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 21 

in theology, as it has not the least coherence with the 
context or the scope of the apostle's reasoning. 

If Peter too had meant to say that the soul of our 
Lord went to these- other souls, he must have taken 
a most circuitous and unexampled mode of expressing 
it in employing the phrase ev S>, referring to irveviuLaTi 
just before. The statement, if not the interpretation, 
would be most unnatural. Taken as it stands for 
Christ's going and preaching in virtue of the Spirit 
by Noah to the rebellious antediluvians, it is in my 
judgment fully justified, were this necessary, by the 
Pauline phrase, Koi eXdwv eurjyyeXlcraTO eiprivr]v vfiiv 
Toh jmaKpav Kui eipyjvtjv Toig eyyi'S'. The latter is even 
a stronger instance ; for there is no explanatory 
reference to Tri/ei/yuart ev &. Further, it is not a natural 
interpretation to take toi? ev <p. ttv. as those who were, 
but who are, in prison, because of aTreiOr'ia-acrlv irore 
ore, K.T-X, following, which very simply attributes 
their being in custody to their disobedience of old. 
There is no need nor just ground for joining ttote with 
■KopevQeh eKr)p., but with a-Tretft, which marks off their 
unbelief at the preaching from the time when they 
were in prison. We are thus shown as plainly as 
words can that we here read of Christ preaching, not 
in person but by virtue of the Spirit, to those suffering 
the consequences of having been disobedient in the 
days of Noah. 

Again, be it observed, the moral aim of this supposed 
preaching in the unseen world is as unsatisfactory 
as we have seen the grammar to be irregular and 



22 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the doctrine strange. For it supposes a preaching 
confessedly without either faith or repentance as its 
end ; and it selects, in what seems the most arbitrary 
way, out of all the departed scrtils those spirits im- 
prisoned because of their heedlessness, when the long- 
suffering of God was awaiting in the days of Noah.* 
To single out such wilful sinners, as the objects to 
whom Christ in the under-world proclaimed His 
triumph and their fully effected redemption, seems 
to be a statement as foreign to scripture as can be 
conceived, and equally ill adapted to impress their 
danger on such as now despise the preached word. 

Bishop Horsley's Sermon on the passage, which is so 
warmly commended in Bishop Middleton's Treatise and 
in Bishop Browne's Exposition, appears to sober minds 
little worthy of confidence. Thus he affirms strongly 
that the English translation of ^. (5e -kv., though "a 
true proposition, is certainly not the sense of the 
apostle's words. It is of great importance to remark, 
though it may seem a grammatical nicety, that the 
prepositions, in either branch of this clause, have been 
supplied by the translators and are not in the original. 
The words 'flesh' and 'spirit,' in the original, stand 
without any preposition, in that case which, in the 
Greek language, without any preposition, is the case 

* The careful student will uotice that the original is not exactly 
rendered by the English translators and most others in this respect, 
that dTreiSijffao-ii' from the omission of the article must needs be a 
predicate, and not an epithet describing or defining the spirits. The 
meaning therefore is not "which were," etc., for this requires toTs, 
but "disobedient as they once were when," etc. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 23 

either of the cause or instrument by which — of the 
time when — of the place where — of the part in which 
— of the manner how — or of the respect in which, 
according to the exigence of the context ; and to any 
one who will consider the original with critical 
accuracy it will be obvious, from the perfect antithesis 
of these two clauses concerning flesh and spirit, that 
if the word ' spirit ' denote the active cause by which 
Christ was restored to life, which must be supposed by 
them who understand the word of the Holy Ghost, the 
word ' flesh ' must equally denote the active cause by 
which He was put to death, which therefore must have 
been the flesh of His own body — an interpretation too 
manifestly absurd to be admitted. But if the word 
'flesh' denote, as it most evidently does, the part in 
which death took effect upon Him, ' spirit ' must denote 
the part in which life was preserved (!) in Him, that is, 
His own soul ; and the word ' quickened ' is often 
applied to signify, not the resuscitation of life ex- 
tinguished, but the preservation and continuance of 
life subsisting (?). The exact rendering, therefore, of 
the apostle's words would be, 'Being put to death in 
the flesh, but quick in the spirit,' that is, surviving in 
His soul the stroke of death which His body had 
sustained, ' by which,' or rather ' in which,' that is, in 
which surviving soul, 'He went and preached to the 
souls of men in prison or in safe keeping.' " 

I have given this long extract, which clearly puts 
this able divine's objections to the Authorised Version. 
Now without committing myself to the defence of what 



24 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

is not quite correct, I have no hesitation in asserting 
that Horsley, by his own mistaken view, has diverged 
incomparably farther from the truth. We need not go 
beyond the Bishop himself and the passage in debate, 
where he gives a difference of shade to the two 
participles, which are quite as much contrasted with 
each other as their complementary datives. According 
to his own principle therefore, as the first means " put 
to death," the other should be " made alive," even if its 
uniform usage by inspired writers did not force one to 
the same conclusion. Why then did not H. carry out 
fairly and fully his own reasoning ? Because it would 
have involved him in the result that Christ was not 
only put to death in the flesh, but made alive, in His 
own soul or spirit. The good Bishop of course shrank 
from so portentous an inference, and was therefore 
driven to modify the antithesis, not in TrvevfiaTi, but 
in an unnatural and unfounded interpretation put on 
^woTroitjOeis, which even Dean A. explodes, who insists 
justly on "brought to life," instead of "preserved 
alive." 

The truth is that Horsley did not himself seize the 
exact force of crapKi and TrvevfiaTi, still less the 
difference produced by ev in the beginning of verse 20. 
Christ was put to death in {i.e. in respect to) flesh, as 
a living man below; He was made alive in {i.e. in 
respect to) Spirit, as one henceforth living in the life 
of resurrection, characterised by the Spirit as the other 
by flesh, though Christ was not a spirit only but had a 
spiritual body. It is not His own spirit as man, which 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 25 

is far woise than the English Version here, both 
grammatically and theologically. Grammatically it 
would demand raJ -kv., which is a reading unknown to 
the best copies and scouted by all competent critics; 
but even if diplomatically and grammatically legiti- 
mate, it would land us in the frightful heterodoxy that 
Christ died not merely in flesh but in spirit, and had 
to be quickened in the human spirit, which dies not 
even in the lost. Only the materialist conceives that 
spirit, if he at all allows of spirit, can die. 

Further, if t,- (Se irv. refers to the resurrection of 
Christ, it is harshness itself and out of all reason to 
suppose Him back in the separate state in the verse 
following, wliere Horsley takes kv S to mean in 
which surviving soul He went and preached to the 
souls of men in prison. But understand it as ev 
means we should, that Christ also went ei^ xveiz/xarj, 
not merely in character of Spirit, but in His power 
when He preached through JSToah; and all is precise 
in grammar, correct in doctrine, clear in sense, and 
consistent with the context. When we are raised 
by -and -by it will be Sia to svoikovv avrov irvevfjia, 
because of His Spirit that dwelleth in us. It was 
not suitable to Christ, so to speak of His resurrection. 
He was, when put to death, quickened Trvev/xan, 
denoting the character of His life in resurrection 
(not merely the agent), ev & kuI marking the Spirit's 
power in which, before He was thus put to death 
and raised, He went and preached to the spirits in 
prison, disobedient as they were once when, etc. 



26 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Who can wonder, therefore, that the Anglican 
divines in the 5th of Queen Elizabeth dropped the 
reference to this passage of Peter in Article iii., while 
they had inserted it in the 6th and 7th of King 
Edward the Sixth ? Nor need we with Bishop Horsley 
impute it to undue reliance on the opinion of 
Augustine (Ep. 99 [164], Evodio), who was followed 
by some others of the Fathers in rejecting the super- 
stitious idea of Christ's preaching in hades. The 
excellent Leighton, at a later day, was so far from 
seeing this to be the plain meaning of the passage 
that he does not hesitate to say, "They that dream 
of the descent of Christ's soul into hell think this 
place sounds somewhat that way ; but, being ex- 
amined, it proves no way suitable, nor can by the 
strongest wresting be drawn to fit their purpose.'' 

On the other hand, the figurative explanation of 
T0(? kv <j>. TTveufjiaa-iv is quite indefensible and uncalled 
for. The sense of sinners shut up in a prison of 
darkness while living on earth, whether in Noah's 
day or in apostolic times, whether of the Gentiles or 
of the Jews and Gentiles, must be rejected. Bishop 
Horsley, however, is as mistaken on his side when 
he avers that such passages as Isaiah xlix. 9, Ixi. 1, 
refer to the liberation of souls from hades ; they 
describe Jehovah's gracious work on the earth. 
Equally wrong is his idea that Trore joined with 
aireiO. implies that the imprisoned souls were re- 
covered from that disobedience, and before their death 
had been brought to repentance and faith in the 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 27 

Eedeemer to come. Contrariwise the scope is that, 
having once on a time disobeyed when God's long- 
suffering was waiting before the deluge, they are in" 
prison. In virtue (or in the power) of the Spirit 
Christ went and preached to such, by a preacher 
of righteousness, no doubt ; but it is styled His 
preaching to enhance the solemnity of what was 
then refused, as it was also in Peter's day. These 
spirits were in prison as having once been disobedient 
thus and then; and God will not be mocked now 
if Christ's preaching in the Spirit be rejected and 
He be despised in His servants. Where would be 
the force of the few, that is, eight souls who were 
saved, through water, if the disobedient mass, or any 
of them, were saved none the less though outside 
the ark ? 

Again, it is certainly a suicidal citation which H. 
makes from the beginning of Eevelation xx. 13. For 
we know that the sea at that epoch will have none to 
give up but the unblessed and unholy, all the righteous 
dead having already been raised in the first resurrection. 
Nor is there the least reason from scripture to fancy 
that souls deceive themselves by false hopes and 
apprehensions after death, so that some should need 
above others the preaching of our Lord in hades. It 
is nowhere said that thither He went and preached. 
The spirits are said to be in prison, and this, as 
having once on a time been disobedient; but it is 
not said or meant that Christ went there and preached 
to them. 



28 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

It is no question then of discrediting clear assertions 
of Holy Writ on account of difficulties, which may seem 
to the human mind to arise out of them. It is inexact 
interpretation, which produces endless confusion, leads 
too naturally into false doctrine, and has no connection 
with the passage any more than with the general tenor 
of revealed truth elsewhere. To put such a notion, 
based on a spurious reading, slighting the exactness of 
grammar, ignoring the nice distinctions of the phrases, 
and resulting in the most impotent conclusion 
spiritually ; to put this on the same level " with the 
doctrines of atonement — of gratuitous redemption — of 
justification by faith without the works of the law — of 
sanctification by the influence of the Holy Spirit"; to 
say that, discrediting Christ's preaching in hades, we 
must, on similar grounds, part at once with the hope of 
resurrection, is more worthy of a bold or weak special 
pleader than becoming a grave and godly minister of 
Christ. To urge that its great use is to confute the 
notion of death as a temporary extinction of the soul, 
or of its sleep between death and resurrection, is 
certainly not to claim much from so wonderful a fact, 
if a fact. Whether scripture does not abundantly 
confute such dreary and mischievous dogmas of 
unbelief, without resorting to strange doctrine, based 
on a hasty and superficial interpretation of 1 Peter 
iii. 18-20, may safely be left to spiritual men who 
judge according to the word of God. 

It is curious to see how an intrepid and strong- 
minded writer, such as Bishop Horsley unij^uestionably 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 29 

was, commits himself to untenable statements * once 
he leaves the lines of the Holy Spirit in scripture. 
" The apostle's assertion, therefore " (says he), " is this, 
that Christ went and preached to souls of men in 
prison. This invisible mansion of departed spirits, 
though certainly not a place of penal confinement to 
the good, is nevertheless in some respects a prison. 
It is a place of seclusion from the external — a place 
of unfinished happiness, consisting in rest, security, 
and hope, more than enjoyment. It is a place which 
the souls of men never would have entered had not 
sin introduced death, and from which there is no exit 
by any natural means for those who once have entered. 
The deliverance of the saints from it is to be effected 
by our Lord's power. It is described in the old Latin 
language as a place enclosed within an impassable 
fence; and in the poetical parts of scripture it is 
represented (?) as secured by gates of brass, which 
our Lord is to batter down, and barricaded with huge 
massive iron bars, which He is to cut in sunder. As 
a place of confinement, therefore, though not of punish- 
ment, it may well be called a prison. The original 
word, however, in this text of the apostle imports not 

* Indeed, so far from agi'eeiug with Bi.sliop Browne that it is an 
"admirable sermon," I am surprised at the want of knowledge that 
Horsley displays, e.g. in respect of Calvin's views. For he imputes 
to his favourite author the doctrine of Christ's literal descent into 
Gehenna ; whereas C. really held that Christ suffered on the cross the 
divine wrath due to sin, and that this is the meaning of His descent 
into hell — sound doctrine, though mistakenly attached to that clause 
of the creed. 



30 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

of necessity so much as this, but merely a place of 
safe keeping; for so this passage might be rendered 
with great exactness, 'He went and preached to the 
spirits in safe keeping.' And the invisible mansion 
of departed souls is to the righteous a place of safe 
keeping where they are preserved under the shadow 
of God's right hand, as their condition sometimes is 
described (?) in Scripture, till the season shall arrive 
for their advancement to their future glory; as the 
souls of the wicked, on the other hand, are reserved, 
in the other division of the same place, unto the 
judgment of the great day. Now, if Christ went and 
preached to souls of men thus in prison or in safe 
keeping, surely He went to the prison (?) of those 
souls, or to the place of their custody ; and what 
place that should be but the hell of the Apostles' 
Creed to which our Lord descended, I have not yet 
met with the critic that could explain." 

The careful reader will perceive, indeed any one 
when it is pointed out, the immediate departure from 
scriptural sense and accuracy. For the apostle does 
not assert "that Christ went and preached to souls 
of men in prison." He speaks not of human souls 
generally, but only of those characterised by dis- 
obedience of yore, when Noah the preacher of right- 
eousness prepared an ark to the saving of his house. 
This makes all the difference possible ; for there is no 
reference whatever to the invisible mansion of departed 
spirits as a whole, still less to the special place of 
seclusion for the good. These last are in fact excluded 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 31 

by the language and the thought of the apostle. His 
argument is against those who, as incredulous Jews 
were especially apt to do, made light of preaching 
Christ only present in Spirit, not reigning in power, 
and of the comparative fewness of those who professed 
to believe. His refutation of their taunts, and proof 
of their extreme danger, are grounded on the Lord's 
dealing with the men of Noah's day, who similarly 
slighted the divine warning, while those only were 
saved who heeded it. How few the latter, how many 
the former! 

It is true indeed that " it is a place which the souls 
of men never would have entered had not sin been 
introduced"; but what is this to the purpose? It 
applies on the side of good as of evil, of heaven as of 
hell ; for sin, which forfeited living on the earth along 
with innocence, furnished occasion for that infinite 
grace which gives the believer eternal life and heavenly 
glory in and with the Son of God, the last Adam. 
And if the actual condition of the departed be as 
regards the body incomplete, even so it is not correct to 
speak of our being at home with the Lord as " a place 
of unfinished happiness." Doubtless the Lord Himself, 
the saints with Him, and those on earth are looking 
onward to the day of His and their manifested glory, 
when the world shall know that the Father sent the 
Son and loved us even as He loved Him; when He 
will gather together in one all things in Christ, both 
which are in heaven and which are on earth, in Him 
in whom also we have obtained inheritance, being 



32 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

predestinated according to His purpose; when in 
virtue of the name of Jesus every knee shall bow of 
beings heavenly, earthly, and infernal, and every tongue 
shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to God the 
Father's glory. 

Ifowhere does scripture speak of "the deliverance 
of the saints from " this state of things, though surely 
it is of the Lord's grace and the divine virtue of life in 
Him, that He will raise their bodies and transform 
what was erst of humiliation into conformity to His 
body of glory, according to the working of power 
whereby He is able even to subdue all things to 
Himself. This no doubt is the full answer to the cry 
of the wretched though quickened man (in Eom. vii.) : 
"Who shall deliver me out of the body of this death ?" 
For it is our resurrection (Eom. viii. 11) which will 
manifest the victory over death* through our Lord 
Jesus Christ, as it is His resurrection which has even 
now given us life in the Spirit, freeing us from the law 
of sin and death. We have for our souls what we shall 
know at His coming for our mortal bodies. But 
deliverance from a place of seclusion for our spirits, to 
be effected by our Lord's power, is a dream wholly 
opposed to the scriptural representation of the saints' 
enjoyment with Christ meanwhile. The apostle 
declares that to depart and be with Him even now 

* In 1 Corinthians xv. 55 it is twice, "0 death," 6i.va.Te, N B D 
E F G I, some cursives, the more ancient versions save the Syriao and 
Gothic, several Greek, and all, or almost all, the Latin fathers. Two 
uncials of the ninth century (K L) with the hulk of cursives support 
the reading of 9S1;, The Alex, before being changed gave ttoO aav pikos. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 33 

and thus is very much better than remaining here, 
though doubtless there will be more for the body when 
He comes : for the soul there cannot be. Therefore, 
while earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our 
house which is from heaven, he says that we are 
confident and willing rather to be absent from the 
body and present with the Lord (that is, rather than 
abide here in the body absent from the Lord). Yet 
are we now, not shut up as were believers before 
redemption, but called to stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ made us free. 

Hence it is in vain to urge what "the old Latin 
language" describes, since it is quite opposed to the 
truth ; and it is a mistake to cite the poetical parts 
of scripture which treat of the deliverance of God's 
people on earth. For " the gates of brass " and " the 
bars of iron" (Isaiah xlv. 2) certainly refer to Babylon, 
not to the presence of the Lord, with whom are the 
spirits of departed saints. So Psalm cxxi. 5, " Jehovah 
is thy shade upon thy right hand," is expressly a 
prophetic song for Israel in the latter day, and in no 
way about those deceased; as Isaiah xlix. 2 certainly 
has no such reference, the context plainly giving the 
transition from Israel to Christ. It is a distressing 
misrepresentation then to call His presence a place 
of confinement, though not of punishment, which 
"may well be called a prison." Never does God's 
word so call it. The converted robber asked to be 
remembered when Christ comes in His kingdom {i.e. 
in the resurrection state and the day of glory for the 



34 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

earth) ; and the Lord gives him, as a nearer comfort 
and intrinsically the deepest joy, the assurance of 
being with Him that very day in paradise. It is 
grievous dishonour to Him and ignorance of scripture 
to slight such grace, even to the length of saying that 
it "may well be called a prison." Certainly it will 
never be so called by one who appreciates either the 
blessedness of Christ's love or the honour the Father 
is now putting on the Son. The Father's house can 
only be called "a prison" by the darkest prejudice. 
It is where Christ is now, and where we shall be when 
Christ at His coming takes us to be with Him as the 
expression of His fullest love. The presence of the 
Lord on high is the very kernel of joy by grace, 
whether for the separate spirit after death or when we 
are all changed at His coming. 

Feeling apparently that this is rather strong 
language (though many of the fathers knew no better, 
through their ignorance of eternal life in Christ and 
of redemption). Bishop Horsley qualifies his defence, 
and affirms that the original word in the text of the 
apostle imports not so much as this, but merely a 
place of safe keeping. Now what are the facts of the 
usage of (pvXaK^'? Primarily it means the act of 
watching; hence (2) the persons that watch or guard 
(as in Latin and English) ; (3) the time ; (4) the place, 
not only where those watching are posted, but (5) 
where others are kept as in ward or prison. Such 
(with the moral application of taking heed, and being 
on one's guard, from keeping in ward) are the chief 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 35 

senses in which the word was employed by the Greeks. 
The New Testament has it once in the first sense (Luke 
ii. 8), once in the second (Acts xii. 10), five times in 
the third (Matt. xiv. 25 ; xxiv. 43 ; Mark vi. 48 ; Luke 
xii. 38 twice), and forty times in the fifth sense, in- 
cluding not only 1 Peter iii. 19 but Kevelation xviii. 2, 
where it is in the Authorised Version translated " the 
liold of every foul spirit and a cage of every unclean and 
hateful bird," all evidently equivalent to the meaning 
of "prison," which is used even of Satan's place of 
temporary detention. JSTever elsewhere does the Holy 
Spirit use it in the more general signification of a 
mere "place of safe keeping." Is there any special 
reason in our text why it should here be so rendered ? 
The assigned ground of custody being the former 
disobedience of the spirits thus restrained, there ought 
to be no hesitation in accepting the English Version 
as fully justified, and rejecting that suggested as both 
unexampled in New Testament usage and at issue with 
the context. 

It is then going beyond scripture to affirm that 
" Christ went and preached to souls of men thus in 
prison or safe keeping"; and no proof is given that 
He went to the prison of those souls or to the place 
of their custody. It is quite sure that the apostle 
speaks only of the spirits in prison, disobedient once 
when the long-suffering of GOD waited in Noah's 
days, not of souls of men as a whole in the separate 
state. ,It is sure that Christ, in the power of the 
Spirit, went and preached to the former ; but it is 



36 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

nowhere written that He went to the prison or place 
of custody of any souls whatever, and preached there. 
The building and the groundwork of Bishop Horsley 
are alike unsubstantial ; his handling of scripture is 
careless, and his reasoning unsound. Such passages 
as Isaiah xlii. 7 and xlix. 9 have only to be examined 
with ordinary attention in order to satisfy any candid 
mind that it is a question of the deliverance of 
captives in this world, be it literal or figurative, and 
in no way of men's souls after death. 

If, as Bishop Browne holds, hades and paradise 
are two names applying to the same state, it would 
seem to follow that paradise must apply to the place 
of departed saints, and hades to their state as separate 
from the body. For 2 Corinthians xii. 2, 4 naturally 
connects paradise, not with heaven merely, but even 
with the third heaven, where the Lord is (cf. Luke 
xxiii. 43); and Eevelation ii. 7 is decisive, that in 
this very ""paradise of God will the faithful have 
their future reward at Christ's coming, when risen 
from the dead or changed. It is an error, therefore, 
to think that " it was not heaven " ; for the latter 
scripture certainly identifies the scene of the separate 
spirits of the saints with that of their future glorifica- 
tion.* They are with the Lord now as they will be 

* One sees hence the rashness of Bishop Horsley, who says, 
" Paradise was certainly some place where our Lord was to be on 
the very day on which He suffered, and where the companion of His 
sufferings was to he with Him. It was not heaven ; for to heaven 
our Lord, after His death, ascended not till after His resurrection, 
as appears from His own words to Mary Magdalene. He was" not, 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 37 

when changed, and thus completely and for ever 
with Him ; but now as then in heaven. The ancients 
who denied this were as wrong as the moderns, who 
popularly hold the soul's passing at once to its final 
reward with very little thought of the resurrection 
at Christ's second coming, or of the kingdom. 

But we may here add that the ancient versions 
are too loose to render any help worth naming. 
Without discussing now whether the Peschito does 
(as Bode and others assert) or does not use scheiul 
for the grave as well as hades, it is plain that " lived " 
in spirit is faulty for ^woTroitjOeh, and that to leave 
out "in [or in the power of] which," substituting a 
mere connective particle " and," is far from the truth. 
"To the souls which were kept" may after a fashion 
represent tocs ev <f>. ivv., the addition of "in hades" 
or " scheiul " being unwarranted. There are other 
inaccuracies ; but let this suffice. Far better here is 
the Philoxenian Syriac, which is thus rendered by 

therefore, in heaven on the day of the crucifixion; and where Se 
was not, the thief could not be with Him. It was no place of 
torment; for to any such place the name of paradise never was 
applied. It could be no other place than that region of repose and 
rest where the souls of the righteous abide in joyful hope of the 
consummation of their bliss." The fallacy running throughout is 
due to the want of understanding that the ascension is spoken not of 
the separate spirit but of the whole man, of body as well as spirit 
and soul. The conquerors are certainly not promised their final 
reoompenee in an intermediate state, yet it is to be in paradise. 
And there beyond controversy entered the spirit of the Lord Jesus, 
and with Him that of the converted robber on the day of crucifixion. 
John XX. 17 speaks of His ascension in bodily presence, but in no way 
negatives the going of His spirit there at death. (Compare Luke 
xxiii. 43 and Kov. ii. 7.) 



38 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

White, "morte affectus quidem carne, vivificatus 
autem spiritu. In quo et spiritibus, qui in domo 
custodiae sunt, profectus praedicavit: Qui non obedi- 
verant aliquando, quum expectabat longanimitas Dei 
in diebus Noe," etc. The Arabic (Pol.) and the 
Vulgate alone give correctly the beginning of the 
verse, the Erpenian Arabic and the Aethiopic being 
as loose as the Peschito Syr. The Aeth. adds " holy " 
to "Spirit"; but it does not follow, as Bishop Middleton 
seems to think, that the other ancient versions did 
not understand exactly the same sense, though they 
very properly did not add the word "holy" so as 
to define their rendering more than the original text. 
The Memphitic, according to Wilkins, is no better 
than the rest. This is his version: "mortuus quidem 
in carne, vivens autem in Spiritu. In hoc Spiritibus 
[S. sic] qui in carcere abiit evangelizavit. Incredulis 
aliquando," etc. 

In every version and in every edition of the text, 
accurate or faulty, this at least stands out irrefragably, 
that the spirits in question are nowhere represented 
as those of men who had already repented when on 
earth, but on the contrary as disobedient. This we 
have seen to be very far from the only difficulty in 
the way of the alleged preaching in hades; but it is 
at least felt and confessed by the stoutest champions 
of that interpretation. It is quite erroneous to 
assume that Peter speaks here of the proclamation 
made of finishing the great work of salvation; nor 
is it less to say that it was addressed to the peni- 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 39 

tents of antediluvian times, even if there were no 
question about the penitents of later ages, who are 
equally interested in the tidings. The apostle uses 
not even ewyyeX/^o^at (which, though expressive of 
glad tidings, admits of far greater latitude in scripture 
than the good news of the finished work of salvation) 
but Kt\pv(T(TW, a word equally applicable to 'express a 
public setting forth of righteousness, and a warning 
of the destruction which must fall on the despiser. 
(Compare 2 Peter ii. 5, " Noah a preacher of righteous- 
ness," SiKaioG-vvr]^ KYjpvKa.) The main difficulty then 
really is that the text speaks only of impenitent 
persons; the exposition, only of penitents. 

Whatever the rapture with which we may suppose 
paradise filled when the soul of Jesus came among the 
souls of His redeemed, it is certain that the passage of 
the apostle says not one word about it; and it would 
be no small difficulty to produce any other scripture 
which does reveal it. Here it is a question of the 
spirits in custody for their former disobedience in the 
days of Noah, while a very few in contrast with them 
were saved, used for the present comfort of saints 
taunted with their paucity by the masses, who dis- 
believed what was preached by the Spirit now, as 
before the flood. Possibly no doubt some who then 
perished in the waters may not be doomed to perish 
everlastingly in the lake of fire, just as one at least 
preserved in the ark may not have been ordained 
to life eternal. But all this is only profitless specu- 
lation; and those who indulge in it lose sight of 



40 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the grand and plain lessons of the apostle, whether for 
the comfort of the faithful or for the warning of un- 
believers. Before the kingdom of God is established 
and displayed in power the masses have ever been 
disobedient to the word, and believers a little flock ; 
but be these ever so few, let not those forget the days 
wherein a world of impious men perished. And this 
too is not the worst ; for their spirits are in ward 
(which is never said of the righteous), the Lord 
without doubt reserving them as unjust for judgment- 
day to be punished. 

As much misconception exists respecting Calvin's 
sentiments, I will here state fully what he has written 
in his early and later works. It is at any rate an 
error to classify him, as did Dean Alford after Huther, 
with those who understand the passage of a literal 
descent of our Lord into hades. Nowhere does Calvin 
commit himself to any such statement, though, as 
already pointed out, he applied the phrase in the 
creed to His sufferings on the cross, and he conceived 
the efficacy of that work sensibly and at once to reach 
the Old Testament saints. The reader need not for 
a moment suppose aixthority is attached to what may 
be quoted from the great leader of the reformed. The 
effect, I trust, will be only to prove the incontestable 
superiority of the divine word ; the wise are but weak 
where they depart from it, while it gives light to 
the simple. 

In order of time the first allusion is in the Psyclio- 
pannychia, published in 1534, when the author was 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 41 

but twenty-five years of age : a tract directed against 
the materialistic notion of Anabaptists and others, 
who would have the soul to sleep during its departure 
from the body before the resurrection. Some zealots 
were the more disposed to embrace this revolting and 
utterly unscriptural scheme ; because, if true, it would 
decide against the Popish dreams of limbus patrum, 
and in particular of purgatory. But Calvin's pious 
sobriety was proof against such a temptation even 
in the heats of controversy. This is his use of the 
text, as quoted from the third volume of his Tracts 
(Translation Soc. Edinb. 1851), pp. 428, 429 :— 

"Not less evidently does the apostle Peter show 
that after death the soul both exists and lives, when 
he says (1 Peter iii. 19) that Christ preached to the 
spirits in prison, not merely forgiveness or salvation to 
the spirits of the righteous, but also confusion to the 
spirits of the wicked. Per so I interpret the passage 
which has puzzled many minds; and I am confident 
that, under favourable auspices, I will make good my 
interpretation. Por after he had spoken of the 
humiliation of the cross of Christ, and shown that all 
the righteous must be conformed to His image, he 
immediately thereafter, to prevent them from falling 
into despair, makes mention of the resurrection to 
teach them how their tribulations were to end. Por 
he states that Christ did not fall under death, but 
subduing it came forth victorious. He indeed says in 
words, that He was 'put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened in the Spirit' (1 Peter iii. 18), but just in 



42 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the same sense in which Paul says that He suffered in 
the humiUation of the flesh, but was raised by the 
power of the Spirit. Now, in order that believers 
might understand that the power belongs to them also, 
he subjoins that Christ exerted this power in regard to 
others, and not only towards the living but also to- 
wards the dead ; and, moreover, not only towards His 
servants but also towards unbelievers and the despisers 
of His grace. 

" Let us understand, moreover, that the sentence is 
defective and wants one of its two members (!). 
Many examples of this occur in scripture, especially 
when as here several sentiments are comprehended 
in one clause. And let no one wonder that the holy 
patriarchs who waited for the redemption of Christ are 
shut up in prison (!). As they saw the light at a 
distance, under a cloud and shade (as those who saw 
the feeble light of dawn or twUight), and had not 
yet an exhibition of the divine blessing in which 
they rested, he gave the name of prison to their 
expectancy.* 

"The meaning of the apostle will therefore be that 
Christ in Spirit preached to those other spirits who 
were in prison — in other words, that the virtue of the 
redemption obtained by Christ appeared and was 
exhibited to the spirits of the dead. Now there is a 

* But how could the spirits of the ungodly (as he supposes, no less 
than of the godly) be "in a watch-tower" of expectancy, anxiously 
looking out for Christ ? if " in a prison," how include the godly ? It 
is painful to remark Calvin's irreverence for scripture, no less than 
Luther's, when they failed to understand its meaning. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 43 

want of the other member, which related to the pious 
who acknowledged and received this benefit (!) ; but it 
is complete in regard to unbelievers who received this 
announcement to their confusion. For when they saw 
but one redemption from which they were excluded, 
what could they do but despair ? I hear our opponents 
muttering and saying that this is a gloss of my own 
invention, and that such authority does not bind them. 
I have no wish to bind them to my authority; I only (?) 
ask them whether or not the spirits shut up in prison 
are spirits." 

In this handling of the text there is no great ability 
in tracing the apostle's scope or in developing the 
argument of the Epistle, though the reasoning may be 
fair against the fancied sleep of the soul. But it is 
plain that Calvin then held that the power of the work 
of Christ when accomplished reached the departed 
spirits, just and unjust, not that He visited them in 
person. But the young man does not tremble at God's 
word. He confesses that the sentence does not express 
what he wishes it to comprehend; for the member 
relative to the pious is wanting, unbelievers only being 
spoken of, at least " completely " ! The truth is that 
the only patriarchs in question were those preserved 
in the ark; yet they are contrcisted, with the disobedient 
whose spirits were in prison. The pious Noah and his 
house therefore are not wanting afterwards, but so 
named then as to refute the argument before us. 

Not long after Calvin published his Institutes of 
Christian Beligion, in the second book of which 



44 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

(chap. xvi. § 9) we may see, if possible more clearly, 
how little he agreed with the class to which of late he 
has been assigned. After a severe but just reproof of 
those who like Bishop Horsley in modern times wrest* 
Psalm cvii. 16 and Zechariah ix. 11 to an imaginary 
subterraneous limbus, treating such thoughts of 
Justin M., both the Cyrils, Ambrose, Jerome, etc., as 
no better than a fable, he then proceeds : — 

" And what need was there that the soul of Christ 
should descend thither to set them free? I readily 
own indeed that Christ illumined them by the power 
of His spirit, enabling them to recognise that the grace, 
of which they had only had a foretaste, was then 
displayed to the world. And probably to this may be 
applied the passage of Peter, where he says that Christ 
went and preached to the spirits in a watch-tower (it 
is commonly rendered 'in prison') (1 Peter iii. 19). For 
the context (?) also leads us to the conclusion that the 
faithful who had died before that time were partakers 
of the same grace as ourselves ; because he dwells on 
the power of Christ's death in that He penetrated even 
to the dead, pious souls enjoying an immediate view of 
that visitation for which they had anxiously waited, 
whilst on the other hand the reprobate more clearly 
knew themselves shut out from all salvation. Though 
Peter does not speak very distinctly (!), it is not to be 
received that he absolutely confounds the righteous 

* The Latin has " hue perperam trahunt testimonia, " etc. Still 
stronger is his French : " Pour colorer leur fantasie, ils tirent par les 
chcvoux (luelqiics tuinoiguages,'' etc. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 45 

and the wicked; he only intimates that both alike (?) 
had the death of Christ made known to them." 

It is a strange notion, adopted by Calvin (it is to 
be hoped, without a single intelligent follower), that 
(pvXaKri here means a watch-tower, whence he supposed 
the saints to have been awaiting the Messiah. On this 
no remark is needed in addition to what has been 
made already, unless it be that the verse itself is as 
inexorably adverse to it as the general current of the 
New Testament. ¥or the spirits spoken of are those 
of men not only without the least hint of any 
subsequent obedience, but expressly said to be kept in 
ward because of former disobedience. -The only reason 
for charging defect or indefiniteness on the passage is 
his own singular fancy that the apostle meant to 
include the pious in these spirits without one word to 
justify it. As to the wicked the language of the 
apostle is confessed to be "complete." 

The reverent reader of scripture will not fail to 
censure Calvin for adding to God's words, rather 
than Peter for taking away. In text or context there 
is no thought of making known Christ's death to 
believers and unbelievers ; but very plainly does the 
apostle urge the danger of despising Christ's testimony 
by the Spirit, even before His Kingdom come, and 
this drawn from the days of Noah, to which the Lord 
elsewhere compares the day when the Son of man 
shall be revealed (Luke xvii). Before the flood, as 
now, we see a time of testimony; but an awful blow 
feU on heedless man then, as there will again shortly 



46 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

from Him who is ready to judge quick and dead. If 
there is any reference in the context to the believers 
who died before Christ it is to those saved in the ark, 
a figure of the salvation set forth in baptism by virtue 
of Christ's resurrection. The spirits in prison were 
expressly those of the men who perished in the deluge 
for their unbelief. 

But here again we see how far it was from Calvin's 
mind that our Lord, in His disembodied state, did 
actually go to the place of detention for the departed 
spirits, and there preach; still farther, that He thus 
preached salvation to those in that state who had 
refused to obey -the Spirit's voice when the judgment 
of the flood was hanging over them. The plain words 
of scripture here, as elsewhere, give no countenance 
to such strange doctrine; nor is it true that there 
is any " dark enigma " in the judgment either of men 
before the flood or of those the apostle warns here. It 
is neglect or unbelief of scripture to say that these 
are cases where the final doom seems at all out of 
proportion (I will not dwell on the impropriety of 
saying with the late Dean Alford, "infinitely out of 
proportion") to the lapse which has incurred it. To 
speak or to think so is to dispute with GOD and to 
contemn His most solemn revelation. 

If the antediluvians had a doom more awful than 
others before them, we have the divine assurance on 
the one hand of a special testimony to them, and on 
the other of their excessive corruption and violence. 
Most justly therefore did the Judge of all the earth 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 47 

send the flood which took them all away, save the man 
of faith who, divinely warned of things not seen as yet 
and moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving 
of his house, through which he condemned the world, 
and became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. 
Granted that worse remains for all unbelievers than 
the flood; but not worse for antediluvians as such 
than for others, and for none so sad as for those 
who slight God's call to repent and believe since 
redemption, especially for such as bear, and bear 
falsely or with indifference, the name of the Lord. 
Who that beholds the Lamb of GOD who takes away 
the sin of the world can say that the doom of un 
believers is out of proportion to their gailt ? He who 
can deliberately think so seems to me to have no real 
sense of man's evil or of God's infinite grace. 

To allow that unbelievers, who perished at the flood 
or otherwise, are objects of a preaching of salvation 
in the disembodied state when Christ died or at other 
seasons is to cast off, not only the general testimony 
of Old Testament and Wew, but very specially that 
dark background of eternal judgment and destruction 
which the gospel affirms with a precision unknown 
to law. To found such a renewal of hope for deceased 
unbelievers on our text, and to hint at extending 
it indefinitely, seems to my mind presumption of the 
most perilous sort. 

But there is a third passage from Calvin's writings 
of a later date, which may furnish further matter 
for reflection as well as comparison with scripture. 



48 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

In his comment on the Epistle, published about the 
beginning of 1554, it will be observed for the third 
time that, far from admitting Christ's personal 
descent to hades, as meant by the text, he seeks 
to explode any such application. "It has been a 
threadbare and common opinion that Christ's descent 
into hell is here stated; but the words mean no 
such thing. For there is no mention made of the 
soul of Christ, but only that He went by the Spirit. 
But these are very different things, that Christ's soul 
went, and that Christ preached by the power of His 
Spirit. Expressly, therefore, does Peter name the 
Spirit to take away the notion of what may be called 
a real presence"* (Owen's Translation, 1855). 

* "Trita et vulgaris opinio fait, hie narrari Christi descensum ad 
inferos; sed verba aliud sonant. Neque enim animae Christi fit 
mentio; sed tantum quod spiritu veuerit. Sunt autem liaec longe 
diversa, animam Christi venisse, et Christum praedicasse spiritus sui 
potentia. Nominatim ergo spiritum exprimit Petrus, ut imagina- 
tioneni tollat (ut vocant) praesentiae. Alii de apostolis exponunt, 
quod scilicet eorum miuisterio mortuis apparuit, id est, iufidelibus. 
Fateor quidem, Christum per apostolos spiiitu sue venisse ad eos 
qui in carne detinebantnr; sed haeo expositio multis rationibus falsa 
coarguitur. Primum dioit Petrus, ad spiritus Christum venisse; 
quo nomine signifioat animas a corporibus separatas; vivos enim 
homines spiritus vocari nusquara receptum est. Deinde quod cap. 4, 
in eundem sensum repetet Petrus, allegoriam non admittit. Ergo 
de mortuis proprie verba intelligi oportet. Tertio hoc valde absurdum 
est, Petrum de apostolis agentom mox quasi sui oblitum transilire 
ad tempus Noe. Certe nimis intempestive hoc modo abrupt* esset 
oratio: falsum ergo est illud comniontum. Porro eorum delirium, 
qui putant inoredulos Christi adventu post mortem suam a reatu 
liberatos esse, longa refutatione non indiget Certe enim soripturae 
dootrina est nos salutem non oonsequi in Christo, nisi fide : ergo qui 
ud mortem iisque obstinati fnerunt, his nulla spes relinquitur. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 49 

Again, Calvin sets himself against the view advo- 
cated chiefly by Socinian commentators, but also 
afterward by Grotius, Schottgen, and others, who take 
the preaching as that of the apostles, and by roh 
ev (j>. irv. understand either the Jews under law or 
the Gentiles under Satan, or both together as bound 
with a common chain of sin, the allusion to Noah's 

Probabilius aliquanto loquuntur, qui redemptionem a Christo partam 
profuisse dicunt niortuis, qui tempore Woe diu fueraut iucreduli: 
tamen resipuerant demum, paulo antequam diluvio mergerentiir. 
Illos ergo intelligunt poenas contumaciae suae dedisse in carne, 
servatos tamen Cliristi beneficio, ne aeternum perirent. Sed haec 
parum firma est divinatio ; deinde pugnat cum orationis contextu. 
Petrus enim uni duntaxat familiae Noe salutem attribuit: exitio 
autem addioit omues, qui extra arcam fuerunt. Ego itaque non 
dubito quin gcneraliter dicat Petrus gratiae Christi manifestationem 
ad pios spiritus pervenisse, atque ita vitali spiritus efficacia esse 
perfusos. Quare timendum non est, ne ad nos usque emanet. Sed 
quaeri potest ournam piorum animas postquam e oorporibus migi'a- 
runt, in carcere collocet. Mibi quidem (^uXa/cr) potius speculam 
significat, in qua aguntur vigiliae, vel ipsum exoubandi actum. 
Nam saepe ita oapitur apud Graecos, et sensus optime fluet, pias 
animas in spem salutis promissae fuisse intentas, quasi eminus earn 
Gonsiderarent. Neque enim dubium est, quin ad hunc scopum sancti 
patres tam in vita quam post mortem suas oogitationes direxerint. 
Verum si cui placeat retinere carceris nomen, non male conveniet. 
Sicuti enim, dum vivebant, lex illis (teste Paulo, Gal. iii. 23) 
quaedam arotior fuit custodia in qua detinebantur : ita post mortem 
soUicito Christi desiderio constringi oportuit, quia nondum spiritus 
libertatis plene exhibitus erat. Ergo exspectationis anxietas illis 
fuit veluti career. Hactenus apostoli verba oum re ipsa et filo argu- 
menti belle congruunt ; sed quod sequitur, nonnihil liabet difiBcultatis. 
Neque enim hie fidelis sed iucredulos solos commemorat, quo videtur 
tota ilia superior expositio everti. Hac ratione adduoti quidam 
putarunt nihil hie dici aliud nisi incredulos, qui olim piis molesti 
infeatique fuerant, spiritum Christi iudicem expertos esse, quasi hoc 
arguraento consoletur fideles, quia Christu.s etiam niortuus poenas de 
ipsis sumpserit. Sed eorum errorem eonvincet, quod proximo capite 
D 



50 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

time being no more than a sample or similitude. 
To this our commentator replies : " I allow, indeed, 
that Christ through the apostles went by His Spirit 
to those who were detained in the flesh; but this 
explanation is proved false by many considerations. 
First, Peter says that Christ went to 'spirits,' by 
which he means souls separated from their bodies, 
for living men are nowhere called spirits. Secondly, 



videbimus, mortuis evangelium praedioatum, ut vivant secundum 
Deum spiritu, quod peculiariter in fideles oorapetit. Porro oertum 
est idem, quod nunc dieit, illio repetere. Deinde non animadvertunt 
hoc praecipue velle Petrum, quemadmodum potentia spiritus Christi 
viviileam se in ipso ostendit, et talis, a mortuis fuit oognita, talem 
etiam erga nos fore. Videndum tamen quorsum hoc speotet, quod 
inereduloa tantura nominat. Videtur enim dicere, Christum in spiritu 
apparuisae iis qui olini fuerant increduli. Atqui ego aliter distingue ; 
tunc quoque permistos fuisse inoredulis puros Dei eultores, imo eorum 
multitudiue fere opertos. Disorepat (fateor) ab hoc sensu Graeca 
syntaxis; debuerat enim Petrus, si hoc vellet, genitivum absolutum 
ponere. Sed quia apostolis novum nou est liberius casum unum 
ponere aiterius loco, et videmus Petrum hie confuse multas res simul 
coacervare, nee vero aliter aptus sensus elioi poterat: non dubitavi ita 
resolvere orationem implioitam, quo intelligerent leotores alios vocari 
incredulos quam quibus praedicatum fuisse evangelium dixit. Post- 
quam ergo dixit Christum se mortuis manifestasse, mox addit : quum 
increduli fuissent olim ; quo signiflcat nihil nocuisse Sanctis patribus 
quod impiorum multitudiue paene obruti fuerint" (Calv. Comment, 
in loc. ed. Tholuck, 56, 57). The late Dean A., quoting the most 
objectionable part of these remarks, designates it " a sentence to be 
well remembered for many reasons " : why, it is hard to see, unless 
it be a pleasure to remember how far a believer can go in unbelief, 
and a commentator in doing violence to his text. We may do well 
to remember it for our own warning, as well as to guard souls from 
this or any such licence. Is it possible that he meant to encourage 
others to similar disrespect towards an inspired writer from a 
reformer's delinquency ? From his own freedom sometimes I cannot 
but fear that the latter may have been one of his "many reasons," 
which he naturally hid. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 51 

what Peter repeats in chapter iv. does not admit 
of allegory. Therefore the words must be understood 
properly of the dead. Thirdly, it seems most absurd 
that Peter, speaking of the apostles, as though 
forgetting himself, should go off to the time of N'oah. 
Certainly such a mode of discourse would be abrupt 
and unsuitable. This explanation then cannot stand." 

But there is no sparing the notion of many fathers, 
now it would seem reviving, that dead unbelievers had 
a fresh offer of salvation, and in fact were saved after 
the cross. "Moreover, their madness who think that 
unbelievers in the coming of Christ were after His 
death freed from their guilt needs no longer refutation; 
for it is the certain doctrine of scripture that we do 
not obtain salvation in Christ save by faith ; and 
therefore for those who have been persistent in 
unbelief up to death there is no hope left." 

Then he gives his reason for rejecting the notion 
that prevailed among the Greek and Latin Fathers : — 
" Somewhat more probable is their assertion who say 
that the redemption procured by Christ availed the 
dead who in I^oah's day had long been unbelievers, but 
repented a short time before they were drowned in the 
deluge. The idea, therefore, is that they suffered in 
the flesh the punishment due to their perverseness, yet 
that they were saved by Christ's grace from perishing 
for ever. But this conjecture is weak; as besides it 
is inconsistent with the context, for Peter ascribes 
salvation only to the family of Noah, and assigns to 
ruin all who were outside the ark." 



52 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

But we must pay more heed to his own conclusion 
in its most mature form. "I therefore do not doubt 
but Peter says generally that a manifestation of 
Christ's grace was made to the godly spirits, and that 
they were thus endued with the vital power of the 
Spirit. Wherefore there is no cause to fear that it 
will not reach to us. But it may be inquired why he 
puts in prison the souls of the godly after quitting 
their bodies. To my mind indeed (pvXaKr/ means rather 
a watch-tower in which a watch is kept, or the very act 
of watching. For it is often so taken among the 
Greeks, and the sense would be excellent that godly 
souls were intent on the hope of the promised salvation 
as if they saw it afar off. Nor is it doubtful that the 
holy fathers in life as well as after death directed 
their thoughts to this object. But if anyone chooses 
to retain the word (prison), it will not be unsuitable ; 
for as, while they lived, the law (according to Paul, 
Gal. iii. 23) was a sort of strict custody in which they 
were kept, so after death they must have felt the 
anxious longing for Christ, because the spirit of liberty 
had not yet been fully given. Therefore their anxious 
expectation was a kind of prison." 

Here for the third and last time in his writings we 
see how Calvin repudiates the idea of Christ's actual 
descent into hades. He among the reformed held a 
view substantially similar to that of Durand among 
Eomanists, that Christ's preaching to the spirits was 
a visitation by the efficacy of His work, not by His 
presence among them. To call Abraham's bosom or 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 53 

paradise either a watch-tower or a prison will not be 
accepted by sober believers as fair dealing with our 
Lord's intimations. To be " comforted " is no character- 
istic of imprisonment. Dean Alford's note on Luke 
xxiii. is not only exceptionable throughout, but its con- 
clusion is refuted by 2 Corinthians xii. and especially 
by Eevelation ii. 7, where beyond controversy paradise 
is the scene not merely of blessed spirits, but of the 
perfection of glorified humanity in heaven. The effort 
of Calvin to reconcile the idea of a prison with spirits 
in heaven (as he at least believed) is vain; and the 
weakening, if not change, of the apostle's words is the 
evident and inevitable consequence. 

It is 'not correct therefore to say that thus far the 
apostle's words seem to agree well with the fact itself 
and with the thread of the argument. " But what 
follows," even he confesses, "is attended with some 
difficulty; for he does not mention the faithful here 
but only the unbelieving, by which the whole of the 
preceding exposition seems to be overturned." 

I do not agree with the objection put forward any 
more than the thoughts we have next, believing in- 
deed that the ground is of the strongest, and that the 
reasoning given has no real force. "Some have been 
led by this reason to think that nothing else is said 
here than that the unbelievers who had formerly 
opposed and persecuted the godly found the Spirit of 
Christ a judge, as if Peter consoles the faithful with 
this argument that Christ even when dead punished 
them. But their error, is disposed of by what we 



54 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

shall see in the next chapter, that the gospel was 
preached to the dead, that they might live according 
to God in the Spirit, which peculiarly applies to the 
faithful. Moreover, it is certain that he repeats there 
what he now says." " Next, they do not perceive that 
Peter meant this especially that as the power of the 
Spirit of Christ showed itself vivifying in Him, and was 
known as such by the dead, so it will be toward us." 

The apostle seems rather to correct unbelieving 
notions natural to those who looked only for the 
Messiah reigning gloriously and delivering them from 
their enemies. They therefore despised the Spirit's 
action in preaching, and the comparatively small 
results which yet appear, nay the present sufferings 
and persecution of Christians. Peter brings in Christ's 
death but also His resurrection, and points to His 
dealing of old by the Spirit (not by a personal display 
in glory), where there was disobedience then as now, 
but to their spirits too as in prison kept for judgment, 
besides the public fact in this world that far fewer 
than the Christians were saved in the ai'k. 

Further, it is gratuitous assumption to bring in here 
1 Peter iv. 6, which has assuredly a quite distinct 
bearing. Calvin's mistake is proved by 2 Peter ii. 6, 
which does expressly treat of the same time, and 
excludes all idea of the faithful by the declaration 
that God brought a flood on a world of ungodly 
persons. I believe accordingly that the apostle does 
certainly not repeat there what he now says, but 
speaks here of good news having been set before dead 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 55 

persons also, though of course the preaching to them 
was while they lived, with one or other of these two 
results, " in order that they might be judged according 
to men in the flesh, and live according to God in the 
Spirit." For the Jews habitually were apt to lose 
sight of the judgment of the dead in their eagerness 
to put forward the judgment of the quick, as to which 
the heathen were wholly ignorant. 

"Let us see, however" (continues he), " why he men- 
tions only unbelievers ; for he seems (!) to say that 
Christ in Spirit appeared to those who were formerly 
disobedient. But I distinguish otherwise; that then 
also the pure servants of G-OD were mixed up with 
unbelievers and were almost hidden by their multi- 
tude (!). Greek syntax (I confess) is at variance with 
this meaning (!) ; for Peter, if he meant this, ought to 
have used the genitive absolute (! !). But because it 
was no new thing for the apostles to put one case 
instead of another (!), and we see Peter here heaping 
together many things confusedly (!) and no other 
suitable sense can be elicited (!), I have no hesitation 
in thus explaining an intricate passage;- so that readers 
may understand that those called disobedient are 
different from those to whom the preaching was 
made (!). After then he said that Christ manifested 
Himself to the dead, he immediately adds, ' when 
there were formerly disobedient men' ; by which he 
means that the holy fathers sustained no harm from 
being almost overwhelmed by the multitude of the 
ungodly." How sad this perversion of the text ! 



56 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

To the rest of his remarks I make no objection, as 
they seem sound and sensible : but it would not be 
easy to discover a match for the hardihood of the 
words just cited, and the utter want of self-distrust in 
thinking and speaking as he does of an inspired man. 
The Greek construction, he admits, is adverse to the 
sense he would impose. This is enough for one who 
believes that the Holy Spirit perfectly guided Peter. 
Certainly the dative aireSr^a-atyiv is in agreement with 
the in/evij.a<7iv just before, which demolishes the imagi- 
nary distinction of God's servants mixed up with the 
unbelieving. It is impossible to construe or even 
conceive the meaning Calvin would insist on, without 
giving up the claim of the Epistle to be divinely 
inspired. Again, it is as false that the apostles else- 
where put one case instead of another as that Peter 
here heaps anything confusedly together. The most 
suitable sense has been shown to be the strictest 
according to grammatical considerations. Calvin there- 
fore would have been much wiser if he had hesitated 
about his own explanation, which in fact brings in- 
tricacy into a passage by no means obscure, either in 
syntax or in scope. 

The Christian reader will want no further reasoning 
to assure him that the spirits in prison are no other 
than those of men once disobedient, when the Spirit of 
Christ in Noah preached by him before the deluge. 
It is egregious to suppose that the Spirit was not only 
to strive with them, contrary to God's express admoni- 
tion, after the term of a hundred and twenty years of 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 57 

waiting in divine long-suffering, but even to save some 
or all after Christ died: a strange proof, it must be 
allowed, that the Lord knows how to deliver godly 
persons out of temptation and to reserve unjust men 
unto judgment-day to be ptmished. 

Having examined the statements of the Eeformer 
most celebrated for his doctrine, we may now turn 
to the very different views of Bellarmine, the most 
famous of those who have written on the Eomanist 
side, with the authoritative statements of the Council 
of Trent in their Decrees and Canons, and yet more 
fully in their Catechism. To the discussion of our 
text the Cardinal devotes the entire chapter (xiii., 
book iv.) of his third general controversy — that about 
Christ {Disput. JR. Bellarmini Pol. torn. i. pp. 176-178, 
Col. Agr. 1615). It may strike some as remarkable 
that the text is not cited by him to prove purgatory, 
but only the descent of Christ's soul to hell; and 
the more so as the proofs of purgatory from the New 
Testament are lamentably defective and manifestly 
forced. But this able controversialist justly avoided 
the passage as evidence for purgatory; for nothing 
would suit Eomish ideas less than preaching, least of 
all Christ's preaching, to souls there. Wholly different 
is their scheme, which distinguishes purgatory from 
limbus patrum.* 

* " IV. Venun inferorum nomen abdita ilia reoeptaoula signifioat, 
in quibus animae detinentur, quae Goelestein beatitudinem non sunt 
oonseoutae. Ita vero sacrae litterae hanc vooem multis in locis 
usurparunt, etc. . . , Neque tamen ea reoeptaoula imius et ejusdem 
generis sunt omnia ; est enim teterrimus et obsourissimus career, ubi 



58 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Purgatory, according to Tridentine doctrine, is a penal 
fire to satisfy for the remains of sin in the righteous, a 
place of punishment where justified souls in general 
suffer for a time before they go to heaven ; for, as they 
teach, souls dying in mortal sin go to hell, while on 
the other hand martyrs and adults dying immediately 
after baptism go to heaven. Thus, in the first part, 
Art. V. § iv.-vi. of the Catechism, they distinguish 
hell into (1) the place where the damned are for ever 
punished, (2) the fire of purgatory, where the souls 
of the pious suffer torture in expiation for a definite 
time, and (3) the receptacle in which the souls of 

pei'petuo et inextinguibili igne damnatorum animae simul cum im- 
mundis spiritibus torquentur, qui etiam gehenna, et propria significa- 
tione infernus vocatur. V. Praeterea est purgatorius ignis, quo piorum 
animae ad definitum tempus oruciatae expiantur ut eis in aeternam 
patriara ingressus patere possit, in quam nihil ooinquinatum iu- 
greditur. . . . VI. Tertium postremo receptaculi genus est, in quo 
animae sanctorum ante Christi Domini adventum excipiebantur, 
ibique sine uUo doloris sensu, beata redemptionis spe sustentati, 
quieta habitatione fiiiebantur. Horum igitur piorum animas, quae 
in sinu Abrahae Salvatorem expectabant, Ohristus Dominus ad in- 
fernos desoendens liberavit. VII. Nee vero existimandum est euni 
sic ad inferos descendisse, ut ejus tautummodo vis ac virtus, non 
etiam anima eo pervenerit. . . . VIII. . . . Praeterea alii onmes qui 
descenderunt, partim poenis aoerbissimis torquebantur, partim vero 
ut alio doloris sensu carebant, tamen Dei aspectu privati et spe beatae 
gloriae quam exspeotabant, suspensi torquebantur. . . . IX. His 
cxpositis docendum erit propterea Christum Dominum ad inferos 
descendisse, ut ereptis daemonum spoliis, sanotos illos patres eaeteros- 
que pios caroere liberates seoum adduceret in coelimi. . . . X. . . . 
Quamobrem antequam ille moreretur ne resurgeret, coeli portae nemini 
unquam patueruut ; sed piorum animae, cum e vivis'excessissent, vel 
in sinum Abrahae deferebantur, vel, quod etiam nunc iis contingit, 
quibus aliquid diluendum et persolvendum est, purgatorii igue expie- 
bantur." — Cat. Cone, Trid. Varisiis, pp. 66-69. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 59 

saints before Christ's advent were received, and, 
exempt from any pain and sustained by the blessed 
hope of redemption, dwelt there in peace. It is true 
that this last statement does not cohere with the 
language of § 8, that the fathers were tortured in 
suspense while waiting for glory : but when was error 
really consistent? Again, in § 10 they confess that 
Old Testament saints, like those of the Kew, not only 
were in limbus as we have seen, that is, in the bosom 
of Abraham, but also might need the satisfaction of 
the fire of purgatory for their venial sins, and for 
whatever remained of the temporal punishment due 
for mortal sins though forgiven. 

It is plain therefore that it is ignorance of their 
own doctrine or deceit for a Eomanist to cite our text 
for purgatory.* Their most authoritative teaching 
is that the apostle speaks of the place once occupied 
by the Old Testament saints before Christ came and 
took them to heaven. Limbus patrum is therefore 
without a tenant, and useless for any practical purpose 
now. Purgatory is far otherwise, according to their 
best instructed doctors; though why it should be 
styled " purgatory " does not clearly or satisfactorily 
appear, for there is only the endurance of penalty, 
and no real purging whatever. How opposed to the 
truth and grace of God ! By Christ all that believe 
are justified from all things and have life, eternal life, 
in Him. They even died with Christ from sin; 

* So the note to the text in the Ehemish New Testament, where 
the difference is slurred over under the phrase "middle place." 



60 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

crucified with Him, yet they live of a new life, not 
the first Adam life but Christ living in them, dead 
to sin but alive to God in Christ Jesus. Hence sin 
is not to reign in their mortal body. They are under 
not law but grace ; and, living in the Spirit, they have 
to walk in the Spirit. But if one sin, we have an 
Advocate with the Father; and the washing of water 
by the word is made good to us by the Spirit in 
answer to Christ's intercession when we get defiled 
in any way. 

But Eomanism ignores and destroys the entire 
groundwork of the gospel and its privileges as appUed 
now to the believer. They preach as if Christ were 
such an one as themselves ; they reason as if His 
blood had no more efficacy than a bull's or a goat's; 
their thoughts of sin are as human as of the Saviour 
and of His work. Of a real communication of life 
through faith, of a new and spiritual nature which 
the believer has in recei^'ing Christ, they have no 
notion; for if they saw either life or redemption 
as scripture puts them, there could be no place for 
purgatory. There is a process of cleansing which 
goes on in the believer while he passes through 
this defiling world, that the practical state may 
correspond with the standing, with life in Christ and 
full remission of sins by His blood. But when the 
Christian departs from this life, he departs to be 
with Christ; and there is no need of cleansing more, 
as only the new and holy life remains. 

Eomanism sets up the veil of Judaism again, 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 61 

undoing laboriously the infinite blessing of a known 
reconciliation with God founded on atonement, and 
consequently putting those who bear the Lord's name 
not only outside, but in darkness, doubt, and un- 
certainty. It is the unbelief of nature, usurping 
the place of the gospel, a mere round of rites which 
flatter the flesh and can never clear the conscience. 
Who can wonder, seeing that the true light which now 
shines is intercepted, and the power of redemption 
is wholly denied ? Hence it is really heathenism 
clothed with Jewish forms, a return of the Gentiles 
in Christendom to the weak and beggarly elements 
to which they desire to be again anew in bondage. It 
is the more guilty, because it is a going back to old 
darkness after God's revelation of Himself as a 
Saviour in Christ: a churlish turning away from the 
feast of divine love and light where the Father imparts 
His joy in goodness, saving the worst and to the utter- 
most, let who will stay without and boast of their own 
ways to His dishonour. 

But enough of the fabulous purgatory : our business 
is with B.'s explanation of our text. The first ex- 
position noticed is that of Augustine, who applied it 
to the preaching of ISToah by the Spirit of Christ to 
the men of that day. The chief defect in it is that 
the prison is held to be the mortal body, instead of 
seeing that iv (p. ("in prison") refers to their sub- 
sequent state when alone also they could be properly 
designated as irvevii.acTiv or " spirits." 

The Cardinal apologises for refuting S. Augustine. 



62 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

N'o doubt it is awkward to such as start with the 
Vincentian canon of tradition, "quod semper, quod 
ubique, quod ab omnibus"; and the rather when the 
father to be refuted is the greatest light of the 
Western Church. It is pleaded, however, that A. 
himself confesses that he had not understood the 
passage, and asks for cause to be shown why it should 
refer to hell (or hades). As if the father then not 
only permitted but himself desired it, E. proceeds to 
his task.* 

His first argument is the common opinion of the 
fathers in opposition; Clement Alex., Athan., Epi- 
phan., and Cyril, Hilary, Ambrose, Ruffin., and Oec. 
being all alluded to as inferring hence Christ's descent 
to the spirits in hell. He also points to the occurrence 
of an alleged citation of Isaiah to a similar effect 
in Justin M. and Irenaeus. But we may reserve the 
views of the early ecclesiastical writers to a later 
moment, when they will come fully before us.-f 

* ' ' Prima expositio est saneti Auguatini epist. 99 ad Euodium, 
quern sequitur Beda. Sic Augustinus exponit, ut per spiritus in 
oarcere constitutes intelligebat homines qui erant tempore Koe, 
quorum animae erant in eorpore mortali tamquam in carcere; est 
enim corpus career animae, ac dicit Christum non secundum humani- 
tatem quam nondum assumpserat sed secundum Deitatem praedieasse 
per interuam inspirationem, aut per linguara Noe illis hominibus, qui 
tamen increduli fuerunt. Itaque non vult August, hunc locum ad 
inferos pertinere. Hanc expositionem non refutarem si ipso Augustino 
placeret omniuo; sed ipsemet fatetur se hunc locum non iutellexisse 
et rogat ut quaeratur ratio quomodo possit hie locus ad inferos 
pertinere. Ipso Igitur non solum perraittente sed etiam cupiente 
Augustino, hanc expositionem primam breviter refellemus." 

t "Primo, non placet liaec sententia, quia communis Patrum est 
in coutrarium. Nam Clemens Alexandrinus libro 6. Stromatum 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 63 

The second objection is that Christ is said to have 
gone in spirit to preach to spirits. The spirit which 
is here distinguished against flesh seems as if it could 
not possibly mean anything else than the soul, says B. 
N"ot, therefore, in His divinity only, but in His soul 
did the Lord go and preach to the spirits. Now this, 
if it were the real intimation, would have incomparably 
greater weight for the Christian than the opinions of 
the Fathers, were they ever so unanimous. But it is 
precisely what I have shown the best authorities for 
the critically correct text of the epistle reject. If the 
article of the vulgarly received text before irvevnafi 
possessed any real weight of evidence, the phrase 
might well, if not certainly, convey the sense of 
Christ's spirit as man ; but all the copies of value 
concur in the anarthrous form, which cannot hear the 
meaning for which B. contends. As the apostle wrote, 
it is the character of Christ's quickening when He 
rose from the dead. The Holy Spirit beyond a doubt 

ante medium, Athanasius epistola ad Epictetum et lib. de inoar- 
natione qui incipit : Mos pii hominis, Epiphanius haeresi 77, 
Cyrillus lib. de recta fide ad Tlieodosium, et lib. 12 in Johanem, 
ca. 36, Hilarius in Psal. 118 in illud: Defecerunt oculi mei in 
eloquium ttmm, dicentes: Quando consolaheris ine? Ambrosius in 
e. 10 ad Eomanos, Ruffiuus in expositione Symboli, Oecumenius in 
huno locum Petri, exponnnt de descensu Christi ad inferos, ubi 
spiritus defunctorum degere existimabant. Praeterea Justinus in 
dialogo cum Tryphone, et Irenaeua lib. 3, c. 23, citant verba quaedam 
Isaiae quae modo non inyeniuntur, simillima istis verbis sancti Petri, 
ut credibile sit inde sanctum Petrum acoepisse. Sunt autem haec 
verba ; Commemoratus est Dominus saiwtus Israel mortiwrum suorum, 
qui dormierant in terra sepuUionis, et deseendit ad eos evangelizare 
mlutem quae est ab eo ut saharet eos." 



64 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

was the agent; but this is presented in the shape of 
manner, and therefore the article is absent; whereas 
it must have been present if the intention had been 
to present the case as B. imagines. The more carefully 
the language is examined, the more certain it is that 
the soul of Christ cannot have been here contemplated. 
Again, Augustine had good ground to say that ^. 
(5e TTv. could not apply to the soul of Christ; and B. 
tries in vain to answer by citing 1 Sam. xxvii. 9 ; 
2 Sam. viii. 2 ; and Acts vii. 19 ; for this is a con- 
fusion of ^oooyoveco or ^wypioo with ^woivoiew. It is 
unfounded, therefore, to say that Peter meant that 
Christ's soul could not be slain, but remained alive in 
His triumphant work over hell. He really says and 
means that Christ was brought to life ; and all efforts 
to shake the truth will only confirm it before all com- 
petent judges. Our clever theologian is decidedly 
feeble in questions of a philological kind.* 

* " Secuiido, non probatur ea sententia, quia dioitur Christas pro- 
feotus spiritu ad praedicanduiu spiritus. Id enira refert illud, in quo, 
nimirum spiritu veniens, etc., at spiritus qui hie distinguitur contra 
carneni non videtur posse significare aliud quam animam : non ergo 
sola divinitate, sed etiam anima Doniinus ad praedicandum spiritibus 
profectus est. S. Augustinus ex hac ipsa ratione dicit se moveri ad 
hoc ut non intelligat per huuo spiritum animam Christi. Xam cum 
dicitur (vivijicatus antem spiritu) si spiritus signifiearet animam, 
sequeretur aliquando animam Christi mortuam fuisse, nihil enim 
vivificatur, nisi quod mortuum est. Vult igitur ipse sensum esse, 
Christum mortificatum fuisse carne, quia secundum carnem mortuus 
est, et vivificatum spiritu, quia virtute Spiritus Dei excitatus est a 
mortuis. Sed haec ratio non concludit : nam in Scriptura passim 
dicitur vivificari id quod non occiditur. 1 Reg. 27, Viriwi ft 
mulierem non vivificabat David, id est non relinquebat vi%imi, et 
2 Reg. 8 dicitur; David cvtendisse duos fun iculos super Moab, unum 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 65 

There is no force in the third argument, which is 
that the expression, " went and preached," can properly 
apply to the soul, not to Christ's divinity. It is a 
question of what is called in 1 Peter i. 11 "the Spirit 
of Christ," which certainly wrought in the prophets 
and among the rest in Noah, who is also formally styled 
"a preacher of righteousness" in the second Epistle. 
There is no more reason why in this place TropevOeh 
eKYipv^ev should be a literal change of place in Christ 
personally than eKQwv evriyyeKlcraTO in Ephesians ii. 
17. We are dealing with historical matter equally in 
both passages; but figure is excluded in neither, and 
in fact there is the strongest analogy between the 
figures employed by " both. The one illustrates the 
other. There is a manifestly distinct precision of 
phrase where a literal going of Christ is intended, 
as in verse 22, where we read tt. ety ovpavov. It might 
have been safely inferred here if the apostle had 
written tt. eh aSou,* or aSr/v 

It is granted that the fourth argument of the 

ad occidendum, unum ad vimficandum, id est definivisse quot ex 
Moabitis vellet occidi, quot servari. Et Act. 7, Afflixit patres nostras 
ut exponerent infantes suos ne vimficarentur, id est, ut non viverent, 
sed occiderentur ad unum omnes. Vult ergo sanctus Petrus dicere, 
Christum earns mortificatum, spiritu vivifioatum in passione, quia 
oaro mortua mansit, anima vero non potuit occidi sed mansit viva et 
operans ao triumphans de inferno." 

* " Tertio, non placet ea sententia, quia illud : Veniens praedicavit, 
si de anima intelligatur, proprie accipi poterit, vere enim venit ad 
locum ubi non erat. At si de divinitate, non potest accipi nisi im- 
proprie. Praeterea verbum in Graeco est wopevBeU, id est, profectus, 
quod idem reperitur paulo infra, cum dicitur, profectus in coelum, etc., 
at in hoc secundo loco acoipitur proprie, ergo et in primo, " 



66 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Cardinal lies fairly against a faulty detail in the view 
of Augustine; for we cannot by "spirits in prison" 
rightly understand living men. Such a description 
applies only to persons in their disembodied state. 
There is no ground, however, to suppose that the 
preaching was then and there, more than in chapter 
iv. 6 (where we are told that "to dead men also was 
the gospel preached ") ; but this, of course, while they 
were alive, not after they died as some strangely con- 
ceive, without the smallest warrant from the words 
employed, and contrary to the plain drift of universal 
scripture on the point elsewhere. It is not correct to 
suppose, as is often assumed, that Peter speaks here of 
the same persons as dead whom he had described in 
the chapter before as the "spirits in prison." He 
contemplates here not the generation which refused 
righteous warning before the flood, but such of the 
dead in times past as had the promises presented to 
them with the effect of putting all under the responsi- 
bility of being judged as men in flesh, while those 
who heeded the word, being by grace quickened, lived 
according to God in Spirit. The language of the 
apostle perfectly agrees with his own teaching through- 
out the Epistle, as weU as his immediately precedent 
warning of the Lord's readiness to judge quick and 
dead, no less than the witness in baptism to His 
sa^'ing grace. 

But the notion of preaching after death is evidently 
a strange doctrine, out of harmony with the context, 
and openly, irreconcilably, opposed to the scriptures in 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 67 

general. There is therefore no need here to adopt the 
Augustinian fancy of "dead" meaning dead in tres- 
passes and sins, any more than to explain " the spirits 
in prison" of souls shut up in flesh and the darkness 
of ignorance as if in a prison. But that the men were 
dead when the glad tidings were announced to them is 
not what the apostle says ; still less that it was Christ 
who preached thus, or that dead men spoken of in such 
broad terms are the same as those formerly disobedient 
when the long-suffering of God was waiting in N'oah's 
days. The exegesis which indulges in such assump- 
tions as these seems justly open to the charge of 
having no longer any fixed rule. But, thanks be to 
God! scripture refuses everything of the sort, and 
cannot be broken.* 

B.'s fifth objection is that, if the passage be under- 
stood of the preaching in the days of Noah, it does not 
appear to what end that account is inserted here. For 
how hang together, that Christ was put to death in 

* " Quarto, quia per spiritus qui in caroere erant, non videtur posse 
intelligi homines viventes nisi de industria sanotus Petrus affeotaverit 
improprietatem at obsouritatem : at oerte quanilo habemus sensum 
proprium et faoilem, non licet fingere tropos. Adde, quod capita 
quarto de iisdem loquens Petrus dioit : idea enim et mortuis praedica- 
tum, est evangelium. Et licet Augustinus per mortuos intelligi velit 
mortuos in peocatis, qui tamen vivant in oorporibus, tamen videtur 
obstare praeoedens sententia, nam dicit : Reddent rationem ei qui 
parattis est jvdicare vims et mortuos, ideo enim et mortuis praedieatum 
est. At cum dicimus Christum esse judicem vivorum et mortuorum, 
intelligimus ad literam, quod judicabit eos qui vivunt, et eos qui 
mortui sunt vere et proprie, et ut idem Augustinus docet in Enohi- 
ridio, oa. 55. Igitur veris mortuis Ohristus praedicavit, id est, ad 
veros inferos despen.dit," 



68 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

flesh, but quickened (or, as he says, remained alive) in 
spirit, and therefore God formerly preached to men by 
Noah? But if we understand it of the descent to 
hell, all is consistent. For Peter, wishing to show 
that Christ in suffering and death remained alive, 
proves it as to His soul, because at that time His soul 
went to hell and preached ,to the spirits shut up in 
prison.* N"ow the fact on the contrary is that the 
reference to Noah's preaching is highly relevant to the 
purpose in hand. For the apostle is insisting on the 
certainty of divine government, whatever the long- 
suffering of God in bearing with men's hostility to His 
people and opposition to His testimony. His own 
people are called to walk with a good conscience in 
grace, suffering for righteousness, and for doing good, 
not ill. How touching the reason ! Christ once suffered 
for sins : let this suffice. It was His grace so to suffer 
unto the full, exclusively His glory to suffer thus Just 
for unjust, in order that He might bring us to God. 
It is ours to suffer for good, for righteousness: never 
should it now be for faults and sins. For us when 
unjust this was His work, in which He was put to 
death in flesh but quickened in Spirit. 

* " Quinto si hie loons iutelligatur d« praedicatione facta in diebus 
Koe, nou apparet quorsum hio sit inaerta ista navratio. Quomodo 
enim ista cohaerent, Christus in passione sna carne mortuus est, 
spiritu vivns mansit, ideo Deus olim pi-aedioavit hominibns per Noe ? 
At si intelligamus de descensu ad inferos, omnia coliaereut. Nam 
volens Petrus ostendere Christum in passione et morte mansisse 
vivum, quoad animam probat, quia illo tempore anima ejus profeota 
est in iuferuum, et praedioavit spiritibus in cai;cere cpnolusis." 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 69 

The outer life of Jesus closed in suffering for our 
sins, the days of His flesh wherein He offered up both 
supplications and entreaties, with strong crying and 
tears, to Him who was able to save Him out of death. 
His resurrection was no question yet of external 
display of power, but characteristically of the Spirit, 
and hence unseen and unknown by the world. This 
was of all things most strange to the Jewish mind, 
which associated with the Messiah the manifestation 
of an energy overwhelming to all adversaries. Never 
was such a victory over Satan, even in his last strong- 
hold of death, as Christ's resurrection ; but He was 
made alive in no such way as instantly to put down 
the Eoman oppressor, and expel the old serpent, and 
exalt restored Israel, and humble the haughty Gentiles, 
and deliver all creation. All this and much more must 
yet be to the praise of the glory of divine grace ; but 
He was quickened in Spirit. Doubtless divine energy 
of the highest kind wrought here, but it was distinct- 
ively in the Spirit ; and hence He who was thus raised 
(though most truly a risen man), capable of eating and 
drinking (though needing no food), capable of being 
handled and felt (though equally able to pass through 
closed doors, to appear in another form, to vanish out 
of sight, and to ascend to heaven), was seen only of 
chosen witnesses, not as by-and-by He will be seen by 
every eye. 

In knowledge this ran so counter to ordinary Jewish 
expectation that the apostle reminds his readers of 
that which might help them to juster thoughts of 



70 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

God's ways before the day comes when judgment will 
silence all gainsayers. It was no new thing for the 
Spirit of Christ to testify. He, as we have already 
been told — He who in the prophets had pointed out 
beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the glories 
that should follow, preached in Noah's days. The 
patience of God in testimony sounded strange to the 
Jew. Yet there it was in the first book of the law : 
"My Spirit shall not always strive with man." It is 
the very scripture which it would appear the apostle 
had before his mind's eye, when inspired to write, " in 
which [Spirit] He went and preached to the spirits in 
prison, once disobedient when the long-suffering of 
God was waiting in Noah's days." 

Now also, as then, it is a season of testimony and 
long-suffering before the judgment shall be executed 
at the appearing of Jesus. If the Spirit strove of old, 
surely it was not less now; if the work of God was 
wrought in the Spirit, proclaimed and received in the 
Spirit, not yet in visible and indisputable power before 
which all the world must bow, it was j\ist so in the 
most marked season of testimony, before the most 
marked judgment on all mankind which the ancient 
oracles attest. Hence the exceeding appositeness of 
the allusion to Noah's days when the Spirit strove, 
but would not always ; for the flood was then at hand 
which must, as it did, surprise and take away those 
who stumbled at the word, being disobedient. It was 
guilty then for the sons of Adam to slight the preach- 
ing : how much more so in the seed of Abraham now. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 71 

who had before them that ancient warning, with an 
incomparably fuller testimony in the promises fulfilled, 
though not yet manifested, hefore the world ! 

The attentive student of scripture may thus see the 
admirable force and pertinence of irvevmaTi, ev (!) km 
T. ev (f>. TTv. TTop. eKYip., espsclally as connected with 
the account given in Genesis vi., which the Holy 
Spirit here interweaves in the instruction for those 
addressed. There is no such statement as that Christ's 
Spirit was the subject, recipient, or vehicle of restored 
life, for this would require the article to convey suqh 
a sense. Yet were the article genuine and such a 
sense necessarily taught, it is hard to see how one 
who held to the text thence resulting could deny the 
monstrous inference that His spirit had previously 
died — at least, if the case connected had been the 
direct complement, not the indirect. It is also a 
manifest oversight to contend, as has been done, 
that the use of the word Trvev fiacriv, connecting ev 
w (irveu/jLaTi) our Lord's state with the state of those 
to whom He preached, is a crowning objection to the 
view here advocated. For it is certain that ^oDOTrottjOeh 
Se irv. describes the resurrection of Christ, not His 
separate state; and that the anarthrous form of ttv. 
is decisive against the idea of its being His spirit as 
man, as is supposed in every form of the hypothesis 
that Christ descended to preach to separate spirits. 

No such connection is in the passage : but attention 
is drawn to the character of Christ's resurrection as 
of the Spirit, bound up with His testimony and 



72 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

presence now known in Christianity, instead of the 
visible power and glory of the kingdom which Israel 
looked for. The Spirit is expressed as giving character 
to the quickening, not His spirit as the subject or 
vehicle of restored life; and then it is added that in 
virtue, or in the power, of this (ei/ 5) He went and 
preached to the spirits in prison, once on a time 
disobedient when the long-suffering of God was 
waiting in Noah's days, while an ark was in prepara- 
tion. There was no external demonstration of divine 
power then, but a testimony of the Spirit, the Spirit of 
Christ; and all who despised it proved the value of 
the warning too late in their own destruction; and 
their spirits are imprisoned till the judgment of the 
dead declares afresh and for ever the consequences 
of despising God's word. So it will assuredly be with 
all who, preoccupied with Messianic glory according 
to Jewish feeling, scorn the Spirit of Christ that now 
warns the world of coming judgment, and mock a 
presence of Christ which is only known in Spirit. 

Another point of analogy singled out from the tale 
of old and applied now is the fewness of those saved, 
as meeting the taunts of those who looked for uni- 
versal homage to the Messiah reigning, and could not 
understand the hidden glory of One who, believed 
in by a few, bears with masses of unbelief till He 
comes in judgment. 

But one can easily discern why all these analogies 
between the testimony of Noah and that under 
Christianity should escape the Cardinal, who finds 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 73 

more congenial aliment in the reveries of imagination 
about the descent of Christ to hades, than in the 
solemn and sober realities of a Christian's walk and 
witness, well-nigh forgotten in Christendom. The 
dark source, whether Popish or Patristic, of Bishop 
Horsley's reasoning will not have escaped the reader. 
For he too, like Bellarmine, draws from this strikingly- 
suggestive passage little more than the impotent con- 
clusion that Christ remained alive in His passion and 
death ! proved by His soul's descent and preaching to 
the spirits below. It is needless to expose the poverty 
of an interpretation which yields so paltry a result, 
as compared with the rich and varied lessons flowing 
from the passage, when understood in itself and in its 
connection with the Old Testament history alluded to. 
Augustine had objected* to the deduction of 

* "Sed objicit Augustimis, quia non videtur ratio, cur praedicaverit 
solum lis qui inoreduli fuerunt tempore Noe, cum tam multi alii 
essent in inferno. Item quia videtur absurdum valde, quod Cliristus 
praedicaverit in inferno. Videtur enim inde sequi, ut debeat etiam 
in inferno coustitui ecolesia ubi convertantur et reoonoilientur animae. 
Id autem absurdum sequi ex nostra seutentia probat Augustinus, quia 
sinus Abrahae, ubi erant omnes justi, non videtur fuisse in inferno, 
sed ab inferno remotissimus cum esset Chaos magnum inter divitem 
inferni colonum et Lazarum habitatorem sinus Abrahae. Ergo si hie 
locus de desoensu ad inferos intelligitur, Cliristus solis peccatoribus 
praedicavit : at non praedicavit frustra, neo sine fructu : ergo aliquos 
couvertit. At hoc nullo modo est asserendum, ergo praestat hunc 
locum non intelligere de desoensu ad inferos. Et haeo est potissima 
diffioultas, quae Augustinum a oommuni sententia recedere coegit. 
Tirauit enim, ne cogeretur admittere oonversionem et reoonciliationem 
spirituum damnatorum. 

" Respondeo, primam objectionem posse retorqueri. Nam etiam 
non apparet ratio cur dicat Petrus Christum in diebus Noe praedioasse 
potius quam in diebus Abraham et aliorum patriarchorum vel etiam 



74 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Christ's descent to hades, from this passage, (1) 
that consequently He would preach only to the 
unbelievers at the time of the flood, and (2) that, 
Abraham's bosom being distinct from hades, such a 
preaching would lead to the notion of converting the 
damned. Bellarmine (1) retorts with the question 
why Christ should be said to preach in Noah's days 
rather than in those of Abraham and other patriarchs 
or even of all other men, and (2) answers that the 
preaching of Christ in hell was not to convert infidels 
but only to announce great joy to pious souls in 

aliorum omnium hominum. Dico praeterea, Christum praedicasse in 
inferno omnibus bonis spiritibus, sed nominatim fuisse expresses illos 
qui fuerunt in diebns Noe increduli, quia de illis erat majus duMum 
an essent salri nee ne, cum puniti fuerint a Deo et submersi aquis 
diluvii. Indicat ergo liio Petrus etiam ex illis incredulis fuisse aliquos 
qui etiam in fine poenitentiam egerint, et licet quantum ad corpus 
perierint, tamen quantum ad animam salvi fuerint (quod etiam 
Hieronymus docet in quaestionibus Hebraiois in Genes, traotans 
illud cap. 6. Hon permanehil spintus incus in Iwmiiie, etc.). Ubi 
dicit Deum punivisse multos eorum temporaliter aquis diluvii, ne 
deberet eos punire in geheuna in aeternum. Et hunc etiam sensum 
videntur facei-e ilia verba cap. 4 : Idea mortuis et prctedicatum est 
evangeliuni, ut judiccntur quidem secundum homines in came, vivant 
autem secundum Deum spiritu ; id est, ut secundum homines exterius 
judicentur carue, id est, damnati existimentur humano jndicio, qviia 
corpora eorum aquis necata fuerunt, tamen vivant spiritu secundum 
Deum, id est, animae eorum salvae sint apud Deum. 

"Ad secuadam dico, ipsum Augustinum postea cognovisse sinum 
Abrahae fuisse in inferno, ut patet ex traolatu in Psal. 85 et lib. 20 
de oiv. Dei, ca. 16, quae sententia est omnium patrum et totius 
ecolesiae. Dico igitur, praedioationem -Christi in inferno non fuisse 
ad convertendos iufideles, sed fuisse solum ad aununoiationem gaudii 
magni piis animabus, quibus annuncia vit oompletam esse redemptionem, 
ut intelligerent se jam inde liberandas et tempore suo etisun corpora 
reoepturas. Atque haeo de expositione sancti Augustini quam re- 
futavimus, sequuti niciitum ejus, iinn voilui." 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 75 

redemption now completed, Abraham's bosom being 
viewed as part of hades by Augustine himself like 
all other fathers. 

But the reader will have seen that Bellarmine is 
quite wrong, and Augustine much more right, as to 
both points. The text characterises the imprisoned 
spirits as having been formerly disobedient without 
a trace of their subsequent repentance or piety, the 
announcement of great joy being a pure fiction for 
which the passage gives no warrant, but rather as we 
read it plain intimations to the contrary. N'ot a word 
in scripture intimates that those on whom the flood 
came were believers but unbelievers, not a hint that 
they repented at last or that their souls were saved, 
though their bodies perished, let Jerome teach what 
he may. Their spirits are said to be in prison, in full 
contrast .with Abraham's bosom or paradise ; they are 
kept there for judgment like angels that sinned of old, 
with whom indeed the apostle classes them in the 
second chapter of his second Epistle ; and no wonder, 
for he characterises them as a world of ungodly men. 

Are these then the pious souls to whom above all 
others the Lord descended to announce the great joy 
of His completed redemption? It will be observed by 
those who weigh God's word, apart from tradition, 
that not a thought appears in the passage of delivering 
the spirits from prison, any more than of translating 
them to heaven. This would be singular on the 
supposition of such a descent; for it is evident that, 
were the patristic idea true, it would be more in 



76 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

keeping with Christ's presence there to speak, not of 
preaching in hades, but of translating the saints thence 
gloriously as the fruit of His victory over Satan. 

The remarks of Bellarmine on Beza's modification 
of the Augustinian view and on Calvin's ideas do not 
claim any special notice here, whatever is true in them 
(as I believe) having been already anticipated. 

We may now briefly consider the current of thought 
from days not long subsequent to those of the apostles. 
We shall see the various but constant aberration from 
the truth which characterised such as drew from our 
text an actual preaching of our Lord in the world of 
spirits. Doubtless it was no question of an isolated or 
casual misinterpretation of the scripture before us ; 
but this rather sprang from the general ignorance even 
then pervading Christendom as to the full blessedness 
of our standing in Christ — ignorance found in the 
Fathers as such, if possible more than in the popular 
theology of our own day, or in the puritanism of the 
past. Lack of faith could not but expose men to crude 
guesses because of their uncertainty; especially as 
here where the first obvious view of the passage is not 
the sure, sound, and spiritual one which falls in with 
the contextual aim and the analogy of the faith else- 
where. Indeed our way of regarding any particular 
portion of revealed truth can scarcely be severed from 
our state generally ; so much so that habitually an 
intelligent eye can see where we are by the judg- 
ment we form as to divine things wholly remote and 
apparently quite unconnected. Here, for instance, a 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 77 

soul established in the gospel and therefore feeling 
solemnly the fixed doom of the lost, as well as the 
blessedness of the saved now and evermore, is at once 
delivered from nine-tenths of the speculations about 
our Lord's preaching to the spirits of saints or sinners 
after their and His separation from the body. It is 
ordinarily thus : where we rest not in the grace and 
truth which came by Jesus, we are in danger from 
ordinances, fables, reasonings, or from a mixture of 
them all. Apostolic power and fidelity, Paul's above 
all, cut up by the root these workings of Satan's 
malice; but, when the apostles were gone, the evils 
previously judged found too ready an acceptance and 
gave birth to results more openly disastrous both to 
truth and to souls, and, if this could be, more 
decidedly opposed to the glory of the Lord. 

1. The first I would produce is the allusion of 
Justin M., the ecclesiastical writer, more blessed in his 
death of martyrdom than in his life of philosophy. 
It will illustrate the state of things at that time in 
more ways than one. Kal airo rwv Xoyoov tov uvtov 
lepefjiiov ofioloog Tavra TrepieKOxlrav. ^/mvi^trdr] §e Kupioi 
6 Geo? airo (? dytos) IcrpariX twv veKpuiv axiTov tSov 
KeKoiiJ.t]lu.ev(jov ejy yrjv 'Xpo/xaTO's, km KaTe/3>] irpo's avTOv? 
avayyekLaacrQai. avTocg to crwTripiov avTov. The 
common reading is retained in the modern edition 
of Otto, spite of the conjecture of Sylburg approved 
by Jebb, Thirlby, etc. But the emendation if correct 
makes no difference for our object. Here then we 
have a spurious text attributed to the prophet 



78 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Jeremiah, but evidently founded on the vulgar mis- 
application of 1 Peter iii. 19; iv. 6. Man, however, 
cannot add to scripture without clashing with 
revelation. Supposing we draw from the apostle a 
personal preaching of the Lord in the place of spirits, 
it is impossible to infer from the words of the New 
Testament an announcement of His salvation. The 
apostle, where he may be thought to speak of such a 
descent, tells us only of His preaching to imprisoned 
spirits once disobedient in the days of ISToah ; where he 
speaks of glad tidings to dead men, there is no hint of 
Christ's descent to preach. 

2. Irenaeus, the pious Bishop of Lyons in the latter 
part of the second century, cites repeatedly this 
alleged text, under the name of Isaiah and of 
Jeremiah, as well as with no name attached to it (^Adv. 
Eaer. iii. c. 20, § 4 ; iv. c. 22, § 1). The notion that 
the Jews effaced such a verse from the Hebrew is 
baseless ; especially as they have left other testimonies 
to Christ incomparably clearer and more at issue with 
their traditions. Even Massuet confesses this to be a 
knot quite beyond his power to untie, bound though 
he was to sustain, had it been possible, the credit of 
patristic traditions. "Vereor ut Justino primum, ac 
deinde Irenaeo fucum fecerit apocrypha quaepiam 
scriptura." The unbiassed reader will have no scruple 
in affirming what the Benedictine feared — that it is a 
mere apocryphal gloss, loosely imputed to a prophet, 
and a little expanding as it goes down ; for Irenaeus 
adds (or at least the barbarous Latin version, which 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 79 

alone here represents his Greek) " ut salvaret eos " or 
"ad salvandum eos." That is, He preached in hades 
not merely to announce but to save. Irenaeus, strange 
to say, seems unusually attached to this pseudograph ; 
for he cites it again in his book, iv. c. 33, § 1. Only in 
§ 12 of the same chapter the Latin translation gives 
the notable variation, " in terri limi . . . uti erigeret," 
with the addition named in both, though differently 
expressed. Lastly, in his fifth book too he once more 
falls back on his prophet, but recurs to the earlier form, 
" in terra sepelitionis '' (so Feuardentius, etc., instead of 
the Erasmian reading, " stipulationis "), though even so 
with some change, "extrahere eos et salvare eos." 
Comment is scarce needed. When a man quotes so 
carelessly in the same work of no considerable extent, 
we need not be surprised if he were loose as to 
scripture and indistinct as to doctrine. 

3. But there is no small descent when we turn next 
to Hermas, an author probably of the latter half of 
the same second century. Much of his reputation 
was derived from the singular confusion which led 
many in early days to regard him as the Christian 
saluted in Eomans xvi. 14; for most probably 
{Muratori, Ant. Ital. med. aevi, iii. 853) he was brother 
of the Pius who was Bishop of Eome after Hyginus 
died A.D. 157. Here too we have only a Latin version 
of the "Shepherd," as even the recent discoveries of 
Tischendorf do not give us the Greek original* beyond 

• It is likely indeed, that Clement of Alexandria gives us part of 
the Greek in his citation in the Strom, ii. 379, ed. Sylb. 



80 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the fourth evToXrj (i.e. mandatum or command) of the 
second book. I quote from the third book, and the 
sixteenth section of the ninth similitude (Cotelerii 
Patres Apost. I. 118, ed. 1698):— 

"Quoniam hi Apostoli et doctores, qui praedica- 
verunt nomen Filii Dei, cum habentes fidem ejus et 
potestatem defuncti essent, praedicaverunt his qui 
ante obierunt, et ipsi dederunt eis illud signum. De- 
seenderunt igitur in aquam cum illis, et iterum ascen- 
derunt," etc. Thus, Hermas is distinctly committed 
to the absurd doctrine that the apostles preached to 
the dead and baptised them. This is a further and a 
desperate step in superstition, and of course without 
a shred of support from scripture ; but it seems to 
be the not unnatural complement of the notion that 
the Lord went down after death to preach in hades to 
the spirits there. Is it not melancholy to think that 
such a production as this, immeasurably inferior in 
every point of view to Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 
though doubted by some and even declared apocryphal 
by certain synods, was extensively read in the public 
Christian assemblies, and was evidently incorporated 
with the scriptures in the Sinai MS., as Clement* 
of Eome's epistles were in the Alexandrian copy ? 

4. Can we go down lower ? Alas ! not only so, but 

* Clement of Rome is tainted with the same vice of that early 
day that we have seen in Justin and Irenaeus, quoting as scripture 
tlie words of men. Not only does he refer to apocryphal books, but 
also draws from the false Gospel to the Egyptians, not to speak of an 
unauthentic dialogue between the Lord and Peter ; nay, he more than 
once formally cites as the word of God what is not scripture, yiypa- 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 81 

at the next step. Clement of Alexandria appears 
under the reign of Severus and Caracalla, a speculative 
eclectic though a Christian presbyter. In the second 
book of his Miscellanies (ErpcoyU- ■^'^^> ^^- Sylburg, 1629) 
he quotes "the Shepherd," and applies the baptism 
carried on by the apostles after death, not (as Hermas 
appears to mean) only to the godly before redemption, 
but to heathen 5)hilosophers or moral men as well. 
In the sixth book (637 et seqq.) he recurs to a similar 
strain, and yet more openly treats it as certain that 
our Lord descended to hades for no other reason 
than to preach the gospel, and this that they might 
believe and be saved; that such as lived uprightly, 
Jews or Greeks, even though imprisoned in hades, on 
hearing His voice either in person or through the 
apostles, were presently brought to conversion and 
faith ; that there is the same dispensation below as on 
earth for souls to manifest their repentance or their 
unbelief. Thus the awful consequences of living and 
dying impenitent in this world are explained away by 
this Clementine notion of a further offer of salvation 
by Christ and the apostles after death; and this 
evidently to keep up the illusion of salvation for 
philosophers and moral men among the heathen. 
5. I^Tone will wonder that the famous Origen outran 

TTTai yi,p' KoWaffSe to?s 117(015, Sn oi KoXXii/iej'oi aiSrois ayiacrS'^croi'Ttu 
(1 Ep. ad Cor. xlvi.), and elwev 6 Kdpios' 4ctv ^7f jtier' ^fwv avvqy^hoi 
^v ry K6\Tti3 fiov Kal fi^ iroLTJre ras ivToXds /iou, d7ro/3a\w {ifias Kdl ipui 
ijuv ■ iirdyere dir' ifiov, oiK oTSa i/ms irbSev iark, ipydrai. Avofitas (2 Ep. 
iv.). Some doubt the genuineness of the second epistle; but the first 
substantiates what I say. 



82 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

his master, and that the philosopher Celsus provoked 
him into deplorable statements. Thus in the second 
book in reply (Opera I. 419, ed. de la Eue) Origen does 
not hesitate to say that the Lord in the separate state 
held converse with souls similarly separate from the 
body, converting to Himself such of them as would or 
such as He saw more suited for reasons known to Him. 
Again, in his fourth homily on Luks (I. 937), he says 
that John B. descended to hell and there preached the 
Lord's advent; and a similar work of Paul he seems 
to imply in his comment on Eomans xi. 13 (IV. 35). 

6. Cyril of Alexandria writes, if possible, more 
unguardedly in his Homilies : — " hades spoiled of 
spirits "; yea, of Christ (Hom. 6) " immediately spoiliag 
all hades, and opening the doors which admit of no 
escape to the spirits of those fallen asleep ; and, the 
devU then deserted and alone. He rose after the third 
day." 

7. In the same spirit wrote the author of a discourse 
on the ascension, falsely imputed to Chrysostom, who 
really censures such thoughts as old wives' fables in 
his Homily on Matthew xi. 3, as Augustine classed the 
dream among heresies — the 79th in his list. I say 
nothing of the question raised by Gregory of Xazianzus 
(whether Christ saves in hades all without exception 
or only such as believe, Orat. xli.) ; or of such romance- 
writers as Anastasius, who introduces Plato appearing 
to one asleep who used to abuse his doctrine, and 
pretending that he was one of the first to believe on 
Christ when He preached in hades. Even a Koman 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 83 

Synod condemned one, a man of mark, who taught 
thus in the year 745. Tertullian among the early 
Latins and Gregory of Nyssa are far enough from 
Eomish doctrine either as to limbus patrum or as to 
purgatory ; for they, like many others of the ancients, 
held all the saints before and after Christ to be waiting 
in Abraham's bosom, a region not heavenly yet higher 
than hell or hades, till the resurrection at Christ's 
coming. Let this suffice just now. 

I feel it neither needful nor profitable to pursue the 
long dreary journey through the mediaeval desert, 
though even then souls were not wanting, like our own 
Bede and St. Thomas Aquinas, with a long interval 
_between, who adhered to the substantial truth in the 
apostle's words as against the more prevalent super- 
stition which had overgrown them. 

Coming down to the Eeformation times, it may be 
of interest to mention that Luther naturally did not 
refrain from giving his mind on a scripture which 
had occupied so many and been perverted by not a 
few. We may notice here that Dr. John Brown, in 
his Expository Discourses on 1 Peter (i. 222), cites 
with mild censure some alleged remarks of the leading 
Eeformer,* as not meriting the eulogium he bestows 
on the " well-weighed words of the candid and learned 
Joachim Camerarius."f If Luther really wrote that 

* ' ' Hao tarn horribili poena Petrus Apostolus quoque motus videtur, 
lit non aliter quam fanatious loquatur talia verba quae ne hodie quidem 
a nobis intelligi possunt (1 Peter iii. 19, 20). Mirabile profecto judi- 
cium, et vox paene fanatioa." — LxMi. Exeg. 0pp. Latt. torn. ii. p. 221. 

t "Est hio uuus ex iis loois sacrarum literarum, de quibus pietas 



84 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the apostle seems moved by the horrible punishment, 
so as to speak like a fanatic words which cannot to 
this day be understood by us, he spoke with as little 
sense as reverence. Even of a fellow-Christian, or 
of an ordinary minister of the gospel, ought one not 
to be thoroughly sure that he is in error before 
pronouncing that he talks like a fanatic or almost 
so ? But to confess that the words were not under- 
stood ought, to say the least, to have shielded an 
apostle from any censure; indeed, to have made it 
impossible, and thrown the blame on those who con- 
fessedly understood not the voice of inspiration. But 
I have searched in vain both his Latin (tomm. i.-iv., 
Jenae, 1556-8 folio) and his German (ten vols, folio, 
Altenburg, 1561-4) writings without finding anything 
like the passage cited. What I do see in both Latin 
and German differs widely ; so that, if the citation be 
authentic, it would go to prove very great inconsistency. 
In the exposition of Peter's Epistles, given in the 
second volume of the great German collection, he calls 
the passage (1 Peter iii. 19-22) a "wonderful text," 
but speaks with considerable hesitation. He will not 
resist those who infer from it that the Lord descended 
to hades, and preached to the spirits imprisoned there ; 
but he seems disposed to think the meaning is rather 
that Christ, risen and gone to heaven, preaches to 
sinners spiritually while His servants preach the word 

religiosa quaerere amplius et dubitare quid dioatur sine reprelieusione : 
et de quibus diversae etiam sententiae admitti posse videantur, dum 
modo non detorqueatur Kav^v toC t6 ainh ippoviiv, id est, religiosa de 
fide couseiisio, neque aberretur Awb t§s di'aXo7/as ttj^ Trfffrea's." 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 85 

to their ears — to sinners as unbelieving as those in 
the days of Noah, and thus embracing sinners of all 
times. He objects, however, to the change of man's 
state before God after death. This is the substance of 
a rather diffuse comment in pages 451, 452. 

The passage in the German writings, vol. viii. p. 660, 
answers to what appears in the Latin edition, vol. iv. 
pp. 638, 639: "Et Petrus hunc descensum videtur 
explicare cum dicit," etc. "Hie Petrus clare dicit, 
non solum apparuisse Christum defunctis Patribus et 
Patriarchis, quorum sine dubio Christus aliquos cum 
resurgeret secum ad vitani aeternam excitavit, sed 
etiam aliquibus qui tempore Noae non crediderunt 
ac expectaverunt patientiam Dei, hoc est, qui spera- 
runt Deum non sic duriter grassaturum in universam 
carnem, praedicasse, ut agnoscerent sibi per Christi 
sacrificium peccata condonata esse." 

Hence it is evident that there is little harmony 
between the earlier and the later doctrine of Luther 
on this point; and that the later view does not seem 
to be an advance in truth, but rather approximates 
to what was taught afterwards by the well-known 
Romanist divines, Suarez, Estius, etc., as well as by 
his own followers. The earlier view is what we find sub- 
stantially taken up afterwards by the Socinian party,* 

* ' ' Christus dum in tei-ris vixit pauoos Judaeos oonvertit : at post 
mortem et resurrectionem suam, per spiritum profectus praedicavit 
spiritubus qui erant in oarcere (1 Peter iii. 19) ; id est gentibus quae 
sedebant in umbra mortis oonstriotae obmpedibus, atque oatenis tene- 
brarum et ignorantiae, easque imperio ao regimini sui subjecit." 
— Wolzoffenms, Oomm. in Evang. Joan. xiv. 12. Bibl. Pol. Frat. 
viii. 963. 



86 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

or such as too often seem swayed by their reasoning, 
Grotius, Schottgen, etc. 

Francowitz (or Flacius lUyricus), famous for his 
hand in the Genturiae Magcleburgenses and other works 
which furthered the Eeformation, held that our Lord 
descended to hades to announce only the condemnation 
of the lost. It is plain however that, though less 
objectionable on exegetic grounds than that which 
supposes a declaration of deliverance to believers there 
(for Peter speaks only of spirits in prison once dis- 
obedient), this scheme is open to the defect equally 
fatal to both views, that the passage in debate speaks 
neither of believers nor of unbelievers as a whole in 
the separate state, but only of such as rejected the 
divine testimony in Noah's days. Not that there is 
any force in Wiesinger's or Alford's reasoning that 
such a "concio damnatoria" would jar in the midst 
of a passage intended to convey consolation and en- 
couragement by the blessed consequences of Christ's 
sufferings. For, as we have seen, the context here 
as elsewhere consists really of as distinct and solemn 
warning to unbelief as of rich and solid comfort to 
faith. On the face of it the governing object is to 
meet those who might be overmuch tried and cast 
down under their sufferings for righteousness' sake, 
and to sustain them in well-doing. 

Hence the apostle brings in the Messiah not reigning 
here but suffering once for sins, Just for unjust, that 
He might bring us to God; put to death in respect 
of flesh and quickened in respect of Spirit. Instead 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 87 

of even then restoring the kingdom to Israel, there 
was only the testimony of His Spirit while He is 
exalted (not on earth or in Jerusalem, but) on high 
at God's right hand, angels and authorities and powers 
being subjected to Him, but not yet His enemies made 
a footstool for His feet. On the contrary there goes 
on here below His testimony by the Spirit; just as 
of old He went in the Spirit and preached when the 
antediluvians disobeyed the word as the mass do now, 
and still fewer were those saved in the ark than the 
comparatively few baptised, who have now found that 
acceptance which is the demand of a good conscience 
toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ. There 
is the long-suffering of God now as then, and the Lord 
will come to judge the quick as the deluge befell the 
despisers then, eternal judgment awaiting all the 
wicked dead by-and-by (Rev. xx. 11-15). 

We have already seen Calvin was as little consistent 
as Luther. Thus in his Commentary on the first 
Epistle he maintains that Peter speaks of the mani- 
festation of Christ's grace to ,godly spirits, and this 
expressly in the, spirit that he might take away the 
notion of a real descent of Christ into hades to 
preach,* contrary to the representation of Dr. Huther 
followed by Alford, who twice over classes him with 

* This reminds one of J. Pious Mirandula before the Refonnation, 
as cited by Huther : " Christus non veraoiter et quantum ad realem 
praesentiam descendit ad inferos . . . sed quo ad effeotum." Hollaz 
sets against it the iropeia of Christ (ver. 22) ; but this no more proves 
it to be really personal than Paul's i\6Ciiv in Eph. ii. 17, indeed rather 



88 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the advocates of a literal preaching there. On the 
other hand Calvin in his Institutions (like Erasmus 
a little before him, following Athanasius among the 
Greek fathers and Ambrose among the Latin) lays 
down that the preaching had for its objects both the 
good and the evil, the one for salvation and the other 
for damnation. But such an inference, while it may 
be reasoned out or imagined, none can gravely pretend 
to elicit from the words of the apostle as the revealed 
mind of the Spirit. 

But early or late, in this at least Luther and Calvin 
agree with Augustine (who was no less wavering and 
uncertain as to our text than themselves), that preach- 
ing the gospel for faith and repentance to spirits after 
death comes altogether too late, and is repugnant to 
the uniform tenor of scripture in its plainest, brightest, 
and most earnest appeals to the souls of men. It is a 
notion subversive of the first principles of truth, not 
to say of morality. Let me add that a fresh offer 
of salvation in the invisible world is not more contra- 
dictory to and contradicted by the awful warnings 
to unbelievers which accompany the gospel than de- 
structive of one of the main lessons in the passage 
before us. For Peter is refuting the fond security of 
such as taunt the paucity of the household of faith in 
comparison with the multitudes of those who slighted 
the Christians and the suffering Christ (their fovmda- 
tion before God) : and this by the instance of the days 
of Noah, when the world perished save the few who 
found a divinely given aud ordered shelter in the ark. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 89 

It would scarcely be for edification to pursue 
minutely the history of opinion to our own days, 
involving too as it would a frequent repetition of 
hardly anything more than old views and arguments 
under new names. Dr. J. Brown's exposition is 
perhaps the lengthiest contribution among moderns 
on the Epistle, and therefore it may seem to claim 
examination; but there is extremely little to notice 
in the way of fresh thought, and his own judgment of 
the passage seems to my mind defective or wrong in 
various ways. 

Commenting on the Authorised Version he says 
(168, 169), "the words flesh and spirit are plainly 
opposed to one another. The prepositions in and ly 
are not in the original. The opposed words [o-a/a/ct — 
TTvei/yuaTj] are in the same case ; they stand plainly in 
the same relation respectively to the words rendered 
'put to death' and 'quickened' \Qavar(cQei<i, ^ojoiroit]- 
6eh], and that relation should have been expressed 
in English by the same particle. If you give the 
rendering, 'put to death m the flesh,' you must give 
the corresponding rendering, ' quickened in the spirit,' 
which would bring out the sense, either ' quickened in 
His human spirit or soul,' a statement to which it is 
difficult to attach a distinct meaning; for the soul is 
not mortal. Christ's spirit did not die, and to continue 
alive is not the meaning of the original word; or 
'quickened in His divine nature,' a statement obviously 
absurd and false, as implying that He who is the life, 
the living One, can be quickened, either in the sense of 



90 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

restored from a state of death, or endowed with a 
larger measure of vitality. On the other hand, if you 
adopt the rendering of our translators in the second 
clause, ' quickened by the Spirit,' then you must render 
in accordance with it the first clause, ' put to death hy 
the flesh.' If by the Spirit you understand the divine 
nature of our Lord, by the flesh you must understand 
the human nature, which makes the expression an 
absurdity. On the other hand, if you understand by 
the Spirit the Holy Ghost, then by flesh you must 
understand ' mankind,' put to death by men, but 
restored to life by God the Spirit. This interpretation, 
though giving a consistent and true sense, the sense so 
forcibly expressed in Peter's words to the Jews, ' whom 
ye crucified; whom Gob raised from the dead,' is 
forbidden by the usage of the language. Then there 
can be no doubt that there does appear something very 
material in introducing our Lord in what is plainly a 
result of His atoning sufferings, as having in the Spirit, 
by which He was quickened after He had been put to 
death, gone many centuries before, in the antediluvian 
age, to preach to an ungodly world ; and there is just 
as little doubt that the only meaning that the words 
will bear, without violence being done them, is that it 
was when He had been put to death in the flesh, and 
quickened in the Spirit or by the Spirit, whatever that 
may mean, He went and preached; and that 'the 
spirits,' whoever they be, were 'in prison,' whatever 
that may mean, when He preached to them." 

This is no unfair specimen of what one cannot but 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 91 

characterise as daubing with untempered mortar. It 
is but a balancing of probabilities or rather of 
improbabilities, and recalls the passage of Isaiah, who 
tells us of the judicial sleep poured out on Israel ; so 
that the whole vision became to them like the words of 
a sealed book. For this, if delivered to the learned 
man with the request to read it, elicits the reply, I 
cannot, for it is sealed ; or, if delivered with the same 
request to the unlearned, he excuses himself as unable 
because of the want of learning. 

It is confessed by Dr. J. B. that the sense brought 
out is self-consistent and not incompatible with any of 
the facts or doctrines of revelation. He only complains 
of the mode of interpretation as liable to objections. 
I shall show, however, that, far from being really 
insurmountable, every one of these objections is 
destitute of weight. 

Flesh and spirit are opposed; though in the same 
case it does not follow that they must have the same 
preposition supplied in English. This would not be 
necessary if the same Greek preposition (which is far 
stronger or more precise) accompanied each of the two 
opposed terms. Thus in Eomans iv. 25 two clauses 
stand in antithesis with one another, whence many 
have been allured to argue, like our author here, for a 
necessarily similar force of ^la with each accusative. 
But this is an error. For the former clause means 
that our Lord Jesus was delivered because of our 
offences ; the second, that He was raised again on 
account of the justifying of us (that is, in order to 



92 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

it) ; for justifying cannot be severed from faith, as the 
very next verse proves (Eom. v. 1). Indeed the 
notion of justification before faith would introduce 
nothing but confusion and false doctrine, not to speak 
of the evil in practice which naturally results. The 
Authorised Version however has not rendered ill in 
gi\ing " for " with both clauses; the English preposition 
"for" being as flexible as the corresponding Greek 
one. 

Similarly here there is no necessity to vary the 
EngUsh by supplying in the flesh and hy the Spirit; 
but, if there were, it was open to the translators to 
have done so. The relation of the dative is not so 
contracted or consequently so uniform as to demand 
the exactly same form of representing it. Besides 
we have to take into account the idiom of the 
English tongue, which does not by any means conform 
always to the Greek. The reader is already aware 
that "in" or "in respect of" may be given equally 
in both the clauses; but the translators might legiti- 
mately enough have given " in " and " by " as they 
have done. Hence the reasoning which develops the 
objection is invalid. " In His human spirit," if it 
were ever so proper in itself, would require the article 
Tft) (as in the common text). But as the best MSS. 
expunge it, so the sense resulting from its presence 
would have been really an insurmountable objection, 
for it is impossible to apply "quicken" to the spirit 
of Christ any more than to His divine nature. But, 
as we have seen, if one translates the latter term 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 93 

"by the Spirit," it is not correct to assume that we 
must translate the former " by the flesh." The alleged 
-necessity is just the mistake which falsifies the 
reasoning of many interpreters, and has mystified 
more readers. 

Strictness of parallelism is to my mind more 
common in the limited scope of human thought than 
in the word of God, which habitually (I believe), 
while thus comparing or contrasting, gives a further 
and varying side of truth in the fulness of divine 
wisdom. Hence the mere technicality of the schools 
is sure to err in interpreting scripture. It does not 
follow therefore, that, when we see two datives 
balanced against each other, they must loth be ex- 
pressions of element, agency, or instrument, though it 
may be wise to avoid a greater precision in the 
rendering than the inspired original itself carries. 
At the same time such a difference is not advocated 
in the present instance; but, as the authorised trans- 
lators rightly enough elsewhere represent 8ia twice 
by an English " for," so " in " or " in respect of " will 
be found to suit both here. Consequently there is no 
such difficulty connected with the version or with the 
interpretation already given as to weaken it ; still less, 
as some easily frightened have supposed, to convince 
us that it is untenable. Nor does it become the 
believer to hesitate because the plain meaning of 
scripture seems to favour a view opposed to his pre- 
judice, though he would do well to examine closely 
what is really at issue with known truth. For "no 



94 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

lie is of the truth " : all that is true must be consistent. 
Only we must beware of confounding our limited 
apprehensions with the truth itself in all its breadth 
and depth. 

But let us follow the reasoning a little more. If we 
hold the rendering " in " on both sides, there can be no 
doubt that "put to death" in flesh yields a simple 
and excellent sense. But what of "quickened in the 
Spirit " ? Is not this equally good, and as clear as the 
other ? Strange to say, the true and plain antithesis 
seems to have quite escaped Dr. B., who allows us only 
the alternatives of "in His spirit" (which would be 
quite wrong, as we have often shown), or "in His 
divine nature,'' which is an impossible version, and, if 
possible, obviously absurd and false, as is admitted. 
But why not " in the Spirit " as presenting the manner 
of Christ's resurrection, characterised by the Spirit in 
contrast with the violent close of His life in flesh, in 
both cases the article being excluded by presenting 
each as a question of principle rather than of fact? 
On the other hand, "put to death by the flesh" is 
intolerable, either as the human nature of our Lord 
or as mankind. But there is no need to understand 
either if we take "by the Spirit" to mean the Holy 
Ghost, which to my mind is assuredly the truth ; only 
presented in character rather than as an objective 
personal agent, which is quite common in Greek, 
though not so easily expressed in our tongue or 
caught by the English reader. 

Nor can I for one see anything unnatural, but 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 95 

rather great force and beauty, in pointing out that it 
was in virtue of the Spirit who thus wrought in His 
resurrection that Christ preached by Noah in the ante- 
diluvian world. For it was of the utmost importance 
for the Jews, who ever craved the visible in their 
thoughts of the Messiah and His kingdom, to learn 
that it is now, as of old, a question of a testimony in 
the Spirit to be believed or slighted, and surely to be 
followed by judgment; as then, so now. Hence, too, 
the preference to the Spirit's mind of presenting their 
past example as " spirits in prison " rather than as men 
living in flesh ; which, however, He does also involve 
in their antecedent moral condition in the world when 
" once " or heretofore disobedient. 

Such an allusion here to Genesis vi. 3 appears to a 
reflecting mind most apt and impressive, identifying 
Christ with Jehovah, as is often done in Peter's 
Epistles. It was natural in writing to Christians of 
the circumcision, and comforting them, in their suffer- 
ings and the contempt of their testimony, by the 
evidence given to the substantial sameness of its 
reception from the flood till the Lord returns in glory. 
This passage has in no way for its immediate object a 
description of the results of the Lord's atoning suffer- 
ings, bright as is the witness given to them, but rather 
to console the saints in their sufferings, apt to repine 
as Jews might at their trials ever since they believed 
in the Lord Jesus. The apostle explains to them the 
government of God in what He permits of sorrow to 
His own. Faithfulness does bring present blessing; 



96 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

but even if suffering come for righteousness' sake, is 
not the saint now blessed ? It is better, if God will 
it so, to suffer for well-doing than for evil-doing; 
because Christ also once suffered for sins, Just for 
unjust, that He might bring us to God. 

Such is the way His suffering for our sins is intro- 
duced, not a harsh interpolation (of His having, in the 
Spirit that raised Him, preached of old to the impeni- 
tent antediluvians) put into a statement of His atone- 
ment, but undeniable encouragement to downcast saints 
to go on suffering for righteousness, since it was His 
once for all to suffer for sins. With this, not they, 
but He only, had to do ; and it is quite done — a work 
despised by sneering Jews, who felt not their sins nor 
their need of grace like His. But if put to death in 
flesh, He was quickened in the Spirit, in whose power* 
He had already gone and preached to the imprisoned 
spirits, once disobedient when the long-suffering of God 
waited out in the days of Noah, while the ark was 
preparing, wherein few, that is eight, souls were saved 
through water, which was the destroying element. 

They must not wonder then, if few were saved now ; 
for this has ever been a favourite taunt of unbelief, as 
an absent Messiah who left His own in suffering would 
be to an incredulous Jew. Thus far the analogy with 

* We have already seen that, if it were meant that Christ went 
down after death and as a disembodied spirit preached to the spirits 
in hades, the language is singularly ill-adapted to bear such a meaning. 
Observe that, if so, it must have been after Ho was quickened in Spirit 
(that is, raised, as well as put to death). Tlie truth is however, that 
it is expressly said to be not personal, but iv if, in which Spirit. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 97 

the times before and at the deluge is plain. So is the 
use of the allusion that follows ; for as men were then 
waited on in long-suffering, it is not otherwise now; 
and as they are kept for a worse judgment, so will it 
be with such as despise the gospel. On the other 
hand, baptism is to the believer the sign of salvation 
by the death and resurrection of Christ; for as He 
died atoningly, so we, when baptised, are buried with 
Him in those waters of death ; and as He rose, we 
through His resurrection have what a good conscience 
asks for, even acceptance before God by His work who 
is gone into heaven and is on God's right hand, angels 
and authorities and powers being made subject to 
Him. This, though invisible, is far beyond the throne 
of David on earth and the subjection of Gentile foes, 
as the Jews coveted. 

What is Dr. B.'s explanation ? Truly the notable one, 
that "a consequence of our Lord's penal, vicarious, 
expiatory suffering, was that He (!) became spiritually 
alive (! !) and powerful in a sense, and to a degree, in 
which He was not . previously ; and in which, but for 
these sufferings. He never could have become — full of 
life to be communicated to dead souls, mighty to save. 
He was there spiritually quickened." No wonder that 
Dr. B. has few to follow him in his view, though it is 
no worse than most others. But to be "quickened" 
is not to be a " quickening Spirit," though both be true 
of our Lord. Neither does John v. 26 speak of the 
Lord in resurrection but as a man here below, the 
Servant of His Father's glory; nor does Matthew 

G 



98 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

xxviii. 18 speak of either quickened or quickening, but 
only as Son of man invested with authority in heaven 
and on earth. And if this be violent as to Christ, not 
less so is the notion that by " the spirits in prison " are 
meant "spiritually captive men." A strange phrase 
indeed, as the author allows ; stranger still if possible, 
though Dr. B. sees nothing perplexing in the statement, 
"that they were aforetime disobedient in the days 
of Noah"; as if it meant that Christ preached to 
spiritually captive men who were hard to be convinced 
in former times, especially in Noah's day. But this is 
to pervert, not to expound. 

If Dr. B. had been a scholar and had examined the 
passage, he must have seen that the absence of the 
article before a.-KuQr\rTam arises from the disobedience 
being viewed as the ground why the spirits were in 
prison. There is no hint of an aggregate, some part 
of which had been disobedient in former times. In 
short, the view is mistaken altogether ; for, instead of 
employing " spirits in prison " as a phrase characteristic 
of men in all ages, Peter speaks there of a special 
class disembodied and in custody or prison, because 
they had been once on a time disobedient in the days 
of Noah: not a word about their being turned to 
the wisdom of the just and delivered after Christ's 
resurrection. These steps of departure from the text 
emboldened Dr. B. to go farther still and contrast the 
multitudes that heard and knew the joyful sound with 
the few saved in Noah's day. " Still is He going and 
preaching to 'spirits in prison'; and though all have 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 99 

not obeyed, yet many already have obeyed, many are 
obeying, many more will yet obey." And this is a 
comment on 1 Peter iii. 19, 20 ! where one prime aim 
is to comfort the Christian Jews subject to the taunts 
of their enemies on their own fewness, as compared 
with the masses who reject the truth of the gospel. 
The saved are comparatively few alas ! now as in 
Noah's day. There is analogy, not contrast. So the 
apostle teaches. 

But this is not all. "This view of the subject has 
this additional advantage, that it preserves the connec- 
tion of the passage both grammatical and logical." We 
have seen enough of the grammar : let us see as to the 
"logic." "The words of the apostle, thus explained, 
plainly bear on his great practical object. 'Be not 
afraid, be not ashamed of suffering in a good cause, in 
a right spirit.' No damage comes from well-doing, or 
from suffering in well-doing. Christ in suffering, the 
Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God, 
suffered for well-doing." "For well-doing!" does the 
author say? Happily little logic suffices to test this 
view of the context; for the scripture here says, in 
the most pointed terms of contradiction, that Christ 
suffered once /or si'ns, not for well-doing. 

Dr. Bartle's book (The Scriptural Doctrine of Hades)* 
may be briefly noticed so far as it alludes to our text, 
•which he pronounces most extraordinary, because, 
after all that has been written by ancients and 
moderns^ and jiotwithstanding the learning and erudi- 

* Third edition, London, 1871. 



100 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

tion expended on it, the passage is still involved in 
much obscurity. He himself proposes a solution, 
which, he tells us, differs entirely from the expositions 
of any of those who have hitherto written on the 
subject. (Page 63.) Now one of the tests of a true 
or a false explanation is whether the light shines 
thereby or the darkness abides. If any scripture is 
still involved in obscurity, there is the strongest 
presumption that its meaning is as yet unknown. 

Whether Dr. B.'s view be well founded remains to 
be shown. His denial that the paradise (to which 
the converted robber went with our Lord on the 
day of the crucifixion) is in heaven seems rather an 
unhappy beginning. (Page 67.) Dr. B. reasons that 
the robber spoke to Jesus as supreme God, that the 
words "with Me" are to be understood as referring 
exclusively to His divine character, and that therefore 
the meaning of the promise is, not that the spirit 
of the condemned malefactor was with the spirit of 
Christ in heaven, but that he was with Jesus only 
as the Omnipresent God, according to Psalm cxxxix. 
7-19 ! His frightful doctrine is, that, wliile the 
penitent thief quitted the earth in a forgiven state, 
and was therefore among the blessed, Christ, being a 
substitute after the cross as well as on it, had still 
to suffer in the other world that measure of punish- 
ment allotted by divine justice to sinful man. It 
denies the work finished by the offering up of His 
body. This is heterodoxy. It separates the natures 
of Christ no less than Christ and the robber in 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. lOl 

paradise. Touch His work or His person, and our 
best privileges are inamediately shaken. In this 
Dr. B. seems to affect both fatally. 

But, as_ to the passage itself, Dr. B. tells us that 
those who regard it as a statement of Christ's 
preaching by His Spirit in Noah seem to forget that 
He is represented to have effected it in His own person. 
(Page 90.) This, however, is not the fact. He is 
declared to have done it by or in Spirit; as the 
Spirit of Christ, which was in the prophets, is de- 
clared by the same apostle in the same Epistle to 
have testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ and 
the glories that would follow. 

Further, it has been already shown that the use of 
the preposition {ev w) is not immaterial, and that the 
anarthrous form (tti/.) is perfectly correct. The quicken- 
ing and the preaching, therefore, are not absolutely 
analogous, as he argues. It is not true that Christ is 
said by the apostle to have done anything whatever 
during His disembodied state. But, even if a personal 
action of Christ were here intended, it would seem most 
natural to place it after His resurrection, not during 
His disembodiment; for there can be no just doubt 
that " quickened by the Spirit " refers to resurrection. 
But Dr. B. himself owns that Christ preaching to 
the spirits in the prison of hades involves very grave 
difficulties, arising from its apparent inconsistency 
with numerous declarations of the word of God. 
He maintains from Luke xvi. the impossibility of 
an alterable condition in the next world for the 



102 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

departed righteous or wicked ; and so far he is quite 
right. A great gulf is fixed, and there is no passing 
it from either side. 

What then does Dr. B. propose? An amended 
translation, "Because Christ also once suffered for 
sins, a Just for unjust persons, in order that He might 
bring us to God, being put to death indeed in the body, 
but enlivened in the Spirit, in which Spirit He also 
went and cried aloud in prison, among those spirits 
who formerly believed not," etc. (Page 89.) It is first 
to be observed that {wo-Koirfiii<i means not "enlivened," 
but "quickened," as has been already shown with 
precision.* Secondly, "cried aloud" is an impossible 
rendering of eKr/pviev. The passage quoted from the 
Hecuha of Euripides (145) proves nothing of the sort. 
To invoke is not to " cry aloud " as a sufferer. In the 
very few classical instances where the word bears the 
peculiar meaning of invocation, k. has an object which 
determines the sense, whereas here it is without one. 
But its New Testament meaning is to preach or 
publish; and the reason alleged for a variation here 
(that it is the only place in which it refers to one 
who was in a state of suffering) is a mere and un- 
founded assumption. There is no more real ground 
to deny an active subject here than anywhere else in 
the New Testament. It is not true that the apostle 
was in this clause concerned with the voluntary 

• Dr. B. says quickened or enlivened because His spiritual person- 
ality or soul ceased to perform its functions through a body. (Page 
104.) This, however, would also require the article tQ tti/., which, we 
know, is contrary to the best MSS. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 103 

sufferings of Christ, any more than with the desire 
of the Saviour to be delivered from those sufferings; 
for this slights the value of the conjunction "also" 
(kv S) Kai). The apostle states it as a distinct fact, 
and connects it with the Spirit's power by which He 
was quickened. 

The attempt also to gather support from the 
supposed derivation of Krjpva-a-w from the Chaldaic 
'"^-3 proves rather the contrary, for Daniel v. 29 in no 
way supports the notion of crying out in suffering.* 
Nor is it true that the word eKripv^ev should be 
followed by an objective case, if the apostle had 
been desirous of impressing on our minds the definite 
notion of publishing the gospel; for if Mark xvi. 15 
expresses the gospel, Mark i. 38 leaves it out, and yet 
who can doubt the meaning? So does Mark iii. 14, 
nay, even chapter xvi. 20 — the very context to which 
Dr. B. appeals for the contrary. The rest of the 
New Testament would still more fully disprove the 
notion, but what we have referred to is surely enough. 

Then again it is to corrupt scripture, not to 

translate it, if one represents Peter as saying that 

He " cried aloud in prison among those spirits who 

formerly believed not." It has been already pointed 

out in an earlier part of this essay that the apostle 

says nothing about preaching in prison, but that Christ 

by (or in the power of) the Spirit preached to the 

* The theory that "Christ" and "Jesus Christ" respectively 
distinguished between our Lord's suffering and glory (p. 199), is at 
once disproved by a simple reference to scripture, say, to Romans 
viii. 11 ; 2 Tim. ii. 8 ; Heb. ii. 9 : x. 10, etc. 



104 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

spirits that are there, which is a wholly different 
proposition. For this leaves it to be decided by the 
context, if not by other scriptures, whether the 
preaching was there, or only the persons preached to 
were because they heeded not the preaching, as indeed 
the next clause of the verse lets us know is the truth. 

Now it is obvious that the Greek does not intimate 
that Christ cried aloud (even if the word could bear 
this meaning, which would rather be eKpaiev) in prison; 
it tells us of the imprisoned spirits of those con- 
templated in Christ's /ojpyy/xa or rather Kjjpviis by 
the Spirit. To bear the desired meaning ev <pvXaK^ 
must have been put with e/oypu^ev, instead of being 
entrenched in its present position apart, as it is most 
firmly. Further, it is equally an error to suppose that 
the original text can possibly mean "among the spirits," 
etc. Were the words iv (j). fj-era tmv TrvevfxdToov, k.t.X., 
there would be something answering to what is set out 
in his English : as it is, there is not even a distant 
resemblance. Again, the Greek does not say "who 
formerly believed not " ; for this would require the 
article, the absence of which indicates that their former 
disobedience in Noah's day was the ground, occasion, 
or circumstance antecedent to their being in prison. 

Our readers will therefore gather that of all ex- 
positions Dr. B.'s is perhaps the least satisfactory, 
and of all translations, known to me, certainly the 
most inexact. Many have failed in one phrase or 
another; Dr. B., in all that is of consequence to 
the right understanding of the passage, though clear 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 105 

enough in rejecting most of the counter-interpretations. 
For (1) it is impossible to sustain that "the spirits 
in prison " mean the blessed on high ; (2) it is contrary 
to the tenor of scripture to allow of a preaching to 
the lost in hell; (3) it is a paltry view that no 
more is meant than the Gentiles in bondage to 
idolatry till they heard the gospel; (4) the notion 
of purgatory being intended here is quite untenable 
and inconsistent. For it is not Eomish doctrine 
to have Christ preaching to souls there (at least for 
prospective grace) ; it is to have masses now said and 
paid for on their behalf. 

All who look into the passage must in fairness 
concede, that the singling out of the spirits of the 
antediluvians (who perished for their indifference to 
Noah, preacher of righteousness as he was), for Christ 
to preach to them in person after His death, is not 
only without the smallest support from general 
scripture teaching or any passage in particular, but 
wears every appearance of caprice, being both without 
moral motives and opposed to the most solemn 
considerations derivable from God's word. On the 
view that Peter means Christ's preaching by the Spirit 
in N"oah to the men of his day, one can readily 
understand that those who were about to be visited 
by an unexampled destruction might well have a 
special warning; and that all this should be turned 
by the apostle to the present or future profit of those 
who hear the gospel that is now preached. For Jews 
especially were disposed to slight anything short of 



106 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

open signs and displays of power. They little thought 
that, while not reigning as David's Son over Israel and 
their land, now too He in Spirit is preaching before He 
conies personally in judgment of the habitable earth. 
Indeed all who have despised His admonitions, and 
fallen in such solemn dealings, await what is still more 
awful at the close. For then is eternal judgment 
when the dead, small and great, stand before the throne 
and are judged according to their works by Him who, 
unseen and gone into heaven, is at God's fight hand, 
angels and authorities and powers being made subject 
to Him. Even now is He Himself ready to judge the 
quick and the dead. 

There is another work* to be noticed before this 
treatise is brought to a close, because it seeks to 
yoke our text with the general bearing of the unholy 
scheme of universalism. Not that there is anything 
intrinsically which calls for a notice; but that the 
work bears witness to the prevalence of the infidel 
thought, now put forth without a blush by professing 
ministers of Christ, and spread far and wide by those 
regarded as respectable publishers. The usual guaran- 
tees of orthodoxy fast vanish away. 

"That even as to the saints, the intermediate state 
between death and the resurrection will be one of 
progression I firmly believe, and on that point I shall 
have something more to say in my next sermon. But 

• The Kingdom of Chi-ist ; Us ultimate, complete, and universal 
triumph over evil, in tlie subjection and reconciliation of all things to 
God. By Kev. A. R. Symoxps, MA., Wadham College, Oxfoi-d. 
London, 1873. Hamilton and Adams, itc. 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 107 

what of those who die in utter ignorance of the truth 
as it is in Jesus or in conscious rejection of it ? If 
ultimately all things are to be reconciled to GoD, 
if the kingdom of Christ is to eventuate in the 
restoration of all things, then it is evident in regard 
to those who are not saved from sin and brought 
to God in this life, there must be some provision for 
their rectification and restoration in an after state 
of existence. Let it be admitted that holy scripture 
does most clearly and distinctly teach that all things 
in heaven and earth are to be gathered up again into 
one in Christ, and that by Him everything is to be 
brought into subjection to God, that in His name 
everything is to bend and every tongue to confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the 
Father; let this be admitted, and I do not see how 
the inference can be escaped that, even though there 
were no specific revelation on the point, there must 
be some provision hereafter for the reconciliation and 
restoration of those who in this life have not been 
reconciled and restored." (Pages 135, 136.) 

It need surprise none that in his next sermon 
Mr. S. has not one word to prove the alleged pro- 
gression of saints in the intermediate state. "The 
life, then" (says he), "of the sainted dead, we may 
believe, is one of blessed hope and holy expectation; 
and if, as before said, it be one also of nearer com- 
munion with God and Christ, we may believe it to be 
a life of progress and development," etc. (Page 150.) 
But supposing we believe nothing of the sort without 



108 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

scripture, what then has he to say? Nothing. The 
idea of growth is altogether unwarranted by revelation, 
and contrary to every instinct of the believer, who 
weighs the force of what scripture does say on our 
sojourn here below as the place of growth, exercise, 
and testimony. We turn however to what is of even 
graver concern, the perversion of the scriptures, which 
speak of reconciling and restoring all things, to draw 
a similar conclusion as to the impenitent and un- 
believing, in the teeth of the plainest and most 
solemn warnings of God. Every believer must feel 
the utter fallacy of such arguments. 

Thus, on the one hand, Colossians i. distinguishes 
between "you hath He reconciled" and reconciling 
" all things." But even so, they are only " the things 
on the earth and the things in the heavens"; not a 
word about the things infernal. The apostle does not 
speak of persons; they are nowhere before us in this 
reconciliation of " all things." It is a question of the 
universe, not of men : " all things " are contradis- 
tinguished from the saints, who are already and 
expressly said to be " now reconciled," whereas the 
reconciliation of all things is of course future, "to 
reconcile" etc. 

On the other hand, when the Spirit of God treats 
the subjection of every creature to the Lord, infernal 
beings are just as distinctly added to those . heavenly 
and earthly (Phil, ii.) ; because the point here is 
the compulsory bowing of every knee and the con- 
fession of every tongue. Eecouciliation therefore is 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 109 

carefully avoided. Por judgment is beyond question 
the means GOD the Father will use to enforce the 
honour of His Son on the unbelieving (John v.), as 
the gift of eternal life bows the heart of the believer 
now before His glory and His love. 

Ephesians i. quite confirms this evident and im- 
portant truth. For we have there shown to us the 
mystery of God's will, according to the good pleasure 
which He purposed in Himself, for the administration 
of the fulness of the times, to gather up together 
(or, head up) all things in Christ, the things in the 
heavens and the things on the earth. Here we see 
that infernal things or beings are quite left out of this 
blessed gathering under His headship ; and, secondly, 
that the saints, or the church, do not form a part of 
"all things," in heaven or earth, but are associated 
with Christ in His inheritance over them all. Compare 
not only verse 11 but also 22, and indeed scripture 
in general. It is the universe, distinguished from 
those who reign with Christ over it, which is meant 
by "all things." 

Thus the awful revelation of the unending punish- 
ment of the ungodly and unbelieving remains intact 
and unqualified ; and the mischievous and wicked folly 
is exposed of such as would distort the disclosure of 
the regeneration of creation, or "restitution of all 
things," into a spurious hope for the final recovery of 
the lost. Not a hint of such expectations appears in 
scripture. The alleged passages refer ta the inherit- 
ance or to the judgment, not to the heirs or to salva- 



110 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

tion. To the deliverance of the groaning creation, of 
which Paul speaks in Eomans viii., the prophets bear 
witness; not one, nor a single shred of either Testa- 
ment, to the reconciliation and restoration of those 
who in this life have not been reconciled and restored. 
With this falls all possibility of such an inference 
legitimately. 

But Mr. S. thinks that there is even a direct in- 
timation in the passage before us, wherein St. Peter 
tells us how Christ went and preached to the spirits 
in prison. His short paraphrase however is quite 
wrong; and he only adds to the number of those 
he characterises as trying to make the text mean 
almost anything but what it does mean, if taken in 
the simple literality of its words. "We utterly deny, 
for reasons already given, that it speaks of or means 
a preaching to spirits in another state of existence. 
A superficial glance might so construe it, not a careful 
or exact examination of what is said. 

"Suffering death" (says Mr. S., p. 138) "as far as 
the flesh was concerned. His body being put to death 
upon the cross, but continuing to live in respect of 
His spirit, which did not die, but passed from the body 
on its dying, and descended into hell, that is, hades, 
the place of disembodied spirits, 'in which also,' says 
the apostle, that is, in His spirit, 'He went and 
preached to the spirits in prison.'" 

Now this paraphrase is manifestly and hopelessly 
inaccurate. " Continuing to live " is a false rendering 
of fft)O7roj>;0et?, which is the less excusable, as the 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. Ill 

Authorised Version in this" respect gives the only 
correct translation. Again, " in respect of His Spirit " 
is ignorance or neglect of the true text, which has 
no article in the Greek ; if " His Spirit " were meant, 
the idiom would require it. As it is, the Holy Spirit 
is intended, though this be rather as a characteristic 
state than drawing attention to the person who so 
wrought in power. Compare 2 Timothy iii. 16, where, 
as here, it is hard in our language to avoid the article ; 
but it is "the Spirit" that is meant, certainly not 
" His spirit." Lastly, the interpretation of the clause is 
false ; for as a whole it points to our Lord's resurrection, 
not to His spirit's passing from the body on His dying, 
to say nothing of foisting in here a descent into hell 
or hades, of which the passage says not a word, but 
"in which [Spirit] also" He went and preached to 
the spirits in prison. That is, Christ in Spirit went 
and preached to them. Not a word intimates that 
the disembodied spirit of Christ went there ; not a 
word that He personally preached in the prison, 
disembodied or not; not a word that they, when 
preached to, were spirits in prison. There are of course 
precise phrases in the Greek tongue for" expressing any 
of these ideas, which the paraphrase assumes. As 
they are not employed, the only fair and sound 
inference is that they were not meant ; and that the 
paraphrase departs really from the letter and spirit of 
the words, which we are quite content to take as they 
are, refusing every sense save that which flows from 
their precise grammatical import. 



112 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Nor is it allowable to Mr. S. to cite the late Dean 
Alford for what these words raean; for he expressly 
declares that they do not mean " universal restitution " 
(Mr. S.'s hypothesis), any - more than the Eomanist 
dream of purgatory. "It is not purgatory, it is not 
universal restitution; but it is one which throws 
blessed light on one of the darkest enigmas of the 
divine justice : the cases where the final doom seems 
infinitely out of proportion to the lapse which incurred 
it." Did the Dean realise his own thought ? In good 
sooth he did not ; for the real difficulty to speculating 
benevolence is not God's visiting the antediluvian 
rejecters of Noah's preaching in the destruction of the 
deluge, but the everlasting punishment of all unbe- 
lievers. There is no darkening of divine justice in the 
former, any more than a ray of light cast on the latter 
in this passage. It is implied indeed, that, besides 
perishing by the deluge, their spirits are kept shut up 
for the day of judgment; but one can hardly imagine 
that this is the " blessed light " Dean A. cherished in 
his lively and poetical mind. It is certain at least that 
he explicitly denies that the words mean that universal 
restitution which Mr. S. would draw from them : what 
he himself inferred is left, purposely or not, in the 
utmost vagueness. 

So it is apt to be where we have not consciously the 
known truth of God. The hint is even thrown out, 
of which Mr. S. does not fail to avail himself, con- 
sistently enough on the scheme of universalism ; most 
inconsistently on Dean A.'s, if indeed he had anything 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 113 

definite before his mind. "And as we cannot say to 
what other cases this KripvytJ.a may have applied, so it 
would be presumption in us to limit its occurrence or 
its efficacy. The reason of mentioning here these 
sinners, above other sinners, appears to be their 
connection with the type of baptism which follows. 
If so, who shall say that the blessgd act was confined 
to them?" (Comm. in loco.) To faith the real pre- 
sumption seems the fancy of an efficacy which the 
context disproves, and the hinting at an enlargement 
of its occurrence without the smallest evidence. 
Undoubtedly that the Spirit of Christ preached to 
those spirits in prison was a " blessed act." All we 
know of the result for those preached to is that they 
were " disobedient, and suffered its consequences in 
being kept" shut up (as Dean Alford says) "in the 
place of the departed awaiting the final judgment": a 
description which in no way suits the deceased saints, 
who are with Christ in paradise, and come not into 
judgment. One may boldly say that the "blessed act" 
Dean A. fancies, of our Lord's preaching in hades to 
the disembodied unbelievers of Noah's day, not only 
was not repeated to any other class, but has no 
warrant from scripture in the case reasoned on. It 
never once was a fact. 

It is useless after these remarks to quote all the 
arguments of Mr. S. in which he enlarges for his own 
purpose the words thus rashly flung out by the late 
Dean of Canterbury. But the reader will learn how 
things grow worse and worse in this line from his 



114 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

conclusion (p. 139): "Yet it is these notable sinners 
who are especially mentioned as having been preached 
to by Christ on His descent into hades. If to thesa 
then surely to all, may we believe, was the announce- 
ment made," etc. 

Nor is one disposed to give the least weight to the 
reasoning Mr. S. reproduces from Dean Plumptre's 
sermon. It is absurd to argue, as he and some of the 
fathers do, from Ephesians iv. 9, 10. Not a word 
connects the spirits of the departed with "the lower 
parts of the earth." Nor is it the reverence believers 
owe to God and His word to quit revelation for analogy 
and human reasons, whatever one may use for stopping 
the mouth of an infidel if we truthfully can. 

Once committed to the uncertain guesses of the 
mind, how can one avoid being tossed as waves and 
carried about by every wind of teaching? "May we 
not be permitted to indulge the thought " (says Mr. S., 
p. 142) " that as the Lord Jesus in His spirit went, in 
the interval between His death and resurrection, and 
preached to the spirits in prison, so possibly this may 
form part of the blessed occupation of the saints in 
hades ? They rest indeed, we are told, from their 
labours, so far as weariness is connected with them, 
and yet their works do follow them. May it not be 
that the work in which they delighted here, that of 
winning souls, shall follow them there ■? If, it has been 
well observed [by the aforesaid Dean], — if the future 
is to be the development and continuation of the 
present, if we are not to pass from a life of ever- 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 115 

varying relations with our fellow-men, each bringing 
with it opportunities for self- discipline and for serving 
God to an absolute isolation, may we not so get one 
step further and believe, as some did in the earliest 
ages of the Church, and as others have thought of late, 
that those whose joy it has been in life to be fellow- 
workers with Christ, in leading many to righteousness, 
may continue to be fellow-workers there, and so share 
the life of angels in their work of services as in their 
ministries of praise? The manifestations of God's 
righteous judgment and of His changeless love may 
thus, using men and angels as His instruments, help to 
renew throughout His universe all who are capable of 
renewal ! " 

Thus sadly is it our lot to see, in these last days of 
a fallen but no longer slumbering Christendom, that 
the anile fables of early legend-mongers find ready 
acceptance among those who turn away their ears from 
the truth. The Holy Spirit has prepared us for these 
and all other aberrations. Por as surely as the wise 
virgins have obeyed the midnight cry, "Behold, the 
bridegroom: come forth to meet him," the foolish are 
going hither and thither to buy that "unction from 
the Holy One"; the lack of which no religious zeal, no 
sentimental activity, disguises at last from consciences 
even unpurged, from hearts which have never found 
rest in Christ the Lord. 

Little did the early fathers, little do the modern 
ritualists and rationalists, suspect that in these dreams 
of preaching in the unseen world to such as heard not 



116 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

in this world, and thus continuing the work of grace 
in the separate state, they are in principle reproducing 
the reveries of the heathen, who knew not God and 
sought His word. Instead of this they fell a prey to 
human imagination, and pictured to themselves an 
occupation after death as akin as possible to the life 
which now is. The chief difference among such as 
profess the Lord's name is, that they conceive a 
continuance of Christian forms, instead of merely 
earthly habits and enjoyments. 

As we wait for new heavens and a new earth may 
we be diligent to be found of Him in peace without 
spot and blameless, and account the long-suffering of 
our Lord salvation ! Whether it be the Epistles of 
Peter or of Paul, the untaught and ill-established 
wrest them, as also the other scriptures, to their own 
destruction. 

Since the foregoing was written, Dr. E. W. Bul- 
linger's pamphlet (fifth edition revised, 1898) has 
appeared. He is not aware that its distinctive point 
was long ago presented by a former and respected 
Rector of Fethard, Mr. H. Woodward. "The con- 
jecture then, which I propose without further preface, 
is that the imprisoned spirits spoken of in the nine- 
teenth verse are fallen angels" {Es&ays, 186, second 
edition, 1836). He too reasons from Gen. vi. 2 ; Job i. 
and xxxviii. ; Heb. i. 7, 14 ; 2 Peter ii. and Jude, with 
"seen of angels" in 1 Tim. iii, 16. 

Dr. B. begins with the design and scope of the 
Epistle. The apostle has himself decided, and decided 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 117 

against Dr. B., that he wrote to Christian Jews only, 
though of course for the edifying of all the faithful. 
But he addressed "strangers of the dispersion," a 
category applicable not to Gentiles but solely to 
Israelites, in a very large part of Asia Minor, as 
indeed such was his province as apostle of the cir- 
cumcision. Ch. ii. 10 does not include Gentiles, any 
more than do i. 14 and iv. 3. When Paul, in Eom. ix., 
cites Hosea for the call of Gentiles, he cites Hosea i., 
as Peter cites for his purpose Hosea ii. The other 
texts merely indicate how the Jews there had sunk to 
the low level of their Gentile neighbours practically. 
But it is agreed that trial and persecution had set in ; 
nobody perhaps doubts this. The apostle was to 
strengthen his brethren; and so he does here. 

Next, in p. 8 we come to the question, and first the 
fact that Tftj before ttv. is rejected by the best critics, 
though read by perhaps all the editions before the A.V. 
of 1 Peter iii. 18. But in p. 9 "Holy Spirit" is 
repeatedly given as the sense. This is erroneous, for 
it would require the omitted article. The rendering of 
the A.V. is not so far wrong, though it is better to 
avoid " by " with " spirit " if we have " in " with 
"flesh." They are antithetical, and if we say "in 
respect to" we can say it of both. But it is not 
possible to justify the inference from the true text, 
"that though as regards His flesh Christ was put to 
death, yet as regards His Spirit He was quickened or 
made alive " (p. 9). It is as unsound philologically as 
in theology. In no way is it justifiable. Undoubtedly 



118 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the second member refers to resurrection; but how 
can any legitimately draw " the body " from " His 
Spirit " ? This is an error which the anarthrous 
construction repels; for -Tfvevfxari without tu> cannot 
mean " His Spirit." The true text points to the 
Spirit of God, as I have already shown, and Dr. B. 
can verify it in his own dictionary, in Bruder's Con- 
cordance, or in any good text of the Greek N.T. 

Our tongue does not always admit of the Greek 
anarthrous expression. If it did, we might say, " Put 
to death indeed in flesh, but made alive in Spirit." 
But English requires for most ears "in [the] Spirit." 
It is a simple difference of idiom, and does not affect 
the sense intended. In respect of natural life here 
below (or flesh) He was put to death on the one hand, 
as on the other in respect of Spirit, or as we say the 
Spirit, He was quickened, when raised from the dead. 
Thus, though the A.V. varied the preposition need- 
lessly, their version is right in substance, and Dr. B. 
is clearly wrong. He seems aware of mistake some- 
where, though unable to discern how it came about; 
for he admits of course that "as regards His Spirit 
He was always alive," and therefore the quickening 
cannot apply to His Spirit; yet this is just what his 
argument does imply. But if the text really and 
only means "quickened in Spirit," i.e. God's Spirit, 
the difficulty vanishes. For the characteristic phrase 
expresses the Spirit's action in quickening after Christ 
was put to death in flesh. 

" Quickened " never means " always alive," any more 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 119 

than " His Spirit " can mean His body risen from the 
grave. Neither the text nor 1 Cor. xv. 45 sanctions 
such teaching (p. 10). In p. 11 it is remarkable how 
h w [in the power of which] is left out of what is 
called " the glory of the triumph " Christ immediately 
received when risen; "He went and preached to the 
in-prison spirits." The difference between k^pviev (as 
here said absolutely) and ev^yyeXladi] (iv. 6) is justly 
stated ; and it is as necessary for the true interpreta- 
tion of those " spirits " as for the strange doctrine here 
taught. Notably too, though p. 18 puts together wop. 
in verse 19 and the same word in verse 22, it was 
already said in p. 13 that the proclamation of it [His 
triumph] was so far-reaching that it extended "even 
to the in-prison spirits." But unless it were a local 
going to Tartarus, there was not " perfect correspond- 
ence." If he really holds that Christ risen went there 
in person, what comes of the intimation that it was in 
virtue of the same Spirit, that quickened Him when 
dead. He went and preached ? Is it not language 
suited to convey a preaching not in bodily presence 
but ia the Spirit? Can one be surprised that the 
pamphlet says so little about this visit ? 

The main peculiarity is next described (pp. 18-20). 
Were "the spirits" those of men who once lived and 
disobeyed the word ? Or, as Dr. B. affirms, were they 
fallen angels ? He argues on the absence of qualifying 
words, such as are in Heb. xii. 23. This again is 
singular misconception. For the imprisoned spirits 
are qualified "as heretofore disobedient," i.e. to the 



120 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

preaching in Noah's days. Men, not angels, are the 
objects of preaching, or the subjects of unbelieving 
disobedience. On the showing of the scripture cited, 
the sin alleged in Second Peter and Jude was a 
horrible rebellion against the divine demarcation be- 
tween angels and mankind, l^or does Moses any 
more than the N.T. characterise the offending angels 
as disobedient to preaching. Jehovah's Spirit strove 
with man, but would not more than a hundred and 
twenty years; whereas angels are branded as having 
sinned and not kept their own first estate or princi- 
pality, but left their proper habitation. Therefore 
were they dealt with exceptionally and consigned to 
Tartarus, while reserved for judgment of the great 
day, instead of being allowed freedom to tempt like 
the rest. "The demons also believe and shudder" 
(James ii. 19). They all knew and know their doom, 
they are not blinded like man. 

Again, our Lord in Luke xxiv. 39, compared with 37 
(and see Matt. xiv. 26), explains "spirit." "A spirit 
hath not flesh and bones as ye see Me have," even 
when risen. He had a " spiritual body," and was not 
a mere " spirit," though a quickening spirit. Granted 
that angels are spirits, but so is man when disembodied, 
whether the Lord Himself before He rose (Matt, xxvii. 
50 ; John xix. 30), saints (Acts vii. 59 ; Heb. xiL 23 ; 
Eev. xxii. 6, as rightly read), or the unbelieving (1 
Peter iii. 19). Soul (i/'i/x^) is the "ego" or "I," the 
seat of personal identity, and therefore predicable of 
men alive or dead, as in ver. 20, etc., for the former; 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 121 

or Rev. vi. 9; xx. 4, for the latter; while Tri/ey/xa 
expresses the spiritual capacity, inseparable from the 
soul, wherein is the working of the will. They compose 
the inner man, as the body is the outer. 

Thus responsibility is, if we may so say, in the soul, 
about the spirit and the body. One may be a rebel 
against God by that spiritual capacity in disobedience 
of His word, while by it in faith the renewed man 
enjoys and serves God, as the body is the outward 
instrument, or obeying or disobeying Him openly. 

Dr. B. (p. 20) confounds "the angel" with "the Spirit" 
in Acts viii. 26, 29, 39 (cf. Acts xii. 23 and Acts xiii. 2), 
as he misinterprets "the seven Spirits" in Eev. i. 4 
and iv. 5, of angelic beings. Think of creatures, 
however exalted, placed between the Eternal and the 
Lord Jesus, and sending grace and peace to the saints ! 
That the Holy Ghost should be presented, not in His 
unity as in the rest of the N.T., but in the divine 
perfections of His power in the great book of prophecy, 
as in Isa. xi., might be a difficulty to his mind; but 
piety ought to have preserved a believer from a state- 
ment so hazardous, unsound, and irreverent. In p. 18 
(note) he even seems unwilling to allow that spirits of 
just ones made perfect were certainly those of men in 
the separate state, and to suggest the alternative of 
" their angels " ! His view of Heb. xii. 22-24, as 
referring to the Heavenly host in contrast to 18-21 or 
Earthly things, is a manifest blunder; for the very first 
object is Mount Zion, which is assuredly not heavenly, 
though the most GoD-honoured site of earth. It is 



122 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

really a series of glory which rises from earth up to 
God, and then descends again. The divine purpose 
comprehends all things to be put under Christ, whether 
heavenly or earthly (Eph. i.; Col. i.) 

Again, why did Dr. B., in giving his own version 
of vers. 18, 19 (as in p. 21), perpetuate the slipshod 
error of " which were disobedient " for the anarthrous 
a-KiSr\<Ta(Tiv1 Por it expresses not the fact as such, 
but their disobedience causatively or as the reason for 
their being in prison. 

Nevertheless Dr. B. strenuously rejects the evil and 
mischievous misuse which amiable men like the late 
Deans Alford and Plumptre made of our text. For in 
p. 24 he denounces "the new doctrine of probation 
for men after death, which is foreign to the word of 
God ; which is repugnant to scripture truth ; which 
has no relation to the context; and, moreover, is utterly 
destitute of all logic," etc. Has he not himself missed 
capital parts of the contextual appeal ? Their un- 
believing brethren looked for a kingdom of power and 
glory on the earth if Messiah had really come. They 
taunted the believing Jews with their exposure to 
suffering. This Peter answers by Christ's necessary 
and blessed suffering for sins, which was His alone 
and but " once " atoningly, while we share those for 
righteousness and love. What did they care for His 
acting by the Spirit? They panted only for the 
"first dominion," and for all the nations to own it. 
Hence the importance of pointing to His testimony by 
the Spirit before the deluge, by which the disobedient 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 123 

perished, as at His appearing will those who despise 
His Spirit now. Did they reproach the Christian 
Jews with their fewness? Very much fewer were 
preserved in Noah's days. 

As for Dr. Sanderson's little book on The Life, of the, 
Waiting Soul, it is a dark denial of the gospel. He 
believes neither in the real salvation of the saint, nor 
in the total ruin of the finally impenitent. This 
comes out in his opening address (on 1 Thess. iv. 13). 
From the first page of the second (p. 13), it seems, he 
does not like that a good man's soul should go straight 
to heaven, escaping the day of judgment. 

Hear our Saviour's ruling in John v. 24 (R.V.) : 
"Verily, verily, I say to you, He that heareth My 
word, and believeth Him that sent Me, hath eternal 
life, and cometh not into judgment, but hath passed 
out of death into life." Here is no ambiguity. It was 
too plain for many of old as for many now. Hence 
the fear of grace, which changed the true rendering 
into " condemnation " in the A.V. and some others, not 
in the Vulgate. It is not KaruKpi/xa however, but Kp'uyns- 
This noun, and the corresponding verb to "judge," the 
context requires as imperatively as philology. 

The Lord throughout contrasts life (life eternal) 
with judgment. All for man turns on receiving or 
rejecting Himself. He that receives Him by faith has 
this wondrous life (for He is our life as believers), and 
comes not into judgment; which is for those who in 
unbelief reject Him and so must be judged by Him. 
He is Son of God, giving life to those that believe; 



124 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

Son of man to judge unbelievers. Hence He tells of 
a resurrection of life at His coming, and afterwards 
a resurrection of judgment, exactly as in Kev. xx.; 
where we have the first resurrection for the blessed, 
and the judgment at the close for those whose 
names were not found written in the Lamb's book 
of life. 

All shall give account to God (Rom. xiv.) ; all shall 
be manifested before the judgment-seat of Christ, and 
shall receive according to the deeds of the body. But 
this is not judgment, save for those who, rejecting 
Christ (2 Cor. v.), die in their sins. Those who are 
Christ's are justified even now by faith. Unbelievers, 
who refuse Him and His redemption, must be judged ; 
and they perish justly, for their works are evil. The 
day of judgment will be no contradiction of the 
believer's justification. The gospel declares it in- 
dividually ; the church witnesses it corporately ; as the 
Lord will manifest it gloriously in that day. It is only 
unbelief which sets all in confusion. Take Heb. ix. 
27, 28, as a clear corroboration of this on the ground 
of redemption, as John v. on the ground of life eternal. 
"And as it is appointed to men once to die, and after 
this judgment ; so Christ also, having been once offered 
to bear the sins of many, shall appear a second time 
apart from sin to them that wait for Him unto 
salvation." Dr. S. sees only the natural man's portion ; 
faith receives Christ's sacrifice and waits for salvation 
in contrast with judgment. 

How incredulous in p. 16 is his comment on Luke 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 125 

xxiii. 43!* "Was Paradise, then, another name for 
heaven ? It ■cannot be ; our Lord did not go to heaven 
until the day of His ascension, forty-three days after 
His death." Has he never weighed 2 Cor. xii. 2-4? 
or Eev. ii. 7? The paradise of GoD is not only 
heavenly but its choicest part, as Adam's was of the 
earth. The Lord commends His spirit to the Father, 
whereas John xx. 17 speaks of His bodily presence 
there; just as 2 Cor. v. 8 and Phil. i. identify the 
believer's departure and being with Christ, or present 
with the Lord. Is He then not in heaven? His system 
is an idle and evil dream, at issue with the first 
principles of Christian truth. 

In pp. 44, 45 he repeats the common error as to 
"spirit" in 1 Peter iii. 18, the sole ground of which 
lies in the tw> which all true criticism explodes. The 

* Even Dean Alford, who unhappily wrote too much to spread thia 
dangerous delusion, says, " Surely the reply to the penitent thief 
implies a iropevB^vcu, and in that vopcvdrivai a joy and triumph 
sufficient to he the snhjeot of a consoling promise at that terrible 
moment." Now the force of that blessed episode of the crucified 
robber's appeal of faith is, that the Saviour gave him to know on this 
side the grave, and at that moment, that he should not have to wait 
for His remembrance in His kingdom, but should have part with 
Himself that very day in paradise. By the gospel Christ has annulled 
death, and brought life and incorruption to light. Thus has He thrown 
blessed light on what unbelief still ventures to call "the darkest 
enigma of divine justice.'' Surely the apostle Peter did not write to 
contradict the apostle Paul, nor claim to announce a posthumous 
gospel to solace the "disobedient." As the application of mercy to 
the antediluvian unbelievers is mere infatuation, yet more pre- 
sumptuous is it to deduce or to fancy its occurrence or its efficacy for 
other reprobates without limit. This one cannot but regretfully call 
a snare of Satan. 



126 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

anarthrous ttv., as every scholar who reflects must 
recognise, does not admit of His human "spirit," but 
only of the divine. So false too is the note in p. 72. 
In p. 73 it is equally untrae that " St. Peter now tells 
us what His spirit did there " — i.e. in paradise. Of a 
prison or custody he spoke, not of paradise. It is only 
Dr. S. who confounds them. It is not said that Christ's 
human spirit visited the imprisoned spirits, but that 
they are there as having been formerly disobedient 
when in the Spirit He went and preached by Noah. 

Not a word of God countenances the notion of 
Christ's " disembodied soul " visiting them in their safe 
keeping, but that they are there in consequence of their 
guilt in disobeying His proclamation by the Spirit, and 
this in Noah's days. Nor is anything said of "the 
good news of the gospel"; it is expressly and only 
" proclaiming,'' as to the Ninevites, in contrast with 
dead saints in 1 Peter iv. 6 who were "evangelised" 
when living. Dr. S.'s "facts," p. 75, are entirely 
fictitious. His deduction is as illogical as his doctrine 
is unsound. Does it not strike him or anybody as 
beyond measure harsh that Jehovah's Spirit should 
strive with them only for 120 years when living, and 
that He should to these spirits only again preach in 
the unseen world?* Error constantly involves in- 

* Well might the learned J. Eisner ask (Observ. Sacrae, in N.F. 
Libros, ii. 407), "Cur quaeso ostentasse sese dioeretur spii'itibus solis 
diluvianis, nee Diabolo potius, Judaeis mortuis, Judae proditori, et 
Herodi regi? Nee Tartarus sed Golgotha locus fuit istius ostentationis 
triumphalis, Paulo dootore (Col. ii. 14, 15), ut alia quae Theologia 
suppeditat taceani." 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 127 

congruities. Not a word of God implies " a chance, as 
we say, of salvation." The text before us spoke not of 
those who never heard, but of such as "disobeyed." 
Then follows the same wild speculation, as with the 
more childish of the fathers, on Christ's servants 
carrying on His gospel work in the unseen world (pp. 
78, 79). This is worse still, and blinds men to God's 
present call : " Behold, now is the acceptable time ; 
behold, now is the day of salvation " (2 Cor. vi. 2). 

Dean Luckock's volume on The Intermediate State, 
though in a new and cheaper edition, need not detain 
us long. He belongs to the Oxford school of sacra- 
mental and ecclesiastical retrogradism. Prejudice 
betrays itself as early as the note to p. 3 ; he objects 
to "up" in 2 Cor. xii. 2, 4. ITow what difference of 
sense would be in " rapt as far as third heaven," or 
caught up into paradise? Certainly snatch down would 
be quite false. The connection of paradise is not with 
heaven only, but its highest scene, " third heaven," 
from which he has no right to separate paradise as he 
does. John xi. encourages no such speculation as to 
Lazarus. Even Tennyson's verse was more reverent. 
Not to the imprisoned spirits did Christ's spirit pass in 
dying, but to the Father; and there the converted 
robber was the same day with Him. There He risen 
and ascended is now, as none questions; and with Him 
there are all the faithful on their departure to be 
present with the Lord. Dr. L. shares not the faith 
of the apostle, but the gloomy unbelief of the fathers 
and their modern imitators. Yet, though "very far 



128 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

better/' it is not the best of all which awaits Christ's 
coming for the resurrection of life or glorious change. 

From the chapters that follow, with heaps of mis- 
takes flowing out of ignorance of Christian standing, 
church state, and even a full gospel, let us turn to 
chapter xiv. on our text in 1 Peter iii. He admits that 
such weighty names as J. Pearson, Barrow, Hammond, 
Leighton, to :vhich we may add Piscator and Beza, 
Scaliger, Ussher, etc., with Augustine and Bede of old, 
excluded from the passage any allusion to Christ's 
preaching after death. But he says that their view 
"is abandoned by modern interpreters as grammatically 
inconsistent with the plain meaning and construction 
of the language'' (p. 138)! Now assuredly even the 
more learned of these moderns, as De Wette, Huther, 
Steiger, Weiss, Wiesinger, or their Anglo-Saxon fol- 
lowers, Drs. Alford and Christ. Wordsworth, possess 
no such oracular place. Happily he states what 
the grammatical inconsistency is. " There is no refer- 
ence in the Greek, such as the A.V. implies, to the 
action of the Holy Spirit, but simply an antithesis 
between the lower and higher parts of Christ's human 
nature, between His flesh and His spirit; and this is 
brought out in the E.V." But the grammatical blunder 
is Dr. L.'s. For, to bear his view out, the Greek ought 
to have the article before ^apKi as well as irvevixaTi. 
Next confessedly the correct text is anarthrous mi both 
sides, the statement being characteristic. Nor does the 
E.V. decide anything against referring to the Holy 
Spirit, save perhaps by their small "s." We can 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 129 

certainly render more closely "in flesh" and perhaps' 
may say "in Spirit." But even if English idiom 
prefers "in the Spirit," the true sense is not Christ's 
human spirit but "Spirit" i.e. of God, as already 
often shown. 

Further, Dr. L. has not read Bishop Middleton 
aright. Eor M. asks, " What would happen, supposing 
the article authentic ? Not that the passage would 
speak of the Holy Spirit [as Dr. L. fancies] : the sense 
would be, in his Spirit, viz., the spirit or mind of 
Christ, as John xiii. 21, and elsewhere." He does lay 
down the need of a preposition where anything is said 
to have been done or suffered by the Holy Spirit. But 
Dr. L. ought to know that this is unfounded. In Eom. 
viii. 14 we read of being "led by the Spirit of God"; 
yet there is no article and no preposition. Neither 
A.V. nor E.V. differs, nor any others known to me ; 
nor do MSS., critics, or commentators raise a doubt. 
In Gal. iii. 3 we read, "Having begun in the Spirit, 
are ye now made perfect by the flesh," in A.V., or in 
RV., "perfected in the flesh?" But both rightly regard 
it of the Holy Spirit ; and yet there is no preposition 
any more than article. The Bishop's notion that it 
means no more than " spiritually " was a mere crotchet. 
The reader may compare to proflt Gal. v. 16, 18, and 
25. The context only confirms how truly the Holy 
Spirit is in question. His own view of the true 
meaning here too is anything but satisfactory, " dead 
carnally, but alive spiritually" This is doubly false ; 
for it is neither fwj/ nor TrveufxariKU)^. Indeed through- 



130 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

out his able treatise he fails as to the usage with 
prepositions, etc., and has misled many thereby. See 
how uncertain he is as to -kv. in Eom. viii. and Gal. v., 
and so are the Eevisers occasionally as to spirit or 
Spirit, as any attentive reader can see. 

Then in p. 139 what a failure to reflect the drift of 
the passage! "He was put to death in the flesh, but 
in that He died, the Just for the unjust, not because 
He deserved death, but simply for well-doing," etc. 
"What ! not a word about its unique character to God's 
glory and for us ! not a word about " once for sins"! 

Dr. L. is absorbed in the mirage of His activity 
about the imprisoned spirits. "And if the men died 
impenitent, it cannot be but that He preached repent- 
ance and offered them salvation." Keally the logic 
here is peculiar. Why cannot it but be ? Does he 
not know that a large body of those holding the 
strange doctrine of Christ's preaching personally in 
hades regard it as announcing condemnation to the 
lost? Does he not know that the early fathers (as 
Irenaeus, Hippolytus, Tertullian), the mediasval School- 
men (not Thomas Aquinas), N. de Lyra, and some of 
the Eeformers as Zwingle, held it to be His announcing 
salvation to the Old Testament saints ? Luther, Peter 
Martyr, Bengel, etc., like the Romanists Suarez, Estius, 
and Bellarmine, adopted the imaginary idea that it 
speaks only of the unbelievers at the deluge believing 
at the last moment ! Others, like Ambrose and 
Athanasius, Erasmus and Calvin, held that His 
preaching was to both saints and sinners ! Logic 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 131 

has as little as scripture to do with these conflicting 
hypotheses. They all neglect the grammar, the context, 
and the analogy of the faith generally. 

He is a bold man who denies an allusion to Genesis 
vi. 3 in the apostle's words, especially remembering 
1 Peter i. 11 and 2 Peter ii. 5, or excludes what Christ 
did in the Spirit's power of old, when His personal 
work is dwelt on. And why should not Peter use -Kop. 
figuratively in 19 and literally in 22, when we find 
Paul using KaQevSwfxev for moral sleep in 1 Thess. v. 6, 
and for the sleep of death in verse 10 ? Yea, the Lord 
Himself uses " dead " figuratively and literally in the 
same clause of Matt. viii. 22. The Holy Spirit looks 
for spiritual intelligence in a believer. "When thine 
eye is single, thy whole body also is full of light " 
(Luke xi. 34). What more inept than singling out of 
all the myriads of lost spirits the antediluvian sufferers 
through the flood for Christ's visit in either mercy or 
judgment ? Especially as a plain design in the passage 
is to warn by the disobedient on the one hand, and by 
the few preserved in the ark on the other. 

In his Second Epistle perishing in the flood, or in 
the fires of Sodom, is not all the doom of the ungodly : 
the Lord keeps for worse punishment in judgment-day. 
Does Peter contradict his Eirst Epistle or its misinter- 
pretation ? It is utterly false that their doom seems 
out of proportion to their sins. The Lord Himself, 
the righteous Judge, warns that, as it was then, so it 
will again be in the days of the Son of man. Who 
and what are the men who dare in their self-sufficiency 



132 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

to sit in judgment on God's ways and on Christ's 
word? "Father, forgive them; for they know not 
what they do." 

In short the superficial impression, leading into 
" strange doctrine " all who yield to it, neglects the full 
connection of the words and clauses, the scope of the 
apostle's argument here, and the instruction given as to 
them in Gen. vi. and in 2 Peter ii. ISToah's days are 
cited as the most striking testimony in the O.T. for 
publicity, patient continuance, and striking results. 
For the disobedient mass not only perished in the 
flood, but their spirits in custody await judgment 
(2 Peter ii.) as having despised that "preacher of 
righteousness." On the other hand stress is laid on 
the few who were preserved with Noah in the ark, 
not " by " water, but " through " that which destroyed 
all the rest. Hence it is not said (of these spirits), 
as by Dean A. and too many before and since, " which 
were once disobedient," but " disobedient as they once 
were." It is the moral reason why they are im- 
prisoned, as all must be who refuse Christ's testimony 
by the Spirit now. " The very far-off allusion," to the 
fact that the Spirit of Christ (not His spirit as man) 
preached in Noah, is the most pertinent and powerful 
which the O.T. furnishes to warn against the perils of 
disobedience. For what did unbelievers care for One 
who only acts by the Spirit now, instead of reigning 
in visible glory and crushing opposition? By that 
Spirit Christ preached then; by the same Spirit He 
preaches now. And as so few, heeding Him, were 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 133 

brought safely through then, beware lest you be among 
the many who disobey and perish to-day. What a 
comfort to the despised little flock who suffer for 
His Name ! 

How sad and humbling that one should need to 
speak of another pernicious book greedily received 
to-day. 0%T Life after Death has reached its forty- 
sixth edition ! Notwithstanding its scientific show of 
propositions, deductions, and objections considered, it 
is mere froth covering deadly error, not without im- 
piety. Much is made of " hades " according to Greeks, 
later Jews, and post-apostolic Christians, like Justin 
Martyr, Tertullian, Origeii, etc., deeply infected by 
heathen and heterodox thought. No real heed is paid 
to the full light of our Lord and His apostles. 

Thus the Hebrew of Ps. xvi. 10 does not mean " in " 
but "to" sheol, nor imply a descent there, any more 
than Acts ii. 27 in the critical text {eh aSriv) of Alford, 
Lachmann, Tischendorf, Tregelles, Wordsworth, West- 
cott and Hort. So the R.V. rightly renders the 
Hebrew "Thou wilt not leave my soul to sheol," etc., 
though they wrongly translate the Greek as "in" 
instead of " unto " or " to." In dying our Lord com- 
mended His spirit into the hands of His Father, who 
is assuredly in heaven ; and the converted robber, late 
as it might be, was that very day with Him in 
paradise (Luke xxiii.). Now we have already seen 
that, instead of being in hades, paradise is in heaven, 
and, as before remarked, its brightest part. One 
apostle connects it with "third heaven" (2 Cor. xii. 



134 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

3, 4); and our Lord by another says He will give to 
him that overcometh (when glorified) to eat of the 
tree of life there, certainly not in hades (Eev. ii. 7). 
In the O.T. hades, like death, life, and incorruption, 
were left indefinite ; but these things and more are 
brought to light through the gospel. Hence in the 
last parable of Luke xvi. our Lord represents the rich 
man, who had neither faith nor love, after death 
lifting up his eyes in hades, but believing Lazarus 
blessed with faithful Abraham. So great a gulf was 
fixed as to preclude crossing from either side. Hades 
was indeed "afar off"; and to be there is to be "in 
torments." Not a word is breathed that Lazarus was 
there; he was in Abraham's bosom. The parabolic 
converse in no way denies that the believing were 
comforted in heaven before resurrection, or that the 
self-seeking were in " this place of torment," though 
not yet in the lake of fire. 

This error falsifies much scripture. Thus (p. 40) 
"it is quite certain that Christ did not go from the 
cross to heaven.'' This assumption he supports by 
John XX. 17; yet the text not only supposes the risen 
body but looks on to His ascension, and refutes the 
absurd "therefore" that the paradise in question was 
not heavenly. 

We may pass over the misuse of 1 Peter iii. 18-20 as 
fully exposed in dealing with others, only noticing the 
inexcusable misconception which applies "the dead" in 
John V. 25 to the departed; whereas it expresses the 
common condition of fallen mankind, dead in trespasses 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 135 

and sius (Eph. ii. 1, 5). " The hour coming, and now 
is " tells us what the Son of God is doing, ever since 
He came, by the gospel whicli quickens those that hear 
His voice. The blinding effect of preoccupation leads 
into the ditch. No Christian doubts the separate state, 
or what he calls " intermediate life " ; none ought to 
doubt that the lost soul is at once tormented before 
the judgment, and that one saved when absent from the 
body is present with the Lord, which is assuredly in 
heaven, and not hades. Yet the resurrection of the 
righteous is not come, still less that of the unjust. 

The reference to Eev. vi. 9 is unintelligent; for the 
reference to "the altar" is simply to indicate that in 
their martyrdom they offered up their souls for God's 
word and their testimony. In the very different verse 8 
we hear of hades, not in verse 9. Saints await the 
vindication and rest of "that day," like others to 
suffer after them, as the Apocalypse shows elsewhere 
also.' Intermediate "state," not "life," would be cor- 
rect language. 

The remarks in pp. 51-54 on 2 Cor. v. 1-8 and Phil, 
i. 23, 24 are an evasion, not an exposition, of the 
truth. The resurrection of the body is glorious for the 
Lord, and for His own at His coming; but to deny 
tfiat saints on departure go to Christ in heaven, to 
imagine hades instead, is to contradict the scriptures 
before us. IsTot less unfounded is the reasoning on 
Heb. xii. 22, 23. A " perfecting " in the intermediate 
state is without God's word. Hades is not used in 
any, of these texts: 2 Cor. xii. 2 expressly mentions 



136 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

the "third heaven," in absolute contradiction of that 
hypothesis on the author's showing (p. 58). 

From p. 100 is an advance into ever-deepening error. 
It is not universalism, but annihilation for the worst, 
and conditional immortality for any ; it is not Eomish 
purgatory, but one of the sceptical order for many 
wh(T died in their sins, to whom is vainly promised 
salvation in hades. Did the Lord hold out any such 
hope in His parable? Did He not teach its im- 
possibility ? But the mind of Christ we have not in 
this book; nothing but perverted scripture and self- 
confident argument. What can one think of a man 
who could apply such passages as Heb. vi. 1 ; Eom. ii. 
7 ; Eph. iv. 13 ; Phil. i. 6 ; iii. 12, etc., to progress and 
perfecting after death ? For most of the race the "due 
time " of 1 Tim. ii. 6 must be the intermediate life ! 

"What is it to deduce from airoXea-ai (Matt. x. 28) 
" cessation of being " ? Was he so ignorant as not to 
know that a form of the word, rather stronger, is 
applied to the lost {a-n-oXiuXoTa.) sheep of the house of 
Israel in verse 6 of the same chapter ? For the perfect 
participle implies the present result of a past act, 
wholly incompatible with extinction of being. They 
were living men when said to be "lost sheep." Annihila- 
tion is a falsehood of Buddhism, and a resource of 
incredulity, but a lie of the enemy, and unknown to 
scripture : even science repudiates its folly. The Lord 
here, as in Matt, xxv., teaches "punishment everlasting," 
and more solemnly still, if possible, in Mark ix. 42-49. 

But the book is more guilty yet. What does this 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 137 

rash man allow himself to say ? " However hideously 
the thought misrepresents God, by making Him more 
cruel and remorseless than the vilest monster ever 
pictured by perverted imagination . . . this barbarous 
dogma of eternal torment is the only one we can 
consistently adopt if we start with the assumption that 
man is naturally immortal" (p. 140). Is he not as real 
a blasphemer as the scoffing T. Paine ? He believes in 
prayers for the dead (pp. 179-188) no less than the 
darkest Eomanist. These are necessary consequences 
of his wicked fable. If the Bible be thus twisted, the 
Litany and Occasional Prayers do not escape. 

The God who gave His only begotten Son, that who- 
soever believeth on Him should not perish, is " an un- 
sympathetic Exactor," in too evil eyes, if His wrath 
abides on him who disbelieves ! God is not " fair," if 
He gives not an opportunity after death — the God who 
sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins ! Is it 
not a horror that one claiming to be a minister of the 
gospel should be its unblushing reviler ? Alas ! in these 
days it is a growing evil of which scripture has fully 
warned (2 Tim. iv. 3, 4 ; 2 Peter ii. 1, 2). 

From an hypothesis, weird and murky in itself, alien 
from the assured bearing of revelation, barren of glory 
to God or of profit to man, fruitful only in encouraging 
spurious hopes, and in undermining God's incalculably 
grave warning against present insubjection to Himself 
and His word, what a blessed contrast we have in that 
which scripture does tell us unmistakably of Christ's 
closing scenes here below up to His resurrection ! Pour 



138 The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 

detailed accounts have been famished by the Holy 
Spirit, besides all-important additions in the Acts and 
the Apostolic Epistles. The first Gospel tells us of 
those hours on the cross of supernatural darkness, 
when the rejected Messiah expresses, according to the 
prediction of Ps. xxii.. His sense of being abandoned 
by His God ; and well we know why ! It was for our 
sins. God made Him to be sin for us, as the apostle 
expounds it. And this the second Gospel presents 
from its picture of the righteous Servant completing 
His work of obedience even unto death, and that, 
death of the cross. The third Gospel, which brings 
into relief the perfect Man, the Son of Man yet withal 
Son of God, in all His human affections and sympathies 
but in absolute devotedness to God's glory, lets us 
know that with a loud voice He said, "Father, into 
Thy hands I commend My spirit," and expired. The 
fourth Gospel is equally true to the Spirit's purpose in 
it of setting out the Eternal Word and Son become flesh, 
who of His own authority yet in obedience (John x. 
18) could give up His spirit (an expression never used 
of another, and possible only to Him), after saying in 
His consciousness of Deity, " It is finished." 

The environment and consequences were no less 
worthy and of inestimable value. For what meant 
the rending of the veil recorded by the three Synoptics, 
but that as God had come down to man in love, so now 
believing man can draw near to God in righteousness ? 
If the first Gospel mentions the earth shaken, and the 
rocks rent, and the tombs opened, it takes care to add 



The Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 139 

that after Christ's resurrection mauy bodies of the 
saints that slept were raised, left the tombs, entered 
into the holy city, and appeared to many : a bright 
testimony to the victory after His atoning death, 
whereby the devil's might was annulled, and He 
Himself has the keys of death and of hades. 

But not a whisper is insinuated here or elsewhere 
in all four Gospels of a visit (whether when disem- 
bodied, or when risen, for they differ widely) to hades 
or Tartarus (where believers could not be), to preach to 
unbelievers a message as unmeet for them then and 
there as 'the supposition of their repentance at the 
last moment is a baseless fable, irreconcilable with all 
that the text conveys. 1 Cor. xv. again expressly 
announces the gospel, but without a shadow of this 
pseudo-evangel; so it is with Eph. iv. and Phil. iii. 
The saving grace of God appeared here to all that 
sinned (Titus ii.). Hades knows " being in torments," 
not the gospel entering there to save those who paid 
no heed to God's word here. It is a "place of tor- 
ment " for the wicked dead, though not the lake of fire ; 
and there is a great gulf fixed between it and the 
blessed by faith in Abraham's bosom, which none from 
either side can pass. So our Lord has revealed. Can 
words more evidently and conclusively refute these 
unholy speculations ? 



PLYMOUTH 

WILLIAM BRENDON AND SOS 

PRINTERS 



