THE    LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  ICUNG  U    IVLRSITl 

PROVO,  UTAH 


V 


THE   PREACHER'S   COMMENTARY 


ON 


I.  and  II.  PETER,  I.  II.  and  III.  JOHIST, 

JUDE,  and  THE  REVELATION 
OF  ST.  JOHN  THE  DIVINE 


THE 


1|«a[t^er's  Compute  Jomilettcal 

COMMENTARY 


ON    THE 


NEW    TESTAMENT 

fON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN) 

tt|^  Critical  attlr  ®^planat0rg  %^it%,  Itttria^,  'Set.,  d^c. 


BY 


VARIOUS   AUTHORS 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
London  and  Toronto 
1896 


tzo. 


HOMILETICAL  COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


GENERAL  EPISTLES  OF 
I.  AND  II.  PETER,  I.  II.  AND  III.  JOHN, 

JUDE, 


AND 


THE    REVELATION 

OP 

ST.  JOHN  THE  DIVINE 


BY 


EEV.    ROBERT   TUCK,   B.A.    (Lonb.) 


Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 


iPctD  gorb 

FUNK    &    WAGNA.LLS    COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1896 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2011  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


-iVjnArvi  YCUrvr   rT---rtr^ 

fROVa  UTAH   ''"^"^ 

http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet31newy 


THE 

PREACHER'S    HOMn.ETIOAL    COMMENTARY. 


THE  FIRST  EPISTLE  GENERAL  OF 

PETER. 


INTEODUOTION. 

It  is  generally  accepted  that  the  apostle  Peter  was  the  author  of  this  first 
epistle,  and  indeed  this  may  be  admitted  as  beyond  reasonable  dispute.  But 
when  he  wrote  it,  where  he  wrote  it,  and  for  whom  he  wrote  it,  can  only  be 
conjectured.  Much  might  be  settled  if  we  could  be  sure  that  St.  Peter  visited, 
and  for  a  time  resided  in,  Rome.  What  seems  to  be  clear  is,  that  the  epistle 
was  written  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  a.d.  70  ;  and  a  very  probable 
date-  is  a.d.  64,  immediately  before  the  Neronian  persecution.  The  epistle 
mentions  Babylon  as  the  place  of  the  author's  residence  at  the  time;  but 
Babylon  may  be  a  figurative  name  for  Rome.  Babylon  is,  in  a  mystical  way, 
put  for  Rome  by  Papias.  Those  addressed  in  the  letter  are  the  "  dispersed  "  in 
Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and  Bithynia,  but  many  of  the  churches 
in  these  provinces  were  founded  by  St.  Paul,  and  are  known  to  have  contained 
Gentile  converts  ;  and  some  of  the  counsels  of  the  epistle  have  distinct  application 
to  Gentile-Christian,  rather  than  Jewish -Christian  conditions,  so  we  must 
understand  the  apostle  to  address  the  Christian  Churches  generally,  but  to  write 
as  the  Apostle  of  the  Circumcision,  with  special  interest  in  the  Jewish  members. 
The  difficulties  which  St.  Paul  met  with  from  the  Judaising  teachers  would  be 
more  serious  in  relation  to  the  Jewish  than  to  the  Gentile  sections  of  the 
Churches  ;  and  it  was,  therefore,  a  distinct  support  of  St.  Paul's  position,  that 
the  Apostle  of  the  Circumcision  should  send  to  the  Churches  of  the  "  Dispersion," 

B  1 


INTRODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


independently,  precisely  the  same  teachings  and  counsels.  Perhaps  the  most 
striking  thing  in  this  epistle  is,  the  moral  support  which  it  virtually,  though  not 
openly,  gives  to  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  There  is  no  more 
difference  between  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter  than  between  St.  Paul  and  St.  James. 

Simon  Peter — A  Character- Study. 

Simon  Peter  is,  in  every  way,  the  most  prominent  of  the  personal  disciples 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  companion  disciples,  and  even  John  his  friend,  make 
but  a  vague  and  indistinct  impression  upon  us.  The  only  man  whom  we  seem 
to  know,  until  St.  Paul  appears  upon  the  scene,  is  this  man  Peter.  There  must 
have  been  something  in  his  natural  disposition  and  character  which  our  Lord 
immediately  recognised,  and  in  which  He  saw  the  possibilities  of  a  noble  life  and 
noble  service.  But  Peter's  character  is  not  an  easy  one  to  estimate,  because 
the  things  which  lie  on  the  surface  of  his  story,  and  are  evident  to  the  casual 
observer,  are  not  the  revealing  things,  they  are  only  indications  of  the  weak 
sides  of  a  really  strong  man.  And  yet  to  one  who  is  skilful  in  reading  human 
character,  Peter's  weaknesses  are  the  suggestion  of  his  strength,  and  they  set 
the  character-reader  upon  searching  for  the  noble  things  that  must  have  been  in 
the  man  who  could  be  so  foolish,  and  so  weak.  Impulsive  he  was  ;  he  constantly 
made  mistakes  by  speaking  before  he  had  thought.  But  a  man  must  have  some- 
thing in  him  to  be  impulsive ;  there  are  energy  and  enterprise  in  the  man  who 
speaks  at  once,  and  he  will  learn  by-and-bye  wisdom  and  self-restraint. 

The  life-story  of  Peter  should  be  well  before  the  mind,  in  its  completeness, 
and  in  its  details,  when  an  effort  is  made  to  appraise  his  character.  It  is  so 
easy  to  misjudge  a  character  when  only  certain  actions  are  taken  into  the 
purview.  Every  man  has  a  right  to  demand  that  his  character  shall  be 
estimated  in  the  light  that  his  entire  life  throws  upon  it.  Every  man  who  has 
energy  at  all  does  some  foolish  things  sometimes,  just  as  Peter  did,  and  just  as 
David  did;  but  the  man's  life  can  never  be  read  aright  by  him  who  keeps  his  eye 
fixed  exclusively  on  those  few  foolish  things.  Even  the  great  Moses  sometimes 
spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips  ;  and  the  apostle  Paul  had  to  apologise  for 
unguarded  speech.  Peter's  life  as  a  whole  will  be  found  to  reveal  the  good 
things  o^  his  nature,  the  great  possibilities  which  did  get  cultured  into  a  noble 
life  of  noble  service.  When  we  commune  with  the  almost  sanctified  Peter  of 
these  epistles,  we  easily  forget,  or  at  least  put  into  their  proportionate  place,  the 
little  weaknesses  and  mistakes  which,  almost  always,  leaned  to  virtue's  side. 

We  know  the  name  of  Peter's  father ;  it  was  Jona,  or  Jochanan,  represented 
by  our  John.  Tradition  gives  the  name  of  his  mother  as  Joanna.  The  family 
belonged  to  the  western  Bethsaida,  which  is  identified  as  the  modern  Ain  et 
Tabigah^  near  Chorazin  and  Capernaum.  As  the  father  is  never  introduced  in 
the  narrative,  it  is  assumed  that  Peter  and  Andrew  his  brother  were  early  left 
orphans,  and  were  brought  up  by  Zebedee  and  Salome  with  their  two  lads 
James  and  John,  Peter  thus  beginning  in  early  life  that  personal  friendship 
with  John,  which  proved  such  a  power  for  blessing  to  the  end  of  his  days.  The 
2 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.   PETER,    introduction. 

four  young  men  received  the  ordinary  Jewish  education,  which  was  mainly, 
if  not  exclusively,  concerned  with  the  Scriptures,  and  could  not  fail  to  excite 
in  their  minds  a  great  interest  in  the  coming  of  the  long-promised  Messiah. 
The  four  eventually  became  partners  in  the  business  of  fishermen,  and  the 
energy  and  promptitude  of  Peter  soon  brought  to  him  the  foremost  position  as 
leader.  When  he  is  introduced  in  the  gospels,  Peter  was  residing  at  Capernaum, 
with  his  wife  and  wife's  mother,  and  he  was  in  very  tolerable  circumstances, 
his  social  status  not  being  at  all  represented  by  that  of  the  fisher-folk  of  the 
western  world. 

With  his  daily  companions,  he  had  been  much  excited  by  the  appearance  of 
John  the  Baptist ;  he  had  evidently  submitted  to  his  rite  and  enrolled  himself 
among  his  disciples.  But  Peter  was  not  with  Andrew  and  John  on  that 
memorable  day  when  the  sight  of  Jesus  seemed  to  inspire  John  the  Baptist,  and 
led  him  to  cry  out,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world  "  Andrew  at  once  thought  how  deeply  interested  his  brother  would  be 
in  their  discovery  of  the  Messiah.  He  sought  him  out,  and  brought  liim 
to  Jesus.  In  a  moment,  He  who  "knew  what  was  in  man,"  read  this  man, 
and  fixed  his  estimate  of  his  character  in  one  significant  word,  "  Thou  shalt  be 
called  Cephas  " — the  Bock-man. 

The  four  companions  returned  to  their  business,  and  some  time  elapsed  before 
Christ  called  them  to  personal  attendance  upon  Him.  This  He  did  in  connection 
with  the  miraculous  draught  of  fishes,  bidding  them  follow  Him,  that  He  might 
make  them  fishers  of  men.  From  this  time  Peter  seems  to  have  been  in  daily, 
unbroken  contact  with  His  Master;  becoming  passionately  attached  to  Him, 
wholly  devoted  to  Him,  and  almost  jealous  of  Him,  unable  to  bear  anything  that 
seemed  a  slight  to  Him,  or  even  to  hear  Him  speak  in  what  seemed  a  hopeless  way 
about  Himself.  A  natural  leader  himself,  he  always  seemed  to  expect  that  Jesus 
would  say  and  do  just  what  he  would  say  and  do  if  he  were  Jesus.  That 
enthusiastic  admiration  for  Jesus  provides  the  explanation  of  many  of  Peter's 
impulsive  acts,  and  confessions,  and  mistakes,  such  as  his  walking  on  the  water, 
acknowledging  the  Mes  iahship,  resisting  the  idea  of  Christ  suffering,  asking  to 
have  tents  built  on  the  Mount,  and  professing  such  brave  things  in  the  upper 
room.  He  did  not  know  his  sides  of  weakness  and  peril ;  he  had  to  learn  what 
those  were  by  bitter  and  humiliating  experiences,  in  Gethsemane,  and  in  the 
Judgment  Hall.  But  he  recovered  himself  in  a  way  that  told  how  really  firm, 
and  strong,  and  rock-like  his  nature  was ;  and  when  he  had  received  his  full 
restoration  from  his  Divine  Lord,  he  started  upon  a  new  career — not  yet  quite 
free  from  his  weaknesses,  but  marvellously  developed  in  self-restraint — naturally 
leader  of  the  apostolic  company,  chosen  to  preach  the  first  gospel  sermons,  to 
endure  the  first  persecutions  for  Christ's  sake,  and  to  open  the  door  of  gospel 
privileges  for  the  free  admission  of  believing  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews. 

Traditions  have  gathered  round  his  later  story.  He  is  said  to  have  founded 
the  church  at  Antioch,  and  to  have  been  an  evangelist,  carrying  the  glad 
tidings  even  to  distant  Parthia.  Wholly  uncertain  traditions  associate  P(  ter 
with  Rome.     There  is  no  historical  record  of  any  kind  to  prove  that  he  was 

3 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


ever  in  that  city.  He  is  said  to  have  been  martyred  there  ;  and  though  we 
can  have  no  confidence  in  the  legend  of  his  death,  it  beautifully  rounds  off  the 
brief  sketch  of  Peter's  life  which  has  been  given.  When  Nero  began  his  perse- 
secutions,  the  disciples  urged  Peter  to  flee,  and  he  left  the  city  by  the  Appian 
Way.  A  little  way  beyond  the  Porta  Capena  he  saw  his  Master's  form,  and  he 
asked  him,  *'  Lord,  whither  goest  Thou  ? "  and  from  His  lips  there  came  these 
words,  *'  I  go  to  Rome  to  be  crucified  yet  again."  The  apostle  felt  the  rebuke, 
turned  his  steps  back,  and  was  soon  afterwards  taken  and  thrown  into  the 
Tullianum,  or  Mamertine  prison.  There,  in  what  is  now  the  crypt-like  chapel 
of  S.  Pietro  in  cojrcere^  he  converted  his  gailors,  and  a  spring  of  fresh  water 
burst  out  of  the  ground  that  he  might  baptize  them.  The  day  of  execution 
came,  and  St.  Peter,  whose  wife  had  suffered  martyrdom  before  him,  and  had 
been  strengthened  by  his  exhortations,  was  taken  to  the  height  of  the  Janiculum, 
or  Transtiberine  region,  and,  on  the  spot  now  marked  by  a  small  circular  chapel 
in  the  churchyard  of  S.  Pietro  in  Monlorio,  suffered  the  punishment  which  the 
Romans  inflicted  on  slaves  and  outlaws  and  barbarians,  and  was  nailed  to  the 
cross.  He  desired,  in  the  intensity  of  his  humility,  something  that  would  make 
his  death  more  ignominious  and  shameful  than  his  Master's,  and  at  his  own 
request  he  was  crucified  head  downwards.  So  at  last  he  gained  the  martyr's 
crown.  When  all  was  over,  the  body  was  interred  in  the  catacombs  outside 
the  city  on  the  Appian  Way — probably  in  those  known  as  the  Catacombs  of 
S.  Callistus  (after  Plumptre). 

We  can  divide  Peter's  Hfe  into  three  periods  for  the  more  careful  examination 
which  is  necessary  if  we  would  estimate  his  character  aright : — 1.  His  personal 
relations  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.  His  grievous  and  humiliating  fall.  3.  His 
devoted  service  as  chief  apostle. 

With  the  first  period  of  Peter's  career  kept  before  the  mind,  we  may  inquire  : 
I.  What  led  to  his  selection  by  our  Divine  Lord  for  discipleship  and  apostle- 
ship?  The  selections  which  God  makes  for  service  are  always  based  on  His 
recognition  of  abilities,  or  character,  or  latent  possibilities.  Divine  selections  as 
mere  acts  of  Divine  sovereignty  are  not  illustrated  in  any  Scripture  instance,  and 
it  is  not  honouring  to  God  to  assume  that  He  ever  acts  on  what  in  man  we  call 
self-will.  There  are  grounds  of  wisdom  and  good  judgment  for  every  Divine 
action.  The  basis  on  which  selections  are  made  are  shown  plainly  in  many 
prominent  cases,  in  order  that  we  may  fully  recognise  the  Divine  rule  which 
works  in  every  case.  Men  are  as  precisely  fitted  to  the  smaller  places  of  service 
as  we  can  see  that  they  are  to  the  greater  and  more  prominent  ones.  To  every 
disciple  Jesus  can  say,  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen  you,  and 
ordained  you."  Abraham  was  selected  as  the  new  race-head  on  account  of  his 
character.  The  root  principle,  the  key-note,  of  faith  in  the  one  unseen  God  was 
the  recognised  fitness  for  his  mission.  Moses  was  selected  for  his  position  of 
natural  leadership  on  account  of  the  organising  and  ruling  abilities  with  which 
he  was  endowed ;  and  David  was  anointed  for  a  future  kingship  because,  though 
he  was  but  a  youth,  and  ruddy,  and  of  a  fair  countenance,  there  were  in  him 
the  possibilities,  which  the  discipline  of  life  would  develop  into  an  unusual  regal 
4 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER,    introduction. 


efficiency.  It  must  be  true  of  each  one  of  the  twelve  first  disciples  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  They  must  be  regarded  as  distinctly  selected  men,  chosen  on  a  sufficient 
basis  of  insight  and  judgment.  And  this  must  even  be  true  of  Judas  Iscariot. 
The  records  preserved  concerning  these  twelve  men  are  so  slight  that  we  cannot 
be  said  to  know  any  of  them  thoroughly,  and  some  of  them  we  scarcely  know 
at  all,  and  "sve  cannot  therefore,  with  any  detail,  set  forth  the  ground  of  selection 
in  each  case.  But  we  can  sufficiently  recognise  their  leading  characteristics,  so  as 
to  form  them  into  three  very  distinct  groups.  Art  has  endeavoured  to  reproduce 
the  individuality  of  these  twelve  men,  but  its  creations  show  how  imperfect  our 
knowledge  of  their  character,  their  personnel^  is.  Art  has  to  depend  on  their 
offices,  their  relations,  and  the  Church  traditions  preserved  concerning  them. 

Leonard  Limousin  executed  a  series  of  enamels  for  the  church  of  St.  Peter 
at  Chartres.  The  twelve  are  there  represented  with  the  following  insignia; 
St.  Peter  with  the  keys,  as  commissioned  (according  to  Roman  Catholic  ideas) 
with  the  power  to  bind  and  to  loose ;  St.  Paul  with  a  sword,  as  a  soldier  of 
Christ,  armed  with  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit " ;  St.  Andrew  with  a  cross  shaped 
as  the  letter  X,  the  form  of  the  cross  on  which  he  is  supposed  to  have  been 
martyred  ;  St.  John  with  a  chalice,  in  allusion  to  the  words,  "  Are  ye  able  to 
drink  the  cup  that  I  am  about  to  drink?"  (Matt.  xx.  23).  St.  James  the  Less 
with  a  book  and  a  club,  in  allusion  to  the  supposed  manner  of  his  death. 
St.  James  the  Elder  with  a  pilgrim's  staff,  a  broad  hat  with  scallop  shells,  and  a 
book,  he  being  regarded  as  the  patron  of  pilgrims.  St.  Thomas  with  an  archi- 
tect's square,  as  patron  of  architects  and  builders.  St.  Philip  with  a  small  cross, 
the  staff  of  which  is  knotted  like  a  reed,  and  indicates  the  traveller's  staff,  and 
marks  the  apostle  as  the  preacher  of  Christ  crucified  to  distant  nations.  St. 
Matthew  with  a  pike  (or  spear).  St.  Matthias  with  an  axe.  St.  Bartholomew 
with  a  book  and  a  knife.  St.  Simon  with  a  saw.  These  indicating  the  different 
modes  of  their  death,  according  to  the  legendary  accounts. 

The  three  groups  into  which  the  twelve  men  naturally  divide,  each  group 
containing  four  men,  have  been  skilfully  explained  by  T.  T.  Lynch.  1 .  There 
are  four  men  who  were  born  leaders.  These  may  be  called  the  Boanergic  Group, 
and  the  type  is  given  in  Peter.  2.  There  are  four  men  who  were  born  doubters. 
This  may  be  called  the  Critical  Group,  and  the  type  is  given  in  Thomas. 
3.  There  are  four  others  who  were  born  men  of  business.  This  may  be  called 
the  Practical  Group,  and  the  type  is  given  in  Judas. 

Our  Lord  recognised  this  born  leadership  in  Peter  at  once,  on  the  occasion  of 
His  first  introduction  to  him.  Oftentimes  we,  in  a  very  striking  way,  form 
immediate  impressions  of  those  with  whom  we  are  casually  brought  into  contact ; 
but  we  constantly  have  to  correct  those  first  impressions  as  we  become  more 
intimate  with  those  whose  characters  we  thus  hastily  judge.  But  the  Divine 
Lord  not  only  read  character  quickly ;  he  read  it  truly,  so  that  His  impressions 
never  needed  any  after  correction. 

What,  then,  did  Jesus  at  once  see  in  Simon  ?  What  was  revealed  to  Him  at 
once  as  the  key-note  of  Simon's  character  ?  It  may  very  well  be  that  his  face  was 
a  strong  one,  and  the  pose  of  his  body  indicated  physical  energy  and  vigour.     He 

5 


INTRODUCTION.    HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


was  evidently  a  man  all  alive,  who  delighted  in  activity  and  enterprise,  and  by  the 
force  of  his  energy  was  carried  into  the  foremost  place  in  whatever  work  he  under- 
took. It  was  this  that  Jesus  at  once  saw,  and  sealed  by  calling  him  the  "  Rock- 
man."  It  was  not  his  impulsiveness  or  his  unsteadiness — these  are  the  things 
w^hich  most  impress  its,  who  are  so  quick  to  see  the  evil — it  was  the  active  moral 
trength  of  the  man,  that  showed  him  to  be  a  man  worth  disciplining  for  noble 
service.  Our  Lord  saw  a  man  who  was  firm,  vigorous;  steadfast ;  who  took  a 
strong  hold  of  things,  and  gripped  tight.  Liicke  describes  Simon's  character  wtll, 
as  "  that  firmness  or  hardness  of  power  which,  if  not  purified,  easily  becomes 
violence."  Dean  Plumptre  gives  a  very  fair  estimate,  though  he  scarcely  can  be 
said  to  appraise  worthily  that  strength  of  chai'acter  in  which  lay  such  great 
possibilities.  He  says  :  "  Through  all  the  scenes  of  his  life  we  see  the  natural 
character  of  the  man  breaking  out  ever  and  anon,  and  showing  its  evil  and  its 
good.  He  is  foremost  in  his  confession,  and  the  first  to  retract ;  he  alone  throws 
himself  into  the  waves  to  join  the  loved  Form  that  he  saw  through  the  darkness 
of  the  night,  and  then,  his  foith  failing  him,  begins  to  sink;  prominent  in  all 
questionings  and  murmurings,  impetuous,  zealous,  but  also  wavering  and  in- 
constant ;  in  years  a  man,  but  in  character  a  wayward  boy,  needing  the 
education  of  a  Divine  Guide." 

Impulsiveness  is  certainly  a  main  characteristic  of  Simon  Peter.  But  im- 
pulsiveness may  either  be  the  sign  of  a  weak  nature,  and  then  it  is  mere 
restlessness ;  or  it  may  be  the  sign  of  a  strong  nature,  and  then  it  is  energy 
and  enterprise.  It  is  usual  to  think  of  Peter  as  impulsively  weak ;  he  should  be 
thought*  of  as  impulsively  strong,  decided,  resolute,  and  in  danger  of  becoming 
merely  stubborn.  He  could  make  prompt  and  quick  decisions,  and,  like  all  such 
men,  though  usually  right,  he  sometimes  made  terrible  mistakes.  Jesus  saw  in 
him  exactly  the  nature  that  needed  discipline,  that  was  worth  disciplining,  and 
that  could  be  developed  into  the  foremost  man,  the  "  Pock-man,"  in  the  spiritual 
kingdom  that  He  was  about  to  establish. 

That  selection  of  Peter  has  its  lessons  for  us.  The  secret  still  of  selection  for 
service  in  Christ's  Church  is  the  Divine  Master's  insight  of  our  characters  and 
possibilities.  1.  We  wonder  why  some  men  are  put  in  positions  of  high  trust. 
The  Master  saw  possibilities  of  fitness.  2.  We  wonder  why  we  are  not  put  in 
positions  of  high  trust.  The  Master's  estimate  of  us  differed  from  our  estimate 
of  ourselves.  3.  We  wonder  why  we  are  in  the  positions  that  we  are.  The 
Master  discerned  our  fitness,  and  we  should  be  happier  men  if  we  fully  accepted 
His  decisions  concerning  us.  To  men  we  are  only  what  we  seem  to  be.  To  our- 
selves we  are  only  what  v7Q  feel  to  be.  To  Christ  we  are  what  we  may  become  ; 
and  He  proposes  to  train  the  possibilities. 

11.  What  brought  round  to  Peter  his  time  of  testing  and  peril  ?— The  story 
of  his  failure  and  fall  needs  to  be  read  between  the  lines,  and  with  a  good  deal  of 
sympathetic  consideration.  Two  things  must  be  kept  in  mind  :  (1)  His  intense, 
enthusiastic,  almost  extravagant  attachment  to  Christ ;  and  (2)  that  spirit  of 
leadership — that  natural  power  of  ruling — which  even  strove  to  make  Jesus  go 
Peter'^s  way.  The  truth  is,  that  it  was  very  hard  indeed  for  Peter  to  be,  and  to 
6 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER,    introduction. 

keep,  second  to  Jesus.  He  was  constantly  making  up  his  mind  what  Jesus  ought 
to  do,  and  how  He  ought  to  do  it.  And  Jesus  did  not  go  Peter's  way.  It  was 
very  hard  for  a  man  with  the  disposition  of  Peter  to  be  compelled  to  keep  second. 
And  we  can  hardly  wonder  if,  in  the  prolonged  fight,  he  did  sometimes  fail  and  fall. 
He  must  have  struggled  again  and  again  with  himself  to  keep  faith  in  Christ  as  he 
did.  And  that  last  great  strain  time  came  when  he  was  bodily  over-wrought,  when 
he  was  annoyed,  disappointed,  angry  with  himself,  angry  with  everybody  else. 
Nothing  was  going  "  according  to  his  mind."  He  had  been  reproved  by  his 
Master  before  the  other  apostles  in  the  Upper  Poom ;  he  was  annoyed  at  his 
falling  asleep  in  Gethsemane,  after  having  made  such  protestations  of  devotion ; 
and  he  had  again  come  under  the  severe  reproof  of  his  Master  when  he  slashed 
away  so  impulsively  with  his  sword  in  the  time  of  the  arrest.  If  ever  a  man 
was  in  a  bad  mood,  Peter  was.  Many  a  man,  feeling  as  Peter  did  that  day, 
would  have  gone  away  and  sulked.  Being  strong,  not  weak,  Peter  did  not  do 
that,  but  followed  the  arresting  party,  and  gained  entrance  into  the  high  priest's 
palace,  resolutely  determined  to  see  the  end.  There,  caught  at  unawares,  he 
denied  with  oaths  and  curses.  Only  a  strong  man  could  fall  so  terribly  as  Peter 
did  that  day. 

And  we  may  learn  :  1.  That  the  providential  discipline  of  every  life  is  adjusted 
to  character.  2.  That  the  greatness  of  a  moral  fall  is  no  proof  of  the  exceptional 
badness  of  a  man.  It  may  only  tell  of  a  strong  nature  which  calls  for  severe 
remedies.  3.  For  most  of  us  the  wonder  of  life  is,  that  God  succeeds  in  accom- 
plishing so  much  sanctifying  by  such  mild  testings,  such  limited  afflictions,  and 
so  few  falls. 

III.  What  gave  Peter  his  power  and  place  and  influence  in  the  Early  Church? 
— For  the  foremost  place  and  power  Peter  gained  at  once  when  his  Master  passed 
from  mortal  vision  among  the  clouds  of  Olivet.  He  simply  took  it,  and  nobody 
ever  thought  of  disputing  his  right,  or  rivalling  his  claim.  Neither  St.  Paul  nor 
St.  John  ever  presumed  to  take  the  first  place.  It  belonged  to  Peter.  He  was 
facile  princeps.  In  the  Upper  Room  he  led  in  the  matter  of  filling  the  vacant 
apostleship.  At  Pentecost  he  stepped  forward  to  explain  the  mysterious  signs. 
He  opened  the  door  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentile  believers. 

But  it  was  not  just  that  man  who  had  been  found  by  his  brother  and  led  to 
Jesus  and  given  the  Cephas  name.  It  was  that  man,  and  with  all  his  natural 
characteristics  still  strong  upon  him.  But  it  was  that  man  after  he  had  come 
through  the  humiliating,  disciplinary  experiences  of  life.  It  was  that  man  after 
he  had  been  for  some  time  in  the  Christ-school — that  school  in  which  man  learns 
the  supreme  lesson  of  self-restraint,  the  mastery  and  wise  use  of  his  own  powers- 
He  had  his  work  when  he  was  made  ready  for  the  doing  of  it.  "  When  thou 
art  converted  '* — with  the  second,  the  Christian  conversion — "  strengthen  thy 
brethren.  Recovered  from  a  self -revealing  fall ;  a  humbled  and  gentle  and 
sympathetic  man — '  Feed  My  lambs.'  "  That  is  the  great  secret  of  power  still, 
the  secret  of  Christ's  own  power,  for  "  the  Cap.bain  of  our  salvation  was  made 
perfect  through  suffering,"  perfectly  efficient  for  His  sublime  and  blessed  work — 
the  bringing  on  of  many  sons  unto  glory. 

7 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    /.  PETER. 

Learn  two  lessons:  1.  Have  you  nothing  to  do  for  God?  (It  is  not  so,  but 
are  you  thinking  that  it  is  1)  Then  you  may  fear  that  there  is  nothing  in  you 
that  is  worth  disciplining  into  efficiency.  2.  Have  you  high  trusts  for  God, 
noble  places,  almost  overwhelming  responsibilities  ?  Then  there  must  be  possi- 
bilities in  you  which  your  Divine  Master  has  recognised,  which  make  you  worth 
all  the  stern,  all  the  humiliating,  all  the  afflictive  discipline  which  you  may  have 
to  undergo.  ''  Though  He  were  a  Son,  yet  learned  He  obedience  by  the  things 
which  He  suflfered."     It  was  worth  while  training  such  a  man  as  Peter. 


Peter's  Earlier  Teachings. 

It  is  not  merely  a  matter  of  interest  to  inquire  how  far  St.  Peter  was  con- 
sistent with  himself,  or  how  far  he  had  gone  in  intellectual  apprehension  and 
spiritual  appreciation  of  the  Christian  truth ;  it  is  distinctly  helpful  to  the  proper 
understanding,  and  to  the  skilful  homiletic  treatment,  of  his  epistle  that  we  should 
know  what  points  of  the  Christian  truth  first  arrested  his  attention,  absorbed 
his  interest,  and  found  expression  in  his  ministry  as  the  first  gospel  preacher. 
This  subject  has  been  skilfully  treated  by  the  Rev.  Owen  James^  and  his  chief 
points  may  be  presented. 

When  Jesus  died  the  Christian  religion  had  no  outward  form  or  organisation. 
During  His  life  He  taught  new  truths,  set  up  new  ideals,  awakened  new  aspira- 
tions, and  established  new  hopes ;  but  He  did  not  organise  His  followers  into  a 
society  separate  and  distinct  from  Judaism.  After  the  resurrection,  during  the 
forty  days,  He  continued  His  instruction  on  points  bearing  especially  on  the 
nature  of  the  heavenly  kingdom. 

The  process  of  giving  an  external  organisation  to  Christianity  may  be  said  to 
have  begun  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  This  process  was  a  gradual  one — was, 
indeed,  a  growth.  In  this  growth  we  can  easily  distinguish  five  phases  : — 1 .  A 
doctrinal  growth,  i.e.  a  growth  in  the  apostles'  understanding  of  Christianity. 
2.  A  numerical  growth,  i.e.  an  increase  in  the  number  of  those  who  held 
Christian  beliefs.  3.  A  separative  growth — i.e.  a  process  by  which  the  Christians 
were  expelled  from  the  Jewish  body,  and  organised  into  a  new  and  distinct  body. 
4.  A  structural  growth,  i.e.  a  process  by  which  this  new  Christian  body  deve- 
loped within  itself  its  own  functions,  and  its  own  organs.  5.  A  dispersive  growth, 
i.e.  a  process  by  which  the  Christian  society  not  x  only  came  into  existence,  but 
also  reproduced  itself  in  every  part  of  the  Roman  empire. 

Thus  there  was  a  growth  in  the  individual ;  from  one  individual  to  another ; 
a  separation  of  these  individuals  into  a  class;  structural  growth  within  the 
class ;  a  multipUcation  of  the  class  throughout  the  world.  These  processes  were, 
of  course,  independent,  and  each  was  in  part  the  effect,  and  in  part  the  cause,  of 
all  the  others. 

The  doctrinal  growth  was  from  Peter,  through  Stephen  to  Paul  and  John.  It 
has  thus  its  four  stages :  Petrine,  Stephanie,  Pauline,  and  Johannine. 

Peter  was  a  Jew.  He  shared  in  the  Jewish  hopes  and  prejudices,  conformed 
o 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I  PETER,    introduction. 

to  the  Jewish  ritual,  and  lived  a  Jewish  life.  His  idea  of  the  Messianic  kingdom 
was  that  in  form  it  would  be  earthly  and  Jewish.  The  crucifixion  dispersed  all 
the  expectations  of  Peter,  and  overwhelmed  him  with  despair.  But  the  resur- 
rection, the  intercourse  and  meditations  of  the  forty  days,  the  ascension,  and  the 
outpouring  of  the  Spirit  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  were  events  whose  logic  reset 
his  views.  He  saw  that  the  Jewish  nation  had  crucified  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
its  Lord  and  Messiah.  Peter  has  not  ceased  to  be  a  Jew.  But  he  is  a  Jew 
who  believes  that  the  Messiah  has  already  come,  that  the  nation,  not  being  pre- 
pared for  Him,  killed  Him,  and  that  for  this  reason  He  has,  for  the  present > 
gone  back  to  heaven.  When  Peter  declared  this  publicly  there  was  great  conster- 
nation. The  multitudes  i  cried,  "  Brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? "  That  is,  How 
shall  we  avert  the  consequences  of  our  unpreparedness  for  the  Messiah,  and  our  con- 
sequent rejection  and  crucifixion  of  Him  ?  They  are  commanded  to  do  two  things  : 
1.  "  Repent  ye."  2.  *'  Be  baptized,  every  one  of  you,  into  the  name  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah."  He  does  not  use  the  word  "  Repentance  "  in  the  modern  metaphysico- 
theological  sense.  He  tells  the  Jews  simply  that  they  must  resolve  to  cease 
from  their  wicked  doings,  and  to  give  scrupulous  obedience  to  the  law,  as  faithful 
Jews.  That  was  one  thing  they  must  do.  Then  they  were  to  be  baptized  into 
the  name  of  Jesus,  upon  the  basis  of  their  conviction  and  avowal  that  He  was 
the  Messiah.  He  requires,  therefore,  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  as  Messiah,  and  a 
formal  expression  of  this  acceptance  by  baptism. 

The  repentance,  the  naming  of  Jesus  as  Messiah,  and  the  baptism  into  this 
name,  were  with  a  view  to  two  objects — the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  bestowal 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Remission  of  sins  is  here  used  in  its  objective  and  not  in  its 
subjective  sense.  Peter  is  not  thinking  of  that  Divine  act  in  which  God  acquits 
man  of  sin.  He  is  thinking  rather  of  averting  the  calamitous  consequences  of 
sinning,  and  he  has  a  special  series  of  calamities  in  his  mind. 

Shortly  after  the  Day  of  Pentecost  Peter  addressed  the  multitudes  that  had 
assembled  in  Solomon's  porch.  Here,  again,  repentance,  turning  again,  blotting 
out  of  sin,  are  pre-requisite,  and  upon  them  is  conditioned  the  coming  of  the  seasons 
of  refreshing.  The  exhortations  of  the  second  address  are  given  from  a  different 
point  of  view.  In  the  first  address  the  main  object  in  view  is  to  avert  the 
destruction  which  the  Messiah  will  inflict  on  those  unprepared  for  Him.  In 
the  second  address  the  main  object  in  view  is  to  secure  the  speedy  return  of  the 
Messiah. 

Addressing  the  Sanhedrin,  Peter's  point  is  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom  the 
Sanhedrin  had  crucified,  was  the  true  Messiah,  the  only  Messiah  which  the 
nation  would  ever  have ;  that  God  had  raised  Him  from  the  dead ;  and  that  in 
His  name  the  lame  man  was  healed. 

Again  addressing  the  Sanhedrin,  Peter  says  in  closing :  "  Him  as  Prince  and 
Saviour  did  God  exalt  at  His  right  hand  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  remis- 
sion of  sins."  That  is,  God  raised  Jesus,  who  was  a  Prince  and  Saviour,  unto 
His  right  hand  in  order  to  give  to  Israel  time  and  opportunity  for  repentance 
and  forgiveness.  Rather  than  destroy  the  nation  at  once  because  of  its  rejection 
of  the  Messiah,  God  had  raised  the  Messiah  unto  His  right  hand  in  order  that 

9 


INTRODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


the  nation  might  be  brought  to  repentance,   and  through  repentance  to  the 
forgiveness  of  sins. 

Eecapitulating  the  four  addresses  of  Peter  recorded  in  the  first  part  of  the 
Acts,  we  learn,  according  to  the  above  exposition  :  — 

1.  That  Peter  was  a  true  and  faithful  Jew. 

2.  That  in  his  mind  the  Messianic  kingdom  was  earthly  and  political,  but 
based  on  pure  morality  and  fervent  piety.  The  benefits  of  the  kingdom  were  to 
be  in  part  worldly,  and  in  part  spiritual.  The  Holy  Spirit  was  to  be  poured  out 
on  all  classes  of  Jews.  On  the  other  hand,-  the  Messiah  was  to  destroy  with  a 
terrible  destruction  the  immoral,  the  impious,  and  the  hostile  to  Himself  among 
the  nation. 

3.  The  Messiah  had  already  come,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth. 

4.  The  nation,  not  being  prepared  for  Him,  had  crucified  Him. 

5.  God  had  raised  Him  from  the  dead,  and  had  exalted  Him  to  a  place  at  His 
right  hand  in  heaven. 

6.  The  crucifixion,  death,  and  resurrection  of  the  Messiah  had  for  their  efiicient 
cause  the  sins  of  the  people ;  for  their  formal  cause  the  determinate  counsel  and 
foreknowledge  of  God  ;  but  concerning  their  final  cause,  Peter  is  silent.  That  is, 
Peter  mentions  no  purpose  that  God  had  in  His  counsel  that  the  Messiah  should 
be  a  suffering  one. 

The  Messiah  had  been  exalted  to  heaven  not  only  because  the  people  were 
unprepared  for  Him,  but  also  in  order  to  give  the  nation  time  and  opportunity 
to  become  prepared  for  Him. 

8.  When  the  nation  should  be  sufficiently  prepared,  the  Messiah  would  again 
appear  to  establish  the  kingdom  and  destroy  the  unprepared  remnant. 

9.  Preparedness  for  the  Messiah  produced  an  individual  and  a  national  result: 
(1)  For  the  nation  it  accelerated  the  setting  up  of  the  Messianic  kingdom  with 
all  its  national  blessings.  (2)  For  the  individual  it  effected  a  removal  from 
a  hostile  class  to  a  friendly  class,  from  a  class  that  was  to  be  destroyed  to  a 
class  that  was  to  be  blessed;  it  averted  the  destruction  and  secured  the 
salvation  which  the  comiug  of  the  Messiah  brought.  In  other  words,  prepared- 
ness for  the  Messiah  resulted  to  the  individual  in  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  the 
bestowal  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

10.  This  preparedness  consisted  in  reformation  of  moral  and  religious  conduct 
(repentance)  ;  in  naming  Jesus  as  Messiah  (faith) ;  and  in  being  baptized  into  this 
name  (confession).  The  import  of  this  baptism  is  threefold  ;  it  expressed  accept- 
ance of  Jesus  as  Messiah,  it  was  a  formal  committal  of  self  to  Jesus  as  Messiah, 
and  it  changed  the  class  of  the  baptized.  It  was  a  confession,  it  was  a  pledge,  and 
it  identified  the  confessing  and  pledging  person  with  the  disciples.  He  became 
a  disciple  by  this  very  act.     This  was  the  mark  that  classified  him  outwardly. 

11.  This  preparedness  was  to  be  produced  by  the  disciples  through  their 
testimony  and  preaching,  and  through  the  confirming  of  their  testimony  by  the 
Holy  Spirit. 

Such  seem  to  have  been  the  beliefs  of  the  Christians  during  the  early  Petrine 
period. 

10 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER,    introduction. 


St.  Peter's  Acquaintance  with  St.  Paul's  Epistles. 

At  some  time  or  other  in  the  later  period  of  St.  Peter's  life,  we  must  think 
of  him  as  coming  into  contact  for  the  first  time  with  what  must  have  been  a 
new  treasure  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  equivalent  almost  to  a  new  apocalypse 
of  truth.  During  the  thirty  years  or  so  that  had  passed  since  the  conversion 
of  Saul  of  Tarsus,  the  two,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  had  but  seldom  met.  True, 
St.  Peter  had  once  heard  in  brief  outline  the  substance  of  the  gospel  which 
St.  Paul  preached  to  the  Gentiles  (Gal.  ii.  2).  True,  he  had  publicly  recognised 
his  teaching  and  his  work  ;  but  after  this  there  had  been  an  interval  of 
separation  and  distrust,  for  a  time  even  of  actual  antagonism,  brought  about 
by  ignorance  and  misrepresentation.  During  all  these  years  the  only  time 
in  which  he  listened  to  St.  Paul'c  voice  was  when  he  spoke  in  sharp  reproof 
at  Antioch.  We  have  no  reason  to  think  it  likely  that  any  of  St.  Paul's  epistles 
had  at  that  time  come  within  his  reach.  Bat  now,  in  his  old  age,  he  came  in 
contact  with  Silvanus,  who  for  years  had  been  St.  Paul's  companion,  who  was 
joined  with  him  in  the  salutations  to  the  churches  of  Thessalonica,  who  possibly 
acted  as  his  amanuensis  in  writing  the  Epistle  to  the  Eomans.  From  him, 
therefore,  St.  Peter  may  well  have  obtained  a  copy  of  some,  at  least,  of  the  great 
epistlcc  in  which  the  teaching  of  the  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles  has  come  down 
to  us  for  an  everlasting  possession.  Can  we  not  picture  to  ourselves  the  flood 
of  new  feelings  and  thoughts  which  would  rush  in  upon  his  soul  as  he  sat  and 
read  them  ?  Delight  to  find  a  heart  that  beat  so  entirely  in  unison  with  his 
own,  loving  Christ  as  he  himself  loved  Him,  a  truth  essentially  the  same, 
though  presenting  here  and  there  different  phases,  and  including  some  things 
hard  to  be  understood — a  new  warmth  of  affection  towards  the  "  beloved 
brother  Paul,"  who,  when  they  last  met,  had  reproved  him  so  sharply — wider 
thoughts,  it  may  be,  than  he  had  before  known  as  to  the  mystery  of  Christ,  and 
the  hidden  symbolism  of  the  types  and  shadows  of  the  law-j— all  these  are 
traceable  in  his  epistles  ;  and  this  also,  the  influence  of  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul 
on  the  mind  of  St.  Peter,  would  well  repay  a  distinct  and  full  inquiry. 

With  such  fruits  fresh  gathered  into  the  garner  of  his  old  age,  with  a  mind 

illumined  at  once  by  a  long  experience  and  by  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of 

Truth,  soaring  far  above  the  strife  and  contention  with  which  party  and  faction 

had  sought  to  identify  his  name,  looking  back  upon  the  past,  to  the  days  when 

his  Lord  had  been  with  him  upon  earth,  and  he  saw  His  glory,  and  listened 

to  His  words,  looking  forward  to  the  time  as  already  near  when  he  would  have 

to  put  off  this  tabernacle,  as  that   Lord  had  showed  him — all  the  fear,  and 

vacillation,  and  self-confidence  of  the  natural  man,  the  Simon  Bar-Jona,  having 

passed  away — the   true   Peter,  at   last  worthy  of  his   name,   sends  forth  the 

great  encyclical  epistles,  which  were  then  the  stay  and  bulwark  of  the  Church 

against  the  hosts  of  dark  and  dangerous  errors,  and  which  continue  to  give 

light  to  all  seekers  after  truth,  and  comfort  to  all  penitents  and  mourners. — 

Dean  Plumptre. 

11 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


St.  Peter's  Ministry  in  Rome. 

The  most  that  can  be  said  of  the  evidence  for  this  is  that  it  leaves  it  fairly 
probable  that  St.  Peter  ended  his  life  at  Rome.  Of  the  twenty-five  years  of  his 
Episcopate,  and  of  his  having  thus  been  the  first  of  a  long  line  of  Pontiffs,  there 
is  not  the  shadow  of  any  evidence  till  we  come  to  Eusebius  himself,  who  states 
that  Peter  followed  Simon  Magus  to  Rome  in  the  reign  of  Claudius  (a.d.  41),  and 
there  defeated  him.  He  does  not  give  the  details  of  the  defeat,  but  wraps  them 
in  a  vague  rhetoric.  The  true  source  of  the  Petrine  legend  are,  accordingly,  not 
to  be  found  in  the  early  fathers  of  the  church,  nor  in  any  local  tradition  of  an 
earlier  date  than  the  latter  part  of  the  second  century.  Their  starting  point  is 
found  in  the  elaborate  apocrypha  of  the  Ebionite  heretics. — Dean  Plumptre. 


12 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE  PRESENT  POWER  OF  THE  FUTURE   SALVATION. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Peter. — This  may  be  called  his  ofl&cial,  his  apostolic  name,  as  distinguished  from 
his  personal  name  Simon,  or  Simeon.  Christ  gave  it  to  mark  His  estimate  of  his  character  ; 
it  has  come  to  indicate  his  office.  Apostle. — That  is,  one  directly  called,  commissioned, 
and  sent,  by  Jesus  Christ  Himself.  Compare  the  name  "  servant,"  given  to  themselves  by 
James  and  Jiide,  which  suggests,  and  seems  to  imply,  that  they  were  not  apostles  in  the  first 
sense  of  the  term.  Jesus  Christ. — As  St.  Peter  writes  mainly  to  Jews,  this  name  is  significant 
as  assuming  the  recognised  Messiahship  of  Jesus.  He  is  Jesus  the  Messiah.  Strangers. — 
€K\€Krols  Trapein.5riiJ.oLS ;  chosen  strangers,  or  elect  sojourners  of  the  Dispersion.  Compare 
John  vii.  35,  "the  dispersion  of  the  Greeks,"  which  must  mean  the  "dispersed  Jews  who 
live  among  the  Greeks."  Here  "  the  dispersed  of  Pontus,"  etc.,  means  "  the  dispersed  Jews 
who  live  in  these  countries."  Strangers  is  a  confusing  word ;  sojourners  is  better.  Jerusalem 
is  thought  of  as  the  Jews'  home  ;  anywhere  else  he  is  a  sojourner.  The  tone  of  the  epistle  is 
adapted  to  the  Jew,  and  especially  to  the  foreign-dwelling  Jew.  The  countries  mentioned 
are  provinces  of  Asia  Minor.  The  particular  occasion  of  the  letter  is  not  indicated  even  by 
its  contents. 

Ver.  2.  Elect.— The  usual  idea  of  the  Jews  as  a  nation.  But  Peter  intimates  that  the 
Christian  Jews  were  elect  in  a  new  sense.  "  The  word  and  the  thought  that  the  disciples  of 
Christ  are  what  they  are  by  the  election  or  choice  of  God  characterises  the  whole  teaching 
of  the  New  Testament."  Foreknowledge. — Plumptre  says  that  the  word  hovers  between  a 
mere  "  prevision  of  the  future  "  and  the  higher  sense  in  which  "  knowing  "  means  *'  loving  " 
and  "approving,"  as  in  1  Cor.  viii.  3;  Gal.  iv.  9,  and  probably  Rom.  viii.  29,  xi.  2,  God  the 
Father. — St.  Peter's  clear  conception  of  the  Sonship  of  Christ  gave  him  a  clear  and  strong 
impression  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  Through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit. — Which  prac- 
tically carries  out  the  electing  purpose  of  God.  "  Separating, '  rather  than  "  making  holy," 
is  the  idea  of  sanctification  here,  after  the  familiar  meaning  of  the  term  to  Jews.  Compare 
"consecration."  The  election  of  God,  as  a  Divine  purpose,  realised  or  manifested  itself  in 
their  being  separated  from  the  world,  and  set  apart  as  consecrated  ones.  Unto  obedience. — 
The  response  of  the  consecrated  one  to  the  grace  of  his  separation.  To  secure  such  obedience 
is  the  purpose  of  God's  election,  and  the  work  of  the  sanctifying  Spirit.  So  the  obedience  of 
the  Jewish  nation  was  the  proper  response  to  the  national  election.  Sprinkling  of  the  blood. 
— Which  bears  direct  relation  to  infirmities  in  the  obedience  of  the  sanctified  ones,  as  is  even 
more  clearly  expressed  in  1  John  i.  7.  It  should  be  noticed  that  this  cleansing  and  sprinkliug 
of  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  applied  to  those  who  are  Christian,  who  are  separated  or  sanctified. 
"The  daily  being  sprinkled  by  Christ's  blood,  and  so  cleansed  from  all  sin"  {Fausset). 
Grace  .  .  .  peace.— By  peace  is  meant  that  inward  composure  of  mind  which  attends  upon 
the  experience  of  electing  grace.  "Peace"  is  the  old  Hebrew  salutation;  the  addition  of 
"  grace  "  makes  it  a  Christian  salutation. 

Ver.  3.  Blessed  be. — A  characteristic  Jewish  recognition  of  God's  mercy.  Compare  with 
2  Cor.  i.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  3.  Abundant. — ttoXu,  much.  Begotten  us. — The  choice  of  the  nation 
is  thought  of  as  its  first  Divine  birth  ;  the  call  into  gospel  privileges  is  thought 
of  as  a  new  and  second  Divine  birth  (see  John  iii.  5 ;  Titus  iii.  5 ;  James  i.  18). 
Lively  hope. — Living  hope.  "A  life  in  which  hope  is  the  energising  principle"  {Alford). 
MacknifjhVs  note  is  suggestive  :  "  Believers  of  all  nations  are  begotten  to  the  hope  of  a  new 
life  after  death,  through  the  covenant  of  grace  made  with  our  first  parents  after  the  Fall.  In 
the  same  hope  they  are  begotten  a  second  time,  through  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the 
dead."  By  the  resurrection. — Here  St.  Peter  speaks  from  his  own  personal  experiences.  The 
great  revealing  time,  which  brought  to  him  the  consciousness  of  a  new  life,  was  the  resur- 

13 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


rection  of  Jesus.  Then  he  believed  in  Him  with  a  belief  that  brought  to  him  a  new  life. 
ArchhisJwp  LHghton  makes  the  resurrection  the  efficient  cause  of  our  new  birth. 

Ver.  4.  To  an  inheritance. — Still  the  Jewish  national  figure  is  in  the  mind  of  St.  Peter. 
That  nation  was  begotten  to  the  inheritance  of  Canaan  ;  we  are  begotten  to  a  spiritual 
inheritance,  figured  for  us  as  a  heavenly  Canaan.  Incorruptible,  etc. — "  Exuberant  description 
of  the  excellencies  of  the  new  Canaan."  In  heaven. — The  heavenly  spiritual  spheres.  Keserved 
until  you  were  quickened  with  the  new  life  that  could  appreciate  it.  Not  future  heaven, 
but  present  heavenliness. 

Ver.  5.  Kept. — "  Who,  by  virtue  of  God's  power,  are  under  guard."  "As  the  inheritance 
hath  been  preserved,  so  are  the  heirs  guarded  ;  neither  shall  it  fail  them,  nor  they  it "  {Bengel). 
Through  faith. — Not  intellectual  belief,  but  daily  trust,  which  keeps  us  in  spiritual  union 
with  God,  and  secures  the  Divine  defence.  Unto  salvation.— Full  salvation  from  all  the 
frailties  and  consequent  sorrows  of  this  life;  full  development  of  the  new  life  begun  in  us. 
Ready  to  be  revealed. — A  heaven  actually  prepared.  A  future  that  even  now  may  be  a 
spiritual  presence.  The  idea  of  an  inheritarice  gives  the  character  to  St.  Peter's  figures. 
But  heaven  must  be  in  man  before  he  can  be  in  heaven. 

Ver.  6.  Greatly  rejoice. — The  prospect  brings  all  the  joy  of  a  present  possession.  "  Salvation 
is  realised  by  faith  as  a  thing  so  actually  present  as  to  cause  exulting  joy,  in  spite  of  existing 
afflictions."  The  rejoi  ing  is  in  "the  whole  complex  sense  of  the  preceding  verses,  concerning 
the  hope  of  glory."  In  heaviness. — Or  "  ye  were  grieved,  burdened,  distressed."  Temptations. 
— Troubles,  persecutions,  regarded  as  trials  or  testings  of  faith  (see  James  i.  2). 

Ver.  7.  Trial  of  your  faith. — "  Faith  is  not  known  to  be  what  it  is  until  it  is  tested  by 
suffering."  More  precious. — The  faith  is  meant,  not  the  trial  of  it.  Illustration  from  the 
severe  processes  found  necessary  for  the  refining  of  gold.  "  More  valuable  than  the  trial  of 
gold,  which  is  perishable,  and  that  is  a  fiery  trial."  Appearing. — Better,  "  revelation."  The 
Early  Church's  expectation  of  Christ's  coming  is  very  difl3.cult  to  understand,  but  it  explains 
many  apostolic  expressions. 

Ver.  8.  Not  seen. — Some  MSS.  read,  "Whom  not  knowing,  ye  love."  Love. —  The  word  of 
calm  and  Divinely-given  attachment,  not  the  word  of  warm  human  friendship.  Compare 
our  Lord's  commendation  of  those  "  who  have  not  seen,  yet  have  believed." 

Ver.  9.  Receiving  the  end. — Getting  now,  up  to  measures  of  capacity,  all  the  blessings  of 
the  salvation.  "  Their  joy  and  peace  in  believing  constituted  a  present  salvation,  the  pledge 
and  earnest  of  final  and  complete  deliverance." 

Ver.  10.  Read  "  prophets  "  without  the  article.  Plmnptre  thinks  St.  Peter  is  speaking 
mainly,  though  perhaps  not  exclusively,  of  the  prophets  of  the  Apostolic  Church.  It  is, 
however,  usual  to  see  reference  to  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament.  "All  the  prophets 
looked  forward  with  envy  to  the  prize  now  in  their  hands."  Have  enquired. —  Calvin  says: 
"  When  he  states  that  the  prophets  inquired  and  examined,  this  refers  not  to  their  writings 
or  teaching,  but  to  the  private  longing  vt-ith  which  each  was  fired."  (Compare,  however. 
Acts  i.  6,  7.) 

Ver.  11.  Spirit  of  Christ. — If  this  does  not  mean  the  "Messianic  Spirit,"  it  would  seem  to 
support  Plumptre's  limitation  to  New  Testament  prophets.  Sufferings  of  Christ. — ra  ei's 
Xpiardv  TradrjfxaTa:  the  sufferings  for  Christ,  or  "which  pass  on  unto  Christ."  "  The  sufferings 
spoken  of  are  those  which  the  disciples  were  enduring  for  Christ,  and  which  he  thinks  of  as 
shared  by  Him,  flowing  over  to  Him"  (Plu7n])tre). 

Ver.  12.  Unto  us.— The  better  MSS.  give  "  unto  you."  Now  reported. — By  the  Christian 
teachers  and  preachers.  Application  i:^  direct  to  the  Christian  Jews  of  Asia  Minor,  who  were 
late  in  receiving  the  good  tidings,  but  entered  into  the  full  heritage  of  all  the  good  things. 
Angels. — Eead  without  the  article. 

Ver.  13.  Be  sober. — The  word  suggests  a  sobriety  of  the  Nazarite  type.  To  the  end. — 
Margin,  perfectly ;  hope  with  a  hope  that  lacks  nothing  of  completeness. 

Ver.  14.  Obedient  children. — Lit.  "  children  of  obedience."  Read  "  lusts  which  were 
formerly  yours  in  the  time  of  your  ignorance  " — before  the  first  revelation  of  Christ  was 
made  to  you.  It  is  implied  that  the  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  the  lusts.  The  words  are 
quite  as  applicable  to  unregenerate  Jews  as  to  unregenerate  Gentiles. 

Ver.  15.  Conversation. — Behaviour,  conduct;  turning  about  in  daily  relationships;  moving 
to  and  fro  with  others.  Swift  is  the  first  writer  who  limits  the  word  to  talking.  Read  the 
first  clause  of  t];e  verse  :  "  After  the  pattern  of  the  Holy  One  who  called  you." 

Ver.  16.  Be  ye  holy.— Or  future  "Ye  shall  be  holy,"  but  with  the  force  of  an  imperative. 
For  application  to  Jewish  nation  see  Lev.  xi.  44,  xix.  2,  xx.  26. 

Ver.  17.  The  Father.-  Better,  "  a  Father."  God  apprehended  as  Father  through  our  appre- 
hension of  the  Sonship  of  Christ.  Plumjjtre  reminds  us  that  "  the  sequel  shows  this  attribute 
of  Fatherhood  is  not  thought  of  as  excluding  the  idea  of  judgment,  but  gives  assurance  that 
the  judgment  will  be  one  of  perfect  equity."  Sojourning.— (See  ver.  1).  Fear.— Not  dread, 
but  seriousness  and  self -distrust.  "  This  fear  is  not  cowardice  (nor  superstition)  ;  it  drowns 
all  lower  fears  and  begets  true  fortitude  "  (J^eighton). 

u 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  i. 


Ver,  19.  Precious  blood. — Order  of  the  Greek  is,  "  with  precious  blood,  as  of  a  lamb  without 
blemish  and  without  spot  (even  that)  of  Christ." 

Ver.  20.  Fore-ordained. — Lit.  "foreknown,"  which,  however,  implies  "fore-ordination." 
Last  times. — "  At  the  end  of  the  times." 

Ver.  21.  Faith. — TrtVrts.  Relates  to  things  present  which,  though  invisible,  are  realised 
by  the  eye  of  the  mind.  Hope. — Attis.  Relates  to  things  in  the  distant  future,  which  are 
objects  of  such  loveliness  that  they  fill  the  heart  and  engage  the  affections,  as  if  they  were 
near  at  hand  (  Webster  and  Wilkinson). 

Ver.  22.  Good  M8S.  omit  the  word  "  pure." 

Ver.  23.  Born  again. — Better,  "  having  been  begotten  again." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PAR  AGE  A  PH. —Verses  1—2. 

The  Called-out  Ones. — The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  evidently  written  for  the 
Jewish  Christians,  but  it  had  no  direct  address  or  dedication  to  them.  The  only 
epistle  besides  1  Peter,  addressed  to  the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion,  is  the  epistle  of 
James ;  and  that  epistle  should  be  carefully  compared  with  this,  in  order  to  dis- 
cover what  common  conditions  each  writer  dealt  with,  and  what  peculiar  perils 
or  weaknesses  each  noticed. 

I.  The  Dispersion. — It  is  important  to  mark  the  distinction  between  St.  James' 
dedication  and  St.  Peter's.  St.  James  addresses  the  "  twelve  tribes  which  are  of 
the  Dispersion,"  apparently  not  wishing  to  press  any  distinction  between  Jews 
and  Christian  Jews.  St.  Peter,  as  is  brought  out  clearly  by  the  Pevised  Version, 
addressed  only  those  who,  of  the  Dispersion,  had  accepted  the  faith  of  Christ. 
"  To  the  elect  who  are  sojourners  of  the  Dispersion."  There  is  consequently  a 
general  tone  on  the  counsels  of  St.  James,  and  a  precise  aud  specific  tone  on  the 
counsels  of  St.  Peter.  His  interest  in  those  to  whom  he  wrote  as,  like  himself, 
Jews,  is  evident  in  the  illustrations  and  references  of  the  epistle ;  but  it  is  equally 
evident  that  St.  Peter  has  in  mind  those  who  share  with  him  in  a  distinctly 
Christian  experience.  The  term  that  he  uses,  "  sojourners,"  suggests  that  he  had 
not  in  mind  those  of  the  Dispersion  who  had  settled  down  and  made  their  homes 
in  these  lands,  but  rather  those  who  were  taking  temporary  shelter  in  these 
lands,  because  driven  from  their  homes  by  persecution,  or  by  some  prevailing 
famine  or  distress.  Sojourners  of  the  Dispersion  cannot  be  intended  to  suggest 
the  Dispersion.  As  those  in  flight,  and  in  fear,  and  in  distressing  circumstances, 
St.  Peter's  assurances  and  sympathy  would  be  especially  comforting  to  them.  He 
thinks  of  them  as  elect  ones,  called  out  ones — as  those  who,  in  the  persuasions  of 
Divine  grace,  had  been  led  to  accept  of  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  and  Saviour ;  to 
them  had  been  given  "  like  precious  faith  "  with  him. 

II.  The  basis  of  their  call. — **  According  to  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the 
Father."  St.  Paul  in  a  similar  way  says,  "  Whom  He  did  foreknow,  He  also  did 
predestinate."  The  thought  is  almost  peculiarly  a  Jewish  one.  It  was  the 
genius  of  that  nation  to  see  God's  mind,  God's  purpose,  and  God's  hand  in  every- 
thing. A  Jew  could  not  look  upon  anything  without  the  feeling  :  God  thought 
it,  God  meant  it,  God  did  it.  They  were  jealous  of  admitting  that  anything 
could  ever  happen  which  was  not  first  in  the  mind  of  God.  And  it  was  quite 
natural  that  the  Jewish  apostles  should  be  jealous  of  every  attempt  to  separate 
the  new  life  in  Christ  from  God.  The  Christian  faith  and  life  was  no  independent 
thing.  Every  one  who  exercised  the  faith,  and  received  the  life,  was  known  of 
God  beforehand,  and  within  all  agencies  that  won  the  man  for  Christ  was  the 
Divine  call,  based  upon  the  Divine  foreknowledge.  "Them  He  also  called." 
Difficulty  is  often  made  by  unnecessarily  assuming  that  the  Divine  foreknowledge 
involves  Divine  interference.  It  is  thought  that  because  God  foreknew,  therefore 
man  could  not  be  left  free  to  act  upon  motives  and  judgments.  It  is  even 
assumed  that,  all  being  settled  beforehand  in  the  Divine  councils,  men  could  be 

15 


CHAP.  I. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  PETER. 


no  other  than  Saved  or  unsaved,  as  God  arranged  for  them.  But  knowledge  of 
what  will  happen  is  quite  distinct  from  interfering  to  make  things  happen.  The 
Divine  eye,  searching  the  ages,  may  see  every  one  that  will  accept  the  offer  of 
salvation  in  Christ,  and  yet  all  the  ordinary  agencies  for  the  teaching  of  the  truth 
and  the  persuading  of  the  will  may  go  on  unhindered.  God's  foreknowledge  is  a 
sublime  mystery  of  the  Divine  nature,  which  comes  comfortingly  to  Jewish  toned 
souls  but  in  no  way  affects  man's  freedom  to  act  on  considerations  submitted, 
or  his  responsibility  for  making  wise  and  worthy  decisions.  Even  in  the  small 
spheres  of  family  life,  parents  often  feel  quite  certain  how  their  several  children 
will  act  under  the  same  circumstances ;  but  that  parental  knowledge — though  it 
guides  parental  doings — in  no  sense  interferes  with  the  free  expression  of  them- 
selves by  the  children. 

III.  The  method  of  their  call. — "The  sanctification  of  the  Spirit."  It  is 
gmmmatically  possible  that  the  reference  is  not  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  to  the 
man's  own  spirit.  And  the  idea  of  separation  and  consecration  is  that  expressed 
by  the  one  word  "  sanctification."  The  call  of  God  is  an  arousing  of  the  man's 
spiritual  nature  into  activity.  But  God  working  in  the  spirit  of  man  we 
recof^nise  as  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  first  idea  of  sanctifying  a  man  we  express  as 
spiritualising  a  man — wakening  him  to  spiritual  interests,  to  attention  to 
spiritual  claims  and  considerations,  and  to  the  making  of  spiritual  decisions  and 
resolves.  St.  Paul  says,  "  Ye  which  are  spiritual."  And  God's  call  is  a  "  sancti- 
fying," because  it  awakens  a  man,  and  makes  him  spiritual.  Illustration  may 
be  taken  from  the  boy  Samuel,  who  heard  God's  call,  and  became  spiritual  from 
that  hour.  Or  from  Saul  of  Tarsus,  who  heard  God's  call,  and  became  spiritual 
from  that  hour.  The  proper  act  of  the  awakened  spiritual  life  is  consecration 
to  God.  To  that  God's  Spirit  moves  the  spiritual  man.  That  consecration  is  his 
sanctification. 

IV.  The  purpose  of  their  call. — "  Unto  obedience,  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ."  Compare  St.  Paul's  words,  "  To  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
His  Son."  Obedience  is  the  epitome  of  right  relations  between  God,  and  His 
creatures,  between  the  Father  and  His  sons.  But  it  is  the  spiritual  obedience  of 
spiritual  men  that  is  referred  to  ;  an  obedience  which  is  the  expression  of  heart - 
devotion.  By  "  sprinkling  of  the  blood  "  may  possibly  be  meant  that  sense  of 
acceptance  with  God,  that  joy  of  fellowship  with  God,  and  that  guarantee  of 
maintained  relations  with  God,  which  comes  to  us  only  through  the  sprinkled 
blood.  The  purpose  God  has  in  their  call  is  to  bring  them  into  that  holy  life,  to 
which  He  can  respond  by  giving  them  fully  His  Divine  favour  and  friendship. 
The  greeting  of  this  passage,  "  Grace  to  you  and  peace  be  multiplied !  "  becomes 
interesting  as  the  sympathetic  greeting  of  a  specially  called  one,  called  to  be  "  an 
apostle  of  Jesus  Christ." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  2.  Election. — We  may  at  once 
place  aside,  as  having  nothing  to  do 
with  our  subject,  the  question  whether 
God's  knowledge  of  future  events 
practically  abolishes  human  freedom. 
We  know  absolutely  nothing  of  the 
nature  of  God,  excepting  what  He  has 
revealed,  and  the  question  before  us 
simply  Ls,  What  did  the  writers  of  the 
New  Testament  mean?  Who  are  the 
elect  and  chosen  of  whom  they  speak  ? 

16 


Are  they  (whoever  they  are)  arbitrarily 
chosen  according  to  the  determinate 
counsel  of  God  ?  and  if  so,  to  what  are 
they  chosen  ?  The  apostles  were  Jews, 
and  part  of  their  mission  was  to  ex- 
plain why  God  should  turn  away  from 
His  elect  people,  and  offer  eternal  life 
also  to  the  Gentiles.  St.  Paul  says,  God 
hath  not  cast  away  His  people  which 
He  foreknew,  but  as  in  the  time  of 
Elijah  there  was  a  faithful  remnant, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


SO  those  whose  ears  had  been  opened 
to  hear  the  word  of  the  gospel  were 
the  election  of  grace,  as  he  calls  it, 
and  that  they  and  the  Gentiles  who 
had  been  admitted  to  the  privileges  of 
hearing  the  word  of  the  gospel  through 
their  fall,  are  now  the  elect  people  of 
God.  In  Eom.  ix.,  the  apostle  asserts 
the  power  of  God  to  extend  His  chosen 
people,  and  reminds  them  that  God 
had  not  acted  in  His  choice  of  them  as 
the  elect  people  of  God  upon  the  prin- 
ciples of  bare  lineal  descent,  but  that 
the  revelation  of  His  mercy  and  good- 
ness has  not  been  dependent  upon  any 
goodness  of  theirs,  but  on  His  sovereign 
will  and  pleasure.  Not  that  God  has 
no  reasons,  but  that  "  He  giveth  not 
account  "  to  His  creature  man  ''  of  any 
of  His  matters.  God  blesses  some 
nations  wnth  peculiar  blessings  which 
He  withholds  from  others.  The  Potter 
makes  two  vessels ;  one,  the  Jewish 
nation,  God  saw  fit  to  devote  to  honour ; 
the  other,  the  Egyptian  nation,  He 
devotes  to  less  honour,  to  make  His 
power  known.  What  were  God's 
favoured  nation,  the  Jews,  elected, 
chosen,  predestinated  to  ?  Not,  surely, 
final  salvation,  but  to  peculiar  religious 
privileges — not  to  a  blessing  absolutely, 
but  to  a  special  privilege  and  advan- 
tage, and  the  offer  and  opportunity 
of  obtaining  temporal  blessings,  not 
extended  to  the  other  nations  of  the 
world,  and  of  having  committed  to 
them  the  oracles  of  God.  The  Jews 
were  not  chosen  for  their  obedience,  for 
they  were  a  peculiarly  disobedient 
people,  and  their  privileges  were  made 
to  depend  upon  their  obedience.  They 
were  left  free  to  choose  between 
blessing  and  cursing  ;  a  blessing  if  they 
attended  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their 
God,  and  a  curse  if  they  refused  to 
obey. — Robert  Barclay. 

Election  as  held  by  Jeios. — The 
Old  Testament  containing  not  only  the 
germs  of  the  doctiine  of  election  in 
the  contraposition  of  Abraham  and  the 
world,  Isaac  and  Ishmael,  Jacob  and 
Esau,  Judah  and  his  brethren,  but 
also   the    ^erms    of    tbe    doctrine    of 


decrees  in  the  lives  of  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  Joseph,  Moses,  and  others,  not 
to  speak  of  the  book  of  Ruth,  and  the 
book  of  Job,  those  grand  representative 
exemplifications  of  Divine  fore-ordin- 
ation, it  was  quite  natural  that  the 
idea  of  Divine  predestination  should  be 
found  living  and  active  among  the 
Jews,  though  it  was  very  differently 
developed  in  the  different  systems  of 
Judaism.  The  Sadducees  openly  as- 
serted that  each  man  was  the  master 
of  his  own  destiny ;  while  the  Phari- 
sees, with  their  mechanical  separation 
of  the  effects  of  Divine  blessing  from 
the  effects  of  human  righteousness, 
made  human  destiny  depend  partly 
on  Divine  ordination  and  partly 
on  human  actions.  The  Essenes, 
representing  that  form  of  Judaism 
which  was  most  mixed  up  with  pagan- 
ism, considered  destiny  as  an  inevitable 
fate ;  the  whole  idea,  however,  being 
peculiarly  mitigated  by  the  religious 
quietism  which  characterised  the  sect. 
The  fate  of  Islam  is  the  absolute, 
arbitrary  despotism  of  Allah ;  and 
when  the  Koran  in  one  place  teaches 
the  inevitableness  of  destiny,  and  in 
another  the  possibility  of  warding  off 
Divine  punishment,  it  simply  contra- 
dicts itself.  The  fatalism  of  Moham- 
med referred,  probably,  -only  to  the 
infidels  ;  and  when  to  the  faithful  he 
preached  absolute  necessity,  with  re- 
spect to  the  hour  of  death,  he  had 
probably  only  a  practical  purpose  in 
view — to  make  them  good  fighters  for 
his  religion. — Herzog's  ^^ Encyclopcedia.^^ 

Diviiie  Election  not  Absolute. — What 
does  the  word  "elect "  mean  here  ?  Does 
it  refer  to  an  absolute  and  uncon- 
ditional election  of  these  Christians  to 
eternal  life  ?  Such  is  the  interpre- 
tation put  upon  the  word  by  the 
followers  of  Augustine,  Calvin,  and 
many  other  Church  teachers ;  but  here, 
at  least,  it  is  otherwise  defined.  It  is 
an  election  "  unto  obedience  and  sprink- 
ling of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ " ;  and 
indeed,  throughout  the  New  Testa- 
ment its  primary  signification  is  God's 
choice  of  nations,  or  of  individual  men, 

17 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


to  the  enjoyment  of  special  privileges 
(better  say  duties,  obligations,  missions), 
with  a  view  to  their  eternal  salvation 
if  those  privileges  are  rightly  used. 
It  is  an  election  according  to  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God — that  foreknowledge 
which  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning, 
which  embraces  all  the  events  of  time, 
which  is  acquainted  with  the  actions, 
lives,  and  motives,  of  all  men ;  and 
which  therefore,  can  never  be  taken 
by  surprise.  But  God's  foreknowledge 
is  not  fore-determination.  It  does  not 
interfere  with  human  free  agency.  It 
does  not  deal  with  men  as  with  beings 
who  have  no  moral  responsibility. 
In  what  way  the  thought  of  man's 
freedom  to  will  was  reconcileable  with 
that  of  God's  electing  purpose,  the 
writers  of  the  New  Testament  did  not 
care  to  discuss.  They  felt,  we  may 
believe,  instinctively,  half  uncon- 
sciously, that  the  problem  was  in- 
soluble, and  were  content  to  accept  the 
two  beliefs,  which  cannot  logically  be 
reconciled.  In  the  words  "  the  fore- 
knowledge of  God  the  Father  "  we  find, 
■perhaps,  the  secret  of  their  acceptance 
of  this  aspect  of  the  Divine  government. 
The  choice  and  the  knowledge  were 
not  those  of  an  arbitrary  sovereign  will, 
capricious  as  are  the  sovereigns  of 
earth,  in  its  favours  and  antipathies, 
seeking  only  to  manifest  its  power,  but 
of  a  Father  whose  tender  mercies  were 
over  all  His  works,  and  who  sought  to 
manifest  His  love  to  all  His  children. 
From  that  standpoint  the  *'  choice " 
of  some  to  special  blessings  was  com- 
patible with  perfect  equity  to  all. — 
Dean  Plumptre. 

The  Election  of  Christian  Jews. — 
The  term  "  elect "  here  marks  off 
the  Christian  Jews  from  the  rest 
of  the  Jewish  settlers  in  those  parts. 
God  selected  these  particular  Hebrews 
out  of  the  whole  number  and  made 
them  Christians  :  but  what  He  elected 
them  to  is  abundantly  shown  in  the 
next  words. — A.  J.  Mason,  M.A. 

Sprinkling. — By  this  word  he  alludeth 
to  the  sacrifices  of  the  law,  which  all 

18 


pointed  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ ;  and 
to  show  that  as  it  had  been  nothing 
that  a  sacrifice  had  been  killed,  unless 
the  blood  thereof  had  been  sprinkled 
upon  the  people  (for  so  was  the  manner), 
so  it  avails  nothing  that  Christ  died, 
unless  His  blood  be  sprinkled  upon  us  by 
the  hand  of  a  true  faith,  applying  Jesus 
Christ  to  our  consciences.  It  is  not 
Christ  that  saves,  but  Christ's  death 
apprehended  by  a  true  and  lively  faith  ; 
for  a  particular  persuasion  hereof  are 
we  to  labour, — John  Rogers,  1657. 

Inauguration  by  Sprinkling. — Com- 
pare Heb.  ix.  19,  xii.  24.  As  the 
people  themselves  are  "  sprinkled,"  and 
not  their  houses,  the  reference  cannot 
be  to  the  Paschal  sprinkling  (Exod. 
xii.  22),  but,  as  in  Hebrews,  to  the 
scene  under  Mount  Sinai,  in  Exod. 
xxiv.  8,  where,  once  for  all,  the  old 
covenant  was  inaugurated  by  the 
sprinkling  of  the  people.  (A  curious 
ceremony  of  sprinkling  the  people  is 
observed  in  Madagascar.)  It  was  to 
the  same  scene  that  our  Lord  referred 
when  He  said  of  the  Eucharistic  cup, 
"  This  is  My  blood  of  the  new  covenant." 
Thus  "  elect  unto  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood,"  seems  to  mean,  "  selected  for 
admission  into  the  new  covenant,  in- 
augurated by  the  sprinkling  of  Christ's 
blood."  But  whereas  the  old  covenant 
was  inaugurated  by  sprinkling  the 
people  collectively  and  once  for  all,  the 
new  is  inaugurated  by  individual  applica- 
tion. Doubtless  the  participation  of  the 
Holy  Communion  is  the  act  of  *'  sprink- 
ling" here  before  St.  Peter's  mind,  it 
being  the  one  act  which  betokens  mem- 
bership in  the  new  covenant-people, 
the  new  Israel. — A.  J.  Mason,  M.A. 

Daily  Sprinkling. — Not  sprinkling 
in  justification  through  the  Atonement 
once  for  all,  which  is  expressed  in  the 
previous  clauses,  but  (as  the  order 
proves)  the  daily  being  sprinkled  by 
Christ's  blood,  and  so  cleansed  from  all 
sin,  which  is  the  privilege  of  one  already 
justified,  and  walking  in  the  light 
(1  John  i.  7,  9,  10  ;  compare  Heb.  xii. 
24  ;  Be  v.  i.  5,  vii.  14). — Fausset. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap.  i. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS   OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3—12. 

Present  and  Future  Salvation. — The  similarity  between  the  "  blessings  "  of  ver. 
3  and  the  "  blessings  "  of  2  Cor.  i.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  3,  attracts  attention,  and  requires 
explanation.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  expression,  "  God  and  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  had  become  fixed  in  the  Early  Church  as  a  formula  familiarly 
used ;  and,  if  so,  we  can  readily  recognise  its  value  as  a  succinct  statement  of  the 
primary  Christian  truths.  It  affirms  that  the  Chi'istian  God  is  the  one  and  only 
God,  the  same  God  whose  unity  and  spirituality  were  the  sacred  trust  of  the 
Jewish  nation ;  that  this  God,  having  been  manifested  to  men  in  a  Son,  and  in 
SoDship,  may  now  be  apprehended  as  the  Divine  Father ;  and  that  what  He  is  to 
us  we  may  learn  from  what  He  is  to  Christ :  that  Jesus  is  the  Saviour  from  sin 
which  His  name  expresses  ;  and  that,  as  Christ,  or  Messiah,  He  is  sent  of  God  to 
do  that  saving  work ;  that  He  who  saves  from  sin  gains  the  right  to  rule  the 
saved  ones  as  Lord  ;  and  that  the  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  Him  is  a 
distinctly  personal  one,  so  that  they  can  call  Him  "  our  Lord."  It  is  the  Christ- 
ian truth  epitomised  in  the  Christian  name  for  God.  And  it  fittingly  introduces 
the  references  to  the  salvation  which  the  Father  God  works  by  the  ministry  of 
"  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

I.  The  life  which  the  Father  quickens. — *'  Who  according  to  His  great  mercy 
begat  us  again  unto  a  living  hope."  *'  A  life  in  which  hope  is  the  energising 
principle"  {Alford).  St.  Peter  is  not  here  referring,  generally,  to  the  new  birth, 
and. the  new  life  of  the  soul,  but  specifically  to  that  new  life  which  comes  to  men 
in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the  dead.  St.  Paul's  expression  helps  to 
explain  St.  Peter's.  He  says,  "  If  ye  then  be  risen  with  Christ " ;  as  if  for  the 
believer  in  Christ  there  was  as  truly  a  fresh  life,  as  there  was  for  Christ  after 
His  resurrection.  St.  Peter  is  writing  to  new-born  souls,  to  those  who  have  the 
life  in  Christ,  and  purposes  to  set  before  them  their  Christian  privileges  and 
responsibilities.  The  new  life  which  the  Father  quickens  is  a  double  life ;  it  is  a 
present  life  of  privilege,  and  it  is  the  hope  of  a  future  life  of  blessedness.  It  is 
a  living  life,  in  the  holy  cheer  of  a  living  hope.  It  has  the  promise  of  the  life 
that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come.  It  is  the  life  of  hope  which  the 
Father  quickens,  through  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  that  is  St.  Peter's  great 
point.  That  was  the  truth  to  cheer  persecuted  Christians  who  were  driven  from 
their  homes,  perhaps  with  the  loss  of  all  things.  What  had  they  for  their  com- 
fort, save  their  Christian  hope  ?  If  we  would  understand  how  this  new  life  of 
hope  comes  to  us  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus,  we  may  consider  St.  Peter's 
own  experience.  That  resurrection  made  him  a  new  man.  If  St.  James  was 
our  Lord's  real  brother,  as  is  assumed,  his  belief  in  Jesus  as  the  Messiah  came  as 
the  persuasion  of  His  resurrection,  and  St.  James  was  "  begotten  again  "  through 
the  resurrection.  "  Mystically  speaking,  the  moment  of  our  emergence  into  this 
new  glow  of  expectation  was  that  when  the  Messiah  Jesus,  who  had  been  cut  off, 
emerged  from  among  the  dead."  The  believer  is  born  again  to  this  lively  hope 
when  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  is  acknowledged,  and  its  significance  realised. 

II.  The  future  for  which  the  Father  quickens. — "  Unto  an  inheritance  incor- 
ruptible and  undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven."  Children 
are  begotten,  not  only  to  life,  but  to  the  father's  property,  that  is  their  in- 
heritance ;  it  is  theirs  in  reversion.  Those  who  had  been  called  to  suffer  the  loss 
of  all  things  might  well  remember  that  it  was  but  a  present  and  temporary  loss 
— a  loss  of  their  banking  account,  not  of  their  title  deeds — it  in  no  way  affected 
their  inheritance.  If  a  man's  future  is  well  secured,  he  can  with  comparative 
ease  bear  present  disaster.  The  future  as  an  inheritance  is  suggestively  presented 
to  us  as  our  Heavenly  Father's  home  and  estate ;  but  instead  of  indications  of  the 
wealth  and  extent  of  it,  our  minds  are  occupied  with  the  differences  between  it 

19 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


and  the  inheritances  of  earth.  It  is  unchangeable,  holy,  permanent.  Earthly 
properties  are  ever  changing  their  values ;  sometimes  consist  of  things  of  a  low 
and  degrading  character,  and  are  always  uncertain ;  riches  have  a  way  of  spread- 
ing wings.  The  Pontine  dispersion  had  lost  their  inheritance  in  Palestine,  but 
they  have  in  no  sense  lost  their  title  to  their  Father's  heavenly  inheritance. 

III.  The  keeping  until  the  future  is  ready. — "  Who  by  the  power  of  God  are 
guarded  through  faith."  It  were  but  to  lift  a  part  of  the  load  to  assure  the 
persecuted  believers  that  an  inheritance  for  them  was  held  in  reserve.  What 
would  ensure  their  preservation  through  their  present  struggles ;  and  what  could 
be  done  for  them  in  the  long  waiting-time  ?  They  were  to  think  of  themselves 
as  now  being  kejyt,  being  guarded.  That  includes  the  supply  of  every  present  need, 
if  only  they  can  realise  that  it  is  their  God  and  Father  who  is  keeping  His  sons 
until  the  time  of  their  entering  on  their  inheritance.  His  keeping  is  fulness  of 
blessing.  But  the  keeping  of  God  implies  the  watching  and  effort  of  the  believer. 
The  keeping  is  done  through,  or  in  connection  with,  the  believer's  faith.  He 
must  keep  up  his  faith  if  God  is  to  keep  him.  The  term  that  is  used  and  trans- 
lated in  KV.,  ''  guarding,"  is  a  military  term.  As  the  heir  of  a  royal  house  is 
never  allowed  to  be  without  a  watchful  attendant,  so  for  every  *'  heir  of  salva- 
tion "  there  are  God's  attendant  ministering  spirits.  We  are  safe,  we  may  be 
satisfied,  till  our  day  of  possession  comes  round. 

IV.  The  discipline  of  the  keeping  time. — "  Though  now  for  a  little  while,  if 
need  be,  ye  have  been  put  to  grief  in  manifold  tempta  tions ;  "  trials.  A  most 
sympathetic  and  wise  reference  to  the  calamities  and  afflictions  which  these 
Christians  had  to  endure.  St.  Peter  would  have  them  thought  of  as  only  the 
school-boy  discipline  of  the  heir  to  an  estate,  who  must  bo  duly  prepared  for  his 
coming  responsibilities  and  privileges.  Moral  character  can  only  be  moulded 
through  a  discipline  of  seveie  experiences ;  and  when  we  have  entered  on  our 
inheritance,  our  surprise  will  be  that  God  has  been  enabled  to  accomplish  in  us 
such  fitness  for  it  through  so  few  earthly  trials.  Observe  the  suggestive  relation 
of  the  many  and  various  trials  and  the  "  little  while  "  for  which  we  have  to  be 
disciplined  by  them.  There  is  always  this  great  consolation  connected  with  our 
earthly  trials  :  they  never  do  stay  long.  There  is  no  element  of  permanency  in 
human  troubles.  They  would  not  be  disciplinary  if  there  were.  They  cannot 
stay  one  moment  after  God's  purpose  in  them  is  fully  wrought.  And  so  we  can 
always  truthfully  speak  of  "our  light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment." 
And  there  is  always  this  consolation  :  God's  discipline  now  is  the  guarantee  that 
He  is  preparing  us  for  something  by-and-bye. 

V.  The  present  possession  of  that  future "  Receiving  the  end  of  your  faith, 

even  the  salvation  of  your  souls."  "  Faith  is  the  substance  " — the  actual,  present 
realisation — "  of  things  hoped  for."  It  is  in  one  sense  true  that  the  heir  to  an 
estate,  while  he  is  only  the  heir,  has  nothing ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  in  the  feeling 
that  all  is  coming  to  him,  he  has  a  present  possession  of  everything ;  and,  more- 
over, he  has  the  use,  up  to  present  needs,  of  all  that  belongs  to  the  estate.  So 
the  believer  has  all  the  comfort  of  knowing  heaven  is  coming,  and  for  the  supply 
of  all  his  present  needs  he  has  the  full  use  of  all  the  heavenly  things.  The  atten- 
tion of  these  persecuted  men  is  turned  away  from  the  loss  of  their  worldly  goods, 
to  the  untouched,  ever  abundant  supplies  of  spiritual  good,  which  really  are 
some  of  thsir  future  inheritance  come  to  them  now.  "  Poor  in  this  world,  rich 
in  faith,  heirs  of  the  kingdom." 

YI.  The  advantage  which  Christians  have  over  Jews  in  this  present  spiritual 
possession. — The  Jews'  advantages  were  all  in  the  material,  earthly  sphere.  A 
land  of  Canaan ;  a  formal  and  ceremonial  religion ;  an  obedience  of  works. 
According  to  their  ideas,  a  Messiah  as  an  earthly  conqueror  and  King.  So 
outward  was  the  entire  Jewish  range,  that  the  more  devout  souls,  the  prophets, 
20 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  i. 


anxiously  looked  forward  to  the  spiritual  time,  which  the  Christians  had  now 
entered  upon  (vers.  10-12).  So  far  from  Christian  Jews  wanting  to  go  back  to 
formal  Judaism,  the  best  Jews  of  the  ages  had  always  wanted  to  get  on  to 
Christianity ;  and  even  the  angels  were  profoundly  interested  in  this  spiritual 
dispensation.  There  is  nothing  to  envy  in  the  past.  It  has  had  its  day  ;  it  fitted 
to  the  needs  of  its  day.  But  it  only  fitted  to  the  average  needs  of  men.  In  the 
old  times  the  better,  the  more  spiritual,  men  could  not  rest  in  it,  could  not  be 
satisfied  with  it.  Abraham  "  rejoiced  to  see  Christ's  day."  And  so  did  every 
man  of  faith,  every  man  of  spiritual  insight  and  spiritual  feeling,  all  down 
through  the  ages.  If  they  anticipated  the  spiritual  dispensation,  how  foolish 
those  actually  in  the  spiritual  dispensation  must  be  if  they  hankered  after,  and 
thought  of  returning  upon,  the  old  and  formal  and  preparatory  one. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  3.  Hope  as  a  Power  in  Mould-  than  all  the  rest  of  the  animal  creation. 
ing  'Chaixtcter. — Three  great  graces —  And  as  it  is  a  necessary  factor  in 
faith,  hope,  and  love — are  the  abiding  character,  so  it  is  in  human  progress. 
graces,  vital  in  their  influence  on  cha-  Any  conditions  in  human  society  which 
racter,  and  central  in  their  relations  tend  to  repress  or  suppress  hope  are 
to  Christianity ;  combining,  they  pro-  abnormal  and  unnatural,  and  hostile 
duce  all  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit."  to  man's  well-being.  We  glory  in  our 
Faith,  taking  hold  on  the  unseen,  pre-  American  civilisation  because,  more 
vents  us  from  giving  too  much  heed  to  than  in  any  other  country  on  the  face 
that  which  is  visible  ;  Hope,  taking  of  the  earth,  men  may  here  rise,  give 
hold  on  the  future,  prevents  us  from  scope  to  hope,  foster  aspirations,  and 
giving  undue  attention  to  that  which  encourage  all  rational  expectations, 
is  temporal  and  present ;  Love,  taking  Hope  presents  a  perpetual  incentive  to 
hold  on  the  unselfish  and  the  Divine,  progress ;  not  an  ignis  fatuus,  a  will- 
prevents  us  from  being  absorbed  in  o'-the-wisp,  beguiling  us  into  marsh 
carnal  and  idolatrous  self-interest.  In  and  mire,  but  impelling  us  continually 
the  original  the  emphasis  grammati-  onward  to  things  higher  and  better. 
cally  falls  on  the  word  hope,  for  while  If  we  could  reach  our  own  ideal, 
the  other  words  are  participles,  this  is  further  progress  would  be  impossible, 
in  the  imperative.  Literally  translated.  And  hope  helps  us  to  bear  trials.  It 
it  would  read  thus :  "  Wherefore,  gird-  surrounds  us  with  a  kind  of  *'  elastic 
ing  up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  being  medium,"  so  that  when  the  terrible 
sober,  hope  to  the  end  for  the  grace  aflBictions  of  this  life  beat  against  us, 
that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you  at  the  they  rebound  from  us.  There  is  a 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  text  power  in  hope  that  prevents  the  severity 
suggests  the  power  of  hope  as  an  in-  of  their  blows  from  crushing  us. 
spiration  in  character  and  conduct,  II.  What  are  the  objects  set  before 
and  indicates  the  objects  of  Christian  the  Christian  hope? — "jTAe  g7'ace  that 
hope,  and  the  time  when  those  objects  is  to  he  brought  unto  you  at  the  revela- 
shall  be  most  gloriously  and  fully  Hon  of  Jesus  Christ.^'  Few  of  us  ever 
revealed.  think  of  this.     When  we  speak  of  the 

I.  Look   at   the   power  of  hope  in  grace   that   is   revealed,  we   think   of 

human   character. — What   makes  the  what  is  already  manifested,  of  Golgotha 

difierence  between  human  beings  and  with  its  cross,  of  Gethsemane  with  its 

beasts  1      Very   largely,   the   presence  agony,    of   the    Garden   with  its   rent 

of  hope  as  a  factor  in  character.     Hope  tomb,  of  the  ascending  Christ  and  the 

is   one   of   the   foremost   elements    in  descending  Spirit.     But   in  the  third 

human  character ;  distinguishing  man  verse  of  this  chapter  the  apostle  says 

as   man,   giving   him   a   higher   rank  God  "  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a 

21 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an  in- 
heritance incorruptible  and  undefiled, 
and  that  fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in 
heaven  for  you,  who  are  kept  by  the 
power  of  God  through  faith  unto 
salvation,  ready  to  he  revealed  in  the 
last  time.^^  Peter  is  speaking  of  some- 
thing future,  not  grace  already  mani- 
fested, but  an  inheritance  *'  reserved 
in  heaven,"  "  ready  to  be  revealed  in 
the  last  time."  And  so  here,  "  The 
grace  that  is  to  he  brought  unto  you  at 
the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ."  Jesu^ 
Christ's  incarnation  was  not  a  revela- 
tion. His  Divinity  was  rather  hidden 
within  the  veil  of  His  humanity  :  only 
now  and  then  the  glory  of  that  Divinity 
shone  forth,  and  then  His  disciples 
saw  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and 
realised  for  a  moment  the  greatness 
and  the  grandeur  of  His  personality. 
When  Jesus  was  here  He  was  in  dis- 
guise. God  was  only  feebly  and  faintly 
manifested  in  the  flesh,  which  obscured 
the  glory.  But  when  Christ  comes  a 
second  time,  no  longer  to  make  a  sin- 
ofFeiing,  but  to  bring  full  salvation 
unto  His  people,  then  will  be  the 
revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  will 
come  like  the  King  in  His  glory,  and 
with  Him  all  the  holy  angels  and 
saints ;  not  to  pursue  a  weary  way 
from  the  manger  to  the  cross,  but  as  a 
King  to  reveal  and  unfold  Himself ; 
and  that  will  be  the  revelation  of 
Christ.  All  the  grace  that  comes  to 
you,  from  the  hour  of  your  regeneration 
to  the  hour  of  your  complete  sanctifica- 
tion,  is  nothing  in  comparison  with  the 
grace  that  is  to  he  revealed  to  you  by 
Christ  in  the  day  when  you  are  pre- 
sented, faultless,  before  the  presence  of 
His  glory  with  exceeding  joy.  When 
Christ  shall  come  to  receive  His  saints 
to  Himself  there  will  be  a  revelation  of 
grace  in  comparison  with  which  all  the 
grace  that  you  now  have,  or  have  pre- 
viously known,  will  be  but  as  a  drop  in 
comparison  to  the  ocean. 

III.  The  contrast  between  the  ob- 
jects of  Christian  hope  and  worldly 
hope. — What  God  promises  stands  firm 
T-a  verity,  a  reality ;  there  is  an  in- 

22 


heritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and 
unfading.  You  do  not  see  that  in- 
heritance yet.  You  are  like  a  minor 
who  has  not  yet  entered  on  his  estate, 
but  who  receives  the  revenue  of  it  as 
the  payments  of  interest  come  in  :  and 
so  we  have  a  foretaste  of  our  future 
inheritance ;  the  Spirit  of  God  gives 
us  an  earnest  of  our  possession  until 
the  day  of  redemption.  There  is  no^ 
thing  illusive  in  the  Divine  promise. 
And  consider,  once  more,  the  perma- 
nence and  reliability  of  the  Christian 
objects  of  desire  and  expectation.  We 
come  to  a  limit  in  this  world.  You 
may  have  all  the  treasure  of  the  world, 
and  yet  when  death  comes,  from  your 
relaxing  grasp  all  these  things  dis- 
appear. You  may  have  been  applauded 
and  admired  by  the  world,  but  the 
applause  of  men  will  fade  and  faint  on 
your  ear  as  you  reach  the  gates  of  the 
tomb.  The  glory  of  your  possessions 
and  your  achievements  will  all  pale 
and  grow  dim  when  you  face  the  last 
great  destroyer.  But,  blessed  be  God, 
the  point  at  which  human  hopes  are 
utterly  blasted  is  the  point  at  which 
Christian  expectations  only  arrive  at 
their  consummation. — A.  T.  Pierson, 
D.D. 

The  Resurrection  the  Chief  Doctrine 
of  Christian  Faith. — If  Christ  had  not 
risen  from  the  dead  there  would  be  no 
Christianity ;  our  faith  would  be  in 
vain,  and  our  hope  void,  the  whole 
gospel  a  farce,  and  there  would  be  no 
forgiveness  of  sin.  The  resurrection 
of  Christ  is  the  basis  of  all  that  we 
have  and  hope  and  love  in  Christ,  but 
especially  have  we  in  it  the  surety  of 
the  hope  of  eternal  life,  because  thereby 
all  fear  of  death  has  been  banished, 
and  future  blessedness  and  life  have 
become  a  reality  in  Christ  Jesus.  He 
is  our  Head,  and  we  through  faith  are 
members  of  His  body.  And  since  our 
Head  has  overcome  sin  and  death  and 
Satan,  we  partake  of  the  triumph  and 
the  victory.  For  He  has  conquered 
our  enemies  for  us  and  not  for  Him- 
self. The  victory  is  ours,  as  is  also  the 
triumph.     When  a  ruler  or  a  general 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


conquers  the  enemies  of  a  kingdom,  he 
indeed  triumphs,  but  the  fruits  and 
glories  of  the  victory  belong  to  the 
whole  country  and  to  all  the  citizens. 
Therefore  all  Christians  triumph  with 
Christ  in  His  glorious  resurrection. — 
Gossner's  Schatz-Kdstlein. 

The  Resurrection  Mystically  Treated. 
— St.  Peter  is  speaking,  so  far  as  him- 
self is  concerned,  not  mystically  but 
literally,  as  his  history  before  and  after 
the  resurrection  shows.  To  him  and 
to  the  other  apostles  the  resurrection 
VMS  a  regeneration,  and  they  became 
new  beings.  To  subsequent  Christians 
precisely  the  same  efi'ect  takes  place 
when  (suddenly  or  gradually)  the  fact 
of  the  resurrection  is  acknowledged  and 
its  significance  realised  (Phil.  iii.  10). 
Yet  we  must  not  confine  the  meaning 
of  the  words  to  the  effects  of  this  con- 
scious realisation.  St.  Peter  is  re- 
viewing the  transaction  theologically — 
i.e.,  from  God's  point  of  view,  not 
phenomenally,  from  man's.  He  speaks 
of  the  begetting,  not  of  the  being  born 
— of  the  resurrection  itself,  not  of  the 
preaching  of  the  resurrection.  To  God, 
with  whom,  according  to  St.  Peter, 
time  does  not  exist  (2  Pet.  iii.  8),  there 
is  no  interval  between  His  begetting 
of  Christ  again  from  the  dead  (Acts 
xiii.  33 ;  E-ev.  i.  5)  and  His  begetting 
of  us  again  thereby.  In  the  mystery 
of  our  union  with  the  Incarnate  Word, 
historical  resurrection  did,  through 
baptism,  in  some  ineffable  manner, 
infuse  into  us  the  grace  which  makes 
new  creatures  of  us.  Archbishop 
Leigh  ton  well  says,  "  Not  only  is  it " 
[the  resurrection]  "  the  exemplar,  but 
the  efficient  cause  of  our  new  birth." — 
A.  J.  Mason,  M.A. 

The  Resurrection. 

I.  In  these  words  our  attention 
is  directed  to  Jesus  Christ. — 
"  Jesus  Christ "  is  a  name  above 
all  other  names  on  earth.  Many 
great  names  of  heroes,  military  con- 
querors, philosophers,  poets,  scholars, 
artists,  musical  composers,  scientific 
investigators,    and     discoverers,     and 


great  religious  reformers,  are  dear  to 
the  heart  of  this  country,  and  of  the 
whole  civilised  world.  But  the  name 
of  Jesus  is  above  all  other  names. 
Every  Sabbath  is  the  weekly  memorial 
of  His  triumphant  resurrection. 

II.  Jesus  Christ  is  considered  in 
His  human  nature. — "  Seed  of  David." 
See  Matthew's  Genealogy.  He  was 
also  Son  of  God.  "  Thou  art  My  Son." 
*'  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word." 
As  God,  He  could  make  an  atonement 
for  human  sins.  Yet  He  was  human  ; 
a  real  man,  with  all  our  liabilities  and 
limitations,  experiencing  our  infirmi- 
ties, and  having  a  fellow-feeling  with 
us. 

III.  The  emphasis  given  to  our 
Lord's  resurrection. — "  Pemember." 
The  resurrection  is  more  than  a  fact. 
Many  facts  are  secret  or  private.  But 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  was  a  public, 
and  thus  a  historical  fact. 

IV.  The  entire  Christian  Church- 
east  and  west,  north  and  south,  is 
founded  on  the  fact. — Every  individual 
church,  of  every  name  and  denomina- 
tion, is  founded  on  the  fact.  The 
church  in  Antioch,  the  apostolic 
churches  in  Europe,  and  all  other 
churches,  are  built  up  on  the  same 
foundation.  The  observance  of  the 
Lord's  day  bears  testimony  to  the  fact 
of  His  resurrection. 

V.  The  disciples  of  our  Lord  pro- 
claimed far  and  wide  the  fact  of  the 
Lord's  resurrection. — They  had  seen 
the  Lord,  and  they  went  into  details. 
They  preached  everywhere,  Christ  the 
Crucified,  and  Christ  the  Pisen.  For 
their  testimony  they  braved  opposition, 
odium,  and  obloquy.  Jesus  also  fore- 
told His  resurrection.  Consider  three 
theories.  1.  Some  person  or  persons 
had  taken  His  hody  and  hidden  it. 
They  could  have  had  no  motive  for 
such  theft.  2.  His  enemies  took  it  and 
hid  it,  It  was  in  their  interest,  as 
His  enemies,  to  produce  His  body  after 
the  third  day.  3.  The  disciples  them- 
selves stole  the  hody  and  hid  it.  How 
could  they  dare  martyrdom  for  a  fable  1 

VI.  The  Resurrection  is  a  joyful 
fact. — "According  to  My  gospel."    It 

23 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   L  PETER. 


was  part  of  the  "  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy"  which  it  was  His  pride  and  deHght 
to  proclaim.  The  apostle  appropriated 
it  with  rapture.  ''  My "  gospel. 
"  Eemember."  We  are  apt,  in  the  daily 
jostle  of  daily  business  and  engage- 
ments, to  push  aside  and  to  forget  this 
fact.  Hence  the  importance  of  the 
anniversary  of  Easter  Day,  and  of  every 
successive  Sabbath  Day. — -James  M ori- 
son,  D.D. 

Ver.  3-9.  The  Living  Hope  of  the 
Christian. 

I.  What  gives  us  this  hope  ? 
(ver  3). — It  is  God  who  does  this, 
according  to  His  great  mercy. 
Without  this  love  of  God  there  is 
fear  of  Him,  and  a.  lack  of  trust  in 
Him  on  the  part  of  man,  and  an 
endeavour  to  base  and  build  upon 
other  foundations.  Yet  all  of  these 
prove  to  be  dead  hopes,  and  end  in 
self-deception,  or  even  despair.  The 
living  God,  through  the  resurrection 
of  His  Son,  has  given  a  firm  founda- 
tion for  a  living  hope  ;  the  resurrection 
being  the  sure  evidence  that  Christ's 
atonement  for  our  sins  has  been 
accepted,  and  that  in  Him  and  Him 
alone  we  can  hope. 

II.  Who  can  entertain  this  hope? 
(ver.  5). — It  is  those  who  are  guarded 
through  faith  unto  salvation.  The 
only  assurance  and  certainty  in  this 
living  hope  springs  from  the  faith  in 
God's  mercy,  and  Christ's  life  and 
work.  And  reasons  to  believe  we  have 
now,  as  many  as  had  the  early  Christ- 
ians. To  them,  indeed,  the  Lord 
appeared  visibly,  even  to  Paul ;  but  we 
have  His  sure  Word  and  testimony, 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  working  through 
that  Word,  convincing  and  convicting 
the  heart. 

III.  What  does  this  hope  bring? 
(ver.  4). — It  is  an  inheritance  in- 
corruptible and  undefiled  which  this 
living  hope  guarantees.  All  this,  how- 
ever, is  only  possible  under  the  presup- 
position that  those  who  are  to  receive 
this  realisation  of  their  hopes  are  also 
aUve,  and  have  been  raised  from  the 
tomb.     Christ's  resurrection  is  thus  to 

24 


us  also  a  sure  sign  that  we  too  shall 
rise  and  live  in  and  with  Him  eternally. 
— Wilhelm  Bauer. 

Vers.  4,  5.  The  Inheritance. — Most 
of  the  salutations  in  the  epistles  refer 
to  the  privileges  of  believers.  We  often 
dwell  on  the  things  which  we  do  npt 
possess,  but  in  these  introductions  we 
are  reminded  of  the  things  which  we 
do  possess.  Our  names  are  down  in 
the  old  register — the  election  book. 
See  ver.  2.  We  trace  back  our  line- 
age. Every  step  of  the  inquiry 
delights  us,  as  we  move  from  one 
number  of  the  pedigree  to  another — 
martyr,  apostle,  prophet,  priest,  king, 
to  the  father  of  the  faithful,  yea,  to 
Enoch,  Enos,  and  Abel.  But  the  last 
step  is  the  grandest — to  see  our  name  in 
the  old  book  of  election  by  grace.  The 
new  birth, — see  ver.  3.  We  have  a 
new  heart  of  love  and  tenderness.  We 
are  bidden  to  look  forward  to  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 

I.  That  by  the  promise  of  the  gospel 
we  are  entitled  to  an  inheritance. — 
Begotten  again,  we  are  children,  and 
as  such,  heirs  of  God  and  joint-heirs 
with  Christ.  The  words  which  the 
apostle  uses  in  the  text  appear  syno- 
nymous, and  yet  they  are  not.  (See  the 
original.) 

1.  Immortal  in  its  nature. — "  In- 
corruptible." The  final  state  of  godli- 
ness will  be  of  such  a  spiritual  nature 
that  corruption  will  be  impossible.  In 
other  words,  it  will  be  a  state  without 
sin,  and,  consequently,  without  its 
destructive  effects.  Present  experi- 
ence has  its  moments  of  foretaste  of 
that  state.  Let  us  examine  this 
matter.  Beturning  on  Wednesday 
evening  from  Box  Hill,  the  heavens 
were  generally  covered  with  clouds, 
but  in  the  west  the  setting  sun  had 
riven  the  clouds,  and  there  was  a 
streak  of  beautiful  blue  sky.  So  is 
Christian  experience — clouds  generally, 
but  here  and  there  beautiful  light.  I 
will  look  towards  the  heaven  of  your 
soul.  Before  the  cross  and  the  end  of 
the  ninth  hour,  the  light  returned.  So 
when    conviction   made   way  for  con- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


version  ;  on  the  mount  of  transfigura- 
tion,   overshadowed   by   the   cloud   of 
glory.       So    communion     with     God. 
*'  The    disciples  were  glad  when  they 
saw   the   Lord."      Look   to  vers.     18, 
19,  and  23,  of  this  chapter.    The  life  of 
Jesus      is      immortal  —  invulnerable. 
Strike  the  light,  but  you  cannot  wound 
it :  so  is  the  truth.     Touches  of  these 
speak  of  the  state  when   all  shall  be 
undying — thought,  praise,  purity,  joy, 
etc. — all    undying.       2.    Pure    in     its 
administration.  —  "  Undefiled."         It 
will     be     a     wstate     the      enjoyment 
of    which     will     preclude    the    possi- 
bihty    of    abuse.     The     most    perfect 
and  delicate  flower  is  the  most  suscept- 
ible of  being  tarnished  or  destroyed  ; 
the  touch  of  the  finger  will  do  this.    So 
with  the  Christian  virtues.     When  we 
would  do  good,  evil  is  present.     There 
are  interruptions.     Let   us   name  one 
or  two.      Interruption    to   continuous 
religious    thought.       The    astronomer 
making   observations,    and    the    cloud 
coming  between.   Som  e  gloomy  thought. 
There  are   also  circumstances   outside 
ourselves    that    do    this.       Like    the 
withering  blast  of  the  east  wind,  our 
prospects  are  often  blighted.     But  the 
state  of  heaven  will  be  such  that  no 
clouds  will  darken  the  mind,  and  no 
trials  will  harass  the  heart.    The  touch 
will  be  pure — even   if   we  touch    the 
throne  itself  there  will  be  no  dark  mark. 
3.    Perpetual    in    its  beauty.     "  That 
fadeth   not   away."     The  beauty  that 
was,  has  faded  ;  the  beauty  that  is,  is 
fading  ;  and  the  beauty  that  is  to  come 
must    fade    here  —  Nature's    beauty, 
human     beauty,    and     fortune    itself. 
Moral  beauty.     The  fair  and  promising 
young  man  has  gone  wrong.     Look  at 
yonder  garden.     Body   like  unto  His 
glorious  body.     The  soul  without  spot 
or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.    Virtue 
eternal  as  its  Author.     4.  Distant  in  its 
location. — "  Reserved  in  heaven."    You 
must  remove  to  a  new  scene,  where  the 
wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  where 
the    weary   are   at   rest.     No   battle- 
fields  there  ;  no  hospitals ;    no  grave- 
yards.    No,   not  even  a  trace  of  sin. 
"  Reserved.^'     Some  lovely  spot.     *'  Be- 


hold, I  go  and  prepare  a  place  for  you," 
— crowns,  thrones,  etc. 

II.  That  believers  are  now  kept 
under  guard  and  discipline  in  order  to 
the  future  enjoyment  of  that  blessed 
state. — 1.  Faith  is  the  medium  of  power. 
— The  power  of  resistance,  and  the 
power  of  perseverance.  To  reign  with 
Christ  in  life  is  full  of  inspiration.  We 
lay  hold  of  eternal  life.  2.  Salvation 
is  the  end  of  faith.  What  is  the  voice 
of  faith  but  a  cry  for  a  better  state  % 
W^e  cannot  rest  till  we  reach  the  goal. 
We  press  forward.  3.  Time  is  the 
revealer  of  salvation.  You  will  see. 
The  ages  have  rolled  on — wonderful 
things.  Time's  last  effort.  Bring  in 
the  inheritance.  What  is  our  title  ? — 
Anon. 

Ver.  5.  Kept  by  the  Power  of  God. — 
Believers,  as  a  class,  are  thus  described  : 
"  Kept  by  the  power  of  God  through 
faith  unto  salvation."  The  words 
bring  before  us  the  doctrine  commonly 
known  as  that  of  "  final  perseverance," 
as  opposed  to  that  of  possible  defection 
and  perdition  on  the  part  of  true  be- 
lievers and  regenerated  sinners.  Look 
at  the  objections  to  this  doctrine,  as 
they  seem  to  weigh  upon  the  minds, 
not  of  speculative  theologians,  but  of 
practical  experimental  Christians,  whose 
belief  is,  in  purpose  and  profession, 
founded  on  the  word  of  God  and  the 
experience  of  His  people.  The  objec- 
tions are  twofold  :  (1)  The  doctrine  is 
unscriptural ;  (2)  it  is  of  evil  tendency. 
These  are  virtually  one  ;  for  the  objec- 
tion to  the  doctrine  as  unscriptural 
has  no  substantive  existence  or  founda- 
tion apart  from  its  imputed  or  alleged 
pernicious  tendencies  in  practice.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  in  Scripture 
there  is  no  categorical  denial  of  this 
doctrine,  or  any  statement  absolutely 
inconsistent  with  it.  If  it  is  rejected 
it  must  be  because  it  is  believed  to  be 
pernicious.  What,  then,  is  the  evil 
tendency  imputed  to  this  doctrine? 
1.  It  is  said  to  assume  the  final  per- 
severance of  the  saints  to  be  secured 
by  a  power  inherent  in  themselves,  or 
by  something  in  the  very  nature  of  a 

25 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


saving  change,  precluding  all  defection  control.  This  specious  representation 
as  a  sheer  impossibility,  entirely  irre-  quietly  assumes  that  we  ascribe  the 
spective  of  the  subject's  own  religious  perseverance  of  believers  to  an  absolute, 
state  or  dispositions,  or  of  any  influence  immediate  act  of  power,  without  the 
exterior  to  him,  over  and  above  the  use  of  means  or  the  prescription  of 
impulse  given  at  conversion,  or  the  conditions.  But  this  aspersion  on  the 
vis  inertice  of  his  new-born  nature — a  doctrine  is  wiped  off  by  the  simple  but 
belief  which  may  be  justly  charged  authoritative  language  of  the  text, 
with  tending  to  indulge  a  proud  reli-  which,  so  far  from  representing  this 
ance  upon  self,  and  an  habitual  security,  conservative  agency  of  God's  grace  and 
alike  dishonouring  to  God  and  danger-  omnipotence  as  acting  independently 
ous  to  man.  2.  The  only  proof  which  of  faith  in  the  preserved  and  per- 
it  requires  of  the  saving  clause,  from  severing  subject,  holds  up  faith  itself 
which  it  draws  its  proud  security  and  as  in  a  certain  sense  the  means  by 
absolute  immunity  from  danger,  is  the  which  the  perseverance  is  secured,  by 
consciousness  or  memory  of  inward  which  the  preservation  is  effected, 
exercises,  not  susceptible  of  formal  Faith  is  not  a  thing  to  be  assumed  at 
proof,  and  wholly  independent  of  the  pleasure,  but  to  be  established  as  con- 
actual  condition  of  the  subject  at  the  elusive  evidence ;  not  that  of  conscious- 
time  when  he  asserts  his  claim  to  this  ness,  or  memory,  or  fancy,  but  of  actual 
prerogative  or  privilege  of  absolute  experience  and  practice.  Where  the 
exemption  from  the  risk  or  possibility  fruits  of  faith  are  not,  there  is  no  evi- 
of  a  fall  from  grace.  The  rejection  of  dence  of  faith.  Where  faith  is  not, 
the  doctrine  is  always  based  on  the  there  is  no  pledge  of  God's  omnipotence 
assumption  of  an  inherent  independent  to  save  from  falling.  It  is  only  those 
power  of  self-preservation,  or  the  suffi-  who  have  this  faith  and  bear  this  fruit 
ciency  of  mere  subjective  states  and  that  have  a  right  to  claim  a  place 
exercises,  to  demonstrate  the  possession  among  the  happy  souls  who  are  "  kept 
of  that  power.  But  no  such  assump-  by  the  power  of  God  through  faith  un- 
tions  are  imputed  in  the  word  of  God.  to  salvation." — J.  A.  Alexander,  D.D. 
As   in   our   text,   the   preservation   is 

explicitly  described  as  the  effect  of  a  Kept  iji^nto  Salvation. — Many  of  God's 
power  exterior  and  superior  to  them-  people  are  at  times  full  of  fears  con- 
selves,  as  effected  by  a  sovereign,  a  cerning  their  personal  interest  in 
Divine,  an  almighty  agency.  If  all  Christ.  Perhaps  it  ought  not  to  be  so. 
depend  upon  the  action  of  Omnipotence  We  have  to  face  the  fact  that  it  often 
(the  power  of  God),  where  is  the  per-  is  so.  The  work  of  sanctification  is  a 
nicious  tendency  ?  If  we  can  no  more,  quiet,  gradual,  unseen  work,  of  which 
in  and  of  ourselves,  secure  our  own  we  cannot  accurately  trace  all  the 
continuance  in  this  state  than  we  could  stages.  It  may  be  likened  to  the  cur- 
create  it,  or  create  ourselves,  or  than  rents  that  run  below  the  surface  of  the 
we  could  create  a  world,  "  where  is  ocean,  and  secretly  bear  the  vessel  on 
boasting  then  1  It  is  excluded."  It  its  way,  or  out  of  its  way.  Or  it  may 
may,  however,  be  said  that  if  we  look  be  likened  to  the  steady  march  of  time, 
upon  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  God  which  changes  all  earthly  things,  wears 
as  absolutely  and  irrevocably  pledged  away  the  framework  of  the  Pyramids, 
for  our  protection,  the  tendency  of  this  and  crumbles  down  the  everlasting 
belief  to  generate  security  and  licence  hills,  though,  watch  as  we  may,  we 
is  as  evident  and  strong  as  if  the  power  can  hardly  follow  the  process.  In  our 
were  inherent  in  ourselves  ;  nay,  more  times  of  fear,  we  more  often  doubt 
so,  since  the  power,  instead  of  being  our  right  to  the  Divine  promises  than 
finite,  is  now  infinite  ;  instead  of  being  doubt  the  general  fulfilment  of  the 
human,  is  Divine  ;  instead  of  being  ours  promises.  At  our  darkest  times  we 
is  Grod's,  and  yet  completely  under  our  are  assured  that  the  promises  are  "  yea. 

26 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP,  t 


and  amen  "  for  those  to  whom  they  are 
given.     Our  difficulty  is  that  they  are 
not  given  to  us.     Sometimes  these  feel- 
ings follow  on  the  encouragement  of 
some  loved  sin.     Keep  that  sin ;    call 
it  by  some  milder  name   though  you 
may,   it   will   stand  between  you  and 
God.      Like   the   host   of    Israel   that 
went  forth  against  the  city  of  Ai,  you 
will  return  from  your  toil  defeated  and 
disgraced   if   some   accursed  thing   be 
kept   within   your   camp.     Sometimes 
they   follow   on    neglected    means    of 
grace.     Only  as  the  soul  maintains  a 
constant  intercourse  with  God  can  it 
maintain  a,  constant  assurance  of  His 
love.    Sometimes  they  follow  on  watch- 
ing  too   minutely   our  own  thoughts, 
and    frames,    and   feelings.     We  may 
soon  come  to  put  our  trust  in  those 
feelings,  and  then  every  change  in  our 
feeling  will    fling   a    shadow   over  us, 
and   feeble   feeling    will    fill    us   with 
despair.     In   our  text  may  be  found 
a    threefold    description    of   the   true 
child   of   God,  by  the  help   of    which 
we  may  scatter  the  doubts  and  fears 
that  loom  over  us.     He  is  one  (It)  on 
whom   the   preserving   power   of   God 
rests ;  (2)  one  in  whom  the  spirit  of 
faith  is  working;    (3)    one   for  whom 
salvation  is  prepared. 

I.  The  child  of  God  is  one  on  whom 
the  preserving  power  of  God  rests. — 
This  is  a  description  which  links  the 
believer  with  the  king-psalmist  of 
Israel,  whose  poetically  recorded 
experiences  we  so  greatly  enjoy.  Per- 
haps there  was  no  thought  brought  so 
much  peace  to  the  psalmist  as  the 
thought  that  he  was  "  kept  by  God." 
To  his  thought,  God  was  "  a  sun  and  a 
shield ;  the  Lord  would  give  grace  and 
glory."  His  prayer  was,  "  Hold  Thou 
me  up,  and  I  shall  be  safe."  God  was 
to  him  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in 
a  weary  land  "  :  "the  Keeper  of  Israel, 
who  never  slumbered  nor  slept."  He 
could  say  of  God,  "  I  flee  unto  Thee  to 
hide  me."  Christian  experience  ever 
deepens  our  con^dction  of  our  own 
weakness ;  our  inability  to  protect  and 
keep  ourselves.  We  feel  more  and 
more  every  day  that  we  need  a  guarding 


as  well  as  a  guiding  hand.     The  pro- 
mises Christ  gave  to  His  disciples  show 
that  this  need  was  recognised.     *'  They 
shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any 
man  pluck  them   out  of    My   hand." 
Those  disciples  are  the  sheep  and  lambs 
of  Christ's  flock.     They  may  be  quite 
sure  that  the  Shepherd  is  ever  near  to 
protect,  defend,  and  keep.     Our  Lord, 
in  His  great  intercessory  prayer,  said, 
"  I  kept  them  in  Thy  name,  and  none 
of  them  is  lost."     Discipleship  to  Christ 
involves     Divine    keeping ;     and    the 
Saviour   prayed   as   though    He  were 
bound  to  give  an  account  to  God  of 
each  believer's  safety.     We  may  realise 
this  preserving  power  of  God  in  several 
ways.     L  In  the  guidance  and  help  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.     No  doubt  the  opera- 
tions  of    the    Spirit    are   mysterious. 
"The  wind  bloweth  where   it  listeth, 
and  thou   hearest  the  sound  thereof, 
but  canst   not  tell  whence  it  cometh 
and    whither    it    goeth."        But    He 
does    take     up     His    abode     in     the 
believing  soul.      His  presence  pledges 
the  fact  of  the  change  wrought  in  us. 
His  operation  is  designed  to  preserve 
the  soul  from  all  evil,  and  to  guide  it 
into   all    truth.       Source    whence   all 
Divine    blessings    for   the   soul    flow, 
whence  all  the  food  of  the  spiritual 
life  comes,  whence  all  developments  of 
the  spiritual  life  receive  their  further- 
ance, that  Spirit  is  no  less  the  "  Great 
Heart"  guide,  by  whom  the  pilgrim  is 
defended  and  preserved,  the  champion 
by  whom  his  foes  are  defeated  and  his 
difficulties  overcome.     His  presence  is 
our  seal  unto  the  day  of  redemption ; 
His  work  to  keep  the  soul  unto  the 
full  salvation  that  is  prepared.      The 
presence   of    the    Holy   Spirit   is   the 
fulfilment  of  all  the  promises  of  the 
Divine  Presence.     When  Moses  stood 
before  the  burning  bush,  and  received 
the  Divine  command  for  the  deliverance 
of  Israel,  he  was  overwhelmed  by  the 
responsibilities    of     the    charge,    and 
received  this  comforting  and  strength- 
ening  assurance  :    "  Certainly   I    will 
be    with   thee."      That    promise    was 
fulfilled  in  the  presence  with  him  of 
God's  Holy  Spirit.      When  Jeremiah 

27 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


pleaded  his  incapacity  for  the  prophetic  fulness  in  prayer  is  the  recognition  of 

office,  so  earnestly  saying,  "  Ah,  Lord  the   hand   of   goodness   ever   over   us. 

God ;  behold,  I  cannot  speak  !  for  I  am  And  the  substance  of   all   prayer   is, 

a  child,"  God's  promise  came,  comforting  that  in  all  the  forms  of  our  spiritual 

him  :"  Be  not  afraid  of  their  faces :  for  toil  and   struggle  we   may   have   the 

I  am  with  thee  to  dehver  thee."     That  help  of  God;  we  may  not  be  left  to  our 

also  was  fulfilled   in  the   presence  of  own  weakness ;  we  may  be  upheld  and 

God  the  Spirit.     And  how  much  to  us  kept.     And  so  of  all  the  answers  we 

all  is  that  promise  and  assurance  of  receive  to  our  prayer.     They  may  be 

our   ascending    Saviour,    "  Lo,    I    am  summed  up  in  one  thing  :  the  realisa- 

with  you  all  the  days,  even  unto  the  tion  of   God's   presence  with  us,  and 

end  of  the  world."     However  else  we  power   resting   on   us.     The   sense   of 

may  think  that  promise  to  have  been  Divine  aid.  Divine  inspiration.  Divine 

fulfilled,  it   was   certainly  fulfilled   in  keeping,    which   we   may   bear   about 

the  abiding  presence  with  us  of   the  with  us  day  by  day,  is  the  answer  to 

Holy  Spirit.      We  imagine  a  sort  of  our  prayer.     3.  In  the  actual  experieMce 

threefold    Divine    presence    that    we  of  the  believer.     In  their  temple  service 

enjoy.    A  presence  of  God  the  Father —  the    Jewish   people    might   well   sing, 

a  Divine  eye  watching  our  every  step,  "  The  Lord  of   hosts   is  with  us,  the 

searching  our  every  thought  and  pur-  God  of  Jacob  is  our  refuge,"  because 

pose;  a  presence  of  God  the  Son,  the  their  entire   history  was  lit  up  with 

living   Friend  to  whom  our  thoughts  continual    signs  of    His   presence  and 

may  be  made  known,  whose  companion-  power.      Delivered  from  the  house  of 

ship  we  may  daily  enjoy ;  and  a  presence  bondage  with   a   high    hand,  the   sea 

of  God  the  Spirit,  working  within  us,  saw  the  majesty  of  their  leader,  and 

checking,  inspiring,  guiding,  keeping.  fled,    leaving    a    highway    for    God's 

But,  if  we  think  a  little  closely,  shall  people ;  waste  deserts  became  lands  of 

we  not  find  that  these  three  are  one  ?  plenty,   and  foes  failed  when  Israel's 

If  we  have  the  presence  of  the  Spirit,  God  marched  before  them.     Manifested 

have  we  not  each  person  of  the  blessed  in  burning  bush  and  fiery  pillar,  ruling 

Trinity — the  loving  Father,  the  only-  as   Theocratic    King,    raising    up   one 

begotten    Son,    and    the    all -presiding  and  setting  down  another,  delivering 

Spirit.     Surely  the  whole  promise  of  a  and   redeeming   again  and   again,  no 

present    God   is   fulfilled   for    you,    if  truth  was  brought  home  to  the  Jew 

you  know  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  like  this  one,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  is 

with  you.      If  you  know  His  power  with  us."     And  we  are  the  Israel  of 

in    your    heart,    rejoice ;     it    is    the  God.     The  power  of  God  is  witnessed 

power  of  God,  a  power  efficient  to  keep  in  all  our  past  history.      Looking  at 

you   unto   the    salvation  ready  to    be  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  hath  led 

revealed.     2.  In  the  strength  we  derive  us,  we  say,  again  and  again,  There  God 

from  the  exercise  of  prayer.     The  spirit  guided  ;    there    God   preserved ;    there 

of  prayer  is  illustrated  in  the  wrestling  God    conquered    for    us ;     there    foes 

of  Jacob  with  the  angel  at  the  Brook  gathered   thickly,    but    God   put    His 

Jabbok.         Intense      earnestness      is  hedge  of   mercy  round   us ;   there  we 

expressed   in   that  determination,   "  I  made    mistakes,    and    wandered    into 

will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  by-paths  that  might   have   led   us  to 

me."     Prayer  is  a  laying  hold  of  the  destruction,  but  God  in  mercy  restored 

Divine  arm,  a  reliance  on  the  Divine  our  wandering  feet.     Over  all  our  past 

strength.     The  very  terms  of  Christian  may  well  be  written,  "  Kept  by  the 

prayer    indicate    our    sense   of    God's  power  of  God."      We  have  been  like 

interest    in    us,    and    concern    for    us.  that    servant   of    the    prophet.       We 

"  Abba,     Father,"    gathers    about    us  could  see  that  the  house  was  surrounded 

fatherly    love,    fatherly   watchfulness,  with  foes,  and   there  was  no  way  of 

and   fatherly    preservations.      Thank-  escape.       We    could    not    see    what, 

28 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER,  chap.  i. 


nevertheless,  we  might  have  seen,  that  and  touch  the  chords ;  then  music  is 
the  mountains  all  round  about  were  drawn  forth,  which  seems  like  earth- 
full  of  the  chariots  and  horsemen  of  echoes    of    the    angels'    songs    above, 
the  Lord.      Far  "  greater  were  those  Now   it  may   be  warlike    tones,   wild 
with  us  than  all  that  could  be  against  and  clear,  that  nerve  the   Christian's 
us."  arm,  and  send  him  boldly  forth  to  fight 
II.  One  in  whom  the  spirit  of  faith  the  good  fight  of   faith ;   now  gentle, 
is  working. — Faith  is  often  dealt  with  soothing  strains  that  calm  the  troubled 
as  connected  with  our  first  approach  to  breast,  and  whisper  to  the  torn  and 
God ;  as  the  gate  at  the  head  of  the  tried,  God's  eternal  peace.     Have  faith 
way  of  life.     But  we  need  to  see  that  in   God.      Lay   hold   thereby    of    the 
this  same  "  faith  "  is  called  for  through-  power  of  God.     Let  that  be  the  spirit 
out  the  whole  course  of  the  Christian  in  you  which  grasps  the  Divine  energy 
life.     We  live  day  by  day,  spiritually,  that  would  rest  upon  you.     With  the 
only  as  we  believe ;  our  strength,  our  power  on  you,  and   the  faith  in  you, 
comfort,  our  success,  are  in  direct  pro-  you  shall   be  kept  unto  the  salvation 
portions  to  our  faith.     The  work  being  prepared.       Learn    from    that    great 
carried  on  in  your  hearts  is  a  spiritual  chapter   of    Hebrews   how   faith    can 
work ;  you  cannot  watch  it  with  your  work  in  daily  life.     Faith  marked  the 
todily  eyes.     The  Being  working  is  a  acceptable  worship  Abel  offered.     Faith 
spiritual  Being ;  you  can  never  see  Him  gave    the    triumph   in    the    hour    of 
by  your  side.     His  way  of  working  is  Enoch's  translation.     Faith  kept  Noah 
a  spiritual  way ;  you  may  not  always  when  the  judgments  of   God  were  in 
discover    it :    only    faith    brings    the  the  earth.     Faith  guided  Abraham  in 
comfort  of   the    Divine  strength  and  his  journeyings.      Faith  saved  Moses 
nearness.     That  is  true  for  us  which  in    the   moments   of    danger.      Faith 
was  but  fabled  of  an  ancient   prince.  discomfited   the  foes  of   God's   Israel. 
He    had    lost   his   father,   and    when  And  what  shall  we  more  say?     Time 
setting    out    to    endeavour    to    gain  would  fail  to  tell  the  triumphs  of  daily 
tidings  of  him,   one  of  the  divinities  faith,  the  toil  it  helps  us  to  perform ; 
came  down,  took  the  form  of  an  aged  the  sorrow  it  helps  us  to  bear  ;    the 
counsellor,  and  accompanied  him  in  all  wisdom  it  helps  us  to  gain ;  the  evils  it 
his  journeyings.     That  is  true  for  us,  helps  us  to  fight ;  the  glory  it  helps  us 
but  we  only  feel  it,  only  get  the  joy  of  to  win. 

it,  only  know  the  impulses  of  it,  only         III.  One  for  whom  salvation  is  pre- 

walk    strongly    and    safely,   as   faith  pared. — Our  salvation  begins  when  we 

realises  the   fact.      There   is    a   great  begin  to  live  for  God.     Peter  speaks  of 

difierence  between  knowing  things  with  ''receiving  now  the  end  of  your  faith, 

the  mind,  and  believing  them  with  the  even  the  salvation  of  your  soul."     But 

heart.     The  doctrines,  commands,  and  that  salvation  has  another  stage.     It 

promises  of  God  lie  within  this  sacred  is  really  as  yet  undeveloped.     "  Now 

book    Hke   dry   bones    in   the   valley.  are  we  the  sons  of  God,  but  it  doth 

They  are  mere  forms  of  truth;  mere  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."     The 

declarations  of  Divine  wisdom  ;  beauti-  salvation  now  is  salvation  in  the  world, 

ful  enough,  but  cold  and  dead.     Faith  that  shall  be  salvation  from  the  world, 

comes,  the  faith  which  says,  This  is  the  This  is  salvation  going  on  amid  dangers. 

Word  of  God,  and  the  Word  of  God  to  temptations,   and  evils  :  that  shall  be 

me — and  then  the  dry  bones  live ;   a  salvation  perfected   in   scenes  of  holy 

creative  breath  seems  to  have  passed  rest,    and   triumph,   and  peace.     And 

over    them   all.       Without   faith   the  that  fuller  salvation  is  ready,  prepared, 

Word  of  God  is  as  a  harp  fully  strung,  waiting  to  be  revealed.     This  further 

but  silent.      Even   in   its   silence  one  salvation  is  God's  purpose  in  the  work 

feels  there  are  within  it  the  possibilities  of  His  Son.     However  much  the  work 

of  beauteous  song.     But  let  faith  come,  of  Christ  accomplishes  for  us  here  on 

29 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


earth ;  however  God's  grace  beautifies 
character,  conquers  evil,  gladdens  the 
home,   gilds  life  with  brightness,  and 
crowds  it  with  blessing,  we  cannot  limit 
the  great  salvation  to   that  which    is 
earthly  and  fleeting.     The  purpose  of 
God  in  redemption  is  wide  and  broad 
and  deep  as  the  everlasting   life,   and 
long  as  the  everlasting  ages.      It  may 
find  you  a  poor  sinful  soul,  low  down 
in    degradation;    it    will   cleanse    all 
stains,  heal  all  wounds,  and  bless  you 
now  ;  but  it  will  not  rest  satisfied  until 
you  are  placed  as  a  polished  jewel  in 
the   crown   of   the   Eedeeming   King. 
This   is   the  design   of  the  preserving 
power  that  rests  upon  you.     For  what 
does  He  keep  you  ?     Why  does  an  eye 
that  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps  watch 
Israel  1  Why  does  the  Almighty  Friend 
ever  abide  with  us  %    Why  1    It  is  this  : 
that  we  are  being  "  kept "  to  the  salva- 
tion that  is  ready  to  be  revealed.    This 
is  the  end  of  our  faith.     Faith  grasps 
much  for  this  life  ;  but  it  is  like  the 
foreign  bird,    brought    from    sunnier 
climes — it  ever  seems  to  be  stretching 
its  wings  and  striking  the  bars  of  its 
cage,  as  though  it  would  be  away  to 
the  home  it  loves.     Faith,  a  heavenly 
thing,  born  of  God,  in  sympathy  with 
the    high    and    heavenly,    will    press 
beyond  the  struggling  and  darkness  of 
time,  and  strive  to  gain  the  light  and 
peace   of   eternity.      And  all   is  to  be 
revealed  in  the  last  time.     We  know 
when  that  is.     When  the  keepers  of 
the  house  shall  tremble,  and  the  strong 
men   shall   bow    themselves,    and   the 
grinders   cease    because   they    be   few, 
and  those  that  look  out  of  the  windows 
be  darkened  ;  when  the  silver  cord  shall 
be   loosed,    and   the    golden    bowl    be 
broken  ;  when  the  dust  shall  return  to 
the   earth    as   it    was,    and  the  spirit 
return  unto  God    who  gave  it ; — then 
shall   the   full    salvation  be   revealed, 
and  we  shall  enter  the  New  Jerusalem, 
from  whence  they  go  out  no  more,  and 
where  God   shall   wipe  away  all  tears 
from  our  eyes.     Kept  now  for  sanctify- 
ing, one  day  we  shall  be  glorified. 

Ver.  6.  Rejoicing  and  Heaviness. — 
30 


This  verse  seems  to  gather  up  the 
thought  of  the  first  nine  verses.  The 
tone  of  this  epistle  reveals  the  sanctify- 
ing influence  of  a  Christian  experience 
upon  St.  Peter.  What  strikes  atten- 
tion is  the  recognition  of  the  twof  oldness 
of  religious  life.  If  it  breathes  the  air 
of  heaven,  it  treads  the  soil  of  earth. 
We  are  often  surprised  to  find  the  life  is 
a  constant  struggle,  and  the  soul  is  calm 
with  a  Divine  peace.  St.  Peter  inti- 
mates that  this  is  the  very  thing  we 
should  expect.  The  best  men  cannot 
always  live  in  the  sunshine  of  hope. 
A  Christian  life  on  earth  can  hardly 
fail  to  be  a  mingling  of  rejoicing  and 
heaviness. 

I.  The  spirit  of  the  Christian  should 
usually  be  a  spirit  of  rejoicing. — 
1.  The  rejoicing  of  love  (ver.  8).  Love 
to  Christ.  The  love  that  comes  with 
faith  in  the  unseen.  Accepted  love  is 
our  deepest  source  of  earthly  joy.  We 
feel  a  holy  pride  when  we  can  say  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  "This  is  my  beloved, 
and  this  is  my  friend."  2.  The  re- 
joicing of  the  promised  future  (ver.  4). 
But  the  future  finds  nothing  for  the 
soul  apart  from  Christ.  Heaven  is 
everything  if  the  "  Lamb  be  the  light 
thereof." 

II.  The  spirit  of  the  Christian  may 
be  for  a  time  a  spirit  of  heaviness. — 
The  rejoicing  is  ''  without  limit."  The 
sadness  is  "  for  a  season,"  and  "  if 
needs  be."  The  heaviness  comes  from 
the  trying,  testing,  of  the  very  faith 
whence  the  rejoicing  comes.  The 
struggle  of  life  may  be  expressed  in 
this  form  :  Under  how  thick  darkness 
can  you  cling  to  Christ?  Beaten  how- 
ever severely  by  foes,  can  you  still  keep 
hold  on  Christ,  refusing  to  be  beaten 
off  !  Whatever  your  earth-trials  may  be, 
remember  they  are  but  passing  things. 
The  soul's  restful  joy  in  God  should  be 
deep,  abiding,  eternal. 

Note  hy  Archbishop  Leighton. — ''His 
scope  is  to  stir  up  and  strengthen 
spiritual  joy  in  his  afflicted  brethren. 
In  this  thing  ye  rejoice,  that  ye  are 
begotten  again  ;  that  there  is  such  an 
inheritance,  and  that  you  are  made 
heirs  of  it ;  that  it  is  kept  for  you,  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


you  for  it ;  that  nothing  can  come 
betwixt  you  and  it,  and  disappoint  you 
of  possessing  and  enjoying  it.  Though 
there  be  many  deserts  and  mountains 
and  seas  in  the  way,  yet  you  are  ascer- 
tained that  you  shall  come  safely 
thither." 

The  Christian  State. — 1 .  The  Christian 
state  is  properly  one  of  deep  and  abiding 
joy.  See  this  in  St.  Paul.  (1)  Joy  in 
the  salvation  wrought  by  Grod.  (2)  Joy 
in  the  salvation  resting  on  God.  A 
deep-sea  calm.  An  above-clouds  calm. 
2.  Apparently,  the  Christian  state  is 
one  of  agitation,  anxiety,  and  heavi- 
ness. Observe,  however,  the  qualifica- 
tions of  this — "  for  a  season,"  *'  if  needs 
be."  Still,  even  with  these  qualifica- 
tions, the  Christian  state  is  often  one 
of  heaviness.  How  is  this  ?  The  soul's 
joy  is  the  sign  of  a  life  of  faith,  and 
this  must  be  tested,  as  in  the  case  of 
Abraham,  David,  Peter,  Can  any- 
thing keep  up  the  soul's  joy  under  the 
heaviness.  (1)  Assurance  that  it  is 
testing,  not  destruction,  not  punish- 
ment. (2)  Assurance  that  God  is 
watching  the  process,  regarding  it  as 
a  precious  work  of  refining.  (3)  Seeing 
that  the  designed  issue  is  a  simpler 
hold  of  Christ ;  a  clearer  spiritual  sight 
of  Him.  And  so,  through  the  experi- 
ence, the  joy  really  becomes  "  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory."  And  so  we 
receive  nov)  the  end  of  our  faith,  the 
salvation  of  our  souls  (a)  from  fear, 
(6)  from  sin,  (c)  from  corruption.  And 
thus  we  are  made  ready  for  Christ's 
appearing.  We  see  what  we  ought  to 
regard  as  our  great  Christian  treasure 
■ — our  souls'  joy  in  the  great  salvation. 
We  are  sure  to  have  the  joy  if  only  we 
have,  and  can  keep,  holy  admirations 
of  Christ. 

The  Future  in  the  Present. — St.  Peter 
here  states  a  fact  of  common  human 
experience,  which  takes  its  highest 
form  in  the  Christian  spheres.  The 
future  we  anticipate  does  exert  a  pre- 
sent influence  on  us.  What  is  to  he  is 
everywhere  helping  men  to  bear  what 
is.     The  ''castles  in  the  air"  of  the 


boy  or  girl  at  school  help  them  over 
present  tasks  and  discipline.  The 
future  of  business  success  strengthens 
men  to  bear  with  and  to  overcome 
present  perplexities  and  difficulties. 
The  "  good  time  coming,"  the  ''  golden 
age,"  are  not  altogether  things  in  the 
by-and-bye.  They  are  actually  with 
us  now,  in  the  cheer  and  strength 
they  give. 

Yer.  8.  Things  Unseen. — It  takes  a 
very  strenuous  effort  to  bring  the  un- 
seen Christ  before  the  mind  habitually, 
and  so  as  to  produce  effects  in  the  life. 
You  have  to  shut  out  a  great  deal 
besides,  in  order  to  do  that ;  as  a  man 
will  shade  his  eyes  with  his  hand  in 
order  to  see  some  distant  thing  the 
more  clearly.  Keep  out  the  cross 
lights,  that  you  may  look  forward. 
You  cannot  see  the  stars  when  you 
are  walking  down  a  town  street  and 
the  gas  lamps  are  lit.  All  those 
violet  depths,  and  calm  abysses,  and 
blazing  worlds,  are  concealed  from  you 
by  the  glare  at  your  side.  So,  if  you 
want  to  see  into  the  depths  and  the 
heights,  to  see  the  great  white  throne 
and  the  Chiist  on  it,  who  helps  you  to 
fight,  you  have  to  go  out  unto  Him 
beyond  the  camp,  and  leave  all  its 
dazzling  lights  behind  you. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

The  Love  of  One  Unseen. — In  Peter 
we  have  not  a  highly  intellectual,  cul- 
tured man,  so  it  was  not  given  to  him 
to  set  the  fii-st  forms  and  shapes  to  the 
expression  of  Christian  doctrine.  For 
that  work  the  Apostle  Paul  was 
specially  called,  endowed,  and  educated, 
and  the  fitness  of  the  Divine  choice  of 
instruments  has  never  been  more  fully 
demonstrated  than  in  the  selection  of 
Paul  for  that  particular  work.  Peter 
evidently  had  a  larger  heart  than 
head  ;  his  great  feature  was  impulsive- 
ness :  sometimes  it  led  him  astiay  into 
forwardness,  presumption,  and  over- 
positiveness  ;  but  sometimes  it  enabled 
him  to  make  noble  testimonies,  and 
even  sometimes  to  force  an  entrance 
into  mysteries  whose  doors  refused  to 

31 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


yield  at  the  bidding  of  sanctified  intel- 
lect. It  may  be  said,  in  a  compre- 
hensive way,  that  we  are  indebted  to 
Paul  for  Christian  truths  that  may 
be  thought  out.  Paul,  in  his  most 
enthusiastic  moments,  is  a  man  of 
mind  and  culture,  and  he  abundantly 
proves  that  the  intellectual  man  need 
not  be  a  cold,  hard,  dry,  or  unloving 
man.  Again  and  again  we  find  his 
soul  catching  fire  of  the  truth  with 
which  he  deals,  all  aglow  with  the 
fervour  and  enthusiasm  which  the  truth 
he  studies  enkindles  ;  bursting  out  in 
intense  utterances  of  adoration,  as  if 
the  emotions  of  his  heart  must  force 
the  bonds  of  silence,  and  send  forth  at 
least  a  cry.  Peter  adds  to  the  circle  of 
Christian  truth  and  doctrine  almost 
wholly  those  forms  which  bring  satis- 
faction to  the  heart,  which  are  found 
out  by  the  sensitiveness  of  Christian 
emotion ;  and  so  his  words  come  to  us 
like  fresh  revelations  in  particular 
moods  of  our  feeling.  In  our  times  of 
meditation,  of  quickened  emotion,  of 
sacramental  preparation,  we  shall  find 
words  of  Peter  frequently  suggested, 
and  largely  helpful;  by  their  aid  our 
souls  may  often  gain  wing,  and  fly 
into  the  innermost  recesses  of  com- 
munion with  Christ,  and  with  His 
truth .  Peter's  words  have  often  proved, 
through  the  Divine  Spirit,  live  coals 
from  off  the  altar,  which  have  re- 
illumined  the  smouldering  love  of  our 
souls,  and  set  the  flame  rising  high 
again,  and  burning  bright  for  con- 
suming the  dross  of  self  and  sin.  Our 
text  is  one  of  his  most  characteristic 
and  best-remembered  words.  I  envy 
no  man  who  is  so  unsusceptible  to  its 
tenderness,  its  thrill  of  emotion,  and 
its  hallowed  suggestiveness,  that  he 
can  coldly  study  it,  take  it  to  pieces, 
criticise  it,  and  set  out  the  precise 
meaning  of  its  parts.  I  cannot.  I 
shall  not  try  to.  I  shall  not  satisfy  any- 
body to-day  who  asks  exactly  what  it 
means,  what  it  teaches  and  what  it 
involves.  I  have  wanted  it  to  be  to 
me  a  live  coal,  setting  fire  to  holy 
feelings  of  love  and  truth  within 
me.       And    now   I   want   it   to   be  a 

32 


live  coal  to  you,  kindling  such  fires  of 
thankfulness,  faith,  and  love  in  you, 
that  we  may  have  an  unusual  time  of 
refreshing  and  hallowed  joy  in  presence 
of  the  emblems  of  our  suffering,  dying 
Saviour  to-day.  I  want  to  lead  you 
along  this  line  of  thought,  staying  a 
little  while  at  each  point  for  the  need- 
ful unfolding  and  illustration.  Sal- 
vation comes  by  love  to  a  Person ; 
that  love  may  be  sight -quickened,  that 
love  may  be  faith-quickened  ;  the  love 
quickened  by  faith  will  be  altogether 
nobler,  mightier,  more  satisfying  than 
the  love  quickened  by  sight. 

I.  Salvation  comes  by  love  to  a 
Person. — I  am  always  trying  to  make 
you  see  what  a  large,  comprehensive 
thing  our  salvation  is.  With  its  varied 
forms  of  beginning,  with  its  many- 
sided  applications  as  it  continues  its 
working,  and  with  its  many  endings 
of  relation  to  soul-life,  body-life,  and 
social  life,  the  salvation  of  a  man  may 
well  be  called  "  so  great  salvation." 
Looking  in  some  directions  towards 
God  and  conditions  of  reconciliation 
and  acceptance  with  Him ;  in  others, 
towards  ourselves  and  the  effectual 
removal  of  the  very  love  of  sinning ; 
and  in  yet  others,  towards  our  fellow- 
men,  and  perfecting  the  harmony  of 
our  intercourse  with  them  ; — verily 
a  man's  salvation  does  grow  to  our 
thought  as  a  very  wide,  rich,  compre- 
hensive thing.  I  cannot  get  all  the 
fulness  of  the  idea  of  a  man's  sal- 
vation into  the  word  conversion ;  that 
is  but  a  point  of  it,  a  stage  in  it,  a 
portion  of  it.  ISTor  will  it  all  go  into 
the  word  sanctification  ;  that,  too,  ex- 
presses a  part  only.  The  Bible  words 
are  regeneration  and  salvation — wide 
w^ords,  that  arch  over  a  man^s  life, 
from  the  moment  of  spiritual  awaken- 
ing right  through  to  the  moment  of 
"  presenting  faultless  before  the  glory," 
even  as  the  arched  dome  of  heaven 
spans  our  earth  from  utmost  east  to 
utmost  west.  Can  we  get  any  worthier 
impression  of  what  God  intends,  and 
what  he  prophetically  sees  realised, 
when  he  begins  to  save  a  man  ?  Surely 
He    anticipates   the    poor    half -burnt 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


brand,  not  only  plucked  from  the  fire, 
but  the  fire-marks   taken  away;   the 
brand  quickened  with  new  life,  grafted 
into  the  true  vine,  filled  in  every  duct 
and  vessel  with  the  rich  vine  sap,  and 
bringing  forth   abundant   fruit.     The 
brand  is  not  fully  saved  until  the  grape 
clusters  hang  thickly  upon  it.     Surely 
when   God   touches   the   heart  of  the 
poor,   weary,   homeless,   despised,  and 
despairing  prodigal  with  the  thought 
of   love   and  home,   it   is  in  the  hope 
of  finding  him  one  day  settled  in  the 
old  son's  place,  and  filled  with  the  old 
child-spirit    of    obedience    and    trust. 
The  prodigal  is  not  saved  by  being  put 
back  into  the  home,  he  is  only  saved 
when  he  gets  again  the  spirit  of  the 
home.     What  does  God  see  as  the  final 
issue  when  He  begins  to  save  a  man  ? 
Surely    a   sight   that   must    fill   with 
rejoicing  that  heavenly  Father's  heart. 
He  sees  one  clothed  in  white  robes,  all 
stainless,  which  are  the  emblem  of  one 
at  last  made  all    pure  and  *'  glorious 
within."     He  sees  one  crowned  with  a 
crown  which  is  the  seal  of  final  victory 
in   the  life-battle  with  sin.     He  sees 
one  tuning  a  right  noble  song  from  a 
heaven-harp ;  a  song  so  sweet,  so  loud, 
it  shall  for  ever  tell  what  joys  fill  that 
soul  with   rapture  which  has  reached 
the  perfect  righteousness  and  the  full 
salvation.     Let  us  but  get  this  large 
idea  of  what   it  is   for  a  man  to  be 
saved,  and  then  we  shall  see  the  truth 
of  the  statement  that  salvation  comes 
by  love  to  a  Person.     No  merely  intel- 
lectual grasp  of  any  truth,  even  the 
sublimest  ever  revealed  to  man,  can 
work  out  this  great  and  mighty  change. 
The  force  that  alters  man  for  better  or 
for  worse  is  the  force  of  His  love.    ''  Tell 
me,"  it  has  been  said,  "  the  companions 
a  man  keeps,  or  the  friends  he  has,  and 
I  will  tell  you  what  he  is."     The  great 
renewing,  changing,  saving   power   is 
our  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the 
infinitely  excellent  and  loving  One ;  or, 
as  I  like  to  think  of  it,  it  is  our  heart- 
grasp  of  Him  ;  because  all  heart-grasps 
must   be   blended   faith-holdings    and 
love-holdings ;    and    when    faith    and 
love    hold    together,    love   is   sure   to 


swallow  up  and  absorb  the  faith  :  and 
when  our  love  just  opens  our  whole 
soul  and  life  to  Christ,  and  bids  Him 
welcome  to  come  right  in,  then  all  the 
saving  power  He  has  in  His  Divine 
right,  and  has  won  by  His  life,  ex- 
perience, and  sacrifice,  can  be  exerted 
in  us ;  He  can  save  us  wholly ;  save 
us  with  His  full  salvation  from  the 
past,  from  our  sins,  from  sinfulness, 
from  death,  from  hell ;  save  us  by 
changing  us  into  the  likeness  of  His 
own  obedience,  trust,  and  love ;  and  so 
prepare  us  to  "shine  for  ever  in  the 
light  of  God,"  the  monuments  of  a 
great  salvation.  We  may  believe  a 
thing^  we  cannot  love  a  thing  :  we  may 
like  it,  admire  it,  value  it,  cherish  it. 
It  is  of  necessity  to  love  that  its  object 
must  be  able  to  respond,  returning 
love  for  love.  So  you  see  I  believe  in 
the  work  of  Christ;  believe  in  the 
Atonement ;  and  the  Redemption  ;  and 
the  Sacrifice;  and  the  Resurrection. 
But  since  my  higher  life,  my  full  sal- 
vation, comes  by  that  love,  which  is  a 
swallowing-up  of  faith  in  something 
higher,  I  must  get  beyond  things  :  I 
shall  never  be  able  to  love  the  work,  and 
the  Atonement,  and  the  Redemption, 
— they  must  pass  into  lights  which 
shine  down  upon,  and  all  around,  the 
Saviour,  the  Redeemer,  the  Atoner, 
the  Propitiator,  Him  who  gave  Him- 
self for  us — glorifying  Him,  making 
Him  so  beautiful  that  our  heart  is 
wholly  won  to  Him,  our  love  fully  set 
upon  Him,  and  body,  soul,  and  spirit, 
are  yielded  in  a  sacrifice  of  affection 
unto  Him.  Sometimes  you  feel  a  little 
difference  between  the  mode  in  which 
I  present  Divine  truth  to  you,  and  the 
modes  of  your  previous  apprehension  ; 
and  possibly  you  may  sometimes  think 
the  diBference  far  greater  than  it  is. 
Really  it  lies  in  this :  you  think  so 
much  of  the  redemption;  I  try 
to  lift  up  your  eyes,  and  get  them 
fixed  on  the  Redeemer.  You  dwell  on 
the  work  of  salvation  ;  I  try  to  point 
out  the  person  of  the  Saviour,  and  show 
you  what  glorious  power  to  deliver  He 
has  gained  through  His  work.  You 
try   to    formulate   a   doctrine    of    the 

)  33 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


Atonement ;  I  long  to  make  you  see  the 
infinite    fitness    and    fulness    of     the 
Divine    Atoner   and  Reconciler.     You 
say,  "  It  is  Christ  that  died."     I  try 
to   repeat  after   Paul,   and  say.  Yes, 
that  is  true,  but  there  is  more.     Oh ! 
to  see  and  feel  that  something  more : 
"  Yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who 
is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who 
also  maketh  intercession  for  us."      It 
is  impossible  to  do  more  than  suggest 
to  you  how  much  the  apostles  made  of 
the  person  of  Christ,  and  how  constant 
is  their  demand  of  loyal  attachment  to 
Him,  trust  and  love  to  Him.     A  little 
roll  of  passages  may  suffice  to  set  this 
upon  your  thoughts.     Christ  required 
personal  relations  to  Himself.     "  Come 
unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden."      "  He   that   hath   the 
Son  hath  life."     "  I  give  unto  them 
eternal    life."       "  Him    that    cometh 
unto  Me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out." 
"  By  faith  that  is  in  Me."     "  Whoso- 
ever believe th  in  Him  might  not  perish, 
but  have  everlasting  life."     "  This  do  in 
remembrance  of   Me."      The   apostles 
preach,    saying :     *'  Him     hath     God 
exalted,    a    Prince    and    a    Saviour." 
"God   hath    made   that  same    Jesus 
whom   ye    crucified,   both    Lord   and 
Christ."     "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."     "  Unto  you  that  believe  He 
is  precious."     Paul  shows  us  his  loving 
relations  to  a  personal  living  Saviour, 
when  he  says,  "  The  life  I  live  in  the 
flesh  is  a  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of 
God  "  ;  and  our  text  is  in  fullest  accord 
with  the  whole  New  Testament  when 
it    says,     *'  whom^^    not    **  which " — 
"whom  having  not  seen,  we  love;  in 
whom  though  now  we  see  Him  not  yet 
believing,  we  rejoice,"  etc.     And  surely 
He  is  the  true  minister  of  the  Word 
who,  as  an  ambassador  of  the  living 
Christ,  beseeches  men  in  Christ's  stead 
to   be   reconciled   unto    God."      This, 
then,  is  a  most  true  and  worthy  way 
in  which  to  think  about  Divine  things. 
Our  full  salvation  comes  by  love  to  a 
Person.     In   presence  of   these  sacra- 
mental emblems,  how  true  that  must 
seem  to  every  one  of  us !     Just  what 
we   gather   round   them  for  is,   that, 

34 


seeing  Christ  afresh  by  their  help,  we 
may  set  our  love  afresh  upon  Him ; 
and  often  we  have  found  that  nothing 
so  mightily  helps  us  in  our  godly  living 
as  these  saci-amental  quickenings  of  our 
love  to  the  personal  and  living  Christ. 
We  do  not  see  Him  in  a  vision  of 
dazzling  brightness,  **  clothed  in  white 
garments  dowTi  to  the  foot.  .  .  .  His 
head  and  hairs  white  like  wool,  as 
white  as  snow,  His  eyes  like  flames 
of  fire.  His  feet  like  fine  brass,  burn- 
ing to  white  heat  in  a  furnace?" 
His  voice  does  not  come  to  us  like  "  the 
sound  of  many  waters  "  j  but  we  still 
hear  Him  say  the  words  which  quicken 
adoring,  thankful,  trustful  love :  "  Fear 
not ;  I  am  the  first  and  the  last,  I  am 
He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead ;  and, 
behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore. 
Amen."  The  old  test  of  discipleship 
remains :  "  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest 
thou  Me  ? "  Well  for  us  all,  and  for 
the  progress  of  the  work  of  redemption 
in  us,  if  we  can  respond,  "  Thou 
knowest  all  things  ;  Thou  knowest  that 
I  love  Thee." 

II.  That  love  may  be  sight-quickened. 
— As  was  the  love  of  the  disciples  for 
their  Master.  They  were  with  Him 
in  the  privileges  of  closest  intimacy ; 
they  received  the  impressions  of  con- 
fidence which  ought  to  follow  witnessing 
His  mighty  works;  but  far  beyond 
that,  the  secrecies  of  communion,  the 
knowledge  of  His  private  lifo  of  purity 
and  charity,  woke  in  their  hearts  an 
enthusiasm  of  affection  which  made 
them  in  due  time  heroes  and  martyrs. 
With  what  a  tender,  trustful  affection 
John  loved  Christ ;  getting  as  close  as 
he  could  to  Him,  and  even,  with  almost 
a  woman's  gentleness,  venturing  to 
lean  on  His  bosom.  With  what  a 
passionate  and  ardent  affection  Peter 
loved  Him ;  a  kind  of  love  which 
might  stumble,  but  was  too  wholly 
sincere  and  intense  entirely  to  fail  and 
fall.  Would  you  see  love  that  comes 
hy  sight,  read  the  heart  of  Mary  Mag- 
dalene, that  woman  who  was  "  last  at 
the  cross  and  first  at  the  grave,"  and 
wept  her  sorrow  because  they  had  taken 
away  the  body  which  she  had  meant 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


to  embalm  with  sweetest  spices  by  her 
own  loving  hands ;  or  go  into  the 
Bethany  home,  and  see  Mary  pass 
out,  soon  to  return  and  blend  precious 
ointment  and  thankful  tears  upon  the 
Saviour's  feet ;  look  at  her  : — 

"  Her  eyes  are  homes  of  silent  prayer, 
Nor  other  thought  her  mind  admits, 
But,  he  was  dead,  and  there  he  sits, 
And  He  that  brought  him  back  is  there. 

"  Then  one  deep  love  doth  supersede 
All  other,  when  her  ardent  gaze 
Roves  from  the  living  brother's  face, 
And  rests  upon  the  Life  indeed." 

Tennyson. 

All  this  was  sight -quickened  love ; 
they  saw  and  believed ;  and  need  I 
point  out  how  this  love  was  salvation 
to  them,  delivering  them  from  sin,  and 
self,  and  all  ignoble  ends,  and  lifting 
them  up  to  all  high  and  noble  uses, 
and  putting  a  glory  on  their  lives? 
Too  readily  we  cherish  the  thought  of 
our  dreadful  loss,  in  that  we  have  never 
seen  Christ.  Sometimes  the  heart  goes 
out  in  a  passionate  longing  :  "  Oh  that 
I  could  but  once  see  Him  ! "  How 
would  we  journey  if  we  might  at  last 
gaze  upon  Him  in  one  of  His  attitudes 
of  infinite  tenderness,  bending  to  look 
with  such  gentle  acceptance  on  the 
poor  sinner  that  rained  her  tears  upon 
His  feet,  or  holding  a  little  babe  in 
His  arm,  and  touching  the  other  little 
ones  that  clung  about  His  robe,  and 
saying,  "  Suffer  the  little  ones  to  come 
unto  Me."  Only  to  see  a  full-length 
picture  of  Him  sets  our  heart  beating 
with  emotion  ;  surely  we  could  beUeve, 
we  could  love,  if  we  might  but  see 
Him.  So  we  repeat  the  mistake  of 
doubting  Thomas,  who  wanted  to  see 
the  wound-marks  in  His  hands  and  side. 
A.nd  to  us,  as  well  as  to  Him,  comes  the 
Saviour's  gentle  reproof  :  "  Thomas, 
because  thou  hast  seen  Me  thou  hast 
believed ;  blessed  are  they  which  have 
not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed." 

III.  That  love  may  be  faith- 
quickened. — As  was  the  love  of  these 
stranger  Jews,  scattered  abroad,  to 
whom  Peter  wrote,  and  as  is  ours.  They, 
nor  we,  have  ever  seen  the  Son  of 
God ;  yet,  *'  though  now  we  see  Him 


not,  believing  in  Him,  we  rejoice  with 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory." 
Archbishop  Leigh  ton  says  :  "  The  eye 
is  the  ordinary  door  by  which  love 
enters  the  soul,  but  this  (saving  love 
to  the  Lord  Christ)  enters  by  the  faith- 
faculty,  which  is  the  soul's  eye."  For 
the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal 
stand  related  to  the  soul's  eye  just  as 
the  things  that  are  seen  and  temporal 
do  to  the  bodily  eye.  And  amongst 
the  various  definitions  given  of  faith, 
I  would  single  out  this  one  as  peculiarly 
full,  and  true,  and  suggestive  :  "  Faith 
is  that  state  of  the  soul  in  which  the 
things  of  God  become  glorious  cer- 
tainties." Must  not  all  the  faculties 
of  our  soul  be  vastly  superior  to  the 
faculties  of  our  bodies  ?  In  truth  they 
are  sublime  powers,  only  feebly  repre- 
sented even  by  the  wonderful  senses  of 
eye,  and  ear,  and  touch.  It  is  a  far, 
far  grander  thing  that  we  can  love, 
and  believe,  and  adore,  and  obey,  than 
that  we  can  see,  and  hear,  and  feel. 
And  all  that  sphere  of  unseen  things 
with  which  faith  and  love  and  hope 
have  to  do  is  far  more  real  than  that 
outward  world  of  sensible  objects  with 
which  eye  and  touch  can  deal.  Put 
together  these  two  things  :  "  The  sun 
shines ;  '■  **  God  lives  ; "  and  surely  that 
one  which  only  the  soul's  eye  sees, 
which  only  faith  can  grasp,  is  the  one 
which  is  most  certainly  true,  really  the 
most  free  from  doubt  to  every  one 
whose  soul-eye  is  clear.  Only  try  to 
think  what  a  little  piece  of  our  life, 
after  all,  is  concerned  with  "  things 
seen  and  temporal,"  and  how  broad, 
and  wide,  and  high,  and  rich,  is  the 
world  of  the  unseen  with  which  we 
deal.  The  things  of  thought,  emotion, 
and  affection,  are  mostly  unseen.  The 
heroes,  whose  stories  we  cherish  for 
continual  inspiration,  are  all  unseen. 
Our  departed  friends  are  now  unseen ; 
we  have  only  the  images  of  them  which 
faith  and  love  create.  Beyond  the  blue 
sky  we  see  the  dome  of  God;  within 
the  movements  of  nature  we  trace  the 
handiwork  of  God.  Measure  life  by 
what  our  eye  sees,  our  ear  hears,  and 
our  hand  can  touch,  and  it  is  a  poor, 

35 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


limited  life  indeed ;  so  many  miles 
through  to  the  other  side — so  many 
leagues  measured  all  round.  Look  at 
life  with  the  soul's  eye,  see  it  with  the 
faith-faculty,  and  then  our  human 
life  grows  profound  and  awful ;  worlds 
are  within  worlds;  worlds  are  beyond 
worlds  ;  everything  has  eternal  issues 
and  relations.  By  the  measurements 
of  faith  the  world's  diameter  is  infinite, 
and  its  circumference  is  Grod.  But 
the  question  which  our  text  suggests, 
and  which  our  Christian  hearts  want 
answered,  is  this  ;  Can  this  faith-sight 
of  Christ  help  me  to  love^  to  the  love  that 
saves  1  Well  we  know,  for  again  and 
again  we  have  felt  how,  looking  into 
the  face,  and  watching  the  life,  of  our 
brother  or  sister  has  touched  our  hearts 
and  won  out  a  love  that  longed  to 
prove  its  deep,  true  power  in  sacrifices 
for  them.  Well  we  know  how  sight- 
quickened  love  has  delivered  us  from 
evil,  elevated  us,  made  us  nobler  men 
and  women.  But  can  it  be  so  with 
faith-sightl  Yes,  brethren,  and  more, 
much  more.  Try  if  your  loves  are 
all  limited  to  those  you  see.  Try 
whether  it  is  so,  that  all  the  persons 
present  to  your  heart  are  persons  you 
can  look  upon  and  touch.  Well  the 
widow  knows  that  her  unseen  husband 
is  far  closer  and  more  real  to  her  than 
any  who  sit  beside  her.  The  mother 
folds  her  heavenly  child  to  her  heart 
oftener  than  her  living  children  to 
her  bosom.  And  by  faith  we  can  see 
Christ;  we  can  realise  Him,  and  find 
kindlings  of  love  rise  towards  Him, 
purer,  stronger  far  than  any  that  we 
might  have  felt,  had  we  looked  into 
His  human  face  and  touched  His 
gracious  hand.  How  true  poetry  is 
to  the  deepest  feelings  of  our  nature  ! 
Tennyson,  mourning  over  his  friend, 
lost  to  touch,  tells  us  how  near  that 
friend  ever  was  to  thought,  and  heart, 
and  faith  : — 

"  Dear  friend,  far  off,  my  lost  desire, 
So  far,  so  near,  in  woe  and  weal ; 

0  loved  the  most,  when  most  I  feel 
There  is  a  lower  and  a  higher  ; 

"  Far  off  thou  ait,  but  ever  nigh, 

1  have  thee  still  and  I  rejoice." 

36 


•'  Known  and  unknown ;  human,  Divine  ; 
Sweet  human  hand,  and  lips,  and  eye ; 
Dear  heavenly  friend  that  canst  not  die, 
Mine,  mine,  for  ever,  ever  mine." 

And  hear  how  the  poet -soul  thinks  of 
Him  who  found  it  "  expedient  that  He 
should  go  away,"  out  of  sight  and 
touch,  to  become  for  human  souls  the 
ideal  of  all  that  is  pure,  and  loving, 
and  winsome,  and  beautiful : — 

"  Strong  Son  of  God,  immortal  Love, 

Whom  we,  that  have  not  seen  Thy  face, 
By  faith,  and  faith  alone,  embrace. 

"  Thou  seemest  human  and  Divine, 

The  highest,  holiest  manhood  Thou." 

Better,  far  better  for  us,  that  Christ  is 
now  unseen.  We  are  no  longer  limited 
to  the  impressions  produced  by  His 
human  figure,  we  can  raise  the  noblest 
and  most  perfect  ideal  of  Him ;  we  can 
put  about  our  thought  of  Christ  every- 
thing that  we  find  touches  our  heart 
most  deeply,  everything  we  count  most 
loving  and  lovely.  Even  when  we  love 
through  sight  we  do  not  love  exactly 
what  we  see,  but  an  ideal  which  our 
heart  fashions ;  we  love  our  beloved 
because  we  see  them  transformed  with 
a  beauty  which  our  heart  gathers 
round  them ;  and  upon  the  records 
left  of  the  Son  of  God  we  all  can 
build  the  figure  of  our  own  Christ, 
transcendently,  infinitely  pure  and 
lovely,  and  our  soul  will  be  lifted  up 
by  the  very  nobility  and  glory  of  the 
unseen  One  whom  we  love.  And  this 
is  our  confidence  and  joy ;  our  ideal 
shall  never  disappoint  us.  Let  the 
faith-faculty  do  its  utmost,  and  the 
love-faculty  crown  its  creation  to 
the  utmost,  it  cannot  reach  the  very 
glory  of  Jesus ;  it  is  never  worthy  of 
Him.  He  is  better  than  mind  can 
think.  He  is  better  than  heart  can 
conceive.  Our  Christ  is  unseen,  and 
yet  we  set  our  love  upon  HiTn.  Our 
Christ  we  shall  not  see  to-day,  and  yet, 
believing  in  Him,  we  may  be  found 
rejoicing  with  joy  unspeakable  and 
full  of  glory,  receiving  the  end  of  our 
faith,  even  the  salvation  of  our  souls. 
How  can  this  be?  What  is  there  in 
our  soul-vision  of  Christ  to  kindle 
fresh   love    and    awaken    a    joy   that 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


shall  be  ever  growing  toward  the  un- 
speakable? What?  Oh,  brethren,  as 
you  see  Him  there,  about  Him  is  the 
fashion  of  a  "lamb  as  it  had  been 
slain."  Gazing  on  Him,  our  soul  is 
flooded  with  memories  of  a  wonderful, 
blessed  past.  We  see  the  manger-place 
that  tells  how  He  thought  not  even 
equality  with  God  a  thing  to  be  held 
with  unrelaxing  grasp,  but  emptied 
Himself  and  entered  the  world  a  help- 
less Babe.  We  see  the  daily  scene  of 
self-denial  and  grace — mighty  deeds 
of  kindness,  and  winsome  words  of  love, 
— melting  •  even  hard  hearts  to  His 
obedience.  We  see  the  scene  shaded 
by  the  olives  of  Gethsemane.  We  see 
the  scene  illumined  by  the  torches  of 
a  murderous  band.  We  see  the  scenes 
that  disgraced  for  ever  the  tribunals  of 
earthly  judgment.  We  see  a  Saviour 
coming  forth,  wearing  a  mock  crown 
of  thorns  and  a  scornful  old  purple 
cloak,  yet  calm  in  the  grace  of  His 
self-sacrifice.  We  see  three  crosses  ; 
our  soul  is  entranced  to  watch  the 
dying  agonies  and  listen  to  the  dying 
cries  of  One  whose  woe  a  darkening 
sky  in  mercy  hid  ;  and  as  we  see  our 
hearts  remind  us  that  all  this  was 
home  for  us. 

*'  For  love  of  us  He  bled  ; 
For  love  of  us  He  died  ; 
'Twas  love  that  bowed  His  fainting  head, 
And  pierced  His  sacred  side." 

Is  it  any  wonder  that  those  memories 
should  quicken  within  us  a  new  and 
enthusiastic  love?  And  when  the 
memories  of  the  past  grow  faint,  we 
look  again,  and  lo  !  how  beautiful  our 
Saviour  is !  In  His  face  shines  the 
glory  of  an  infinite  love,  that  has  won 
its  triumph  out  of  sacrifice.  Does 
heaven  seem  bright  ?  It  is  the  light 
of  His  beauty  shining  through  it.  Is 
heaven  radiant  with  song  ?  The  one 
burden  of  those  who  sing  is  the  infinite 
worth  and  grace  of  Him  who  "  loved 
us  and  gave  Himself  for  us."  And  a.«?, 
admiringly,  with  the  eyes  of  our  soul, 
we  look  upon  Him  ;  as  we  cherish  loving 
memories,  and  listen  to  His  words  of 
tenderness  and  grace,  still  spoken  to 
all  loving  hearts ; — how  can  we  keep  our 


souls  from  rising  in  their  responsive 
love,  and  saying,  with  new  enthusiasm 
of  affection,  **  Lord,  Thou  knowest  all 
things;  Thou  knowest  that  I  love  Thee." 
Did  St.  Peter  say, "  ^o^ having  seen"  ? 
That  is  but  partly  true,  poorly  true. 
Our  souls  have  seen  the  unseen  Christ. 
The  life  is  ever  freshly  manifested  to 
the  faith-quickened  vision  of  human 
souls.  We  have  seen.  We  have 
'*  beheld  His  glory,  the  glory  as  of 
the  Only-Begotten  of  the  Father,  full 
of  grace  and  truth  " ;  and  it  may  be 
that  we  shall  have  another  soul-vision 
to-day,  and  our  hearts  may  respond, 
as  did  Thomas,  saying,  "  My  Lord  and 
My  God." 

Ver.  7.  The  Proper  Reading  of 
Human  Afflictions. — They  are  the 
"trial  of  our  faith."  Faith  is  here 
put  for  the  Christian  profession,  which 
is  based  on  faith  in  Jesus  as  Messiah 
and  Saviour.  And  the  trial  of  the 
faith  is  spoken  of  because  those 
addressed  were  actually  then  suffer- 
ing on  account  of  their  Christian 
profession.  The  writer  of  the  epistle 
more  fully  describes  the  trial  through 
which  these  Jewish  Christians  had 
passed  (Heb.  x.  32-34).  "After  ye 
were  enlightened,  ye  endured  a  great 
fight  of  afflictions;  partly  while  ye 
were  made  a  gazingstock,  both  by  re- 
proaches and  afflictions,  and  partly 
while  ye  became  companions  of  them 
that  were  so  used.  For  ye  had  com- 
passion of  me  in  my  bonds,  and  took 
joyfully  the  spoiling  of  your  goods." 
The  trial  of  faith  is  sometimes  spoken 
of  in  a  way  that  leaves  a  very  unworthy 
impression  of  God  upon  the  mind.  It 
is  assumed  that  He  sends  trial  in  an 
arbitrary  way,  upon  His  good  pleasure, 
and  as  an  exercise  of  what  is  called 
Divine  Sovereignty.  Scripture  gives  no 
warrant  for  our  representing  Divinely 
sent  trials  as  other  than  "  for  our 
profit."  Man  submits  metals  to  severe 
testings,  but  only  with  one  or  both  of 
two  distinct  objects  in  view.  Either 
for  the  improving  of  the  metal  itself, 
or  for  the  preparing  of  the  metal  unto 
some   use   and   service.     And   human 

37 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.  PETER. 


afflictions,  as  God-sent  trials  of  faith, 
are  never  read  aright,  unless  they  are 
seen  to  have  a  distinct  purpose  in  the 
improvement  of  the  person  subject  to 
them,  or  in  the  fitting  of  him  for  some 
particular  ministry.  "  He  doth  not 
afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  child- 
ren of  men." 

Ver.  8.  Loving  Whoin  we  have  Not 
Seen. — That  God  should  be  invisible  is 
a  necessity  of  His  perfection.  Heaven 
is  no  more  capable  of  containing  God 
than  the  earth,  although  more  of  His 
glory  is  displayed  there.  And  angels 
and  sainted  souls  in  heaven,  in  their 
highest  raptures,  in  their  clearest 
visions,  **  see  no  similitude."  But  here 
is  another  kind  of  invisibility  alto- 
gether. God  having  appeared  and 
made  Himself  "  manifest,"  disappears 
again  from  mortal  sight.  Jesus  Christ, 
in  personal,  visible  form,  has  wholly 
left  this  world.  All  the  myriads  of 
living  men  who  name  His  name  have 
to  speak  of  Him  as  "  Him  whom  they 
have  not  seen."  This  is  apt  to  shape 
itself  to  our  first  thoughts  as,  in  some 
sense,  a  loss.  ''The  eye  affects  the 
heart,"  and  we  think  that  if  we  saw 
Him  with  our  eyes  it  would  surely  be 
a  little  easier  to  believe  in  Him,  and 
our  love  would  spring  up  at  the  sight. 
When  we  think  more  deeply,  and  bring 
into  our  view,  as  far  as  we  can,  all  the 
elements  of  the  case,  we  drop  these 
earthly  hankerings  and  vain  regrets, 
and,  coming  upon  the  higher  ground 
of  our  text,  we  say,  "  Whom  having 
not  seen,  we  love."  It  is  very  desirable 
that  we  should  live  habitually  on  this 
higher  ground,  making  as  few  back- 
ward, downward  movements,  to  the 
lower  ground,  as  may  be.  It  is  a  fact 
that  great  multitudes  saw  Jesus  Christ 
in  the  flesh,  and  did  not  believe.  It  is 
a  fact  that  great  multitudes  who  had 
thus  seen  Him  in  the  flesh  without 
believing,  did  believe  immediately  after 
He  disappeared.  It  is  a  fact  that  those 
who  had  believed  when  He  was  here, 
believed  still  more  when  He  went  away. 
Their  faith  then  became  more  intelli- 
gent   and    more    heroic;    it    became 

38 


another  and  a  higher  thing.  It  is 
a  fact  that  many  who  had  not  seen 
Him,  but,  being  His  contemporaries, 
had  often  heard  of  Him,  without  be- 
lieving by  the  hearing,  no  sooner  heard 
that  He  had  gone  from  the  world  than 
they  believed  at  once.  It  is  a  fact 
that  great  numbers,  in  many  cities 
and  countries,  hearing  from  the  lips  of 
preachers  and  evangelists  the  whole 
story  of  His  coming  to  this  world  and 
going  hence,  believed.  It  is  a  fact 
that  on  the  same  testimony,  and  by 
force  of  the  same  evidence,  men  have 
believed  ever  since,  all  over  the  world, 
and  are  believing  now.  Take  for 
guidance  of  thoughts  three  words  out 
of  the  passage  : — 

I.  Faith. — "Yet  JeZtevm^,  we  rejoice." 
Faith  is  naturally  the  first  thing,  with- 
out which  no  other  thing  can  be.  If 
we  do  not  believe  in  the  existence  of 
Christ  in  heaven,  of  course  we  shall 
not  direct  any  affections  to  Him  there. 
If  we  do  believe,  we  have  it  as  our 
life-work  to  nourish  faith,  to  raise  it  to 
its  higher  degrees,  keep  to  it  in  per- 
petual exercise.  Faith  is  fundamental, 
but  it  is  structural  as  well — it  grows  in 
and  with  the  building.  If  his  life  is  a 
growing  one,  as  every  life  should  be, 
his  faith  grows  with  and  in  his  life, 
and  his  life  by  his  faith.  Nearly  all 
believing  may  be  said  to  be  believing 
in  Christ.  This  makes  the  object  of 
faith  so  simple,  and  yet  so  manifold  !  It 
is  Christ  in  heaven,  but  that  one  thing 
contains  many.  He  is  therewith  as 
a  sacrifice,  to  offer  its  perpetual  virtue  ; 
as  an  advocate,  to  plead  for  those  who 
are  in  trouble  and  danger  ;  as  a  Ruler, 
to  watch  and  guide  all  affairs ;  as  a 
Friend,  to  do  His  friends  all  kindly 
service ;  as  an  Elder  Brother,  to  pre- 
pare for  the  home-coming  of  the 
younger  members  of  the  Divine  family, 
and  to  welcome  them  home  when  they 
come. 

II.  Love. — "  Whom  having  not  seen, 
ye  love."  The  love  is  really  born  with 
the  faith,  begins  to  act  with  it,  grows 
by  its  means,  and  is  not  cooled  or 
repressed  by  the  invisibility  of  its 
object.     Love  is  the  tenderest  and  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


most  delicate,  and  yet  it  is  the  strongest 
and  most  overmastering,  of  all  human 
emotions.     To  love  Christ — there,  in  a 
moment,  you  have  the  sublime  of  this 
affection  !       But  how  does  the  great 
and  glorious  Christ  feel  to  me?     For 
love  rises  to  meet  love.     The  feet  of 
love  are  fleetest  when  other  feet  are 
seen  advancing.     The  arms  of  love  are 
outstretched  to  meet  outstretched  arms. 
III.  Joy. — One  Christian  feeling  thus 
glides  into  another,  becomes   part  of 
another.     Faith  begins  to  have  a  glow 
in  it,  and — lo  !  it  is  "  Love."     "  Love  " 
begins  to  have  a  gladness  and  to  wear 
a  glory,  and — lo  !  it  is  heavenly  "  Joy." 
There  is  some  joy  in  every  Christian's 
heart.     Much  will  depend  on  tempera- 
ment, much  on  habit,  much  on  outward 
circumstances,  as  to  the  development 
and  cultivation  of  this  sacred  principle. 
But  in  every  case  you  have  the  element 
and   actual    beginning — the  root,  and 
fountain,    and    flowing    spring,   of    a 
heavenly    and    eternal    joy.      Blessed 
necessity  !  that  compels  every  soul  in 
Christ  to  be  happy  in  Him  !   A  flame  of 
renewal  has  passed  through  the  inmost 
being,  refreshing  waters  of  grace  have 
cleansed  every  corrupted  faculty,  and 
cooled  every  fevered  thought.  If  he  can- 
not break  out  into  a  loud  song,  he  can 
chant  some  softer  syllables  of  praise. 
It  is  even  said  to  be  the  joy  "  unspeak- 
able";  and  it  is  "full  of  glory."— ^. 
Raleigh,  D.D. 

The  Love  of  the  Unseen. — Show 
how  it  is  that  we  find  it  possible  to 
love  the  unseen  ;  and  that  it  is  possible 
for  our  love  of  the  unseen  to  become  a 
mightier  moral  power  than  our  love  of 
the  seen.  Our  salvation  comes  by  love 
(which  necessarily  includes  faith),  but 
in  setting  our  love  upon  Christ  we  are 
under  this  apparent  disabihty  :  we  have 
not  the  important  help  of  the  sight- 
faculty.  We  are,  however,  under  this 
real  advantage,  that  we  are  set  upon 
securing  the  help  of  the  faith-faculty. 
That  will  do  much  more  and  better  for 


us  than  the  sight-faculty  ever,  under 
any  circumstances,  could.  Observe  that, 
in  a  proper  sense,  we  cannot  be  said  to 
love    things.     We   love  persons.     But 
the  interest  we   have  in  things    may 
help    us   toward  loving  persons.     Our 
Lord's   sacrifice,    atonement,  etc.,  are 
not  objects    of  love,  but  helps  toward 
our  loving  Christ.      The  faith-faculty 
is  exercised  about  truth  declared.     It 
fashions    from    its   own   ideal   of   the 
person   so   revealed.     And  no  worthy 
ideal    of    Christ,   fashioned   upon   the 
basis  of  truth  declared  concerning  Him, 
can  ever  disappoint.     The  sight-faculty 
does  materially  help  us  to  love,  but  it 
keeps  us  under  limitations,  from  which 
the      faith-faculty      wholly     delivers. 
"  Thomas,  because  thou  hast  seen  Me 
thou   hast  believed ;    blessed  are  they 
that  have  not  seen  and  yet   have  be- 
lieved." 

Yers.  11,  12.  The  Unselfish  Ministry 
of  the  Prophets. — "Not  unto  them- 
selves, but  unto  you,  did  they  minister 
the  things."  And  this  they  knew. 
This  "  was  revealed  to  them."  This 
they  accepted  as,  for  them,  the  duty 
of  the  hour.  But  there  could  not  be 
a  much  harder  lot.  They  pictured  a 
glorious  time;  they  lived  in  their 
imaginations ;  but  for  them  it  was  all 
a  dream,  an  anticipation,  a  vision  of 
the  far-away,  which  they  knew  could 
never  become  reality  for  them.  But 
they  were  willing  to  serve  others.  It 
must  have  been  hard  for  them.  It 
must  have  been  a  great  strain  on  cha- 
racter and  faith.  They  saw  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ,  they  saw  the  spiritual 
glory  that  followed  them.  They 
saw  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  Christ 
possess  the  earth,  and  they  knew  they 
would  never  breathe  the  air  of  that 
kingdom,  or  be  employed  in  its  service. 
Yet  those  old  prophets  do  but  illustrate 
the  universally  working  law  of  service 
for  God.  You  cannot  do  it  if  you 
want  anything  ybr  yourself 


39 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L  PETER. 


MAIJV  HOMILETICS    OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—16. 

Self  Discipline. — Christian  privilege  ought  always  to  act  upon  us  as  an 
inspiration  to  duty.  But  the  first  sphere  of  the  Christian's  duty  is  himself ,  his  own 
character,  habits,  and  relationships.  It  never  can  be  too  constantly  or  too 
persuasively  presented,  that  a  Christian's  power  lies  first  in  what  he  is.  The 
service  a  renewed  man  can  render,  and  is  called  to  render,  is  the  service  of 
his  own  cultured  self.  "  Among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,  holding 
forth  the  word  of  life."  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  St.  Peter  has  in  mind, 
however,  not  only  the  duty  of  self -discipline,  but  the  security  that  lies  in  it. 
The  Christian  who  is  diligently  attentive  to  spiritual  self-culture  is  guarded 
round,  and  protected  safely  from  all  the  assaults  of  evil.  Too  much  engaged, 
too  interestedly  occupied,  to  be  overborne  by  any  outward  circumstances  of 
persecution  or  trial.  It  may  further  be  said  that,  in  a  well-ordered  self- discipline 
the  Christian  finds  so  much  personal  pleasure  that  he  is  fully  compensated  for  all 
losses  of  worldly  pleasure  which  the  self -culture  may  involve.  Christian  self- 
discipline  is  here  seen  to  include  : — 

I.  Bracing  up. — "  Girding  up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  To  His  disciples  our 
Lord  gave  the  same  counsel.  *'  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about,  and  your  lamps 
burning  "  (Luke  xii.  35).  The  figure  is  a  familiar  one,  but  it  is  more  forcible 
when  associated  with  the  long,  flowing  garments  of  the  East.  The  loose  dress  had 
to  be  turned  up  and  bound  round  the  waist,  when  active  exertion  was  required. 
Thus,  Elijah  is  said  to  have  girded  up  his  loins  when  he  ran  before  the  chariot  of 
Ahab  from  Carmel  to  Jezreel  (1  Kings  xviii.  46),  and  the  Lord  required  Job  to 
"  gird  up  his  loins  like  a  man,"  to  hsten  to  His  sublime  response  (Job  xxxviii.  3). 
In  modern  times  athletes  brace  up,  or  gird,  the  body  before  exertion.  What  is 
represented  in  the  moral  sphere  we  can  well  understand.  There  is  a  resolute 
dealing  with  ourselves  in  the  face  of  difficulties — to  use  a  familiar  expression,  a 
"  pulhng  of  ourselves  together  " — which  enables  us  to  present  a  strong  front  to  the 
adversary,  and  to  endure  what  may  involve  serious  strain.  Something  of  this 
severe  self -dealing  is  indicated  in  the  psalmist's  expression,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  O 
God,  my  heart  is  fixed."  "  I  am  purposed  that  my  mouth  shall  not  transgress." 
Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  soldiers  in  an  enemy's  country,  and  on  some 
dangerous  expedition.  Day  and  night  they  keep  fully  attired  and  armed,  get 
what  sleep  they  can  beside  their  horses,  ready  at  any  moment  to  spring  into  the 
saddle — always  braced  up.  The  ''loins  of  the  mind"  are  the  resolves  and  purposes. 
They  keep  the  mind  occupied,  and  brace  it  up  for  its  duty.  A  striking  instance 
of  bracing  up  the  loins  of  the  mind,  and  standing  four  square  to  every  tempta- 
tion and  every  foe,  may  be  found  in  Joshua,  who  was  strong ^  and  could  say,  "  As 
for  me  and  my  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 

II.  Self-restraint. — "  Be  sober."  Temperate  in  all  things.  Weakness  attends 
upon  excess  in  anything,  partly  because  a  rebound  is  sure  to  follow  it,  and  all 
rebounds  are  perilous ;  partly  because  every  excess  tends  to  repeat  itself,  and  the 
repetition  involves  entire  loss  of  self-control.  Moderation  is  essential  to  Christian 
virtue  ;  and  it  has  its  application  in  the  religious  as  well  as  the  moral  spheres. 
This,  however,  is  seldom  wisely  insisted  on,  and  many  religious  persons  actually 
lose  their  power  of  self-restraint  by  excess  in  religious  meetings,  duties,  and 
services.  Self-restraint  needs  to  be  cultured  in  relation  to  everything.  Physical 
health  depends  on  our  working  up  to,  but  never  beyond,  the  limit  of  our  powers, 
and  so  does  moral  health.  But  it  is  more  practically  helpful  to  show  that  each 
individual  will  find  some  particular  sphere  in  which  he  is  called  to  "  be  sober." 
And  the  mastery  of  himself  in  that  particular  thing  will  be  found  a  triumph 
which  carries  with  it  his  easy  restraining  and  ruling  of  all  other  things.  It  may 
be  shown  that  we  all  need  to  win  the  power  of  self-restraint  in  relation  to  the 

40 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


"  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life."  And  the  evils 
into  which  the  unrestrained  man  falls  may  he  vigorously  described,  as  a  warning 
against  neglecting  self -culture. 

III.  Trust  in  provision  and  promise. — "  Set  your  hope  perfectly  on  the  grace 
that  is  to  be  brought  unto  you."  It  is  possible  to  present  the  duty  of  self- 
restraint  only  on  its  sterner  side,  as  the  resolute  mastery  of  tendencies  that 
are  evil.  And  doing  this  may  give  a  severer  view  of  the  Christian  life  than 
is  necessary.  Self-culture  is  the  nourishing  of  the  good.  There  is  the  call  to 
self-restraint  that  we  may  win  good,  as  well  as  that  we  may  control  evil.  St. 
Peter  would  have  those  he  addressed  master  all  depression,  and  fear,  and  in- 
difference, and  so  set  the  Christian  hope  before  them,  that  they  should  always 
be  working  towards  its  attainment.  He  really  speaks  of  the  grace  that  is 
"being  brought"  day  by  day,  and  not  of  some  grace  that  is  "to  be  brought" 
some  one  day.  But  it  involves  self-restraint  for  us  to  loosen  the  self-confidence 
so  that  we  may  wisely  trust. 

IV.  Distinct  aim  at  holiness. — "  Be  ye  yourselves  also  holy  in  all  manner  of 
living."  Our  Lord  set  this  aim  before  His  disciples.  "  Ye  therefore  shall  be 
perfect,  as  your  heavenly  Father  is  perfect."  Self -discipline  needs  a  pattern,  a 
standard.  It  cannot  be  intelligent ;  it  will  not  be  wisely  directed  ;  it  cannot 
hope  to  reach  an  effective  result ; — unless  a  man  sees  what  he  is  restraining,  dis- 
ciplining himself  unto.  He  is  working  at  himself,  at  his  moral  character  and 
relations ;  but  to  what  end,  after  what  pattern  1  When  he  has  done  his  self- 
culturing  work,  what  does  he  expect  to  be  ?  Holiness,  as  God's  holiness,  is  the 
distinctly  Christian  aim,  and  it  is  the  aim  of  no  other  religion  besides  Christianity. 
Holiness  is  more  than  cleanness  and  fitness  of  relations.  It  is  an  inward  state  of 
mind  and  feeling  which  ensures  that  the  relations  must  be  pure  and  right.  And 
it  is  purity  with  a  bloom  on  it,  that  makes  it  attractive,  and  gives  it  a  peculiar 
power  of  influence.  But  it  is  practical,  not  dreamy  and  sentimental;  and 
therefore  St.  Peter  says,  "  Be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  " ;  holy  in  all 
the  turning  about,  all  the  associations,  of  life.  That  tone  on  all  life  would  in  the 
most  marked  way  distinguish  the  Jewish  Christians  from  the  older  Jews,  and  from 
all  the  heathen  world  around  them. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  13.  Girding  the  Loins  of  the 
Mind. — The  figure  is  Oriental.  The 
Orientals  wore  a  loose  and  flowing 
robe,  which,  dangling  about  the  feet, 
hindered  swift,  straight  motion.  When 
they  would  move  quickly  and  with  pre- 
cision, they  must  needs  gather  the 
trailing  garment  into  the  girdle  about 
the  waist.  You  remember  how  the 
children  of  Israel  were  commanded  to 
eat  the  passover.  The  passover  was 
the  door  of  their  deliverance.  The 
lamb,  slain,  and  roasted  whole,  they 
were  to  eat.  How?  Standing,  with 
travelling-staff  in  hand,  with  loins 
girded.  A  journey  was  before  them. 
They  were  to  go  forth  from  Egypt.  On 
that  journey  no  trailing  robes  were  to 
hold  them  back.     A  definite  aim  was 


theirs — to  leave  Egypt,  and  march 
toward  freedom  and  nationality.  They 
were  to  be  harnessed  toward  that  aim. 
Robes,  trailing,  flowing  down  and  out, 
catching  at  stones,  sweeping  up  sticks — 
robes  to  be  trodden  on,  and  so  the 
cause  of  stumbling — might  do  for  the 
smooth  floors  of  Pharaoh's  palace, 
might  do  for  the  even  paths  about  their 
villages ;  but  they  would  not  do  for 
men  on  the  march.  With  girded  loins 
they  were  to  go  forth.  So,  before 
these  Christians  to  whom  Peter  wrote, 
there  was  an  aim.  They  were  to  be 
sober,  to  hope  to  the  end,  to  be  obedient 
children,  to  refuse  to  live  after  the 
fashion  of  their  former  heathen  lusts; 
they  were  to  be  holy,  since  He  who  had 
called  them  was  holy.     A  shining  and 

41 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


gracious  aim  was  theirs.  And  there 
was  but  one  way  for  them  to  reach  it ; 
wherefore  toward  this  aim  gird  up  the 
loins  of  your  minds,  says  the  apostle. 
Thoughts,  loose  and  wandering; 
thoughts  heedlessly  trailing  over  this 
thing  and  that ;  allowed  imaginings  of 
your  former  heathen  lusts;  the  robes 
of  your  minds  unbound,  and  let  down 
to  Sow  over  whatever  they  may  list ; — 
such  ungirded  thoughts  will  be  as 
hindering  to  you,  O  Christians,  as 
would  have  been  the  loose  robes  of  the 
Israelites  on  their  desert  march.  Girded 
thoughts  are  what  you  need.  All  this 
is  very  close-  and  practical.  Here  is 
a  young  man  who  has  come  to  the 
consciousness  of  life's  meaning  and 
solemnity.  "  Ah,"  he  says,  "  I  must 
be  sober;  I  must  take  for  my  life  a 
strong  and  noble  aim."  But  how  may 
the  young  man  make  real  and  actual 
such  aim  ?  Here  our  Scripture  comes 
in.  By  girded  thought,  not  by  thoughts 
loose  and  wandering.  1.  What  ungirds 
thoughts?  (1)  Pleasure  as  an  end  for 
life  ungirds  them.  Duty  is  the  sacri- 
fice for  the  great  altar  of  the  life,  and 
pleasure — recreation — is  to  come  in 
only  as  it  helps  us  lay  that  sacrifice 
more  constantly  and  worthily  upon 
that  holy  place.  (2)  Aimless  and 
frivolous  reading  ungirds  thoughts. 
(3)  Bad  associations,  also,  ungird 
thoughts.  (4)  Neglected  Bibles  and 
neglected  secret  prayers  ungird  thoughts. 

(5)  Carelessness  of  attendance  on 
religious    services    ungirds     thoughts. 

(6)  Sunday  secular  newspapers  ungird 
thoughts.  2.  What  girds  thoughts? 
(1)  A  high  and  determined  purpose 
girds  them.  (2)  Quick  decisions  for 
the  Eight  gird  thoughts.  (3)  Love  for 
the  true  and  good  girds  thoughts. 
The  best  and  most  helpful  girdle  for 
the  thoughts  is  passionate  devotion  to 
the  personal  Christ. — Anon, 

Spiritual  Sobriety. — This  injunction 
may  refer  infer  en  tially  to  the  practice 
of  temperance  as  commonly  understood; 
but  its  significance  and  scope  are  much 
deeper  and  wider  than  that.  Writing 
of  the   surpassing   excellence  of   that 

42 


great  salvation  of  which  prophets  had 
prophesied,  into  which  angels  desired 
to  look,  which  had  really  been  made 
known  by  the  Spirit  of  God  (ver.  12), 
Peter  urges  his  readers  to  "  gird  up  the 
loins  of  their  mind" — i.e.,  to  call  forth 
all  their  spiritual  resources,  that  they 
may  understand  and  appreciate  it ;  he 
then  bids  them  "be  sober" — i.e.,  exercise 
in  this  great  matter  a  sound  judgment, 
command  themselves,  not  to  be  led  to 
harmful  extremes,  or  give  way  to  illu- 
sions that  would  disappoint  them,  but 
maintain  a  manly,  intelligent,  healthful 
self-restraint.  Doing  this,  they  might 
*'  set  their  hope  perfectly"  [to  the  fullest 
possible  limit]  "  on  the  grace  that  was 
being  brought  unto  them  at  the  revela- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ " — i.e.,  they  might 
confidently  expect  the  largest  and 
richest  blessings  which  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  grace  of  Christ  was  fitted 
to  bring  with  it.  We  may  strive  and 
we  may  look  for  the  greatest  good,  the 
fullest  prosperity,  in  connection  with 
the  gospel,  but  at  the  same  time  we 
must  cherish  and  exercise  spiritual 
sobriety. 

I.  In  the  acceptance  of  Christian 
doctrine. — 1.  The  Church  at  Thessa- 
lonica  had  a  strong  hold  on  the  doctrine 
of  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  "  The 
coming  of  the  Lord  draweth  nigh  "  was 
its  watchword,  its  prevaiHng  thought. 
It  had  a  right  to,  anticipate  the  hour 
when  there  would  be  another  mani- 
festation of  its  Lord.  But  it  fell  into 
insobriety  of  thought  and  of  conduct 
in  this  matter.  Its  members  thought 
that,  as  Jesus  Christ  might  appear 
among  them  at  any  hour,  they  need 
not  concern  themselves  with  the  ordi- 
nary duties  of  life,  vdth  provision  for 
its  bodily  necessities ;  and  they  began 
to  be  "  disorderly.""  They  had  to  be  re- 
buked by  the  apostle  Paul  (2  Thess.  iii.), 
and  summoned  to  be  sober  in  doctrine 
and  in  deed.  2.  The  Church  of  Corinth 
had  an  unusual  share  of  "  gifts,"  par- 
ticularly of  this  "  gift  of  tongues." 
The  members  of  that  Church  had  a 
perfect  right  to  make  the  most  of  its 
possession.  But  they  were  bound  to 
hold  their  special  powers  in  subordina- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


tion   to   the  great   ends  of  glorifying 
Christ,  and  of   edifying   one  another. 
This  they  did  not  do;  they  were  not 
taking   a   sober  view   of   the  subject, 
and  had  to  be  corrected  (1  Cor.  xiv.). 
3.  It  is  a   distinct  Christian  doctrine 
that  we  must  be  "separate"  from  the 
world ;  that  while  in  it  we  are  not  to 
be  of  it.     But  the  hermits  of  the  earlier 
time,  and  the  monks  and  nuns  and  the 
ascetics  of  a  later,  and  of  the  present, 
time,  fell  into  sad  insobriety  when  they 
sought   to   retire  altogether  from   the 
engagements  and  relationships  of  human 
life.     Painful  facts  have  superabund- 
antly proved  that  we   cannot  decline 
what   our   heavenly  Father   offers   us 
without   doing   ourselves  harm  rather 
than  good.     On  the  other  hand,  proof 
abounds  on  every  side  that  in  accepting 
the  joys  and  filling  the  spheres  which 
open  to  us  in  the  providence  of  God, 
we  may  "  walk  holily,  righteously,  and 
blamelessly,"  and   adorn  the  doctrine 
of  our  Saviour  in  all  things.     It  is  the 
sober   view  of   separateness   from  the 
world  which  is  the  right,  wise,  Christian 
one.     4.    That    "  we  are   justified  by 
faith"  is  according  to  Scripture.     By 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  we  have  access  to 
the  grace  of  God ;  believing  on  Him 
we  have  eternal  life.     But  when  men 
say,  as  they  have  said,  that  when  we 
have  once  believed,  and  been  restored 
to  the  favour  of  God,  we  cannot  forfeit 
His  friendship  by  any  folly,  or  even 
by  any  sin,  they  fall  into  the  gravest 
spiritual  insobriety  ;  they  push  certain 
statements  to   an   extreme,  and  they 
fall   into  dangerous,  even  destructive, 
error.     5.    We   are  sanctified   by  the 
Spirit  of  God.    When  we  have  returned 
unto  God  and  been  received  by  Him, 
there  remains  much  in  us  that  has  to 
be   removed   from  us ;  there  is  much 
absent  from  us  that  has  to  be  gained 
by   us.     We    are    not    "  complete   in 
Him."     The  process  of  spiritual  com- 


pletion is  the  work  of  the  Divine 
Spirit.  But  when  it  is  maintained,  as 
it  has  been,  that  if  we  only  give  our 
hearts  to  Him,  and  invite  His  entrance, 
and  make  entire  surrender  of  ourselves, 
we  may  be  instantaneously  lifted  up 
to  the  full  height  of  holiness,  then  the 
mistake  is  made  of  not  *'  being  sober  " 
in  thought  and  in  belief.  Christian 
maturity  is  a  growth  ;  it  is  the  gradual 
upbuilding  ourselves  on  our  holy  faith  ; 
it  is  the  result  of  a  strenuous  struggle ; 
it  is  the  consummation  of  a  wise  and 
true  Christian  course  ;  it  is  the  blessed 
consequence  of  daily  prayer,  of  the 
continual  reception  into  our  minds  of 
the  thoughts  of  God,  of  much  fellowship 
with  Jesus  Christ,  of  the  wise  use 
of  all  forms  of  Christian  privilege,  of 
active  work  in  the  field  of  sacred  useful- 
ness, of  the  lighter  and  also  the  severer 
discipline  of  the  Lord  of  our  life,  of  the 
wise  Father  of  our  spirit.  That  is  the 
"  sober  "  view,  strongly  substantiated 
by  Scripture,  constantly  confirmed  by 
the  experience  of  the  good. 

II.  In  the  regulation  of  Christian 
life. 

III.  In  the  nourishment  of  Christian 
character. — There  is  a  kind  of  spiritual 
sustenance  which  is  pleasant  "  to  the 
flesh,"  but  which  is  dangerous,  if  not 
delusive  ;  it  is  that  of  perpetual  reli- 
gious excitement ;  the  reading  of  those 
books,  and  the  hearing  of  those  sermons, 
which  make  an  almost  unbroken  appeal 
to  the  imagination.  This  cannot  be 
said  to  be  taking  milk  (1  Cor.  iii.  2), 
but  drinking  champagne.  If  we  would 
build  up  a  robust  and  fruitful  Christian 
character  we  must  eat  the  "  strong 
meat "  of  Divine  truth,  which  informs 
the  mind,  which  enlarges  the  view, 
which  braces  the  will,  which  sustains 
and  strengthens  the  soul.  There  is 
much  occasion  here  for  attention  to 
the  apostolic  admonition — be  sober. — 
William  Clarkson^  B.A. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—25. 

The  Fear  of  Son-like  Sons. — The  key-note  of  this  passage  is  the  sentence, 
"  pass  the  time  of  your  sojourning  in  fear."     There  is  a  godly  fear,  and  there  is- 

43 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


a  slavish  fear  ;  the  right  fear  of  the  child,  and  the  wrong  fear  of  the  slave,  or  of 
the  child  in  whom  all  right  feeling  is  crushed.     Such  proper  filial  fear — 

I.  Is  based  on  right  thoughts  of  God. — The  point  of  ver.  17  is  brought  out  in 
the  Revised  Version.  "  And  if  ye  call  on  Him  as  Father."  But  that  is  precisely 
what  our  Lord  taught  His  disciples  to  do.  "  When  ye  pray,  say,  Abba,  Father." 
A  Christian  is  marked  off  from  all  the  world  by  the  thought  he  has  of  God,  and 
the  name  in  which  he  embodies  his  thought.  He  must,  of  course,  seek  to  gain 
true  and  worthy  thoughts  of  the  Father,  and  they  will  always  be  such  as  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  had,  which  led  Him  to  address  God  as  "  Holy  Father," 
*'  Righteous  Father."  It  is  thought  that  if  men  call  God  "  Father,"  they 
will  think  of  him  after  the  patterns  of  human  fatherhood ;  but  surely  that 
is  fully  guarded  against  by  associating  the  thought  of  God  with  the  thought  of 
fatherhood.  What  is  added  to  our  thought  of  God,  by  calling  Him  Father,  is 
His  personal  interest  in  each  one  of  us ;  His  personal  affection  for  each  one ; 
and  His  personal  service  to  each  one.  There  is  no  more  reverent  name  than 
father,  and  no  more  reverent  relation  than  father  and  son.  The  fear  men  have 
for  a  "  thundering  Jove,"  or  for  an  autocratic  king,  is  ignoble  when  compared 
with  that  which  they  have  for  their  fathers ;  and  the  fear  of  son-like  sons  of  the 
Father-God  is  an  altogether  refined,  gracious,  inspiring,  and  ennobling  feeling ; 
it  is  the  secret  of  the  beautiful  life. 

II.  Is  based  on  right  thoughts  of  redemption. — "  Knowing  that  ye  were 
redeemed,  not  with  corruptible  things,  with  silver  or  gold,  .  .  .  but  with  precious 
blood."  The  expression,  "from  your  vain  manner  of  life  handed  down  from 
your  fathers,"  makes  precise  application  of  the  passage  to  the  Jewish  Christians, 
who  had  been  brought  over  from  formal  Judaism  into  spiritual  Christianity. 
The  rest  of  the  verses  may  be  taken  with  a  general  application.  They  express 
the  idea  of  redemption  which  will  always  nourish  a  true  and  worthy  fear.  Our 
redemption  was  a  costly  ransom :  our  liberty  unto  righteousness  was  obtained  at 
a  priceless  price.  In  common  life  the  cost  of  a  thing  puts  a  value  on  it,  and  we 
fear  to  lose  it,  or  to  damage  it.  And  that  is  a  right  fear,  the  fear  we  should 
have  for  our  spiritual  life,  because  of  the  cost  of  its  purchase.  A  cost  only  the 
more  impressive  that  it  is  not  weighted  as  silver  and  gold,  but  is  spiritual  value, 
life,  even  Divine  life,  figured  for  us  as  "  precious  blood."  "  That  blood,  the  life 
which  it  represented,  poured  out  upon  the  cross,  took  its  place  among  the  things 
that  were  not  corruptible."  The  reference  to  the  *' lamb  "  is  probably  due  to 
St.  Peter's  thinking  of  John's  famous  sentence,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God." 
Mason  has  a  good  note.  '*  How  Christ's  death  freed  them  from  their  *  vain  con- 
versation '  is  not  explained  here ;  but  we  may  give  a  twofold  explanation. 
Historically,  it  did  so,  because,  when  they  came  to  realise  that  their  Messiah 
could  only  reach  His  glories  through  suffering,  it  gave  them  a  new  insight  into 
the  whole  meaning  of  the  system  under  which  they  had  been  brought  up.  It 
did  also,  however,  doubtless,  in  a  more  mysterious  way,  such  as  we  cannot 
imagine,  procure  in  God's  sight  their  emancipation."  "The  whiteness,  the 
helplessness,  the  youth,  the  innocence,  and  the  patience,  of  the  lamb,  make  it  a 
natural  symbol  of  our  Lord." 

III.  Is  based  on  right  thoughts  of  present  claims  (ver.  22). — "Seeing  ye 
have  purified  your  souls  in  your  obedience  to  the  truth  unto  unfeigned  love  of 
the  brethren,  love  one  another  from  the  heart,  fervently."  It  is  the  constant 
teaching  of  the  apostles  that  Christianity  makes  two  claims  on  men ;  first,  the 
claim  to  love  God  ;  then  the  claim  to  love  one  another.  And  just  as  heart-love 
to  God  will  guarantee  the  right  service  of  God,  so  heart-love  for  the  brethren  will 
ensure  and  preserve  right  relations  with  them,  and  the  due  fulfilment  of  all 
brotherly  duties.  St.  John  puts  the  connection  between  the  love  of  God  and  the 
love  of  the  brethren  in  a  very  strong  and  impressive  sentence  :    "  If  a  man  say, 

44 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  I. 


I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar  :  for  he  that  loveth  not  his 
brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  cannot  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen.  And  this 
commandment  have  we  from  Him,  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  brother 
also." 

The  present  claim,  then,  is  to  'Move  the  brethren,"  and  the  claim  involves 
every  service  that  love  can  render  to  them.  But  the  question  may  properly  be 
asked.  Is  it  possible  to  make  ourselves  love?  The  answer  is  twofold.  1.  We 
can  create  an  ideal  which  is  lovable,  and  which  we  cannot  help  loving ;  and  we 
can  see  that  ideal  in  our  brethren,  when  they  are  not  lovable  in  themselves. 
Our  ideal  is  Christ.  We  cannot  help  loving  Him  wherever  we  find  Him. 
2.  Though  we  cannot  make  ourselves  love,  we  can  put  ourselves  in  such  relations 
as  will  help  to  inspire  love.  We  often  find  that  knowing  persons  in  the  intimacy 
of  life,  in  common  work,  or  common  sorrow,  brings  round  to  us  a  love  for  them 
which  we  should  not  otherwise  have  felt.  And  the  apostles  are  so  anxious 
about  keeping  up  the  fellowship,  because  that  is  the  secret  of  keeping  up  the 
love. 

IV.  Is  based  on  right  thoughts  of  fleeting  time. — And  the  particular  thought 
is,  that  all  that  belongs  to  the  material,  sensuous,  earthly  life  is  touched  with 
this  weakness — it  is  uncertain,  transitory.  Time  stamps  everything  as  frail. 
All  time-conditioned  things  are  below  man,  when  man  is  seen  to  be  a  spiritual 
being.  The  regenerate  man,  begotten  again  of  the  incorruptible  seed,  is  not 
time-conditioned,  and  nothing  that  he  does  is  time-conditioned.  Spiritual  life 
belongs  to  the  sphere  of  things  permanent  and  abiding.  By  cherishing  such 
thoughts  as  these  we  may  dignify  that  new  life  with  which  we  are  quickened,  and 
make  altogether  more  important  its  culture,  and  its  expression,  in  holy  life  and 
service,  than  the  attainment  of  any  earthly  good,  since  on  such  attainment  must 
always  rest  the  frailty  that  belongs  to  the  seen,  the  temporal,  the  transitory. 
Only  the  man  who  keeps  in  right  relations  with  the  spiritual  and  permanent  can 
ever  hope  to  be,  or  to  keep,  in  right  relations  with  the  temporal  and  transitory. 


•      SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  21.  Three  Stages  of  Faith. —  Christ  seemed  to  be  the  highest,  most 
What  is  the  point  of  this  text  ?  It  sets  efficient  help  to  this  faith  in  God.  For 
forth  who  is  the  final  object  of  faith.  It  the  Jew,  who  has  faith  in  God,  Christ 
is  God.  Herein  the  text  may  appear  to  is  the  clearing,  enlarging,  and  perfect- 
differ  from  the  usual  run  of  texts  in  ing  of  faith.  For  the  Gentile,  Christ 
the  gospels  and  epistles  :  e.g.,  "  By  is  the  medium  by  which  faith  in  God 
faith  which  is  in  Me  "  (Christ).  "  Be-  is  reached.  As  Christianly-educated, 
lieve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Can  we  occupy  in  some  degree  the  Jew- 
we  find  out  the  harmony  of  these  place.  But,  more  truly,  we  follow  on 
apparently  differing  statements?  This  the  line  of  the  Gentile,  and  reach  the 
must  certainly  be  the  first  and  most  full  saving  relation  to  God  by  three 
absolute  of  truths  :    man's   glory   and  stages  of  faith. 

blessedness  come  of  trusting  God.  lUus-  I.  First  stage  of  faith. — Faith  in 
trate  from  Enoch,  Abraham,  Jacob,  Christ.  See  the  prominent  place  of 
Davidic  psalms,  prophecies,  etc.  Such  Christ  in  the  New  Testament;  in  preach- 
trust  in  God  sets  man  right  with  God.  ing ;  in  the  early  experience  of  Christ- 
Failing  in  such  trust  shows  man  to  be  ians.  And  yet,  when  the  gospels  are 
wrong.  Self-trust  involves  distrust  of  carefully  studied,  we  are  impressed  by 
God.  Still,  it  is  the  fact,  that  man  has  the  persistency  with  which  Jesus 
to  be  helped  to  trust  by  some  agency —  always  puts  God  the  Father  first. 
medium,  mediator.     Now,  to  St.  Peter  Observe  how  well  fitted  Christ  was  to 

45 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


win  the  trust  of  men.  Notice  His  The  Agent  and  Caiise  of  Faith. — The 
appeals  (1)  to  man's  understanding  by  redeemed  are  also  described  here  by 
His  truth  ;  (2)  to  man's  reverence  by  their  faith  and  hope,  the  cause  of  which 
His  miracles  ;  (3)  to  man's  conscience  is  Jesus  Christ.  "  You  do  by  Him  be- 
by  His  appeals  and  by  His  life  ;  (4)  to  lieve  in  God  " — ^by  Him  as  the  author, 
man's  affections  by  His  Spirit ;  (5)  to  encourager,  support,  and  finisher,  of 
man's  emotions  by  His  cross.  The  your  faith  ;  your  faith  and  hope  may 
whole  man  is  swayed  toward  faith  by  now  be  in  God,  as  reconciled  to  you  by 
the  influence  of  Christ.  Christ  the  Mediator.  God  in  Christ 
II.  Second  stage  of  faith. — God*s  is  the  ultimate  object  of  a  Christian's 
relation  to  Christ.  There  was  more  in  faith,  which  is  strongly  supported  by 
Christ  than  even  the  apostles  could  at  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  the  glory 
first  see.  The  relation  does  not  come  that  did  follow. — Matthew  Henry. 
out  during  our  Lord's  life.     Then  God 

witnesses  to  Him.  The  relation  comes  The  Final  Object  of  Saving  Faith. — 
to  view  in  His  resurrection,  ascension.  Already  we  are  getting  our  springtime 
and  glorification.  Then  He  comes  to  remindings  of  resurrection.  Nature 
be  apprehended  as  God  in  Christ.  has  begun  her  teachings.  At  times 
Sometimes  it  is  said  that  Christ  raised  we  feel  the  pleasant  sunshine  and  the 
Himself,  usually  it  is  said  that  God  warmth  of  the  air.  Already  the  droop- 
raised  Him,  from  the  dead.  Resur-  ing  snowdrops,  the  pale  primrose,  and 
rection,  and  Christ  in  heaven,  bring  the  brilliant  yellow  daffodil  have  begun 
God  into  prominence.  to  whisper  to  us  that  winter  is  gather- 
Ill.  Third  stage  of  faith. — In  God.  ing  up  her  skirts,  and  preparing  to 
This  is  reached  actually,  as  a  result  of  hasten  away.  Nature  keeps  her  own 
Christian  experience ;  but  not  always  times,  and  even  now  the  *'  time  of 
consciously.  So,  through  Christ,  the  the  singing  of  birds  is  come,"  and  the 
perfect  restoration  is  effected,  and  "flowers  appear  on  the  earth."  At 
man's  faith  and  hope  are  set  on  God,  this  time  we  naturally  cherish  resur- 
See  in  this  faith  in  God  (1)  our  per-  rection  thoughts,  and  dwell  on  His 
feet  communion  with  Old  Testament  being  raised  from  the  dead  who  has 
saints,  (2)  the  true  mediatorial  work  "  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
of  Christ;  He  is  bringing  many  sons  by  His  gospel."  The  resurrection,  of 
unto  the  glory  of  this  higher  faith  in  which  all  else  seems  to  be  but  the 
God.  shadow,  and  the  symbol,  and  the  sug- 
gestion, is  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord 
The  Father's  Part  in  the  Work  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  that  should  never 
Redemption.  be  regarded  as  standing  alone  j  it  in- 

I.  The  part  that  the  Father  bore  eludes  and  involves  our  resurrection  in 
in  the  work  of  redemption. — 1.  He  Him,  first  from  sin,  and  then  from 
ordained  His  Son  to  the  mediatorial  the  grave.  "  Because  He  lives,  we  shall 
office.  2.  He  manifested  Him  to  the  live  also."  Three  visions  rise  before 
world.  3.  After  suffering  Him  to  be  us.  We  see  Christ  rising  from  the 
put  to  death.  He  raised  Him  up  from  grave,  "  leading  captivity  captive,  and 
the  dead.  4.  He  exalted  Him  to  heaven,  receiving  gifts  for  men."  We  see  the 
and  invested  Him  with  all  heaven's  *human  soul  rising  from  the  death  of 
glory.  sin  unto  the  life  of  righteousness,  in 

II.  The  effect  that  the  consideration  response  to  tho  awakening  call  of  Him 
of  this  is  intended  to  produce  upon  us.  who  "  liveth  for  ever  and  ever."  And 
It  should — (1)  Confirm  our  faith  ;  (2)  we  see  that  day  of  days,  for  which  all 
enliven  our  hope.  Address  (1)  those  other  days  were  made,  when  "all  that 
who  are  in  unbelief ;  (2)  those  who  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice 
yield  to  doubts  and  fears. — C.  Simeon,  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  shall  come 
M.A.  forth."     In  the  text  the  reference  to 

46 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER.  chap.  i. 


the  resurrection  is  necessary,  but  it  is  all  trustings  in   God.      The   prophets 

subordinate    to    the    purpose    of    the  unite  to  bid  us  "  Trust  in  the  Lord  for 

apostle.      It    stands    in     relation    to  ever " ;   and   they  assure  us  that  the 

another  point  which  is  more  directly  "  just  by  faith  shall  live."     But  this  is 

occupying  the  writer's  attention.     He  also   evidently  true ;  man  has  always 

is  really  meeting  a  question  which  was  needed  to  be  helped  to  trust  in  God 

then     anxiously    asked;      which     has  by  some   medium,  or   agency.     Vision 

always    been    anxiously    asked;     and  and   promise  helped  Abraham   to   his 

which  is  anxiously  asked  to-day.     Who  trust.       Moses    was    the    medium    or 

is  the  final  object  of  oar  faith  ]     The  mediator    who   helped   the    people    of 

apostle  at  first  surprises  us — upsets  our  Israel  to  their  trust.     That  trust  alone 

cherished  ideas.     He  says,  God  is  the  sets  man  the  creature  in  right  relations 

final   object  of   our   faith.     God   who  with  God  the  Creator  and  Father.    He 

was  in  Christ.     God  as  He  who  raised  requires  it,  and  we  ought  to  give  it. 

up  Christ  from  the  dead.     "  Who,  by  This  must  be  clearly  seen  to  stand  as 

Him,  do  believe  in   God,  that  raised  the  absolute  first  and  universal  truth  : 

Him  up  from  the  dead,  .  .  .  that  your  man's  salvation — man's  realisation   of 

faith  and  hope  may  be  in  God."      In  his  fullest  and  best  possibility — comes 

this  way  of  putting  the  truth,  there  is  out  of  trusting  God.     To  the  mind  of 

at  least  a  seeming  variation  from  many  Peter,  Jesus  Christ  seemed  to  be  the 

familiar  passages  in  the  Acts  and  in  highest,   the   most   perfect,    the    most 

the  Epistles.     *'  The  Son  of  Man  must  gracious  help  to  saving  faith  in  God. 

be  lifted  up,  that  whosoever  believeth  Jesus  Christ   was  to   him    God's  own 

in  Him  should   not  perish,  but  have  way  of  helping  His  people  to  the  trust 

eternal   life."      The   eunuch   said,    "  I  in  Him  which  saves.     Peter  wrote  his 

believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God."  epistle  for  Gentile  Christians,  as  dis- 

The  jailor  at  Philippi  was  required  to  tinguished  from  Jewish  Christians.     It 

**  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  was  he  who   opened   the  door  to  the 

he  might  be  saved."     The  apostle  John  Gentiles  in  recognising  the  Christian 

declares,  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  faith   and   standing   of    Cornelius   the 

life."    It  is  perfectly  certain  that  Peter  centurion.     His  epistle  is  addressed  to 

could  have  had  no  intention  of  setting  the  "  strangers  scattered  abroad,"  and 

aside,    or    in    any   way   dishonouring,  we  may  properly  look  for  some  precise 

Christ,  when  he  put  the  truth  in  the  adaptations  of  the  Christian  truths  to 

particular   way   in   which  we   find   it  their  circumstances  and  points  of  view, 

presented  in  our  text.     How,  then,  can  For  the  Jew,  who  knows  God,  the  one 

we  set  out  the  harmony  of  these  two  living  God,  the  truth  could  be  put  in 

difiering  kinds  of  statement.    Our  faith  this    form  by    the   great,   the    Divine 

is  to  be  in  Christ.     And  yet  our  faith  Teacher  :  *'  Ye  believe  in  God ;  believe 

is,  through  Christ,  to  be  in  God.     This  also  in  Me."      "  This   is   life  eternal, 

much  is  quite  clear :  the  first,  and  the  to   know   Thee   the   only    true    God." 

most  absolutely  universal  of  all  truths  For  the  Gentile,  who  only  comes  upon 

is,   that  man's  blessedness  comes,  and  the  right  knowledge  of  God  through 

can   only  come,  out  of   trusting  God.  the   revelation   which   centres   in   the 

Adam,  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  "  Man    Christ  Jesus,"  the   truth   can 

Isaac,  Jacob,  all  lived  before  the  Mosaic  best  be  put  in  this  form  by  the  dis- 

period,  and  they  believed  God,  and  it  ciples    of   the  great  Teacher  :    "  Who 

was  counted  to  them  for  righteousness,  by  Him  do  believe  in  God,  that  raised 

The   foundation    law    of    Mosaism    is.  Him    up   from    the    dead."      Gentiles 

**  Thou  shalt  love  the    Lord  thy  God  must  be  set  looking  to  Christ  as  the 

with  all  thine  heart."     But  love  im-  sole  medium  through  which  the  right, 

plies  a  foregoing  faith,  on  which  alone  the    worthy    knowledge    of    God    can 

the  love  can  rest.     The  psalms  are  full  come.    There  is  a  sense  in  which,  being 

of  expressions  of  trust,  but  they  are  Christianly   educated,   we  occupy   the 

47 


CHAP.  I. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


place  of  the  Jew.  We  come  into  per- 
sonal relations  with  Christianity  through 
a  previous  suitable  apprehension  of  God; 
and  yet  we  may  more  truly  be  said  to 
follow  along  the  line  of  the  Gentile ; 
for  it  is  only  through  our  Lord's 
humanity  that  we  can  ever  gain  the 
right  impression  of  His  Divinity.  It 
must  be  man  first,  then  the  God-man. 
The  partaker  of  flesh  and  blood  seen 
at  last  to  be  "  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh."  Personal  religion  of  trustful 
love  and  devotion  to  Christ,  leading  us 
into  saving  and  sanctifying  relations 
with  God — the  One,  the  Triune  God. 
More  or  less  distinctly  there  can  be 
traced  three  stages  in  the  growth  of 
Christian  experience.  There  are  three 
steps  in  Christian  faith.  By  faith  we 
come,  in  a  regular  advance,  to  appre- 
hend three  things.  1.  Christ.  2.  God's 
relation  to  Christ.  3.  God.  Christian 
experience  arrives  at  its  perfection 
when  God  is  "all  in  all."  On  the 
Mount  of  Transfiguration,  when  the 
cloud  had  passed,  the  disciples  saw 
"  Jesus  only."  On  the  Mount  of  Beati- 
fication, when  all  the  cloud  shadows  of 
earth  shall  have  passed,  the  disciples  of 
Jesus  will  see  *'  God  only."  *'  Then 
shall  the  Son  also  Himself  be  subject 
unto  Him  that  put  all  things  under 
Him,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all." 

I.  The  first  stage  of  faith  is  faith 
in  Jesus  Christ. — You  cannot  want 
me  either  to  show,  or  to  prove,  or  to 
vindicate  the  fact  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  the  most  prominent  place  in  the 
New  Testament,  in  preaching,  in 
teaching,  in  thinking,  in  writing,  or  in 
early  religious  experience.  If  there  is 
anything  self-evident,  that  is.  Fully, 
heartily,  rejoicingly  acknowledging  that 
fact,  there  is,  nevertheless,  something 
very  remarkable  that  comes  into  view 
when  we  come  to  study  it  carefully. 
Christ  always  puts  the  Father  before 
Himself.  He  never  proposes  to  absorb 
the  faith  and  love  of  His  disciples.  He 
receives  them  only  that  thus  He  might 
help  the  disciples  into  the  love  and 
trust  of  the  Father.  He  says,  "  My 
Father  that  dwelleth  in  Me,  He  doeth 
the  works."      *'  My  Father  is  greater 

48 


than  I."  **Your  heavenly  Father 
knoweth  what  things  ye  have  need 
of."  "  I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and 
the  life  ;  no  man  cometh  to  the  Father 
but  by  Me."  "  I  do  always  the  things 
that  please  Him."  At  first  Christ  is 
presented  to  the  seeking  soul,  and  He 
fills  all  his  vision.  And  we  could 
dwell  long  and  lovingly  on  the  ways  in 
which  Jesus  Christ  is  fitted  for  winning 
the  love  and  trust  of  men.  He  appeals 
to  man's  understanding  by  the  truths 
which  He  reveals  and  teaches — mo- 
mentous truths  concerning  God  and 
man,  and  sin,  and  salvation,  and 
righteousness,  and  the  future.  He 
appeals  to  the  reverence  of  men  by  the 
miracles,  which  declare  that  in  Him  is 
the  great  power  of  God.  He  appeals 
to  men's  consciences  by  presenting  the 
standard  of  the  perfect  human  life. 
He  appeals  to  men's  affections  by  His 
Divine  tenderness,  and  pitying  gentle- 
ness, and  love.  He  sways  the  deepest 
emotions  of  men  by  the  persuasions  of 
His  cross.  Jesus  Christ,  in  His  human 
manifestation,  in  His  earthly  life  of' 
sympathy  and  of  suffering,  has  a  strange 
power  on  us.  He  seems  at  first  to  fill 
the  whole  foreground,  and  sways  our 
whole  manhood  toward  faith.  Peter 
speaks  the  truth  for  us  when  He  speaks 
of  Jesus  Christ  in  this  way.  "  Whom, 
having  not  seen,  ye  love;  in  whom, 
though  now  ye  see  Him  not,  yet  be- 
lieving, ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory." 

II.  The  second  stage  of  faith  is  faith 
in  God's  relation  to  Christ. — Once 
setting  our  heart  on  Christ,  our  faith 
wants  to  know  better  Him  on  whom  it 
rests.  Evidently  there  are  more  and 
deeper  things  in  Jesus  Christ  than  the 
soul  can  see  in  its  first  apprehensions 
of  Him ;  than  even  the  apostles  could 
find  out  while  they  were  with  their 
Master  in  the  limited  fellowship  of  the 
flesh.  Many  of  their  fuller  and  deeper 
apprehensions  come  out  to  view  in 
their  epistles,  which  are  precisely  this : 
soul-readings  of  the  mystery  of 
Christ,  in  the  illumination  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Only  to  one  point  of  this  can 
our    attention    now    be    given.       In 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I,  PETER.  chap.  i. 


Christian  life  there  is  a  strong,  master-  I  observed  that  the  young  Christians 
ful  instinct,  which    makes   us   linger,  prayed  to  Jesus,  and  the  old  Christ- 
with  chief  interest  and  concern,  about  ians   prayed   to    God.      And   I   knew 
the  records  of  our  Lord's  resurrection.  they    both    meant    the    same    thing. 
It  is  not  pecuHar  to  us  in  these  days.  In     the    young     Christians'     prayers 
The  evangelists  did ;  the  apostles  did.  God    was   hardly   mentioned.     In  the 
Paul  writes,  "It  is   Christ  that  died,  old     Christians'    prayers     Jesus     was 
yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again."    ''Now  hardly  mentioned.     There  is  the  sign 
is    Christ   risen   from   the   dead,    and  of  the  growth  of  the  Christian  know- 
become  the   firstfruits   of    them   that  ledge     and     experience.      We    begin, 
slept."     Now,  what  is  it  comes  to  view  and   we   see    Jesus,   and    God     is    in 
when  we  let  the  apostles  guide  us  into  Jesus.      We    grow,    and     more    and 
the    mysteries    of    the    resurrection  1  more  we  see  God,  until  at  last  we  see 
This  :.  God  was  in  the  closest  relation  God  only,  and   Jesus  is  in  God.      It 
to  the  Redeemer's  work.      Sometimes  remains  still  true  that  all  the  forms 
it  is  indicated  that  Christ  raised  Him-  of    thought   are   taken    from    Christ, 
self,  by  His  own  inherent  power  ;  but  The  Christ-help  to  right  thought,  and 
usually  it  is  intimated,  as  in  our  text,  view,  and  feeling,  never  passes  away ; 
that  God  raised  Him.     The  salvation  but  really  the  soul's  resting  has  come 
was  God's,  but  it  was  wrought  out  by  to  be  in  God.     And  thus,  in  the  most 
Christ,  and  in  Him.     The  suggestions  spiritual    fashion,    Christ's    work    of 
of  resurrection  and  ascension  are  full  restoration   is   fully  accomplished   for 
of  God,  and  they  open  to  us  the  larger,  the  individual.     We  apprehend  God  in 
richer  meanings  of  familiar  texts,  such  Christ,  we  trust  God,  and  so  Christ  is 
as  these  :| "  God  was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  means  by  which  all  Christ's  brothers 
the  world  unto  Himself,  not  imputing  are     brought    to    His    own    son-Uke 
their   trespasses   unto  them."      "God  obedience  to  God,  and  trust  in  Him. 
commendeth   His   love  toward  us,   in  Our  faith  and  hope  at  last  are  fully  set 
that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  on  God,  and  the  law  of  life  is  fulfilled 
died  for  us."     "  God  so  loved  the  world,  — God  is  become  "  all  in  all."     There 
that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son."  are  things  suggested  by  this  setting  of 
"  Herein   is   love,   not  that  we   loved  truth,  on  which  I  invite  you  to  dwell, 
God,  but  that  He  loved  us,  and  sent  meditatively,  in  the  quiet  hours  of  this 
His  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  day.      1.    See  the  perfectness  of   our 
sins."       In    the    second    stage    faith  communion  with  all  the  Old  Testament 
embraces    both    God   and    Christ,    as  saints.     A  fellowship,  not  in  the  means 
working  together  in  the  accomplishment  by  which  they  and  we  are  helped  to 
of  human  salvation.  God,  but  a  fellowship  in  the  end.     For, 
III.  The  third  stage  of  faith  is  faith  whether  by  angel -manifestation,  sym- 
in  God,  which  swallows  up,  absorbs,  bolical  ceremony,  prophetic  declaration, 
the  faith  in  Jesus. — But  this  stage  of  or  the  human  life  and  teachings  of  the 
faith  is  usually  reached  unconsciously.  Son  of  God,  we  are  all  moving  to  one 
Many  an  advanced,  experienced  Christ-  goal ;  for  us  all  there  is  but  one  soul-rest 
ian  stands  high  up  on  this  level  to-day,  — it  is  the  rest  that  comes  from  the  full 
but  does  not  know  it,  and  would  be  trust,  which  carries  our  whole  selves, 
half  frightened  if  any  one  were  to  tell  and  lays  them  on  the  everlasting  arms 
him  that  it  was  so  with  him.     When  of  God.     Enoch  lay  there.     Abraham 
I    was    a    youth,   and    in    the    early  lay  there.  Moses  lay  there.  Jesus  Him- 
periods  of  religious  experience,  I  used  self  lay  there.     The  whole  round  world 
to  attend  regularly  the  prayer-meetings,  is  bound  about  with  this  golden  chain 
and  found  them  specially  helpful.     I  of  trust  in  God.     One  way  or  another, 
remember  being  struck  with  something  this  way  and  every  way,  the  souls  of 
which    has   given   a   key-note   to   the  men  are  being  caught,  turned,  helped 
Christian  thinking  of   my  whole  life,  to  trust  in  God,     2.   Dwell  lovingly  on 

»  49 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


the  preciousness  of  that  particular 
agency  by  which  we  have  been  thus 
caught,  and  drawn  into  our  full  trusting 
in  God.  I  only  heard  Mr.  Spurgeon 
preach  a  few  times,  but  on  one  occasion 
he  seemed  to  me  to  surpass  himself, 
and  thrilled  us  all  with  the  holy  passion 
of  his  utterance,  childlike  as  the  sei  mon 
was  in  its  simplicity.  He  had  taken 
as  his  text  the  words,  *'  This  is  my 
beloved ;  this  is  my  friend."  And  the 
sermon  was  just  a  series  of  boastings 
and  gloryings  over  Jesus,  each  section 
closing  with  the  appeal,  "  *  This  is  my 
Beloved,'  will  you  make  Him  yours  V 
I  should  like  to  have  my  time  open 
still,  so  that  I  might  thus  boast  over 
Jesus  my  Saviour  before  you  now. 
He  is  "worthy  of  more  glory  than 
Moses."  Poets  did  but  sing  out  the 
deepest  feeling  of  all  loving  souls,  when 
they  called  Him — 

"  Thou  highest,  sweetest,  fairest  One 
That  eyes  have  seen,  or  angels  known." 

3.  But  shall  we  be  content  to  stay  with 
the  human  manifestation  of  Christ, 
with  His  life  and  with  His  death  ?  Or 
shall  we  be  willing  to  let  Him  lead  us 
on  to  the  holier  mysteries  of  His 
resurrection,  and  show  us  that,  trusting 
Him,  we  are  really  trusting  God,  who 
"raised  Him  from  the  dead."  Are 
you  willingly  staying  down  on  the  low- 
levels  of  spiritual  apprehension  1  or  are 
you  climbing  the  heights  where  the 
air  is  pure  and  clear,  and  the  soul  can 
see  the  eternal  realities,  and  even  the 
Christ-garment  of  God  has  fallen  off 
Him,  and  the  sky  is  pure  blue  from 
rim  to  rim — not  one  cloud  sails  across 
to  throw  a  shadow,  and  you  think,  you 
feel,  you  know,  that  Christ  has  **  de- 
livered up  the  kingdom  to  the  Father  "  ? 
You  see  God  only,  and  God  is  all  in 
all.  It  is  heaven  all  about  you  on 
those  heights  of  spiritual  experience. 
At  last,  helped  by  Christ — so  sweetly 
helped  by  Christ — ^you  have  come  to 
this,  and  this  has  gained  the  forever 
stamp — 

"  Your  faith  and  hope  are  in  God." 

Ver.  22.  Fervent  Love  of  the  Brethren. 
— Selfishness,  or  the  exaggerated  love 

50 


of  self,  was  the  source  and  seal  of  the 
fall  of  man.  Love  of  God  in  Christ, 
through  the  power  of  the  Spirit ;  and 
love  of  mankind,  but  most  of  all,  love 
of  those  with  whom  God's  children 
shall  dwell  through  all  eternity — this 
is  peculiarly  and  pre-eminently  the 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  St.  Peter  is 
admonishing  the  brethren  to  abide  in 
Christian  kindness  and  affection ;  and 
he  bids  them  consider  the  very  purpose 
that  God  has  wrought. 

I.  The  work  accomplished. — "See- 
ing ye  have  purified  your  souls."  The 
grand  point  is  having  the  heart  good. 
The  heart  is  impure.  What  vain 
thoughts,  evil  inclinations,  presump- 
tuous actions,  vain  fancies,  are  con- 
tinually gushing  forth,  as  from  a  deep 
stream !  To  be  pure  in  heart  is  to  be 
pure  in  life.  Man  is  not  a  passive 
subject,  but  an  active  agent.  There 
must  be  co-operation,  on  our  part,  with 
the  influence  of  the  mighty  Spirit  of 
God,  otherwise  there  can  be  no  purify- 
ing of  the  soul. 

II.  The  instrument  of  its  accom- 
plishment.— "  Ye  obey  the  truth."  It 
is  a  law  of  almost  universal  obtain- 
ing that,  as  we  can  do  nothing  without 
God,  so,  generally  He  will  do  nothing 
without  us.  He  acts  on  the  heart  in 
order  to  achieve  what  He  would  have 
done ;  and  so,  in  all  the  business  of 
life,  we  have  certain  means  to  employ ; 
and  if  we  neglect  them,  or  try  to  sub- 
stitute our  own,  we  have  our  toil  in 
vain.  The  Divinely  constituted  means 
to  the  purifying  of  men's  souls  is  the 
truth.  When  men  are  disposed  to  find 
fault  with  God's  Word,  and  to  discover 
imperfections  in  it.  His  people  should 
honour  it,  cling  to  it,  maintain  it, 
exalt  it,  cherish  it.  To  be  immortal, 
great,  and  good,  let  a  man  study  God's 
Word.  The  grand  point  is  to  look 
beyond  the  instrument  to  the  omnipo- 
tent power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

III.  One  special  result  of  this  work. 
— "  Unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren." 
It  is  not  merely  love  and  charity  to  all 
men,  but  specially  and  specifically  love 
of  those  united  to  us  in  a  new  birth,  in 
new  relationship  to  God,  many  mem- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap.  I. 


bers  in  one  body.  This  yearning  flowers  for  barrenness  and  death.  The 
affection  is  one  of  the  most  blessed  Word  of  God  endures  for  ever.  It  can- 
signs  that  a  man  has  purified  his  soul,  not  be  likened  to  anything  on  which 
by  obeying  the  truth.  rests  the  earthly  stamp.  It  is  not 
IV.  The  beautiful  exhortation. —  even  like  the  giant  trees,  which  grow 
"  See  tbat  ye  love  one  another  with  a  on  while  the  giass  and  the  flowers  of  a 
pure  heart,  fervently."  Do  not  mis-  hundred  summers  flourish  and  fade 
take  the  injunction.  We  must  not  beneath  them ;  for  at  last  even  the 
confound  the  precious  jewel  with  the  trees  fail  to  respond  to  the  wakening 
metal  in  which  the  jewel  is  placed,  spring-breath,  and  the  great  trunks 
"  Fervently."  With  a  pure,  unselfish  and  branches  crumble  down  to  dust, 
love,  with  no  sinister  motive.  "  With-  and  pass  away.  It  is  not  even  like  the 
out  dissimulation."  There  must  be  no  mighty  hills,  which,  towering  high 
appearance,  no  pretence,  but  the  above  us,  seem  to  have  their  found- 
reality.  "  Fervent,"  not  cold.  How  ations  in  the  very  centre  of  the  earth, 
fervent  in  heaven,  where  all  tin  and  They  also  are  weathering  down,  and 
dross  are  purged  away,  the  soul  will  shall  one  day  change  and  pass.  It  is 
be,  swallowed  up  in  the  love  of  God  !  not  even  like  the  vast  firmament,  which 

1.  If  you  desire  to  he  holy  and  happy,  keeps,  through  summer  and  through 
set  about  it  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  winter,  its  broad  expanse  of  blue, 
Jesus,  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  and  in  though  clouds  all  blackness,  or  clouds 
obedience. — You  may  judge  materially  silver -tinged,  sweep  in  ever-varying 
how  far  the  work  is  progressing,  if  you  shapes  across  it ;  for  at  last  **  the 
feel  a  glowing  love  to  the  Father  for  heavens  shall  pass  away  with  a  great 
Jesus'  f-ake,  and  desire  as  you  have  noise."  The  Word  of  God  is  His  reve- 
opportunity  to  do  good  unto  all  men."  lation — His  entire  revelation.     Not  the 

2.  We  must  not  attempt  to  do  this  in  Bible  only,  but  every  testimony  that  He 
our  own  strength  and  resolution. —  is  pleased  to  make  to  men  of  His  will. 
Philanthropy,  intellectual  culture.  Every  utterance  of  God  is  permanent ; 
moral  training,  are  beautiful,  but  there  it  endures  up  to  the  very  uttermost 
must   be  the  power  of  the   Spirit   of  limit  of  necessity  for  it. 

God.    3.  You  must  cultivate  that  spirit  I.  The   transient  character  of  all 

always  and  ever. — Canon  Hugh  Stowell,  earthly    things. — Everything    has     a 

M.A.  body  and  a  soul;  a  form  that  can  be 

apprehended  by  our  senses,  that  we 
Vers.  24,  25.  The  Transitory  and  the  may  see  and  touch,  and  a  mysterious 
PerTYianent. — This  passage  is  brought  and  invisible  subst  no  3,  which  is  its 
before  our  minds  every  early  summer  real  self,  and  of  which  the  form  is  only 
time,  by  the  sight  and  smell  of  the  the  expression.  George  Macdonald's 
fields.  The  "  fashion  of  this  world  saying  may  be  applied  to  things  as  well 
passeth  a\\ay."  "  The  Word  of  the  as  to  persons.  *'  We  are  accustomed 
Lord  endureth  for  ever."  Away  from  to  say  that  we  are  bodies,  and  have 
changing,  passing,  transitory  earth  we  souls ;  whereas  we  should  rather  say, 
may  look  upward  to  God,  saying,  "  He  we  are  souls  and  have  bodies."  Within 
liveth  ;  and  blessed  be  my  Rock."  St.  everything  there  is  a  soul  that  abides 
Peter  evidently  had  in  mind  the  — that  is  its  real  self — however  its 
poetical  passage  in  the  fortieth  chapter  form  may  change.  The  grass  of  each 
of  Isaiah.  The  figure  of  the  grass  is  springtime  falls  before  the  mower,  but 
sufficiently  impressive  to  us  who  see  the  spirit  of  the  grass  abides  through 
the  swathes  lying  in  the  path  of  the  all  the  generations.  The  milHon 
mower;  but  it  is  more  effective  in  the  flowers  of  gay  and  pleasant  summer- 
East,  where  the  sudden  blasts  of  time  fade  and  drop  away,  but  the  work 
scorching  wind  burn  up  the  vegetation  of  the  flowers,  in  the  toned  and 
in  an  hour,  and  change  freshness  and  scented  air,  and  in  the  pleasure  they 

51 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


give,    abides    long    after    they    have  our  Church  life.     In  a  few  years  a  con- 
passed,  gregation  entirely  passes  away.    2.  It 

,     ,    „              ,  is  true  of  the  very  forms  and  modes  in 

"The^niy  dies  not,  when  both  flower  and  ^j^.^j^    ^^^    ^^^  ^^^.^^^   ^^^  j^^^p   ^^^ 

Fade,  and  are  strewed  upon  the  cbill,  sad  Wess    another.       Some  men's  ways  of 

ground ;  presenting  God's  truth  to  us  do  help  us 

Gone  down  for  shelter  to  its  mother-earth,  more  than  the  ways  of  others.      But 

'Twill  rise,  re-bloom,  and  shed  its  fra-  ^^^^  ^^^  spiritual  helpers  do  not  stay 

grance  round.  ^,^          ^ 

with  us  long. 

All  nature  seems  to  echo  the  message  II.  The  permanent  character  of  all 
of  the  grass.  The  winter  snow  falls  Divine  things. — Especially  of  all  Divine 
lightly,  and  lies  in  its  white  purity —  revelations  and  declarations,  for  these 
mystic,  wonderful — over  all  the  land.  are  properly  gathered  into  the  term, 
But  so  soon  it  soils,  and  browns,  and  the  "  "Word  of  God."  Everything  that 
sinks,  and  passes  all  away  !  The  spring  speaks  to  our  souls  of  God  is  a  re  vela - 
flowers  that  come,  responsive  to  the  tion  to  us.  It  may  be  a  touch  of 
low  sunshine  and  the  gentle  wind,  are  nature.  It  may  be  only  a  pure  white 
so  fragile,  they  stay  with  us  only  such  flower.  It  may  be  the  pale  gold  and 
a  little  while,  and  then  they  pass  away  !  green  of  a  late  sunset.  It  may  be  the 
The  summer  blossoms  multiply,  and  snowy  crest  of  an  Alpine  mountain, 
stand  thick  over  the  ground,  and  they  lying  still  and  pure  against  the 
seem  so  strong  in  their  rich,  deep  summer's  deep  blue  sky.  It  may  be 
colours;  yet  they,  too,  wither  and  droop,  the  weird  mist  of  the  gloaming,  creep- 
and  pass  away.  The  autumn  fruits  ing  over  the  landscape.  It  may  be  the 
cluster  on  the  branches,  and  grow  big  glimpse  down  some  woodland  vale  of 
in  their  ripening,  but  they,  too,  are  the  "  many  twinkling  sea."  It  may  be 
plucked  in  due  season,  and  pass  away.  the  solemn  shadows  of  the  secluded 
The  gay  dress  of  varied  leafage  is  soon  mountain  tarn.  It  may  be  the  great 
stripped  off  by  the  wild  winds  and  passes  thunder-noise  of  God,  echoing  through 
away.  Down  every  channel  of  the  the  valleys.  It  may  be  the  voice  of 
hillside  is  borne  the  crumblings  wasted  some  fellow  man,  translating  into 
from  the  "  everlasting  hills  "  that  human  words  for  us  the  great  thoughts 
really  are  passing  away.  The  hard  of  God.  Howsoever  the  Word  of  God 
trap  rocks  that  hold  in  the  wintry  sea  may  come  into  our  souls,  it  is  true  for 
are  yet  worn  down  with  its  ceaseless  ever.  All  things  that  our  souls  hear, 
chafing,  and  are  passing  away.  And  and  feel,  and  know,  are  Divine,  and 
man  ! — does  he  differ  from  the  things  permanent,  and  eternal  things.  When 
in  the  midst  of  which  he  is  set  ?  Nay,  the  very  soul  of  nature  speaks  to  our 
what  a  little  thing  is  human  life,  even  souls,  its  message  is  Divine  and  eternal, 
at  the  longest  !  We  can  scarcely  reach  Have  you  forgotten  when  you  first 
to  do  anything  great,  or  to  get  within  heard  the  voice  of  the  flowers  ?  They 
sight  of  a  life's  great  purpose,  before  lived,  and  spoke  to  you  of  God.  Have 
the  call  comes,  bidding  us  away.  It  is  you  forgotten  the  quiet  lying  on  the 
not  only  true  of  us,  it  is  true  of  our  country>  hill-side,  when  lost  strength 
worh.  All  the  glory — all  the  good-  was  slowly  returning,  and  in  the  still- 
liness — of  man's  genius  and  enterprise  ness,  the  very  music  of  the  earth 
and  effort — it  is  all  "  as  the  flower  of  seemed  to  be  heard,  creation  hymning 
the  field."  Man's  strength,  and  wisdom,  its  chorus,  *'  Praise  God,  praise  God  !  " 
and  riches,  and  learning,  and  honour,  When  God  speaks  to  us  by  Divine 
and  beauty,  and  science,  and  art — all  providence,  the  message  is  permanent; 
are  subject  to  change  and  decay.  The  our  souls  get  it,  and  keep  it  for  ever, 
moth  and  rust  eat  into  them,  and  the  The  spiritual  influences  of  our  life- 
thief  steals  them  away.  This  is —  experiences  are  eternal.  That  revela- 
1.  Impressively  seen  in  the  changes  of  tion  of  redemption — if  it  is  really  made 

52 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I  PETER. 


CHAP.  1. 


to  our  souls-^is  a  permanent  revela- 
tion. Everything  that  pleads  in  us  for 
duty  is  eternal,  because  all  such  things 
bear  on  character,  and  character 
endures ;  its  flower  never  withers  nor 
falls ;  God  puts  upon  it  the  immortal 
stamp,  and  crowns  it  with  the  eternal 
righteousness.  Every  voice  that  brings 
truth  home  to  the  soul  is  permanent. 
Every  uplifting  of  the  mystery  of  being 
that  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  reality,  and 
a  new  hold  on  God,  is  permanent.  All 
God's  comfortings  abide  with  us.  The 
troubles  pass,  but  the  "  everlasting 
arms "  stay  underneath  us.  God's 
comforts  suit  the  moment,  but  they 
last  for  ever.  And  when  God  kindles 
hope,  it  is  hope  that  cannot  disappoint, 
that  will  never  make  ashamed.  In 
the  "  Life  of  Dr.  Horace  Bushnell,"  it 
is  stated  that  the  following  words  of  his 
were  found  dimly  pencilled  on  a  stray 


sheet  of  paper.  Referring  to  the  time 
of  his  infancy,  when  he  "  came  out  in 
this  rough  battle  with  winds,  winters, 
and  wickedness,"  he  says,  "  My  God, 
and  my  good  mother,  both  heard  the 
cry,  and  went  to  the  task  of  strengthen- 
ing me  and  comforting  me  together, 
and  were  able  ere  long  to  get  a  smile 
upon  my  face.  .  .  .  Long  years  ago  she 
vanished ;  but  God  stays  by  me  still, 
embraces  me  in  my  gray  hairs  as 
tenderly  and  carefully  as  she  did  in  my 
infancy,  and  gives  to  me,  as  my  joy, 
and  the  principal  glory  of  my  life, 
that  He  lets  me  know  Him,  and  helps 
me  with  real  confidence  to  call  Him 
my  Father."  It  is  true,  but  we  need 
not  trouble  over  it — "  the  fashion  of 
this  world  passeth  away."  It  is  true, 
and  we  will  join  in  saying  it  with  an 
exceeding  great  joy — *'  The  Word  of 
our  God  shall  stand  for  ever." 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  I. 


Ver.  5.  Kept  by  God.— The  Rev.  J.  H. 
Brooks,  D.D.,  says  :  "  If  your  final  salvation 
depends  on  your  holding  out  or  holding  on, 
you  will  most  certainly  be  lost.  Two  ministers 
were  conducting  a  meeting  together,  and  at 
its  close  one  of  them  said,  '  1  picked  up  a 
Dublin  tract  on  a  railroad  train  the  other 
day,  and  with  great  interest  and  profit,  al- 
though it  teaches  a  doctrine  I  don't  believe.' 
'What  is  the  doctrine?'  asked  Lis  friend. 
'The  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of  the 
saints,'  he  answered.  '  Neither  do  I  believe 
it,'  was  the  reply.  *  Is  it  possible  ? '  ex- 
claimed the  first.  '  I  thought  you  were  de- 
cided in  your  belief  of  it.'  '  No,  I  am  not.  I 
once  believed  it,  but  since  I  have  come  to 
know  more  about  the  saints,  and  especially 
about  myself,  I  believe  all  of  us  would  go  to 
the  devil  if  left  to  ourselves ;  but  I  believe 
very  firmly  in  the  perseverance  of  the  Lord  ; ' 
and  they  shook  hands  to  show  their  fellow- 
ship in  this  truth." 

Vers.  6,  7.  The  Purpose  for  which  Trials 
are  Sent. — When  Joseph  Alleine  and  seven 
other  ministers,  and  forty  private  Christians, 
were  committed  to  the  prison  of  Ilchester 
about  two  hundred  years  ago,  Alleine  said 
much  to  cheer  them.  Among  other  sweet 
things,  he  said  :  "  Shall  I  tell  you  a  story  I 
read  ?  There  was  a  certain  king  that  had  a 
pleasant  grove,  and  that  he  might  make  it 
every  way  delightful  to  him,  he  caused  some 
birds  to  be  caught,  and  to  be  kept  in  cages 


till  they  had  learned  sundry  sweet  and 
artificial  tunes.  And  when  they  were  per- 
fect in  their  lessons,  he  let  them  abroad  out 
of  their  cages  into  the  grove,  that  he  might 
hear  them  singing  those  pleasant  tunes,  and 
teaching  them  to  other  birds  of  milder  note. 
Brethren,"  he  added,  "  the  Lord  is  that  king, 
this  grove  is  His  Church,  these  birds  are 
yourselves,  this  cage  is  the  prison  ;  and  God 
hath  sent  you  hither  that  you  should  learn 
the  sweet  and  pleasant  notes  of  His  praise." 

Ver.  7.  Trial  of  Faith. — When  a  founder 
has  cast  his  bell,  he  does  not  at  once  put  it 
into  the  steeple,  but  tries  it  with  the  hammer, 
and  beats  it  on  every  side,  to  see  if  there  be 
a  flaw.  So  when  Christ  converts  a  man.  He 
does  not  at  once  convey  him  to  heaven,  but 
suffers  him  first  to  be  beaten  upon  by  many 
temptations,  and  then  exalts  him  to  his 
crown. 

Ver.  8.  Loving  the  Unseen. — A  mother  in 
England  taught  her  little  child  that  his 
father  was  away  in  India.  As  soon  as  he 
could  lisp  his  father's  name,  his  picture  was 
shown  him,  and  he  was  taught  to  say,  "  That's 
my  papa."  Though  he  had  nev(  r  seen  his 
father  to  know  him,  yet  through  that  mother's 
faithful  teaching  he  had  learned  to  love 
him.  One  day,  unexpectedly  to  all,  the 
father  returned  from  India,  and  as  he  entered 
the  hall  door,  his  little  son  was  the  first  to 
greet  him,  exclaiming  as  he  did  so, "  My  dear 

53 


CfiAP.  i. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


papa,  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you."  So  the  Bible 
pictures  before  us  Christ,  our  Elder  Brother, 
"  whom,  having  not  seen,  we  love,"  and  of 
whom  we  sing,  "  He's  my  Saviour."  By-and- 
bye,  when  we  behold  Him  face  to  face,  we 
shall  know  Him  and  meet  Him,  not  as  a 
stranger,  but  as  a  friend. 

Faith  and  Reason. — An  old  writer  says 
Faith  and  Reason  may  be  compared  to 
two  travellers.  Faith  is  like  a  man  in  full 
health,  who  can  walk  his  twenty  or  thirty 
miles  at  a  time  without  suffering  ;  Reason  is 
like  a  little  child,  who  can  only  with  difficulty 
accomplish  three  or  four  miles.  Well,  says 
this  old  writer,  on  a  given  day  Reason  says 
to  Faith,  "  0  good  Faith,  let  me  walk  with 
thee."  Faith  replies,  "  O  Reason,  thou  canst 
never  walk  with  me."  Well,  they  set  out  to- 
gether ;  when  they  come  to  a  deep  river. 
Reason  says,  "  I  can  never  ford  this."  When 
they  reach  a  lofty  mountain,  there  is  the 
same  exclamation  of  despair;  and  in  such 
cases  Faith,  in  order  not  to  leave  Reason 
behind,  is  obliged  to  carry  him  on  his  back ; 
and,  adds  the  writer,  "  Oh,  what  a  luggage  is 
Reason  to  Faith  1 " 

Faith  as  the  Eye  of  the  Soul. — Faith  is  a 
grace  that  has  both  its  birth  and  life  in  light, 
and  in  that  light  it  sees  light.  Faith  is  not 
only  a  hand,  but  an  eye,  to  the  soul,  and  hath 
its  sights  both  in  way  of  aspect  and  prospect, 
not  only  to  look  on  things  immediately  before 
it,  but  to  look  on  thiugs  far  hence  and  to 
come ;  it  can  see  things  that  are  invisible. 
Some  things  are  invisible  in  respect  of  their 
nature  ;  so  God  is,  and  so  spirits  are.  Some 
things  are  invisible  in  respect  of  their  distance, 
they  are  not  yet  present  with  us,  but  are 
things  to  come  ;  faith  can  see  both  these. 
It  is  true  we  have  not  the  sight  of  sense,  but 
we  have  a  sight  as  noble,  yea,  and  in  some 
respects,  more  excellent  than  that  of  sense. 
The  sight  of  faith  is  more  full  and  certain 
than  that  of  sense.  We  have,  indeed,  not  a 
perfect  sight,  but  we  have  such  a  sight  which 
God  hath  vouchsafed  to  His  poor  ones  in  the 
world,  that  by  the  power  of  it  they  may  be 
enabled  to  walk  through  all  the  conditions, 
how  dark  and  sad  soever. — Symonds  (1651). 

Ver.  16.  An  African  Figure  of  Holiness. — 
Dr.  Livingstone  once  asked  a  Bechuana  what 
he  understood  by  the  word  "  holiness " 
(foitsepho).  He  answered,  "  When  copious 
showers  have  descended  during  the  night, 
and  all  the  earth  and  leaves  and  cattle  are 
washed  clean,  and  the  sun  rising  shows  a 


drop  of  dew  on  every  blade  of  grass,  and  the 
air  breathes  fresh — that  is  holiness. 

Ver.  19.  The  Precious  Blood. — One  evening 
two  soldiers  were  placed  as  sentries  at  the 
opposite  ends  of  a  sallyport  or  long  passage, 
leading  from  the  rock  of  Gibraltar  to  the 
Spanish  territory.     One  of  them,  from  the 
reading  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  was  rejoic- 
ing in  God  his  Saviour ;  wlaile  the  other,  from 
the  same  cause,  was  in  a  state  of  deep  mental 
anxiety,  being  under  strong  convictions  of 
sin,  and  earnestly  seeking  deliverance  from 
the  load  of  guilt  that  was  pressing  upon  his 
conscience.     On  the  evening  alluded  to,  one 
of  the  officers,  who  had  been  out  dining,  was 
returning  to  the  garrison  at  a  late  hour,  and 
coming  up  to  the  sentry  on  the  outside  of  the 
sallyport,  and  who  was  the  soldier  recently 
converted,  he  asked,  as  usual,  for  the  watch- 
word.    The  man,  absorbed  in  meditation  on 
the  glorious  things  that  had  recently  been 
unfolded  to  him,  and  filled  with  devout  grati- 
tude and  love,  on  being  roused  from  his  mid- 
night reverie,  replied  to  the  officer's  chal- 
lenge with  the  words,  *'  The  precious  Mood  of 
Christ."     He  soon,  however,  recovered  his 
self-possession,  and  gave  the  correct  watch- 
word.    But  his  comrade,  who  was  anxiously 
seeking  the  Lord,  and  who  was  stationed  as 
sentry  at  the  other  or  inner  end  of  the  sally- 
port, a  passage  specially  adapted  for  the  con- 
veyance of   sound,   heard  the   words,  ^Hhe 
precious  blood  of  Christ,'''  mysteriously  borne 
upon  the  breeze  at  the  solemn  hour  of  mid- 
night.    The  words  came  home  to  his  heart 
as  a  voice  from  heaven  ;  the  load  of  guilt  was 
removed,  and  the  precious  blood  of  Christ 
spoke  peace  to  the  soul  of  the  sin-burdened 
soldier.     He  was  afterwards,  with  others  of 
his  regiment,  drafted  for  service  in  India, 
and  proceeded  to  the  island  of  Ceylon,  where 
a  long  career  of  usefulness  opened  up  before 
him,  and  where  he  became  the  honoured  in- 
strument, in  the  hands  of  the  Lord,  for  the 
completion  of  a  great  and  important  work. 
Soon  after  arriving  in  Ceylon,  his  discharge 
was  procured   from   his   regiment,  that  he 
might  fill  the  office  of  master  of  the  principal 
school  in  Colombo,  for  which  he  w^as  well 
qualified  by  a  good  education  in  early  life. 
He  soon  acquired  an  intimate  knowledge  of 
the  Cingalese  language,  and  as  a  translation 
of  the  Bible  into  that  tongue  was  lying  in 
an  unfinished  state,  owing  to  the  death  of 
the  individual  who  commenced  the  work,  he 
set  himself  to  the  task,  and  completed  the 
Cingalese  version  of  the  Scriptures,  which 
was  afterwards  printed  by  the  British  and 
Foreign  Bible  Society  in  four  quarto  volumes. 


54 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER.  chap.  ii. 


CHAPTER  II. 
CHRISTIAN  LIFE  CALLS  FOR  THE  PUTTING  AWAY  OF  EVILS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  Jewish  Christians  addressed  in  this  epistle  are  thought  of  as  "  born  again  "  into  the 
Christian  faith  and  life.  The  key-note  of  the  epistle  is  "  hath  begotten  us  again  "  (chap.  i.  3)  and 
"  being  bom  again  "  (chap.  i.  23).  The  idea  that  on  professing  faith  in  Christ  a  man  enters  on 
and  begins  a  new  life,  as  a  spiritual  babe,  in  a  spiritual  atmosphere,  in  which,  and  in  receipt 
of  spiritual  nourishment,  he  is  to  grow  up  into  the  fulness  of  the  spiritual  man  in  Christ,  is 
decidedly  Pauline.  But  St.  Peter  makes  a  special  application  of  it  to  the  Jews  who  became 
Christians,  and  might  plead  that  they  were  already  born  of  God,  and  that  Christianity 
involved  no  vital  change  in  their  standing  and  relations  ;  it  was  really  no  more  than  an 
unfolding,  or  reformation,  of  the  life  unto  God  which  they  already  had.  Both  St.  Paul  and 
8t.  Peter  distinctly  claim  for  the  Christian  profession  that  it  is  a  nev)  life,  beginning  with 
a  new  spiritual  birth,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  this  is  fully  apprehended,  the 
substance  of  the  epistle  will  be  understood  as  a  varied  help  toward  the  training  and  shaping 
and  nourishing  of  the  spiritual  babe  up  through  its  stages  of  growth,  and  the  ordering  of  the 
various  relations  into  which  the  babe  must  come  as  it  grows.  But  there  is  a  Jewish 
blending  of  figures  and  ideas  taken  from  the  old  dispensation  which  is  sometimes  a  little 
difficult  for  us  to  follow,  but  which  would  be  very  suggestive  to  those  familiar  with  Judaism, 
who  were  directly  addressed  in  the  epistle.  This  chapter  has  been  described  as  an  exhorta- 
tion to  realise  the  idea  of  the  new  Israel.  "  The  apostle  bids  them  put  away  all  elements  of 
disunion,  and  combine  into  a  new  Temple,  founded  on  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  and  into  a  new 
hierarchy  and  theocracy."  Personally  each  professor  of  faith  in  Christ  had  begun  a  new  life. 
Unitedly  those  who  professed  faith  in  Christ  constituted  a  newly  founded  race,  a  spiritual 
Israel,  a  kingdom  of  priests. 

Ver.  1.  Wherefore. — Because  the  new  life  has  begun  for  you.  There  is  something  befitting 
that  new  life.  There  are  things  associated  with  the  old  life  which  are  manifestly  unfitting, 
and  must  be  put  away.  The  things  mentioned  are  precisely  the  besetting  sins  of  the  Jewish 
character.  Laying  aside. — The  counsel  implies  recognition  of  their  power  to  deal  both  with 
wrong  feelings  toward  others  and  with  wrong  expressions  of  such  feelings.  Literally  it  is 
"  having  laid  aside,"  and  it  is  implied  that  this  is  involved  in  the  old  life  being  ended,  and 
the  new  life  begun.  This  is  what  ought  to  be.  St.  Peter  urges  them  to  make  things  be  as 
they  ought  to  be  (compare  St.  Paul's  teaching  concerning  the  lingering  corruptions  of  the  "  old 
man,"  as  in  Rom.  vii.).  Malice. — Generally  wickedness,  or  disposition  to  injure  others ; 
perhaps  resentment  of  supposed  wrong,  which  was  a  characteristic  evil  of  the  Jewish  mind. 
The  relations  of  the  Jewish  Christians  and  Jews  would  provide  easy  occasion  for  such 
resentments.  Guile. — The  great  weakness  of  Jewish  character  in  every  age.  The  Laban 
taint  in  the  Abrahamic  race.  Hypocrisies. — Like,  yet  distinct  from,  "guile."  The  idea 
here  would  be  met  by  "  insincerities,"  over-anxiety  to  make  a  Christian  appearance.  The 
apostle  would  say  *'  be  genuine,"  do  not  strain  for  effect.  Let  the  new  life  grow  naturally, 
and  show  itself  and  express  itself  how  it  will.  We  might  put  his  counsel  in  this  shape : 
*'  Beware  of  cant  and  sentimentality."  Envies. — These  would  spoil  the  fellowship  of  the 
Christians  among  themselves.  Evil  speakings. — With  special  reference  to  the  characters  of 
others.  St.  Peter  would  support  the  motto  nil,  nisi  bonum.  Augustine  thus  marks  the 
significance  of  these  terms ;  "  Malice  delights  in  another's  hurt ;  envy  pines  at  another's 
good  ;  guile  imparts  duplicity  to  the  heart ;  hypocrisy  (flattery)  imparts  duplicity  to  the 
tongue  ;  evil  speakings  wound  the  character  of  another." 

Ver.  2.  Newborn  babes. — The  Greek  word  dpTiy^uvTjra  implies  the  earliest  stage  of  infancy.  It 
was  usual  for  Rabbinical  writers  thus  to  designate  proselytes.  Compare  the  term  "  neophytes." 
Sincere  milk.— Simple,  unadultered.  Be  Wette,  "  The  pure,  rational  milk."  In  view  of 
the  additions  which  had  been  made  to  the  genuine  Word  of  God  by  the  Rabbinical  schools, 
and  its  over-laying  by  perplexing  and  mischievous  commentaries,  St.  Peter  properly  calls 
upon  those  beginning  the  new  life  to  take  nothing  but  the  Word  God  as  provided,  and  to 
cultivate  an  appetite  for  it.  R.V.  gives  "  The  spiritual  milk  which  is  without  guile,"  and  it 
adds  to  the  verse  the  words  "unto  salvation,"  for  which  there  is  good  authority.  For 
St.  Peter's  use  of  the  word  "  salvation  "  see  chap.  i.  5,  9,  10. 

Ver.  3.  Tasted. — Or  had  a  beginning  of  experience  of  personal  relations  with  the  Lord 
Jesus.  The  words  are  taken  from  Ps.  xxxiv.  8,  LXX.  version.  Gracious. — More  precisely 
"usable,"  "serviceable."     The  figure  in  the  Greek  word  is  the   mellowness  of  old  wine. 

55 


CHAP.  n.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L  PETER. 


The  idea  of  the  apostle  is  that  if  the  Christians  were  like  newborn  babes  the  food  they  had 
tasted  once  they  would  want  again. 

Ver  4. — The  figure  is  now  changed,  and  the  apostle  deals  with  the  Christian  Church  rather 
than  the  Christian  individual.  Two  things  were  present  to  his  mind — the  material  Jewish 
temple  and  the  spiritual  Jewish  dispensation.  He  makes  the  one  help  to  the  understanding 
of  the  other.  The  Christian  Church  is  like  a  new  temple,  built  up  from  its  very  first 
foundation-stone.  It  is  like  a  new  dispensation,  only  instead  of  the  new  religious  nation 
being  represented  by  an  order  of  priests,  it  is  a  kingdom  of  priests,  represented  only  by  one 
great  High  Priest.  To  whom  coining. — In  order  to  make  a  beginning  in  building  the  spiritual 
house.  Living  stone. — Not  here  natural  rock,  as  distinguished  from  stone  shaped  by  the 
mason ;  but  spiritual  foundation  of  a  spiritual  house.  Chosen  of  God. — The  rejection  of 
Christ  by  the  Jews  is  a  historical  fact :  the  acceptance  of  Christ  by  God  is  the  spiritual  fact 
implied  in  our  Lord's  resurrection.  Precious. — Or  honourable.  The  assumed  criminality  of 
the  crucifixion  deceived  neither  God  nor  good  men.  No  matter  what  Christ  seemed  to  be, 
He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled." 

Ver.  5.  Lively. — Better,  living,  with  the  same  idea  as  above.  Men  quickened  with  a 
spiritual  life,  therefore  spiritual  men ;  stones  to  match  Christ,  the  living  stone.  (Perhaps 
the  sentence  should  read,  "  Build  yourselves  up.")  Spiritual  house.  — The  Christian  Church, 
thought  of  as  the  spiritual  reproduction  of  the  Jewish  Temple.  Holy  priesthood. — In  old 
days  the  true  spiritual  temple  was  the  nation  of  devout  worshippers  ;  it  was  represented  by 
the  tribe  (twelfth  part  of  itself),  which  was  wholly  devoted  to  the  Temple  ministry.  The 
Christian  Church  is  the  new  spiritual  temple,  every  member  being  a  priest,  and  all  together 
offering  up  spiritual  sacrifices.  The  blending  of  figures  is  sometimes  puzzling;  "the  priests 
who  sacrificed  in  the  true  temple  were  themselves  the  stones  of  which  that  temple  was 
built."  R.V.  has  "  a  spiritual  house,  to  be  a  holy  priesthood."  Spiritual  sacrifices. — No 
longer  material  sacrifices,  but  the  spiritual  things — thankfulness,  lo  ve,  devotion,  etc. — which 
they  represented.  By  Jesus  Christ.— Who  offered  the  model  spiritual  sacrifice— who 
offered  Himself. 

Ver.  6.  In  the  Scripture. — Not  precisely  quoted  from  either  Heb.  or  LXX.  of  Isa. 
xxviii.  16.  The  apostle  evidently  wrote  from  memory.  In  Sion. — The  Temple  was  built  on 
Moriah.  Corner-stone. — With  possible  allusion  to  the  corner  of  the  Temple  area  that  was 
built  right  up  from  the  valley.  But  one  of  the  stones  in  the  foundations  of  ancient  buildings 
was  usually  spoken  of  as  the  foundation-stone.  Elect. — Better,  "  selected."  Precious. — 
Counted  honourable.  Confounded. — The  idea  given  by  the  rendering  in  the  LXX.  Building 
on  this  foundation,  we  build  securely ;  do  not  find  our  confidence  misplaced. 

Ver.  7.  Precious. — Still  the  same  idea,  "  held  in  honour  "  or  in  confidence.  Such  is  your 
esteem  that  you  have  no  hesitation  in  building  on  this  foundation.  Disobedient. — Involving 
unbelief  finding  expression  in  active  rebellion.  Disallowed. — Left  in  the  quarry  as  unsuit- 
able and  unworthy.     Head  of  the  corner. — Is  put  in  the  most  honourable  position. 

Ver.  8.  Stone  of  stumbling,  etc. — See  Isa.  viii.  14.  "Xheir  stumbling  implies  the  judicial 
punishment  of  their  rejection  of  Messiah.  They  hurt  themselves  in  stumbling  over  the 
corner-stone."  Appointed. — The  Jewish  mind  always  regarded  what  did  happen  as  what 
God  had  arranged  should  happen.  No  doubt  the  reference  here  is  to  the  prophecies  which 
had  so  plainly  anticipated  the  rejection  as  well  as  the  acceptance  of  Messiah.  "  Those  who 
stumbled  by  disbelief  were  marked  out  by  prophecy  as  men  who  would  stumble."  But 
prophecy  refers  to  a  class,  not  to  individuals. 

Ver.  9.  Chosen  generation. — These  terms  describe  the  new  spiritual  Israel  in  terms  taken 
from  the  old  Israel.  God  chose  the  Abrahamic  race  ;  God  called  out  a  particular  priesthood. 
The  entire  nation  was  holy,  in  the  sense  of  separated  unto  God.  The  Jews  were  a  peculiar, 
or  purchased,  people,  in  view  of  the  redemption  from  Egypt,  which  was  the  beginning  of 
their  national  life.  So  the  new  Israel  was  a  race  chosen  in  Christ,  constituted  as  a  kingdom 
of  priests,  separated  from  the  world  unto  God,  and  specially  related  to  God  as  the  purchase 
of  His  own  sacrifice.  Out  of  darkness. — Not  the  darkness  of  heathenism,  but  of  the  formal 
Judaism  of  that  day. 

Ver.  10.  Not  a  people. — For  this  figure  see  Hos.  ii.  23.  The  Jews  are  still  addressed,  but 
from  this  point  of  view — while  they  had  disbelieved  and  rejected  God's  Son  whom  He  had 
sent,  they  were  not  God's  people.  All  disbelief  and  disobedience  put  them  out  of  covenant 
relations.  When  they  believed  and  obeyed  Christ  they  became  God's  people  again,  and  now 
in  a  new  and  higher  sense. 

Ver.  11. — This  verse  begins  some  direct  counsels  concerning  the  ordering  of  Christian 
conduct  and  relations.  As  they  have  a  somewhat  severe  tone,  they  are  commenced  with  an 
affectionate  form  of  address — "Dearly  beloved."  Strangers  and  pilgrims. — Sojourners, 
suitable  to  those  who  belonged  to  the  dispersion,  but  specially  suggesting  the  unworldliness 
of  the  spiritual  life,  in  Christ,  which  they  had  begun.  Fleshly  lusts. — Which  lead  to  drunken- 
ness, gluttony,  and  uncleanness.  There  was  special  need  for  the  Hebrew  Christians  to  be 
vigilant,  on  account  of  the  calumnies  which  the  heathen  were  beginning  to  circulate  about 

56 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I  PETER  chap.  il. 


the  Christians.  For  the  "works  of  the  flesh"  see  Gal.  v.  19-21.  Soul. — The  higher  element 
in  man's  nature.  Here  the  new  spiritual  life  of  the  soul  is  referred  to.  The  antagonism 
between  flesh  and  spirit  is  a  familiar  Pauline  topic. 

Ver.  12.  Conversation. — Behaviour  in  relationships  with  others.  Honest. — Better,  "  seemly." 
The  word  used  is  the  ordinary  Greek  word  for  "  beautiful,"  and  it  distinctly  means  goodness 
that  comes  into  sight.  A  daily  walk  that  is  attractive,  winsome,  to  look  at.  Gentiles. — 
Everybody  other  than  yourselves.  Speak  against  you. — In  different  ways.  Both  the  Gentiles 
and  the  bigoted  Jews  aspersed  the  character  of  the  Christians.  We  cannot  stop  the 
slanderer,  but  we  can  jealously  see  to  it  that  he  shall  have  no  ground  for  his  slandering.  We 
may  be  persecuted,  as  Christ  was  ;  we  must  try  to  be  as  free  from  blame  as  Christ  was  (see 
ver.  20).  Day  of  visitation. — Time  of  calamities  which  the  early  Christians  regarded  as  the 
coming  of  Christ.  "  Not  only  the  last  great  day,  but  on  whatever  occasion  God  brings 
matters  to  a  crisis  "  (Canon  Mason). 

Ver.  13.  Submit  yourselves. — This  belongs  to  the  care  Christians  should  take  not  to  be  in 
any  sense  an  occasion  of  offence  in  Society  (Rom.  xiii.  1-7).  Ordinance  of  man. — Every 
human  institution.  A  spiritual  life  can  find  expression  in  every  form  of  governmental  and 
social  life.  For  the  lord's  sake. — Lest  reproach  should  come  on  Him,  through  reproach 
coming  on  you.  King. — Here  an  abstract  word  for  the  person  in  chief  authority.  Then  an 
emperor. 

Ver.  14. — Even  an  imperfect  government  aims  to  secure  the  general  good.  It  is  noticed 
that  neither  St.  Peter  nor  St.  Paul  lay  down  any  exceptions  to  the  rule  of  complete  obedience; 
and  yet  proper  exceptions  there  must  be. 

Ver.  15.  With  well-doing.—  Not  with  disputations,  but  with  the  irresistible  persuasion  of 
a  holy  life.  Ignorance. — For  the  calumnies  of  Christians  were  spread  by  those  who  hated 
them  without  knowing  anything  correctly  about  them.  The  word  implies  a  stolid  and 
wilful  ignorance. 

Ver.  16.  As  free. — In  regard  to  the  ordering  of  personal  life  relations.  Bound  to  meet  all 
public  obligations ;  free  to  shape  their  own  life  and  conduct.  Worldly  maxims,  social 
customs,  common  habits  and  opinions,  have  no  binding  force  on  Christians.  In  all  this 
sphere  the  Christian  is  a  "  law  unto  himself."  Cloke  of  maliciousness. — "  If  under  the  pre- 
tence that  they  were  asserting  their  Christian  freedom  they  were  rude,  overbearing,  insolent, 
regardless  of  the  conventional  courtesies  of  life,"  this  made  the  liberty  a  cloke  of  baseness. 

Ver  17.  Honour. — By  showing  each  one  the  respect  that  is  due  to  him.  Love. — With 
more  than  the  love  of  complacency ;  with  the  love  of  family.  Fear. — The  feeling  which 
recognises  a  supreme  claim. 

Ver.  18.  Servants.— Slaves.  Many  of  the  early  Christians  came  from  the  ranks  of  slaves, 
or  freedmen.  And  their  freedom  in  Christ  made  their  bondage  to  an  earthly  master 
specially  irksome.  Perhaps  "the  oi'/c^rai  here  addressed  are  domestic  servants,  who  were 
more  exposed  to  the  bad  temper  of  their  masters  than  the  servants  in  the  field."  Froward. — 
Crooked.     One  who  is  unreasonably  exacting,  capricious,  and  cross-grained. 

Ver.  19.  Conscience  toward  God. — Better,  "consciousness  of  God."  This  essentially  belongs 
to  the  new  life.  Conscious  of  God's  presence  as  seeing,  judging,  helping.  His  servants. 
"Wrongfully. — Without  having  given  just  occasion. 

Ver.  20.  BuflEeted. — Cuffed  with  the  hand,  or  smitten  with  the  stick,  as  servants  then  were. 
Acceptable. — Same  word  as  "  thankworthy,"  in  ver.  19. 

Ver.  21.  Were  ye  called.— Or,  "this  is  involved  in  your  call."  Example. — Of  patience  in 
bearing  suffering,  with  the  inward  assurance  of  innocence.  The  Greek  word  suggests  a 
drawing  which  the  student  is  to  copy. 

Ver.  24.  Bare  our  sins.— See  Isa.  liii.  12.  Our  sins,  not  His  own.  The  Hebrew  word  may 
mean  either  to  carry,  or  to  lift  or  raise.  It  is  not  clear  which  precise  meaning  St,  Peter 
intends.  On  the  tree. — Cross.  R.V.  "  upon  the  tree  "  ;  marg.  "  up  to  the  tree."  Stripes. — 
Prophetic  reference,  Isa.  liii. ;  historic*  reference,  our  Lord's  scourging  by  command  of 
Pilate. 

Ver.  25.  Shepherd  and  bishop. — Episcopos,  guardian,  protector.  See  Ezek.  xxxiv.  11,  12. 
Alford  thinks  that  the  apostle  transfers  the  well-known  name  of  the  elders  of  the  Churches, 
iiriffKOToi,  to  the  great  Head  of  the  Church,  of  whom  they  were  all  the  servants  and 
representatives. 


Note  on  Ver.  19. — Br.  R.  W.  Dale  translates  thus  :  "  For  this  is  acceptable,  if  through 
consciousness  of  God  a  man  endureth  griefs,  suffering  wrongfully."  He  holds  that  the  Greek 
word  which  Peter  used  has  sometimes  the  meaning  "  consciousness  "  and  sometimes  that  of 
"  conscience."  In  this  passage  the  former  meaning  is  much  more  appropriate,  and  Dr.  Dale 
uses  it  very  effectively  to  prove  that  the  knowledge  or  consciousness  that  Christians  have  of 
God  becomes  an  effective  force  in  the  moral  life.  Such  a  knowledge  is  open  to  every 
Christian,  for  Peter  here  writes  to  slaves  when  he  says,  "  This  is  acceptable  if,  through 
consciousness  of  God,  a  man  endureth  griefs,  suffering  wrongfully." 

57 


CHAP.  li.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  1—3. 

Christian  Growth  is  in  Christian  Control. — In  these  verses  the  growth  is  seen 
in  what  it  enables  a  man  to  throw  off.  When  men  became  Christians  out  of 
Pagan  or  heathen  associations,  there  would  necessarily  be  a  great  deal  of  the  old 
life  and  habit  that  must  be  thrown  off — a  great  incrustation  of  old  evils  that  must 
be  resolutely  dealt  with.  The  apostle  Paul  recognises  how  much  had  been  done 
in  this  way  by  his  Gentile  converts  when  he  says  (1  Cor.  vi.  10,  11),  "Be  not 
deceived ;  neither  fornicators,  nor  idolators,  nor  effeminate,  nor  abusers  of  them- 
selves with  men,  nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  revilers,  nor 
extortioners,  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  such  were  some  of  you  : 
but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  the  Spirit  of  our  God."  But  St.  Peter  wrote  his 
epistle  mainly,  if  not  exclusively,  for  Jewish  converts,  not  for  Gentile  Christians. 
The  point  is,  however,  equally  applicable  to  them.  For  there  were  characteristic 
moral  faults  of  Judaism,  and  especially  of  the  later,  formal,  and  corrupt  Judaism, 
which  were  quite  as  antagonistic  to  the  Christian  spirit,  and  the  Christian  life, 
as  any  of  the  open  vices  of  Paganism  could  be.  "  Hypocrisies  and  evil-speak- 
ings "  were  characteristic  Jewish  sins.  And  they  must  be  thrown  off  if  the 
Christian  life  is  to  find  free  expression ;  they  would  be  surely  thrown  off  with 
advancing  Christian  growth.  The  point  has  its  continuous  application  in  every 
age,  and  to-day.  More  or  less  defined,  every  Christian  life  is  a  new  start  and  a 
change.  There  has  always  been  much  in  the  old  life  w^hich  is  unsuitable  in  the 
new.  A  man  carries  habits,  tendencies,  cherished  ideas,  infirmities,  into  the  pro- 
fession of  faith  in  Christ,  which  he  must  gradually  throw  off  if  he  is  to  "  walk 
worthy  of  his  vocation  " ;  and  the  throwing  off  is  not  best  done  as  a  series  of 
efforts,  it  is  the  natural  result  of  growth  in  the  Divine  life.  Grow,  and  the  more 
vigorous  life  of  the  soul  will  surely  shake  off  the  old  evils  and  frailties.  In  rela- 
tion to  the  evils  of  our  habits,  disposition,  hereditary  tendencies,  etc. — 

I.  We  can  deal  with  the  things  that  give  them  their  opportunity  and  power. 
— In  that  sense  we  can  "  lay  them  aside,"  ''  put  them  away."  A  man  may  not 
have  gained  power  over  himself  so  as  to  allow  himself  to  be  placed  in  circum- 
stances of  temptation ;  but  he  may  have  gained  such  a  power  of  control  over  his 
circumstances  that  he  can  alter  conditions  and  relations  which  he  knows  are 
temptations  to  him.  The  familiar  illustration  is  the  man  who  has  the  craving 
for  drink.  He  cannot  directly  master  that  craving,  but  he  can  watch  everything, 
and  carefully  avoid  everything  that  excites  it.  By  so  doing  he  can  wear  the 
craving  out,  and  presently  gain  the  full  victory,  and  consciousness  of  full  strength 
to  resist.  Shaping  life  so  that  there  shall  be  no  appeals  to  our  natural  frailties 
in  it,  is  the  duty  which  is  seldom  recognised.  And  yet,  in  that  sense,  the  Christ- 
ian's life  is  in  his  own  hands. 

II.  We  can  suitably  nourish  the  spiritual  growth. — "  The  sincere  milk  of  the 
Word"  is  not  the  "milk  for  babes"  of  which  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  treats.  St.  Peter's  "  sincere  milk "  is  rational  (intellectual),  or  more 
precisely  spiritual  milk ;  and  he  only  calls  it  milk  because  his  thoughts  are  occu- 
pied with  the  terms  "  begotten  again,"  "  new-born  babes."  He  means  this : 
Nourish  yourselves  into  spiritual  strength  with  just  that  spiritual  food  which  is 
precisely  adapted  to  your  spiritual  condition.  It  may  be  milk,  if  that  is  best  for 
you  ;  it  may  be  strong  meat,  if  that  is  best  for  you.  The  one  important  thing  is 
that  the  Christian  should  grow ;  and  the  conditions  of  growth  are  very  largely 
within  his  own  control.     He  must  meet  his  possibilities  and  responsibilities. 

III.  We  shall  want  to  nourish  that  spiritual  growth  if  we  rightly  apprehend 
the  responsibilities  of  the  Christian  life. — Growth  is  the  one  demand  of  all  life — 

58 


SOMlLEflC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETEM. 


CHAP.  II. 


vegetable,  animal,  intellectual,  moral,  spiritual.  Wherever  there  seems  to  be 
life,  we  ask  what  we  feel  to  be  the  testing  question,  "  Does  it  grow  ? "  Every 
life  has  an  aim — it  is  moving  toward  something.  It  will  never  reach  it  if  it  does 
not  grcyw. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  2.  Things  to  he  Laid  Aside. — 
The  apostle  mentions  five,  but  he  in- 
cludes others  of  like  nature,  and  he 
means  they  are  to  be  laid  aside  once 
for  all,  never  to  be  touched,  thought 
after,  or  desired  again.  Having  been 
laid  aside,  the  temptation  to  them 
must  be  resisted,  and  not  one  of  these 
noxious  weeds  must  be  permitted  to 
show  its  head. 

I.  All  malice — or  all  manner  of 
malice.  Malignity,  or  resentment  of 
real  or  fancied  injuries.  You  think 
that  some  one  has  done  you  a  wrong, 
and  you  are  angry  with  him  ;  you  owe 
him  a  grudge,  you  are  determined  to 
have  your  revenge.  This  is  malice 
(Eccles.  vii.  9). 

II.  All  g^uile. — Guile  is  deceit,  and 
opposed  to  truth  and  openness  of  mind. 
A  man  who  cherishes  guile  is  never  to 
be  trusted,  and  he  is  so  suspicious  that 
he  can  seldom  trust  any  one  himself. 
A  true  Christian  is  sincere. 

III.  Hypocrisies. — These  are  allied 
to  guile,  and  are  indeed  a  species  of  it. 
Hypocrisy  is  acting  a  part  as  on  a 
stage,  where  a  person  appears  to  be 
what  he  really  is  not.  A  hypocrite  is 
one  who  deceives,  and  intends  to  do  so 
— does  it  knowingly. 

IV.  Envies. — tSome  men  see  others 
better  off,  more  respected,  and  in 
possession  of  greater  honours  than 
themselves,  and  they  envy  them,  want 
to  be  like  them,  and  are  mortified  if 
they  cannot  be. 

V.  AU  evil  speakings  or  slander- 
ings. — Envies  lead  to  these,  and  these 
are  the  bane  of  all  society.  What 
heartburnings,  and  jealousies,  and 
misunderstandings  have  arisen  from 
the  practice  of  evil -speaking !  There 
are  many  ways  of  speaking  evil  of 
others.  You  may  insinuate  doubts  as 
to  their  piety  ;  you  may  ask  questions 
about  them  which  will  lead  others  to 


ask  questions  still  more  significant. 
And  it  is  an  easy  thing  to  blast  the 
character  of  another,  whilst  it  is  a 
very  difficult  thing  to  repair  the  injury. 
These  things  the  Christian  is  thought 
of  as  having  already  laid  aside,  and  in 
all  circles  of  true  believers  they  are — 
and  they  should  be — guarded  against 
with  the  utmost  care. — Thornley  Smith. 

Ver.  3.  Testing  Conditions. — St.  Paul 
commends  the  duty  of  self-examination 
and  heart -searching  in  connection  v/ith 
the  Holy  Sacrament  in  1  Cor.  xi. 
This  verse  of  our  text  may  suggest 
suitable  preparatory  self -examinations. 

I.  The  beginnings  of  a  religious  life. 
— "  Tasting  that  the  Lord  is  gracious." 
We  are  very  anxious  to  gain  assurance 
that  our  beginning  has  been  right. 
Perhaps  we  make  too  much  of  the 
initial  stages.  The  New  Testament 
describes  the  beginnings  of  religious 
life  under  a  variety  of  forms  and 
figures.  Sometimes  it  is  the  passing  in 
at  a  gate,  or  it  is  the  first  breath  of  a 
new  life ;  or  it  is  the  first  cry  of  a  new- 
born babe;  or  the  first  prayei  of  a 
penitent  soul;  or  the  healing  in  re- 
sponse to  a  look ;  or  the  answer  to  a 
call ;  or  the  laying  of  a  life  foundation. 
Here  it  seems  to  be  the  infant's  fiist 
taste  of  food — the  wakening,  as  it  were, 
of  a  new  sense,  which  discovers  that 
*'the  Lord  is  gracious."  St.  Peter's 
words  may  be  read  in  the  light  of  his 
own  experience.  There  is  one  incident 
of  unsurpassed  tenderness  in  St.  Peter's 
life.  It  is  his  interview  with  Christ 
after  the  resurrection,  when,  again  and 
again,  but  using  somewhat  different 
terms,  Christ  asked  the  searching 
question,  "  Lovest  thou  Me?"  That 
was  the  time,  above  all  other  times,  in 
which  St.  Peter  felt  the  graciousness  of 
the  Lord.  That  was  not  his  conversion, 
but  it  was  his  first  "  soul-taste,"  the 

59 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


scene  that  henceforth  toned  his  life. 
By  this  expression  St.  Peter  evidently 
means — 1.  A  personal  realisation  of 
the  graciousness  of  the  Lord.  He  had 
been  brought  up  in  a  knowledge  of 
God  that  must  have  included  His  good- 
ness. But  such  things  as  we  may 
learn  about  God  may  lie  on  the  mind 
as  mere  knowledge.  St.  Peter  says 
that  it  must  get  in  to  a  man,  and 
become  the  man's  own.  The  soul,  with 
its  sensitiveness  and  receptivities,  must 
touch  and  taste.  It  is  easy  enough  for 
us  all  to  sing,  "  God  is  Love."  It  is  a 
solemn  moment  when  the  soul  wakes 
up  to  say,  with  a  passion  of  personal 
feeling,  "  Yes,  God  is  love."  "  He  loved 
me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."  2.  A 
heart  realisation  of  the  graciousness  of 
the  Lord.  Many  a  man's  mind  has 
hold  of  it,  but  it  is  much  more  for  the 
affections  to  be  swayed  and  constrained 
by  it,  and  for  the  graciousness  to  flow 
in  on  the  soul  like  the  tide  of  new  life 
to  one  who  has  been  sick.  3.  And  it  is 
nothing  less  than  the  graciousness  of 
God  that  is  tested.  That  word 
"  graciousness "  must'  be  meant  to 
express  more  than  goodness,  more  than 
kindness.  God  is  good  to  all  ;  kind  to 
the  unthankful  and  the  unholy,  but 
gracious  to  the  penitent  sinner.  So 
"  graciousness  "  is  the  sinner's  "  taste  " 
of  the  Lord.  Now,  cannot  a  man 
know  for  himself  whether,  made 
sensitive  by  sin-burden,  he  has  "  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious." 

II.  The  privileges  that  belong  to 
such    a     beginning. — Not     to     any 


particular  degree  of  Christian  attain- 
ment, but  to  the  very  beginning.  First 
privilege — a  right  to  the  name,  and  to 
the  hope,  of  a  Christian.  Second,  a 
right  of  admission  to  Christ's  Church, 
which  is  the  communion  of  such. 
Third,  a  right  to  kneel  at  the  altar  of 
the  Lord,  to  sit  down  at  the  table  of  the 
Lord,  which  is  the  feast  together  of 
those  who,  in  love,  respond  to  love. 

God's  Graciousness. — This  is  the 
sweetness  of  the  word,  that  it  hath  in  it 
the  Lord's  graciousness,  and  gives  us 
the  knowledge  of  His  love.  This  they 
find  in  it,  who  have  spiritual  life  and 
senses,  and  those  senses  exercised  to 
discern  good  and  evil,  and  this  engages 
a  Christian's  further  desire  of  the 
Divine  Word.  They  are  fantastical, 
deluding  tastes  that  draw  men  from  the 
written  Word,  and  make  them  expect 
other  revelations.  This  graciousness  is 
first  conveyed  to  us  by  the  Word  ;  there 
first  we  taste  it,  and  there  still  we  are 
to  seek  for  it ;  there  the  love  of  God 
in  Christ  streams  forth  in  the  several 
promises.  The  heart  that  cleaves  to 
the  Word  of  God,  and  delights  in  it, 
cannot  but  find  in  it,  daily,  new  tastes 
of  His  goodness.  Here  it  reads  His 
love,  and  by  that  stirs  up  its  own  to 
Him,  and  so  grows  and  loves  every  day 
more  than  the  former,  and  thus  is 
tending  from  tastes  to  fulness.  It  is 
but  little  we  can  receive  here — some 
drops  of  joy,  that  enter  into  us;  but 
there  we  shall  enter  into  joy,  as  vessels 
put  into  a  sea  of  happiness. — Leighton. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—8. 

The  Spiritual  House. — The  figures  of  this  paragraph  are  precisely  adapted  to 
those  who  were  familiar  with  the  associations  of  Judaism,  and  more  especially 
with  the  material  tabernacle  and  the  Temple,  and  the  outward  religious  system 
associated  with  them.  The  material  house  of  Judaism  is  contrasted  with  the 
spiritual  house  of  Christianity.  It  is  the  contrast  that  is  so  fully  elaborated  in 
the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  That  was  a  material  house,  in  which  earthly  men 
fulfilled  prescribed  temporal  duties,  and  carried  out  a  ritual  and  ceremonial 
system.  This  is  a  living,  spiritual  house,  of  living,  spiritual  men,  who  offer  in  it 
living,  spiritual  sacrifices.  And  yet  St.  Peter  recognises  that  there  was  a  spiritual 
within  that  old  material.  The  spiritual  had  always  been  revealed  to  the  spiritu- 
ally-minded. The  spiritual  could  now  be  more  fully  apprehended,  and  the 
old    material   building   may  now  fade  away,  or  be  removed,  as  scaffolding  is 

60 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  ii. 


removed,  when  the  Temple  is  complete.  Or,  using  another  figure,  St.  Peter  says, 
the  people  of  Israel  were  separated,  consecrated  people ;  the  whole  people  were 
a  "  holy  priesthood,"  devoted  to  the  service  of  God.  This  fact  was  represented, 
and  so  kept  ever  before  their  minds,  by  the  separation  of  one  tribe  entirely  to  the 
priestly  service.  St.  Peter  sees  that  truth  concerning  Israel  carried  over  into 
Christianity,  and  spiritually  realised.  The  Church  wants  no  delegation  of  any 
portion  of  itself  for  priesthood,  because  spiritually  every  member  is  a  priest,  and 
the  entire  Church  makes  up  the  "holy  priesthood."  Fixing  attention  on  the 
"  Spiritual  House,"  notice  three  things ; — 

I.  Its  foundation. — It  is  a  living  man — that  is,  a  spiritual  man.  "  Unto  whom 
coming,  a  living  stone."  It  is  the  spiritual,  Divine  man,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
*'  Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that  is  laid,  even  Christ  Jesus."  The 
figure  of  the  foundation  stone  is  doubtless  taken  from  that  corner  of  the  Temple- 
area  which  was  built  up  from  the  valley  with  gigantic  masonry.  The  figure  of 
a  foundation  is  somewhat  difficult  for  us  to  apprehend,  because  our  buildings  do 
not  in  any  sense  rest  upon  a  single  stone.  The  right  thought  may  come  to  us 
through  the  schools  of  philosophy,  systems  of  theology,  or  other  religions.  We 
speak  of  Socrates  as  the  founder  or  foundation  of  the  Socratic  School  ;  of  Calvin 
as  the  founder  or  foundation  of  the  Calvinistic  system  of  theology ;  of  Mohammed 
as  the  founder  or  foundation  of  the  Mohammedan  religion.  In  each  case  we 
mean  that  on  one  man's  thoughts,  doings,  teachings,  rests  the  house  of  thought  or 
truth  which  has  been  reared.  Christianity  is  the  house  of  truth  and  life 
reared  upon  the  thoughts,  doings,  teachings,  sufferings,  of  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
and  it  is  a  spiritual  house,  because  the  spiritual  is  the  range  of  Christ.  What 
He  thought,  did,  felt,  taught,  were  the  spiritual  things  on  which  the  spiritual 
house  was  reared. 

II.  The  stones  of  the  building. — Living  men — that  is,  spiritual  men.  Living 
in  the  sense  in  which  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  living.  Connect  with  the  idea  of 
being  begotten  again,  born  again,  quickened  with  the  new,  the  spiritual  life.  St. 
John  is  the  apostle  of  this  new  life.  He  "  conceives  of  religion  as  consisting  in 
the  immediate  personal  relation  of  the  soul  to  God  or  to  Christ.  It  begins  with 
an  impartation  from  God.  To  be  born  of  God  means  to  receive  from  Him  a 
communication  of  spiritual  life,  whereby  the  soul  is  more  and  more  transformed 
into  Christ-likeness."  The  stones  of  the  building  must  be  of  the  same  nature  as 
the  foundation.  Of  material  stones  build  the  old  Temple,  on  a  foundation  of 
stone  from  the  quarry.  Of  spiritual  stones — men  alive  unto  God — build  the 
spiritual  temple,  on  a  foundation  of  the  spiritual  stone,  the  man  alive  unto  God, 
the  spiritual  man  Christ  Jesus.  But  another  idea  is  suggested  by  the  term 
*'  lively"  or  "living."  A  living  thing  is  a  moving,  acting  thing,  and  the  stones 
of  the  spiritual  house  are  living  men  in  their  activity.  It  is  a  difficult  associa- 
tion for  us,  but  Eastern  minds  delight  in  involved  and  mixed  metaphors.  It 
may  at  least  suggest  to  us  that  we  give  ourselves  to  Christ  as  living  ones, 
*'  living  sacrifices  " — those  who  serve. 

III.  The  service  within  the  building. — "To  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices." 
The  building  is  a  temple.  And  this  is  true  whether  we  think  of  a  single  life  or 
of  the  corporate  Church.  Within  the  temple  of  the  individual  life  spiritual 
sacrifices  have  to  be  offered.  Within  the  temple  of  the  Church  must  be  kept 
up  the  holy  ministries.  What  the  spiritual  sacrifices  are  we  may  learn  from 
the  services  of  the  older  and  material  Temple.  Find  what  was  at  the  heart  of 
the  old  ritual,  and  that,  without  the  ritual,  is  the  spiritual  sacrifice  of  the  new 
dispensation.  Illustrate,  from  the  inner  significance  of  the  primary  form  of 
sacrifice,  the  burnt-offering.  That  was  the  giving  of  a  man's  whole  self  to  God, 
represented  by  the  giving  of  an  entire  animal.  That  giving  of  the  whole  self  to 
God  is  the  spiritual  sacrifice  which  we  can  now  offer  as  quickened,  living  men. 

61 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 

And  spiritual  sacrifices  include  acts  of  praise,  thanksgiving,  trust ;  include  every- 
thing that  can  fitly  find  expression  for  the  new  and  spiritual  life.  That  is  the 
one  and  essential  condition  of  acceptance.  The  new  life  must  be  in  everything 
we  say  or  do  in  the  living  temple.  Formalities  are  of  no  value  now,  save  as 
they  are  instinct  with  Divine  life.  One  law  applies  to  the  whole  service  of  the 
spiritual  temple, — it  must  express  the  life  of  men  who  are  "  born  of  God." 

Note  hy  Dean  Plumptre  on  the  words  "  through  Jesus  Christ"  ver.  5. — "  In 
the  addition  of  these  words,  we  have  at  once  the  sanction  for  the  Church's  use 
of  that  form  of  words  in  connection  with  all  her  acts  of  prayer  and  praise,  and 
the  implied  truth  that  it  is  only  through  theii'  communion  with  Christ  as  the 
great  High  Priest,  and  with  His  sacrifice,  that  His  people  are  able  to  share  His 
priesthood,  and  offer  their  own  spiritual  sacrifices." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  5.  The  Spiritual  Temple. — This  was  yet  partial,  but  preparing  to  be 

passage  suggests  that  the  Tabernacle  extended;  and  for  this  last  dispensation, 

and  Temple  were  type  and  symbol  of  which  was  to  embrace   all  the  world, 

the  true  Church  of  God  and  even  of  what  temple  would  have  been  sufliicient 

the  individual  believer.    Here  the  terms  but  a  temple  co-extensive  and  identical 

of  communion  with  God  are  set  forth  with  the  worshippers   themselves  ?     As 

in  the  altar  of  burnt  offering,  and  the  in  the  true  Atonement   there  was  no 

laver ;     one    signifying    expiation    by  victim  worthy  of   the   priest    but   He 

blood,  and  the  other  the  washing  of  who  combined  both  in  His  own  person, 

regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  so,  in   the  true  worship,    there  could 

Ghost.     The  Holy  Place,  with  its  three  have  been  no  adequate   temple,  unless 

articles  of  furniture,  the  golden  candel-  the  worshippers  and  the    temple  had 

abra,    the    table   of    shew-bread,   and  been  the  same. — Bishop  Hinds. 
altar  of  incense,  typifies  the  forms  of 

communion,  as  Prof.  Moore  of  Virginia  The  Christian  Ternple,   or   Spiritual 

beautifully  phrases  it.     Here  we  are  House. — St.  Paul,  in  his  epistle  to  the 

taught  first  the  duty  of  a  burning  and  Corinthians,   speaks  of    the    Christian 

shining  testimony  for  God ;    secondly.  Church  under  the  symbol  of  a  temple, 

of  consecrated  and  constantly  renewed  but  he  uses  the  word — i/aos — nowhere 

offerings ;  thirdly,  of  unceasing  prayer  else,  and  St.  Peter  never  uses  it  at  all. 

and  heart -worship.     The  Holiest  Place,  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that 

with    its   cherubim,   mercy   seat,   and  when  he  wrote  these  words   the   idea 

shekinah,  may  represent  heavenly  and  was  in  his  mind,  and  that  he  thought 

complete  fellowship,  in  the   immediate  of  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  in  contrast 

presence  of  the  glory  of  God,  where  a  with  which  he  calls  believers  a  spiritual 

redeemed     and     glorified     humanity,  house — oTkos — of  which  the  Lord  Jesus 

reconciled    to    God    and     in    perfect  is  the  foundation,  or  the  corner-stone, 
harmony  with  all  created   being,  the  I.  The  foundation  of  this  Temple^ 

Law  of  God  perfectly  enshrined  in  the  — 1.  It  is  Christ  Himself.     St.  Peter 

heart,     communes     immediately     and  was  a  stone  laid  upon  the  foundation- 

within  the  veil  with  Jehovah  ! — Anon.  stone,  as  also  were  each  of  the  apostles. 

They  were  the  first  layer  of  the  Temple, 

The  Worshippers  and  the  Temple  the  next    to    the    foundation ;     but    the 

Same. — It  is  obvious,  then,  how  fit,  how  foundation  itself   is  Christ   and   none 

essential  it  was  that  there  should  be  a  other.     He  is  called  *' the  living  stone"; 

temple  of   stone  for   the   partial   dis-  He  has  life,  and  gives  life,  spiritual 

pensation ;    the    presence   of    God    in  and  eternal,  to  all  who  trust  in  Him. 

Christ  for  the  transition  state,  when  it  A  stone  is  hard,  cold,  and  rigid,  but 

62 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I,  PETER.  chap.  ii. 


this   Stone  lives  and   imparts   life   to  were,  and  still  are,  spiritual  sacrifices — 

every  other  stone  of  which  the  Church  the  sacrifice  of  a  broken  and  contrite 

is  built.     2.  Its  excellence  is  set  forth  heart ;  the  sacrifice  of  earnest  prayer 

by   a   contrast — "  rejected,   indeed,   of  and  faith  ;  the  sacrifice  of  a  holy  and 

men,  but  chosen  of  God  and  honourtd."  devoted  life. — Thornley  Smith. 
St.  Peter  had  said,  before  the  Sanhedrin, 

"  This  is  the  Stone  set  at  nought  by  Ver.    7.    '*  The    Preciousness." — The 
you  builders "  (Acts  iv.  11).     Christ  is  alteration   made   in   the   E.Y.,  which 
still    rejected    of    men.      The   sceptic  reads,     "For     you     therefore     which 
rejects  Him.      The  rationalist  rejects  believe    is    the    preciousness,"   is    less 
Him.      The    worldling    rejects    Him.  serious  than  at  first  sight  it  appears  to 
God   honours   Him.       Believers  count  be.     It  in  no  way  changes  the  senti- 
Him    "precious,"    "honourable."      3.  ment,  it  only  alters  the  form  in  which 
The  results  of  its  being  laid.     "Unto  it  is  expressed.     It  keeps  in  the  line  of 
you,  therefore,   which   believe   in    the  the  figure  which  the  apostle  is  using — 
honour  of  belonging  to  the  Stone,  and  a  characteristic  figure  for  him  who  had 
of  being  united  to  the  building  of  which  himself    been  called  a  "  stone  "  ;    the 
it   is   the  foundation."      Such   is  the  "  rock-man,"    on    whose    witness    for 
import  of  ver.  7.  Christ  the  Church  was  to  be  founded. 
II.  Look  at  the   superstructure. —  St.  Peter  had  spoken  of  coming  to  the 
"  Ye  also  as  living  (^wvtc?)  stones  are  Lord,    the    Lord    Christ,   as    unto    a 
built  up  a  spiritual  house."      1.  The  "  living    stone,"    that    could    be    the 
materials  are  living  stones.     Such  are  foundation-stone  on  which  to  raise  the 
Christian    believers.      Drawn    out   of  temple  of  a  holy  life.      He  was  not 
nature's    quarry,    they    are    cut    and  writing  of  the  Jlrst  coming  of  the  soul 
polished   by  the    Spirit  of   the   living  to  Christ,  with  the  burden  of  sin — the 
God,   and  are  then  prepared   for  the  coming  for  forgiveness  and  renewal — 
place  they  are  to  occupy  in  the  temple  but  of  the  coming  of  the  believer  when 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts.    Of  such  materials  he  proposes  to  make  the  endeavour  to 
must  God's  house  be  built.      2.  Com-  build  a^,  godly  life.     As  Christ  is  the 
posed  of  such  materials,   this   temple  foundation  of  our  hope,  so  He  is  the 
is  called  a  spiritual  house.      God  has  foundation   of   our   life   of    character, 
had  three  temples  on  earth — the  temple  Build  a  character  upon  nothing,  and  it 
of  stone,  the  temple  of  Christ's  body,  sways  with   every  wind,  and  is  over- 
and  the  living  temple  of  the  Church,  thrown  with  the  first  storm.     Build  a 
The   first    was   destroyed    and    swept  character  upon  the  self  of  resolve  and 
away;  the  second  was  removed,  and  is  human  wisdom,  and  it  is  as  the  house 
now  in  heaven,  the  third  remains ;  and  upon  the  sand,  which  keeps  fair  enough 
will  continue  to   grow  until   the  top-  under  the  summer  rains,  but  is  under- 
stone  be  brought  forth  with  shoutings  mined  and  imperilled  when  the  winter 
— "  Grace  unto  it !  "      In  the  temple  floods  surge  around  it.     Build  a  cha- 
of   stone  the  shekinah  dwelt ;    in  the  racter  upon  the  rock  of  Christ ;  let  the 
temple  of  Christ's  body  dwelt  all  the  foundation  be   His  Divine  claim   and 
fulness  of  the  Godhead  ;  in  the  temple  His  model  humanity,  as  held  in  the 
of  the  Church  the  Spirit  dwells,  filling  grasp  of  our  faith ;   and  then  let  life 
all  its  courts  with  the  light  and  glory  bring  round  what  storms  and  floods  of 
of  the  Lord.     3.  In  this  spiritual  house  trial  and  temptation  that  it  may,  the 
there  is  a.  holy  priesthood.     Every  living  house  of  character  which  we  build  may 
stone  in  this  temple  is  also  a  consecrated  be  weathered  and  worn,  but  it  will  not 
priest,    and  has  access   by  faith   into  fall ;  it  cannot  be  shaken.    It  is  founded 
the  hoKest  of  all  by  the  blood  of  the  upon  a  rock  :  that  rock  is  the  "  Rock  of 
everlasting  covenant.      4.    A  temple  Ages."     That  is  the  "  living  stone,  re- 
implies  sacrifices,  and  they  are  offered  jected  indeed  of  men,   but  with  God 
here.      The  sacrifices  of  God  always  elect,  precious,"     "It  is  contained  in 

63 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L  PETER. 


Scripture,    Behold    I    lay   in    Zion    a 
chief  corner-stone,  elect,  precious  :  and 
he  that  believeth  on  Him  shall  not  be 
put  to  shame."    The  Temple  of  Solomon 
is  evidently  present  to  the  mind  of  the 
apostle,  and  suggests  his  figure.     That 
Temple  was  built  upon  the  living  rock 
of  Mount  Moriah  ;  but  the  summit  of 
the  mount  was  not  sufficiently  large  or 
level  to  permit  the  full  size  and  proper 
shape  of  the  Temple  court.     On  the 
one  side  the  ground  dipped  suddenly, 
and    to    complete    the    form    of    the 
required  area,  a  corner- piece  had  to  be 
raised,   in   heavy   masonry,    right   up 
from  the  valley  to  the  Temple  level. 
It  was  a  stupendous  work  for  the  age 
in   which    it   was    accomplished.      It 
came  to  absorb  attention  rather  than 
the  rock  of  the  hill  itself.     It  was  the 
national  pride.     It  seemed  as  if  the 
Temple  was  really  built  on  that  corner  ; 
as  if  that  were  its  real  foundation-stone. 
Every  believer  has  a  temple  to  raise — 
the  temple  of  a  Christly  character,  the 
temple   of   a  holy  life.    There  is  the 
natural  rock  of  disposition  and  heredity 
on  which  every  man  builds  his  house 
of  character  ;  but  the  believer  wants 
something  more  than  this.     He  needs 
a  completion  of  its  incompleteness  and 
insufficiency  by  the  laying  of  a  *'  chief 
corner-stone."      That  alone  can  make 
the  foundation  area  satisfactory  :  that 
alone  can  be  trusted  to  bear  the  full 
weight  of  the  building  ;  and  that  alone 
can  give  noble  character  to  the  build- 
ing.    And  that  chief  corner-stone  of 
the   temple  of  a  godly  life   God   has 
provided  for  every  man.     It  is  Jesus 
the  Lord,  elect,  precious :   "  the  tried 
stone,  the  precious  corner-stone."    But 
St.  Peter  points  out  that,  though  the 
corner-stone  foundation  is  actually  pro- 
vided, and  available  for  all,  it  must  be 
individually  accepted  and  individually 
used.     And  so  it  becomes  the  test  of 
every  professor.     Where   there  is  no 
actual,  practical  faith,  giving  tone  to 
the  daily  endeavour  to  live  the  godly 
life,  that  corner-stone  is  neglected ;  it 
may  even  be   "  a  stone  of  stumbling 
and  rock  of  offence."    But  where  there 
is   practical,    living    faith,    there   the 

64 


stone  is  valued,  held  honourable  ;  the 
grace  of  its  provision  is  recognised,  its 
uses  are  understood,  and  the  life  of 
holiness  is  so  raised  upon  it  that  every 
part  of  the  life  feels  the  strength  and 
support  of  that  foundation.  It  is  the 
interest  which  the  man  of  faith  has  in 
the  chief  corner-stone,  on  which  he 
wants  to  build  every  part  of  his 
spiritual  house,  which  St.  Peter  sug- 
gests to  us  in  this  passage.  And  it 
does  not  matter  whether  we  keep  to 
the  figure  of  the  stone — an  impersonal 
thing — and  say,  "  Unto  you  therefore 
which  believe  is  the  preciousness  "  ;  or, 
seeing  who  it  is  that  is  meant  by  the 
stone — the  personal,  living  Lord  Jesus, 
our  Saviour  and  Sanctifier — say,  "Unto 
you  that  believe.  He  is  precious."  As 
we  may,  however,  gain  a  little  fresh- 
ness in  the  form  and  setting  of  very 
familiar  truth  thereby,  we  will  take 
advantage  of  the  impersonal  figure 
preserved  for  us  by  the  II.V.,  and  let 
our  text  mean — 

I.  By  the  believer  the  preciousness 
is  discerned. — It  will  not  be  possible 
to  deal  wisely  with  this  or  the  other 
points  to  be  brought  before  us  unless 
we  first  understand  clearly  who  is 
meant  by  the  "  believer."  It  cannot 
be  too  often  asserted  that  the  epistles 
are  not  written  to  unconverted  persons 
as  persuasions  to  a  saving  belief. 
However  unworthy  of  the  Christian 
name  those  addressed  in  the  epistles 
may  be,  the  assumption  is  that  they 
do  all  bear  the  Christian  name;  they 
have  all  accepted  Christ  as  their 
Saviour  and  Lord ;  they  are  all  be- 
lievers. The  distinction  is  not  suffi- 
ciently recognised  between  the  act  of 
faith  and  the  life  of  faith.  The  act  of 
faith  is  the  beginning  of  a  life  of  faith, 
and  it  has  no  effective  value  unless  it 
is  followed  up  by  such  a  daily  faith. 
The  apostle  expresses  the  belief  in 
which  we  are  just  now  interested  when 
he  says,  "  The  life  that  I  live  in  the 
flesh  is  a  life  of  faith  on  the  Son  of 
God."  The  act  of  faith  ought  to 
establish  an  attitude  of  faith,  and  that 
attitude  should  be  a  permanent  atti- 
tude.    It   is  by  that   daily  and   per- 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  II. 


manent  attitude  of  our  souls  that  the 
preciousness   of    Christ    is    discerned. 
To  use  the  figure  of  the  photographer, 
we   may    say    that    the   act   of   faith 
renders  the  whole  plate  of   the   soul 
sensitive  to  particular  things,  sensitive 
to  spiritual    things ;    and   they  make 
their  due  impressions  according  as,  day 
by   day,  their   sensitiveness   is   main- 
tained.    There  is  a  school  of  thought 
which  exaggerates  the  importance  of 
the  act  of  faith.     Salvation  is  regarded 
as  the  Divine   response  to  that  act ; 
and   a   daily   renewal   of    the    act   is 
required  only  as  keeping  up  the  daily 
right  to  the  salvation.     But  our  salva- 
tion is  a  much  larger  thing  than  the 
setting  us  in  a  new  relation  with  God ; 
it  includes  getting  that  relation  rightly 
toned.     And  what  we  need  to  see  so 
much  more  clearly,  and  to  feel  so  much 
more    adequately,    is   that    our   daily 
believing  is  a  power  of  discernment, 
and    a    power   of   receptivity,    and   a 
secret    of     growth    and     sanctifying. 
Constantly,  therefore,  must   believers 
be  urged  to  believe.     It  may  even  be 
pressed  upon  us  that  the  maintenance 
of  the  attitude  of  trust  is  the  condition 
of  all  joy,  and  of  all  growth  in  the 
Divine  life.     It  is  not  of  chief  import- 
ance to  ask,  "  Have  you  believed  unto 
the   salvation   of   your   soul  ?  *'     It  is 
most  important,  and  it  is  most  search- 
ing, to  ask.   Are  you  believing  unto 
the   sanctification  of  your  whole   life 
and    relationships  ?     To    that   life   of 
faith  the  mystery  of  Christ  is  revealed  : 
by   that    permanent    daily    mood    of 
belief,  of  living  trustfulness,  the  pre- 
ciousness  of   Christ   is   discerned.     In 
the    Song   of    Solomon    the    lover   is 
taunted  with  the  words,  "  What  is  thy 
beloved  more  than  another  beloved  ?  " 
He  is  all  the  more  to  her  by  what  her 
love  discerns  in  him  ;  and  Christ  is  all 
the  more  to  us  by  what  our  faith — our 
trust,  which  is  simply  our  faith  with 
love  in  it — can  discern  in  Him.     Here 
is  the  figure  of  Christ  presented  in  the 
gospels ;  here  is  the  estimate  of  Christ 
formed  by  His  apostles ;  here  are  the 
accumulated     sentiments     concerning 
Christ  of  saintly  souls  through  all  the 


ages.     And  yet,  do  most  men,  with  all 
this  help,  discern  the  preciousness  of 
Christ  ?     They  admire  Him,  it  may  be ; 
they  write  about  Him,  it  may  be  ;  they 
wrangle   over   Him,  it   may  be ;    but 
they  cannot  discern  His  sweet  secret. 
That  comes  only  to  the  man  of  faith  ; 
that  is  the  discovery  of   the  trustful 
soul.     It  is  "  hid  from  the  wise  and 
prudent,"  who  think  they  knovj ;  it  is 
"revealed  unto  babes,"  who  can  only 
trust.     Is   it   not  a   simple   fact   that 
those  who  are  living  lives  of  faith  do 
see  in  Christ  more,  and  more  precious 
things,  than  any  one  else  can  see  1     It 
is  no  wonder  at  all  that  men  should 
accuse   us   of   extravagance   when  we 
speak    of    our    Divine    Lord.      They 
cannot  see  in  Him  what  we  see,  and 
they  never  will  while  they  keep  in  their 
present  conditions.     To  us  He  is  "  the 
chiefest    among    ten    thousand,"    the 
"  altogether   lovely."     The   older   pro- 
phet shows  the  difference  that  a  true 
discernment  can  make  in  Messiah  and 
in  His  mission.     "  We  did  esteem  Him 
stricken,  smitten  of  God  and  afflicted. 
But   He  yjas  wounded  for  our  trans- 
gressions."     This    daily   faith   is    the 
quickening  of   new  powers,   and   that 
will    partly   explain    our   keener   and 
fuller  discernment.    There  are  spiritual 
powers.     They  lie  dormant  until  faith 
quickens  them.    The  man  who  believes 
in   Jesus    finds    himself    possessed    of 
unexpected   powers ;    and  what   is   so 
remarkable  about  the  new  powers  is 
that   they  are   ever  enabling   him  to 
discern  more  and  more  of  the  precious- 
ness of  Jesus.     And  the  daily  life  of 
faith  is  ever   training    and    culturing 
those  new  powers  to  a  higher  efiiciency. 
Keep  up  the  daily  soul  trust,  and  the 
spiritual    eyes   will    be    ever   gaining 
quicker,  keener  vision ;    the   spiritual 
ears    will     be    ever    gaining     subtler 
sensitiveness   to   every   sound    of    the 
Divine  voice ;  and  the  spiritual  hands 
will  be  ever  gaining  firmness  to  grasp 
the  duties  which  are  set  before  us  by 
the  Divine  will.     And  what  is  it  that 
the   cultured    powers   will   discern   in 
Christ?      What    of    His   preciousness 
does  stand  out  clear  to  those  who  live 

f  65 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


the  life  of  faith  ?     The  answer  can  but 
be  a  series  of  hints.     They  see  Jesus 
Himself,  but  Jesus  in  all  His  varying 
moods,  graciously  adapted  to  all  their 
moods.     Always  in  direct  and  helpful 
relations  to  them.    Just  the  Jesus  they 
need  when  the  sunshine  is  all  about 
them,  and  seems  to  have  got  into  their 
souls.     Just  the  Jesus  they  need  when 
the  clouds  hang  low  over  them,  earth 
toil  seems  hard,  and  heaven  *'  far  to 
go."     Yes,  that  is  the  preciousness  of 
Jesus  which  the  man  of  faith  discerns. 
His  real  and  abiding  presence,  involving 
His  relativity  to  all  our  changing  need  : 
Jesus,  vestured  as  no  worldly  eye  ever 
beheld  Him,  practically  helpful  in  every 
endeavour  of  our  godly  life.     There  is  a 
certain  Eastern  character  in  the  figure 
of  the  text  that  makes  it  sound  some- 
what strange  to  us,  but  we  can  catch  the 
idea  it  suggests.     Let  the  stones,  quick 
with  a  living  faith,  be  put  on  the  living 
stone,  the  corner  foundation-stone,  and 
there  surely  will  be  the  thrill  of  life 
into  life.     The  Living  Stone  will,  as  it. 
were,  bind  and  keep  all  the  stones,  and 
there  will  be  the  Life  ever  present  in 
every  stone,  keeping  in  place  all  the 
spiritual   house.     Unto  you  that   be- 
lieve   there    is    that    preciousness    of 
discernment.     You  can  see  how  much 
He    is   to    you   who    is   your    Living 
Stone,  your  sure  foundation.    But  keep 
near  to  heart  and  thought,  that   the 
power   of    discernment    must    always 
depend  on  the  believing,  on  the  life  of 
faith.     Here,  as   in   so   many  things, 
the   law   holds   good,    "  According    to 
your  faith  it  shall  be  unto  you." 

II.  By  the  believer  the  preciousness 
is  enjoyed. — We  only  derive  pleasure 
from  things  that  answer  to  us,  things 
with  which  we  have  affinity.  And  so 
the  things  that  give  pleasure  to  men 
are  manifold,  and  vary  from  the 
trifling  to  the  sublime.  A  diamond  is 
no  more  precious  to  a  child  than  any 
prettily  coloured  stone,  or  shining  bit 
of  stone.  Only  when  trained  to  appre- 
ciate it  can  the  precious  stone  be 
enjoyed.  As  we  are  cultured,  as 
mental  faculties,  and  moral  sentiments, 
and  religious  interests,  are  developed, 

66 


directed,    and   enlarged,    we   find   our 
pleasure   in  ever   higher,   and  nobler, 
and    purer   things.      The   merely  ma- 
terial ceases  to  satisfy  us,  the  moral 
and  the  spiritual  prove  able  to  provide 
ever-increasing  enjoyment.     We  begin 
with  pleasure  in  things,  we  advance  to 
pleasure  in  truth,  and  in  character  ;  we 
attain   our  apprehension   of  the  very 
highest  pleasure  when  we  find  our  joy 
in  God.     Christ  is  no  personal  interest, 
no  source   of  ever-satisfying  pleasure, 
to  the  great  mass  of  men.     When  they 
see  Him  there  is  "no  beauty  that  they 
should  desire   Him."      Why   is   this  ? 
He   is   what  He   is,    but  what  He  is 
is  nothing  to  them.     It  is  that  they 
do  not  believe ;  the  soul's  power  of  trust 
has  never  been  awakened ;    the  great 
gratitude  of  the  sinful  soul  to  its  all- 
sufficient   Saviour   has   not   awakened 
the  eyes   to  discern  the  transcendent 
loveliness  of  that  Saviour.     Only  those 
who  are  living  the  life  of  faith   can 
ever  enjoy  His   preciousness.     Every- 
thing  depends   on   the   mood    of    the 
mind.     And   it   is  singular   to   notice 
how   the    joy   of   the    soul   in    Christ 
goes  up   and   down  with  the  varying 
moods  of  its  faith.     Cannot  we  make 
this  a  test  of   our  spiritual   state  ? — 
"  Unto     you     that     believe     He     is 
precious."     Do  not  ask.  Are  you  full 
of  admirations   of   Christ  ?     Can   you 
recognise   His    Divine   fitness   as    the 
Saviour  of  the  world  ?    Be  more  search- 
ing  than  that.     Ask  yourself,  Am  I 
personally  enjoying  Christ  %     Does  He 
fully  satisfy  me  ?     In  the  love  of  Him 
do    I    find    my   soul's   rest  ?      Is    the 
"  dearest  spot  on   earth  to  me  "  that 
where   I   meet  with   Him?     When  I 
think  of  the  beautiful  does  He  seem 
to  me  more  beautiful  still  ?     When  I 
yearn  for  happiness  do  I  find  myself 
running  right  in  to  the  shadow  of  His 
all-comforting   love?      Is   He,   indeed 
and  in  truth,  my  joy  and  my  crown? 
Can   I  walk  earth's  highway  with  a 
song  in  my  soul — His  song,  "  I  have 
loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love  "  ? 
And   do    I   turn   from   all   the   glory 
and  bliss  of  heavenly  scenes  to  fix  all 
eye   and   heart   on  Him   that  sitteth 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  II. 


on  the  throne,  the  "  Lamb  as  it 
had  been  slain  1 "  Then  surely  by  us 
the  preciousness  of  Jesus  is  enjoyed ; 
and  it  must  be  that,  in  some  measure 
at  least,  we  are  living  that  life  of 
faith.  Is  there  any  test  of  Christian 
standing  better — more  searching  and 
more  satisfying — than  this  ?  "  What 
think  ye  of  Christ  ?  "  Nay,  rather, 
What  is  Christ  to  you  ?  How  do  you 
feel  towards  Him?  For  "unto  you 
that  believe  is  the  preciousness."  Our 
cherished  sentiments  concerning  Christ 
keep  pace  with  the  daily  faith  that 
brings  Him  ever  into  the  field  of  our 
soul- vision  and  our  touch. 

III.  By  the  believer  the  precious- 
ness is  responded  to. — It  is  not  that 
he  only  sees  it ;  it  is  not  that  he  only 
enjoys  it ;  it  is  that  he  meets  it,  he 
answers  to  it.  It  becomes  the  hoHest 
of  forces  moving  him,  the  sweetest  of 
constraints  upon  him.  It  presses  him 
to  all  loving  obediences,  to  all  loyal 
services,  to  the  constant  endeavour  to 
attain  the  likeness  of  the  beloved  one, 
and  to  a  life  of  virtues  and  sweet 
charities  as  the  only  life  well-pleasing 
to  Him.  The  Christian  life  has  its  sen- 
timents, and  nourishes  them  ;  but  the 
sentiments  are  impulses  and  inspira- 
tions ;  they  are  active  powers  ;  they 
give  tone  to  conduct ;  they  help  the 
holy  living.  Let  faith  glorify  Christ, 
and  keep  Him  ever  near,  the  object 
of  unceasing  admirations,  the  source 
of  undying  satisfactions,  and  then 
the  soul  will  surely  have  its  per- 
petual prayer,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou 
have  me  to  do  ? "  And  the  life  will 
be  one  proh  nged  endeavour  to  do  what 
the  loved  one  would  have  done.  We 
know  in  our  every-day  relations  what 
a  sweet  and  powerful  constraint  the 
enjoyment  of  our  loved  ones  is.  Who 
among  us  is  not  a  better  man  or 
woman  day  by  day  because  the 
preciousness  of  our  loved  ones  is  so 
fully  discerned  and  enjoyed.  Life  for 
us  is  the  sweet  response  we  make  to 
those  whom  we  fully  trust,  whom  we 
deeply  love,  whose  fellowship  we  so 
much  enjoy.  And  yet  in  the  earthly 
spheres  we   are  only  learning  Divine 


things.  Away  even  from  the  earthly 
spheres  and  relations  we  soar  into  the 
regions  of  the  spiritual.  There,  with 
the  power  of  our  faith — our  trust,  which 
is  faith  with  love  in  it — we  discern  the 
preciousness  of  Jesus,  our  tried  corner- 
stone, our  sure  foundation.  There  we 
feel  the  sweet  fascination  of  Jesus,  and 
enjoy  the  fellowship  and  all-embracing 
love,  and  find  it  heaven  begun  to  sit 
at  His  dear  feet.  There  we  feel  our- 
selves caught  and  held  in  His  re- 
straints, bound  by  love -cords  to  His 
service,  and  peifectly  willing,  gladly 
willing,  to  be  just  what  He  would 
have  us  be,  go  just  where  He  would 
have  us  go,  and  do  just  what  He  would 
have  us  do. 

Ver.  7.  Our  Honour  in  Christ. — 
"  Unto  you  therefore,  the  believers, 
belongs  the  honour."  So  said  in  refer- 
ence to  His  being  called  '*  a  stone  elect, 
honoured,"  taken  in  conjunction  with 
"  shall  not  be  ashamed."  Both  the 
Hebrew  and  the  Greek  word  rendered 
*•  precious  "  may,  with  equal  propriety, 
be  translated  "  honoured,"  and  this 
contrasts  better  with  the  "  shame " 
just  spoken  of.  Thus  Dr.  Lightfoot 
takes  it.  The  argument  is  this  :  "  God 
has  selected  Jesus  for  special  honour, 
and  has  promised  that  all  who  trust 
in  Him,  instead  of  scorning  Him  like 
the  Jewish  rulers,  shall  have  no  cause 
to  blush.  Now,  you  do  trust  in 
Him,  therefore  to  you  belongs  the 
promise,  and  the  honour  bestowed  by 
God  on  Him  reflects  on  you.  You, 
like  Him,  are  made  parts  of  the  Divine 
imperishable  architecture.  —  Ellicott's 
Commentary. 

Christ  a  Precious  Saviour. 

I.  To  whom  is  He  precious?  To 
them  that  believe. 

II.  Why  is  He  precious  to  believers  ? 
1.  Because  recognised  as  the  medium 
of  all  earthly  blessings ;  and  2.  As  the 
source  of  all  spiritual  blessings. 

III.  When  is  He  thus  precious? 
1.  In  certain  frames  of  mind,  as 
when  the  soul  hungers  after  righteous- 

67 


CHAP.  II. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L  PETER. 


ness.  2.  In  certain  duties,  as  in 
secret  prayer,  worship,  etc.  3.  In 
certain  seasons,  as  times  of  danger, 
bereavement,  sickness,  trial. — J.  M. 
Sherv^ood. 

Christ  All  in  All. — Christ  is  all 
in  all  to  His  people.  He  is  all 
their  strength,  wisdom,  and  right- 
eousness. They  are  but  the  clouds 
irradiated  by  the  sun,  and  bathed 
in  its  brightness.  He  is  the  light 
which  flames  in  their  grey-mist  and 
turns  it  to  a  glory.  They  are  but 
the  belt  and  cranks  and  wheels : 
He  is  the  power.  They  are  but  the 
channel,  muddy  and  dry ;  He  is  the 
flashing  life  which  fills  it  and  makes 
it  a  joy.  They  are  the  body,  He  is  the 
soul,  dwelling  in  every  part  to  save  it 
from  corruption,  and  give  movement 
and  warmth. 

"  Thou  art  the  organ,  whose  full  breath  is 
thunder ; 
I    am    the    keys    beneath    Thy    fingers 
pressed." 

— A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  Christ  of  Experience. — This  is 
one  of  the  undertones  of  Scripture, 
heard  in  all  the  pauses  of  its  history  or 
its  argument.  It  is  a  recognition  of 
the  practical  religious  value  of  the 
Christ,  of  what  He  is  to  those  who  have 
put  Him  to  experimental  tests.  Such 
recognitions  make  the  New  Testament 
the  religious  book  of  men's  practical 
life.  Peter  was  a  man  far  less  pro- 
found and  intentional  than  John,  more 
realistic,  more  under  the  power  of 
externalism  and  of  mere  ethics.  He 
moves  upon  a  lower  plane  of  spiritual 
conception  and  Christian  life.  And 
yet  how  the  fervency  of  his  heart  of 
religious  love  breaks  forth  !  Here  he 
is,  setting  forth  the  great  value  of 
Christianity  as  a  source  of  strength 
and  comfort  and  hope  in  the  trials  of 
human  life.  A  stricter  rendering  of 
the  text  would  be,  "  Unto  you  who 
believe  is  the  honour."  So  far  from 
making  you  ashamed,  trust  in  Him 
will    be    your     highest    honour ;    for 

68 


through  your  trust  in  Him  you  will 
attain  to  all  that  constitutes  the 
salvation  of  a  man,  the  noblest  life  here, 
and  everlasting  glory  hereafter.  What 
is  the  estimate  of  Christ  which  they 
form  who  have  tried  Him  ?  who  have 
submitted  their  minds  to  His  ideas, 
their  hearts  to  His  claims,  their  lives 
to  His  control  1  "  He  is  precious." 
The  fundamental  idea  is  value.  In  the 
commercial  sense  of  the  term,  a 
precious  thing  is  a  priceful  thing,  a 
thing  which  fetches  a  price.  Three 
things  constitute  value :  1.  Karity. 
2.  Beauty  ;  3.  Serviceableness.  All 
the  qualities  that  constitute  precious- 
ness  are  in  Christ,  in  a  degree  of 
excellence  that  imagination  cannot 
overcolour,  that  even  love  cannot  ex- 
aggerate. In  respect  of  serviceable- 
ness, of  personal  beneficial  relations  to 
men,  as  their  Eedeemer  from  sin.  His 
preciousness  transcends  all  our  words 
or  thoughts.  This  is  the  form  of  the 
apostle's  thought.  He  speaks  of  the 
experimental  value  of  the  Christ — His 
preciousness  to  those  who  have  practic- 
ally come  to  Him  as  the  living  founda- 
tion stone ;  through  whose  vitalising 
properties  they  have  been  quickened 
into  living  stones  of  the  spiritual 
Christian  temple.  1.  We  might 
apply  a  comparative  test,  and  put  the 
preciousness  of  Christ  into  comparison 
with  all  other  possessions  of  our  human 
life.  Or  we  might  subject  Him  to  a 
comparison  with  other  good  men. 
2.  Our  estimates  are  largely  in- 
fluenced by  the  judgments  of  others. 
Think,  then,  of  the  estimates  put  upon 
Christ's  character  and  work  by  other 
moral  beings.  It  is  significant  of  His 
excellence  that  He  attracts  the  most 
readily,  and  attaches  the  most  pro- 
foundly, the  holiest  and  noblest 
natures'?  Christ  is  never  rejected 
because  His  moral  teaching  is  false, 
His  moral  character  defective,  His 
moral  inspirations  corrupting.  3.  The 
conclusive  appeal  is,  however,  to  the 
conscious  experience  of  our  own 
religious  souls.  In  personal  experience 
we  find  our  chief  grounds  for  a  high 
estimate  of  Christ. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I   PETElt. 


CHAP.  11. 


I.  Christ  is  precious  when  we  grope 
and  stumble  at  the  mystery  of  God. 

II.  Christ  is  precious  when  the  sense 
of  sin  is  quickened  within  us. — When 
we  awaken  to  the  grave  culpability 
of  its  guilt,  when  we  realise  its  es- 
sential antagonism  to  the  Divine 
holiness. 

III.  Christ  is  precious  in  our 
struggle  with  practical  evils. — As  we 
fight  with  lusts,  resist  temptation, 
overcome  worldliness,  subdue  selfish- 
ness, or  mourn  over  failures  and 
falls. 

IV.  Christ  is  precious  to  us  in  times 
of  great  sorrow. 

V.  Christ  is  precious  in  our  own 
mortal  conflict. — It  is  not  a  question 
of  notions  or  beliefs  about  Christ,  but 
of  living  experience  of  Him,  practical 
appropriation  of  the  grace  that  He 
brings,  practical  quickening  by  the  life 
that  He  is.— JZ  Allon,  D.D. 

The  Verse  a  Quotation. — The  words 
of  this  passage  are  quoted  directly 
from  the  LXX.,  and  properly  re- 
present the  Hebrew.  Almost  all  the 
best  modern  critics  consider  the  psalm 
from  which  this  verse  is  cited  to  be  a 
late  psalm,  written  subsequent  to  the 
return  from  Babylon,  in  which  case  it 
is  most  probable  that  the  composer  was 
directly  thinking  of  the  prophecy  of 
Isaiah  above  quoted.  The  Messianic 
interpretation  of  the  psalm  would  be 
no  novelty  to  the  Hebrews  who  received 
this  epistle  (see  Matt.  xxi.  9),  though 
probably  they  had  not  perceived  it  in 
its  fulness. — A.  J.  M. 


A  Christian  Test. — One  of  the  test- 
ing passages,  which  help  us  to  gain 
assurance  of  our  Christian  standing. 
Uncertainty  about  our  personal 
religious  condition  may  be  neither  right 
nor  necessary,  but  it  is  felt  by  all 
Christians  at  times.  Two  other  tests 
may  be  suggested.  1.  Tenderness  of 
conscience  about  sin.  2.  Manifest 
difference  in  the  things  we  now  love 
and  choose.     In  the  text  we  have. — 

I.  A  description  of  the  Christian. — 


"  You  that  believe."  That  fits  pre- 
cisely into  apostolic  preaching.  In 
Acts  we  find  St.  Peter  calling  upon 
men  to  believe  in  Christ  as  Messiah, 
proved  to  be  by  His  resurrection. 
Belief  is  more  than,  other  than, 
knowledge,  and  indicates  the  Spirit's 
power.  Christians  are  they  who  in 
the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  have  come 
to  believe,  with  a  soul-reHance  on 
Christ. 

II.  A  test  of  the  Christian. — "  He 
is  precious."  The  word  is  "  honour," 
"  preciousness."  1.  QhYi^ii^  honoured. 
Occupies  the  highest  place  of  respect ; 
the  Divine  place  of  worship.  He  who 
can  speak  lightly  of  Christ  is  no 
Christian.  2.  Christ  is  valued. 
Precious,  in  the  sense  of  costly.  In- 
volving a  right  estimate  (1)  of  Christ's 
person  ;  (2)  of  Christ's  work, 
3.  Christ  is  loved.  Those  are  precious 
to  us  whom  we  love.  We  love  to  think 
of  His  salvation,  to  realise  His  pre- 
sence, and  to  do  His  will.  In  this 
way  the  testing  of  our  spiritual  condi- 
tion is  put  in  its  most  gentle,  persuasive, 
and  attractive  forms. 

Ver.  8.  Appointed  unto  Stumbling. — 
When  St.  Peter  says  that  these  un- 
happy Jews  were  appointed  to  stumble, 
he  primarily  means  that  the  clear 
prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  which 
he  has  quoted  marked  them  for  such  a 
destiny.  It  was  no  unforeseen, 
accidental  consequence  of  the  gospel. 
It  had  never  been  expected  that  all 
who  heard  the  gospel  would  accept  it. 
Those  who  stumbled  by  disbelief  were 
marked  out  in  prophecy  as  men  who 
would  stumble.  Still,  in  fairness,  we 
must  not  shirk  the  further  question 
which  undoubtedly  comes  in  at  this 
point.  It  cannot  be  denied,  that,  in  a 
certain  sense,  it  was  God  Himself  who 
appointed  them  to  stumble.  There  is 
no  reference  to  condition  after  death. 
God  does  put  men  sometimes  into 
positions,  where,  during  this  life,  they 
almost  inevitably  reject  the  truth. 
These  things  remain  unexplained,  for 
the  trial  of  faith. — EllicotCs  Commen- 
tary. 

69 


CHAP.  11.  aOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   PETER. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—10. 

Christian  Jews  are  the  True  Jews. — These  verses  may  at  first  sight  seem  to 
describe  the  dignities  and  privileges  of  the  Jews  as  the  elect  nation.  But  any- 
such  praise  of  the  Jews  would  be  quite  out  of  harmony  with  the  truth  St.  Peter 
is  presenting.  His  whole  argument  is  that  we  have  something  now  far  better  than 
old  Judaism  ;  something  so  much  better  that,  for  the  sake  of  it,  we  may  cheer- 
fully give  up  the  old.  St.  Peter  is  writing  to  Christian  Jews,  whom  he  regards 
now  as  the  true  Israel ;  he  would  not  suddenly  turn  aside  to  praise  those  who 
clung  to  the  older  system.  The  figures  of  speech  are  taken  from  the  older 
associations,  and,  however  difficult  the  work  may  be  to  us,  we  must  fit  them  to  the 
new  spiritual  nation  made  up  of  Christian  Jews.  St.  Peter  even  suggests  that, 
before  accepting  Christ  as  Messiah  and  Saviour,  these  Christian  Jews  were  "  not 
a  people  "  ;  by  accepting  Him,  and  by  virtue  of  the  new  life  in  Him,  they  had 
become  the  true,  elect  race.  They  "now  are  the  people  of  God."  They  "had 
not  obtained  mercy,  but  now  have  obtained  mercy."  "  The  glories  that  attach 
to  the  company  of  believers  in  Christ  are  brought  before  us  in  a  mosaic  of  Old 
Testament  phraseology."  For  "chosen  generation,"  see  Isa.  xliii.  20.  For 
"  royal  priesthood,"  Exod.  xix.  6,  LXX.  For  "  peculiar  people,"  compare 
Deut.  vii.  6  ;  Isa.  xliii.  21;  Mai.  iii.  17.  The  words  would  be  better  rendered, 
"  a  people  of  purchase."  The  "  praises "  of  ver.  9  would  be  better  rendered, 
"  excellences,"  "  attributes,"  "  distinguishing  qualities." 

I.  The  Divine  election  is  always  to  responsibility  and  service. — It  is  the 

Divine  method,  illustrated  in  every  nation  and  in  every  department  of  life,  to 
secure  the  advancement  of  moral  beings  by  setting  forth  elect  men.  What  we 
have  in  the  Bible  is  simply  the  Divine  election  relative  to  the  world's  religion. 
It  is  most  helpful  to  the  understanding  of  election,  thus  to  recognise  it  as  an 
ever-working  Divine  method.  God  always  has  had  His  elect  nations ;  He  has 
had,  and  has.  His  elect  individuals  in  the  spheres  of  government,  science,  art, 
poetry,  literature,  family  life,  priesthoods,  ministries,  etc.  The  election  is  always, 
and  essentially,  a  special  call  to  service,  and  it  always  involves  the  previous  en- 
dowment of  the  man,  by  God,  with  the  particular  gifts  which  He  will  need  for 
the  service.  The  Jewish  race  had  been  called  out  by  God  for  a  particular  service 
in  relation  to  humanity,  and  for  that  service  they  were  endowed  with  an  extra- 
ordinary se7ise  of  God ;  that  marks  the  Jewish  off  from  every  other  human  race. 
They  were  to  keep,  as  living  truths  for  humanity,  the  unity  and  spirituality  of 
God,  and  they  were  to  preserve  the  oracles  which  recorded  the  revelations  of 
that  one  spiritual  being.  That  was  theii-  service,  and  in  rendering  that  service 
lay  their  responsibility.  The  Christian  Jews  are  bidden  to  think  of  themselves  as 
an  elect  race,  called  to  this  service  for  humanity,  to  show  forth  the  excellences 
and  the  grace  of  God,  as  manifested  in  the  person,  and  in  the  redemptive  work, 
of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  In  Christ  God  had  called  them  "  out  of  darkness  into 
marvellous  light."  Their  service  was  to  show  Him  forth  by  life  and  by  lip.  It 
is  the  calling  and  election  of  every  Christian  now. 

II.  The  Divine  election  always  carries  with  it  dignity  and  privilege. — The 

mistake  is  often  made  of  putting  the  privilege  of  Divine  election  before  the 
responsibility  ;  and  this  tends,  in  frail  men,  to  nourish  a  perilous  self-satisfaction. 
Men  come  to  think  of  themselves  as  the  "  favourites  "  of  heaven,  to  the  disad- 
vantage of  others.  And  on  this  idea  of  election  privilege,  sects  are  formed  which 
isolate  themselves  from  the  whole  community  of  Christians.  It  is  dignity  to  be 
called  to  Divine  service,  but  we  had  better  think  more  about  the  service  than 
the  dignity.     It  is  privilege  to  receive  a  sacred  trust,  but  it  is  healthier  for  us  to 

70 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L   PETER. 


CHAP.  11. 


think  about  the  trust  than  about  the  privilege.     We  may  cheer  our  souls  some- 
times with  the  thought  of  our  privilege,  but  we  should  inspire  our  souls  always 


with  the  thous:ht  of  our  trust. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  9.  A  Chosen  Generation. — The 
greatness  of  the  Christian  privilege  is 
a  chief  reason  for  our  failing  worthily 
to  realise  it.  And  we  do  not  feel  the 
claims  and  responsibilities  aright  when 
we  are  not  duly  impressed  by  the 
privilege.     In  this  text  we  have — 

I.  Christian  privilege. — "  A  chosen 
generation."  There  is  reference  to 
Abraham  and  Israel.  Chosen  in  Divine 
sovereignty,  and  also  in  Divine  love. 
This  su^'gests  duty  as  last  clause  of 
verse. 

II.  Christian  dignity.  —  "  Eoyal 
Priesthood."  Reference  to  Israel  as  a 
nation.  Union  of  two  highest  dignities, 
King  and  Priest,  in  Melchizedek.  Ex- 
plain the  kingly  sphere.  Wherever 
God  reigns — self  or  world,  there  the  re- 
newed man  reigns  as  God's  vicegerent. 
Explain  the  priestly  sphere.  The  re- 
newed man  is  to  be  his  own  offerer. 
What  have  we  to  offer  ?  "  Sacrifice  of 
praise."  ''  Ouiselves  as  living  sacri- 
fices."    This  involves  duty. 

III.  Christian  quality.  —  *'  Holy 
nation."  Holiness  is  the  profession  of 
every  Christian.  Holiness  is  the  ex- 
pectation concerning  every  Christian. 
Holiness  is  first  an  internal  quality, 
and  then  an  external  manifestation. 


IV.  Christian  peculiarity.  —  "A 
peculiar  people."  Not  meaning  an 
odd  people,  but  a  separated,  an  ap- 
propriated people.  A  people  having  a 
definite  set  of  characteristics.  Peculiar 
as  a  family  of  one  type  of  countenance, 
and  one  disposition.  Peculiar  as  hav- 
ing a  special  idea  and  aim  in  life. 
Here,  also,  duty  comes  in.  The  better 
we  know  the  privileges  which  Divine 
grace  has  bestowed  upon  us,  and  does 
bestow,  the  better  shall  we  feel  the 
claims  which  Divine  grace  makes  upon 
us,  and  the  more  disposed  shall  we  be 
to  respond  to  them. 

Interest  in  Ancestry. — It  is  counted 
a  matter  of  great  moment  unto  noble 
families,  if  but  for  honour's  sake,  to 
know  their  descent  from  houses  more 
ancient  and  sovereign  ;  tbat  they  have 
sprung  from  such  and  such  marriages, 
and  conjunctions  of  sovereign  princes, 
although  they  be  in  alliance  very  far 
removed  from  them.  So  is  this  here  to 
us ;  the  saints  are  "  a  chosen  genera- 
tion, a  royal  priesthood,"  as  Peter 
speaks,  the  royalest  family  heaven  or 
earth  affords,  and  that  in  respect  of 
the  descent  thereof. — Dr.  T.  Goodwin. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  11,  12. 

The  Persuasive  Power  of  Moral  Goodness. — St.  Peter  urges  these  Christian  Jews 
to  live  out  fully  their  Christian  life,  to  ''  walk  worthy  of  their  vocation  " — they 
would  find  that  give  them  their  best  influence,  their  best  power  of  ministry. 
Men  must  heed  when  they  see  "  what  almighty  grace  can  do."  Living  out  fully 
the  Christian  life  involves  two  distinct,  but  closely  related,  things. 

I.  Self-management. — "Abstain  from  fleshly  lusts."  The  Christian's  first 
and  greatest  difiiculty  is  with  himself.  He  has  bodily  passions  which  men 
around  him  are  in  no  sense  holding  in  contiol,  and  to  which  he  has  given  power 
because  once  he  did  not  hold  them  in  control.  When  a  man  becomes  a  Christian 
he  virtually  pledges  himself  that  henceforth  he  will  "  hold  the  vessel  of  his  body 
in  sanctification  and  honour."  But  fulfilling  that  pledge  he  finds  to  be  most 
serious  and  anxious  work.  Sins  of  the  flesh,  of  sensual  indulgence,  are  usually 
thought  of  as  Pagan,  Gentile  sins,  they  are  the  sins  of  humanity.     And  no  forms 

71 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


of  sin  so  directly,  or  so  ruinously,  affect  the  spiritual  life.  They  "  war  against 
the  soul."  "  The  lusts  are  on  active  service^  engaged  in  a  definite  campaign  against 
the  immortal  part  of  the  man." 

II.  Ordered  conduct  and  relations. — "  Having  your  behaviour  seemly  among 
the  Gentiles."  The  R.V.  gives  *'  seemly,"  but  the  good  old  suggestive  word 
"  honest "  might  wisely  have  been  retained.  Honest  includes  simple,  sincere, 
straightforward — even  good-looking,  commendable,  persuasive.  The  honest  man 
is  a  power  wherever  he  goes.  The  type  is  found  in  Nathanael :  "  An  Israelite 
indeed,  in  whom  is  no  guile."  The  ancient  philosopher  was  told  that  a  certain 
man  was  slandering  him.  "  Never  mind,"  he  replied  ;  *'  I  will  live  so  that  no 
one  will  believe  him."  We  have  always  at  our  command  the  all- conquering  power 
that  lies  in  an  honest  and  good  life.  That  always  does,  sooner  or  later,  "  put  to 
silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  12.  Christians  called  Evil- doers.  Christian  assemblies.     The  Christians 

— St.    Peter    asserts    distinctly    that  were  a  secret  society,  and  held  their 

calumnies  were  really  rife  about  some  meetings    before    daylight ;     and    the 

particulars  of  the  Christian  morality,  heathen,  partly  from  natural  suspicion, 

at  the  time  that  this  letter  was  written.  partly    from    consciousness     of    what 

It  is  a  mark  of  a  late  date,  for  at  first  passed   in   their   own  secret    religious 

the  Christians  had  not  attracted  sujQ&-  festivals,  imagined  all  kinds  of   horrors 

cient  notice,  as  a  body,  to  be  talked  of,  in     connection    with     the     Christian 

either  in  praise  or  blame.     The  heathen  mysteries.       From     what     transpired 

at   first  regarded    them   as   merely   a  about  the  Lord's  Supper,  they  believed 

Jewish  sect  (Acts  xviii.   15,  xxv.    18-  that  the  Christians  used  to  kill  children, 

20),  and  as  such  they  received  a  con-  and   drink  their  blood,  and   eat  their 

temptuous  toleration.     The  first  State  flesh.      Here,    however,    the     context 

recognition  of  Christianity  as  a  separate  points   to  a  different   scandal.       They 

religion,  with  a   characteristic   of   its  are  warned  against  the  fleshly*  lusts,  in 

own,   was   the   Persecution   of    Nero,  order  that  the  heathen  may  find  that 

A.D.  64.     Now  it  so  happens  that  we  the  Christians'  great  glory  Hes  in  the 

have    almost    contemporary    heathen  very  point  wherein  they  are  slandered, 

documents  which  bring  out  the  force  "  Evil-doers,"     therefore,    must    mean 

of  this  passage.     Suetonius,  in  his  life  chiefly  offences  on  that  score.      It  is 

of  Nero  (chap,  xvi.),  calls  the  Christians  historically  certain  that  such  charges 

by  the  very  name  St.  Peter  uses :  "the  against  Christian  purity  were  common. 

Christians,  a  kind  of  men  of  a  new  Even  as  late  as  the  persecution  under 

and  malefic  superstition."     Only  about  Maximin  II.,  in  the  year  312,  it  was 

forty  years  later,  we  have  Pliny's  famous  reported    that   these   meetings   before 

letter  to  Trajan,  written  actually  from  light  were  a  school  of  the  vilest  arts. — 

the  country  in  which  St.  Peter's  corre-  A.  J.  Mason,  M.A, 
spondents  lived,  and  referring  to  some 

of   the  very   persons   (probably)   who  Charges     against     Christians. — The 

received  the  epistle,  as  having  aposta-  words  indicate  the  growth  of  a  wide- 

tisedat  the  time  of  the  persecution  under  spread    feeling     of     dislike,     showing 

Nero;inwhichletter  Pliny  asks  whether  itself  in  calumny.      The  chief  charge 

it  is  the  profession  of  being  a  Christian  at    this   time   was    probably   that   of 

which  is  itself  to  be  punished,  or  "  the  "  turning  the  world  upside  down,"  i.e. 

crimes  which  attach  to  that  profession."  of  revolutionary  tendencies,  and  this 

The  Apologists  of  the  second  century  view  is  confirmed  by  the  stress  laid  on 

are    full    of    refutations   of    the    lies  obedience  to  all  constituted  authority 

current  about  the  immorality  of  the  in  the  next  verse.      With  this   were 

12 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  cHap.  II. 


probably  connected,  as  the  sequel  shows,  speech,    that    cannot    be   condemned  ; 

the  accusations  of  introducing  discord  that  he  who  is  of  the  contrary  part 

into   families,    setting    slaves    against  may  be  ashamed,  having  no  evil  thing 

their  masters,  wives  against  their  hus-  to  say  of  you  "  (Titus  ii.  7,  8).     These 

bands,    etc.       The     moie     monstrous  and  like  references  inculcate  the  duty 

calumnies  of  worshipping  an  ass's  head,  of   conservating   the    Christian   name 

of     Thyesteian     banquets    of    human  and  the  glory  of  God.     Such  warnings 

flesh,    and    orgies    of    foulest   licence,  would  be  in  keeping  with  the  Jewish 

were   probably   of    later   date. — Dean  faith,  in  which  honour  was  fortified  at 

Rlumptre.  any  cost ;  but  in  the  teachings  of  Jesus 

Christ  the  subject  has  received  another 

Vers.  11,12.  Strangers  and  Pilgrims.  and  a  better  side — viz.,  that  the  exhibi- 

— Archbishop     Leighton      paraphrases  tion  of  the  Christian  character  should 

these  verses  thus  :  "If  you  were  citi-  be  perfect,  with  a  view  to  exert  on  the 

zens   of   this   world,   then   you   might  unconverted  the  best  possible  influence, 

drive  the  same  trade  with  the  men  of  *'  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men, 

this  woi-ld,  and  follow  the  same  lusts  ;  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and 

but  seeing  you  are  chosen  and  called  glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven." 

out  of  this  world,  and  invested  into  a  In  addition  to  the  duty  to  '*  give  none 

new  society,  made  free  of  another  city,  occasion  to  the  adversary  to  speak  re- 

and  are  therefore  here  but  travellers,  proachfully,"  add  the  power  which  will 

passing  through  to  your  own  country,  convert  reproach  into  praise,  and  make 

it  is  very  reasonable  that  there  be  this  of  the  enemy  a  friend.     Let  this  latter 

difference  between  you  and  the  world,  side  of  the  matter  have  our  present 

that   while   they   live  at   home,  your  attention.     That  the  Christian  charac- 

carriage   be  such   as   befits  strangers,  ter  should  be  perfect  for  the  sake  of  its 

not    glutting    yourselves    with    their  own    beauty,   is   a    truth    worthy   of 

pleasures,    nor    surfeiting    upon    their  prayerful  solicitude  at  all  times ;   but 

delicious  fruits,  as  some  unwary  tra-  the  Christian  character  is  more  than 

vellers  do  abroad ;  but  as  wise  strangers,  a   garment  to   be   observed — it  is  an 

living   warily   and    soberly,    and    still  influence   to   be    imparted    to   others, 

minding    most   of    all    your    journey  That  the  name  of  Jesus,  by  which  we 

homewards,    suspecting    dangers    and  are  called,  may  not  be  dishonoured  by 

snares  in  your  way,  and   so  walking  the  inconsistencies  of  our  life,  we  need 

with  a  holy  fear,  as  the  Hebrew  word  to  Kft  the  subject  of  holy  living  above 

for  a  stranger  imports."  the  mere  matter  of  duty,  into  that  of 

service,  wherein  the  glory  of  God  will 

Ver.  12.  The  Church  in  Relation  to  overcome  the  darkness  of  the  human 

the    World. — The    relation    in    which  heart. 

Christians  stand  to  those  who  are  not  I.  We  begin  with  the  fact  that  we 

Christians  is  of  vital  importance  to  are   watched    by    those   who  are   of 

understand  and  feel.      The  references  opposite    tendencies. — We   are   under 

to  this  are  numerous  and  emphatic  : —  daily  examination.     We  are  searched, 

"  I  said,  I  will  take  heed  to  my  ways,  not  for  the  good  we  may  have,  but  for 

that  I  sin  not  with  my  tongue  ;  I  will  the  blemishes  that  may  be  found  in  us, 

keep  my  mouth  with  a  bridle,  while  the  because  the  "carnal   mind   is  enmity 

wicked  is  before  me "  (Ps.  xxxix.   1).  against  God."      There  are  those  who 

"  Also  I  said,  It  is  not  good  that  ye  take  a  greater  delight  to  look  at  an 

do  ]  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  eclipse   of    the   sun   for   five   minutes 

of  our  God,  because  of  the  reproach  of  than  to  enjoy  its  light  for  a  lifetime, 

the  heathen  our  enemies? "  (Neh.  v.  9).  But  if  there  were  no  light  in  the  sun 

"  In  all  things  show  thyself  a  pattern  there  could  not  be  an  eclipse.     So  with 

of   good   works;    in  doctrine   showing  men  of   worth,   the  contrast   between 

uncorruptness,  gravity,  sincerity,  sound  the   excellent   and    the   not   excellent 

73 


CltAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  I   PETER. 


fixes  the  eye  of  envy  upon  them ;  but 
where  excellency  is,  it  cannot  be  alto- 
gether ignored.  In  this  fact  we  rejoice, 
but  our  rejoicing  is  the  more  when 
only  virtue  is  found.  Let  those  who 
search  us  to  discover  weakness  find 
none.  Let  the  reflection  of  our  virtue 
reveal  to  them  their  own  un worthiness. 
II.  Let  us  further  consider  the  in- 
fluence of  the  Christian  character  for 
the  good  of  others. — ''Glorify  God," 
etc.  There  is  an  error  which  must  be 
removed  from  the  minds  of  many  to 
establish  this  remark  in  their  minds. 
Too  frequently  it  is  supposed  by  some 
that  because  they  cannot  take  a  promi- 
nent part  in  gospel  services,  and  thereby 
possibly  become  instrumental  directly 
in  the  conversion  of  souls,  their  lives 
are  comparatively  unobserved  and  use- 
less. Let  us  remove  this  notion.  As 
there  is  not  a  single  ray  of  light,  or 
drop  of  water,  or  breath  of  air,  which 
does  not  contribute  to  the  vast  system 
of  light,  of  water,  and  of  air,  so  there 
is  not  a  single  Christian  example  which 
does  not  minister  in  the  circle  of  the 
Church,  and  lead  to  higher  results. 
The  old  man,  staff  in  hand,  short  step, 
all  weathers,  going  by  the  squire's 
house  to  chapel,  made  an  impression  at 
last,  and  the  squire  followed.  He 
entered,  and  heard  a  sermon  which 
touched  him ;  the  next  Sunday  he 
waited  for  the  old  man,  but  in  vain. 
He  went  alone,  and  learnt  fi'om  the 
preacher  that  the  old  man  had  gone 
home  that  morn.  Men  will  feel  the  need 
of  the  change  which  they  see  in  us.  The 
sinner  knows  that  there  is  something 
wrong  within.  He  may  not  compre- 
hend the  mischief — he  may  not  under- 
stand his  sins  ;  but  he  will  perceive  by 
the  change  in  others  that  he  also  needs 
a  change.  Where  there  is  sin  there  is 
sorrow  and  unrest.  There  is  a  perfect 
charm  in  the  apostle's  description  of 
the  change — "the  new  man."  (De- 
scribe a  man  wasting  by  disease,  who 
has  been  cured.)  The  new  man  breathes 
freely  to  heaven  the  aspirations  of  his 
soul.  He  walks  uprightly,  and  runs 
in  the  way  of  God's  commandment. 
His  arm  is  strong  to  do  work.    Another 

74 


diseased  man  will  see  the  change,  and 
'  in  all  need  to  Jesus  go.'  As  God  has 
visited  us  to  give  us  a  new  heart,  so 
He  will  visit  others,  who  have  seen  the 
change,  to  give  them  a  new  heart  also. 
Conversions  have  been  singularly 
blest  in  this  respect, — "  We  will  go 
with  you,  for  we,"  etc.  Men  will  feel 
the  need  of  the  peace  v^hich  we  enjoy. 
You.  remember  the  invitation,  "  Come 
unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
Men  will  feel  the  need  of  the  prospect 
which  cheers  us.  We  have  a  good  hope 
through  grace.  I  was  asked,  when 
nearing  New  York,  if  I  expected  any 
one  to  meet  me  at  the  landing  place, 
and  I  said,  "  Yes."  But  the  friend 
who  asked  said  sorrowfully,  "  No  one 
will  meet  me  !  "  "I  will  come  again, 
and  take  you  to  Myself."  Seeing  that 
such  glorious  issues  depend  on  the  con- 
sistency of  our  character  that  others 
may  follow  our  example  and  be  saved, 
we  have  the  highest  inducement  to 
live  a  godly  life  in  this  present  world. 
Let  us  take  others  with  us  home  to 
glory:  we  may  meet  by  the  way  the 
lame ;  let  us  help  him  on.  See  the 
world  outside  the  Church  !  What 
misery  and  degradation  !  We  will 
take  the  gospel  to  them  :  the  Christ 
of  the  Bible  shall  be  a  living  Christ 
before  them  in  our  lives.  Holy  living 
shall  be  a  song  that  they  must  hear. 

"  0  Friend  !     O  Brother  !  not  in  vain 
Thy  life  so  calm  and  true, 
^^    The  silver  dropping  of  the  rain, 
The  fall  of  summer  dew  !  " 

— Whittier. 

And,  lastly,  The  influence  of  the 
Christian  life  leads  to  the  highest 
result. — It  may  be  that  to-day  we 
think  so  much  of  self  that  we  cannot 
rise  to  the  highest  point  of  our  life. 
The  highest  degree  of  Christian  excel- 
lence is  the  service  and  glory  of  God. 
To  realise  this  we  must  look  beyond 
ourselves,  and  beyond  those  to  whom 
we  may  bring  salvation,  and  beyond 
any  benefits  faith  may  confer  on  either 
of  them  or  us,  to  God.  He  will  mani- 
fest Himself  in  the  day  of  visitation, 
when  we  shall  see  and  feel  that  our 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap,  it 


life  is  intended  to  reach  even  to  Him-  charitable  living  of  the  early  Christians 

self.      In    the    day    of    visitation    all  told   upon  their  enemies.     3.  Submit, 

matters   will    be    seen    in   their   true  The  EarlyChristians  lived  under  heathen 

light.       The    life   of   the   Church    will  governments,  which,  in  many  respects, 

never  be  fully  and  rightly  comprehended  were  despotic,  cruel,  and  unjust.     But 

until  that  day,  when  God  will  explain  human   institutions   are   indirectly   of 

it.       Therefore,    labour   on,    brethren,  Divine  origin,  and   Christians    should 

leaving  the  consequences  to  the  light  submit  to  all  lawful  authority.    Christ- 

of  that  day,  striving  only  to  do  good,  ianity  helps  the  repeal  of  unjust  and; 

and    save    immortal    souls.  —  Weekly  iniquitous   laws,    but  it   requires  sub- 

Fulpit.  missive  obedience  to  all  that  is  lawful. 

II.  A  summary  of  Christian  duties. 

Verses  11-17.      Our  Pilgrim  Life;  — 1.    "Honour  all  men."     This  duty 

Hov^  to  Pursue  It.  has   no   limits.       "  All    men,    without 

I.  The  threefold  exhortation. — Ab-  exception,  possess  a  certain  value,  first, 

stain,    suffer,    submit     (vers.     11-16).  as  the  creatures  of  God,  and  secondly, 

1.  Abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  as  redeemed  by  Christ.     2.  "  Love  the 

against  the  soul.      These   include   all  brotherhood."      Such  is  the  Christian 

inordinate  sensual  gratifications  of  our  Church — a  brotherhood,  a  household  of 

physical   nature.      2.  Sufter.     Christ-  faith.      3.  "  Fear  God."      This  is  the 

ians    living    as   strangers   among   the  highest  principle  by  which  men  can  be 

Gentiles  in  apostolic  times  were  spoken  actuated,  in  all  the  relationships  of  life. 

of  as  evil-doers.    Their  chai-acters  were  "  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning 

maligned,  their  motives  were  impugned,  of  wisdom,"  and  therefore  the  beginning 

their    conduct    misrepresented   in     all  of  goodness,  charity,  love,  and  holiness, 

manner  of  ways.     They  must  endure  4.  "Honour  the   king"   (see  ver.   13, 

such  treatment  as  their   Saviour  did,  and  Prov.  xxiv.  21).     In  virtue  of  his 

with     all     meekness,      having     their  office,  honour  is  due  to  him.   Anarchy  is 

behaviour,     conversation     {ava(TTpo(f>YJ)  a  crime,  loyalty  is  a  virtue. — Thornley 

good  and  honest.     The  good,  patient.  Smith. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   13—17. 

Fitting  the  New  Life  into  Old  Relations. — When  a  man  is  born  of  God,  and 
made  conscious  of  a  new  life,  with  new  interests,  new  motives,  new  desires,  and 
new  sympathies,  he  is  often  troubled  by  the  difficulty  of  fitting  his  new  self  to 
the  old  associations.  Those  old  associations  he  must  keep.  He  cannot  change  his 
family  circumstances,  or  his  business,  or  his  obligations,  or  his  social  conditions. 
He  must  find  out  how  to  fit  his  new  life  into  them,  so  that  it  may  ennoble  them, 
and  they  may  in  no  way  hinder  or  injure  it.  The  difficulty  is  seen  very  clearly 
in  the  case  of  Christians  who  had  been  heathen,  and  must  still  keep  in  heathen 
surroundings.  Those  heathen  round  them  were  keenly  on  the  watch  for  grounds 
of  accusation  against  them ;  quick  to  discern  any  inconsistencies.  The  Christians 
were  bound  to  be  careful  not  to  give  offence,  and  bring  the  Christian  name  into  dis- 
repute. In  this  paragraph  one  form  of  practical  difficulty  with  which  the  Christians 
had  to  deal  is  indicated.  Their  new  life  could  not  fail  to  bring  to  them  a  sense  of 
dignity ;  it  might  easily  take  a  bad  form,  and  become  an  assumption  of  superiority, 
which  would  spoil  their  every-day  relations  with  men,  and  make  them  unwilling 
to  submit  to  existing  rule  and  authority.  Their  new  life  would  give  them  a 
sense  of  freedom  from  all  restraints,  which  might  readily  pass  into  resistance  to, 
and  rebellion  against,  the  constituted  authorities.  Apostolic  advice  was  specially 
needed  under  such  circumstances,  and  St.  Peter  is  fully  in  harmony  with  St.  Paul 
in  the  advice  that  he  gives.     The  particular  case  before  St.  Peter's  mind  is  that 

75 


CHAP.  11.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


of  Christian  Jews  driven  from  their  own  country  and  lifelong  associations  by 
persecution,  and  finding  shelter  for  a  time  in  foreign  lands,  where  there  were 
different  systems  of  government,  difierent  customs,  and  people  of  different  tem- 
peraments. There  could  not  fail  to  be  very  much  that  grieved  them,  very  much 
that  tried  them,  and  very  much  that  provoked  them.  The  serious  question  for 
them  to  answer  was  :  How  can  the  new  life  in  Christ  fit  to  these  stiange  sur- 
roundings ?  How  does  it  inspire  us  to  think  and  to  act  ?  The  kind  of  feeling 
which  the  presence  of  Christians  in  a  community  then  excited  is  illustrated  by 
the  exclamation  of  the  rabble  that  dragged  Jason  and  certain  of  the  brethren 
before  the  rulers  of  Thessalonica,  "  These  that  have  turned  the  world  upside 
down  are  come  hither  also  "  (Acts  xvii.  6).  There  evidently  was  a  widespread 
suspicion  that,  wherever  they  went.  Christians  became  elements  of  disorder. 

I.  Christians  should  loyally  accept  the  governmental  system  of  the  country 
in  which  they  dwell. — It  may  be  monarchical,  republican,  colonial,  or  otherwise. 
There  are  different  systems  of  government,  and  there  must  always  be  difierences 
of  opinion  as  to  which  is  absolutely  the  best,  and  which  is  relatively  the  best  for 
a  particular  nation,  at  a  particular  time  in  its  history.  A  Christian  has  a 
perfect  right  to  his  own  opinion,  and  is  free  to  find  wise  occasions  on  which  to 
express  it ;  but  so  far  as  his  practical  conduct  and  daily  life  are  concerned,  he 
should  loyally  accept  existing  conditions,  and  take  care  to  be  no  disturber  of  the 
peace.  A  question  of  casuistry  arises  here.  Is  it  ever  lawful  for  a  Christian  to 
resist  the  law?  Assuming  Hampden  to  have  been  a  spiritual  Christian,  was 
he  justified  in  refusing  to  pay  the  "ship-money"?  The  answer  may  be  that  no 
rule  is  without  exceptions;  and  that  cases  may  occur  in  which  principle  is 
involved,  and  loyalty  to  the  absolute  right,  which  is  loyalty  to  God,  demands 
resistance,  even  at  the  cost  of  being  misunderstood,  and  of  suffering.  Still,  the 
general  rule  is  that  Christians  should  make  peaceable  citizens,  and  in  so  doing 
they  help  to  secure  that  general  protection  from  evil-doers,  and  security  for 
honest  trade,  which  are  the  primary  duties  of  social  government,  whatever  form 
it  may  take. 

II.  Christians  always  have  a  power  at  command  for  the  silencing  of  those 
who  slander  them. — "  The  ignorance  of  foolish  men  "  means  baseless,  senseless 
slanders.  Men  in  positions  of  authority  are  always  subject  to  the  malign 
influence  of  the  slanderer.  Christians  in  a  heathen  city  could  not  fail  to  attract 
attention  by  their  very  difference  from  others.  Slanders  start  with  next  to 
nothing,  and  grow  until  shamefully  wicked  things  can  be  said,  all  utterly  base- 
less, but  too  easily  believed,  because  men  find  such  strange  pleasure  in  hearing  of 
the  failure  of  the  good.  Very  seldom,  indeed,  can  a  slander  be  followed  through, 
fought,  and  conquered.  But  the  Christian  can  always  live  it  down.  He  can  be 
calm,  he  can  be  silent,  he  can  keep  on  his  life  of  purity  and  charity,  and  that  will 
tell  in  the  long  run.  Slanders  have  no  staying  power ;  well-doing  has.  The 
good  man,  if  he  will  be  persistent,  is  sure  of  victory,  for  God  is  on  the  side  of  the 
good. 

III.  Christians  are  free  to  sustain  all  gracious  relations. — An  old  divine, 
dealing  with  the  saying  that  "  a  Christian  is  a  man  who  may  do  v^hat  he  likes" 
replied,  "  That  is  quite  true,  only  a  Christian  is  a  man  with  a  new  set  of  likes." 
The  Christian  is  free  unto  righteousness ;  free  to  do  everything  right,  and  kind, 
and  worthy.  But  the  Christian  is  not  free  to  do  wrong.  He  is  under  the 
strictest  obligations  not  to  do  anything  unworthy  of  the  name  he  bears.  What 
sort  of  things  a  Christian  is  free  to  do  is  indicated  in  ver.  17.  1.  Treat  every 
man  respectfully  and  considerately,  as  he  would  wish  them  to  treat  him.  To  a 
Christian  man,  every  man,  no  matter  how  poor  or  ignorant  he  may  be,  is  to  be 
honoured  for  the  image  of  God  in  him.  2.  Keep  up  all  that  is  becoming  to  the 
family  relation  within  the  Church  of  God.     3.  Let  the  cherished,  reverent  sense 

7G 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER, 


CHAP.  II. 


of  God  put  serious  and  careful  tone  on  all  the  conduct  and  association  of  life. 
4.  Set  good  example  of  good  manners  in  the  social  and  national  life.  Good 
manners  recognise  what  is  due  to  persons  placed  in  positions  of  trust  and 
responsibility. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  16.  Our  Freedom  in  Christ. — 
There  is  not  another  word  in  human  lan- 
guage with  power  to  thrill  human  hearts 
like  this  word  "  liberty."  The  victim 
of  revolution  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  liberty  ! 
what  crimes  are  committed  in  thy 
name ! "  And  we  may  say,  "Oh,  liberty  ! 
what  deeds  of  philanthrophyand  heroism 
have  been  wrought  under  thy  inspira- 
tion !  "  There  must  be  some  sentiment, 
common  to  humanity,  to  which  this 
w^ord  makes  its  appeal.  It  must  be 
this  :  throughout  humanity  there  is  an 
inward  consciousness  of  bondage  under 
sin.  Every  offer  of  outward  liberty — 
liberty  of  circumstance — is  caught  up 
by  men,  in  the  hope,  more  or  less  dis- 
tinctly cherished,  that  its  final  issue 
will  be  liberty  of  soul.  The  religion 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  its  chief 
end  •'  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are 
bruised."  It  proclaims  "  liberty  to  the 
captives." 

I.  Freedom  in  Christ  is  freedom  of 
the  soul. — Men  want  (1)  freedom 
of  circumstances ;  (2)  freedom  of 
thought ;  or  (3)  freedom  to  do  wrong — 
the  wrong  that  they  wish  to  do.  But 
freedom  in  Christ  is  no  freedom  such 
as  these.  It  is  the  freedom  of  the  soul. 
The  sinner  is  the  real  slave.  The 
drunkard,  the  worldling,  the  sensual, 
the  passionate,  the  dishonest,  the  selfish, 
the  proud,  the  unforgiving,  the  un- 
charitable, the  unbelieving,  are  slaves. 
Christ  comes,  past  all  the  fetters  of 
human  circumstance,  right  into  the 
soul  of  man.  He  comes  to  strike  off 
rings  and  chains  from  the  wrists  and 
anklets  of  the  soul.  This  is  the  price- 
less boon.  The  only  freedom  worth 
having  is  liberty  to  do  always  the 
things  that  please  God.  And  in  that 
sense  Gcd  has  made  us  free  in  Christ 
Jesus.  We  are  free  to  grow  up  into 
the  likeness  of  God's  dear  Son ;  our 
souls  are  free  in  righteousness.     The 


Son  has  made  us  free,  and  we  are  free 
indeed. 

II.  Freedom  in  Christ  is  freedom 
by  the  truth. — Falsehood  binds  to  a 
practical  life  of  sin.  The  root  of  all 
evil  is  a  lie.  Truth  works  out  into 
goodness  and  righteousness ;  untruth 
always  works  out  into  unrighteousness 
and  misery.  Nothing  can  stand  but 
the  truth.  Nobody  can  endure  who 
is  not  true.  Every  opinion  has  some 
practical  issue  ;  it  works  toward  some- 
thing. If  it  be  false  and  unworthy, 
it  will  surely  tie  the  soul  down  to  a 
life  of  indulgence  and  wrong-doing. 
If  it  be  true  and  noble,  it  as  surely 
leaves  the  soul  free  to  fulfil,  in  the 
earthly  spheres,  the  righteousness  for 
which  it  was  made.  The  truth  ever 
makes  free.  Every  lesser  phase  of 
truth,  whether  it  be  political,  or  social, 
or  scientific,  or  moral,  is  a  liberation  of 
men.  But  it  is  that  truth  brought  to 
light  by  Christ,  taught  by  Him,  and 
embodied  in  His  life,  which  is  the  great 
liberator.  It  frees  hand,  and  conscience, 
and  heart,  to  know  that  God  is  the 
heavenly  Father,  and  the  Saviour  of 
men  by  sacrifice.  It  frees  us  for  seek- 
ing after  righteousness  to  apprehend 
the  truth,  that  this  world  is  not  the 
real  world,  and  that  a  time  is  coming 
when  the  whole  humanity  shall  be 
glorified. 

III.  Freedom  in  Christ  is  freedom 
in  the  Spirit. — "  Where  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  is,  there  is  Liberty.  That 
Holy  Spirit  works  within  us,  in  the 
secrets  of  our  spiritual  natures.  He 
moulds,  and  restrains,  and  impels,  and 
purifies,  and  quickens  our  inclination, 
and  passion,  and  affection,  and  imagina- 
tion, and  intellect,  and  habit,  plucking 
all  the  self-bondages,  all  the  society 
bondages,  all  the  sin-bondages,  away. 
He  who  is  quite  perfectly  in  the  sway 
of   God  the  Holy  Ghost — if  there  be 

77 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


such  an  one  among  us — is  free  from  all 
the  enticements  and  allurements  of 
evil — free  to  follow  God  fully.  Dis- 
tinguish between  liberty  and  inde- 
pendence ;  between  freedom  and  licence: 
and  then  we  may  readily  recognise  those 
reasonable  abridgments  and  restraints 
under  which  Christian  freedom  is  set. 
The  Christian  man  will  not  only  find 
necessary  limitations  of  his  freedom,  he 
will  also  voluntarily  abridge  his  liberty, 
and  put  himself  under  restraints. 
Cultured  and  sensitive  conscience,  in 
respect  of  right  and  wrong,  is  sure  to 
set  limitations.  But  Christian  interest 
in  others,  positions  of  influence  on  others, 
and,  above  all,  the  sacrificings  of  Christ- 
ian love  and  charity,  lead  us  constantly 
to  refuse  to  do  what,  in  a  strict  sense, 
we  have  full  liberty  to  do.  We  must 
take  heed  "  lest  our  liberty  become  a 
stumbling-block  to  them  that  are  weak." 

Liberty. — A  brief  sketch  of  history 
sufiices  for  indicating  the  power  which 
the  cry  for  "  liberty  "  has  universally 
exerted.  The  hope  of  liberty  called  out 
of  Egypt  a  tribe  of  slaves,  and  in  seek- 
ing freedom  they  became  one  of  the 
foremost  nations  of  the  earth.  Liberty 
rallied  the  down-trodden  sons  of  Israel 
round  the  banners  of  a  delivering  Barak, 
or  Gideon,  or  Jephthah.  Liberty  fired 
the  nation  with  a  magnificent  heroism, 
and  led  to  the  casting  off  of  a  foreign 
yoke,  in  the  days  of  Judas  Maccabeus. 
The  freedom  of  the  holy  sepulchre  from 
the  hands  of  the  infidel  flung  the  noblest 
of  Europe's  sons,  in  splendid  and  en- 
thusiastic self-sacrifice,  on  the  shores 
of  Asia,  in  the  time  of  the  Crusades. 
Freedom  from  a  hated  tyrant's  power 
made  a  handful  of  Swiss  mountaineers 
mightier  than  an  empire  of  soldiers,  in 
the  legendary  days  of  William  Tell. 
Freedom  to  worship  God  sent  the 
Pilgrim  Fathers  over  the  then  almost 
trackless  Atlantic,  seeking  new  lands 
and  homes.  "  Liberty,  equality,  fra- 
ternity " — grand  words — have  served 
for  a  sign  that  should  arouse  nations 
into  hideous  passions  of  revolution. 
Freedom  for  a  million  English  slaves 
woke  the  response  of  the  noblest  English 

78 


hearts  in  our  fathers'  time.  And  stilly 
if  men  would  move  the  hearts  of  their 
fellows,  they  raise  some  cry  of  civil  or 
religious  liberty.  False  or  true,  worthy 
or  unworthy,  a  host  will  surely  follow 
him  who  offers  a  boon  that  is  esteemed 
so  priceless. 

Ver.  17.  Honour. — To  "  honour,"  \ 
as  the  word  signifies,  is  to  estimate  the 
value  of  anything,  and  to  proportion 
our  regards  to  the  ascertained  value.  ; 
Apply  this  rule  to  man.  Estimate  his  i 
value  by  his  Creator's  love,  and  by  his 
Redeemer's  sufferings ;  by  his  own 
capacity  of  religion,  of  morals,  of  in- 
tellectual advancements,  of  pleasure,  of 
pain,  by  his  relation  to  a  life  and  to  a 
death  to  come ;  and  you  will  then  feel 
that  to  honour  a  man  is  to  respect  him 
under  these  views  and  relations  ;  to  be 
anxious  for  his  welfare  ;  to  contemplate 
him,  not  only  with  benevolence,  but 
even  with  awe  and  fear,  lest  a  prize  so 
glorious  should  be  lost,  lest  a  being  so 
capable  should  be  wretched  for  ever. — 
Richard  Watson. 

Ver.  1.  Honour  all  Men. — The  royal 
law  of  Christ  rests  not  on  the  crumbling 
basis  of  varying  ordinances,  nor  on  the 
tottering  foundation  of  disputable 
traditions,  but  on  the  foundation  of 
broad,  eternal  truths,  on  the  foundation 
of  Christ  Himself.  For  we  cannot 
understand  either  why  or  how  we 
should  honour  all  men  unless  we  know 
what  this  meaneth :  "The  Word  became 
flesh." 

I.  "  Honour  all  men." — There  is  a  •'' 
strange  universality  about  the  precept. 
All  but  the  brutish  understand  the 
duty  of  giving  honour  where  honour  is 
due;  all  but  the  vile  honour  those 
whose  lives  are  beautiful  with  the 
beauty  of  holiness,  and  noble  with  the 
nobleness  of  God.  But  are  we  to 
honour  the  mean,  the  base,  the  despic- 
able, the  depraved  ?  Yes,  we  honour 
the  majesty  of  their  nature  even  in  its 
fall.  We  honour  the  man  in  the  men. 
As  Michael  Angelo  sees  in  the  rough 
block  of  marble  the  winged  angel, 
struggling   to   be  free  j    as    Flaxman 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  ii. 


walking  in  the  slums,  sees  the  beauties  compassion  as  shall  feel  none  to  be  too 

and  possibilities  of   the  "  human   face  low,  too  fallen,  for  our  pity  or  our  help, 

divine  "  even  under  the  dirt  and  squalor  Let  us  see  humanity  in  Christ,  and  it 

of  the  gutter-child  ; — even  so  with  pity  will    be     indeed      transfigured      with 

and  reverence  the  true  Christian  sees,  heavenly  lustre. — Archdeacon  Farrar. 
even  in  the  lowest,  the  marred  work  of 

Him  who  breathed  into  man's  nostrils  The    Sum     of    Our     Duty. — These 

the  breath  of  life.  words  have  very  briefly,  and  yet  not 

II.  As  life  goes  on,  it  is  more  and  obscured  by  briefness,  but  withal 
more  our  temptation  to  honour  no  man.  very  plainly,  the  sum  of  our  duty 
— All  our  faith  in  human  nature  som«-  towards  God  and  men  ;  to  men,  both 
times  seems  to  be  shaken  to  its  founda-  in  general — honour  all  men ;  and  in 
tions.  Nor  can  we  be  surprised,  our  special  relations,  in  their  Christian  or 
human  nature  being  what  it  is,  if  even  religious  relations — love  the  brotherhood ; 
good  and  great  men  have  succumbed  and  in  a  chief  civil  relation — honour 
at  times  to  the  fatal  temptation  of  the  king.  And  our  whole  duty  to  God, 
despairing  of  humanity.  "  Most  men  comprised  under  the  name  of  His  fear^ 
are  bad ;  "  there  is  the  summary  of  the  is  set  in  the  middle  betwixt  these,  as 
Greek  philosopher,  who  deliberately  the  common  spring  of  all  duty  to  men, 
left  it  as  the  maxim  of  his  wisdom.  and  of  all  due  observance  of  it,  and 

III.  Though  there  is  so  much  the  sovereign  rule  by  which  it  is  to  be 
weight  of  authority  and  evidence  to  regulated. — Leighton. 

support     this     despairing     view,     it 

would  bo  fatal  to  us  ;  fatal  to  the  hope  The   Image   of  God   in   Man. — The 

by  which  we  are  saved,  and  which  is  as  fact  that  there  are  in  every  man  traces 

a  vernal*  breeze  amid  poisonous  fogs;  of  the  image  of  God,  after  which  he 

fatal   to   the    glad   enthusiasm   which  has   been   created,    and   infinitely  un- 

leaps  up  like  a  fountain  amid  the  briny  developed  capacities  which  might  issue 

waves   and   corrupted  currents   of  the  in  the  restoration  of  that  image  to  its 

world.     In  spite  of  all  the  facts  and  original    brightness,    was   in    itself   a 

evidence,  we  would  say,  with  a  living  reason  for  treating  all,  even  the  vilest 

writer :  "  I   trust  in  the  nobleness  of  and  most  degraded,  with  some  measure 

human  nature,  in  the  majesty  of  its  of  respect. — Dean  Plumptre. 
faculties,  in  the  fulness  of  its  mercy,  in 

the  joy  of  its  love."      Has    it    never  Honour  Due  to  All  Men. — Among  the 

struck    you    how    marvellous     is    the  inestimable    blessings   of  Christianity, 

fact    that    words    so    noble,    so    far-  not  the  least  is  the  new  sentiment  with 

reaching  as  these — "  Honour  all  men" —  which  it  teaches  man  to  look  upon  his 

should   be   uttered  by    a   poor  Jew,  a  fellow-beings — the  new  relation  which 

Galilean   fisherman?     Had    this    rule  it  establishes  between  man  and  man. 

been  followed,  what  a  different  world  There  is  nothing  of  which  men  know 

we  should    have   seen    in    the    past  !  so  little  as  themselves.     They  under- 

Every  great  crime  of  governments  and  stand     incomparably     more     of     the 

of  nations  has  been  a  crime  against  the  surrounding  creation  of  matter,  or  of 

inherent  rights  of  the   human  race —  its  laws,  than  of   that  spiritual  prin- 

slavery,    despotism,     priestcraft,     etc.  ciple  to  which  matter  was  made  to  be 

*'  Honour    all    men  " — their    inherent  the  minister,  and  without  which   the 

dignity,  the  infinite  possibilities  of  their  outward  universe  would  be  worthless, 

nature,    their   freedom   of   conscience,  Men  have  as  yet  no  just  respect  for 

the  awful  price  of   their  redemption,  themselves,  and  of  consequence  no  just 

their  immediate  accountability  to  God.  respect  for  others.     Nothing  can  make 

While   this   honour  leads  us  to  deep  man  a   true  lover    of    man    but   the 

reverence  for  all  human  goodness,  let  it  discovery  of  something  interesting  and 

i  inspire    us   also   with   such   hope  and  great  in  human  nature.     We  must  see 

79 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


and  feel  that  a  human  being  is  some-  "which  it  calls  on  us  to  wash  away.  It 
thing  important,  and  of  immeasurable  gives  none  of  those  dark  views  of  our 
importance.  To  show  the  grounds  on  race  which  would  make  us  shrink  from 
which  the  obligation  to  honour  all  men  it  as  from  a  nest  of  venomous  reptiles, 
rests,  I  might  take  a  minute  survey  of  The  very  strength  of  his  temptations  is 
that  human  nature  which  is  common  one  of  the  indications  of  his  greatness, 
to  all,  and  set  forth  its  claims  to  rever-  The  sentiment  of  honour  or  respect 
ence.  But  there  is  one  principle  of  for  human  beings  is  essential  to  the 
the  soul  which  makes  all  men  essenti-  Christian  character.  A  more  faithful 
ally  equal,  which  places  all  on  a  level  culture  of  it  would  do  much  to  carry 
as  to  means  of  happiness.  It  is  the  forward  the  Church  and  the  world.  I 
sense  of  duty,  the  power  of  discerning  attach  to  this  sentiment  such  import- 
and  doing  right,  the  moral  and  ance  that  I  measure  by  its  progress 
religious  principle,  the  inward  monitor  the  progress  of  Society.  The  various 
which  speaks  in  the  name  of  God.  forms  in  which  this  principle  is  to  be 
This  is  the  great  gift  of  God.  We  can  exercised  or  manifested,  may  be  en- 
conceive  no  greater.  It  is  this  moral  larged  on.  Honour  man  from  the 
power  which  makes  all  essentially  equal,  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  earthly 
which  annihilates  all  the  distinctions  of  course.  Honour  the  child  :  on  this  | 
this  world.  The  idea  of  Kight  is  the  principle  all  good  education  rests./ 
primary  and  the  highest  revelation  of  Honour  the  poor ;  this  sentiment  of  \ 
God  to  the  human  mind,  and  all  out-  respect  is  essential  to  improving  the ' 
ward  revelations  are  founded  on,  and  connexion  between  the  more  and  less 
addressed  to  it.  We  little  understand  prosperous  conditions  of  Society, 
the  solemnity  of  the  moral  principle  in  Perhaps  none  of  us  have  yet  heard  or 
every  human  mind.  We  think  not  how  can  comprehend  the  tone  of  voice  in 
awful  are  its  functions.  We  forget  which  a  man,  thoroughly  impressed 
that  it  is  the  germ  of  immortality,  with  this  sentiment,  would  speak  to  a 
There  is  a  foundation  in  the  human  fellow-creature.  It  is  a  language 
soul  for  the  honour  enjoined  in  the  hardly  known  on  earth.  The  great 
text  towards  all  men.  By  Christ-  revelation  which  man  now  needs  is  a 
ianity  this  duty  is  enforced  by  new  revelation  of  man  to  himself.  The 
and  more  solemn  considerations.  This  faith  which  is  most  wanted  is  a  faith 
whole  religion  is  a  testimony  to  the  in  what  we  and  our  fellow-beings  may 
worth  of  man  in  the  sight  of  God,  to  become  ;  a  faith  in  the  Divine  germ  or 
the  importance  of  human  nature,  to  the  principle  in  every  soul.  Happy  are 
infinite  purposes  for  which  we  were  they  who  have  begun  to  penetrate  that 
framed.  True,  Christianity  speaks  of  mystery  of  our  spiritual  nature,  and  in 
man  as  a  sinner — it  deals  with  human  whom  it  has  awakened  feelings  of  awe 
sin  ;  but  it  does  not  speak  of  this  as  towards  themselves,  and  of  deep  interest 
indissolubly  bound  up  with  the  soul,  as  and  honour  towards  their  fellow-crea- 
entering  into  the  essence  of  human  tures. — W.  E.  Channing,  D.D. 
nature,    but    as    a    temporary   stain, 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18—25. 

The  Example  of  Suffering. — -However  general  may  be  made  the  applications  of 
this  paragraph,  it  is  well  to  observe  that  its  counsels,  and  arguments,  and  per- 
suasions, are  directly  addressed  to  "  slaves,"  and  that,  in  their  form,  they  are 
precisely  adapted  to  such  persons.  The  "  servants  "  of  the  New  Testament  are 
not  persons  who  ofiered  free  service  upon  fixed  wage  terms,  but  individuals  whose 
personal  liberty  was  lost,  who  were  the  property  of  some  other  man,  and  whose 
powers  of  body  and  mind — whose  lives,  indeed — were  absolutely  at  their  masters' 
command.     We  need  not   associate  African,  West  Indian,  or  American  slavQ- 

80 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L  PETER.  chap.  il. 


horrors  with  the  ancient  slave-system,  though  it  is  true  that  Roman  and  other 
Pagan  slaves  often  had  the  bitterest  of  bitter  lots  in  other  ways.  The  term  that 
is  here  translated  **  servants  "  points  to  "  domestic  slaves" — those  sustaining  house- 
hold relations,  and  occupied  in  household  duties ;  and  we  have  to  think  of  the 
kinds  of  suffering  which  they  would  have  to  endure,  more  especially  when  they 
had  become  converts  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  as  so  many  of  this  class  had  in  those 
early  days.  We  know  enough  of  the  difficulties  which  our  servants  have  to 
endure  now,  when  they  are  amongst  ungodly  and  scornful  fellow-servants,  and 
in  pleasure -loving,  self -indulging  families,  to  be  able  to  imagine  what  burdens, 
and  what  trials,  a  Christian  slave  in  an  ancient  Pagan  family  might  have  to  bear* 
It  was  most  fitting  that  the  apostle  should  directly  address  these  kindly, 
reassuring,  and  inspiring  messages  to  them.  A  large  proportion  of  the  early 
Christian  converts  are  known  to  have  belonged  to  this  class.  It  has  been 
noticed  that  nearly  all  the  names  given  in  Romans  xvi.,  and  many  of  those 
of  other  members  of  the  Church,  are  found  in  the  Columbaria,  or  Catacombs  of 
Rome,  as  belonging  to  slaves  or  freedmon.  Conscious  of  a  new  and  higher  life, 
and  of  thoughts  and  hopes  altogether  transcending  their  human  lot,  these  slaves 
could  not  fail  to  fret  under  their  humiliating  conditions  ;  and  they  might  easily 
fail  to  meet  their  daily  responsibilities,  and  unduly  repine  under  disabilities 
which  now  seemed  to  be  overwhelming.  Indeed,  the  question  often  came  up 
before  the  regenerate  slave,  "  Ought  I  to  remain  in  this  degrading  servitude  ? 
Ought  I  not,  at  any  cost,  to  strike  for  personal  liberty  ? "  If  such  an  one  took 
his  question  to  the  apostles,  we  know  that  they  would  have  bidden  him  keep  his 
place,  and  serve  Christ,  by  fitting  nobly  into  his  position,  and  living  before  his 
fellow-servants  and  the  family  in  the  most  attractive  Christian  spirit.  "  Let  every 
man  wherein  he  is  called,  therein  abide  with  God  "  is  the  apostolic  principle  applied 
to  the  slaves  of  that  day.  But  St.  Peter  seems  to  know  enough  of  the  actual  lot 
of  these  slaves  to  take  them  as  types  of  the  kind  of  sufiering  which  Chiistians 
were  then  called  to  endure.  He  is  not,  it  should  be  carefully  noticed,  dealing 
here  with  the  sufferings  which  come  from  the  accidents,  disasters,  or  calamities 
of  life,  nor  with  those  which  belong  to  the  inroads  of  disease,  or  to  bodily 
infirmities,  or  to  the  action  of  heredity.  He  has  in  mind  the  sufferings  which 
come  out  of  our  various  relations  with  others,  and  especially  the  sufferings  which 
attend  on  our  endeavour  to  live  out  our  Christian  principles  in  those  relations. 
The  force  of  the  Christly  example,  which  he  presents,  is  only  seen  when  its 
sphere  is  thus  circumscribed.  It  is  quite  true  that  our  Lord  is,  in  a  general  and 
comprehensive  sense,  our  example ;  but  here  St.  Peter  does  but  present  Him  as 
an  example  of  suffering,  and  of  precisely  such  suffering  as  these  slaves  were 
called  to  endure.  If  these  remarks  seem,  at  first,  to  unduly  limit  the  appli- 
cations of  this  familiar  passage,  it  will  be  found,  on  further  examination,  that  it 
opens  up  detailed  applications,  within  the  limitations,  which  give  fresh  point  to 
the  apostolic  advice.  For  it  will  be  found  to-day  that  most  of  our  serious 
sufferings  come  in  connection  with  our  human  relationshij^s.  Precisely  what 
these  Christian  slaves  felt  was  the  bitterness  of  being  punished  when  they  were 
innocent.  And  this  they  often  were,  in  the  anger,  or  the  tyranny,  or  the 
malice,  of  their  masters.  They  also  felt  the  difficulty  of  keeping  patient  under 
peculiar  aggravations,  and  the  apparent  uselessness  of  their  most  heroic  efforts 
to  serve  well ;  for  they  constantly  failed  to  alter  the  conditions  under  which  they 
so  grievously  sufiered.  This  is  St.  Peter's  message  to  them  :  "  For  hereunto  were 
ye  called,  because  Christ  also  suffered  for  you,  leaving  you  an  example,  that  ye 
should  follow  His  steps."  Jeremy  Taylor  has  a  suggestive  illustration  of  the 
help  we  may  find  by  following  the  example  of  our  Lord's  sufierings.  "  St. 
Wenceslaus,  the  Bohemian  king,  one  winter  night,  going  to  his  devotions  in  a 
remote  church,  barefooted,  in  the  snow  and  sharpness  of  unequal  and  pointed 

G  81 


CHAP.  11.  HOmLETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


ice,  his  servant,  Redevivus,  who  waited  upon  his  master's  piety  and  endeavoured 
to  imitate  his  affections,  began  to  faint  through  the  violence  of  the  snow  and 
cold,  till  the  king  commanded  him  to  follow  him,  and  set  his  feet  in  the  same 
footsteps  which  his  feet  should  mark  for  him.  The  servant  did  so,  and  either 
fancied  a  cure  or  found  one,  for  he  followed  his  prince,  helped  forward  with 
shame  and  zeal  to  his  imitation,  and  by  the  forming  footsteps  in  the  snow.  In 
the  same  manner  does  the  blessed  Jesus  ;  for,  since  our  way  is  troublesome, 
obscure,  full  of  objection  and  danger,  apt  to  be  mistaken,  and  to  affright  our 
industry.  He  commands  us  to  mark  His  footsteps,  to  tread  where  His  feet  have 
stood,  and  not  only  invites  us  forward  by  the  argument  of  His  example,  but  He 
hath  trodden  down  much  of  the  difficulty,  and  made  the  way  easier  and  fit 
for  our  feet." 

I.  The  Chiistly  example  of  suffering  is  the  example  of  suffering  innocence. — 
"  Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth."  This  is  precisely 
adapted  to  St.  Peter's  declaration  to  the  slaves  :  "  For  this  is  acceptable,  if  for 
conscience  toward  God  a  man  endure  griefs,  suffering  wrongfully."  St.  Peter  is 
not  intending  to  make  any  general  declaration  here  concerning  the  sinlessness  of 
Jesus.  He  has  no  doctrine  about  it.  He  says,  "  Take  any  case  of  our  Lord's 
suffering ;  take  the  supreme  case  of  His  suffering  the  death  of  shame ; — you  will 
always  find  this  to  be  true :  He  never  suffered  for  a  fault ;  His  suffering  could 
never  be  thought  of  as  punishment  for  wrong-doing."  See  what  sympathy  with 
Jesus  the  poor  slaves  would  feel,  when  it  was  thus  brought  right  home  to  them 
that  their  Divine  Lord  also  "  suffered  wrongfully  " — suffered  in  innocence.  Even 
we  may  find  how  wonderfully  near  that  brings  the  Lord  Jesus  to  us.  For  the 
thing  that  sometimes  almost  overwhelmingly  oppresses  us  is  the  thought  of  how 
much  we  had,  and  have,  to  bear  in  life,  which  has  no  relation  whatever  to  our 
own  wrong-doing,  or  even  to  our  mistakes  or  negligences,  and  over  which  we 
have  had,  and  can  have,  no  sort  of  control.  Our  Lord  felt  the  same  oppressive 
burden.  *'  He  did  no  sin,  .  .  .  yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise  Him  :  He  hath 
put  Him  to  grief."  There  is  our  example  of  suffering  innocence.  It  may  not 
have  been  straightforwardly  presented  to  us,  that  suffering  which  is  the  proper 
recognition  of  wrong-doing  and  sin  is  not  Christian  suffering.  It  is  the  proper 
lot  of  moral  beings — there  is  nothing  distinctively  Christian  about  it ;  and  Christ 
offers  us  no  example  of  bearing  the  punishment  of  sin  in  that  sense.  There  is 
much  good  advice  to  be  given  to  those  who  suffer  for  their  wrong-doing.  But 
Christ's  example  cannot  be  offered  to  them  for  their  inspiration,  since  it  does  not 
in  any  way  concern  them.  Keeping  loyalty  and  obedience ;  walking  in  right- 
eousness ;  preserving  the  "  vessel  of  your  body  in  sanctification  and  honour  "  ; 
meeting  nobly  all  your  earthly  obligations,  nevertheless,  is  the  fact  for  you 
that  life  brings  round  to  you  sufferings  and  distresses  ?  White-souled  with 
Christ  are  you,  and  is  it  nevertheless  the  fact  that,  along  with  Christ,  you 
are  misunderstood,  maligned,  illtreated,  persecuted,  turned  out,  "  a  man  of 
sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief  "  ?  Then  the  inspiring,  comforting  example 
of  Christ  is  precisely  for  you. 

IL  The  Christly  example  of  suflfering  is  the  example  of  suffering  patience.— 
"  Who,  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again,  when  He  suffered,  threatened  not ; 
but  committed  Himself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously."  It  will  at  once  be 
seen  how  precisely  this  example  fits  into  the  persuasion  and  argument  which 
St.  Peter  addresses  to  the  slaves.  "  For  what  glory  is  it,  if,  when  ye  sin,  and  are 
buffeted  for  it,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently  ?  but  if,  when  ye  do  well,  and  suffer 
for  it,  ye  shall  take  it  patiently,  this  is  acceptable  with  God."  And  concerning 
precisely  this  you  have  the  helpful  example  of  Christ.  We  are  led  in  thought 
to  the  Palace  of  the  High  Priest ;  to  the  Prsetorium ;  to  Herod's  Judgment 
Hall  ;  to  thorn-crowned  Calvary.     There  is  scorn,  accusation,  smiting,  mockery, 

82 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER,  chap.  il. 


howling,  scourging,  taunt,  and  cruelty;  and  all  this  strain  made  it  a  poor, 
exhausted  victim  "that  at  last  they  hung  mid  earth  and  heaven,  as  if  He  were 
unfit  for  either.  And  no  resistance  was  offered  by  Him,  no  reproach  was  made 
— "  a  silent  Man  amid  His  foes."  *'  Taken  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  like 
a  sheep  dumb  before  the  shearers."  And  there  was  the  sublimest  triumph — 
moral  triumph — earth  has  ever  witnessed.  There  is,  for  slaves,  or  for  us,  the 
entrancing  example  of  suflfering  patience.  It  is  Christian  suffering  when  we 
suffer  in  innocency.  It  is  yet  more  truly  Christian  suffering  when,  so  suffering, 
we  suffer  silently,  with  the  heroism  of  a  patient  endurance.  Buffeted  for 
nothing,  as  Christ  was ;  taking  it  patiently,  as  Christ  did  ;— this  is  acceptable 
with  God.  But  could  any  example  be  presented  to  us  that  could  be  so  searching 
and  so  humbling  as  this  is  ?  It  reveals  our  supreme  life-failures.  Just  what 
we  seem  never  able  to  do  is  to  suffer  innocently,  and  at  the  same  time  to  suffer 
patiently.  Oh  how  ready  we  are  to  proclaim  our  wrongs !  Oh  the  bitter  things 
we  say  of  those  who  do  us  wrong  !  Oh  the  frettings  and  the  chafings  under  the 
wrongs  which  seem  to  us  so  wholly  undeserved  !  See  once  again  how  He  stands, 
calm  and  silent,  dressed  in  the  mock  royal  robes.  See  howrestrainedly  He  bears 
the  cruel  scourge.  See  how  He  submits  when  the  nails  are  driven  through  the 
living  flesh.  He,  with  His  holy  example,  shames  us  into  the  dust.  We  can 
scarcely  dare  to  look  upon  His  holy  example  and  by  it  appraise  our  conduct. 
**  When  He  suffered  He  threatened  not,  but  committed  Himself  to  Him  who 
judgeth  righteously."  Christly  suffering  is  suffering  patiently.  And  that  is 
something  for  us  yet  to  win. 

III.  The  Christly  example  of  suffering  is  the  example  of  suffering  love. — 
This  indeed  explains  how  the  patient  bearing  became  possible.  Christ  was 
sustained  by  a  cherished  purpose — a  purpose  of  love.  He  could  so  calmly  endure. 
He  could  be  so  restrainedly  patient,  because  His  sufferings  were  vicarious. 
"Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."  He  so 
endured  in  the  inspiration  of  this  most  loving  purpose,  ''  that  we,  having  died 
unto  sins,  might  live  unto  righteousness."  All  was  borne  so  well  in  the  per- 
suasion of  service  to  others.  We  have  reached  at  once  the  point  of  the 
example,  and  the  power  of  the  example.  That  suffering  was  borne,  not  for  sin  ; 
not  as  accident,  or  necessity  ;  but  in  the  purpose  of  redeeming  love — love  to  us. 
"  For  love  of  us  He  bled,  for  love  of  us  He  died.*  Christly  suffering,  suffering  after 
the  pattern  and  example  of  Christ,  is  vicarious  suffering ;  suffering,  not  because 
we  crtight;  not  because  we  must;  but  suffering  endured  because  we  watit  to  serve — 
and  he  alone  can  serve  and  save  his  brother  who  ran  suffer  for  him.  Let  the 
slave  suffer  for  the  Master's  sake.  Let  us  see  that  if  we  follow  the  example  of 
Christ,  we  present  an  example  to  others  for  Christ ;  and  our  suffering  may  be 
our  bearing  of  sins,  that  those  whom  we  love  may  die  unto  sin,  and  live  unto 
righteousness.  We  shall  never  suffer  well,  never  suffer  after  the  Christly  example, 
until  we  rise  into  a  vicariousness  of  suffering  like  our  Lord's.  When  we  take 
up  somebody's  burden  on  our  own  hearts  we  can  go  on  to  our  cross  as  calmly, 
as  sweetly,  as  patiently,  as  Jesus  went  on  to  His.  Look  once  again  at 
what  alone  is  Christian  suffering — suffering  after  the  example  of  Christ's 
sufferings.  You  have  much  to  suffer  as  a  consequence  and  penalty  of  your  sin. 
Christ  never  bore  any  such  suffering,  for  He  "  did  no  sin."  You  have  much 
suffering  to  bear  from  circumstances  altogether  beyond  your  control — hereditary 
disabilities,  natural  calamities,  social  distresses,  insidious  diseases ;  and  in  all  that 
natural  sphere  of  suffering  your  Lord  shared  with  you.  But  only  because 
He  shared  with  you  in  being  a  man.  There  is  nothing  specifically  Christian  in 
the  suffering  which  belongs  to  the  common  human  lot.  But  you  have  sufferings 
which  come  to  you  for  somebody's  sake ;  which  belong  to  your  effort  to  serve 
others ;  which  follow  upon  your  whole-hearted  purpose  to  serve  Christ,  in  His 

83 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


purpose  to  save  men.  You  suffer  as  mothers  suffer  for  their  children's  sake. 
You  suffer  as  dehverers  suffer  who  rescue  the  imperilled  from  flood  and  fire. 
You  suffer  by  bearing  somebody  else's  woes  upon  your  own  mind  aiid  heart  and 
life.  You  suffer  in  absolute  loyalty  of  witness  to  Him  who  is  for  you  the  king 
of  righteousness.  You  suffer  as  the  martyr  suffers  rather  than  bring  dishonour 
upon  the  *'  Name  that  is  above  every  name."  Then  you  know  what  Christian 
suffering  is.  You  know — and  you  may  recall  to  mind  what  you  know — that 
the  Christly  suffering  is  suffering  innocence,  and  suffering  patience,  and  suffering 
love.  It  is  bearing  somebody's  sin,  or  somebody's  woe,  or  somebody's  recovery, 
or  somebody's  well-being,  in  your  own  body,  on  some  tree  of  agony  or  shame.  It 
is  this:  you -suffer,  because  you  want  somebody  to  *'  die  unto  sin,  and  live  unto 
righteousness." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  19.  Suffering. — St.  Peter  is 
writing  here  to  one  particular  class 
of  Christians — to  household  slaves. 
"  Slaves,"  he  begins,  "  be  subject  to 
your  masters."  As  St.  Peter  thinks 
over  his  Jewish  flock  of  converts,  he 
remembers  that  multitudes  of  them 
are  Christian  slaves  in  Pagan  house- 
holds. He  teaches  that  suffering  is 
thankworthy, .  a  gift  from  God,  and 
acceptable  in  turn  to  Him,  if  it  be 
accompanied  by  two  conditions.  1.  It 
must  he  unde7'stood.  2.  The  suffering 
must  he  for  conscience  toward  God. — 
This  is  it  which  makes  pain  at  once 
bearable  and  bracing,  when  the  con- 
science of  the  sufferer  can  ask  the 
perfect  Moral  Being  to  take  note  of  it. 
Mere  suffering,  which  a  man  dares  not 
offer  to  Grod,  though  borne  patiently 
through  "pluck,"  as  we  term  it,  has 
no  spiritual  value.  "  Father,  into  Thy 
hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  This 
is  the  consecration  prayer  uttered  on 
the  cross,  uttered,  if  in  other  lan- 
guage, wherever  men  suffer  for  con- 
science toward  God ;  and  by  it  suffering 
is  changed  into  moral  victory.  There 
are  two  questions  raised  by  our  text. 

I.  Why  did  not  the  apostles  de- 
nounce slavery  as  an  intolerable 
wrong? — By  advising  slaves  to  honour 
and  obey  their  owners,  they  seem  to 
sanction  it  indirectly.  Nothing  can 
well  be  more  antipathetic  than  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  and  the  spirit  of 
slavery.  The  gospel  proclaims  the 
unity  of  the  human  race,  and  the 
equality  of  all  its  members  before  God. 


But  the  business  of  the  apostles  lay 
rather  witli  the  other  world  than  with 
this — with  this  just  so  far  as  it  bore 
upon  the  other.  And  the  exact  ques- 
tion for  them  to  consider  was  whether 
slavery  ruined  the  prospects  of  the 
human  soul. 

II.  Does  not  the  advice  of  the 
apostle  to  submit  quietly  to  wrong 
destroy  manliness  and  force  of  cha- 
racter if  acted  on  ? — Moral  strength, 
when  at  its  best,  is  generally  passive 
and  unobtrusive.  No  moral  strength 
ever  approached  that  which  was  dis- 
played on  Calvary,  when  all  that  was 
before  Him  was  present  from  the  first 
to  the  mind  of  the  Divine  Victim, 
"  who  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled 
not  again." 

III.  This  truth,  announced  by  St. 
Peter,  is  always  applicable  in  every 
age  and  country. — Among  ourselves 
there  are  many  who  endure  grief  for 
conscience  toward  God.  It  is  no  mono- 
poly of  any  one  class.  Every  rank  in 
society  has  its  petty  tyrants.  Law 
can  do  but  little  for  these  sufferers,  but 
religion  can  do  much,  by  pointing  to 
the  Crucified. — Canon  Liddon. 

Yer.  21.  The  Imitahleness  of  Christ's 
Character. — Christ  came  to  give  us  a 
religion.  By  a  wise  and  beautiful 
ordination  of  Providence,  he  was  sent 
to  show  forth  His  religion  in  Himself. 
Christianity  is  not  a  mere  code  of  laws, 
nor  an  abstract  system  such  as  theo- 
logians frame.  It  is  a  living,  embodied 
religion.     It  comes  to  us  in  a  humai^ 


EOMILETIC  COMMElSfTARt :   L  PETEB.  chap.  11. 


form ;  it  offers  itself  to  our  eyes  as  material.  All  minds  are  essentially 
well  as  ears ;  it  breathes,  it  moves  in  of  one  origin,  one  nature,  kindled  from 
our  sight.  It  is  more  than  precept ;  one  Divine  flame,  and  all  are  tending 
it  is  example  and  action.  The  im-  to  one  centre,  one  happiness.  This 
portance  of  example,  who  does  not  truth  mingles,  unperceived,  with  all 
understand  1  And  it  is  impossible  to  our  worship  of  God,  which  uniformly 
place  ourselves  under  any  influence  so  takes  for  granted  that  He  is  a  mind 
quickening  as  the  example  of  Jesus.  having  thought,  aflfection,  and  volition, 
This  introduces  us  to  the  highest  order  like  ourselves.  It  is  also  demonstrable 
of  virtues.  This  is  fitted  to  awaken  from  the  consideration  that  Truth,  the 
the  whole  mind.  Nothing  has  equal  object  and  nutriment  of  mind,  is  one 
power  to  neutralise  the  coarse,  selfish,  and  immutable,  so  that  the  whole 
and  sensual  influences  amidst  which  family  of  intelligent  beings  must  have 
we  are  plunged,  to  refine  our  concep-  the  same  views,  the  same  motives,  and 
tion  of  duty,  and  to  reveal  to  us  the  the  same  general  ends.  All  souls  are 
perfection  on  which  our  hopes  and  one  in  nature,  approach  one  another, 
most  strenuous  desires  should  habitually  and  have  grounds  and  bonds  of  com- 
fasten.  It  is  possible,  however,  so  to  munion  with  one  another.  I  am  not 
present  the  greatness  of  Jesus  as  to  only  one  of  the  human  race ;  I  am  one 
place  Him  beyond  the  reach  of  our  of  the  great  intellectual  family  of  God. 
sympathy  and  imitation.  This  needs  There  is  no  spirit  so  exalted,  with 
to  be  carefully  dealt  with.  1.  Real  which  I  have  not  common  thoughts 
greatness  of  character,  greatness  of  and  feelings.  No  greatness  of  a  being 
the  highest  order,  far  from  being  re-  separates  me  from  him,  or  makes  him 
pulsive  and  discouraging,  is  singularly  unapproachable  by  me.  Christ  never 
accessible  and  imitable.  Greatness  of  holds  Himself  up  as  an  inimitable  and 
character  is  a  communicable  attribute ;  unapproachable  being,  but  directly  the 
I  should  say,  singularly  communicable.  reverse.  3.  There  is  one  attribute  of 
It  has  nothing  exclusive  in  its  nature,  mind  that  should  particularly  animate 
I  know  not  in  history  an  individual  so  us  to  propose  to  ourselves  a  sublime 
easily  comprehended  as  Jesus  Christ,  standard,  as  sublime  as  Jesus  Christ, 
for  nothing  is  so  intelligible  as  sincere,  It  is  the  principle  of  growth  in  human 
disinterested  love.  I  know  not  any  nature.  We  were  made  to  grow.  Our 
being  who  is  so  fitted  to  take  hold  on  faculties  are  germs,  and  given  for  ex- 
all  orders  of  minds  ;  and  accordingly  pansion,  to  which  nothing  authorises 
He  drew  after  Him  the  unenlightened,  us  to  set  bounds.  The  soul  bears  the 
the  publican,  and  the  sinner.  It  is  a  impress  of  illimitableness,  in  the  thirst, 
sad  mistake,  then,  that  Jesus  Christ  the  unquenchable  thirst,  which  it  brings 
should  be  presented  as  too  great  to  with  it  into  being,  for  a  power,  know- 
allow  us  to  think  of  intimacy  with  ledge,  happiness,  which  it  never  gains, 
Him,  or  to  think  of  making  Him  our  and  which  always  carry  it  forward  into 
standard.  2.  Though  so  far  above  us,  futurity.  When  I  consider  this  prin- 
as  at  once  man,  and  other  than  man,  ciple  or  capacity  of  the  human  soul,  I 
Christ  is  still  one  of  us,  and  is  only  an  cannot  restrain  the  hope  which  it 
illustration  of  the  capacities  which  we  awakens.  I  no  longer  see  aught  to 
all  possess.  All  minds  are  of  one  prevent  our  becoming  whatever  was 
family.  When  we  speak  of  higher  good  and  great  in  Jesus  on  earth. — 
orders  of  beings,  of  angels  and  arch-  W.  E.  C harming ^  D.D. 
angels,   we    are    apt    to    conceive    of 

distinct  kinds  and  races  of  beings.  Of  Patience. — In  these  words  two 
separated  from  us  and  from  each  other  things  appear  especially  observable  :  a 
by  impassable  barriers.  But  it  is  not  duty  implied  (the  duty  of  patience), 
so.  There  is  no  such  partition  in  the  and  a  reason  expressed,  which  en- 
spiritual   world    as    you    see    in    the  forceth  the  practice  of  that  duty   the 

85 


tJHAP   II. 


HOMILEfIC  COMMENTARY :    L  PETER. 


example  of  Christ).  We  shall,  using 
no  more  preface  or  circumstance,  first 
briefly,  in  way  of  explication  and 
direction,  touch  the  duty  itself,  then 
more  largely  describe  and  urge  the 
example.  The  word  patience  hath,  in 
common  usage,  a  double  meaning,  taken 
from  the  respect  it  hath  unto  two 
sorts  of  objects,  somewhat  different. 
As  it  respecteth  provocations  to  anger 
and  revenge  by  injuries  or  discourtesies, 
it  signifieth  a  disposition  of  mind  to 
bear  them  with  charitable  meekness ; 
as  it  relateth  to  adversities  and  crosses 
disposed  to  us  by  providence,  it  im- 
porteth  a  pious  undergoing  and  sustain- 
ing them.  That  both  these  kinds  of 
patience  may  here  be  understood,  we 
may,  consulting  and  considering  the 
context,  easily  discern :  that  which 
immediately  precedeth  "  If  when  ye 
do  well,  and  suffer  for  it,  ye  take  it 
patiently,  this  is  acceptable  to  God " 
relateth  to  good  endurance  of  adversity  ; 
that  which  presently  folio weth  "  who 
when  He  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again, 
when  He  suffered  He  threatened  not" 
referreth  to  meek  comporting  with 
provocations :  the  text  therefore,  as  it 
looketh  backward,  doth  recommend  the 
patience  of  adversities ;  as  forward,  the 
patience  of  contumelies.  But  seeing 
both  these  objects  are  reducible  to  one 
more  general,  comprising  both — that  is, 
things  seeming  evil  to  us,  or  offensive 
to  our  sense — we  may  so  explicate  the 
the  duty  of  patience  as  to  include 
them  both.  Patience,  then,  is  that 
virtue  which  qualifieth  us  to  bear  all 
conditions  and  all  events,  by  God's 
disposal  incident  to  us,  with  such  ap- 
prehensions and  persuasions  of  mind, 
.such  dispositions  and  affections  of  heart, 
such  external  deportments  and  practices 
of  life,  as  God  requireth  and  good  reason 
directeth.  Its  nature  will,  I  conceive,  be 
understood  best  by  considering  the  chief 
acts  which  it  produce th,  and  wherein 
especially  the  practice  thereof  con- 
sisteth.  1.  A  thorough  persuasion 
that  nothing  befals  us  by  fate,  or 
chance,  or  the  mere  agency  of  inferior 
causes ;  but  that  all  proceeds  from 
the  dispensation,  or  with  the  allowance, 

86 


of  God  :  quotations  on  this  point  from 
holy  writ.  2.  A  firm  belief  that  all 
occurrences,  however  adverse  and  cross 
to  our  desires,  are  consistent  with  the 
justice,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God; 
so  that  we  cannot  reasonably  complain 
of  them.  3.  A  full  satisfaction  of 
mind,  that  all,  even  the  most  bitter 
and  sad  accidents,  do  by  God's  purpose 
tend  and  conduce  to  our  good,  accord- 
ing to  those  sacred  aphorisms,  "  Happy 
is  the  man  whom  God  correcteth,"  etc. 
4.  An  entire  submission  and  resignation 
of  our  wills  to  the  will  of  God,  with 
a  suppression  of  all  rebellious  senti- 
ments against  his  providence.  5.  Bear- 
ing adversities  calmly,  cheerfully,  and 
courageously,  so  as  not  to  be  discom- 
posed with  anger  or  grief,  not  to  be 
dejected  or  disheartened  j  but  to  re- 
semble in  our  disposition  of  mind  the 
primitive  saints,  who  were  as  grieved, 
but  always  rejoicing,  etc.  6.  A  hopeful 
confidence  in  God  for  the  removal  or 
alleviation  of  our  aflflictions,  and  for 
His  gracious  aid  to  support  them  well, 
agreeably  to  Scripture  rules  and  pre- 
cepts. 7.  A  willingness  to  continue, 
during  God's  pleasure,  in  our  aflSicted 
state,  without  weariness  or  irksome 
longings  for  alteration,  according  to  the 
wise  man's  advice :  My  son,  despise 
not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  etc. 
8.  A  lowly  frame  of  mind,  sensible  of 
our  unworthiness  and  manifold  defects; 
deeply  affected  with  reverence  towards 
the  awful  majesty  of  God,"  etc.  9.  Be- 
straining  our  tongues  from  all  dis- 
contented complaints  and  murmurings, 
all  profane  and  harsh  expressions, 
importing  displeasure  or  dissatisfaction 
in  God's  dealings  with  us,  or  despera- 
tion and  distrust  in  Him.  10.  Blessing 
and  praising  God  (that  is,  declaring  our 
hearty  satisfaction  in  God's  proceedings 
with  us,  acknowledging  His  wisdom, 
justice,  and  goodness  therein,  express- 
ing a  grateful  sense  thereof,  as  whole- 
some and  beneficial  to  us),  in  conformity 
to  Job,  who,  on  the  loss  of  all  his 
comforts,  did  thus  vent  his  mind : 
"  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath 
taken  away ;  bless-^^d  be  the  name  of 
the  Lord."     IL  Particularly  in  regard 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  n. 


to  those,  who,  by  injurious  and  offensive 
usage,    do   provoke    us,   patience    im- 
porteth — (1)  That  we  be  not  hastily, 
over-easily,     not     immoderately,     not 
pertinaciously    incensed     with     anger 
toward  them,  according  to  those  Divine 
precepts  and  aphorisms :  "Be  slow  to 
wrath."     "  Be  not  hasty  in  thy  spirit 
to  be  angry,  for  anger  resteth  in  the 
bosom    of    fools."       "  Give    place    to 
wrath  "    (that   is,    remove   it).      "  Let 
all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger, 
and  clamour,  and  evil  speaking,  be  put 
away    from    you,    with    all    malice." 
*'  Cease  from  anger,  let  go  displeasure, 
fret  not  thyself  in  anywise  to  do  evil." 
(2)  That   we    do    not    in   our   hearts 
harbour  any  ill  will,  or  ill  wishes,  or 
ill  designs  toward  them,   but  that  we 
truly  desire  their  good,  and  purpose  to 
further  it,  as  we  shall  have  ability  and 
occasion,  according  to  that  law  (even 
charged  on  the  Jews),  "  Thou  shalt  not 
bear  any  grudge  against  the  children 
of  thy  people  ;  but  thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself ; "  and  according 
to  that  noble  command  of  our  Saviour, 
"  Love  your  enemies ;   pray  for  them 
which  despitefully  use  you  and  perse- 
cute you."   (3)  That  in  effect  we  do  not 
execute  any  revenge,  or  for  requital  do 
any  mischief  to  them,  either  in  word 
or  deed  ;  but  for  their  reproaches  ex- 
change blessings   (or  good  words  and 
wishes),     for     their     outrages     repay 


benefits  and  good  turns,  according  to 
those  evangelical  rules :    "  Do  good  to 
them  that  hate  you,  bless  them  that 
curse  you."     "  Bless  them  that  perse- 
cute you ;  bless  and  curse  not."     "  See 
that  none  render  evil  for  evil."     "  Be 
pitiful,    be    courteous,    not    rendering 
evil  for  evil,  or  railing  for  railing,  but 
contrariwise     blessing."        "  If     thine 
enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thirst, 
give  him  drink."     "  Say  not,  I  will  do 
to  him  as  he  hath  done  to  me ;  I  will 
render   to   the   man  according   to  his 
work."     "  Say  thou  not,  I  will  recom- 
pense evil,  but  wait  on  the  Lord,  and 
He  shall  save  thee."     In  fine,  patience 
doth   include   and   produce   a  general 
meekness    and    kindness   of   affection, 
together   with   an  enlarged   sweetness 
and   pleasantness  in  conversation  and 
carriage    toward    all   men ;    implying 
that   how   hard  soever  our  case,  how 
sorry  or  sad  our  condition  is,  we  are 
not  therefore   angry   with  the    world, 
because  we  do  not  thrive  or  flourish  in 
it;    that   we   are    not    dissatisfied   or 
disgusted  with  the  prosperous  estate  of 
other  men  ;   that  we   are  not  become 
sullen  and  froward  toward  any  man, 
because  his  fortune  excelleth  ours,  but 
that  rather  we  do  "  rejoice  with  them 
that  rejoice  "  ;  we  do  find  complacence 
and  delight  in  their  good  success;  we 
borrow  satisfaction  and  pleasure  from 
their  enjoyments. — Dr,  Isaac  Barrow, 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  II. 


Ver.  14.  Living  Stones. — Figuratively,  like 
plants,  connected  with  and  nourished  by 
their  roots.  Stones  still  in  the  quarry  are 
said  to  be  living.  The  epithet  means  the 
firmness  of  that  thing  signified  by  the  name 
of  a  stone,  for  nothing  is  firmer  than  stones 
growing  in  a  quarry,  as  cleaving  fast  to  a 
p*ck  by  the  root. — Burder. 

Seeming  Life  of  Radiant  StoTies. — Of 
course  a  living  stone  means  a  human 
being.  The  figure  takes  its  origin  from  the 
seeming  life  of  radiant  stones,  whose 
gleams  and  flashes  have  the  seeming,  at 
times,  of  will  and  life.  A  man  is  said  in  the 
Bible  to  be  more  precious  than  the  gold  of 
Ophir  ;  and  of  a  woman  it  is  said,  "  Her  price 
is  far  above  rubies."  These  were  common 
comparisons.     There  is  something  in    the 


glow  of  precious  stones  that  peculiarly  fits 
them  to  serve  for  such  spiritual  figures. 
There  is  about  them  a  subtle  light— a  bril- 
liancy— that  burns  without  fire ;  that  con- 
sumes nothing,  and  requires  no  supply  ;  that 
for  ever  shines  without  oil ;  that  is  ever-* 
living,  unwasting,  unchanged  by  any  of  the 
natural  elements.  A  diamond  that  glows  in 
the  sunlight  flashes  yet  more  beautifully  in 
the  night.  No  mould  can  get  root  upon  it ; 
no  rust  can  taruish  it ;  no  decay  can  waste  it. 
The  jewels  that  were  buried  two  thousand 
years  ago,  if  now  dug  up  from  royal  and 
priestly  tombs,  would  come  forth  as  fair  and 
fresh  as  they  were  when  the  proud  wearer 
first  carried  them  in  his  diadem — fit  emblems 
by  which  to  represent  spiritual  qualities,  and 
the  beauty  and  imperishableness  of  Christian 
virtue.    And  a  company  of  holy  men,  resting 

87 


CHAP.  II. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   L  PETER. 


upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  may  well  be 
compared  to  a  palace  built  upon  broad 
foundations,  and  sparkling  to  the  very 
summit  with  living  stones  wliich  throw  back 
to  the  sun  a  differing  flash  through  every 
hour  of  his  rise  or  fall  through  the  long  day, 
— jy.  W.  Beecher. 

Stones  Left  Unused. — Travellers  sometimes 
find  in  lonely  quarries,  long  abandoned,  or 
once  worked  by  a  vanished  race,  great  blocks, 
squared  and  dressed,  that  seem  to  have  been 
meant  for  palace  or  shrine.  But  there  they 
lie,  neglected  and  forgotten,  and  the  building 
for  which  they  were  hewn  has  been  reared 
without  them.  Beware,  lest  God's  grand 
temple  should  be  built  without  you,  and 
you  be  left  to  desolation  and  decay. — A. 
Maclaren,  D.D. 

Ver.  10.  Marvellous  Light.  —  The  pheno- 
mena of  light  and  vision  have  for  all  minds 
surpassing  interest,  whether  in  regard  to  the 
beauty  of  light  or  its  utility.  The  beauty  is 
seen  spread  over  a  varied  landscape,  in  the 
verdure  of  fields  and  forests,  among  the  beds 
of  the  flower  garden,  in  the  plumage  of 
birds,  in  the  clouds  around  the  rising  and 
setting  sun,  in  the  circles  of  the  rainbow. 
And  the  utility  is  such  that,  if  a  man  had 
needed  to  supply  his  wants  by  groping  in 
utter  and  unchangeable  darkness,  even  if 
originally  possessed  of  all  knowledge  now 
existing  in  the  world,  he  would  scarcely  have 
secured  his  existence  for  one  day.  Eternal 
night  would  have  been  universal  death. 
Light,  then,  while  the  beauteous  garb  of 
nature,  is  also  the  absolutely  necessary 
medium  of  communication  between  living 
creatures  and  the  universe  around  them. 
The  rising  sun  is  what  converts  the  wilder- 
ness of  darkness  whi;h  night  covered,  and 
which,  to  the  mind  of  a  child  not  yet  aware 
of  the  regularity  of  nature's  changes,  is  so 
full  of  horror,  into  a  visible  and  lovely 
paradise.— -Key.  W.  Arnot. 

Vers.  13-17.  Political  Morality. — The  teach- 
ing of  the  New  Testament,  as  exhibited  in 
this  passage,  imparts  a  new  vitality  to 
political  economy.  It  forms  a  marvellous 
contrast  to  the  ordinary  teaching  of  Judaism 
— that  civil  obedience  was  not  due  to  heathen 
governors  except  on  compulsion.  The  Christ- 
ian's devotion  to  Jesus  Christ  is  to  be 
enthusiastic.  All  ordinary  duties  are  His, 
and  this  consideration  is  to  breathe  a  new 
spirit  into  the  discharge  of  them.  It  makes 
the  Caristian,  as  circumstances  require  it, 
either  the  faithful  public  servant  or  the 
hero.  It  may  be  objected  that  the  state  is 
put  forward  rather  in  a  negative  than  in  a 
positive  aspect.  I  ask,  How,  under  existing 
circumstances,  could  it  possibly  have  been 
otherwise  ?  It  was  at  this  period  so  corrupt 
that  to  have  taught  a  devotion  to  it  would 

88 


have  been  inconsistent  with  pure  public 
morality.  One  cannot  conceive  of  a  holy 
man  being  fired  with  an  ardent  patriotism 
for  such  a  condition  of  political  society  as 
that  involved  in  the  Roman  empire  during 
the  first  century  of  our  era.  Enthusiastic 
r  loyalty  to  the  Roman  emperors  of  that 
period  was  impossible.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  writers  of  tlie  New  Testament  had 
given  a  formal  precept  to  Christians,  enforc- 
ing on  them  the  duty  of  becoming  political 
reformers,  this  would  have  at  once  aroused 
the  mighty  power  of  the  empire  to  crush  the 
Christian  Church.  As  there  was  nothing  in 
the  existing  state  of  society  to  kindle  a 
spark  of  enthusiasm  in  the  discharge  of  duty, 
the  New  Testament  asks  the  Christian  to 
discharge  his  duties  to  the  Lord  Christ. — 
Mow. 

Ver.  15.  Silencing  tJie  Foolish. — To  a  young 
infidel  who  was  scofl&ng  at  Christianity 
because  of  the  misconduct  of  its  professors, 
the  late  Dr.  Mason  once  said,  "  Did  you  ever 
know  an  uproar  to  be  made  because  an  infidel 
went  astray  from  the  paths  of  morality  ?  " 
The  infidel  admitted  that  he  had  not.  "  Then 
do  you  not  see,"  said  Dr.  Mason,  *'  that  by 
expecting  professors  of  Christianity  to  be 
holy  you  admit  it  to  be  a  holy  religion,  and 
thus  pay  it  the  highest  compliment  in  your 
power  ? "  The  infidel,  of  course,  had  no  reply 
to  make. 

Ver.  17.  "  Honour  all  3fen.  Love  the 
Brotherhood.^' — When  we  speak  of  the  larger 
class,  ••  Honour  all  men,"  it  is  as  if  we  should 
say  "  all  waters,"  comprehending  those  that 
are  in  the  sea,  in  the  earth,  and  in  the  air  ; 
the  salt  and  the  fresh,  the  pure  and  the 
impure ;  absolutely  and  universally,  all 
waters.  When  we  speak  of  the  smaller  class, 
"  Love  the  brotherhood,"  it  is  as  if  we  should 
say  "  all  the  clouds."  These  are  waters, 
too ;  these  waters  were  once  lying  in  the  sea, 
and  lashing  themselves  into  fury  there,  or 
seething,  putrifying  under  the  sun  in  hollows 
of  the  earth's  surface  ;  but  they  have  been 
sublimed  thence,  they  are  now  in  their  resur- 
rection state,  and  all  their  impurity  has  been 
left  behind.  They  are  waters  still,  as  com- 
pletely and  perfectly  as  any  that  have  been 
left  below.  But  these  waters  float  in  the 
upper  air,  far  above  the  defilements  of  the 
earth  and  the  tumults  of  the  sea.  Although 
they  remain  essentially  of  the  same  nature 
with  that  which  stagnates  on  the  earth,  or 
rages  in  the  ocean,  they  are  sustained  aloft 
by  the  soft,  strong  grasp  of  a  secret,  universal 
law.  No  hand  is  seen  to  hold  them,  yet 
they  are  held  on  high.  As  the  clouds  which 
soar  in  the  sky  to  the  universal  mass  of 
waters,  so  are  the  brotherhood  of  God's 
regenerated  children  to  the  whole  family  of 
man.  Of  mankind  these  brothers  are  in 
origin  and  nature,  but  they  have  been  drawn 


JSOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


out  and  from  the  rest  by  an  unseen,  omnipo- 
tent law.  Their  nature  is  the  same,  and  yet 
it  is  a  new  nature.  They  are  men  of  flesh 
and  blood,  but  they  have  been  elevated  in 
stature  and  purified  in  character.  They  are 
nearer  God  in  place ,  and  liker  God  in  cha- 
racter. They  are  washed,  and  justified,  and 
sanctified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
by  the  Spirit  of  our  God.  Besides  the  com- 
mand, "  Come  ye  out  from  among  them,  and 
be  ye  separate,"  which  they  have  heard  and 
obeyed,  the  promise  has  been  fulfilled  in 
them,  "  Ye  shall  be  My  sons  and  daughters, 
saith  the  Lord  Almighty." — Mev.  William 
Arnot. 

Ver.  21.  In  the  Footsteps  of  Christ. — Many 
seem  to  think  that  to  go  to  Jerusalem  and 
tread  literally  upon  the  ground  He  trod  is 
following  the  footsteps  of  Christ ;  as  if  one, 
when  showed  a  tree  bearing  delicious  and 
wholesome  and  nourishing  fruit,  should 
neglect  the  fruit  and  try  to  feed  on  the 
leaves  or  bark :  or  as  if,  when  he  had  re- 
ceived a  package  of  most  valuable  goods,  he 
should  lay  them  by  and  make  no  use  of  them, 
but  wear  with  much  pride  the  canvas 
wrapper  in  which  they  were  packed  up. — 
Archbishop  Whately. 


Footsteps  as  a  Copy. — He  left  His  foot- 
steps as  a  copy,  so  the  word  in  the  original 
imports,  to  be  followed  by  us.  P^very  step 
of  His  is  a  letter  of  this  copy,  and  particu- 
larly in  this  point  of  suffering  He  wrote  us 
a  pure  and  perfect  copy  of  obedience,  in 
clear  and  great  letters,  in  His  own  blood. 
His  whole  life  is  our  rule  ;  not,  indeed,  His 
miraculous  works — His  footsteps  walking 
on  the  sea,  and  such  like — they  are  not 
for  our  following ;  but  His  obedience,  holi- 
ness, meekness,  and  humility  are  our 
copy,  which  we  should  continually  study. — 
Leightmi. 

Looking  unto  Jesus. — The  soldier  whose 
officer  says  not  "  Go  on,"  but  *'  Come  on,"  has 
tenfold  the  spirit  for  entering  the  battle. 
The  mowers  who  mow  in  line  have  much 
more  heart  during  the  burden  and  heat  of 
the  day  when  their  scythes  sweep  through 
the  grass,  keeping  time  to  the  stroke  of  a 
fellow-workman  in  front.  Even  walking 
along  the  roads  ourselves,  we  know  that  we 
can  walk  better  and  continue  longer  if  we 
be  following  some  one  that  is  a  little  way 
ahead.  We  have  One  always  to  look  to,  and 
we  can  most  go  out  of  ourselves  when  we 
look  at  Him. 


CHAPTER  III. 
THE  CHRISTIAN  SPIRIT  IN   SOCIAL  RELATIONS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 


The  main  contention  of  St.  Peter  is  that  the  Christian  life  and  obligations  are  not  intended 
to  be,  and  never  should  be,  made  a  disturbing  force  in  social  and  family  relations.  Our  Lord 
warned  His  disciples  that  Christianity  would  become  such  a  disturber,  by  reason  of  the  oppo- 
sition which  it  would  excite  ;  but  the  disturbing  force  must  never  be  in  the  Christian.  As 
much  as  '•  lieth  in  him,''  he  must  "  follow  peace  with  all  men."  Relations  to  masters  and 
rulers  have  already  been  dealt  with  :  the  apostle  now  applies  the  Christian  principles  to  the 
more  limited,  but  oftentimes  more  difficult,  spheres  and  relations  of  the  home, 

Ver.  1.  In  subjection. — The  apostle  is  not  dealing  in  a  general  way  with  the  relations  in 
which  wives  should  stand  to  husbands.  That  must  always  depend  on  the  sentiments  and 
customs  of  particular  ages  and  nations.  St.  Peter  is  giving  precise  advice  to  certain  persons 
who  were  placed  in  difficult  circumstances,  and  needed  apostolic  direction.  The  wives 
addressed  had  become  Christians,  but,  in  many  cases,  their  husbands  had  not.  The  question 
naturally  arose  :  Was  becoming  Christian  to  break,  or  to  spoil,  the  marriage  relation  ?  And 
the  apostle  replies,  Certainly  not.  Keep  the  old  relations — of  subjection  or  of  equality, 
whichever  they  might  be — only  take  care  to  put  the  new  Christian  tone  upon  them  all,  and 
get  your  power  out  of  the  better  doing  of  all  marital  duties.  The  same  advice  is  given  to 
husbands.  The  subjection  required  is  that  which,  in  a  natural  way,  belongs  to  woman's 
dependent,  receptive  nature.  It  should  never  be  thought  of  as  a  subjection  of  inferiority. 
"Without  the  Word. —  Direct  efforts  to  teach  and  influence  will  often  only  irritate  and  provoke 
resistance.  The  silent  persuasion  of  a  dutiful  and  gracious  behaviour  is  well-nigh  irresistible. 
"  The  wife,  without  setting  up  for  a  preacher,  ought,  by  the  discreet  charm  of  her  piety,  to 
be  the  great  missionary  of  the  faith  "  (^M.  Renan'). 

89 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


Ver.  2.  Behold. — Keep  their  eyes  on.  Chaste. — In  general  sense  pure  and  beautiful,  but 
with  a  hint  of  the  fear  husbands  woald  then  have  concerning  the  attendance  of  wives  at  the 
private  Christian  meetings.  About  this  scandals  were  very  freely  raised.  Fear. — Of  being 
misunderstood,  or  of  giving  the  faintest  cause  for  suspicion.  Perhaps  there  is  also  a  hint  of 
woman's  weakness,  trepidation  from  the  apprehension  of  real  or  imaginary  dangers. 

Ver.  3.  Adorning. — Characteristic  adorning,  as  a  wife  possessing  the  new  spiritual  life  in 
Christ.  The  limitation  of  the  advice  to  Christian  women  needs  to  be  constantly  kept  before 
us,  or  the  sharp  points  of  the  counsels  will  be  missed.  Outward  adorning. — Care  for  merely 
personal  appearance.  Characteristic  of  the  worldly  mind  is  supreme  interest  in  appearance. 
A  proper  concern  about  dress  and  manners  is  quite  consistent  with  supreme  concern  for  the 
inward  things  of  character.  The  terms  "plaiting,"  "wearing,"  "putting  on,"  suggest 
elaborate  processes  by  which  time  is  wasted. 

Ver.  4.  Hidden  man  of  the  heart. — As  if  there  were  a  spiritual  counterpart  of  the  body,  and 
that  really  called  for  appropriate  dress  and  decoration.  The  invisible  person.  The  inner 
self,  which  is  the  true  self.  Compare  St.  Paul's  "  inward  man."  Not  corruptible. — Contrast 
with  material  things,  "which  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt."  Meek. — Not  self-assertive. 
Quiet. — Self -controlled.     That  does  not  readily  give  way  under  provocation. 

Ver.  5.  The  holy  women. — This  appeal  would  be  specially  forcible  to  Jewesses,  who 
regarded  Scripture  women  as  models  of  womanhood,  and  wifehood,  and  motherhood. 
Trusted. — Lit.  "  hoped  "  ;  with  special  reference  to  Sarah,  who  hoped  and  waited  quietly  for 
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  made  to  her. 

Ver.  6.  Daughters. — Compare  "  children  of  Abraham,"  as  those  who  have  Abraham's  faith. 
"  Daughters  of  Sarah ; "  those  who  have  Sarah's  spirit  of  submission  and  hope.  Not  afraid. — 
This  clearly  has  reference  to  particular  conditions  of  the  time  ;  probably  to  the  slanders  and 
persecutions  to  which  the  Christians  were  exposed.  Special  efforts  would  be  made  to  frighten 
the  wives  into  giving  up  their  profession.  "Menaces  of  evil  may  assail  the  Christian 
wife,  but  let  her  be  calm  and  confident,  and  let  her  pursue  the  pathway  of  obedience 
to  the  will  of  God,  and  the  holy  courage  of  Sarah  will  sustain  her  amid  whatever  terrors 
may  arise." 

Ver.  7.  Knowledge. — With  thought  and  care ;  trying  wisely  to  meet  all  circumstances, 
Giving  honour. — In  the  spirit  of  Christian  meekness  and  gentleness,  which  always  puts 
others  before  self.  Weaker  vessel. — This  is  physically  true,  and  it  puts  woman  upon  every 
good  man's  consideration.  Even  the  rights  of  the  husband  are  qualified  by  Christian  gentle- 
ness toward  the  frail  and  often  suffering  wife.  Heirs  together. — The  new  life  and  new  hope 
putting  a  new  tenderness  into  your  marital  relations.  Not  hindered. — Cut  off,  as  they  would 
be  by  one  of  them  praying  against  the  other. 

Ver.  8.  Of  one  mind. — One  aim  and  purpose.  This  is  possible  when  all  seek  the  honour  of 
Christ ;  impossible  when  each  seeks  his  own  honour.  Love  as  brethren. — Or  "  loving  the 
brethren."  Pitiful — Towards  each  other's  frailties.  "Good-hearted,"  "sweet-spirited." 
Courteous. — Having  a  considerate  tone  on  all  your  intercourse.  Kecognising  the  spiritual 
equality  which  underlies  all  distinctions  of  rich  and  poor,  master  and  servant.  The  Christian 
gentleman  is  gentle  with  every  one. 

Ver.  9.  Should  inherit. — "  In  order  that  ye  might."  Because  we  are  ourselves  so  blessed 
we  may  well  become  agents  in  imparting  blessing. 

Ver.  11.  Eschew. — Put  away  as  offensive  to  him  (see  Ps.  xxxiv.  12-16).  Ensue. — A  word 
not  now  used  in  this  form.     We  now  use  "  pursue." 

Ver.  13.  Followers. — Imitators.     Better  MSS.  give  "be  zealous  for." 

Ver.  15.  Lord  God.— Probably  better,  "  Lord  Christ."  '*  To  sanctify  Christ  or  God  was  to 
count  His  name  as  holy  above  all  other  names,  His  fear  as  the  only  fear  which  men  ought 
to  cherish,  and  therefore  as  the  safeguard  against  all  undue  fear  of  men." 

Ver.  17.  Suffer  for  well-doing. — Notice  how  prominent  this  idea  is  in  the  epistle.  There 
must  have  been  some  precise  circumstances  to  which  the  advice  bore  direct  relation. 

Vers.  18-22.  This  passage  is  fully  treated  in  the  Homiletic  Notes.  Here  only  certain 
meanings  of  terms  need  be  dealt  with. 

Ver.  18.  Read  "  Christ  also  suffere  1,"  not  "  hath  suffered."  For  the  unjust.—"  Ob  behalf 
of,"  not  "  in  the  place  of."  Spirit.— Refers,  not  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  to  Christ's  own  spirit. 
He  became  alive  again  in  a  spiritual  sense. 

Ver.  19.^  For  "  hy  which"  read  "  in  which."  In  His  spiritual,  as  distinct  from  His  fleshly 
life.  Spirits  in  prison.— Now  in  prison,  because  they  were  disobedient  to  the  message  of  the 
spiritual  Christ  delivered  by  Noah.  It  makes  no  point  in  St.  Peter's  persuasion  against 
failing  from  the  Christian  profession  if  we  think  of  Christ  going  to  preach  in  Hades.  The 
disobedient  antediluvians  are  a  warning  example,  and  the  salvation  of  obedient  Noah  is  an 
inspiring  example. 

Ver.  21.  Which  also.— R.V.,  which  water  of  the  Flood,  represented  in  baptism.  like  figure. 
— "  After  a  true  likeness."  The  apostolic  use  of  Old  Testament  Scripture  is  very  different 
to  that  of  modern  times, 

90 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  I.  PETER.  chap.  ill. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. ^Verses  1—6. 

Th^  Message  of  Christianity  to  Wives. — To  understand  what  Christianity  has 
done  for  woman,  and  especially  for  woman  in  marriage  relations,  it  would  be 
necessary  to  present,  with  much  and  careful  elaboiation,  the  customs  and 
sentiments,  in  apostolic  times,  of  different  classes  of  society,  in  the  different 
nations  to  which  Christianity  found  entrance.  It  must,  however,  suffice  to 
present  the  distinction  between  the  Eastern  and  the  Western  modes  of  treating 
woman.  In  the  East  woman  is  almost  everywhere  an  inferior  being,  a  slave 
and  a  drudge,  kept  shut  up  in  private  apartments,  allowed  no  freedom,  no 
society,  no  education.  The  only  exception  given  in  ancient  history  is  that  of  the 
Eg}'ptians,  whose  respect  for  woman,  and  recognition  of  some  approach  to  wifely 
equality,  help  to  explain  the  steadiness  and  the  high  tone  of.  their  civilisation. 
The  Pagans — especially  of  the  Western  world — in  a  way  honoured  woman,  and 
the  Romans  secured  at  once  nobility  and  stability,  by  cultivating  the  family 
virtues.  There  was  indeed  a  sad  side  to  the  Pagan  interest  in  woman,  and  it 
has  to  be  kept  in  view  when  the  apostolic  counsels  are  considered.  St.  Peter, 
however,  has  chiefly  in  his  mind  the  Jewish  Christians  who  were  living  among 
Pagan  populations,  and  might  be  badly  influenced  by  the  tone  of  Society,  and 
the  family  customs  with  which  they  were  surrounded.  That  woman  was 
honoured  and  trusted  in  the  Mosaic  system  is  evident  from  the  references  and 
teachings  of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  if  the  relations  of  a  Jew  with  his  wife 
were  such  as  they  should  be,  Christianity  needed  to  do  no  more,  and  it  could 
do  no  more,  than  put  a  new  tone  upon  those  relations.  Indeed,  Christianity 
needs  to  be  understood  as  the  power  that  relieves  everything  good  of  the  pressure 
of  surrounding  evil,  and  puts  a  new  tone  and  a  new  force  into  everything  that 
is  right,  and  wise,  and  worthy,  and  beautiful.  The  point  which  appears  to  be 
before  St.  Peter's  mind  at  this  time  is  this  :  Christianity,  as  an  actual  fact,  has 
been  found  very  seriously  to  disturb  existing  social  relations.  Rightly  enough ; 
necessarily  enough  ;  but  still  anxiously,  and  oftentimes  as  occasioning  serious 
distress.  It  did  actually  disturb  the  marriage  relations,  more  especially  in  those 
cases  in  which  the  wife  became  a  Christian,  and  had  to  find  fitting  expression  for 
the  new  Christian  spirit  in  the  old  Pagan  home.  St.  Peter  presents  some 
practical  principles. 

I.  Christianity  does  not  break  up  home  relations. — It  is  a  fixed  apostolic 
principle  that  wherein  a  man  is  called,  therein  he  is  to  abide  with  God  ;  that  is, 
wliatever  may  be  his  class  relation,  and  whatever  his  occupation  or  business 
(provided  it  is  honest),  when  he  is  converted,  he  is  to  remain  in  it,  and  find 
expression  for  his  new  Christian  life  in  connection  with  it.  And  this  principle 
can  be  applied  to  wives.  If  they  are  called,  being  wives,  they  are  to  remain  in 
that  marital  relation,  whatever  difficulties  may  gather  round  them,  and  find 
expression  for  the  new  Christian  life  in  the  associations  of  their  home  life.  And 
it  would  not  be  difficult  for  them  to  do  this,  if  they  properly  apprehended 
Christianity  as  a  new  life,  sanctifying  their  daily  life,  and  not  a  mere  creed  to 
believe,  or  ritual  to  observe,  or  relation  to  sustain.  The  difficulty  which  was 
felt  when  Christianity  entered  the  old  Pagan  homes  is  felt  to-day  when 
Christianity  enters  the  Hindoo  home,  and  becomes  a  converting  and  saving 
power  to  the  women  of  the  homes.  For  them  to  be  baptized  would  be  for  them 
to  be  turned  out  of  their  homes,  and  exposed  to  a  life  of  misery  and  even  shame. 
For  them  to  remain  and  force  Christian  practices  upon  their  households  would 
mean  constant  conflict  and  distress  for  everybody.  And  it  is  necessary  to  see 
clearly  that  Christianity  never  proposes  the  breaking  up  of  home  relations.  It 
would  be  a  new  spirit  in  the  heart  of  a  wife,  and  do  its  gracious  work  through 
the  moral  influence  of  a  sanctified  life.     Under  no  conceivable  circumstances  is 

91 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETEk. 


any  woman  justified  in  breaking  away  from  her  home  relations  on  the  ground 
of  her  Christianity.     Her  new  life  must  find  its  sphere  in  the  old  relations. 

II.  Christianity  perfects  the  harmony  of  the  home  relations. — It  does  this 
in  two  ways.  1.  It  is  the  most  efficient  power  to  enable  a  wife  to  bear  the 
disabilities  and  difficulties  of  her  home  life.  It  nourishes  just  those  passive, 
gentle  graces  which  enable  her  to  bear,  and  suflfer,  and  endure.  And  2.  It  guides 
her  in  the  moulding  and  training  of  the  character  of  the  inmates,  so  that 
efficiently,  but  very  unconsciously,  she  gets  them  all  into  harmony.  And  in  her 
harmonising  work  she  has  not  only  the  power  of  her  own  cultured  character  and 
influence,  she  has  also  the  Divine  power,  which  she  draws  down  for  her  help,  by 
her  soul -openness  and  dependence,  and  by  her  daily  prayer.  It  must  be  added 
that  her  harmonising  work,  being  moral,  cannot  be  sudden,  and  is  not  likely  to 
be  apparent  to  any  one.     It  is  the  ministry  of  a  life,  and  it  often  takes  a  life. 

III.  Christianity  triumphs  over  the  difficulties  that  arise  in  the  home 
relations. — We  need  not  think  of  contentions.  Where  these  are  happily 
unknown,  home  life  has  its  anxieties.  The  men  are  harassed  and  worried  ;  the 
members  are  afflicted.  Business  cares,  bodily  diseases,  frailties  in  children's 
characters,  failure  in  plans  for  the  children's  well-being,  all  make  varied 
difficulties.  Sincere  and  earnest  Christian  feeling  in  the  wife  is  the  great  secret 
of  triumph  iu  and  over  all  such  things.  The  ruffled  find  her  at  peace ;  the 
troubled  are  sure  of  her  sympathy ;  the  disappointed  are  cheered  by  her  hopeful- 
ness. Her  piety  helps  her  to  see  a  bright  light  in  every  cloud ;  her  faith  enables 
her  to  see  God  ever  near,  just  behind  the  cloud. 

IV.  Christianity  works  in  homes  through  its  power  in  personal  character.— 
"  The  hidden  man  of  the  heart :  "  "  the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit :  " 
*'  so  long  as  ye  do  well,  and  are  not  afraid  with  any  amazement."  It  may  be  true 
that  the  supreme  power  of  Christianity  in  everybody,  male  and  female,  is  its 
power  in  character ;  but  the  public  activities  of  men  seem  to  overshadow  this 
truth.  We  see  it  quite  clearly  in  woman.  Her  mission  for  Christ  in  the  world 
lies  mainly  in  that  influence  she  can  win  just  by  being  beautiful  in  character, 
through  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  1.  The  Wife's  Sphere  in  the  by  him,  and  from  near  his  heart  to 
Home. — The  philosophy  of  marriage,  walk  in  sympathy  and  helpfulness  by 
as  our  Lord  unfolds  it,  is  this  :  a  man  his  side."  God  made  for  Adam  but 
and  a  woman  made  one  all  around  the  one  Eve,  not  two,  nor  ten.  Mormon- 
circle  of  their  being  ;  married  in  heart  ism  has  no  authority  from  God.  What 
and  thought  and  life  ;  joined  in  desires  God  has  joined  together,  let  not  man 
and  purposes  and  aims;  in  afiections  put  asunder.  The  union  made  by 
and  interests  one.  Here  is  the  start-  ordinance  of  God  cannot  be  broken  by 
ing  point  for  the  interpretation  of  the  ordinance  of  man,  save  by  the  one 
wife's  sphere  and  duty  in  the  model  exception  which  Jesus  Christ  insti- 
home.  Matthew  Henry's  exposition  tuted.  Hence  the  part  of  the  wife  in 
must  be  quoted  once  more  :  "In  ere-  the  happy  home  is  equal  in  position 
ating  woman" — for  she  was  a  new  and  and  influence  to  that  of  the  husband, 
fresh  creation,  and  the  last  thing  God  but  not  the  same.  Woman  is  not 
did  create,  and  hence  His  masterpiece—  merely  a  copy.of  man — a  faded,  second 
''God  did  not  take  her  out  of  the  head  impression  from  the  same  plate — but 
of  man  to  be  over  him,  nor  from  his  another  creation,  enlarging  and  en- 
feet  to  be  under  him,  but  out  of  his  riching  life.  It  brought  new  and  higher 
side  to  be  equal  with  him,  from  under  elements  into  the  circle  of  being,  adding 
his  arm  to  be  sheltered  and  protected  to  life's  joys  and  possibilities,  and 
92 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


making  man  himself  more,  through 
her.  The  husband  and  wife  are  the 
two  halves  of  one  whole,  and  the  whole 
is  designed  by  God  to  be  greater  and 
better  than  the  sum  of  the  parts.  Let 
her,  then,  not  assume  headship,  much 
less  loidship,  putting  on  airs  as  if  the 
Millennium  would  come  when  she  got 
her  fancied  rights.  *'  The  wife  must 
see  that  she  reverence  her  husband." 
Neither  let  her  be  fretted  and  chafed 
by  an  overbearing  man,  making  her 
feel  that  she  is  an  inferior  by  some 
jumping-jack  of  a  husband.  The 
Scotch  have  a  proverb,  "  You  may  ding 
the  devil  into  a  wife,  but  you  can  never 
ding  him  out."  The  husband  and  wife 
are  in  a  true  sense  one.  Whatever  is 
good  for  him  is  good  for  her.  What- 
ever is  due  from  him  to  her  is  also 
equally  due  from  her  to  him.  They 
move  together.  He  owes  no  duty  to 
her  that  she  does  not  owe  to  him  a 
counterpart.  It  is  an  even  thing. 
What  the  wife  requires  of  her  husband, 
that  let  her  give  to  him.  She  is 
married  "  for  better  or  for  worse  "  ; 
let  her  resolve  that  it  shall  be  for 
better.  Matches  are  not  made  in 
heaven,  and  will  be  for  the  worse  if 
there  be  no  watchful,  patient  care  to 
work  them  out  on  earth  for  heaven. 
It  is  the  duty  of  the  wife  to  cultivate 
the  practical  home-making,  God-given 
gift,  keeping  her  house  bright  and 
genial.  In  a  churchyard  in  England  I 
found  this  eulogy  on  a  wife's  tablet : 
"  She  always  made  home  happy." 
Blessed  is  the  home  that  shelters  mutual 
love ;  but  the  ideals  must  be  reduced  to 
reality.  Work  for  the  husband  is 
better  than  worship  of  him,  if  the 
buttons  are  not  sewed  on.  The  word 
"  wife  "  means  a  weaver,  and  "  lady  "  a 
loaf-giver.  She  can  be  no  idle  dreamer. 
If,  before  marriage,  the  maiden  weaves 
cobwebs  of  fancy,  after  marriage  she 
must  weave  the  solid  "cloth  of  gold." 
That  is  an  ornament  which  adorns. 
She  is  never  so  amiable  or  beautiful 
as  when  useful.  Spurgeon,  a  prime 
minister  of  England,  says  :  "I  have  no 
faith  in  that  woman  who  talks  of  grace 
and  glory  abroad  and  uses  no  soap  and 


water  at  home."  The  wife's  sphere 
has  home  for  its  centre,  and  its  cir- 
cumference cuts,  in  its  curves,  all  that 
is  true  and  beautiful  and  good.  It  is 
not  money  that  makes  a  happy  home. 
Rich  as  Vanderbilt,  the  wife  must  seek 
to  be  an  intelligent  mistress  of  the 
house,  with  a  smile  that  brightens  and 
a  touch  that  beautifies.  Kich  or  poor, 
she  must  know  how  to  guide  affairs, 
and  strive  for  the  tact  and  taste  that 
makes  homely  duties  handsome.  "  She 
layeth  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  she 
clotheth  her  husband  in  scarlet."  In 
the  home  she  may  say  she  rules  in 
queenly  fashion  :  "I  am  sovereign  by 
the  grace  of  God.  My  home  to  me  a 
kingdom  is,  and  to  all  that  enter  this 
realm  I  will  hold  out  the  golden  sceptre 
of  blessing."  Marriage,  to  a  woman, 
is  more  than  a  king's  coronation.  The 
wedding  ring  is  as  much  a  symbol  of 
power  and  influence  in  the  home  as  the 
monarch's  signet.  "  There  is  great 
force  hidden  in  a  sweet  command." 
No  life  can  be  tame  or  limited  when 
high  aims  are  followed.  The  strength 
of  a  wife  to  lift  up  others  in  trouble, 
and  hold  them  to  worthy  aims,  is  very 
great.  Let  the  wife  accept  that  mission 
cheerfully,  if  it  be  assigned  to  her,  and 
work  under  pressure  and  without  recog- 
nition, long  and  painfully,  if  it  is 
called  for.  The  reward  is  sure.  God 
sees  and  remembers  all.  He  that 
seeth  in  secret  shall  reward  her  openly. 
The  pleasant  home-making  talent  of 
the  wife  will  curb  bad  temper  and 
evil  propensity.  Thus,  to  suppress  a 
moment's  anger  may  save  a  week  of 
sorrow.  She  will  strive  to  preserve 
all  amenities  of  dress  and  manner, 
keeping  the  home  orderly  and  inviting. 
Carefulness  and  courtesy  in  the  home 
are  never  lost.  Roughness  and  in- 
difference are  never  safe,  and  coarseness 
breeds  contempt.  The  wise  wife  will 
continue  to  do  those  things  which  first 
won  her  husband's  love.  Treat  your 
husband's  return  from  business  cares 
with  a  joyous  and  smiling  welcome, 
and  make  the  home  bright  and  winsome 
while  he  stays.  He  will  stay  the 
longer  and  be  back  the  sooner.     If  you 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER, 


pout  out,  "  Oh,  you  have  come  at  last, 
have  you  ?  You  care  nothing  for  me, 
that  is  plain  !  I  have  no  charm,  I 
see,  for  you  any  longer,"  you  are  in 
danger  of  throwing  away  the  key  to 
his  heart.  Never  do  it.  He  can't  be 
harassed  in  business  all  day  and 
harassed  by  his  wife  at  night.  He 
will  want  to  go  out  ''  to  see  a  man," 
or  to  go  to  "the  post  office  and  just 
step  into  the  club  house."  Peevishness 
and  fault-finding  will  never  do.  Study 
to  be  a  real  help-meet  to  your  husband, 
and  never  a  drag  on  him — to  be  one 
meet  to  help  such  a  one  as  he  is. 
Contact  with  a  noble-minded  woman  is 
good  for  any  man.  There  has  been  a 
good  wife,  as  a  rule,  close  beside  every 
eminent  man.  Seldom  will  a  man 
become  any  greater  than  his  wife  will 
let  him.  She  must  strive  to  fit  herself 
for  his  growing  fortunes  and  to  rise 
with  him,  and  be  a  true  helper  in  all 
the  spheres  to  which  he  is  called.  That 
is  the  wife's  sphere,  and  if  she  does  not 
keep  even  with  him  she  will  pull  him 
down.  A  wife  that  is  her  husband's 
help-meet,  growing  as  he  grows,  is  his 
best  fortune.  *'  Whoso  findeth  such  a 
wife  findeth  good.  He  will  not  say, 
'  I  fell  in  love ' ;  he  will  say,  '  I  rose.''  " 
But  he  will  be  thoughtfully  tender  of 
such  a  wife,  and  very  careful  to  put 
no  hindrance  in  her  way.  He  will 
lend  her  every  aid  in  family  cares, 
that  they  may  ascend  the  hill  together. 
He  is  the  sturdy  oak,  and  she  the  ivy 
entwining.  He  will  throw  out  his 
strong,  protecting  arms  that  she  may 
reach  the  topmost  bough  in  grace  and 
beauty.  Pity  for  the  ivy  that  will  not 
climb  !  In  order  to  do  this,  there  must 
be  a  life-long  assimilation.  When 
husband  and  wife  first  come  together, 
they  are  alike  at  only  a  few  points, 
and  know  really  little  about  each 
other.  They  must  study  each  other, 
and  see  the  faults  and  virtues  of  each 
other,  mutually  helping  and  strengthen- 
ing each  other.  So  will  they  conform  to 
one  another,  and  grow  more  and  more 
together,  avoiding  stirring  up  the  bad 
in  each,  and  developing  the  good.  We 
all  have    our   faults.      Expect   faults, 


and  be  not  surprised  at  finding  them. 
It  is  a  great  thing  to  kindly  help  one 
to  get  rid  of  them  and  beyond  them. 
Very  likely  here  is  where  the  young 
wife  will  have  her  first  cry.  She  has 
been  such  a  darling  in  the  home,  and 
such  a  pet  in  society ;  and  so  long  has 
she  had  her  own  way  that  when  her 
husband  gets  tired  of  her  egotism  and 
selfishness,  and  brings  her  up  with  a 
square  turn  to  consider  that  there  arc 
two  to  be  consulted  in  that  firm  instead 
of  one,  it  will  overwhelm  her.  Hasn't 
her  husband  always  said  that  they  are 
one? — "Two  hearts  with  but  a  single 
thought  !  "  and  has  she  not  been  given 
to  think  that  she  is  the  one  !  And 
now,  she  thinks,  he  is  a  monster,  and 
that  life  is  not  worth  the  living.  But 
she  is  good  and  true  at  heart,  and  will 
find  her  head  soon,  and  be  a  wiser  and 
better  wife.  She  will  be  married  to 
her  husband,  after  that,  at  a  higher 
point  in  her  soul.  In  this  way,  by 
self-denial  and  forbearance,  they  will, 
step  by  step,  become  truly  joined  in 
the  nobler  ranges,  and  secure  a  happy 
marriage  union. — C.  L.  Goodell,  D.D. 

Vers.  3,  4. — The  Higher  Life  for 
Woman. — There  are  two  passages,  and 
this  is  one  of  them,  from  which  there 
has  been  derived  by  the  Puritan  and 
so-called  Christian  teachers  the  doc- 
trine that  it  was  wicked  for  women  to 
wear  jewellery  and  precious  stones. 
They  have  not  been  so  particular  about 
plaiting  the  hair,  that  I  know  of,  al- 
though that  comes  in  under  condem- 
nation in  the  same  way.  Now,  the 
whole  point  is  lost  where  it  is  fixed  on 
these  things.  The  point  is,  that  one 
should  not  expend  the  whole  of  life  on 
making  the  outside  beautiful,  but  that 
one  should  see  to  it  that  the  inside  is 
adorned  also.  You  are  not  to  cheat 
the  soul  of  all  its  gems  and  virtues  for 
the  sake  of  making  yourself  attractive 
exteriorly  by  adornments  of  that  kind. 
That  is  the  point,  but  it  has  been 
commuted  into  a  general  declaration 
against  ornaments  of  beauty — whether 
of  the  hair,  or  of  the  apparel,  or  of 
precious    stones.       Nothing   could  bQ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


farther  from  the  spirit  of  the  text  than 
that.  This,  we  are  to  bear  in  mind,  is 
addressed  in  its  original  form  to  Oriental 
women.  They  were  in  the  condition 
mainly  that  multitudes  of  men  think 
they  ought  to  be  in  now.  They  were 
stayers  at  home ;  they  were  managers 
of  the  household ;  they  received  no 
gifts  of  education  whatever.  It  was 
not  necessary  that  a  woman  should  be 
expensively  educated  for  the  sake  of 
making  bread  or  mending  stockings, 
and  so  they  were  but  little  better  than 
slaves  of  the  harem.  Even  in  the  very 
highest  point  of  its  splendour  there 
was  not  in  all  Athens  a  single  woman 
who  was  permitted  to  be  educated,  if 
she  wished  to  have  the  reputation  of 
virtue.  Knowledge  with  women  in 
Grecian  days  was  a  token  of  impudicity. 
If  a  woman  meant  to  live  as  a  courtesan, 
no  pains  were  spared  to  educate  her  in 
taste,  in  knowledge,  in  philosophy,  even 
in  statesmanship.  Here  is  the  root 
of  the  explanation  in  regard  to  those 
dissuasions  in  the  writings  of  the  New 
Testament,  that  women  should  not 
speak  in  public.  In  the  corrupt  and 
degraded  sentiment  of  those  Oriental 
ages,  for  a  woman  to  be  able  to  speak 
in  meeting  and  to  rise  to  do  it,  would 
have  fixed  upon  her  the  stigma  of  being 
common  and  corrupt.  Therefore  it 
was  a  wise  decree  of  the  apostle  that, 
in  such  an  age,  and  under  such  public 
ideas  of  what  was  feminine  and  pure, 
and  what  was  unfeminine  and  impure. 


women  must  be  silent.  They  must 
conform  in  the  churches  to  the  public 
sentiment  of  their  time,  until  Christ- 
ianity should  have  changed  the  times, 
and  rendered  possible  a  larger  liberty, 
felicitous  and  beneficial.  Now,  in  such 
a  case  as  that  of  women,  whose  desire 
to  please  and  love  of  pleasure  is  strong 
— not  perhaps  stronger  than  in  men, 
but  under  circumstances  in  which  there 
were  fewer  ways  of  pleasing  than 
men  possess — what  coTild  they  do  but 
make  their  persons  attractive  ?  They 
were  forbidden  to  make  themselves 
beautiful  within,  and  so  they  made 
themselves  as  beautiful  as  they  could 
without,  with  braided  hair,  with  all 
manner  of  pearls  and  precious  stones, 
with  allfancifulness  and  beauty  of  dress. 
But  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  alike  said : 
"  Do  not  spend  yourself  on  external 
garnishing  ;  look  inward,  and  cultivate 
the  inward  life,"  or,  as  St.  Peter  here 
calls  it,  "  the  hidden  man  of  the  soul." 
In  short,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  were 
both  in  favour  of  higher  education  for 
women.  They  did  not  believe  that  the 
line  of  her  life  should  not  rise  above  the 
bread-trough,  or  the  handling  of  the  in- 
struments by  which  she  was  to  obtain 
victory  in  the  industries  of  life.  They 
believed  that  a  woman  should  have  a 
higher  life,  a  higher  inward  develop- 
ment ;  and  should  not  therefore  turn 
to  frivolous  pleasures  and  external 
beauty. — H.  Ward  Beecher. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verse  7. 

The  Christian  Husband. — The  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  but  not  in  such 
sense  that  she  is  to  be  under  his  feet,  to  be  treated  as  his  servant,  or  to  be 
deemed  his  inferior.  She  is  of  his  bone  and  of  his  flesh,  and  St.  Paul  therefore 
said,  "  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  and  be  not  bitter  against  them  "  (Eph.  v.  25  ; 
Col.  iii.  19).  And  here  St.  Peter  is  equally  express  :  "  Likewise,"  or  in  like 
manner,  "  ye  husbands,  dwelling  with  the  feminine  according  to  knowledge,  as 
with  the  weaker  vessel,  giving  honour  to  those  who  are  also  fellow-inheritors  of 
the  grace  of  life ;  that  your  prayers  be  not  hindered."  Such  is  the  true  rendering 
of  the  apostle's  words.     What,  then,  is  required  of  the  husband  ? 

1.  Consideration. — He  is  to  dwell  with  his  wife  according  to  knowledge,  as 
with  the  weaker  vessel.  Both  are  vessels — clay  in  the  hands  of  the  Potter,  Who 
has  formed  them  for  Himself,  giving  to  each  the  frame  best  suited  for  the  end 
He  has  in  view  (Jer.  xviii.  6  ;  Isa.  xxix.  16,  etc.)  ;  but  the  wife  is  physically  the 
weaker  vessel,  and  the  husband,  knowing  this,  is  to  treat  her  in  every  respect 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


with  kind  consideration.  She  is  subject  to  many  trials  as  a  mother,  to  many 
cares  as  the  mistress  of  the  household,  to  many  diseases  peculiar  to  her  sex. 
Shall  all  this  be  forgotten  ?  And  shall  the  often  suffering  and  sorrowful  wife 
have  no  sympathy,  or  very  little,  from  him  to  whom  she  has  a  right  to  look  up  ? 
God  forbid.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  by  *'  the  weaker  vessel "  here  it  is 
meant  that  the  wife  is  always  mentally  the  inferior  of  the  husband.  In  many 
qualities  of  the  mind  she  often  far  excels  him,  and  there  have  been,  and  still  are, 
women  whose  acquirements  in  all  branches  of  science  and  art  equalled  those  of 
the  most  eminent  men.  The  society  of  many  a  wife  is  better,  in  an  intellectual 
point  of  view,  than  her  husband  will  meet  with  away  from  home ;  and  as  for 
spiritual  conversation  and  Christian  fellowship,  hers  is  often  not  to  be  surpassed. 

II.  Honour. — Your  wives,  says  the  apostle,  are  fellow-heirs  with  you  of  the 
grace  of  life.  It  is  here  assumed  that  both  are  believers,  and,  if  so,  both  are 
partakers  of  the  gift  of  life  flowing  from  the  grace  of  God.  Eternal  life  begins 
on  earth  and  is  consummated  in  heaven,  so  that  two  things  are  here  implied  : 
that  the  husband  and  the  wife  are  one  in  Christ  now,  and  that  hereafter  their 
union  will  continue  in  a  brighter  and  a  happier  sphere.  Shall  they,  then,  be 
afraid  to  converse  with  one  another  on  the  things  of  God  ?  Shall  they  have  any 
secrets  in  reference  either  to  their  outer  or  their  inner  life  ?  The  union  that 
subsists  between  them  is  so  close  and  sacred  that,  as  far  as  possible,  their  very 
thoughts  should  blend ;  and  if  any  differences  of  opinion  exist,  either  with  regard 
to  their  family  affairs  or  in  respect  to  religious  views,  they  should  try  to  remove 
them  as  soon  as  possible,  or  should  bear  with  one  another  in  reference  to  them 
with  all  charity  and  love.  Specially  should  they  honow^  one  another  ;  and  the 
husband  who  has  a  Christian  wife  should  never  for  one  moment  fail  to  see  in  her 
one  who,  equally  with  himself,  bears  the  signature  and  stamp  of  heaven. 

III.  The  apostle  adds  a  special  reason  for  all  this.—  ''  That  your  prayers  be 
not  hindered."  He  assumes  that  the  husband  and  the  wife  do  pray  ;  that  they 
pray  not  merely /or  one  another,  but  with  one  another ;  not  merely  at  the  domestic 
altar,  but  together,  when  no  one  else  is  near.  It  is  said  of  Philip  Henry  that  he 
and  his  wife  constantly  prayed  together  morning  and  evening,  and  from  his  own 
experience  of  the  benefit  of  the  practice  he  recommended  it  to  all  his  Christian 
friends.  That  your  prayers  be  not  hindered,  love  one  another  with  a  pure  heart, 
fervently,  with  that  love  which  is  essential  to  the  happiness  of  married  life  (from 
Thomley  Smith).  The  three  points  in  relation  to  the  Christian  husband  which 
this  passage  suggests  are  :  1.  His  authority^  implied  in  his  superiority  of  physical 
strength,  and  in  that  rule,  in  the  ordering  of  life-relations,  which  is  implied  in 
"  dwelHng  with  them  according  to  knowledge."  2.  His  consider  at  eness.  Putting 
her  interest  before  his  own.  Giving  her  all  honour.  3.  His  religious  helpfulness. 
The  activity  and  energy,  which  are  manly  characteristics,  finding  expression  in 
the  shaping  of  the  religious  customs  of  the  home. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

"Ver.  7.  Honour  to  the  Weaker  Vessel,  sidered  !the  founder  of  it.  Weakness 
—Read,  "  as  with  a  weaker  vessel,  itself,  by  being  weakness,  has  a  claim 
with  what  is  female."  This  explains  upon  the  strong  man's  deference  and 
the  saying,  "according  to  knowledge."  self -submission.  The  weakness  here 
The  thing  which  the  husband  is  specially  ascribed  to  the  female  sex  is  primarily 
to  understand,  and  take  into  account,  that  of  the  body,  though  it  may,  per- 
is that  he  is  dealing  with  a  thing  less  haps,  indicate  frailty  in  other  respects 
strong  than  himself.  The  whole  of  as  well.  If  the  word  "  vessel  "  is  to  be 
chivalry  is  in  these  words,  and  St.  here  a  description  of  a  "  wife,"  as  some 
Peter,  next  after  Christ,  m^y  be  con-  pontend  on  1  Thess.  iv.  4,  in  a  sense  in 
96 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


which  it  does  not  equally  describe  a 
husband,  it  is  difficult  to  see  with  what 
the  vessel  is  compared  and  pronounced 
weaker.  "  Dwell  with  the  female  as 
with  a  more  delicate  vessel  or  instru- 
ment"— than  what?  If  we  answer, 
"  than  yourselves,"  it  becomes  clear 
that  the  husbands  are,  by  implication, 
less  delicate  vessels.  And  this  is  the 
case.  In  1  Thess.  iv.  4  the  word 
"vessel"  (whether  as  receptacle  or  as 
instrument)  is  a  description  of  the  bod^^ 
or  rather  of  the  self  as  manifested  in 
the  body.  The  word  in  itself  may  be 
used  to  describe  anything  made  to 
be  ser\dceable — machinery,  tackle  and 
gear,  pots  and  pans,  and,  in  fact,  any 
kind  of  apparatus  or  implement ;  and 
here  it  might  be  very  fairly  rendered, 
"  as  with  a  weaker  thing  or  object." 
That  which  is  translated  *'  the  wife  " 
is  really  a  neuter  adjective,  and  it  is 
a  question  whether  we  are  to  supply 
with  it  the  noun  "  vessel  " — "  with  the 
female  as  with  a  vessel  which  is  weaker" 
— or  whether  it  is  to  stand  absolutely, 
*'  the  female,"  as  we  say  "  the  good," 
"the  e\il,"  i.e.  "that  which  is  female." 
The  latter  seems,  on  the  whole,  simpler 
and  more  forcible,  as  calling  closer 
attention  to  the  fact  of  weakness  being 
inherent  in  the  sex. — A.  J.  Mason^  M.A. 

The  Husband^ s  Sphere  in  the  Home. — 
The  true  home  is  the  brightest  spot 
since  the  Garden  of  Eden ;  but  it  does 
not  make  itself,  or  come  by  chance. 
In  building  a  glad  and  happy  house- 
hold, each  one  has  a  part  to  perform, 
and  God's  choicest  blessing  comes  only 
when  all  the  members  stand  in  their 
place  and  do  their  duty.  The  happy 
home  grows  out  of  a  union  of  hearts 
and  hands  toward  one  cherished  end. 
One  person  alone  may  do  much,  but 
no  one  can  do  all  that  is  required. 
The  best  is  only  when  there  is  sympa- 
thetic and  harmonious  blending  to- 
gether, like  the  different  parts  of 
music.  When  either  part  fails,  there 
Ls  discord  and  loss.  Complete  concert 
of  action  between  husband  and  wife  is 
a  necessity  in  any  well-ordered  home. 
Perfect  confidence  and  affection  must 


exist  between  them.  To  draw  apart, 
tears.  To  make  the  home  the  happiest 
and  most  helpful  place  in  the  world, 
each  must  give  the  best  to  it.  Not  to 
society,  not  to  business,  not  to  outside 
intimates,  but  to  the  family  circle, 
must  the  choicest  gleanings  be  brought 
from  all  the  fields  of  life,  as  the  bee 
brings  to  his  hive,  and  not  elsewhere, 
honey  from  all  the  sweetest  flowers. 
The  husband  has  an  important  sphere. 
The  more  he  gives  to  the  home,  the 
more  it  will  give  to  him.  The  more  he 
is  to  it,  the  more  it  will  be  to  him  and 
to  the  world.  His  dividend  will  be  in 
proportion  to  his  investment.  Some 
complain  that  theii*  home  joys  are 
meagre.  Let  them  remember  how 
mean  and  beggarly  are  their  contri- 
butions. They  cannot  reap  where 
they  do  not  sow.  If  they  will,  they 
can  make  the  home  a  source  of  peren- 
nial comfort  to  themselves,  and  the 
means  of  blessing  to  many.  It  should 
be  a  bright  beacon  in  this  world's 
night.  The  word  "  husband  "  means  a 
house-band  ;  a  band  of  strength  around 
the  home,  upholding,  protecting,  and 
keeping  it  together.  The  home  was 
the  first  institution  God  made.  The 
germs  of  the  State  and  the  Church  are 
in  it.  The  husband,  as  the  head  of 
the  home,  stands  at  the  beginning  of 
all  the  worthiest  elements  of  Society. 
In  the  household  he  plants  the  seeds  of 
religion  for  the  Church,  and  of  authority 
for  the  State.  The  family  is  the  spring- 
head of  the  nation,  the  source  of  its 
purest  spiritual  and  civil  life.  It  is 
plain  what  manner  of  man  the  husband 
ought  to  be.  The  husband  in  the 
model  home  must  love  his  wife.  St. 
Paul  says,  "  Husbands  love  your  wives, 
and  be  not  bitter  against  them."  These 
arQ  strong  words — Bible  words.  The 
Bible  is  the  marriage  ring.  Marriage 
begins  in  love.  It  must  continue  and 
end  there.  The  husband  must  see  that 
the  early,  tender  affection  never  fails ; 
that  the  gentle  tone  of  life's  morning 
does  not  grow  harsh.  He  must  love 
the  wife  down  through  old  age,  and  on 
through  fading  youthful  beauty,  to  the 
sunset  years,  with  a  love  that  makes 

97 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    I.   PETER. 


wrinkles  beautiful,  and  infirmities  seem  some  of  the  benefits  that  flow  out  of 

precious.     Tell  her  how  much  you  love  domestic   love,    and   in   proportion   as 

her  still.     Tell  it  more  and  more,  as  this   love    ceases    these    benefits   fail, 

the   years   go   on.      Never   allow  the  What  if  love  has  ceased  already  %     Do 

white  roses  of  affection  to  fade  on  your  these  things  and  it  will  come  back,  as 

lips,   and  your  mouth  to  grow  dumb.  the   seeds   begin   to    open    when    the 

A   cold   silence   is   a   mildew.       Some  spring    sun    shines    again.      Let   the 

wives  would  be  surprised  to  hear  ex-  husband  honour  his  wife.     Peter  says, 

pressions   of    endearment   from    their  "  Ye  husbands,  give  honour  unto  the 

husbands  now.     All  that  ceased  long,  wife,  as  being  joint  heirs  of  the  grace 

long  ago.     Let  the  husband  show  his  of  life."      Honour  her  by  caring   for 

love  by  his  presence,  not  leaving  her,  her  needs.     In  the  hard  places  of  life, 

and    deserting    the    home    the     long  stand  by  her  side,   and  give  her  true 

evening  through,  when  he  can  help  it.  sympathy.    When  children  are  ill,  and 

Let  the  husband  cherish  his  wife,  and  burdens  press,  let  her  feel  that  she  has 

appreciate  what  she  does,  causing  her  a  stronghold  in  you,  and  give  her  your 

to  feel  that  he  sees  and  esteems  her  comfort.      Because   she  is   your   wife, 

service.      Let   little   attentions    never  you  owe  her  what,  without  you,  she 

cease,  nor  delicate  though tfulness  for  can  never  have.     Bland  and  polite  as 

her  welfare.     Let  the  husband  shelter  treacle   some   are   to  guests  and  out- 

his   wife  under  his  strong   arm,    and  siders,  while  in  their  homes  they  are 

smooth  her  path.    Let  him  protect  her  domineering  and  exacting,  finding  fault 

and   stand   by   her  in  her  cares   and  with    the    wife,    and    criticising    her 

trials,  and  know  that  she  will  never  before  the  children,  blaming   her   for 

look  to  him  in  vain.     Let  him  provide  the  mishaps,  with  seldom  a  kind  word, 

for  her   reasonable   wants,   that    she  *'  Oh,  it  is  only  my  wife  !  "    This  is  the 

come  not  into  embarrassment,  and  feel  gilt  edge  of  married  life,  in  a  guilty 

that  he  demeans  her.     Ill  temper  and  age.     Do  you  say  you  have  no  time 

hasty   words  on   his   part — these   are  for  all  these   trifles  ?     In  the  perfect 

not  for  the  happy  home.     Some  seem  home  there   are   no   trifles.      "It    is 

to  be  more  considerate  of  their  horse  trifles  that  make  perfection,  and  per- 

and  dog  than  of  their  wives,  but  many  fection  is  no  trifle."     Honour  her  by 

a  husband  is  a  mule.     The  true  hus-  sharing   your   joys   with   her,    as   she 

band  will  be  mindful  of  his  wife's  good,  shares  all  your  cares,  taking  on  herself 

and  not  indifferent  to  her,  for  in  his  in  the  family  the  heaviest  part.    Allow 

smile  she  lives,    and  in  his   frown   is  her  to  be  with  you  when  she  can,  to  go 

chill.    A  husband's  love  is  the  sunshine  with  you  when  she  may,  and  to  enter 

of  the  wife.     It  brings  out  her  beauty  into   your   life.      Do   not  add  to  her 

of  soul,  as  a  spring  morning  opens  the  crosses  by  leaving  her  to  doubt  you. 

flowers,  and  sustains  her  in  her  deeper  Do  not  lay  up  food  for  sad  reflection 

needs.       Selfishness   and   disregard   to  when  death  comes,  and  plant  thorns 

the  interests  and  happiness  of  the  wife,  in    your    pillow    against    that    hour, 

planting  one's  own  self  in  the  centre.  The  time  .  to   love,  honour,  and   help 

and   absorbing   every   good    thing    in  her,  is  when  these  things  are  needed, 

one's  own  greed,  the  wife  drudging  and  When  death  has  entered,  and  plucked 

denying   herself   for    her   husband,  as  the  lilies  from  her  cheek,  it  will  be  too 

the   slave   for    his    lord — running    to  late  then  to  lighten  her  lot,  or  speak 

serve   his    every    whim  ; — this   is   not  her   praises.      Honour  her  by  taking 

found  on  heathen  ground  alone.  There  her   into  counsel  with  you.     She  will 

are    home    heathens.      Genuine    love  be  wise  with  a  true  woman's  wisdom, 

casts  out  selfishness,  and  ennobles  the  Insight  and  intuition  are  her  gift,  and 

heart.     It  makes  it  generous  and  self-  she   will  give   her   husband   her  best 

denying  for  all   others*  sakes.      Hus-  thought,    and   be   happy    that    it    is 

bands,    love   your   wives.      These   are  sought.     In   all  the  affairs  of  life,  a 
98 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  ill. 


true  woman's  judgment  has  its  uses,  vampire  of  wedded  life  is  where  an 
Many  a  man  has  failed  for  want  of  it.  alien  comes  in  between  husband  and 
The  counsel  at  his  elbow  would  have  wife,  under  sanction  and  authority  of 
saved  him  had  he  sought  it.  Thus  the  husband,  and  frets,  almost  to 
honouring  her,  she  will  be  made  breaking,  the  marriage  tie,  and  sucks 
strong.  Then,  if  he  takes  her  into  out  the  pure  joys  of  connubial  life, 
counsel,  and  honours  her  in  his  sue-  Every  husband  should  be  a  Christian 
cesses,  w^hen  failures  and  reverses  in  heart  and  life,  and  unite  with  the 
come,  and  trouble  and  misfortune  wife  in  faith  and  prayer  and  the  ser- 
sweep  over  them,  as  they  do  sometimes  vice  of  God.  He  should  join  with  her 
over  the  best  and  most  prosperous,  she  in  the  training  of  the  children  for 
will,  in  turn,  grandly  stand  by  him  usefulness  here  and  for  heaven  here- 
and  become  his  polar  star,  enduring  after.  The  husband  should  not  let  the 
every  hardship  for  his  sake  wdth  wife  pray  alone.  The  whole  household 
sweet  and  abiding  cheerfulness  and  needs  it.  He  should  not  allow  her  to 
courage,  never  breathing  a  murmur  of  go  alone  to  church.  He  requires  it  as 
complaint.  Be  worthy  of  her,  and  you  much  as  she.  He  should  be  with  her 
will  find  she  will  be  worthy  of  you.  at  the  communion  table.  Above  all, 
Your  lives  will  develop  together.  Let  he  should  not  leave  to  her  the  Christian 
the  husband  be  faithful  and  true  to  his  education  of  the  children.  Alone  in 
wife.  The  evils  that  I  have  been  this,  the  wife  is  a  bird  with  one  wing, 
speaking  of  are  the  little  foxes  that  It  is  a  great  wrong  to  the  wife,  to  put 
spoil  the  vines.  But  intemperance  all  these  tvymg  and  difficult  duties  on 
and  infidelity  are  what  Dr.  Abbott  her,  when  God  lays  them  equally  on 
calls  the  wolves  that  destroy  the  home.  him.  Some  of  the  most  important 
The  Lord  Bishop  of  Durham  founded  ones  can  only  be  done  by  him.  Others 
the  White  Cross  League.  It  asserts  require  their  united  Christian  effort, 
that  the  time  will  come  when  father-  the  closest  conference  of  Christian 
hood  will  take  its  place  beside  mother-  hearts.  A  married  couple  can  never 
hood,  its  Divine  counterpart,  as  equal  be  truly  one,  in  the  greatest  and  pro- 
sharers  in  the  cares  which  have  so  foundest  interests  of  life,  until  both 
ennobled  women  as  to  make  some  of  are  Christians.  The  most  sacred  and 
them  akin  to  angels.  The  pledge  of  blessed  side  of  the  soul,  that  bordering 
this  order  declares  :  "  I  will  maintain  on  eternity,  they  cannot  walk  together 
the  law  of  purity  as  equally  binding  on  in,  until  they  together  know  the  Lord, 
men  and  women.  I  will  endeavour  to  How  many  times  does  a  mother's  heart 
spread  these  principles  among  my  com-  ache  for  the  aid  a  Christian  father 
panions,  and  try  to  help  my  younger  could  give  to  her,  when  perplexed  in 
brothers.  I  will  use  every  means  to  the  household,  when  things  are  at 
fulfil  the  sacred  command,  *  Keep  thy-  cross  purposes,  and  the  load  seems 
self  pure.' "  If  the  wife  be  led  into  heavier  than  she  can  bear  !  How 
sin,  she  is  denounced  and  cast  off  as  a  barren,  after  all,  is  wedded  joy,  to  live 
thing  unclean,  with  little  effort  for  her  together  on  earth,  and  for  earth  only, 
reform  ;  yet  through  all  the  husband's  without  the  bright  hope  of  dwelling 
excesses  and  untruth  to  her,  and  together  in  eternity,  meeting  there, 
drunkenness  and  dishonour,  she  clings  never  more  to  part  !  That  home 
to  him,  pleading  and  toiling  to  draw  cannot  be  happiest  which  looks  for  no 
him  back  into  the  true  path.  How  reunion  in  heaven.  The  happiest 
the  husband  owes  it  to  such  a  being  to  home  is  always  the  Christian  home, 
keep  his  marriage  vows  in  all  fidelity  where  husband  and  wife  are  one  at 
and  truth  !  I  have  spoken  of  the  little  the  family  altar,  as  one  in  interests 
foxes  and  the  wolves  of  the  home.  The  and  affection. — C.  L.  GoodelL  D.D. 


99 


CHAF.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


MAIN  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  ^~IZ. 

Christ-like-mindedness. — If  such  a  term  can  be  permitted,  it  may  be  regarded 
as  the  key-word  of  this  paragraph.  St.  Peter  would  have  those  who  live  and 
worship  together  in  the  name  of  Christ,  unanimous.  The  Greek  word  does  not 
occur  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  but  the  duty  is  often  enjoined 
(Rom.  xii.  16  ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11  ;  Phil.  ii.  2).  It  involves  an  agreement,  not  only 
in  doctrine  but  also  in  practical  aims.  "  Oneness  of  mind,"  what  is  meant  by  itl 
How  can  we  promote  it?  1.  By  having  compassion  one  of  another,  or  sym- 
pathising in  one  another's  weal  or  woe,  weeping  with  those  who  weep,  and  rejoic- 
ing with  those  who  rejoice.  2.  By  loving  one  another,  as  brethren  in  Christ, 
truly  and  fervently.  3.  By  being  pitiful,  literally  of  strong  bowels,  like  our 
Father  in  heaven,  whose  bowels  yearn  with  tenderness  towards  His  children, 
erring  and  wayward  though  they  are.  4.  By  being  courteous,  humble-minded 
towards  every  one,  and  kind  in  thought  and  deed.  This  courteousness  implies  a 
sweet  and  gentle  disposition,  which  displays  itself  in  genuine  regard  to  all  around 
us,  deeming  every  man  worthy  of  respect  and  honour,  however  humble  his  station 
in  life "  {T.S.).  Where  this  lowliness  of  mind  exists,  there  will  be  found 
unanimity  6ix6tf)pov€<s,  sympathy  o-v/x7ra^€ts,  love,  erga  sanctos,  <^tA.a8eX^oi,  com- 
passion, erga  qfflictos,  evo-rrXayxoL.  The  teaching  of  this  paragraph  may  be 
presented  in  three  closely  related  divisions. 

I.  Like-mindedness  is  a  state  of  thought  and  feeling. — It  must  be  a  feature 
of  the  Christian  life,  or  it  never  can  find  expression  in  the  Christian  conduct  or 
in  the  Christian  relations.  The  associations  of  the  Christian  are  no  mere 
arrangement  of  things  upon  intellectual  decisions,  or  resolves  of  will.  They 
are  shaped  and  toned  by  what  he  is  in  spirit  and  character.  So  the  culture  of 
himself  and  the  mastery  of  life  are  closely  connected.  Power  in  life  follows 
power  gained  over  self.  The  features  of  character  which  make  this  like-minded- 
ness easy  are  sometimes  merely  parts  of  the  natural  disposition.  Some  people 
seem  to  be  born  amiable,  and  so  are  easy  to  live  with.  But  perhaps  for  most 
people  the  conditions  of  like-mindedness  are  things  to  win.  Not  that  they  ever 
can  be  won  by  forcing  the  conduct  into  any  particular  moulds.  They  can  only 
be  won  by  tempering  the  heart  and  the  thought  and  the  feeling  to  a  particular 
frame — the  Christ-like  frame.  And  that  can  only  be  done  by  the  soul's  keeping 
in  constant  and  sensitive  relations  with  the  living  Christ  Himself,  and  so 
changing  into  His  image.  They  can  be  like-minded  with  their  fellow-Christians 
who  can  say,  '*  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ." 

II.  Like-mindedness  works  out  into  practical  expression. — How  it  does  in  the 
Church  relations,  and  the  social  relations,  may  be  illustrated  by  its  working  in 
the  family  relations.  Let  husband  and  wife  be  of  one  mind,  and  all  the  things 
of  everyday  life  in  the  home  are  smoothed,  and  shaped,  and  ordered  ;  difficulties 
are  mastered ;  difiering  tempers  are  harmonised  ;  and  each  member  is  helped  to 
forget  his  own  things  for  the  sake  of  the  things  of  others.  In  the  Church  let 
there  but  be  like-mindedness  in  the  supreme  desire  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and 
the  practical  relations  will  surely  be  rightly  toned,  and  the  difficulties,  that 
must  arise  in  all  frail  human  fellowships,  will  be  easily  over-mastered.  The 
quotation  in  the  paragraph  illustrates  how  practical  are  the  ways  of  the  right- 
minded,  Christ-minded  man. 

III.  Like-mindedness,  working  out  thus  practically,  gives  a  man  the  very 
best  security  in  life. — For  nobody  wants  to  hurt  the  really  good,  kind  man,  who 
is  always  ready  to  serve  others,  and  does  it  evidently  in  the  inspiration  of  that 
highest  of  all  persuasions,  the  constraining  love  of  Christ.  To  injure  such  a  good, 
kind,  Christly  man  is  to  injure  ourselves.     To  kill  him  is  to  deprive  ourselves 

100 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    I  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


and  others  of  his  sweet  ministry  of  blessing.  "Who  would  ever  think  of  such  a 
thing  as  injuring  Elizabeth  Fry  or  Florence  Nightingale  1  "  When  a  man's 
ways  please  the  Lord,  He  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him  " 
(Prov.  xvi  7).  And  the  security  is  also  guaranteed  by  Him  whom  the  right- 
minded  man  serves.     He  is  God's  servant,  and  God  takes  care  of  His  servants. 


SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  8. — The  True  Gentleman. — "  Be 
courteous."     It  is  almost   a  definition 
of  a  gentleman  to  say  that  he  is  one 
who  never  inflicts  pain.     He  carefully 
avoids  whatever  may  cause  a  jar  or  a 
jolt  in  the  mind  of  those  with  whom  he  is 
cast — all  clashing  of  opinion  or  collision 
of  feeling,  all  restraint  or  suspicion  or 
gloom  or  resentment;  his  great  con- 
cern being  to  make  every  one  at  ease 
and  at  home.     He  has  his  eyes  on  all 
his  company  ;  he  is  tender  toward  the 
bashful,  gentle  toward  the  distant,  and 
merciful  toward  the  absurd.     He  can 
recollect  to  whom  he  is  speaking ;  he 
guards  against  unseasonable  allusions, 
or  topics  which   may   irritate  ;    he  is 
seldom  prominent  in  conversation,  and 
never  wearisome.     He  makes  Hght  of 
favours  when  he  does  them,  and  seems 
to  be  receiving  when  he  is  conferring. 
He  never  speaks  of  himself  except  when 
compelled,  never  defends  himself  by  a 
mere  retort ;  he  has  no  care  for  slander 
or  gossip,  is   scrupulous    in   imputing 
motives   to   those  who   interfere  with 
him,  and  interprets  everything  for  the 
best.     He  is  never  mean  or  little  in 
his   disputes,   never   takes  unfair   ad- 
vantages, never  mistakes  personalities 
or   sharp   sayings   for    arguments,    or 
insinuates  evil  which  he  dare  not  say 
out.     From  long-sighted  prudence,  he 
observes  the  maxim  of  the  ancient  sage, 
**  that  we  should  ever  conduct  ourselves 
toward  our  enemy  as  if  he  were  one 
day  to  be  our  friend."      He  has  too 
much   good   sense   to   be  affronted  at 
insults.     He  is  too  well  employed  to 
remember  injuries,  and  too  indolent  to 
bear  mahce.     He  is  patient,  forbearing 
and  resigned  on  philosophic  principles ; 
he  submits  to  pain  because  it  is  in- 
evitable, to  bereavement  because  it  is 
irreparable,  and  to  death  because  it  is 
his  destiny. — Cardinal  Newman. 


Courteousness.  —  This  courteousness 
implies  a  sweet  and  gentle  disposition, 
which  displays  itself,  not  in  outward 
acts  and  formal  manners,  such  as  the 
fashionable  world  calls  courteousness — 
the  politeness  and  civility  that  cour- 
tiers practise — but  in  genuine  regard 
to  all  around  us,  deeming  every  man 
worthy  of  respect  and  honour,  how- 
ever humble  his  station  in  life.  The 
courteous  man  is  affable,  friendly- 
minded,  always  trying  to  please  others  ; 
and  such  a  man  will  attract  even  those 
who  are  otherwise,  as  sweet  music 
attracts  the  ear,  or  lovely  flowers  the 
eye.  Courteousness  is  a  magnet  which 
draws  all  men  to  itself,  and  binds 
them  together  like  a  threefold  cord. 
Some  men  possess  it  naturally,  or  by 
their  training  and  education,  whilst 
others  are  rough  and  uncouth  in 
manner,  and  it  is  difficult  for  them  to 
speak  in  gentle  tones.  But  Christian- 
ity can  polish  the  most  unshapely 
diamond,  and  it  almost  invariably 
makes  even  the  country  peasant  a  true 
gentleman,  however  lowly  his  position, 
or  however  poor  his  garb. — Thornley 
Smith. 

Vers.  10, 11.  The  Way  to  Secure  Good 
Days.  It  is,  on  the  whole,  a  healthy 
characteristic  of  our  times,  that  men 
are  asking  what  practical  power  Christ- 
ianity can  exert  on  human  lives,  and 
on  Society.  The  religion  of  Jesus  Christ 
is  being  judged  by  what  it  can  do.  But 
Holy  Scripture  throughout  is  mainly 
concerned  with  character  and  conduct. 
The  examples  of  good  men  set  before  us 
in  Scripture  are  not  examples  of  men 
of  excellent  sentiments  or  opinions 
merely;  they  are  examples  of  practi- 
cally good  men.  The  prophets  are  ever 
calling  men  back  to  God,  and  to  practi- 
cal goodness.     Our  Lord  was  the  most 

101 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


practical  of  preachers,  and  even  poured  and  they  are  all  thoroughly  practical : 

scorn  on  profession  that  had  no  fitting  all  proved  to  be  essential,  as  he  declares 

accompaniment  in  character  and  con-  them  to  be,  by  the  experience  of  earnest 

duct.      Apostles  are  never  unmindful  men  through  all  the  ages.     1.  He  who 

of   the   practical   applications    of    the  would  have  good  days  will  have  to  I'ule 

truths  they  proclaim.      Religion  that  his  speech.     And  his  chief  work  will  be 

is  unpractical  has  no  sort  of  commenda-  restraining,     holding     back,     keeping 

tion  in  God's  Word.     The  spirit  of  the  silence.       Keadiness    to    talk    is    the 

older  age  associated  long  and  healthy  constant  temptation.     The  most  diffi- 

life   with    moral   goodness,    and   even  cult  of  virtues,  for  most  men,  is  "  not 

regarded  it  as  the  Divine  reward  of  answering  again."      If  we  would  see 

such  goodness.    The  apostles  do  not  try  how  this  ruling  of  our  speech  stands 

to  take  the  details  of  conduct  into  their  related  to  "  seeing  good  days,"  let  us 

control.     They  implant  principles,  and  think  how  many  of  the  misunderstand- 

they  present  models  and  ideals,  leaving  ings,  and  separations,  and  troubles,  and 

these  to  exert  their  own  influence.    The  wrongs  of  our  lives  have  come  out  of 

text  is  a  characteristic  apostolic  counsel,  hasty,  unwise,  unkind,  impure  speeches, 

though  the  form  of  it  is  taken  from  Let  us  think  how  often  we  have  spoiled 

one  of  the  earlier  psalms.     It  brings  the  happiness  of  others,  and  broken  up 

before    us    a    reasonable    desire,    and  our   own   peace,   by  the  utterance  of 

reminds   us  how  that  desire    may  be  foolish  and  unworthy  words.      2.  He 

attained.  who  would  have  good  days  will  have  to 

I.  A  reasonable  desire. — ''  He  that  order  his  conduct.  That  involves  work 
will  love  life,  and  see  good  days."  The  of  two  kinds,  each  closely  related  to  the 
love  of  life  and  desire  to  prolong  .  i  are  other.  As  soon  as  we  take  our  life  into 
quite  natural.  Life  is  God's  best  gift  our  hands,  and  resolve  to  get  it  into  fair 
to  us,  and  it  ought  to  be  counted  as  our  and  good  shape,  we  find  there  is  much 
chief  treasure.  The  love  of  life  is  the  to  get  away,  to  cut  off,  to  pluck  out,  to 
basis  of  Society ;  the  secret  of  man's  put  from  us.  The  attaining  of  good 
right  relations  v/ith  his  brother.  JFor  ever  goes  along  with  the  clearing  out 
his  jealousy  in  guarding  the  treasure  of  evil.  And  this  makes  the  moral 
of  his  own  life  makes  him  careful  to  conflict  of  our  lives.  But  the  putting 
preserve  the  treasure  of  life  for  his  away  of  evil  must  be  accompanied  with 
brother.  It  may  be  thought  that  the  strong  feelings  of  repulsion  towards  it. 
supreme  interest  which  the  Christian  The  good  man  finds  sin  unpleasant  in 
has  in  the  life  to  come  ought  to  make  his  mouth,  and  would  fain  be  quit  of  it. 
him  indifferent  to  the  continuance  of  He  eschews  evil.  But  our  Lord  taught 
the  life  that  is.  But  that  notion  that  the  house  was  in  peril  if  the  evil 
belongs  to  extravagant  sentiment,  and  spirit  were  only  driven  out,  and  the  house 
has  no  countenance  in  Bible  teachings,  left  *'  empty,  swept,  and  garnished." 
Every  one  of  us  ought  to  try  to  live  We  must  be  doing  good,  seeking  good, 
here  on  earth,  keeping  up  our  loving  filling  up  our  lives  with  good;  filling 
service  to  our  Divine  Lord,  just  as  long  them  so  full  that  evil  cannot  even 
as  ever  we  can.  And  the  restfulness  squeeze  in  edgeways.  Activity  in 
and  peace  which  piety  brings  ought  to  goodness  is  our  safeguard.  3.  He  who 
be  important  aids  towards  the  prolonga-  would  have  good  days  will  have  to  tone 
tion  of  life.  But  St.  Peter  uses  another  his  relationships.  By  peace  we  must 
expression  for  the  befitting  Christian  understand  peaceableness,  the  spirit  of 
desire.  A  man  should  hope  for  good  the  peace-maker;  gentle,  considerate, 
daySy  days  filled  up  with  goodness,  in  charitable.  The  Christ-tone  should  be 
the  sense  of  good  doings,  and  consequent  on  all  our  intercourse,  and  on  all  our 
good  enjoyings.  relations.      And   that   rightness,  that 

I I.  TMs  reasonable  desire  attained. —  gentleness,  that  graciousness,  will 
The  apostle  lays  down  three  conditions,  mightily  help  to  prolong  our  life,  and 

102 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETEB.         chap.  m. 


bring  round  to  us,  over  and  over  again,  Christians  if  we  find  ourselves  uncertain 

good  days.  whether  things  offered  to  our  thought, 

or  to  our  enjoyment,  are  good  or  evil. 

Yer.  13.   The  Safety  of  the  Good. —  We  should  discern  the  good.     2.  One 

The  Jews  of  the  Dispersion  found  it  who  chooses  the  good.     The  will  and 

very  difficult  to  live  Christian  lives  in  the  effect  must  follow  on  the  sensibility 

the    midst    of    heathen    associations,  and  the  discernment.   The  Latin  motto 

Silvanus  had  come  to  St.  Peter  bringing  is,  "  I  approve  the  better  course,  but 

tidingsof  exposure  to  a  fiery  trial  of  per-  I  follow  the  worse."     But  that  is  the 

secution.     They  were  accused  of  being  wn-Christian   example.      If   we   know 

evil-doers,  preaching  revolutionary  doc-  good,  we  must  do  the  good  we  know, 

trines.    The  very  name  of  "Christian"  If  we  see  the  good,  we  must  follow  it 

exposed  them  to  odium  and  outrage,  wheresoever  it  may  lead.     The  Divine 

St.    Peter    felt    that    he    could   not  regeneration  strengthens  the  will  for 

withhold    his   words   of    comfort    and  the  choosing  and  steadily  working  out 

counsel   from    those   who   were    thus  of   the  good.      3.  One  who  recognises 

suffering.      After   cheering   them,    by  the  activity  of  good.    The  righteous  are 

reminding  them  of  their  noble  standing  those   who   have   goodness   enough  in 

and  high  privilege  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  themselves  to  oppose  evil,  and  try  to 

tells  them  that  their  daily  lives,  in  all  make  other  people  good,  and  so  win 

their  relationships,  whether  as  slaves  God  His  triumph.     Passive  goodness  is 

under   masters   or   as    citizens    under  but  a  poor,  frail,  sickly  thing,  if  indeed 

rulers,  should  be  such  as  to  refute  all  there  is  such  a  thing.      You  must  be 

slanders.    "  In  all  their  sufferings  they  good,  in  order  that  you  may  do  good, 

should  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  The  term  "  followers  "  implies  "  zealous 

patience  and  meekness  of  Christ,"  their  for.'     Every  Christly  person  should  be 

very   submission   and   gentleness    dis-  a  "zealot"  for  the  good.     Goodness  a 

arming  all   opposition.      For   all  this  holy  passion  with  him  ;   he  living  to 

there  were   the   broad   rules   of   holy  get  it  enthroned  everywhere, 

living,  such  as  Christ  had  taught ;  and  II.  How   may   harm   come   to  .  the 

those   who   lived   according    to    these  followers    of    the    good? — "Through 

rules     may     surely     trust     in    God's  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the 

protection.     They  know  how  to  defend  kingdom."      St.  Peter   had   chiefly  in 

themselves,  but  their  best  defence  will  mind  outward  and  temporal  troubles, 

be  the  silent  witness  of  their  lives.  the  spoiling  of  the  Christian's  goods, 

I.  Who  may  be  called  a  "  follower  of  the  slander  heaped  on  the  Christian's 

the  good  "  ?  What  St.  Peter  understood  name,  the  peril  of  the  Christian's  life, 

by  "the  good"  is  indicated  in  vers.  10,  Men  could  harm  the  Christian's  body; 

11.     The  good  is  always  close  kin  with  they  could  hinder  the  Christian's  work  ; 

the  "kind."      It  means  the   gracious  they  could  damage  the  Christian's repu- 

and  kindly  deed,  and  the  love  of  peace.  tation.     But  all  these  are  external  to 

The  follower  of  the  good  is — 1.  One  who  the  man,  they  do  not  harm  the  man. 

can  discern  the  good.     When  a  man  is  Stone  walls  cannot  imprison  souls  and 

"  born  again,"  regenerate  in  the  power  keep  them  from  their  communion  with 

of   the   Holy  Ghost,  one  of  the  best  God.       Persecutions    do    not    destroy 

signs  of  the  change,  and  one  of  the  faith.      Martyrdom  cannot  touch  the 

best  expressions  of  the  new  life,  is  quick  eternal  life  in  Christ  Jesus.     Though 

discernment  of  anything  and  everything  we  are  not  exposed  to  the  perils  of  the 

that  is  good.     It  is  as  if  the  magnet  early  Christians,  none  of  us  fail  to  need 

were  charged  with  the  Divine  loadstone  St.  Peter's  encouragement.      1.  Some 

of  Him  who  is  good,  and  consequently  harm   will   come   from   the    relics    of 

found  out,  and  drew  to  itself,  the  iron  personal    frailty.      There    are    bodily 

of   goodness   everywhere.      We    must  tendencies,  inclinations,  and  passions, 

have  lost  our  proper   sensitiveness   as  ever  ready  to  do   us   harm.      2.  The 

103 


OflAP.  III.  HOMiLETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


earnest  Christian  must  take  his  share  bitter    disappointment    will    be     ex- 

of   the   common  evils  that  belong  to  perienced.     The   young    heart,   which 

human   circumstances.       3.    He    must-  has  been  born  again,  finds  the  world 

even  take  into  account  the  harm  that  all  changed.     There  is  a  frown  where 

the  foes  of  goodness  may  devise  against  used  to  be  a  smile,  a   repulse  where 

him.   These  take  varying  shape  for  each  used  to  be  a  welcome,  and  a  sharp  cut 

age.      Let  men  speak  evil  of  us;   let  whereused  to  be  a  healing  balm.    That 

men  set  snares  for  our  feet ;  let  men  tender  heart  overlooks  the  fact   that 

persecute  us  according  to  the  fashion  the  change  has  taken  place  in  itself, 

of  their  times ;  it  really  does  not  much  and  not  in  the  ungodly  surroundings, 

matter.     Plato,  being  told  that  he  had  If  we  change  our  front,  how  can  we 

many  enemies  who  spoke  ill  of  him,  expect  our  old  companions   in  sin  to 

replied,  "It  is  no  matter;  I  will  live  countenance  us  ?     Think  of  the  accusa- 

so    that    none    shall    believe    them."  tions  we  bring  against  them.     We  tell 

Goodness  is  an  ever-triumphing  power  them,  by  our  conduct,  that  they  are 

over  all  harm.     Goodness  can  disarm  offenders  against  man  and  God,  and 

persecutors.     Goodness  can  shield  from  that   they  deserve  eternal  wrath.     Is 

persecutors.       Goodness    outlasts    the  it  a  wonder,  therefore,  that  their  anger 

persecutors.     Goodness   can   even   get  should  be  kindled  against  us  ?     When 

itself  better  through  the  persecutions,  the  commandment  entered,  sin  revived, 

and    St.    Paul   experienced    a    mortal 

The  Safe  Conduct. — Detail  as  to  struggle.  We  have  felt  the  same.  If 
Christian  conduct  forms  a  feature  in  the  light  of  truth  encountered  such 
the  epistles  which  renders  them  ex-  bitter  opposition  in  our  own  heart,  how 
ceedingly  valuable  to  the  Church.  much  more  so  in  the  wide  world  ?  The 
They  contain  specific  directions  for  Christian  character  is  itself  in  active 
particular  circumstances,  and  encour-  opposition  to  sin.  There  is  a  wide 
agement  for  moments  of  trial.  St.  difference  between  the  two  opposites — 
Peter,  in  this  chapter,  deals  with  the  the  believer  carries  on  a  war  with  the 
duties  imposed  by  marriage,  and  also  enemy  of  the  unbeliever  for  his  own 
with  those  inspired  by  Christian  fellow-  benefit,  but  the  unbeliever  wars  against 
ship.  He  instructs  us  as  to  our  con-  the  friend  of  the  believer  to  his  in- 
duct before  the  world.  Moral  courage  tended  hurt.  We  say  intended  hurt, 
is  an  essential  element  in  that  conduct  because  it  is  impossible  to  damage 
(vers.  14,  15).  The  hallowed  presence  light.  You  may  exclude  it,  but  harm 
of  God  in  thought  strengthens  the  it  you  cannot.  Truth,  honesty,  kind- 
Christian  in  every  good  purpose.  We  ness,  love,  self-sacrifice,  and  the  fear  of 
are  strong  to  resist  temptation,  to  God,  no  one  can  tarnish.  Therefore, 
bear  trial,  and  to  confront  our  ad-  let  not  the  good  which  is  in  us  suffer 
versarits,  when  God  is  enthroned  in  our  on  account  of  crooked  following,  but 
affection.  let  our  course  be  straight  and  thorough, 

I.  To  follow  that  which  is  good  is  that  our  very  presence  may  excite  the 

to  excite  opposition. — "  And  who  is  he  envy,  malice,  hatred,  and  destructive- 

that  will  harm  you  ?  "     Our  persons,  ness  of  the  evil  heart, 

our  characters,  our  families,  and  our  II.  To  follow  that  which  is  good  is 

worldly  affairs,  will  be  attacked.     The  to  cultivate  the  noblest  virtues. — St 

lion  is  quiet  enough  in  his  den  until  he  Peter    in    the    second    epistle,    says, 

hears  the  footstep  of  the  hunter.    It  is  "  Grace  and  peace  be  multiplied  unto 

the  tread  of  virtue  in  your  life  that  you  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  and 

rouses    the     anger    of    your    enemy.  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  according  as 

Calmly  reflect  on  the  fact  that  what  His  Divine  power  hath  given  unto  us 

we  must  expect  from  a  sinful  world  is  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and 

opposition.     If  this  fact  is  not  borne  in  godliness,  through   the   knowledge   of 

mind,  especially  by  young  Christians,  a  Him  who  hath  called  us  to  glory  and 

104 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   l  PETER  CHAP.  HI 


virtue :  whereby  are  given  unto  us  ex-  the  course  of  virtue  affords  nourishment 

ceeding  great  and  precious  promises :  for  the  spiritual  man.     By  doing  the 

that  by  these  ye  might  be  partakers  of  right  we   gain  strength,   and  become 

the  Divine  nature,  having  escaped  the  more  vaHant.     Prayer  to  God,  justice 

corruption  which  is  in  the  world  through  and  mercy  to   man,  and   the  general 

lust "  (chap.  i.  2,  3,  4).      "  Partakers  conformity  to  the  will  of  the  good  God 

of  the  Divine  nature,"  is  an  expression  which  the   gospel   prescribes,    enlarge 

akin  to  that  used  by  the  apostle  St.  our  capacity  of  resistance  to  evil.     To 

John :    "  Which   were    born,    not    of  follow  that  which  is  good  is  to  "  Be 

blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 

of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."     The  of  His  might." 

*'new   creature   in   Christ   Jesus,"    of  III.  To  follow  that  which  is  good 

St.  Paul,  and  "  of  His  own  will  begat  ensures   the  Divine   approval.  —  "  If 

He  us  with  the  word  of  truth,"  fepoken  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  " 

by  St.  James,  echo  the  Master's  teach-  The  history  of  the  Church  shows  that 

ing  to  Nicodemus  concerning  the  new  "  The     chariot    of     God's     providence 

birth  :     "  Except   a   man  be  born    of  runneth  not  on  broken  wheels,"  as  the 

water  and  of  the  spirit,  he  cannot  enter  immortal    Rutherford    used    to    say. 

into  the  kingdom  of  God."     If  such  a  "  Every  movement  is  sure,  and  every 

tree  be  planted  in  the  human  heart,  the  turn  of  the  wheel  of  Providence  secures 

result  cannot   otherwise  be  than   the  the  good  of   the  Christian.      If   God 

fruit  of  the  Spirit — "  love,  joy,  peace,  smiles  upon  us,  what  matters  it  who 

long-sufiering,      gentleness,     goodness,  may  frown  ? "              •       •^- 

faith,    meekness,    temperance."      The  .^  r\^   .^,  ,      a/i..       .x         i.4.x*„ 
1  -1      r- 1^     -r^-   •      t <«    •               j^     x  i  *^  Do  Tight.    And  thou  hast  nought  to  rear; 
tendrils  of  the  Divine  life  m  man  stretch  j^g^t  hath  a  power  to  make  thee  strong : 
onward    in    the   path  of   the  goodness  The  night  is  dark,  but  light  is  near  ; 
of  God.     The  safety  of  the  Christian  The  grief  is  short,  the  joy  is  long." 
character  consists  as  much  in  the  course  xhe  power  of  right  no  one  can  describe, 
it  follows  as  in  the  overruling  hand  of  Government,   the    universe,    yea,    the 
God.     That  course  is  one  of  expansion  throne  of  God,  rests  upon  it.     It  has 
of  thought,  communion  mth  God,  good-  never  yet  suffered  defeat.     Sometimes 
will  towards  men,  and  a  supreme  effort  jts  vindication  has  tarried  long,  but  not 
to  benefit  all  mankind  by  the  dissemina-  for  ever.      Clouds  cannot  impede  the 
tion  of  Divine  truth.    There  is  but  one  course  of  the  sun,  although  they  may 
path  to  growth  and  strength  before  the  ]^{^q  it  from  our  view.     So  the  chariot 
new-born  child.    The  germs  of  thought,  of  justice  cannot  be  delayed  by  wicked 
of  emotion,  of  moral  obligation,  and  of  ^gn.    The  power  of  goodness,  we  would 
life  generally,  will  only  thrive  in  the  almost   say,   is   still   greater.      Every 
good    soil    adapted   to   their    growth,  thought,    word,    and    deed,  which   is 
Give  the  child  wholesome  food,  fresh  prompted  by  eternal  love,  must  travel 
air,  education,  exercise,  and  exemplary  on  to  its  goal.     There  is  a  charm  as 
society,  and  the  attributes  of  manhood  ^ell  as  power  in  doing  good.     You  re- 
will  develop  and  advance  towards  their  member  the  line  of  Goldsmith- 
final  stages.     The  new  man,  created  in 
Christ  Jesus,  in  like  manner,  by  follow-  "  ^^^  ^^^^^  t^e  luxury  of  doing  good." 

ing  that  which  is  good  advances  towards  jt  niust  be  done  without  pomp  or  desire 

the  enlargement  of  its  capacities  and      of  glory  as  Pope  puts  it : 

the  perfection  of  its  being.     The  one 

path  to  eternal  life  yields  the  fruit  of  "^^ff^^^^^^  '^^^^^^'  ^""^  ^^^^^  *^  ^"^  '^ 

holiness,    and    imparts    the    strength 

necessary   to  pass    over    the   ground.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  sense  of  safety 

Therefore  we  advance  in  our  faith  from  in  doing  good.     We  are  never  stronger 

the  bare  fact  that  man  cannot  harm  than  when  we  are  conscious  of  foUow- 

us,  to  the  second  great  truth — viz.,  that  ing  God  as  dear  children  in  the  matter 

105 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


of  walking  in  love.    Fountain  has  given      evil,  for  the  Good  Shepherd  will  be  with 
us  two  beautiful  lines  on  this . —  us,  to  safely  conduct  us  into  His  eternal 

«  Happy  were  men  if  they  but  understood      ^oU--Weekly  Pulpit. 
There  is  no  safety  but  in  doing  good." 

Be  Zealous. — The  better  MSS.  give 

There  is  One  who  was  called  "  Good  the  word  (zelotai)  which  is  commonly 

Master."     He  is  the  Fountain  of  Good,  rendered  ''  zealous  for,"  as  in  Acts  xxi. 

the  Inspirer  of  Good,  and  the  Giver  of  20,  xxii.  3.    As  a  word  in  frequent  use 

Good.     He   only  can   make   us  good,  among   devout  Jews   (as,    e.g.j  in  the 

Unless  we  are  made  good  we  cannot  name  of  the  apostle  Simon  Zelotes),  it 

seek  it.     The  great  secret  of  following  has  a  special  force  as  addressed  to  the 

in  a  good  course  is  the  good  heart  which  Church    of    the    Circumcision.       "  Be 

the  blessed  Saviour  gives.    In  the  path  zealous,"  he  seems  to  say  to  them,  "  not 

of  virtue,  truth,  and  mercy,  there  is  ^'  a  as  Pharisees  and  scribes  are  zealous, 

good  hope  through  grace."    The  greater  as  you  yourselves  were  wont  to  be,  for 

brightness  is  at  the  farther  end  of  the  the  Law  as  a  moral  and  ceremonial 

good  way.     Although  there  is  a  dark  code,  but  for  that  which  is  absolutely 

valley  to  cross,  yet  we  shall  fear  no  good." — Dean  Plwmptre. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—22. 

Power  Gained  through  Suffering  for  Well-doing. — In  order  to  understand,  and  to 
feel  the  force  of,  the  points  made  in  St.  Peter's  epistle,  it  must  be  kept  in  mind 
that  he  wrote  to  persons  who  were  placed  in  circumstances  of  disability,  and 
even  exposed  to  suffering  and  persecution,  on  account  of  their  faith  in  Jesus  as 
Messiah  and  Saviour,  and  on  account  of  the  Christian  lives  they  were  living. 
The  great  purpose  of  the  apostle  is  to  afford  them  consolation,  and  to  strengthen 
them  to  bear  and  persevere.  The  most  difficult  passage  now  before  us  is  greatly 
relieved  of  its  difficulty  when  we  clearly  see  that  its  object  is  not,  primarily,  any 
doctrinal  teaching,  but  comforting,  assuring,  moral  strengthening ;  and  that  its 
characteristic  is  rather  illustration  and  persuasion  than  any  forth-setting  of 
doctrinal  truths.  The  distinction  we  fully  recognise  in  our  own  pulpit-work. 
Sometimes  we  are  teachers,  but  sometimes  we  are  preachers,  persuaders,  com- 
forters ;  we  illustrate  and  impress  known  truths ;  we  show  the  relation  known 
truth  bears  to  existing  conditions  of  difficulty  and  trial.  St.  Peter  here  is 
reminding  the  disciples  of  what  they  knew,  rather  than  unfolding  anything  new 
to  them.     In  the  paragraph  we  may  find — 

I.  A  possibility. — "  But  and  if  ye  should  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake."  It 
is  but  as  a  possibility  for  all ;  it  was  a  realised  fact  for  some.  But  when  men 
are  brought  into  suffering,  their  first  idea  is  that  there  must  be  some  wrong  of 
which  it  is  the  punishment.  The  friends  of  Job,  in  trying  to  convict  him  of  sin, 
do  but  represent  the  commonplace  first  explanation  of  all  suffering.  What  we 
have  to  admit  is,  that  a  man  may  suffer  who  is  righteous,  and  may  even  have  to 
suffer  because  of  his  righteousness.  That,  indeed,  is  the  fact  for  all  ages,  but  it 
is  the  fact  which  comes  out  most  clearly  in  these  Christian  times,  because  it  is 
the  fact  so  sublimely  exhibited  in  the  representative  man,  Christ  Jesus ;  who 
"  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth.  Yet  it  pleased  the  Lord  to 
bruise  Him  ;  He  hath  put  Him  to  grief."  This  is  surely  a  suggestive  ground  of 
consolation  to  the  afflicted  and  persecuted.  There  is  at  least  the  possibility  that 
they  are  suffering  for  righteousness'  sake,  even  as  their  Divine  Lord  had  done. 
And  Christian  suffering  is  precisely  that  sort  of  suffering.  Righteousness  may  be 
high  principle,  standard  right,  or  the  Christian  profession. 

II.  Suffering  for  righteousness  is  to  be  accepted  as  for  Christ.—"  Sanctify  in 
your  hearts  Christ  as  Lord."     Not  as  Lord  in  any  general  or  abstract  way,  but 

106 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap.  in. 


precisely  as  Lord  of  those  who  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake.  He  is  their  head, 
leader,  representative ;  their  living  leader,  whose  actual  present  grace  rests  on  all 
those  who  take  the  same  suffering  way,  and  bear  their  disabilities  as  loyalty  and 
service  to  Him.  Christ  Himself  suffered  in  the  same  way,  "  leaving  you  an 
example  that  ye  should  follow  His  steps."  And  it  should  be  a  most  comforting 
relief  under  persecution  and  distress,  to  feel  that  we  are  but  "  filling  up  that 
which  is  behind  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  in  our  body,"  or  in  our  circumstances. 
The  sting  is  gone  wlien  we  know  that  we  are  suffering  for  Christ's  sake. 

III.  We  must  not  let  suffering  silence  our  witness  for  Christ. — Precisely  that 
would  be  the  temptation  of  those  early  Judaic  Christians.  When  they  saw  that 
their  witness  for  Clirist  brought  them  misunderstanding  and  persecution,  their 
first  idea  would  be  to  save  themselves  from  the  trouble  by  ceasing  to  make  the 
witness.  They  would  think  to  keep  disciples,  but  would  judge  it  to  be  altogether 
wiser  to  become  silent  and  secret  disciples.  This  is  a  most  subtle  form  of 
temptation,  which  assails  God's  people  in  every  age.  The  psalmist  felt  it,  and 
resisted  it,  for  he  says,  "  I  have  preached  righteousness  in  the  great  congre- 
gation ;  lo,  I  have  not  refrained  my  lips,  O  Lord,  Thou  knowest.  1  have  not  hid 
Thy  righteousness  within  my  heart ;  I  have  declared  Thy  faithfulness  and  Thy 
salvation  "  (Ps.  xi.  9,  10).  And  St.  Paul  is  almost  intense  in  his  demand  that 
confession  of  Christ  shall  always  go  with  belief  in  Christ.  "  If  thou  shalt 
confess  with  thy  mouth  Jesus  as  Lord,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God 
raised  Him  from  the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved  "  (Rom.  x.  9).  The  charm  of  St. 
Stephen's  example  lies  in  his  heroic  persistence  in  rendering  his  witness  for 
Christ,  even  in  face  of  hatred  and  death.  And  St.  Peter  here  urges  these  per- 
secuted Christians  not  to  let  their  troubles  silence  either  the  quiet  witness  of  their 
lives,  or  the  outspoken  witness  of  their  lips.  Suffering,  c**  not,  let  them  be 
"  ready  always  to  give  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  you  a  reason  concerning 
the  hope  that  is  in  you,  yet  with  meekness  and  fear." 

IV.  Power  to  witness,  and  to  suffer,  depends  on  keeping  a  good  conscience. 
— What  makes  trouble  unbearable  is  the  fear  that  it  is  deserved.  A  man  is 
always  soul-master  of  all  circumstances,  even  the  most  distressing,  when  he  has 
no  conscience  of  wrong.  We  see  this  in  its  perfection  in  Christ.  He  felt 
suffering  acutely,  but  He  bore  it  nobly,  because  none  could  convict  Him  of  sin, 
nor  could  His  own  conscience.  *'  Keep  conscience  as  the  noon-tide  clear,"  and  you 
can  go  through  a  midnight  darkness,  and  a  world  of  woes  unspeakable.  "  Who 
is  he  that  will  barm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is  good  ? "  St.  Paul 
stands  calmly  before  the  raging  Sanhedrin  that  longed  for  his  blood  because  he 
could  say,  "  Brethren,  I  have  lived  before  God  in  all  good  conscience  until  this 
day"  (Acts  xxiii.  1).  So  St.  Peter  urges  upon  the  persecuted  disciples  that  they 
should  have  and  keep  "  a  good  conscience,  that,  wherein  ye  are  spoken  against, 
they  may  be  put  to  shame  who  revile  your  good  manner  of  life  in  Christ." 

V.  Christians  should  find  the  model  of  their  sufferings  in  the  sufferings  of 
Christ. — "  Because  Christ  also  suffered  for  sins  once."  Yes,  "  for  sins,"  but  not 
His  own.  He  suffered,  "  the  righteous  for  the  unrighteous  "  And  His  sufferings 
are  a  model  of  ours  in  two  ways.  1.  They  came  upon  Him  through  the  malice 
and  wickedness  (sins)  of  men  ;  and  2.  They  came  on  Him  through  His  under- 
taking to  deal  with  the  sins  of  men,  to  deliver  men  from  their  penalties  and 
dominion.  Christians  are  in  the  world  to  do  what  Christ  did,  and  they  must 
fully  expect  to  have  to  suffer  in  the  doing,  even  as  Christ  did. 

VI.  Christians  should  find  the  suggestion  of  what  their  sufferings  might 
enable  them  to  do,  in  what  Christ's  sufferings  enabled  Him  to  do. — St.  Peter's 
point  here  is  this  :  Christ's  suffering  in  well-doing  unto  death,  brought  Him 
altogether  unique  spiritual  power ;  and  he  suggests  that  just  what  the  noble 
endurance  of  their  troubles  would  bring  these  persecuted  Christians  was  a  unique 

107 


CHAP.  111.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


spiritual  power.  To  set  forth  this  he  uses  an  illustration,  taken  from  a  popular 
idea  then  prevailing  in  the  Christian  community,  which  was  afterwards  embodied 
in  a  strange  and  fantastic  legend,  known  as  the  "  Gospel  of  Nicodemus."  The 
verses  19-21  are  properly  an  illustrative  parenthesis,  intended  to  illuminate  the 
declaration  that  Christ,  after  His  bodily  suffering,  was  "  quickened  in  the  spirit " 
to  become,  what  He  has  become  ever  since,  an  unique  spiritual  power ;  such  a 
power  as  He  could  only  become  through  the  experience  of  suffering  in  well-doing  ; 
such  a  power  as  we  only  can  gain  through  the  same  experience.  The  '*  baptism  " 
of  ver.  21  is  not  the  rite  of  baptism  on  confession  of  faith,  but  the  baptism  of 
suffering  which  the  disciples  were  undergoing,  and  the  reference  is  to  the  baptism 
of  suffeiing  which  Noah  underwent  through  all  the  long  years  of  waiting,  in 
which  he  was  scorned  and  persecuted,  but  through  which  he  was  kept  and  saved. 
Noah  kept  a  good  conscience  all  through.  His  discipline  was  no  "putting  away 
of  the  filth  of  the  flesh."  You,  too,  should  keep  a  good  conscience ;  then  you 
would  see  that  your  sufierings,  like  Noah's,  and  like  your  Lord's,  were  no 
mere  discipline,  but  were  that  sublimest  of  sublime  things,  vicarious  ministry. 

VII.  Christians  should  find  the  suggestion  of  what  their  suiferings  will  result 
in  in  what  Christ's  sufferings  resulted  in. — Taking  out  the  parenthesis,  the  point 
St.  Peter  would  impress  comes  fully  into  view.  '*  Being  put  to  death  in  the 
flesh,  but  quickened  in  the  spirit,  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ ;  Who 
is  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  having  gone  into  heaven,  angels  and  authorities 
and  powers  being  made  subject  unto  Him."  When  Christ's  bodily  sufierings  in 
well-doing  reached  even  to  the  extremity  of  death,  they  proved  to  be  but  the  way 
in  which  spiritual  power  was  quickened  and  developed,  and  to  that  spiritual 
power,  free  for  the  largest,  noblest  service,  the  highest,  holiest  trusts  and 
authorities  are  now  committed.  "  Sufier  on,  then,"  St.  Peter  would  say, 
*'  sufiering  in  well-doing,  well  borne,  can  but  have  such  results  for  us  as  we 
see  in  the  case  of  our  Divine  and  blessed  Lord." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  15.-4  Reason  for  our  Hope. —  skill?  Yes;  for  though  he  may  not 
The  word  is  literally  an  apology,  but  be  able  to  answer  all  the  objections  of 
that  word  is  now  used  in  the  sense  of  the  sceptic,  yet,  inasmuch  as  his  hope 
an  excuse,  so  that  the  rendering  of  our  is  a  matter  of  experience,  he  can  easily 
version  is  correct — a  reason',  and  that  give  such  reasons  for  it  as  a  candid 
every  one  should  be  able  to  give  for  mind  would  accept.  And  how  many, 
his  hope,  readily  and  whenever  he  is  who  have  been  perfectly  ignorant  of 
asked  for  it.  Not  that  we  are  bound,  the  learning  of  the  schools,  perfectly 
as  Christians,  to  answer  any  scoffer  unacquainted  with  the  arts  of  disputa- 
that  may  assail  our  faith ;  but  if  any  tion,  have  been  able,  in  a  few  words, 
one  comes  to  us  and  asks  us  on  what  to  put  to  silence  those  who  have  called 
we  are  resting  our  hope,  what  ground  their  hope  in  question  !  But  only  those 
we  have  for  it,  or  how  we  can  defend  can  do  this  who  have  a  good  conscience 
it,  we  should  be  prepared  to  give  a  — a  conscience  void  of  offence  before 
reply;  yet,  as  Luther  says,  "not  with  God  and  before  man.  He  who  keeps 
proud  words  or  with  violence,  but  with  a  good  conscience  is  in  possession  of  a 
such  fear  and  humility  as  if  we  stood  good  hope,  and  can  defend  that  hope 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  God."  But  with  good  reasons  which  the  world 
can  an  unlettered  Christian  be  expected  around  him  will  not  be  able  to  gain- 
to  do  this,  especially  in  such  times  as  say.  Of  our  hope  we  need  never  be 
these,  when  the  Christian  faith  is  ashamed,  for  we  have  answers  for  it 
assailed  at  every  point  in  the  most  ready — not  far  to  seek ;  and  if  those 
subtle  manner,  and  with  the  greatest  who  question  us  about  it  are  not  satis- 

108 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap.  hi. 


fied   with   them,  we   can  maintain  it  beginning  of  man.    We  look  at  Society 

still,  assured  that  it  will  not  fail  us  and  we  say.  This  is  not  God's  ideal  of 

when  we  are  anticipating  its  fruition,  man.    "We  come  to  the  New  Testament 

But  there  are  times  when  silence  is  and  we  see  the  life  of  Christ,  Jesus  of 

our  best  answer,  and  when  it  will  have  Nazareth.      He  was  the  type  of  true 

greater  weight  than  all  the  assertions  manhood.     In  Him  we  see  what  God 

we  can  make,  and  all  the  arguments  meant  man  to  be.    He  represents  what 

we  can  use. — Thornley  Smith.  you  and  I  are  to  be  if  we  fulfil  God's 

plan.     As  we  look  at  this  pattern  we 

The  Reason  of  Hope. — There  is  here  hear  the  voice  of  God  saying,  You  also 
a  play  upon  the  words  in  the  original  are  to  be  the  sons  of  Gcd.  So  we  gather 
Greek  which  we  fail  to  see  in  our  ver-  inspiration  from  the  thought  that  this 
sions.  In  seems  in  English  as  if  there  is  what  God  intends  man  shall  be. 
were  a  contrast  between  the  "  giving  How  shall  man  become  this  ?  I  look 
the  answer "  and  the  *'  reason,"  when,  at  an  acorn.  It  says  to  me,  By-and 
in  fact,  they  are  the  same.  We  might  bye  I  shall  be  a  great  tree ;  by-and-bye 
read  it :  "Be  ye  ready  always  to  give  the  birds  will  nest  in  my  branches ;  by- 
a  justification  to  every  one  who  would  and-bye  I  shall  be  a  shelter  to  those 
require  you  to  justify  the  hope  that  is  who  dwell  under  my  roof;  by-and-bye 
in  you."  St.  Peter,  realising  that  the  I  shall  carry  many  over  the  great 
Christian  religion  is  a  hopeful  religion,  Atlantic.  But,  I  say  to  the  acorn, 
says  to  the  strangers  scattered  abroad,  "  Can  you  be  all  this  ? "  "  Yes,  God  and 
to  whom  he  wiites,  *'  You  must  have  I  !  "  So  man  will  be  like  the  great 
a  reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  you.  Pattern ;  for  it  is  God  and  man.  We 
You  must  not  be  content  to  look  only  see  by  faith,  more  and  more,  that  God 
on  the  bright  side  of  things  and  shut  is  doing  this.  We  see  Him  moving 
out  the  dark  side,  to  hear  only  paeans  and  shaping  man  more  and  more  in 
of  peace  and  not  to  notice  the  sounds  accordance  with  His  purpose.  If  we 
of  battle.  You  must  have  a  reason  could  have  seen  the  world  in  its  first 
for  this  hope  in  times  of  darkness  and  stage  of  creation,  in  its  chaotic  con- 
trial,  as  well  as  in  seasons  of  sunshine  dition — "  without  form  and  void  " — 
and  joy."  Let  us  try  to  answer  this  and  if,  then,  any  one  could  have  said 
question :  What  are  the  Christian's  to  us  that  this  was  to  become  a  place 
reasons  for  hope — hope  for  ourselves,  where  man  should  dwell  in  happiness 
for  our  families,  and  for  our  nation  ?  and  glory — that  from  all  this  should 

I.  We  believe  in  a  God  of  hope. —  come  order  and  beauty — we  should  have 
We  believe  that  God  created  the  world,  scoffed  at  the  idea,  unless  we  could 
that  He  is  a  God  of  foresight  and  love,  have  seen  that  God  was  there,  that 
that  He  knew  what  He  was  about  His  Spirit  was  brooding  over  the  water, 
when  He  made  life,  and  that  He  will  and  bringing  out  this  great  result.  So 
bring  out  of  our  imperfect  life  here  a  we  look  on  humanity,  in  its  defects 
nobler  and  a  better  one.  We  believe  and  imperfections,  and  we  say :  This 
that  when  He  sowed  the  seed  He  knew  is  but  the  chaotic  state ;  God  is  at 
that  there  would  not  be  a  gathering  in  work ;  He  can  change  all  to  beauty, 
of  tares,  but  that  the  wheat  would  God  is  in  human  history  and  is  bringing 
overbalance  the  tares  in  the  last  great  order  out  of  chaos.  But  there  are 
harvest.  We  believe  He  is  a  God  of  limitations  of  our  hope.  We  must  be 
hope,  and  that  He  understands  human  willing  to  look  at  the  dark  side  some- 
nature  better  than  we  can.  He  saw  times.  Some  hopes  may  be  dis- 
the  darkness,  but  yet  He  hopes ;  and  appointed.  Our  desires  may  not  be 
so  we  can  hope.  Again,  He  has  given  realised.  We  have  hope  for  America; 
a  definiteness  to  the  hope.  We  look  but  Egypt,  Babylon,  Greece,  Rome, 
at  the  savage  in  his  degradation ;  he  and  other  great  civilisations,  have 
is  not  the  true  man ;  he  is  only  the  perished.      We    are    not    sure    what 

109 


CHAP.  III.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


plan  God  is  to  work  out  in  this  our  is  "from  everlasting  to  everlasting  upon 

beloved    nation.       But    whether    the  them  that  fear  Him."     In  closing  I 

nation    perishes    or    lives,    we    know  want  to  turn  to  a  second  text :  "  With- 

that    humanity   will    still    move    on.  out  hope  in  the  world."      Atheism  is 

God's  purposes  are  sure.      We  know  hopeless.     Can  there  be  a  nation  with- 

that  we  love  purity  and  truth  all  the  out  God  ?      Do  you   write  over   that 

more  because  there  are  some  in  our  precept,     "  Put    not    your    trust    in 

own  dear  land  who  are  working  against  princes,"  put  your  trust  in  politicians  ? 

them.      We  are  not  sure  of  religious  Without  God  there  is  no  hope  for  a 

organisations.     We  are  not  sure  that  nation.    There  is  no  hope  for  a  Church 

Congregationalism   was   the    apostolic  if  there  be  not  an  open  door  to  take  in 

church.     Congregationalism  is  not  the  the  love  of  God.     What  is  your  hope 

great  thing,  but  humanity.    All  things  for  your  children  ?     If  there  is  no  God 

that  mould  human  life  may  change,  to  guide,  you  might  as  well  attempt  to 

but    man    lives    on.      The    tools    are  lead  them  through  the  great  wilderness 

nothing,  but  the  building  ;   and  that  of  Sahara  as  to  hope  to  guide  them 

which   God   is    building   is    manhood,  safely  through  this  life,  fraught  with 

The   battle   of    the    Reformation   has  its  many  dangers.     What  is  your  hope 

passed,  but  the  conception  of  the  Re-  for  yourself  ?      Do  you  carry  God  to 

formation — that  God  is  mercy  as  well  your  work,  to  your  store,  in  society  ? 

as  justice — remains.      To-day  we  are  Do  you   live   with   God  ?      Our   hope 

debating  on   probation   and   a   future  rests  in  God.     We  believe  that  there 

life,  as  if   we  knew  all   about  them,  is  One  working  in  humanity  who  is 

when  how  little  we  know !     Churches,  shaping    all    according    to    His    wise 

creeds,    nations,    may   disappear,   but  purpose.      This  is  the   reason^  of  our 

human  character  will  grow  and  grow,  hope. — Lyman  Ahhott^  D.D.    \ 

because    God   is    begetting  man,    and  | 

working     out     His     ideal     manhood.  Rationalism. — This  term   isfusually 

These    things    are    but    His    instru-  employed  to  describe  an  attitude  of  the 

ments.     The  seed  enters  the  ground,  mind  adverse  to  religion,  and  especially 

and   out   of    it   comes   the   tulip,    the  adverse  to  the  belief  in  Christianity, 

lily,    because   God   is    working    in   it.  But     this    is    incorrect    and    unfair. 

Because  we  believe  that  God  is  work-  Christianity  claims  to   be   a   rational 

ing  within  man  we  have  a  sure  hope  religion.      It   sprang   from   the   most 

of  the  future ;  for  God  knows  what  He  rational,   perhaps  one  might  say  the 

is   doing.      This,  you  say,   is   a  large  only  rational,  religion  of  the  old  world, 

outlook,   but   how   about   myself  ?      I  the    religion   that    protested    against 

don't  care  so  much  about  the  race  as  polytheism,  and  idolatry,  that  taught 

my  own   individual   life.      There   are  men   to   believe  in   God,    and   not   to 

no  large  things  with  God  and  no  little  worship  the  hosts  of  heaven,    nor   to 

things  with  God.     It  is  not  a  strange  deify  the  forces  of  nature,  nor  to  bow 

declaration  of  Christ's  that  the  hairs  down   to   images   graven    by  art  and 

of  our  heads  are  numbered,  and  that  man's  device.     The  Israelites,  so  far  as 

not    a    sparrow   falls    to   the   ground  they   were   faithful   to  their  religion, 

without  His  notice.     The  little  things  were   the   rationalists  of   their   time ; 

are  the  determining  things.     It  is  the  and  Christianity  claims  to  be  a  rational 

small   rudder   that    guides    the   great  religion.     This  claim  is  distinctly  made 

ship.     We  believe  in  a  God  who  not  for  it  by  Peter   in  our  text,  and   as 

merely   deals    with   nations    or    with  distinctly   by   Paul,  when   he   speaks 

masses,  but  One  who  looks  on  every  of  the  Christian's  presenting  himself  to 

cradle,   on   every  soul.      We   have   a  God  a  living  sacrifice  as  a  "  reasonable 

true  hope,  that  cheers  our  hearts  and  service."     Taking  the  whole  of  Christ's 

is  with  us  in  darkness  as  well  as  in  teaching  as  recorded   in  the   gospels, 

light.     We  believe  in  One  whose  mercy  we  can  truthfully  say  of  it  that,  while 

110 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


it   contains  much   that   is   above  our 
comprehension,  and  much  that  we  may 
think  hard  in  the  way  of  precept,  still 
it   is  a  teaching  distinguished   by  its 
reasonableness.     The  Reformers  were, 
to   a   remarkable   extent,  rationalists. 
They  found  Christianity  so  corrupted 
in  doctrine,  in  morals,  in  ritual,  as  to 
have    become    almost    an    irrational 
religion.      Against    such    corruptions 
they  uttered  their  protest,  and  argued 
the   whole   case   in  a  highly  rational 
manner.       They    did    much    towards 
substituting   a  sober   and   reverential 
reason  for  blind  submission  to  ecclesias- 
tical authority.    Looking  at  rationalism 
as   the   application  of    reason   to   the 
investigation  of  religion,  what  has  it 
done?     1.    It  demanded,  and  secured, 
the  right  of   all  men  to  possess  and 
read  the  Scriptures.     2.    It  has  done 
much  towards  the  destruction  of  beHef 
in  many  degrading  superstitions.      3. 
We  owe    to    it   the   cessation   of    all 
persecution  for  religious  opinions  and 
practices.     4.  The  spirit  of  rationalism 
being  largely  of  a  practical  and  util- 
itarian  character,    it   has   done  much 
toward  bringing  to  the  front  the  ethics 
of  Christianity,  to  make  less  of  religious 
dogma,  and  more  of  religious  conduct. 
There  have  been  times  when  conduct 
has  counted  for  little,  but  orthodoxy 
in  creed  was  everything.     Eationalism 
has  taught  men  to  be  less  positive  and 
dogmatic  in  regard  to  the  unseen,  the  in- 
finite, the  unknowable,  and  has  turned 
the  current  of  religious  thought  and 
feeling  and  life  more  into  the  channel 
of  moral  and  spiritual  utility.     5.  It 
has  compelled   Christians  to  consider 
and  to  set  forth  the  reason  or  reasons 
they  have  for  the  hope  that  is  in  them. 
I  am  far  from  saying  that  rationalism 
has  done  no   harm.      It   has  affected 
very  many  minds  with  much  painful, 
much  agonising  doubt ;  it  has  wrenched 
from  many  their  Christian  faith  and 
hope.     If  rationalism  has  brought  into 
prominence     the      practical,      useful, 
beneficent    characteristics    of    Christ- 
ianity,  it    has,    on    the   other    hand, 
acting   on    less   worthy   minds,    made 
men  proud,  and  vain,  and  impious,  and. 


in  regard  to  all  beneficent  work,  in- 
different, scaptical,  cold,  and  dead.     It 
has  in  many  instances  enlightened  the 
intellect,  at  the  terrible  cost  of  stunting 
the  affections;  it  has  given  men  broader 
views,  but  has  in  proportion  narrowed 
their   sympathies ;    it    has   fed    their 
minds,  but  starved  their  hearts.    What- 
ever be  the  successes  of  rationalism,  it 
has    its   failures,    and    very    grievous 
failures.     It  fails  in  unity.     There  are 
rationalists  and  rationalists.    The  name 
does  not  indicate  just  one  clearly-de- 
fined class  or  sect.    If  there  be  anything 
in  the  argument  against  Christianity, 
on  the  gi'ound  of  diversity  of  opinion 
held  by  its  professors,  the  same  objection 
may  be  urged  against  rationalism.     It 
fails,  too,  in  not  furnishing  clear  and 
definite  rules  for  the  conduct  of  life. 
It  is  not  provided  with  any  high  and 
powerful  motive  to  influence  men  for 
good,  to  lead  them  to  exercise  self-denial, 
to  cause  them  to  devote  themselves  to 
the  welfare  of  society  or  of  any  portion 
of  it.     It  cannot  deal  with  the  sense 
and  conviction  of  sin  ;  and  it  fails  us 
just   where   we   most   need   help   and 
guidance  :  it  may  accompany  us  to  the 
end   of   our   earthly   journey,   casting 
much  light  over  our  path,  instructing 
us,  interesting  us,  and  proving  of  great 
advantage  to  us  in  many  things  of  a 
secular  character ;  but  the  end  of  the 
journey   is   reached,    and    rationalism 
can   go  with  us  no   farther,   and   its 
light   goes   out.      Mr.   Lecky  says  of 
rationalism,  "Utility   is   perhaps   the 
highest  motive   to   which  reason   can 
attain."      And    he    laments   the   dis- 
couragement given   by  rationalism  to 
disinterestedness,  to  generosity,  to  self- 
sacrifice,  to  true  moral  heroism.     Tliese 
defects,  which  are  inherent  in  its  very 
nature,  and  cannot  be  made  up  for  by 
any  other  perfections,  however  valuable, 
will  probably  in  time  form  a  check  to 
rationalism,  and  cause  it  to  be  rejected, 
as  so  many  other  systems  have  been 
rejected.      And    rationalism,    now  in 
all  the  height  of  its  greatness  and  its 
strength,  may  turn  out  to  be  only  a 
passing  wave  of  thought,  over  which 
the   ark   of   God's  covenant  of   grace 

111 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


will  float  with  safety,  thus  giving 
another  witness  to  its  unchangeable 
strength,  to  the  wisdom  of  Him  who 
guides  it,  and  to  the  security  of  those 
who  have  fled  to  it  for  refuge. — H. 
Stowell  Brown. 

Vers.  17, 18.  The  Secret  of  True  Great- 
ness.— There   is   a   marked    difference 
between    the    standard   by  which   we 
measure  the  men  of  our  own  day  and 
the  men  of  a  past  age.    When  we  study 
a  past  epoch,  we  are  neither  blinded  by 
our  interests  nor  our  prejudices,  nor  are 
we  dazzled  by  merely  outward  shows. 
We  now  delight  to   honour  only  the 
men  who  have  uttered  great  thoughts, 
wrought  great  deeds,  Uved  great  lives  ; 
and  these  are  often  men  who  made  no 
great  noise  in  their  day.      Two  classes 
all  men  select  for  reverence,  and  rank 
among  the  great — at  least,  when  their 
day  is  past.     1 .  Those  who,  possessed 
of  large  natural  gifts,  cultivated  them 
wisely,  and  devoted  them  to  the  public 
good.     In  proportion  as  these  men  have 
suffered  in  and  for  their  endeavours  to 
enlighten   or   benefit    the   world,   the 
world  has  taken  them  to  its  very  heart, 
and  they  have  assumed  heroic  propor- 
tions  in   the   eyes    of   all   subsequent 
generations.     2.  Those  who  have  been 
able  to  frame  for  themselves  an  heroic 
conception  of  duty,  and  to  live  by  it. 
Any   good    historian,    any   competent 
judge,    would  affirm   that  the   nation 
was  to  be  accounted  great  which  was 
capable  of  an  heroic  self-devotion,  which 
had  men  and  women  who  could  dare 
and  endure  all  things  for  a  noble  cause. 
And  in  this  class,  too,  those  whom  the 
world  honours  most  are  still  those  who 
have  endured  most  and  most  bravely, 
those  who  have  suffered  most  for  the 
sake  of  others,  who  have  been  animated 
by  the  most  generous  and  disinterested 
spirit.     That  which  touches  and  moves 
men,  till  they  grow  ashamed  of  their 
own  useless  and  self -pleasing  lives,  is  the 
courage  that  dares  and  endures,  the 
love  which  conquers  selfishness,  and  is 
ready  to  fling  away  life  itself  if  only 
others  can   thus  be  served   or   saved. 
This  is  the   true   greatness,  the   true 

112 


heroism.     Why,  then,  when  the   man 
Christ  Jesus  does  a  deed  of  this  very 
kind — the   kind  which  all  men  admit 
to  be  most  noble  and  heroic,  a   deed 
which  differs  from  that  of  other  men 
only  in  being  incomparably  more  heroic, 
more  noble,  more  unselfish — why  does 
not  the  world  admire  Him,  and  take 
Him  to  its  heart  ?     He  suffered  for  us  ; 
suffered  an  agony  which  we  cannot  so 
much  as  conceive — a  passion  of  which 
the  cross  is  a  pathetic  but  utterly  in- 
adequate symbol — that  He  might  bring 
us  back  to  life  and  freedom,  health  and 
peace.    Are  we  not,  then,  bound  to  love 
Him,   and  to    devote  our   life  to  His 
service?     The    text   contains   and   en- 
forces the  secret  of  true  greatness  when 
it  bids  us  carry  well-doing  to  the  suffer- 
ing point.     Have  we  not  here  a  most 
welcome    side-light     thrown    on    that 
great  mystery,  the   function  and  pur- 
pose of  evil  ?     How  should  we  suffer  in 
and  for  well-doing  if  there  were  no  evil 
in  and  around  us  ?      In  the  last  resort, 
all   our   miseries,    all    our    sufferings, 
spring  from  sin.      The  invincible  ignor- 
ance, the  obstinate    prejudices,  the  per- 
sistent selfishness    of  our  fellows,  their 
enmity  to  the  truth,  which  cuts  their 
prejudices  against  the  grain,  and  to  the 
righteousness  which  rebukes  their  vices, 
or  imposes  a  check  on  their   passion — 
all  these  come  of  evil.    It  is  from  these 
that  men   suffer  when    bent  on   doing 
well;    it    is   by   these    that   they   are 
hindered,  thwarted,  and  at  times  driven 
back  in  apparent  defeat.    So  that,  after 
all,  it  would   seem  that  to  creatures 
such  as  we  are,  in  such  a  world  as  this, 
what  we  call  "  evil  "  is  necessary  to  our 
education  and  discipline  in  goodness,  to 
our  culture  in  impersonal  and  unselfish 
habits  and  aims ;  to  the  development, 
in    fine,    of    the   very    elements    and 
qualities    in    our    nature,    which   are 
universally  confessed  to  be  the  noblest 
and    best.       This     line     of     thought 
yields    a   glimpse    into    the    mystery 
of  the  Incarnation.     Any  man — any 
theist,  at   least — will   acknowledge   it 
to  be  of  the  first  importance  that  we 
should  come  to  know  and   love   God. 
But  we  cannot  find  Him  out  to  per- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I,  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


fection,  whether  by  the  searching  in- 
quest of  reason,  or  by  the  more  vital 
and  gracious  intuitions  of  the  heart. 
If  we  are  to  know  Him  as  we  need  to 
know  Him,  He  must  reveal  Himself 
to  us.  He  must  limit  Himself.  He 
must  speak  to  us  in  our  language,  since 
we  cannot  understand  His.  But  He 
must  use  our  noblest  language,  that 
which  most  intimately  appeals  to  our 
conscience  and  heart,  that  which  can 
be  apprehended  by  all  the  kindreds  of 
this  divided  earth.  Our  noblest 
language,  that  which  all  can  apprehend 
and  admire,  which  touches  and  moves 
all  races  and  all  classes  with  a  common 
emotion,  to  a  common  enthusiasm,  is, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  language  of  noble 
deeds,  of  a  noble  life — the  language  of 
that  heroic  greatness  which  is  content 
to  suffer  for  doing  well,  and  able  to 
draw  from  its  sufferings  new  life  and 
vigour  for  the  spirit.  This,  then,  is 
the  language  which  God  must  deign  to 
use,  if  He  would  in  very  deed  reveal 
Himself  to  us.  And  this  is  the 
language  in  which  the  gospel  of  Christ 
is  written.  Christ  suffered  for  us. 
God  has  spoken.  He  has  shown  Himself 
to  us,  if  only  we  believe  that  God  was 
in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto 
Himself.  This  line  of  thought  also 
supplies  us  with  a  noble  incentive  to  a 
noble  life.  One  kind  of  greatness  is 
beyond  our  reach.  No  man  can  make 
himself  a  great  statesman,  a  great  poet, 
or  even  a  great  theologian.  We  must 
accept  our  natural  capacities  and  gifts, 
whatever  they  may  be.  But  the  highest 
kind  of  greatness,  that  which  most 
deeply  moves  the  hearts  of  men,  is  open 
to  us  all.  Well-doing  is  not  a  close 
profession  ;  it  is  open  to  us,  and  to  all 
men.  When  St.  Peter  sets  before  us 
the  example  of  Christ,  and  stimulates 
us  to  a  self-effacing  devotion  to  duty 
and  conviction  by  reminding  us  how 
He  once  suffered  for  our  sins  that  He 
might  bring  us  to  God,  then  surely  He 
supplies  us  with  the  keenest,  the  most 
pathetic  and  constraining  of  all  motives, 
of  all  incentives,  to  a  great  and  noble 
life.  For  we  cannot  be  followers  of 
Christ  and  not  follow  Him;   nor  can 


we  follow  Him  save  as  we  take  the 
way  of  the  cross. — S,  Cox,  D.D. 

Yer.  18.  The  Power  of  Suffering  In- 
nocence.—  "  Because  Christ  also  suffered 
for  our  sins  once."  This  passage  is 
found  in  the  midst  of  very  practical 
counsels.  It  is  an  instance  of  the 
characteristic  New-Testament  advice 
urged  by  the  example  of  Christ,  or  by 
directly  Christian  motives.  It  should 
ever  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  religion 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  an  inspired 
morality;  its  key-note  is  "righteous- 
ness." 

I.  The  practical^lesson  which  the 
apostle  is  here  urging^. — Compare 
vers.  13,  14,  with  ver.  17.  Describe 
the  particular  circumstances  of 
difficulty  and  strain  in  which  the 
early  Church  was  placed,  dwelling 
especially  on  the  slandering  and  mis- 
representation to  which  the  Christians 
were  subject,  and  even  the  actual  per- 
secution which  they  were  called  to 
endure.  St.  Peter  says  there  is  a  kind 
of  happiness  they  should  have  in  being 
called  to  suffer  innocently,  for  righteous- 
ness' sake,  even  as  their  Divine  Lord  and 
Master  had  to  suffer.  That  suffering 
innocence  God  makes  to  be  the  very 
highest  moral  force  in  His  world  of 
humanity.  In  every  sphere  of  life  the 
truth  is  true,  that  he  who  can  suffer — 
undeservedly,  and  in  the  spirit  of 
heavenly  Divine  charity — can  save. 
Suffering  for  evil  doing  says  nothing, 
and  does  nothing ;  it  has  to  be  borne, 
and  there  is  nothing  more  to  be  said 
about  it.  Suffering  for  well-doing 
sublimely  exhibits  faith  in  God,  self- 
restraint,  power  of  character,  and  a 
measure  of  likeness  to  the  Lord 
Jesus. 

II.  The  example  of  Christ  by  which 
this  lesson  is  urged.— 1.  In  Him 
was  a  fellowship  with  us  in  suffering. 
Both  He  and  we  share  together  the 
common  sufferings  which  belong  to 
humanity,  and  the  special  sufferings 
which  come  to  men  whenever  they 
resist  the  tendencies  of  the  world 
around  them  in  the  spirit  of  loyalty  to 
God.     2.  His  suffering    was    through- 

113 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


out  suffering  innocence,  the  suffering 
that  comes  through  persistent  well- 
doing. 3.  And  His  suffering  was 
caused  by  the  wrong,  the  sin  of  others. 
It  might  be  the  result  of  prejudice,  or 
misunderstanding,  or  false  notions  of 
loyalty  to  God,  but  it  was  always,  in 
some  form,  man's  waywardness,  wilful- 
ness, self -pleasing,  that  brought  round 
bitterness,  distress,  and  suffering,  to 
Christ. 

III.  The  influence  that  such  suffer- 
ing innocence  has  on  human  hearts. 
— It  "  brings  men  to  God."  It  may 
be  difficult,  with  our  spiritual  appre- 
hension of  the  Dmne  Fatherhood,  for 
us  to  state  clearly  the  way  in  which 
God  needs  to  be  reconciled  to  man. 
We  cannot  know  our  hearts  without 
having  the  deepest  conviction  that  we 
need  reconciling  to  Him.  Now,  the 
spectacle  of  suffering  innocence  is  the 
most  moving  thing  on  earth.  And 
when  that  suffering  innocence  is  seen 
to  be  directly  related  to  our  sin,  and 
borne  in  the  power  of  a  self-sacrificing 
love  to  us,  it  makes  us  hate  the  sin, 
and  feel  drawn  to  the  sufferer.  And 
we  may  be  sure  that  our  suffering  in 
righteousness  will  be  a  moral  power  on 
others,  even  as  Ohrist-'s  was,  and  is, 
upon  us. 

The  Man-side  of  the  Redemp- 
tion.— ''  That  He  might  bring  us  to 
God."  It  is  generally  recognised 
that  there  are  two  sides  to  the  great 
redemptive  work.  But  its  relation  to 
the  government  and  righteousness  of 
God  must  always  be  to  us  a  mystery 
only  partly  comprehended.  We  can 
form  doctrinal  systems,  based  on  what 
revelations  of  the  being  and  nature  of 
God  we  have  been  able  to  receive,  but 
there  is  always  this  uncertainty  :  if  we 
knew  God  more  perfectly,  we  might 
have  to  modify  our  system.  We  are 
on  clearer,  safer  ground  when  we  try 
to  understand  how  the  redemption 
bears  relation  to  its,  removes  the  hind- 
rances that  keep  us  from  God,  bears  a 
gracious  influence  on  us,  so  as  to  fit  us 
for  coming  to  God,  and  actually  brings 
us  to  Him,  and  keeps  us  in  gracious 

114 


relations  with  Him.  St.  Paul  set 
forth  the  manward  side  of  redemption 
in  a  very  forcible  way  in  his  famous 
passage  (2  Cor.  chap.  v.  19,  20),  "  God 
was  in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world 
unto  Himself."  *'  We  beseech  you  on 
behalf  of  Christ,  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God." 

Bean  Plumptre^s  Exegesis  of  1  Peter 
iii.  18-20. — The  train  of  thought  which 
leads  the  apostle  to  refer  to  the 
"  descent  into  hell,"  is,  at  first  sight, 
far  from  clear ;  but  it  is  clearer  by  far 
on  the  assumption  that  this  is  what  he 
has  in  view,  than  on  the  supposition 
that  he  is  thinking  of  a  work  done  by 
Christ  as  preaching  in  the  days  of 
Noah  to  the  spirits  that  were  after- 
wards in  prison.  The  assignment  of 
such  a  work  to  Him  as  the  Christ  is  at 
all  events  entirely  foreign  to  the  cycle 
of  apostolic  thought  and  language. 
Let  us  examine  the  passage  on  the 
other  assumption,  and  see  how  it  bears 
the  test.  The  analogy  of  1  Cor.  vii. 
34,  Col.  ii.  5,  as  regards  the  use  of 
the  case  of  Rom.  i.  4,  1  Tim.  iii.  16, 
as  regards  the  antithesis  between  the 
"  flesh "  and  "  spirit  "  of  our  Lord's 
human  nature,  compels  us  to  alter  the 
rendering  of  the  Authorised  Version. 
The  dative  is  not  that  of  the  instrument 
in  either  clause,  but  that  of  "  the  sphere 
to  which  a  general  predicate  is  to  be 
limited."  To  take  it  as  having  one 
force  in  the  first  clause,  and  a  different 
one  in  the  second,  is  to  do  violence  to 
the  natural  structure  of  the  sentence. 
The  authority  of  all  the  great  uncial 
MSS.  and  of  all  recent  editions,  is 
against  the  insertion  of  the  article 
before  "  spirit "  and  without  it,  as  the 
sentence  stands,  the  reference  of  the 
second  clause  to  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  cannot  be  supported.  We 
have  therefore  to  take  the  words  as 
meaning  that  Christ  was  "  put  to  death 
in  the  flesh,  but  quickened,  endowed 
with  a  new  power  of  life,  in  His  spirit." 
They  connect  themselves  with  the 
death-cry  on  the  cross,  "  Father,  into 
Thy  hands  I  commend  My  spirit." 
That  moment  of  outward  death  to  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


body  was  the  entrance  of  the  spirit  into 
a  higher  life.  That  thought  is  what 
the  apostle  is  anxious  to  impress  on 
those  who  were  exposed  to  persecution, 
suffering,  death.  Let  men  do  their 
worst,  if  they  "  armed  themselves  with 
the  mind  of  Christ,"  death  would  be  to 
them  gain,  not  loss,  would  bring  with 
it  freedom  from  sin  and  an  increase  of 
spiritual  energy.  He  goes  on  to  speak  of 
the  nature  of  that  new  energy.  **  In  " 
[not  *'  by  "]  "  which  also  He  went  and 
preached  to  the  spirits  in  prison." 
The  "  flesh  "  was  placed  in  the  tomb, 
but  He,  in  that  other  element  of  His 
nature,  went  where  go  the  "  spirits " 
of  other  men.  Almost  as  if  con- 
sciously guarding  against  the  dis- 
tortions of  the  plain  meaning  of  the 
words  which  take  their  place  among 
the  monstrosities  of  exegesis,  St.  Peter 
repeats  the  word  which  he  uses  here 
["  having  gone "]  when  he  comes  to 
speak,  in  ver.  25,  of  Christ's  ascension 
["  having  gone  into  heaven  "].  In  both 
cases  there  was,  as  measured  by  his 
thoughts,  a  local  motion.  As  in  Eph.  iv. 
9, 1 0,  the  ascent  involved  a  descent.  And 
there  he  **  preached."  That  word  had 
been  familiar  to  the  apostle's  ear  during 
his  Lord's  ministry  on  earth.  It  had 
become  familiar  to  the  Church  through 
the  oral  or  written  narratives  of  the 
gospel  history.  Taken  by  itself  it 
would  suggest,  naturally,  not  to  say 
inevitably,  a  continuance  of  the  work 
that  had  been  done  on  earth,  a 
"  preaching  "  of  like  nature  with  that 
which  had  been  heard  in  Galilee : 
"  Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand."  And  to  whom  did  He 
thus  preach ?  The  answer  is,  "To  the 
spirits  in  prison,"  to  human  spirits  like 
His  own,  who  were  in  that  Hades 
which  was  for  them  a  prison-house,  in 
which  they  were  in  ward,  awaiting  a 
yet  future  judgment.  So  far  his 
words  were  general.  But  he  has  in 
bis  mind  one  representative  class  of  all 
those  spirits  of  the  dead  to  which  his 
Lord's  teaching  had  once  and  again 
led  his  thoughts  (Matt.  xxiv.  37  ;  Luke 
xvii.  26).  Never  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  as  told  in  the  Hebrew  records, 


had  there  been  so  vast  and  terrible  a 
judgment,  sweeping  off  so  many 
myriads,  following  upon  such  slighted 
"  long-suffering."  That,  if  any,  was  a 
-  crucial  instance  of  the  extent  of  the 
redeeming  work  of  Christ.  The  whole 
history,  as  he  goes  on  to  show,  was  as 
a  parable  in  its  inner  meaning.  The 
Church  of  God  was  as  the  ark ;  the 
water  of  the  Flood  in  which  the  world 
was,  as  it  were,  born  again  to  a  new 
stage  in  its  life,  answered  to  the 
baptism  which  saves  men  now.  Then 
the  disobedient  died,  and  were  swept 
away,  but  the  suffering  once  for  all  of 
Christ  for  sin,  the  just  for  the  unjust, 
availed  in  its  retrospective  action  to 
bring  to  God  some  at  least  of  those 
who  had  thus  disobeyed.  Much  more 
would  His  resurrection  and  ascension, 
after  that  triumph  over  "  authorities 
and  powers,"  avail  to  save  those  who 
suffered  as  He  suffered,  and  for  whom 
baptism  was  not  merely  the  "  putting 
away  the  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the 
enquiry  of  a  good  conscience  after  God." 
The  connexion  between  the  words 
*'  for  this  cause  was  the  gospel  preached 
also  to  them  that  are  dead  "  (1  Pet. 
iv.  6),  and  that  "  preaching  to  the 
spirits  in  prison"  is  very  close.  We 
have  to  follow  the  thoughts  of  the 
apostle,  as,  with  that  aspect  of  the 
descent  into  Hades  present  to  his  mind, 
he  was  led  on  to  speak  of  Christ  as  of 
Him  that  "  is  ready  to  judge  the  quick 
and  dead."  Not  only  to  those  of  whom 
he  had  before  spoken,  the  "  disobe- 
dient" in  the  days  of  Noah,  but  to 
the  "  dead  "  generally,  had  the  gospel, 
in  some  way  or  other,  been  preached. 
In  what  way  he  does  not  think  it 
necessary  to  add.  But  to  what  end, 
with  what  intention,  was  that  gospel 
so  preached  to  them  ?  He  gives  the 
answer  in  words  which  remind  us  of 
the  antithesis  between  *'  flesh"  and 
"  spirit "  in  1  Peter  iii.  18.  As 
Christ  was  there  said  to  have  been 
"put  to  death  in  the  flesh,  but 
quickened  in  the  spirit,"  so  of  these  he 
says,  that  the  gospel  was  preached  to 
them  *'  that  they  might  be  judged 
after  the  manner  of  men,  as  men  in 


CHAP.  III.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER, 


the  flesh,  but  live  according  to  God,  as  counsel  with  each  other,  and  were  full 

He  wills,  in  the  spirit."     Kara  ^cov,  as  of  fear.     He  who  had  rescued  so  many 

in  Rom.  viii.  27 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  9 ;  Eph.  of  their  victims  upon  earth,  who  had 

iv,  24.  raised  Lazarus  from  the  grave,  was  now 

about  to   invade   their   kingdom,   and 

Quickened    in    the    Spi7'it. — But    in  to  set  free   all  who  were  shut  up   in 

His    spirit     He     was    quickened,    or  prison,  bound  with  the  chain  of  their 

brought    again    to    life.       His    spirit  sins.     And  as  they  spoke  there  was  a 

never  died  ;  but,  as  to  it,  He  was  made  cry  like  as  of  thunder  :  "  Lift  up  your 

alive  again,  that  spirit  re-entering  the  heads,  O  ye  gates,  and  be  ye  lift  up,  ye 

body  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day,  everlasting    doors,    and   the    King   of 

ere  it  saw  corruption,  and  thus  giving  Glory  shall  come  in."      Hades  sought 

it    the    victory   over    death   and    the  in  vain  to  close  the  gates,  and  to  set 

grave.     He  has  a  body  now,  but  it  is  fast    the    bars.       David    and    Isaiah 

a   spiritual,    and    not   a    fleshly  one ;  uttered  aloud  the  prophecies  in  which 

and  that  body  has  passed  into  a  state  they  had  foretold  this  victory.     Death 

of  inconceivable  glory,  such  as,  in  His  and  Hades  trembled,  and  owned  them- 

Divine  nature.  He  had  with  the  Father  selves  conquered.     They  saw  that  One 

before  the  world  began  (John  xvii.  5).  had  come  to  set  free  those  who  were 

- — Thornley  Smith.  fast    bound    with   the   evil    of    their 

nature,  to   shed   light    on   those   who 

Sketch  of  the '''' Gospel  of  NicodemusJ''  were  blinded  with  the  thick  darkness 

hy  Bean  Plumptre. — The  starting  point  of  their  sins.    Hades  and  Satan  wearied 

of  the  narrative  is  that  two  sons  of  themselves     in     vain    murmurs    and 

Simeon    (the   Simeon    of    Luke     ii.),  recriminations.    Adam  and  his  children 

Karinus,   and    Leucius,   were    among  were  rescued  from  the  power  of  Hades ; 

those  who  had  risen  from  their  graves  Satan  and  his  hosts  were  left  to  take 

at  the  time  of   the  resurrection,   and  their  place.     Then  the  Lord  stretched 

had  appeared  to  many  (Matt,  xxvii.  57).  forth  His  hand  and  said,  ''  Come  unto 

They  tell  the  tale  of  what  they  had  Me,  all  My  saints  who  have  My  image 

seen  and  heard   in  the  world  of   the  and  similitude."     Adam  and  the  saints 

dead.      They  were  with  their  fathers  rose  up  from   Hades  with  psalms  of 

in  the  thick  darkness,  when  suddenly  jubilant  thanksgiving  ;  prophets  burst 

there  shone  upon  them  a  bright  light  out   into   cries  of   joy.      Michael   the 

as  of  the  sun.    Adam  and  the  patriarchs  archangel    led    them   all    within   the 

and   prophets   exulted   at    its  coming.  gates  of    Paradise.     There  they  were 

Isaiah   knew  it  to  be  the  light  that  met   by   Enoch  and   Elijah,  who  had 

should  shine  upon  those  who  sat  in  the  not  tasted  death,  and  were  kept  there 

region  and  shadow  of  death.     Simeon  till  they  should  return  to  earth  before 

saw  that  it  was  the   light  to  lighten  the    coming    of     Antichrist.      There, 

the    Gentiles,    over     which     he     had  too,  was  the  repentant  robber,  bearing 

rejoiced   in   his  Nunc   dimittis.      The  on  his  shoulders  the  cross  to  which  he 

Baptist  doing  there  also  the  work  of  owed   his  entrance   within  the   gates. 

the  forerunner,  came    to  prepare  the  The  cross  on  which  the  redemption  of 

way  and  announce  the  coming  of  the  mankind  had  been  achieved  was  left. 

Son    of    God.       Seth     narrated    how  according   to   another   version   of   the 

Michael  the  archangel  had  told  him,  legend,  in  Hades  itself,  as  a  perpetual 

as  he  prayed  at  the  gates  of  Paradise,  witness   of    the   victory   thus   gained, 

that  one  day,  after  five  thousand  five  that  the  ministers  of  Death  and  Hades 

hundred  years,  the  Son  of  God  would  might  not  have  power  to  retain  any 

come   to    lead   his  father   Adam   into  one   whom   the   Lord   had    pardoned. 

Paradise,    and   to   the  tree  of  mercy.  All  this,  of  course,  is  wildly  fantastic ; 

Meantime   Hades  (here  personified  as  the  play  of  an  over-luxuriant  imagina- 

an  actor  in  the  drama)  and  Satan  held  tion,   seeking    to    penetrate   into   the 

116 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I  PETER. 


CHAP.  in. 


things  behind  the  veil.  But  a  mythus 
of  this  kind  pre-supposes  the  existence 
of  the  belief  of  which  it  is  the  develop- 
ment, and  is,  therefore,  so  far  as  its 
date  can  be  ascertained,  an  evidence  as 
to  its  antiquity. 

Vers.  18-22.  Chrisfs  Sufferings  In- 
Jluencing  the  Unseen  World. — Point : 
Better  to  suffer  for  well-doing,  since 
Christ  suffered  thus.  In  chap.  ii.  21 
Christ's  exarnple  of  suffering  is  pro- 
minent. Here  note  the  advantage 
which  accrued  from  the  suffering. 

I.  Christ's  sufferings. — 1.  Suffered 
once.  2.  Suffered  for  sin.  3.  Suffered 
vicariously.  4.  Put  to  death  in  the 
flesh,  made  alive  in  the  spirit. 

II.  The  effect  of  these  sufferings  on 
the  unseen  world. — Who  are  meant 
by  the  "  spirits  in  prison  "  1  Those 
who,  before  the  Flood,  resisted  the  grace 
of  God  in  Noah's  time.  The  judgment 
came,  and  they  were  hurried  into  the 
unseen  world,  not  hell;  and  their  doom 
was  not  finally  fixed.  There  must  be 
millions  more  such.  The  hopeless 
condition  of  those  who  have  rejected 
Christ  we  know,  but  there  are  millions 
who  have  never  heard  of  Christ.  Two 
suggestions  :  1.  Christ  preached  of  old 
to  them  by  His  spirit  in  Noah.  2. 
Christ  went  to  the  abode  of  the  dead, 
and  preached  to  them  in  His  disem- 
bodied spirit. — Thornley  Smith. 

Webster  and  Wilkinson's  Notes  on 
1  Peter  Hi.  19. — This  is  given  as  the 
most  careful  setting  of  the  explanation 
which  finds  reference  to  a  preaching  of 
Christ  to  the  antediluvians  through 
the  agency  of  Noah,  rots  cv  <f3v\aKfj 
TTVivixaa-L.  Possibly,  "  to  the  spirits  in 
safe  keeping  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  4,  9  ;  Jude  6). 
aSrys,  the  invisible  mansion  of  departed 
spirits,  is  where  the  righteous  are 
preserved  till  the  season  shall  arise  for 
their  advancement  to  future  glory ; 
in  the  other  division,  Tartarus,  or 
Fcci/va,  the  souls  of  the  wicked  are 
reserved  unto  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day  (Luke  xvi.  23).  The  abode 
of  the  blessed  is  a  place  of  custody, 
though  not  of  penal  confinement.     *'  It 


is  a  place  of  seclusion  from  the  external 
world,  a  place  of  unfinished  happiness, 
consisting  in  rest,  security,  and  hope, 
rather  than  enjoyment.     It  is  a  place 
which  the  souls  of  men  never  would 
have  entered  had  not  sin  introduced 
death,  from  which  there  is  no  exit  by 
any  natural  means  for  those  who  have 
once  entered.     The  deliverance  of  the 
saints  from  it  is  to  be  effected  by  the 
Lord's      power"      {Bishop      Horsley), 
7rop€v6eU   iKrjpv$€v.      When   was   this] 
and   in  what  manner  1      Some  think 
that  the  irvevfia  of  Christ  between  His 
death   and   resurrection   went   to   the 
place  where  the   antediluvian  sinners 
were  in  confinement,  and  proclaimed 
that  He  had  offered  the  sacrifice  for 
their  redemption.     This  announcement 
would  give  fresh  animation  of  joy  to 
those  who  through  faith  had  embraced 
the  Redeemer,  and  would  set  forth  the 
justice   of   God   in  condemning   those 
who    neglected    the    way    of    escape. 
Others,  again,  consider  that  the  pro- 
clamation refers  to  the  offers  of  mercy 
made   to   them   during    their   earthly 
existence,  by  the  agency  of  Noah,  the 
SiKatocrvvq^s  Krjpv^  (2  Pet.  ii.  5).     If  we 
consider   the   purpose   for  which   this 
fact  is  mentioned  here,  we  shall  see 
reason  to  adopt  the  latter  view,  and  to 
conclude  that  those  to  whom  Christ  is 
said  to  have  preached  were  the  ante- 
diluvian sinners  in  the  time  of  Noah. 
Clearly  the  object  of  the  apostle  is  to 
show  that  Christ  acted  for  the  salvation 
of  men,  in  the  administration  of   the 
Spirit,   in  former  and   ancient   times, 
even  as  He  now  does,  since  His  passion 
and  resurrection.      A  gospel  of  grace 
and  righteousness,  of  faith  and  obedi- 
ence, was  preached  to  them  as  to  us, 
by  which  the  obedient  lived  as  now, 
but  under  which  the  unbelieving  and 
disobedient  perished  (chap.  iv.  6).  There 
is  a  striking  resemblance  between  this 
passage  and  Heb.  iii.  7 — iv.  11,  where 
the  example  of  the  ancient  Israel  is 
introduced   for   the   same   purpose   as 
that   of    the    antediluvians,    lost   and 
saved,  is  introduced  here.     The  apostle 
represents  Christ  as  having  gone  and 
proclaimed  a  gospel  of  grace  and  faith 

117 


CHAP.  m.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I  PETER. 


to  the  spirits  now  in  prison  when  they  succeeding   contexts.     In   the  present 

were  in  their  state  of  earthly  existence,  paper  it  is  proposed,  by  means  of  the 

The  expression  iropf.vOa  s^K-^p.,  as  applied  strict  application  of  these  rules,  to  seek 

to    Christ    preaching    by    Noah,   may  the    meaning   of   this   much-discussed 

be  compared  with  Eph.   ii.   1 7,  iXOibv  passage  in  the  first  epistle  of  St.  Peter. 

€vr)yy€\.  dp.  vfuv,  which  applies  to  His  There    is  a   distinct   line   of   thought 

preaching    by    the    apostles.       Christ  running  through   both  the   preceding 

preached   in    Noah's    preaching,    and  and   succeeding   contexts.      It  can  be 

that    preaching    was    without    effect,  easily  traced  up  to  the  passage  before 

except  for  the  souls  of  Noah  and  his  us,  and,  passing  over  the  passage,  it  can 

household.  be  easily  picked  up  again  at  its  close. 

This  being  the  case,  the  natural  infer- 

Other  Views. — Other  interpretations  ence  is  that  that  line  of  thought  some- 

of  the  passage  divide  into  two  classes  :  how  or  other  runs  through  the  passage 

(1)  Those  which  accept  the  words  as  itself,  and  that  a  true  interpretation  of 
referring  to  a  descent  into  Hades,  and  the  passage  will  reveal  it.    St.  Peter  has 

(2)  those  which  give  them  an  entirely  been  urging  the  Christians  of  the  Dis- 
different  interpretation.  Under  (1)  we  persion  to  lead  holy  and  beneficent 
have — (a)  the  view  that  the  preaching  lives.  He  presents  various  motives  to 
was  one  of  condemnation,  anticipating  induce  them  to  live  such  lives.  1.  By 
the  final  judgment.  (6)  The  view  that  so  doing  they  will  place  themselves 
Christ  descended  into  Hades  to  deliver  under  the  protection  and  gracious 
the  souls  of  the  righteous,  (c)  A  modi-  providence  of  Almighty  God.  "  For 
fication  of  this  view  has  found  favour  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon  the 
with  some  writers,  such  as  Estius,  righteous,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  2.  If  they 
Bellarmine,  Luther,  Bengel.  They  live  such  lives,  few  will  molest  them, 
limit  the  application  of  St.  Peter's  "  And  who  is  he,"  etc.  (ver.  13). 
words  to  those  who  had  lived  at  the  3.  Should  they  even  suffer  for  such  a 
time  of  the  Deluge,  and  they  make  the  life,  they  will  be  happy.  *'  But  and 
preaching  one  of  pardon  and  deliver-  if,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  The  mention  of  this 
ance,  but,  under  the  influence  of  the  possibility  leads  to  a  brief  digression, 
dogma  that  "there  is  no  repentance  Besuming  his  argument,  he  maintains 
in  the  grave,"  they  assume  that  the  that  suffering  for  righteousness  ought 
message  of  the  gospel  came  to  those  to  bring  happiness,  because  it  brings 
only  who  turned  to  God  before  they  success.  "  For  it  is  better,"  etc.  All 
sank  finally  in  the  mighty  waters,  recognise  the  fact  that  it  is  well  to 
Under  (2)  we  find  the  denial  that  there  suffer  for  evil-doing  ;  but  it  is  even 
is  any  reference  at  all  to  the  descent  better,  if  wills  the  will  of  God  (mark 
into  Hades.  Christ  went  in  spirit,  the  condition),  to  suffer  for  well-doing, 
not  in  flesh — i.e.,  before  His  incar-  This  position  he  justifies  by  the  ex- 
nation — and  preached  to  the  spirits  who  perience  of  Christ.  "  For  Christ  also 
are  now  in  prison,  because  they  re-  hath  once  suffered,"  etc.  (ver.  18). 
jected  the  warnings  and  teachings  of  Then  follows  a  statement  respecting 
Christ's  spirit  through  Noah.  the  sufferings  of  Christ.     It  is  a  very 

suggestive  statement,  and  contains  an 

Vers.    18-22. — An  Exegetical  Study,  admirable  summary  of  Christian  soteri- 

— In  seeking  to  ascertain  the  meaning  ology.     It  presents  in  the  briefest  form 

of  an  obscure  passage  in  any  writing,  the  great  features  of  Christ's  redemp- 

close  attention  must  be  given  to  three  tive  sufferings.    They  were  penal,  "  for 

things:  1.  The  exact  language  of  the  sins";    vicarious,    "for   the    unjust"; 

passage.     2.  The  manifest  teachings  of  propitiatory,    "to   bring  us  to   God." 

plain   portions   of   the   same  writing  ;  But  the  richness  and  suggestiveness  of 

and  3.  The  line  of  thought,  if  any  such  the  passage  in  the  domain  of  soteriology 

be  discoverable,  in  the  preceding  and  should  not  be  permitted  to  prevent  a 

118 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER.  chap.  III. 


clear  recognition  of  its  place  in  the  whatever  may  be  its  specific  meaning, 
apostle's  argument.  It  is  not  the  the  purpose  of  the  passage  is  to  justify 
uniqueness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ  the  apostle's  assertion  that  the  physical 
which  the  apostle  has  now  specially  in  death  of  Christ  has  resulted  in  the 
mind,  but  the  fact  that  they  were  spiritual  quickening  of  Christ.  It  is 
sufferings  for  well-doing,  and  as  such  manifest  that  the  only  way  in  which 
were  wondrously  beneficent.  We  must  it  can  be  shown  that  the  sufferings  of 
keep  this  fact  clearly  and  constantly  Christ  intensified  the  spiritual  life  of 
in  mind,  if  we  would  follow  the  apostle  Christ  is  by  comparison  of  the  vigour 
in  his  argument.  It  is  true  that  of  that  life  prior  to  His  sufferings  with 
actually,  as  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  its  virility  subsequently.  If  such 
accomplishment  of  God's  purpose  of  comparison  reveals  increased  vigour 
redemption,  Christ  suffered  for  sins.  subsequently  to  His  sufferings,  there 
It  is  true  also  that  ostensibly,  in  the  comes  then  the  further  question,  Is  this 
light  of  the  judicial  sentence  under  increased  vigour  the  result  and  reward 
which  the  extreme  measure  of  these  of  these  sufferings  %  By  the  terms  of 
sufferings  was  inflicted,  He  suffered  for  argument  just  this  is  the  task  which 
sins ;  but  it  is  yet  true  that  it  was  only  Peter  sets  himself  to  accomplish  in  the 
vicariously  that  He  so  suffered.  He  passage  before  us.  The  passage,  liter- 
was  personally  innocent  of  all  the  ally  rendered,  reads  as  follows  ;  "  Being 
crimes  laid  to  His  charge.  His  whole  put  to  death,  indeed,  in  flesh,  but 
life  was  holy,  and  His  whole  work  quickened  in  spirit ;  in  which,  going  He 
gracious  in  its  purposes  and  beneficent  preached  also  to  the  spirits  in  prison, 
in  its  results.  And  yet  He  suffered —  '%obedient  sometime  when  the  long- 
suffered  to  the  death  ;  but  with  what  suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of 
result  ?  In  its  rendering  of  the  Noah,  while  the  ark  was  preparing,  in 
apostle's  statement  in  this  regard  the  which  few — that  is,  eight — souls  were 
Authorised  Version  is  very  seriously  de-  saved  through  water  ;  which,  in  a  like 
fective.  It  translates,  "  Being  put  to  figure,  now  saveth  us  also,  even 
death  in  the  flesh  but  quickened  by  the  baptism — not  the  putting  away  the 
Spirit."  It  spells  "  spirit "  with  a  filth  of  the  flesh,  but  the  stipulation 
capital  S,  and  so  indicates  that  the  toward  God  of  a  good  conscience ; 
thought  is,  that  He  was  put  to  death  through  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
in  the  flesh,  but  was  made  alive  again  Christ,  who  is  on  the  right  hand  of 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Thus  translated,  God,  having  gone  into  heaven,  angels 
the  passage  asserts  the  facts  of  Christ's  and  authorities  and  powers  having  been 
death  and  revivification,  and  reveals  made  subject  unto  Him.  Evidently 
the  agent  by  whom  this  latter  was  two  things,  at  least,  are  here  asserted  : 
effected;  but  this  introduces  an  idea  1.  That  the  unemhodied  spirit  of 
entirely  foreign  to  the  apostle's  Christ  preached.  2.  That  those  to 
thought,  and  states  a  fact  which  is  whom  He  preached  were  antediluvian 
wholly  irrelevant  to  his  argument.  sinners.  This  much  is  plain  ;  but  when 
Literally  the  expression  is :  "  Being  was  this  preaching  done  ?  An  in- 
put to  death  in  flesh,  kv  o-apKL,  but  creasingly  popular  answer  to  this 
quickened  in  spirit,  ev  Tn/cv/xart.  The  question  is  substantially  this  :  it  was 
contrast  is  between  Christ's  physical  done  in  the  interval  between  the  cruci- 
nature,  on  the  one  hand,  and  His  fixion  of  Christ  and  His  resurrection, 
spiritual  nature,  on  the  other.  His  A  cursory  reading  of  the  passage 
physical  life  was  terminated,  but  seems  to  justify  this  answer,  but  close 
His  spiritual  life  was  intensified.  And  attention  to  his  language  reveals  the 
now  this  assertion  is  to  be  substan-  fact  that  the  apostle  does  not  speci- 
tiated.  Then  follows  the  passage  fically  designate  the  time.  All  he 
which  is  to  be  considered  in  this  study.  says  is  that  Christ,  in  His  unembodied 
This  being  the  case,  it  is  manifest  that  spirit,  preached  to  the  antediluvians, 

119 


CHAP.  in. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


and  that  His  going  to  them  preceded 
His  preaching  to  them ;  but  he  says 
nothing  directly  about  the  time  of  His 
going.  It  is  to  be  noted,  however,  that 
these  spirits  were  disobedient  in  the  days 
of  Noah.  He  does  not  say  that  those 
to  whom  Christ,  in  His  unembodied 
spirit  preached,  were  the  spirits  of  men 
who  were  disobedient  in  the  days  of 
Noah.  They  were  spirits  who  in  the 
days  of  Noah  were  disobedient.  This 
would  seem  to  indicate  that  the  preach- 
ing was  in  the  days  of  Noah,  and  that 
the  disobedience  consisted  in  rejecting 
it.  He  further  describes  those  to 
whom  Christ's  spirit  preached  as  being 
spirits  in  prison.  The  word  is  of  fre- 
quent occurrence  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, and  in  thirty-six  instances  out  of 
forty-seven  denotes  a  place  of  primitive 
safe-keeping.  Only  here,  however, 
and  in  Rev.  xx.  7 — where  it  is  applied 
to  Satan — is  it  used  in  connection  with 
spiritual  beings.  The  thought  seems 
to  be  that  when  the  bodies  of  the 
antediluvians  perished  in  the  Flood, 
their  spirits  were  put  in  safe-keeping 
— *'  prison  " — till  the  judgment.  And* 
now  the  question  is,  Was  this  their  con- 
dition when  Christ's  spirit  preached  \f 
them  ?  The  current  answer  to  th} 
question  is  an  affirmative  one.  Is  that 
answer  the  true  one  ?  In  attempting 
to  determine  the  point,  let  us  remem- 
ber the  third  principle  of  interpretation 
with  which  we  started.  In  accordance 
with  it,  the  right  answer  must  unfold 
the  apostle's  argument  and  manifest 
conclusiveness.  The  point  the  apostle 
is  seeking  to  establish  is  that  the 
suflferings  of  Christ's  flesh  intensified 
the  power  of  His  spirit.  It  can  only 
be  established  by  comparison.  If  this 
preaching  by  Christ's  spirit  to  the 
spirits  in  prison  was  to  the  disem- 
bodied spirits  of  those  who  perished  in 
the  Flood,  it  must  have  been  preceded 
by  a  preaching  to  these  spirits  in  their 
embodied  condition  in  the  days  of 
Noah.  That  there  was  such  preaching 
may  be  accepted  as  a  historic  fact.  In 
Gen.  vi.  3  we  are  told  that  God  said, 
"  My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive 
with   man."     This  implies  that  God's 

120 


spirit  had  been  striving  with  man  and 
striving  inefiectually.  This  being  the 
historic  fact,  it  is  certainly  legitimate 
to  claim  that  this  striving  included  the 
preaching  of  Christ's  spirit  to  the 
spirits  of  the  antediluvians.  This 
answer,  then,  meets  the  first  require- 
ment of  the  apostle's  argument.  It 
supplies  a  first  preaching  by  Christ's 
spirit  to  the  antediluvians,  with  which 
a  subsequent  preaching  can  be  con- 
trasted. Was  there  a  subsequent 
preaching  ?  If  so,  when  did  it  occur, 
and  what  were  its  results?  The 
current  interpretation  answers  the  first 
of  these  questions  also  affirmatively, 
and  holds  that  this  second  preaching 
was  that  described  in  our  passage,  and 
that  it  occurred  in  the  interval  between 
Christ's  crucifixion  and  His  resur- 
rection. Does  this  meet  the  require- 
ments of  the  apostle's  argument?  It 
must  be  remembered  that  he  is  seeking 
to  prove  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
quickened  the  spirit  of  Christ.  If  so, 
the  second  preaching  must  be  more 
effective  than  the  first.  In  the  first 
instance  the  mass  of  the  antediluvians 
were  disobedient  to  the  gracious  mes- 
sage addressed  to  them.  What  evi- 
dence does  our  passage  furnish  that  the 
preaching  to  these  disembodied  and 
imprisoned  spirits  by  Christ's  disem- 
bodied spirit  was  more  effectual  ?  It 
is  not  necessary  to  resort  to  a  critical 
examination  of  the  passage  to  secure 
an  answer,  for  the  reason  that  the 
advocates  of  this  view  themselves 
frankly  admit  that  it  furnishes  none. 
"  What  was  the  intent  of  that  preach- 
ing, and  what  its  effect,  is  not  here 
revealed ;  the  fact  merely  is  sta,ted." 
{Alfordy  Greek  Testament,  in  loco.) 
So  also  Archdeacon  Farrar :  "  Of  the 
effect  of  the  preaching  nothing  is  said." 
("Early  Christianity,"  p.  93).  This 
interpretation,  then,  fails  to  make  clear 
and  conclusive  the  argument  of  the 
apostle,  and  hence,  for  that  reason 
alone,  if  there  were  no  other,  is  to  be 
rejected.  But  besides  this,  the  interpre- 
tation is  liable  to  another  objection.  It 
presents  a  doctrine  not  elsewhere  found 
in  the  writings  of  St.  Peter,      More 


BOMlLEfIC  COMMENTARt:     l  PETEB.  cHap.  Hi. 


than  this.  It  teaches  a  doctrine  which  interpretation  of  the  passage,  meeting 
seems  to  be  excluded  by  other  plain  all  the  requirements  of  the  case,  is 
teachings  of  the  apostle.  In  his  second  obtainable  through  identification  of 
epistle  the  apostle  refers  again  to  the  this  preaching  to  the  spirits  with  the 
destruction  of  the  antediluvian  world,  historical  striving  of  God's  spirit  with 
He  does  so  in  connection  with  two  the  antediluvian  contemporaries  of 
other  signal  illustrations  of  the  power  Noah.  And  such  identification  is 
and  justice  of  God.  One  of  these  is  justifiable.  1.  It  is  a  historic  fact 
the  punishment  of  the  fallen  angels,  that  God'g  spirit  strove  with  the  ante- 
and  the  other  the  destruction  of  the  diluvians  St.  Peter  here  affirms  that 
cities  of  the  plain.  In  two  of  these  Christ,  in  His  unembodied  spirit 
three  cases  there  was  signal  illustration  preached  to  their  spirits.  It  is  not 
of  God's  grace,  as  well  as  of  His  justice  ;  necessary  to  suppose  that  this  striving 
and  hence  to  both  features  of  His  consisted  solely  of  this  preaching.  It 
providence  attention  is  called  in  the  is  enough  to  believe  that  it  included  it, 
general  conclusion  drawn  from  a  con-  and  that  in  his  assertion  about  Christ's 
sideration  of  the  whole  series  of  provi-  preaching  St.  Peter  had  reference  to  it. 
dences.  That  conclusion  is  thus  ex-  2.  God's  striving  with  the  antedi- 
pressed  :  *'  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  luvians  was  ineffectual.  So,  on  this 
deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptations,  assumption,  was  the  preaching  of 
and  to  reserve  the  unjust  unto  the  day  Christ's  spirit  to  their  spirits.  It  is 
of  judgment  to  be  punished  "  (2  Peter  upon  this  that  St.  Peter  dwells.  They 
ii.  9).  The  Revision  renders  better :  were  disobedient.  In  consequence  of 
''And  to  keep  the  unrighteous  under  disobedience  they  are  in  prison.  The 
punishment  unto  the  day  of  judgmert."  mass  of  the  antediluvians  perished. 
The  words  "  under  punishment "  are  Only  eight  entered  the  ark  graciously 
the  translation  of  the  present  passive  provided  for  them,  and  so  were  saved, 
participle  of  the  verb  "  to  punish."  It  3.  The  historic  reason  for  the  failure 
means  literally  "  being  punished."  of  this  striving  was  the  fact  that  God's 
The  thought  seems  to  be  that  as  God's  spirit  was  unembodied,  while  the  ante- 
punishment  overtook  these  objects  of  diluvians  were  embodied  spirits.  "  My 
His  wrath.  His  power  grasped  them  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man, 
and  holds  and  will  hold  them  in  for  that  he  also  is  flesh "  (Gen.  vi.  3). 
unchanged  condition  till  the  Day  of  Pure  spirit  cannot  successfully  strive 
Judgment.  This  is  evidently  the  idea  with  incarnated  spirit ;  and  hence  God 
in  the  expression  "  in  prison."  The  will  not  always  attempt  it.  Man  has 
spirits  of  these  antediluvian  sinners  body  as  well  as  spirit,  and  is  to  be 
remain  fixed  in  the  condition  in  which  reached  through  the  senses  as  well  as 
they  were  when  God's  justice  overtook  the  perceptions  ;  hence  a  being  must  be 
them  and  destroyed  their  bodies.  They  incarnate  in  order  to  successfully  in- 
are  in  prison — that  is,  in  the  custody,  fluence  him.  It  is  worthy  of  notice 
primitive  safe-keeping  of  Divine  justice,  that  even  Satan,  the  great  tempter  of 
And  there  they  are  to  remain  until  the  mankind,  succeeded  in  seducing  our 
Day  of  Judgment.  This  being  the  case,  first  parents  and  alienating  them  from 
there  is  no  room  in  the  theology  of  St.  God,  only  by  assuming  a  physical  form, 
Peter  for  a  gracious  visit  to  the  spirits  and  so  enforcing  his  suggestions  to  the 
of  the  antediluvians  on  the  part  of  mind  of  Eve  by  appeals  to  her  senses. 
Christ,  and  an  offer  to  them  of  salvation  Now  all  this  is  in  closest  keeping  with 
An  interpretation,  then,  which  thus  the  apostle's  line  of  thought.  He  is 
explains  this  passage  is  to  be  rejected  endeavouring  to  justify  his  assertion 
for  the  two  reasons :  1 .  That  it  fails  that  Christ's  endurance  of  the  ex- 
to  meet  the  requirements  of  the  tremest  degree  of  physical  suffering 
apostle's  argument,  and  2.  That  it  is  has  resulted  in  His  spiritual  quickening, 
at   variance   with    his   theology.     An  And  his  proof  is  furnished  by  contrast 

121 


CHAP.  Ml. 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


betweei  the  power  of  the  pre-incarDate 
and; the  post-incarnate,  risen,  glorified 
Christ.  4.  The  historic  failure  indi- 
cates the  line  of  present  and  current 
success.  "  The  like  figure  whereunto," 
etc.  (ver.  21).  Lit.  **  Which  you 
also  the  antitype  now  saves — baptism." 
In  other  words,  St.  Peter  affirms  that 
salvation  to  day  through  baptism  is 
analogous  to — literally,  antitypical  of — 
— salvation  by  water  through  the  ark 
in  the  days  of  Noah.  It  is  not  likely 
that  St.  Peter  meant  to  say  that  the 
waters  of  the  Flood  were  a  type  of  that 
of  baptism  in  the  modern  technical 
sense  of  the  term.  In  fact,  the  current 
theological  signification  of  the  term 
does  not  seem  to  be  its  scriptural  one. 
The  word  is  used  but  twice  in  the  New 
Testament — in  Heb.  ix.  24  and  here. 
In  the  passage  in  Hebrews  its  meaning 
is  clear.  The  tabernacle  to  be  con- 
structed by  Moses  was  to  be  a  copy — 
antitype  is  the  word  in  the  original — of 
that  shown  him  in  the  mount.  So  here ; 
the  plan  of  salvation  to-day  is  modelled 
after  that  of  the  days  of  Noah.  This 
being  the  case,  there  is  opportunity  to 
contrast  the  effectiveness  of  the  two 
plans,  and  this  opportunity  St.  Peter 
embraces.  But  how  does  he  do  it  in 
such  way  as  to  prove  that  the  suffer- 
ings of  Christ  quickened  the  spirit 
of  Christ?  He  does  so  (1)  By 
declaring  that  the  water  of  baptism  is 
more  graciously  effective  than  the 
waters  of  the  Flood.  The  latter  saved 
eight  souls ;  the  former  is  saving  you. 
St.  Peter  is  not  exactly  mathematical. 
The  number  saved  in  the  Flood  is 
historic.  He  gives  that.  The  number 
being  saved  now  is  known  only  to  God  ; 
but  no  matter.  It  includes  those 
Christians  of  the  Dispersion.  That  was 
enough  for  them.  They  were  at  least 
greatly  more  numerous  than  those  in 
the  ark  ;  and  yet,  however  numerous 
they  were,  they  were  being  saved  by 
baptismal  water.  Left  unqualified, 
this  declaration  of  the  apostle  would 
inevitably  be  used  to  prove  the  ex- 
tremest  doctrine  of  baptismal  grace  ; 
hence  he  explains  that  he  has  reference 
to  real  and  not  to  ritual  baptism,  to 

122 


the  formal  and  sacramental  response 
of  the  loyal  soul  to  God,  and  not  the 
external  application  of  water  to  the 
body.  (2)  By  declaring  that  the 
efficacy  of  baptismal  water  is  owing  to 
the  resurrection  of  Christ  (ver.  21). 
But  resurrection  implies  death.  The 
sufferings  of  Christ,  then,  as  leading  to 
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  have  won- 
drously  increased  the  gi  acious  power  of 
Christ.  Nor  is  this  all.  Not  only 
have  the  sufferings  of  Christ  won- 
drously  increased  the  efficacy  of  His 
present  as  compared  with  His  former 
method  of  salvation — baptism  now 
saving  multitudes  while  the  ark  saved 
but  eight ;  they  have  also  secured  for 
Him  wondrously  increased  facilities 
for  the  accomplishment  of  His  purposes 
of  grace.  As  the  risen,  triumphant 
Bedeemer,  He  has  gone  into  heaven, 
and  is  now  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  has  control  of  the  entire  host  of 
heaven,  "  angels  and  authorities  and 
powers  being  subject  to  Him  "  (ver.  22). 
It  thus  becomes  evident  that  the 
passage  under  consideration  does  pre- 
sent proof  of  the  apostle's  assertion 
that  suffering  for  good.  When  God's 
will  wills  it,  is  promotion  of  good. 
That  proof  is  furnished  by  the  con- 
trasted results  of  two  methods  of 
salvation.  Our  race  has  twice  been 
exposed  to  destruction.  Once  it  was 
exposed  to  temporal  destruction  by  a 
flood.  Now  it  is  exposed  to  eternal 
ruin  by  the  punishment  of  sin.  In 
both  instances  God  has  sought  to  avert 
the  peril,  and  save  the  race.  In  the 
case  of  the  antediluvians  He  wrought 
simply  as  spirit.  The  effort  failed. 
Now  God  works  upon  a  different  plan. 
Christ  has  become  incarnate.  Having 
become  incarnate.  He  has  suffered  and 
died  and  lisen  again.  The  result  is  a 
wondrous  increase  of  His  saving  power. 
Of  this  fact  those  to  whom  the  apostle 
wrote  were  themselves  grateful  wit- 
nesses. In  the  light,  then,  of  their 
own  experience  of  the  gracious  power 
of  their  risen  Saviour,  the  apostle 
urges  those  to  whom  he  wrote  to 
arm  themselves  with  the  same  mind, 
and    seek,   through    similar    patience 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   l  PETER. 


CHAP.  111. 


under  sufferings,  a  like  increase  of 
gracious  power.  "  Forasmuch,  then, 
as  Christ  hath  suffered  .  .  .  arm  your- 
selves," etc.  (iv.  1).  Thus  interpreted, 
the  passage  becomes  the  logical  as  well 
as  the  textual  nexus  connecting  chap, 
iii.  7  with  chap.  iv.  1.  Not  only  so,  but 
as  thus  interpreted  its  teaching  is  in 
harmony  with  the  analogy  of  faith, 
and  present  no  strange  or  doubtful  doc- 
trine for  Christian  acceptance. — D.  F. 
Bonner f  D.D. 

Vers.  19,  20.  The  Disobedient  Spirits. 
— We  can  quite  understand  that  there 
would  be  much  speculation  in  the  Early 
Church  concerning  the  place  and  occu- 
pation of  the  spirit  of  Christ,  between 
the  death  and  the  resui^rection ;    and 
such   speculations   must   fit   into    the 
strange  and   confused   notions  of   the 
day   concerning  Hades,  the   abode  of 
disembodied  spirits.      It   needs   to   be 
seen  clearly  that  direct  teaching  con- 
cerning the  spirit  of  man  when  it  is 
liberated  from  the  body  is  no  part  of 
Divine  revelation.      The  fact  of  con- 
tinuity, immortality,   is  asserted,  but 
there  revelation  stops.     Much  is  sug- 
gested by  figures  and  parables,  but  even 
those  who  had  died,  and  whose  human 
lives  were  restored  for  awhile,  brought 
no  news  whatever  of  the  after  life.     St. 
John  recognises   the   blank   when   he 
says,  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we 
shall  be."     Absolutely  nothing  what- 
ever is  known  concerning  the  time  be- 
tween Christ's  death  and  resurrection. 
According  to  the  thought  of  His  day — 
not  according  to  the  Bible,  which  is 
silent   on   the   matter — there    was    a 
general  place  of   confinement   for  all 
disembodied    spirits,    and    speculation 
divided  this  general   region  into   two 
pai-ts;    the   one,   called   Paradise,  re- 
ceiving   the     good,    and    the     other, 
Gehenna,  receiving  the  bad,   and   in- 
volving them  in  some  kind  of  torture. 
The  speculations  of  the  Early  Church 
imagined  Christ  as  passing   at  death 
into  this  general  region  of  Hades,  and 
then  went   on   to   represent   Him   as 
preaching  to  both  those  on  the  Paradise 
side  and  those  on  the  Grehenna  side; 


but  it  should  be  fully  recognised  that 
all  this  was  speculation  of  men,  and 
not   revelation  from   Grod.     Strangely 
enough,  the  floating  speculations  gained 
one  precise  form,  and  Christ  was  re- 
presented as  having  preached  to  the 
antediluvian   sinners ;    but   what    He 
preached,  and   with   what   result   He 
preached,  the  speculators  did  not  de- 
clare.   These  floating  speculations  were 
familiar  to   the    early    disciples,    and 
were  embodied,  later  on,  in  the  apocry- 
phal work  known  as  the  "  Gospel  of 
Nicodemus."     Now,  St.  Peter  and  St. 
Jude  seem  to  have  been  very  greatly 
influenced    by    the    speculative    and 
imaginary  ideas  of  their  age,  and  they 
did  not  hesitate  to  use  them  for  strictly 
illustrative  purposes  in  their  writings ; 
and  St.  Peter  has  in  mind  the  common 
idea  of  his  time  when  he  thus  refers  to 
Christ's  preaching  to  the  *' spirits   in 
prison."      If   we  take  the  passage  as 
illustrative,  its  difficulties  are  lightened. 
If   we  take  it  as  authoritative  teach- 
ing, its  difficulties  are   overwhelming. 
There  is  no  other  reference  in  all  God's 
Word    to   "  spirits   in   prison."      And 
there  is  no  conceivable  reason  why,  if 
Christ  preached  to  old-world  sinners. 
He  should  limit  Himself  to  those  who 
lived   before,  and   died  in,  the  Flood. 
There  is  simply  a  passing  allusion  to 
the  unauthorised  talk  of  the  day,  in 
order  to  introduce  the  case  of  Noah  as 
an  illustration  of  the  safety  and  the 
power  that  can  be  gained  by  persistent 
suffering  for  righteousness'  sake.     Be- 
cause we,  too,  persist  in  speculating  con- 
cerning the  place  and  condition  of  dis- 
embodied spirits,  we  so  readily  grasp  at 
every  passing   allusion    in    the    New 
Testament,   from   which   inferences — 
and  they  are  usually  vague,  ill-grounded, 
and   worthless — can   be   drawn.      We 
are  strangely  unwilling  to  recognise, 
what  is  certainly  the  fact,   that   the 
world  to  come,  the  world  of  spirits,  is 
no  subject  of  Divine  revelation ;  and 
that   concerning   the  spiritual   Being, 
Christ,  we   only  know,  and   caii   only 
know,  what  He  is  in  relation  to  that 
work   of   redemption   which    He    has 
undertaken  for  the  individual  and  for 

123 


CHAP.  Hi. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L  PETER. 


the  world.  The  "Larger  Hope,"  the 
doctrine  of  *' Purgatory,"  etc.,  are 
simply  speculations,  with  more  or  less 
ground  in  inferences  from  casual  ex- 
pressions of  God's  Word.  What  St. 
Peter  teaches  is  that  Jesus  was  put  to 
death  in  the  flesh,  but  quickened  in  the 
spirit  through  the  resurrection ;  and 
in  His  spiritual  life  now,  angels  and 
authorities  and  powers — the  symbols 
of  all  moral  and  spiritual  forces — are 
made  subject  to  Him,  so  that  He  can 
use  them  all  for  carrying  through  His 
work  in  the  redemption  and  sanctifica- 
tion  of  humanity. 

Ver.  20.  The  Disobedient  Spirits  in 
Prison. — The  "spirits  in  prison  "  can- 
not well  mean  anything  but  disem- 
bodied souls,  under  a  greater  or  less 
degree  of  condemnation,  waiting  for 
their  final  sentence,  and  undergoing 
meanwhile  a  punishment  retributive  or 
corrective.  Had  the  apostle  stopped 
there  we  might  have  thought  of  the 
preaching  of  which  he  speaks  as  having 
been  addressed  to  all  who  were  in  such 
a  prison.  The  prison  itself  may  be 
thought  of  as  a  part  of  Hades  contrasted 
with  the  Paradise  of  God,  which  was 
opened,  as  in  Luke  xxiii.  43 ;  E-ev.  ii. 
7,  to  the  penitent  and  the  faithful. 
The  words  that  follow,  however,  ap- 
pear to  limit  the  range  of  the  preach- 
ing within  comparatively  narrow  boun- 
daries. The  "  spirits "  of  whom  St. 
Peter  speaks  were  those  who  had  "  once 
been  disobedient " ;  the  once  being 
further  defined  as  the  time  when  "  the 
long-sufiering  of  God  was  waiting  in 
the  days  of  Noah."  We  naturally 
ask,  as  we  read  the  words  (1)  why  the 
preaching  was  confined  to  these ;  or 
(2)  if  the  preaching  itself  was  not  so 
confined,  why  was  this  the  only  aspect 
of  it  on  which  the  apostle  thought  fit  to 
dwell  1  The  answer  to  the  first  question 
cannot  be  given  with  any  confidence. 
It  is  behind  the  veil  which  we  cannot 
lift.  All  that  we  can  say  is,  that  the  fact 
thus  revealed  gives  us  at  least  some 
ground  for  seeing  in  it  a  part  of  God's 
dealings  with  the  human  race,  and  that 
it   is  not   unreasonable    to    infer    an 

124 


analogous  treatment  of  those  who  were 
in  an  analogous  condition.  The  answer 
to  the  second  question  is,  perhaps,  to 
be  found  in  the  prominence  given  to 
the  history  of  Noah  in  our  Lord's 
esch  at  ©logical  teaching,  as  in  Matt, 
xxiv.  37,  38;  Luke  xvii.  26,  27,  and 
in  the  manifest  impression  which  that 
history  had  made  on  St.  Peter's  mind, 
as  seen  in  his  reference  to  it  both  here 
and  in  2  Pet.  ii.  5,  iii.  6.  It  is  a  con- 
jecture, but  not,  I  think,  an  improbable 
or  irreverent  one,  that  the  disciple's 
mind  may  have  been  turned  by  our 
Lord's  words  to  anxious  inquiries  as  to 
the  destiny  of  those  who  had  been 
planting  and  building,  buying  and 
selling,  "  when  the  Flood  came  and  took 
them  all  away,"  and  that  what  he  now 
states  had  been  the  answer  to  these 
inquiries.  What  was  the  result  of  the 
preaching  we  are  not  here  told,  the 
apostle's  thoughts  travelling  on  rapidly 
to  the  symbolic  or  typical  aspect  pre- 
sented by  the  record  of  the  Flood; 
but  chap.  iv.  6  shows  that  his 
mind  still  dwelt  upon  it,  and  that  he 
takes  it  up  again,  as  a  dropped  thread, 
in  the  argument  of  the  epistles.  It 
will  be  noted,  whatever  view  we  may 
take  of  the  interpretation  of  the  passage 
as  a  whole,  that  it  is  the  disobedience, 
and  not  any  after  repentance  at  the 
moment  of  death,  of  those  who  lived  in 
the  days  of  Noah,  that  is  here  dwelt  on. 
Such  is,  it  is  believed,  the  natural  and 
true  interpretation  of  St.  Peter's  words. 
It  finds  a  confirmation  in  the  teachings 
of  some  of  the  earliest  fathers  of  the 
Church — in  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and 
Origen,  and  Athanasius,  and  Cyril  of 
Alexandria.  Even  Augustine,  at  one 
time,  held  that  the  effect  of  Christ's 
descent  into  Hades  had  been  to  set  free 
some  who  were  condemned  to  the 
torments  of  hell,  and  Jerome  adopted 
it  without  any  hesitation.  Its  accept- 
ance at  an  early  date  is  attested  by  the 
apocryphal  gospel  of  Nicodemus,  nearly 
the  whole  of  which  is  given  to  a 
narrative  of  the  triumph  of  Christ  over 
Hades  and  Death,  who  are  personified 
as  the  potentates  of  darkness.  It  tells 
how   He  delivered    Adam    from    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  hi. 


penalty  of  his  sin,  and  brought  the  Lord  had  said,  "  Are  ye  able  to  drink 
patriarchs  from  a  lower  to  a  higher  the  cup  that  I  drink  ?  or  to  be  baptized 
blessedness,  and  emptied  the  prison-  with  the  baptism  that  I  am  baptized 
house,  and  set  the  captives  free,  and  with?"  evidently,  in  this  figurative 
erected  the  cross  in  the  midst  of  Hades,  way,  referring  to  the  experience  of 
that  there  also  it  might  preach  salva-  suffering  that  was  before  Him.  In 
tion.  Legendary  and  fantastic  as  the  this  sense  Noah  experienced  a  baptism 
details  may  be,  they  testify  to  the  of  suffering  in  well-doing.  Those  years 
prevalence  of  a  widespread  tradition,  of  working  at  the  ark,  and  waiting  for 
and  that  tradition  is  more  naturally  the  judgment  of  God,  were  years  of 
referred  to  the  teaching  of  St.  Peter  in  strain  and  suffering,  a  time  of  hard 
this  passage,  as  the  germ  out  of  which  experience,  when  he  was  scorned  and 
it  was  developed,  than  to  any  other  persecuted  by  godless  neighbours.  But 
source.  As  a  matter  of  history,  the  he  found  what  Christ  found,  and  what 
article,  "  He  descended  into  hell,"  i.e.  Christ's  people  always  have  found,  that 
into  Hades,  first  appeared  in  the  if  they  persistently  suffer  in  well- 
Apostles'  Creed  at  a  time  when  the  doing  they  gain  the  highest  power 
tradition  was  almost  universally  ac-  for  service,  moral  and  spiritual  power  ; 
cepted,  and  when  the  words  of  the  and  they  are  in  the  special  keeping  and 
Creed  could  not  fail  to  be  associated  in  care  of  God,  and  are  even  permitted  to 
men's  minds  with  the  hope  which  it  save  others.  Noah's  suffering  in  well- 
embodied. — Dean  Plumptre.  doing  enabled   him  to  preach  to  the 

antediluvians — it    v/as     preaching    to 

Yqt.II,  NoaKs  Baptism  of  Suffering,  them;   it  secured  his  personal  safety 

— It  appears  to  be  at  once  assumed  when  the  judgment  fell,  and  it  brought 

that  "  baptism"  here  can  only  refer  to  him  the  right  of  saving  seven  persons 

the  initial  rite  of  the  Christian  pro-  beside   himself.     "Baptism   doth  now 

fession.      But    there   are   two   things  save  you."     Not  the  rite  of  baptism — 

which  need  to  be  taken  into  careful  that  does  not  save  anybody :  and  there 

consideration.     1.  St.  Peter  is  not  in  would  be  no  point  in  that  applied  to 

any  way  dealing  with  the  beginnings  Christian  disciples  who  were  called  to 

of  Christian  profession,  but  with  the  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake.     It  was 

persecutions   and   troubles   which   are  their  baptism  of  providential  discipline 

found  always  to  attend  the  persistent  that  St.  Peter  had  in  mind ;  and  what 

effort  to  live  the  Christian  life.     In  no  he  would  impress  on  them  is,  that  they 

natural  way  could  any  reference  to  the  must  not   think  of  it  as  merely  cor- 

rite   of   baptism   be   suggested   to  his  rective  of  evil ;   it  was   not   designed 

mind.     2.  The  term  "  baptism  "  is  not  merely  to  secure  *'  the  putting  away  of 

used  only  of  the  initiatory  rite ;  it  is  the  filth  of  the  flesh."     It  was  sent  to 

employed  as  a  figure  for  providential  give  them  that  kind  of  spiritual  power 

dispensations  of  a  disciplinary  charac-  for  witness  and  service  which  can  only 

ter,  under  which  men  are  brought.     In  come  when  a  man  can  suffer,  keeping  a 

Heb.   vi.   2  the  word  is  used   in   the  good  conscience.    And  that  is  the  kind 

plural,  as  if   it  was   fully  recognised  of  suffering  which  brought  Christ  His 

that    there    were    different    sorts    of  unique   spiritual   power.      Job   is   the 

baptisms.     And    St.   Peter   could   not  Old -Testament  illustration  of  suffering 

fail  to  have  in  cherished  memory  the  that  was   not   sent  for  the   *' putting 

figurative  words  of  his  Divine  Master :  away  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh,"  but  for 

*'  But  I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  that   kind  of  spiritual   testing  of  in- 

with,  and   how   am   I   straitened   till  tegrity — of  a  good  conscience — which 

it  be  accomplished  !  "  (Luke  xii.  50).  made  Job  a  witness  to  the  ages  of  the 

Christ  had  a  disciplinary  experience  of  fact,  that  disinterested  love  to  God  is 

suffering  in  well-doing  to  pass  through.  possible,  and   such   confidence   in   the 

And  on  another  occasion   St,  Peter's  Pivine  wisdom  as  enables  a  man  to 

125 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


trust  God,  though  He  slays.  It  is  not  sin  must  contradict  all  experience  in 
possible  without  undue  strain  to  con-  the  transmission  of  qualities.  It  is 
nect  the  "  interrogation  of  a  good  plain  that  the  first  man  must  have 
conscience  toward  God "  with  the  exerted  on  his  race  an  influence  quite 
resurrection  of  Christ,  so  as  to  think  peculiar ;  that  his  acts  must  have 
of  it  as  "  through  the  resurrection  " ;  biassed  their  acts.  And  this  bias  or 
but  if  we  understand  the  parenthesis  tendency  is  what  we  call  original  sin. 
to  close  with  the  words  "  conscience  Now,  original  sin  is  just  the  denial  of 
toward  God,"  then  ''  through  the  re-  God's  paternity,  refusing  to  live  as  His 
surrection"  connects  with  **  quickened  children,  and  saying  we  are  not  His 
in  the  Spirit"  of  ver.  18,  and  the  two  children.  From  this  state  Christ  re- 
points  of  St.  Peter's  persuasion  come  deemed.  He  revealed  God  as  the 
fully  into  view,  Christ  having  suffered  Father,  and  as  the  Spirit  who  is  in 
in  well-doing,  even  unto  extremity,  man,  "  lighting  every  man,"  moving 
even  unto  death — physical  death — has  in  man  his  infinite  desires  and  infinite 
gained  a  free,  large,  spiritual  power,  affections.  This  was  the  Revelation, 
and  the  trust  of  supreme  spiritual  The  reception  of  that  revelation  is 
authority.  And  St.  Peter  would  urge  Regeneration.  There  are  two  ways  in 
on  these  persecuted  disciples  that  they  which  that  revelation  may  be  accepted, 
may  well  endure  their  baptism  of  1.  By  a  public  recognition  called  bap- 
suffering  for  righteousness'  sake,  in  the  tism.  2.  By  faith.  "  We  are  saved  by 
confidence  that  it  would  be  over-ruled  faith  "  ;  *'  baptism  saves  us." 
for  sublime  issues,  and  they  would  be  II.  But  if  baptism  is  only  the  public 
absolutely  safe  under  every  form  of  recognition  and  symbol  of  a  fact,  is  not 
stress  and  strain.  The  apostolic  use  baptism  degraded  and  made  super- 
of  Old-Testament  illustrations,  and  the  fluous?  1.  Baptism  is  given  as  a 
peculiar  typical  manner  in  which  Old-  something  to  rest  upon ;  nay,  as  a 
Testament  incidents  and  characters  something  without  which  redemption 
were  treated,  is  very  familiar  to  the  would  soon  become  unreal ;  which  con- 
Bible  student.  It  is  a  manner  which  verts  a  doctrine  into  a  reality,  which 
the  Western  mind  finds  exceedingly  realises  visibly  what  is  invisible.  For 
difficult  to  understand  or  appreciate.  our   nature  is   such   that    immaterial 

truths  are  unreal  to  us  until  they  are 

Baptism. — We  enter  upon  this  ques-  embodied    in    material    form.      God's 

tion — whether  we  have  a  right  to  claim  character — nay,    God   Himself — to    us 

to  be  sons  of  God  or  not  ?     And  if  so,  would  be  nothing  if  it  were  not  for 

on   what   grounds  %      In   virtue   of   a  the  creation,  which  is  the  great  symbol 

ceremony,  or  of  a  certain  set  of  feel-  and  sacrament   of   His   presence.     So 

ings  ?     Or  in  virtue  of  an  eternal  Fact  baptism  is  a  fact  for  man  to  rest  upon, 

— the  fact  of  God's  Paternity.  a  doctrine  realised  to  flesh  and  blood. 

I.  The  apparent  denial  of  original  2.  Baptism  is  the  token  of  a  church,  of 

sin  in  asserting  the  paternity  of  God.  an  universal  church,  not  the  symbol  of 

The  text  declares  that  baptism  saves  a  sect.     3.  Baptism  is  an  authoritative 

us.     But  it  declares  that  this  can  only  symbol,  but  not  an  arbitrary  symbol, 

be  said  figuratively  :  "  The  like  figure  The  authoritativeness  is  the  all  in  all 

whereunto  even  baptism  doth  also  now  which  converts  baptism  from  a  mere 

save   us."     Original   sin   is   an   awful  ceremony  into  a  sacrament.     It  is  no 

fact.    It  is  not  the  guilt  of  an  ancestor  conventional  arrangement ;  it  is  valid 

imputed   to   an   innocent    descendant,  as  a  legal,  eternal  truth,  a  condensed, 

but  it  is  the  tendencies  of   that  an-  embodied  fact.    Is  this  making  baptism 

cestor    Hving    in    his    offspring,    and  nothing  ?     I  should  rather  say  baptism 

incurring  guilt.     Original  sin  can  be  is  everything.     Take  your  stand  upon 

forgiven  only  so  far  as  original  sin  is  the    broad,    sublime    basis    of    God's 

removed.     He  who  would  deny  original  Paternity.     God  created  the  world — 

126 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


God  redeemed  the  world.  Baptism 
proclaims  separately,  personally,  by 
name  to  you — God  created  you,  God 
redeemed  you.  Baptism  is  your  war- 
rant— you  are  His  child.  And  now, 
because  you  are  His  child,  live  as  a 
child  of  God ;  be  redeemed  from  the 
life  of  evil  which  is  false  to  your 
nature  into  the  life  of  light  and  good- 
ness, which  is  the  truth  of  your  being. 
— F.  W.  Robertson. 

Ver.  22.  Chrisfs  Spiritual  Rights 
and  Spiritual  Powers. — *'  Who  is  on 
the  right  hand  of  God,  having  gone 
into  heaven;  angels  and  authorities 
and  powers  being  made  subject  unto 
Him."  It  is  now  fully  recognised  by 
all  thoughtful  and  intelligent  persons 
that  there  is  a  gi'owth  and  development 
in  the  teachings  of  our  Lord's  brief 
ministerial  life.  That  He  grew  in 
wisdom  during  the  thirty  years  of  His 
private  life  at  Nazareth  is  expressly 
declared.  That  He  grew  in  wisdom 
and  apprehension  of  truth,  and  spiritual 
insight  and  teaching  skill,  during  the 
three  years  of  practice  and  expeiience 
in  active  ministry  is  plain  to  all  who, 
without  prejudice,  compare  His  earlier 
and  later  teachings.  It  is  but  the 
affirmation  of  His  true  humanity  to 
declare  that  He  grew  in  the  appre- 
hension of  His  own  mystery,  and  the 
meaning  of  His  own  mission.  But 
however  difficult  it  may  be  to  receive 
this  fact,  or  even  to  state  it  with  due 
precision,  limitations,  and  qualifications, 
we  are  on  perfectly  safe  grounds  when 
we  say  that  the  apostles  grew  in  the 
spiritual  apprehension  of  the  person  of 
their  Lord,  the  incidents  of  His  career, 
and  the  doctrinal  mysteries  that 
centred  in  His  person  and  work.  It 
was  long  before  they  really  understood 
their  Lord  Himself.  They  accepted 
Him  as  the  national  Messiah.  By-and- 
bye  they  saw  in  Him  the  Son  of  God, 
and  Saviour  from  sin.  At  first  they 
were  simply  overwhelmed  by  their 
Lord's  death,  which  seemed  an  un- 
endurable disgrace,  and  an  irreparable 
loss.  By-and-bye  they  saw  in  it  the 
necessary   self-sacrifice    of    Him   who 


would  deliver  humanity  from  sin.  At 
first  they  could  make  little  or  nothing 
of  their  Lord's  resurrection.  It  was 
even  more  a  mystery  than  a  joy.  He 
was  with  them  again,  but  He  was  not 
with  them  as  He  had  been.  And  it 
was  a  long  time  before  they  could  fully 
realise  that  His  presence  with  them  in 
His  spiritual,  resurrection,  heavenly 
life  was  better,  every  way  better,  to 
them  than  His  presence  within  bodily 
limitations.  Each  of  the  apostles 
gained  some  special  and  characteristic 
thought  of  the  present  mission  of  the 
Risen  and  Living  One.  It  is  to  one  of 
the  thoughts  of  St.  Peter  that  atten- 
tion is  now  directed.  It  represents 
what  he  most  deeply  felt  after  he  had 
thought  for  long  years  about  it.  That 
resurrection  brought  to  Christ  the  kind 
of  trust — spiritual  trust;  the  kind  of 
power — spiritual  power,  which  God 
always  has  given,  and  always  does 
give,  to  those  who  suffer  in  the  flesh 
for  righteousness'  sake.  And  it  is  a 
kind  of  power  and  trust  which  can  be 
given  on  no  other  conditions,  can  be 
attained  in  no  other  way.  The  apostle 
Paul  gives  us  the  same  apprehension 
of  the  Resurrection  in  a  different  form 
of  words.  "  He  humbled  Himself, 
becoming  obedient  even  unto  death ; 
yea,  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wherefore 
also  Gcd  highly  exalted  Him,  and  gave 
Him  the  name  which  is  above  every 
name."  And  if  we  put  St.  Peter's 
words  together  without  confusing  them 
with  his  parenthesis,  what  he  says  is 
this :  "  Because  Christ  also  suffered  for 
sins  once,  the  righteous  for  the  un- 
righteous, that  He  might  bring  us  to 
God;  being  put  to  death  in  the  flesh, 
but  quickened  in  the  spirit  through 
His  resurrection.  Who  is  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  having  gone  into  heaven ; 
angels  and  authorities  and  powers 
being  made  subject  unto  Him."  This 
is  fully  intelhgible,  and  this  is  entirely 
in  harmony  with  the  teaching  of  the 
other  apostles.  In  His  resurrection 
life  Jesus  has  gained  spiritual  power 
and  spiritual  authority,  and  these  He 
is  using  now  in  the  completing  of  His 
great  redemptive  work  for  humanity. 

127 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


Christ  has  no  longer  a  sphere  of 
redemptive  ministry  in  bodily  rela- 
tions. Christ  has  now  a  sphere  of 
redemptive  ministry  in  spiritual  rela- 
tions. For  the  fulfilment  of  that 
spiritual  ministry  He  is  entrusted 
with  spiritual  rights,  and  endowed 
with  spiritual  powers.  On  these 
points  we  may  suggestively  and  profit- 
ably dwell.  Christ  has  no  longer  a 
sphere  of  redemptive  ministry  in 
bodily  relations.  Once  He  had  !  He 
came  into  human  spheres  that  He 
might  deal  illustratively  with  the 
human  physical  woes  that  are  attend- 
ant upon  and  illustrative  of  sin.  He 
could  say,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is 
upon  Me,  because  He  hath  anointed 
Me  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor ; 
He  hath  sent  Me  to  heal  the  broken- 
hearted, to  preach  deliverance  to  the 
captives,  and  recovering  of  sight  to  the 
blind,  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are 
bruised."  He  could  send  this  message 
back  to  the  anxiously  inquiring  Bapt- 
ist:  "  Go  and  show  John  again  those 


things  which  ye  do  hear  and  see :  the 
blind  receive  their  sight  and  the  lame 
walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed  and  the 
deaf  hear,  the  dead  are  raised  up  and 
the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to 
them."  But  all  that  illustrative  re- 
demptive work  in  bodily  sufferings 
and  disabilities  was  ended.  That  was 
finished.  That  was  never  to  be  re- 
sumed. Jesus  never  opened  a  blind 
eye,  or  cleansed  a  leper,  or  cast  out  a 
devil,  during  His  resurrection  life. 
He  was  "  put  to  death  in  the  flesh." 
We  see  clearly  that  His  cross  ended 
His  human  life ;  we  need  to  see  as 
clearly  that  the  cross  ended  His  illus- 
trative redemptive  ministry  in  physical 
scenes  and  relations.  We  shall  not 
properly  apprehend  what  He  does  if 
we  fail  to  apprehend  what  He  once  did, 
but  now  and  for  ever  has  ceased  to  do. 
The  illustrative  redemption  is  done ; 
the  redemption  which  was  illustrated 
is  now  being  wrought  by  Him  who  is 
quickened  in  the  spirit  through  His 
resurrection. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III. 


Ver.  1.  A  Wife's  Power  to  Wm. — "  As  I  was 
conversing,"  says  a  writer  in  the  New  York 
Observer,  "  with  a  pious  old  man,  I  inquired 
what  were  the  means  of  his  conversion.  For 
a  moment  he  paused — I  perceived  I  had 
touched  a  tender  string.  Tears  gushed  from 
his  eyes,  while,  with  deep  emotion,  he  replied : 
*My  wife  was  brought  to  God  some  years 
before  myself.  I  persecuted  and  abused  her 
because  of  her  religion.  She,  however,  re- 
turned nothing  but  kindness — constantly 
manifesting  an  anxiety  to  promote  my  com- 
fort and  happiness  ;  and  it  was  her  amiable 
conduct  when  sufEering  ill-treatment  from 
me  that  first  sent  the  arrows  of  conviction 
to  my  soul.' " 

Ver.  3.  Pride  in  Press. — Goldsmith  tells  of 
a  mandarin  who  took  much  pride  in  appear- 
ing with  a  number  of  jewels  on  every  part 
of  his  robe.  He  was  once  accosted  by  a  sly 
old  fellow,  who,  following  him  through 
several  streets,  bowed  often  to  the  ground, 
and  thanked  him  for  his  jewels.  "What 
does  the  man  mean  ?  "  cried  the  mandarin. 
"  I  never  gave  you  any  of  my  jewels."  **  No," 
replied  the  other ;  "  but  you  have  let  me 
look  at  them,  and  that  is  all  the  use  you  can 
make  of  them  yourself.  So  the  only  difEerence 
between  us  is,  that  you  have  the  trouble  of 
watching  them  ;  and  that  is  an  employment 
1  don't  much  desire,'' 

128 


Ver.  8.  Courtesy. — The  Queen,  accom- 
panied by  Lady  Agnes  Duif,  was  once  visit- 
ing the  fine  falls  of  Corriemulzie.  In 
crossing  the  high  road,  which  runs  between 
the  cottage  grounds  and  the  site  of  the  Falls, 
the  party  met  a  drove  of  cattle  coming  from 
the  Castleton  market.  The  drover,  a  fine- 
looking  man  from  Atholl,  addressing  Lady 
Agnes,  said,  "  Please,  can  you  tell  me  if  the 
Queen  is  forward  to-night  ?  "  Her  Majesty 
overheard  the  question,  turned  round,  and 
bestowed  on  the  stalwart  Highlander  a  most 
gracious  bow  and  smile.  Sir  George  Grey 
then  fell  back,  and  told  him  that  it  was  the 
Queen  who  thus  bowed  to  him. 

Civility. — When  old  Zachariah  Fox,  the 
great  merchant  of  Liverpool,  was  asked 
by  what  means  he  had  contrived  to  realise 
so  large  a  fortune  as  he  possessed,  his  reply 
was,  *'  Friend,  by  one  article  alone,  in  which 
thou  mayest  deal  too  if  thou  pleasest — 
civility." 

Triumphing  over  Calumniators. — *'  If  any 
one  speaks  ill  of  thee,"  said  Epictetus,  "  con- 
sider whether  he  has  truth  on  his  side  ;  and 
if  so,  reform  thyself,  that  his  censures  may 
not  affect  thee."  When  Anaximander  was 
told  that  the  very  boys  laughed  at  his  sing- 
ing, "  Ay,"  said  he,  "  then  I  must  learn  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER, 


CHAP.  IV. 


sing  better."  Plato,  being  told  that  he  had 
many  enemies  who  spoke  ill  of  him,  "  It  is 
no  matter,"  said  he  ;  "  I  will  live  so  that  none 
shall  believe  them."  Hearing  at  another 
time  that  an  intimate  friend  of  his  had 
spoken  detractingly  of  him,  "  I  am  sure  he 
would  not  do  it,"  said  he,  "  if  he  had  not 
some  reason  for  it."  This  is  the  surest  as 
well  as  the  noblest  way  of  drawing  the  sting 
out  of  a  reproach,  and  the  true  method  of 
preparing  a  man  for  that  great  and  only  re- 
lief against  the  pains  of  calumny — a  good 
conscience. 

Suffering  with  Christ, — 

Wouldst  thou  inherit  life  with  Christ  on 
high? 
Then  count  the  cost,  and  know 
That  here  on  earth  below 


Thou  needs  must  suffer  with  thy  Lord,  and 

die. 
We  reach  that  gain  to  which  all  else  is  loss 
But  through  the  cross. 

Oh  !  think  what  sorrows  Christ  Himself  has 
known ; 
The  scorn  and  anguish  sore, 
The  bitter  death  He  bore, 
Ere  He  ascended  to  His  heavenly  throne ; 
And  deemest  thou  thou  canst  with  right 
complain, 
Whate'er  thy  pain  ? 

Not  e'en  the  sharpest  sorrows  we  can  feel, 
Nor  keenest  pangs,  we  dare 
With  that  great  bliss  compare, 

When  God  His  glory  shall  in  us  reveal ; 

That  shall  endure  when  our  brief  woes  are 
o'er 
For  evermore  I    Simon  Dach,  1640. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
THE  CALL  TO  HOLY  LIVING. 


CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETIGAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  In  the  flesh. — Or  to  the  flesh ;  i.e.,  so  far  as  the  flesh  is  concerned.  The  same  sphere 
in  which  Christian  disciples  were  called  to  suffer.  Same  mind. — Or  thought.  The  same 
temper  of  trust,  obedience,  and  submission.  Put  yourselves  into  the  same  disposition. 
Ceased  from  sin. — "  Hath  been  caused  to  rest."  The  moral  result  of  the  suffering  is  deliver- 
ance from  the  motions  of  sins.  But  it  is  suffering  borne  in  the  *  mind  of  Christ '  that  alone 
has  its  full  moral  power  on  us.     See  Kom.  vi.  7-11. 

Ver.  2.  This  verse  explains  the  previous  verse.  Suffering,  rightly  borne,  brings  a  mood  of 
submission  to  the  will  of  God,  and  this  involves  our  deliverance  from  our  own  self-will.  A 
man  ceases  to  live  unto  the  lusts,  desires,  of  his  own  heart,  when  he  comes  fully  to  do  and 
bear  God's  holy  will.  iTnOvfjilais,  All  sensual  objects,  pleasures,  profits,  honours,  which  are 
repugnant  to  the  will  of  God. 

Ver.  3.  Will  of  the  Gentiles. — Almost  satirical,  as  addressed  to  Jews.  It  was  altogether 
unworthy  of  them  to  take  up  with  the  self-indulgent  customs  of  the  Gentiles  ;  it  was 
impossible  for  Jews  who  had  become  Christians  in  any  way  to  keep  association  with  old 
evil  practices.  It  seems  that  both  Gentiles  and  bigoted  Jews  were  trying  to  draw  the 
Christian  Jews  away  from  their  profession  by  the  enticements  of  sensual  indulgence,  and 
public  excitements.  If  we  could  understand  the  state  of  society  in  those  days,  we  should 
readily  see  how  attractive,  and  how  subtle  and  strong  in  their  influence,  those  enticements 
and  temptations  were,  and  therefore  how  needful  was  the  apostolic  warning.  Those  pledged 
to  do  the  will  of  Christ  must  in  no  sense  allow  themselves  to  do  the  "  will  of  the  Gentiles." 
To  us  Christ  our  Master  must  be  all,  or  nothing  at  all.  Lasciviousness. — A  plural  form  for 
all  kinds  of  bodily  impurity.  Lusts. — See  above.  Excess  of  wine. — A  contemptuous  word 
is  used — "  wine-swillings."  Involving  loss  of  due  self-restraint.  Eevellings. — Koystering 
parties.  Banquetings. — Or  carousings ;  drinking-bouts.  Idolatries. — With  reference  to  the 
excitements  and  immoralities  usually  associated  with  idol  feast-times.  It  is  evident  that 
licentious  Jews  had  sadly  fallen  into  evil  ways,  but  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  that  the 
Christian  Jews  had  yielded  to  such  enticements.  Perhaps  St.  Peter  only  warns  them  of 
serious  possibilities  of  temptation. 

Ver,  4.  Wherein. — In  regard  to  which  fleshly  life.  Christians  always  excite  surprise  in 
persisting  in  separation  from  carnal  indulgences.  Riot. — Or  letting  loose  of  bodily  passions. 
The  word  used  may  mean,  sink,  slough,  puddle.  Speaking  evil  of  you. — Slanderously  affirm- 
ing that  you  are  as  bad  as  themselves.  Such  slander  was  part  of  the  suffering  of  the 
Christians  ;  and  they  must  take  care  that  they  gave  no  conceivable  occasion  for  it. 

Ver.  5.  Who. — That  is,  these  revilers  and  slanderers.     They  will  surely  be  called  to  account 


^ 


129 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


before  God.  '*  They  who  now  demand  an  account,  will  one  day  have  to  render  it,"  St.  Peter 
offers  the  consideration  of  God's  near  judgment,  for  the  comfort  and  assurance  of  Christians 
unjustly  slandered.  The  early  disciples  thought  of  Christ's  vindication  as  near  at  hand. 
*' Hence  St.  Peter  includes  the  slanderers  of  his  day  among  the  living,  as  just  about  to  be 
judged  "  {BengeV). 

Ver.  6.  Them  that  are  dead. — Not  the  souls  of  the  dead ;  but  to  those  who  once  were  alive, 
and  are  now  dead  ;  e.g.,  the  men  of  the  age  of  Noah,  to  whom  reference  is  made  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter.  This  sentence  should  help  us  to  understand  the  preaching  to  the  "  spirits  in 
prison."  In  ver.  5  the  "  quick  "  and  the  "  dead  "  are  distinguished.  The  familiar  apostolic 
meaning  is  the  "  dead  "  before  Christ's  coming,  and  the  "  quick  "  or  "  alive  "  at  Christ's  coming. 
This  is  the  idea  of  "  dead  "  in  this  verse.  Alford  thinks  those  in  their  graves  are  meant. 
According  to  men. — That  is,  the  discipline  of  life,  the  common  experience  of  human  suf- 
fering, was  God's  gospel  preached  to  them,  with  a  view  to  their  quickening  to  spiritual  life. 
If  they  failed  to  respond,  there  could  be  for  them^  but  "  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment." 
St.  Peter  is  comforting  tempted  and  tried  Christians,  by  assuring  them  that  their  tempters 
and  persecutors  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  in  the  just  judgment  of  God.  "  Even  such  as  are 
now  dead  had  the  gospel  preached  to  them,  with  this  result,  that  the  common  judgment  should 
pass  upon  them  in  the  flesh,  and  yet  that  they  should  have  a  higher  life  before  God  by  the 
operation  of  the  Spirit "( W.  W.).  ''  They  were  judged  after  the  manner  of  men,  by  the  laws 
by  which  all  men  are  judged  according  to  their  works  ;  but  the  purpose  of  that  judgment, 
like  that  of  the  judgments  that  come  upon  men  in  this  life,  was  to  rescue  them  from  a  final 
condemnation  "  {Plum^tre).  Many  of  the  slanderers  and  persecutors  of  the  Christians  would 
be  their  personal  friends  and  relatives  ;  and  St.  Peter  would  feel  it  necessary  to  temper  and 
relieve,  as  far  as  possible,  his  denunciations  of  them.  We  all  want  some  ground  of  hope 
concerning  our  unbelieving  and  ungodly  friends. 

Ver.  7.  End  of  all  things. — Jews  naturally  thought  of  the  end  of  organised  Judaism  as  the 
**  end  of  all  things."  The  end  of  one  great  ceon,  or  dispensation  was  nigh  at  hand,  and  this 
fact  was  properly  used  as  an  incentive  to  w  atchf ulness.  Man  is  not  capable  of  attaching  a 
definite  meaning  to  the  term,  "  end  of  all  things."  He  can  understand  the  "  end  of  his 
things."  Sober. — Better,  "  be  of  sound  mind,  and  be  sober  unto  prayer."  Keep  a  good  check 
on  all  bodily  desires  and  passions  ;  sober,  or  self-restrained,  and  so  able  to  make  everything 
an  occasion  of  prayer. 

Ver.  8.  Charity. — Or  love  ;  but  it  is  love  as  influencing  Christian  fellowship.  Distinguish 
from  the  love  of  sex.  Charity  suggests  the  mutual  consideration,  and  mutual  service,  which 
are  the  essential  elements  of  social  love.  Ferment. — Or  intense.  It  is  important  that  the  love 
should  be  more  than  cherished  good  feeling.  It  should  find  free  expression  in  daily  inter- 
course. The  difiicult  circumstances  of  the  Churches  made  mutual  confidence,  mutual 
interest,  and  mutual  helpfulness,  unusually  important.  Cover  the  (a)  multitude. — See  James 
V.  20.  The  idea  is,  that  love  tries  to  hide  the  faults  and  failings  of  brethren ;  or,  love  others, 
and  you  will  find  it  easy  to  forgive,  and  pass  over  faults.  *'  It  is  a  truth  from  which  we  need 
not  shrink,  that  every  sin  which  love  hides  from  man's  sight,  is  hidden  in  God's  sight  also  " 
(^Alford),  One  writer  thinks  the  idea  of  the  sentence  is,  that  the  exercise  of  this  grace  of 
charity,  or  love,  makes  up  for  a  great  many  other  shortcomings  in  the  man. 

Ver.  9.  Hospitality. — Suggested  by  the  word  "  charity,"  and  an  important  form  of  it  in 
those  days,  when  Christians  were  often  turned  out  of  their  homes,  and  dependent  on  the 
shelter  and  kindness  of  Christian  friends.  Grudging. — Murmuring,  fretting  under  the  claim 
put  upon  you.  Circumstances  of  family  life  often  make  offering  hospitality  a  great  strain 
on  feeling. 

Ver.  10.  The  gift. — Better,  a  gift,  any  gift.  Each  renewed  man  is  thought  of  as  being 
endowed  with  some  gift,  which  he  is  to  put  to  use  for  the  general  edification.  Activity  in 
the  employment  of  our  Christian  gifts  provides  the  best  security  against  temptation. 
Minister. — In  the  general  sense  of  "  use  in»service."  Stewards. — Men  put  in  trust.  A  steward 
is  in  no  sense  a  possessor.  Manifold. — Various.  God's  gifts  take  various  forms,  and  so  the 
whole  circle  of  the  Church's  need  is  adequately  provided  for. 

Ver.  11.  Speak. — Kef  erring  to  the  gift  of  tongues,  which  took  form  as  preaching, 
prophecy,  ecstatic  utterance,  counsel,  etc.  (See  Eom.  xii.  6-8 ;  1  Cor.  xii. — xiv).  Oracles  of 
God. — R.V.  "  speaking  as  it  were  oracles  of  God."  Two  ideas  are  suggested,  but  the  latter  is 
probably  the  one  in  the  apostle's  mind.  1.  Speaking  in  harmony  with  what  was  already 
received  as  oracles  of  God  ;  or,  2.  Speaking  only  as  inspired  by  oracles  of  God.  The  teacher 
is  to  keep  himself  strictly  open  to  Divine  leadings  ;  to  speak  as  one  possessed  of  powers  not 
his  own.  Minister.  — Serve  in  the  Church  as  the  first  deacons  did.  *'  Serve  tables."  General 
helping  in  meeting  the  various  claims  and  duties,  perhaps  with  special  reference  to  the  poor. 
There  is  a  gift  of  practical  ministry  to  which  attention  should  be  directed.  God  giveth.  It 
makes  all  the  difference  whether  we  are  using  our  strength,  or  a  God-given  strength.  The 
gift  of  working  for  others  comes  from  God.  Glorified. — Compare  Matt.  v.  16;  1  Cor.  x.  31. 
Praise.  —Glory.     Ever  and  ever. — Ages  and  ages. 

130 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  iv. 


Ver.  12.  Strange. — Do  not  be  surprised,  as  if  something  unreasonable  had  happened.  No 
form  of  suffering  can  come  to  Christians  as  accident.  God,  with  a  purpose  of  grace,  is  behind 
all.  Fiery  trial. — Burning  fire.  R.V.  "  among  you,  which  cometh  upon  you  to  prove  you." 
Whether  "  fiery  "  is  intimation  of  intensity,  or  strictly  descriptive,  does  not  appear.  The  word 
as  a  symbol  is  more  probable.     Martyrdoms  by  fire  may  not  have  begun  so  early. 

Ver.  13.  Bejoice. — In  one  point  of  view  of  the  sufferings,  they  bring  you  into  the  experi- 
ence which  led  to  the  sanctifying  and  glorifying  of  Christ.  It  will  lead  through  to  yours 
also.  Inasmuch  as. — Better,  "in  as  far  as."  We  get  the  true  blessing  of  affliction  only  so  far 
as  we  enter  into  the  mind  of  the  suffering  Christ. 

Ver.  14.  If  ye  be. — This  form  of  expression  hints  that  they  had  been,  were^  and  might  he. 
Slander  and  reproach  are  often  harder  to  bear  than  suffering  in  body  or  in  circumstance. 
Spirit  of  glory. — '♦  Of  glory  and  of  power  and  of  God.''  The  spirit  which  marks  you  out  as  an 
heir  of  glory.  "  The  argument  is,  that  reproach  for  the  name  of  Christ  is  a  proof  of  glory  in 
reserve,  or  rather,  already  belonging  to  the  man."  On  their  part. — This  closing  part  of  the 
verse  is  omitted  in  E.V.  The  words  are  an  undoubted  interpolation.  They  are  not  found  in 
the  best  MSS.  and  Versions  (see  "  Variorum  Bible."). 

Ver.  15.  The  word  translated  "  busy-body  "  is  a  peculiar  one,  and  seems  to  have  been 
coined  by  St.  Peter, — dXXoTpLoeTricrKoiros — lit.  "Bishops  of  other  men's  matters,"  claiming 
rights  in  matters  with  which  he  has  no  proper  concern.  Interference  is  a  fruitful  source  of 
trouble  in  all  religious,  as  well  as  other  communities. 

Ver.  16.  Christian. — St.  Peter  recognises  this  as  the  known  name  of  the  sect.  This  fact 
helps  to  date  the  epistle.  On  this  behalf. — In  this  matter,  or  in  this  name ;  in  being  "  counted 
worthy  to  suffer  in  this  name." 

Ver.  17.  Judgment  must  begin. — Compare  vers.  5,7.  "Just  about  to  begin."  House  of 
God. — See  1  Tim.  iii.  15 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5.  End  be. — Not  the  final  doom,  but  the  end  of  the 
judgment  dispensations  that  St.  Peter  knew  were  about  to  begin. 

Ver.  18.  Scarcely. — With  difficulty.  Keep  association  with  the  calamities  immediately 
coming,  which  would  centre  round  the  Roman  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Apostles  thought 
of  this  as  God's  judgment  on  the  wicked.  Illustrate  by  the  singing  of  the  Christians,  headed 
by  Olynthus,  when  the  fires  of  Vesuvius  were  destroying  Pompeii,  as  given  by  Bulwer 
Lytton : 

"  Woe  to  the  proud  ones  who  defy  Him ; 
Woe  to  the  wicked  who  deny  Him ; 

Woe  to  the  wicked,  woe  I " 

Ver.  19.  According  to  the  will  of  God. — Recognised  as  permitting,  over-ruling,  and  even 
apportioning,  our  suffering  lot.  Suffering  borne  for  God  is  sanctified  by  God.  "  Stress  is 
laid  upon  the  attribute,  or  act  of  creation,  as  the  ground  of  confidence.  He  who  made  the 
soul  is  also  He  who  hateth  nothing  that  He  hath  made." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—6. 

SuffeHng  in  the  Flesh  as  Help  to  Ceasing  from  Sin. — It  will  be  seen  how 
directly  adapted,  pointed,  and  practical,  St.  Peter's  teachings  are.  They  apply- 
precisely  to  the  conditions,  sufferings,  and  temptations  of  the  brethren  of  the 
"  Dispersion,"  to  whom  the  epistle  is  addressed.  St.  Peter  has  not  the  interest 
in  theology  which  characterises  St.  Paul,  and  he  should  not  be  studied  in  order 
to  find  settings  of  doctrinal  truth.  His  supreme  interest  is  in  Christian  living, 
and  in  truths  only  so  far  as  they  may  inspire  and  guide  godly  living.  And  in 
this  epistle  he  is  mainly  concerned  with  the  hindrances  to  Christian  living  which 
come  from  the  disabilities  and  distresses  which  making  a  Christian  profession 
then  involved.  He  looks  at  the  sufferings  of  the  brethren  from  different  points  of 
view,  and  from  every  point  of  view  he  finds  encouragement  by  showing  that 
they  always  "  work  together  for  good."  Here  his  point  of  view  is  the  peril 
occasioned  by  having  to  live  in  the  very  midst  of  a  licentious  Glentile  society — 
a  peril  all  the  greater  because  they  once  indulged  in  the  unrestrained  and 
degrading  customs  of  Gentile  life,  and  there  was  some  affinity  for  such  things 
left  in  their  fleshly  nature.  And  he  reminds  them  that  suffering  in  the  flesh 
was  the  very  thing  to  deliver  them  from  the  power  of  these  evils,  the  very  thing 
to  work  the  very  last  relics  of  these  things  out  of  their  natures,  and  enable  them 
to  cease  altogether  from  sin. 

131 


CHAP.  IV.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


I.  Christ's  example  of  suffering  in  the  flesh. — What  was  the  point  of  that 
example  ?  What  was  the  power  that  sustained  Him  1  And  what  were  the 
results  of  His  endurance?  It  was  distinctly  and  precisely  such  suffering 
as  we  have  to  undergo,  suffering  in  the  fleshly,  human  sphere ;  bodily  and 
mental  suffering,  arising  from  conditions  similar  to  ours;  bodily  states,  sensibilities, 
oppositions  of  evil  men,  etc.  It  is  only  too  easy  to  represent  Christ  as  so  unique 
a  Being  that  we  cannot  see  in  His  any  likeness  to  our  own  bodily,  fleshly 
sufferings.  He  was  "  in  all  points  "  tested,  disciplined  by  suffering,  even  as  we  are. 
St.  John  vigorously  pleads  for  the  truth  that  Christ  is  "  come  in  the  flesh " ; 
St.  Peter  vigorously  pleads  for  the  truth  that  Christ  "  suffered  in  the  flesh." 
As  to  the  power  which  sustained  Him  under  the  suffering,  we  have  to  see  that 
the  grace  of  God  rested  upon  Him  as  it  rests  upon  us ;  but  beside  that,  and  as 
the  special  point  of  interest  now,  Jesus  was  sustained— as  we  may  be,  and  ought 
to  be  sustained — by  His  fuU  loyalty  and  devotion  to  God,  and  absolute  resolve 
to  serve  Him  in  righteousness  and  well-doing,  whatever  that  might  involve. 
And  as  to  the  result,  it  may  be  said  that,  in  entire  consecration  to  God,  to 
righteousness  as  God's  will,  is  always  found  the  deliverance  of  a  man  from  the 
"motions  of  sins  in  his  members."  Sin  is  essentially  self-centredness,  self- 
seeking  ;  and  a  man  ceases  from  self-willed  ness  and  sin  when  he  gives  himself 
wholly  over,  in  devotion  and  service  to  another.  Christ  absolutely  ceased  from 
the  service  of  self,  because  He  was  entirely  absorbed  in  the  service  of  the 
Father. 

II.  Deliverance  and  elevation  may  come  to  Christians  through  their  suffering 
in  the  flesh  (vers.  2,  3). — The  acceptance  of  bodily  suffering  in  doing  what  we 
know  to  be  right,  and  the  will  of  God,  is  the  sign  of  the  highest  moral  triumph, 
of  deliverance  from  the  self.  It  lifts  a  man  right  up  above  the  plane  in  which 
men  seek  their  own  pleasures,  and  indulge  their  own  lusts  and  passions.  To  be 
willing  to  suffer  for  righteousness'  sake  is  proof  of  self-mastery.  No  man  ever 
chooses  suffering,  or  submits  easily  to  it,  save  under  the  persuasion  of  some  high 
and  holy  motive.  Illustration  may  be  taken  from  the  case  present  to  the  mind 
of  St.  Peter.  These  Christians  once  had  shared  in  the  self-indulgent  and  de- 
moralising Pagan  life  around  them.  On  principle  they  had  separated  themselves 
from  it  all.  But  the  separation  was  putting  them  under  disability,  and  causing 
them  suffering.  Their  loyalty  to  principle  was  severely  tested,  but  if  they  held  fast 
their  loyalty,  and  patiently  bore  their  sufferings,  they  would  surely  find  that  this 
would  perfect  the  separation,  and  make  it  easy  to  stand  quite  aloof  from  every 
evU  feature  of  the  old  Pagan  life.  It  is  the  point  which  may  be  set  in  adaptation 
to  the  circumstances  of  every  age.  In  the  earnestness  of  the  Christian  life — 
and  earnestness  is  effectively  shown  in  willingness  to  endure — lies  the  true  safety 
from  surrounding  evils,  howsoever  they  may  appeal  to  the  fleshly  nature. 

III.  The  misunderstanding  those  must  expect  who  are  willing  to  suffer  in 
the  flesh  (ver.  4). — "  Wherein  they  think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with  them 
into  the  same  excess  of  riot ;  speaking  evil  of  you."  The  early  Christians  were, 
in  a  remarkable  way,  exposed  to  slander  and  misrepresentation ;  and  these  are 
often  harder  to  bear  than  actual  persecutions  affecting  body  and  circumstances. 
A  Christian  who  is  indifferent  concerning  material  things  is  intensely  jealous 
concerning  his  good  name,  because  the  honour  of  his  Lord  is  bound  up  in  his 
keeping  his  good  name.  But  even  this  he  must  be  willing  to  bear;  by  his 
persistency  in  good  and  gracious  living  "putting  to  silence  the  ignorance  of 
foolish  men."  A  Christian  has  always  this  effective  power  against  the  slanderer 
he  can  live  so  that  no  one  can  by  any  possibility  credit  the  slanders.  He  can 
live  so  as  to  stand  in  the  acceptance  of  the  righteous  God,  and  so  as  fearlessly 
to  anticipate  the  time  when  human  lives  must  be  appraised  and  judged.  The 
apostles,  with  their  anticipation  of  the  immediate  return  of  Christ  for  judgment, 

132 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  IV. 


constantly  urge  that  whatever  benefits  accrue  to  the  faithful  will  be  shared  by 
the  Christians  who  have  died  before  He  comes,  as  well  as  by  those  who  are  alive 
when  He  comes.  As  they  contemplated  material  blessings  from  the  coming,  it 
was  necessary  to  show  that  those  who  had  died  before  He  came  would  be  placed 
under  no  disability.  St.  Peter  in  no  way  refers,  in  ver.  6,  to  old-world  sinners, 
but  entirely  to  the  Christians  who  had  suffered  in  well-doing  right  up  to  death. 
The  gospel — this  same  gospel  of  suffering  with  Christ,  and  in  His  spirit — 
was  preached  unto  them  (see  Matt.  v.  10-12).  They  were  misunderstood,  judged, 
persecuted  by  men  in  their  fleshly  life.  But  in  their  loyalty  and  faithfulness  they 
lived  their  spii  itual  life ;  in  their  spirits — their  inner  spiritual  life — they  kept 
true  to  God,  and  the  will  of  God,  as  they  knew  it.  And  their  being  dead  would 
prove  no  hindrance  to  their  sharing  the  full  Divine  acceptance  with  the  loyal 
living,  and  with  Christ,  who  in  the  same  way  "  suffered  in  the  flesh." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Yer.  1.  Suffering  in  the  Flesh. — A 
key  to  the  passage  is  found  in  the  fact 
that  it  is  addressed  to  martyrs  and 
prospective  martjrrs,  and  through  them 
to  all  sufferers  of  bodily  woes.  Willing- 
ness to  suffer  is  the  sign  of  ceasing 
from  sin,  the  essence  of  sin  being  our 
living  according  to  our  self-will,  and 
unto  our  self -pleasing.  Willingness  to 
suffer  was  a  sign  of  Christ's  life  to  the 
will  of  God,  and  death  to  self-will. 
He  was  willing  to  cuffer  even  to 
extremity,  even  unto  death.  That 
mind  of  willingness  was  Christ's  de- 
fence and  power,  and  it  may  be  ours. 
Christ  presents  the  example  of  putting 
the  body  under  restraint  by  the  do- 
minion of  the  will  or  spirit.  His 
suffering  in  the  flesh  was  for  us,  as  an 
example  and  power  upon  us.  Take 
these  points :  1 .  Christ's  experience  of 
suffering  in  the  flesh.  2.  In  what 
senses  this  suffering  was  borne  for  us. 

3.  How  the  mastery  of  the  flesh — 
which  takes  such  a  diversity  of  forms 
— can  be  regarded  as  one  great  battle. 

4.  What  are  the  two  possible  laws 
under  the  control  of  which  human 
lives  can  be  conducted — the  will  of 
God  or  the  will  of  the  flesh  1  5.  How 
altogether  inconsistent  a  fleshly  life 
must  be  to  a  Christian,  seeing  he  is  a 
regenerate  man  and  born  unto  God. 
Paraphrase.  "  As  Christ  suffered  in 
the  flesh  without  shrinking,  take  for 
your  protection  and  support  the  same 
thought  which  proved  a  protection  and 
support  to  Him — viz.,  that  to  be  rid  of 


sin  for  ever  was  the  greatest  of  all 
possible  blessings,  and  that  this  is  only 
attainable  through  the  bodily  death. 
And  the  result  of  embracing  this 
thought  will  be  that  for  the  rest  of 
your  lives  on  earth  (so  soon,  perhaps, 
to  be  cut  violently  short)  you  may  no 
longer  live  to  men's  lusts,  but  to  God's 
will." — EUicott's  Commentary. 

Christ's  Sufferings. — The  Redeemer 
of  the  world  is  infinitely  above  us,  and 
in  another  sense  actually  beside  us. 
We  adore  Him  as  King  of  angels,  and 
love  Him  as  our  Elder  Brother.  His 
sympathy  is  as  true  as  His  sovereignty ; 
and  because  He  once  suffered  being 
tempted.  He  is  able  now  to  succour  them 
that  are  tempted.  His  incarnation 
was  necessary.  The  suffering  humanity 
of  our  Lord  is  the  point  where  we  may 
touch  Him.  He  was  a  real  man,  living, 
sensitive,  suffering,  sympathetic,  and 
such  a  Saviour  became  us.  To  see  His 
footprints  in  the  path  we  have  to  tread 
inspires  us  with  willingness  to  endure 
to  the  end. 

I.  Try  to  understand  what  the 
sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ  were. — 
There  is  a  mystery  about  His  sufferings 
which  even  far-seeing  angels  cannot 
discover.  Let  reverence  walk  hand  in 
hand  with  study.  1.  There  can  he  no 
doubt  that  Jesus  was  exempted  from 
many  of  the  physical  ills  from  which  we 
suffer.  He  was  healthy,  vigorous,  with 
life  replete.  Many  of  our  physical 
sufferings    we    bring    on     ourselves, 

133 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


Jesus  suffered  as  a  man,  but  not  as  a 
sinner.  His  whole  life  was  a  martyr- 
dom. The  pure  amongst  the  impure. 
2.  His  utter  loneliness.  His  was  the 
solitude  of  a  holy  soul  surrounded  by 
sinners ;  of  a  heavenly  spirit  in  contact 
with  things  earthly  and  sensual ;  of  a 
mind  whose  higher  thoughts  not  a 
single  being  on  earth  could  appreciate ; 
whose  truest  objects  in  living  and 
dying  as  He  did  none  could  compre- 
hend. 3.  The  expression  "  in  the  flesh  " 
reminds  us  of  His  uncongenial  sur- 
roundings.  The  environment  of  our 
life  has  much  to  do  with  our  happiness 
or  misery.  He  lived  and  died  among 
a  despised  people.  At  any  moment 
He  might  have  left  the  world  to  its 
sins  and  sorrows,  and  risen  triumphant 
above  them  all.  Then  He  could  not 
have  been  our  Brother,  our  Great 
High  Priest.     Jesus  is  our  Example. 

II.  How  these  sufferings  were  en- 
dured by  Him. — 1.  It  is  evident  that 
He  accepted  them  as  God^s  appointment 
for  Him,  here.  "The  cup  which  My 
Father  has  given  Me,  shall  I  not  drink 
it  1 "  indicates  His  attitude  to  trouble 
right  through.  It  was  a  "  cup " 
measured  and  proffered  by  the  Father's 
hand — a  Father  whose  will  was  wise 
and  good.  The  secret  of  patient,  brave 
endurance  of  the  ills  of  life  is  that  God 
rules  them,  and  in  the  long  run  will 
bring  Divine  issues  out  of  them,  as  He 
did  out  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary. 
2.  Our  Lord  never  allows  Himself  to  he 
absorbed  in  His  oion  sorrows.  Suffer- 
ing tends  to  make  us  self-absorbed. 
No  selfishness  in  Jesus.  He  was 
always  ready  to  enter  into  other 
people's  joys  and  griefs,  whatever  His 
own  sorrows  might  be.  If  a  follower 
of  Christ,  our  couch  of  pain  will  be  the 
centre  of  joy  and  peace  to  those  who 
circle  round  us.  Effort  for  others 
shall  mitigate  our  own  distress.  **  Arm 
yourselves  also  with  the  same  mind." 

III.  How  can  we  do  this? — 1.  By 
God's  help  in  answer  to  prayer.  We 
must  set  Christ  before  us  as  our 
Pattern.  A  living  example  is  more 
helpful  than  abstract  principles.  Keep 
Jesus  steadily  before  you.     2.  Jesus  is 

134 


no  historic  personage,  hut  a  Living 
Presence.  "  I  am  with  you  alway." 
3.  He  identifies  Himself  with  us.  If 
we  suffer  with  Him,  we  shall  be  also 
glorified  together.  Trials  of  faith  and 
patience  and  temper  are  not  purpose- 
less. Nothing  in  all  this  multitudinous 
world  walks  with  aimless  feet.  The 
end  of  His  pathway  was  not  Calvary 
but  heaven.  Those  who  follow  it  will 
find  at  last,  not  a  plunge  into  an 
abyss,  but  a  path  of  ascension  to 
realms  sorrowless  and  sinless,  which 
He  entered  and  claimed  for  us  when 
He  ascended  on  high  and  a  cloud 
received  Him  out  of  His  servants' 
sight. — A.  Rowland,  LL.B.,  B.A, 

Vers.  1,  2.  The  Mind  of  Christ 
the  Christian's  Armour. — The  ruling 
thought  of  the  text  is  this  :  You  may  be 
persecuted,  you  may  even  be  martyred ; 
you  may  have  much  to  suffer  in  your 
flesh,  in  your  circumstances  ;  but  so 
had  Christ.  You  may  escape  it  all  by 
giving  up  your  allegiance  to  Christ. 
Live  to  yourself  and  to  your  own  self- 
will,  to  the  indulgence  of  your  own 
love  of  ease  and  safety,  and  then  you 
need  not  thus  "  suffer  in  the  flesh." 
But  if  you  have  the  same  mind  as 
Christ,  if  you  are  determined  to  set 
the  will  of  God  first,  and  bear  what- 
ever doing  that  "  will "  may  involve, 
then  you  will  find  yourself  lifted  up 
in  spirit  so  as  to  look  cheerfully  on  to 
suffering,  even  to  martyrdom,  and  you 
will  feel  that  self-will — the  essence  of 
sin — has  ceased ;  it  is  crushed  within 
you.  Christ's  "  suffering  in  the  flesh  " 
specially  directs  our  thought  to  the 
physical  sufferings  of  the  cross.  It  was 
from  those  physical  pains  that  His 
human  nature  shrank,  and  in  Geth- 
semane He  triumphed  over  that  shrink- 
ing, and  won  the  victory  of  a  perfect 
and  submissive  trust  in  His  Father's 
will.  He  suffered,  yielding  His  body 
to  the  great  and  prolonged  agony,  but 
able  to  bear  it  all  calmly  unto  the  end, 
because  the  self — the  essence  of  sin — 
was  quite  mastered,  and  He  could  say, 
**  Thy  will  be  done."  "  Arm  your- 
selves with  the  same  mind."     Christ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER.  chap.  iv. 


was  defended  from  yielding  to  bodily  the  simple,  cheerful  determination  that 
suffering,  defended,  too,  from  human  everywhere  and  in  everything  we  will 
shrinking  from  it,  by  a  certain  intent,  do  and  bear  God's  wUl.  Here  is  the 
thought,  purpose,  resolution,  which  answer  to  the  question,  What  shall 
may  be  sharply  expressed  in  this  way  :  arm  us  for  the  battle  and  sorrow  of 
"  I  shall  do  and  bear  the  will  of  God,  life  ?  It  is  "  the  mind  of  Christ,"  the 
whatever  it  may  have  in  it."  We  can  set  of  soul  towards  God,  and  so  towards 
have  that  mind.  Prospective  suffering  holy  things,  which  was  characteristic  of 
will  show  whether  we  have  it.  Actual  Christ.  Can  we  yet  more  fully  see 
suffering  will  test  its  power  and  in-  what  that  prevailing  mind  and  purpose 
fluence  on  us.  *'  Ceased  from  sin."  of  Christ  was  ?  Look  at  His  child- 
Understand  "  sin "  here  to  stand  for  hood.  There  we  often  find  the  fore- 
that  which  is  the  essence  of  sin,  self-  shadowings  of  the  life ;  and  in  such  a 
will,  self -pleasing,  and  the  sentence  child  as  Jesus  we  may  well  expect  to 
becomes  clearer.  Live  to  do  the  will  see  the  prophecy  of  the  life.  The 
of  God.  Set  that  first,  and  you  will  thought  evidently  abiding  in  Him  was 
surely  find  that  you  become  dead  to  this :  Life  for  Me  is  My  Father's 
self ;  you  cease  from  sinful  shrinking  business.  He  began  with  something 
back ;  nay,  the  actual  suffering  will  in  His  mind — with  an  idea  and  a 
but  help  to  kill  the  self  in  you.  The  resolution  that  lifted  Him  above  the 
mind  of  Christ  then  will  arm  us  for  thought  of  suffering.  Upon  our  Lord, 
the  battle  and  suffering  of  life.  during  His  ministry,  there  came  awful 
I.  What  is  that  mind  ? — Like  the  visions  of  the  woe  awaiting  Him  in  the 
early  Christians,  we  find  that  in  the  Holy  City,  and  He  plainly  saw,  at  the 
Christian  lot  there  is  the  "  needs  be  "  centre  of  all  that  woe,  the  agonising 
for  what  answers  to  their  persecutions  cross  ;  and  yet,  what  was  His  mind  ? 
and  martyrdoms.  And  we  cannot  con-  It  is  revealed  at  once  in  this  :  "  He  set 
trol  our  circumstances.  "  There's  a  His  face  steadfastly  towards  Jerusa- 
divinity  that  shapes  our  ends,  rough-  lem."  Strong  to  go  forward,  even 
hew  them  how  we  will."  Indeed,  no  into  the  mists  and  the  darkness, 
man  can  master  his  circumstances  because  He  must  simply  do  God's  will, 
until  he  has  mastered  himself ;  but  Gethsemane  is  the  place  where  the 
then,  even  if  he  never  can  alter  the  mind  of  Christ  is  so  fully  revealed.  It 
things,  he  can  alter  the  set  and  tone  was  Calvary  without  the  bodily  pain, 
of  his  mind  and  feeling  towards  the  There  came  upon  the  frail  and  worn 
things,  and  mate  and  master  them  human  nature  of  our  Lord  the  full 
thus.  For,  after  all,  the  various  vision  of  the  awful  scenes  of  the  next 
things  of  life  are  to  men  according  to  day,  and  that  human  nature  cried  out 
their  mind  and  feeling  towards  them.  in  its  shrinking,  "  If  it  be  possible,  let 
Things  hurt  us  in  one  mood  of  mind  this  cup  pass  from  Me."  But  quickly 
which  we  do  not  at  all  feel  in  another ;  after  it  comes  the  triumph-cry  of  the 
and  by  differences  of  disposition  men's  soul's  set  purpose  :  "  Nevertheless,  not 
troubles  vary.  The  one  most  impres-  as  I  will,  but  as  Thou  wilt."  That  is 
sive  of  all  lessons  learned  from  the  the  mind  of  Christ  which  armed  Him 
human  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  this  :  for  all  bearing  work.  And  He  was 
He  could  not  change  His  circumstances  victorious  right  to  the  end.  The  last 
or  surroundings ;  He  would  not  have  words  that  broke  from  His  dying  lips 
done  so  if  He  could ;  and  yet  He  really  showed  how  thoroughly  He  had  ceased 
mastered  them  all  by  the  inward  from  sin  ;  He  was  dead  to  all  self-will, 
feeling  and  purpose  of  submission  and  all  self-seeking — "  Father,  into  Thy 
obedience  which  He  so  fully  cherished.  hands  I  commend  My  spirit."  Get 
Nothing  can  master  the  disabilities  of  that  spirit  or  mind  of  Christ.  Be  like 
a  human  life  but  soul-strength ;  nothing  Him,  and  it  will  not  be  hard  to  live 
can  give  and  keep  soul-strength  save  the  rest  of  life  in  the  flesh,  not  to  the 

.    -  135 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


lusts  of  men,  not  to  the  self-seekings 
of  our  own  hearts,  but  to  the  will  of 
God. 

II.  How  may  this  mind  be  gained  ? 
,— Christ's  suffering  in  the  fiesh  was 
intended  to  bring  closely  home  to  us 
His  kinship  with  us.  Suffering  is  the 
common  lot  of  humanity.  However 
we  separate  Christ  from  us  in  His 
Divine  nature,  we  must  keep  Him 
quite  near  in  His  human  nature. 
We  cannot  be  like  Him  tn  degree,  we 
can  be  in  hind.  How  can  the  mind  of 
Christ  be  gained  ?  We  must  have  the 
same  thought  of  God  that  Christ  had. 
That  only  comes  out  of  personal  rela- 
tions. We  must  have  the  same  thought 
of  self  that  Christ  had.  Self  second, 
God  first.  We  must  have  the  same 
thought  of  life  that  Christ  had.  Life, 
the  sphere  of  God's  mission.  We  must 
have  the  same  thought  of  suffering 
that  Christ  had.  The  testing  of  the 
full  obedience  and  trust. 

III.  How  will  this  '*  mind  "  practi- 
cally help  us  ? — See  how  it  will  make 
us  soul-strong  (1)  in  cases  of  bodily 
depression ;  (2)  in  those  changes  that 
involve  suffering ;  (3)  in  perplexed, 
anxious  times;  (4)  when  called  to 
part  with  beloved  friends.  We  might 
cover  all  human  woes,  and  show  how 
the  medicine  for  all  is  the  "mind  of 
Christ "  ;  we  shall  only  cease  from  self 
as  we  can  get  it.  It  is  the  uplifted 
face  of  the  Son  to  the  Father,  and  the 
trembling  cry  from  the  bitter  cross — 
"As  Thou  wilt."  But  neither  Christ, 
nor  we,  can  ever  feel  it,  or  ever  say  it, 
until  our  souls  get  a  vision  of  the 
Father's  hands.  All  is  well  then.  We 
can  suffer  and  be  strong. 

Ver.  6.  Preaching  to  the  Bead. — 
Having  just  spoken  of  Christ  as  the 
judge  of  the  living  and  the  dead,  he  now 
affirms  that  the  dead — those  who  are 
now  dead — will  be  judged  according 
to  men  in  the  flesh ;  that  is,  as  those 
now  Uving  will  be  judged.  But  to 
those  now  living  the  gospel  has  been 
preached.  They  have  heard  of  the 
redemption  provided  for  them  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  have,  therefore,  been  placed 

136  .    ,       . 


in  the  most  favourable  circumstances 
for  preparing  for  the  judgment,  and 
escaping  final  condemnation.  Is  this 
the  case  also  with  the  dead  ?  with  the 
heathen  world,  who,  indeed,  ran  to  all 
kinds  of  excess  in  sin,  but  never  had 
the  light  of  revelation  %  The  apostle 
answers  in  the  affirmative,  for  the 
gospel  was  preached  to  them  also  ;  for 
when  Christ,  in  His  disembodied  spirit, 
went  into  Hades,  He  proclaimed  to 
them  the  good  tidings  of  salvation,  and 
offered  to  them  deliverance  from  their 
prison,  and  a  title  to  eternal  life.  St. 
Peter  goes  back  to  the  former  passage 
(chap.  iii.  1 8),  and  re-affirms  the  fact  of 
Christ's  preaching  to  the  inhabitants 
of  the  unseen  world ;  and  further,  he 
affirms  the  object  of  the  preaching, 
that  they,  being  judged  as  having 
merited  death,  might,  notwithstanding, 
live  as  regards  the  spirit.  St.  Paul 
affirms,  "  The  body  is  dead  because  of 
sin  ;  but  the  spirit  is  life  because  of 
righteousness  "  (Rom.  viii.  10),  meaning 
that  the  body,  even  of  a  Christian,  dies 
on  account  of  sin,  but  that  the  spirit 
lives  because  of  the  righteousness  it  has 
obtained  through*  Christ.  Even  so 
have  all  past  generations  died,  whilst 
the  antediluvians  especially,  and  others 
who  died  in  a  state  of  alienation  from 
God,  were  judged  to  imprisonment  in 
Hades,  until  Christ  came  and  offered 
them  salvation.  If  any  of  them  ac- 
cepted it — and  perhaps  many  of  them 
did — they  already  live  in  the  spirit, 
having  entered  upon  a  state  of  blessed- 
ness which  Christ  prepared  even  for 
them. — Thornley  Smith. 

The  Dead  and  the  Living. — The  dead 
here,  contrasted  with  the  living,  must 
naturally  mean  those  who  were  in  the 
state  of  the  dead  when  this  message 
came  to  them.  It  sounds  like  an  un- 
expected and  mysterious  extension  of 
the  gospel  message,  so  that  not  living 
men  alone,  but  the  departed  also,  came 
directly  within  the  range  of  its  pro- 
clamation. The  change  was  to  affect 
their  state,  not  in  the  sight  of  men  but 
of  God  alone.  The  men  in  the  days  of 
Noah,  the  dwellers  in  the  cities,  of  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER.  chai>.  iv. 


plain,  the  Egyptian  host,  the  Canaanite  ment  in  the  early  Church  which 
armies,  to  the  eye  of  men  were  all  materially  helps  in  the  understanding 
swept  away  in  one  indiscriminate  of  this  difficult  verse.  When  the 
judgment.  Yet  in  each  case  there  visible  coming  of  Christ  was  daily  ex- 
may  have  been  a  secret  and  powerful  pected,  those  seemed  to  be  placed  at 
work  of  repentance,  by  which  a  grave  disadvantage  who  were  taken 
remnant  turned  to  God  in  the  hour  of  away  by  death  before  He  came.  In 
calamity  and  desolation.  To  all  such  this  way  Christians  mourned  over  their 
the  message  of  mercy  might  come,  dead  fellow-Christians,  as  having  missed 
when  our  Lord,  in  His  separate  spirit,  the  great  Christian  hope  and  privilege, 
preached  to  the  dead,  to  the  spirits  in  St.  Peter  intends  to  comfort  such  dis- 
prison ;  and  the  destined  result  was  tressed  souls.  He  is  speaking  of  dead 
attained,  "  that  they  might  live  accord-  Christians  and  living  Christians.  He 
ing  to  God  in  the  spirit,"  or  gain  a  firm  bids  the  troubled  ones  be  quite  sure  that 
hold  of  that  Saviour  and  His  finished  as  the  gospel  was  preached  to  their 
sacrifice,  on  whom,  as  the  promised  dead  friends,  and  they  found  the 
seed  of  the  woman,  with  a  dim  and  eternal  life  through  it,  they  do  live, 
starlight  faith  they  had  learned  to  put  according  to  God's  thought  for  them, 
their  trust  in  the  hour  of  judgment,  that  very  spiritual  life  into  which  we 
when  all  their  refuges  of  lies  were  all  are  to  be  brought  at  Christ's 
swept  away. — Birks.  coming,    though,   in    the   ordering    of 

God's  providence,  they  had  died.     The 

Alive  and  Dead. — The   remarkable  mistakes    in   apprehending   both   this 

expression  used  by  St.  Paul  in  2  Thess.  and  the  previous   passage   arise  from 

iv.   15,  "We  that  are  alive,  that  are  our  putting  our  modern  ideas  into  St. 

left  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  shall  Peter's   mind,    instead   of   simply   en- 

in  no  wise  precede  them  that  are  fallen  deavouring  to  discover   what  actually 

asleep,"   indicates   a   prevailing  senti-  was  in  his  mind. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7— IL 

Immediate  Duty  in  Relation  to  Christian  Graces  and  Christian  Gifts. — As  the 
apostle  is  directly  addressing  persecuted  and  imperilled  Christians — men  whose 
lives  were  in  danger  on  account  of  their  steadfast  loyalty  to  Christ — we  must 
understand  him  as  adapting  his  persuasions  to  their  particular  thoughts  and 
fears.  There  is  an  end  to  all  things.  There  is  an  end  to  sufiering  in  the  flesh. 
That  end  may  be  martyrdom — it  is  in  some  cases.  That  end  may  be  death — it  is 
in  all  cases ;  and  the  uncertainty  of  death  is  a  constant  persuasion  to  energy 
and  persistency.  "  Be  ye  always  ready."  It  may  be  true  that  the  early 
Christians  anticipated  the  end  of  their  sufferings  in  Christ's  coming  rather  than 
in  death,  and  that  we  have  learned  to  see  death  as  Christ's  coming  ;  but  the  fact 
remains,  whatever  may  be  the  forms  under  which  it  is  presented,  that  whosoever 
sufiers  in  well-doing,  suffers  but  for  a  time,  and  he  never  knows  any  day  how 
near  the  end  of  his  sufferings  may  be.  He  may  find  cheer  in  the  thought  of 
that  uncertainty.  He  may  be  inspired  to  do  and  suffer  well  by  that  uncertainty. 
He  ought  to  be  full  of  supreme  anxiety  to  make  the  very  best  of  the  "  little  while  " 
of  possibiHties  that  is  given  to  him.  St.  Peter  urges  upon  these  persecuted 
Christians  that  they  ought  to  be — 

I.  Nourishing  all  Christian  graces. — The  moderation  of  a  careful  self-restraint 
and  self -management  needs  to  be  cultivated  and  exercised.  "  Be  ye  therefore 
sober."  The  term  implies  the  harmony  of  affections  and  desires  with  reason, 
and  the  due  control  of  passions.  Perhaps  the  idea  prominent  in  the  apostle's 
mind  was  that  the  last  days — as  he  imagined  them  to  be — would  be  full  of  com- 

137 


€HAP.  IV.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I  PETER. 


motions,  surprises,  and  calamities,  occasioning  great  alarm  and  distress.  It 
should  be  characteristic  of  the  Christians  that  they  preserved  their  calmness 
at  such  times,  "in  their  patience  possessing  their  souls."  Watchfulness  of 
themselves  should  be  joined  with  prayer.  Lit.  **be  sober  unto  prayers" 
(vpoo-evxas)'  Recalling  our  Lord's  words  in  Gethsemane,  "  Watch  and  pray,  that 
ye  enter  not  into  temptation."  "  Men  are  to  be  sober  with  a  view  to  prayer. 
Desires  of  all  kinds,  above  all,  those  of  man's  lower  nature,  are  fatal  to  the 
energy,  and  therefore  to  the  efficacy,  of  prayer."  "  There  can  be  no  preparation 
for  the  duty  of  prayer  when  the  mind  is  absorbed  either  in  the  pursuit  of 
pleasure  or  in  the  pursuit  of  riches,  or  even  in  the  pursuit  of  the  arts  and 
sciences.  He  only  can  bow  the  knee  in  a  right  spirit,  and  hold  real  fellowship 
with  God,  who  is  able  to  throw  off  all  temporal  affairs  like  a  loose  garment, 
and,  free  from  distracting  thoughts,  at  once  address  himself  to  his  Father  who 
is  in  heaven."  The  grace  of  which  Christians  in  all  ages  need  to  be  most 
anxious,  the  grace  which  they  should  most  diligently  and  experimentally 
cultivate,  is  the  grace  of  charity,  using  that  term  in  the  sense  of  love  to  another 
finding  daily  expression  in  service  one  of  another.  "  And  above  all  things — as 
the  chief  and  all-essential  thing — having  your  love  toward  one  another  intense, 
because  love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins."  There  was  special  need  of  culti- 
vating this  mutual  patience  and  sympathy  and  helpfulness  of  brotherly  love  in 
times  of  peril  and  persecution.  It  is  an  important  point  of  St.  Peter's  advice 
that  he  sees  in  this  cultivated  and  freely  exercised  brotherly  love  the  one 
thing  that  can  master  the  misunderstandings,  and  prejudices,  and  estrange- 
ments that  inevitably  come  up  in  all  associations  of  frail  and  imperfect  men. 
Christian  love  can  cover,  correct,  or  remove  these  evils.  Hospitality  is  a 
Christian  virtue  which  at  a  pecuHar  time,  and  under  particular  circumstances, 
found  befitting  expression  for  the  brotherly  love.  Jewish  Christians  scattered 
abroad  would  be  very  dependent  on  the  kindness  of  Jewish  Christians  in  the 
countries  they  visited,  or  resided  in.  Hospitality  is  still  a  Christian  grace  that 
should  be  cultivated  and  exercised,  but  it  must  find  expression  within  the  limita- 
tions and  conditions  of  modern  civilised  life. 

II.  Exercising  all  Christian  gifts. — "  According  as  each  hath  received  a  gift, 
ministering  it  among  yourselves,  as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace  of  God." 
The  apostles  thought  of  the  bestowment  and  sealing  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as 
including  the  imparting  to  the  believer  of  some  special  gift,  or  ability,  which  he 
was  to  use  for  the  edification  of  his  fellow-believers.  Every  converted  man 
is  an  endowed  man,  placed  under  the  responsibility  of  a  trust.  His  gift  is 
nothing  for  him  to  glory  in  or  boast  over,  it  is  his  possibility  of  service ;  whatever 
it  is,  it  is  to  be  cultured  into  efficiency,  and  exercised  with  all  wisdom,  prudence, 
and  energy.  "All  gifts  involve  reponsibilities,  yet  it  is  an  honour  to  possess 
them,  and  if  we  have  also  grace  to  employ  them  aright,  they  will  be  doubled  to 
us  in  a  future  life."  The  gifts  are  classified  by  St.  Peter  under  two  heads — 
1.  Speaking  gifts.  2.  Ministering  gifts.  Gifts  relating  to  the  tongue.  Gifts 
relating  to  the  hand,  or  visiting  the  sick  and  needy,  teaching  children,  helping 
those  in  trouble,  etc.  And  in  exercising  our  gifts  it  is  important  to  be  reminded 
that  there  is  no  absolute  standard  by  which  the  exercise  must  be  judged ;  each 
must  minister  his  own  gifts,  in  his  own  way,  "  as  of  the  ability  that  God  giveth." 
No  man  of  them  must  judge  his  brother.  This  supreme  anxiety  should  possess 
them  all,  that  they  should  not  serve  themselves  in  the  use  of  their  gift,  nor  even 
serve  others  only  ;  they  must  keep,  as  the  one  inspiring  idea  in  the  exercise  of  all 
gifts,  that  they  should  glorify  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  whose  name  they  bore, 
and  whose  servants  they  were.  "  We  are  often  actuated  in  our  Church  life 
by  personal  motives,  seeking  our  own  honour,  and  anxious  to  obtain  the  praise 
of  men ;  and  sometimes  we  are  actuated  by  mixed  motives,  having  God's  glory 

138  ,  . 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER.  chap.  iv. 


partly  in  view,  but  not  losing  sight  of  our  own.  When  our  motives  are 
thoroughly  purified,  and  we  learn  to  live  and  act  only  for  the  Divine  glory,  how 
lofty  will  be  our  piety,  and  how  transparent  our  character  and  our  lives " 
(Thornley  Smith). 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  7.  The  End  Then  and  the  End  Watching  for  the  Advent. — It  must 

Now. — 1.    In  what  sense  was  it  true  be  held  as  a  first  principle  that,  ever 

then,  that  "  the  end  of  all  things  was  since  the  appearing  of  Christ,  there  is 

at  hand"?      In  the  widest  and  most  nothing  left  to  the  faithful  but,  with 

literal  sense  that  the  expression  will  wakeful  minds,  to  be  always  intent  on 

bear,  it  was  not  true,  for  upwards  of  His  second  advent. — Calvin. 
eighteen  centuries  have  passed  away, 

and  the  end  has  not  yet  come.     "  Of  Yer.   7.  The  End  of  All  Things. — 

that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man."  Respecting  the  transactions  of  the  last 

The  ^'ecise  joe?*iocZ  of  the  final  judgment  day,  many  entertain  the  view  that  a 

was  one  of  those  mysteries  which  even  moment  will  come  when  the  present 

St.  John,  in  the  Apocalypse,  did  not  order  of  things  will  abruptly  terminate, 

unfold.     Is  it  surprising,  then,  if  the  to  be  followed  by  a  general  destruction 

apostle  supposed  that  the  end  of  all  of   the  present  material   order.      The 

things  was  nearer  than  it  really  was?  prophetic  language  used  in  reference 

Some  think  he  referred  to  the  end  of  to  those  transactions,  and  the   poetic 

that  age — to  the  end  of  the  Jewish  dis-  garb  in  which  they  are  couched,  have 

pensation.     Some  think  he  meant  the  tended  to  nourish  such  a  conception  ; 

end  of  all  these  things  is  at  hand — the  but  the  true  end  of  things  is  not  an 

follies  of  the  wicked,  and  the  persecu-  abrupt  suspension  of  their  functions, 

tions  of  the  righteous.     Death  would  but  a  completion — a  perfect  finish — of 

soon  put  an  end  to  both,  and  all  would  the    ideal    purposes   for   which   these 

soon  be  called  before  the  Judge.     2.  In  materials  were  created.      Moral  ends 

what  sense  is  it  true  now  ?      We  are  are  the  highest  ideals  of  all  things  and 

living  in  the  nineteenth  century  of  the  all    beings.       To   their   fulfilment   we 

Christian  era;  is  the  end  of  it  approach-  must    look   for   the   terminus  of    the 

ing  ?    or    is   an   end    of    the    present  railway  of  time,  and  not  exclusively  to 

dispensation  near  ?     Some  interpreters  their   physical    constitution,    although 

of  prophecy  believe  that  the  manifesta-  the  movement  may  be  conterminous  in 

tion  of  Christ  from  heaven  is  at  hand,  both.      Human  life  is  the  highest  of 

when  He  will  raise  the  bodies  of  the  all  purposes,  and  fitted  to  accomplish 

sainted   dead,  change   those   that   are  the  highest  and  most  definite  ends.     Its 

alive,    and   commence   His   millennial  course  has  run  for  thousands  of  years, 

reign  on  the  earth.     The  conception  is  but,  having  regard  to  the  regeneration 

a  grand  one,  and  possibly  it  may  be  of  the  whole  race,  we  do  not  see  the 

realised ;    but  the   personal   reign   of  end  of   the   present  order  very  near. 

Christ  on  the  earthy  as  the  earth  is  at  Nevertheless,    it    is   certain,    and   the 

present     constituted,    is    difficult    to  fact  must  have  its   place  among  the 

imagine ;  nor  does  the  language  of  any  subjects  of  contemplation.    If,  however, 

of  the  apostles  teach  it.      When  He  we  think  of   the  duration  of   human 

comes  the  saints  are  to  be  caught  up  life,  and  the  uncertainty  thereof,  to  us 

to  meet  Him  in  the  air,  and  they  are  the  "  end   of  all    things  is  at   hand." 

to  live  and  reign  with  Him  a  thousand  When  this  life  is  over,  it  will  be  like 

years ;  but  it  is  nowhere  said  that  this  the  final  dissolution  of  the  universe  : 

will  be  on  the  earth.     We  cannot,  how-  we   shall   have   none   of    the    present 

ever,  affirm  positively  that  these  events  interest  in  it.     Our  course  will  soon  be 

are  nigh. — Thornley  Smith.  at  an  end.     There  is  but  a  step  between 

139 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER 


us  and  the  grave.  The  contemplation 
of  such  a  serious  step  demands  soberness, 
with  watching  and  prayer.  "Be  ye 
ready,"  is  the  Master's  call ;  to  which 
we  ought  to  answer,  Ready^  Lord. 

I.  A  grave  crisis. — "  The  end  of  all 
things  is  at  hand."  There  is  a  terminus 
in  view  towards  which  all  things  con- 
verge. There  are  no  such  things  as 
*'  eternal  rounds  "  for  finite  creatures, 
but  one  straight  course,  with  a  sharply 
defined  beginning  and  ending.  In 
order  to  take  a  general  view  of  the 
subject,  we  notice  four  particulars  or 
departments  of  God's  works  which  are 
daily  moving  towards  a  finale.  1. 
Human  life.  The  contemplation  of 
the  end  of  our  present  life  ought  to 
cause  no  regret.  Time  and  facilities 
enough  will  be  granted  to  every  man 
to  work  out  the  ideal  manhood  on 
which  his  whole  life  is  based.  Time 
wasted,  and  circumstances  frittered 
away,  will  cause  sorrow ;  but  the 
improvement  of  time  and  the  right 
use  of  opportunities  will  bear  a  peace- 
able fruit.  Life  is  a  germ,  to  be 
developed  day  by  day,  and  when  Death 
puts  in  the  sickle,  the  abundant  harvest 
should  amply  repay  the  trouble  of 
sowing.  He  who  builds  up  character 
according  to  the  Divine  model  will  lay  in 
^eaven  the  topmost  stone,  with  "grace, 
grace  unto  it."  It  is  necessary  to  keep 
the  end  in  view,  to  avoid  the  waste 
of  time  and  the  abuse  of  talent.  A 
life  in  earnest  will  bring  death  in  peace. 
2.  Moral  means.  Within  a  definite 
period,  either  long  or  short,  the  founda- 
tions of  faith  must  be  laid,  obedience 
to  God  rendered,  service  to  mankind 
given,  and  a  general  assimilation  of 
purpose  to  the  nature  and  tendency  of 
the  gospel  made.  It  is  a  great  work, 
and  must  be  accomplished  within  its 
own  period.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot 
comprehend  eternity,  or  know  all  the 
ultimate  purposes  of  God;  but  those 
who  have  abundant  opportunities  for 
repentance  and  faith  now,  cannot 
expect  a  period  of  probation  hereafter. 
The  offer  of  mercy  through  Jesus 
Christ  is  made  within  its  own  term, 
and  the  gospel  will  utter  its  last  word 

140  ,    . 


to  every  sinner  in  this  world.  Are 
there  more  effective  means  beyond 
death — means  that  will  be  more  certain 
to  produce  reformation?  In  the 
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus 
there  are  these  words :  "  If  they  hear 
not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded  if  one  rise 
from  the  dead."  Take  a  more  emphatic 
answer  from  the  parable  of  the  barren 
fig-tree  :  "  Lord,  let  it  alone  this  year 
also,  till  I  shall  dig  about  it,  and  dung  it; 
and  if  it  bear  fruit  thenceforth,  well\  but 
if  not,  thou  shalt  cut  it  down."  There 
is  a  time  set,  and  means  ordained  for  se- 
curing the  peace  of  God,  and  our  obvious 
duty  is  to  "  take  the  tide  at  the  flood." 

3.  The  course  of  nature.  The  heavens 
and  the  earth  shall  pass  away.  There 
are  material  evidences  to  show  this. 
We  do  not  build  our  faith  on  scientific 
truths,  but  we  receive  them  in  corro- 
boration of  the  teaching  of  the  Book. 
Nature's  course,  though  long,  is  ter- 
minable. Suns,  moons,  stars,  and  the 
earth  will  one  day  declare.  We  have 
finished  our  task.    A  graphic- description 

of  that  day  is  given  by  St.  Peter  in 
the  second  epistle  and  the  third  chapter. 
After  reading  these  words,  the  one 
impression  left  on  our  mind  is,  that 
the  eternal  God  has  created  all  things 
for  definite  purposes  in  connection  with 
the  life  and  salvation  of  the  human  race; 
and  the  call  is  to  prayer  and  to  diligence. 

4.  Moral  administration.  The  course 
of  sin  will  be  arrested,  and  every 
discordant  note  will  cease.  To-day,  sin 
meets  with  a  series  of  checks,  but  then, 
a  complete  annihilation.  This  will 
necessitate  a  change  in  many  depart- 
ments of  moral  government.  The 
mediation  of  the  Saviour  will  cease  in 
its  intercessory  character.  The  day  of 
forgiveness  will  end.  The  unclean  will 
remain  so,  and  the  regenerate  will 
rise  to  a  state  of  perfection.  The  whole 
gospel  dispensation  will  advance  from 
its  preparatory  stages  to  the  final  con- 
dition of  harmony  and  beauty  in  God 
the  Father.  This  will  take  place  after 
the  resurrection  and  the  last  judgment. 
"  And  when  all  things  have  been  sub- 
jected unto  Him,  then  shall  the  Son  also 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  IV. 


himself  be  subjected  to  Him  that  did 
subject  all  things  unto  Him,  that  God 
may  be  all  in  all."  Seeing  that  things, 
material  and  moral,  are  working  towards 
that  grave  crisis,  we  ought  to  awake 
out  of  sleep,  for  our  salvation  is  nearer 
than  when  we  believed. 

II.  An  earnest  exhortation. — "Be 
ye  therefore  sober,  and  watch  unto 
prayer."  The  end  must  be  in  view, 
that  the  means  appointed  for  its 
attainment  may  find  a  legitimate  place 
in  the  economy  of  human  life.  This 
reminds  us  of  a  motto  which  a  gentle- 
man had  inscribed  over  every  door  in 
his  house  :  "  Whatever  you  do,  consider 
.the  end."  1.  Seriousness.  To  be  sober- 
minded  is  to  look  at  human  life  in  all 
its  bearings  and  responsibilities.  Men 
are  liable  to  several  kinds  of  intoxica- 
tion, and  there  are  many  drunken,  but 
not  with  alcohol.  Some  are  intoxicated 
with  pride,  others  with  pleasure,  others 
with  wealth,  and  many  with  imaginary 
greatness.  St.  Peter  exhorts  us  in  the 
text  to  avoid  frivolity.  Trifling  with 
serious  matters  is  a  grave  offence 
against  morality,  as  well  as  an  injury 
to  the  soul.  2.  Watchfulness.  Care 
must  be  taken  to  conserve  the  good  we 
possess,  and  to  entrench  ourselves  firmly 
in  every  position  we  occupy.  There  must 
be  no  "unguarded  hours  "  in  the  Christ- 
ian's year.  There  may  be  enough 
courage  to  fight  sin  in  open  battle,  where 
there  is  not  enough  caution  to  retain 
the  advantage.  Our  Saviour  exhorts 
us  to  "  watch  and  pray."  The  roaring 
lion  is  about,  seeking  us  for  his  prey. 
Watchfulness  is  the  compass  by  which 
the  vessel  is  steered.  Thousands  have 
made  a  shipwreck  of  the  faith  because 
they  neglected  to  look  at  the  compass. 
Let  us  watch  our  very  thoughts,  fearing 
they  should  be  vain.  Let  us  watch 
every  emotion  of  the  heart,  fearing 
they  are  sinful.  Let  us  watch  every 
step  of  the  foot,  fearing  it  may  be 
outside  the  narrow  path.  Watch  all 
your  moments,  and  at  all  times. 
Temptation  is  your  greatest  foe ;  watch 
against  your  besetting  sin.  Keep 
yourselves  spotless  from  the  world. 
"Love    not    the    world,    nor,"     etc. 


3.  Pray  erf ulness.  The  aspirations 
of  prayer  are  heavenward.  God  has 
promised  to  help  us.  Prayer  leads  on 
to  the  grand  end  of  moral  perfection 
and  eternal  joy.  "  For  we  are  made 
partakers  of  Christ,  if  we  hold  the 
beginning  of  our  confidence  steadfast 
unto  the  end"  (Heb.  iii.  14).  Then 
pray  on.  Many  of  you  may  look  with 
fear  to  the  end.  You  are  not  confident 
that  yours  will  be  peace  and  joy.  It 
may  be  that  such  a  blessed  assurance  is 
not  given  to  most  of  the  saints  until  the 
time  comes.  But  one  thing  is  certain  : 
we  must  pray  on.  Prayer  leads  the 
way.  We  enter  on  holiness  by  prayer. 
We  secure  every  blessing  by  prayer, 
because  we  take  the  name  of  Jesus 
with  us  to  the  throne  of  mercy.  Prayer 
leans  on  His  breast.  "  Pray  without 
ceasing."  Brethren,  let  us  keep  the 
glorious  end  of  our  faith  in  view,  even 
the  salvation  of  our  souls.  We  need 
to  feel  the  coming  of  the  end  in  every 
service,  and  in  every  religious  exercise, 
as  the  sailor  sees  the  beacons  of  his 
native  land  coming  in  sight  when 
nearing  the  shore.  Bend  to  the  oar, 
and  pull  for  the  shore.  Watching  and 
praying  will  soon  be  over.  Look  to 
the  end  of  these,  for  there  you  will  see 
the  crown  and  the  Saviour. — Anon. 

Ver.  8.  The  Pre-eminence  of  Charity, 
— The  grace  of  charity  is  exalted  as 
the  highest  attainment  of  the  Christian 
life  by  St.  Paul,  St.  Peter,  and  St. 
John.  These  three  men  were  very 
different  from  each  other.  Each  was 
the  type  of  a  distinct  order  of  cha- 
racter. And  it  is  a  proof  that  the 
gospel  is  from  God,  and  that  the  sacred 
writings  are  inspired  from  a  single 
Divine  source,  that  personal  peculiar- 
ities are  not  placed  foremost  in  them, 
but  the  foremost  place  is  given  by 
each  to  a  grace  which  certainly  was 
not  the  characteristic  quality  of  all  the 
three.  Love  is  over  all  and  above  all, 
above  intellect,  freedom,  courage. 

I.  What  charity  is. — Charity  has 
become  identified  with  almsgiving. 
Love  is  appropriated  to  one  particular 
form  of  human  affection,  and  that  one 

HI 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC   C0MMEN2ARY:    I.  PETER. 


with  which  self  and  passion  mix  in- 
evitably. Philanthropy  is  a  word  too 
cold  and  negative.  Charity  may  be 
defined  as  the  desire  to  give,  and  the 
desire  to  bless.  1.  The  desire  to  give. 
Not  to  get  something,  but  to  give 
something.  The  mightier,  the  more 
irrepressible  this  yearning  to  give  is, 
the  more  truly  is  the  love  love. 
Sacrifice,  in  some  shape  or  other,  is  the 
impulse  of  love,  and  its  restlessness  is 
only  satisfied  and  only  gets  relief  in 
giving.  For  this,  in  truth,  is  God's 
own  love,  the  will  and  the  power  to 
give.  2.  The  desire  to  bless.  Even 
weak  and  spurious  love  desires  happi- 
ness of  some  kind  for  the  creatui-e  that 
it  loves.  What  we  call  philanthropy 
is  often  calm  and  cool — too  calm  and 
cool  to  waste  upon  it  the  name  of 
charity.  But  it  is  a  calm  and  cool 
desire  that  human  happiness  were 
possible.  It  is,  in  its  weak  way,  a 
desire  to  bless.  Now,  the  love  whereof 
the  Bible  speaks,  and  of  which  we 
have  but  one  perfect  personification — 
viz.,  in  the  Hfe  of  Christ — ^is  the  desire 
for  the  best  and  true  blessedness  of  the 
being  loved.  It  wishes  the  well-being 
of  the  whole  man — body,  soul,  and 
spirit ;  but  chiefly  spirit.  The  highest 
love  is  the  desire  to  make  men  good 
and  GodUke.  Concerning  this  charity, 
notice  (1)  It  is  characterised  as  fervent. 
Literally,  intense,  unremitting,  un- 
wearied. Fervent  charity — Christ's 
spirit — does  not  tire,  and  cannot  be 
worn  out ;  it  loves  its  enemies,  and 
does  good  to  them  that  hate  it.  (2)  It 
is  capable  of  being  cultivated.  We 
assume  that,  simply  because  it  is  en- 
joined. How  shall  we  cultivate  it? 
(a)  Love  cannot  be  produced  by  a 
direct  action  of  the  soul  upon  itself. 
You  cannot  love  by  a  resolve  to  love. 
Efibrt  of  heart  is  followed  by  collapse. 
Excitement  is  followed  by  exhaustion. 
It  is  as  impossible  for  a  man  to  work 
himself  into  a  state  of  genuine,  fervent 
love  as  it  is  for  a  man  to  inspire  him- 
self, (b)  We  may,  however,  cultivate 
charity  by  doing  acts  which  love 
demands.  It  is  God's  merciful  law 
that    feelings  are  increased    by    acts 

142 


done  on  principle.  If  a  man  has  not 
the  feeling  in  its  warmth,  let  him  not 
wait  till  the  feeling  comes.  Let  him 
act  with  such  feeling  as  he  has ;  with 
a  cold  heart  if  he  has  not  got  a 
warm  one :  it  will  grow  warmer  while 
he  acts,  (c)  We  cultivate  Christian 
love  by  contemplating  the  love  of  God. 
Love  begets  love.  Love,  believed  in, 
produces  a  return  of  love ;  we  cannot 
love  because  we  must.  "  Must  "  kills 
love  ;  but  the  law  of  our  nature  is  that 
we  love  in  reply  to  love. 

II.  What  charity  does. — It  covereth 
a  multitude  of  sins.  But  whose  sins  ? 
Is  it  that  the  sins  of  the  charitable 
man  are  covered  by  his  charity  in  God's 
sight  ?  Or  is  it  the  sins  of  others  over 
which  charity  throws  a  mantle,  so  as 
not  to  see  them  ?  The  latter  must  be 
meant.  There  are  three  ways,  at 
least,  in  which  love  covers  sin.  1.  In 
refusing  to  see  small  faults.  2.  By 
making  large  allowances.  It  under- 
stands by  sympathy.  It  is  that 
glorious  nature  which  has  affinity  with 
good  under  all  forms,  and  loves  to  find 
it,  to  believe  in  it,  and  to  see  it.  Those 
with  such  natures — God's  rare  and 
best  ones — learn  to  make  allowances, 
not  from  weak  sentiment,  which  calls 
wrong  right,  but  from  that  heavenly 
charity  which  sees  right  lying  at  the 
root  of  wrong.  3.  By  tolerating  even 
intolerance.  Let  no  man  think  that 
he  can  be  tolerant  or  charitable  as  a 
matter  of  self-indulgence.  For  real 
charity  and  real  toleration  he  must  pay 
the  price. — F.  W.  Robertson, 

Ver.  IL  In  All  Things  Glorifying 
God. 

Apply  this  rule — 

I.  To  the  labours  of  the  understand- 
ing.— We  may  read  all  things,  and  yet 
read  as  God's  scholars;  drawing  even 
from  the  writings  of  those  who  thought 
but  of  evil,  or  at  least  were  utterly  care- 
less of  God,  a  food  for  holy  and  spiritual  v 
principles  to  be  nourished  with. 

II.  To  our  labours  of  charity,  or  our 
acts  of  kindness  to  our  neighbours. — If 
we  give  but  a  cup  of  cold  water  to  one 
of  the  humblest  of  our  brethren,  let  it 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  IV. 


be  done  for  Christ's  sake.  Too  often  our 
charity  is  very  unsanctified  ;  we  think 
of  our  suffering  brethren  only,  without 
remembering  who  it  is  that  puts  Him- 
self forward  in  their  persons  to  receive 
our  love,  and,  if  we  will  but  see  Him, 
to  take,  in  their  behalf,  the  office  of 
over-paying  all  that  we  can  do  to 
them.     Apply  this  rule — 

III.  To  all  our  more  general  conduct, 
the  things  which  do  not  come  under 
the  two  previous  divisions. — There  is 
no  real  goodness,  there  is  even  no  safety 
from  condemnation,  unless  we  glorify 
God  through  Jesus  Christ.  With 
regard  to  the  employment  of  our  time, 
the  exercise  of  our  bodily  faculties,  the 
government  of  our  tongues,  how  soon 
shall  we  be  satisfied,  and  into  how 
much  of  real  sin  shall  we  continually 
be  falling,  if  we  do  not,  in  all  these 
matters,  remember  that  we  are  but 
stewards  of  God's  manifold  bounties ; 
that  our  time,  our  bodies,  and  the 
wonderful  faculty  of  speech,  were  all 
only  lent  us  to  improve  them — lent  us 
to  glorify  Him  who  gave  them. — 
T.  Arnold,  D.D. 

God  Seeks  His  Own  Glm^y. — The  glory 
of  God,  or  the  showing  forth  of  His 
nature  and  attributes,  is  necessarily  His 
own  chief  end  in  al  1  His  works  of  creation 
and  providence.  It  is  so  especially  in  the 
wondrous  constitution  of  the  Church, 
and  must  therefore  be  her  chief  end 
also  in  all  the  service  that  she  renders 
to  His  name.  And  as  God's  love  to 
her  flows  ever  in  the  channel  of  Christ's 
mediation,  and  Christ's  presence  with 
her  by  His  word  and  spirit  is  the  sole 
cause  of  her  Hfe  and  activity,  so,  like- 
wise, it  is  "through  Jesus  Christ" 
that  her  answering  tribute  of  praise 
reaches  the  eternal  throne. — Lillie. 

Ver.  12.  Tlie  Vindication  of  Suffenng. 
— Suffering  fills  a  large  place  in  our 
present  system.  It  is  not  an  accident, 
it  enters  into  every  life.  A  great 
amount  of  suffering  may  be  traced  to 
human  ignorance  and  guilt,  and  this 
will  gradually  disappear  in  proportion 
to   the  progress  of  truth   and  virtue. 


Still,   under   the   imperfections  which 
seem  inseparable  from  this  first  stage 
of  our  being,  a  great  amount  of  suffer- 
ing will  remain.     God  intends  that  we 
shall  suffer.     It  is  sometimes  said  that 
He  has  created  nothing  for  the  purpose 
of   giving   pain,    but   that  every   con- 
trivance in  the  system  has  good  for  its 
object.       All    this    is    true,     and    a 
beautiful  illustration  of  kind  purpose 
in  the  Creator.      But  it  is  also  true 
that  every  organ  of  the  body,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  delicacy  of  its  structure, 
and  its  susceptibility  to  influences  from 
abroad,  becomes  an  inlet  of  acute  pain. 
And  how  much  pain  comes  from  the 
spirit,  and  from  the  very  powers  and 
affections  which  make  the  glory  of  our 
nature !        Suffering      comes     to      us 
through  and  from  our  whole  nature. 
It  cannot  be  winked  out  of  sight.     It 
cannot   be  thrust   into  a  subordinate 
place  in  the  picture  of  human  life.     It 
is  the  chief  burden  of  history.     It  is 
the  solemn  theme  of  one  of  the  highest 
departments  of   literature,    the  tragic 
drama.     It  gives  to  fictions  their  deep 
interest.     It    wails   through   much  of 
our  poetry.     A  large  part  of  human 
vocations  are  intended  to  shut  up  some 
of  its  avenues.     It  has  left  traces  on 
every  human  countenance  over  which 
years  have  passed.     It  is,  to  not  a  few, 
the  most  vivid  recollection  of  life.     We 
are  created  with  a  susceptibility  of  pain, 
and  severe  pain.     This  is  a  part  of  our 
nature,  as  truly  as  our  susceptibility  of 
enjoyment.       God   has    implanted    it, 
and  has  thus  opened  in  the  very  centre 
of  our  being  a  fountain  of  suffering. 
One  of  the  most  common  indications  of 
Divine  benevolence  is  found  in  the  fact 
that,  much  as  men  suffer,  they  enjoy 
more.     We   are  told   that  there  is  a 
great   balance    of  pleasure  over  pain, 
and  that  it  is  by  what  prevails  in  a 
system    that   we    must   judge    of    its 
author      There  is  a  grand  vindication 
of  God's  benevolence,  not  reaching,  in- 
deed,  to  every  case  of  suffering,  not 
broad    enough    to    cover    the    whole 
ground  of  human  experience,  but  still 
so    comprehensive,    so    sublime,    that 
what  remains  obscure  would  be  turned 

143 


CHAP.  IV.; 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


into  light,  could  all  its  connections  be 
discerned.  This  is  found  in  the  truth 
that  benevolence  has  a  higher  aim  than 
to  bestow  enjoyment ;  and  this  requires 
suffering  in  order  to  be  gained.  As 
long  as  we  narrow  our  view  of  benevo- 
lence, and  see  in  it  only  a  disposition 
to  bestow  pleasure,  so  long  Kf e  will  be 
a  mystery ;  for  pleasure  is  plainly  not 
its  great  end.  Amidst  the  selfish  and 
animal  principles  of  our  nature,  there 
is  an  awful  power,  a  sense  of  right, 
a  voice  which  speaks  of  duty,  an 
idea  grander  than  the  largest  personal 
interest — the  idea  of  excellence,  of 
perfection.  Here  is  the  seal  of  Divinity 
on  us ;  here  the  sign  of  our  descent 
from  God.  It  is  in  this  gift  that  we 
see  the  benevolence  of  God.  It  is  in 
writing  this  inward  law  on  the  heart, 
it  is  in  giving  us  the  conception  of 
moral  goodness,  and  the  power  to 
strive  after  it,  the  power  of  self -conflict 
and  self-denial,  of  surrendering  pleasure 
to  duty,  and  of  suffering  for  the  right, 
the  true,  and  the  good — it  is  in  thus 
enduing  us,  and  not  in  giving  us 
capacities  of  pleasure,  that  God's  good- 
ness shines ;  and  of  consequence,  what- 
ever gives  a  field,  and  excitement,  and 
exercise,  and  strength,  and  dignity  to 
these  principles  of  our  nature,  is  the 
highest  manifestation  of  benevolence. 
The  end  of  our  being  is  to  educate, 
bring  out,  and  perfect,  the  Divine 
principles  of  our  nature.  We  were 
made,  and  are  upheld  in  life  for  this 
as  our  great  end,  that  we  may  be  true 
to  the  principle  of  duty  within  us,  that 
we  may  put  down  all  desire  and 
appetite  beneath  the  inward  law ;  that 
we  may  enthrone  God,  the  infinitely 
perfect  Father,  in  our  souls;  that  we 
may  count  all  things  as  dross,  in  com- 
parison with  sanctity  of  heart  and 
life ;  that  we  may  hunger  and  thirst 
for  righteousness  more  than  for  daily 
food  j  that  we  may  resolutely  and 
honestly  seek  for  and  communicate 
truth ;  that  disinterested  love  and  im- 
partial justice  may  triumph  over  every 
motion  of   selfishness,   and  every  ten- 


dency to  wrong-doing ;  in  a  word,  that 
our  whole  lives,  labours,  conversation 
may  express  and  strengthen  reverence 
for  ourselves,  for  our  fellow-creatiu-es, 
and  above  all  for  God.  Such  is  the 
good  for  which  we  were  made  ;  and  in 
order  to  this  triumph  of  virtuous  and 
religious  principles,  we  are  exposed  to 
temptation,  hardship,  pain.  Is  suffer- 
ing, then,  inconsistent  with  God's  love  ? 
I  might  show  how  suffering  ministers 
to  human  excellence  ;  how  it  calls  forth 
the  magnanimous  and  sublime  virtues, 
and  at  the  same  time  nourishes  the 
tenderest,  sweetest  sympathies  of  our 
nature ;  how  it  raises  us  to  energy,  and 
to  the  consciousness  of  our  powers,  and 
at  the  same  time  infuses  the  meekest 
dependence  on  God  ;  how  it  stimulates 
toil  for  the  goods  of  this  world,  and  at 
the  same  time  weans  us  from  it,  and 
lifts  us  above  it.  I  do  not,  then,  doubt 
God's  beneficence  on  account  of  the 
sorrows  and  pains  of  life. — W.  E, 
Charming,  D.D. 

The  Mystery  of  Pain. — We  must 
accept  pain  as  a  fact  existing  by  a 
deep  necessity,  having  its  root  in  the 
essential  order  of  the  world.  If  we 
are  to  understand  ifc,  we  must  learn  to 
look  on  it  with  different  eyes.  And 
does  not  a  different  thought  suggest 
itself  even  while  we  recognise  that  the 
others  fail  1  For  if  the  reason  and  the 
end  of  pain  lie  beyond  the  results 
that  have  been  mentioned,  then  they 
lie  beyond  the  individual.  Pain,  if  it 
exist  for  any  purpose,  and  have  any 
end  or  use — and  of  this  what  sufferer 
can  endure  to  doubt  ? — must  have  some 
purpose  which  extends  beyond  the 
interests  of  the  person  who  is  called 
upon  to  bear  it.  For  the  ends  which 
have  been  mentioned  include  all  that 
concerns  the  individual  himself.  That 
which  surpasses  these  rises  into  a 
larger  than  the  individual  sphere. 
From  this  ground  it  becomes  evident 
again  that  to  know  the  secret  of  our 
pains  we  must  look  beyond  ourselves, 
— Howard  Hinton, 


144 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap.  IV. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—19. 

.  Christian  Suffering  No  Surprise. — The  burning  fire  is  the  symbol  of  afflictions 
and  persecutions.  The  mind  of  the  apostle  goes  back  once  more  to  those  afflictions 
which  the  Christians  of  the  Dispersion  were,  at  that  time,  called  to  endure 
(chap.  i.  6,  7,  ii.  19-21,  iii.  15-17).  All  who  profess  the  faith  in  Christ  must 
take  into  full  account  the  fact  that  only  "  through  much  tribulation "  can  any 
man  enter  the  kingdom. 

"  The  path  of  sorrow,  and  that  path  alone, 
Leads  to  the  place  where  sorrow  is  unknown." 

Christian  suffering  should  be  no  surprise  because — 

I.  It  is  needed  for  proving  us. — "  The  fiery  trial  cometh  upon  you  to  prove 
you."  That  is  not  precisely  the  same  thing  as  to  discipline  you.  The  cases  of 
Abraham,  Job,  and  the  Lord  Jesus,  show  that  proving  the  good,  by  suffering 
experiences,  is  the  condition  of  advance  in  spiritual  life  and  power.  The  poet 
"  learns  in  suffering  what  he  teaches  in  song."  And  the  Christian's  power  to 
serve  is  a  product  of  his  trying  experiences. 

II.  It  does  but  bring  us  into  the  line  of  Christ. — We  have  solved  the  mystery 
of  our  sufferings  when  we  have  solved  the  mystery  of  His.  "  Though  He  were 
a  son,  yet  learned  He  obedience  by  the  things  that  He  suffered."  He  was 
**  made  perfect  through  suffering  to  be  a  bringer-on  of  sons  to  glory."  Moral 
power  cannot  be  gained,  save  in  Christ's  way. 

III.  It  is  the  medium  for  conveying  special  grace  to  us  (ver.  14). — "The 
Spirit  of  glory  and  the  Spirit  of  God  resteth  upon  you."  These  afflictions  are  the 
special  agencies  of  the  Spirit,  and  signs  of  unusual  interest  in  you,  concern  for 
you,  and  purposes  for  you. 

IV.  It  is  best  seen  as  part  of  the  Divine  judgment  on  the  race. — Which  you 
are  bearing  vicariously,  in  order  that  you  may  be  ministers  of  the  Divine  mercy 
that  always  blends  with  judgment. 

V.  It  may  be  difficult  to  endure  these  afflictions  well. — "  The  righteous  is 
scarcely  saved."  You  must  put  your  whole  heart  and  effort  into  the  enduring, 
since  the  perils  are  so  extreme.  Life  well-nigh  masters  everybody,  with  its 
strain  and  stress.  Only  the  grace  of  God,  sanctifying  the  most  constant  and 
careful  watchfulness,  gets  even  the  righteous  man  through.  Christian  living 
is  no  easy  thing. 

VI.  Suffering  in  well-doing  can  only  be  borne  to  right  issues  when  there  is 
full  trust  in  God,  and  the  absolute  committal  of  ourselves  to  Him  in  well-doing. 
— "  In  the  acceptance  of  sufferings  as  being  according  to  the  will  of  God,  much 
more  is  meant  than  the  mere  submission  to  an  inevitable  destiny.  If  we  really 
think  of  pain  and  persecution  as  working  out  God's  will,  permitted  and  controlled 
by  Him,  we  know  that  that  will  is  righteous  and  loving,  planning  nothing  less 
than  our  completeness  in  holiness  (1  Thess.  iv.  3),  the  will  of  which  we  daily 
pray  that  it  may  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven  "  [Dean  Plumptre). 

^.  J^.  J/ason,  in  "  Ellicott's  Commentary,"  paraphrases  ver.  19  thus:  "Con- 
sider the  mildness  of  these  trials  compared  with  the  terrors  overhanging  the 
sinful.  Even  if  the  worst  should  come  to  the  worst,  and  you  must  die  a 
martyr's  death,  it  is  but  the  execution  of  God's  plan  for  you.  View  your  life  as 
a  deposit  lay  it  confidently  in  His  hands,  to  be  returned  to  you  again  when  the 
time  comes,  and  you  will  find  Him  faithful  to  what  a  Creator  ought  to  be." 
The  "  will  of  God,"  in  accordance  with  which  they  "  suffer,"  is  part  of  the  act  of 
creation.  The  term  "  faithful  Creator  "  contains  the  idea  that  the  act  of  creation 
mposes  duties  and  responsibilities  on  the  Creator.      In  the  Greek  the  words 

L  145 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


"in  well-doing"  are  made  emphatic  by  being  placed  last  in  the  sentence. 
Punishment  is  the  word  for  suftering  which  attends  on  wrong-doing.  Discipline 
is  the  word  for  suffering  which  comes  to  frail-doing.  Sanctifying  is  the  proper 
word  for  suffering  which  is  associated  with  well-doing. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Yers  15.  Busyhodies. — It  is  but  one 
word  in  the  original  (meaning),  as 
bishops  in  another's  diocese,  as  pryers 
into  other  men's  matters,  as  pragmatical 
persons  that  meddle  with  other  men's 
concernments,  without  cause  or  call. 
It  is  not  suffering  for  evil-doing,  but 
suffering  for  well-doing,  that  carries 
the  crown  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  It  is  not 
just,  but  unjust  suffering,  that  hath 
the  recompense  of  reward  annexed 
to  it  (1  Pet.  iii.  14,  iv.  14).  It  is  not 
sufferers  for  the  evil  of  sin,  nor  sufferers 
of  the  evil  of  sin  ;  but  sufferers  of  the 
evil  of  punishment,  for  the  avoiding  of 
the  evil  of  sin,  whose  cause  is  good. — 
Brooks. 

Bishops  of  Those  Without. — "Others, 
through  excess  of  zeal,  declaimed  aloud 
against   the    Pagans,    and    cast    their 
vices  in  their  teeth.     Their  more  sen- 
sible brethren  humorously  called  them 
"  bishops,"  or  "  overseers  of  those  who 
are  without  "  (Eenan).    Such  is,  indeed, 
the  meaning  of  the  droll  word  which 
St.    Peter    here    gives  :    except    that, 
instead  of  "  bishops  of  those  without," 
it    means    "  bishops    of    other    men's 
matters."      It    denotes    those    prj^ng 
and  self-important  people,  who  fancy 
they    can    set    everything    to    rights, 
and  that  everybody  they  come  across 
is     under     their     personal      jurisdic- 
tion.      Such   persons    would    tend    to 
make    Christianity    unpopular    among 
the  unbelievers,  and  in  case  of  persecu- 
tion  would   be   the    first    to  "suffer" 
(i.e.,  to  be  picked  out  for  martyrdom) ; 
and  while  flattering  themselves  for  the 
boldness  with  which  they  had  spoken 
out,  they  would   incur  St.  Peter's  cen- 
sure, and  their    martyrdom  would  be 
reckoned  no  martyrdom  by  the  Church. 
"  Cruel  mishaps,"  continues  M.  Penan, 
"  befell   them ;   and  the  wise  directors 
of  the  community,  so  far  from  extolling 

146 


them,  told  them  pretty  plainly  that  it 
did  but  serve  them  right." — A.  J. 
Mason,  M.A. 

Vers.  17-19.  The  Time  of  Visitation. 
— A  new  reason  is  here  introduced 
why  Christians  should  suffer  gladly  for 
their  Lord's  sake.  He  will  deliver 
them  from  the  terrible  judgments 
which  are  about  to  burst  on  the 
ungodly,  and  their  souls  will  find  rest 
in  God,  to  whom  they  commit  them- 
selves as  to  a  faithful  Creator. 

I.  The  visitation  of  judgment. — 1. 
Its  beginning.  When  St.  Peter  wrote, 
the  city  and  temple  of  Jerusalem  were 
still  standing,  but  were  threatened. 
The  coming  visitation  affected  believers 
as  discipline,  before  it  affected  the 
ungodly  as  judgment.  2.  Its  progress. 
"  What  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that 
obey  not  the  gospel  of  God."  If  the 
sons  are  chastised,  what  have  the  rebels 
to  expect?  Not  with  impunity  shall 
any  one,  on  any  grounds  whatever, 
disobey  the  gospel  of  God.  3.  Its 
results.  The  righteous  are  saved  with 
difficulty.  In  consequence  of  the 
severity  of  the  trial,  and  their  own 
weakness,  they  barely  escape  the  judg- 
ments of  the  Most  High  (illustrated  by 
the  haste  of  the  escape  of  the  Christians 
to  Pella).  The  ungodly  are  those  who 
care  not  for  God ;  sinners  are  those 
who  make  a  trade  of  sin.  What  will 
be  their  doom  ? 

II.  The  lesson  to  believers. — Drawn 
from  these  facts  :  1.  An  exhortation 
to  those  who  suffer  according  to  the 
will  of  God.  They  never  suffer  but 
when  God  wills,  and  He  will  not 
always  chide,  nor  lay  upon  them  more 
than  they  are  able  to  bear.  2.  What 
are  such  sufferers  to  do  ?  Commit  the 
keeping  of  their  souls  to  God,  and  put 
all  their  strength  into  well-doing.  3. 
The  encouragement  to  do  this  arises 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    1.   PETER. 


CHAP.  IV. 


from  the  fact  that  He  is  "  a  faithful 
Creator." — ThornUy  Smith. 

Suffering  a  Common  Experience. — 
All  Christians  are  not  tried  as  the 
Christians  to  whom  Peter  wrote — the 
Christians  at  the  close  of  the  Jewish 
dispensation  ;  but  all  Christians  meet 
with  afflictions,  and  meet  with  afflictions 
because  they  are  Christians ;  all  suffer, 
and  all  suffer  as  Christians.  We  must 
never  think  ill  of  a  cause  merely  because 


it  is  persecuted,  nor  indulge  dark 
thoughts  respecting  the  spiritual  state 
and  prospects  of  men  merely  because 
they  are  very  severely  afflicted.  The 
absence  of  trial  is  a  worse  sign  than 
what  we  may  be  disposed  to  think  the 
excess  of  trial.  It  is  not  exposure 
to  trial,  but  the  endurance  of  trial,  in 
*'  a  patient  continuance  in  well-doing," 
that  is  a  characteristic  mark  of  those 
who  obey  the  gospel  of  God. — Dr.  J. 
Brown. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  IV. 


Ver.  2.  Lawful  Pleasure. — Undoubtedly 
there  is  a  degree  of  natural  pleasure,  con- 
nected with  the  exercise  of  the  appetites, 
which  is  lawful.  But  it  is  very  obvious  that 
self  is  the  natural  man,  which,  in  always 
seeking  for  pleasure,  without  regarding 
either  its  nature  or  its  lawfulness,  has 
polluted  everything  here.  It  is  in  connection 
with  the  appetites  in  their  unsanctified  state 
that  w^e  find  one  of  the  strong  ties  which 
bind  man  to  his  idols,  and  which  subject  his 
proud  spirit.  This  strong  bond  must  be 
sundered.  No  one  can  be  acceptable  to  God 
who  does  not  crucify  and  reject  every  form 
of  attraction  and  pleasure  from  this  source 
which  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  inten- 
tions of  nature,  and  does  not  receive  the 
Divine  approbation  and  sanction. —  Upliam. 

Ver.  8.  ''Fervent.'' — Literally  intense,  un- 
remitting, unwearied.  Now,  there  is  a  feeble 
sentiment  which  wishes  well  to  all  so  long 
as  it  is  not  tempted  to  wish  them  ill,  which 
does  well  to  those  who  do  well  to  them. 
But  this,  being  mere  sentiment,  will  not  last. 
Ruffle  it,  and  it  becomes  vindictive.  In  con- 
trast with  that,  St.  Peter  calls  Christ's  spirit 
which  loves  those  who  hate  it,  "  fervent 
charity,"  which  does  not  tire,  and  cannot  be 
worn  out ;  which  loves  its  enemies,  and  does 
good  to  them  that  hate  it.  For  Christian 
love  is  not  the  dream  of  a  philosopher  sitting 
in  his  study,  and  benevolently  wishing  the 
world  were  better  than  it  is  ;  congratulating 
himself,  perhaps,  all  the  time  on  the 
superiority  shown  by  himself  over  other 
less  amiable  natures.  Injure  one  of  these 
beaming  sons  of  good-nature,  and  he  bears 
malice — deep,  unrelenting,  refusing  to  for- 
give. But  give  us  the  man  who,  instead  of 
retiring  to  some  small,  select  society,  or 
rather  association,  where  his  own  opinions 
shall  be  reflected,  can  mix  with  men  where 
his  sympathies  are  unmet,  and  his  tastes  are 
jarred,  and  his  views  traversed  at  every  turn, 
and  still  can  be  just,  and  gentle,  and  for- 
bearing.— F.  W.  Robertson. 


Ver.  9.  Eastern  Hospitality. — I  was  begin- 
ning to  make  my  meal  upon  the  food  we  had 
with  us,  when  in  came  nine  people,  each 
bearing  a  dish.  A  large  tray  was  raised  on 
the  rim  of  a  corn-sieve  placed  on  the  ground, 
in  the  centre  of  which  was  placed  a  tureen 
of  soup,  with  pieces  of  bread  around  it.  The 
stranger,  my  servant,  and  a  person  who 
seemed  to  be  the  head  man  of  the  village, 
sat  round  the  tray,  dipping  their  wooden 
spoons  or  fingers  into  each  dish  as  it  was 
placed  in  succession  before  them.  Of  the 
nine  dishes,  I  observed  three  were  soups.  I 
asked  why  this  was,  and  who  was  to  pay  for 
the  repast,  and  was  informed  it-  was  the 
custom  of  the  people,  strictly  enjoined  by 
their  religion,  that,  as  soon  as  a  stranger 
appears,  each  peasant  should  bring  his  dish, 
he  himself  remaining  to  partake  of  it  after 
the  stranger — a  sort  of  picnic,  of  which  the 
stranger  partakes  without  contributing.  The 
hospitality  extends  to  everything  he  re- 
quires ;  his  horse  is  fed,  and  wood  is  brought 
for  his  fire,  each  inhabitant  feeling  honoured 
by  offering  something.  This  custom  ac- 
counts for  the  frequent  recurrence  of  the 
same  dish,  as  no  one  knows  what  his  neigh- 
bour will  contribute.  Towards  a  Turkish 
guest  this  practice  is  perfectly  disinterested, 
but  from  an  European  they  may  have 
possibly  been  led  to  expect  some  kind  of 
return,  although  to  offer  payment  would  be 
an  insult.  The  whole  of  the  contributors 
afterwards  sat  down  and  ate  in  another  part 
of  the  room. — Fellows. 

Grudging. — The  word  that  is  here  trans- 
lated "grudging"  signifies  murmuring,  or 
unwillingness  in  doing  anything,  as  if  it 
were  torn  and  forced  from  one,  rather  than 
proceeded  from  a  free  inclination.  And  this 
hateful,  churlish  way  of  almsgiving  St.  Paul 
likewise  expressly  forbids,  and  says  our 
charity  must  not  be  shown  grudgingly,  or  of 
necessity  (2  Cor.  ix.  7 ;  Pom.  xii.  8).  And 
here  we  cannot  but  admire  and  adore  the 
infinite  goodness  of  God,  who  has  not  only 

U7 


CHAP.  IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


obliged  us  to  the  substance  of  this  duty,  but 
has  so  ordered  the  very  circumstantials  of  it 
that  the  necessitous  may  be  relieved  with  as 
much  decency  and  ease  to  themselves  as  can 
be,  and  the  alms  of  others  look  rather  like 
their  own  propriety,  as  the  payment  of  a 
debt,  or  restoring  of  a  pledge,  or  bestowing 
of  a  reward  ;  and  that  their  souls  might  not 
be  grieved  by  frowns,  and  taunts,  and  un- 
kind language,  when  they  receive  supply  for 
the  needs  of  their  body. 

Ver.  16.  The  Name  "  Christimi:'—''  There 
are  only  three  places  in  the  New  Testament 
where  the  name  Christian  occurs.  It  is 
plain  that  for  a  long  time  there  was  no 
commonly  recognised  term  of  this  kind. 
Hence  they  are  called  variously,  "they  that 
believed"  (Acts  ii.  44),  "the  disciples" 
(vi.  1),  "those  of  the  way"  (ix.  2),  etc. 
Again,  the  name  of  Nazarenes  was  applied 
to  them  by  the  Jews,  as  a  term  of  reproach, 
but  plainly  arose  before  the  extension  of  the 
faith  to  the  Gentiles.  It  was  at  Antioch 
that  the  large  accession  of  Gentiles  first 
made  it  impossible  to  look  upon  them  merely 
as  a  Jewish  sect,  and  required  the  use  of 
some  more  distinctive  title.  It  was  natural, 
therefore,  that  the  use  of  such  a  title  should 
first  prevail  at  Antioch.  When  the  book 
[Acts  of  the  Apostles]  was  written,  towards 
the  close  of  Paul's  imprisonment  at  Rome, 
the  formation  of  churches  in  the  chief  cities 
of  almost  every  province  would  avvaken 
inquiry  as  to  the  origin  of  this  new  name, 
that  was  already  in  every  one's  mouth. 
How  suitable,  then,  would  be  this  passing 
remark  of  the  historian  (Acts  xi.  26),  to 
show  when  and  where  it  began  to  be  current ! 
— Birks. 

Called  Christians. — The  word  xPVI^C'Ti(Tat., 
used  by  St.  Luke  ("they  were  called"), 
implies  the  thing  to  have  been  done  by 
some  public  and  solemn  act  and  declaration 
of  the  whole  Church ;  such  being  the  use  of 
the  word  in  the  imperial  edicts  and  proclama- 
tions of  those  times,  the  emperors  being  said 
XPwarl^eLv,  "  to  style  themselves,"  when  they 
publicly  proclaimed  by  what  titles  they  would 
be  called.  .  .  .  Such  being  the  general 
acceptation  of  the  word,  St.  Luke  (who 
was  himself  a  native  of  this  city)  makes 
use  of  it  to  express  that  solemn  declaration 
whereby  the  disciples  of  the  religion  entitled 
themselves  to  the  name  of  Christians. — 
Cave. 


Ver.  17.  The  Danger  of  Unbelief. — In  one  of 
the  popular  books  of  the  present  day  there 
is  a  story  told  of  "  The  Sunken  Rock."  A 
vessel,  named  the  Thetis,  was  cruising  in  the 
Mediterranean,  in  search  of  a  shoal  or  bank, 
or  something  of  that  kind,  said  to  exist 
beneath  the  treacherous  waters.  The  cap- 
tain, after  be  had  adopted  all  the  means  he 
thought  necessary,  having  failed,  abandoned 
the  enterprise,  declaring  "  that  the  reported 
danger  was  all  a  dream."  An  officer  on 
board  formed  a  different  judgment,  went  out 
by  himself  on  an  expedition  afterwards  into 
the  very  same  latitude  and  longitude,  and 
there  discovered  a  reef  of  rocks,  which  he 
reported  to  the  Admiralty,  and  it  was  in- 
serted in  the  charts,  the  discoverer  being 
rewarded  with  a  high  appointment.  The 
intelligence  came  to  the  captain's  ears  ;  he 
would  not  believe  in  the  discovery.  He  was 
a  shrewd,  clever,  practical  man,  but  un- 
scientific, incredulous,  and  obstinate.  "  The 
whole  thing  is  a  falsehood,"  he  exclaimed ; 
adding,  "  If  ever  I  have  the  keel  of  the 
Thstis  under  me  in  those  waters  again,  if  I 
don't  carry  her  clean  over  where  the  chart 
marks  a  rock,  call  me  a  liar  and  no  seaman." 
Two  years  after,  he  was  conveying  in  the 
same  vessel  the  British  Ambassador  to 
Naples.  One  windy  night  he  and  the  master 
were  examining  the  chart  on  deck  by  the 
light  of  the  lantern,  when  the  latter  pointed 
out  the  sunken  rock  on  the  map.  "  What !  " 
exclaimed  the  old  seaman,  "  is  this  invention 
to  meet  me  in  the  teeth  again  ?  No ;  I  swore 
I  would  sail  over  that  spot  the  first  chance  I 
had,  and  I'll  do  it."  He  went  down  into  the 
cabin,  merrily  related  the  story  to  the 
company,  and  said,  "  Within  five  minutes  we 
shall  have  passed  the  spot."  There  was  a 
pause.  Then,  taking  out  his  watch,  he  said, 
'*  Oh,  the  time  is  past.  We  have  gone  over 
the  wonderful  reef."  But  presently  a  grating 
touch  was  felt  on  the  ship's  keel,  then  a 
sudden  shock,  a  tremendous  crash — the  ship 
had  foundered.  Through  great  exertions 
most  of  the  crew  were  saved,  but  the 
captain  would  not  survive  his  own  mad 
temerity,  and  the  last  seen  of  him  was  his 
white  figure,  bareheaded,  and  in  his  shirt,  from 
the  dark  hull  of  the  Thetis,  as  the  foam  burst 
round  her  bows  and  stem.  He  perished,  a 
victim  of  unbelief.     So  perish  multitudes. 

Ver.  18.  Scarcely  Saved. — There  is  such  a 
fate  as  being  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire,  going 
into  the  brightness  with  the  smell  of  fire  on 
your  garments. — A.  Maclaren,  D.B. 


148 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap.  v. 


CHAPTER  V. 
THE  ATTITUDE  OF  HUMILITY. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL   NOTES. 

The  exhortations  are  still  designed  to  meet  the  crisis  in  which  the  Churches  were  placed. 
In  keeping  together,  preserving  the  Christian  spirit,  and  serving  one  another  in  their  various 
relations,  they  would  be  kept  safely,  brought  through,  and  even  sanctified  by  their  ex- 
periences. 

Ver.  1.  Elders. — Names  of  office  carried  over  from  the  Jewish  synagogues.  Exhort. — 
irapaKuXQ,  a  very  full  word,  including  encouragement  and  entreaty,  and  even  consolation 
and  exhortation.  An  elder. — Fellow-elder.  St.  Peter  puts  this  prominently.  The  sympathy 
of  the  fellow-elder,  rather  than  the  authority  of  the  apostle.  Partaker. — The  word  is  chosen 
in  the  same  spirit,  and  suggests  "joint  partaker  with  you." 

Ver.  2.  Feed. —  "Tend,"  implying  the  various  duties  of  the  shepherd.  "Willingly. — 
"  According  to  God  ;  "  in  cheerful  recognition  of  His  call  and  His  will. 

Ver.  3.  As  being  lords. — "Nor  yet  as  lording  it."  "  One  is  your  Master,  even  Christ,  and 
all  ye  are  brethren."  God's  heritage. — There  is  no  word  in  the  original  answering  to  God's. 
K.V.  reads,  "the  charge  allotted  to  you." 

Ver.  4.  Chief  shepherd. — "  This  beautiful  term  seems  to  have  been  invented  by  St.  Peter. 
(See  Heb.  xiii.  20).  A  crown.— Better,  ''the  crown."  Of  glory. — Or  "crown  amarantine,  of 
the  flower  that  fadeth  not." 

Ver.  5.  Be  clothed. — Lit.  "gird  yourselves."  Perhaps  the  word  refers  to  the  frock,  or 
apron,  distinctive  of  slaves.  Strictly,  the  Greek  word  means,  *'  tie  yourselves  up  in  humility." 
eyKOfi^wffaade,  from  ko/ji^os,  a  top-knot,  as  a  cock's  comb,  or  bow-knot,  or  ornamental 
fabtening  by  which  vestments  are  drawn  about  the  wearer.  Make  humility  your  outermost, 
conspicuous  dress,  that  which  covers  all  the  rest,  or  binds  all  into  one.  (There  was  a 
peculiar  kind  of  cape,  well  known  by  a  name  taken  from  this  verb — we  might  call  it  a  "  tie- 
up  " — and  this  kind  of  cape  was  worn  by  slaves,  and  by  no  others.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  badge  of 
servitude.) 

Ver.  6.  Humble  yourselves. — Especially  with  a  view  to  the  quiet  bearing  of  the  afflictions 
and  distresses  you  may  be  called  to  endure. 

Ver.  8.  The  devil. — Thought  of  under  the  figure  of  a  wild  beast  that,  at  any  moment,  may 
put  the  flock  in  peril.  Those  who  fall  into  sin  are  often  surprised  at  the  sudden  and  over- 
whelming character  of  their  temptation.  Adversary. — See  Matt.  v.  25.  did^oXos  term  in 
LXX.  for  the  Hebrew  "  Satan,"  with  special  idea  of  "  making  charges  against."  Devour. — 
"  Gulp  down." 

Ver.  9.  The  faith.— Better,  "  yo^ir  faith."    Are  accomplished. — Are  being  accomplished. 

Ver.  12.  Silvanus. —  See  Notes  on  Verses. 

Ver.  13.  Babylon. — Precisely,  the  sentence  reads:  "the  co-elect  one"  [fern,  sing.]  "in 
Babylon."  This  makes  it  the  greeting  of  an  individual,  not  of  a  Church.  It  might  be  the 
message  of  St.  Peter's  wife.  Whether  the  term  "  Babylon  "  is  descriptive  or  symbolic  is  dis- 
putable. A  new  city  had  arisen  near  the  old  one,  and  a  considerable  population  dwelt  in  it. 
There  is  no  good  reason  for  resisting  the  conclusion  that  the  letter  was  sent  from  this  town. 
There  was  a  military  fortress  in  Egypt  named  Babylon,  but  it  is  not  probable  that  St.  Peter 
was  there. 

Ver.  14.  Kiss  of  charity.— Or  love  (Rom.  xvi.  16  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  20;  2  Cor.  xiii.  12).  "This 
was  an  accompaniment  of  that  social  wor.ship  which  marked  Christianity,  and  arose  from  the 
tendency  of  the  Christian  religion  to  encourage  honour  towards  all  men,  as  men,  and  to 
cherish  the  softer  affections  of  the  heart."  The  early  custom  almost  only  survives  in  the 
use  of  the  Osculaforium,  or  kissing  token,  known  as  the  Pax  (sometimes  a  relic,  sometimes 
an  ivory  or  metal  tablet,  with  sacred  symbols  cut  on  it),  which  was  passed  through  the  con- 
gregation, and  kissed  by  each  in  turn. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—4. 

Official  Models. — This  direct  message  to  the  *'  elders  "  of  the  Church  may  be 
taken  as  indicating  that  the  Churches  of  Chi-ist  were  organised,  and  the  term 
'*  elders  "  suggests  that  the  first  forms  of  organisation  were  modelled  after  the 
pattern  of  the  Jewish  synagogue.  It  is  significant  that  St.  Peter  does  not 
address  these  elders  with  any  authority  as  an  apostle,  with  any  assumption  of 

149 


CHAP.  V.  EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


superiority  as  a  higher  official,  but  puts  himself  gn  their  level,  and  makes  his 
experience,  not  his  authority,  the  ground  of  his  persuasion.  The  advice  of  a 
fellow-elder,  one  with  a  longer  and  fuller  experience,  would  be  altogether  more 
acceptable  and  effective  than  any  commands  based  on  claim  of  Divine  authority. 
St.  Paul  is  in  full  sympathy  with  St.  Peter  in  this  attitude  towards  the  elders  of 
the  Churches  when  he  says,  '*  Not  that  we  have  lordship  over  your  faith,  but  are 
helpers  of  your  joy  "  (2  Cor.  i.  24).  St.  Peter's  right  to  advise  ("  exhort,"  a  term 
which  in  the  Greek  includes  encouragement,  and  entreaty,  and  even  consolation, 
as  well  as  exhortation)  rests  upon  (1)  his  official  position;  he  also  was  an  elder ; 
(2)  upon  his  personal  experience  and  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
had  to  endure  the  severest  sufferings  because  of  His  persistency  in  well-doing — 
St.  Peter  was  a  direct  personal  "  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ ;  "  and  (3) 
upon  his  actual  fellowship  with  these  elders  in  the  hopes  which  cheered  them 
under  the  present  burdens  of  anxiety  and  suffering.  St.  Peter  was  "  a  par- 
taker"— with  them — "of  the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed.  The  advice 
concerns — 

I.  Good  shepherding. — The  Lord  Jesus  had  given  the  shepherd  figure  to  His 
Church,  and  had  sanctioned  it,  by  using  it  for  His  own  relations,  as  in  John  x. 
The  figure  had,  however,  been  previously  used  by  the  prophets,  and  is  a  natural 
and  suggestive  one  for  a  people  who  were  largely  concerned  in  the  tending 
of  flocks,  and  whose  first  fathers  were  heads  of  wandering  tribes.  (See,  for 
illustration  of  prophetic  use,  Jer.  xxiii.  1-4  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  2-31).  It  will  at 
once  be  seen  that  shepherding  suggests  much  more  than  preaching,  or  even 
teaching.  It  suggests  ruling,  providing,  and  even  tending  and  correcting.  The 
older  idea  of  shepherding  we  pat  into  the  term  pasto7'al :  the  modern  pastor  is  the 
shepherd-elder  of  the  Early  Church.  St.  Peter  fixes  one  point :  good  shepherding 
has  in  it  no  taint  of  self-seeking.  And  self-seeking  usually  takes  two  forms 
in  persons  who  are  placed  in  official  positions.  It  shows  itself  in  using  the  office 
to  enrich  the  self,  or  to  attain  the  pleasure  which  comes  from  being  able  to  lord 
it  over  others.  But  under  this  head  the  thought  had  better  be  confined  to  the 
one  mark  of  good  shepherding — wise,  skilful,  efficient /eec^m^  and  tending  of  the 
flock  of  God ;  which  may  be  amply  illustrated  by  references  to  the  various  calls 
on  an  Eastern  shepherd's  care,  in  the  ever-varying  daily  needs  of  his  flock. 

II.  Wise  authority. — "  Exercising  the  oversight,  not  of  constraint,  but 
willingly,  according  to  God."  Sometimes  a  person  is  put  into  office  who  feels  unfit 
for  it.  Sometimes  a  person  is  put  into  office  because  there  is  no  one  else  who  is 
fit  for  it.  In  either  case  there  may  be  lacking  that  willingness  which  would 
make  it  a  service  of  love.  And  the  true  Christly  service  never  can  be  rendered, 
save  as  a  willing  service  of  love.  Wise  authority  in  a  Church  is  that  which  he 
alone  can  wield  who  loves  the  members,  seeks  their  highest  well-being,  and  is 
ever  ready  to  put  his  own  advantage,  and  even  his  own  preferences,  aside  in 
order  to  secure  it.     Unwilling  authority  is  sure  to  be  unwise  and  unworthy. 

III.  Pure  motive. — "  Nor  yet  for  filthy  lucre,  but  of  a  ready  mind,  neither  as 
lording  it  over  the  charge  allotted  to  you."  Impure  motive  is  seen  in  using  an 
official  position  for  securing  any  personal  ends.  The  position  in  Christ's  Church 
is  essentially  one  of  service  to  others.  It  may,  indeed,  bring  both  gain  and 
authority  to  the  official,  but  these,  as  belonging  to  the  self -sphere,  he  must  in  no 
way  seek. 

IV.  Attractive  example. — "  But  making  yourselves  ensamples  to  the  flock." 
The  official  position  gives  personal  example  a  special  importance.  The  elders  of 
a  Church  ought  to  be  specimen  Christians ;  models,  not  only  in  the  administering 
of  their  office,  but  also  in  their  personal  character.  And  the  chief  shepherd  may 
be  relied  on  to  recognise,  approve,  and  reward,  all  under-shepherds  who  prove 
faithful,  and  present  good  models. 

160 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  V. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  2.  The  Pastor's  Duty,— The, 
pastoral  duty  is  three-fold  : — 1.  To  feed 
the  flock,  by  preaching  to  them  the 
sincere  Word  of  God,  and  ruKng  them 
according  to  such  directions  and  dis- 
cipline as  the  Word  of  God  prescribes, 
both  which  are  implied  in  this  expres- 
sion, Feed  the  flock.  2.  The  pastors  of 
the  Church  must  "  take  the  oversight 
thereof."  The  elders  are  exhorted  to 
do  the  office  of  bishops  (as  the  word 
signifies),  by  personal  care  and  vigilance 
over  all  the  flock  committed  to  their 
charge.  3.  They  must  be  "  examples  to 
the  flock,"  and  practise  the  holiness, 
self-denial,  mortification,  and  all  other 
Christian  duties,  which  they  preach 
and  recommend  to  their  people.  These 
duties  must  be  performed  *'  not  by  con- 
straint," not  because  you  must  do  them, 
not  from  compulsion  of  the  civil  power, 
or  the  constraint  of  fear  or  shame,  but 
from  a  willing  mind  that  takes  pleasure 
in  the  work  :  "  not  for  filthy  lucre," 
or  any  emoluments  and  profits  attend- 
ing the  place  where  you  reside,  or  any 
perquisites  belonging  to  the  office,  *'but 
of  a  ready  mind,"  regarding  the  flock 
more  than  the  fleece,  sincerely  and 
cheerfully  endeavouring  to  serve  the 
Church  of  God.  "Neither  as  being 
lords  over  God's  heritage,"  tyrannising 
over  them  by  compulsion  and  coercive 
force,  or  imposing  unscriptural  and 
human  inventions  upon  them  instead 
of  necessary  duty  (Matt.  xx.  25,  26  ; 
2  Cor.  i.  24).  Learn  1.  The  eminent 
dignity  of  the  Church  of  God,  and  all 
the  true  members  of  it.  2.  The  pastors 
of  the  Church  ought  to  consider  their 
people  as  the  flock  of  God,  as  God's 
heritage,  and  treat  them  accordingly. 
3.  Those  ministers  who  are  either  driven 
to  their  work  by  necessity,  or  drawn  to 
it  by  filthy  lucre,  can  never  perform 
their  duty  as  they  ought,  because  they 
do  not  do  it  wilHngly,  and  with  a  ready 
mind.  4.  The  best  way  a  minister 
can  take  to  engage  the  respect  of  a 
people  is  to  discharge  his  own  duty 
among  them  in  the  best  manner   he 


can,  and  to  be  a  constant  example  to 
them  of  all  that  is  good. — Matthew 
Henry. 

Luo'e  and  Filthy  Lucre. — The  word 
*'  lucre"  appears  five  times  in  the  Bible ; 
and  in  every  case  it  bears  a  bad  signi- 
fication. It  is  remarkable  that  the 
warning  against  the  love  of  lucre — of 
filthy  lucre — is  in  all  these  cases  in- 
tended for  ministers  of  religion-  They 
are  addressed,  not  to  merchants,  but  to 
bishops,  deacons,  elders  as  such,  what- 
ever secular  occupations  they  might  be 
engaged  in.  How  comes  it  to  pass  that 
ministers  of  religion  should  be  marked 
out  for  this  word  of  caution  ?  Perhaps 
even  in  the  time  of  the  apostles  there 
were  symptoms  of  this  evil  in  the 
ministry  of  the  Church,  and  certainly 
in  after  times  the  evil  became  so  great, 
so  monstrous,  that  there  was  urgent 
need  for  condemnation  stronger  far  than 
that  expressed  in  the  words  of  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Paul.  The  word  "  lucre  "  is 
not  in  itself  a  word  of  evil  signification. 
It  simply  means  "  gain."  No  one 
objects  to  it  when  it  appears  in  another 
form,  and  a  business  is  spoken  of  as 
lucrative.  Practically  the  distinction 
between  "lucre"  and  "filthy  lucre" 
has  been  lost;  a  curious  instance  of 
the  manner  in  which  the  world  unin- 
tentionally accuses  and  condemns  itself. 
The  world  evidently  feels  in  its  con- 
science that  generally  there  is  some- 
thing bad  in  connection  with  gain.  I 
venture  to  draw  a  very  marked  dis- 
tinction between  "  lucre  "  and  "  filthy 
lucre."  Lucre  is  gain,  and  gain  of  all 
sorts,  mental  as  well  as  material ;  and 
the  love  of  lucre  may  be  a  virtue  and 
not  a  vice.  No  man  is  more  greedy  of 
lucre  than  a  very  studious  man.  But 
let  us  take  the  word  in  its  commonest 
signification,  as  money,  material  gain — 
gain  in  the  form  of  money,  or  money's 
worth.  The  loss  of  the  distinction  be- 
tween lucre  and  filthy  lucre  has,  in 
some  instances,  proved  disadvantageous 
to   the  world's   interest.      Lucre   and 

151 


CHAP.  V. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


filthy  lucre  being  confounded  very  much 
in  the  religious  mind  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  there  rose  up  an  immense  mass 
of  mendicancy.  There  is  lucre  that  is 
not  filthy,  but  perfectly  clean.  The 
lucre  that  is  made  by  honest  labour 
and  honest  trading  is  nowhere  con- 
demned in  the  Word  of  God.  The 
Word  of  God,  indeed,  rather  approves 
of  it,  and  encourages  men  in  the  pur- 
suit of  it.  A  man's  moral  and  religious 
character  does  not  necessarily  sufier 
through  the  acquisition  of  lucre.  Job, 
we  are  told,  was  the  greatest  man  of 
the  East — he  certainly  was  one  of  the 
best  men,  East  or  West.  A  con- 
scientious but  timid  man  of  old,  named 
Agur,  prayed  that  God  would  give  him 
neither  poverty  nor  riches;  he  was 
afraid  of  the  demoralising  influence  of 
either  extreme.  But  a  far  wiser  and 
better  man  than  Agur — the  apostle 
Paul — felt  that  his  religion  was  such 
as  enabled  him  to  set  riches  and  poverty 
equally  at  defiance  in  regard  to  any 
demoralising  tendency.  Religion  is 
in  a  considerable  measure  sustained  by 
lucre.  The  riches  of  lucre  enable  a 
man  to  be  rich  in  good  works  ;  and  so 
the  quest  of  lucre  becomes  a  religious 
duty,  because  its  result  leads  to  a  man's 
greater    power  ,  of    usefulness.      But 


"  filthy  lucre  "  is  quite  another  thing. 
It  is  gain  gotten  in  dishonest  and  dis- 
honourable ways  ;  by  violence,  by  fraud, 
by  falsehood,  by  misrepresentation,  by 
taking  unfair  and  cruel  advantage  of 
the  ignorance  or  the  necessity  of  our 
neighbour.  And  it  is  to  the  great  dis- 
credit of  many  professedly  religious 
people  that  they  are  in  these  matters 
no  more  to  be  trusted  than  the  most 
worldly  of  worldlings.  Moreover,  the 
lucre  that  is  filthy,  through  being 
gained  in  evil  ways,  cannot  be  clean 
through  spending  it  liberally  and 
piously.  God  will  graciously  accept 
lucre,  but  will  refuse  with  indignation 
filthy  lucre.  Lucre  is  filthy  when 
gained  wrongly,  and  becomes  filthy, 
however  honestly  made,  when  wrongly 
used  ;  when  self  and  selfish  indulgence 
is  a  man's  great  aim  and  object ;  when 
it  is  applied  to  purposes  of  corruption, 
oppression,  injustice,  profligacy ;  when 
it  is  withheld  from  those  good  works 
which  it  ought  to  encourage  and  to 
help ;  when  a  man  makes  it  his  idol, 
and  worships  it  as  his  god  ',  in  such 
cases  it  is  defiled  and  defiling.  Of  our 
lucre,  be  it  little  or  much,  we  shall 
have  to  give  account  to  God. — H. 
Stowell  Brown, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—7. 

Humility  in  Church  Relations. — It  is  but  natural  that  the  apostle,  in  giving 
bis  advice  to  the  Church,  in  view  of  its  circumstances  of  disability,  temptation, 
and  peril,  should  first  address  the  "  elders  "  or  officials,  and  then  address  the 
members  of  the  Church,  dividing  them  into  the  "  younger  ones  "  and  the  "  rest." 

I.  Humility  in  the  younger  takes  form  as  submission. — "  Likewise,  ye 
younger,  be  subject  unto  the  elder."  The  very  energy  of  activity  and  enterprise, 
that  should  be  characteristic  of  young  people,  may  make  them  unduly  confident, 
and  over-masterful.  Young  people  will  seldom  take  any  advice  from  the  older 
ones.  But  the  Christian  spirit  should  have  its  influence  on  this  characteristic 
weakness,  and  make  the  young  members  humbly  submit  themselves  to  superior 
wisdom  and  experience.  Humility  in  Church  life,  possessing  both  the  younger 
and  the  elder,  would  enable  the  energetic  younger  to  inspire  the  slow  and 
sluggish  elder ;  and  the  careful  and  experienced  elder  to  tone  and  temper  the 
impulsive  younger. 

II.  Humility  in  the  elder  takes  form  as  service. — "Yea,  all  of  you  gird 
yourselves  with  humility,  to  serve  one  another."  When  St.  Paul  would  plead  for 
Christian  humility,  he  presents  the  example  of  Christ,  saying,  "  Let  this  mind  be 
in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  "  ;  and  when  we  follow  his  illustration  we 
see  that  it  was  a  mind  of  humility  which  showed  itself  in  service — sacrificing 

152 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER.  chap.  v. 


service.  If,  without  asserting  himself,  or  getting  for  himself,  each  member  is 
supremely  anxious  to  find  opportunities  for  serving  the  others,  there  need  be  no 
fear  whatever  of  the  Church  relations  being  pleasantly  sustained.  And  St.  Peter, 
perhaps,  had  especially  in  mind  the  way  in  which  such  humble  and  self -forgetting 
mutual  service  would  help  the  Churches  in  the  time  of  difficulty  and  strain, 
which  might  involve  serious  loss  and  persecution  for  particular  members.  The 
times  provided  plentiful  occasions  for  fulfilling  the  injunction,  "  By  love  serve  one 
another." 

III.  Humility  in  all  the  members  of  the  Church  towards  God. — This  is  the 
humility — basal  humility — on  which  must  rest  all  humility  in  the  various 
relations  of  the  Church.  A  man  will  never  be  humble-minded  in  his  relations 
with  his  fellow-man  unless  he  is,  and  keeps,  humble-mindt  d  towards  God.  And 
this  is  the  right  attitude  to  take  before  God.  "  Humble  yourselves,  therefore,  under 
the  mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may  exalt  you  in  due  time."  But  is  this  to  be 
taken  as  vague  and  general,  or  as  precise  and  particular?  If  the  latter,  then 
St.  Peter  means,  by  the  "  mighty  hand  of  God,"  just  those  circumstances  of 
distress  and  peril  in  which  the  Christians  were  then  placed,  which,  from  one  point 
of  view,  were  the  schemes  of  enemies,  but  from  a  higher  point  of  view  were  the 
permissions,  and  overrulings,  and  discipline,  of  God — the  "  mighty  hand  of  God  " — 
to  which  they  should  respond  in  the  humbling  of  a  cheerfully  gracious  submission 
and  endurance.  Taken  in  this  light,  we  see  at  once  how  the  sentence,  "  casting  all 
your  care  (anxiety)  upon  Him,"  is  a  very  tender  and  pathetic  re-statement  of  the 
earlier  sentence  :  "  humble  yourselves,  therefore,  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 
It  is  the  best  sign  of  a  true  humility  before  God  that  we  do  not  try  to  keep  our 
own  care,  as  if  we  felt  that  we  could,  but  are  fully  willing,  in  a  child-spirit,  to 
let  our  Father  care,  being  quite  sure  that  He  does  care.  The  humility  of  the 
child  before  God  will  be  sure  to  nourish  the  humility  of  the  brother,  which  will 
find  fitting  expression  in  all  the  relations  with  the  brothers.  "  It  would  be  a  sad 
calamity  for  Christians  under  persecution,  suddenly  to  find  God  Himself  in 
array  on  the  enemy's  side  ;  and  this  they  would  find  if  they  went  against 
discipline."  *'  The  humility  here  recommended  is  not  merely  a  submissive 
bearing  of  the  strokes  which  it  pleased  God  to  let  fall  upon  them,  but  it  was  to 
be  shown  in  their  bearing  towards  one  another." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.  6-7.  Service  Free  from  Care. —  the  passage  into  which  those  words  are 

Single  sentences  taken   out   of   Bible  fitted  lights  up  the  familiar  sentence 

passages  may  oftentimes  suggest  very  with  new  meaning,  and  gives  it  a  fresh, 

beautiful  and  very  helpful  meditations  and   more    practical   bearing   on   that 

and   sentiments ;    but   he  would  be  a  Christian  life  which  we  are  pledged  to 

very  limp  and  weak  Christian,  having  Hve.     We   may   be    quite    sure    that 

no    strengthening   principles,   and    no  St.  Peter  dwelt  much  in  thought  upon 

strong  grip  of  steadying  truths,  who  the  brief  time  of  his  fellowship  with 

should    persist   in   living   entirely   on  the  "  Man,  Christ  Jesus,"  in  whom  he 

single    texts.       The     familiar    words,  discerned  the  "  Son  of  God."     And  two 

"  Casting   all   your    care   upon    Him,  scenes  especially  must  have  come   up 

for   He   careth   for   you,"  have  made  before  him  with  great  frequency.     He 

solacing  music  for  our  souls  in  many  of  would    often     see     the    high    priest's 

the  anxious  times  of   life.      We  love  palace;     recall     again     his    shameful 

them,  as  we  love  the  friends  who  have  denials  of  his  Lord  ;  and  feel  afresh  the 

put  their  hands  gently  into  ours  when  "  look  "  that  melted  him  into  penitence, 

we  entered,  and  went  through,  the  dark  But  he  must  have  tried  to  shut  out  that 

valleys  of  our  life's  sorrows.     And  yet  scene :  to  dwell  on  it  too  much  was  to 

153 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


bring  undue  depressions  upon  his  spirit. 
He  would  turn  to  another  scene ;  he 
would  free  his  thoughts  from  weak 
and  sinful  self,  and  try  to  fix  them 
upon  Jesus.  St.  Peter  would  love  to 
go  over  again  and  again  the  scene  in 
the  upper  chamber  before  the  Lord's 
last  Passover — though  it  also  had  its 
smaller  humiliations  for  him.  He 
would  see  again  the  surpassing  dignity 
of  his  Divine  Lord,  as  He  rose  from 
supper,  laid  aside  His  garments,  took  a 
towel,  and  girded  Himself,  as  if  He 
were  but  the  servant  of  the  house; 
poured  water  into  the  basin,  and  began 
to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe 
them  with  the  towel  wherewith  He 
was  girded.  Could  St.  Peter  ever  for- 
get the  look  that  was  on  the  face  of 
his  Lord  when  He  had  taken  His 
garments,  and  was  seated  again.  Could 
He  ever  lose  out  of  his  soul  the  words 
that  were  then  spoken  by  Him  "  who 
spake  as  never  man  spake  "  ?  They 
thrill  us  now  as  we  read  them.  How 
they  must  have  thrilled  him  who  heard 
them  fresh  from  the  sacred  Lips ! 
*'  Know  ye  what  I  have  done  to  you  ? 
Ye  call  Me  Master  and  Lord  :  and  ye 
say  well ;  for  so  I  am.  If  I,  then,  he 
Lord  and  the  Master,  have  washed 
your  feet,  ye  ought  also  to  wash  one 
another's  feet.  For  I  have  given  you 
an  example,  that  ye  also  should  do  as 
I  have  done  to  you."  The  scene  was 
evidently  in  St.  Peter's  mind,  and  the 
words  were  evidently  in  his  memory, 
when  he  wrote  the  passage  which  is 
before  us  as  a  text.  He  has  been, 
in  the  previous  verses,  giving  particu- 
lar counsels,  precisely  adapted  to  the 
"  elder "  and  to  the  "  younger  " 
members  of  the  Church.  And  then 
he  thinks  of  something  that  needs  to 
be  pressed  upon  the  attention  of  every 
one.  It  is  the  example  of  their  Divine 
Lord,  and  his,  on  that  solemn  supper 
night.  "  Yea,  all  of  you  gird  your- 
selves with  humility,  to  serve  one 
another ;  for  God  resisteth  the  proud, 
but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble. 
Humble  yourselves,  therefore,  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God,  that  He  may 
exalt  you  in  due  time ;  casting  all  your 

154 


anxiety  upon  Him,  because  He  careth 
for  you."  Pemembering  that  St.  Peter 
wrote  his  letter  to  Jewish  Christians, 
scattered  abroad,  who  were  called  to 
endure  much  and  varied  persecution  on 
account  of  their  faith  in  Christ,  the 
point  of  His  counsel  at  once  appears. 
Such  persecution  was  but  Divine 
discipline.  They  would  lose  all  the 
blessing  of  it  if  they  resisted,  repined, 
and  let  it  make  them  feel  hard  and 
unloving.  Better,  far  better,  humble 
themselves  under  God's  mighty  hand ; 
submit  to  His  providential  dealings ; 
see  how  the  afflictions  and  persecutions 
affected  them  all  alike,  rich  and  poor, 
and  were  designed  to  draw  them  into 
a  nearer  and  more  helpful  brotherhood. 
One  thing  they  could  do,  and  it  would 
bring  them  the  best  cheer  in  their  time 
of  trouble ;  forgetting  their  own  dig- 
nities, they  could  ^'gird  themselves 
with  humility,"  and  by  love  "  serve  one 
another."  They  could  fill  up  their  lives 
with  the  joy  of  Christlike  service ;  and 
as  for  the  cares,  and  anxieties,  which 
persecutions  might  bring,  or  even  this 
loving  service  of  others  might  bring,  they 
could  cast  all  such  cares  on  God,  in  the 
absolute  confidence  that  He  was  caring 
for  them.  We  may  get  St.  Peter's 
counsel  duly  impressed  upon  our  hearts, 
and  with  fitting  applications  to  our  own 
precise  circumstances,  if  we  consider 
(1)  that  the  service  of  one  another  de- 
mands humility  ;  (2)  that  the  service  of 
one  another  at  once  relieves  from  cares, 
and  brings  cares  ;  (3)  and  that  the  cares 
which  service  brings,  God  bears  with 
us. 

I.  The  service  of  one  another 
demands  humility. — Our  Lord's  sym- 
bolic teachings  in  the  upper  room  were 
called  forth  by  the  failure  of  His 
disciples  to  serve  one  another.  ISTot 
one  of  them  was  willing  to  do  the 
lowly,  kindly  service  of  washing  the 
feet  of  the  others.  And  their  failure 
was  due  to  their  lack  of  humility. 
They  were  all  self-interested ;  each  had 
an  exaggerated  estimate  of  his  own 
importance.  In  their  self-conscious- 
ness and  pride  they  had  even  been 
disputing  as  to  which  had  the  claim 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER.  chap.  V. 


to  the  most  honourable  offices  in  the  humiliating.      "  Gird  yourselves  with 

kingdom  which  they  expected  to  see  so  humility,"  and  keep  yourselves  girded, 

soon  established.     Each   one   thought  and  you    will    want    to    *'  serve    one 

he  was  a  proper  person  to  he  served,  another."      Undo   that  girdle,   put  it 

and  as  long  as  each  one  thought  so,  he  away  from  you,  and  then  other  people 

was  not  likely  to  demean   himself  to  may  wash    disciples'   feet — you  won't. 

serve — certainly  not  in  such  lowly  ways  So  far  from  helping  disciples  to  serve 

as  washing  feet.     We  can  never  serve  one    another,    you     will     expect    the 

one  another  while  we  keep  up  undue  disciples  to  serve  you.     It  is  a  thing 

estimates  of  our  own  importance.    The  to  set  ever  freshly  before  us,  that  we 

man  who  has  to  take  care  of  his  own  must  be  striving  to  gain  this  mind  of 

dignity  will  never  take  care  of  anybody  Christ — the    humility    that    loves   to 

else's  well-being.     He  is  over-occupied.  serve.     St.   Peter  speaks   of  humility, 

For   those   first    disciples    the   object-  in  a  figurative  way,  as  a  garment  to 

lesson  given  them  was  a   severe  and  be  put  on.     The  word  here  rendered 

searching  one.     The  Master  Himself,  "be  clothed "  is  a  very  expressive  one, 

whose  dignity  was  unquestionable,  took  being  derived  from    KOfx/Sos,  a  string, 

a  towel,  and  girded  Himself,  as  if  He  or   band,    with   which   a    garment    is 

were  a  servant,  and  cheerfully  did  a  fastened     to     the     person  ;    so     that 

servant's  work.     He  showed  them  that  humility  is  to  be  put  on  as  an  outer 

the    humility   which   can   serve   is    a  dress,  to  ornament  the  wearer ;  and  to 

distinguishing  mark  of  true  greatness,  be  kept  on  (because  tied  in  knots),  and 

and  is  perfectly  in  harmony  with  the  not    merely    to    be   worn    on   certain 

highest  offices.     Had  He  thought   of  occasions."       There     is    a     secret   in 

what  was  due  to  Him,  He  never  would  Christian  humility.     It  is  the  attitude 

have    served    humanity    at    the    cost  of  a  man  among  men  who  has  humbled 

of   self-sacrifice.      Because    He    could  himself     before    God — humbled    him- 

humble    Himself   to   serve  humanity,  self  "  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God." 
therefore  God  hath  highly  exalted  Him,  II.  The   service  of  one  another  at 

and  given  Him  a  name  which  is  above  once  relieves  US  from  cares  and  brings 

every  name.     The  idea — essential  idea  to  US  cares. — It  relieves  us  from  the 

— of  Christian  discipleship  is  "  service,"  cares  which  come  to  us  out  of  difficult 

because  another  essential  idea  of  it  is  and  distressing  circumstances.     Many 

"humility."     St.  Augustine  was  right  a  Christian  man  has  felt  overwhelmed  ; 

when  he  answered  the  question,  "  What  every  door  has  seemed  shut  up,  every 

is  the  chief  grace  of  Christianity  ?  "  by  sphere   over- weighted  ;   every   attempt 

saying  at  once  "Humility."     Humility  results  in  failure,  every  prospect  looks 

is  the  most  striking  thing  in  a  man's  dark.       Moved      by    the    comforting 

conversion.       He    is    self-humbled   in  Spirit,  he  just  leaves  it  all,  and  goes 

the  conviction  of  sin  ;  and  he  is  self-  out  to  serve  somebody,  to  find  some  soul 

humbled  in  being    obliged    to    accept  more  sorely  stricken  than  he  is,  and  to 

salvation  as  a  gift  of  grace.    And  that  cheer  such  a  soul  with  the  consolations 

humility   is   the    rootage   of   the  new  of  God.     That  man,  in  the  service  of 

regenerate  character.     As  the  new  life  another,   finds  his  own  cares  relieved, 

unfolds,  it  will  soon  be  evident  how  it  What  he  has  been  saying,  in  his  efibrts 

brings  a  man  into  tender,  sympathetic  to  serve,  has  come  right  home  to  his 

relations    with    his    fellow-men,    and  own  heart,  and  he    returns  upon  his 

inspires  him  to  watch  for  and  meet  all  own  cares,  and  they  do  not  seem  quite 

opportunities  of  service.     But  let  the  so  heavy  and  so  dark.    He  can  almost  be 

new  regenerate  life  fail  to  grow ;  let  sure  that  there  is  a  little  break  in  the 

the  old  "  self  "  come  back,  nourishing  sky  that  is  ushering  in  the  dawn  of  a 

the    old    pride,    and     inevitably    the  brighter  day  for  him.     What  a  cheer 

interest  in  others  declines,  and  a  life  of  for  his  own  sorrows  St.  Paul  must  have 

service    begins    to     look     mean    and  gained    when   he   tried   to   serve    the 

155 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


sorrowing  Corinthians  !  He  speaks  of 
the  *'  Father  of  mercies  and  God  of  all 
comfort,  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
affliction,  that  we  may  be  able  to 
comfort  them  that  are  in  any  affliction, 
through  the  comfort  wherewith  we 
ourselves  are  comforted  of  God." 
Many  a  Christian  has  been  over- 
whelmed with  doubts  ;  has  found  him- 
self questioning  this  and  that,  until  the 
very  foundations  of  truth  seem  to  have 
given  way,  and  he  has  not  even  a 
corner-stone  left  on  which  to  rest  a 
hope.  He  is  a  wise  friend  to  the 
doubter  who  takes  him  away  from 
study,  and  books,  and  thoughts ;  refuses 
to  argue  anything  with  him,  but  leads 
him  out  to  the  widowed,  the  fatherless, 
the  sick,  the  lost,  whom  he  may  serve. 
The  cares  of  doubt  will  soon  be  relieved, 
and  charity  will  bring  back  faith.  And 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  cares  of 
the  spiritual  life  may  be  relieved  by 
the  humble  serving  of  others.  If  we 
make  attention  to  spiritual  life  too 
exclusive,  we  are  sure  to  become  morbid, 
full  of  moods,  dependent  on  feelings, 
and  insincere  in  reading  our  own 
experiences.  It  is  the  best  relief 
to  go  and  undertake  some  Christian 
work.  Give  up  brooding  over  varying 
feelings,  and  go  out  and  undertake  some 
service  of  righteousness  and  charity. 
Never  mind  about  spiritual  emotions ; 
they  will  take  care  of  themselves.  Be- 
come intensely  anxious  about  good 
works;  this  good  work,  "by  love  serving 
one  another."  Many  a  young  Christian 
has  begun  to  keep  a  diary  of  his  feel- 
ings, and  kept  on  with  it  until  he 
discovered  that  it  was  making  him 
morbid  and  miserable;  and  then  he 
flung  the  diary  away  for  ever,  let  God 
take  care  of  his  feelings,  and  spent  him- 
self in  active  service — girded  himself, 
and  set  himself  to  do  the  Christly  work 
of  "  serving  others."  But  it  is  also 
true  that  the  service  of  others  brings 
cares.  It  brings  their  cares  upon  us 
whom  we  serve,  for  all  true  service 
rests  upon  sympathy,  upon  fellow- 
feeling  ;  and  it  means  that  we  jbake 
the  cares  of  others  upon  our  own  hearts 
and  hands.     But  this  is  the  holiest  and 

156  .   , 


most  Christlike  form  that  human  care 
can  take  ;  and  with  absolute  assurance 
of  help,  for  us  and  for  them,  we  may 
cast  these  cares  of  others  upon  God. 
But  if  we  devote  ourselves,  in  a 
generous  spirit  of  self-denial,  to  the 
helping  of  others,  we  shall  also  find  the 
service  brings  cares  concerning  our- 
selves. Oftentimes  they  will  be  cares 
taking  form  as  temptations.  It  may 
be  suggested  to  us  that  our  lowly  deeds 
may  affect  our  reputations ;  our 
readiness  to  serve  others  may  seem  to 
prevent  our  getting  on  in  life,  and  may 
even  make  earthly  prosperity  impos- 
sible. We  may  hear  men  saying  of  us. 
He  is  always  looking  after  other  people, 
but  he  never  seems  to  look  after  him- 
self. It  is  true  that  no  man  ever  yet 
made  himself  poor  by  what  he  gave 
away  for  Christ's  sake,  and  no  man 
ever  yet  ruined  his  life -prospects  by 
unselfish  devotion  to  the  service  of 
others.  A  man  may  miss  what  he 
imagined  for  himself,  or  what  others 
have  hoped  for  him.  That  is  very 
possible.  But  God  stands  by  every 
Christly  man  ;  takes  his  care  upon 
Himself,  and  sees  that  the  man  gains 
the  "  best  of  both  worlds,"  just  the 
best  of  both  worlds  ybr  him.  Does  such 
care  come  pressing  on  any  of  you? 
Have  you  almost  become  convinced 
that  a  life  of  service  cannot  be  a  life  of 
worldly  success  ?  Cast  that  care  on 
God.  I  know  how  He  will  comfort 
you.  He  will  say  in  your  soul,  "  A  life 
of  service  is  a  life  of  success."  To 
serve  is  heaven.  To  serve  is  angelic. 
To  serve  is  Christly.  To  serve  is  Divine. 
And  to  be  heavenly,  Christly,  angelic, 
and  close  kin  with  God,  is  success. 

III.  The  cares  which  service  brings, 
God  bears  with  us. — "  For  He  careth 
for  you."  We  dwell  frequently  on  the 
delightful  thought  that  God  is  con- 
cerned about  us,  and  that  His  loving 
interest  wraps  us  round,  keeps  us  safe, 
and  holds  us  up.  But  we  do  not  so 
often  see  the  limitation  of  the  assur- 
ance. God  careth  for  you,  precisely 
you  who  are  girding  yourselves  to  serve 
one  another,  and  find  that  various 
cares  come  to  you  as  you  render  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  V. 


service.  God  careth  for  you,  who  have 
characters  which  find  revealing  ex- 
pression in  service.  God  is  interested 
in  you,  and  in  yours,  in  your  circum- 
stances, but  only  in  them  for  the  sake 
of  you.  God  cares  for  character.  Do 
not  in  the  least  fear.  God  will  take 
care  of  that.  God  will  nourish  that. 
God  will  reward  that.  Faithfully  live 
out  the  Christian  life,  as  a  life  of 
humility  that  loves  to  serve.  Faith- 
fully live  it  out,  whatever  it  may  seem 
to  cost  you,  whatever  loss  it  may  seem 
to  involve.  Man  may  misread  your  life. 
He  is  very  likely  to  do  so.  You  may 
misread  it  yourselves.  You  are  even 
more  likely  to  so.  But  God  makes  no 
mistakes,  and  never  misunderstands. 
He  sees  some  doing  service — washing 
disciples'  feet — in  a  spirit  of  ostenta- 
tion, and  He  turns  away  from  the 
unlovely  sight.  He  knows  whether 
His  servants  are  girded  with  humility 
for  their  service.  He  estimates  the 
cares  that  come  upon  them,  He  cares 
for  them.  And  His  care  has  in  it  a 
purpose  of  infinite  love.  The  care 
shines  in  the  smile  that  cheers 
the  workers.  The  care  reaches  down 
"  everlasting  arms "  to  uphold  the 
workers.  The  care  bids  the  angels 
keep  ready  the  *'  many  mansions," 
the  resting  places,  until  the  day 
when  those  who  have  served  others 
shall  themselves  be  served.  He  shall  bid 
them  sit  down  to  meat,  and  come  forth 
Himself  and  serve  them.  Ministers, 
serving  one  another  ;  casting  all  self 
cares  on  God,  while  we  do  His  work, 
quite  sure  that  He  careth  for  us ; — this 
many  of  us  may  have  to  win  ;  this 
many  of  us  may  have  to  keep.  "  Gird 
yourselves  with  humility,  to  serve  one 
another."  And  of  this  be  quite  sure, 
*'  He  careth  for  you." 

Ver.  5.  Uumility. — This  was  not  a 
new  word  when  the  New  Testament 
was  written.  It,  or  its  Greek  equiva- 
lent, was  very  common,  but  used  only 
contemptuously  and  rebukingly.  It 
always  meant  meanness  of  spirit.  To 
be  humble  was  to  be  a  coward.  It 
described  a  cringing  soul.     It   was  a 


word  for  slaves.  Where  could  we  find 
a  more  striking  instance  of  the  change 
that  the  Christian  religion  brought  into 
the  world  than  in  the  way  in  which  it 
took  this  disgraceful  word,  and  made  it 
honourable  ?  To  be  humble  is  to  have 
a  low  estimation  of  one's  self.  That 
was  considered  shameful  in  the  olden 
time.  You  insulted  a  man  if  you 
called  him  humble.  It  seemed  to  be 
inconsistent  with  that  self-respect 
which  is  necessary  to  any  good  activity. 
Christ  came,  and  made  the  despised 
quality  the  crowning  grace  of  the 
culture  that  He  inaugurated.  The 
disgraceful  word  became  the  key-note 
of  His  fullest  gospel.  He  redeemed 
the  quality  and  straightway  the  name 
became  honourable.  What  was  the 
change  that  Christianity  accomplished, 
and  how  did  it  come  about  ?  Humility 
means  a  low  estimate  or  value  of  one's 
self.  But  all  values  are  relative.  The 
estimate  we  set  on  anything  depends 
on  the  standard  with  which  we  com- 
pare it.  And  so  values  are  always 
varying  as  the  standard  or  the  object 
with  which  you  compare  the  thing  that 
you  are  valuing  changes.  Christianity's 
great  primary  revelation  was  God. 
Much  about  Him  it  showed  men,  but 
first  of  all  it  showed  them  Him.  He 
stood  beside  man's  work.  And  God 
in  the  world  must  be  the  standard 
of  the  world.  Greatness  meant  some- 
thing different  when  men  had  seen 
how  great  He  was ;  and  the  manhood 
which  had  compared  itself  with  lesser 
men,  and  grown  proud,  now  had  a 
chance  to  match  itself  with  God,  and 
to  see  how  small  it  was,  and  to  grow 
humble  about  itself.  It  is  wonderful 
how  the  smallest  man  can  keep  his 
self-complacency  in  the  presence  of  the 
largest.  But  let  that  small  man 
become  a  Christian ;  that  means,  let 
the  narrow  walls  of  his  life  be  broken 
down,  and  let  him  see  God,  present 
here  by  Christ.  At  once,  then,  all  is 
changed.  It  would  be  a  fearful  thing 
if  the  only  thing  that  Christ  showed 
us  of  God  were  His  greatness.  The 
pure  humiliation  would  be  too  crush- 
ing.    But  the  revelation  is  not  only 

157 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  PETER. 


this.      It  includes  not  only  the  great-  perfect  through  sufferings."     "  He  be- 
ness,  but  the  love,  of  God.    The  majesty  came   obedient  unto   death,   even   the 
is  that  of  a  father,  which  takes  our  death  of  the  cross."     If  we  would  be 
littleness  into  His  greatness,  makes  it  like  Him  in  His  glory,  we  must  first 
a  part  of  itself,  honours  it,  trains  it,  be  like  Him  in  His  sufferings.     Good 
does  not  mock  it ;  then  there  comes  the  things  come  after  trouble.     It  is  well 
true  graciousness   of  humility.     It  is  to  try  and  look  upon  life  aright  before 
not  less  humble ;  but  it  is  not  crushed.  we  are  forced  to  do  so  by  the  pressure 
The  energy  which  the  man  used  to  get  of  outward  misery.     We  are  to  imitate 
out  of  his  estimate  of  his  own  great-  Christ,  so  far  as  it  is  possible,  in  the 
ness,  he  gets  now  out  of  the  sight  of  particular  sort  of   employment  which 
his  Father's,  which  yet  is  so  near  to  He  chose — namely,  in  the  mixing  with 
him   that,   in   some   finer  and  higher  other  men  ;  neither  for  business  only — 
sense,  it  still  is  his  ;  and  so  he  is  more  that  is,  in  the  way  of  our  calling  ;  nor 
hopeful,  and  happy,  and  eager,  in  his  yet    for    pleasure    only- — that    is,    in 
humility  than  he  ever  used  to  be  in  common  society ;  but  for  charity  in  its 
his  pride.     The  true  way  to  be  humble  largest  sense — that  is,  from  a  desire  to 
is  not  to  stoop  till  you  are  smaller  than  do  good  to  the  bodies  or  souls  of  others, 
yourself,   but   to  stand   at   your    real  This   Christ-like    employment   is  most 
height    against   some    higher    nature  suited    to    our    state    on   earth,    and 
that   shall   show   you   what   the   real  especially  helps  us  to  make  that  state 
smallness  of  your  greatest  greatness  is.  happy,  by  enabling  us  to  rid  it  of  its 
The  first  is  the  unreal  humility  that  carefulness.      Half,    and    more    than 
goes  about  deprecating  human  nature ;  half,   of   the   practical   faults    in   the 
•the   second   is    the    genuine   humility  world  arise  from  looking  upon  life  in  a 
that  always  stands  in  love  and  adora-  false  view,  and  expecting  from  it  what 
tion,    glorifying     God.        Christ    also  God  does  not  mean  us  to  find  in  it. 
rescued     and     exalted     humility     by  He  to  whom  all  things  future  are  as 
magnifying    the    essential     glory     of  present,  suited  both  His  life  and  His 
humanity.     There  never  was  any  life  words  to  what  He  knew  would  be  ever 
that  so  superbly  asserted  the  essential  the  chief  error  of  mankind.     He  knew 
worth  of   humanity — showed   what  a  that    social    and    civil    activity   were 
surpassing  thing  it  is  to  be  a  man —  sufficiently  natural  to  man  to  need  no 
like  that  sin-convicting  life  of   Jesus.  encouragement.     He  knew  that  know- 
He  showed  us  that  the  human  might  ledge  would  be  pursued,  and  arts  and 
be  joined  to  the  Divine.     He  glorified  sciences   cultivated.       But    He    knew 
human  nature,  and  by  this  glorification  that   the   kingdom   of    God    and   His 
He  taught  man  that  it  was  his  true  righteousness  would  not  be  sought  after; 
place  to  be  humble.     There  is  nothing  He  knew  that  men  would  look  carefully 
more  strange,  and  at   the  same  time  enough  on  the  things  of  this  life,  but 
more  truthful,  about  Christianity  than  would  care  for  little  beyond  it.     He 
its   combination   of   humility  and  ex-  therefore  made  that  so  valuable  which 
altation  for  the  soul  of  man.     Christ-  could  help  us  forward  to  our  real  and 
ianity  puts  men  face  to  face  with  the  eternal  life,  and  that  so  trifling,  when 
humbling  facts,  the  great  realities,  and  received  in  faith,  which  can  but  give 
then   humility    comes   upon    the   soul  joy  and  sorrow  for  a  moment.     Life  is 
as  darkness  comes  upon  the  face  of  the  before  us  as  a  trial-time  of  uncertain 
earth,  not  because  the  earth  has  made  length,  in  which  we  may  fit  ourselves, 
up  its  mind  to  be  dark,  but  because  it  if  we  will,  for  an  eternal  life  beyond 
has  rolled    into   the   great  shadow. —  it.     We  may  be  thankful  to  God  when 
Phillips  Brooks.  He   makes  our  training   for   eternity 

consist  in  the  doing  great  and  useful 

Vers.  6,  7.  Perfect  for  Service. — The  actions,  in  bringing  forth  much  fruit ; 

*'  captain  of  our  salvation "  was  "  made  but   we,   each   of   us,   are   doing    our 

158 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  V. 


business  as  thoroughly,  are  answering 
as  completely  the  purposes  for  which 
we  were  sent  into  the  world,  if  we  are 
laid  for  years  on  a  bed  of  sickness, 
and  made  incapable  of  action.  It  is 
not  true  that  our  great  business  or 
object  in  this  world  is  to  do  all  the 
good  we  can  in  it ;  our  great  business 
and  object  is  to  do  God's  will,  and  so  to 
be  changed  through  His  Spirit  into 
His  image  that  we  may  be  fit  to  live 
with  Him  for  ever.  His  will  is  de- 
clared to  us  by  the  course  of  His 
providence,  putting  us  into  different 
situations  of  life  where  different  duties 
are  required  of  us.  But  these  duties 
are  duties  because  they  are  His  will ; 
and  if  performed  without  reference  to 
Him,  however  good  our  motives  may  be, 
the  great  business  of  life  is  left  undone. 
To  keep  this  end  in  view  is  a  wonderful 
means  of  ridditfg  life  of  its  carefulness. 
If  simply  to  be  useful  in  our  generation 
be  our  main  object,  our  happiness  can- 
not but  greatly  depend  upon  outward 
circumstances.  Weakened  health,  and 
early  death,  spoil  usefulness.  When 
we  recollect  what  is  indeed  our  real 
business  here,  we  cast  at  once  all  our 
care  on  God,  and  resign  ourselves  con- 
tentedly to  His  disposal.  It  is  with 
reference  to  this  view  of  life  especially 
•that  Christ's  particular  employment, 
the  mixing  with  others,  not  for  busi- 
ness, or  for  pleasure,  but  to  do  them 
good,  is  so  exceedingly  useful.  It  is 
surprising  how  much  pleasure  may  be 
given  every  day,  how  much  suffering 
relieved,  and  how  much  good  done. 
But  how  can  we  secure  such  a  life  1 
We  may  not  be  able  to  imitate  Christ 
exactly  in  this  point,  but  we  must  find 
opportunity  to  do  sometimes  what  He 
did  always.  In  every  station  or  em- 
ployment, we  must  find  opportunity,  or 
make  it,  if  we  would  not  deprive  our- 
selves of  what  may  well  be  called  the 
path  of  daily  living.  And  God  will 
enable  us  to  make  a  great  deal  even  of 
our  common  intercourse  with  others ; 
and  here  we  all  have  our  opportunities, 
unless  we  choose  to  neglect  them. 
Such,  then,  is  Christ's  daily  lesson  to 
us;    not  to  be  idle  or  slothful  in  our 


work ;  and  to  sanctify  it  all  by  doing 
it  as  to  Him,  and  not  to  man. — Thomas 
Arnold,  D.D. 

Ver.  7.  Casting  Care. — This  familiar 
verse  is  more  suggestive  studied  in  its 
connection.  The  apostle  is  commending 
the  great  grace  of  Christian  humility  ; 
first  on  the  younger  members  of  the 
Church  in  all  their  relations  with  the 
elder,  and  then  on  all  the  members  in 
their  various  Church  relations.  Then 
follows  this  striking  expression  :  "Be 
clothed  with  humility,"  or  *'  Gird  your- 
selves with  humility."  The  picture 
presented  to  us  is  that  of  the  Eastern 
gentleman,  whose  long,  loose,  and 
flowing  garments  are  not  held  in  place, 
or  properly  set  off,  until  the  handsome 
folded  girdle  is  skilfully  adjusted  about 
the  loins.  St.  Peter  would  remind  us 
that  there  is  a  dress  of  Christian  graces 
with  which  we  should  be  clothed  ;  but 
the  various  graces  will  not  take  orderly 
forms  and  relations,  nor  will  they  bo 
complete,  unless  we  are  girded  about 
with  the  sweet  grace  of  Christian 
humility.  Then  the  apostle  reminds 
us  that  there  is  a  foundation  humility 
upon  which  our  humble  relations  one 
with  another  must  depend.  It  is  the 
humbling  of  the  self  before  God.  Our 
text,  taken  with  the  immediately 
previous  sentence,  reminds  us  that  the 
same  truth  may  need  setting  in  different 
forms,  in  order  to  meet  the  needs  of 
various  classes  of  persons.  There  are 
strong,  energetic  persons,  who  need  to 
have  truth  stated  strongly,  and  in 
tones  of  command.  To  them  St.  Peter 
says,  "  Humble  yourselves  under  the 
mighty  hand  of  God."  But  there  are 
also  gentle  souls,  to  whom  the  truth 
comes  most  effectively  when  it  sounds 
like  a  "  still  small  voice,"  and  falls  like 
the  night  dews.  To  meet  their  case  St. 
Peter  repeats  his  command ;  and  now  it 
is,  "  Casting  all  your  care  upon  Him, 
for  He  careth  for  you."  Humble  souls 
find  it  easy  to  "  cast  their  care."  They 
who  can  "  cast  their  care ''  must  be 
humble. 

I.  Think  of  man's  care. — "  All  your 
care."     By  "  care  "  is  meant  "  anxiety  " 

159 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.    PETER. 


rather  than  "  affliction."  Anxiety- 
suggests  the  daily  worry,  the  care 
about  a  thousand  things.  Care  arises 
from:  1.  Our  frequent  misunderstand- 
ings with  our  fellow-men.  It  comes 
because  we  persist  in  estimating  things 
from  our  own  points  of  view.  2.  Our 
business  and  family  claims.  For  these 
we  need  the  word  ^*  harassed."  3.  Our 
religious  claims.  There  should  be 
grave  anxiety  as  to  the  spirit  of  our 
life,  and  the  tone  of  our  example. 
And  there  should  be  constant  watch- 
fulness to  find  out,  and  willingness 
to  respond  to,  all  the  reasonable  de- 
mands made  on  our  time  or  on  our 
money. 

II.  Think  of  God's  care.— '*  He 
careth  for  you."  One  is  surprised  to 
find  the  same  word  used  for  God  as  for 
ourselves.  His  care  cannot  be  quite 
like  ours.  There  can  be  no  fretfulness, 
no  worry,  in  it.  1.  See  His  care  of  all 
the  creatures  He  has  made.  2.  His 
precise  knowledge  of  our  anxieties. 
3.  His  care  of  us  in  the  midst  of  our 
anxieties. 

III.  God's  care  of  us  is  a  persuasion 
to  cast  our  care  on  Him. — "  For." 
He  cares ;  then  why  should  we  ?  He  is 
able ;  He  is  wise ;  He  knows  all ;  He 
loves  with  an  everlasting  love ;  He  is 
our  Father.  Why  should  we  not  be 
as  calm  as  the  sailor  boy  in  the  wild 
storm,  who  knew  that  his  father  held 
the  helm  1  If  we  would  see  precisely 
what  is  meant  by  "casting  our  care 
on  God,"  let  us  think  of  the  prophet 
lifting  up  holy  hands,  and  saying  that 
most  full,  most  touching,  of  all  Bible 
prayers,  "  O  Lord,  I  am  oppressed ; 
undertake  Thou  for  me."  Is  this 
"casting  care"  difficult?  It  is  life's 
great  lesson.  Yokes  cease  to  rub  and 
press  when  God  bears  them  with  us. 
Crosses  are  lightened  when  God  bears 
them  with  us.  And  He  always  takes 
the  heavier  end.  Some,  however,  do 
not  know  God  well  enough  to  trust 
Him  thus  simply,  thus  perfectly.  Of 
all  the  burdens  He  would  have  cast 
upon  Him,  the  first  is  that  of  the 
unpardoned  soul.  That !  Yes ;  that 
greatest    of    all    our    cares    we    may 

160 


"  roll  off "  on  Him  "  who  careth  for 
us.'* 

The  Care  of  One  Who  Loves. — The 
care  which  God  has  is  the  care  of 
one  who  loves,  and  therefore  takes 
on  his  own  heart  the  troubles  of  his 
beloved  one.  And  what  does  He  do 
with  our  care  when  thus  we  cast  it 
upon  Him  ?  He  does  not  take  it  and 
put  it  right  away,  hiding  it  for  ever 
from  our  view.  We  wish  He  would 
do  that.  He  does  something  altogether 
better.  He  takes  the  burden  of  care 
and  puts  it  gently  back  on  our 
shoulders,  saying,  "  Remember,  it  is 
My  care  now;  it  is  yours  no  longer. 
And  now  I  want  you  to  carry  it  for 
Me."  Then  the  yoke  feels  easy,  and 
the  burden  is  light. 

Human  Ca/res  and  the  Divine  Care. 
— The  value  of  the  injunction  in  the 
former  half  of  the  text  depends  entirely 
upon  its  latter  half.  For  until  we  can 
get  men  to  believe  in  the  care  of  God 
for  them,  we  shall  never  persuade 
them  to  cast  all  their  care  upon  Him. 
It  must  be  confessed,  however,  that  it 
is  not  easy  for  any  of  us  adequately  to 
realise  what  these  words,  "  He  careth 
for  you,"  mean. 

I.  There  are  those  who  declare  that 
the  words  have  no  meaning. — They 
see  no  "  He "  in  the  universe.  True, 
they  speak  of  nature  with  reverence, 
and  in  terms  so  warmly  personal  that 
we  are  sometimes  tempted  to  think 
that  their  science  has  found  what  their 
faith  had  lost ;  but,  if  we  may  trust 
their  own  assertions,  it  is  not  so,  for  they 
find  no  evidence  in  nature  of  a  living 
God.  No  man  can  cast  his  care  upon  an 
It.  The  materialists'  creed  fosters  an 
inhuman  quite  as  much  as  an  ungodly 
type  of  character.  If  ever  the  presence 
of  care  becomes  too  heavy  for  him 
to  bear  it  alone,  one  of  two  results 
will  follow :  either  the  creed  will 
break  down,  or  the  man  will.  Hence 
suicide  is  so  often  the  consequence  of 
atheism. 

II.  We  may  find  it  difficult  to 
realise  that  God  really  cares  for  us. — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER.  chap,  v 


1.  Easier  to  believe  that  He  cares  for  the  care  at  all  we  are  to  lift  it  for  the  last 

universe  at  large,  than  that  He  takes  time,  that  we  may  cast  it  upon  God. — 

any  interest  in  us  as  individuals.     Too  Once  there,  it  becomes  God's  care,  not 

prone  to  think  of  Him  as  exercising  ours.     Because  God  cares  for  us,  He 

some  kind  of  care  over  us,  as  a  general  will  care  for  it. 

does  over  his  troops.  He  is  not  a  IV.  The  little  word  "  all "  includes 
general,  but  a  Father.  To  rightly  even  the  trivial  and  passing  anxieties 
understand  this  text  we  must  read,  of  each  day. — To  suppose  that  some 
"  He  cares  for  me '' ;  or,  2.  Some  one  cares  are  too  insignificant  to  take  to 
Tnay  say,  "  /  cannot  think  God  cares  God  in  prayer  is  not  to  honour  Him, 
tvery  much  for  me,  or  He  would  not  allow  but  unnecessarily  to  burden  ourselves. 
me  to  suffer  as  I  do,  and  give  me  this  It  has  been  said  that  **  white  ants  pick 
weary  burden  of  care  to  bear  day  by  a  carcase  quicker  and  cleaner  than  a 
day."  Like  a  child  complaining  of  lion  does " ;  and  so  these  little  cares 
having  hard  lessons  to  karn.  Very  may  even  more  effectually  destroy  our 
often  trials  and  anxieties  are  the  pledge  peace  than  a  single  great  trouble  if,  in 
and  token  of  God's  love.  If  we  had  no  our  mistaken  reverence  for  God's  great- 
care  we  might  begin  to  doubt  whether  ness,  we  refuse  to  cast  them  upon  Him. 
God  cared  for  us.  G.  S.  Barrett,  B.A, 
III.  If  we  lift  the  burden  of  our 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE   PARAGRAPH,— Verses  8,  9. 

The  Common  Enemy. — The  figures  in  this  passage  are  evidently  suggested  to 
St.  Peter's  mind  by  his  reference  to  shepherds  and  shepherding,  and  by  his 
conception  of  the  Church  as  the  "flock  of  Gcd."  "These  are  the  sudden  cries  ('  be 
sober,  be  vigilant'),  of  warning  from  a  shepherd  to  the  other  shepherds,  who  spies 
the  lion  prowling  round  the  flock  in  the  darkness,  while  the  guardians  of  the 
flock  lie  drowsy  and  asleep."  Whether  St.  Peter  is  to  be  understood  as  afl^irming 
the  existence  of  a  personal  devil,  or  as  speaking  here  in  a  figurative  manner, 
personifying  the  calamities  and  evils  which  were  proving  such  serious  temptations 
to  the  Christians  of  the  Dispersion,  need  not  be  decided.  Evil,  taking  form  as 
disability,  reproach,  and  persecution,  is  a  distinctly  active  and  mischievous  force; 
it  was  seiiously  imperilling  the  Christian  faith  and  life  of  the  disciples,  and 
precisely  what  they  had  to  watch  against  was  the  subtle  and  constant  and  varied 
influences  of  these  calamities  and  anxieties.  They  resisted  the  devil  by  resisting 
the  things  which  were  his  agencies. 

I.  Temptations  of  evil  are  always  on  the  watch  for  opportunities. — To 
impress  this  fact  the  figure  of  the  prowling  wild  beast  is  taken. 

II.  Temptations  of  evil  are  always  active. — This  is  said  to  impress  the 
necessity  of  wakefulness.  The  Christian  while  on  earth  is  always  on  the  battle- 
field, in  face  of  the  enemy.     All  are  subject  to  some  kind  of  suffering. 

III.  Temptations  of  evil  always  work  with  a  bad  design. — What  they  want 
to  devour  is  the  faith  which  is  the  very  foundation  of  Christian  life.  When 
there  is  so  much  to  bear,  it  is  hard  to  keep  trust  in  God. 

IV.  Temptations  of  evil  must  be  met  by  a  watchfulness  and  activity  greater 
than  that  which  they  exhibit. — "  Whom  withstand,  stedfast  in  your  faith." 
Steady  ;  ever  ready,  clothed  in  the  whole  armour  of  God. 

V.  Temptations  of  evil  made  the  same  trouble  and  conflict  for  our  fathers. — 
It  is  but  a  common  lot.  Our  fathers  conquered,  so  may  we  ;  our  Divine  Lord 
and  Master  conquered,  so  may  we,  in  His  strength. 


M  161 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yers.  8,  9.  Malign  Spiritual  In- 
fluences.— Man's  soul  carries  in  it  the 
elements  of  all  good,  and  of  all  evil — 
for  every  faculty  has  its  good  and  its 
evil  side,  its  temperate  and  its  excessive 
use  ;  and  there  is  no  outward  evil  in 
the  world  which  is  not  made  so  by 
something  which  represents  it  in  man. 
There  is  no  evil  under  the  general  de- 
signation of  sin^  which  has  not  its  origin 
within.  There  is  that  in  man  which 
answers  to  whatever  is  good  and  what- 
ever is  evil.  This  is  itself  a  sufficient 
reason  for  forethought  and  for  vigilance. 
But  the  sacred  Scripture  declares  that 
there  is  a  power  of  temptation  in  evil 
spirits ;  that  man,  in  this  mortal  state, 
is  surrounded  by  a  sphere  filled  with 
spirits  that  are  perpetually  tempting 
him  to  evil.  Many,  indeed,  disbelieve 
in  spirit  agency.  It  is  inconsistent 
with  their  conception  of  a  benevolent 
God,  that  He  should  permit  a  devil  to 
exist.  Inquire  into  the  nature  of  this 
influence  called  temj)tation.  Temptation 
holds  a  parallel  and  analogic  course 
with  inspiration.  It  is  simply  a 
stimulus,  coming  from  wherever  it  may, 
applied  to  a  faculty,  or  to  classes  of 
faculties,  in  the  human  mind — faculties 
of  which  men  have,  or  should  have, 
might  have,  full  control.  Temptation 
never  works  out  anything.  It  merely 
gives  impulse,  suggestion,  stimulus. 
If  any  evil  is  wrought  out  through  you, 
you  work  it  out  wholly  and  absolutely. 
If,  being  impelled,  men  do  evil,  as 
when,  being  impelled,  they  do  right, 
the  right  or  the  wrong  is  their  own 
act,  for  which  they  are  responsible. 
For,  although  they  were  pushed  to  it, 
tempted  to  it,  they  had  plenary  power 
to  do  it  or  not  to  do  it.  No  man, 
therefore,  is  carried  away  under  tempta- 
tion or  by  temptation.  Many  men 
carry  themselves  away.  No  man  is 
overborne  by  temptation  in  any  literal 
sense,  although  figuratively  the  lan- 
guage is  employed  properly  enough. 
Temptation  does  not  destroy  self-control. 

162 


It  may  intensify  its  difficulty,  but  it 
does  not  invalidate  plenary  power.  The 
strength  of  the  temptation  lies  wholly  in 
the  faculty  which  it  tempts.  Temptation 
goes  with  the  strongest  faculties.  See 
some  of  the  conditions  of  mind  which 
make  temptations  by  evil  natures  fatal 
and  dangerous.  Every  right  and  good 
tendency  of  the  soul  draws  to  itself 
food  for  goodness.  A  good  man  attracts 
goodness,  and  is  sensitive  to  goodness. 
The  better  you  are,  the  more  qualities 
there  are  in  life  helping  you  to  be  good. 
It  is  easy  to  be  good,  after  you  have 
received  impulsion  towards  goodness. 
A  bad  man  finds  th at  which  is  bad.  He 
carries  it  with  him.  An  irritable  man 
finds  not  only  irritable  men,  but 
occasions  for  irritability.  Selfishness 
finds  everywhere  occasions  for  selfish- 
ness. The  moral  condition  which  you 
carry  into  life  constitutes  the  first 
great  ground  of  susceptibility  to  in- 
spiration on  the  side  of  good,  and  to 
temptation  on  the  side  of  evil.  To  this 
must  be  added  the  want  of  fixed  and 
ruling  purposes  by  which  you  meet  and 
resist  evil  tendencies.  There  is  much 
in  life  that  is  easily  overcome,  if  there 
be  a  positive  and  steadfast  resistance 
to  it.  But  if  we  are  languid,  if  we 
are  pulseless,  we  become  a  prey  to  it. 
Physicians  tell  us  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  predisposition  to  epidemic. 
Also  the  habit  of  doing  wrong  makes 
it  more  sure  that  temptations  will  be 
victorious  over  men.  And  the  social 
element  enhances  the  power  of  tempta- 
tion. Consider,  then,  how  many  ad- 
versaries are  moving  upon  every  single 
point  of  your  nature.  Consider  what 
special  temptations,  over  and  above  the 
general  tenor  of  society,  are  marching 
out  upon  you  from  your  business. 
Consider,  too,  all  the  temptations  which 
spring  upon  you  from  individual  men. 
Consider  the  evil  fellowship  which  you 
have  in  the  company  in  which  you  go 
at  large.  Consider  that  you  have  secret 
and  open  sins,   which  are  themselves 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER.  chap.  v. 


like  cancers  draining  the  body  of   its  influence    which    sweeps   in   from    the 

strength  and  stamina,  and  eating  at  great  spirit-world,  against  which  God 

the  very  vitals.     Upon  all  these  tempta-  bids  us  take  heed. — H.  Ward  Beecher. 
tions     there     descends     that     malign 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  10—14. 

Soul- Strength  out  of  Life-Strain. — "  The  God  of  all  grace  .  .  .  shall  Himself 
perfect,  stablish,  strengthen  you." 

I.  God  can. — For  He  is  the  God  of  all  grace. 
II.  God  meant  to. — For  He  called  you  with  that  very  purpose  in  view. 
III.  God  does. — For  the  present  stablishing  is  with  a  view  to  future  perfecting. 
lY.  God  is  keeping  on  doing. — Though  He  may  be  pleased  to  put  the  com- 
pletion, the  perfecting  of  His  work  into  the  future,  and  make  you  wait  awhile, 
and  make  the  waiting  time  a  time  of  sore  trial,  of  this  you  may  be  absolutely 
assured,  there  is  some  needs  be  for  the  delay ;  but  the  work  is  in  steady  progress, 
all  through  the  time  of  delay,  and  the  issue  will  be  in  every  way  higher  and 
better  because  of  the  delay.     We  have  to  suffer  awhile,  and  God  knows  best 
how  long  the  "  while  "  should  be. 

The  Promise. — "  He  Himself  "  is  the  emphatic  language  of  the  apostle  here  ; 
for  from  the  same  fountain  of  grace  as  the  call  to  eternal  glory  came,  wall  come 
all  the  gifts  essential  to  its  attainment. 

I.  He  will  perfect  you. — The  believer  is  at  first,  and  for  a  while,  very  deficient 
in  many  respects — in  wdsdom,  prudence,  charity,  patience,  and  all  other  virtues 
of  the  Christian  character.  Must  those  defects  remain  in  him  ?  and  must  he 
carry  them  to  the  grave  ?  No  ;  ere  he  enters  the  "  eternal  glory  "  he  must  be 
blameless,  harmless,  and  without  rebuke,  and  therefore  made  perfect  in  every 
good  word  and  work.  He  cannot,  however,  make  himself  perfect.  God  must  do 
it ;  and  He  will  do  it,  never  leaving  His  servant  until  He  has  done  for  him  all 
that  He  has  promised. 

II.  He  will  stablish  you,  or  make  you  fast. — "  He  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock, 
and  estabUshed  my  goings,"  said  David ;  and  Jesus  said  to  Peter,  "  I  have 
prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  There  are  Christians  who,  when  the 
storm  sets  in,  are  like  trees  which  wave  to  and  fro  in  the  wind,  and  which, 
having  but  a  slender  hold  of  the  soil,  are  in  danger  of  being  blown  down  ;  but 
God  can  give  them  such  support  that  they  shall  be  like  majestic  oaks  that  defy 
the  fiercest  blast,  or  like  a  lighthouse  on  a  rock  that  stands  unmoved  amid  the 
billows  of  the  raging  sea. 

III.  He  will  strengthen  you. — For  ordinary  warfare,  bodily  strength  is 
necessary ;  for  the  warfare  in  which  the  Christian  is  engaged,  spiritual  strength 
is  essential.  A  feeble,  timid  Christian  will  fly  before  the  enemy,  but  one  who 
is  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might  will  go  and  meet  him  with 
all  confidence.  And  God  gives  strength  to  His  people.  They  are  strengthened 
with  might  by  His  Spirit  in  the  inner  man,  and  when  temptation  comes  they  are 
able  to  resist  it,  and  in  every  conflict  they  come  off  victorious. 

IV.  He  will  settle  you. — The  word  ^t/xcAtdjo-at  means  He  will  ground,  or 
fix  you,  as  on  a  sure  foundation,  so  that,  Hke  a  mighty  fortress,  you  shall  stand 
unmoved,  even  though  assailed  by  hosts  of  foes.  A  precious  promise  this ;  for 
our  enemies  sometimes  come  upon  us  like  an  army  set  in  array,  threatening  to 
storm  a  citadel,  and  to  take  possession  of  it  by  force.  But  our  citadel  will  prove 
too  strong  for  them,  and  they  shall  be  driven  back,  like  the  armies  of  Sennacherib 
when  they  threatoned  to  invade  the  Holy  City.     In  these  several  words  there  is 

163 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   PETER. 


a  striking  rise  and  development.  The  believer's  character  is  first  perfected,  then 
he  becomes  firm  in  the  faith  ;  he  is  then  strengthened  to  endure  the  assaults  of 
the  foe,  and  then  he  becomes  settled  or  made  fast,  and  is  as  a  tower  of  strength 
which  none  of  his  enemies  can  shake. — Thornley  Smith. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  10.  Stablished,  Strengthened, 
Settled. — The  word  "settled"  is  some- 
times used  in  describing  a  building 
which  comes  to  rest  securely  on  its 
foundations.  In  common  phraseology 
we  speak  of  the  "  settling  "  of  a  house 
when  the  structure  consolidates  and 
comes  to  abide  surely  and  immovably 
in  its  place.  It  takes  years,  in  some 
instances,  for  that  process  to  complete 
itself ;  and,  as  it  goes  on,  flaws  are 
discovered,  and  rents  are  sometimes 
made,  showing  clearly  where  the 
strength  of  the  house  lies — not  in  the 
mere  walls,  but  in  that  firm  founda- 
tion on  which  they  rest,  and  on  which 
the  several  parts  settle  themselves 
broadly  and  wholly.  We  cannot  but 
remember  in  this  connection  the  one 
ultimate  foundation  of  a  sinner's  trust, 
other  than  which  no  man  can  lay — 
Jesus  Christ,  and  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Him  ;  and  that  the  whole  great  process 
of  Christian  life  and  education  is  with 
a  view  to  solidify  the  trust,  and  fix  the 
faith  immovably  on  Him.  God's  first 
work  in  a  man  is  largely  potential. 
He  builds  the  framework  of  a  new  life. 
He  gives  enough,  when  used,  to  supply 
all  the  need.  Yet,  when  the  need 
arises,  it  is  many  a  time  very  great. 
Through  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  weari- 
ness, and  storm,  and  battle,  the  soul 
makes  way — often  apparently  with 
extremest  difficulty  —  "  troubled  on 
every  side,  perplexed,  persecuted,  cast 
down" — bearing  about  in  the  body 
the  death-pains  of  the  Son  of  Gcd. 
But  lo  !  by  means  of  all  this  searching 
and  conflict  and  endeavour,  there 
comes  by  degrees  the  growing  fulness 
of  the  better  life.  Temptation  brings 
increase  of  strength ;  assaults  of  the 
enemy,  repulsed,  give  new  courage; 
change  carries  away  many  a  treasure, 
but,  to  fill  the  void,  brings  ever  more 
and  more  of  the  "  unsearchable  riches." 

164 


Castles  in  the  air,  built  on  vain  con- 
fidence, melt  from  the  sight,  and  the 
heart,  convinced  of  its  folly,  comes  to 
rest,  with  a  child's  simplicity  of  trust, 
and  yet  with  a  man's  certainty  of  con- 
viction, on  Him  who  is  able  to  keep 
that  which  is  committed  to  Him,  and  is 
"  stablished,  strengthened,  settled,"  at 
last.  It  is  literally  at  last  with  many 
a  one.  The  final  settlement  is  often 
just  before  the  dying.  It  sometimes 
takes  God  a  lift  time  to  teach  us  to  flee 
from  false  refuges — to  teach  us  to  be 
humble,  and  to  trust  entirely  in  His 
Son,  and  in  His  own  love,  as  brought 
near  in  Him.  Fiom  many  a  pale, 
bloodless  face  there  looks  out  at  length 
the  calmness,  almost  celestial,  of  a 
perfect  trust.  On  many  a  dying  bed 
you  see  the  features  which  have  beea 
seamed  and  scarred  and  almost  worn 
away  by  earthly  care,  and  by  spiritual 
sorrow  and  fear,  which  seemc  d,  never- 
ending,  smoothed  at  last  into  a  serenity 
and  a  beauty  caught  directly  from 
heaven.  And  from  many  a  low  voice, 
sinking  into  the  last,  murmurs,  you 
might,  if  you  were  near,  catch  the 
whisper  of  the  departing  one  :  "I  am 
at  peace  now  ;  *  settled '  at  last !  "  We 
may  all  have  "  settlement  "  in  Christ ; 
it  is  intended  and  promised  that  we 
should  have  it,  if  we  will,  before  the 
end  of  life  comes.  God  grant  that,  if 
we  have  not  this  good  thing  earli(  r,  we 
may  all  have  it  then. — A.  Raleigh,  D.D. 

Ver.  12.  The  True  Grace  of  God.  ~ 
St.  Peter  affirms  that,  no  matter  what 
disabilities  may  attach  to  their  Christian 
profession,  it  was  the  true  grace  of  God 
in  which  they  stood,  and  in  it  they  must 
still  stand  steadfast.  "The  positivon 
they  now  occupied  was  one  which  the 
favour  of  God  had  brought  them  into." 
The  expression,  the  "  true  grace  of 
God,"  may  be  opened  and  illustrated  in 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   1.  PETER. 


CHAP.  V. 


three  relations.  1.  True  grace  regarded 
as  Revelation — in  the  Son.  2.  True 
grace  regarded  as  Redemption  —  in 
the  self-sacrifice  of  the  Son.  3.  True 
grace  regarded  as  Sanctification  —  in 
the  power  of  the  suflfering  innocence  of 
the  Son. 

The  Gospel  of  the  Grace  of  God. — 
1.  That  the  economy  of  the  gospel  is, 
throughout  its  constitution  and  in- 
fluences, a  grand  display  of  Divine 
grace.     (1)  The  announcements  of  the 


gospel,  as  to  the  methods  by  which 
blessings  are  meritoriously  secured. 
(2)  The  influence  by  wbich  blessings 
are  actually  imparted.  (3)  The  nature 
of  those  blessings  themselves.  (4)  The 
extent  to  which  these  blessings  are  to 
be  diffused.  2.  That  the  economy  of 
the  gospel,  as  such,  impresses  important 
demands  on  all  to  whom  it  is  pro- 
claimed. (1)  It  should  be  cordially 
believed.  (2)  It  must  be  steadfastly 
adhered  to.  (3)  It  must  be  zealously 
diffused. — James  Parsons. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER   F. 


Ver.  7.  God^s  Love  Inexhaustihle. — Suppose 
a  meadow  in  which  a  million  of  daisies  open 
their  bosoms,  all  at  one  time,  to  the  sun. 
On  one  of  them,  while  it  was  yet  a  bud,  a 
little  stone  has  fallen.  At  once  crushed  and 
overshadowed,  it  still  struggles  bravely 
against  all  odds  to  expand  its  petals  like  the 
rest.  For  many  days  this  effort  is  continued 
without  success.  The  tiny  stone,  a  mighty 
rock  to  the  tiny  flower,  squats  on  its  breast, 
and  will  not  admit  a  single  sunbeam.  At 
length  the  flower-stalk,  having  gathered 
strength  by  its  constant  exertion,  acquired 
force  enough  to  overbalance  the  weight,  and 
tossed  the  intruder  off.  Up  sprang  the 
daisy  with  a  bound ;  and  in  an  instant 
another  floweret  was  added  to  the  vast 
multitude  which  in  that  meadow  drank  their 
fill  of  sunlight.  The  sun  in  heaven  was  not 
incommoded  by  the  additional  demand.  The 
new-comer  received  into  its  open  cup  as 
many  sunbeams  as  it  would  have  received 
although  no  other  flower  had  grown  in  all 
the  meadow — in  all  the  earth.  Thus  the 
sun,  finite  though  it  be,  helps  us  to  under- 
stand the  absolute  infinitude  of  its  Maker. 
When  an  immortal  being,  long  crushed  and 
turned  away  by  a  load  of  sin,  at  length, 
through  the  power  of  a  new  spiritual  life, 
throws  off  the  burden,  and  opens  with  a 
bound  to  receive  a  heavenly  Father's  long- 
offered  but  rejected  love,  the  Giver  is  not 
impoverished  by  the  new  demand  upon  His 
kindness.  Although  a  thousand  millions 
should  arise  and  go  to  the  Father,  each 
would  receive  as  much  of  that  Father's  love 
as  if  he  alone  of  all  fallen  creatures  had 
come  back  reconciled  to  God. — Mev.  William 
Arnot. 

Providential  Care. — When  a  child  (says 
Mrs.  Mary  Winslow,  in  her  diary,  then  Mary 
Forbes)  I  accompanied  my  parents,  during 
the  French  war,  on  a  visit  to  England.  Our 
vessel  was  a  light  barque,  carrying  a  few 
guns,  and  but  ill  furnished  for  severe  conflict 


with  the  enemy.  On  entering  the  Channel, 
midway  between  the  English  and  French 
coast,  a  ship  of  war  bore  in  sight.  It  was 
toward  night,  and  as  she  appeared  to  bear 
down  upon  us,  our  captain  prepared  for 
action.  My  mother  and  I  were  hurried  from 
the  cabin  to  what  was  thought  a  place  of 
greater  safety  below.  My  father  remained 
on  deck.  All  was  confusion  above  us, 
while  I  was  astonished  at  being  thus  suddenly 
removed  from  my  comfortable  berth  to  the 
dismal  quarters  beneath  the  decks.  We  had 
not  been  long  there  when  I  observed  a  boy 
come  occasionally  to  the  place  of  our  im- 
prisonment, and,  with  a  large  horn  in  his 
hand,  take  something  from  out  of  a  barrel, 
having  first  fixed  a  lighted  candle  upon  its 
edge,  and  leaving  it  there.  Observing,  as  1 
sat  upon  my  mother's  lap— who  was  too 
much  absorbed  in  anxiety  to  notice  the 
circumstance — that  the  piece  of  candle  was 
nearly  burnt  to  the  edge,  I  got  down,  put 
out  my  hand,  and  took  it  away,  saying, 
"  Mamma,  this  will  burn  the  barrel."  It  was 
a  cask  of  gunpowder.  Had  I  not  removed 
it  that  moment,  or  in  removing  it  had  a 
spark  fallen  from  the  lengthened  wick,  the 
vessel  and  all  on  board  must  have  been  blown 
to  atoms. 

God's  Care  of  His  servants. — Paul  Gerhard 
was,  many  years  ago,  a  great  preacher  in 
Brandenburg,  Germany,  and  he  loved  to 
preach  from  his  heart  what  he  saw  and 
believed  in  the  Word  of  God.  But  the 
•'Great  Elector"  of  Brandenburg  did  not 
like  his  preaching,  and  sent  to  say  to  him, 
"  Paul  Gerhard,  if  you  cannot  preach  differ- 
ently from  that,  you  must  leave  this  country." 
Gerhard  sent  back  a  message  that  it  would 
be  very  hard  to  leave  his  home,  his  people, 
his  country,  and  his  livelihood  ;  but  he  could 
only  preach  what  he  found  in  God's  Word, 
and  as  long  as  he  lived  he  would  preach 
that.  So  he  had  to  go  into  banishment  with 
his  wife  and  little  children.     At  the  end  of 

165 


CHAP.  V. 


nOMlLEilC  COMMENTARY:   I  PEfEtt. 


the  first  day's  journey  they  came  into  a 
wood,  and  rested  at  night  at  a  little  inn  they 
found  there.  The  little  children  were  crying 
and  clinging  to  their  mother,  and  she  too, 
who  had  kept  up  all  day,  now  began  to 
weep.  This  made  Gerhard  have  a  very 
heavy  heart.  So  he  went  alone  into  the 
dark  wood  to  think  and  pray.  While  he 
was  in  the  wood  this  text  came  to  his  mind 
and  comforted  him :  "  Commit  thy  way  unto 
the  Lord;  trust  also  in  Him,  and  He  will 
bring  it  to  pass."  "  Yes,"  he  thought, 
"though  I  am  banished  from  house  and 
home,  and  don't  know  where  to  take  my 
wife  and  children  for  shelter  to-morrow,  yet 
God,  my  God,  sees  me  in  this  dark  wood. 
Now  is  the  time  to  trust  Him.  He  will  show 
me  the  way  through.  He  will  bring  it  to 
pass.'"  He  was  so  happy  that  he  remembered 
that  text,  and  so  thankful  to  God,  that  he 
tried  to  make  the  text  into  a  hymn  as  he 
paced  up  and  down  between  the  trees. 
Every  verse  begins  with  a  word  or  two  from 
the  text,  so  that  if  you  read  the  first  words 
of  each  verse  you  just  read  the  text.  When 
he  went  into  the  house  he  told  his  wife 
about  the  text,  and  began  to  repeat  to  her 
his  hymn.  She  soon  dried  her  tears  (the 
children  had  already  gone  to  sleep),  and 
become  as  hopeful  and  trustful  as  Gerhard 
himself.  They  had  scarcely  retired  to  rest 
when  they  heard  a  great  noise  at  the  door. 
It  seemed  as  though  some  important  person 
were  knocking  there.  When  the  landlord 
opened  the  door,  a  man  on  horseback  said 
aloud,  *'  I  am  a  messenger.  1  come  from 
Duke  Christian  of  Merseberg,  and  I  am  in 
search  of  Paul  Gerhard.  Do  you  know 
whether  he  has  passed  this  way  1 "  "  Paul 
Gerhard,"  said  the  landlord.  "  Yes,  he  is  in 
this  house."  "  Then  let  me  see  him  instantly," 
said  the  Duke's  messenger.  And  the 
messenger  handed  to  the  good  man  a 
large  sealed  letter.  It  came  from  the  Duke 
Christian,  and  it  said,  "  Come  into  my 
country,  Paul  Gerhard,  and  you  shall  have 
church,  and  people,  and  home,  and  livelihood, 
and  liberty  to  preach  the  gospel  to  your 
heart's  content.  Gerhard's  hymn  commenced 
thus : — 

"  *  Commit  thy  way,'  O  weeper, 
The  cares  that  fret  thy  soul, 
To  thine  Almighty  Keeper, 
Who  makes  the  world  to  roll ; 

" '  Unto  the  Lord,'  who  guideth 
The  wind  and  cloud  and  sea ; 
Oh,  doubt  not,  He  provideth 
A  pathway,  too,  for  thee." 

Ver.  13.  TJie  Church  at  Babylon.— "^he 
rendering  of  this  verse  in  our  Authorised 
Version  probably  results  from  the  old  eccle- 
siastical figment  that  Peter  was  founder 
and  Bishop  of  the  Roman  Church,  and 
that  he  here  says   Babylon  mystically   for 

166 


Rome.  But  for  the  influence  of  this  idea  it  is 
improbable  that  our  translators  would  have 
supplemented  the  verse  by  introducing  the 
word  "  Church."  Neander  renders  it,  "Syne- 
clecte,  who  is  at  Babylon,  greets  you,  and  so 
does  my  son  Marcus."  By  Syneclecte  he 
understands  Peter's  wife,  whom  here  he 
mentions  by  name.  That  he  was  married 
we  learn  from  Matt.  viii.  14.  That  his  wife 
accompanied  him  on  his  journeys  is  implied 
in  Paul's  language,  1  Cor.  ix.  5,  "  Have  not  I 
a  right  to  take  a  believing  wife  (ddi\<pT]v 
yvpoiKa)  with  me  on  my  journeys,  like  .  .  . 
Cephas  ? "  Neander  quotes  Clem.  Alex.  Strom., 
to  the  effect  that  Peter,  seeing  his  wife  led  by 
to  martyrdom,  called  to  her  by  name,  and  said, 
*'  Oh,  remember  the  Lord."  lean  hardly  think, 
however,  that  Neander  is  right  in  his  idea 
that  Syneclecte  is  a  proper  name.  Probably 
the  word  should  be  translated.  Its  equivalent 
would  be  some  such  phrase  as  "  your  sister 
in  the  faith."  The  verse  would  then  read, 
"  Your  sister  in  the  faith,  who  is  at  Babylon, 
salutes  you,  and  so  does  my  son  Marcus." 
This,  of  course,  would  leave  Neander's 
view  of  the  passage  untouched,  that  it  is  his 
wife  and  son,  then  with  him  at  Babylon,  who 
send  greetings,  and  not  the  Church. — 
Baptist  Magazine. 

Bahylon. — Three  places  have  claimed  to  be 
understood  under  this  name :  1.  A  little 
place  called  Babylon  in  Egypt,  which  has 
nothing  to  plead  for  itself  except  the 
unlikelihood  of  St.  Peter  ever  being  at  the 
Oriental  Babylon,  coupled  with  the  difiiculty 
of  supposing  that  the  name  is  used  quite 
figuratively.  Perhaps,  also,  we  should 
mention  the  traditional  connection  of 
St.  Mark  with  Egypt.  No  one  now,  however, 
maintains  this  view.  2.  The  literal  Babylon 
in  the  East.  This  has  for  itself  the  simple 
way  in  which  St.  Peter  uses  the  word,  without 
any  circumlocution.  But  it  has  nothing  else 
for  it  to  set  against  all  the  overwhelming 
arguments  in  favour  of  the  third  claimant ; 
besides  which  we  learn  from  Josephus  of  a 
great  expulsion  of  Jews  from  the  Oriental 
Babylon  a  few  years  before  this  date.  These 
Jews  might,  of  course,  however,  have 
gathered  there  again,  as  they  did  at  Rome, 
in  spite  of  frequent  expulsions.  3.  It  may 
be  called  the  established  interpretation  that 
the  place  meant  Rome.  We  never  hear  of 
St.  Peter's  being  in  the  East,  and  the  thing 
in  itself  is  improbable,  whereas  nothing  but 
Protestant  prejudice  can  stand  against  the 
historical  evidence  that  St.  Peter  sojourned 
and  died  at  Rome.  Whatever  theological  con- 
sequences may  flow  from  it,  it  is  as  certain 
that  St.  Peter  was  at  Rome  as  that  St.  John 
was  in  Ephesus.  Everything  in  the  letter  also 
points  to  such  a  state  of  things  as  was  to  be 
found  at  Rome  about  the  date  when  we 
believe  the  letter  to  have  been  written.  It 
is  objected  that  St.  Peter  would  not  gravely 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  PETER. 


CHAP.  V. 


speak  of  Rome  under  a  fanciful  name  when 
dating  a  letter ;  but  the  symbolism  in  the 
name  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the  context. 
St.  Feter  has  just  personified  the  Church  of 
the  place  from  which  he  writes,  which  seems 
quite  as  unprosaic  a  use  of  language  as  to 
call  Kome  "  Babylon."  And  it  seems  pretty 
clear  that  the  name  was  quite  intelligible  to 
Jewish  readers,  for  whom  it  was  intended. 
The  Apocalypse  (xvii.  18)  is  not  the  only 
place  where  Rome  is  found  spoken  of  under 
this  title.  One  of  the  first  of  living  Hebraists 
told  the  present  writer  that  no  Hebrew  of 
St.  Peter's  day  would  have  had  need  to 
think  twice  what  city  was  meant,  when 
"  Babylon "  was  mentioned.  And  on  the 
mention  of  the  name  all  the  prophecies  of 


the  vengeance  to  be  taken  on  the  city  which 
had  desolated  the  Holy  Land  would  rush 
with  consolation  into  the  minds  of  the 
readers,  and  they  would  feel  that  St.  Peter, 
though  supporting  St.  Paul,  was  still  in  full 
sympathy  with  themselves.  Finally,  as 
M.  Renan  suggests,  there  were  reasons  of 
prudence  for  not  speaking  too  plainly  about 
the  presence  of  a  large  Christian  society  in 
Rome.  The  police  were  still  more  vigilant 
now  than  when  St.  Paul  wrote  in  guarded 
language  about  the  Roman  Empire  to  the 
Thessalonians.  It  might  provoke  hostilities  if 
the  epistle  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  delator^ 
with  names  and  places  too  clearly  given. — 
A,  J.  Mason,  M.A. 


167 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF 

PETER. 


INTRODUCTION. 

Deprecating  the  use  of  extravagant  language  concerning  the  consequences  of 
rejecting  St.  Peter's  authorship  of  this  epistle,  the  Rev.  A.  Plummer,  M.A.j  has 
the  following  useful  passage  in  *'  Ellicott's  Commentary." 

*'  The  question  of  the  genuineness  of  the  epistle  is  one  of  immense  interest  and  of 
no  small  importance  ;  but  there  is  no  terrible  alternative  before  us.  If,  after  all, 
we  have  to  admit  that  the  epistle  is  possibly,  or  probably,  or  certainly  not  the  work 
of  St.  Peter,  the  spiritual  value  of  the  contents,  both  in  themselves  and  in  having 
received  the  stamp  of  the  Church  as  canonical,  will  remain  absolutely  unchanged ; 
although,  possibly,  our  own  views  of  God's  providence  in  relation  to  the  canon  of 
Scripture  may  require  re-consideration  and  re-adjustment.  This,  however,  is  but 
the  common  experience,  both  of  the  individual  and  of  the  race.  Men's  views  of 
God's  dealings  with  them  are  ever  needing  re-adjustment,  as  He  hides  and 
manifests  Himself  in  history ;  for  His  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  nor  His 
thoughts  as  our  thoughts." 

In  the  time  of  Eusebius  this  epistle  was  classed  among  the  disputed  books.  The 
first  definite  references  to  it  are  not  found  before  Origen,  in  the  third  century. 
There  is  manifest  difference  in  style,  subject-matter,  and  persons  addressed* 
between  it  and  the  earlier  epistle.  The  similarity  between  2  Peter  ii.  1-19,  and 
Jude  verses  3-16,  suggests  copying  one  from  the  other;  and  probably  Peter  from 
Jude.  The  epistle  was  received  as  in  the  canon  at  the  Council  of  Laodicea 
(372  A.D.),  and  the  Council  of  Carthage  (397  a.d.). 

The  object  of  the  epistle  is  twofold  (chap.  iii.  17,  18) :  1.  That  the  readers 
might  believe,  lest,  being  led  away  with  the  error  of  the  wicked,  they  should  fall 
from  their  steadfastness.  2.  That  they  might  grow  in  grace  and  the  knowledge 
of  their  Lord  and  Saviour ;  this  last  being  the  final  aim  of  the  whole,  as  the  one 
means  of  fellowship  with  God,  of  escape  from  the  pollutions  of  the  world,  and 
of  access  into  the  Divine  kingdom. 

169 


INTRODUCTION.    BOMILETIC  commentary :  II.   PETER. 

There  is  no  reference  in  the  epistle  to  dangers  from  without  affecting  the 
Churches  in  the  way  of  persecution.  The  dangers  dealt  with  are  those  which 
arise  from  (1)  the  encouragement  to  evil  living  given  by  false  teachers,  and 
(2)  from  disbelief  of  the  Lord's  coming. 

Canon  Maclear,  D.D.,  says  that  "  its  style  differs  considerably  from  that  of  the 
earlier  epistle,"  a  fact  which,  as  St.  Jerome  tells  us,  weighed  with  those  who 
rejected  it,  and  which  he  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  different  "  inter- 
preters "  or  secretaries  were  employed.  It  has  a  greater  unity  of  thought.  It 
is  more  elegant,  and  comes  nearer  to  having  a  Greek  air  about  it. 

Analysis  of  the  Contents. 

The  writer  salutes  those  who  have  like  faith  with  himself  in  the  righteousness 
of  their  God  and  Saviour.  He  exhorts  them  to  growth  and  fruitfulness  in  the 
knowledge  of  Christ.  He  lays  down  the  grounds  on  which  this  knowledge  rests, 
in  the  testimony  of  apostles  and  the  word  of  prophecy.  He  describes  the  erroneous 
teachers  who  were  about  to  arise,  their  unholy  practices,  and  the  destruction 
sure  to  come  upon  them,  as  of  old.  He  rejects  the  scoffers  who  deny  Christ's 
coming.  He  exhorts  believers  in  view  of  the  Lord's  coming. — From  ''  The 
Comprehensive  Teacherd  Helps." 


170 


BOMlLEfIC  COMMENTARY:    ll.  PETER.  chap.  f. 

CHAPTER   I. 
INSPIRATION    TO    CHRISTIAN    GROWTH. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Simon.— The  Greek  MSS.  give  Symeon ;  see  Acts  xv.  14.  A  servant  and  an  apostle 
—  Compare  1  Peter  i.  1,  "an  apostle,"  and  Jude  verse  1,  "a  servant."  Like  precious  faith. — 
See  1  Pet.  i.  7,  19.  This  appears  to  be  addressed  to  Gentile  Christians,  as  called  to  share  in 
Christian  privilege  with  the  Jews.  Through. — ev  ;  inclusive  ;  that  by  which  they  were  sur- 
rounded, the  element  of  their  spiritual  existence.  "  In  the  justifying  grace,"  the  righteous- 
ness which  God  has  provided  for  us  in  Christ.  God  and  our  Saviour. — Not  as  two  persons. 
rod  Qeov  thj.Cjv  Kai  auTrjpos.  The  single  article  tov  applies  to  both  QeoC  and  a-ooTrjpos  :  "Our 
God  and  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ." 

Ver.  2.  Knowledge. — iiriyviba-ei.  Increasing — ever-increasing — knowledge  ;  see  chap.  iii.  18. 
Our  Lord. — That  is,  of  Jesus  as  our  Lord. 

Ver.  3.  Divine  power. — ttjs  deias  dwd/xeojs.  The  personification  of  this  means  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  personally  the  author  of  the  new  creation.  Life  and  godliness. — 
The  new  soul-life,  and  its  fitting  expression  in  earthly  life  and  relations.  Godliness  is  a  tone 
and  character  on  conduct.  Tog  glory  and  virtue. — Margin  R.V.  "  by  His  own  glory  and 
virtue."     By  the  exercise  of  the  same  attributes  to  which  we  are  to  refer  our  call. 

Ver.  4.  Exceeding  great. — ra  fxeyLcra :  the  greatest,  as  concerning  the  greatest  things. 
Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature. — Compare  1  Pet.  i.  23.  "  A  participation  in  the  moral  per- 
fections and  communicable  attributes  of  the  Godhead."  The  Christian  is  thought  of  as 
receiving,  upon  faith,  a  new,  Divine  life,  which  makes  him  kin  with  God. 

Ver.  5.  Beside  this. — "  Yea,  and  for  this  very  cause,"  "  on  this  very  account."  Diligence. — 
Or  earnestness;  putting  heart  into  effort.  Add. — Better  as  R.V.,  "in  your  faith  supply." 
Adding  to  is  not  the  idea  of  the  Greek.  "  Each  element  of  the  Christian  life  is  to  be 
as  an  instrument  by  which  that  which  follows  is  wrought  out."  Knowledge.  — Here,  "  moral 
discernment." 

Ver.  6.  Temperance. — General  self-management.  Patience. — As  self-control  in  temper. 
Godliness. — The  right  tone  on  all  conduct ;  or  it  may  mean,  as  it  certainly  includes,  right 
disposition  towards  God. 

Ver.  7.  Charity. — t7]v  dydirriv,  general  and  universal  love  for  men  as  men. 

Ver.  8.  Barren,  etc. — dpyovs,  idle,  not  using  effort;  dKdpirovs,  not  attaining  results.  Know- 
ledge.— See  vers.  2,  3. 

Ver.  9.  Blind. — Self-blinded,  closing  his  eyes  to  the  light,  fivuirdi^wv,  contracting  the 
eyelids,  as  one  who  cannot  see  clearly.  Was  purged. — And  therefore  stands  pledged  to 
the  new  life. 

Ver.  10,  Never  fall. — Better,  "  stumble."  A  step  short  of  falling.  "  The  man  who  has 
acquired  these  graces  has  his  path  freed  from  many  stumbling-blocks,  and  his  vision  cleared 
to  see  and  avoid  the  rest." 

Ver.  11.  Ends  the  first  main  section  of  the  epistle. 

Ver.  12.  Present  truth. — Not  some  particular  phase  of  truth,  but  the  truth  which  you  have 
and  hold. 

Ver.  14.  Showed  me. — The  reference  cannot  be  to  John  xxi.  18,  as  John's  gospel  was 
written  later  than  the  epistle.  It  may,  however,  be  to  the  incident  narrated  in  that 
gospel. 

Ver.  16.  Fables. — Legends,  myths.  With  special  reference  to  the  narrative  of  the  marvels 
of  the  Transfiguration.  Coming. — Whether  this  looks  backward  or  onward  is  not  quite  clear. 
It  is  best  limited  to  the  Transfiguration.  Eyewitnesses. — And  so  have  a  personal  sense- 
testimony  to  render. 

Ver.  19.  Word  of  prophecy. — Not  probably  to  be  confined  to  things  foretold.  Remember 
how,  in  his  addresses,  and  in  his  first  epistle,  St.  Peter  freely  made  appeal  to  Old-Testament 
Scriptures  as  proving  or  supporting  his  teachings.  It  is  important  to  realise  how  devout 
Jews  regarded  the  Old  Testament. 

Ver.  20.  Private  interpretation. — Special.  Those  who  interpreted  must  no  more  be  self- 
willed  than  those  who  wrote.  No  man  wrote  save  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  no 
man  must  venture  to  interpret  save  in  the  same  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Ver.  21.  Render,  "But  being  borne  on  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  men  spake  from  God."  The  idea 
is  that  men  did  not  speak  out  of  their  own  hearts,  but  as  they  were  commissioned  by  God. 
St.  Peter's  anxiety  concerns  the  mischievous,  self-willed  influence  of  the  false  teachers, 
with  whom  he  is  about  to  deal  in  the  next  chapter. 

171 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.   PETER. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

Christian  Provisions,  Privileges,  and  Promises. — The  first  epistle  of  Peter  was 
directly  addressed  to  the  "  elect  who  are  sojourners  of  the  Dispersion,"  in  the 
provinces  of  Asia  Minor,  but  there  is  no  such  limitation  in  the  second  epistle, 
which  has  a  general  character,  and  a  wider  application  to  all  who  share  in  the 
"  common  faith." 

I.  The  person  who  writes. — The  authorship  of  St.  Peter  has  been  disputed, 
but  the  difficulties  of  the  denial  of  his  authorship  are  greater  than  those  which 
connect  with  its  acceptance.  The  Petrine  character  of  both  the  thoughts  and 
the  language  is  evident  to  every  unprejudiced  reader,  and  the  differences  may 
find  a  simple  and  natural  explanation  in  the  supposition  of  a  different  amanu- 
ensis. The  Greek  form  of  the  name  Symeon  is  to  be  preferred  here.  In  the 
opening  words  of  the  first  epistle,  St.  Peter  does  but  call  himself  "an  apostle  of 
Jesus  Christ  " ;  but  in  this  epistle  he  imitates  St.  Paul,  and  unites  the  terms — 
"  servant  and  apostle"  (Rom.  i.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  1  ;  Tit.  i.  1).  The  word  "servant" 
carries  the  more  precise  meaning  of  "  bond-servant,"  or  "  slave."  The  union  of 
the  two  terms  suggests  the  union  of  service  with  authority,  which  was  the 
characteristic  of  the  apostleship.  The  service  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  which  St.  Peter 
was  bound,  was  the  service  to  the  people  which  the  Lord  Jesus  wanted  to  have 
rendered.  And  the  authority  was  not  a  merely  official  right,  but  that  kind  of 
authority  which  is  always  given  by  first,  precise,  and  complete  personal  knowledge. 
Apostolic  authority  is  indicated  in  1  John  i.  L  These  are  the  permanent 
features  of  all  healthy  Christian  ministry.  It  is  the  service  of  men,  because  the 
heart  is  loyal  and  devoted  to  the  service  of  Christ.  It  is  service  with  the 
authority  that  comes  with  first  hand,  full,  and  precise  knowledge,  more  especially 
when  it  is  the  knowledge  of  personal  experience. 

II.  The  persons  addressed. — '*  Them  that  have  obtained  a  like  precious  faith 
with  us."  Sharers  in  a  faith  which  is  not  said  to  be  always  the  same  in 
character,  but  which  always  had  the  same  quality  and  the  same  object.  *'  All 
believed  the  same  precious  mysteries."  We  need  not  think  that  St.  Peter  refers 
exclusively  to  the  apostles.  It  would  be  quite  in  harmony  with  his  manner  to 
refer  to  the  association  of  the  Gentiles  with  the  Jews  in  the  Christian  faith.  He 
himself  had  opened  the  door  to  the  Gentiles,  and  they  had  become  fellow-heirs 
with  the  Jews  in  Christian  privilege.  The  object  of  faith  is  not  here  said  to  be 
the  person  of  Christ.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  St.  Peter  that  he  traced  salvation 
back  to  God,  as  its  first  cause,  and  regarded  Christ  as  the  Mediator,  or  agent,  by 
whom  the  Divine  purpose  was  outwrought  (see  1  Pet.  i.  21).  The  expression, 
"  the  righteousness  of  our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,"  sets  before  us  God's 
righteousness  in  saving  men  from  their  sins  by  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  the  final 
object  of  faith,  and  which  the  apostle  Paul  so  fully  dwells  upon.  (Some  writers 
suggest  that  the  righteousness  here  referred  to  is  only  "  fairness  "  in  giving 
gospel  privilege  to  Jew  and  Gentile  alike.) 

III.  The  blessing  invoked. — "  Peace  be  unto  you  !  "  is  the  familiar  Jewish 
blessing.  "Grace  and  peace"  is  the  characteristic  Christian  blessing.  The 
addition  of  the  word  "  grace  "  brings  in  the  gospel  peculiarity.  To  all  men  God 
gives  "  peace  " ;  on  sinful  men  He  bestows  His  grace.  "  By  grace  are  ye  saved." 
This  is  familiar ;  but  the  peculiarity  of  St.  Peter's  blessing  lies  in  his  idea  of  the 
way  in  which  the  "  grace  and  peace  "  will  come  to  us.  It  is  through  knowledge. 
Not,  of  course,  mere  head- knowledge.  Experimental  knowledge.  The  Petrine 
setting  reminds  us  of  the  remarkable  words  of  our  Lord's  intercessory  prayer  : 
"  And  thLs  is  life  eternal,  that  they  should  know  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Him  whom  Thou  didst  send,  even  Jesus  Christ." 

IV.  The  provisions  made. — "  All  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and  godhness." 

172 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  11.  PETER.  chap.  I. 


It  is  important  to  see  that  the  religious  life  is  never  given  to  any  one  in  a 
matured  condition.  Sometimes  truth  is  so  imperfectly  stated  that  we  get  the 
impression  that  the  new  man  is  created  in  us  fully  grown,  as  Adam  was  made  a 
full-^rovvn  man.  Conversion  is  supposed  to  be  enough,  and  the  converted  man  is 
fully  saved.  Nothing  could  be  more  unscriptural.  The  new  man  is  born  in  us 
a  babe ;  all  we  need  assure  ourselves  of  is  independent  breath  and  a  cry.  Abund- 
ant provisions  are  made  for  its  nourishment  and  growth  ;  and  they  all  range 
round  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  spiritual  and  experimental  knowledge  of  Him.  The 
terms  *'  life  "  and  "  godliness,"  if  they  were  not  intended  to  mean,  may  at  least 
suggest  to  us,  the  two  spheres,  the  inner  life  of  feeling,  and  the  outer  life  of  con- 
duct and  relations.  The  "  glory  and  virtue  "  is  misconceived  as  something  to 
which  we  are  called.  The  idea  of  the  verse  is,  that  our  Lord's  own  glory  and 
virtue,  the  inspiring  example  of  His  own  beautiful  and  gracious  life,  are  a  per- 
petual call  to  us  to  culture  soul-piety  and  practical  goodness. 

V.  The  promises  given. — This  must  be  restricted  to  such  promises  as  bear 
upon  our  effort  to  live  the  godly  life.  Not  the  general  promises  scattered  through 
the  sacred  Word,  but  the  specific  promises  which  are  associated  with  calls  to 
Christian  duty  and  culture.  Such  as  were  spoken  by  Christ ;  such  as  are  found 
in  the  epistles.  It  may  be  shown  that  they  are  (1)  abundant ;  (2)  sufficient ; 
(3)  adapted  ;  and  (4)  assured. 

VI.  The  life  shared. — "  Through  these  ye  may  become  partakers  of  the  Divine 
nature."  The  idea  seems  to  be  this :  the  culture  of  the  soul  is  a  culture  into 
ever  fuller  communion  with  Christ,  involving  ever  fuller  communications  of 
Christ's  life  and  grace.  And  as  the  life  flows  more  freely,  there  is  more  complete 
deliverance  from  the  fleshly  life,  and  consequently  more  and  more  freedom  from 
the  temptations  and  corruptions  of  the  world.  Or,  to  express  it  in  another 
way,  the  full  life  of  love  to  God  in  Christ  insures  full  mastery  over  the  life 
of  lust. 

SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.  1.  Message  to' Gentile  Christians.  would  be  more  likely  than  Jews  to  fall 

— "  Like  precious  faith  with  us."    Not  into    the    excesses    denounced  in  the 

that  all  had  an  equal  amount  of  faith,  second  chapter,  which  bear  a  strong 

which  would  scarcely  be  possible  ;  nor  resemblance  to  the  catalogue  of  heathen 

that  their  faith  gave  all  an  equal  right  vices  given   by   St.   Paul  in   Eom.    1. 

to    salvation,    which  the   Greek  could  The  idea  that  Christians  are  the  anti- 

scarcely  mean  ;  but  that  all  believed  the  type  of  the  chosen  people  is  prominent  in 

same  precious  mysteries  (compare  1  Pet.  St.  Peter's  writings  (compare  ch.  ii.  11  ; 

i.    7).     It   is    delicately    implied    that  1  Pet.  i.   10).     Note  that  no  particular 

"  we  as  well  as  you  have  had  it  allotted  Churches  are  mentioned.     The  second 

to  us  ;  it  is  no  credit  to  us ;  we  are  not  epistle  is  more  *'  general  "  or  "  catholic  " 

superior  to  you."     "  Us "    may   mean  in  its  address   than  the    first.     Here 

either  the  apostles  or  (more  probably)  again  we  have  a  mark  of  independence, 

the   first  Christians,  as  distinct  from  A   writer  personating  St.   Peter,  and 

those  converted   later,   i.e.    Jewish   as  referring  to  the  former  letter,  would 

distinct  from  Gentile  Christians.     This  probably  have  taken  care  to  make  the 

shows  that  Gentile  converts  are  chiefly  address    of     the    second    letter    tally 

addressed  in  this  epistle  as  Jewish  were  exactly    with    that    of    the    first. — A. 

in  the  first  epistle.      Gentiles  would  be  Flummer,  M.A. 
more  likely  to  be  doubters  respecting 

Christ's  return  to  judgment  than  Jews,  Precious  Faith. — God's  righteousness 

who  were  well  acquainted  with  Hebrew  here    is    His  fairness.     He    has    no 

prophecies  on  the  subject.   Gentiles  also  respect    of    persons,   and    hence    has 

173 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


given  to  all  ChristiaDS,  early  or  late, 
Jew  or  Gentile,  a  "  like  precious  faith." 

1.  The  nature  and  origin  of  precious 
faith.      (1)     It    originates  with   God. 

(2)  It  comes  through  man's  ministra- 
tion. (3)  It  is  the  effect,  act,  and 
evidence,  of  a  renewed  state  of  mind. 

2.  A  few  of  the  properties  of  such  a 
faith.  (1)  It  is  essential  to  the 
existence  of  the  Christian  character. 
(2)  It  is  used  to  denote  the  whole 
household  of  God.  (3)  It  appears  in 
Christian  ordinances.  3.  A.  caution  as 
to  its  appropriation.  4.  Its  necessity 
and  importance. — J.  Stevens. 

What  is  Faith  ? — Faith  is  a  grace 
wrought  in  the  soul  of  a  sinner  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  whereby,  being  emptied  of 
all  opinionative  thoughts  of  his  own 
righteousness,  strength,  and  fulness,  he 
is  enabled  to  look  to  Christ,  to  betake 
Himself  to  Him  as  his  only  Saviour, 
to  receive  Him,  to  rest  and  rely  upon 
Him  for  the  remission  of  his  sins,  for 
a  righteousness  to  justify  him  in  the 
sight  of  God ;  for  strength  to  en- 
able him  to  perform  duty,  to  follow 
after  holiness,  and  to  encounter 
spiritual  enemies ;  and  for  eternal  life 
when  his  work  of  faith  and  labour  of 
love  is  ended,  and  when  he  comes  to 
finish,  with  joy,  his  course.  This  is  the 
Scripture  notion  of  saving  faith ;  and 
it  has  God  for  its  fundamental  and 
principal  object,  as  He  is  a  God  of 
truth,  reconciled  to  sinners  ;  but  it  has 
Christ  for  its  immediate  object,  for  it 
is  only  by  His  mediation  that  a  sinner 
can  come  to  God. — A.  Taylor. 

Ver.  4.  Divine  Assimilation. — 
"  Partakers  of  the  Divine  nature," 
The  text  suggests — 1.  That  the  Divine 
nature  is  the  source  and  standard  of 
all  perfection.  (1)  God  is  an  eternal, 
infinite,  and  self-existent  Being. 
(2)  He  is  both  remote  from  and 
independent  of  His  works.  (3)  He  is 
absolutely  perfect.  (4)  He  is  an 
emotional  and  communicative  Being. 
2.  That  man  can  partake  of  that 
nature.  We  become  partakers  of  it 
when  we    (1)  receive    Divine     ideas; 

174 


(2)  are  made  holy ;  (3)  have 
eternal  life  ;  (4)  are  made  happy  in 
God.  3.  That  the  process  of  becoming 
a  partaker  of  the  Divine  is  most  Divine. 

(1)  The  substratum — the  mental  and 
moral  natures  of  man.  (2)  The  Divine 
medium — the  Atonement.  (3)  The 
causation — the  Spirit.  (4)  The  Divine 
instrumentality — the  promises.  4.  That 
such  a  participation  sublimates  man. 
It      augments      (1)     The     Divinity; 

(2)  the  sublimity ;  (3)  the  spiritual 
development  of  life. — C.  Briggs. 

Promises. — Here,  not  the  promises 
of  the  Old  Testament,  that  Christ  should 
come,  or  even  promises  in  general,  but 
precisely  the  promises  of  the  New 
Testament,  that  Christ  should  come 
again.  "  The  certainty  of  Christ's 
return  to  reward  the  righteous  and 
punish  the  wicked  is  one  of  the  main 
subjects  of  the  epistle."  Promises  are 
distinct  from  prophecies.  These  only 
declare  what  shall  be,  but  promises 
declare  that  what  shall  be,  shall  be  in 
special  adaptation  to  us,  and  shall  be 
provision  for  the  supply  of  our  highest 
and  best  needs.  However  promises  in 
relation  to  the  one  special  matter  of 
Christ's  coming  again  may  have  been 
in  St.  Peter's  mind,  we  may  be  per- 
mitted to  see  the  general  truth,  that 
God  has  always  dealt  with  His  people 
by  drawing  them  on  to  the  future,  and 
giving  them  present  assurances  on 
which  they  may  rest  their  faith,  and 
feel  inspired  for  present  activity.  It 
may  even  be  said  of  all  Christians,  as  it 
can  be  said  of  Abraham  :  they  have 
nothing  but  promises ;  they  live  upon 
promises.  Nothing  is  ever  realised 
here  that  can  in  any  sense  be  said  to 
exhaust  the  promises.  Indeed,  their 
partial  fulfilments  never  satisfy  ;  they 
do  but  reveal  to  us  the  inexhaustible 
fulness  of  the  promises. 

I.  Then  what  do  these  promises 
rest  upon  ? — How  is  it  that  we  can  be  so 
confident  about  them,  and  can  willingly 
keep  them  for  our  cheering,  though 
they  are  unfulfilled?  The  answer  is 
not  merely  this  :  We  have  them  in  the 
Word.     It  is  this  :  They  reveal  to  us 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   IL  PETER.  chap.  i. 


Him  in  whom  we  trust.  They  reveal  by  God,  and  met  with  a  promise  in 
Him  in  His  relations,  Him  in  His  precise  adaptation.  Let  but  a  Christ- 
thoughts  and  purposes.  And  in  our  ian  get  into  any  night  of  affliction,  and 
best  moods  we  rise  superior  to  the  at  once  the  whole  heaven  seems  alive 
shapings  of  the  promise,  and  rest  our-  with  stars  of  promise,  concerning  hia 
selves   in  the  Faithful  Promiser.     To  things. 

have  God  who  promises  is  far  better  III.    What   of  the   future   do   the 

than  to  have  God's  promises.  promises   assure  ? — We   easily   forget 

II.    What    of  the    present   do   the  things  pledged  for  our  future  when  it 

promises  cover? — The   most  remark-  is  borne  in  upon  our  hearts  that  God 

able    direct   personal    revelation   that  pledges  Himself  by  the  promises  to  be 

ever  comes  to  a  Christian  is  perhaps  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.     Here  or 

the  discovery  that  no  need  ever  arises  yonder  the  soul's  only  rest  is  in  God 

in  his  life  that  has  not  been  thought  of  Himself,  the  Faithful  Promiser. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  5—11. 

Yers.  5-9.  The  Proper  Response  to  Christian  Privilege. — The  apostle  has 
been  reminding  his  readers  of  the  Christian  promises  and  privileges.  Such 
reminders  are  always  the  basis  on  which  is  laid  some  earnest  call  to  duty.  In 
ver.  5,  the  apostle  says,  "  beside  this " ;  or  better,  *'  on  this  very  account." 
R.V.  "  Yea,  and  for  this  very  cause."  Because  of  the  promises  and  privileges, 
you  should  give  diligent  attention  to  making  a  worthy  response  in  spiritual 
growth.  Growth  in  Christian  life  is  the  prominent  point  of  the  teaching  of 
this  epistle.  Perhaps  St.  Peter  felt  that  his  Christian  life  had  witnessed  a 
very  remarkable  growth,  and  that  in  this  he  was  an  ensample  to  the  believers. 
He  seems  to  sum  up  what  he  would  most  anxiously  impress  in  the  closing  words 
of  this  epistle  :  "  But  groiv  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ."  The  B.Y.  helps  to  the  proper  understanding  of  this  passage. 
It  is  not  "  Add  to  your  faith  virtue,"  but  "  With  your  faith  supply  virtue."  Do 
not  be  content  with  any  one  Christian  grace,  and  do  not  exaggerate  the 
importance  of  any  one,  but  try  to  nourish  harmoniously  the  complete,  all-round 
Christian  life  and  character.  It  is  as  if  St.  Peter  had  said,  ''  You  will  surely 
find  that  each  grace  gained  helps  you  to  gain  the  other  graces ;  and  that  every 
new  grace,  or  improved  grace,  improves,  and  helps  to  perfection  the  other 
graces."  The  proper  response  for  us  to  make  to  promise,  and  privilege,  and 
indeed  to  our  own  pledge,  is  precisely  this  all-round  and  harmonious  growth 
in  Christian  graces.  What  things  are  necessary,  then,  to  the  proper  making  up 
of  the  Christian  character,  and  the  Christian  life?  1.  i^atVA  is  pre -supposed ; 
both  as  the  belief  which  is  the  beginning  of  right  relations  with  Christ,  and 
as  the  daily  faith  or  trust,  which  is  very  breath  of  the  Christian  life.  A 
Christian  only  lives  so  long  as  he  keeps  his  trust.  2.  Virtue.  Not  purity,  or 
chastity,  which  is  a  later  association  with  the  term.  In  Pagan  ages  vii'tue 
meant  valour,  courage ;  and  this,  filled  with  the  Christian  spirit,  is  the  firmness, 
conscious  strength,  and  good  cheer,  that  come  of  firm,  established  Christian 
principle.  It  is  really  m,oral  stability  which  brings  a  sense  of  sufficiency  for 
every  good  work.  This  virtue  led  St.  Paul  to  say,  "  I  can  do  all  things  in  Him 
who  strengtheneth  me."  3.  Knowledge.  Apostles  never  exaggerate,  as  we  are 
apt  to  do,  the  importance  of  mere  A€a<i-knowledge.  But  it  is  quite  as  true 
that  they  urge  with  much  earnestness  the  intelligent  apprehension  of  revealed 
truth.  The  more  practical  form  of  knowledge  is,  however,  most  prominent  in 
their  minds  ;  it  is  the  "  wisdom  "  of  the  Book  of  Proverbp,  which  means  "  moral 
discernment,"  cultured  skill  in  the  actual  ordering  and  ruling  of  our  lives. 
Knowing  how  to  behave  ourselves  in  the  house  of  God,  and  everywhere  else. 

175 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.  PETER. 


Not  mere  Aeac^-knowledge,  but  what  may  properly  be  called  Zz/e- knowledge, 
the  basis  of  good  self-ruling.  4.  Temperance.  Not  mere  abstention  from 
anything,  drink  or  lust ;  but  wise  management  of  self,  so  that  there  never  shall 
be  any  excess.  The  power  to  strike  the  •*  happy  mean  "  always.  The  skill 
that  keeps  from  any  form  of  excitement  that  tends  to  put  us  off  our  balance, 
and  make  us  lose  our  self-control.  Abstinence  may  be  the  best  thing  under 
given  circumstances,  but  it  is  not  the  absolutely  best  thing.  To  use  without 
abusing  is  altogether  nobler  than  not  to  use  at  all.  The  saintly  man  is  not 
the  man  who  gets  away  from  the  world,  but  the  man  who,  staying  in  the 
world,  is  not  of  it ;  never  lets  it  master  him.  5.  Patience.  Christian  patience 
is  waiting^  but  it  is  much  more  than  waiting  ;  it  is  endurance,  which  means 
a  waiting  that  involves  strain  and  trial.  It  is  bearing  a  burden  while  you 
wait.  It  is  that  spirit  which  is  only  attained  when  life  is  apprehended  as  a 
sphere  of  moral  discipline,  the  methods  of  which  cannot  now  be  fully  under- 
stood, but  the  issues  of  which  are  absolutely  assured,  and  the  conduct  of  which 
is  wholly  in  all-wise  and  all-loving  hands.  6.  Godliness.  Better  seen  as 
God-likeness.  Then  it  can  at  once  be  apprehended  that,  if  it  is  to  be  something 
really  practical,  it  must  be  likeness  to  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  It  must 
be  the  persistent  endeavour  to  fashion  our  lives  after  the  Christ-pattern,  not 
by  way  of  any  mere  servile  imitation  of  incidents  or  actions,  but  in  a  noble 
way  of  giving  sway  and  influence  to  the  same  principles,  and  motives.  And 
to  ensure  "  God-likeness "  involves  the  deepest  interest  in  the  human  life  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  such  near  fellowship  with  Him  that  we  readily  change 
into  His  image.  7.  Brotherliness.  "  Love  of  the  brethren."  The  power  and 
the  skill  that  may  enable  us  to  fix  and  arrange  all  our  human  relationships 
aright,  and  keep  them  right.  There  may  be  a  direct  reference  to  our  relations 
with  those  who  have  like  precious  faith  with  us ;  our  brethren  and  sisters  in 
Christ  Jesus.  8.  Charity.  K.V.  "  love."  It  may  be  doubted  whether  we  can 
wisely  lose  the  word  *'  charity,"  which,  for  Bible  readers,  does  not  mean  "  alms- 
giving," but  **  considerate  helpfulness  of  one  another."  And  we  want  a  word 
to  express  that,  which  is  one  of  the  essential  features  of  the  Christly  life.  Charity 
expresses  the  *'  beautiful "  in  Christian  relations,  as  no  other  word  can  do.  If 
the  very  close  relations  between  these  things  be  observed,  it  will  be  fully 
recognised  that  the  getting  of  any  one  of  them  becomes  a  direct  help  to  the 
gaining  of  the  others.  They  are  links  of  a  chain,  and  if  one  link  be  drawn 
close,  the  others  will  surely  be  drawn  nearer.  The  truth  to  present  forcibly 
is,  that  Christian  character  is  a  whole.  You  see  it  is  when  you  see  it  perfectly 
presented  in  Christ.  We  can  never  be  satisfied  with  our  own  characters 
while  the  possible  whole  is  unrealised.  We  can  never  be  satisfied  with  one- 
sided and  imperfect  developments  in  those  to  whom  we  minister  in  Christ's 
name.  We  must  desire  their  all-round  and  harmonious  growth.  And  the 
grace  is  at  our  command  for  nourishing  in  ourselves,  and  in  others,  that  all-round 
growth. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  10.  Making  Sure  our  Calling.  are  two  factors  in  human  redemption : 

— The     doctrines     of     predestination,  the  moving  of  Divine  grace  toward  us, 

Divine    grace,    and    effectual   calling,  the  response  of  our  hearts  to  it ;  and 

have   a   strong   basis   in   human   con-  both  are  essential.     The  order  of  the 

viction.     Whatever  his  forms  of  belief  words  "calling   and   election"  is  not 

may  be,  every  saved  man  cherishes  the  our   usual   order.     We   say   "  election 

assurance  that  he  was  called  of  God,  and  calling "  (Rom.  viii.  29,  30).     St. 

and  led  to  make  choice  of  God.     There  Peter  may  have  meant  by  "  election," 

176 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   11.  PETER. 


CHAP.  I. 


here,  man's  act  of  choice.  Then  he 
may  be  representing  Christian  hope  on 
both  its  sides  :  God's  calling  and  man's 
choosing. 

I.  Our  calling  and  election  needs  to 
be  made  sure. — Not  to  God.  It  does 
need  to  be  realised  by  ourselves,  and 
demonstrated  to  others.  There  is  a 
great  difference  in  individuals  as  re- 
gards Christian  assurance.  Some  have 
no  confidence  throughout  their  lives. 
Assurance  partly  depends  on  natural 
disposition,  partly  on  surrounding  cir- 
cumstances and  influences.  Religious 
experience  is  too  living  a  thing  to  be 
squared  to  any  system.  The  kind  of 
relation  that  health  bears  to  the  work 
and  pleasure  of  life,  an  assured  interest 
in  Chnst  bears  to  our  Christian  living 
and  labouring.  The  assurance  of  our 
calling  bears  directly — 1.  On  the  activity 
of  Christian  life,  "  Not  barren  or  idle," 
as  ground  bringing  forth  nothing. 
Illustration  :  Conviction  of  call  on  the 
old  prophets  made  them  active.  Noah 
kept  busy  at  his  Ark  under  the  power 
of  strong  convictions.  St.  Paul  says, 
"Woe  is  me  if  I  preach  not  the 
gospel;"  "Now,  then,  we  are  ambas- 
sadors for  Christ."  In  him  was  a 
noble  restlessness  of  activity,  based  on 
strong  conviction.  2.  On  the  fruitful- 
ness  of  the  Christian  life.  "Nor  un- 
fruitful." "Herein  is  My  Father 
glorified,  that  ye  bear  much  fruit." 
Fruitage  of  Christian  knowledge. 
Real  rooting  in  Christ  is  never  afraid 
of  growing  in  knowledge.  There  is 
sometimes  more  attention  given  to 
rooting  than  to  fruiting ;  then  the 
religious  life  is  apt  to  weaken  into 
mere  sentiment.  3.  On  the  hopefulness 
of  Christian  life.  They  that  fail  are 
"  blind  " — cannot  see  afar  off.  Plain 
human  vision  can  see  little  beyond 
this  present  life.  Strong  confidence 
gets  us  upon  the  Delectable  Mountains, 
and  helps  us  to  hold  the  telescope,  and 
see  visions  of  the  far-away.  Much  of 
the  joy  of  Christian  living  depends 
on  the  hopefulness  which  pierces  into 
the  future.  4.  On  the  responsibility  of 
Christian  life.  "  Forgotten  that  he 
was  piurged."     If  a  man  is  purged,  it 


N 


is  manifestly  as  a  preparation  for  a 
clean,  new  life.  "  Ye  are  washed,  ye 
are  sanctified."  life  gains  its  full 
responsibility  as  the  sphere  in  which 
Christ  can  be  glorified,  when  we  can 
say,  "  I  am  a  purged,  washed,  redeemed 
man."  5.  On  (he  secu7'ity  of  the  Christ- 
ian life.  "  Shall  never  fall."  Illus- 
trate from  experience  of  Christian 
ministers.  God's  call  is  just  what  keeps 
them  from  despair  in  the  stiain-times 
of  life.  There  are  similar  experiences 
in  private  life.  6.  On  the  final  triumph 
of  Christian  life.  "So  an  entrance 
ministered  abundantly."  A  most 
unworthy  feeling  sometimes  gets  pos- 
session of  Christian  professors.  They 
think  they  may  get  at  last  just  inside 
the  gate  ;  satisfied  with  being  "  almost 
saved,"  "  saved  so  as  by  fire,"  "  scarcely 
saved."  Holy  Scripture  never  en- 
courages such  feelings,  because  they 
usually  represent  a  false  humility.  It 
urges  us  rather  to  aim  at  getting  right 
close  up  to  the  throne.  The  Christian 
ought  to  go  into  heaven  as  a  ship 
enters  harbour  after  voyage,  with 
yards  manned,  and  flags  hanging  along 
every  rope.  If  it  be  so  important  that 
we  should  have  and  keep  a  well-grounded 
hope,  the  question  remains — 

II.  How  can  the  assurance  of  our 
calling  and  election  be  maintained  ? — 
"  Give  diligence."  It  is  a  matter 
requiring  active  pursuit.  We  must 
not  idly  wait  for  some  Divine  impres- 
sions. God's  witness  comes  to  workers. 
Yet  we  may  pursue  it  wrongly.  We 
shall  (1)  if  we  fall  back  on  past 
experience ;  or  (2)  if  we  merely  nourish 
religious  feelings.  The  true  direction 
is  given  by  St.  Peter  (vers.  5-7).  These 
terms  describe  growth — the  prowth 
which  is  the  sure  sign  of  life.  Plant : 
its  life  is  shown  by  its  growing.  Child  : 
its  health  and  vigour  are  evidenced 
by  its  growing.  1.  True  assurance 
comes  out  of  growth  in  godly  character. 
One  grace  is  to  be  added  to  another. 
A  lower  grace  is  to  rise  and  be 
developed  into  a  higher.  2.  True 
assurance  comes  out  of  growth  in 
practical  godly  living.  Ever  more 
complete  subjection  of  all  life  to  the 

177 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    II.   PETER. 


sway  of  holy  principle.  Ever  holding 
more  and  more  of  life  under  godly 
control.  Up  to  the  light  you  have, 
follow  on,  and  you  will  find  that,  as 
you  grow,  assurance  grows;  you  will 
"  keep  your  calling  and  election  sure." 

Vers.  10,  11.  Christian  Diligence. — 
How  eagerly  we  catch  the  last  words 
of  dying  friends  !  In  the  fourteenth 
verse  of  this  chapter  St.  Peter  says, 
"  Knowing  that  shortly  I  must  put  off 
this  my  tabernacle,  even  as  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  hath  shewed  me."  The 
warm-hearted  apostle,  who  through 
good  and  evil  report  had  faithfully 
preached  the  gospel  for  many  years, 
and  had  led  very  many  souls  to  peace 
and  joy,  was  about  to  enter  within 
that  veil  which  hides  the  "  great 
majority  "  from  mortal  sight,  and  to  join 
the  "spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect" 
in  their  eternal  rest.  With  such  a 
change  at  hand,  it  is  no  wonder  that 
such  an  earnest  and  loving  entreaty 
runs  through  this  epistle.  With  the 
last  moments  of  his  life  he  strove  to 
minister  to  the  saints  by  stirring  them 
up  with  the  holy  reminiscences  of  the 
past.  What  a  worthy  termination  to 
the  life  of  one  who  had  left  all  things 
to  follow  the  Master  !  Let  the  thought 
that  our  text  formed  a  part  of  the  last 
message  St.  Peter  delivered  to  the 
Church,  influence  us  to  give  the  more 
earnest  heed  to  his  words.  The  ex- 
pansion of  the  Christian  virtues  forms 
a  part  of  the  exhortation.  We  have  a 
chain  of  eight  links  to  forge.  "  And 
besides  this,  giving  all  diligence,  add  to 
your  faith  virtue  ;  and  to  virtue  know- 
ledge ;  and  to  knowledge  temperance ; 
and  to  temperance  patience;  and  to 
patience  godliness ;  and  to  godliness 
brotherly  kindness;  and  to  brotherly 
kindness  charity."  Out  of  the  Christ- 
ian temper  these  holy  virtues  grow, 
but  their  cultivation  requires  diligence. 
Our  text  is  a  resumption  of  the  passage 
under  another  figure — that  of  entering 
service,  and  perseverance  in  duty.  This 
duty  is  stimulated  by  the  twofold 
promise  of  present  safety  and  future 
glory. 

178 


I.  The  duty  which  is  enjoined. — 
"  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling 
and  election  sure."  Negligence  would 
have  endangered  the  safety  of  their 
position.  They  were  in  possession,  and 
they  were  exhorted  to  conserve  every 
blessing  and  maintain  a  good  profes- 
sion. The  subject  has  two  branches, 
indicating  two  important  steps  in  the 
experience  of  the  saints.  1.  Your 
calling.  This  word  is  frequently  used 
by  St.  Paul.  "  I,  therefore,  the  pri- 
soner of  the  Lord,  beseech  you  that  ye 
walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith 
ye  are  called"  (Eph.  iv.  1).  It  is  by 
invitation  we  enter  the  service  of  Jesus 
Christ.  "  Wherefore,  holy  brethren, 
partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling, 
consider  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest 
of  our  profession,  Christ  Jesus."  The 
source  of  the  invitation  is  Divine, — 
*' For  the  gifts  and  calling  *of  God  are 
without  repentance."  Two  things  are 
implied  :  the  gracious  invitation  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  willing  acceptance  of 
it  by  us.  Let  us  seize  on  these  im- 
portant points,  that  we  may  fully 
realise  our  calling.  The  gospel  is  a 
call  from  God.  We  have  turned  every 
one  to  his  own  way,  and  have  forsaken 
the  way  of  peace.  Notwithstanding 
our  apostasy,  the  gracious  Lord  has 
stretched  forth  His  hands  to  a  stiff- 
necked  and  a  gainsaying  people.  The 
first  step  in  redemption  is  from  the 
throne  :  the  rebels  are  asked  to  return 
and  sue  for  peace.  Under  the  old 
Dispensation  the  proclamation  ran : 
"  Look  unto  Me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all 
the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  for  I  am  God, 
and  there  is  none  else."  Under  the 
Christian  dispensation  the  proclamation 
was  renewed  and  intensified  :  "  Come 
unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
The  mission  of  Jesus  was  not  only  to 
declare  the  merciful  nature  of  God,  but 
also  to  use  every  legitimate  means  to 
induce  the  sinner  to  seek  God's  favour. 
The  Advent  brought  in  a  life  more 
replete  than  any  other,  which  embodied 
all  the  elements  of  influence  and 
attraction.  The  Ambassador  of  peace 
sought,    by   a   full   exposition   of    the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


CHAP..  I. 


terms  of  mercy,  to  influence  sinners  to 
accept  their  salvation.     The  parable  of 
precept ;  by  example  and  deed,  yea,  and 
by   suffering   and   death,    our    blessed 
Lord   put   forth    the   invitation.     His 
first  great  work  was  to  seek  the  lost,  to 
bring  the  offer  of  redemption  home  to 
the  heart  and  conscience  of  man.     The 
gospel  is  that  representation,  and  its 
ministers    are    the    ambassadors   who 
cry,  "  Hear  His  voice,  and  harden  not 
your  hearts  as  in  the  day  of  provoca- 
tion."   The  sum  and  substance  of  their 
mission  is  contained  in  the  memorable 
words  of  St.  Paul :  "  Be  ye  reconciled 
to  God."     But  this  is  not  all ;  we  are 
called  into  the  service  of  God,  which  is 
a  course  of  life  in  harmony  with  the 
call.     To  accept   the   invitation  is  to 
make  the  life  of  Christ  our  example. 
We  are  called  to  repentance,  to  faith, 
to  prayer,  to  holiness,  and  to  service. 
The  first  response  of  the  penitent  is : 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? " 
Those  who  accept  the  invitation  engage 
to  enter  the  service  of  Christ,  and  give 
Him  their  time,  talent,  and  substance. 
This  is  our  calling.     2.   You7'  election. 
The  term  "  election  "  in  the  writings  of 
St.  Paul  generally  means  the  pre- deter- 
mination   of    God    to    save    mankind 
through  Jesus  Christ.     But  St.  Peter, 
in  the  text,  uses  the  word  in  the  sense 
of    "  acceptance."      It    is    simply    an 
extension  of   the    meaning  which  the 
word  ^^ calling^'  contains.   The  servant  is 
chosen,  or  approved  of,  after  a  trial  of 
his  services.     This  is  a  step  forward. 
The  first  step  is  taken  in  answer  to  the 
sovereign   will   of    God,    through    His 
mercy  by  Jesus  Christ ;  but  the  second 
step  is  a  movement -in  our  own   soul. 
The  new  birth  is  exhibited  by  the  life 
which    follows    it.       The    new    heart 
circulates   the   vital   element   through 
the   whole   man.      3.    Such   a   station 
demands  diligence.     We  do  not  at  once 
ascend  to  the  higher  grade  of  faith,  but 
must  work  out  our  salvation  through 
fear   and   trembling.     The   climax   of 
Christian  experience  is  reached  by  a 
persistent  effort  of  holy  living.     Dili- 
gence in  the  study  of  God's  Word  will 
bring  the   assurance  of   truth.     Dili- 


gence   in   following    the    example    of 
Christ  will  give  a  conscience  void  of 
offence.      Diligence    in    the    spiritual 
exercise  of  communion  with  God  will 
give  the  evidence  of  the  Spirit,  testify- 
ing with  our  spirits  that  we  are  the 
children  of  God.     Diligence  in  loving 
efforts    to   establish    the    kingdom   of 
Christ    in   this  world   will   bring   the 
assurance  of  service.     Every  step  for- 
ward  brings  us  nearer  the  promised 
land.       The    higher     objects    of    the 
Divine    life    are    attainable,    not    by 
spasmodic  effort,  but  by  faithfulness  to 
trust.      The   cross    comes   before   the 
crown,   and   labour  before   rest.     The 
example  of  Jesus  will  lead  us  onward 
and  upward,  until  we  reach  the  highest 
point    in    holiness    and    consecration. 
Let  us  lay  aside   every  hindrance  to 
run  with  patience  the  race  set  before 
us.      The    certainty   that   "if    ye   do 
these    things    ye    shall     never    fall," 
stimulates  action,  for  all  the  steps  of 
faith  are  firm,  and  all  the  aspirations 
of  hope  are  sure.     There  never  will  be 
any  unfaithfulness  in  the  Master ;  He 
will  not  discharge  His  faithful  servants. 
If  we  are  true  to  our  Father's  faith  till 
death,  we  shall  maintain  the  course, 
and  get  the  crown.     Those  who  have 
put  their  hand  to  the  plough  must  not 
look  back.     It  is  by  looking  forward, 
we  make  the  straight  furrow.     Those 
who   are   in   the   fold   will    share   its 
blessings   world   without    end.      They 
will  never  fall  into  unbelief  or  tempta- 
tion, but  will  stand,  firmly  fixed  on  the 
Rock  of  Ages. 

II.  The  prospect  which  cheers. — 
In  looking  upward  there  is  to  be  seen 
the  object  for  which  all  labour,  and  its 
possession.  1.  Everlasting  kingdom. 
"  Wherefore  we  r.eceive  a  kingdom 
that  cannot  be  moved."  The  ultimate 
triumph  of  truth,  and  the  universal 
reign  of  righteousness,  are  looming  in 
the  distance.  The  vision  is  full  of 
encouragement.  From  one  mind  the 
law  will  go  forth  to  rule  all  men  ;  and 
from  one  heart  love  will  flow  to  bless 
*  mankind.  The  kingdoms  of  this 
world  change,  but  Messiah's  rule  will 
run  parallel   with   the   ages.       "  Thy 

179 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.  PETER. 


kingdom  is  ^n  everlasting  kingdom, 
and  Thy  dominion  endureth  for  ever." 
Founded  upon  His  immutable  nature, 
and  directed  by  His  own  inexorable 
counsel.  His  reign  cannot  be  shaken  by 
time  or  destroyed  by  sin.  The  gates  of 
hell  will  not  prevail  against  it.  We 
are  looking  forward  towards  universal 
order,  when  the  foundation  of  the 
government  shall  be  laid  in  the  affec- 
tions of  its  subjects.  Its  organisation 
will  be  complete,  and  its  boundaries 
commensurate  with  the  habitable  parts 
of  the  earth.  To  our  labour  of  love 
and  work  of  faith,  this  is  the  goal. 
Once  established,  the  gospel  will  con- 
tinue its  hold  on  all  believers,  and 
supply  them  with  unabatable  joy. 
There  will  be  no  more  sin,  and  no 
more  curse.  The  kingdom  will  be 
lighted  up  by  the  presence  of  Jehovah, 
and  no  unclean  thing  will  enter  it. 
This,  then,  is  that  consummation  for 
which  the  ages  are  in  travail,  and  to 
which  Christian  effort  will  give  birth. 
2.  Abundant  entrance.  The  vision 
is  that  of  the  gate  of  the  golden  city, 
thrown  widely  open.  It  seems  as  if 
he  saw  the  victorious  army  returning 
from  the  battle-field,  receiving  an 
ovation  from  the  citizens.  The  result 
of  Christian  service  is  contemplated, 
and  the  joy  that  shall  follow.  The  con- 
summation of  hope,  and  the  realisation 
of  the  objects  of  faith,  will  flow  into 
the  soul  abundantly.  Abundant  will 
be  the  gratification  at  seeing  the 
victories  of  the  cross.  Jesus  will  be 
crowned  "  Lord  of  all."  Abundant 
will  be  the  welcome  to  the  pilgrims  of 
the  night :  "  Well  done,  thou  good  and 
faithful  servant "  ;  and  unstinted  will 
be  the  congratulation  when  they  enter 
the  joy  of  thtir  Lord.  They  will  ever- 
more reign  with  Christ  in  life.  Such 
will  be  the  end  of  prayer,  such  the 
reward  of  patience.  Each  worker 
will  receive  his  penny,  and  each  martyr 
his  crown.  The  termination  of  the 
struggle  will  be  the  beginning  of  real 
and  eternal  life.  Work,  then,  until 
the  Master  come  with  His  reward  to 
each  faithful  servant.  Work,  before 
the  night  cometh ;  work  diHgently  to 

180 


obtain  the  Master's  approval  now,  and 
His  joy  hereafter. — Weekly  Pulpit. 

Vers.  11,14,15.  What  Faith  Makes 
of  Death. 

I.  The  representation  of  death  as  a 
putting  off  the  tabernacle. — There  is, 
of  course,  a  reference  to  the  warning 
which  the  apostle  received  from  his 
Lord  "  signifying  what  death  He 
should  die."  He  had  learned  that 
in  his  old  age  he  should  be  seized  and 
bound  and  led  "  whither  he  would 
not."  In  all  probability  the  language 
of  our  verse  would  be  more  accurately 
represented  if  we  read  for  ' '  shortly  " 
suddenly — the  apostle's  anticipation 
not  being  so  much  that  his  dissolution 
was  impending  as  that  his  death, 
when  it  came,  would  be  sudden — that 
is  to  say,  violent — and  therefore  he 
seeks  to  warn  and  prepare  his  brethren 
beforehand.  The  expression  seems  to 
blend  the  two  figures,  that  of  a  taber- 
nacle— or  tent — and  that  of  a  vesture. 
As  the  apostle  Paul,  in  like  manner, 
blends  the  same  two  ideas  when  he 
talks  of  being  "  clothed  upon  with  our 
house  which  is  from  heaven,"  and 
unclothed  from  *'  our  earthly  house  of 
this  tabernacle."  To  such  small 
dimensions  has  Christian  faith  dwindled 
down  the  ugly  thing,  death.  It  has 
come  to  be  nothing  more  than  a 
change  of  vesture,  a  change  of 
dwelling.  Now,  what  lies  in  that 
metaphor?  Three  things  I  touch 
upon  for  a  moment.  First  of  all  the 
rigid  limitation  of  the  region  within 
which  death  has  any  power  at  all.  It 
affects  a  man's  vesture,  his  dwelling- 
place,  something  that  belongs  to  him, 
something  that  wraps  him,  but  nothing 
that  is  himself.  This  enemy  may 
seem  to  come  in  and  capture  the  whole 
fortress,  but  it  is  only  the  outworks 
that  are  thrown  down ;  the  citadel 
stands.  The  organ  is  one  thing,  the 
player  on  it  is  another  ;  and  whatever 
befalls  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  what 
touches  him.  Instead  of  an  all-master- 
ing conqueror,  then,  as  sense  tells  us 
that  death  is,  and  as  a  great  deal  of 
modern  science  is  telling  us  that  death 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


CHAP.  1. 


is,  it  is  only  a  power  that  touches  the 
fringe  and    circumference,    the   wrap- 
page and  investiture  of  my  being,  and 
has   nothing   to  do    with    that   being 
itself.       The     "  foolish    senses "    may 
declare  that  death  is  lord,  because  they 
"  see  no  motion  in  the  dead."     But  in 
spite  of  sense  and  anatomist's  scalpels, 
organisation   is   not   life.       Mind  and 
conscience,    will   and   love,    are   some- 
thing more  than  functions  of  the  brain ; 
and  no  scalpel  can  ever  cut  into  self. 
I  live,  and  may  live,  and — blessed  be 
God  ! — I  can  say  shall  live,  apart  alto- 
gether from  this  bodily  organisation. 
Whatever  befalls,  it  is  only  like  chang- 
ing a  dress,  or  remo\'ing  into  another 
house.        The     man     is     untouched. 
Another  thing  implied  in  this  figure — 
and,  indeed,  in  all  three  metaphors  of 
our  text — is  that  life  runs  on  unbroken 
and  the  same  through  and  after  death. 
If  the  apostle  be  right  in  his  conviction 
that  the  change  only  affects  the  cir- 
cumference, then  of  course  that  follows 
naturally.     "Unbroken  and  the  same  ! 
The  gulf  looks  deep  and  black  to  us  on 
this  side,  but,  depend  upon  it,  it  looks 
a  mere  chink  which  a  step  can  cross, 
when  seen  from  the  other.     Like  some 
of  the  rivers  that  disappear  in  a  sub- 
teranean  tunnel,  and  then  emerge  into 
the  light  again,  the  life  that  sinks  out 
of   sight   in   the   dark    valley   of    the 
shadow  of  death  will  come  up  into  a 
brighter   sunshine   beyond  the   moun- 
tains,  and  it  will  be  running  in  the 
same  direction  that  it  followed  when  it 
was  lost  to  mortal  eye.     For  just  as 
the  dying   Stephen   knew  his  Master 
again,  when  he  saw  Him  standing  in 
the  glory,   we  should  know  our  dear 
ones   after   they  had    passed   through 
this  change  ;  for  all  the  sweetness  and 
all  the  love  would  be  there  still,  and 
nothing  would  be  gone  but  the  weak- 
ness that  encompassed  them,  and  the 
imperfection   that   sometimes    masked 
their  true  beauty.     The  same  in  direc- 
tion, the  same  in  essence,  uninterrupted 
through   the    midst   of    the    darkness, 
the  life  goes  on.     A  man  is  the  same, 
whatever    dress    he    wears.      Though 
we  know  that  much  will  be  changed, 


and  that  new  powers  may  come,  and 
old  wants  and  weaknesses  fall  away 
with  new  environment,  still  the 
essential  self  will  be  unchanged,  and 
the  life  will  run  on  without  a  break, 
and  with  scarcely  a  deflection.  There 
is  no  magic  in  the  art  of  death 
which  changes  the  set  of  a  character, 
or  the  tendencies  and  desires  of  a 
nature.  As  you  die  so  you  live,  and 
you  live  in  your  death  and  after  your 
death  the  same  man  and  woman  that 
you  were  when  the  blow  fell. 

II.  Death  is  farther  spoken  of  as 
a  departure.  **  I  will  endeavour,"  says 
the  apostle,  "  that  ye  may  be  able 
after  my  decease."  The  word  for 
"  decease "  here  is  a  very  unusual 
one,  as,  no  doubt,  many  of  you  know. 
It  is  employed  with  reference  to  death 
only  twice  in  the  New  Testament,  once 
in  the  text,  and  once  in  the  account  of 
our  Lord's  Transfiguration,  where 
Moses  and  Elias  are  represented  as 
speaking  with  Him  ''  of  the  decease  that 
He  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem." 
You  may  observe  that  immediately 
after  the  last  of  my  texts,  the  apostle 
begins  to  speak  about  that  Transfigura- 
tion, and  makes  definite  reference  to 
what  he  had  heard  there;  so  that 
it  is  at  all  events  possible  that  he 
selects  the  unusual  word  with  some 
reference  to,  or  some  remembrance  of, 
its  use  upon  that  occasion  in  the  narra- 
tive of  one  of  the  evangelists.  Again, 
it  is  the  word  which  has  been  trans- 
ferred into  English  as  Exodus,  and  may 
possibly  be  here  employed  with  some 
allusion  to  the  departure  of  the 
children  of  Israel  from  the  land  of 
bondage.  Now,  looking  at  these  three 
points,  the  literal  meaning  of  this 
word,  its  employment  in  reference  to 
the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  its 
employment  in  reference  to  the  death 
of  Christ,  we  gather  from  them  valu- 
able considerations.  This  aspect  of 
death  shows  it  to  us  as  seen  from  this 
side.  Like  the  former,  it  minimises 
its  importance  by  making  it  merely 
a  change  of  place — another  stage  in 
a  journey.  We  have  had  many  changes 
already ;  only  this  is  the  last  stage,  the 

181 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


last  day's  march,  and  it  takes  us  home. 
But  yet  the  sad  thoughts  of  separation 
and  withdrawal  are  here.  These  show 
us  the  saddest  aspect  of  death,  which 
no  reflection  and  no  consolation  of 
religion  will  ever  make  less  sad.  Death, 
the  separator,  is,  and  must  always  be, 
an  unwelcome  messenger.  He  comes 
and  lays  his  bony  hand  upon  us,  and 
unties  the  closest  embraces,  and  draws 
us  away  from  all  the  habitudes  and 
associations  of  our  lives,  and  bans  us 
into  a  lonely  land.  But  even  in  this 
aspect  there  is  alleviation,  if  we  will 
think  about  this  departure  in  con- 
nection with  the  two  uses  of  the  word 
which  I  have  mentioned.  A  change  of 
place ;  yes  !  an  Exodus  from  bondage ; 
as  true  a  deliverance  from  captivity  as 
that  old  Exodus  was.  Life  has  its 
chains  and  limitations,  which  are  largely 
due  to  the  bodily  life  hemming  in  and 
shackling  the  spirit.  It  is  a  prison- 
house,  though  it  be  full  of  God's  good- 
ness. We  cannot  but  feel  that,  even 
in  health,  and  much  more  in  sickness, 
the  bondage  of  flesh  and  sense,  of  habits 
rooted  in  the  body,  and  of  wants  which 
it  feels,  weighs  heavily  upon  us.  By 
one  swift  stroke  of  Death's  hammer, 
the  fetters  are  struck  off.  Death  is  a 
Liberator,  in  the  profoundest  sense; 
the  Moses  that  leads  the  bondsmen 
into  a  desert  it  may  be,  but  to  liberty 
and  towards  their  own  land,  to  their 
rest.  It  is  the  angel  who  comes  in  the 
night  to  God's  prisoned  servant,  striking 
the  fetters  from  his  limbs,  and  leading 
him  through  the  u-on  gate  into  the  city. 
And  so  we  do  not  need  to  shiver  and 
fear  for  ourselves  or  to  mourn  for  our 
dear  ones,  if  they  have  passed  out  of 
the  bondage  of  "  corruption  into 
the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children 
of  God."  Death  is  a  departure  which 
is  an  emancipation.  Again,  it  is  a 
departure     which      is     conformed     to 


Christ's  "decease,"  and  is  guided  and 
companioned  by  Him.  Ah !  There 
you  touch  the  deepest  source  of  all 
comfort  and  all  strength  : 

"Christ  leads  us  through  no  darker  rooms 
Than  He  went  through  before." 

And  the  memory  of  His  presence  is 
comfort  and  light.  What  would  it  be, 
for  instance,  to  a  man  stumbling  in  the 
polar  regions,  amidst  eternal  ice  and 
trackless  wastes,  to  come  across  the 
footprints  of  a  man  1  What  would  it 
be  if  He  found  out  that  they  were  the 
footprints  of  His  own  brother?  And 
you  and  I  have  a  Brother's  steps  to 
tread  in  when  we  take  that  last  weary 
journey  from  which  flesh  and  sense 
shrink  and  fail. 

III.  The  last  aspect  of  these  meta- 
phors is  that  one  contained  in  the 
words  of  our  first  text :  "an  entrance 
ministered  abundantly."  The  going 
out  is  a  going  in  ;  the  journey  has  two 
ends,  only  the  two  ends  are  so  very 
near  each  other  that  the  same  act  is 
described  by  the  two  terms.  Looked 
at  from  this  side,  it  is  a  going  out ; 
looked  at  from  the  other  side,  it  is  a 
coming  in.  The  smallest  faith  that 
unites  a  man's  heart  with  Jesus  Christ 
makes  him  capable  of  receiving  so 
much  of  salvation  as  is  contained  in 
the  bare  entrance  into  the  kingdom ; 
but  every  degree  of  faith's  increase, 
and  every  degree  of  faith's  enrichment, 
makes  him  more  capable  of  receiving 
more  of  God  in  Christ,  and  he  will  get 
all  he  can  hold.  So  every  deed  here 
on  earth  of  Christian  conduct,  and 
every  grace  here  on  earth  of  Christian 
character,  has  its  issue  and  its  repre- 
sentative in  a  new  influx  of  the 
glory,  and  a  more  intimate  possession 
of  the  bliss,  and  a  more  abundant 
entrance  into  the  everlasting  kingdom. 
— Selected. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  ON  THE  PARAGRAPH, —Verses  12—15. 

Co7n,pleting  a  Life-Work. — St.  Peter  could  not  fail  to  realise  how  important  to 
the  young  Christian  Churches  was  his  own  personal  influence,  and  his  authorita- 
tive teaching,  as  well  as  those  oi  St.  Paul.  It  is  singular  that  he  makes  no 
reference  to  his  friend  St.  John,  and  we  can  only  conclude  that  at  this  time 

182 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  II.  PETEB.  chap,  t 


St.  John  had  not  found  the  opportunity  for  setting  forth  in  writing  his  womanly, 
mystical  conceptions  of  the  person  and  gospel  of  Christ.-  It  was  befitting  that 
St.  Peter  should  make  provision  for  the  continuance  of  his  life-influence,  and 
that  he  should  comfort  his  disciples  with  the  assurance  that  he  would  have  this 
in  mind.  In  a  sense  the  necessity  was  specially  laid  on  St.  Peter,  as  the  most 
prominent  of  the  apostles.  But  it  is  a  duty  which  should  be  duly  considered  by 
every  good  man,  and  especially  by  every  good  teacher.  No  man  has  any  right 
to  allow  his  influence  to  be  a  merely  temporary  and  passing  thing.  He  ought 
to  do  all  that  in  him  lies  to  make  it  permanent.  The  relation  of  the  apostolic 
developments  of  the  Christian  truth  to  the  original  revelations  of  those  truths 
in  the  Person,  teaching,  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  needs  very  careful  con- 
sideration. More  especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  on  the  revelation  rests  the 
absolute  Divine  stamp,  but  on  the  developments  only  a  Divine  assistance,  which 
worked  through  the  particular  knowledge,  and  peculiar  characteristics,  of 
individual  minds;  so  that  we  have  respectively  the  Petrine,  Pauline,  and 
Johannine  sattings  of  the  truth.  And  St.  Peter  is  in  no  way  to  blame  if,  in  his 
anxiety  for  the  preservation  of  Christ's  truth,  there  blended  an  anxiety  to 
preserve  also  the  Petrine  stamp  upon  it.  It  would  have  been  an  unworthy 
thing  if  St.  Peter  had  cherished  the  idea  of  founding  a  Petrine  school  or  sect ; 
but  a  man  may  be  jealous  about  conserving  the  particular  settings  of  truth 
which  have  been  revealed  to  him,  and  have  come  to  him  with  power, 

I.  Christian  truth,  and  thought,  and  life,  may  become  too  dependent  on 
individuals. — The  controversies  of  the  Christian  ages  would  have  been  milder- 
toned  if  the  various  settings  of  truth  could  have  been  dissociated  from  their 
authors,  and  considered  simply  upon  their  merits.  Personal  feeling  comes  in 
when  we  think  of  Cerinthus,  and  Arius,  and  Augustine,  and  Calvin,  and  Wesley, 
and  there  is  a  kind  of  jealousy  for  the  system,  out  of  respect  to  the  man. 
Sectarianism,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  has  grown  out  of  the  personal  influence  of 
some  man.  That  is  a  perfectly  legitimate  force — one  which  God  abundantly  uses 
for  the  spread  of  His  truth.  But  the  response  to  it  often  becomes  exaggerated 
and  excessive,  and  men  accept  on  the  authority  of  the  man  rather  than  on  the 
evidence  of  the  truth.  Following  particular  men  is  one  of  the  grave  weaknesses 
of  our  time.  When  a  Christian  life  is  really  no  more  than  personal  attachment 
to  an  individual,  and  repeating  after  him,  it  is  placed  in  the  gravest  peril  when 
that  man's  influence  is  removed.  So  often  the  man  has  come  to  stand  in  front 
of  the  Christ. 

II.  Because  of  this  undue  dependence,  Christian  teachers  are  often  removed 
by  death  or  otherwise. — We  can  easily  see  that  the  prolonged  influence  of 
individuals  must  grow  perilous.  When  pastors  continue  into  old  age  in  the 
same  church,  there  are  certain  serious  evils  which  become  rife.  If  Calvin  or 
Wesley,  or  any  other  leader,  had  lived  on,  how  surely  they  must  have  been 
mischief-makers  to  the  Church  !  And  so  often  in  smaller  spheres,  popular  men 
carry  people  away,  wisely  and  well,  or  otherwise,  but  always  at  the  peril  of 
quiet,  sober  Christian  thinking  and  Christian  living.  And  God's  providence  is 
always  actively  at  work  for  their  removal  at  fitting  times.  It  is  for  the  world's 
good  that  apostles  die.  Their  work  can  only  be  for  a  while.  It  is  for  the 
Church's  good  that  her  thought-leaders  and  her  popular  leaders  never  stay  very 
long  in  any  one  sphere.  Sectarianism  may  be  useful,  but  exaggerated 
sectarianism  would  not  fail  to  secure  the  Church's  moral  ruin. 

III.  The  truth  of  all  true  teachers  abides  when  they  have  passed  away. — 
No  living  seeds  of  truth  sown  in  the  souls  of  men  ever  really  fail.  It  may  very 
well  be  that  we  fail  to  recognise  the  fruitage.  It  often  is  a  fruitage  in  life,  in 
character,  in  triumph  over  sin,  in  good  cheer,  in  comfort,  in  the  soul's  renewed 
power.     We  err  in  thinking  so  much  of  the  results  of  Christian  teaching  and 

183 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


influence  in  the  purely  intellectual  spheres.  And  yet,  what  every  man  has 
truly  taught  surely  goes  to  make  up  the  whole  of  truth  for  the  ages.  Time  does, 
indeed,  try  all  settings  of  truth,  and  relegate  some  that  seemed  for  a  time  very 
prominent,  to  the  background  and  obscurity.  And  it  is  singular  to  notice  how 
the  spheres  of  Christian  truth  that  interest  men  are  constantly  changing,  and  so 
what  seemed  to  be  lost  settings  of  truth  come  into  view  and  power  again,  and  when 
they  come  are  often  unrecognised,  and  so  they  are  freely  talked  of  as  the  fresh 
discoveries  of  the  new  age.  Every  true  teacher  may  honourably  ^how  an  anxiety 
that  the  truth  given  to  him  to  teach  should  be  preserved ;  and  this  is  best  done 
by  committing  it  to  writing,  as  St.  Peter  did.  Oat  of  the  writings  the 
personal  element  soon  fails,  and  the  opinions  and  views  come  to  stand  on  their 
own  merits  alone.  Beginning  with  the  holy  gospels,  what  a  splendid  heritage  of 
Christian  literature  has  come  to  us  !  But  this  is  not  so  fully  recognised  as  it 
should  be — the  literature  of  each  age  belongs  to  each  age,  is  adapted  to  each 
age,  and  fades  with  its  age ;  but  the  literature  of  the  next  age  is  really  its 
resurrection — its  thoughts  and  truths  re-translated,  re-dressed,  and  re-expressed, 
to  fit  the  moods  of  the  new  generation.  The  apostles  and  their  immediate 
successors  live  on  in  every  age.  They  have  gone.  Age  after  age  their  successors, 
too,  have  gone  ;  but  their  teachings,  a  thousand  times  translated  and  adapted, 
are  the  Church's  possessions  to-day.  And  what  is  true  of  them  is  true  of  eveiy 
man  to  whom  is  given  grace  to  put  a  personal  stamp  on  any  side  or  aspect  of  the 
revealed  truth  of  God.     Dead — he  lives. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.   12.    The  Present  Truth. — This  the  best  watch  needs  to  be  adjusted  by 

is   a   suggestive   phrase.      There   is   a  God's  celestial  clock, 

present    truth     for    every    age — that  II.  As  to  the  Divine  image  in  man. 

which  God  emphasises  by  His  provi-  — It  is  defaced,  but  not  effaced,  like  a 

dence,    which    history   emphasises    by  shattered  mirror  whose  fragments  still 

human  need,  and  which  doctrine  em-  reflect  your  image.     Development  is  at 

phasises  by  the  extremes  of  error.     In  bottom  a  denial  of  the  descent  of  man 

this  day  the  present  truth  which  is  of  from  God,   and  substitutes  his  ascent 

supreme  importance  is  the  supernatural.  from  the  oyster.     To  make  a  man  a 

The   drift    is    towards   naturalism   in  mere  animal  leaves  gaps  unfulfilled — 

philosophy  and  materialism  in  practice.  the   beginnings  of   life,   consciousness, 

We  must  lay  stress  on  the  Divine  and  intelligence,  conscience.     Moreover,  it 

supernatural  element  in  the  Word  of  leads  to  the  caste  spirit,  to  the  under- 

God,  the  nature  of  man,  the  history  of  valuatiem   of   man   a.s   man,   and   the 

the  race,  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  erection  of  barriers  to  human  progress, 

I.  As   to   the   Word    of  God. — We  and  begets  carelessness  of  his  condition, 

must  assert  its  inspiration  and  infalli-  It  classes  dogs  and  Hottentots  together, 

bility.     Inspiration  must  be  more  than  and  led  the  French  governor  of  the  isle 

genius,  or  illumination  which  depends  of  Bourbon  to  rank  the  Malagasy  with 

on   internal    consciousness,   while    in-  asses. 

spiration   has   external   attestation  of  III.    As   to   the    hand   of    God   in 

prophecy  and  miracle.     Any  theory  of  history. — To  make   history  atheistic  is 

inspiration  that  leaves  out  infallibility,  to    make    humanity    anarchistic.       If 

destroys  the  value  of  the  Bible  as  God's  human  history  is  but  an  accident  or  a 

book,  for  it  takes  away  the  court  of  fate,  then,  as  there  is  no  God  in  it  to 

final  appeal.     Reason   and   conscience  rectify  it,  man's  only  hope  is  to  right 

are   ordinarily  safe   guides,  but  when  his   own    wrongs.      To    believe    in    a 

they  err  we  need  an  infallible  standard  Providence  behind  human  aflairs  leads 

by  which  to  correct  their  variations,  as  to  patience  and  long-suffering ;  but  if 

184 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


CHAP.  1. 


there  be  no  adjusting  power,  why 
consent  to  injustice  1  The  alarming 
developments  of  Society  to-day,  which 
threaten  all  government  with  ruin,  are 
direct  results  of  infidel  teaching. 

IV.  As  to  the  Spirit  of  God. — Refor- 
mation is  not  regeneration.  Transfor- 
mations of  character  and  communities 
which  are  radical  and  permanent  are 
the  fruits  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Nothing 


less  than  creative  power  can  be  equal 
to  a  new  creation  ;  and  for  the  highest 
success  in  any  true  work  for  God  and 
man,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  a  necessity. 
Genius,  learning,  and  philanthropy, 
come  to  their  limits.  The  moral  and 
spiritual  nature  of  man  refuse  to  yield 
until  some  mightier  force  is  at  work 
than  man  can  bring  to  bear. — Homi- 
letic  Magazine. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  16—21. 

The  Apostolic  Testimony. — In  the  salutation  of  this  epistle  Simon  Peter 
distinctly  calls  himself  an  ''  apostle "  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  here  he  puts 
himself  with  the  other  apostles,  and  testifies  of  the  veritablenesss  of  the  witness 
which  they  made  on  the  basis  of  their  own  knowledge  and  experience. 

I.  It  was  clear  and  emphatic  — This  is  implied  in  the  assertion  that  it  was 
not  vague,  uncertain,  and  untrustworthy,  like  the  "cunningly  devised  fables" 
with  which  the  popular  ear  was  tickled.  "  By  this  term  probably  some  elements 
in  the  doctrine  of  the  false  teachers  are  alluded  to;  something  analogous  to 
the  *  feigned  words '  of  chap.  ii.  3.  There  is  reason  for  believing  that  the 
particular  elements  in  their  teaching  thus  incidentally  condemned  were  of  Jewish 
origin.  If  this  conjecture  be  correct,  then  St.  Peter  is  here  dealing  with  errors 
similar  to  those  condemned  by  St.  Paul  (I  Tim.  i.  4  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4  ;  Tit.  i.  14 — the 
only  other  passage  in  which  the  word  '  fables '  occurs).  And  in  this  case  much 
light  is  thrown  on  some  of  the  marked  peculiarities  of  this  epistle  and  that  of  St. 
Jude —  viz.,  the  fondness  of  both  writers  for  the  oldest,  and  sometimes  the  most 
obscure,  passages  of  Old  Testament  history,  as  well  as  for  some  strange  portions 
of  uncanonical  apocryphal  tradition.  They  were  fighting  these  seducers  with  their 
own  weapons ;  difficult  passages  of  Scripture  and  tradition,  which  these  men  had 
worked  up  into  a  system  of  pernicious  mysticism,  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude  proved 
to  be  altogether  of  a  different  meaning,  and  to  tell  against  the  very  doctrines 
that  they  were  employed  to  support"  {A.  Plummer,  M.A.).  The  most  effective 
way  in  which  to  show  the  clearness  of  the  apostolic  testimony  is  to  contrast  the 
gospels  with  the  foolish  and  demoralising  stories  of  the  so-called  apocryphal 
gospels. 

II.  It  was  based  on  strong^  conviction. — They  themselves  absolutely  believed 
what  they  recorded  or  declared,  and  showed  their  conviction  by  giving  up  all, 
and  enduring  all,  for  the  sake  of  their  testimony.  They  were  consequently  more 
than  officials  who  do  a  duty,  and  more  even  than  prophets,  who  were  mediums 
for  conveying  a  message.  They  were  convinced  men,  who  put  their  own  hearts 
into  their  testimony.  And  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  all  effective  Christian 
ministry,  that  the  speaker  should  have  the  "  accent  of  conviction." 

III.  The  conviction  was  based  on  personal  experience. — St.  Peter  suggests 
much  that  was  common  to  himself  and  the  other  apostles  who  were  in  the  daily 
fellowship  of  Jesus  Christ  ;  but  he  refers  precisely  to  the  one  experience  which  he 
was  privileged  to  share  exclusively  with  James  and  John.  The  Transfiguration 
may  be  treated  as  St.  Peter's  special  personal  experience  and  testimony,  since  he 
was  th^  sole  spokesman  of  the  occasion.  The  precise  interest  of  the  Transfigura- 
tion lies  in  its  being  the  most  sublime  revelation  of  the  innermost  mystery  of 
Christ's  person  and  mission, — one  great  point  of  suggestion  there  being  the 
necessity  and  spiritual  mystery  of  the  Redeemer's  sacrificial  death.  St.  Peter 
did  not  repeat  something  heard;  nor  even  something  conveyed  to  his  mind  in 

185 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


dream,  or  trance  ;  nor  even  something  studied  from  a  book.  He  claims  accurate 
knowledge  through  personal  experience,  and  in  gaining  that  experience  the  full 
activity  of  all  his  human  powers  and  faculties.  Compare  the  declaration  of 
St.  John  :  "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning,  that  which  we  have  heard,  that 
which  we  have  seen  with  our  eyes,  that  which  we  beheld,  and  our  hands  handled, 
concerning  the  Word  of  Life  "  (1  John  i.  1). 

lY.  The  experience  absolutely  assured  the  righteousness  of  Christ's  personal 
claim. — They  were  "  eye-witnesses  of  His  majesty."  This  may  be  illustrated  by 
the  results  of  the  wine-making  at  the  marriage  in  Cana  of  Galilee.  "  This 
beginning  of  His  signs  did  Jesus  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and  manifested  His  glory  : 
and  His  disciples  believed  on  Him."  We  need  to  see  more  clearly  that  all  the 
experiences  of  Christ's  fellowship  which  the  apostles  had  brought  impressions  of 
Him ;  not  just  of  His  power,  or  His  wisdom,  or  His  goodness,  but  of  HiTn,  in 
whom  so  evidently  dwelt  "  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily." 

The  Witness  of  Propliecy  to  Christ. — The  explanation  of  this  reference  to 
prophecy  needs  first  to  be  given,  and  Plummei^^s  note  is  suggestive  of  every 
important  point.  "  We  have,  as  something  more  sm-e,  the  prophetic  word,  as  a 
second  proof  of  the  truth  of  my  teaching  respecting  Christ's  coming.  The 
expression  *  the  prophetic  word '  •  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  New  Testament. 

*  The  Scripture '  given  as  quoted  by  Clement  of  Rome,  is  quoted  again  in  the 
so  called  Second  Epistle  of  Clement  (ch.  xi.)  as  '  the  prophetic  word.'  The 
quotation  in  both  cases  is  probably  from  some  uncanonical  book  of  prophecies. 
Here  the  expression  means  the  whole  body  of  prophecy  respecting  the  subject  in 
hand ;  but  the  meaning  of  the  whole  sentence  is  not  quite  clear.  It  may  mean 
— 1.  That  the  Transfiguration  has  made  prophecies  more  sure,  for  we  who  were 
there  have  thus  witnessed  their  fulfilment.  In  this  case,  however,  we  should  have 
expected  something  more  than  '  and '  to  introduce  the  statement,  such  as  '  and 
hence,'  '  and  thus,'  '  whereby,'  etc.  Or  it  may  mean — 2.  That  in  the  prophetic 
word  we  have  something  laore  sure  than  the  voice  from   heaven.     Here  a  simple 

*  and  '  is  natural  enough  ;  and  the  word  of  prophecy  is  suitably  compared  with 
the  voice  from  heaven.  But  how  can  the  word  of  prophets  be  more  sure  than 
the  voice  of  God?  In  itself  it  cannot  be  so;  but  it  may  be  so  regarded  (1)  in 
reference  to  those  who  did  not  hear,  but  only  heard  of,  the  voice  from  heaven. 
(2)  In  reference  to  the  subject  in  hand,  (a)  For  the  readers  of  this  epistle,  the 
many  utterances  of  a  long  line  of  prophets,  expounded  by  a  school  of  teachers 
only  second  to  the  prophets  themselves,  might  easily  be  '  more  sure '  evidence 
than  the  narrative  of  a  single  writer  ;  and  '  if  they  heard  not  Moses  and  the 
prophets,  neither  would  they  be  persuaded '  by  the  report  of  a  voice  from  heaven. 
(b)  The  Transfiguration,  though  an  earnest  of  Christ's  future  glory,  was  not 
so  clear  a  promise  of  it  as  the  express  words  of  prophecy.  If  this  latter  inter- 
pretation be  right,  we  have  another  form  of  authenticity.  A  forger  would  be 
likely  to  magnify  his  own  advantage  in  hearing  the  voice  from  heaven  over  the 
ordinary  proofs  ofiered  to  every  one.  In  any  case,  the  coincidence  with  1  Pet. 
i.  10-12  must  not  be  overlooked."  Dealing  generally  with  the  assertion  made 
concerning  the  trustworthiness  of  the  characteristic  Old- Testament  writings, 
consider — 

I.  Prophetic  Scripture. — St.  Peter  clearly  has  in  mind  writings  of  an  antici- 
pative  character,  which  foretold  events  that  would  occur  in  the  future.  The 
term  is  sometimes  made  to  include  the  historic  and  didactic  features  of  Scripture, 
but  here  reference  must  be  to  writings  which  have  relation  to  the  coming 
Messiah.  And  it  must  always  be  borne  in  mind  that  Jews  found  references  to 
Messiah  in  very  many  mere  side-allusions,  which  our  logical  Western  minds 
compel  us  to  free  from  any  such  relation.     Indeed,  the  severer  criticism  of  our 

186 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  PETER.  chap.  I. 


\ 


day  tends  to  put  serious  limitation  upon  the  long-recognised  number  of  Messianic 
passages. 

II.  Its  source. — Distinctly,  the  impulse  and  guidance  of  the  spirit  of  God. 
The  spirit,  as  the  inspiration  of  prophecy  concerning  Messiah,  should  be  carefully 
distinguished  from  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  witness  and  seal,  dwelling  in  Christian 
believers.  There  are  dreams  of  poets,  visions  of  a  golden  age ;  but  these  may 
not  be  compared  with  the  prophetic  portions  of  Scripture,  which  are  distinctly 
revelational,  and  designed  to  confirm  faith  in  the  Divine  ordering  of  human 
affairs,  with  a  view  to  redemptive  issues. 

III.  Its  limitations. — It  is  buried  in  current  human  history,  or  in  figures 
understood  only  in  particular  ages,  and  must  therefore  always  be  dealt  with  in 
a  large,  general,  and  suggestive,  rather  than  precise  way. 

IV.  Its  precise  mission. — It  had  an  immediate  mission.  It  was  to  cheer 
hearts  and  keep  up  hope.  It  was  a  lamp  in  the  night  which  must  stay  and 
brighten  the  house  until  the  daylight  streamed  in  at  the  windows.  Its  interest 
to  us  lies  in  what  it  was^  and  what  it  did,  rather  than  in  what  it  is.  What  kept 
the  world's  faith  alive  is  always  important. 

V.  Its  interpretation.— It  must  not  be  conducted  on  any  private  lines,  but 
according  to  principles  of  interpretation  laid  down.  The  idiosyncracies  of  in- 
dividuals have  wrought  sad  havoc  in  the  treatment  of  God's  Word. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Vers.    19-21.    Loch   and    Key. — St.  spoken  ;  but  pointed  far  onward  into 

Peter  had  been  speaking  of  the  proofs  futurity,  and  had  a  grander  reference 

which  he  and  his  brother  apostles  had  and   application  to   the    Son  of   God. 

received  of   our   Saviour's   power  and  The    prophet  himself   did  not  always 

greatness.      After  a  reference  to  the  fully  understand  his  prophecies.      He 

Transfiguration,  he  comes  to  the  proof  spake  as  he  was  moved  by  the  spirit 

from  prophecy.     He  says,  a  prophecy  of    God ;    he    gave   utterance   to   the 

is  like  a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place,  threats  and  promises  which   God  put 

until  the  day-dawn.     As  men  burn  a  into  his  mouth.    But  how  those  threats 

candle  during  the  night  to  give  light,  and    promises    were    to    be    fulfilled, 

so  was  God  pleased  to  set  up  the  lamp  neither  he  nor  his  hearers  knew.     So 

of  prophecy  in  the  world,  to  save  man-  that  the  prophecies  were  like  a  door 

kind  from  being  left  in  total  darkness  with  a  curious  lock  or  secret  spring  to 

during  the  ages  before  the  coming  of  it.      Till  the  secret  of   the  spring   is 

Christ.     The  prophecies  were  designed  found  out,  till  the  right  key  is  given, 

to  preserve  a  sense  of  God's  goodness,  we  may  puzzle  ourselves  as  long  as  we 

and  a  recollection  of  His  promises,  to  please,  but  we   shall   never  open  the 

keep  hope  alive  in  the  world,  and  to  door.     If  you  saw  half  a  dozen  doors 

awaken  men  to  the  expectation  of  some  with  as  many  locks  to  them,  so  new 

great  mercy,  which  God  was  preparing  and  strange  that  not  a  smith  in  the 

for  His  people  and  would  bring  to  light  country  could  make  a  key  to  fit  any 

in  due  time.     When  Christ  came,  the  one  of  them,  and  if  a  man  then  came 

prophecies  acquired  a  new  use ;    they  with  a  key  which  fitted  all  these  dif- 

became,  perhaps,  the  strongest  of  the  ferent  locks,  and  opened  all  the  six  doors, 

outward  proofs,  the  most  striking  of  could  you  doubt  that  his  was  the  right 

the  external  testimonies  to  the  truth  key  ?      This  is  just  the  kind  of  proof 

of  our  Saviour's  mission.     Their  testi-  which   the    prophecies   afford    of    the 

mony  is  so  sure,  because  not  of  private  truth   and    Divinity   of    Jesus.       The 

interpretation  ;  that  is,  the  prophecies  weight  of  this  proof  rests  on  two  simple 

did  not  refer  merely  to  the  events  of  facts  :  one  is,  that  the  prophecies  were 

the  time  and  place  when  they  were  written  many  hundreds  of  years  before 

187 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


the  birth  of  Christ.  The  other  is,  that 
Jesus  died  the  death  related  in  the  - 
New  Testament.  Compare,  then,  such 
writings  as  Ps.  xxii.  and  Isa.  liii.,  with 
the  account  of  our  Saviour's  trial  and 
crucifixion  in  the  gospels,  and  any  un- 
prejudiced man  must  admit  that  the 
early  writers  were  taught  of  God. 
Illustrations  may  be  fully  taken  from 
the  chapter  in  Isaiah.  Four  assertions 
are  made  in  it :  1.  Messiah  was  to  be 
made  answerable  for  a  sum  that  was 
required.  2.  He  was  to  be  taken  off 
by  an  oppressive  or  unjust  sentence. 
3.  He  was  to  be  dumb  and  patient 
before  his  judges.  4.  He  was  to  be 
brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter, 
and  to  be  cut  off  for  the  sins  of  God's 
people.  These  are  extraordinary  asser- 
tions, yet  they  are  all  fulfilled  in  Jesus; 
so  accurately,  and  in  so  many  points, 
that  the  agreement  cannot  be  acci- 
dental. Therefore,  in  Jesus  we  have 
the  true  key  for  the  prophetic  lock ; 
and    Isaiah,   who    foretold    all    these 


things  so  many  hundred  years  before, 
must  assuredly  have  spoken,  as  St. 
Peter  says,  not  of  his  own  will,  but  as 
he  was  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. — 
A.  W,  Bare,  A.M. 

Ver.  1 9.  Pi'ophecies  Fulfilled  in  Christ. 

I.  The  prophets  themsehes  in  re- 
ference to  Christ. — 1.  Every  one  of 
them  had  in  his  day  a  good  name  and 
character  at  stake.  2.  Still  they  were 
not  afraid,  nor  slow,  to  veiiture  tLeir 
names  upon  mysterious  oracles.  3. 
This  is  the  more  remarkable  since  they 
did  not  themselves  fully  understand 
what  they  prophesied.  4.  The  reason 
for  this  is,  that  they  weie  rendered 
confident  by  Gc  d. 

II.  Christ  Himself  in  reference  to 
the  prophets  and  their  prophecies. — 
1.  His  birth.  2.  His  betrayal.  3.  His 
condemnation  and  crucifixion.  4.  His 
miracles.  5.  His  various  sufferings. 
6.  His  ministry — its  nature  and  success. 
— R.  Philip. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER   I. 


Ver.  3.  Our  Life-Picture. — "At  an  artist's 
reception  one  day,"  says  H.  W.  Beecher,  "  I 
saw  a  picture  of  a  mountain  sunrise,  and  I 
wondered  at  its  marvellous  depths,  richness, 
and  splendour  of  shade  and  colour,  till  the 
artist  told  me  how  he  had  toned  down  the 
picture  and  softened  its  colouring  in  its 
subdued  harmony  of  tint ;  and  I  thought 
how  often  our  life  was  growing  to  be  like 
that  picture  of  a  mountain  sunrise.  God's 
unseen  band  is  before  the  easel,  sketching 
here  and  shading  there.  The  life-picture 
looks  to  us  unfinished,  fragmentary  and 
imperfect  now,  but  each  new  joy-light,  each 
sorrow-shade  is  toning  it  down  with  all  its 
gloom  and  glory  into  harmony  with  God's 
great  ideal.  He  will  frame  it  at  last  in  such 
a  setting  of  events,  as  he  chooses,  and  we 
shall  find  in  the  great  gallery  above  that  the 
light  has  been  in  the  right  place,  and  the 
shadows  too." 

Ver.  7.  Brotlierly  Kindness. — Two  fisher- 
men, a  few  years  ago,  were  mending  their 
nets  on  board  their  vessel  on  one  of  the  lakes 
in  the  interior  of  Argyleshire,  at  a  consider- 
able distance  from  the  shore,  when  a  sudden 
squall  upset  their  boat.  One  of  them  could 
not  swim,  and  the  only  oar  which  floated 
was  caught  by  him  that  could  swim.  His 
sinking  companion  cried,  "  Ah,  my  poor  wife 
and    children,    they    must    starve    now  1 " 

188 


"  Save  yourself  ;  I  will  risk  my  life  for  their 
sakes ! "  said  the  other,  thrusting  the  oar 
beneath  the  arms  of  the  drowning  man.  He 
committed  himself  instantly  to  the  deep,  in 
danger  of  perishing  for  the  safety  of  his 
companion.  That  moment  the  boat  struck 
the  bottom,  and  started  the  other  oar  by 
their  side  and  thus  both  were  enabled  to 
keep  afloat  till  they  were  picked  up. 

Ver.  10.  Wlw  are  tlie  Elect? — You  havei^\ 
heard  of  the  senator  relating  to  his  son  the  ' 
account  of  the  book  containing  the  names 
of  illustrious  members  of  the  Commonwealth. 
The  son  desired  to  see  the  outside.  It  was 
glorious  to  look  upon.  "  Oh,  let  me  open 
it,"  said  the  son.  "Nay,"  said  the  father, 
"it's  known  only  to  the  council."  Then 
said  the  son,  "  Tell  me  if  my  name  is  there." 
"  And  that,"  said  the  father,  "  is  a  secret 
known  only  to  the  council,  and  it  cannot  be 
divulged."  Then  he  desired  to  know  for 
what  achievements  the  names  were  inscribed 
in  that  book.  So  the  father  told  him ;  and 
related  to  him  the  achievements  and  noble 
deeds  by  which  they  had  eternised  their 
names.  "  Such,"  said  he,  "  are  written, 
and  none  but  such  are  written,  in  the  book." 
"And  will  my  name  be  there?"  said  the. 
son.  "  I  cannot  tell  thee,"  said  the  fat!  er ; 
'*  if  thy  deeds  are  like  theirs,  thou  shalt  be 
written  in  the  book ;  if  not,  thou  shalt  not 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER, 


CHAr.  I. 


be  written."  And  then  the  son  con&ulted 
with  himself,  and  he  found  that  his  whole 
deeds  were  playing,  and  singing,  and  drink- 
ing, and  amusing  himself;  and  he  found 
that  this  was  not  noble,  nor  temperate,  nor 
valiant.  And  as  he  could  not  read,  as  yet, 
his  name,  he  determined  to  '*  make  his 
calling  and  election  sure."  And  thus,  "  by 
patient  continuance  in  well-doing,  the  end  is 
crowned  with  glory,  honour,  immortality, 
and  eternal  life." — liev.  E.  P.  Hood. 

Ver.  10.  Preparing  for  Eternity. — I  have 
read  somewhere — I  think  it  was  *  of  Bona- 
ventura — that  in  one  of  his  sermons  he 
described  himself  as  in  a  dream,  beholding 
a  vast  valley  of  rocks  covered  with  workers, 
or  those  who  were  supposed  to  be  working. 
Some  wrought,  and  as  they  wrought, 
they  shaped  pieces  of  stone.  Every  piece 
of  stone  was  shaped  to  exactly  the  same  pro- 
portions, squared  to  exactly  the  same  shape. 
"And  I  saw,"  said  the  dreamer,  "and  behold 
while  they  wrought,  invisible,  white-winged 
angels  stood  by,  and  they  took  each  piece  of 
stone  and  bare  it,  and  built  of  them  a 
palace  in  the  fair  kingdoms  among  the 
mansions  of  light.  And  I  noticed  others 
who  were  idle,  lying,  sleeping  in  the  valley 
of  rocks ;  but  I  noticed  that  invisible,  dark 
living  spirits  were  by  them  while  they  slept — 
not  to  receive  the  hewn  stones,  but  them- 
selves excavating,  and  shaping,  and  bearing 
them  away  to  build  homes  in  the  dark  vaults 
of  lost  being.  Then  I  knew  that  these 
stones  were  hours.  And  1  knew  that  our 
hours  are  building  our  future  eternal  homes  ; 
that  as  they  are  passed  here,  so  shall  we  be 
for  ever. — Hood. 

Ver.  11.  The  Abundant  Entrance. — We 
may  take  an  illustration  from  a  vessel 
returning  after  a  long  voyage,  and  being 
received  and  welcomed  by  expectant  friends. 
She  has  been,  let  us  suppose,  absent  for 
years -has  been  toiling  and  traflficking  in 
every  sea — touching  at  the  ports  and  trading 
in  the  markets  of  many  lands ;  she  is 
approaching  at  last  her  "  desired  bayen " 
the  harbour  from  which  she  set  out,  whence 
loving  thoughts  went  with  her  as  she  started 
on  her  perilous  way,  and  where  anxious 
hearts  are  now  wishing  and  waiting  for  her 
return.  She  is  descried  in  the  distance: 
the  news  spreads  ;  all  is  excitement ; 
multitudes  assemble ;  pier  and  quay,  beach 
and  bank,  are  crowded  with  spectators,  as 
the  little  craft  pushes  on,  and  every  moment 
nears  her  destination.  There  she  is  1 — 
worn  and  weather-beaten,  it  is  true,  covered 
with  the  indications  of  sore  travel  and  long 
service,  and  with  many  signs  of  her  having 
encountered  the  battle  and  the  breeze. 
But  all  is  safe  1  Her  goodly  freight  is 
secure  and  uninjured  ;  her  profits  have  b  on 
large;  the  merchandise  she  brings  is  both 


rare  and  rich.  She  is  coming  along  over  a 
sunny  sea,  leaping  and  dancing  as  if  she 
were  alive.  Her  crew  are  on  the  deck,  and, 
with  straining  eyes  and  palpitating  hearts, 
are  looking  towards  the  shore.  A  soft  wind 
swells  the  sails  ;  the  blue  heavens  are  bend- 
ing over  the  bark,  as  if  smiling  on  her  course, 
while  the  very  waves  seem  to  run  before 
her,  turning  thefnselves  about  with  conscious 
joy,  clapping  their  hands,  and  murmuring  a 
welcome  1  How  she  bounds  forwards  1  She 
is  over  the  bar!  She  is  gliding  now  in 
smooth  water,  is  passing  into  port,  and  is 
preparing  to  moor  and  to  drop  her  anchor 
for  the  last  time  1  While  she  does  so  there 
comes  a  shout  from  the  assembled  spectators 
— the  crowds  that  witness  and  welcome  her 
approach — loud  as  thunder,  musical  as  the 
sea  1  Gladness  and  greeting  are  on  every 
hand.  Eloquent  voices  fill  the  air.  The 
vessel  has  received  ^'an  abundant  entrance  ;  " 
her  crew  have  been  met  with  sympathetic 
congratulations,  are  surrounded  by  eager  and 
glad  friends,  hailed  with  enthusiasm,  em- 
braced with  rapture,  and  accompanied  to 
their  home  with  shouting  and  songs  1 — Rev.  T. 
Blnney. 

Entrance  Ministered. — The  phrase  "  an 
entrance  shall  be  ministered  "  is  an  expressive 
and  a  striking  one  ;  what  can  be  the  mean- 
ing of  it  ?  The  English  word  supplying  no 
satisfactory  answer  to  this  question,  we 
naturally  turn  to  the  word  employed  in  the 
original,  an4  by  this  we  are  unequivocally 
directed  to  a  usage  which  was  anciently 
prevalent,._oii.,,tlie, Greek  stage.  Without 
pretending  to  any  extensive  knowledge  of 
theatrical  amusements  as  they  are  conducted 
among  ourselves,  it  may,  I  suppose,  be  safely 
observed  that  the  scenery  and  the  gierformers 
tell  the  whole  story  of  tlie'plotrand'lihat  an 
acted  drama  has  not  hoW  any  auxiliary 
explanation.  It  was  not  so  in  ancient  Greece. 
There,  besides  the  scenery  and  the  actors, 
was  placed  at  the  side  of  the  stage  a  small 
body  of  persons  who  took  no  part  in  the 
play,  but  at  various  points  of  its  progress 
recited,  or  sang,  a  few  sentences  auxiliary  to 
it ;  either  announcing  persons  of  distinction, 
explaining  some  intended  action,  or  bewail- 
ing some  tragical  occurrence.  This  group  of 
persons  was  called  the  chorus,  and  upon  this 
word  chorus  is  distinctly  formed  tbe  verb 
which  is  here  employed  by  the  apostle  when 
he  says  "  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  " 
into  the  heavenly  kingdom.  One  critical 
observation  only  requires  to  be  made.  At  ^ 
different  periods  of  Grecian  history  the  word  \ 
to  which  I  am  referring  appears  to  have  had  * 
different  significations.  More  anciently, 
and  primarily,  the  word  irnxopvy^i^  signified 
to  leadj, iMT-Conduct,  the  chorus,  while  less 
an(5ierit  writers  employ  it  to  denote  one  who 
provided  the  expenses  of  the  chorus.  I  hold 
myself    quite  at  liberty   to  take  the   more 

189 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


ancient,  and  the  undoubtedly  primary  mean- 
ing of  the  word,  as  the  only  one  which  is  at 
all  suitable  to  the  apostle's  purpose.  And 
his  meaning  cannot,  I  think,  be  less  than 
^this:    that  as   in  a   dramatic    performance 

Y  ( persons    of    distinction     were     honourably 
)    introduced  by  the  chorus,  so  the  entrance  of 

V  a  saint  into  heaven  shall  be  "  ministered,"  or 
•-chorused.  It  shall  not  be  the  mere  addition 
f  of  one  to  the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  not 
^  an  obscure  or  unnoticed  admission,  as  merely 

'•-granted,  but  an  entrance  announced  with 
gladness  and  accompanied  with  honour.  To 
proceed  yet  a  step  farther,  the  apostle  tells  us 
that  to  some  "  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered 
abundantly."  Keeping  in  view  the  general 
idea  before  us,  the  conception  suggested  by 
this  very  expressive  word,  "abundantly," 
it  is  not  difficult  to  realise.  State  pageants 
vary  in  their  degrees  of  splendour.  Always 
befitting  the  royal  dignity,  on  some  occasions 
as  when  the  personage  introduced  is  of  extra- 
ordinary rank,  they  are  more  especially 
gorgeous,  every  contrivance  of   courtly   in- 


genuity being  put  into  requisition  to  make  the 
ceremony  correspond  with  the  dignity  of  the 
one  party,  and  to  express. the  regard  of  the 
other.  In  such  a  case  an  introduction  may 
be  said — to  take  up  the  phraseology  of  the 
text — to  be  "  ministered  abundantly."  And 
the  idea  conveyed  to  us  cannot  be  less  than 
this,  that  among  believers  in  Jesus  there  are 
some  whose  entrance  into  heaven  shall  be 
more  especially  honourable — whatever  those 
honours  may  be,  of  which  all  that  can  be 
said  is  that  the  eye  hath  not  seen  them,  the 
ear  hath  not  heard  them,  neither  hath  the 
heart  of  man  conceived  them. — Rev.  John 
Howard  Hint  on,  M.A. 

Ver.  19.  Promises  of  The  Word. — Like  the 
aurora  borealis  shining  on  the  frosty  and 
sombre  sky,  tinging  it  with  beautiful  colours, 
and  relieving  it  with  brilliant  rays,  the  pro- 
mises of  the  gospel  shine  in  tints  of  light 
and  smiles  of  love  over  the  cold  and  gloomy 
night  of  trouble. — T.  J.  Wright. 


CHAPTER   II. 
MISCHIEF-MAKERS  AND  MISCHIEF-MAKING. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


The  subject  treated  in  this  chapter  is  the  mischievous  influence  of  corrupting  doctrine. 
And  false  doctrine  is  constantly  treated  in  the  New  Treatment  in  view  of  the  immoral 
associations  which  always  attended  it,  as  with  the  idolatries  of  older  days.  True  doctrine 
works  for  righteousness  ;  false  doctrine  works  for  licence.  True  prophets  had  been  referred 
to  in  chap.  i.  21,  and  they  suggest  warnings  against  false  prophets,  and  false  teachers. 

Ver.  1.  There  were. — In  the  times  of  the  true  prophets  there  were  false  ones.  It  is  always 
so.  The  good  and  the  evil  go  together.  False  teachers. — Such  as  the  Judaising  teachers,  who 
dogged  the  steps  of  St.  Paul,  or  such  as  the  Gnostic  teachers — or  teachers  of  what  subse- 
quently became  known  as  Gnosticism,  who  roused  the  intense  opposition  of  St.  John. 
Apart  from  these  there  may  have  been  pure  time-servers,  who  were  ready  to  deceive  the 
people  if  they  could  secure  their  own  gains,  such  as  Simon  the  sorcerer.  People. — Term 
specially  used  of  the  Jews,  as  the  people  of  God's  choice  (Matt.  i.  21  ;  John  xi.  50).  Privily. — 
With  the  idea  of  subtlety  ;  craftily,  not  merely  secretl3^  The  warning  was  needed  because  of 
the  guilef ulness  of  the  false  teachers ;  their  plausibility.  (For  examples  of  false  prophets, 
see  1  Kings  xxii,  6,  11,  24  ;  Jer.  xxviii. ;  Isa.  ix.  15,  etc.).  Damnable  heresies. — R.V. 
"  destructive."  "  Sects  "  is  better  than  "  heresies."  The  word  "  heresy  "  means  '*  choice  of  a 
party,"  and  was  used  in  later  Greek  for  a  philosophic  sect,  or  school.  St.  Peter  deals  with 
classes  rather  than  with  persons.  The  Lord. — Here  deaTrdrrjv,  Master.  Bought  them. — 
Compare  1  Pet.  i.  18.  Some  of  the  early  false  teachers  denied  our  Lord's  humanity,  and  some 
His  Divinity  ;  but  probably  St.  Peter  had  chiefly  in  mind  entangling  men  in  old  legal  Jewish 
forms,  when  they  had  been  lifted  into  spiritual  liberty  and  privilege. 

Ver.  2.  Pernicious  ways, — Lascivious  doings  (see  Mark  vii.  22  ;  Rom.  xiii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  3  ; 
Jude  vers.  4,  8).  The  connection  between  false  doctrine  and  immorality  is  fully  recognised, 
but  the  apostle  may  have  in  mind  self-willedness,  swayed  by  self-seeking  motives.  Way  of 
truth. — The  service  of  Christ  was  at  first  known  as  "  the  way  "  (see  Acts  ix,  2,  etc.). 

Ver.  3.  Through  covetousness. — The  preposition,  iv,  indicates  that  covetousness  (un- 
principled getting  for  personal  advantage)  was  the  element,  the  substratum,  of  their 
profession.      Illustrate  Simon  the  sorcerer.    Feigned  words. — Made-up  tales.      Their  own 

•190 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER.  chap.  ii. 


manufactures,  which  rest  on  no  authority.  *'  A  bombastic  mysticism,  promising  to  reveal 
secrets  about  the  unseen  world  and  the  future,  was  a  very  lucrative  profession  in  the  last 
days  of  Paganism,  and.  it  passed  over  to  Christianity  as  an  element  in  various  heresies." 
(Compare  "  Cunningly-devised  fables,"  chap.  i.  16.)  Damnation.  —Destruction.  "  Judgment 
does  not  loiter  on  its  way ;  destruction  does  not  nod  drowsily.  Both  are  eager,  watchful, 
waiting  for  the  appointed  hour." 

Ver.  4.  The  angels. — No  article — "  angels."  Whether  the  antediluvian  sinners  or  beings  of 
another  world,  are  meant,  is  disputed.  There  is  no  Old  Testament  record  of,  or  allusion  to, 
any  fall  of  angels.  Phitmner  thinks  the  reference  is  to  statements  in  the  book  of  Enoch,  that 
certain  angels  sinned  by  having  intercourse  with  women  (see  T.  Moore's  poem,  "  The  Loves 
of  the  Angels  ").  "  Angels  "  may  be  a  translation  of  "  Sons  of  God  "  (Gen.  vi.  2).  To  hell.— 
Cast  them  into  dungeons.     Tartarus,  raprapivaas,  an  unusual  term. 

Ver.  5.  Old  world. — In  the  book  of  Enoch  the  Flood  follows  close  upon  the  sin  of  the 
angels.  Eighth  person.— Noah  and  seven  others.  Preacher. — K-qpvKa,  herald.  One  to  whom 
a  message  is  given  to  deliver.     (Compare  Jonah.) 

Ver.  7.  Just  Lot. — With  special  reference  to  moral  sentiments.  Filthy  conversation. — The 
lascivious  life  of  the  wicked. 

Ver.  8.  Kighteous  man.—  Spiritual  righteousness  is  not  suggested  ;  only  moral  righteousness. 
Lot's  character  must  be  judged  from  his  story  as  a  whole.  Vexed. — Tortured.  Why,  then, 
did  he  stay  in  the  district  ?  "  Righteous  "  is  a  comparative  term  ;  and  we  must  think  of  Lot 
in  relation  to  the  defective  morality  of  his  age,  and  in  view  of  the  licentiousness  of  those 
with  whom  he  is  here  contrasted. 

Ver.  10.  Despise  government. — Dominion.  Both  self-restraint  and  restraint  of  good  rules 
and  wise  authonties.  Those  who  own  no  superior.  Evil  of  dignities. — Lit.  "  They  tremble 
not  while  railing  at  glories."  "  These  men  deny  the  existence  of,  or  irreverently  speak 
slightingly  of,  those  spiritual  agencies  by  means  of  which  God  conducts  the  government  of 
the  world." 

Ver.  11.  Angels. — See  Jude,  ver.  9.  Allusion  is  evidently  to  some  tradition  which  has  not 
been  otherwise  preserved.     (But  see  Zech.  iii.  1,  2.) 

Ver.  12.  Brute  beasts. — R.V.,  "  as  creatures  without  reason,  born  mere  animals,  to  be  taken 
and  destroyed."  Omit  "natural."  A  denunciation  of  final  ruin  against  these  covetous  and 
corrupting  teachers. 

Ver.  13.  Spots. — In  a  moral  sense.  Sporting  themselves. — Making  great  show  and  boasting, 
as  if  they  were  the  favourites  of  heaven. 

Ver.  14.  Beguiling. — Enticing.  Decoying  as  with  a  bait.  Covetous  practices. — Plans  of 
fraud  and  extortion.  Cursed  children. — Children  of  the  curse :  or  children  of  malediction. 
They  are  devoted  to  execration. 

Ver.  15.  Bosor. — R.V.,  "  Beor."     From  which  it  is  only  a  dialectical  variation. 

Ver.  16.  Rebuked. — Lit.  "  But  had  a  conviction  of  his  own  transgression  "  ;  was  convicted 
of  it.     Madness. — Infatuation  ;  conscious  and  voluntary  perversion  of  mind. 

Ver.  18.  Great  swelling  words  of  vanity. — Exaggeration,  unreality,  boastfulness,  emptiness, 
are  expressed  by  this  phrase.  Clean  escaped. — Better,  "who  are  just  escaped,"  "almost 
escaped."     Such  were  in  special  peril  of  these  evil  things. 

Ver.  19.  Servants. — Bond-slaves.     (See  Rom.  vi.  16,  viii.  21.) 

Ver.  20.  They  have  escaped. — It  is  not  clear  whether  the  deluded  ones,  or  those  who  delude 
them,  is  meant.  Probably  the  latter.  "  The  fullest  clearness  of  spiritual  vision  had  not 
protected  these  heresiarchs  from  the  temptations  of  their  sensuous  natures." 

Ver.  22.  The  form  of  the  proverbs  is  participial.  "  The  dog  returned  to  his  own  vomit ; 
the  washed  sow  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire"  (see  Prov.  xxvi.  11).  "In  both  cases  stress  is 
laid  on  the  fact  that  there  had  been  a  real  change.  The  dog  had  ejected  what  was  foul ;  the 
sow  had  washed  herself ;  but  the  old  nature  had  returned  in  both  cases.  These  who  after 
their  baptism  returned  to  the  impurities  they  had  renounced,  were,  in  the  apostle's  eyes,  no 
better  than  the  unclean  beasts.  In  the  union  of  the  two  types  of  baseness  we  may,  perhaps, 
trace  a  reminiscence  of  our  Lord's  teaching  in  Matt.  vii.  6  "  (^Plumptre), 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—8. 

The  Essence  of  Heresy. — It  has  been  satiiically,  but  with  much  suggestive 
truthfulness,  said  that  orthodoxy  is  "  my  opinion,"  and  heterodoxy  is  "  other 
people's  opinion."  It  should  be  carefully  observed  that,  in  Scripture,  heresy  is 
never  regarded  as  a  mere  difference  in  intellectual  standpoint,  mental 
apprehension,  or  word  setting.  It  is  always  regarded  from  its  moral  side, 
always  seen  as  bearing  a  mischievous  influence  upon  the  character,  or  giving 
an  unhealthy  licence  to  the  conduct.     Heresy  is  anything  and  everything  that 

191 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL  PETER, 


helps  a  man  to  do  wrong.  By  its  fruits  it  is  known.  That  opinion  is  wrong 
which  works  out  into  unrighteousness. 

I.  Heresy  is  not  the  reverent  endeavour  to  understand  revealed  truth. — 
Revealed  truth  has  to  be  understood  and  explained ;  it  has  to  be  understood, 
and  set  forth  in  fresh  language-forms,  for  each  age.  And  it  is  the  gravest 
mistake  to  represent  the  new  shapings  of  truth-forms  in  order  to  carry  old  truths 
to  the  minds  of  a  new  generation,  as  being  heresy.  The  old  forms  become,  in 
course  of  time,  dead  as  mummies,  and  must  be  replaced  by  new  forms,  using  the 
terms  and  connotations  of  each  fresh  generation. 

IT.  Heresy  is  not  the  individual  stamp  which  persons  put  upon  revealed 
truth. — If  it  were,  then  every  intelligent  and  independent-minded  person  would 
be  a  heretic  ;  and  progression  in  the  apprehension  of  truth  would  be  impossible. 
It  is  the  genius  given  to  individuals,  that  they  can  put  life  into  old  things  by 
re-clothing  them  for  presentation  to  our  minds  and  hearts. 

III.  Heresy  is  every  setting  and  shaping  of  opinion  that  gives  incitement  or 
support  to  moral  evil. — Pharisaism  is  therefore  heresy.  Later  Judaism  was 
heresy.  Heathenism  was  heresy.  Gnosticism,  on  some  of  its  sides,  was  heresy ; 
because  these  things  gave  licence  to  moral  evil.  Still,  everything  that  works 
for  righteousness  is  orthodox,  and  everything  that  works  for  evil  is  heterodox. 

IV.  Heresy  is  that  setting  of  opinion  which  has  for  its  inspiration  the 
covetous  spirit. — The  man  is  sure  to  go  wrong  in  his  thinking  whose  aim  is 
getting  for  himself.     See  ver.  3. 

Examples  of  Divine  Judgment. — Three  instances  of  Divine  vengeance, 
proving  that  great  wickedness  never  goes  unpunished — the  special  point  to 
illustrate  being  that  the  Divine  judgments  are  sure  to  come  upon  those  who 
associate  Christianity  with  licence,  or  with  self-seeking.  The  three  instances 
are  here  given  in  chronological  order — Wanton  Angels ;  Flood ;  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  :  while  those  in  Jude  are  not — Unbelievers  in  the  Wilderness ; 
Impure  Angels ;  Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 

I.  The  example  of  the  angels. — We  must  carefully  dissociate  the  representa- 
tions of  modern  poetry  from  the  teachings  of  Scripture.  Milton's  use  of 
legendary  matter  carries  no  authority,  and  affords  no  explanation  of  difficult 
allusions  in  Holy  Scripture.  Moore's  "  Loves  of  the  Angels,"  is  a  pure  work 
of  imagination.  It  was  a  common  Jewish  idea  that  the  term  "  sons  of  God" 
in  Gen.  vi.  2  meant  the  angels.  But  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  of 
the  fact  that  both  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude  took  their  idea  of  fallen  angels 
either  from  the  book  of  Enoch  (an  apocryphal  work  of  that  age),  or  from 
the  current  traditions  which  were  afterwards  embodied  in  the  book.  It 
is  certain  that  Holy  Scripture  carries  no  revelation  at  all  in  relation  to 
the  matter.  "  Not  improbably  the  false  teachers  made  use  of  this  book,  and 
possibly  of  these  passages,  in  their  corrupt  teaching.  Hence  St.  Peter  uses 
it  as  an  arguiYientuini  ad  hominem  against  them,  and  St.  Jude,  recognising 
the  allusion,  adopts  it,  and  makes  it  more  plain  ;  or  both  writers,  knowing 
the  book  of  Enoch  well,  and  calculating  on  their  readers  knowing  it  also, 
used  it  to  illustrate  their  arguments  and  exhortations,  just  as  St.  Paul  uses 
the  Jewish  belief  of  the  rock  following  the  Israelites."  The  sin  of  the  angels 
was  the  self-willedness  that  found  expression  in  self-indulgence.  Instead  of 
keeping  their  dignity  as  the  servants  of  God,  they  asserted  a  dignity  for 
themselves,  in  independence  of  Him.  When  that  dignity  of  their  own  worked 
itself  out,  it  showed  itself  as  sensuality,  and  moral  evil,  upon  which  the  judg- 
ments of  God  must  come. 

II.  The  example  of  sinners  before  the  Flood. — It  is  singular  to  find  St.  Peter 
and  St.  Jude  so  deeply  interested  in  the  antediluvians,  and  we  can  only  suppose 

in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL  PETEB.  chap.il 


that  speculations  concerning  them,  and  their  fate,  were  characteristic  of  the 
times.  But  it  has  been  noticed  that  in  the  book  of  Enoch  reference  to  the  Flood 
immediately  follows  on  reference  to  the  sin  of  the  angels.  Those  old-world 
sinners  set  themselves,  in  their  self-will,  against  God  ;  and  the  self-will  did  what 
it  always  does,  worked  itself  out  into  immorality  and  violence,  upon  which  the 
judgments  of  God  must  rest.  The  inference  in  each  case  is  that  the  false 
teachers,  who  were  corrupting  the  Churches,  were  self-willed  men,  teaching 
self-willed  opinions,  and  the  fruitage  of  their  teaching  was  precisely  what  you 
might  have  expected  it  to  be,  a  licence  to  self-indulgence  and  sin. 

III.  The  example  of  the  cities  of  the  plain. — Pride,  nourished  by  the 
idle  life  which  a  luxurious  soil  permitted,  manifested  itself  in  a  masterful 
self-willedness,  which  found  expression  in  immoralities  of  the  most  abominable 
and  degrading  character.  Upon  them  the  judgments  of  God,  taking  a  most 
terrible  and  overwhelming  character,  were  bound  to  fall.  *'  The  judgment  on 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  forms  a  fitting  complement  to  that  of  the  Flood,  as  an 
instance  of  God's  vengeance,  a  judgment  by  fire  being  regarded  as  more  awful 
than  a  judgment  by  flood,  as  is  more  distinctly  shown  in  chap,  iii.  6,  7,  where 
the  total  destruction  of  the  world  by  fire  is  contrasted  with  the  transformation 
of  it  wrought  by  the  Flood."  The  great  sin  of  Pagan  self-willedness  was 
sensuality.  The  great  horror  of  heathenism  is  sensuality.  The  great  peril  of 
the  early  Christian  Church — under  the  influence  of  self-willed  teachers — was 
sensuality.  Christianity  works  ever  towards  the  righteousness  of  moral  self- 
restraint  ;  and  that  is  not  Christianity  which,  in  any  sense  or  degree  whatever, 
gives  licence  or  incitement  to  moral  evil.  The  judgments  of  God  must  come 
on  all  professing  Christians  who  fail  to  *'  keep  the  vessels  of  their  bodies  in 
sanctification  and  honour." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 

Ver.  5.  A  Preacher  of  Righteousness,  his  work.      And  we  can  only  admire 

— That  is,  a  preacher  whose  preaching,  the  loyalty  and  the  faith  which  kept 

if  followed,  would  surely  work  out  into  him  quietly  go  n^  on  amid  the^  jeers 

righteousness.      There  was  in  his  day  and  scofls  of  the  thoughtless  multitudes 

the  necessity  for  a  very  extraordinary  who  watched  his  work,  and  listened  to 

Divine  judgment.     The  long-lived  race  his  word.     Here  is  no  common  man. 

proved  to  be  so  gigantic  in  its  iniquities  For  one  hundrt  d  and  twenty  years  he 

and   abominations  that  its  entire   re-  held  on  his  faith  in  God  against  all 

moval   became    necessary.      But   God  kinds  of  temptations.     It  would  have 

never   lets  threatened   judgments  fall  been  a  little  thing  if,  on  receiving  his 

until*He  has  given  sufficient  warning,  commission   from   God,    he    had   gone 

and  provided  space  and  opportunity  for  away,  dwelt  in  a  cave,  nourished  his 

repentance.    Noah  was  to  be  the  agent  faith  in  secret,  and  then,  at  the  close 

in  giving  the  Divine  warning  to  that  of  the  time,  come  forth  to  declare  his 

sinful  generation  ;  and  the  opportunity  warnings.    Here  is  the  surprising  thing : 

for  duly  responding  to   the  warnings  the  man  stood  in   the   woild's  eye  all 

was    provided    by   the    long   delay   of  through  those  years.     He  lived  among 

judgment.    Noah  was  to  warn  by  word,  the  people   whom   he  warned.      They 

He  is  called  "  a  preacher  of  righteous-  might   say  of   him   and   of   his   work 

ness."     He  was  to  warn  by  act — build-  what   they   pleased,    but   he   went  on 

ing  on  persistently,  day  by  day,  at  the  gathering   his   material,    shaping   and 

Ark,   and    testifying    thus    his    belief  fitting    things    together,     letting    his 

in  the  Divine  threatenings.     For  one  strange  vessel  grow  in  sight  of  all  who 

hundred  and  twenty  long  years  he  was  cared  to  look.     The  hermit  who  lives 

to  keep  up  his  witness,  and  carry  on  for  God  in  a  secret  cell  is  not  so  very 

0  193 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL   PETER. 


admirable ;  commendations  may  well 
be  kept  for  the  man  who  lives  for  God 
in  the  market-place  and  in  the  street. 
The  religion  that  is  worth  anything 
can  stand  the  strain  of  commonplace, 
every-day  life  and  relations.  The  man 
who  cannot  be  godly  in  home  and 
business  cannot  be  godly  anywhere. 
It  is  in  his  common  life  among  men 
that  the  moral  strength  of  a  Noah  is 
revealed." — From  "  Revelation  hy  Cha- 
racter" 

The  Reception  of  Noah^s  Preaching. 
— Now,  Noah  believed  God's  Word, 
that  He  was  about  to  destroy  the  in- 
habited parts  of  the  world  with  a^  flood, 
if  they  did  not  repent.  We  are  told 
that  he  preached  righteousness  to 
his  neighbours,  and  told  tho  world 
around  him  to  repent  of  their  wicked- 
ness, or  destruction  would  come  upon 
them.  We  can  imagine  how  they 
scoffed  and  jeered.  *'  What  strange 
story  have  you  to  tell  us  ?  that  we 
shall  be  destroyed  by  a  flood  1  We 
will  believe  it  when  we  see  it.  You 
want  us  to  be  religious,  and  so  you  try 
to  frighten  us,  in  order  to  make  us 
give  up  our  sins.  Tell  us  something 
pleasing  •  we  hate  this  melancholy 
message  you  bring  us.  Keligion  has 
gone  out  of  fashion  here.  They  found 
it  was  not  profitable,  and  so  they  gave 
it  all  up.  Everything  has  gone  on 
as  it  was  since  the  beginning  of  the 
creation,  and  we  shall  not  trouble  our- 
selves because  of  this  message."  Noah 
preached ;  they  laughed ;  it  was  all 
unheeded ;  no  one  returned  from  his 
evil  way ;  no  one  believed  the  message 
which  God  sent  by  Noah  to  a  guilty 
world.  He  turned  from  them  with  a 
heavy  heart.  But  he  felt  also  that, 
like  a  brave  man,  he  had  done  his  duty. 
He  began  to  work  at  the  Ark  or  great 
ship  which  God  told  him  to  build,  and 
this  showed  his  ov^n  faith  in  the  mes- 
sage. The  world  around  him,  no 
doubt,  thought  him  mad,  but  God 
comforted  and  supported  him  by  making 
a  covenant  or  solemn  promise  to  him 
that  he  and  all  his  family  should  be 
saved.  .  .  .  Death  yawned  about  them, 

194 


but  Noah  was  supported  by  a  faith  in 
the  truth,  love,  and  faithfulness  of  a 
God  who  will  save  to  the  very  utter- 
most all  who  come  to. Him  for  shelter, 
and  who  will  bring  those  who  trust  in 
Him  safely  across  the  cold,  stormy 
waters  of  death  to  the  land  where  faith 
becomes  reality. — R.  Barclay. 

Method  in  Miracles. — The  spiritual 
substance  of  the  revelation  contained 
in  the  sacred  Scriptures  is  presented  to 
us  as  sanctioned  and  proved,  both  to 
sense  and  reason,  by  a  long  array  of 
miracles.  The  present  purpose  is  to 
point  out  certain  characteristics  of  the 
alleged  miracles  of  the  Bible  which 
deserve  special  consideration.  1.  The 
whole  series  is  entirely  worthy  of  the 
hand  of  God.  In  this  respect  the  works 
of  the  Bible  correspond  to  the  words. 
Amidst  the  large  number  recorded, 
there  is  not  one  which  fails  to  support 
the  character  either  of  nobleness,  or 
greatness,  or  beauty,  or  usefulness, 
or  sublime  beneficence,  or  awful  power, 
which  we  must  attribute  to  the  Deity. 
None  of  them  is  of  the  nature  of  a 
tricky  or  bears  with  it  any  admixture 
of  a  grotesque  or  frivolous  element. 
Compare  the  miracles  of  the  Bible  with 
the  wonders  of  ecclesiastical  history. 
2.  The  apparent  suitableness  of  the 
miracles  to  the  times  and  seasons  when 
they  were  alleged  to  be  wrought,  with 
differences  which  would  scarcely  have 
occurred  to  literary  inventors.  3.  All 
the  alleged  miracles  of  the  Scriptures 
were  wrought  in  support  of  the  most 
exalted  ideas,  in  defence  of  the  highest 
interests  of  man,  and  in  illustration  of 
the  loftiest  moral  attributes  of  God. 
4.  The  miracles  of  the  Scriptures  are 
inextricably  interwoven  with  the  web 
of  Jewish  history,  so  that  the  history 
becomes  unintelligible  apart  from  the 
supposition  of  the  miracles.  5.  A 
system  of  prophecy  runs  parallel  with 
a  system  of  miraculous  agency  in  the 
recorded  dispensations  of  God.  The 
one  yields  support  and  credibility  to 
the  other.  6.  The  chief  objection  to 
the  reality  of  the  Scripture  miracles  is 
derived  from  their  cessation.    It  is  said, 


1   1    I  \ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    11.  PETER.  chajt.  il 


Why  do  they  not  occur  now  ?     But  it  the  senses.    The  moral  evidence  suffices 

was   no   part   of   the   Divine  plan  to  after  miracles  have  once  attested  the 

encourage  the  expectation  of  the  viola-  Divine    origin    of    religion.  — Edward 

tion  of  natural  law,  or  the  perpetual  White, 
presentation  of  miraculous  evidence  to 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9—22. 

Denunciations  of  the  Libertines. 

I.  Confidence  in  God's  over-ruling. — "  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the 
godly."  This  involves  His  recognition  of  the  ungodly,  and  visitation  of  them 
in  judgment.  The  sway  and  triumph  of  evil  in  the  world  is  most  perplexing  to 
God's  people ;  it  would  be  altogether  overwhelming  if  they  could  not  be  sure  of 
the  Divine  overruling  with  a  patience  that  can  wait  for  fitting  opportunities. 
Delayed  judgment  is  never  any  sign  of  indifference,  nor  is  delayed  deliverance. 
As  Christ  said  to  impatient  disciples,  so  God  again  and  again  says  to  His  people, 
"My  time  is  not  yet  come,  but  your  time  is  always  ready."  The  overruling  of 
God  is  even  more  important  than  His  ruling.  It  meets  us  just  where  we  feel 
our  chief  difficulty. 

II.  Denunciation  of  vices. — The  things  which  naturally  follow  as  the  outcome 
of  false  teaching — (1)  impurity,  (2)  self-assertion,  (3)  railing,  (5)  wanton  and 
luxurious  living,  (5)  covetousness.  These  denunciations  can  only  with  great 
difficulty  be  made  subjects  of  pulpit  exercise.  They  must  be  classed  with  the 
imprecatory  Psalms.  There  may  come  times  and  fitting  occasions  for  publicly 
denouncing  the  characteristic  iniquities  of  a  nation  or  a  generation  ;  but  such 
work  can  only  be  done  wisely  by  specially  fitted  men,  and  men  who  have  gained 
the  right  to  speak.  In  small  spheres  of  pulpit  service,  the  denunciation  of 
public  sins  is  apt  to  be  taken  as  directed  to  certain  individuals  ;  and  the  personal 
element  produces  bitterness  rather  than  conviction. 

III.  The  law  that  increases  Divine  judgments. — Privilege  enjoyed  deepens 
responsibility.  When  privilege  is  abused ;  when  men  know  and  do  not ;  when 
men  who  hav^e  come  out  of  their  sinful  life  go  back  to  it ; — then  it  is  as  though 
the  stone  on  which  they  might  have  fallen  fell  on  them.  The  weight  of  woe 
heaps  up  for  those  who  were  once  "  fair  for  the  celestial  city/'  but  turned  back 
to  wilfulness  and  sin. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    9.     The    Godly  Delivered — the  (5)  to  condemn  the  world,  (c)  that  we 

unjust  reserved  unto  judgment.    There  may  be  conformed  to  Christ.     2.   The 

are  only  two  great  classes  of  people  in  Lord  knows  how  to  deliver  them.     It 

the  world — the  godly  and  the  unjust.  matters  not  what  form  the  temptation 

The  godly  are   those   who  have  been  may  take. 

born    again,   made    partakers   of    the  II.  His  treatment  of  the  unjust. — 

Divine   nature,    and    live    unto    God.  ''  God  knoweth   how    to    reserve    the 

The  unjust  are  those  who  are  ungodly,  unjust  to  the  day  of  judgment  to  be 

who  live    to    themselves   and   to   the  punished."       1.  The    end    of    all   the 

world.    God  deals  very  differently  with  ungodly   is   to   be   punished.      2.  God 

the  two  classes.  knoweth  how  to  reserve ;  He  is  not  in 

I.  His   treatment   of  the   godly. —  haste  to  punish. — R.  M.  McCheyne. 
1.  He  allows  them  to  fall  into  tempt- 
ations, as  (1)  solicitations  to  sin,  and  God^s  Judgments. — In  a  general  way 
(2)  as  trials.      This  he  permits  {a)  to  it  may  be  said  that  the  Old  Testament 
manifest   the    reality   of    His    grace,  is  the  book  of  God's  judgments,  and  the 

195 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


New  Testament  the  book  of  God's 
mercies.  There  are  stories  of  judg- 
ment in  the  New  Testament  (Judas, 
Ananias,  Elymas),  and  there  are  stories 
of  God's  mercies  in  the  Old  ;  but  this 
distinction  marks  off  the  characteristic 
of  each  Dispensation.  Few  hearers  get 
much  good  from  the  histories  of  God's 
judgments  read  to  them  from  the  Old 
Testament,  because  they  are  not  felt  to 
be  matters  of  personal  concern.  1.  We 
ought  to  learn  from  them  that  God 
will  not  forget  any  godly  man  what- 
ever, but  will  save  him  amid  the  de- 
struction of  all  around  him.  2.  With 
the  ungodly  it  will  be  otherwise  ;  for 
them,  so  long  as  they  continue  in  their 
ungodliness,  there  is  neither  mercy  nor 
hope,  but  a  certain  looking  forward  to 
wrath  and  punishment  at  the  hand  of 
a  mighty  and  offended  God.  There  is 
no  mercy  for  the  obstinate  and  im- 
penitent sinner.  The  two  great  lessons 
to  be  learnt  from  such  histories  are  : 
the  extent  of  God's  most  fearful  judg- 
ments, and  their  certainty.  For  as  the 
word  of  God's  mercy  is  sure,  so  is  the 
word  of  His  wrath.  And  who  are  the 
cursed  ?  All  who  are  living  in  any 
known  sin  ;  all  who  are  living  in  for- 
getfulness  of  God;  all  who  are  not 
Christ's  people  ;  all  who  are  not  show- 
ing forth  the  blessed  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
in  their  daily  lives.  Many  trust  they 
shall  do  well,  if  they  keep  from  the 
grosser  works  of  the  flesh.  Some  may 
say,  "  This  is  the  old  story  we  have 
heard  so  often."  But  that  should  give 
double  cause  for  trembling,  seeing  the 
gospel  has  been  slighted  so  often  and 
so  long.  God  sends  merciful  invita- 
tions to  repentance,  that  men  may  be 
saved  from  the  ruin  of  a  wicked  world. 
It  is  He  who  will  bring  to  pass  the 
threatenings  of  His  word  against  all 
manner  of  unrighteousness,  and  ungod- 
liness, and  sin. — A.  W.  Hare,  A.M. 

Ver.  15.  Rev  version  as  Shown  in  the 
Character  of  Balaam. — Repulsive  as 
Balaam's  character  is,  seen  at  a  dis- 
tance, when  it  is  seen  near  it  has  much 
in  it  that  is  human,  like  ourselves, 
inviting  compassion,  even  admiration  ; 

196 


there  are  traits  of  firmness,  conscien- 
tiousness,  nobleness.  And  yet  the 
inspired  judgment  of  his  character  as 
a  whole  is  one  of  unmeasured  severity. 
Our  main  lesson  in  Balaam's  history 
must  ever  be  to  trace  how  it  is  that 
men,  who  to  the  world  appear  respect- 
able, conscientious,  honourable,  gifted, 
religious,  may  be  in  the  sight  of  God 
accursed,  and  heirs  of  perdition. 
Balaam  illustrates  perversion. 

I.  Perversion  of  great  gifts. — The 
inspiration  of  Balaam  was  from  God. 
In  him  Divine  powers  were  perverted — 

1.  By  turning  them  to  purposes  of  self- 
aggrandisement.  God's  true  prophets 
make  no  efibrt  to  show  themselves 
difierent  from  others.  Balaam  does 
everything  to  fix  attention  on  himself. 
His  enchantments  were  a  priest's  maa- 
ceuvres,  not  a  prophet's.  He  was  a 
self-seeker.  Balak  struck  the  key-note 
of  his  character  when  he  said,  "  Am  I 
not  able  to  promote  thee  unto  honour  ? " 

2.  By  making  those  gifts  subservient 
to  his  own  greed.  His  very  vaunts 
show  that  Balaam  half  suspected  his 
failing.  Brave  men  do  not  vaunt  their 
courage,  nor  honourable  men  their 
honesty.  By  Balaam  spiritual  powers 
were  degraded  in  order  to  make  him- 
self a  vulgar  man  of  wealth.  (Compare 
the  case  of  Simon  Magus.) 

II.  Perversion  of  conscience. — 
Shown  in  his  second  appeal  to  God. 
He  ought  to  have  been  satisfied  with 
his  first  answer.  In  duty  "  first 
thoughts  "  are  best ;  they  are  more 
fresh,  more  pure,  have  more  of  God  in 
them.  Balaam's  problem  was  how  to 
go  to  Balak,  and  yet  not  offend  God. 
He  went  to  God  to  get  his  duty  altered, 
not  in  simplicity  to  know  what  it  was. 
All  this  rests  on  the  idea  that  the  will 
of  God  makes  right,  instead  of  being 
right.  The  second  stage  is  full  of 
hideous  contradictions.  God  permits 
him  to  go,  and  then  is  angry  with  him 
for  going.  We  notice  in  him  the 
evidences  of  a  disordered  mind  and 
heart.  In  Balaam  we  see  an  attempt 
to  change  the  will  of  God.  His  feeling 
was,  God  is  mutable.  What  was  want- 
ing for  Balaam  to  feel  was,  God  can- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


CHAP.  II. 


not  change  ;  what  he  did  feel  was  only 
this  :  God  ivill  not  change.  See  also  his 
attempt  to  blind  himself.  We  see 
perfect  veracity  with  utter  want  of 
truth.  He  does  not  deceive  Balak 
with  a  spell.  He  would  not  utter  a 
falsehood,  but  tries  to  get  away  from 
seeing  the  truth.  Balaam  tried  a  last 
expedient,  and  lecommended  Balak  to 
use  the  fascination  of  the  daughters  of 
Moab  to  entice  Israel  into  idolatry ; 
and  a  more  diabolical  wickedness  could 
hardly  be  conceived.  The  root  of 
Balaam's  sin  was  selfishness.  Balaam's 
self — the  honour  of  Balaam  as  a  true 
piophet ;  therefore  he  will  not  lie. 
The  wealth  of  Balak  for  himself  ;  there- 
fore the  Israelites  must  be  sacrificed. 
Even  in  his  sublimest  aspirations  he 
never  forgets  himself.  1.  Learn  the 
danger  of  great  powers.  It  is  an  awful 
thing,  this  conscious  power  to  see  more, 
to  feel  more,  to  know  more,  than  our 
fellows.  2.  Mark  well  the  difierence 
between  feeling  and  doing.  A  man  may 
be  going  on  finely,  uttering  orthodox 
words,  and  yet  be  rotten  at  heart. — 
F.  W.  Robertson. 

Yer.  16.  Balaam  and  the  Ass. — An 
excellent  old  writer,  speaking  of  Balaam, 
to  whom  St.  Peter  refers  in  the  text, 
compares  him  to  Bedwald,  the  first 
Saxon  king  who  professed  Christianity, 
and  who  set  up,  in  the  same  church, 
one  altar  for  the  Christian  religion, 
and  another  for  sacrificing  to  devils. 
Balaam,  beyond,  perhaps,  any  Script- 
ural personage,  was  the  "  double- 
minded  man,"  signalised  by  the  apostle 
James.  Balaam  was  neither  an  im- 
postor nor  a  hypocrite.  He  rather 
seems  to  have  been  a  man  heartily  and 
honestly  bent  on  the  doing  of  what  our 
Lord  declares  can  never  be  done :  the 
*'  serving  of  two  masters."  We  must 
admit  that  God  communicated  directly 
with  Balaam,  not  only  giving  him 
orders  and  prohibitions,  but  actually 
furnishing  him  with  the  words  he  was 
to  utter  over  the  Israelites.  Perhaps 
full  justice  has  not  been  done  to 
Balaam.  He  had  good  impulses,  which 
were  only  unserviceable  and  abortive 


because  outweighed  and  counter- 
matched  by  covetousness  and  the  love 
of  money.  He  had  a  conscience 
vigorously  at  work,  under  whose 
chastisement  his  sufferings  must  have 
been  terrible.  Balaam  is  the  nominal 
Christian  of  these  times,  sincerely 
anxious  to  stand  fair,  and  to  keep 
terms  with  disciples  of  Christ  and 
with  men  of  Belial.  When  we  see 
men  devout  in  church,  and  something 
very  different  on  week-days,  we  must 
not  set  them  down  as  necessarily 
hypocrites.  There  is  a  bona  fide  struggle 
to  compound  with  conscience,  and 
run  together  in  the  life,  man  of  God 
and  man  of  the  world,  as  warp  and 
woof — very  foolish,  no  doubt,  and  im- 
practicable, but  not  base,  not  dis- 
honest. 

I.  Recall  to  memory  the  few  facts 
of  this  miracle. — Whether  what 
happened  to  Balaam  happened  to  him 
in  vision,  or  in  literal  historical  fact,  the 
moral  and  spiritual  lessons  are  exactly 
the  same.  There  is  something  to  be 
learned  from  that  strange  group  on 
the  highway,  considered  merely  as 
a  fact :  a  wicked  man  being  obstructed 
in  the  pursuit  of  his  wickedness  by 
a  prodigy.  We  learn  how  gracious 
God  is  in  making  the  way  of  trans- 
gressors a  hard  one ;  just  as  when 
Pilate  was  warned  by  the  dream  of 
his  wife,  and  Saul  was  warned  on  the 
road  to  Damascus.  Regarding  the 
narrative  as  an  allegory,  we  may  see 
that  this  is  not  the  only  place  in  the 
Bible  where  proud  man  is  humbled 
and  brought  to  confusion  by  being 
outdone  and  excelled  by  one  of  the 
beasts  of  the  field.  How  came  it  that 
the  eyes  of  the  mere  brute  on  which 
the  prophet  rode  saw  the  vision  of  the 
angel  before  the  prophet  himself? 
There  is  here  a  portrait  of  what  takes 
place  in  the  world,  day  after  day,  in  all 
generations.  There  is  hardly  a  wider 
gulf  between  the  animal  and  the  man 
than  there  is  between  some  unlettered 
believer  in  sacred  truth  and  the  philo- 
sophic doubter  or  denier  of  that  truth. 
The  difficulty  of  difficulties  in  the 
present  state  of  things  is  not  to  exert 

197 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


but  to  control  the  faculties  of  our 
reason,  to  persuade  ourselves  where 
reason  cannot  follow,  that  there  reason 
ought  not  to  try  to  follow.  Faith  is 
the  problem  of  the  militant  Church. 
The  province  of  the  human  mind  is  to 
humble  itself,  to  keep  the  ear  wide 
open,  and  to  be  contented  that  the  eye 
shall  remain  closed  through  excess  of 
light.  Only  when,  by  nature  or 
through  a  struggle,  the  mind  prefers 
listening  to  understanding,  can  the 
glory  of  Christ  crucified  be  spiritually 
discerned. 

II.  This  miracle  of  the  text  is 
virtually  repeated  whenever  pride  or 
prescription  takes  to  lording  it  over 
some  lower  rank,  guilty  of  no  sins 
but  natural  disadvantages. — Illustra- 
ted in  the  history  of  British  colonisa- 


tion. For  many  years  we  considered 
black  and  brown  and  red  men  to 
be  brutes,  and  treated  them  accord- 
ingly. Illustrated  in  our  resistance 
of  Providence.  We  make  a  miser- 
able blunder  whenever  we  try  to 
force  Divine  providence,  or  to  urge 
the  events  of  our  lives  dead  against 
the  angel.  If  we  want  to  go  one 
way,  and  our  destiny,  controlled  by 
guardian  angels,  is  forcing  us  into 
another  way,  our  wisdom  will  lie  in 
succumbing  at  once.  We  shall  take 
nothing  by  contesting  it.  Things  like 
that  living  thing  under  Balaam  will 
crush  our  foot  against  the  wall,  so 
that  we  cannot  even  dismount  and 
walk.  Providence  will  maim  us  for 
every  pathway  but  its  own. — Henry 
Christopher  son. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  II. 


Ver.  4.  The  ''Heir  of  St.  Peter.  Greek, 
*'  Tartarus." — This  is  the  only  passage  in  the 
New  Testament  in  which  this  word  occurs. 
It  is  a  purely  heathen  word,  and  embodies  a 
purely  heathen  conception.  As  they  pried 
into  the  future,  the  Greeks  and  Romans  saw 
nothing  clearly,  although  the  "  initiated," 
perhaps,  had  been  quickened  into  an  intense 
yearning  for,  if  not  a  very  bright  and  vivid 
hope  of,  a  world  to  come.  The  world  beyond 
the  gates  of  death  was,  for  them,  "  a  world 
of  shades."  Their  utmost  hope,  even  for  the 
good,  was  that  some  thin  shadow  of  the 
former  man  would  survive  to  enjoy  some 
faint  shadow  of  his  former  honour  and 
pursuits.  The  utmost  they  foreboded  for 
the  wicked  was  that  their  thin,  wavering,  un- 
substantial ghosts  would  be  doomed  to 
hopeless  tasks,  or  consumed  by  pangs  such 
as  men  suffer  here.  Sometimes  they  gave 
the  name  "  Tartarus  "  to  the  whole  of  this  land 
of  shadows ;  but  more  commonly  they 
divided  the  under-world  into  two  provinces  : 
Elysian  fields,  in  which  the  spirits  of 
their  heroes  and  sages,  with  all  who  loved 
goodness,  wandered  to  and  fro,  illumined  by 
a  pale  reflection  of  their  former  joys  ;  reserv- 
ing the  name  "  Tartarus  "  for  that  dismal 
region  in  which  the  ghosts  of  the  wicked 
were  tasked,  and  tantalised,  and  tormented. 
.  .  .  But  the  Tartarus  of  St.  Peter  by  no 
means  answered  to  our  hell,  as  it  is  usually 
conceived.  Our  plain  duty  is  to  read  the 
above  passage  just  as  it  reads  in  the  original 
Greek  :  "  God  spared  not  angels  who  sinned, 
but  cast  them  into  Tartarus." — Salvator 
Mundi 

198 


Ver.  19.  Slavery  of  Sin. — Men  would 
rather  be  sin's  drudges  than  God's  freemen, 
and  neglect  that  service  wherein  is  perfect 
freedom  for  that  wherein  there  is  intolerable 
slavery.  They  will  disturb  their  consciences, 
violate  their  reason,  impair  their  health,  in 
contradicting  the  laws  of  God,  and  prefer  a 
sensual  satisfaction,  with  toil  here  and 
eternal  ruin  hereafter,  before  the  honour  of 
God,  the  dignity  of  their  nature,  or  happiness, 
or  peace  and  health,  which  might  be  pre- 
served with  a  cheaper  expense  than  they  are 
at  to  destroy  them. —  Charnock. 

Ver.  22.  The  HaUts  of  the  Sow.— There  is 
no  regeneration  for  the  sow  in  any  amount 
of  washing  by  water ;  the  ablution  over, 
away  she  wends  again  to  her  wallowing  in 
the  mire.  Like  the  canine  race  (dishonour- 
edly  characterised  in  the  same  proverb) 
the  porcine  is  of  ill  account  in  Holy  Writ. 
As  the  flesh  of  the  swine  is  formally  pro- 
hibited as  "  unclean "  in  Leviticus,  so  in 
Isaiah  the  offering  of  swine's  blood  is,  by 
implication,  denounced  as  almost  inconceiv- 
ably abominable,  and  the  "eating  swine's 
flesh,  and  the  abomination  and  the  mouse," 
are  with  execration  connected  together 
(Isa.  Ixvi.  3,  17).  Of  the  Mohammedans  we 
are  assured  that  nothing  in  the  creed  or 
practice  of  Christians  does  so  much  to  en- 
venom the  hatred  of  Mohammedans  against 
them  as  the  fact  of  their  eating  pork.  Be- 
sides its  being  an  offence  to  their  religion, 
their  aversion  to  the  flesh  of  the  "  imclean 
beast "  resembles  an  instinctive  antipathy, 
such  as  the  "  idea  of  uncleanness,"  when 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    IL  PETER. 


CHAP.  Ill 


once  it  sinks  into  the  feelings,  seems  always 
to  excite  in  those  whose  personal  habits  are 
scrupulously  cleanly. 

The  Backslider's  Fate. — The  Greek  poet 
tells  us  of  Hecuba  not  daring  for  shame  so 
much  as  to  lift  up  her  eyes,  or  look  Polym- 
nestor  in  the  face,  because  she  had  been  a 
queen,  but  was  then  a  poor  captive.  Com- 
mon captives  can  easily  lift  up  their  eyes 
and  cry  to  those  who  are  in  prosperity  for 
relief  and  help,  whereas  others  who  have 
lived  at  ease  can  with  more  ease  starve  than 
beg.    As  a  downfall  from  a  seeming  height 


in  spirituals  into  the  mire  of  sin  hath  more 
wickedness  in  it  than  a  bare  continuance  in 
sin,  so  a  downfall  from  a  real  height  in 
temporals  into  the  mire  of  misery  hath  more 
trouble  in  it  than  a  bare  continuance  in 
misery.  They  who  have  made  a  fair  show,  or 
an  outward  flourish,  in  the  faith,  and  after- 
wards fall  back,  are  worse  than  those  who 
never  made  any  show  at  all.  It  is  sad  for 
any  one  to  live  openly  in  sin  ;  but  for  such  as 
have  made  an  open  profession  of  godliness 
to  apostatise,  and  fall  back  to  sin — this  is 
matter  of  saddest  lamentation. —  Caryl. 


CHAPTER  III. 
THE   UNFULFILLED    PROMISE  OF  THE  COMING. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The' apostle  now  deals  with  those  who  made  the  delay  of  the  Lord's  coming,  and  the  dis- 
appointment consequently  felt  by  many  Christians,  an  occasion  for  mockery.  The  sense  in 
which  the  Early  Church  expected  an  early  personal  return  of  the  Saviour,  and  based  their 
expectation  on  the  words  of  our  Lord,  and  the  teachings  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter,  needs  to  be 
carefully  considered.  Probably  both  the  apostles  and  the  Christian  people  gave  a  material- 
istic setting  to  what  was  intended  to  be  spiritually  realised.  It  has  recently  been  con- 
fidently argued  that  our  Lord's  supposed  eschatological  teachings  should  be  limited  to  the 
destruction  of  the  Jewish  religious  system  in  the  Roman  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  save  when 
thos.e  teachings  must  have  a  spiritual  application. 

Ver.  1.  Second  epistle, — Assuming  not  only  a  first,  but  that  first  sent  but  a  little  while 
before.  "This  epistle,  already  a  second  one."  Pure. — That  is,  separated,  so  unsullied, 
sincere  (Phil.  i.  10).  "Its  primary  application  is  to  that  which  will  bear  the  full  test  of 
being  examined  by  sunlight,  and  so  it  carries  with  it  the  idea  of  transparent  sincerity. 

Ver,  2.  Of  the  apostles. — "  Through  your  apostles." 

Ver,  8.  Scoifers, — "  Scoffers  shall  come  in  their  scoffing,"  Own  lusts. — *'  The  habit  of  self- 
indulgence  is  at  all  times  the  parent  of  the  cynical  and  scoffing  sneer,"  Scoffers  revelling  in 
scoffing,  a  cumulative  expression  to  denote  shameless  scoffers, 

Ver,  4  Fathers,— Here  probably  the  first  believers  in  Christ,  who  are  represented  as 
having  proved  the  hope  of  Christ's  coming  to  be  an  illusion,  as  they  died  before  it  was 
realised, 

Ver.  5,  Willingly. — Wilfully  forget,  because  it  does  not  suit  their  purpose  to  remember. 
Ignore.  Standing,  etc, — More  precisely,  "  formed  out  of  water,  and  by  means  of  water  " ; 
implying  possibility  of  the  Flood.  See  the  account  of  Creation  in  Gen.  i.,  ii,  Pluw^ptre  saya, 
*'  The  apostle  speaks  naturally  from  the  standpoint  of  the  physical  science  of  his  time  and 
country,  and  we  need  not  care  to  reconcile  either  his  words,  or  those  of  Gen,  i,,  with  the  con- 
clusions of  modern  meteorological  science." 

Ver.  G,  Whereby,— By  the  two  outlets  of  water.  Gen,  vii,  11,  World. — This  term  distinctly 
assumes  the  universality  of  the  Deluge.  Perished. — A  term  strictly  applicable  only  to  living 
creatures. 

Ver.  7.  Beserved  unto  fire. — This  is  part  of  the  teaching  of  the  book  of  Enoch. 
Scriptural  allusions  are  thought  to  be  found  in  Dan.  vii.  9-11  ;  2  Thess.  i.  8,  "stored  up  for 
fire."  "  By  analogy  with  ver.  5  we  understand  that  the  fire  for  which  the  present  heavens 
and  eartli  are  reserved,  exists  now  as  a  constituent  in  their  original  constitution,  but  pre- 
pared and  designed  as  the  agent  of  their  dissolution.     Science  corroborates  this." 

Ver,  8.  One  day,  etc. — The  time-element  gave  opportunity  to  the  scoffers.  The  time- 
measures  of  God  must  not  be  thought  of  as  like  those  of  men.  It  is  to  misrepresent  this 
verse,  to  regard  it  as  fixing  God's  measure  for  a  day  as  being  a  thousand  years.  To  do  so 
would  make  God's  judgment-day  a  thousand  years  long,  and  the  day  of  Christ's  coming  also 
a  thousand  years  long.  The  Millennium  is  a  day,  if  the  last  sentence  of  this  verse  be  taken 
literally. 

199 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   II.  PETER. 


Ver.  9.  Wot  slack. — The  apparent  delay  is  arranged  in  Divine  wisdom,  and  with  due  con- 
sideration of  the  saints.  "  God  is  long-suffering,  because  He  is  eternal "  {Aufftcstine).  To  us- 
ward. — "  Toward  you." 

Ver.  10.  Great  noise. — Bushing  noise.  Elements. — Or  "  heavenly  bodies."  MacMigJit  s&js, 
*'  The  electrical  matter,  the  sulphurous  vapours,  the  clouds,  and  whatsoever  floats  in  the  air, 
with  the  air  itself. " 

Ver.  11.  Shall  be  dissolved. — Lit.  *•  are  being  dissolved."  All  holy  conversation,  and  god- 
liness.— Both  words  are  in  the  plural.     All  forms  of  holy  living. 

Ver.  12.  Hasting. — (Omit  "  unto  ").  Hasting  the  coming  by  holy  lives.  "Wherein. — Or 
'*  on  account  of  which." 

Ver.  13.  New  heavens,  etc.— See  Isa.  Ixv.  17,  Ixvi.  22;  Eev.  xxi.  1.  The  idea  is  fully  ex- 
panded in  the  book  of  Enoch. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—7. 

Doubts  Concerning  Christ's  Coming. — It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  apostolic 
letters  assume  previous  apostolic  teachings.  In  the  progress  of  the  years  the 
apostles  found  various  intellectual  and  moral  evils  were  seriously  affecting  the 
religious  thought  and  life  of  the  disciples.  Their  epistles  are  mainly  designed  to 
be  corrections  of  these  evils,  and  special  effort  is  made  to  recover  the  neglected 
features  of  apostolic  teaching  which  ought  to  have  made  such  errors  and  evils 
impossible.  So  St.  Peter  here  speaks  of  "  stirring  up  their  pure  "  (sincere  and 
reverent)  "  minds  by  way  of  remembran  ce."  A  certain  measure  of  authority  was, 
from  the  first,  felt  to  attach  to  apostolic  utterances,  because  they  were  persons  who 
had  immediate  and  direct  experiences,  instructions,  and  revelations  concerning 
the  matters  of  which  they  spoke  and  wrote.  We  can  fully  recognise  this  reason- 
able authority  without  presenting  in  any  exaggerated  way  their  absolute  freedom 
from  error.  It  is  manifested  by  the  facts  of  history  that  they  did  not  adequately 
apprehend  the  spiritual  character  of  Christ's  coming,  or  the  period  that  must 
elapse  b afore  He  would  come  in  any  sensible  manifestation. 

I.  Christ's  coming  as  apostles  taught  it. — Their  standpoint  is  indicated  by 
the  question  which  they  asked  of  their  Lord  just  before  His  ascension  :  "  Wilt 
Thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel  ?  "  Christ,  in  reply,  only 
told  them  that  He  could  give  no  account  of  the  precise  time,  but  left  them  to 
understand  that  the  kingdom  would  be  restored ;  and  they  had  an  immediate  and 
pressing  duty  to  perform,  and  keep  on  performing,  until  the  time  for  setting  up 
the  kingdom  came.  With  this  in  their  minds  they  put  their  own  meanings  into 
the  message  of  the  angels  who  appeared,  when  their  Lord  had  passed  out  of  sight : 
"  This  Jesus,  which  was  received  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like 
manner  as  ye  beheld  Him  going  into  heaven."  On  this  basis  an  apostolic  doctrine 
of  Christ's  coming  grew.  At  first  they  expected  Him  to  appear  when  the  cloven 
tongues  appeared.  Then  they  shifted  their  expectations  to  an  immediate  future, 
and,  when  they  began  to  sufier  persecutions,  comforted  themselves  with  the  assur- 
ance that  He  was  coming  to  vindicate  them,  and  to  judge  their  persecutors.  Time 
passed  on,  and  He  did  not  come  just  as  they  anticipated  ;  and  some  of  their  num- 
ber died,  un vindicated  and  unavenged,  and  deprived  of  whatever  privileges  were  to 
attend  the  coming.  But  still  they  persisted  that  the  "  day  of  the  Lord  is  at 
hand."  It  does  not  appear  that  the  spiritual  sense  in  which  believers  have 
always  felt  that  Jesus  has  fulfilled  His  promise  was  ever  apprehended  by  the 
apostles.  They  had  the  promise  and  the  hope,  but  they  could  only  realise  it 
when  placed  before  them  in  a  carnal  and  earthly  setting.  And  that  setting  put 
it  in  limitations  which  started  criticism  and  encouraged  unbelief. 

II.  On  what  grounds  could  doubts  of  Christ's  coming  again  be  cherished  ?— 
There  do  not  appear  to  have  been  any  special  forms  of  doubt  in  those  days.  The 
objections  urged  are  precisely  those  which  have  been  heard  in  every  Christian 
age,  and  are  heard  to-day.    They  may  go  under  two  heads,  and  be  put  in  relation 

200  . 


ROMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  11.  PETER  chap.  hi. 


to  the  two  conditions  of  human  thinking — time  and  space  ;  but  they  always 
assume,  what  we  are  by  no  means  prepared  to  admit,  that  the  coming  is 
altogether  and  only  sensible,  material,  and  earthly.  It  is  said  (1)  He  is  always 
coming  now,  but  the  now  never  comes.  It  is  said  (2)  If  He  came  in  a  material 
form  He  must  put  Himself  in  space-limitations,  and  could  not  possibly  be  the 
help  and  blessing  that  He  is  as  an  unlocalised,  everywhere  present,  spiritual 
Saviour. 

III.  What  facts  of  Divine  dealing  make  all  such  doubts  unreasonable? — The 
scoffers  put  their  scoffing  in  this  form  :  "  You  have  told  us  of  a  coming  affliction 
such  as  there  has  not  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation,  and  lo !  we  find 
the  world  still  goes  on  as  of  old,  and  no  great  catastrophe  happens."  St.  Peter's 
answer  is  that  men  spoke  in  just  the  same  way  concerning  certain  other  great 
historical  catastrophes  and  calamities.  There  is  always  human  confusion  when 
time-measures  are  applied  to  the  Divine  Being  and  His  dealings  with  men.  The 
threatened  catastrophes  always  have  come,  and  what  men  called  "  delay"  had  a 
Divine  mission  of  warning  and  opportunity.  Divine  time -delay  is  never  a  basis 
on  which  doubts  can  reasonably  rest.  The  only  doubts  in  relation  to  the  coming 
of  the  Lord  permissible  to  Christians  are  those  which  lead  them  to  question 
whether  as  yet  they  have  quite  sounded  the  fulness  and  depth  of  their  Lord's 
meaning,  when  He  promised  to  *'  come  again."  We  ought  to  be  advancing  in 
spiritual  power  and  insight,  and  so  better  able  to  read  our  Lord's  spiritual  mean- 
ings. And  he  who  can  enter  fully  into  the  blissful  reality  of  our  Lord's  spiritual 
presence  is  relieved  of  all  undue  anxiety  concerning  a  possible  bodily  manifesta- 
tion. "  That  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual ;  but  that  which  is  natural,  and 
afterwards  that  which  is  spiritual."  Judgment  of  mankind  is  spiritual  work. 
The  reward  of  the  righteous  is  spiritual  reward.  Christ  is  king  of  souls,  and, 
here  or  yonder,  then  or  now,  He  is  the  spiritual  Christ  who  comes  in  spiritual 
ways.  Still,  for  so  many  the  spiritual  truth  has  yet  to  keep  its  material  shapings 
and  dress,  and  they  can  only  realise  His  coming  at  all  when  they  can  picture  to 
themselves  a  majestic,  sensible  manifestation,  wrapped  about  with  clouds. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  4,  Christ's  Coming. — Notice —  "  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth  "  (John 

I.  How  St.  Peter  answers  five  ques-  xi.  11);  of  St.  Paul's,  "many  sleep'* 
tions  relating  to  the  last  day. — 1.  (1  Cor.  xi.  30).  So  in  Greek  sculpture 
Whether  we  are  yet  to  wait  confidently  Death  and  Sleep  appear  as  twin  genii, 
for  the  last  day.  2.  When,  and  at  and  in  Greek  and  Roman  epitaphs 
what  time,  it  will  come.  3.  Why  Jesus  nothing  is  more  common  than  the 
has  not  come  for  so  long  a  time.  4.  record  that  the  deceased  "  sleeps " 
How,  and  in  what  manner,  the  last  below.  Too  often  there  is  the  addition, 
day  will  come.  5.  What  Christ  will  as  of  those  who  are  without  hope, 
perform  on  that  day.  "  sleeps  an  eternal  sleep."    In  Christian 

II.  How  thoroughly  he  instructs  us  language  the  idea  of  sleep  is  perpetuated 
as  to  the  manner  of  our  preparing  for  in  the  term  '*  cemetery"  (KOLfxrjTripiov=: 
it. — 1.  In  holy  conversation  and  godli-  sleeping  place),  as  applied  to  the  burial- 
ness.  2.  To  wait  patiently  for,  and  place  of  the  dead,  but  it  is  blended 
hasten  to  it.  3.  To  give  all  diligence,  with  that  of  an  "  awakening  out  of 
that  we  may  be  found  blameless  by  sleep "  at  the  last  day,  and  even  with 
Christ. —  V.  Ilerherger,  the  thought,  at  first  seemingly  incom- 
patible with  it,  that  the  soul  is  quick- 

Ver.  4.  Death  as  Sleep. — In  the  use  ened  into  higher  energies  of  life  on  its 
of  the  verb  to  "  fall  asleep "  for  dying  entrance  into  the  unseen  world. — 
we  are  reminded  of  our  Lord's  words,      Dean  Plumptre. 

201 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II    PETER. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—13. 

Long-suffering  is  not  Indifference. 

I.  The  Divine  time -measures.— Yer.  8  contains  the  "second  answer  to  the 
sceptical  argument.  Time  is  the  condition  of  man's  thought  and  action,  but  not 
of  God's.  His  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts,  nor  His  ways  as  our  ways;  what 
seems  delay  to  us  is  none  to  Him."  The  figurative  expression  of  this  text  has 
been  much  misrepresented  and  misused.  It  is  when  it  is  treated  as  a  precise 
statement,  and  made  the  basis  of  minute  calculations.  The  whole  conception  of 
a  Millennium  rests  on  a  figurative  expression.  When  it  is  said  that  "  one  day 
is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years,  and  a  thousand  years  as  one  day,'*  it  is 
simply  meant  to  assert  that  God's  prophecies  and  promises  must  never  be  tested 
by  human  time-measures.  If  He  says  a  thing  will  happen  to-day  we  must 
always  keep  in  mind  that  it  is  His  "to-day,"  not  ours;  and  that  His  to-day 
may  cover  even  what  we  should  call  a  "  thousand  years."  As  an  argument 
against  the  scoffer  this  is  effective  enough.  The  force  of  his  scofi"  is  broken 
when  he  is  compelled  to  reckon  the  fulfilment  of  promises  by  God's  time- 
measures. 

II.  The  patience  of  Divine  delay. — It  needs  to  be  clearly  seen  that,  since 
God  must  always  keep  moral  ends  in  view.  He  can  never  make  an  unconditional 
promise.  The  promise  is  a  moral  force.  If  that  promise  fulfils  its  end  the 
promise  can  be  made  good  at  once.  If  that  force  is  in  any  way  hindered,  the 
fulfilment  must  be  left  over  until  the  moral  force  has  duly  afiected  its  mission. 
And  the  Divine  patience  is  seen  in  being  willing  even  to  be  misunderstood  and 
misrepresented,  rather  than  to  cease  exerting  the  graciously  redeeming  moral 
force.  There  is  no  sublimer  revelation  of  God  than  that  which  comes  to  us  in 
the  Divine  delayings.  He  can  wait  and  bear,  in  view  of  the  ends  of  His  infinite 
love  for  man.  He  is  "  not  slack  concerning  His  promise."  We  never  may 
think  that  He  is  indifferent — that  "  He  has  forgotten  to  be  gracious."  That 
never  can  explain  the  Divine  action.  We  may  always  find  long-suffering 
patience.  He  is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish.  He  stretches  opportunity 
of  repentance  to  its  utmost  limit.  He  gives  warning  after  warning,  until  the 
utter  hopelessness  of  any  further  warning  is  made  quite  plain,  and  the  cup 
of  self-willedness  and  iniquity  is  quite  full. 

III.  The  certain  ending  of  times  of  Divine  delay. — "  But  the  day  of  the 
Lord  will  come."  If  judgment  be  threatened  as  a  flood,  the  flood  will  come, 
unless  men  repent.  A  hundred  and  twenty  years  may  pass,  and  men  may  grow 
bold  in  their  impious  self -security  ;  they  may  laugh  away  all  fears  as  they 
enjoy  their  sunny  days  ;  but  the  flood  will  come.  The  Flood  came.  God's 
"  word  never  returns  to  Him  void."  It  will  certainly  be  the  same  in  regard  to 
the  promise  of  Christ's  coming,  whether  that  be  viewed  as  the  vindication  of  the 
saints,  or  as  judgment  on  their  persecutors.  Divine  delay  in  no  sense  indicates 
that  the  Divine  purpose  is  abandoned.  Let  nobody  for  one  moment  think  that. 
Christ  will  come.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  will  come."  And  if  the  scoffer  persists 
in  scoffing,  let  him  remember  that  the  sun  was  risen  upon  the  earth  when  Lot 
entered  Zoar ;  there  was  every  prospect  of  another  splendid  summer  day  ;  but 
that  day  the  fire  of  God  fell.  Certain  as  death  is  judgment — is  Christ's  coming 
to  judgment. 

IV.  The  certainty  of  Divine  judgment  is  present  blessing. — It  is  a  constant 
and  a  gracious  persuasion  to  virtue.  This  is  its  proper  influence  upon  us.  It 
makes  us  say,  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation 
and  godliness."  By  the  earnestness  of  our  endeavours  in  cultivating  the  godly 
life,   and  growing  in  grace,  we  should  be  "  looking  for,  and  hasting  unto  the 

202 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER.  chap.  iii. 


coining  of  the  day  of  God."  Not  "looking  for  "  in  any  sense  of  idly  watching 
at  a  window ;  but  looking  for,  as  Christ  taught  us  the  good  servant  looks  for 
the  return  of  his  Master,  by  all  devoted  obediences,  all  earnest  activities,  all 

careful  preparations.  Christ  is  coming ;  then  let  us  "  be  diligent,  that  we  may 
be  found  of  Him  in  peace." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  8.  A  Thousand  Years  as  a  Day. —  measurer)    differs   wholly  from   man's 

The  latter  half  of  this  saying  is  quite  horologe    (hour-glass).       His    gnomon 

original,    and   has    no    equivalent    in  (dial-pointer)  shows  all  the  hours  at 

Ps.   xc.   4.     The   second  half   is   only  once  in   the  greatest  activity  and  in 

partially  parallel  to  "  a  thousand  years  perfect    repose.      To    Him   the    hours 

in   Thy  sight   are   but   as   yesterday,  pass  away,  neither   more  slowly,   nor 

when    it    is   past."     Consequently   we  more  quickly,  than  befits  His  economy, 

cannot  be  sure  that  the  apostle  had  There  is  nothing  to  make  Him  need 

this  passage  from  the  psalms   in  his  either  to  hasten  or  delay  the  end. — 

mind,  though   it   is   probable   enough  Fausset. 
that  he  had.     That  God  can  punish  in 

one  day  the  sins  of  a  thousand  years  Ver.  11.  What  is  a  Holy  Conversa- 
is  a  thought  which  is  neither  in  the  tion  ? — The  Revised  Version  reads 
text  nor  in  the  context.  What  is  '*  holy  Ztww^,"  but  the  word  "  con  versa- 
insisted  on  is  simply  this :  that  dis-  tion "  may  be  taken  as  altogether 
tinctions  of  long  and  short  time  ai'e  more  suggestive.  It  is  a  very  searching 
nothing  in  the  sight  of  God ;  delay  is  thing  to  require  a  holy  tone  and 
a  purely  human  conception.  Justin  character  upon  all  the  turning  about. 
Martyr  (about  A.  d.  145)  gives  "the  in  and  out,  here  and  there,  to  and  fro, 
day  of  the  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  years  "  with  this  man  and  that,  in  all  the  every- 
as  a  quotation,  and  in  this  form  it  is  day  and  commonplace  associations  of 
closer  to  this  verse  than  to  Ps.  xc.  life.  And  that  is  what  is  meant  by 
4.  As  another  possible  reference  to  the  *'  holy  conversation "  of  the  text, 
our  epistle  follows  in  the  next  chapter,  It  may  seem  at  first  sight  as  if  "  godli- 
it  may  be  regarded  as  not  improbable  ness  "  were  very  much  the  same  thing 
that  Justin  knew  the  epistle.  But  the  as  ''holy  conversation,"  but  we  may 
saying  may  have  been  a  favourite  one,  distinguish  between  the  actual  conduct 
especially  with  those  who  held  Millena-  of  life  and  the  inspiring  motive  of  it. 
rian  views.  In  the  epistle  of  Barnahas  The  inspiring  motive  should  be  "  godli- 
(xv.  4)  we  read,  "  For  a  day  means  with  ness."  "  Godliness"  is  the  realisation 
Him  a  thousand  years,  and  He  Him-  of  God's  abiding  presence,  the  fruits  of 
self  witnesseth,  saying.  Behold,  to-day  which  are  reverence  and  trust.  But 
shall  be  as  a  thousand  years,"  where  the  argument  by  which  a  "  holy  con- 
for  "  to-day  "  the  Codex  Sinaiticus  reads  versa  tion  "   is   urged   upon  us  by  the 

the  day  of  the  Lord."     Irenseus  has,  apostle  is  certainly  somewhat  peculiar. 

"  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  as  a  thousand  Because  all  present  material  things  are 

years  "  twice.     Hippolytus  has  it  once,  to  be  dissolved  ;    because  the  heavens 

Methodius  once.     In  no  case,  however,  shall  pass  away  with  a  great  noise ; 

is   the  context  at   all   similar  to  the  because  the  elements  shall  melt  with 

verses  before  us. — A.  Plummer,  M.A.  fervent  heat ;   because  the  earth  also 

and  the  works  that  are  therein  shall  be 

The   Brevity   of  God's   Delays. — No  burned  up ; — therefore,  we  ought  to  be 

delay  which   occurs  is  long   to   God ;  supremely  concerned  about  our  *'  holy 

as  to    a    man   of    countless   riches,   a  conversation   and  godliness."      If  this 

thousand     guineas    are    as    a    single  stood   alone   it  would   be    perplexing; 

penny.     God's    oenologe    (eternal-ages  but  when  St.  Peter  adds ''Nevertheless 

203 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   PETER. 


we,  according  to  His  promise,  look  for  our  life  drift.     But  it  is  precisely  that 
new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  wherein  we  are  tempted  to  do.     To  let  things 
dwelleth   righteousness,"  we  begin  to  go.     To  live  on,   day  by  day,  simply 
understand  him.    A  great  testing  time  responsive  to  the  accidents  of  the  day, 
awaits  God's  people  ;    what  it  was  to  and  fitting  our  wisdom  and  skill,  as  well 
be  could  only  be  conceived  under  the  as  we  can,  to  the  duties  and  emergencies 
forms  of  an  overwhelming  commotion  of  the  day.     It  is  but  a  butterfly  kind 
of  material  things.  In  that  time  of  test-  of   life,    flitting   lazily  from  flower  to 
ing    nothing  could  possibly  stand  but  flower,    and   sipping   what   nectar   we 
steadfast  goodness,  an  established  "  holy  can.    A  "  holy  conversation  "  was  never 
conversation  and  godliness."      Out  of  attained    in    that   way.      It   is    easy 
that  time  of  testing  will  come  a  condi-  enough   to   drift    into   a  low,  careless 
tion  of  confirmed  holiness ;  there  will  be  kind  of  life,  but  no  man  ever  yet  put 
a    "new   heaven   and   a   new   earth,"  a  stamp  of  character  upon  his  conduct 
whose   supreme    characteristic   should  until  he  gained  a   clear  meaning  and 
be  that   in  it   "  dwelleth,"  "  abide th,"  purpose  for  his  life.      It  is  the  greatest 
"  righteousness."   Only  they  who  main-  work  of  education   to  inspire  the  boy 
tain  the  "  holy  conversation  and  godli-  with  a  great  resolve.      He  is  not  edu- 
ness "  can  have  any  place  in  that  "  new  cated   unless   he   has    come   to    see    a 
earth  " ;  but  he  who  has  persistently  meaning  in  his  life,  to  set  before  him- 
kept  righteous  during  the  testing  time  self  a  noble  purpose,  and  to  recognise 
shall  then  be  "  righteous  still."     That,  the  law  or  principle   by  which  all  his 
then,  is  our  work  as  the  disciples  of  the  eflbrts  to  attain  are  to  be  ruled.     To 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.   We  are  to  earnestly  start  in  life  without  a  fixed  principle 
maintain  our  "holy  conversation  and  is  like  starting  a  voyage  on   the  un- 
godliness," as  our  true  preparation  for  known  and  wind-driven  seas,  without 
every  time    of    strain    that   may   be  a  guiding  and  controlling  helm.    Some- 
coming,  and  as  providing  the  only  sure  times  the  principle  chosen  for  the  order- 
defence  from  the  evil  influences  which  ing  of  a  life  is  not  a  good  principle,  but 
that  time  may  bring.     And  we  are  to  even  then  it  has  its  power  as  a  principle, 
maintain  it  because  only  those  who  are  and  in  the  sway  of  it  the  man  reaches 
holding  it  fast  can  havo  any  "  entrance  altogether   grander   things    than    the 
ministered  unto  them  into  the  ever-  man  possibly  can  who  drifts  through 
lasting     kingdom "    of     righteousness.  life,  anyhow   and    anywhere,   without 
It  is  very  significant  that  the  apostles,  any  guiding  principle  at  all.    But  there 
while  anxious  about  right  opinion,  are  is  no  reason  against  our  choosing  such 
so   much   more   anxious    about    right  a   principle   as   will   secure   for   us    a 
conduct  and  right  character.     The  two  "  holy  conversation."     We  can  resolve 
may  go  together,  and  always  should,  that    life    shall    be    ordered    on    the 
but  conduct  and  character  must  come  principle  of  always  and  simply  doing 
first,  and  be  esteemed  as  of  supreme  what  we  know  to  he  the  will  of  God. 
importance.     "  Only  let  your  con  versa-  For  us  that  will  is  in  part  declared  in 
tion  be  such  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  the  teachings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
Christ."     We  do  well,  then,  to  try  and  and  in  part  witnessed  every  day  afresh, 
understand  what  a  "  holy  conversation "  in  adaptation  to  the  circumstances  of 
is ;  or,  to  put  the  same  thing  in  other  life,  by  the  indwelling  Holy  Spirit.  And 
words,  what  actual  and  practical  order-  what  we  call  "  conversion  "  is  precisely 
ing  and  shaping  of  our  human  life  and  this  :  the  dethroning  of  the  old  principle 
relationships  is  involved  in  our  making  of  seeking  the  interests  of  Self,  and 
a  Christian  profession.   "  What  manner  enthroning  the  principle  of  service  to 
of  persons  ought  we  to  be  ? "  the   holy   will   of   God.     Just   in   the 
I.  A  holy  conversation  is  a  daily  life  measure    in   which    a    man's    life    is 
ordered  by  principle. — One  Scripture  ordered  and  toned  by   that   principle 
writer  earnestly  counsels  us  not  to  let  will  his  daily  life  and  association  be 

204 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    IL  PETER.  chap.  ill. 


described    as    a    "  holy   conversation."  is  the  model  life  of  details,  in  which 

That  is  the  first  thing,  and  there  is  the  power  of  the  controlling  principle 

nothing   more   absolutely  essential   to  is    seen ;    and    whosoever    takes    that 

right  living.     We  can  attain  nothing  human  life  for  his  pattern  increasingly 

unless  we  are  purposed  to  attain  it.  finds    himself    satisfied   with    it,   and 

We  can  attain  no  high  thing  unless  inspired  by  it  so  as  to  attain  a  "  holy 

our  purpose  be  based  on  a  principle,  conversation."      But  we  shall  misuse 

and  that  principle  be  the  noblest  that  that    pattern   if   we    merely   slavishly 

can  give  character  to  a  life.     It  is  but  imitate  it;  if  we   inconsiderately  say, 

putting  this  in  figurative  form  for  the  Jesus    did    and    said    such     and    such 

apostle  to  say,  "I  beseech  you,  therefore,  things,    and    we     must    say    and    do 

by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  exactly   the    same.     That  is    childish 

your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  .  .  .  which  imitation,  not  intelligently  using  our 

is  your  reasonable  service."  pattern.    What  we  require  is  to  see  that 

II.  A   "  holy    conversation "    is    a  Christ's  pattern  is  simply  but  precisely 

daily  life  shaped  to  a  pattern. — We  this  :  the  varying  suggeotion  of  ways  in 

want  help  in  finding  befitting  expres-  which    the    great    life-principle   finds 

sion   for   our   principle  in  the   actual  befitting  expression  in  the  details  of 

details   of   our   daily   association    and  human   conduct.     What  we   have   to 

duty  and  influence.     We  see  this  want  ask,  if  we  would  follow  the  example  of 

very  clearly  in  the  case  of  the  Christians  Christ  aright,  is  this :  How  would  Christ 

connected     with     the     early     Gentile  have  expressed  the  great  principle  if 

Churches.     It  was  most  difficult  and  He   had    been    placed   in   just    these 

perplexing    work    to     get     the     new  particular   circumstances   in   which   I 

Christian  principle,  altering,  re-mould-  am  placed  ?     And  we  can  get  practical 

ing,    and   re-toning   all    the   common,  help  from  observing  how  Christ  did  act 

every -day  thoughts,  feelings,  and  rela-  in   circumstances    that   were    similar, 

tions  of  life;  and  we  know  how,  in  all  To  "follow  His  steps"  is  to  express 

the    epistles,    practical     counsels    for  principle  as  He  did.     Is  it  not  quite 

guidance  were  given,  and  how,  in  the  plain     that    shaping     life    after    the 

epistles  to  the  Corinthians,  the  more  pattern    which    Christ    has    set    will 

special  cases  of  perplexity  were  care-  ensure  a  "  holy  conversation  "  ?     It  did. 

fully  dealt  with.     Was  this  principle,  No  other  terms  are   befitting  as  the 

which   we    have    commended    as    the  description   of    the   life   of    the   Lord 

right,  the  highest,  the  most  sanctifying  Jesus.     Take  what  meanings  you  may 

principle  that  can  order  a  human  life,  please  to  attach  to  the  term  "  holy," 

ever  so  worked  out  into  the  details  of  they  are  all  satisfied  in  the  blessed  life 

any  one   human   career   that   such  a  of  Him  who  "  did  no  sin,  neither  was 

man's  life-story  can   be   taken  as  an  guile  found  in  His  mouth  " ;  "  who  was 

absolutely  satisfactory  pattern  1     We  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate 

can  take  any  and  every  good  man  as  from  sinners."     And  a  "  holy  conver- 

an  example  of  something  ;    but   then  sation  "  is  possible  to  us  in  the  measure 

each  ordinary  good  man  is  almost  as  in  which  we  answer  to  the   pattern, 

much  a  warning  as  an  example.     Was  have   the   *'  mind  that  was  in  Christ 

there  ever  a  case  in  which  the  pattern  Jesus,"  and  are  made  "  hke  unto  Him 

of   the  life-principle,   worked   into  all  in  all  things" — changed  into  His  image, 

details,  was  perfect  ?     A  case  in  which  III.  A  "  holy  conversation"  is  a  life 

the    life    contains    nothing  whatever  sustained  by  consecrated  energy. — It 

which  we  must  be  warned  not  to  copy  ?  is  necessai  y  to  dwell  upon  this,  because 

That    supremely    important    question  Christ's  holy  life  may  seem  to  us  a  far 

has  never  yet  received  more  than  one  easier  thing  than  we  shall  ever  find  a 

answer.     It  never   will   receive   more  holy  life  to  be ;  and  we  may  readily 

than  one.     That  one  is  entirely  satis-  get    disheartened   when   we    are    im- 

factory.     The   ".Man,    Christ    Jesus"  pressed  with  the  contrast  between  our 

205 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   11.  PETER. 


Lord's  easy  attainment  and  our  ever  toned  by  righteousness. — There  are  so 
difficult    and    doubtful    struggle.      It  many   things   in   life   that   would    be 
really  should  not  be  felt  a  surprising  beautiful  if  they  were  polished.    Things 
thing  that  we  can  but,  at  the  best,  never  do  become  lovely  until  they  get 
come  a  long  way  behind  Christ — a  very  their   bloom.     What    marvellous    im- 
long  way  indeed  it  will  be  unless  we  provements   have   been    made   in   the 
put   consecrated   energy  into  our  en-  paper  of   our   books   and   magazines ! 
deavour.      Such   energy   is   demanded  Now  it  has  its  polish  on  and  shines, 
because    the     life-principle    we    have  It  may  be  of  first  importance  that  a 
chosen    is    never   so   established    and  Christian's     conversation     should     be 
confirmed  in  us  as  to  be  beyond  peril ;  right — that   it    should   be   of   sterling 
and  even  more  than  that,  it  has  a  way  worth  ;  the  ring  of  it  must  be  sound 
of  fading  down  in  us  and   becoming  and  true.     But  it  does  not  answer  to 
ineffective  if  we  do  not  perseveringly  the    description    "  holy    conversation " 
and   persistently  keep  it  well  to  the  until  it  gets  its   polish,  until  upon  it 
front,  and  make  it  have  its  say  about  lies  the  bloom.      It  must  be  beautiful 
everything.     A  true  life-principle  in  a  and  gracious.     The  fruits  of  the  Spirit, 
man  must  be  everything  or  nothing,  "  love,  joy,  peace,   long-suffering,  gen- 
every where    or    nowhere.       There    is  tleness,"  make  up   the  bloom,  and  no 
therefore    constant    demand    for    the  man  has  gained   the  "  holy  conversa- 
consecrated    energy   which   will    keep  tion "   until    he   is    strong,    true,   and 
power    and   vigour    in    the    principle  beautiful  in  Christ.      Yes,   in    Christ, 
which   makes  a  ^'  holy  conversation."  For    there    is    a    marvel    about    our 
The  holy  life  is  a  life  in  earnest,  and  Pattern.     The  Pattern  proves  to  be  a 
it  can  be  nothing  else.     The  hair  and  Person,   a  living   Person,   with  whom 
fur  of  animals  reveals  at  once  lowered  we  can  have  so  real  a  fellowship  that 
vitality.     Keep  up  the  energy  of  the  the   glow   of    Him    shall    be   reflected 
soul's  life,   and  all    the  signs  will  be  from  us.     Like   Moses,    when  he  saw 
right ;  there  will  surely  be  the  "  holy  God,  the  shine  will  be  on  our  faces,  the 
conversation."      And   the   consecrated  Christ-tone  will  be  on  all   our  inter- 
energy  is  further  needed  because  the  course.     The    Christ-bloom    creeps   all 
practical  outworking  of  our  life-prin-  over  us  if   we  really  come  into  soul- 
ciple  in  the  details  of  conduct  is  never  nearness  to  Him.     Surely  the  question 
easy  for  us,  if  it  was  always  easy  for  with  which  we  started  has  been  fully 
Christ.     Our  Lord  expressed  a  truth  answered.     What  is  a  '*  holy  conversa- 
which  was  applicable  to  more  than  the  tion  "  ?     It  is  a  human  life  ordered  by 
e7itrance  into   the   kingdom   when   He  the  principle  that  ruled  the  human  life 
said,  "  Strive  "  (agonise)  "  to  enter  in."  of  Christ.     It  is  a  human  life  in  all  its 
It  is  quite  true  that  the  effort  for  us  details  shaped  after  the  pattern  of  the 
will  grow  easier  as  years  unfold,  and  *'  Man,  Christ  Jesus."     It  is  a  human 
will  become  easier  in  particular  things,  life  into  which  is  put  the  energy  of  a 
but    it    will     never     cease    to    make  vigorous  life  and  a  consecrated  purpose, 
demands      upon     watchfulness,     self-  It  is  a  human  life  that  is  kept  within 
mastery,  and  consecrated  energy.     If  the  radiance  of  Christ,  and  shines  out 
we  would  attain  the  "holy  conversa-  His  light  upon  men.     Seeing  that  the 
tion,"  we  must  be  prepared  to  "endure  great  strain-time,  taking  one  form  or 
hardness    as    good    soldiers    of    Jesus  another,    must   come   to   us   all;    and 
Christ,"  and  we   must    be   constantly  seeing  that  through  the  strain-time  we 
lifting  ourselves  afresh  up  to  the  holy^  niay  hope  to  come  to  the  world  where 
enduring.     What    is   wanted,    always  all   is  righteous ; — "  what   manner  of 
wanted,    is    earnestness   put   into   the  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  holy  con- 
endeavour  to  live  the  holy  life.     We  versation  and  godliness  ? " 
must  mean  it,  and  strive  for  it. 

IV.  A  "holy  conversation"  is  life  Ver.    13.    Heaven:   its  Nature  and 

206 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER.  chap.  iii. 


Character. — There   is   great   confusion,  gives  us  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  we  are 

both  in  the  language  and  the  opinions  loth  to  admit,  as  within  its  compre- 

of  men,  in  regard  to  the  j&nal  dwelling-  hension,  anything  that  appertains  to 

place  which  is  promised  in  Scripture  to  our  present  state.     The  contemplative 

the  righteous.      We  speak  of  heaven  mind  cannot  think  of  heaven  as  consti- 

continually,  yet  have  but  a  vague  and  tuted  of  any  such  material  elements  as 

unconnected  notion  of  what  it  positively  here  he  sees  around  him.     But  there 

is.    There  is  no  perspicuous  and  definite  is   a   fallacy   in    such   reasoning,    and 

idea  impressed  upon  the  mind :  we  are  the  fallacy  is  this  :  we  look  upon  the 

wandering  in  the  regions  of  generality,  material  things  of  nature  as  they  are 

or  probability.     It  may  be  this,  or  it  now,   and    not    as    God    made    them 

ma?/ be  that.     It  is  a  speculation  rather  originally;    we  look  upon  the  human 

than  an  article  of  faith.      With  our  body  as  it  is  now,  in  sin,  and  not  as 

very    limited    faculty   of    intelligence,  the  Almighty  originally  constituted  it 

and  with  our  many  imperfections  and  — in  glory  and  holiness.     Man  was  a 

impurities  clinging  on  all  sides  around  sinless  creature;  there  was  naught  for 

us,  we  shall  never  be  able  entirely  to  him  but  loveliness  and  beauty;  there 

penetrate    those    sacred    mysteries   of  was  no  such  thing  as  sorrow,  no  such 

futurity  which  God  has  but  partially  thing  as  pain.     The  paradise  in  which 

disclosed.    To  be  wise  beyond  the  Scrip-  Adam  and  Eve  dwelt,  we  must  consider 

tures  would  be  the  height  of  impiety ;  to   have   been   a   perfect   and   blissful 

but,  nevertheless,  there  is  no  reason  abode  ;    and  yet  it  was  a  local  abode, 

why  we  should  not  strive  to  be  wise  It  was  not  till  Adam  fell  that  material- 

up  to  the  Scriptures.  ism  ceased  to  be  holy.     It  was  not  till 

I.    Heaven  is  a  place,  a  tangible,  sin  entered  into  the  world  that  there 

material  locality. — Heaven,  as  a  word,  was   any  di^awback  in    the   works   of 

is    used    with    various    significations.  nature,    as   now  looked    upon    by   us. 

1.  The  region  of  air  or  atmosphere  Then,  indeed,  the  whole  of  the  works 
immediately    surrounding    the    earth.  of     God     were    changed    from    their 

2.  The  firmament,  or  vast  expanse  of  original  destination.  But  who  would 
space  which  is  beyond  or  above  the  say  that,  because  this  material  state,  in 
atmosphere,  wherein  the  stars  appear.  which  we  now  are,  cannot  form  such  a 

3.  As  the  place  of  God's  residence,  and  place  as  heaven,  that  no  material  state 
the  dwelling  of  angels.  Many  persons  shall  ?  Then  Scripture  asserts  the 
have  taken  up  the  idea  that  heaven  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the 
is  nothing  more  than  a  sort  of  indefinite  reunion  of  the  body  and  soul,  before 
ethereal  abode ;  that  the  grossness  of  entering  the  future  abode  of  eternity, 
materialism  cannot  enter  there ;  that  Christ,  in  His  human  nature,  as  a  body, 
it  is  filled  with  nothing  but  certain  is  in  heaven,  at  God's  right  hand.  We 
mental  and  spiritual  essences  of  glory  cannot  conceive  this  at  all,  unless  we 
and  love,  unallied  to  anything  that  conceive  of  God's  right  hand  as  a  place. 
savours  of  body  or  of  matter ;  and  so  In  all  the  descriptions  of  the  blessed- 
they  attenuate  and  dwindle  away  all  ness  of  the  righteous,  that  which 
notion  of  it,  till  it  disappears  in  nothing;  describes  their  happiness  infers  that 
and  when  pressed  home,  they  find  that  happiness  as  depending  on  organs  of 
their  minds  have  been  dwelling  upon  sensation,  as  seeing,  conversing  with, 
that  which  is  purely  imaginative,  and  and  listening  to,  other  beings  who  shall 
has  no  foundation.  The  source  of  this  there  be  associated  with  us.  If  there 
is  not  difi&cult  to  detect.  By  our  is  material  vision,  material  hearing, 
present  connection  with  the  world  in  material  recognition,  there  must  be  a 
which  we  dwell,  our  notion  of  material-  material  abode,  and  material  objects 
ism  is  inseparably  connected  with  a  on  which  they  are  to  be  exercised, 
notion  of  imperfection  and  sin  ;  and  by  The  promised  abode  of  righteous  men, 
the  exalted   pictures  which  Scripture  we  may  confidently  say,  is  of  a  local 

207 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


and  material  character.  It  is  material- 
ism, purged  indeed  from  sin,  and 
cleansed  of  all  those  imperfections 
which  attach  to  it  here — but  still 
materialism. 

II.  There  is  a  certain  character 
attached  to  the  place  without  which 
character  no  man  can  attain  unto  its 
glories. — '*  Wherein  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness." As  some  have  theorised  away 
the  notion  of  heaven,  by  lifting  it  up 
beyond  the  cognisance  of  our  senses 
altogether,  so  others,  men  of  sensual 
and  earthly  affections,  have  so  debased 
their  notion  of  it  as  to  represent  it  as 
a  mere  place  of  such  corporeal  pleasures 
as  prevail  in  this  world.  But  such  an 
absurdity — let  alone  its  profaneness — 
as  that  picture  of  Paradise  which  the 
Koran  describes,  can  never  for  a  moment 
be  entertained  by  one  who  reads  the 
Bible.  The  most  perfect  and  hallowed 
goodness  must  of  necessity  belong  to 
the  saints  in  light.  Harmony  of  views, 
identity  of  interests,  unison  of  affections 
— in  short,  universal  good — shall  fill 
every  bosom,  and  stimulate  every  heart. 
What  must  the  character  of  the  soul 
of  man  be,  before  he  can  become  the 
fit  inhabitant  of  such  a  heaven  ? 
Clearly,  we  human  beings  must  be 
changed ;  we  must  be  spiritualised ; 
we  must  be  lifted  up  to  God,  for  God 
cannot  be  brought  down  to  us.  And 
when  may  this  change  be  effected? 
Certainly  not  after  death.  If  we 
attain  not  to  holiness  and  spirituality 
of  character  while  on  this  earth,  we 
shall  not  attain  unto  the  spirituality 
of  the  character  which  belongs  to  the 
new  earth.  What  you  are  here,  you 
will  be  hereafter.  Heaven  cannot  but 
be  a  place  of  holiness.  He  therefore 
that  is  unholy  can  have  no  place  therein. 
It  appears,  then,  that  as  one  part  of 
heaven,  the  material  part,  cannot  he 
commenced  here,  but  must  wait  for  the 
final  restitution  of  all  things,  so,  in 
proportion,  the  other  part  of  heaven, 
the  spiritual  part,  must  he  commenced 
here,  otherwise  the  fruition  of  eternal 
joy  never  can  be  ours.  The  spiritual 
heaven,  the  temper  of  mind,  the 
patience,  the  meekness,  the  purity,  the 

208 


love  of  heaven — that,  unless  we  have 
a  foretaste  of  it  now,  we  shall  not  be 
in  a  capacity  for  enjoying  hereafter. — 
William  J.  E,  Bennett,  M.A. 

New  Heavens  and  New  Earth. — 
W^hat  is  our  conception  of  the  new 
heaven  and  the  new  earth  that  we 
desire?  Is  it  a  mere  absence  of 
annoyances  ?  Is  it  an  egotism,  expanded 
to  infinitude  ?  Is  it  a  sensual  Moham- 
medan paradise  ?  Is  it  a  selfish  palace 
of  art  ?  Is  it  a  city  paved  with  gold, 
or  a  pagoda  of  jewels,  like  the  Jeru- 
salem of  St.  John,  in  its  merely  external 
aspect  ?  Childish  must  we  be  indeed 
if  we  have  not  got  beyond  these  symbols, 
if  we  do  not  know  that  man  is,  in  his 
essence,  a  spiritual  being,  and  that  for 
a  spiritual  being  there  can  be  no  felicity 
save  in  spiritual  conditions — in  com- 
munion with  God,  in  serenity  of  mind, 
in  purity  of  heart.  We,  according  to 
His  promise,  look  for  new  heavens  and 
ci  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteous- 
ness. Shall  we  ever  enjoy  that  heaven 
hereafter  ?  Yea,  if  we  truly  seek  it 
now. — Dean  Farrar. 

Attainahleness  of  Righteousness. — ^Is 
righteousness  attainable  by  man  ? 
If  it  be,  then  the  essence  of  God*s 
kingdom  is  not  beyond  man's  reach. 
If  righteousness  be  attainable  here  and 
now,  then  here  and  now  we  may  at 
least  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Is  our  conception  of  happiness  identified 
with  righteousness  ?  Is  that  the  thing 
which  we  desire  ?  Is  that  our  ideal  ? 
Is  that  the  one  goal  to  which  we  are 
stretching  forward  in  the  heavenly 
race  ?  If  so,  then  for  us,  even  here 
and  now,  "  the  path  to  heaven  lies 
through  heaven,  and  all  the  way  to 
heaven  is  heaven."  What  sort  of  a 
condition  answers  to  the  heaven  of 
which  you  dream,  for  which  you  sigh  ? 
Is  it  a  state  of  things  which  you  vaguely 
call  glory  ?  Is  it  a  starry  crown — 
the  symbol  of  supreme  self -aggrandise- 
ment ?  Is  it  a  golden  throne,  the 
summit  of  individual  exaltation  ?  Is  it 
the  rest  of  an  untroubled  indolence  ? 
If  so,   our  heaven  may  prove  to   be 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  PETER.  chap,  iiii^ 

indeed  a  chimera,  both  now  and  here-  selves  into  mere  earthliness,  into  an 

after.     Such  notions  of  heaven  betray  ill-concealed   amalgam   of   vanity   and 

the  vinsuspected   fact  that,  after  all,  selfishness.      The    true    conception   of 

our  high  spiritual  hopes  resolve  them-  heaven  is  holiness. — Dean  Farrar, 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—18. 

The  Common  Teaching  of  the  Apostles. — St.  Peter's  reference  to  St.  Paul  brings 
the  relations  of  these  two  men  to  mind.  At  one  time  they  were  very  strained, 
and  from  the  human  point  of  view  the  strain  can  be  very  simply  explained. 
To  St.  Peter  was  entrusted  the  work  of  opening  the  privilege  of  the  gospel  to  the 
Gentiles;  but  he  could  not  see  more  than  their  being  allowed  to  become  Jewish 
Christians,  holding  the  Christian  faith,  but  ordered  in  religious  conduct  by  Jewish 
regulations.  St.  Paul  was  called  to  extend  and  to  liberalise  his  work.  When  the 
gospel  was  preached  to  men  who  had  no  Jewish  associations,  it  was  found  practically 
impossible  to  put  them  under  formal  Jewish  regulations,  and  the  question  imme- 
diately arose,  "Are  we  justified  in  making  this  particular  demand  upon  our  Gentile 
converts  ? "  Judaism  was  right  enough  for  Jews,  but  was  it  a  yoke  to  be  put  on 
everybody  1  St.  Paul  took  a  bold  line.  So  far  as  Judaism  represented  great  human 
principles,  and  broad  universal  expression  of  those  principles,  so  far  as  it  con- 
cerned man  as  man,  it  must  be  imposed  on  Gentiles.  But  so  far  as  it  was  ex- 
clusive, adapted  to  the  education,  religious  well-being,  and  ministry,  of  a  particular 
race,  it  need  have  no  permanence  and  no  general  applications.  This  was  clear  to 
St.  Paul,  and  to  his  school  of  thought ;  and  it  must  always  be  borne  in  mind 
that  St.  Paul  was,  throughout  his  life,  a  faithful  adherent  of  the  Jewish  faith 
and  practice.  For  himself  he  maintained  a  loyal  allegiance  to  the  customs  of  his 
fathers ;  but  since  he  apprehended  Christianity  as  a  Divine  life  in  the  soul, 
rather  than  as  a  religion,  he  saw  clearly  that  a  particular  dress  in  which  the  life 
must  clothe  itself,  could  not  be  forced  upon  everybody.  But  St.  Peter  never 
could  quite  grow  out  of  his  Jewish  thought- bondages,  and  consequently  the  time 
came  when  St.  Paul  had  openly  to  reprove  him  for  what  looked  very  much  like 
a  piece  of  time-serving  (Gal.  ii.  14).  The  passage  now  before  us  shows  plainly 
that  the  estrangement  had  been  removed,  though  its  remarkable  sentence,  "  in 
which  are  some  things  hard  to  be  understood,"  etc.  (ver.  16)  indicates  that  there 
were  still  some  things  of  St.  Paul's  teaching  which  he  had  to  leave.  His  con- 
fidence in  A^w,  as  a  loyal  and  faithful  fellow-servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  had  been 
fully  restored,  if  it  had  been  temporarily  destroyed,  but  concerning  his  teachings 
be  had  still  to  say,  "  Many  men,  many  minds."  Here  St.  Peter's  point  is,  that 
St.  Paul  and  he  were  absolutely  agreed  in  their  teachings  concerning  Chrivst's 
second  coming,  and  the  attitude  which  the  Christian  Church  should  take  in 
relation  to  it. 

I.  St.  Paul's  references  to  the  coming  of  Christ. — These  are  chiefly  to  be 
found  in  the  epistles  to  the  Corinthians  and  Thessalonians,  and  they  are  in  some 
respects  more  minute  than  those  of  St.  Peter.  It  might,  however,  be  shown 
that  St.  Paul  conceived  the  coming  and  the  issues  of  the  coming,  from  such  a 
spiritual  point  of  view  as  at  least  prepares  for  the  spiritual  apprehension  of  it 
which  is  more  and  more  being  revealed  to  Christ's  Church. 

II.  St.  Paul's  teaching  concerning  Divine  delay. — That  is  one  great  point 
present  to  St.  Peter's  mind  ;  on  it  the  doubting  of  the  scofiers  rested.  He  could 
safely  plead  that  all  the  apostles  had  taught,  that  any  seeming  delay  in  the 
fulfilment  of  God's  promise  was  but  incitement  to  persistency  and  trust. 

III.  St.  Paul's  perplexing  things. — See  the  hints  given  in  the  introductory 
portion  of  this  Homiletic  Note. 

V  '     209 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


IV.  The  apostolic  persuasion  to  maintain  faith,  and  keep  on  in  Christian 
growing  (ver.  18). — See  outline  on  "The  double  Christian  growth."  The 
"  grace  of  our  Lord  "  must  mean  the  grace  of  which  He  is  the  Giver  ;  while  the 
"  knowledge  of  our  Lord "  must  mean  the  knowledge  of  which  He  is  the 
object. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  18.  Never  Satisfied. — The  artist 
who  is  satisfied  with  his  transcript  of 
his  ideal  will  not  grow  any  more. 
There  is  a  touching  story  told  of  a 
modern  sculptor,  who  was  found  stand- 
ing in  front  of  his  masterpiece,  sunk 
in  sad  reverie  ;  and  when  they  asked 
him  why  he  was  so  sad,  ''Because," 
he  answered,  "  I  am  satisfied  with 
it."  "  I  have  embodied,"  he  would 
say,  "  all  that  I  think  and  feel. 
There  it  is.  And  because  there  is  no 
discord  between  what  I  dream,  and 
what  I  can  do,  I  feel  that  the  limit  of 
my  growth  is  reached." — A  Maclaren^ 
D.D. 

Possibilities  of  Goodness. — No  man 
knows  how  much  of  goodness,  noble- 
ness, and  wisdom,  are  possible  for  any 
man,  or  for  himself.  No  bounds  can 
be  set  to  that  progress  of  growth. 
There  is  no  point  on  that  happy 
voyage,  beyond  which  icy  cHflfs  and  a 
frozen  ocean  forbid  a  passage ;  but 
before  us,  to  the  verge  of  our  horizon  of 
to-day,  stretch  the  open  waters.  And 
when  that  farthest  point  of  vision  lies 
as  far  astern  as  it  now  gleams  ahead, 
the  same  boundless,  sapphire  sea  will 
draw  our  yearning  desires,  and  bear 
onwards  our  advancing  powers. — A. 
Maclaren,  D.D. 

Growing  in  Grace. —  Standing  in 
the  portico  of  the  church  of  S.  Pietro 
in  Vincoli,  at  Rome,  and  looking 
across  into  a  convent  of  Maronite 
monks,  one  sees  lifted  against  the 
beautiful  blue  of  the  Italian  sky  a 
magnificent  palm-tree.  It  is  very  tall. 
It  is  straight  as  any  arrow.  Its  stem 
is  thick,  but  tapering  and  exquisitely 
graceful.  And  upon  its  summi't  there 
rests,  with  a  real  solidity,  and  yet 
at   the   same   time    with   a  quite  ex- 

210 


ternal  lightness,  a  vast  and  swaying 
coronal  of  leaves.  As  we  look  at  it 
the  images  of  the  Scripture  come 
thronging  through  the  mind — *'  the 
righteous  shall  flourish  like  the  palm- 
tree."  And  if  we  analyse  a  little  the 
method  of  the  flourishing  of  the  palm, 
we  shall  find  it  full  of  analogies  of 
what  ought  to  be  the  method  of 
advance  for  a  righteous  life.  It  is  a 
tree  singularly  independent  of  external 
circumstances.  When,  in  winter, 
there  fall  the  copious  rains,  it  is  not 
greatly  stimulated ;  when,  in  the 
summer,  the  fiercest  heats  beat  down, 
it  does  not  droop  and  wither.  It 
maintains  its  uprightness.  You  cannot 
shove  it  much  out  of  a  straight  line  of 
growth  from  the  earth  upwards  toward 
the  heavens.  The  strongest  tempests 
cannot  keep  it  bent  out  of  this  straight 
line,  and  sometimes  men  have  tried 
to  hinder  it  from  its  straightness  by 
hanging  heavy  weights  upon  it ;  but 
this  has  failed.  It  is  perfect  in 
its  uprightness.  Then,  too,  the  palm 
is  a  fruitful  tree.  Always,  in  its 
season,  does  it  hang  out  the  rich 
clusters  of  its  dates.  Constantly  does 
it  scatter  down  its  benefactions.  Also, 
the  palm  is  a  tree  which  keeps  on 
growing.  It  grows  on  from  century 
even  into  century.  It  may  be  slow  in 
growth,  but  it  is  sure  and  steady.  And 
thus  constantly,  as  the  years  pass,  it  is 
more  in  height  and  heaven wardness. 
It  is  more  in  bulk.  It  is  firmer  fixed 
in  straightness.  It  is  more  affluent  of 
shade  and  fruit.  It  is  more  in  beauty, 
more  in  strength,  more  in  blessing. 
Thus,  full  of  growth  in  all  directions,  it 
is  full  of  flourishing.  Says  the  Scrip- 
ture, *'  The  righteous  shall  flourish  like 
the  palm-tree."  Grow  thus  in  grace — 
that  is  the  Divine  injunction.  How 
much  have  you  grown  during  the  past 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.   PETER.  chap.  iii. 


year  ?     How  may  we  flourish  in  grace,  knowledge  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

as  the  palm  flourishes  %  But  the  Greek  is  not  quite  clear,  and 

I.  If  we  would  grow  thus  in  grace,  the  idea  suggested  by  the  Authorised 
it  must  be  the  supreme  idea  of  our  Version,  on  which  we  now  dwell,  is 
lives  to  do  it. — As  a  man  thinks,  etc.,  fully  in  accord  with  the  teachings  of 
in  his  heart,  so  is  he.  There  are  such  both  Peter  and  Paul.  The  growth 
people  in  the  Churches  as  minimum  should  be  in  character,  which  is  the 
Christians.  Here  is  the  main  secret  soul's  health,  and  in  knowledge,  which 
of  much  of  our  puny  and  miserable  is  one  side  of  the  nourishment  of  the 
spiritual  growth.  We  are  not,  and  soul's  health.  Grow  like  your  Divine 
hardly  want  to  be,  maximum  Christ-  Master,  grow  in  graciousness  and  grow 
ians.  Unless  it  be  our  idea  to  be  in  wisdom.  So  growing,  grow  in  favour 
such,  we  can  never  be  such.  with  God  and  man.     In  the  Christian 

II.  We  must  grow  in  grace  by  life  growth  is  essential,  and  healthy 
prayer. — Prayer  in  its  results  is  suh-  growth  will  take  two  directions,  the 
jective  ;  it  brings  us  into  harmony  and  line  of  character,  and  the  line  of  know- 
relation  with  God.  But  prayer  is  more  ledge.  Like  the  trees,  there  will  be 
than  this,  what  Dr.  Bushnell  calls  growth  in  the  branchings  of  character, 
"  dumb-bell "  notion  of  it.  Prayer  is  and  growth  in  the  rootings  of  know- 
a  real  grasping  of  objective  benefits.  ledge,  and  there  never  can  be  healthy 
We  get  by  Divine  gift  what  we  pray  growing  of  the  one  apart  from  the 
for — chiefly  grace.  harmonious,    healthy  growing   of   the 

III.  We  must  grow  in  grace  by  other.  "That  we  may  grow  up  into 
knowledge. — The  Bible  is  the  suste-  Him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  head." 
nance  and  nutriment  of  spiritual  Peter,  in  this  epistle,  gives  the  details 
growth.  There  are  too  many  spiritual  of  character-growth :  *•  Adding  on  your 
fasters  from  this  Divine  nutriment.  part  all  diligence,  in  your  faith  supply 

IV.  We  must  grow  in  g^ace  by  virtue ;  and  in  your  virtue  knowledge  ; 
actual  resolving  to  grow,  and  by  and  in  your  knowledge  temperance ; 
pressing  resolution  into  action. — We  and  in  your  temperance  patience  ;  and 
dream  too  much  toward  nobler  grace ;  in  your  patience  godliness  ;  and  in 
we  do  not  enough  strenuously c?o  toward  your  godliness  love  of  the  brethren; 
nobler  grace. — Anon.  and  in  your  love  of  the  brethren,  love. 

For  if  these  things  are  yours  and 
The  Christians  Double  Growth. — At  abound,  they  make  you  to  be  not  idle 
the  starting  of  the  religious  life  of  nor  unfruitful."  Paul,  in  the  epistle  to 
a  new  year  what  word  may  fittingly  the  Colossians,  gives  suggestions  con- 
recall  to  our  minds  the  responsibilities  cerning  growth  in  spiritual  knowledge  : 
of  our  Christian  profession?  Will  this  "And  to  desire  that  ye  might  be  filled 
one  be  helpful  which  I  would  suggest  with  the  knowledge  of  His  will  in  all 
as  our  motto  ?  We  want  one  that  at  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding  ; 
once  suggests  an  estimate  of  our  past,  that  ye  might  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord 
and  inspires  us  to  more  watchful  and  unto  all  pleasing,  being  fruitful  in 
earnest  endeavour  in  the  days  to  come.  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the 
We  want  one  that,  during  the  year,  knowledge  of  God." 
will  recall  to  us  our  solemn  obliga-  I.  In  the  Christian  life  growth  is 
tions.  This  text  says  to  each  one  essential. — It  is  in  all  life.  We  are 
of  us,  Have  you  been  growing  in  the  troubled  about  our  garden  plants  if 
spiritual  life  this  year  ?  And  it  says  they  do  not  grow.  There  must  be 
to  each  one  of  us.  Remember,  you  something  wrong  with  them.  The 
must  grow  in  the  spiritual  life,  or  that  child  that  does  not  grow  in  body 
life  will  surely  shrivel,  and  fade,  and  cannot  be  in  health.  We  call  the 
die.  The  Kevised  Version  reads  the  poor  creature  an  idiot  that  does  not 
sentence,    "  Grow  in   the    gi'ace   and  grow  in  mind.     All  around  us  every- 

211 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


thing  is  growing,  and  we  share  a  life 
whose  sign  of  activity  is  growth. 
That  must  be  true  of  spiritual  life 
which  is  true  of  the  physical.  As  a 
man  in  Christ,  I  may  say,  "  While  I 
live  I  grow,  and  while  I  grow  I  know 
that  I  live."  It  may  be  that  soul- 
growth  cannot  be  watched,  and  some- 
times cannot  even  be  discerned.  It  may 
even  be  better  for  us  that  it  should  be 
impossible  for  us  to  trace  it,  and  that 
we  can  only  get  an  idea  of  our  pro- 
gress at  long  and  distant  intervals. 
Something  may  happen  to  surprise  us 
by  revealing  what  growth  and  pro- 
gress we  have  made  in  the  spiritual 
life,  just  as  moments  of  surprise  come 
to  us  when  we  realise  that  the  girl  we 
so  long  have  watched  is  no  longer  a  child. 

"  The  child  is  a  woman. 
The  book  may  close  over ;  now  all  the  lessons 
are  said." 

It  is  but  reminding  of  familiar  things 
to  say  that  growth  depends  on  nourish- 
ment and  exercise.  And  that  must  be 
as  true  of  soul-growth  as  it  certainly  is 
of  body-growth.  There  is  appropriate 
soul-food,  and  suitable  soul-exercise ; 
and  there  cannot  be  spiritual  health  and 
development  where  these  are  neglected 
or  misused.  And  we  have  been  reminded 
that  growth  depends  upon  healthy  sur- 
roundings, sanitary  atmospheres,  and 
inspiriting  daily  conditions.  Growth 
depends  on  cherished  cheerfulness  of 
spirit,  pleasant  toil,  kept  within  wise 
limitations,  and  the  brightening  in- 
fluence of  daily  friendships.  Pure 
homes,  judicious  and  well-ordered 
measures,  help  to  secure  both  physical 
and  moral  growth ;  and  spiritual 
atmospheres,  surroundings,  and  associa- 
tions are  in  every  way  as  essential  for 
securing  soul -growth.  This  is  very 
familiar  truth,  but  w^e  may  set  it  before 
us  once  again.  It  is  not  so  familiar  to 
say  that  moral  and  spiritual  growth 
depend  on  will  and  effort.  We  grow  if 
we  want  to  grow.  The  athlete  who 
wants  to  grow  muscle  for  the  strain  of 
the  coming  contest,  puts  his  will  into 
the  matter,  makes  the  necessary  effort, 
and    grows    by    force    of    will.     You 

212 


remember  how  one  of  our  greatest 
novel  writers  makes  one  of  his  cha- 
racters die  simply  because  "  she  would 
not  make  an  effort."  It  would  help  us 
if  we  clearly  realised  that  the  soul- 
growth  which  is  essential  to  soul-life  is 
no  happy  accident,  no  unconscious 
process,  going  on  in  a  natural  way, 
whether  we  will  it  or  not.  It  is  a 
growth  under  conditions,  just  as  truly 
as  is  the  growth  of  the  vines  you  are 
training  in  the  glass  houses,  and  the 
arrangement  of  those  conditions  is  a 
matter  of  our  will  and  effort.  A  man 
who  means  to  ensure  the  growth  of  his 
soul  must  use  the  means,  and  he  has  no 
right  to  complain  of  flaccid  spiritual 
muscles,  and  the  terrible  feeling  of 
soul- weakness,  if  he  makes  little  or  no 
efibrt  to  ensure  the  conditions  of 
spiritual  growth.  "If  we  be  living 
Christians — true  men — we  are  grow- 
ing." What  happens  when  living  things 
cease  to  grow?  You  can  see  what 
happens  in  the  trees.  Deadly  fungus 
comes  upon  the  branch  that  will  not 
grow.  There  is  no  possible  halting 
place  for  us.  To  stop  is  to  go  back. 
Fail  to  use  power  and  you  must  lose 
the  power ;  and  losing  our  power  is  but 
death  in  its  beginnings.  Sometimes 
one  inclines  to  ask.  Do  old  people  cease 
to  grow  bodily  ?  I  think  not.  They 
grow  right  on  to  the  end,  only  there 
are  forces  of  decay  at  work  which  mate 
and  master  the  forces  of  growth. 
Certainly  it  is  true  spiritually  that 
growth  never  ceases,  but  while  "  the 
outward  man  perisheth,  the  inward 
man  is  renewed  day  by  day."  Never, 
while  we  tarry  amid  these  mortal 
scenes,  do  we  cease  soul-growth. 
Never  do  we  cease  to  need  the  means 
of  soul-growth.  Shall  we  look  seriously 
at  this  matter?  We  are  alive  unto  God. 
The  sign  of  life  is  growth.  Growth  de- 
pends on  conditions.  Those  conditions 
are  largely  within  our  control.  And 
therefore  the  word  of  the  apostle  comes 
close  home  to  us,  and  should  be  an 
inspiration.  "  Grow  in  grace,  and  in 
the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour, 
Jesus  Christ." 
II.  In  the  Christian   life   growth 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


takes  two  directions. — 1.  In  grace.  It 
is  said  of  the  Divine  Youth  of  Nazareth, 
that  he  "  grew  in  grace,"  and  that  sums 
up  the  development  of  amiable,  high- 
principled,  beautiful,  and  gracious 
character.  In  something  of  that  sense 
we  may  venture  to  take  the  word 
"  grace  "  in  our  text.  Bodily  life  has 
a  tone,  a  character.  Spiritual  life  has 
a  tone,  a  character.  Sometimes  the 
Christian  virtues  and  graces  are  spoken 
of  as  if  they  were  the  garments  which 
the  soul  was  required  to  put  on.  Thus 
the  apostle  Paul  says,  "  Put  on,  there- 
foi-e,  as  God's  elect,  holy  and  beloved,  a 
heart  of  compassion,  kindness,  humility, 
meekness,  long-suffering,  forbearing 
one  another,  and  forgiving  one  another. 
And  above  all  these  things,  put  on  love, 
which  is  the  bond  of  perf  ectness."  And 
Peter  would  have  us  '*  be  clothed  with 
humility."  But  here  character  is  rather 
thought  of  as  something  which  we  are 
to  grow  into.  We  know  how  our  boys 
and  girls,  under  the  varied  influences 
of  their  childhood  and  youth,  grow  into 
their  characters ;  get  this  and  that 
corrected  or  removed,  and  this  and 
that  settled  in,  and  made  their  own. 
We  watch  the  process  with  the  in- 
tensest  interest,  ready  with  all  wise 
training  and  gracious  help.  In  the  little 
child  we  note  the  possibilities ;  in  the 
growing  boy  we  see  them  unfolding  ;  in 
the  young  man  stepping  forth  into  life 
we  expect  to  see  principles  established, 
and  virtue  and  grace  confirmed.  And 
if  we  get  a  deeper  view  of  mature 
life,  we  find  it  is  still  a  growing  into 
character,  up  into  the  ideal  character 
set  before  us  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
What  are  we  with  the  weight  of  years 
upon  us  but  the  Lord's — the  Eternal 
Father's — boys  and  girls,  who  are 
growing  up  into  our  heavenly  charac- 
ter ?  But  the  word  "  grace  "  seems  to 
suggest  the  characteristic  feature  of 
Christian  character.  It  is  dominated 
by  the  passive  virtues.  The  character- 
fruits  wrought  by  the  Spirit  are  quiet, 
modest,  patient,  gentle  things,  such  as 
these  :  "  love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  goodness,  faith,  meekness, 
temperance."      If    natural    character 


develops  well,  we  have  all  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  high-souled  gentleman. 
If  the  spiritual  character  develops  well, 
we  have  all  the  characteristics  of  the 
Christ-toned  Christian.  And  there  is 
no  more  beautiful  thing  upon  this  sin- 
stained  earth  of  ours  than  the  sanc- 
tified, amiable  man,  unless  it  be  the 
sanctified,  amiable  woman.  I  have 
known  such,  and  never  have  lost,  and 
never  shall  lose,  their  holy  power  upon 
me ;  women  who  grew  into  such  lovely, 
saintly  characters  that  they  seemed  to 
have  caught  the  fragrance  of  Christ, 
and  you  breathed  it  whenever  you  came 
near  to  these  lovely  flowers.  If  we 
could  only  grow  in  grace  like  that !  But 
what  a  business  this  character-growth 
is  !  Some  of  us  have  got  very  weary 
of  trying  to  keep  it  up.  It  has  seemed 
to  be  no  use  trying,  so  we  have  let  the 
thing  go,  become  careless  about  the 
means  of  grace  which  would  have 
helped  it,  and  half  said  to  ourselves, 
'*  Never  mind  if  we  are  no  better 
Christians  to  end  the  year  than  we 
were  to  begin  it."  I  can  sympathise 
with  you.  More  than  once  I  have 
been  almost  giving  up  the  struggle, 
and  contentedly  letting  things  go.  So 
we  may  say  to  one  another,  "  Forgetting 
the  things  that  are  behind,  and  reaching 
forth  unto  those  that  are  before,  let  us 
press  toward  the  mark,  for  the  prize  of 
our  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus."  Let 
us  begin  again,  fully  resolved  that  we 
will  grow  in  grace,  grow  into  the 
Christly  character,  and  so  win,  for 
Christ's  service,  the  highest  power,  the 
sanctified  power  that  we  are — that 
we  have  become.  Good  growth  is 
always  slow.  So  we  will  not  be  dis- 
heartened if  the  goal  of  our  hope  keeps 
far  away.  The  very  growing  is  healthy. 
2.  In  knowledge.  And  the  sphere  of  the 
knowledge  is  very  clearly  defined.  "  In 
the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ."  Ward  Beecher  says, 
"  While  sense  is  the  source  of  physical 
or  scientific  knowledge,  disposition  is 
the  source  of  the  knowledge  of  moral 
truth  :  it  depends  upon  the  exercise  of 
moral  feelings."  The  apostles  constantly 
urge  this  growth  in  the  knowledge  of 

213 


CHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


God.  And  their  doing  so  indicated  keen 
observation  of  some  of  the  most  serious 
perils  of  Christian  life.  Growth  in 
knowledge  is  the  great  antidote  and 
medicine  for  some  of  the  gravest  Christ- 
ian diseases.  Keligion  is  feeling,  and 
can  never  be  dissociated  from  feeling ; 
but  feeling  is  a  good  slave  that  is  always 
trying  to  become  master,  and  then 
works  well-nigh  irrecoverable  mischiefs. 
Separate  growth  in  knowledge  from 
your  Christian  life,  and  you  will  become 
sentimental  or  superstitious.  You  will 
take  up  with  a  routine  of  religious 
observances,  or  you  will  pine  for 
crowded  and  excited  religious  meetings, 
and  popular  preachers,  and  foolishly 
imagine  that  you  have  gained  a  real 
blessing  because  you  have  been  made  to 
feel.  One  of  the  most  universally  work- 
ing natural  laws  is  this :  overstrain  any 
emotion,  and  you  inevitably  weaken, 
and  you  may  destroy,  the  capacity  of 
that  emotion.  Remember  this :  excited 
feeling  never  strengthens  the  will, 
never  confirms  principle.  You  may 
enjoy  it,  but  the  after-lassitude  is  the 
moment  for  which  our  soul-tempter 
keenly  watches.  Our  Lord  knew  the 
perils  of  excited  meetings,  and  studious- 
ly avoided  them.  The  apostles  never 
unduly  arouse  feeling,  and  they  per- 
sistently urge  growth  in  Christian 
knowledge  as  the  necessary  accompani- 
ment of  growth  in  grace.  But  let  us 
see  carefully  what  knowledge  it  is  that 
the  apostle  commends.  It  is  precisely 
this :  the  knowledge  of  Christ  the 
Centre ;  "in  whom  are  hid  all  the 
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge." 
Paul  wants  to  know  Him ;  and  our 
Lord  Himself  said,  "  This  is  life  eternal, 
to  know  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and 
Jesus  Christ,  whom  Thou  hast  sent." 
In  our  days  peculiar  attention  is  being 
given  to  the  person  and  mission  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  there  is  no  sign  of  the 
times  more  important  and  more  hopeful. 
But  we  Christians  must  throw  ourselves 
fully  into  the  study,  and  persist  in  it 
that  the  Christ  can  only  be  known  by 
the  quickened,  sanctified,  and  Divinely 
guided  intellect.  This  way  and  that 
men    are   trying   to   shake   down  our 

214 


primary  beliefs.  Our  security  against 
criticism,  on  the  one  hand,  and  against 
religious  sentimentality,  on  the  other — 
the  two  supreme  perils  of  our  age — lies 
in  giving  ourselves  fully  and  freely  to 
the  understanding  of  the  beautiful  and 
blessed  earth-life  of  our  Divine  Lord. 
And  it  is  the  knowledge  of  all  that 
circle  of  truth  of  which  Christ  is  the 
centre.  Everything  in  which  Christ 
was  interested  interests  us.  And  the 
circle  is  broader  and  larger  than  we 
think.  Have  we  not  something  to  regret 
in  the  past  in  relation  to  this  growth  in 
Christian  knowledge  ?  Have  we  really 
cared  about  it  ?  Have  we  longed 
rather  for  something  emotional,  some- 
thing sensational  ?  Have  we  enjoyed 
the  services,  when  we  were  only  told 
what  we  knew  1  Then  look  at  this  text. 
*'  Grow  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  But  it  is 
well  to  face  this  fact :  growth  in  Christ- 
ian knowledge  is  a  very  trying  thing ; 
and  so  many  shrink  from  it,  or  are 
afraid  of  it.  It  involves  leaving  past 
forms  of  knowledge  behind,  just  as  the 
boys  leave  behind  their  little  school 
jackets  when  they  step  up  into  man- 
hood ;  but  nobody  says  anything  evil 
about  the  forms  of  knowledge  or  the 
jackets ;  they  belonged  to  their  time, 
and  did  very  well  then.  I  know  a 
minister  who  has  been  thirty  years  in 
the  ministiy,  and  boasts  that  he  thinks 
to-day  about  the  great  religious  verities 
exactly  the  same  as  he  thought  when 
he  left  college.  I  don't  think  I  could 
say  that  I  would  express  any  one  of 
those  verities  as  I  did  thirty  years  ago. 
We  must  grow.  Let  us  accept  the  dis- 
abilities of  our  growth,  and  look  kindly 
upon  those  thought-forms  which 
properly  belonged  to  our  spiritual 
childhood,  but  were  the  steps  up  which 
we  have  passed  to  gain  the  higher 
apprehensions  of  to-day.  Grow — but 
keep  Christ  the  centre.  The  twofold 
growth — in  character  and  knowledge — 
is  essential.  Both  must  go  together. 
Try  to  conceive  the  case  of  a  Christian 
in  whom  there  has  been  growth  of 
character  without  growth  of  knowledge. 
Keep  that  plant  in  the  hothouse.     It 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    11.  PETER. 


CHAP.  III. 


will  not  do  for  the  workaday  world. 
Try  to  conceive  the  case  of  a  Christian 
in  whom  there  has  been  growth  of 
knowledge  without  growth  of  character. 
Keep  that  man  in  a  study.  He  has  no 
sweet  brotherliness  and  Christly  charity 
for  the  fellowships  of  life.  Both  are  im- 
perfect types.  There  is  no  fruitage  to 
the  glory  of  God  from  any  tree  that 
does  not  grow — and  keep  on  growing — 
two  ways — up  and  down.  Let  us  set 
all  our  hearts  upon  securing  the  double 


growth  ?  Then  we  shall  have  to  mend 
our  ways  of  private  culture.  Then  we 
shall  have  to  mend  our  ways  of  mutual 
help.  How  do  we  make  things  grow  ? 
Not  by  any  direct  action  upon  them. 
We  do  this :  we  try  to  give  them  the 
right  environments,  the  surroundings 
and  atmosphere  which  will  inspire  and 
help  growth.  Finding  the  environment 
in  which  our  souls  can  grow  is  our 
life-work. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  III, 


Ver.  12.  Ready  for  the  Voyage. — The 
Christian,  at  his  death,  should  not  be  like 
the  child,  who  is  forced  by  the  rod  to  quit 
bis  play ;  but  like  one  who  is  wearied  of  it, 
and  willing  to  go  to  bed.  Neither  ought  he 
to  be  like  the  mariner  whose  vessel  is  drifted 
by  the  violence  of  the  tempest  from  the 
shore,  tossed  to  and  fro  upon  the  ocean,  and 
at  last  suffers  wreck  and  destruction ;  but 
like  one  who  is  ready  for  the  voyage,  and, 
the  moment  the  wind  is  favourable,  cheer- 
fully weighs  anchor,  and,  full  of  hope  and, 
joy,  launches  forth  into  the  deep. — Gott- 
hold's  ''Emblems:' 

Influence  of  Fire  upon  the  Earth. — "  What 
has  tire  done  upon  the  earth  1  Fire  has  only 
re-constructed  and  destroyed.  Nothing  has 
found  an  origin  in  fire.  Fire  itself  is  an 
effect,  and  not  a  cause  ;  it  is  in  the  atmo- 
sphere, it  is  in  the  flint  in  the  earth,  it  is  in 
the  water  ;  in  each  it  is  a  thing  by  itself, 
unseen  or  unfelt ;  certain  conditions  bring  it 
into  active  existence,  but  it  cannot  be  traced 
in  either  element  as  a  matter  of  course ;  yet 
it  is  here,  there,  and  everywhere :  it  has 
built  up  Cotopaxi  to  the  height  of  18,000 
feet ;  Teneriffe  has  been  shot  up  by  its 
labours  from  an  unknown  depth  beneath  the 
sea  to  12,000  feet  above  it ;  Etna  is  heaped 
up  with  lava,  ashes,  and  scoriae  some  11,000 
feet ;  Iceland  has  grown  into  a  great  island 
under  its  influence  ;  and  Vesuvius  has  grown 
to  a  height  of  3,751  feet,  from  a  recon- 
struction of  earthy  matter  by  force." — 
Malet. 

Ver.  16.  Bible  Difficulties. — An  old  man 
once  said,  '•  For  a  long  period  I  puzzled 
myself  about  the  difficulties  of  Scripture, 
until  at  last  I  came  to  the  resolution  that 
reading  the  Bible  was  like  eating  fish. 
When  I  find  a  difficulty,  I  lay  it  aside  and 
call  it  a  bone.  Why  should  I  choke  over  the 
bone  when  there  is  so  much  nutritious  meat 


for  me  ?  Some  day,  perhaps,  I  may  find  that 
even  the  bone  may  afford  me  nourishment." 
I  remember  reading  that,  in  cutting  down 
an  oak,  that  must  have  been  two  hundred 
years  old  at  the  very  least,  there  was  found, 
in  the  very  heart  of  the  oak,  a  musket  bullet. 
When  it  was  stated  to  the  peasants  and 
villagers  that  it  was  so,  they  said  it  must  be 
a  trick — that  the  woodmen  must  have  stuck 
it  in,  and  pretended  that  it  was  found  in  the 
oak.  But  when  men  of  science  and  practical 
knowledge  investigated  it,  they  found  it  was 
beyond  all  doubt  that  the  bullet  was  in 
the  very  heart  of  the  oak,  and  there  was  no 
opening  by  which  it  could  be  inserted,  and 
no  symptoms  of  a  rent  by  which  it  could 
have  been  admitted.  But  a  country  gentle- 
man in  the  place  turned  over  the  leaves  of 
his  history,  and  he  discovered  that  in  that 
very  forest,  when  that  tree  must  have  been  a 
mere  sapling,  a  great  battle  was  fought ;  that 
the  presumption,  nay,  the  certainty,  was,  that 
a  bullet  had  fastened  in  the  sapling  ;  that,  as 
it  grew  and  broadened  in  bulk,  in  size,  in 
form,  for  two  hundred  years,  it  had  grown 
over  the  bullet,  and  the  bullet  had  come  to 
be  imbedded  and  inserted  in  the  very  heart 
of  it,  without  any  opening  by  which  it  could 
have  entered  in  past  times ;  and  thus  the 
difficulty,  that  perplexed  at  first,  became 
solved  and  easily  explained  by  further  and 
more  extensive  research.  In  the  same 
manner,  when  we  meet  with  difficulties  in 
Scripture,  when  we  cannot  explain  them  to- 
day, lay  them  up  for  investigation  to-mor- 
row ;  and  you  will  find  that,  as  we  grow  in 
light,  in  practical  experience,  in  research, 
in  study,  the  things  which  seemed  im- 
possible a  few  years  ago,  will  only  seem 
difficult  and  hard  to  be  understood  to-day, 
and  that,  in  the  course  of  a  year  or  two,  all 
will  be  so  plain  that  a  wayfaring  man  can 
understand  it,  and  need  not  err  therein. — 
Dr.  Cumminff. 


215 


THE   FIRST   EPISTLE   GENERAL   OF 

JOHN. 


INTEODUCTION. 

The  earliest  Christian  traditions  ascribe  the  authorship  of  five  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment books  to  the  apostle  John — the  gospel,  three  epistles,  and  the  book  of 
Revelation.  The  burden  of  proof  rests  on  those  who  doubt  or  deny  the 
Johannine  authorship  of  either  one  of  them.  Eusebius  regards  the  authorship 
of  this  first  epistle  as  undisputed.  It  is,  however,  remarkable  that  the  author's 
name  is  not  given  in  either  the  gospel  or  the  epistles,  and  that,  although  the 
name  John  is  found  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  it  is  not  so  given  as  to  make  us 
absolutely  sure  that  the  apostle  John  is  referred  to. 

Our  confidence  in  the  Johannine  authorship  of  the  first  epistle  really  rests 
upon  its  similarity  of  style,  phraseology,  and  thought  to  the  gospel.  And 
this  is  the  more  impressive  because  no  style  could  present  more  marked 
peculiarities  than  that  of  the  fourth  gospel.  The  similarity  deeply  impresses  a 
reader  of  the  English  translation,  but  it  is  much  more  striking  to  a  reader  of  the 
original  Greek. 

The  similarity  of  the  subject-matter  and  doctrine,  or  setting  of  the 
Christian  truth,  is  even  more  important.  "  The  epistle  appears  to  have  been 
intended  as  a  companion  to  the  gospel.  It  is  a  comment  on  the  gospel,  *  a 
sermon  with  the  gospel  for  its  text.'  References  to  the  gospel  are  scattered 
thickly  over  the  whole  epistle.  The  object  of  the  gospel  is  stated  in  John" 
XX.  31 — '  These  have  been  written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  God ;  and  that  believing  ye  may  have  life  in  His  name ' ;  and  the 
similar  object  of  the  epistle  is  stated  in  1  John  v.  13 — 'These  things  have  I 
wiitten  unto  you,  that  ye  may  know  that  ye  have  eternal  life,  even  unto  you 
that  beheve  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God.'  The  gospel  is  written  to  show 
the  way  to  eternal  life  through  belief  in  the  incarnate  Son.  The  epistle  is 
written  to  confirm  and  enforce  the  gospel,  to  assure  those  who  believe  in  the 
incarnate  Son  that  they  have  eternal  life.     The  one  is  an  historical,  the  other 

217 


INTRODUCTION.    EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :   /.  JOHN. 

an  ethical,  statement  of  the  truth.  Of  necessity,  both  writings,  in  stating  the 
truth,  oppose  error ;  but  with  this  difference  :  in  the  gospel  St.  John  simply 
states  the  truth  and  leaves  it;  in  the  epistle  he  commonly,  over  against  the 
truth,  places  the  error  to  which  it  is  opposed.  /  St.  John's  gospel  has  been  called 
/  a  summary  of  Christian  theology,  his  first  epistle  a  summary  of  Christian 
^,  ethics,  i  In  the  gospel  the  fundamental  doctrines  of  Christianity  are  given  as 
the  foundation  of  the  Christian's  faith ;  in  the  epistle  they  are  given  as  the 
/  foundation  of  the  Christian's  life.  To  sum  up  the  relations  of  the  gospel  to  the 
1^  epistle,  we  may  say  that  the  gospel  is  objective,  the  epistle  subjective  ;  the  one 
is  historical,  the  other  moral ;  the  one  gives  us  the  theology  of  the  Christ,  the 
other  the  ethics  of  the  Christian ;  the  one  is  didactic,  the  other  polemical ;  the 
one  states  the  truth  as  a  thesis,  the  other  as  an  antithesis ;  the  one  starts  from 
the  human  side,  the  other  from  the  Divine  ;  the  one  proves  that  the  man  Jesus  is 
the  Son  of  God,  the  other  insists  that  tho  Son  of  God  is  come  in  the  flesh.  But 
the  connection  between  the  two  is  intimate  and  organic  throughout.  The  gospel 
suggests  principles  of  conduct  which  the  epistle  lays  down  explicitly ;  the  epistle 
implies  facts  which  the  gospel  states  as  historically  true"  {A.  Plummei%  D.D.). 
As  to  the  plan  of  the  epistle,  but  little  can  be  said.  We  cannot  expect  from 
the  meditative  and  mystical  John  an  orderly  treatise  such  as  we  may  get  from 
the  logical  and  trained  intellect  of  Paul.  Such  a  man  as  St.  John  always  has 
certain  main  ideas,  and  these  decide  his  selection  of  subjects,  and  give  tone  and 
colour  to  his  treatment  of  them.  He  tells  us  what  he  feels,  rather  than  what 
he  thinks — though  we  should  recognise  that  thought  may  be  deep  and  real  when 
it  is  controlled  by  feeling.  ISTo  one  has  ever  given  a  satisfactory  analysis  of  the 
epistle ;  and  it  may  be  wiser  not  to  attempt  one,  but  to  divide  it  simply  under 
the  two  headings,  God  is  light,  and  God  is  love.  The  practical  applications  of 
the  first  truth  bring  to  view  what  our  "  walking  in  the  light "  involves  ;  and 
of  the  second  truth  what  privileges  and  obligations  attend  our  relation  to  the 
Divine  love,  as  the  sons  of  God. 

For  homiletic  purposes  the  following  general  outline  of  the  contents  may  be 
found  suggestive : — 

I.  The  true  nature  of  fellowship  with  God,  who  is  light  and  love,  requiring 
purity  and  holiness  (chaps,  i. — ii.  29). 

II.  The  blessings  and  duties  of  sonship.     The  privilege  of  adoption  demands 
the  corresponding  duty  of  conformity  to  Christ,  the  true  Son  (chaps,  iii. — iv.  6). 

III.  The  essential  bond  of  fellowship  and  sonship  is  love,  both  to  the  Father 
and  to  one  another  (chaps,  iv.  7 — v.  12).     {Oxf  Bible,  Ap.) 

Webster  says :  "  From  the  general  tenor  of  the  epistle,  it  is  clear  that  the 
integrity  of  religious  profession  had  been  destroyed  by  the  absence  of  Christian 
charity.  Moreover,  there  were  false  teachers,  who  endeavoured  to  overturn  the 
foundation  of  Christianity  by  inculcating  doubts  as  to  the  Divine  and  human 
natures  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  apostle  does  not  strike  one  by  one 
the  dangers  of  the  age,  but  strikes  at  the  root  of  them  all  (chaps,  iv.  21,  v.  1). 
At  the  same  time  it  is  evident,  from  the  undoubtedly  polemical  tone  which  per- 
vades the  epistle,  that  the  apostle  had  in  view  some  special  antagonism  to  *  th/Q 
218 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN,    introduction. 

ttmth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.'  It  will  appear,  we  think,  that  this  was  substantially  the 
heresy  of  those  early  Gnostics  known  as  the  Docetse,  who  denied  the  reaHty  of 
,  Christ's  human  nature,  considering  His  flesh  and  blood  to  be  a  mere  illusory 
appearance  (see  1  John  ii.  22,  iv.  3 ;  2  John  7);  for  though  the  idealistic  philosophy 
of  the  Docetae  was  not  fully  developed  before  the  second  century,  its  germ  existed 
in  the  apostolic  age." 

BengeVs  view  of  the  writer's  design  is  thus  given  :  "  Id  agit  ut  beata  et  sancta 
cum  Deo  et  Jesu  Christo  communio  fidelium  confirmetur." 

The  Gnosticism  of  St.  John's  Later  Life. 

The  principal  points  in  which  Gnosticism,  in  the  closing  days  of  St.  John's 
life,  had  departed  from  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  were  (1)  in  its  doctrine  of  the 
person  of  Christ  and  of  God,  and  (2)  in  its  doctrine  of  sensual  sinlessness.  The 
latter  point  is  dealt  with  by  the  apostle  mainly  in  his  first  epistle,  the  former 
mainly  in  his  gospel.  To  this,  therefore,  we  here  confine  ourselves.  According 
to  the  Gnostics  (of  whom  Hymenajus,  Philetus,  Nicolas,  and  Cerinthus  may  be 
taken  as  types),  God  was  in  His  essence  far  too  exalted,  pure,  and  spiritual  ever 
to  come  directly  into  contact  with  matter  in  any  form.  Whatever  He  did  in 
the  way  of  creation,  providence,  etc.,  was  done  through  the  instrumentality  of 
an  inferior  being,  a  demiurge.  God  Himself  was  an  inapproachable,  inactive, 
quiescent  Being,  interfering  in  no  respect  with  mundane  or  material  affairs. 
Certainly,  then,  God  was  not  incarnate  in  Christ.  A  Divine  emanation,  a 
Spirit  of  God,  no  doubt  rested  on  Christ,  descending  upon  Him,  however,  not  at 
His  birth,  but  at  His  baptism —  Jesus,  up  to  this  time,  having  been  simply  a  man. 
In  their  further  view  of  Christ's  life  the  Gnostics  were  divided.  Some  held  that 
from  the  time  of  His  baptism  the  human  nature  of  Christ  was  a  mere  appear- 
ance or  phantom,  so  that  it  was  only  jn  appearance  that  He  suffered,  died,  and 
rose  again.  Others  held  that  the  man,  Jesus  did  indeed  truly  suffer,  die,  and 
rise  again,  but  not  the  Christ — since,  according  to  them,  the  Divine  Spirit  was 
not  personally  united  to  Him,  but  only  acted  through  Him  as  occasion  requii'ed, 
and  had  no  part  whatever  in  those  weaknesses  and  contingencies  (as  weariness, 
hunger,  pain,  and  death)  which  belonged  to  His  manhood.  In  all  these  things, 
therefore,  it  was  not  the  Christ  that  suffered,  but  simply  the  man  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  (G.  Waringion). 

It  is  not  easy  to  define  Gnosticism.  It  was  a  sort  of  philosophy  of  religion. 
We  may  describe  it  as  a  series  of  imaginative  speculations  respecting  the  origin  of 
the  universe,  and  its  relation  to  the  supreme  Being.  It  had  in  the  main  two 
ground  principles  which  run  through  all  the  bewildering  varieties  of  Gnostic 
systems:  1.  The  supremacy  of  the  intellect,  and  the  superiority  of  enlighten- 
ment to  faith  and  conduct.  This  is  the  Greek  element  in  Gnosticism.  2.  The 
absolutely  evil  character  of  matter  and  everything  material.  This  is  the 
Oriental  element. 

The  historical  and  moral  character  of  the  gospel,  which  brings  it  within  the 
reach  of  the  humblest  intellectual  power,  was  set  on  one  side  as  valueless,  or 

219 


INTRODUCTION.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 

fantastically  explained  away.  Spiritual  excellence  was  made  to  consist,  not  in  a 
holy  life,  but  in  knowledge  of  an  esoteric  kind,  open  only  to  the  initiated  who 
"knew  the  depths,"  and  could  say,  "  This  is  profound"  {A,  Plumnier,  D.D.), 

John,  the  Beloved  Apostle. 

Peter,  James,  John,  and  Andrew  formed  the  first  group  of  men  in  the 
apostoHc  body ;  but  Peter's  strong  personality  dominated  the  group,  so  that  it  is 
difiicult  to  reaHse  the  marked  individuality  of  the  others.  Of  Andrew  we  know 
virtually  nothing.  Of  James  we  know  nothing  personally  except  his  martyrdom 
by  Herod ;  he  is  always  associated  with  John,  and  seems  to  have  been  the  elder 
brother.  John  is  remarkable  for  his  modesty,  his  gentle  and  retiring  disposition. 
He  was  present  at  the  greater  scenes  of  our  Lord's  life.  But  in  no  case  does  he 
ever  press  to  the  front,  and  no  words  spoken  by  him  appear  to  be  recorded,  save 
his  asking  the  Master  to  indicate  the  betrayer.  Even  in  the  early  Church  John 
keeps  in  the  background,  and  in  the  gospel  he  is  assumed  to  have  written  he 
never  separately  mentions  his  own  name.  This  fact  may  help  to  explain  why 
Jesus  called  the  two  brothers  "  Sons  of  Thunder."  James,  the  elder  brother,  was 
the  man  with  the  spirit  of  the  zealot,  who  gave  the  family  characteristic ;  and 
the  name  marks  his  person  aHty  rather  than  that  of  John. 

But  though  keeping  ever  in  the  background,  John  belongs  to  the  first  gr-oup, 
by  a  very  subtle  power  of  leadership,  which  often  characterises  men  of  his  type. 
His  influence  is  recognisable  everywhere  ;  it  even  affected  his  Divine  Master ;  it 
was  very  powerful  on  Peter,  his  friend  ;  it  toned  the  relations  of  the  whole 
apostolic  company.  To  a  surface  view  Peter  is  the  dominant  spirit ;  but  he 
really  is  not.  He  is  swayed  more  than  he  knows  by  John.  To  a  deeper 
view  John  is  the  dominant  spirit — the  man  with  the  personal  fascination  which 
everybody  felt,  to  which  everybody  yielded.  That  personal  power  explains 
the  beautiful  traditions  which  have  gathered  round  his  story.  Peter  was 
the  man  of  action  ;  James  was  the  man  of  energy ;  John  was  the  man  of 
motives,  who  inspired  action,  toned  energy,  and  ennobled  all  relations. 

It  is  strange  that  we  should  feel  to  know  John  so  well,  seeing  that  we 
can  get  so  little  material  on  which  to  form  our  judgment  of  him.  We  can 
never  get  John  alone.  We  can  never  even  get  him  alone  with  his  Master. 
Probably  our  ideas  of  him  are  mainly  formed  from  the  impression  which  the 
gospel  and  epistles  which  bear  his  name  produce  upon  us;  but  partly  also 
from  the  loving  traditions  which  have  been  preserved  concerning  him.  It  may 
be  well  to  see  how  scanty  our  materials  are.  1.  In  the  synoptic  gospels 
there  is  no  more  than  the  mention  of  his  name,  his  relation  to  Zebedee,  his 
partnership  with  Simon,  and  his  presence,  with  James  and  Peter,  at  the  house 
of  Jairus,  at  the  Transfiguration,  and  in  Gethsemane.  In  none  of  these 
cases  is  he  stated  to  have  said  or  done  anything  that  could  specially  reveal 
him  to  us.  He  was  with  his  brother  when  the  man  was  forbidden  to  preach 
Christ  if  he  did  not  follow  Him,  and  when  the  request  was  made  that  a 
judgment  of  fire  should  come  on  the  Samaritan  village ;  but  these  things  were 
220 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN,    introduction. 

in  the  mood  of  the  zealot  James,  rather  than  of  the  gentle  and  sympathetic 
John.  The  chief  impression  we  get  from  the  synoptic  gospels  is  that 
John  always  kept  behind  his  brother,  and  let  him  speak,  just  as  after- 
wards, in  the  early  Church,  he  kept  behind  his  friend  Peter,  and  let  him 
speak. 

In  the  fourth  gospel  a  person  is  named  as  the  **  disciple,"  "  another  disciple," 
"  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,"  "  who  also  leaned  on  His  breast,"  and  it 
is  assumed  that  this  is  the  modest  way  in  which  John  alludes  to  himself. 

In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  John  is  never  referred  to  save  as  associated 
with  Peter.  Paul  only  mentions  him  with  James  and  Cephas,  as  the  three 
who  seemed  to  be  "  pillars  "  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem.  No  name  is  signed 
to  the  gospel;  the  first  epistle  does  not  begin  with  a  name,  or  within  its 
limits  indicate  an  authorship ;  the  second  and  third  epistles  give  the  writer 
only  the  vague  name  of  the  "  elder " ;  and  the  book  of  Revelation  helps  us 
very  little,  for  the  writer  does  not  call  himself  *'  John  the  apostle,"  but  only 
"John,  who  also  am  your  brother." 

It  is  so  remarkable,  and  it  is  the  evidence  of  a  strong  personality,  that, 
though  the  notices  of  him  are  so  limited  and  unsatisfactory,  he  nevertheless 
has  impressed  himself  so  strongly  on  the  Christian  mind  that  we  feel  to 
know  John  quite  as  well  as  we  know  Peter. 

One  of  the  gravest  discussions  of  modern  Biblical  criticism  concerns  the 
authorship  of  the  fourth  gospel  and  the  three  epistles.  What  will  satisfy 
most  Bible  readers  is  the  manifest  harmony  of  tone,  thought,  and  feeling 
between  these  writings,  and  the  apostle  of  whom  it  could  be  said  as  a  character- 
istic, "Jesus  loved  him,  and  he  leaned  on  His  breast."  Whether  John  wrote 
the  book  of  Revelation  need  not  now  be  considered.  If  he  did,  the  mood  he 
was  in  was  a  peculiar  one ;  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  John's  character  has 
been  misjudged,  because  he  has  been  too  much  mixed  up  with  his  brother 
James,  and  because  he  has  been  supposed  to  have  written  the  highly  imaginative 
and  difiicult  book  of  Revelation.  Such  misjudgments  may  be  detected  in 
what  is,  on  the  whole,  the  very  suggestive  and  revealing  estimate  of  Dean 
Farrar :  "  St.  John  and  St.  Peter — the  one  the  symbol  of  the  contemplative, 
the  other  of  the  practical,  life — are  undoubtedly  the  grandest  and  most  attractive 
figures  in  the  apostolic  band.  The  character  of  St.  John  has  been  often 
mistaken.  Filled  as  he  was  with  a  most  Divine  tenderness — realising  as  he  did 
to  a  greater  extent  than  any  of  the  apostles  the  full  depth  and  significance  of 
our  Lord's  new  commandment — rich  as  his  epistles  and  his  gospel  are  with 
a  meditative  and  absorbing  reverence — dear  as  he  has  ever  been  in  consequence 
to  the  heart  of  the  mystic  and  the  saint — yet  he  was  something  indefinitely  far 
removed  from  that  effeminate  pietist  which  has  furnished  the  usual  type  under 
which  he  has  been  represented.  The  name  Boanerges,  or  '  Sons  of  Thunder,' 
which  he  shared  with  his  brother  James ;  their  joint  petition  for  precedence  in 
the  kingdom  of  God;  their  passionate  request  to  call  down  fire  from  heaven 
on  the  offending  village  of  the  Samaritans  ;  the  burning  energy  of  the  patois  in 
which  the  Apocalypse  is  written ;  the  impetuous  horror  with  which,  according 

221 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 

to  tradition,  St.  John  recoiled  from  the  presence  of  the  heretic  Cerinthus, — all 
show  that  in  him  was  the  spirit  of  the  eagle,  which,  rather  than  the  dove,  has 
been  his  immemorial  symbol.  And  since  zeal  and  enthusiasm  have  ever  been 
indispensable  instruments  in  spreading  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  doubtless  it 
was  the  existence  of  these  elements  in  his  character,  side  by  side  with  tenderness 
and  devotion,  which  endeared  him  so  greatly  to  his  Master,  and  made  him 
*  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved.'  The  wonderful  depth  and  power  of  his 
imagination  ;  the  rare  combination  of  contemplativeness  and  passion,  of  strength 
and  sweetness,  in  the  same  soul ;  the  perfect  faith  which  inspired  his  devotion, 
and  the  perfect  love  which  precluded  fear, — these  were  the  gifts  and  graces 
which  rendered  him  worthy  of  leaning  his  young  head  on  the  bosom  of  his 
Lord." 

Such  a  combination  is  certainly  unusual  and  almost  unnatural ;  and  it  may 
well  be  doubted  whether  this  is  the  kind  of  strength  that  was  a  characteristic 
of  John.  The  gentle -spirited,  loving  man  is  generally  weak  when  he  attempts 
to  do  the  impulsive  and  energetic.  His  power  lies  in  steady  and  persistent 
influence  rather  than  in  sudden  efforts.  His  is  a  personal  force,  related  to 
what  he  is  rather  than  to  what  he  does ;  and  when  John  was  freed  from  the 
association  of  his  zealot  brother,  and  was  his  simple  self,  there  is  no  sign 
whatever  of  the  zealot  spirit  in  him.  He  was  a  strong  man,  a  born  leader  ; 
but  he  was  not  strong  as  Peter  was  strong,  or  as  James  was  strong,  though 
both  Peter  and  James  felt  his  strength,  the  strength  of  the  moisture  that 
sunders  the  cliffs  against  which  the  huge  waves  dash  themselves  in  vain. 

Of  the  traditions  that  have  been  preserved  concerning  him,  the  most 
characteristic  and  revealing  one  is  that  which  relates  how,  toward  the  very 
I  end  of  his  life,  when  he  was  so  infirm  that  he  had  to  be  carried  to  the 
I  church,  and  was  too  weak  to  preach,  he  used  to  say  no  more  than  this, 
*  "  Little  children,  love  one  another."  His  hearers  at  last  wearied  of  this,  and 
said,  "  Master,  why  dost  thou  always  say  this  ? "  "  It  is  the  Lord's  com- 
mand," he  replied ;   "  and  if  this  alone  is  done,  it  is  enough." 

This  estimate  of  John  can  be  fully  sustained  if  we  separate  him  from  his 
brother,  and  then  see  how  he  reveals  himself  to  us  (1)  in  his  associations  with 
Jesus;  (2)  in  his  friendship  with  Peter;  and  (3)  in  his  gospel  and  epistles, 
regarded  as  the  work  of  his  advanced  life. 

I.  John  reveals  himself  to  us  in  his  associations  with  Jesus. — We  might  call 
him  the  silent,  receptive  disciple,  and  class  him  with  Mary  of  Bethany,  who 
"  sat  at  Jesus'  feet,  and  heard  His  words,"  helping  Jesus  so  much  by  those 
uplifted  eyes — those  "homes  of  silent  prayer" — and  that  sweet  receptivity  which 
can  always  draw  out  from  a  man  his  very  best.  Jesus  could  talk  to  John,  for 
John  did  not  want  to  talk.  What  Jesus  said  to  him  he  knew  John  would 
treasure,  not  in  his  mere  memory,  but  in  an  altogether  safer  place,  in  his  heart. 
John  never  wanted  to  discuss  things  ;  he  was  no  critic,  and  no  theologian ;  he 
wanted  to  think  over  things,  to  brood  over  things ;  and  by-and-by  he  would  be 
able  to  tell  you  them  all  again,  with  a  strange  and  most  attractive  personal 
glow  upon  them.  John  was  the  kind  of  student  whom  the  teaching -master  is 
222 


/  cl 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I,  JOHN,    introduction. 

sure  to  love ;  and  he  is  the  student  who  always  gets  the  best  of  the  Master's 
work.  It  is  no  wonder  that  this  disciple  Jesus  loved.  Jesus  felt  that  personal 
fascination  of  the  gentle,  thoughtful,  loving  John  just  as  every  one  else  did.  And 
we  may  be  quite  sure  that  many  a  considerate  little  attention  was  paid  to  Jesus 
by  one  who  watched  him  day  by  day  with  so  much  thoughtful  love.  There 
was  established  a  special  confidence  between  them.  There  must  have  been  many 
a  whispering,  and  many  a  revealing  sign,  before  John  could  have  ventured  to 
put  down  his  head  that  day  on  his  Lord's  shoulder,  and  gently  say,  ''  Lord, 
which  is  he  that  betrayeth  Thee  ? " 

That  was  a  much  more  simple  thing  to  do  than  we  are  wont  to  assume. 
Strangely  indeed  it  is  supposed  that  intensely  patriotic  and  bigoted  Jews  adopted 
the  Roman  triclinia  for  the  most  sacred  rite  of  their  religion  ;  and  it  has  been 
a  sore  puzzle  to  explain  how  a  man  reclining  on  a  couch  could  lay  his  head 
on  his  neighbour's  breast.  Leonardo  da  Vinci  pictures  the  disciples  sitting  on 
forms  beside  a  long  and  narrow  table,  and  then  it  must  have  been  a  very 
conspicuous  thing  for  John  to  lean  on  his  Master's  bosom.  But,  of  course, 
the  Jews  kept  the  Passover  Feast  in  Jewish  style,  seated  on  their  feet,  on  mats 
that  were  arranged  on  the  floor,  round  a  small  low  table ;  and  then  it  was  the 
simplest  thing  possible  for  a  neighbour  to  put  down  his  head  on  his  neighbour's 
shoulder  ;  and  this  was  what  John  did.  A  simple,  beautiful,  revealing  incident, 
that  shows  the  Master  to  us,  and  shows  us  John.  John  was  one  of  those  men 
who  call  out  love,  who  can  be  loved,  who  can  help  others  by  letting  them  love 
him,  and  who  can  responsively  meet  love  with  love. 

Do  we  sufficiently  realise  that  we  serve  Christ  and  our  fellows,  in  the  sweetest 
and  most  gracious  way,  just  by  being  lovable,  and  making  every  one  love  us  ? 
John  served  Jesus  as  no  other  person,  except  Mary  of  Bethany,  ever  did,  by 
drawing  out  towards  him  his  Lord's  personal  affection.  John  never  knew  what 
a  comfort  and  help  that  lovingness  of  his  always  was  to  the  Lord.  We  are 
constantly  talking  about  what  we  can  do  for  Christ,  and  urging  one  another  to 
do  something,  or  something  more.  And  we  miss  seeing  that  to  he  gentle,  loving, 
sympathetic,  and  receptive,  as  John  was,  serves  Christ  even  better  than  our 
doings  in  His  service.  To  he  attractive  to  Him,  so  that  He  can  find  personal 
pleasure  in  us — do  we  think  enough  of  that  ?  Yet  of  that  the  beloved  John  is 
the  great  example. 

II.  John  reveals  himself  in  his  friendship  with  Peter. — It  was  a  case  of 
pure  and  helpful  friendship,  that  was  as  beautiful  as  the  familiar  friendship  of 
David  and  Jonathan.  There  must  have  been  basal  likenesses  in  the  two  men 
to  make  the  friendship  possible.  There  must  have  been  marked  differences  in 
order  to  make  the  friendship  interesting,  and  mutually  helpful.  They  became 
friends  when  working  at  the  fishing  together  ;  and  if  we  may  read  their  friend- 
ship by  the  light  of  similar  cases,  we  should  say  that  John  influenced  Peter 
much  more  powerfully  than  Peter  influenced  John.  The  matured  and  restrained 
character  is  always  more  influential  than  the  impulsive ;  and  there  is  a  secret 
leading  which  is  altogether  more  powerful  than  the  self- asserting  man  can  ever 
gain.     In  this  friendship  John  never  appears  prominent,  and  never  has  much 

223 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN, 

to  say  ;  but  it  is  easy  to  read  between  the  lines,  and  trace  the  power  he  exerted 
on  his  friend.  Nothing  could  be  more  tender  and  gracious  than  his  ways  at  the 
time  of  Peter's  fall.  He  had  secured  Peter's  admission  to  the  high  priest's 
palace;  so  he  felt  in  some  sense  responsible  for  the  temptation  which  over- 
whelmed him.  Peter  "  went  out  and  wept  bitterly  " ;  and  we  may  be  sure  that 
John  went  out  too,  and  helped  his  friend  in  that  time  of  humiliation ;  for  when 
Peter  is  introduced  to  us  again,  John  is  with  him,  and  their  friendship  seems 
closer  and  tenderer  than  ever,  so  that  Peter  even  can  forget  himself,  and  ask  the 
Divine  Master  what  blessing  He  has  for  his  friend.  It  would  even  seem  as  if 
that  hour  of  stern  experiences  had  so  deepened  the  spiritual  life  of  Peter,  that 
for  a  time  he  gained  an  unusual  power  over  John.  For  when  they  both  ran  to 
the  sepulchre  at  the  news  of  the  Eesurrection,  though  John  outran  Peter,  it  was 
Peter  who  found  the  courage  to  venture  into  the  tomb,  and  his  doing  so  drew  in 
his  friend  John.  It  was  an  unspeakable  blessing  to  Peter  to  have  such  a  friend 
as  John.  Peter  was  the  kind  of  man  who  must  not  be  interfered  with.  You 
must  let  him  talk,  and  yourself  say  nothing.  You  must  let  him  give  you 
advice,  and  never  attempt  to  give  him  any.  You  must  do  what  he  tells  you, 
but  never  tell  him  what  to  do.  And  John  was  the  kind  of  man  who  could 
constantly  interfere  with  Peter,  without  his  suspecting  it,  or  attempting  to 
resist. 

And  is  not  that  the  truly  invaluable  kind  of  friend  ?  He  never  humbles  us, 
but  he  is  constantly  keeping  us  straight.  His  very  presence  calms  us  :  we 
never  see  him  without  feeling  better  and  wiser.  Even  in  the  New  Testament 
records,  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  have  you  noticed  what  a  half-fear  we  have 
that  Peter  will  do  something  imprudent  if  he  is  alone  ?  We  do  not  feel  quite 
sure  of  him  even  at  Lydda  and  Joppa.  But  we  know  it  is  quite  right  if  John 
is  with  him.  That  is  the  revelation  of  a  character  and  disposition  in  John  which, 
when  repeated  nowadays,  secures  for  us  our  dearest  and  most  helpful  life 
friendship.  If  we  are  to  be  friends,  we  may  well  want  to  be  such  friends  as 
John  was. 

III.  John  reveals  himself  in  his  writings,  in  his  gospel  and  epistles. — On 
this  point  a  hint  or  two  may  be  given,  but  elaborate  treatment  is  impossible. 
He  was  altogether  remarkable  for  his  keen  insight  of  spiritual  things.  Paul  had 
the  masculine  characteristic,  and  loved  to  think  a  thing  out.  John  had  the 
feminine  characteristic,  and  saw  at  once  the  conclusion  which  Paul  laboriously 
reached.  Paul's  key-note  was  faith ;  John's  was  love.  Faith  reposes  on 
conclusions.  Love  grasps  persons,  and  imagines  all  lovely  things  as  associated 
with  the  person.  Or  we  may  say  that  to  Paul  faith  is  belief,  to  John  faith  is 
trust. 

That  spiritual  insight  brought  forcibly  to  John  three  truths.  One  of  these 
he  embodied  especially  in  his  gospel,  the  other  two  in  his  epistles.  It  was  in 
the  hne  of  his  characteristic  disposition  to  make  much  of  the  person  of  Christ. 
Christ  Himself  was  of  absorbing  interest  to  John.  He  delighted  to  think 
about  His  graciousness  and  about  His  mystery;  so  John's  gospel  touches  but 
lightly  what  Jesus  did,  or  what  Jesus  said,  save  as  His  sayings  revealed  what 
224 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN,    introduction. 

Jesus  was.  John  is  ever  trying  rightly  to  understand  Jesus  Himself,  and 
to  make  his  reader  understand  Him.  Godet  puts  this  distinction  somewhat 
skilfully  :  "In  the  mind  of  St.  Paul,  the  idea  of  salvation  predominates ;  in 
St.  John,  that  of  the  Saviour.  It  is  in  the  fact  of  deliverance  that  Paul  finds  the 
Liberator,  in  salvation  itself  that  he  discovers  the  Author  of  salvation.  In  the 
mind  of  John,  on  the  other  hand,  the  person  of  the  Liberator  takes  precedence ; 
salvation  is  to  him  only  an  emanation  from  the  Saviour,  Jesus  Himself  com- 
municating Himself  to  the  soul." 

Concerning  the  person  of  Christ,  what  John  saw  at  once,  and  saw  ever 
more  clearly,  was  the  double  truth  of  His  humanity  and  His  Divinity.  It 
would  seem  as  if  he  was  supremely  jealous  of  his  Lord's  veritable  humanity ; 
and  yet  his  gospel  is  a  series  of  holy  persuasions  of  the  truth  of  His  Divinity. 
John  brings  you  into  the  presence  of  his  Friend,  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus "  ; 
but  he  never  leaves  you  until  you  can  see  in  Him  what  he  can  so  plainly  see, 
the  "  Son  of  God  with  power."  To  John  the  Man  he  knew  so  well  is  ever 
"  manifesting  forth  His  glory,"  that  we  might  believe  on  Him. 

And  in  relation  to  the  person  of  Christ,  the  two  impressions  which  were 
deepened  by  advancing  years  in  the  apostle,  and  find  the  most  attractive 
setting  in  his  epistles,  were  the  stainless  purity  of  Christ,  and  the  deathless 
love  of  Christ.  That  purity  he  saw  to  be  the  inspiration  of  righteousness  in 
Christ's  disciples.  That  love  he  saw  to  be  the  inspiration  of  fellowship,  union, 
self-sacrificing  brotherhood,  in  Christ's  disciples.  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in 
Him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  "Truly  our  fellowship  is  with 
the  Father,  and  with  His  Son  Jesus  Christ."  "  He  that  loveth  God  love  his 
brother  also." 

We  have  been  brought  into  the  near  presence  of  a  delightful  man,  naturally 
amiable  in  disposition,  with  an  unusual  personal  fascination  that  everybody 
felt — a  man  with  natural  amiability  sanctified,  as  it  only  can  be  sanctified, 
by  the  closest  personal  fellowship  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  I  want 
to  be  sure  that  one  thing  is  pressed  home  on  all  our  hearts — that  about  one 
thing  we  are  all  set  thinking.  Character  brings  the  truest  nearness  to  Christ, 
and  the  fullest  revelations  of  Christ.  John  was  not  the  "  beloved  disciple  '* 
because  he  was  unusually  clever,  but  because  he  was  lovable.  We  often  think 
we  shall  never  really  know  Christ,  since  the  holy  mystery  of  Him  is  altogether 
beyond  our  mental  grasp.  John  teaches  us  that  Christ  is  best  apprehended 
by  the  sovl ;  that  if  we  are  in  any  degree  like  Him,  we  shall  be  able  to  see 
Him ;  and  that  the  more  we  are  like  Him,  the  better — the  more  clearly  and 
the  more  fully — we  shall  see  Him. 

And  this  character-apprehension  of  Christ  is  no  sign  of  weakness.  It  is 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  truest  moral  strength.  John  was  in  no  sense 
weak  or  sentimental.  You  must  be  feeling  that,  after  all,  John  was  the  really 
strong  man  of  the  apostolic  company — stronger  than  zealot  James,  stronger 
than  assertive  Peter,  stronger  even  than  intellectual  Paul.  Let  love  be  the 
key-note  of  character,  and  we  shall  nobly  minister  to  Christ  our  Master,  and 
strongly  influence  all  who  come  within  our  reach. 

Q  225 


INTRODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  L  JOHN. 


The  Peculiarities  of  St.  John's  Theology. 

Biblical  theology  undertakes  to  define  the  various  types  of  teaching  which 
are  found  in  sacred  Scripture.  It  aims  to  distinguish  each  type  as  sharply 
as  possible  from  every  other,  in  order  to  set  the  given  writer's  method  of  thought, 
and  style,  and  argument  in  the  strongest  relief.  No  type  of  New  Testament 
teaching  has  more  of  individuality  than  the  Johannine ;  none  has  charac- 
teristics at  once  more  marked,  and  more  difficult  to  define.  Prominent  among 
St.  John's  peculiarities  is  the  tendency  to  group  his  thoughts  around  certain 
great  central  truths.  In  the  gospel,  and  in  the  first  epistle,  his  thought 
moves  out  from  certain  formative  and  determining  conceptions  which  he  has  of 
his  subject.  The  prologue  to  his  gospel  is  designed  to  present  the  apostle's 
loftiest  conception  of  the  person  of  his  Master,  and  of  His  relation  to  mankind. 
So  the  epistle  opens  with  a  reference  to  eternity,  in  which  the  content  of 
the  gospel  message  was  stored  up  ready  to  come  to  the  world  in  Christ.  In  both 
cases  this  secret  of  God  which  is  to  be  disclosed  to  mankind  is  life  or  light. 
St.  John  grounds  the  work  of  Christ  in  His  person.  The  incarnate  life  of 
Jesus  is  the  "  transactional "  revelation  of  principles  and  forces  which  are 
essential  and  eternal  in  His  very  being.  His  bringing  of  Hfe  and  light  to  men, 
on  His  mission  to  earth,  was  grounded  in  the  larger  and  deeper  truth  that  He 
had  always  been  illumining  the  minds  of  men.  All  through  the  Old  Testament 
period  of  revelation  the  true  light  of  the  Logos  was  shining  into  the  lives,  not 
of  the  Jews  only,  but  of  all  men.  This  fact,  again,  was  based  on  the  essential 
nature  of  the  Logos,  who  was  with  God  in  the  beginning,  and  was  God.  But 
in  the  development  of  his  thought  St.  John  starts  from  this  last  and  highest 
point.  Thus  the  specific  Messianic  mission  of  Jesus  to  earth  is  grounded  in  His 
universal  relation  to  the  world  and  man,  and  this  relation,  in  turn,  is  grounded 
in  His  essential  nature.  In  accord  with  this  mode  of  thought  we  find  that  the 
action  of  God  is  always  conceived  of  as  springing  from  the  Divine  nature. 
What  God  has  done  in  revelation  and  redemption  it  was  according  to  His  nature 
to  do.  In  revealing  Himself  to  men  in  Christ  He  has  expressed  under  a 
personal  form  His  own  thoughts,  feelings,  and  will.  God  has  come  to  the  world 
in  Christ.  In  the  epistle  he  deduces  his  whole  teaching  concerning  the  nature 
and  demands  of  the  Christian  life  from  the  idea  of  the  ethical  nature  of  God. 

This  peculiarity  of  thought,  which  centralises  ideas  in  their  logical  source 
or  ground,  is  pervading  and  fundamental  in  the  writings  of  St.  John.  The 
apostle's  mind  penetrates  to  the  heart  of  things,  and  dwells  in  rapt  contempla- 
tion upon  those  deepest  realities  with  which  all  true  religion  is  mainly 
concerned.  Religion  is  altogether  a  matter  of  personal  relations.  It  is  God- 
likeness — fellowship  with  Christ,  sympathy  with  His  Spirit,  fraternal  helpfulness 
among  men.  His  treatment  of  the  truths  of  religion  is  intensely  ethical  and 
spiritual  ;  it  is  characterised  by  an  intense  sense  of  God.  To  St.  John  the  life, 
teaching,  and  death  of  Jesus  are  the  language  in  which  God  has  written  out 
most  plainly  His  deepest  thoughts  and  feelings  toward  mankind. 

Just  as  the  acts  of  God  flow  out  of  His  nature,  and  the  work  of  Christ  is 
226 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   1.  JOHN,    introduction. 

grounded  on  what  He  is,  so  the  acts  and  choices  of  men  are  determined  by  what 
the  men  are  in  their  fixed  preferences  and  character.  This  correspondence 
between  character  and  conduct  St.  John  does  not  conceive  after  the  manner  of 
philosophical  determinism  ;  he  treats  it  as  the  result  of  an  ethical  necessity.  It 
naturally  results  from  this  mode  of  view  that  man  is  regarded  as  a  unit  in  all 
his  powers  and  actions.  All  the  acts  of  a  man  involve  his  total  personality. 
To  know  the  truth  is  to  possess  it  as  a  determining  power  in  one's  life  ;  to  know 
God  is  to  be  in  harmony  and  sympathy  with  His  will.  Religion  is  life  after  the 
type  which  has  been  perfectly  exemplified  in  Jesus  Christ.  Neither  a  barren 
intellectualism  nor  a  dreamy  and  impractical  mysticism  in  rehgion  could  ever 
develop  along  the  lines  of  teaching  which  St.  John  has  marked  out. 

The  mind  of  the  apostle  seems  to  see  all  things  in  their  principles  and 
essential  ideas.  This  peculiarity  of  thought  gives  rise  to  a  species  of  realism. 
All  the  forces  of  goodness  are  comprehended  by  him  under  some  general  idea, 
like  light  or  truth  \  while  all  the  forms  of  evil  are  summed  up  as  darkness 
or  falsehood.  The  whole  course  of  history  illustrates  the  conflict  of  these 
opposing  powers  or  principles.  The  character  and  actions  of  men  correspond 
to  the  principle  which  sways  their  lives.  The  apostle's  habit  of  thinking  in 
antitheses  is  an  illustration  of  this  peculiarity  of  his  mind.  Accordingly,  his 
writings  are  characterised  by  a  species  of  dualism — not  the  metaphysical 
dualism  which  makes  evil  an  essential  and  eternal  principle  of  the  universe, 
but  a  moral  dualism  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  finds  illustration  in  human 
history  from  the  beginning  of  the  race. 

St.  John  conceives  of  religion  as  consisting  in  the  immediate,  personal 
relation  of  the  soul  to  God  or  to  Christ.  It  begins  with  an  impartation  from 
God.  To  be  born  of  God  means  to  receive  from  Him  a  communication  of 
spiritual  life,  whereby  the  soul  is  more  and  more  transformed  into  Christ - 
likeness.  To  the  mind  of  St.  John,  religion  signifies  the  progressive  attainment 
by  man  of  his  true  type  or  idea — not,  indeed,  by  efforts  of  his  own,  but  by 
his  appropriation  and  use  of  that  Divine  power  which  God  freely  bestows 
upon  him.     The  Christ-like  life  is  the  true  life,  and  the  only  life. 

Another  peculiarity  of  the  Johannine  theology  is  seen  in  the  way  in  which 
the  apostle  blends  the  religious  life  in  this  world  with  the  eternal,  spiritual 
order.  By  his  conception  of  eternal  life  as  a  present  possession,  he  unites 
this  world  with  the  world  to  come.  To  his  mind  the  spiritual  life  is  the 
heavenly  hfe  already  begun.  St.  John  has  given  us  a  purely  ethical  and 
spiritual  conception  of  religion.  The  whole  emphasis  is  laid  upon  the  inner 
quality  of  the  Hfe.  Nothing  is  said  of  institutions — not  even  of  the  Church. 
No  emphasis  is  laid  upon  sacraments. 

What  elements  of  Christian  doctrine  is  the  Johannine  theology  especially 
adapted  to  supply  ?  The  Johannine  type  of  thought  has  been  far  less  influential 
than  the  Pauline  type  of  thought  in  shaping  the  great  dogmatic  systems. 
The  Christian  doctrine  of  God  has  usually  been  developed  from  the  legal 
conceptions  of  His  nature  and  relations  to  men  which  underlie  St.  Paul's 
Jewish  forms  of  thought.     The   dominant  idea   of   St.   John   concerning  God 

-  227 


INTKODUCTION.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 

as  light  and  love  has  not  been  the  characteristic  or  central  conception  of 
the  prevailing  historic  theologies.  Christian  thought  concerning  God  has 
continued  through  all  the  centuries  predominantly  Jewish,  taking  its  colour 
from  the  terms  of  St.  Paul's  polemic  against  Judaism,  and  growing  more 
and  more  stereotyped  in  that  form  through  the  influence  upon  it  of  the  severe 
logic  of  certain  great  minds  of  a  strongly  legal  cast — such  as  Augustine, 
Calvin,  and  Grotius.  The  soteriology  of  the  Church  has  been  characteristically 
Pauline.  But  without  detracting  from  the  great  truths  which  Paulinism  has 
contributed  to  Christian  thought,  there  is  much  reason  to  desire  that  the 
spiritual  mysticism  of  St.  John  should  acquire  its  legitimate  influence  in 
theology  and  life.  The  tendency  of  an  increased  appreciation  and  application 
of  St.  John's  method  of  thought  must  be  to  lead  to  a  better  adjustment  of 
doctrine  and  life. 

Theology  is  theory ;  religion  is  life.  Theology  purports  to  be  the  intellectual 
equivalent — which  must  always  be  approximate  only — of  the  realities  of  the 
religious  life.  The  true  method  of  thought  respecting  theology  and  religion 
is  not  to  separate  them,  but  to  assign  to  each  of  them  its  true  function. 
There  can  be  no  reUgion  without  theology — unless  religion  can  be  divorced 
from  thought — since  theology  begins  with  the  simplest  efforts  of  the  mind 
to  construe  its  religious  ideas  and  experiences,  and  to  interpret  their  significance, 
ground,  and  end.     But  for  this  very  reason  theology  is  secondary. 

The  apostle  John  has  placed  in  the  foreground  of  all  his  teaching  the  realities 
of  the  religious  life — God  as  love,  man  as  needy — fellowship  with  God  through 
likeness  to  Christ,  as  eternal  life.  He  seems  willing  to  trust  the  religious  life 
to  give  direction  and  shape  to  religious  thought.  He  thus  places  at  the  centre 
what  by  its  very  nature  is  central  {George  B.  Stevens). 

Estimate  of  St.  John's  Peculiarity. 

We  shall  not,  we  think,  be  mistaken  if  we  say  that  the  profound  necessity 
which  filled  the  soul  of  John  from  the  first  was  the  desire  for  the  infinite. 
The  name  of  mat  de  Vinfini  has  been  given  to  that  nameless  desire  which 
consumes  sensitive  and  dreamy  natures  until  they  have  found  the  object  of 
their  aspirations.  From  St.  John's  writings  we  can  perceive  that  this  was 
the  necessity  of  his  nature  which  opened  his  soul  to  the  gospel.  It  is  not 
without  significance  that  the  word  "  life  "  is  the  dominant  one  in  his  writings. 
In  life  we  see  the  natural  vanity  and  emptiness  of  finite  existence,  saturated 
with  the  richness  of  infinite  being.  It  is  the  heart  of  the  creature  quenching 
its  thirst  with  peace,  with  hoHness,  with  strength,  by  immediate  access  to  the 
supreme  fountain-head.  It  is  man  lifted  to  God,  and  God  Uving  in  man. 
This  seems  to  have  been  the  ideal  of  John  from  his  youth. 

A  contemplative  and  reserved  nature  is  the  soil  in  which  poetical  or  philo- 
sophical geniuses  grow.  The  philosophic  faculty,  which  consists  in  the  power  of 
ascending  rapidly  from  each  individual  fact  to  its  general  principle,  is  evidently 
the  child  of  contemplation ;  and  the  poetical  mind,  which  is  quick  at  discovering 
228 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN.    iNTRODtJCTioN. 

at  once  the  concrete  image  in  which  the  abstract  idea  may  be  clothed  and 
embodied,  presupposes  the  habit  of  surrendering  oneself  to  a  meditative  reverie, 
of  which  the  only  aim  is  to  fix  more  firmly  in  the  mind  the  idea  with  which 
it  is  preoccupied,  and  to  give  it  a  body.  The  first  of  these  faculties  comes  out 
most  conspicuously  in  his  gospel;  the  second  in  the  great  Biblical  poem,  the 
Apocalypse.  In  the  former  every  manifestation  of  the  person  of  Jesus  is 
contemplated  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  eternal  and  spiritual  significance. 
Reading  this  narrative  with  attention,  we  feel  the  Divine  Word  throbbing  in 
ev^ery  fibre  of  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man.  Each  of  His  miracles  is  Hke  the 
illumination  of  some  one  of  the  aspects  of  His  dignity  as  the  Son.  The  various 
effects  which  are  seen  produced  around  His  path,  however  accidental  they  may 
seem  at  first  sight,  are  all  referred  to  their  distinctive  principles,  whether  in 
the  direction  of  good  or  evil ;  and  beyond  the  secondary  causes  we  can  always 
discover,  in  the  two  domains  of  light  and  darkness,  the  higher  cause,  God 
or  Satan. 

From  this  we  understand  why  it  is  that  his  polemics  against  heresy,  which 
are  naturally  not  found  in  the  gospel,  but  which  develop  themselves  in  the  first 
epistle,  should  be  summary  and  affirmative,  not  analytical  or  discursive — 
thundering,  such  as  to  befit  the  son  of  thunder. 

[The  points  of  view  of  the  four  great  apostles  may  be  thus  presented.] 
Entering  upon  the  course  along  which  the  Church  was  to  travel,  Peter  fixes 
his  eyes  upon  the  proposed  goal — that  is,  the  promised  glory  ;  this  was  the  point 
of  attraction,  the  originating  spring  of  the  movement.  James  simply  sketches 
the  route — holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  Paul  points  out 
the  entrance  into  that  route — personal  justification,  reconcihation  with  God,  the 
alone  Good,  apart  from  communion  with  whom  man  can  do  nothing.  John, 
lastly,  contemplates  this  whole  work  under  the  form  of  a  Divine  life  com- 
municated to  man  through  the  medium  of  righteousness,  with  the  view  to 
producing  holiness,  and  in  prospect  of  the  final  glory  (Godet). 


229 


CHAP.  1.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I  JOHN. 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE   FELLOWSHIPS  OF  THE  HOLY  LIFE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Veeses  1  to  4  are  introductory,  and  may  be  compared  with  the  prologue  of  the  gospel  by 
St.  John.  The  subject  of  the  epistle  is  "  the  Word  who  is  the  life  " ;  and  its  purpose  "  to 
complete  the  joy  of  the  disciples  in  the  Lord."  Westcott  thinks  that  St.  John  uses  the 
plural  we  as  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  apostolic  body,  of  which  he  was  the  last  surviving 
representative. 

Ver.  1.  From  the  beginning. — air  dpxv^,  neuter.  This  is  usually  taken  as  referring  to  the 
existence  of  Christ  from  before  the  Incarnation.  '•  The  Being  which  existed  from  the 
beginning."  But  it  may  be  the  simple  assertion  of  the  apostle's  competency  to  deal  with 
a  matter  of  which  he  had  information  at  first  hand  (compare  Luke  i.  2,  3).  "  From  the 
beginning  "  may  mean  the  beginning  of  Christ's  ministry.  St.  John  was  one  of  the  first 
disciples,  and  the  one  who  enjoyed  closest  intimacy  with  our  Lord.  The  first-hand  know- 
ledge of  the  apostles  gave  them  their  special  authority.  Of  the  Word  of  life. — Concerning 
Him ;  related  to  Him.  Genitive  with  preposition  TrepL  The  Word  which  is  the  Zife.  The 
Word  of  God,  and  Life  of  men.  Or,  the  Word  which  was  in  a  life.  That  human  life  which 
Christ  lived  was  His  word,  His  message. 

Ver.  2.  Manifested. — A  word  has  to  be  spoken  if  it  is  to  be  apprehended  by  others.  A  word 
that  is  a  life  must  appear  in  mortal  scenes  if  it  is  to  be  understood,  and  to  exert  a  gracious 
influence.  Manifested  is  made  apprehensible  by  human  senses.  Shew  unto  you. — Better, 
declare.  Eternal  life. — Divine,  spiritual  life.  The  word  "  eternal "  indicates  a  class  or  kind 
of  life.  The  time  figure  in  it  only  helps  to  the  realising  of  quality  or  kind.  R.V.  "the  life, 
the  eternal  life."  "  St.  John  tells  us  over  and  over  again  that  eternal  life  can  be  possessed  in 
this  world." 

Ver.  3.  Fellowship. — Kotvwvlav,  participation,  communion  in  privilege  and  blessing.  The 
special  theme  of  the  epistle ;  the  ruling  word.  "  It  generally  denotes  the  fellowship 
of  persons  with  persons  in  one  and  the  same  object,  always  common  to  all,  and  sometimes 
whole  to  each"  {Canon  Evans).  "  This  is  St.  John's  conception  of  the  Church  :  each  member 
of  it  possesses  the  Son,  and  through  Him  the  Father ;  and  this  common  possession  gives 
communion  with  all  other  members  as  well  as  with  the  Divine  Persons  "  (Plummer).  Our 
fellowship. — Oiir  is  emphatic.  It  is  precisely  that  fellowship  the  apostles  enjoyed  which 
they  wanted  the  whole  Church  to  share.     His  Son. — Greek,  *'  the  Son  of  Him." 

Ver.  4.  Your  joy.— Better,  "  our  joy  may  be  fulfilled  "  (compare  Phil.  ii.  2  ;  John  xv.  11, 
xvii.  13).  "  That  serene  happiness  which  is  the  result  of  conscious  union  with  God  and  good 
men,  of  conscious  possession  of  eternal  life,  and  which  raises  us  above  pain,  and  sorrow,  and 
remorse." 

Ver.  5. — The  first  part  of  the  epistle  begins  here.  It  is  directed  against  the  Gnostic 
teaching,  that  to  a  man  of  enlightenment  all  conduct  is  morally  indifferent.  In  every  age 
there  have  been  those  who  claimed  an  interest  in  Christ  while  living  in  sin.  St.  John  does 
not  address  sinners  generally,  but  distinctly  those  who  made  Christian  profession,  but  fell 
short  of  it  through  misapprehensions  and  self-delusions.  God  is  light. — This  is  not  merely 
the  absolute  fact  concerning  Him.  It  is  the  precise  fact  which  Jesus  Christ  declared  to  be 
the  first  of  truths.  "  We  have  heard  [it]  of  Him."  Christianity  is  founded  on  the  Divine 
holiness.     Light  is  the  sensible  figure  of  rectitude,  moral  purity. 

Ver.  6.  Walk  in  darkness. — Either  to  hide  what  we  do  not  wish  to  be  seen,  or  in  self- 
indulgent  ways  which  are  symbolised  by  darkness.  Plummer  says,  "  Some  Gnostics  taught, 
not  merely  that  to  the  illuminated  all  conduct  was  alike,  but  that  to  reach  the  highest  form 
of  illumination  men  must  experience  every  kind  of  action,  however  abominable,  in  order  to 
work  themselves  free  from  the  powers  that  rule  the  world."  See  2  Cor.  vi.  14.  "We  lie. — 
Either  in  self-deception,  or  in  wilfully  deceiving  others. 

Ver.  7.  One  with  another. — Fellowship  with  Christ,  which  involves  fellowship  with  the 
Father,  and  surely  brings  us  into  fellowship  with  all  who  have  the  same  fellowship.  Blood 
of  Jesus  Christ. — Omit  Christ.    The  Mood  is  as  truly  a  figure  as  the  light.     "  The  blood  is  the 

230 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chaf.  i. 


life."  But  it  is  the  surrendered  life.  There  was  no  actual  Kood  shed  in  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  that  can  in  any  sense  be  applied  for  cleansing.  There  is  no  general  declaration 
of  the  universal  eflScacy  of  Christ's  blood  to  cleanse  all  sin.  The  reference  here  is  strictly 
limited  to  professing  Christians.  Cleanseth. — Present  tense.  The  cleansing  work  is  con- 
tinually going  on.  Us. — Precisely  those  who  are  in  saving  relations  with  Christ,  but  fall  into 
sins  of  frailty  (Heb.  ix.  14  ;  Rev.  vii.  14).  It  is  not  the  pardon  of  sin,  but  purification  from 
sin,  which  is  here  associated  with  the  "  blood  of  Christ." 

Ver.  8.  Deceive  ourselves. — Lead  ourselves  astray. 

Ver.  9.  And  to  cleanse  us. — Notice  that  He  Himself  is  said  to  do  what,  in  ver.  7,  His 
Mood  is  said  to  do.     The  later  expression  helps  to  explain  the  earlier. 

Note  on  ver.  7  by  Eric  Haupt. — '*  Blood  and  life  are  in  the  Scripture  equivalent  terms : 
where  that  is,  there  is  this  ;  for  the  life  is  in  the  blood,  according  to  the  language  of  the  Old 
Testament.  Thus  then  the  Kadapia-fibs  aTrb  irdaijs  d^iapHa?  is  possible  only  in  consequence  of 
the  blood  of  Christ  entering  into  our  life  as  a  new  principle  of  life.  There  is  absolutely 
no  Christian  sanctification  imaginable  which  does  not  take  place  through  the  blood — that 
is,  through  the  Redeemer's  power  of  life  working  its  effects  and  ruling  within  us." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—4. 

The  Testimony  of  the  Apostles. — It  may  be  that,  strictly  speaking,  the  term 
"  apostle  "  means  no  more  than  "  sent  one,"  and  is  sufficiently  represented  by  our 
term  "  missionary  "  ;  but  it  is  evident  that  it  was  used  in  the  early  Church  both 
in  a  general  and  in  a  special  sense.  It  is  applied  to  missionaries,  such  as 
Barnabas  and  Silas  ;  but  it  is  also  the  precise  designation  of  twelve  men  who 
had  been  in  daily  personal  relations  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  commonly 
received  idea  of  an  apostle  was  indicated  by  St.  Peter  in  the  upper  room,  when 
he  suggested  the  filling  up  of  the  place  of  Judas  :  "  Of  the  men  therefore  which 
have  companied  with  us  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  went  out 
among  us,  beginning  from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto  the  day  that  He  was 
received  up  from  us,  of  these  must  one  become  a  witness  with  us  of  His  resurrec- 
tion." And  St.  Paul  rests  his  claim  to  apostleship  on  the  fact  that  he  also  had 
actually  seen  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  had  received  direct  communications  from  Him 
(Gal.  i.  11-17).  The  writer  of  this  epistle  does  not  give  his  name;  probably 
there  was  no  occasion  for  him  to  do  so,  as  he  was  well  known  in  the  Churches, 
and  the  harmony  between  the  letter  and  his  teachings  was  at  once  and  fully 
recognised.  He  claims  attention  to  his  message  not  on  purely  personal  grounds, 
but  on  the  ground  of  his  accurate  and  fiirst-hand  knowledge  of  the  things  of 
which  he  wrote. 

I.  The  competency  of  the  apostles  for  their  witness  and  their  work. — 
That  witness  concerned  the  earthly  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus;  that  work  was 
declaring  the  impressions  which  their  direct  relation  to  Christ's  earthly  life  had 
made  upon  them.  They  were  to  tell  men  that  their  personal  experience  had 
convinced  them  that  Jesus  was  Messiah,  Son  of  God,  God  manifest.  1.  They  were 
competent  through  their  se7?se-apprehensions  of  Christ.  Most  of  the  twelve,  and 
John  was  one,  had  known  Christ,  in  personal  discipleship,  from  the  very  beginning 
of  His  ministry,  and  all  had  been  with  Him  in  daily  intercourse  for  three  years 
up  to  the  sudden  and  violent  close  of  His  hfe.  They  had  the  testimony  of 
their  senses,  of  their  sight,  and  of  their  hearing.  They  watched  their  Lord  in 
His  varied  daily  labours,  and  nightly  devotions  and  restings.  They  knew  every 
characteristic  expression  of  His  face,  and  movement  of  His  hand.  They  listened 
to  His  mutiplied  teachings,  and  knew  well  the  differing  tones  of  His  voice. 
They  had  been  with  Him  in  the  many  moods  of  His  feeling — now  tender  and 
sympathetic,  now  intense  and  earnest,  now  mystical  and  dreamy,  now  reproach- 
ful and  severe.  If  ever  men  knew  a  fellow- man  through  sense-apprehensions  of 
him,  those  twelve  men,  and  St.  John  more  especially,  must  have  known  Christ 

231 


CHAP.  I.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


And  that  sensible  intimacy  gave  a  peculiar  force,  exactness,  and  persuasiveness  to 
their  testimony.  They  spoke  at  first  hand,  and  not  what  they  had  been  told, 
but  what  they  had  themselves  seen,  and  heard,  and  handled  of  the  Word  of 
life.  In  these  days  the  verification  of  everything  by  actual  experiment,  or 
sense -knowledge,  is  demanded ;  and  it  is  not  sufficiently  considered  that  precisely 
this  personal,  direct,  sensible  apprehension  of  Christ  the  apostles  had,  and  that  on 
our  own  conditions  of  acceptable  testimony  we  are  bound  to  receive  theirs.  They 
saw  with  their  own  eyes,  they  beheld,  their  hands  handled.  We  do  not  deal 
fairly  by  the  apostles  if  we  either  suspect  or  reject  their  testimony.  But  their 
relation  to  Christ  brought  them — 2.  Competency  through  their  mental  apprehen- 
sions. What  they  thus  daily  saw  and  heard  became  food  for  thought.  Thought 
fitted  the  new  facts  and  impressions  to  previously  possessed  knowledge,  and  the 
apostles  gradually  made  up  their  minds  that  Jesus  was  the  promised  Messiah, 
though  by  no  means  the  sort  of  Messiah  that  they  expected.  That  otherwiseness 
of  Jesus  became  increasingly  impressed  upon  them  as  they  came  to  know  Him 
better ;  and  gradually  they  came  to  fill  with  their  deeper  meanings  the  names, 
**  Son  of  man,"  and  "  Son  of  God."  Those  thinkings  were  genuine,  unbiassed, 
the  natural  workings  of  the  sensible  impressions  made  upon  them  in  their  daily 
intercourse  with  Jesus.  It  should  be  clearly  seen  that  there  were,  in  the 
apostles'  days,  no  doctrines  concerning  the  person  of  Christ  which  could  possibly 
bias  their  minds.  They  thought  simply  and  genuinely.  Indeed,  their  thinking 
even  surprised  themselves.  And  when  they  testified  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God,  they  uttered  the  personal  conviction  to  which  twelve  men  had  been  led  by 
thinking  on  a  series  of  facts  of  which  they  had  direct  and  exact  knowledge. 
Surely  if  any  men  ever  were  competent  to  make  a  testimony  about  anything, 
these  apostles  were  concerning  the  person  and  mission  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Yet 
this  is  not  all.  3.  These  apostles  had  an  unusual  and  direct  spiritual  illumina- 
tion, and  the  competency  to  render  their  testimony  which  belongs  to  men 
Divinely  inspired.  It  is  well  for  us  to  see  first  their  natiu-al  competency  as 
men,  and  then  their  supernatural  competency  as  inspired  men.  Their  Lord 
promised  them  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  giving  their  witness  concerning 
Him,  and  the  sign  that  the  promise  was  fulfilled  is  found  in  the  baptism  of  the 
Day  of  Pentecost.  In  all  the  records  of  history,  can  any  man,  or  any- body  of  men, 
be  found  who  were  more  efficiently  and  satisfactorily  fitted  for  their  life-work 
than  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  St.  John  has  a  perfect  right  to  claim 
competency  in  dealing  with  the  Christian  truth. 

II.  The  one  truth  which  is  the  centre  of  the  apostolic  testimony. — Perhaps 
most  evidently  of  St.  John's  testimony,  but  as  really  of  St.  Peter's  and  St.  Paul's. 
It  was  the  double  truth  of  the  Deity  and  humanity  of  Christ.  "Declare  unto 
you  the  life,  the  eternal  life,  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  manifested 
unto  us."  It  is  not  with  sufficient  distinctness  seen  that  the  double  nature  of 
Christ  is  no  more  capable  of  proof,  satisfactory  to  the  human  intellect,  than  is 
the  being  of  God.  The  apostles  reached  the  conviction  of  the  Divine  humanity  of 
Jesus  through  their  close  personal  intercourse  with  Him  ;  it  was  the  impression 
made  upon  them  by  what  they  saw,  and  heard,  and  felt.  And  the  conviction 
of  the  Divine -humanness  of  Christ  never  comes  to  any  man  in  any  other  way. 
Let  any  man  now  come  into  close  personal  relations  with  Christ,  let  him  feel  the 
impression  which  Christ  always  makes,  when  He  is  permitted  to  come  fully  into 
the  sphere  of  a  man's  thought,  and  heart,  and  life,  and  he  will  surely  be  drawn 
to  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  and  will  bow  before  Him,  saying,  "  My  Lord,  and  my 
God."  "  St.  John  gives  a  twofold  utterance  concerning  the  object  of  his  publica- 
tion :  that  He  in  His  nature  is  eternal,  and  therefore  Divine ;  and  also  that 
He  descended  into  the  domain  of  human,  yea  sensible,  experience,  and  thus 
became  manifest,  so  that  He  became  known  in  a  perfectly  assured  manner." 

232 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 

"  The  eternal  life  is  described  as  something  enfolded  in  Christ  and  inseparable 
from  His  person  "  {Eric  Haupt). 

III.  St.  John  has  one  great  aim  in  rendering  his  witness. — "  That  ye  also 
may  have  fellowship  with  us  "  (ver.  3).  Fellowship  with  us  in  our  fellowship,  he 
means.  "  Yea,  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus 
Christ."  What  appears  to  be  in  St.  John's  mind  is  this — the  spiritual  apprehen- 
sion of  Christ  which  he  had  gained,  had  not  only  brought  him  closely  near  to  Christ, 
but  had  also  brought  him  closely  near  to  God,  nearer  than  anything  else  ever  had, 
cr  ever  could.  Realising  the  Sonship  of  Christ  glorified  God  to  him  ;  it  revealed  him 
as  the  eternal  Father.  Eealising  his  sonship  in  Christ  brought  him  the  delightful 
realisation  that  God  was  his  Father,  and  so  put  him  in  closest  and  dearest  rela- 
tion and  fellowship  with  Him.  And  then  St.  John  exclaims,  that  he  writes  this 
epistle  because  he  wants  his  friends  to  share  his  joy.  He  would  have  them  know 
Christ  as  he  knew  Him ;  then  they  would  share  with  him  the  fellowship  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son,  and  their  joy  would  be  full.  St  John's  testimony  as  an 
apostle  then  is  fully  trustworthy  ;  he  was  competent  to  the  work  of  giving  it. 
It  concerned  the  possibility  of  fellowship  with  God.  It  declares  that  he  enjoyed 
the  fellowship.  It  explains  how  he  came  into  it.  He  had  personal  intercourse 
with  Christ.  He  learned  the  mystery  in  Christ.  Through  His  humanity  he 
discovered  His  Divinity.  He  saw  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  The  vision  drew 
him  close ;  and  when  close  to,  for  communing  with  the  Son,  he  found  he  was 
communing  with  the  Father.  St.  John's  was  the  typical  experience  of  believers : 
they  apprehend  the  ''  Man  Christ  Jesus  " ;  they  find  in  Him  "  the  Son  of  God 
with  power  " ;  and  the  vision  of  the  Son  brings  the  vision  of  the  Father — the 
fellowship  of  the  Son,  the  fellowship  of  the  Father. 

SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND    SERMON   SKETCHES. 

Yer.    1.    The     Power     of    Personal  which,  in  another  sense,  every  Chris- 

Experience. — There    are    some    things  tian  teacher  may  have,  and  must  have 

that   can   only   be    effectively   known  for  efiiciency,  in  every  age. 
through  a  personal  experience  of  them, 

or  in  relation  to   them.      That   must  "Ver.    2.    Manifesting     the     Eternal 

be  so,  because  some  things  cannot  be  Life. — Manifesting  means  bringing  an 

apprehended   by   the   intellect   alone  ;  unseen,  spiritual  thing  into  the  realm 

they  must  be  known  through  feeling,  of  the  human  senses,  so  that  it  may  be 

The  highest  truths  of  religion  cannot  apprehensible  to  beings  who  are  placed 

be  grasped  save  by  intellect  fused  in  under  the   limitations   of  sense-condi- 

feeling.      It    has   often   been    pointed  tions.        But     manifesting    does     not 

out  that  a  man  cannot  know  evil  save  mean   that   the   spiritual   changes  its 

by   doing   it,   and   feeling   its  results,  nature,  and  becomes  material.     What 

And  it   is  certain  that   no  man  ever  is  meant  is,  that  the  spiritual  accom- 

can   know  Christ   until   he   has  come  modates  itself  to  our  sense -conditions, 

into  personal  relations  with  Him,  and  by  using  and  showing  itself  by  means 

has   experienced    what    He,    by    His  of  a  medium  which  makes  due  appeal 

grace,    can   do   in   and   for   him.     St.  to   the  senses.     Christ   is   a  spiritual 

John    claims   to    have    that    peculiar  and  unseen  Being,  but  He  is  manifest 

power   to  declare   truth,  and   to  per-  to   us    through   the    medium    of    the 

suade     others,     which     comes     from  "  Man    Christ    Jesus,"    who    is     the 

knowledge  gained  through  experience.  material  v^l  through   which   we  can 

It  is  a  power  which,  in  one  sense,  no  discern  the  spiritual  Being  that  He  is. 

Christian  teacher  can  have  had  since  He,  the  life,  the  spiritual,  the  eternal 

the  apostles'  days ;  yet  it  is  a  power  life,    was    manifested,    and   we    have 

233 


CHAP.    I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


seen  it.  Man  can  only  think  with 
words  which  are  really  figures  appre- 
hensible by  the  senses.  So  it  is  said, 
God,  who  cannot  be  seen,  is  seen,  is 
*'  manifest  in  the  flesh."  We  see  God 
in  the  human  Christ. 

Yer.  3.  Fellowship  with  the  Father. — 
There  are  three  stages  in  what  we 
may  call  the  higher  Christian  life. 
1.  Baptism  with  the  Spirit.  2.  Con- 
scious   vital    union     with    the     Son. 

3.  Fellowship  with  the  Father. 
Coming  to  God,  reconciliation  with 
God,  loving  God,  praying  to  God, 
hoping  to  be  with  Him,  are  all  blessed, 
but  they  are  not  fellowship. 

I.  The  access  to  God  which  is 
possible  to  the  believer  is  that  of 
close  and  abiding  fellowship. — The 
sense  of  the  Divine  reality  and  near- 
ness was  a  constant  experience  in 
Eden.  But  sin  altered  all  that.  It 
cut  us  off  from  God.  Our  Lord  came 
to  bring  us  back  to  God.  The  possi- 
bihty  of  human  fellowship  with  God 
is  shown — 1.  In  the  earthly  life  of 
Christ.  To  Him  the  spiritual  world 
was  always  near.  2.  By  God's  presence 
and  relationship.  3.  By  the  plain  state- 
ments of  His  word. 

II.  This  fellowship  is  the  supreme 
Christian  blessedness. — 1.  Think  of 
it  as  unspeakable  honour.  2.  As  per- 
manent satisfaction.  3.  As  progressive 
holiness. 

III.  This  supreme  blessedness  is 
to  be  enjoyed  in  Christ. — 1.  In  Christ 
we  have  the  right  of  approach  to 
God.  2.  In  Christ  we  have  the  per- 
sonal purity  needed  for  Divine  com- 
munion. 3.  In  Christ  we  have  the 
spirit  that  ever  rises  to    the  Father. 

4.  In  Christ  we  have  the  welcome 
with  God  that  He  has. — Charles  New. 

The  Mystery  in  Christ. — The  follow- 
ing profound  thoughts  struggle  for 
expression  in  these  four  opening 
verses.  There  is  a  Being  who  has 
existed  with  God  the  Father  from  all 
eternity :  He  is  the  Father's  Son ; 
He  is  also  the  expression  of  the 
Father's  nature   and   will.       He   has 

234 


been  manifested  in  space  and  time ; 
and  of  that  manifestation  I  and  others 
have  had  personal  knowledge  ;  by  the 
united  evidence  of  our  senses  we  have 
been  convinced  of  its  reality.  In 
revealing  to  us  the  Divine  nature  He 
becomes  to  us  life,  eternal  life.  With 
the  declaration  of  all  this  in  our  hands 
as  the  gospel,  we  come  to  you  in  this 
epistle,  that  you  may  unite  with  us 
in  our  great  possession,  and  that  our 
joy  in  the  Lord  may  be  made  com- 
plete.— A.  Plummer,  D.D. 

Our  Fellowship  in  Christ. — **  Fellow- 
ship" is  the  key -word  of  this  epistle. 
St.  John's  prevailing  idea  was  that 
Christianity  brings  men  together  in 
brotherly  helpfulness  by  bringing  them 
to  God.  He,  in  effect,  says  :  "  You  and 
I  may  be  in  fellowship  with  one  another, 
if  we  are  in  fellowship  with  the  Father 
and  the  Son.  I  would  help  you  to  get 
and  to  keep  in  that  fellowship."  When 
sin  entered  into  the  world,  it  spoiled 
man's  sonship  to  God,  and  his  brother- 
hood with  his  fellow- man.  He  who 
truly  loves  God  will  be  sure  to  love  his 
brother.  He  who  loses  the  love  of  God 
will  be  sure  to  find  his  human  fellow- 
ships breaking  up.  God  made  fathers 
and  mothers,  brothers  and  sisters  ;  but 
the  result  of  the  Fall  was  a  sort  of 
separation  between  Adam  and  Eve,  the 
parents,  in  the  first  generation,  and 
between  Cain  and  Abel,  the  brothers, 
in  the  second.  Gustave  Dore  represents 
Adam  and  Eve,  when  they  have  sought 
the  thick  shade  of  the  trees  to  hide 
away  from  God.  They  are  sitting 
apart  from  each  other,  self-conscious 
and  ashamed,  and  a  huge,  hideously 
shaped  trunk  of  a  great  forest  tree  is 
between  them,  a  fitting  symbol  of  that 
dreadful  thing,  self-will,  and  self- 
indulgence,  which  had  come  between 
them  and  God,  and  therefore  separated 
them  from  each  other.  The  evil  grew 
with  the  generations.  Men  built  cities 
to  protect  themselves  from  each  other. 
Brothers  made  much  of  "  mine "  and 
"  thine  "  ;  each  man  lived  for  himself ; 
and  then  man's  ruin  was  complete. 
Christ  came  to  restore  the  fellowship 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   I. 


of  man  with  man,  and  He  could  only 
accomplish  this  work  by  doing  another 
work  first — restoring  man's  fellowship 
with  God.  Christianity  brings  men 
together  as  nothing  else  does.  And  it 
attains  its  end  by  restoring  God's  family 
idea  for  man.  Parents  and  children 
must  help  each  other.  Brothers  and 
sisters  must  help  each  other.  Each 
member  of  the  family  must  live  for  the 
other  members  :  "  By  love  serving  one 
another."  No  redeemed  man  'Miveth 
unto  himself."  He  is  redeemed  from 
that  very  thing.  Dr.  George  Mac- 
donald  has  a  very  queer  and  dreamy 
character,  who  thinks  and  imagines 
most  weird,  and  quaint,  but  suggestive 
things.  In  one  of  his  dreams  he  seemed 
to  be  in  heaven,  and  it  was  just  like 
earth.  There  were  shops,  and  buying 
and  selling  were  going  on,  only  there 
was  no  money.  Everybody  simply  did 
his  best  to  serve  his  neighbour  for 
nothing.  The  wholesale  house  was 
served  by  the  manufacturer,  and  the 
retail  tradesman  was  served  by  the 
wholesale  house,  and  the  private  cus- 
tomer was  served  by  the  retail  trades- 
man. The  Christ-spirit  was  triumphant. 
There  was  no  need  for  money  to  buy 
service,  for  it  was  freely  given.  It  is 
a  striking  thing  that,  in  the  first 
enthusiasm  of  the  early  Church,  an 
effort  should  have  been  made  to  realise 
this  fellowship  of  mutual  service.  They 
kept  together,  and  lived  on  a  common 
fund. 

I.  Our  fellowship  in  Christ  is  based 
on  relationship. — It  is  "  with  the 
Father."  To  have  fellowship  with  the 
Father  clearly  means  that  we  are,  in 
all  the  joy  of  the  home  life,  fully  enter- 
ing into  all  the  privileges  of  our  rela- 
tionships. Where  a  father  dwells  is 
a  home;  by  his  presence  it  becomes 
a  home.  He  keeps  all  the  members 
together.  When  he  is  gone,  the  family 
is  scattered.  We  may  take  these 
earthly  associations,  and  let  them  help 
us  to  apprehend  our  relationships  with 
God.  We  are,  as  Christians,  not  a 
separated,  scattered  family ;  we  are  all 
with  our  Father.  We  are  at  home. 
We  are  sons  and  daughters,  brothers 


and  sisters,  in  the  actual  relations  of 
family  life  ;  and  our  Father  is  with  us. 
This  is  no  mere  doctrine  or  sentiment. 
"  Because  we  are  sons,  He  hath  sent 
forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  our 
hearts,"  and  in  the  home  life  we  are 
to  be  as  brotherly  and  helpful  to  one 
another  as  Christ  is  to  us. 

II.  Our  fellowship  in  Christ  is  based 
on  character. — When  our  attention  is 
directed  to  it,  we  can  plainly  see  that 
the  joy  and  unity  of  an  earthly  family, 
in  an  earthly  home,  depend  on  good- 
ness. Not  on  love,  or  on  numbers,  or 
on  abilities ;  but  on  character.  The 
one  thing  that  breaks  up  homes  is  lost 
characters,  not  calamity,  not  sickness. 
We  can  neither  have  fellowship  with 
the  Father,  nor  with  one  another,  un- 
less we  have  fellowship  with  the  Son, 
oneness  with  Him  in  thought,  feel- 
ing, spirit,  purpose,  character.  God 
smiled  out  of  heaven  upon  His  Son,  and 
said,  "  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom 
I  am  well  pleased  "  ;  and  it  was  Christ's 
character  with  which  He  was  pleased. 
Christ  bade  His  disciples  '^  follow  Him," 
and  He  did  not  merely  mean,  "  Attend 
upon  Me ;  come  after  Me ;  step  in  My 
footprints  "  :  He  meant,  "  Be  like  Me  ; 
do  like  Me ;  have  My  mind  ;  breathe 
My  spirit ;  work  My  work  ;  be  changed 
into  My  image ;  be  the  Father's  sons, 
acceptable  to  Him,  even  as  I  am."  St. 
John  says,  "Fellowship  with  the  Son," 
to  remind  us  that  the  spirit  of  sonship 
is  the  essential  to  fellowship  with  the 
Father,  and  with  each  other.  Out  of 
the  mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings  God 
perfects  praise.  A  story  is  told  of  an 
old  coloured  woman  in  Michigan,  known 
as  Sojourner  Truth.  Some  one  had 
spread  a  report  that  she  had  left  the 
fellowship  of  the  Church,  and  joined 
the  spiritualists.  One  of  the  village 
pastors  went  to  question  her.  *'  Who 
tole  you  dat,  chile  ?  "  said  the  old  lady. 
"  It  is  so  stated  in  the  newspapers,  and 
I  wanted  to  know  if  you  had  joined  the 
spiritualists."  Straightening  herself 
up  to  her  full  height,  and  bringing  her 
arm  down  like  a  blacksmith,  the  old 
woman  exclaimed,  "Bress  your  soul, 
chile,  dahs  TwtJien  to  jine  /     You  may 

235 


CHAP.  1. 


BOMtLETiC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


tell  all  the  people  that  *  ole  Sojourner  ' 
'long  to  Jesus  these  many  years.  She's 
as  true  to  de  Master  as  de  anvil  to  de 
hammer.  I  nebber  give  up  my  faith  in 
Jesus  for  anything  else."  The  fellow- 
ship of  Jesus  carried  with  it  the  fellow- 
ship of  the  Church. 

Yer.  4.  Joy  in  Higher  Truth. — A.Y. 
*'That  your  joy  may  be  full."  R.V. 
"  That  our  joy  may  be  full."  We 
may  perhaps  combine  the  two,  and 
read,  "  That  the  joy  may  be  full,  yours 
as  well  as  ours."  It  is  in  the  fuller 
and  worthier  apprehension  of  the 
person  of  Christ  that  St.  John  expects 
to  increase  his  own  joy,  and  the  joy 
of  those  to  whom  he  writes.  It  is 
often  pointed  out  that  the  increase 
of  knowledge  is  usually  an  increase 
of  sorrow.  It  is  apt  to  shake  down 
confidence  in  long -cherished  beliefs, 
to  separate  us  from  the  friendships 
and  associations  of  early  life,  and  to 
bewilder  us  with  ever-gathering  and 
ever-thickening  mysteries.  And  if 
that  is  in  any  sense  true  of  increasing 
knowledge  of  the  material  world, 
and  of  the  mental  and  social  life  of 
humanity,  it  is  certainly  much  more 
true  of  those  things  which  concern 
man's  spiritual  nature,  and  man's 
relations  as  a  spiritual  being  to  God 
the   great    Spirit.      Apprehension    of 


the  higher  philosophical,  theological, 
and  spiritual  truths  brings  with  it 
a  great  strain  on  feeling,  which  may 
even  be  called  "  sorrow."  Yet  this  is 
only  one  side  of  the  truth.  Advance 
into  all  higher  truth  is  attended  by 
delightful  excitement,  surprise,  and  joy. 
Positive  pleasure,  and  pleasure  of  the 
purest  and  best  kind,  is  felt  by  those 
who  learn  more,  deeper,  and  surprising 
things  concerning  the  phenomena  of 
life  upon  the  earth,  and  concerning 
the  marvels  of  the  heavens.  A  Newton, 
a  Faraday,  a  Darwin,  have  positive 
joy,  a  fulness  of  joy,  in  the  higher 
truth  of  fact  in  regard  to  the  material 
world  which  they  attain  day  by  day. 
And  the  same  may  be  said  of  the 
masters  in  philosophy,  and  in  history, 
and  in  art.  But  a  curious  idea  has 
come  to  be  established  in  relation  to 
religion.  It  is  boldly  assumed  that 
a  man's  religious  joy  will  be  in  pro- 
portion to  the  simplicity — the  childish- 
ness— of  his  grasp  of  the  eternal 
verities  that  centre  in  the  person  and 
manifestation  of  Jesus  Christ.  Men 
are  deterred  from  growing  into  the 
higher  truth  by  fear  of  losing  their 
joy.  St.  John  unfolds  the  higher 
mysteries  of  Christ,  in  order  that, 
thus,  men's  joy  might  be  filled  up 
full. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—10. 


The  Conditions  and  Privileges  of  Christian  Fellowship. —  St.  John  had  entered 
into,  and  was  enjoying,  the  "  fellowship  of  the  Father  and  the  Son."  That 
fellowship  he  wanted  the  disciples  to  enjoy  as  fully  as  he  did.  He  would 
therefore  have  them  worthily  estimate  its  privileges,  and  understand  the 
conditions  of  its  maintenance.  And  since  he  has  in  mind  the  particular 
character  of  the  mischievous  influences  to  which  the  disciples  were  then  exposed, 
his  instructions  exclusively  bear  relation  to  their  correction.  It  was  then  being 
freely  taught  that  to  the  spiritual  man  all  conduct  is  morally  indifferent — 
nothing  that  he  does,  in  the  bodily  and  material  spheres,  is  regarded  as  sin, 
nothing  breaks  up  his  fellowship  with  God.  It  is  manifest  that  such  teaching 
strikes  at  the  very  root  of  Christianity,  which  is,  essentially,  the  recovery  of 
men  to  righteousness,  and  that  not  a  sentimental  or  mystical  righteousness, 
but  a  real,  present,  practical  righteousness,  which  must  include  knowing  how 
to  "  possess  the  vessel  of  the  body  in  sanctification  and  honour." 

I.  The  absolute  condition  of  fellowship  is  perfect  righteousness. — This 
is  indicated  in  the  term  "  light,"  the  most  pure  and  unsullied  of  all  things, 

236 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  I. 


and  in  the  strongly  marked  contrast  between  light  and  darkness,  each  of  which 
absolutely  opposes  and  excludes  the  other  ;  there  can  be  no  conceivable  alliance 
or  accommodation  between  them.  God  is  represented  by  light.  That  only 
can  be  in  fellowship  with  Him  which  also  is  light.  Man's  self-indulgences 
belong  to  darkness,  and  make  darkness.  The  light  can  have  nothing  whatever 
to  do  with  them,  except  to  clear  the  darkness  away.  There  can  be  no  fellowship 
where  the  strongest  opposition  is  excited.  Illustration  may  be  taken  from 
the  Ormuzd  and  Ahriman  of  the  Zoroastrian  reform.  The  two  powers  are 
actively  and  persistently  opposed.  It  is  well  for  us  to  face  this  truth  as  openly 
as  possible.  The  full  relation  to  God  is  only  possible  to  perfect  beings — perfect 
as  He  is  perfect.  It  was  possible  to  the  one  righteous  Man,  the  sinless  Christ. 
It  is  possible,  fully,  to  no  other  man. 

II.  Perfect  righteousness  is  a  condition  unattainable  by  us. — It  is  to  any 
creature  who  is  only  a  creature.  But  that  perfect  righteousness  which  is  possible 
to  a  creature  is  not  possible  to  us  creatures,  because  our  race  has  to  carry 
the  burden  and  disabihty  of  sin.  We  can  never  have  fellowship  with  God  on 
the  absolute  condition  of  being  light  as  He  is  light,  perfect  as  He  is  perfect. 
St.  John  brings  out  clearly  this  distinction — though  we  cannot  be  actually 
lights  as  God  is,  we  can  will  to  be  light,  and  we  can  rnake  effort  to  be  what 
we  will  to  be.  We  can  "  walk  in  darkness,"  or  *'  walk  in  light,"  the  term 
"  walk "  implying  will  and  effort.  And  in  these  two  things  may  be  found 
the  only  righteousness  attainable  by  any  creature  while  in  limited,  earthly 
conditions,  and  affected  by  the  disabilities  of  a  sin-biassed,  bodily  nature.  The 
will  is  the  man ;  it  is  the  spiritual  being  acting ;  and  the  man  is  in  the  hght, 
if  his  will  is  firmly  set  for  righteousness.  Then  the  man  is  kin  with  God, 
and  can  have  fellowship  with  Him. 

III.  Christian  imperfections  have  to  be  taken  into  account,  but  they 
need  not  spoil  fellowship,  if  they  are  rightly  dealt  with. — St.  John's  teaching 
cannot  be  rightly  apprehended  unless  the  distinction  between  the  sin  of  the 
regenerate  man  and  of  the  unregenerate  man  is  fully  recognised.  The 
unregenerate  man  sins  as  the  expression  of  a  will  that  is  set  against  God. 
The  regenerate  man  sins  by  persuasion  of  bodily  frailty,  or  at  most  by  the 
temporary  hendiing  aside  of  his  will.  Christians  do  sin.  Their  sin  would 
disturb  fellowship.  But  the  liabiHty  to  sin  has  been  taken  into  merciful 
account,  and  due  provision  has  been  made  for  it.  1.  It  is  expected  that 
the  Christian  man  will,  by  confession,  clear  himself  of  all  suspicion  of  having 
his  vnll  in  his  sin.  2.  Then  God  will  entirely  forgive  the  sin,  and  remove  it 
as  a  hindrance  to  fellowship.  3.  And  even  more,  God  will,  in  the  power  of 
the  blood  of  Christ,  cleanse  the  Christian  from  all  the  evil  influences  of  his 
sin,  and  help  him  to  recover  the  power  which  he  must  have  temporarily  lost, 
or  he  could  not  have  yielded  to  the  sin.  The  condition  of  fellowship  with  the 
Light  is  our  being,  at  least  in  central  purpose,  also  light.  The  privilege  is 
a  gracious  provision  for  the  imperfections  which,  at  the  best,  attach  to  the 
human  Hght. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  5.   God  is  light. — Here  is  the  had  meant  angry,  malevolent  beings, 

essence  of  the  Christian  theology,  the  worshipped    best    by    the    secrecy    of 

truth  about  the  Deity  as  opposed  to  outrageous   vice;   to   the   Greeks   and 

all  the  ^imperfect  conceptions  of  Him  Romans,  forces  of  nature  transformed 

which   had   embittered   the   mir.vls   of  into    superhuman    men    and    women, 

the    wise.      To    the    heathen,    Deity  powerful   and  impure;   to   the  philo- 

237 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


sophers,  an  abstraction  either  moral  name;  (2) for  other  people's  sake,  since 
or  physical ;  to  the  Gnostics  it  was  they  cannot  but  misunderstand  Christ, 
a  remote  idea,  equal  and  contending  and  so  fail  to  realise  His  saving  and 
forces  of  good  and  evil,  recognisable  sanctifying  power,  if  we  who  bear  His 
only  through  less  and  less  perfect  name  misrepresent  Him.  But  the 
deputies.  All  this  St.  John,  summing  point  now  to  be  impressed  is,  that 
up  what  the  Old  Testament  and  our  there  must  be  harmony  between  pro- 
Lord  had  said  about  the  almighty  fession  and  conduct,  because  it  is 
Father,  sweeps  away  in  one  simple  absolutely  essential  to  a  man's  moral 
declaration  of  truth.  Light  was  God's  dignity  and  stability  that  he  should 
garment  in  Ps.  civ.  2 ;  to  Ezekiel  (chap,  be  consciously  true  to  himself.  Let 
i.  1),  the  appearance  of  the  likeness  a  man  permit  a  conscious  opposition 
of  God  was  brightness  ;  to  Habakkuk  between  profession  and  life,  and  the 
(chap.  iii.  8),  His  brightness  was  as  the  man  debases  himself.  Fail  to  be  true 
light ;  Christ  had  called  the  sons  of  to  self,  fail  to  be  consciously  at  har- 
God  children  of  the  light  (Johnxii.  36),  mony  with  yourself,  and  you  not  only 
and  announced  Himself  as  the  Light  become  slave  to  man,  but  slave  to  the 
of  the  world  (John  viii.  12) ;  in  the  devil,  who  finds  his  chance  when  the 
Hebrews  (chap.  i.  3),  Christ  was  the  supreme  concern  for  moral  consistency 
refracted  ray  of  the  Father's  glory,  is  destroyed  in  a  man's  soul. 
**  the  express  image  of  His  person  "  ; 

to    James,    the    Almighty    was    the  Walk     in     Darkness. — "The     word 

Father  of  all  lights  (chap.  i.   17)  ;  to  'walk'   expresses   not   merely   action, 

Paul,  He  dwells  "  in  the  light  that  no  but  habitual  action.     A  life  in  moral 

man  can  approach  unto  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  16);  darkness  can  have  no  more  communion 

to   Peter,   the    Christian   state   is   an  with  God,  than  a  life  in  a  coal-pit  can 

admission  "into  His  marvellous  light "  have  communion  with  the  sun.     For 

(1    Pet.    ii.    9).      These    ideas    John  *  what    communion    hath    light    with 

comprehends.      God   is   light.      Light  darkness  ? '  (2  Cor.  vi.  4).     Light  can 

physical,  because  (1)  it  was  He  who  be  shut  out,  but  it  cannot  be  shut  in. 

called  everything  first  out  of  darkness.  Some  Gnostics  taught,  not  merely  that 

and  (2)  from  Him  proceed  all  health  to    the    illuminated   all    conduct   was 

and     perfection.      Light    intellectual,  alike,  but  that  to  reach  the   highest 

because   (1)    He   is  the  source   of   all  form  of  illumination  men  must  experi- 

wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  (2)  in  His  ence    every   kind   of    action,    however 

mind  exist  the  ideals  after  which  all  abominable,   in   order  to  work  them- 

things   strive.     Light   moral,   because  selves  free  from  the  powers  that  rule 

(1)    His    perfection    shows    that    the  the  world."    "  If  the  light  is  the  Divine, 

difference    between    good   and   evil   is  then  the  darkness  is  the  undivine,  or 

not  merely  a  question  of  degree,  but  that  which   is   opposed  to   God — that 

fundamental   and  final ;   and   (2)  the  is,  the  nature  turned  away  from  God, 

life    of     Christ    had     exhibited    that  and  not  directed  to  Him.     Hence  the 

contrast     sharply,     once     for     all. —  o-Korta,    darkness,    coincides   with    the 

W.  M.  Sinclair^  D.D.  New  Testament   idea  of   the   Koo-fio^ ; 

it  is  the  principle  which  animates  and 

Ver.  6.  On  being  true  to   Ourselves,  governs  the  koctiios^  and  which  comes 

— ^A   man   should  take  care  that  his  in    it    into    outward    exhibition    and 

professions  and   his  conduct  are  kept  form." 
in  the  strictest  harmony.     If  he  says 

he   abides   in   Christ,    his   walk   must  Perils    of    Self-deceit. — These    may 

evidently  be   a   Christly  walk.     That  come  from  a  man's  particular  disposi- 

may  be  urged  as  a  plain  and  manifest  tion ;    or   from    the    influence — bias — 

duty  (1)    for  Christ's  sake,  whom  we  of    public    opinion ;    or    from    special 

are  bound  to  honour,  if  we  bear  His  times    of   unrestrainable    passion;    or 

238 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   I. 


from  distinctly   false   and    corrupting 
teachings. 

Vers.  6,  7.  Walking  in  Darkness  or 
in  Light — Darkness  represents  the  self- 
sphere.      Light    represents    the    God- 
sphere.     God  is  kin  with   everything 
clean,    good,   kind.       Self   spoils   even 
good  things   by  throwing  upon  them 
the    shadow    of    its     own     darkness. 
Darkness,  both  in  poetry  and  religion, 
is  the  symbol  of  evil.     The  figure  may 
not  come  very  effectively  to  those  of  us 
who  have  been  brought  up  in  Christian 
surroundings  and  associations  ;  but  we 
have  to  think  of  the  moral  atmosphere 
of  pagan  cities  in  the  time  when  St. 
John  lived.    Their  darkness  is  faithfully 
revealed   in   the  first   chapter   of   the 
epistle   to  the  Komans.     Or  we   may 
try   to   realise  what   is   the  depraved 
moral   life   of  certain  sections  of  our 
great  cities.     Or  perhaps  we  can  gain 
a  better  impression,  and  find  a  sharper 
contrast,   if   we  think  of    the    moral 
atmosphere  of  a  heathen  city,  such  as 
are  to  be  found  all  over  India,  where 
immorality  is  actually  made  a  portion 
of  worship,  an  agency  of  religion,  and 
the  whole  range  of  thought,  and  tone 
of  human  relations,  are  dark  indeed : 
men  walk  in  darkness.     And  there,  in 
the  very  midst  of  all  the  impurities, 
move   to  and   fro   the   few   men   and 
women  who  are  regenerate  in  Christ 
Jesus.     They  walk  in  the  Ught.     Lives 
morally   sweet ;    thought   and   feeling 
sensitively   delicate   and   pure.      They 
breathe  the  light ;  they  live  with  God, 
who    is    light.     St.    John   urges   that 
no   other   than   such  walking   in   the 
light   can   be   befitting   to  those  who 
have   been   made   light   in   the   Lord. 
Men  were   deceiving  themselves  then 
with   the   idea  that   they   could  keep 
their  soul -relations  to  the   light,  and 
yield  to  dark  bodily  indulgences.     All 
material  things,  they  said,  were  evil ; 
and  since  they  were  in  material  bodies, 
they  could  not  help  being  in  a  dark 
sphere,  and  it   did  not   much  matter 
how   dark   it  was,   if  only  they   kept 
their  souls  in  the  light.     But  this  is 
precisely  what  men  never  can  do,  and 


they  wholly  deceive  themselves  if  they 
think  they  can.  Where  the  body  goes 
the  soul  will  really  go,  whatever  the 
outward  seeming  may  be.  And  where 
the  soul  goes  it  will  never  rest  content 
unless  it  has  the  body  with  it. 

Ver.  7.  The  Christianas  Walk  in  Light 
and  Love. — I    am  to   speak  to  you  of 
that  bond  of  love  which  binds  soul  to 
soul  in  binding   all   to  God ;    of   that 
walk  of  light  which  assimilates  us  to 
Him  who   is  light ;  and  of  the  union 
which   identifies   these,    in    connecting 
them   both   with   the   purifying  work 
of   Christ.       1.    The    apostle    declares 
himself    commissioned    to    proclaim   a 
"  message  "  of  transcendent  importance, 
calculated  to  consummate  the  joy  of  all 
the   believing   people   of    God.      It   is 
this,  "  God  is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no 
darkness   at   all."     2.  This   revelation 
of   the   Divine    excellency   is   directly 
connected   with   the  mystical  commu- 
nion of  which  he  speaks.     The  one  is,  in 
some  measure,  the  condition  on  which 
the   other    is   suspended.     This    light, 
with  which  God  Himself  is  identified, 
becomes    also    the    element   in   which 
His  elect  children  breathe  and   move. 
3.  The  apostle  contemplates  the  Church 
of    the    sanctified    walking     together 
under  the  radiance  of  a  common  light, 
which   streams   from   the  presence  of 
God,  and  which,   involving   them  all, 
assimilates  them   all.     What   is    that 
fellowship,  and  what  that  light,  which 
are  declared  to  involve  each  the  other  ? 
First,    we  must  resolve  each  into   its 
proper  origin,  to   contemplate  each  in 
its  proper  aspect.     The  apostle  speaks 
of  a  fellowship  essentially   Christian  ; 
and  to  it  none  other  than  the  Christian 
believer  is  competent.     It  is  "  fellow- 
ship with  us"  because  it  is  "  fellowship 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son."     The 
communion   is    essentially   Divine ;    it 
exists  in  and  through  God  alone  ;  it  is 
•f  each  with  each,  because  of  all  with 
Him.     If  you  would  learn  its  proper- 
ties and  characteristics,  you  must  seek 
them   in    their    fountain,    where    the 
human  soul  is  alone  with  the  Father, 
the  Son,  and  the  Spirit.     We  are  "  to 

239 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light." 
We  are  to  design  from  God  Himself. 
We  are  to  look  straight  to  Him.  The 
remove  from  the  original  may  be 
infinite,  but  it  is  only  one  remove. 
*'  As  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world." 
The  walk  in  light  is  the  earthly  image 
of  the  supernal  light ;  the  "  fellowship 
one  with  another  "  resolves  into  "  the 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son."  The  Christian  verity  has  taught 
us  how  to  contemplate  God.  We  are 
to  regard  that  wondrous  Essence  which 
caused  and  sustains  the  universe  as 
parting  into  three  streams  from  one 
eternal  Source,  which  (stooping  to  our 
capacities,  relationships,  and  language) 
it  has  styled  the  Father,  Son,  and 
Spirit.  Of  what  these  Persons  are,  in 
their  own  nature,  we  cannot  know; 
of  what  they  are  in  relation  to  us, 
we  can.  Our  fellowship  is  with  the 
Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost.  If,  then,  our  fellowship  with 
Deity  be  distinguished  into  separate 
communions,  each  having  its  own 
grounds  and  offices  of  intercourse,  and 
if  this  threefold  communion  be  insepar- 
ably interwoven  with  the  "walk  of 
light "  which  imitates  a  God  who  "  is 
light,"  we  may  naturally  expect  that 
that  celestial  lustre  which  i-epresents 
the  whole  Godhead  shall  itself  be 
separable  into  significancies,  in  some 
measure  corresponding  to  the  Divine 
Personages  whom  the  Godhead  embraces. 
Thus  shall  our  threefold  communion 
be  met  and  answered  by  a  threefold 
"  light."  The  significancies  of  that 
Divine  light  seem  resolvable  into  three 
cardinal  excellencies — holiness,  happi- 
ness, and  knowledge.  God  the  Father, 
God  of  all  righteousness  ;  God  the  Son, 
the  God  of  all  happiness ;  God  the 
Spirit,  God  of  all  truth  :  or  God  the 
Father,  imputer  of  our  righteousness  ; 
God  the  Son,  victorious  obtainer  of  our 
happiness ;  God  the  Spirit,  liberal 
bestower  of  our  wisdom.  To  live  within 
the  verge  of  the  Divine  illumination 
is  to  hold  communion  with  the  essential 
excellencies  of  the  triune  God.  If 
the  fellowship  of  the  Three  in  One  thus 
answer  to  the  threefold  light  in  which 

240 


they  dwell,  how,  specially,  does  it 
correspond  to  each  ?  If  the  Father  be 
eminently  the  light  of  hoHness,  and  our 
accepter  as  a  holy  people  in  Jesus,  he 
who  walks  in  that  light  communes  with 
Him  by  the  hnk  of  holiness,  by  the 
cordial  adoption  of  that  "righteousness 
of  God  which  is  witnessed  by  the  law 
and  the  prophets,"  by  profound  sub- 
mission to  that  will  which  is  the  execu- 
tive, that  reason  which  is  in  itself  the 
legislative  council,  of  the  universe.  If 
the  Son  be  eminently  the  Hght  of 
celestial  peace  and  its  dispenser,  we 
commune  with  Him  as  dwellers  in  that 
light, — by  trust  boundless  and  unfeigned 
in  that  victor  who,  having  once  and  for 
ever  foiled  His  adversary  in  the  deadly 
struggle  of  Gethsemane  and  Calvary, 
will  never  forsake  the  Church  He 
redeemed ;  by  gratitude  for  blessings 
undeserved ;  hy joy  for  blessings  assured 
and  everlasting ;  by  that  sterner  task 
of  which  another  apostle  speaks,  the 
fellowship  of  His  sufferings,  being  made 
conformable  to  His  death  (Phil.  iii. 
10).  If  in  the  Spirit  we  worship  the 
light  of  eternal  truth  and  its  revealer, 
when  are  we  found  in  that  Hght,  and 
when  blending  in  mystic  union  with 
Him  who  abides  there,  but  when  with 
a  sanctified  reason  we  apply  our  whole 
mind  to  receive  and  understand  His 
revelations,  when,  raising  at  His  call 
the  faculties  which  He  alone  can  furnish 
with  fitting  objects,  we  issue  gladly 
forth  from  the  world  of  shadows,  and 
meet  Him,  where  He  awaits  us,  in 
the  world  of  immutable  reality  ?  The 
earthly  career  of  light  involves  the 
whole  Christian  life,  as  directed  to  each 
member  of  the  ever-blessed  Trinity. 
And  the  whole  communion  with  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  as  well 
as  the  mutual  communion  of  the 
brethren  in  Christ,  is  comprehended  in 
that  single  word  love. — W.  Archw 
Butler,  M.A. 

The  Power  of  Christ's  Blood. — Blood 
is  a  figure  for  the  surrender  of  life. 
In  giving  to  God  the  blood  of  animals 
the  worshipper  gave  to  God  the 
animal's  life,     In  shedding  His  blood 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   i. 


Jesus  gave  His  life  to  God  as  a  sacrifice 
of  perfect  obedience  and  perfect  trust. 
Because  He  thus  gave  His  Kfe  to  God, 
and  was  fully  accepted,  Jesus  has  the 
power  to  do  three  things  :  1.  To  for- 
give  sins   that    we   have    committed. 

2.  To  cleanse  us  from  the  bad  con- 
sequences and  influences   of  the   sins. 

3.  To  keep  us  from  committing  them 
again  ;  for  even  when  we  are  made 
clean,  we  have  to  walk  and  work 
amid  temptations  and  evils.  So  we 
need  that  He  who  forgives  and  cleanses 
should  also  defend  and  keep. 

A  Double  Fellowship  and  a  Single 
Condition. 

I.  A  fellowship  with  Christ — with 
God  in  Christ. — 1.  To  be  a  Christian  is 
to  enter  into  gracious  relations  with 
Christ.  2.  To  keep  a  Christian  is 
to  maintain  those  gracious  relations. 
Sometimes  the  prominent  aspect  in 
the  fellowship  is  service,  sometimes 
it  is  friendship.  "  Henceforth  I  call 
you  not  servants,  but  I  have  called  you 
friends." 

II.  A  feUowship  one  with  another 
in  Christ. — The  fellowship  of — 1.  A 
common  love.  2.  A  common  duty. 
3.  A  common  experience.  4.  A  com- 
mon worship. 

III.  Both  forms  of  fellowship  de- 
pend on  one  condition :  ''  Walking 
in  the  light " — that  is,  walking  accord- 
ing to  the  will  of  God,  who  is  the 
light,  as  contrasted  with  walking  in 
the  darkness  of  our  self-will  and  self- 
pleasing.  Our  spheres  of  fellowship 
may  vary,  but  the  condition  of  main- 
taining fellowship  is  absolute  and 
unchangeable. 

The  Fellowship  of  Believers. — Tempt- 
ation in  all  ages  to  dissociate  holiness 
from  profession. 

I.  The  fellowship  of  believers  with 
each  other  depends  on  their  individual 
fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son.  First,  fellowship  with  God. 
That  brings  Christian  union.  The 
degree  of  the  union  depends  on  the 
fellowship   with    God.     No  force   will 


make  a  Christian  life  or  Christian 
union.  Nourishment  of  inward  spirit 
will  tell  on  Christian  living  and  Chris- 
tian fellowship. 

II.  Fellowship  depends  wholly  on 
mutual  sympathy.  Light  cannot  have 
fellowship  with  darkness.  God  is 
light — the  symbol  of  purity,  moral 
perfectness.  A  man  in  sympathy 
with  darkness  cannot  be  in  fellowship 
with  the  light.  That  differs  from 
saying  a  man  who  sins  cannot  be  in 
fellowship.  A  man  may  be  in  full 
sympathy  with  light,  and  be  struggling 
after  it,  and  yet  be  often  overcome 
with  evil.  Fellowship  depends  on  the 
heart  being  set  on  the  light.  And  the 
bond  of  fellowship  with  one  another 
is  the  common  love  of,  and  seeking 
after,  the  light. 

III.  For  the  imperfectness  of  hu- 
man walking  in  the  light  a  gracious 
remedy  is  provided.  "  The  blood  of 
Jesus  cleanseth  us."  It  covers  the 
evil,  and  it  cleanses  it  away.  The 
blood  stands  for  the  living  power  of 
Jesus. 

The  Condition  of  Christian  Fellow- 
ship.—  Some  texts  are  difficult  to 
expound  because  of  our  familiarity 
with  them.  We  too  readily  assume 
that  we  understand  them,  and  we 
therefore  resist  all  fresh  and  independ- 
ent inquiry  concerning  them.  There 
are  two  ways  of  treating  Scripture 
texts :  1.  We  may  let  the  words 
suggest  thought.  That  way  is  suited 
to  private  meditation.  But  there  is 
always  this  danger — wo  may  come  to 
think  that  our  thoughts  are  as  authori- 
tative as  the  Scripture  words.  2.  We 
may  inquire  what  the  words  actually 
mean.  That  way  is  especially  suited 
to  public  ministries.  It  is  strange  that 
St.  John  the  loving  should  be  the  most 
controversial  of  the  New  Testament 
writers.  But  that  is  the  fact  which 
we  may  assert  in  view  both  of  his 
gospel  and  his  epistles.  The  false  teach- 
ings of  his  day  concerning  the  person 
of  Christ  are  familiar :  the  false 
teachings  concerning  the  Christian  life 

R  241 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


are  not  so  well  known.  There  have 
been  Antinomian  teachings  in  every 
age.  They  took  two  forms  in  St. 
John's  days.  It  was  said  (1)  that  the 
enlightened  could  be  indifferent  to 
moral  distinctions ;  and  (2)  that  the 
enlightened  ought  to  have  complete 
knowledge  of  evil  through  personal 
experience  of  it.  We  can  understand 
how  such  teachings  affected  the  Chris- 
tians when  they  came  to  be  translated 
into  the  common  thought.  This  St. 
John  deals  with  in  the  beginning  of 
his  epistle.  Christianity  is  inseparable 
from  holiness  ;  it  can  live  in  no  other  ' 
atmosphere.  As  he  sees  Christianity 
it  is  fellowship ;  and  we  cannot  wonder 
at  his  taking  this  view  when  we  re- 
member how  close  was  his  own  per- 
sonal fellowship  with  Christ.  To  him 
personal  religion  was  fellowship  with 
Christ,  and  what  it  involved,  even 
fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  fellow- 
ship with  the  other  sons.  St.  John 
caught  the  spirit  of  Christ's  great 
prayer,  which  he  alone  records.  St. 
John  begins  his  epistle  by  asserting 
his  competency.  He  had  intimately 
known  everything  relating  to  Christ 
from  the  beginning.  What  then  is 
Christ's  primary  message  ?  This — 
God  is  light.  Light  is  the  material 
symbol  of  goodness,  righteousness. 
Christ,  who  manifests  God,  manifests 
Him  as  light.  No  man  sees  Christ 
aright  unless  the  sight  makes  him 
feel,  as  he  never  felt  before,  the  holi- 
ness of  God.  His  point  in  the  text  is 
this — ^there  is  a  condition  on  which 
fellowship  depends,  and  there  is  a 
privilege  which  maintained  fellowship 
secures. 

I.  The  condition  on  which  fellow- 
ship depends. — "  If  we  walk  in  the 
light."  Illustrate  by  the  conditions 
of  human  associations.  There  must  be 
common  interests,  and  a  common  spirit. 
So  in  religion,  there  can  be  no  fellow- 
ship if  some  walk  in  light,  and  some 
walk  in  darkness.  How  expressive  of 
moral  difference  the  terms  **  light " 
and  "darkness"  are!  The  Father  of 
light  walks  in  light.  The  *'  Light  of 
the   world"   walked   in   light.     Those 

242 


named  after  the  "  Light  of  the  world  " 
must  walk  in  light. 

II.  The  privilege  which  maintained 
fellowship  secures. — "The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us 
from  all  sin."  The  "  blood  of  Jesus  "  is 
a  figure,  just  as  *'  God  is  light "  is  a 
figure.  It  is  not  here  the  blood  as  the 
ground  of  forgiveness,  but  the  blood  as 
the  power,  or  agency,  in  cleansing.  St. 
John  addresses  persons  who  are  for- 
given, and  restored  to  the  Divine 
family.  But  here  is  a  difiiculty.  Blood 
does  not  cleanse.  Nobody  ever  heard 
of  its  use  in  such  a  way.  (The  only 
approach  to  the  idea  is  the  old  use  of 
bullocks'  blood  in  refining  sugar.)  St. 
John  was  a  Jew.  To  him  the  blood 
was  the  life.  Put  the  word  life  for 
the  word  blood,  and  say,  "  The  life  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from 
all  sin."  That  partly  gives  St.  John's 
meaning ;  but  it  is  not  altogether 
satisfactory.  When  blood  stands  for 
life,  it  always  means  blood  shed,  life 
surrendered.  Apprehend  this,  and  the 
apostle's  meaning  becomes  clear.  The  * 
"  blood  of  Jesus  "  stands  for  that  power 
to  cleanse  which  Jesus  has  gained  by 
surrendering  His  life.  It  is  called 
His  blood  because  it  has  come  to  Him 
through  His  blood-shedding.  St.  John's 
idea  is  this — keep  fellowship  by  walk- 
ing in  the  light,  and  you  will  surely 
find  that  there  is  a  privilege  belonging 
to  that  fellowship.  It  is  this — one 
member  of  the  fellowship  is  an  ever- 
active  power,  working  at  the  cleansing 
away  of  everything  that  can  possibly 
break  or  spoil  the  fellowship.  The 
symbol  of  our  Lord's  continuous  work 
in  the  fellowship  was  given  in  the 
"  upper  room,"  when  He  washed  the 
disciples'  feet,  and  dealt,  for  cleansing, 
with  their  sins  of  frailty.  It  was  a 
fellowship  of  the  "  clean."  He  kept  it 
by  removing  the  soilings  from  the  feet. 
And  is  not  this  precisely  the  provision 
that  we  need  ?  The  sincere  ones  are 
frail.  Frailty  is  provided  for  in  the 
fellowship,  if  only  we  keep  sincere. 
In  family  life,  so  long  as  the  fellowship 
is  preserved,  the  frailties  can  be  easily 
and  wisely  dealt  with.     How  does  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  I. 


living  Lord  Jesus  cleanse  ?  Through 
the  disciphne  of  Hfe-experience,  which 
He  uses  and  sanctifies.  And  He  comes 
to  us  with  great  persuasions  that  He 
can  cleanse — persuasions  from  His 
blood -shedding,  from  His  entrusted 
powers  as  Mediator,  from  His  adapta- 
tion through  a  human  experience. 
And  Christ  in  our  life,  cleansing  us 
from  our  Christian  frailties,  is  our 
inspiration  to  the  cleansing  of  ourselves. 
There  is  what  we  only  can  do.  There 
is  what  He  only  can  do. 

Close  with  St.  Peter's  drawing  up  his 
feet  away  from  the  cleansing  Christ. 
He  was  imperilling  his  fellowship. 

The  LordJs  Sujyper  an  Expi^ession  of 
Fellowship. — One  of  the  great  words 
of  St.  John's  epistles  is felloivship.  The 
thought  is  beautifully  presented  here. 
The  early  disciples  came  into  contact 
with  the  Lord,  seeing,  hearing,  and 
touching  Hira.  Their  communion  and 
fellowship  were  immediate  and  per- 
sonal, and  their  contact  with  other  dis- 
ciples who  had  not  seen  the  Lord  was 
also  immediate  and  personal,  and  so  by 
declaring  to  them  what  they  had  seen 
and  heard  they  introduced  them  to  the 
fellowship  of  the  Lord  Himself.  Chris- 
tian history  forms  a  chain  of  many 
links ;  and  as  we  trace  back  link  after 
link,  till  we  come  to  Him  from  whom 
all  hang  in  dependence,  we  feel  the 
unity,  the  solidarity,  of  the  Christian 
brotherhood  and  testimony.  The  Lord's 
Supper  is  the  eccpi^ession  of  this  visible 
fellowship.  1.  Immediately  connected 
with  the  existing  body  of  disciples. 
2.  Links  every  new  commemoration  to 
all  the  prece  ling.  3.  And  so  unites 
every  body  of  disciples  to  the  Lord. — 
Anon. 

The  Limitations  of  Christian  Sin. — 
Much  confusion  of  thought  is  occasioned 
by  persisting  in  keeping  to  one  defini- 
tion of  sin,  as  if  it  could  always  be  just 
the  same  thing.  It  is  the  "  transgres- 
sion of  the  law  "  ;  but  it  is  something 
else  besidas.  It  is  the  expression  of 
self-will.  It  is  even  a  natural  conse- 
quence of  human  frailty.     And  it  will 


be  manifest  that  the  character  of  sin 
necessarily  changes  when  a  man  is 
renewed  in  will  and  motive  by  the 
regenerating  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  He 
becomes  a  new  man ;  and  if  he  gives  full 
and  befitting  expression  to  his  new  life, 
he  cannot  sin.  To  sin  with  the  will  is 
the  act  of  the  unregenerate  man  ;  and  if 
a  Christian  ever  sins  with  his  will,  he, 
at  least  for  the  time,  falls  back  upon 
the  conditions  of  his  unregenerate  life. 
It  needs  to  be  firmly  stated  that  the 
Christian,  as  such,  cannot  determinedly 
sin  with  his  will.  He  may  sin  through 
frailty,  or  because  led  astray,  and  de- 
ceived by  temptation  ;  his  will  may  be 
even  forced  aside  for  a  time  ;  but  he 
comes  to  himself  again  when  the  force  is 
withdrawn.  He  sins  a  child's  sins  who 
is  in  the  full  joy  of  home  life  and  love. 

Yer.  8.  The  Peril  of  Christian  Self- 
deception. — "  Where  there  is  even  only 
a  trace  of  life,  and  of  the  Divine  ful- 
ness, this  must  immediately  manifest 
sin  to  be  sin  "  (Eric  Haupt). 

I.  The  denial  of  sin. — 1.  Some  claim 
an  absolute  exemption  from  sin. 
2.  Some  say  they  have  no  sin,  by 
claiming  a  relative  exemption  from  it. 

II.  The  consequence  of  this  denial. 
— For  us  to  deny  our  sin  is  to  deny — 
1.  Indisputable  facts.  2.  The  infallible 
testimony  of  the  word  of  God.  3.  The 
moral  propriety  of  the  scheme  of  re- 
demption. 

III.  The  confession  of  sin. — *'  If  we 
confess,"  etc. 

IV.  The  consequence  of  such  con- 
fession.— 1.  Forgiveness.  2.  Sanctifi- 
cation. — Dr.  Clark. 

Sinful  Tendencies  of  Christians. — 
The  preceding  words  had  reminded 
St.  John  that  even  mature  Christians, 
though  certainly  not  "  walking  in  dark- 
ness," yet  have  sinful  tendencies  in 
themselves :  sensuous  impulses,  non- 
spiritual  inclinations,  lack  of  self-know- 
ledge, a  lowered  standard^  principles 
and  views  borrowed  partly  from  the 
world,  wavering  of  will,  and  hence 
graver  faults.  Not  to  admit  this  would 
be  to  mislead  ourselves,  and  in  us  the 

243     ' 


CHAP.   I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.^ 


power  and  energy  of  light,  searching 
the  very  corners  of  the  heart,  would  not 
be  working. — W.  M.  Sinclair^  D.D. 

Self-delusion  as  to  our  State  before 
God. — It  is  among  the  most  potent  of 
the  energies  of  sin,  that  it  leads  astray 
by  blinding,  and  blinds  by  leading 
astray.  There  is  an  inherent  and  in- 
evitable efficacy  in  sin  to  diffuse  dark- 
ness, and  to  make  us  in  love  with  the 
darkness  it  diffuses.  In  the  judgment 
God  will  unravel  all  the  tangled  mesh 
of  our  excuses,  and  flash  upon  us  the 
tremendous  conviction,  that  we  are  lost 
only  because  we  would  be  lost,  that  in 
every  several  instance  of  temptation 
the  sin  lay  with  us  as  the  situation 
with  God. 

I.  The  imagination  of  our  own  sin- 
lessness  is  an  inward  lie. — It  has  been 
questioned  whether  the  apostle  included 
in  this  affirmation  the  highest  degrees 
of  Christian  attainment ;  but  Wesley 
made  the  theological  question  of  Chris- 
tian perfectibility  of  far  more  practical 
importance  than  it  ever  deserved. 
Whatever  may  be  the  measure  of 
sanctification  which  God  bestows  upon 
His  children  in  this  world,  we  can 
scarcely  conceive  its  highest  state  un- 
accompanied with  a  longing  for  a  state 
yet  higher,  clearly  conceived,  and  sought 
with  a  personal  consciousness  (so  far) 
of  imperfection,  and  an  ardent  desire 
to  still  escape  that  remainder  of  earth- 
liness  that  embarrasses  the  ascent.  In 
fact,  the  belief  of  Christian  perfect- 
ibility seems  inapplicable  to  individual 
practice  from  the  very  nature  of  Chris- 
tian holiness.  Were  a  perfect  man  to 
exist,  he  himself  would  be  the  last 
to  know  it,  for  the  highest  stage  of 
advancement  is  the  lowest  descent  in 
humility.  The  spiritual  life,  as  a  pro- 
gressive life,  involves  a  progressively 
increasing  knowledge  of  God ;  and  as  it 
approaches  the  Source  of  all  holiness, 
the  spirit  of  man  must  appreciate  far 
more  accurately  the  force  of  the  contrast 
between  itself  and  its  mighty  Model. 
In  truth,  it  is  only  fervent  and  exalted 
piety  that  can  really  feel  how  immeasur- 
ably far   it   is  from   perfect   holiness, 

244 


Whatever  be  the  doctrine  of  Christian 
perfectibility  collected  out  of  the  writ- 
ings of  St.  John,  it  certainly  can  have 
but  little  relation  to  the  earthly  saint's 
estimate  of  his  own  piety.  It  is  not, 
however,  of  these  "  perfect "  ones  that 
we  now  speak,  but  rather  of  those  whose 
cold  hearts  and  neglectful  lives  utter 
the  bold  denial  of  a  sinlessness  which 
the  Hps  dare  not  deny.  Adequately  to 
enumerate  the  causes  of  this  lament- 
able blindness  to  pressing  and  palpable 
evil  would  be  impossible.  The  par- 
ticular causes  of  the  delusion  will  vary 
with  every  variety  of  individual  char- 
acter. Every  temptation  that  occupies, 
and  by  occupying  excludes  all  other 
occupants,  may  claim  its  share  in  the 
perpetuation  of  this  melancholy  ignor- 
ance. We  can  only  speak  of  some  of 
the  general  principles  on  which  the 
delusion  rests. 

II.  The  sources  of  this  lamentable 
ignorance  of  our  personal  state  with 
God. — Something  is  due  to  the  govern- 
ing agency  of  Satan,  the  **  ruler  of 
the  darkness  of  this  world."  He  who 
deceives  that  he  may  destroy,  stupefies 
that  he  may  deceive.  The  cunning 
of  the  serpent  alone  can  reach  the 
master-subtlety  of  making  the  soul 
of  man  do  his  work  by  being  its  own 
unpitying  enemy,  and  traitor,  and 
cheat :  it  is  only  the  "  father  of  lies  " 
that  thus  can  make  the  wretched  heart 
a  liar  to  itself.  The  first  and  darkest 
of  his  works  on  earth  is  the  original 
and  inherited  corruption  of  the  human 
soul  itself.  It  is  ignorant  of  sin,  just 
because  it  is  naturally  sinful.  Faint, 
frail,  and  disordered  from  the  first, 
how  should  it  easily  suspect  its  own 
disease?  One  chief  object  of  the  gospel 
history,  as  applied  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  is  to  humble  and  yet  animate 
us  by  a  portraiture  of  moral  excellence 
which,  as  observation  cannot  furnish, 
so  assuredly  nature  will  never  spon- 
taneously imagine.  We  cannot  know 
our  degradation,  we  cannot  struggle, 
or  even  wish,  to  rise,  if  we  have  never 
been  led  to  conceive  the  possibility  of 
a  state  higher  than  our  own.  For  the 
mournful  unconsciousness  of  our  personal 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.   JOHN. 


CHAP.  I. 


depravity,    have   we    not   a    powerful 
cause  in  tJiat  depravity  itself^.     But  no 
human  being  can  be  seen  in  the  state 
of   nature   alone.     Repeated  acts   are 
become  principles  of  action,  and  every 
man  is  the  creature  of  his  own  past 
life.     If  degraded  nature  is  silent  in 
denouncing  sin,  what  shall  she  be  when 
doubly  and  trebly  indurated  by  hahit. 
We    know   not    ourselves   as   sinners, 
because  from  infancy  we  have  breathed 
the  atmosphere  of  sin.     A  man  lives 
in   the    frigid   formalism   of    external 
religion,  or  in  the  habitual  neglect  of 
God,  until  it  seems  almost  impossible 
to  separate  the  habit  from  life  itself  : 
to   live   at   all   is   to   live    thus.     The 
terrible    power   of    irreligion,    become 
thus   habitual,    to   blind   men   to   the 
momentous  peril  of  their  daily  state, 
is    above    all    evinced   in    this :    that 
every  form  of   exhortation  or  appeal 
is  weak   to    break   the  lethargy ;  yet 
not  at  all  from  any  unbelief   of   the 
facts  or  doctrines  stated,  but  from  an 
obstinate  refusal  or  inability  to  imagine 
that  they  can  have  the  remotest  refer- 
ence to  the  hearer  himself.     And  this 
operation  of  habit  is  a  universal  law. 
Is  not  there  something  in  the  frame 
and   condition    of    the   world   that   is 
fitted  to  assist  this  melancholy  work 
of   deception  ?      The   blind   man    does 
not  conceive  of  light,  neither  does  the 
godless  spirit  conceive  of  God.    But  even 
supposing  the  organ  to  be  restored,  were 
he  placed  in  a  world  of  darkness,  he 
would  be  as  far  as  ever  from  imagining 
the  true  nature  of  the  light  he  could 
not  witness.     Society  moulds  us.     As 
men  copy  themselves  by  force  of  habit, 
they  copy  others  by  force  of  example. 
Mankind  in  crowds  and  communities 
tends  to  uniformity.     We  cherish  and 
confirm  the  dream  that  "we  have  no 
sin,"  because  all  the   world   is   sinful 
as    ourselves.      The    power    of     this 
universality  of  sin  around  us  to  paralyse 
the   sensibility   of    conscience  is  aug- 
mented by  the  influence  of  rank  and 
fashion.     So  servile  a  copyist  of   evil 
is   man,    that   vice,    the   darkest   and 
most  degrading,  seems  to  lose  its  name 
and  nature  when  thus   authenticated 


by  the  passport  of  rank.  To  this  must 
be  added  the  tendency  of  pleasure 
itself,  or  of  indolence,  to  prolong  this 
deception,  and  our  natural  impatience 
of  the  pain  of  self- disapproval.  There 
are  two  ways  of  escaping  an  angry 
conscience — by  ceasing  from  the  evil 
that  provokes  it,  or  by  resolutely 
refusing  to  hear  its  voice,  which  soon 
amounts  to  silencing  it  for  ever. — 
W.  Archer  Butler,  M.A. 

Yer.  9.  God  keeping  Conditions. — 
*'  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us 
our  sins."  It  is  true  to  the  nature 
of  things  that  a  father  should  forgive 
and  restore  his  erring  child,  if  that 
child  penitently  confesses  his  sin.  And 
in  putting  Himself  into  the  figure  of 
a  father,  God  puts  Himself  into 
fatherly  conditions ;  and  those  con- 
ditions we  may  be  quite  sure  that  He 
will  keep.  He  must,  for  He  cannot 
be  other  than  just  to  Himself,  and 
faithful  to  us.  "  Just,"  in  this  verse, 
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  conditions 
on  which,  as  a  moral  governor,  God's 
justice  is  satisfied.  "  Just  "  here  is  a 
feature  of  the  Divine  character.  In 
the  same  sense  as  that  in  which  we 
speak  of  a  man  as  a  just  man,  we  may 
speak  of  God  as  a  just  God.  A  just 
man  will  keep  his  engagements,  strictly, 
honourably,  fully.  He  will  try  to  shirk 
nothing.  And  this  security  we  have 
in  thinking  of  the  just  God.  If  He 
has  made  a  covenant.  He  will  keep 
every  one  of  its  terms.  If  He  has 
given  promises.  He  will  fulfil  every 
one  of  them  to  the  letter.  If  He  has 
said  He  will  forgive  and  cleanse  His 
penitent  children,  forgive  and  cleanse 
He  certainly  will. 

Confession  a  Sign  of  Right-minded- 
ness.— Confession  as  an  act  standing 
by  itself  has  but  little  value.  Its 
importance  lies  in  the  condition  of 
mind  and  feeling  which  it  represents 
and  indicates.  What  is  the  mood 
towards  sin  of  the  man  who  confesses  ? 
(Of  course,  the  supposition  is  that  the 
confession  is  sincere.)  Plainly,  it  is  a 
different  mood  to  that  which   he  was 

245 


CHAP.  I. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


in  when  he  committed  the  sin,  or 
when  he  kept  in  the  hardened  frame 
w^hich  allowed  of  his  committing  the 
sin.  Plainly,  too,  he  is  in  an  humble 
mood  of  mind,  and  even  distressed  that 
he  should  have  been  led  astray.  And 
plainly,  also,  he  now  wants  all  the 
wrong  taken  away,  and  the  broken 
relations  fully  restored.  But  these 
are  right  moods.  The  man  has  become 
right-minded.  The  proper  spirit  of  the 
son  has  come  back  to  the  man ;  and 
in  that  fact  is  found  a  sufficient  basis 
for  full  forgiveness  and  acceptance, 
and  a  gracious  cleansing  work. 

Cases  of  Confession. — Three  cases  are 
conceivable  :  A  man  may  have  nothing 
to  confess  ;  a  man  may  be  in  a  mood 
that  he  will  not  confess ;  and  a  man 
may  want  to  confess.  What  do  each 
of  these  reveal  concerning  the  man  ? 

Confessing  our  Sins. — What  is  it  to 
confess  our  sins  ?  It  is  to  tell  them 
out  to  God.  It  is  true  God  knows 
them  already  far  better  than  we  do 
ourselves.  To  Him  all  hearts  are 
open,  and  from  Him  no  secrets  are 
hid.  So  when  He  bids  us  confess  our 
sins,  it  is  not  that  He  may  know  them 
better,  but  that  we  may  know  them 
better,  and  feel  them  more  deeply. 
And  so  it  is  plain  that  to  confess  our 
sins  must  mean  much  more  than  the 
mere  telling  them  out  to  God.  For 
this  would  be  nothing  at  all,  without 
self-examination,  and  godly  sorrow,  and 
humbling  of  the  heart,  and  penitence, 
and    prayer,    and   holy   resolves,    and 


amendment  of  life.  Observe  the 
twofold  blessing  promised :  (1)  the 
forgiveness  of  sin ;  (2)  the  cleansing 
from  all  unrighteousness.  These  are 
simply  the  two  great  wants  of  man 
with  regard  to  sin  :  pardon  for  the 
past ;  cleansing  for  the  future ;  or,  in 
other  words,  the  gifts  of  justification 
and  sanctification.  By  the  one  (justi- 
fication) we  are  accepted  by  God,  who 
blots  out  our  sins,  and  counts  us  as 
righteous  for  Christ's  sake,  without 
our  really  being  so ;  by  the  other 
(sanctification)  we  are  really  made 
righteous  in  ourselves,  God's  Holy 
Spirit  working  in  us,  so  that  we 
conquer  the  power  of  sin,  and  grow 
in  grace  and  holiness. — W.  Walsham 
How,  D.D. 

Forgiving  must  go  with  Cleansing. — 
Could  it  possibly  suffice  for  God  to 
forgive  ?  That  may  be  tried  in  both 
the  public  spheres  of  justice,  and  in 
the  private  spheres  of  the  family. 
The  failure  of  public  justice  is  seen 
in  that  it  can  do  two  things  only.  It 
can  acquit,  and  it  can  punish,  but  it 
cannot  cleanse.  Consequently  public 
justice  as  a  civil  power  is  effective, 
and  as  a  moral  power  is  helpless.  The 
success  of  family  dealing  with  wrong- 
doing is  seen  in  the  fact  that  a  father 
can  never  satisfy  himself  with  any 
act  of  forgiveness,  because  his  supreme 
concern  is  the  moral  well-being  of  his 
child,  whom  he  would  deliver  from  the 
influence  and  power  of  his  wilfulness, 
whom  he  must  get  cleansed  from  all 
his  unrighteousness. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  I. 


Ver.  5.  "  God  is  light.'' — Light  is  beauti- 
ful ;  it  is  gladdening  to  the  eye  and  to  the 
heart ;  it  flies  toward  us  like  God's  angel 
from  the  skies ;  but  light  of  itself  is  not 
enough.  It  were  a  poor  thing  for  this  earth 
if  the  sun  gave  it  only  light.  Soon  it  would 
be  clothed  in  the  whiteness  of  universal 
snow,  relieved  only  by  an  azure  of  glacial 
ice,  and  in  the  cold,  clear,  dazzling  glare 
the  life  of  ocean  and  continent  would  die. 
The  earth  would  not  cease  to  be — it  would 
roll  on,  a  fair  and  beauteous  star  among  the 
worlds ;  but  no  life  would  stir  in  its  cold 

246 


magnificence,  no  voice  would  break  the 
stillness  of  its  icy  solitudes— it  would  roll 
on,  a  splendid  sepulchre,  through  the  skies. 
Light  of  itself  is  not  enough.  Life  wants 
something  more  than  light.  No  life  can  be 
matured  apart  from  warmth.  Were  God 
only  light,  we  might  be  spotless  as  snow, 
chaste  as  crystals,  beautiful  as  blocks  of  ice  ; 
but  the  best  and  highest  things  in  our 
natures  would  die — there  would  be  no 
warmth  of  friendship  in  our  grasp,  no  pity 
flowing  in  tears  of  sympathy  from  our  eyes, 
no  sacrificing  love  in  our  hearts ;  our  minds 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  I.  JOBl^. 


CHAP.  II. 


H 


/ 


might  become  glorious,  but  our  hearts 
would  be  empty  and  dead.  And,  therefore, 
inasmuch  as  a  tender,  sympathetic  heart  is 
higher  than  a  mere  scholastic  mind,  inas- 
much as  sacrifice  is  profounder  than  wisdom, 
and  the  cross  sublimer  than  philosophy, 
insomuch  is  the  knowledge  that  "  God  is 
love  "  better  to  us  than  the  knowledge  that 
"  God  is  light." — Henry  Wcninacott. 

A  Legend  of  the  Light. — There  is  a  Eab- 
binical  legend  tbat,  when  light  issued  from 
under  the  throne  of  God,  the  prince  of 
darkness  asked  the  Creator  wherefore  He 
had  brought  light  into  existence.  God 
answered  that  it  was  in  order  that  he  might 
be  driven  back  to  his  abode  of  darkness. 
Tlie  evil  one  asked  that  he  might  see  that ; 
and,  entering  the  stream  of  light,  he  saw 
across  time  and  the  world,  and  beheld  the 
face  of  Messiah.  Then  he  fell  upon  his  face 
and  cried,  "  This  is  He  who  shall  lay  low  in 
ruin  me,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  hell." 

Ver.  7.  Walking  in  the  Light. — The  planet 
Venus  teaches  an  important  lesson  to  the 
followers  of  Christ,  viz.  that  the  earth  was 
never  yet  known  to  come  between  her  and 
the  sun.  Whence  the  languor  and  the 
spiritual  declensions,  the  darkness  and  the 
soul  distresses,  of  many  a  child  of  light  ? 
Come  they  not  very  frequently  from  giving 
way  to  earthly  cares,  earthly  joys,  and 
earthly  pursuits  ?  We  let  these  things  shut 
out  the  sun.  No  wonder  that  we  move 
heavily  and  walk  in  the  dark  while  we 
cultivate  that  friendship  with  this  world 
which  is  enmity  with  God.  But  if,  on  the 
contrary,  our  affections  are  set  on  things 
above— if  our  treasure  and  our  hearts  are 
with  Christ  in  heaven — we  shall  probably 
'•  walk  in  the  light,"  and  enjoy  an  abiding 
perception  of  interest  in  His  precious  blood 
which  cleanseth  from  all  sin.— Salter. 


Luther  and  the  Evil  One. — There  is  a 
legend  of  Luther  that,  during  a  serious  ill- 
ness, the  evil  one  seemed  to  enter  his  sick- 
room, and,  looking  at  him  with  a  triumphant 
smile,  unrolled  a  vast  roll  which  he  carried 


in  his  arms.  As  the  fiend  threw  one  end  of 
it  on  the  floor,  and  it  unwound  itself  with 
the  impetus  he  had  given  it,  Luther's  eyes 
were  fixed  on  it,  and  to  his  consternation 
he  read  there  the  long  and  fearful  record  of 
his  own  sins,  clearly  and  distinctly  enu- 
merated. That  stout  heart  quailed  before 
that  ghastly  roll.  Suddenly  it  flashed  into 
his  mind  that  there  was  one  thing  not 
written  there.  He  said  aloud,  "  One  thing 
you  have  forgotten  :  the  rest  is  all  true  ;  but 
one  thing  you  have  forgotten — •  The  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin.' "  As  he  said  this,  the  *'  accuser  of  the 
brethren,"  and  his  heavy  roll  of  "  lamenta- 
tion, and  mourning,  and  woe,"  disappeared 
together. 

Purity  through  Chrisfs  cleansing. — See 
these  pure  white  clouds  that  stretch  in 
ranks,  like  rolling  waves,  across  the  canopy 
of  heaven  in  the  still,  deep  noon  of  a  summer 
day  I  Row  after  row  they  lie  in  the  light, 
opening  their  bosoms  to  the  blaze  of  a  noon- 
tide sun ;  and  they  are  all  fair  ;  "  they  are 
without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing." 
Who  are  these  that  stand,  as  it  were,  around 
the  throne  of  God  in  white  clothing,  and 
whence  came  they  ?  These  are  they  that 
have  come  from  various  places  on  the 
surface  of  the  earth  and  sea, — some  from  the 
briny  ocean,  and  some  from  miry  land  ;  some 
from  yellow,  overflowing  rivers,  and  some 
from  cool,  crystal  springs  ;  some  from  stag- 
nant pools  in  distant,  lonely  deserts,  and 
some  from  the  slimy  bed  of  the  Thames,  or 
the  Clyde,  where  living  beings  can  scarcely 
breathe  on  the  banks.  All  are  alike  welcome 
to  these  heavens,  and  all  are,  in  their  resur- 
rection state,  equally  pure.  May  I — spirit- 
ually distant  and  unclean — may  I  rise,  like 
these  snow-white  clouds,  from  earth  to 
heaven,  and  take  my  place,  without  chal- 
lenge, among  the  stainless  witnesses  who 
stand  around  the  Redeemer's  throne  ?  I  may 
— not  because  my  stains  are  few,  but  because 
"the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son, 
cleanseth  from  all  sin."  I  may — not  because 
my  sins  are  small,  but  because  my  Saviour 
is  great. —  W.  Arnot. 


CHAPTER  II. 
PROVISION  FOR  THE  SINNING  OF  BELIEVERS: 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Firmly  does  St.  John  declare  that  the  Christian  should  not  sin,  and  must  not  sin.  But 
he  clearly  recognises  that  Christians  do  actually  sin  through  frailty.  And  he  presents  the 
consolation  which  is  found  in  the  gracious  provision  for  dealing  with  Christian  sins,  both 
in  their  relation  to  God,  and  in  their  effects  upon  Christians  themselves. 

Ver.  1.  Little  children. — Suitable  to  such  an  aged  and  honoured  teacher,  such  a  father 
in  Christ,  as  St.  John.    It  is  seen  that  it  expresses  his  affectionate  interest  in  them  ;  it  is 

247 


CHAP.  II.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


not  so  often  seen  that  it  expresses  also  his  sense  of  the  immaturity,  and  consequent  peril, 
of  the  disciples.  These  things. — Both  those  things  which  he  has  said,  and  those  things 
which  he  is  about  to  eay.  St.  John's  one  all-ruling  anxiety  was,  to  help  Christians  not  to 
sin.  His  epistle  can  only  be  understood  when  that  passion  for  righteousness  in  Christian 
professors  is  fully  apprehended.  This  may  be  taken  as  8t.  John's  key-note,  "  He  that 
doeth  righteousness  is  righteous,  even  as  He  [the  Divine  and  human  Son]  is  righteous." 
Advocate.— Same  word  as  St.  John  uses  in  his  gospel.  It  is  there  translated  "Comforter" 
(John  xiv.  16,  25,  xv.  26,  xvi.  7).  One  who  is  ready  to  plead  for  us  ;  and  One  who  has 
peculiar  power,  and  right,  to  plead.  See  our  word  "  Intercessor."  With  the  Father. —  With 
is  literally  towards.  But  the  point  is,  that  the  Advocate  is  always  with  the  Father,  and 
His  help  is  therefore  always  available.  The  name  for  God,  Father,  is  intended  to  remind 
us  that  the  apostle  is  not  here  speaking  about  anybody  and  everybody's  sins  against  God, 
but  precisely  about  the  sins  of  God's  children,  which  are  sins  against  their  spiritual  and 
Divine  Father.  The  righteous. — Or,  the  perfect,  ideal,  model  Son,  who  never  sins,  but  does 
always  the  things  that  please  the  Father,  His  standing  before  the  Father  as  the  righteous 
Son  is  the  perpetual  plea  for  merciful  dealing  with  those  who  want  to  be  such  sons  as  He 
is,  and  cannot  be  by  reason  of  their  bodily  and  human  frailties.  Righteous  sonship  is  ^he 
best  of  pleas  with  the  righteous  Father. 

Ver.  2.  Propitiation.— Better,  "And  He  Himself  is  a  propitiation."  It  is  not  something 
He  does  that  propitiates,  but  He  Himself  standing  ever  before  the  Father  as  the  righteous 
Son  propitiates  the  Father,  and,  as  it  were,  secures  His  kindly  dealing  with  the  other  sons, 
who  are  working  towards,  but  come  short  of,  the  same  righteous  sonship.  Our  sins. — 
Distinctly  ours ;  the  reference  is  precisely  to  those  who  are  born  of  God  into  the  spiritual 
sonship.  Of  the  whole  world. — This  St.  John  adds,  lest  his  precise  setting  of  truth  should 
be  supposed  to  exclude  the  general  truth  of  Christ's  redemptive  work  for  the  world. 
St.  Paul  presents  a  similar  double  truth  when  he  writes  of  Christ  as  "  the  Saviour  of  all 
men,  specially  of  those  who  believe." 

Ver.  3.  Know  Him. — Compare  chap.  i.  6,  "have  fellowship  with  Him."  Better,  know 
Him  in  the  special  spiritual  relations  of  Divine  Fatherhood.  Sin  disturbs  the  knowledge, 
and  breaks  the  relations.  Perfect  son-like  obedience,  such  as  Christ's,  keeps  for  us  the 
knowledge  of  the  Father,  and  the  close  relations  with  the  Father,  which  Christ  has.  His 
commandments. — Some  think  Christ's  are  meant ;  but  it  is  better  to  understand  the  Father's 
commandments  apprehended  through  Christ. 

Ver.  4.  A  liar. — We  do  not  now  use  this  word,  save  under  special  stress.  Such  a  man  as 
St.  John  speaks  of  we  should  call  "  self-deceived,"  a  man  giving  way  to  self-delusions. 
The  two  things,  the  new  life  unto  righteousness,  in  Christ,  and  the  old  life  unto  iniquity, 
in  self,  can  never  by  any  possibility  be  made  to  go  together.     The  one  kills  the  other. 

Ver.  5.  Love  of  God  perfected. — Because  the  one  thing  that  love  is  ever  striving  to  do  is, 
inspire  obedience  ;  and  it  only  accomplishes  its  end  when  it  secures  obedience. 

Ver.  6.  Abideth  in  Him. — The  truth  is  applied  to  the  Christian  life  which  has  already 
been  applied  to  the  Christian  profession.  A  Christ-like  obedience  is  the  one  all-sufficing 
test  of  reality  and  sincerity.  Walk. — Compare  "  conversation,"  terms  that  compass  the 
whole  Christian  life  and  relations. 

Ver.  8.  New  commandment. — St.  John  seems  to  refer  to  his  demand  of  love  to  the 
brethren,  as  the  satisfactory  sign  of  heart-obedience,  son-like  obedience  to  the  Father. 
And  this  was  new  in  the  sense  that  no  previous  religious  or  ethical  system  had  made  such 
a  demand.  The  common  law  of  humanity  is,  "  Serve  yourself  first,  and  then  serve  others, 
if  you  can."  The  Divine  law  of  humanity  is,  "  Serve  others  first,  and  serve  yourselves  only 
when  you  are  quite  free  of  all  brotherly  obligations."  Darkness  is  past. — Which  hid  from 
men  the  Fatherhood  of  God,  and  prevented  them  from  realising  their  brotherhood.  True 
light. — It  is  the  light  of  Christ's  ideal  sonship  and  brotherliness. 

Ver,  9.  Hateth. — This  is  a  word  which  has  changed  its  meaning  since  the  A.V.  was  made. 
The  Bible  word  means,  "  love  less  "  ;  "  put  second  "  ;  "  show  indifference  to."  The  Christian 
hates  self  when  he  puts  self  second.  The  worldly  man  hates  his  brother  when  he  puts 
him  after  self. 

Ver.  10.  None  occasion  of  stumbling. — I.e.  the  self-seeking  principle  is  constantly  putting 
men  in  peril  of  doing  wrong  and  unjust  things  to  their  brethren.  The  love  which  "seeketh 
not  her  own  "  never  urges  any  man  to  do  anything  that  is  unkind  or  unworthy.  "  Love  to 
the  brethren  is  a  proof  of  uninterrupted  abiding  in  the  light,  and  of  a  blameless  course  in 
the  way  of  righteousness."  St.  John  evidently  had  to  deal  with  teachers  who  urged  that 
love  to  Christ  was  enough  to  secure  all  the  Christian  blessings.  He  counteracts  such 
mischievous  teachings,  by  thus  firmly  asserting  that  love  to  Christ  is  absolutely  inseparable 
from  love  to  the  brethren  ;  there  cannot  possibly  be  the  one  without  the  other. 

Vers.  12-17  indicate  the  things  which  the  disciples  must  not  love,  if  they  would  walk  in 
the  light,  and  be  sons  with  the  "  Only  Begotten." 

Ver.  12.  Sins  are  forgiven. — The  reception  of  Divine  forgiveness  is  our  virtual  pledge 
that  we  will  not  again  sin.     "The  forgiveness  of  sins  is  the  first  condition  of  Christian 

248 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN.  chap,  il 


morals."  His  name's  sake. — His  name  is  Son.  The  basis  of  forgiveness  is  the  offering  to  God 
the  Father  of  a  perfect  sonsbip — the  sonship  of  a  man  tested  in  a  human  life  and  death, 
St.  John  has  not  in  mind  what  we  mean  by  "  for  the  sake  of  His  atonement." 

Ver.  13.  Fathers. — The  older  men  among  the  disciples  ;  regarded  as  having  a  prolonged 
personal  experience.  Young  men. — Who  have  gained  something  like  a  personal  hold  of 
Divine  things,  but  are  in  danger  of  being  over-confident  and  over-positive.  They  have 
gained  first  victories  over  evil,  and  are  in  danger  of  being  unduly  proud  of  their  success. 
In  each  case  St.  John  recognises  a  certain  maturity,  in  which  there  is  hope,  together  with 
a  certain  immaturity,  which  exposes  disciples  to  the  powers  of  evil  and  temptation. 

Ver.  15.  The  world. — Compare  our  Lord's  words,  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon." 
By  the  "world"  we  may  understand  "that  moral  order  which  is  antagonistic  to  God."  Or 
we  may  keep  in  the  line  of  St.  John's  thought  and  say,  "  It  is  all  that  sphere  in  which 
only  self-interests  are  allowed  to  rule."  St.  John  personifies  the  self,  and  calls  it  the  "  evil 
one,"  the  "  wicked  one."  Things  in  the  world. — The  love  of  pleasure,  money,  glory.  See 
Jas.  i.  27,  iv.  4.  Philo  taught,  "It  is  impossible  for  love  to  the  world  to  coexist  with 
love  to  God." 

Ver.  16.  Lust  of  the  flesh. — The  genitive  after  iTridvfila  is  usually  subjective.  The  lusts 
which  have  their  agents  in  the  flesh  and  in  the  eyes.  Lust  is  desire  that  is  not  being  held 
in  wise  and  safe  control.  "The  habit  of  a  mind  engrossed  by  sensual  gratifications." 
Pride  of  life. — This  is  well  expressed  by  the  term  "  braggadocio  of  life  "  ;  "  wanton  ostenta- 
tion in  gratifying  the  desires  of  sense  and  sight "  (Jas.  iv.  16).  "  All  living  up  to  a 
supposed  social  position,  instead  of  as  the  responsible  steward  of  undeserved  bounties,  is 
hereby  condemned." 

Ver.  17.  Abideth  for  ever. — Because  God  is  on  the  side  of  goodness,  and  there  are  no 
forces  which  can  effectively  stop  it,  or  destroy  it.  In  the  nature  of  things  evil  is  temporary, 
and  good  is  permanent.     Ihr  ever  means,  "  unto  the  age  to  come." 

Ver.  18.  Last  time. — K.V.  "last  hour  "  ;  probably  it  should  be  "  a  last  hour."  The  period 
after  Christ's  coming  in  the  flesh,  however  long  it  may  prove  to  be,  is  regarded  as  the  "  last 
time."  If  the  apostles  did  expect  a  visible  return  of  their  Lord  in  their  day,  it  is  quite 
clear  that  the  facts  of  Christian  history  have  proved  that  the  expectation  was  founded  on 
misapprehension.  The  Christian  dispensation  is  the  last  until  there  is  another.  Antichrist 
shall  come. — Cometh.  It  was  the  common  belief  of  Christians  that  some  individual  anti- 
christ would  appear  before  our  Lord's  second  coming ;  and  a  similar  notion  is  entertained 
by  those  who  look  for  the  second  coming  now.  Antichrist  is  any  person,  or  any  thing,  that 
opposes  the  establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  earth.  So  there  have  been  antichrists 
in  every  age,  and  there  are  antichrists  to-day.  Oppositiun  to  Christ  is  the  essential  idea  of 
the  word ;  but  it  seems  specially  to  refer  to  those  who  claimed  that  they  themselves  were 
christs — such  as  Barcochba.  There  is,  however,  a  distinction  to  be  drawn  between  false 
christs  and  antichrists.  Compare  Barcochba  and  Cerinthus.  Are  there  many  antichrists. — 
Better,  "have  there  arisen."  St.  John  would  check  the  disposition  to  fix  the  association  of 
antichrist  to  any  mie  person.  And  his  caution  is  greatly  needed  in  our  day.  What  we 
require  to  see  more  clearly  is,  that  antichrist  may  be  a  person,  but  it  need  not  be  :  it  may  be 
a  sentiment,  a  teaching,  a  doctrine,  a  social  influence. 

Ver.  19.  Went  out  from  us. — The  most  dangerous  form  of  antichrist  is  the  heretical 
teaching  of  those  who  have  belonged  to  Christ's  Church.  They  so  easily  make  rival  parties 
and  sects.  Perhaps  St.  John  had  in  mind  the  Gnostics,  who  were  recruited  from  members 
of  the  Christian  Church.  The  Church  in  every  age  has  been  composed  of  nominal  members 
and  real  members.  Its  peril  has  always  lain  in  the  uncertainty  of  the  response  of  its 
nominal  members  to  surrounding  doubtful  and  evil  influences.  Those  who  have  the 
"unction  from  the  Holy  One,"  the  Divine  indwelling  Spirit,  are  defended  from  the  attrac- 
tions of  sectarianism  and  heresy.  Their  spiritual  life,  kept  in  health  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
throws  off  all  attacks  of  disease,  as  bodies  do  in  which  there  is  strong  vitality. 

Ver.  20.  Unction  from  the  Holy  One. — Or,  "anointing."  The  association  of  the  Spirit 
coming  to  a  man,  when  anointed  to  a  Divine  office,  may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  the  kings 
Saul  and  David.  Each  believer,  in  the  early  Church,  received  an  anointing  from  God  in  the 
gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Know  all  things. — Led  by  the  Spirit  into  all  truth, 
and  therefore  guarded  against  the  attractions  of  error.  Some  read,  "you  all  know" — that 
is,  "  you  are  in  possession  of  the  true  knowledge"  (John  xvi.  13). 

Ver.  22.  A  liar. — Better,  "  the  liar."  The  Christ. — I.e.  the  Messiah.  Denieth  the  Father  and 
the  Son. — Three  tests  by  which  the  spirit  of  antichrist  may  be  recognised.  It  will  be  found 
to  oppose  the  Messiahship,  and  the  Sonship  of  Jesus,  and  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  These 
tests  of  orthodoxy  are  seldom  applied  now,  or  indeed  regarded  as  sufficient. 

Ver.  23.— The  second  part  of  this  verse  the  R.V.  preserves,  and  reads  thus,  "  he  that  con- 
fesseth  t}ie  Son  hath  the  Father  also," 

Ver.  24. — Omit  "therefore."  Which  ye  have  heard.- Concerning  Christ,  and  Christ's 
truth,  on  the  authority  of  His  apostles.    Remain  .  .  .  continue. — In  both  cases  prefer  the 

249 


CHAP  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


word  "abide."  Br.  Plummer  paraphrases  thus,  "Let  the  truths  which  were  first  taught 
you  have  a  home  in  your  hearts :  if  these  have  a  home  in  you,  ye  also  shall  have  a  home  in 
the  Son  and  in  the  Father."  Developments  of  the  primary  truths  there  must  be,  but  all 
developments,  adjustments,  and  adaptations  must  be  in  the  strictest  harmony  with  the 
primary  truths. 

Ver.  27.  Any  man  teach  you. — That  is,  any  man  who  claims  personal  authority  to  teach, 
and  does  not  speak  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Anointing. — Which  implies  and 
involves  that  the  Spirit  is  in  you,  leading  you  into  all  truth.  St.  John  seems  t©  suggest  that 
the  Spirit  dwelling  in  the  disciple  will  always  make  him  sensitive  to  the  recognition  of  the 
Spirit  in  his  teacher.  As  he  has  shewn  that  the  new  Divine  life  will  keep  us  from  sin^  so 
now  he  shows  that  it  will  keep  us  from  error. 

Ver.  28.  Ashamed  before  Him. — Better,  "  shamed  away  from  Him"-;  or,  "shrink  in  shame 
from  Him." 

Ver.  29.  Ye  know. — Better,  "  know  ye."  Doeth  righteousness.— Note  the  emphasis  on 
doing  :  see  chap.  iii.  7.  "  A  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  life  is  the  fruit,  and  consequently 
the  proof,  of  spiritual  birth — the  token  by  which  the  sons  of  God  by  adoption  and  grace  are 
distinguished  from  other  men." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—6. 

2^he  Remedy  for  Christian  Sin  a  Reason  for  not  sinning. — It  has  already  been 
shown  that  fellowship  with  God  must  depend  on  our  being  kin  with  Him  in 
light,  which  represents  purity,  righteousness,  sinlessness.  But  that  condition  is 
practically  unattainable  by  any  who  are  placed  in  creaturely  limitations,  and 
in  existing  human  conditions.  Even  w^hen  a  man  is  right  in  will,  and  purpose, 
and  endeavour,  the  fact  remains  that  he  falls  into  sins  of  frailty,  and  even  sins 
of  temporary  self-willedness.  If  St.  John  had  failed  to  recognise  this  fact,  and 
had  made  unqualified  the  demand  for  perfection,  as  the  absolutely  essential 
condition  of  fellowship,  he  would  have  made  the  Christian  life  a  hopeless  and 
impossible  thing  :  men  would  despairingly  have  said,  "  It  is  high  ;  I  cannot  attain 
unto  it ;  and  I  shall  not  try."  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  necessary  to  present 
the  remedy  for  Christian  frailty  and  sin  in  such  a  way  that  men  could  not 
presume  upon  it,  and  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound.  In  the  first  two 
verses  of  this  chapter,  the  remedy  for  Christian  sin,  which  was  partly  stated 
in  chap.  i.  7,  is  further  unfolded ;  or  we  may  more  correctly  say,  the  one  truth 
is  seen  from  other  sides,  and  other  points  of  view. 

I.  The  provision  made  for  Christian  sin. — This  is  stated  in  very  precise  terms. 
We  have  an  Advocate,  and  His  advocacy  is  a  propitiation.  1.  We  have  an 
Advocate — TrapaKXrjTov  exo/Jiev.  The  word  is  "Paraclete,"  which  we  directly 
associate  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  which  our  Lord  taught  us  could  properly 
be  applied  to  Himself ;  for  He  said,  "  I  will  send  you  another  Comforter."  Would 
we  then  understand  the  Paraclete's  work  with  the  Father,  we  must  compare  it 
with  the  Paraclete's  work  in  us.  It  is  clearly  a  persuading,  influencing  work — 
a  pleading  of  our  cause,  a  securing  of  gracious  and  kindly  deahng  with  our 
Christian  sins.  The  figure  in  the  word,  both  as  applied  to  Christ  and  to  the 
Spirit,  is  the  pleading  of  a  man's  cause  at  a  court  of  justice,  and  the  securing  of 
an  acquittal,  or  at  least  of  a  modification  of  sentence.  But  we  may  come  much 
nearer  to  the  case  St.  John  presents  if  we  fit  his  illustration  to  family  life. 
One  of  the  children  in  the  family  love  may  be  led  astray,  and  may  do  some 
wrong  thing,  which  greatly  grieves  the  parent,  and  for  the  time  properly  puts 
even  the  beloved  child  out  of  pleasant  relations.  What  can  be  done  to  restore 
relations  ?  Plainly  enough,  it  is  possible  for  another  son — maybe  the  eldest 
son — to  take  all  the  burden  upon  himself,  and  resolve  to  doeveiything  possible  to 
set  things  right  again.  His  first  work  will  be  with  the  erring  brother ;  he  must 
get  him  to  see  his  sin,  confess  it,  and  be  sorry  for  it.  Then  when  he  has  got  his 
brother  restored  to  his  right,  child-like  mind,  he  can   be  his  "advocate  with 

250     " 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  II. 


the  father,"  and  can  present  such  reasons  as  may  persuade  and  propitiate  him, 
and  make  it  right  for  him  to  receive  the  erring  son  back  again  into  the  family- 
life.  And  so  Christ,  our  elder  brother,  undertakes  to  deal  with  His  brothers' 
sins.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sins."  When  they 
are  recovered  to  right -willedness,  right-heartedness.  He  can  become  their 
"  Advocate  with  the  Father,"  and  with  all  becoming  and  effective  persuasions 
propitiate  Him,  and  secure  their  return  to  full  son-like  standing  and  rela- 
tions. 2.  The  advocacy  of  Christ  is  a  "  propitiation."  There  is  no  indication 
whatever  that  St.  John  had  in  his  mind  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ.  His 
mind  was  evidently  occupied  with  the  person  of  Christ,  with  the  living  person 
of  Christ — not  with  something  He  had  done,  but  with  something  He  was  doiiig, 
the  actual  present  relation  in  which  He  stands  to  believers.  His  present  spiritual 
intercession  and  advocacy.  A  father  ought  to  show  his  indignation  and  grief  at 
the  wrong-doing  of  his  child.  He  ought  to  punish  the  child  by  putting  him  for 
a  time  out  of  pleasant  relations.  And  such  a  father,  in  such  a  becoming  state 
of  mind,  can  be  appeased,  can  be  properly  propitiated,  if  he  can  be  assured  that 
the  erring  child  has  been  brought  to  penitence  and  confession,  and,  in  the 
recovered  spirit  of  son -like  obedience  and  trust,  longs  to  have  loving  relations 
restored.  It  should  clearly  be  seen,  that  the  pleading  of  the  Advocate  is  with  the 
Father^  whose  son  has  gone  astray ;  and  the  propitiation  is  such  as  can  be  offered 
to  a  grieved  Father.  It  is  twofold :  1.  It  is  the  personal  acceptableness  of  the 
Advocate  (Christ  the  righteous)  which  gives  power  to  His  plea.  2.  It  is  the 
work  which  the  Advocate  has  done  in  the  erring  son  which  gives  the  Father  full 
and  sufficient  ground  for  restoi-ing  him  to  favour. 

II.  The  persuasion  against  Christian  sinning. — "  These  things  I  write  unto 
you,  that  ye  may  not  sin."  T©  unfold  such  full  and  gracious  provisions  for  a  case 
of  Christian  sin  might  be  used  wi-ongly,  and  Christian  people  might  become 
indifferent  and  careless.  Because  recovery  was  so  easy  and  so  complete,  they 
might  presume,  and  think  Hghtly  of  frailties  and  stumblings.  St.  John  reminds 
us  how  utterly  wrong,  and  how  unworthy,  such  a  misuse  of  his  teachings  was. 
The  grace  in  recovery  should  be  a  persuasion  to  the  most  watchful  endeavour  not 
to  make  occasion  for  the  grace.  There  should  be  the  most  resolute  effort  to  keep 
our  Father's  commandments,  and  never  grieve  Him,  or  put  ourselves  out  of 
loving  relations  with  Him.  And  we  shall  be  sure  to  keep  right  if  only  we  will 
"  walk  even  as  Christ  walked  "  (ver.  6).  There  is  the  Sonsbip  that  is  always 
well-pleasing  to  the  Father ;  and  the  very  grace  of  that  Son  towards  His 
frail  brothers  should  be  a  constant  persuasion  to  them  to  try,  more  and  more, 
to  live  like  Him,  and  think  like  Him,  and  keep  all  pleasant  relations  with 
the  Father,  even  as  He  does,  because  He  ever  walks  in  the  light,  which 
is  kin  with  the  Father,  who  is  light. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  1.  St.  JohifUs  Little  Children. — 
*'  My  little  cliildren  " — rcKi/ta.  It  is  quite 
certain  that  St.  John  does  not  write 
his  epistle  to,  or  here  address,  mere 
children.  His  term  is  used  figura- 
tively. St.  John  may  have  in  mind — 
1.  That  the  believers  to  whom  he 
wrote  were  but  in  the  young,  early 
stages  of  Christian  life,  knowledge, 
and  experience.     2.  Or  the  term  may 


only  indicate  his  affectionate  consider- 
tion  for  them,  as  an  aged  father  in 
Christ.  But  it  is  more  probable — 
3.  That  the  term  was  carefully  chosen 
by  St.  John,  in  order  to  suggest  to 
them  that  family  associations  would 
best  explain  to  them  his  teachings. 
They  would  understand  him  if  they 
thought  of  themselves  as  children — 
good  children,  but  frail — and  needing 

251 


Chap.  it. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


much  training  and  discipline;  and  if 
they  thought  of  God  as  their  Father, 
who  wovild  surely  be  grieved  at  His 
children's  wayward  ways.  **  St.  John's 
conception  of  the  Church  is  that  of  a 
family,  in  which  all  are  children  of 
God  and  brethren  one  of  another,  but 
in  which  also  some  who  are  elders 
stand  in  a  parental  relation  to  the 
younger  brethren."  See  chaps,  ii.  12, 
28,  iii.  18,  iv.  4,  V.  21. 

Children's  Sin. — *'  That  ye  may  not 
sin."  Ye,  the  children  of  the  family, 
to  which  St.  John,  and  the  Lord  Jesus, 
both  belonged.  The  distinction  be- 
tween the  sin  of  those  in  family  rela- 
tions, and  the  sin  of  those  outside  family 
relations,  needs  to  be  very  carefully 
drawn.  For  one  thing,  the  sins  of  the 
members  of  the  family  are  wholly 
dealt  with  within  tlie  family.  They 
are  never  taken  to  a  court  of  justice. 
They  can  be  quite  effectively  dealt  with 
by  the  father,  and  the  other  children. 
For  another  thing,  the  idea  of  punish- 
ment for  vindication  of  authority  goes 
into  the  background  in  connection  with 
a  child's  sin ;  and  the  recovery  of  the 
child,  and  the  discipline  of  the  child 
through  the  way  in  which  he  is  re- 
covered, become  the  prominent  and  all- 
important  things. 

Our  Lwd  as  Paraxilete. — 7rapoLKX7]To<s 
Trpos  Tov  Trarepa.  The  Lord  is  our 
Paraclete — that  is,  not  as  it  were 
with  the  Father,  for  the  accusative 
must  have  its  rights,  as  meaning  over 
against  or  towards  the  Father.  His 
advocacy  turns  towards  the  Father, 
and  has  to  do  with  Him;  while,  on 
the  other  hand.  He  is,  according  to 
the  gospel,  iv  rjfuv,  our  Paraclete,  inas- 
much as  He  stands  by  the  side  of  the 
Christian,  in  all  his  conflict  with  the 
world  and  himself,  as  his  Counsellor, 
and  Advocate,  and  Helper.  But  as 
towards  God,  who  is  light,  and  a 
righteous  Judge,  the  Lord  can  be 
regarded  as  a  merciful  Mediator  only 
under  a  twofold  presupposition : 
1.  He  must  Himself  be  well-pleas- 
ing to  God  through  His  moral  quali- 

252 


fication.  2.  He  must  represent  a 
cause  which  may  commend  itself  to 
God  as  the  righteous  One.  The  first 
element  is  in  our  verse  made  pro- 
minent by  the  predicate  8t/catos ;  the 
second  verse  brings  out  the  second 
element.  The  two  united  cannot  be 
more  tersely  and  precisely  expressed 
than  in  the  words  of  Calvin  :  *'  Justum 
et  propitiationem  vocat  Christum ; 
utroque  prseditum  esse  oportet;  ut 
munus  personamque  advocati  susti- 
neat,  quis  enim  peccator  nobis  Dei 
gratiam  conciliet  ? "  Hence  it  is 
not  to  be  overlooked  that  we  read, 
not  TrapaKXr/Tov  SiKatov  ej^o/xcv,  but 
TrapoLKXrjTOv  e^ofxev  Irjaovv^pio-Tov  SiKaLov. 
The  former  statement  would  indeed 
mean  that  His  agency  as  a  Paraclete 
was  a  righteous  one,  that  He  is 
righteous  in  His  proper  function  as  a 
Paraclete — as  Beda  expresses  it,  "  Pa- 
tronus  Justus  caussas  injustas  non 
accipit "  ;  but  it  is  not  until  the  second 
verse  that  that  element  comes  out. 
The  order  in  the  apostle's  own  words 
gives  prominence  first  to  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  person — by  reason  of  which 
He  is  fitted  generally,  as  over  against 
God,  to  assume  the  part  of  a  Mediator. 
— Eric  Uaupt, 

Christ  in  Heaven. — St.  John's  mes- 
sage can  be  put  into  a  sentence. 
Fellowship  with  the  Father  may  be 
enj©yed,  but  only  by  those  who  "  walk 
in  the  light."  The  full  idea  of  the 
Christian  hfe  includes  likeness  to  God 
in  two  essential  things — light  and  love. 
In  the  perfect  Christian  Hfe  there  is 
no  sin,  for  there  is  no  self-will.  Who- 
soever is  born  of  God  does  not  commit 
sin ;  for  His  seed  remaineth  in  him, 
and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is  born 
of  God.  But  that  ideal  is  seldom,  if 
ever,  actually  attained.  As  a  fact. 
Christian  people  do  sin.  Unless  the 
statement  is  most  carefully  qualified, 
it  is  false  for  any  man  to  say  that  he 
has  reached  conscious  freedom  from 
sin.  The  word  of  God  provides  for 
the  fact  of  Christian  sin.  They  who 
are  clean  every  whit  still  need  to  wash 
their   feet.      There   are   two  ways  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN, 


CHAP.  II. 


dealing  with  the  fact :  1.  We  may 
assume  that  sin  is  a  necessity  to  the 
Christian  hfe,  and  that  there  need  be 
no  grave  anxiety  about  it.  But  to 
deal  with  it  in  this  way  would  be  to 
put  our  Christian  life  in  peril,  and 
nourish  presumption.  Dress  a  child 
in  pure  garments,  and  it  will  make 
all  the  difference  in  his  conduct  if  he 
is  expected  to  soil  them.  The  child 
and  the  Christian  should  fully  under- 
stand that  they  need  not  soil  their 
garments  :  they  may  walk  in  white. 
But  in  case  they  unwittingly  do,  pro- 
vision is  duly  made.  2.  We  may  too 
greatly  despond  on  account  of  Chris- 
tian sins,  and  this  we  do  when  we 
wrongly  estimate  the  provision  which 
has  been  made  for  them.  Despondency 
is  a  serious  evil ;  it  plucks  away  the 
joy  and  enterprise  of  Christian  life. 
It  is  quite  one  thing  for  us  to  have 
some  stains  gather  on  the  white  gar- 
ment of  our  acceptance,  and  quite 
another  to  strip  our  white  garment  off. 
Keeping  it  on,  there  is  a  most  full 
and  blessed  provision  made  for  the 
stains :  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 
Deliverance  from  both  forms  of  mis- 
take lies  in  a  proper  apprehension  of 
the  truth  gathering  round  Christ  in 
heaven. 

I.  Christ  in  heaven — in  general,  His 
work  in  the  heavenly  places. — The 
mediatorial  work  of  Christ  is  repre- 
sented as  having  three  stages,  when 
viewed  historically.  A  stage  of  pre- 
paration running  through  some  four 
thousand  years,  in  which  man  was 
permitted  to  exhaust  every  scheme  of 
self- recovery.  Then  followed  a  stage 
of  manifestation^  comprising  the  brief 
human  life  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Perfect 
virtue,  incarnate  love,  was  then  ex- 
hibited as  the  object  of  man's  trust, 
imitation,  and  love.  To  this  succeeds 
a  stage  of  spiritual  relations.  Christ 
is  conceived  as  exalted  to  the  right 
hand  of  the  Father,  as  passed  beyond 
body  limitations,  as  become  a  spiritual 
power,  aiding  the  development  of  the 
godly  life  in  those  who  believe.  New 
Testament  Scriptures  frequently  pre- 


sent the  vision  of  Christ  in  heaven,  in 
His  glorified  humanity — in  that  glorified 
humanity  which  He  showed  us  for 
forty  days  after  His  resurrection. 
Thus  exalted,  and  spiritualised,  our 
Lord  bears  now  actual,  present,  direct, 
and  most  intimate  relations  to  all  the 
varying  phases  of  our  personal  and 
our  associated  life.  Often  we  read  the 
deep  meanings  of  the  Sacrifice  and 
Besurrectien.  We  should  be  oftener 
searching  into  the  deep  meanings  of 
the  Ascension.  The  Christian  disciple 
may  stand  steadfastly  gazing  into 
heaven,  watching  the  shining  way  up 
which  the  Saviour  went,  and  trying 
to  pierce  the  cloud-veil  that  hides  His 
glory  from  view.  In  the  moments  of 
opened  vision,  which  holy  souls  some- 
times know,  Stephen  looked  through, 
and  saw  "  Jesus  standing  at  the  right 
hand  of  God."  Saul  of  Tarsus  heard 
the  voice  of  Him  he  was  persecuting 
speaking  out  of  the  heavenly  places ; 
and  St.  John  saw  Christ,  in  the 
sublime  visions  of  Patmos,  standing 
before  the  throne,  and,  as  the  **  Angel 
of  the  covenant,"  waving  the  golden 
censer  wherein  are  the  **  prayers  of  the 
saints."  There,  in  the  glory,  ''  on  His 
vesture,  and  on  His  thigh,  is  this  name 
written.  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of 
lords."  "  We  have  a  great  High 
Priest  who  is  passed  into  the  heavens, 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God."  John  "  beheld, 
and  lo  !  in  the  midst  of  the  throne, 
and  of  the  four  beasts,  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb  as 
it  had  been  slain,  having  seven  horns, 
and  seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven 
spirits  of  God  sent  forth  into  all  the 
earth."  We  need  not,  however,  think 
of  Him  as  exhibiting  His  wounds  in 
heaven,  and  using  persuasions  with 
God  on  our  behalf  by  pointing  to  the 
marks  of  nails  and  spear.  He  is  God's 
beloved  Son,  infinitely  acceptable  on 
the  ground  of  a  spiritual  obedience, 
of  which  the  Father  can  never  need 
any  such  material  remindings.  The 
natural  body  has  become  the  glorified 
body ;  even  the  earth -marks  are  glori- 
fied, and  lie  now  only  as  tender 
memorials   of   a  past  to   quicken  the 

253 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


redeemed  to   new  love  and  thankful- 
ness.    In  addition  to  Scripture  teach- 
ings, we  can  discover  the  necessity  for 
thinking   of   Christ  as  in  heaven   by 
the  place   left  for  that  truth  in   the 
circle  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  in  the 
demand  made  for  it  by  the  Christian 
heart.     We  can  see  this — 1.  God  can 
never  be  rightly  known  by  man  except 
through  humanity.      The   very  point 
of    Christ's   taking   our    nature   upon 
Him,    actually    coming    in   the  flesh, 
being   born    of    a    woman,   and  in   all 
points  tempted  like  as  we  are,  lies  in 
the  necessity  for  revealing  the  know- 
ledge of    God   through    man's  nature. 
Man  can  never  know  God  sufficiently 
and   savingly   until   he  can  see    Him 
as  if  He  were  a  fellow-man.     Therefore 
false  religions  always  dream  of  incarna- 
tions.     Therefore    the    true    religion 
declares   that    "  He  who   was  in   the 
form  of  God  .  .  .  was  found  in  fashion 
as   a  man."     It  is  still  as  true  as  it 
ever   was,    that   man  can  only  know 
God  through    the   forms    and   figures 
that  belong  to  man.     So  when  he  lifts 
his  eyes  to  the  heavenly,  and  through 
the  veil  of  Christ  would  see   God,    it 
can  only  be  by  realising  the  humanity, 
the  brotherhood,  of  the  glorified  and 
exalted  Son.     All  visions  of  the  spirit- 
ual and   the   heavenly  would   become 
unreal   to  us,    would   be  vague,    dim, 
dreamy,   unpractical,  if  we  lost   from 
the  ascended   Christ   His   bodily   and 
human  associations.      Our  living  and 
spu-itual  Saviour  is  the  "  Man  Christ 
Jesus."     2.   Men  would  be,    all  down 
through   the   ages,    and   all   over   the 
world,  seeking  the  Saviour  with  their 
various  burdens  of  suffering  and  sin. 
They  would  want  the  >ympathy  of  the 
"  Man  of  sorrows."     They  would  need 
a    Saviour   in   heaven.      Kept  in  the 
limitations  of  a  human  body.  He  could 
not  speak  with  voice  that  should  reach 
all    seekers ;     but    exalted,    ascended, 
spiritual.   He  can  be  the  dear   friend 
of   every   soul ;    from    the    east,    and 
west,  and  north,  and  south  they  may 
come,  and  do  come,  to  sit  down  in  the 
kingdom    of   the    Son,  because   He  is 
the  risen,  glorified,  living  Son.     3.  And 

254 


the  work  of  sanctification  which  has 
to  be  wrought  in  the  renewed  assures 
us  that   Christ   is  in   heaven.     There 
are  three  stages  in  His  work  as  carried 
on  in  the  hearts  of  His  people.     Entire 
recovery  is  not  effected    by  the   first 
act  of  faith.     That  enthrones  the  new 
principle.     But  much  has  to  be  done 
in  giving  that  principle  its  full  sway. 
And  the  one  condition  of  progressive 
sanctification    is     that    we    maintain 
fellowship  with  the  Father.     And  the 
fellowship  is  kept  up  by  this — Jesus, 
our  elder  Brother,  is  maintaining  the 
fellowship,    as    representing    us,    and 
pledging   us.       Is   a   Christian    asked 
whether  he   is  keeping  up  fellowship 
with  God,  'he  replies,  "  Do  you  mean 
I  by  myself,  or  I  in  Christ  ?  "     4.  And 
Christ's  own  are  ever  passing  into  the 
glorified  state,  where  they  will  want 
Him.     If  the  marks  of  His  manhood 
do  not  still  appear,  our  passing  friends 
will  feel  strange  in  their   new  home. 
Surely  it  must  be  the  soul's  recognition 
of  its  long- loved  Brother,  and  Friend, 
and  Saviour  that  will  unseal  the  eyes, 
and     bring    recognition     of     glorified 
mothers,    and    children,    and    friends. 
Call  it  what  you  may,  the  Christian 
heart   clings    to    the    conviction    that 
"  Jesus  lives  "  :  He  is  in  heaven.     He 
still  reveals  the^  Father.     He  still  wel- 
comes the   seeKer.     He  still  sanctifies 
those   who  believe.      He   will    be   the 
glorified  Man  until   all   the  elect   are 
gathered  in,   and  all  the  ends  of  His 
redemption  reached.      Then  He  shall 
"  see  of  the  travail    of  His  soul,   and 
shall  be  satisfied." 

II.  Christ  in  heaven — in  particu- 
lar, His  relation  to  Christian  sins, 
and  to  the  states  of  mind  into  which 
we  are  brought  by  sins. — The  word 
translated  "  Advocate "  is  the  word 
"  Paraclete,"  with  which  we  are  fami- 
liar as  describing  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  exactly  means,  "  One  who  may  be 
called  upon  for  help."  And  in  calling 
Christ  our  "  Advocate "  attention  is 
directed  to  His  relation  to  us  as  a 
Helper.  It  is  not  designed,  by  the  use 
of  this  word,  to  indicate  the  exact 
nature   of    His    relationship   to    God. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN, 


CHAP.   II. 


He  is  our  Advocate,  appearing  in  the 
presence  of  God  /w  ibs.     It  is  needful 
to  point  this  out,  because,  having  the 
idea  of  the  barrister  and  lawyer  in  our 
minds,  we  too  easily  transfer  our  legal 
fictions    to    God,    and    thereby   sadly 
misconceive    His   relations   both   with 
Christ   and   with   men.     Then    He  is 
Advocate  with  the  Father :  not  with  a 
Judge  ;  not  hefcn^e  the  Father,  but  with 
Him.      Not  using  '  persuasions   before 
the  Father,  or  arguments  to  guide  the 
Judge,  but  the  Father's  own  Helper, 
provided  by  the  Father  in  His  great 
love  for  the  helping  of  His  redeemed 
family.      Moreover,  it  is  Jesus  Christ 
the  righteous  who  is  Advocate.      Not 
Jesus   Christ   the  priest.      Not  Jesus 
Christ  the  sacrifice,  or  the  atonement, 
but  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous.     His 
fellowship  with  the  Father,  as  repre- 
senting us,  is  based  on  His  merit,  His 
righteousness — the  righteousness  of  His 
Sonship,  the  obedience  of  the  Divine 
will   unto   and   through   death.       His 
righteousness  is  perfect ;  therefore  the 
fellowship   is   never  broken,    and   He 
can  use  all  the  privileges  belonging  to 
that  fellowship  for  the  helping, ,  com- 
forting, teaching,  saving,  of  His  people. 

1.  Christ  in  heaven  ensures  the  abiding 
forgiveness  of  Christian  sins.  In  Christ 
the  righteous  we  stand  ever  before 
the  Father  as  accepted,  righteous  sons. 
Every  act  of  sin  breaks  our  fellowship. 
The  holy  Father  could  not  pass  by 
even  the  least  sin  in  the  children  He 
loves  so  well.  If  every  act  of  .Christian 
sin  actually  broke  up  our  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father,  how  hopeless 
our  condition  would  be !  Our  elder 
Brother  keeps  up  the  fellowship  for  us. 

2.  Christ  in  heaven  is  the  living  Friend 
by  whose  help  we  are  deUvered  from 
the  power  of  Christian  sins.  He  covers 
with  His  righteousness  all  our  wrong ; 
but  He  can  never  cover  any  unre- 
pented  wrong.  Christ  supposes  that 
we  really  want  to  put  the  sin  away, 
and  comes  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit 
to  help  us.  Every  one  who  honestly 
struggles  against  sin  may  be  sure  of 
the  presence  of  Jesus  to  root  out  of 
his    soul    the    very    love    and    desire 


of  it.  Under  this  most  inspiring 
truth  shall  we  (1)  dare  to  presume, 
or  (2)  dare  to  despond? 

The  Advocate  in  the  Court  of  Mercy. 
This  opening  sentence  reminds  us — 

I.  Of  the  speaker's  venerable  age. — 
Sixty  years  before  he  had  clasped  the 
hand  of  Christ,  drooped  his  head  on 
the   breast    of   incarnate   Love.      He 

.had  stood  by  the  cross,  witnessed  the 
Ascension,  seen  Jerusalem  in  its  glory 
and  final  ruin.  Last  of  apostles  who 
had  stood  face  to  face  with  Jesus. 

II.  It  reveals  his  tender  love. — His 
love  glows  in  the  epithet  of  endear- 
ment with  which  he  habitually  ad- 
dresses his  younger  companions  in  the 
faith. 

IIL  His  authority  as  a  teacher. — 
All  inspired  men  speak  with  equal 
authority  of  ofiice,  but  not  with  equal 
authority  of  knowledge — with  equal 
accuracy,  but  not  with  equal  range 
of  light.  His  writings  are  marked 
by  simplicity,  gentleness,  and  love. 
1.  Consider  the  fact.  "  We  have  an 
Advocate."  ( 1 )  Such  a  mediatoinal  office 
can  only  exist  by  the  appointment  of 
the  absolute  Ruler.  Behind  the  great 
mystery  of  the  Redemption  there  is 
the  love  of  a  Father  contriving  it 
all,  inspiring  it  all,  explaining  it  all. 
(2)  It  proves  our  need  of  an  Advocate. 
There  is  a  wise  and  exact  economy  in 
all  the  works,  and  ways,  and  words  of 
the  Divine  Father.  He  never  grants 
a  needless  gift,  never  founds  a  needless 
institution.  (3)  He  pleads  for  us  in 
tJie  court  of  mercy.  Propitiation,  in  its 
meaning,  includes  the  idea  of  mercy. 
The  propitiatory  was  the  mercy- seat. 
"  Be  propitious  to  me  "  is  fitly  rendered 
"  Be  merciful  to  me."  (4)  "  Advocate  " 
is  the  title  of  a  helper  whose  aid  must 
be  invoked.  An  advocate  is  one  who 
is  called  to  the  aid  of  a  client.  Christ 
is  silent  until  we  invoke  Him.  A  cry 
to  Him  will  bring  Him  to  our  side  as 
a  kind  and  faithful  Pleader.  2.  The 
qualifications  of  the  Person  to  whom 
this  advocacy  is  entrusted  Our  Plea- 
der is  "Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." 
(1)  His  character,  ^''  the  righteous."    The 

255 


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   L  JOHN. 


rectitude  of  Jesus  is  emphatically  stand  in  full  and  perfect  acceptance 
perfect.  Theorists  confess  their  faith  with  the  Father,  with  God,  on  the 
in  the  spotless  splendour  of  His  hu-  ground  of  His  personal  righteousness 
manity.  (2)  His  plea.  God  saves  as  a  Son,  and  as  a  man.  That  personal 
transgressors  on  the  ground  of  right-  acceptance  gives  Him  the  place,  the 
eous  substitution.  Jesus  is  the  second  right,  and  the  power  for  His  advocacy 
Adam,  the  Sponsor  for  those  who  in  our  behalf.  It  is  most  important 
believe.  "  He,  for  us,  has  fulfilled  to  the  understanding  of  St.  John  that 
the  law ;  we,  in  Him,  are  f  ulfiUers  of  we  should  realise  how  entirely  his  mind 
the  law."  (3)  His  nature.  He  has  and  heart  were  absorbed  in  the  con- 
all  natural  qualifications  for  the  under-  templation  of  the  person  of  Christ,  even 
taking.  He  is  God  and  man.  (4)  His  to  the  exclusion  of  direct  references 
acquaintance  with  your  case.  Be-  to  Christ's  work.  To  understand  our 
fore  you  confide  to  Him  a  single  Lord's  redemptive  work,  we  must  seek 
secret.  His  acquaintance  with  your  the  guidance  of  St.  Paul ;  to  under- 
whole  life  is  intimate  and  perfect,  stand  our  Lord's  redemptive  power,  we 
**  He  knew  what  was  in  man."  Christ  must  seek  the  guidance  of  St.  John, 
knows  the  worst  of  us.  3.  Trace  the  Our  Lord  presents  the  only  blameless 
influence  which  these  things  are  to  }tave  example  of  human  nature.  He  is 
upon  our  lives.  (1)  You  are  to  avoid  "righteous."  He  is  human  nature 
presumption.  "  That  ye  sin  not."  entirely  recovered,  absolutely  delivered 
We  must  not  so  hold  the  doctrine  of  from  the  effects  of  the  Fall ;  He  is  God's 
Christ's  substitutionary  work  that  the  idea  of  a  human  son  realised ;  and 
thought  of  it  will  make  us  less  alive  there  can  therefore  be  no  conceivable 
to  the  enormity  of  sin,  and  less  afraid  hindrance  to  His  acceptance  with  the 
of  its  defilement,  than  we  should  Father.  Scripture  writers  are  ex- 
otherwise  have  been.  The  merit  of  ceedingly  jealous  over  not  the  merely 
Christ  justifies  none  but  those  whom  negative  "  sinlessness,"  but  over  the 
His  Spirit  sanctifies.  (2)  You  are  to  positive  "  righteousness,"  of  Christ. 
avoid  despondency,  '''■li  any  man  sin."  (See  John  xvi.  8-10;  Heb.  vii.  26; 
The  men  whose  spiritual  life  is  most  1  Pet.  iii.  18.)  And  the  righteousness 
faint  and  wavering  are  most  in  danger  of  Christ  is  a  distinctly  human  right- 
of  presumption ;  and  the  men  whose  eousness,  because  it  has  been  gained 
spiritual  life  is  most  advanced  are  through  the  testing  of  a  human  body 
sometimes  in  danger  of  despondency,  and  an  earthly  experience.  It  is  not 
Keen  perception  of  sin,  leading  to  an  innocent  condition  in  which  Christ 
despondency,  is  not  always  caused  by  was  set,  but  a  righteousness  which 
growing  holiness.  The  backsHder  may  Christ  has  won  under  the  conditions  in 
feel  it.  Almost  every  awakened  sinner  which  we  have  to  win  our  righteousness, 
has  felt  it.  Whoever  feels  it,  here  is  It  is  therefore  distinctly  relative  to  us. 
a  revelation  that  furnishes  an  antidote  It  is  a  leadership  of  us.  It  can  be  a 
to  all  despair  :  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  representative  of  us.  Christ  before 
have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  the  throne,  Christ  the  Son  before  the 
Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." — Charles  Father,  standing  in  the  acceptance  of 
Stanford,  D.D.  His  own  humanly  won  righteousness, 

is  our  Advocate,  and  pleads  for  us  on 
Christ  the  Righteous. — The  Armenian  the  ground  of  that  righteousness, 
translation  adds  to  the  term  "  right- 
eous," "and  blameless";  and  it  is  Yers.  1,  2.  Propitiation  for  Sin. — Let 
evident  that  what  we  may  properly  us  not  be  afraid  of  a  theory  of  the 
call  our  Lord's  moral  and  religious  Atonement.  Vagueness  in  this  matter 
character  is  the  thing  upon  which  is  spiritual  weakness.  The  word  "pro- 
attention  is  fixed.  The  Son,  the  pitiation "  has  a  well-defined  meaning, 
"Man    Christ    Jesus/'   does    actually  and  in  itself  embodies  a  theory;  aud 

25a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    II. 


when  we  read  it  with  what  else 
Scripture  teaches,  we  cannot  be  wrong 
in  saying  that  the  death  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  the  one  means  by  which  God 
extends  His  favour  to  sinful  men. 

I.  The  need  of  propitiation. — To 
propitiate  is  to  turn  away  wrath. 
Propitiation  implies  wrath.  Words 
occur  all  through  Scripture  which 
indicate  more  than  Divine  sorrow, 
even  Divine  displeasure,  Divine  wrath. 
So  there  is  Divine  wrath  to  be  turned 
away ;  whilst  that  wrath  remains  God 
cannot  receive  man,  and  man  cannot 
go  to  God.  And  Divine  forgiveness 
must  be  legal.  God  is  not  only  Father, 
He  is  Sovereign ;  sin  is  the  rejection 
of  His  law,  rebellion  against  His 
majesty,  and  its  forgiveness  must  be  in 
harmony  with  law,  and  the  inviolable 
claims  of  His  throne.  Before  God  can 
receive  back  the  sinner  there  is  wrath 
to  be  averted  in  some  way  by  which 
righteousness  shall  be  equally  honoured 
with  mercy.  And  man  needs  such 
propitiation  too ;  his  moral  sense  must 
be  satisfied  in  any  adequate  redemption. 

II.  The  propitiation  provided. — 
1.  This  is  a  propitiation  provided  and 
made  by  God  Himself.  2.  This  pro- 
pitiation is  by  the  substitutionary 
offering  of  God  the  Son.  Sin  cannot 
be  transferred,  but  penalty  can. 
3.  This  propitiation  is  sufficient  for 
the  sins  of  the  world. 

III.  The  propitiation  made  use  of. — 
Propitiation  does  not  save ;  it  makes 
it  possible  for  us  to  go  to  God  ;  it 
enables  Him  to  throw  His  door  wide 
open,  and  to  receive  graciously  and 
love  freely  all  who  come ;  but  we  must 
tread  that  open  way,  we  must  go  to 
Him.  That  is  where  faith  comes  in. 
"  We  are  saved  through  faith."  The 
end  of  the  propitiation  is  the  fiHal 
relationship  fulfilled,  and  that  is 
salvation. — Charles  New. 

Ver.  2.  The  Ends  Attained  by  Pro- 
pitiation.— 1.  It  is  the  fullest  revelation 
of  the  Divine  character.  It  sets  before 
us,  in  one  great  act,  the  righteousness 
and  the  mercy  of  God.  The  cross  pro- 
claims the  pardon  for  which  infinite 


love  solicits.  The  heart  of  God  yields 
to  itself.  But  how  can  this  be  ?  It  is 
because  the  pardon  solicited  by  love 
is  obtained  by  a  sacrifice  which  equally 
exhibits  God's  righteousness.  2.  If 
men  are  to  be  saved  at  all,  they  must 
be  saved  to  holiness ;  they  must  be 
sanctified  as  well  as  forgiven.  The 
result  cannot  be  otherwise  for  those 
who  truly  believe  in  the  sacrifice  of 
Christ  as  thus  explained.  Holiness  and 
love,  the  two  great  elements  of  the 
character  of  God — these  are  expressed 
in  the  cross,  and  they  must  be  repro- 
duced in  the  character  of  those  for 
whom  the  cross  does  its  appointed  work. 
— C.  Bailhache. 

Christ's  Death. 

I.  Christ's  death  was  vicarious. — He 
did  not  merely  die  for  our  benefit,  in 
order  to  our  good  ;  He  died  in  our  stead. 
Christ  the  sinless  One  suffered  for  the 
sinful  in  the  place  of  the  sinful. 

II.  Christ's  death  was  propitiatory. 
— When  parties  are  at  variance  with 
each  other,  we  speak  of  the  offended 
party,  especially  if  he  be  a  superior, 
as  becoming  propitious,  or  propitiated, 
when  the  displeasure  is  removed,  and 
the  variance  gives  place  to  favour. 

III.  Christ's  death  is  expiatory. — 
Propitiation  and  expiation  are  con- 
stantly used  as  synonymous  terms. 

IV.  In  our  Lord's  death  God's 
righteousness  is  manifested  in  in- 
separable union  with  His  grace. 

V.  Christ's  death  is  fraught  with 
moral  benefit  to  mankind. — Its  great 
object  is  to  bring  us  back  to  God,  the 
fountain  of  all  goodness.  When  we 
come  under  its  power,  our  character  is 
transformed  ;  we  are  delivered  from  the 
tyranny  of  sin,  and  come  under  the 
sway  of  holy  principle,  which  permeates 
and  controls  our  life  in  all  the  relations 
we  bear,  and  in  all  the  circumstances 
in  which  we  can  be  placed. — James 
Kennedy,  M.A. 

'Propitiation  for  Chmstian  Sins. — 
*'  For  our  sins."  Whatever  may  be 
the  meaning  of  the  word  "  propitia- 
tion "  in  the  New  Testament  generally, 

257 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


it  is  quite  clear  that  in  this  passage  it 
is  directly  connected  with  the  sins  of 
Christians.  In  only  a  very  indirect 
way  can  this  passage  be  connected  with 
the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  That  at 
least  is  the  large  and  general  truth, 
and  St.  John  is  laying  emphasis  on  the 
particular  and  precise  truth.  Propitia- 
tion, as  connected  with  Christian  sins, 
must  be  represented  most  effectively  by 
the  restoration  of  peace  in  a  home  that 
has  been  broken  up  by  the  children's 
wrong-doing.  The  word  cannot  here 
mean  propitiatory  sacrifice,  because  it 
is  the  Person  Christ,  and  not  the  work 
of  Christ,  that  is  referred  to  in  the 
passage.  It  is  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous ;  and  His  personal  righteous- 
ness is  evidently  the  ground  or  basis  of 
the  propitiation.  He  is — He  Himself 
is — the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  He, 
standing  before  God  in  His  righteous- 
ness, is  the  basis  of  God's  gracious  and 
peaceful  relations  with  us.  Christ,  as 
it  were,  pledges  the  family  obedience, 
and  so  wins  and  keeps  the  peace  of  the 
home. 

The  WorlcCs  Propitiation. — "  But  also 
for  the  whole  world."  This  expres- 
sion requires  us  to  recognise  at  once  a 
sameness,  and  a  difference,  in  the  senses 
in  which  propitiation  is  to  be  applied 
to  the  sin-frailties  of  Christians,  and 
the  sin-wilfulnesses  of  the  world.  It 
reminds  us  of  the  expression  of  St. 
Paul,  "  The  living  God,  who  is  the 
Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them 
that  believe."  What  is  presented  to 
thought  is,  that  God  the  Son  has  under- 
taken a  twofold  work  of  grace.  He 
has  undertaken  to  deal  with,  in  order 
to  secure  their  removal,  the  difficulties 
occasioned  by  "  our  sins,"  i.e.  our  Chris- 
tian frailties,  imperfections,  and  tem- 
porary wilfulnesses.  And  He  has  also 
undertaken  to  deal  with  all  the  difficul- 
ties, disabilities,  and  penalties  which 
have  come  through  the  world's  wilful 
sin.  Christ  bears  brotherly  and  help- 
ful relations  to  those  who  are  sons 
indeed,  and  also  to  those  who  are  sons, 
though  heedless  of  the  fact. 

Ver.   3.   Obedience  the   Secret  of  the 
258 


Higher  Knowledge. — ''And  hereby  know 
we  that  we  know  Him,  if  we  keep  His 
commandments."  The  reference  is  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  that  full 
apprehension  of  Him  which  is  so  en- 
tirely different  from  mere  acquaintance. 
There  may  be  only  one  way  in  which 
we  can  get  to  know  things.  The  laws 
of  mind  may  be  as  absolute  and  uni- 
versal as  the  laws  of  nature.  But  there 
are  many  ways  in  which  we  can  get  to 
)^now  persons.  1.  We  can  make  them 
a  subject  of  study,  watch  their  conduct 
under  varying  circumstances,  and  form 
our  impressions,  which  will  be  more  or 
less  correct  and  complete.  In  that 
way,  however,  we  can  never  come  to 
know  more  than  the  surface  of  a  man. 
The  spiritual  being,  who  is  the  real 
man,  makes  only  a  very  imperfect 
impression  upon  us,  in  that  way.  No 
amount  of  study  will  ever  do  more  than 
give  us  apprehension  of  a  man  from 
the  outside.  2.  We  can  come  into 
direct,  constant,  personal  associations 
with  a  man,  and  thus  come  to  know 
him  through  daily  intercourse.  The 
persons  on  earth  whom  we  know  best 
we  know  in  this  way,  and  the  know- 
ledge comes  hy  feeling  rather  than  by 
thinking.  The  good  son  never  thinks 
of  studying  his  mother,  but  he  knows 
her  well.  3.  We  can  yield  ourselves 
in  personal  service  to  a  man,  and  thus 
come  to  the  very  fullest  and  highest 
knowledge  of  him.  It  is  said  that 
"  No  man  is  a  hero  to  his  own  valet." 
And  it  is  so  because  a  man  opens  up 
his  real  and  true  self  to  him  who  serves 
him.  And  our  Lord  said  concerning 
the  intimacy  given  to  trusted  servants, 
"  Henceforth  I  call  you  not  servants, 
but  I  have  called  you  friends."  It  is 
but  presenting  this  truth  from  one 
point  of  view  to  say  that  through  our 
obedience  to  Christ,  our  keeping  His 
commandments,  our  serving  Him, 
come  into  our  souls  the  fullest,  highest, 
most  spiritual,  apprehensions  of  Him. 
We  can  know  Christ  by  study,  and  by 
ordinary  relations  of  life  with  Him. 
But  we  can  never  know  Christ  fully 
until  we  have  entered  into  personal 
relations  of  obedient  service  to  Him. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


Ver.    6.    Fellowship    dependent     on  practical  conformity  to  His  will.     St. 
Like-mindedness. — "  Ought  himself  also  John  is  again  condemning  that  Gnostic 
to  walk,  even  as  He  walked."    A  man's  doctrine  which  made  excellence  to  con- 
walk  is  the  expression  of  his  real  mind  sist  in  mere  intellectual  enlightenment, 
and   pui-pose,    but   not   necessarily   of  Divorced    from   holiness   of    life,    St. 
the    profession   he   may   make.       The  John  says,  no  enlightenment  can  be  a 
distinction  between  a  man's  profession  knowledge  of  God.     In  his  system  of 
and  a  man's  mind  needs  to  be  clearly  Christian  ethics  the  apostle  insists,  no 
and  sharply  drawn.     They  ought  to  be  less    than  Aristotle,    that   in    morals 
in  absolute  correspondence  ;  they  need  knowledge  without  practice  is  worth- 
not  be  ;  and  they  often  are  not.     What  less  :    "  not  speculation,  but  conduct," 
measure  of  fellowship  can  be  obtained  is  the  aim  of  both  the  Christian  and 
on  the  basis  of   men's  professions? —  the  heathen  philosopher.     Mere  know- 
1.  When    they    do    not    carry   men's  ledge  will  not  do ;  nor  will  knowledge 
minds,  and  find  fitting  expression  for  "  touched  by  emotion  "  do.     It  is  pos- 
them.     Such  fellowship  must  of  neces-  sible  to  know,   and  admire,  and  in  a 
sity  be  surface   fellowship,    uncertain,  sort  of  way  love,  and  yet  act  as  if  we 
untrustworthy,  and  wholly  unable  to  had  not  known.     But  St.  John  gives 
stand   any   sort   of   strain.     2.  When  no  encouragement  to  devotion  without  a 
they    do    carry     and    express     men's  moral  life  (compare  chap.  i.  6).     There 
settled  minds  and  purposes.     Then  the  is  only  one  way  of  proving  to  ourselves 
fellowship  is  soundly  and  safely  based  ;  that  we   know   God,    and   that  is  by 
the  man  himself  is  in  it.     But  it  re-  loving   obedience  to  His   will.     Com- 
mains  to   be  shown  that  for  the  full  pare  the  very  high  standard  of  virtue 
joy  of  the   fellowship  the  man's  mind  set  by  Aristotle  :  he  only  is  a  virtuous 
must   be   ful»ly   kin   mth   him   whose  man  who  does  virtuous  acts, —  "first, 
fellowship  he  seeks.       The   man  him-  knowingly  ;  secondly,  from   dejiberate 
self  must  be   in  it ;    and  he  must  be  preference,    and  deliberate   preference 
like-minded   with  the  other  party  in  for   the    sake   of    the   acts    (and    not 
the  fellowship.  any  advantages  resulting  from  them) ; 

and,  thirdly,  with  firm  and  unvarying 

Knowledge     through      Obedience.  —  purpose "    {Nico.    Eth.^    II.   iv.    3). — 

There   is  no  real   knowledge  of   God,  A.  Plummer^  D.D. 
no    fellowship    with     Him,     without 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—11. 

A  New,  yet  Old,  Commandment. — The  new  life  in  Christ  will  always  find 
expression  in  two  forms — in  righteousness,  and  in  charity.  Or,  to  state  the 
same  thing  in  concrete  form,  in  the  obedience  of  sonship  to  God,  and  in  the 
service  of  brotherhood  to  men.  The  apostle  has  been  dealing  with  the  first 
of  these ;  he  now  turns  to  the  second,  beginning  a  new  section  by  the  direct 
address  *'  Brethren,"  or  more  precisely,  "  Beloved."  There  are  senses  in  which 
the  love  of  the  brethren  is  the  oldest  of  old  commandments.  And  there  are 
senses  in  which  the  old  commandment  has  been  given  anew ;  a  fresh  glow,  and  force, 
and  meaning  have  been  put  upon  it,  and  it  comes  to  us  like  a  new  command- 
ment, when  we  receive  it  from  the  lips  of  our  Divine  Lord  and  Master.  Think 
of  it  as  old,  or  think  of  it  as  new,  still  it  stands  as  the  second  great 
commandment  for  humanity,  and  it  is,  in  fact,  included  and  involved  in  the 
first.  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  It  is  remarkable  that 
counsels  respecting  the  law  of  brotherly  love  should  take  such  a  prominent 
place  in  St.  John's  epistles.  The  Churches  of  his  day  must  have  been  failing 
in  this  duty.     The  spirit  of  self-seeking  and  rivalry  must  have  been  spoiling 

259 


CHAP.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


the  Christian  relations.  It  was  not  the  wisest  thing  for  the  apostle  to  attempt 
dealing  directly  with  cases  of  contention  and  misunderstanding.  It  is  seldom 
possible  to  get  such  matters  put  straight  by  any  interference  from  without. 
But  it  is  always  possible,  and  it  is  often  effective,  to  deal  with  such  matters  by 
reaflfirming  and  reimpressing  general  principles,  and  this  course  the  apostle 
takes.  There  is  a  Divine  atmosphere,  in  which  alone  the  quickened  and 
regenerate  soul  can  breathe  and  thrive.  It  is  the  light,  which  is  the  atmosphere 
of  God.  And  there  is  an  earthly  atmosphere,  in  which  alone  the  quickened 
and  regenerate  soul  can  breathe  and  thrive.  It  is  love — the  love  of  the 
brethren,  the  spirit  in  a  man  towards  the  brethren  which  leads  him  to  put 
the  interest  of  his  brethren  before  his  own.     Nothing  but  love  will  inspire  that. 

I.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  an  old  commandment, — "  An  old  commandment, 
which  ye  had  from  the  beginning."  It  is  as  old  as  humanity.  This  was 
evidently  in  the  apostle's  mind,  for  we  find  him  presently  referring  to  the  first 
human  brother,  Cain,  who  failed  in  keeping  this  commandment  in  his  day. 
When  God  made  man,  He  designed  for  him  fatherhood ;  and  since  this  involved 
sonship,  it  also  involved  brotherhood.  The  Divine  idea  of  society  was  brotherhood 
in  the  inspiration  of  family  love,  which  would  lead  each  brother  to  care  for 
his  brother,  as  much  and  as  truly  as  he  cared  for  himself.  What  would  society 
have  been  if  the  Divine  idea  had  never  been  disturbed,  if  the  Cain  spirit  had 
never  been  introduced?  What  would  society  be  to-day,  if,  everywhere,  every 
man  was  as  interested  in  the  welfare  of  his  brother-man  as  in  his  own  ? 
*'  Brotherly  love  is  an  original  human  instinct.  Christian  ethics  are  as  old  as 
humanity."  The  "  milk  of  human  kindness  "  feeds  every  child  at  the  breast  of 
the  great  nature-mother.  No  man,  the  world  over,  needs  to  be  told  of  this  old 
commandment.  It  is  recognised  as  the  first  of  human  laws  in  every  clime  and 
every  age.  If  the  appeal  be  limited  to  the  Jews,  as  having  received  a  special 
revelation  from  God,  we  can  see  another  sense  in  which  brotherly  love  is  an  old 
commandment.  For  Moses  distinctly  enjoined  this  rule  for  the  guidance  of 
all  social  relations,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself"  (Lev.  xix.  18), 
and  the  law  was  never  for  one  moment  disputed ;  the  only  contention  that  arose 
was  over  the  precise  meaning  to  be  attached  to  the  term  "  neighbour."  It  may, 
however,  be,  as  some  have  thought,  that  St.  John's  expression  "  from  the 
beginning  "  has  exclusive  reference  to  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  experience 
of  those  to  whom  he  wrote.  It  was  one  of  the  first  things  they  were  taught ; 
and  it  had  been  taught  them  as  an  essential  feature  of  the  Christian  life. 
There  can  be  no  "  sonship "  without  "  brotherhood." 

II.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  a  new  commandment. — Two  things  make  it  a 
new  commandment  for  Christian  disciples.  1.  It  was  announced  afresh,  on 
His  own  authority,  by  their  Divine  Lord  and  Master.  It  was  a  main  point 
of  His  teaching.  It  never  had  been  taught  so  clearly,  or  so  forcibly ;  it 
never  had  been  set  in  such  a  primary  place,  as  moral  duty.  There  was  no 
conceivable  possibility  of  any  man's  being  a  disciple  of  Christ,  if  he  failed  to 
keep  this  commandment  of  the  Lord.  Jesus  Himself  called  it  a  new  command- 
ment, because  He  put  such  freshness  of  meaning  into  it,  when  He  commended 
it  to  His  disciples,  and  because  He  put  such  new  power  of  obedience  into  it, 
when  He  quickened  souls  with  His  Divine  life  (John  xv.  12).  2.  It  was  embodied 
afresh  in  our  Lord's  example.  Taking  upon  Himself  human  sonship.  He  took 
on  Himself  human  brotherhood ;  and  He  loved  His  brethren  up  to  the  very 
limits  of  self-sacrifice  for  their  true  welfare.  The  law  of  brotherly  love  is  true 
for  Christ,  since  He  walked  in  the  light.  It  will  be  true  for  us  precisely  in  the 
measure  in  which  we  walk  with  Him  in  the  light.  The  thing  "  is  true  in  Him 
and  in  you,  because  the  darkness  is  past,  and  the  true  light  now  shineth." 

III.  Love  of  the  brethren  is  in  full  consistency  with  the  Christian  pro- 

260 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT ARt :    I  JOHN. 


CfiAP.   11. 


fession. — That  profession  is  symbolically  represented  as  "  light."  It  includes 
everything  true,  kind,  right,  pure,  gentle,  and  helpful.  Manifestly  "  love  of  the 
brethren  "  is  in  the  fullest  harmony  vi^ith  all  these  things.  And  the  worldly  life, 
ruled  wholly  by  self-interest,  by  self-seeking  considerations,  is  symbolically 
represented  as  "  darkness " ;  and  hatred  of  our  brother,  in  the  milder  form  of 
neglecting  him,  or  the  harsher  form  of  injuring  him,  is  in  full  harmony  with 
that  worldly  life  of  darkness.  "  The  whole  history  of  religious  rancour  has 
been  a  deplorable  illustration  of  this  *  hating  our  brother.'  Controversy  for 
principles  honestly  and  reasonably  held  is  one  thing ;  prejudice,  spite,  private 
censures  and  condemnations,  harsh  words,  suspicions,  jealousies,  misunder- 
standings and  misrepresentations,  are  the  chief  props  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness 
among  Christian  churches  and  nations."  (Compare  John  xiii.  34,  xv.  12  ; 
1  Cor.  xiii.  2  ;  1  Pet.  i.  22  ;  2  Pet.  i.  7-9).  St.  John  even  suggests  that  keeping 
up  the  love  of  the  brethren,  by  finding  for  it  constantly  active  expression,  is  the 
very  best  way  to  keep  in  the  light.  Such  a  man  "  abideth  in  the  jight,  and 
there  is  none  occasion  of  stumbling  in  him  "  (ver.  10). 


SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND   SERMON   SKETCHES. 


Yer.  8.  Right  Estimate  of  Christian 
Times. — "The  darkness  is  past,  and 
the  true  light  now  shineth."  The 
apostle  Paul  calls  the  prse- Christian 
ages,  "  The  times  of  this  ignorance." 
And  of  Galilee,  upon  which  the  light 
of  Christ's  ministry  shone,  prophecy 
had  declared,  "  The  people  that  walked 
in  darkness  have  seen  a  great  light." 
We  can  get  a  right  estimate  of  Chris- 
tian times  only  by  contrast  with  a 
right  estimate  of  proe- Christian  times. 

I.  Prae-Christian  times  are  repre- 
sented by  the  term  "  darkness." — And 
— 1.  Darkness  implies  the  absence  of 
light.  No  sun,  or  moon,  or  stars  bring 
any  relief.  And  these  represent  the 
revelations  of  God  which  alone  can 
relieve  the  moral  darkness  of  men. 
It  is  not  advisable  to  speak  in  an 
exaggerated  way  on  this  matter,  and 
to  deny  all  Divine  interest  in  heathen 
and  pagan  peoples.  What  may  be 
clearly  stated  is  that  God  was  pleased 
to  leave  the  world  to  itself,  to  its  own 
natural  developments,  without  direct 
and  special  Divine  intervention  and 
help.  But  it  must  be  "darkness" 
for  the  creature  made  by  God,  and 
dependent  on  Him,  to  be  wholly  left 
without  any  sense  of  His  presence. 
The  creature  could  but  be  "feeling 
after  Him,"  groping  for  Him,  in  the 
dark.     2.  Darkness    implies   Joulness. 


And  we  could  not  exaggerate  in  any 
statement  that  we  could  make  con- 
cerning the  moral  degradation  of 
heathen  and  pagan  nations  ;  it  would 
be  difficult  to  exaggerate  in  stating 
the  mental  blindness  and  moral 
corruption  into  which  the  Jews  had 
fallen  in  the  ages  between  Malachi 
and  John  the  Baptist. 

II.  Christian  times  are  represented 
by  the  term  "light."— 1.  If  the 
earlier  ages  were  characterised  by  the 
absence  of  revelation,  this  is  charac- 
terised by  the  greatest  of  all  the 
revelations  that  have  ever  come  from 
God :  the  one  that  illuminates,  ex- 
plains, and  renews  every  other  revela- 
tion. 2.  If  the  earlier  ages  were  dark 
indeed  with  sensual  vices  and  self- 
aggrandisements,  these  ages  are  light 
indeed  with  a  higher  morality,  family 
purity,  personal  restraints,  gracious 
relations,  and  brotherly  love. 

Ver.  10.  Love  preventing  Stum- 
blings.— "  He  that  loveth  his  brother 
abideth  in  the  light,  and  there  is  none 
occasion  of  stumbling  [scandal]  in 
him."  This  verse  is  pointedly  ad- 
dressed to  the  members  of  the  Christian 
Church,  and  has  in  view  the  fact  that 
there  had  been  stumblings,  scandals, 
and  that  there  was  always  more  or 
less  danger  of  such  things.     The  tone 

261 


CHAP.  n. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I  JOHN. 


of  the  epistle  suggests,  that  St.  John 
had  been  greatly  distressed  by  the 
report  of  such  things.  He  does  not 
choose  to  refer  directly  to  any  par- 
ticular cases  ;  he  prefers  to  treat  the 
evil  as  a  general  one,  and  to  meet  it 
by  the  assertion  of  Christian  principles 
directly  appHcable  to  the  case.  The 
idea  in  his  mind,  to  which  he  gives 
expression  here,  is  something  like  this  : 
If  a  man  walks  in  the  light,  he  can 
see  where  he  is  going ;  he  can  watch 
the  path  of  his  feet,  and  there  is  no 
occasion  whatever  for  his  stumbling. 
But  if  he  walks  in  the  night  and 
darkness,  he  must  pick  his  way 
tremblingly,  for  there  are  likely  to  be, 
here  and  there,  many  occasions  of 
stumbling.  St.  John's  words  recall 
those  of  our  Divine  Lord  :  "  If  a  man 
walk  in  the  day,  he  stumbleth  not, 
because  he  seeth  the  light  of  this 
world.  But  if  a  man  walk  in  the 
night,  he  stumbleth,  because  the  light 
is  not  in  him."  We  have  seen  that 
the  proper  atmosphere  for  the  Chris- 
tian life,  if  regarded  in  relation  to  God, 
is  light,  and  if  regarded  in  relation  to 
man,  is  love.  Here  St.  John  is  think- 
ing of  the  love.  If  a  man  love  his 
brother,  he  will  walk  in  an  illuminated 
atmosphere,  in  which  he  can  see  his 
way,  and  carefully  avoid  all  occasions 
of  offence.  But  if  a  man  does  not 
love  his  brother,  if  he  has  any  enmities 
cherished  against  him,  he  will  walk  in 
a  darkened  atmosphere,  in  which  he 
will  not  recognise  occasions  of  offence, 
and,  in  this  mood  of  mind,  he  will  not 
care  to  avoid  them  if  he  does  see  them. 
"  It  must  needs  be  that  offences  come, 
but  woe  unto  that  man  by  whom 
the  offence  cometh."  All  family,  all 
church,  all  society,  quarrels  come  still, 
as  they  have  always  come,  out  of 
somebody's  unbrotherly  moods.  Some- 
body has  been  "  walking  in  the  dark- 
ness "  of  ill-will. 

Yers.  11  and  \^.  An  Important  Dis- 
tinction.— Light    is   often   thrown    on 


the  meaning  of  passages  by  comparing 
scripture  with  scripture.  That  will 
reveal  apparently  striking  distinctions 
and  contrasts.  The  distinctions  of 
inspired  language  are  always  carefully 
made,  and  they  represent  spiritual 
realities.  Putting  these  two  passages 
together,  three  things  appear  to  view  : 
1.  A  distinction  between  "sinning" 
and  ''  loving  the  world."  Sinning  is  a 
peril  to  which  the  best  Christian  stands 
exposed.  Loving  the  world  is  essentially 
an  un- Christian  state.  Sinning  is  an 
act.  Loving  the  world  is  a  spirit,  an 
inward  principle.  Sinning  is  response 
to  outward  temptation.  Loving  the 
world  is  a  personal  choice.  2.  A  dis- 
tinction between  the  effect  of  "sinning  " 
and  of  "  loving  the  world "  on  the 
religious  spirit  and  life.  Sin  drives 
the  soul  to  God.  Loving  the  world 
draws  the  soul  away  from  God.  Sin 
makes  precious  the  Father's  Comforter. 
Loving  the  world  crushes  out  all  love 
of  the  Father.  3.  Loving  the  world 
is  set  forth  as  a  more  perilous  thing 
than  sinning.  The  one  may  be  con- 
sistent with  a  real,  sincere,  and  earnest 
religious  life.  The  other  is  absolutely 
inconsistent  with  it.  And  yet,  prac- 
tically, we  think  but  little  of  this 
"  loving  the  world."  It  is  treated  as 
quite  a  venial  sin.  It  is  more  to  be 
dreaded  than  any  sinful  act  we  could 
possibly  commit. 

Ver.  11.  The  Apostle^ s  Line  of 
Argument. — God  is  light.  Christ  is 
that  light  revealed.  The  life  of  Christ 
was  a  life  of  obedience  and  a  life  of 
love.  In  order,  therefore,  to  have 
fellowship  through  Him  with  God 
believers  must  obey  and  love.  The 
state  of  things  in  which  this  is  possible 
has  already  begun.  Therefore  I  write 
to  you  a  command  which  is  both  old 
and  new ;  walk  in  the  light  by  imitating 
the  love  of  Christ.  In  this  manner 
St.  John  lays  the  foundation  of 
Christian  ethics. — A,  Plummer^  D.D. 


262 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  il. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—17. 

Types  of  Stages  in  ChHstian  Experience. — We  have  piety  here  as  it  appears 
in  individuals  at  different  periods  of  life — its  characters  in  each  class,  and  the 
common  danger  of  all,  I.  Little  children.  Their  piety  is  characterised  by 
much  affection.  II.  Young  men — and  women  too.  Piety  in  manhood  is — 
1.  Strong  and  courageous.  2.  Full  of  enterprise  and  achievement.  III.  Old 
men,  or  fathers  in  Christ.  The  characteristic  of  these  is  knowledge — knowledge 
of  men  and  things,  but  especially  of  Divine  things  {J.  Leifchild^  D.D.).  It 
is,  however,  a  fuller  understanding  of  St.  John  to  recognise  in  his  three  terms, 
"  little  children,"  "  young  men,"  "  fathers,"  figures  of  the  three  great  stages  of 
religious  culture  and  experience  which  are  represented  in  every  Church.  Some- 
times the  term  "  little  children  "  is  used  to  include  all  the  believers,  but  at  other 
times  the  threefold  distinction  is  clear.  In  every  Church  there  are  always  those 
who  do  but  look  on  to  Christian  living,  those  who  are  in  the  actual  strain  of 
Christian  living,  and  those  who  are  able  to  look  hack  on  Christian  living.  Or 
to  state  the  case  in  simple  terms,  there  are  united  in  the  fellowship  of  every 
Church  the  immature,  the  prime,  and  the  mature.  And  the  blending  of  these 
classes,  their  mutual  relations,  responsibilities,  and  ministries,  make  the  glory 
of  Church  Hfe ;  and  it  is  skilful  and  helpful  mutual  blending  that  we  should  try 
to  secure.  Let  us  see  if  we  can  recognise  the  distinctness  of  these  types,  and 
the  ways  in  which  each  one  may  be  the  helper  of  the  other. 

I.  <'  Little  children  "  represent  the  "  immatuie,"  those  who  have  no  experience 
behind  them,  and  do  but  look  on  to  Christian  living. — Of  them  St.  John  says, 
*'  I  write  unto  you,  because  your  sins  are  forgiven  you  for  His  name's  sake  " — 
"  because  ye  know  the  Father."  The  very  first  stage  of  Christian  life  is  the 
thought  of  God  which  brings  personal  relations  and  the  joy  of  forgiveness.  The 
awakening  of  the  soul  is  the  sense  of  God  that  comes,  the  reality  of  God, 
the  personal  relation  of  God  to  the  soul.  No  man  is  converted  save  as  Jacob 
was,  by  a  personal  revelation  of  God  to  him.  Express  it  in  whatever  form  you 
may,  the  very  essence  of  conversion  is  a  man's  discovery  that  he  is  a  child,  and 
that  God  is  his  Father.  A  man  cannot  help  becoming  a  new  being,  conscious 
of  a  new  atmosphere  and  new  relations,  when  once  he  has  apprehended  those 
two  things.  And  there  is  no  other  possible  beginning  of  the  regenerate  life. 
With  that  discovery  there  is  bound  to  go  another.  He  will  feel  his  actual 
relations  as  a  child  with  a  father  are  not  what  they  should  be ;  and  he  cannot 
rest  until  they  are  made  what  they  ought  to  be.  And  since  he  feels  the  wrong 
to  be  altogether  on  his  side,  he  can  but  seek  that  Fatherly  forgiveness  which  is 
so  ready  to  be  extended  to  every  seeking  child.  There  are  always  in  the  Church 
some  persons  who  are  at  this  first  and  simple  stage  of  the  Divine  life.  They 
are  alive  to  the  thought  of  God,  and  they  have  got  their  relations  right  with 
Him.  But  they  have  no  experience.  Christian  living  is  an  altogether  unknown 
thing  to  them  ;  they  can  but  look  on,  and  wonder  what  the  long  years  will 
unfold.  Such  persons  come  into  the  fullest  concern  of  Christian  pastors,  who, 
like  St.  John,  will  try  to  adapt  their  teaching  and  influence  so  as  most  efficiently 
to  help  and  guide  all  such.  The  simplicity  and  strength  of  faith,  the  brightness 
and  joy  of  first  experience,  in  these  *'  little  children,"  are  a  most  gracious 
blessing  to  the  spiritual  life  of  our  Churches,  and  it  is  well  that  every  Church 
should  have  such  representative  cases  always  in  it. 

IL  "  Young  men "  represent  the  "  prime,"  those  who  are  in  the  actual 
strain  of  Christian  living. — "I  write  unto  you,  young  men,  because  ye  have 
overcome  the  evil  one  " — "  because  ye  are  strong,  and  the  word  of  God  abideth 
in  you,  and  ye  have  overcome  the  evil  one."     These  members  of  the  Church  are 

263 


CHAP.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


such  as  have  some  experience  of  the  Christian  life,  enough  to  fit  them  for 
dealing  with  the  duties,  difiiculties,  and  temptations  that  may  come.  When  a 
man  has  reached  some  thirty  years  of  life,  he  is  in  a  sense  prepared  for  life, 
partly  matured.  The  unexpected  will  still  happen  ;  but  the  round  of  experiences 
which  the  man  has  gone  through  will  have  prepared  him  to  deal  wisely  with  any 
circumstances  that  may  arise.  And  so  there  are  in  a  Church  those  whose  experi- 
ences of  the  Divine  life  have  been  sufficiently  prolonged  and  varied  to  give  them 
efficiency  and  maturity.  They  are  like  young  men  in  their  prime.  On  them 
the  strain  of  Church  life  and  responsibility  rests.  They  are  fitted  for  it :  their 
experiences  are  fresh  ;  none  have  become  so  prolonged  as  to  become  wearisome, 
the  sense  of  strength  and  wisdom  makes  Church  life  and  work  a  deUght  to  them. 
They  have  fought  evil,  in  one  shape  and  another.  They  have  felt  the  thrill  of  joy 
in  first  victories,  and  a  great  sense  of  power  is  upon  them.  But  they  need  the 
wisely  adapted  teachings  of  the  apostle,  and  of  faithful  ministers,  because  in  their 
conscious  strength  lies  a  subtle  peril.  These  experiences  are  not  complete  ;  they 
have  no  experience  of  keeping  on.  There  is  too  much  excitement  in  their  experi- 
ence; they  are  too  much  in  it  themselves.  It  is  more  an  experience  of  what 
they  have  been  doing,  than  of  what  God  has  been  doing  in  them.  It  gives  them 
confidence  and  energy.  They  feel  as  if  they  could  overcome  all  the  evil  ones, 
and  so  need  to  be  reminded  that  "  old  Satan  may  prove  too  much  for  young 
Melancthon." 

III.  "  Fathers  "  represent  the  "  mature,"  those  who  are  able  to  look  back  on 
Christian  living. — "  I  write  unto  you,  fathers,  because  ye  know  Him  which  is 
from  the  beginning."  This  is  the  one  thing  in  St.  John's  mind  concerning  the 
fathers,  and  he  repeats  it  a  second  time.  Their  experience  was  complete.  It 
might  be  that  in  the  Churches  which  St.  John  addressed  some  yet  lingered  who 
had  been  connected  with  Church  life  from  the  very  beginning,  fi'om  the  days  of 
the  earthly  manifestation  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Or  the  thought  may  be  of  a  long 
life  spent  in  Christian  relations,  and  bringing  not  only  every  kind  of  experience, 
but  such  a  repetition  of  experiences  as  involves  the  special  experience  of  weariness 
through  sameness.  There  are  always  "  fathers "  in  this  sense  in  Christian 
Churches ;  and  they  need  apostolic  counsels,  for  they  are  in  danger  of  checking 
enterprise,  by  being  quite  sure  that  everything  attempted  will  fail,  because  they 
have  seen  so  many  things  fail,  and  because  they  know  so  well  how  many  diffi- 
culties ever3rthing  will  have  to  contend  against.  A  full  experience  is  not  an 
unqualified  advantage.  In  Christian  experience  it  is  possible  to  know  so  much 
as  to  lose  faith  in  anything.  These  types  can  be  helpful  to  each  other  in  Church 
life.  The  *'  Httle  children  "  call  for  sympathy,  and  put  the  brightness  of  simple 
faith  into  Church  relations.  The  "  young  men "  bear  the  burden  of  Church 
duties  and  responsibilities.  And  the  "  fathers  "  temper  enterprise  with  counsels 
of  prudence.  And  what  is  the  one  message  which  St.  John  considers  to  have 
its  precise  adaptation  to  each  of  these  classes  ?  At  first  sight  it  seems  to  be  suit- 
able only  for  the  "  young  men,"  those  in  their  prime.  It  is  this,  "  Love  not  the 
world."  But  if  we  understand  St.  John  to  mean  by  the  vwrld  what  we  may  call 
personified  (or  projected)  self,  we  shall  at  once  see  how  his  advice  becomes  applic- 
able to  all  the  classes.  The  peril  of  the  **  little  children  "  is  making  too  much 
of  what  they  have  felt ;  and  that  is  simply  putting  self  into  their  experiences. 
The  peril  of  the  "  young  men  "  is  in  making  too  much  of  what  they  do,  of  what 
they  are  doing  in  their  maturity  and  strength ;  and  that  is  simply  putting  self 
into  their  experiences.  The  peril  of  the  "fathers"  is  in  making  too  much  of 
what  they  know,  presuming  upon  their  length  of  years  and  their  observations ; 
and  that  is  simply  putting  self  into  their  complete  experiences.  "  Love  not  the 
world  "  really  is  but,  in  a  figurative  way,  saying,  "  Love  not  yourself."  And  this  is 
plain  to  view  when  we  notice  that  it  is  not  the  '*  world,"  but  the  love  of  the  world, 

264 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


against  which  we  are  so  carefully  warned.  That  is,  it  is  something  in  us,  not 
something  outside  us ;  it  is  the  self  in  us  that  is  always — either  in  some  secret 
or  some  open  way — trying  to  be  master  of  us.  St.  John  is  evidently  very 
anxious  to  make  this  quite  plain  to  us.  So  he  tells  us  what  he  means  by  the 
"  things  that  are  in  the  world,"  and  we  see  at  once  that  they  are,  all  three,  not 
things  of  the  outside  world  at  all,  but  things  of  the  world  of  self  the  world 
within  us.  The  "  lust  of  the  flesh  "  is  a  bad  side  of  the  self.  The  "  lust  of  the 
eyes  "  is  a  bad  side  of  the  self.  The  **  vain-glory  of  life  "  is  a  bad  side  of  the  self. 
Those  things  will  be  found  to  prove  sources  of  difficulty  to  Church  members  in 
all  the  stages  of  the  Divine  life.  Beginners  must  beware  of  over-mastering  self. 
Strong  men  must  beware  of  over-mastering  self.  Aged  men — our  fathers  in 
Christ — must  beware  of  the  subtle  ways  in  which  self  can  spoil  their  witness 
and  their  influence.  And  St.  John  suggests  the  safeguard  that  will  defend  us 
at  every  stage  of  the  Divine  life — defend  us  from  the  precise  influence  of  the 
world  of  self  upon  us.  It  is  this — Keep  up  the  full  sense  of  your  child- relation 
to  the  Father,  and  in  everything  watch  for  and  do  His  will. 


SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  12.  Forgiveness  of  Sins  a  First  One." — "  Ye,  young  men,  have  overcome 

Experience. — It    is    remarkable     that  the  wicked  one."     It  is  very  easy  to 

"forgiveness  of  sins"  should  be  asso-  assume  that  there  is  a  Satan,  and  then 

ciated  with  the  term  *'  little  children,"  say  that  Satan  is  meant  by  the  "  wicked 

if  children  in  age  are   meant  by  the  one"  here.     But  the  verse  needs  some 

apostle.      The   real   sense  of  sin,  and  careful    and   precise    thinking   about, 

consequently  the  full  joy  of   forgive-  Personifying  moral  or  immoral  quali- 

ness,    can    only    be    known    by   those  ties,  influences,  or  forces  is  constantly 

of  mature   age,  who   have   intelligent  done,  and  constantly  occasions  difficulty, 

understanding,    and    personal    experi-  Jouhert  very  wisely  says,   *'  The  trick 

ence,  of  what  wilful  sin  is  and  involves,  of  personifying  words  is  a  fatal  source 

A   child's   experience  of   sin  and  for-  of   mischief  in  theology."      It   is   not 

giveness   are    right    enough   and   im-  intended   here   to   present   any   argu- 

poi  tant  enough  for  the  child-stage  of  ments   for   or   against   the   idea  of  a 

life ;  but  we  must  look  to  the  larger,  personal  devil — only  to  direct  attention 

fuller  life  of  manhood  for  real  and  deep  to   the    suggestive   fact,    with    which 

experiences.    When  a  man  is  awakened  preachers   may   effectively   deal,    that 

by   the    Spirit  of  God,  he  is  brought  the    "young    man's   wicked    one"    is 

to  a  sense  of  sin,  and  of  the  conditions  nothing  outside  him,  but  is  himself,  in 

into  which  sin  has  brought  him.     He  the  untried  and  unrestrained  strength 

is  oppressed  above  everything  by  the  of   his   intensity   and  passion.      It   is 

conviction   that   it    has  put   him   out  his   undue    "  self-centredness,"    "  self- 

of  pleasant  relations  with  the  Father-  interest."     There  can  be  no   "  wicked 

God,  and  brought  on  him  the  Divine  one"    so   wicked   to   him   as   his   own 

disfavour  and  frown.     Then  it  is  clear  weak,  untested,  over-confident  self 
that   there   can    be   no   beginning    of 

Christian  life,  without  such  a  restora-  Knowing   the    Father. — "  Ye    know 

tion    of   relations   with  God   as   must  the  Father."     We  may  learn  from  the 

involve  His  forgiveness.      Not  a  step  case  of  the  apostles  — those  first  disciples 

can  be  taken  in  the  Christian  life  until  — what  is  the  Christian  way  of  getting 

we   know   that   we  are  forgiven   and  to  see  and  know  the  Father, 

accepted.                        ^  I.  The  disciples  were  filled  with  the 

thought    of  Christ.— They   had   their 

Ver.  13.  The  Young  MarHs  "  Wicked  Master   in   the   sphere  of   the  senses. 

265 


CHAP.   II. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


They  spent  day  by  day  with  Him. 
They  watched  every  deed,  and  listened 
for  every  word,  and  their  whole  thought 
was  occupied  with  His  personality. 
We  can  hardly  imagine  what  it  must 
have  been  to  spend  three  years  in  the 
fascination  of  Christ's  daily  presence. 
Those  disciples  could  think  of  nothing 
but  Jesus,  and  talk  of  nothing  but 
Jesus.  And  this  was  so  far  good  and 
right.  Since  Christ  is  God,  we  can 
never  make  too  much  of  Him  ;  we  may 
fearlessly  fill  our  heart  and  thought 
with  Him.  His  individuality  can 
never  be  too  forcibly  impressed  upon 
us.  And  yet  Christ  will  be  grieved  if 
we  stop  with  His  earthly  manifesta- 
tion, and  fail  to  enter  into  His  greater 
mystery.  He  does  not  want  to  be  seen 
only  with  men's  bodily  eyes.  We  may 
not — the  disciples  may  not — stop  with 
the.  fascination  of  the  "  Man  Christ 
Jesus."  He  does  indeed  strongly  im- 
press His  human  presence,  but  only 
with  an  ultimate  design,  only  as  a 
stepping-stone  to  something  further 
and  better.  *'  Though  we  have  known 
Christ  after  the  flesh,"  says  St.  Paul, 
"  yet  now  henceforth  know  we  Him 
[thus]  no  more."  Christ  would  neither 
have  His  disciples,  nor  us,  rest  in  Him, 
if  we  can  only  see  His  earthly  features. 
Disciples  must  see  God  in  Him,  even  the 
Father-God  in  Him.  We  may  not  stay 
with  the  outward  show  of  the  Christ  of 
the  gospels  :  we  too  must  find  God  in 
Him,  even  the  Father- God  in  Him. 
The  earthly  and  the  human  are  but 
stepping-stones  ;  and  yet  it  is  only  with 
our  feet  on  them  that  we  can  rise  to 
higher  and  better  things.  The  way  to 
all  else,  and  better,  is  to  be,  like  the  first 
disciples,  full  of  the  thought  of  Christ, 
and  setting  all  our  affection  and  hope 
on  Him.     But,  on  the  other  hand — 

II.  Christ  was  filled  with  the 
thought  of  His  Father.— All  His  life 
was  seen  by  Him  in  its  relation  to 
the  Father,  and  to  the  Father's  will. 
He  was  absorbed  with  the  thought  of 
the  Father.  He  was  always  talking 
of  the  Father.  It  was  the  word  for 
God  that  was  characteristic  of  Him, 
the  sacred  name  that  was  continually 

266 


upon  His  lips.  He  seemed  to  be 
always  putting  Himself  back  into  the 
second  place,  that  He  might  fill  men's 
thoughts  with  the  holy,  righteous 
Father.  So  thoroughly  characteristic 
is  this  of  His  teaching,  that  we  are 
almost  justified  in  calling  it  "Jesus 
Christ's  name  for  God,"  and  in  saying 
that  it  is  the  very  point  and  essence 
of  the  revelation  which  He  brought  to 
men.  He  seemed  only  to  live  among 
men  that,  in  His  character,  and  by 
His  conduct.  He  might  "  show  us  the 
Father."  Was  He  pure,  with  a  strict 
and  yet  winsome  purity  ?  He  was  but 
bringing  closely  home  to  our  thought 
and  feeling  the  holiness  of  God.  Was 
He  gentle,  and  pitying,  and  merciful  ? 
He  was  but  persuasively  making  all 
the  '*  goodness  of  God  to  pass  before 
us,"  and  proclaiming  the  Father-name 
of  God  before  us.  Was  He  personally 
touched  by  human  sorrows  ?  Did  He 
really  take  up  our  human  woes  as 
burdens  on  His  own  sympathy  ?  He 
was  but  convincing  us  that  "  like  as  a 
father  pitieth  his  children,  so  the  Lord 
pitieth  them  that  fear  Him."  Look 
at  His  mighty  works.  His  miracles 
of  love  and  power.  Are  they  merely 
wonderful  events — merely  demonstra- 
tions of  almightiness  ?  Nay,  surely, 
better  far  is  their  purpose.  They  are 
signs  of  the  Father.  There  are  the 
Father's  great  works  seen  in  miniature, 
that  men  may  recognise  the  Father- 
hand  that  is  in  all  the  great  things. 
Christ  healed  the  sick,  with  a  word 
and  a  touch,  to  reveal  the  li\dng 
Father,  who  is  watching  by  all  sick- 
beds, raising  up  them  that  are  bowed 
down,  restoring,  and  healing,  and  com- 
forting, every  day  and  everywhere. 
Christ  stood  up  to  quell  the  sudden 
storm  on  little  Galilee,  to  show  His 
disciples  the  Father,  who  holdeth  "  the 
winds  in  His  fists,  and  the  waters  in 
the  hollow  of  His  hand "  ;  who  can 
say,  even  to  the  winter- driven  waves 
of  the  great  ocean,  "Hitherto  shalt 
thou  come,  and  no  further " ;  who  is 
the  all-controlling  Father  even  of  the 
whirlwind  and  the  tempest.  Christ 
took  the   few  loaves,   and   multiplied 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  II. 


them  into  a  full  feast  for  the  seated 
thousands,  to  show  the  Father- God, 
who,  each  returning  year,  multiplies 
the  scattered  seeds  of  the  spring-time 
into  the  rich  and  waving  autumn 
harvests  from  which  all  His  children 
are  fed.  The  miracles  are  not  simply 
acts  that  glorify  Christ's  power;  the 
Father  who  sent  Him,  He  doeth  the 
works,  and  He  stands  out  to  view  in 
all  those  miracles.  They  were  all 
wrought  with  this  for  their  supreme 
aim — to  "shew  us  the  Father."  All 
that  Christ  did,  all  that  Christ  said, 
all  that  Christ  suffered,  has  for  its  one 
object  the  glorifying  of  the  Father ; 
and  His  closing  prayer  revealed  the 
great  purpose  of  His  life  :  "  Now,  O 
Father,  glorify  Thou  Me  with  Thine 
own  self." 

III.  When  disciples  see  Christ 
truly,  they  go  past  Him,  and  know 
the  Father,  see  the  Father,  even  as 
He  did. — Seeing  Christ  truly  !  What 
is  the  true  seeing  of  anything,  or  of 
any  one  ?  Is  it  ever  so  minute  and 
exact  a  tracing  of  his  doings  or  his 
sayings?  Nay,  it  must  be  reading 
the  heart — sympathetically  entering 
into  the  very  motive  and  spirit.  Seeing 
is  not  a  mere  matter  of  bodily  vision. 
What  can  any  man  who  has  only  eyes 
in  his  body  see  of  Christ  ?  True 
seeing  is  soul-seeing,— apprehending 
the  inner  life  of  thought,  principle, 
motive;  seeing  a  man's  secret.  What 
then  may  we  see  in  Christ  ?  He  tells 
us  Himself  :  "  He  that  hath  seen  Me 
hath  seen  the  Father."  W^e  may  see 
the  wise  God  as  we  trace  the  long 
and  chequered  history  of  our  race, 
and  note  how  "  all  things  have  been 
working  together  for  good."  We  can 
see  the  strong  God  as  we  look  upon  the 
everlasting  mountains,  and  hear  the 
mighty  storm-voice  echoing  among 
the  hills.  We  can  know  the  beautiful 
and  good  God  as  we  gaze  upon  the 
jewelled  lake  in  its  mountain  setting, 
see  the  threading  of  the  silver  stream- 
let, or  watch  the  golden- flowered  fields. 
Goodness  is  revealed  to  all  who  can 
read  nature's  heart.  But  how  every- 
thing seems  to  pale,  and  fade,  and  pass 


out  of  vision,  when  we  find  that  we 
can  see  and  know  our  Father-God,  in 
the  human  manifestation  of  Christ  the 
Son,  when  we  can  read  its  heart  aright ! 
Simple  souls,  Christ's  *'  little  children," 
can  "  know  the  Father." 

Yers.  14-16.  An  Old  ManJs  Message 
to  the  Young. — The  writer  of  these 
words  was  an  old  man,  a  very  old 
man,  a  very  noble  old  man, — one  more 
than  usually  rich  in  the  experiences 
of  life ;  one  whose  work  for  many 
years  had  been  to  watch  the  influences 
for  good  or  for  evil  affecting  the  people, 
so  that  he  might  duly  warn  and  guide. 
We  read  of  "  Paul  the  aged,"  but  the 
man  of  whom  we  now  speak  was  "  John 
the  Beloved,"  who  lived  to  be  nearly  a 
hundred  years  old.  What  a  wonderful 
century  of  life  his  must  have  been  ! 
Born  into  Jewish  privileges,  but  at  a 
time  when  Jewish  ceremonial  had  lost 
its  ever-present  Jehovah,  and  had 
become  a  vain  formalism — born  at  a 
time  when  Jewish  liberty  was  crushed 
under  the  heel  of  Roman  supremacy — 
St.  John  must  have  had  a  hard  youth- 
time  and  early  manhood.  For  a  soul 
with  any  bigness  in  it,  any  great  wants 
in  it,  any  yearnings  after  high  and 
Divine  things  in  it,  those  few  years 
before  the  birth  of  Christ  must  have 
been  a  weary  time — the  cry  of  the  soul 
ever  stifled,  the  out-reaching  hand 
smitten  back,  the  empty  soul  left 
empty  still.  Manhood  had  fully 
dawned  when  St.  John  came  into  the 
illuminations  of  the  "  Light  "  God  had 
sent  into  the  world.  Prepared  by  the 
repentance  which  John  the  Baptist 
demanded,  he  came  to  Jesus,  "  found 
in  Him  a  resting-place,"  and  for  some 
three  years  knew  a  kind  of  joy  unspeak- 
able in  the  daily  fellowship  of  "God 
manifest  in  the  flesh."  When  he  lost 
his  Lord  out  of  hand-grasp,  there  came 
years  of  loving  service  to  the  risen 
and  living  One — years  of  travel,  of 
preaching,  of  teaching,  of  suffering,  of 
practical  dealing  with  varieties  of  char- 
acter, and  of  opposing  both  subtle  and 
open  evils.  Who  can  tell  what  care 
and   what    work    were    crowded    into 

267 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


those  long  years !  He  must  have 
come  to  know  young  men  well.  He 
watched  the  eagerness  with  which 
they  received  the  gospel-message.  He 
mourned  over  the  devices  by  which 
they  were  so  often  enticed  back  into 
the  world  again.  Surely  the  young 
may  wisely  sit  at  the  feet  of  this 
reverend,  this  saintly,  this  experienced 
old  man.     Consider  then — 

I.  The  old  man's  kindly  description 
of  young  men. — "  Ye  are  strong."  If 
this  description  were  not  given  by 
an  inspired  teacher,  we  might  suspect 
flattery,  or  at  least  such  an  effort  to 
say  kindly  things  as  would  open  the 
young  man's  heart  to  receive  his 
counsels.  But,  in  truth,  St.  John  gives 
us  a  careful,  an  almost  philosophical 
estimate  of  the  young  man.  No  single  ^ 
word  could  more  exactly  describe  him. 
He  is  "  strong."  "  The  glory  of  young 
men  is  their  strength."  The  prophet 
exclaims,  "  Even  the  youths  shall  faint 
and  be  weary,  and  the  young  men 
shall  utterly  fall :  but  they  that  wait 
upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their 
strength."  The  word  is  a  fitting  one 
to  describe  the  bodily,  physical  vigour 
of  the  young.  At  no  other  time  in 
life  is  the  frame  so  perfect,  the  energy 
so  abundant,  the  vitality  so  strong. 
Oftentimes  there  is  such  a  flow  of 
purely  physical  power,  as  cannot  be 
exhausted  in  the  toil  of  life,  and  must 
flow  over  into  athletic  sports.  To  the 
strong  man  labour  is  joy,  not  toil ;  it 
is  only  with  the  wearying  years  that  a 
man  finds  his  work  grow  toilsome  and 
hard.  But  St.  John  means  more  than 
bodily  strength  ;  he  applies  his  word 
to  the  whole  man,  to  the  moral  and 
spiritual  nature,  as  well  as  the  physical. 
We  never  love  as  we  love  in  youth. 
We  never  desire  as  as  we  desire  in 
youth.  We  never  battle  with  obstacles 
and  difiiculties  as  we  battle  with  them 
in  youth.  Perhaps  it  is  even  true  to 
say,  that  we  never  "  hunger  and  thirst 
after  righteousness  "  as  we  do  in  youth. 
There  is  an  intensity  in  all  that  the 
young  folks  do.  Sometimes,  indeed, 
it  needs  checking ;  sometimes  it  is  not 
ruled   by    prudence.       Sometimes    the 

268 


young  man's  glory  becomes  his  shame. 
The  very  energy  put  into  worldly 
pursuits  may  result  in  bringing  into 
the  soul  the  "  love  of  the  world,"  and 
pushing  out  the  "  love  of  the  Father." 
And  St.  John  says  of  the  young  men, 
"  the  word  of  God  abideth  in  you." 
Only  just  started  in  life,  the  cares,  and 
toils,  and  sorrows  that  make  up  our 
human  lot  have  not  yet  proved  strong 
enough  to  efface  the  impressions  of 
the  word  of  God,  as  they  have  been 
made  on  your  hearts  by  early  teachings 
and  associations.  By  and  by  this 
may  be  true  of  you :  the  cares  of  life 
and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches  may 
choke  the  word.  By- and- by  you  may 
refuse  the  invitations  of  Divine  grace, 
using  the  poor  excuses,  "  I  have  bought 
a  piece  of  land "  ;  "I  have  bought  five 
yoke  of  oxen."  But  it  is  not  so  with 
you  now.  The  hallowing  impressions 
of  the  early  years  abide.  Holy  memo- 
ries of  mother's  prayers  abide.  Belies 
of  influence  from  days  of  sickness  abide. 
Thoughts  come  back  that  were  started 
in  the  Sabbath  class.  Warm  feelings 
fill  the  heart  sometimes,  renewing  th^ 
sacred  impressions  of  the  Sabbath  and 
the  sanctuary.  There  is  on  your  heart 
to-day  a  strong  grip  of  Christian, 
truth  and  Christian  claim.  As  yet, 
you  have  your  souls,  your  memories, 
filled  up  with  the  word  of  God,  the 
desire  for  God.  In  that  the  beloved 
apostle  finds  a  basis  for  his  warning  : 
"  Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things 
that  are  in  the  world."  And,  again, 
St.  John  describes  young  men  as  those 
who  have  "  overcome  the  wicked  one." 
How  graciously  God  must  have  put  the 
hedge  of  His  protection  round  you,  if 
this  can  be  said  truly  of  you  !  Up  to 
this  hour  you  have  been  kept  from 
"  that  wicked  one  " — from  young  men's 
sins,  the  sins  that  come  in  the  line  of 
bodily  indulgence  and  passion.  Up  to 
this  hour  you  stand  in  God's  all-search- 
ing presence,  pure  from  these  defihng 
and  debasing  forms  of  evil.  A  stained 
and  erring  man,  in  the  shame  and 
weariness  of  old  age,  once  said  to  a 
young  brother,  "  John,  bless  God 
every  day  you  live,  if,  by  His  grace, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


you  have  been  kept  from  youthful  sins."  three  things.     The  first,  "the  lust  of 

Up  to  this  time   you   have   overcome  the  flesh,"  embraces  all  the  indulgences 

**  that  wdcked  one."     You  have,  then,  of  the  natural  passions  and  depraved 

begun   the   great    conflict  :   you   have  inclinations  of  our  bodily  nature — all 

begun  to  understand  what  life  means  the  excesses  in  eating,  and  drinking,  and 

and  involves.     Consider —  sensuality   to  which   fallen   humanity 

II.     The    old    man's     estimate     of  is  liable.     And  how  appalling  is  the 

youDg  men's  dangers. — "  The  lust  of  ruin  wrought  by   these   lusts  of  the 

the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  flesh  !      Every   day  we   may   see,    on 

pride  of   life."      The   old  man   knows  the   street,  the  leering  side-glance  of 

what  things   there   really  are  in  the  the   sensualist,   the   bloated   face   and 

world,    and   what   are   their   different  figure   of   the  drunkard ;    and    as   we 

values  and  influences.    The  young  man  see  them,  we  can  scarcely  admit  the 

can  know  very  little  of  the  world,  and  possibility  of  our  ever  becoming  as  they 

what  he  does  know  is  largely  disguised  are.    Yet  St.  John,  with  his  full  experi- 

to   deceive.       There    is   an   important  ence  of  life  and  temptation,  sees  danger 

difference  between  the  old  man's  "  I  even  for   us.     "I    have  written   unto 

know,"  and  the  young  man's  "I  know."  you,  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong." 

When  the  old  man  says  *'  I  know,"  he  True  of  the  powers  of  good  in  us,  that 

means,  "  I  have  been  there,"  "  I  have  is  also  true  of  the  powers  of  evil.     The 

had  to  do  with  it,"  "I  have  battled  **  lusts  of  the  flesh"  in  the  young  are 

through  it."     When   the  young   man  strong.     The   passions   and  desires   of 

says    "  I  know,"  he   only  means,    "  I  our  fallen  nature  are  strong — stronger 

think  so,"  "  I  have  heard  so,"  "  I  hope  in   youth- time   than   they  ever  again 

so."      Young    folk   often    think    that  will  be ;  and  in  their  strength  hes  our 

the  dangers  of  life  are  magnified  by  peril.     Remember,  I  beseech  you,  that 

the  old  people  :  they  cannot  see  such  the  "  lusts  of  the  flesh  "  are  not  of  the 

pitfalls,  such  carefully  concealed  nets  Father ;    they   do   not    belong   to   the 

and   gins,  such  gaily  decked  tempta-  holy  Father,  they  do  not  suit  the  great 

tions,  as  they  hear  of.     And  yet  the  Father's  thoughts  and  hopes  for  you. 

truth  is  with  the  old  man,  not  with  If  you  would  be  the  Son  of  the  holy 

the  young.     It  is  a  glorious  thing  to  Father,    then    "  flee   youthful    lusts." 

live,  but  it  is  a  very  responsible  thing.  The  second  danger  comes  out  of  the 

It   is  a   blessed   thing   to   be   in   this  *'  lust   of   the   eye."      This  is   a   peril 

wonderful    world   of    God's,    with    all  affecting  nobler   kinds  of   men.     The 

these    surroundings   of    pleasure,    and  eye  is  one  of  the  most  honourable  of 

all  these  possible  achievements  opening  our  senses.     The  "  eye  is  never  satisfied 

before  us.     But  it  is  a  highly  perilous  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear  with  hearing," 

thing ;    and    every   earnest    soul   will  and  God  is  graciously  pleased  to  give 

want   to   ask,   "Wherewithal  shall  a  us  exquisite  pleasure  in  the  things  on 

young  man  cleanse  his  way,"  and  be  which  we  may  gaze.     But  the  Father 

ready  to  pray,  "  Keep  back  Thy  servant  made  them  all,  gave  them  all,  speaks 

also  from   presumptuous  sins."     Aged  by  them  all  to  our  hearts.     St.  John, 

St.   John   could    see   that    the   world  however,  says  that,  for  you  young  men, 

appeals  to  three  faculties,  or  capacities,  there  is  some  danger.    You  are  strong  ; 

in   us ;    and    that,    if    our    controlling  the  *'  lust  of    the   eye "  is   strong :  in 

power  be  the  love  of  the  worlds  rather  passionate    satisfying    of    the    senses, 

than  the  love  of  the  Father^  then  the  even  the  sense  of   the  beautiful,  you 

world  will  be   sure  to  lead  us   away  may  pass  by  the  Father ;  you  may  fail 

from   all  that  is  true  and  good,  and  to  see  Hirrif  and  find  Him ;  you  may 

put  us  into  the  power  of  the  "  lust  of  be  carried   away  by  the  love   of   the 

the  flesh,  the   lust   of   the   eyes,  and  world.    Your  very  strength  may  make 

the  pride  of  life."     Everybody's  danger  you  love  even  the  higher  pleasures  of 

and  temptation  bear  relation  to  these  hfe  for  their  own  sakes ;  and  your  soul, 

269 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


with    all    its   noble    possibilities,    will 
stop  short  of  God,  our  only  true  end. 
The   third    danger    comes   out   of   the 
"  pride   of  life " — a   still   higher   kind 
of  peril,  connected  with  our  intelligence, 
our  thought,  our  ambitions,  our  aspira- 
tions.   Many  a  man  has  fled  youthful 
lusts,    has    conquered    the   desire    for 
pleasure  through  the  senses,  and  then 
has  fallen  before  this  "  pride  of  life." 
We  know  well  what  is  meant  by  that 
term.      We    watch,    we    envy,    those 
above  us  in  society ;  we  want  to  have 
houses  such  as  they  have,  to  be  as  free 
with  wealth  as  they  are,  to  be  able 
to  enjoy  what  they  enjoy,  to  take  the 
position  in  society  which  they  are  able 
to  take.     And  St.  John  reminds  us  of 
our  peril.     We  need  to  step  carefully, 
and  to  walk  watchfully.     The  "  pride 
of  life  "  is  not  wholly  wrong ;  the  desire 
to  rise  must  fill  every  noble  breast ; 
it  is  the  feebler  sphere  of  the  yearning 
of  our  souls  for  God.     But  the  "  pride 
of    life"    must   be    kept    in,    curbed, 
moulded,    well-possessed,  and  inspired 
with  higher  principle,  or  it  will  surely 
overwhelm   us   and  degrade   us.     The 
danger  for  the  young  is  that  they  are 
strong.     Fill  the  "  pride  of  Ufe  "  with 
all   your  youthful  strength,   and  you 
will    surely   find   it   is    not    "  of    the 
Father  "  ;  it  is  "  of  the  world,"  and  the 
"  world   passeth   away,    and   the   lust 
thereof  "  ;  only  "  he  who  doeth  the  will 
of  God  abideth  for  ever."     Consider — 
III.  The  old  man's  counsel  for  the 
guidance  of  the  young  man's  way. — 
"  Love    not    the    world,    neither    the 
things   that   are   in   the   world."     St. 
John  would  say,   "  Young  men,  take 
care    of    yourselves;    consider    where 
your  love  is  set,  and  what  is  its  object." 
Love  is   always  nobler   and   mightier 
than  lust.     Love  is  the  holy,  God-like 
power   within   us.     Lust    is   the   low, 
grovelling  earth-power.     Nothing  can 
really  conquer  lust  and  pride  but  love. 
Then  you  will  be  safe,  quite  safe,  if 
your  love  is  right.     The  whole  life  is 
endangered  if  the  love  be  wrong.     A 
man   always  is  according  as  he  loves. 
A  man  may  drive  the  evil  spirit  out, 
and  have  his  house  empty,  swept,  and 

270 


garnished.     But  he  is   not  safe  until 
holy  love  fills  the  empty  house.     There 
is   always    the   danger   that   the   evil 
spirit   may  come   back   to  the   empty 
place,     and     bring    with     him     seven 
other  spirits  worse  than  himself.     The 
sanctifying    capacity    in    us    is    love. 
Then  "love  not  the  world."     *' If  any 
man  love  the  world,   the  love  of  the 
Father  is  not  in  him."     The  love  in 
us  can  never  rest  in  anything  ;  it  must 
set  itself  upon  a  person.     Our  lust  can 
do  with  things,  but  our  love  cannot. 
And  our  love  to  a  person  can  never 
fully    satisfy    itself    with    any    other 
person  than  our    "  Father  who  is  in 
heaven."       Then    let    your    youthful 
strength   go   out   in   love   to   God,   of 
whom    John    Tauler    so    expressively 
says,  "Rightly is  He  called  the  Master 
of  love,  for  He  rewards  nothing  but 
love ;    He  rewards  only  out   of   love ; 
and   He   rewards   with    love."      Love 
God,  and  then  you  shall  keep  down  all 
lusts,  all  pride ;  you  shall  make  such 
things    servants    to    serve    you,    not 
temptations  to  triumph  over  you,  nor 
tyrants  to   enslave   you.     Love   God ! 
What  God  ?     Why,  "  God  manifest  in 
the    flesh," — God    shadowed    to    your 
view  in  your  own  humanity,  that  your 
eyes  may  see  Him,  your  ears  may  hear 
Him,  and  your  arms  twine  with  a  life- 
clasp  about  Him, — the  God  whom  St. 
John   loved  and   Hved   for;    the    God 
whom  St.  Paul  loved,  and  would  have 
died  to  honour  ;  the  God  whom  Mary 
loved,  and  at  whose  feet  she  sat  up- 
looking,  with  those  eyes  which  Tenny- 
son   so   exquisitely    calls    "  homes    of 
silent  prayer."     Set  your  hearts  upon 
loving,  trusting,  following,  serving,  that 
brother- man,    that    manifested    God, 
Jesus   Christ.      Belying   on   the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  you  are  trusting  the  God 
of  love.     Loving  Christ  Jesus,  on  your 
hearts   will   be  set   that   love   of   the 
Father   which    alone    can    keep    you, 
through  all  the  long  years,  from  the 
love  of  the  world. 

Yer.  1 5.  The  Love  of  the  Father  as  the 
Law  of  Life. — A  fragment  from  Philo 
declares  that  "  it  is  impossible  for  love  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    L  JOHN.  chap.  ii. 


the  world  to  coexist  with  love  to  God."  conception  from  their  existence  in  onr- 

By  writing  "the  love  of  the  Father,"  selves.     2.  By  the  representation  which 

rather   than  "  the   love  of   God,"  the  God  has  given  us  of  Himself  in  Christ, 

apostle  points  to  the  duty  of  Christians  3.  The  world  is  but  manifested  Deity 

as  children  of  God.     The  "  love  of  the  — God   shown   to    eye,    and    ear,    and 

Father  "  means  man's  love  to  Him,  not  sense.     Then  to  forbid  the  love  of  all 

His  to  man.     "  The  love  of  the  F^.ther  this  world  is  to  forbid  the  love  of  that 

is  the  true  posture  of  the  soul  towards  by  which  God  is  known  to  us.     The 

God.     If  the  soul  is  evenly  balanced  sounds  and  sights  of  this  lovely  world 

between  love  of  God  and  of  the  world,  are   but   the   drapery  of   the  robe  in 

it  is  negative  and  colourless.     If  the  which  the  Invisible  has  clothed  Him- 

balance  incline  towards  the  things  that  self.     By  the  world  is  sometimes  meant 

distract  from  the  pure  and  simple  walk  the  men  that  are  in  the  world — as  if 

with  God,  then  the  emotion  for  Him  we  could  love  God  the  more  by  loving 

has  died  away ;  if  the  balance  be  for  man  the  less.     This  is  not  St.  John's 

Him,  the  expulsive  power  of  the  new  forbidden  world.     By  the  world  is  often 

affection  "  makes  the  contrary  attrac-  understood     the    worldly    occupation, 

tions    insignificant    and     increasingly  trade,  or  profession  which  a  man  exer- 

powerless."     A  man  must  have  a  "law  cises.      It  is  no  uncommon  thing   to 

of  life  "  to  be  a  man  at  all.     Manhood  hear  this  spoken  of  as  something  which, 

is  life  under  intelligent  rule.     The  law  if  not  actually  anti- religious,  so  far  as 

of  his  life  will  be  the  thing  which  he  it  goes,  is  time  taken  away  from  the 

supremely  loves.     A  man  may  love  the  religious  life.     A  man's  profession  or 

woi'ld,  which  is  precisely  this — himself  trade  is  his  religion.     And  this  is  true 

projected  outside  himself,  and  made  a  even  of   those  callings  which  at  first 

circle  round  himself.      That   self  will  sight  appear  to  have  in  them  something 

present  the  entire  series  of  considera-  hard   to   reconcile   with   religiousness, 

tions  that  rules  his  conduct.     Or  a  man  such  as  that  of  the  lawyer.     Worldli- 

may  love  the  Father  ;  and  that  is  man  ness   consists   in   these    three   things  : 

going  out  beyond  himself,  outside  his  attachment  to  the   outward  ;    attach- 

own  circle,  and  living  under  the  most  ment  to  the   transitory  ;    attachment 

sanctifying  rule  of  love.  to  the  unreal,  in  opposition  to  love  of 

the  inward,  the  eternal,  and  the  true. 

Vers.   15-17.  Woi-ldUness. — Religion         II.  The  reasons  for  which  the  love 

differs  from  morality  in  the  value  which  of  the  world   is  forbidden. — 1.  It   is 

it  places  on  the  affections.     Morality  incompatible  with  the  love  of  God.     St. 

requires  that  an  act  be  done  on  prin-  John  takes  it  for  granted  that  we  must 

ciple.     Religion  goes  deeper,  and  in-  love  something.     Every  man  must  go 

quires  into  the  state  of  the  heart.     In  out  of  himself  for  enjoyment.     2.  Its 

the  eye  of  Christianity  he  is  a  Christian  transitoriness.     It  is  transitory  in  it- 

who  loves  the  Father.     He  who  loves  self — the  world   passeth  away.     It  is 

the  world  may  be  in  his  way  a  good  transitory   in    its   power    of    exciting 

man,  respecting  whose  eternal  destiny  desire — the  lust  thereof  passeth  away, 

we  pronounce  no  opinion  ;  but  one  of  Man  becomes  satiated  with  the  world, 

the  children  of  the  kingdom  he  is  not.  There  is  something  in  earthly  rapture 

The  boundary  lines  of  this  love  of  the  that  cloys.     3.  The  solitary  permanence 

world,  or  worldliness,  are  exceedingly  of  Christian  action.     Christian  life  is 

difficult  to  define.  action  :    not  a  speculating,  not  a  de- 

I.  The  nature  of  the  forbidden  bating,  but  a  doing.  One  thing,  and 
world. — There  are  three  ways  in  which  only  one,  in  this  world  has  eternity 
we  learn  to  know  God  :  1.  By  the  stamped  upon  it.  Feelings  pass;  re- 
working of  our  minds.  Love,  justice,  solves  and  thoughts  pass ;  opinions 
tenderness :  if  we  would  know  what  change.  What  you  have  done  lasts — 
they  mean  in  God,  we  must  gain  the  lasts   in   you.      Distinguish,   however, 

271 


CHAP.  II.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


between  the  act  and  the  actor :  it  is  he  wrote,  may  be  studied,  and  used  to 
not  the  thing  done,  but  the  doer  who  give  point  to  his  counsels  and  warn- 
lasts.  The  thing  done  often  is  a  ings.  Attention  is  now  fixed  on  this 
failure.  Two  lessons  :  1 .  Learn  from  — that  the  "  pride  of  Ufe "  is  a  self- 
earthly  changef ulness  a  lesson  of  cheer-  toned  circle  of  which  the  centre  is  self. 
ful  activity.  2.  The  love  of  this  world  The  essence  of  it  is  self- superiority  :  it 
is  only  unlearned  by  the  love  of  the  is  the  Pharisaic  "  I  thank  thee  that 
Father.  It  were  a  desolate  thing,  I  am  not  as  other  men  are."  It  is 
indeed,  to  forbid  the  love  of  earth,  if  pride  of  the  peculiarities  that  mark 
there  were  nothing  to  fill  the  vacant  our  Kves  oflt  from  the  lives  of  others, 
space  in  the  heart.  But  it  is  just  for  It  may  be  pride  of  superior  intellect, 
this  purpose,  that  a  sublimer  affection  or  superior  acquirements,  or  superior 
may  find  room,  that  the  lower  is  to  be  birth,  or  superior  station,  or  superior 
expelled. — F.  W.  Robertson.  tastes.      Our   differences  from   others 

are  no  moral  temptations  to  us  while 

Ver.  1 6.  The  Pride  of  Life. — This  is  we  regard  them  as  a  Divine  trust  com- 

one  of  the  great  frailties  of  humanity  mitted  to  us,  as  an  agency  for  service 

in  every  age,  and  it  gains  expression  in  to   others.       "Who    maketh   thee   to 

every  class  of   society.     The  forms  it  differ  ?  and  what  hast  thou  that  thou 

took  in  the  days  of  the  apostle  John,  hast  not  received  ?  " 
and  in  the  Christian  Churches  to  which 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  18,  19. 

The  Time  of  the  Antichrists. — "  It  is  the  last  time,"  or  more  correctly,  "  it  is  a 
last  hour."  By  this  figurative  term  the  apostle  indicates  a  time  of  severe 
conflict.  We  precisely  express  his  meaning  when  we  say,  "  Things  are  reaching 
a  climax."  Much  mistake  has  been  made  by  taking  the  expression  "  last  time  " 
in  a  strictly  temporal  sense.  What  St.  John  meant  to  say  was  this,  ^'  Things 
are  evidently  coming  to  a  point."  When  we  come  to  deal  closely  and  philo- 
sophically with  the  term  *'  last  time,"  we  are  compelled  to  see  that  so  long  as  God 
lives,  and  is  actively  working,  there  cannot  be  any  such  thing  as  a  "  last  time." 
There  never  has  been,  and  there  never  can  be.  Seemingly  last  things  were  only 
last  of  parts  of  a  series.  There  never  yet  was  an  end  that  was  not  also  a 
beginning, — just  as  you  cannot  destroy  one  particle  of  matter ;  you  can  only 
change  its  form  and  relations.  The  "last  times"  of  St.  John  have  come  and 
gone,  but  the  Christian  ages  continue;  and  every  time  in  those  ages  when  a 
great  fight  has  arisen  over  some  imperilled  Christian  truth  has  been  a  "last 
time "  in  St.  John's  sense.  The  conflict  over  the  "  filioque "  was  a  last  time. 
The  Arian  struggle  was  a  "  last  time."  The  Beformation  was  a  "  last  time." 
Another  point  has  too  often  escaped  attention.  The  name  "  Christ "  is  the  Greek 
equivalent  of  the  Hebrew  word  "  Messiah,"  and  therefore  the  term  "  antichrist" 
is  strictly  referable  to  any  one  who  opposes  or  denies  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,  and  all  that  it  involved.  But  that  was  a  particular  phase  of  conflict 
which  belonged  exclusively  to  the  times  of  St.  John.  For  the  Christian  nations 
it  is  a  controversy  that  is  dead  and  gone,  or  lingering  only,  in  a  small  way,  in 
the  controversy  with  the  Jew.  We  have  filled  the  term  "  antichrist "  with  our 
own  meanings,  and  so  have  quite  forgotten  the  very  precise  and  limited  connota- 
tion of  the  term  in  the  time  of  the  first  Christian  Church.  In  these  verses 
three  things  are  urged  on  attention. 

I.  The  Christian  Churches  had  been  warned  to  expect  antichrist. — "  Ye  have 
heard  that  antichrist  shall  come."  Warnings  had  been  fully  given  by  our 
Lord  Himself  (Matt.  xxiv.  5,  23,  24).  And  it  could  not  have  been  otherwise, 
human  nature  being  what  it  is.     Was  ever  anything  provided  for  humanity, 

272 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN,  chap.  ii. 


or  proclaimed  to  humanity,  which  was  not  opposed  ?  Was  ever  scientific 
theory  or  theological  doctrine  presented  without  arousing  contradiction? 
Enthusiastic  men  may  take  up  some  new  thing,  and  imagine  that,  unhindered, 
it  is  going  to  carry  all  before  it ;  but  it  never  does.  It  succeeds  at  all  only  by 
forcing  its  way  through  and  against  obstacles.  Christianity  is  a  Divine  force, 
but  it  works,  and  can  only  work,  under  human  conditions.  It  was  a  dream 
that  it  would  go  forth  to  conquer,  in  such  a  sense  as  that ;  crushing  all  opposi- 
tion, it  would  never  have  any  fighting  to  do.  Our  Lord  never  for  one  moment 
encouraged  that  delusion.  The  result  of  His  coming  would  be  to  set  men  at 
variance ;  and  His  truth  would  have  as  big  a  fight  as  His  people.  It  must  be 
so ;  and  it  was  better  that  it  should  be  so.  Man  never  can  get  his  best  things 
save  through  conflict.  And  it  is  in  wrestlings  against  antichrists  that  the 
Christian  truth  has  been  at  once  unfolded  and  preserved.  And  it  will  always 
be  kept  in  similar  conflicts. 

II.  The  antichrists  had  come,  and  proved  to  be  many. — If  the  singular 
*'  antichrist "  is  employed,  it  is  only  as  a  collective  or  representative  term.  To 
find  some  single  person  answering  to  antichrist  has  been  a  kind  of  mania  in 
the  Church.  There  never  was  only  one ;  there  is  not  now  ;  and  there  never 
will  be.  St.  John  does  all  that  he  can  toward  correcting  that  serious  mistake 
when  he  says,  **  even  now  are  there  many  antichrists,"  suggesting  as  the 
conclusion  of  his  sentence,  "  and  how  many  more  there  will  be  by-and-by." 
When  once  we  have  mastered  the  fact,  that  antichrists,  in  every  age,  are  many, 
we  are  put  upon  the  right  lines  for  understanding  what  is  meant  by,  and  what 
is  included  in,  the  term.  Whatever  in  the  Church  opposes  the  living  authority 
and  rule  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  an  antichrist.  So  it  includes  the  moral  opponent, 
the  sensual  teacher,  quite  as  truly  as  the  doctrinal  opponent.  And  the  very 
essence  of  the  spirit  of  antichrist  is  this — setting  some  authority,  based  on  the 
claims  of  self,  against  the  authority  of  Christ. 

III.  The  antichrists  proved  to  be  mischievous  persons  inside  the  Church. — 
The  significance  of  ver.  19  as  an  account  of  the  antichrists  that  were  in 
St.  Johvbs  mind  has  been  overlooked.  We  have  not  to  look  for  them  outside 
the  Churches.  They  were  persons  who  had  been  until  recently  members  of 
the  Churches.  They  were  apostates,  who  had  found  their  position  within  the 
Church  impossible,  and  so  had  left  the  Church,  and  were  now  making  themselves 
as  actively  mischievous  against  the  Church  as  they  possibly  could.  And  now 
we  know  the  two  classes  from  which  the  antichrists  were  recruited.  1.  The 
Judaisers ;  or  those  who  wanted  to  make  religion — Christianity — a  formality 
instead  of  a  life.  And  such  persons  are  antichrists  in  every  age.  2.  The 
philosophers ;  or  those  who  wanted  to  make  Christianity  an  opinion  rather 
than  a  life.  And  it  is  equally  true  that  such  persons  are  antichrists  in  every 
age.  Under  the  Judaiser,  the  false  liberty  that  nourishes  immorality  is  sure 
to  flourish.  Under  the  philosopher,  the  false  pride  that  puts  self  between  the 
soul  and  the  living  Christ  is  sure  to  flourish.  Christ  is  holiness  and  humility. 
Antichrist  is  sensual  indulgence,  and  self-aggrandisement,  and  everything  that 
tends  to  nourish  such  evil  things. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  19.  Separation  expressing  Lost  The  voluntary  withdrawal  of  members 

Harmony. — Some  actual  cases  of  self-  from  Church  fellowship  always  puts  a 

willed  separation  from  the  Church  had  slight  upon  the  fellowship,  and  brings 

evidently   occurred,    and   had   been   a  a  feeling  of  unrest   and   suspicion  to 

source  of  much  anxiety   and   distress,  the    remaining    members.      There    is 

T  273 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :    L  JOHN. 


always  danger  of  those  who  leave 
making  a  party.  And  St.  John  there- 
fore tries  to  quiet  the  unrest,  and 
prevent  the  enlargement  of  the  mis- 
chief, by  helping  the  members  to  look 
aright  on  the  removal  of  these  self- 
willed  persons.  Sooner  or  later  things 
out  of  harmony,  or  persons  out  of 
harmony,  will  be  sure  to  separate. 
Outside  forces  may  act  for  a  while  and 
keep  in  relation  those  who  are  not  in 
harm.ony.  But  the  forces  never  succeed 
in  holding  on  very  long.  The  natural 
separation  persists  in  working  on 
beneath  all  the  restraints ;  and  the 
moment  that  the  force  holding  them 
together  is  released,  they  break  asunder. 
It  is  so  in  the  Church  of  Christ. 
Members  that  are  out  of  harmony, 
either  with  the  moral  tone,  or  with  the 
primary  religious  truths  of  the  Church, 
cannot  long  maintain  their  association 
with   it.     As   St.    John   expressed   it, 


*'  they  are  not  of  us."  They  are  not  in 
sympathy  with  us.  Their  aims  are  not 
ours ;  their  cherished  thoughts  are  not 
ours ;  their  first  principles  are  not  ours. 
And  they  cannot  help  it ;  they  must  go 
from  us.  If  we  stand  firm  in  our 
loyalty  to  Christ,  they  will  be  sure 
to  find  themselves  uncomfortable,  and 
make  some  occasion  for  going  away. 
And  this  is  the  point  in  which  the 
want  of  harmony  will  most  evidently 
appear.  Supreme  in  the  mind  of  the 
Church  will  be,  the  holiest  admiration 
of  Christ,  the  most  loving  loyalty  to 
Christ,  the  full  recognition  of  the  living 
presence  of  Christ,  and  the  absolute 
submission  of  the  whole  soul  and  hfe 
to  His  authority.  In  whatever  sense 
self  rules  mind,  and  feeling,  and  life, 
the  man  will  be  out  of  harmony  with 
all  this.  He  will  be  antichrist ;  and 
when  he  finds  he  is,  he  knows  he  will 
be  best  away. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  20—23. 

The  First  and  Supreme  Christian  Truth. — "  Jesus  is  the  Christ."  But  this 
is  repeated  and  explained.     St.  John  shows  how  much  is  involved  in  it. 

I.  Jesus  is  the  Christ. — This  is  the  first  apprehension  of  Jesus  that  can  be 
gained.  This  begins  the  differentiation  of  Jesus  from  other  men.  There  were 
other  men  named  Jesus  (Joshua),  but  this  man  stands  out  distinct  from  them 
all.  He  appeared  before  the  Jews,  and  the  first  thing  they  were  asked  to  do 
was  to  recognise  in  Him  their  long-expected  Messiah.  St.  Peter  expressed  what 
all  should  have  felt,  when  he  said,  "Thou  art  the  Christ  [Messiah]  of  God." 
This  first  faith  concerning  Christ  does  not  of  course  come  so  freshly  and  so 
powerfully  to  us  as  it  did  to  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  ;  but  we  may  apprehend 
what  is  always  the  first  call  of  faith  to  us,  if  we  express  it  in  this  form — we 
must  believe  in  Jesus  as  the  sent  One.  Jesus  is  commonplace  and  ordinary 
until  we  have  that  belief  concerning  Him.  Then  he  becomes  intensely  interesting 
to  us.  He  has  a  message  :  it  may  be  that  He  is  a  message.  We  must  know 
concerning  this  unique  Man. 

II.  Jesus  is  the  Son. — Fix  exclusive  attention  upon  Him,  watch  His  doings, 
listen  to  His  words,  and  it  will  increasingly  be  impressed  upon  you  that  what 
He  is  embodying  in  a  human  life  is  sonship  ;  and  it  is  so  evidently  beyond 
anything  ever  attainable  by  man,  that  you  are  compelled  to  call  it  a  Divine 
Sonship.     You  find  your  faith  claimed  for  the  truth  that  He  is  "  the  Son  of  God." 

III.  The  Son  implies  the  Father. — When  Jesus  is  known,  you  find  that  God 
is  known.  The  Son  implies  that  He  who  sent  Him  is  the  Father.  And  so  you 
gain  the  truth  that  is  "  worthy  of  all  acceptation,"  and  in  the  acceptance 
of  which  is  eternal  life.  "  The  Father  sent  the  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the 
world." 


274 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  II. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


"Ver.  20.  The  Unction  from  the  Holy 
Q^ie^ — The  word  rendered  "  unction  " 
signifies  "  anointing  oil."  Its  reference 
is  to  the  anointing  of  men  who  were 
set  apart  to  special  Divine  service. 
The  act  of  anointing  was  the  symbolical 
act  of  consecration  ;  the  oil  symbolised 
the  endowments  with  which  God  fitted 
them  for  their  work.  The  sacred  oil 
with  which  the  priests  were  consecrated, 
compounded  of  rich  and  varied  medica- 
ments, was  the  symbol  of  the  manifold 
endowments  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which 
should  be  given  to  all  God's  consecrated 
people.  The  virtue  of  Christian  con- 
secration, and  specially  its  power  to 
discern  between  truth  and  error,  is  the 
present  subject.  The  word  ''  unction  " 
might  be  changed  to  "  chrism,"  which 
immediately  suggests  the  word  "  Christ." 
John  is  intending  to  contrast  the 
"  chrism  "  with  the  "  antichrist,"  the 
Spirit  with  which  Christians  are  en- 
dowed because  of  their  fellowship  with 
Christ  with  the  spii'it  of  error  that 
is  opposed  to  Him.  The  coming  of 
antichrist  was  the  sign  of  the  last 
times.  We  too  witness  many  anti- 
christs, subtle  signs  of  a  spirit  opposed 
to  Christ  revealing  itself  in  many  and 
diverse  ways.  We  know  that  we  are 
exposed  to  these  seductions, — falsehood 
wearing  the  garb  of  truth  ;  many  a 
time-honoured  habit  and  tradition  con- 
cealing an  essential  denial  of  Christ ; 
a  spirit  and  a  tone  in  society,  and  in 
the  Church  itself,  and  sanctioned  by 
venerated  names,  which  involve  nothing 
less  than  the  rejection  of  the  precepts 
and  teachings  of  the  gospel.  And 
John  here  affirms  that  we  are  safe 
against  these  things  in  the  possession 
of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  In  our  con- 
secration to  Him,  in  our  fellowship 
with  His  anointing,  is  given  us  a  Spirit 
that  cannot  be  deceived. 

I.  This  is  a  common  Christian  en- 
dowment.— It  is  to  a  body  of  Christian 
disciples  that  John  is  writing.  So 
simple  are  some  of  them  that  he  calls 
them  *'  little   children."     John  speaks 


of  a  gift  bestowed  upon  all  alike  in 
their  very  consecration  to  Christ,  and 
involved  in  that  consecration, — the  en- 
dowment of  a  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  the 
Holy  One,  in  which  all  are  sharers ;  a 
Divine  instinct,  which  enables  those 
who  receive  it  to  look  on  what  is  true 
and  good,  and  recognise  it ;  to  look  on 
error,  and  on  evil,  and  at  once  detect  it. 
II.  Observe  what  this  Spirit  is  which 
is  given  us  in  our  consecration,  and  by 
which  we  are  enabled  to  discern  the 
truth  of  things. — 1.  It  is  the  spirit  of 
the  consecration  itself.  Decision  of  pur- 
pose is  the  secret  of  directness  of  judg- 
ment. We  shake  ourselves  free  from  the 
influence  of  many  a  deluding  motive  ; 
we  are  able  to  look  right  through  plau- 
sibilities and  discern  hidden  falsehood  ; 
we  are  delivered  from  confusion  in  the 
simple  fact  of  our  acceptance  of  one 
aim  in  life.  When  you  resolved  that 
you  would  follow  Christ,  you  felt  that 
you  had  attained  a  new  power  of 
judgment.  A  truer  spirit,  a  spirit 
clearer  and  more  confident,  was  yours 
in  your  consecration.  2.  It  is  the 
Spirit  of  Christ — a  chrism  from  Christ, 
who  was  Himself  the  anointed  One. 
The  mind  that  was  in  Christ  is  given 
to  us ;  we  are  partakers  of  the  Spirit 
of  Jesus.  3.  The  spirit  of  consecration 
is  the  spirit  of  devotedness  to  our  fellows. 
Priests  and  kings  were  anointed  in 
symbol  of  their  dedication  to  the 
service  of  their  brethren.  The  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  was  on  Christ,  endowing 
Him  for  service.  We  share  in  Christ's 
consecration ;  His  purpose  is  ours  ; 
ours  too  is  the  Spirit  that  dwelt  in 
Him.  The  devotion  to  men  which  we 
have  learnt  from  Christ  will  be  our 
protection.  Our  fellowship  is  with 
Christ's  love  and  hopefulness ;  a  Spirit 
devoted  to  men  like  His  to  men  is 
given  us,  and  by  this  Spirit  we  discern 
all  things.  Christian  character  is  the 
director  of  Christian  life.  The  true 
heart  of  Christ  within  us  is  never- 
failing  discernment,  clearness  of  decision, 
promptitude  of  resolve,  and  stability  of 

275 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   JOHN. 


will.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the  posses- 
sion of  all  who  consecrate  themselves 
to  Him. — A.  Mackennalj  B.A.j  D.D. 

The  Oil  of  the  Spirit. — I  need  not 
remind  you  how,  in  the  old  system, 
prophets,  priests,  and  kings  were 
anointed  with  consecrating  oil,  as  a 
symbol  of  their  calling,  and  of  their 
fitness  for  their  special  offices.  The 
reason  for  the  use  of  such  a  symbol 
would  lie  in  the  invigorating,  and  in 
the  supposed,  and  possibly  real,  health- 
giving  effect  of  the  use  of  oil  in  those 
climates.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  reason  for  the  use  of  oil  in  official 
anointings,  the  meaning  of  the  act  was 
plain.  It  was  a  preparation  for  a 
specific  and  distinct  service.  And  so, 
when  we  read  of  the  oil  of  the  Spirit, 
we  are  to  think  that  it  is  that  which 
fits  us  for  being  prophets,  priests,  and 
kings,  and  which  calls  us  because  it 
fits  us  for  these  functions.  You  are 
anointed  to  be  prophets,  that  you  may 
make  known  Him  who  has  loved  and 


saved  you,  and  may  go  about  the 
world  evidently  inspired  to  show  forth 
His  praise,  and  make  His  nameglorious. 
That  anointing  calls  and  fits  you  to  be 
priests,  mediators  between  God  and 
man — bringing  God  to  men,  and,  by 
pleading  and  persuasion,  and  the  pre- 
sentation of  the  truth,  drawing  men  to 
God.  That  unction  calls  and  fits  you 
to  be  kings,  exercising  authority  over 
the  little  monarchy  of  your  own 
natures,  and  over  the  men  around  you, 
who  will  bow  in  submission  whenever 
they  come  in  contact  with  a  man 
evidently  aflame  with  the  love  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  filled  with  His  Spirit.  The 
world  is  hard  and  rude  ;  the  world  is 
blind  and  stupid  ;  the  world  often  fails 
to  know  its  best  benefactors  ;  but  there 
is  no  crust  of  stupidity  so  crass  and 
dense  but  that  through  it  there  will 
pass  the  penetrating  shafts  of  light 
that  ray  from  the  face  of  a  man 
who  walks  in  fellowship  with  Jesus. — 
A.  Maclarerij  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  24—29. 


Persuasions  to  letting  the  Truth  abide  in  us. — **  Abiding  "  is  one  of  St.  John's 
key- words.  What  had  to  be  feared  in  the  early  Church  has  to  be  feared  in 
every  age  of  the  Church.  It  is  restlessness,  that  tends  to  shift  men  from  their 
foundations.  Nothing  more  effectually  hinders  Christian  living  than  perpetual 
uncertainty  about  the  grounds  of  our  confidence  and  hope.  Souls  are  like  plants 
— they  cannot  thrive  if  their  roots  are  continually  being  shaken.  They  grow  in 
atmospheres  of  quietness  and  peace.     They  must  abide  as  they  have  begun. 

I.  Abiding  in  Christ  is  holding  fast  the  truth  received  concerning  Him. — 
"  That  which  ye  have  heard  from  the  beginning."  Apostles,  and  all  true  teachers, 
never  attempted  to  shift  the  foundations  of  primary  truth  concerning  Christ 
which  they  had  laid.  They  are  willing  enough  to  build  on  those  foundations, 
but  absolutely  unwilUng  to  alter  the  foundations.  It  would  be  useless  and 
mischievous  work  for  Englishmen  now  to  try  and  alter  Magna  Charta,  which  is 
the  basis  of  English  liberty.  "  Holding  fast  the  profession  of  our  faith  without 
wavering  "  is  "  abiding  in  Christ."  The  primary  truths  about  Christ  concern 
His  Divine-human  person,  and  Divine- human  mission  :  Son  of  God  ;  Son  of 
man  ;  and  God  saving  man. 

II.  Abiding  in  Christ  is  the  guarantee  of  continuous  spiritual  life. — It  brings 
the  **  eternal  life."  That  life  can  be  ours  only  by  vital  union  with  Him.  It  is 
the  communication  of  His  own  Divine  life  through  the  channels  of  our  faith. 
Break  the  connection,  and  the  life  can  but  flag  and  fail.  Our  Lord  Himself 
said,  "  Without  Me  ye  can  do  nothing." 

III.  Abiding  in  Christ  is  the  work  for  us  done  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is 
with  us. — This  appears  to  be  the  idea  St,  John  tries  to  express  under  the  figure 

276 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  II. 


of  the  "  anointing."  The  believer  is  sealed  by  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit.  That 
Spirit  has,  for  His  supreme  mission  in  the  believer*  to  keep  him  in  vital  relations 
with  Christ — abiding  in  Christ. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  24.  Jealousy  concerning  Pri- 
niary  Truths. — In  our  day  it  has  been 
anxiously  asked,  "What  is  the  mini- 
mum of  evangelical  truth  which  must 
be  accepted  to  constitute  a  saving 
belief  ?  "  The  answer  is  difficult,  and 
will  probably  vary  according  to  the 
religious  school  to  which  the  answerer 
belongs.  It  is  quite  clear  that  there 
were  some  primary  and  essential  truths 
to  which  apostles  required  full  assent 
and  absolute  faithfulness;  but  they 
are  much  more  simple  truths  than  we 
usually  admit,  and  they  are  sufficiently 
general  to  allow  of  various  unfoldings 
and  expressions.  We  may  see  how 
simple  the  truth  required  to  be  wit- 
nessed before  baptism  was  in  the  case 
of  Philip  and  the  eunuch.  If  the 
words  of  Acts  viii.  37,  "  I  believe  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,"  are 
a  later  addition  to  the  text,  they  meet 
our  case  by  representing  the  earliest 
tradition.  The  primary  truth,  of  which 
we  must  be  supremely  jealous,  and 
which  constitutes  the  minimum  of 
the  Christian  demand,  is  this — Jesus 
of  Nazareth  is  the  Christ  of  God, 
the  Son  of  the  Father,  sent  by  Him 
to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world  from 
sin. 

Ver.  25.  The  Promise  of  Eternal  Life. 
— The  term  "  eternal  life  "  is  a  figura- 
tive one.  Mere  continuance  is  not  the 
manifestly  most  desirable  thing ;  and 
all  time- measures  are  unsuitable  to 
the  after-life,  "time"  being  strictly 
one  of  the  present  earthly  conditions 
of  thought.  As  a  figure,  the  term 
"eternal"  represents,  in  part,  what 
we  mean  by  "  spiritual "  ;  or  perhaps 
it  would  be  more  precise  to  say  that 
it  stands  for  "  the  highest  conceivable," 
"the  best  that  is  attainable."  When 
applied  to  "life,"  it  suggests  full,  un- 
hindered life  in   God,  life   unto   God. 


From  the  point  of  view  of  the  tripartite 
division  of  human  nature  into  body, 
animal  soul,  and  spirit,  what  is  meant 
by  "  eternal  life  "  can  readily  be  appre- 
hended. It  is  the  Divine  quickening, 
and  consequently  the  holy  activity,  of 
the  "spirit"  which  man  really  is. 
Much  has  been  missed  by  the  con- 
founding of  the  "eternal  life"  with 
the  "after-life."  It  may  be  found  in 
the  after- spheres,  but  it  may  also  be 
found  in  the  present  earthly  spheres. 
A  man  may  have  the  eternal  life  now. 
As  soon  as  this  is  clearly  seen,  the 
figurative  character  of  the  word  comes 
to  view,  and  the  impossibility  of  its 
being  strictly  descriptive  is  recognised. 
There  are  many  passages  in  which  the 
"  time  "  idea  is  manifestly  unsuitable ; 
in  them  the  idea  of  "  quality "  is 
prominent.  As  instances  see  Deut. 
xxxiii.  27 — "The  eternal  God  is  thy 
refuge  "  ;  where  it  is  evidently  intended 
to  suggest  high  and  inspiring  estimates 
of  God,  as  the  infinitely  trustworthy 
One.  In  Isa.  Ix.  15,  the  prophet,  speak- 
ing in  the  name  of  God  to  Israel  as 
a  nation,  says,  "  I  will  make  of  thee 
an  eternal  excellency."  Continuity  of 
existence  cannot  be  predicated  of  any 
nation.  A  supreme  excellency  is  evi- 
dently meant.  St.  Paul,  in  Rom.  i.  20, 
refers  to  God's  "  eternal  power  "  ;  and 
in  2  Cor.  iv.  17  he  writes  of  an  "ex- 
ceeding and  eternal  weight  of  glory." 
Save  as  a  figurative  expression,  "an 
eternal  weight "  can  have  no  intel- 
ligible meaning.  The  following  sug- 
gestion deserves  consideration :  One 
of  our  common  "  notes  of  value "  is 
the  length  of  time  that  a  thing  will 
last.  Ephemeral  things  are  regarded 
as  worthless;  enduring  things  are 
estimated  as  valuable.  The  nettle  is 
worthless ;  the  oak  is  valuable.  The 
gnat  of  a  summer  evening  is  worth- 
less ;  the  elephant  of  a  century  is  valu- 

277 


CHAP.   II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  JOHN. 


able.  The  coal  that  burns  through 
in  an  hour  is  worthless ;  the  diamond 
that  outlasts  all  the  generations  is 
valuable.  God,  then,  would  impress 
on  us  the  very  highest  conceivable 
value,  as  attaching  to  His  gift  to  us 
in  Christ  Jesus.  So  He  meets  us  on 
our  own  level,  fits  His  figure  to  our 
usual  thoughts  and  estimates,  bids  us 
realise  what  must  be  the  value  of  a 
thing  which  can  not  only  outlast  all 
generations,  but  even  outlast  all  world- 
stories,  and  so  apprehend  the  infinite 
value  of  that  gift  which  He  gives  to 
us,  even  "  eternal  life."  The  "  eternal 
life "  is  the  life  which  cannot  be 
measured  by  years  or  days,  but  is  the 
enjoyment  of  the  blessedness  of  virtue. 
This  is  a  present  fact,  begun  as  soon 
as  the  believer  begins  to  be  in  Christ, 
growing  more  and  more  as  he  walks 
more  and  more  closely  with  God,  secured 
for  ever  when  he  enters  his  rest,  and 
perfected  in  the  glory  of  heaven.  But 
this  life,  depending  on  knowledge  of 
God,  as  begun  here,  does  not  lessen  the 
reasonableness  of  its  being  perfected 
hereafter,  any  more  than  its  future 
completion  prevents  its  present  begin- 
ning. F.  D.  Maurice  took  a  firm  stand 
in  resisting  the  association  of  the  idea 
of  "  duration  "  with  the  term  "  eternal." 
A  striking  passage  from  his  2'heo- 
logical  Essays  may  be  given :  "  The 
word  '  eternal,'  if  what  I  have  said 
be  true,  is  a  key-word  of  the  New 
Testament.  To  draw  our  minds  from 
the  temporal,  to  fix  them  on  the  eternal, 
is  the  very  aim  of  the  Divine  economy. 
How  much  ought  we  then  to  dread 
any  confusion  between  thoughts  which 
our  Lord  has  taken  such  pains  to  keep 
distinct — which  our  consciences  tell  us 
ought  to  be  kept  distinct !  How 
dangerous  to  introduce  the  notion  of 
duration  into  a  word  from  which  He 
has  deliberately  excluded  if! "  And  yet 
this  is  precisely  what  we  are  in  the 
habit  of  doing,  and  it  is  this  which 
causes  such  infinite  perplexity  in  our 
minds.  "  Try  to  conceive,"  the  teachers 
say,  "  a  thousand  years.  Multiply 
these  by  a  thousand,  by  twenty  thou- 
sand,  by   a   hundred   thousand,  by   a 

278 


milHon.  Still  you  are  as  far  from 
eternity  as  ever."  ''Certainly  I  am 
quite  as  far.  Why  then  did  you  give 
me  that  sum  to  work  out  ?  What 
could  be  the  use  of  it,  except  to  bewilder 
me,  except  to  make  me  disbelieve  in 
eternity  altogether?  Do  you  not  see 
that  this  course  must  be  utterly  wrong 
and  mischievous  ?  If  eternity  is  the 
great  reality  of  all,  and  not  a  por- 
tentous fiction,  how  dare  you  impress 
such  a  notion  of  fictitiousness  on  my 
mind  as  your  process  of  illustration 
conveys  ?  "  "  But  is  it  not  the  only 
one  ?  "  f'  Quite  the  only  one,  so  far  as 
I  see,  if  you  will  bring  time  into  the 
question — if  you  will  have  years  and 
centuries  to  prevent  you  from  taking 
in  the  sublime  truth,  *  This  is  life 
eternal — to  know  God!  The  eternal 
life  is  the  perception  of  His  love,  the 
capacity  of  loving ;  no  greater  reward 
can  be  attained  by  any,  no  higher  or 
greater  security.  The  eternal  punish- 
ment is  the  loss  of  that  power  of  per- 
ceiving His  love,  the  incapacity  -of 
loving;  no  greater  damnation  can  be- 
fall any."  Bishop  Westcott,  writing 
of  the  phrases  used  in  St.  John's 
epistles,  says  :  "In  considering  these 
phrases  it  is  necessary  to  premise  that 
in  spiritual  things  we  must  guard 
against  all  conclusions  which  rest  upon 
the  notion  of  succession  and  duration. 
'  Eternal  life '  is  that  which  St.  Paul 
speaks  of  as  rj  oVrws  ^w^,  *  the  life 
which  is  life  indeed'  (1  Tim.  vi.  10), 
and  y  ^0)7)  Tov  ©cov,  '  the  life  of  God ' 
(Eph.  iv.  18).  Tt  is  not  an  endless 
duration  of  being  in  time,  but  being 
of  which  time  is  not  a  measure.  We 
have,  indeed,  no  power  to  grasp  the 
idea  except  through  forms  and  images 
of  sense.  These  must  be  used,  but  we 
must  not  transfer  them  as  realities  to 
another  order.  The  life  which  lies  in 
fellowship  with  God  and  Christ  is 
spoken  of  as  'eternal  life,'  in  order 
to  distinguish  it  from  the  life  of  sense 
and  time,  under  which  true  human 
life  is  veiled  at  present.  Such  a  life 
of  phenomena  may  be  '  death,'  but 
'  eternal  life  '  is  beyond  the  limitations 
of   time;  it   belongs  to  the   being  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   II. 


God." — From  "  Handbook  of  Scientific 
and  Literary  Bible  Difficulties.^^ 

Ver.  26.  False  Teachings  as  Spiritual 
Seduction.  —  ''Concerning  them  that 
seduce  you."  The  term  which  St.  John 
uses  brings  out  veiy  prominently  that 
the  mo7'al  mischief  of  false  teachings  is 
of  much  more  serious  concern  than  the 
intellectual.  We  need  not  undervalue 
the  importance  of  correct  opinion  on 
religious-  subjects.  But  as  mere  in- 
tellectual  differences,   keeping   in   the 


mental  range,  they  are  too  often  little 
more  than  logomachies.  Every  shape 
of  opinion  bears  some  direct  relation 
to  moral  conduct,  and  every  wrong 
setting  of  Christian  truth  has  an  evil 
influence  on  morals,  and  can  be  fairly 
judged  in  the  light  of  that  influence. 
Concerning  all  teaching  submitted  to 
us  we  can  ask  two  questions  :  1 .  Is  it 
true  ?  That  question  is  often  beyond 
all  our  power  of  solution.  2.  Does  it 
work  out  unto  righteousness  ?  That 
can  always  be  answered. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    II, 


Ver.  1.  Intercession. — An  ancient  historian 
records  the  history  of  two  brothers,  one  of 
whom  was  a  gallant  hero,  and  had  lost  his 
arm  in  the  defence  of  his  native  country ; 
the  other,  an  infamous  profligate,  who  for 
capital  crimes  was  condemned  to  die.  The 
hero  appeared  before  the  judges  as  an 
advocate  for  his  brother ;  he  spoke  not,  but 
only  held  up  his  arm.  This  act  pleaded  so 
powerfully  that  the  guilt  was  forgiven,  on 
account  of  the  services  rendered  by  his 
brother.  Sacred  history  also  gives  an 
account  of  the  debt  or  guilt  of  one  being 
charged  to  another.  Onesimus  was  Phile- 
mon's bond-slave,  but  had  stolen  his  master's 
goods,  and  deserted  his  service.  In  his 
wanderings  he  met  with  Paul,  and  became  a 
convert  to  the  gospel ;  being  useful  to  the 
apostle  during  Lis  imprisonment  at  Eome, 
he  took  him  under  his  protection,  and 
endeavoured  to  bring  about  a  reconciliation 
between  the  master  and  slave.  Accordingly, 
he  wrote  a  letter  to  the  rich  citizen  of 
Colossae,  and  sent  it  by  the  criminal  himself, 
in  which  he  insisted  that  the  slave  might  be 
forgiven,  and  that,  if  he  had  been  injured  by 
him,  or  was  in  his  debt,  to  charge  it  to  his, 
Paul's,  account  (Philem.  18).  Pardon  and 
forgiveness  were  thus  obtained,  not  from 
any  merits  in  the  recipients,  but  in  con- 
sideration of  the  merits  of  others. 

Ver.  16.  Love  of  Dress. — A  forcible  in- 
stance occurs  in  Ten  Years  of  a  Preacher^ s 
Life.  A  man  following  the  occupation 
of  wood-cutting  wrought  with  exemplary 
zeal  the  six  working  days,  hoarding  every 
cent  not  required  to  furnish  him  with  the 
most  frugal  fare.  As  his  "pile"  increased, 
he  invested  it  in  gold  ornaments, — watch- 
chain  of  massive  links,  shirt  and  sleeve 
buttons,  shoe  buckles,  then  buttons  for  vest 
and  coat,  a  hat-band  of  the  precious  metal, 
a  heavy  gold-headed  cane  ;  and,  in  short, 
wherever  an  ounce  of  it  could  be  bestowed 
upon  his  person,  in  or  out  of  taste,  it  was 


done.  The  glory  of  his  life,  his  sole  ambi- 
tion, was  to  don  this  curious  attire,  which 
was  deposited  for  safe  keeping  during  the 
week  in  one  of  the  banks,  on  Sunday  morn- 
ing, and  then  spend  the  day,  the  "  observed  of 
all  observers,"  lounging  about  the  office  or 
bar-room  of  the  St.  Charles.  He  never  drank, 
and  rarely  spoke.  Mystery  seemed  to  en- 
velop him.  No  one  knew  whence  he  came, 
or  the  origin  of  his  innocent  whim.  Old 
citizens  assured  you  that  year  after  year  his 
narrow  savings  were  measured  by  the  in- 
crease of  his  ornaments,  until  at  length  the 
value  of  the  anomalous  garments  came  to  be 
estimated  by  thousands  of  dollars.  By  ten 
o'clock  on  Sunday  night  the  exhibition  was 
closed — his  one  day  of  self-gratification 
enjoyed — his  costly  wardrobe  was  returned 
to  the  bank  vault,  and  he  came  back  into  the 
obscurity  of  a  wood -chopper. 

Ver.  18.  The  Pope  as  Antichrist. — It  is 
singular  to  find  that  the  See  of  Eome  did 
not  receive  the  appellation  of  antichrist  first 
from  its  enemies  the  Protestants,  but  from 
its  own  leaders.  Gregory  himself  (a.d.  590) 
started  the  idea  by  declaring  that  any  man 
who  held  even  the  shadow  of  such  power  as 
the  popes  arrogated  to  themselves  after  his 
time  would  be  the  forerunner  of  antichrist. 
Arnulphus,  bishop  of  Orleans,  in  an  invec- 
tive against  John  XV.  at  Rheims  (A.D,  991), 
intimated  that  a  pope  destitute  of  charity 
was  antichrist.  But  the  stigma  was  fixed, 
in  the  twelfth  century,  by  Amalric  of  Bena, 
and  also  by  the  abbot  Joachim  (a.d.  1202). 
Joachim  said  that  the  second  apocalyptic 
beast  represented  some  great  prelate  who 
will  be  like  Simon  Magus,  and,  as  it  were, 
universal  pontiff,  and  that  yery  antichrist 
of  whom  St.  Paul  speaks.  Hildebrand  was 
the  first  pope  to  whom  this  ugly  label  was 
aflSxed,  but  the  career  of  Alexander  VI. 
(Roderic  Borgia)  made  it  for  ever  irremov- 
able for  the  Protestant  mind.  There  is  in 
the  British  Museum  a  volume  of  caricatures, 

279 


CfiAP.  III.  BO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :    I  JOHN. 


dated    1545,   in  which   occurs  an  ingenious  attention    whatever     to     these    wandering 

representation  of  Alexander  VI.     The  pope  strangers,  urged  forward  though  they  were, 

is  first  seen  in  his  ceremonial  robes ;  but  a  by  the  barking  dog,  farther  and  farther  from 

leaf  being  raised,  another  figure  is  joined  to  their  rightful  companions.     At  last,  thinking 

the  lower   part   of  the   former,   and   there  I  must  have  been  mistaken  in  supposing  they 

appears   the   papal   devil,  the  cross  in  his  were  not  his,  I  pointed  to  one  of  them  and 

hand     being     changed    into    a    pitchfork.  said,    "Are   those   your   sheep?"      And   he 

Attached  to  it  is  an  explanation  in  German,  answered  •'  No."     I  said   unto  him,  '•  Why 

giving  the  legend  of  the  pope's  death.     He  then  do  you  not   separate   them  from  the 

was  poisoned  (1503)  by  the  cup  he  had  pre-  flock  ?  "    And  he  answered  and  said,  "  They 

pared  for  another  man.— Cb7i7y«y.  will  find  out  directly  they  are   not  of  us, 

and  then  they  will  go  away  of  themselves." 

Ver.  19.  One  Fold  and  One  Shepherd.— OnQ  And  immediately  I  remembered  the  words  of 

evening  I  went  out  with  a  shepherd  to  col-  John,  how  he  had   said,   "  They   went   out 

lect  his  sheep.     After  they  had  been  gathered  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us  ;  for  if  they 

together,  and  were  being  driven  off  the  moor,  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have 

I   observed   that  there   were    some    among  continued  with  us :  but  they  went  out,  that 

them  who  did  not  belong  to  his  flock.    I  they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were 

particularly  noticed,  also,  that  he  paid  no  not  all  of  us." —  W.  G.  S. 


CHAPTER  III. 
THE  RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  THE  SONSHIP. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL   NOTES. 

The  last  word  of  the  previous  chapter  brought  to  mind  that  the  Christian  is  related  to 
God  by  a  spiritual  and  Divine  birth.  A  Christian  is  one  "born  of  the  Spirit" — "born  of 
God."  But  St.  John  suddenly  feels  how  much  is  involved  and  included  in  that  new  Divine 
birth,  and  expresses  sudden  feeling  in  the  outburst  of  grateful  surprise  which  begins 
chap.  iii.  Birth  brings  near  to  thought  Divine  Fatherhood,  and  privileges  of  spiritual 
sonship.  That  sonship  may  bring  some  present  disabilities,  but  it  has  in  it  the  very  noblest 
possibilities,  and  time  is  altogether  on  its  side. 

Ver.  1.  What  manner. — Trorair-qv,  of  what  kind  ;  "  how  great  of  its  kind."  The  Father. — 
The  distinctive  name  of  the  Christian  God,  as  Jehovah  was  the  distinctive  name  of  the 
Jewish  God.  Bestowed. — Compare  John  i.  12,  R.V.  Notice  the  singular  use  of  5i5oVat. 
Be  called — I.e.  should  bear  the  name,  and  experience  the  reality  of  sonship.  Not  some- 
thing that  is  to  be  ours  in  the  future.  A  privileged  relation  into  which  we  are  brought 
now.  We  receive  the  name  because  we  have  the  reality.  Sons  of  God. — Better,  as  R.V., 
*'  children,"  which  is  more  comprehensive,  and  bears  better  relation  to  the  comparison  of 
ver.  2.  An  addition  is  necessary  here,  as  in  R.V.,  "  and  such  we  are."  "  God  has  allowed 
us  to  be  called  children,  and  children  we  are."  Therefore. — Better,  "  for  this  cause  " :  on 
account  of  our  being  children  of  the  Father,  the  world  does  not  recognise  us,  since  it 
does  not  recognise  Him.  Br.  Plummer  says  that  "  St.  Augustine  compares  the  attitude 
of  the  world  towards  God  to  that  of  sick  men  in  delirium  who  would  do  violence  to  their 
physician." 

Ver.  2,  Sons. — Children.  Appear. — Made  manifest;  evident  to  our  present  apprehension. 
Omit  the  word  "but."  For  "when"  read  "if."  For  "He"  margin  reads  "it,"  which 
makes  the  reference  to  be  to  the  /nil  meaning  of  the  sonship,  which  can  only  be 
imperfectly  apprehended  under  present  conditions.  If  "  He  "  is  preserved,  the  reference  is  to 
Christ,  and  to  His  second  coming,  which  appears  to  have  been  at  this  time  in  St.  John's 
thought  (see  chap.  ii.  28).  If  we  take  the  word  "  He,"  the  likeness  suggested  is  to  Christ. 
If  we  take  the  word  "  it,"  the  likeness  suggested  is  to  the  Father-God.  See  Him  as  He  is. 
— Compare  2  Cor.  iii.  18.  "The  Divine  image  which  was  lost  in  the  Fall  shall  be 
restored."' 

Ver.  3.  Hope  in  Him. — There  is  certainly  more  point  if  this  is  referred  to  Christ.  Hope 
in  God  is  too  general,  since  John  is  addressing  Christians,  and  dealing  with  their  dis- 
tinctive hope  of  being  fully  like  Christ.  Purifieth  Himself. — The  word  ayvlii'eiv  is  used 
chiefly  in  a  technical  sense  of  ceremonial  purifications ;  and  St.  John,  in  Rev.  i.  6,  represents 
Christians  as  made  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God."  The  Christian's  "  purifying  himself " 
must  be  seen  in  its  harmony  with  the  other  side  of  truth  which  St.  John  presents.     "  The 

280 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN.  ohap.  iii. 


blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  [Christians]  from  all  sin."  As  He  is  pure. — The 
holiness  of  Christ,  as  the  holiness  of  a  man  living  on  earth  under  human  conditions,  is  our 
model  and  inspiration.  Such  holiness  is  an  attainable  thing,  because  it  has  once  been 
attained. 

Ver.  4.  Committeth  sin. — Better,  "doeth  the  sin,  doeth  also  lawlessness."  This  should 
not  be  taken  as  a  merely  general  statement ;  it  is  specific  to  those  whom  St.  John  addresses. 
A  Christian  who  wilfully  does  sin  must  not  for  one  moment  imagine  that  his  standing  in 
Christ  has  freed  him  from  the  grip  of  the  law.  St.  John  had  in  mind  the  Gnostics,  who 
considered  the  moral  law  to  be  no  longer  binding  on  the  enlightened,  as  a  rule  of  life. 
Transgression  of  the  law. — Better,  "  is  [or  doeth]  lawlessness,"  i.e.  acts  from  caprice,  not 
from  cont>cience  ;  does  his  own  will,  not  God's. 

Ver.  5.  Take  away  our  sins. — Not  the  same  as  "blot  out  our  sins."  Two  reasons  are 
given  for  the  sinlessness  of  Christians  :  1.  To  take  away  the  love  and  the  power  of  sin 
was  Christ's  work.  They  would  not  want  to  sin  if  Christ  was  really  doing  His  work  in 
them.  2.  Christ  was  the  model  Christian,  and  His  example  was  distinctly  one  of  sinless- 
ness, in  this  sense,  that  He  never  wanted  to  sin.  Those  who  are  sons  with  Christ,  through 
the  new  spiritual  birth,  never  want  to  sin.  They  may  be  overborne  by  frailties  ;  they  never 
will  to  sin. 

Ver.  6.  Abideth. — One  of  St.  John's  special  words.  See  Kom.  vii.  20;  Gal.  ii.  20. 
Whosoever  sinneth. — Purposely,  wilfully,  persistently,  proves  that  he  has  not  in  him  that 
new  life  which  comes  with  the  spiritual  birth.  Not  having  the  life,  he  has  not  the  vision 
which  alone  can  see  Christ,  nor  the  apprehension  that  alone  can  know  Him,  because  these 
belong  exclusively  to  the  new  life. 

Ver.  7.  Little  children. — reKvla  ;  not  infants,  but  young  and  immature  disciples. 
Doeth  righteousness. — Emphasis  lies  on  "  doeth  " ;  habitually  does.  Doing  is  opposed 
to  mere  profession,  mere  sentiment,  and  the  moral  licence  of  false  doctrine.  "  There  is  only 
one  way  of  proving  our  enlightenment,  of  proving  our  parentage  from  Him  who  is  the 
light,  and  that  is  by  doing  the  righteousness  which  is  characteristic  of  Him  and  His  Son." 

Ver.  8.  Of  the  devil. — Compare  John  viii.  44-49.  Br.  Plummer  quotes  the  following 
suggestive  note  from  St.  Augustine :  "  The  devil  made  no  man,  begat  no  man,  created  no 
man  ;  but  whoso  imitates  the  devil  becomes  a  child  of  the  devil,  as  if  begotten  of  him.  In 
what  sense  art  thou  a  child  of  Abraham  ?  Not  that.  Abraham  begat  thee.  In  the  same 
sense  as  that  in  which  tlie  Jews,  the  children  of  Abraham,  by  not  imitating  the  faith  of 
Abraham,  are  become  children  of  the  devil."  The  demonology  of  the  Jews  must  be  taken 
into  due  account  in  explaining  the  New  Testament  references  to  the  devil.  From  the 
beginning. — A  way  of  saying  "  always  sins."  It  is  just  the  one  thing  he  does,  and  always 
has  been  doing.  His  specific  sin  is  bringing  accusations  against  God,  and  trying  to  make 
men  doubt  and  distrust  Him.  When  there  is  neither  love  nor  fear  of  God,  sinning  becomes 
easy  work.     Destroy  the  works. — This  is  done  by  perfecting  the  reasons  for  trusting  God. 

Ver.  9.  Seed  remaineth  in  him. — The  germ  of  new  life  from  God.  "Every  one  that 
has  been  made,  and  that  remains,  a  child  of  God."  For  "born"  E.V.  reads  "begotten" 
(John  i..l3).  "The  whole  analogy  refers  to  human  generation."  Cannot  sin. — Not  if  the 
new  life  is  alive  in  him.  The  new  life  wants  submission  and  obedience ;  it  never  wants 
wilfulness. 

Ver.  10.  Loveth  not  his  brother. — The  new  life  in  Christ  as  naturally  finds  expression 
in  service  to  the  brethren  as  it  does  in  obedience  to  the  Father.  The  new  birth  is  birth 
into  a  family,  and  a  family  life  and  duty. 

Ver.  11.  Message. — Commandment  (John  xv.  12). 

Ver.  13.  World  hate  you. — The  "world"  includes  all  who  are  not  actuated  by  the 
supreme  motive,  love  to  God.     For  "  hate  "  read  "  hateth  "  (John  xv.  18). 

Ver,  14.  From  death  unto  life. — Death  is  spiritual  death  in  selfishness.  Life  is  spiritual 
life  in  love  for  others,  which  finds  expression  in  serving  others. 

Ver.  15,  Is  a  murderer, — With  distinct  allusion  to  the  case  of  Cain.  "  The  first  and  the 
worst  effect  of  hatred  gives  it  its  true  character." 

Ver.  16. — Kead,  "Hereby  know  we  love."  Lay  down  our  lives.— The  figure  of  self- 
surrender,  reaching  to  the  limits  of  self-sacrifice, 

Ver.  18.  In  word. — Profession,  mere  boasting.  True  love  finds  expression  in  service. 
"  St.  John  hints  that  there  is  some  danger  of  this  conventionality  amongst  his  friends, 
and  earnestly  exhorts  them  to  genuineness," 

Ver,  20,  Heart  condemn. — There  are  always  sensitive  souls,  who  are  much  too  ready  to 
think  evil  of  themselves,  and  distress  themselves  with  their  evil-thinking.  Better  never 
attempt  to  appraise  our  own  spiritual  life  and  progress ;  leave  it  with  God,  and  bend  all 
attention  on  further  progressing. 

Ver.  22.  Whatsoever  we  ask. — Not  whatsoever  anybody  asks.  The  promise  is  limited  to 
those  who  are  in  the  full  privilege,  power,  and  holiness  of  sonship.  We  receive  because  we 
are  the  Father's  children. 

281 


CHAP.  III.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    7.  JOHN. 


Yer.  23.  His  commandment. — One  but  inclusive,  so  as  to  appear  as  two.  Believe. — Not 
oy  a  mere  act  of  faith,  but  by  a  continuous  daily  trusting,  which  kept  up  vital  relations. 
Love  one  another. — The  certain  outward  sign  of  our  loving  and  trusting  Christ. 

Ver.  24.  Dwelleth  in  Him. — Better  use  St.  John's  favourite  word  "abideth."    Spirit. 

Which  St.  Paul  represents  as  the  "  earnest  "  and  the  "  seal."  "  The  Spirit  Himself  beareth 
witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God." 

MAIN  BOMILETIC  S  OF  THE  P A  B.  AGRA  PH. —Verses  1—6. 

What  we  are,  and  what  we  hope  to  he. — The  things  which  St.  John  remembered, 
of  the  words  and  works  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  were  the  things  that  most  arrested 
and  engaged  his  attention,  and  became  most  firmly  fixed  in  his  memory.  It  is 
a  general  mental  law,  that  we  remember  things  according  to  the  measure  of 
attention  that  we  give  to  them.  And  that  law  is  used,  not  swept  aside,  when 
the  Divine  inspiration  comes  to  a  man.  Only  St.  John  records  our  Lord's 
interview  with  Nicodemus.  Only  St.  John  distinctly  gives  us  the  idea  of  the 
Christian  life  as  coming  from  a  new  and  Divine  birth.  "  Ye  must  be  born 
from  above."  The  apostle  evidently  made  this  a  ruHng  idea  in  his  ministry. 
Closing  the  previous  chapter,  he  had  said,  "  If  ye  know  that  He  is  righteous,  ye 
know  that  every  one  also  that  doeth  righteousness  is  begotten  of  Him."  That 
word  "  begotten  "  brings  before  him  his  favourite  thought,  and  he  is  at  once 
carried  away  by  his  feelings,  and  led  to  exclaim,  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love 
the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us ! "  For  that  begetting  of  the  Father  makes 
us  spiritual  sons ;  and  it  is  not  possible  to  unfold  all  that  is  involved  in  being 
spiritually,  and  with  Christ,  the  children  of  God.  We  can,  however,  see  what 
present  obHgations  that  new  birth  and  that  new  relation  bring.  It  delivers 
us  from  wanting  to  sin,  and  it  puts  us  upon  earnest  self- purifying.  This  is  the 
point  of  the  paragraph,  which  may  be  unfolded  in  the  following  way  : — 

I.  As  new-born,  we  may  think  what  we  now  are. — All  the  apostles  deal 
with  the  Christian  standing,  and  expect  to  gain  persuasion  unto  righteousness, 
consistency,  and  service,  by  presenting  and  urging  the  Christian  privileges  ;  but 
none  make  so  much  of  the  Divine  sonship  as  does  the  apostle  John.  St.  Paul's 
idea  is  adoption  into  the  family  of  God.  St.  John's  idea  is  actual  spiritual  birth 
into  the  spiritual  family,  involving  direct,  and  immediate,  and  complete  family 
rights  and  privileges.  Adoption  implies  something  that  we  may  become ;  birth 
implies  something  that  we  are.  1.  We  are  objects  of  the  Divine  love.  "  Behold 
what  manner  of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us  ! "  The  expression  of 
surprise  reminds  us  of  St.  John's  famihar  sentence,  "  God  so  loved  the  world" ; 
and  it  may  be  illustrated  by  Goneril's  answer  to  King  Lear  :  "  Beyond  all 
manner  of  so  Tuuch  I  love  you."  St.  John  had  fully  entered  into  the  Christ- 
revelation  of  God  as  the  Father ;  and  indeed  that  was  essential  to  the  idea  he 
had  of  the  beginning  of  Christian  life  as  a  birth,  and  the  relation  of  Christian 
life  as  a  sonship.  Outside  the  Christian  sphere  God  may  be  the  Creator,  the 
Provider,  the  moral  Governor — El,  or  Shaddai,  or  Jehovah.  Within  the  Christian 
sphere,  on  the  standing  with  Christ  the  Son,  God  is,  distinctly  and  comprehen- 
sively, the  Father.  But  birth  is  the  fruitage  of  human  love,  and  St.  John 
sublimates  the  idea,  and  bids  us  think  of  God's  giving  birth  to  sjMritual  sons  as 
a  fruitage  of  His  Fatherly  love  ;  and  then  we  are  permitted  to  think  that  God's 
spiritual  children  are  dear  to  Him,  even  as  our  natural  children  are  to  us.  We 
stand  in  the  surprising  love  of  our  heavenly  Father.  We  are  called  sons, 
children,  because  we  are  wrapped  round,  watched,  and  tended  with  the  Father- 
love  of  Him  by  whom  we  are  begotten.  Perhaps  we  have  never  yet  entered 
fully  into  all  the  precious  meaning  involved  in  our  being  spiritually  begotten  by 
the  eternal  Father,  and  so  actually  in  a  standing  mth  Him  beside  His  Son  Jesus. 
Did  we  realise  that,  we  should  at  once  utter  our  thankful  surprise  with  St. 

282 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I  JOHN.  chap.  HI. 


John,  and  say,  "  Behold  what  manner  of  love."     2.  We  are  children  of  God.     The 
K.V.  does  well  in  substituting  "  children"  for  ''sons" — not  only  because  "children" 
is  more  inclusive  than  "  sons,"  but  because,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  what  he 
has  to  say  depends  on  our  recognising  the  immaturity  that  belongs  to  children. 
It  may,  however,  be  asked  whether  all  men  are  not,  by  nature,  the  children  of 
God.     They  are,  in  a  sense  ;  but  there  is  a  further  sense  in  which  Jesus  was  the 
Son  of  God — Son  by  a  mysterious  spiritual  generation.     It  is  in  something  of 
that  sense  that  we  too  may  become  children  of  God.     The  Hindoos  speak  of  men 
as  being  "  twice  born."     And  we  may  see  a  double  sense  in  which  we  are  the 
children  of  God  :  a  first  sense  in  which  we  are  the  creations  of  His  power,  into 
whom  He  has  breathed  His  breath  of  life,  and  whom  He  makes  the  objects 
of  parental  and  providential  care;  and   a  second  sense,   in  which   we  are  the 
quickenirgs  of  His  Spirit,  and  live  in  a  higher  life  of  relations  with  Him,  which 
glorify  the  lower.     We  are  children  of  God  in  a  spiritual  sense.     And  if  w^e 
would  understand  that,  we  must  enter  into  the  mystery  of  Christ  as  the  spiritual 
Son  of  God.     His  real  life  on  earth  was  the  life  of  His  spiritual  sonship  ;  and 
this  carried  into  a  responsive  and  harmonious  service  all  His  bodily  life,  and  all 
His  material  relations.     In  a  spiritual  sense  Jesus  was  the  Son  of  God  ;  in  that 
same  sense  we  are  the  children  of  God — born,  in  the  Divine  love,  into  the 
Father's  spiritual  family.     The  hfe  of  children  that  we  live  is  a  spiritual  life. 
The  obedience  of  children  that  we  offer  is  spiritual  obedience.     The  service  of 
children  that  we  render  is  spiritual  service.     It  carries  with  it  the  mateiial  life, 
and  powers,  and  relations,  just  as  Christ's  spiritual  life  as  the  Son  carried  to 
the  Father  the   full   devotion   and  consecration  of   His  human  life  ;  but   His 
Sonship  and  ours  are  essentially  spiritual ;  and  what  we  have  therefore  to  be 
supremely  anxious  about  is  the  child-life  of  our  souls.     Keep  that  nourished 
into  health  and  vigour,  and  there  need  not  be  any  fear  of  its  failing  to  carry 
into  obedience  the  whole  material  life.     3.  We  are  sharers  in  the  experience  of 
Christ.     This  is  involved  in  what  has  now  been  said  ;  but  St.  John  brings  in  a 
point  which  we  might  readily  have  missed.     It  is  one  which  our  Divine  Lord  set 
in   prominence  in   His  great  high-priestly  prayer.       He  prayed  thus  for  His 
disciples,   "I  have  given  them  Thy  word ;  and  the  world  hated  them,  because 
they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."     And  St.  John,  in 
his  epistle,  says,  "  For  this  cause  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew 
Him  not."     The  experience  of  Christ  was  that  which  one  born  into  and  living 
in  a  spiritual  sphere  must  always  repeat.     It  is  another  life  to  the  material 
life  of  men.     It  is  otherwise.     There  are  other  atmospheres,  other  interests,  and 
other  relations;   and  the  people  who  are  confined  to  the  lower  ranges  can  no 
better  understand  the  life,  and  thought,  and  feeling  of  those  in  the  higher  ranges, 
than  the  uneducated  rustic  can  understand  and  appreciate  the  speeches  in  a 
convention  of  scientific  men.     The  people  who  were  unspiritual  could  do  nothing 
with  Christ,  when  He  was  here  on  earth,  but  turn  Him  out,  and  crucify  Him. 
And  in  every  age  it  has  been  a  grave  source  of  suspicion  when  the  Church  has 
confederated   with  the  world,  and  the  world  has  felt  that  it  understood  the 
Church.     It  is  the  side  of  peril  in  which  the  spiritual  life  is  placed  in  these  days. 
Be  spiritual  children  of  God,  and  you  must  share  the  experience  of  Christ ; 
**  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew  Him  not." 

II.  As  new-bom,  we  may  think  what  we  hope  to  be. — ''  We  know  that, 
if  He  shall  be  manifested,  we  shall  be  like  Him ;  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 
The  margin  II.V.  gives,  "if  it  shall  be  manifested,"  and  makes  the  reference 
to  be  to  the  sonship ;  but  St.  John  evidently  had  the  reappearance  of  Christ  in 
his  mind,  for  immediately  before  (chap.  ii.  28)  he  had  wiitten,  "  Abide  in  Him  ; 
that,  if  He  shall  be  manifested,  we  may  have  boldness,  and  not  to  be  ashamed 
before  Him  at  His  coming."     And  the  point  of  the  apostle  is  evidently  this — 

283 


CHAP.  III.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  JOHN. 


Our  Lord's  Sonship  has-  unfolded  in  the  heavenlies  into  something  quite  beyond 
our  present  apprehension.  But  it  is  the  proper  unfolding  of  the  spiritual 
sonship.  And  we  shall  find  that  the  growth  of  our  spiritual  life,  even  here 
on  earth,  is  growth  along  the  same  lines,  so  that  this  surprise  awaits  us — 
when  we  do  understand  what  Christ  now  has  become,  and  is,  we  shall  find 
that  we  have  been  growing  so  like  Him,  that  we  shall  be  able  to  see  Him 
even  as  He  is.  If  we  did  not  grow  and  develop  as  spiritual  children  of  the 
Father,  and  the  Only  Begotten  did  blossom  into  a  glorified  humanity,  a  glorified 
manhood,  we  should  lose  Him — lose  our  relations  with  Him,  and  blind  our  eyes, 
so  that  we  should  not  be  able  to  see  Him.  And  St.  John  would  therefore  say — 
See  how  much  depends  on  the  self-purifying,  self-culture  of  the  spiritual  life. 
This  idea  may  be  opened  in  two  ways:  1.  "We  shall  be  like  Him" — that 
is,  we  shall  be  matured,  as  a  child  is  who  has  become  a  man.  It  will  at 
once  be  seen  what  point  is  given  by  reading  "  now  are  we  the  children  of  God," 
instead  of  "sotis  of  God."  Now  are  we  but  "children,"  in  the  child-stage.  We 
cannot  now  realise  what  it  is  to  be  children  still,  but  children  in  the  mature,  the 
man-stage.  But  that  is  precisely  what  Christ  is  now,  a  Child  matured  through 
a  completed  earth -experience,  who  has  reached  His  man-stage.  His  full 
maturity,  as  a  spiritual  Son.  But  who  of  us  can  imagine  what  the  full  maturity 
of  spiritual  sonship  is  ?  Who  of  us  can  worthily  conceive  Christ  in  heaven, 
in  His  glorified  humanity — the  spiritual  Child  of  earth  unfolded  into  the 
spiritual  Man  in  heaven  ?  You  see  the  earth -child  bright  with  play,  the  earth- 
boy  busy  with  lessons,  the  youth  learning  his  trade.  Do  any  of  them  know 
what  it  is  to  be  a  man  ?  Can  any  of  them  anticipate  a  man's  thoughts,  and 
feelings,  and  ways  ?  And  yet  they  are  on  their  way  to  that  manhood ;  and 
if  they  grow  worthily,  they  are  growing  into  that  manhood.  And  when 
it  is  come,  when  it  is  manifested,  they  will  find  that  they  have  been  precisely 
preparing  for  it,  and  are  able  quite  to  understand  it.  And  that  seems  to 
be  St.  John's  thought.  We  are  all  now  in  the  child-stage,  spiritually.  Jesus 
our  Lord  was  also  in  the  child-stage  once,  when  He  tarried  among  men 
here.  He  is  out  of  the  child-range  now.  He  is  in  the  spiritual  manhood 
and  maturity  now.  And  we  cannot  fully  and  worthily  realise  Him  as  He 
is.  But  it  does  not  matter  greatly;  for  of  this  we  may  be  well  assured — 
if  we  do  but  worthily  grow  through  our  child-stages,  we  too  shall  become 
men,  and  then  we  shall  have  the  great  glory  of  discovering,  that  we  can  see 
and  understand  Christ.  We  can  be,  like  Him,  sons  still,  but  sons  that  have 
grown  into  full  maturity  and  manhood.  Child-training  may  be  trying,  anxious 
work ;  it  may  seem  to  be  moving  toward  nothing.  It  is  moving  towards  the 
spiritual  manhood  which  assuredly  will  give  us  the  vision  of  Christ  as  He  is. 
2.  "  We  shall  be  like  Him  " — that  is,  we  shall  be  pure,  as  He  is  whose  character 
has  come  through  a  severe  life-testing.  "  Every  one  that  hath  this  hope  set  on 
him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  He  is  pure."  We  do  not  know  what  Christ  now 
is,  but  we  do  know  one  thing — "  He.isjowre  "  :  not  merely  "  innocent,"  as  a  little 
child  is  pure ;  but  pure  as  a  man  can  be  pure  who  has  walked  life's  soiling  high- 
ways, and  experienced  life's  temptations.  Of  this  we  can  be  absolutely  certain, 
"  He  is  pure  " — fittingly  figured  before  us  as  the  infinitely  white  One  of  the  book 
of  Revelation.  If  we  are  ever  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  we  must  become  like  Him 
in  this.  Only  the  pure-souled  can  ever  see  pure  souls.  Then  see  how  this 
becomes  an  inspiration  to  self- purifying.  If  the  hope  of  seeing  Christ  as  He  is 
is  set  before  us,  it  will  surely  exercise  a  present  and  practical  influence  on 
our  daily  life  and  endeavour.  St.  John  gives  us  both  sides  of  this  most  inspiring 
truth.  He  who  is  spiritually  born  of  God  does  not  want  to  sin.  He  strives  with 
himself  that  he  may  not  sin.  Yet  he  may  sin  through  frailties  and  infirmities. 
But  the  "  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  such  sin  " ;  and  we  have  an 

284 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    L  JOHN 


CHAP.   III. 


Advocate  with  the  Father,  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins.  We  shall  see 
Him,  when  we  are  pure  as  He  is  pure.  And  if  we  are  ever  to  be  pure,  we  must 
now  be  purifying  ourselves.  We  can  understand  this  best,  if  we  think  of  the 
immaturity — in  respect  of  moral  purity — of  the  child-stage.  You  cannot  in  any 
high  spiritual  sense  call  a  child  pure.  You  can  call  him  innocent.  You  may 
recognise  that  in  some  small  things  he  may  have  won  victory  over  himself,  and 
over  evil,  and  so  gained  a  beginning  of  purity.  But  a  man  can  never  be  morally 
pure  until  he  has  been  soiled,  or  at  least  has  come  to  understand  what  it  is  to  be 
soiled.  His  manhood  of  passions  and  possibilities  must  have  come  to  him  before 
you  can  talk  of  his  moral  purity.  That  manhood  must  have  been  submitted  to  its 
Divinely  arranged  circle  of  earthly  testings  and  temptations,  and  come  through 
them  all  victorious,  ere  we  can  possibly  speak  of  the  man  as  morally  pure.  And 
self-purification  is  precisely  this — the  effort  which  the  new  life  in  Christ  makes 
to  win  the  whole  body  and  the  whole  earth-relations  for  righteousness.  Do  it. 
Let  your  life  be  one  persistent  effort  to  purify  the  self,  and  one  day,  the  day 
when  Christ  is  fully  apprehended,  you  will  find  that  you  can  see  Him  as  He  is, 
because  you  are  like  Him.  The  issue  of  the  life-struggle  is,  that  you  are  pure, 
"  even  as  He  is  pure."  There  is  one  other  thing  that  we  are  clearly  to  see. 
That  hope,  that  particular  Christian  hope  of  one  day  being  like  Christ,  and 
therefore  able  to  see  Him  as  He  is,  acts  in  a  really  practical  way  upon  us. 
Usually  hope  does  little  save  set  men  dreaming  :  this  hope  sets  men  working, 
and  even  working  upon  themselves.  It  becomes  a  present  impulse  to  self- 
purifying.  It  becomes  a  present  defence  from  the  sinning  of  self-love  and  self- 
serving.  "  Every  man  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself."  "  Every 
one  that  doeth  sin  doeth  also  lawlessness :  and  sin  is  lawlessness.  .  .  .  Whoso- 
ever abideth  in  Him  sinneth  not :  whosoever  sinneth  hath  not  seen  Him,  neither 
known  Him."  The  Christian  hope  then  is  of  unfolding  through  this  child-stage 
of  earth  into  the  maturity  which  Christ  has  gained.  The  Christian  hope  is  of 
winning  at  last  that  purity  which  Christ  has  gained.  Christ  won  it  through 
a  human  life  of  conflict,  and  so  must  we.  "It  is  enough  for  the  servant  that 
he  be  as  his  Master."  Be  as  the  Master  in  the  daily  sanctifyings,  self-purifyings, 
of  earth,  and  then  the  great  surprise  awaits  you.  One  day  you  will  see  Christ — 
see  Christ  as  He  is.  He  will  be  manifested  to  you  ;  and  the  secret  will  be  this — 
beyond  all  your  possible  imaginings  you  will  be  found  like  Him,  cultured  into 
likeness  to  Him,  and  therefore  able  to  see  Him  as  He  is.  Sons  come  to  their 
manhood,  even  as  He  has. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES 


Yer.  1.  The  Christian  Standing. — 
How  different  is  the  tone  which  men 
put  on  their  teachings  and  writings ! 
Some  are  coldly  intellectual ;  some  are 
wisely  restrained ;  some  are  passion- 
ately intense  ;  and  some  are  emotional, 
even  to  weakness.  But  there  is  a 
sphere  of  service  and  influence  for  men 
and  women  of  every  kind  of  tempera- 
ment— for  practical  James,  and  impul- 
sive Paul,  and  mystical  John.  It  is 
characteristic  of  the  apostle  John  that 
he  gives  us  truth  with  the  glow  of 
personal  feeling  upon  it.  He  himself 
grasps    the    truth    through    personal 


feeling,  spiritual  insight,  rather  than 
by  distinct  mental  operations.  And 
he  is  to  be  fully  understood  only  by 
those  who  are  found  in  answering 
sympathetic  moods.  We  may  well  be 
warned  of  the  influence  exerted  on  us 
by  the  scientific  spirit  of  our  times.  It 
tends  to  make  us  think  that  cannot  be 
truth  at  all  which  cannot  be  set  down 
in  intellectual  forms,  and  fully  verified. 
It  remains  the  fact,  however  the 
scientific  mind  may  try  to  resist  it, 
that  man  has  to  feel  his  way,  not  think 
his  way,  into  the  best  truth  he  can 
attain,      As    long    as    we    have    the 

280 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


writings  of  the  apostle  John,  we  shall 
be  sure  of  this — that  our  love  can  be 
the  opening  of  our  e>es  to  see  the 
deepest  and  the  best  of  God's  truth, 
and  the  saintly  soul  may  know  Him 
better  than  the  cultured  mind.  St. 
John  should  be  recognised  as  the 
apostle  of  the  sonship.  His  chief 
words  are  "  Father,"  "Son,"  "Fellow- 
ship." He  received  fully  that  revela- 
tion of  the  Divine  Fatherhood  which 
Jesus  brought.  He  knew  in  his  own 
life-experience  the  exceeding  honour 
and  joy  of  the  sonship  in  Christ. 
Our  Lord  constantly  taught  the  Father- 
hood of  God  toward  men ;  and  the 
apostles  constantly  taught  the  sonship 
of  men  toward  the  Father.  The  two 
truths  answer  to  one  another.  We 
behold  the  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed.  We  see  it,  we  know 
it,  we  feel  it,  in  this — that  to  us  is  given 
the  standing,  the  relationship,  the 
spirit  of  sons.  And  our  separation 
from  the  world  is  found  in  this — we  are 
like  our  Father -God. 

I.  The  Christian  standing. — "  Called 
the  sons  of  God."  We  do  not  hesitate 
to  affirm,  that  this  is  something  dis- 
tinct and  peculiar  to  the  Christian 
religion.  Ofcher  religions  propose  no 
such  relations  to  the  gods.  There  have 
been  many  forms  of  incarnation,  but 
never  elsewhere  has  the  essence  of  the 
Incarnation  been  the  manifestation  of 
God  in  the  relation  of  sonship,  Divine 
help  to  the  apprehension  of  God 
through  the  nearest  and  dearest  of 
human  ties,  man  in  his  best  forms  of 
fellowship  lepresenting  the  relationship 
existing  between  God  and  His  crea- 
tures. Think  what  standings  men 
may  possibly  have  before  their  God. 
They  may  be  the  creatures  of  a 
Creator,  and  so  may  have  reasonable 
claims  to  His  care.  His  providings,  and 
His  guidance.  He  who  makes  a 
thing,  bi-ings  a  thing  into  being,  is 
honourably  bound  to  provide  for  the 
thing  which  He  has  made.  And  so 
"  God's  tender  mercies  are  over  all  His 
works  "  ;  and  He  "  maketh  His  sun  to 
rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good  ;  and 
sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  the  un- 

286 


just."  "  The  eyes  of  all  wait  upon 
Him,  and  He  giveth  them  their  meat 
in  due  season."  We  have  our  rights 
before  God,  on  the  standing-ground 
that  we  are  His  creatures.  *'  He  gave 
us  breath  and  being."  "  He  made  us, 
and  not  we  ourselves :  we  are  the 
people  of  His  pasture,  and  the  sheep 
of  His  hand."  It  is  well  sometimes 
to  remind  ourselves  of  our  common 
rights  before  God  as  His  creatures. 
"  He  giveth  to  all  life,  and  breath,  and 
all  things."  Sometimes  our  standing 
before  God  is  represented  as  that  of 
subjects  to  a  king.  We  do  not  greatly 
value  this  mode  of  presenting  our 
relationship,  because  a  king  is  a  purely 
earthly  creation,  a  governmental  device 
of  sinful  men,  who  wanted  to  protect 
themselves  from  one  another.  When 
God  set  men  forth  upon  His  world,  He 
made  fathers  ;  when  men  cast  God  off, 
and  took  the  ordering  of  life  into  their 
own  hands,  they  made  "  kings."  But 
this  good  lies  in  regarding  our  standing 
as  that  of  subjects — it  brings  promi- 
nently before  us  that  we  are  under  the 
control  of  law  and  rule,  and  that  this 
rule  is  in  the  hands  of  One  altogether 
beyond  and  above  us.  It  must  be 
wrong  for  us  to  follow  "  the  devices 
and  desires  of  our  own  hearts."  "God 
is  the  great  king  above  all  gods." 
But  neither  of  these  forms  of  standing 
before  God  can  satisfy  men  who  can 
think,  and  love,  and  trust,  and  yearn 
for  a  supreme  object  of  love,  one  who 
can  be  trusted  absolutely.  Man  is 
not  a  mere  creature  of  a  creator ;  he 
is  not  a  mere  subject  of  a  king.  There 
is  a  child  in  every  man.  And  there  is 
no  rest  for  any  man  until  the  child 
in  him  has  found  the  eternal  Father. 
And  this  is  the  very  essence  of  God's 
revelation,  "  I  will  be  to  him  a  father, 
and  he  shall  be  to  Me  a  son."  "  Be- 
cause ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent  forth 
the  Spii-it  of  His  Son  into  your  hearts." 
Dr.  A.  Maclaren,  in  a  sermon  on  this 
text,  says  :  "  Thank  God,  the  prodigal 
son,  in  his  rags  among  the  swine,  and 
lying  by  the  swine-troughs  in  his  filth, 
and  his  husks,  and  his  fever,  is  still  a 
son.     No  doubt  about  that !     He  has 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  III. 


these  three  elements  and  marks  of  son- 
ship  that  no  man  ever  gets  rid  of  :  he 
is  of  Divine  origin;  he  has  a  Divine 
likeness  in  that  he  has  got  mind,  and 
will,  and  spirit ;  and  he  is  the  object 
of  a  Divine  love.  The  doctrine  of  the 
New  Testament  about  the  Fatherhood 
of  God,  and  the  sonship  of  man,  does 
not  in  the  sHghtest  degiee  interfere 
with  these  great  truths  :  that  all  men, 
though  the  features  of  the  common 
humanity  may  be  almost  battered  out 
of  recognition  in  them,  are  all  children 
of  God  because  He  made  them ;  they 
are  children  of  God  because  still  there 
lives  in  them  something  of  the  likeness 
of  the  creative  Father ;  and,  blessed  be 
His  name !  they  are  all  children  of 
God  because  He  loves,  and  provides, 
and  cares  for  every  one  of  them." 
All  this  is  true;  and  yet  there  is  a 
higher  relation  to  which  the  name 
"  sons  of  God "  is  more  accurately 
given ;  and  this  higher  sonship  is  the 
aim  and  purpose  of  the  revelation  of 
God's  love  to  men,  and  most  especially 
of  the  great  gift  of  His  love  in  Christ. 
Think  of  the  case  of  right  relation 
between  an  earthly  father  and  his 
child.  There  is  a  purely  physical  tie. 
There  is  a  condition  resulting  from  the 
long  years  of  close  association.  There 
has  grown  up  a  very  loving  sense  of 
dependence ;  and  it  has  even  become 
a  mutual  dependence.  But  there  is 
more.  There  is  a  full  sympathy,  per- 
fect love,  unquestioning  trust.  And 
these  bring  a  joy  unspeakable  into  the 
relationship.  The  Christian  standing 
ot  sonship  is  the  relation  in  its  very 
highest  form.  And  to  St.  John  it 
seems  so  supremely  blessed,  that  he  calls 
on  us  to  "  behold,"  to  look,  to  look 
long,  and  fully  realise  what  "  manner 
of  love "  it  was  that  put  us  in  this 
standing  and  relation.  Let  us  not 
fail  to  recognise  that  *'  sonship "  in- 
volves "  brotherhood."  Our  common 
life  in  Christ  ought  to  bring  us  closely 
together.  As  Christians,  these  are 
our  marked  peculiarities.  We  have  a 
heavenly  Father ;  we  are,  spiritually, 
sons  ;  we  are  bound  in  fellowship  with 
the  Father's  other  sons ;  we  belong  to 


a  family,  some  members  of  which  are 
in  the  heavenlies,  and  some  are  with 
us  yet  on  earth  ;  and  the  family  name 
is,  "  the  general  assembly  and  Church- 
of  the  firstborn,  which  are  written  in 
heaven." 

II.  The  ground  of  our  standing. — 
God's  love  in  calling  us  to  be  sons. 
To  understand  this,  let  us  think  of  the 
prodigal  son  in  our  Lord's  parable, 
who  so  penitently  and  so  humbly  said, 
*'I  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called 
thy  son,"  because  he  felt,  in  his  deep 
heart,  that  he  had  made  himself  so 
unsonlike.  Then  if  God  can  call  us 
sons,  we  may  be  sure  that  He  only  calls 
us  what  we  are,  and  in  His  great  love 
He  must  have  made  us  sonlike.  And 
precisely  that — making  us  sonlike, 
making  us  "  obedient  children  " — is 
the  great  aim  and  purpose  of  the 
wonderful  and  gracious  redemption 
which  He  has  wrought  for  us  in  Christ. 
He  is  making  us  sons,  so  that  He  may 
call  us  what  we  are,  and  deal  with  us 
as  the  sons  He  would  have  us  be.  Did 
ever  father  show  such  love  to  a  prodigal 
son  as  God,  our  Father,  has  shown  to 
us,  His  wayward,  wilful,  lost  sons  and 
daughters  ?  See  what  God  has  had  to 
do.  Think  about  it  with  the  help  of 
that  most  pathetic  of  all  our  Lord's 
parables.  He  had  to  get  a  prodigal 
thinking  rightly  of  his  father.  If  he 
had  thought  aright,  he  never  would 
have  wandered  off  in  his  wilfulness, 
taking  his  "portion  of  goods."  He 
had  to  get  the  prodigal  to  think  rightly 
of  himself.  The  conceited  confidence 
in  the  management  of  his  own  life  had 
to  be  utterly  broken  down,  as  failure, 
calamity,  and  degrading  wretchedness 
alone  could  break  it  down.  He  had 
to  set  the  prodigal  upon  longing  for 
home,  and  envying  the  very  servants 
that  went  to  and  fro  in  the  dear  old 
house.  He  had  to  show  the  prodigal 
the  way  home.  For  fears  blinded  his 
eyes,  and  despair  would  have  made 
him  faint  by  the  way.  And  He  had 
to  inspire  the  father  to  meet  with  such 
a  love  and  welcome  the  prodigal's 
return,  that  sin  and  wilfulness,  fear 
and  despair,  would  for  ever  flee  away, 

287 


CHAP.    III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


and   the  sweet  joy  of  sonlike  feelings 
come  back  to  the  humbled  soul.    Types 
of   God !     Suggestions   of   the   Divine 
Fatherhood !      Beavitif ul   vision  !     St. 
John  looks  on  Christians  as  a  company 
of  returned  prodigals — he  knows  that 
nothing    but    the  Father's   love  could 
have  won  them  back  ;  they  are  sitting, 
happy  indeed,  at  their  Father's  table, 
and  they  are  once  again  called  sons. 
And    St.   John  exclaims,   as  he  looks 
upon  them,  "  Behold  what  manner  of 
love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  !  "     Do 
you  ask  then  for  the  ground  of  our 
standing  ?     It  is   this,  only  this,   but 
this  is  everything — our  Father^ s  love. 
Would  we  "  know  the  love  of  God,  which 
passeth  knowledge."  ?     We  must  turn 
to   the  work  of   Christ.     "  The   most 
wonderful  revelation  to  every  heart  of 
man,  of  the  depths  of  the  Divine  heart, 
lies  in  the  gift  of  Jesus  Christ.     I  turn 
to  the  cross,  and  I  see  there  a   love 
which  is  evoked  by  no  lovableness  on 
my  part,  but  comes  from  the  depths 
of  His  own  infinite  being,  who  loves 
because  He  must,  and  who  must  be- 
cause He  is  God.     I  turn  to  the  cross, 
and  I  see  there  manifested  a  love  which 
sighs   for    recognition,    which    desires 
nothing  of  me  but  the  repayment  of 
my  poor   affection,  and   longs   to   see 
its  own   likeness   in  me.     And   I  see 
there  a   love  which  will   not   be  put 
away  by  sinfulness,  and  shortcomings, 
and  evil,  but  pours  its  treasures  on  the 
unworthy,  like   sunshine   on  a  dung- 
hill.    So,  streaming  through  the  dark- 
ness  of   eclipse,  and   speaking   to  me 
even  in  the  awful  silence  in  which  the 
Son   of   man  died   there   for   sin,    "I 
behold,"  and  I  hear,  the  "  manner  of 
love  that  the  Father   hath   bestowed 
upon  us,"  stronger  than  death  and  sin, 
armed   with  all   power,  gentler  than 
the   fall   of    the   dew,    boundless   and 
endless,    in    its   measure   measureless, 
and  in  its  quality  transcendent — the 
love  of  God  to  me  in  Jesus  Christ  my 
Saviour"  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.). 

III.  The  world's  blindness  to  this 
Christian  standing. — "Therefore  the 
world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  knew 
Him   not."      It   wa^   the  fact  of  St» 

388 


John's  time,  that  the  Christians  were 
neglected  and  despised.     But  the  fact 
surprised  the   loving   apostle,  because 
he  looked  upon  the  men  of  the  world 
as  "  sons  of  God  "  too.     Only  they  did 
not  know  their  Father  in  His  fullest 
relations,  and  so  they  did  not  feel  like 
sons  indeed,  and  then  find  themselves 
looking   out   for    their   Father's   other 
sons.     Our  Lord  prepared  us  for  the 
treatment   the   world   would   give   us. 
"  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know  that 
it  hated  Me  before  it  hated  you.     If 
ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would 
love  his  own  ;  but  because  ye  are  not 
of  the  world,  but  I  have  chosen  you 
out  of  the  world,  therefore  the  world 
hateth  you."     St.  John's  meaning  may 
be  illustrated  from  our  own  family  life. 
Outsiders  are  strangers  to  all  the  secret 
joys  we  find  in  our  home  fellowships  ; 
and   the  world  can   never  understand 
or  appreciate  the  pleasures  we  find  in 
our  family  life  with  God.     And  what 
shall    be    said    in   conclusion  ?      Only 
these  two  things  :  1.  Here  is  the  bond 
that   binds    the    heavenly    family   to- 
gether.    Not  any  mental    agreement. 
That  we  can  never   get  while  brains 
vary  in  size,  capacity,   and    contents. 
This — knowing  and  feeling  our  Father's 
love.     You  know  that.    So  do  I.     Then 
we  are  one  for  all  human  fellowship 
in    the    common    joy    of     that    love. 
2.    Here   is   the    truth   given    to   the 
family  to  use  in  getting  back  the  rest 
of    the    prodigal    sons.      The    Father 
yearns  over  them.     He  cannot  bear  to 
see  their  vacant  places  at   the  table. 
He  wants  them  to  come  home.     This 
opens  up  the  gospel,  which  is  the  good 
news  of  the  Father's  love  for  His  sons, 
for  all  His  sons  ;  and  of  this  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  "  Man  Christ  Jesus," 
is  the  proof,  the  "  teacher,  the  illustra- 
tion, and  the  persuasion." 

The  Love  that  calls  us  Sons. — This 
text  may  point  to  the  fact  that  we 
are  called  the  sons  of  God,  as  the 
great  exemplification  of  the  wonderful- 
ness  of  His  love.  But  it  is  better  to 
see  that  the  love  bestowed  is  the  means 
by  which  tlie  design  that  we  should  be 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN.  chap.  hi. 


called  His  sons  is  accompKshed.     What  first,  a  communicated  life  ;    second,  a 

John    calls    us    to    contemplate   with  kindred  nature  which  shall  be  ''  pure 

wonder  and  gratitude  is  not  only  the  as  He  is  pure  "  ;  third,  growth  to  full 

fact  of  this  marvellous  love,  but  also  maturity. 

the  glorious  end  for  which  it  has  been  III.  The   glad   recognition   of  this 

given  to  us,  and  works,  viz.  that  men  sonship  by  the  child's  heart. — By  the 

should  become,  in  the   deepest   sense,  expression  *'  and  such  are  we,"   John 

God's   children.     The  Revised  Version  asserts  his  and  their  glad  consciousness 

adds   the   words   *'  and  such  we  are,"  of  the  reality  of  the  fact  of  their  son- 

a  kind  of  rapid  '*  aside  "  of  the  writer.  ship,  which  they  know  to  be  no  empty 

I.  The  love  that  is  given. — We  can  title.  He  asserts,  too,  the  present  pos- 
no  more  "  behold  what  manner  of  love  session  of  that  sonship,  realising  it 
the  Father  has  bestowed  on  us,"  than  as  a  fact,  amid  all  the  commonplace 
we  can  look  with  undimmed  eyes  right  vulgarities,  and  carking  cares,  and  petty 
into  the  middle  of  the  sun.  But  we  aims  of  life's  Httle  day.  He  turns 
can  look  on  the  sun's  activities.      So  doctrine  into  experience. 

we  have  to  turn  to  the  work  of  Christ,  lY.  The  loving   and    devout    gaze 

and   especially   to   His   death,    if    we  upon  this  wonderful  love. — "Behold." 

would    estimate    the    love    of      God.  This  is  not  a  mere   exclamation,   but 

Through   and    in    the   great   sacrifice  a  distinct  command   to  do  the  thing, 

of  Jesus  Christ  there  comes  to  us  the  to   look,    and   ever   look,  and   to  look 

gift   of   a    Divide   life  like    His   own.  again,   and  live   in  the   habitual   and 

This    communication    of    Divine    life,  devout  contemplation  of  that  infinite 

which   is  at  bottom  Divine  love — for  and   wondrous   love  of  God.     Such  a 

God's  life  is  God's  love — is  His  great  habit  of  devout  and  thankful  medita- 

gift  to  men.     Christ  for  us  and  Christ  tion  upon  the  love  of  God,  as  manifested 

in  us  must  both  be  taken  into  account  in  the   sacrifice  of   Jesus  Christ,  and 

if  you  would  estimate  the  manner  of  the  consequent  gift  of  the  Divine  Spirit, 

the  love  that  God  has  bestowed  upon  us.  joined  with  the  humble,  thankful  con- 

II.  The  sonship  which  is  the  pur-  viction  that  I  am  a  child  of  God 
pose  of  His  given  love. — John's  phrase,  thereby,  Hes  at  the  foundation  of  all 
"the  sons  of  God,"  is,  "children  of  vigorous  and  happy  Christian  life. 
God."  Stress  is  laid  on  the  children's  But  we  cannot  keep  that  great  sight 
kindred  nature  with  their  Father,  and  before  the  eye  of  our  minds  without 
on  their  immature  condition.  Con-  effort.  You  will  have  very  resolutely 
sider  this  great  gift  and  dignity  of  to  look  away  from  something  else,  if, 
being  children  of  God,  which  is  the  amid  all  the  dazzling  gauds  of  earth, 
object  that  God  has  in  view  in  all  the  you  are  to  see  the  far-off  lustre  of  that 
lavish  bestowment  of  His  goodness  heavenly  love. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 
upon    us.       There    are   two    families 

amongst  men.  All  men  are  children  Yer.  2.  Getting  like  Christ. — We 
of  God  because  He  made  them  ;  be-  shall  know  Christ  by  getting  like  Him. 
cause  there  still  lives  in  them  some-  The  water  of  life  takes  the  shape  of 
thing  of  the  likeness  of  the  creative  the  containing  vessel,  but  it  has  like- 
Father  ;  and  because  He  loves,  and  wise  the  property  of  dilating  the  spirit 
provides,  and  cares  for  every  one  of  into  which  it  flows,  and,  by  fruition, 
them.  But  there  is  a  higher  relation  enlarging  capacity,  and  hence  kindling 
than  that,  to  which  the  name  "  children  desire.  The  sun  shines  upon  the 
of  God  "  is  more  accurately  given,  and  sensitive  plate,  and  an  image  of  the 
to  which  in  the  New  Testament  that  sun  is  photographed  there. — Ihid. 
name  is  confined.      What   is  implied 

in    that    great   word    by    which    the  The    Inestimable    Privileges    of  Be- 

Almighty  gives  us  a  name  and  a  place  lievers. — Our  Lord  was  hated,  reviled, 

kas  of  sons  and  daughters  ?      Clearly,  and  persecuted  unto  death ;  but  we  see 

U  289 


OHAP.  III. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN  J 


how  glorious  was  His  person,  and  how 
exalted  His  character.  In  the  same 
manner  His  followers  are  treated  with 
contempt ;  but  God  declares  their  state 
to  be  the  most  honourable  upon  earth. 
To  this  effect  St.  John  represents  them 
as  slighted  by  man  and  honoured  by 
God. 

I.  The  present  state  of  believers. — 
Not  servants,  but  sons.  1.  His  hy 
adoption.  Every  believer  was  once  a 
child  of  wrath.  But  God  takes  whom 
He  will  into  His  family;  He  adopts 
them  as  His  sons,  and  makes  them 
heirs  of  His  glory.  2.  Also  hy  regenera- 
tion. Born  again  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
they  are  renewed  after  the  image  of 
their  heavenly  Father.  3.  They  en- 
joy this  state  "  now.^^  Bich  and  poor, 
learned  and  unlearned,  partake  alike 
of  this  honour.  Even  now,  while  the 
world  despises  them,  does  God  own  His 
relation  to  them.  What  an  unspeak- 
ably blessed  state  is  this  !  How  differ- 
ent from  the  state  they  were  once  in  ! 
How  great  the  privileges  of  this  rela- 
tion !  To  what  a  glorious  state  does  it 
lead  in  a  better  world  ! 

II.  Their  future  state. — 1.  Very  little 
is  Tcnown  respecting  this.  No  idea  of 
spiritual  and  glorified  bodies.  We  can- 
not imagine  how  extensive  will  be  the 
capacities  of  the  soul.  We  have  very 
faint  conceptions  of  perfect  holiness 
and  perfect  happiness.  2.  Yet  there  are 
some  things  revealed  to  us.  We  shall 
see  Christ  with  our  bodily  eyes.  We 
shall  resemble  Him  in  all  His  imitable 
perfections.  This  resemblance  will 
result  from  our  sight  of  Him.  3.  These 
things  we  may  he  said  to  "  knowT  We 
have  already  experienced  the  earnest  of 
them  in  our  hearts.  When  we  believe 
in  Him,  we  have  views  of  Him  which 
we  had  not  before  :  these  transform  the 
soul  into  His  image.  Our  Lord  has 
given  us  the  full  assurance  of  these 
things.  St.  Paul  leaves  us  no  room  to 
doubt  (1  Cor.  xv.  49  ;  Col.  iii.  4). 

Infer — 1.  Row  wonderfully  different 
the  lot  of  helievers  and  unhelievers. 
BeHevers  are  children  of  God ;  un- 
believers are  children  of  the  wicked 
one.     One   no   idea   of   the   happiness 

290 


of  the  future  ;  the  other  no  idea  of  the 
misery.  How  different  their  feelings 
on  seeing  Christ  upon  His  judgment- 
throne  !  What  a  different  state  to 
all  eternity  !  If  we  believe  in  Christ, 
these  blessings  shall  be  ours.  2.  How 
hright  the  prospects  of  the  true  Chris- 
tian. The  Christian's  warfare  will  soon 
be  over.  Another  day  may  bring  him 
to  the  full  possession  of  it.  Let  these 
prospects  animate  every  pious  soul. 
Let  none  of  us  suffer  our  minds  to  be 
drawn  away  by  the  things  of  time. 
Let  every  one  stand  ready  to  take  his 
flight.  Let  the  beloved  apostle  be  our 
example. — C.  Simson,  M.A. 

Likeness  brings  Vision. — This  fami- 
liar passage  is  altered  in  the  Bevised 
Version,  which  reads  :  "  Beloved,  now 
are  we  children  of  God,  and  it  is  not 
yet  made  manifest  what  we  shall  be. 
We  know  that,  if  He  [margin,  it]  shall 
be  manifested,  we  shall  be  like  Him ; 
for  we  shall  see  Him  even  as  He  is." 
This  is  the  dreamy,  meditative  utter- 
ance of  an  aged  saint,  whose  interest 
is  in  the  other  life  to  which  he  is 
hastening.  Compare  a  young  man's 
speculative  and  an  old  man's  meditative 
way  of  dealing  with  the  future  life. 
St.  John  has  been  expressing  joy  in 
the  standing  of  the  redeemed  as  sons. 
The  Father's  giving  prodigals  again 
their  places  as  sons  is  a  surprise  of 
love.  In  the  text  he  dwells  on  it 
broodingly.  There  is  something  we 
know.  There  is  something  that  we 
cannot  know.  What  we  cannot  actually 
know,  we  can  argue  about,  and  get 
comfort  and  assurance  from  our  argu- 
ment. 

I.  Something  we  know. — "  Now  are 
we  the  children  of  God."  The  word 
"  children  "  is  more  inclusive  than  the 
word  "sons."  Children — 1.  In  fact — 
of  nature,  and  of  restoration.  2.  In 
favour — within  the  shadow  of  the 
Fatherliness.  3.  In  feeling — really 
wanting  to  be,  and  striving  to  be, 
children.  We  need  not  wait  for  the 
joy  of  the  fact,  the  safety  of  the  favour, 
or  the  inspiration  of  the  feeling.  We 
ought  to  have  them  all  now. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


II.  Something  we  cannot  know. — 

"  It  is  not  yet  made  manifest  what 
we  shall  be."  It  cannot  be  known — 
1.  Because  we  are  unable  to  under- 
stand. 2.  Because  we  are  only  getting 
like  what  we  are  to  be.  Illustrate  by 
the  boy  not  realising  his  manhood, 
because  he  is  only  getting  towards  it. 
3.  Because  Christ  is  out  of  present 
apprehension.  But  everything  that  is 
growing  is  growing  up  to  something, 
though  it  may  not  now  know  what 
is  to  be  its  flower  or  its  fruit.  The 
Christian  is  surely  growing  to  some- 
thing; but  no  Christian  ever  reached 
full  flowering,  so  as  to  hang  the  perfect 
flower  out  in  the  earth -skies.  All  who 
remain  among  the  earthly  things  re- 
main among  imperfect  things. 

III.  What  we  cannot  know  we  can 
argue  about. — Compare  the  A.Y.  "  He  " 
with  the  R.V.  margin  "it."  When 
what  we  shall  be  is  manifested.  It 
will  be  by-and-by.  One  thing  is  cer- 
tain— then  we  shall  see  God.  But 
seeing  God  is  only  possible  to  the 
creature  in  seeing  Christ,  who  is  the 
ray  of  the  eternal  Sun  that  comes 
into  the  sensible  spheres.  We  have 
had  Christ  in  the  flesh,  and  men  ap- 
prehended Him  thus.  We  have  Christ 
in  the  Spirit,  and  we  do  apprehend 
Him  thus.  But  these  involve  limita- 
tions. (Illustrate  from  T.  Moore's 
Lalla  Rookh^  "The  Veiled  Prophet 
of  Khorassan.")  We  are  to  see  Christ 
as  He  is  in  His  glorified  humanity, 
and  then  we  shall  find  that  He  is  what 
we  have  been  growing  to  become  like. 
We  can  argue  thus :  If  we  see  Him, 
we  must  have  become  like  Him.  Try 
this  with  the  apostles — that  apostle 
knew  Jesus  best  who  was  most  like 
Him.  It  was  St.  John.  Then  this  is 
a  practical  application  for  us — in  the 
measure  of  our  growing  likeness  to 
Christ  comes  to  us  the  clearer  vision 
of  Him.  If  we  are  ever  to  he  like 
Him,  we  must  be  getting  daily  towards 
that  end,  changing  into  His  likeness, 
image.  Our  best  helps  are  present 
lookings  into  the  face  of  Christ.  There 
is  a  story,  or  parable,  of  a  family  in 
the  Spanish  Indies,  who  were  in  nowise 


different  from  their  neighbours  in  the 
same  upland,  save  that,  when  they 
looked  towards  the  sky,  every  one  of 
them  saw  a  face  looking  back  upon 
him.  The  family  got  scattered,  and 
multiplied;  but,  into  whatever  towns 
or  strange  lands  they  came,  this  mark 
followed  every  one  of  them — that  still 
he  saw  the  face  which  no  other  around 
him  could  see.  Men  marked  that, 
while  differing  widely  in  other  respects, 
all  were  like  to  each  other  in  their 
look.  And  while  some  explained  that 
they  inherited  this  common  look  from 
their  ancestors,  others  said  that,  by 
looking  to  the  one  face,  they  grew 
like  to  it  in  their  own  visage,  and, 
consequently,  like  to  each  other.  The 
story  may  stand  for  illustration  of 
what  takes  place  through  looking  unto 
Jesus  :  we  are  changed  into  His  like- 
ness— as,  in  His  appearing,  "  we  shall 
be  like  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as 
He  is." 

"  For,  oh  !  the  Master  is  so  fair, 

He  smiles  so  sweet  to  banished  men, 
That  they  who  once  have  seen  His  face 
Can  never  rest  on  earth  again." 

In  heaven,  after  **ages  of  ages"  of 
growing  glory,  we  shall  have  to  say, 
as  each  new  wave  of  the  shoreless, 
sunlit  sea  bears  us  onward,  *'  It  doth 
not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be." — 
A.  MaclarGTij  D.D. 

The  Unrevealed  Future  of  the  Sons  of 
God. — The  present  is  the  prophet  of 
the  future.  "  Now  are  we  the  sons 
of  God,  and"  (not  "but")  "it  doth 
not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be." 

I.  The  fact  of  sonship  makes  us 
quite  sure  of  the  future. — The  strong- 
est reasons  for  believing  in  another 
world  are  these  two :  first,  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead,  and 
has  gone  up  there ;  and,  second,  that 
a  man  here  can  pray,  and  trust,  and 
love  God,  and  feel  that  he  is  His  child. 
Childhood  leads  to  maturity.  He 
that  here,  in  his  infantile  way,  is 
stammering  with  his  poor,  unskilled 
lips  the  name,  "Abba,  Father,"  will 
one  day  come  to  speak  it  fully.  He 
that  dimly  trusts,  he  that  partially 
'-■'-■—  291 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  JOHN. 


loves,  he  that  can  lift  up  his  heart  in  men's  eyes,  in  this  earthly  life  of  ours, 

some    more   or   less  vmworthy  prayer  an  example,  or  an  instance,  of  what 

and  aspiration  after  God,  in  all  these  the  sons  of  God  are  to  be  in  another 

emotions  and  exercises   has  the  great  state  of  being."     And  so,  because  men 

proof   in  himself  that  such  emotions,  have    never  had   the   instance    before 

such   relationships,  can  never  be  put  them,  they  do  not  know  much  about 

an  end  to.     The  roots  have  gone  down  that  state.     In  some  sense  there  has 

through  the  temporal,   and  have  laid  been  a  manifestation  through  the  Kfe 

hold  on  the  Eternal.     "We  are   the  of   Jesus    Christ.       Let    us    feel    two 

sons  of  God";  therefore  we  shall  always  things:    let  us   be  thankful    that   we 

be  so,   in  all  worlds,  and  whatsoever  do  not  know,  for  the  ignorance  is  the 

may  become  of  the  poor  wrappage  in  sign  of  the  greatness  ;  and,  then,  let  us 

which  the  soul  is  shrouded.     Not  only  be  sure  that  just  the  very  mixture  of 

the  fact  of  our  sonship  avails  to  assure  knowledge    and   ignorance   which   we 

VIS  of  immortal  life,  but  the  very  form  have  about  another  world  is  precisely 

which   our  religious   experience   takes  the  food  which  is  most  fitted  to  nourish 

points  in  the  same  direction.     As  the  imagination     and     hope.      The  white 

bud   foretells  the  flower,  so  the  very  mountains    keep   their     secret     well; 

imperfections  of  the  Christian  life,  as  not  until  we  have  passed  through  the 

it   is   seen  here,    argue    the   existence  black  rocks,  that  make  the  throat  of 

of  another  state,  where  all  that  is  here  the  pass  on  the  summit,  shall  we  see 

in   the  germ  shall  be  fully   matured,  the  broad  and  shining  plains   beyond 

and  all  that  is  here  incomplete  shall  the  hills. 

attain  the  perfection  which  alone  will  III.  Our  sonship  flings  one  all  pene- 

correspond  to  the  power  that   works  trating  beam  of  light  on  that  future, 

in  us.     Think   of  the  ordinary  Chris-  in  tho  knowledge  of  our  perfect  vision 

tian     character.       The    beginning     is  and    perfect    Ukeness. — "  When    He 

there,    and   evidently   no    more    than  shall  be   manifested,  we  shall  be  like 

the  beginning.     As   one  looks  at  the  Him,  for  we  shall  see  Him  as  He  is." 

crudity,  the  inconsistencies,  the  failings.  His   "  coming  "   is  His  manifestation. 

the  feebleness,  of  the  Christian  life  of  To  behold  Christ  will  be  the  condition 

others,  or  of  oneself,  and  then  thinks  and  the  means  of  growing  like  Him. 

that  such  a  poor,  imperfect  exhibition  That  way  of  transformation  by  behold- 

is   all  that  so  Divine  a  principle  has  ing,  or  of  assimilation  by  the  power  of 

been  able  to  achieve  in  this  world,  one  loving   contemplation,   is   the    blessed 

feels  that  there  must  be  a  region  and  way    of   ennobling    character,    which 

a   time  where   we  shall  be  all  which  even  here,  and  in  human  relationships, 

the  transforming  power  of  God's  Spirit  has  often  made  it  easy  to  put  off  old 

can  make  us.     The  very  inconsistencies  vices,  and  to  clothe  the  soul  with  un- 

of  Christians  are  as  strong  reasons  for  wonted  grace. — A.  Macla7^en,  D.D. 

believing  in  the  perfect  life  of  heaven  „            /.  .,      a    i    -  •         /•  ^   7 

,1    .*           ., .  ^          1       .  ,  rower  of  the  bout-vision  of  God. — 

as    tneir    purities    and    virtues    are.  t-,    ,           *'    ,      ,              •  •  ^    l.^ 

mi          .      ^         J.    1     1  •  Endeavour    to    keep    vivid    the    con- 

Ihere  is  a  e^reat  deal  m  every  man,  .                   c   n    ^i     c                i     i  • 

J         J.    c     ^^  •     ri\    •  2.'                     i  sciousness    01    God  s   I  ace   as    lookinsr 

and  most  or  all  m  Christian  men  and  ,             .                        vi        .li          i 

1  .  1     1             i    r.i    ii  •  always   in    on   you,    like    the   solemn 

women,  which  does   not  nt  this   pre-  /.       -^        ^  ,i      rn    •  ,       ,  •  i     a        t 

,    rr>^              '                 PIT       .  ^  ,  irescoes  or  the  Christ  which  Ansjelico 

sent.   Ihe  consciousness  oi  belons^mff  to  •   .    ^          .i           ^^       c  ^  ■                . 

,1           1        <?  ii  •         1.              T  painted  on    the  walls   or   his  convent 

another  order  or  thme^s,  because  I  am  ^^      ,^    ,          i               t_     i.i            •  i  i. 

n  j»      1,-ij       Ml         1                       J.1,  X  cells,   that    each    poor   brother   mi£(ht 

Gods  child,  will  make  me  sure  that,  r    i  i  •    tv/t     -                  -j.!,  i  •          rt-j 

1        T  1-         1            -^1          i.1     J.1,     J.-  reel  his  Master  ever  with  mm. — loid. 
when  I  have  done  with  earth,  the  tie 

that  binds  me  to  my  Father  will  not  The  Face   of  Jesus. — Painters   have 

be  broken.  attempted  to  meet  the  longing  to  see 

II.  We  remain   ignorant   of  much  the  face  of  Jesus  which  Scripture  leaves 

in  that  future. — John   seems   to  say,  unsatisfied.     They  show  us   the   child 

"  There  has  never  been  set  forth  before  Jesus,   clad   at   times  in  the  "  tender 

292 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


sweetness  of  unsuffering  and  unfore- 
boding  y oil thf Illness,"  and  again  with 
tlie  shadow  of  the  cross  thrown  over 
His  face  ;  they  represent  almost  every 
incident  of  His  ministry  and  life  re- 
corded in  the  New  Testament ;  they 
venture  into  Gethsemane,  with  the 
mystery  of  its  grief  and  agony ;  they 
fill  up  almost  every  moment  from  His 
leaving  the  Prsetorium  and  going  down 
the  steps  where  the  cross  awaits  Him, 
with  a  face  in  which  there  is  no  guile, 
and  a  bearing  that  shows  Him  equal 
to  the  endurance,  onward  till  we  see 
His  dead  face  ready  to  be  wrapped  up 
for  the  grave  ;  they  trace  Him  from 
the  grave  to  the  Ascension ;  they  show 
Him,  as  it  were  to-day,  knocking  at 
the  heart-door,  with  a  crown  on  His 
head,  and  eyes  full  of  yearning  love, 
and  wondering,  sorrowing  patience. 
Few  comparatively  of  these  pictures 
are  spuitually  helpful ;  they  fail  to 
"  enlarge  our  sense"  of  Christ.  Some 
of  them,  indeed,  are  profane  in  the 
highest  degree ;  not  a  few  of  them 
tend  to  a  worship  of  art  rather  than  of 
God.  Many  of  the  painters  had  no 
right  to  touch  the  subject.  They  may 
have  been  competent  to  render  scenes 
from  heathen  mythology,  or  battle- 
pieces,  or  popes  and  emperors,  or  sen- 
suous beauty,  or  portraits  of  a  county 
gentleman  or  member  of  parliament, 
but  they  were  as  unfit  for  showing  us 
the  face  of  Jesus  Christ  as  an  unbe- 
liever is  for  leading  Christian  song, 
or  preaching  the  everlasting  gospel. 
Especially  in  trying  to  represent  the 
Sufferer,  whose  visage  was  "so  marred 
more  than  any  man,  and  His  form 
more  than  the  sons  of  men,"  they 
have  made  too  much  of  the  physical, 
and  have  missed  the  grand,  glorious 
grief  which  marked  Him  for  the  Man 
of  sorrows.  And,  after  all  they  have 
shown  us,  we  sympathise  the  more 
earnestly  with  the  words  of  the  apostle 
Paul  :  "  Yea,  though  we  have  knowo 
Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet  now  hence- 
forth know  we  Him  no  more." — J.  Cul- 
rosSy  D.D. 

Ver.  3.  The  Purifying  Influence   of 


Hope. — Here  is  the  most  mystical 
teacher  of  the  New  Testament  insist- 
ing on  plain  morality  as  vehemently 
as  his  friend  James  could  have  done. 
His  thought  is  a  simple  one — If  you 
expect,  and,  expecting,  hope  to  be  like 
Jesus  Christ  yonder,  you  will  be  trying 
your  best  to  be  like  Him  here. 

I.  The  principle  insisted  on — if 
we  are  to  be  pure,  we  must  purify  our- 
selves.— There  are  two  ways  of  getting 
like  Christ.  One  is  the  way  of  assimila- 
tion and  transformation  by  beholding. 
"  If  we  see  Him,  we  shall  be  like  Him." 
The  word  "purify"  speaks  of  another 
condition, — it  implies  impurity ;  it  im- 
plies a  process  which  is  more  than  con- 
templation ;  it  implies  the  reversal  of 
existing  conditions,  and  not  merely  the 
growth  upwards  to  unattained  con- 
ditions. Growth  is  not  all  that  Chris- 
tian men  need :  they  need  excision  ;  they 
need  casting  out  of  what  is  in  them  ; 
they  need  change  as  well  as  growth. 
Purifying  they  need,  because  they  are 
impure.  But  if  there  is  to  be  this 
purifying  of  the  Christian,  it  must  be 
done  by  the  Christian  himself.  Our 
best  way  of  cleansing  ourselves  is  by 
keeping  firm  hold  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
of  the  cleansing  powers  that  lie  in  Him. 
The  very  deepest  word  about  the  Chris- 
tian effort  of  self-purifying  is  this — 
keep  close  to  Jesus  Christ.  We  kill 
all  evil  by  fellowship  with  the  Master. 
But  holding  ourselves  in  fellowship 
with  the  Master  is  not  all  that  we 
have  to  do.  There  have  to  be  direct 
specific  efforts,  constantly  repeated, 
to  subdue  and  suppress  individual  acts 
of  transgression.  We  have  to  fight 
against  evil,  sin  by  sin.  Holiness  is 
not  feeling  ;  it  is  character.  You  do 
not  get  rid  of  your  sins  by  the  act  of 
Divine  amnesty  alone.  You  are  not 
perfect  because  you  say  you  are,  and 
feel  as  if  you  were,  and  think  you  are. 
God's  cleansing  does  not  dispense  with 
fighting,  but  makes  victory  possible. 
Then  first  turn  to  Him  from  whom  all 
cleansing  comes  ;  and  then,  moment  by 
moment,  remember  that  it  is  our  work 
to  purify  ourselves  by  the  strength 
that  is  given  to  us  by  the  Master. 

293 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


II.  This  purifying  of  ourselves  is  spirits  from  their  childhood.  The 
the  link  or  bridge  between  the  present  proper  spirit  of  a  nobleman,  a  prince, 
and  the  future. — "Now  are  we  the  or  a  king  is  greater  than  that  of  an 
sons  of  God  "  is  the  pier  on  one  side  of  inferior  person.  And  the  reason  is, 
the  gulf.  "  When  He  is  made  mani-  because,  as  he  comes  to  understand  his 
fest,  we  shall  be  like  Him  " — that  is  quality,  his  spirit  grows  with  his  hopes 
the  pier  on  the  other  side.  How  are  of  what  he  shall  attain  to ;  his  very 
the  two  to  be  connected  ?  We  must  hopes  greaten  his  spirit,  ennoble  him, 
throw  across  the  gulf,  by  God's  help,  and  make  him  think  of  living  like  one 
day  by  day  here,  that  bridge  of  our  that  expects  to  be  in  such  a  state  as 
effort  after  growing  likeness  to  Himself,  that  to  which  he  is  born.  And  such  is 
and  purity  therefrom.  The  one  link  the  property  of  the  Christian's  hope.  It 
between  sonship  here  and  likeness  to  not  only  makes  him  not  ashamed,  but 
Christ  hereafter  is  this  link  of  present,  it  heightens  and  ennobles  his  spirit, 
strenuous  effort  to  become  like  Him  makes  him  aspire  high,  and  look 
day  by  day  in  personal  purity.  Only  forward  to  great  things. — John  Howe. 
this  effort  will  ever  enable  us  to  "  see 

Him   as   He   is."     Only   the   pure  in  The    Lost    Purity    restcnred. — *'This 

heart  shall  ever  see  God  in  Christ.  hope  "  is  a  hope  to  be  with  Christ ;  and 

III.  This  self- cleansing  is  the  off-  as  Christ  is,  in  highest  verity,  the 
spring  and  outcome  of  the  hope  re-  manifestation  of  God,  who  is  infinite 
ferred  to  in  the  text. — It  is  the  child  purity,  it  is  a  hope  to  be  concomitant 
of  hope.  Hope  is  by  no  means  an  with  purity,  the  purity  of  Christ  and 
active  faculty  generally ;  she  is  not  in  of  God,  which  again  is  but  a  hope 
the  way  of  doing  much  work  in  the  of  being  entered  into,  and  perfectly 
world.  The  hope  here  is  a  certain  answerable  to,  the  purity  of  God.  It 
kind  of  hope ;  it  is  the  hope  of  being  follows  that  every  man  that  hath  this 
like  Jesus  Christ.  Such  a  hope  fights  hope  in  him  will  be  purifying  himself 
against  the  disappointment  and  de-  here  on  earth  even  according  to  the 
pression  which  are  so  apt  to  dishearten  purity  of  Christ,  with  whom  he  hopes 
us.  Here  is  a  test  for  Christian  people  to  be.  Purity  of  soul  is  the  aim  of 
who  say  that  they  look  to  heaven  with  spiritual  redemption,  and  the  legitimate 
hope  as  to  their  home  and  rest.     A  issue  of  Christian  experience. 

great  deal  of  the  religious  contempla-  I.  Form   a  fit   conception  of  what 

tion  of  a  future   state  is  pure  senti-  purity  is. — It  is  the  character  of  angels 

mentality,  and,  like  all  pure  sentiment-  and  of  God.     It  is  God,  as  represented 

ality,  is  either  immoral  or  non-moral.  here  on  earth,  in  the  sinless  and  perfect 

But  here  the  two  things  are  brought  life  of  Christ, — His  superiority  to  sense, 

into    clear    juxtaposition — the    bright  and  passion,  and  the  opinions  of  the 

hope   of   heaven,  and  the  hard  work  world ;  His  simple  devotion  to  truth ; 

done  here  below. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  His  unambitious  goodness;  His  holy, 

r/Tz,   Tir  7  •        j'm.        s         rrn        •  harmlcss,  undefiled  life,  as  beinff  with, 
TtieMakinq  of  (Jharacter. — The  micro-  ,  .     r  •  m  i      - 1 

,  ^  "^     ,  1  ,       r      T  .  1  yet  separate  from,  smners.     lake  the 

scopic  creatures,   thousands   or   which  ip.i  ,   ^      t>---- 

•11         .    ,  •     T_       •  1      xi  analogy  oi  the  crystal.     Jrurity  is,  m 

will  ffo  into  a  square  inch,  make  the  i       ^i         i    -  -  •    •    xi 

X      \.'i.      Tir    XT.  X  T„    XT  XI  character,  what  transparency  IS  m  the 

great  white  clitts  that  beetle  over  the  .   i      V\  i        -i  -x 

°.ii,  jrxxi^x  a  crystal.     Or   we  may  describe  purity 

wildest  sea  and  front  the  storm.     So,*^,.  ,  ,*^.,i       ^• 

,        i      Tji         J.      -i-i-  by  reierence  to  contrasts ;  then  it  is  a 

permanent  and  solid  character  is  built  r         ,  -x     x       n     •        tx    • 

^  .     o  ^  •  -  ^       i-  jxi„--  character   opposite   to   all   sm.     it   is 

up  out  01  trivial  actions:  and  this  is  .  ,      -r x  •    •  x      tx  • 

.  if      T  ,     e  -J  innocent.     It  is  incorrupt,     it  is  man 

the  solemn  aspect  or  our  passing  days —  t^xj  xx?xi        •       c    •  i,j 

.  1    ,  ,1  ^      n  .  Ti  •  J  nrted  up  out  or  the  mire  or  sin,  washed 

that  they  are  making  us. — Ibid.  •  •.    •   ,     .i        ^  t!-x     i 

•^  °  as  a  spirit  into  the  clean  white  love 

The  Power  of  the  ChristiarCs  Hope. —  and    righteousness   of    his   Redeemer, 

It  is  obvious  to  observe  how  the  hopes  and  so  purged  of  himself  as  to  be  man, 

of  persons,  by  degrees,  greaten  their  without   anything  of  the  sordid   and 

294 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


defiled  character  of  a  sinner.  Or  we 
may  set  forth  the  idea  of  purity  under 
a  reference  to  the  modes  of  causes.  In 
the  world  of  causes,  it  is  the  scientific 
ideal  of  purity  that  events  transpire 
normally,  according  to  the  constitutive 
order  and  original  law  of  the  creation. 
But  as  soon  as  a  soul  transgresses,  it 
breaks  out  of  order,  and  its  whole 
internal  working  becomes  mixed,  con- 
fused, tumultuous,  corrupt.  Abiding 
in  God,  all  its  internal  motions  would 
proceed  in  the  simple,  harmonious, 
orderly  progress  of  the  firmament,  and 
it  would  be  a  pure  soul.  Plunging  into 
sin,  it  breaks  order,  and  falls  into 
mixtures  of  causes  in  all  its  actions. 
Or  we  may  describe  purity  absolutely, 
as  it  is  when  viewed  in  its  own  positive 
quality.  It  is  chastity  of  soul ;  that 
state  of  the  spiritual  nature  in  which 
it  is  seen  to  have  no  contacts  or 
afiinities,  but  such  as  fall  within  the 
circle  of  unforbidden  joy  and  un- 
corrupted  pleasure.  Real  chastity  puts 
the  soul  as  truly  asunder  and  apart 
from  the  reach  of  evil  suggestion  as 
God  Himself  is  in  the  glorious  chastity 
of  His  holiness. 

II.  It  is  the  aim  and  purpose  of 
Christian  redemption  to  raise  us  up 
into  the  state  of  complete  purity  before 
God. — It  is  curious  to  observe,  in  Scrip- 
ture, what  an  apparatus  of  cleansing 
God  appears  to  have  set  in  array  for 
the  purification  of  souls.  It  would 
seem,  on  looking  at  the  manifold  array 
of  cleansing  elements,  applications, 
gifts,  and  sacraments,  as  if  God  had 
undertaken  it  as  the  great  object  and 
crowning  mercy  of  His  reign,  to  effect 
a  solemn  purgation  of  the  world.  But 
it  may  be  asked.  Is  it  given  to  us  to 
attain  to  a  state  which  can  fitly  be 
called  purity,  or  which  is  to  itself  a 
state  consciously  pure  ?  There  is  a 
Christian  purity  that  is  related  to  the 
soul  as  investiture.  Christ  may  be  so 
completely  put  on  that  the  whole  con- 
sciousness may  be  of  Him,  and  all  the 
motions  of  sins  give  way  to  the  domi- 
nating efiicacy  of  His  harmonious  and 
perfect  mind.  Being  thus  held  up  by 
the   attachment    to    him    of    Christ's 


affinities,  he  is  growing  like  Him — 
pure  as  He  is  pure.  Still  the  body  is 
dead  because  of  sin.  Perfect,  absolute 
purity  it  is  hardly  supposable  may  be 
realised  here.  Enough  to  know  that 
there  need  be  no  limit  to  the  process 
of  purifying  while  life  remains,  and 
that,  when  life  ends,  it  may  be  glori- 
ously approximated  to  the  state  of 
completeness. 

III.  How  may  we  promote  our 
advancement  toward  the  state  of 
purity? — 1.  We  must  set  our  heart 
upon  it.  2.  Live  in  Christ,  and  seek 
to  be  as  closely  and  intimately  one  with 
Him  as  possible.  This  includes — (1)  A 
willingness  to  wholly  cease  from  the 
old  man,  as  corrupt,  in  order  that  a 
completely  new  man  from  Christ  may 
be  formed  in  you.  (2)  The  life  must 
be  determined  implicitly  by  the  faith 
of  Christ.  (3)  The  hope  of  being  with 
Christ  is  ever  an  inspiration ;  of  itself 
it  draws  the  soul  towards  purity.  We 
are  to  be  much  in  the  meditation  of 
Christ  as  glorified.  We  are  to  be 
raised  by  our  longings,  and  purified 
with  Christ  by  the  hopes  we  rest  upon 
His  person. — Horace  Bushnell,  D.D. 

Yers.  4,  5.  The  Sinlessness  of  Christ. 
— In  St.  John's  day  there  were  men  so 
over-refined  and  fastidious,  that  they 
could  not  endure  the  thought  of  any- 
thing spiritual  being  connected  with 
materialism.  They  could  not  believe 
in  anything  pure  that  was  also  fleshly, 
for  flesh  and  sinfulness  were  to  them 
synonymous  terms.  While  admitting 
the  Divinity  of  Jesus,  they  denied  the 
reality  of  His  materialism.  In  this 
there  was  an  attempt  to  be  eminently 
spiritual ;  and,  what  seems  exceedingly 
marvellous,  is  the  fact  withal  that  these 
men  led  a  life  of  extreme  licentiousness. 
But  the  most  spiritual  of  all  the 
apostles  was  the  one  who  insisted  most 
earnestly  on  the  materialism  of  the 
human  nature  of  our  Lord.  In  the 
natural  propensities  of  human  nature 
there  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of ;  there 
is  nothing  for  a  man  to  be  ashamed  of 
but  sin — there  is  nothing  more  noble 
than  a  perfect  human  nature. 

295 


CHAP.  III. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


I.  The  sinlessness  of  our  Lord's 
nature. — We  have  a  definition  of  sin. 
**  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law." 
There  is  a  difference  between  sin  and 
transgression.  Every  sin  is  a  trans- 
gression of  the  law ;  but  every  trans- 
gression of  the  law  is  not  a  sin.  There 
must  be  some  voluntary  act,  trans- 
gressing some  known  law,  or  there  is 
no  sin.  But  there  is  a  law  written  for 
the  heart,  as  well  as  for  the  outward 
man ;  and  it  is  not  the  outward  act 
that  constitutes  alone  the  morality  of 
Christ — it  is  the  feeling  of  the  heart, 
the  acts  of  the  inner  man.  Some  men 
say,  "  If  the  thought  is  as  bad  as  the 
act,  why  should  we  not  do  the  act  ? 
I  am  as  guilty  as  if  I  had  committed 
the  transgression.  Why  should  I  debar 
myself  from  the  enjoyment  ?  "  But 
that  is  a  sophistry  with  which  no  man 
who  has  any  conscience  can  deceive 
himself.  Christ  was  doubly  free  from 
sin,  as  free  in  desire  as  He  was  free  in 
act.  The  proof  of  His  perfect  purity 
is  to  be  found  in  the  testimony  of  His 
enemies.  His  friends,  and  those  in- 
different to  Him.  There  was  no 
actual  transgression  in  our  Lord's  life. 
See  too  what  His  inward  life  was.  For 
there  may  be  no  outward  transgression, 
and  yet  the  heart  may  not  be  pure. 
Outwardly  all  may  seem  right,  through 
absence  of  temptation ;  and  yet  there 
may  be  the  want  of  inward  perfection. 
His  mind  regulates  every  other  mind ; 
it  moves  in  perfect  harmony  with  the 
mind  of  God.  In  all  the  just  men  that 
ever  lived,  you  will  find  some  peculiarity 
carried  to  excess.  We  note  this  in  the 
zeal  of  St.  John,  in  the  courage  of 
St.  Peter,  in  the  truth-seeking  of  St. 
Thomas.  It  was  not  so  with  Jesus  ;  no 
one  department  of  His  human  nature 
ever  superseded  another  :  all  was  har- 
mony there.     The  one  sound  which  has 


come  down  from  God  in  perfect  melody 
is  His  life,  the  entire  unbroken  music 
of  humanity. 

II.  The  power  there  is  in  the  mani- 
fested sinlessness  of  Jesus  to  take 
away  the  sins  of  the  world. — Consider 
this  (1)  in  reference  to  man  ;  (2)  in  re- 
ference to  God.  There  is  in  the  eternal 
constitution  of  the  heavenly  govern- 
ment that  which  makes  the  life  and 
death  of  Jesus  the  atonement  for  the 
world's  sins.  Human  nature,  which 
fell  in  Adam,  rose  again  in  Christ ;  in 
Him  it  became  a  different  thing  alto- 
gether in  God's  sight — redeemed  now, 
hereafter  to  be  perfected.  Consider 
how  the  world  was  purified  by  the 
change  of  its  own  nature.  There  are 
three  ways  by  which  this  may  be  done 
— by  faith,  by  hope,  by  love.  1.  It 
is  done  by  faith,  for  the  most  degrading 
thing  in  the  heart  of  man  is  the  dis- 
belief in  the  goodness  of  human  nature. 
What  raises  human  nature  is,  faith 
in   the    perfect    innocence    of    Jesus. 

2.  Trust  in  Divine  humanity  elevates  the 
soul  by  hope.  Kotice  the  hopefulness 
of  the  character  of  Jesus —  His  hopeful- 
ness for  human  nature.  This  hopeful- 
ness raises  hope  in  us.  We  dare  to 
hope  for  that  nature  which  Jesus 
loved ;  we  dare  to  forgive  that  nature 
which    Jesus    condescended    to    wear. 

3.  It  is  done  also  by  love.  Hate 
narrows  the  heart ;  love  expands  the 
heart.  To  love  is  to  have  almost  the 
power  of  throwing  aside  sin.  If  we 
would  separate  the  world  from  sin,  and 
from  the  penalty  of  sin,  and  the  inward 
misery  of  the  heart  attendant  on  sin  in 
this  world,  and  the  world  to  come,  it  is 
written  in  Scripture,  "There  is  none 
other  name  under  heaven  given  among 
men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved,"  than 
the  name  of  Jesus. — F.  W.  Robertson. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. —Verses  7—12. 

Doing  Righteousness. — This  appears  to  be  the  expression  of  a  sudden  thought 
that  came  to  St.  John.  We  have  often  to  notice  how  the  apostolic  writers  are 
turned  aside  from  their  main  line  of  argument  by  some  sudden  thought  which 
seizes  them.     This  indeed  is  a  common  peculiarity  of   what  we   properly  call 

296 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN.  chap.  ill. 


''  uneducated,"  "  untrained  "  writers  and  preachers.  Some  of  their  best  things 
come  as  "  asides."  St.  John  has  been  dealing  with  high  sentiment.  Perhaps  he 
feared  that  what  he  had  said  belonged  to  too  high  a  range,  and  therefore  might 
be  misconceived,  misrepresented,  and  misused.  Religion  has  both  its  mystical 
and  its  practical  side.  The  mystical  may  be  most  pleasing  and  satisfying 
to  ourselves  ;  the  practical  is  the  most  important,  and  the  most  honouring, 
to  Christ.  Emotions  do  not  glorify  our  Divine  Lord  as  righteousness  does. 
Sometimes  the  religion  of  Christ  is  represented  as  being  doctrinal  and  sentimental. 
And  so  it  is.  But  it  is  also,  and  even  yet  more  truly,  ethical,  and  practical, 
and  social.  Its  key-note  no  one  need  misapprehend  :  '"  He  that  doeth  righteous- 
ness is  righteous."  Christ's  own  teachings  were  distinctly  ethical.  Apostolic 
teachings  were  very  largely  practical.  In  the  dark  ages  Christianity  was  the 
humanising  force.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  civiHsing  heathendom.  Back  of 
literature,  and  philanthropy,  and  sociology,  to-day,  lie  the  great  Christian  truths 
and  principles.  What  God  provides  for  the  redemption  of  the  world  is — (1)  the 
salt  of  Christian  character;  (2)  the  leaven  of  Christian  principle;  (3)  the  in- 
spiration of  the  Christian  motive.  Christ  has  a  sociology,  but  it  is  a  set  of  living 
principles,  not  an  elaborated  system.     Each  age  must  make  its  own  elaboration. 

I.  A  mistake  often  made  by  the  early  Christian  disciples. — It  concerned 
righteousness.  This  surprises  us,  because  Christ's  teachings  about  righteousness 
seem  to  us  so  clear.  Trace  the  rise  of  the  Antinomian  spirit  in — (1)  the  misuse 
of  the  doctrine  of  election  ;  (2)  of  present  salvation  ;  (3)  of  the  new  life.  The 
truth  is  that  the  Church  has  always  to  guard  against  this  evil.  There  is  ever 
creeping  in  a  subtle  idea  of  a  difference  between  a  Christianas  sins  and  other 
people's  sins.  To  liv^e  up  to  the  full  expression  of  Christian  principle  in  their 
old  heathen  svirroundings  must  have  been  difficult  for  the  early  Christians,  and 
we  may  pity  them.  We  need  not  wonder  that  some  of  them  said,  "  Why  should 
we  try  ?  "  or  that  some  of  them  easily  found  reasons  why  they  should  not  try. 
It  was  easy  to  urge  that  the  new  life  was  a  spiritual  thing,  and  there- 
fore entirely  independent  of  its  material  surroundings.  Even  nowaday — 
(1)  feeling  is  regarded  as  more  satisfying  than  righteousness;  (2)  knowledge  is 
regarded  as  more  important  than  righteousness;  (3)  morality  is  confused  with 
righteousness;  (4)  ceremonial  is  put  instead  of  righteousness.  Indeed,  the 
mistake  is  wont  to  take  such  subtle  forms  that  it  may  have  found  out  how  to 
master  even  its.  We  may  be  sure  of  this  :  righteousness  is  rightness^  in  view 
of — (1)  God's  claims;  (2)  Christ's  example;  (3)  the  possibilities  of  service  to 
our  fellows. 

II.  The  apostolic  correction  of  the  mistake. — It  was  the  aged  apostle's  most 
anxious  fear  that  the  religion  of  his  disciples  might  evaporate  in  sentiment. 
Therefore  he  lays  so  much  stress  on  doing  righteousness.  Righteousness  is  the 
expression  of  right  feeling.  And  right  feeling  can  never  exist  without  wanting 
to  get  expression.  Quickened  germs  in  the  soil  are  sure  to  show  blades  above 
the  soil.  Righteousness  toward  God  is  doi^ig.  Righteousness  toward  man  is 
doing.  Good  feeling  wants  expression.  Knowledge  wants  service.  Resolve 
wants  sphere  of  operation.  And  none  of  these  are  righteousness  so  long  as  they 
stand  alone.  Does  then  the  Divine  acceptance  rest  upon  the  doing  ?  No ;  let 
us  never  make  that  mistake.  It  rests  on  the  righteousness  which  finds  expression 
in  the  doing.  Understand  what  righteousness  is.  It  is  the  objective  of  faith ; 
it  is  the  operative  of  the  new  life  ;  it  is  its  activity  in  its  relations.  Everything 
that  lives  does  something.  Life  escapes  you.  You  can  see  what  life  does.  A 
Christian  lives :  then  he  does  righteousness.  Where  then  is  the  place  for 
Christian  sentiment  and  feeUng?  It  is  the  inspiration,  and  the  tone,  of  the 
doing. 

III.  The  basis  on  which  the  apostolic  correction  rests.— God  the  Father, 

297 


CHAP   III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    1.  JOHN. 


or  Christ  the  Son.  1.  Essential  to  the  thought  of  God  is  activity.  God's 
righteousness  is  doing.  Conceive  of  God  as  non-operating  goodness,  and  He 
is  but  a  silent,  mysterious  Brahm — nothing  really,  nothing  helpfully,  to  you. 
2.  Christ's  righteousness  is  doing.  Conceive  Christ  as  only  cherishing  good 
sentiments,  never  "  going  about  doing  good,"  and  He  becomes  nothing  helpfully 
to  you — only,  in  some  sense,  a  hermit  Antony,  or  a  St.  Simeon  Stylites.  Our 
models  of  righteousness  are  distinctly  practical. 

Apply  in  our  several  spheres  :  (1)  Righteousness  as  our  personal  character- 
istic ;  (2)  as  the  life  of  our  home  relations ;  (3)  as  the  life  of  our  business 
scenes  ;  (4)  as  the  life  of  our  Church  fellowships ;  (5)  as  the  life  of  our  social 
intercourse.  Everywhere  we  want  "  righteousness  " ;  and  everywhere,  "  he  that 
doeth  righteousness  is  righteous,"  even  as  God  is  righteous,  even  as  Christ  is 
righteous. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  7,  The   Practical   Character   of  the  same  class,  has  the  same  character- 

Righteousness. — "  He  that  doeth  right-  istic.     The  contrast  is  with  the  "  doing 

eousness  is   righteous,  even  as  He   is  righteousness  "  of  ver.  7.     To  put  the 

righteous."     It  is  clear  that  emphasis  distinction  in  language  more  familiar 

is  to  be  placed  on  doing,  as  contrasted  to  us,  we  may  say  :  He  that   pleases 

with   professing,  or  with   talking.     A  himself,  and  serves  his  own  ends,  is  of 

man   is    according   to   what   he   does,  the  devil ;  he  belongs  to  the  devil-class, 

because  in  a  genuine  man  the  doing  is  He  that  denies  himself,  and  serves  his 

the  natural  sign  and  expression  of  hi7n-  conviction  of  what  is  right,  is  of  God, 

self.     William  Jay   used  to   say,  "Do  and    belongs    to    the   Christ-class    of 

not  tell  me  what  a  man  said  when  he  obedient,  and   loyal,  and  loving  sons, 

lay  on  his  dying-bed :  tell  me  how  he  Then   we    can    readily   perceive    how 

lived."     And  it  is  equally  clear   that  Christ's  work  must  destroy  the  devil's 

fearless   appeal   can   be   made   to   the  work.     Let  Christ  bring  us  into  obe- 

practical  character  of  the  human  right-  dient  sonship,  and  we  shall  only  want 

eousness    of    the    Lord   Jesus   Christ,  to  do  righteousness. 
There   is   no   possibility   of   imagining 

that    Christ's  righteousness  was  mere  Ver.  9.  The  Divine  Seed  in  Man. — 

sentimentality  or  profession.     Nor  can  The    Greek    father,     Justin    Martyr, 

a  righteousness  of  talk  gain  any  sup-  seems    to    have   found    the   figure    in 

port   from   our   Lord's   teachings,  the  this  text  specially  suggestive,  and  his 

key-note    of    which   is    this,    "  If    ye  elaboration  of  it  may  help  our  appre- 

know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  hension.     He  says  that  "  the  truths  in 

do  them."     And  there  is  another  point  the  utterances  of   heathen  philosophy 

suggested  by  the  form  of  the  original  and  poetry  are   due  to  the  fact  that 

word   translated  "doeth."     It   means,  a  seed  of   the  Word   is  implanted,  or 

"  he  who  habitually  does  righteousness."  rather,  inborn,  eficf^vTov,  in  every  race 

And  precisely  in  that  we  have  the  in-  of  men.     Those  who  grasped  the  truth 

spiring  example  of  Christ.  lived    according    to    "a   part    of    the 

seminal  Word,"  even  as  Christians  live 

Ver.  8.  Christ's  Work  on  the  DeviVs  "  according  to  the  knowledge  and  con- 

Works. — "  That  He  might  destroy  the  templation  of  the  whole  Word,  that  is 

works  of  the  devil."     The  works  of  the  Christ."      They   "  nobly   uttered^what 

devil  are  here  described  as  "  doing  sin."  they  saw  akin  to  the  part  of  the  Divine 

The  work  of  the  devil  in  man  is  making  seminal  Word  which  they  had  received." 
him  do  sin.    The  "devil  sinneth  " — that 

is  his  characteristic  work.     "  He  that  "  His  seed  remaineth  in  him." — The 

doeth  sin  is  of  the  devil,"  belongs  to  following  Bible  writers  suggest  expla- 

298  .       ,      , 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


nations  of  this  very  difficult  expres- 
sion : — Bengel :  '*  In  eo,  qui  genitus  est 
ex  Deo,  manet  semen  Dei,  i.e.  verbum, 
cum  sua  virtute  (1  Pet.  i.  23  ;  Jas.  i. 
18).  Quam\is  peccatum  saepe  furioso 
impetu  conetur  prosternere  renatum. 
Vel  potius  sic :  Semen  Dei,  i.e.  is,  qui 
natus  est  ex  Deo,  manet  in  Deo." 
Webster  aiid  Wilkinson :  *'  crTrep/Aa  is 
vinderstood  to  be  tbe  Word  of  God 
(1  Pet.  i.  23;  Jas.  i.  18),  or  the  Holy 
Spirit  (John  iii.  8).  We  may  explain 
it  of  the  principle  of  Divine  life  im- 
planted in  the  soul,  which  renders  us 
^etas  KOLViDvovs  ^vcrcoos  (2  Pet.  i.  4). 
That  which  originates  also  maintains 
(fjicvei)  his  fihal  relation  to  God;  and 
he  who  is  in  this  relation  to  God  can- 
not lead  a  sinful  Ufe."  Alford:  "Be- 
cause that  new  principle  of  life  from 
whicli  his  new  life  has  unfolded,  which 
was  God's  seed  deposited  in  him,  abides 
growing  there,  and  precludes  the  de- 
velopment of  the  old  sinful  nature." 
By  the  seed  Alford  understands  tbe 
icord^  the  utterance  of  God,  dropped 
into  the  soul  of  man.  Matthew  Henry 
calls  the  seed  the  "  spiritual  seminal 
principle  remaining  in  him."  Fausset 
calk  the  seed  "  the  living  word  of  God, 
made  by  the  Holy  Spirit  the  seed  in  us 
of  a  new  life."  Sinclair  says  :  "  The 
seed  is  the  Holy  Spirit — that  influence 
proceeding  from  God,  imbued  with 
Divine  vitality,  regenerating,  renewing, 
refreshing,  causing  the  nature  of  holi- 
ness to  spring,  to  grow,  to  bloom,  to 
bear  fruit." 

Ver.  12.  Cain,  the  Unloving  Brother. 
— The  reference  to  Cain  is  singularly 
appropriate,  because  the  controlling 
thought  in  St.  John's  mind  is,  that  if 
a  man  really  loves  God,  he  will  be  sure 
to  love  his  brother  also  ;  and  if  a  man 
is  found  not  to  be  loving  his  brother, 
we  may  be  confidently  sure  that  he 
does  not  love  God.  There  are  two  dis- 
tinct phases  of  conduct  manifest  in  the 
record  concerning  Cain.     We  see  what 


he  was  toward  God,  and  find  no  sign 
of  any  inspiration  of  personal  love  to 
God.  We  see  what  he  was  toward 
his  brother,  and  find  no  sign  of  that 
self-denying  brotherly  love  which  alone 
sanctifies  family  life,  and  expresses  the 
common  love  of  the  father.  That  the 
unrighteousness  of  Cain  is  here  ex- 
hibited as  the  ground  of  his  hatred  to 
his  brother  is  altogether  in  harmony 
with  the  Old  Testament  record.  For 
there  we  see  that  the  motive  of  his 
hatred  to  Abel  was  his  envy,  because 
Abel  was  more  acceptable  to  God,  but 
this  latter  was  founded  in  the  "  good 
work "  of  Abel,  which  was  wanting 
in  Cain.  St.  John  does  not  speak  of 
the  ixio-etv  of  Cain,  but  of  the  o-<^a^€tv  in 
which  that  hatred  found  expression  ; 
for  he  is  treating  generally  of  the  out- 
ward evidence  of  the  internal  disposi- 
tion, through  which  outward  evidence 
the  internal  disposition  appears  mani- 
festly and  uncontrovertibly  to  the  man 
himself.  But  St.  John  does  not  present 
the  fratricide  of  Cain  only  as  one 
individual  result  of  the  general  un- 
righteousness of  his  works,  but  rather 
as  specifically  evoked  by  the  opposite 
character  of  the  works  of  Abel.  As 
everywhere,  so  here  also  evil  is  brought 
to  its  full  maturity  by  means  of  juxta- 
position with  the  light,  which  reveals 
its  character,  and  makes  it  truly  dark. 
The  wicked  man,  who  feels  himself 
miserable  at  heart,  grudges  the  good 
man  the  blessedness  he  has  in  his 
righteousness,  and  therefore  has  the 
disposition  to  rob  him  of  it  by  annihilat- 
ing the  good  himself.  As  it  is  in  the 
nature  of  the  devil,  so  it  is  in  the  nature 
of  the  child  of  the  devil ;  they  are  alike 
avOpoiiroKTovoi.  And  the  mention  here 
of  envy  as  the  cause  of  the  murder 
accords  with  the  record  of  Genesis  : 
Cain  was  urged  to  his  sinful  act  by 
knowing  that  his  offering  was  not 
acceptable  to  God,  while  his  brother's 
was  acceptable. — Eric  Haupt, 


299 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 

A  Sure  Sign  of  the  Regenerate  Life. — It  is  such  a  love  of  the  brethren  as  leads  us 
to  self-denial  and  service  for  the  sake  of  securing  their  highest  well-being.  That 
man  must  be  "  born  again,"  he  must  be  a  new  man,  other  than  the  unnatural 
being  which  sin  and  self  have  made  him,  who  really  cares  for  his  brother  in  such 
a  way  as  enables  him  to  give  up  his  own  things  for  his  sake.  The  principal 
word  in  this  paragraph  is  "hate,"  "hateth";  and  it  is  evidentally  intended 
to  stand  in  absolute  contrast  with  *'  love."  But  the  word  has  undergone  such 
change  in  meaning  since  it  was  used  by  the  Bible  translators,  and  even  in  their 
time  it  so  imperfectly  represented  the  Scriptural  term,  that  the  precise  meaning 
and  thought  of  St.  John  readily  escapes  the  reader  of  his  epistle.  "  Hate " 
is  often  the  equivalent  of  our  word  "despise,"  or  pass  aside,  show  yourself 
indifferent  to,  count  as  a  thing  of  little  value.  Sometimes  it  means  scarcely 
more  than,  "  put  down  into  quite  a  secondary  place  of  interest."  In  something 
of  this  sense  it  is  said  of  God,  that  He  "  loved  Jacob,  and  hated  Esau."  What 
we  have  in  modern  times  imported  into  the  word  is  bitter,  personal  feeling,  and 
that  complicates  our  treatment  of  such  expressions  as  are  found  in  this  para- 
graph. "To  hate"  is  not  always  to  be  understood  rigorously.  It  frequently 
signifies  no  more  than  a  lesser  degree  of  love  (Deut.  xxi.  15).  If  a  man  have 
two  wives,  one  beloved,  and  another  hated,  that  means  less  beloved.  So  our 
Saviour  says  that  he  who  would  follow  Him  must  hate  father  and  mother — that 
is,  he  should  love  them  less  than  Christ,  less  than  his  own  salvation.  Solomon 
says,  "  He  that  spareth  the  rod  hateth  his  son  "  (Prov.  xiii.  24).  Fathers  often 
spare  their  children  out  of  an  excessive  love  to  them ;  but  this  is  not  a 
proper  instance  of  affection,  to  forbear  correcting  them  ;  their  fond  affection  is 
as  pernicious  to  their  children  as  other  men's  hatred  could  be.  There  is  also 
a  malicious  hatred  of  men  referred  to  in  Scripture — as  in  Ahab,  who  hated  the 
Lord's  prophet,  Micaiah  (1  Kings  xxii.  8).  Wicked  men  do,  in  this  sense,  hate 
the  righteous  (Ps.  xxxiv.  21).  It  may  also  be  added,  that  there  is  a  hatred  of  the 
sins  of  men  (Jude  23),  and  of  our  own  sins  (Rom.  vii.  15).  Taking  the  milder 
connotation  of  the  term  "  hate,"  let  us  see  if  we  can  understand,  and  get  the 
precise  teaching  of,  this  paragraph. 

I.  The  sphere  of  hate  that  may  reasonably  be  expected. — Yer.  13  ;  "  Marvel 
not,  brethren,  if  the  world  hateth  you,"  is  indifferent  to  you,  takes  no  interest  in 
you,  and  even  scorns  you  as  enthusiasts.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  world  shows 
positive  enmity  to  God's  people,  and  is,  and  ever  has  been,  ready  on  occasions  to 
persecute  them  ;  but  we  miss  a  point  of  much  direct  application  to  us,  when  we 
dwell  too  much  on  the  active  persecution  to  which  Christ's  Church  has  at  times 
been  subjected.  The  indifference  of  the  world,  the  scorn  of  the  world,  is 
constantly  felt,  and  constantly  wearing  our  hearts.  Everywhere  earnest  piety 
is  spoken  against.  It  is  the  hate  of  the  world  in  that  sense — the  society 
indifference  which  we  are  told  should  be  expected,  and  should  occasion  no 
surprise.  Our  Lord  impressed  on  His  disciples  that  being,  like  Himself,  "  not  of 
the  world"  the  world  would  be  sure  to  hate  them.  Then  this  should  be  no 
occasion  of  anxiety  to  us.  In  entering  on  the  regenerate  hfe  we  should  take 
account  of  it,  and  then  it  will  not  come  on  us  as  a  surprise,  or  be  in  any  sense 
a  painful  and  trying  experience.  We  may  so  satisfy  ourselves  with  God's 
approval,  that  we  can  be  easily  indifferent  to  the  world's.  God's  world  is  kin 
with  us  ;  man's  world  never  can  be. 

II.  The  sphere  of  hate  that  is  wholly  unexpected,  and  cannot  be  approved. — 
Ver.  15  :  "  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer."  This  is  true  when 
applied  generally  to  the  brotherly  relations  of  man  with  man — true  in  the  same 

300  ,       ,     , 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IIL 


sense  as  the  saying  that  "  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  Push 
hatred  out  to  its  utmost,  and  it  appears  as  murder,  as  is  illustrated  in  the  case 
of  Cain.  But  St.  John  here  is  distinctly  addressing  those  who  have  the  new  Hfe 
in  Christ,  and  are  thus  set  in  new  and  gracious  relations  one  with  another. 
What  he  says  is  that  hate,  even  in  its  milder  form  as  indifference,  is  inconceiv- 
able among  the  members  of  the  Christian  brotherhood.  In  them  the  great 
human  law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  ought  to  be  ennobled 
into  this,  "  For  Christ's  sake  thou  shalt  love  thy  Christian  brother  better  than 
thyself,  and  be  always  going  out  beyond  thyself  in  loving  ministries  and 
service  to  him."  Then  St.  John's  point  may  be  sharply  presented  in  this 
contrast,  ''  Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you  ;  but  marvel  much, 
my  brethren,  if  you  are  found  hating  one  another,  even  if  it  be  only  in  the  mild 
sense  of  being  indifferent  to  one  another,  and  loving  yourselves  better  than  your 
brethren." 

III.  The  mastery  of  unloving  thoughts  concerning  our  brethren  is  gained 
through  the  service  of  love. — Vers.  16,  17  :  **  We  ought  to  lay  down  our  lives 
for  the  brethren.  But  whoso  hath  this  world's  goods,  and  beholdeth  his  brother 
in  need,  and  shutteth  up  his  compassion  from  him,  how  doth  the  love  of  God 
abide  in  him  ? "  The  point  is  this — Do  nothing  for  your  brother,  and  you 
will  find  you  very  readily  become  heedless  of  him,  indifferent  to  his  interests, 
you  may  even  come  to  dislike  and  hate  him;  but  do  something  for  him, 
tend  him,  spend  yourself  for  him,  give  up  something  of  your  own  to  secure 
his  well-being,  imperil  your  life  for  him,  and  you  will  be  surprised  how  love 
to  him  grows  in  your  heart,  how  easy  then  it  is  to  "  love  the  brethren.'^ 
Activity  of  ministry  keeps  up  the  love,  and  delivers  from  all  evil  feelings.  You 
never  can  hate  people  whom  you  are  actively  serving  for  Christ's  sake. 


The  love  of  the  brethren  is —  1 .  A  peculiar  and  most  appropriate  kind  of  love : 
(1)  there  is  a  general  love,  which  we  owe  to  every  man  ;  (2)  there  is  a  particular 
love,  which  Christians  owe  to  their  fellow-believers.  2.  Free  from  all  dissimu- 
lation. 3.  Fixed  and  fervent,  invariable  in  its  operations,  and  disinterested 
and  fearless  on  all  occasions.  This  sort  of  love  was  shown  by  John  towards 
Christ,  by  the  early  Galatian  converts  towards  Paul,  and  by  Onesiphorus  to 
the  same  apostle. — F.  Gilpin. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  10.  Love  seen  in  Self-sacrifice. — 
*'  And  we  ought  to  lay  down  our  Uves 
for  the  brethren."  Laying  down  life 
is  the  extreme  expression  of  self- 
sacrifice.  We  may  give  up  our  time, 
our  personal  interests,  our  possessions, 
our  health,  in  the  service  of  others, 
and  these  are  beautiful  and  persuasive 
expressions  of  the  Christly  love.  But 
that  love  does  not  reach  its  perfection, 
its  full  flowering,  until,  in  the  spirit  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  we  are  prepared  to 
imperil,  and  even  lay  down,  our  lives 
for  the  saving  of  others.  Love  in  self- 
sacrifice  is  seen  in  the  home  and  family 
life.     It  may  be  that  we  expect  it  in 


father  and  mother;  but  where  there 
is  a  fulness  of  family  love  we  find  it 
in  the  brothers  and  sisters.  They  will 
spend  themselves  for  each  other's  well- 
being.  They  will  imperil  life  for  each 
other's  sakes.  And  it  should  be  thus 
in  the  family  of  God,  among  the 
regenerate  sons,  who  have  become,  in 
the  very  highest  sense,  brothers.  It  is 
not  often  that  the  extreme  demand 
is  made.  But  seldom  now  does  the 
service  of  Christ  call  for  the  laying 
down  of  life.  Yet  the  persuasion  of 
St.  John  will  come  home  to  us  if  we 
see  that  laying  down  life  is  the  extreme 
limit,  and  tlat  love  can  be  shown  in 

301 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   L  JOHN. 


everything  that  has  the  spmt  of  sacri- 
fice and  service,  which  comes  short  of 
the  limit.  Therefore  Christ  set  before 
us  the  extreme  opposite  hmit,  telHng 
us  that  love  could  go  into  the  little  act 
of  sacrifice,  the  little  trouble  and  in- 
convenience in  giving  a  cup  of  water 
to  a  disciple.  The  essence  of  a  love- 
gift  is  the  self-denial  that  is  in  it. 
And  there  is  nothing  so  sweetens, 
so  beautifies,  so  dignifies  our  various 
human  associations  as  the  love  which 
can  deny  self,  in  order  to  serve  others. 


That  is  artistically,  ideally,  presented 
to  us  in  Mary's  bringing  the  alabaster 
box  of  precious  ointment  to  pour  upon 
the  Saviour's  feet.  It  was  a  love-gift 
with  a  woman's  uttermost  self-sacrifice 
at  the  heart  of  it.  That  is  sublimely, 
divinely,  presented  to  us,  in  the  utter- 
most self-sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as 
the  persuasion  of  the  "so  great  love" 
He  had  for  us. 

*'  For  love  of  us  He  bled ;  for  love  of  us  He 
died." 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  TEE  PARAGEAPH.—Verses   18—24. 

Assuring  our  Hearts. — Christian  assurance,  the  confidence  that  we  have 
passed  from  death  unto  life,  the  restfulness  of  knowing  that  we  are  reconciled 
to  God,  and  are  in  a  gracious  standing  with  Him,  is  not  only  desirable,  it  is 
even  necessary,  if  we  are  to  live  earnest  Christian  Hves,  free  from  the  fret  and 
worry  of  a  continual  uncertainty.  It  is  not  "  a  point  we  should  long  to  know  " ; 
it  ought  not  to  "  cost  us  anxious  thought."  It  should  be  a  settled  thing ;  the 
evidences  should  be  clear  and  sufficient.  It  should  keep  a  settled  thing,  for  the 
evidences  should  be  maintained,  and  should  be  effectively  persuasive  upon  us 
day  by  day.  And  it  must  be  fully  understood  that  assurance  is  attainable.  It 
is  often  sought  in  wrong  ways,  through  some  particular  setting  of  belief,  on 
some  minor  point  of  Christian  truth,  or  through  some  definite  phase  of  religious 
feeling.  St.  John  delivers  us  from  these  mistaken  ideas  when  he  sets  before 
us  the  true  grounds  on  which  our  hearts  may  be  assured  before  God. 

I.  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  if  we  are  living  a 
life  of  active  charity  and  service  to  others.  Then  there  must  have  come  a 
change  over  us ;  we  must  be  other  than  our  old  selves.  Everybody  looks  after 
his  own  interests  first.  Everybody  except  the  man  with  the  new  life  in  Christ ; 
and  he  looks  after  Christ's  interests  first,  other  people's  interests  next,  and  his 
own  interests  last.  '*  He  is  not  his  own."  "  To  Him  to  live  is  Christ."  Or 
to  put  it  in  another  form,  the  service  of  brotherhood  is  the  satisfying  proof  of 
the  sonship. 

II.  We  know,  by  our  inner  life  of  soul-culture.  "  If  our  heart  condemn  us 
not,  we  have  boldness  towards  God."  It  is  true  that  the  witness  of  our  heart 
is  not  always  reliable,  and  we  sometimes  have  to  appeal  to  God  against  our 
own  hearts.  We  often  have  to  when  by  our  hearts  we  mean  only  our  feelings. 
But  understand  that  our  soul-culture  is  meant,  the  growth,  under  all  holy 
influences,  of  the  spiritual  life  that  has  been  quickened,  and  then  we  may  see 
that  our  hearts  can  bring  us  assurance.  Their  growth  in  trust,  joy,  love,  hope, 
says  continually  that  we  must  be  standing  in  the  full  saving  relations. 

III.  We  know,  through  our  experiences  of  answer  to  prayer.  The  psalmist 
persuaded  himself  that  he  must  be  standing  in  the  love  of  God,  for  he  says, 
"  This  poor  man  cried,  and  the  Lord  heard  him,  and  saved  him  out  of  all  his 
troubles."  This  is  a  way  of  regarding  our  answers  to  prayer,  of  which  sufficient 
is  not  made.  We  think  too  much  of  what  we  get  in  such  answers.  We  think 
too  little  of  what  is  involved  in  our  being  answered  at  all.  Our  Lord  Jesus 
said  to  His  Father,  "  I  know  that  Thou  hearest  Me  always."  His  assurance 
rested  on  His  being  in  such  full  acceptance  with  the  Father.  And  if  God  hears 
us  always,  we  also  may  be  quite  sure  that  we  stand  in  full  acceptance  with  Him. 

302 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  hi. 


IV.  We  know,  by  the  sense  we  have  of  God's  relationship  to  us.  He  hath 
**  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  our  hearts,"  and  we  feel  His  Fatherhood. 
We  "  abide  in  Him,"  as  sons  do  in  the  father.  He  *'  abides  in  us,"  as  fathers 
do  in  their  sons.  The  supreme  fact  concerning  us  is,  that  we  are  "  sons  of  God." 
And  the  assurance  that  we  are  is  found  in  our  pecuhar  and  characteristic 
apprehension  of  God. 

Y.  We  know,  by  the  inward  impulse  of  the  Spirit.  "Hereby  we  know 
that  He  abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He  gave  us."  God  is  never  anywhere 
as  an  inactive  Being.  The  quiescent  Brahm  is  man's  conception,  not  God's 
revelation,  of  Himself.  Wherever  He  is,  He  is  active.  If  He  is  in  the  soul 
of  man,  if  He  is  in  our  soul,  then  He  is  active ;  and  the  movings  and  the 
impulses  of  the  Spirit  are  His  activity;  and  through  those  impulses  we  are 
assured  that  He  is  abiding  in  us.  Assurances  based  on  such  grounds  as  these 
are  altogether  healthy,  ennobling,  and  inspiring  ;  and  thus  we  may  all  "  assure 
our  hearts." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  18.  Profession  amd  Practice. —  the  "  ten  talents,"  the  Master  is  repre- 
"  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  sented  as  expecting,  and  properly  ex- 
word,  neither  with  the  tongue ;  but  in  pecting,  that  the  servants  who  know 
deed  and  truth."  St.  John  is  so  full  of  His  will  shall  be  doing ^  and  multiply 
the  family  feeling,  and  uses  so  con-  their  talent-trusts  by  wise  trading.  In 
stantly  the  family  figures,  that  we  are  that  of  the  "  husbandman,"  we  find  the 
tempted  to  think  he  must  have  been  Lord  of  the  vineyard  sending  yearly  for 
a  family  man,  centre  of  a  happy  family  his  proportion  of  the  fruits  of  the  hus- 
circle.  It  may,  however,  only  be  that  bandman's  toils.  In  that  of  the  "sower 
he  was  saturated  with  the  idea  of  and  the  seed,"  the  farmer  looks  for  a 
Christ's  Sonship^  and  that  gave  tone  and  return  of  his  labour  and  expenditure, 
colour  to  every  setting  of  truth  and  hoping  to  reap  thirty,  sixty,  or  a  hun- 
persuasion  of  duty.  The  term  "  little  dred-fold  of  what  the  soil  has  done. 
children "  here  is  used  in  a  general  The  "  barren  fig  tree "  is  represented 
sense  of  the  believers,  but  it  suggests  as  reasonably  cut  down,  because  it  did 
the  simplicity,  humility,  and  recep-  nothing  in  response  to  all  the  efforts 
tiveness  which  ought  to  be  their  charac-  made  to  urge  it  to  well-doing.  In  the 
teristics.  In  the  teaching  of  this  text,  parable  of  the  "  judgment,"  the  Divine 
as  in  so  many  other  cases,  St.  John  approval  is  given  to  those  who  did 
shows  how  he  had  been  influenced  by  something,  who  did  "  visit  the  father- 
the  teachings  of  his  Divine  Master,  less  and  widows  in  their  affliction " ; 
and  did  but  reproduce  them,  bearing  a  and  the  Divine  indignation  rests  on 
certain  impress  from  his  own  thought  those  who  knew,  who  could,  yet  who 
and  experience.  The  best  illustrations  did  nothing  that  was  merciful  and 
of  our  text,  and  of  the  duty  enjoined  unselfish.  Our  Lord  even  exhibits  this 
in  it,  may  be  gained  by  showing  how  necessity  for  doing  in  His  own  life  and 
much  our  Lord  made  of  doing  His  will  conduct.  Anticipating  the  life,  as  a 
— not  knowing  it  merely,  not  talking  twelve-year-old  boy,  He  said,  "  Wist 
about  it  only,  but  really  doing  it  in  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My 
the  energetic  endeavour  of  a  life  of  Father's  business  ? "  Of  Him  it  could 
service  and  charity.  be  said,  "  He  went  about  doing  good." 
I.  The  connection  of  "  doing "  with  At  Jacob's  well,  though  weary  with 
"  knowing  "  is  characteristic  of  Christ's  His  journey,  He  roused  Himself  to  talk 
teachings. — We  find  it  constantly  made  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  when  the 
the  topic  of  His  parables.     In  that  of  opportunity  for  doing  His  Father's  will 

303 


CHAP.   III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


was  presented  to  Him.  He  could  not 
be  satisfied  with  only  talking  about  the 
Father,  though  that  was  so  often  the 
duty  of  the  hour.  He  could  say,  "  My 
meat  and  My  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of 
My  Father."  And  at  the  close  of  His 
life,  He  could  cherish  no  nobler  thought 
of  the  life  He  had  lived  than  this,  "  I 
have  finished  the  work  which  Thou 
gavest  Me  to  do."  His  direct  teachings 
bore  on  the  same  subject — the  supreme 
importance  of  doing  as  well  as  knowing, 
doing  as  well  as  feeling.  "  He  that 
heareth  these  sayings  of  Mine,  and 
doeth  them."  "  If  any  man  will  do 
His  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doc- 
trine." "  He  that  doeth  the  will  of 
God  .  .  .  the  same  is  My  brother,  and 
and  sister,  and  mother."  "  Yea,  blessed 
are  they  that  hear  the  word,  and  do 
it."  "  Why  call  ye  Me  Lord,  Lord, 
and  do  not  the  thfings  which  I  say  ? " 
He  told  us  that  we  can  always  judge 
things  and  persons  by  their  *'  fruits" — 
that  is,  by  what  they  do.  He  likened 
His  disciples  to  "  salt,"  v/hich  does 
something,  savours  and  seasons ;  to  a 
*'  light,"  which  does  something,  shines 
in  the  room,  and  enables  those  present 
to  see  their  work  ;  to  a  "  city  set  on  a 
hill,"  which  does  something,  acts  as 
a  beacon  to  guide  pilgrims  on  their 
journey  across  the  broad  plain.  As  if 
to  leave  a  last  impression  on  those  dis- 
ciples, our  Lord  rose  from  His  place  at 
the  last  meal  with  them,  took  a  towel, 
girded  Himself,  and  reaching  the  ewer 
and  basin,  did  the  servant's  work,  pour- 
ing water  over  the  feet  of  those  dis- 
ciples, and  wiping  them  with  the  towel 
wherewith  He  was  girded.  And  then, 
returning  to  His  seat,  He  solemnly 
said,  "  Know  ye  what  I  have  done  unto 
you  ?  Ye  call  Me  Master  and  Lord  ; 
and  ye  say  well,  for  so  I  am.  If  I 
then,  your  Lord  and  Master,  have 
washed  your  feet,  ye  ought  also  to  wash 
one  another's  feet.  For  I  have  given 
you  an  example,  that  ye  also  should  do 
as  I  have  done  to  you.  If  ye  know 
these  things,  blessed  are  ye  if  ye  do 
them."  Our  Lord  showed  no  sort  of 
fear  that  doing  would  nourish  a  legal 
spirit,  or  tempt  men  to  make  their  good 

304 


works  a  ground  of  acceptance  with 
God.  His  earnestness  shows  His  sense 
of  our  graver  danger.  We  are  all  much 
more  likely  to  satisfy  ourselves  with 
professions,  and  to  become  only  good- 
looking,  leafy  fig  trees,  on  which,  when 
He  draweth  nigh  in  His  hunger.  He 
can  find  no  figs.  Our  peril  is,  that  we 
may  be  induced  to  sever  asunder  what 
God  has  joined  together,  "  knowing  " 
and  "  doing,"  and  so  be  like  the  foolish 
man  who  built  his  house  upon  the  sand. 
Doing  put  in  place  of  Christ  is  always 
wrong.  Doing  foi'  Christ^s  sake  is 
always  right. 

II.  The  connection  of  *«  doing  "  with 
"knowing,"  whicli  both  Christ  and 
His  apostles  taught,  is  still  absolutely 
necessary. — 1.  It  is  needed  to  satisfy 
us,  and  others,  of  the  reality  of  our 
piety.  For  that  piety  is  like  a  seed  ; 
and  if  it  be  not  a  worthless  seed,  if 
there  be  any  real  germ  of  life  in  that 
seed,  it  will  do  something ;  it  will 
crack  the  soil;  it  will  send  a  gi^een 
blade  forth  ;  it  will  show  itself  to  the 
light.  A  seed  that  does  nothing  is 
worth  nothing.  A  Christian  who  does 
nothing  is  worth  nothing  before  God 
or  men.  Indeed,  nobody  can  see  any- 
thing that  is  gained  by  his  calling 
himself  a  Christian.  Let  us  be  quite 
sure  of  this,  and  let  us  keep  the 
thought  ever  present  before  us — men 
expect  to  see  our  religion  influencing 
our  conduct.  We  expect  this  in  others, 
and  are  hard  upon  them  if  we  cannot 
find  their  piety  in  their  every-day 
relations.  We  may  well  be  reminded, 
that  the  people  about  us  are  looking 
at  our  doings,  and  will  speak  dishonour- 
ing things  of  our  Lord  Christ,  if  they 
cannot  see  His  spirit  in  all  our  rela- 
tionships. Solemnly  let  us  say  to  one 
another — No  creed,  however  correct  it 
may  be,  will  ever  make  up,  before  God, 
or  before  men,  for  unsubdued  tempers, 
unrestrained  habits,  tyranny  at  home, 
offences  given  abroad,  self-indulgences, 
or  neglect  of  the  sick  whom  we  might 
visit,  the  poor  whom  we  might  feed, 
or  the  naked  whom  we  might  clothe. 
Search  and  see  what  personal  satis- 
factions you  can  gain  as  you  compare 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    III. 


your  "  knowing  "  with  your  "  doing," 
your  "  profession  "  with  your  *'  prac- 
tice." Inquire  and  see  whether  there 
is  abroad,  among  those  whom  you  have 
to  do  with  day  by  day,  an  impression 
which  leads  them  to  say  concerning 
you,  *'  Well  reported  of  for  good 
works."  Would  the  widows  and  the 
poor  folk  come  about  your  house,  if 
you  lay  dead,  showing  the  coats  and 
garments  which  you  made,  as  they 
came  crowding  round  the  house  of 
Dorcas,  that  early  Christian  woman, 
who  was  full  of  good  works  and 
alms-deeds  that  she  did?  2.  It  is 
necessary  in  order  to  prove  the  truth 
of  Christianity  itself.  This  system  of 
religion  makes  marvellous  pretensions. 
It  is  the  last  and  highest  revelation 
of  God  to  men  :  it  is  the  supreme 
remedy  for  the  deepest  human  sorrows. 
It  is  God's  own  sunshine  to  bring 
spring-time  life  to  an  earth  lying  cold 
and  dead  in  the  long  winter  of  sin. 
But  how  shall  it  support  the  preten- 
sions ?  Only  by  living  examples  of  its 
power — only  as  the  men  and  women 
who  profess  to  have  received  the  life 
in  Christ  do  something.  Experiment 
tests  everything.  Constantly  fresh 
experiments  are  needed.  Select  a  few 
professing  Christians.  See  what  they 
are  doing.  Do  not  fear  to  apply  the 
test — judge  Christianity  by  its  fiuits. 
In  every  age  it  has  stood  this  test. 
When  all  the  great  arguments  and 
evidences  have  wearied  us,  we  may 
say — See  what  Christianity  has  done. 
The  spirit- possessed,  the  blind,  the 
lame,  the  drunkard,  the  strong-tem- 
pered, the  selfish,  all  have  been 
changed  ;  and  the  charity  of  the  world 
is  to-day  in  the  hands  of  those  who  are 
constrained  by  the  love  of  Christ.  If 
you  would  prove  to  all  around  you  the 
truth  of  Christianity,  use  argument 
and  evidence  with  all  wisdom,  as  far 
as  ever  you  can ;  but  this,  above 
everything  else,  we  would  say  to  you — 
Show  men  what  it  can  do.  Men  may 
resist  eloquence  ;  they  may  even  refute 
reasoning  ;  they  may  deny  your  evi- 
dences ;  but  they  cannot  resist  the 
power  of  goodness.     It  is  like  leaven. 


and,  unbeknown,  it  leavens.  It  is  like 
the  morning  light.  It  peeps  above 
the  eastern  ridge,  flinging  great  lines 
of  glory  up  the  sky.  The  night  dark- 
ness does  not  like  it,  but  it  must  feel 
it.  That  darkness  will  have  to  fly; 
for  the  morning  light  will  grow  in 
power  until  it  makes  the  shadowless 
noonday. 

Vers.  22,  23.  Keeping  God's  Com- 
mandments.— This  position  taken  by 
St.  John  is  but  putting  in  Christian 
form  the  universal  condition  on  which 
Divine  favour  must  rest.  It  is  de- 
clared in  the  most  general  way  that 
"  the  Lord  is  far  from  the  wicked,  but 
He  heareth  the  prayer  of  the  righteous  " 
(Prov.  XV.  29).  And  in  his  gospel 
St.  John  represents  the  people  as 
arguing  about  Christ  on  the  basis 
of  commonly  received  principles  and 
opinions  :  "'  We  know  that  God  heareth 
not  sinners :  but  if  a  man  be  a  wor- 
shipper of  God,  and  do  His  will  [keep 
His  commandments],  him  He  heareth  " 
(John  ix.  31). 

I.  Keeping  commandments  may  be 
regarded  as  acts  of  obedience.  It  is 
seldom  seen  with  sufficient  clearness 
that  moral  training,  for  the  child  or 
the  child-nation,  must  necessarily  begin 
with  formal  acts  of  obedience.  The 
child  must  do  what  it  is  told  to  do. 
Israel  must  obey  the  elaborate  ten 
laws  of  Sinai  in  the  actual  details  of 
every-day  life  and  relationship.  And 
even  Christian  life  properly  begins  in 
formal  acts  of  obedience. 

II.  Keeping  commandments  may  be 
regarded  as  the  expression  of  son  ship. 
— The  true  child  in  a  home  never  tries 
to  obey  ;  he  obeys  without  trying, 
because  obedience  is  the  natural  and 
proper  spirit  of  sonship.  Some  alien 
force  must  be  influencing  a  child  if  he 
does  not  obey.  Let  a  man  be  born 
of  God,  his  new  life  will  certainly 
express  itself  in  keeping  God's  com- 
mandments. 

III.  Keeping  commandments  may 
be  tested  by  the  obedience  of  two 
commandments  (ver.  23). — 1.  Our  be- 
lief in  the  /S'o?i- name  of  Jesus,     There 


X 


305 


OHAP.  III. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


is  no  point  of  persuasion  if  St.  John  is 
assumed  to  be  referring  to  saving  faith 
in  Christ,  or  to  faith  in  Him  as 
Messiah.  It  must  never  be  lost  from 
view  that  he  is  writing  to  professing 
Christians,  to  those  who  have  the  life 
in  Christ.  He  is  writing  to  them 
about  the  higher  life.  What  Christians 
are  called  by  God  to  do  is  to  beHeve 
in  the  So7iship  of  Christ,  in  Him  as 
the  Son  of  God,  and  in  all  that  such 
belief  involves  concerning  the  actual 
Fatherly  relations  of  God.  If  this  be 
the  test  commandment,  how  sinful  is 
the  hesitation  of  Christians  to  receive 
the  full  revelation  of  the  Sonship ! 
2.  Oar  love  for  those  who  are  our 
brothers  because  they  are  with  us  sons, 
through  the  Son -name  of  Jesus. 

Yer,  24.  The  Spirit's  Inward  Wit- 
ness.— "  And  hereby  we  know  that  He 
abideth  in  us,  by  the  Spirit  which  He 
gave  us."  There  are  two  witnesses  to, 
our  standing  before  God,  to  our  son-' 
ship  in  Christ  with  the  eternal  Father. 
There  is  the  witness  of  our  own  spirit, 
and  there  is  the  witness  of  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  but  the  testimony  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  an  inward  witness,  given 
through  the  spirit  of  the  man. 

I.  The  witness  of  our  own  spirit 
to  our  having  the  Father,  and  being 
sons. — It  may  be  asked.  Whence  comes 
the  assurance  of  our  sonship  to  our 
human  parents^  Whence  that  spirit 
of  restfulness  and  satisfaction  in  our 
relationship  which  we  felt  so  strongly 
when  we  dwelt  at  home,  and  which  we 
have  even  now,  though  far  away  from 
home,  or  though  even  the  old  home 
has  been  broken  up,  and  those  who 
made  it  so  dear  have  passed  away  ? 
There  is  a  witness*  of  our  own  spirit. 
That  spirit  tells  us  it  holds  cherished 
memories  of  home  life  and  joys.  Our 
spirit  reminds  us  that,  when  utterly 
helpless,  a  mother's  bosom  was  our 
resting-place  ;  broken  rest  was  thought 
but,  little  of  by  her ;  daily  trouble 
seemed  no  weight  to  her,  for  the  great- 
ness of  the  ,  mother- love  she  bore  us. 
Oar  spirit  tells  us  that  the  love  which 
testified  itself  in  such  ways  then  has 

306 


been  a  growing  love,  ever  finding  new, 
tender,  and  wonderful  ways  of  expres- 
sion.    The  testimony  of  our  own  spirit 
about  the  past  is  one  great  assurance 
of  our  sonship.     But  the  inward  wit- 
ness tells  of  more  than  this ;  it  speaks 
of    our    own    views,    ideas,    affections, 
and  emotions.     Our  spirit  bids  us  see, 
that  towards  our  father  we  feel  a  kind 
of  respect  and  reverence,  and  towards 
our   mother   we    have   affections  and 
emotions,  which  we   need   some  new, 
and  almost  heaven-born,  word  to  ex- 
press.    Our  spirit  testifies  to  a  defer- 
ence to  their  opinion,  a  desire  to  please 
them,    a    willingness    to    obey   them, 
and  a  confidence  in  them,  which  is  the 
most    certain   inward   witness   of   our 
sonship.     We  are   quite  satisfied  and 
happy ;  it  is  the  testimony  of  our  own 
spirit  that  we  are  the  children  of  these 
parents,  and  that  we  are  preserving 
our  relationship.     So   we   might   ask. 
What  is  our  assurance   that   we  are 
children  of  this  beloved  England  ?     Do 
we  need  to  appeal  to  Magna  Charta  ? 
or    must    we    anxiously    collect    and 
examine  the  birth,  marriage,  and  death 
certificates  of  our  ancestry  ?      Surely 
not.    We  are  abundantly  satisfied  with 
the  testimony  of  our  own  spirit  that 
we  have  the  English  thought,  and  the 
English  ways   and   habits;  and   that, 
in   the   temper   of   the   child,  we  are 
obeying  England's  laws,  and  glorying 
in  her  dignities  and  privileges.     This 
seems  to  be  very  plain.     And  in  this 
way  there  is  a  testimony  of  our  own 
spirit   to   the   reality  of   sonship  with 
God.     Inquire  of  your  own  spirit.     Is 
there  not  cherished  in  it  a  memory,  a 
thought — cherished  in  its  very  holiest 
place — of  the  wonderful  love  of  God  in 
Christ  to  you  :  a  memory  of  a  great 
gift,  the  offering  of   saving   love  and 
pity,   once  made  for  you  ?     Does   not 
your   spirit   tell   you   it   has   a    most 
hallowed,    inner    shrine,   and    in    that 
shrine  you  keep  the  memory  of  that 
ever-blessed  One,  whose  beautiful  life 
of  heavenly,  divine  charities  closed  so 
sadly,  so  shamefully,  in  a  death  that 
won  life  and  heaven  for  you  ?     Does 
not  your  spirit   tell  how  that  shrine 


HOMdLETIC  COMMENTARY :    /.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   III. 


has  been  opened  in  the  hours  of  silent 
meditation,    and    sweetest    odours    of 
infinite  love  have  streamed  forth,  mak- 
ing fragrant  all  the   temple  of   your 
soul  ?     Does  not  your  spirit  tell  that 
the  memory  and  the  thought  of  Christ 
exercise   continual    power    upon    you, 
swaying  your  nature  as  with  the  might 
of  some  great  principle  ?     If  then  your 
spirit  has  such  things  as  these  to  tell 
you,  may  you  not  be  sure  that  this  is 
like   the   child's   memory  of   parental 
love  ? — it  is  the  pledge  of  your  sonship ;, 
it  is  the  witness  of   your  own  spirit 
that  you  are  the  child  of  God.     But 
beyond   this    witness   of    a   cherished 
memory,  our  spirit  gives  testimony  to 
our   sonship   with   God   in  our  views, 
feelings,  dispositions,  and  in  the  spirit 
and   conduct  •of   our  life.     Our   spirit 
renders  witness  to  us  of  the  reahty  of 
the   great   spiritual   change  that   has 
been  wrought  in  us.     Our  hearts  will 
tell  us  whether  we  are  the  same  now 
that  we  were  some  ten  or  twenty  years 
ago,  or  it  may  be  even  a  few  months 
since.     As  we  set  our  old  life,  in  its 
principle  and  in  its  spirit,  over  against 
our  present  life,  in  its  principle  and  in 
its  spirit,  we  are  sensible  of  a  most 
decided  contrast,  which  cannot  possibly 
be  explained  by  the  mere  fact  of  our 
having  grown  older.     As  we  compare 
the  things  which  we  loved  and  sought 
in  those  old  days  with  the  things  we 
are  loving  and  seeking  now,  we  say — 
Our  present  life  is  not  indeed  what  we 
would  have  it  to  be  ;  still  it  is  different, 
most  manifestly  different.     "  We  were 
sometime  darkness,  now  are  we  light 
in  the  Lord."     Our  own  spirit  testifies 
within   us  to  the  change.      Our  own 
spirit  witnesses  also  to  a  new  view  of 
God,  and  of  the  relation  in  which  we 
stand  to  Him.     Our  own  spirit  wit- 
nesses to  our  thinking  differently  now 
of  goodness  and  of  holiness.     Goodness 
was   the   highest   conception  we  once 
could  reach,  and  we  meant  by  it,  order- 


ing our  life  within  certain  prescribed 
limits.  That  has  given  place  to  a  con- 
ception of  the  claims  of  holiness ;  by 
which  we  mean  a  life  in  conformity 
with  the  will  of  God — a  life  informed 
and  possessed  with  the  spirit  of  allegi- 
ance, devotion,  and  love  to  Him. 

II.  The  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  our  sonship  with  God. — That  Spirit 
works  through  the  testimony  that  is 
given  by  our  spirit.  The  Holy  Ghost 
does  not  give  oral  testimony ;  He  does 
not  speak  even  by  "  a  still  small  voice," 
caught  only  by  the  attentive  ear.  He 
does  not  come  with  observation,  in 
extraordinary  and  overwhelming  mani- 
festation. He  comes  as  a  silent,  secret, 
inward,  Divine  force  of  life,  strengthen- 
ing and  renewing  those  who  are  good 
and  pure  in  heart  and  purpose  ;  He 
comes  purifying,  perfecting,  guiding 
the  witness  of  our  own  spirit.  In  two 
ways  we  may  recognise  the  concurring 
witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  our 
spirit.  We,  with  our  whole  powers  of 
spirit,  seek  to  know  the  mind  and  will 
of  God,  as  they  have  been  revealed  to 
us  in  His  word.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit 
who  enables  us  to  gain  true  apprehen- 
sions, and  to  lay  personal  hold  of  the 
truths  and  promises  it  contains.  He 
leads  into  all  truth.  And  we,  with 
our  whole  power  of  spirit,  seek  to 
cherish  all  godly  emotions,  and,  in 
bringing  forth  good  fruit,  to  live  the 
godly  life.  It  is  the  Holy  Spirit  who 
quickens  those  emotions,  and  all  the 
fruits  we  can  produce  are  but  varieties 
of  the  "love,  joy,  peace,  long-suffering, 
gentleness,  meekness,  and  patience," 
which  we  know  are  the  immediate 
fruits  of  the  Spiiit.  We  might  with 
truth  say,  *'  I  live,  yet  not  I,  the  Holy 
Ghost  liveth  in  me."  It  is  the  recog- 
nition of  this  inner  life,  the  conscious- 
ness of  this  Divine  indwelling,  which 
brings  rest  and  peace,  and  the  impulse 
to  nobler  things,  to  the  Christian. 


307 


CHAP.  Ill 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    J.  JOHN. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    III. 


Ver.  1.  The  Privilege  of  Sonship. — When 
the  Danish  missionaries  in  India  appointed 
some  of  their  Indian  converts  to  translate  a 
catechism,  in  which  it  was  mentioned  as 
the  privilege  of  Christians  to  become  the 
sons  of  God,  one  of  the  translators,  startled 
at  so  bold  a  saying,  as  he  thouglit  it,  said, 
"  It  is  too  much ;  let  me  rather  render  it, 
*  They  shall  be  permitted  to  kiss  His  feet. ' " 

Ver.  2.  Spiritual  Development  imperfeet 
7wrv. — If  you  take  a  seed  that  has  ripened 
in  Nova  Zembla,  and  bring  it  into  the 
tropics  and  plant  it,  it  will  not  be  what  it 
would  have  been  in  Nova  Zembla,  with  a 
short  growing  season  and  a  scanty  supply 
of  food.  It  will  have,  with  a  long  summer 
and  an  abundant  supply,  a  growth  to  which 
no  one  would  suspect  it  could  attain  who 
had  only  seen  it  grow  in  the  frigid  zones. 
Many  things  that  are  shrubs  in  the  frigid 
zones,,  are  high,  waving,  century  trees  in  the 
tropics.  And  so  men  in  this  life  are  in 
conditions  which,  though  fitted  to  develop 
the  earlier  stages  of  human  growth,  are  not 
fitted  to  develop  the  full  estate  of  that  idea 
which  God  has  expressed  in  the  creation  of 
man. — H.  W.  Beecher, 

Ver.  7.  Christian  Righteousness. — Do  not 
fancy  that  Christian  righteousness  is  dif- 
ferent from  ordinary  "  goodness,"  except  as 
being  broader  and  deeper,  more  thorough- 
going, more  imperative.  The  precepts  of 
the  one,  like  some  rock-hewn  inscriptions  by 
forgotten  kings,  are  weathered  and  indis- 
tinct, often  illegible,  often  misread,  often 
neglected.  The  other  is  written  in  living  char- 
acters in  a  perfect  life. — A.  Maclaren,  D.B. 

Ver.  16.  Laying  down  Life  for  the  sake  of 
Another. — Two  men  were  working  together 
in  a  mine,  and  having  prepared  to  blast  the 
rock,  and  laid  the  train,  the  latter  became 
by  accident  ignited.  In  a  few  moments  a 
tremendous  explosion  they  knew  was  inevit- 
able, and  the  rock  must  be  rent  in  a 
thousand  pieces.  On  perceiving  their  danger, 
they  both  leaped  into  the  bucket,  and  called 
to  the  man  on  the  surface  to  draw  them  up. 
He  endeavoured  to  do  so,  but  his  arm  was 
found  too  feeble  to  raise  the  bucket  while 
both  the  men  were  in  it.  What  was  to  be 
done?  The  burning  fuse,  which  could  not 
be  extinguished,  was  now  within  a  few  feet 
of  the  powder ;  a  moment  or  two,  and  the 
explosion  must  take  place.  At  this  awful 
crisis,  one  of  the  men,  addressing  the  other, 
said,  "  You  shall  live,  and  I  will  die ;  for 
you  are  an  impenitent  sinner,  and  if  you  now 
die  your  soul  will  be  lost ;  but  if  I  die,  I 
know  that,  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  I  shall  be  taken  to  Himself."    And 

308 


so  saying,  without  waiting  for  a  reply,  he 
leaped  out  of  the  bucket,  and  prayerfully 
awaited  the  result.  On  the  other  reaching 
the  surface,  he  bent  over  the  shaft  to  ascer- 
tain the  fate  of  his  companion.  At  this 
moment  a  terrific  explosion  was  heard ;  a 
portion  of  the  rock  was  thrown  up,  and 
smote  him  on  the  forehead,  leaving  an 
indelible  mark  to  remind  him  of  his  danger 
and  deliverance.  But  the  man  of  God,  when 
they  came  to  search  for  him,  was  found 
arched  over  by  the  fragments  of  broken 
rock  in  the  mine,  uninjured  and  rejoicing  in 
the  Lord.  This  magnanimous  miner  ex- 
hibited in  this  act  an  amount  of  disinterested 
love  and  charity  which  has  seldom  been 
equalled,  and  which  is  never  found  but 
in  connection  with  the  love  of  Christ. — 
R.   Young. 

Self-sacrifice  :  the  Pilot  of  the  "•Rothesay.'''' 
— This  vessel  was  wrecked  in  a  cyclone  in 
the  Indian  Ocean.  The  pilot,  Paul  Elson, 
collected  a  few  volunteers,  and  rigged  a 
raft.  Thirteen  only  of  the  crew  got  on  her  ; 
the  rest  were  frantic  with  terror — some 
praying,  others  drunk,  others  raving,  others 
lashed  inextricably  to  the  sinking  vessel, 
Elson  was  the  last  to  leave  the  ship ;  leaping 
overboard,  he  swam  to  the  raft,  cut  the 
hawser  that  held  her,  and  constituted  him- 
self by  inherent  right  her  sole  officer. 
Within  an  hour  the  doomed  vessel  heeled, 
lurched  heavily,  and  went  down  head  first. 
All  that  day  and  all  that  night  the  raft 
drifted,  heavy  seas  breaking  over  her.  "  We 
were  up  to  our  necks  in  water,"  says  the 
man  who  tells  the  tale,  "  for  she  floated 
low."  All  that  night,  nevertheless,  Elson, 
who  was  a  powerful  swimmer,  swam  round 
and  round  the  raft,  lashing  her  together  and 
strengthening  her  as  best  he  could.  Ever 
and  anon  the  furious  breakers  washed  a  man 
off.  And  then  would  the  brave  pilot  who 
had  not  only  the  heart  but  the  strength  of  a 
gaint,  strike  out  towards  him  and  carry  the 
drowning  wretch  back.  But  at  last  it 
became  apparent  that  the  raft  must  be 
broken  up,  and  that  a  second  and  smaller 
raft  must  be  constructed  to  relieve  the 
other.  This,  too,  the  pilot  effected  almost 
single-handed.  The  large  raft  floated  away 
into  the  night ;  Elson  and  three  other  men 
took  to  the  smaller ;  while  on  the  other 
drifted  away  a  native  boy,  Paul  Elson's 
servant,  of  whom  hitherto,  in  the  midst  of 
all  his  terrible  toil,  the  brave  pilot  had  never 
once  lost  sight.  "  He  kept  near  him ;  he 
tended  him  as  a  mother  would  tend  her 
child  ;  he  gave  him  our  last  supply  of  drink- 
able water."  The  vessel  had  sunk  on  the 
29th  of  July  ;  it  was  now  the  2nd  of  August. 
The  raft  was  drifting  under  a  raging  tropical 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   L  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IV. 


sun ;  for  three  days  there  had  been  no  food 
or  water ;  worse  than  this,  the  frail  support 
itself  began  to  break  up,  and  swimming 
about  in  a  heavy  surf,  I'aul  Elson  became 
much  exhausted.  The  end  of  course  could 
not  now  be  far  off.  First  one  of  the  men 
was  washed  away,  and  then  another,  until 
Elson  himself  and  the  Scotchman  who  tells 
the  story  were  the  sole  survivors.  " '  Pilot,' 
said  I" — so  the  narrative  runs — 'iwe   must 


fight  it  through  1 '  '  Oh,  Fraser  1 '  answered 
he,  '  I  can't  hold  out  any  longer.'  .  .  .  Then 
a  heavy  sea  broke  upon  us,  and  knocked  him 
off.  I  found  it  impossible  to  hang  on,  and 
was  forced  to  let  him  go."  And  so  the 
story  ends.  The  body  of  Pilot  Elson,  wi  rn 
out  by  his  incessant  labours,  floats  away 
into  the  great  deep,  there  to  lie  till  the  sea 
shall  give  up  its  dead. — Daily  Telegraph. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
LOVE  FINDS  THE  TRUTH;  FEAR  TAKES   UP  WITH  ERROR. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

In  the   first  'three   verses  the  apostle   guards  his  readers  against  being  misled  by  false 
pretensions  to  the  possession  of  the  Spirit  (see  chap.  ii.  24). 

Ver.  1.  Beloved. — Indicating  the  affectionate  relations  in  which  St.  John  and  his  disciples 
stood.  Believemot.  —Do  not  be  carried  away  by  loud  professions.  In  all  ages  of  the  Church 
persons  have  arisen  who  claimed  to  possess  supernatural  powers,  or  to  ha\  e  received  special 
revelations.  St.  John  does  not  say  that  they  all  are  insincere  and  time-serving;  but  he 
reminds  us  that  they  may  he,  and  that  their  claims  must  always  be  submitted  to  careful 
examination  and  testing.  They  may  be  the  delusions  of  fanatical  enthusiasts  ;  they  may 
be  the  lies  of  fanatical  impostors.  Spirit. — That  is,  persons  who  pretend  to  have  a  spirit. 
Illustrate  by  Acts  viii.  9,  xvi.  16,  xxi.  9.  Try  the  spirits. — E.V.  prove.  He  bids  them  exercise 
the  x<^P'-<^f^^  o^  8iaKpi<T€is  irvev/xaTOjp  (1  Cor.  xii.  4:  see  also  1  Cor.  x.  15,  xi.  18,  xii.  10; 
Eph.  V.  10  ;  1  Thess.  v.  21).  False  prophets. — Teachers,  not  foretellers.  Men  who  pretend 
to  have  received  a  special  revelation,  which  is  out  of  harmony  with  that  received  through 
Christ  and  His  apostles.  Under  the  old  dispensation  prophets  were  to  be  tested  by  "  the 
law  and  the  testimony.  If  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no 
truth  in  them  "  (Isa.  viii.  20).  Under  the  new  dispensation  all  claimants  to  Divine  inspira- 
tion must  submit  to  be  tested  by  the  inspired  words  of  Christ  and  His  apostles.  Whatever 
proposes  to  supersede  the  revelation  given  us,  and  whatever  is  out  of  harmony  with  that 
revelation,  must  be  wrong  and  untrustworthy.  Gone  out. — Generally,  are  spread  abroad. 
It  is  not  meant  that  they  had  all  once  been  Christian  disciples.  Some  may  have  been, 
perhaps  some  of  the  most  mischievous  ones. 

Ver.  2.  Know  ye. — Prefer  indicative  "  ye  know."  Spirit  of  God. — That  is,  a  spirit  which  has 
been  given  by  God.  A  man  may  axsvme  to  have  the  Spirit ;  a  man  may  have  the  Spirit :  you 
will  know  which  it  is  if  you  estimate  aright  what  the  spirit  moves  the  man  to  say  and  do. 
St.  John  suggests  one  test  as  specially  applicable  to  the  delusions  of  his  own  age.  Come  in 
the  flesh. — The  strongest  way  of  asserting  the  veritable  humanity  of  Christ.  It  is  important 
to  notice  that  the  heretics  of  the  later  apostolic  age  did  not  deny  the  Diviriity,  but  the 
humanity,  of  Christ.  See  the  Cerinthian  and  Docetic  doctrines.  That  spirit  of  antichrist. — 
There  is  no  word  answering  to  spirit  in  the  original,  but  it  is  necessary  to  the  sense  of  the 
passage.  Observe  that  the  antichrist  is  not  a  person,  but  a  sentiment,  influence,  point  and 
tone  of  teaching.  The  essence  of  apostolic  teaching  is  loyalty  to  Christ;  the  essence  of  the 
teaching  of  deceiving  or  self -deceived  prophets  was  independence  of  Christ,  or  antagonism 
to  Him.  If  any  man  wants  to  improve  upon  Christ,  or  teach  otherwise  than  He  did,  we 
cannot  be  wrong  in  calling  him  antichrist.  And  so  there  are  "  many  antichrists."  Should 
come. — It  Cometh. 

Ver.  4.  Little  children. — As  before,  conceiving  disciples  as  in  the  immature,  training  stage, 
and  therefore  specially  exposed  to  evil  influences.  He  that  is  in  you. — The  Holy  Spirit. 
In  the  world. — The  spirit  of  self,  or  the  devil. 

Ver.  6.    Knoweth  God.— Compare  John  xvii.  3. 
personal   experience,  not   by  merely  mental  effort, 
with   God,   that   man  will  have   riglit  discernment 
to  receive   their   messages.     Spirit   of  truth. — Not 


whose  range  is  truth. 
is  error. 


The  knowing  is  that  which  comes  by 

Let  a  man  stand  in   right   relations 

of  God's  servants,  and  be  ever  ready 

only   the   true   spirit,   but   the    spirit 


Spirit  of  error. — Not  only  the  false  spirit,  but  the  spirit  whose  range 

309 


CHAP.  IV.  ttOMILETiC  COMMENTARY:    LJOHW: 


Ver.  7. — The  previous  verses  are  in  some  sense  an  "  aside.''  The  apostle  now  resumes  his 
proper  theme.  His  main  truth  is  this — Love  is  the  mark  of  the  children  of  God,  who  is 
love.  Love  to  God  is  a  delusion  if  it  does  not  find  expression  in  love  toward  one  another  as 
brethren.  And  love  of  the  brethren  is  a  sure  test  of  our  having  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  the 
spirit  of  antichrist  is  a  self-seeking  and  self-serving  spirit.  "  Just  as  it  severs  the  Divine 
from  the  human  in  Christ,  so  it  severs  Divine  love  from  human  conduct  in  man."  Love  to 
one  another  may  be  recognised  as  a  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  an  "  effluence  from  the  very 
being  of  God."  Born. — Better,  "  begotten."  Knoweth  God. — As  one  only  can  know  by  sharing 
the  same  nature. 

Ver.  8.  Knoweth  not. — Better,  "can  never  have  known  " ;  "hath  never  known."  God  is 
love. — 1  John  i.  5.  Not  God  loves,  which  is  true,  but  far  short  of  the  truth  that  John 
expresses.  The  very  essence  of  God  is  His  going  outside  Himself,  and  living  in  others,  in 
the  service  of  others. 

Ver.  9.  Manifested. — Jesus  manifests  what  God  is,  and  what  God  does.  St,  John  here 
speaks  of  what  God  does.  E.V.  renders,  "  Herein  was  the  love  of  God  manifested  in  us,"  or 
"  in  our  case."  "  Manifested  "  is  one  of  St.  John's  favourite  words.  It  means,  "  became  such 
that  it  could  be  known  or  apprehended  by  man."  We  see  the  love  in  a  gift  which  the  love 
has  made.  Only  begotten. — Though  we  too  are  begotten  of  God,  there  must  be  a  sense  in 
which  Christ's  relationship  is  unique,  and  this  is  expressed  by  the  term  "  only  begotten." 
fiovoyev-qs  as  applied  to  Christ  is  St.  John's  peculiar  term.  Live  through  Him. — "  Enjoy  a 
blessed  fellowship  with  God,  being  delivered  from  that  state  of  estrangement  and  alienation 
which  is  virtually  death."    Live  applies  to  the  life  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  man. 

Ver.  10.  Propitiation. — IXaafiou  (1  John  ii.  2,  and  not  elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament). 
For  the  idea  St.  John  had,  see  the  notes  on  the  previous  passage. 

Ver.  12.  Seen  God. — "  We  cannot  contemplate  the  incomprehensible  essence  of  the  Deity 
by  a  direct  gaze."  God  can  be  seen  only  in  Christ  (John  i.  18).  His  love  is  perfected. — I.e. 
attains  just  what  it  wants  to  attain.  Let  that  love  of  God  which  we  apprehend  in  Christ 
work  its  full  work,  and  it  will  be  sure  to  make  us  "  love  the  brethren." 

Ver.  18.  Of  His  Spirit. — Contrasted  with  those  mentioned  in  the  early  verses,  who  professed 
to  have  the  Spirit,  but  whose  self-seeking  tone,  and  self -glorifying  teachings,  plainly  showed 
that  it  was  not  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Ver.  15.  Son  of  God. — St,  John  was  jealous  of  the  double  truth  of  the  person  of  Jesus — 
His  Divinity  and  His  humanity. 

Ver.  17.  Made  perfect. — Or  reaches  its  purpose  and  end.  The  sign  of  its  being  fully 
developed  in  us  will  be  the  removal  of  fear  in  relation  to  the  "  day  of  judgment."  We  shall 
no  more  fear  it  than  Jesus  did.  Enter  into  sonship,  and  all  thought  of  judgment  day  passes 
away  from  us.     Children  are  not  afraid  of  their  father. 

Vers.  20,  21. — A  recapitulation,  in  a  vivid  form,  of  the  truth  and  the  duty  contained  in 
vers.  10, 11.  The  love  of  our  neighbour  cannot  be  separated  from  the  love  of  God,  of  which  it 
is  a  distinguishing  and  essential  mark.  Sight  is  the  great  provocative  of  love.  The  difficulty 
of  our  loving  God  as  an  unseen  being  is  met  by  the  manifestation  of  God  in  His  Son.  This 
commandment. — Matt.  xxii.  37-39. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—6. 

Come  in  the  Flesh — the  True  man. — Trench  #says,  "  Jesus  took  the  name  Son 
of  Man,  as  He  who  alone  realised  the  idea  of  man."  Philo  calls  the  Logos, 
6  aXrj6Lvo<i  avOpii)7ro<i.  It  is  often  shown  that  the  purpose  Christ  had  in  view  in 
coming  to  our  world  was  to  reveal  the  Father;  to  correct  the  mistakes  into 
which  men  had  fallen  respecting  the  Divine  Being ;  to.  convince  us  .that  He  is 
no  impassive  Being,  no  mere  embodiment  of  abstract  justice  or  impersonation 
of  law,  but  the  Divine  Father  of  spirits.  Our  Lord  Jesus  came  into  this  world 
with  one  supreme  aim — to  save  us  by  making  the  Father -God  lovely  to  us,  and 
lovable  by  us.  But  we  should  give  heed  to  another  great  meaning  and  purpose 
of  our  Lord's  life  on  the  earth.  It  was  designed  to  be  a  revelation  of  humanity 
to  men — of  man  to  himself.  The  rays  of  light  shine  out  from  Christ  both 
upwards,  and  all  around.  Upwards  they  pierce  to  some  extent  the  darkness  in 
which  Deity  is  hidden  from  mortal  eyes.  All  around  they  shine  into  our^ hearts, 
and  dispel  the  mistakes  that  hide  our  true  selves  from  our  own  view.  Christ  is 
Emmanuel,  God  and  man  ;  God  with  us,  in  our  own  flesh  and  blood.  We 
cannot  be  said  adequately  to  know  Jesus  Christ  until  we  have  seen  the  God  that 

310 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   T.  JOHN.  chap.  iV. 


is  in  Him,  and  also  the  man  that  is  in  Him.  He  is  come  in  the  flesh.  He  is 
the  second  Adam.  He  represents  ideal  humanity,  man  as  God  thought  him 
when  He  gave  him  breath  and  being.  Over  the  old  Grecian  temple  they  put 
the  words,  "  Know  thyself."  An  easy  command  to  give,  a  most  difficult 
command  to  obey.  And  that  for  one  sufficient  reason — the  true  standard  of 
humanity  is  lost,  and  we  have  no  one  with  whom  we  may  safely  compare 
ourselves.  To  know  a  picture,  or  a  statue,  or  a  building,  we  must  judge  it  by 
the  standard ;  and  there  are  world-standards.  But  when  we  would  know 
ourselves,  where  is  our  standard  ?  If  it  ever  was  here  amongst  men,  it  is  lost 
now,  and  has  been  lost  for  ages.  That  the  ideal  of  humanity  is  lost  is  shown  in 
the  conceptions  alike  of  old  and  of  modern  poets.  They  declare,  in  their  word- 
pictures,  the  universal  conviction  that  there  was  once  a  Golden  Age.  But  they 
all  mourn  over  it  as  a  past  and  lost  time.  They  do  but  tell  us  the  Bible  story 
of  Eden — its  innocency,  its  grace,  its  possibilities,  and  then  its  sin,  its  shame, 
and  its  desolation.  Men  have  been  seeking  vainly  for  the  true  standard 
through  all  the  ages  since  Eden  was  lost.  God  purposed,  when  He  saw  that  the 
fitting  time  had  come,  to  show  men  a  man  once  again,  a  perfect,  ideal,  standard 
man.  The  fulness  of  time  came,  and  He  sent  forth  His  Son  "  made  of  a 
woman,  made  under  the  law,"  veritable  partaker  of  our  flesh  and  blood.  There 
is  the  only  perfect  flower  of  manhood  that  has  ever  unfolded  out  of  the  root  of 
humanity.  How  soon,  and  how  easily,  men  can  lose  fitting  and  worthy  concep- 
tions of  God  !  Give  to  any  nation  comparatively  clear  light  on  the  nature  and 
character  and  relations  of  God,  and  in  a  generation  or  two  we  shall  find  that 
the  light  is  faded,  and  the  image  is  blurred  Men  began  to  worship  the  sun  as 
if  it  were  the  brightness  of  God  ;  then  they  thought  of  the  nobler  beasts  of  the 
earth  as  images  of  Him  ;  presently  they  made  symbols  of  reptiles  and  creeping 
things ;  and  at  last  sunk  to  making  idols  which  expressed,  in  their  forms  and 
features,  the  vilest  human  passions.  But  men  have  proved  quite  as  ready  to 
lose  the  truth  about  themselves.  Indeed,  if  men  will  not  keep  the  truth  about 
God,  they  shall  not  keep  the  truth  about  anything  else — at  least  about  anything 
moral.  How  men  sunk  from  the  standard  of  humanity  St.  Paul  has  described  in 
Bom.  i.  Then  God  sent  forth  His  Son,  the  ideal  man,  the  standard  man.  Other 
men,  lost  in  their  corruptions,  shall  see  amongst  them  the  true  man,  Christ 
Jesus.  Looking  upon  Him  men  know  themselves,  and  are  humbled  to  find  how 
low  they  have  sunk  from  what  they  ought  to  be.  Since  Jesus  came  to  the 
world  there  have  been  no  great  men,  no  standard  men.  All  fall  below  His 
excellence.  But  that  life  Jesus  lived  was  truly  human.  There  are  some  things 
in  which  we  may  become  true  men  like  Christ. 

I.  It  is  possible  for  man  to  enjoy  consciously  near  and  happy  fellowship 
with  God,  as  Jesus  did. — Into  the  Divine  presence  He  seemed  to  be  always 
easily  going.  He  breathed  in  the  Divine  atmosphere.  Carrying  the  thought 
of  God  always  with  Him,  every  place  became  a  holy  place,  all  work  became 
holy  work,  all  days  holy  days.  His  humanity  was  no  hindrance  to  Him ;  it 
made  no  mists  or  cloud-shadows  between  Him  and  God.  And  it  is  light  and 
hope  for  us  thus  to  see,  in  Christ,  that  the  thing  which  shuts  us  out  from  God 
is  not  our  being  men,  but  our  being  sinners.  Christ  was  a  man,  but  not  a 
sinner,  and  so  the  holy  place  of  communion  was  to  Him  as  a  home.  And  as  we 
look  on  Christ,  come  in  the  flesh,  we  see  the  work  of  life  set  before  us.  We 
must  be  wholly  freed  from  sin,  and  then  God  Himself  shall  become  the  dear 
love,  and  near  friend,  and  cherished  home  of  our  soul. 

II.  It  is  possible  for  man  to  reach  the  abiding  conquest  of  sin— of  sin  both 
without  him  and  within. — Up  to  the  time  of  Christ,  that  possibility  was  never 
known,  it  could  never  be  realised.  Man  toiled  on  under  the  slavery  of  sin. 
There  had  never  been  seen  such  a  thing  as  a  man  free  from  sin,  a  man  proved 

311 


CHAP.  IV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAPY :    L  JOHN. 


through  all  the  temptations  of  a  human  life  to  be  mightier  than  evil.  Men  had 
never  seen  one  human  tree  without  some  traces  of  the  decaying  worm ;  never 
seen  the  building  of  one  human  life  without  some  bulgings  and  disfigurings  of 
failure ;  never  seen  one  human  face  without  the  care- look  of  a  wounded 
conscience.  So  men  might,  with  some  show  of  reason,  have  said,  "  Sin  is  a  part 
of  humanity  ;  we  cannot  be  rid  of  it."  But  in  saying  that,  man  would  have 
consummated  his  ruin ;  he  would  have,  as  it  were,  reached  out  his  hand  to  the 
tree  of  life,  and  stamped  immortality  upon  his  sin.  God  would  not  let  him  do 
that.  God  would  guard  the  tree  of  life  with  a  flaming  sword.  God  would  send 
His  Son  into  the  world  as  a  man  without  sin,  to  break  the  hopeless  sameness  of 
the  past — as  a  man,  surrounded  with  evil,  attacked  by  temptations,  and  yet  able 
to  say,  "  Who  convict eth  Me  of  sin  ?  "  No  stain  upon  the  life,  no  pollution  on 
the  soul,  one  with  men,  separate  from  sinners, — there  is  hope  for  us  in  that. 
Sin  is  not  man.  Sin  is  not  any  necessary  part  of  man.  Sin  may  be  put  away 
from  man.  It  is  a  fact  now — a  man  has  stood  and  walked  and  worked,  in  a 
world  full  of  sin,  with  unsoiled  garments,  and  unspotted  soul,  always  clothed  in 
pure  white  garments.  Man  has  proved  to  be  mightier  than  sin.  It  can  no 
longer  raise  its  head  and  boast,  as  if  it  were  an  unconquered  and  unconquerable 
foe.  It  is  a  beaten  foe.  Christ  has  beaten  it.  The  shame  and  weakness  of 
defeat  lie  on  sin  now.  And  our  manhood,  with  God's  help,  may  renew  the 
victory. 

III.  It  is  possible  for  men  to  reach  the  cherished  spirit,  and  the  abiding 
expression,  of  self-sacrifice. — If  we  know  ourselves,  we  know  this,  that  outward 
enemies  are  easily  mastered,  but  the  inward  foe  of  self  only  with  extreme 
difficulty.  But  the  most  marked  feature  in  the  life  of  Christ  is  His  self-sacrifice. 
He  was  among  us  as  one  that  serveth.  But  on  what  principle  is  all  this  possible 
to  us,  to  humanity  ?  The  success  of  Christ  was  not  due  to  any  latent  force  which 
is  in  humanity  itself,  and  which  Christ  alone  succeeded  in  developing.  Humanity 
has  no  independent  energies.  As  a  created  thing  it  is  a  necessarily  dependent 
thing.  It  has  trailed  on  the  ground,  and  soiled  its  flowers,  because  it  tried  to 
grow  alone.  In  the  forests  of  Madagascar  may  be  seen  a  beautiful  climbing- 
plant,  twining  itself  about  the  larger  trunks  and  branches,  and  singing  out 
its  strength  in  bright  green  leaves,  and  laughing  out  its  gladness  in  large, 
abundant,  and  exquisite  white  flowers.  It  is  so  strong  and  so  beautiful  because 
it  clasps  the  strong,  twines  about  the  strong,  and  drinks  up  ever  new  life  from 
the  strong.  And  so  humanity  is  strong  in  God,  holding  a  living  dependence  on 
Him,  and  a  happy  reliance  on  Him.  The  triumph  which  Christ  gained  was  the 
result  of  a  most  near  union  between  the  Divine  and  the  human,  the  man  and 
God.  The  secret  of  His  life  is  this — in  Him  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelt  above 
measure.  He  was,  in  some  wonderful  way,  God  and  man.  At  first  that  dashes 
down  all  our  hopes.  Then  He  is  altogether  other  than  we  are.  But  if  Christ 
won  so  perfect  a  life  by  having  the  Spirit  above  measure,  we  may  win  towards  it 
by  having  the  Spirit  in  measure.  We  can  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  become 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  in  some  degree  at  least,  hke  Christ — men  having 
God  with  them. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yqy.  \.  The  Trial  of  Spiritual  Claims  thought    to   that  of   afl3iction    in   the 

by  Spiritual  Men. — "  Prove  the  spirits."  sphere  of   religious   relations.       There 

We  have  to  take  full  account  of  the  always  has  been  in  the  Church  testing, 

fact    that    error — false    or    imperfect  tempting,    disciplining    error,    just   as 

presentation    of   truth — has  a  similar  there  always  has  been  in  the  Christian 

mission    in    the    sphere    of    religious  experience    testing,     tempting,     disci- 

312 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IV. 


plining    affliction.       Had    there    been 
no    error,    the    truth    would    neither 
have    been    preserved    effective,    nor 
would  it  have  been  elaborated,  defined, 
or  adapted.     So  many  of  the  settings 
of    Christian    truth,     in     which    the 
Church   now   rejoices,    are   the   direct 
products  of  times   of   conflict.      Look 
along  the  level  lines,  and  error  seems 
to  be  an  unmitigated  evil.     But  look 
down  on  it   from  above,    see   it   with 
some  fitting  idea  of  the  Divine  over- 
ruling, and  it  is  but  one  of  the  dark 
angels   that    are    about    the   Father's 
business ;  it  is  but  as  the  emery  that 
polishes   the   sword   of   truth.     If    we 
keep  in  thought  a  comparison  between 
"erroi's"    and    "afflictions,"    we    may 
learn    how    to    deal    effectually    and 
wisely   with    errors.      Afflictions    are 
overwhelming  woes  until  their  inmost 
mystery  is  opened,  as  it  only  can  be 
opened,  by  the  sjnritually -minded  man. 
And   that   is    equally   true   of    error. 
That  it  is  error  is  always  detected  by 
the    spiritually- minded   man,    because 
he  can  test  every  setting  of  truth  by 
two  infallible  tests  :    1.  By  the  sense 
of  its  harmony    with    God,    which    in 
Him  is  most  keen.      2.  By  the  ten- 
dency of  it  to  work  towards  righteous- 
ness ;    and  of  this  the   spiritual   man 
has   a   quickened    and    cultured    dis- 
cernment.     The    error    never   lies   in 
any  particular  form  of  words  by  which 
a  side  or  aspect  of  truth  is  expressed. 
Error  lies  in  the  motive  that  shapes  the 
setting,  and  in  the  moral  or  immoral 
influence  which  the  setting  may  exert. 

Vers.  2,  3.  The  Doctrine  of  Christ^ s 
Humanity  a  Test  Doctrine. — We  live 
in  times  when  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
Divinity  is  usually  made  the  test 
doctrine,  and  when  much  anxiety  is 
felt  lest  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
humanity  should  gain  an  exaggerated 
place,  and  an  extravagant,  and  there- 
fore mischievous,  setting.  In  the  early 
Church,  the  Divinity  of  Jesus  seems 
to  have  been  fully  recognised.  The 
Arian  conflicts  belong  to  a  much  later 
age.  The  union  of  the  Divine  and 
human   in    Christ    is   of    necessity    a 


mystery  that  can  never  gain  precise 
statement  in   any   limited,    imperfect, 
and  variable  human  language.       But 
then    that    can    with    equal    truth    be 
s^id  of  the  union  of  soul  and  body  in 
man.     Men  will  have  a  right  to  demand 
proof  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ,  when 
they    have    found    it    reasonable    to 
demand  proof  of  the  existence  of  the 
soul.     And  it  will  be  found  that  the 
arguments   on    which   rest   our   belief 
in  the  one  are  of   the  same  kind  as 
those  on  which  rest  our  belief  in  the 
other.     In  the  early  Church  the  test 
of  orthodoxy  was  belief  in  the  verit- 
ableness    of    Christ's    humanity.    His 
real   body   of    flesh   and   blood.      The 
error  of  that  day  was   a   subtle    dis- 
tinction between  a  Divine  Being  and 
a  human  body  which  that  Divine  Being 
temporarily  used.    This  made  the  "  Man 
Christ    Jesus "    an    unreal,    unnatural 
Being — not  such  a  man  as  we  are  ;  and 
if  not.  He  could  be  no  proper  repre- 
sentative of  us,  to  be  sacrificed  for  us. 
But  the  error  took  even  a  more  subtle 
form.     Men  taught  that  what  seemed 
a  human  body,  and   could   indeed  be 
seen  and  touched,  was  in  fact  no  body 
at  all,  but  only  such  an  appearance  of 
a  body  as  angels  had  taken  for  their 
earth-ministries  in  Old  Testament  times. 
Neither  of  these  can  possibly  be  con- 
sistent with  the  Christian  revelation, 
which  declares  that  Jesus  is  come  in 
the  fleshy   and  so  is  a    hond-fide  man, 
with  body,  soul,  and  spirit  like  every 
other  man ;  and  so  able  to  be  the  race 
representative  and  Saviour. 

Ver.  3.  Spirit  of  Antichrist. — Man 
after  man,  rich  in  gifts,  endowed  often 
with  far  larger  and  nobler  faculties 
than  the  people  that  oppose  him,  with 
indomitable  perseverance,  a  martyr  to 
his  error,  sets  himself  up  against  the 
truth  that  is  sphered  in  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  the  great  Divine  message  simply 
goes  on  its  way,  and  all  the  battlement 
and  noise  is  like  so  many  bats  flying 
against  a  light,  or  the  wild  sea-birds 
that  come  sweeping  up  in  the  tempest 
and  the  night,  against  the  hospitable 
Pharos    that   is   upon   the   rock,    and 

313 


CfiAP.   IV. 


EOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


smite   themselves    dead   against    it. — 
A.  Maclm^en,  D.D. 

Yer.  4.  The  True  Secret  of  the  Mastery 
of  Error. — "  Because  greater  is  He  that 
is  in  you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world." 
Canon  Liddon  says :  "St.  John  con- 
stantly teaches  that  the  Christian's 
work  in  this  state  of  probation  is  to 
*  conquer  the  world.'  It  is,  in  other 
words,  to  fight  successfully  against 
that  view  of  life  which  ignores  God, 
against  that  complex  system  of  attrac- 
tive moral  evil  and  specious  intellectual 
falsehood  which  is  organised  and  mar- 
shalled by  the  great  enemy  of  God, 
and  which  permeates  and  inspires  non- 
Christianised  society."  To  be  "  of  God" 
implies  that  God  is  in  us ;  dwelling 
in  us  as  the  spiritual  presence  and 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  So  our 
Lord  promised  and  assured  His  dis- 
ciples (John  xiv.  16,  17,  23).  If  we 
may  suggest  a  distinction  between  our 
apprehensions  of  the  presences  with  us 
of  the  Son  and  of  the  Spirit,  we  may 
say — ^the  living  Christ  is  God  with 
us  in  order  that  He  may  be  for  us ; 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  God  with  us  in 
order  that  He  may  be  in  us,  ever  at 
the  springs  of  thought,  and  feeling, 
and  motive,  and  action.  Then  we  can 
fill  St.  John's  assertion  in  this  text 
with  a  double  meaning,  and  so  assure 
our  hearts  that  we  have  all-sufiicing 
strength  unto  ever -renewed  victory 
over  all  forms  of  moral  evil. 

I.  God  with  us  as  the  living  Christ 
is  greater  than  all  the  evil  forces  that 
may  seek  to  injure  us. — In  some  such 
sense  as  the  human  Christ  was  with 
His  apostles,  defending,  preserving, 
guiding  them — with.them  in  the  sphere 
of  their  circumstances,  shaping,  con- 
trolling, overruling  them,  so  as  to 
secure  for  His  disciples  triumph  over 
all  evil — the  living  Christ  is  with  His 
people  now,  with  His  Church  now, 
"  walking  amid  the  candlesticks,"  work- 
ing the  safety  of  His  people  and  His 
Church,  by  His  control  of  all  their 
circumstances.  He  is  for  them  as  a 
Hving  Helper  and  Friend ;  for  them 
in  the  exertion  of  Divine  power. 

314 


II.  God  with  us  as  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  greater  than  all  the  subtle  influ- 
ences that  can  act  upon  us. — What 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  in  the  early 
Church  as  defence  against  error,  taking 
the  most  subtle  forms  against  the 
malign  influence  of  subtle  men,  spirits, 
antichrist,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  is  in 
every  age  to  the  believer — the  abso- 
lutely secure  defence  against  intel- 
lectual and  moral  evil,  as  Divine  wis- 
dom and  strength  abiding  in  us. 

Yer.  6.  All  inspired  by  God  will  he  in 
Essential  Harmony. — "  He  that'knoweth 
God  heareth  us."  The  more  careful  and 
strict,  the  more  critical,  examination  of 
Holy  Scripture  has  brought  to  view, 
in  a  very  impressive  way,  the  fact 
that  wherever  there  is  a  Divine  in- 
spiration there  is  essential  harmony 
with  all  other  Divine  inspiration.  Of 
this  we  are  now  so  well  assured,  that 
we  are  even  prepared  to  say  this — if 
there  is  any  inspiration  of  God  outside 
the  Scriptures,  then  that  inspiration 
will  certainly  be  found  in  essential 
harmony  with  all  that  is  in  them. 
But  the  statements  properly  occasion 
surprise  and  stimulate  thought.  The 
Scriptures  represent  different  ages, 
different  types  of  mind,  different  social 
and  intellectual  conditions  ;  and  in  the 
Scriptures  is  found  an  ever-refreshing 
variety  in  the  settings  and  shapings  of 
truth  ;  and  yet  take  any  vital,  primary, 
fundamental  verity  concerning  God, 
or  man,  or  the  relations  between  God 
and  man,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  find 
anything  out  of  the  general  harmony. 
The  inspired  word  of  God  never  con- 
tradicts itself.  St.  John  says  that 
what  is  true  of  the  inspired  word  is 
also  true  of  the  inspired  man.  Assume 
that  God  is  in  the  teacher,  inspiring  his 
words  ;  then  it  is  certain  that  when- 
ever God  is  in  the  hearer,  inspiring 
him  for  hearing,  he  will  receive  the 
message  which  the  inspired  teacher 
delivers.  Safety  against  the  false 
teacher,  the  uninspired  teacher,  is  found 
in  the  hearer  being  inspired  for  hear- 
ing. Such  an  one  is  in  no  moral 
danger.     He   cannot  live   and   thrive 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAitY:    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  IV. 


on  the  uninspired  teaching.  He  finds 
himself  out  of  harmony  with  it.  But 
his  inspiration  brings  him  into  full 
harmony  with  everything  that  is  also 
inspired.  It  is  of  course  to  be  under- 
stood that  the  term  "  inspiration  "  is 
here  used,  not  of  a  precise  and  limited 
definition  of  inspiration,  such  as  may 
be  characteristic  of  a  particular  school 


of  thought,  but  of  that  general  ex- 
perience of  Divine  inspiration,  which 
the  believer  knows  as  the  moving, 
impelling,  directing,  restraining  influ- 
ence of  the  Holy  Ghost  that  dwelleth 
in  him.  Inspiration  is  the  proper  word 
for  the  inward  work  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost. 


MAIJV  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  7—14. 

The  Fatherly  Love  carries  with  it  Brotherly  Love. — What  may  possibly  have 
been  in  St.  John's  mind  is  the  error  of  assuming  a  difference  between  the  love 
that  we  have  for  God  and  the  love  that  we  have  one  for  another.  And  that 
is  an  error  which  is  often  secretly  cherished,  though  it  gains  no  open  expression, 
and  would  indeed  be  ashamed  to  show  itself  to  the  light.  How  often  our  feeling 
is  this — "  We  cannot  be  expected  to  love  other  people  just  as  we  love  God."  But 
it  may  properly  be  maintained  that  there  can  be  no  varieties  in  love.  There 
can  be  differences  in  quality  and  degree,  but  not  in  kind.  There  must  be 
relation  to  its  object,  but  love  can  never  be  anything  but  just  itself.  Whether 
it  go  out  to  God,  or  go  out  to  our  brother,  it  is  just  the  same  thing — love.  Even 
as  in  family  life,  there  can  be  nothing  but  just  the  family  love.  It  goes  out 
to  the  father  and  mother,  or  to  the  brothers  and  sisters,  using  a  variety  of.  signs 
and  expressions,  but  it  can  never  be  anything  but  itself;  and  it  is  not  itself 
if  it  is  hmited  to  the  parents,  or  limited  to  the  brothers.  And  St.  John  aftirms 
that  love  is  not  love  when  it  is  set  only  upon  God  the  Father,  and  restrained 
from  our  fellow-men,  our  brothers.  "  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not  God." 
The  point  of  connection  in  St.  John's  mind  between  this  and  the  preceding 
section  may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  false  doctrine  is  always  self-centred,  self- 
serving,  and  consequently  tends  to  separate  men  from  their  fellows.  You  cannot 
love  your  fellows,  if  you  only  want  to  make  a  gain  of  them.  False  teachers 
boasted  much  about  love  to  God,  but  they  wholly  failed  under  the  test  of  love 
to  men.  Dr.  Plummer  says  :  "  The  antichristian  spirit  is  a- selfish  one  ;  it  makes 
self,  i.e.  one's  own  intellect  and  one's  own  interest,  the  measure  of  all  things. 
Just  as  it  severs  the  Divine  from  the  human  in  Christ,  so  it  severs  Divine  love 
from  human  conduct  in  man.  *  Beloved,  let  us  do  far  otherwise.  Let  us  love 
one  another.'  For  the  third  and  last  time  in  this  epistle  the  apostle  introduces 
the  subject  of  brotherly  love.  1.  It  was  introduced  as  a  consequence  and  sign 
of  walking  in  the  light  (ii.  7-11).  Next,  2,  it  was  introduced  as  a  special  form 
of  righteousness  and  mark  of  God's  children  (iii.  10-18).  3.  Here  it  appears  as 
a  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  a  contrast  to  the  antichristian  spirit,  and  above  all 
as  an  effluence  from  the  very  being  of  God."  From  a  careful  examination  of 
the  verses  we  gather,  that  St.  John  is  endeavouring  to  impress  the  truth  that 
profession  of  love  can  be  of  no  avail,  it  must  find  fitting  and  adequate  expression 
in  the  relations  of  every-day  life.  Even  God's  love  must  be  manifested,  in  order 
to  be  in  any  sense  an  effective  power  on  men. 

I.  Abstract  love  in  God  is  ineffective. — "God  is  love."  There  the  truth 
stands.  It  is  full  and  clear  to  view.  It  is  sublime,  but  it  is  unattainable.  If 
that  be  all,  if  we  only  know  some  absolute  and  abstract  fact  concerning  the 
intimate  nature  of  God,  then  it  is  really  nothing  to  us.  It  is  high  ;  we  cannot 
attain  unto  it.  If  the  philosophers  can  do  something  with  it,  we  commonplace, 
every-day  men  and  women  cannot. 

315 


OHAP.  IV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARt :   1.  JOHN. 


II.  Manifested  love  is  persuasion  and  power  (vers.  9,  10).— God's  love  has 
found  expression  in  the  most  persuasive  of  all  ways — by  a  gift,  and  a  gift  which 
involved  an  extreme  self-sacrifice ;  and  moreover  by  a  gift  which  so  precisely 
meets  our  needs  that  it  carries  the  persuasion  of  His  love  right  into  our  hearts. 
(Propitiation  for  our  sins.)  We  feel  the  love  through  the  manifestation  and 
expression,  and  we  can  feel  it  in  no  other  way. 

III.  Sentimental  love  in  man  is  worthless,  and  even  mischievous. — This  is 
really  the  point  which  St.  John  is  enforcing.  (Compare  Jas.  ii.  14-16.) 
Characteristic  of  uninspired  teaching  is  fine  sentiment  about  society  and  brother- 
hood ;  and  men  can  be  easily  carried  away  by  exaggerated  and  helpless 
sentiment.  They  can  think  themselves  good  because  they  have  uttered  good- 
sounding  phrases. 

lY.  Practical  love  towards  man  alone  honours  God,  and  does  God's  work. 
— To  express  this  in  the  line  of  St.  John's  thoughts.  The  love  must  be 
manifested  :  it  must  find  its  gift ;  and  its  gift  must  carry  its  self-sacrifice  unto 
the  uttermost. 


SUGGE'STIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Yqy.  7.  To  love  is  the  Sign  of  the  New 
Birth. — "  And  every  one  that  loveth  is 
begotten  of  God,  and  knoweth  God." 
There  is  physical  or  natural  life ;  there 
is  moral  life ;  and  there  is  spiritual 
or  Divine  life.  The  sign  of  physical 
life  is  movement.  There  is  a  sign 
indicating  the  existence  of  a  moral 
being,  a  being  who  can  come  into 
relations  with  other  beings.  There  is 
a  sign  of  moral  life.  It  is  the  power 
to  love,  to  go  outside  oneself  and 
take  on  our  own  heart  the  concern 
of  another.  And  there  is  a  sign  of 
the  yet  higher,  spiritual  life ;  and 
since  that  life  is  kin  with  the  moral 
life  the  sign  is  the  same  for  it.  It 
is  love ;  but  it  is  the  going  outside 
ourselves  to  lose  ourselves  in  God. 
You  may  know  that  a  man  is  begotten 
to  the  higher,  spiritual.  Divine  life,  if 
you  can  see  that  the  supreme,  the 
master  principle  and  persuasion  of  his 
life  is  love  to  God.  And  it  may  further 
be  said  that  the  love  gauges  the  life. 
The  fuller  the  life,  the  intenser  the 
love,  the  more  ennobling  and  sanctify- 
ing the  power  of  the  love. 

Love  implies  Insight  of  the  Highest 
Spiritual  Things. — "And  knoweth 
God."  Knowing  depends  on  two 
things — on  the  thing  known,  and  on 
the  person  knowing.       We  know  differ- 

316 


ent  things  in  different  ways.  Things 
are  different  to  different  persons. 
There  is  a  particular  way  in  which 
God  alone  can  be  known,  and  in 
which  alone  high,  spiritual  things  can 
be  known.  They  cannot  be  known 
by  any  effort  of  the  intellect  alone. 
And  the  intellect  by  itself  is  not 
the  man.  They  can  be  known  only 
through  the  affections,  and  their 
use  of  the  intellectual  powers.  God, 
and  everything  kin  with  Him,  is 
"  spiritually  discerned."  And  it  is  not 
everybody  who  can  know  God;  only 
the  man  whose  affections,  .being  spirit- 
ually quickened,  in  a  natural  way  turn 
to  God,  and  are  fully  open  and  recep- 
tive to  the  manifestations  and  evidences 
of  Himself  that  God  may  be  pleased  to 
give.  '^ 

Born  of  God.  — Theologians  and  others 
have,  I  think,  assumed  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  birth  from  above  is  more  in- 
scrutably mysterious  than  it  is,  and 
have  therefore  unwarrantably  obscured 
Christ's  truth.  It  is,  I  admit,  under 
any  view  of  it,  a  "great  mystery  of 
godliness " ;  yet  it  is  not  altogether 
without  its  parallel  in  every-day  life. 
Every  good  son  is  born  again.  A  child 
is  first,  by  no  choice  of  his  own,  born 
into  the  family  of  a  good  man.  So 
far   he   is  a  son   by  nature  only;  he 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IV. 


may  grow  up  to  be  dissatisfied  with 
his  father's  mode  of  Hfe,  and  with  the 
law  of  his  father's  house.  He  may 
also  adopt  a  course  of  action  so  widely 
divergent  from  the  father's,  that  the 
natural  bond  between  them  shall  serve 
only  to  reveal  the  vast  and  widening 
gulf  of  character  that  separates  them, 
and  similarity  of  feature  shall  only 
serve  to  give  painful  emphasis  to  the 
utter  dissimilarity  of  disposition.  The 
son  is  now  a  son  in  form  only — in  all 
things  else  a  foreigner.  To  become 
truly  a  son  he  must  be  born  again — 
must  of  his  own  choice  accept  as  his 
father  the  parent  Nature  gave  him, 
and  must  by  his  own  love  and  conduct 
make  the  house  in  which  Providence 
placed  him  a  home.  No  parent  is 
truly  and  fully  a  father  till  he  is 
adopted  by  his  own  child.  To  be  fully 
"born  of  God"  is  for  the  soul,  being 
filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  acknow- 
ledge God's  fatherly  authority,  accept 
God's  law,  live  His  life,  do  His  work ; 
or,  in  one  word,  to  love  God — "  He 
that  loveth  is  born  of  God."  God  is 
not  fully  "our  Father"  till  we  love 
Him  as  He  loves  us;  and  when  a 
heart  is  won  to  love,  there  is  joy  in 
the  presence  of  the  angels  for  another 
holy  child  born  into  the  great  family 
of  God. — J.  Moi^gan  Gibbon. 

Ver.  8.  The  Truth  of  Truths.— '^o 
two  persons  ever  see  the  same  pic  ture ; 
the  image  is  modified  by  the  personality 
of  him  who  sees  it.  No  two  persons 
have  the  same  idea  of  God.  He  re- 
veals Himself  with  a  separate  revela- 
tion to  each  individual  soul.  There 
have  been  two  great  and  dominant 
ideas  of  God — one  moral  and  the  other 
physical.  1.  27ie  moral.  The  fii'st 
great  revelation  of  God  was  the  re- 
velation of  Him  as  the  moral  governor. 
The  Hebrew  prophets  lifted  Him  out 
of  mere  locality  into  a  larger  sphere  ; 
they  preached  Him  as  God  of  the 
whole  earth,  the  God  of  righteousness. 
2.  The  j)hysical.  This  conception  came 
from  the  Greeks.  To  them  God  was 
the  underlying  ground  and  cause  of  all 
things ;    He    was    power,   being ;    He 


was    infinite     and     eternal,     without 
passion  and  without  change. 

I.  Each  of  these  conceptions  of  God 
is  profoundly  true ;  and  each  must 
have  its  place  in  our  thoughts. — He 
controls  this  vast  sphere  of  physical 
action  by  laws  which  cannot  be  broken, 
and  which  are  perfectly  good.  *'  Of 
Him  are  all  things,  and  in  Him  are 
all  things."  The  conception  of  God  as 
a  moral  governor  has  on  the  one  hand 
been  pressed  as  though  it  exhausted 
all  that  we  know  about  Him  ;  on  the 
other  hand,  it  has  been  darkened  by 
analogies  from  human  laws,  until  this 
supreme  conception  of  a  God  of  right- 
eousness has  been  transmuted  into  a 
conception  of  One  who  curses  where 
even  men  would  bless,  and  who 
punishes  where  even  men  would 
pardon. 

II.  The  loftier,  more  Christian  idea 
of  God. — The  simplest  conceptions  are 
always  the  deepest.  In  three  short 
words  we  are  told  that  in  the  awful 
Maker  of  all, things  seen  and  unseen, 
the  Infinite,  the  Absolute,  the  Eternal, 
there  is  something  like  that  which 
draws  the  mother  to  the  son  and  the 
sister  to  the  brother.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  practical  truths,  and  one  of 
the  most  necessary.  It  is  not  a  form- 
less and  impassive  spirit  that  is  close 
to  us,  but  the  infinitely  holy,  infinitely 
true,  infinitely  kind.  This  gives  the 
thought  of  God  a  place  in  practical 
life. 

III.  Here  is  the  most  practical  of 
truths,  and  the  most  necessary. — It 
is  a  special  truth  for  our  time.  It 
contains  the  gospel  we  need ;  it  comes 
to  our  sadness  as  a  gospel  of  consola- 
tion ;  it  comes  to  our  restlessness  as  a 
gospel  of  repose.  For  material  want 
there  is  material  alleviation.  Some- 
thing beyond  material  relief.  I  speak 
of  social  unrest.  To  you  who  feel  most 
of  all  the  strain  and  stir  of  life,  this 
revelation  of  God  as  love  comes  with  a 
singular  power,  for  it  is  the  gospel  of 
repose.  When  tired  with  noises  and 
stir  and  strife,  tired  of  the  factiousness 
of  political  party  feeling,  with  the  mean- 
ness of  social  ambition,  the  chicanery 

317 


CHAP    IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


of  commerce,  just  for  a  moment  or  two 
rise,  as  the  spirit  can,  and  rest  in  the 
eternal  Father  who  loves  you. 

lY.  The  supreme  manifestation  of 
the  love  of  God  in  sending  His  only 
begotten  Son  into  the  world  that  we 
might  live  through  Him. — Let  our 
thoughts  rest  on  this  one  of  the  in- 
numerable ways  in  which  God's  love 
has  shown  itself.  To  the  truth  of 
truths  the  text  calls  us.  About  other 
truths  we  may  differ ;  in  this,  at  least, 
we  agree.  Into  some  other  truths 
there  may  enter  elements  of  doubt 
which  weaken  their  force  as  motives  of 
conduct ;  but  here  is  a  sublime  revela- 
tion. Let  it  be  a  sublime  inspiration, 
a  constraining  motive.  Let  it  be  for 
us  the  supreme  repose  to  know  that 
the  Father  Himself  loveth  us,  for  *'  God 
is  love," — Edwin  Hatch,  D.D. 

Love  to  God. — Love  is  the  highest, 
purest,  holiest  motive  from  which  we 
can  act.  Faith  makes  us  strong  by 
keeping  before  us  the  great  truths 
and  realities  of  the  world  unseen. 
Hope  helps  us  on  our  way  by  filling 
our  souls  with  the  longing  expectation 
of  the  blessedness  in  store  for  us. 
But  faith  is  cold,  and  hope  is  selfish, 
without  love.  Love  is  the  going  forth 
of  the  soul  towards  another,  tender 
and  glowing,  generous  and  unselfish. 
Love  will  do  all  things,  it  will  bear 
all  things,  for  one  it  loves.  And  so 
we  read  that  "Love  is  the  fulfilling 
of  the  law."  For,  if  we  love  God, 
we  shall  fulfil  all  our  duty  to  God ; 
and  if  we  love  man,  we  shall  fulfil 
all  our  dutv  to  man.  And  so  to 
love  the  Lord  our  God  with  all  our 
heart,  and  our  neighbour  as  ourselves, 
takes  in  all  we  have  to  do.  There 
would  be  no  need  for  any  other  law, 
if  we  all  obeyed  perfectly  the  law  of 
love.  But  think  specially  of  love  to 
God.  As  love  is  the  best  motive  for  our 
actions,  so  love  to  God  is  the  best  sort 
of  love.  For,  when  we  love  God,  we 
are  loving  that  which  is  perfect,  loving 
Him  who  is  alone  perfectly  worthy  to 
be  loved.  And  if  we  love  God  truly, 
we  are  quite  sure  to  love  His  creatures 

318 


also.  So  that  the  love  of  God  is  the 
fountain  of  all  goodness.  Now  there 
are  different  ways  in  ,which  we  may 
love  God.  First,  we  may  love  Him 
for  our  own  sakes,  or  because  we  love 
ourselves ;  that  is,  because  of  all  His 
goodness  to  us.  Another  word  for 
this  sort  of  love  is  gratitude.  And  it 
is  a  right  and  good  thing — only  not 
the  best.  In  this  way  we  may  love 
God  for  all  the  blessings  we  enjoy  in 
this  life,  and  this  is  the  easiest  sort 
of  love  to  gain ;  or,  better  still,  we 
may  love  Him  for  His  spiritual  mercies, 
for  the  gift  of  a  blessed  Redeemer,  for 
the  aid  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  and  for  the 
hope  of  eternal  happiness.  But  a 
higher  and  purer  way  of  loving  God 
is  to  love  Him  for  His  own  sake,  to 
love  Him  because  He  is  so  lovable — 
because  our  hearts  are  drawn  to  His 
infinite  perfections — because  He  is  so 
good  in  Himself,  so  fit  to  win  His 
creatures'  love.  This  is  to  love  Him 
as  the  angels  love  Him.  Perhaps 
man,  while  in  this  world,  may  never 
be  able  to  love  God  entirely  with  this 
sort  of  love.  Perhaps  none  can  love 
quite  in  this  way,  except  those  who 
see  face  to  face.  When  that  time 
comes,  oh,  may  we  be  filled  with 
this  pure,  childhke,  unselfish,  angelic 
love  !  But,  meanwhile,  it  is  very  hard 
to  love  One  so  exalted,  so  far  above  us 
in  His  nature,  and  so  different  from 
us,  as  God  is.  And  God  knew  this. 
How  thankful  then  should  we  be  that, 
in  pity  to  our  weakness,  God  was 
pleased  to  take  upon  Himself  the  form 
and  nature  of  man,  so  that  we  have 
One  like  ourselves  to  love — One  who 
can,  and  does,  feel  for  us  and  with 
us,  and  yet  who  is  God.  Those  who 
might  find  it  hard  to  love  an  infinite, 
almighty  God,  of  whom  they  could 
form  to  themselves  no  image  or  like- 
ness, will  not  find  it  so  hard  to  love 
the  meek,  and  gentle,  and  lowly,  and 
loving  Man  Jesus  Christ.  How  shall 
we  gain  more  love  ?  Like  other  Chris- 
tian graces,  it  grows  by  degrees  ;  and, 
like  them,  it  is  the  gift  of  God.  So, 
first  of  all,  we  must  pray  God  for 
this  gift  of  love.    It  is  His  Holy  Spirit 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.  IV. 


which  must  make  us  love  Him  better  ; 
we  can,  indeed,  only  love  Him  by 
Himself,  who  "  is  love,"  dwelling  within 
us.  We  must  ask  Him  to  give  us  of 
Himself,  to  come  and  fill  our  hearts, 
that  they  may  be  filled  with  love. 
1.  We  must  try  to  deepen  our  feeling 
of  love  by  deepening  our  feeling  of 
God's  goodness.  2.  We  must  seek 
to  gain  more  love  through  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ.  By  looking  steadfastly 
to  Him,  by  realising  (that  is,  making 
real  to  us)  all  He  is  to  us,  and  all  He 
has  done  for  us,  we  shall  best  learn  to 
love  Him  as  He  should  be  loved. — 
W.   Walsham  How,  D.D. 

Gnostic  Ideas  of  God. — The  Gnostics 
knew  a  good  deal  about  God,  but  they 
did  not  know  Him  ;  for  instead  of 
loving  those  brethren  who  did  not 
share  their  intellectual  attainments, 
they  had  an  arrogant  contempt  for 
them. 

Ver.  9.  God^s  Love-gift. — There  are 
two  ways  of  treating  the  records  of 
Christ's  birth  into  the  world  :  (1)  we 
may  dwell  on  the  incidents  ;  or  (2)  we 
may  ponder  over  the  meanings,  as 
Mary,  the  mother  of  Jesus,  did.  We 
may  ask- — Who  sent  Him  ?  Why  did 
He  come  ?  And  what  did  He  come 
to  do  ?  The  apostle  John  is  the  per- 
son above  all  others  who  can  worthily 
answer  our  questions. 

I.  The  secret  of  Christ's  coining  is 
God's  love  to  us. — The  Babe  is  a  sent 
one,  and  this  is  the  message  He  carries. 
The  absolute  truth  about  God  is  this, 
"  God  is  love."  And  that  is  the  pri- 
mary truth  of  the  Christian  revelation. 
By  itself,  however,  as  something  only 
to  think,  it  would  be  of  little  interest 
to  us.  We  could  never  find  any  help 
in  elaborate  arguments  to  prove  con- 
cerning our  mother  that  "  she  is  love." 
Love  always  wants  to  find  expression — 
to  make  the  loved  one  happy,  to  satisfy 
itself  in  what  it  can  do  for  those  on 
whom  its  love  is  set. 

IT.  The  further  secret  of  Christ's 
coming  is  this — God  wanted  to  show 
His  love  to   us. — Love  finds  expres- 


sion in  gifts.  Two  things  about 
gifts ;  1.  Love  finds  what  will  best 
express  itself.  It  really  gives  itself  in 
the  gift.  God  loved  the  world,  and 
wanted  to  give  it  something  that  would 
really  be  giving  it  Himself.  Would 
any  mere  thing  do  ?  Nay,  He  would 
give  His  Son,  who  was  Himself  in  the 
sphere  of  our  human  life.  Himself  in 
our  humanity.  2.  Love  finds  what 
will  best  satisfy  those  it  loves.  We 
ask  what  the  loved  one  most  needs. 
We  find  that,  and  we  try  to  meet 
that.  God  asks  what  His  creatures 
most  need.  There  was  something  they 
needed  which  they  hardly  knew  they 
needed — a  Saviour  from  sin.  God  gave 
that.  And  God  gave  that  as  a  hahe, 
because  He  would  save  men  from  sin 
through  love.  Just  what  a  babe  can 
do  is  win  love,  constrain  hearts,  deliver 
from  self,  and  so  ennoble.  What  the 
infant  Jesus  did  for  Mary  is  the  type 
of  what  Jesus  does  for  us  all.  We 
have  salvation  in  having  the  Saviour. 
Take  God's  love- gift  into  the  heart,  and 
let  Him  do  His  work  there,  and  we 
are  saved. 

The  Only  Begotten  Son. — "  His  Son, 
His  only  begotten  "  (/xoi/oycv^?).  The 
term  is  peculiar  to  St.  John,  and 
it  means  "  only  born,"  distinguishing 
between  Him  who  was  horn  a  son,  a 
son  in  such  a  way  as  can  only  be 
figured  by  a  human  generation,  and 
those  who  are  made  sons,  constituted 
such  by  an  act  of  creation,  which 
decided  the  being  they  should  have, 
and  the  relations  in  which  they  should 
stand.  Matthew  Henry  says:  *'This 
person  is  in  some  peculiar  distinguish- 
ing way  the  Son  of  God  ;  He  is  the 
only  begotten.  Should  we  suppose  Him 
begotten  as  a  creature  or  created  being, 
He  is  not  the  only  begotten.  Should 
we  suppose  Him  a  natural  necessary 
irradiation  from  the  Father's  glory,  or 
glorious  essence,  or  substance.  He  must 
be  the  only  begotten  ;  and  then  it  will 
be  a  mystery  and  miracle  of  Divine 
love  that  such  a  Son  should  be  sent 
into  our  world  for  us."  In  Heb. 
i.  6  the  expression  appears  as  **  first - 

319 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY     I.  JOHN. 


begotten."  What  has  to  be  discovered, 
and  what  is  so  diificult  to  discover,  is 
the  precise  reason  St.  John  had  for 
speaking  of  Christ  in  this  particular 
way.  The  term  is  indeed  exclusively 
used  by  St.  John,  and  the  associations 
of  the  similar  terms,  "  first -begotten," 
and  "  first-begotten  from  the  de-ad," 
and  "  first-born,"  are  altogether  differ- 
ent. On  four  occasions  in  his  gospel 
St.  John  mentions  the  "only  begot- 
ten "  :  once  it  is  "  only  begotten  of  the 
Father " ;  three  times  it  is  "  only 
begotten  Son,"  (John  i.  14,  18,  iii.  16, 
18).  In  1  John  v.  1  we  have,  "  Him 
that  is  begotten  of  Him."  In  1  John 
V.  18,  "  He  that  is  begotten  of  God." 
But  this  last  verse  is  somewhat  con- 
fusing, because  it  applies  the  word 
"  begotten  "  to  believers,  and  we  think 
it  must  be  kept  exclusively  for  Christ. 
In  Rev.  i.  5  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  the 
"  first-begotten  of  the  dead."  It  can- 
not therefore  be  said  that  by  Sb.  John 
the  idea  of  a  relation  to  God  which 
can  only  be  represented  by  human 
generation  is  exclusively  kept.  But 
he  certainly  did  conceive  of  a  unity 
between  God  and  Christ  differing  from 
the  relation  subsisting  between  God 
and  Christ's  people. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Lovers  Highest  Manifes- 
tation.— The  text  is  one  of  the  loveliest 
gems  of  gospel  truth,  and  the  context 
forms  an  appropriately  beautiful  set- 
ting. Love  is  of  God,  yea,  is  of  the 
very  essence  of  His  being  ;  to  be  love- 
less is  to  be  godless,  while  to  love  is 
to  be  a  "  partaker  of  the  Divine 
nature." 

I.  The  feeling  manifested. — Not 
mere  goodness  or  benevolence,  but  love. 
*'  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting 
love."  "Like  as  a  father."  "Thy 
Maker  is  thine  husband  "  (Isa.  xlix. 
15,  16).  It  is  love  that  "  passeth 
knowledge,"  for  it  is  an  attribute  of 
the  infinite  Being. 

II.  Toward  whom  manifested. — 
Consider:  1.  Our insig^iificance.  "What 
is  man,  that  Thou  shouldst  magnify 
him,  and  that  Thou  shouldst  set  Thine 
heart  upon   him  ? "     2.  Our  depravity 

320 


and  guilt.  "  God  commendeth  His  love 
toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet 
sinners,  Christ  died  for  us "  (Tit.  iii. 
3-6).  3.  Our  indifference  and  hostility. 
"  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved 
God,"  etc.  "  When  we  were  enemies, 
we  were  reconciled  unto  God  by  the 
death  of  His  Son." 

III.  How  manifested. — 1.  ^^  Sent  His 
only  begotten  Son.''  Consider:  (1)  The 
greatness  of  Christ.  "God  over  all, 
blessed  for  ever."  Same  in  substance 
with  Father,  equal  in  power  and  glory. 
(2)  His  nearness  and  dearness  to  the 
Father.  "  Only  begotten,  well  be- 
loved "  ;  "  His  dear  Son."  Our  children 
are  endeared  to  us  because  they  are 
our  own  flesh  and  blood,  resemble  us, 
have  been  long  associated  with  us,  and 
have  shown  fidelity  and  affection. 
Christ  "  and  the  Father  are  one  " ;  He 
is  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's 
glory,  and  the  express  image  of  His 
person  " ;  "  was  in  the  beginning  with 
God  "  ;  and  is  ever  faithful  and  loving. 
"  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will ;  yea.  Thy 
law  is  within  My  heart."  (See  2  Pet. 
i.  17.)  2.  ''^ Sent  into  the  world'' — a 
world  alienated  from  God,  averse  to 
holiness,  and  hostile  toward  holy  char- ' 
acters.  Parable  of  the  wicked  husband- 
men (Matt.  xxi.  34-38).  Incarnate 
Virtue  appeared  on  earth,  and  instead 
of  worshipping  Him  the  people  cruci- 
fied Him  between  two  thieves.  God 
sent  Him  with  full  knowledge  of  His 
future  sufferings  and  shame — saw 
Him  recoiling  from  loathsome  touch 
of  tempter,  agonising  in  Gethsemane 
with  piteous  appeal  to  His  Father,  and 
heard  Him  cry  inf  desertion  of  soul  upon 
the  cross,  "  My  God,  My  God  !  "  And 
not  only  with  foreknowledge,  but  pre- 
determination. The  very  conditions  of 
the  Incarnation  necessitated  the  Cruci- 
fixion ;  the  path  from  Bethlehem  to 
Calvary  was  a  straight  one  marked  out 
by  God  Himself.  "  God  sent  forth 
His  Son,  made  under  the  law,  to 
redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law." 
But  Christ  could  only  "  redeem  us  from 
the  curse  of  the  law  "  by  "  being  made 
a  curse  for  us."  The  Father  therefore 
deliberately  "  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.    IV. 


of  US  all,"  and  delivered  Him  over  to 
punitive  justice  (Acts  ii.  23;  Rom. 
viii.  32). 

lY.  For  wkat  purpose  manifested. 
— 1.  "To  he  the  pi^opitiation  for  our 
sins"  (Rom.  iii.  23-26  ;  Col.  i.  20-22). 
2.  "  That  we  might  live  through  Him'' 
(John  iii.  16,  x.  10). — Agape, 

Ver.  10.  The  Propitiation. — The 
greater  anything  is,  the  more  sides  and 
aspects  it  will  present  to  view ;  the  less 
will  it  be  revealed  to  any  one  view, 
the  more  necessary  it  becomes  to 
observe  it  from  every  possible  stand- 
point. A  dwelling-house  can  be 
comprehended  after  a  few  minutes' 
examination ;  but  a  cathedral  discloses 
ever  new  parts,  new  relations,  new 
proportions,  and  new  adornments  to 
the  man  who  can  be  patient,  can  look 
at  it  from  every  angle,  and  under 
every  variety  of  circumstance, — when 
the  sunshine,  streaming  in  through 
the  coloured  windows,  makes  a  glory 
round  every  pillar  and  floods  the 
pavement  with  tints ;  or  when  the 
shadowy  twihght  makes  a  saintly 
gloom  hang  over  the  arches ;  or  when 
the  full  cold  moonlight  seems  to  people 
aisle  and  choir  with  ghostly  shapes ; 
or  when  sounds  of  holy  music  rise  from 
the  worshippers  and  circle  round,  and 
swell  high,  going  up  to  God ;  or  when 
all  is  still,  no  human  voice  is  heard, 
the  buried  saints  alone  seem  to  fill  the 
place,  and  in  the  stillness  the  soul  can 
almost  catch  the  echoes  of  the  heavenly 
song.  And  God's  truth  is  a  great 
whole  that  is,  for  us,  many-sided,  and 
can  never  be  perfectly/  known  by  any 
one  of  us.  And  that  particular  part 
of  truth  which  concerns  the  recovery 
and  salvation  of  men  is  one  of  these 
great  and  many-sided  things.  We 
may  all  get  our  own  best  positions  for 
examining  the  great  cathedral  of  the 
redemption  truth,  and  be  thankful 
for  the  fitnesses  and  beauties  which 
we  can  for  ourselves  discover.  St. 
Paul  helps  us  to  understand  the 
meaning  of  this  expression  in  the  text, 
"  the  propitiation  for  sins,"  when  he 
writes  in  this  way  of  the  Lord  Jesus 


Christ,  "Whom  God  hath  set  forth 
a  propitiation  through  faith  in  His 
blood,  to  declare  His  righteousness  for 
the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past, 
through  the  forbearance  of  God " 
(Rom.  iii.  25).  By  making  "  propitia- 
tion for  the  sin  of  the  world,"  let  us 
then  understand  this  little  part  or 
piece  of  the  great  whole  of  redeeming 
truth — the  righteousness  of  God  is 
seen  in  His  justifying  freely,  as  an 
act  of  infinite  grace,  all  who,  having 
sinned,  believe  the  message  of  forgive- 
ness brought  to  them  by  Jesus  Christ, 
and  sealed  to  them  in  His  blood.  But 
how  does  Christ,  set  forth,  declare  the 
righteousness  of  God  in  the  forgiveness 
of  sin  ? 

I.  Christ  is  the  Ambassador  of  the 
act  of  grace. — As  Ambassador  His 
credentials  were  abundant,  and  in 
every  way  satisfactory.  His  life  itself 
is  the  great  proof  that  He  was  the 
Son  of  God.  His  words  were  Divine 
words ;  His  miracles  were  exhibitions 
of  Divine  power.  Who  has  ever 
doubted  the  righteousness  of  those  mes- 
sages which  Moses  and  the  prophets 
delivered  for  God,  and  concerning  Him  ? 
Because  we  are  sure  that  they  were 
men  sent  from  God,  we  are  sure  that 
their  message  was  a  righteous  message. 
Then  if  Jesus  Christ  was  the  very 
highest  of  all  ambassadors,  the  message 
He  brought  was  a  righteous  message, 
a  faithful  expression  of  that  eternal 
righteousness  which  belongs  to  Him 
who  is  "light,"  and  in  whom  is  no 
darkness  at  all.  What  then  did  Jesus 
tell  us  concerning  God  ?  He  preached, 
on  God's  behalf,  the  forgiveness  of  sins. 
He  Himself  forgave  sin.  We  never 
can  think  of  Jesus  as  acting  unright- 
eously when  He  said  to  the  paralytic, 
"  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee  " ;  or  to 
the  woman  whom  everybody  knew  as 
a  sinner,  "  Thy  sins,  which  are  many, 
are  all  forgiven  thee."  But  in  those 
cases  Jesus  was  only  showing  us  God, 
and  telling  His  message  to  men. 
Jesus  commanded  men  to  forgive  one 
another  freely,  so  that  they  might  be 
children  of  their  heavenly  Father,  who 
forgave    freely.      He    sent    out    His 

321 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   1.  JOHN, 


disciples  into  the  world  to  preach 
everywhere  His  message  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins.  And  on  His  very 
cross  He  prayed  for  His  murderers, 
"  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do."  His  very  presence 
here  among  men  was  an  act  of  grace. 
It  seemed  to  say — God  has  not  forsaken 
even  His  sinful  world.  He  pities  His 
lost  creatures.  He  will  even  sacrifice 
His  best  if  He  may  save  the  lost. 
And  the  character  of  Jesus — His  per- 
fect righteousness — seems  to  guarantee 
the  righteousness  of  His  work.  He 
was,  all  through  His  life,  showing  us 
God  ;  and  none  ever  dwelt  among  men 
who  showed,  as  He  has  shown,  the 
infinite  holiness,  the  spotless  right- 
eousness, of  God.  None  of  us  can 
think  that  the  gospel  which  the 
righteous  Jesus  brought  in  any  sense 
limits  the  perfections  of  God.  Let 
Christ  then  preach  us  His  God- 
honouring  gospel.  It  is  the  free 
forgiveness  of  sins.  It  is  the  announce- 
ment of  God's  gracious  act  of  pardon. 
Christ  came  to  bring  that  message  to 
earth,  and  in  order  to  make  us  believe 
it,  He  sealed  it  with  His  own  blood. 
God  is  not  merely  willing  to  forgive  ; 
He  has  once  for  all  forgiven  every  one 
who  will  believe  His  word.  "  He 
pardoneth  and  absolveth  all  them 
that  truly  repent,  and  unfeigneclly 
believe  His  holy  gospel"  of  full  and 
free  forgiveness. 

II.  Christ  demands  and  works  such 
a  moral  change  in  men  as  declares 
His  righteousness  in  granting  forgive- 
ness.— The  apostle  Paul  explains  to  us 
that  "  propitiation  is  through  faith  in 
His  blood."  But  his  language  is  very 
careful.  He  does  not  say,  "  a  propitia- 
tion through  His  blood  "  ;  or,  "  a  pro- 
pitiation by  His  blood " ;  but  he 
distinctly  and  precisely  says,  *'  a  pro- 
pitiation through  faith"  the  object  of 
the  faith  being  "  the  blood."  Faith  is 
the  thing  set  so  prominently  before  us — 
our  justification  by  faith,  our  forgive- 
ness upon  faith,  our  acceptance  on  the 
ground  of  faith.  Evidently  this  faith 
is  something  belonging  to  men,  and 
it   imphes   some   groat   moral  change 

322 


wrought  in  men.  When  the  king 
announces  to  his  rebellious  subjects  his 
free  pardon  of  all  their  offences,  and 
sends  that  pardon  by  the  hands  of  his 
messenger,  who  is  it  that  needs  to  be 
propitiated  ?  Plainly  enough,  it  is  not 
the  king.  He  is  propitiated,  or  he 
would  not  send  that  message  of  pardon. 
There  is  no  enmity  in  him.  It  is  that 
rebel  nation  that  needs  to  be  appeased. 
They  have  taken  up  an  ill-will  against 
their  king.  It  is  the  work  of  the 
king's  messenger  to  appease  men's 
anger,  and  sooth  down  their  ill-feeling 
toward  their  king,  and  so  induce  them 
to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  accept  his 
sovereign  mercy.  What  hinders  rebels 
from  receiving  the  forgiveness  offered 
them  ?  Surely  nothing  but  their  rebel- 
lion. As  long  as  that  spirit  of  rebellion 
lasts,  they  cannot  have  the  pardon, 
though  it  is  proclaimed.  How  can  a 
man  have  the  king's  pardon  while  he 
grasps  his  weapons  ?  By  that  con- 
tinued act  he  really  refuses  the  pardon. 
But  let  his  mind  be  changed,  let  him 
throw  down  those  weapons ;  and  then 
the  proclaimed  forgiveness  covers  even 
him  beneath  its  shadow  ;  then  there 
has  been  propitiation  between  the  king 
and  his  rebellious  subjects ;  then  the 
king's  messenger  has  become  the  pro- 
pitiator, or  propitiatory,  the  mercy- 
seat  where  the  separated  ones  have 
met  in  reconciliation.  This  is  the  truth 
to  which  our  attention  should  be  most 
anxiously  given—Man  needs  to  be 
propitiated  ;  man's  enmity  against  God 
needs  to  be  appeased.  We  need  that 
Jesus  Christ  should  be  a  propitiator  to 
us,  and  change  our  hearts  towards  God. 
That  is  the  very  work  entrusted  to  the 
Messenger  and  Ambassador,  Jesus 
Christ.  He  is  sent  into  the  world, 
that  by  His  life,  by  His  teachings,  by 
His  deeds,  by  His  moral  influence,  by 
the  holy  persuasions  of  His  sacrifice, 
He  might  get  a  redeeming  power  on 
the  hearts  of  men — breaking  down 
middle  walls  of  partition,  changing 
pride  for  humility,  replacing  hard- 
heartedness  with  repentance,  and 
hatred  of  God  for  love  to  Him.  The 
great  aim  of  our  Lord's  A\^ork  is,  so  to 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.   JOHN. 


CHAP.    IV. 


bear  persuasions  on  the  hearts  of  men, 
that  they  should  be  wilUng  to  accept 
salvation  by  grace.  How  Christ  works 
that  change  in  men's  hearts  can  only 
be  briefly  suggested.  It  is  done  partly 
by  that  most  attractive  view  of  God 
which  Jesus  brings  :  partly,  as  Jesus 
shows  us  what  a  real  son  of  God  is, 
and  so  what  we  should  be  ;  partly,  by 
a  most  extraordinary  proof  of  love ; 
God's  own  Son  is  willing  to  sacrifice 
Himself,  even  in  a  most  painful  and 
shameful  death,  in  order  to  convince 


us  that  God  does  love  us  with  an 
everlasting  love,  and  does  want  to  save 
us.  Whosoever  believes  becomes  another 
man  by  believing. 

Ver.  13.  '' Of  His  Spirit:'— It  v^o\i\di 
be  precisely  in  accordance  with  St. 
John's  teaching  here  if  we  read  "spirit," 
or  disposition.  What  God  gives  to 
those  who  are  in  vital  relations  with 
Him  is,  the  spirit  of  His  own  love^ 
which  inspires  them  also  to  self- 
sacrifice. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  15—21. 

The  THumphs  of  the  Perfect  Love. — There  is  considerable  repetition  of  state- 
ment in  this  epistle,  the  repetition  of  a  man  who  has  a  few  main  truths  which 
he  holds  tightly,  and  loves  to  brood  over.  He  dehghts  in  the  sound  of  them, 
and  so  goes  over  them  again  and  again.  The  additional  thought  here  is,  that 
when  our  love — our  love  to  God,  and  to  our  brother — has  grown  into  such 
strength  that  it  can  fairly  be  called  "perfect,"  that  is,  perfect  within  the 
measures  of  the  human,  it  proves  to  have  a  splendid  power  in  our  lives,  elevating 
us  to  meet  all  occasions,  freeing  us  from  all  fear,  giving  us  grand  inspirations, 
and  even  making  us  bold  to  meet  the  testings  of  the  judgment  day.  Then,  as 
if  it  were  to  him  an  absolutely  essential  point,  he  urges  again  on  attention  that 
the  love  he  means  is  only  that  love  which  comes  by  the  conviction  and  persuasion 
of  God's  love  in  Christ  to  us,  and  finds  its  natural  and  befitting  expression  in 
self-sacrificing  love  to  the  brethren.  Yer.  18  is  "proof  of  the  preceding 
statement  that  perfect  love  will  give  us  boldness,  by  showing  the  mutually 
exclusive  nature  of  love  and  fear.  Love  moves  towards  others  in  the  spirit  of 
self-sacrifice ;  fear  shrinks  from  others  in  the  spirit  of  self-preservation.  The 
two  are  to  be  understood  quite  generally ;  neither  love  of  God  nor  fear  of  God 
is  specially  meant.  In  all  relations  whatever,  perfect  love  excludes  fear,  and 
fear  prevents  love  from  being  perfect.  And  the  two  vary  inversely :  the  more 
perfect  the  love,  the  less  possibility  of  fear;  and  the  more  the  fear,  the  less 
perfect  the  love.  But  though  as  certain  as  any  physical  law,  the  principle, 
that  perfect  love  excludes  all  fear,  is  an  ideal  that  has  never  been  verified  in 
fact.  Like  the  first  law  of  motion,  it  is  verified  by  the  approximations  made 
to  it.  No  believer's  love  has  ever  been  so  perfect  as  entirely  to  banish  fear ; 
but  every  believer  experiences  that  as  his  love  increases  his  fear  diminishes" 
(A.  Plummer,  D.D.). 

I.  Love's  triumph  in  the  judgment  day. — What  can  there  possibly  be  to 
condemn  in  a  life  ruled  and  toned  by  love?  That  can  be  answered  by 
asking  another  question — What  was  there  to  condemn  in  that  human  life 
which  was  lived  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  was  ruled  and  toned  by  love  ?  It  is 
inconceivable  that  the  Lord  Jesus  could  fear  any  attempt  to  appraise,  or  test, 
or  judge  His  human  life.  Then,  in  the  degree  in  which  we  have  the  perfect 
love,  it  can  be  said  of  us,  "  As  He  is,  so  are  we  in  this  world,"  and  therefore  we 
need  fear  judgment  no  more  that  He  did. 

II.  Love's  triumph  over  the  inward  distress  of  fear. — "  Perfect  love  casteth 
out  fear  :  because  fear  hath  torment."  It  worries  us,  causes  fretting  and 
anxiety,  because  it  keeps  our   thoughts   circling  round  self  and  self-interests. 

323 


CHAP.   IV. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  JOHN, 


There  is  no  fear  in  love,  because  it  takes  us  out  of  ourselves,  and  makes  us 
spend  ourselves  in  the  service  of  others.  And  anxiety  about  them  is  altogether 
different  from  fear,  which  concerns  ourselves.  "If  we  live  in  this  serene 
atmosphere  of  pure  sympathy  with  God  and  man,  Christ  is  in  us,  and  we  in 
Him,  because  God  is  love  itself.  Sharing  His  nature,  therefore,  we  must  be  like 
Him ;  and  the  more  completely  we  allow  this  Divine  love  towards  our  Father 
and  our  brothers  to  transform  our  whole  being,  the  more  we  shall  be  like  our 
Judge,  and  the  less  cause  we  shall  have  for  dread."  "  The  more  perfect  this 
disposition  of  serene  sympathy  becomes,  the  less  share  can  any  form  of  anxiety 
have  in  it.  Where  it  is  a  well-grounded  sympathy  with  a  perfect  being,  its 
serenity  is  all  the  more  complete  in  proportion  to  its  sincerity." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  15.  The  Divinity  of  Christ  a 
Test  Doctrine. — "  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 
God."  Compare  ver.  2,  which  demands 
the  confession  that  "  Jesus  Christ  is 
come  in  the  flesh,"  or  took  upon  Him- 
self a  veritable  human  body.  But  this 
comparison  brings  to  view  a  distinction 
not  always  recognised.  Belief  in  the 
humanity  of  Christ  is  absolutely  de- 
manded as  a  condition  of  being  a 
Christian  at  all ;  but  no  such  absolute 
demand  is  made  in  relation  to  belief  in 
Christ's  Divinity.  What  is  said  about 
that  is  that  it  is  essential  to  the  higher 
Christian  life,  it  belongs  to  the  .higher 
experiences ;  the  man  who  can  see  in 
Christ  the  Son  of  God  enters  into  the 
more  advanced  privileges ;  God  dwelleth 
in  him,  and  he  in  God.  When  this 
distinction  is  set  before  us,  we  remember 
that  our  Lord's  disciples  had  Him  first 
in  a  human  fellowship,  and  appre- 
hended Him,  and  believed -in  Him  as 
the  Messiah- man  Christ  Jesus.  It 
even  appears  that  they  only  very 
slowly  grew  into  the  idea  of  His  Divine 
Sonship.  St.  Peter  was  manifestly  in 
advance  of  them  all  with  his  confession. 
But  none  of  them  entered  into  the 
higher  life  of  relations  with  Christ 
until  they  did  fully  grasp  the  truth  of 
the  Divine  Sonship.  To  be  saved  men 
must  believe  in  the  human  Saviour^ 
in  Christ  "  come  in  the  flesh."  To  be 
sanctified,  to  attain  the  higher  life, 
men  must  believe  that  "  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God."  So  the  test  of  the  re- 
generate life  was — and  perhaps,  if  we 
stated  things  aright,  we  should  see  that 

324 


it  still  is — believing  that  Christ  is 
"  come  in  the  flesh."  And  the  test  of 
Christian  attainment  is  the  sign  of  the 
cultured  soul-power  that  can  grip  the 
truth,  that  "  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  " 

Ver.  16.  God  is  Love. — There  is  one 
form  of  worship  that  is  universal  and 
involuntary,  and  that  is  the  resem- 
blance which  the  deity  and  the  devotee 
are  certain  to  bear  to  one  another. 
They  who  worship  an  idol  are  like  to 
the  idol  in  the  beginning,  for  they 
fashion  it  after  the  model  of  something 
in  themselves  ;  but  they  grow  more 
and  more  like  to  it  afterwards,  by 
sharing  and  copying  the  qualities  with 
which  they  fancy  the  false  god  to  be 
endowed.  No  man  is  better  than  what 
he  burns  incense  to,  but  every  man 
takes  on  more  and  more  of  the  char- 
acter of  his  favourite  divinity.  How 
came  human  parents  by  their  love? 
Through  the  being  made  in  the  image 
and  likeness  of  God.  Parental  love  is 
a  valuable  salvage  from  the  wreck  of 
the  Fall.  This  is  our  subject — the 
divinity  of  Love,  and  the  love  of 
Divinity. 

I.  The  strong  representation,  "  God 
is  love." — There  is  a  most  vital  differ- 
ence betwixt  the  conduct  of  any  being 
and  the  character  of  any  being ;  and 
there  is  a  yet  further  distinction 
between  character  and  essence.  This 
emphatic  language — the  calling  the 
Being  the  attribute — is  a  dignity  re- 
served for  this  one  attribute  alon£.  I 
read     that     "with     God    is    terrible 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I  JOHN. 


CHAP.  IV, 


majesty,"  but  I  have  no  recollection 
of  being  told  that  "God  is  majesty." 
(See,  however,  the  expression  "  God  is 
light.")  How  could  love  have  been 
embodied  so  richly  as  it  was  in  the 
Seeker  and  Saviour  of  the  lost,  the 
Friend  of  little  children,  the  Companion 
of  sorrowful  women,  the  Comforter  of 
penitent  outcasts,  the  Refuge  of  pub- 
licans and  sinners,  and  the  Sacrifice  in 
body  and  blood  for  the  world  of  the 
ungodly  ?  Surely,  herein  is  love.  This 
text  is  Immanuel  in  print.  We  want 
both  the  "  love  "  and  the  "  God."  Call 
Christ  "God,"  or  call  Christ  "Love," 
as  you  need  Him  at  the  moment,  for 
He  is  both.  Being  both  makes  Him 
the  Mediator. 

II.  The  extraordinary  language 
touching  the  relation  of  the  Christian 
with  Christ. — We  are,  first,  the  inhabit- 
ants, with  Christ  for  a  dwelling,  and 
then  we  are  the  houses,  in  which  Christ 
makes  a  home.  Two  very  different 
ideas,  but  both  equally  beautiful  and 
equally  instructive. — Henry  Christo- 
pherson. 

Vers.  18-21.  Perfect  Love  casteth 
out  Fear. — (This  outhne  is  given  as 
an  illustration  of  the  evangelistic 
method  of  dealing  with  the  passage.) 

I.  The  state  of  an  awakened  soul. 
— "  Fear  hath  torment."  There  are 
two  kinds  of  fear  mentioned  in  the 
Bible.  The  one  is  the  atmosphere  of 
heaven,  the  other  of  hell.  1.  There 
is  the  fear  of  love.  2.  There  is  the 
fear  of  terror.  Deal  with  the  latter, 
and  explain  its  rise  in  the  soul.  (1)  A 
natural  man  casteth  off  fear,  and 
restrains  prayer  before  God.  (2)  When 
the  Spirit  of  God  opens  the  eyes.  He 
makes  the  sinner  tremble.  (3)  The 
Spirit  makes  him  feel  the  greatness 
of  sin,  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  it. 
(4)  Then  the  sense  of  corruption 
working  in  the  heart  torments  the 
soul.  (5)  The  Spirit  also  convinces 
the  soul  of  his  inability  to  help  himself. 
(6)  And  then  the  man  fears  he  shall 
never  be  in  Christ. 

II.  The  change  on  believing. — 
1.  The  love  here  spoken  of  is  not  our 


love  to  God,  but  His  to  us;  for  it  is 
called  perfect  love.  2.  But  where  does 
this  love  fall  ?     On  Jesus  Christ. 

III.  His  love  gives  boldness  in  the 
day  of  judgment.  —  Because  then — 
1.  Christ  shall  be  our  Judge.  2.  The 
Father  Himself  loves  us. 

lY.  The  consequences  of  being  in  the 
love  of  God. — 1.  We  love  Him.  2.  We 
love  our  brother. — E.  M.  McCheyne. 

Yer.  18.  Two  Kinds  of  Fear.—ThQ 
Bible  speaks  of  two  kinds  of  fear. 
One  is  terror,  fright,  dread, — the  lively 
apprehension  of  evil  to  come ;  the 
crouching  and  crying  of  the  dog  in 
anticipation  of  the  lash  whose  whistle 
in  the  air  he  already  hears.  The 
other  is  reverence,  respect,  adoration, — 
the  awe  that  fills  the  mind  as  it  stands 
in  the  presence  of  errorless  Wisdom  ; 
the  instinctive  tribute  that  weakness 
pays  to  Omnipotence  ;  the  admiration 
that  human  frailty  cannot  conceal,  or 
suppress,  when  God's  flawless  goodness 
rises  before  it ;  tho  impression  of  the 
Divine  on  the  human  ;  the  worshipful 
stoop  of  the  soul  before  God,  not  because 
it  is  frightened,  not  because  God  has 
thunder-bolts  in  His  hands,  and  legions 
of  heaven-bright  warriors,  with  swords 
that  turn  every  way  around  Him, 
but  because  He  is  altogether  lovely, 
because  He  has  mercy  for  thousands, 
because  He  is  holy  and  good,  because 
He  is  God — because  He  is  Love. — 
J.  Morgan  Gibbon. 

Love  and  Fear. — In  the  epistles  of 
the  apostle  of  love  comes  out  most 
broadly,  most  sternly,  the  principle 
that  all  mankind  are  divided  into  two 
great  classes, — the  one,  those  that  are 
of  God ;  and  the  other,  those  that  are 
of  the  world  and  of  the  devil.  What- 
ever is  not  of  light  is  darkness.  There 
are  only  two  motives,  St.  John  says, 
that  rule  men  in  regard  to  God — only 
two  emotions  :  either  love  or  fear. 

I.  The  universal  dominion  of  fear. 
— Wherever  there  is  not  the  presence 
of  active  love.  This  rests  on  the 
universal  consciousness  of  sin.  All 
men  everywhere   have   some  more  or 

325 


CHAP.  IV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


less  active  or  torpid  working  of  con- 
science. It  is  not  made  doubtful  by 
the  fact,  that  the  ordinary  condition 
of  men  is  not  one  of  active  dread  of 
God.  Man  has  a  strange  power  of 
refusing  to  think  of  a  subject,  because 
he  knows  that  to  think  of  it  would 
be  torture  and  terror.  The  fear  which 
springs  from  the  conviction  of  God  as 
righteous,  and  the  consciousness  of 
individual  sinfulness,  varies  in  energy 
with  the  varying  strength  of  these 
two  convictions,  and  it  assumes  various 
forms.  Sometimes  it  appears  as  a 
straining  after  forgetfulness — that  is 
fear  wearing  the  mask  of  godlessness. 
Sometimes  it  assumes  the  very  opposite 
shape,  and  becomes  the  underlying 
basis  of  vast  and  complicated  systems 
of  rigorous,  joyless  worship — that  is 
fear  wearing  the  mask  of  godliness. 
Sometimes  this  fear  takes  the  under- 
standing into  its  pay,  and  appears  as 
enlightened  disbelief  in  God  and  immor- 
tality. Sometimes  it  takes  the  shape 
of  vehement  efforts  to  get  rid  of  un- 
welcome thought  by  fierce  plunging 
into  business,  or  into  wild  riot.  What- 
ever form  it  take,  the  fear  which  hath 
torment  lies  like  a  sleeping  serpent  in 
the  hearts  of  all  who  think  of  God, 
and  who  cannot  say,  "  We  have  known 
and  believed  the  love  which  God  hath 
to  us." 

II.  The  fearlessness  of  perfect  love. 
— Love  is  no  weak  thing,  no  mere 
sentiment.  The  manliness  of  Christian 
love,  and  the  putting  away  from 
ourselves  of  all  fear,  because  we  are 
"  perfected  in  love,"  is  one  of  the  highest 
lessons  that  the  gospel  teaches  us,  and 
one  of  the  greatest  things  which  the 
gospel  gives  us.  Love  and  fear  exclude 
each  other.  Fear  is  based  upon  a 
consideration  of  some  possible  personal 
evil  consequence  coming  down  upon 
me  from  that  clear  sky  above  me. 
Love  is  based  upon  the  forgetfulness 
of  self  altogether.  The  love  of  God, 
entering  a  man's  heart,  destroys  all 
fear  of  Him.  All  the  attributes  of 
God  come  to  be  on  our  side.  The  love 
which  casts  out  fear  rises  in  the  heart 
as  a  consequence  of  knowing  and  be- 

326 


lieving  the  love  which  God  hath  to  us. 
This  love  to  God,  which  is  built  upon 
God's  love  to  us,  is  the  all-powerful 
motive  for  every  good  thing.  If  you 
would  grow  in  power,  hoHness,  blessed- 
ness, remember  this,  "  Love  is  the 
fulfilling  of  the  law."  Perfect  love  is 
perfect  man.  And  love,  which  destroys 
fear,  heightens  reverence  and  deepens 
self -distrust. — A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

Yer.  19.  The  Genesis  of  Christian 
Love. — "  We  love,  because  He  first 
loved  us."  Spontaneous  love,  loving 
just  because  He  is  love,  and  must  give 
out  Himself,  may  be  predicated  of 
God,  but  it  can  be  predicated  of  none 
else.  Yet  even  the  love  of  God  can  do 
nothing  until  it  finds  an  object  to 
spend  itself  upon.  All  love  other  than 
God's  is  kindled  by  love.  It  is  like 
life — it  cannot  exist  save  by  the  contact 
of  love.  Nobody  on  earth  ever  loves 
unless  he  is  loved.  The  love  may  be 
that  of  some  one  who  loves  us,  or  it 
may  be  the  love  of  some  one  whom  we 
love.  In  any  and  every  case  we  love 
because  somebody  loves  us.  And  St. 
John  does  not  simply  say  that  we  love 
God  because  He  loves  us  ;  but  he  urges 
the  larger  and  altogether  more  search- 
ing truth,  that  the  love  of  God  to  us 
cannot  have  its  right  influence  on  us 
unless  it  tnahes  us  loving — loving  to 
the  brethren,  loving  to  everybody. 
The  Christian  love  is  precisely  that 
feeling  a  man  can  alone  have  when  he 
*'  knows  and  believes  the  love  that  God 
hath  unto  him." 

Love  the  Cause  of  Love. 

I.  The  love  of  God  to  us  as  sinners 
is  the  "  sole "  cause  of  our  love  to 
Him. — To  make  this  fully  appear,  we 
may  specify  those  other  sources  from 
which  this  disposition  might  be  sup- 
posed to  proceed.  1.  Our  love  to  God 
might  be  supposed  to  be  the  result  of 
a  superior  discernment  of  the  Divine 
character.  But  as  that  character  is 
an  object  of  dislike  to  all  men  in  their 
natural,  fallen  state,  it  is  obvious  that 
this  repugnance  is  not  to  he  overcome 
by  the  exhibition  of  that  character  in 


BO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    I  JOHN. 


CHAP.   IV. 


a  clearer  light.  An  object  of  terror  or 
dislike,  so  long  as  it  is  viewed  as  such, 
cannot  be  loved ;  and  the  more  dis- 
tinctly such  an  object  appears,  the 
more  intensely  will  it  be  hated.  The 
antipathy  to  it  can  only  be  removed 
by  means  of  some  7iew  discovery,  which 
shall  place  that  object  in  an  attractive 
light.  2.  It  might  be  thought  that 
love  to  God,  where  it  exists,  is  the 
result  of  some  predisposition  in  the 
sinner's  heart  towards  God.  Such 
partialities  and  predilections  operate 
very  generally  among  men.  But  since 
the  heart  of  every  man,  by  nature, 
is  at  enmity  to  God,  our  love  to  Him 
cannot  be  attributed  to  this  sourca. 
If  in  any  heart  it  might  have  origin- 
ated thus,  we  should  expect  to  find 
it  in  the  amiable  John.  But  he 
himself  is  no  exception.  3.  It  might 
be  supposed,  again,  that  the  principle 
of  love  to  God  is  directly  planted 
in  the  heart  by  the  hand  of  God. 
But  true  love  cannot  be  forced ;  it 
withers  under  the  breath  and  touch 
of  violence.  No  other  source  but 
the  Divine   compassion  to   us  as  sin- 


ners can  give-  birth  to  this  heavenly 
principle. 

II.  This  love  of  God  is  the  ''  suffi- 
cient "  cause  of  our  love  to  Him. — The 

stoutest  rebel  must  relent  and  love  a 
Being  whose  mercy  and  compassion  he 
has  been  brought  to  feel  extends  to 
himself. — A  non. 

Yer.  20.  Keeping  with  Brethren. — 
To  separate  ourselves  from  our  brethren 
is  to  lose  power.  Half- dead  brands 
heaped  close  will  kindle  one  another, 
and  flame  will  sparkle  beneath  the 
film  of  white  ashes  on  their  edges. 
Fling  them  apart,  and  they  go  out. 
Rake  them  together,  and  they  glow. 
Let  us  try  not  to  be  little,  feeble 
tapers,  stuck  in  separate  sockets,  and 
each  twinkhng  struggling  rays  over 
some  inch  or  so  of  space  ;  but  draw 
near  to  our  brethren,  and  be  workers 
together  with  them,  that  there  may 
rise  a  glorious  flame  from  our  summed 
and  collective  brightness  which  shall 
be  a  guide  and  hospitable  call  to 
many  a  wandering  and  weary  spirit. — 
A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 


ILLUSTRATIONS   TO    CHAPTER    IK 


Ver.  8.  The  Zove  of  God.—"  God  is  love." 
This  single  announcement  of  the  beloved 
disciple,  contradicted  by  so  many  appear- 
ances, yet  carrying  its  own  evidence — in  the 
world  around  us  met  by  many  a  No  and 
many  a  murmur,  and  from  the  caverns  of 
despair  fetching  up  a  fiendish  laughter,  and 
yet  countersigned  by  Jehovah's  handwriting 
on  the  ruined  tablets  of  the  heart,  and  in 
trumpet  tones  reverberated  from  the  hills  of 
immortality — this  shortest  of  sentences,  and 
most  summary  of  gospels,  which  a  breath 
can  utter,  and  which  a  signet  ring  can  con- 
tain— is  the  truth  which,  shining  bright  at 
the  Advent,  will  overspread  tlic  world  in 
the  millennium's  mild  lustre.  It  is  a  truth 
on  which  no  man  has  mused  too  much,  even 
although  lie  has  pondered  it  all  his  days, 
and  to  which  no  anthem  can  do  justice, 
except  that  in  which  golden  harps  mingle, 
and  in  which  the  redeemed  from  among  men 
are  helped  by  the  seraphim. — Br.  James 
Hamilton. 

TJie  Heart  of  God.  -  History's  noblest  deed 
and  record  of  love  is  in  the  self-devotion  of 
the  generous  heathen  Pylades,  who  forfeited 


his  life  to  save  his  friend ;  but  "  God  com- 
mendeth  His  love  to  us,  in  that,  while  we 
were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us." 
"  You  have  not  seen,"  says  a  great  writer 
and  profound  thinker,  *'  the  greatest  gift  of 
all — the  heart  of  God,  the  love  of  His  heart, 
the  heart  of  His  love.  And  will  He  in  very 
deed  show  us  that  ?  Yes,  unveil  that  cross, 
and  see.  It  was  His  only  mode  of  showing 
us  His  heart.  It  is  infinite  love  labouring 
to  reveal  itself — agonising  to  utter  the  ful- 
ness of  infinite  love.  Apart  from  that  act, 
a  boundless  ocean  of  love  would  have  re- 
mained for  ever  shut  up  and  concealed  in  the 
heart  of  God  ;  but  now  it  has  found  an 
ocean-channel.  Beyond  this  He  cannot  go. 
Once  and  for  ever  the  proof  has  been  given, 
♦  God  is  love.'  " 

Our  Love  comes  from  God. — As  the  rays 
come  from  the  sun,  and  yet  are  not  the  sun, 
even  so  our  love  and  pity,  though  they  are 
not  God,  but  merely  a  poor,  weak  image  and 
reflection  of  Him,  yet  from  Him  alone  they 
come.  If  there  is  mercy  in  our  hearts,  it 
comes  from  the  fountain  of  mercy.  If 
there    is   the    light    of   love    in    us,    it    is 

327 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN, 


a    ray   from   the  full   sun    of  ^  His  love. — 
Rev.  C.  Kingsley. 

The  Ocean  of  Divine  Love.—  In  that  great 
ocean  of  the  Divine  love  we  live,  and  move, 
and  have  our  being,  floating  in  it  like  some 
sea-flower  which  spreads  its  filmy  beauty, 
and  waves  its  long  tresses,  in  the  depths  of 
mid-ocean.  The  sound  of  its  waters  is  ever 
in  our  ears,  and  above,  beneath,  around  us 
its  mighty  currents  run  evermore. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

Ver.  17.  Perfect  Love. — We  are  a  long  way 
yet  from  perfect  love  ;  it  is  too  Divine  a 
thing  to  be  speedily  fulfilled  in  the  creature. 
But  we  are  coming  to  it ;  and  then,  when 
we  do  come  to  it,  we  shall  know  more  fully 
bow  great  and  blessed  it  is  as  the  best  wine, 
creation's  endless  festival,  by  reviewing  the 
ages  upon  ages  of  division  and  strife  through 
which  we  have  struggled  on  to  the  unity  of 
love  in  Christ.  The  labours  of  God,  the 
labours  of  the  angels,  the  labours  of  the 
Church,  the  groans  and  contentions  of  all 
creatures  and  all  elements,  will  go  on,  and 
never  cease,  until  the  redemption  of  man- 
kind ;  for  the  perfect  individual  is  essential 
to  the  perfection  of  love. — Pulsford. 

Ver.    18.    Love    casting    out    Fear. — The 


literal  sense  of  this  verse  is  as  follows : 
(Slavish)  fear  exists  not  in  this  love,  but 
perfect  love  (such  as  this)  casts  aside  fear ; 
for  (such)  fear  carries  with  it  terror  (which 
is  inconsistent  with  love),  since  he  who 
feareth  is  not  perfected  in  love,  does  not 
love  perfectly  and  sincerely.  0o/3os,  "  fear," 
here  signifies  a  fear,  not  of  displeasing  God, 
but  of  incurring  His  punishment,  which 
conscience  raises.  "  Casteth  out  fear  "  refers 
to  the  previous  verse,  and  is  contrasted  with 
a  joyful  confidence  in  the  mercy  of  God. — 
Bloomjield. 

Ver.  19.  Love-won  Love. — Have  you  seen 
a  broad,  straight  path  of  silver  brightness 
lying  by  night  upon  a  smooth  sea,  and 
stretching  frt  m  your  feet  away  until  it  was 
lost  in  the  distance — a  path  that  seemed  to 
have  been  trodden  by  the  feet  of  all  the 
saints  who  have  ever  passed  through  a 
shifting  world  to  the  eternal  home  1  Oh, 
that  silver  path  by  night  across  the  sea,  it 
glittered  much  ;  but  it  was  not  its  brightness 
that  lighted  up  the  moon  in  the  sky,  neither 
was  it  the  love  to  Jesus,  trembling  in  a 
believer's  heart,  that  kindled  forgiving  love 
in  Him  I  The  love  that  makes  bright  a 
forgiven  sinner's  path  across  the  world  was 
kindled  by  the  light  of  life  in  the  face  of 
Jesus. —  W,  Arnot. 


CHAPTER   V. 
FAITH  THE  SOURCE  OF  LOVE,  AND  LOVE  THE  FRUIT  OF  FAITH. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Genuine  faith  in  Christ  is  the  sure  sign  of  the  new  life — faith  in  the  sense  of  living,  daily 
trust.  The  faith  which  links  us  with  Christ  in  sonship  carries  with  it  a  twofold  love :  love 
to  the  Father,  which  is  shown  in  keeping  His  commandments  ;  and  love  to  the  brethren — the 
other  sons — which  is  shown  in  self-denying  service.  "  The  very  object  of  the  Divine  birth 
is  the  conquest  of  all  that  is  opposed  to  God  and  to  His  commandments,  and  the  instrument 
of  the  conquest  is  faith."  "  There  is  an  historical  faith,  or  receiving  of  Christ,  which  pre- 
cedes the  new  birth.  But  the  sure  and  certain  persuasion  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the 
Mediator,  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King,  with  a  practical  and  personal  trust  in  Him  as  such  for 
salvation,  is  the  principal  fruit  of  the  new  birth." 

Ver.  1.  Born.— Better,  as  R.V.,  "  begotten."  Him  that  begat. — God.  See  chap.  iv.  7.  So  our 
Lord  pleaded  that  men  could  not  really  love  God,  if  they  did  not  receive  and  love  the  Son 
whom  He  had  sent. 

Ver.  2.  Keep  His  commandments. — A  reminiscence  of  our  Lord's  teachings  (John  xiv.  15, 
21,  23,  XV.  10  :  see  also  2  John  6). 

Ver.  3.  Not  grievous. — It  is  never  a  strain  to  obey  those  whom  we  love.  It  is  of  the  very 
nature  of  love  to  make  obedience  easy.  Were  we  perfect,  we  should  not  find  God's  require- 
ments to  be  commands  at  all ;  they  would  be  our  natural  impulses.  Commands  indeed  are 
only  helps  from  outside  us  towards  our  being  what  we  ourselves  would  wish  to  be,  if  we  were 
our  free,  best  selves. 

Ver.  4.  Overcometh  the  world. — The  world  is  regarded  as  the  sphere  of  the  self-seeking 
principle.  He  who  is  born  of  God  is  born  into  another  sphere — the  sphere  of  the  God-seeking 
principle.  And  the  higher  overmasters  the  lower,  rbv  Kocfxov  ;  the  present  order  of  things 
as  opposed  to  the  kingdom  of  Christ.    Victory  that  overcometh. — R.V.  "  hath  overcome  " 

328 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


(Rom.  viii.  2).  Our  faith. — Which  unites  us  to  Christ,  and  makes  us  participators  in  His 
victory. 

Vers.  6,  7. — In  E.V.  ver.  7  is  properly  omitted.  It  is  an  interpolation,  and  probably 
inserted  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  the  Trinitarian  controversy.  By  water  and  blood. — I.e. 
with  these  distinguishing  marks  or  evidences.  Water  is  the  symbol  of  our  Lord's  baptism ; 
blood,  of  our  Lord's  cross,  passion,  and  sacrifice.  Observe  that  these  stand  at  the  beginning 
and  at  the  close  of  His  ministry,  and  so  present  to  us  the  whole  life.  He  was  declared  to  be 
the  Son  of  God  by  the  Divine  voice  at  His  baptism.  He  was  declared  to  be  the  Son 
of  God  by  His  resurrection,  when  His  life-work  was  completed  in  the  shedding  of  His 
blood.  So  these  two  things  become  the  ground  of  our  faith  in  Him.  The  Spirit. — The 
witness  within  us,  which  fits  to  the  witness  of  the  water  and  the  blood  outside  us.  Notice 
the  use  of  iv  and  5ia  in  this  verse.  Jesus  showed  Himself  to  be  Messiah  by  means  of  (5ia) 
the  water  and  the  blood  ;  ev  marks  the  sphere,  substratum,  element,  in  which  the  proof  was 
afforded.  Not  by  water  only. — This  is  directed  against  the  Cerinthians,  who  held  that  Jesus 
did  suffer  on  the  cross,  but  the  Christ  did  not.  St.  John  asserts  that  the  same  Jesus  to  whom 
the  Divine  testimony  came  at  baptism,  received  the  Divine  testimonj'-  when  His  life-mission 
was  completed  on  the  cross.  He  has  the  testimony  of  both  the  water  and  the  blood ;  and 
the  inward  witness  of  the  Spirit  seals  the  double  testimony.  Spirit  is  truth. — Better,  the 
truth  :  truth  in  perfection.     His  inward  witness  may  be  absolutely  trusted. 

Ver.  8. — This  is  but  a  repetition  of  ver.  6,  for  the  sake  of  emphasising  it. 

Ver.  9.  Keceive. — Xa/x^dvofiev  ;  admit  as  valid.  The  testimony  of  two  human  witnesses 
is  admitted ;  here  is  the  threefold  testimony  of  God — the  voice  at  baptism,  the  acceptance 
in  resurrection,  the  Spirit  in  our  hearts. 

Ver.  10.  Witness  in  himself. — In  two  ways — in  having  the  permanently  abiding  Spirit, 
and  in  having  a  personal  experience.  Made  Him  a  liar.  —Because  to  fail  to  trust  a  person 
is  really  to  declare  him  untrustworthy. 

Ver.  11.  Eecord. — Statement  or  declaration  which  we  are  required  to  believe.  "The 
Christian  creed  is  here  reduced  to  a  very  small  compass — the  gift  of  eternal  life,  and  the 
dependence  of  that  life  upon  His  Son."  Eternal  life. — Not  merely  continuing  life,  but 
that  new  life  we  have  by  spiritual  birth.  Eternal  life  is  that  which  we  now  understand 
by  spiritual  Hfe.  That  is  in  its  nature  continuous.  On  it  the  "  second  death  "  can  have 
no  power.  It  depends  on  our  relation  to  Jesus  Christ.  To  have  Christ  by  faith  is  to 
breathe  the  first  breath  of  the  eternal  life.  The  life  is  in  Christ  for  impartation  to  us,  and 
the  receptivity  in  us  is  our  faith. 

Vers.  13-21  may  be  treated  as  a  summary  and  conclusion.  They  divide  into  three  parts  : 
1.  Faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  eternal  life,  and  love  of  the  brethren  showing  itself  in 
intercession,  are  recalled  to  mind.  2.  Three  great  facts  which  believers  know  are  restated. 
3.  A  last  practical  warning  is  given.  In  the  first  part  the  new  thought  is,  the  association 
of  boldness  in  prayer  with  the  love  of  the  brethren  (vers.  14-17). 

Ver.  16.  Sin  not  unto  death  .  .  .  sin  unto  death. — The  usual  distinction  between  sins  of 
frailty  and  sins  of  will.  Sins  of  frailty  are  possible  to  the  child  of  God  ;  sins  of  will 
indicate  that,  for  the  time,  the  child- spirit  is  dead — he  cannot  sin  wilfully  who  is  born 
of  God.  St.  John  deals  very  carefully  with  the  latter  case.  "  Not  concerning  that  do  I 
say  that  he  should  make  request."  Wilful  sin  in  one  claiming  to  have  the  Divine  life 
does  not  come  into  the  range  of  Christian  prayer  for  the  brethren,  because  such  a  case 
is  not  regarded  as  possible.  St.  John  does  not  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  it  is  not  a  subject 
for  prayer  at  all. 

Ver.  21.  Idols. — Better,  "  the  idols";  or  "your  idols."  "This  parting  word  is  suggested 
by  the  thought  of  the  '  true  God.'  Every  scheme  of  thought,  every  object  of  affection, 
which  is  not  of  Him,  is  a  rival  of  His  empire,  a  false  god,  a  delusive  appearance 
only,  without  solidity  or  truth."  "  Every  street  through  which  St.  John's  readers  walked, 
and  every  heathen  house  they  visited,  swarmed  with  idols  in  the  literal  sense  ;  and 
magnificent  temples  and  groves,  and  seductive  idolatrous  rites,  constituted  some  of  the 
chief  attractions  at  Ephesus."  "  Of  the  strictness  which  was  necessary  in  order  to  preserve 
Christians  from  the  attractions  of  idolatry  the  history  of  the  first  four  centuries  is  full." 
St.  John  hints  that  Jesus  is  no  idol.  The  Son  of  God,  who  was  manifested  in  the  flesh 
as  the  Son  of  man,  was  a  Being  not  only  altogether  worthy  to  be  worshipped  and  served, 
but  a  Being  whose  worship  and  service  are  supremely  ennobling. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

Hie  Love  of  the  Father  involves  the  Love  of  His  Sons. — "  Whosoever  loveth  Him 
that  begat  loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  Him."  These  words  give  the 
point  of  this  paragraph.     It  is  a  common  delusion  of  Christian  professors,  that 

329 


CHAP.  V.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  JOHN. 


they  can  keep  in  saving  relations  with  God  while  they  persist  in  keeping 
unloving  relations  with  men.  The  delusion  is  based  upon  the  failure  to  recognise 
the  essential  family  element  in  Christianity.  The  supreme  mission  of  the 
Christian  revelation,  the  very  essence  of  the  work  of  Christ,  is  the  full  restoration 
of  the  family  relation  in  which  God  designed  to  stand  with  His  creatures,  and 
still  wishes  to  stand.  It  was  that  family  relationship  which  the  wilful  sin  of 
the  children  broke  up.  Men  ceased  to  be  sons  ;  they  persisted  in  being  men. 
God  might  be  King,  but  they  refused  to  recognise  Him  as  the  "  eternal  Father." 
And  there  was  no  hope  for  humanity  until,  maybe  through  a  bitter  experience, 
the  self-willed  prodigal  turned  his  thoughts  to  Father  and  home.  And  turning 
his  thoughts  to  Father  and  home  is  just  the  work  which  the  Lord  Jesus  did,  by 
the  manifestation  of  His  own  Sonship,  and  by  the  holy  persuasion  of  His  teach- 
ings. It  is  the  fashion  of  our  day  to  insist  that  all  the  social,  and  political,  and 
national  woes  of  humanity  vvould  be  cured,  if  men  did  but  fully  believe  in,  .and 
heartily  carry  out,  the  "  brotherhood  of  humanity."  They  do  not  see  that, 
standing  by  itself,  with  no  common  love,  or  common  interest,  beyond  its  own 
interest,  hviman  broth ei'hood  never  has  been,  and  never  can  be,  anything  but 
selfish,  and,  being  selfish,  it  never  can  be  a  real  brotherhood.  No  brotherhood 
is  possible  save  out  of  a  common  fatherhood.  And  so  Christ  brought  men 
together,  as  nobody  else  has  ever  brought  them,  because  He  has  revealed  the 
Father-God,  who  is  the  Father  of  them  all.  "  Whosoever  loveth  [the  Father] 
who  begat  loveth  also  [the  sons  and  brothers]  who  are  begotten  of  Him."  It 
is  missing  the  point  to  say  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  is  one  of 
the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  faith.  It  is  the  first,  it  is  the  foundation,  it  is 
the  essential  doctrine.  It  has  nothing  whatever  to  say  to  men  about  themselves 
or* their  relations  until  it  has  put  them,  right  with  God — made  them  think  rightly 
of  God,  and  brought  them  into  gracious  reconciliations  with  Him. 

I.  Loving  the  Father. — "  Him  that  begat."  The  love  required  is  precisely^ 
that  which  is  characteristic  of  good  children,  and  is  the  law  of  their  life. 
St.  John  tells  us  that  believing  the  only  begotten  Son  wakens  the  sonship  in 
us,  and  makes  us  feel  like  those  who  are  "  born  of  God."  And  that  is  the  actual 
fact  of  our  experience.  When  we  believe  in  Christ  the  Son,  we  begin  to  feel  that 
we  are  sons  with  Him,  and  hke  Him.  And  He  adds,  that  as  soon  as  t\iQ  feeling 
of  sonship  comes  to  us,  the  signs  of  sonship  will  appear  in  our  life  and  conduct. 
We  shall  do  just  as  Jesus  did;  we  shall  "keep  our  Father's  commandments." 
In  our  limited  human  measures  we  shall  say,  what  the  Divine  Son  could  say, 
"  My  meat  and  My  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  My  Father."  The  question  of  our 
being  sons  is  settled  if  we  are  sonlike,  as  Christ  was. 

II.  When  we  love  the  Father,  everything  else  will  come  right. — All  the 
human  relationships  will  be  rightly  toned;  all  the  human  responsibilities  will 
be  rightly  borne.  Was  the  Lord  Jesus  the  very  ideal  of  sacrificing  brotherhood  ? 
It  was  but  His  Sonship  getting  expression  in  the  family  sphere.  It  will  be  thus 
with  all  who  share  His  Sonship.  They  cannot  help  it — they  cannot  be  true  to 
themselves  and  help  it — they  must  be  brothers  and  brotherly.  The  love  of  the 
Father  is  the  source  of  love  to  His  childi-en.  And  Maurice  wisely  says,  "  That 
is  the  natural  order ;  that,  we  may  say  it  confidently,  is  the  universal  order." 
"  If  love  of  God  is  absent,  then  our  love  of  our  fellows  is  not  genuine — is  earthly, 
is  a  mockery.  If  love  of  our  fellows  is  absent,  then  have  we  no  love  for  God. 
All  friendship  must  be  tested  by  loyalty  to  God  ;  all  love  to  Him  must  be  tested 
by  charity.'' 


330 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    L  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  1.  Faith  and  the  New  Birth. —  Yer.  3.  A  Misapprehension  of  the 
"Whosoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  Commandments. — "  And  His  command- 
the  Christ  is  begotten  of  God."  What  ments  are  not  grievous."  They  seem 
appears  to  be  asserted  is,  that  faith  to  be  sometimes,  because  they  put  us 
is  at  once  the  cmidition  and  the  sign  into  limitations  and  restraints.  But  of 
of  the  new  life.  Confusion  comes  by  one  thing  we  can  be  absolutely  sure — 
limiting  faith  to  the  acceptance  of  the  commandments  are  no  abstract  or 
some  particular  proposition  concerning  arbitrary  things.  They  are  Fatherly 
Christ.  Men  are  said  to  be  saved  arrangements,  precisely  adapted  to 
when  they  declare  their  belief  in  some  secure  the  truest  welfare  of  the  chil- 
statement  about  Christ  which  is  made  dren.  And  this  we  can  see  plainly — 
to  them.  What  we  need  to  see  clearly  the  commandments  never  weie  in  any 
is,  that  faith  is  the  very  essence  of  the  sense  grievous  to  Christ.  If  we  ever 
child-spirit.  A  child  cannot  be  a  feel  them  to  be  grievous,  it  must  be 
child  without  faith.  And  wherever  because  we  are  failing  from  that 
there  is  faith  there  is  a  child-spirit.  perfect  love  which  always  carries  with 
So  faith  is  the  condition  of  the  new  it  perfect  trust  and  perfect  submission, 
birth.  There  never  yet  was  a  soul  Two  reasons  have  been  given  as  ex- 
alive  unto  God  that  did  not  believe  plaining  why  the  Father's  command- 
and  trust.  And  being  the  condition,  ments  are  not  grievous.  1.  He  gives 
it  becomes  also  the  sign.  See  what  us  strength  to  bear  them  and  do 
a  man  is  toward  God,  toward  God  them.  2.  Love  makes  the  Father's 
manifested  in  Christ,  and  you  can  yoke  (which  Christ  called  His)  feel 
tell  whether  he  is  a  child.  If  he  is  light  and  easy.  The  commandments 
born  of  God,  he  will  as  surely  believe  are  only  grievous  when  we  resist  them,. 
and  trust  as  the  new-born  babe  will  cry. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—8. 

The  Power  that  overcomes  the  World. — It  is  usual  to  limit  thought  to  faith 
as  the  power  that  ensures  our  victory  over  our  surroundings,  our  **  over- 
coming the  world  " ;  but  if  this  paragraph  be  taken  as  connected  thinking, 
it  will  be  seen  that  St.  John  explains  what  faith  it  is  that  thus  overcomes 
the  world.  It  is  the  faith  in  the  Sonship  of  Jesus,  which  links  us  to  Him, 
makes  us  sons  like  Him,  and  brings  to  us  the  victory  of  obedience  and  sub- 
mission which  He  won.  (It  will  be  understood  that  ver.  7,  in  this  paragraph, 
is  treated  as  an  interpolation,  inserted  by  some  later  hand  to  support  a 
particular  theory.) 

I.  The  faith  that  overcomes. — It  is  significant  that  St.  John  should  say, 
"  even  our  faith."  It  may  be  true — it  is  in  fact  true — that  faith,  as  one  of 
the  powers  of  human  nature,  the  power  that  enables  a  man  to  act  upon  unseen 
considerations,  does  enable  men  to  rise  above  the  entanglement  and  depression 
of  present  circumstances.  The  world  could  not  get  on  without  faith.  All 
her  high  triumphs  have  been  triumphs  of  faith.  But  St.  John's  world  is  not 
the  world  of  material  difficulties,  but  the  world  of  moral  evils.  And  he  knows 
well  enough  that  commonplace  human  faith  can  never  gain  victory  over  that. 
It  is  our  faith — that  specific  thing  which  must  be  called  the  "  Christian  faith," 
which  alone  can  overcome  the  moral  world,  the  world  of  evil. 

II.  The  object  of  the  faith  that  overcomes. — '*  Who  is  he  that  overcometh 
the  world,  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  "  Whatsoever 
is  born  of  God  overcometh   the  world."     It  should  not  be   possible  for  us  to 

331 


CHAP.  V.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    /.  JOHN. 


miss  the  point  of  St.  John's  teaching  in  these  sentences.  It  is  the  man  who, 
believing  in  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God,  is  himself  a  son  of  God  who  overcomes 
the  world.  The  object  of  faith  is  the  Sonship,  or,  more  precisely,  Christ  the  Son. 
His  Sonship  was  the  secret  of  His  triumph  over  the  world,  which,  though  He 
lived  in.  He  was  not  of.  And  our  sonship  in  Him  will  have  to  be  the  secret 
of  our  triumph,  if  ever  it  be  said  of  us,  they  have  overcome  the  world. 

III.  The  grounds  faith  has  for  resting  on  this  object. — Jesus  the  Son  is 
fully  attested ;  the  witnesses  are  altogether  sufficient  and  trustworthy.  There 
are  three  witnesses  to  the  acceptable  Sonship.  The  Spirit,  who  testifies  of 
Christ  in  our  hearts.  (But  it  is  quite  possible  that  St.  John  had  in  his  mind 
the  spirit  of  the  life  of  Jesus,  which  was  the  most  perfect  expression  of  sonship, 
and  the  satisfactory  attestation  that  He  was  the  Son.)  The  water,  which  stands 
for  the  direct  testimony  given  by  the  Father  at  our  Lord's  baptism  :  "  This 
is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  a-m  well  pleased."  And  the  hlood,  which  stands 
for  the  Divine  acceptance  of  our  Lord's  sacrifice — the  self-sacrifice  of  the  Son — 
which  was  declared  in  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  "  These  three  agree 
in  one "  thing ;  they  declare  that  "  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God,"  and  present 
Him  to  us,  in  this  relation,  as  the  object  of  our  faith. 

The  Worldly  Idea  of  overcoming  the  World. — We  read  in  history  of  one  in 
departed  days  who  fancied  that  he  had  accomplished  the  hard  task  of  "  over- 
coming the  world."  We  read  how  he  carried  his  victorious  arms  over  every 
region  of  the  then  known  earth — how  he  subjugated  king  after  king,  and 
brought  nation  after  nation  beneath  his  sway,  and  then  fancied  that  he  had 
*'  overcome  the  world."  We  read  how  he  felt  it  sad  to  think  that  his  heroic 
task  was  done,  and  how  he  wept  that  there  were  no  more  worlds  to  conquer. 
Oh,  far  astray,  far  mistaken  !  There  was  one  world  to  conquer  yet,  to  which 
that 'Conqueror  was  a  slave — a  world  to  overcome  for  which  the  arms  of  Alexander 
were  of  no  avail.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith."— ^.  K.  H.  B. 

Our  Victorious  Weapon. — Value  of  this  text  as  the  speech  of  an  aged, 
experienced  disciple.  Compare  our  feeling  if  it  had  been  the  utterance  of 
a  young  man.  We  should  say  that  he  did  not  know  Kf e,  or  that  he  was 
visionary  and  impulsive.  Bat  St.  John  looked  back  over  many  years  of  conflict, 
and  many  scenes  of  struggle  and  victory ;  and  he  may  commend  to  us  a  weapon 
which  he  has  found  in  every  way  efficient. 

I.  What  is  the  design  which  the  world  has  upon  us  ? — We  are  represented 
as  trying  to  overcome  it.  Then  what  is  it  trying  to  do  ?  Born  into  the  world,  we 
might  have  said  that  surely  the  world  ought  to  be  our  law.  And  yet  we  know 
that  we  are  superior  to  the  world.  It  should  be  under  us,  as  the  creatures  are. 
It  should  be  our  servant,  to  help  us  in  doing  the  will  of  God.  Illustrate  by 
things  good  as  servants  that  are  bad  as  masters — water,  fire,  wealth,  pleasure, 
the  world  regarded  morally.  The  difficulty  is  that  some  of  these  servants  are 
always  trying  to  get  to  be  masters.  That  makes  our  conflict  with  the  world. 
It  wants  to  be  master.  The  general  conflict  is  represented  in  the  individual; 
the  world  fights  to  gain  authority  in  some  one  direction,  and  a  man  becomes 
a  miser,  a  drunkard,  or  vicious.  Conceive  a  man  ruled  by  the  world.  Is  that 
a  true  man  ?  Social  science,  philosophy,  and  religion  all  say.  No,  a  man  must 
rise  above  the  world.     And  Christ  alone  effectually  shows  man  how  to  do  it. 

II.  Is  it  left  with  us  to  decide  whether  or  no  we  will  resist,  and  try  to  over- 
come the  world  ?  — In  one  sense  it  is.  That  is  the  great  term  of  our  probation 
here — will  you  be  ruled  by  the  world  or  by  God  ?  To  you,  shall  the  world  be 
master  or  servant  ?     This  is  especially  pressed  on  attention  in  early  manhood. 

332 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I,  JOHN.  CHAP.  V. 


But,  in  another  sense,  it  is  not  left  to  us.  We  are  urged  by  such  impressive 
considerations  to  strive  to  overcome,  that  we  are  scarcely  manly  if  we  do  not  so 
strive.  Illustrate  by  such  things  as  :  proofs  about  us  of  the  ruin  following 
world-triumphs ;  the  high,  and  sole,  claims  of  God  to  our  love  and  service ;  the 
light  of  that  better  world  where  God  only  is  loved  and  served  ;  the  testimony  of 
those  who  have  lived  God-ruled  lives.  As  Christiaiu^  no  sort  of  option  is  left  to 
us ;  we  are  actually,  we  are  deeply,  pledged  to  the  carrying  on  of  this  warfare. 

III.  With  what  weapon  may  we  have  the  assurance  of  victory? — Picture 
Bunyan's  *'  Christian,"  going  through  the  Yalley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death,  and 
betaking  himself  to  the  weapon  of  "  All- prayer."  Here  the  great  sword  is 
called  "  Our  Faith."  The  world  can  only  overcome  by  dimming  and  unvitalising 
God,  and  so  loosening  from  us  the  sense  of  His  claims  and  relations.  The 
chance  of  the  world  Hes  in  the  absence  of  God  from  our  thought,  and  from  our 
love.  Men  can  only  sin  when  at  heart  they  say,  "  The  Lord  shall  not  see." 
Then  our  hope  of  conqueringflies  in  our  keeping  God  in  our  love,  and  thought, 
and  trust.  Abraham  conquered,  because  he  thought  of  God  as  Him  "before 
whom  I  walk."  Moses  conquered,  because  •he  persisted  that  the  "Presence" 
should  go  with  him.  David  conquered,  because  he  could  say,  **  I  have  set  the 
Lord  always  before  me."  That  is  precisely  the  work  of  faith.  The  faith  of  God 
in  Chnstj  the  human  Christ,  is  the  faith  that  keeps  God  closely  and  directly 
related  to  our  daily  life.  Only  let  faith  keep  God  near,  as  we  do  our  business, 
as  we  gather  up  our  profits,  as  we  go  to  and  fro  in  our  households,  then  the 
world  shall  never  overcome  us ;  we  shall  surely  overcome  the  world.  Observe  a 
distinction.  Is  this  commending  a  general  faith  in  God,  as  being  just,  and 
strong,  and  wise,  and  good  ?  Yes,  it  is  ;  but  it  is  much  more.  It  is  a  commend- 
ing of  what  must  be  the  foundation,  and  the  constant  daily  support,  of  such 
faith, — the  faith  of  God  in  Christ ;  in  God  revealed,  manifested  in  the  human 
life  of  the  Son ;  the  faith  of  God,  who  was  "  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world 
unto  Himself." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  4.  Faith  oveixoming  the  World.  out  the  greater  things  beyond  ;  absorbs 

I.  What  is  the  true  notion  of  con-  my  attention,  so  that  if  I  let  it  have 

quering   the   world  ? — Our   notion   of  its  own  way  I  have  no  leisure  to  think 

being  victorious  in  life  is  when  each  about  anything   but   itself.     And  the 

man,    according   to   his   own   ideal  of  world   conquers  me   when   it  succeeds 

what  is  best,  manages  to  wring  that  in  hindering  me   from  seeing,  loving, 

ideal  out  of  a  reluctant  world.    A  man  holding  communion  with  and  serving 

desires  conspicuous  notoriety  and  fame,  my  Father-God.     On  the  other  hand, 

But   what    is    the    teaching    of    this  I  conquer  it  when  I  lay  my  hand  upon 

epistle  ?     Following  in  the  footsteps  of  it,  and  force  it  to  help  me  get  nearer 

Jesus  Christ  Himself,  the  poor  man.  Him,  to  get  more  like  Him,  to  think 

the  beaten  man,  the  unsuccessful  man,  more  often  of  Him,  to  do  His  will  more 

may  yet  say,   "  I  have  overcome  the  gladly  and  more  constantly.     The  one 

world."    What  does  that  mean  ?    Well,  victory  over  the  world  is  to  bend  it  to 

it  is  built  upon  this :  the  world,  meaning  serve  me  in  the   highest  things — the 

thereby    the    sum -total    of    outward  attainment  of  a  clearer  vision  of  the 

things,  considered  as  apart  from  God —  Divine  nature,    the   attainment   of   a 

the   world   and   God   we   make  to  be  deeper  love  to  God  Himself,  and  of  a 

antagonists  to  one  another.     And  the  more  glad  consecration  and  service  to 

world  woos  me  to  trust  to  it,  to  love  Him.     That  is  the  victory,  when  you 

it ;  crowds  in  upon  my  eye  and  shuts  can  make  the  world  a  ladder  to  lift 

333 


CHAP.  V. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    I.  JOHN. 


you  to  God.  Rule  the  world  by  making 
it  help  you  to  be  wiser,  gentler,  nobler, 
more  gracious,  more  Christ- like,  more 
Christ- conscious,  more  full  of  God,  and 
more  like  to  Him,  and  then  you  will 
get  the  deepest  delight  out  of  it. 

II.  The  method  by  which  this 
victory  over  the  world,  of  making  it 
help  us  to  keep  the  commandments  of 
God,  is  to  be  accomplished. — The  true 
victory  over  the  world  is  won  by  a  new 
life,  born  of  and  kindred  with  God  ; 
that  life  is  kindled  in  men's  souls 
through  their  faith ;  and  the  faith 
which  kindles  that  supernatural  life, 
the  victorious  antagonist  of  the  world, 
is  the  definite,  specific  faith  in  Jesus 
as  the  Son  of  God.  You  can  conquer 
the  world  if  you  will  trust  in  Jesus 
Christ,  because  such  trust  will  bring 
you  into  constant,  living,  loving  contact 
with  the  great  Conqueror.  I  can 
appropriate  Christ's  conquest  to  myself 
if  I  trust  Him.  The  might  of  it,  and 
some  portion  of  the  reality  of  it,  passes 
into  my  nature  in  the  measure  in 
which  I  rely  upon  Him.  So  if  we  join 
ourselves  to  Him  by  faith,  and  bring 
into  our  daily  life,  in  all  its  ignoble 
effort,  in  all  its  little  duties,  in  all  its 
wearisome  monotonies,  in  all  its  trivi- 
ality, the  thought,  the  illuminating 
thought,  of  the  victorious  Christ,  our 
Companion  and  our  Friend — in  hoc 
signo  vinces — in  this  sign  thou  shalt 
conquer.  They  that  keep  hold  of  His 
hand  see  over  the  world  and  all  its 
falsenesses  and  fleetingnesses.  They 
that  trust  in  Jesus  are  more  than  con- 
querors by  the  might  of  His  victory. 
You  can  conquer  the  world  if  you  will 
trust  Jesus  Christ,  because  your  faith 
will  bring  into  the  midst  of  your  lives 
the  grandest  and  most  solemn  and 
blessed  realities.  Faith  is  the  true 
anaesthesia  of  the  soul — the  thing  that 
deadens  it  to  the  pains  and  the 
pleasures  that  come  from  this  fleeting 
life.  Get  near  to  Jesus  Christ  by 
thought,  and  love,  and  trust.  Trust 
to  Him  and  to  the  great  love  that  gave 
itself  for  you.  And  then  bring  Him 
into  your  life,  by  daily  reference  to 
Him  of  it  all ;  and  by  cultivating  the 

334 


habit  of  thinking  about  Him  as  being 
present  with  you  in  the  midst  of  it 
all;  and  so,  holding  His  hand,  you 
will  share  in  His  victory. — A.  Mac- 
laren,  D.D. 

The  Victory  of  Faith. — Men  acknow- 
ledge that  the  world  is  a  place  of 
conflict,  but  they  often  mistake  the 
nature  of  the  conflict,  and  the  nature 
of  the  weapon  that  should  be  employed 
in  it. 

I.  They  mistake  the  nature  of  the 
conflict. — They  look  upon  it  as  a  battle 
with  poverty,  with  ignorance,  or  with 
weakness.  But  a  victory  over  all  these 
does  not  mean  a  victory  over  care, 
or  sorrow,  or  death.  But  the  apostle 
tells  us  that  the  true  enemy  is  not 
in  the  world,  nor  in  the  things  that 
are  in  the  world,  but  rather  in  the 
world  within  the  heart.  The  enemy 
is  not  poverty,  but  desii-e ;  not  obscurity, 
but  lust.  He  who  overcomes  the  world 
is  not  he  who  paves  his  way  from 
poverty  to  wealth,  but  he  who  gets 
rich  by  the  penuriousness  and  parsi- 
mony of  his  spirit ;  not  he  who  has 
made  his  way  to  the  highest  places  of 
earth,  but  he  who  has  risen  into  the 
true  knowledge  and  purity  of  God. 
The  true  victory  lies  in  the  vanquish- 
ing of  the  heart's  desires. 

II.  The  weapon  is  mistaken  also. — 
Industry  will  overcome  poverty,  and 
knowledge  obscurity ;  but  if  these  are 
not  the  foes,  then  must  we  try  another 
weapon.  Even  in  the  common  aspect 
of  life  faith  is  needed.  A  man  cannot 
do  well  who  secretly  disbelieves  in  the 
work  he  is  doing.  So  to  conquer  within 
we  must  believe  in  goodness.  And 
not  only  in  goodness  in  the  abstract; 
it  is  faith  in  a  person  which  the 
apostle  tells  us  will  overcome  the 
world.  Faith  in  great  principles  has 
done  much.  But  for  the  greatest 
and  most  permanent  success  we  must 
have  faith  in  goodness  guaranteed, 
illustrated,  and  emphasised  in  the  life 
and  death  of  a  person.  Here  then 
comes  the  glory  of  Christ's  life,  that 
it  is  precisely  the  emphasis  of  all  faith 
in  goodness. — W.  B.  Carpenter^  D.D. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   V. 


Vers.  4,  5.  Faith  a  Moral  Power. — ■ 
Faith  may  be  described  as  a  preferring 
of  some  future  and  unseen  good  to 
a  present  and  visible  one,  on  the 
authority  of  some  one  whom  we  had 
reason  to  think  good  and  wise.  And 
rehgious  faith  consists  in  preferring 
future  to  present  good  things,  on  the 
authority  of  God  Himself — that  is, 
of  One  who  is  perfectly  wise  and  good. 
Christian  faith  has  this  advantage 
over  simple  religious  faith,  in  the 
more  general  sense  of  the  word,  that 
having  obtained  clearer  and  fuller 
notions  of  God'c  perfections,  it  is 
rendered  stronger  and  more  triumphant 
over  temptations.  Christian  faith,  or 
the  faith  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God, 
gives  us  so  much  clearer  and  fuller 
notion  of  God,  that  it  makes  us  know 
both  Him  and  ourselves,  and  love  Him, 
far  better  than  we  could  do  without 
it.  This,  then,  is  the  faith  that 
overcometh  the  world ;  for  it  is  a 
faith  that  looks  to  an  eternal  reward, 
and  it  is  founded  on  such  a  display 
of  God's  love  and  hoUness,  that  the 
Christian  may  well  say,  "  I  know  in 
whom  I  have  believed."  Conceive 
any  one  of  us,  old  or  young,  having 
this  faith,  and  do  we  not  feel  sure 
that  it  must  overcome  the  world  ? 
Do  we  not  feel  sure  that  all  tempta- 
tions must  be  powei-less  against  him 
who  is  heartily  persuaded  of  what 
God  has  done,  and  will  do  for  him, 
who  looks  forward  to  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  and  knows  and  feels  by  whose 
blood  it  has  been  thrown  open  to 
him  ?  Do  we  not  see  clearly,  and 
do  not  our  own  hearts  tells  us,  that 
if  temptations  are  too  strong  for  us, 
it  is  because  our  faith  is  weak. — 
Dr.  T.  Arnold. 

Yer.  6.  The  Threefold  Witness.— 
"  By  water  and  blood."  "  It  is  the 
Spirit  that  beareth  witness."  It  is 
important  that  the  mind  should  not  be 
confused  by  the  suggestions  of  ver.  7, 
which  brings  in  the  doctrinal  term 
"Holy  Ghost."  It  is  probable  that 
ver.  8  precisely  represents  the  thought 
to  which  St.  John  wishes  to  ffive  ex- 


pression, and  that  no  reference  to  the 
third  person  of  the  Divine  Trinity  is 
intended.  St.  John's  mind  was  not  so 
occupied  with  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  as  was  the  mind  of  St.  Paul. 
St.  John's  whole  interest  was  absorbed 
in  the  person  of  Christ,  and  his  point 
here  is,  that  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  as 
the  Son  of  God,  is  the  faith  that  is 
overcoming,  and  will  overcome,  the 
world.  It  is  strictly  relative  to  his 
subject  to  point  out  how  well  founded 
that  faith  in  Christ  is.  There  are 
three  witnesses ;  two  are  usually  re- 
garded as  sufficient.  And  these  three 
altogether  agree  in  their  testimony. 
But  what  precisely  is  it  that  these 
witnesses  testify  to  ?  .  Not  generally 
to  Jesus  Christ,  but  specifically  to 
Jesus  Christ  as  the  Son  of  God.  They 
are  three  witnesses  to  the  human  son- 
ship  of  the  Divine  Son.  When  once 
this  is  grasped,  the  reason  for  mention- 
ing them  here  is  understood.  That 
they  are  witnesses  "  in  earth  "  (ver.  8) 
sufficiently  proves  that  the  Holy  Ghost 
is  not  meant.  What  St.  John  says  is 
really  this :  The  witness  of  the  "  water  " 
— that  is,  of  Christ's  baptism — was  the 
miraculous  attestation  of  His  Sonship 
by  a  voice  from  heaven.  The  witness 
of  the  "  Spirit  " — that  is,  Christ's  own 
spirit,  the  tone  and  temper  of  His 
daily  life — was  a  most  persuasive  ex- 
hibition of  His  Sonship.  The  witness 
of  the  "  blood  " — that  is,  of  His  "  resist- 
ing unto  blood"  all  temptation  to 
unsonlike  doings,  His  self-sacrifice  for 
the  sake  of  obedient  sonship — was  an 
all-convincing  proof  of  His  Sonship. 
Surely,  then,  we  have  all-sufficient 
grounds  for  believing  that  Jesus  is  the 
Son  of  God.  Then  He  is  what  we 
ought  to  he.  And  trying  to  be  what 
He  is  will  prove  for  us  the  "  over- 
coming of  the  world  " — first  the  world 
within,  and  then  the  world  without. 

Ver.  8.  Water  and  Blood. — The  Rev. 
W.  M.  Sinclair,  D.D.,  in  Ellicott's 
Commentary,  gives  suggestively  the 
more  usual  explanation  of  these  sym- 
bolic terms.  "  Water  "  and  "  blood  " 
are  referred  to  as  two   of   the   three 

335 


CHAP.  V. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   1.  JOHN. 


great  witnesses,  or  sets  of  evidence,  for 
Christ.  They  are  symbols,  and  look 
back  to  two  of  the  most  characteristic 
and  significant  acts  of  His  personal  his- 
tory. The  one  is  His  baptism,  the  other 
His  cross.  Why  His  baptism?  The 
baptism  of  John  was  the  seal  of  the 
law.  It  was  the  outward  sign  by  which 
those  who  repented  at  his  preaching 
showed  their  determination  to  keep  the 
law  no  longer  in  the  letter  only,  but 
also  in  the  spirit.  Jesus,  too,  showed 
this  determination.  Baptism  in  water* 
was  His  outward  sign  and  seal  to  the 
Old  Testament :  that  He  had  not  come 
to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil  the  law  ;  not  to 
supersede  the  prophecies,  but  to  claim 
them.  It  was  to  show  that  in  Him 
the  righteousness  and  purification  which 
the  law  intended  was  to  be  a  reality, 
and  through  Him  to  be  the  law  of  His 
kingdom.  Thus  it  pointed  to  all  the 
evidence  which  this  Old  Testament 
could  possibly  afford  Him ;  and, 
through  the'Old  Testament,  it  pointed 
to  the    dispensation    of    the    Father. 


Thus,  when  this  most  symbolic  act  was 
complete,  the  almighty  Giver  of  the 
old  law  or  covenant  was  heard  saying, 
"  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I 
am  well  pleased."  "Blood"  in  the 
same  way  refers  to  the  special  work 
of  Christ  Himself — the  work  of  recon- 
ciliation and  atonement  by  His  death 
and  passion,  the  realisation  of  all  that 
the  sacrifices  and  types  of  the  former 
state  of  religion  had  meant.  That  He 
was  the  true  sacrifice  was  proved  by 
the  perfection  of  His  life,  by  the  signs 
and-  wonders  with  which  He  had 
attracted  and  convinced  His  followers, 
by  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  by  the 
marvels  of  His  teaching,  by  the  amaz- 
ing events  which  had  happened  at  the 
different  crises  of  His  life,  by  His 
resurrection  and  ascension,  and  by  the 
confession  of  all  who  knew  Him  well 
that  He  was  the  Word  made  flesh,  full 
of»  grace  and  truth,  and  with  the 
glory  as  of  the  Only  Begotten  of  the 
Father. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  9— li 

GodJs  Gift  in  a  Person, — All  the  mystery  of  redemption  will  not  go  into  a 
sentence.  And  yet  very  helpful  sentences  are  graciously  given.  If  we  would 
know,  as  briefly  as  possible,  what  are  the  essentials  of  salvation,  this  paragraph 
answers,  "  Having  the  Son."  How  limited  this  is  !  It  confines  human  hope 
to  one  absolute  condition.  How  comprehensive  it  is !  It  concerns  man  as  man, 
recognising  no  merely  intellectual,  or  social,  or  sectarian  distinctions.  Any- 
where, everywhere,  the  man  who  has  the  Son  has  Hfe.  There  is  full,  free, 
present  salvation  for  all  in  Christ  the  Son. 

I.  God's  gift  to  us — "eternal  life." — The  young  rich  ruler  asked,  "What 
good  thing  can  I  do  that  I  may  inherit  eternal  life  ?  "  He  had  the  Pharisaic 
notion,  that  it  was  the  reward  of  doing  some  extraordinary  thing.  It  is  often 
regarded  as  only  continuous,  never-ending  life.  But  the  Scriptures  put  other 
and  larger  meanings  into  the  term.  The  word  is  applied  to  God  :  "  the  eternal 
God  is  thy  refuge."  To  the  power  of  God  :  "  His  eternal  power  and  Godhead." 
To  Israel :  "  an  eternal  excellency."  Unseen  things  are  eternal.  We  read 
of  "an  eternal  weight  of  glory "  ;  "an  eternal  purpose  " ;  " eternal  salvation  " ; 
"eternal  judgment";  "eternal  redemption";  "the  eternal  Spirit";  "eternal 
inheritance  " ;  "  eternal  fire."  And  the  Revised  Version  has  "  an  eternal  sin." 
Evidently  the  word  chiefly  means  what  we  mean  by  "  spiritual,"  "  divine,"  or 
perhaps  "the  highest,  intensest,  conceivable."  Quality  is  indicated  by  the  term, 
and  not  mere  size  or  length.  There  is  a  time-figure  in  the  word,  as  there 
is  a  material  figure  in  all  words,  e.g.  Spirit,  God.  The  length  of  time  that 
a  thing  will  last  is  a  well -recognised  note  of  value.  So  the  term  "  eternal 
life  "  makes  us  think  of  the  highest  form  of  life  that  is  possible  to  man.     Our 

336 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


thought  of  life  is  a  gradual  ascent — vegetable,  animal,  human,  mental,  social, 
political,  then  spiritual,  which  is  the  life  of  God  so  far  as  it  can  be  man's.  We 
vainly  try  to  conceive  of  Divine  life,  the  Hfe  of  God,  which  is  the  top  of  the 
ascent.  What  thoughts  may  we  have  concerning  the  gift  God  bestows? 
1.  If  He  arranges  to  give  it,  we  must  supremely  need  it.  As  men  we  cannot 
be  content  to  stop  short  of  the  best  that  is  possible  to  us.  What  is  within 
the  limit  of  human  attainment  ?  Culture  of  body ;  culture  of  mind ;  culture 
of  character.  Nothing  more.  Something  more  is  attainable  as  the  gift  of 
God.  He  seals  our  faith  with  the  gift  of  Divine,  spiritual  life.  2.  If  He 
arranges  to  give  it,  we  cannot  otherwise  get  it.  The  young  rich  ruler  a  type. 
What  could  he  get  by  means  of  works  ?  Life  is  only  quickened  by  the  contact 
of  life.  Regeneration.  The  best  possible — the  Divine  in  man — is  a  gift  of 
God  as  truly  as  was  the  first  life  for  Adam. 

II.  God's  g^ft  in  a  person. — "  This  life  is  in  His  Son."  Not  merely  entrusted 
to  Him,  but  actually  in  Him.  If  so,  we  can  see  it  in  Him.  We  can  know  it 
by  watching  Him.  Can  we  then  know  what  the  Divine,  eternal  life  in  the 
soul  of  man  is?  There  it  is,  in  Christ.  That  life  is  in  the  Son.  If  so,  there 
is  a  mystery  in  Christ.  The  hfe  in  Him  is  for  us.  It  is  a  life  that  imparts 
life,  a  life  that  quickens  life.  Illustrate  how  we  change  into  the  spirit  of 
those  with  whom  we  live.  What,  then,  is  that  soul-contact  that  brings  to  us 
Christ's  eternal  hfe  ?     Illustrate  by  grafting  or  budding  trees. 

III.  That  person  imparting  the  gift. — "He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life." 
Having  Christ — what  can  that  mean  ?  1 .  In  what  senses  are  we  said  to  have 
things'^  (1)  We  have  material  things,  by  the  personal  use  of  them.  (2)  We 
have  persons,  by  the  pleasure  of  their  affection  and  intercourse.  (3)  We  have 
knowledge,  when  our  mind  for  itself  grasps  truth.  (4)  We  have  principles, 
when  they  act  within  us  as  motives.  So  the  idea  of  *'  having  Christ "  is 
appropriation,  personal  relation.  2.  In  what  sense  did  the  disciples  "have 
Christ "  ?  Daily  and  hourly  He  was  in  the  circle  of  their  life  and  thought,  the 
shaper  of  their  life  and  thought.  Illustrate  from  Bethany.  Martha  had  Christ 
to  serve.  Mary  had  Christ  to  love  and  listen  to.  Lazarus  had  Christ  to  receive 
life  from.  See  the  test  presented  to  the  young  rich  ruler.  '*  You  have  much 
wealth.  Give  it  up,  and  have  Me."  3.  How  is  "  having  "  related  to  "  believing  "  ? 
'"  Having "  fixes  thought  on  one  part  of  believing — the  last  part.  Believing 
includes:  (1)  intellectual  apprehension  of  a  statement;  (2)  heart-feeling  of 
the  importance  of  the  statement ;  (3)  active  effort  to  reahse  personal  interest 
in  it.  Take  the  statement,  "  Christ  died  for  sinners."  "  Having "  sets  out 
prominently  the  third  element — the  effort  to  appropriate.  "  Having  "  says 
"He  died  for  me."  See  then  that  no  faith  in  a  creed  will  do;  no  works  will 
do ;  only  trust  in,  and  love  to,  a  person  brings  us  life.  The  life  we  supremely 
need  is  just  that  life  of  sonship  that  was  in  Christ.  The  life  of  sonship  to  God 
is  the  eternal  life.  To  have  Christ  is  to  have  Hfe,  i.e.  to  have  Divine  acceptance, 
with  Him — to  have  the  spirit  of  sonship  with  Him.  Not  to  have  Christ  is 
death.  Dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Dead  in  self- will.  Dead  as  in  the  wrath 
of  God. 

The  Life  in  God. — "  The  Christian  creed  is  here  reduced  to  a  very  small  com- 
pass :  the  gift  of  eternal  life,  and  the  dependence  of  that  life  upon  His  Son. 
Eternal  life  does  not  here  mean  the  mere  continuance  of  life  after  death,  whether 
for  good  or  evil :  it  is  the  expression  used  throughout  St.  John's  writings  for  that 
hfe  in  God,  thought  of  without  reference  to  time,  which  can  have  no  end,  which 
implies  heaven,  and  every  possible  variety  of  blessedness,  and  which  consists  in 
beheving  in  God  the  Father,  and  in  His  Son.  Its  opposite  is  not  annihilation, 
but  the  second  death,  existence  in  exclusion  from  God."     "  Having  the  Son  ' 

z  337 


CHAP.   V. 


HO  MILE  TIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


is  His  dwelling  in  the  heart  by  faith — a  conscious  difference  to  human  life 
which  transforms  its  whole  character.  "  Having  life  "  is  the  birth  of  the  new 
man  within,  which  can  never  die." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  10.  The  Dishonouring  Character 
of  Unbelief. — It  makes  God  to  seem  a 
liar,  a  deceiver,  one  who  makes  state- 
ments for  which  there  is  no  ground, 
and  promises  which  can  but  disappoint. 
We  can  do  no  greater  dishonour  to  a 
brother- man  than  fail  to  trust  him,  to 
believe  his  word,  to  rely  upon  his 
promise.  Human  unbelief  is  some- 
times presented  as  the  source  of  moral 
mischief  in  a  man's  character  and  life, 
and  as  the  cause  of  his  deprivation  of 
privilege.  There  are  a  thousand  things 
that  man  *' cannot  enter  into"  ''be- 
cause of  his  unbelief."  But  here  quite 
another  side  of  the  evil  influence  of 
unbelief  is  presented.  It  dishonours 
God.  It  prevents  men  from  putting 
that  trust  in  Him  which  He  seeks, 
which  is  the  invitation  and  persuasion 
of  His  love,  and  which  is  so  firmly 
based  on  His  goodness  and  faithfulness. 
Unbelief  proclaims  God  to  be  untrust- 
worthy. But  this  brings  up  the  ques- 
tion, w^hether  the  evidences  of  God's 
truth,  and  righteousness,  and  goodness, 
are  sufficiently  abundant,  and  clear, 
and  impressive,  to  make  absolutely 
unreasonable  all  human  unbelief.  And 
this  ground  may  reasonably  be  taken. 
The   appeals  for  God  may  be  made — 

(1)  to   every    part   of    man's    nature; 

(2)  to  every  matter  of  man's  concern ; 

(3)  to  every  page  of  man's  history. 
Take  the  best  men  who  have  appeared 
in  all  the  ages  ;  they  have  believed  in 
God.  Take  the  most  perplexing  and 
involved  circumstances  of  God's  people  ; 
He  has  always  fulfilled  His  promise, 
and  led  them  safely  through.  Take 
the  promises  which  lie  thick  on  the 
page  of  the  word,  like  stars  in  the 
midnight  sky ;  there  cannot  one  be 
found  which  stands  unfulfilled  in  the 
history  of  God's  people.  He  always 
"  remembers  His  word." 

The    Method    of   Faith. — Court    of 
338 


justice,  judge,  jury,  counsels,  reporters, 
listeners.  The  culprit — his  trial  will 
come  on.  His  fate  depends  on  the 
evidence  which  will  be  adduced — not 
on  public  opinion  or  feeling.  There 
is  a  tribunal  in  every  breast.  "For 
when  the  Gentiles,  which  have  not 
the  law,  do  by  nature  the  things  con- 
tained in  the  law,  these,  having  not  the 
law,  are  a  law  unto  themselves :  which 
show  the  works  of  the  law  written  in 
their  hearts,  their  consciences  also 
bearing  witness,  and  their  thoughts 
the  meanwhile  accusing  or  else  excus- 
ing one  another." 

I.  The  process  which  transfers  the 
gospel  and  all  its  living,  saving  power 
into  the  soul. — "  He  that  belie veth." 
1.  Our  attention  must  be  thoroughly 
arrested.  This  is  done  by  two  distinct 
methods — by  striking  and  forcible 
means,  by  gradual  influence  and  de- 
velopment. A  mirage — a  whole  scene 
pictured  in  the  heavens.  Gradual 
influence — father's  prayers,  Saul  of 
Tarsus  and  Timothy.  ?.  We  must 
Idealise  in  ourselves  and  for  ourselves  the 
gospel  and  its  influence.  Every  man  is 
intensely  individual,  and  the  things 
which  affect  us  so  are  the  most  real. 
Beading  of  the  dangers  of  others  will 
produce  an  impression,  but  when  in 
danger  ourselves  the  feeling  is  most 
intense.  The  father  whose  five  little 
children  were  in  the  railway  carriages 
which  broke  loose  was  most  anxious 
for  their  safety.  "  I  am  crucified  with 
Christ  to  the  world."  "  Fellowship 
with  His  sufferings."  Look  into  that 
great  soul,  and  you  will  see  Golgotha, 
the  cross,  the  suffering  Saviour.  Again, 
"  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory." 
Besurrection,  ascension,  intercession, 
benediction.  3.  There  must  be  felt  an 
abiding  presence  and  influence.  There 
are  momentous  things  engraved  on  our 
minds,  but  they  only  come  up  occa- 
sionally.    "Abide    in   Me,    and   I   in 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    J.  JOHN.  chap.  v. 


you,    so    that    ye    be    My    disciples."  are  life."     Repent,  believe,  pray,  obey, 

"Let    that   therefore    abide    in    you  love;  the  soul  says  "  Amen  "  to  all  these, 

which  ye  have  heard  from  the  begin-  2.  The  presence  of  the  Spirit  and  the 

ning."     Not  a  passing  breath,  but  the  attestation.     "  The  Spirit  itself  beareth 

functions  of  breathing  ;  not  the  drop  witness   with    our   spirit  that  we    are 

of    blood   which    passes   through    the  the  children  of  God."     The  appeal  of 

veins,   but  the  heart  which  circulates  the     loving,    confiding     child    to    the 

it.     *' I  in  them,  and  Thou  in  Me,  that  witnessing  of  the   father.     "And    be- 

they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one."  cause  ye  are  sons,  God  has  sent  forth 

II.    The  inward  testimony   to   our  the  Spirit  of  His  Son  into  your  hearts, 

salvation. — 1.   The  accoi^d  of  truth  with  crying,    Abba,    Father."       The    Spirit 

the  moral  demands  of  our  nature.     Let  gives  the  assurance  of  faith, 
us  not  treat  our  souls  as  if  they  were         III.  The  accord  of  the  verdict  with 

blank  or  empty,  but  as  morally  sentient,  the  soul. — We  shall  stand  soon  before 

Our  whole  nature,  physical  and  mental,  the   judgment-seat   of   Christ.      "  For 

is  based  on  the  same  principle.     "  It  is  God  is  my  witness,  whom  I  serve  with 

the  spirit  that  quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  my  spirit  in  the  gospel."     "  Also  now 

profiteth   nothing  :    the   words  that  I  behold  my  witness   is  in  heaven,  my 

speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  they  record  is  on  high." — Anon. 


MAIN  EOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  13—17. 

Tlie  Rights  of  the  New-hegotten  Sons. — Ver.  13  recalls  to  mind  the  explana- 
tion St.  John  gives  of  his  purpose  in  writing  his  gospel.  "But  these  are 
written,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God ;  and  that, 
believing,  ye  may  have  life  in  His  name."  Life  is  St.  John's  great  word,  and  by 
it  he  means  that  life  as  a  son  of  God,  in  loving  and  obedient  relations  with  the 
eternal  Father,  which  is  seen  in  Christ  the  Son,  and  becomes  ours  as  by  faith 
we  are  linked  with  that  Son  so  as  to  receive  His  life.  When  we  are  thus  made 
sons,  we  enter  upon  the  possession  of  three  rights  or  privileges,  and  we  ought 
thankfully  to  use  them. 

I.  The  right  to  eternal  life. — The  right  to  live  a  higher  kind  of  life  than  can 
be  attained  by  other  men, — a  spiritual  life,  a  human-divine  life  like  that  which 
the  Lord  Jesus  lived  ;  for  His  life  on  the  earth  is  precisely  described  as  the 
*'  eternal  life."  That  is  not  life  in  heaven  :  it  is  the  Christ-life  lived  on  earth. 
But  the  right  to  this  life  involves  the  right  to  everything  that  is  needed  for 
sustaining,  developing,  and  perfecting  the  life.  If  God  calls  any  one  into  being, 
His  creative  act  implies  a  continuous  providential  act,  for  the  well-being  of  the 
creature  made.  So  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  all  things  are  at  the  command  and 
use  of  the  sons  of  God. 

II.  The  right  to  expect  answers  to  prayers  (vers.  14,  15). — The  prayers  here 
thought  of  are  those  bearing  relation  to  the  believer's  own  life,  circumstance, 
and  need.  Answer  to  prayer,  following  on  attention  to  prayer,  is  involved  in 
Fatherhood  and  sonship.  A  father  who  neither  hears,  nor  heeds,  nor  answers, 
his  children's  requests  is  no  father  at  all.  If  God  be  our  Father,  He  must  heed 
and  answer  all  who  keep  child-like  souls. 

III.  The  right  to  intercede  for  others  (vers.  16,  17). — The  very  fact  that 
there  is  a  limit  to  Christian  intercession  asserts  the  right  to  intercede  within 
the  limits.  And  this  is  the  right  which  belongs  to  the  brotherhood.  Brothers 
ought  to  be  concerned  with  brothers'  welfare,  and  be  ready  with  all  sympathy 
and  help  in  times  of  frailty  and  trouble, 

339 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  13.  Knowing  that  we  have  Life, 
— The  arguments  and  persuasions  of 
St.  John  were  intended  to  bring  a 
personal  confidence  and  assurance  to 
the  behevers.  He  wanted  them  to 
know  that  they  had  the  eternal  life. 

I.  Personal  assurance  is  possible. — 
But  too  often  it  is  assurance  founded  on 
mere  feelings.  St.  John's  assurance  is 
founded  on  facts  and  truths.  Emotional 
assurance  io  of  but  little  value :  it 
seldom  does  more  than  soothe  the  soul 
to  a  sleep  of  self-satisfaction  and  in- 
difference ;  and  it  has  a  strangely  evil 
tendency  to  make  men  think  themselves 
the  special  favourites  of  God,  and  to 
despise  others.  Assurance  founded  on 
facts  and  truths  has  a  graciously 
bracing  influence ;  it  ennobles  a  man, 
makes  him  feel  like  a  co-worker  with 
God,  and  want  to  be  an  active  co- 
worker. And  it  brings  the  man  nearer 
to  his  fellows,  because,  taking  form  as 
assurance  of  sonship,  it  cannot  fail  to 
bring  on  the  responsibiUty  of  brother- 
hood. 

II.  Personal  assurance  is  to  be 
sought. — It  is  not  only  a  desirable 
attainment  ;  it  is  a  necessary  one. 
Upon  it  the  strength  of  the  Christian 
life  depends.  But  it  is  even  more  im- 
portant to  see  that  upon  it  the  bright- 
ness and  cheeriness  of  the  Christian 
life  depend.  The  uncertain  man  is 
depressed,  and  can  put  no  joy  into  his 
work.  No  man  should  rest  anywhere 
short  of  the  "full  assurance  of  faith." 

III.  Personal  assurance  is  gained 
through  apprehension  of  higher  truth. 
— Not  in  the  most  hopeful  way  through 
experience,  because  experience  always 
has  too  much  of  the  variableness  of 
self  in  it.  Assurance  comes  by  soul- 
growth,  through  spiritual  and  mental 
apprehensions  of  the  higher  truth. 
And  that  can  be  fully  apprehended 
when  we  recognise  that  the  higher 
truth  brings  the  fuller  knowledge  of 
God,  and  in  the  going  out  of  ourselves 
to  ever  higher  and  worthier  thoughts 
of  God  we  gain  our  best  confidences 
and  satisfactions. 

340 


The  Knowledge  of  Eternal  Life. — This 
being  the  declared  object  of  this  epistle, 
we  are  not  surprised  to  find  the  words 
"  know  "  and  "  eternal  Hfe"  conspicuous. 
The  whole  epistle  is  occupied  with  the 
signs  of  sonship.  Light,  love,  and  life 
are  the  grand  words  which  interpret 
the  epistle,  and  under  which  all  these 
evidences  of  the  new  nature  may  be 
arranged.  God  is  here  directly  de- 
clared to  be  light  and  to  be  love,  and 
it  is  everywhere  implied  that  He  is 
also  Hfe.  Hence  His  own  children 
must  partake  of  His  light,  and  love, 
and  life,  because  partakers  of  His 
nature. 

I.  Light  is  here  used  as  the  equiva- 
lent for  higher  knowledge,  as  darkness 
is  for  ignorance.  The  child  of  God 
walks  in  light.  Light  is  a  revealer. 
Hence  he  knows  God,  knows  himself 
and  his  sin,  and  knows  the  truth.  He 
that  is  in  darkness  knows  not  God, 
denies  his  sin,  denies  Jesus,  and  denies 
the  truth,  embraces  a  lie,  etc.  The 
signs  of  being  in  the  light  are  mainly 
these  three :  recognition  of  sin,  belief 
and  confession  of  Jesus,  and  knowledge 
of  God.  Of  many  truths  we  may  yet 
be  in  ignorance  or  doubt,  but  of  these 
the  true  child  of  God  must  be  assured. 

II.  Love,  this  is  the  synonym  for  a 
pure,  unselfish  affection  and  benevo- 
lence. Love  is  found  in  the  world — 
natural  affection,  selfish  affection,  the 
love  of  sympathy  and  of  complacency. 
But  this  love  is  not  of  this  world  ;  like 
the  warmth  of  the  sun,  it  is  the  out- 
going of  something  that  aims  to  bless 
others  rather  than  benefit  ourselves. 
"  He  that  loveth  is  born  of  God  and 
knoweth  God."  This  love  is  expan- 
sive, expulsive,  and  explosive.  It  en- 
larges the  heart,  it  expels  evil,  and 
it  demands  expression  and  action.  It 
expels  the  love  of  sin,  the  love  of  the 
world,  and  the  hatred  of  man.  It 
demands  vent  in  benevolent  action  and 
in  confession  of  Jesus  as  Lord. 

III.  Life.  Here  we  touch  another 
class  of  mysteries.  The  life- principle 
of  God  is  in  the  believer^  and  is  opposed 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    I.  JOHN, 


CHAP.   V. 


to  death.  Hence  there  is  :  1.  A 
quickening  power — obedience.  2.  A 
sanctifying  power — purification.  He 
that  is  born  of  God  doth  not  commit 
sin,  and  cannot  sin — observe  the  force 
of  the  Greek  present  tense,  continued 
action — doth  not  go  on  sinning.  There 
is  that  in  him  which  constrains  him  to 
do  Hghteousness  and  put  away  iniquity. 
He  has  affinity  with  God.  He  purifies 
himself,  even  as  Christ  is  pure.  No 
sinner  ought  to  be  in  ignorance  of  the 
way  of  salvation  with  the  gospel  of 
John  before  him.  No  saint  should  be 
in  doubt  about  his  saved  state  with  the 
first  epistle  of  John  before  him.  To 
be  saved  one  has  only  to  believe  on 
Jesus  as  the  Saviour,  to  receive  the 
gift  of  God's  love.  The  disciple  has 
only  to  examine  himself  as  to  whether 
he  is  in  the  light,  the  love,  the  life  of 
God.  If  he  sees  and  confesses  his  sin  ; 
if  he  accepts  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God  ;  if  he  finds  a  love  of  God 
and  of  the  brethren  which  expels  the 
love  of  sin,  of  the  world,  and  of  self ; 
if  he  feels  the  life  of  God  impelling  him 
to  obey  the  commands  of  God,  to  re- 
nounce sin,  and  to  live  for  God, — all  this 
is  the  work  of  God,  and  of  Him  alone. — 
AnA)n. 

Ver.  14.  The  Condition  of  all  Answers 
to  Prayer. — The  one  condition  is  re- 
peated again  and  again,  as  if  St.  John 
foresaw  with  what  difficulty  Christians 
through  all  the  ages  would  realise  it. 
All  his  effort  was  directed  to  persuad- 
ing men  to  believe  fully  in  the  Sonship 
of  Christ.  He  says  that  he  wiote  to 
them  precisely  as  those  who  pi^ofessed 
to  believe  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of 
God.  He  wrote  to  them  in  order  that 
he  might  persuade  them  really  to  be- 
lieve on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God. 


The  life  is  in  the  Son.  It  is  not  "  he 
that  hath  Christ  hath  life."  It  is,  "  he 
that  hath  the  Son  hath  life,  and 
he  that  hath  not  the  Son  of  God  hath 
not  life."  And  this  is  the  ground  of 
our  confidence  in  prayer — we  have  the 
Son  ;  and  when  a  man  has  the  Son, 
he  has  the  sonship ;  and  in  the  quiet, 
happy  trust  of  his  sonship,  he  is  as 
sure  that  his  heavenly  Father  hears 
and  answers  prayer,  as  any  happy 
loving  child  is  in  an  earthly  father's 
home.  Does  God  answer  prayer  ? 
That  child,  who  is  a  child  indeed, 
never  asks  the  question,  and  never 
likes  to  have  such  questions  asked.  He 
says,  with  deepest  feeling,  "  Don't  ask. 
He  is  my  Father."  "  If  ye,  being  evil, 
know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your 
children,  how  much  more  shall  your 
heavenly  Father  give  good  things  to 
them  that  ask  Him  ?  "  But  there  is  a 
particular  matter  in  St.  John's  mind. 
The  one  thing  he  is  urging  is  the 
"  love  of  the  brethren,"  which  we  must 
feel  if  we  love  the  Father,  and  have 
in  us  the  mind  of  the  only  begotten 
Son.  If  we  love  them,  w^e  shall  want 
to  do  something  for  them  ;  and  then 
we  shall  be  sure  to  intercede  for  them, 
to  ask  things  of  God  in  their  behalf. 
And  we  may  ask  with  confidence  of 
answer,  if  we  have  the  spirit  of  sons, 
because  we  shall  only  ask  what  is  in 
harmony  with  God's  will,  and  only  ask 
in  a  becoming  spirit.  The  prayer  of 
the  brotherhood,  the  prayer  of  the 
family  for  one  another,  is  evidently  in 
St.  John's  mind,  as  is  clear  from  vers. 
16,  17.  It  is  true  that  answer  to 
prayers  for  ourselves  rests  on  the  same 
condition  ;  but  it  comes  freshly  to  us 
to  find  that  our  intercessions  are  con- 
ditioned on  our  maintaining  our  son- 
ship. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.^Yerses  18—21. 

Things  about  which  we  ought  to  he  swre. — The  expression  "  we  know,"  as 
indicating  something  that  is  unquestionable,  something  that  is  settled  and 
indisputable,  something  which  has  been  so  confirmed  by  evidence,  observation, 
and  experience,  that  it  has  become  a  persuasive  power  on  our  life,  is  applied  to 
three  things :  1 .  The  actual  fact  that,  the  children  of  God  do  not  sin  wilfully. 

341 


CHAt.  V.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I  JOHN. 


2.  The  actual  fact,  that  those  who  have  not  the  new  Hfe  in  Christ  do  sin  wilfully. 

3.  The  spiritual  fact,  that  the  new  life  we  have  is  a  spiritual  Hfe  communicated 
to  us  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God.  St.  John  states  these  three 
things  that  we  ought  to  know,  as  a  kind  of  summary  of  his  epistle.  We  ought 
then  to  know — 

I.  The  actual  fact  that  the  children  of  God  do  not  sin  wilfully. — "  We  know 
that  whosoever  is  born  of  God  sinneth  not."  If  we  treat  this  expression  with 
simple  common  sense,  it  will  occasion  no  difficulty.  No  doctrine  of  human  sinless- 
ness  is  suggested.  It  can  be  said  of  every  child  who  is  in  right  relations  in  a 
Christian  home  that  he  "  sinneth  not."  Such  a  child  has  no  sort  of  disposition 
to  do  any  wrong  thing,  and,  wilfully,  never  does  any  wrong  thing.  He  must 
lose  the  sweet  spirit  of  his  sonship  ere  it  can  be  possible  for  him  to  do  anything 
to  grieve  his  father  or  his  mother.  And  he  who  is  born  of  God,  and  stands  fully 
in  the  sonship,  never  wants  to  do  wrong,  to  grieve  the  heavenly  Father.  He 
wants  to  find  fitting  expression  for  his  life,  and  he  never  can  find  it  save  in 
submissive  and  loving  obediences,  and  kindly  services,  and  righteous- doing.  He 
cannot  sin,  for  that  would  be  to  be  unnatural.  The  Revised  Version  gives  an 
alteration  of  the  second  clause  of  ver.  18  which  seems  to  explain  how  it  is  that 
the  man  born  of  God  does  not  commit  sin.  "But  he  that  was  begotten  of  God 
keepeth  him  [margin,  himself],  and  the  evil  one  toucheth  him  not."  This,  however, 
introduces  quite  a  new  subject,  and  the  watchfulness  of  a  man  over  himself  is 
much  more  in  the  line  of  St.  John's  thought  here,  than  any  refereace  to  the 
preserving  power  of  Christ.  "  The  child  of  God  keeps  himself  in  the  estate  of  a 
child  of  God  simply."     "The  true  ideal  frame  is  the  absence  of  wilful  sin." 

II.  The  actual  fact  that  those  who  have  not  the  new  life  in  Christ  do  sin 
wilfully.— Yer.  19  :  "  The  whole  world  lieth  in  the  evil  one."  Lieth  in  his 
power,  because,  there  being  no  new  life,  there  is  no  steadfastly  set  will  towards 
obedience  and  righteousness.  It  is  just  as  natural  for  the  man  with  only  the 
earthly  life  to  please  himself,  as  it  is  for  the  man  with  the  spiritual  life  to 
please  God.  Then  St.  John  says,  if  it  is  thus  natural  for  everybody  to  act 
wilfully,  and  to  please  themselves,  then  we  may  assure  our  hearts  that  we 
have  experienced  the  great  change,  and  are  of  God,  if  we  never  can  think  of 
acting  wilfully  or  wickedly,  if  we  cannot  bear  the  idea  of  pleasing  ourselves, 
when  so  doing  can  in  any  way  be  unpleasing  to  God.  "  We  know  that  we  are 
of  God,"  because  our  contrast  with  the  world  is  so  strongly  marked. 

III.  The  spiritual  fact,  that  the  new  life  we  have  is  a  spiritual  life  com- 
municated to  us  through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God. — Ver.  20  : 
"  And  we  are  in  Him  that  is  true,  even  in  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ."  The  idea  of 
St.  John  may  be  made  somewhat  clearer  by  recalling  what  St.  Paul  could  say  he 
knew.  "  I  live,  yet  not  I,  Christ  liveth  in  me."  "  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ." 
It  is  the  Christian  mystery  that  a  Divine  life  was  in  Christ,  and  found  its  expres- 
sion through  all  human  activities  and  relations,  guaranteeing  a  life  in  absolute 
conformity  with  the  will  of  God.  That  Divine  life  is  imparted  to  believers,  and 
they  become,  within  the  creaturely  limitations,  what  Christ  was,  men  in  whom 
is  a  spiritual  and  Divine  hfe,  which,  finding  expression  in  all  the  details  of  life, 
enables  them  to  live  lives  free  from  wilful  sin.  "  We  have  in  these  last  verses  a 
final  emphasis  laid  on  the  fundamental  principles  on  which  the  epistle  rests  : 
that  we  through  the  mission  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  have  fellowship  with  God ; 
that  this  fellowship  protects  us  from  sin,  and  establishes  us  in  a  relation  of 
perfect  opposition  to  the  world." 


342 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   V. 


SUGGESTIVE    NOTES   AND    SERMON   SKETCHES, 


Yer.  18.  Keeping  Ourselves. — The 
Revised  Version  reads  this  verse  thus, 
*'  But  he  that  was  begotten  of  God 
keepeth  him,  and  the  evil  (^e  toucheth 
him  not,"  with  the  marginal  addition 
"himself,"  instead  of  "him."  The 
idea  may  therefore  be  either  "the 
Son  of  God  preserves  him,"  or  "  he 
watchfully  keepeth  himself."  The 
latter  seems  more  precisely  in  the  line 
of  St.  John's  teaching  here.  He  is 
speaking  of  the  vii-tue  that  lies  in  the 
new  Divine  life  of  the  soul.  "  Who- 
soever is  born  of  God  sinneth  not " ; 
for  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  that 
life  to  be  jealous  of  it»  own  integrity 
and  purity.  This  point  may  be  opened 
out  and  illustrated  on  the  following 
lines. 

I.  Every  creature  having  life  has 
life  in  trust. — It  is  the  one  thing 
which  every  animal  and  every  man 
properly  regards  as  his  chief  treasure. 
"  Skin  after  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man 
hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  How- 
much  more  must  the  spiritual  and 
Divine  life  be  a  trust. 

II.  Keeping  here  means  guarding, 
but  much  more  than  guarding. — It 
is  quite  true  that  the  Christian  is 
"  kept  by  the  power  of  God,"  but  it 
is  also  true  that  God's  keeping  is 
effective  when  it  goes  along  with  his 
keeping  himself.  How  little  a  parent 
can  do  for  his  boy  if  the  boy  will  do 
nothing  for  himself. 

III.  Guarding  must  be  the  man's 
own  work,  but  for  it  he  may  accept 
auxiliary  aids. — He  must  "  work  out 
his  own  salvation,"  but  he  may  and 
should  reahse  how  fully  the  Divine 
help  is  at  his  command. 

lY.  He  only  knows  his  particular 
perils,  and  the  self-weaknesses  that 
bear  such  relation  to  his  perils. — It  is 
in  the  spiritual  as  in  the  physical 
world.  A  man  gets  to  know  his  own 
body,  and  learns  how  to  preserve 
health,  by  the  wise  management  of 
himself.  But  the  question  may  be 
asked,    Is    there    usually    such    self- 


knowledge  in  the  spiritual  life  as 
inspires  a  man  to  this  "  keeping 
himself." 

Yer.  20.  The  Gospel  of  the  Incarna- 
tion.— St.  John  simply  mentions  the 
great  things  that  lie  inside  this  fact : 
"  The  Son  of  God  is  come." 

I.  By  His  coming  He  has  "  given 
us  an  understanding  that  we  may 
know  Him  that  is  true." — This  does 
not  mean  that  Christ  gives  men  any 
new  intellectual  power,  that  He  adds 
to  the  faculties  of  the  mind  any  more 
than  to  the  senses  of  the  body.  "  Un- 
derstanding "  here  signifies  rather  the 
ineans  of  knowing^  the  power  of  under- 
standing. The  Son  of  God  has  given 
us  the  means  of  knowing  God.  By 
word  and  life  He  has  given  us  ideas 
about  Fatherhood,  holiness,  purity, 
kindness,  and  love,  that  we  had  not 
before.  The  horizon  of  language  has 
been  widened,  and  its  heaven  lifted 
higher  than  before. 

II.  For  what  purpose  has  Christ 
given  us  these  new  ideas  and  opened 
the  eyes  of  our  understanding  ? — That 
we  may  "know  Him  that  is  true," 
even  God.  It  is  needful  that  we  should 
know  God.  In  Christ  you  will  find 
the  truth  about  God. 

III.  We  know  that  the  Son  of  God 
is  come,  and  we  are  in  Him  that  is 
true,  in  His  Son  Jesus  Christ — i.e.  in 
Christ  we  are  in  God. — Union  with 
Christ  by  faith,  obedience,  and  love  is 
perfect  union  with  God. 

lY.  The  Son  of  God  is  come,  and  to 
be  in  Him  is  to  have  eternal  life. — 
"This  is  the  true  God  [the  God  in 
Christ],  and  eternal  life."  Christ  tells 
the  truth  :  believe  Him.  Christ  is 
the  life :  accept  Him. — J,  Morgan 
Gibbon. 

Yer.  21.  The  Ever-recwring  Tempta- 
tion to  Idolatry. — "  As  the  epistle  is 
addressed  to  Christians,  this  last  ex- 
hortation to  keep  themselves  from  idols 
could  not  refer  to  gross  idolatry ;  such 

343 


CHAP.   V. 


HOMlLETiC  COMMENTARY:   I  JOHN, 


a  dehortation  would  most  in  harmo- 
niously fit  the  tenor  of  the  whole  docu- 
ment. The  ctSoiXa  are  rather  the  ideas 
of  God  entertained  by  the  false  prophets 
of  whom  the  apostle  has  spoken,  the 
antichrists,  who,  because  they  have 
not  the  Son,  have  not  the  Father  also, 
without  therefore  being  atheists  in  the 
common  meaning  of  the  word.  All 
the  heretics  of  that  time  would  serve 
God.  Against  them  is  held  up  the 
proposition  that  ovro^,  that  is,  this 
God  revealed  in  Christ,  is  alone  the 
true  God ;  all  else  is  an  ciScoXov.  But 
not  only  is  God  robbed  of  His  honour, 
not  only  does  man  serve  a  false  god 
when  he  seeks  another  god  than  the 
God  revealed  in  Christ,  but  he  also 
trifles  away  his  own  salvation,  for  this 
only  is  eternal  life — he  that  hath  Him 
hath  thereby  life  "  (Eric  Haupt).  But 
while  it  may  be  helpful  thus  to  follow 
the  precise  meaning  and  allusion  of 
St.  John,  it  is  permissible,  for  homiletic 
purposes,  to  follow  the  suggestions  of 
his  words,  and  we  may  therefore  re- 
cognise the  fact  that  the  temptation 
to  idol -service  in  some  form  has  been 
the  temptation  of  men  in  every  age, 
and  is  their  temptation  still. 

Striking  Contrasts. — This  is  the  last 
of  the  contrasts  of  which  the  epistle  is 
so  full.  We  have  had  light  and  dark- 
ness, truth  and  falsehood,  love  and 
hate,  God  and  the  world,  Christ  and 
antichrist,  life  and  death,  doing  right- 
eousness and  doing  sin,  the  children  of 
God  and  the  children  of  the  devil,  the 
spirit  of  truth  and  the  spirit  of  error, 
the  believer  untouched  by  the  evil  one, 
and  the  world  lying  in  the  evil  one ; 
and  now  at  the  close  we  have  what  in 
that  age  was  the  ever-present  and 
pressing  contrast  between  the  true 
God  and  the  idols.  There  is  no  need 
to  seek  far-fetched,  figurative  explana- 
tions of  "  the  idols "  when  the  literal 
meaning  lies  close  at  hand,  is  suggested 
by  the  contrast,  and  is  in  harmony 
with  the  known  circumstances  of  the 
time. — A.  Plummer,  D.D. 

Christian  Idolatry. — The  first  com- 
344 


mandment  forbids  us  to  have  any  god, 
but  the  one  true  God.  The  second 
forbids  us  to  make  any  image  or  like- 
ness of  any  created  thing,  for  the 
purpose  of  bowing  down  to  it  and 
worshipping  it.  These  two  command- 
ments may  be  regarded  in  a  manner 
as  parts  of  one  and  the  same  command- 
ment. For  there  is  hardly  any  way 
in  which  mankind  have  been  drawn 
off  from  the  worship  of  the  one  true 
God  to  the  worship  of  false  gods,  so 
much  as  by  the  setting  up  of  images, 
and  the  falling  down  to  them,  and 
worshipping  them.  (See  book  of 
Wisdom  xiv.  12,  "The  devising  of  idols 
was  the  beginning  of  spiritual  fornica- 
tion, and  the  invention  of  them  the 
corruption  of  life.")  In  the  time  of 
our  Lord  every  nation,  except  the  Jews, 
was  sunk  in  idol-woi-ship.  The  yoke 
of  idolatry  lay  heavy  upon  every 
people,  and  nation,  and  language. 
After  our  Saviour's  teaching,  one  might 
have  thought  things  would  have  gone 
on  better,  at  least  in  His  own  Church. 
But  the  same  causes  will  ever  produce 
the  same  effects.  Instead  of  the 
images  of  heathen  gods,  which  had 
been  overthrown,  the  Churches  after 
a  time  were  again  filled  with  the 
images  of  apostles,  evangelists,  martyrs, 
and  other  holy  men.  These  were  not 
introduced  with  any  design  of  worship- 
ping them.  Yet  they  came  to  be 
worshipped.  We  may  not  be  falling 
into  this  error,  but  we  may  have  set 
up  idols  in  our  hearts,  and  this  may 
prove  to  be  a  worse  evil  than  bowing 
down  before  images.  It  is  if,  instead 
of  keeping  our  souls  pure,  as  befits 
temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  profane 
and  pollute  them  to  vain  and  perish- 
able, or,  as  too  many  do,  to  abominable, 
things.  The  root  and  essence  of  idolatry 
is  the  worshipping  and  serving  God's 
creatures  more  than  God  Himself. 
Whoever  then  serves  any  one  of  God's 
creatures  more  than  he  serves  God — 
whoever  loves  any  one  of  God's  crea- 
tures more  than  he  loves  God — who- 
ever makes  any  of  God's  creatures 
more  an  object  of  his  thoughts,  and 
allows  it  to  fill  a  greater  space  in  his 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   I.  JOHN. 


CHAP.   V. 


mind  than  God  fills — that  man  is 
guilty  of  idolatry,  in  the  spiritual  and 
Christian  sense  of  the  word.  When  it 
is  said,  God's  creatures,  it  is  meant, 
not  living  creatures  merely,  but  crea- 
tures of  every  kind — everything  which 
God  has  made  for  us,  or  enabled  us 
to  make  for  ourselves — all  the  sweet 
and  relishing  things  we  can  enjoy  in 
this  world — pleasures,  honours,  riches, 
comforts  of  every  kind.  Therefore,  if 
any  man  is  foolish  and  wicked  enough 
to  give  up  his  heart  to  any  one  of 
these  creatures,  and  suffers  himself  to 
be  drawn  away  from  serving  God  by 
it,  he  is  an  idolater  in  the  sight  of 
heaven.  Then  if  the  goods  of  this 
world  may  all  become  so  many  idols, 
luring  our  hearts  away  from  God,  then 
is  the  land  full  of  idols  of  a  thousand 
kinds — idols  for  all  ages,  for  all  classes, 
for  all  tempers,  for  all  hearts.  There 
are  idols  for  the  worldly-minded,  and 
idols  for  the  generous  ;  idols  for  the 
intemperate,  and  idols  for  the  prudent ; 
there  are  idols  for  the  affectionate ; 
and  again  there  are  idols  for  the 
selfish.  Young  and  old  have  their 
idols ;  married  and  unmarried  have 
their  idols  ;  rich  and  poor  have  their 
idols.  The  covetous  man  is  an  idolater 
(Col.  iii.  5).  The  insatiable  and  greedy 
man  is  an  idolater.  Mammon  is  not 
the  only  heathen  god  w^hose  worship  is 


carried  on  in  the  hearts  of  men  to-day. 
What  shall  we  say  of  Belial,  the 
fleshhest  spirit  that  ever  seduced  man 
to  sin  ?  He  is  the  god  of  lust,  of  riot, 
of  Uncleanness,  of  unruliness.  Or  look 
at  Moloch,  the  god  of  hatred  and  every 
fierce  passion  :  has  he  no  children,  no 
worshippers,  nowadays  ?  Men  who 
pay  him  the  service  he  is  best  pleased 
with — the  service  of  an  envious, 
rancorous,  malicious,  and  festered 
heart.  But  the  commonest  idol  of  all, 
which  has  the  most  constant,  the 
devoutest  worshippers,  which  reigns 
indeed  in  every  heart,  unless  it  has 
been  cast  out  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  is 
the  idol  of  self.  It  is  almost  impossible 
to  get  rid  of  him,  unless  we  starve  him 
out.  So  long  as  we  feed  him  and 
strengthen  him  by  gratifying  his  wilful- 
ness and  whim,  so  long  will  he  continue 
in  possession.  Nor  will  even  starving 
him  out  be  enough  of  itself,  unless  we 
add  frequent  prayer  thereto.  For  this 
is  the  spirit  of  which  our  Lord  said, 
that  it  goeth  not  out,  except  by  prayer 
and  fasting.  Mortify  yourselves  there- 
fore, brethren :  strive  to  crush  every 
feeling  within  you  that  would  lift  up 
its  head  against  the  will  of  God  :  strive 
to  break  the  neck  of  your  own  will, 
and  to  make  it  bend  meekly  and 
patiently  under  the  yoke  of  Christ. — 
A.  W.  Hare,  A.M. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO  CHAPTER  V, 


Ver.  20.  The  Deity  of  CTirist.— Two  gentle- 
men were  once  disputing  on  the  Divinity  of 
Christ.  One  of  them,  who  argued  against 
it,  said,  "If  it  were  true,  it  certainly  could 
have  been  expressed  in  more  clear  and 
unequivocal  terms."  "  Well,"  said  the  other, 
'•  admitting  that  you  believed  it,  were  you 
authorised  to  teach  it,  and  allowed  to  use  your 
own  language,  how  would  you  express  the 
doctrine  to  make  it  indubitable  ?  "  "I  would 
say,"  said  he,  *'  that  Jesus  is  t?ie  true  God." 
•'You  are  very  happy,  sir,"  rejoined  the 
other,  *'  in  the  choice  of  3^our  words  ;  for  you 
have  happened  to  hit  upon  the  very  words 
of  inspiration.  The  apostle  John,  speaking 
of  the  Son,  says,  '  This  is  the  true  God,  and 
eternal  life.'  "  The  Kev.  Charles  Buck  says, 
"  I  was  once  arguing  with  a  person  on  the 
same  subject ;  and  when  I  quoted  the  scrip- 
ture, he  was  quite  confounded,  and  said  he 


was  not  previously  aware  that  there  was  any 
such  passage." 

Ver.  21.  Christian  Idols. — This  idea  is  a 
general  and  very  comprehensive  one :  it 
embraces  all  things  and  everything  which 
may  be  opposed  to  the  God  revealed  in 
Christ,  and  to  His  worship  in  spirit  and  in 
truth.  Pre-eminently,  therefore,  it  embraces 
the  delusive  and  vain  idols  of  the  Cerinthian 
Gnosticism,  whether  ancient  or  modern ; 
but  it  includes  also  the  idols  and  false 
mediators  of  superstition,  to  whom  the 
confidence  is  transferred  which  is  due  only 
to  God  in  Christ — be  their  name  Madonna, 
or  saints,  or  Pope,  or  priesthood,  or  good 
works,  or  pictures,  or  office,  or  church,  or 
sacraments.  The  one  Being  in  whom  we 
have  the  '*  life  eternal  "  is  Christ.  .  .  .  And 
this  Christ  we  possess  through  the   Spirit 

345 


CHAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   I  JOHN. 


of  God,  whose  marks  and  tokens  are  not 
priestly  vestments,  but  faith  and  love.  In 
this  meaning  the  apostle's  cry  sounds  forth 
through  all  the  ages  in  the  ears  of  all  Chris- 
tians, "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves 
from  idols."  The  holiest  things  may  be- 
come a  snare,  if  their  letter  is  regarded,  and 
not  their  spirit.  Every  Christian  Church 
has  a  tendency  to  worship  its  own  brazen 
serpents.  Happy  are  they  who  have  a 
Hezekiah  to  call  them  Nehushtan  (a  piece 
of  worthless  brass). — Ebrard. 

Modem  Forms  of  Idolatry. — In  the  Eusso- 
Greek  Church  solid  images  are  not  per- 
mitted, and  the  symbols  of  faith  are 
generally  worthless  pictures,  made  to  re- 
present images  as  much  as  permissible,  by 
having  stuffs  wrought  in  thin  gold  or  silver 
stuck  upon  the  painting.  The  celebrated 
gate  in  the  wall  of  the  Kremlin  is  famous 
because  a  picture  of  this  sort.  "  The  Re- 
deemer of  Smolensk,"  as  it  is  called,  is 
suspended  above  the  high  archway  of  brick. 
With  an  opera-glass  one  can  discern  a 
representation  of  the  typical  face  of  Christ 
decked  in  golden  garb  and  nimbus.  Even 
in  these  degenerate  days  it  is  scarcely  per- 
mitted that  any  one  shall  pass  under  this 
archway  except  uncovered.  Jews  and 
Mohammedans  generally  find  some  less 
sacred  gate  when  they  wish  to  enter  the 
Kremlin — the  Acropolis  of  Moscow.  The 
Czar  himself  never  passes  by  any  other  way, 
and  never  with  his  hat  upon  his  head.  But 
it  is  upon  the  outer  side  of  the  Voskreneski 
Gate,  in  the  Kitai-Gorodi,  or  "Chinese 
town  "  of  Moscow,  that  the  most  remark- 
able exhibition  of  religious  feeling  may  be 
witnessed.  Before  the  stout  wall  of  brick- 
work which  separates  the  outgoing  from 
the  incoming  way  is  the  Iberian  Chapel- 
(Iverskaya  Chasovnia),  architecturally 
nothing  but  a  large-sized  hut  of  stone,  on 
a  platform  raised  by  two  steps  above  the 
roadway.  From  morning  till  night  this 
platform  is  thronged,  and  the  chapel  over- 
flows with  a  crowd,  chiefly  composed  of 
men,  pressing,  all  bareheaded,  and  all  with 
money  in  their  hands,  toward  the  narrow 
doorway  of  the  little  sanctuary.  We  were 
some  time  getting  into  the  chapel,  which 
will  hold  about  ten  people  abreast,  and  is 


lighted  by  the  flickering  glare  of  a  score  of 
candles.  There  is  a  step  at  the  farther  end, 
and  the  wall  opposite  the  door  is  resplendent 
with  shining  metal,  except  where  the 
object  of  this  extravagant  devotion  looks 
grimy  through  its  framework  of  gold.  On 
the  left  side  of  "  the  Iberian  Mother  of 
God,"  which  is  the  name  given  to  this 
commonplace  daub,  supposed  to  possess 
miraculous  powers,  stands  a  long-haired 
priest — now  and  then  relieved  by  another 
long-haired  priest — who,  hour  by  hour,  in 
the  name  of  the  tinselled  and  jewelled 
picture,  and  with  blessings,  consecrates  the 
prayers  and  offerings  of  the  faithful.  Only 
the  face  of  the  Madonna  is  visible,  and  it 
is  not  easy  to  distinguish  her  features  be- 
neath  the  dust  of  years.  But  not  a  minute 
passes  in  which  the  rattle  of  money  falling 
to  the  uses  of  the  Russian  Church  is  not 
heard,  or  in  which  lips  are  not  pressed  upon 
the  framework,  or  upon  the  rudely  wrought 
robes  of  beaten  gold  which  conceal  the 
picture  to  the  neck.  Surely  no  lower  depth 
of  superstitious  degradation  was  ever 
reached  in  connection  with  Christian  wor- 
ship 1  One  cannot  be  surprised  that  to  a 
Turk  a  Russian  seems  to  be  an  idolatrous 
worshipper  of  pictures.  The  refining  ex- 
planation which  the  most  enlightened 
fathers  of  the  Greek  Church  offer  concerning 
this  exhibition  is  precisely  of  the  sort,  and 
differs  only  in  degree,  from  that  which 
might  be  offered  for  the  idol-worshippers 
of  more  southern  and  eastern  lands.  The 
picture  has  no  historic  reputation.  It  was 
brought  from  Mount  Athos,  that  pleasant 
wooded  hill  peopled  with  monkish  drones. 
A  sum  of  about  .£12,000  a  year  is  collected, 
and  from  this  the  salary  of  the  Metro- 
politan of  Moscow  is  paid.  Time  was  when 
in  the  ceremonies  which  precede  Easter  the 
Czar  used  to  lead  the  donkey  upon  which 
the  Patriarch  of  Moscow  rode,  carrying  a 
sacred  chalice,  and  a  copy  of  the  four 
gospels.  Nowadays  that  ceremony  is  neg- 
lected, but  we  are  given  to  understand  that 
the  Czar  never  enters  Moscow  without 
assisting  the  revenues  of  this  high  ecclesias- 
tical officer  by  praying  at  the  shrine  of 
this  "  Iberian  Mother  of  God." — Frasers 
Magazi^w. 


346 


THE    SECOND    EPISTLE    OF 

JOHN. 


INTEODUCTION. 

This  epistle  is  anonymous,  and  it  is  a  private  letter  which  did  not  for  some 
time  gain  a  recognised  place  in  the  Canon.  It  is  singular  that  its  author 
should  call  himself  "  the  elder,"  if  he  was  the  well-known  and  highly-honoured 
apostle  John.  No  satisfactory  reason  has  been  given  for  his  giving  himself  this 
particular  name.  All  that  can  be  said  is,  that  the  assumption  of  the  title  is 
consistent  with  the  belief  that  he  wrote  this  and  the  following  epistle  in  advanced 
age — the  title  "  elder "  for  himself  matching  the  affectionate  term  "  little 
children,"  which  he  used  for  those  whom  he  addressed.  He  might  wish  to  avoid 
the  appearance  of  making  a  special  claim  as  the  only  surviving  apostle ;  and  he 
may  have  been  Divinely  guided  into  dropping  the  apostolic  name,  which  in 
its  special  sense  had  had  its  day,  and  adopting  a  name  which  was  to  be  a 
permanent  possession  of  the  Church.  "  No  ordinary  presbyter  would  be  likely 
to  style  himself  6  Trpccr/JvTcpos  in  the  inscription  of  "a  letter." 

The  argument  for  the  Johannine  authorship  is  entirely  based  on  a  comparison 
of  its  contents,  expressions,  and  tone  with  the  first  epistle  and  the  gospel. 
The  uncertainty  of  the  argument  lies  in  its  being  equally  applicable  to  one  of 
John's  disciples,  endowed  with  a  double  portion  of  his  spirit.  Of  the  thirteen 
verses  of  the  shorter  epistle,  eight  have  close  counterparts  in  the  first.  All  that 
can  safely  be  said  is,  that  there  are  good  reasons  for  assuming  that  it  was 
written  by  the  apostle  John,  and  no  good  reasons  for  favouring  any  other 
assumption.  If  it  holds  the  field  uncertainly,  still  the  Johannine  authorship 
does  hold  the  field. 

The  following  summary  of  its  character  and  scope  has  been  given  :  "  The 
apostle,  who  is  probably  staying  at  the  same  place  as  some  of  his  correspondent's 
children,  writes  to  a  mother  and  her  other  children  to  express  his  sympathy  and 
delight  at  the  faith  of  the  family,  and  to  warn  them  against  admitting  false 
teachers  into  their  circle.  It  contains  noticeable  definitions  of  love,  antichrist, 
and  of  true  and  false  believers.  It  also  has  a  general  lesson  on  the  treatment 
of  wilful  depravers  of  Divine  truth." 

347 


VERS.  1-12.         BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.  JOHN. 


EVIL    INFLUENCES    IN    FAMILY    LIFE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  elder. — Indicating  both  the  writer's  age  and  official  position.  Elect  lady. — 
Or  possibly,  "  the  Elect  Kyria,"  Kyria  being  a  feminine  form  of  Kijpios,  "  lord,"  which  was  used 
as  a  name.  But  the  A.V.  is  to  be  preferred.  Some  think  that  a  community,  or  Church,  is 
addressed  ;  but  the  best  point  and  interest  of  the  epistle  are  realised  if  it  be  regarded  as  a 
private  letter  to  an  individual.  It  expresses  the  personal  religious  interest  which  the 
apostle  felt  in  one  particular  family.  Beza's  note  is  :  "  Some  think  Eclecta  a  proper  name, 
which  I  do  not  approve,  because  in  that  case  the  order  of  the  words  would  have  been, 
Kvpiif.  iKXeKTTJ,  To  the  Lady  Eclecta.  Others  think  this  name  denotes  the  Christian  Church  in 
general.  But  that  is  disapproved,  first,  by  its  being  a  manner  of  speaking  altogether 
unusual ;  secondly,  by  the  apostle's  expressly  promising  in  the  last  two  verses  to  come  to 
her  and  her  children ;  thirdly,  by  sending  to  her  the  salutation  of  her  sister,  whom  also  he 
calls  Eclecta.  I  therefore  think  that  this  epistle  was  inscribed  to  a  woman  of  eminence,  of 
whom  there  were  some  here  and  there,  who  supported  the  Church  with  their  wealth,  and  that 
he  called  her  Elect,  that  is  '  excellent,'  and  gave  her  the  title  of  Kvp[q.,  '  lady,'  just  as  Luke  gave 
to  Theophilus,  and  Paul  gave  to  Festus,  the  title  of  KparicrToi,  '  most  excellent.'  For  the 
Christian  religion  does  not  forbid  such  honourable  titles  to  be  given,  when  they  are  due." 
For  the  apostolic  use  of  the  term  "  elect,"  compare  1  Pet.  i.  1 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  10.  "  Every  Chris- 
tian is  elect,  or  chosen,  out  of  the  anti- Christian  world  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  We  are 
to  understand  that,  as  this  lady  was  a  person  of  influence,  "  deceivers  "  were  insinuating 
themselves  into  her  family,  in  order  to  lead  her  and  her  children  away  from  the  truth.  "  If 
the  name  of  the  matron  is  not  given,  it  is  not  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  dangers  of  the  times, 
or  family  persecution,  may  have  made  it  advisable  that  both  her  name  and  that  of  the 
writer  should  be  withheld.  The  messenger  would  supply  both  deficiencies.  In  the  truth. — 
Or,  "  in  truth,"  i.e.  sincerely  ;  with  Christian  love,  as  distinct  from  personal  or  family 
affection.  Have  known  the  truth. — There  is  a  particular  interest  in  one  another  secured  by 
a  common  experience  of  the  power  of  saving  truth.  It  is  inferred  that  this  lady  was  widely 
known,  respected,  and  beloved. 

Ver.  2.  Truth's  sake. — There  was  evidently  something  then  commonly  recognised  as  the 
standard  Christian  truth.  It  must  have  been  that  setting  of  truth  concerning  the  person 
and  redemptive  work  of  Christ,  which  the  apostles  had  given.  From  St.  John's  writings  we 
gather  that  he  was  supremely  anxious  concerning  the  standard  truth  of  Christ's  person. 
Dwelleth  in  us. — This  is  true  of  the  truth,  and  it  is  true  if  the  truth  be  personified  as  Christ, 
who  dwells  in  us  by  His  Spirit  (John  xiv.  16).  Plummer  gives  the  sense  of  these  verses 
thus,  "  The  apostle  and  all  believers  love  the  elect  lady  and  her  children  on  account  of  the 
ever-abiding  presence  of  Christ  in  the  gift  of  the  Spirit." 

Ver.  3.  Grace. — The  free  Divine  favour  of  God.  Mercy. — The  Divine  pitifulness  towards 
man's  infirmities.  Peace. — The  spirit  of  him  who  is  the  recipient  of  Divine  grace,  and  dealt 
with  in  the  Divine  mercy.  Son  of  the  Father. — Observe  the  distinctness  with  which  the 
Father  is  presented  as  another  person  than  the  Son.  "Perfect  independence,  parallel 
equality,  and  mutual  connection."  In  truth  and  love. — The  element  or  sphere  in  which 
alone  grace,  mercy,  and  peace  can  have  place,  h  denotes  the  condition,  circumstances, 
sphere,  in  which  these  blessings  shall  be  enjoyed  :  "  in  truth,"  as  revealed  by  Him,  and 
received  by  you — the  knowledge  and  faith  of  Christ ;  "  in  love,"  mutual  between  us  and  Him. 

Ver.  4.  Walking  in  truth. — Compare  John  viii.  12 ;  1  John  i.  6,  7,  ii.  6 ;  3  John  3,  4. 
St.  John  had  recently  met  with  some  of  the  lady's  children,  and  was  glad  to  report  the  good 
impressions  they  had  made  upon  him.  "  The  elliptical  mode  of  expression  {iK  r&v  riKviov) 
is  rather  common  in  St.  John  "  (John  i.  24,  vii.  40,  xvi.  17  ;  Rev.  ii.  10,  v.  9,  xi.  9).  Bengel 
remarks  that  there  must  have  been  at  least  four  children,  for  more  than  one  were  present 
with  her,  and  more  than  one  were  absent. 

Ver.  5.  New  commandment. —John  xv.  12  ;  1  John  ii.  7.  Love  one  another. — Love,  as  here 
defined,  must  be  love  in  its  highest  and  most  comprehensive  sense,  that  of  which  mutual 
Christian  love  is  an  exemplification  and  exercise — the  love  of  God  and  our  neighbour. 
"  Love  is  the  Christian's  moral  disposition  of  mind,  which  embraces  all  other  virtues  and 
graces.     It  implies  faith,  because  it  is  founded  on  Christian  principle,  and  can  only  be  tested 

348 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   II.  JOHN.  vers.  1-3. 


by  a  right  belief.  It  implies  purity,  because  it  is  modelled  on  the  love  of  God,  and  has 
abjured  the  old  man.  It  implies  unselfishness,  because  it  desires  the  good  of  the  other  for 
his  own  sake  and  God's.  It  implies  humility,  because  it  distrusts  itself,  relies  on  God,  and 
thinks  more  of  the  other  than  of  itself  (compare  John  xiii.  14,  xv.  12 ;  1  Cor.  xiii. ;  Eph.  v.  2 ; 
1  Pet.  iv.  8  ;  I  John  iii.  11,  23,  iv.  7,  21)"  {Sinclair). 

Ver.  7.  Come  in  the  flesh. — The  veritable  humanity  of  the  Son  of  God  is  St.  John's  strong 
point.  Reference  is  to  the  teaching  afterwards  formulated  as  the  Gnostic  heresy,  that  the 
"  Man  Christ  Jesus  "  was  only  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  not  a  real  human  being. 
Deceiver. — Either  one  who  deceives  himself,  is  deceived,  or  deceives  others.  Antichrist. — 
As  opposing  what  is  absolutely  vital  truth  concerning  the  person  of  Christ.  These  teachers 
did  not  merely  deny  the  fact  of  the  Incarnation,  but  also  the  possibility  of  it.  "  They 
confess  not  Jesus  Christ  as  coming  in  the  flesh." 

Ver.  8.  Have  wrought. — Apostolic  teachings,  which  should  bear  fruit  in  steadfast  loyalty 
to  the  truth,  and  righteous  living  in  the  inspiration  of  the  truth.  Full  reward. — In  that 
steadfastness  and  righteousness. 

Ver.  9.  Hath  not  God. — 1  John  ii.  23,  v.  12.  Only  the  true  humanity  of  Christ  can  bring 
to  man  the  true  conception  of  God,  and  the  true  relations  with  God. 

Ver.  10.  Bring  not  this  doctrine. — St,  John  provides  a  means  of  testing  all  who  claimed 
the  lady's  hospitality  as  Christian  teachers.  Still  it  is  true  that  the  doctrine  of  the  veritable 
humanity  of  Christ  provides  the  true  test  of  orthodoxy ;  and  when  that  is  rightly  taught,  the 
full  moral  influence  of  Christianity  is  efiiciently  secured.  Beceive  him  not  into  your  house. 
This  advice  is  given  less  for  the  lady's  own  sake  than  for  the  sake  of  her  children.  Such 
teachers  specially  seek  to  gain  influence  on  the  young,  and  they  can  readily  influence  them 
in  private  home  life. 

Ver.  11.  God  speed. — Or  success  in  his  mission.  To  sympathise  with  a  false  teacher  is  to 
condone  his  false  doctrine.  It  should  be  clearly  seen  that  St.  John  has  in  mind,  not  merely 
misguided  persons,  but  persons  who  deliberately  set  themselves  to  the  degrading  of  the 
Christian  doctrine.  We  have  to  think  of  the  false  teachers  of  that  age.  The  idea  was  that 
the  Christian  truth  could  be  so  presented  as  to  give  licence  to  immorality.  It  is  against 
this  that  the  apostles  so  vigorously  contend.  Mere  variations  in  the  forms  of  explaining  and 
presenting  the  Christian  truths  should  never  be  confounded  with  deliberate  attempts  to  alter 
and  deprave  the  Christian  verities. 

Ver.  12.  Joy  may  be  full. — In  the  interchange  of  Christian  thoughts,  and  the  assurance 
that  malign  influences  had  been  successfully  resisted. 

The  "  Amen  "  is  the  addition  of  a  copyist. 

Note  on  Ancient  Ink  (ver.  12). — Pliny  says,  of  the  ink  used  by  the  Eomans,  that  it  was 
made  of  soot  in  various  ways  with  burnt  resin  or  pitch.  "  For  this  purpose  they  have  built 
furnaces  which  do  not  allow  the  smoke  to  escape.  The  kind  most  commended  is  made  in 
this  way  from  pine-wood :  it  is  mixed  with  soot  from  the  furnaces  or  baths,  and  this  they 
use  for  writing  on  rolls.  Some  also  make  a  kind  of  ink  by  boiling  and  straining  the  lees  of 
wine."    The  black  matter  of  the  cuttle-fish  was  also  sometimes  used  for  writing. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

Loving  for  the  TruiKs  Sake. — It  is  a  little  strange  that  St.  John  should  here 
call  himself  "  the  elder,"  especially  as  that  term  had  a  recognised  meaning  in 
the  early  Church.  It  indicated  the  chief  official  position,  and  is  probably  a 
reproduction  of  the  eldership  of  the  synagogue.  Westcott  says,  **  In  this  connec- 
tion there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  describes  not  age  simply,  but  official  position." 
It  is  not  at  all  likely  that  St.  John  intended  to  allude  to  his  advanced  age, 
though  that  idea  is  supported  by  Dollinger  in  the  following  passage  :  "  The 
use  of  the  word  in  this  epistle  shows  that  he  cannot  have  understood  his  title  in 
the  usual  ecclesiastical  sense,  as  though  he  were  only  one  among  many  presbyters 
of  a  community.  Clearly  the  writer  meant  thereby  to  express  the  singular  and 
lofty  position  he  held  in  the  circle  around  him,  as  the  teacher  venerable  for  his 
old  age,  and  the  last  of  the  apostles."  His  calling  himself  "  the  elder  "  (not 
"fellow-elder,"  as  1  Pet.  v.  1)  suggests  that,  while  he  put  himself  on  the  level 
of  the  elders,  he  could  not  fail  to  regard  himself  as  primus  inter  pares.  The 
language  and  the  thought  of  the  apostle  are  so  Johannine  that  the  authorship 
of  St.  John  is  almost  assured, 

349 


i^ERS.  4-13.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    II.  JOHN. 


I.  Christian  love — love  of  others  in  Christ,  and  for  Christ's  sake — should  be 
regarded  as  the  human  ideal  of  love. — It  is  the  highest  thing  attainable  by 
humanity.  It  is  only  attainable  when  man  is  regenerated,  quickened  with  a 
new,  Divine  life. 

II.  Christian  love  is  loving  others  for  their  own  sake. — It  is  not  something 
different  from  ordinary  human  love.  It  is  that  glorified.  It  is  as  capable  as 
ever  of  loving  the  lovely,  of  personal  attachments. 

III.  Christian  love  is  loving  others  for  the  truth's  sake. — Or  as  we  should 
express  it,  because  of  the  common  Divine  life  in  them  and  us.  It  will  be  seen 
at  once  how  this  rises  above  personal  love  and  family  love,  though  it  is  in 
the  same  line.  In  all  spheres  the  common  life  is  the  basis  of  the  common  love. 
Loving  others  has  two  objects  to  attain  :  1.  Personal  enjoyment  out  of  the 
loving.     2.  Service  rendered  to  those  loved. 

Vers.  4-13.  Peril  in  Going  Onvmrd. — The  point  of  this  paragraph  is  given  in 
the  R.V.  of  ver.  9  :  "  Whosoever  goeth  onward,  and  abideth  not  in  the  teaching 
of  Christ,  hath  not  God :  he  that  abideth  in  the  teaching,  the  same  hath  both 
the  Father  and  the  Son."  The  going  onward  against  which  St.  John  warns  is 
advance  beyond  the  revealed  doctrine  in  Christ.  There  is  a  false  progress  as  well  as 
a  true.  St.  John  recognises  gladly  the  Christian  love  of  this  lady  and  her  family, 
and  that  it  showed  its  proper  signs  of  loyalty  and  obedience  to  Christ's  truth. 
But  in  order  that  the  love  should  be  pure,  that  the  commandments  should  be 
unimpaired,  it  was  necessary  to  remember  that  nothing  new  could  be  added  to 
the  original  message  of  Christ.  Unauthorised  developments  of  Divine  revelation, 
such  as  are  found  in  Gnostic  or  Agnostic  systems,  are  always  perilous.  This 
lady  must  jealously  guard  her  family  against  the  pernicious  influence  of  those 
who  tamper  with  the  truth,  or  would  add  to  the  truth.  "  These  anti- Christian 
Gnostics  were  advanced  thinkers  :  the  gospel  was  all  very  well  for  the  unen- 
lightened, but  they  knew  something  higher.  This  agrees  very  well  with  what 
follows  :  by  advancing  they  did  not  abide."  There  is  an  advance  which  involves 
desertion  of  first  principles ;  and  such  an  advance  is  not  progress,  but  apostasy. 

1.  There  is  a  "  going  onward  "  which  is  an  otherwise  growing.  It  is  unusual. 
It  is,  to  say  the  least,  doubtful.     It  may  be  healthy.     It  will  need  watching. 

2.  There  is  a  "  going  onward  "  which  is  an  ow^-growing.  As  the  boy  outgrows 
his  child-clothes,  so  a  Christian  may  outgrow  his  child-forms  of  thought,  and 
want  new  ways  for  expressing  old  principles  and  truths.  This  may  be  perfectly 
normal  and  natural,  and  liberty  in  this  must  be  permitted  ;  provision  for  this 
must  be  made.  3.  There  is  a  going  onward  which  is  an  m-growing.  A  develop- 
ing of  the  soul's  life,  which  finds  fitting  outward  expression  in  conduct  and 
relations,  and  this  is  always  hopeful  and  safe.  Progress  along  the  lines,  and 
within  the  lines,  is  healthy.  Progress  beyond  the  Knes,  or  aside  the  lines,  needs 
most  careful  watching. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  4.  Walking  in  Truth. — Pleasant  thing  about  her  children  that  greatly 

to  receive  letters ;  a  surprise  to  receive  pleased  him.     "  I  rejoiced  greatly  that 

one   from   a  minister.     A  lady,  men-  I    found   of   thy   children  walking  in 

tioned  in  a  general  way,  without  any  truth."     Walking  in  truth :  that  our 

specific   name,    received   one.     It  was  friends    are    walking    in   truth — that 

from     a     much -loved    and    honoured  the  children  growing  up  around  us  are 

minister.     What  made  him  write  that  walking   in   truth — this  is   something 

loving   letter  ?     He   had   heard  some-  to  be  glad  about.     By  "  walk "  Scrip- 

350 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    II.  JOHN. 


VER.   12. 


ture  means  our  way  of  living,  and 
acting,  and  sustaining  relations,  and 
meeting  obligations.  The  figure  at- 
taches to  the  familiar  way  of  regarding 
human  life  as  a  pilgrimage.  The 
following  ideas  may  be  included  in  the 
term  "  walking  in  truth  "  : — 

I.  Walking  straight. — A  dying 
minister  drew  down  to  him  one  of  his 
people,  a  man  whose  business  relations 
were  shaky,  and  solemnly  said,  as  his 
parting  word,  "  William,  go  straight." 
Bunyan  illustrates  how  the  pilgrims 
are  drawn  aside  from  the  straight 
path.  Illustrate  "  walking  straight " 
by  the  example  of  Joseph. 

II.  Walking  steadily. — The  idea  of 
uprightness  with  steadfastness.  Head 
uplifted.  Eyes  looking  up.  Contrast 
the  drunkard,  undecided,  wavering 
man.  Illustrate  by  the  example  of 
Samuel. 

III.  Walking  with  a  purpose. — A 
man's  conduct  depends  upon  his  aim. 
He  walks  persistently  who  is  going 
snmevjJiere.  Illustrate  by  the  example 
of  Joshua.  "  As  for  me  and  my  house, 
we  will  serve  the  Lord." 

TV.  Walking  according  to  direc- 
tions.— As  given  in  the  great  moral 
guide-book.  Illustrate  by  psalm. 
"  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man 
cleanse  his  way  ?  "  "  Lamp  to  feet, 
light  to  path."  Give  Wilberforce's 
figure  of  the  strangers  and  pilgrims 
who  are  passing  through,  and  the  men 
of  the  world  who  settle  down.  We 
should  be  those  who  are  passing 
through ;  and  because  they  want  to 
pass  through  well,  endeavour  to  *'  walk 
in  truth." 

Yer.  12.  Presence  and  Correspond- 
ence.— Having  many  things  to  write 
unto  the  elect  lady  and  her  children, 
whom  he  loved  in  the  truth,  the  elder, 
as  he  wills  to  call  himself,  willed 
not  to  write  with  paper  and  ink,  but 
trusted  to  come  in  person  and  speak 


face  to  face,  or  mouth  to  mouth,  that 
their  joy  might  be  full.  Joy  there 
might  be,  and  must  be,  in  receiving  a 
letter  from  such  a  penman  as  this. 
But  for  the  fulness  of  joy  there  must 
be  his  personal  presence ;  and  in 
person  he  trusted  to  be  with  his 
correspondents  soon,  and  to  prove 
what  a  different  meaning  "face  to 
face  "  has  from  pen,  ink,  and  paper — 
that  in  realising  the  depth  of  that 
difference  their  joy  might  be  full.  It 
has  been  said  that  for  anything  like 
real  friendship  there  must  at  one 
period  have  been  constant  and  free 
conversation.  "  Letters  are  all  very 
well,"  and  the  correspondence  of  close 
friends  is  a  comparative  good  in  default 
of  a  positive  letter;  but  a  shrewd  as 
well  as  genial  authority  owns  to  having 
not  much  faith  in  that  friendship 
which  is  content  with  letters,  and  does 
not  make  constant  efforts  for  the  more 
cordial  and  the  closer  encounter  of 
hand  and  eye,  of  actual  face  to  face. 
"  Without  this  there  may  be  kind 
feeling  and  preference ;  but  warmth 
is  wanting,  and  warmth  is  essential  to 
friendship."  Immense  as  is  the  dis- 
tance between  a  letter  and  an  inter- 
view, writes  Madame  dArblay  to  her 
father  from  abroad,  "  where  the  dearer 
is  unattainable,  its  succedaneum  be- 
comes more  precious  than  those  who 
enjoy  both  can  believe,  or  even  con- 
ceive. 0  my  dearest  father,  let  no 
possible  conveyance  pass  without  giving 
me  the  sight  of  your  hand,  if  it  bo 
but  by  your  signature  !  "  Between  the 
sight  of  a  hand  and  the  warm  grasp  of 
one  the  difference  is  indeed  most  real. 
One  of  the  Crauford  worthies  describes 
correspondence  as  bearing  much  the 
same  relation  to  personal  intercourse 
that  the  hortus  siccus,  or  book  of  dried 
plants,  does  to  the  living  and  fresh 
flowers  in  the  lanes  and  meadows. — 
Francis  Jacox. 


351 


THE    THIRD   EPISTLE    OF 

JOHN. 


INTEODUCTION. 

There  is  little  to  be  added  to  what  has  been  said  concerning  the  second  epistle. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  both  were  written  by  the  same  person ;  and  every 
argument  for  the  Johannine  authorship  drawn  from  the  contents  of  the  second 
epistle  can  be  fully  supported  by  the  contents  of  the  third.  But  no  positive 
knowledge  of  the  person  addressed  can  be  obtained. 

The  contents  may  be  thus  summarised  :  "  The  writer  recounts  how  some 
missionaries  had  been  badly  received  by  Diotrephes,  who  had  ambitiously 
obtained  for  himself  the  chief  influence  in  a  certain  Church,  but,  notwithstanding, 
Gaius  had  been  courageous  and  kind  enough  to  entertain  them  hospitably. 
Gains  is  exhorted  to  help  them  still  further.  The  letter  gives  us  an  idea  of  the 
high  importance  of  hospitality  at  the  time  as  a  Christian  virtue,  and  brings 
out  the  fact  that  St.  John's  authority  was  no  less  disputed  in  certain  cases 
than  St.  Paul's.  It  is  probable  that  the  Church  of  Diotrephes  had  not  been 
founded  by  St.  John." 

Gaius  was  an  exceedingly  common  name.  A  person  named  Gaius  is  referred 
to  in  ExDm.  xvi.  23  ;  1  Cor.  i.  14  ;  Acts  xix.  29,  xx.  4.  A  Gaius  is  also  mentioned 
in  the  Apos.  Constit.^  vii.  40,  as  bishop  of  Pergamos. 

What  can  be  assured  is  that,  whether  St.  John  was  the  writer  of  the  epistle  or 
not,  the  writer  occupied  a  position  of  authority  in  the  Church  of  which  Gaius 
was  a  member ;  but  at  the  time  of  writing  he  was  away  from  the  Church,  and 
had  received  reports  which  had  filled  him  with  anxiety.  The  letter  contains 
three  things,  afiixed  to  three  names,  which  may  be  regarded  as  types. 

I.  Encouragement. — Offered  to  Gaius.  The  writer  recognises  soul-prosperity, 
and  wishes  it  matched  with  worldly  success  and  bodily  health.  And  there  is 
a  natural  and  necessary  connection  between  soul  and  bodily  prosperity,  which 
would  be  much  more  constantly  realised  and  recognised  but  for  the  disturbing 
influences  of  what  is  called  "  civilisation."     The  soul -prosperity  of  Gaius  is  seen — 

A  A  353 


INTKODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  III.  JOHN. 

1.   In   his   piety — "  walkest  in   the   truth."     2.   In   his   hospitality — practical 
goodness. 

II.  Censure. — Of  Diotrephes.  Human  nature  has  the  same  weaknesses  in 
every  age.  In  this  man — 1.  Self-assertion.  2.  Masterfulness.  3.  Incon- 
siderateness.     Shown  in  dealing  with  strangers  visiting  the  Church. 

III.  Commendation. — Of  Demetrius.  He  was  possibly  the  man  rejected 
and  unworthily  treated  by  Diotrephes.  The  man  who  has  won  a  good  name 
may  properly  expect  to  use  his  good  name. 

The  one  thing  impressed  in  this  brief  epistle  is  the  importance  of  Christian 
character,  and  the  sadness  of  falling  from  its  high  standard  of  excellence.  It  is 
intimated  that  Christian  character  always  materially  helps  in  securing  kind 
and  gracious  relations. 


354 


PERSONAL   CONFIDENCES  AND  KINDLY  WARNINGS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  elder. — It  cannot  be  decided  whether  this  was  a  recognised  official  title,  or 
an  allusion  by  St.  John  to  his  great  age.  The  fact  that  St.  Peter  calls  himself  "  a  fellow- 
presbyter  "  (1  Pet.  V.  1)  favours  the  idea  that  the  title  is  official ;  and  the  Jewish  Christian 
communities  were  likely  to  call  their  officials  "  elders,"  after  the  pattern  of  the  synagogue 
elders.  Gains.— Or  Caius.  This  man  cannot  be  confidently  indentified  with  any  person 
previously  mentioned  (Acts  xix.  29,  xx.  4 ;  Rom.  xvi.  23  ;  1  Cor.  i.  14) ;  but  the  Gaius 
mentioned  in  Rom.  xvi.  23  is  commended  for  the  hospitality  which  St.  John  also  praises 
in  Ms  Gaius.  In  the  truth. — Not  merely,  "  whom  I  truly  love,"  but,  "  whom  I  love  with 
Christian  love."  There  is  love  we  have  for  persons  for  their  own  sakes,  and  love  we  have 
for  them  as  brethren  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Ver.  2.  Above  all  things. — Concerning  all  things,  irepl  iravTwv.  irepl  gives  the  notion, 
"before,  on  all  sides,  at  every  point."  In  all  respects.  Prosper. — In  circumstances.  In 
health. — Of  body.  St.  John  desires  the  "  all  round  "  blessing  of  this  good  man — God's 
hand  upon  him  for  good,  in  his  soul,  his  body,  and  his  relations.  A  model  of  Christian 
wishes  for  friends.  Soul  prospereth. — Notice  that  of  his  spi7'itual  health  St.  John  was 
well  assured,  but  concerning  his  health  and  business  successes  he  seems  to  have  had  no 
definite  information. 

Ver.  3.  Truth  that  is  in  thee. — It  was  not  merely  that  the  conduct  and  relations  of  Gaius 
were  rightly  toned  ;  it  was  that  they  were  manifestly  inspired  by  Christian  principles  and 
Christian  feeUng.  The  truth  was  in  him,  and  therefore  there  could  be  all  these  kindly 
and  gracious  expressions.     There  was  consistency  because  there  was  reality. 

Ver.  4.  No  greater  joy. — /xec^oripav.  A  double  comparative.  Compare  the  English  word 
lesser.  It  may  be  used  to  gain  intensity,  or  it  may  be  a  mere  irregularity.  Children. — 
St.  John's  affectionate  term  for  the  members  of  the  Churches,  many  of  whom  regarded  him 
as  their  spiritual  father. 

Ver.  5.  Faithfully. — Not  impulsively,  not  selfishly,  but  with  a  due  sense  of  duty 
and  obligation,  and  with  an  earnest  care  to  do  well.  Perhaps  the  precise  meaning  is 
•'  Christianly,"  in  a  manner  true  to  thy  Christian  profession  and  character.  R.V.  "  Thou 
doest  a  faithful  work  in  whatsoever  thou  doest."  Westcott :  "  Thou  makest  sure  whatsoever 
thou  workest,"  i.e.  "  Such  an  act  will  not  be  lost,  will  not  fail  of  its  due  issue  and  reward." 
To  strangers. — Precisely,  "  to  the  brethren,  and  that  strangers."  The  point  is,  that  Gaius 
had  been  specially  trustful  and  kind  in  dealing  with  Christian  brethren  who,  in  their 
journeyings,  had  visited  the  Church  with  which  he  was  connected.  These  brethren  were 
often  '*  strangers,"  personally  unknown  ;  and  it  was  only  too  easy  to  be  suspicious  of  their 
integrity,  and  so  to  neglect  them.  *'  The  duty  of  entertaining  Christians  on  their  travels 
was  of  peculiar  importance  in  early  times:  (1)  from  the  length  of  time  which  travelling 
required  ;  (2)  from  the  poverty  of  the  Christians  ;  (3)  from  the  kind  of  society  they  would 
meet  in  public  inns.  The  duty  is  enforced  in  Rom.  xii.  13 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Tit.  i.  8 ; 
Heb.  xiii.  2;   1  Pet.  iv.  9"  (Sinclair). 

Ver.  6.  Charity. — Distinguished  from  love  as  a  feeling  or  sentiment.  Charity  is  Christian 
love  (love  for  Christ's  sake),  finding  expression  in  deeds  of  kindly  service.  In  this  sense 
of  the  term  it  is  well  to  retain  the  word  "  charity  "  used  in  the  A.V.  of  the  New  Testament. 
No  intelligent  reader  confuses  "charity"  with  "almsgiving."  Before  the  Church. — That 
Church  with  which  the  apostle  John  was,  at  the  time,  closely  associated.  It  is  suggested 
that  certain  persons  had  been  sent  from  St.  John's  Church  on  some  Christian  mission  to 
other  Churches.  On  their  journey  they  had  visited  the  Church  of  which  Gaius  was  a 
member.  They  were  strangers,  and  some  regarded  them  with  suspicion,  but  Gaius  had 
not  only  trusted  them,  and  given  them  hospitality,  but  had  interested  himself  in  their 
mission,  and  furthered  them  in  their  plans.  Bring  forward. — This  implies  that  there  was 
yet  some  service  to  the  missionaries  which  Gaius  could  render. 

Ver.  7.  His  name's  sake. — The  more  precise  rendering  is,  "for  the  sake  of  the  name.' 

355 


VERS.  1—4.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    III  JOHN. 


Compare  Acts  v.  41.  Taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles. — Not  seeking  help  from  them,  but 
fully  trusting  the  Christian  love  of  the  Christian  brethren. 

Ver.  9.  Wrote  unto  the  Church. — Evidently  to  introduce  the  coming  missionaries,  and 
to  prepare  the  way  for  them.  Bead,  '*  I  wrote  somewhat,"  i.e.  a  short  letter.  It  was 
evidently  a  brief  request  that  kindness  might  be  shown  to  the  visitors.  Diotrephes. — The 
name  can  be  of  no  Christian  significance,  for  it  only  means,  "  love-nourished."  He  was  a 
prominent  member  of  the  Church,  and  probably  a  man  of  wealth  and  influence.  We  need 
not  think  he  was  an  insincere  or  bad  man.  He  was  undisciplined  in  character,  and  his 
natural  dispositions  were  unlovely.  The  root  of  evil  was  probably  jealousy  of  the  con- 
fidential relations  of  Gains  and  St.  John.  That  spirit  would  lead  him  to  oppose  whatever 
Gains  wished.  Pre-eminence. — Note  how  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  Christ,  who  was  among 
us  as  "  He  that  serveth,"  and  to  the  teachings  of  Christ,  "  If  any  among  you  wishes  to  be 
chief,  let  him  be  your  minister."  The  desire  for  pre-eminence  in  a  Christian  community 
is  the  fruitful  occasion  of  trouble.  He  who  wants  pre-eminence  is  likely  to  be  unscrupulous 
in  his  methods  of  striving  for  it.  Eeceiveth  us  not. — Will  not  recognise  our  authority,  or 
give  our  wishes  due  consideration. 

Ver.  10.  Prating  against  us. — Painful  reports  of  what  had  been  said  and  done  in  the 
Christian  assemblies  had  reached  St.  John,  and  the  supreme  mischief  was  that  a  party 
had  been  formed  which  gathered  round  the  masterful  Diotrephes.  He  had  evidently  acted 
in  a  very  unreasonable  and  violent  way.  He  actually  went  so  far  as  not  only  to  refuse 
hospitality  to  the  missionaries,  but  also  to  eject  from  the  local  congregation  those  who  were 
willing  to  entertain  them. 

Ver.  11.  That  which  is  evil. — Notice  the  Christian  carefulness  which  avoids  saying, 
••  him  who  is  evil."  Possibly  there  was  some  danger  of  Gains  yielding  for  the  sake  of  peace. 
St.  John  reminds  him  that  if  a  thing  is  manifestly  wrong  from  the  Christian  standpoint, 
he  must  stand  against  it,  whatever  may  be  the  cost.  He  must  not  give  way  from 
any  good-natured  pliability.  Good  is  of  God. — A  familiar  Johannine  teaching.  See 
1  John  ii.  16,  29,  iii.  8,  9,  iv.  4,  6,  7.    Not  seen  God.— 1  John  iii.  6. 

Ver.  12.  Demetrius. — Either  the  principal  man  of  the  missionaries,  whose  genuineness 
Diotrephes  refused  to  recognise,  or  the  person  sent  to  Gaius  with  this  letter.  The  former 
is  the  better  suggestion.  It  is  then  a  strong  assurance  of  the  trustworthiness  of  Demetrius, 
so  that  Gaius  might  confidently  persist  in  his  kindly  treatment  of  him  and  his  fellow- 
messengers.  There  is  no  good  reason  for  identifying  the  person  with  the  Demetrius  of 
Acts  xix.  24.  Of  the  truth  itself.— Or,  "of  the  spirit  of  truth."  It  may,  however,  mean, 
"  judged  by  the  Christian  standard."  For  a  similar  double  witness,  see  John  xv.  26,  27. 
Record. — Or,  "  testimony." 

Ver.  14.  Our  friends. — Precisely,  "  the  friends." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  1—4. 

A  Pastor's  Joy  in  His  People. — This  finds  expression  in  two  very  suggestive 
and  striking  figures  of  speech  :  '*  Even  as  thy  soul  prospereth  " ;  "  Walkest  in 
the  truth." 

I.  Soul-prosperity. — What  he  means  may  be  illustrated  by  enlarging  his 
sentence :  "I  wish  for  you  that  your  soul  may  prosper  and  be  in  health,  even 
as  I  wish  that  your  body  may  prosper  and  be  in  health."  We  cannot  think 
of  God  without  the  mental  help  derived  from  the  forms  of  humanity ;  and  we 
cannot  think  of  the  soul  save  as  shaped  as  a  sort  of  counterpart  of  the  body. 
And  its  full  health  and  ideal  perfection  are  conceived  by  us  with  the  help  of 
bodily  conditions.  1.  What  then  are  the  marks  of  a  prosperous  soul  ?  That 
soul  is  prosperous  in  which — (1)  The  truth  dwells  richly.  (2)  The  doctrinal 
and  practical  parts  of  rehgion  are  well  proportioned  and  united.  (3)  There  is  a 
happy  mixture  of  the  retired  and  the  active.  (4)  There  is  a  good  degree  of 
public  spirit  and  largeness  of  heart.  (5)  There  is  no  wrong  ambition.  2.  Why 
does  prosperity  of  soul  render  temporal  prosperity  desirable?  (1)  Because  it 
makes  temporal  prosperity  safe.  (2)  Because  it  secures  the  welfare  of  others, 
and  promotes  the  general  good.     (Part  from  A.  Fuller.) 

II.  Walking  in  the  truth. — This  properly  includes  two  things :  1.  The 
knowledge  of  the  outward  substantial  body  of  truth — the  gospel  of  the  grace  of 
God,  and  of  Jesus  as  our  Saviour.  2.  A  heartfelt  possession  and  enjoyment 
of  the  truth,  not  merely  in  the  intellect,  but  also  in  the  heart. 

356 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   III.  JOHN.        vers.  2,  3. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


"Ver.  2.  Soul-jyros'perity.  —  John 
makes  soul-pl'osperity  the  standard 
and  rule  of  prayer  for  other  things. 
This  would  be  a  dreadful  rule  with 
regard  to  many.  Such  praying,  if 
answered,  would  ruin  them.  Yes,  if 
they  were  to  prosper  in  temporal  things 
as  they  prosper  in  spiritual,  they  would 
become  the  poorest,  meanest  wretches 
on  earth,  for  they  are  strangers  to 
everything  like  the  "  true  riches  "  ;  and 
if  their  bodies  were  to  be  as  healthful 
as  their  souls,  their  dwelling  would 
become  an  hospital,  their  bed  of  ease 
a  bed  of  languishing :  they  would  be 
blind,  for  they  have  no  spiritual  under- 
standing ;  deaf,  for  they  never  hear  the 
voice  of  God  ;  dead,  for  the  Spirit  of 
the  living  God  is  not  in  them.  Yet " 
this  seems  to  be  the  only  safe  rule ; 
for  unless  religion  keeps  pace  with 
our  outward  prosperity,  our  safety  and 
welfare  will  be  endangered  by  it.  We 
are  not  afraid  when  we  see  Christians 
succeed  in  life,  if  at  the  same  time  they 
*'  grow  in  grace  "  ;  but  the  peril  is, 
when  there  is  so  much  sail  and  so  little 
ballast, — W.  Jay. 

Ver.  3.  Gains. — The  sincere  and 
generous  host  of  Demetrius,  the  quiet 
but  sturdy  opponent  of  the  intolerance 
and  tyranny  of  Diotrephes.  Gains  was 
one  who  "  walked  in  truth^^  and  so 
walked  in  it  that  men  "  bore  witness 
to  his  truth."  The  Greek  word  means 
*'  reality."  Gains  was  a  true  man,  a 
genuine  man,  a  real  man,  whose  life 
was  all  of  one  piece,  whose  daily  con- 
duct was  the  practical  outcome  and 
inference  from  the  truths  he  believed. 
Evidently  he  cared  more  for  deeds 
than  for  words.  He  would  not  bring 
the  spirit  and  methods  of  the  world 
into  the  Church.  Nor  would  he,  as 
a  true  man,  yield  to  that  still  more 
subtle  and  fatal  temptation  by  which 
those  are  overcome  in  whom  religion 
degenerates  into  mere  ecclesiasticism  or 
sectarianism.  From  all  these  faults 
and    errors  Gains   was   free.       Of   an 


incorrigible  and  losing  honesty,  it  was 
his  distinction  that  he  was  in  the  truth, 
and  that  he  was  walking,  i.e.  growing 
and  advancing,  in  the  truth  of  Christ ; 
that  the  truth  was  making  him  true 
— true    in    thought,     in    motive,    in 
word,  in  deed,  insomuch  that,  when  the 
eye  saw  him,   it  bore  witness  to  him. 
The  charity  of  Gains  was  as  conspicu- 
ous as  his  unworldliness.     He  not  only 
received    the  strangers,  but  continued 
to  receive  and  serve  them,  even  when 
Diotrephes  forbad  him,  and  had  per- 
suaded the  Church  to  excommunicate 
those  who   ventured  to   receive  them. 
He  could  do  no  other ;  for  he  walked 
in  truth.     He  believed  that   all    who 
were  in  Christ  were  his  brethren,  even 
though  they   were  strangers  to  him  ; 
and  he  was  bound  to  treat  them  as  his 
brethren,  even  though  for  being  true 
to   his    convictions    he    was    cut    off 
from  the  body  of   Christ.     A   certain 
genuineness    and    wholeness,    then,    a 
certain  staunchness  and  loyalty,  com- 
bined with  great  breadth  and  tolerance, 
seems   to   have  been  characteristic  of 
the  hospitable  and  kindly  Gains.     He 
was   in    the    truth.       He    walked   in 
truth.     He   could    be   true   to   truth, 
come  whence  it  would.     He  could  be 
true   to   men,    even   when   they   were 
reviled  and  thrust  out  of  the  Church. 
In  fine,  he  was  a  man  who  stood  on 
his  own  feet,  used  his  own  eyes,   and 
was  faithful  to  the  inspirations  of  the 
Divine  Comforter  and  Guide  who  had 
taken  up  His  abode  with  him.     This 
large,  steadfast,  yet  gentle  loyalty  to 
truth    is  as  essential  to  a   genuine,   a 
real    and    strong.    Christian  character 
now  as  it  was  then.     The  discipline  of 
life,  and  the  advantages  and  privileges 
of  the  Christian  life,  have  been  wasted 
on  us,  if,  whatever  our  gifts   or   our 
lack   of   them,    whatever   our    oppor- 
tunities or  our  lack  of  them,  we  have 
not  built  up  for  ourselves,  or  are  not 
building  up,  such  a  character  as  this ; 
if,  whether  we  do,  or  do  not,  strive  and 
cry,  and  cause  our  name  to  be  heard 

357 


VERS.  4—14.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   III  JOHN, 


in  the  streets,  there  is  no  quiet  sanc- 
tuary within  our  souls,  from  which  a 
light  is  sometimes  seen,  and  prayers 
and  songs  are  sometimes  heard,  and  a 
hallowed  influence  constantly  proceeds, 
to  prove,  to  all  who  are  capable  of 
receiving  proof,  that  Christ  has  an 
altar  and  a  throne  within  us,  and  is 
the  true  Lord  and  Ruler  of  our  life. 
If  we  are  really  walking  in  the  truth, 
we  must  in  various  methods,  some  of 
them  very  quiet  and  simple,  but  not 
therefore  the  less  effective,  bear  wit- 
ness to  the  truth  which  guides  and 
shapes  our  ways. — S.  Cox,  D.D. 

Ver.  4.  Saving  a  Prodigal  Child :  a 
Tradition  concerning  St.  John. — Tra- 
dition has  been  more  than  ordinarily 
busy  in  preserving  anecdotes  of  St. 
John.  Eusebius  relates  a  beautiful, 
and  not  improbable,  story  to  this 
effect  :  John,  on  a  visit  to  a  city  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Ephesus,  com- 
mended to  the  care  of  the  bishop  a 
young  man  of  fine  stature,  graceful 
countenance,  and  ardent  mind,  as 
suited  to  the  work  of  the  ministry. 
The  bishop  neglected  his  charge.  The 
young  man  became  idle  and  dissolute, 
and  was  at  length  prevailed  on  to  join 


a  band  of  robbers,  such  as  commonly 
had  their  holds  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  ancient  Greek  cities.  He  soon 
became  their  captain,  and  attained  to 
eminence  in  crime.  Long  after,  John 
entered  the  city  again,  and  inquired 
for  the  young  man.  "  He  is  dead," 
said  the  bishop — "  dead  to  God."  Hav- 
ing ascertained  the  particulars,  the 
apostle  exclaimed,  "  I  left  a  fine  keeper 
of  a  brother's  soul";  then,  mounting 
a  horse,  he  rode  into  the  country,  and 
was  taken  prisoner.  He  attempted 
not  to  flee,  but  said,  ''  For  this  purpose 
I  am  come ;  conduct  me  to  your  cap- 
tain." He  entered  the  presence  of 
the  armed  bandit,  who,  recognising  the 
apostle,  attempted  to  escape.  "  Why 
dost  thou  fly,  my  son,"  said  he,  "  from 
thy  father — thy  defenceless,  aged 
father.  Fear  not ;  thou  still  hast 
hopes  of  life.  I  will  pray  to  Christ 
for  thee.  I  will  suffer  death  for  thee. 
I  will  give  my  life  for  thine.  Believe 
that  Christ  hath  sent  me."  The  man 
was  subdued,  fell  into  the  apostle's 
arms,  prayed  with  many  tears,  be- 
came perfectly  reformed,  and  was 
restored  to  the  communion  of  the 
Church. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  5—14. 

Sanctified  and  Unsanctijied  Natural  Dispositions. — There  are  three  men  intro- 
duced by  name  to  us  in  this  epistle.  They  are  in  many  things  very  unlike  each 
other.  They  are  alike  in  this — that  in  each  case  the  new  Christian  life  has  come 
into  a  natural  disposition,  proposing  to  alter,  or  strengthen,  or  tone  that  natural 
disposition  as  need  may  be.  To  use  an  illustration  :  Three  very  different 
branches,  each  with  its  own  capabilities,  strength,  or  weakness,  or  bias,  have 
been  grafted  into  the  same  living  tree.  The  life  of  the  tree  flows  freely  into 
each  branch,  but  it  has  to  deal  with,  it  has  to  be  affected  by,  the  condition  and 
bias  of  each  grafted  branch,  and  the  fruitage  of  each  branch  is  found  to  differ. 
The  same  life  in  each,  differing  results  according  to  the  peculiarities  of  each. 
Gains,  Diotrephes,  and  Demetrius  have  the  life  in  Christ,  but  one  of  them  has 
a  natural  disposition  which  even  that  new  life  cannot  easily  tone  aright,  or 
cannot  tone  save  with  the  help  of  long  years  of  severest  discipline. 

I.  Gaius  had  a  naturally  hospitable  disposition. — The  grace  of  God  could  fit 
well  to  that — could  raise  the  tone  of  it,  dignify  it  as  the  expression  of  high  and 
holy  principles,  and  sanctify  the  man  through  the  new  forms  in  which  he  found 
exercise  for  it. 

II.  Diotrephes  had  a  naturally  masterful  disposition. — He  would  be  nowhere 
if  he  could  not  be  first.     He  allowed  no  resistance  of  his  will.     His  spirit  has 

358 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    III.  JOHN. 


VER.  7. 


been  at  once  described  and  satirised,  when  it  is  said  of  such  men,  "  The^  would 
rather  _reign  in  hell  than  serve  in  heaven."  Men  with  such  dispositions  can  he 
Christians ;  but  in  them  the  Christian  spirit  and  Hfe  have  a  long  and  fearful 
struggle  ere  the  self-will  is  brought  into  subjection.  And  they  make  heaps  of 
misery  before  the  good  work  is  accomplished  in  them. 

III.  Demetrius  had  a  naturally  amiable  disposition. — There  was  no  one 
unusual  virtue,  as  in  the  case  of  Gains,  but  a  generally  amiable  tone  and 
character.  He  was  a  gentleman.  And  it  is  in  such  natures  that  the  new  hfe 
has  the  freest,  fullest  sphere  for  its  highest  and  noblest  work. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


^  Yer.  7.  For  the  Name's  Sake. — In 
all  the  older  manuscripts  the  phrase  is, 
*'  For  the  Name's  sake."  There  is  no 
need  to  put  the  personal  pronoun,  or 
the  proper  name.  There  is  but  one 
Name  known  among  men,  for  the  sake 
of  which,  and  to  tell  the  virtue  and 
power  of  which,  men  will  leave  their 
homes,  and  wander  up  and  down 
among  the  countries  and  through  the 
cities,  taking  cheerfully  whatever  for- 
tunes may  come.  The  men  spoken  of 
were  evidently  Jewish  believers,  who 
went  out  among  the  Gentiles  to  tell 
the  glad  news.  These  men  were  very 
thankful  for  any  hospitality  they  might 
receive  from  Christian  motives,  and 
the  well-beloved  Gains  was  famous  for 
his  kindness  to  the  saints.  St.  John 
bids  him,  and  those  with  him,  still 
welcome  the  stranger  in  the  Name  of 
the  Master  whom  he  serves,  and  for 
whose  Name's  sake  alone  he  came  to 
them. 

I.  For  the  Name's  sake  is  the  avail- 
ing plea  in  acceptable  prayer.— 
Prayer  is  not  the  rising  up  of  the 
intellectual  soul  of  man  to  Divinity. 
That  is  merely  speculative  thought, 
tinged,  it  may  be,  with  devoutness, 
but  lacking  the  simplicity,  the  earnest- 
ness, the  energy,  of  real  prayer.  Ileal 
prayer  is  prayer  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
That  means  that  God  has  revealed 
Himself  in  Christ.  The  name  is  the 
character  :  the  name  of  God  is  the 
character  of  God  as  manifested  among 
men,  as  displayed  in  human  history. 
To  pray  in  the  name  of  Christ  is  to 
recognise  God  in  Him,  in  His  whole 
personality,  in   His  whole   history,  in 


what  He  has  done  and  suffered  on  our 
behalf. 

II.  For  the  Name's  sake  is  also,  in 
a  pre-eminent  degree,  the  spring  and 
motive-power  of  holy  obedience. — 
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  text  in  its 
own  connection.  These  men  went 
forth,  these  first  missionaries,  in  a 
spirit  of  self- consecration  that  asked 
no  questions,  that  fixed  no  limits,  that 
reserved  no  retreat ;  they  went  forth 
to  tell  the  world  the  news.  And  they 
lived  upon  the  news  they  told.  The 
gospel  was  meat  and  drink  to  them, 
and  clothing,  and  house,  and  home. 
"  Taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles."  The 
gospel  would  be  benefited  by  their 
self-denial — that  settled  the  question 
in  a  moment.  "  Nothing,  nothing  from 
you.  If  you  believe  the  message,  if 
you  feel  its  constraining  force,  and 
yield  yourselves  to  Christ,  and  live 
through  Him  to  God,  then  open  your 
door,  and  spread  your  table,  and  light 
your  lamp  of  welcome,  and  we  will 
come  in.  But  so  long  as  you  are  only 
listeners — undeclared  and  undecided — 
nothing."  And  this  was  no  transient 
impulse.  The  whole  secret  of  the 
loyalty,  endurance,  unselfishness,  of  the 
Christian  witnesses  and  martyrs,  lay 
in  this — "  For  the  Name's  sake." 
What  essentially  is  this  Christian 
service?  It  means  the  consecration 
of  the  redeemed  self  in  wholeness  to 
the  glory  of  Christ,  and  to  the  service 
of  our  fellow-men  under  Him.  We 
say  from  the  heart,  "  For  the  Name's 
sake,"  and  then  all  is  easy.  The  love 
of  Christ  has  this  perfectly  unique 
peculiarity — that  it  is  the  love  of  God 

359 


VER.   7. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    III.  JOHN. 


and  the  love  of  man  in  one  ;  and  when, 
*'for  the  Name's  sake,"  we  give  our- 
selves to  God,  and  live  to  God,  then 
we  are  swayed  by  the  all- comprehend- 
ing love.  Of  what  importance,  then, 
must  it  be  to  a  Christian  to  be  full  of 
love — full  of  the  love  of  Christ  to  him, 
shed  abroad  by  the  Holy  Ghost — full 
of  quick- answering  love  to  Christ — full 
of  the  power  of  "  the  Name "  ! — 
A.  Raleigh,  D.D. 

For  the  Sake  of  the  Name. — The 
E..Y.  gives  the  true  force  of  these 
words  by  omitting  the  "  His,"  and 
reading  merely,  "for  the  sake  of  the 
Name."  There  is  no  need  to  say  whose 
name.  There  is  only  one  which  could 
evoke  the  heroism  and  self-sacrifice  of 
which  the  apostle  is  speaking.  The 
expression,  however,  is  a  remarkable 
one.  The  Name  seems  almost,  as  it 
were,  to  be  personified. 

I.  The  pre-eminence  implied  in  the 
Name. — The  name  means  substantially 
the  same  thing  as  the  Person  of  Jesus. 
The  distinction  between  "the  Name" 
and  "the  Person  "is  simply  that  the 
former  puts  more  stress  on  the  qualities 
and  characteristics  as  known  to  us. 
Thus  "  the  Name "  means  the  whole 
Christ  as  we  know  Him,  or  as  we  may 
know  Him,  from  the  book,  in  the 
dignity  of  His  Messiahship,  in  the 
mystery  of  His  Divinity,  in  the  sweet- 
ness of  His  life,  in  the  depth  of  His 
words,  in  the  gentleness  of  His  heart, 
in  the  patience  and  propitiation  of  His 
sacrifice,  in  the  might  of  His  resurrec- 
tion, in  the  glory  of  His  ascension,  in 
the  energy  of  His  pi'esent  life  and 
reigning  work  for  us  at  the  right  hand 
of  God.  All  these,  the  central  facts  of 
the  gospel,  are  gathered  together  into 
that  expression,  the  Name,  which  is  the 
summing  up  in  one  mighty  word,  so  to 
speak,  which  it  is  not  possible  for  a 
man  to  utter  except  in  fragments,  of 
all  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  Himself, 
and  of  all  that  He  is  and  does  for  us. 
It  is  but  a  picturesque  and  condensed 
way  of  saying  that  Jesus  Christ,  in 
the  depth  of  His  nature  and  the  width 
of  His  work,  stands  alone,  and  is  the 

360  ,  , 


single,  because  the  all-sufiicient,  Object 
of  love,  and  trust,  and  obedience.  There 
is  no  need  for  a  forest  of  little  pillars 
— as,  in  some  great  chapter-house, — one 
central  shaft,  graceful  as  strong,  bears 
the  groined  roof,  and  makes  all  other 
supports  unnecessary  and  impertinent. 
There  is  one  Name,  and  one  alone, 
because  in  the  depths  of  that  wondrous 
nature,  in  the  circumference  of  that 
mighty  work,  there  is  all  that  a 
human  heart,  or  that  all  human 
hearts,  can  need  for  peace,  for  noble- 
ness, for  holiness,  for  the  satisfaction 
of  all  desires,  for  the  direction  of 
efforts,  for  the  stability  of  its  being. 
The  Name  stands  alone,  and  it  will  be 
the  only  Name  that,  at  last,  shall  blaze 
upon  the  page  of  the  world's  history 
when  the  ages  are  ended,  and  the 
chronicles  of  earth,  with  the  brief 
"immortality"  which  they  gave  to 
other  names  of  illustrious  men,  are 
mouldered  into  dust.  "  The  Name  is 
above  every  name,"  and  will  outlast 
them  all,  for  it  is  the  all-sufiicient  and 
encyclopaedical  embodiment  of  every- 
thing that  a  single  heart  or  the  whole 
race  can  require,  desire,  conceive,  or 
attain.  So  then,  brethren,  the  unique- 
ness and  solitariness  of  the  Name 
demand  an  equal  and  corresponding 
exclusiveness  of  devotion  and  trust  in 
us.  "  Hear,  0  Israel !  The  Lord  thy 
God  is  one  Lord.  Therefore  thou  shalt 
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with 
all  thy  strength,  and  with  all  thy 
mind."  And,  in  like  manner,  we  may 
argue — There  is  one  Christ,  and  there 
is  none  other  but  He.  Therefore  all 
the  current  of  my  being  is  to  set  to 
Him,  and  on  Him  alone  am  I  to  repose 
my  undivided  weight,  casting  all  my 
cares  and  putting  all  my  trust  only  on 
Him.  Lean  on  none  other.  You  can- 
not lean  too  heavily  on  that  strong 
arm.  Love  none  other  except  in  Him ; 
for  His  heart  is  wide  enough,  and  deep 
enough,  for  all  mankind.  Obey  none 
other,  for  only  His  voice  has  the  right 
to  command.  And  lifting  up  our  eyes, 
let  us  see  "  no  man  any  more  save 
Jesus   only" — the  Name   that   stands 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   III.  JOHN. 


VER.  7. 


alone  !  Involved  in  this,  but  worthy 
of  briefly  putting  separately,  is  this 
other  thought — that  pre-eminent  and 
exclusive  mention  of  the  Name  carries 
with  it,  in  fair  inference,  the  declara- 
tion of  His  Divine  nature.  It  seems 
to  me  that  we  have  here  a  clear  case 
in  which  the  Old  Testament  usage  is 
transferred  to  Jesus  Christ,  only,  in- 
stead of  the  Name  being  Jehovah,  it  is 
Jesus.  It  seems  to  me  impossible  that 
a  man  saturated  as  this  apostle  was 
with  Old  Testament  teaching,  and 
familiar  as  he  was  with  the  usage 
which  runs  through  it  as  to  the  sanctity 
of  "the  Name  of  the  Lord,"  should 
have  used  such  language  as  this  of  my 
text  unless  he  had  felt,  as  he  has  told 
us  himself,  that  "  the  Word  was  God." 
And  the  very  incidental  character  of 
the  allusion  gives  it  the  more  force  as 
a  witness  to  the  commonplaceness 
which  the  thought  of  the  Divinity  of 
Jesus  Christ  had  assumed  to  the 
consciousness  of  the  Christian  Church. 
II.  The  power  of  the  Name  to  sway 
the  life. — The  preposition  seems  to 
me  to  cover  both  the  ground  of,  '*  on 
account  of,"  or  "by  reason  of,"  and 
"  on  behalf  of."  Taking  the  word  in 
the  former  of  these  two  senses,  note 
how  this  phrase,  "  for  the  sake  of  the 
Name,"  carries  with  it  this  principle — 
that  in  that  Name  lie  all  the  forces 
that  are  needed  for  the  guidance  and 
the  impulses  of  life.  In  Him,  in  the 
whole  fulness  of  His  being,  in  the 
wonders  of  the  story  of  His  character 
and  historical  manifestation,  there  lies 
all  guidance  for  men.  He  is  the 
pattern  of  their  conduct.  He  is  the 
companion  for  us  in  our  sorrow.  He 
is  the  quickener  for  us  in  all  our  tasks. 
And  to  set  Him  before  us  as  our 
pattern,  and  to  walk  in  the  paths  that 
He  dictates,  is  to  attain  to  perfection. 
Whosoever  makes  "  for  the  sake  of  the 
Name  "  the  motto  of  his  life  shall  not 
walk  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the 
light  of  life.  And  not  only  is  there 
.guidance,  but  there  is  impulse,  and 
that  is  better  than  guidance.  For 
what  men  most  of  all  want  is  a  power 
that  shall  help  or  make  them  do  the 


things  that  they  see  plainly  enough  to 
be  right.  Where  is  there  such  a  force 
to  quicken,  to  ennoble,  to  lead  men  to 
higher  selves  than  their  dead  past 
selves,  as  lies  in  the  grand  sweep  of 
that  historical  manifestation  which  we 
understand  by  the  Name  of  Jesus  ? 
Thei-e  is  nothing  else  that  will  go  so 
deep  down  into  the  heart,  and  unseal 
the  fountains  of  power  and  obedience, 
as  that  Name.  Our  whole  life  ought 
to  be  filled  with  His  Name.  You  can 
write  it  anywhere.  It  does  not  need  a 
gold  plate  to  carve  His  Name  upon. 
It  does  not  need  to  be  set  in  jewels 
and  diamonds.  The  poorest  scrap  of 
brown  paper,  and  the  bluntest  little 
bit  of  pencil,  and  the  shakiest  hand, 
will  do  to  wiite  the  name  of  Christ ; 
and  all  life,  the  trivinlities  as  well  as 
the  crises,  may  be  flashing  and  bright 
with  the  sacred  syllables.  Moham- 
medans decorate  their  palaces  and 
mosques  with  no  pictures,  but  with 
the  name  of  Allah,  in  gilded  ara- 
besques. Everywhere,  on  walls  and 
roof,  and  windows  and  cornices,  and 
pillars  and  furniture,  the  name  is 
written.  There  is  no  such  decoration 
for  a  life  as  that  Christ's  Name  should 
be  stamped  thereon. 

III.  The  service  that  even  we  can 
do  to  the  Name. — That,  as  I  said,  is 
the  direct  idea  of  the  apostle  here. 
He  is  speaking  about  a  very  small 
matter.  There  were  some  anonymous 
Christian  people  who  had  gone  out 
on  a  little  missionary  tour,  and  in  the 
course  of  it,  penniless  and  homeless, 
they  had  come  to  a  city  the  name  of 
which  we  do  not  know,  and  had  been 
taken  in  and  kindly  entertained  by 
a  Christian  brother,  whose  name  has 
been  preserved  to  us  in  this  one  letter. 
And,  says  John,  these  humble  men 
went  out  "  on  behalf  of  the  Name " 
— to  do  something  to  further  it,  to 
advantage  it !  Jesus  Christ,  the  bearer 
of  the  Name,  was  in  some  sense  helped 
and  benefited,  if  I  may  use  the  word, 
by  the  work  of  these  lowly  and  un- 
known brethren.  Now  there  are  one 
or  two  other  instances  in  the  New 
Testament  where  this  same  idea  of  the 

361 


VERS.  9,  10.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   III.  JOHN. 


benefit  accruing  to  the  Name  of  Jesus 
from  His  servants  on  earth  is  stated, 
and  I  just  point  to  them  in  a  sentence, 
in  order  that  you  may  have  all  the 
evidence  before  you.  There  is  the 
passage  to  which  1  have  already  re- 
ferred, recording  the  disciples'  joy  that 
they  were  "  accounted  worthy  to  suffer 
shame  on  behalf  of  the  Name."  There 
are  the  words  of  Christ  Himself  in 
reference  to  Paul  at  his  conversion, 
"  I  will  show  him  how  great  things 
he  must  suffer  for  My  Name's  sake." 
There  is  the  Church's  eulogium  on 
Barnabas  and  Paul,  as  *'  men  that 
have  hazarded  their  Hves  for  the 
Name  of  our  Lord  Jesus."  There  is 
Paul's  declaration  that  he  is  "ready, 
not  only  to  be  bound,  but  to  die,  on 
behalf  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus." 
And  in  the  introduction  of  the  epistle 
to  the  Romans  he  connects  his  apostle- 
ship  with  the  benefit  that  thereby 
accrued  to  the  Name  of  Christ.  If 
we  put  all  these  together,  they  just 
come  to  this — that,  wonderful  as  it  is, 
and  unworthy  as  we  are  to  take  that 
great  Name  upon  our  lips,  yet,  in  God's 
infinite  mercy  and  Christ's  fraternal 
and  imperial  love.  He  has  appointed 
that  His  Name  should  be  furthered 
by  the  sufferings,  the  service,  the  life, 
and  the  death  of  His  followers.  "  He 
was  extolled  with  my  tongue,"  says 
the  psalmist,  in  a  rapture  of  wonder 
that  any  words  of  his  could  exalt 
God's  Name.  So  to  you  Christians 
is  committed  the  charge  of  magnifying 
the  Name  of  Jesus  Christ.  You  can 
do  it  by  your  lives,  and  you  can  do  it 
by  your  words,  and  you  are  sent  to 
do  both.  We  can  "  adorn  the  doc- 
trine " — paint  the  lily  and  gild  the 
refined  gold,  and  make  men  think 
more  highly  of  our  Lord  by  our  example 
of  faithfulness  and  obedience.  We  can 
do  it  by  our  definite  proclamation 
of  His  Name,  which  is  laid  upon  us 
all  to  do,  and  for  which  facilities  of 
varying  degrees  are  granted.  The  in- 
consistencies of  the  professing  followers 
of  Christ  are  the  strongest  barriers 
to  the  world's  belief  in  the  glory  of 
His    Name.     The  Church,  as  it  is,  is 

362 


the  hindrance  rather  than  the  help  to 
the  world's  becoming  a  Church.  If 
from  us  sounded  out  the  Name,  and 
over  all  that  we  did  it  was  written 
blazing,  conspicuous,  the  world  would 
look  and  listen,  and  men  would  believe 
that  there  was  something  in  the 
gospel.  If  you  are  a  Christian  pro- 
fessor, either  Christ  is  glorified  or  put 
to  shame  in  you.  His  saint,  and  either 
it  is  true  of  you  that  you  do  all  things 
in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
so  glorify  His  Name,  or  that  through 
you  the  Name  of  Christ  is  "  blas- 
phemed among  the  nations."  Choose 
which  of  the  two  it  shall  be ! — 
A.  Maclaren^  D.D. 

Vers.  9,  10.  Diotrephes.— The  vain, 
irritable,  and  loquacious  Diotrephes, 
whose  religion  seems  to  have  been  quite 
compatible  with  a  slippery  morality. 
What  exactly  it  was  at  which  Diotrephes. 
took  offence,  whether  in  the  letter  of 
St,  John  or  in  the  conduct  of  Demetrius, 
we  are  not  told  ;  but  it  is  not  difficult 
to  offend  a  man  who  has  an  undue 
sense  of  his  own  importance,  and  whose 
self-love  may  be  set  on  fire  by  any 
match,  however  innocently  it  may  be 
struck.  The  offence  was  some  wound 
to  his  love  of  pre-eminence,  his  deter- 
mination to  stand  first,  and  to  exact 
a  homage  he  did  not  deserve.  Possibly 
Gains  had  "  received  "  Demetrius  with- 
out consulting  Diotrephes,  or  even 
after  he  had  declined  to  receive  him. 
Whatever  the  prick  which  his  vanity 
had  received,  the  character  of  the  man 
comes  out  in  his  wholly  disproportionate 
and  extravagant  resentment  of  the 
offence.  In  his  resentment  he  sets 
himself  against  men  far  wiser  and 
better  than  himself  ;  he  imperils  the 
peace  of  the  Church  ;  he  diminishes  its 
numbers  and  strength.  His  wounded 
vanity  landed  him,  as  it  often  does 
land  men,  in  the  most  bitter  animosity 
and  intolerance.  Ho  must  have  won 
over  a  majority  of  his  fellow -members 
to  his  side.  And  he  must  have  taken 
a  by-path  to  his  end.  He  may  long 
have  cherished  a  factious  spirit  in  the 
inferior   members  of  the  Church,  the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    III.  JOHN.       vers.  9,  10. 


less  wise  and  less  good,  by  opposing 
whatever  Gains  and  his  friends  pro- 
posed, and  finding  plausible  reasons 
for  opposing  them.  And,  indeed,  a 
man  of  inferior  gifts  and  of  a  spirit 
less  informed  by  the  grace  of  Christ, 
who  will  stand  first,  will  put  himself 
forward  and  attempt  to  rule  a  free 
Christian  congregation,  must  take  this 
course.  He  must  play  on  the  ignor- 
ance, and  even  on  the  piety,  of  those 
who  follow  him, — must  affect  a  superior 
wisdom,  or  a  superior  orthodoxy,  or  a 
superior  devotion  to  the  claims  of  its 
poorer  and  less- instructed  members; 
must,  in  short,  wield  the  common 
weapons  of  that  loud-mouthed,  irrepres- 
sible, and  unsavoury  creature,  the 
religious  demagogue.  He  cannot  suffer 
learning,  wisdom,  godliness,  experience, 
to  exert  their  natural  and  beneficent 
influence,  but  must  at  all  risks  counter- 
work that  influence,  and  suggest 
plausible  reasons  for  not  yielding  to  it. 
How  else  can  he  win,  and  maintain, 
a  pre-eminence  he  does  not  deserve, 
which,  in  his  calmer  moments,  he  may 
even  know  that  he  does  not  deserve? 
There  is  nothing  in  the  epistle  to 
suggest  that  Diotrephes  held  unsound 
doctrinal  views,  or  that  he  fell  into 
what  are  called  gross  and  open  sins. 
All  that  he  is  blamed  for  is  the  conceit 
and  self-assurance  which  rendered  him 
impatient  of  rivalry  or  resistance,  and 
set  him  on  seeking  power  rather  than 
usefulness.  How  did  Diotrephes  induce 
his  fellow- members  to  follow  his  lead, 
since  they  must,  most  of  them  at  least, 
have  been  good  men,  who  were  not 
likely  to  excommunicate  their  fellows 
either  for  an  excess  of  charity,  or  for 
wounding  his  self-conceit  ?  St.  John 
says,  "  He  receiveth  not  us  .  .  ,  prating 
against  us  with  wicked  [or  malicious] 
words."  No  doubt  he  questioned  the 
authority  of  St.  John  in  an  indirect 
way.  He  may  have  pitted  Paul  against 
John,  contrasting  their  teachings,  and 
unduly  exalting  Paul.  We  are  told 
two  things  about  Diotrephes.  We  are 
told  not  only  that  he  loved  to  have 
the  pre-eminence,  but  also  that  he  was 
cursed  with  a  voluble  tongue,  that  he 


would  "  still  be  speaking "  :  for  how 
often  does  a  fluent  tongue  lead  a  man 
whither,  in  his  reasonable  moods,  he 
would  not  go,  and  betray  him  into 
positions  which  he  would  not  willingly 
have  assumed  ?  And  if  the  itch  of 
speaking  is  apt  to  lead  on  to  the  prating 
of  idle,  and  even  of  malicious,  words, 
the  lust  of  power  commonly  leads  to 
an  abuse  of  power.  No  punishment 
is  more  unwelcome  to  such  an  one  than 
that  with  which  St.  John  threatened 
Diotrephes  :  "I  will  put  him  in  mind 
of  his  words  and  his  works  "—bring  him 
to  book  for  them,  in  his  own  presence 
and  in  that  of  the  Church.  Such  men 
dislike  nothing  so  much  as  being  com- 
pelled to  face  their  own  whispers,  and 
to  see  how  they  sound  in  honest  and 
impartial  ears,  or  even  in  their  own 
ears,  now  that  their  excitement  and 
irritation  have  subsided.  Diotrephes, 
then,  was  a  man  who  was  not  neces- 
sarily or  wholly  bad — a  man  who  may 
have  had  many  good  qualities,  and 
have  done  some  service  to  the  Church ; 
but  his  good  qualities  were  blended  with, 
and  their  good  effects  vitiated  by,  an 
exorbitant  self-conceit  and  loquacity. 
So  vain,  so  bent  on  influence  and  supre- 
macy, as  to  be  capable  of  the  most 
cruel  intolerance  in  asserting  his 
supremacy ;  so  talkative  as  to  be 
capable  of  slipping  into  malicious 
and  wicked  words  rather  than  hold  his 
tongue  or  let  the  Church  defer  to  other 
guidance  than  his  own, — he  offers  a 
much -needed  warning  to  many  a  man 
of  "  spotless  respectability  and  worry- 
ing temper,  of  pious  principles  and 
worldly  aims,"  of  good  intentions  but 
a  too  voluble  tongue,  who,  because  he 
thinks  more  highly  of  himself  than  he 
ought  to  think,  flatters  himself  that 
he  is  serving  the  Church  when  he  is 
only  pandering  to  his  self-importance 
and  self-conceit,  and  is  cruelly  injuring 
the  Church  he  professes  to  love.  Let, 
then,  your  religion  show  itself  in  deeds 
rather  than  in  words,  in  a  life  con- 
formed by  the  grace  of  Christ  to  the 
will  of  God,  not  in  loud  professions 
and  loquacious  speeches,  nor  in  an 
intolerant  temper,  and  your  readiness 

363 


VER.  12. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   III.  JOHN. 


to  sit  in  judgment  on  your  brethren, 
and  to  pass  sharp  and  pungent  verdicts 
upon  them. — S.  Cox^  D.D. 

Prating  for  Pre-eminence. — The  verb 
(jiLXoTTpuyTeveiv  occurs  in  Polybius  in  the 
sense  of  to  domineer,  and  Plutarch  is 
cited  for  the  equivalent  phrase  rravTa 
Trpwrcvetv  l3ovX6ix€vo<;.  The  race  of 
domineering  praters  is  not  likely  to 
die  out.  In  all  times  it  has  flourished 
and  in  all  cHmes.  Many  prate  them- 
selves into  pre-eminence  with  malicious 
words  or  otherwise,  by  dint  of  pushing 
without  scruple,  of  prosing  without 
mercy,  of  self-assertion  and  self-glori- 
fication, and  all  for  love  of  having 
pre-eminence,  with  the  profits,  real  or 
reputed,  thereunto  attached,  or  thence 
accruing.  Some  men,  as  Emerson 
says,  love  only  to  talk  where  they  are 
masters  ;  they  like  to  go  to  school -girls 
or  to  boys,  or  into  shops  where  the 
sauntering  people  gladly  lend  an  ear 
to  any  one.  They  go  rarely  to  their 
equals  :  "  listen  badly,  or  do  not  listen 
to  the  comment  or  the  thought  by 
which  the  company  strive  to  repay 
them  ;  rather,  as  soon  as  their  own 
speech  is  done,  they  take  their  hats." 
Swift's  readers  could  supply  the  name 
of  the  person  indicated  in  that  para- 
graph of  his  essay  on  conversation, 
where  he  professes  to  know  a  man  of 
wit  who  is  never  easy  but  where  he 
can  be  allowed  to  dictate  and  preside, 
who  expects  neither  to  be  informed 
nor  entertained,  but  to  display  his  own 
talents,  whose  business  is  to  be  good 
company  and  not  good  conversation, 
and  who  therefore  chooses  to  frequent 
those  only  who  are  content  to  listen, 
and  profess  themselves  his  admirers — 
witlings  and  suckling  Templars,  who 
every  sentence  raise,  and  wonder  with 
a  foolish  face  of  praise.  Dr.  Moore's 
analysis  of  the  self-conceit  of  Zeluco 
includes  this  characteristic — that,  de- 
testing all  whom  he  suspected  of 
having  sufficient  penetration  to  see 
into  his  real  character,  he  could  sup- 
port the  company  of  those  only  upon 
whose  understandings  he  imagined  he 
imposed     by    giving    them    a    much 

364 


better  idea  of  his  character  than  it 
deserved.  "  This  accounts  for  his  con- 
stant preference  for  ignorant  society  " 
— a  preference  tending  to  the  same  re- 
sult as  Gay  sets  forth  in  the  prelude  to 
one  of  his  fables  : — 

"  How  fond  are  men  of  rule  and  place, 
Who  court  it  from  the  mean  and  base  1 
These  cannot  bear  an  equal  nigh, 
But  from  superior  merit  fly. 
They  love  the  cellar's  vulgar  joke, 
And  lose  their  hours  in  ale  and  smoke ; 
There  o'er  some  petty  club  preside, 
So  poor,  so  paltry,  is  their  pride  ; 
Nay,  e'en  with  fools  whole  nights  will  sit, 
In  hopes  to  be  supreme  in  wit." 

The  man  of  strong  intellect  and  firm 
will  is  apt,  as  Professor  Spalding  says, 
to  degenerate  into  dogmatism,  and 
reasons  with  his  fellow-men  in  the 
same  spirit  in  which  the  Jews  built 
the  second  Temple,  where  every  man 
worked  with  one  hand  and  with  the 
other  hand  held  a  weapon.  What 
insolent  familiar,  asks  Lamb  in  his 
notes  on  the  old  Benchers  of  the  Inner 
Temple,  durst  have  mated  Thomas 
Coventry  ? — whose  person  was  a  quad- 
rate, his  step  massy  and  elephantine, 
his  face  square  as  the  lion's,  his  gait 
peremptory  and  path-keeping,  indi- 
vertible from  his  way  as  a  moving 
column,  the  scarecrow  of  his  inferiors, 
the  brow- beater  of  equals  and  superiors. 
But  who  does  not  love  to  rule,  be  it 
over  a  genius  or  a  dolt? — Francis 
Jacox. 

Yer.  12.  Demetrius. — This  epistle  was 
probably  written  from  Ephesus,  to- 
ward the  close  of  St.  John's  long  life 
and  ministry,  and  addressed  to  one  of 
the  neighbouring  Churches  of  Asia 
Minor,  which  St.  Paul  had  founded 
some  thirty  or  forty  years  before. 
Obviously  there  was  a  good  deal  of 
independence  in  the  Churches  when 
one  Church  in  a  province  could  refuse 
communion  with  men  who  were  com- 
mended to  them  by  another  Church, 
could  excommunicate  those  who  did 
commune  with  them,  and  an  unknown 
Diotrephes  could  not  only  set  himself, 
but  persuade  the  majority  of  his  fellow- 
members  to  set  themselves,  against  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    III.  JOHN.  ver.  12. 


request  and  command  of  one  of   the  himself,  to   hold   it   alone.     He  must 

apostles  who  had  seen  the  Lord,  and  impose  it  on  the  Church.     When  others 

he  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  had  loved  would  have  "  received  "  the  evangelists, 

above  the  rest.     But  if  the  Churches  he  forbad  them.     If  they  paid  no  heed 

had  grown  in  independence,  they  had  to  his  prohibition,  he  got  them  '*  cast 

not  declined  in  missionary  zeal.     The  out "  of  the  Church — the  motto  of  this 

Churches  under  the  charge  of  St.  John  lover  of  pre-eminence  being,  apparently, 

were  sending  out  evangelists,  such  as  '*  Better  to  reign  in  a  small  Church 

Demetrius,  to  the  Gentiles.     The  im-  than  to  serve  in  a  large  one."     Un- 

pression  which   the   epistle   leaves  on  deterred  by  his  influence  and  threats, 

our  minds  is  that  the  members  of  the  the  hospitable  Gains  had  welcomed  the 

primitive   and   apostolic  Church  were  repulsed  and  disheartened  evangelists 

not,  as  they  have  sometimes  been  drawn,  to  his   home,  and  furthered  them   in 

saints  who   lived  together  in  an  un-  their  good   work.      Whether   he   also 

broken  charity  and  peace,  "  too  good  was   excommunicated    by   Diotrephes, 

for  human  nature's  daily  use,"  but  men  or  whether   he  was  too  wealthy  and 

and  women  of  Hke  passions  with  our-  powerful   a   man   to  be  attacked,  we 

selves ;  with  much  that  was   good  in  are   not   told.     But,   at   all   risks,   he 

them,  but  also  with  not  a  little  that  discharged  his  duty,  having,  I  suppose, 

came  of  evil ;  capable  of  heroic  self-  an  affectionate  reverence  for  St.  John 

sacrifice,  but  also  capable  of   sinking  which  made  the  displeasure  of  a  Dio- 

into  selfish  ambitions,  and  envies,  and  trephes  sit  lightly  upon  him.     Deme- 

strif es — of   falHng,  in  short,  into  the  trius  was  very  grateful  to  him ;  and 

very  errors   and   faults   of   which  we  when  he  returned  to  Ephesus,  reported 

find  some  lingering  traits  even  in  the  the  fidelity  of  Gains  both  to  the  apostle. 

Church  Ufe  of  to-day,  when  we  ought  and  to  the  Church  of  which  John  was 

to  be  so  much  wiser  and  better  than  pastor  or  bishop.     And  now  the  apostle 

they.     Demetrius  and  his  fellows  had  sends  back  Demetrius,   and  writes  to 

been  called  to  the  evangelic  ofliice,  and  Gains,   commending   and   encouraging 

had  devoted  themselves   to  preaching  him,  and  promising  him  a  speedy  visit, 

the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles.     St.  John  in  the  course  of  which  he  will  depose 

knew  them,  loved  them,  approved  them,  Diotrephes   from    his   pride   of   place, 

gave   them    letters    of    commendation  make   him   eat    his    "  wicked   words," 

to  the  Churches  of   Asia  Minor,  and,  and  restore  those  whom  he  had  cast 

among  others,  to  the  Church  of  which  out.       Demetrius   was    an    evangelist, 

both  Gains  and  Diotrephes  were  mem-  a  travelling  evangelist,  or  missionary, 

bers.     Diotrephes,  evidently  a  man  of  He  had  devoted  himself  to  the  service 

some  mark  and  gifts,  declined  to  have  of  the  Gentiles  (ver.  7),  and  he  was 

anything  to  do   with   them  :    perhaps  probably  also  a  prophet.     But  what- 

becauee  Demetrius  did  not  come  first  ever   his   gifts,    and   whether    few   or 

to  him,  or  did  not  make  much  of  and  many,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the 

defer  to  him  ;  perhaps  because  he  pre-  self-sacrificing   and   disinterested  spirit 

f erred  St.  Paul's  doctrinal  and  argu-  in  which  he   used   them.      Simply  to 

mentative  method  of  teaching,  and  his  travel  was  dangerous  in   those   days, 

demand  for  faith,  to  St.  John's  Divine  since    every   stranger   was   then   held 

and  deep  simplicity,  and   his   eternal  to  be  an  enemy.     But  to  go  into  the 

insistence  on  charity,  or  love.     In  any  schools,    market-places,    and    sanctu- 

case  he  did  not  like  Demetrius,  did  not  aries   of    strange   cities,    in    order    to 

take  to  him  ;    and  doubtless  he  soon  teach  a  strange  religion,  was  very  like 

found  or  imagined  abundant   reasons  courting   death.     But    Demetrius    did 

for  his  dislike.     Having   formed   and  not  shrink.     He  would  "  take  nothing 

uttered  his  hasty  opinion,  Diotrephes  of   the  Gentiles."     Like   St.  Paul,   he 

was  not  the  man  to  draw  back  from  knew  well  enough  that,  if  he  seemed 

it.     Nor  was  he  content  to  keep  it  to  to  make  anything  by  his  message,  the 

365 


VER.  12. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    III.  JOHN. 


sharp,  suspicious  traders  of  the  Asian 
harbours  and  markets  would  close  their 
minds  and  hearts,  as  well  as  their 
purses,  against  him.  Hence  he  would 
take  nothing  from  them  ;  no,  not  even 
if  it  was  offered  him,  lest  he  should  be 
placing  a  stone  of  stumbling  in  the 
way  of  any  whose  consciences  had 
been  touched.  If  we  ask  for  the 
motive  which  inspired  this  noble  and 
self-sacrificing  devotion  to  the  spiritual 
welfare  of  men,  we  are  told  that  it 
was  simply  "  for  the  sake  of  the 
Name  "  that  Demetrius  devoted  him- 
self to  the  service  of  the  Gentiles. 
The  **  way "  stood  for  the  "  way  of 
Christ,"  or  the  Christian  way  of  thought 
and  life.  And,  in  like  manner,  "the 
Name"  was  the  Name  of  the  great 
Saviour  of  men,  and  stood  for  all  that 
was  known  of  Him,  all  that  was 
summed  up  in  Him.  What  moved 
Demetrius  and  his  companions  to 
their  great  and  perilous  work  was 
the  love  they  bore  to  the  Name  of 


Jesus  Christ  their  Lord,  and  the  Lord 
and  Saviour  of  all  men.  What  the 
"  Name "  really  covers  is  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  the  Saviour  whom  God 
had  promised  and  anointed,  and  that 
God  was  in  Him,  reconciling  the  world 
unto  Himself.  Demetrius  won  for 
himself  a  threefold  testimony :  L  He 
won  the  witness  of  all — the  witness  of 
all  good  men,  of  all  who  were  capable 
of  appreciating  goodness.  2.  He  won 
the  testimony  of  the  truth  itself.  He 
embodied  the  truth  in  deeds  of  love 
and  self-sacrifice  of  which  he  would 
have  been  incapable  but  for  the  truth 
which  animated  and  sustained  him. 
The  truth  itself  speaks  through  such 
a  man,  and  bears  witness  to  him. 
3.  St.  John  adds  his  own  testimony  : 
*'  we  also  bear  witness."  How  it  nerves 
a  man's  courage,  and  sustains  his  devo- 
tion, if  some  great  master,  or  apostle, 
openly  supports  him,  saying,  "  I  love 
him  ;  I  trust  him  :  receive  him  as  you 
would  receive  me  "  ! — S.  CoXy  D.J). 


366 


THE  GENERAL  EPISTLE  OF 

JUDE. 


INTRODUCTION. 

This  writer  styles  himself  "  the  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  brother  of  James." 
He  was  not  therefore  Jude,  the  son  of  James  the  apostle.  It  appears  most 
probable  that  he  is  tb  be  identified  with  Jude,  the  brother  of  the  Lord  and  of 
James  (Matt.  xiii.  55  ;  Mark  vi.  3),  who  was  not  an  apostle,  and  indeed  was 
converted  to  faith  in  Christ  after  the  Lord's  resurrection.  His  brother  James 
was,  probably,  the  first  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  author  of  the  epistle  that 
bears  the  name  of  James. 

The  exact  personality  of  the  author  being  uncertain,  the  canonicity  of  the 
letter  has  always  been  a  matter  of  doubt.  A  marked  peculiarity  of  the  letter 
is  its  quotation  of  things  which  are  not  found  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures. 
The  writer  even  quotes  directly  from  the  apocryphal  book  of  Enoch,  and 
possibly  also  from  another  apocryphal  book  entitled  "  The  Assumption  of 
Moses."  If  the  canonical  position  of  Jude's  epistle  is  recognised,  it  remains 
disputable  whether  his  authority  must  be  accepted  as  verifying  quotations 
from  books  whose  canonical  value  and  authority  are  unrecognised.  But  that 
question  introduces  the  larger  question  of  the  limitations  within  which  Divine 
inspiration  operated  in  the  Bible-writers.  The  quotations  from  apocryphal 
writings  in  Jude's  epistle  present  the  gravest  difficulties,  and  they  even  compel 
a  careful  and  candid  consideration  of  the  quotations  from  canonical  Scriptures 
which  are  made  by  all  the  New  Testament  writers. 

Bea/rh  Plumptre  skilfully  summarises  all  that  can  be  known  concerning  this 
writer.  He  must  have  been  "born  some  few  years  before  B.C.  4;  and  if  we 
are  right  in  assigning  his  epistle  to  nearly  the  same  date  as  those  of  St.  Peter, 
he  must  have  been  not  far  from  seventy  at  the  time  of  writing  it.  There  is, 
perhaps,  no  writer  in  the  New  Testament  of  whose  life  and  character  we  know 
BO  little.  We  can  but  picture  to  ourselves,  as  in  the  case  of  his  brother  James^ 
the  life  of  the  home  at  Nazareth,  the  incredulous  wonder  with  which  they  saw 

367 


INTKODUCTION.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDE. 

Him  whom  they  had  known  for  so  many  years  in  the  daily  intercourse  of  home- 
life,  appear  first  in  the  character  of  a  teacher,  and  then  of  a  prophet,  and  then 
of  the  long-expected  Christ.  So  it  was  that  they  sought  to  stay  His  work 
(Matt.  xii.  46  ;  Mark  iii.  31-35  ;  Luke  viii.  19-21),  and  were  yet  in  the  position 
of  those  who  believed  not  when  they  went  up  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  six 
months  before  the  close  of  our  Lord's  ministry  (John  vii.  5).  They  were,  how- 
ever, converted  to  a  full  acceptance  of  his  claims  between  the  Crucifixion  and 
the  Ascension — probably,  we  may  believe,  by  our  Lord's  appearance  to  James 
after  the  Resurrection  (1  Cor.  xv.  7),  or  by  their  sharing  in  the  manifestation 
which  was  made  to  five  hundred  brethren  at  once  (1  Cor.  xv.  6)." 

"  Reading  between  the  lines  of  the  epistle,  we  can  trace  something  of  the 
character  of  the  man.  We  miss  the  serene  calmness  which  distinguishes  the 
teaching  of  his  brother,  but  its  absence  is  adequately  explained  by  the  later 
date  of  the  epistle,  by  the  presence  of  new  dangers,  by  the  burning  indignation 
roused  by  the  sensual  impurities  of  the  false  teachers  with  whom  he  had  to  do. 
What  strikes  us  most,  in  some  sense,  as  an  unexpected  difiiculty,  is  the  reference 
to  narratives  and  prophecies  which  we  find  nowhere  in  the  canonical  scriptures 
of  the  Old  Testament,  but  which  are  found  in  spurious  and  unauthentic 
apocrypha.  .  .  .  The  false  teachers  against  whom  he  wrote  were,  we  know, 
characterised  largely  by  their  fondness  for  *  Jewish  fables '  (Tit.  i.  14),  and  the 
allusive  references  to  books  with  which  they  were  familiar  were  therefore  of  the 
nature  of  an  argumentum  ad  hominem.  He  fought  them,  as  it  were,  with  their 
own  weapons." 

Dean  Plumptre  gives  the  following  admirable  analysis  of  the  contents  of  the 
epistle :  "  The  writer  addresses  himself  at  large  to  all  who  were  consecrated 
and  called  as  God's  people  (vers.  1,  2).  He  states  that  he  had  been  moved  to  write 
to  them,  urging  them  to  contend  for  the  faith,  by  the  dangers  of  the  time  (ver.  3). 
Ungodly  men  are  turning  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness  (ver.  4).  Behevers 
should  therefore  remember  that  no  privileges,  however  great,  exempt  them  from 
the  danger  of  falling,  as  the  Israelities  fell  after  leaving  Egypt,  as  the  angels, 
and  the  Cities  of  the  Plain,  had  fallen  (vers.  5-7).  The  sins  of  the  false  teachers 
were  like  theirs  and  worse,  as  sins  against  nature,  sins  after  the  pattern  of  those 
of  Cain,  and  Balaam,  and  Korah  (vers.  8-11).  They  mingled  in  the  Agapse  with 
impure  purposes;  all  images  of  natural  disorder,  rainless  clouds,  withering 
trees,  wandering  stars,  were  realised  in  their  lives  (vers.  12,  13).  Truly  had  Enoch 
prophesied  that  the  Lord  would  come  to  judge  such  as  these,  murmurers,  self- 
willed,  covetous  (vers.  14-16).  From  that  picture  of  evil  the  writer  turns  to  warn 
his  readers  against  another  hardly  less  threatening  danger  from  the  mockers  of 
the  last  days,  sensual  and  schismatic  (vers.  17-19).  In  contrast  with  both  these 
classes,  they  were  to  build  themselves  up  in  faith,  and  prayer,  and  love  (vers.  20,  21). 
They  must  not  shrink  from  rebuking  those  that  needed  rebuke,  but  they  must 
deal  with  each  case  on  its  own  merits,  with  greater  or  less  severity  (vers.  22,  23). 
The  writer  ends  with  an  ascription  of  praise  to  God  as  their  protector  and  pre- 
server from  all  the  dangers  that  threatened  them  (vers.  24,  25)." 
.    308 


THE  ENEMIES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAITH. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  The  servant. — Better,  "a  servant."  As  he  does  not  call  himself  an  apostle,  we 
cannot,  without  adequate  reason  assigned,  identify  him  with  the  apostle  Judas.  Brother  of 
James. — Which  James  is  uncertain.  Probably  the  James  who  wrote  the  epistle.  Perhaps 
he  wished,  by  this  indication,  to  distinguish  himself  fr®m  others,  like  Judas,  not  Iscariot 
(John  xiv.  22,  Luke  vi.  16)  ;  the  Lebbseus  or  Thaddeus  of  Matt.  x.  3  ;  Judas,  surnamed 
Barsabas  (Acts  xv.  22),  and  others.  Perhaps  Jude  claimed  authority  as  the  brother  of  one 
so  honoured  as  James  the  Just.  Sanctified. — Perhaps  "  beloved "  is  the  better  reading. 
If  "  sanctified  "  is  kept,  the  idea  in  the  word  must  be  "  separated  "  ;  not  "  made  holy."  To 
Jude  the  Christian  disciples  are  (1)  designated  or  separated  in  the  Father's  love,  and 
(2)  preserved  until  the  time  when  they  could  be  (3)  called  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  was  a 
favourite  thought  of  the  early  teachers  that  the  disciples  were  chosen,  separated,  and 
preserved  by  God,  before  their  conscious  life  of  discipleship  began,  in  the  personal  call  of 
the  Lord  Jesus. 

Ver.  2.  Mercy,  peace,  love. — Compare  1  Pet.  1.  2 ;  2  Pet.  i.  2.  Sometimes  "  grace  "  is  used 
for  "  mercy."  All  three  may  be  taken  as  Divine  bestowments.  Love  as  the  Divine  personal 
affection,  finding  ever  gracious  expression.  Or  the  three  may  be  regarded  as  in  logical 
order ;  mercy  from  God  to  man ;  hence  peace  between  God  and  man  ;  hence  love  of  all 
towards  all.     Be  multiplied. — irX-qdwdelv,  peculiar,  in  salutation,  to  Jude  and  1  and  2  Peter. 

Ver.  3.  Common  salvation. — It  does  not  immediately  appear  why  he  uses  this  epithet 
"common."  He  may  only  mean,  "  this  salvation  which  is  a  matter  of  common  interest  to  us 
all."  The  best  MS8.  read,  "  of  our  common  salvation  " ;  of  those  things  which  pertain  to  the 
salvation  of  us  all.  It  is  suggested  that  Jude  may  intend  to  distinguish  between  the  •'  faith," 
or  "  salvation,"  which  is  common  to  all,  and  the  *'  knowledge"  which  was  claimed  by  false 
teachers  as  belonging  only  to  a  few.  Faith  once  delivered. — Faith  is  objective — the  substance 
of  truth  offered  to  faith.  It  is  assumed  that  this  is  well  known,  and  stands  within  recognised 
limitations.  It  was  not  then  embodied  in  a  creed ;  and  we  cannot  with  certainty  declare  its 
contents.  The  apostle  Paul  frequently  refers  to  a  well-known  and  clearly-defined  setting  of 
the  primary  Christian  verities  (2  Tim.  i.  13,  14,  etc.).  Saints. — Such  they  were  in  their 
calling ;  and  such  they  were  by  their  separation  through  belief  of  the  Christian  truth.  There 
is  special  significance  in  the  term  "  saints  "  here,  because  Jude  has  in  mind  those  who  were 
disgracing  the  Christian  profession  by  moral  licence.     He  means  to  suggest  a  contrast. 

Ver.  4.  Unawares. — Finding  their  opportunity  in  Christian  unwatchfulness.  Mischievous 
teachers  get  into  Churches  under  false  pretences.  Of  old  ordained. — Keference  is  to  previous 
prophetic  intimations  and  warnings,  and  not  to  Divine  decrees.  The  sentence  has  been  well 
rendered  thus :  "  who  were  long  ago  before  marked  out  as  on  their  way  to  this  condemna- 
tion." "Ordained"  means  "written  down,"  or  "written  up";  the  "metaphor  may  come 
from  the  practice  of  posting  up  the  names  of  those  who  had  to  appear  in  court  for  trial." 
TTpoyeypafi/xivoi.  ets  Kplciv.  Condemnation. — The  denunciation  which  follows.  Their  "  ungod- 
liness" is  seen  in  the  two  things  which  most  distressed  the  later  Christian  writers  :  (1)  the 
association  of  the  Christian  profession  with  sensual  indulgences ;  and  (2)  the  teaching  of 
perilous  error  concerning  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  "  Lord  God,"  the  name  "  God  "  should 
be  omitted.     Only  one  person  is  meant.     "  Denying  Jesus  Christ,  our  only  Master  and  Lord." 

Ver.  5.  In  remembrance. — That  which  we  have  in  mind  is  often  well  and  wisely  brought 
up  forcibly  before  our  minds. 

Ver.  6.  Angels,  etc;— There  is  nothing  in  the  Old  Testament  to  which  this  can  be  referred, 
unless  we  take  "  angels"  to  be  a  figurative  term  for  the  antediluvians.  It  is  most  probably 
a  reference  to  a  tradition  which  is  preserved  in  the  book  of  Enoch,  but  whether  that 
book  was  written  before  or  after  the  epistle  of  Jude  seems  to  be  uncertain.  The  passages  in 
the  book  of  Enoch,  or  the  traditions  which  these  passages  fix,  areas  follows :  Chap.  vii.  1,  2 — 
"  It  happened,  after  the  sons  of  men  had  multiplied  in  those  days,  that  daughters  were  born 
to  them,  elegant  and  beautiful.    And  when  the  aoigels,  the  sons  of  heavem.,  beheld  them,  they 

BB  369 


VERS.  7—20.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE. 


became  enamoured  of  them,  saying  to  each  other,  Come,  let  us  select  for  ourselves  wives 
from  the  progeny  of  men,  and  let  us  beget  children."  Chap.  xv.  7 — "  Therefore  I  made  not 
wives  for  you  [angels]  because,  being  spiritual,  your  dwelling  is  in  heaven."  Chap,  xviii.  16 — 
"  Therefore  was  he  offended  with  them  [the  angels],  and  bound  them,  until  the  period  of  the 
consummation  of  their  crimes  in  the  secret  year."  (Compare  chap.  xxi.  2,  3 — "  I  beheld  .  .  . 
a  desolate  spot,  prepared,  and  terrific.  There,  too,  I  beheld  seven  stars  of  heaven  [angels], 
bound  in  it  together.  These  are  those  of  the  stars  which  have  transgressed  the  command- 
ment of  the  most  high  God ;  and  are  here  bound,  until  the  infinite  number  of  the  days  of 
their  crime  be  completed."  Compare  chap.  Ixxxvii.  2,  3.)  Estate. — Principality.  The  term 
belongs  to  the  Jewish  classification  of  angels,  and  refers  to  their  power  or  rule.  Everlasting 
chains. — An  evident  figure  of  speech.  "Everlasting"  suggests  "firm  gripping,"  "severe" 
rather  than  merely  "  continuous."     For  other  traditions  influencing  Jude,  see  Illustrations. 

Ver.  7.  Giving  themselves  over. — eKiropveijcFaaai ;  the  e/c  denotes  the  intensity  of  their  lust, 
which  would  be  gratified  at  all  hazards.  Strange  flesh. — Other  flesh ;  prceter  naturam  ; 
Rom.  i.  Eternal  fire. — As  eternal  is  a  spiritual  quality,  and  fire  a  material  substance,  the 
association  of  the  two  terms  must  be  figurative,  and  suggestive  of  moral  truth.  Vengeance. 
— Is  of  course  "  just  punishment,"  not  "  unrestrained  feeling." 

Ver.  8.  Filthy  dreamers. — Omit  the  adjective.  We  call  similar  persons  "  mystics  " ;  and 
with  such  there  is  always  peril  of  neglecting  the  moral  claims  of  religion.  "  Under  the  plea 
of  spiritual  perfection,  these  men  have  indulged  in  carnal  pollutions,  have  sinned  against 
themselves,  have  held  tenets  subversive  of  all  civil  authority  and  constituted  government, 
have  formed  degrading  conceptions  of  heavenly  glories,  or  of  glorified  beings,  as  saints  and 
angels,  reducing  the  hope  of  the  Church  to  the  sensual  delights  of  a  Mahometan  paradise." 

Ver.  9.  Michael  the  archangel. — For  the  legends  concerning  him,  see  Illustrations. 
See  Zech.  iii,  2 ;  Dan.  x.  21,  xii.  1 ;  Rev.  xii.  7.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  an  unhistorical 
incident  is  here  cited  as  a  warning ;  and  our  theories  of  inspiration  must  be  such  as  can 
admit  this  fact. 

Ver.  10. — "  What  they  do  not  know,  and  cannot  know,  they  abuse  by  gross  irreverence. 
What  they  know,  and  cannot  help  knowing,  they  abuse  by  gross  licentiousness." 

Ver.  11. — Three  examples  of  similar  wickedness.  The  stories  of  Cain,  Balaam,  and  Korah. 
The  root-evil  in  each  case  is  covetousness.  There  were  singular  Rabbinic  legends  associated 
with  Cain.  Balaam's  advice  to  seduce  Israel  to  moral  evil  is  in  mind  (2  Pet.  ii.  15).  "  A 
strange  legend  placed  the  souls  of  Korah  and  his  company  in  Gehenna,  but  represented  them 
as  not  being  tormented  there." 

Ver.  12.  Spots. — Lit.  o-TrtXdSes,  rocks  ;  Vulg.  maculce  (compare  2  Pet.  ii.  13).  "  Rocks  in 
your  love-feast,  causing  stumbling  and  shipwreck."  Feeding  themselves. — Seeking  their  own 
interests ;  getting  their  satisfaction  out  of  leading  you  astray,  forwarding  their  own  purposes. 
Clouds  .  .  .  trees. — Figures  of  useless  things,  that  may  be  noisy  and  may  make  a  show, 
but  prove  wholly  mischievous  (compare  2  Pet.  ii.).  Twice  dead. — When  it  fails  to  yield 
good  fruit,  and  when  it  wholly  loses  vital  sap. 

Ver.  13.  Raging  waves. — With  evident  allusion  to  unrestrainedness  of  sensual  passions. 
Wandering  stars. — Figure  from  the  shooting  stars,  or  the  comets.  Suggestive  of  the  short- 
lived fame  and  baleful  influence  of  these  false  teachers.  "  They  too  were  drifting  away  into 
the  eternal  darkness." 

Ver.  14.  Enoch  also. — Here  is  almost  a  verbal  quotation  from  the  apocryphal  book  of 
Enoch,  or  from  the  tradition  embodied  in  that  book.  See  Illustrations.  Seventh  from 
Adam. — Some  symbolical  importance  attached  to  this  numbering  which  cannot  now  be 
recovered. 

Ver.  15.  Execute  judgment. — To  exercise  universally  judicial  administration.  This  must 
not  be  taken  as  a  quotation  from  inspired  Scriptures. 

Ver.  16.  Persons  in  admiration. — Or  loudly  praising  persons  for  the  sake  of  what  they  can 
get  out  of  them. 

Ver.  18.  Ungodly  lusts Lit.  "after  the  lusts  of  their  own  impieties." 

Ver.  19.  Separate  themselves. —Carrying  with  them  a  certain  following,  and  so  making 
schisms  and  sects.  Sensual. — Better  "sensuous."  The  Spirit. — Who,  if  He  dwells  in  us, 
surely  controls  the  natural  ambitions  and  passions.  The  word  for  "  Spirit "  is  without  the 
article  in  the  Greek,  so  it  may  mean  simply  "  unspiritual." 

Ver.  20. — This  gives  positive  teaching.  It  answers  the  question.  What  can  sincere  and 
earnest  believers  do  to  guard  themselves  from  the  insidious  influence  of  evil  men,  and 
imperilling  surroundings  and  influences  ?  The  answer  in  the  general  is  thus  given — Faith  is 
strengthened  and  preserved  by  growth  in  the  Christian  life,  prayer  of  the  meditative  and 
fervent  type,  cherishing  the  sense  of  the  personal  divine  love,  and  keeping  up  hope  of  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  Christ  Jesus,  Most  holy  faith.— This  can  only  mean,  a  recog- 
nised and  accepted  set  of  first  principles  and  truths,  on  which  the  apostolic  stamp  rested. 
Most  holy  faith  as  opposed  to  the  most  unholy  quicksands  of  the  doctrines  condemned  in 
this  epistle.     By  building  up  is  more  especially  meant,  "  strengthening  the  foundations/' 

370 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE.  vers.  1,  2. 


Praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost. — An  expression  not  found  elsewhere.  "  What  is  meant  is  the 
ecstatic  outpouring  of  prayer  in  which  the  words  of  the  worshipper  seem  to  come  as  from  the 
Spirit, who  '  helpeth  our  infirmities.'  " 

Ver.  21.  Love  of  God. — In  the  sense  of  His  love  to  us.  See  John  xv.  9.  Looking  for. — 
With  a  special  anticipation  of  your  Lord's  coming. 

Ver.  22.  Making  a  difference. — The  A.V.  appears  to  have  been  taken  from  the  later  MSS. 
The  R.V,  gives  the  reading  which  has  earlier  and  better  authority,  but  its  English  is 
somewhat  involved :  *'  And  on  some  have  mercy,  who  are  in  doubt  [margin  *  while 
they  dispute  with  you ']  ;  and  some  save,  snatching  them  out  of  the  fire  ;  and  on  some  have 
mercy  with  fear,  hating  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the  flesh."  The  subject  is  the  dis- 
crimination with  which  it  was  necessary  to  treat  Christians  who  were  not  well  established 
in  the  faith.  There  is  a  wise  blending  of  tenderness  and  severity.  Hating  the  garment. — 
That  is,  avoiding  all  familiarity  with  them,  as  they  would  avoid  touching  the  garment 
infected  from  the  flesh  of  one  who  had  died  of  pestilence. 

Ver.  24.  Able  to  keep  you. — Whatever  may  be  said  about  your  self -efforts,  the  supreme 
truth  is  that  God  can  keep,  and  your  supreme  hope  should  rest  on  the  assurance  that  He  is 
keeping.  Falling. — Better  stumbling,  or  the  mistakes  that  may  lead  to  a  fall.  Of  His 
glory. — That  associated  with  His  second  coming. 

Ver.  25.  Only  wise  God. — Better  "  to  the  wise  God  alone,"  R.V.  "  to  the  only  God  our 
Saviour,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  Both  now  and  ever. — R.V.  *'  before  all  time,  and 
now,  and  for  evermore."  "  Before  all  time  "  is  exactly  "  before  the  whole  aeon,"  "  for  ever  " 
is  literally  "  unto  all  the  ages  or  aeons." 

The  Angels  and  their  First  Estate. 

Dean  Plumptre's  Note  on  Ver.  6. — St.  Jude's  language,  like  that  of  St.  Peter,  follows  the 
traditions  of  the  book  of  Enoch,  which  speaks  of  fallen  angels  as  kept  in  their  prison-house 
until  the  day  of  judgment ;  and  also  those  which  are  represented  in  the  Midrasch  Ruth  in 
the  Book  of  Zohar — "  After  that  the  sons  of  God  had  begotten  sons,  God  took  them  and 
brought  them  to  the  mount  of  darkness,  and  bound  them  in  chains  of  darkness  which  reach 
to  the  middle  of  the  great  abyss."  A  fuller  form  of  the  Rabbinic  legend  relates  that  the 
angels  Asa  and  Asael  charged  God  with  folly  in  having  created  man  who  so  soon  provoked 
Him,  and  that  He  answered  that  if  they  had  been  on  earth  they  would  have  sinned  as  man 
had  done.  "  And  thereupon  He  allowed  them  to  descend  to  earth,  and  they  sinned  with 
the  daughters  of  men.  And  when  they  would  have  returned  to  heaven  they  could  not,  for 
they  were  banished  from  their  former  habitation,  and  brought  into  the  dark  mountains  of 
the  earth."  The  resemblance  between  this  tradition  and  that  of  the  Zoroastrian  legend  of 
the  fall  of  Ahriman  and  his  angels,  and  again  of  the  punishment  of  the  Titans  by  Zeus  in 
the  mythology  of  Hesiod,  shows  the  widespread  currency  of  the  belief  referred  to. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1,  2. 

True  Believers. — The  salutation  slightly  differs  from  those  of  the  epistles 
generally,  but  in  the  main  both  the  disposition  and  the  expressions  of  the  writer 
are  of  the  usual  apostolic  form.  Compare  1  Cor.  i.  2,  y^yiaa^ivoi^  iv  XpLorrco. 
Manuscripts  A,  B,  seven  cursives,  Vulgate,  Syriac,  Coptic,  and  some  others 
have  r]ya7rr)fX€voL<Si  which  also  both  Lachman  and  Tischendorf  have  adopted. 
Having  weighed  all  the  arguments,  we  do  not  see  a  sufficient  reason  for  the 
alteration.  Besides,  the  appellation  rjyiaorixevoi  is  more  distinguishing  when  the 
Church  is  regarded  in  relation  to  the  world.  Jude  was  writing  to  the  dispersed 
Christian  Jews,  who  kept  themselves  separate  from  the  world.  With  this  the 
meaning  of  TerrjprjfievoLs  agrees.  It  was  difficult  for  them,  being  few  and  poor, 
to  preserve  that  degree  of  independent  life  which  their  profession  of  Christ 
demanded  ;  by  the  power  and  grace  of  God  they  were  enabled  to  do  so.  In  the 
Syriac  version  we  have  the  addition,  "  To  the  Gentiles  who  are  called,  beloved 
of  God  the  Father,"  etc.  Evidently  this  cannot  be  a  part  of  the  text,  although 
a  very  good  exposition  of  it,  inasmuch  as  possibly  this  apostle  intended  the 
epistle  for  the  edification  of  the  Gentile  converts  as  well  as  the  Jewish  Christians. 
The  terms  cAcos,  eiprjvrj,  and  ayairq  are  as  comprehensive  as  any,  if  not  more  so, 
which  the  other  apostles  have  used.     In  both  his  epistles  St.  Peter  only  uses 

371 


VERS.  3,  4.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


grace  and  peace.  This  also  proves  that  St.  Jude  was  not  a  slavish  copyist  or 
imitator  of  St.  Peter.  A  very  profitable  introduction  might  be  worked  out 
from  the  thought  that  the  apostles  regarded  their  own  cordial  feelings  towards, 
and  their  fervent  prayers  for,  those  to  whom  they  wrote,  and  whom  they  hoped 
to  influence  by  their  writings,  of  primary  importance.  To  the  Christian  teacher 
it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  stand  in  the  best  possible  relations  to  those 
whom  he  intends  to  benefit. 

I.  Characteristics  of  the  true  believers. — There  are  three,  and  they  include  all 
which  pertain  to  godliness.  1.  A  Divine  act  in  the  soul.  The  idea  of  consecra- 
tion is  here  intended.  But  we  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God  without  the  imparta- 
tion  of  purity.  When  we  are  set  apart  for  the  service  and  glory  of  Christ,  it 
must  be  after  the  washing  of  regeneration.  Sanctification  implies  the  twofold 
operation  of  partaking  of  the  Divine  nature  and  being  set  apart  for  the 
Master's  use.  2.  Divine  guardianship  over  the  soul.  The  idea  of  preservation 
here  is  limited  to  the  faith  of  believers.  They  were  preserved  in  the  holy  state 
which  we  have  before  mentioned.  We  are  preserved  in  the  matter  of  possession 
— what  God  has  given  us,  and  in  the  matter  of  condition — what  God  has  made 
us.  3.  Divine  leadership  before  the  soul.  This  is  the  call  to  service,  activity, 
and  suffering.  Whatever  we  have  to  do  or  suffer,  there  is  a  voice  which  calls 
us  thereto. 

II.  The  blessings  of  true  believers. — The  apostolic  prayer  is  that  the  threefold 
condition  before  described  might  be  sustained  by  a  triple  stream  of  goodness. 
1 .  God^s  mercy  to  maintain  their  purity.  The  very  idea  of  weakness  and  imper- 
fection is  here  implied.  By  the  constant  supply  of  grace  the  saints  are  kept 
from  falling.  2.  God's  peace  to  maintain  their  preservation.  Commotion,  strife, 
perturbation  of  soul  invariably  lead  to  loss  and  disaster.  The  godly  are  safe  in 
tumults  because  the  peace  of  God  rules  in  their  heart.  3.  God's  love  to  inspire 
their  life.  To  work  and  die  for  the  Saviour,  there  is  only  one  incentive — tlje 
love  of  Jesus  in  the  breast.  There  are  other  considerations,  but  this  is  the 
mainspring. — W.  P. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  3,  4. 

Ver.  3.  The  Common  Salvation. — It  appears  that  the  mind  of  the  apostle  was 
moved,  in  the  first  place,  to  write  concerning  salvation  generally  ;  but  on  reflection 
he  was  constrained  to  write  on  one  particular  aspect,  bearing  oil  the  temper  of 
the  times.  The  brevity  of  the  epistle  testifies  that  only  one  special  aspect  of 
religion  is  set  forth.  It  was  in  view  of  the  general  defection  among  Christians, 
then  so  prevalent,  he  was  earnestly  moved  to  write.  The  case  was  urgent,  as 
we  learn  from  avayK-qv  ecr;j(oi/,  arising  from  the  necessity  of  contending  earnestly 
for  the  faith — cTraywvt^eo-^at.  The  description  given  in  the  epistle  of  the  declen- 
sion of  some,  and  the  false  teaching  of  others,  fully  sets  forth  the  earnest  hope 
the  apostle  felt,  that  a  few  lines  from  him  might  serve  the  good  purpose  of 
conserving  the  true  faith. 

I.  A  designation  of  the  gospel. — "  Common  salvation."  The  gospel  had  an 
interest  for  all.  Its  integrity  was  a  matter  which  affected  all.  Nothing  could 
be  of  more  importance  than  the  general  concern  which  all  ought  to  feel  in  the 
matter  of  the  purity  of  the  teaching  which  was  intended  to  set  it  forth. 
1.  Salvation  is  the  great  need  of  all.  It  supplies  a  universal  want.  It  reveals 
clearly  the  great  subjects  which  have  agitated  human  thought  in  every  age — 
God,  the  soul,  moral  accountability,  and  futurity.  It  also  leads  mankind  to  the 
fountain  of  blessing — God  in  Christ  Jesus.  If  life  is  to  answer  any  special 
end,  and  if  the  soul  of  man  is  to  attain  to  any  particular  satisfaction  and 

372 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE.  ver.  4. 


happiness,  the  gospel  is  as  great  a  necessity  to  the  mind  as  air  is  to  the  body. 
2.  Salvation  is  a  provision  for  all.  It  touches  the  case  of  every  one.  There  had 
been  a  Jewish  exclusiveness  even  on  the  part  of  the  apostles  ;  but  they  were 
taught  to  "  call  no  man  common  or  unclean,"  and  that  *'  God  is  no  respecter  of 
persons."  The  gospel  is  free  to  all,  whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  Barbarian,  Scythian, 
bond,  or  free.  The  gospel,  like  the  sun,  is  God's  great  blessing  to  all  men  of 
every  clime  and  time.  Jesus  is  the  "  Son  of  man,"  to  designate  the  universality 
of  His  mission.     He  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  the  race  of  man. 

II.  The  sacred  trust. — "  Once  for  all  delivered  unto  the  saints."  The  gospel 
is  in  the  custody  of  the  Church.  1.  The  integrity  of  its  doctrines.  Those  to 
whom  the  Spirit  has  revealed  the  truth  alone  can  transmit  it  to  posterity.  If 
inspiration  has  ceased,  illumination  continues.  The  gospel  as  a  revelation  from 
God  is  also  taught  by  Him.  2.  The  purity  of  its  ordinances.  Truth  must  have 
forms  as  channels  of  transmission.  Sacraments  and  spiritual  exercises  are 
essential  to  the  spread  of  the  gospel  and  the  growth  of  piety.  However  free 
Christianity  may  be  in  its  spirit,  it  prescribes  forms  and  rites  for  the  welfare  of 
the  Church.  3.  The  consistency  of  its  professors.  To  walk  in  the  light  is  the 
duty  of  every  believer.  Christ  has  ordained  that  infractions  of  the  laws  of  His 
kingdom  should  receive  attention  and  be  visited  with  discipline.  The  fruitless 
and  rotten  branches  must  be  taken  away.  The  Church  has  authority  to  deal 
with  matters  of  internal  order,  and  also  the  conduct  of  its  members  in  the  world. 
The  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  are  now  administered  by  the  Church,  until 
He  comes. 

III.  Special  duty  enjoined. — "  Contend  earnestly  for  the  faith."  The  Church 
is  often  thrown  into  times  of  particular  difficulty,  when  its  efforts  are  needed 
to  defend  its  position  in  the  world.  The  apostolic  Church  was  early  called  upon 
.to   defend   its   doctrines   and   practices  against   false   teachers.     This  is  done  : 

1.  By  unswerving  fidelity  to  truth.  To  hold  fast  that  which  we  have  is  a  duty 
we  owe,  not  only  to  ourselves,  but  to  the  Church  and  the  world.  2.  By  a  hold 
confession  before  men  of  that  which  God  has  done  for  our  soul.  Men  will  be 
convinced  of  the  efficacy  of  the  means  when  they  see  the  cure.  3.  By  being 
ready  to  give  an  intelligent  reason  for  the  hope  which  is  in  us.  The  defence  of  the 
faith  on  the  ground  of  truth  and  justice  is  a  matter  that  can  be  accomplished. 

Yer.  4.  The  Denial  of  the  Divinity  of  Christ. — The  reason  is  here  stated  why 
the  apostle  chose  a  particular  line  to  write  to  the  scattered  Christians.  The  case 
was  urgent,  because  the  opposition  came  not  from  men  who  had  openly  denied 
the  truths  of  the  gospel,  but  from  those  who  had  privily  crept  into  the  Church, 
and  w^ere,  in  name,  members  of  it.  The  danger  was  not  from  without  this  time, 
but  from  within.  The  use  of  the  three  verbs  Trapeio-ayto  (2  Pet.  ii.  1),  Trapua-ipxofxai 
(Gal.  ii.  4),  and  TrapiLcr^voi  in  the  text,  plainly  shows  a  systematic  conspiracy  to 
subvert  the  truth.  The  bold  opposition  of  persecution  having  failed,  the  evil  one 
covertly  introduced  into  the  Church  false  teachers.  The  adroit  use  of  7rpoypa<^a>, 
which  follows,  indicates  the  impossibility  of  hiding  the  evil  designs  of  these  false 
prophets.  St.  Jude  doubtless  refers  to  the  second  epistle  of  Peter,  and  also  to 
the  warnings  contained  in  the  writings  of  St.  Paul.  The  figure  is  taken  from  ^^ 
the  practice  of  posting  up  the  names  of  those  who  were  cited  to  trial,  with  a 
description  of  their  crimes.  Every  corrupter  of  the  doctrines,  and  every 
disturber  of  the  peace  of  the  Church,  is  a  marked  man.  On  the  notice-board  of 
justice  is  written,  *'  Wanted,"  etc.  The  Kpt/xa  is  fully  described  in  the  following 
verses.  The  force  of  />tcTaTi^r;/xi,  which  means  to  alter  a  thing  from  its  original 
use,  is  brought  out  in  the  contrast  between  the  grace  of  God  and  lasciviousness 
— the  greatest  abuse  of  the  greatest  favour.  In  the  same  way  we  get  the  full 
meaning  of  dpvov/nevot  from  fxovov  h€air6rriv  koX  Kuptov  i7/Lta>v.     It  was  not  a  denying 

373 


? 


VER.  3.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE. 


of  the  truths  of  the  gospel  in  general,  but  the  central  truth — the  Divinity  and 
the  Divine  mission  of  Christ. 

I.  A  great  crime. — Never  was  there  a  time  in  the  history  of  the  Church  when 
this  crime  should  be  guarded  against  more  than  at  present.  The  days  of  intoler- 
ance are  over,  and  the  danger  now  is  of  relaxing  all  obligations  as  to  the  truth, 
and  holding  that  every  man  is  at  liberty  to  believe  and  teach  whatsoever  he  pleases. 
The  sacred  trust  committed  to  the  care  of  the  Church  is  the  "  faith  once  delivered 
to  the  saints."  Why  should  men  want  to  change  the  truth  of  the  Uving  God  ? 
Look  into  the  text,  and  you  have  the  answer.  1.  Because  the  fear  of  God  is  not 
in  their  soul — "  ungodly  men."  When  the  helm  is  broken,  the  vessel  will  drift  in 
every  direction.  Keverence  for  God  is  the  first  essential  of  faith  in  revelation. 
2.  Because  to  human  appearance  sin  appears  less  hideous  when  committed  in 
the  name  of  religion — *'  turning  the  grace  of  our  God  into  lasciviousness."  This 
meant  the  abuse  of  that  liberty  which  the  gospel  confers,  and  the  committal  of 
sin  that  grace  might  abound.  3.  Because  the  authority  of  "our  only  Master 
and  Lord  "  is  against  the  licence  they  would  afford  the  flesh.  Take  Christ  out  of 
the  gospel,  and  any  use  might  be  made  of  it ;  but  give  Him  His  place  in  the 
sphere  of  Divine  truth,  and  the  force  a^gainst  sin  is  irresistible. 

II.  An  awful  doom. — St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  sounds  the  warning  in 
strong  accents  :  "  If  any  man  shall  add  unto  them,"  etc.  (chap.  xxi.  18,  19).  A 
few  considerations  will  show  that  the  punishment  of  those  who  pervert  the 
truth,  and  teach  so  unto  others,  must  be  very  severe.  1 .  It  is  a  defiance  of  Divine 
authority.  God  is  contradicted.  When  this  is  done,  moral  government  is  at  stake. 
2.  It  is  the  greatest  wrong  that  can  be  done  to  others.  If  you  do  not  know  the 
way,  say  so ;  but  to  know  the  way  and  direct  the  man  to  go  in  the  contrary 
direction  is  to  cause  him  harm.  To  tell  people  that  they  are  on  the  road  to 
heaven,  when  it  is  known  that  they  are  going  to  hell,  must  be  punished.  3.  It 
is  an  offence  against  the  love  of  God,  who  sent  His  only  Son  to  make  us  good, 
and  lead  us  to  virtue. — W.  P, 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.    3.    Doctrinal   Contention. — As  names  had  not  occurred  in  the  pages 

in  war  they  will  clear  away  the  houses  of  Christian  apologists,  flies  in  amber, 

and  the  flower-gardens  that  have  been  nobody  in  this  generation  would  ever 

allowed  to  come  and  cluster  about  the  have  heard  of  them. — Ibid. 
walls   and  fill   up  the   moat,  yet   the 

walls  will  stand,  so  in  all  the  conflicts  Influence  of  Strong  Assertion. — The 

that  befall  Christ's  Church  and  God's  consciovisness   that  Christian  truth  is 

truth,  the  calming  thought  ought  to  denied    makes  some    of   you   falter  in 

be  ours,  that  if  anything  perishes  it  is  its  profession,  and  fancy  that  it  is  less 

a  sign  that  it  is  not  His,  but  man's  certain  simply  because  it  is  gainsaid, 

excrescence  on  His   building.     What-  The  mist  wraps  you  in  its  folds,  and 

ever   is    His    will    stand    for    ever. —  it   is  difticult   to  keep  warm  in  it,  or 

A.  Maclaren,  D.D.  to  believe  that  love  and  sunshine  are 

above  it  all  the  same.     *'  Because  ini- 

Boohs    of    the    Olden    Time. — Who  quity  shall  abound,  the  love  of  many 

knows    anything    about    the    world's  shall  wax  cold." — Ibid. 
wonders   of    books    that,    a    hundred 

years    ago,    made   good    men's   hearts  Contending  for  the  Faith. — What  do 

tremble  for  the  ark  of  God  ?    You  may  we   observe    as    a    fact   in    Christian 

find  them  in  dusty   rows   on  the   top  Church    history  ?       This.      Christian 

shelves  of  great  Hbraries.     But  if  their  doctrine  is    evidently  a   great    whole 

374 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE. 


Ver.  3. 


made  up  of   many  parts.      What  we 
seek  to  find  is  the  harmonious  fitting 
of  the  several  parts,  each  being  held  in 
its  proper  proportions.    But  the  Chris- 
tian faith  is  subject  to  attacks  on  its 
several   positions.      The   attacks  have 
their    special   characteristics   in    each 
age.    They  should  be  met  by  the  whole 
united  force  of  the  Church  ;  the  com- 
mon foe  met  by  a  common  resistance. 
There    is,    however,    another    process 
going  on  continually,  as  Christ's  truth 
is  committed  to  the   charge   of  weak 
men.     Aspects  of  truth  are  in  constant 
danger  of  being  pushed  to  extremes  ; 
and   important  sides   and    aspects    of 
truth   are   in  constant  peril  of   being 
neglected   and   dropped   out   of   sight. 
And  in  this    way  the    proportions   of 
truth,  the  harmonious  whole  of  truth, 
may  be  lost.     So  there  is  a  continual, 
and  ever-repeated  call  for  the  activity 
of  those  who  will  reaffirm   the   truth 
that  is  shpping  from  view,  or  qualify 
the  truth  that  is  getting  exaggerated 
settings.     That  may  be  the  good  side 
of  what  may  be  misapprehended,  and 
called  heresy  and  schism.     It  may  be 
questioned   in   what   sense   the   whole 
Christian    faith    was    "  once    for    all 
delivered  to  the  saints."    All  revelations 
are  wholes  for  the  age  to  which  they 
come ;    but   they   are   not    necessarily 
wholes  to  the  after- ages  of  intellectual 
and  moral  advancement.     The  Mosaic 
revelation  was  a  whole ;  but  in  pro- 
phetic times  its  deeper  moral  features 
came  to  view,  and  the  Christian  ages 
have    perfected    it,    fulfilled    it,    fully 
realised  it.     It  is  a  whole  now  which 
the  Jews  of  Moses'  time  could  not  by 
any  possibility  recognise.     Perhaps  we 
may  affirm  that  finality  can  belong  to 
nothing  that  bears  relation  to  finite, 
but  ever-unfolding   man ;    and   so  we 
can  never  really  look  for  more  than  a 
faith  adequate  to   an   age.      If   your 
mother's  name  were  defiled,  would  not 
your   heart    bound    to    her    defence  ? 
When  a  prince  is  a  dethroned  exile,  his 
throne  is  fixed  deeper  in  the  hearts  of 
his  adherents,  *'  though  his  back  be  at 
the  wall,"  and  common  souls  become 
heroes  because  their  devotion  has  been 


heightened  to  subhmity  of  self-sacrifice 
by  a  nation's  rebelHon.  And  when  so 
many  voices  are  proclaiming  that  God 
has  never  spoken  to  men,  that  our 
thoughts  of  His  book  are  dreams,  and 
its  long  empire  over  men's  spirits  a 
waning  tyranny,  does  cool  indifference 
become  us  ?  will  not  fervour  be  sobriety, 
and  the  glowing  emotion  of  our  whole 
nature  our  reasonable  service  ? — 
Ibid. 

Right  Dealing  with  Unbelief. — You 
may  hammer  ice  on  an  anvil  or  bray 
it  in  a  mortar.  What  then  ?  It  is 
pounded  ice  still,  except  for  the  little 
portion  melted  by  heat  of  percussion, 
and  it  will  soon  all  congeal  again. 
Melt  it  in  the  sun,  and  it  flows 
down  in  sweet  water,  which  mirrors 
that  light  which  loosed  its  bonds  of 
cold.  So  hammer  away  at  unbelief 
with  your  logical  sledge-hammers,  and 
you  will  change  its  shape  perhaps, 
but  it  is  none  the  less  unbelief  because 
you  have  ground  it  to  powder.  It  is 
a  mightier  agent  that  must  melt  it — 
the  fire  of  God's  love,  brought  close  by 
a  will  ablaze  with  the  sacred  glow. — 
Ibid, 

Defenders  of  the  Faith. — This  ex- 
hortation applies  to  our  circumstances 
in  this  period  of  unsettledness  in 
religious  beliefs.  It  is  claimed  that 
the  old  "  faith "  has  served  its  day, 
and  some  new  faith  must  take  its 
place.  Our  opinion  is  that  instead  of 
finding  a  new  faith,  we  are  on  our 
way  to  a  better  understanding  of  the 
old  one.  We  are  concerned  about  the 
essential  truths  of  Christianity,  and 
willingly  renounce  the  accretions  and 
interpretations  by  which  those  truths 
have  been  overlaid  and  obscured.  The 
indications  of  our  modern  unrest  point 
to  a  change  for  the  better. 

I.  What  are  we  to  understand  by 
the  faith  which  was  once  delivered 
to  the  saints? — It  is  defined  as  *'the 
common  salvation."  Not  the  doctrine 
of  salvation,  but  the  salvation  itself', 
it  is  not  a  theory,  but  an  experience. 
Faith  is  the  means,  salvation  is  the 

,   ,  375 


VER  3.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE. 


end.  *'  Receiving  the  end  of  your  danger  by  a  perfect  pardon.  It  forti- 
faith,  even  the  salvation  of  your  souls  "  fies  and  strengthens  the  soul  against 
(1  Pet.  i.  9).  It  was  common  to  all  the  temptations  of  all  evil  agencies, 
the  apostles.  They  might  have  par-  so  that  it  is  enabled  to  stand  in  the 
ticular  methods,  but  they  certainly  glorious  liberty  of  the  gospel.  The 
had  a  general  result  in  view.  Salva-  faith  responds  to  the  liability  to  tempta- 
tion was  the  aim  in  their  teaching.  tion  and  trouble.  All,  irrespective  of 
They  became  all  things  to  all  men,  position  or  rank,  are  exposed  to  them, 
that  by  all  means  they  might  save  The  only  remedy  philosophy  offers  is 
some.  This  salvation  is  common  to  stoicism.  The  gospel  discovers  One 
all  men,  and  not  a  matter  pertaining  who  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our 
to  a  particular  class.  It  is  available  infirmities,  who  was  in  all  points 
for  Jew  and  Gentile.  It  is  for  every  tempted  like  as  we  are,  yet  without 
one  that  believeth.  The  essential  sin.  "  Let  us,  therefore,  come  boldly 
truths  of  Christianity,  as  contained  unto  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may 
in  the  New  Testament,  constitute  the  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace  to  help 
faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  in  time  of  need."  Apart  from  this 
1.  The  faith  is  Divine  in  its  origin,  living  Christ,  one  of  the  deepest  needs 
It  is  not  a  production  of  human  philo-  of  human  nature  is  left  unsatisfied, 
sophy,  but  the  substance  of  a  Divine  The  certainty  of  death  is  also  answered 
revelatioii.  The  necessity  for  a  Divine  by  this  faith.  Death  and  the  problem 
revelation  appears  in  the  fact  that  of  the  future  hang  like  a  heavy  pall 
human  opinions  are  so  varied  and  over  all  heathendom.  The  religious 
contradictory.  When  my  heart  is  and  philosophical  systems  of  paganism 
burdened  with  the  consciousness  of  throw  no  light  upon  the  darkness  of 
guilt,  and  my  soul  cries  out  in  its  the  grave.  But  the  gospel  of  Christ 
agony,  "  Oh,  wretched  man  that  I  am,  tells  of  Him  who  died  and  rose  again 
who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  as  the  firstfruits  of  those  who  slept, 
this  death  ?  "  I  must  have  a  Divine  who  has  abolished  death,  and  opened 
answer.  I  need  to  know  God's  thought  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers, 
and  purpose  concerning  a  penitent  soul.  It  inspires  men  with  hope  of  immor- 
The  gospel  is  the  Divine  answer  to  tality.  It  alleviates  human  bereave- 
human  need.  2.  The  faith  is  adapted  ment  and  gilds  the  future  with  radiant 
to  man^s  moral  needs.  Three  truths  hope.  Blessed  gospel !  It  meets  the 
force  themselves  upon  our  notice  when  deepest  needs  of  the  human  soul, 
we  study  man  in  his  moral  relations  :  3.  The  faith  is  complete  in  its  contents 
(1)  The  sense  of  guilt  and  moral  "  once  delivered " — i.e.  complete.  To 
weakness ;  (2)  the  liabiKty  to  tempta-  it  nothing  can  be  added.  New  light, 
tion  and  trouble ;  (3)  the  certainty  hidden  riches,  sweetest  harmonies,  may 
of  death  and  a  future  state.  These  be  found  in  it.  Astronomy  may  dis- 
exist  in  all  men  everywhere.  These  cover  worlds  of  light  in  the  heavens, 
are  the  bases  of  moral  needs,  and  to  but  it  does  not  add  to  the  universe, 
these  needs  the  gospel  responds.  The  Every  star  was  there  before  astrono- 
faith  responds  to  the  sense  of  guilt  mers  lifted  their  telescopes  skyward, 
and  moral  weakness.  The  fact  and  Astronomy  may  enlarge  our  knowledge 
experience  of  sin  are  common  to  all  of  the  heavens,  and  thrill  us  wdth  new 
men.  In  every  land  men  are  wrestling  views  of  heavenly  beauty,  but  it  cannot 
with  the  great  problem,  "  What  shall  create  a  new  star.  Music  cannot  add 
we  do  to  be  saved  ? "  The  gospel  is  a  new  tone  to  the  scale.  The  octave 
the  specific.  "  It  is  the  power  of  God  is  the  final  measure  of  possible  tones. 
unto  salvation  to  every  one  that  be-  Gifted  musicians  may  combine  the 
lieveth."  This  '*  common  salvation "  tones  in  new  relations,  and  thus  give 
includes  two  things — deliverance  and  the  world  sweeter  song  and  more  thrill- 
safety.      It   dehvers    from    impending  ing  melody ;  but  in   all  the  witchery 

376 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDE. 


VEE.  5,  e. 


of  music  they  will  never  reach  beyond 
the  octave  of  tones.  So  with  the  faith. 
Theology  cannot  add  to  it.  The  Bible 
will  gain  in  interpretation,  but  no  new 
principles  can  be  added  to  its  contents. 
The  foundation  of  our  faith  is  laid  in 
final  power  away  from  frost  and  wave 
and  storm. 

II.  To  whom  was  the  faith  deliv- 
ered?—"To  the  saints."  The  term 
refers  to  character^  not  to  official 
position.  1.  Saints  are  the  depositaries 
of  the  faith.  Not  councils,  priests,  or 
popes,  but  holy  men  are  the  trustees 
of  this  precious  gift.  The  power  and 
the  safety  of  the  faith  are  not  in 
organisation,  or  popular  favour,  or 
political  power,  desirable  as  these  may 
be,  but  primarily  in  the  character  of 
individual  Christians.  2.  Saints  are  the 
disseminato7's  of  the  faith.  Dissemina- 
tion is  the  purpose  for  which  the 
deposit  has  been  made.  Saints  hold 
it  in  trust  for  the  use  and  benefit  of 
mankind.  Truth  must  be  incarnated 
before  it  can  become  an  available 
factor  in  the  world's  evangelisation. 
God  incarnates  the  gospel  in  His 
saints.  This  incarnation  is  the  secret  of 
successful  evangelism.  The  old  prophets 
were  mighty  because  their  hearts  were 
burdened  with  the  "word  of  the  Lord." 
God  put  His  great  truths  in  their 
hearts,  and  they  were  transfigured  by 
the  glory  of  inward  truth,  and  flamed 
and  burned  among  men.  The  apostles 
were  resistless  evangelists  because  their 
souls  were  thrilled  and  dominated  by 
the  great  revelations  of  Christ,  and 
they  could  not  but  speak  the  things 
commanded  them.  The  disciples, 
scattered  by  persecution,  went  every- 
where. In  all  their  flight  they  were 
flaming  evangelists.  So  grew  the  word 
of  the  Lord  mightily  and  prevailed. 

III.  What  is  our  duty  in  reference  to 
the  faith? — "Contend  earnestly,"  etc. 
1 .   We  must  hold  to  it  experimentally  and 


consistently.  Not  to  the  theory,  but 
to  the  practice  ;  not  to  doctrine  merely, 
but  to  salvation  as  a  blessed  reality. 
The  faith  needs  not  swords  to  fight  for 
itf4>ut_  saints  to  live  it.  A  holy  life 
is  the  noblest  defence  of  the  gospel. 
2.  We  must  hold  it  with  courage  and 
7'esolution.  The  faith  has  had  to  con- 
tend for  recognition  in  the  world.  In 
the  beginning  the  Jew  denied  it,  the 
Greek  ridiculed  it,  and  the  Roman 
denounced  it ;  but  the  saints  contended 
for  it  in  spite  of  all.  So  now  it  comes 
into  conflict  with  the  prejudices,  selfish 
interests,  and  wrath  of  men.  It  re- 
quires brave,  true  men  to  stand  by  it. 
The  age  of  chivalry  is  not  yet  past. 
YaUant  knights  of  the  Order  of  the 
Cross  are  needed  now  in  defence  of  the 
old  faith.  3.  We  must  contend  for  it 
with  simplicity  and  sincerity.  "  The 
weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal," 
etc.  Not  the  weapons  of  the  flesh, 
not  the  mere  external  aids  that  men 
are  wont  to  use,  not  eloquence,  learn- 
ing, wealth,  or  beauty — these,  though 
highly  desirable,  are  not  essential. 
Simple,  sincere  Christian  lives  are  the 
irresistible  argument  for  the  faith.  I 
do  not  undervalue  apologetics.  Its 
function  is  to  defend  the  Bible  and  set 
forth  the  evidences  of  the  Divine 
authority  of  the  Scriptures.  All 
honour  to  our  "great  apologists"  for 
their  literary  work  in  defence  of  our 
precious  faith ;  but  I  do  insist  that  an 
earnest  Christian,  sincere  in  heart, 
true  in  conduct,  pure  in  speech,  and 
gentle  in  spirit,  is  the  one  unanswer- 
able argument  for  Christianity.  He 
is  "  the  people's  Bible,"  needing  neither 
commentary  nor  apology.  We  are  to 
be  "  defenders  of  the  faith."  Paul's 
saying  ought  to  be  the  conviction  of 
our  heart :  "I  am  set  for  the  de- 
fence of  the  gospel"  (Phil.  i.  17). — 
IF.  Hansom,  B.D.,  LL.D. 


MAIN  HO  MILE  TICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses    5,  6. 

Privileges  are  always  Conditional. — St.  Jude  is  concerned  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  Christian  life  in  those  to  whom  he  writes.  They  had  been  highly  exalted 
in  being  raised  to  a  spiritual  life.     Their  privilege  is  intimated  in  the  style  of 

377 


VERS.  7— 11.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE. 


bis  address  to  them,  in  ver.  1 .  But  their  fall  from  privilege  was  possible  ;  con- 
tinuance of  privilege  depended  on  continuance  of  faith,  and  on  persistent  effort 
to  meet  the  obligations  of  privilege.  Yet  they  were  in  a  very  perilous  way 
exposed  to  temptation.  It  took  form  as  the  attractive  teachings  of  men  who 
claimed  for  them  a  liberty  which  was  only  rightly  called  "  licence,"  and  who 
shook  their  confidence  in  the  primary  Christian  truths  which  they  had  received 
from  the  apostles.  The  one  thing  that  filled  St.  Jude  with  fear  was,  that  they 
might  presume  upon  their  Christian  standing  and  privilege  and  think  themselves 
secure.  There  is  no  more  perilous  condition  in  which  any  man  can  be  placed 
than  that  of  self -security.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he.standeth  take  heed  lest 
he  fall."  St.  Jude  therefore  brings  some  striking  and  impressible  illustrations  of 
the  truth  that  privileges  never  have  been  held,  and  never  can  be  held,  apart 
from  conditions.  No  created  being  ever  yet  had  absolute  possession  of  any 
privilege.  It  can  be  lost ;  it  can  only  too  easily  be  lost.  In  the  paragraph 
before  us  the  illustrations  are  taken  from  two  sources — history  and  tradition. 

I.  The  illustration  from  history. — The  salvation  of  Israel  from  Egypt  was  a 
remarkable  sign  of  Divine  favour  and  interest  which  lifted  the  nation  of  Israel 
into  a  high  place  of  dignity  and  privilege.  But  that  privilege  did  not  keep  the 
rebellious  members  of  that  community  from  suffering  the  just  judgment  of  God. 
Their  privilege  provided  no  security  against  their  suffering  the  proper  conse- 
quences of  distrust  and  disobedience.  Even  when  He  had  saved  them,  in  such 
a  glorious  and  gracious  way,  the  "  Lord  afterward  destroyed  them  that  believed 
[trusted]  not."  *'  St.  Jude's  main  object  is  to  warn  his  readers  against  that 
party  in  the  Christian  community  who,  by  its  abuse  of  Christian  liberty,  trans- 
formed the  gospel  of  purity  into  a  gospel  of  wantonness,  and  to  give  them  a 
safeguard  against  such.  And  the  safeguard  is  this  :  to  hold  fast  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  them,  and  to  remember  the  consequences  of  being  unbelieving.  For 
this  purpose,  no  warning  could  be  more  apposite  than  the  fate  of  Jude's  own 
nation  in  the  wilderness  "  (Plummer). 

II.  The  illustration  from  tradition. — It  is  quite  certain  that  St.  Jude  did  not 
get  the  illustration  of  the  fallen  angels  from  any  Scriptures  that  have  come 
down  to  our  time,  or  of  which  we  have  any  intimation.  St.  Peter  indeed  refers 
to  the  matter  (2  Pet.  ii.  4),  but  he  plainly  draws  his  illustration  from  the  same 
source  as  St.  Jude.  A  little  thought  brings  home  to  us  the  conviction  that  it  is 
a  matter  concerning  which  men  may  speculate  and  imagine  much,  but  can  know 
nothing.  The  nature,  estate,  possibilities  of  angels  have  not  been  made  the 
subjects  of  Divine  revelation,  and  we  must  not  attempt  to  be  wise  above  what 
is  written.  Admitting,  however,  that  St.  Peter  and  St.  Jude  referred  to  a  very 
familiar  tradition  of  their  day,  it  is  important  for  us  to  see  that  their  use  of  it  in 
a  way  of  illustration  does  not  guarantee  the  historical  truth  of  it.  Such  as  it  is, 
and  whatever  it  is,  it  can  be  used  to  illustrate  and  enforce  truths  and  principles. 
These  angels  were  thought  of  as  highly  exalted  in  privilege.  But  they  had  no 
absolute  security  of  the  privilege.  They  went  wrong  when  they  presumed  on 
their  privilege,  and  failed  to  meet  the  conditions  of  dependence  and  obedience  on 
which  the  retention  of  privilege  depended.  In  a  similar  way  a  modern  minister 
may  illustrate,  and  press  home  some  truth,  by  the  stories  in  Tennyson's 
Idylls  of  the  King,  and  his  using  them  in  no  sense  implies  his  belief  in  their 
historic  verity.  The  two  illustrations  effectively  enforce  the  truth,  which  is 
true  in  every  age,  that  "  patient  continuance  in  well-doing"  alone  can  guarantee 
the  retention  of  Christian  privilege. 

Yers.  7-11.  Denunciation  of  Moral  Mischief-makers. — The  reference  to  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  is  suggested  by  the  terrible  doom  of  the  fallen  angels.  The 
connection  of  thought  seems  to  be  this — Those  angels  fell  through  sensual  self- 

378 


BOMILEflC  COMMENTARY:   JtJDE.  vers.  7—11. 


indulgence,  and  their  miserable  condition  is  appalling ;  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
fell  through  sensual  self-indulgence,  and  the  present  condition  of  the  Sodomite 
sinners  is  appalling.  And  these  false  and  mischievous  teachers  are  tempting 
you  to  just  that  sensual  self-indulgence  which  must  as  certainly  bring  a  like 
appalHng  ruin  round  to  you.  Writing  thus,  St.  Jude  rouses  himself  into  a  very 
height  of  moral  indignation  which  makes  him  pour  forth  burning  words  of 
denunciation.  The  danger  for  Christians  lay  in  the  attractiveness,  personal 
fascination,  of  these  mischief-makers,  and  in  the  subtlety  mth  which  they 
disguised  the  real  purpose  they  had  in  view.  To  St.  Jude  they  were  maskers, 
*'  wolves  in  sheep's  clothing,"  and  with  a  rough  hand  he  pulls  the  sheepskins 
off,  and  shows  us  plainly  enough  the  gaunt  and  hungry  wolves  within.  He  bids 
us  look  at  them  as  thus  fully  exposed,  and  see  three  things — they  are  irreverent, 
sensual,  covetous. 

I.  The  moral  mischief-makers  were  irreverent. — It  may  be  that  it  was 
characteristic  of  these  teachers  that  they  tried  to  undermine  the  authority  of 
the  apostles.  We  know  how  St.  Paul  had  to  vindicate  his  claims  against  them. 
But  it  is  always  a  sign  of  the  self-willed  teacher,  and  always  a  cause  for  the 
gravest  suspicion,  that  the  tone  of  a  man's  ministry  is  irreverent,  either  in 
regard  to  God  or  to  His  servants.  The  good,  sincere  man  is  not  irreverent,  and 
cannot  possibly  be.  The  self-contained  man  is  almost  sure  to  reveal  himself 
by  the  tone  in  which  he  speaks  of  dignities.  By  this  fruit  you  may  always  know 
him.  They  can  be  no  true  leaders  of  men  who  themselves  cannot  obey,  who 
"  despise  dominion."  (The  illustration  from  Michael  is  treated  in  a  Suggestive 
Note.) 

II.  The  moral  mischief-makers  were  sensual. — The  character  of  the  teaching 
could  be  judged  by  the  character  of  the  teachers.  Our  Lord  taught  the  same 
truth  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  St.  Jude  says,  "  See  how  these  teachers 
of  liberty,  which  is  licence,  themselves  act  in  relation  to  their  sensual,  animal 
natures."  The  revelation  is  an  awful  one  ;  it  reminds  of  Sodom  and  its  shameful 
sins.  "  What  they  understand  naturally,  like  the  creatures  without  reason,  in 
these  things  they  are  destroyed."  The  A.Y.  rendering  is  altogether  more 
vigorous  than  the  B.  Y.,  "  What  they  know  naturally,  as  brute  beasts,  in  those 
things  they  corrupt  themselves."  The  teachers  of  the  pure  Christianity  must 
themselves  be  pure.  We  have  a  perfect  right  to  refuse  any  man's  teachings, 
when  he  does  not  match  his  teaching  with  his  life.  Sensual  restraint  is 
required  by  Christianity ;  sensual  licence  is  the  teaching  of  antichrist.  And 
this  truth  is  as  true  of  the  refined  sensualities  of  civilisation  as  of  the  coarser 
and  more  animal  forms  that  are  characteristic  of  earlier  times.  *'  Be  ye  clean 
that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord." 

III.  The  moral  mischief-makers  were  covetous. — This  almost  necessarily 
follows  from  their  self -centredn ess  and  self-sufficiency.  Covetousness  is  getting 
for  self,  without  consideration  for  the  claims  of  others.  The  true  teacher  gets 
for  those  whom  he  teaches ;  the  false  teacher  gets  for  himself.  The  three 
illustrations  taken  from  Old  Testament  Scriptures  impress  this  self-centredness 
which  is  sure  to  make  a  man  covetous  and  grasping.  Cain  thought  what  he 
could  get ;  Balaam  considered  what  would  pay ;  and  Core  [Korah]  aimed  to 
secure  personal  credit.  We  are  right  in  testing  all  would-be  teachers  by  the 
spirit  which  they  show  in  doing  their  work.  The  Lord  "  pleased  not  Himself." 
The  apostle  said,  "  We  seek  not  yours,  but  2/ow."  No  man  can  ever  do  the  work 
of  Christ  if  he  is  possessed  and  ruled  by  a  passion  for  serving  himself. 


379 


VEES.  8,  9. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Yer.  8.  The  Course  of  Sin. — After 
citing  the  above  examples  of  impeni- 
tence and  punishment,  the  apostle  re- 
turns to  the  Ttves  avOpoiTToi  of  ver.  4, 
and  proceeds  to  show  an  exact  parallel 
between  them  and  both  the  fallen 
angels  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Cities  of  the  Plain.  To  distinguish 
them,  however,  a  term  is  applied—- 
ivvTrvLa^ofxevoL,  the  exact  application  of 
which  is  open  to  a  diversity  of  opinions. 
Beza,  Grotius,  and  a  host  of  other 
expositors  take  the  word  in  a  figura- 
tive sense,  meaning  idle  and  delusive 
fancies,  in  the  same  sense  as  Joseph 
was  called  the  dreamer  by  his  brethren. 
Some  such  idea  is  attached  to  the 
word  in  the  A.Y.,  where  it  is  qualified 
by  the  word  "  filthy."  There  is  nothing 
in  the  original  to  indicate  this  except 
the  context.  In  Acts  ii.  17,  we  have 
KOL  ol  7rpeo"^vTcpot  vfjiihv  ivvTTVia  evvTTVLaa- 
6r}(TovTai — "  and  your  elders  shall  dream 
dreams."  When  Jude  calls  the  false 
teachers  dreamers,  it  appears  to  us 
that  the  Gnostics  of  his  day  claimed 
supernatural  illumination.  The  apostles 
claimed  inspiration,  and  to  meet  this 
they  assumed  the  same  Divine  autho- 
rity. The  K.Y.  has,  "in  their  dream- 
ings  "  ;  but  this  appears  a  forced  trans- 
lation of  the  participle,  considering  the 
case  and  the  gender.  Once  more  the 
apostle  refers  to  their  sodomy — ordpKa 
jxkv  fjLiaivova-t,  which  is  a  strong  expres- 
sion to  denote  an  unnatural  method  of 
gratifying  lust.  By  KvpioTrjTa  we 
understand  apostolic  authority ;  and 
by  So^as  the  apostles  themselves. 
Translating  according  to  our  view — 
*  In  like  manner  indeed  also  these,  the 
dreamers,  pollute  the  flesh,  set  at 
nought  authority,  and  blaspheme  the 
excellent.'  The  course  of  sin  is  much 
the  same  in  all  places  and  at  all  times. 
Its  marks  are  the  same  on  the  spirit 
of  the  fallen  angels,  the  inhabitants  of 
Sodom,  and  the  false  teachers  in  Asia 
Minor.  The  chameleon  may  change 
its  colours,  but  not  its  nature.  Where- 
ever  sin  touches  there  is  a  black  spot. 

380 


In  the  text  the  course  of  sin  is  three- 
fold. 1 .  The  abuse  of  natural  instincts. 
God  has  placed  in  the  body  appetites 
and  passions.  In  this  respect  man  is 
on  the  same  plane  as  the  animal. 
Singularly  enough,  the  animal  is  above 
man  in  the  observance  of  their  require- 
ments. Neither  gluttony,  intemper- 
ance, nor  incontinency  has  invaded  the 
animal  creation.  Yicar  Prit chard,  of 
Llandovery,  had  a  goat,  which  followed 
him  through  the  town.  At  one  period 
he  was  in  the  habit  of  frequenting 
public- houses.  On  one  occasion  some 
young  men  forced  the  goat  to  drink 
beer  until  it  was  drunk.  The  next 
day,  when  the  vicar  entered  a  public- 
house,  the  goat  remained  outside  the 
door,  and  would  on  no  account  enter. 
The  vicar  learnt  the  lesson,  and  be- 
came a  reformer  of  no  mean  order. 
The  history  of  sin  is  read  in  the  per- 
version of  the  natural  man.  2.  The 
denial  of  Divhie  authority.  God  has 
spoken  in  every  age  and  to  every  man. 
Nature  and  Providence,  as  well  as 
Revelation,  have  spoken  in  His  name. 
Inspired  men  have  delivered  His  com- 
mands, but  sin  has  refused  every  voice, 
and  rejected  every  message.  The  denial 
could  not  be  made  effectively  without 
substituting  error  for  truth,  and  forms 
of  immorality  for  holiness.  3.  The 
persecution  of  the  excellent  of  the  earth. 
Every  virtue  has  been  assailed  in  the 
persons  of  the  virtuous.  Every  weapon 
has  been  used  to  torture  and  destroy 
the  godly,  in  whose  life  the  glory  of 
God  shone.  If  human  nature  is  per- 
verted, if  the  authority  of  God  is  con- 
temned, and  if  the  best  characters  are 
destroyed,  what  must  be  the  conse- 
quence? Expulsion  from  heaven,  and 
an  abode  with  devils  in  the  lake  of 
fire  \—W.  P. 

Yer.  9.  Michael  and  the  Devil. — We 
can  hardly  suppose  that  the  interview 
between  Michael  and  Satan  was  com- 
municated to  St.  Jude  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  because  such  a  novel  revelation 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDE. 


VER.  9. 


would  have  rather  startled  his  readers 
than  illustrated  the  truth  he  was  setting 
before  them.  To  treat  it  as  a  fable 
without  foundation  in  fact  would  have 
weakened  the  argument  of  the  apostle. 
Some  think  that  the  reference  is  to 
Zech.  iii.  1,  "  And  he  shewed  me  Joshua 
the  high  priest  standing  before  the 
Lord,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right 
hand  to  resist  him.  And  the  Lord  said 
unto  Satan,  The  Lord  rebuke  thee,  O 
Satan,"  etc.  But  there  was  no  refer- 
ence then  made  to  the  burial  of  Moses, 
and  the  similarity  in  the  expression  is 
too  slender  a  foundation  to  connect  the 
two.  Origen  mentions  an  apocryphal 
book  called  'AvaAr/i/^ts  tov  Mcoo-eo)?,  which 
was  extant  in  his  time.  That  the 
apostle  quoted  from  that  book  is  not 
improbable,  although  there  is  nothing 
in  the  narrative  before  us  to  warrant 
the  belief.  Then  there  is  the  other 
supposition,  that  among  the  traditions 
held  by  the  Jews  there  was  one  relative 
to  a  controversy  between  the  two  chiefs 
of  the  opposing  angels  about  the  burial 
of  Moses.  As  these  traditions  were 
largely  taught  in  those  days,  it  may  be 
that  the  apostle  simply  reads  a  lesson 
to  the  false  teachers  from  their  own 
teaching.  They  brought  railing  accusa- 
tions against  the  apostles,  which  even 
an  archangel  dared  not,  as  the  higher 
and  final  judgment  awaits  all.  An 
accusation  of  blasphemy  is  the  strongest, 
as  blasphemy  is  a  sin  of  the  deepest 
dye,  which,  when  made  against  the 
Holy  Ghost,  is  unpardonable.  The 
apostle  therefore  conveys  but  one  lesson 
by  his  reference  to  the  dispute  about 
the  body  of  Moses,  viz.  that  the  final 
judgment  is  reserv^ed  in  God's  own 
keeping.  1.  The  text  teaches  that 
there  are  two  orders  of  spirits  in  con- 
flict concerning  matters  affecting  the 
human  race.  Not  only  angels  are 
ministering  to  the  necessities  of  the 
saints,  and  devils  using  influence  to 
destroy  them  ;  but  the  corner  of  the  veil 
is  lifted  up  in  the  text,  that  we  may 
mentally  see  the  battle-field  on  which 
these  powerful  spirits  meet  to  contend 
for  their  side.  The  fact  administers  to 
the  strength  of  our  faith,     Sataji  brings 


accusations  against  us,  as  was  the  case 
with  Joshua ;  but  the  angel  defends 
us,  and  hands  over  the  accuser  to  a 
higher  judgment.  2.  The  text  teaches 
that  controversy  must  be  confined  to 
its  proper  limits.  This  leads  us  to 
reflect  on  the  spirit  which  has  too  often 
animated  the  controversies  which  have 
taken  place  between  the  polemics  of 
the  Church.  Men  have  assumed  so 
much  authority  as  to  consign  their 
opponents  to  a  literal  fire  and  an 
eternal  hell.  In  this  they  have  assumed 
the  function  of  judge.  Michael  was 
right,  but  he  did  not  go  further  than 
controversy.  However  certain  one  may 
feel  that  he  is  contending  for  the  truth, 
he  must  not  utter  imprecations  on  the 
head  of  his  adversary.  3.  The  text 
teaches  that  judgment  belongs  to  the 
Lord  alone.  The  term  "  rebuke  "  implies 
far  more  than  correction  or  admonition  ; 
it  means  to  censure.  Here  we  take  it 
to  indicate  that  God  only  has  the  power 
of  final  decision,  and  to  Him  must  the 
prerogative  be  ascribed.  Omniscience, 
impartiality,  and  power  belong  to  Him. 
Christians  must  not  avenge  themselves, 
for  vengeance  belongs  to  the  Lord. 
4.  The  text  teaches  also  another  valu- 
able lesson,  viz.  that  the  strongest  side 
of  controversy  is  an  appeal  to  God. 
Bring  your  adversary  into  the  presence 
of  his  Maker,  and  leave  him  in  the 
Divine  balance.  He  who  can  refer  his 
matter  to  Him  who  is  light,  and  in 
whom  is  no  darkness,  has  his  cause 
justified  by  the  fact  of  his  readiness  to 
abide  by  God's  word. — W.  P. 

Dispute  over  the  Body  of  Moses. — 
St.  Jude  evidently  refers  to  something 
that  was  familiar  to  his  readers.  Now 
the  Bible  preserves  nothing  that  can 
conceivably  be  twisted  into  the  support 
of  such  a  legend  as  this.  "  No  tradi- 
tion, precisely  corresponding  with  this 
statement,  is  found  in  any  Rabbinic 
or  apocryphal  book  now  extant,  not 
even  in  the  book  of  Enoch,  from  which 
Jude  has  drawn  so  largely  in  other 
instances  (vers.  6,  14).  (Ecumenius, 
indeed,  writing  in  the  tenth  century, 
reports  a  tradition  that  Micbael  was 

381 


VER.  10. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   JUDE. 


appointed  to  minister  at  the  burial  of 
Moses,  and  the  devil  urged  that  his 
murder  of  the  Egyptian  (Exod.  ii.  12) 
had  deprived  him  of  the  right  of 
sepulture  ;  and  Origen  states  that  the 
record  of  the  dispute  was  found  in  a 
lost  apocryphal  book,  known  as  "  The 
Assumption  of  Moses " ;  but  in  both 
these  instances  it  is  possible  that  the 
traditions  have  grown  out  of  the 
words  of  St.  Jude,  instead  of  being 
the  foundation  on  which  they  rested. 
Rabbinic  legends,  however,  though 
they  do  not  furnish  the  precise  fact 
to  which  St.  Jude  refers,  show  that 
a  whole  cycle  of  fantastic  stories  had 
gathered  round  the  brief,  mysterious 
report  of  the  death  of  Moses,  in 
Deut.  xxxiv.  5,  6.  It  should  be  care- 
fully noticed  that  the  name  Michael, 
for  an  angel  or  archangel,  does  not 
appear  until  Dan.  x.  21.  And  it  is 
in  the  book  of  Enoch"  tliat  he  is 
prominent,  as  the  "  merciful,  the 
patient,  the  holy  Michael."  Perhaps, 
however,  we  are  wrong  in  seeing  any 
reference  to  the  material  body  of 
Moses.  John  Bellamy  makes  a  novel 
suggestion,  which  may  receive  some 
consideration,  as  he  bases  it  on  a  care- 
ful examination  of  the  original  Greek. 
He  says  that  the  word  *'  archangel " 
is  a  compound  word,  and  means  "the 
first  messenger."  He  thinks  the  re- 
ference is  to  John  the  Baptist,  who 
was  the  "  first  messenger  "  of  the  new 
dispensation.  The  word  "  body  "  refers 
to  the  Messiah,  as  foretold  in  the 
shadows,  types,  and  figures  of  the 
books  of  Moses  ;  these  shadows,  types, 
and  figures  being  called  the  "  body  of 
Moses,"  the  whole  assemblage  of  all 
things  that  had  respect  to  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Redeemer.  The  word 
"  devil "  should  be  translated  Satan, 
"  an  adversary,"  and  really  represents 
the  rulers  and  Pharisees  who  resisted 
John's  teaching  and  Christ's.  "  Thus 
we  find  that  there  was  no  celestial 
being  called  by  the  term  *  archangel,' 
sent  down  from  heaven  to  dispute 
with  the  devil  about  the  fleshly  body 
of  Moses — no  devil  from  heU,  accord- 
ing   to    the    vulgar    opinion   hitherto 

382 


understood,  to  dispute  with  an  arch- 
angel ;  but  that  it  was  the  *  arch- 
messenger,'  i.e.  the  first  messenger ; 
and  that  the  word  diaholo,  rendered 
*  the  devil,"  was  applied  as  a  collective 
noun  singular  to  the  assembled  body 
of  Pharisees,  the  adversary  of  the 
mission  of  the  Baptist,  the  declared, 
interested  enemy  of  the  gracious 
Redeemer."  *'  Let  those  who  suppose 
the  contention  was  about  the  material 
body  of  Moses  recollect  that  the 
material  body  of  Moses  had  been  buried 
in  a  valley  in  the  land  of  Moab  about 
fifteen  hundred  years,  when  it  was  said 
that  Michael  and  the  devil  contended 
about  it.  A  contention  for  the  material 
body  of  Moses  never  took  place  between 
these  two  immaterial  beings."  Thus 
mystically  John  Bellamy  deals  with 
the  passage ;  but  probably  sober- 
minded  Bible  students  will  regard  this 
spiritualising  explanation  as  extrava- 
gant and  unreasonable,  and  will  prefer 
the  simpler  suggestion  of  a  familiar 
legend,  used  by  way  of  illustration. — 
H.  B.  D. 

Ver.  10.  Presvmiption. — Dr.  Bloom- 
field  renders  this  verse  as  follows  : 
"  But  those  fellows,  of  things  such  as 
they  have  no  knowledge  of,  they  speak 
railingly ;  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
such  things  as  they  do  know — natur- 
ally, or  sensually,  as  the  irrational 
animals  —  they  corrupt  themselves 
therein.''  At  first  sight  it  would  ap- 
pear that  the  meaning  of  the  apostle 
is  simply  twofold;  the  holy  truths  of 
apostolic  teaching,  which  the  false 
teachers  did  not  comprehend,  they 
treated  with  scorn ;  the  natural  in- 
stincts, which  they  enjoyed  in  common 
with  the  brute  creation,  they  abused. 
But  on  looking  at  the  context  we  are 
inclined  to  think  that  there  is  a 
connection  between  the  blasphemy  of 
Divine  things  and  the  perversion  of 
natural  instincts.  The  parallel  passage 
in  2  Pet.  ii.  12,  13  says  :  "But  these, 
as  natural  brute  beasts,  made  to  be 
taken  and  destroyed,  speak  evil  of  the 
things  that  they  understand  not ;  and 
shall  utterly  perish  in  their  own  cor- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JUDE.        vers.  12— 19. 


ruption  ;  and  shall  receive  the  reward  Christianity  because  they  were  opposed 

of  unrighteousness,  as  they  that  count  to    their   corrupt    practices.     It    was 

it  pleasure  to  riot  in  the  day  time."  what  Charnock  calls  practical  atheism. 

Dr.  Peile  develops  the  brevity  of  the  In  this  age,  when  religious  knowledge 

expression  thus  :  "  In  those  things  they  is  so  general,  much  of  the  opposition 

first  vitiate,  then  destroy  themselves  ;  to  the  teaching  of  the  Church  starts 

first  vitiate  the  thing  (or  doctrine,  by  from  the  same  source.     We  must  wake 

abuse),  and  destroy  themselves  in  that  up  to  the  fact  that  with  the  heart  man 

abuse."     St.  Peter  had  before  said  of  believeth  unto  righteousness.     Faith  in 

them  :  "  And  many  shall  follow  their  the  truths  of  Revelation  is  impossible 

pernicious  ways  ;  by  reason  of  whom  without  a  change  of  heart.     The  first 

the  way  of  truth  shall  be  evil  spoken  step  is  to  convert  men,  and  then  educate 

of."     One  of  the  perversions  was  their  them. 

covetousness,     and     through     feigned  II.  The  sin  of  presumption. — Those 

words  they  made  merchandise  of  the  who  have  presumed  to  teach  religion 

saints.     One   would    infer    that    they  to  others,  whether  their  teaching  has 

sold    indulgences,    and    pretended    to  been  a  distorted  gospel  or  some  opinion 

absolve  the  people  from  their  sins  on  of  their  own,  have  led  people  to  the 

payment  of   money.     It  also  appears  committal   of   sins    far   more   heinous 

that  there  were  other  practices  of  such  than  is  found  in  the  heart  of  a  heathen 

a   forbidden  nature   that    no    apostle  land.     The  morality  of  literal  ignorance 

would  disgrace  his  epistle  by  the  men-  is  far  better  than  that  of  false  teaching, 

tion  of  the  same.  This  we  have  seen  in  the  rise  of  various 

I.  The  presumption  of  ignorance. —  sects,  some  of  which  survive  until  the 

The    virulent  opposition   of   the   false  present  day.  Julian  the  apostate  was  a 

teachers  to  the  truths  taught  by  the  very  violent  opponent  of  Christianity, 

apostles,  and  their  setting  up  opinions  whose  teaching  led  many  into  various 

of  their  own  as  the  standard  of  mor-  immoralities.     In  the  face  of  the  bold- 

ality,  was  typical  of  a  course  of  action  ness   which   is   abroad,    avowing  that 

from  which  the  Church  has  in   every  certain  unnatural  and  immoral  courses 

age  suffered.     "  The  fool  hath  said  in  are  lawful  and  desirable,  the  duty  of 

his  heart.  There  is  no  God."    This  class  the  Church  is  clear.     As  the  darkness 

of  ignorance  is  to  be  distinguished  from  flies  from  the  light,  so  libertinism  will 

the   absence   of   knowledge.     He  who  not  stand  the  presence  of  a  high  moral 

has   never  heard  the  gospel   must  be  character.    Therefore  we  think  that  the 

ignorant  of  it ;  but  in  his  case  there  is  first  concern  of  the  Church  is  to  utterly 

no  assumption  against  its  truths.     On  forsake  all  questionable  practices,  and 

the   other   hand,    false  teachers   were  confront  the-  world  with  the  virtues  of 

wilfully  ignorant  of  the  principles  of  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ. — Selected. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—19. 

Three  Types  of  Mischief-makers. — In  ver.  11  three  men  are  introduced  as 
types  from  the  Old  Testament  history  of  the  men  who  were  putting  the  faith  and 
purity  of  the  Christian  Churches  in  such  grave  peril.  They  are  Cain,  Balaam, 
and  Korah.  But  it  is  evident  that  St.  Jude  had  more  in  his  mind  associated 
with  these  names  than  we  can  find  in  the  Scripture  records.  Round  these  three 
names  Rabbinical  and  other  legends  had  grown  up,  and  in  the  Jewish  mind  there 
was  a  kind  of  horror  at  the  mention  of  these  names.  It  was  saying  the  severest 
thing  that  could  be  said  of  the  mischief-makers  to  liken  them  to  Cain,  or  Balaam, 
or  Korah.  The  Rabbinic  legends  represented  Cain  as  the  offspring,  not  of  Adam, 
but  of  Sammael,  the  evil  spirit,  and  Eve,  and  as  the  parent  of  other  evil  spirits, 
and  therefore  as  connected  with  the  idea  of  foul  and  unnatural  impurity.     The 

383 


VER<=(.  12—19.         HO^IILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


point  prominent  in  the  remembrance  of  Balaam  is  his  scheming  to  ruin  Israel 
through  enticements  to  sensuality.  And  a  strange  Rabbinic  legend,  while  it 
placed  the  souls  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  in  Gehenna,  represented  them 
as  not  tormented  there.  The  paragraph  now  before  us  divides  into  three  sections. 
I.  The  Cain  type  of  mischief-makers  (vers.  12,  13). — We  need  not  follow 
those  precise  suggestions  which  come  from  the  legendary  additions  ;  we  may 
keep  to  those  which  connect  with  the  Scriptural  narratives.  Then  the  Cain  type 
represents  self-seekers.  Cain  did  not  want  anything  absolutely  wrong.  His 
want  was  unworthy,  and  revealed  an  unworthy  disposition,  simply  because  it  was 
so  utterly  self-centred  and  selfish.  And  there  ever  have  been  men  in  Christ's 
Church,  who  proved  to  be  most  serious  mischief-makers,  not  because  they  have 
done  things  positively  wrong,  but  because  they  have  brought  such  a  self-seeking 
spirit  into  it.  Nothing  more  surely,  or  more  utterly,  spoils  the  peace  of  Christ's 
Church,  than  the  presence  of  a  member  who  is  merely  "  seeking  his  own  things." 
Such  a  man,  like  Diotrephes,  "  loves  to  have  the  pre-eminence,"  and  will  be  sure 
to  push  and  strive  to  get  it.  Precisely  what  the  self-interested  man  cannot 
bear  is  to  have  any  favour  shown  to  a  brother,  an  Abel.  Rejoicing  in  a  brother's 
blessing  or  success  he  cannot  do.  The  poor  soul  can  do  nothing  but  rejoice  in  his 
own ;  and  fret — and  fret  other  people — if  neither  success  nor  blessing  come  to  him. 
St.  Jude  is  intensely  severe  in  dealing  with  the  Cain  type  of  mischief-makers. 
They  appear  at  the  love- feasts,  when  everybody  ought  to  be  mindful  of  his 
brother,  and  finding  every  way  of  expressing  brotherly  love ;  and  in  a  sharp 
sentence  he  shows  the  selfish  men  sitting  at  the  feast,  "  feeding  themselves  with- 
out fear."  If  there  are  any  delicacies  on  the  table,  they  have  got  them.  If  their 
neighbours  right  and  left  have  had  for  a  long  while  empty  plates,  they  neither 
see  nor  care.  We  know  the  men  only  too  well.  The  Church  of  to-day  is  troubled 
with  their  presence  and  influence.  St.  Jude  likens  them  to  four  things  ;  declares 
how  certainly  they  must  come  into  Divine  judgment ;  and  vigorously  denounces 
the  spirit  which  is  so  manifest  in  their  conversation  and  intercourse.  The  four 
things  to  which  they  are  likened  are  :  1.  "  Clouds  without  water,"  self-contained, 
that  have  no  blessing  for  anybody.  Aggravating  clouds,  that  show  themselves  as 
grandly  as  they  can,  wandering  about  the  sky,  but  never  break  and  pour 
refreshing  rains  upon  the  thirsty  earth.  2.  "  Trees  whose  fruit  withereth." 
Aggravating  trees  !  Watch  them  in  spring-time — there  is  good  show  of  blossom  ; 
watch  them  in  summer — the  fruitage  seems  enlarging  ;  come  to  them  in  autumn — 
there  is  nothing  for  you  :  all  is  shrivelled.  A  tree  for  show,  that  had  no 
blessing  for  anybody  in  it.  3.  "  Raging  waves  " ;  this  suggests  a  darker  side  of 
the  selfish  man.  He  is  always  fussy,  always  worrying,  always  wanting  to  put 
everybody  else  straight ;  always  mounting  up  like  the  waves,  and  making  a  great 
noise,  and  doing  nothing,  only  showing  his  own  noisy  helplessness.  4.  "  Wandering 
stars,"  who  will  come  into  no  sort  of  order,  persist  in  taking  their  own  way,  and 
will  surely  find  the  woe  of  being  out  of  God's  order.  Then  St.  Jude  declares  how 
certainly  all  self- ordering,  self-seeking  men  must  come  into  Divine  judgment, 
taking  his  sentences  (vers.  14,  15)  almost  precisely  from  a  familiar  literary 
work  of  his  day,  known  as  the  book  of  Enoch.  It  is  precisely  the  same  basis 
of  Divine  judgment  that  our  Lord  presents  in  His  judgment  parable,  and  in  the 
parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus.  Those  who  did  no  ministry  were  the  self- 
contained,  self -interested  prof  essors.  The  rich  man  was  wholly  self-satisfied,  and 
never  once  thought  of  ministering.  The  great  judgment  of  God  falls  upon 
those  who,  while  bearing  the  Christ-name,  were  nothing  to  anybody,  and  did 
nothing  for  anybody — even  as  Cain.  And  upon  them  St.  Jude  pours  out  his 
denunciations,  as  well  he  might.  See  these  men  in  any  Christian  Church.  They 
are  the  grumblers,  the  dissatisfied,  the  boasters.  They  are  the  men  who  make 
much  of  the  rich,  flatter  them,  to  get  what  they  can  for  themselves  out  of  them. 

3^4 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDE.  vers.  14,  16. 


"  Their  mouth  speaketh  great  swelling  words."  Alas  !  how  often  we  have  heard 
them  !  You  would  think  the  world  was  made,  and  the  Church  founded,  entii^ely 
for  the  honour  of  these  men.  And  they  have  "  men's  persons  in  admiration 
because  of  advantage."  They  are  **  courtiers,  flatterers,  and  parasites."  The 
temper  characterised  is  that  which  fawns  as  in  wondering  admiration  on  the 
great,  while  all  the  time  the  flatterer  is  simply  seeking  what  profit  he  can  get 
out  of  him  whom  he  flatters.  There  is  no  real  Christian  hfe  unless  the  Cain 
spirit  is  wrought  out  of  a  man ;  unless  self  is  dethroned,  and  sonship  and  brother- 
hood enthroned. 

II.  The  Balaam  type  of  mischief-makers. — A  portion  of  ver.  16  evidently 
is  suggested  by  the  remembrance  of  Balaam.  It  is  not  essential  to  the  selfish 
man  that  he  should  seek  money  only  ;  but  where  there  is  gain-seeking  there  is 
an  additional  power  for  mischief- making  in  Christ's  Church.  The  gain-seeker 
is  always  a  selfish  man ;  but  the  selfish  man  is  not  always  a  ^am-seeker. 
Balaam  always  had  his  eye  upon  the  rewards  of  divination,  and  he  could  do 
mean  and  shameful  things  under  the  inspiration  of  that  gain-seeking.  Illustra- 
tion may  also  be  taken  from  Simon  the  Sorcerer,  and  from  Demas.  The  love 
of  money  is  partly  a  bad  bias  of  natural  disposition ;  but  as  such  the  Christian 
professor  is  bound  to  resist  it  and  work  it  out.  "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root 
of  all  evil."  Let  the  covetous,  grasping  spirit  get  into  any  Christian  com- 
munity, it  w^ill  speedily  effect  its  spiritual  degradation  and  ruin.  All  high  and 
holy  motives  fade  away  when  the  sordid  ones  are  forced  to  the  front. 

ill.  The  Korah  type  of  mischief-makers. — These  are  the  credit-seekers,  who 
are  sharply  defined  by  St.  Jude  as  "they  who  separate  themselves."  They  are 
the  schismatics  and  sectarians.  They  want  to  be  first.  They  can  only  get  first 
by  being  "  otherwise  "  in  something.  All  sects  that  have  broken  off  from  the 
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church  have  been  led  into  their 
separateness  by  some  Korah-typed  man.  For  all  true  freedom  of  thought  and 
hfe,  within  due  bounds  of  authority,  the  Church  provides,  and  this  freedom 
should  suffice  for  all  who  are  humble-minded,  and  supremely  want  the  honour  of 
Christ,  and  the  unity  and  blessing  of  God's  people.  Credit  of  superior  knowledge, 
or  of  keener  spiritual  insight,  will  soon  make  a  man  masterful  within  the 
Church  of  Christ,  and  there  are  always  weak  souls  who  are  easily  carried  away 
by  the  positiveness,  the  dogmatic  tone  of  the  over-confident  man. 

These  three  types  of  Church  troublers  have  been  found  in  every  age,  and  are- 
found  among  us  to-day.  But  he  whose  supreme  aim  is  "  the  glory  of  Christ " 
can  be  no  *'  self-seeker  "  ;  he  whose  great  concern  is  being  a  blessing  to  others 
can  be  no  "  gain-seaker  "  ;  and  he  whose  whole  effort  is  devoted  to  securing  the 
welfare  of  the  community  can  be  no  mere  credit-^Qokev.  We  must  not  be  after 
the  pattern  of  Cain,  or  of  Balaam,  or  of  Korah.  "  One  is  our  master,  even 
Christ,  and  all  we  are  brethren." 


SUGGESTirE    NOTES    AND    SERMON   SKETCHES, 

Vers.  14,  15.  The  Book  of  Enoch. —  thing  which  the  sinful  and  ungodly 
That  there  is  a  very  close  resemblance  have  done,  and  committed  against 
between  this  passage  and  the  book  Him." 
of  Enoch  (ii.)  will  be  seen  by  com- 
paring the  following  translation  :  "  Be-  Judds  Use  of  the  Book  of  Enoch, 
hold  He  comes  with  ten  thousand  — As  the  book  of  Enoch  had  pro- 
of His  saints,  to  execute  judgment  bably  been  in  existence  for  a  century 
upon  them,  and  destroy  the  wicked,  before  St.  Jude  wrote,  and  was  easily 
and  reprove  all  the  carnal  for  every-  accessible,  it  is  more  natural  to  suppose 

c  c  385 


VEKS.  20— 23.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDE. 


that    he   quoted  here,  as   in   previous  come  down  to  us  is  the  Apocalypse,  or 

instances,  what   he  thought  edifying,  book  of  Enoch.     It  is  the  product  of 

than  to  adopt  either  of  the  two  strained  different  authors.     The  main  bulk  of 

hypotheses  :  (1)  that    the   writer  had  the  work,  describing  the  visit  of  Enoch 

received   what   he   quotes    through    a  to   paradise,    and    the    vision   of    the 

tradition   independent  of  the  book  of  future    history    of     the   world   which 

Enoch,  that  tradition  having  left  no  was  revealed  to  him  there,  was  written 

trace  of  itself  in  any  of  the  writings  by   a   Jew   about    30   B.C.      The   rest 

of  the  Old  Testament ;  or  (2)  that  he  of    the    work    has    been     proved    by 

was   guided   by   a   special   inspiration  Hilgenfeld  to  have  been  composed  by 

to  set  the  stamp  of  authenticity  upon  a  Christian   at  the   beginning  of   the 

the   one   genuine  prophecy  which  the  second    century.     It   is    this   part    of 

apocryphal    writer    had    imbedded    in  the  book  which  has  been  assigned  by 

a     mass    of     fantastic    inventions. —  Ewald  and  others  to  the  first  century 

A.  Plummer^  D.D.  before  Christ,  and  regarded  as  evidence 

that  the  leading  conceptions  and  terms 

Booh  of  Enoch  by  Different  Authors.  of  Christianity  were  already  familiar  to 

— One   of   the   most   curious   remains  the  Jewish  people   before  the  coming 

of  early  Christian  literature  that  have  of  Christ. 


MAIJSr  HOMILETIGS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  20—23. 

The  Believer^ s  Daily  Endeavour. — St.  Jude  seems  to  have  been  almost  carried 
away  by  the  intensity  of  his  feeUng  as  he  wrote  of  the  mischievous  influence  of 
the  false  teachers.  There  was  in  him  much  of  the  spirit  of  the  Jewish  Zealot, 
as  there  was  also  in  his  brother  James.  The  former  part  of  his  epistle  is  full 
of  the  fiercest  denunciations,  but  it  would  have  been  in  every  way  a  mistake  if 
he  had  carried  it  on  to  the  end  in  the  same  spirit.  Warnings  may  be  most 
necessary  and  most  valuable ;  but  they  are  not  wisely  left  to  stand  alone.  In 
moral  as  well  as  religious  training  counsels  as  to  what  should  be  done  must 
always  blend  with  warnings  as  to  what  should  not  be  done.  *'  What  to  do  "  is 
even  more  important  than  "  What  to  avoid."  Christian  teachers  need  always 
to  keep  in  mind  the  lesson  of  their  Lord's  illustration  of  the  house  that  was 
*'  empty,  swept,  and  garnished,"  but  not  filled  up  with  good  spirits,  and  so  easily 
came  to  be  the  abode  of  more  and  worse  spirits  than  dwelt  in  it  at  first.  Turning 
out  evil  never  can  suffice.  St.  Jude  therefore  closes  his  epistle  with  positive 
advice  to  the  Christian  disciples,  and  suggestive  directions  concerning  their 
daily  life  and  daily  endeavour.  First,  however,  reminding  them  that  the 
conditions  of  peril  in  which  they  found  themselves  had  been  anticipated  by  the 
teachings  and  prophecies  of  the  apostles,  who  had  given  them  the  sure  test 
by  which  to  judge  all  who  claimed  to  be  teachers.  The  teacher  is  at  once 
judged  and  condemned  if  his  life  shows  licence  of  sensual  indulgence ;  and  the 
teaching  is  at  once  declared  to  be  false,  they  who  offer  it  "  have  not  the  Spirit," 
if  its  practical  influence  is  to  relax  the  strictness  of  Christian  purity,  and  give 
believers  licence  for  any  forms  of  sensuous  gratification.  It  must  never  for  one 
moment  be  lost  from  the  Christian  view,  that  the  holy  is  the  tru£^  and  the 
self-indulgent  is  the  false.  No  excuse,  no  disguise,  no  persuasion,  can  ever 
make  an  unclean,  sensual,  or  sensuous  thing  Christian.  Christ  is  righteous. 
Christianity  is  righteousness.  *'  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord." 
It  is  the  absolute  and  universally  applicable  test  of  all  claimants  to  be  teachers 
to-day  as  truly  as  in  the  days  of  St.  Jude.  Elo'quence  is  nothing,  emotional 
fervour  is  nothing  ;  righteousness  is  everything.  A  man's  work  must  stand 
this  test — Does  it  lift  men  into  a  higher  plane  of  Christian  restraints,  wise 

386 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDE.        vers.  20-23. 


mastery  of  life,  and  holy  living  ?  But  St.  Jude  felt  that  it  was  not  enough  to 
say  this,  and  to  say  this  firmly.  He  must  also  give  plain  indications  concerning 
that  holy  Uving.  He  must  remind  them  of  the  things  that  should  be  in  their 
daily  endeavour,  if  they  were  to  "  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing." 
And  the  thing  that  more  especially  arrests  attention  is  the  skilful  way  in  which 
St.  Jude  makes  his  counsels  cover  all  the  departments  of  the  Christian  life.  He 
has  a  suggestive  word  for  each,  and  so  in  effect  intimates  that  if  the  whole  man 
is  every  day  brought  into  the  obedience  of  Christ,  fully  used  in  the  effort  to 
gain  and  to  maintain  the  righteousness  that  Christ  requires,  the  man  will  be 
absolutely  safeguarded  from  the  subtleties  of  false  teachers,  whose  offered 
Ucence  can  be  no  possible  attraction,  and  from  the  surroundings  of  evil,  which 
can  only  be  influential  on  the  carnally-minded  man.  St.  Jude  has  four  practical 
counsels  related  to  the  daily  Christian  endeavours.  One  concerns  the  intellectual 
Christian  Hfe — "  building  up  yourselves  on  the  most  holy  faith  "  ;  one  concerns 
the  emotional  life — "  praying  in  the  Holy  Ghost "  ;  one  concerns  the  practical 
Christian  hfe — "  keep  yourselves  in  the  love  of  God  "  ;  and  one  concerns  the 
imaginative  Christian  life — "looking  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto 
eternal  life."  St.  Jude's  covering  in  this  way  every  department  of  the  Christian 
life  reminds  us  that  we  have  to  make  an  entire  sacrifice  of  ourselves,  make  of 
ourselves  a  whole  burnt  offering,  a  living  sacrifice ;  reserving  nothing,  but 
laying  body,  soul,  and  spirit  upon  the  altar.  The  absoluteness  of  our  safety  from 
all  evil  depends  on  the  entireness  of  our  consecration. 

I.  Our  daily  endeavour  concerns  the  intellectual  Christian  life. — '*  Building 
up  yourselves  on  your  most  holy  faith."  We  are  familiar  with  apostohc  advice 
as  to  the  raising  of  an  edifice  of  good  character  on  the  foundations  of  a  Christian 
profession  ;  but  that  is  not  in  the  mind  of  St.  Jude.  He  is  advising  a  continual 
daily  endeavour  to  strengthen  the  foundations  of  faith ;  to  get  clearer,  fuller, 
firmer  apprehensions  of  the  great  Christian  verities,  the  primary  Christian 
principles.  There  is  a  necessary  Christian  knowledge.  Growth  in  knowledge 
is  necessary  even  to  security  of  Christian  living.  Our  Lord  said,  in  His  great 
prayer,  "  This  is  hfe  eternal,  to  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ 
whom  Thou  hast  sent."  And  St.  Peter  bids  disciples  "  grow  in  grace  and 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  St.  Jude  speaks  of  "  our 
most  holy  faith"  as  if  in  his  day  the  primary  Christian  truths  had  been 
arranged  into  some  sort  of  creed,  which  was  well  known,  and  which  bore  upon 
it  the  stamp  of  apostohc  authority.  No  such  creed  is  given  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  no  such  creed  remains  among  the  Church  traditions ;  but  it  is 
not  difiicult  to  gather  from  the  various  apostolic  writings  those  truths  which 
were  common  subjects  of  instruction  by  all  the  early  teachers.  It  will  be  found 
that  they  mainly  concern  the  person  of  Christ,  and  include  His  claims  to 
Messiahship,  His  proper  humanity.  His  essential  Divinity,  His  personal  sin- 
lessness,  His  resurrection  from  the  dead,  His  present  claim  to  service.  And 
perhaps  it  has  not  yet  been  sufficiently  apprehended  that  one  of  the  truths 
most  deeply  impressed  on  the  apostolic  mind  was  the  absolute  demand  Christ 
made  that  He  should  be  served  hy  righteousness.  St.  Jude  advises  the  disciples 
to  make  daily  endeavour  to  get  clearer  apprehensions  of  these  primary  truths 
and  principles,  and  a  fuller  recognition  of  their  practical  applications  to  life  and 
conduct.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  directly  our  security  will  depend  on  our 
systematici  growth  in  Christian  intelligence.  Let  a  man  be  content  with  what 
he  knows  of  Christian  truths,  and  he  will  surely  find  that  what  he  knows 
gradually  fades  down  and  becomes  ineffective,  unable  to  offer  any  sort  of 
resistance  to  the  subtle  forms  in  which  error  may  assail.  The  laws  of  mental 
life  apply  to  religious  truth.  Only  by  enlarging  our  scientific  knowledge  can 
we  keep  the  scientific  knowledge  we   have.      If  we  will  not  go  on,  we  must 

387 


VERS.  20-23.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDE, 


ine^dtably  go  back.  And  good  truth  loosely  and  ineffectively  held  can  present 
little  or  no  effective  resistance  to  the  insidious  attacks  of  intellectual  error. 
We  need  to  find  out  how  to  make  a  wise  daily  endeavour  to  add  to  the  sum  of 
our  Christian  knowledge ;  not  satisfied  with  the  mere  luxury  of  some  religious 
sentiment,  and  the  satisfaction  of  having  felt  some  feeling,  but  detei-mined  that 
we  will  see  some  truth  more  clearly,  or  grip  some  truth  more  firmly — that,  and 
that  alone,  would  be  "  building  ourselves  up  on  our  most  holy  faith." 

II.  Our  daily  endeavour  concerns  the  emotional  Christian  life. — "Praying 
in  the  Holy  Ghost."  Many  people  in  these  days  seem  to  have  made  up  their 
minds  that  the  Christian  life  is  nothing  but  an  emotional  life,  and  so  their  daily 
endeavour  is  simply  to  arouse  and  increase  emotion.  And  when  effort  is  made 
to  check  the  extravagance  and  get  the  emotional  element  to  keep  its  fitting 
proportions,  it  is  readily  assumed  that  injury  is  being  done.  The  emotional 
side  of  human  nature  is  the  cause  of  our  gravest  anxieties.  The  history  of 
Christ's  Church  reveals  the  fact  that  neither  heresies  nor  inconsistencies  have 
ever  wrought  mischiefs  in  the  Church  comparable  for  one  moment  to  those 
wrought  by  the  exaggerations  and  extravagances  of  religious  emotion.  For 
proofs  reference  may  be  made  to  Isaac  Taylor's  books.  The  History  of  Enthu- 
siasm and  the  History  of  Fanaticism.  But  the  exaggeration  unto  perilous 
weakness  must  not  prevent  our  pleading,  under  the  leadership  of  St.  Jude,  for  a 
daily  culture  of  Christian  emotion.  There  ought  to  be  a  daily  glow  of  feeling, 
a  fervour  in  our  practical  piety.  That  is  indicated  in  the  expression,  "  Praying 
in  the  Holy  Ghost "  ;  for  what  is  peculiar  in  that  sentence  is  not  "  praying,"  but 
this  particular  kind  of  praying,  "  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  No  other  New  Testament 
writer  uses  the  same  term,  though  St.  Paul  indicates  how  we  are  helped  by  the 
Spirit  in  our  prayer.  What  Sfc.  Jude  has  in  mind  is  this— if  the  Holy  Spirit 
dwells  in  us,  we  shall  be  subject  to  His  impulses,  and  especially  His  impulses 
to  prayer.  Let  us  take  care  that  we  respond  to  those  impulses,  never  resisting 
or  quenching  the  Spirit.  His  work  is  largely  a  work  in  Christian  emotion.  He 
will  inspire  it ;  but  He  will  tone  it,  and  limit  it,  and  keep  it  in  wise  bounds.  So 
often  men  respond  to  the  Spirit's  impulse,  but  fail  to  respond  to  the  Spirit's 
checks.  They  start  with  the  Spirit,  and  then  ,get  altogether  beyond  Him  ;  they, 
as  it  were,  take  the  bit  in  their  teeth,  and  are  away  on  their  own  line,  but  are 
trying  to  persuade  themselves  and  others  that  they  still  have  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Praying  then  represents  the  emotional  side  of  Christian  life ;  we  are  to  make 
daily  endeavour  harmoniously  to  culture  and  to  express  ^religious  emotion.  We 
are  to  pray  in  the  impulse  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  but  we  are  to  pray  in  the  limita- 
tions of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Our  praying,  our  whole  emotional  Christian  life,  is  to 
be  absolutely  kept  in  the  sphere  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  St.  Jude  intimates 
that  in  this  will  be  found  our  best  security  from  the  influence  of  false  teachers. 
In  exaggerated  religious  emotion  the  sectarian,  and  the  teacher  of  moral  licence, 
have  always  found  their  most  promising  seed-beds. 

III.  Our  daily  endeavour  concerns  the  practical  Christian  life. — "  Keeping 
yourselves  in  the  love  of  God."  That  will  keep  us  in  the  love  of  God  which  will 
keep  us  in  any  right  human  relations.  How  does  the  wife  keep  herself  in  the  love 
of  her  husband,  the  child  in  the  love  of  the  home,  the  friend  in  the  love  of  the 
friend  ?  There  is  no  new  condition  for  the  maintenance  of  our  relations  with  God 
our  Father.  The  Lord  Jesus  told  us  very  plainly  how  He  *'  kept  Himself  in  the 
love  of  God."  "  I  do  always  the  things  that  please  Him."  It  is  the  universal 
law  for  all  Christ's  disciples.  The  daily  endeavour  to  live  a  life  of  practical 
obedience  and  service  can  alone  "  keep  us  in  the  love  of  God."  Jesus  said, 
*'  If  a  man  love  Me,  he  will  keep  My  word  :  and  My  Father  will  love  him, 
and  We  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  Our  abode  with  him."  This  counsel  of 
St.  Jude's  is  needed  in  every  age,  as  a  caution  against  the  errors  into  which  men 

388 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE.  vers.  20,  2 L 


readily  fall.  It  is  so  easy  to  overpress  the  intellectual  element  in  Christian  life, 
and  become  merely  doctrinal  and  sectarian,  spending  all  the  force  of  our  re- 
generate life  in  contending  for  opinions,  and  making  particular  settings  of  truth  the 
occasion  for  separations  and  wranglings  and  bitterness.  And  it  is  so  easy  to 
overpress  the  emotional  element  in  Christian  life,  and  waste  our  spiritual  strength 
in  sighs  and  groans  and  feelings,  and  imagine  that  we  are  unusually  pious  on  the 
ground  of  our  religious  excitements.  Therefore  our  Lord  and  His  apostles  so 
constantly  urge  upon  the  disciples  that  religion  is  practical.  It  is  the  conduct, 
the  tone,  the  doings,  the  maintaining  of  right  relations,  the  putting  of  good 
principles  into  practice.  St.  John  stamps  for  ever  the  Christly  claim  to  real, 
practical,  daily,  godliness  of  doing  when  he  says,  "  He  that  doeth  righteousness  is 
righteous,  even  as  He  [Christ]  is  righteous."  And  He  was  righteous  in  this, 
that  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  Never  be  afraid  of  doing — that  is  the 
expression  of  your  new  life  in  Christ ;  for  it  is  that  alone  which  can  keep  you  in 
the  love  of  God.  Doing  in  order  to  make  a  claim  upon  Divine  favour  is  hope- 
lessly wrong.  But  doing  to  express  our  sense  of  Divine  favour  is  hopefully 
right.  It  is  what  God  looks  for.  It  is  what  the  world  asks  of  all  professors. 
You  may  hear  the  voice  of  men  around  you  every  day,  saying  to  you — *'  Have 
you  faith,  and  new  life  through  faith  ?  Then  let  us  see  it ;  show  it  in  your 
works."  Righteousness,  service,  and  charity  before  men  ;  obedience,  submission, 
and  holiness  before  God — these  alone  can  keep  us  in  the  acceptance  of  men  or 
in  the  love  of  God. 

lY.  Our  daily  endeavour  concerns  the  imaginative  Christian  life. — "  Looking 
for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life."  Essential  to  the 
completeness  of  human  nature  is  the  imaginative  faculty,  on  which  rests  the 
possibility  of  conceiving  the  future,  and  creating  an  inspiring  hope.  Only  in 
imagination  has  the  Christian  anything  before  him.  Perfect  holiness  and 
happy  heaven  are  our  hope.  No  doubt  hope  well-grounded,  but  still  hope  only, 
the  creation  of  our  imaginations.  Faith  says  a  hope  "  that  maketh  not 
ashamed."  But  how  seldom  do  we  put  it  to  ourselves  that  the  culturing  of  the 
Christian  imagination — and  that  is  done  by  feeding  and  exercising  it — is  part 
of  our  daily  endeavour.  Look  down  on  the  book  of  truth  we  must.  Look  in  on 
the  moods  of  the  soul  we  must.  Look  Ground  on  the  duties  of  the  hour  we  must. 
Look  on  and  away  to  the  "  battlements  of  the  Golden  City,"  and  the  "  markets 
of  the  Golden  Year,"  we  must.  The  man  who  keeps  hope  bright,  well  proportioned 
in  its  culture  to  the  other  Christian  faculties,  will  be  secure  against  the  subtleties 
of  evil.  He  is  satisfied  with  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for.  Our  daily 
endeavour  as  Christians — in  which  lies  the  assurance  of  our  safety  in  the  midst 
of  the  enticing  and  entrancing  evils  of  the  day — concerns  our  all-round  and 
harmonious  daily  culture.  We  are  minds — but  not  minds  only — and  must  grow 
in  apprehension  of  truth.  We  are  feelings — but  not  feelings  only — and  must 
nourish  all  hallowing  emotions.  We  are  actions — but  not  actions  only — and 
must  sanctify  our  doings.  We  are  hopes — but  not  hopes  only — and  must  keep 
imaginations  filled  with  the  visions  of  the  "  King  in  His  beauty  "  and  the  "  home 
over  there."     In  a  word,  we  must  be  "  complete  in  Him." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yers.    20,    21.  The   Secret   of  being  construction  and  closely  akin  in  senti- 

kept. — Thus   arranged  the    participles  ment.      Jude   is    the   prophet   of   the 

represent  the  means  by  which  the  in-  apostasy.     He  sounds   the   final    note 

junction  is  followed.     Compare  1  Pet.  of  warning.     The  key- word  is  "  kept." 

i.    13,    which    is    exactly    similar    in  Those  who  embrace  the  faith  and  con- 

389 


VEHs.  ^0,  21.         BOMILETIC  COMMENT AkY:   JUDE. 


tend  for  the  faith   are  preserved  unto  incorporate  it  into  our  life.    If  the  word 
the    day    of    presentation ;    those   who  of    God   is    the  quarry,  prayer  is  the 
reject  and  oppose  the  faith  are  reserved  power    which    turns    the    stone    into 
unto   the    day    of   retribution.     Those  building    material    and   puts  it  in  its 
who  kept  not  their  first  estate,  and  are  place.     The  phrase  is  peculiar,  "  pray- 
kept    for    judgment,    are     contrasted  ing   in   the   Holy   Ghosts      Elsewhere 
with  those  who  keep  themselves  in  the  the  Holy  Ghost  is  represented  as  pray- 
love   of   God,    and   are   kept   by    His  ing  in  us  (Rom.   viii.  26,   27).     Both 
power.     There  are  two  sides   to   this  representations   are    true.      Here   the 
keeping — a  divine  side  (ver.   24)  and  a  Spirit   of    God    is    represented   as    an 
human  side  (vers.  20,  21).     The  words  atmosphere  necessary  to  prayer.     We 
preserve   and   persevere    are    so    much  can   only    persevere    in  prayer   as  we 
alike  that  one  can  be  spelt  from  the  abide  in  the  Spirit.     A  worldly  atmo- 
other ;  and   so  if  we   are   to   be  pre-  sphere  stifles  prayer.   We  must  breathe 
served,  it  is  equally  true  that  we  must  in  the  Spirit,  and  then  prayer   is  the 
persevere.      How    to    persevere   is   the  breathing  out  of  the  Spirit   unto  God. 
subject  of  this  text.     The  text   itself  Here  again  is  a  twofold  condition   of 
supplies   the   divisions  :    1.  The    great  praying  :    first    there    must    be   daily 
duty   and    privilege — keep    yourselves  fellowship  with  the  Spirit,  or  we  shall 
in   the  love   of  God.     2.  The  way  to  not   have   the   spirit   of    prayer  ;  and 
do     it — building,     praying,      looking.  again  there  must  be  daily  exercise  of 
We   begin    with   the   three   means   of  prayer  itself  as  communion  with  God. 
perseverance  :    1.    A    perseverance    of  Such  prayer  becomes  both  a  protection 
growth.       Building    up   yourselves   on  from     temptation    and    a    means    of 
your  most  holy  faith  means  carrying  assimilation   to  God.     3.  A   persever- 
up  character  and  conduct  toward  per-  ance  of  hope  (compare  1  Pet.  i.  1-13). 
fection.     The  foundation  is  laid,  which  Hope   looks   forward  into  the  future, 
is  Jesus  Christ.     We  have  simply  to  The  final  consummation  of  the  mercy 
add  stone  to  stone  and  story  to  story,  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  waits  to  be 
and  use  material  consistent  with  the  revealed.     We  are  pilgrims  journeying 
foundation  (1  Cor.  iii.  10-15).     Faith  toward  a  better  country,  and  are  pass- 
seems  to  stand  here,  as  it  often  does,  ing  through  an  enemy's  territory.  Here 
for   the   truth  held  in  faith  ;  what  is  we   are   to   have    only   our   tent ;  our 
believed  and  the  belief  of  it  both  being  permanent    home   is   beyond.      Hence 
included.     And  the  disciple  is  to  go  on  the  importance  of  fastening  our  gaze 
adding  to  faith,  virtue,  etc.,  until  the  upon  the  city  which  hath  foundations, 
whole  life  is   complete  (see   2    Pet.   i.  All   apostasy   comes  from   looking  at 
5-7).     Two  conditions  are  essential  to  the  past  or  at  the  present.     To  dwell 
this   growth :    (1)  growing   knowledge  on    past    attainments  makes   progress 
of   the   word  of   God,    which  supplies  impossible.      To   be   absorbed    in    the 
the    material    for   faith;    (2)   growing  present  is  to  follow  the  spirit  of  the 
obedience   of   the   word,   which   incor-  age,  always  contrary  to  God.     If  faith 
porates   the    truth    in   the   life.     The  provides   the  quarry    and    prayer    the 
word  is  the  quarry  from  which  obedi-  energy  for  building  up  Christian  life, 
ence  takes   the   blocks  that  are  built  hope  presents  the  ideal  of  the  struc- 
iuto  conduct.    To  study  the  Scriptures  ture,  and  teaches  us  how  to  build.     It 
daily    and    practise    what    we    learn  becomes  to  us  a  perpetual,  inspiring, 
builds   this    building  up,  and  nothing  heavenly     vision,     and    the    building 
else   will ;  it   also   insures    that    right  grows   into   conformity    with  it.     We 
material   shall    be   used.      2.   A   per-  are   now  prepared   to   appreciate   the 
severance  oi  prayer.     As  the  word  of  injunction,  "Keep  yourselves  in  the  love 
God  supplies  the  truth  to  be  embraced  of  God."     This  suggests,  first,  that  our 
by  faith,  so  prayer  supplies  the  energy  only  hope  is  in  positive  culture  of  holi- 
and  force   to   appropriate  truth,  and  ness.      Negative  resistance  to  evil    is 

390 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


VEE.  21. 


not  enough ;  we  must  overcome  evil 
with  good.  We  must  learn  the  "  ex- 
pulsive power  of  a  new  affection " 
which  drives  out  evil  and  replaces  it 
by  good.  Ulysses  sought  to  escape 
the  sirens  by  being  bound  to  the  mast 
of  his  vessel.  Orpheus  drowned  their 
voices  with  his  lyre  and  sacred  songs. 
Secondly,  it  is  in  the  love  of  God ; 
not  our  love  to  Him,  but  His  love  to 
us,  that  we  must  find  keeping  power. 
Archbishop  Ussher,  when  an  old  man, 
lacked  animal  heat,  and  he  used  to 
seek  to  be  constantly  bathed  in  sun- 
shine. When  too  feeble  to  go  out  of 
doors,  he  would  be  wheeled  in  his  chair 
to  an  eastern  window  in  the  morning, 
a  southerly  window  at  noon,  and  a 
western  window  toward  evening,  and 
abide  in  the  sunshine. — A.  T.  Pier- 
son^  D.D. 

Ver.  21.  Keeping  in  the  Love. — St. 
Jude  wrote  his  epistle  with  an  evident 
and  dii-ect  purpose.  He  found,  as  St. 
Paul  also  found,  that  in  Churches 
formed  among  the  Gentile  peoples 
there  was  exceeding  danger  lest  the 
truth  should  be  debased  through  the 
self-indulgence,  the  immoralities,  and 
the  false  teachings  by  which  such 
indulgences  and  moral  evils  were  sup- 
ported. St.  Jude  pleads  with  those  on 
whom  he  could  exert  an  influence, 
that  they  should  "earnestly  contend 
for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints " ;  and,  in  very  vigorous  lan- 
guage, he  denounces  the  iniquity  of 
these  inconsistent  and  unworthy  pro- 
fessors. Then,  in  the  closing  of  the 
epistle,  he  gives  the  principle  on  which 
alone  members  can  be  guarded  from 
surrounding  evils.  The  text  is  part  of 
a  loving  and  faithful  persuasion  of  the 
believers. 

Our  most  pressing  Christian  duty. 
— It  may  often  be  helpful  to  us  to 
gather  up  the  various  claims  and  re- 
quirements of  a  religious  profession 
into  some  very  simple,  but  suggestive 
and  inspiring  principle.  There  are, 
in  the  New  Testament,  many,  various, 
and  minute  injunctions  and  counsels 
for  the  guidance  and  regulation  of  a 


Christian  life ;  and  yet  we  cannot  fail 
to  observe  that  the  apostles  seem  much 
more  anxious  to  implant,  and  tho- 
roughly establish,  quick,  living  truths 
and  principles,  than  to  take  the  mere 
shaping  and  moulding  of  the  details  of 
Christian  conduct  into  their  control. 
They  would  rather  make  the  tree  good, 
and  leave  the  fresh,  strong,  healthy 
sap  to  fashion  its  own  leafage  and 
flowering  and  fruiting.  And  it  is 
well  that  we  should  follow  apostolic 
models,  and  seek  with  much  more 
anxiety  to  culture  into  vigour  and 
health  godly  principles,  than  merely 
to  fashion  into  set  forms  the  minute 
details  of  Christian  relations  and  Chris- 
tian conduct.  Let  us  make  the  tree 
good,  and  we  need  not  fear  for  the 
fruit.  But  here  we  are  met  by  a 
seriously  hindering  difl[iculty.  There 
is  not  usually  among  Christian  people 
a  proper  faith  in  the  quickening,  in- 
spiring, controlling,  and  guiding  power 
of  established  moral  principle.  Even 
good  people  persist  in  asking  exactly 
what  they  ought  to  do  in  such  and 
such  circumstances ;  and  so  we  have, 
again  and  again,  to  throw  men  back 
on  the  power  of  simple  first  principles. 
If  we  really  know  what  the  gospel  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is,  what  the 
foundation  laws  of  the  new  spiritual 
kingdom  are,  then  we  cannot  fail  to 
be  delicately  sensitive  in  all  the  de- 
tails of  Christian  conduct,  to  that 
which  becometh  the  gospel.  Our 
Christian  duty  is  here  set  before  us, 
not  in  a  series  of  minute  and  carefully 
adjusted  counsels,  but  in  one  simple, 
comprehensive,  searching,  yet  glorify- 
ing principle — '*  Keep  yourselves  in 
the  love  of  God."  Our  Saviour  pressed 
this  upon  His  disciples  as  if  it  were 
the  very  essence  of  their  duty,  "  Con- 
tinue ye  in  My  love."  And  the  apostle 
Paul  states  what  he  had  found  could 
be  the  glorifying  principle  of  a  life 
— of  a  right  noble  and  heroic  life — 
when  he  said,  "  The  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  us."  Our  text  means  in 
part — 

1.  Keep  yourselves  in  the  full  convic- 
tion of  the  truth  of  God's  love. — That 

391 


VER.  21. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


truth  is  the  one  special  and  distinctive 
revelation  of  God  that  was  made  to  us 
by  Christ  and  in  Christ.  That  is  the 
"life  and  immortality  which  He  brought 
to  light  by  His  gospel  "  ;  for  our  future 
can  only  be  properly  seen  in  the  light 
of  God's  love.  That  is  the  central 
foundation  truth  of  the  Christian 
religion  ;  it  is  the  thing  in  which  it 
differs  from  all  other  religious  systems  ; 
it  is  the  one  truth  concerning  which 
we  ought  to  be  unspeakably  jealous. 
Before  Christ  came  men  had  some  weak 
notions  that  love  was  one  of  the  Divine 
attributes,  but  it  was  only  one  of  them, 
and  by  no  means  prominent,  cer- 
tainly not  the  ruling  one.  The  apostle 
John  clearly  marks  off  the  Christian 
man  from  all  the  rest  of  the  world  by 
this  as  his  peculiarity,  "  We  have 
known  and  believed  the  love  which 
God  hath  to  us."  To  believe  in  the 
love  of  God,  and  to  come  into  the  for- 
giving, cleansing,  quickening,  correct- 
ing, sanctifying  power  of  that  love,  is 
to  become  a  Christian.  And  this  is  but 
another  way  of  saying  it  is  "  coming 
to  Christ,"  it  is  "  believing  on  Christ." 
We  may  have  expected  to  find  such  a 
counsel  in  the  sacred  word  as  this — 
Keep  yourselves  in  the  justice  of  God  ; 
or  this — Keep  yourselves  in  the  holi- 
ness of  God;  or  this — Keep  yourselves 
in  the  commandments  of  God.  But 
there  is  nothing  of  the  kind,  because  for 
renewed,  right- hearted  Christian  men 
and  women  "  justice "  is  quite  safe, 
"holiness"  is  quite  safe,  the  "com- 
mandments "  are  quite  safe,  if  only 
they  will  "  believe  in  the  love  which 
God  hath  unto  them."  And  yet  what 
a  half-fear  there  is  in  some  of  our 
hearts  that  this  cannot  be  sufficient, 
that  to  state  things  in  this  way  is 
to  imperil  something  very  vital.  But 
that  can  only  be  because  we  do  not 
fill  the  word  "  love  "  with  the  fulness 
of  its  meaning.  We  have  a  half-fear 
that  love  is  weak  and  easyf  ul.  Think- 
ing of  frail  human  love,  we  fancy  that 
it  may  do  things  that  are  not  absolutely 
right ;  it  can  carry  away  on  its  impulses 
the  judgment,  the  conscience,  and  the 
will.     Men  and  women  do,  too  often, 

392 


make  their  fond  affections  excuse  un- 
worthy things.  And  therefore,  even 
when  we  speak  of  God's  love,  some  of 
us  feel  as  if  we  must  shore  the  weak 
thing  up,  and  buttress  it  with  notions 
— theological  notions — of  His  justice, 
His  moral  government.  His  holiness, 
and  His  law.  And  because  our  hearts 
are  filled  with  these  unworthy  and 
hindering  notions,  we  cannot  receive 
the  fulness  of  the  revelation  of  God's 
love  to  us  in  Christ  Jesus.  We  will 
not  let  Christ  show  us  how  just,  how 
holy,  how  searching,  how  inexorable, 
that  love  of  God  is.  We  should  be 
satisfied  if  we  could  see  it  as  Christ 
saw  it,  if  we  could  feel  it  as  Christ 
felt  it.  What  is  love  as  applied  to 
God  ?  What  is  the  love  of  God  as  it 
is  shown  to  us  in  Christ  ?  The  answer 
is  this — You  must  know  what  the  love 
of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  was,  when 
He  tarried  among  the  ignorant  and 
the  suffering ;  and  watching  Him, 
correcting,  counselling,  comforting,  you 
will  learn  the  greatness  and  the  gra- 
ciousness  of  the  love  of  God.  You  will 
see  that  love  can  reprove,  can  chastise, 
can  say,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan," 
to  an  erring  disciple.  You  will  see 
that  love  keeps  rods  for  smiting,  and 
refining  fires  for  cleansing.  No  law, 
no  judge,  is  so  inexorable  as  love,  which 
will  not  take  its  strong,  stern  hand  off 
its  beloved,  until  they  are  "  whiter 
than  snow,"  cleansed  so  as  no  fuller  on 
earth  can  whiten  them.  Love  is  the 
corner-stone,  on  which  the  whole  super- 
structure of  the  faith  rests  securely. 
It  underlies  the  exceeding  great  mystery 
of  the.  Incarnation.  Love  is  the  very 
life  and  strength  of  the  day  by  day 
earthly  humiliation.  Love  is  the  all- 
satisfying  explanation  of  the  great 
Atonement.  Love  gives  the  life-force 
to  the  message  of  grace  sent  forth  from 
the  cross  to  every  creature.  We  preach 
Christ.  We  set  Him  forth  in  all  His 
thousand-fold  forms  of  grace,  in  order 
that  we  may  bring  sinful  men  to  know 
and  believe  the  love  which  God  hath 
unto  them.  Now  St.  Jude  tells  us 
that  of  this  great  truth  we  must  be, 
personally     and     individually,     most 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


VER.  21. 


anxious.  You  and  I  must  take  care 
that  we  keep  in  the  love  of  God.  We 
must  never  let  any  theories,  any 
teachings,  any  passing  excitements  of 
the  hour,  any  exigencies  of  theological 
opinion,  any  class  or  sectarian  senti- 
ments, put  in  peril,  or  cast  into  the 
shadow  of  neglect,  this  first  of  Christian 
truths.  We  must  be  jealous  with  a 
godly  jealousy  over  any  aspect  of  the 
Divine  Being  which  men  may  try  to 
press  in  the  front  of  this.  In  the  sphere 
of  Christian  doctrines  remember  that 
this  is  the  absolute  first  of  truths — 
"God  is  love."  "He  that  dwelleth 
in  lovo,  dwelleth  in  God." 

2.  Keep  yourselves  in  the  comforting 
assurance  of  God^s  love. — We  should 
be  able  to  say,  not  only,  "  He  loved 
me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me,"  but 
also,  with  an  actual,  present  applica- 
tion, "  He  loveth  me,  and  giveth  Him- 
self for  me."  For  that  love  is  actually 
over  us  and  around  us  now ;  it  wraps 
us  about,  as  an  enfolding  and  envelop- 
ing atmosphere ;  in  it  we  live,  and 
move,  and  have  our  being.  If  it  be 
indeed  so,  then  we  hold  the  secret  key 
that  unlocks  the  meaning  of  all  our 
cares,  all  our  trials,  all  our  losses,  all 
our  perplexities,  and  all  our  fears. 
We  make  our  mistakes  ;  we  come  into 
calamities ;  we  stumble  in  our  way- 
wardness ;  we  walk  where  the  road 
is  rough,  and  the  clouds  hang  down 
lov7  and  darken ;  we  lift  burdens  on 
our  own  shoulders  ;  we  have  to  carry 
burdens  for  others :  but  in  all  these 
things  let  us  "keep  ourselves  in  the 
love  of  God."  He  rules  and  overrules. 
He,  just  like  the  holy  father,  trains 
His  children  through  their  mistakes 
and  follies.  Our  lots  in  life  may  be 
very  suffering  ones,  very  anxious  ones ; 
but  however  dark  they  may  be,  let  us 
never  doubt  God's  love  to  us.  In  that 
assurance  we  may  find  unfailing  con- 
solation and  strength.  "The  light  of 
that  love  is  our  guide  through  the 
gloom  " ;  and  with  fuller,  deeper  feel- 
ing than  even  the  ancient  psalmist 
knew,  we  may  sing  and  say,  "  When 
my  father  and  my  mother  forsake 
me " — which,   to  many  of   us,  is   the 


almost  impossible  of  earthly  calamity 
— "  then  the  Lord  will  take  me  up." 

3.  That  we  put  ourselves  under  the 
daily  constrainings  of  God's  love. — 
Here  in  our  common  earthly  relations 
there  is  no  persuasion  urging  us  to 
goodness  like  the  daily  influence  of  a 
true  and  faithful  love.  How  that 
dear  earthly  friend,  that  beloved  com- 
panion of  our  life,  moves  and  sways 
and  inspires  us,  guards  and  keeps  and 
purifies  us !  We  feel  as  if  we  could 
not  do  wrong  and  disgrace  that  love. 
We  must  be  beautiful  for  the  honour 
of  that  love.  We  -cannot  go  where 
our  beloved  one  would  be  grieved  to 
find  us.  We  cannot  speak  what 
would  pain  our  friend  to  hear.  That 
earthly  love  is,  in  gracious  measures,  a 
sweet  and  sanctifying  influence.  But 
how  much  more  should  this  be  upon 
us  the  constraining  power  of  the  love 
of  God  !  Surely  His  love  should  be 
the  supreme  impulse  to  holy  living, 
the  inspiration  of  all  high  Christian 
attainment,  the  constraint  of  all  holy 
and  earnest  labour.  The  apostle  Paul 
is  the  great  human  example  of  the 
holy,  devoted,  self-denying  Christian, 
and  he  can  only  explain  the  Divine 
beauty  and  consecrated  energy  of  his 
life — as  we  ought  to  be  able  to  explain 
ours — by  saying,  "  The  love  of  Christ 
constraineth  us."  That  I  may  be 
very  direct  and  practical,  let  me  show 
you  that  the  counsel  of  the  text  bears 
this  further  persuasion  upon  you — 
Beware  lest  anything  should  take 
you  from  under  the  shadow  of  God's 
love.  I  need  only  suggest  what  things 
may  do  this.  Pride  of  heart  will. 
All  forms  of  subtle  self-reliance  will. 
There  is  a  tender  gentleness,  a  gracious 
humihty,  a  trustful  dependence,  a 
self- forgetting  love,  about  everybody 
who  really  believes  in  the  love  of  God, 
and  lives  in  the  sanctifying  warmth 
of  it.  If  you  have  lost  these  things, 
or  at  least,  if  you  have  lost  the  bloom 
off  these  things,  if  you  feel  very  well 
satisfied  with  yourselves,  and  very  con- 
fident that  you  can  stand  steady  in 
your  own  strength,  then  you  may  be 
sure  that  you  have  come  from  under 

393 


VER.  21. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE, 


the  shadow  of  the  love.  For  it  has 
this  for  its  peculiarity — it  always 
makes  men  meek,  dependent,  gentle. 
Pandering  to  the  appetites  and  pas- 
sions of  the  body,  or  to  the  pride  of 
the  intellect,  will  be  sure  to  take  you 
away  from  the  love.  That  love  can 
only  dwell  with  the  temperate,  the 
pure — the  saintly  ones,  who  walk  in 
white — the  self- restrained,  the  modest ; 
so  that,  if  any  of  us  are  determined 
to  be  salf- indulgent,  or  if  we  will 
cherish  conceit  of  our  intellectual 
superiority,  the  love  will  be  sure  to 
remove  afar  off.  All  the  manifold 
phases  of  unbrotherliness  put  in  peril 
our  relations  with  the  Divine  love. 
For  if  we  do  not  "  love  our  brother 
whom  we  have  seen,  how  can  we  love 
God  whom  we  have  not  seen  ?  "  Un- 
watchfulnesses  and  wilful  disobediences 
also  take  us  away  from  the  love.  For 
the  Master  Himself  said,  "If  ye  love 
Me,  keep  My  commandments  ;  and  My 
Father  will  love  you."  So  it  is  made 
quite  plain  for  us  all  that  God's  love 
is  no  weak  thing.  It  is,  indeed,  a 
most  searching  thing,  a  most  sensitive 
thing.  It  is  most  quickly  grieved. 
It  is  wounded  with  a  rough  touch. 
It  may  be  hurt  by  our  commonplace, 
every- day  Christian  frailties.  If  we 
fear  that  we  have  got  away  from  that 
life-constraining  love  of  God,  let  us 
hear  the  voice  of  His  servant,  calling 
us  back  under  the  shadow,  and 
bidding  us  "  keep  ourselves  in  the  love 
of  God." 

The  Sense  of  God's  Love. — If  you  had 
been  born  a  Jew,  it  would  not  have 
seemed  strange  to  you  that  you  had  to 
hear  continually  about  God's  law.  It 
was  daily  read.  There  were  times  of 
special  rehearsal  (Josiah,  Nehemiah). 
As  born  a  Christian,  it  is  not  strange 
that  you  should  continually  hear  about 
love.  This  is  the  central  force  of  the 
gospel ;  it  wields  the  moral  power,  the 
"  bands  of  a  man."  The  love  that  is 
characteristic  of  the  gospel  gathers 
round  the  revelation  of  the  Father. 
Divine  Fatherhood  was  shadowed  over 
in  Judaism  ;  it  was  there,  but  it  was 

394 


not  made  prominent.  It  takes  the 
first  and  front  place  in  Christianity. 
Fatherhood  is  clearly  seen  in  the  patri- 
archal religion.  And  that  was  the 
universal  religion  of  its  day.  Father- 
hood is  in  Judaism ;  and  realised  at 
least  by  the  pious  and  spiritually- 
minded  Jew.  But  Fatherhood  gains 
a  fuller  meaning  in  Christianity.  The 
gospel  is  really  this — the  power  of 
God's  love  on  human  souls. 

I.  The  beginning  of  the  Christian 
life  is  the  revelation  to  the  soul  of  the 
love  of  God. — It  seems  that  a  special 
revelation  was  needed  to  teach  men 
God's  love.  Nature  alone  cannot  teach 
it,  because  of  its  uniformity  ;  Provi- 
dence*alone  cannot,  because  of  its  per- 
plexity ;  Judaism  could  not,  because  of 
the  sternness  of  its  law;  and  heathen- 
ism could  not,  because  of  its  coarse 
polytheistic  and  sensual  associations. 
The  difficulty  of  receiving  it  lies  in  our 
own  natures,  enfeebled  and  degraded 
by  sin.  Our  consciousness  of  sin  makes 
us  think  God  unloving,  just  as  the 
erring  child  thinks  the  father  cruel, 
and  the  faithless  man  with  the  one 
talent  thought  his  master  hard  and 
unjust.  As  revealed,  the  love  of  God 
is  no  mere  statement ;  it  is  an  exhibited 
love,  exhibited  in  a  recovering  purpose^ 
in  a  priceless  gift,  in  a  mysterious  sacri- 
fice. But,  as  revealed,  it  needs  appro- 
priation by  us.  When  appropriated 
it  becomes  a  power  to  change  our 
spirit  and  our  life.  It  changes  our 
views  of  God,  life,  duty,  eternity,  etc. 
We  see  all  in  the  light  of  "  crucified 
love." 

II.  The  continuance  of  Christian 
life  depends  on  keeping  up  the  sense 
of  God's  love. — That  alone  can  keep 
us  sincere  and  earnest.  Love  is  more 
exacting  than  law,  more  inexorable 
than  law.  Love  is  jealous  lest  its 
object  should  lose  one  of  the  smallest 
blessings  of  obedience  and  goodness. 
Love  is  jealous  lest  its  object  should 
find  and  experience  one  of  the  sorrows 
that  attend  upon  evil.  Illustrate  by 
the  greater  jealousy  over  a  son  than 
over  an  apprentice.  Nothing  will  keep 
us  so  pure,  so  steadfast,  and  so  humble, 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


VERS.  22,  23. 


as  urging  upon   us,  ever   afresh,  the 
assurance  of  God's  love. 

III.  The  one  effort  of  our  Christian 
life  should  be  to  keep  in  the  sense  of 
God's  love. — In  our  earthly  life  we 
know  the  help  and  the  joy  of  keeping 
in  the  love  of  mother,  wife,  or  friend. 
It  must  be  more  helpful  and  more 
blessed  to  keep  in  the  love  of  God. 
To  lose  the  light  of  God's  love  is  more 
— far  more — than  losing  the  sunlight 
off  the  flowers.  How  shall  we  keep  in 
the  love  ?  1.  Cherish  every  loving 
thought  of  God  that  may  be  suggested 
to  you.  2.  Walk  in  righteousness, 
and  you  will  ever  be  in  the  smiles  of 
the  love.  3.  Watch  over  all  your 
opportunities  of  heart -fellowship  mth 
Christ,  for  friendship  needs  com- 
munion. 4.  Cultivate  the  child- spirit. 
Illustrate  by  our  Lord  putting  the  child 
in  the  midst  of  the  men.  No  doubting 
in  the  child-heart.  But  can  this  coun- 
sel apply  to  all,  "  keep  in  the  love  "  ? 
Do  we  all  beUeve  the  love  which  God 
hath  unto  us  ?  Are  any  Hving  on  in 
sin,  because  they  do  not  believe  the 
love  ?  Have  you  felt  how  God's  love 
to  sinners  shines  forth  from  Calvary  ? 
I  beseech  you  then.  Come  into  the 
love,  that  we  may  be  able  to  say  also 
unto  you,  ^^  Keep  yourselves  in  the 
love  of  God." 

Yers.  22,  23.  Mercy  for  the  Victims 
of  Evil  Influence. — The  beautiful  turn 
of  these  verses  exhibits  in  full  force  the 
Christian  disposition  of  St.  Jude.  The 
former  part  of  the  epistle,  taken  by 
itself,  conveys  the  impression  that  the 
apostle  was  a  mere  declamator  and 
denunciator — a  master  of  withering 
censure.  But  now  the  very  men  whom 
he  had  severely  reprimanded  are  to  be 
sought  and  reclaimed.  We  have  no 
room  to  give  the  learned  criticism  of 
the  text  supplied  by  our  great  scholars. 
The  Revisers  have  accepted  it,  with  a 
marginal  note,  to  remind  the  reader 
that  the  first  part  is  doubted.  After 
carefully  reading  the  pros  and  cons^  we 
see  no  valid  reason  for  rejecting  the 
portion  in  dispute,  nor  is  there  any 
difficulty   in   the   rendering.      "  Those 


disputing  with  you,  have  mercy  upon 
them ;  and   save   some,    by   snatching 
them   as   brands    from    the   burning ; 
have   mercy   on   some   with    caution ; 
hating   even  the  garment  spotted  by 
the   flesh."     The    method   of   treating 
the  three  classes  on  Christian  grounds 
is  laid  down  here,  and  is  as  applicable 
to-day  as  it  then  was.     1.  The  doubters. 
They  are  to  be  treated  with  considera- 
tion and  kindliness.     Doubt  is   some- 
times the  result  of  imperfect  training, 
or   a   misapprehension    of    the   truth. 
There  was  a  class  then  who  were  not 
able   to   judge   between   the   teaching 
of  the  apostles  and  that  of  the  false 
teachers.     They  needed  a  tender  treat- 
ment to 'bring  them  to  a  knowledge  of 
the  truth.     This  is  a  very  large  class 
in  our  own  day.     They  say,  "  We  do 
not  know  what  to  believe."     Then  they 
will    adduce    what    they    have   heard 
against  the  Church,  in  opposition   to 
the  teaching  of  the  Church.     This  is 
•not   a   hopeless   class   by   any   means. 
Patience,  perseverance,  and  compassion, 
accompanied   by   lucid    teaching,   will 
lead    them    into    the    way    of    truth. 
Many,    who   once  were  disputers,  are 
now     firm    believers     of     the    truth. 
2.    Scoffers.     There   was   a   class,  not 
the   leaders   of   the   schism,  that  had 
been  led  away,  to  whom  warning  must 
be    adminstered.       To    reclaim    them 
terrible   earnestness   was   needed,  just 
as  a  man  plucks  the  brand  from  the 
burning,    which    he    desires   to   save. 
The  suggestion  is  that   the   authority 
of  the  truth  be  used.     Not  persuasion, 
but   admonition,  exhibiting  the  power 
of   the   truth.     The   scoffer   is   a  man 
who  ridicules  tenderness  and  love,  but 
is   a    coward    before    the    attacks    of 
the   sword   of   the    Spirit.       Let   him 
know  that  there  is  a  God  in  heaven, 
and  a  judgment  at  whose  bar  he  must 
soon   stand,    and    his    conscience   will 
tremble  and   make  a   coward   of  him. 
No  asperity  or  bitterness  is  to  be  used, 
but  forcibly  bring  home  to  him  a  sense 
of  his  guilt  by  the  earnest  care  for  his 
soul  which  your  manner  will  manifest. 
We    do    not   hear   of    many    scoffers 
converted  in   our  own  day,    owing   to 

396 


VERS.  24,  25.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   JtJDE. 


the  loving  manner  which  the  Church  circumference.      The    lesson    for    the 

assumes  towards  everybody.     Let  the  Church  to   learn   is  to  approach  men 

arrow  of  conviction  have  its  own  barb,  according   to   their   condition.     Some- 

and  let  it  fly.    3.  The  sensualists.  They  body  in  a  hurry  gave  a  tract  on  the 

must  be  approached  with  fear,  or  with  sin   of   dancing   to   a   man   with   two 

caution.     By  these   the   apostle  must  wooden   legs.      We    fear    that    worse 

mean    the   false  teachers   themselves,  mistakes,    if   possible,    are    committed 

who  preached  sodomy,  and  other  forms  frequently.         When      the      Saviour 

of  immoral  practices.     Although  sunk  preached    to    publicans    and    sinners, 

very   deep   in   sin,   they   were  not   to  His    method    was    simple,     and    His 

be  abandoned  ;  yet,  inasmuch  as  their  message  loving  ;  but  when  He  preached 

garment  was  defiled  by  sin,  they  were  to  the  Pharisees,  Scribes,  and  Sadducees 

not  to  be  approached  too  nearly  or  too  His  manner  was   more  dignified,  and 

tenderly.     They  were  within  the  bounds  His  message  more  authoritative. — W.P, 
of  conviction,  although  very  near  the 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  24,  25. 

GodJs  Work  in  Souls. — This  beautiful  doxology  breathes  of  the  apostolic  spirit 
seen  in  others.  See  Kom.  xvi.  27  ;  Eph.  v.  27  ;  Col.  i.  22  ;  and  1  Tim.  iii.  3. 
The  additional  words,  Sta  'Irja-ov  Xpiorrov  tov  KvpCov  t^/awv,  are  not  contained  in 
many  MSS.,  although  most  recent  editors  have  included  them  in  their  text.  We 
are  inclined  to  omit  them,  but  not  on  strong  grounds,  principally  on  the  ground 
that  their  presence  in  the  text  does  not  well  agree  with  the  incisive  style  of 
this  apostle.  We  have  placed  o-o</)a)  in  brackets,  because  internal  evidence  is 
against  it.  We  think  that  a-ioTrjp  here,  as  at  1  Tim.  ii.  3  and  Tit.  i.  3, 
iii.  ,4,  refers  to  God  the  Father,  and  not  to  Jesus  Christ,  whose  name  probably 
was  not  in  the  original,  but  inserted  in  the  margin,  and  later  incorporated  with 
the  text. 

I.  Supplication. — "  Now  unto  Him  who  is  able  to  guard  you  from  stumbling, 
and  to  place  you  before  His  glorious  presence  with  exceeding  joy."  The  fervent 
desire  contained  in  this  word  starts  as  if  with  the  consciousness  of  the  presence 
of  the  seductive  teaching  of  the  false  teachers.  1.  God  is  able  to  guide  His 
people.  "  He  will  give  His  angels  charge  over  thee,  lest  thou  dash  thy  foot 
against  a  stone."  It  is  the  Spirit  that  guides  into  all  truth,  and  prevents 
stumbUng  against  error.  "  Lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  is  one  of  the  petitions 
in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  because  the  faithful  are  liable  to  commit  sin  under  pressure. 
"  I  will  guide  thee  with  Mine  eye,"  is  a  promise  to  those  who  walk  in  the  narrow 
path.  2.  God  is  able  to  consummate  the  work  of  grace.  The  end  will  be 
glorious,  because  the  saints  will  be  perfect.  The  presentation  at  court  will  be 
made  with  greeting.  The  congratulations  of  heaven  will  be  with  "  exceeding 
joy."  There  are  many  sources  of  joy,  but  redemption  will  exceed  all  others  in 
degree  and  duration.  The  words  of  the  parable  are  identical — "  Well  done, 
thou  good  and  faithful  servant ;  .  .  .  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord." 

II.  The  ascription. — "  To  the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majesty, 
dominion  and  power,  both  now  and  through  all  the  ages."  That  is,  let  the 
God  of  glory  and  majesty  be  revered  and  praised  in  time  and  in  eternity. 
1.  Praise  the  being  of  God.  He  dwells  in  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness. 
The  effulgence  of  the  Divine  presence  is  *'  light  inaccessible."  In  creation  and 
redemption  there  is  a  reflexion  of  that  glory — "The  heavens  declare  the  glory 
of  God,"  etc.  His  greatness — majesty — is  unsearchable.  He  is  incomprehensible. 
A  sense  of  His  greatness  mingles  reverence  with  praise — "  My  soul  doth 
magnify  the  Lord."     2.  Praise  His  government.     His  dominion  is  from  sea  to 

396 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    JUDE,  vee.  24. 


sea,  and  from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  idea  is  that  His  kingdom 
is  CO- extensive  with  all  creation.  His  power  or  authority  is  paramount. 
Rebellion  is  temporary  ;  He  must  rule  until  all  enemies  are  under  His  feet. 
Even  the  last  enemy — death — will  be  vanquished.  The  Christian  is  never 
without  joyous  strains  when  he  meditates  upon  the  works  of  Jehovah.  See  the 
concluding  paragraph  of  Ps.  ciii. — W.  P. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.    24.    The   Steadying   Power  of  grace  that  we  may  step  into  heaven 

Christ. — The    work   that    Christ    does  clad    in    unstained     garments.       His 

in  souls  that   are  exposed  to  malign  grace  is  sufficient  for  that ;  and  that 

influences,  and  even  to  active  tempta-  is  what  He  wants.     Should  not  that 

tions,  is  sometimes  misconceived,  and  be  what  we  want — that  Christ  should 

even    misrepresented.      It   is  thought  present  us  as  virgin  souls,  kept  pure, 

that  Christ  is  with  us  in  the  tempta-  always  pure,  through  His  abounding 

tion,  to  guard  us  from  it,  to  defend  us  grace  ? 
from  its  evil  influence.    It  is  altogether 

truer,   and  it   is  certainly  deeper  and  Moral  Purity :  what  it  is,  and  what 

more    searching    to   say,   that   Christ  it  gains. — Notice   how  we   have   here 

is  in  us,  the  inspiration  and  the  help  the  great  end  to  which  this  upholding 

in  our  battling  with   and  overcoming  leads — "  Able  to  keep  you  from  stum- 

the  temptation.    A  doctor  may  actually  bling,    and    to    present   you   faultless 

deal  with  a  disease  which  aftiicts  us ;  before  the  presence  of  His  glory  with 

but  it  is  altogether  a  higher  type  of  exceeding   joy."     To  Jude,  then,  that 

doctor    who   deals    with    us,    and    so  future  had  three  salient  points.     The 

nourishes   our   vitality    that    we   can  great  range  of  mountains,  as  it  were, 

successfully  throw  off  the  disease.     It  towered  up  into  three  peaks,  each  of 

is  something  on  a  slippery  day  to  cling  them  smitten  by  the  sunlight,  and  so 

to  a  friend's  arm,  and  be  kept  from  made   visible  across  the  waste.     And 

stumbling.     But  it  is  a  much  greater  these  three  are,  after  all   speculation 

thing  to  be  made  so  steady  in  limb,  and   revelation,   the  sum  of  what  we 

and   so   self-controlled    in   movement,  really  know  about  that  blessed  heaven 

that  we  can  walk  the  slippery  high-  to  which  we  aspire — "  faultless  before 

ways    without     fear.       Christ     keeps  His    presence — with    exceeding    joy." 

from  falling  by  His  grace  in  us  steady-  As   to   the   first,    it    indicates    moral 

ing  us.  purity.     The  word   is  the  same  as  is 

used  to  describe  the  physical  perfection 

The    Aim    and    Hope   of   Christ. —  of  the  sacrificial  lamb,  which  was   to 

"  To  present  you  faultless."    R.V.  *' To  be  *' without  blemish,"   and  is  thence 

set   you    before   the   presence   of    His  transferred  to  describe  the  immaculate 

glory    without    blemish."     St.    Jude's  holiness  of  Christ's  manhood  and  of  His 

precise  point  is  usually  missed.     It  is  servants,  who  are  one  day  to  be  "  holy 

when  the  continuous  sanctifying  work  and  without  blame  before  Him  in  love." 

of   Christ  is   thought   of.     It   is  true  The  unspotted  and  unblemished  lamb 

that    when    "sanctified    wholly"    we  was  the  type— Christ  Himself.     So  not 

may  be  presented  faultless.     But  St.  only  may  we  be  kept  without  stumbling 

Jude    means    that    Christ    wants    to  here ;  but  the  foulest  and  the  darkest 

present  His  people  as  those  who  have  of  us,  in  whose  nature  sin  may  seem  to 

not  fallen,    under   the  enticements  of  be  most  deeply  engrained,  may  humbly 

the  world,  the  flesh,  the  devil.     Christ  expect  to  stand  in  His  presence  "  with- 

makes    us    clean   when   we   come    to  out  spot  or  wrinkle  or  any  such  thing." 

Him,  and  He  ia  willing  to  give  such  Here  the  nature  may  be  one  field  of 

397 


VER.  24. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    JUDE. 


black,  broken  only  by  narrow  and  short 
streaks  of  contradictory  light ;  but 
yonder  all  the  foulness  may  be  dis- 
charged from  it,  and  sin  lie  behind  us, 
an  alien  power  that  has  nothing  in  us. 
That  is  the  first  of  the  mountain  sum- 
mits, up  to  which  the  good  hand  of  the 
Lord  our  God  may  lead  us,  devious  and 
tottering  though  our  steps  be  there. 
And  the  second  of  them  lies  by  the  side 
of  the  first,  equal  in  altitude,  equal  in 
radiance — *'  before  His  presence."  If 
we  are  to  connect  that  clause  directly 
with  the  one  which  precedes  it,  it  is 
intended  to  heighten  the  conception  of 


the  purity.  If  it  is  without  blemish 
when  it  is  submitted  to  the  searching 
of  that  fierce  light,  it  must  be  un- 
blemished indeed.  But  if  we  take  the 
words  not  to  be  thus  connected,  but 
to  present  a  separate  though  cognate 
thought,  they  present  the  hope  of  a 
complete  immersion  in,  and  illumination 
by,  the  glorious  presence  in  which  we 
shall  walk.  Purity  is  the  condition  of 
that.  We  must  be  blameless  in  order 
to  stand  in  the  presence  of  God. 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for 
they  shall  see  God." — A.  Maclaren,  D.D, 


398 


THE   REVELATION    OF 

ST.    JOHN    THE   DIYINE. 


INTKODUCTION. 

One  consideration  is  persistently  kept  in  view  in  this  Commentary,  which  is  to 
be  regarded  as  supplemental  to  Commentaries  of  the  ordinary  kind.  The  author 
and  editor  has  not  been  required  to  discuss  theories  of  interpretation,  or  even,  in 
any  elaborate  way,  the  significance  and  meaning  of  symbols,  or  the  fulfilment  of 
prophecy  in  history.  One  question  alone  has  to  be  answered  :  How  can  the  book 
of  Revelation  be  used,  wisely,  skilfully,  and  suggestively,  for  pulpit  purposes. 
The  question  of  authorship  need  not  be  discussed.  For  the  preacher  it  is  enough 
to  say  that  no  name  has  ever  been  submitted,  and  no  suggestion  of  authorship 
has  ever  been  made,  that  do  not  involve  far  more  serious  difficulties  than  are 
associated  with  the  traditional  view.  And  the  chief  objections  to  the  Johannine 
authorship  rest  upon  a  very  imperfect  estimate  of  John's  character,  which  was  at 
once  more  intense,  and  more  intensely  mystical,  than  is  usually  recognised.  The 
supreme  interest  that  both  his  gospel  and  hia  epistles  reveal  in  the  personal 
Christ,  and  in  the  living  relations  of  Christ  with  His  people,  should  satisfy  us 
that  he  must  be  the  author  of  the  other  work,  whose  supreme  subject  is  the 
present  relation  of  the  living,  personal  Christ  to  His  Church.  John's  gospel  is 
the  preparation  for  the  book  of  Revelation. 

The  date  of  the  book  is  much  disputed,  but  the  trend  of  modern  opinion  is 
decidedly  in  favour  of  an  early  date,  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  if 
that  date  be  accepted,  we  may  gain  great  help  towards  the  apprehension  of  the 
symbols  and  the  historical  allusions,  by  fixing  attention  upon  the  unusually 
alarming,  and  even  mysterious,  incidents  and  circumstances  of  that  particular 
time.  It  has  not  been  sufficiently  considered  that  the  author  clearly  expected 
the  things  which  were  represented  to  him  in  visions  to  come  to  pass  shortly.  He 
never  gives  the  slightest  indication  that  his  eye  swept  over  long  centuries  of 

399 


INTEODUCTION.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  REVELATION. 

Christian  conflict.  In  the  opening  words  of  the  book  the  Revelation  is  most 
distinctly  declared  to  be  of  **  things  which  will  shortly  come  to  pass."  And  when 
the  entire  series  of  visions  is  passed,  lest  there  should  be  any  possible  misconcep- 
tion, the  assurance  is  renewed  in  the  closing  words,  "  Seal  not  up  the  words  of 
the  prophecy  of  this  book  ;  for  the  time  is  cut  hand^  "  He  which  testifieth  these 
things  saith,  Yea,  I  come  quickly."  If  we  expect  to  find  anticipative  Church 
history  in  this  book,  such  expressions  are  inexplicable.  If  we  expect  to  find 
principles  illustrated  in  the  life  and  relations  of  individuals,  the  Church,  and 
Society,  in  the  Johannine  age,  which  gain  illustration  in  every  recurring  age, 
then  we  satisfy  such  expressions,  and  at  the  same  time  understand  how  the  book 
becomes  one  of  age-long  interest  and  helpfulness  to  Christ's  Church. 

Dr.  Scha£f  says  :  *'  The  early  date  is  now  accepted  by  the  majority  of  scholars. 
In  its  favour  may  be  urged  the  allusion  to  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  (xi.  1  seqq.) 
in  language  which  implies  that  it  yet  existed,  but  would  speedily  be  destroyed ; 
and,  further,  that  the  nature  and  object  of  the  Revelation  are  best  suited  by  the 
earlier  date,  while  its  historical  understanding  is  greatly  facilitated.  With  the 
great  conflagration  at  Rome,  and  the  Neronian  persecution,  fresh  in  mind,  with 
the  horrors  of  the  Jewish  war  then  going  on,  and  in  view  of  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  as  an  impending  fact,  John  received  the  visions  of  the  conflicts  and 
final  victories  of  the  Christian  Church.  His  book  came,  therefore,  as  a  comforter 
to  hearts  distracted  by  calamities  without  a  parallel  in  history." 

Warfield  notes  the  chief  arguments  in  favour  of  the  early  date,  thus:  1.  The 
whole  tradition  of  the  Domitian  origin  of  the  Apocalypse  rests  on  Irenseus. 
2.  There  is  not  even  an  obscure  reference  in  the  book  to  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  as  a  past  event.  3.  Jerusalem  is,  instead,  spoken  of  as  still  standing, 
and  the  Temple  as  still  undestroyed  (xi.  1,  2,  3,  seqq.,  and  even  chap.  i.  7,  ii.  9, 
iii.  9,  vi.  12,  16).  4.  The  time  of  writing  is  exactly  fixed  by  the  description  of 
the  then  reigning  emperor,  in  xiii.  13,  xvii.  7-12.  5.  The  chief  argument  with 
evangelical  men,  however,  is  that  derived  from  the  literary  differences  between 
the  Apocalypse  and  the  gospel  of.  John,  which  are  thought  by  many  to  be  too 
great  to  be  explained,  except  on  the  supposition  that  a  long  period  of  time  inter- 
vened between  the  writing  of  the  two  books. 

Warfield  argues  against  the  early  date,  and  so  does  Principal  David 
Browiiy  D.D.,  who  says  :  *'  Two  dates  are  given :  1.  Reign  of  Nero,  about  68  a.d. 
2.  Reign  of  Domitian,  about  95  or  96.  For  1,  there  is  no  external  evidence  ;  for 
2,  Irenseus,  it  is  claimed,  was  speaking  from  knowledge  when  he  declared  that 
the  Revelation  was  seen  not  long  since,  but  almost  in  his  generation,  near  the 
close  of  Domitian's  reign.  Concerning  the  internal  evidence  for  1,  it  may  be  noted 
(1)  that  the  use  of  the  term  '  Lord's  day  '  as  the  common  term  for  the  first  day 
of  the  week  shows  that  the  book  was  written  long  after  Nero's  reign.  (2)  The 
difference  between  the  Greek  of  this  book  and  of  the  gospel  is  explained  by  the 
ecstasy  of  the  writer,  and  by  the  difference  of  the  subject-matter  in  the  case  of 
the  Apocalypse.  It  is  prophetic,  full  of  strange  details,  Old-Testament  phrases. 
(3)  Instead  of  the  Apocalypse  being  the  connecting  link  between  the  Synoptists 
and  the  fourth  gospel,  the  same  truths  are  expressed  in  each,  and  the  Apocalypse 
400 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,    introduction. 

has  a  more  developed  form  of  the  same  truths  than  the  gospel,  though,  doubt- 
less, the  gospels  and  epistles  of  John  were  written  later.  Is  it  natural  that 
such  lofty  developments  of  truth  as  the  Revelation  exhibits  should  belong  to  the 
earliest  apostolic  age  ?  Note  other  specific  characteristics  of  the  book,  arguing 
for  the  later  date  :  1.  The  conception  of  the  Church  as  divided  into  sections — 
*  seven  golden  candlesticks.'  2.  The  degenerate  state  of  the  Churches.  3.  Use 
of  the  Lamb  as  a  proper  name.  4.  The  phrase,  the  hooks  of  life,  which  is  used 
in  a  highly  developed  sense.  5.  Other  unique  and  peculiar  words  and  phrases 
denoting  an  advanced  state  of  doctrinal  conception.  All  this  constrains  us  to 
reject  the  early  date." 

Probably  the  key  to  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  the  book  of  Revelation  lies 
in  a  decision  as  to  its  date,  and  the  contents  of  St.  John's  field  of  vision  at  the 
ear  her  or  at  the  later  date. 

Another  question  of  grave  importance  concerns  the  unity  of  the  contents  of 
the  book.  The  modern  mania  for  finding  a  composite  character  in  all  the  Bible 
books  has  produced  a  theory  of  this  kind  in  relation  to  the  book  of  Revelation. 
It  can  best  be  met  and  answered  by  showing  how  systematic  and  regular  the 
construction  of  it  is,  and  that  the  apparent  breaks  upon  the  continuity  of  the 
writer's  scheme  are  no  marks  of  distinct  authorship,  but  only  indications  of  an 
independent  individuality.  Side-issues  are  treated  in  a  similar  way  both  by 
St.  Paul  in  his  epistles,  and  by  St.  John  in  his  gospel  and  epistles. 

The  unity  of  the  book  will  be  seen  at  once  if  we  set  before  ourselves  its 
ground-plan.  St.  John  always  begins  his  work  by  stating  his  thesis.  The 
beginning  both  of  his  gospel,  and  of  his  first  epistle,  is  a  summary  of  what 
the  gospel  and  epistle  are  written  to  unfold  and  illustrate  ;  and  precisely  in  the 
same  way  the  first  three  chapters  of  the  book  of  Revelation  present  a  summary 
of  what  the  rest  of  the  book  unfolds  and  illustrates.  Briefly  stated,  his  thesis  is 
feomething  like  this  :  the  glorified  and  living  Christ  is  actually  now  with  His 
Church,  for  the  completion  of  that  redemptive  work  which  He  has  begun.  That 
Church,  in  its  unity  of  principles,  spirit,  and  experience,  can  be  represented  by 
the  seven  Churches  of  Asia.  That  Church  is  left  in  the  world,  and  cannot  fail 
to  be  influenced,  bqth  for  good  and  evil,  by  surrounding  circumstances  of  distress, 
persecution,  etc.  But  the  living  Lord  is  using  all  these  circumstances  for  the 
carrying  on  of  His  sanctifying  work,  making  them  to  be  discipline,  and  even 
judgment,  as  need  be.  Moreover,  that  same  living  Lord  who  is  using  all  the 
schemes  of  men,  and  calamities  of  nature,  for  the  fulfilling  of  His  purpose  in  His 
Church,  is  also  controlling  and  overruling  all  these  schemes  of  worldly  men  and 
nations.  And  this  double  control  of  the  Church  and  the  world  must  move 
towards  a  final  issue.  What  that  will  be  can  only  now  be  suggested  by  symbol, 
but  of  these  two  things  we  can  be  absolutely  assured  :  it  will  be  the  triumph  of 
Christ  and  righteousness,  and  it  will  involve  the  infinite  glory,  purity,  and 
blessedness  of  Christ's  Church. 

That  being  the  introductory  thesis,  it  is  worked  out  under  the  figure  of  seven 
seals,  which  are  affixed  on  the  book  which  contains  the  record  of  the  various 
ways  in  which  the  living  Christ  will  discipline  His  Church,  and  govern  and  judge 

D  i>  401 


INTRODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


the  world  in  the  interests  of  His  Church.  The  seals  are  not  successive  in  order 
of  time,  nor  do  they  represent  anything  occurring  in  order  of  time.  They 
indicate  the  seven  kinds  of  things  that  Christ  will  use  for  the  work  He  is  doing 
in  His  Church. 

But  here  we  come  upon  a  peculiarity  in  St.  John's  treatment  of  his  theme. 
It  reminds  us  of  the  construction  of  the  Book  of  Job.  The  test  of  Job,  by 
material  loss  and  by  bodily  suffering,  is  briefly  and  lightly  passed  over,  and  the 
strength  of  the  work  is  given  to  the  testing  of  Job  by  doubts,  questions,  and  false 
faiths,  presented  to  his  mind.  So  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  the  six  seals  which 
mainly  represent  the  influence  of  nature-forces  and  physical  calamities  on  the 
Church  are  lightly  dealt  with,  aud  the  strength  of  the  work  is  put  into  the 
elaboration  of  the  seventh  seal,  which  concerns  the  more  subtle  and  perilous 
testings  of  intellectual  and  moral  evils  within  the  Church. 

The  seventh  seal  is  elaborated  under  seven  trumpets ;  and  the  seventh  trumpet 
is  elaborated  under  seven  vials  and  bowls. 

When  the  entire  circle  of  possible  earthly  influences  is  completed,  and  the 
Church,  in  one  or  other  of  its  sections,  has  been  fully  subjected  to  all  possible 
earthly  influences  that  can  imperil  or  discipline  it,  then  the  triumph  of  Christ 
will  have  come,  and  that  will  prove  the  glory  hour  for  His  Church. 

There  is  one  marked  peculiarity  of  the  work  which  has  hardly  received  sufficient 
attention.  There  are  throughout  interposed  visions,  all  of  a  similar  character, 
being  either  visions  of  some  from  the  Church  who  have  gained  their  triumph, 
or  anticipative  worship  and  praise  of  the  finally  triumphant  Christ.  In  these 
interposed  visions  are  to  be  found  the  practical  applications  of  the  book.  It  was 
written  with  a  most  distinct  purpose.  It  was  not  intended  to  furnish  precise 
information  as  to  what  would  come  to  pass,  but  to  comfort,  strengthen,  and 
cheer  persecuted,  strained,  tempted,  anxious  Christians  in  what  did  come  to  pass. 
Its  message  was  really  this  :  Whatever  happens  to  you,  you  will  he  safe.  Through 
whatever  happens  you  will  be  moving  to  a  final  victory  ;  because  the  living  Christ 
is  with  you,  controlling  all,  and  making  all  "  work  together  for  good." 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that,  from  St.  John's  point  of  view,  there  were  four 
classes  of  persons  in  his  day,  and  that  each  class  bore  distinctive  relations  to  the 
outward  and  inward,  the  physical  and  moral,  evils  of  the  times.  Their  various 
liability  to  influence  is  indicated  in  this  book,  and  we  have  to  find  which  class 
was  dominant  in  St.  John's  mind  when  we  seek  for  the  precise  reference  of 
particular  prophecies.  They  were:  (1)  Jews;  (2)  Jewish  Christians;  (3)  Gentile 
Christians;  (4)  Gentiles.  How  far  some  of  the  visions  concern  the  ancient 
people  of  God,  as  distinct  from  the  Christian  Church,  is  a  matter  of  interpretation 
in  which  Dr.  F.  Godet  ("  Essay  on  the  Apocalypse  ")  may  prove  a  good  guide. 

It  needs  only  to  be  remarked  that  the  imagery  of  the  book  rests  largely  upon 
the  prophetic  writings  of  Ezekiel  and  Daniel,  and  perhaps,  to  a  greater  extent 
than  we  can  now  trace,  upon  the  apocryphal  writings  or  traditions  of  that  day, 
especially  the  book  of  Enoch.  It  is,  however,  more  than  possible  that  some 
genius  in  interpretation  may  arise,  who  will  show  that  the  book  of  Revelation  is 
really  no  more  than  an  expansion  of  the  eschatological  discourse  of  our  Divine 
402 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY,    REVELATION,    introduction. 

Lord.  From  that  point  of  view  the  reference  of  the  figures  and  visions  to  the 
immediate  age  of  St.  John  will  be  more  fully  indicated,  but  at  the  same  time 
the  permanent  application  of  the  principles  illustrated  will  be  more  fully  recog- 
nised. It  was,  precisely,  the  book  of  Divine  comfortings  for  t'mt  age  ;  it  is  the 
book  of  Divine  comfortings  for  every  age ;  for  it  is  the  assurance  that  the  living 
Christ  is  with  His  Church,  and  that  the  triumph  cf  Christ  and  His  Church  is 
sure,  and  is  coming  to-morrow. 

The  Problem  of  the  Apocalypse. 

The  latest  elaborate  attempt  to  solve  the  problem  of  the  Apocalypse  is  from 
the  pen  of  Dr.  Daniel  Voelter,  Professor  of  Theology  at  Amsterdam,  who  has 
already  handled  the  subject  in  a  work  entitled  ''  Investigations  into  the  Origin  of 
the  Apocalypse"  (1st  edition,  1882;  2nd  edition,  1885).  The  substance  of  the 
new  effort  is  as  follows.  The  growth  of  the  Apocalypse  into  its  present  form 
is  ascribed  to  editorial  revision,  not  to  compilation.  An  apostolic  nucleus,  or 
Ur- Apocalypse,  was  gradually  enlarged,  until  the  work  attained  its  present 
dimensions.  This  nucleus,  the  greater  part  of  which  is  contained  in  chaps, 
iv. — ix.,  is  believed  to  have  been  composed  by  the  Apostle  John,  in  Palestine, 
about  the  year  ad.  62.  It  was  probably,  in  the  first  instance,  written  in 
Hebrew.  Professor  Voelter  considers  the  composition  of  a  work  in  Greek  by 
one  of  the  original  apostles  extremely  improbable.  He  also  rejects  the  state- 
ments of  Irenseus  concerning  the  last  years  of  the  Apostle  John.  Additions 
(found  in  chaps,  x.,  xi.,  xvii.,  xviii.,  and  xix.)  were  made  by  an  unknown 
hand  in  a.d.  68  and  a.d.  70.  The  document  was  then  revised  by  four 
successive  editors.  The  first  is  identified  with  Cerinthus,  the  well-knowa 
heresiarch,  who  is  represented  by  Irenseus  as  the  special  aversion  of  John ;  he 
wrote  under  Titus — that  is,  a.d.  79 — 81.  The  activity  of  the  second  is  put 
towards  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Domitian,  or  about  a.d.  95  ;  that  of  the  third 
is  assigned  to  the  reign  of  Trajan ;  and  the  last,  to  whom  we  are  said  to  owe 
the  epistles  to  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia,  is  supposed  to  have  written  about 
a.d.  130.  In  the  opinion  of  Professor  Voelter,  therefore,  six  hands  can  be 
traced  in  the  Apocalypse  as  we  possess  it,  and  its  gradual  growth  extended  over 
a  period  of  nearly  seventy  years.  This  compHcated  theory  is  expounded  with 
considerable  learning  and  admirable  patience  and  ingenuity ;  but  in  all 
probability  very  few  will  accept  it.  The  author's  treatment  of  a  very  important 
tradition  is  not  calculated  to  win  the  reader's  confidence  in  his  judgment,  and 
he  is  signally  unsuccessful  in  differentiating  the  styles  of  the  alleged  writers 
and  revisers.  He  admits  that  they  are  all  largely  dependent  on  the  Old 
Testament,  and  that  Hebraisms  occur  in  all  parts  of  the  book.  The  opening 
remark  of  the  preface,  that  a  peculiarly  sinister  influence  seems  to  dominate 
apocalyptic  research,  is  well  illustrated  by  this  clever  but  most  inconclusive 
work.—"  The  Thinker." 

The  book  which  clos«s  the  New  Testament  "shuts  up  all"  "  with  a  sevenfold 
chorus  of  hallelujahs  and  harping  symphonies,"  as  Milton  says,  in  its  stately 

403 


INTEODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 

music,  and  may  well  represent  for  us,  in  that  perpetual  cloud  of  incense  rising 
up  fragrant  to  the  Throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb,  the  unceasing  love  and 
thanksgiving  which  should  be  man's  answer  to  Christ's  love  and  sacrifice. — 
A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  Practical  Purpose  of  the  Apocalypse. 

Jewish  apocalyptic  literature   arose   from   two   factors,    oppression   and   the 
Messianic  hope.     Pre-Christian  apocalypses  were  a  complaint  of  the  persecution 
of  Israel,  coupled  with  an  assurance  of  deliverance  by  the  advent  of  the  Messiah. 
Christian  apocalypses  complained  of  the  oppression  of  the  Church  by  hostile 
Jews  and   Komans,   with   exhortations    to    courage  and  hope  in  view  of  the 
destruction  which  would  be  visited  upon  their  enemies  by  the  second  advent 
of  the  Messiah,  which  was  regarded  as  imminent.     The  Apocalypse,  or  Revela- 
tion, of  John  is  the  noblest  example  of   such    Christian   writings.      The   aim 
of   the    book   was   distinctly   practical ;  it  was   written  primarily  for  its  own 
time,  and  must  have  had  a  powerful  effect  in    promoting   Christian   courage 
and  hope  during  the  bitter  persecutions  which  the  Church  then  sustained.     The 
book  is  obscure  because  it  deals  with  obscure  themes, — the  programme  of  the 
future  and  Christ's  return  to  judgment.     Also  because,  being  strongly  political 
in  its  bearings,  clearness  would  have  been  dangerous ;  it  was  a  proclamation  of 
the  curse  of  heaven  on  the  Roman  power.     And,  lastly,  because  the  language 
of  concealment  (which  the  initiated  would  be  able  to  interpret  correctly)  consists 
of  Oriental  symbols,  largely  derived  from  books  like  Ezekiel  and  Daniel,  which 
are  necessarily  more  or  less  enigmatic  to  the  Western  and  modern  mind.     The 
"  contents  are  briefly  as  follows :  chaps,  i. — iii.  are  introductory,  containing  the 
messages  of  the  ascended  Lord  to  the  seven  Churches.      Chap.  iv.  begins  the 
apocalypse  proper,  which  consists  in  a  series  of  visions.     It  presents  in  striking 
imagery  a  description  of  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  homage  of  the  universe  to  Him. 
Chap.  V.  describes  the  sealed  book  containing  the  mysteries  of  the  future,  which 
Jesus  only  can  unlock,  and  His  praise  is  sung.    Chap.  vi.  records  the  breaking  of 
six  seals,  revealing  the  calamities  and  judgments  which  are  to  come  upon  those 
who  spurn  Christ  and  persecute  His  followers.     Chap.  vii.  iLtrodaces  a  pause 
before  the  breaking  of  the  last — the  seventh — seal,  and  gives  a  pictui  e  of  the  host 
of  the  redeemed.      Chaps,  viii.,  ix.,  see  the  seventh  seal  broken,  and  there  come 
forth  seven  angels  with  trumpets  to  proclaim  the  revelation  of  the  final  mysteries. 
Six  in  turn  announce  signs  and  portents  of  the  coming  judgment,  which  will 
witness  Messiah's  enemies  destroyed,   and  saints  glorified.     Chaps,  x. — xi.  14, 
record   a  pause   before  the   seventh   angel's   proclamation,   and   represent   the 
coming  joy  and  sorrow,  the  overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  the  faithful  testimony  of 
the  Christians,  and  the  cruelty  of  their  foes.      Chap.  xi.  15-19,  the  proclama- 
tion of  the  seventh  angel.     Chaps,  xii.,  xiii.,  present,  under  various  figures,  the 
opposition  of  the  Roman  power  to  the  Church.     Chap.  xiv.  pictures  the  certain 
triumph  of  Christ.     Chaps,  xv.,  xvi.,  record  the  outpouring  of  the  seven  vials  of 
wrath  and  destruction.     Chaps,  xvii,,  xviii.,  witness  the  complete  overthrow  of 
404 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY^    REVELATION,    introduction. 

the  Church's  arch-enemy,  Rome.  Chap.  xix.  celebrates  in  angelic  chorus  the 
victory  of  Christ.  Chap.  xx.  1-10  records  the  binding  and  final  subjection  of 
Satan.  Chap.  xx.  11-15,  the  final  judgment.  Chaps,  xxi.,  xxii.,  present  the 
consummation  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the  culmination  of  the  great  drama  of 
conflict  and  judgment  in  a  scene  of  eternal  peace  and  joy. — Prof.  G.  B. 
Stevens^  D.D. 

St.  John  was  not  a  prophet  in  the  ancient  and  vulgar  sense  ;  he  was  not  a 
mere  seer  of  coming  events,  a  mere  student  and  interpreter  of  the  shadows  they 
cast  before  them ;  but  a  wise  and  holy  man,  who  had  a  keen  and  trained  insight 
into  the  moral  laws  by  which  God  governs  the  world,  and  so  heartily  believed 
in  these  laws  as  to  be  quite  sure  that  in  the  ethical,  as  in  the  physical,  world, 
efltects  spring  from  causes  and  correspond  to  them — that  actions  are  invariably 
followed  by  their  due  consequences  and  rewards.  And,  hence,  the  Apocalypse 
of  St.  John  is  not  a  series  of  forecasts,  predicting  the  political  weather  of  the 
world  through  the  ages  of  history ;  it  is  rather  a  series  of  symbols  and  visions 
in  which  the  universal  principles  of  the  Divine  Rule  are  set  forth  in  forms  dear 
to  the  heart  of  a  Hebrew  Mystic  and  poet.  What  is  most  valuable  to  us  in  this 
book,  therefore,  is  not  the  letter,  the  form  ;  not  the  vials,  the  seals,  the  trumpets, 
over  which  interpreters,  who  play  the  seer  rather  than  the  prophet,  have  been 
wrangling  and  perplexing  their  brains  for  centuries;  but  the  large  general 
principles  which  these  mystic  symbols  of  Oriental  thought  are  apt  to  conceal 
from  a  Western  mind.  Whether  or  not,  for  example,  the  vision  of  an  ange^ 
flying  through  heaven  to  proclaim  an  impending  judgment  was  taken  by  St. 
John's  first  readers  to  indicate  an  approaching  event  of  world-wide  moment,  is 
a  question  of  comparatively  slight  importance  to  us ;  it  is,  indeed,  mainly  a 
question  of  curious  antiquarian  interest. — S.  Cox^  D.D. 

The  Descriptive,  or  Idealist,  Theory  of  the  Apocalypse. 

In  the  first  three  chapters  we  have  the  subject  of  which  it  is  to  treat  set 
before  us.  That  subject  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  not  so  much  in  the  essential 
and  external  glory  of  His  Divine  Sonship  as  in  the  glory  belonging  to  Him  as  the 
Head  of  His  Church.  In  other  words,  the  subject  of  the  Apocalypse  is  the 
Church  in  Christ,  and  the  object  of  the  book  is  to  present  to  us  a  picture  of  the 
trials  and  struggles  in  the  world  at  the  time  when,  at  His  Second  Coming,  her 
Lord  makes  His  glory  manifest,  and  completes  His  victory  over  all  her  enemies. 

It  is  true  that  St.  John  did  start  from  events  in  his  own  day ;  but  he  beheld 
in  them  illustrations  of  principles  which  had  marked  the  dealings  of  God  with 
His  people  in  all  past  ages  of  His  Church,  and  which  would  continue  to  mark 
His  dealings  to  the  end.  That  end  is  constantly  before  him.  It  is  not  reached 
either  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  or  in  any  prospect  of  the  overthrow  of 
the  Roman  power.  It  comes  only  with  the  final  manifestation  of  the  Lord,  with 
the  final  judgment  of  the  wicked,  and  with  the  casting  of  death  and  Hades  into 
the  lake  of  fire. 

405 


INTRODUCTION.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 

Unquestionably  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  author  wrote  from  the  stand- 
point of  his  own  age,  with  its  events  before  his  eyes,  and  with  a  practical  purpose 
bearing  primarily  upon  it.  But  that  did  not  hinder  him  from  beholding  these 
events  less  in  themselves  than  in  the  eternal  principles  that  underlay  them,  and 
came  into  manifestation  through  them.  Nothing  is  clearer  than  that  he  was 
the  child  of  his  time  in  a  sense  in  which  few  writers  are.  Why  should  he  not 
also  be  steeped  in  the  principles  which  had  made  the  past  what  it  was,  and 
which  were  to  form  the  future  1  To  think  that  he  was  so;  to  think  that  he  cared 
more  for  the  ideal  than  the  phenomenal,  for  the  deeper  meaning  of  facts  than 
for  the  facts  themselves,  is  to  put  him  on  a  level  with  the  highest,  not  the 
lowest,  spirits  of  our  race,  and  with  all  in  whom  God  has  most  clearly  spoken. 

We  shall  be  wrong  if  we  treat  the  book  as  predictive,  and  if  we  seek  in 
particular  events,  either  of  the  Church's  or  the  world's  history,  for  the  fulfilment 
of  its  supposed  predictions.  The  book  is  mainly  occupied  with  the  enunciation  of 
the  great  principles  which  guide  the  action  of  the  Church's  Lord,  until  the  time 
of  His  return. 

Everything  contained  in  the  Apocalypse  is  to  be  understood  symbolically  and 
spiritually.  Even  did  this  not  appear  on  the  face  of  the  book  as  a  whole,  the 
writer  gives  us  in  one  case  a  clear  indication  of  the  principle  of  interpretation  he 
would  have  us  apply.  When  speaking  of  the  fate  of  the  two  witnesses,  he  says, 
in  ch.  xi.  8,  "  And  their  dead  bodies  lie  in  the  streets  of  the  great  city,  which 
spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  Egypt " — words  clearly  showing  that,  in  this 
instance  at  least,  we  are  not  to  interpret  literally.  Apart,  however,  from  these 
particular  words,  literal  interpretation  must  be  admitted  by  all  to  be,  at  least  in 
the  main  parts  of  the  book,  impossible.  The  only  question  might  be,  whether 
we  are  to  draw  any  line  between  the  symbolical  and  the  literal,  and  if  so,  where 
and  how?  No  absolute  rule  can  be  laid  down.  The  skill  and  tact  of  the 
interpreter  can  alone  guide  him.  But  this  much  may  be  said,  that  where  by  far 
the  larger  portion  of  the  book  is  symbolical,  the  probabilities  are  in  favour  of  the 
supposition  that  all  is  so. 

Symbolical  language  may  be  a  not  less  definite  exponent  of  human  thought 
than  any  other  form  of  speech  that  we  employ.  The  same  symbol  may  be  used, 
and,  on  the  lips  of  a  true  teacher,  will  be  used  as  strictly  as  any  word  that  liter- 
ally expresses  his  idea.  The  meaning  may,  in  the  present  instance,  be  at  first 
more  difficult  to  discover,  because  in  the  West,  which  is  so  much  colder  and  more 
phlegmatic  than  the  East,  we  are  accustomed  to  give  much  less  play  to  the 
imagination  than  is  done  in  regions  at  once  warmer,  grander,  and  more 
mysterious.  But  of  this  we  may  be  assured :  that  a  distinct  meaning  lies 
beneath  the  figures  that  are  employed. 

One  of  the  great  lessons  of  the  Apocalypse  consists  in  this,  that  it  unfolds  such 
a  bright  view,  not  of  a  world  beyond  the  grave,  but  of  this  present  world,  when 
we  contemplate  it  with  the  eye  of  faith,  and  penetrate  through  the  veil  of  sense 
to  the  great  springs  of  spiritual  action  by  which  it  is  really  moved.  It  may  be 
doubted  if  in  this  respect  there  is  one  single  picture  of  the  Apocalypse  applicable 
only  to  the  future  inheritance  of  the  saints.  What  is  set  forth  in  its  apparent 
406 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,    inteoduction. 

visions  of  future  happiness  is  rather  the  present  privilege  of  believers,  when  they 
look  at  what  they  possess  in  the  light  of  that  Christian  revelation  in  which  old 
things  pass  away,  and  all  things  are  made  new.  If  we  enter  upon  the  study  of 
it  with  this  feeling — and  it  is  a  feeling  which,  as  the  spirituality  of  the  Church 
increases,  will  more  and  more  commend  itself  to  the  Christian  mind — the  visions 
of  this  book  will  be  to  us  what  they  were  to  the  apostle  who  first  beheld  them. 
They  will  give  us  fellowship  on  the  loneliest  rock  of  the  wide  ocean  of  life,  and 
they  will  lighten  the  darkest  spots  of  earth  with  a  heavenly  and  unchanging 
glory. — W.  Milligan,  D.D. 

Opposition  to  the  Descriptive  Theory. 

There  are  two  possible  theories,  the  historical  and  the  descriptive.  The 
descriptive  theory  is  that  which  sees  in  the  book  only  the  symbolical  representa- 
tion of  great  ideas  and  principles ;  proclamations  of  eternal  truth  in  general 
terms.  Against  this  it  is  urged  ;  1. — Tho  mere  expression  of  general  principles  of 
the  Divine  government  hardly  affords  a  sufficient  motive  for  so  complicated  and 
difficult  a  book.  These  ideas  are  plainer  than  the  book  written  to  enforce  them. 
2.  The  theory  is  not  self-consistent,  for  it  admits  that  there  may  be  some 
predictive  or  historical  element  in  the  book.  And  if  any  of  this  element  is  to  be 
admitted — and  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  can  be  shut  out — then  this  scheme  of 
interpretation  fails  to  satisfy  the  demand  which  the  book  itself  makes.  3.  This 
book  ranks  with  Daniel,  and  the  two  books  stand  or  fall  together.  Both  are  what 
are  called  apocalyptic,  and  are  more  than  mere  prophecy.  What  may  be  asserted 
of  prophecy  cannot  be  in  all  respects  true  of  them.  While  we  have  no  right  to 
class  these  two  books  with  that  heap  of  writings  which  are  usually  denominated 
"  apocalyptic,"  yet  it  must  be  granted  that  such  a  method  of  interpretation  as 
the  "  descriptive  "  is  out  of  keeping  with  them,  as  having  characteristics  similar, 
though  in  a  higher  degree,  to  those  other  writings.  The  purely  historical  theory 
sees  in  the  book  only  closely  related  events  which  it  needed  no  predictive  power 
to  discover. — Principal  David  Brown,  D.D, 


407 


CHAP.  I.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE  REVELATION  OF  THE  LIVING  CHRIST. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

r.  1.  The  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ. — This  may  mean,  "  belonging  to,  or  proceeding  from, 
Jesus  Christ,"  or  it  may  be  the  revelation  concerning  Jesus  Christ ;  i.e.,  the  partial  unfold- 
ing of  what  He,  as  the  living  one,  is  doi-ng,  and  vi^ill  do,  with  His  Church  in  the  world.  The 
mystery  which  has  to  be  unfolded  is  this  :  for  what  purpose  is  the  redeemed  Church  left  in 
the  world,  and  made  subject  to  the  varied  influences  of  calamities,  national  changes,  perse- 
cutions, and  temptations  ?  The  revelation  of  the  mystery  is  the  present  relation  in  which 
Jesus  Christ  is  standing  to  His  Church,  and  the  purpose  concerning  it  which  He  is  outwork- 
ing, and  for  which  He  is  using  these  various,  and  apparently  strange,  instrumentalities.  God 
gave  unto  him. — I.e.,  God  permitted  him  to  reveal  so  much  as  is  in  his  book  for  the  comfort 
and  encouragement  of  the  Church.  The  full  mystery  must  ever  be  hid  in  God  ;  but 
revelations  may  be  made  to  men  within  limitations  which  the  Divine  wisdom  provides. 
Under  the  Old-Testament  economy,  faithful  souls  were  helped  and  cheered  by  partial  dis- 
closures of  the  Divine  plans  and  purposes,  through  the  agencies  of  the  prophets ;  and  in  the 
New-Testament  economy  the  discourses  concerning  the  last  things  given  by  our  Lord,  the 
prophecies  of  St.  Paul  and  St.  Peter,  and  the  Apocalypse  of  St.  John,  are  analogous  to  the 
work  of  the  older  prophets.  Shortly, — There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  apostle's  mind  was  full 
of  the  coming  events  of  his  own  time,  but  these  events  are  properly  regarded  as  typical  of 
the  events  which  recur  in  every  age,  and  are  used  by  the  Living  Christ  for  the  discipline  of 
His  Church.  By  His  angel. — The  visible  agent  in  the  Divine  communication  (chap,  x  .8, 
xvii.  7,  xxii.  8,  etc.).  John. — The  reason  for  calling  himself  "  servant "  rather  than 
"apostle"  does  not  appear  ;  but  that  the  author  of  the  work  is  the  beloved  apostle  seems 
to  be  beyond  reasonable  doubt.  *He  is  the  apostle  of  Christ's  higher  nature  and  living 
relations. 

Ver.  2.  Bare  record. — Or  had  already  borne  record.  The  expression  seerns  to  refer  to  St. 
John's  earlier  work  of  teaching,  if  not  to  the  gospel  and  epistles  he  had  written.  (Some 
regard  the  Apocalypse  as  his  first  work.)  Prophecy. — A  term  used  in  the  sense  of  "  dis- 
closure," as  well  as  "  foretelling."  A  prophecy  may  reveal  a  meaning ;  the  time  element  is  not 
essential  to  it.  "  Any  declaration  of  the  principles  of  the  Divine  government,  with 
indications  of  their  exemplification  in  coming  history,  is  a  prophecy.  The  prophecy  gives 
us  the  rule,  with  some  typical  application  illustrative  of  its  method  of  working ;  after  history 
affords  us  the  working  out  of  various  examples." 

Ver.  4.  Churches. — Or  congregations.  Asia. — The  single  province,  not  the  whole  Asia  Minor, 
It  may  have  been  the  province  in  which  St.  John  had  chiefly  laboured.  The  Seven  Churches 
are  taken  as  types  of  the  varieties  in  the  churches  which  make  up  together  the  one  Church. 
Seven  is  the  perfect  number.  Him  which  is,  etc. — God  Himself.  Note  how  jealously 
apostles  guard  against  the  possibility  of  being  so  interested  in  Christ  as  to  lose  the  sense 
of  God.  Christ  Himself  never  would  come  between  souls  and  God,  and  He  will  not  now. 
Seven  spirits. — Or  the  one  spirit,  with  differing  manifestations.  The  Holy  Ghost  must  be 
meant.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  see  why  He  should  be  represented  as  before  the  throne. 
Possibly  the  allusion  is  to  the  attendants  about  God's  throne  who  reverently  agree  in  what 
God  does. 

Ver.  5.  Jesus  Christ. — This  combines  His  human  name,  "  Jesus,"  and  His  human  oflSce, 
"  Christ,"i.f.,  Messiah.  St.  John  is  the  apostle  of  the  veritable  humanity.  Faithful  Witness. 
— Alluding  to  the  teaching  work  of  His  human  life.  First  begotten. — R.V.  first-horn,  which 
conveys  the  idea  of  the  text.  Christ  was  the  first  person  born  into  that  spiritual,  eternal  life, 
into  which  we  must  be  born.  Prince,  etc. — True  ruler  of  mankind,  because  King  in  the 
spiritual  sphere,  which  must  necessarily  control  the  material.  Bislwp  Carpenter  well  says  : 
"  The  disposition  to  dwell  on  the  future  and  more  visibly  recognised  reign  of  Christ  hereafter 
has  tended  to  obscure  the  truth  of  His  present  reign.    He  is  the  real  King  of  kings."   Washed 

408 


BOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.  chap.  I. 


us  .  .  .  blood. — Clearly  a  strong  figure.  Taken  literally  it  carries  no  meaning,  for  nothing 
ever  is,  or  can  be,  washed  in  blood.  It  will  appear  again  and  again  in  this  book,  and,  indeed, 
elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament,  that  Christ's  "  blood  "  stands  as  a  figure  for  the  strenuous- 
ness  of  His  endeavour  in  carrying  out  His  redemptive  mission,  which  mission  is  figured  as 
"  washing  us  from  our  sins."'  The  sentence  giving  the  key  to  the  use  of  the  term  is  this :  "  Ye 
have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin  "  (Heb.  xii.  4). 

Ver.  6.  Kings  and  priests. — R.V.  "  to  he  a  kingdom,  to  he  priests"  ;  see  1  Peter  ii.  5.  The 
service  which  Christ's  redeemed  and  cleansed  ones  are  called  to  render  is  partly  represented 
by  the  service  of  a  Ving,  and  partly  by  the  service  of  2i priest. 

Ver.  7.  With,  clouds. — Mark  xiv.  62.  Either  as  with  a  glory  which  must  be  tempered  by 
clouds,  or  magnificently  surrounded  with  clouds,  or  set  against  a  background  of  clouds,  so  as 
to  stand  out  most  impressively.  There  is  also  the  idea  that,  being  in  the  sky,  all  eyes  can 
be  turned  up  to  Him.  But  we  should  clearly  see  that  Christ's  coming  is  figured,  not 
descrihcd ;  indeed,  it  cannot  be  described  in  human  language.  Pierced. — John  xix.  34. 
Type  of  those  who  pierced  Christ,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  in  every  age. 

Ver.  8.  Alpha  and  Omega. — First  and  last  letters  of  the  Greek  alphabet,  regarded  as 
including  all  the  letters  between.  8o  Christ  bears  relation  to  the  whole  story  of  humanity, 
from  its  beginning  to  its  close.  Recalling  ver.  4,  we  incline  to  refer  this  verse  to  God 
rather  than  to  Jesus.     R.V.  has,  •'  saith  the  Lord  God." 

Ver.  9.  Companion. — As  having  a  full  share  in  the  experience  of  those  who  confess  and 
serve  Christ.  Tribulation. — The  work  of  the  threshing  roller  (trihulnm).  The  troubles  and 
persecutions  of  Christ's  Church  were,  in  the  control  of  Christ,  separating  the  chaff  from  the 
wheat.  Kingdom. — Or  recognised  present  rule  of  the  Living  Christ.  Patience. — Or  effort  to 
bear,  endure,  and  wait,  which  is  becoming  to  those  who  know  that  Jesus  lives.  Patmos. — 
A  barren  island,  now  Palmosa,  used  by  some  Roman  emperors  as  a  place  of  banishment.  No 
historic  record  of  8t.  John's  exile  has  been  found. 

Ver.  10.  In  the  Spirit. — This  means  in  a  rapt,  contemplative,  absorbed  state  of  mind  ;  but 
such  a  state  of  mind  may  well  be  thought  of  as  wrought  by  the  indwelling  Holy  Ghost.  It  is 
the  mood  of  mind  which  prepares  us  for  spiritual  visions.  Lord's  day. — An  important  state- 
ment. What  put  St,  John  into  this  rapt  condition  was  his  meditation  on  the  mystery  and 
glory  of  his  Divine  Lord,  as  the  Risen  and  lAvbig  One.  Great  voice. — Thinking  about 
Christ,  he  suddenly  seemed  to  hear  Him,  and  then  even  to  see  Him,  in  marvellous  symbolic 
form. 

Ver.  11.  For  the  Churches  mentioned  see  notes  on  each  epistle. 

Ver.  12,  See  the  voice. — "  See  Him  whose  voice  I  heard."  Seven  golden  candlesticks. — 
Compare  Zech.  iv.  2-11.  Lamp-stands  would  be  a  better  term.  Not  one  candlestick  with 
seven  branches,  but  seven  candlesticks.  The  independence  of  the  Churches  of  Christ  is 
consistent  with  the  unity  of  the  Church  of  Christ. 

Ver.  13.  Midst. — Middle,  centre.  Like  unto. — So  as  to  be  immediately  and  distinctly 
recognised.  "Son  of  Man"  was  Christ's  own  name  for  Himself.  It  is  used  here  because 
His  glory  might  hide  from  view  His  oneness  of  sympathy  with  His  people.  Down  to  the 
foot. — Compare  the  long  garments  of  priests.  Girdle. — Put  round  the  breasts  as  a  sign  of 
kingly  repose,  not  round  the  loins,  which  w^ould  be  a  sign  of  toil.  Christ  is,  as  head  of  His 
people,  the  great  Priest,  and  the  great  King.  These — the  garment  and  girdle— suggest  His 
offices.  Now  we  see  His  personal  character  and  His  power  for  fulfilling  His  offices.  Each 
figure  suggests  absolute  purity,  in  w^hich  lies  perfect  power. 

Ver.  14.  White. — Compare  scene  at  our  Lord's  transfiguration.  Flame  of  fire. — Which  is 
white  when  it  is  full  and  strong. 

Ver.  15.  Brass. — Which  glows  with  whiteness  in  the  furnace.  Many  waters. — Flowing 
down  hill-sides,  white  with  foam,  the  very  sound  of  them  in  harmony  with  whiteness. 

Ver.  16.  Seven  stars. — See  ver.  20.  In  His  light  these  glow  with  whiteness.  Two-edged 
sword. — Gleaming  white.  Sun. — So  white  no  eye  can  gaze  upon  it.  By  all  these  figures  the 
lustre  of  holiness  and  righteousness  is  signified. 

Ver.  17.  As  dead. — Compare  Job  xlii.  5,  6 ;  Isa.  vi.  5.  The  realisation  of  the  Divine  pre- 
sence, even  in  symbol,  is  profoundly  humbling  to  the  devout  man. 

Ver.  18.  I  am  alive,  etc. — In  this  sentence  is  the  key-note  of  the  book.  Hell  and  death. — 
Figures  of  all  the  forms  of  woe  that  can  affect  the  Church.  They  are  in  the  absolute 
control  of  the  I>iving  One,  and  are  used  by  Him  for  His  purposes. 

Ver.  20.  Angels.— Either  the  ministers,  or  the  guardian  angels,  of  the  Churches.  It  is, 
however,  quite  possible  that  they  represent  the  angels  appointed  to  conduct  the  discipline  of 
each  Church.  Then  what  is  asserted  is,  that  the  angel  of  discipline  for  each  Church  is 
absolutely  held  in  the  Living  Christ's  hands,  and  does  but  work  out  His  purpose  of 
grace. 

Note  on  the  "  Seven  Spirits  "  hy  Moses  Stuart, — After  dismissing  the  suggestions  that  either 
God,  or  the  Holy  Spirit,  can  be  meant  by  this  figurative  expression,  Stuart  argues  in  favour 

409 


CHART.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


of  a  third  possible  meaning — that  of  attending  or  ministering  presence-angels.  Among  the 
ancient  fathers  not  a  few  embraced  this  view ;  such  as  Clemens  Alex.  Andreas  of  Csesarea, 
aad  others.     So  among  the  moderns,  Valla,  Beza,  Drusius,  Hammond,  and  many  others. 

1.  The  nature  of  the  whole  expression  favours  this  view.  The  seven  spirits  lefore  His  throne 
naturally  means  those  who  stand  in  His  presence,  waiting  His  commands  in  the  attitude  of 
ministering  servants ;  see  and  compare  Rev.  iv.  5,  vii.  9,  15,  viii.  2,  xi.  4,  16,  xii.  10, 
xiv.  3,  XX.  12 — which  passages,  although  not  all  of  the  same  tenor  with  the  text  before  us, 
still  decide  that  those  who  are  before  the  throne  are  different  from  those  on  the  throne. 

2.  Several  passages  in  the  Revelation  go  directly  to  confirm  the  opinion  in  question. 
E.g.,  Apoc.  viii.  2,  "  I  saw  tous  eTrrd  ayy^\ov%,  who  stand  before  God."  This  is  the  first  men- 
tion of  these  seven  angels  which  occurs  after  the  introduction  to  the  book.  The  article  rows 
of  course  designates  here  the  well-known  seven  angels,  i.e.  archangels,  or  presence-angels, 
which  the  reader  was  expected  readily  to  recognise.  Such  a  meaning  is  unavoidable,  under 
such  circumstances.  Here  also,  I  cannot  doubt,  is  to  be  ranked  the  passage  in  Rev.  iv.  5, 
where  the  seven  lamps  burning  before  the  throne  are  said  to  be  rk  k-wra  irvevfxaTa  rod  Qeov, 
i.e.  the  seven  spirits.  All  the  passages  cited  serve  to  show  that  the  "  seven  angels "  was 
a  familiar  idea  with  the  writer ;  and  that,  in  this  respect,  he  only  followed  the  common  usus 
loquendi  of  his  time.  The  book  of  Tohit  introduces  Raphael  as  saying,  "  I  am  .  .  .  one  of 
the  seven  angels."  The  book  of  Enoch  gives  the  names  of  the  seven  angels  who  watch. 
The  word  "  watchers  "  is  employed  in  the  Syriac  liturgies  for  guardian  angels,  or  archangels. 
We  find  seven  Amshaspends,  or  archangels,  in  the  theosophy  of  Zoroaster. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—3. 

The  Mission  of  Prophecy. — We  are  familiar  with  the  fact  that  God  never  brings 
judgments  on  either  nations,  families,  or  individuals,  without  giving  them  previous 
warnings,  and  opportunities  of  repentance.  It  is  equally  certain,  though  by  no 
means  so  fully  recognised,  that  God  does  not  give  rewards  and  blessings  to  His 
faithful  servants  without  first  cheering  them  with  promises  and  prophecies. 
Hope  is  a  most  inspiring  and  ennobling  grace,  and  in  every  age  God  has  held 
before  His  people  something  to  hope  for.  The  assurance  and  prophecies  of  Old- 
Testament  Scripture  were  the  cheer  of  God's  saints  through  long  periods  of 
depression  and  anxiety.  For  them  the  curtain  of  the  future  was  lifted,  and  they 
saw  something  of  the  good  time  coming.  As  we  apprehend  the  conditions  of  the 
Christian  Churches,  and  especially  the  Gentile  Churches,  in  the  days  of  St.  John, 
we  can  recognise  the  grace  shown  in  thus  sending  them  this  revelation  of  things 
that  "  must  shortly  come  to  pass."  The  commotions  of  that  age  might  well  seem 
o\7erwhelming.  The  persecutions  imperilled  the  Church's  life.  What  could  bring 
cheer  to  fainting  hearts  like  this  assurance  that  the  Living  Lord  was  working 
amid  it  all  in  behalf  of  His  Church?  and  this  prophecy  that,  out  of  all  the  conflict, 
and  the  stress,  the  Church  would  come  purified  and  perfected,  a  bride  fit  for  the 
Sinless  One  ? 

I.  Prophecy  dispels  all  idea  of  chance  as  ruling  the  world. — It  does  not 
matter  whether  by  chance  is  meant  a  series  of  accidents,  or  the  outworking  of 
fixed  laws — prophecy,  as  a  forth  telling  and  foretelling  of  things  to  come,  makes  it 
impossible  to  believe  in  chance,  or  mere  law.  There  must  be  intelligence — and 
an  intelligent  One — discerning  the  future,  and  making  it  a  moral  power  in  the 
present.     One  verified  prophecy  would  witness  for  the  being  of  God. 

II.  Prophecy  delivers  from  all  fear  of  the  schemes  of  men. — If  we  could  only 
look  down,  we  should  only  see  what  men  were  doing.  Those  early  Christians 
might  easily  become  hopelessly  distressed  as  they  watched  the  schemes  of  men  in 
their  day.  Prophecy  delivered  them,  by  making  them  look  on,  and  see  how 
vain  men's  schemes  would  prove,  and  how  certainly  God  was  making  the  very 
wrath  of  men  praise  Him.  The  future,  unfolded  before  them,  showed  plainly  that 
God  knew  "  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  (men's)  persecution." 

III.  Prophecy  occupies  the  thought  and  heart  of  men  with  comforting  con- 
siderations.— The  best  relief  from  the  strain  of  what  is,  may  be  found  in 
meditating  on  what  shall  he.     We  must  live  in  our  to-day  for  the  doing  of  our 

410 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  1. 


duty.  We  may  live  in  God's  to-mw^row  for  the  comfort  and  good  cheer  of  our 
souls.  There  are  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  past.  There  are  fears  to  be  felt 
in  the  present.  But  there  are  hopes  to  cheer  us  in  the  pictures  of  the  future 
God  graciously  gives.  It  is  not  healthy  to  dwell  on  the  future  as  a  mere  store- 
house of  good  things  which  we  are  going  to  enjoy ;  but  it  is  healthy  to  dwell  on 
the  future  as  the  time  of  the  full  and  manifested  triumph  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.     And  that  is  the  prophecy  of  this  book. 

TV.  Prophecy  of  what  is  to  be  acts  as  a  persuasion  to  men  to  seek  what  must 
be  now,  if  they  are  to  share  the  good  prophesied. — See  ver.  3.  All  God's  good 
things  are  ours — only  on  conditions ;  and  those  conditions  are  to  be  met  now,  in 
our  present  relations.  There  are  endurances  of  present  tribulation  ;  steadfast- 
nesses under  present  strain,  witnesses  amid  present  opposition ;  maintenances 
of  loyalty,  even  at  cost  of  suffering ;  and  personal  purities  to  keep  while  sur- 
rounded with  defiling  Paganism ;  and  the  prophecy  of  what  is  to  he  inspires  to 
persistent  endeavour.  The  prophecy  that  says  we  shall  walk  with  Christ  in 
white  is  a  present  incentive  to  getting  white  and  keeping  white.  The  revelation 
given  to  the  Church  through  St.  John  is  really  a  prophecy,  and  intended  to 
have  on  the  early  Christians  the  usual  moral  power  belonging  to  all  Divine 
prophecies. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  1.  Revelation  of  Christ  in  the 
Church. — The  action  of  Christ  is  seen 
throughout  the  book.  It  is  Christ  who 
bids  John  write  to  the  Seven  Churches ; 
it  is  Christ  who  opens  the  Seven  Seals 
(chap.  vi.  1) ;  who  reveals  the  sufferings 
of  the  Church  (chap.  vi.  9) ;  who  offers 
the  prayers  of  the  saints  (chap.  viii.  3) ; 
and  delivers  the  little  book  to  John 
(chap.  X.  1-11).  Thus  it  is  seen  that, 
though  the  rise  and  fall  of  earth's 
history  is  included  in  the  revelation,  it 
is  a  revelation  also  of  a  living  person. 
It  is  not  the  dull,  dead,  onward  flow  of 
circumstances,  but  the  lives  of  men  and 
nations  seen  in  the  light  of  Him  who 
is  the  light  of  every  man,  and  the  life 
of  all  history ;  and  thus  we  learn  that 
"  only  a  living  person  can  be  the  Alpha 
and  Omega,  the  starting  point  of 
creation  and  its  final  rest."  The  testi- 
mony of  Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  this 
prophecy  as  of  all  others. — Bishop  Boyd 
Carpenter. 

The     Christian     Hope. — From     the 


beginning  of  its  history,  humanity 
has  lived  in  a  state  of  expectation,  of 
disquieting  fears,  and  of  glorious  hopes. 
*'  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise 
the  serpent's  head " — this  prophecy 
contains  already  an  indication  of  the 
formidable  struggles  which  are  impend- 
ing, and  of  the  assured  final  victory. 
This  expectation  concentrated  and  puri- 
fied itself  in  the  heart  of  the  people  of 
Israel,  which  was  ever  attracted  to- 
wards the  future,  and  whose  fervent 
aspirations  were  met  on  their  upwaid 
way  towards  heaven  by  the  prophecy 
which  was  descending  from  thence  to 
meet  it.  Through  Jesus  this  Divine 
aspiration  became  that  of  the  Church ; 
and  the  book  of  the  Apocalypse  is  the 
precious  vessel  in  which  this  treasure  of 
Christian  hope  has  been  deposited  for 
all  ages  of  the  Church,  but  especially 
for  the  Church  under  the  Cross.—  F. 
Godet,  D.D. 

For  the  life  of  St.  John,  see  Intro- 
duction to  his  epistles. 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  4—7. 

A  Salutation,  a  Doxology,  and  a  Prophecy. — It  is  important  to  notice  distinctly 
to  whom  this  book  of  Revelation  is  addressed.  It  is  neither  sent  to  the  world 
in  general,  nor  meant  for  the  world  in  general ;  and  it  takes  a  point  of  view 
which  makes  it  wholly  incomprehensible  to  the  world  in  general.    It  is  altogether 

411 


CHAP.  I.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


a  mistake  for  men  who  have  not  the  special  iUumination  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
belongs  exclusively  to  the  new,  Divine  life  in  men,  to  seek  in  the  book  of  Revela- 
tion for  any  events  or  details  of  human  history.  The  book  is  prepared  for,  and 
addressed  exclusively  to,  the  regenerate  persons  who  are  in  the  fellowship  of  seven 
particular  Christian  Churches,  but  to  these  Churches  as  representing  the  whole 
Church  of  Jesus  Christ  in  that  age,  and  so  to  the  whole  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
in  every  age.  The  book  of  Revelation  is,  strictly  and  exclusively,  a  Christianas 
book.  It  is  no  disclosure  of  the  progress  of  human  history,  even  to  him ;  it  is  the 
assurance — which  is  a  most  gracious  and  inspiring  assurance  to  him — that  the 
Living  Lord  Jesus  is  ruling,  controlling,  and  using  all  the  movements  of  men,  all 
the  calamities  of  nature,  and  even  all  the  ills  and  evils  brought  in  by  men's  bad 
passions,  for  His  purposes  in  the  disciplining  and  perfecting  of  His  Church.  It 
is  the  book  of  Revelation  of  Christ's  triumph  over  all  material  and  all  human 
evils,  in  the  interest  of  His  Church.  Keeping  this  in  mind  will  greatly  help  our 
understanding  of  the  book,  which  may  properly  be  called  "  Christ  in  History  for 
His  Church's  sake." 

I.  The  salutation. — "  Grace  and  peace  "  are  familiar  to  us  as  the  Old  Hebrew 
salutation,  "  Peace  be  unto  you  !  " — instinct  with  the  new  Christian  feeling  which 
recognises  peace  to  be  dependent  on  grace.  "What  is  peculiar  in  this  salutation 
is  the  threefold  source  from  which  St.  John  expects  the  grace  and  peace  to  come. 
1.  From  God,  the  Being  who  is  thought  of  as  outside  of  and  independent  of  time. 
"  From  everlasting  to  everlasting  thou  art  God."  This  thought  of  God  must  be 
seen  in  precise  relation  to  the  contents  of  the  book.  Such  are  the  commotions 
and  the  woes  of  the  human  story,  that  men  might  easily  be  so  unduly  oppressed 
by  them  as  to  fear  that  they  were  even  beyond  God's  control.  So  St.  John  starts 
with  such  an  assertion  concerning  God  as  involves  His  absolute  superiority — 
beyondness.  All  the  earth-story  is  but  a  day  in  His  eternal  years.  The  conflicts 
of  earth  are  to  Him  but  as  a  play  fight  of  children  to  a  father.  He  holds  it  all 
in  control,  and  can  give  peace  in  the  power  of  His  grace.  2.  From  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Church.  "The  seven  Spirits  which  are  before  the  throne"  (see 
"  Critical  Notes" ;  and  Special  Note  from  Moses  Stuart).  It  would  be  unnatural  to 
bring  in  the  Holy  Ghost  here,  because  of  the  attitude ;  because  of  the  unnatural 
description, — "  seven  Spirits  " — and  because  St.  John  does  not  usually  deal  with 
the  work  of  the  Spirit.  He  is  the  apostle  of  the  Person  of  Christ,  human,  and 
glorified.  God  is  thought  of  under  figure  of  an  Eastern  king,  seated  on  His 
throne,  surrounded  by  His  courtiers,  who  cheerfully  echo  His  wishes,  and  join  in 
wishing  for  the  Church  on  earth  "  peace  through  grace."  3.  From  the  Son  of 
God,  as  the  mediatorial  agent  for  administering  God's  grace  to  His  Church,  and 
so  bringing  to  it  peace.  Christ  is  presented  in  a  threefold  form,  as  Witness,  New- 
Born,  and  Prince.  This  description  must  be  seen  in  relation  to  the  contents  of 
the  book,  and  then  we  see  Christ  as  the  Witness  for  God  who  prepares  the 
Church  for  what  is  coming ;  as  the  first  to  possess  that  new  spiritual  life  which 
is  to  be  subjected  to  the  strain  of  all  these  earthly  associations ;  and  as  the 
Prince — Immanuel  commissioned  by  Shaddai — to  do  the  actual  ruling  and 
over-ruling  of  everything  in  the  interests  of  the  Church. 

II.  The  doxology. — Yers.  5,  6.  This  is  dealt  with  fully  in  one  of  the  Outlines. 
We  only  notice  here  that  praise  is  offered  for  (1)  Christ's  self-sacrificing  love; 
(2)  for  the  cleansing  which  that  self-sacrificing  love  effects;  and  (3)  for  the 
honour  which  Christ  brings  for  those  whom  He  has  cleansed.  Two  things  are 
desired  for  Christ ;  present  honour — that  honour  and  glory  which  come  from  full 
trust  and  loyal  service ;  and  final  triumph,  the  hastening  of  the  day  when  every- 
thing shall  be  put  under  His  feet.  The  doxologies  grow  in  strength  in  this  book. 
Here  twofold;  in  chap.  iv.  9-11,  threefold;  in  chap.  v.  13,  fourfold;  in  chap,  vii, 
12,  sevenfold. 

412 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  I. 


III.  From  prophecy. —  Ver.  7.  The  explanation  of  this  verse  depends  on  our 
regarding  it  as  indicating  what  Christ's  coming  will  be  to  the  Church,  or  to  the 
world.  Probably  St.  John  is  briefly  declaring  what  it  will  be  to  all  who  have 
not  been  cleansed  by  Christ  from  their  sins.  To  Christians,  Christ  is  presented 
as  the  Living  One,  who  has  come,  who  is  here,  and  who  is  now  working  for  them 
amid  world-scenes.  But  what  is  Christ  to  the  world  ?  Only  the  coming  One 
who  comes  for  judgment.  The  picture  of  the  coming  fixes  attention  on  the 
manifestation  of  Christ  in  the  majesty  and  terror  of  surrounding  clouds.  Then 
it  bids  us  see  the  upturned  eyes,  and  hear  the  hopeless  wail,  of  unrepentant 
humanity.  For  the  Saviour  of  moral  beings  must  become  their  Judge  when  His 
saving  grace  toward  them  has  been  finally  despised  and  refused.  Christ  coming 
to  a  world  of  sinners  can  but  be  an  appalling  revelation  to  them.  Seeing  Him, 
they  will  know  what  they  have  lost,  and  what  they  have  to  fear.  In  the 
righteous  dealings  of  God  the  good  man  cannot  fail  to  coincide.  "  Even  so, 
Amen."  But  this  must  in  no  way  be  represented  as  gloating  over  the  woes  of 
the  lost.  What  is  right  for  God  to  do,  is  right  for  God's  servants  to  approve. 
And  "  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ? " 

Note  on  ver.  4.  ^^ Seven  Spirits"  ]  so  chap.  iii.  1,  iv.  5,  v.  6.  In  the  second  of 
these  passages  it  would  be  possible  to  understand  the  names  of  seven  chief  angels 
(see  chap.  viii.  2) ;  but  here  it  would  scarcely  seem  possible  that  creatures  should 
be,  not  merely  coupled  with  the  Creator  as  sources  of  blessing,  but  actually 
thrust  into  the  midst  of  His  being,  between  the  two  Divine  Persons.  "  The  seven 
Spirits,"  thus  made  co-ordinate  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  can  scarcely  be 
other  than  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  is  known  to  us  in  His  sevenfold  operations 
and  gifts,  and  who,  perhaps,  has  some  sevenfold  character  in  Himself  which  we 
cannot  and  need  not  understand,  but  of  which  there  seem  to  be  intimations  in 
the  passages  of  this  book  referred  to,  and  in  Zech.  iii.  9,  iv.  10,  by  which  these 
are  certainly  to  be  illustrated. — W.  H.  Simcox.  M.A. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  4.  The  Number  Seven. — It  may 
not  be  inappropriate  to  note  that 
Philo  speaks  of  the  number  seven  in 
its  mystical  import  as  identical  with 
unity,  as  unity  developed  in  diversity, 
and  yet  remaining  one.  The  after- 
recurrence  in  this  book  of  the  num- 
ber seven  is  selected  to  support  the 
thought  of  completeness  and  variety; 
the  dramatic  unity  is  preserved,  though 
the  scenes  which  are  unfolded  are 
amply  diversified  ;  and  the  seven  seals, 
seven  trumpets,  and  seven  vials,  are 
not  three  successive  periods,  but  three 
aspects  of  one  complete  period,  presided 
over  by  that  one  Spirit  whose  guidance 
may  be  seen  in  all  ages  and  in  diverse 
ways. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

Seven  Spirits. — There  are  three 
possible    explanations    of    this    term 


which  claim  our  careful  considera- 
tion. (1)  It  may  mean  God,  regarded 
as  a  most  perfect  Spirit;  (2)  it  may 
mean  the  Holy  Spirit,  endowed  with 
a  most  perfect  nature  ;  or  (3)  it  may 
mean  the  seven  archangels,  or  presence- 
angels,  who  stand  near  the  throne  of 
God,  and  are  (so  to  speak)  prime 
ministers  in  the  execution  of  His  will. 

The  Seven  Spirits. — No  one  who  has 
studied  the  mystic  use  of  the  number 
"  seven  "  will  wonder  to  find  the  infini- 
tude of  the  power  and  the  glories  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  expressed  in  the  lan- 
guage, "  the  seven  Spirits."  The  Holy 
Ghost  is  described  as  ''  before  the 
throne,"  to  convey,  with  the  idea  of 
equality.  His  continual  procession  from 
the  Father  and  from  the  Son.  There 
is  another  reason  why  the  Holy  Ghost 

413 


CHAP.  I. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


is  called  ''the  Seven  Spirits" — in  that 
sevenfold  action  by  which  He  works 
upon  the  soul  of  a  man. 

I.  The  office  of  reproving  or  con- 
vincing.— "  He  shall  reprove  the  world 
of  sin."  To  show  us  what  we  are,  to 
make  us  feel  sin,  is  the  Spirit's  first 
work. 

II.  The  showing  of  Christ. — "  He 
convinces  of  righteousness."  There  is 
no  other  power  that  ever  can,  or  will, 
reveal  the  Saviour  to  a  sinner's  soul. 

III.  The  Holy  Ghost  comforts.— All 
the  Spirit's  comfortings  have  to  do 
with  Jesus  Christ.  He  never  uses 
the  commonplaces  of  man's  conso- 
lation. He  makes  Christ  fill  the 
empty  place,  and  exhibits  the  loveli- 
ness of  Christ's  person,  and  the  sufii- 
ciency  of  Christ's  work. 

IV.  The  Holy  Ghost  teaches.— He 
admits  the  believer  into  those  deeper 
hidden  meanings  which  lie  buried 
under  the  surface  of  the  Word.  He 
assists  the  memory  and  makes  it  re- 
tentive of  holy  things.  There  are 
none  who  teach  like  this  Teacher, 
because  He  knows  all  things — not  the 
lesson  only,  but  the  learner  also. 

V.  The  Holy  Ghost  sanctifies.— He 
prompts  every  good  desire  and  right 
thought.  He  gives  the  taste  for 
spiritual  things,  and  prepares  the 
timid  for  the  occupations  and  enjoy- 
ments of  a  higher  world. 

VI.  The  Holy  Ghost  intercedes. — 
Not  as  Christ,  who  carries  on  His 
work  without  us  and  prays  for  us  in 
heaven ;  but  He  inwardly,  throwing 
Himself  into  the  soul,  prays.  All 
true  prayer  in  a  man  is  the  prayer 
of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

VII.  The  Holy  Ghost  seals  the  soul. 
— He  lays  on  the  believer  that  stamp 
with  the  name  and  the  image  of  God 
which  every  power  in  earth,  or  in 
heaven,  or  in  hell,  shall  recognise. 
This  is  "  the  seven  Spirits  which  are 
before  the  throne."  I  thank  God  the 
"  seven "  are  one  and  the  one  is 
"seven."  Where  He  fulfils  one  of 
His  blessed  ofiices,  there,  sooner  or 
later.  He  will  assuredly  fulfil  them 
all. — James  Vaughan,  M.A, 

414 


Vers.  4,  5.  The  Gifts  of  Christ  as 
Witness,  Risen,  and  Crowned. — So 
loftily  did  John,  in  his  old  age,  come 
to  think  of  his  Lord.  The  words  of 
the  text  are  not  only  remarkable  in 
themselves,  and  in  the  order  in  which 
they  give  these  three  aspects  of  our 
Lord's  character,  but  remarkable  also 
in  that  they  occur  in  an  invocation 
in  which  the  apostle  is  calling  down, 
blessings  from  heaven  on  the  heads  of 
his  brethren. 

I.  How  do  **  grace  and  peace  "  come 
to  us  from  the  "  Faithful  Witness  "  ?— 
"Witness"  is  one  of  St.  John's  most 
familiar  words.  He  received  it  from 
Chiist  Himself,  who  claimed  to  be, 
in  an  eminent  and  special  sense,  the 
Witness  to  the  world.  Witness  of 
what  ?  Mainly  about  God.  All  our 
highest,  and  purest,  and  best  know- 
ledge of  God  comes  from  the  life,  and 
conduct,  and  character,  of  Jesus  Christ. 
The  name  "Witness"  indicates  the 
characteristic  and  remarkable  manner 
of  our  Lord's  testimony.  The  task  of 
a  witness  is  to  affirm ;  and  our  Lord 
makes  His  words  stand  on  their  own 
evidence,  or,  rather,  depend  upon  His 
veracity.  The  name  bears,  too,  on  the 
ground  of  His  testimony.  A  faithful 
witness  is  an  eye-witness.  That  Christ 
claims  to  be  in  His  witness  concerning 
God.  Is  there  not,  then,  grace  and 
peace  brought  to  us  all  from  that 
faithful  Witness  and  from  His  credible 
testimony  ? 

II.  We  have  grace  and  peace  from 
the  Conqueror  of  death.— He  is  the 
"  first- W/i  from  the  dead,"  the  resur- 
rection being  looked  upon  as  a  kind  of 
birth  into  a  higher  order  of  life.  1.  The 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  confir- 
mation of  His  testimony.  In  it  He 
is  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God." 
All  the  truth,  and  peace,  and  grace, 
and  hope,  which  flow  to  us  from  the 
witness  of  Jesus  Christ  to  the  Father 
are  neutralised  and  destroyed  unless 
we  believe  in  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead.  His  words  may  still  remain 
gracious  and  true  in  a  measure,  only 
all  dashed  with  the  terrible  mistake 
that  He  asserted  that  He  would  rise 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION.  chap.  i. 


again,  and  rose  not.  Strike  away  the 
resurrection,  and  you  fatally  damage 
the  witness  of  Jesus.  You  cannot 
strike  the  supernatural  out  of  Christ- 
ianity and  keep  the  natural.  More- 
over, faith  in  the  resurrection  gives  us 
a  living  Lord  to  confide  in.  And  in 
Him,  and  in  His  resurrection-life,  we 
are  armed  for  victory  over  that  foe 
whom  He  has  conquered. 

III.  We  have  grace  and  peace 
from  the  King  of  kings. — The  series 
of  aspects  of  Christ's  work  here  is 
ranged  in  order  of  time,  in  so  far  as 
the  second  follows  the  first  and  the 
third  flows  from  both ;  though  we  are 
not  to  suppose  that  our  Lord  has 
ceased  to  be  the  Faithful  Witness 
when  He  has  ascended  His  sovereign 
throne.  1.  He  is  "  Prince  of  the 
kings  of  the  earth"  just  because  He 
is  "the  Faithful  Witness."  That  is 
to  say,  His  dominion  is  the  dominion 
of  the  truth  ;  His  dominion  is  a  king- 
dom over  men's  wills  and  spirits  :  such 
rule  rests  upon  His  witness.  2.  He 
is  "  Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth " 
because  in  that  witness  He  dies,  and 
so  becomes  a  "  martyr "  to  the  truth. 
His  dominion  rests  on  love  and  sacrifice. 
He  is  the  King  because  He  is  the 
Sacrifice.  3.  Because  He  has  risen 
again.  His  resurrection  has  been  the 
step  mid-way,  as  it  were,  between  the 
humiliation  of  earth  and  death,  and 
the  loftiness  of  the  Throne.  By  it  He 
has  climbed  to  His  place  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  He  is  King  and  Prince, 
then,  by  right  of  truth,  love,  sacrifice, 
death,  resurrection.  And  King  to 
what  end  ?  That  He  may  send  grace 
and  peace.  Is  there  no  peace  for  a 
man's  heart  in  feeling  that  the  Brother 
that  loves  him  and  died  for  him  rules 
over  all  the  perplexities  of  life,  the 
confusions  of  providence,  the  sorrows 
of  a  world,  and  the  corruptions  of 
his  own  nature?  Is  it  not  enough 
to  drive  away  fears,  to  anodyne  cares, 
to  disentangle  perplexities,  to  quiet  dis- 
turbances, to  make  the  coward  brave, 
and  the  feeble  strong,  and  the  foolish 
wise,  and  the  querulous  patient,  to 
think  that  Christ  is  King,  and  that 


the  Hands  which  were  nailed  to  the 
cross  wield  the  sceptre,  and  that  He 
who  died  for  me  rules  the  universe,  and 
rules  me] — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Vers.  4-6.  The  Song  of  the  Forgiven. 
— Not  every  gift  calls  forth  a  song ; 
but  this  gift  of  forgiveness  is  worthy 
of,  and  has  obtained,  one. 

I.  This  gift  of  pardon  is  necessary 
for  the  Church. 

II.  It  was  purchased  at  a  great  cost. 

III.  Love  prompted  its  bestowment. 

IV.  It  is  bestowed  freely. 

V.  Like  all  the  benefactions  of 
love,  it  is  bestowed  promptly. 

VI.  It  is  all-inclusive. 

VII.  It  brings  with  it  all  other 
blessings. — R.  A.  Bertram. 

Ver.  5.  Christ^s  Present  Love  and  its 
Great  Act.—R.Y.  "  Unto  Him  that 
loveth  us,  and  looseth  us  fiom  our 
sins  by  His  blood." 

I.  The  ever-present,  timeless  love 
of  Jesus  Christ. — St.  John  wrote 
nearly  half  a  century  after  Jesus 
Christ  was  buried,  and  he  proclaims, 
not  a  past  love,  not  a  Christ  that 
lived  long  ago,  but  a  Christ  that 
lives  now ;  and  he  speaks  as  "  the 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved."  This 
is  unintelligible,  unless  we  believe 
Christ  to  be  Divine.  He  loves  us  with 
an  everlasting  love,  because  He  is  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh.  The  Divine 
nature  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
woven  through  the  whole  of  the  book 
of  Bevelation,  like  a  golden  thread. 
Christ's  love,  then,  is  (1)  unaffected  by 
time,  for  it  is  the  love  of  One  who  is 
Divine.  As  of  all  His  nature,  so  of 
all  His  love,  we  may  be  sure  that  time 
cannot  bound  it.  And  it  is  (2)  not  dis- 
turbed or  absorbed  by  multitudes.  He 
loveth  us.  It  is  (3)  unexhausted  by 
exercise,  pouring  itself  ever  out,  and 
ever  full  notwithstanding.  It  is  (4)  a 
love  unchilled  by  the  sovereignty  and 
glory  of  His  exaltation.  There  is  a 
wonderful  diflference  between  the  Christ 
of  the  gospels  and  the  Christ  of  the 
Revelation.  But  the  nature  behind 
the  differing  circumstances  is  the  same. 

415 


CHAP.  I. 


H03I1LETIC  C03IMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


II.  The  great  act  in  time  which  is 
the  outcome  and  proof  of  this  endless 
love. — "  He  looseth  us."  The  metaphor 
is  that  of  bondage.  We  are  held  and 
bound  by  the  chains  of  our  sins. 
Christ  looses  them  by  "  His  blood." 
The  death  of  Christ  has  power  to 
deliver  us  from  the  guilt  and  penalty 
of  sin.  His  blood  looses  the  fetters  of 
our  sins,  inasmuch  as  His  death,  touch- 
ing our  hearts,  and  also  bringing  to  us 
new  powers  through  the  Spirit,  frees  us 
from  the  power  of  sin,  and  brings  into 
operation  new  powers  and  motives, 
which  deliver  us  from  our  ancient 
slavery. 

III.  The  praise  which  should  be 
our  answer  to  this  great  love. — Irre- 
pressible gratitude  bursts  into  a  doxo- 
logy  from  St.  John's  lips  as  he  thinks 
of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  all  through 
the  Apocalypse  we  hear  the  shout  of 
praise  from  earth  or  heaven. — A. 
Madarerij  D.D. 

Vers.  5,  6.  A  Suggestive  Doxology. — 
This  is  a  doxology — a  sudden  outburst 
of  praise.  There  are  many  such  in 
Scripture,  and  they  show  that  religion 
is  a  matter  of  emotion,  and  not  of 
intellect  only.  St.  John,  in  his  vision 
of  the  redeemed  world,  saw  that  the 
mention  of  Christ's  name  woke  the 
heavenly  song,  and  set  the  angels  and 
the  redeemed  singing  together  His 
praise.  In  the  doxology  now  before 
us,  though  we  seem  to  have  no  more 
than  St.  John's  human  feeling,  we 
have  in  reality  the  praise  of  the  rapt 
and  entranced  man,  who  seems  to  him- 
self to  be  actually  taking  a  place  among 
the  redeemed  hosts,  and  only  giving  an 
earthly  form  and  voice  to  the  utterance 
of  their  heavenly  song.  The  doxologies 
in  which  the  redeemed  Church  takes 
part  grow  in  fulness  in  the  early  chap- 
ters of  this  book  of  Revelation.  In 
our  text  the  doxology  ascribes  *'  glory 
and  dominion."  The  four  and  twenty 
elders  ascribe  "  glory  and  honour  and 
power."  All  creation  ascribe  "  blessing, 
and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power." 
And  the  angels,  and  the  elders,  and 
the  four  beasts,  solemnly  bow  before 

416 


the  throne,  offering  a  sevenfold,  perfect 
adoration,  and  saying,  "  Blessing,  and 
glory,  and  wisdom,  and  thanksgivifig, 
and  honour,  and  power,  and  might,  be 
unto  our  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen." 
We  have,  in  the  text,  the  threefold 
marvel  for  which  we  should  be  ever 
praising  Christ  now,  in  our  measure, 
as  for  this  same  threefold  marvel  the 
redeemed  praise  Him  in  the  glory. 

I.  The  first  marvel  is,  that  He  should 
love  us.— "Unto  Him  that  loved  us." 
St.  John  dwells  on  this  as  if  it  were  a 
most  surprising  thing.  It  is  charac- 
teristic of  dependent  and  affectionate 
natures  that  they  cannot  understand 
why  it  is  that  they  have  become  objects 
of  love.  No  one  dwells  on  the  mystery 
of  God's  love  to  sinful  men  as  St.  John 
does.  His  pleased,  satisfied  feeling, 
which  so  often  finds  expression,  kept 
the  beloved  disciple  in  right  relations 
with  his  Saviour.  It  made  him  feel 
every  day  in  a  clinging,  humble,  thank- 
ful mood.  And  that  is  the  kind  of 
mood  we  all  need  to  win.  It  is  a 
marvel  indeed  that  Christ  should  love 
us.  If  we  were  lovable  we  might  feel 
no  surprise.  But  what  are  we  to  His 
all-searching  view  ?  Who  but  the 
Father  could  see  anything  attractive 
in  the  prodigal.  In  view  of  the  actual 
tone  and  temper  of  our  daily  life,  is  it 
really  a  surprise  to  us  that  Christ 
should  keep  His  arms  of  everlasting 
love  continually  about  us  1 

II.  The  second  marvel  is,  that 
Christ  should  *'  wash  us  from  our 
sins  in  His  own  blood." — The  cleans- 
ing power  of  the  blood  of  Christ  was 
one  of  this  apostle's  most  cherished 
ideas.  The  words  of  Jesus  on  the 
supper  night,  "If  I  wash  thee  not, 
thou  hast  no  part  with  Me,"  gave 
St.  John  a  key-thought,  which  un- 
locked for  him  the  mystery  of  the  risen 
Christ's  continuous  work,  and  explained 
the  relation  in  which  the  redeemed  ones 
must  ever  stand  to  Christ.  That  com- 
pany of  white-robed  saints  in  heaven,  is 
not  a  company  of  sinners,  all  of  a  sudden 
washed  and  cleansed.  It  is  made  up 
of  sanctified  sinners,  whose  Christian 
sins  have  been  washed  away  by  Christ, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.         chap.  I. 


through  the  gracious  agency  of  earthly  figuratively  used  by  St.  John  con- 
tribulations.  The  figure  of  washing  is  corning  His  present  work  in  the 
a  somewhat  difficult  one  for  us  to  "  heavenlies,"  stands  for  His  present 
apprehend,  because  one  side — another  efforts  and  suffering  anxieties — up,  as 
side — of  our  Eedeemer's  work.  His  it  were,  to  measures  of  blood — borne 
justifying  work.  His  work  of  setting  in  carrying  out  the  heavenly  mission 
us  in  a  right  standing  with  Gcd,  has  of  sanctifying  that  is  now  entrusted  to 
been  almost  unduly  pressed  on  atten-  Him.  Christ's  blood,  when  it  is  applied 
tion.  We  may  be  helped  by  observing  to  His  human  history,  stands  as  a  figure 
that  washing  is  not  so  much  an  act  as  for  His  strenuous  earnestness,  and 
a  procesSj  and  that  it  bears  relation  to  sacrificing  endeavours  as  a  human 
stains  on  the  garments,  and  foulness  on  Saviour.  Christ's  blood,  if  it  is  applied 
the  person.  It  is  a  prolonged  business  to  His  present  continuing  life  in 
to  get  the  foulness  off,  and  the  stains  heaven,  stands  as  a  figure  for  the 
out ;  and  several  processes,  and  often  strenuous  earnestness,  and  sacrificing 
severe  ones,  have  to  be  gone  through,  endeavours  of  His  heavenly  life, 
Christ's  washing  is  to  be  distinguished  as  our  Intercessor,  High  Priest,  and 
from  His  forgiving  and  His  justifying.  Mediator.  We  are  "  washed  in  the 
"  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  sanctified,  ye  blood  of  the  Lamb,"  then,  means  this  : 
are  justified."  Justified,  or  set  in  a  We  are  actually  now  being  cleansed 
right  standing  before  God.  Washed,  from  our  pollutions,  our  corruptions, 
or  cleansed  from  the  defilements  left  our  evil  inclinations,  our  easily  beset- 
from  the  old-time  of  sin  and  self-will,  ting  sins,  by  the  present  gracious 
Sanctified,  or  positively  endowed,  clothed  working  of  the  Living  Saviour,  who 
upon,  with  the  beautiful  and  pure  spirit  still  works  in  us,  even  as  He  did  on 
of  Christ.  We  can  readily  see  how  earth  for  His  disciples,  up  to  such 
those  who  had  been  brought  over  from  measures  as  can  only  be  represented 
the  defilements  and  moral  corruptions  by  the  shedding  of  His  blood.  "  Ye 
of  heathenism  would  deeply  feel  the  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood, 
marvel  of  Divine  grace,  shown  in  wash-  striving  against  sin  ;  "  but  Christ,  our 
ing  them  from  their  sins.  That  they  Lord,  has  so  resisted,  and  is  so  resisting 
would  be  able  to  get  fully  rid  of  the  every  day.  He  rolls  over  us,  back 
relics  of  immorality  and  foulness,  left  and  fro,  His  own  great  trihulum,  the 
from  their  old  heathen  life,  must  have  threshing  roller  of  testings  and  suffer- 
seemed  to  them  impossible  ;  and  so,  for  ings,  parting  the  chaff  from  the  wheat, 
them  to  be  actually  clean  at  last,  and  But  have  we  watched  Him  at  the 
dressed  in  the  symbolic  white  robes,  rolling?  Have  we  seen  that  the  rolling 
was  to  them  the  marvel  of  marvels.  is  hard  work  to  Him — straining  work 
This  much  is  easy  in  explanation  of  for  Him  ?  In  His  supreme  concern  for 
the  figure ;  but  what  did  the  apostle  our  washing  and  cleansing.  He  brings 
mean  by  washing  *'  in  His  own  blood."  right  over  us,  body  and  soul,  the  great 
We  do  not  wash  things  in  blood.  threshing  roller  of  tribulation,  and  will 
Even  in  Judaism,  there  was  sprinkling  sacrifice  Himself  up  to  measures  of 
with  blood,  but,  in  our  sense  of  wash-  blood,  if  He  can  but  cleanse  us  from 
ing,  neither  garments,  nor  persons,  all  sin,  and  make  us  pure  grain,  free 
nor  sacrifices,  were  ever  washed  in  and  faultless.  It  is  the  marvel  of 
blood.  Perhaps  this  was  the  apostle's  marvels — Christ,  the  infinite  Cleanser, 
meaning  :  Christ's  blood,  as  referring  is  actually  at  work  in  our  lives  to-day  ; 
to  His  earthly  work,  stands  for  His  and  the  work  is  so  hard  that  it  even 
sufferings,  borne  in  carrying  out  His  costs  Him  groans,  and  tears,  and  blood, 
life-mission  as  man's  Redeemer — suffer-  III.  The  third  marvel  is,  that  He 
ings  which  were  consummated  in  His  should  make  us  "  kings  and  priests 
offering  Himself  unto  blood-shedding  unto  God." — The  symbol  of  the  washing 
and    death.      And   so    Christ's   blood,  naturally  leads  on  to   the   symbol   of 

EE  417 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


consecration.  God  does  not  merely 
turn  citizens  and  subjects  into  kings, 
and  common  people  into  priests.  That 
would  be  a  very  little  thing  to  count  a 
marvel  of  grace.  In  the  old  Jewish 
thought,  kings  and  priests  were  God's 
"  anointed  ones  " — anointed  to  some 
special  service,  as  Aaron  and  David. 
And  it  is  in  just  this  concerning  them- 
selves that  redeemed  souls  rejoice. 
They  are,  in  the  higher  sense,  king's 
and  priests,  consecrated  to  God's  ser- 
vice, altogether  set  apart  as  His,  having 
every  power  and  faculty  absorbed  in 
His  work.  Will  not  that  be  a  marvel 
for  us,  who  have  been  so  long  busied 
with  our  own  things — so  busied  that  we 
could  scarcely  find  even  corners  of  our 
time  and  life  for  the  things  of  God? 
At  last  we  shall  be  wholly  Christ's,  to 
serve  Him  day  and  night  in  His  temple. 
We  shall  be  kings  and  priests  unto 
God,  and  in  that  find  an  all -satisfying 
heaven. 

Ver.  7.  The  Hope  of  God's  Church  in 
all  the  Ages. — Sometimes  we  dwell  on 
the  hope  of  the  Old-Testament  saints. 
Christ,  Messiah,  was  to  them  the 
coming  One.  To  us,  in  that  sense — per- 
haps also  in  a  yet  higher  sense — Christ 
has  come ;  that  old  promise  has  been 
fulfilled.  And  yet  Christ  is  to-day 
what  He  has  always  been — the  coming 
One.  Can  we  profitably  think  of  the 
ever-coming  Onel 

I.  The  hope,  in  the  old  Church,  was 
Messiah's  coming. — The  world,  every- 
when  and  everywhere,  has  its  "  Golden 
Age,"  and  it  is  always  somewhere 
ahead.  Men  have  always  been  heard 
saying  to  their  fellows  : — 

"  Courage,   boys,   wait  and  see  ;  Freedom's 
ahead." 

The  world  would  sink  into  helplessness 
and  despair  without  that  hope.  A 
sovil  is  not  lost  till  it  has  lost  hope.  A 
nation  is  not  lost  till  it  has  lost  hope. 
But  how  did  the  hope  of  the  Jewish 
world  differ  from  the  hope  of  the 
poetical  and  imaginative  world  ?  Pre- 
cisely in  this :  that  it  centred  in  a 
person.     And  the  person  was  its  mani- 

418 


fested  God.  That  hope  in  a  coming 
person  kept  up  faith  in  the  living  God. 
More  than  that,  better  than  that,  the 
hope  kept  up,  day  by  day,  the  sense  of 
living  relations  with  the  living  God, 
and  the  conviction  of  the  Divine 
presence  and  Divine  interest.  And 
this  helps  us  to  understand  and  to 
realise  what  our  hope  of  Christ's  coming 
should  be  to  us. 

II.  The  hope,  in  the  modern  Church, 
is  Christ's  coming. — That  is  the  "  Good 
time  coming  "  of  which  the  Christian 
ever  dreams  and  sings.  But  it  is  still 
true  that  the  Christian's  hope  differs 
from  the  world's  hope,  just  as  of  old. 
It  centres  in  a  person.  Christian  life 
is  love  to  a  person.  Christian  hope  is 
being  with  the  person  we  love.  1.  See 
how  the  Christian's  hope  keeps  up 
faith  in  the  living  God.  A  faith 
scarcely  needed  in  this  age  of  "  law," 
and  "  material  success."  2.  See  how 
the  Christian  hope  brings  Christ  into 
present  relations  with  us.  His  coming 
is  the  consummation  and  issue  of  what 
He  is  now  presiding  over.  We  cannot 
hold  the  hope  of  Christ's  coming  apart 
from  the  spiritual  conviction  that 
Christ  is  now  with  us. 

III.  The  Christian  hope  was  held 
in  a  formal  and  material  way  in  the 
apostolic  age. — Indeed,  it  could  then 
be  held  in  no  other.  Pictures  always 
come  before  principles.  That  was  the 
child-age  of  Christianity.  The  Christ- 
ian then  "  understood  as  a  child." 
The  apostles  took  Christ's  words  liter- 
ally. They  are  not  to  be  so  taken, 
for  "  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life." 
Apostles  expected  the  return  of  the 
Lord  in  their  day,  and  as  a  bodily 
appearance.  Were  they  right?  Cer- 
tainly Christ  did  not  come  in  their 
day,  just  as  they  expected.  Nay,  this 
further  is  true,  Christ  has  never  so 
come  yet :  and  that  could  not  have  been 
His  meaning;  that  must  have  en- 
shrined His  meaning.  The  truth  is 
that  our  Lord  put  His  spiritual  mean- 
ing into  a  formal  setting,  and  we  have 
to  find  His  secret. 

IV.  The  Christian  hope  gets  a  final 
statement  in  the  book  of  Revelation, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.         chap,  i 


— Notice  the  sudden  insertion  of  this  citements,  controversies,  and  national 

verse,  and  St.  John's  way  of  giving  a  perplexities,   and   set   before  ourselves 

thesis,  or  summary.     He  really  wrote  the  actual  historical  materials  of  the 

a  book  of  illustrations  of  this  double  various  visions.     Indeed,  we  cannot  be 

point.     The   Living   Christ   is   always  sure  how  much  of  it  is  historical,  and 

here,  and  yet   is   always  coming  into  how  much  symboUcal.     And  we  do  not 

definite  relations,  for  every  emergency  quite  understand   how  Old-Testament 

of  His  Church.     He  is  ever  working  images,  such  as  are  found  in  the  books 

towards    His   own   climax.     Christ   is  of  Ezekiel  and  Daniel,  can  be  put  to 

always  coming  for — 1.  Special  help —  New-Testament  uses.     There  is  an  ex- 

of  the  faithful.      2.  Special   discipline  aggeration  and  an  extravagance  about 

— of   the   wayward.     3.  Special    judg-  the  forms  of  Eastern  poetry,  and  even 

ment — of  the  wilful.     These  are  illus-  of  Eastern  prose,  which  sorely  puzzles 

trated   in    the   epistles   to   the    Seven  the  more  orderly  and  formal  Western 

Churches  in  Asia.  mind.      The     contents    of    the    book 

appear  to  be  a  series  of  Divine  judg- 

The  Christ  who  is  the  Coming  One. —  ments,  running  through  the  Christian 

The  story  of  the  human  race  may  be  ages  ;  and  the  text  affirms  that  Christ 

read    as  the   story   of    the    successive  comes   in   all    these    judgments,    and 

comings   of    God   in    Christ    unto    it.  works    His   work   of    grace,    for    His 

There  have  been — 1.  Comings  in  sign  people,  and  for  His  Church,  by  means 

and  symbol,  from   the  first  symbol  of  of  them.     But  this  is  a  larger  and  more 

the  Cherubim  set  watching  and  guard-  comprehensive  view  of  Christ's  coming 

ing   the    way    to   the    "  tree    of   life."  than  is  usually  taken. 

2.  Comings  in  vision  and  dream,  from  I.   Christ   coming   in  judgments. — 

the  first  vision  to  Abraham,  who  saw  Fix  these  points  :  judgments  in  a  man's 

the  smoking  furnace  and  burning  lamp  life,  or  in  a  nation's  life,  the  book  of 

pass  between  the  severed  pieces  of  the  Revelation   teaches    us   to   regard    as 

victims.      3.    Coming   in   angel   mani-  Christ's  coming.      Christianity  stands 

festation,   from    the  three  men  whom  in  the  closest  connection  with  all  human 

Abraham    led    on  their  way  to  make  calamity.     Read  the  verse  in  this  light, 

due  examination  of  the  truth  concern-  Clouds :      the    recognised    symbol     of 

ing  Sodom.     4.  Comings  in  the  flesh  :  calamity,  regarded  as  Divine  judgment. 

"The     Word    was    made    flesh,    and  (See   associations   in   Jewish    history.) 

dwelt   among    us,    full    of   grace   and  Sometimes  "  clouds "  represent  "  mys- 

truth."      5.  Comings   in   the  Spirit —  tery,"  but  usually  "  Divine  calamity." 

according   to    the   word    of   the    Lord  Every  eye :  we  are  not  able  to  conceive 

Jesus  :  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfort-  how  this  can  be  one  localised  event.  But 

less,  I  will  come  to  you."     6.  Comings  it  is  the  fact  of  the  ages.      Christ  in 

in    judgment  :    all   human    calamities  judgment  is  universal.     Every  eye  does 

are  Divine  visitations.     7.  Comings  in  see  him.     They  who  pierced  :  this  is  for 

final   judgment :    *'  Inasmuch   as    He  a    class.      Only   one    soldier   actually 

hath  appointed  a  day  in  which  He  will  pierced  ;  but  plainly  the  words  repre- 

judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  the  sent    the    Jews,    as    a    nation,    who 

Man  whom  He   hath  ordained."     The  crucified  the  Lord.      They  come  into 

last  two  of  these  comings  seem  to  be  Christly  judgments,   and,    indeed,  are 

more  especially  referred  to  in  this  text.  under  such    now.      All  kindred^  etc.  : 

Strange,  and  complex,  and  difficult  to  who  also  now  come  under  the  Christly 

understand,  is  this  book  of  Revelation.  testings,  as  the  gospel  is  preached  to 

No  real  and  satisfying  key  for  the  un-  them.      Jesus  is  now  the  World-Test, 

locking  of  its  meaning  and  message,  as  the  Administrator,  the  Judge.  Human- 

a  whole,  has  yet  been  found.     We  can-  ity  now  stands  before  God  in  Christ ; 

not  so  precisely  recover  the  associations  all  judgment  is  committed  to  the  Son. 

of  St.  John's   age  as  to  know  its  ex-  Christ  does  come  constantly  in   judg- 

419 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


merits  on  men  and  nations.  No  sin 
ever  goes  unnoticed.  Christ  visits  for 
every  sin.  Bereavement,  failure, 
plague,  storm,  war,  are  never  seen 
alight  until  they  are  recognised  as 
Christ's  comings.  It  is  true  of  all  men. 
We  need  not  shift  our  thoughts  away 
to  some  appalling  day  in  the  far  future. 
"  Be  not  deceived  ;  God  is  not  mocked." 
"  The  avenging  Fates  are  shod  with 
wool,"  but  it  only  silences,  it  does  not 
prevent,  their  coming. 

II.  Christ  coming  to  judgment. — 
Once  for  all,  to  judge  your  life  as  a 
whole,  when  that  life  is  complete.     The 
"  when,"  the  "  where,"  the  "  how,"  of 
that  final  judgment  can  only  be  told  us 
in  figures.     What  we  can  get  firm  hold 
of  is  this  :  "  Our  life  on  the  earth  will 
be  estimated   by  an   infallible   judge, 
and  our  future  must  depend  upon  the 
result."     We  can  also  see,  more  or  less 
perfectly:  1.  That  God  in  Christ  will 
be  the  Judge.     2.  That  the  revelations 
which  God  has  made  to  us  will  be  the 
test.      3.    That  the  disabilities  under 
which  men  have  been  placed  will  all 
be  righteously  and  graciously  estimated. 
4.  And  that  all  actions  will  be  treated 
as  revealing  the  will  and  heart  from 
which  they  come.     Then  we  ought  to 
live  in  the  clear  sense  of  this  twofold 
judgment  relation  of  Christ.      As  we 
know  Christ's  judgments,  in  the  history 
of  the  ages,  they  have  all  been  designed- 
ly corrective.     And  some  are  able  to 
cherish  the  hope  that  even  the  final 
judgment  will  prove  to  be  corrective, 
as  all  the  others  have  been.     No  one 
may  speak  positively  on  a  matter  that 
is  not  clearly  and  fully  revealed,  but 
it  is  a  sublime  possibility  that  the  final 
judgment  may  prove  to  be  the  judgment 
of  the  redeeming  love  and  wrath — the 
"  wrath  of  the  Lamb."     Can  we  add 
"Christ  the  Judge^^  to  our  conception  of 
Christ,  and  find  that  view  of  Him  add 
to  our  confidence  and  our  love  ?     We 
have   not   seen   the   whole   of    Christ 
unless  we  have  seen  that  judgment  is 
committed  to  Him. 

Ver.   7.     Coming  ivith  Clouds. — See 
Dan.    vii.    13.      Accompanied   or   sur- 

420 


rounded  by  clouds  ;  for  /xera  (with)  fre- 
quently indicates  the  relation  of  a  thing 
with  other  things  which  accompany 
or  surround  it.  The  idea  here  is  that 
He  will  come  seated  on  a  cloud  as  His 
throne  or  chariot,  or  at  least  in  a  cloud 
moving  or  conveying  these.  So  God  is 
said  to  be  surrounded,  in  Ps.  xviii.  11. 
The  clouds  are  His  chariot  (Ps.  civ.  3). 
Compare  also  Exod.  xix.  16,  xl.  34  ; 
Isa.  vi.  4,  xix.  1 ;  Ezek.  i.  4.  The 
object  of  this  figurative  language  is  to 
show  that  Christ  will  come  in  a  majestic 
and  awful  manner,  as  enthroned  upon 
a  cloud  fraught  with  thunder,  lightning, 
and  tempest,  and  thus  will  execute 
vengeance  upon  His  enemies, — Moses 
Stuart. 

Christ's     Return     iu     Glory.- — Did 
not   the   Lord  declare,  in  the  assem- 
bled    sanhedrin,    and     at     the    very 
moment  when  His  death  was  about  to 
put  an  end  to  His  presence  upon  earth, 
"  I  say  unto  you,  Hereafter  shall  ye 
see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  on  the  right 
hand   of    power,   and   coming   in   the 
clouds  of  heaven "  1   (Matt.  xxvi.   64). 
In  that  notable  saying,  Christ's  return 
in   glory,    as   King   and    Judge — this 
latter  is  the  idea  implied  in  the  symbol 
of  the  cloud — is  closely  connected  with 
the  fact  of  the  Ascension.     The  reason 
is  that  in  fact  from  this  moment  the 
oflQce  fulfilled  by  Jesus  in  the  world's 
history  is  that  of  establishing,  by  the 
instrumentality  of    preaching,   and  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  He  sends  forth 
from  the  seat  of  His  glory,  His  kingdom 
in  the  earth,  and  of  successively  over- 
throwing all  the  obstacles  which  oppose 
themselves  to  its  progress.     His  glorious 
appearance,    when    the   close    of    this 
period  of  His  working  has  been  reached, 
will  not  be  His  coming — for  that  began 
to  take   place  from  the  time  of    His 
ascension  —  but     His     advent.        The 
coming  of   Christ  takes   place  during 
the  whole  of  the  present  age  ;  it  will 
only    be   consummated    in    the    event 
which  is  called  the  Farousia,  or  advent. 
Accordingly,  the  sigh  of  the  Church, 
and  of  the  inspired  bard,  who  prays  in 
her  name,  is  not.  Come  soon,  but,  more 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  I. 


exactly  and  literally,  Come  quickly. 
This  expression  refers,  properly 
speaking,  not  to  the  nearness  of  the 
arrival,  but  to  the  rapidity  of  the 
journey,  though  the  former  is  the 
necessary  result  of  the  latter.  This 
coming  of  Christ,  from  the  time  of  the 
Ascension  to  the  time  of  the  Parousia, 
is  therefore  the  true  subject  of  the 
Apocalypse,  just  as  His  first  coming, 
bttween  the  fall  of  man  and  the  Incar- 
nation, was  the  true  subject  of  Old- 
Testament   prophecy.       *' Behold,    He 


shall  come,"  said  the  last  of  the  prophets, 
at  the  highest  summit  of  ancient 
revelation,  speaking  of  the  Messiah - 
Jehovah  (Mai.  iii.  1).  The  history  of 
the  world,  in  its  essential  character,  is 
summed  up  in  these  three  sayings  :  He 
is  coming ;  He  has  come ;  He  will 
come  again.  It  is  upon  this  idea  that 
the  whole  plan  of  the  apocalyptic 
drama  rests.  In  every  journey  w^e 
contemplate,  as  distinct  from  one 
another,  the  starting  point,  the  journey 
itself,  and  the  arrival. — F.  Oodetj  D.D. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   TEE   PARAGRAPH.— Verse   8. 

The  Eternity  of  God. — It  is  thought  by  many  that  this  must  be  a  description  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  a  distinct  assertion  of  His  divinity.  But  it  would  appear 
more  simple  and  natural  to  regard  it  as  a  solemn  repetition  of  ver.  4,  especially 
as  the  w^ords  "  the  beginning  and  the  ending  "  are  of  doubtful  authority.  Among 
the  Rabbins  the  expression  from  x  to  fi  is  a  common  one,  employed  to  designate 
the  whole  of  anything,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  Stuart  regards  God  as 
the  speaker.  But  elsewhere  (Bev.  i.  17,  xxii.  13)  the  same  thing  is  directly 
asserted  of  Christ,  whom  we  believe  to  be  one  with  the  Father  in  nature,  but 
other  than  the  Father  in  manifestation.  We  can  form  no  proper  conception  of 
beings  that  had  no  beginning.  We  had  j  everybody  with  whom  we  have  to  do 
had  ;  everything  around  us  had.  And  it  is  almost  as  impossible  for  us  to  con- 
ceive of  beings  that  have  no  ending.  Everybody  and  everything  seems  to  have 
a  limited  existence,  and  the  apparently  simple  idea  of  the  continuity  of  life  our 
minds  seem  unable  really  to  grasp.  At  least  so  far  as  the  earth-life  is  concerned, 
everything  has  a  beginning  and  an  ending.  See,  then,  what  a  sublime  assertion 
of  Divine  superiority  is  made  when  we  are  required  to  form  three  conceptions  of 
God.  1.  He  exists.  It  is  all  that  can  be  said  about  Him.  He  is  the  "  I  am," 
dependent  on  nobody  and  nothing,  adversely  aflfected  by  nobody  and  nothing. 
2.  He  always  did  exist.  Carry  the  story  of  the  world  back,  if  you  will,  through 
millions  of  ages,  God  was  before  the  first  age  begun.  What  changes  He  must 
have  seen  !  How  little  He  is  afiected  by  changes  that  seem  overwhelming  to 
us  !  3.  He  always  will  exist.  To  say  nothing  of  the  little  story  of  that 
Christian  age,  the  w^hole  story  of  the  world's  ages  is  as  nothing  in  His  sight. 
Egypt  gone,  Babylon  gone,  Bome  gone,  but  God  abides.  The  seemingly  long 
history  of  the  world — of  humanity  in  the  world — is  but  an  episode  in  His 
eternity,  and  readily  grasped  in  one  vision  by  Him.  What  grounds  of  fear 
can  that  Church  have  which  is  His  Church  in  the  World '? 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  8.  The  Eternal  Life  of  Christ  in  since    the   times   of    Capernaum    and 

Heaven. — One    fact     confers   peculiar  Bethany.      Yet,    notwithstanding    all 

interest   on  the   book   of    Revelation.  the   pomp  of  celestial  grandeur,   how 

Christ   speaks    by    His    Spirit   in    all  remarkable  is  the  minuteness  of  anxiety 

Scripture,      but    here   we   have   Him  which  the  messages  of  this  wonderful 

speaking   in    His  own    person  to  the  Being  manifest !     He  is  represented  as 

mortal  followers  He  left  behind  Him.  walking  in  the  midst  of  seven  golden 

But  a   change  has   passed   over  Him  lamps,   which  are  Churches,  to  typify 

421 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


His  indwelling  presence  and  pervading 
care  ;  and  each  Church  is  warned  with 
a  precision  and  particularity  that 
evince  how  impossible  it  is  to  evade 
His  scrutiny  or  defeat  His  purposes  of 
retribution.  What  His  present  rela- 
tion may  be  to  other  worlds  we  know 
not,  but  we  do  know  that  His  relation 
to  us  is  as  intimate  and  incessant  as  if 
no  other  object  existed  to  occupy  His 
thoughts.  In  His  highest  glory  we 
are  all  personally  interested.  All  His 
powers  and  privileges  of  being  our 
eternal  Governor,  Guide,  and  Friend, 
are  founded  on  the  great  declaration, 
"  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  Christ, 
who  "  liveth  for  evermore,"  is  set  forth 
in  two  great  characters,  in  both  of 
which  His  eternal  life  in  glory  is 
momentous  to  our  interests.  In  rela- 
tion to  sin  He  is  a  mediator  of  justifi- 
cation and  holiness;  in  relation  to  death 
and  pain,  He  is  the  author  of  endless 
life  and  glory.  1.  As  regards  the  con- 
flict with  sin,  He  justifies  and  sancti- 
fies. Both  are  based  upon  the  redemp- 
tion through  hlood :  it  is  the  sacrifice 
that  gives  our  Mediator  the  right, 
either  to  vindicate  or  purify  His  faith- 
ful. (1)  How,  then,  is  the  perpetuity 
of  Christ  in  heaven  connected  with  the 
work  of  our  justication  ?  In  the  epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  we  are  shown  the 
immeasurable  superiority  of  the  dis- 
pensation of  Christ  to  the  typical 
dispensation  of  Aaron.  It  shows  us 
that  the  covenant  of  Christ  is  better, 
for  it  is  a  covenant  of  grace ;  the  con- 
secration of  Christ  better,  for  it  was 
attested  with  the  solemnity  of  a  Divine 
oath ;  the  tabernacle  of  Christ  better, 
for  it  is  the  eternal  heaven ;  the 
sacrifice  of  Christ  better,  for  it  alone 
can  truly  take  away  sins ;  the  priest- 
hood of  Christ  better,  for  it  is  ever- 
lasting, after  the  order  of  Melchizedek. 
The  writer  establishes  the  pre-emin- 
ence of  the  sacrifice  and  the  priesthood, 
by  insisting  on  the  singleness  of  the 
sacrifice  and  the  perpetuity  of  the 
priesthood.  This  priesthood  of  Christ, 
then,  being  perpetual,  yet  employing 
but  a  single  sacrificial  act,  it  must 
consist  in  a  constant  r#f©renc©  to  that 

422 


sacrifice  of  which  His  own  blessed 
person  stands  in  heaven  as  the  un- 
dying memorial.  He  became  human 
that  He  might  save ;  His  perpetuated 
humanity  is,  in  heaven,  the  token  and 
warrant  of  salvation,  the  vestment  of 
the  Divine  priesthood  ;  that  we  should 
be  there  recognised  as  blessed,  it  is 
enough  that  the  Son  of  God  be  there 
recognised  as  a  man.  (2)  The  eternal 
life  of  Christ  in  heaven  is  yet  more 
directly  the  fountain  of  blessing  to  us, 
in  being  the  immediate  source,  not 
only  of  justification,  but  also  of  holiness ; 
not  only  of  gracious  acceptance  into 
the  favour  of  God,  but  of  all  the  bright 
train  of  inward  graces  by  which  that 
favour  effectuates  itself  in  us.  It  is 
the  perpetual  lesson  of  Scripture  that 
we  should  fix  our  hearts  in  entire 
dependence  on  Christ  Jesus.  He  sus- 
pends us  on  Himself  for  our  whole 
spiritual  existence;  He  will  have  us 
trace  every  emotion  of  faith,  hope,  and 
love,  to  His  bounty.  This  communica- 
tion of  Himself  is  no  less  necessary  in 
heaven  than  on  earth.  If  the  holiness 
be  everlasting,  the  source  that  supplies 
it  must  be  everlasting  too.  We  have 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  depend- 
ence on  Christ  shall  ever  cease ;  our 
very  exaltation  shall  be  but  to  feel 
that  dependence  more  nearly,  to  lean  on 
that  Arm  more  trustingly,  to  look  up  to 
those  Divine  Eyes  with  more  affection- 
ate confidence.  He  is  "  alive  for  ever- 
more," that  He  may  be  to  us  the  ever- 
lasting fountain  of  our  holiness.  The 
abiding  sanctity  of  His  nature  is  the 
condition  of  ours.  In  the  eternal  laws 
of  the  Divine  reason,  it  is  decreed  that 
Christ  shall  be  the  authorised  dis- 
penser of  spiritual  blessedness  to  His 
redeemed,  that  every  grace  shall  flow 
through  this  channel,  or  cease  to  flow. 
II.  Christ  is  "  alive  for  evermore  " 
as  the  eternal  antagonist  and  conqueror 
of  physical  evil,  pain,  and  death.  He 
is  the  radiant  centre  of  life  itself,  and 
happiness,  to  all  that  truly  lives.  He 
has  the  "  keys  of  death  and  of  Hades," 
that  is.  He  possesses  the  power  of 
liberating  from  the  bonds  of  death 
those    confined    in    the    intermediate 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.  chap.  i. 


state.  Human  death  is  the  result  of  happy ;  this  is  the  original  law,  and 
human  sin.  The  eternal  overthrow  of  general  rule.  Scripture  uses  the  word 
sin,  by  the  eternal  life  of  Christ,  in-  "  life  "to imply ''felicity,"  and  "  eternal 
volves  the  overthrow  of  that  which  is  life  "  to  imply  "  eternal  felicity." 
but  a  consequence  of  sin,  and  the  Glorious  alliance.  It  shall  be  bound 
conquest  of  death  is  the  conquest  of  eternally  in  heaven,  when  He  who  is 
all — pain,  disquietude,  disease — that  "  alive  for  evermore,"  shall,  in  the 
disposes  to  it,  and  in  it  ultimately  power  and  diffusion  of  that  life,  spread 
terminates.  First  and  second  death  around  Him  happiness  with  it  co- 
are  spoken  of.  Christ  is  the  destroyer  extensive  and  commingled.  Every 
of  one,  the  ruler  and  restricter  of  the  blessing  that  belongs  to  our  inheritance 
other.  The  first  form  of  death  results  centres  in  this  great  truth,  that  He 
on  the  sin  of  nature,  and  is  therefore  who  "  was  dead  "  is  now  "  alive  for 
universal  as  it  is  ;  the  second  form,  evermore."  In  Him  newly  born,  we 
which  perhaps  is  naturally  the  sequel  in  Him  die,  rise,  and  ascend ;  our  life 
or  maturity  of  the  former,  is,  by  the  is  the  reflection  of  His,  if,  spiritually 
mercy  of  God,  restricted  to  unpardoned  quickened  by  Him,  we  too,  like  Him, 
guilt.  There  is  an  eternal  alliance,  in  are  even  now,  and  hereafter  are 
the  primitive  counsel  of  God,  between  destined  yet  more  gloriously  to  be, 
life  and  happiness.  Even  on  earth,  "  alive  for  evermore." — W.  Archer 
beings  are  made  ahve  in  order  to  be  Butler^  M.A. 

MAIN  EOMILETIICS^OF  THE  PARAGRAPH,— Verses  9—11. 

A  Sublime  Commission. 

I.  To  whom  did  it  come? — John;  without  any  reasonable  doubt,  John,  the 
beloved  apostle.  Certainly  the  most  fitting  of  the  apostles  to  deal  with  the  new 
conception  of  the  person,  and  present  mission,  of  the  Living  Christ.  But  he 
puts  in  no  claim  to  be  heard  on  the  ground  of  the  insight  which  his  mystical 
temperament  brought  him.  He  does  not  even  claim  on  the  ground  of  his 
apostleship.  There  is  a  great  tenderness  in  his  simple  appeal  to  a  common 
experience.  It  is  as  if  he  said,  "You  are  in  much  anxiety  and  distress  for 
Christ's  sake,  and  so  am  I.  You  are  trying  to  be  patient  and  trustful  under  the 
strain,  and  so  am  I.  My  experiences  have  brought  to  me  most  comforting  and 
reassuring  visions  ;  I  will  tell  them  to  you,  so  that  you  may  be  comforted  by 
them,  as  I  have  been."  It  is  precisely  the  mission  of  those  who  have  much 
common  experience,  and  some  unusual  experience,  in  Christian  life,  to  cheer  and 
help  their  Christian  brethren.  Nothing  brings  soul  so  near  to  soul  as  companion- 
ship in  tribulation,  and  fellow-experience  of  the  need  of  Divine  patience. 

II.  Under  what  circumstances  did  the  commission  come  ? — St.  John  was  at 
the  time  separated  from  his  people  and  from  his  ministry.  It  was  a  time  of 
forced  seclusion,  and  lonely  meditation,  with  such  natural  associations  of  sea  and 
sky  as  might  help  to  fitting  moods.  Take  into  due  account  St.  John's  mystical 
temperament,  meditative  habits,  recent  trying  experiences,  sense  of  having  a 
trust  from  Christ,  and  immediate  surroundings,  we  can  see  that  he  was  the 
fitting  man  to  receive  this  commission,  and  that  it  came  at  a  fitting  time.  Such 
a  series  of  visions  probably  occupied  the  apostle  for  many  weeks,  and  the  series 
could  only  be  maintained  when  he  was  undisturbed  by  immediate  claims  of 
duty.  The  strange  times  of  life  are  often  the  great  times  of  life.  Illustrate  Luther 
at  the  Wartburg,  Bunyan  in  Bedford  goal. 

III.  What  form  did  the  commission  take  ? — A  series  of  visions,  not  in  any 
chronological  order,  but  apparently  visions  of  the  same  scenes  taken  from 
different  points  of  view.  St.  John  received  the  commission  from  One  whose 
voice   was   as   arresting   as  a   trumpet-call.     But   it   was   no   vague  blare  of 

423 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


trumpet;  it  spoke  in  intelligible  language,   though  using  strange  figures  and 
symbols. 

IV.  To  whom  was  the  messsge  to  be  sent  ?— To  seven  particular  Churches. 
Why  to  these?  Possibly  because  they  were  grouped  in  one  district,  and  bore 
one  general  character.  Possibly  because  they  had  become  the  special  "  diocese  " 
of  St.  John.  Possibly  because  they  would  effectively  illustrate  the  main  varieties 
marking  the  Churches  that  make  up  the  one  Church  of  the  redeemed.  It  is 
clear  that  our  interest  is  not  to  be  wholly  absorbed  by  the  particular  epistles  to 
particular  Churches,  since  the  message  is  to  the  whole  Church  of  all  the  ages ; 
and  we  have  only  to  see  that  the  various  forms  of  strain  and  tribulation  through 
which  the  Church  passes  are  necessary,  because  the  discipline  must  be  adapted 
to  a  variety  of  conditions.  And  this  variety  of  conditions  is  represented  by  the 
description  of  the  states  in  which  the  Living  Christ  found  these  seven  Churches. 
The  Church  has  its  own  particular  temptations  and  trials  in  each  successive 
age.  It  may  always  cherish  this  assurance  :  in  the  hands  of  Christ  they  bear 
direct  disciplinary  relations  to  its  particular  weaknesses,  or  failings. 

Note  on  Patmos. — One  of  the  Sporades,  the  south-eastern  group  of  the  islands 
of  the  ^gean.  According  to  tradition,  as  given  by  Victorinus,  St.  John  was  con- 
demned to  work  in  the  mines — which,  if  trustworthy,  must  mean  marble  quarries, 
as  there  are  no  mines,  strictly  speaking,  in  the  island.  Christians  were  sent  to 
the  mines  (Roman  Christians  to  Sardinia)  at  least  as  early  as  the  reign  of 
Commodus,  and  this  was  much  the  commonest  punishment  during  the  Diocletian 
persecution,  in  which  Victorinus  himself  suffered.  In  St.  John's  time  it  was 
commoner  to  put  Christians  to  death.  But  the  tradition  is  probably  right : 
*^  deportation,"  confinement,  without  hard  labour,  on  a  lonely  island  was  then 
and  afterwards  reserved  for  offenders  of  higher  secular  rank. — W.  H.  Simcox, 
M.A, 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  9.  The  Kingdom  and  Patience. —  know  the  mysteries  of  God's  words  and 

What    wicked    men   have   done   with  ways.       How   came   these   two   words 

Divine   Revelation   as   a   whole,   good  "  kingdom  "  and  "  patience "  together, 

men  have  done  with  that  part  of   it  as  if  they  properly  belonged  to  each 

which  we  call  by  itself  "  the  Revelation."  other?      And  how  can   we  be  *' com- 

You  commonly  divide  the  enemies  of  panions "    with    John    in    these    two 

truth  into  such  as  believe  more  than  things  ?     The  first  thing  w^e  have  to  ad- 

they  ought,  and  such  as  believe   less  mire  is  "  the  patience  of  Jesus  Christ." 

than    they    ought.      Superstition   the  Was  it  to  the  glory  forsaken  before  His 

crime  of  the  first,  infidelity  the  crime  death,  or  the  glory  inherited  after  His 

of   the   other.      These   are   the  errors  death,     that    the    word     "  kingdom " 

that      divide     the     readers     of     the  alluded?     The  latter  must  have  been 

Apocalypse.    One  order  of  readers  goes  intended.      St.     John     could     be     no 

too  far,  professing  to  understand  so  as  partner  in  the  glory  that  preceded  the 

to  expound  and  clear  up  the  whole  of  Advent.        Nor   could   any   of    us   be 

it ;  another  order  almost  entirely  pass  companions  in  that  glory.     So  that  the 

the   book  by,  as  if  the  Canon  never  kingdom   was    the    "  kingdom "    that 

contained  it.     Never  give  to  mysteries  followed  the  "  patience."     But  the  two 

the  go-by  because  they  are  mysteries.  epochs  in  Messiah's  career — the  earthly 

There  would  be  nothing  left  for  you  to  and  the  heavenly,  the  atoning  and  the 

love,  nothing  to  admire,  if  you  banished  triumphing — seem,  in  the  text,  as  if 

all   but   what  you  could  comprehend.  run  into  one  another,  as.  it  were,  with- 

Learn  what  you  can,  and  follow  on  to  out   a  break.      Nay,   the  "  kingdom  " 

424 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION. 


CHAP    I. 


is  actually  put  before  the  '•  patience," 
to  perfect  the  union  between  the  dying 
and    the    living     for    evermore ;     to 
illustrate  the  hold  He  had  upon  His 
reward  while  He  was  earning  it ;  the 
"  joy  that  was  set  before  Him,"  support- 
ing   and    staying    His     spirit    while 
enduring  the  cross  and  despising  the 
shame.      These    are    the     very    twin 
doctrines  of  our  salvation  :  that  Jesus 
Christ  suffered,  else  we  are  yet  unfor- 
given ;    and   that   Jesus    Christ    now 
reigns    after    the    suffering,    else    we 
preach    in   vain,  and  believe  in  vain. 
The  "  patience  "  takes  away  our  sins. 
The    *'  kingdom "    preserves    us   from 
sinning.     But  if  Jesus  was  manifested 
to  take  away  our  sins.  He  was  mani- 
fested  also   to   set  us  an  example,  so 
that,    besides   being    believers    in    His 
"  kingdom  and  patience,"   we  are,   in 
our  degree,  to  share  in  both  the  one 
and  the  other.     How  may  we  become 
companions   with    Christ,    as    well    as 
pensioners  on  His  sacrifice  ?     We  are 
not  glorified  as  soon  as  justified.     We 
must  be  "  made  perfect  through  suffer- 
ing."     And   we,   too,    *'have  need  of 
patience,"  and  in  experience  of  tribula- 
tions  we   become   companions   in    the 
patience  of  Jesus  Christ.     But  there  is 
no  "  patience  "  where  there  is  not  also 
the  '•  kingdom."      As  men  we  suffer  ; 
as   redeemed   men   we   sit   enthroned. 
The   servants   of    the   Saviour   live   a 
double  life.       "  As  unknown,  and  yet 
well-known ;  as  dying,  and  behold  we 
live,"  etc.      Take,   then,  the  patience, 
lest   you   mount   too   high ;  and    take 
also  the   kingdom,  lest   you   sink   too 
low. — Henry  Christopher  son. 

Johns  Banishment. — It  has  been 
beautifully  said  that  his  *'  banishment 
from  his  earthly  home  lifted  him 
nearer  a  heavenly  one ;  there  he  saw 
a  glory  he  never  witnessed  in  Jerusalem. 
So  Martin  Luther,  during  his  confine- 
ment in  Wartburg,  translated  the 
Scriptures,  and  had  the  enjoyment  of  a 
freedom  and  repose  to  which  thousands 
outside  were  strangers"  {Cumming). 
The  banishment  of  John  is  not  the 
only  instance  in  which  God  has  made 


the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him. 
*'  Satan  is  not  always  wise.  For  him 
it  would  have  been  better  had  he  never 
persecuted  Paul.  He  put  him  in  prison, 
and  there  he  wrote  some  of  his  beauti- 
ful epistles,  which  have  done  more  for 
the  world's  good  than  all  his  preaching. 
He  had  better,  for  his  own  interests, 
have  never  put  poor  John  Bunyan  in 
gaol,  for  there  he  wrote  the  book 
which  has  immortalised  his  name,  and 
done,  perhaps,  more  injury  than  any 
other  work,  save  the  Bible,  to  Satan's 
kingdom." — Thomas  Jones. 

The  Efficiency  of  the  Passive  Virtues. 
— Kingdom  and  patience  !  a  very 
singular  conjunction  of  terms,  to  say 
the  least ;  as  if  in  Jesus  Christ  were 
made  compatible  authority  and  suffer- 
ing, the  impassive  throne  of  a  monarch 
and  the  meek  subjection  of  a  cross,  the 
reigning  power  of  a  prince  and  the 
meek  subjection  of  a  lamb.  What 
more  striking  paradox  !  And  yet  in 
this  you  have  exactly  that  which  is 
the  prime  distinction  of  Christianity. 
Christ  reigns  over  human  souls  and 
in  them,  erecting  there  His  spiritual 
kingdom,  not  by  force  of  will  exerted 
in  any  way,  but  through  His  most 
sublime  passivity  in  yielding  Himself 
to  the  wrong  and  the  malice  of  His 
adversaries.  It  is  a  kind  of  first 
principle,  in  a  good  life,  that  the 
passive  elements,  or  graces  of  the 
Christian  life,  well  maintained,  are 
quite  as  efficient  and  fruitful  as  the 
active.  Nothing  discouraging  need  be 
said  concerning  what  are  called  active 
works  in  religion,  when  we  point  out 
the  efficiency  of  those  virtues  which 
belong  to  the  receiving,  suffering, 
patient  side  of  character.  They  are 
such  as  meekness,  gentleness,  forbear- 
ance, forgivingness,  the  endurance  of 
wrong  without  anger  or  resentment, 
contentment,  quietness,  peace,  and  un- 
ambitious love.  These  are  gathered  up 
in  the  comprehensive  term  ^^  patience.^^ 
These  are  never  barren  forces ;  they 
are,  in  fact,  the  most  efficient  and 
most  operative  powers  that  a  Christian 
wields,    inasmuch  as   they  carry  just 

425 


CHAP.  1 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


that  kind  of  influence  which  other  men 
are  least  apt  and  least  able  to  resist. 
Power  is  not  measured  by  exertion. 
A  right  passivity  is  sometimes  the 
greatest  and  most  effective  Christian 
power. 

I.  The  passive  and  submissive  vir- 
tues are  most  of  all  remote  from  the 
exercise  or  attainment  of  those  who  are 
out  of  the  Christian  spirit  and  the  life 
of  faith.  All  men  are  able  to  be 
active ;  but  when  you  come  to  the 
passive,  or  receiving,  side  of  life,  here 
they  fail.  A  true  Christian  man  is 
distinguished  from  other  men,  not  so 
much  by  his  beneficent  works  as  by  his 
patience.  In  this  he  most  excels  and 
rises  highest  above  the  mere  natural 
virtues  of  the  world.  Just  here  it  is 
that  he  is  looked  upon  as  a  peculiar  and 
partially  Divine  character.  Consider 
the  immense  power  of  principle  that  is 
necessary  to  establish  the  soul  in  these 
virtues  of  endurance  and  patience. 
Here  is  no  place  for  ambition,  no 
stimulus  of  passion.  The  Christian 
gets  the  power  of  his  patience  wholly 
from  above.  It  is  not  human ;  it  is 
Divine.  Hence  the  impossibility  of  it, 
even  to  great  men.  It  is  chiefly  by 
this  endurance  of  evil  that  Christ,  as 
a  Redeemer,  prevails  against  the  sin 
of  the  human  heart  and  subdues  its 
enmity.  Jesus  said,  "  The  prince  of 
this  world  is  judged,"  as  if  the  kingdom 
of  evil  were  now  to  be  crushed,  and  His 
own  new  kingdom  established,  by  some 
terrible  bolt  of  judgment  falling  on 
His  adversaries.  It  was  even  so  ;  and 
that  bolt  of  judgment  was  the  passion 
of  the  cross.  We  had  never  seen 
before  the  sublime  passivities  of  God's 
character,  and  His  ability  to  endure 
the  madness  of  evil.  In  the  cross  we 
see  Him  bearing  wrong,  receiving  the 
shafts  of  human  enmity,  submitting 
Himself,  in  His  sublime  patience,  to 
the  fury  of  the  disobedient,  and  so 
melting  down  by  His  gentleness  what 
no  terrors  could  intimidate,  and  no 
frowns  of  judgment  could  subdue. 
Men,  as  being  under  sin,  are  set  against 
all  active  efforts  to  turn  them,  or 
persuade  them,  but  never  against  that 

426     -'-''        ' 


which  implies  no  effort — viz.,  the  gentle 
virtue  of  patience.  We  are  naturally 
jealous  of  control  by  any  method  which 
involves  a  fixed  design  to  exert  con- 
trol over  us ;  therefore  we  are  always 
on  our  guard  in  this  direction.  But 
we  are  none  the  less  open,  at  all  times, 
to  the  power  of  silent  worth,  and  the 
unpretending  goodness  of  those  virtues 
that  are  included  in  patience.  The 
submissive  forms  of  excellence  provoke 
no  opposition,  because  they  are  not  put 
forth  for  us,  but  for  their  own  sake. 
They  move  us  the  more  because  they 
do  not  attempt  to  move  us.  See  how 
little  impression  is  often  made  upon  you 
by  the  most  strenuous  efforts  to  exert 
influence  over  you,  and  then  how  often 
you  are  swayed  by  feelings  of  respect, 
reverence,  admiration,  tenderness,  from 
the  simple  observation  of  one  who 
suffers  well.  How  gently  do  these 
lovely  powers  of  patience  insinuate 
themselves  into  your  respect  and  love. 
Notice  some  of  the  instructive  and 
practical  uses  of  the  truth  illustrated. 
1.  It  is  here  that  Christianity  makes 
issue  with  the  whole  world  on  the 
question  of  human  greatness.  That  is 
ever  looked  on  by  mankind,  and 
spoken  of,  as  greatness  which  displays 
some  form  of  active  power.  It  has 
never  entered  into  human  thought,  un- 
sanctified  by  religion,  that  there  is  or 
can  be  any  such  thing  as  greatness  in 
the  mere  passive  virtues,  or  in  simply 
suffering  well ;  least  of  all  in  suffering 
wrong  and  evil  with  a  forgiving,  un- 
resentful  spirit.  Christianity  is  here 
alone,  holding  it  forth  as  being,  when 
required,  the  Divinest,  sublimest,  and 
most  powerful  of  all  virtues,  to  suffer 
well.  2.  The  ofiice  of  the  Christian 
martyrs  is  here  explained.  In  the 
martyr  ages  we  see  a  vast  array  of 
active  genius  and  power,  that  could  not 
be  permitted  to  spend  itself  in  works  of 
benefaction  to  the  race,  but  was  conse- 
crated of  God  to  the  more  sacred  and 
more  fruitful  grace  of  suffering.  The 
design  was,  it  would  seem,  to  prepare 
a  Christly  past,  to  show  whole  ages 
of  faith  populated  by  men  who  were 
able,   coming  after  their  Master  and 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.  chap.  I. 


bearing  His  cross,  to  suffer  with  Him,  why  we  have  so  many  crosses,  trials, 
and  add  their  human  testimony  to  wrongs,  and  pains,  is  here  made 
His.  3.  We  see  how  it  is  that  so  many  evident.  We  have  not  too  many 
persons  are  so  abundantly  active  in  re-  occasions  given  us  for  the  exercise  of 
ligion,  with  so  little  effect,  while  others,  patience.  5.  Possibly  men  not  re- 
who  are  not  so  conspicuous  in  action,  ligious  are  averted  from  the  Christian 
accomplish  so  much.  The  reason  is,  that  life  more  by  their  dislike  of  the  sub- 
one  class  trust  mainly  to  the  virtues  of  missive  and  gentle  virtues  than  by  any 
action,  while  the  others  unite  also  the  distaste  of  sacrifice  and  active  duty. — 
virtues  of    patience.       4.    The   reason  H.  Bushiiell,  D.D. 

MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  12—20. 

The  Symbolic  Presentation  of  Christ  in  His  Church. — There  are  two  possible 
conceptions  of  the  continuity  of  Christ's  life  and  ministry  from  the  time  of  His 
resurrection.  The  usual  thought  of  Him  is  of  One  who  has  passed  into  heaven, 
and  there  acts  as  Mediator,  Intercessor,  High  Priest,  for  His  people.  That  idea 
is  specially  elaborated  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  The  less  usual  thought, 
but  the  one  which  is  every  day  gaining  more  interest  and  importance,  conceives 
Christ  as  actually  having  come  again,  as  He  said  He  would,  and  being  actively 
engaged  in  His  Church,  for  His  Church's  good  ;  but  in  spiritual,  not  in  sensible 
fashion.     So  present,  this  vision  represents — 

I.  His  place. — "In  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks"  (ver.  13). 
In  the  centre,  the  middle,  the  very  heart  of  the  Church,  so  as  to  have  full 
control,  out  to  the  circumference. 

II.  His  office. — This  appears  to  be  indicated  by  His  dress  (ver.  13).  The 
long  robe,  indicating  the  priest ;  the  peculiar  position  of  the  girdle  indicating 
the  King. 

III.  His  character  (vers.  14,  15). — The  figures  indicate  absolute  and  dazzling, 
glistering,  whiteness.  Not  merely  a  passive  holiness,  but  an  active  holiness 
which  7nakes  holy.     It  shines  and  makes  shining. 

IV.  His  mission. — Symbolled  by  the  two-edged  sword  proceeding  out  of  His 
mouth.  He  had  to  search  the  Churches,  and  solemnly  declare  the  truth  con- 
cerning them,  however  severe  and  humiliating  it  might  have  to  be.  Symbolled, 
too,  in  a  countenance  like  the  sun,  withering  up  all  falseness  and  evil.  St.  John's 
fear  in  the  presence  of  this  symbolled  Christ  represents  the  fear  which  the 
Church  always  has  when  it  realises  that  the  Living  Christ  is  inspecting  it,  and 
critically  searching  it.  The  response  to  St.  John's  fear  represents  the  response 
Christ  makes  to  the  Church's  fear.  It  may  be  stated  in  this  way.  Christ — the 
Living,  Present  Christ — compasses  the  Christian  ages  even  as  God  compasses  all 
ages.  Therefore,  Christ  can  fully  control  and  use  all  the  evil  influences  that 
may  be  affecting  His  Church,  making  "  all  things  work  together  for  good." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.    12.    The   Candelabrum   of  the  IV.    The  source    of  its  vitality. — 

Apocalypse. — This  is  a  striking  symbol  Continually  fed  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
of  the  Church.     Herein  we  see —  V.  Its  beauty. — Each  branch  richly 

I.  The   position   of   the   Church —  ornamented. 

without  the  veil.  VI.     Its    value. — the    candelabrum 

II.  Its  work. — To  exhibit  light — that  was  gold — believers  are  Christ's  jewels, 
is,  Christ.  Application:  1 .  How  great  the  honours ! 

III.  Its  unity. — Many  lamps,  but  2.  How  certain  the  safety,  of  believers  ! 
one  light.  — R.  A.  Griffin. 

427  ' 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


Yer.  13.  Symbols  of  the  Living  Christ.  St.  John  gives  us  history  for  advanced 

— Here  our  Lord  appeared  to  St.  John,  students,  the  philosophy  of  the  facts, 

clothed  in  all  the  insignia  which  serve  The  explanation  of  St.  John's  peculiar 

as  emblems  of  the  different  aspects  of  point  of  view  is  found — 1.  In  his  nature, 

His  glory.      It  is  specially  important  which  may  be  compared  with  that  of 

to  notice  that  it  is  from  this  general  Mary  of  Bethany.    2.  In  the  fact  that 

picture  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  that  he   was    brought    to    Christ    by    the 

the  particular  emblems  in  which  He  personal    influence   of    Christ.      That 

appears  to  each  particular  Church  are  fixed  his  lifelong  interest  upon  Christ 

drawn.     "  These  emblems  represent  the  Himself.       For   many   long   years   he 

qualities  in  virtue  of    which  He  will  had    meditated    on    his   theme,    and, 

have  power  to  do  all  that  He  announces  through  his  meditations,  had  kept  the 

to  them."  personal   influence  of  the  Living  and 

Spiritual    Christ    strong    upon    him. 

The  Symbolism  of  Numbers.  —  And  the  heretical  teachings  of  his  day 
There  is  an  alternation  of  praise  and  made  him  increasingly  zealous  to  up- 
blame,  answering  to  the  even  and  odd  hold  views  that  honoured  Christ ;  so 
numbers  included  in  seven.  The  law  he  became  the  guide  and  helper  of  ad- 
according  to  which  the  Seven  Churches  vanced  Christians,  who  are  spiritually- 
have  been  disposed  in  the  picture  seems  minded,  mystical,  and  able  to  grow 
to  be  this :  the  numbers  one,  three,  into  discernment  of  those  spiritual  and 
five,  and  seven,  indicate  the  different  eternal  truths  which  underlie  varying 
degrees  of  the  dominion  of  sin  over  the  forms,  and  can  gain  expression  through 
Christian  life  in  a  Church — its  gradua-  ever- varying  forms.  St.  John  can  lead 
tion  in  evil.  The  numbers  two,  four,  all  who  have  the  insight  of  love.  It 
and  six,  indicate,  on  the  contrary,  the  is  well  for  us  to  keep  in  mind  that 
different  degrees  of  the  victory  gained  Christianity,  as  a  system,  unfolded 
by  the  work  of  God  over  sin — its  pro-  along  two  distinct  lines.  1.  Led  by 
gress  in  good. — F.  Godet^  D.D.  St.  Paul,  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  work 

was  gradually  elaborated  ;  and,  2.  Led 

Vers.  17,  18.  Christ  Risen,  Living,  by  St.   John,  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 

and  Life-giving. — The  point  of  interest  person.      There   is   a   Jewish   way   of 

in  these  verses   is  this :  they  present  reading    the   Crucifixion :    there  is   a 

St.  John's  full  and  final  impression  of  Pauline  way,  and  there  is  a  Johannine 

the  person  of  Christ.     A  revelation  by  way.     From  this  last  point  of  view  it 

vision  of  the  Risen  Christ  was  given  appears    as    the    great    self-sacrifice. 

to    St.    John,    because    he   would    be  He  laid  down  His  life  that  He  might 

specially     sensitive     to     visions,     his  take    it   again.       St.    John   wants   to 

mystical,    meditative    mood    of    mind  know    what    the    Crucifixion    teaches 

enabling  him  most  effectively  to  deal  concerning  the  person  of  Christ.     There 

with  this  mode  of  revelation.     Compare  are  three  ways  of  treating  our  Lord's 

the   visions   given   to    St.    Paul,  as   a  resurrection :      1.     We     may     collect 

sufferer   in    Christ's   service;    and   to  evidences  of  it  as  an  actual  event  in 

St.  Peter,  as  a  leader  into  the  larger  history.     This  is  the  familiar  method 

truth.     St.  John's  gospel  concerns  the  of  the  ordinary  ministry.    The  evidences 

person  of  Christ.      He  is  not  mainly  include   (1)  Scriptural  anticipations  of 

interested   in  what   Jesus  did,  but  in  it ;    (2)   Christ's    prophetic   words    in 

what   Jesus  was,    and   in   the  things  relation  to  it ;  (3)  historical  facts  con- 

which  revealed   what    He  was.      The  cerning  it ;  (4)  historical  results  of  it, 

synoptists  relate  what  Christ  said  and  in  the  martyr-witness  of  apostles,  and 

did,  without  having  any  argumentative  in  the  founding  of  the  Church.     2.  We 

purpose    in    their   narrations — or   we  may  endeavour  to  discover  the  doctrinal 

may   say,    they    give   us    history   for  significance  of  it.     Christian  facts  and 

beginners,   the   record   of    facts  ;    but  truths  have  been  shaped  into  systems ; 

42S 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  I. 


for  the  completion  of  every  system, 
Christ's  resurrection  is  found  to  be 
absolutely  essential.  No  Christian 
doctriiial  system  will  hold  together  that 
denies  it.  3.  We  may  try  to  get  at 
the  spiritual  significance  of  it,  as  a 
revelational  experience  through  which 
Christ  passed.  Revelational,  as  carrying 
a  revelation  to  us  concerning  Christ's 
person.  This  last  is  St.  John's  way. 
It  is  suggestive  to  compare  the  accounts 
of  the  resurrection-period  in  the 
synoptists  with  those  given  in  St.  John. 
What  St.  John  felt  had  been  taught 
him  concerning  the  person  and  relations 
of  the  Eisen  Christ  is  embodied  in  our 
text,  which  records  an  immediate 
revelation  made  to  the  apostle,  but  as 
truly  expresses  the  sanctified  impression 
of  more  than  fifty  years  of  thought 
about  Christ,  and  fellowship  with 
Him. 

I.  Christ  as  the  Living  One. — He 
has  life  in  Himself.  That  life  was  in 
a  human  body.  That  life  now  is  in  a 
spiritual  body.  He  is  "  Christ  who  is 
our  life."  In  what  sense  are  we  said 
to  livel  Distinguish  the  derived  life 
of  the  creature  from  the  absolute  life 
of  God.  Compare  the  terms  "  Living 
one,"  and  "  I  am."  The  manifested 
life  is  this  Divine,  uncaused,  eternal 
life  of  God,  set  in  human  conditions  and 
hmitations. 

II.  Christ  as  the  Life-yielding  One. 
— Explain  that  the  Divine  life  could 
not  be  yielded.  Absolute,  unbroken 
continuity  belongs  to  its  very  essence. 
The  manifest  life,  the  human  life 
which  was  the  agency  of  the  manifesta- 
tion, alone  could  be  yielded.  The 
heresy  attributed  to  Cerinthus  was 
but  an  imperfect,  unworthy,  and 
dangerous  setting  of  a  spiritual  truth, 
which  needs  to  be  recovered,  and 
worthily  stated.  The  Divine  Being, 
Christ,  did  not  die,  could  not  die  ;  the 
"Man,  Christ  Jesus,"  died.  Word- 
settings  constantly  imperil  spiritual 
verities. 

II.  Christ  as  the  Life-Resuming  One. 
— *'  Am  aUve."  The  idea  which  the 
apostles  were  likely  to  take  up  was 
that  Christ  was  dead,  because  Christ's 


body  lay  in  Joseph's  new  tomb.  They 
had,  therefore,  in  some  outwardly 
evidential  way,  to  be  shown  that  His 
body  was  not  He.  It  could  be  changed 
for  a  spiritual  body,  and  He  remain 
the  same.  He  lives.  It  may  be  said, 
*'  Christ  died."  And  with  equal  truth 
it  may  be  said,  "  Christ  never  died." 

IV.  Christ  as  the  Life -Giving  One. 
— "Keys  of  Death  and  Hades."  He 
who  has  only  derived,  life  cannot  quicken 
life.  You  may  pull  a  flower  to  pieces, 
but  you  cannot  put  it  together  again, 
and  breathe  life  into  it,  though  you 
have  a  derived  life  in  you.  He  who 
has  life  in  Himself  can  quicken  life. 
Death  and  Hades  for  bodies  are  but 
types  of  all  kinds  of  deaths — deaths  of 
feeling,  deaths  of  power,  deaths  of  sin, 
deaths  of  backsliding,  deaths  of  doubt ; 
but  from  all  deaths  the  Risen  and 
Living  One  can  quicken  us.  St.  John 
saw  Christ  in  the  vision  as  He  is,  as 
He  permanently  is,  the  Living  One  who 
gives  life ;  who  is  ever  giving  life ; 
who  has  come  that  "  we  may  have  life, 
and  have  it  more  abundantly."  That 
is  our  Christ.  That  is  Christ  who  "  is 
our  life." 

The  Self-description  of  the  Risen 
Christ. 

I.  "I  am  He  that  liveth."— That 
word  "  liveth  "  is  a  word  of  continuous, 
perpetual  life.  It  describes  the  ex- 
ternal existence  which  has  no  beginning 
and  no  end  ;  which,  considered  in  its 
purity  and  perfectness,  has  no  present, 
and  no  past,  but  one  eternal  and 
unbroken  present — one  eternal  now. 
It  is  the  "  I  am  "  of  the  Jehovah  who 
spoke  to  Moses.  "  He  that  liveth  "  is 
the  Living  One  ;  He  whose  life  is  The 
Life,  complete  in  itself,  and  including 
all  other  lives  within  itself.  If  any- 
thing has  come  to  us  to  make  us  think 
what  a  fragmentary  thing  our  human 
life  is,  there  is  no  greater  knowledge 
for  us  to  win  than  that  the  life  of  One 
who  loves  us  as  Ciirist  loves  us  is  an 
eternal  life,  with  the  continuance  and 
unchangeabloness  of  eternity.  It  is 
the  thought  of  an  eternal  God  that 
really   gives  consistency  to   the   frag- 

429 


CHAP.  I. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


mentary  lives  of  men,  the  fragmentary 
history  of  the  world. 

II.  "  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was 
dead." — Into  that  life  of  lives  death 
has  come — as  an  episode,  an  incident. 
When  death  came  to  Him  it  was  seen 
to  be,  not  the  end  of  life,  but  only  an 
event  in  life.  It  did  not  close  His 
being,  but  it  was  only  an  experience 
which  that  being  underwent.  This  is 
the  wonder  of  Christ's  death.  It  was 
an  experience  of  life,  not  an  end  of 
life.  Life  goes  on  through  it  and 
comes  out  unharmed. 

III.  '*I  am  alive  for  evermore." — 
This  existence  after  death  is  special 
and  different.  "  Alive  for  evermore  " 
is  an  assurance  that  in  the  continued 
life  which  has  once  passed  through  the 
experience  of  death  there  is  something 
new,  another  sympathy,  the  only  one 
which  before  could  have  been  lacking, 
with  His  brethren  whose  lot  it  is  to  die, 
and  so  a  helpfulness  to  them  which 
could  not  otherwise  have  been,  even  in 
His  perfect  love.  This  new  life,  the 
life  that  has  conquered  death  by 
tasting  it — this  life  stretches  on  and 
out  for  ever.  Think  what  that  great 
self-description  of  the  Saviour  means, 
and  what  it  is  to  us.  What  do  we 
need,  we  men  ?  Think  of  the  certainty, 
yet  mystery,  of  death.  Christ's  words 
come  to  us,  and  at  once  death  changes 
from  the  terrible  end  of  life  into  a 
most  mysterious,  but  no  longer  terrible, 
experience  of  life.  Not  merely  is  there 
a  future  beyond  the  grave,  but  it  is 
inhabited  by  One  who  speaks  to  us, 
who  went  there  by  the  way  that  we 
must  go,  who  sees  us  and  can  help  us 
as  we  make  our  way  along,  and  will 
receive  us  when  we  come  there.  Then 
is  not  all  changed  ? 

IV.  "  Have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of 
death."  — Hell,  of  course,  means  Hades, 
that  unseen  place,  that  place  of  departed 
spirits  in  which  our  creed  expresses  its 
belief.  Christ,  then,  having  experienced 
death,  has  the  keys  of  death  to  open 
its  meaning,  and  to  guide  the  way 
through  it  for  those  who  are  to  die  like 
Him.  It  is  because  He  died  that  He 
holds  the  keys  of  death.     Can  we  not 

430 


understand  that?  Do  we  not  know 
how  any  soul  that  has  passed  through 
a  great  experience  holds  the  keys  of 
that  experience,  so  that  he  can  help 
those  who  have  to  pass  through  it  ? 
Having  the  keys  of  death  and  hell, 
He  comes  to  us  as  we  are  drawing  near 
to  death,  and  He  opens  the  door  on 
both  sides  of  it,  and  lets  us  look  through 
it,  and  shows  us  immortality.  What 
is  it  to  be  immortal  and  to  know  it  ? 
What  is  it  to  have  death  broken  down, 
so  that  life  stretches  out  beyond  it — 
the  same  life  as  this,  opening,  ex- 
panding, but  for  ever  the  same 
essentially  ?  1.  Think  of  the  immense 
and  noble  freedom  from  many  of  the 
most  trying  and  vexatious  of  our 
temptations,  which  comes  to  a  man  to 
whom  the  curtain  has  been  lifted,  and 
the  veil  rent  in  twain.  2.  The  whole 
position  of  duty  is  elevated  by  the 
thought,  the  knowledge,  of  immortality. 
3.  A  new  life  is  given  to  friendship,  to 
all  our  best  relations,  to  one  another, 
by  the  power  of  immortality. — Phillips 
Brooks. 

Ver.  18.  Christ  in  Glory. — 1.  These 
are  the  words  of  our  Lord,  and  they 
were  spoken  by  Him  in  glory.  Some 
have  gathered  together  the  sayings  of 
Christ  in  different  periods.  For  in- 
stance. His  utterances  during  His 
Passion ;  His  Seven  Sayings  from  the 
Cross  on  Good  Friday ;  His  words 
during  the  great  Forty  Days  of  the 
Risen  Life ;  and  His  words  from 
heaven.  The  Church  to-day  does  not 
direct  our  eyes  to  the  empty  tomb,  but 
to  the  vision  of  Christ  in  glory.  2.  The 
words  were  addressed  to  St.  John — the 
disciple  whom  Christ  had  drawn  near 
to  Him,  with  St.  Peter  and  St.  James, 
in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane ;  the 
disciple  who  stood,  with  Christ's  blessed 
mother,  beneath  the  cross,  and  watched 
Him  in  His  dying  hours ;  who  was 
last  at  the  cross  and  early  at  the 
sepulchre ;  the  disciple  "  whom  Jesus 
loved  "  (John  xiii.  23).  Differences  of 
substanc3  and  style  between  the 
Apocalypse  and  the  fourth  gospel  are 
certainly  not  sufficient  to  justify  the 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  I. 


conclusion  that  it  is  not  the  same  St. 
John  who  wrote  both.  3.  They  were 
words  of  encouragement.  John  had 
another  legacy  besides  that  blessed  one, 
Christ's  mother  ;  he  had  the  legacy  of 
tribulation.  He  was  realising  the 
Lord's  prophecy,  "  In  the  world  ye 
shall  have  tribulation  "  (John  xvi.  33). 
He  was  partaker  "  in  the  kingdom  and 
patience  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  was  an 
exile  in  the  Isle  of  Patmos  "  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ" — a  wretched, 
barren,  desolate  spot ;  and  then  con- 
demned to  work  in  the  mines,  if  the 
statement  of  Victorinus  can  be  relied 
upon ;  at  any  rate,  a  solitary  exile  in 
a  remote  island.  It  was  there  the 
Loi'd  appeared  to  His  servant,  to 
strengthen  and  sustain  him.  What  do 
the  words  of  the  text  teach  us  about 
Christ?     What  about  ourselves? 

I.  They  point  to  Christ  in  Glory. — 
1.  They  may  seem  in  this  respect  to 
antedate  the  Festival  of  the  Ascension. 
Christ  did  not  enter  into  glory — that 
is,  did  not  visibly  assume  a  glorious 
condition — on  Easter  Day.  We  know 
this  by  the  narrative  in  the  gospels. 
The  glorious  Form  which  appeared  to 
St.  John  made  him  fall  "at  His  feet 
as  dead  "  (Rev.  i.  17) ;  but  in  the  Kisen 
Life,  during  the  Great  Forty  Days,  we 
read  of  no  such  manifestation.  On  the 
contrary,  Christ  is  taken  for  the 
gardener.  He  stands,  unknown,  upon 
the  shore ;  He  joins  the  disciples  on 
the  road  to  Emmaus  as  an  ordinary 
wayfarer ;  He  dines  with  His  disciples. 
No  rays  of  glory  emanate  from  His 
countenance  or  illuminate  His  garments. 
]fe  does  not  force  the  human  will  to 
acknowledge  Hiiii  by  some  overwhelm- 
ing manifestation.  When  they  saw 
Him  on  the  mountain  in  Galilee, 
"some  doubted"  (Matt,  xxviii.  17). 
He  reserved  the  light  of  glory  till  He 
entered  the  land  of  glory.  He  was 
*'  received  up  in  glory"  (1  Tim.  iii.  16). 
The  Church  seems  to  desire  to  set  Christ 
before  us  in  all  His  perfected  glory  in 
heaven,  that  our  joy  may  be  full ;  and 
our  Lord  Himself,  in  the  same  way, 
over  leaps  the  interval  between  Easter 
and  Ascension  Day  in  the  question  to 


the  two  disciples :  "  Ought  not  Christ 
to  have  suffered  these  things,  and  to 
enter  into  His  glory  ?  "  (Luke  xxiv.  26). 
2.  The  text  teaches  us  the  sameness  of 
Christ,  the  identity  of  His  person : 
*•  I  am  He  that  liveth,  and  was  dead." 
The  angels  impressed  the  same  truth 
upon  the  minds  of  the  apostles  at  the 
Ascension :  "  This  same  Jesus  which 
is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye 
have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven  "  (Acts 
i.  11).  Our  Lord  not  only  speaks  of 
Himself  as  the  Living  One,  but  also 
refers  to  His  death  :  "  and  was  dead." 
I  am  the  eame  you  watched  upon  the 
cross.  The  waters  of  Lethe  do  not 
sponge  out  the  marks  of  life  on  earth. 
Though  in  glory,  the  memory  of  the 
Passion  was  still  fresh.  He  who  was 
conceived  and  born  of  Mary,  dwelt  in 
Nazareth,  preached  in  the  towns  and 
villages  of  Judsea  and  Galilee,  died 
upon  the  cross,  rested  in  Joseph's 
tomb,  went  to  "  the  spirits  in  prison," 
vanquished  death,  and  rose  from  the 
dead  on  the  third  day,  is  the  same  who 
sits  in  glory  at  the  Father's  right 
hand. 

II.  The  text  carries  with  it  the  con- 
viction of  our  own  identity  hereafter. — 
1.  The  truth  which  Easter  teaches  is 
that  of  our  ow^n  immortality.  There 
are  many  *'  indications "  of  man's 
survival  after  death,  but  only  one 
proof.  The  yearning  for  a  life  beyond 
the  grave  has  been  regarded  as  a 
witness  to  its  existence,  on  the  ground 
that  nature's  desires  are  not  futile. 
The  consciousness  that  we  are  some- 
thing more  than  flesh  has  been  appealed 
to.  The  analogy  of  chrysalis  and 
butterfly  has  been  laid  under  contribu- 
tion as  suggestive.  The  moral  argu- 
ment is,  that  if  there  be  a  just  God, 
the  "  cruel  wrongs  of  time  "  must  be 
rectified  hereafter.  The  simplicity  of 
the  soul's  essence  has  been  regarded  as 
inferring  its  indestructibility,  and  the 
scientific  doctrine  that  no  force  is  ever 
destroyed.  The  goodness  and  purpose 
of  God  in  creating  man  have  seemed 
incompatible  with  a  belief  in  annihila- 
tion.    These  and  other  indications  of 

431 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


man's  immortality  can  be  enumerated, 
all  forming  accumulative  inference  of 
great  force;  but  the  one  proof  is  the 
resurrection  of  Christ.  He  rose  from 
the  dead,  "  the  First-fruits  of  them 
that  slept "  (1  Cor.  xv.  r*J),  and  He 
entered  into  heaven  "  ^>o  open  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers." 
The  doctrine  of  our  resurrection  rests 
upon  the  historic  fact  of  Christ's 
resurrection.  Life  and  immortality 
have  been  brought  to  light  through 
the  gospel  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  2.  Further, 
we  see  that  Easter  teaches  that  our 
immortality  is  personal.  The  same 
who  lived  and  died  shall  rise  again 
and  live  for  ever.  No  other  immorta- 
lity, of  a  lower  kind,  can  satisfy  us. 
The  immortality  of  matter,  of  force, 
of  mind,  of  love,  of  fame,  are  mere 
shadows ;  the  substance  is  the  survival 
of  the  personal  life.  The  memory 
links  us  with  the  past ;  it  is  a  ground 
of  identification  :  "  liveth,  and  was 
dead."  And  this  carries  with  it  the 
truth  of  recognition  in  another  life. 
III.  Lessons. — 1.  Joy  in  the  triumph 
of  Christ  over  death  and  hell.  2.  The 
realisation  of  a  present  Christ,  who, 
though  in  glory,  can  be  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  through 
His  experience  of  trial  and  temptation, 
of  suffering  and  death,  whilst  on  earth. 
3.  To  rise  from  the  death  of  sin  to 
the  life  of  righteousness,  from  the 
penitence  of  Lent  to  the  new  life  of 
Easter-tide.  4.  Through  the  grace 
of  Easter  communion  to  seek  the  virtue 
of  perseverance,  so  as  not  to  fall  back 
into  sin,  but,  like  Christ,  to  be  "  alive 
for  evermore." — "  The  Thinker." 

The  Risen  Saviour. — From  death  to 
life  is  the  greatest  possible  transition, 
and  this  transition,  in  the  case  of  Jesus 
of  Nazareth,  is  the  most  marvellous  as 
well  as  the  most  perfect.  It  is  the 
only  true  victory  ever  won.  Warriors 
conquer  to  be  conquered.  Tyrants 
rule  with  a  rod  of  iron  to  fall  under 
its  stroke.  All  men  that  rise,  rise  to 
fall.  From  the  dust  we  came,  and  to 
the  dust  we  must  return.  But  the 
text  speaks  of  a  final  victory :  "I  am 

432 


alive  for  evermore."  The  aged  St. 
John  was  an  exile  in  the  lone  island  of 
Patmos.  He  had  been  banished  thither 
"  for  the  word  of  God,  and  the 
testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  was 
not  there  alone.  John,  "  the  beloved 
disciple,"  and  Jesus,  the  loving  Saviour, 
have  again  met  in  a  strange  land. 
The  visit  of  the  Saviour  was  special, 
and  John  was  elevated  to  heights  of 
inspiration  far  above  that  which  he 
had  experienced  before.  He  received 
visions  and  revelations  of  a  transcendent 
nature.  The  whole  panorama  of  the 
future  passed  before  his  eyes.  He 
saw  the  rise  and  fall  of  empires.  The 
terrible  conflict  between  good  and  evil 
was  waged  in  his  presence.  He  saw 
the  rise  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah, 
and  the  New  Jerusalem  coming  down 
from  heaven.  Patmos  was  the  only 
place,  and  the  banishment  from  Society 
the  only  condition,  suitable  to  such  a 
revelation.  But  the  aged  apostle 
needed  the  assurance  that  the  old 
Master  was  communing  with  him.  So 
he  is  led  back  to  the  impressive  scene 
of  the  Crucifixion  :  "I  am  He  that 
liveth,  and  was  dead."  Some  sixty 
years  previously  John  stood  before  the 
cross,  and  for  that  long  period  he  had 
preached  Christ  and  Him  crucified,  in 
the  cities  of  Asia  Minor.  He  was 
drawn  nearer  to  the  Saviour  than  he 
had  ever  been  before  when  he  saw 
Him  on  the  cursed  tree.  It  was  a 
time  of  sorrow,  followed  by  a  few  days 
of  painful  suspense.  But  the  spell  was 
broken.  The  tidings  came  that  Jesus 
was  risen.  Peter  and  John  ran 
towards  the  sepulchre ;  John  outran 
Peter,  and  was  first  at  the  grave.  He 
found  none  there :  the  sepulchre  was 
empty.  Then,  in  the  upper  room,  the 
tidings  were  confirmed,  when  His 
glorious  form  appeared,  and  the  familiar 
Voice  was  heard  saying,  "Peace  be  unto 
you  !  "  Their  hearts  throbbed  with  that 
joy  ever  after.  Finally,  they  saw  Him 
ascend,  and  a  cloud  veiled  Him,  that 
they  saw  Him  not  again.  There,  on 
the  road  to  Bethany,  they  knew  that 
He  was  alive  for  evermore.  John,  in 
Patmos,  felt  that  only  one  could  have 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.  chap.  I. 


uttered   the   words   of   the   text.      To  woman.      In    Germany,    Straus    and 

those   who   have   afflicted  their  souls,  others,  with  more  apparent  decency, 

and    have    deepened    their    sense    of  have  endeavoured  to  build  up  something 

demerit  in  the  garden  and  at  the  cross,  like  an  argument  on  the  power  of  vision, 

we  n"ow  say.  Arise,  wipe  off  your  tears,  arising  from  a  strong  desire  to  see  Jesus, 

remove    the    sackcloth   of    penitence.  When  it  is  said  that  he  appeared  to  the 

rejoice^  and  look  at  your  Living  Lord.  eleven,  to  Paul,  and  to  more  than  five 

I.  Let  us  contemplate  the  resurrec-  hundred, brethren  at  once,  we  are  simply 

tion  of  the  Lord  as  a  great  historical  to  understand  a  mental  vision,  arising 

fact. — It  is  the  central  fact  of  Christ-  from  the  feeling  of  hero-worship.     But 

ianity,   and  the   key-note  of   apostolic  we  have  so  much  supposition  to  make 

preaching.     If  the  miracle  of  the  resur-  that  the  most  elementary  principles  of 

rection  of  Jesus  is  a  myth,  the  gospel  psychology  must  be  discarded  to  do  so. 

has    no    sun    for    a    centre  of    light  We  must  suppose  between  five  and  six 

and  heat.     The  sanhedrin  spread  the  hundred  persons  to  be  exactly  of  the 

calumny  that  the   disciples   stole   the  same  temperament  and  expectation,  so 

body.     If  so,  we  ask,  what  became  of  that  they  had  precisely  the  same  mental 

the  body  ?     The  disciples  were  a  few  vision.    These  persons  are  credited  with 

poor  fishermen  from  Galilee,   without  sincerity  by  the  holders  of  this  view  ; 

standing  or  confederates  at  Jerusalem.  but,  if   so,   the  world  would  question 

Joseph  of  Arimathea  and   Nicodemus  their  sanity.     We  have  briefly  stated 

were  the  only  two  persons  of  influence,  absolutely  all  that  has  ever  been  ad- 

in  Jerusalem,   who  were  in   any  way  vanced  against   the   great  fact  of  the 

identified  with  Christ.     Did  they  lend  resurrection    of    Jesus   Christ.      How 

themselves  to  the  fraud  ?     Under  the  flimsy  !     Human  credulity  even  rejects 

circumstances,  and  in  such  a  climate,  all  such  suppositions.    The  resurrection 

how  was  the  removal  and  the  re-inter-  of   Christ   is    a    significant   fact.      It 

ment  of  the  body  possible  ?     Can  you  brings  to  light  the  truth  that  there  is 

conceive  of  any  band  of  men  making  a  a  living  and  personal  God — that    He 

sacrifice  of  every  comfort,  and  facing  a  presides  over  human  afiairs.    A  revela- 

frowning  world,   with  its  torture  and  tion  of  His  will  is  made,  in  which  He 

death,  to  propagate  a  conscious  fraud  1  has  promised  a  Saviour  for  mankind. 

We   turn    away   in    haste    from    the  That  Saviour  is  no  other  than  His  own 

absurdity.      Another   supposition   has  Son.     The  resurrection  verified  the  life 

been  started  :  that  the  death  of  Jesus  of   Jesus.     St.   Peter,   looking   at   the 

was   only   apparent.      This   incredible  perfection   of   that   life,    has    said    of 

view  received  its  birth  from  two  cases  death,  "  It  was  not  possible  that  He 

of   crucified   persons    restored   to   life,  should    be    holden    of    it."      Life    is 

mentioned  by  the  historian  Josephus.  greater  than  mortality,  and  moral  law 

Leaving   aside   the    flat   contradiction  is   superior   to   the   decay   of    nature, 

which  even  the  sanhedrin  would  give  The  natural  order  of  creation  is  that 

to   such    a    supposition,   how   was    it  life  is  stronger  than  death,  otherwise 

possible  to  restore  animation  after  the  spring  would  never  follow  winter.     By 

spear- wound  in  His  side,  and  the  long  analogy,  a  life  of  so  much  purity  and 

hours  of  interment  1     This  hypothesis  force  as  that  of   Christ  could  not  be 

is  a  greater  absurdity  than  the  first.  holden  of  death.      St.  Paul  speaks  of 

We  mention  a  third  supposition  :  that  the  priesthood  of  Jesus  as  possessing 

the  various  appearances  of  Christ  to  the  "  power  of  an  endless  life "  ;  and 

His    disciples    after    His    death    were  again  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  is 

visions,  or  apparitions.     In  France  the  confirmed  by  the   abiding   vitality  of 

effort  has   been  male    to   prove   that  the  Saviour's  life   as  witnessed  in  the 

Christianity   owes   its   potency  to  the  lives  of  thousands.     "  Except  a  corn  of 

morbid  condition  of  Mary  Magdalene  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it 

— ^'ea,  to  the  hallucination  of  a  nervous  abideth  alone  ;  but  if  it  die,  it  bringeth 

FF  433 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


forth  much  fruit."  The  death  on  the 
cross  is  followed  by  life  everlasting, 
both  to  the  Holy  Victim  and  to  them 
that  believe  on  Him.  The  miracle  of 
the  resurrection  is  the  comment  on 
the  life  which  preceded  it ;  it  is  the 
illumination  of  words  spoken,  deeds 
done,  and  sufferings  borne.  But,  dear 
brethren,  our  thoughts  run  past  these 
weighty  considerations  to  the  sacred 
Person  Himself.  We  are  ready  to 
leave  all  prospects  of  life  and  happiness 
on  one  side,  to  welcome  from  the  tomb 
the  Friend  of  Sinners.  "  I  am  He  that 
liveth."  Oh,  word  of  joy  !  The  raptures 
of  our  hearts  know  no  bound — Jesus 
lives. 

II.  We  further  observe  that  hence- 
forth the  Living  Christ  is  the  object  of 
our  faith. — Having  been  buried  with 
Him  in  death,  we  rise  with  Him  into 
newness  of  life.  But  to  rise  into 
fellowship  with  the  Living  Christ,  our 
faith  must  soar  above  the  mere  belief 
in  historical  Christianity.  This  sublime 
condition  of  fellowship  implies  associa- 
tion in  thought  with  the  risen  Saviour. 
The  person  of  Christ,  not  in  form,  bub 
in  fact,  must  engage  our  heart.  Purity 
of  thought,  concentration  of  thought, 
and  intensity  of  thought,  alone  can  lead 
us  to  the  living  association  with  Jesus. 
The  faith  of  the  believer  receives  its 
strongest  impetus  from  the  fact  that 
He  who  was  dead  is  now  alive.  It 
imparts  to  the  gospel  its  higher  degree 
of  life.  Bodily  presence  we  cannot 
have,  neither  do  we  realise  each  other's 
love  and  service  by  presence  always. 
Bodily  presence  creates  mental  absence. 
The  Christ  of  the  Besurrection  became 
more  real  to  the  disciples  than  the 
Christ  of  the  Crucifixion.  Thomas  be- 
lieved because  He  saw,  but  "Blessed  are 
they  that  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have 
believed."  The  Christian  must  realise 
more  the  power  of  faith.  That  faith 
increases  in  power  as  he  lives  near  the 
Living  Christ.  Stand  by  the  cross,  and 
your  faith  works  within  a  definite  circle; 
but  stand  by  the  Bisen  Lord,  and  faith 
touches  no  circumference.  The  gospel, 
re-enacted  in  the  heart  and  life,  is  our 
work.     His  marvellous  teaching  must 


speak  to  us  with  a  living  lip.  We 
must  lay  hold  of  His  hand  to  keep 
pace  with  His  example.  The  power 
to  destroy  sin  comes  from  fellowship 
with  His  sufierings.  If  we  are  com- 
pelled to  go  from  the  cross  to  the  tomb, 
we  need  not  linger  there  long,  for  He 
is  in  the  upper  room.  Then  we  journey 
with  Him  to  Emmaus,  that  He  may 
open  to  us  the  Scriptures,  and  kindle 
the  fire  of  His  love  within  our  breast. 
In  Galilee  also  we  receive  our  com- 
mission to  work  out  life's  plan.  Lastly, 
He  is  gone  within  the  veil.  The  King 
of  Glory  has  triumphantly  entered,  and 
is  seated  at  the  Father's  right  hand. 
Will  He  think  of  us  again  ?  Hark  to 
the  sound  of  holy  voices,  singing  His 
praise  !  See  the  golden  crowns  which 
are  cast  at  His  feet  in  honour  of  His 
person  !  Will  He  think  of  us  again? 
Yes,  oh,  yes  !  He  ever  liveth  to  make 
intercession  for  us.  The  delightful  life 
of  daily  and  hourly  communion  with 
our  living  Saviour  cannot  be  enjoyed 
by  a  mere  contemplation  of  the  fact 
that  He  is  risen.  The  Holy  Spirit  is 
the  true  revealer  of  the  Spiritual  Christ. 
This  truth  was  distinctly  taught  to  the 
Church  by  the  Saviour.  We  may  have 
a  very  sincere  desire  to  have  the 
presence  of  Christ  with  us  daily,  but 
that  blessing  can  only  come  through 
the  Holy  Ghost.  The  Spirit  gives  us 
the  sight  of  the  risen  Lord.  We  can- 
not now  hear  Him  speak  except  we 
have  the  ear  circumcised  by  the  Spirit, 
Heaven  is  far  away  from  earth ;  He 
who  fills  the  space  between  is  the  Spirit 
of  God. 

"  Spirit  of  purity  and  grace, 
Our  weakness,  pitying,  see ; 
Oh,  make  our  hearts  Thy  dwelling  place, 
And  worthy  Thee." 

III.  And,  lastly,  we  observe  that  the 
resurrection  of  Christ  is  the  open  door 
of  immortality. — "  But  now  is  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the 
first-fruits  of  them  that  slept."  These 
are  the  words  with  which  we  seek  to 
succour-  the  hearts  of  the  bereaved. 
They  are  words  of  comfort  in  the 
deepest  sorrow.      The   resurrection  of 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.  chap.  I. 


the  Lord  shows  that  life  is  more  than  the  body  can  come  up  from  the  grave, 

the  animation  of  the  organism  of  the  fashioned  after  the  body  of  His  Glory, 

brain.       As     animation     moves     the  -  It  is  not  death  to  fling 

material    form,    so     does     life     wear  Aside  this  mortal  dust, 

animation   as  a  garment.     But  under  And  rise,  on  strong,  exulting  wing, 

it  all  is  the  living  spirit.     We  are  now  To  live  among  the  just." 

unable  to  speak  of  the  body  that  shall  — "  Weekly  Pulpit." 
be :  we  are  content  with  the  promise 

that  it  will  resemble  His  glorious  Easter  Joy. — The  Easter  season  is  a 
body.  The  most  astonishing  words  time  of  great  joy  for  all  the  children  of 
ever  uttered  by  human  lips  are  these  :  God.  1.  They  rejoice  on  account  of 
"  I  am  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life."  the  completeness  of  the  work  of  salva- 
Those  who  are  in  Christ  are  in  life.  tion.  For  when  Christ  had  risen  from 
The  vision  which  was  given  to  Hosea  the  dead,  He  thereby  had  fully  paid  the 
represents  the  Saviour  at  the  gates  of  wages  of  sin.  God  has  accepted  the 
Hades ^  demanding  the  release  of  the  death  of  His  Son  in  the  place  of  our 
prisoners :  "I  will  ransom  them  from  death,  and  therefore  has  given  us  life, 
the  power  of  the  grave  ;  I  will  redeem  2.  All  Christians  rejoice  on  account  of 
them  from  death  ;  O  death,  I  will  be  the  excellent  witnesses  and  testimonies 
thy  plagues;  O  grave,  I  will  be  thy  concerning  the  resurrection  of  Christ, 
destruction  ;  repentance  shall  be  hid  He  appeared  no  fewer  than  ten  different 
from  Mine  eyes.'"  He  has  taken  the  times  after  His  resurrection,  and  on 
keys  of  helan  from  the  hands  of  one  occasion  was  seen  of  five  hundred 
Pluto,  and  has  opened  the  gates  of  the  (1  Cor.  xv.  5).  He  conversed  and  ate 
dark  world.  The  first  thought  which  with  His  disciples  alone  (Acts  x.  41). 
engrosses  our  mind  is  the  release  of  He  permitted  Himself  to  be  touched 
those  who  have  entered  from  our  side,  by  them  (John  xx.  25  ;  1  John  i.  1). 
To  the  aged  there  are  many.  Some  of  Evidence  of  this  kind  admits  of  no 
them  are  very  near  to  our  hearts.  See  contradiction.  Even  now  He  still  f  ur- 
the  Risen  Saviour  standing  at  their  nishes  the  proof  that  He  is  alive  by 
grave,  as  He  stood  at  the  grave  of  living  in  us  (Gal.  ii.  20).  3.  Christ- 
Lazarus,  saying,  "  Come  forth.  "  ians  rejoice  in  Easter  because  they 
Blessed  thought :  we  shall  see  them  have  been  given  the  seal  and  security 
again.  Then  comes  the  other  thought,  of  the  gracious  forgiveness  of  sins,  of 
that  we  must  soon  enter  the  valley  of  peace  with  God,  so  that  they  can,  with- 
death.  It  will  not  be  long  ere  these  out  fear,  approach  God,  and  know  that 
bodies  will  lie  in  their  graves,  when  He  will  come  to  them.  4.  Christians 
the  shades  of  death  will  hide  from  us  rejoice  because  the  resurrection  of 
everything  earthly.  His  resurrection  Christ  is  for  them  a  comfort  in  death, 
will  throw  light  on  the  other  side.  Christ  has  sweetened  death  for  the 
Think  for  a  moment  of  the  glorious  believers,  has  sanctified  the  grave,  and 
sight  which  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  they,  too,  shall  enter  into  eternal  life, 
suggests,  when,  in  the  last  day.  He  5.  Christians,  for  these  reasons,  make 
will  turn  the  key  to  open  millions  of  •  it  a  special  point  to  celebrate  Easter- 
graves.  To-day  the  churchyard  is  the  day  by  rejoicings  of  the  heart,  by 
quiet  lesting  place  of  many — the  most  meditation  and  prayer,  and  contempla- 
peaceful  spot  on  earth.  But  the  day  tion  of  the  great  things  which  God  lias 
will  come  when  the  trumpet  shall  done  for  them.  6.  They  strive  daily 
sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised,  to  rise  from  the  dead  spiritually,  to 
incorruptible.  We  fear  not  death,  for  throw  aside  sin  and  evil  deeds,  and 
we  have  witnessed  the  death  of  Jesus ;  sanctify  their  lives  to  the  service  of 
we  dread  not  the  grave,  for  we  have  God. — G.  H.  Schodde,  Ph.  D. 
been  at  the  grave  of  Jesus.  There  is 
a  resurrection  into  spiritual  life,  before  Symbol  of  the  Keys, — As  to  keys^  and 

435 


CHAP.  I.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


the   associated  idea   of  unlocking,  one  half-way   between  the   town  and  the 

need   but   compare    Ps.    ix.    13 ;    Isa.  port.     A  traveller  helps  us  to  realise 

xxxviii.   10;  Matt.  xvi.  18,  in  order  to  the  scene  on  which  the  banished  apostle 

see  that  the  Hebrews  ascribed  to  the  must   often   have   gazed.     *'  The  time 

underworld  or  region  of  the  dead  dooo^s  when   the   island  appears  in   its  best 

or  gates — imagery  borrowed  from  the  position  is  during  the  rising  and  setting 

doors  of  sepulchres.      In  like  manner  of  the  sun.     Whether  viewed  in  dim 

the  great  Abyss  has  doors  to  be  un-  perspective,   through  grey  and  silvery 

locked    (Rev.    ix.    1,    xx.    1-3).      The  mists,  or  amidst  hues  of  liveliest  purple, 

Rabbins   say   that    God   has   reserved  the  isles  and  continent  of  Greece  pre- 

f our  keys  to  Himself,  which  He  has  sent  their  varied  features,  which  neither 

not  committed  to  any  of  the  angels —  pen  nor  pencil  can  adequately  portray, 

viz.,  the  key  of  rain,  of  aliment,  of  the  Picture   an   evening   sun,  behind   the 

sepulchre,  and  of  parturiency.      Wet-  towering  cliffs  of  Patmos,  gilding  the 

stein  has  many  citations  which  show  battlements  of  the  monastery  of  the 

how  common  this  sentiment  was  among  Apocalypse   with    its    parting   rays — 

them.     If  it  were  prevalent  when  the  the  island,  surrounded  by  inexpressible 

Apocalypse  was  written,  and  John  had  brightness,  seeming  to    float  upon  an 

any  respect  to  it  in  the  passage  before  abyss  of  fire,  while  the  moon,  in  milder 

us,  it  would  furnish  another  particular  splendour,  is  rising  full  over  the  opposite 

in   which   he  ascribes  to  the  Saviour  expanse."     A  poetic  soul  could  not  fail 

the    prerogatives    of   the   Godhead. —  to  be  affected  by  the  influence  of  such 

Moses  Stuart.  surroundings.    To  the  lonely  man  came 

wonderful  visions,  weird  as  ever  were 
The  Living  Lord. — The  Isle  of  Patmos  given  to  the  prophets  of  the  olden  time, 
is  of  undying  interest  to  the  Christian  Bat  the  first,  the  introductory  vision, 
Church.  Yet  it  is  not  the  kind  of  which  was  the  key  to  all  the  rest,  was 
interest  that  makes  us  want  to  visit  the  vision  of  the  Risen,  Living,  Glori- 
the  lonely  place.  Perhaps  we  should  fied,  Present-working  Master  and  Lord, 
understand  the  book  of  Revelation  whose  name  John  loved  to  bear,  and 
better  if  we  could  study  it  among  the  for  whose  sake  John  was  then  a 
very  scenes  that  helped  to  give  tone  banished  and  persecuted  man.  Then, 
and  shape  to  the  writer's  imaginations.  and  always,  the  key  to  everything  is 
Patmos  is  a  rocky  and  bare  island  of  fuller  apprehension  of  the  person  and 
the  -^gean  Sea,  On  account  of  its  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
stern  and  desolate  character  it  was  One  thing  above  all  others  we  desire, 
used  under  the  Roman  empire  as  a  even  as  did  the  apostle  Paul  before  us  : 
place  of  banishment.  *'  As  the  coast  that  we  may  "  know  Him,  and  the 
is  approached  from  the  sea,  it  is  found  power  of  His  resurrection,  and  the 
to  be  high  and  comprising  many  pro-  fellowship  of  His  sufferings."  We  must 
montories  and  bays,  which  give  to  the  know  Him  in  the  exercise  of  Christian 
whole  a  very  irregular  appearance,  thought.  St.  John  knew  Him  with 
The  only  port  that  is  used  is  a  deep  the  aid  of  suggestive  symbolic  repre- 
bay,  sheltered  by  high  mountains  on  •  sentations.  But  what  he  came  to 
every  side  but  one,  where  it  is  protected  know  we  can  learn  from  him ;  and  it 
by  a  projecting  cape.  Above  the  was  this :  Christ  bears  present  and 
landing  place  is  a  small  village,  com-  saving  relations  to  men  through  all  the 
prising  about  fifty  habitations,  and  progress  of  human  history.  Jesus  lives, 
situated  on  the  edge  of  a  vast  crater.  He  has  come  again  to  the  world.  He 
sloping  off  on  either  side,  like  the  roof  is  in  the  world.  He  is  adequately 
of  a  tiled  house."  The  famous  grotto,  endowed  for  the  conflict  with  evil, 
or  cavern,  where  the  apostle  is  said  to  He  is  living  Saviour ;  Captain  of  sal- 
have  written  the  book  of  Revelation,  is  vation.  The  text  is  a  part  of  Christ's 
situated  on  the  face  of  the  hill  about  own   explanation    of    the   symbols  in 

43a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  L 


which    He   had  presented  Himself  to 
the  beloved  St.  John.     We  notice — 

I.  The  mystery  behind  Christ. — 
"  Was  dead."  This  is  the  assertion  of 
a  fact  which  carries  the  profoundest 
significance  with  it.  It  brings  to  mind 
the  most  wonderful  event  that  ever 
occurred  in  human  history.  Not  most 
wonderful,  even,  as  the  death  of  an 
innocent  man  by  torturing  crucifixion, 
but  most  wonderful  as  the  submission 
to  human  death  of  one  who  was  the  Son 
of  God,  with  power.  It  is  not  only  an 
historical  fact,  it  is  a  cherished  memory 
that  is  full  of  gracious  influence. 
Thoughtful  souls  are  never  made  so 
gentle,  so  tender,  as  when  they  meditate 
in  full  view  of  Him  who  died.  But 
why,  when  Christ  is  shov/ing  Himself 
as  the  Living  One,  does  Ho  recall  His 
death  ?  It  must  havo  been  to  call 
back  to  St.  John's  mind  His  veritable 
humanity.  Nothing  stamps  a  man  as 
a  man  more  than  the  fact  that  he  will 
have  to  die ;  "  there  is  no  discharge 
from  that  war."  We  know  Jesus 
Christ  was  a  real  brother-man,  for  He 
died.  It  was  also  necessary  for  Christ 
to  qualify  the  glorious  vision  in  which 
He  appeared  to  St.  John,  or  it  might 
so  absorb  his  attention  as  to  keep  away 
from  his  thought  the  competency  of 
Christ  for  tho  work  which  He  had  to  do 
as  the  Living  One.  He  who  died  must 
have  passed  through  a  life  before  He 
died,  and  go  He  must  have  gained 
actual  and  full  experience  of  our  human 
needs  and  sorrows,  and  must  be  able  to 
succour  the  tempted,  and  to  redeem  His 
Church  from  all  evil,  seeing  "  He  was 
in  all  points  tempted  like  as  we  are." 
But  the  place  taken  by  Christ's  death 
in  His  own  representation  of  Himself 
needs  our  special  notice.  He  does  not 
put  the  death  ^rs^.  The  greatest,  and 
most  important,  of  all  truths  for  His 
Church  is  this  :  "I  am  He  that  liveth." 
The  second  truth  is  :  "I  was  dead." 
The  apostle  Paul  apprehended  tho  same 
relative  position  of  the  two  truths  when 
he  wrote,  *'  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea, 
rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also 
maketh  intercession  for  us."     Only  as 


we  set  these  two  truths  in  their  right 
relations  can  we  apprehend  one  of  the 
deeper  meanings  of  Christ's  death.  It 
was  the  experience,  and  the  obedience, 
through  which  He  gained  both  the  right 
and  the  fitness  to  be  the  "  bringer-on 
of  sons  unto  glory."  For  that  work 
He  was  *''•  made  perfect  through  suffer- 
ing." Gaining  His  fitness  to  be  the 
ever-living  Saviour  lights  up  the  deeper 
meanings  of  the  life  of  Christ  as  well 
as  of  His  death.  It  helps  us  to  under- 
stand that  salvation  is  His  personal 
work.  It  is  only  a  part  of  the  truth  to 
say,  "  He  has  saved  us  " ;  the  rest  of 
the  truth  is  this  :  "  He  is  saving  us." 
''  He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  utter- 
most." His  healings  of  the  sick,  and 
lame,  and  leprous,  when  He  dwelt 
among  men,  and  "  wore  earth  about 
Him,"  do  but  show  what  He  can  now 
do  in  souls.  He  is  "alive  for  ever- 
more," and  we  can  come  to  Him,  soul- 
blind,  soul -lame,  and  receive,  direct 
from  Him,  healing  and  life. 

II.  The  glory  in  Christ.—"  He  that 
liveth."  "  Am  alive  for  evermore." 
This  is  no  mere  assertion  of  His 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  It  is  the 
declaration,  "  I  am  the  living  One." 
As  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  our  Lord 
afiirmed  that  "  He  had  life  in  Himself." 
He  was  "  the  Life."  In  Christ's  con- 
tinuous, eternal  life,  that  human 
death  was  only  an  episode.  "  When 
death  came  to  Him,  it  was  seen  to  be, 
not  the  end  of  life,  but  only  an  event 
in  life.  It  did  not  close  His  being, 
but  it  was  only  an  experience  which 
that  being  underwent.  That  spiritual 
existence  which  had  been  going  on  for 
ever,  on  which  the  short  existences  of 
men  had  been  strung  into  consistency, 
now  came  and  submitted  itself  to  that 
which  men  had  always  been  submitting 
to.  And  lo !  instead  of  being  what 
men  feared  it  was,  what  men  had 
hardly  dared  to  hope  that  it  was  not — 
the  putting  out  of  life — it  was  seen  to  be 
only  the  changing  of  the  circumstances 
of  life,  without  any  power  over  the 
real  principle  of  life — any  more  power 
than  the  cloud  has  over  the  sun  that 
it   obscures,    or   than   the   ocean   has 

437 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION. 


over  the  bubble  of  air  that  it  buries 
fathoms  deep,  but  whose  buoyant 
nature  it  cannot  destroy,  nor  hinder  it 
from  struggling  towards,  and  sometimes 
reaching  to,  the  surface  of  the  watery 
mass  that  covers  it.  That  was  the 
wonder  of  Christ's  death.  He  passed 
into  it  for  love  of  us.  And  as  He  came 
out  from  it,  He  declared  its  nature. 
It  is  an  experience  of  life,  not  an  end 
of  life.  Life  goes  on  through  it  and 
comes  out  unharmed."  This  is  shown 
us  in  the  vision  of  Him  who  "  liveth, 
and  was  dead."  But  to  St.  John's 
mind  that  visioned  Figure  might  seem 
to  be  an  appearance  only,  a  symbol, 
a  picture-teaching.  He  must  learn 
that  it  was  but  the  garment,  the 
setting,  the  manifestation  of  a  real, 
living  Being ;  only  figured  in  this  way 
in  order  to  help  St.  John,  and  us,  to 
lealise  what  Jesus  Christ  still  is,  and 
what  are  the  relations  in  which  He 
still  stands  to  His  Church,  and  what 
is  the  work  that  He  still  has  to  do, 
in  the  Church,  and  in  the  world.  And 
is  not  this  truth,  that  Christ  is  the 
"  Living  Saviour,"  a  new  revelation, 
even  to  us'^  So  strangely  Christian 
doctrine  strives  to  gather  our  supreme 
interest  about  our  Saviour's  death ; 
and  once  a  year  we  break  loose  to  glory 
in  the  Risen  and  Living  Christ  of  the 
Easter  memories.  Christian  doubts 
and  fears  too  often  cling  about  the 
Saviour  dead,  and  we  cannot  rise  into 
the  heaven  of  our  hope  in  the  Living 
One,  and  sing  away  our  fears.  And 
sometimes  our  strange  Christian  infirm- 
ities even  make  us  wish  Him  dead ;  for 
we  do  not  want  a  Saviour  who  is  actually 
working  now,  cleansing  now,  finding 
out  the  sin-stains  in  His  people,  washing 
them  away,  and  seeking  to  make  His 
people  "  whiter  than  snow."  So  it  is 
the  ever-new  gospel  we  need  to  hear 
again  to-day  :  Jesus  lives.  More  than 
all  He  was  to  His  disciples,  in  the  days 
of  His  flesh.  He  is  to  us.  His  relations 
to  them  were  really  spiritual  relations, 
but  they  were  illustrated  for  them  by 
actual  bodily  associations.  His  rela- 
tions with  us  are  spiritual  relations, 
and  they  ar«  illustrated  for  ui  in  th« 

438 


records  of  His  human  life  with  His 
disciples.  If  we  can  enter  into  the 
inner  mysteries,  then  we  say,  Christ 
has  come  again,  even  as  He  promised. 
Indeed,  He  never  really  went  away.  He 
only  passed  out  of  sense  apprehensions. 
He  is  here :  free  from  bodily  limitations; 
His  name  is  still  "  Emmanuel  Jesus," 
"  God  with  us,"  saving  us — not  "  who 
has  saved  us  " — "  from  our  sins." 

III.  The  present  mission  of  Christ. 
— "Have  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death." 
I  need  not  explain  that  "  hell  "  here  is 
really  "  Hades,"  the  resting  place  of 
disembodied  spirits  ;  nor  need  I  tell  you 
more  than  that  the  "  keys  "  are  the 
symbol  of  authority.  The  steward  in 
possession  goes  about  with  the  keys 
hanging  from  his  shoulder,  as  the  sign 
of  his  office.  But  it  cannot  surely  be 
the  present  glory  of  Christ,  that  He 
has  merely  to  open  the  gates  of  death, 
and  rule  the  spirits  in  Hades  ?  This  is 
teaching  by  figure  and  symbol.  Just 
as  leprosy  is  taken  as  the  type  of  all 
diseases,  so  "  death  and  hell "  stand  as 
types  of  all  the  forces  that  resist  the 
progress  of  Christian  life  in  the  indi- 
vidual, and  the  extension  of  Christ's 
Church.  "  Death "  stands  as  the 
representative  of  all  the  material 
forces ;  "  Hades "  stands  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  all  the  immaterial,  unseen, 
spiritual  forces  ;  for  we  wrestle  against 
principalities,  against  powers,  against 
the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this 
world,  against  spiritual  wickedness  in 
high  places."  When  we  see  ''death 
and  hell "  standing  for  all  the  material 
and  spiritual  oppositions  to  the  progress 
of  Christ's  Church,  we  begin  to  under- 
stand why  Christ  was  figured  to  St. 
John  as  the  "  infinitely  white  One," 
who  is  white,  and  liveth  to  make  white. 
The  full  figure  is  given  in  the  first 
chapter,  as  bearing  relation  to  the 
whole  Church,  and  its  entire  circle  of 
needs.  And  then  Christ  is  visioned  in 
parts,  those  sides  of  Christ's  living 
power  being  chosen  which  bear  direct  re- 
lation to  each  of  the  Seven  Churches — to 
the  weaknesses,  the  sins,  and  the  perils, 
of  each.  This  is  the  truth  shining 
forth  from  our  text :  the  White  Christ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION,         chap.  1. 


is  alive,  and  is  working  to  make  His 
Church  white,  as  He  is  white.  Are 
you  a  seeker  for  salvation  ?  See  !  Christ 
liveth,  and  can  save  you.  Are  you  a 
Christian,  battling  with  sin  !  See  !  you 
do  not  struggle  alone;  Christ  is  with 
you  in  the  fight.  Are  you  a  Christian 
in  the  world  of  peril  and  temptation  1 
See !  the  Hebrew  youths  were  safe, 
even  in  the  fire,  when  one  was  with 
them  like  unto  the  Son  of  God.  To 
the  Church,  groaning  under  the  burdens 
of  her  disability  we  say.  Let  her  arise, 
shake  herself  from  the  dust,  and  win 
her  victories,  for  her  Lord  lives^  He 
"  is  alive  for  evermore." 

ReswH^ection  in  Retrospect. — The  true 
explanation  of  the  extreme  distress 
and  perplexity  of  our  Lord's  disciples 
lies  in  this  :  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
they  could  not  understand,  they  could 
not  believe.  And  this  condition  of 
mind  continued  till  the  event  actually 
took  place.  But  what  a  difierence 
there  is  between  resurrection  in  pros- 
pect and  resurrection  in  retrospect  ! 
No  change  in  any  recorded  history  or 
any  known  biography  is  more  start- 
ling. The  whole  mind  of  the  Christian 
disciples,  in  reference  to  the  resurrec- 
tion of  their  Lord,  is  suddenly  trans- 
figured, and  that  which  they  looked 
forward  to  dimly,  timidly,  unwillingly, 
they  now  look  back  upon  with  undoubt- 
ing  and  exulting  confidence.  It  has 
been  said — 1.  That  there  was  2^. fraud: 
Christ  did  not  really  rise,  but  His 
disciples  practised  a  deception.  But 
falsehood  in  one  thing  does  not  fit  a 
truthful  and  genuine  religion;  and 
falsehood  does  not  make  men  brave. 
2.  That  the  death  of  Christ  was  an 
imaginary  death.  But  Christ  prophe- 
sied and  expected  His  death ;  and 
the  physical  conditions  narrated  in- 
volve actual  death.  3.  The  belief 
in  the  resurrection  was  the  result 
of  a  waking  drearn.  But  there  is  no 
conceivable  basis  for  any  such  idea  in 
the  record.  We  cannot  separate  the 
thought  of  our  own  resurrection  from 
the  thought  of  that  rising  of  Christ; 
nor  ought  we  to  separate  them.     At 


present  our  resurrection  is  m  prospect, 
and  we  know  not  what  it  will  be. 
But  it  will  not  be  so  always.  The 
time  will  come  when  all  will  be  behind 
us — when  all  the  past  will  be  clearly 
known  and  well  remembered.  Then  it 
will  be  resurrection  in  retrospect.  We 
shall  look  back  on  the  life  we  led  here. 
This  we  know  as  to  the  future,  that 
if  we  are  true  Christians  we  shall  then 
be  with  Him  "  who  liveth,  and  was 
dead,  and  is  alive  for  evermore  "  ;  and 
*'  because  He  liveth,  we  shall  live  also." 
— Dean  Howson. 

The  Keys  of  Hell  and  of  Death. 

I.  The  keys  symbolise  sovereignty. 
— And  the  sovereignty  referred  to  is 
in  the  hands  of  Christ.  He  is  the 
Everlasting  One  who  was  dead  and  is 
alive  again  for  evermore.  Upon 
Christ's  head  "  are  many  crowns  "  ;  in 
Him  are  vested  many  sovereignties. 
Nature  is  His,  for  He  made  it.  Mind 
is  His,  for  He  created  it.  Angels  are 
His,  for  they  worship  Him.  Men  aie 
His,  for  He  redeemed  them.  The 
Church  is  His,  for  He  purchased  it 
with  His  own  blood.  And  over  all  is 
He  the  Supreme  Ruler.  There  is  not 
an  atom  or  a  force  of  nature ;  not  a 
form  or  function  of  life  ;  not  a  type  or 
order  of  intelligence  ;  not  a  nation  or 
grade  of  moral  being ;  not  a  condition 
or  circumstance  of  existence ; — over 
which  His  throne  flings  not  its  shadow 
or  shelter.  It  is  of  the  sovereignty  of 
this  ascended,  triumphant,  glorified, 
and  enthroned  Jesus  that  the  Spirit 
speaks  in  this  sublime  portion  of  Holy 
Writ.  Here  you  have  the  range  of 
His  Kingship ;  the  province  of  His 
empire ;  the  process  of  His  govern- 
ment ;  the  antagonisms  with  which  He 
wrestles ;  the  methods  by  which  He  puts 
down  all  rule  and  authority — curbs  the 
rage  of  men,  confounds  the  schemes 
of  hell,  rolls  back  the  swelling  billows 
of  error  and  vice,  conserves  the  truth, 
enshields  His  Church,  and  finally  sits 
enthroned  upon  the  homage,  reverence, 
and  love,  of  a  redeemed  and  glorified 
humanity  !  Among  the  antagonisms 
of  that  humanity,  death,  in  form  most 

439 


CHAP.  I. 


aOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


hideous ;  death,  with  its  most  terrific 
symbols  and  enginery  ;  death,  with  its 
cruel  mockings  ; — threatens  to  extin- 
guish the  race.  Christ  knows  and  feels 
all  this.  And  that  there  might  not  be 
a  moment's  misgiving  or  shadow  of 
anxiety,  He  reveals  Himself,  clothed  in 
attributes  and  belted  with  potencies 
which  qualify  Him  for  all  the  emer- 
gencies which  await  the  Church  of  the 
future,  till  time  shall  be  no  longer. 
He  knows  her,  for  He  ever  walks  in 
the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks. 
Her  members  droop  and  die ;  He  is 
alive  for  evermore.  Her  foes  wield 
the  dread  sceptre  of  destruction,  but 
they  know  not  that  it  is  under  Him,  and 
because  of  His  permission,  and  subject 
to  His  control,  that  they  waste  and 
lay  low  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of 
Hosts ;  for  "  He  has  the  keys  of  hell 
and  of  death." 

II.  Christ  is  sovereign  of  death. — 
"He  has  the  keys  of  .  .  .  death." 
That  death  is  not  an  outlaw  we  might 
anticipate,  seeing  that  there  is  nothing 
around  us  not  subject  to  law.  Life,  in 
all  its  beauties,  melodies,  and  beati- 
tudes, is  everywhere  and  always  under 
law.  Shall  it  be  that  such  an  agency 
as  death  shall  act  defiant  of  law  ? 
When  we  remember  the  agonies  which 
it  can  extract ;  the  energies  which  it 
can  paralyse;  the  hopes  which  it  can 
blast ;  the  homes  which  it  can  disrupt 
and  desolate  :  how  it  can  revel  in  ruin 
and  banquet  upon  groans,  and  quaff 
the  chalice  filled  with  tears  wrung 
from  poor  widows'  and  orphans'  hearts  ; 
how,  with  dread  might,  it  can  strew 
earth  with  the  wreck  and  spoil  of  noble 
manhood  and  cultured  womanhood ; 
how,  in  a  moment,  the  result  of  long, 
long  years  of  the  training  of  character 
for  the  highest  service  of  human- 
ity can  be  frustrated ; — then  we  ask 
again,  "  Is  death  an  exception  to 
the  general  fact  that  law  prevails 
throughout  God's  universe  ?  "  Can  it 
be  that  such  a  monster  is  loose,  with 
no  hook  in  his  jaw  and  no  bridle  to  his 
power  ?  Does  not  He,  who  guides 
Arcturus,  wheels  the  comet,  rides  upon 
the   whirlwind,   rims    in    old    Ocean, 

440 


chains  the  fire-fiend,  enkindles  and  ex- 
tinguishes the  volcano ;  who  bids  the 
seasons  from  their  palaces  in  the 
heavens  march  forth  to  fling  their 
treasures  over  the  habitable  earth  ; — 
does  not  He  control  and  order  this  over- 
shadowing hierarchy  of  death  ?  Yes  ! 
thanks  to  His  ever-blessed  name,  "  He 
has  the  keys  ...  of  death  !  "  He  is 
King  of  kings,  and  the  "  King  of 
Terrors  "  is  but  a  vassal  prince,  with- 
out right  of  independent  sovereignty, 
and  altogether  subject  to  Him  who  in 
His  own  person  conquered  death  and 
the  grave.  He  opens  the  gates  of 
death  and  no  man  shuts.  He  shuts 
and  no  man  opens.  No  saint  or 
servant  of  His  can  die,  but  as  He 
permits  it.  Not  a  foothold  is  there 
for  Chance.  Within  the  domain  of 
death,  unknown  to  Him,  the  grave 
cannot  seize  another  victim.  No 
march  of  spoliation  can  death  steal 
upon  the  hosts  of  God's  elect.  Their 
Captain  is  all-vigilant,  and,  should  the 
unauthorised  arrow  fly.  His  shield 
shall  turn  and  shiver  it.  "  He  has  the 
keys  of  death." 

III.  He  has  also  the  keys  of  Hell. 
— "  Hell,"  or  Hades,  here  refers  to  the 
invisible  world  of  spirits.  The  sover- 
eignty of  this  invisible  world  owns 
Christ's  sceptre.  It  is  within  His 
empire.  Who  dare  compute  the 
myriads  on  myriads  congregated  there  ! 
And  they  are  all  there  living  !  "  All 
live  unto  Him."—/.  0.  Peck,  D.D. 

Yer.  20.  Holding  the  Stars. — The 
hand  that  holds  the  seven  stars  is  as 
loving  as  the  hand  that  was  laid  in 
blessing  upon  the  little  children.  The 
face  that  is  as  the  sun  shining  in  its 
strength  beams  with  as  much  love  as 
when  it  drew  publicans  and  harlots  to 
His  feet.  The  breast  that  is  girt  with 
the  golden  girdle  is  the  same  breast 
upon  which  John  leaned  his  happy 
head. —  A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

The  Angels  of  the  Churches. — This 
title  appears  to  have  been  borne  by 
the  ministers  of  the  synagogues  among 
the  Jews.     The  business  of  this  ofiicer, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION. 


CHAP.  1. 


who  was  always  called  a  bishop  of  the 
congregation,  was  to  offer  prayers  for 
the  whole  assembly,  to  which  the  people 
answered,  "  Amen,"  and  to  preach,  if 
there  were  no  other  to  discharge  that 
office.  The  reading  of  the  law  was 
not  properly  his  business,  but  every 
Sabbath  he  called  out  seven  of  the 
synagogue,  and  on  other  days  fewer, 
to  perform  that  duty.  The  angel 
stood  by  the  person  that  read,  to 
correct  him  if  he  read  improperly. 
He  took  care  also  that  worship  was 
performed  without  disorder  and  with 
all  regularity.  By  a  name  probably 
borrowed  from  the  S3magogue  the 
bishops  and  pastors  of  the  Seven 
Churches  of  Asia  Minor  are  termed 
the  "  angels "  of  the  Churches.  It 
is  very  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
Paul  alludes  to  this  name  when  he 
says  that  women  ought  to  be  covered 
before  the  angels  (1  Cor.  xi.  10). 
Bishops,  or  ministers  of  Christian 
Churches,  are  often  called  "  angels " 
by  the  earlier  writers.  It  is,  however, 
better  to  regard  the  angel  of  the 
Church  as  the  ideal  embodiment  (so 
to  speak)  of  the  Church,  rather  than 
any  particular  official.  ''  The  angel 
of  the  Church  would  be  the  spiritual 
pei'sonification  of  the  Church^— the 
Church,  seen  in  its  heavenly  repre- 
sentative, and  seen,  therefore,  in  the 
light  of  those  splendid  possibilities 
which  are  hers  if  she  holds  fast  by 
Him  who  holds  the  seven  stars. 

The  General  Idea  of  the  Picture  of 
the  Seven  Churches. — It  contains  the 
portraiture  of  all  the  shades  and,  in 
a  manner,  the  statistics  of  all  the 
spiritual  states,  either  of  good  or  evil, 
in  which  Christianity  on  earth  may 
find  itself.  The  Lord  chose,  in  order 
to  characterise  these  seven  degrees, 
the  Churches  of  the  country  in  which 


John  lived,  which  embodied  most  per- 
fectly these  seven  types.  The  number 
seven  indicates  here,  as  it  always  does, 
a  totality.  But  the  idea  of  the  book 
is  that  of  a  simulta7ieous,  not  that  of 
a  successive,  totality,  as  those  think 
who  see  in  these  seven  Churches  the 
portraiture  of  the  principal  phases  of 
the  history  of  the  Church.  One  may, 
doubtless,  by  taking  up  this  latter 
standpoint,  succeed  in  bringing  out 
some  ingeniously  conceived  points  of 
harmony,  but  they  always  have  a 
somewhat  arbitrary  character.  Besides, 
the  subject  itself  of  this  first  part  is 
against  such  an  interpretation.  It  is 
the  starting  point  of  the  Lord's  progress 
which  should  be  here  indicated ;  this 
starting  point  is  the  state  of  the  Church 
at  the  time  of  the  vision,  and  not  the 
unrolling  of  its  future  history,  which 
is  contained  rather  in  the  subsequent 
visions. — F.  Godet,  D.D. 

The  Universal  Church. — We  are 
introduced,  in  chaps,  ii.,  iii.,  to  the 
Universal  Church  under  the  presenta- 
tion given  of  seven  Churches  of  Asia 
selected  for  that  purpose.  These 
Churches  are  so  selected  that  they 
present  us  with  a  picture  of  the  various 
elements  that  make  up  the  Church's 
life.  We  see  her  in  herself  and  in  her 
relation  to  the  world  ;  in  her  strength 
and  in  her  weakness ;  in  her  steadfast- 
ness and  in  her  declensions ;  in  her 
prosperity  and  in  her  sufferings ;  in 
her  outwaid  poverty  and  in  her  true 
riches ;  in  the  distinction  existing  be- 
tween the  real  and  nominal  followers 
of  Christ  within  her  borders ;  in  the 
just  indignation  of  her  Supreme  Head 
against  the  one,  and  in  His  leading 
the  other  to  the  full  possession  of  His 
own  triunKph  in  the  presence  of  His 
Father  and  their  Father,  of  His  God 
and  their  God. — W.  Milligan^  D.D. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  I. 


Ver.  1  A  Legend  about  John. — The  follow- 
ing is  narrated  by  John  Cassian,  a  hermit  of 
the  fifth  century,  and  it  is  also  told  by  St. 
Anthony  and  others.  In  his  old  age  the 
apostle  used  to  find  pleasure  in  the  attach- 


ment of  a  bird  which  he  had  tamed — a 
partridge.  One  day,  as  he  held  it  in  his 
bosom,  and  was  gently  stroking  it,  a  hunts- 
man suddenly  approached,  and,  wondering 
that  one  so  illustrious  should  take  such  a 

441 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION, 


trivial  amusement,  he  asked,  '•  Art  thou  that 
John  whose  singular  renown  has  inspired 
even  me  with  a  great  desire  to  know  thee  ? 
How,  then,  canst  thou  occupy  thyself  with 
an  employment  so  humble  ?  "  The  apostle 
replied,  "  What  is  that  in  thy  hand  ? "  He 
answered,  "  A  bow."  "  And  v}h.j  dost  thou 
not  always  carry  it  bent  ?  "  "  Because,"  he 
answered,  "it  would  in  that  case  lose  its 
strength ;  and  when  it  was  necessary  to 
shoot,  it  would  fail,  from  the  too  continuous 
strain."  "  Then  let  not  this  slight  and  brief 
relaxation  of  mine,  0  young  man,  perplex 
thee,"  answered  the  apostle ;  "  since  without 
it  the  spirit  would  flag  from  the  unremitted 
strain,  and  fail  when  the  call  of  duty  came." 
— Biblical  Things. 

Ver,  8.  Alpha  and  Omega. — It  would  be 
both  more  correct  and  expressive  to  render 
this  sentence,  "  I  am  the  Alpha  and  the 
Omega."  In  the  Early  Church  these  two 
letters  came  to  be  frequently  used  as  symbols 
of  Christ.  Sometimes  the  letters  were  sus- 
pended from  the  upper  arms  of  St.  Andrew's 
cross.  Very  many  works  of  Christian 
antiquity  were  adorned  with  them.  They 
were  also  worn  on  rings  and  seals,  frequently 
in  the  form  of  a  monogram.  Shortly  after 
the  death  of  Constantine  (A  d.  337)  the 
letters  were  stamped  on  the  current  coin  of 
the  Roman  Empire.  The  use  of  the  symbol 
in  the  primitive  Church  amounted  to  a  quo- 
tation of  Rev.  xxii.  13,  and  was  regarded  as 
a  confession  of  faith  in  Christ's  own  asser- 
tion of  His  infinite  and  Divine  nature.  The 
Arians,  who  denied  the  divinity  of  Christ, 
avoided  the  employment  of  the  symbol,  but 
after  the  outbreak  of  that  heresy  its  use 
became  almost  universal  among  the  or- 
thodox. It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  Alpha 
is  once  used  by  an  ancient  writer  in  the 
same  sense  as  our  Al. 


Ver.  11.  The  word  "  Church."— St.  John 
addresses  his  message  to  certain  symbols  or 
signs  that  were  shown  him  in  the  vision 
when  he  was  "  in  the  spirit."  They  were 
"  seven  churches."  The  Greek  word  ecclesia 
is  frequently  translated  by  the  English  word 
church.  It  is  not  properly  church,  for 
cMirch  is  an  Anglicised  term  derived  from  a 
different  Greek  word,  curiacon,  which  means 
the  Lord's  place  (or  house').  Ecclesia  means 
originally  a,  summoned  assembly.  An  assem- 
bly, so  called,  was  made  up  (if  a  quorum 
attended),  held,  and  dissolved.     In  the  New 


Testament,  so  far  as  affects  this  book,  it 
seems  to  mean  a  body  of  people  who  have 
been  invited,  by  an  ordained  apostle,  pres- 
byter, or  householder,  to  worship  God  to- 
gether in  convenient  places  of  meeting,  and 
have  accepted  and  acted  upon  the  invitation. 
Ecclesia,  not  church,  has  a  more  spiritual 
meaning  in  Eph.  i.  22,  23  ;  Col.  i.  18.  In 
these  passages  it  includes  all  those  who 
form  the  body  of  which  Christ  is  the  head, 
such  as  are  elsewhere  described  as  "  called 
by  God"  to  various  duties  and  graces.  In 
the  Book  of  Revelation  this  latter  sense  of 
ecclesia  is  never  used.  If  referred  to  at  all, 
it  can  only  be  symbolically,  but  the  more 
spiritual  meaning  need  not  be  introduced. 
The  English  word  church  means  an  eccles- 
iastical building,  and,  metaphorically,  all  its 
"  connection  " — i.e.,  the  baptized  members  of 
the  Christian  body  who  use  it  for  worship. 
The  word  congregation  means  an  assembly, 
and  cannot  properly  be  used  to  mean  the 
"  connection,"  as  a  limitation  to  the  baptized, 
either  metaphorically  or  otherwise. 

Ver.  18.  The  Classical  Idea  of  ''Hades:'— 
The  Greek  word  "  Hades "  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  the  Hebrew  word  "  Sheol " 
in  the  Old  Testament,  are  used  in  the  most 
general  sense  to  denote  the  state  of  the 
dead,  including  the  grave  as  the  residence 
of  the  body,  and  the  world  of  spirits  as  the 
abode  of  the  soul.  The  Hebrew  idea  of  it  is 
perhaps  most  fully  given  in  Job  x.  21,  22, 
But  it  may  be  interesting  to  compare  the 
pagan  notion  from  which  the  word  "  Hades  " 
is  taken.  The  name  was  given  by  the  ancient 
Greeks  and  Romans,  and  especially  by  the 
poets,  to  Pluto,  the  god  who  was  supposed 
to  preside  over  the  infernal  regions.  He  is 
represented  as  being  the  son  of  Chronos  and 
Rhea,  the  husband  of  Persephone,  and  the 
brother  of  Zeus  and  Poseidon.  He  bore  the 
character  of  being  a  fierce,  cruel,  and  inex- 
orable tyrant,  dreaded  by  mortals,  who, 
when  they  invoked  him,  struck  the  earth 
with  their  hands,  sacrificed  black  sheep  in 
his  honour,  and  in  offering  their  sacrifices 
stood  with  averted  faces.  The  grim  Hades 
shuts  up  the  shades  of  the  dead  in  his  dark 
domains.  His  wife  Persephone  shared  the 
throne  of  the  lower  world  with  her  cruel 
husband.  And  not  only  did  Hades  rule 
over  infernal  regions ;  he  was  considered  also 
as  the  author  of  those  blessings  which  spring 
from  the  earth,  and  more  especially  of  those 
rich  mineral  treasures  which  are  contained 
in  the  bowels  of  the  earth. 


442 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chap.  ll. 


CHAPTEK   II. 
REVELATIONS  OF   CHURCH  LIFE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Angel. — If  this  be  taken  as  the  chief  pastor  of  the  Church,  it  is  quite^  possible  that 
Timothy  is  the  person  addressed.  Holdeth. — As  a  figure  for  exercising  dominion  over, 
having  power  over.  Walketh. — Is  present  among  Christian  societies  and  exercises  particular 
inspection  over  them.     Ephesus  is  first  addressed,  as  the  chief  city  of  the  district. 

Vcr.  2.  I  know. — Often  used  to  denote  approbation  or  complacency.  Works. — Perhaps 
"  all  developments  of  character,"  but  better  treated  as  a  general  term,  which  is  explained  as 
embracing  '•  labour "  (strain)  and  "  patience."  The  word  "  labour  "  here  means  "  labour 
carried  on  unto  weariness."  "  Patience  "  here  expresses  the  brave  and  persistent  endurance 
of  the  Christian.  Canst  not  bear. — Or  cannot  do  with  ;  cannot  put  up  with.  Evil.  — /ca/coi5s 
Evil  ones.  Perhaps  the  morally  evil  were  specially  in  mind.  Found  them  liars. — For 
St.  Paul's  warning  of  false  teachers,  see  Acts  xx.  28-31.  Tried  is  a  strong  word.  Thoroughly 
tested  their  pretensions.  Apostles. — Involving  claim  to  direct  Divine  authority.  They  were 
probably  Judaisers,  either  of  the  antinomian  or  the  Gnostic  type.  The  word  translated  "  liars  " 
is  xj/evdeh — false.  They  who  made  false  claims  would  be  sure  to  teach  false  things.  They 
could  be  tested  (1)  by  comparing  their  teachings  with  those  of  St,  Paul ;  (2)  by  recalling 
the  characteristic  features  of  heretical  doctrine,  as  described  by  him ;  and  (3)  by  the  moral 
and  spiritual  influence  which  their  teachings  were  found  to  exert. 

Ver.  3.  Not  fainted. — Or,  not  been  wearied  out,  though  the  strain  has  been  long  continued. 
See  the  word  translated  "  labour  "  in  ver.  2.  "  They  had  toiled  on  to  very  weariness,  without 
wearying  of  their  toil." 

Ver.  4.  Left. — Let  go.  *'  I  have  it  against  thee  that  thou  givest  up  the  love  thou  hadst  at 
the  beginning."  The  first  love  may  be  (1)  their  first  fervour  of  love  to  Christ ;  or  (2)  their 
former  spirit  of  benevolence  and  kindness  toward  all  men.  Stuart  inclines  to  the  second 
explanation.  Phivijytrc  says  :  "  Whether  the  '  first  love '  is  that  which  has  God,  or  Christ, 
or  man,  for  its  object,  I  am  not  careful  to  enquire,  for  the  true  temper  of  love  or  charity 
includes  all  three." 

Ver.  5.  Fallen. — The  height  of  Christian  attainment  gained  has  to  be  maintained.  To 
be  satisfied  with  a  lower  level  is  to  fall.  Do  the  first  works. — This  is  possible  at  once. 
To  restore  the  feeling  may  not  be  possible  at  once  ;  but  resuming  the  works  puts  us  in  the 
way  of  the  restoration  of  the  feeling.  Or  else. — Lit.  "but  if  not."  "Will  come.— Am 
coming.  Remove  thy  candlestick. — A  providential  and  spiritual  visitation  of  Christ  is  meant. 
"The  judgment  threatened  was  determined  by  the  symbolism  of  the  vision.  The  lamp  was 
not  burning  brightly.  If  it  were  rekindled  and  trimmed  and  fed  with  oil,  well.  If  not, 
there  would  come  on  it  the  sentence  which  falls  on  all  unfaithfulness,  and  the  lamp  should 
be  removed.  The  Church  which  had  not  let  its  light  shine  before  men  would  lose  even  its 
outward  form  and  polity,  and  be  as  though  it  had  never  been"  (Plumptre).  A  few  huts  only 
remain  on  the  site  of  ancient  Ephesus. 

Ver.  6.  Nicolaitanes.—  A  branch  of  the  Gnostics  who  held  it  to  be  lawful  to  eat  meats 
offered  to  idols,  and  who  practised  fornication.  They  traced  their  origin  to  Nicolas,  one  of 
the  seven  deacons,  but  there  is  no  clue  to  the  assumed  connection  between  them.  They 
were  the  antinomians  of  the  Asiatic  Church.  Some  think  the  word  is  but  a  Greek  form  of 
the  name  Balaam,  or  as  symbolical  of  Balaam,  and  so  Nicolaitanes  was  equivalent  to 
Balaamites. 

Ver.  7  The  Spirit.— r6  wev/jLa.  Yet  the  Living  Christ  is  the  speaker  throughout.  "  The 
mode  of  transmission  to  the  Churches  is,  however,  by  the  Spirit,  in  His  dispensation,  'giving 
utterance  '  to  John."  Remember,  however,  that  to  Christ's  human  nature  the  Spirit  was 
imparted  without  measure.  Tree  of  life. — Figurative  description  of  eternal  life  (see  Gen.  ii.  9). 
"  The  promise  of  the  tree  of  life  is  appropriate  (1)  to  the  virtue  commended :  those  who 
had  not  indulged  in  the  license  of  the  Nicolaitanes  shall  eat  of  the  tree  of  life ;  (2)  to  the 
special  weakness  of  the  Ephesians  :  to  those  who  had  fallen  and  lost  the  paradise  of  first 
loving  communion  and  fellowship  with  God  is  held  out  the  promise  of  a  restored  paradise, 
and  participation  in  the  tree  of  life  "  {Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter). 

Ver.  8.  "Was  dead  and  lived  again  (R.V.). — Both  the  death  and  the  return  to  life  are 
assigned  to  a  past  time.  The  appropriateness  of  this  presentation  of  Christ  lies  in  the  fact 
that  the  epistle  was  addressed  to  a  persecuted  Church,  exposed  even  to  the  peril  of  martyr- 
dom.    They,  even  as  their  Lord,  might  have  to  go  "  through  death  to  life.' 

443 


CHAP.  II         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


Ver.  9.  Works. — Omitted  in  R.V.  Tribulation. — Trench  explains  the  origin  of  this  word 
("  Study  of  Words,"  p.  8).  Poverty. — Attendant  on  the  persecution.  When  turned  out  of 
the  synagogue,  on  becoming  Christians,  Jews  were  often  deprived  of  their  property.  Rich. — 
In  character,  and  Divine  approval.  Blasphemy. — A  term  usually  and  properly  applied  to 
God;  here  meaning  "reviling,"  "insult,"  "calumny."  Synagogue  of  Satan. — With  simple 
meaning  of  congregation  of  deceivers.  "  A  company  of  people  bearing  the  image  of  Satan, 
copying  his  example,  doing  his  work,  and  supporters  of  his  rale."  Here  Satan  is  treated 
as  the  ideal  deceiver,  who  represents  these  deceivers.  No  argument  in  relation  to  his 
personality  can  safely  be  drawn  from  such  figurative  expressions  as  these. 

Ver.  10.  Devil. — Representing  the  informers  against,  accusers  of,  the  Christians,  and 
persecuting  magistrates.  Prison. — The  first  degree  of  punishment.  Tried. — In  the  sense  of 
tempted  to  apostatise.  Ten  days. — Not  literal  ten  days  ;  the  expression  is  figurative,  and 
means  a  strictly  limited  and  relatively  short  time.  Faithful. — Constant,  persistent.  Death, 
— 9avaTov  suggests  here  a  violent  death.  Crown  of  life. — I.e.,  eternal  life  as  a  crown,  or 
sealing  of  the  faithfulness.     See  1  Pet.  v.  4  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  8. 

Ver.  11.  Second  death — Compare  chap.  xx.  6,  14,  xxi.  8.     It  points  to  a  death  other  than, 
the  death  of  the  body.     It  is  used  in  the  Chaldee  paraphrase.     Carpenter  says :  "  The  life 
of  the  spirit  is  the  knowledge  of  God  (John  xvii.  3) ;  the  death  of  the  spirit,  or  the  second 
death,  is  the  decay  or  paralysis  of  the  powers  by  which  such  a  knowledge  was  possible,  and 
the  experience  of  the  awfulness  of  a  life  which  is  without  God." 

Ver.  12.  Sharp  sword. — Suggesting  unusual  severity  of  asserting,  and  unusual  severity  of 
dealing  (see  chap.  i.  16  ;  also  Eph.  vi.  17).  "  On  the  one  hand,  it  was  to  smite  that  it  might 
heal,  cutting  to  the  quick,  reaching  the  conscience,  laying  bare  the  hidden  depths  of  each 
man's  life.     On  the  other,  it  was  also  quick  and  powerful  to  smite  and  to  destroy. 

Ver.  13.  Thy  works. — Better  omitted,  as  in  ver.  9.  Satan's  seat. — Or  "throne."  Reference 
may  be  to  the  worship  of  ^sculapius,  under  the  symbol  of  a  serpent ;  but  Sinclair,  on  the 
ground  of  recent  excavations,  gives  the  suggestion  that  the  phrase  refers  to  the  great  altar 
of  Zeus  Soter,  carved  with  the  wars  of  gods  and  giants,  which  Attalus  set  up  to  com- 
memorate his  victory  over  the  Gauls — the  last  great  triumph  of  Hellenism  over  barbarism. 
Another  suggestion  is,  that  the  phrase  merely  indicates  that  Pergamos  v\^as,  in  a  special 
sense,  a  home  of  the  Satanic  spirit  of  persecution.  It  may  be  better,  however,  to  keep  the 
idea  of  deceiver  associated  with  the  term  "  Satan,"  and  destroyer  associated  with  the  word 
"  Devil."  Antipas. — Probably  short  for  Antipater ;  a  man  not  otherwise  known.  Martyr. — 
Strictly  witness  ;  but  bearing  witness  unto  death.  The  death  of  one  of  them  reveals  the 
fceverity  of  the  persecution  under  which  all  passed.  (The  legend  concerning  Antipas  cannot 
be  traced  earlier  than  the  fifth  century,  and  then  legends  of  martyrs  were  freely  invented.) 

Ver.  14.  Doctrine  of  Balaam. — Which  was  this :  if  you  caunot  get  your  own  way  by  open 
disobedience  to  God,  get  it  by  scheming ;  get  it  through  oif  ering  gratification  to  human 
passion.  Nothing  can  be  baser,  or  more  demoralising,  than  this  "  doctrine  of  Balaam." 
"  Israel  could  not  be  cursed,  but  they  might  be  made  to  bring  a  curse  upon  themselves  by 
yielding  to  sin." 

Ver.  15.  Nicolaitanes. — These  people  encouraged  Christians  to  join  in  the  idolatrous  feasts 
of  their  neighbours,  on  the  plea  that  to  the  spiritual  man  there  can  be  no  sin  in  any  merely 
bodily,  animal  action.  It  is  true  that  sin  is  in  the  will,  but  it  is  known  by  its  expression  in 
acts.     I  hate. — 6  {iiaio.     Probably  should  be  oixoiojs,  in  like  manner. 

Ver.  16.  Repent. — Addressed  either  directly  to  the  angel  or  to  the  loyal  ones  in  the 
Church.  Them. — Those  zuembers  who  are  yielding  to  surrounding  evil  influences.  The 
discipline  must  be  severe  on  them,  and  an  anxiety  for  the  whole  Church. 

Ver.  17.  Hidden  manna. — Figure  for  the  Divinely-provided,  spiritual  food,  with  which 
loyal  souls  are  nourished.  White  stone. — Sign  of  acquittal.  See  in  "  Main  Homiletic " 
account  of  the  "  tessara  hosjntalis,'  which  explains  the  secrecy  and  value  of  the  new  name 
written  upon  the  stone.  New  name. — That  which  betokens  their  adoption  into  the  family 
of  God  ;  a  new  character,  new  position  and  privileges." 

Ver.  18.  Thyatira. — Situated  between  Pergamos  and  Sardis.  Inscriptions  show  that  it  con- 
tained many  corporate  guilds,  one  being  that  of  the  dyers.  Apollo  was  specially  worshipped, 
as  the  sun-god,  under  the  Macedonian  name  of  Tyrinnas.  Son  of  God. — This  name  solemnly 
affirms  His  Divine  power,  as  well  as  right,  and  prepares  for  the  promised  bestowment  of 
power,  in  ver.  26.  Eyes, — A  figure  representing  His  omniscience,  and  especially  the 
intensity  of  its  searching.  Feet. — Figure  representing  the  firmness  of  His  tread  who  comes 
in  judgment.     Feet  of  Chalcolihanus.     An  aspect  of  stern  sovereignty  marks  this  epistle. 

Ver.  19.  Works. — Divided  into  two  sets — active :  charity  and  service  ;  passive  :  faith  and 
patience.  Ephesus  had  failed  in  the  second  set  ?  this  Church  was  stronger  in  the  second 
than  in  the  first.  It  would  seem  that  on  the  passive  side  they  were  even  weak  ;  permitting 
things  that  put  them  in  peril. 

Ver.  20.  Woman  Jezebel. — More  exactly,  "thy  wife  Jezebel."  Probably  a  party  in  the 
Church   is  referred  to  which  was   led  by  an   unscrupulous  woman.      It  is  necessary  to 

444 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.         chap.  ii. 


remember  that  traditions  had  grown  up  around  the  person  of  Jezebel,  and  these,  rather 
than  the  actual  history,  are  referred  to.  Seduce  my  servants. — The  teachings  of  St.  Paul 
show  how  liberty  in  sensual  indulgence,  in  its  two  forms,  was  a  cause  of  constant  anxiety 
in  the  Early  Churches. 

Ver.  22.  Bed. — Of  sickness  and  suffering.  The  figure  is  in  keeping  with  the  sin,  and 
suggests  a  fitting  and  answering  punishment. 

Ver.  23.  Children. — Her  disciples;  those  who  take  up  with  her  teachings,  and  follow  her 
ways.     Death, — In  forms  that  would  clearly  indicate  Divine  judgment. 

Ver.  24.  Deep  things. — Probably  these  heretical  teachers  boasted  of  knowing  the  deep  things 
of  God,  so  they  are  satirised  as  the  deep  thinrjs  of  Satan.     Other  burden. — See  Acts  xv.  28,  seqq. 

Ver.  26.  My  works. — Not  the  works  of  any  self-willed  teacher.  There  must  be  simple  and 
supreme  loyalty  to  Christ,  and  that  involves  loyalty  to  everything  that  is  self -restrained  and 
pure.  Christ  gives  power  over  seZ/and  sin.  Over  the  nations. — This  is  a  figure  of  speech. 
The  individual  triumph  over  all  individual  and  all  combined  immoral  forces  and  influences 
is  pictured  as  a  rule  over  riotous  and  violent  nations  (Compare  Ps.  ii.).  "  Those  who,  like  their 
Master,  refused  to  win  power  by  doing  homage  to  wrong  (Matt.  iv.  3-10),  would  share  the 
nobler  sway  which  He  now  established."  Morning  star. — Used  of  Christ  Himself  in  chap, 
xxii.  16.  •'  The  symbol  of  sovereignty  on  its  brighter  and  more  benignant  side,  and  therefore 
the  fitting  and  necessary  complement  of  the  dread  attributes  that  had  gone  before." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—7. 

A  Church  Weak  in  the  Sp'ings  of  Life. — We  are  treating  the  book  of 
Revelation  as  a  spiritual  rather  than  as  a  historical  book.  Not  anxious  to  fit  it 
to  any  history,  or  to  find  events  that  seem  to  match  its  symbols,  but  purposing 
to  find  what  suggestive  spiritual  and  practical  applications  can  be  made  of  the 
symbols.  In  this  and  the  following  chapter  is  the  picture  of  the  Living  Christ, 
the  searching  White  Christ,  moving  among  His  Churches,  carefully  inspecting 
them.  And  what  He  notices,  and  remarks  on,  in  these  seven  representative 
cases,  may  help  us  to  discover  what,  in  the  Churches  of  to-day,  must  be  grieving 
Him  who  would  have  them  white  as  He  is  white. 

I.  The  Living  Christ  accepts  the  fact  that  His  Church  on  earth  is  a  fighting 
Church.  (Compare  St.  Paul's  address  to  the  elders  of  Ephesus,  Acts  xx.  28-30.) 
That  the  enemies  of  the  Church  are  mainly  within  itself  is  seen  in  all  these  seven 
cases.  The  chief  wrong  is  always  some  wrong  in  themselves.  Outside  evils  and 
temptations  are  easily  over-mastered  when  the  internal  spiritual  health  and 
vitality  are  well  maintained.  The  Living  Christ  is  not  content  with  surface  im- 
pressions ;  He  goes  to  the  very  root  of  the  evil.  He  sees — 1.  Inconsistency — the 
failure  to  harmonise  spirit  and  conduct.  2.  Inefficiency — the  failure  to  rise  to  a 
high  standard  of  Christian  life,  or  to  meet  the  higher  spiritual  obligations. 
3.  Influence  of  false  teachers,  regarded  rather  as  the  source  of  moral  than  of 
merely  intellectual  mischief.  The  conflict  of  Christ's  Church  must  partly  be  with 
circumstances  and  with  persecutors ;  but  the  real  importance  of  their  influence 
lies  in  the  strain  put  on  Christian  motive,  and  the  injury  done  to  Christian 
character.  Christ  does  not  expect  present  perfection  in  His  Church.  He  does 
expect  *'  overcoming,"  which  is  the  pursuit,  step  by  step,  of  perfection — steady 
progress,  by  advancing  triumphs,  towards  perfection.  Christian  life  should  be  a 
series  of  victories,  small  and  great. 

II.  The  Living  Christ  may  notice  a  wavering,  changeable  spirit  in  a  Church. 
— This  is  the  point  of  importance  in  the  inspection  of  this  Church.  The  Search- 
ing Lord  found  out  that  they  were  not  actually  what  they  had  been.  Surface 
appearances  were,  indeed,  the  same,  but  they  had  "  left  their  first  love."  The 
history  of  this  Church  may  be  reviewed.  First,  certain  disciples  of  John  the 
Baptist  had  taught  a  reformed  Judaism.  Then  came  the  eloquent  preaching  of 
Apollos.  Then  the  instructive  work  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  and  then  the  three 
years'  ministry  of  St.  Paul.  The  Church  was  greatly  attached  to  the  apostle,  but 
in  the  epistle  to  Timothy  there  have  been  found  signs  of  what  seems  to  be  a 

445 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


change  of  feeling  toward  him.  And  this  may  suggest  one  meaning  of  the  ex- 
pression, "  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  There  was  much  that  deserved  com- 
mendation in  the  Church  at  Ephesus.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  was  a 
very  difficult  city  to  live  a  Christian  life  in.  It  was  Eastern ;  Diana's  great 
Temple  was  there ;  it  was  noted  for  its  superstitions  and  magical  arts.  The  ^ 
Living  Christ  was  able  freely  to  praise  their  (1)  works,  (2)  patience,  (3)  zeal, 
(4)  good  motive.  But  if  the  tone  of  Christ's  praise  is  carefully  estimated,  it  willy 
be  seen  that  He  observed  an  intensity  in  these  things,  which  itself  indicated  a 
sense  of  flagging  soul  life.  Over-activity  is  a  bad  sign.  Though  surface  things 
seemed  right,  there  was  weakness  in  the  springs  of  life.  There  were  signs  of  a 
serious  change  in  them.  Changed  feeling  towards  St.  Paul  showed  a  changed 
state  of  soul ;  they  were  not  keeping  soul-steadfast.  How  did  this  changeable- 
ness,  fickleness,  come  about  ?  1 .  Partly  it  was  due  to  natural  disposition. 
Fickle  people  need  to  watch  themselves,  and  their  varying  moods,  with  unusual 
care.  Impvilsive  people  seldom  have  also  staying  power,  and  they  soon  flag. 
2.  Partly  it  resulted  from  the  influence  of  circumstances.  The  strain  of  con- 
tinuance is  always  trying,  and  the  subtlety  of  false  teachers  undermines 
Christian  vitality.  3.  The  neglect  of  private  soul-culture  leaves  the  inner  life 
to  flag.  Such  neglect  often  follows  from  undue  absorption  in  worldly  things. 
Application  may  be  made  to  the  sin  and  peril  of  the  changeableness  that  is 
so  sadly  characteristic  of  Christian  Churches  nowadays.  The  signs  of  it  are 
(1)  craving  for  excitement;  (2)  wanting  to  be  made  to  feel;  (3)  distaste  of  quiet 
spiritual  influences.  When  a  man  has  lost  his  souFs  love  and  life,  he  tries  to 
make  up  for  the  loss  by  ceremonies,  or  singing,  or  revivals.  Men  should  ask 
themselves  this  question  :  How  is  it  we  want  to  be  revived  ?  Why  are  we  not 
keeping  up  our  high  standard  of  Christian  life  ? 

III.  The  Living  Christ  encourages  wrestling  with  this  weakness  by  promising 
permanency  to  them  who  overcome. — "  Eating  the  tree  of  life."  See  the  tree 
in  the  Garden  of  Eden  ;  and  the  tree  figured  later  on,  in. this  book  of  Revelation, 
which  bore  twelve  manner  of  fruits,  and  these  every  month,  so  that  it  was  per- 
manently refreshing,  sustaining  a  continuous  high  life  and  vigour.  *'  Over- 
coming "  includes  (1)  recognising  the  evil,  as  evil ;  (2)  returning  upon  a  better 
spirit — humility — new  purposes — dependence  ;  (3)  watching  against  new  failures. 
In  all  such  recovery  the  Living  Christ  helps,  fixing  the  new  and  better  way  into 
a  permanency  of  goodness. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  1.  The  Seven  Stars  aiid  the  Seven  and  it  is  applied  to  priests,  and,  in  one 

Candlesticks. — This  vision  is  the  natural  passage,  to  an  officer  of  the  synagogue, 

introduction  to  all  that   follows,  and.  It  does  not  mean  here  a  supernatural 

indeed,  defines  the  main  purpose  of  the  being,    but   the  minister,  or  spiritual 

whole  book,  inasmuch  as  it  shows  us  pastor,    of      the      Church.        L    The 

Christ,  sustaining,  directing,   dwelling  messengers     are     rulers.       They    are 

in,  His  Churches.     The  words  of  the  described  in  a  double  manner — by   a 

text    are    meant    to    set     forth     the  name   which   expresses  subordination. 

Churches     and     their     servants,     the  and    by    a    figure     which     expresses 

Churches  and  their  work,  the  Churches  authority.    And  this  perfectly  embodies 

and  their  Lord.  the  very  essential  characteristic  of  all 

I.  We  have  in  the  symbol  important  office   and   power  in  Christ's  Church, 

truths  concerning  the   Churches  and  Dignity  and  authority  mean  liberty  for 

their  servants. — "  The  seven  stars  are  more,  and  more  self -forgetting,  work, 

the   angels   of    the   seven    Churches."  Power  binds  its  possessor  to  toil.     But 

The  word  "angel"  means  messenger,  to  be  servant  oi  all  does  not  mean  to 

446  "^ 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chap.il 


do  the  bidding  of  all.  The  service 
which  imitates  Christ  is  helpfulness, 
not  subjection.  Neither  the  Church 
is  to  lord  it  over  the  messenger,  nor 
the  messenger  over  the  Church. 
2.  The  messengers  and  the  Churches 
have  at  bottom  the  same  work  to  do. 
Stars  shine ;  so  do  lamps.  Light  comes 
from  both — in  different  fashion,  indeed, 
and  of  a  different  quality;  but  still,  both 
are  lights.  These  are  in  the  Saviour's 
hands,  those  are  by  his  side  ;  but  each 
is  meant  to  stream  put  rays  of  bright- 
ness over  a  daik  night.  So,  essentially, 
all  Christian  men  have  the  same  work 
to  do.  The  ways  of  doing  it  differ,  but 
the  thing  done  is  one.  We  have  all 
one  office  and  function,  to  be  discharged 
by  each  in  his  own  fashion — viz.,  to 
give  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Christ 
Jesus.  3.  The  Churches  and  their 
messengers  are  alike  in  their  religious 
condition  and  character.  The  messenger, 
or  minister,  represents  the  Churches 
completely.  The  religious  condition  of 
a  Church,  and  that  of  its  leaders, 
teachers,  pastors,  ever  tend  to  be  the 
same,  as  that  of  the  level  of  water  in 
two  connected  vessels.  There  is  such 
a  constant  interaction  and  reciprocal 
influence,  that  uniformity  results. 

II.  The  Churches  and  their  work. — 
1.  The  Church  is  to  be  light.  Light 
is  spontaneous,  suggesting  the  in- 
voluntary influence  of  character. 
Light  is  silent  and  gentle,  though  so 
mighty.  Light  is  self -invisible  ;  reveal- 
ing all  things,  it  reveals  not  itself. 
The  source  you  can  see,  but  not  the 
beams.  So  we  are  to  shine — not  show- 
ing ourselves,  but  our  Master.  2.  The 
Church's  light  is  derived  light.  Two 
things  are  needed  for  the  burning  of  a 
lamp  :  that  it  should  be  lit,  and  that 
it  should  be  fed.  In  both  respects,  the 
light  with  which  we  shine  is  derived. 
Reflected,  not  self-originated,  is  all  our 
radiance.  A  derived  and  transient 
light  is  all  that  any  man  can  be.  The 
condition  of  all  our  brightness  is  that 
Christ  shall  give  us  light.  And  the 
soul  kindled  by  Christ  must  constantly 
be  supplied  with  the  grace  and  gift  of 


His  Divine  spirit.  3.  The  Church's 
light  is  blended,  or  clustered,  light. 
Each  of  these  little  communities  is 
represented  by  one  lamp.  And  that 
one  light  is  composed  of  the  united 
brightness  of  all  the  individuals  who 
constitute  the  community.  They  are 
to  have  a  character,  an  influence,  a 
work,  as  a  society,  not  merely  as 
individuals.  A  Church  is  not  to  be 
merely  a  multitude  of  separate  points 
of  brilliancy,  but  the  separate  points 
are  to  coalesce  into  one  great  orbed 
brightness. 

III.  The  Churches  and  their  Lord. — 
His  strengthening  and  watchful 
presence  moves  among  the  Churches, 
and  is  active  on  their  behalf.  That 
presence  is  a  plain  literal  fact,  however 
feebly  we  lay  hold  of  it.  He  is  with 
us,  to  hold  up  and  to  bless ;  to  observe, 
to  judge,  and,  if  need  be.  to  punish. 
And  He  is  the  same  loving  and  for- 
bearing Lord  whom  the  apostle  had 
learned  to  trust  on  earth,  and  found 
again  revealed  from  heaven. — A. 
Maclaren^  D.D. 

Chrisfs  Presence  in  His  Church. — 
There  is  a  subject  of  unusual  interest 
suggested  by  the  attitude  in  which 
the  Living  and  Infinitely  White  Christ 
is  represented  as  standing,  and  the 
relations  which  He  is  rej)resented  as 
actually  bearing  to  the  "  stars  "  and  the 
"  candlesticks,"  which  are  the  symbols 
of  the  Church,  audits  ministry.  "  The 
seven  stars,  are  the  angels  of  the  seven 
Churches ;  and  the  seven  candlesticks 
are  seven  Churches."  That  subject  is, 
the  actual  presence,  and  practical 
working,  of  Christ,  in  His  Church  of 
every  age,  and  in  His  Church  of  to-day. 
To  put  it  in  another  form  :  Does  the 
Living  Christ  still  reserve  to  Himself, 
even  into  this  nineteenth  century.  His 
executive  and  administrative,  as  well 
as  His  legislative,  rights  ?  Those  rights 
He  certainly  did  exercise  in  the  first 
Churches  of  the  redeemed,  for  the 
Church  at  Ephesus  is  called  to  recognise 
Him  in  this  way — "  These  things  saith 
He  that  holdeth  the  seven  stars  in 
His  right   hand.   He  that  ivalketh  in 

447 


CHAP.  II.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candle- 
sticks." 

I.  The  actual  presence  of  the  Living 
Christ  with  His  Church  is  the  Church's 
most  precious  truth. — It  always,  and 
everywhere,  has  been  recognised  as 
such.  So  far  as  theory  is  concerned, 
the  living  headship  of  Christ  has 
always  been  the  Church's  theory. 
What  we  have  to  complain  of  is,  not 
that  the  truth  has  ever  been  really 
lost,  but  that  it  has  so  often  been  buried, 
and  therefore  practically  lost.  The 
constant  work  of  the  Christian  ages 
has  been  recovering  lost  truths,  and 
getting  neglected  truths  estimated  at 
their  right  value.  If  the  truth  of  the 
actual  presence  of  Christ  in  His  Church 
to-day  were  a  nev)  truth,  it  could  not 
be  true.  It  is  only  a  half-buried  old 
truth  ;  one  that  has  been  covered  over 
with  the  dust  of  men's  formulae ;  one 
that  claimed  the  first  place,  but  was 
soon  pushed  back  into  a  second,  when 
ecclesiastics  grasped  the  duties  and 
rights  of  Him  who  is  "  above  for 
evermore " ;  and  then  into  a  third, 
when  men  made  so  much  more  of 
getting  into  the  kingdom  than  of  the 
conduct  becoming  to  those  in  the 
kingdom.  I  want  to  show  you  that 
Christ's  permanent  abiding  in  His 
Church  was  the  true  Messianic  expecta- 
tion ;  it  was  our  Lord's  own  anticipation, 
and  it  was  the  realisation,  and  the 
teaching,  of  His  apostles.  We  may 
possibly  come  to  see  that  the  indwell- 
ing and  presiding  '^  Holy  Ghost "  of 
the  Church  of  the  redeemed  is  simply 
the  form  under  which  this  presence, 
and  consequent  presidency,  of  theLiving 
Christ  is  now  to  be  recognised  by 
us.  Christ,  spiritually  present,  and 
spiritually  working,  is  the  Holy  Ghost. 
There  are  three  possible  thoughts  that 
we  may  cherish  concerning  the  con- 
tinuance of  Christ's  life  beyond  His 
human  death  on  the  cross.  We  may 
think  of  Him  as  simply  alive  again, 
as  men,  we  assume,  will  be  alive  again 
after  the  great  resurrection-morn.  Or 
we  may  think  of  Him  as  altogether 
removed  from  earthly  scenes,  dwelling 
away   in   the    heavenlies,    and    there 

448 


wholly  engaged  in  what  may  be  found 
necessary  for  the  completion  of  His 
redemptive  work.  Probably  most 
Christian  people  cherish  this  thought 
of  the  Risen  Christ,  to  the  exclusion 
of  all  others.  To  them  He  is  the  great 
High  Priest ;  the  Advocate  with  the 
Father;  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant. 
He  is  there,  and  only  there,  in  the 
"  Temple  not  made  with  hands."  But 
there  is  another  thought  of  Him, 
which  it  would  be  a  new  inspiration 
to  us  to  cherish.  He  is  back  again 
amid  mortal  scenes.  He  is  as  really, 
nay,  more  really,  here  with  us  now, 
than  when  He  seemed  to  live  in  our 
homes,  eat  our  food,  and  speak  our 
words.  He  went  away  in  order  that 
He  might  come  and  abide.  He  went 
away  from  our  senses  that  He  might 
come  to  our  souls.  The  Church  is  His 
Temple  ]  in  it  He  dwells  and  rules. 
All  is  spiritual,  the  Church,  the  Temple, 
the  rule ;  but  then,  the  spiritual  is  the 
real,  the  material  is  only  the  picture 
and  the  seeming.  It  is  this  truth 
concerning  Christ  that  heroic  souls 
have  kept  alive  through  the  long 
Christian  ages  of  struggle  and  of  error. 
It  is  this  truth  which  is  now  every  day 
getting  into  clearer  light.  It  is  this 
truth  which  is  destined  to  revolutionise 
Christianity — not  the  Christianity  of 
Christ,  that  only  needs  restoration, 
but  the  Christianity  that  men  have 
made  for  themselves  out  of  the  revela- 
tion that  has  been  given  to  them. 
The  key-note  of  the  Christianity  of  the 
future  will  be,  Christ  come ;  Christ 
here  ;  Christ  spiritually  present  ; 
Christ  saving  now  ;  Christ  sanctifying 
now;  Christ  ruling  now.  Really,  to-day 
"  holding  the  stars,  and  walking  among 
the  candlesticks."  1.  It  is  the  truth 
foreshadowed  in  Messianic  picture- 
teachings.  Men  would  make  less  of 
particular  Messianic  psalms,  and 
Messianic  prophecies,  if  they  more 
clearly  saw  that  the  Mosaic  dispensa- 
tion was,  in  its  very  essence,  Messianic. 
It  is  but  the  expression,  fitted  for  the 
times,  of  the  primary  idea  of  the 
"  theocracy  " ;  and  the  "  theocracy  " 
was  but  the  preparatory  picture- teacji-' 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION,        chap.il 


ing  of  Christ's  spiritual  rule  over  His 
Church  and  in  His  Church.  By  the 
term  "  theocracy "  is  meant,  God's 
immediate  and  direct  rule.  Without 
delegation,  or  mediation,  or  inter- 
vention, He,  actually  present  with 
them,  controlled,  instructed,  guided, 
rewarded,  punished,  the  Jewish  nation. 
That  material  rule  fitted  to  the  times, 
but  it  prepared  the  way  for  a  spiritual 
realisation  of  the  spiritual  truth  that 
it  embodied.  Christ  is  God,  spiritually 
present  in  His  spiritual  Church, 
spiritually  ruling,  and  ordering,  and 
sanctifying,  2.  And  this  is  the 
relation  He  would  sustain  which  was 
anticipated  by  Christ.  We  cannot  be 
surprised  to  find  it  held  in  reserve  by 
our  Lord  during  the  earlier  part  of 
His  ministry.  It  would  have  been  of 
no  use  whatever  to  speak  of  a  spiritual 
presence  to  His  disciples  while  they 
were  so  full  of  worldly  ideas  and 
expectations.  He  had  to  wait  until 
some  beginnings  of  spiritual  apprehen- 
sion were  made  by  at  least  some  of 
them.  And  yet  there  are  many  indica- 
tions that  it  was  always  in  His 
thoughts,  and  hints  of  it  were  given 
when  plain  words  could  not  be  spoken. 
When  He  referred  to  His  coming 
rejection  and  death.  He  usually  closed 
His  remarks  with  an  allusion  to  His 
resurrection,  as  if  He  would  set  the 
disciples  thinking  what  He  would  he  to 
them  in  that  risen  life.  When  He 
came  to  them  in  the  grey  and  misty 
morning,  walking  upon  the  sea.  He 
evidently  intended  to  help  them  towards 
realising  His  presence  with  them  in 
other  than  sense  conditions.  That  was 
a  stage  in  His  education  of  them  to 
the  apprehension  of  the  unseen.  When 
He  had  only  the  chosen  band  around 
Him  in  the  upper  room,  He  could 
speak  more  freely  than  He  had  ever 
been  able  to  speak  before.  He  felt 
the  closing  of  the  earthly,  sensuous 
relations.  He  knew  what  a  strain  it 
would  be  to  those  disciples.  And 
therefore  He  bent  all  His  effort  to  the 
work  of  ciieering  them  by  the  repeated 
assurance  that  it  would  be  no  real  loss 
to  them  ;  it  would,  indeed,  be  the  most 


real  gain.  They  might  at  first  think 
that  it  was  another  one  who  would 
come  to  be  in  them,  and  to  abide  with 
them  for  ever ;  but  presently  it  would 
seem  clear  to  them  that  Him  they 
called  the  "  Holy  Spirit "  was,  in 
deepest  reality,  Jesus  Himself  with 
them  in  a  spiritual  way,  fulfilling  His 
own  gracious  word,  "  I  will  not  leave 
you  comfortless,  I  will  come  to  you ; 
the  world  seeth  Me  no  more,  but  ye 
see  Me."  And  then  that  strange 
coming  into  vision,  and  passing  out  of 
vision,  of  the  Resurrection  days,  was 
His  most  gracious  way  of  loosening 
their  hold  on  His  bodily  presence,  and 
clearing  their  apprehension  of  His 
spiritual  presence.  And  when  they 
saw  Him  go  up  from  earth,  and  the 
cloud  hid  Him  from  their  sense-view 
for  ever.  His  last  words  were  in  their 
souls,  and  they  were  left  to  think  out, 
and  feel  out,  their  wondrous  meanings  : 
"  Lo,  /  am  with  you  all  the  days." 
3.  And  this  truth  of  Christ's  present 
spiritual  abiding  in  His  Church  was 
distinctly  the  realisation,  and  the  teach- 
ing, of  His  apostles.  St.  Peter  stood 
by  the  bedside  of  sick  ^neas,  and 
spoke  as  if  Jesus  was  actually  there; 
he  could  see  Him,  and  ^neas  might  if 
he  would  look  aright,  ''^neas,  Jesus 
Christ  maketh  thee  whole."  It  is 
firmly  asserted  that,  on  certain 
occasions,  *'  the  power  of  the  Lord  was 
present  to  heal."  In  the  great  crises 
of  St.  Paul's  life,  Christ's  presence  with 
him  and  ruling  of  his  course,  was 
revealed  to  him  in  personal  visions. 
In  such  a  chapter  as  the  third  in  the 
epistle  to  the  Oolossians,  every  act  and 
effort  of  the  Christian  life  is  directly 
referred  to  Christ's  present  inspection  : 
everything  is  to  be  done  "  as  unto  the 
Lord."  And  the  one  purpose  of  the 
book  of  Revelation  is  to  associate 
the  Living,  Spiritual  Christ,  in  a  very 
direct  way,  with  all  the  growth,  the 
sins,  the  frailties,  the  conflicts,  the 
sorrows,  the  varied  experiences,  of  His 
Church.  The  key-note  of  the  book  is 
struck  in  the  first  chapter.  The  Christ 
presented  in  such  suggestive  symbols  is 
not  the  Christ  of  the  heavenly  places — 

GG  449 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


how  the  book  is  misconceived  when 
that  idea  is  unduly  pressed  ! — it  is  the 
Christ  of  the  Churches — the  presiding 
Spirit  of  the  Churches ;  it  is  the 
infinitely  White  One  with  the  sword, 
who  "holds  the  stars  in  His  right 
hand,  and  walks  among  the  candle- 
sticks "  ;  who  presided  over  every 
movement  of  the  Churches  of  that  day, 
Ephesus,  and  Smyrna,  and  the  rest ; 
who  presides  over  every  movement  of 
His  universal  Church  in  all  the  ages. 

II.  The  Living  Christ,  spiritually 
present,  stands  in  a  twofold  relation 
to  His  Church. — The  one  relation  is 
universally  admitted  ;  the  other  is 
generally  obscured,  misrepresented, 
neglected,  and  imperilled  :  and  to  some 
is  entrusted  the  work  of  recovering, 
and  setting  forth  afresh  in  view  of 
men,  the  imperilled  relations.  Every 
human  government  has  two  functions, 
legislative  and  administrative.  It 
makes  laws,  and  it  provides  the 
machinery  for  carrying  out  its  laws, 
actually  presiding  over  their  admini- 
stration. A  curious  relic  of  the  idea 
that  the  Sovereign  actually  executes 
her  own  laws  is  found  in  the  ceremony 
of  opening  the  Assizes  in  our  county 
towns.  The  judges  are  met,  on  entering 
the  town,  with  a  state  ceremony,  as  if 
they  were  actually  the  Queen.  The 
Assize  is  opened  on  the  assumption 
that  it  is  the  Queen  herself  who  is 
going  to  try,  and  condemn  or  acquit, 
the  prisoners.  The  fiction  of  her 
presence  is  constantly  maintained,  and 
her  executive,  as  well  as  her  legislative, 
rights  are  preserved.  The  right  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  to  make  laws  for  His 
Church  is  never  disputed.  The  Pope 
of  Rome  is  but  the  Yicar  of  Christ,  and 
he  is  as  zealous  as  we  can  be  of  the 
legislative  claims  of  his  supreme  and 
sovereign  Lord.  But  the  assumption 
is  that  He  only  makes  the  laws,  and 
makes  them  away  up  in  heaven,  and 
commits  the  carrying  out  of  His  laws 
to  some  delegates  here  on  earth.  It  is 
supposed  that  He  committed  the  carry- 
ing out  of  His  laws  first  to  St.  Peter, 
through  him  to  the  Pope,  through  the 
Pope  to  the  bishops,  and  through  the 

450 


bishops  to  the  priests.  And  so  we  have 
on  earth  now,  not  Christ,  but  a  Churchy 
which  is  supposed  to  represent  Him, 
and  carry  His  authority.  Or  we  may 
say  that,  while  the  legislative  rights  of 
Jesus  are  duly  honoured.  He  is  thought 
of  as  having  surrendered  His  executive 
and  administrative  rights.  He  keeps 
Himself  now  altogether  in  the  heavenly 
spheres — He  is  not  here ;  and  His 
Church,  or  rather  a  certain  order  of 
priests  in  His  Church,  consider  they 
have  the  right  to  take  His  place  and 
do  His  work.  Now  you  can  clearly  see 
the  principle  for  which  contest  has 
been  variously  made  through  all  the 
Christian  ages — the  principle  for  which 
again,  in  our  day,  a  holy  fight  must  be 
waged.  As  to  particular  methods  of 
organising  Churches,  special  arrange- 
ments of  ministry,  or  systems  of 
government,  we  have  nothing  whatever 
to  say.  Let  every  man  find  out  what 
is  best  for  him,  and  let  every  man 
give  me  full  liberty  to  find  out  what 
is  best  for  me.  "  Let  every  man  be 
fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind." 
Only  we  take  our  stand  here  ;  we  draw 
the  line  here.  No  plan,  no  system, 
must  touch  the  real,  present,  practical 
administrative  rights  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
No  scheme  must  even  seem,  to  shut 
Christ  up  in  heaven,  and  keep  Him 
seated  on  His  throne.  No  effort  must 
be  made  to  teach  that  Christ  has  put 
his  royal  rights  into  commission,  so 
that  we  can  now  have  no  direct  dealings 
with  Him,  but  must  deal  with  priest, 
or  bishop,  or  earthly  sovereign,  or 
Poman  Pope,  who  claim  to  speak  in 
His  name.  It  is  not  some  fact  of  a 
bygone  age  that  He  once  held  the  stars 
in  His  right  hand,  and  once  walked 
among  the  candlesticks.  It  is  the  fact 
of  the  hour ;  it  is  the  truth  of  to-day. 
He  is  the  executor  of  His  own  laws. 
He  does  now  actually  Himself  hold  the 
stars  in  His  right  hand,  and  walk 
among  the  candlesticks.  The  history 
of  Christianity  is  really  the  story  of 
man's  varied  efforts  to  establish  a 
mediatorship  between  Christ  and  men. 
There  must  be  none.  There  can  be 
none.       Christ    is    mediator    between 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chap.  ii. 


man  and  God.     But   Christ's  relation  are  "settling  down  into  a  lower  state 

to  man  is  direct.     There  must   be  no  of  spiritual  life  than  that  which  they 

attempt  to  push  in  any  mediation  be-  once   aimed    at    and    once    knew." — 

tween  Christ  and  the  soul.    The  history  Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter, 
of  Christianity  is   the  heroic  story  of 

the  struggles  of  men  who  fought  for,  The  True  Frohlenn  of  ChHstian  Ex- 

and  died  for,  the  administrative  rights  perience. — There  are  many  disciples  of 

of  Christ.     Their  conflict  took  a  variety  our  time,  who,  like  the  Ephesian  dis- 

of  forms,  but  the  essence  of  it  always  ciples,  are  to  be  warmly  commended  for 

was  the  resistance  of  all  human  media-  their   intended    fidelity,    and   are   yet 

torship  between  Christ  and  His  Church,  greatly  troubled  and  depressed  by  what 

appears  to   be  a   real  loss  of   ground 

Ver.  4.  Losing  First  Love. — The  first  in  their  piety.     They  are  compelled  to 

love  had  gone  out  of   their  religion ;  sigh  over  a  certain  subsidence  of  that 

there  was  a   tendency  to  fall  into  a  pure  sensibility,  and  that  high  inspira- 

mechanical  faith, strong  against  heresy,  tion,  in  which  their  discipleship  began, 

but  tolerant  of  conventionalism.    Their  The  clearness  of  that  hour  is  blurred, 

temptations   did    not    arise   from    the  the  fresh  joy  interspaced  with  dryness, 

prevalence  of  error,  or  the  bitterness  I.  The  relation  of  the  first  love,  or 

of  persecution,  but  from  a  disposition  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  disciple- 

to   fall*  backward,  and   again  do  the  ship,  to  the  subsequent   life. — What 

dead  works  of  the  past.    There  was  not  we   call    conversion   is   not   a   change 

so  much  need  to  take  heed  unto  their  distinctly  traceable  in  the  experience 

doctrine,  but  there  was  great  need  that  of  all  disciples,  though  it  is,  and  must 

they  should  take  heed  unto  themselves  be,  a  realised  fact  in  all.     There  are 

(1  Tim.  iv.  16  ;   compare  Acts  xx.  28).  many  that  grew  up  out  of  their  infancy. 

When  there  is  danger  because  earnest-  or   childhood,  in  the  grace  of  Christ, 

ness  in  the  holy  cause  is  dying  out,  and  and    remember    no    time    when   they 

the  very  decorum  of  religion  has  become  began  to  love  Him.     Even  such,  ho w- 

a  snare,  what  more  fitting  than  to  be  ever,  will  commonly  remember  a  time 

reminded   of    Him    whose    hand    can  when   their   love  to  God  and   Divine 

strengthen  and  uphold  them,  and  who  things  became  a  fact  so  fresh,  so  newly 

walks  among  the  candlesticks  to  supply  conscious,  as  to  raise  a  doubt  whether 

them  with  the  oil  of  fresh  love  (ver.  1)  ?  it   was  not   then    for   the    first    time 

#The  decay  of  love  is  the  decay  of  that  kindled.     In  other  cases  there   is   no 

/  without  which  all  other  graces  are  as  doubt  of  a  beginning,  a  real,  conscious, 

(  nothing  (1   Cor.   xiii.    1-3),  since  "  all  definitely  remembered  beginning,  a  new 

religion  is  summed  up   in   one  word,  turning  to  God,  a  fresh-born  Christian 

Love.     God  asks  this ;  we  cannot  give  love.     What  is  the  import  of  such  a 

more.  He  cannot  take  less."     Great  as  state?  what  its  relation  to  the  subse- 

the  fault  is,  it  is  the  fault  which  Love  quent   life   and   character  1      It    is   a 

alone  could  have  detected.      Can  any  character  begun,  a  Divine  fact  accom- 

one  more  touchingly  rebuke  than  by  plished,  in  which  the  subject  is  started 

commencing,  "  Thou  no  longer  lovest  on  a  new  career  of  regenerated  liberty 

me  enough"?     There  is  at  present,  in  in  good.     But   it    is  not  a  completed 

the   Ephesian  Church,   little   outward  gift,  which  only  needs  to  be  held  fast, 

sign  of  decay  ;  they  have  resisted  evil  It  is  one  of  God's  beginnings,  which  He 

and  false  teachers  ;  they  have  shown  will  carry   on  to  perfection.      In   one 

toil    and    endurance;    but   the   great  view,  indeed,   it  is  a   kind  of  perfect 

Searcher  of  hearts  detects  the  almost  state — a    state    resembling   innocence, 

imperceptible    signs    of    an    incipient  It  is  free,  it  is  full  of  God,  it  is,  for  the 

He  alone  can  tell  the  moment  time,  without  care.     In  this  flowering 


I  decay, 
when  love  of  Iryth  is   passing  into  a      state  of  beauty  the  soul  discovers,  and 
noisy,  Pharisaic  zealotism  ;  when  men      even  has  in  its  feeling,  the   sense  of 

451 


chap.il         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


perfection,  and  is  thus  awakened  from 
within  to  the  great  ideal,  in  which  its 
bliss  is  to  be  consummated.  The 
perfection  conceived,  too,  and  set  up  as 
a  mark  of  attainment,  is  something 
more  than  a  form  of  grace  to  be  here- 
after realised.  It  is  now  realised,  as 
far  as  it  can  be.  There  is  a  certain 
analogy  between  this  state,  paradi- 
saically  beautiful,  pure,  and  clean,  and 
that  external  paradise  in  which  our 
human  history  began.  Still,  the  proba- 
bility that  any  one  will  continue  in  the 
clearness  and  freshness  of  his  first  love 
to  God,  suffering  no  apparent  loss, 
falling  into  no  disturbance  or  state 
of  self-accusing  doubt,  is  not  great. 
Where  the  love  is  really  not  lost,  it  will 
commonly  need  to  be  conquei-ed  again, 
over  and  over,  and  wrought  into  the 
soul  by  a  protracted  and  resolute 
warfare.  A  mere  glance  at  the  new- 
born state  of  love  discovers  how  in- 
complete and  unreliable  it  is.  An 
angel,  as  it  were,  in  feeling,  it  is  yet 
a  child  in  self-understanding.  The 
significance  of  the  first  love,  as  related 
to  subsequent  life,  is  twofold.  In  the 
first  place,  it  is  the  birth  of  a  new, 
supernatural,  and  Divine  consciousness 
in  the  soul,  in  which  it  is  raised  to 
another  plane,  and  begins  to  live  as 
from  a  new  point.  And,  secondly,  it 
is  so  much  of  a  reality,  or  fact  realised, 
that  it  initiates,  in  the  subject,  experi- 
mentally, a  conception  of  that  rest, 
that  fulness,  and  peace,  and  joyous 
purity,  in  which  it  will  be  the  bliss 
and  greatness  of  his  eternity  to  be 
established.  In  both  respects  it  is  the 
beginning  of  the  end ;  and  yet,  to  carry 
the  beginning  over  to  the  end,  and  give 
it  there  its  due  fulfilment,  requires  a 
large  and  varied  trial  of  experience. 

II.  The  relation  of  the  subsequent 
life,  including  its  apparent  losses,  to 
its  beginning. — The  real  object  of  the 
subsequent  life,  as  a  struggle  of  ex- 
perience, is  to  produce  in  wisdom  what 
is  there  begotten  as  a  feeling  or  a  new 
love,  and  thus  to  make  a  fixed  state  of 
that  which  was  initiated  only  as  a  love. 
It  is  to  convert  a  heavenly  impulse 
into   a   heavenly   habit,    to   raise   the 

452 


Christian  childhood  into  a  Christian 
manhood.  The  paradise  of  first  love  is 
a  germ,  we  may  conceive,  in  the  soul's 
feeling,  of  the  paradise  to  be  fulfilled  in 
its  wisdom.  At  first  the  disciple  knows 
very  little  of  himself.  At  first  nothing 
co-operates  in  settled  harmony  with 
his  new  life  ;  but  if  he  is  faithful,  he 
will  learn  how  to  make  everything  in 
him  work  with  it,  and  assist  the  edify- 
ing of  his  soul  in  love.  A  great  point 
is  the  learning  how  to  maintain  his 
new  supernatural  relation  of  sonship 
and  vital  access  to  God.  And  through 
the  same  course  of  experience,  he 
conceives  more  and  more  perfectly  what 
is  the  true  idea  of  character.  At  first, 
character  is  to  him  a  mere  feeling  or 
impulse — a  frame.  Next  it  becomes  a 
life  of  work  and  self-denial.  Next,  a 
principle — nothing  but  a  matter  of 
principle.  Next  he  conceives  that  it 
is  something  outwardly  beautiful — a 
beautiful  life.  Character  is  at  last 
conceived  as  a  life  whose  action,  choice, 
thought,  and  expression,  are  all  ani- 
mated and  shaped  by  the  spirit  of 
holiness  and  Divine  beauty  which  was 
first  breathed  into  his  feeling.  A  great 
point  to  be  gained  in  the  struggle  of 
experience  is  to  learn  when  one  has  a 
right  to  the  state  of  confidence  and  rest. 
By  a  similar  process  he  learns  how  to 
modulate  and  direct  his  will.  His 
thinking  power  undergoes  a  similar 
discipline.  At  first  he  had  a  very 
perplexing  war  with  his  motives.  The 
new  love  kindled  by  the  Spirit  has  to 
maintain  itself  in  company  with  great 
personal  defects  in  the  subject.  And 
his  temporary  failures  may  occasion 
great  distress.  Still,  the  process  of 
God  is  contrived  to  bring  us  round, 
at  last,  to  the  simple  state  which  we 
embraced,  in  feeling,  and  help  us  to 
embrace  it  in  wisdom.  The  beginning 
is  the  beginning  of  the  end — the  end, 
the  child  and  fruit  of  the  beginning. 
The  fact,  then,  of  a  truly  first  love, 
the  grand  Christian  fact  of  a  spiritual 
conversion  or  regeneration,  is  no  way 
obscured  by  the  losing  experiences  that 
so  often  follow.  On  the  contrary,  its 
evidence  is  rather  augmented  by  these 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chap.il 


irregularities  and  seeming  defections. 
And,  if  it  be  more  than  nothing,  then 
it  is,  of  all  mortal  experiences,  the 
chief ;  a  change  mysterious,  tremendous, 
luminous,  joyful,  fearful — everything 
which  a  first  contact  of  acquaintance 
with  God  can  make  it. — H.  Bushnellj 
D.B. 

Ver.  7.  OvercorYiing, — Life  on  the 
earth  for  moral  beings  is  not  what  we 
would  have  made  it,  if  we  had  been 
entrusted  with  the  making.  Why 
should  it  cost  such  conflict  for  moral 
beings  to  win,  and  keep,  goodness  ? 
For  it  does. 

"  The  path  of  sorrow,  and  that  path  alone, 
Leads   to   the  place  where  sorrow  is  un- 
known." 

That  is  a  truth  concerning  our  life  on 
the  earth  which  there  is  no  gainsay- 
ing. Nothing,  indeed,  that  is  really 
worth  having  is  easy  to  gain.  That 
which  costs  nothing  always  proves  to 
be  nothing  worth.  St.  Paul  speaks  of 
the  battle  of  life,  and  shows  us  how  to 
win  it.  St.  John  speaks  of  our  *'  over- 
coming." The  fight  is  a  continuous 
and  prolonged  one.  We  never  end  it, 
save  with  the  ending  of  our  earthly 
life.  This  fact,  this  truth,  is  freshly 
and  vigorously  impressed  by  the 
message  of  the  Living  Christ  sent  to 
the  Churches  of  Asia.  These  seven 
messages  tell  what  the  Living  Christ 
watches — us  in  the  fight ;  us  fighting. 
These  seven  messages  tell  what  the 
Living  Christ  will  do.  Reward  those 
who  overcome. 

I.  All  of  us  have  something  to 
wrestle  with  and  overcome. — 1.  Some- 
thing preventing  our  success  in  life. 
Often  we  say  that  circumstances  hinder 
us.  Nay,  the  truth  is  this  :  we  will  not 
fight.  2.  Something  preventing  our 
surrender  to  Christ.  Something  we 
persist  in  clinging  to,  something  we 
will  not  wrestle  with  and  master. 
3.  Something  preventing  our  union 
with  His  Church.  4.  Something  pre- 
venting growth  of  character.  It  often 
is  something  in  the  self,  in  the  natural 
or  educated  disposition,  that  makes  our 


great  fight ;  some  weakness  of  charac- 
ter, some  besetting  sin,  some  unworthy 
habit.  Or  it  may  be  something  in  our 
surroundings,  our  place  of  business, 
our  companionships,  our  pleasures.  It 
may  be  something  of  sin  or  temptation, 
as  it  meets  us  out  in  life.  Whatever 
it  may  be,  we  are  not  to  be  overcome 
of  evil,  but  to  overcome  evil  with 
good. 

II.  There  is  only  one  way  in  which 
we  may  hope  to  overcome. — There  are 
self-reliant  ways  that  men  try.  They 
trust  in  vows,  resolves,  character, 
efforts.  But  life  sternly  deals  with  all 
merely  self -efforts,  and  refuses  to  let 
man  reap  a  moral  victory  in  his  own 
strength.  There  is  really  only  one 
way.  The  fight  must  be  waged  under 
the  leading  of  the  great  Captain  of 
Salvation.  By  the  sign  of  the  cross 
we  conquer,  or,  to  use  a  Scripture 
figure,  we  "  overcome  by  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb."  David  conquered  Goliath 
because  the  wisdom  and  strength  of 
God  were  upon  his  wisdom  and 
strength.  St.  Paul  could  do  all 
things  '*  through  Him  who  strengthened 
him."  We  may  be  "more  than  con- 
querors through  Him  that  loved  iis." 
It  is  a  spiritual  fight,  and  for  it  we  can 
have  our  Lord's  spiritual  presence — and 
this  presence  as  help  for  the  small 
things  of  life. 

III.  Gracious  rewards  await  those 
who  overcome. — There  is  nothing  for 
those  who  never  knew  what  it  was  to 
fight.  But  the  rewards  of  victors  in 
the  moral  conflict  can  only  be  pre- 
sented to  us  in  figures.  The  messages 
to  the  Seven  Churches  indicate  that  the 
reward  will  be  precisely  adapted  to  each 
precise  fight,  and  each  precise  victor. 
But,  whatever  else  mav  be  said,  the 
smile  and  acceptance  of  Jesus  is  the 
one  all-satisfying  reward.  1.  Ephesus 
— fading,  or  lost,  life  of  love.  Reward  : 
the  quickening  and  sustaining  tree  of 
life.  2.  Smyrna — test  of  martyrdom 
(Polycarp).  Reward:  "Not  hurt  of 
second  death."  3.  Pergamos — failing 
purity.  Reward  :  gift  of  the  White 
Stone.  4.  Thyatira — outward  heathen 
temptations.      Reward  :   mastery  over 

453 


CHAP.  n.        nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  REVELATION. 


influence  of  evil.  5.  Philadelphia  — 
the  steadfast.  Reward  :  made  a  pillar, 
with  Christ's  great  Name  inscribed 
upon  it.  6.  Laodicea — the  self-satis- 
fied. Keward :  sit  beside  Christ,  the 
King  of  the  lowly.  It  should  be  our 
joy  that  we  are  in  the  Lord's  war,  and 
under  the  Lord's  eye,  and  assured  of 
the  Lord's  acceptance.  Then,  every 
day,  and  everywhere,  let  us  be  fully 
determined  that  we  will  "  overcome." 

The  Symbol  of  Eating  of  the  Tree  of 
Life. — Prominent  as  this  symbol  had 
been  in  the  primeval  history,  it  had 
remained  unnoticed  in  the  teaching 
where  we  should  most  have  looked  for 
its  presence — in  that  of  the  Psalmists 
and  the  Prophets  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment. Only  in  the  Proverbs  of 
Solomon  had  it  been  used,  in  a  sense 
half  allegorical  and  half  mystical. 
(See  Prov.  iii.  18,  xi.  30,  xiii.  12, 
XV.  4.)  In  connection  with  the  revival 
of  the  symbol  in  the  Apocalypse,  it  may 
be  noted — 1.  That  it  was  the  natural 
sequel  of  the  fresh  prominence  that 
had  recently  been  given  to  the  thought 
of  Paradise.  2.  That  the  writings 
of  Philo  had  specifically  called  atten- 
tion to  the  tree  of  life  as  being  the 
mystical  type  of  the  highest  form 
of  wisdom  and  holiness — the  fear  of 
God  (Oeoo-e/BeLo)  by  which  the  soul 
attains  to  immortalit3^  We  trace,  in 
other  things  at  least,  the  indirect 
influence  of  Philo's  teaching  on  the 
thoughts  and  language  of  St.  John, 
and  as  we  must  assume  that  all 
imagery  is  adapted,  even  in  the  words 
of  the  Divine  Speaker,  to  the  minds  of 
those  who  hear,  there  seems  no  reason 
why  we  should  not  admit  the  working 
of  that  influence  here.  It  may  be 
asked,  however.  What  is  the  meaning 
of  the  symbol,  as  thus  used  ?  How  are 
we  to  translate  it  into  the  language  of 
more  abstract  truth  ?  And  here,  if  I 
mistake  not,  the  more  developed  form 
of  the  symbol,  at  the  close  of  the 
Apocalypse,  gives  us  the  true  answer  : 
*'  The  tree  of  life  bare  twelve  manner 
of  fruits,  and  yielded  her  fruit  every 
month,  and  the  leaves  of  the  tree  were 

454 


for  the  healing  of  the  nations  "  (Rev. 
xxii.  2).  The  leaves  and  the  fruit 
obviously  represent,  the  one  the  full 
and  direct,  the  other  the  partial  and 
indirect,  workings  of  that  eternal  life 
which  St.  John  thought  of  as  mani- 
fested in  the  Incarnate  Word.  The 
"  healing  of  the  nations,"  the  elevation 
of  their  standard  of  purity  and  holi- 
ness, of  duty  and  of  love — this  has 
been  the  work  of  that  partial  know- 
ledge which  the  Church  of  Christ  has 
been  instrumental  in  diffusing.  Its 
influence  has  counteracted  the  deadly 
working  of  the  fruit  of  the  other  tree 
of  "  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil," 
which  we  trace  as  due  to  a  wisdom  that 
is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish.  But  to 
*'  eat  of  the  tree  of  life "  implies  a 
more  complete  fruition,  a  higher  com- 
munion and  fellowship  with  the  source 
of  life.  And  here,  therefore,  I  cannot 
but  think  that  the  promise  of  the 
Judge  points  to  the  truth  that  He  is 
Himself,  now,  as  ever,  the  "  exceeding 
great  reward "  (Gen.  xv.  1)  of  those 
that  serve  Him  faithfully;  that  the 
symbol  veils  the  truth  ;  that  "  this  is 
life  eternal,  to  know  the  only  true  God, 
and  Jesus  Christ  whom  He  has  sent  " 
(John  xvii.  3). — L>ean  Plumptre. 

Legends  Concerning  the  Tree  of  Life. 
— In  an  old,  rare  book,  called  "  Adam's 
Repentance,"  it  is  said  that  Seth,  the 
third  son  of  Adam,  went  to  the  gate  of 
Paradise  at  the  request  of  his  dying 
father,  and  there  received  from  the 
angel  in  charge  three  seeds  of  the  tree 
of  life,  which  he  put  in  the  mouth  of 
Adam  when  he  buried  him.  From 
these  grew  three  saplings,  from  which 
were  taken  the  wood  for  Moses'  rod, 
and  that  by  which  the  waters  of  Marah, 
in  the  desert,  were  sweetened.  The 
temple  of  David  was  also  built  of  the 
wood  of  these  trees,  and  the  bench  on 
which  the  heathen  Sibyls  sat  when 
they  prophesied  the  coming  of  Christ. 
Moses'  rod  was  planted  in  Canaan, 
and  also  became  a  tree,  from  which  the 
cross  of  Christ,  the  new  tree  of  life, 
was  made,  and  the  eternal  life,  lost  in 
Adam,  regained.     This  legend  is  fully 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.         chap.  II. 


portrayed  in  a  picture  on  the  altar  of 
a  Church  in  Leyden.  It  is,  perhaps, 
founded  on  a  simpler  story  told  by 
Sozomen,  the  ecclesiastical  historian, 
that  at  Hermopolis,  in  Egypt,  stood  the 
tree  Persis,  the  fruit,  leaves,  and  bark 
whereof  possessed  wonderful  healing 
qualities.  When  the  Virgin  Mary,  on 
her  flight  to  Egypt  with  the  infant 
Jesus,  rested  under  this  tree,  it  bowed 
its  whole  length  in  humble  reverence 
to  Jesus  as  the  true  Lord  of  life  and 


health.  The  arbor  vitce,  familiar  to 
us,  is  sculptured  on  Egyptian  tombs,  as 
a  symbol  of  belief  in  another  existence 
beyond  the  grave.  In  the  Middle 
Ages  it  was  said  that  whosoever  would 
eat  of  the  wood  of  this  tree  of  life 
would  be  preserved  from  weakness  and 
decrepitude,  and  would  be  rendered 
invincible  as  Achilles.  It  was  also 
said  that  to  eat  of  its  foliage  would 
cause  one  to  forget  all  hunger  and 
care. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  8—11. 

Cheer  for  the  Faithful. — He  who  spake  in  parables,  as  the  human  Christ,  speaks 
in  figures  and  symbols  as  the  Living  Christ.  Smyrna,  now  "  Ismir  "  is  still  an 
important  commercial  city  of  Ionia,  with  a  population  of  some  hundred  and  twenty 
thousand.  It  claims  to  be  the  birthplace  of  Homer.  The  vine  was  much  cultivated ; 
Dionysos,  the  God  of  wine,  was  worshipped,  and  intemperance  was  the  character- 
istic sin  of  the  inhabitants.  Dionysos  represents  the  productive,  overflowing,  in- 
toxicating power  of  nature,  and  of  this,  wine  is  the  natural  and  appropriate  symbol. 
The  association  of  Poly  carp  with  this  epistle  is  very  uncertain,  but  his  martyrdom 
may  be  used  as  illustration.  Perhaps  he  was  ordained  by  St.  John  ;  he  succeeded 
Bucolus  as  bishop  of  Smyrna,  and  was  martyred  a.d.  156,  or  157,  in  the  reign  cf 
Marcus  Antoninus.  Evidently  the  one  thing  specially  noticed  by  the  Living  Chrit-t, 
when  inspecting  this  Church,  is  its  heroic  endurance  of  outward  persecution.  It 
was  severely  subject  to  the  strain  of  circumstances,  and  bore  it  nobly  and 
well.  Smyrna  suffers  for  the  sake  of  its  culture  (as  Job  did)  ;  other  Churches 
suffer  as  discipKne  for  correction.  It  is  important  to  face  the  fact,  that  a  godly 
individvAxl  may  be  called  to  suffer  simply  as  an  agency  to  secure  his  higher 
culture  ;  and  it  is  equally  true  that  a  Christian  Church  may  be  put  into  circum- 
stances of  grave  anxiety  and  distress,  with  a  view  to  securing  its  spiritual 
culture. 

I.  The  figure  in  which  the  Living  Christ  appears  to  this  Church. — "  The  first 
and  the  last,  which  was  dead  and  lived  again."  The  key-note  of  the  epistle  is 
this :  Christ  died  to  live  again — to  live  truly.  You  die,  and  you  too  shall  live 
again — shall  live  indeed.  (Some  think  the  figure  may  be  suggested  by  the  legend 
of  the  violent  death,  and  the  lesurrection,  of  Dionysos  ;  but  see  chap.  i.  17,  18.) 

II.  The  things  noticed  in  this  Church  by  the  Living  Christ. — The  word 
"  works  "  is  best  understood,  not  as  active,  energetic,  enterprising  works,  but  as 
suggested  by  the  two  following  and  explanatory  terms,  "  labour,"  or  strain, 
bearing,  and  "  patience,"  the  virtue  of  the  snfierer.  The  *'  works  "  of  Smyrna 
were  passive-bearing  rather  than  active-doing.  The  Living  Christ  finds  no 
ground  of  open  complaint;  and  yet,  the  very  fact  that  there  was  need  for 
disciplinary  and  culturing  trouble  to  do  a  gracious  work  in  the  Church,  implies 
some  imperfection.  The  Living  Christ  saw  three  things.  1.  The  tribulation  the 
Church  had  to  endure.  2.  The  poverty  of  circumstances  which  the  tribulation 
involved  ;  and  3.  The  insults  offen  d  by  the  bigoted  Jewish  party.  Each  of 
these  troubles  would  be  hard  to  bear  ;  the  three  together  made  a  hard  lot  indeed. 
The  question  of  supreme  interest  to  Him  who  inspected  the  Church  was  this  : 
"  Would  they  live — as  they  might  live — by  getting  from  under  the  pressure  of 
these  evils  1  Or  were  they  willing  to  die — die  to  self,  as  they  might  die — by  nobly 
yielding  to  bear  them  ?     If  they  would  live  by  denying  Christ,  then  they  would 

455 


chap.it.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


die  to  the  eternal  life.  If  they  would  die,  by  suffering  for  Christ,  then  they  should 
live  to  the  eternal  life.  Illustrate  by  the  familiar  picture,  "  Diana  or  Christ  %  " 
Matamoros,  the  Spanish  martyr,  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  I  purpose  to  be 
steadfast  to  the  end,  be  that  what  it  may." 

III.  The  message  sent  to  the  Church  by  the  Living  Christ. — It  was  the 
anticipation  of  further  strain,  to  which  the  Church  would  be  subject,  and  a 
gracious  warning  in  relation  to  it.  "  Prison  and  death  ;  "  not  relief,  but  more 
trial.  "  Ten  days  ;  "  the  figure  of  completeness  as  a  test,  but  implying  a  limited 
time.  But  the  warning  blends  with  encouragement  and  assurance.  "  Be  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  It  seems  that  the 
priests  of  Dionysos  were  presented  with  a  crown  ;  but  the  crown  that  Jesus  gives 
is  a  crown  of  life.  The  story  of  the  martyrdom  of  Bishop  Polycarp  closes 
with  the  words,  "  By  his  patience  he  overcame  the  unrighteous  ruler,  and  received 
the  crown  of  immortality." 

IV.  The  provision  which  the  Living  Christ  makes  for  those  who  overcome. — 
''  Not  be  hurt  of  the  second  death."  That  expression,  "  second  death,"  is  not  to 
be  found  in  either  the  gospels  or  the  epistles.  Here  is  a  strange  thing:  they  were 
to  conquer  by  yielding,  to  overcome  by  dying.  "  Death  " — the  consummation  of 
persecution  and  suffering,  is  the  prominent  figure  of  this  message.  Christ 
suffered  unto  death,  and  gained  His  victory  through  death.  They  were  to  be 
"faithful  unto  death,"  and  so  they  were  to  be  secured  from  the  "  second  death." 
The  first  death  is  death  unto  self.  The  second  death  is  death  unto  Go4.  Sufier 
the  first,  and  you  are  saved  from  the  second.  In  this  we  find  but  a  repetition  of 
our  Lord's  earthly  teachings,  for  He  said,  "  He  that  findeth  his  life  shall  lose  it, 
and  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  My  sake  shall  find  it."  See  the  principle 
illustrated  in  the  Church  at  Smyrna,  regarding  Bishop  Polycarp  as  its  type. 
He  was  aged  when  arrested.  He  was  offered  his  life  if  he  would  sacrifice 
to  the  Emperor.  And  though  he  was  aged,  life  was  precious.  He  died  unto 
self,  and  lives  unto  God.  See  the  principle  illustrated  in  a  Church  of  to-day.  A 
Church  may  have  to  pass  through  times  of  outward  trouble  as  correction,  but  it  is 
also  true  that  the  purpose  of  the  trouble  may  only  be  culture.  Can  it  bear  1 
Can  it  suffer  ?  Can  it  even  be  crushed,  and,  as  it  were,  die  ?  If  it  can,  what 
shall  it  win  ?  Show  what  features  of  the  higher  Church-life  can  be  won  only 
through  the  experience  of  well-borne  suffering.  There  are  martyrs  who  do  not 
die — who  are  just  heroic  endurers.  And,  both  as  individuals  and  as  Churchas,  we 
need  to  think  of  ourselves  as  those  who  serve  Him  who  died  to  self,  and  lived,  and 
lives,  to  God. 

Note  on  Dionysos. — The  tutelary  deity  of  Smyrna  was  the  god  of  wine,  who 
represented  the  productive,  overflowing,  and  intoxicating  power  of  nature.  The 
story  of  the  violent  death  and  subsequent  resurrection  of  this  god  was  particularly 
celebrated  by  the  people  of  Smyrna,  and  there  may  be  a  reference  to  this  in  the 
figure  chosen  to  represent  Christ.  "  Was  dead,  and  is  alive  again."  The  priests 
who  annually  presided  at  the  celebration  of  the  resurrection  of  Dionysos  were 
persons  of  distinction,  and  at  the  end  of  their  year  of  ofiice  they  were  presented . 
with  a  crown. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  9.  Poverty  in  the  Early  Churches,  ignoble  cares,  the  living  as  from  hand 

— Persecution  has  its  heroic  side,  and  to  mouth,  the  insufficient  food  and  the 

under  its  stimulus   men  may  do  and  scanty,  squalid  clothing  of  the  beggar, 

dare  much ;  but  when,  in  addition  to  the  trial  becomes  more  wearying,  and 

this,   there    is    the   daily    pressure   of  calls  for  greater  fortitude  and  faith. 

456 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  ii. 


We  do  not  sufficiently  estimate,  I  be- 
lieve, this  element  in  the  sufferings  of 
the  first  believers.  Taken  for  the  most 
part  from  the  humbler  class  of  artizans; 
often  thrown  out  of  employment  by  the 
very  fact  of  their  conversion,  with  new 
claims  upon  them  from  the  afflicted 
members  of  the  great  family  of  Christ 
close  at  hand  or  afar  off,  and  a  new 
energy  of  sacrifice  prompting  them  to 
admit  those  claims ;  subjected,  not  un- 
frequently,  to  the  "  spoiling  of  their 
goods  "  (Heb.  x.  34) ; — we  cannot  wonder 
that  they  should  have  had  little  earthly 
store,  and  that  their  reserve  of  capital 
should  have  been  rapidly  exhausted. 
Povei-ty  brought  with  it  some  trials 
to  which  those  who  had  been  devout 
Jews  (Israelites)  before  their  conver- 
sion, and  who  had  not  ceased  to  claim 
their  position  as  such,  would  be  pecu- 
liarly sensitive.  In  the  synagogue 
which  they  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
attending,  and  which  there  was  no 
reason  for  their  at  once  forsaking — 
perhaps  even  in  the  assemblies  of 
Jewish  disciples,  which  still  retained 
the  old  name  and  many  of  the  old 
usages — they  would  find  themselves 
scorned  and  scoffed  at,  thrust  into 
the  background,  below  the  footstool 
of  the  opulent  traders  in  whom  a 
city  like  Smyrna  was  sure  to  abound 
(James  ii.  2,  3).  The  hatred  which  the 
unbelieving  Jews  felt  for  the  name  of 
Christ  would  connect  itself  with  their 
purse-proud  scorn  of  the  poor  and 
needy,  and  "  those  beggars  of  Christ- 
ians" would  become  a  byword  of 
reproach. — Dean  Plumptre. 

Ver.  10.  Faithful.  Christian  Faith- 
fulness.— Bishop  Poly  carp  was  martyred 
A.D.  168,  long  years  after  the  book  of 
Revelation  was  written,  but  his  story 
glorifies  the  place  (see  "  Illustrations"). 
In  most  of  the  other  messages,  complaint 
and  commendation  are  blended.  In  this 
to  Smyrna  there  is  no  complaint.  The 
point  of  the  message  is,  that  this 
Church  must  expect  unusual  trouble. 
And  that  is  God's  frequently  allotted 
experience  for  the  unusually  devout : 
the  better  souls  are  the  very  ones  that 


respond  best  to  the  holy,  refining  fires  ; 
fine  gold  is  most  worth  refining.  Their 
trouble  was  to  take  three  forms  :  the 
despoiling  of  their  goods,  peril  of  life, 
and  calumny,  or  slander.  Some  would 
be  cast  into  prison.  The  great  "  tri- 
hulum"  the  mighty  threshing  roller  of 
persecution,  would  go  over  their  heap 
of  wheat,  to  and  fro,  back  and  again, 
through  the  ten  long  years  of  Marcus 
Antoninus'  reign.  Man  would  say, 
It  is  overwhelming,  crushing.  Christ 
says,  the  tribulum  of  God  never  crushes; 
it  only,  with  strong  hand,  separates 
the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  that  the 
wheat  may  be  gathered  into  the  garner. 
I.  Our  Lord's  call  to  an  afflicted 
Church. — "  Be  faithful,"  even  to  death- 
limits.  In  all  His  dealings  with  His 
people,  our  Lord  is  ever  more  anxious 
about  them  than  about  their  circum- 
stances. We  are  worried  and  anxious 
about  our  circumstances,  but  Christ  is 
not.  His  anxiety  concerns  our  moral 
and  spiritual  state.  Nothing  relieves 
us,  in  times  of  distress  and  pain,  like 
this  thought :  my  Lord  wants  me  to 
be  right ;  and  that  explains  why  perse- 
cution abides,  w^hy  misunderstandings 
will  not  get  corrected,  why  pain  cannot 
be  taken  away,  why  the  "  thorn  "  stays, 
and  we  are  thrown  wholly  on  the 
"  strengthening  grace."  The  Living 
Christ  does  not  send  to  Smyrna  saying, 
"  I  foresaw  persecution  and  slander 
threatening  you,  and  I  warded  it  off." 
He  does  not  even,  when  it  comes  upon 
them,  put  forth  miraculous  power  for 
its  removal.  He  leaves  the  great 
providential  workings  alone,  but  calls 
upon  His  people  to  be  noble  in  the 
very  midst  of  suffering.  "  Be  thou 
faithful."  "Faithful"  is  a  familiar 
Scripture  term  used  concerning  men, 
and  even  used  of  God.  Abraham  was 
faithful.  Moses  is  "  faithful  in  Mine 
house."  Samuel  was  faithful  to  be  a 
prophet  of  the  Lord.  "  Who  is  so  faith- 
ful as  DanieU"  "  Hananiah  was  a 
faithful  man."  "  Judah  is  faithful  with 
the  saints."  "  Timothy  is  faithful  in  the 
Lord."  *'  Tychicus  is  a  beloved  brother 
and  faithful  minister."  "  Antipas  was 
My  faithful  martyr."     God  is  spoken 

457 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


of  as  "  the  faithful  God  who  keepeth 
covenant  "  ;  and  "  we  are  to  commit 
our  souls  to  Him  as  unto  a  faithful 
Creator."  Christ  is  "the  Faithful 
Witness,"  and  His  people  are  "saints 
and  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  Jesus." 
The  figure  in  the  word  is  that  of 
"  keeping  covenant."  Those  who  are 
in  covenant  take  mutual  pledges  and 
come  under  mutual  responsibilities.  To 
meet  those  responsibilities  and  fulfil 
those  pledges  is  to  be  faithful,  and  so 
the  word  applies  to  all  positions  of 
service  or  ministry,  since  all  such  are 
really  covenant-positions.  And  we 
have  entered  into  solemn  and  ever- 
lasting covenant  with  Christ.  He  has 
entrusted  to  us  His  truth,  His  rights, 
His  work  in  the  world.  Every  one  of 
us  lies  under  this  holy  burden,  unless 
we  be  reprobates.  Then,  being  faithful 
means  :  1 .  Faithful  in  keeping  the  truth 
entrusted  to  us.  It  does  not  matter 
how  few  or  how  simple  you  make  the 
great  primary  truths  and  principles  of 
Christianity  to  be,  there  certainly  are 
some  truths  which  are  characteristically 
Christian — that  is,  which  have  been 
brought  to  light  and  set  forth  in  the 
world  of  human  thought  by  Jesus 
Christ  as  the  essential  first  principles 
of  what  is  called  the  Christian  system. 
If  men  do  not  accept  these,  they  may 
call  themselves  by  what  name  they 
please,  they  are  not  Christians.  The 
fundamental  revelation  of  Christ  is 
the  Fatherhood  of  God.  This  dis- 
covers the  helpless,  prodigal  condition 
of  man.  And  it  prepares  the  way  for 
a  redemption  of  love,  wrought  by  God 
Himself,  operating,  in  the  sphere  of 
the  senses,  by  the  manifestation  of  the 
Son  in  our  world,  and,  in  the  spheres 
of  mind  and  soul,  by  the  grace  and  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the  test  of  the 
acceptance  of  this  revelation,  this  whole 
circle  of  truth,  is  the  view  that  is  taken 
of  the  perso7i  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
In  the  Early  Ages,  again  in  the  Middle 
Ages,  and  yet  again  now  in  our  day, 
our  faithfulness  to  the  Christian  truth 
is  tested  by  our  answer  to  this  question 
concerning  Christ,  "  Whose  Son  is 
He .?  "      And   the   answer   must   ring 

458 


out  clear  as  the  midnight  hour  from 
cathedral  chimes  :  He  is  "  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh."  "  The  Word  was  God." 
"  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
among  us."  We  may  yield  a  large 
and  generous  liberty  to  men  in  relation 
to  the  forms  and  terms  in  which  they 
set  the  truth  in  Christ.  But  we  have  a 
trust :  in  regard  to  it  we  must  be  found 
faithful.  We  would  "  earnestly  con- 
tend for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints,"  the  faith  of  Christ,  who  is  God ; 
of  Christ,  who  is  Man ;  of  Christ,  who 
has  atoned ;  of  Christ,  who  does  re- 
deem ;  of  Christ,  who  ever  lives ;  of 
Christ,  who  is  "  Head  over  all  things 
to  His  Church " ;  of  Christ,  who  will 
one  day  "judge  the  world  in  righteous- 
ness." 2.  Faithful  in  manifesting  the 
spirit  that  is  becoming  to  Christ's 
servants.  For  there  is  a  spirit,  a  tone, 
an  atmosphere  of  mind  and  feeling, 
which  is  peculiarly  becoming  to  Christ- 
ianity; a  spirit  which  times  of  trouble, 
and  especially  times  of  calumny,  mis- 
understanding, and  slander,  such  as 
Smyrna  passed  through,  seriously 
affect.  In  this,  too,  the  Living  Christ 
bids  us  "  Be  faithful."  The  spirit  becom- 
ing to  us  is  comprehensively  called  love. 
Jesus  bade  His  disciples  "Love  one 
another."  And  St.  Paul  elaborates  the 
great  Christian  grace  in  writing  to  the 
Corinthians  (chap.  xiii.).  How  readily 
those  Christians  at  Smyrna  might  lose 
love  and  brotherhood  when  conflict  of 
opinion  and  persecution  arose  and  "  a 
man's  foes  were  they  of  his  own  house- 
hold "  !  How  difficult  to  keep  calm, 
gentle,  loving,  when  their  very  good 
was  evil  spoken  of,  and  malignant 
Judaisers  blasphemed  them  for  their 
liberty  in  Christ  !  They  might  hold 
fast  by  the  Christian  truth  and  yet 
lose  the  Christian  spirit,  and  so  prove 
themselves  unworthy  followers  of  Him 
who,  "  though  He  was  reviled,  reviled 
not  again,  though  He  sufiered,  threat- 
ened not " ;  of  Him  who,  dying  on  a 
cruel  cross,  prayed  for  His  murderers, 
saying,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do,"  passing  out 
of  life  full  of  heavenly,  Divine  charity. 
Perhaps  it  is  the  very  hardest  thing 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    REVEL  A  TION.        chap.  ii. 


we  have  to  do  in  life,  to  be  firm  to  the 
truth,  manly  in  stating  settled  con- 
victions, brave  to  point  out  public 
wrongs,  and  yet  not  lose  love,  or  fail 
from  the  Christian  spirit  when  our 
work  is  misunderstood,  our  purpose 
maligned,  and  slanders  abound  which 
must  not  be  followed  and  fought 
through.  Happy  indeed  is  he  who  at 
such  times  may  "  in  patience  possess 
his  soul ; "  unto  whom  God  gives  the 
grace  of  patience  and  gentleness,  that 
he  may  be  found  faithful,  "  hoping  all 
things,  enduring  all  things.'/  3.  Ftiith- 
fvl  in  doing  that  work  of  grace  in 
the  world  ichich  Christ  wants  carried 
through.  For  a  Church  has  no  right 
to  exist,  save  as  it  is  an  active,  working 
Church.  A  Christian  man  has  no 
right  to  his  Christian  comfortings  and 
hopes,  save  as  he  is  an  active,  working 
Christian.  There  are  spheres  for  every 
one  of  us.  We  must  find  for  ourselves 
what  ours  is.  Nobody  can  tell  us. 
Having  found  our  sphere,  the  text  has 
its  message  for  us  :  "  Be  thou  faithful." 
Our  work  may  be  witness,  prayer, 
influence,  giving,  teaching,  writing, 
ministrv,  or  other  form  of  service. 
But  faithful  is  by  no  means  to  be 
confused  with  successful \  and  yet,  so 
full  of  business  ideas,  that  is  very 
much  how  we  read  His  meaning.  It 
is  not  the  grandest  thing  in  life  to 
be  successful.  Success  is  the  false 
idol-god  of  this  age,  and  strives  hard 
to  take  the  place  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
No  man  ever  sees  the  nobility  of  human 
life  until  he  learns  to  put  success  second, 
and  faithfulness  first.  Very  often  that 
very  thing  on  which  men  have  pityingly 
gazed,  and  called  it  a  failure,  God  has 
regarded  as  among  the  noblest  achieve- 
ments of  the  sons  of  men. 

II.  For  the  faithful  ones  Christ 
keeps  the  holy  reward,  the  crown  of 
life. — Bound  four  together  at  the  stake, 
the  nobles  of  Madagascar  glorified  God 
in  the  fires,  "faithful  unto  death" ;  and 
as  they  died  a  lovely  rainbow  spanned 
the  scene,  and  crowned  those  heroic 
souls.  Forth  from  the  conflict  in 
Olympic  and  Isthmian  games  con- 
querors went,  with  circlets  of  ivy,  or 


of  parsley,  twined  about  their  brows ; 
crowned,  men  called  it,  and  they  meant, 
sealed  as  conquerors,  recognised  as 
conquerors,  stamped  as  kingly  among 
their  fellows,  attested  as  heroes.  Worth- 
less enough  in  itself,  the  parsley  wreath 
expressed  so  much ;  and  the  city  of 
him  who  wore  it  woke  to  feel  its 
exceeding  honour,  and  when  he  returned 
from  the  games,  flung  wide  open  its 
gates,  nay,  even  sometimes  made  a 
new  way  through  its  walls,  for  him 
who  seemed  to  them  too  noble  to  enter 
as  might  commoner  men.  And  Christ 
gives  no  crown  that  may  arrest  atten- 
tion for  its  own  value.  He  gives  one 
which  shall  be  for  earth  and  heaven, 
the  sign  of  conflict  maintained  and 
victory  won.  The  life  of  faithfulness 
shall  be  crowned  with  acceptance  and 
permanency.  The  struggle  for  right- 
eousness shall  be  crowned  with  the 
eternal  seal  of  righteousness.  The 
work  for  the  glory  of  a  completed 
obedience  shall  be  sealed  with  the  seal 
of  sonship,  and  the  welcome  for  the 
''blessed  of  the  Father."  This  is 
Christian  life  in  its  progress  :  being 
faithful.  This  is  Christian  life  in  its 
ending :  being  faithful  unto  death. 
And  this  is  Christian  life  passed  through 
into  the  unknown  :  crowned  with  the 
crown  of  life. 

The  Reward  of  Faithfulness. — Learn 
that  the  religion  of  Christ — 

I.  Requires  faithfulness. — To  be 
faithful  in  religion  means  that  the 
believer  should  make  use  of  all  his 
powers  on  behalf  of — 1.  Religion. 
2.  Religion  in  the  circle  in  which  God 
has  placed  him.  3.  Religion  according 
to  God's  will. 

II.  Requires  personal  faithfulness. 
— Because  every  Christian — 1.  Has  a 
personal  work  to  accomplish.  2.  Is 
endowed  with  power  to  accomplish  his 
own  work.  3.  Is  under  a  personal  obli- 
gation to  be  faithful. 

III.  Requires  continual  faithfulness. 
— Because — 1.  The  work  is  great. 
2.  The  time  is  short. 

IV.  The  religion  of  Christ  rewards 
this  personal  and  continual  faithful- 

459 


CHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  Ait  1  :    REVELATION. 


ness. — The  reward  is — 1.  Precious — 
"a  crown."  2.  Glorious — "a  crown 
of  life.  3.  Durable — "  life."  4.  Personal 
— *'  I  will  give  thee"— J.  0.  Griffiths. 

Yer.  11.  Second  Death. — (See  chap. 
XX.  14,  15). — The  imagery  of  the  fiery 
lake,  like  that  of  the  worm  and  the 
flame  of  the  Valley  of  Hinnom,  may 
be  but  imagery,  but  it  points,  at  least, 
to  some  dread  reality  which  is  veiled 
beneath  those  awful  symbols.  What 
that  reality  is  we  may  infer  from  St. 
John's  conceptions  of  the  higher  life. 
If  the  first  death  is  the  loss  of  the  first 
or  earthly  life,  then  the  second  death 
must  be  the  loss  of  that  knowledge  of 
God  which  makes  the  blessedness  of 
eternal  life — and  that  loss  is,  at  least, 
compatible  with  the  thought  of  con- 
tinuous existence.  What  possibilities 
in  the  far-off  future  were  shadowed 
forth  by  the  mysterious  words  that 
"  Death  and  Hades  were  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire  "  !  As  though  they  were  to 
be  robbed  of  their  power  to  destroy,  and 
were  punished  as  the  great  enemies  of 
God  and  man.  How  far  those  who  were 
cast  in  with  them  might  even  there  be 
not  shut  out  from  hope,  it  was  not 
given  to  the  seer  of  the  Apocalypse  to 
know,  nor  did  he  care  to  ask.  It  was 
enough  for  the  faithful  sufferers  under 
persecution,  who  overcame  in  that 
conflict  with  the  plurima  mortis  imago. 


to  which  they  were  exposed,  to  know 
that  this  was  all  that  their  enemies 
could  inflict  on  them,  and  that  the 
"  second  death  "  should  have  no  power 
over  them. — Dean  Plumptre. 

Ver.  1 1 .  The  Three  Deaths  of  Scrip- 
ture.— In  the  New  Testament,  death  is 
spoken  of  in  three  difTerent  senses. 
Por  it  is  regarded  as  simply  a  separa- 
tion from  some  form  of  life ;  which 
modern  science  acknowledges  to  be  a 
strictly  accurate  view  to  take  of  death. 
In  scientiJ^c  language,  it  is  the  cessation 
of  a  correspondence  with  some  special 
environment.  There  is,  first,  physical 
or  temporal  death,  which  is  simply 
separation  from  this  present  outward 
world,  the  end  of  our  correspondence 
with  our  physical  environment.  There 
is,  next,  spiritual  death.  Here  the 
environment  is  God,  and  death  means 
separation  from  the  light  of  His  love. 
"  To  be  carnally  minded  is  death " 
(Rom.  viii.  6) ;  "  You,  who  were  dead 
in  trespasses  and  sins"  (Eph.  ii.  1). 
And,  lastly,  there  is  the  death  to  sin, 
the  exact  converse  of  the  latter — separa- 
tion from  the  devil  and  his  works, 
through  the  life  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 
"  Reckon  ye  also  yourselves  to  be  dead 
indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "  (Rom. 
vi.  11).  "He  that  is  dead  is  freed 
from  sin  "  (Rom.  vi.  7). 


MAIN  HOMILETIC S  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.—  Verses  12—17. 

A  Church  Flagging  in  its  Duty. — Of  this  Church  there  is  much  complaint,  and 
much  need  for  stern  discipline.  Two  evils  were  imperilling  its  very  life.  Christ  deals 
with  them  hopefully,  because  they  were  yet  in  their  early  stages,  and  undeveloped. 
Only  a  few  were  really  bad.  Pergamos,  or  Pergamum  (the  original  of  the  word 
"  parchment  ")  was  in  the  province  of  Troas,  Asia  Minor,  some  sixty  miles  north 
of  Smyrna.  It  was  not  a  commercial  city,  but  its  hill  formed  a  natural  fortress. 
It  was  the  seat  of  the  worship  of  ^sculapius,  the  god  of  healing,  who  was 
symbolled  as  a  serpent,  and  represented  by  a  live  serpent  which  was  kept  in  his 
temple.  There  is  a  legend  about  this  god  to  the  following  effect :  On  one  occasion, 
in  the  house  of  Glaucus,  whom  he  was  to  cure,  while  he  was  standing  absorbed 
in  thought,  a  serpent  entered,  and  twined  round  his  staff.  He  killed  it,  and  then 
another  serpent  came  in,  carrying  in  its  mouth  a  herb  with  which  it  recalled  to 
life  the  one  that  had  been  killed,  ^sculapius  henceforth  used  that  herb,  with 
healing  effects,  on  man.  But  an  elaborate  system  of  magic  grew  up  around  this 
god,  attended  with  deceptive  practices.  Pergamos  became  a  focus  of  idolatrous 
worship,  and  could  be  described  as  the  place  "  where  Satan's  seat  is."     Outward 

460 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.         chap.  ii. 


circumstances  of  temptation^  rather  tjaan  of  trouble^  are  represented  in  the  picture 
of  this  Church.  Under  pressure  of  these  temptations  the  Church  has  partly 
yielded ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  recognised  the  seriousness  and  peril  of  this 
partial  yielding;  and  therefore  the  Living  Christ  must  come  to  it  with  the 
dividing  and  revealing  two-edged  sword. 

I.  A  Church  faithful  to  the  truth. — "  Hast  not  denied  My  faith."  Antipas 
was  probably  the  proto-martyr  of  the  Asiatic  Churches.  "  I  know  thy  works." 
We  would  like  Christ  to  judge  us  by  our  Church  activities  alone ;  but  He  always 
seeks  to  judge  the  soul  that  is  behind  the  activities.  Christ  takes  due  account  of 
our  disabilities — *'  where  thou  dwellest " ;  but  not  so  much  to  excuse  failure  as 
to  show  that  He  expects  energy.  Only  noble  souls  are  put  in  dangerous  places ; 
they  are  honoured  even  as  is  the  "  Forlorn  Hope  "  of  an  army.  (The  "  Nicolai- 
tanes  of  ver.  15  are  best  apprehended  as  the  Antinomians  of  that  day.) 

II.  A  Church  failing  from  its  duty. — Its  practice  was  by  no  means  so  good  as 
its  profession.  Some  were  going  wholly  wrong.  Balaam  and  the  Nicolaitanes  are 
introduced  as  types  of  the  two  serious  evils  affecting  this  Church.  1.  Unrestrained 
feastings,  or  self-indulgence  in  food.  The  story  of  Balaam  which  is  specially 
brought  before  us  here  is  given  in  Num.  xxxi.  16.  Over-mastered  by  God, 
Balaam  became  a  revengeful  schemer,  and  taught  Balak  to  show  friendliness, 
and  get  the  Israelites  to  mix  with  his  people  at  the  idol-feasts,  whose  great 
characteristic  was  riotous  self-indulgence.  This  evil  took  a  refined  form  in  the 
early  Church,  and  St.  Paul  had  to  advise  on  the  question  of  eating  meat  which 
had  been  offered  to  idols,  if  a  Christian  was  invited  to  a  feast  by  a  heathen 
friend.  The  difficulty  was  based  on  the  Eastern  idea  of  communion  by  eating. 
Fulness  of  self-indulgence  in  eating  and  drinking  still  involves  the  hopeless  ruin 
of  Christian  piety.  2.  Unrestrained  passions,  or  self-indulgence  in  sexual  rela- 
tions. In  Balaam's  day  this  over-feeding,  and  these  idol  associations,  led  to  sadly 
immoral  relations  between  Israel  and  Moab — relations  that  were  in  open  and 
wilful  opposition  to  the  conditions  of  the  Jehovah -covenant.  In  connection  with 
this,  bring  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  which  supported  immorality  by 
its  assertion  that  self-indulgence  is  not  sin  in  the  regenerate.  There  have  been 
known  cases  in  which  men  who  were  living  in  open  immorality  have  persisted  in 
coming  to  the  Lord's  Table.  But  such  men  always  have  been,  and  are  to-day, 
the  canker  of  the  Church.  The  sign  that  a  man  is  a  saved  man  is  his  wanting 
to  be  righteous,  and  trying  to  be  righteous.  A  Christian  absolutely  must  he 
self-restrained  in  matters  of  bodily  appetite  and  passion. 

III.  A  Church  encouraged  to  become  steadfast  in  holy  living. — "Eat  of  the 
hidden  manna,"  to  satisfy  the  feast-feeling.  The  figure  may  be  based  on  the 
legend  that  Jeremiah  hid  the  Temple  pot  of  manna.  Manna  is  Divinely-provided 
food — spiritual  food.  The  addition  of  "  hidden  "  makes  it  clear  that  it  was  not 
such  manna  as  was  provided  for  Israel — not  something  to  satisfy  merely  bodily 
appetite.  The  point  is  this :  overcome,  and  hold  in  wise  restraint  bodily 
appetite,  and  Christ's  reward  will  be  the  culture  of  spiritual  appetite,  with 
abundant  supply  of  spiritual  food.  "  White  stone  and  new  name,"  to  satisfy 
the  love  for  human  relations.  When  houses  of  public  entertainment  were  less 
common,  private  hospitality  was  the  more  necessary.  When  one  person  was 
received  kindly  by  another,  or  a  contract  of  friendship  was  entered  into,  the 
tessera  hospitalis  was  given.  It  was  so  named  from  its  shape,  being  four-sided  : 
it  was  sometimes  of  wood,  sometimes  of  stone.  It  was  divided  into  two  by  the 
contracting  parties ;  each  wrote  his  own  name  on  half  the  tessera.  Then  they 
exchanged  pieces,  and  therefore  the  name  or  device  on  the  piece  of  the  tessera 
which  each  received  was  the  name  the  other  person  had  written  on  it,  and  which 
no  one  else  knew  but  him  who  received  it.  It  was  carefully  prized,  and  entitled 
the  bearer  to  protection  and  hospitality.     The  idea  is,  that  human  friendships 

461 


CHAP.  II.        HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y :   REV  EL  A  TION. 


and  relations  should  become  wholly  pure,  freed  from  carnal  strain,  sanctified, 
heavenly,  the  friendship  of  purified  souls.  "  In  heaven  they  neither  marry  nor 
are  given  in  marriage,  but  are  as  the  angels."  Overcoming  carnal  tastes  will 
surely  go  with  culture  of  the  spiritual  tastes,  so  that  we  shall  prefer  the  "  hidden 
manna,"  and  see  glory  in  the  "  white  stone."  Every  Christian,  and  every 
Christian  Church,  is  expected  to  wear  the  "  white  flower  of  a  blameless  life." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver  14.  Doctriyie  of  Balaam. — 
"  Things  sacrificed  to  idols,"  eiSooXo^vra." 
Every  convert  from  heathenism  would 
acknowledge  that  he  was  bound  to 
abstain  from  any  participation,  direct 
or  indirect,  in  the  false  worship  which 
he  renounced  at  baptism.  But  the 
question,  What  acts  involved  an  in- 
direct participation  1  was  one  that  gave 
rise  to  a  perplexing  casuistry,  and  yet 
could  not  be  avoided.  Was  the  con- 
vert to  go  out  of  the  world,  and  turn 
from  all  social  gatherings  but  those  of 
his  own  community  ?  Was  he  to 
refuse  to  join  in  the  public  meals,  at 
inns,  or  elsewhere,  which  travel  made 
almost  indispensable  ?  If  he  did  so 
refuse,  he  cut  himself  off,  not  only 
from  the  pleasures,  but  from  the  duties 
and  opportunities  of  family  and  social 
companionship.  Yet  if  he  accepted 
the  invitation,  there  was  the  risk  that 
he  might  be  eating  of  the  flesh  of 
sheep  or  ox  which  the  host  had  himself 
sacrificed,  as  a  festive  thank-ofiering,  to 
Zeus  or  Apollo,  or  that  the  wine  which 
he  drank  might  have  been  poured  out 
as  a  libation.  If  he  did  so  eat,  was  he 
not,  in  "  eating  of  the  sacrifice,"  a 
partaker  in  the  worship,  eating  the 
flesh  and  drinking  the  cup  which 
belonged  to  the  demons  that  he  had 
learnt  to  identify  with  the  gods 
whom  the  heathen  worshipped  (1  Cor. 
xi.  20).  Yet  another  case  presented 
itself,  which  followed  the  convert  even 
to  his  own  home.  Of  the  sacrifices 
that  were  oflered  in  heathen  temples 
the  greater  part  became  the  perquisite 
of  the  priests.  When  they  had  more 
than  they  could  consume  themselves, 
they  sold  it  to  the  meat-dealers  of  the 
market.  The  Christian  convert,  there- 
fore, could  never  be  sure  that  what  he 
bought  had  not  been  thus  ofiered,  and 

462 


the  sensitive  conscience  was  harassed 
with  the  tormenting  thought  of  an 
unknown  and  involuntary  transgres- 
sion, which  yet  brought  with  it  defile- 
ment and  condemnation.  The  Jew 
might  avoid  the  danger  by  dealing  only, 
as  tor  the  most  part,  Jews  deal  now, 
with  a  butcher  of  his  own  persuasion ; 
but  this  implied  a  more  settled  and 
organised  society  than  that  of  most 
Christian  communities  in  the  early 
days  of  the  Church's  life,  and  many 
years  would  probably  pass  away  before 
the  convert  was  able  to  meet  with  a 
Christian  butcher.  On  the  other  hand, 
in  most  cases  the  Jewish  butcher 
would  probably  refuse  to  supply  him ; 
or,  if  that  were  not  the  case,  would 
only  do  so  under  the  restrictions  (to 
the  Gentile  burdensome  and  vexatious) 
of  the  Mosaic  law  of  clean  and  unclean 
meats.  (See  the  discussion  of  this 
difficulty  in  1  Cor.  x.  14-33.)  Those 
who  are  condemned  by  this  message  are 
precisely  those  whom  St.  Paul  urges, 
on  grounds  of  a  moral  expediency  so 
high  that  it  becomes  a  duty,  to  refrain 
from  the  exercise  of  the  right  and 
freedom  of  which  they  boasted.  It 
was  to  be  expected  that  some,  in  their 
self-will,  would  harden  themselves 
against  the  appeal ;  that  they  might 
even  use  St.  Paul's  name,  and  boast 
that  they  were  more  consistent  with 
his  principles  than  he  was  himself. 
This,  we  know,  was  what  Marcion  and 
his  followers  actually  did  when  they 
claimed  a  true  liberty  for  themselves  ; 
and  Marcion  may  well  have  had  fore- 
runners among  the  Gnostics  of  the 
apostolic  age. — Dean  Plumptre. 

Ver.  17.  The  New  Name. — The 
gi\'ing  of  new  names  is  not  uncommon 
in  the  bible;  e.g..,  Abraham — Israel — 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chap.  ii. 


Boanerges — Peter.    The  new  name  ex-  man  knoweth  the  characteristics  of  the 

pressed  the  step  which  had  been  taken  growth  of  the  character,  the  spiritual 

into    a    higher,    truer    life,    and    the  conflict  in  which  the  work  is  done,  and 

change    of    heart,    and    elevation    of  the  features  of  that  change  which  has 

character,  consequent  upon   it.     Such  been,  and  is  being,  wrought,  except  he 

are  known  in  the  world  by  their  daily  who   experiences  the  love,   the  grace, 

life,    their   business,    their   character;  and    the    tribulation,    by    which    his 

they    are  known  above  by  the   place  spirit-life   has    grown. — Bishop    Boyd 

they  hold,  and  the  work  they  are  doing  Carpenter, 
in   the   great   war   against  evil.      No 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses    18—29. 

Praise  and  Blame  for  Thyatira. — Lydia,  the  first  Christian  convert  in  Europe, 
was  a  purple -seller  of  this  city  of  Thyatira,  which  was  famous  for  its  dyeing 
works,  especially  for  purple  or  crimson.  Inscriptions  found  on  the  spot  bear 
witness  to  the  existence  of  a  guild,  or  corporation,  of  purple-sellers,  with  which 
Lydia  may  have  been  connected.  The  city  stands  on  the  river  Lycus,  and  it  is 
situated  on  the  borders  of  Mysia  and  Ionia,  a  little  to  the  left  of  the  Roman  road 
from  Pergamos  to  Sardis.  It  was  founded  by  Seleucus  Nicator  after  the  Persian 
Empire  had  been  destroyed  by  Alexander  the  Great.  From  the  names  that 
appear  on  their  monuments,  the  inhabitants  seem  to  have  presented  a  greater 
mingling  of  races  than  was  commonly  to  be  found,  and  included  Macedonians, 
Italians,  Asiatics  (in  the  narrower  sense  of  that  word  as  including  the  in- 
habitants of  the  pro-consular  province  of  Asia),  and  Chaldseans.  The  chief 
object  of  their  cultus  was  Apollo,  worshipped  as  the  sun-god,  under  the 
Macedonian  name  of  Tyrinnas.  An  interesting  discovery,  in  connection  with  the 
religious  rites  of  the  city,  materially  helps  in  explaining  the  allusions  made  in 
the  epistle.  Outside  the  walls  stood  a  small  temple  dedicated  to  a  Sibyl,  a 
woman  who  was  supposed  to  have  the  gift  of  prophecy.  This  temple,  or  church, 
was  in  the  midst  of  an  enclosure,  called  the  "  Cbaldsean's  Court,"  and  the  Sibyl, 
who  was  called  Sanhethe^  is  sometimes  said  to  be  Jewish,  sometimes  Chaldaean,  and 
sometimes  Persian.  The  inference  to  be  drawn  from  this  is,  that  some  corrupted 
Jews  of  the  dispersed  tribes  had  introduced  from  Chaldsea  or  Persia  a  religion 
which  was  a  mixture  of  Judaism  and  heathenism.  It  is  not  improbable  that 
this  Sanbethe,  or  her  school,  had  at  Thyatira  a  place  dedicated  to  the  promul- 
gation of  a  religion  which  was  an  admixture  of  Orientalism  and  Judaism, 
with  some  importations  from  the  Greek  and  Roman  rites,  and  even  with  some 
kind  of  appropriation  of  Christian  ideas,  forming  altogether  a  system  similar  to 
those  which  the  various  sects  of  Gnostics  soon  afterwards  established.  And,  this 
supposition  being  correct,  it  is  then  easy  to  see  how  Jewish  Christians  of  the 
Church  of  Thyatira  might  be  affected  with  this  heresy,  and  fail  to  offer  to  it  the 
opposition  which  it  ought  to  have  received  from  a  Christian  community.  Dr. 
Tristram  describes  the  present  city,  and  its  surroundings,  as  seen  when  approach- 
ing it  from  Pergamos.  "  Diverging  a  little  to  the  right,  the  broad  valley  of  the 
Hyllus  opens  to  view,  and  as  we  look  down  in  spring  or  summer,  we  see  before 
us  a  panorama  resembling  in  kind,  though  not  equal  in  extent  and  grandeur  to, 
the  traveller's  first  glimpse  of  Damascus.  The  eye  tracks  across  the  plain  the 
silver  thread  which  marks  the  course  of  one  of  the  eflBuents  of  the  Hyllus ;  and 
in  the  centre  are  the  crowded  white  roofs  of  a  widespread  Turkish  city,  with 
here  and  there  a  minaret  towering  in  the  midst,  and  many  a  clump  of  tall 
cypresses  raising  their  funeral  plumes  on  high  ;  while  the  whole  is  girt  with  a 
fringe  of  orchards,  and  watered  gardens,  over  which  the  silver  mist,  drawn  down 
by  the  sun,  hangs  in  a  thick,  quivering  cloud.     This. is  Akhissar,  'the  white 

463 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


castle,'  the  ancient  Thyatira."  That  city,  or  rather  the  Christian  Church  in  that 
city,  was  in  the  immediate  Divine  inspection.  All  about  the  rites  of  Apollo, 
and  all  about  the  seductions  of  Sanbethe,  was  known  to  Him  who  "  walketh 
among  the  golden  candlesticks."  We  may  see  (1)  the  form  in  which  the  Living 
C^hrist  is  presented  in  His  relation  to  this  Church  ;  (2)  the  things  in  the  Church 
life  which  He  could  commend ;  and  (3)  the  things  which  caused  Him  grave 
anxiety,  and  called  for  His  severe  reproof. 

I.  The  form  in  which  the  Living  Christ  presents  Himself  to  this  Church. — 
The  ^eneraZ  symbolical  appearance  of  the  Living  Christ,  as  present  in  His  Church, 
is  given  in  the  first  chapter,  and  certain  portions  of  the  description  are  taken  to 
indicate  the  special  relation  of  the  Living  Christ  to  each  particular  Church.  We 
Westerns  speak  so  little  in  the  language  of  symbols,  that  it  is  often  difficult  for 
us  to  understand  them,  or  to  get  their  precise  adaptations.  Two  things  in  the 
figure  of  the  Living  White  One  are  recalled  to  mind  in  presenting  the  message 
to  Thyatira  :  "  Who  hath  His  eyes  like  unto  a  flame  of  fire,  and  His  feet  like  fine 
brass,"  or  burnished  brass  (E.V.).  In  the  first  chapter  the  symbol  is  given  in 
a  fuller  form  :  "  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  His  feet  like  unto 
burnished  brass,  as  if  it  had  been  refined  in  a  furnace."  The  eyes  of  flame  seem 
to  indicate  a  severity  of  inspection ;  and  the  feet  like  burnished  brass  may 
indicate  the  determination  to  tread  down  the  evils  which  the  searching  eyes  may 
discover.  "  The  feet  of  Ghalcolihanus  " — that  is  the  peculiar  word  used — "shall 
crush  the  enemies  of  God  as  though  they  were  the  vessels  of  a  potter."  Dean 
Blakesley  thinks  that  the  special  description  was  determined  by  the  character  of 
the  worship  of  Apollo  in  this  city.  He  thinks  there  was  a  statue  of  Apollo,  of 
gold  and  ivory,  or  of  wood  or  marble,  richly  gilt ;  that  this  shone  with  a  dazzling 
brightness,  and  that  the  "  eyes  like  a  flame  of  fire,  and  the  feet  like  fine  brass  " 
were  meant  to  present  the  image  of  the  Lord  of  the  Churches  as  yet  more  glorious 
and  terrible.  There  is  certainly  a  tone  of  severity ^  as  well  as  of  searching,  in  the 
epistle.  A  purpose  to  burn  up,  and  tread  down,  the  moral  evils  which  were  so 
seriously  imperilling  the  life  of  the  Church.  Theie  are  some  evils  in  Church  life 
which  must  be  dealt  with  vigorously.  No  gentle  hand  will  do.  They  are 
corrupting  forces,  and  must  be  trampled  down.  If  we  may  take  the  idea  of  this 
prophetess  Sanbethe  morally  corrupting  the  people  with  her  idolatrous  and 
immoral  system,  we  can  well  understand  that  Christ's  inspections  of  that  Church 
must  be  as  with  a  flame  of  fire,  and  His  dealings  with  that  Church  as  the 
treading  of  burnished  feet.  We  should  nevv3r  hesitate  to  associate  the  holiest 
severities  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  very  perfection  of  love  makes  it  stern 
and  severe  against  all  wrong-doing,  and  especially  against  all  evil  that  is  doing  an 
actively  corrupting  work.  Its  activity  must  always  be  met  by  a  more  than 
answering  activity  of  goodness,  in  resisting  and  rooting  it  out. 

II.  The  things  in  the  Church  life  at  Thyatira  which  the  Living  Christ  could 
commend. — It  is  interesting  to  notice  that  they  were  very  much  the  things  which 
St.  Paul  could  commend  in  writing  his  letter  to  the  Philippians.  *'  Loving 
ministrations,  patient  endurance,  warm-hearted  faith,  the  more  feminine  graces 
of  the  perfect  Christian  character."  But  when  this  is  seen,  the  sternness  of  the 
closing  portion  of  the  epistle  to  Thyatira  is  explained.  The  Church  needed  to  be 
aroused.  The  sterner,  masculine  gi-aces  were  called  into  exercise  by  the 
Church's  peril.  It  is  a  serious  mistake  for  a  Church  to  develop  "  active " 
graces  to  the  neglect  of  the  "  passive  " ;  but  it  is  as  perilous  a  mistake  for 
a  Church  to  settle  down  into  the  enjoyment  of  Christian  peace  and  Christian 
privileges,  heedless  of  moral  evils  that  may  be  making  serious  inroads  upon 
it — as  perilous  a  mistake  to  develop  only  "passive"  graces,  feminine  graces, 
to  the  neglect  of  those  that  are  manly,  active,  and  strong.  There  is  a 
righteous  zeal  against  evil  which  Churches  should  exhibit ;    and  Christ  puts 

464 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION.        chap.  ii. 


into  His  Church  the  power  and  the  right  to  judge  and  condemn.  These  are  the 
things  in  the  Church  at  Thyatira  upon  which  the  Living  Christ  can  look  with 
complacency.  "  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  love,  and  faith,  and  ministry,  and 
patience,  and  that  thy  last  works  are  more  than  the  first."  Three  things  seem 
to  be  expressed  in  these  terms  :  1.  Service  ;  2.  Character  ;  3.  Growth.  1.  Service. 
The  Living  Christ  saw  this  Church  realising  the  ideal  of  a  Christian  Church  in 
its  "  works  "  and  "  ministry."  The  works  may,  indeed,  suggest  "  good  conduct " 
as  the  expression  of  sincere  and  active  faith ;  but  it  seems  better  to  take  it  as 
meaning  works  of  charity,  and  works  of  witness  for  the  truth  in  Christ.  Then 
*'  ministry  "  would  mean  loving  readiness  to  serve  and  help  one  another  in  all 
the  various  anxieties,  distresses,  sufferings,  which  constantly  come  into  the  human 
lot,  and  which  even  made  a  special  experience  in  those  early  Christian  days. 
That  is  always  commendable  in  a  Christian  Church.  Its  members  ought  to  "  love 
one  another  "  in  the  sense  of  being  ever  ready  to  minister  to  one  another.  And 
its  members  ought  all  to  recognise  that  they  are  put  in  trust  with  the  gospel,  and 
are  bound  to  witness  to  it  by  attractively  holy  living,  and  by  all  gracious  per- 
suasions. In  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  voice — the  inspiring  voice — of  the  Living 
Lord  should  ever  be  heard  saying,  "  Ye  have  not  chosen  Me,  but  I  have  chosen 
you,  and  ordained  you,  that  ye  should  go  and  bring  forth  fruit,  and  that  your 
fruit  should  remain.  This  is  praiseworthy.  Thyatira  was  a  working  Church  ; 
it  was  found  working  in  all-loving  ministries,  within  its  circle,  and  in  all  loving 
service  beyond  it.  2.  Character.  Three  words  are  used  to  indicate  their  high  level 
of  Christian  attainment,  but  all  three  belong  to  t\iQ  feminine,  or  passive,  graces: 
Love ;  Faith ;  Patience.  If  we  find  other  names  for  them,  we  may  call  them 
Gentleness  ;  Dependence  ;  Submission  ; — the  very  things  that  are  essential  to  all 
Christian  character  that  can  be  called  "  beautiful."  Things  that  give  the  Christian 
professor  a  certain  kind  of  strength — a  very  admirable  kind  of  strength,  but  not 
precisely  that  kind  of  strength  which  is  required  in  dealing  with  public  evils, 
moral  evils.  Christ's  commendation  ever  rests  upon  gracious  character.  Of  that 
we  may  be  sure.  It  is,  indeed,  one  supreme  purpose  of  the  communion  of  saints 
to  cultivate  saintliness  of  character,  the  "  holiness  without  which  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord  "  or  win  the  loving  approval  of  Him  who  is  ever  walking  amid  the 
candlesticks.  The  Church's  concern  is  the  character  of  its  members.  The 
Church's  safety  lies  in  the  chara/iter  of  its  members.  The  Church's  power  is  the 
witness  made  by  the  character  of  its  members.  3.  Growth.  This  is  indicated  in 
the  singular  expression,  "  and  that  thy  last  works  are  more  than  the  first." 
This  was  a  great  thing  to  say.  For  a  Church  to  stand  still  is  for  a  Church  to  go 
back.  Its  only  security  lies  in  its  keeping  going  forward.  It  is  full  of  comforting 
for  this  Church  at  Thyatira  that  Christ  could  recognise  advance  and  growth ; 
because  that  is  precisely  what  both  Churches  and  individual  Christians  are 
usually  altogether  unable  to  recognise  for  themselves.  They  cannot  institute 
befitting  comparisons.  To  them  the  past  of  Christian  life  and  feeling  is  apt  to 
loom  large,  and  the  present  can  seldom  be  estimated  fairly.  It  is  full  of  good 
cheer  for  us,  too,  if  Christ  sees  that  our  present  is  an  improvement  on  the  past ; 
if  the  last  is  better  than  the  first.  Very  encouraging  is  the  Divine  estimate  of 
the  loving,  devout,  ministering,  and  almost  saintly,  Christians  at  Thyatira.  One 
almost  wishes  it  had  not  been  necessary  to  turn  and  deal  so  severely  with  evils 
which,  if  not  actually  in  the  Church,  were  closely  and  perilously  related  to  it — 
did,  indeed,  affect  some,  and  perhaps  some  of  the  principal,  members  of  it. 

III.  The  things  which  caused  the  Living  Christ  grave  anxiety  and  called  for 
His  severe  reproof. — We  must  satisfy  ourselves  with  a  general  understanding  of 
the  mischievous  influence  that  was  at  work,  and  not  dwell  too  closely  on  the 
figures  of  speech  that  are  employed  to  describe  it.  It  is  clear  that  there  was 
some  mischief -making  Jewish  Christian  teacher  in  the  town;  and  it  seems  to 

U  ij  465 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


have  been  a  woman  professing  occult  powers.  She  is  likened  to  Jezebel,  and  her 
influence  is  likened  to  that  of  the  Phoenician  priestess  and  princess,  who  brought 
the  degrading  rites  of  Astarte  into  the  land  of  Israel,  and  wholly  corrupted  the 
people  who  should  have  been  "holy  unto  the  Lord."  Whatever  this  woman's  teach- 
ings may  have  been  intellectually — and  of  that  we  can  form  no  sufficient  judgment 
— their  influence  was  bad,  very  bad,  morally.  She  evidently  taught  that  the 
Christians  were  in  bondage,  and  needed  liberty.  They  were  an  isolated  section  of 
Society,  and  took  no  part  in  the  so-called  pleasures  of  Society.  They  had  scruples 
about  their  eating,  and  scruples  about  their  relationships,  and  they  needed  to 
have  these  scruples  put  away,  and  just  to'  be  men  and  women,  with  passions  and 
pleasures  like  other  men  and  women ;  they  needed  to  be  able  to  eat  what  they 
liked  to  eat,  and  to  do  what  they  liked  to  do.  This  was  the  practical  result  of 
Sanbethe's  licentious  and  idolatrous  teachings,  permissions,  and  example.  How 
far  this  degrading  influence  had  gone  does  not  quite  appear.  The  message  seems 
to  indicate  that  the  elder  or  pastor  of  the  Church,  and  a  goodly  number  of  the 
members,  had  kept  themselves  from  the  evil  influence.  The  Living  Lord  says 
this  :  "  To  you  I  say,  to  the  rest  that  are  in  Thyatira,  as  many  as  have  not  known, 
this  teaching."  Some,  let  us  hope  a  great  many,  were  *'  faithful  among  the 
faithless  found."  Dean  Plumptre  suggests  that  the  "  Agapse,  or  love-feasts,  of 
the  Church  were  stained,  as  the  hints  in  2  Pet.  ii.  13,  14,  and  Jude  ver.  12, 
not  obscurely  intimate,  with  the  perpetration  of  fathomless  impurities,  in  which 
this  so-called  prophetess  was  herself  a  sharer,"  as  well  as  the  leader.  What  we 
need  to  see,  is,  that  idolatry  finds,  and  ever  has  found,  its  congenial  atmosphere 
in  self-indulgence  and  licentiousness ;  that  even  false  and  unworthy  presentation 
of  Chiistianity  finds,  and  ever  has  found,  its  support  in  an  intellectual  and  moral 
liberty,  which  has  always  tended  to  generate  into  licence,  and  that  Christianity — 
the  Christianity  of  Christ — can  only  live  in  a  pure  moral  atmosphere,  and  may 
always  be  judged  by  "  the  fruits  unto  holiness,"  which  it  produces  wherever  it  is 
established.  The  religion  which  does  not  tend  to  make  pure  lives,  pure  homes, 
pure  Churches,  and  pure  Society,  has  no  right  to  be  called  Christianity.  But  the 
point  of  impression  for  the  Church  at  Thyatira,  which  has  its  practical  application 
for  us,  is  this.  The  evil  in  its  midst  must  not  be  left  alone.  It  must  not  be  left 
to  grow  into  ruinous  power.  It  must  be  dealt  with  vigorously,  and  at  once.  It 
must  be  resisted  manfully.  The  Living  Christ  lays  "no  other  burden  "  upon 
them,  but  he  does  lay  that  burden.  Kelative  to  the  moral  evil  in  its  midst,  what- 
ever form  it  may  take,  every  Church  of  Christ  must  be  manly.  It  must  be 
Christly  as  the  Christ  who  drove  out  the  money-changers  and  dove-sellers  when  they 
defiled  the  holy  Temple.  And  they  who,  striving  against  all  moral  evil  in  their 
midst,  "  overcome,"  have  this  for  their  reward.  The  Christian  life  in  them  gains  the 
full  development ;  the  strong  things  are  harmoniously  cultured  with  the  gentle. 
They  win  authority  as  well  as  submission  ;  are  now  nourished  all  round  into  the 
entire  image  of  Christ,  and  become  strong  to  resist  evil,  and  to  witness  for  purity, 
as  Christ  was  strong.  To  him  that  overcometh  is  given  the  '*  morning  star,"  the 
sign  of  victory  over  all  darkness,  all  night — everything  evil. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.   20.  Jezebel. — The  best  editors  Jezebel's  unchastity.    A  great  point  of 

decline    to    adopt   the   reading    *'  thy  this  is,  however,  made  in  Peter  Bayne's 

wife."     The  name  of  Ahab's  idolatrous  poem  on  Jezebel.     It  would   seem  to 

wife  is  here  plainly  a  symbolical  name.  be  the   intimate   relation    which    the 

Except  in  Jehu's  taunt  (1  Kings  ix.  22),  woman  adverted    to    sustains   to    the 

which    need   not   be   meant    literally,  Church  that  appears  to  give  occasion 

there    is    no     evidence    whatever    gf  for  the  appellation  t^v  yvvaiKa  q-ov.    The 

466 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.         chap.  ii. 


woman  in  question,  whose  proper  name 
(probably  from  motives  of  delicacy)  is 
withheld,  was  evidently  one  who 
assumed  the  office  of  a  public  teacher 
(Kttt  St8ao-K€i),  and  gave  herself  out 
(for  so  it   is   said)  as    an    authorised 

Ver.  24.  Depths  of  Satan.— The 
heretics  condemned  in  the  preceding 
vei-ses  were  doubtless  a  sect  of  those 
who  called  themselves  Gnostics,  pro- 
bably at  this  time,  certainly  in  the 
next  generation.  They  contrasted 
ktiowledge  of  the  "depths,"  or  "  deep 
things  of  God"  (1  Cor.  ii.  10),  with 
the  faith  of  the  orthodox  in  the  plain, 
simple  doctrines  that  were  openly 
preached  to  the  world.  The  Lord 
answers  that  the  depths  of  knowledge 


that  they  attained  were  depths,  not  of 
God,  but  of  Satan.  .  .  .  It  is  to  be  re- 
membered that  the  Gnostic  systems  of 
the  second  century,  and  probably  thoee 
of  the  first  also,  included  a  strange 
mythology  of  half  personified  abstrac- 
tions, and  it  may  be  that  the  Lord 
rather  identifies  one  of  these  with 
Satan  than  substitutes  the  name  of 
Satan  for  that  of  God.  It  appears 
from  Irenceus  that  the  Gnostics  of  his 
time  talked  of  the  "  deep  things  of 
Depth,"  as  well  as  the  *'  deep  things  of 
God."  It  is  curious  that  the  phrase, 
"  the  depths  of  knowledge  "  is  quoted 
from  the  great  Epbesian  philosopher, 
Heraclitus  :  possibly  it  was  owing  to 
his  influence  that  such  notions  found 
a  congenial  home  in  Asia  Minor. — 
W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  II. 


Ver.  1.  Rnins  of  Ancient  Ephesus. — Let  us 
go  with  the  traveller,  as  he  journeys  over 
the  scenes  of  Asia  Minor — of  which  Homer, 
Hesiod,  ^schylus,  and  Euripides,  sang,  and 
of  which  Herodotus  and  Xenophon  wrote — 
scenes  of  ancient  myths,  of  high  adventure, 
of  sacred  narrative, — scenes  where  Pagan 
mythology  recorded  its  wonders,  and  where 
gospel  doctrine  claimed  its  triumphs  ;  and 
let  us  rest  for  a  moment  with  him  as  he 
surveys,  in  the  ancient  district  of  Lydia,  on 
the  borders  of  the  ^gean  Sea,  a  poor 
Turkish  village,  bearing  the  modern  name 
of  Aiasalftk.  From  the  eminence  upon  which 
that  hamlet  stands,  built  of  materials  in 
which  are  constantly  to  be  seen  traces 
of  a  more  dignified  antiquity,  the  eye 
wanders  over  immense  heaps  of  chaotic  ruin 
in  the  valley  below.  These  masses  of  ancient 
masonry  are  partly  overgrown  by  the  wild 
luxuriance  of  an  almost  tropical  vegetation, 
and  only  the  serpent,  the  lizard,  and  the 
scorpion,  are  at  home  on  the  spot.  The 
elegant  forms  of  Corinthian  architecture, 
shafts  of  Ionic  columns,  and  the  less  grace- 
ful remnants  of  later  Roman  days,  may  be 
traced  amidst  the  inextricable  confusion.  A 
considerable  river  (the  Cayster),  the  waters 
of  which  were  originally  clear  as  crystal, 
having  broken  loose  from  its  bounds,  wanders 
at  will  amidst  the  ruins,  and  converts  the 
whole  into  a  malarious  swamp.  Here  and 
there  a  corn-field  ofEers  a  contrast  to  the 
surrounding  desolation,  yet  only  serves  to 
make  that  desolation  more  marked  and 
emphatic.  Among  other  remnants  of  the 
past  are  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  theatre, 
whose    circular   seats,   uprising  one   above 


another,  may  still  be  traced,  whilst  numerous 
arches  remain  witnesses  of  its  former 
grandeur.  But  though  the  broken  masonry 
is  most  extensive,  not  an  apartment  remains 
entire.  No  Christian  dwells  in  its  vicinity  ; 
there  is  no  certainty  as  to  the  site  of  any 
one  of  the  buildiugs  which  gave* to  the  city 
its  peculiar  character.  Confusion  has  done 
its  utmost  work.  Such  are  the  ruins  of 
ancient  Ephesus.  Its  position  and  pros- 
pects have  undergone  a  total  revolutior ; 
"  the  very  sea  has  shrunk  from  its  shores." 
Everywhere  are  visible  the  traces  of  the 
spoilers'  hand.  The  columns  which  once 
adorned  its  temples,  and  which  were  the 
envy  of  the  beholder,  were  removed  by 
Justinian,  to  ornament  the  churcli  of  Sophia, 
in  Constantinople.  Barbarians  pillaged  all 
that  emperors  had  spared ;  and  as  the 
traveller  gazes  upon  the  fallen  fiirtunes  of 
so  much  antecedent  magnificence,  he  shud- 
ders at  the  too  visible  fulfilment  of  the 
threat,  "  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and 
will  remove  thy  candlestick  out  of  his  place, 
except  thou  repent."  While  all  trace  of  the 
temple  of  Diana  has  been  lost,  Chandler 
relates  that  he  found  amongst  the  ruins  of 
the  city  an  inscription,  commencing  as 
follows:  "  Inasmuch  as  it  is  notorious  that, 
not  only  among  the  Ephesians,  but  also  every- 
where among  the  Greek  nations,  temples  are 
consecrated  to  her,  and  sacred  portions,"'  etc., 
which  strikingly  illustrates  the  address  of 
the  town  clerk  of  Ephesus  :  "  Ye  men  of 
Ephesus,  what  man  is  there  that  knoweth 
not  how  that  the  city  of  the  Ephesians  is  a 
worshipper  of  the  great  goddess  Diana" 
(Acts  xix.  35)  ? 

467' 


CHAP.  II.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


Ver.  7.  Overcoming. — As  on  some  battle- 
field, whence  all  traces  of  the  agony  and  fury 
have  passed  away,  and  harvests  wave,  and 
larks  sing  where  blood  ran  and  men  groaned 
their  lives  out,  some  grey  stone,  raised  by 
the  victors,  remains,  and  only  the  trophy 
tells  of  the  forgotten  fight ;  so  that  monu- 
mental word,  "I  have  overcome,"  stands  to 
all  ages  as  the  record  of  the  silent,  lifelong 
conflict. — A.  Maclaren,  D.D. 

Tree  of  Life. — Comparing  this  verse  with 
Christ's  declaration  to  the  penitent  thief, 
"  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  Me  in  Paradise," 
Parkhurst  maintains  that  the  tree  of  life  is 
not  an  emblem  of  any  agent  through  which 
Christ  bestows  blessings,  but  that  it  sym- 
bolises our  Lord  Himself.  So,  following  out 
the  idea,  he  points  out  that  the  cherubim,  after 
Adam  was  expelled  from  the  Edenic  paradise, 
were  set  to  guard  the  approaches  to  the  tree 
of  life  :  the  time  had  not  yet  come  for  Christ 
to  be  manifested  in  the  "  glory  of  His  work 
of  redemption."  In  Luke  xxiii.  31  we  find 
that  Christ  alludes  to  Himself  in  His  atti- 
tude of  a  sufferer  as  "  the  green  tree  "  ;  that 
is  to  say.  He  was  under  the  constant  influence 
of  the  spirit  of  God,  and  brought  forth  the 
fruit  of  perfect  holiness  in  His  Divine  man- 
hood. 

Ver.  8.  Smyrna. — This  celebrated  city  is 
situated  on  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  about 
forty  miles  north  of  Ephesus.  It  has  a  popu- 
lation of  nearly  130,000,  of  whom  25,000 
are  Greeks,  10,000  Jews,  8000  Armenians, 
and  the  remainder  chiefly  Turks.  It  has 
twenty  mosques,  but  the  Turkish  power  is 
declining.  The  poppy  and  convolvulus  are 
much  cultivated,,  the  latter  yielding  a  valu- 
able drug  known  as  "  scammony." 

The  Beauty  of  Smyrna. — *'  The  first  sight 

of  Smyrna,  especially  when  approached  by 

sea,  must  produce  a  strong  impression.     It 

presents  a  picture  of  indescribable  beauty. 

The  heights  of  Mount  Pagus  and  the  plain 

beneath,  covered  with  innumerable  houses; 

the  tiled  roofs  and  painted  balconies,  the 

domes  and  minarets  of  mosques  glowing  and 

glittering  with  the  setting  sun;  the  dark  walls 

of  the  old  fortress  crowning  the  top  of  the 

mountain,  and  the  still  darker  cypress  groves 

below ;  shipping  of  every  form  and  country 

covering  the  bay    beneath ;    flags  of   every 

nation  waving  on  the  ships  of  war  and  over 

the  houses  of  the  consuls ;  mountains  on  both 

sidestof  stupendous  height  and  extraordinary 

outline  .  .  .  tinted  with  so  strong  a  purple, 

that  neither  these  nor  the  golden  streaks  on 

the  water  could  safely  be  attempted  to  be 

represented  by  the  artist ;  at  the  margin  of 

the   water   on    the   right,   meadows   of   the 

richest  pasture,   the  velvet  turf  contrasted 

with  the  silvery  olive,  and  covered  with  cattle 

and  tents  without  number ; — all  this  will  at 

once   tell  the  traveller  that  he  sees  before 

46S 


him  the  city  extolled  by  the  ancients  under 
the  title  of  the  lovely,  the  crown  of  Ionia, 
the  ornament  of  Ada.  It  will  remind  the 
Christian  that  he  is  arrived  at  Smyrna, 
the  Church  favoured  so  much  beyond  all 
the  other  Churches  of  the  Apocalypse;  the 
only  city  retaining  any  comparison  with 
its  original  magnificence.  JSphesus,  the  mart 
of  all  nations,  the  boast  of  Ionia,  has  long 
dwelt  in  darkness,  as  though  she  had  not 
been  ;  the  streams  of  her  commerce,  like  her 
own  numerous  ports,  are  all  dried  up.  Where 
once  pro-consuls  sat  at  Laodicea,  now  sit  the 
vulture  and  the  jackal.  At  Sardis,  where 
once  a  Solon  reminded  Croesus  of  his  mor- 
tality, the  solitary  cucuvaia  awakens  the  same 
reflection ;  and  if  Philadelphia,  Thyatira, 
and  Perga7Hos  continue  to  exist,  it  is  in  a 
state  of  being  inflnitely  degraded  from  that 
which  they  once  enjoyed.  Smyrna  alone 
flourishes  still.  Her  temples  and  public 
edifices  are  no  more ;  but  her  opulence, 
extent,  and  population,  are  certainly  in- 
creased."— Arundel. 

Ver.  10.  Faithful  unto  Death:  Polycarp. 
When  Polycarp,   an  ancient  Bishop  of  the 
Church   at    Smyrna,    was    brought    to    the 
tribunal,  the  pro-consul  asked  him  if  he  was 
Polycarp,  to  which  he  assented.     The  pro- 
consul then  began  to   exhort   him,   saying, 
*'  Have  pity  on  thine  own  great  age.    Swear 
by  the  fortune  of  Caesar.    Repent :  say,  *  Take 
away  the  atheists' " — meaning  the  Christians. 
Polycarp,  casting  his  eyes  solemnly  over  the 
multitude,  waving  his  hand   to   them,  and 
looking  up   to    heaven,    said,    "Take  away 
these  atheists,"  meaning  the  idolaters  around 
him.     The  pro-consul,  still  urging  him,  and 
saying,   "Swear,  and   I  will  release   thee: 
reproach    Christ,"    Polycarp   said,    "Eighty 
and  six  years  have  I  served  Him,  and  He 
hath   never   wronged   me ;   and   how  can  I 
blaspheme  my  King  who  hath  saved  me  ?  " 
"I  have  wild  beasts,"  said  the  pro-consul, 
"  and  will  expose  you  to  them  unless  you 
repent."      "  Call   them,"    said   the    martyr. 
'•  I  will  tame  your  spirit  by  fire,"  said  the 
Roman.     "  You  threaten  me,"  said  Polycarp, 
"  with   the   fire    which   burns    only    for    a 
moment,  but  are  yourself  ignorant   of  the 
fire  of  eternal  punishment  reserved  for  the 
ungodly."     Soon  after  this,  being  about  to 
be  put  to  death,  he  exclaimed,  "  O  Father  of 
Thy  beloved  and  blessed  Son  Jesus  Christ ! 
O    God    of    all    principalities    and    of    all 
creation  I      I  bless   Thee   that    Thou     hast 
counted  me   worthy   of  this  day  and  this 
hour,  to  receive  my  portion  in  the  number 
of  the   martyrs,   in   the   cup  of   Christ.     I 
praise   Thee  for  all   these  things.     I  bless 
Thee,   I  glorify  Thee  by  the  eternal  High 
Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  Thy  well-beloved  Son  ; 
through  whom,  and  with  whom,  in  the  Holy 
Spirit,  be  ^lory  to  Thee,  both  now  and  for 
ever.    Amen," 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.         chap.  il. 


Ignatius. — Having  been  sent,  bound,  to 
Rome,  the  Roman  prefect  caused  it  to  be  an- 
nounced that  on  a  given  day  Ignatius  would 
fight  with  wild  beasts  in  the  Colo;jseum. 
Into  the  building,  which  would  accommodate 
eighty-seven  thousand  spectators,  we  are  told 
"  the  whole  city "  gathered  to  witness  the 
bloody  spectacle.  When  he  was  in  the 
amphitlieatre,  turning  to  the  people,  as  one 
who  gloried  in  the  ignominy  which  was 
before  him,  Ignatius  cried  out,  "  Romans, 
spectators  of  this  present  scene,  I  am  here, 
not  because  of  any  crime,  nor  to  absolve  my- 
self from  any  charge  of  wickedness,  but  to 
follow  God,  by  the  love  of  whom  I  am 
impelled,  and  whom  I  long  for  irrepressibly. 
For  I  am  His  wheat,  and  must  be  ground  by 
the  teeth  of  beasts,  that  1  may  become  His 
pure  bread."  When  he  had  uttered  these 
words,  the  lions,  being  let  loose,  instantly 
flew  upon  him  and  devoured  him  altogether, 
with  the  exception  of  his  larger  bones  ;  thus 
fulfilling  his  prayer  that  the  beasts  might  be 
his  sepulchre,  and  that  nothing  might  be 
left  of  his  body ;  Christ  receiving  greater 
glory  from  the  sufferings  of  His  servant  than 
would  have  followed  from  his  escape  from 
the  wild  beasts.  Thus  perished  one  who,  a 
short  time  previously,  feared  that  he  was 
wanting  in  love  to  Christ,  seeing  that  he  had 
not  then  been  thought  worthy  of  the  crown 
of  martydom , 

Hooj^er. — Bishop  Hooper  was  condemned 
to  be  burned  at  Gloucester,  in  Queen  Mary's 
reign.  A  gentleman,  with  the  view  of  in- 
ducing him  to  recant,  said  to  him,  "  Life  is 
sweet  and  death  is  bitter."  Hooper  replied, 
"  The  death  to  come  is  more  bitter,  and  the 
life  to  come  more  sweet.  I  am  come  hither 
to  end  this  life,  and  suffer  death,  because  I 
will  not  gainsay  the  truth  I  have  here  formerly 
taught  you."  When  brought  to  the  stake,  a 
box,  with  a  pardon  from  the  queen  in  it,  was 
set  before  him.  The  determined  martyr 
cried  out,  "  If  }ou  love  my  soul,  away  with 
it !  if  you  love  my  soul,  away  with  it  1 " 

A  Greek  Chris tia7i. — "  A  Turk  had  pre- 
vailed by  artifice  upon  a  Greek  Christian, 
twenty-four  years  of  age,  to  enter  his  service, 
abandon  his  faith,  and  embrace  the  tenets  of 
Mol;ammed  when  he  assumed  the  costume  of 
a  Mussulman.  On  the  expiration  of  his 
engagement  the  Greek  departed  for  Mount 
Athos,  in  Macedonia,  and  was  absent  about 
twelve  montlis,  when  he  returned  to  Smyrna  ; 
but,  his  conscience  having  reproached  him 
for  the  act  of  apostasy  of  which  he  had  been 
guilty,  he  proceeded  to  the  Turkish  judge, 
threw  down  his  turban,  declared  he  had 
been  deceived,  and  would  still  live  and  die  a 
Christian.  Every  effort  was  made  to  prevail 
on  him  to  continue  in  the  principles  of 
Mohammedanism,  by  offering  him  great  re- 
wards if  he  did,  and  threatening  him  with 


the  severest  penalties  if  he  did  not.  The 
Greek,  having  rejected  every  bribe,  was 
thrust  into  a  dungeon  and  tortured,  which 
he  bore  most  heroically,  and  was  then  led 
forth  in  public  to  be  beheaded,  with  his 
hands  tied  behind  his  back.  The  place  of 
execution  was  a  platform  opposite  to  one 
of  the  principal  mosques,  where  a  black- 
smith, armed  with  a  scimitar,  stood  ready  to 
perform  the  dreadful  operation.  To  the 
astonishment  of  the  surrounding  multitude, 
this  did  not  shake  his  f  i  rtitude ;  and 
although  he  was  told  that  it  would  be  quite 
suflacient  if  he  merely  declared  he  was  not  a 
Christian,  rather  than  do  so,  he  chose  to  die. 
Still  entertaining  a  hope  that  the  young 
man  might  retract,  especially  when  the 
instrument  of  death  was  exhibited,  these 
offers  were  again  and  again  pressed  upon 
him,  but  without  effect.  The  executioner 
was  then  ordered  to  peel  off  with  his  sword 
part  of  the  skin  of  his  neck.  The  fortitude 
and  strong  faith  of  this  Christian,  who  ex- 
pressed the  most  perfect  willingness  to 
suffer,  enabled  him  to  reach  that  highest 
elevation  of  apostolic  triumph  evinced  by 
rejoicing  in  tribulation  ;  when,  looking 
steadfastly  up  to  heaven,  like  the  martyr 
Stephen,  he  loudly  exclaimed,  '  I  was  born 
with  Jesus,  and  shall  die  with  Jesus ' ;  and, 
bringing  to  recollection  the  exclamation  of 
that  illustrious  martyr  in  the  cause  of  his 
Divine  Master,  Polycarp,  in  this  very  place, 
he  added,  '  I  have  served  Christ,  and  how 
can  I  revile  my  King  who  has  kept  me  ? ' 
On  pronouncing  these  words,  his  head  was 
struck  off  at  once.  .  .  .  The  head  was  then 
placed  under  the  left  arm  (after  the 
Mohammedan  is  beheaded,  the  head  is  placed 
under  the  right  arm,  and  in  this  mjinner  he 
is  interred)  and,  with  the  body,  remained  on 
the  scaffold  three  days  exposed  to  public 
view,  after  which  the  Greeks  were  permitted 
to  bury  it." 

A  Brave  Boy. — A  company  of  boys  in 
Chicago  once  endeavoured  to  ton  e  a  boy  to 
go  with  them  into  a  garden  to  steal  fruit.  He 
persisted  in  his  refusal  to  go  with  them. 
They  threatened  to  duck  him  in  the  river 
unless  he  consented,  but  he  remained  firm 
His  tormentors  then  forced  him  into  the 
water,  and  wickedly  drowned  him,  because 
he  would  not  steal.  There  was  the  true 
hero,  and  the  genuine  spirit  of  a  martyr. 
One  of  the  local  printers  furnishes  the 
following  paragraph  in  relation  to  him : — 
"  His  father  is  one  of  our  most  worthy 
and  estimable  Norwegian  citizens.  He  is  a 
member  of  the  Evangelican  Lutheran  Church, 
His  little  son,  though  but  ten  years  of  age, 
had  given  such  true  evidences  of  piety,  and 
he  was  so  intelligent  and  consistent  in  every 
respect,  that  he  had  also  been  admitted  as  a 
member  of  the  same  church.  His  seat  in 
the  Sabbath  school  was  never  vacant,  and  his 

469 


CHAP.  II.        BOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


lessons  were  always  learned."  It  is  pro- 
posed to  erect  a  monument  to  his  memory. 
Who  will  say  that  children  are  too  young  to 
love  and  obey  the  truth  1  Honour  to  the 
noble  boy  who  was  willing  to  die  rather  than 
sin  against  God. 

The  Young  Drummer. — In  one  of  the  late 
wars  a  little  drummer  boy,  after  describing 
the  hardships  of  the  winter  campaign,  the 
cold,  the  biting,  the  pitiless  wind,  the 
hunger  and  the  nakedness,  which  they  had  to 
endure,  concluded  his  letter  to  his  mother 
with  the  simple  and  touching  words,  "  But, 
mother,  it  is  our  duty,  and  for  our  duty  we 
will  die." 

Crowns  for  Conquerors.  —  Among  the 
Romans,  with  other  military  honours  and 
recompenses,  rich  and  splendid  crowns 
were  publicly  bestowed  upon  the  illustrious 
conqueror,  and  upon  every  man  who,  acting 
worthy  of  the  Roman  name,  had  distin- 
guished himself  by  his  valour  and  his  virtue. 
In  the  triumph  of  Paulus  ^milius,  after 
taking  king  Perseus  prisoner,  and  putting  an 
end  to  the  Macedonian  empire,  there  were 
carried  before  the  conqueror  four  hundred 
crowns,  all  made  of  gold,  and  sent  from  the 
cities  by  their  respective  ambassadors  to 
^milius,  as  a  reward  due  to  his  valour. 
How  beautiful  and  striking,  then,  are  those 
promises  which  assure  us  that  the  Saviour 
shall  confer  crowns  of  immortal  glory  upon 
His  persevering  saints,  and  that  before  the 
host  of  angels  and  an  assembled  world! — 
Kennett. 

Ver.  12.  Pergamos. — Pergamos,  a  celebrated 
city  of  Mysia,  in  Asia  Minor,  and  for  one 
hundred  and  fifty  years  the  capital  of  a 
powerful  and  independent  kingdom  of  the 
same  name,  is  situated  about  sixty-four  miles 
north-west  of  Smyrna.  It  was  the  residence 
of  the  Attalian'  kings,  and  a  famous  seat  of 
Eastern  learning,  having  a  noble  library, 
containing  two  hundred  thousand  volumes. 
The  advantages  of  its  situation,  near  the  sea, 
and  commanding  an  extensive  plain,  rendered 
it  a  place  of  great  importance.  The  acropolis, 
or  citadel  (which  was  always  the  most 
ancient  part,  and  the  stronghold,  of  Grecian 
and  Roman  cities),  stands  on  a  hill  two 
hundred  feet  above  the  plain,  now  crowned 
with  its  ruins,  amongst  which  those  of  a 
castle  or  fortress,  resembling  those  at  Smyrna 
and  Ephesus,  covering  the  whole  summit, 
and  including  about  eight  acres,  stand 
prominent.  It  was  built  in  the  more  pros- 
perous times  of  Pergamos,  though  much  of 
its  present  form  is  of  a  later  date.  The  town 
afterwards  became  more  extended,  and  the 
modern  one  lies  in  part  on  the  slope  of  the  hill, 
but  principally  in  the  plain.  Among  the 
antiquities  of  Pergamos  may  be  mentioned 
the  remains  of  the  temple  of  Minerva,  which 

470 


rose  on  a  high  area,  and  was  unrivalled  in 
sublimity  of  situation,  being  visible  from  the 
vast  plain  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  Its 
columns  now  lie  in  a  lofty  heap.  With  a 
descent  almost  perpendicular,  on  the  north 
and  west  sides  is  a  very  narrow  valley,  with 
a  rivulet,  over  which,  at  one  extremity,  the 
great  aqueduct  of  one  row  of  lofty  arches  is 
constructed,  and  at  the  other  a  pile  of 
massive  buildings,  which,  filling  the  whole 
breadth  of  the  valley,  was  the  front  and 
grand  entrance  into  an  extensive  amphi- 
theatre, .  .  .  the  most  complete  edifice  of  the 
kind  in  Asia  Minor.  Here,  at  times,  by 
retaining  the  waters  of  the  rivulet,  a  Nauma- 
chia,  or  place  for  the  exhibition  of  a  mock 
sea-fight,  was  formed ;  while  at  others,  when 
the  arena  was  dry,  and  the  stream  confined 
within  its  narrow  bounds,  it  was  used  for 
chariot,  gymnastic,  and  other  exercises.  Of 
the  site  of  the  royal  palace  of  King  Attains, 
celebrated  for  its  beautiful  prospect  (and 
therefore  probably  occupying  an  elevated 
and  commanding  position),  nothing  can  be 
positively  asserted.  Once  there  was  at 
Pergamos  the  celebrated  temple  of  ^Escula- 
pius,  which  was  also  an  asjdum,  and  the  con- 
course of  individuals  to  which  was  without 
number  or  cessation.  They  passed  the  night 
there  to  invoke  the  false  deity,  who  com- 
municated remedies  either  in  dreams  or  by 
the  mouth  of  his  priests,  who  distributed 
drugs  and  performed  surgical  operations. 

Ver.  17.  The  White  Stone. — We  have  here 
an  allusion  to  an  ancient  mode  of  indicating 
approbation  and  acquittal,  as  described  by 
Ovid  :— 

"  A  custom  of  old,  and  still  ordains. 
Which  ]ife  or  death  by  sulFrage  obtains  ; 
White  stones  and  black  within  an  urn  are  cast, — 
The  first  absolve,  but  death  is  in  the  last." 

This  ancient  custom  was  something  like  our 
modern  balloting,  or  voting  by  white  and 
black  balls.  The  White  Stone  promised  by 
our  Lord  seems  to  mean  full  and  complete 
justification  at  the  great  day,  through  His 
glorious  imputed  righteousness.  Some  inter- 
preters refer  to  the  ancient  custom  of  acquit- 
ting an  accused  person  by  the  jurors  placing 
a  white  pebble  in  the  balloting  box.  Thus 
the  Christian,  at  the  last  great  assize,  shall 
receive,  not  the  black  stone  of  condemnation, 
but  the  white  stone  of  salvation,  through  the 
merits  of  Him  who  died  for  sinners.  The 
white  stone  has  also  suggested  the  token  of 
triumph  allotted  to  the  victor  at  the  Olympic 
games,  entitling  him  to  a  triumphant  recep- 
tion on  his  return  home.  There  is  another 
tessera,  or  white  stone — the  tessera gladiatoria. 
Before  a  young  man  could  appear  as  a 
gladiator  in  the  great  public  games,  he  had 
to  pass  through  a  long  and  severe  process  of 
training.  During  that  time  he  went  under 
the  name  of  tiro,  or  apprentice.    When  ^© 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  REVELATION.         chap.  11. 


made  his  first  public  appearance  in  the 
arena,  if  he  proved  victorious,  he  received  an 
oblong  tablet  of  ivory  {tessera  gladiatoria) 
as  a  reward  and  sign  of  his  proficiency,  on 
which  was  written  his  name,  that  of  his 
master,  and  the  day  of  hi&'Mfirst  fight  and 
victory.  He  was  then  admitted  to  the  rank 
of  the  spectati  (distinguished  persons).  The 
name  of  tiro  was  dropped,  and  his  new  name 
of  spectatus  was  inscribed  upon  his  tessera. 
The  tessera  gladiatoria  may  not  be  so  at- 
tractive in  itself  as  the  tessera  hospitalism 
but  there  is  no  objection  to  the  employment 
of  a  symbol  by  St.  John  which  is  used  by 
the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles.  And,  then,  it 
fits  the  case,  which  the  other  does  not.  There 
is  the  change  of  name,  the  new  name  being 
more  honourable,  and  commanding  greater 
privileges,  than  the  old.  And  this  white 
stone  is  given  as  a  reward  of  victory — of  a 
victory,  it  should  be  observed,  not  in  a  single 
brief  contest,  but  which  was  the  crown  and 
finish  of  a  long  and  self-denying  course  of 
discipline. 

Ver.  18.  Thyatira. — "The  appearance  of 
Thyatira,  as  we  approached  it,"  says  Arundell, 
♦'  was  that  of  a  very  long  line  of  cypresses, 
poplars,  and  other  trees,  amidst  which  ap- 
peared the  minarets  of  several  mosques  and 
tTie  roofs  of  a  few  houses  at  the  right.  On 
the  left,  a  view  of  distant  hills,  the  line  of 
which  continued  over  the  town ;  and  at  the 
right,  adjoining  the  town,  was  a  low  hill,  with 
two  ruined  windmills.  Thyatira  is  a  large 
place,  and  abounds  with  shops  of  every 
description.  The  population  is  estimated  at 
three  hundred  Greek  houses,  .  .  .  thirty 
Armenian,  and  one  thousand  Turkish ;  nine 
mosques,  one  Armenian,  and  one  Greek 
church.  We  visited  the  latter ;  it  was  a 
wretchedly  poor  place,  and  so  much  under 
the  level  of  the  churchyard  as  to  require  five 
steps  to  descend  into  it.  .  .  .  We  intended  to 
give  the  priest  a  Testament,  but  he  seemed 
so  insensible  of  its  worth  that  we  reserved 


it,  as  it  was  our  only  remaining  copy,  and 
bestowed  it  afterwards  much  better.  Very 
few  of  the  ancient  buildings  remain  here ; 
one  we  saw,  which  seems  to  have  been  a 
market-place,  having  six  pillars  sunk  very  low 
in  the  ground.  We  could  not  find  any  ruins 
of  churches;  and,  inquiring  of  the  Greeks 
about  it,  they  told  us  there  were  several  great 
buildings  of  stone  under  ground  (which  we 
were  very  apt  to  believe,  from  what  we  had 
observed  in  other  places),  where,  digging 
somewhat  deep,  they  met  with  strong  founda- 
tions that,  without  all  question,  have  formerly 
supported  great  buildings.  I  find,  by  several 
inscriptions,  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  city, 
as  well  as  those  of  Ephesus,  were,  in  the 
times  of  heathenism,  great  votaries  and 
worshippers  of  the  goddess  Diana.  The  city 
has  a  very  great  supply  of  water,  which 
streams  in  every  street,  flowing  from  a 
neighbouring  hill. ...  It  is  populous,  inhabited 
mostly  by  Turks,  .  .  .  few  Christians  residing 
among  them ;  those  Armenians  we  found 
here  being  strangers  who  came  hither  to  sell 
sashes,  handkerchiefs,  etc.,  which  they  bring 
out  of  Persia.  They  are  maintained  chiefly 
by  the  trade  of  cotton  wool,  w'hich  they  send 
to  Smyrna,  for  which  commodity  Thyatira  is 
very  considerable.  "It  is  this  trade,"  says 
Bycaut,  "  the  crystalline  waters,  cool  and 
sweet  to  the  taste  and  light  on  the  stomach, 
the  wholesome  air,  the  rich  and  delightful 
country,  which  causes  this  city  so  to  flourish 
in  our  days,  and  to  be  more  happy  than  her 
other  desolate  and  comfortless  sisters." 
Hartley  remarks,  "  The  buildings  are  in 
general  mean,  but  the  place  in  which  we  are 
at  present  residing  is  by  far  the  best  which 
I  have  yet  seen.  .  .  .  The  language  addressed 
to  Thyatira  is  rather  different  from  that  of 
the  other  epistles.  The  commendations  are 
scarcely  surpassed,  even  in  the  epistle  to 
Philadelphia,  while  the  conduct  of  some  was 
impious  and  profligate.  The  Church  thus 
exhibited  a  contrast  of  the  most  exalted  piety 
with  the  very  depths  of  Satan." 


471 


CHAP.  III.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   MEVELATION. 


CHAPTIlIl    III* 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Ver.  1.  Sardis.— Modern,  Sart ;  once  the  capital  of  the  old  Lydian  monarchy,  now  a  village 
of  paltry  huts.  Seven  Spirits  of  God. — Most  writers  see  in  this  the  endowment  of  Christ  with 
the  Spirit,  so  as  to  be  judge  in  His  Church.  But  this  idea  involves  unduly  pressing  the 
word  "  hath,"  which  more  naturally  suggests  "  hath  in  control"  than  "  hath  in  possession." 
Stuart  understands  our  Lord  presented  here  as  having  the  seven  presence-angels  under  His 
control,  or  at  His  disposal— having  them  as  His  attendants  and  the  ministers  of  His  will. 
In  whatever  sense  "  hath  "  is  applied  to  the  "  seven  Spirits  "  it  is  applied  to  the  "  seven 
stars."  Art  dead. — Spiritually ;  a  figure  for  being  in  a  cold  and  lifeless  state  (Matt.  viii.  22  ; 
Eom.  vi.  13 ;  Eph.  ii.  1,  5 ;  Col.  ii.  13). 

Ver.  2.  Watchful. — Wakeful;  the  opposite  of  the  present  drowsy  condition  of  the  Church. 
Lit.  "  become  watching,"  "  become  as  one  who  watches."  Things  which  remain. — Implying 
that  some  things  had  died  out,  and  that  some  things  were  dying  out,  through  neglect  and 
disuse.  In  getting  back  energy  for  flagging  things,  there  might  come  also  restoration  of 
lost  things.  Perfect. — Or  up  to  the  standard,  "  fully  done,  in  weight  and  tale  and 
measure." 

Ver.  3.  Hold  fast. — Compare  the  counsel  to  Tiniothy  (2  Tim.  i,  14,  ii.  2).  As  a  thief. — 
Unexpectedly,  so  as  to  find  thee  in  a  wholly  unprepared  state.  (See  Matt.  xxiv.  43; 
Luke  xii.  39  ;  1  Thess.  v.  2,  4  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10  ;  Rev.  xvi.  15.) 

Ver.  4.  Names. — This  is  thought  to  imply  a  Church  roll.  It  may,  however,  only  be  a 
figure  for  "persons."  Defiled  their  garments. — "Clean  white  garments  are  very  natural 
emblems  of  innocence.  Hence,  to  be  clothed  with  polluted  garments,  i.e.  garments  soiled 
and  stained,  is  an  emblem  of  a  character  which  is  soiled  and  polluted."  (See  Zech.  iii,  3, 
seqq.')     Those  are  described  whose  outward  lives  had  been  free  from  impurity. 

Ver.  5.  Be  clothed, — Or  shall  clothe  himself  (Trept/SaXetTat)-  Book  of  life.  Koll,  or  register,  of 
the  citizens  of  heaven.  Names  are  blotted  out  of  city  registers  when  death  occurs,  or  when 
crime  is  committed,  and  forfeiture  of  privilege  ensues.  Confess  his  name.— See  Matt.  x.  32 ; 
Luke  xii.  8. 

Ver.  7.  Philadelphia. — Situated  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Tmolus,  and  named  after  Attalus 
Philadelphus,  King  of  Pergamos.  It  was  a  centre  of  the  wine  trade.  Holy  and  true. — 
dyios,  not  6<tlos.  It  represents  the  holiness  of  consecration  rather  than  that  which  is 
ethical  and  indwelling.  The  word  *'  true  "  implies  that  He  will  be  sure  to  keep  His  word. 
Key  of  David. — See  Isa.  xxii.  22.||  Access  to,  and  control  over,  the  house  of  David,  i.e.  the 
regal  house  or  palace,  is  plainly  designated  by  the  key  ;  in  other  words,  regal  dominion  is  its 
meaning.  Christ's  actual  management  and  control  in  His  Church  are  implied.  Openeth, 
etc. — With  reference  to  occasions  and  opportunities  of  service.  An  opportunity  of  Christian 
service  should  be  thought  of  as  a  Christ-opened  door.  In  at  such  doors  His  Church  must  be 
ready  to  enter. 

Ver,  8.  Open  door. — For  the  figure  compare  Acts  xiv,  27 ;  1  Cor,  xvi,  9 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12  ; 
Col.  iv,  3.  An  opening  for  some  form  of  missionary  work  is  clearly  suggested.  The  safety 
of  a  Church  lies  more  truly  in  enterprising  service  than  in  self-culture.  The  healthiest 
Church  is  the  most  active  one.  No  man  can  shut  it, — So  they  need  not  fear  the  opposition 
indicated  in  ver,  9.  Little  strength. — This  is  praise,  not  covert  blame.  "  The  point  is  that 
his  strength  is  not  great,  not  that  he  has  a  little  left  in  spite  of  the  strain  upon  it  "  {Simcox). 
Thou  hast  some  energy,  Plumptre  thinks  "  the  words  point  to  something  in  the  past 
history  of  the  Church  of  Philadelphia  and  its  ruler,  the  nature  of  which  we  can  only  infer 
from  them  and  from  their  context.  Some  storm  of  persecution  had  burst  upon  him,  probably, 
as  at  Smyrna,  instigated  by  the  Jews,  or  the  Judaising  section  of  the  Church,  They 
sought  to  shut  the  door  which  he  had  found  open,  and  would  have  kept  so.  They  were 
strong,  and  he  was  weak ;  numbers  were  against  him,  and  one  whose  faith  was  less  real 
and  living  might  have  yielded  to  the  pressure.  He  had  kept  the  Word  unmoved  by  fear 
of  man," 

Ver,  9,  Synagogue  of  Satan, — The  antagonistic  Jewish  section  ;  but  the  term  suggests  that 
they  were  doing  their  evil  and  hindering  work  in  a  secret  and  underhand  way,  as  if  they 
were   serving  Satan,  the  deceiver.    Worship  before  thy  feet. — As  suppliants  in  a  time  of 

472 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  REVELATION,       chap.  in. 


grievous  distress.  The  idea  is  that  troubles  were  at  hand  which  would  ruinously  affect  both 
Jews  and  Christians,  but  rest  so  heavily  on  the  Jews  that  they  would  be  glad  to  gain  the 
help  and  defence  of  the  Christians. 

Ver.  10,  Hour  of  temptation. — Trial  which  severely  tests  faithfulness.  Terrible  persecutions 
burst  on  the  Churches,  arising  from  heathen  panic  and  suspicion. 

Ver,  11.  Take  thy  crown. — That  which  is  reserved  for  the  faithful  combatant.  "  Perseverance 
is  essential  to  the  final  reward  of  the  Christian." 

Ver.  12,  A  pillar. — A  figure  from  the  use  of  pillars  in  supporting  ancient  temples.  The 
classical  architecture  involves  the  use  of  pillars.  See  Gal.  ii,  9.  *'  What  pillars  are  to  a 
temple,  literally  considered,  the  like  will  such  Christians  as  those  in  Philadelphia  be  in  the 
spiritual  temple  built  by  the  Saviour."  The  idea  of  established,  permanent  goodness  is 
suggested.  And  the  man  who  proves  strong  under  strain  is  made  a  strengthener  and 
supporter  of  others.  My  new  name. — Inscriptions  were  often  made  on  pillars,  and  they 
have  been  actually  found  on  the  sides  of  the  four  marble  pillars  which  survive  as  ruins  at 
Philadelphia.  The  allusion  is  to  the  golden  frontlet  inscribed  with  the  name  of  Jehovah 
(chap.  xxii.  4  ;  see  also  ix.  4  ;  illustrate  by  Exod.  xxviii.  36).  Stuart  says  :  "  The  name  of  God, 
inscribed  on  one's  forehead,  designates  the  generic  idea  of  one  devoted  to  objects  and 
purposes  spiritual  and  heavenly ;  the  name  of  the  New  Jerusalem  marks  the  peculiar  city  to 
which  the  conqueror  belongs;  tlie  new  name  is  that  which  is  peculiar  to  the  Christian  as 
such — to  a  disciple  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  With  such  a  distinction  impressed  upon  him, 
or  at  least  borne  upon  the  fiontlet  of  his  mitre,  the  conqueror  would  be  recognised  and 
acknowledged  by  all  as  entitled  to  his  place  in  the  New  Jerusalem." 

Ver.  14.  Laodiceans. — The  city  of  Laodicea  was  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Lycus,  near 
Hierapolis  and  Colossae,  Archippus  was  possibly  the  angel  of  this  Church,  in  the  sense  of 
being  its  chief  pastor.  Laodicea  received  its  name  from  Laodice,  wife  of  Antiochus,  the  j 
second  King  of  Syria,  by  whom  it  was  re-built  and  beautified.  Amen, — Here  only  used  as  a  ' 
personal  name.  Faithful. — In  the  sense  of  trustworthy  (see  chap.  i.  5),  "  Trench  suggests  the 
three  things  necessary  to  constitute  a  true  witness.  He  must  have  been  an  eye-witness  of 
what  he  relates,  possess  competence  to  relate  what  he  has  seen,  and  be  willing  to  do  so." 
But  the  assertion  is  here  made  in  view  of  the  severity  of  the  message  sent  to  this  Church. 
However  searching  and  severe,  it  is  assuredly  faithful  and  true.  Beginning  of  the  creation. 
— See  Col,  i,  15.  This  may  mean,  the  first  of  a  new  spiritual  creation,  or  th.e  Author  of 
creation — the  material  world  being  conceived  of  as  due  to  the  agency  of  the  Divine  Son  ;  or 
the  first  created  being ;  or  the  beginning  (in  the  active  sense)  of  the  creation ;  i.e.y  the 
Creator  of  all  things — primary  source  of  all  creation.  The  appropriateness  of  this  declaration 
concerning  Christ  comes  to  view  as  we  realise  the  special  temptations  of  this  Church  to  the 
worship  of  inferior  divinities,  "Like  Colossae,  this  Church  was  exposed  to  the  risks  of 
angelolatry,  of  the  substitution  of  lower  principalities  and  created  mediators  for  Him  who 
was  head  over  all  things  to  His  Church," 

Ver.  15.  Cold  nor  hot, — Plumptre  suggests  that  it  was  specially  exposed  to  the  chilling  and 
enervating  influence  of  wealth.  To  passionate  and  intense  natures  there  is  nothing  so  irritat- 
ing as  the  "  superior"  man  who  can  always  keep  the  happy  medium,  and  never  gets  excited 
about  anything.  Wealthy  people  are  especially  tempted  to  take  things  easy,  to  take  even 
their  rehgion  easy.  "  The  term  '  hot '  denotes  the  temper  of  fervent  love,  a  love  that  warms 
and  animates  the  whole  life,  the  temper,  we  must  remember,  of  the  apostle  who  records  the  ^ 
message."  The  term  "cold"  simply  implies  the  abj^ence  of  enthusiasm.  "The  tepid 
temperature  has,  as  its  physical  effect,  the  sickening  sense  of  nausea,  and  in  its  moral  aspect 
causes,  in  most  earnest  minds,  a  loathing  that  is  not  roused  by  the  state  described  as 
'  cold.' " 

Ver.  17.  Sayest, — In  a  spirit  of  blind  self-confidence.  Eich. — Lit.  "  I  am  rich,  and  have 
gotten  riches,"  The  repetition  implies  satisfaction  in  the  riches  (Hos.  xii.  8),  "Wretched. — 
The  worst  kind  of  hypocrites — hypocrites  without  knowing  it.  There  is  no  more  subtle  peril 
than  self-deception  concerning  our  spiritual  condition — the  self-deception  that  comes  of 
self-confidence. 

Ver.  18.  Buy  of  me. — There  is  perhaps  a  touch  of  irony  here.  Gold  tried. — Lit.  "fresh 
burnt  from  the  fire."    Eye-salve, —  Collyrium  was  the  common  dressing  for  weak  eyes. 

Ver.  19,  Bebnkeand  chasten. — See  Prov.  iii.  11  ;  Heb.  xii.  5,  Zealous. — Implying  rousing 
themselves  out  of  their  careless,  lukewarm  temper. 

Ver.  20.  Stand  at  the  door,—  Compare  Song  of  Solomon  v.  2. 

Ver.  21.  My  throne.  .  .  ,  His  throne. — Both  to  be  treated  as  figures.  "  The  promise  of 
sharing  the  throne  is  the  climax  of  an  ascending  series  of  glorious  promises,  which  carry  the 
thought  from  the  Garden  of  Eden  (chap  ii,  7)  through  the  wilderness  (ver,  17),  the  temple, 
(chap.  iii.  12)  to  the  throne."  The  conquerors  in  the  strife  are,  "in  some  sense  which  we 
cannot  as  yet  fathom,  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  Nature  "  (2  Pet.  i.  4) — sharers  in  the 
holiness,  the  wisdom,  the  love,  and  therefore  in  the  glory  and  the  majesty,  which  have 
been  from  everlasting." 

473 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—6. 

Death  and  Life  and  Peril  of  Life  in  a  Christian  Church. — There  is  scarcely 
more  than  a  doubtful  allusion,  in  this  epistle,  to  the  secular  or  religious  conditions 
of  the  city  of  Sardis.  That  some  of  the  members  of  the  Church  had  not  "  defiled 
their  garments  "  implies  that  there  was  some  peculiar  peril  of  moral  defilement 
in  their  daily  associations.  There  are  ruins  of  a  stately  temple  still  remaining, 
which  was  dedicated  to  the  mother-goddess  Cybele  ;  and  her  ''  worship,  with  its 
eunuch  priesthood  and  its  orgiastic  rites,  was  one  which  tended,  as  much  almost 
as  that  of  Dionysos  or  Aphrodite,  to  sins  of  a  foul  and  dark  impurity."  The 
city  was  a  very  interesting  one.  It  was  famous  for  its  purple  dye,  for  its  coinage, 
and  for  the  manufacture  of  a  compound  metal,  known  as  electrum.  It  was  the 
ancient  capital  of  the  Lydian  monarchy,  and  through  its  agora,  or  market-place, 
flowed  the  Pactolus,  with  its  golden  sands.  But  this  epistle  directs  exclusive 
attention  to  the  Christian  Church  in  Sardis,  and  it  is  chosen  as  one  of  the  seven 
Churches  to  receive  direct  messages  from  the  Living  Christ,  because  it  was,  in 
some  way,  a  typical,  or  representative,  Church  ;  and  in  connection  with  it  may 
be  illustrated  the  universal  Divine  dealings  with  Churches  that  answer  to  this 
type.  In  what,  then,  is  this  Church  a  type  of  certain  Christian  Churches  which 
may  be  found  in  every  age  ?  Its  most  marked  peculiarity,  the  consequences  of 
which  the  searching  Spirit  of  Christ  discovers  and  brings  out  to  view,  is,  that 
the  Church  had  been  left  for  years  in  quietness  and  peace.  It  had  not  been 
touched  by  any  of  the  persecutions  that  had  afflicted  sister  Churches.  The 
members  lived  as  citizens  in  the  esteem  of  their  neighbours,  not  rousing 
opposition  by  any  active  resistance  of  the  heathenism  around,  but,  perhaps 
in  an  exaggerated  and  unworthy  way,  "  following  peace  with  all  men."  The 
apparent  consequence  was  a  look  of  well-to-do-ness  ;  a  general  prosperity ;  much 
orderliness  of  public  service ;  fair  charities ;  and  conditions  that  seemed  to 
indicate  healthy  Christian  life.  Sardis  had  the  name  and  repute  of  a  living 
Church.  But  there  are  peculiarly  subtle  influences  always  bearing  upon 
individuals,  and  nations,  and  Churches,  that  go  on  a  long  time  in  undisturbed 
and  prosperous  quietness,  with  no  changes  to  put  virtue  to  the  proof,  and  no 
warfare  to  put  noble  qualities  to  exercise.  The  supreme  moral  peril  for  a  man 
is  found  in  years  of  continued  and  unqualified  worldly  prosperity.  The  supreme 
test  of  a  nation  comes  in  prolonged  periods  of  peace.  And  Churches  that  never 
know  storm,  or  stress,  or  strain,  are  in  grave  danger  of  dropping  down  into 
listlessness  and  worldliness.  The  one  thing  that  the  individual,  the  nation,  and 
the  Church,  lose  in  periods  of  unbroken  outward  material  prosperity,  is  spiritual 
life^  soul  life.  Bodily  life,  material  life,  social  life,  thrive  well  under  such 
conditions,  and  they  may  come  even  to  simulate,  or  stand  instead  of,  spiritual 
life  ;  but  souls  grow  in  times  of  conflict  and  trial.  Pressure  of  distress,  affliction, 
or  evil,  forces  the  soul  into  the  activity  in  which  alone  it  can  thrive.  Of  some 
it  is  said  in  God's  Word,  and  in  a  very  striking  way,  "  Because  they  have  no 
changes,  therefore  they  forget  God."  Life — soul  life — cannot  do  with  long- 
continued  smoothness  and  ease.  The  law  is  an  ever- working  one,  "Through 
much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the  kingdom." 

"  The  path  of  sorrow,  and  that  path  alone, 
Leads  to  the  place  where  sorrow  is  unknown." 

The  prophet  Jeremiah  illustrates  the  truth  by  a  very  suggestive  figure :  *'  Moab 
hath  been  at  ease  from  his  youth,  and  he  hath  settled  on  his  lees,  and  hath  not 
been  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel,  neither  hath  he  gone  into  captivity  ;  therefore 
his  taste  remained  in  him,  and  his  scent  is  not  changed"  (Jer.  xlviii.  11).  The 
Church  in  Sardis,  then,  is  a  type  of   those  Churches  that  have  known  years 

474 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.       chap.  liI. 


of  unbroken  outward  prosperity  and  peace.  We  always  are  disposed  to  make 
mistakes  about  such  Churches,  and  to  over-estimate  their  spiritual  condition. 
The  Living  Christ,  who  ''  walketh  among  the  candlesticks,"  makes  no  mistakes. 
Let  us  see  what  He  may  be  finding,  to-day,  to  be  the  truth  concerning  such 
Churches,  by  what  He  found  to  be  the  actual,  rather  than  the  apparent,  state 
of  the  Church  in  Sardis.  In  dealing  with  the  previous  Churches,  we  have  seen 
that,  in  each  case,  the  Living  Christ  is  pictured  as  present  in  a  precise  relation  to 
the  conditions  and  needs  of  the  Church.  That  is  equally  true  in  this  case.  We 
have  to  be  assured  that  He  is  never  deceived,  or  carried  away  by  mere  appearances. 
He  goes  in  behind  the  show  of  things  to  the  inward  reality.  He  can  searchingly 
search.  He  can  deal  with  motives.  He  can  test  for  signs  of  spiritual  life.  So 
He  is  figured,  in  relation  to  Sardis,  as  having  the  seven  Spirits,  or  the  perfect 
Spirit  of  God.  He  has  the  Divine  eye,  which  the  psalmist  felt  "  searched  and 
knew  him,"  and  which  the  Christian  teacher  spoke  of  as  "  discerning  the 
thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."  The  Church  in  Sardis  might  be  so  satisfied 
with  itself  that  it  would  find  it  hard  to  believe  it  could  be  as  Christ  declared 
it  was.  Let  them  know,  then,  that  the  Living  One,  who  moved  among  them, 
saw  secrets  with  absolute  precision,  for  He  had  the  seven  Spirits  of  God.  There 
can  be  no  appeal  from  His  searching  inspection,  and  unhesitating  decision.  But 
that  is  not  all  the  figure  in  which  Christ  is  presented  to  this  Church.  He  is 
also  "  He  that  hath  the  seven  stars."  Now,  the  "  stars "  are  the  angels,  or 
ministers,  of  the  Churches  ;  and  this  allusion  to  the  Living  Christ  as  having, 
or  holding,  the  stars  in  His  right  hand,  is  evidently  intended  to  suggest  that  He 
meant  to  subject  the  minister  of  this  Church  in  Sardis  to  an  unusually  searching 
test.  It  was  possible  that  he  might  be  found  as  spiritually  dead  as  were 
the  average  of  the  members  of  the  Church.  It  might  even  be  that  his  yielding 
to  subtle,  worldly  influences  had  sealed  the  spiritual  death  of  the  Church.  "  His 
faith,  as  well  as  the  faith  of  the  Church,  may  have  sunk  into  a  superficial, 
though  perhaps  an  unostentatious,  state."  And  if  so,  it  was  well  that  the 
Divine  rebukes  should  seem,  in  a  very  direct  way,  to  be  pointed  at  him.  In  the 
inspection  of  this  Church  notice — 

I.  The  Living  Christ  does  not  stop  with  mere  signs  of  life. — There  is  almost 
an  abruptness  in  the  way  in  which  they  are  mentioned,  and  brushed  aside.  "  I 
know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name,  that  thou  livest."  "  These  things  bring 
you  men's  praise,  and  even  men's  confidence,  but  I  am  not  interested  in  them ; 
I  want  to  know  what  is  behind  them."  The  show  and  the  fame  of  Christian 
life  is  not  always  a  genuine  expression  of  spiritual  life.  Many  a  consumptive 
patient  makes  a  brave  show  of  life  when  he  is  just  dropping  into  the  grave. 
Other  things  besides  spiritual  life  can  secure  the  commonplace  goodness  of  a 
man,  and  of  a  Church.  A  moral  man  may  not  be  a  Divinely  quickened  man. 
An  apparently  healthy  Church  may  have  really  lost  its  vitality.  The  leaves 
of  the  tree  do  not  fall  at  once  when  the  fresh  springs  of  sap  are  stopped  in  their 
flowing.  Presently,  if  there  be  no  sustaining  life,  the  signs  of  life  will  surely 
fail.  But  when  the  Living  Christ  searched  the  Church  in  Sardis,  audits  minister, 
the  evil,  the  spiritual  death,  was  only  in  its  beginnings.  The  tone  of  His  address 
is  more  than  usually  severe.  The  conditions  were  subtle.  The  discovery  of  the 
insidious  evil  was  physician's  work.  The  seeming  flush  of  health  really  was  but 
the  hectic  flush  of  disease.  The  very  little,  dull,  but  steady,  pain  and  swelling, 
of  which  no  notice,  was  taken,  was  the  sign  of  cancerous  growth,  and  a  living 
death.  Signs  of  life  in  a  Church  !  Services  maintained;  numbers  increasing; 
propriety  of  conduct  winning  public  respect;  generous  meeting  of  responsibilities; 
service  of  charity  to  the  poor  ;  kindly  sympathies  with  one  another  in  times  of 
sorrow ; — Christ,  the  Living  Christ,  passes  them  by,  with  a  glance  of  approval ; 
they  are  good  as  far  as  they  go.     He  goes  in  behind  them  to  test  the  vitality, 

475 


cflAP.  m.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


the  spiritual  life,  of  which  they  should  be  the  expression.  And  He  may  have 
to  say,  *'  I  know  thy  works ;  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest,  and  thou  art 
dead."  "  In  Sardis  there  had  been  no  open  scandals.  It  was  still  recognised  by 
the  other  Churches  as  a  living  and  true  member  of  the  great  family  of  God — was 
even,  it  may  be,  winning  their  admiration  for  its  seemingly  energetic  vitality. 
And  yet  the  chill  and  the  paralysis,  which  were  the  forerunners  of  the  end, 
were  slowly  creeping  in  upon  its  life ;  death,  not  life,  was  already  master  of  the 
position,  the  dominant  characteristic  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  and  perhaps 
of  its  spiritual  ruler  in  particular  "  [Plumptre). 

II.  The  Living  Christ  is  anxious  about  flagging  life. — Nothing  can  be  done 
by  agencies  within  the  Church's  control  for  those  in  the  fellowship  who  are  quite 
spiritually  dead.  There  is  no  hope  for  them,  save  in  the  awakening  trump  of 
some  direct  Divine  dealing.  But,  while  this  may  be  the  condition  of  a  few,  the 
Living  Christ  fixes  attention  on  those  whose  vital  force  was  but  failing — who  were 
but  beginning  to  die.  And  the  searching  Eye  noticed  that  it  was  on  certain 
sides  of  Christian  life  that  they  had  begun  to  die,  as  trees  show  signs  of  hastening 
death  in  particular  branches.  This,  however,  only  made  their  spiritual  condition 
the  more  perilous,  because  they  might  easily  be  satisfied  with  the  things  into 
which  spiritual  life  still  streamed,  and  might  fail  to  see  the  significance  of  the 
death  that  was  doing  its  work  in  other  things.  When  we  live,  crediting  ourselves 
with,  and  getting  the  credit  of,  superior  piety,  it  is  very  easy  to  blind  ourselves  to 
the  actual  conditions  of  spiritual  peril  in  which  we  are  found.  But  there  is  hope 
in  dealing  with  those  whose  spiritual  life  is  only  flagging.  The  Living  Christ 
bids  them  "  establish  the  things  that  remain  "  alive,  but  "  are  ready  to  die." 
He  tells  them  that  He  had  not  found  their  works  perfect,  they  were  not  good, 
not  alive,  all  round  the  tree,  and  the  death  in  some  of  the  branches  would 
inevitably  spread  to  all  the  other  branches.  And  He  solemnly  warns  them — 
with  a  most  arousing  warning — that  when  deadly  disease  stealthily  creeps  upon 
a  man,  and  is  left  unchecked,  it  has  a  way  of  leaping  upon  him  at  last,  and 
clutching  him  with  one  hopeless  grip.  They  will  find  it  even  so  with  flagging, 
diseased,  deteriorated,  spiritual  life.  "  If,  therefore,  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will 
come  as  a  thief,  and  thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee." 
Plumptre  says :  "  The  angel  of  the  Church  is  called  to  wake  up  from  his  slumbers, 
and  then  to  strengthen  in  himself  the  energy,  the  zeal,  the  love,  the  hope,  the 
faith,  which  were  so  nearly  dying  out.  In  doing  this  he  could  not  fail  to  help 
the  persons,  also,  in  whom  this  flagging  of  all  spiritual  vigour  had  been  most 
conspicuous,  or,  in  the  language  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  *  to  lift  up  the 
hands  that  hang  down,  and  strengthen  the  feeble  knees.'  " 

III.  The  Living  Christ  recognises  those  in  the  Church  who  are  truly  and 
healthily  alive.  — For  such  there  always  are,  even  in  a  spiritually  decaying  and 
dying  Church.  The  Lord  always  has  His  "  remnant."  In  a  prosperous  Church 
they  are  often  found  among  those  who  are  poor  in  this  world's  esteem.  And 
almost  always  they  are  found  among  the  severely  afflicted  ones — those  who  have 
the  trials  and  persecutions  in  their  own  personal  experiences,  which  the  Church, 
as  a  Church,  may  so  perilously  lack.  They  are  always  the  salt  of  the  Church, 
the  hope  of  the  Church.  And  they  are  sure  to  gain  the  loving  recognition  of 
the  Living  Lord  who  "  walks  among  the  candlesticks."  But  the  description  given 
of  the  sign  of  life  in  them  which  their  Lord  recognises  is  singular  and  suggestive. 
"  Thou  hast  a  few  names  in  Sardis  which  did  not  defile  their  garments."  They 
walked  the  foul  highways  of  immoral  Sardis  clean.  But  the  suggestion  is  not 
one  of  merely  careful,  watchful  walking — one  of  mere  ordering  of  conduct  and 
relationship.  It  reminds  us  of  Christ  Himself,  who  walked  the  earth  in  spotless 
white,  though  He  touched  the  leper  and  ate  with  sinners.  He  had  such  vigorous 
life  in  Him  that  neither  His  soul  nor  His  body  could  take  stains.     That  is  the 

476 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION.       chap.  hi. 


idea  of  the  undefiled  few.  They  have  such  vigorous  spiritual  life  that  as  they 
go  to  and  fro  among  defiled  men  and  things  they  take  no  stains  ;  they  throw  off 
all  infections  ;  cleanness  and  health  are  guaranteed  to  them  by  vigorous  life. 
And  these  shall  "  walk  with  Christ  in  white."  They  shall  come  into  such  a  near 
and  sympathetic  fellowship  with  Him  as  only  they  can  know  who  are  alive  as 
He  is  alive.  If  it  be  true  that  death  creeps  on  from  a  spot  to  a  limb,  and  from 
a  limb  to  a  vital  organ,  we  need  not  miss  seeing  the  answering  truth — that  life 
is  active  to  resist  encroaching  death.  Every  really  living  Christian  in  a  Church 
is  an  active,  energetic  power.  The  undefiled  few  preserve,  as  does  the  salt ;  they 
work  as  does  the  leaven ;  they  spread  as  does  life  ;  they  fight  evil  and  death, 
even  as  the  White  One  Himself  ever  did,  and  does.  The  hope  of  every  Sardis  lies 
in  her  present,  searching  Lord,  and  in  her  "  undefiled  few." 

IV.  The  Living  Christ  encourages  effort  to  recover  life  by  giving  gracious 
assurances  and  promises. — "  To  him  that  overcometh  "  the  stealthy,  insidious 
influence  of  this  prolonged  Church  prosperity  and  peace,  that  braces  himself  to 
resist  the  evil,  and  nourishes  his  soul-life  into  healthy  vigour  and  activity,  these 
assurances  come.  "  He  shall  be  arrayed  in  white  garments  " — a  fitting  array  for 
the  white-souled,  and  for  the  servants  of  the  White  Christ.  Their  whiteness  shall 
come  out  and  clothe  them,  and  so  take  the  attention  of  men  and  be  a  powerful 
witness  for  Christ.  Their  "  name  shall  not  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  of  life,"  as 
the  names  of  the  dead  citizens  must  be,  and  the  names  of  the  dying  citizens  are 
in  peril  of  being.  And  the  Living  Christ  shall  find  His  personal  pleasure  in 
them.  He  shall  speak  about  them  to  His  Father  and  to  the  angels ;  glad  in 
those  who  are  quick,  and  strong,  and  healthy,  in  that  Divine  life  they  have 
through  Him.  "  I  will  confess  his  name  before  My  Father,  and  before  His 
angels."  '*  He  that  hath  an  ear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  "  unto  the 
Church  in  Sardis.  Beware,  lest  any  of  you  succumb  to  the  oppressive  moral 
atmosphere  that  is  around  the  Churches  of  Christ  in  these  days  of  national 
prosperity,  wealth,  worldhness,  and  peace.  In  that  atmosphere,  spiritual  life 
finds  it  hard  to  thrive.  It  has  this  subtle  influence  upon  us  :  it  nourishes  self- 
indulgent  life,  mental  life,  artistic  life,  and  even  a  sort  of  philanthropic  life; 
and  Churches  are  so  easily  deceived  with  these  things,  and  induced  to  call  them 
spiritual  life.  And  then  the  real  spiritual  life  moves  slowly  in  the  veins  of  the 
Church,  and  then  it  becomes  stagnant  in  places,  and  then  it  mortifies.  He  who 
hath  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  looks  at  the  facts,  not  at  the  seeming,  and  behold. 
He  must  say  this  :  "  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou  hast  a  name,  that  thou  livest, 
and  art  dead."  Dead  in  places,  dying  in  other  places — only  a  few  parts  really 
alive.  W^hat  an  alarming  picture  of  a  Christian  Church  !  This  is  the  arousing 
warning  given  to  it :  "  Remember,  therefore,  how  thou  hast  received  and  didst 
hear,  and  keep  it  and  repent.  If,  therefore,  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will  come 
as  a  thief,  and  thou  shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee."  Resist 
the  creeping  lethargy,  arouse  yourselves,  shake  off"  the  sleep  of  hastening  death. 
Be  among  those  who  overcome  and  live,  and,  because  alive,  walk  the  earth  with 
the  Living,  White  Christ. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  1.  A   Name   to  Live. — It  is  the  that   the   adoption   of    habits   of    life 

reputation  for  piety  possessed  by  the  higher   than    those   around    them,    or 

Church  at  Sardis  which  is  referred  to.  those  who  lived    before  them,  was  no 

Living  with  the  credit  of  superior  piety,  guarantee  of  real  spiritual  life  ;  for,  as 

it  was  easy  to  grow  satisfied  with  the  Mozhy  says,  "  the  real  virtues  of  one 

reputation,  and  to  forget  to  keep  open  age  become  the   spurious  ones  of  the 

the  channels  through  which  grace  and  next.  .  .  .  The  belief  of  the  Pharisees, 

life  could  flow,  and  to  fail  to  realise  the  religious  practice  of  the  Pharisees, 

477 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


was  an  improvement  upon  the  life  of 
the  sensual  and  idolatrous  Jews  whom 
the  prophets  denounced.  But  those 
who  used  both  the  doctrinal  and  moral 
improvements  as  the  fulcrum  of  a 
selfish  power  and  earthly  rank,  were 
the  same  men,  after  all,  as  their  fathers, 
only,  accommodated  to  a  new  age." 
Self-satisfaction,  which  springs  up  when 
a  certain  reputation  has  been  acquired, 
is  the  very  road  to  self-deception.  The 
remedy  is  progress,  forgetting  the  things 
behind,  lest,  looking  with  complacency 
on  the  past,  moral  and  spiritual  stag- 
nation should  set  in,  and  spiritual  death 
should  follow. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

Seven  Spirits  of  God. — The  Spirit  is 
thought  of,  to  use  the  later  terminology 
of  the  Nicene  creed,  as  the  "  Giver  of 
life,"  and  of  all  its  sevenfold  gifts  ;  the 
seven  Spirits  of  chaps,  i.  4  and  v.  6 
were  but  forms  of  that  Divine  life  which 
He — one,  yet  manifold — imparted.  He 
also  "  hath  the  seven  stars,"  which 
represent  the  guides  and  teachers  of  the 
Church ;  He  is  able,  that  is,  to  bring 
together  the  gifts  of  life,  and  the  minis- 
try, for  which  those  gifts  are  needed. 
If  each  star  shines  with  its  peculiar 
radiancy,  it  is  because  it  is  under  the 
power  and  influence  of  the  sevenfold 
Spirit ;  if  it  has  no  life  or  light,  and 
ceases  to  shine,  there  is  the  danger  of 
its  falling  away  from  its  place  in  that 
glorious  band  and  becoming  as  one 
of  the  "  wandering  stars,  to  whom  is 
reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for 
ever  "  (Jude  ver.  13). — Dean  Flunnptre. 

True  Church  Life. — The  Church  to 
whom  this  statement  was  made  was 
that  of  Sardis,  and  the  remarkable 
thing  is  that  this  strong  condemnation 
is  pronounced  while  yet  no  flagrant 
vices  are  charged  upon  its  members. 
They  appear  to  have  been  sound  in 
creed,  respectable  in  conduct ;  yet,  after 
all,  they  were  dead. 

I.  There  are  certain  things  which 
secure  for  a  Church  a  good  name, 
which  yet  are  no  sure  indications  of 
spiritual  life. — 1.  Numbers  may  give 
a  name  to  live  while  yet  there  may  he 

478 


death.  2,  Wealth  may  give  a  name  to 
live.  3.  The  absence  of  immoral  con- 
duct is  no  sure  indication  of  life.  4.  A 
sound  creed  is  no  indication  of  a 
Church's  life,  because  it  may  have 
been  departed  from,  or  a  Church  may 
put  the  creed  in  place  of  the  Saviour, 
or  its  members  may  have  gone  soundly 
to  sleep  upon  its  sound  creed. 

II.  A  sure  indication  of  life  is  the 
fruit. — "  I  know  thy  works."  The 
threefold  test  of  a  Church's  life  is — 
1.  Works  of  faith.  2.  Works  of  love. 
3.  The  patience  of  hope.  The  patience 
of  hope  is  the  work  of  hope.  "  If  we 
hope  for  that  we  see  not,  then  do  we 
with  patience  wait  for  it."  This 
patience  is  not  simply  quiet  waiting,  it 
is  also  actiA^e  perseverance.  Hope  is 
the  mainspring  of  effort,  and  a  hopeful 
Church  will  be  a  persevering  Church, 
with  no  such  word  as  weariness  in  its 
vocabulary. — W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D. 

Ver.  4.  The  Undefiled  Few.— To  the 
Church  in  Sardis  the  message  is  one  of 
almost  unmingled  reproof.  Christ  is 
represented  as  having  the  seven,  or 
perfect.  Spirits  of  God,  therewith  look- 
ing this  Church  through  and  through; 
going  in  behind  the  appearances  of 
life,  discerning  the  beginnings  of 
spiritual  death.  Sardis  was  a  tree 
fair  to  look  upon,  with  leaf  and  flower ; 
but  the  blight  had  stricken  it — the 
blight  of  worldliness  and  self-indulgence. 
But  that  Eye,  which  is  so  quick  to 
detect  the  evil,  is  yet  more  lovingly 
quick  to  discern  the  feeblest  traces  of 
good.  "  Even  in  Sardis "  that  Eye 
rested  on  an  undefiled  few,  who  were 
steadfast  in  heart,  who  were  clinging 
to  Him  in  trustful  love,  who  were 
trying  to  walk  the  soiling  streets  of 
Sardis  with  unspotted  garments.  Such 
as  they  Christ  will  never  pass  over  in 
forgetf ulness ;  such  true  and  earnest 
hearts  need  great  comfortings ;  they 
shall  have  them,  if  need  be,  from  the 
very  lips  of  Jesus.  To  such  He  says, 
"  They  shall  walk  with  Me  in  white, 
for  they  are  worthy." 

I.  The  undefiled  few.— 1.  The  figure 
used  of   unstained  garments  indicates 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.       chap.  iii. 


those  who  have  not  brought  disgrace  with  them,  to  make  them  white.     He 

upon   their    Christian    professions   by  uses  the  yaried  forms  of  earth- tribula- 

their   outward    Hfe.       This  is,  indeed,  tion  as    His  agents.     As   the  process 

only  one  of  the  lowest  forms  of  Christ-  goes    on    through    the    ages,    we   get 

ian  virtue.       2.    But   more  than  this  occasional    glimpses    of  the    heavenly, 

is   meant.     Sardis   was   famous,    even  and  there  some  sanctified  wholly.     The 

among  the  degraded  cities  of  that  day,  book  closes  with  the  vision  of  the  Holy 

for   the    abandoned    profligacy   of   its  City  for  the  holy  ones,  and  the  cry  to 

inhabitants.    In  comparison  with  those  Jesus  to  hasten  the  perfecting  of  His 

around  them,  their  garments  were  un-  work. 

defiled.      3.    There    is    yet   a   deeper  I.    We   are   not    white. — St.   John 

reference   here.      The   truly  undefiled  says,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin 

are  they  who  keep  up  their  integrity  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is 

of  heart,  amidst  all  the  faintings  and  not  in  us."     It  is  the  fact  concerning 

fallings  of  their  life.  us  all,   that  we    "  have  not  kept  our 

II.  Their  present  power. — In  every  garments  unspotted  from  the  world." 
branch  of  life,  or  phase  of  history,  you  We  could  not  bear  the  searching  of  the 
find  God  has  had  a  few  who  were  full  sunshine,  or  the  testing  of  the 
leaders — leaders  of  thought,  opinion,  spring-time.  The  White  One  searches 
enterprise,  active  efibrt,  and  pure  all  who  are  satisfied  with  themselves 
living.  These  are  the  salt,  preserving  — searches  words,  thoughts,  affections, 
the  rest  from  corruption.  Such  was  tone,  relations.  How  severe  His 
the  service  of  the  few  in  Sardis.  searchings  are,  is  seen  in  His  messages 

III.  Their  future  glory.  —  This  to  the  Seven  Churches  of  Asia, 
appears  to  embrace  two  things  :  Ephesus  had  left  its  first  love,  Smyrna 
1.  They  who  struggle  after  goodness  needed  tribulation.  There  were  a  few 
now,  shall  find  themselves  settled  in  things  against  Pergamos.  Thyatira 
goodness  then  for  ever.  2.  Above  all,  was  self-indulgent.  Sardis  had  a 
these  undefiled  few  shall  have  a  com-  name  to  live,  but  was  dead.  Phila- 
munion  with  Christ  of  an  extraordinary  delphia  had  but  *'  a  little  "  strength." 
intimacy  and  preciousness.  "  They  shall  Laodicea  was  lukewarm.  However 
walk  with  Him  in  white."  self-satisfied    we    may    be,    revealing 

times  are  sure  to  come,  which  humble 

Walking     in      White. — White      can  us  in  the  dust.     This  is  our  severest 

hardly  be  called  a  colour.     It  is  the  testing.     True  whiteness  will  not  take 

soul   of    a    thing   shining   through    a  stains,    any    more    than    Christ    took 

simple     and      transparent      medium.  leprosy.     The  only  thing  that  can  be 

White  shows  the  purity  that  a  thing  is.  said  of  us  is,  we  have  not  been  among 

Illustrated     by    the      white      cactus.  stains.      Who   of   us   is   clean     every 

White  is  the  emblem  of  innocence  for  whit? 

children,  and  virtue  for  the  redeemed.  II.    Christ   is    white. — Let    us  say, 

Illustrate   priests  in    white.      Church  was    white,    that    we   may   feel    His 

dressed    as   Bride — snow,    wool,    pure  was  a   human    whiteness ;    and    that 

spring  flowers.       The    text   is   in  the  whiteness,  kin  to  us.    He  has  carried 

book  of  Revelation.     Can  that  book  be  above.      This  is    the    impression   left 

won  for  Christian  uses  ?     The  key  to  by  the  scene   of   the  Transfiguration. 

it   is   white,  whiteness.     Explain    the  This    impressed   the    apostles.      They 

prologue  as  a  thesis  worked  out  in  the  speak  of  Him  as  "  holy,  harmless,  un- 

book.       Compare    the    gospel    of    St.  defiled."      He   "  did  no  sin."     This  is 

John,  which  has  a  similar  beginning  the  point   of   the   vision   seen   by  St. 

thesis.     The  first  chapter  is  the  vision  John.       God   could    see  no   stains   on 

of   the   Living,  White  Christ.     He  is  Him,  though  He  walked  earth's  high' 

with   His   Churches.      He   finds   that  way.     Man   has   tried  his    utmost   to 

they  are   alj   not-white.      He  is  ever  find  stftins  pn  Christ ;  and  what,  at  th^ 

479 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


most,  do  they  ever  find  ?  Destruction 
of  the  swine,  egotism,  whip  of  cords, 
cursing  of  fig-tree.  Do  not  say  He 
was  white  because  He  was  God.  He 
was  white  as  man.  Then  there  must 
be  a  secret  in  His  human  whiteness. 
It  was  His  sanctified  Will.  The  blood  is 
the  physical  life.  The  Will  is  the  moral 
life.  The  blood  must  be  pure.  The 
Will  must  be  right.  Our  trouble  is 
that  our  Will  is  not  right,  therefore 
stains  come  and  stay. 

III.  Christ  is  working  to  make  us 
white  as  He  is. — He  wants  it.  It  is 
the  aim  of  His  infinite  love.  In  our 
deep  hearts  we  want  it.  Why  do  we 
so  love  white  flowers  ?  Have  you  lost 
the  present,  living,  cleansing,  saving 
Christ  out  of  your  life  ?  Are  you  only 
resting  in  something  He  once  did  ? 
Then  you  have  not  learned  the  lesson 
of  the  book  of  Revelation.  Then  you 
have  not  seen  the  supreme  glory  of 
Christ.  He  maketh  white.  He  is 
making  white.  In  two  ways.  1.  As 
sunshine  make  sails  look  white. 
2.  As  washing  makes  white  paper  in 
the  paper  mills.  The  book  of  Revela- 
tion describes  God's  tearers,  and 
chemicals,  and  rollers.  (1)  The  great 
Son  cannot  bear  to  see  any  stains  on 
His  brothers.  Therefore  He  refines,  as 
silver  is  refined,  seven  times.  (2)  The 
great  Son  wants  His  own  purity  for 
every  brother.  His  is  purity  within. 
We  are  anxious  about  a  covering  robe. 
The  robe  of  immortality  lets  the  white 
(that  we  have  become)  shine  through. 
This,  then,  is  Christ's  present  work  in 
us — His  sanctifying  of  tribulation.  He 
is  getting  our  Wills  turned  wholly  to 
righteousness.  Death -time  is  the  final 
process  in  the  cleansing  of  the  Will. 
In  recognition  of  this,  we  get  white 
wreaths  for  the  dead.  Christ's  glory 
for  the  future  is  this  :  we  shall  be  clean, 
as  He  is.  He  can  work  on  to  secuie 
that  end.     He  can  make  us  suffer  in 


securing  that  end.  And  we  ought  to 
respond  to  His  worki  ng  in  us.  Triumph 
for  the  sin -stained  is  the  Christ- won, 
everlasting,  white  robe.  What  becomes 
of  bodies  or  of  garments  that  keep  on 
getting  stained,  and  never  get  washed  ? 
It  suggests  the  future  of  all  who  are 
out  of  Christ. 

Ver.  5.  Erasure  of  Names  from  the 
Book  of  Life. — "  A  process  of  erasure 
is  ever  going  on,  besides  the  process  of 
entering.  When  the  soul  has  finally 
taken  its  choice  for  evil ;  when  Christ 
is  utterly  denied  on  earth  and  trodden 
under  foot ;  when  the  defilement  of 
sins  has  become  inveterate  and  inde- 
lible ; — then  the  pen  is  drawn  through 
the  guilty  name ;  then  the  inverted 
style  {stylus)  smears  the  wax  over  the 
unworthy  characters;  and  when  the 
owner  of  that  name  applies  afterwards 
for  admittance,  the  answer  is,  "I  know 
thee  not :  depart  hence,  thou  willing 
worker  and  lover  of  iniquity  !  '^ — Dr. 
Vaughan. 

Christ's  Book  of  Life, — I.  Christ 
has  His  Book  of  Life,  a  register  and 
roll  of  all  who  shall  inherit  eternal 
life. — 1.  The  book  of  eternal  election. 
2.  The  book  of  remembrance  of  all 
those  who  have  lived  to  God,  and  have 
kept  up  the  life  and  power  of  godliness 
in  evil  times. 

II.  Christ  will  not  blot  the  names 
of  His  chosen  and  faithful  ones  out  of 
this  Book  of  Life. 

III.  Christ  will  produce  this  Book 
of  Life,  and  confess  the  names  of  the 
faithful  who  stand  there  before  God 
and  all  the  angels. — He  will  do  this 
as  their  Judge,  when  the  books  shall 
be  opened ;  he  will  do  this  as  their 
Captain  and  Head,  leading  them  with 
him  triumphantly  to  heaven,  present- 
ing them  to  the  Father. — Matthew 
Henry. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  7—13. 

A  Church  Above  Censure. — Godet  says  :  *'  No  church  receives  richer  praise  than 
Philadelphia,  the  sixth  ;  it  seems  as  if  she  had  but  one  step  to  make  in  advance 
to  obtain  her  admittance  into  the  church  triumphant."     Three  f£|,cts  connected 

480 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       ohap.  in. 


with  Philadelphia  may  be  noted,  as  having  some  historical  interest :  1.  Like 
Sardis,  it  had  severely  suffered  from  the  great  Asiatic  earthquake  in  the  reign 
of  Tiberius.  2.  That  of  all  the  Seven  Churches  it  had  the  longest  duration  of 
prosperity  as  a  Christian  city,  and  is  still  a  spacious  town,  with  the  remains 
of  not  less  than  twenty-four  churches.  3.  That  of  all  the  seven  its  name  alone 
appears  in  the  catalogue  of  modern  cities.  We  may  assume  that  the  address 
was  sent  directly  to,  and  in  precise  adaptation  to,  a  particular  person,  the  *'  angel 
of  the  Church  "  ;  but  he  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  embodiment  of,  and  representa- 
tion of,  the  whole  Church. 

I.  A  Church  with  an  ability.—"  Thou  hast  a  little  strength."  And  He  recog- 
nises the  "  little  "  who  never  "  breaks  the  bruised  reed  nor  quenches  the  smoking 
flax."  The  little  strength  suggests  that  the  Church  had  been  subjected  to  severe 
strain,  but  had  not  lost  its  vitaUty.  It  had  been  weakened,  but  it  had  not  lost 
hold.  The  difference  between  this  and  other  Churches  lay  in  this :  the  Living 
One  saw  them  weakening  and  losing  vitality ;  He  saw  this  one  keeping  its  life 
nnd  trying  to  get  its  full  strength.  Their  light  was  going  out;  its  light  was 
trying  hard  to  keep  in.  It  is  precisely  that  "  little  strength  "  which  Christ  still 
looks  for.  It  is  the  sign  of  ability  ;  it  is  a  basis  of  possibilities — a  sphere  in  which 
Divine  grace  can  hopefully  work.  Churches  cannot  but  feel  the  strain  of 
circumstances  and  persecutions,  they  cannot  but  be  weakened  thereby.  But 
they  need  not  wholly  faiL  Even  under  the  extremest  pressure  they  can  keep  a. 
"little  strength." 

II.  A  Church  with  an  opportunity. — "  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door." 
That  figure  distinctly  indicated  special  opportunities  for  engaging  in  the 
missionary  work  of  the  Church.  It  is  a  special  honour  for  a  Church  to  have 
such  opportunities  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  in  the  generous  missionary  activities 
of  a  Church  are  to  be  found  the  best  security  for  its  continued  vitality.  The 
Church  alive  enough  to  do  earnest  Christian  work  is  alive  enough  to  resist 
the  influence  of  evil.  Recalling  the  texts  in  which  the  figure  of  the  open  door 
is  used,  Plumptre  says  :  "In  all  these  cases  the  open  door  refers  to  the  admission 
of  the  Gentile  converts  into  the  great  house  of  God,  the  widening  opportunities 
for  the  mission  work  of  the  Church  which  the  providence  of  God  placed  in  the 
preacher's  way.  That  phrase  must,  in  the  nature  of  things,  have  become  current 
in  the  Churches  which  owed  their  very  existence  to  the  labours  of  St.  Paul ; 
and  when  it  came  to  the  ear  and  was  recorded  by  the  pen  of  St.  John,  it  could 
not  fail  to  recall  the  same  thought  and  to  signify  the  same  thing."  No  greater 
sign  of  Divine  approval  can  come  to  a  Church  than  the  opening  before  it  of 
larger  and  wider  possibilities  of  usefulness. 

III.  A  Church  with  a  security. — "  I  also  will  keep  thee."  God  always  is  to 
His  people  as  they  are  to  Him.  He  meets  them,  responds  to  them ;  is  always 
as  they  are,  but  always  better  to  them  than  they  are  to  Him.  "  With  the 
merciful  Thou  wilt  show  Thyself  merciful."  Keep  the  faith,  then  ;  God  will  keep 
the  promise.  The  keepers  will  be  kept  ones.  "  He  who  had  *  kept  the  word  of 
the  endurance  of  Christ,'  the  message  which  bade  him  endure,  should  in  his  turn 
be  '  kept '  from  (or  in)  that  hour  of  trial  or  temptation,  the  '  fiery  trial '  of 
1  Pet.  iv.  12,  which  was  about  to  spread  over  the  '  whole  world '  of  the  Roman 
Empire." 

IV.  A  Church  with  a  fixity. — "  Will  I  make  a  pillar."  The  main  idea  of  a 
pillar  is  of  a  thing  put  to  an  important  and  responsible  service,  and  permanently 
kept  to  the  doing  of  its  work.  Goodness  is  sure  to  get  permanency.  And  good 
work,  missionary  service,  shall  gain  continuity.  Nothing  shall  hinder  the  work 
of  the  Church,  and  it  shall  be  its  joy  to  keep  at  work.  Of  this  we  may  always 
be  sure :  more  work  comes  as  our  reward  for  faithfulness  in  using  opportunities 
given. 

n  481 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  7.  Key  of  David. — Some  early 
commentators  saw  in  this  key  the  key 
of  knowledge  which  the  scribes  had 
taken  away  (Luke  xi.  52),  and  under- 
stood this  expression  here  as  implying 
that  Christ  alone  could  unloose  the 
seals  of  Scripture  and  reveal  its  hidden 
truth  to  men.  In  support  of  this  they 
refer  to  chap.  v.  7-9.  The  fault  of  the 
interpretation  is  that  it  is  too  limited ; 
it  is  only  a  corner  of  the  full  meaning. 
He  who  is  "  the  True  "  alone  can  un- 
lock the  hidden  treasures  of  truth. 
But  the  use  of  the  word  "  David," 
and  the  obvious  derivation  of  the  latter 
part  of  this  verse  from  Isa.  xxii.  22, 
points  to  a  wider  meaning :  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  true  Steward  of  the 
House  of  David  (compare  Heb.  iii. 
2,  5,  6).  The  faulty,  self-seeking 
stewards,  the  Shebnas  of  Jerusalem 
and  Philadelphia,  vainly  claimed  a 
right  of  exclusion  from  synagogue  or 
church,  where  Jesus,  the  God-fixed 
nail  in  the  sure  place,  upon  which 
the  bundle  of  earth's  sorrows  and  sins 
might  securely  be  suspended  (Isa.  xxii. 
23-25),  the  Eliakim  of  a  greater  Zion, 
had  the  key  of  the  sacred  and  royal 
house.  In  this  the  chamber  of  truth 
was  one  treasure,  as  the  chamber  of 
holiness,  the  chamber  of  rest,  the 
chamber  of  spiritual  privileges,  were 
others.  In  other  words,  though  in  a 
sense,  the  keys  of  spiritual  advantages 
are  in  the  hands  of  His  servants,  "  He 
still  retains  the  highest  administration 
of  them  in  His  own  hands."  The  power 
of  the  keys  entrusted  to  apostles  gave 
them  no  right  to  alter  "  the  essentials 
of  the  gospel,  or  the  fundamental 
principles  of  morality." — Bishop  Boyd 
Carpenter, 

True  Mora  Strength. 

I.  Its  connection  with  Christ. — 
1.  He  recognises  it  (ver.  7).  A 
glorious  and  faithful  description  of 
Christ  is  this.  He  is  holy,  true, 
supreme.  2.  He  honours  it  (ver.  8). 
He  is  the  key  of  all  spheres,  and  opens 

482 


a  sphere  of  usefulness  for  the  morally 
strong.  3.  He  imparts  it.  He  is  the 
moral  power.  All  true  moral  strength 
is  derived  from  Him.  What  power 
He  had  over  circumstances.  Society, 
temptation  ! 

II.  Its  influence  over  error  (ver.  9). 
— These  Jews  were  of  the  **  synagogue 
of  Satan."  He  had  synagogues  then ; 
he  has  churches  and  chapels  now.  The 
general  idea  is  that  false  religion  shall 
pay  homage  to  Christian  moral  power, 
which  comes  in  contact  with  it  as 
(1)  a  morality;  (2)  an  institution; 
(3)  a  theology.  It  appeals  to  man's 
craving  after  self-interests,  worship, 
truth. 

III.  Its  future  reward. — 1.  Pre- 
servation (ver.  10).  The  strong  in 
truth  and  Christ  have  ever  been, 
and  ever  will  be,  supported  in  trial. 
2.  Visitation  (ver.  11).  Death  comes 
to  usher  us  into  everlasting  blessed- 
ness. 3.  Exaltation  (ver.  12).  Three 
ideas      here  :       1.      Stability — pillar. 

2.  Utility — a    pillar    is    a    support. 

3.  Divinity — "  write  upon  him  the 
name  of  My  God." — Caleb  MooTis. 

Ver.  11.  ^^  Behold,  I  come  quickly. ^^ 
Possibly  the  bishop  of  the  Church  at 
Philadelphia  was  Demetrius  (John  iii.). 
If  this  is  the  case,  we  have  before  us  a 
holy  man,  who,  probably,  was  not  a  very 
resolute  one,  and  was  placed  in  a  posi- 
tion of  much  difficulty.  Such  a  bishop 
had,  as  a  rule,  two  kinds  of  difficulties 
to  contend  with.  There  was  a  fermenta- 
tion of  thought  on  the  frontiers  of  the 
apostolic  Church  in  which  Jewish  and 
heathen  ingredients  were  constantly 
producing  one  or  another  form  of  so- 
called  Agnostic  error — one  phase  of 
which  is  described  in  the  epistle  to  the 
Colossians,  and  another  phase  in  the 
epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus ;  and  this 
was  a  constant  subject  of  anxiety  to 
the  primitive  rulers  of  the  Churches  of 
the  Lesser  Asia.  Besides  those  dangers 
from  within,  there  was  the  constant 
danger  of  popular  violence,  or  of  official 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       chap.  ill. 


persecution,  from  without.  Each  Jewish  to  Him  what  they  mean  to  us.     "  One 

synagogue,  and,  still  more,  each  heathen  day  is  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand 

temple,   was  the  centre   of    a   strong  years."      To  us  **  long "  and   "  short " 

anti- Christian  fanaticism  which  might  are  only  comparative  epithets ;    they 

at  any  moment  arouse  the  passions  too  mean   a    comparison    of    some    given 

violently  to  be  appeased  with  anything  period  of  time  with  sonie  other  which 

short  of  bloodshed.     Demetrius — if  he  we  have  before  our  minds.     To  God  a 

was   the   bishop — had    hitherto   made  period  may  be  little  enough  by  com- 

head  against  the  anxieties  around  him.  parison  with  the  standard  of  eternity. 

Hitherto  he  had  kept  the  Word,  he  had  *' Quickly"  is  a  relative  term,  which 

not  denied  the  name  of  Christ,  he  had  may  mean  one  thing  when  man  uses 

the   promise   which   past    faithfulness  it,  and  another  when  it  is  uttered  by 

always  commands,  while,  at  the  same  the   Eternal    Being.      In    death    our 

time — since  no  such  promise  can  suspend  Lord  comes  to  each  of  us.     There  are 

man's  freedom  to  rebel  or  to  obey — he  two  things  about  death  which  are  full 

is  warned  of  the  urgent  duty  of  perse-  of  meaning,  and  which  do  not  admit  of 

verance.  If  our  Lord's  words  are  under-  any  sort  of  contradiction.     The  first  is 

stood  of  His  Second  Coming,  it  is  obvious  the  certainty  that  it  will  come  to  each 

that  we  must  assume  the  good  bishop  of  us  some  day ;  and  the  second  is  the 

of  Philadelphia  died  without  witnessing  utter  uncertainty  of  the  day  on  which 

their  fulfilment — nay,  he  has  been  in  it  will  come.     When  the  end  before  us 

his  grave  for  something  like  eighteen  is  so  certain,  and  the  date  of  its  ap- 

cen tunes,  and  our  Lord  has  not  yet  proach  so  utterly  uncertain,  man's  true 

come   to   judgment.      The   event    has  wisdom  cannot  be  doubtful.     It  is  a 

shown  that  the  predictions  uttered  by  matter  on  which  the  most  clear-sighted 

our  Lord  at  the  close  of  His  ministry  philosophy  and  the  most  fervid  religious 

referred  only  remotely  to  His  Second  faith  are  entirely  agreed :  it  is  to  sit 

Coming,     and     immediately     to     the  easily  to  the  things  of  time;  it  is  to 

destruction   of   Jerusalem.      But   this  keep  the  eye  fixed  on  that  which  will 

saying  of  our  Lord,  "Behold,  I  come  follow  after  time;  it  is,  day  by  day,  to 

quickly,"  cannot  have  referred  to  the  untwine   the   bands   and  cords  which 

destruction  of  Jerusalem  ;  and  yet,  if  it  scenes  and  persons  among  whom  we 

meant  the  Second  Advent,  the  bishop  live  here  are  constantly  winding  around 

of   Philadelphia   did   not   witness   the  our  hearts,  that  we  may  be  ready  at  a 

fulfilment  of  it,  and  it  is  still  unfulfilled.  short  notice  to  quit  them  for  the  world 

St.  Peter  warned  Christians  that  this  in  which  all  is  lasting  and  all  is  real, 

delay  would  be  used  in  after  times  as  Duty  will  not  be  done  less  thoroughly 

an     argument     against    Christianity,  because  done  while  conscious  that  this 

The  scoffers  would  probably  rest  rather  is  a  passing  scene,  since,  if  it  is  done 

on     the    indefinite    postponement    of  rightly,  it  will  be  with  an  eye  to  that 

Christ's  coming,  than  on  any  supposed  higher    existence    for    which   it   is   a 

intrinsic  impossibility  attaching  to  it.  preparation.     The  expected  coming  of 

St.  Peter  meets  this  by  reminding  us  Christ   throws   a   flood  of   light  upon 

that  God  necessarily  looks  at  time  in  a  various   aspects    of   human   existence, 

very  different  way  from  that  in  which  We  are  struck  with  the  insignificance 

man  looks  at  it.    To  man  it  seems  that  of   life.       If    Christ's    coming    means 

an  event  will  never  arrive  which  has  been  anything,    it   means   the   introduction 

delayed  for  some  centuries,  and  so  that  of   a   life    which    has    no    end.      The 

judgment,  long  apprehended,  but  long  coming  of   the   Lord  means   thut   all 

delayed,  will  not  really  take  place  at  all,  the  wrong-doing  and  the  passions   of 

but  may  well  at  once  be  classed  among  men,  which  create  so  much  misery,  will 

the  phantoms  of  a  morbid  and  disordered  have   had   their  day.      It   means   the 

brain.   With  God  it  is  otherwise.    Long  exercise  of  man's  highest  powers  to  the 

and  short  periods  of  time  do  not  mean  fullest   extent  of   their   capacity,    the 

483 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


beginning  of  an  existence  in  which 
thought  and  heart  and  Will  will  rest  in 
perfectly  ecstatic  satisfaction  on  their 
one  true  Object,  and  an  existence  which 
will  last  for  ever.  If  a  large  number 
of  human  beings  are  disposed  to  look 
almost  exclusively  upon  the  darker  side 
of  life  here,  there  are  others  who 
regard  it  chiefly  as  an  opportunity  for 
enjoyment,  and  often  of  lawful  enjoy- 
ment. The  pleasures  of  sense,  kept 
within  limits,  do  promote  happiness. 
But  the  devotion  to  the  pleasures  of 
sense  is  an  illusion  which  will  vanish  at 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Many 
value  wealth  as  a  means  of  gratifying 
ambition.  They  value  the  considera- 
tion and  respect  which  are  paid  to  high 
position.  The  coming  of  Christ  is  the 
coming  of  One  who  has  taken  the 
measure  of  human  life,  and  Who,  by 
His  incarnation  and  His  death,  has  put 
His  own  mark  and  certificate  on  real 
greatness.  Many  devote  themselves  to 
knowledge  of  polite  letters.  That 
pleasures  of  intellect  are  higher  than 
those  of  sense,  and  even  higher  than 
those  of  public  life,  is  sufficiently  in- 
disputable. But  the  seat  of  true  enjoy- 
ment or  happiness  is  not  in  the  intel- 
lect; it  is  in  the  heart.  There  are 
those  to  whom  the  service  of  God,  mani- 
fested in  His  blessed  Son,  incarnate, 
crucified,  and  risen  for  man,  is  the  main 
object  of  human  life — men  who,  living 
in  this  world  and  doing  their  duty  in  it 
to  the  best  of  their  power,  yet  are  not 
of  it ;  men  who  set  their  affections  on 
things  above  and  not  on  earth,  and  look 
forw^ard  to  the  day  "  when  He  who  is 
their  life  shall  appear,"  in  the  humble 
hope  that  they  too  will  appear  with 
Him  in  glory.  For  them  Christ's 
message  is  sent :  "  Behold,  I  come 
quickly ;  hold  fast  that  which  thou 
hast,  that  no  man  take  thy  crown." — 
Canon  Liddon. 

Ver»  12.  Monuments  in  Heaven. — 
In  every  one  of  the  seven  epistles  to 
the  Churches  our  Lord  describes  his 
correspondents  as  so  many  warriors. 
Nothing  is  promised  but  to  "  him  that 
overcometh."      What   is  the    promise 

484 


announced  by  the  Captain  of  our 
salvation  to  him  who  has  bought  a 
sword,  and  finally  achieved  a  victory  ? 

I.  Some  great  change  must  be 
wrought  in  men  before  they  could 
suitably  be  likened  to  pillars  in  a 
temple. ^ — More  is  made  in  Scripture  of 
the  vanity  of  the  soul  by  nature  than 
of  the  body  by  nature.  We  shall  do 
wrong  unless  we  take  the  benefit  of 
the  contrast  between  what  sin  makes 
us,  and  what  Jesus  Christ  makes  us. 
If  the  Christian  is  a  pillar,  we  must 
not  imagine  he  is  a  pillar  of  support, 
as  being  necessary  to  the  temple.  The 
pillars  are  to  be  thought  of  as  pillars 
of  commemoration.  Monumental 
pillars  were  reared  in  the  Grecian 
cities  of  Europe  and  of  Asia,  within 
the  temples  of  their  gods,  to  celebrate 
a  battle  and  announce  a  victory.  The 
monument  was  sanctified  by  the  temple, 
and  the  temple  was  adorned  by  the 
monument.  The  simple,  bold  doctrine 
of  the  similitude  amounts  to  this,  that 
a  good  man,  in  glory,  will  preserve  the 
fame  of  his  victories  fresh  in  the 
memories  of  eternity ;  he  himself  will 
be  the  monument  of  past  battles,  past 
conquests.  The  Christian  will  live  on, 
to  tell  his  own  tale  among  the  ranks  of 
the  redeemed.  The  Christian  warrior, 
in  truth,  never  dies,  for,  the  moment 
when  he  drops  his  sword  on  the  blood- 
red  plains  of  the  Militant  Church, 
without  a  moment  of  inaction  he  passes 
to  chronicle  his  prowess  in  the  Church 
Triumphant. 

II.  The  assertion  that  the  good  man 
in  glory  will  be  his  own  monument 
must  nevertheless,  be  qualified. — How 
far  have  we  got  ?  Only  to  the  point 
that  a  warrior  in  Christ's  army  shall  be, 
in  heaven,  a  memorial  of  the  battles  he 
fought  on  earth,  just  as  the  pillars  in 
the  temple  preserved  the  exploits  of 
the  ancients;  only  with  this  great  differ- 
ence, that  the  pillars  of  antiquity  have 
long  since  been  removed,  but  the  pillars 
of  the  Church  will  remain  for  ever. 
But  what,  after  all,  is  a  pillar?  Has 
the  marble  monument  done  anything? 
If  you  think  of  the  marble  is  it  not 
wholly  and  entirely  as  the  workman- 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,       chap..iii. 


ship  of   the   artist   who  chiselled  and      the  sweetest  and  richest  of  all. — Henry 

fashioned  it  ?     You  really  look  at  the      Christopher  son, 

characters  on  the  sculpture :  you  look  ^.7,  ,,  *  ±^\      n      ^ 

.  .  r  r  xu  ^       t        4.U  Gibbon   says :    *'  Anions   the  Greek 

at  the  names  or  the  men  to  whom  the         1     •  ,  Vii        1         r.°  a   •      -r^i  -i 

11  •        -u  J      wTx.      'i.  •        A  colonies  and  Churches  01  Asia,  Fhila- 

marbles  are  inscribed.     When  it  is  said  1  i   1  •     •       .-n  ^  ^  • 

4-1,  4.  j-i     ni,  •  4--  -n  \.  4-  delphia  is  still  erect — a  column  m  a 

that  the  Christian  will  be  a  monument  c        •  ^      -  ^ 

.     1-       ir      1    .    •     ..!•       ir»r)     \T7u  scene    or    ruins — a   pleasing   example 

to  himseli,  what  is  "  himselr    ?     Who  .1    ,    ,1  .i        ^  ^  j       r  4. 

•     I.    1     T    -4.  4-    4.1,    V,  £  4.U  i^hat  the  paths  or   honour  and  satety 

IS  he  I     Is  it  to  the  honour  or  the  man  f-         i_    ^i  » 

,,    ,    ,1        -n  -11  u        4.  •     4-1,  i^^y  sometimes  be  the  same, 

that  the  pillar  will  be  set  up  in  the  ^^ 

temple?     What  of  the  inscription  on  The     Pillar   a   Monument. — 1.     He 

the  pillar  1     If  the  monument   is  not  shall  be  a   monumental  pillar  in  the 

for  itself,  for  whom  is  it  ?     God's  name  temple  of  God  ;  not  a  pillar  to  support 

is   first   on   the   monument.     ''  I  will  the    temple    (heaven    needs    no   such 

write  upon  him  the  name  of  My  God."  props),  but  a   monument   of  the  free 

Then  comes  the  name  of  the  city  of  and  powerful  grace  of  God — a  monu- 

God,  the  new  Jerusalem.     And  then  ment  that  shall  never  be  defaced  nor 

the  new  name — "  Immanuel,  God  with  removed,    as     many     stately     pillars 

us."      The    source    of    your     victory,  erected    in    honour     to    the     Roman 

the  motive  of   your  victory,  and,  last  emperors    and    generals    have     been. 

and  best,  the  Author  of  your  victory.  2.    On  this    monumental  pillar  there 

I  am  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  shall  be  an  honourable  inscription,  as 

only  because  upon  me,    if  I  conquer,  in  those  cases  is  usual.     (Illustrate  by 

three   other    names  will  be    inscribed  the    names     inscribed     on     the    Arc 

above — God;  Heaven;  Immanuel.    My  d'Etoile  in  Paris).     On  this  pillar  shall 

only,  or  chief,  reward  is  to  be,  that  I  be  recorded   all   the   services  the    be- 

shall  display  to  the  myriads  of  God's  liever  did  to  the  Church  of  God,  and 

creatures  the  exceeding  riches  of  His  there  shall  also  be  put  the  new  name 

grace.     This  would  be  no  promise  to  of  Christ,  the  Captain   of  His  salva- 

others,  but  to  the  child  of   God  it  is  tion. — Matthew  Henry. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  14—22. 

A  Self- Satisfied  Church. — The  city  of  Laodicea  was  situated  between  Phila- 
delphia and  Colossse.  It  was  either  actually  founded,  or  re-built,  by  Antiochus 
II.,  the  King  of  Syria,  and  named  after  his  wife,  Laodice.  In  St.  John's  day  it 
was  celebrated  for  its  wealth,  which  was  derived  chiefly  from  commerce.  In  the 
interest  of  the  apostle  Paul,  the  Church  in  Laodicea  was  associated  with  the 
Church  in  Colosse.  Neither  of  those  Churches,  however,  seem  to  have  enjoyed 
his  personal  ministry,  for  writing  to  the  Colossians  he  says,  "  For  I  would  have 
you  know  how  greatly  I  strive  for  you,  and  for  them  at  Laodicea,  and  for  as 
many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh  "  (Col.  ii.  1).  He  refers  to  an  earnest 
Christian  work  which  one  of  His  disciples,  Epaphras,  had  done  in  Laodicea  and 
the  neighbouring  towns,  and  the  form  in  which  he  sends  his  message  to  Archippus 
suggests  that  this  person  was  the  angel,  or  minister,  of  the  Church  at  Laodicea 
(Col.  iv.  12-17).  The  tone  of  St.  Paul's  references  indicate  considerable  anxiety 
concerning  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  Church,  and  we  can  well  understand 
that,  under  the  enervating  influence  of  increasing  wealth,  the  evils  that  he 
noticed  and  feared  grew  into  perilous  strength  in  the  latter  days  of  St.  John,  and 
gave  occasion  to  the  most  cutting  and  reproachful  of  the  seven  epistles.  The 
key-note  to  the  moral  condition  of  this  Church  is  found  in  its  wealth.  It  was 
not  disturbed  by  heresies,  or  broken  up  by  persecutions.  Its  members  were  in 
comfortable  circumstances.  The  services  could  be  maintained  without  strain, 
there  was  nobody  in  the  Church  of  a  contentious  disposition  to  disturb  the  peace, 
so  they  had  drifted  into  an  easy-going  way,  and  satisfied  themselves  with  simply 

485 


\ 


.CHA^iii.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION. 


\ 


keeping  things  up  to  a  fair  average  level.     Their  full  strength  went  into  their 
weekly   money-getting,    and  they  got  through  their  Sabbath  obligations  and 
duties  as  respectably  and  as  easily  as  they  could.     It  would  be  very  possible  to 
find  an  instance  of  just  such  a  Church  in  these  days  of  ours ;  for  Laodicea  is  a 
type,  and  a  type  as  distinct  as  either  of  the  others  to  which  attention  has  been 
drawn.     It  is  full  of  suggestion  to  us  that  the  Living  Christ,  moving  to  and  fro 
among  the  Churches,  is  arrested   by   the  actual  condition  of  this  apparently 
prosperous  Church.     It  reminds  us  that  He  who  has  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  is 
never  deceived  by  the  appearance  of  prosperity  in  a  Church,  but  searcbingly 
estimates  its  tone,  and  mood,  and  temper,  and  may  thus  discover  and  reveal 
a  condition  of  things  which  will  altogether  surprise  the  members  of  the  Church, 
who   may  expect  commendation,  and  have   to   receive   severe   reproaches   and 
warnings.     We  have  seen  that  some  particular  feature  of  the  vision  of  the  Risen 
and  Living  One  is  taken,  in  order  to  point  the  application  to  each  Church.     Here 
He  who  walketh  among  the  candlesticks  is  figured  as  "  the  Amen,  the  faithful 
and  true  witness,  the  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."     Amen  is  not  elsewhere 
used  as  a  personal  name.     It  means,  *'  verily,"  and  is  the  firm  assertion  that  a 
thing  is  true,  and  so  it  can  be  made  a  proper  name,  and  stand  for  Him  who  is 
the  truth.     The  word  the  Living  One  had  to  speak  to  this  Church  would  surprise 
and  humiliate  it.     And  the  very  first  response  that  the  Church  would  make, 
when  it  received  the  message,  would  be  this :  "  It  is  not  true  ;  it  cannot  be  true." 
The  very  possibility  of  such  a  response  must  be  anticipated,  and  guarded  against, 
so  the  epistle  begins  with  the  solemn  declaration  that  it  comes  from  Him  who  is 
the  absolute  and  indisputable  truth,  the  "  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  witness." 
Dean   Plumptre  thinks  that  the  words    "  faithful    and    true   witness "  should 
be  regarded  simply  as  the   Greek  equivalent  of  the   Hebrew   word    "  amen." 
It  affirms  the  competency  of  the  Living  One  to  make  this  testimony,  seeing  that 
He  combines  in  Himself  all  those  qualifications  which  a  witness  ought  to  possess. 
The  other  form  in  which  the  Living  One  is  presented  is  more  difficult  to  explain. 
*'  The  beginning  of  the  creation  of  God."     It  is  probably  the  solemn  assertion  of 
His  absolute  and  perfect  knowledge  of  all  things,  from  the  very  beginning.    From 
Him  nothing  is  hid.     Efibrt  has  been  made  to  explain  this  term  by  comparing  it 
with  the  figures  found  in  the  epistle  to  the  Colossians — "  First-born  of  every 
creature,"  "first-born  from  the  dead" — and  by  assuming  that  the  Laodicean 
Church  was  exposed  to  the  temptation  of   worshipping  inferior  principalities. 
But  this  is  to  bring  in  a  set  of  new  ideas,  unrelated  to  the  point  of  the  Divine 
message.     He  who  is  truth,  sees  truly,  and  witnesses  truly,  has  something  to 
say  to  which  this  Church  is  bound  to  give  good  heed,  however  it  may  surprise 
and  distress  them.  * 

I.  And  what  is  the  message  ? — L  It  is  a  searching  revelation  of  the  Church's 
unrecognised  weaknesses.  And  the  first  thing  noticed  is  its  listless  indifference. 
It  was  lukewarm  about  everything.  It  was  dying,  as  Churches  can  die,  of 
moderation  and  respectability.  It  might,  in  its  apparently  sound  and  safe 
prosperity,  be  the  envy  of  other  Churches.  Its  very  evenness,  its  persistently 
keeping  at  a  dead  level,  was  a  supreme  ofience  to  Christ.  Nobody  in  the  Church 
brought  any  disgrace  upon  the  Christian  name,  but  nobody  brought  any 
particular  honour  upon  the  Christian  name.  The  Church  did  not  make  the 
holy  and  inspiring  witness  of  consistency  in  keeping  at  a  high  level  of  Christian 
attainment  and  service.  It  was  simply  easyful,  indifierent,  content  to  go  on, 
aiming  at  nothing  and  doing  nothing.  The  "  lukewarm  are  neither  earnest  for 
God,  nor  utterly  indifierent  to  religion.  They  are  perhaps  best  described  as  those 
who  take  an  interest  in  religion,  but  whose  worship  of  their  idol  of  good  taste, 
or  good  form,  leads  them  to  regard  enthusiasm  as  ill-bred  and  disturbing ;  and 
who  have  never  put  themselves  to  any  inconvenience,  braved  any  reproach,  or 

486 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.       chap.  iii. 


/ 


abandoned  any  comfort,  for  Christ's  sake,  but  hoped  to  keep  well  with  th^'^rld, 
while  they  flattered  themselves  that  they  stood  well  with  Grod."  Such  a  state 
of  lukewarmness  is  unreal  and  sickly,  and  yet  thinks  that  it  is  a  true  and  healthy 
state.  Carlyle  calls  it  "  the  hypocrisy  which  does  not  know  itself  to  be 
hypocritical."  2.  But  the  Living  Christ,  in  searching  this  Church,  does  not  stop 
even  with  thus  showing  the  fact  of  its  condition.  He  reveals  the  root  of  the  evil, 
in  the  spirit  of  self-satisfaction  which  has  gained  power  in  the  Church,  and  has 
eaten  out  its  heart  of  love  and  zeal  for  Christ.  "  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am  rich, 
and  have  gotten  riches,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  Dean  Plumptre  says :  "  The 
vmderlying  grounds  of  the  condemnation,  the  secret  working  of  this  tepidity  of 
the  soul,  are  brought  before  us  in  these  words.  It  is  clear  that  the  imagined 
wealth  here  is  that  of  spiritual,  not  temporal,  riches.  In  regard  to  the  latter, 
the  boast  would  probably  have  been  true,  and  would  have  called  for  no  such 
stern  contrast.  And  yet  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  it  was  the  possession  of  the 
riches  of  this  world  that  made  the  Laodicean  angel  and  his  Church  so  satisfied 
that  they  had  the  riches  of-  the  other.  They  took  the  *  unrighteous  mammon,' 
not  only  as  a  substitute  for  the  '  true  riches,'  but  almost  as  a  proof  that  they 
possessed  them.  Outward  ease  and  comfort  took  the  place  of  inward  peace ; 
prosperity  was  thought  a  sure  sign  of  Divine  approval.  We  cannot  read  the 
history  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  or  look  around  us,  or  retrace  our  own  experience, 
without  feeling  that  it  has  often  been  so,  both  with  Churches  and  individual 
men.  Lethargy  creeps  over  them  ;  love  is  no  longer  active ;  material  success, 
multiplied  endowments,  the  power  of  giving  money  as  the  one  embodiment  of 
love  to  God  or  man — these  have  been  the  precursors  of  decline  and  of  decay." 
The  man  who  is  in  a  comfortable  and  well-satisfied  frame  of  mind,  because  all 
his  material  wants  are  thoroughly  provided  for,  can  seldom  be  brought  to  believe 
that  his  spiritual  state  can  possibly  be  wrong.  And  it  is  precisely  the  same 
with  a  Church  that  experiences  years  of  steady  and  unbroken  prosperity;  it 
becomes  so  hopelessly  satisfied  with  its  spiritual  state,  that  it  resents  even  the 
searching  appeals  of  the  ever-living  Head  of  the  Church.  And  there  is  no 
condition  for  the  individual  and  for  the  Church  so  dangerous  as  that  self- 
satisfied  frame  of  mind.  In  spiritual  things  it  has  need  of  nothing.  Its 
spiritual  state  is  quite  satisfactory  to  itself,  and  unless  that  self-satisfaction  can 
be  broken  up,  and  the  truth  of  its  spiritual  condition  revealed  to  it,  that  self- 
satisfaction  will  surely  bring  its  doom.  3.  With  an  almost  withering  severity, 
the  Living  Christ  declares  that  the  self-satisfaction  the  Church  was  nourishing 
as  to  its  spiritual  state  was  but  a  sign  of  its  moral  blindness.  If  they  could  see 
facts,  they  would  see  that,  as  a  Church,  they  were  "  poor,  and  miserable,  and 
blind,  and  naked.  They  were  not  even,  as  they  assumed,  keeping  to  a  fair 
spiritual  level.  They  had  sunk  low  :  they  had  lost  tone.  They  thought  them- 
selves rich,  but  where  were  their  spiritual  riches  ?  Could  they  show  them  when 
called  upon  to  do  so  ?  Where  were  their  spiritual  garments  ?  Could  they 
appear  clothed  in  them  when  called  upon  to  do  so  ?  The  Living  Christ  suddenly 
calls  upon  them  to  bring  forth  the  signs  of  their  spiritual  life.  They  can  find 
none,  and  now  their  blindness  is  forcibly  removed,  and  they  are  compelled  to 
appear  before  Him  as  they  are,  and  to  see  themselves  as  they  are,  poor,  and 
miserable,  and  blind,  and  naked.  What  a  humiliation  !  "  The  sin  of  this 
Church  came  out  of  its  being  too  comfortable.  It  was  not  serious  enough  about 
anything.  And  this  is  often  the  secret  of  self-centredness.  It  satisfies  a  man 
with  his  narrow  circle  of  interests — which,  like  the  famous  chamber-prison  of 
fable,  is  ever  narrowing  and  narrowing,  until  at  last  it  crushes  all  life  worth 
living  out  of  the  man. 

II.  And  what  is  the  advice  given  by  the  Risen  and  Living  Lord  ? — '*  I  counsel 
thee  to  buy  of  Me  gold  refined  by  fire,  that  thou  mayest  become  rich ;  and  white 

487 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


garments  that  thou  mayest  clothe  thyself,  and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness 
be  not  made  manifest ;  and  eye-salve  to  anoint  thine  eyes,  that  thou  mayest  see." 
Precisely  the  work  for  the  sake  of  which  the  Living  Christ  is  ever  moving  among 
the  Churches  is  the  rehabilitation  of  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Churches.  The 
condition  of  this  Church  was  had,  but  it  was  not  hopeless.  Something  could  be 
done.  Provision  for  the  recovery  of  position,  and  health,  and  spiritual  tone, 
were  at  command.  That  provision  can  be  supplied  only  by  the  Church's  awaking 
from  her  lethargy,  beginning  really  to  care  for  its  spiritual  condition,  mourning 
over  the  condition  into  which  it  had  allowed  itself  to  drift,  and  making  fresh, 
direct,  personal  applications  to  her  Lord  for  reviving  and  restoring  grace.  In 
his  "  Holy  War  "  Bunyan  pictures  Mansoul  awakened  to  recognise  the  Laodicean 
state  into  which  it  had  fallen,  filled  with  zealous  anxiety,  and  sending  messengers, 
with  pleading  entreaties,  to  her  absent  Emmanuel.  '•  Buy  of  Me,"  as  only  we 
can  buy  of  Christ ;  with  penitence,  and  zeal,  and  prayer,  and  holy  yearnings,  but 
without  money  and  without  price.  "  The  gold  "  which  Christ  will  thus  "  sell "  to 
him  who  seeks  it — the  treasure  of  holiness,  and  peace,  and  joy — is  that  which  has 
been  "  tried  in  the  fire  "  ;  and  this,  as  in  all  like  cases,  implies  chastisement  and 
suffering.  The  ''  white  garments  "  that  hide  the  shame  of  nakedness,  the  true 
holiness  of  life  which  alone  prevents  the  exposure  of  that  "  inner  vileness  "  of 
which  even  the  saints  of  God  are  ever  painfully  conscious,  are  those  which  have 
been  made  white  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  which  symbolises  suffering.  The 
*'  eye-salve "  which  gives  clearness  of  vision,  does  so,  not  without  the  pricking 
smart  that  clears  away  the  blinding  or  beclouding  humours.  And  the  counsel 
is  urged  by  this  gracious  persuasion ;  the  Living  One  who  rebukes  them,  loves 
them,  and  rebukes  them  because  He  loves  them.  For  love  can  never  let  sin 
alone  when  it  finds  sin  in  the  objects  of  its  love.  And  the  love  that  rebukes  will 
not  stop  with  rebuke ;  it  will  go  on  to  chastening,  it  will  be  followed  by  discipline 
that  may  secure  full  deliverance  from  the  sin.  The  very  familiar  ver.  20 
receives  its  proper  explanation  only  by  observing  its  insertion  at  this  precise 
point  of  the  epistle.'"  It  is  usual  to  sever  it  entirely  from  its  connection,  and  to 
regard  it  a  figure  of  Christ's  seeking  admission  to  the  human  heart.  And  that 
may  be  justifiable,  but  it  was  not  in  the  mind  of  this  writer,  nor  does  it  bear 
direct  relation  to  the  subject  of  this  epistle.  In  Holman  Hunt's  suggestive 
picture,  *'  The  Light  of  the  World  "  is  represented  as  an  august  person,  artistically 
and  symbolically  arrayed,  standing  with  a  lamp  in  his  hands  under  a  midnight 
sky,  on  the  outside  of  a  walled  enclosure,  the  entrance-gate  of  which  is  barred. 
He  stands  as  one  who  has  knocked  over  and  over  again,  and  received  no  answer  ; 
and  you  observe  that  the  wild  vine  and  bramble  have  grown  over  the  gate, 
showing  how  long  and  resolutely  it  has  been  closed.  But  in  this  epistle  the 
Christ  is  the  Living  White  One  standing  at  the  door  of  a  Church.  He  has  come 
to  deliver  His  searching  and  arousing  rebukes.  He  stands,  as  it  were,  outside  to 
deliver  His  rebuke  ;  and  now  He  v/aits — *'  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks " — 
waits  to  see  if  the  Church  will  respond  aright,  and  give  Him  welcome  to  do  His 
cleansing  and  reviving  work.  He  will  not  at  once  begin  His  chastenings.  They 
must  come  if  the  Church  does  not  fittingly  respond  to  reproof  and  rebuke.  But 
He  will  wait — hopefully  wait.  "  Judgment  is  His  strange  work,  mercy  is  His 
delight."  He  would  so  much  rather  work  the  recovery  of  the  Church  with  its  will 
than  against  it.  But  there  is  a  very  remarkable  change  in  the  appeal  of  Christ  as 
He  stands  waiting.  His  rebuke  and  counsel  had  been  sent  to  the  Church.  His 
appeal  is  directly  addressed  to  each  and  every  individual  member  of  the  Church. 
*'  If  any  man  hear  My  voice  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will 
sup  with  him,  and  He  with  Me."  The  responsibility  of  rightly  answering  the 
reproof  of  Christ  is  made  to  rest  on  each  single  person.  It  could  easily  be  shifted 
off,  and  made  to  appear  the  general  duty  of  the  Church.     Christ  demands  that 

488 


HOMtLETiC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION.       chap.  hi. 


it  shall  be  the  direct  answer  of  each  man.  The  recovery  of  a  lethargic  and 
lukewarm  Church  is  the  recovery  of  its  individuals,  one  by  one.  The  promise 
to  the  overcoming  soul  and  overcoming  Church  is  the  full  enjoyment  of  the 
highest  spiritual  privilege,  the  privilege  that  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  the  most 
spiritually-minded.  "  I  will  give  to  him  to  sit  down  with  Me  in  My  throne ;  as 
I  also  overcame,  and  sat  down  with  My  Father  in  His  throne." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  14.  Laodicea. — A  Church  of 
which  the  state  is  described  in  the 
darkest  colours,  and  whose  future 
seems  to  be  compromised.  She  is 
threatened  with  immediate  rejection — 
*'  Spue  thee  out  of  My  mouth."  There 
is  here  more  than  an  expression  of 
indignation ;  it  is  one  of  disgust. 
Laodicea  has  fallen  as  low  as  a  Church 
can  fall,  while  still  bearing  the  name 
of  a  Church.— i^.  Godet,  D.D. 

Ver.  15.  Hot. — The  heat  commended 
by  implication  is  not  the  "self-conscious, 
galvanised  earnestness  which,  in  days 
of  senile  pietism,  passes  for  zeal.  It  is 
an  earnestness  which  does  not  know 
itself  earnest,  being  all  too  absorbed  in 
its  work.  It  is  self -forgetful,  and  so 
self-sacrificing,  rather  than  ambitious 
of  self-sacrifice.  It  is,  in  short,  kindled 
of  God,  and  sustained  by  converse  with 
the  Divine  One." — Bishop  Boyd  Car- 
penter. 


Ver.  17.  Self- deception. — "Why  should 
a  man  repent  of  his  goodness  %  He 
may  well  repent,  indeed,  of  his  false- 
hood, but  unhappily  the  falsehood  of 
it  is  just  the  thing  he  does  not  see,  and 
cannot  see  by  the  very  law  of  his 
character.  The  Pharisee  did  not  know 
he  was  a  Pharisee.  If  he  had  known 
it  he  would  not  have  been  a  Pharisee. 
The  victim  of  passion,  then,  may 
be  converted — the  gay,  the  thought- 
less, or  the  ambitious ;  he  whom 
human  glory  has  intoxicated  ;  he  whom 
the  show  of  life  has  ensnared  ;  he  whom 
the  pleasures  of  sense  have  captivated  ; 
— they  may  be  converted,  every  one  of 
them  ;  but  who  is  to  convert  the  hypo- 
crite? He  does  not  know  he  is  a 
hypoci'ite ;  he  cannot,  upon  the  very 
basis  of  his  character ;  he  must  think 
himself  sincere ;  and  the  more  he  is  in 
the  shackles  of  his  own  character,  -i.e., 
the  greater  hypocrite  he  is,  the  more 
sincere  must  he  think  himself. — Mozley. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  III. 


Ver  1.  Sardis  Famous  for  Toys. — "The 
games  of  children  are  pretty  nearly  the 
same  the  world  over.  Wilkinson  has  de- 
scribed some  of  the  toys  of  the  ancient 
Egyptians,  found  among  the  ruins  and  tombs 
of  that  remarkable  land.  Similar  remains 
are  found  in  various  parts  of  Western  Asia, 
the  more  graceful  being  the  work  of  the 
Greek  race,  and  of  their  nearest  neighbours 
in  the  western  part  of  the  Peninsula,  Sardis, 
the  capital  of  Lydia,  was  celebrated  of  old 
for  its  manufacture  of  children's  toys,  as 
Nuremberg  is  in  Germany  now.  In  that 
same  region  a  great  variety  of  articles  in 
terra-cotta  are  found,  exhibiting  no  little 
taste  in  the  imitation  of  nature's  models. 
Miniature  horses,  cattle,  dogs,  fish,  chickens, 
lions,  and  deer,  an  ass  with  its  pack-saddle, 
dolls  with  arms  and  legs  that  could  be 
moved  by  the  pulling  of  a  string,  comic 
figures,  or  caricatures  of  hunch -backs,  de- 
formed  negroes,    satyrs,    and    idiots ;    also 


whistles,  marbles,  and  many  other  things  in 
a  sufficiently  good  state  of  preservation, 
which  compare  well  with  similar  products  of 
our  modern  civilisation.  The  religion  of 
Islam,  indeed,  forbids  such  representations 
now,  yet  it  cannot  prevent  little  girls  playing 
with  dolls,  nor  boys  amusing  themselves  with 
mimic  horses,  sheep,  and  carts ,  nor  both 
from  eating  the  sugar  birds,  horses,  and  men 
of  the  candy-seller,  himself  a  Muslim." — 
Van  Lennep. 

A  few  mud  huts,  inhabited  by  Turkish 
herdsmen,  and  a  mill  or  two,  contain  all  the 
present  population  of  Sardis. 

Ver.  5.  White  the  Royal  Colour.— ^ost 
persons  believe  that  purple  was  the  colour  of 
royal  robes  in  our  Lord's  day.  So  tlie  author 
believed  when,  riding  over  the  valley  of 
Sharon,  he  saw  a  lily  in  bloom,  and  was 
satisfied  that  it  must  be  a  genuine  facsimile 

489 


CHAP.  III.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


of  the  New-Testament  flower.  On  dismount- 
ing from  our  horse,  we  found  its  rich  velvet 
corolla  to  be  of  a  dark  purple.  "  There," 
we  exclaimed,  "  is  the  lily  that  vied  with 
Solomon  in  his  glory."  But  careful  investi- 
gation has  compelled  us  to  give  up  our 
impression.  We  are  satisfied  that  the 
royal  colour  of  all  the  monarchs  in  our 
Lord's  day  was  white.  The  Persian  mingled 
the  blue  with  the  white  (Esth.  viii.  15 ;  con- 
firmed by  Xenophon).  Solomon's  royal 
attire,  when  visited  by  the  Queen  of  Sheba, 
was  white  (Josephus,  I.  viii.  7  ;  Eccles.  ix.  8). 
The  high  priest,  on  the  great  day  of  atone- 
ment, wore  a  robe  of  white  linen  (Exod. 
xxviii.  2,  40).  Mordecai's  was  blue  and 
white,  with  a  crown  {Cyropedia,  lib.  viii. 
23).  Alexander  entered  Jerusalem  robed 
in  white.  Our  Lord,  in  coronatioji  robes, 
appeared  in  white  on  Mount  Tabor.  The 
kings  slain  were  so  many  that  their  robes 
made  the  battle-field  "  white  as  the  snow  in 
Salmon  "  (Ps.  Ixviii.  14).  Herod's  robe  was 
resplendent  with  silver  tissue,  woven  through 
the  linen  (Acts  xii.  21 ;  Josephus).  \  Angels 
who  appear  to  Cornelius,  and  were  seen  at 
the  sepulchre,  were  clothed  in  white,  and 
the  saints,  advanced  to  thrones  and  crowns, 
wear  white  coronation  robes  as  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  (Rev.  i.  6,  iii.  5).  "  Shushan, 
the  Persian  word  for  lily,  signifies  white" 
{Gesenius).  Pilate  clothed  our  Lord  in  a 
purple  robe  (worn  of  Roman  nobility). 
Herod  clothed  Him  in  a  white  robe  (Greek, 
"  gorgeous,"  or  "  shining  "),  Luke  xxiii.  11. 

Ver.  7.  PkiladelpMa. — "We  arrived  at 
Allah-Shehr,  the  ancient  Philadelphia.  .  .  . 
entering  the  town  through  chasms  in  the 
old  wall,  but  which,  being  built  of  small 
stones,  did  not  appear  to  be  particularly 
ancient:  the  passage  through  the  streets 
was  filthy  in  the  extreme,  though  the  view 
of  the  place,  as  we  approached  it,  was  ex- 
tremely beautiful,  and  well  entitled  to  the 
appellation  of  the  *  fair  city.'  .  .  .  We 
walked  through  the  town,  and  up  to  the 
hill  on  which  formerly  stood  the  acropolis. 
The  houses  were  mean  in  the  extreme,  and 
we  saw  nothing  on  the  hill  but  some  walls 
of  comparatively  modern  date.  On  an  ad- 
joining hill,  separated  from  the  first  by  a 
deep  fosse,  or  a  narrow  ravine,  were  similar 
fragments  of  walls  ;  but  we  observed  a  few 
rows  of  large  square  stones  just  appearing 
above  the  surface  of  the  ground.  The  view 
from  these  elevated  situations  was  magni- 
ficent in  the  extreme ;  highly  cultivated 
gaidens  and  vineyards  lay  at  the  back  and 
sides  of  the  town,  and  before  it  one  of  the 
most  extensive  and  richest  plains  in  Asia. 
The  Turkish  name,  •  Allah-Sbehr  '— '  the  city 
of  God ' — reminded  me  of  the  Psalmist : 
*  Beautiful  for  situation  is  Mount  Zion,'  etc. 
We  returned  through  a  different  part  of  the 
town,  and,  though  objects  of  much  curiosity, 

490 


were  treated  with  civility;  confirming 
Chandler's  observation  that  the  Philadel- 
phians  are  a  '  civil  people.*  It  was  extremely 
pleasing  to  see  a  number  of  turtle-doves  on 
the  roofs  of  the  houses;  they  were  well 
associated  with  the  name  of  Philadelphia. 
The  storks  retain  possession  still  of  the  walls 
of  the  city,  as  well  as  of  the  roofs  of  many 
of  the  houses.  We  called  upon  the  bishop 
at  three  o'clock,  who  received  us  with  much 
kind  attention.  ...  At  five  o'clock  we 
accompanied  him  to  his  church  ;  it  was  Palm 
Sunday,  and  the  service  extremely  long.  I 
could  not  help  shedding  tears  at  contrasting 
this  unmeaning  mummery  with  the  pure 
worship  of  primitive  times,  which  probably 
had  been  offered  on  the  very  site  of  the 
present  church.  A  single  pillar,  evidently 
belonging  to  a  much  earlier  structure, 
reminded  me  of  the  reward  of  victory 
promised  to  the  faithful  member  of  the 
church  of  Philadelphia — 'Him  that  over- 
cometh  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of 
My  God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out ;  and 
1  will  write  upon  him  the  name  of  My  God, 
and  the  name  of  the  city  of  My  God.'" — 
Arundell. 

Ver.  12.  Pillars  in  Temples. — Turner,  in 
his  "  Nineteen  Years  in  Polynesia,"  records 
the  views  entertained  by  the  Samoans  in 
reference  to  a  future  state.  In  that  state  the 
chiefs  were  supposed  to  have  a  separate  place 
allotted  them,  called  Pulotu.  The  house,  or 
temple,  of  the  great  king  of  these  sub- 
terranean regions  was  supported,  not  by 
pillars  of  wood  or  stone,  but  by  columns  of 
living  men — men  who  on  earth  had  been 
chiefs  of  the  highest  rank.  Chiefs,  in  antici- 
pation of  death,  were  often  pleased  with  the 
thought  of  the  high  honour  which  awaited 
them,  of  being  at  once  the  ornament  and  sup- 
port of  the  mansion  of  the  great  chief  of  their 
Pulotu  paradise.  What  a  striking  coincidence 
have  we  here  with  the  language  of  Scripture, 
and  one  which  throws  an  additional  interest 
around  our  instructions,  as  we  read  the 
words  of  Him  who  exhorted  His  people  to 
perseverance  by  the  cheering  declaration, 
applicable  to  all,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor, 
*'  Him  that  overcometh  will  I  make  a  pillar 
in  the  temple  of  My  God  "  ! 

Ver.  14.  Laodicea. — This  city  was  originally 
called  Diospolis,  and  afterwards  Rhoas.  It 
was  re-built  and  beautified  by  Antiochus  II., 
King  of  Syria,  and  named  after  his  wife 
Laodice,  by  whom  he  was  subsequently 
poisoned.  In  Roman  times  it  was  a  very' 
principal  city  among  those  of  the  second 
rank  in  Asia  Minor.  It  suffered  in  the 
Mithridatic  war,  but  ere  long  recovered ;  it 
was  also  well-nigh  destroyed  by  a  great 
earthquake,  A.D.  62,  but  was  repaired  by  the 
efforts  of  its  own  citizens,  who  asked  no  help 
from  the  Roman  Senate.     Laodicea  was  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       chap.  tV. 


Soulhtrn  Phrygia,  called  Phrygia  Pacatiana, 
not  far  from  Colossae,  and  about  six  miles 
south  of  Hierapolis.  It  was  distinguished 
from  other  cities  of  the  same  name  by  being 
termed  Laodicea  on  the  Lycus.  Its  commerce 
was  considerable,  being  principally  in  the 
wools  grown  in  the  neighbouring  district, 
which  were  celebrated  for  their  fine  texture 
and  rich  hue.  A  village,  called  £ski-hissar, 
stands  amidst  its  ruins. 

Ver.  19.  God's  Love  in  Afflictian. — It  is  re- 
related  that  a  poor  but  worthy  inhabitant  of 
Paris  once  went  to  the  bishop  of  the  place, 
with  a  countenance  beclouded  and  a  heart 
almost  overwhelmed.  '*  Father,"  said  he, 
with  the  most  profound  humility,  "  I  am  a 
sinner — I  feel  that  I  am  a  sinner — but  it  is 
against  my  will.  Every  hour  I  ask  for  light, 
and  humbly  pray  for  faith,  but  still  I  am 
overwhelmed  with  doui  ts.  Surely  if  I  were 
not  despised  of  God  He  would  not  leave  me 
to  struggle  thus  with  the  adversary  of  souls ! " 
1  he  bishop  thus  consoled,  with  t!ic  language 
of  kindness,  his  sorrowing  son  :  "  The  king 
of  France  has  two  castles  in  different  situa- 
tions, and  sends  a  commander  to  each  of 
them.  The  castle  of  Montelberry  stands  in 
a  place  remote  from  danger,  far  inland  ;  but 
the  castle  of  La  Rochelle  is  on  the  coast, 
where  it  is  liable  to  continual  sieges.  Now, 
which  of  the  two  commanders,  think  you, 
stands  the  highest  in  the  estimation  of  the 
king :  the  commander  of  La  Rochelle,  or  he 
of  Montelberry?"  "Doubtless,"  said  the 
poor  man,  "  the  king  values  him  the  most 
who  has  the  hardest  task,  and  braves  the 
greatest  dangers."  '*  Thou  art  right,"  replied 
the  bishop.  '♦  And  now  apply  this  matter  to 
thy  case  and  mine,  for  my  heart  is  like  the 


castle  of  Montelberry,  and  thine  like  that  of 
La  Rochelle." 

Ver.  20.  Christ  at  the  Door.— The  love  of 
Christ  has  to  come  to  sinful  men  with  patient 
pleading  and  remonstrance,  that  it  may  enter 
their  hearts  and  give  its  blessings.  Some  of 
you  may  remember  a  modern  work  of  art  in 
which  that  long-sufEering  appeal  is  wonder- 
fully portrayed.  He  who  is  the  Light  of  the 
world  stands,  girded  with  the  royal  mantle 
clasped  with  the  priestly  breast-plate,  bear- 
ing in  his  hand  the  lamp  of  truth,  and  there, 
amidst  the  dew  of  night  and  the  rank  hem- 
lock, He  pleads  for  entrance  at  the  closed 
door  which  has  no  handle  on  its  outer  side, 
and  is  hinged  to  open  only  from  within.  '♦  I 
stand  at  the  door  and  knock.  If  any  man 
open  the  door,  I  will  come  in." — A.  Maclaren, 
D.D. 


Knocking  at  Doors. — The  gates  of  the  rich 
and  the  doors  of  the  caravanserais  and  other 
large  buildings  have  a  knocker  made  of  a 
bent  bar  of  iron  hung  by  a  hinge,  so  as  to 
strike  upon  a  broad-Leaded  nail.  Otherwise 
there  is  always  a  ring  set  in  the  door,  by 
which  it  is  pulled  to,  and  this  is  used 
as  a  knocker  by  striking  it  against  the  door 
with  the  open  palm.  Officers  of  justice  rap 
on  the  doors  with  the  ends  of  their  staves  of 
office,  and  some  people,  impatient  of  delay, 
try  to  make  more  noise  by  striking  the  door 
with  a  stone.  The  sleep  of  Orientals  is 
proverbially  heavy,  and  loud  and  repeated 
knockings  at  doors  are  sometimes  heard  at 
the  dead  of  night,  accompanied  by  the  re- 
iterated shouts  of  some  belated  traveller. — 
Van  Lennep. 


CHAPTER   IV. 
AN   INTRODUCTORY   THEOPHANY. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Ver.  1.  Saw. — Observed,  not  specially  "  looked  up."  Opened. — Set  open.  Trumpet. — 
Chap.  i.  10.     Which  said. — The  voice  is  put  for  the  person  speaking. 

Ver.  2.  In  the  spirit. — Implying  a  rapt  state  of  mind,  absorbed  wholly  in  the  things  now 
unfolded.  Compare  St.  Peter's  '*  trances,"  and  St.  Paul's  "  visions."  "  It  is  implied  that  he  was 
caught  up  through  the  open  door  into  heaven,  and  saw  what  was  going  on  above."  Compare 
the  conception  of  Dante's  poem.  Throne.—  See  1  Kings  xxii.  19.  A  similar  description  of 
the  throne  of  God  may  be  found  in  the  book  of  Enoch,  xiv.  17-23.  See  also  Ezek.  i. ; 
Dan.  vii.  He  who  sat  on  the  throne  is  not  named  (see  Jewish  reticence  in  relation  to  the 
sacred  Name),  but  •'  He  is  kept  before  us  in  the  whole  book,  to  remind  us  that  the  great 
world-drama  moves  forward  ever  under  the  eyes  of  the  ruling  One. 

Ver.  3.  Jasper. — The  ancient  jasper  was  the  translucent  stone  now  known  as  chalcedony, 
a  dark,  opaque  green  (Exod.  xxviii.  20  ;  Rev.  xxi.  19).  This  colour  is,  however,  unsuitable  as 
a  description  here.  In  the  lat€r  reference  the  jasper  is  spoken  of  as  "  clear  as  crystal,"  and 
then  the  brightness  of  the  jasper  blends  with  the  red  glow  of  the  sardius,  which  is  a  red 

491 


CHAP.  IV.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


carnelian,  fiery  in  colour.  Together  the  images  denote  the  powerful  splendour  which 
beamed  from  Him  who  sat  on  the  throne.  Compare  Ezek.  i.  26,  27.  Kainbow. — Symbol  of 
Divine  mercy,  beautiful  in  itself,  and  veiling  the  splendour.  Emerald.— Green.  "The  iris 
is  compared  to  it  here,  because  the  modified  and  mild  colour  of  green  apparently  predomi- 
nates in  the  rainbow."    Ancients  felt  very  strongly  the  relief  given  to  the  eye  by  looking  at  it, 

Ver.  4.  Elders. — "  The  representatives  of  Christ's  Church  and  people — of  those  whom  Christ 
calls  His  friends "  (John  xv.  15).  Two  sets  of  twelve.  The  Christian  Church  of  St.  John's 
day  was  a  Jewish  Christian  Church.  The  two  sections  are  represented  in  the  one  set  of 
elders :  not  Jews  and  Christians  as  distinct  bodies.  White. — Note  the  importance  of  this 
symbol  of  purity  throughout  the  book.  "  They  are  the  glorified  embodiment  and  represen- 
tatives of  the  people  of  God."  {Stuart  prefers  to  explain  the  number  by  the  division  of  the 
priesthood  into  twenty-four  classes  which  David  made.)  Crowns. — With  the  robes  denoting 
their  king-priestly  character. 

Ver.  5.  Proceeded. — iKiropevovTai,  continually  proceed.  See  the  associations  of  the  giving 
of  the  Law  on  Sinai  (Exod.  xix.).  Thunder  and  lightning  are  our  most  impressive  nature 
suggestions  of  the  Divine  majesty  and  power.  "  By  these  are  signified  the  instructions  of 
God's  law,  the  encouragement  of  His  promises,  and  the  warnings  of  His  judgments."  Lamps 
of  fire. — I.e.  seven  resplendent,  glorious  beings,  all  radiant,  like  burning  torches,  or  lamps. 
Or  it  may  be  a  symbol  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  whose  sevenfold  gifts  are  spoken  of. 

Ver.  6.  Sea  of  glass. — Figure  from  the  "  sea "  that  was  in  front  of  Solomon's  temple 
(1  Kings  vii.  23,  etc.).  This  temple  has  a  real  sea  in  front  of  it.  It  is  suggested  that  fickle, 
movable  waters  represent  the  unguided,  unreasoning,  and  unprincipled  thoughts  of  men. 
By  analogy,  the  calm,  glass-like  sea  represents  those  counsels  of  God,  those  purposes  of 
righteousness  and  love,  often  fathomless,  but  never  obscure,  always  the  same,  though  some- 
times glowing  with  holy  anger,  like  unto  crystal,  resplendent  and  pellucid.  The  pavements, 
or,  as  we  ssiy, Jioors,  of  palaces  and  elegant  houses  of  the  East  are  constructed  with  expensive 
and  splendid  materials.  Here  the  idea  is  that  the  pavements  or  floors  are  all  of  precious 
and  diapbonous  stones,  appearing  to  him  who  should  walk  upon  them  pellucid,  like  the 
waters  of  the  ocean.  In  the  Koran,  Belkis,  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  is  represented  as  supposing 
the  pavement  on  which  she  walks  in  the  audience-hall  to  be  a  sea  {Moses  Stuart).  Four 
beasts. — Living  beings.  Their  position  in  relation  to  the  throne  is  not  clear.  They  were 
either  the  supports  or  ornamentation  of  the  throne.  Full  of  eyes. — Teeming  with. 
Easterns  indicate  greatness  and  variety  of  power  by  multiplying  representations  of  the  organ. 
(Curiously  enough,  the  Fathers  regard  these  beasts  as  representing  the  Four  Gospels,  which 
had  no  recognised  existence  in  St.  John's  day).  Perhaps  they  represent  animate  nature.  But 
it  is  more  probable  that,  as  they  take  precedence  even  of  the  crowned  elders  in  their  cease- 
less worship,  they  represent  redeemed  humanity.  Birks  says  :  "  They  seem  to  represent  four 
distinct  classes,  each  federally  united  among  those  blessed  saints  who  occupy  the  foremost 
places  in  the  kingdom  of  glory."     For  Stuart's  view  see  *'  Suggestive  Notes." 

Ver.  7.  *'  Four  beings  hold  a  primacy  in  the  world :  among  created  beings,  man ; 
among  birds,  the  eagle ;  among  cattle,  the  ox ;  among  untamed  animals,  the  lion.  The 
characteristics  of  these  four  chiefs  of  creation  unite  to  make  a  perfect  picture  of  the  spirit 
of  true  service,  which  should  be  brave  as  the  lion,  patient  as  the  ox,  aspiring  as  the  eagle, 
intelligent  as  man."  The  number  four  is,  in  the  Apocalypse,  almost  always  associated  with 
the  earth. 

Ver.  8.  Six  wings.— Compare  Isa.  vi.  1-4.  Full  of  eyes.— Compare  Ezek.  i.  18,  x.  12  ;  Zech. 
iii,  9.  Multiplicity  of  eyes  may  symbolise  vitality  and  vigilance.  Within. — This  may  mean, 
inside  their  wings ;  and  these  eyes  were  seen  when  the  wings  were  spread.  Almighty. — 
Heb.  in  Isaiah,  *•  God  of  hosts." 

Vers.  9,  10.  Beasts  give  glory. — The  idea  of  this  and  the  following  verse  is,  that  when  the 
redeemed  Church  realises  the  voice  of  creation  in  its  worship,  it  reverently  joins  in  the 
worship.  "  All  Thy  works  praise  Thee  in  all  places  of  Thy  dominion,  and  Thy  saints  shall 
bless  Thee."  See  the  ascriptions  of  praise  to  Jehovah  in  1  Chron.  xix.  10-13;  Ps.  xcvi. 
2,  3, 7-10.  Cast  their  crowns. — Alford  compares  Tacitus,  Ann.,  XV.  xxix.  3,  6,  where  Tiridates 
lays  down  his  crown  before  the  image  of  Nero,  as  a  token  of  homage  for  his  kingdom.  The 
future  tenses,  "shall  worship,"  "  shall  cast,"  indicate  what  is  often  and  customarily  done  in 
heaven.  Simcox  suggests  that  the  tenses  in  this  book  may  be  accommodated  to  the  rules  of 
Hebrew  rather  than  of  Greek  grammar. 

"  Thus  concludes  this  magnificent  exordium  to  the  principal  visions  of  the  book.  Chap,  v, 
is  intimately  connected  with  it,  but  it  is  rather  to  be  regarded  as  a  special  proem  to 
chap,  vi. — xi.,  than  as  a  proem  to  the  book  at  large.  The  impressive  nature  of  the  scene  pre- 
sented in  chap.  iv.  cannot  but  strike  the  mind  of  every  intelligent  reader.  The  holy  seer 
was  duly  prepared,  by  such  an  august  vision,  for  the  disclosures  which  follow,  and  the  mind 
of  the  reader  can  hardly  fail  to  be  prepared,  also,  to  look  for  them  with  deep  interest.  It 
cannot  escape  even  the  most  unobserving,  how  greatly  this  whole  scene  resembles  the 
inaugural  theophanies  in  Isa.  vi.  and  Ezek.  i,"  (Stuart). 

492 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       chap.  iv. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—11. 

The  Eteimal  Throne  and  its  Surroundings. — From  the  very  first,  and  still, 
there  will  be  found  a  side  of  peril  in  the  very  intensity  with  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  presented  to  us.  He  may  take  our  attention  off  from  God,  and 
seem  to  stand  in  front  of  Him.  Our  Lord  Himself  recognised  this  possible  evil, 
during  His  earthly  life.  He  might  absorb  too  fully  the  interest  of  His  disciples, 
and  therefore  we  find  Him,  in  His  conversations  with  them,  constantly  putting 
His  Father,  as  it  were,  in  front  of  Himself.  The  apostles  show  precisely  the 
same  anxiety.  They  will  not  let  the  interest  of  men  stay  with  Christ.  He 
leads  men  to  God.  By  Him  they  believe  in  God.  Remembering  how  jealous 
the  Jews  were  of  the  primary  truth  of  the  Divine  unity,  we  can  easily 
see  that  it  would  have  been  a  fatal  objection  to  Christianity  if  it  could  be 
reasonably  shown  that  it  put  Christ  in  the  place  of  God.  Essentially  Christ  is 
God ;  but  revelationally,  and  for  particular  purposes  of  manifestation.  He  is 
apprehended  as  the  Son  of  God,  and  as  Son,  He  must  not  be  confused  with  the 
Father,  or,  in  any  sense,  put  in  His  place.  This  important  distinction  explains 
this  introductory  vision  of  the  eternal  glory  of  God.  The  seer  has  brought  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  vividly  before  us  as  the  Living,  White  One.  He  is  going  to 
deal  with  the  present  activities  of  that  Living  One  in  the  Church,  and  in  the 
world  in  which  His  Church  is  set.  He  will  be  filling  all  our  thoughts  with 
Christ.  But  there  must  be  no  possibility  of  mistake,  no  possibility  of  our  even 
seeming  to  put  dishonour  on  God,  or  showing  Him  any  slight,  or  faiHng  to 
recognise  His  supreme  relations  with  the  actual,  present  work  of  Christ.  So  the 
vision  of  this  chapter  is  given,  and  God  is  seen  receiving  the  absolutely  sole 
worship  of  the  representatives  of  all  creation,  animal  and  human.  He  is  God 
alone.  Heaven  is  visioned  as  the  sublime  palace  of  the  eternal  King,  and  a  door 
is  set  open  so  that  we  may  enter  the  audience-chamber ;  and  we  may  well  be 
awed  by  the  magnificence,  the  sublimity,  of  the  scene. 

I.  The  throne. — To  this  much  attention  is  given  in  Eastern  Kingdoms. 
(For  Solomon's  throne,  see  1  Kings  x.  18-20).  The  stability  of  this  throne  is 
even  more  impressive  than  its  splendour.  However  shifting  and  changing  may 
be  the  panorama  of  events  recorded  in  this  book,  that  throne  remains  the  same. 
Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away.  That  throne  abides.  It  cannot  be  moved, 
because  "  righteousness  and  judgment  are  its  habitation."  Carefully  observe 
that  no  attempt  is  ever  made  in  Scripture  to  describe  Him  who  sitteth  on  the 
eternal  throne.  He  must  ever  simply  be  to  us  the  **  I  AM."  **  Existence- 
uncaused,  independent  existence." 

II.  The  supports  of  the  throne. — The  four  living  creatures,  as  the  representa- 
tives of  all  creation.  The  honour  and  dignity  of  God  is  the  supreme  concern  of 
every  living  thing.  His  throne  is  upheld  by  their  needs,  which  Grod  alone  can 
meet ;  by  their  trustings,  which  are  its  buttresses  ;  and  by  their  service  in  their 
spheres,  which  witnesses  to  their  Master. 

III.  The  front  of  the  throne. — Two  ideas  are  suggested  in  connection  with  the 
sea  of  glass.  1.  The  shining  pavement  is  like  solidified  water.  2.  The  brazen 
sea,  in  front  of  the  temple,  indicated  the  need  for  purity  in  all  who  came  to 
worship.  The  former  idea  is  the  more  probable  one,  and  only  a  figure  of 
magnificence  is  intended.  Or  the  idea  of  waving  sea,  settled  into  glassy  stillness, 
may  suggest  the  sublime  peace  of  God's  eternal  presence.  "  Where,  beyond 
the  voices,  there  is  peace." 

IV.  The  courtiers. — Four  and  twenty  elders.  Ofiicers  were  always  in  the 
royal  presence  at  Eastern  Courts,  and  these  often  represented  the  provinces 
of  the  country,  or  dependent  nations.     The  elders  stand  for  the  Church  as  at 

493 


CHAP.  IV.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION, 


present  redeemed.     The  full  chorus  of  creation  rises  now  to  God ;  but  the  full 
chorus  of  humanity  does  not  rise  yet.     It  is  but  the  chorus  of  a  portion. 

V.  The  worship. — The  point  to  notice  is,  that  God's  praise  is  begun  by 
creation ;  taken  up  and  ennobled  by  the  redeemed  Church,  but  perfected  only 
when  all  are  redeemed,  and  the  completed  Church  can  join  the  song  of  Nature, 
and  so  all  the  earth  "  praise  God." 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  1.  An  Anticipative  Triumph- 
Song. — The  fourth  and  fifth  chapters 
are  to  be  regarded  as  a  song  of  triumph 
sung  even  before  the  contest  begins, 
and  conveying  to  us  an  assurance  of 
what  will  be  the  issue.  It  will  not  be 
forgotten  that  this  is  elsewhere  the 
manner  of  St.  John.  Before  the  great 
contest  delineated  in  the  fourth  gospel, 
which  begins  at  chap,  v.,  we  have 
the  victory  of  the  Redeemer  over 
Nicodemus,  the  woman  of  Samaria, 
and  the  Galilean  nobleman.  When 
speaking,  in  his  first  epistle,  of  the 
struggles  of  Christians  with  the  world, 
St.  John  uses  the  words,  "  And  this  is 
the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith  "  (chap.  v.  4).  He  does 
not  speak  of  the  weapons  with  which 
the  Christian  soldier  prepares  himself 
for  the  battle,  but  of  the  "  victory  "  with 
which,  as  if  it  were  his  armour,  he  is, 
from  the  first,  equipped.  In  other 
words,  it  is  St.  John's  manner  of 
thought  to  sing  his  song  of  triumph 
before  the  fight  begins,  and  that  is 
exactly  what  he  does  in  the  fourth 
and  fifth  chapters  of  the  Apocalypse. — 
W,  Milligan,  D.D. 

A  Vision  of  the  Glory  of  God. — 
The  fourth  chapter  is  a  vision  of  the 
g^ory  of  God.  His  throne  is  supported 
by  four  living  creatures,  and  twenty- 
four  elders  fall  down  before  it.  These 
are  the  representatives  of  Nature  and 
of  the  Church.  The  former  represent 
the  forces  of  nature,  which,  in  the 
ancient  religions,  sat  upon  the  throne, 
personified  in  the  Pagan  deities,  but 
which,  in  the  monotheism  of  the  Bible, 
play  a  more  modest  part,  and  are 
employed  in  bearing  up  the  throne  of 
God — that  is  to  say,  in  establishing 
His  kingdom.      They  are  represented 

494 


by  the  four  living  creatures  which  are 
supposed  to  be  the  chefs  d'oeuvre  of  the 
animal  creation — the  lion,  the  bull,  the 
eagle,  and  man.  The  twenty-four 
elders  represent  the  Judgeo-Christian 
and  the  Gentile  Church,  twelve  for 
each  of  these  two  moieties  of  the 
primitive  Church,  in  conformity  with 
the  types  of  the  twelve  patriarchs, 
the  twelve  tribes,  and  the  twelve 
apostles. — F.  Godet,  D.D, 

Ver.  3.  The  Rainbow  Symbol. — The 
discovery  made  of  the  Divine  mercy  in 
the  covenant  of  grace  refreshes  the 
mind  as  the  green  relieves  the  eye  from 
the  fatigue  and  glare  of  other  colours. 
*'  In  the  arched  iris  spanning  the  Divine 
throne  the  ancient  Church  beheld  an 
emblem  of  the  Divine  severity,  blended 
with  love;  in  it  she  saw  the  dark 
showers  of  His  judgments,  gilded  by  the 
bright  beams  of  His  mercy.  The 
heavenly  Bow  spake  to  her  of  the 
Deluge,  the  shipwreck  of  the  world 
for  sin;  it  spake  to  her  also  of  calm 
and  sunshine  after  the  storm." — 
Wordsworth, 

Being  in  the  Spirit. — He  was  in  a 
rapture,  as  before  (chap.  i.  10),  whether 
in  the  body  or  out  of  the  body  we  can- 
not tell ;  perhaps  he  himself  could  not ; 
however,  all  bodily  actions  and  sensa- 
tions were  for  a  time  suspended,  and 
his  spirit  was  possessed  with  a  spirit  of 
prophecy,  and  wholly  under  a  Divine 
influence.  The  more  we  abstract  our- 
selves from  all  corporeal  things  the 
more  fit  we  are  for  communion  with 
God ;  the  body  is  a  veil,  a  cloud,  and 
a  clog  to  the  mind  in  its  transactions 
with  God.  We  should,  as  it  were, 
forget  it  when  we  go  in  before  the 
Lord  in  duty,  and  be  willing  to  drop  it, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       chap.  iv. 


that  we  may  go  up  to  Him  in  heaven. —  valuable  of  tame  beasts,  and  the  image 

Matthew  Henry.  of    patient   and   useful   labour.      The 

third  has  the  face  of  a  man  ;  and  this 

Eastei^n  Abstraction. — It  is  well  to  is  indicative  of  reason  and  intelligence, 

remember  that  Easterns  have  a  power  The  fourth  is  like  to  an  eagle ;  and  this 

of   mental  abstraction — of   separating  indicates  velocity,  and  far-sighted  and 

themselves  for  a  time  from  their  bodies  penetrating  vision.     The  special  mean- 

— which     is     quite     inconceivable    to  ing  of  these  symbols  is  not  to  be  applied 

Westerns.  Illustrate  by  the  experiences  immediately,     or      directly,      to      the 

of   Yogis,    Brahmans,  Buddhists,  and  attributes  of  God  Himself,  but  to  be 

even  Dervishes.  regarded   as    primarily    indicative    of 

powers  possessed  by  the  ^a>a.     Yet  the 

Ver.  6.  The  Throne  and  the  Living  ^wa  thus  constituted,  are  themselves 
Creatures. — The  whole  imagery  is  to  symboUc  of  the  attributes  of  the  God- 
be  conceived  of  thus :  The  throne  on  head.  These  living  bearers  of  the 
which  the  Divine  Majesty  is  seated  -Almighty's  throne,  as  the  author 
rests  upon  four  living  creatures,  who  represents  the  matter,  serve  Him  with 
form  its  animated  and  moving  basis,  great  power,  with  patient  obedience. 
Instead  of  being  like  the  throne  of  with  quickness  of  intelligence  and 
earthly  kings,  i.e.,  resting  upon  reason,  and  with  a  rapidity  and 
inanimate  and  lifeless  substances,  its  perspicacity  which  may  indeed  be  com- 
support  is  constituted  of  living,  moving,  pared  to  that  of  the  eagle,  but  of 
rational  creatures,  ever  watchful,  and  which  this  king  of  birds  is,  after  all, 
ever  ready  to  move,  as  Ezekiel  says,  only  a  faint  image.  The  same  may 
like  "  a  flash  of  lightning  "  (Ezek.  i.  14).  in  truth  be  said  of  all  the  other  symbols; 
These  living  creatures  are  represented  but  then,  imperfect  as  they  are,  they 
as  endowed  with  forms  which  are  are  the  best  which  the  natural  world 
symbolical  and  highly  significant.  could  afford,  and  are  therefore  chosen 
They  are  "  full  of  eyes  "  ;  i.e.,  they  are  by  the  author  with  good  reason.  The 
ever  wakeful  and  watchful,  looking  ultimate  meaning  is :  God  is  every- 
every  way,  seeing  everything,  and  where  present,  and  executes  His 
ready  to  move  in  any  direction.  They  purposes  by  an  agency  powerful,  wise, 
are,  taken  as  a  whole  in  respect  to  unremitted,  and  speedy  whenever  speed 
their  ultimate  design,  symbolic  of  the  is  required. — Moses  Stuart, 
all-pervading   power,    providence,    and 

government,  of  God,  who  uses  them  as  Ver.  8.  The   Unity  of  God. — God  is 

His   instruments.      The  first  has  the  one.     The  unity  of  any  being  contains 

appearance  of  a  lion  ]  and  the  lion  is  two   ideas.       1.    Oneness    in    number , 

the  king  of  wild  beasts,  and  an  image  whereby   it    is  parted  from  all  other 

borrowed    from    him   is   indicative   of  beings  without  itself.    2.  Oneness  with- 

power,  strength,  sway.     The  second  is  in   itself,    as   opposed   to   every   other 

like  to  an  ox  ;   and  this  is   the   most  compound. — Bishop  S.  Wilherforce. 


495 


CHAP.  V.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


CHAPTER  Y. 
THE  OPENER  OF  THE  SEALED  BOOK. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETIGAL  NOTES. 

Having  duly  conserved  the  honour  of  the  one  and  Only  Lord  God  Almighty,  attention  can 
be  again  fixed  on  the  ministry  of  the  Living  Christ.  He  has  been  presented  under  symbols 
bearing  relation  to  His  work  in  the  Church ;  now  He  is  present  under  symbols  bearing 
relation  to  His  place  and  rights  in  heaven.  He  is  conceived  of  as  there,  "  highly  exalted," 
and  "  having  a  Name  above  every  name  " ;  because  "  He  humbled  Himself,  and  became 
obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross  " ;  because  He  "  poured  out  His  soul  unto 
death,  and  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors,  and  bare  the  sin  of  many."  Christ  in 
heaven  is  the  accepted  Sacrifice,  and  therefore  figured  as  a  slain  Lamb.  That  is  not  His 
figure  for  earth.  Here  he  is  the  present  Sanctifier  through  the  control  of  all  the  discipline 
of  human  Hfe.  Here  He  is  presiding  over  the  carrying  through  of  His  redemptive  mission. 
If  this  distinction  be  fittingly  apprehended,  some  of  the  apparent  incongruity  between  the 
several  figures  of  the  Redeemer  will  be  relieved.  We  must  see  Him  as  (rod  sees  Him,  and 
then  He  is  the  slain  Lamb.  We  must  see  Him  as  the  Church  sees  Him,  and  th  en  He  is  the 
Living  Sanctifier,  through  discipline,  and  even  through  judgments. 

Ver.  1.  Book. — That  it  should  be  written  on  both  sides  implied  abundance  of  matter.  "  It 
represents  the  history  of  the  conflicts  of  the  Church  from  St.  John's  days  to  the  day  of 
doom."  (Wordsworth).  Most  modern  writers  generalise,  and  suppose  that  it  is  the  book  of 
God's  counsels.  But  this  is  too  vague.  "  Conjiictus  et  triumphos  Ecclesice  reser  at  futuros'^ 
(^Bede).  It  is,  in  precise  relation  to  the  subject  about  which  St.  John  is  writing  the  book 
which  contains  the  mystery  why  the  Church  is  left  in  the  world,  and  called  to  bear  the 
brunt  of  such  calamities,  temptations,  and  persecutions,  and  the  present  work  of  the  Living 
Christ — a  work  entrusted  to  Him  because  He  has  ofEered  a  perfect  and  infinitely  acceptable 
sacrifice  of  Himself — in  the  Church  for  the  sake  of  the  world,  and  in  the  world  for  the  sake 
of  the  Church.  The  Divine  purposes  concerning  the  Church  and  the  world  are  a  secret,  and 
they  are  symbolised  by  this  sealed  book.  "  The  roll  is  not  the  Apocalypse  so  much  as  the 
book  of  those  truths  which  are  exemplified  in  the  Apocalypse,  as  in  a  vast  chamber  of 
imagery"  (^Carpenter').  Seals. — See  Isa.  xxix.  11;  Dan.  xii.  4.  Note  that  the  seals  are 
placed  in  such  positions  that  the  contents  can  be  gradually  disclosed  in  an  ordinary  way. 
When  the  first  seal  was  broken,  the  manuscript  could  be  unrolled  until  one  came  to  a  second 
seal,  and  so  on.  But  this  idea  must  not  be  unduly  pressed,  so  as  to  involve  the  historical  and 
chronological  order  of  the  book  of  Revelation. 

Ver.  2.  Strong  angel. — Suggesting  that  the  proclamation  was  made  throughout  the  whole 
realm  of  existence.  His  voice  reached  from  utmost  East  to  utmost  West.  Worthy. — Either 
on  the  ground  of  personal  dignity  or  of  extraordinary  services.  The  term  certainly  implies 
moral  fitness. 

Ver.  3.  Look  thereon. — So  as  even  to  make  a  guess  at  its  contents. 

Ver.  5.  Lion,  etc. — As  the  lion  is  regarded  as  king  among  animals,  so  Christ  is  Lion,  King 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah  (see  Gen.  xlix.  9).  Root. — Or  sprout  (Isa.  xi.  1 ;  Zech.  vi,  12). 
Prevailed. — Conquered.  Christ  acquired  the  power  to  open  the  book  by  His  great  endurance, 
struggle,  and  victory  (see  Phil.  ii.  6-10).  The  right  belongs  to  Him  alone,  because  He  alone 
had  suffered  and  conquered  in  doing  and  bearing  the  holy  will  of  God.  To  open  the  book 
was  at  once  the  honour  and  privilege  God  gave  to  His  accepted  Sou,  and  the  work  which 
His  experience  brought  Him  the  ability  to  perform. 

Ver.  6. — Omit  words  "  and  lo  1  "  Lamb,  etc. — The  word  used  means  "  a  little  Lamb."  It 
was  in  the  middle  front  of  the  throne.  Remember  that  St.  John  records  the  title  given  to 
Christ,  "  Lamb  of  God  "  (John  i.  29,  36 ;  Isa.  liii.  7).  Had  been  slain.— With  marks  which 
showed  it  had  been  slain  in  sacrifice,  and  offered  to  God.  Compare  our  Lord  showing  the 
marks  of  His  crucifixion  in  hands  and  side  to  doubting  Thomas.  The  death-marks  are  the 
sign  of  the  completion  of  that  Ufe-sacrifice  which  is  infinitely  acceptable  to  God,  and  proves 
Christ  to  be  fitted  to  undertake  the  further  and  final  stages  of  the  redemptive  work.  Seven 
Spirits. — Sign  of  perfect  competency. 

Ver.  8.  Harps,  etc. — To  give  expression  to  the  praises  and  prayers  of  the  world-wide  and 
age-long  Church  of  Christ.    The  prayers  of  the  saints  are  expressions  of  confidence  in  Christ, 

496 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  v. 


as  undertaking  this  new  trust — the  sanctifying  of  the  Church  He  has  redeemed.  Its  prayer 
is  embodied  in  the  word  "  come"  and  in  the  sentence  "come  quickly." 

Ver.  10.  Shall  reign  on  the  earth. — As  sharing  the  victory  Christ  will  surely  win.  "  They 
reign  with  and  in  Christ,  but  they  also  reign  on  the  earth.  Christ  gives  them  a  kingship, 
even  sovereignty,  over  themselves — the  first,  best,  and  most  philanthropic,  of  all  kingships. 
He  gives  them,  too,  a  kingship  on  the  earth  among  men,  for  they  are  exerting  those  influences, 
promoting  those  principles,  and  dispensing  those  laws  of  righteousness,  holiness,  and  peace, 
which  in  reality  rule  all  the  best  developments  of  life  and  history"  {Carperiter). 

Ver.  11.  Ten  thousand,  etc. — Lit.  "myriads  of  myriads"  (see  Dan.  vii.  10). 

Ver.  12.  Power,  etc. — This  is  the  most  complete  of  the  doxologies.  A  sevenfold  doxology. 
An  expression  of  the  highest  adoration  that  language  can  express. 

Ver.  13.  Under  the  earth. — Possibly  an  inclusion  of  the  holy  dead.  In  the  sea. — Better, 
"on  the  sea."  Unto  Him  that  sitteth  .  .  .  unto  the  Lamb. — "This  linking  of  the  Lamb  with 
God  as  the  Throned  One  is  common  throughout  the  book.  Here  they  are  linked  in  praise  ; 
in  chap.  vi.  16  they  are  linked  in  wrath ;  in  chap.  vii.  17  they  are  linked  in  ministering 
consolation  ;  in  chap.  xix.  6,  7,  they  are  linked  in  triumph.  In  the  final  vision  of  the  book 
the  Lord  God  and  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  (chap.  xxi.  22),  and  the  light  (chap.  xxi.  23), 
the  refreshment  (chap.  xxii.  1),  and  sovereignty  (chap.  xxii.  3),  of  the  celestial  city." 

Note  on  the  "  hooky — The  reason  why  a  hook  is  chosen  for  the  symbol  in  this  case  will  be 
very  apparent  to  a  careful  reader  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  The  Book  of  Life  has  a  limited 
significance,  and  is  employed  only  in  respect  to  the  state  of  individuals,  whose  weal  or  woe, 
life  or  death,  depends  on  what  is  recorded  therein.  But  in  the  present  case  the  book  before 
us  contains  a  record  of  the  secret  counsels  of  God — i.e.,  hitherto  secret  in  regard  to  the 
Christian  Church  and  its  enemies.  Texts  which  make  use  of  the  like  imagery  may  be  found 
in  Mai.  iii.  16  ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  16  ;  and  probably  Deut,  xxxii.  34  (^Moses  Stuart). 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE    PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—14. 

The  Acknowledgment  of  the  Champion^ s  Rights. — "The  fifth  chapter  pictures 
the  glory  of  the  Lamb,  Jesus  sacrificed  and  risen  again.  In  His  hands  is  a  roll 
made  up  of  seven  leaves,  and  sealed  with  seven  seals;  this  book  contains  the 
Divine  decrees  which  are  about  to  be  put  into  execution,  with  regard  to  the 
world.  These  two  circumstances — that  the  Lamb  is  entrusted  with  it,  and  that 
it  is  He  who  successively  breaks  its  seals — evidently  signify  that  it  is  He  who 
is  to  be  the  executor  of  the  designs  of  God ;  accordingly.  He  is  represented  as 
possessing  the  seven  eyes  and  the  seven  horns ;  that  is  to  say,  the  fulness  of 
omniscience  and  of  omnipotence,  without  which  He  could  not  accomplish  this 
Divine  work  "  {F.  Godet,  D.D.). 

I.  The  champion. — The  figures  employed  in  ver.  5  indicate  His  representative 
character.  He  who  has  undertaken  to  deliver  man  from  the  thraldom  of  sin, 
and  has  gloriously  succeeded,  is  the  very  one  to  whom  may  be  entrusted  the 
further  work  of  delivering  men  from  the  consequences  of  sin,  and  from  the 
influence  of  evil  surroundings.  The  Champion  may  be  still  entrusted  with 
champion's  work. 

II.  His  rights. — The  successful  general  considers  he  has  rights  to  new  com- 
missions ;  rights  to  the  full  confidence  of  his  sovereign.  Kights  are  won  by 
(1)  proofs  of  ability;  (2)  faithfulness;  (3)  experience.  There  are  rights  of 
reward  ;  but,  to  noble  souls,  the  best  reward  is  further  and  larger  trust. 

III.  The  acknowledgment  by  God. — Take  the  passage  in  Phil.  ii.  as  fully  un- 
folding this,  and  Isa.  liii.  as  anticipating  it.  No  one  could  be  so  profoundly 
interested  in  the  redemption  of  humanity  as  He  who  has  successfully  can*ied 
through  the  first  stage  of  it.  Nobody  could  be  so  fully  in  the  secret  of  the  Divine 
love,  or  so  fully  in  sympathy  with  the  Divine  purpose.  So  to  Him  is  entrusted 
the  sealed  book. 

IV.  The  responsive  acknowledgment  of  all  creation. — Indicated  by  the 
worship  and  praise  of  the  representatives  of  all  animate  being.  There  is  recogni- 
tion of  the  dignity  of  the  new  trust ;  and  there  is  recognition  of  the  hope  for 
humanity  that  lies  in  the  further  mission  of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain. 

KK  497 


CHAP.  V.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION, 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  1.  The  Glorified  Christ  ness  and  the  sacrifice  of  the  "  Lamb  of 

I.  The  solution  of  the  mysteries  of  God  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
God. — 1.  The  book  in  the  right  hand,  world,"  come  fully  into  view.  The  soul 
God  always  works  by  a  plan.  Cha-  gains  a  holy  nearness  to  her  Lord,  and 
racteristics  of  this  plan — order,  com-  a  kindling  of  new  affections,  by  the  aid 
pleteness,  duration.  2.  The  book  of  such  a  painfully  beautiful  symbol, 
sealed.  Its  secrets  hid.  3.  Christ  Of  all  the  visions  that  may  come  to 
the  reveal er  of  the  mysteries  of  God.  renewed  souls,  none  can  surpass  this 
This  is  true  in  relation  to  history — to  one,  the  "  vision  of  the  Slain  Lamb." 
the  soul.  The  purpose  of  the  Christian  We  treat  this  subject  meditatively  as 
life  is  to  reveal  His  glory  and  promote  a  spiritual  preparation.  An  exposition 
it.  of  the  passage,  as  it  stands  connected 

II.  The  object  of  worship. — Christ  with  the  book  of  Revelation,  is  beyond 
worshipped  by  the  redeemed.  —  R,  our  purpose.  We  do  not  presume  to 
Vaughan  Price,  M.A.  treat  it  exhaustively  ;  we  shall  feel  as 

deeply  as  any  one  how  much  has  been 
What  was  tlie  Book  ? — Numberless  left  unsaid.  But  sometimes  we  may 
interpretations  have  been  offered.  It  more  easily  reach  the  very  heart  of 
is  the  Old  Testament ;  it  is  the  whole  truth  by  the  way  of  meditation  than  by 
Bible  ;  it  is  the  title-deed  of  man's  the  way  of  study  and  research ;  and  at 
inheritance ;  it  is  the  book  containing  sacramental  seasons  we  want  to  get 
the  sentence  of  judgment  on  the  foes  of  quite  away  from  the  bustle  of  Biblical 
the  faith ;  it  is  the  Apocalypse ;  it  is  controversy  into  the  "  desert  place " 
part  of  the  Apocalypse ;  it  is  the  book  where  we  can  be  quiet,  and,  in  the  holy 
of  God's  purposes  and  providence,  stillness,  find  "Jesus  only."  A  few 
There  is  a  truth  underlying  most  of  words  will  suffice  to  give  a  general  idea 
these  interpretations,  but  most  of  them  of  the  purpose  of  this  book  of  Revela- 
narrow  the  force  of  the  vision.  If  we  tion.  On  the  ground  of  His  completed 
say  it  is  the  book  which  unfolds  the  obedience  and  perfected  work  on  earth, 
principles  of  God's  government — in  a  the  New  Testament  teaches  us  that 
vidde  sense,  the  book  of  salvation  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  constituted 
(Rom.  xi.  25,  26),  the  interpretation  Mediatorial  King,  and  appointed  to 
of  life  which  Christ  alone  can  bestow —  preside  over  the  whole  work  of  the 
we  shall  include,  probably,  the  practical  redemption  of  the  human  race,  and, 
truths  which  underlie  each  of  these  indeed,  the  entire  creation,  from  the 
interpretations;  for  all  — Old  Testament  consequences  and  dominion  of  sin.  We 
and  New,  man's  heritage  and  destiny,  are  to  think  of  our  Lord  as  now  en- 
God's  purposes  and  providences — are  gaged  in  this  most  blessed  work,  carry- 
dark  till  He  who  is  Light  unfolds  those  ing  out  His  great  commission  in  the 
truths  which  shed  a  light  on  all.  Such  individual  life,  in  the  Church,  in  the 
a  book  becomes  one  *'  which  contains  world,  and  in  heaven.  A  sublime  work, 
and  interprets  human  history,"  and  whose  full  issues  will  only  be  revealed 
claims  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  for  in  the  "  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  But  it 
God. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter.  is  altogether  too  complicated  and  too 

vast  a  matter  to  be  set  down  in  plain 

Ver.  6.  The  Vision  of  the  Slain  Lamb,  human  language.     Human  words  will 

— This  is  one  of  the  Scripture  sentences  not  reach  "  to  the  height  of  this  great 

that  has  a  holy  fascination  for  pious,  thought."     And  yet,  in  some  way,  the 

meditative   souls.      The   figure   under  Church   must   receive   assurance  that 

vrhich  it  presents  our  Lord  is  exquisite  her  Lord  liveth,  reigneth,  and  is  work- 

with  its  tender  suggestions.    The  gentle-  ing  out  His  beneficent  purposes  through 

498 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  v. 


all  the  changes  of  the  ages,  the  rising 
and  falling  of  nations,  the  calamities 
of  famine,  pestilence,  and  war,  and  the 
prosperities  and  persecutions,  declin- 
ings  and  reformations,  of  the  Church. 
Christ  uses  for  this  purpose  prophetic 
figures ;  He  tells  the  story  of  the 
Christian  ages  in  the  highest  forms 
of  poetry  and  parable;  paints  it  in 
visions  which  spiritual  insight  may  fill 
up  and  translate,  as  the  ages  pass  on. 
Setting  however,  this  one  thing  in  con- 
stant prominence,  as  though  He  would 
fix  permanently  the  outlook  of  His 
Church.  Christ  reigns.  Christ  works. 
Everything  that  happens  is  known  to 
Him.  All  things,  however  strange 
they  may  seem,  work  towards  His  final 
redemption  ends.  "  I  am  He  that 
liveth  and  was  dead,  and  behold,  I  am 
alive  for  evermore,  and  have  the  keys 
of  Hades  and  of  death."  In  this  great 
faith  His  Church  must  live,  labour,  and 
die.  The  key  to  the  prophecy  is  given 
to  us,  we  think,  in  some  of  the  opening 
sentences  of  the  first  chapter.  "  Be- 
hold, He  cometh  with  clouds  " ;  not.  He 
shall  come  merely  in  some  great  day  of 
manifestation,  but  He  "  is  coming," 
always  coming ;  He  does  come  to  every 
occasion  of  the  Church's  need,  to  every 
new  circumstance,  both  of  the  Church 
and  of  the  world.  Whatever  may 
happen,  believe  that  Christ  has  come^ 
aivd  is  therCf  in  the  very  midst  of  it. 
Separate  your  Lord  from  nothing  that 
concerns  you  or  your  fellow-men.  Is 
it  persecution  ?  Christ  is  come,  Christ 
is  there.  Is  it  national  calamity? 
Christ  is  come,  Christ  is  there.  Is  it 
the  falling  of  the  Church  into  perilous 
errors  ?  Christ  is  come,  Christ  is  there. 
Is  it  abounding  antichrists  of  scepti- 
cism, luxiu*y  or  indifference  1  Christ 
is  come,  Christ  is  there.  And  His 
victorious  powers  will  yet  be  displayed, 
when  death  and  hell,  man's  last  enemies, 
are  *'  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire."  The 
times  will  often  be  very  hard,  the  out- 
look very  dark,  and  Christians  will 
need  much  patience  and  faith ;  but  they 
may  expect  and  prepare  for  the  struggle. 
John  tells  them  he  is  their  "  Brother 
and   companion  in  tribulation " ;   and 


in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  kingdom  whose  character- 
istic virtue  is  the  patience  of  faith  that 
clings  hard  to  this  great  fact  in  the 
darkness  and  in  the  light — "  Jesus 
lives,"  ''  Jesus  is  here."  So  the  Christ- 
ian soul  ought  to  have  its  abiding 
vision  of  the  present  Saviour.  And 
thus  arises  the  question  which  our 
text  is  designed  to  answer — at  least,  in 
part.  If  we  are  to  have  a  vision  of 
Jesus,  how  are  we  to  figure  Him  ?  It 
seems  that  we  are  to  conceive  of  Him 
as  directly  related  to  His  Churches, 
and  to  their  spiritual  Hfe  and  progress, 
under  the  figures  that  are  given  to  us 
in  the  j^rs^  chapter  of  this  book,  as  the 
powerfully,  searchingly  pure  One — the 
fire  that  burns  unto  whiteness  for 
the  consuming  of  the  Church's  sin. 
But  we  are  also  to  conceive  of  Him 
more  generally  in  His  mediatorial 
sovereignty,  and  this  we  may  do  with 
the  aid  of  the  figures  of  our  text, 
standing  as  the  central  Person  of  all 
creation — a  Lamb  with  marks  of 
slaughter  on  Him,  and  endowed  with 
all  power  and  authority  in  His  per- 
fection of  horns  and  perfection  of  eyes. 
*'  In  the  midst  of  the  throne,  and  of 
the  four  beasts,  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
elders,  stood  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been 
slain,  having  seven  horns  and  seven 
eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of 
God  sent  forth  into  all  the  earth." 
We  fix,  then,  attention  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  as  Christian  souls  ought 
to  apprehend  Him.  Observe  His  form, 
His  marks.  His  attitude,  and  His 
place. 

I.  His  form. — "  A  Lamb."  We  are 
very  familiar  with  the  way  in  which 
animals  are  regarded  as  typos  of  cha- 
racter. The  lion,  for  instance,  repre- 
sents for  us  majesty  and  force ;  the  fox 
dexterity  and  cunning.  Our  Lord  used 
the  characteristic  qualities  of  animals 
in  commending  virtues  to  His  disciples, 
saying,  **  Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,  harm- 
less as  doves."  It  is  the  business  of 
poetry  to  observe  the  instincts  of 
animals,  and  trace  their  analogies  with 
the  virtues  and  vices  of  men ;  and 
prophecy,  such  as  we  have  in  our  text, 

499 


CHAP.  V.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


is  kin  to  the  highest  poetry;  it  finds 
its  only  befitting  expression  in  figura- 
tive and  symbolical  terms.     There  are 
certain    ideas    universally    associated 
with  the  "  Lamb."     It  is  the  common 
symbol   of   gentleness,  innocence,  and 
obedient  meekness.     The  word  used  by 
John,  however,  is  a  peculiar  one,  carry- 
ing these  ordinary  notions  and  some- 
thing   more — something     of     unusual 
tenderness  and  endearment,  as  if  this 
Lamb  won  our  Love,  and  took  at  once 
His  place  in  our  heart.     We  lose  some- 
thing  of  the  strength   of   the   actual 
word  used  when  we  translate  it,  in  the 
only  words  possible  to  us  :  "  dear  little 
Lamb."     Perhaps  our  best  addition  to 
it  would  be  the  word  "  precious,"  re- 
minding us  of  Peter's  words :   "  Unto 
you  that  believe  He  is  precious."    Then 
we  may  read  our  verse,  *'  In  the  midst 
of  the  throne  stood  a  precious  Lamb,  as 
it  had  been  slain."    The  symbol  is  used 
in  connection  with  two  others.    Before 
John   saw  Christ  Himself,  the  angel 
had  spoken  of  Him  in  very  striking 
terms.       "  The   Lion   of   the   tribe   of 
Judah,  the  Root  of  David,  hath  pre- 
vailed to  open  the  Book  and  to  loose 
the  seven  seals."     These  three  figures 
show  that  He  who  might  prevail  to 
open  the  Book  was  no  other  than  the 
Messiah  of  the  older  prophecies.     "  Lion 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah  "  is  the  prophecy 
of  Jacob,  uttered  far  back  in  the  patri- 
archal times.     "  Root  of  David  "  is  the 
prophecy  of   the   middle  ages   of   the 
Jewish    Church.      And    the    "  Lamb 
slain  "  reminds  us  at  once  of  the  evan- 
gelical prophet  Isaiah,  and  his  familiar 
words,  "  He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the 
slaughter."      The    chief    relations    in 
which   Christ   stands   to   us   seem  in- 
dicated in  these  triple  figures  :    Lion, 
Root,  and  Lamb.     As  the  Lion,  He  is 
our  Ruler  and  Head.     As  the  Root,  He 
is  our  Life,  whence  all  vitality  is  drawn. 
As  the   Lamb,  He   is   our  Exemplar, 
the  model  of  the  conduct  that  would 
worthily    express    the    life     lived     in 
Christ's  kingdom.      Model  of  conduct 
and    character    that    may   stand   the 
testing  of  uttermost  sorrow  and  sacri- 
fice.    A  Lamb  led  meekly  even  to  the 

500 


shearing  and  the  slaughter.  The  ex- 
pected Messiah  was  a  Lion  and  a  Root. 
These  figures  helped  men  to  the  know- 
ledge of  Him  :  but,  behold,  when  He 
is  fully  revealed,  when  we  see  Him  as 
He  is,  a  new  figure  appears.  We 
looked  for  a  Lion  and  a  Root,  and  we 
see  a  Lamb,  with  slaughter -marks  and 
blood-stains  on  Him.  And  yet,  though 
the  change  causes  a  passing  shudder, 
this  Lamb  figure  is  the  one  for  Christ 
that  is  so  deeply  true,  so  attractive, 
so  satisfying.  It  embodies  the  very 
highest  and  most  spiritual  conceptions 
of  Christ  we  can  have.  His  glory  is 
the  glory  of  character.  The  Lamb-like 
purity.  His  fleece  never  once  sullied 
with  a  sin-stain ;  the  Lamb-like  gentle- 
ness, neither  "  striving,  nor  crying,  nor 
letting  His  voice  be  heard  in  the 
street " :  the  Lamb-like  obedience, 
knowing  nothing  but  His  Father's 
will,  lead  wheresoe'er  it  may.  It  may 
seem  at  first  as  though  His  glory  was 
His  work  of  redemption  and  sacrifice  ; 
but  soon  we  begin  to  feel  that  not  even 
His  work  must  hide  us  from  Himself. 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !  "  This  is 
the  all-satisfying  vision.  It  is  the 
fitting  figure  for  Christ's  character, 
but  it  is  the  equally-fitting  figure  for 
Christ's  office.  As  "  mediatorial  King  " 
He  is  the  Lamb.  This  is  the  symbol 
of  His  reign.  He  rules  in  righteous- 
ness. He  wins  by  yielding.  His  force 
is  gentleness.  His  commands  are, 
"Hear  and  obey."  He  dignifies  the 
"passive  graces"  of  character.  He 
bids  us  look  away  from  the  mighty 
things  that  take  men's  eye,  to  discern 
the  secret,  gentle,  lamb-like  forces  of 
love,  trust,  patience,  forbearance,  sub- 
mission, and  hope,  which  are  fast 
redeeming  the  world.  Would  you, 
then,  see  Christ,  would  you  get  a 
vision  of  Him  to  your  soul?  Behold 
the  window  opened  in  heaven,  and  a 
"  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  Your 
Lord  is  a  Lamb,  and  remember  He  is — 

"  Lord  of  lambs,  the  lowly ; 
King  of  saints,  the  holy  " 

II.  His  marks. — "As  it   had  been 
slain,"     He    retains,    in    heaven,   the 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  V. 


marks  of  His  slaughter,  and  by  the 
holy  signs  we  may  know  Him  who 
have  these  soul-visions  of  Him  now. 
Slaughter  is  surely  the  right  word  for 
the  cruel  and  dreadful  death  He  died. 
To  spiritual  vision,  indeed,  it  rises  to 
the  height  of  a  sublime  sacrifice  ;  the 
smoke  of  that  perfected  obedience  in 
death  rose  up  to  God  to  win  an  infinite 
acceptance.  This  Lamb  was  in  Divine 
purpose  "slain  before  the  foundation 
of  the  world."  "  He  that  hath  redeemed 
us  to  God  by  His  blood."  By  "the 
precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot." 
But,  to  human  apprehension,  it  was 
still  a  slaughter,  leaving  blood-stains, 
and  five  holy  wounds. 

"  Hath  He  marks  to  lead  me  to  Him, 
If  He  be  my  guide  ? 
In  His  hands  and  feet  are  wound-prints, 
And  His  side." 

I  know  nothing  that  touches  the  soul 
like  this  sight  of  Christ,  which  we 
should  ever  keep  before  us.  A  Lamb, 
as  if  it  had  been  slain.  A  modern  poet 
has  shown  how  his  deepest  heart  was 
reached  by  it : — 

*'  I  saw,  in  a  vision  of  the  night, 
The  Lamb  of  God,  and  it  was  white ; 
White  as  snow,  it  wander'd  thro' 
Silent  fields  of  hare-bell  blue. 
Still  it  wandering  fed,  and  sweet 
Flower'd  the  stars  around  its  feet. 

"  Then  suddenly  I  saw  again. 
Bleating  like  a  thing  in  pain, 
The  Lamb  of  God,  and  all,  in  fear. 
Gazed  and  cried  as  it  came  near. 
For  on  its  robe  of  holy  white 
Crimson  blood-stains  glimmer'd  bright. 
Oh,  the  vision  of  the  night ! 
The     Lamb    of    God !     the    blood-stains 
bright  1 " 

Robert  Buchanan. 

Thomas  knew  his  Lord  by  the  marks, 
which  told  He  was,  indeed,  the  crucified 
One.  And  we  who  see  Him  now  in  the 
visions  of  the  soul,  we  must  keep  in 
sight  those  marks,  and  so  feel  sure  that 
it  is,  indeed,  He,  the  "  Man  of  love,  the 
Crucified."  For  this  is  a  part  of 
Christ's  hallowed  influence  upon  us,  as 
we  bring  Him  into  close  and  living 
relations.  We  see  Him  who  was  ** slain 
for  us."   We  feel  Him  near  "  who  loved 


us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us."  We 
"  consider  Him  that  endured  such 
contradiction  of  sinners  against  Him- 
self, that  we  be  not  weary  or  faint  in 
our  minds."  And  what  influence  shall 
the  abiding  presence  of  those  slaughter- 
marks  have  upon  us  ?  Surely  they 
should  keep  us  ever  humble ;  what  are 
we,  that  our  redemption  should  have 
cost  so  much  as  this  !  They  should  be 
a  voice  pleading  for  an  all-consuming, 
self-mastering  love  for  Him  that  died. 
They  should  bring  us  to  a  hearty  sub- 
mission unto  Him  who,  by  agony  and 
shame,  has  won  the  right  to  rule.  They 
should  call  upon  us  continually  to 
accept  of  the  Christian  life  as  a  sacri- 
fice; following  Him  cheerfully,  and 
saying,  "It  is  enough  for  the  disciple 
that  he  be  as  his  Master,  and  the 
servant  as  his  Lord."  Believe  in  the 
Living  Christ.  He  is  the  Lamb.  But 
never  fail  to  observe  that  it  is  as  if  He 
had  been  slain,  and  **  Learn  of  Christ 
to  bear  the  cross." 

III.  His  attitude.— "  Stood."  Not 
now  lying  down,  slaughtered,  and 
dead ;  but  standing,  raised  again,  with 
but  the  sad  marks  left  behind  of  all 
that  is  now  passed  through  and  done. 
Once  the  fainting  Head  bowed,  and  they 
loosened  the  piercing  nails,  and  bent 
down  the  rigid  limbs,  and  lay  the  poor 
body  out,  and  folded  the  spices  round, 
and  lifted  it  upon  the  bier,  and  cariied 
it  into  the  garden  tomb.  Then  the 
Lamb  of  God  was  lying  crucified, 
slaughtered,  dead.  But  not  thus  is  He 
to  be  seen  by  our  spiritual  vision  now. 
*'  No  more  the  bloody  cross ;  the  nails 
and  spear  no  more."  We  have  not  to 
keep  before  us  a  dead  Redeemer;  the 
sound  has  long  since  rung  through 
heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell,  "  He  liveth, 
and  is  alive  for  evermore."  Keep  your 
spirits  humble  and  solemn  by  the 
memory  of  His  cruel  death  ;  but  be  sure 
of  this :  the  Redeemer  lives.  Before 
the  throne  He  stands  in  all  the  vigour 
of  His  eternal  life.  We  have  "  a  grt  at 
High  Priest  passed  into  the  heavens, 
Jesus,  the  Son  of  God " ;  and  **  He 
abideth  a  priest  continually."  And  yet, 
how  Christian  thought  will  cling  about 

501 


CHAP.  V.         HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


that  shameful  scene  of  Calvary,  and 
about  that  tomb  where  Jesus  was, 
though  we  know  He  is  no  longer  there. 
It  is  the  secret  source  of  so  much  of  our 
bondage  and  error,  that  we  let  our 
minds  dwell  so  constantly  on  a  dead 
Christ.  We  preach  too  much  a  dead 
Christ.  We  paint  too  many  artistic 
pictures  of  a  dead  Christ.  We  think 
too  often  over  the  dead  Christ.  Our 
vision  is  not  cleared  enough  of  prejudice 
to  observe  Christ's  attitude  before  the 
throne.  As  we  usually  see  it,  the 
Lamb  is  lying  down,  as  if  it  were  slain. 
Nay,  look  again  ;  the  Lamb  is  standing 
up,  only  it  has  upon  it  the  marks  that 
tell  it  was  once  slain.  How  hard  it  is 
to  take  Paul's  comparative  estimate  of 
the  Crucifixion  and  the  Resurrection. 
"It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather, 
that  is  risen  again.*'  But  another 
thought  gathers  round  the  attitude  of 
Christ  as  Mediatorial  King.  He  is 
"  standing"  as  expressive  of  His  activity 
and  energy.  He  stands  before  the 
throne  as  one  attentive,  quick,  waiting 
that  He  may  obey.  Like  the  visioned 
cherubim  of  Isaiah,  who  stood  covering 
face  and  feet,  with  poised  wing  waiting 
to  fly.  So  we  are  helped  to  feel  that 
His  rule  is  a  living,  active  thing ;  not 
some  sublime  possibility;  not  some 
future  glory ;  not  a  wondrous  "  may- 
be " ;  but  a  present  fact.  He  stands 
concerned  now  for  us ;  ruling  now  over 
us ;  active  now  to  bless  us.  Applying 
now  the  virtue  of  His  wounds ;  sanctify- 
ing us  wholly — body,  soul,  and  spirit ; 
changing  us  now  into  the  image  of  His 
own  Lamb-like  purity.  He  not  only 
liveth,  but  is  working,  until  all  enemies 
be  put  under  His  feet.  With  Stephen, 
we  may  "see  Jesus  standing  at  the 
right  hand  of  God." 

IV.  His  place. — "  In  the  midst  of 
the  throne  and  of  the  four  beasts,  and 
in  the  midst  of  the  elders."  The  term 
"  midst "  should  be  middle,  in  the 
central  place,  the  place  that  properly 
belongs  to  the  representative  and  leader. 
All  nature  is  figured  as  present  before 
the  rainbow -girdled  throne  of  God. 
The  four  living  creatures  represent  all 
animated  nature.     The  Church  of  God 

502 


is  there,  the  older  and  the  newer 
Church,  for  which  stand  four-and- 
twenty  elders.  But  in  the  very  middle, 
in  the  central  leader's  place,  is  "  Jesus," 
standing  for  them  all.  Head  and  Repre- 
sentative of  all.  In  Eastern  lands  the 
gorgeous  pavilion  of  the  great  king  or 
general  is  placed  in  the  very  centre 
of  the  encampment.  Bound  it  the 
tents  of  captains  and  soldiers  are 
gathered,  in  ever-widening  circles,  every 
man's  tent-door  opening  to  the  view  of 
the  king's  tent.  The  central  place  is 
the  place  for  the  leader.  And  so  with 
this  feature  of  the  vision  we  are  helped 
to  realise  the  surpassing  dignities  that 
belong  to  the  slain  Lamb;  for,  blending 
poetic  figures,  we  read,  "  On  His  vesture 
and  on  His  thigh  is  this  name  written. 
King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of  Lords." 
The  sadness  of  those  wounds  and 
blood-stains  almost  seems  to  pass; 
nay,  the  very  Lamb-figure  fades  a  little 
from  our  view,  when  we  see  the  'place 
He  occupies,  and  know  that  to  Him 
every  knee  shall  bow,  of  things  in 
heaven  and  things  in  earth.  He  is  in 
the  midst — the  central  place — of 
nature;  her  glory  and  her  crown; 
the  secret  of  her  infinite  beauty  to  all 
open,  reverent  souls.  He  is  in  the 
middle — the  central  place — of  the  old 
Judaic  life  and  system.  Abraham  saw 
His  day.  David  sang  His  praise.  And 
prophets  painted  the  coming  glories  of 
His  salvation.  He  is  in  the  midst — the 
central  place — of  the  Christian  Church, 
as  it  marches  down  through  the  ages  to 
the  great  day  of  redemption,  and  of 
God.  He  leads  His  witnesses  through 
martyr's  fires.  He  keeps  His  followers 
amid  fierce  persecutions.  He  nerves 
His  soldiers  to  the  great  warfare,  and 
His  labourers  to  the  arduous  toil.  He 
steers  the  great  mission  ship,  as  it 
carries  the  gospel  far  and  wide  over 
the  earth,  while  His  servants  sing : — 

*'  Fly,  happy,  happy  sails,  and  bear  the  press, 
Fly  happy  with  the  banner  of  the  cross ; 
Knit  land  to  land,  and,  flowing  havenward, 
Enrich  the  markets  of  the  Golden  Year." 

It  is  His  rightful  place.  Centre  every- 
where and  of  everything.  Let  Him 
have  His  rightful  place  in  your  hearts, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  V. 


your  thoughts,  your  life  !  Complete  High  God,  and  his  utterances  are  more 
the  vision  you  keep  before  your  soul  of  than  poetry.  They  are  discriminating 
the  •'  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain,"  by  and  far-seeing  prophecy.  They  forth- 
adding  this  :  "  He  stands  in  the  midst  tell  as  well  as  foretell  the  destiny  of 
of  the  throne,  and  of  the  four  beasts,  the  sons,  through  generations  to  come, 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders."  We  I.  The  victorious  leadership  and 
are  to  see  Jesus,  to  be  always  seeing  power  of  Judah. — Of  Judah,  the  old 
Jesus,  to  keep  Him  ever  well  in  view,  man  says  that  he  shall  be  chief 
We  come  to  His  table  of  communion  amongst  his  brethren.  "  Thou  art  he 
that,  in  the  way  of  His  own  providing,  whom  thy  brethren  shall  praise ;  .  .  . 
and  by  the  aid  of  His  own  symbols,  we  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down 
may  clear  and  renew  our  visions  of  before  thee."  He  is  to  be  a  victorious 
Him.  We  find  no  mystic  presence  in  power.  "Thy  hand  shall  be  in  the 
the  bread  and  wine,  but  we  find  a  real  neck  of  thine  enemies  .  .  .  from  the 
presence  in  our  soul :  and  Him  whom  prey  thou  art  gone  up."  His  is  to  be 
we  see  and  recognise;  Him  before  whom  a  legislative  and  regal  power.  "The 
we  freshly  bow ;  Him  whose  honoured  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah, 
Name"  we  anew  confess ;  Him  whose  nor  a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet." 
redemption-work  we  lovingly  remember;  He  is  to  be  the  true  centre  of  govern- 
Him  whose  "  prepared  place  for  us  "  we  ment,  the  rallying  point  of  the  world's 
hope  to  occupy ;  Him  whose  smile  we  hopes  ;  "to  him  shall  the  gathering 
feel  will  make  our  everlasting  heaven; —  of  the  people  be."  Let  us  trace  the 
Him  we  behold  as  a  '^  Lamb."  Looking  history  to  see  the  facts  that  fulfil  the 
as  if  He  once  was  slain.  Standing  prophecy.  Two  hundred  years  after 
before  the  throne  of  God.  Head  of  the  old  man's  dying  words  were  spoken, 
nature  and  of  man.  He  is  the  Lamb-  we  find  the  children  of  Israel  going  up 
like  leader  of  lambs,  the  lowly  One.  out  of  Egypt,  and  God  gives  directions 
Then  let  us  become  the  lowly  lambs  He  about  the  order  of  their  encampment, 
leads.  He  is  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  "  On  the  east  side  (Num.  ii.  3)  .  .  . 
the  foundation  of  the  world,"  then  let  shall  they  of  the  standard  of  the  camp 
us  trust  the  whole  burden  of  sin  and  of  Judah  pitch."  Why  is  Judah 
salvation  on  that  great  sin- bearer.  He  assigned  the  principal  place  in  the 
is  the  Lamb  risen  to  die  no  more,  front  of  the  Tabernacle  1  Why  is  he 
exalted  to  heaven's  first  place,  crowned  here  the  chief  tribe  ?  Why  should  not 
with  the  Name  above  every  name.  He  Reuben,  the  first-born,  be  appointed 
is  our  strength,  our  triumph,  and  our  here?  There  is  no  explanation  to  be 
hope.  Let  us  join  beasts,  elders,  angels,  given  except  that  for  his  sin  he  had 
and  redeemed,  as  they  bow  before  Him,  been  displaced,  "  and  the  genealogy  is 
and  sing :  "  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  not  to  be  reckoned  after  the  birth- 
glory,  and  power,  be  unto  Him  that  right,"  and  "  Judah  was  made  the 
sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  chief  ruler"  (1  Chron.  v.  1,2).  Again, 
Lamb,  for  ever  and  ever."  in  Num.  vii.    12,   when  the  offerings 

were  to  be  made,  Nahshon  ...  of  the 

The     All-conquering    Christ. — It    is  tribe  of  Judah  was  assigned  the  dignity 

needless  to  say  to  the  biblical  student  of  offering  first.     In  Numbers  xxiv.  9 

that    this    imagery    has   its    base    on  Balaam  warns   Balak   that  he  would 

Genesis  xlix.   8-10.      An  old  Hebrew  better  beware  of  these  people,  because. 

Sheikh  comes  to  die,  and,  dpng,  blesses  according    to   an    old   tradition,    they 

his  boys.     He  talks  poetically.     It  is  destroy    their    enemies   with    a   lion's 

easy  for  a  Semitic  man  to  speak   in  strength.     *'  He  couched,  he  lay  down 

poetry.     One  old  Arab  is  on  record  as  as  a  lion,  and  as  a   great   lion,  who 

having  composed  a  poem  of  one  hundred  shall  stir  him  up  ? "  save  at  his  own 

and  fifty-seven  lines  when  dying.    But  peril.     The  tradition  does  not  die,  and 

this  Sheikh  is  a  prophet  of  the  most  Moses  re-announces  it  at  his   d^ing. 

503 


CHAP.  V.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION, 


He  blesses  the  descendants  of  the  boys 
whom    Jacob    blessed    a-dying.       He 
renews  and  re-formulates  the  prophecy 
(Deut.   xxxiii.  7) :    "  And  this   is  the 
blessing  of  Judah :    Hear,   Lord,   the 
voice    of    Judah,     and     bring     him " 
(victorious    from    battle)     "  unto   his 
people ;  let  his  hands  be  sufficient  for 
him  j  and  be  thou  an  help  to  him  from 
his  enemies."     The   same   all -conquer- 
ing   element,    the    all-prevailing,   all- 
victorious  might  must  still  abide  with 
Judah.     When  the  tribes  had  passed 
'  into    Canaan    the    remnants     of   the 
people  were  to  be  overcome,  and  Israel 
inquires  of  the  Lord  who  shall  be  put 
in  the  forefront  of  the  fray,  who  should 
lead  to  battle.     "  Who  shall "  (Judges 
i.    2,    3)    "  go  up    for  us   against  the 
Canaanites  first,  to  fight  against  them  ? 
And  the  Lord  said,  Judah  shall  go  up : 
behold,  I  have  delivered  the  land  into 
his    hand."     Still   later   the   tribe    of 
Benjamin  revolt  (Judges  xx.   18)  and 
the  people  "  went  to  the  house  of  God  " 
and  '*  asked  counsel  of  God.     Which  of 
us  shall  go  up  first  to  the  battle  against 
the  children  of  Benjamin  ?     And  the 
Lord   said,  Judah   shall  go  up  first." 
The    regal    pomp   and   power   of   the 
Messiah  was  symbolised  by  David,  and 
the    foundation     of     his    royalty    he 
recognised  to  be  this  old  legend  of  his 
people,   this  prophetic   decree    of   the 
father  of  his  line.     The  Lord  chose  me, 
and   my  father's  house,   for  He  hath 
chosen  Judah  to  be  the  ruler  (1   Chr. 
xxviii.     4).      When    the    north    wind 
ripples  over  his  harp,  he  sings,  ^'  Judah 
is  my  "  (Israel's)    "  lawgiver  "  (Psalm 
Ix.  7). 

II.  But  this  all-conquering  and  all- 
controlling  power  of  Judah  but  symbol- 
ised the  real  royalty  and  supreme 
sway  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  hence  we  go 
on  to  the  New  Testament.  Matthew 
opens  with  a  long  chapter  of  hard 
names — the  family  record  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  "  the  book  of  the  generation  of 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  David."  The 
old  promise  of  Jacob  in  Genesis  was 
that  this  regal  might,  this  conquering 
splendour,  should  abide  with  Judah 
till    the    Peace-Bringer,    the    Shiloh, 

504 


should  come  (Gen.  xlix.  10).  We  have 
been  wont  to  remark  how  this  was 
fulfilled,  and  to  emphasise  the  fact 
that  when  the  Shiloh  did  come,  this 
power  departed  from  Israel.  Home's 
greedy  eagles  flew  over  Jerusalem  and 
struck  their  bloody  talons  into  Judaea's 
heart,  and  since  then  they  have  been 
peeled,  scattered  and  scorned,  hunted 
and  hated,  without  a  priest,  without 
an  ephod,  without  a  sceptre,  the  by- 
word of  the  world.  But  that  is  not 
the  deeper  and  inner  meaning  of  the 
utterance.  The  truth  is,  that  the  regal 
power  and  splendour  never  did  depart 
from  Judah.  Look  at  Matthew's 
record.  It  is  a  record  which  God 
kept  through  three  thousand  years, 
and  which,  after  Shiloh  came,  of  Judah^ 
fell  into  confusion,  so  that  no  Jew  on 
earth,  it  is  said,  can  prove  to-day  to 
what  tribe  he  belongs.  The  power 
never  did  depart  from  Judah.  It  only 
centred  in  the  Shiloh,  and  He  wag  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah.  All  that  had  been 
before,  as  compared  with  the  race- 
power  of  the  Shiloh,  was  only  a  dim 
foreshadow.  It  was  as  unequal  to  the 
real  might  and  majesty  of  the  real  Lion 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah  as  "  a  painted  ship 
upon  a  painted  ocean  "  is  to  the  real  ship 
on  the  real  ocean.  It  is  needless  to  point 
out  the  manifested  regal  sway  of  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  needless  to  remind  our- 
selves, at  length,  that  Christian  kings, 
and  Christian  princes,  and  Christian 
piesidents  rule  to-day  more  than  half 
the  land  surface  of  the  globe,  and  all 
the  seas.  The  unobserved  but  steady 
transfer  of  the  thrones  and  of  all 
political  power  from  heathen  and 
Moslem  to  Christian  hands  is  but  one 
of  the  many  indications  that  the 
sceptre  has  not  yet  departed  from 
Judah,  nor  a  "  lawgiver  from  between 
his  feet." 

III.  It  would  be  interesting  to  note 
at  length  the  blending  of  the  Lion  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah  and  Shiloh  the 
Peace-Bringer,  as  the  two  elements  are 
portrayed  in  the  book  of  Revelation. 
— The  Rest-Man  is  to  rule,  until  He 
put  all  enemies  under  His  feet.  He  is 
to  be  the   Prince  of  Peace,  **that  in 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  V. 


the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times 
He  might  gather  together  in  one  all 
things  in  Christ,  both  which  are  in 
heaven,  and  which  are  on  earth  even  in 
Him  "  (Eph.  i.  10),  for  to  this  Lion, 
Shiloh,  **  shall  the  gathering  of  the 
people  be."  In  our  text  (chap.  v.  5,  6), 
John  was  asked  to  behold  a  Lion,  and 
he  looked  and  beheld  a  Lamb.  He 
looked  for  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of 
Judah  and  beheld  the  Shiloh.  And 
now  henceforth  John  flashes  and  flames 
with  the  record  of  his  visions  of  the  all- 
conquering,  all-controlling,  all-compell- 
ing power,  the  regal  splendour,  the 
triumphant  sway,  of  the  Shiloh — the 
Lamb  slain.  The  Lamb  is  the  centre  of 
thrones  and  principalities  and  powers. 
He  is  the  centre  of  the  homage  and 
honour  of  the  whole  creation.  The 
elders  with  harps  are  before  the 
throne  (chap.  v.  8),  and  the  assembly 
shouts  His  worth,  saying,  "  Worthy 
is  the  Lamb  to  receive  power  .  .  .  and 
stre7igth,  and  honour,  and  glory,"  and 
His  enemies  overthrown  are  fearful 
in  His  presence,  crying  (chap.  vi.  16), 
*'  Hide  us  .  .  .  from  the  wrath  of  the 
Lamb.  .  .  .  Who  shall  be  able  to  stand  " 
before  the  irresistible  sweep  of  His 
"sceptre"?  And  (chap.  vii.  9,  10) 
an  international  multitude,  too  vast  to 
be  estimated,  victorious  in  His  might, 
wave  palms  before  the  throne  on 
which  He  sits,  and  these  are  they 
(ver.  10)  which  washed  their  robes  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  He  (ver.  17) 
fed  them  and  led  them,and"  wiped  away 
all  tears  from  their  eyes."  And  yet 
again  (chap.  xi.  15),  amid  the  thunders 
and  lightnings  great  voices  in  heaven 
say,  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and 
of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  for 
ever  and  ever."  And  still  further,  when 
the  head  of  all  the  organised  evil  forces 
is  overthrown,  it  is  said  he  was  cast 
down  by  "the  blood  of  the  Lamb." 
Christ's  forces  are  enrolled,  His  registry 
is  complete,  and  jx)wer  was  given  Him 
(chap.  xiii.  7,  8)  over  all  kindreds  and 
tongues  and  nations,  and  this  marshalled 
and  enrolled  multitude  whose  names 
are  written  in  the  Book  of  Life,  of  the 


Lamb  slain,  ascribe  unto  Him  all 
dominion.  The  scroll  unfolds,  vision 
rushes  after  vision,  and  one  regiment  of 
144,000,  the  "  King's  own,"  a  personal 
escort  branded  with  the  love-brand  of 
the  Father's  own  name  in  their  fore- 
heads, in  sweet  and  royal  submission 
"  follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He 
goeth."  John's  wing  does  not  weary ;  he 
soars  on.  Now  it  is  over  a  sea  of  glass, 
mingled  with  fire,  where  is  another 
group  of  victors  who  had  gotten  the 
victory  over  the  beast,  who  sing  the 
song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb.  The" 
nineteenth  chapter  ushers  us  into  the 
banqueting  room  for  the  "  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb."  And  now  the 
central  courts  of  the  universe  are 
flooded  with  light,  and  the  Lamb  is  the 
Light  thereof  (chap.  xxi.  23),  and  the 
book  closes  with  the  outflow  of  peace 
and  prosperity  from  the  centre  of  the 
regal  splendour,  and  a  "  river  of  water 
flows  out  from  the  throne  of  God  and 
of  the  Lamb."—/.  T.  Gracey,  D.D. 
r 

Ver.  12.  TTie  Slain  Lamh. — John 
was  the  bosom  friend  of  Christ.  To 
his  affectionate,  confiding  nature  may 
be  traced  the  intimacy  formed  with 
his  Lord.  Through  him,  the  beloved 
disciple,  we  have  disclosed  the  inner 
life  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  In  gospel  and 
epistle  John  makes  Christ  the  central 
figure.  When  isolated  from  men,  exiled 
at  Patmos,  he  was  not  cut  off  from 
Christ,  but  made  to  witness  the  su- 
blime revelations  of  his  enthroned 
Redeemer,  as  well  as  the  events  of 
coming  history  exhibited  as  an  open- 
ing panorama,  even  down  to  the  end 
of  time.  He  sees  the  vials  poured, 
the  trumpets  blown,  and  Satan  bound. 
He  beholds  the  bewildering  glory  of 
the  eternal  world  and  hears  the 
song,  "  Worthy  the  Lamb."  Let  us 
consider — 

I.  The  Lamb  slain. 

II.  The  Lamb  worshipped  as  worthy. 
— There  is  nothing  dubious  or  defective 
in  this  matter.  The  statement  is  clear. 
John  the  Baptist  pointed  to  Jesus, 
saying,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God." 
The  lamb  is  an  emblem  of  purity  and 

505 


CHAP.  V.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


innocence.  Christ  is  holy,  harmless,  "  My  God,  why  hast  Thou  forsaken 
and  undefiled.  We  eat  the  flesh  of  Me  ? "  Thus  was  the  Lamb  slain, 
a  lamb  and  wear  its  fleece.  Christ's  III.  The  Lamb  who  was  slain  is 
flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  His  blood  our  worthy  of  praise. — 1.  Because  of  His 
drink,  spiritually.  So,  too,  we  are  to  essential  dignity.  This  meek  and  lowly 
put  on  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  sacrifice  Jesus  was  also  kingly.  This  root  out 
of  Jesus  delivers  us  from  wrath,  for  of  a  dry  ground  was  also  the  fairest 
His  death  cancels  the  debt  due  to  among  the  children  of  men.  He  who 
justice.  The  demands  of  the  law  are  to  some  had  no  form  or  comeliness  was 
met  in  our  surety,  and  we  are  delivered  really  "  altogether  lovely."  By  Him 
from  wrath.  How  was  He  slain  ?  all  things  were  made,  and  by  Him  all 
1.  He  was  slain  in  the  counsel  of  God.  things  consist,  stand  together.  The 
His  purpose  who  can  annul  ?  It  was  universe  reflects  the  glory  of  Christ. 
"  before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  Great  is  the  dignity  and  mystery. 
He  saw  man  ruined  through  their  He,  too,  is  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King, 
federal  head.  He  determined  to  save.  His  name  shall  endure  for  ever.  When 
That  was  a  marvellous  consultation  Caesars  are  forgotten  and  Alexanders 
had  between  the  three  Persons  of  the  pass  into  obscurity,  the  Lamb  that  was 
blessed  Trinity.  God  gave  up  His  slain  shall  still  reign  in  undying  re- 
Son,  by  eternal,  inevitable,  and  neces-  nown.  The  orchestra  of  heaven,  and 
sary  generation.  Amazing  act  of  the  shouts  of  the  redeemed,  proclaim 
generosity !  Where  can  its  equal  be  Him  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords, 
found  ?  He  doomed  His  Son  to  igno-  2.  His  interposition  on  our  behalf 
minious  death.  He  furbished  the  sword  makes  Him  worthy  of  praise.  When 
of  justice.  2.  He  was  slain  in  promise  restitution  was  demanded,  Christ  met 
and  in  type.  The  seed  of  the  woman  the  claim.  How  could  God  be  just 
is  to  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  This  and  yet  justify  the  sinner  ?  When  the 
is  the  germ  of  all  succeeding  promises,  Father  asked,  "  Who  shall  go  for  us  1 " 
all  of  which  are  exceedingly  precious,  the  Son  replied,  "  Here  am  I,  send 
The  serpent  bruises  His  heel ;  that  is.  Me ;  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will."  We 
the  humanity  of  Christ.  In  David's  admire  the  self-forgetfulness  of  men 
psalms,  in  Zechariah,  Isaiah,  and  in  philanthropic  endeavour,  but  it  is 
Daniel,  we  learn  more  of  Him  who  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the 
was  to  be  slain  for  our  offences  and  self-abnegation  of  the  Kedeemer  of 
cut  off  "  not  for  Himself."  He  is  the  the  world.  3.  His  exaltation  makes 
Paschal  Lamb.  The  true  day  of  Atone-  Jesus  worthy  of  praise.  He  hath 
ment  was  hastening,  when  the  promise  been  *'  highly  exalted  "  to  the  right 
and  type  were  to  be  fulfilled  on  Calvary,  hand  of  the  Father.  In  the  name 
3.  He  was  actually  slain.  Infidelity  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow  to  pray, 
has  denied  this,  but  the  fact  stands,  for  Him  hath  God  made  Lord  of  all. 
He  climbed  the  fatal  hill,  being  He  drank  of  the  brook  by  the  way, 
straitened  until  the  sacrifice  was  ac-  and  therefore  hath  He  lifted  up  the 
complished.  The  cross  was  erected,  head.  To  Him  are  given  dominion. 
The  nails,  forged  in  hell,  were  driven  and  glory,  and  power,  and  blessing, 
as  the  murderous  hammer  fell.  Blood  All  in  heaven  worship  the  Lamb  who 
streams  from  His  hands  and  feet.  The  was  slain.  Shall  not  we  join  them  in 
cross  becomes  as  a  rock  against  which  this  adoration  1  Yes,  let  us  kiss  the 
the  waves  of  the  curse  dash  in  vain —  Son,  lest  He  be  angry.  4.  Christ  is 
the  lightning-rod  that  turns  away  the  represented  as  receiving  the  homage  of 
wrath  of  God  from  us,  which  otherwise  the  whole  creation.  All  in  heaven,  and 
would  have  slain  us.  The  Lord  of  in  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  join  in 
glory  dies.  The  graves  open.  There  this  recognition  of  the  Lamb  that  was 
is  a  preternatural  chill  in  the  air.  slain.  This  is  with  the  approval  of 
Legions  of   hell   rejoice   as   He  cries,  God  the  Father.     Then  we  should  not 

506 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION.        chap.  v. 


delay  to  bring  our  worship  and  service 
to  Christ.  In  conclusion,  I  remark : 
1.  Here  is  revealed  the  love  of  God 
the  Father.  He  so  loved  the  world, 
He  gave  Christ  to  die.  The  apostle 
also  says,  "  He  gave  Himself  for  us." 
Here  is  love  which  is  measureless. 
Paul  prays  that  we  may  be  able  to 
comprehend  its  length,  breadth,  height, 
and  depth,  yet  adds  that  it  passes 
knowledge.  2.  We  infer  the  value 
of  the  atonement.  "  Thanks  be  unto 
God  for  His  unspeakable  gift."  We 
cannot  compute  the  worth  of  this  in- 
finite sacrifice.  We  walk  on  the  brink 
of  an  ocean  of  fathomless  depth,  as 
Newton  said  he  stood  by  the  sea-shore 
picking  up,  as  it  were,  mere  pebbles  of 


truth,  knowing  little  of  treasures  hid. 
3.  This  memorial  supper  is  an  appro- 
priate recognition  of  the  work  of  Christ's 
atoning  grace.  Men  keep  the  deeds  of 
heroes  in  mind  by  memorial  observ- 
ances; they  build  shrines  and  rear 
pillars.  But  here  is  a  sublimer  event, 
that  calls  us  to  more  solemn  and 
reverent  recognition  of  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain  for  our  salvation.  4.  I  offer 
you  this  Saviour  as  your  only  hope. 
Do  not  pass  by  with  indifference,  but 
seek  His  favour,  which  is  life,  and  His 
lovingkindness,  which  is  better  than 
life.  In  the  love  and  favour  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  you 
are  safe  for  timo  and  safe  for  eternity. 
— Z>.  Steele,  D.D. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER    V. 


Ver.  1.  Written  Scrolls. — Sometimes  the 
scrolls  were  written  on  both  sides,  and  the 
manner  in  which  this  was  done  is  so  well 
explained  by  a  modern  traveller,  who  saw 
two  ancient  rolls  of  this  description  in  Syria, 
that  we  shall  give  the  account  in  his  own 
words:  "In the  monastery," says  Mr.  Hartly, 
"  I  observed  two  very  beautiful  rolls,  contain- 
ing the  liturgy  of  St.  Chrysostom  and  that 
attributed  by  the  Greeks  to  St.  James.  You 
begin  to  read  by  unrolling,  and  you  continue 
to  read  and  unroll,  till  at  last  you  arrive  at 
the  stick  to  which  the  roll  is  fastened ;  then 
you  turn  the  parchment  round,  and  continue 
to  read  on  the  other  side,  rolling  it  gi-adually 
up  till  you  complete  the  liturgy."  It  was 
thus  written  within  and  without,  and  it  may 
serve  to  convey  an  intelligible  and  correct 
idea  of  the  books  described  both  by  Ezekiel 
and  John. — Paxton. 

Ver.  6.  The  Plea  in  Chrisfs  Intercession. 
— ("  As  it  had  been  slain.")  "  A  rare  illustra- 
tion of  the  efficacious  intercession  of  Christ 
in  heaven  we  have  in  that  famous  story  of 
Amintas,  who  appeared  as  an  advocate  for 
his  brother  ^schylus,  who  was  strongly 
accused,  and  very  likely  to  be  condemned  to 
die.  Now,  Amintas,  having  performed  great 
services,  and  merited  highly  of  the  common- 
wealth, in  whose  service  one  of  his  hands 
was  cut  off  in  the  field,  he  came  int®  the 
court,  in  his  brother's  behalf,  and  said 
nothing,  but  only  lifted  up  his  arm  and 
showed  them  an  arm  without  a  hand,  which 
so  moved  them  that  without  speaking  a 
word,  they  freed  his  brother  immediately. 
And  thus,  if  you  look  into  chap.  v.  6,  you  shall 
see  in  what  posture  Christ  is  represented 
visionally  there  as  standing  between  God 


and  us:  'And  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  and  of  the  four  beasts, 
and  in  the  midst  of  the  elders,  stood  a  Lamb 
as  it  had  been  slain ; '  tliat  is,  bearing  in 
His  glorified  body  the  marks  of  death  and 
sacrifice.  Those  wounds  He  received  for 
our  sins  on  earth  are,  as  it  were,  still  fresh 
bleeding  in  heaven ;  a  moving  and  prevailing 
argument  it  is  with  the  Father  to  give  us  the 
mercies  He  pleads  for." — Flavel. 

The  "  Agnus  Dei." — In  early  Christian  art, 
symbolical  representations  of  our  Saviour  as 
a  lamb  are  found,  and  it  was  at  the  Trullan 
Council  (692  A.D.)  that  it  was  decreed  that 
the  Lord  should  no  longer  be  pictured  in 
churches  under  the  form  of  a  lamb,  but  in 
human  form.  It  was  an  ancient  custom  to 
distribute  to  the  worshippers,  on  the  first 
Sunday  after  Easter,  particles  of  wax  taken 
from  the  paschal  tapers,  each  particle  being 
stamped  with  the  figure  of  a  lamb.  These 
were  burned  in  houses,  fields,  or  vineyards, 
•to  secure  them  against  evil  influence  or 
thunderstrokes.  A  waxen  Agnus  Dei  is  said 
to  have  been  among  the  presents  made  by 
Gregory  the  Great  to  Theolinda,  Queen  of 
the  Lombards ;  but  proof  of  this  is  wanting. 
One  was  found  in  1725  A.D.,  in  the  Church  of  • 
San  Clemente,  at  Rome,  in  a  tomb  supposed 
to  be  that  of  Flavins  Clemens,  a  martyr.  A 
legend  preserved  by  Robert  of  Mount  St. 
Michael  tells  how,  in  the  year  1183,  the  Holy 
Virgin  appeared  to  a  woodman  at  work  in  a 
forest,  and  gave  him  a  medal  bearing  her 
own  image,  and  that  of  her  Son,  with  the 
inscription,  **  Agnus  Dei,  qui  tollis  pcccata 
mundi,  Dona  twMs  pacetn.  This  she  bade 
him  bear  to  the  bishop,  and  tell  him  that 
all   who  wished  the  peace  of  the  church 

507 


CHAP.  VI.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION, 


should  make  such  medals  as  these,  and  wear  Church  of  Christ.     The  true  odours  are  the 

them  in  token  of  peace. — Biblical  Dictionary  heart-prayers  of  God's  children.    Archbishop 

of  Antiquities.  Leighton  says,  alluding  to  the  composition 

of    the  Temple   incense :   "  Of    these  three 

Ver.  8.    The  Praises  and  Prayers  of  the  sweet  ingredient  perfumes — namely,  petition, 

Church. — The    vials    (which    seem    to    be  confession,  thanksgiving — is  the  essence  of 

censers,  as  they  hold  the  incense)  and  the  prayer,  and  by  the    Divine  fire  of   love  it 

harps,  it  is  perhaps  more  natural  to  suppose,  ascends  unto  God,  the  heart  and  all  with  it ; 

were  in  the  hands  of  the  four  and  twenty  and  when  the  hearts  of  the  saints  unite  in 

elders,  and  not  of  the  living  creatures.     Here,  joint  prayer,  the  pillar  of  sweet  smoke  goes 

then,  we  have  the  praises  (represented  by  up    the    greater    and    the    fuller." — Bishoj? 

the  harps),  and  the  prayers  (represented  by  Boyd  Carpenter. 
the  censers),  of  the  world-wide  and  age-long 


CHAPTER   VI. 
CALAMITIES   ON  THE  OPENING  OF   SIX  SEALS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  first  catastrophe,  or  overthrow  of  the  Jewish  persecuting  power,  is  the  subject  of 
chaps,  vi. — xi.  Some  take  the  subject  in  a  more  general  way,  as  being  the  relation  of 
Christianity  to  great  universal  evils. 

Ver.  1  One. — kvos,  the  first  of  the  living  ones.  Come  and  see. — Properly  only  the  word 
**  Come.''  This  cry  is  not  to  the  seer,  but  to  the  riders,  who  immediately  begin  to  appear. 
Some  take  the  invitation  as  "  addressed  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  His  creatures  pray  Him  to 
come — and  behold,  instead  of  His  coming  immediately,  there  come  these  terrible  precursors 
of  His,  so  increasingly  unlike  Him." 

Ver.  2.  White  horse. — The  rider  is  armed  with  a  bow,  and  adorned  with  a  victor's  crown. 
"  This  is  an  emblem  of  the  gospel,  which,  through  the  instrumentality  of  preaching,  is  about 
to  extend  itself  victoriously  through  the  earth."  For  visions  of  horses  see  Zech.  i.  8-11  ; 
vi.  1-8.  There  is  symbolic  significance  in  their  colours.  Here  the  colours  of  the  four  horses 
symbolise  triumph,  slaughter,  mourning,  and  death.  The  meaning  of  the  first  is  disputed. 
Simcox  suggests  that  it  symbolises  the  "  spirit  of  conquest " ;  such  as  animates  men  like 
Alexander  or  Napoleon.  Carpenter  improves  on  this  by  suggesting  the  spirit  of  Christian 
victory.     The  horses  used  in  Roman  triumphs  were  white. 

Ver.  4.  Horse  that  was  red. — The  angel  of  war.  "  The  seal  puts  in  pictorial  form  the 
warning  of  Christ,  that  wars  and  rumours  of  wars  would  be  heard  of.  Red  is  the  symbol 
of  blood  to  be  shed." 

Ver.  5.  A  black  horse.—"  Whose  rider  holds  a  pair  of  balances  in  his  hand,  with  which  he 
measures  out  to  men  their  daily  portion  of  wheat  and  of  barley:  this  is  the  angel  of  famine." 
Black  is  the  colour  indicative  of  distress,  misfortune,  or  mourning.  It  is  a  picture  of  "  bad 
times." 

Ver.  8.  Pale  horse. — le.  livid ;  lit.  green,  cadaverous.  The  emblem  of  contagious 
sickness  or  pestilence.  Hell. — Is  Hades,  the  shelter-place  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  The 
•'  under- world."  The  grave,  conceived  of  as  ready  to  devour  those  slain  by  the  pestilence. 
Fourth  part. — A  mission  in  strict  hmitations.  But  pestilence  is  not  here  -regarded  as  a 
single  force ;  it  is  associated  with  war,  famine,  accidents,  and  inroads  of  wild  beasts 
(Ezek.  xiv.  21).  Possibly  it  represents  the  special  calamities  of  what  are  called  the  Middle 
Ages. 

Ver.  9.  Fifth  seal. — No  horse  is  associated  with  this.  It  is  the  announcement  of  the 
lant  persecutions.  A  scene  in  the  invisible  world  ;  the  cry  of  the  martyrs  whose  blood  has 
been  shed  unjustly,  and  who  demand  the  appearing  of  the  Judge  of  the  world.  Altar. — 
Here  first  mentioned.  In  Old-Testament  sacrifices,  the  blood  of  the  victims  was  poured 
out  at  the  foot  of  the  altar.  "  This  seal  inrlicates  that  the  mission  of  the  Christian  Church 
can  only  be  carried  out  in  suffering."  Souls. — This  word  usually  means  the  mere  principle 
of  natural  life,  as  distinguished  from  "  spirit,"  the  immortal  part  of  man.  In  Scripture  it  is 
often  the  simple  equivalent  of  life, 

508 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION,       chap.  VI. 


Ver.  10.  0  Lord. — 6  hairor-ns^  our  Sovereign,  distinguished  from  icupios.  "  It  is  a  poetical 
description.  The  righteous  blood  shed  does  fall  upon  the  world  in  retribution ;  the  laws  of 
God  avenge  themselves,  though  the  victims  do  not  live  to  behold  the  rewards  of  the 
ungodly." 

Ver.  11,  White  robes. — As  sign  of  the  Divine  acceptance  and  favour.  Rest. — There  was 
need  for  checking  the  impatience  of  the  age  for  our  Lord's  immediate  return. 

Ver.  12.  Earthquake. — Matt.  xxiv.  7.  Actual  natural  calamity.  The  fear  produced  by 
earthquake,  and  its  associated  efiEects  in  nature,  is  poetically  given  in  this  and  following 
verses.  "  AH  phenomena  of  this  kind  were  anciently  regarded  with  great  terror,  as  being 
the  evidences  that  God  was  angry,  and  was  about  to  punish."    Blood.— Compare  Joel  ii.  31. 

Ver.  13.  Stars. — Matt.  xiv.  29.  Fig  tree. — Isa.  xxxiv.  4  ;  but  see  Matt.  xxiv.  32.  Untimely 
figs.— Those  which  form  too  late  to  ripen,  and  fall  oflE  when  spring  comes. 

Ver.  14.  Departed. — Better,  "  parted."     Moved. — By  force  of  the  earthquake. 

Ver.  1.5.  Dens  .  .  .  rocks. — Shelter-places  sought  in  the  senseless  fright  produced  by  the 
earthquake. 

Vers.  16,  17.  Day  of  His  wrath. — This  was  the  fear,  not  the  fact.  This  entire  picture 
must  be  explained  by  the  wild,  unreasoning  alarm  occasioned  by  an  unusually  awful  earth- 
quake. In  every  great  convulsion  of  nature,  and  in  every  great  social  convulsion,  people 
rush  at  once  to  the  idea  that  the  day  of  judgment  has  come.  But  Christians  ought  not  to 
yield  to  any  such  fears. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—17. 

The  Chief  Outward  Woes  of  Human  Society  which  will  Bear  on  the  Church. — 
Just  as  the  individual  Christian  is  left  in  the  world  to  be  disciplined  by  an  ever- 
varying  human  experience,  so  is  the  Church  left  in  the  world,  and  made  subject 
to  the  influence  of  calamities  in  the  sphere  of  nature,  persecutions  at  the  hand  of 
man,  and  disappointments  and  failures  in  the  orderings  of  Divine  Providence. 
The  Apocalypse  first  presents  the  strain  in  which  the  Church  is  placed  by  its 
outward  relations,  and  then  the  more  severe  and  perilous  strain  through 
evils,  and  evil  influences,  within  itself.  (Compare  Acts  xx.  29,  30.)  The 
more  serious  strain  involved  in  the  presence  of  an  apostate  section  in  the  Church, 
or  from  a  wildly  time-serving  spirit  getting  into  the  Church,  is  dealt  with  in 
the  later  chapters,  under  the  heading  of  the  seventh  seal.  The  evils  are 
variously  represented  as  the  work  of  Antichrist,  the  Beast,  and  the  False 
Prophet  j  and  the  Apostate  Church  within  the  Church  is  the  Babylon  that  must 
come  into  the  overwhelming  judgments  of  God.  The  first  four  of  the  seals  are 
evidently  alike  in  this,  that  they  deal  with  the  things  that  try  the  chai-acters  of 
men,  and  press  heavilj;  on  human  society.  The  first  seal  is  the  most  difficult  one 
to  understand.  Godet  thinks  the  conqueror  on  the  white  horse  represents  the 
gospel,,  but  that  would  not  harmonise  with  the  other  jseals.  A  peaceful  con- 
queror, who  covers  distances  with  his  hovj,  is  clearly  indicated  ;  and  the  only  such 
conqueror  that  can  be  conceived  is  commerce  and  colonisation.  From  one  point 
of  view  this  is  a  woe,  for  commerce  has  its  side  of  financial  calamities,  and 
colonisation  breaks  up  family  and  Church  life.  The  second  seal  reveals  the 
influence  of  war ;  the  third  the  influence  of  famine,  or  scarcity ;  and  the 
fourth  the  influence  of  contagious  disease  or  pestilence.  It  will  at  once  be  felt 
that,  in  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church,  all  these  things  have  exerted 
discipUnary  influence,  but  that  no  sort  of  chronological  order  need  be  assigned  to 
them.  The  fifth  seal  introduces  the  actual  persecutions  to  which  the  Church  is 
subject  from  outside  enemies,  which  often  involve  martyrdom.  The  point  of  the 
paragraph,  vers.  9-11,  is  not  the  vision  of  those  who  have  been  martyred,  but 
the  assurance  that,  in  the  time  to  come,  their  fellow-servants  would  he  killed, 
even  as  they  were.  The  sixth  seal  deals  with  the  more  terrible  convulsions  of 
nature — earthquakes,  volcanoes,  tempests,  etc.,  and  the  more  terrible  portents — 
eclipses,  etc. — which,  in  those  days,  filled  men  with  overwhelming  fears,  and  could 
not  fail  to  influence  even  the  Church  of  Christ.  What  St.  John  presents  by  his 
vision  of  the  seals  to  the  oppressed  and  persecuted  Churches  of  Asia  in  his  day  is, 

509 


CHAP.  VI.        EOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    REV  EL  A  TION. 


that  the  various  outward  forms  of  strain  will  still  be  permitted  to  affect  them. 
Sometimes  the  strain  on  faith  and  steadfastness  will  take  one  form  and  some- 
times another.  It  may  be  financial  distress,  or  war,  or  scarcity,  or  pestilence, 
or  martyrdom,  or  disasters  of  nature.  The  Church  life  had  to  be  maintained 
under  every  form  of  stress  and  temptation.  And  it  is  precisely  to  use  these 
various  seemingly  evil  influences  for  His  sanctifying  purposes  that  the  Living 
Lord  Jesus  is  now  actually  present  in  His  Church,  ''walking  among  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks." 

M.  Renan  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  extraordinary  natural  calamities 
occurring  at  the  time  when  the  Apocalypse  was  written.  *'  Never  had  the  world 
been  seized  with  such  a  trembling  tit ;  the  earth  itself  was  a  prey  to  the  most 
terrible  convulsions  :  the  whole  world  was  smitten  with  giddiness.  The  planet 
seemed  shaken  to  its  foundations,  and  to  have  no  life  left  in  it.  The  conflict 
of  the  legions  (amongst  themselves)  was  terrible;  .  .  .  famine  was  added  to 
massacre;  .  .  .  misery  was  extreme.  In  the  year  65  a.d.,  a  horrible  plague 
visited  Kome.  During  the  autumn  there  were  counted  thirty  thousand  deaths. 
The  Campagna  was  desolated  by  typhoons  and  cyclones  ;  .  .  .  the  order  of  nature 
seemed  to  be  overturned  ;  frightful  tempests  spread  terror  in  all  directions.  But 
that  which  produced  the  greatest  impression  was  the  earthquakes.  The  globe 
was  undergoing  a  convulsion  analogous  to  that  of  the  moral  world ;  it  was  as  if 
the  earth  and  mankind  were  taken  with  fever  simultaneously.  Vesuvius  was 
preparing  for  the  terrible  eruption  of  the  year  79.  Asia  Minor  was  in  a  chronic 
earthquake.  Its  cities  had  to  be  continually  re-built.  The  valley  of  the  Lycus 
especially,  with  its  Christian  towns  of  Laodicea  and  Colossse,  was  laid  waste  in 
the  year  60. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  L  The  Call  to  the  Riders. — This  the  advent  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  who 

invitation   indicates   that    the    events  is  to  come. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 
revealed  are  great  and  wonderful ;  it 

consoles  the  Church  with  the  assurance  Ver.  8.  The  Personification  of  Death. 

'chat,    however    she    may  suffer,    the  — "  The  personification  of  death,  in  the 

voice  of  the  gospels  will  survive — that  act  of  executing  the  Divine  commands, 

all  her  sufferings  will  be  for  her  own  is  exhibited  with  great  difference,  both 

good  and  for  Christ's  glory. — Words-  as  to  features  and  character,  amongst 

w(yrth.  different   nations.      Perhaps  the  most 

mean     delineation     is     the     common 

The  Living    Creatures. — The   living  monkish  one  of  a  skeleton,  with  dart 

creatures  represent  animate  nature —  and  hour-glass ;  while  one  of  the  most 

that  nature  and  creation  of  God  which  terrible   is  that   of   the  Scandinavian 

groans  and  travails  in  pain,  waiting  for  poets,  who  represent  him  as  mounted 

the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  on  horseback,  riding  with  inconceivable 

These  summon  the  emblems  of  war  and  rapidity  in  pursuit  of  his  prey,  meagre 

pestilence   to   come  on  the  scene,  for  and  wan,  and  the  horse  possessing  the 

these    things    must     needs     be,     and  same  character  as  his  rider.     Yet  the 

through   these   lies   the    way  for  the  passage  cited  from  the  Apocalypse  is, 

final  coming  of  God's  Christ,  for  whom  in  sublimity  and  terror,  superior  to  the 

Creation   longs.     They  bid  the   pains  most    energetic    specimens    of    Runic 

and  troubles  come,  because  they  recog-  poetry.      The    word    translated    pale 

nise   them  as   the  precursors  of  Cre-  (chloros)  is  peculiarly  expressive  in  the 

ation's  true   King.      Thus  their  voice  original ;  it  might  be  more  adequately 

has  in  it  an  undertone  which  sighs  for  rendered  "  ghastly,"  meaning  that  wan 

510 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,       CHAi>.  VI. 


and   exanimate   hue  exhibited  in  cer- 
tain diseases." — Mason  Good. 

Times  of  Public  Sickness. — Some 
interpret  this  of  the  persecution  under 
Decius  and  his  successors,  of  the 
epidemic  diseases,  consequent  upon 
famine,  which  prev^ailed  so  widely  from 
A.D.  250  to  265,  that  half  the  popu- 
lation is  said  to  have  been  destroyed 
by  war,  pestilence,  and  famine.  After 
the  death  of  Gallienus,  the  multipli- 
cation of  wild  beasts  in  various  parts 
of  the  empire  was  ascribed  to  the  guilt 
of  the  Christians. 

Ver.  9.  Martyr  Ages. — The  burden 
of  this  pass.'ige  is,  that  there  should  be 
a  fierce  and  sanguinary  persecution  of 
the  Christians  during  this  seal ;  that 
that  persecution  should  be  terminated 
by  a  temporary  and  judicial  dehver- 
ance  of  the  oppressed  ones,  in  which 
should  supervene  another  terrible  per- 
secution. The  signal  triumph  of  the 
cause  of  the  martyrs  over  that  of  their 
cruel  oppressors  satisfies  all  the  re- 
quirements of  the  passage. — Bishop 
Waldegrave. 

Ver.  12.  Natural  Signs  of  Spiritual 
Events. — We  are  not  to  expect  a 
literal  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies  in 
this  seal,  which  describe  a  great  ele- 
mental convulsion.  We  are  not  to 
look  for  any  terrific  changes  in  the 
heavenly  bodies  before  Christ's  Second 
Coming.  These  prophecies  are  spiritual, 
and  to  be  understood  spiritually. — 
Wordsworth. 

Vers.  16,  17.  The  Wrath  of  the  Lamb. 
— The  lamb  is  the  most  simply  inno- 
cent of  all  animals.  Historically,  also, 
it  had  become  a  name  for  sacrifice. 
Under  this  twofold  reason  Christ  is 
set  forth  as  the  Lamb.  The  lamb  is 
but  the  complemental  gentleness  of 
God's  judicial  vigour.  A  most  para- 
doxical, jarring  combination  of  words 
predicates  wrath  of  the  very  lambhood 
of  Christ.  To  some,  even  to  speak  of 
the  wrath  of  God  is  an  offence,  though 
Scripture  speaks  of  His  wrath  without 


compunction.      But  the  term  "wrath 
of  the  Lamb  "  not  only  violates  a  first 
principle  of    rhetoric,    forbidding   the 
conjunction  of  symbols  that  have  no 
agreement  of  kind  or  quality,  but  also 
shocks   our    cherished  conceptions    of 
Christ  as  the  suffering  Victim  or  the 
all-merciful  and  beneficent  Friend,  in 
either   way   the    Saviour    of    sinners. 
Who    will    ever    speak    of    a    lamb's 
wrath  ?     Scripture  does.     What  shall 
we  make  of  such  a  fact  1     Simply  this, 
that   while   our   particular  age   is   at 
the  point  of  apogee  from  all  the  more 
robust  and  vigorous  conceptions  of  God 
in  His  relation  to  evil — while  it  makes 
nothing  of  God  as  a  person  or  govern- 
ing will,  less,  if  possible,  of  sin  as  a 
wrong-doing  by  subject  wills — we  are 
still  to  believe  in  Christianity,  and  not 
in  the  new  religion  of   nature.     We 
must  have  the  right  to  believe  in  the 
real    Christ,   and   not   that    theologic 
Christ  which  has  so  long  been  praised, 
as  it  were,  into  weakness,  by  the  show- 
ing that  separates  Him  from  all  God's 
decisive   energies    and    fires    of    com- 
bustion,  and  puts  Him  over   against 
them,  to  be  only  a  pacifier  of  them  by 
His   suffering   goodness.      Our   Christ 
must  be  the  real  King — Messiah — and 
no  mere  victim ;  He  must  govern,  have 
His  indignations,  take  the  regal  way 
in  His  salvation.     His  goodness  must 
have  fire  and  fibre  enough  to  make  it 
Divine.    We  take  the  principle  without 
scruple,  that  if  we  can  settle  what  is 
to  be  understood  by  the  wrath  of  God 
we  shall  not  only  find  the  wrath  in 
God,    but    as    much    more    intensely 
revealed    in    the    incarnate    life    and 
ministry  of   Christ  as  the  love  is,  or 
the  patience,  or  any  other   character 
of   God.      Since  He  is  the  Lamb,  in 
other  words,   the  most  emphatic  and 
appalling  of  all  epithets  will  have  its 
place — viz.,   the  wrath  of   the  Lamb. 
We   want   a   better    English  word  to 
express  the  Scriptural  word  opyiy.     We 
have  wrath,  anger,  indignation,  fury, 
vengeance,  judgment,  justice,  and  the 
like,    but   they   are   all   more   or   less 
defective.       Indignation   is    the    most 
unexceptionable,  but   it   is   too   prosy 

511 


CHAP.  VI.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


and  weak   to   carry  such   a  meaning 
with  due  effect.     Wrath  must  be  kept 
as  a  moral,  not  merely  animal,  passion, 
or  it  will  connect  associations  of  un- 
regulated   temper    that    are    wholly 
unsuitable.     We  understand  by  wrath, 
as   applied   to    God  and   to  Christ,  a 
certain  principled  heat  of  resentment 
towards  evil-doing  and  evil-doers,  such 
as  arms  the  good  to  inflictions  of  pain 
or  just  retribution  upon  them.     It  is 
not  the  heat  of  revenge.     It  is  that 
holy  heat  which  kindles  about  order 
and  law,  and  truth  and  light,  going 
in,  as  it  were,  spontaneously  to  redress 
their  wrongs,  and  chastise  the  injuries 
they   have    suffered.       It    is   that,   in 
every  moral  nature,  which  prepares  it 
to  be  an  essentially  beneficent  avenger. 
Is  it,  then,  a  fact  that  Christ,  as  the 
incarnate  Word  of  God,  embodies  and 
reveals  the  wrath-principle  of  God,  even 
as  He  does  the  patience,  or  love-prin- 
ciple,  and   as   much   more   intensely? 
On  this  point  we  have  many  distinct 
evidences.     1.  Christ  cannot  be  a  true 
manifestation  of  God  when  He  comes 
in  half  the  character  of  God,  to  act 
upon,  or  qualify,  or  pacify,  the  other 
half.     If  only  God's  affectional  nature 
is  represented  in  Him,  then  He  is  but 
a  half  manifestation.     If  the  purposes 
of  God,  the  justice  of  God,  the  indigna- 
tions of  God,  are  not  in  Him — if  any- 
thing is  shut  away,  or  let  down,  or 
covered  over — then  He  is  not  in  God's 
proportions,  and  does  not  incarnate  His 
character.     2.  Christ  can  be  the  mani- 
fested wrath  of  God  without  being  any 
the  less  tender  in  His  feeling,  or  gentle 
in  His   patience.      In  the   history  of 
Jesus  we  see  occasions  in  which  He 
actually  displays  the  judicial  and  the 
tender,  most  affectingly,  together  and 
in  the  very  same  scene,  as  in  His  de- 
nouncing and  weeping  over  Jerusalem. 
Indeed,  the  tenderest,  purest  souls  will, 
for  just  that  reason,  be  hottest  in  the 
wrath -principle  where  any  bitter  wrong, 
or  shameful  crime,  is  committed.    They 
take  fire,  and  burn,  because  they  feel. 
3.    God,   without   the  wrath -principle, 
never   was,  and  Christ  never  can  be, 
a   complete   character.      This  element 

512 


belongs    inherently    to    every    moral 
nature.      God  is  no  God  without  it ; 
man  is  no  man  without  it.     It  is  this 
principled   wrath,   in   one   view,    that 
gives   staminal   force   and  majesty  to 
character.      4.   It  is  a  conceded  prin- 
ciple of   justice  that  wrong-doers  are 
to  suffer  just  according  to  what  they 
deserve.      In  Christianity  God  is  not 
less  just  or  more  merciful,  but  He  is 
more    fitly    and    proportionately    ex- 
pressed.     5.   One  of  the  things  most 
needed  in  the  recovery  of  men  to  God 
is   this    very   thing — a   more   decisive 
manifestation   of   the   wrath-principle 
and  justice  of  God.      Intimidation  is 
the  first  means  of  grace.     6.  We  can 
see  for  ourselves   that   the  more  im- 
pressive   revelation    of    wrath,    which 
appears    to    be    wanted,    is    actually 
made  in  the  person  of  Christ,  as  in 
His  driving  out  the  money-changers, 
and  denouncing  the  hypocritical  Phari- 
sees.      7.    Christ    is    appointed    and 
publicly  undertakes   to   maintain   the 
wrath-principle  officially,  as  the  Judge 
of   the  world,  even  as    He  maintains 
the    love-principle    officially,    as    the 
Saviour  of  the  world.      He  even  de- 
clares that  authority  is  given  Him  to 
execute  judgment,  because  He  is  the 
Son  of  man.     But  the  wrath-principle 
in  Christ  is  only  that  judicial  impulse 
that   backs  Him  in   the   infliction  of 
justice  whenever  justice  requires  to  be 
inflicted.     And  it  does  not  require  to 
be  inflicted  always;  it  never  ought  to 
be  when  there  is  anything  better  that 
is  possible.     Put  it  down,  then,  first  of 
all,  at  the  close  of  this  great  subject, 
that  the  New  Testament  gives  us  no 
new  God,  or  better  God,  or  less  just 
God,  than  we  had  before.     He  is  the 
I  AM  of  all  ages,  the  I  AM  that  was, 
and  is,  and  is  to  come  ;  the  same  that 
was    declared    from   the    beginning — 
"  The  Lord  God,  gracious  and  merci- 
ful, forgiving  iniquity,  transgressions, 
and  sin,   and  that  will  by  no  means 
clear  the  guilty." — H.  Bushnell^  D.D, 

Ver.  17.  Survivors  of  the  Calamities. 
— The  sixth  seal  does  not  give  us  a 
completed  picture.     We  see  the  great 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       chap.  vi. 


and  awe-inspiring  movements  which 
are  heralds  of  the  day  of  wrath.  The 
whole  world  is  stirred  and  startled  at 
the  tread  of  the  approaching  Christ, 
and  then  the  vision  melts  away;  we 
see  no  more,  but  we  have  seen  enough 
to  be  sure  that  the  close  of  the  age  is 
at  hand.  Yet  we  are  anxious  to  know 
something  of  those  who  have  been 
faithful,  pure,  and  chivalrous  witnesses 
for  truth  and  right,  for  Christ  and 
God.  In  that  day,  that  awful  day, 
the  whole  population  of  the  world 
seems  to  be  smitten  with  dismay ;  the 
trees,  shaken  with  that  terrible  tem- 
pest, seem  to  be  shedding  all  their 
fruit;  the  trembling  of  all  created 
things  seems  to  be  about  to  shake 
down  every  building.  Are  all  to  go  ? 
Are  none  strong  enough  to  survive  ? 
We  heard  that  there  were  seven  seals 
attached  to  the  mystic  book  which  the 
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  was  opening ; 
but  this  sixth  seal  presents  us  with  the 
picture  of  universal  desolation.  What 
is  there  left  for  the  seventh  seal  to  tell 
us  %  The  answer  to  these  questions  is 
given  in  the  seventh  chapter,  which 
introduces  scenes  that  may  either  be 
taken  as  dissolving  views,  presented  in 
the  course  of  the  sixth  seal,  or  as  com- 
plementary visions.  And  those  scenes 
show  us  in  pictorial  form  that  the  Lord 
knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out 
of  temptation  ;  that  in  the  midst  of 
the  time  of  the  shaking  of  all  things, 
when  all  might,  majesty,  strength,  and 
genius  of  men  is  laid  low,  and  every 
mere    earth-born    kingdom    is    over- 


thrown, there  is  a  kingdom  which 
cannot  be  shaken. — Bishop  Boyd  Car- 
penter. 

The  A  wful  Character  of  Earthquakes. 
— One  of  the  ihost  terrible  earthquakes 
on  record  happened  at  Lisbon,  Novem- 
ber 1st,  1755.  The  morning  was  fine, 
and  there  was  no  apparent  indication 
of  the  coming  destruction.  About  nine 
o'clock  a  low  subterraneous  rumbling 
was  heard,  which  gradually  increased, 
and  culminated  at  last  in  a  violent 
shock  of  earthquake,  which  levelled 
to  the  ground  many  of  the  principal 
buildings  of  the  place.  Three  other 
shocks  followed  in  rapid  succession  and 
continued  the  work  of  destruction. 
Scarcely  had  the  ill-fated  inhabitants 
begun  to  realise  the  enormity  of  the 
disaster  which  had  come  upon  them 
when  they  were  surprised  by  another 
visitation  of  a  different,  but  not  less 
destructive,  character.  The  sea  began 
to  rush  with  great  violence  into  the 
Tagus,  which  rose  at  once  as  much  as 
forty  feet  above  high -water  mark.  The 
water  swept  over  a  great  part  of  the 
city,  and  many  of  the  inhabitants  fled 
from  its  approach  to  take  refuge  on  a 
strong  marble  quay  recently  erected. 
They  had  collected  there  to  the  number 
of  three  thousand  when  the  quay  was 
suddenly  hurled  bottom  upwards  and 
every  soul  on  it  perished.  A  fire  broke 
out  in  the  city.  And  by  the  combined 
effect  of  these  disasters  sixty  thousand 
persons  are  supposed  to  have  perished, 


l-if 


513 


CHAP.  VII.      EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


CHAPTER  VII. 
SEALING  OF  THE  SERVANTS   OF  GOD. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

This  chapter  is  in  the  nature  of  an  episode.  Before  the  enemies  of  the  gospel  are  finally 
destroyed,  St.  John  sees  the  admission  of  believers  to  their  blessedness  in  heaven.  The 
vision  has  certainly  the  appearance  of  being  supplementary  to  the  preceding,  and  seems  to 
refer  to  the  visitation  described  under  various  seals,  especially  the  third  and  sixth,  and  to 
represent  their  universality  ("  four  corners  of  the  earth,"  "  four  winds  of  the  earth  ")  ;  their 
character,  as  providential,  ordered  and  directed  by  God  through  His  angels ;  their  limita- 
tion, or  suspension,  or  restriction,  as  the  interests  of  God's  Church  required  (W.  and  TF.). 
Godet  treats  the  two  visions  of  this  chapter  as  anticipative.  "The  foresight  of  her 
own  triumph  is  to  inspire  the  Church  with  courage  to  face  the  formidable  crises  which 
still  stand  between  her  and  the  object  of  her  hope."  He  thinks  the  first  vision  concerns 
Jews  (Israel) ;  the  second  the  Gentile  Church.  It  is,  however,  better  to  take  the  early 
standpoint,  and  see  the  Christian  Church  as  composed  of  two  distinct,  though  closely  related 
elements,  the  Judaic  and  the  Gentile.  The  revelation  is  not  addressed  to  Jews,  nor  does  it 
concern  them,  save  as  they  stand  in  some  relation,  hostile  or  helpful,  to  the  Christian  Church. 

Ver.  1.  After  these  things. — Not  to  be  unduly  pressed.  The  law  of  succession  in  time 
controls  all  forms  of  human  thinking,  even  visions.  Holding,  etc. — By  this  figure  the  Divine 
care  of  the  elect  ones  is  intimated.  Their  safety  is  secured  before  the  calamities  indicated 
in  the  previous  chapter  are  let  loose.  Winds,  being  a  great  cause  of  calamities,  are  taken  as 
symbols  of  calamity. 

Ver.  2,  Ascending.— In  the  book  of  Enoch,  which  seems  to  have  suggested  some  of  the 
figures  of  this  book,  the  east  is  the  paradise  of  God,  the  place  where  the  Lord  of  Glory 
dwells.  There  is  the  possible  idea  also  that,  as  the  angel  came  with  the  dawn,  a  long  day's 
work  is  intimated.  Seal  of  the  Living  God.— Eastern  kings  signed  documents,  etc.,  by 
impressing  the  seal  of  the  signet  ring  which  they  jealously  kept  on  their  finger.  To  entrust 
this  seal  to  a  person  was  to  empower  him  to  act  on  the  king's  authority. 

Ver.  3.  Sealed  the  servants  of  God.— This  act  is  illustrated  in  the  salvation  of  Israel  from 
the  destroying  angel,  through  the  mark  of  the  blood  upon  the  door.  The  sealing  does  not 
preserve  the  Church  from  being  affected  by  outward  calamities,  only  from  being  overwhelmed 
by  them. 

Ver.  4.  Hundred,  forty  and  four  thousand. — Clearly  a  symbolical  number.  A  goodly 
number,  from  all  the  tribes,  had  become  members  of  the  Christian  Church.  Scripture  gives 
no  support  to  the  notion  of  "  Lost  Tribes." 

Ver.  9.  Could  number. — The  relativity  of  Gentile  to  Jewish  members  of  the  Christian 
Church  is  strikingly  suggested  by  this  fixed  number  for  the  Jewish,  and  limitless  numbers 
for  the  Gentile,  portions.  White  robes. — The  sign  of  triumph  in  the  conflict  with  evil. 
Palms. — The  recognised  symbol  of  victory. 

Ver.  10.  Salvation. — To  be  conceived  as  both  a  negative  thing — deliverance  from  evil ;  and 
also  a  positive  thing — attainment  of  holiness.  To  our  God. — It  is  fitting  that  we  go  past  all 
agencies  to  the  final  cause. 

Ver.  13.  What  are  these  ? — A  question  not  asked  in  order  to  gain  information,  but  in  order 
to  open  the  way  for  giving  information. 

Ver.  14.  Tribulation. — A  special  time  of  trouble  is  referred  to;  probably  that  which  was 
endured  by  the  Church  under  the  Pagan  emperors.  Washed  ...  in  the  blood. — This  very 
strange  figure  is  perhaps  not  yet  properly  apprehended.  The  blood  of  Christ  is  used  as  a 
figure  for  His  strenuous  efforts,  even  unto  death,  in  effecting  His  purpose  of  redemption. 
The  champion  fromEdom  with  blood-dyed  garments  (Isa.  Ixiii,  1)  ;  the  sweat-like  blood-drops 
in  Gethsemane  ;  and  the  appeal  in  Hebrews,  "  Ye  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood,  striving 
against  sin,"  should  guide  us  to  the  right  thought.  The  idea  may  be  this  :  Christ  is  highly 
exalted  because,  in  the  resistance  of  sin,  He  "  poured  out  His  soul  unto  death  "  ;  and  these 
have  the  white  robes  because  they,  too,  resisted  sin,  and  bore  their  earth- burdens,  and  won 
the  triumph  of  obedient  submission,  as  He  did,  and  in  His  strength.  The  figure  of  actually 
washing  clothes  or  persons  in  blood  is  a  very  strained  one,  unless  its  symbolical  character  is 
clearly  recognised. 

Ver.  15.  Dwell  among  them. — R.V.  "  Shall  spread  His  tabernacle  over  them."  Dr. 
Tregelles  compares  this  passage  with  Exod.  xl.  35,  and  suggests,  as  a  true  rendering,  "  He 
, .  .  shall  be  a  covert  over  them."    In  Alford's  revision  we  read,  "  shall  spread  His  habitation 

514 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.      chap.  vii. 


over  them."  The  allusion,  then,  is  to  the  manner  in  which  the  Israelites  were,  all  through 
their  wilderness  journey,  overshadowed  by  the  cloud  which  represented  God's  presence,  so 
that  He  was  not  only  with  them,  but  they  did,  as  it  were,  live  in  the  Divine  tabernacle,  as 
they  moved  hither  and  thither.     Compare  John  i.  14  ;  Kev.  xxi.  3. 

Ver.  17.  Feed  them. — As  a  shepherd.  It  should  be  clearly  apprehended  that  the  vision 
blends  what  waking  apprehension  cannot.  St.  John  saw  a  person  as  if  He  were  a  lamb. 
We  should  have  to  speak  of  Christ  in  the  glory  not  as  a  lamh,  but  as  "  the  lamb-like  One." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH. -Vet^ses  1—17. 

The  Vision  of  the  Redeemed. — 
We  see — 

I.  The  great  number  of  the  redeemed  (ver.  9).  All  who  have  believed  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  who  have  died  in  the  faith  ;  all  who  shall  believe  on  Him 
in  the  future  ages ;  infants,  dying  in  infancy  ;  the  great  multitude  who  have 
come  out  of  great  tribulation.     Many  are  the  saved. 

II.  The  eternal  glory  of  the  redeemed. — 1.  The  glory  of  their  appearance. 

(1 )  "  Clothed  with  white  robes."  They  shine  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  (2)  "  With 
palms  in  their  hands."  They  are  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  them. 
1.  The  glory  of  their  service.  (1)  Their  service  of  song  ;  their  song  of  salva- 
tion (ver.  10)";  their  song  of  eternal  praise  to  God  (ver.  12).  (2)  Their  holy 
ministry  (ver.  15).  3.  The  glory  of  their  eternal  home.  (1)  Their  communion 
with  God  (ver.  15).     "  He  that  sitteth  on  the  throne  shall  dwell  among  them." 

(2)  The  heavenly  provision  {a)  for  their  immortal  nature  :  the  Lamb  "  shall 
feed  them  "  ;  He  is  their  eternal  Shepherd  ;  (6)  for  their  constant  refreshment : 
the  Lamb  "  shall  lead  them  unto  living  fountains  of  waters  "  ;  (c)  For  their  ever- 
lasting comfort,  "  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes." 

III.  Our  lessons  from  the  redeemed. — 1.  Once  they  were  sufferers  such  as  we, 
or  more  than  any  of  us.  They  came  "  out  of  great  tribulation."  2.  Once  they 
were  sinners  such  as  we.  They  had  need  of  cleansing.  They  "  washed  their 
robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  The  same  fountain  is 
open  for  us.  Through  the  merits  of  the  same  Saviour  we  may  enter  into  the 
same  heaven,  and  enjoy  the  same  blessedness  and  glory. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  4.    Who  are  the  "  hundred  and  wise  there  must  be  some  spiritual  signi- 

fortyfour  thousand  1 " — Very  probably  ficance  in  each  particular  tribe,  which 

the  believing  Jews  of  this  period — those  is     hardly    conceivable.       The     exact 

of  the  house  of  Israel  who,  in  an  age  of  number  denotes  election  (Jer.  iii.  14). — 

national  apostasy  and  national  punish-  W.  and  W. 
ment,    acknowledged    Jesus    as    their 

Messiah  and  Lord  ;  who  accepted  the  God's  Elect. — This  vision  of  a  certain 

new  covenant  and  passed  under  its  seal,  number    of    Israelites,    and   the   next 

both  outward  and  inward.     They  are  of   an    innumerable   multitude   of   all 

the  class  who  are  emphatically  termed  nations,    are   certainly    correlative    to 

by  St.  Paul  '*  the  election,"  "  the  rem-  each  other ;  and  the  most  obvious  way 

nant    according    to    the    election     of  of  understanding  them  is,  that  among 

grace  "  (Rom.  xi.  5,  7) ;    the  predicted  God's  elect  there  will  be  many  faithful 

remnant  which  should  be  saved  (Rom.  Israelites,  and  yet  few  comparatively 

ix.  27;  Lsa.  x.  20-22,  Ixv.  8,  9).     This  to  the  number  of  faithful  Gentiles.— 

interpretation  is  sustained  by  the  parti-  W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A. 
cularity   with   which    the    tribes    are 

named,  as  if  to  fix  attention  upon  the  Ver.    9.     Universal   Praise  for   Re- 

fact  of  a  special  reference  to  the  actual  demption. — Then  the  countless  host  of 

descendants  of  the  patriarchs.     Other-  the  redeemed,  with  palm  branches  of 

515 


CHAP.  VII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


victory  in  their  hands,  the  emblems  of  which  we  enter  into  sympathy,  and  to 

the  Church's  triumph,  unite  in  praising  whose  likeness   our   lives   almost    un- 

God,  with  all  the  angels,  and  elders,  and  consciously   attempt    to    shape   them- 

living  creatures.     One  universal  sym-  selves.     This  power  of   influence  may 

phony  fills  the  heavenly  world.  Among  belong  to  all  the  past  in  general.    From 

this  countless  host  stand  conspicuous,  in  all    the    multitude    of     failures    and 

robes  of  white,  the  martyrs  who  have  successes  rises  up  the  picture  of  a  true 

sealed   their   testimony  by  their  own  successful  manhood — the  perfect  man. 

blood.      The  glory  to  which  they  are  That  is  our  leader.      Or  we  see  that 

destined  is  brought  distinctly  into  view  power  incorporate  itself  in  some  great 

in  order  that  persecuted  and  suffering  man.      Who   can   explain   the   subtle 

Christians,  then  "  enduring  the  cross,"  fascination   that    reaches    everywhere 

might,    "  on   account   of    the   joy   set  and  lays  hold  of  all  kinds  of  men,  and 

before  them,  despise  the  shame,"  and  turns  their  lives  out  of  their  course  to 

attain  at  last  to  the  same  blessedness. —  follow  his  course;,  to  be  with  him  in 

Moses  Stuart.  some    sympathy   of    purpose,    and,    if 

possible,  to  be  like  him  in  some  simi- 
Vers.  9,  10.  All  Saints'  Day. — One  larity  of  nature  ?    We  may  analyse  the 
day  is  given  to  the  commemoration  of  power   of   leadership  that   great  men 
the  great  general  idea  of  sainthood.   It  have.     It  may  rest  in  either  of  three 
seems  to  gather  in  all  the  multitude  of  things  :  (1)  It  may  be  in  mere  strength 
the  holy  in  every  age,  and  bids  us  think  of  personality ;  (2)  it  may  be  in  some 
of  their  characters,  and  follow  in  their  truths  that  he  teaches ;  (3)  or  it  may 
steps.     What  is  there  in  the  world  for  be  in  a  certain  thing  which  we  call 
each  one  of  us  that  would  not  be  here  holiness,  which  we  cannot  define  other- 
if  others  had  not  lived  before  us — if  we  wise  than  that  it  is  a  larger  and  more 
were   the   first   generation   that    ever  manifest  presence  of  Cod  in  the  life  of 
peopled   this  populous  earth  of  ours  ?  one  man  than  other  men  have — more 
What  are  the  legacies  that  the  past  sympathetic    nearness    to    Divinity — 
sends  down  to  us  ?    1.  There  are  certain  which  makes  men  feel  that  he,  more 
circumstances,  things  which  men  have  than  they,  embodies  the  Divine  Spirit 
gradually,  in   the  course  of   ages,  in-  and  utters  the  Divine  will ;    that  He 
vented  and  worked  out,  and  they  are  shows  God  to  them.    This  is  the  leader- 
permanent,  and  have  come  down  to  us  ship  of  the  saint.   These  are  the  leaders, 
in  their  accumulation.     Besides  these,  the  inspirers,   of  men — the  hero,   the 
there  are  certain  truths ;  all  the  know-  teacher,  the  saint.     We  have  reached, 
ledge    that    man    has    ever    won,    of  then,  this  distinctive  definition  of  the 
physics,  of  metaphysics,  of  morals,  of  saint.      He  is  the  man  whose  power 
religion,  of  beauty — all  this  wo  have  comes  of  his  holiness,  his  godlikeness. 
not  to  win  over  again  for   ourselves.  It  is  a  special  kind  of  power,  and  it  is 
Besides  these,  there  is  another  gift — of  the  strongest  kind  of  power  where  it 
certain  inspirations  which  we  find  wait-  can  be  brought  to  bear  at  all.     In  the 
ing  for  us  in  the  world.    Men  have  left  hero  man  feels  that  there  is  something 
behind    them    their    examples,    their  of  God's  power,  but  by  no  means,  of 
enthusiasms,  and  their  standards.    The  necessity,  any  of  God  Himself.     In  the 
impulse  and  contagion  of  their  work  teacher,  there  is  God's  truth,  because 
is  waiting  everywhere  to  breathe  itself  all  truth  is  God's,  but  the  teacher  is 
into  ours.     The  power  of  this  inspira-  only  the  glass  through  which  it  shines, 
tion  comes  in  various  ways.     In  some  But  in  the  saint  there  is  something  of 
degree  it  is  the  mere  force  of  heredita-  God  Himself,  a  real,  abiding  presence 
tion.     Then  there  is  the  distinct  power  of  Divinity.      The  saint  wins  a  sym- 
of  example.     Moreover,  they  have  set  pathetic,  loving  awe.   In  our  experience 
up   certain    ideals    of    character,   not  we  have  felt  the  power  of  such  saintly 
reducible  to  precise  rules  of  action,  with  souls.      We   may   connect    our   whole 

516 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,      chap.  Vir. 


notion  of  sainthood  with  this  idea  of 
power.     True  sainthood  is  the  strong 
chain  of  God's   presence  in  humanity 
running  down  through  all  history,  and 
making  of  it  a  unity,  giving  it  a  large 
and    massive   strength,    able    to    bear 
great  things    and  to  do  great  things 
too.      This   unity   which   the   line    of 
sainthood  gives  to  history  is  the  great 
point  that  shows  its  streiigth.     You  go 
to  your  saint  and  find  God,  working  and 
manifest,  in  him.     But  he  got  near  to 
God    through    some    saint    who    lived 
before  him.      And  that  saint  lighted 
his  fire  at  some  flame  before  him ;  and 
so  the  power  of  the  sainthoods  animates 
and  fills  the  world.     So  holiness  and 
purity,  and  truth  and  patience,  daring 
and  tenderness,    hope   and   faith,    are 
kept  constant  and  pervading  things  in 
our  humanity.     In  this  truth  we  get 
the   corrective   that   we   need   of    the 
continual  tendency  to  solitariness  and 
individuality   in    our    religion.      This 
church  of  all  the  saints  is  a  great  power 
in  the  world.     Ever  from  out  the  past, 
from  the  old  saints  who  lived  in  other 
times,  from  Enoch,  David,  Paul,  and 
John,     Augustine,     Jerome,     Luther, 
Leighton,  there  comes  down  the  power 
of  God  to  us.    Take  away  holy  example, 
and  the  inspiration  of  holy  men,  and 
you   would   depopulate  heaven.     Only 
one  bold,  supreme  soul  here  and  there 
would  still  be  able  to  scale  the  height 
alone,  and   stand   triumphant    in    the 
gloriousfpresence  of  God.   We  ascend  by 
one  another.     These  saints  were  incor- 
porations, not  of  the  power,  nor  of  the 
truth,  but  of  the  spirit  or  the  character 
of  God.   But  in  God  Himself  all  three — 
power,  and  truth,  and  character — must 
go  together ;  and  so  they  will,  to  some 
extent,  in  the  saint,  who  is  God's  copy 
— but  not  entirely.  We  must,  however, 
clearly  see   the   absence   of    power  of 
miracle,  or  of  authority  in  truth,  in  the 
saints  of  the  Christian  Church,  because 
we  must  have  some  doctrine  of  saint- 
hood* which  shall  not  for  a  moment  dim 
or  distort  the   leadership  and  perfect 
headship   of    the    Christian    and    the 
Church,  which  rests  in  Christ  alone. 
But  Christ,  as  He  leads  us  on  to  higher 


things,  may  still  strengthen  us  with  the 
company  of  those  who  have  the  same 
road  to  travel,  and  are  walking  it  in 
the  same  strength.    Are  there  no  saints 
to-day?     If  sainthood  means  what  we 
have  said — the  indwelling,  the  manifest 
indwelling,  of  God  in  man — then  there 
must  be  many  a  very  saintly  saint  in 
these  late  days  of  ours.     There  may  be 
fewer    supreme,     pre-eminent     saints, 
fewer  out-reaching  pinnacles  of  grace, 
in  the  long  ranges  of  spiritual  life.    As 
all  civilisation  and  human  culture  ad- 
vances, great  men  become  less  common 
and  less  marked.    Still,  there  are  saints 
enough,  if  we  only  know  how  to  find 
them.       The    old    idea    of    sainthood 
demanded  miracles  of  those  whom  it 
admitted  to  its  calendar.       It  is   the 
truer    discrimination    that    recognises 
the  presence  of  God  in  men,  the  saints 
that   are   in    the    world,    not    by    the 
miracles  they  work,  but  by  the  miracles 
they  are ;   by  the  way  in  which  they 
bring  the  grace  of  God  to  bear  on  the 
simple  duties  of  the  household  and  the 
street.     The  saint  is  he  in  whom  God 
dwells. — Phillips  Brooks. 

Vers.  13,  14.  The  Redeemed  in  Glory. 
— The  Bible  opens  and  closes  with  con- 
flict— between  evil  and  good.  Opens 
with  man  defeated,  closes  with  man 
victorious.  So  it  tells  the  whole  story 
of  humanity.  The  reason  for  the 
difference  is  given  us  in  the  song  which 
the  victors  sing — "  Salvation  to  our 
God  which  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
and  unto  the  Lamb."  He  that  was 
defeated  has  become  victor,  because 
God  Himself  has  helped  him,  and  won 
a  first  and  inclusive  triumph  for  him 
in  the  person  of  His  Son,  The  associa- 
tion of  the  text  is  a  great  multitude 
in  the  attitude  of  victors  through 
Christ.  It  is  important  to  Christian 
living  that  our  thought  should  be  often 
lifted  to  that  world  towards  which  we 
are  hastening.  We  need  to  keep 
heaven  near.  And  yet  it  is  but  little 
more  than  a  shadow  to  us.  The  terms 
under  which  heaven  is  represented 
are  figurative  ;  of  its  realities  we  can 
know   nothing.      Figurative   language 

517 


CHAP.  VII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


is  an  accommodation  to  the  uncultured, 
imperfect  mind.  It  is  developed  in 
the  early  history  of  nations.  But  how 
warm  and  bright  and  hopeful  are  the 
figures  suggesting  heaven  !  Mansions, 
or  Homes.  Wiping  away  tears.  Rest. 
What  holy  joy  and  triumph  are 
suggested  by  its  crowns,  and  harps, 
and  palms,  and  songs  !  What  a  glory 
is  round  about  its  throne  ! 

I.  Heaven  is  not  merely  another 
place  and  other  circumstances. — We 
often  cherish  the  notion  that,  if  we 
could  get  away  from  present  scenes,  we 
should  lose  our  troubles.  In  this  hope 
we  have  made  earthly  changes ;  but  did 
we  thus  lose  the  trouble  1  Many  say, 
''  Oh,  to  get  my  footsteps  off  this  sin- 
burdened  earth  !  "  It  is,  therefore, 
needful  to  impress  that  heaven  is, 
primarily,  a  change  in  oui^selves. 
Heaven  is  character  first,  then  place 
suited  to  character.  White  robes  are 
but  the  expression  of  moral  whiteness. 

II.  The  glorified  in  heaven  keep 
their  individuality. — "  Who  are  these?" 
Notice  the  minute  account  of  the 
tribes,  and  the  maintenance  of  tribal 
distinctions.  This  retention  of  our 
individuality  is  absolutely  essential  to 
a  full  and  happy  thought  of  heaven. 
Unity  in  variety — not  in  sameness — is 
the  beauty  of  the  earth.  Single  leaves  ; 
single  faces.  On  the  basis  of  individu- 
ality our  friendships  here  are  formed. 
If  the  redeemed  have  become  merely 
spirits,  our  personal  interest  in  them 
is  almost  gone.  Illustrate  by  giving 
the  dying  hopes  of  Socrates. 

III.  In  heaven  the  connection  with 
earth  is  not  lost  sight  of. — "  Whence 
come  they  ? "  If  Christ  remembers 
Bethlehem  and  Calvary,  well  may  we. 
This  connection  is  to  be  a  material 
element  in  our  bliss.  Earth  is  our 
battle-ground,  the  sphere  in  which  we 
win  our  victories  ;  it  is  not  merely  our 
place  of  probation.  On  earth  we  learn 
to  estimate  the  rest,  and  prepare  to 
enjoy  the  triumph  of  heaven.  Illustrate 
by  visits  to  a  nation's  battle-fields. 

IV.  In  heaven  all  merely  earthly 
distinctions  are  lost. — The  angel  says 
nothing  about  the  host  being  rich  or 

518 


poor,  noble  or  servile.  The  one 
characteristic  is  this :  they  are  clothed 
in  white  robes,  because  blood- washed. 
The  one  qualification  for  heaven  is 
personal  interest  in  the  work  of  Christ. 
There  are  two  efficiencies  in  His  work  : 
He  washes,  and  He  sanctifies.  Learn 
to  look  far  deeper  than  earthly  distinc- 
tions, and  to  value  character.  The  title 
to  the  eternal  feast  is  the  wedding 
garment  of  sanctified  character. 

V.  Heaven  helps  us  to  understand 
and  bear  present  tribulation.— The 
white-robed  came  out  of  great  tribula- 
tion. There  is  a  direct  connection 
between  "tribulation"  and  ''heaven." 
Describe  the  old  threshing  sledge. 
Life  in  general,  and  life  for  each 
individual,  has  its  forms  of  tribulation. 
We  want  to  be  sure  of  its  relation  to 
the  white  robes.  The  Christian  has 
two  things  to  learn  experimentally  here 
on  earth.  1.  How  to  get  his  garments 
washed.  2.  How  to  keep  his  garments 
clean.  When  he  has  learned  both, 
he  is  fit  for  heaven.  But  he  could 
learn  neither  without  passing  through 
great  tribulation.  Compare  the  things 
talked  of  in  the  earthly  and  heavenly 
worlds.  We  talk  of  the  battle  for 
money  and  position ;  they  talk  of  the 
battle  for  character.  We  talk  of  the 
fashion  of  the  garments  that  clothe 
our  mortality :  they  talk  of  the  blood- 
washed  robes  of  the  soul.  We  talk  of 
success,  and  worship  success ;  they  talk 
of  sanctified  tribulation.  By  cherishing 
more  of  their  spirit  now,  we  shall  be 
preparing  ourselves  by-and-bye  to  share 
their  society. 

Vers.  13-17.  The Redeemedin  Heaven. 
— This  passage  exhibits  to  us,  first,  the 
condition  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven. 
That  condition  is  marked,  on  the  one 
hand,  by  a  cessation  from  all  suffering. 
They  have  come  out  of  great  tribulation 
1.  They  are  beyond  the  reach  of  want. 
"  They  shall  hunger  no  more."  2.  They 
are  beyond  the  reach  of  harm.  "  The 
sun  shall  not  light  on  them,  nor  any 
heat."  That  condition  is  marked,  on 
the  other  hand,  by  the  perfection  of  all 
enjoyment.     Their  enjoyment  is  trace- 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,     chap.  viii. 


able  to  three  sources.  (1)  They  stand 
in  the  immediate  presence  of  God. 
"  They  are  before  the  throne."  (2)  They 
are  uninterruptedly  engaged  in  His 
service.  "  They  serve  Him  day  and 
night."  (3)  They  have  access  to  sources 
of  solid  gratification.  "  The  Lamb  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed  them, 
and  shall  lead  them,"  etc.  The  Lamb 
is  here  said  to  lead  the  flock ;  the 
anomaly  is  unavoidable.  The  figure  is 
imperfect,  and  is  sacrificed  to  the 
sentiment.  The  passage  also  distinctly 
exhibits  the  ground  on  which  that 
condition  is  enjoyed  ;  which  is,  not  their 
having  come  out  of  great  tribulation, 
but  their  "  having  washed  their  robes, 
and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb."  Here  are  two  things 
implied  :  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  indi- 
cated by  their  being  washed  in  the 
blood  ;  and  the  renewal  of  the  character, 
indicated  by  their  having  their  robes 
washed — robes   being  emblematical  of 


character.  It  is  their  being  pardoned, 
or  justified,  that  is  the  strict  and  only 
ground  of  their  admission  to  the 
blessedness  of  heaven ;  whilst  their 
being  sanctified  qualifies  them  to  enjoy 
it. 

Ver.  16.  No  Thirst  in  Heaven. — A 
poor  mangled  German  one  night 
crawled  out  of  his  hospital  bed  in  the 
delirium  of  fever  following  amputation. 
Somebody  found  him  in  the  village 
street,  moaning  and  raving  alternately, 
while  he  tried  to  drag  his  bleeding 
body  over  the  frozen  earth.  A  kind 
Frenchwoman  took  him  in  and  put 
warm  wine  to  his  lips,  which  were 
burning,  while  the  rest  of  his  frame 
was  so  cold.  *'  No,  no  ! "  the  poor 
soldier  murmured  ;  "I  am  only  thirsty 
for  my  home  and  children  ;  "  and  so, 
with  that  thirst  unassuaged,  and  that 
heart-touching  explanation  of  his  dark 
journey,  he  died. — "  Daily  Telegraph.'^ 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

FOUR  TRUMPET  VOICES. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 


Ver.  1.  Seventh  seal. — "The  main  visions  give  us  more  external  aspects;  the  interposed 
visions  show  the  inner  and  more  spiritual  aspects.  The  main  visions  give  us  the  trumpet 
voices  of  God's  manifold  providences,  summoning  the  world  to  surrender  to  Him  ;  the 
subsidiary  visions  point  to  the  witness  and  work  of  the  true  children  of  God  in  this  world, 
and  the  more  secret  growth  of  the  Church  of  Christ." 

Ver.  2.  Seven  angels. — There  was  a  popular  Jewish  belief  in  seven  special  angels  as 
attendant  on  God  (Tobit  xii.  15).  They  may  be  taken  as  representing  the  "complete  circle 
of  God's  power  in  judgment."  "  Symbols  of  that  complete  and  varied  messenger  force 
which  God  evermore  commands."  Seven  trumpets. — "  The  usual  emblems  of  war  and  blood- 
shed; they  are  emblems  of  the  series  of  judgments  now  to  be  inflicted."  Godet  regards  the 
trumpet  as  "something  more  than  the  mere  revelation  of  an  event  that  is  to  happen  in  the 
future  ;  it  is  a  manifestation  of  Will,  which  calls  for  a  speedy  realisation." 

Ver.  3.  Altar. — In  the  Jewish  Temple  the  priest  was  wont  to  burn  incense,  while  the  people 
outside  were  praying  (Luke  i.  8-11).  Oifer  it  with. — Lit.  give,  or  add,  it  to  the  prayers. 
To  use  a  phrase  of  modern  Church  life,  the  prayers  are  on  the  altar,  and  the  angel-priest 
♦'  censes  the  holy  things." 

Ver.  4.  With  the  prayers. — Better  "/or  the  prayers " ;  i.e.,  to  ratify  and  consecrate 
them. 

Ver.  5.  Cast  it. — "  The  burning  incense  may  denote  Christian  worship.  Then  that  which 
was  pure  worship,  if  defiled  and  degraded  by  human  corruptions,  becomes  the  instrument  of 
discord  and  violence  "  (compare  Exod.  ix.  8-10).  The  hot  ashes  are  the  token  of  coming  judg- 
ments;  the  ashes /a^^,  to  indicate  that  the  judgments  are  at  hand. 

519 


CHAP.  VIII.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


Ver.  7.  First  angel. — This  is  the  aggravation  of  the  judgments  of  the  third  se^X— famine. 
Blood. — Here  coloured  rain,  which  does  sometimes  fall,  and  is  regarded  as  a  sure  sign  of 
coming  agricultural  evils. 

Ver.  8,  Second  angel  sounded. — The  sea  is  smitten  ;  its  inhabitants  perish  ;  commerce  is 
interrupted.  Addition  to  previous  calamity  in  the  ocean  sphere.  Mountain. — Volcano. 
Bursting  of  volcanoes  always  affects  the  sea  and  shipping.  Volcanoes  are  almost  always  near 
the  sea. 

Ver.  10,  Third  angel  sounded. — See  the  fourth  seal.  Star. — Compare  what  we  call  shoot- 
ing stars.  Fatal  results  follow  from  the  defilement  of  the  waters  men  drink.  Illustrate 
how  civilisation  tends  to  corrupt  rivers,  and  springs,  and  induce  pestilential  disease.  A 
terrible  mortality  seizes  mankind. 

Ver.  12.  Fourth  angel. — Judgment  affecting  the  atmosphere.  Note  how  dependent 
human  health  is  on  atmospheric  conditions.  (Illustrate  by  the  plague  of  darkness  in 
Egypt,  Exod.  X.  21-23.)  The  moral  influence  of  eclipses,  and  other  sky-portents,  on  the 
ancient  mind  must  be  taken  into  full  account.  These  various  plagues  need  not  be  under- 
stood in  any  allegorical  sense ;  they  represent  Uie  various  distresses  attendant  (partly)  on 
the  sins  of  advancing  civilisation,  in  the  very  midst  of  which,  and  even  suffering  under  which, 
the  Church  of  Christ  has  to  live  and  labour. 

Ver.  13.  Angel. — Or  eagle.  This  is  introductory  to  the  last  three,  or  woe,  trumpets.  The 
three  last  trumpets  are  called  "  the  three  woes."  The  difference  between  the  first  four 
trumpets  and  three  last  appears  to  be  this  :  the  first  concern  the  sphere  of  nature,  the  last 
the  sphere  of  humanity.  This  eagle-angel's  sight  of  woes  that  were  coming  suggests  the 
*'  eagle-like  judgments  which  fall  upon  the  carcase  of  dead  nations,  or  a  dead  Society." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—13. 

Judgments  Ajffecting  Nature. — The  servants  of  God  being  now  secure  against 
impending  destruction,  all  things  appear  to  be  in  readiness  for  the  execution  of 
justice  upon  the  persecutors  of  the  Church.  One  seal,  and  one  only,  remains  to  be 
broken  of  the  volume  in  which  their  destiny  is  inscribed ;  and  it  seems  as  if  this 
must  introduce  the  consummation.  It  is  evident  that  such  is  represented  to  be 
the  impression  on  the  great  multitude  who  encircle  the  throne  of  God.  They 
stand  in  silent  and  awful  expectation  of  the  sequel  which  must  take  place  when 
that  seal  is  broken.  But  the  Lord  is  "  slow  to  anger  and  of  great  merc^,  not 
willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  repent  and  be  saved." 
"  Judgment  is  His  strange  work,"  and  delay  does  not  prove  that  any  uncertainty 
attends  the  final  event.  Besides,  it  had  already  been  declared  (chap.  vi.  11),  that 
some  delay  would  take  place  until  more  martyrdoms  should  be  accomplished.  Here, 
then,  the  writer  introduces  various  circumstances  by  which  this  is  aptly  brought 
about.  The  breaking  of  the  last  seal,  instead  of  presenting  a  single  .symbol  of  a 
single  event,  is  followed  by  a  new  series  of  events  which  is  disparted  into  seven 
gradations,  or  stages,  of  accomplishment ;  and  these  are  presented  as  becoming 
gradually  more  and  more  annoying  and  destructive  to»the  enemies  of  the  Church. 
Trumpets,  the  usual  emblems  of  war  and  bloodshed,  are  chosen  as  emblems  of  the 
series  of  judgments  now  to  be  inflicted.  The  first  four  trumpets  affect  the  earth, 
the  sea,  the  rivers  with  the  springs,  and  the  heavens.  The  remaining  three 
indicate  judgments  that  fall  more  immediately  upon  man.  The  present  chapter 
comprises  the  first  four  trumpets,  and  the  evils  which  they  introduce  occur  in 
the  order  already  named.  But  before  any  of  the  trumpets  are  sounded,  symbols 
are  presented  in  heaven  of  the  judgments  about  to  take  place.  The  supplication 
of  the  saints  for  the  relief  of  the  Church  comes  up  before  God,  along  with  the 
incense  which  is  presented  before  His  throne ;  and  the  answer  which  will  be 
made  to  these  supplications  is  symbolised  by  the  action  of  an  angel,  who  casts 
fire  down  upon  the  earth,  which  calls  forth  thunder,  lightning,  and  earthquake, 
all  indicative  of  future  destruction  to  the  enemies  of  the  Church. — Moses 
Stuart. 


520 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  vui. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  1.  The  Way  to  Rest  is  Through 
Trouble. — We  reach,  in  the  seventh  seal, 
the  eternal  quiet  of  God's  presence. 
Through  a  series  of  visions  we  have 
been  shown  that  the  way  to  rest  is  not 
easy,  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  see 
the  great  features  of  earth's  troubles 
remain  till  the  close,  and  that  the 
children  of  God  must,  through  tribula- 
tion, and  even  persecution,  enter  the 
kingdom  of  God's  peace.  The  seals 
answer  the  question,  "  Lord,  wilt  Thou 
at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  ?  " 
But  the  kingdom  will  be  restored. 
The  Church  may  find  her  way  a  way 
of  difficulty,  delay,  danger ;  but  it  will 
be  a  way  to  triumph.  The  kingdoms 
of  this  world  mil  become  the  kingdoms 
of  the  Lord.  Let  the  people  of  God 
go  forward;  let  their  prayers  be  set 
forth  as  incense ;  let  them  blow  the 
trumpet,  and  summon  men  to  repent- 
ance. They  are  not  alone ;  the  Lord 
still  fights  for  His  Israel.  This  is  the 
assurance  which  we  gather  from  the 
trumpets.  In  all  the  wondrous  pro- 
vidences which  the  history  of  the  earth 
discloses,  we  may  hear  the  trumpet- 
voice  which  heralds  the  kingdom  of 
Christ,  to  which  the  Church  is  bearing 
constant  and  sufficient  witness  (chap, 
xi.  3,  4).     The  seals  close  with  peace ; 


the  trumpets  close  appropriately  with 
victory  (chap.  xi.  15).  The  visions  are 
not  scenes  of  events  which  chrono- 
logically succeed  one  another.  The 
one  set  shows  us  the  way  through 
trouble  to  rest ;  the  other  shows  us  the 
way  through  conflict  to  triumph  :  the 
one  set  shows  us  the  troubles  which 
befall  the  Church  because  of  the 
world ;  the  other  shows  us  the  troubles 
which  fall  on  the  world  because  the 
Church  advances  to  the  conquest  of 
the  world,  as  Israel  to  the  possession 
of  the  land  of  promise. —  Bishop  Boyd 
Carpenter. 

Silence  in  Heaven. 
This  silence  was — 

I.  Wonderful.  —  Wonderful,  con- 
sidering— 1.  The  multitude  present ; 
they  must  have  been  under  perfect 
control.  2,  Their  feelings.  Joy  and 
wonder  yearned  to  express  themselves. 

II.  Instructive. — \.  Nothing  done 
in  haste,  or  in  the  heat  of  excitement. 
2.  Time  for  thought  furnished  to  both 
friends  and  foes  of  God.  3.  The  short- 
ness of  the  silence  a  sign  that  the 
work  of  God  is  not  long  delaying  ;  the 
praises  of  saints  are  only  temporarily 
interrupted. — Anon. 


521 


CHAP.  IX.       BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION, 


CHAPTER  IX. 
THE  FIFTH  AND  SIXTH  WOE-TRUMPETS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

Yer.  1.  Fall. — Better,  "fallen";  that  had  fallen.  A  star  would  seem  to  represent  a  false 
teacher.  Some  think  Mahomet  is  referred  to.  He  claimed  to  have  received  instructions 
from  Gabriel.  And  he  let  loose  a  flood  of  evils  on  the  earth.  But  it  is  doubtful  whether 
any  personal  identifications  are  permissible.  The  typical  and  symbolical  character  should 
be  preserved.  Bottomless  pit. — Better,  "  pit  of  the  abyss  " ;  inner  prison  ;  lowest  deep 
(Luke  viil.  31).  The  word  "deep"  describes  the  abode  of  the  evil  spirits,  "This  verse 
suggests  a  vast  depth,  approached  by  a  pit  or  shaft,  whose  top,  or  mouth,  is  covered.  Dante's 
"Inferno,"  with  its  narrowing  circles  winding  down  to  the  central  shaft,  is  somewhat 
similar.  The  abyss  is  the  lowest  spring  of  evil,  whence  the  worst  dangers  arise." — Bishop 
Boyd  Carpenter. 

Ver.  2.  Darkened  by  reason  of  the  smoke. — "  The  enemy  is  at  work  (in  the  conflict  of  the 
Church  with  evil),  seeking  to  obscure  the  Church's  light  by  the  diffusion  of  dark  and  low- 
born thoughts, 

Ver,  3.  Locusts. — Not  the  insect,  but  evil  spirits,  whose  influence  and  work  can  be  repre- 
sented by  locusts.  Oodefs  note  marks  every  point  of  this  figure  :  "From  out  the  bottomless 
pit,  the  dwelling-place  of  devils,  issue  a  cloud  of  evil  spirits,  represented  under  the  image 
of  locusts,  of  brilliant  and  attractive  colours,  but  armed  with  the  sting  of  a  scorpion,  and 
who  for  five  months  (the  time  during  which,  in  the  East,  the  plague  of  locusts  lasts — May  to 
December)  throw  into  a  kind  of  delirium — not  of  joy,  but  of  deep  sadness — mankind,  crushed 
under  the  weight  of  its  struggle  with  the  Almighty.  It  is  as  if  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
were  subjected  to  possession  on  a  great  scale,  after  the  likeness  of  the  single  instances  of  the 
kind  which  we  find  in  the  gospel  history."  These  times  of  delusion,  and  possession —of 
fanatics  and  fanaticism — bear  very  seriously  on  the  Christian  Church,  carrying  even  its 
members  away. 

Ver.  4.  Not  hurt  the  grass. — As  they  were  not  to  do  the  mischievous  work  of  actual 
locusts,  we  are  to  understand  that  actual  locusts  are  not  meant. 

Ver.  5.  Not  kill  them. — They  were  to  produce  a  living  misery.  The  poison  of  scorpions 
is  so  acid  that  it  causes  great  agony.     This  is  the  figure  here. 

Ver.  6.  Seek  death. — As  an  end  to  their  misery. 

Ver.  7.  Like  unto  horses. — There  is  an  imagined  likeness  between  the  head  of  the  locust 
and  the  mailed  head  of  a  horse.  Crowns. — With  possible  allusion  to  decorations  on  war- 
horses'  heads. 

Ver.  8.  Hair  of  women. — It  is  said  that,  in  Arabic  poetry,  the  same  comparison  is  used 
of  the  antennae  of  the  natural  locust.  Teeth  as  lions, — Joel.  i.  6.  Alford  sees  in  this  vision 
"  a  great  symbolical  army,  multitudinous  as  locusts,  malicious  as  scorpions,  ruling  as  kings, 
intelligent  as  men,  wily  as  womanhood,  bold  and  fierce  as  lions,  resistless  as  those  clad  in 
iron  armour.  The  locust-like  army  has  characteristics  partly  human,  partly  diabolical, 
partly  civilised,  partly  barbarous."  It  may  be  best  to  see  in  this  description  the  various 
delusions,  infatuations,  fanaticisms,  which  have  afflicted  humanity,  and  put  Christ's  Church 
in  peril,  idealised.     This  explains  the  mixture  of  metaphor. 

Ver.  11.  Abaddon,  ApoUyon. — The  destroyer.  Not  an  historical  person,  but  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  destructive  spirit.     "  The  genius  of  destruction — bodily  and  spiritual." 

Ver.  13.  Sixth  angel  sounded. — This  woe  is  an  invasion  of  foreign  nations  coming  out 
of  the  East,  and  causing  everywhere  ruin  and  disaster. 

Ver.  14.  Loose  the  four  angels. — These  are  the  angels  of  invasion.  No  actual  reference 
to  the  Euphrates  must  be  sought  for,  but  what  the  Euphrates  symbolises.  Rivers  do  not 
actually  bind  angels.  The  Euphrates  was  the  great  military  barrier  between  the  great 
northern  and  southern  kingdoms.  It  may  symbolise  the  providence  which  kept  Eastern 
delusions  and  fanaticisms  from  passing  over  to  the  West.  When  the  barrier  was  broken  a 
flood  of  evils  poured  into  Europe.  But  it  cannot  be  said  that  this  reference  to  Euphrates 
is  satisfactorily  explained. 

522 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION.       chap.  IX. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF   THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—12. 

The  Locust  Symbols. — The  interpretation  of  these  visions  is  most  difficult,  but 
we  must  bear  in  mind  that  they  are  descriptive  of  that  great  war  which  the 
Chui'ch  is  waging  with  the  world,  which  good  is  waging  with  evil,  but  the  end  of 
which,  we  are  assured,  is  the  victory  of  the  good.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world 
become  the  kingdoms  of  the  Lord,  and  of  His  Christ  (chap.  xi.  15),  but  during 
the  progress  of  the  war  the  issue  will  often  appear  doubtful — nay,  even  the 
triumph  may  seem  to  be  in  the  hand  of  the  enemy ;  but  faith  disregards  the  back- 
flowing  waves,  for  she  knows  the  tide  is  coming  in.  We  have  seen  that  the 
advance  of  Christianity  is  marked  by  the  manifestation  of  evils  as  well  as  the 
establishment  of  good.  Christianity  does  not  create  evils,  but  the  very  intense 
honesty  of  her  principles  reveals  the  hidden  force  of  unsuspected  corruption. 
Thus  the  faith  of  Christ  is  come  to  give  light  unto  the  world,  but  in  her  progress 
many  lights  fall — the  false  lights  of  world-power,  world-wisdom,  false  religionism, 
heresies.  The  enemy,  too,  is  at  work,  and  seeks  to  obscure  her  light  by  the 
difi*usion  of  low  and  earth-born  thoughts.  The  smoke  of  the  pit  blackens  the 
light,  and  confuses  the  atmosphere.  Now,  this  obscuration  is  surely  the  difiiision 
on  earth  of  evil  thoughts  and  ideas,  the  spirit  of  falsehood  and  hate,  hostility  to 
truth,  and  emnity  against  God  and  man.  The  bright,  clear  air,  made  gladsome 
by  the  sun,  is  darkened;  "all  forms,  that  once  appeared  beautiful,  become  hideous." 
In  the  history  of  advancing  truth  there  will  come  times  when  confused  ideas  will 
darken  simple  truth  and  right,  and  out  of  the  darkness  will  emerge  strange  and 
mongrel  teachings,  with  a  certain  enforced  unity,  but  without  moral  harmony — 
a  medley  of  fair  and  hideous,  reasonable  and  barbarous,  dignified  and  debased, 
which  enslave  and  torment  mankind.  The  outcome  of  these  teachings  is  often 
war  and  tyrannous  oppression,  but  the  sacred  seer  teaches  us  distinctly  that  those 
who  hold  fast  by  the  seal  of  God  are  those  who  cannot  be  injured,  for  he  would 
have  us  remember  that  the  true  sting  of  false  conceptions  is  not  in  the  havoc  of 
open  war,  but  in  the  wounded  soul  and  conscience. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH— Verses  13—21. 

The  Second  Woe- Trumpet. — The  aim  of  the  plague  is  to  exhibit  the  death- 
working  power  of  false  thoughts,  false  customs,  false  beliefs,  and  to  rouse  men  to 
for^^ake  the  false  worships,  worldliness,  and  self-indulgence,  into  which  they  had 
fallen  (vers.  20,  21).  The  enemy  against  whom  these  foes  are  gathered  is  the 
great  world,  lost  in  false  thoughts,  luxurious  ways,  dishonest  customs — that  world 
which,  in  the  very  essential  genius  of  its  nature,  is  hostile  to  goodness  and  the  God 
of  goodness.  But  the  hosts  which  come  against  this  sin-drowned  world  are  not 
merely  plagues,  as  famine  and  pestilence ;  they  are  plagues  which  are  the  result 
of  the  world-spirit,  and  are,  to  a  great  extent,  therefore,  the  creation  of  those  who 
suffer.  For  there  are  evils  which  are  loosed  upon  the  world  by  the  natural  action 
of  sin  and  sinful  customs.  We  should  notice  that  the  historical  basis  of  the 
Apocalypse  is  the  past  history  of  God's  chosen  people.  The  Apocalypse  shows 
us  the  same  principles  working  in  higher  levels  and  in  wider  arena.  The  Israel 
of  God,  the  Church  of  Christ,  with  its  grand  opportunities,  takes  the  place  of  the 
national  Israel.  (But  its  experiences  are  similar,  and  each  set  of  experiences 
helps  us  in  the  understanding  of  the  other.)  The  people  who  are  victorious  by  faith 
at  Jericho  lay  themselves  open,  by  their  timid  worldliness,  to  the  dangers  of  a 
Babylonish  foe.  The  plague  which  falls  on  the  spirit  of  worldliness  does  not 
spare  the  worldliness  in  the  Church.  The  overthrow  of  corrupted  systems  bear- 
ing the  Christian  name  is  not  a  victory  of  the  world  over  the  Church,  but  of  the 
Church  over  the  world.  The  history  of  Israel  is  in  much  the  key  to  the  history 
of  the  world. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

523 


CHAP.  IX.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  IX. 


Ver.  7.  Horses  in  Battle. — "  The  Mama- 
lukes,  wearing  their  beards  long  and  rough, 
with  graue  and  sterne  countenance,  hauing 
strong  and  able  bodies,  vsed  such  cunning  in 
all  their  fights  and  battels  that,  after  they 
had  giuen  the  first  charge  with  their  launces, 
they  would  by  and  bye,  with  wonderful 
actiuitie,  vse  their  bows  and  arrows,  casting 
their  targuets  behind  them  ;  and  forthwith 
the  horseman's  mace,  or  crooked  scimitar,  as 
the  manner  of  the  battel  or  place  required. 
Their  horses  were  strong  and  couragious,  in 
making  and  swiftnesse  much  like  unto  the 
Spanish  jennets  ;  and  that  which  is  of  many 
hardly  beleeued,  so  docile,  that  at  certaine 
signes  or  speeches  of  the  rider  they  would 
with  their  teeth  reach  him  up  from  the 
ground  a  launce,  an  arrow,  or  such  like  thing  ; 
and  as  if  they  had  known  the  enemie,  run 
vpon  him  with  open  mouth,  and  lash  at  him 
with  their  heeles,  and  had  by  nature  and 
custom  learned,  not  to  be  afraid  of  any  thing. 
These  couragious  horses  were  commonly 
furnished  with  siluer  bridles,  guilt  trappings, 
rich  saddles,  their  necks  and  brests  armed 
with  plates  of  yron ;  the  horseman  himselfe 
was  commonly  content  with  a  coat  of  maile 
or  a  brest  plate  of  yron.  The  chiefe  and 
wealthiest  of  them  vsed  head  pieces :  the 
rest  a  linnen  covering  of  the  head,  curiously 
folded  into  manie  wreathes,  wherewith  they 
thought  themselves  safe  ynough  against  any 
handle  strokes  ;  the  common  souldiers  vsed 
thrumb'd  caps,  but  so  thicke  that  no  sword 
could  pierce  them," — Knolles. 

Vers.  7-10.  Locusts. — These  great  grass- 
hopper-looking insects  have  been  sad 
scourges  to  mankind,  and  the  Egyptian 
plague  of  them  has  happened  more  than 
once  since  that  early  date.  Africa,  especi- 
ally that  part  near  to  Egypt,  has  been  at 
different  times  infested  by  myriads  of  these 
creatures,  which  have  consumed  nearly  every 


green  thing.  The  effects  of  the  havoC 
committed  by  them  may  be  estimated  by 
the  famine  they  occasioned.  St.  Augustine 
mentions  a  plague  of  this  kind  in  Africa, 
which  destroyed  no  less  than  eight  hundred 
thousand  men  in  the  kingdom  of  Masinissa 
alone,  and  many  more  in  the  lands  near 
the  sea.  It  is  also  related  that  in  the 
year  591  great  hosts  of  locusts  migrated 
from  Africa  into  Italy,  and  after  grievously 
ravaging  the  country,  were  cast  into  the 
sea,  and  there  arose  a  pestilence  from 
their  stench,  which  killed  nearly  a  million 
men  and  beasts.  In  the  territory  of 
Venice,  in  1478,  more  than  thirty  thousand 
persons  are  said  to  have  perished  in  a  famine 
occasioned  by  the  devastation  of  the  locusts, 
and  instances  t>f  their  dreadful  numbers 
have  been  recorded  in  France,  Spain,  and 
Germany.  In  different  parts  of  Kussia, 
Hungary,  Poland,  Arabia,  India,  and  other 
countries,  the  locusts  have  come  at  regular 
intervals.  In  the  accounts  of  the  invasions 
of  locusts,  the  statements,  which  appear 
most  marvellous,  relate  to  the  prodigious 
mass  of  matter  which  encumbers  the  sea 
wherever  they  are  blown  into  it,  and  the 
pestilence  arising  from  its  putrefaction. 
Their  dead  bodies  are  said  to  have  been,  in 
some  places,  heaped  one  upon  the  other  to 
the  depth  of  four  feet,  in  Russia,  Poland,  and 
Lithuania ;  and  when,  in  South  Af i  ica,  they 
were  driven  into  the  sea  by  a  north-west 
wind,  they  formed,  says  Barrow,  a  bank 
three  or  four  feet  high  along  the  shore. 
When  we  consider  the  forests  that  are 
stripped  of  their  foliage,  and  the  earth  of 
its  green  garment  for  thousands  of  square 
miles,  it  may  well  be  supposed  that  the 
volume  of  animal  matter  produced  may  equal 
that  of  herds  of  large  animals  accidentally 
falling  into  the  sea.  Nevertheless,  unless 
Augustine  had  been  a  saint,  the  death  of  so 
many  men  would  have  been  doubted. 


524 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION.        chap.  x. 


CHAPTER  X. 
THE  OPEN  BOOK. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

"And  yet,  notwithstanding  all  these  calamities— last  appeals  from  the  Divine  holiness  to  ^ 
the  conscience  of  man — men  do  not  come  to  themselves.  They  continue  to  live  in  their ' 
idolatrous  and  corrupt  practices.  The  seventh  trumpet  is  preceded  by  an  episode  which  has 
specially  in  view  the  destiny  of  Israel  in  the  crisis  which  is  coming  on.  In  order  clearly  to 
indicate  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  a  scene  by  itself,  and,  as  it  were,  isolated  in  the  midst 
of  the  great  apocalyptic  drama,  the  author  makes  it  the  subject  of  a  special  little  hook, 
inserted  within  the  great  one.  John  is  to  eat  it.  This  represents  the  most  complete  spiritual 
assimilation.  This  nourishment  is  to  strengthen  him  for  taking  up  again  the  great  prophecy 
relating  to  '  peoples  and  nations,  and  tongues  and  kings  '  (chap.  x.  11).  The  contents  of  '  the 
little  book,'  which  are  at  once  joyful  and  bitter,  are  comprehended  in  chap,  xi.  1-13  (^Godet). 
The  '  little  book  '  certainly  indicates  a  supplementary  prophecy,  introducing  a  fuller 
account  of  the  rise,  progress,  decline,  and  restoration,  of  Christianity,  preparatory  to  the 
revelations  of  the  seventh  trumpet.  This  account  is  presented  in  a  twofold  form.  1.  In  the 
discourse  of  the  angel  (chap.  xi.  1-13).  2.  In  the  visions  seen  by  St.  John,  chap.  xii.  1-14" 
{W.  and  W.). 

Ver.  1.  Another  mighty  angel. — This  angel  comes  as  the  representative,  and  in  the  power 
of,  Christ,  to  remind  God's  secret  ones  that  Christ  is  with  them  "  all  the  days,"  and  will  surely 
instruct  them  as  to  their  conduct  amid  these  calamities.  Clothed  with  a  cloud. — The  token 
always  of  the  Divine  presence.  Rainbow. — Chap.  iv.  3.  Token  of  covenant.  Sun,  etc.  See 
figures  of  chap.  i. 

Ver.  2.  Little  book. — Contrasted  with  the  book  of  chap.  v.  1.  The  attitude  of  the  angel 
symbolises  his  taking  possession  of  the  whole  world.  The  contents  of  the  little  book  are 
partly  given  in  the  following  chapter. 

Ver.  4.  Write  them  not. — The  idea  is  that  some  things  are  only  for  those  who  have  ears  to 
hear.  St.  John  may  hear  and  understand,  but  it  is  useless  to  expect  others  to  understand. 
Compare  our  Lord's  words,  *'  I  have  many  things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them 
now." 

Ver.  6.  Time  no  longer. — Not  "  finite  time,"  as  opposed  to  "  eternity."  The  idea  of  time 
here  is  delay.  There  shall  be  no  time  lost  before  judgment  shall  fall.  The  suffering  saints 
had  cried,  "  How  long  ?  "  They  were  bidden  to  wait  awhile.  Now  they  are  told  that  tlfey 
will  have  to  wait  no  longer. 

Ver.  7.  Mystery  of  God. — "  The  whole  of  His  plan  and  of  His  counsel  concerning  this  earth 
in  its  present  state  of  discipline  and  of  imperfection — all  that  God  means  to  do  upon  it  and 
towards  it,  even  till  that  which  we  read  of  as  the  •'  time  of  the  end  "  (Dan.  xii.  4-9). 

Ver.  9.  Eat  it  up. — "  Thoroughly  consider  and  digest  it,"  "  make  its  contents  your  own  " 
(see  Ezek.  ii.  8,  iii.  3).  Belly  bitter,  etc.— The  first  effect  of  being  admitted  to  share  in  the 
Divine  counsels  is  delightful,  but  when  those  counsels  are  known  and  realised,  they  may 
cause  grave  distress  and  anxiety  ;  the  Christ-like  sorrow  for  those  against  whom  God's  wrath 
is  revealed,  who  "  knew  not  the  time  of  their  visitation."  The  devouring  of  the  book  is  a 
figure  for  the  thorough  and  eager  perusal  of  it.  What  the  seer  learns  by  the  reading  is  matter 
both  for  joy,  and  grief :  for  joy,  because  of  the  good  tidings  respecting  the  faithful  disciples  of 
Christ ;  of  grief,  because  of  the  evils  which  were  to  come  upon  many  who  would  persevere  in 
their  wickedness. 

Note  on  the  "  Little  Open  Book." — It  is  that  gospel  which  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  the 
weapon  of  the  Church,  that  Word  of  God,  open  to  all,  hidden  only  from  those  whom  the  god 
of  this  world  has  blinded.  The  fallen  powers  may  bear  the  key,  and  let  loose  darkening 
clouds  of  confused  thought  and  unworthy  teaching;  the  outer  courts  of  the  Church  may  be 
overcast ;  but  unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness,  and  God's  Word  has  risen 
with  new  light  and  power  upon  the  bewilderments  and  glooms  of  the  age. — Bishop  Boyd 
Carpenter. 


535 


CHAP.  XI.       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


CHAPTER    XI. 
THE  FATE   OF  JERUSALEM  AND  ITS  TEMPLE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  paragraph,  vers.  1-13,  gives  the  contents  of  the  "  little  book,"  which  are  in  part  joyful 
and  in  part  bitter.  The  marking  ofE  of  a  portion  of  the  temple  answers  to  the  sealing  of  the 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  in  chap.  vii.  Here  there  is  a  symbolical  reserve  of  a  portion 
of  the  temple  from  impending  evils,  as  there  a  reserve  of  an  elect  portion  of  God's  people. 
' '  Just  as  those  were  sealed  to  mark  them  for  ever  as  the  heritage  of  God,  so  is  the  temple 
measured  as  destined  to  remain  His  domain  for  ever.  The  temple,  together  with  the  court, 
is  here  the  emblem  of  the  Jewish  nation,  one  part  of  which  will  remain  faithful  to  its  God — 
that  represented  by  the  temple  measured  by  the  angel,  with  the  altar  and  its  worshippers  ; 
and  the  other  part,  carnal  Israel,  will  give  itself  up  to  the  spirit  of  apostasy  which  will  carry 
captive  the  Gentiles." 

Ver.  1.  Reed. — Canon  :  the  word  may  mean  staff,  pen,  or  light  measuring  rod  (Ezek.  xl.  3  ; 
Rev.  xxi.  15).  Angel  stood. — Omit ;  but  assume  the  speaker  to  be  he  who  gave  the  rod. 
Temple,  etc. — Treat  as  symbols  of  the  people  of  God  within  the  Jewish  people.  Temple  with 
all  its  courts  symbolises  the  whole  Jewish  people.  The  measuring  was  for  the  reserving  of 
this  portion. 

Ver.  2.  Without. — Outside,  or  beyond.  Here  the  ordinary  worshippers  assembled.  Leave 
out. — Despise,  neglect,  take  no  trouble  with.  Gentiles. — Probably  alluding  to  Komans. 
Tread  under  foot. — Luke  xxi.  24.  Forty  and  two  months. — See  ver.  3,  chap,  xii.  14;  and 
compare  Dan.  vii.  25,  xii,  7,  11.  Not  an  exact,  or  literal  period;  to  be  treated  typically,  of  a 
prolonged,  but  strictly  limited,  time.  "  It  is  the  pilgrimage  period  of  the  Church,  the  period 
of  the  world's  power,  during  which  it  seems  to  triumph." 

Ver.  3.  Bisliop  Boyd  Carpenter  thus  explains  the  aim  of  the  present  vision :  "  It  explains 
that  in  the  great  progress  towards  victory  the  Church  itself  will  suflEer,  through  corruptions 
and  worldliness,  but  the  true  temple — the  kernel,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Church — will  be  un- 
harmed and  kept  safe  in  her  Master's  hands.  But  the  position  of  this  hidden  and  enshrined 
Church  will  not  be  one  of  idle  security.  In  that  temple  will  be  reared  those  who  will  witness, 
undaunted  and  undefiled,  for  their  Lord  ;  throughout  the  whole  of  that  chequered  period  of 
profanation  and  pain  there  will  never  be  wanting  true  witnesses  for  righteousness  and  faith." 
Two  witnesses. — Not  to  be  regarded  as  actual  persons ;  compare  Zech.  iv.  6,  7.  The  idea  is 
that  there  should  always  be  some,  even  in  a  decaying,  imperilled  Church,  who,  in  the 
special  power  of  Divine  grace,  should  witness  against  prevailing  evils.  In  every  age  God 
has  His  specially  appointed  and  sustained  witnesses.  "  As  God  raised  up  prophets  in  the 
ancient  Church,  to  witness  against  the  idolatrous  corruptions  of  religion,  so  there  should  be 
some  in  every  age  to  testify  against  the  iniquity  and  idolatry  of  their  times. 
Ver.  4.  Candlesticks. — Lamp-stands,  to  hold  up  the  light  of  God's  claims  and  truth. 
Ver.  5.  Will. — I.e.,  wishes  to.  Fire. — Compare  Jer.  v.  14  ;  2  Kings  i.  10.  Evidently  Old- 
Testament  individuals  and  narratives  suggest  these  figures. 

Ver.  6.  Shut  heaven. — As  Elijah.  Power  over  waters,  etc. — As  Moses. 
Ver.  7.  Beast. — A  familiar  symbol  for  any  noxious,  powerful,  and  dangerous*enemy.  "  A 
beast-spirit,  which  is  in  utter  hostility  to  the  Christ-spirit  "  (see  Dan.  vii.).  Kill  them. — 
This  typifies  the  temporary  triumph  of  worldliness  over  the  witnesses  to  high  spiritual  life. 
"  Men  can  silence,  can  conquer,  can  slay  the  witness  for  a  higher,  purer,  nobler  life.  They 
have  done  so."  But  men  may  always  reckon  upon  the  resurrection  of  God's  witnesses.  He 
never  leaves  Himself  without  a  witness. 

Ver.  8.  Great  city. — Jerusalem.  See  Isa.  1.  10 ;  Jer.  xvi.  46  ;  Ezek.  xxiii.  8. 
Ver.  11.  Stood  upon  their  feet. — Compare  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the  "  valley  of  dry  bones." 
Ver.  15.  Seventh  angel  sounded. — The  angel  who  will  sound  the  trumpet  of  Christ's  final 
triumph,  or  the  trump  of  doom.  This  trumpet,  or  third  woe,  has  reference  to  the  appearing 
of  the  Antichrist.  Ver.  14  takes  up  the  thread  of  the  general  vision.  Godet  says  :  "  We 
shall  see  that  it  is  the  reign  of  Antichrist  which  brings  upon  men  the  last  calamities, 
represented  by  the  seven  vials  ;  hence  it  follows  that  these  latter  are  included  in  the  seventh 
trumpet,  just  as  the  seven  trumpets  formed  the  contents  of  the  seventh  seal.  There  is 
great  art  in  this  way  of  picturing  history  as  a  series  of  periods,  each  of  which  arises  out  of 

526 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.       chap.  XI. 


the  last  term  of  the  period  which  precedes  it.  In  this  simple  image  is  expressed  one  of  the 
profoundest  laws  of  the  progress  of  the  world." 

In  vers.  15-18  the  end  of  the  great  struggle  is  anticipated,  and  the  mingled  rejoicing  in 
heaven,  and  woe  on  earth,  is  indicated.  With  this  assurance  of  final  victory  we  are  prepared 
for  all  the  terrible  scenes  that  make  up  the  sublime  conflict  of  the  ages.  It  must  be  con- 
stantly kept  in  view  that  the  one  aim  of  St.  John  is  the  comfort  and  assurance  of  God's 
people  in  their  persecution,  peril,  and  fear ;  therefore  it  is  that  these  recurring  visions  of  the 
triumph  of  some,  and  the  final  triumph  of  all,  are  given. 

Ver.  15.  His  Christ. — Compare  "  Lord's  anointed  "  (Luke  ii.  26). 

Ver.  16.  Sat  before  God. — Better,  "which  are  before  God,  sitting  upon  their  thrones." 

Ver.  17.  Omit  here  "  art  to  come." 

Ver.  19.  Ark  of  His  Testament. — It  is  almost  always  better  to  read  "  covenant."  The  third 
woe  brought  on  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  is  the  ruin  and  downfall  of  the  Antichristian 
kiugdom  ;  but  this  is  only  a  woe  from  the  earthly  point  of  view.  It  is  a  cause  of  rejoicing 
in  the  heavenly  spheres. 

MAIN  UOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—19. 

The  Prophecy  of  the  Two  Witnesses. — Here  comes  in  another  interposition — viz., 
that  in  respect  to  saving  a  part  of  the  temple,  like  to  that  in  chap,  vii.,  with  re- 
spect to  saving  Christians  from  impending  evils.  Christians,  indeed,  have  already 
been  made  secure  in  the  case  before  us.  But  the  close  of  the  Jewish  or  Mosaic 
institutions  is  near  at  hand.  Shall  all  which  pertained  to  these  now  go  to  ruin  % 
Or  is  there  not  something  that  constitutes  the  essential  unity  of  religion  under  both 
dispensations  which  is  worthy  of  preservation,  and  which,  therefore,  must  be  pre- 
served ?  If  the  ground  taken  by  the  author  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is 
correct  (which  we  may  well  believe)  then  the  basis  of  Judaism  and  Christianity  is 
the  same.  The  introduction  of  the  two  witnesses  has  been  the  occasion  of  much 
controversy,  chiefly  because  effort  has  been  made  to  identify  the  persons  referred 
to,  and  because  the  symbolical  use  of  the  number  two  has  not  been  recognised. 
Stuart  explains  this  chapter,  and  the  meaning  of  these  witnesses,  in  the  follow- 
ing way :  "In  Rev.  vi.  11,  the  martyrs,  supplicating  for  retribution  upon  the 
enemies  and  persecutors  of  the  Church,  are  told  that  they  must  wait  for  awhile, 
until  the  number  of  martyrs  becomes  augmented,  and  the  iniquity  of  their  perse- 
cutors comes  to  its  full  completion.  Against  the  judgments  of  heaven  which  are 
to  overtake  the  latter.  Christians  in  general  are  secured  by  the  seal  of  God  im- 
pressed upon  their  foreheads  (chap.  vii.).  Here,  in  chap,  xi.,  which  brings  us  to  the 
close  of  the  first  catastrophe,  we  have  a  picture  of  the  renewed  and  bitter  efforts  of 
the  enemies  of  the  Church  to  destroy  it,  even  at  the  period  when  destruction  was 
impending  over  themselves.  In  this  way  the  reader  is  prepared  to  acquiesce  in 
the  doom  which  awaits  them  on  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  and  last  trumpet. 
Nor  is  this  all.  The  long-suffering  of  God  is  thus  displayed  towards  His  once 
beloved  people.  They  are  exhorted  to  repentance  while  destruction  is  impending, 
in  order  that  they  may  escape.  Prophets,  furnished  with  miraculous  powers, 
like  those  of  Moses  and  Elijah,  so  as  to  give  full  proof  of  their  Divine  mission, 
are  sent  to  them.  But  they  will  not  hear.  When  the  time  fixed  by  heaven  for 
their  probation  is  past,  those  prophets  are  given  up  to  the  persecuting  fury  of 
their  enemies,  and  they  fall  a  sacrifice.  Yet  the  cause  which  they  advocated  is 
not  rendered  hopeless  by  this.  It  is  not  even  weakened  ;  for  the  martyrs  are 
raised  from  the  dead,  and  ascend  in  triumph  to  heaven.  In  other  words,  '  The 
blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church,'  for  the  Church  becomes  vic- 
torious by  the  deadly  assaults  made  upon  it.  The  enemies  of  religion  may,  indeed, 
bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction  by  their  malignity ;  they  do  so.  But  the 
Church  will  rise  and  triumph,  and  enjoy  continued  Divine  protection  and  favour 
amid  all  the  trials  to  which  it  can  be  subjected.  That  literally  turn,  and  only  two 
witnesses  were  to  appear  in  these  times  of  peculiar  wickedness  ;  that  they  were 
to  be  literally  raised  from  the  dead,  and  ascend  to  heaven,  etc.  ; — we  need  not 

527 


CHAP.  XL       HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


strive  to  disprove  in  commenting  on  such  a  book  as  the  Apocalypse.     But  why- 
are  there  two  witnesses  mentioned.    Partly,  because  two  are  a  competent  number 
to  establish  any  matter  (see  Deut.  xvii.  6,  xix.  15  ;  Num.  xxxv.  30  ;  John  v. 
30-33;  Matt,  xviii.    16).     The  apostles  and  disciples  were  sent  out  in  pairs. 
Compare  also  the  combinations,  Moses  and  Aaron,  Elijah  and  Elisha,  Zerubbabel 
and  Joshua,  Peter   and  John.     The  meaning  is  that  a  competent  number  of 
Divinely  commissioned  and  faithful  Christian  witnesses,  endowed  with  miraculous 
powers,  should  bear  testimony  against  the  corrupt  Jews,  duiing  the  last  days  of 
their  commonwealth,  respecting  their  sins.     All  beyond  this  is  mere  costume  and 
symbol."    Godet^s  explanation  runs  along  the  same  lines,  but  brings  out  some  fresh 
and  suggestive  homiletic  points.     "  The  last  signal — that  of  the  seventh  trumpet 
— is  preceded,  as  the  opening  of  the  seventh  seal  had  been,  by  a  scene  of  an 
encouraging  tendency — that  of  the  two  witnesses.     This  episode  refers,  as  did 
the  former  of  the  two  which  prepared  for  the  seventh  seal,  to  the  destinies  of  the 
Jewish  people.      This  subject  is  so  important  that  it  is  treated  here  in  a  little 
book,  which   forms,  as  it   were,    a  parenthesis  in  the  great  book.     It  is   the 
announcement  (already  anticipated  in  the  prophetic  vision  itself)  of  the  con- 
version of  Israel.     The  faithful  Jews,  together  with  the  hundred  and  forty-four 
thousand  (chap,  vii.)  are  seen  prostrated  in  the  holy  place  before  the  golden  altar 
(the  symbol  of  Judaism)  in  an  ideal  temple  ;  for  the  material  temple  is  no  longer 
in  existence.     They  are  awaiting  the  new  revelation,  which  is  to  carry  them  on  a 
step  farther,  into  the  most  holy  place.       The  mass  of  the  people  are  given  up  to 
the  Gentiles,  who  tread  them  under  foot.      The  author   here  reproduces  the 
exact  words  of  Jesus :  *  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled.'     John  does  not,  any  more  than  Jesus,  use 
the  expression,   '  to  tread  under  foot,'  in  a  literal   sense.     The  subject  in  his 
mind  is  that  of  the  moral  domination  of  the  Gentiles  over  Israel,  and  of  the 
apostasy^  becoming  ever  more  and  more  general,  of  that  ancient  elect  people,  in 
abjuring  the  Divine  principle  of  their  national  existence,  and  basely  seeking  to 
identify  themselves  with  the  heathen  nations  amongst  whom  they  were  scattered. 
Thus,  whilst  the  elect  part  of  the  nation,  by  their  unshaken  fidelity,  prepare 
themselves  for  a  sacred  mission,    the  mass  of  the  people — that  constitute  the 
outer  court  given  up  to  the  Gentiles — degrade  and  materialise  themselves  more 
and  more  to  the  level  of  the  heathen.     In  the  midst  of  this  defection  appear — 
as  did  in  ancient  times  Enoch  in  the  midst  of  the  degenerate  children  of  Seth, 
Moses  before  Israel  corrupted   by  Egyptian   idolatry,  Elijah  amongst  the  ten 
tribes  who  had  become  almost  completely  Paganised — the  two  witnesses,  whose 
preaching,  as  well  as  their  dress  and  acts  of  power,  preach  repentance  to  Israel. 
But — and  this  is  surprising — the  beast  now  appears  upon  the  scene,  though  his 
coming  has  not  yet  been  described.      The  reason  is  that  the  contents  of  the  little 
book  constitute  a  special  prophecy  within  the  great  one.     We  shall  see  later  on 
why  the  Antichrist  thinks  it  expedient  to  leave  Rome,  his  capital,  and  to  take  up 
his  abode  at  Jerusalem.     The  two  witnesses  are  killed  by  him,  but  they  come  to 
life  again  miraculously.     The  city  is  smitten  with  an  earthquake,  and  one  part 
of  the  inhabitants  are  swallowed  up  by  it.      The  remainder  of  the  people,  and 
particularly  those  who  have  been  specially  reserved  for  these  supreme  moments, 
give  glory  to  God,  and  are  converted  to  Him.     Accordingly,  we  shall  find,  in 
chap,  xiv.,  the  hundred  and  forty-four  thousand  surrounding  the  Lamb  between 
the  time  of  the  Advent  and  that  of  the  destruction  of  the  Antichrist.      This 
picture  is  well  adapted  to  encourage  the  Church  in  presence  of  the  terrible  con- 
flict she  is  about  to  be  called  on  to  sustain.     She  knows  now  beforehand  that  she 
will  have  within  humanity  itself  a  powerful  ally — that  is,  the  people  of  peoples, 
of  which  the  elect  part  will  occupy  a  central  place  in  the  Christian  army,  and 
form  a  kind  of  bodyguard  of  the  Lamb," 

528    . 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chaj*.  XL 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  15.  Christ's  Final  THumph. — 
The  book  of  Revelation  is  difficult  to 
interpret.  No  principle  of  interpreta- 
tion has  yet  gained  universal  accept- 
ance. Some  see  in  it  mere  history — 
blended  human  and  Church  history. 
Some  would  have  us  find  chiefly  the 
history  of  the  Church,  and  only  indirect 
references  to  nations  or  individuals. 
Some  regard  it  as  a  story  that  is  past. 
Others  regard  it  as  even  now  in  its 
unfolding.  And  some  treat  it  as  the 
history  of  spiritual  truth  in  its  contact 
and  conflict  with  error.  Our  difficulties 
arise  from  the  fact  that  we  have  no 
wide  and  comprehensive  view  of  God's 
administration  of  the  world,  and  pur- 
pose concerning  it.  We  do  not  enter 
into  God's  thought  in  guiding  His 
world  on  its  course  through  so  many 
ages,  sustaining  it  through  so  many 
changes,  and  peopling  it  with  such  an 
ever-teeming  multitude  of  living  beings. 
There  must  be  some  sublime  end  to- 
wards which  God,  by  processes  which 
we  call  slow,  is  ever  moving.  As  surely 
as  geological  science  unfolds  the  story 
of  a  series  of  material  changes,  running 
on  through  uncounted  ages,  preparing 
the  earth  for  the  abode  of  man,  so 
surely  is  the  history  of  our  earth  the 
story  of  great  moral  and  spiritual 
changes  and  progressions,  preparing 
man  for  some  higher  and  sublimer 
destiny.  And  as  we  stand  wondering 
over  that  record  of  geological  eras, 
amazed  that  God  should  take  so  long 
to  prepare  the  earth  for  man,  so  do  we 
stand  wondering  over  these  moral  and 
spiritual  ages,  these  succeeding  "  dis- 
pensations " ;  this  apparent  ebb  and 
flow,  these  triumphs  and  failures,  these 
boundings,  and  walkings,  and  creepings, 
out  of  all  which  God  is  preparing  man 
for  the  glory  which  is  to  be.  The  great 
end  can  never  be  lost  out  of  God's 
thought.  So  far  as  we  can  discern  it, 
reading  it  under  the  symbol  and 
imagery  that  veil,  while  they  disclose, 
its  mystery,  it  is  this  :  the  full  restora- 
tion   of    tlie   whole    moral    world    to 


harmony  with  Himself.  He  is  working 
to  secure  that  all  the  wills  of  all  moral 
beings  should  freely  choose  to  be  in 
accordance  with,  and  submission  to,  His 
Divine  Will.  All  humanity  is  to  repeat 
after  the  Christ-man,  "  Thy  will  be 
done."  All  the  changes  of  the  world's 
history  have  been  working  towards  this 
sublime  end.  Patriarchal  simplicity, 
Jewish  ceremonial.  Pagan  idolatry, 
civilised  learning,  unities  of  commerce, 
warrings  of  nations,  blendings  of 
races,  emigration  of  surplus  popula- 
tions, and  the  special  forces  of  Christ- 
ianity and  the  Christian  civilisation — 
all  these  things  may  be  thought  of  as 
winds  from  various  quarters,  blowing 
at  various  times,  and  in  various  degrees, 
pressing  on  the  sails  of  the  great  vessel 
of  humanity,  and  bearing  it  forward 
towards  the  love  and  service  of  the  One 
Living  God.  If  we  are  to  get  full 
possession  of  this  great  thought  of  God 
concerning  humanity,  we  must  first  see 
that  all — every  one — of  God's  human 
creatures  must  be  a  subject  of  interest 
to  Him.  You  may  say,  "But  surely 
no  one  ever  doubts  that  God  '  maketh 
His  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  the 
good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and 
on  the  unjust  ? '  "  We  readily  admit  it 
as  a  general  interest  to  create,  preserve, 
feed,  and  clothe ;  but  what  many  of  us 
have  yet  to  see  is,  that  God  has  a  saving 
interest  in  every  human  creature  He 
has  made — an  interest  of  grace.  He 
"  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but 
that  he  turn  from  his  wickedness  and 
live."  We  gain  new  views  of  God's 
dealing  with  the  world  when,  emanci- 
pated from  old  prejudices,  we  can  ?ay, 
with  St.  Peter,  "  Now  I  perceive  that 
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  but,  in 
every  nation,  he  that  feareth  God,  and 
worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  of 
Him";  or  with  Paul,  who  could  stand 
before  a  company  of  Pagan  Greeks,  and 
argue  with  them  on  the  ground  of  the 
universal  Fatherhood.  "  God,  that 
made  the  world,  and  all  things  therein, 
seeing  that  He  is  Lord  of  heaven  and 


M  M 


529 


CHAP.  XI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


earth,  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  cannot  be  God's  ways,  because  they  do 
with  hands.  .  .  .  He  hath  made  of  one  not  seem  successful."  Some  say,  *'  At 
blood  all  nations  of  the  earth,  .  .  .  hath  the  present  rate  of  conversions,  how 
determined  the  times  before  appointed,  long  will  it  take  to  convert  the  world  ? " 
and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation,  if  Men  will  try  and  prove  to  us  that  the 
haply  they  might  feel  after  Him,  and  increase  of  conversions  is  not  equal  to 
find  Him,  though  He  be  not  far  from  the  increase  of  population,  and  there- 
every  one  of  us ;  for  in  Him  we  live,  fore  the  present  means,  the  preaching 
and  move,  and  have  our  being — as  of  the  gospel,  cannot  be  God's  means 
certain,  also,  of  your  own  poets  have  for  converting  the  world.  The  answer 
said,  '  For  we  are  also  His  offspring.' "  to  such  strange  calculations  is  very 
Which  of  us  is  so  fully  in  fellowship  simple.  We  are  only  serva  nts ;  we  are 
with  God's  great  purpose  that  he  could  not  let  into  the  secrets  that  belong  to 
stand  before  the  superstitious  Hindoo,  the  Master.  Servants  have  nothing  to 
the  degraded  savage  from  the  islands  of  do  with  results  and  issues  of  work,  only 
the  seas,  the  wretched  African  from  with  faithfulness  to  duty.  Moreover, 
whom  well-nigh  the  semblance  of  we  cannot  measure  results  as  God  can. 
humanity  itself  has  passed,  and,  with-  We  could  not  make  any  true  or  trust- 
out  a  faltering  in  his  voice,  assure  them  worthy  sum  upon  such  a  subject.  And 
all  that  they  were  gathered  up  into  the  uttermost  apparent  failure  would 
the  kindly  thought  of  God,  objects  of  not  blot  out  one  word  of  that  command 
the  saving  vdll  of  the  great  God  that  which  ever  animates  God's  servants  to 
made  them.  Brethren  in  the  one  Divine  consecrated  toil,  "Go  ye  into  all  the 
creation,  God  wills  them  to  be  brethren  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every 
too  in  the  one  Divine  redemption.  Till  creature  :  he  that  believeth  shall  be 
we  can  do  that,  without  a  question  or  saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not  shall 
a  doubt,  we  prove  that  we  are  as  yet  be  condemned."  God  might,  con- 
out  of  sympathy  with  God's  thought  ceivably,  have  healed  up  the  wounds 
for  humanity.  This  world  becomes  of  humanity  by  one  touch  of  His 
a  new  world,  this  life  a  new  life,  mighty  hand ;  He  might  have  restored 
moral  influences  new  powers,  when  we  to  harmony  all  the  notes  of  creation, 
can  stand  beside  God  and,  as  He  does,  set  ajar  by  sin,  as  in  a  moment ;  He 
take  humanity  itself  into  the  great  might  have  pieced  up  again,  set  in 
grasp  of  our  love.  "  Have  I  any  order,  all  the  broken  fragments  of  the 
pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  moral  creation  by  one  sublime  exertion 
die,  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and  not  of  His  power.  Did  an  evil  force  enter 
that  he  should  return  from  his  ways  our  social  system,  and  disturb  the  rela- 
and  live  ?  "  But  if  it  is  God's  will,  tions  of  the  planets,  God's  fiats  could, 
God's  purpose,  to  bring  the  world  into  in  a  moment  of  time,  destroy  that 
fellowship  with  Himself,  the  means  force,  and  restore  the  perfections  of 
employed  must  be  such — wholly  such,  movement  and  of  place.  But  God  has 
and  only  such — as  He  Himself  is  pleased  no  occasion  for  doing  even  that.  He 
to  choose.  Those  means  may  be,  to  a  works  in  nature  in  accordance  with  the 
large  extent,  beyond  our  full  compre-  laws  He  has  Himself  impressed  upon 
hension.  Some  we  may  have  to  use;  the  creatures  He  has  made.  Instead 
some  we  may  a  little  understand  ;  the  of  making  a  home  for  man  in  a  week 
whole  will  be  beyond  us.  We  are  of  seven  days,  He  guided  the  working 
sometimes  found  foolish  enough  even  of  the  laws  he  had  fixed  in  the  original 
to  test  God's  ways  by  our  ideas  con-  elements,  and  wrought  a  final  witness 
cerning  the  best  ways.  We  say,  "  These  as  the  issue  of  the  conflicts  and  the 
cannot  be  God's  ways,  because  they  are  unfoldings  of  ages.  It  may  be  con- 
not  such  as  we  should  have  taken."  ceivable  that  God  could  have  forced 
We  even  venture  to  test  God's  plans  by  our  moral  nature  into  a  complete  sub- 
their  seeming  results,  and  say,  "  These  jection  to  His  will  (I  cannot  conceive 

530 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.        chap.  xi. 


it,  but  perhaps  some  persons  can) ;  God  Calvary,  we  give,  we  labour,  we  pray, 
could  have  driven  sin  away  from  His  that  the  whole  world  may  one  day  be 
world  with  a  breath.  He  has  not,  uplifted  in  the  eternal  light  and  love  of 
however,  done  so.  He  has  been  pleased  that  cross.  The  day  is  coming — certainly 
persistently  to  act  in  the  line  of  those  coming — towards  it  all  holy  living  and 
laws  according  to  which  He  created  all  holy  toiling  are  most  positively  tend- 
man,  and  especially  in  the  line  of  that  ing — when  the  magnificent  song  of 
law,  of  personal  liberty — free  will,  we  our  text  shall  be  sung  by  a  ransomed 
call  it — which  He  made  man's  supreme  and  redeemed  universe — "  The  king- 
dignity.  So  far  as  we  can  read  the  pur-  doms  of  this  world  are  become  the  king- 
pose  of  God  in  dealing  with  our  world,  doms  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ." 
He  intends  to  bring  men  back  to  His  This  glorious  hope  has  always  been 
love  and  favour  entirely  by  the  use  of  held  before  the  Church,  and  it  has 
moral  motives,  moral  influences.  He  exercised  a  most  important  influence 
means  to  move  the  heart  of  man  by  on  all  its  life  and  labour.  That  gospel 
such  exhibitions  of  Himself,  and  of  His  which  is  the  highest  form  of  moral  in- 
gracious  relations,  that  the  very  heart  fluence,  gathers  into  itself ,  and  uses  up, 
of  the  world  shall  be  won  to  Him.  all  kinds  of  moral  influence.  It  sways 
That  is  the  meaning  of  the  fact  that  by  the  force  of  gratitude,  deepening 
all  the  moral  influences  affecting  man  ever  the  service  to  which  it  calls  by 
for  God  seem  to  be  gathered  up  into  the  thought  of  redemption,  and  ransom, 
the  one  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ  and  purchase  by  precious  blood.  It 
to  the  world.  Moral  force  reaches  its  moves  by  personal  affection ;  constrain - 
climax,  its  supreme  development,  in  ing  by  the  force  of  our  love  to  One 
the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  By  whom  we  increasingly  esteem  as  "  the 
that  cross  God  touches  the  very  inmost  chief  among  ten  thousand,  and  the 
of  the  human  heart.  He  speaks  therein  altogether  lovely."  It  excites  the 
to  man  by  the  mightiest  power  that  holiest  ambitions ;  holds  forth  as  in- 
can  reach  him,  the  power  of  a  self-  spiration  the  possibility  of  the  noblest 
sacrificing  love.  Jesus  declared  the  achievements;  offers  work  of  the  highest 
sublime  moral  power  that  streams  forth  character,  and  bids  us  aim  at  the 
from  Calvary  when  He  said,  "  And  I,  spiritual  conquest  of  the  whole  world, 
if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  It  touches  our  faculty  of  hope,  paints 
draw  all  men  unto  Me."  Now,  if  that  for  us  a  final  victory  in  comparison 
is  God's  highest  power  to  move  human  with  which  the  victories  of  all  earth's 
hearts,  and  to  draw  men  unto  Himself  ;  battle-fields  are  but  as  children's  soldier 
if  God  has,  as  it  were,  gone  beyond  table-play — a  victory  so  sublime  in  its 
Himself  in  the  sacrifice  of  His  Son ;  if  character,  and  so  far-reaching  in  its 
that  is  His  sublime  Evangel,  His  issues,  as  shall  make  reasonable  to  our 
gospel  for  the  world.  His  way  for  win-  view  all  the  years  of  waiting,  all  the 
ning  souls ; — surely  we  cannot  be  wrong  faintiugs  of  hope  deferred.  The  Church 
in  preaching  Christ  the  wide  world  of  Christ  has  found  the  blessing  of  this 
over ;  we  cannot  be  wrong  in  telling  great  hope  for  herself,  for  the  nourish- 
every  human  brother  of  the  Lamb  ment  of  her  own  spirit,  and  the 
God  has  provided  for  a  sin-offering.  strengthening  of  her  own  faith.  So 
We  cannot  be  wrong  in  sending  out  far  as  the  Church  has  been  a  living 
heralds  to  the  most  distant  and  most  Church,  it  has  found  the  value  of  this 
degraded  places  of  the  earth,  to  lift  up,  great  hope.  The  more  the  Church 
in  sight  of  men  everywhere,  the  cross  rejoices  in  its  privileges,  the  more  does 
of  Jesus.  Result  or  no  result,  success  it  long  that  its  King  should  receive 
or  no  success,  God  surely  knows  the  His  full  royal  rights.  When  the 
wisdom  and  grace  of  His  own  plan  ;  it  Church  has  been  flagging  and  failing, 
is  enough  for  us,  if,  swayed  ourselves  its  renewal  has  come  in  visions  of  the 
by   the   moral  power  of    the  cross  of  glory    of    the    day    that    is    coming. 

531 


CHAP.  XI.        HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


Dimmed  by  the  foul  breath  of  the  evil 
rife  in  an  age  covered  over  with  crowding 
life-cares,  the  Church  has  known  the 
dimness  pass,  and  the  covering  be 
lifted  off,  when  it  caught  sight  again 
of  the  glory  of  that  day  when  "the 
kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  have 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and 
of  His  Christ,  and  He  shall  reign  for 
ever  and  ever."  The  Church  has  found 
the  blessing  of  this  hope  in  its  times 
of  decay  and  persecution.  That  is, 
whenever  it  has  been  a  suffering  Church. 
The  story  of  Christ's  Church  has  been 
no  even  tale,  no  simple  on-moving, 
and  ever-growing  towards  its  end. 
Sometimes  the  river  has  overflowed  its 
banks,  and  hurried  along  with  the 
swift  current  of  revival  and  holy 
zeal ;  sometimes  the  waters  have  lain 
very  low  in  the  bed,  and  seemed 
scarcely  to  care  to  move  onwards. 
Those  were  days  of  sluggishness  and 
decline.  Sometimes  the  full  stream 
has  moved  slowly,  noiselessly  along, 
exhaling  on  either  side  its  fertilising 
moistures.  At  times  the  kings  of  the 
earth  have  favoured  Christianity,  and 
it  has  had  its  days  of  prosperity  and 
world-triumph.  And,  yet  again,  it  has 
been  a  despised  thing ;  it  has  known 
the  holier  days  of  trial  and  sorrow,  of 
martyr  fires,  and  wearying  prison,  and 
torturing  rack.  What  has  kept  alive 
the  faith,  the  fervour,  the  steadfastness 
of  holy  men  and  women  in  those 
suffering  days  ?  Surely  it  was  their 
vision  of  the  Lamb,  who  goeth  forth 
conquering  and  to  conquer.  And  not 
in  her  times  of  persecution  only ;  in 
those  other  times  of  suffering,  when 
the  tides  of  evil  rose  high,  and 
were  driven  on  with  fierce  winds,  when 
the  Church  seemed  helpless  to  resist 
the  desolating  encroachments,  and 
could  only,  with  an  infinite  sadness, 
watch  the  sight — humanity  drifting 
away  into  error,  and  superstition,  and 
pride,  and  woe.  Those  are  the  most 
trying  times  for  Christ's  Church. 
Then  its  faith  is  most  severely  tested. 
What  holds  the  Church  to  its  allegiance, 
save  its  persistent  hoping  for  the  day 
when    the    *' kingdoms   of    this    world 

532 


shall  have  become  the  kingdoms  of  our 
Lord  and  of  His  Christ "  ?  Who  that 
knows  those  wonderful  letters  written 
with  such  overflowing  emotion  by 
Samuel  Kutherford  but  will  remember 
how,  in  the  shadows  of  his  prison- 
house,  his  very  soul  thrilled  within 
him  in  longing  for  the  full  I'oyal  rights 
of  that  King  whom  he  so  quaintly,  but 
so  tenderly,  calls  "  his  sweet  Lord 
Jesus "  ?  The  Church  has  found  the 
blessing  of  this  hope  in  its  days  of  toil 
and  sacrifice.  That  is,  whenever  it  has 
been  a  labouring  Church.  It  has,  indeed, 
always  been  a  labouring  ai^d  an  aggres- 
sive Church.  They  would  have  us 
believe,  in  these  days,  that  our  fore- 
fathers were  wrong  in  expecting  the 
world  would  be  converted  through  their 
sanctified  labours.  If  they  were  wrong, 
it  was  a  strange  sort  of  wrong,  for  it 
exercised  a  most  ennobling  influence 
upon  them.  They  are  a  good  company. 
We  may  well  join  them.  There  is  Paul, 
not  counting  his  life  dear  if  only  he  can 
get  opportunities  for  lifting  up  Christ. 
Peter  declaring  he  cannot  but  speak 
out  the  things  he  has  seen  and  heard. 
Austin  visiting  the  then  benighted  isle 
of  Britain,  so  that  he  might  lift  up 
Christ  to  our  forefathers.  Luther, 
braving  the  opposition  of  those  in 
authority,  in  rendering  his  testimony 
for  Christ.  But  time  would  fail  if  I 
tried  to  speak  of  Huss,  and  Wickliffe, 
and  Savonarola,  and  Bernard,  and 
Whitefield,  and  Wesley,  <and  Haldane, 
and  Hill,  and  Moody,  and  all  the  host 
of  devoted  missionaries,  who  have  gone 
forth,  consecrating  all  life,  all  powers, 
to  the  service  of  their  redeeming 
Christ.  Witnesses  for  Christ  when 
the  witness  was  denied.  Preachers  of 
Christ  when  the  Word  fell  on  stopped 
ears.  What  was  it  sustained  them  in 
thus  labouring,  and  ceasing  their  labour 
only  with  their  life  ?  It  was  the  hope 
of  that  coming  day — always  coming — 
when  the  "kingdoms  of  this  world  shall 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of 
His  Christ."  Do  you  think  that  we,  in 
these  latter  days,  can  afiford  to  lose  out 
of  our  lives  the  force,  the  impulse,  the 
thrill,  of  this  Divinely  assured  hope? 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,       chap.  xr. 


Are  we  so  strong  that  we  can  live  our 
Christian  lives,  and  render  our  Christian 
witness,  well  without  it  1  In  this  cold, 
calculating,  business  age  of  ours,  can 
our  Christian  life  be  vigorous  and 
bright,  and  pure,  without  the  passion 
of  love  and  anticipation  kindled  by 
such  a  hope?  In  these  days,  when 
really  devout  and  spiritual  living  is 
half  scorned,  can  we  be  "  steadfast, 
unmoveable,  always  abounding  in  the 
work  of  the  Lord,"  without  the  cheering 
of  this  hope  ?  Longing  to  take  our 
places  among  the  Lord's  labourers ;  to 
be  co-workers  together  with  God  in 
His  redemptive  scheme,  light-holders 
for  God  ;  Safed  cities  crowning  hill -tops, 
and  guiding  ever  pilgrim  spirits  home 
to  God.  Longing  to  be  among  those 
who  would  have  all  men  know  the  royal 
claims  of  Him  whom  we  call  "  Lord  of 
lambs,  the  lowly ;  King  of  saints,  the 
holy " ;  among  those  who  would  lift 
up  the  cross  in  sight  of  a  dying  world  ; 
how  shall  we  renew  our  zeal,  refuse  to 
be  weary  in  our  well-doing,  lay  ever 
more  talent,  more  money,  more  time, 
more  prayer,  upon  the  altar  of  service, 
save  by  keeping  ever  in  view  the  glory 
of  that  time  when  the  "  kingdoms  of 
this  world  have  become  the  kingdoms 
of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ."  We 
cannot  do  without  these  rapturous 
visions  of  the  latter-day  glory.  The 
intensity,  the  holy  passion,  the  conse- 
crated zeal  of  a  Christian  life,  fade  out 
if  we  lose  sight  of  that  future.  God 
has  given  us  wonderful  pictures  of  the 
scenes  that  are  to  be.  Pearly  gates, 
golden   streets,   waving   palms,   white- 


robed  hosts ;  and  then,  reaching  up 
beyond  sensible  figures  into  higher 
moral  suggestions,  God  gives  us  the 
song  of  the  days  that  are  to  be,  when 
the  *'  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall 
have  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  of  His  Christ."  Perhaps  these  are 
the  last  days.  The  world's  coronation 
of  Jesus  may  be  nearer  than  we  think. 
And  what  a  day  that  will  be  !  What 
a  day  for  toilers,  and  for  givers,  and 
for  men  of  prayer  !  What  a  day  for 
the  martyrs  who  have  died  for  Christ  ! 
What  a  day  for  the  missionaries,  who 
have  given  their  lives  to  witnessing  for 
Christ !  What  a  day  for  those  who 
have  been  looking  for  its  appearing  in 
the  only  true  way  of  looking,  by  earnest 
and  faithful  discharge  of  present  duty 
for  Christ's  sake  !  Sung  by  the  chorus 
in  the  great  oratoiio,  the  words  of  our 
text  have  thrilled  our  hearts.  But 
what  shall  be  the  chorus  of  the  ten  thou- 
sand times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands 
of  thousands  ?  What  will  be  the 
blended  harmony  of  prophets  and 
kings,  and  magi,  and  millions  of  the 
unlettered  from  east  and  west  and 
north  and  south  !  Will  you  have  a 
place  in  that  great  coronation  of  Jesus? 
Will  you  have  a  believer's  place  ?  Will 
you  have  a  worker's  place  ?  Will  you 
have  a  song  of  your  own  ?  Will  you 
have  a  band  round  you  of  those  whom 
you  led  to  Christ  ?  The  day  is  coming. 
The  glints  of  the  dawning  are  already 
in  the  east.  Soon  the  cry  will  go  up, 
"The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and 
of  His  Christ." 


533 


CHAP.  xii.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION, 

CHAPTER    XII. 
THE  MISSION   OF   CHRIST'S  CHURCH  AND   ITS   GREAT   HINDERER. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL   NOTES. 

"  In  the  set  of  visions  now  before  us,  the  Apocalypse  unveils  the  spiritual  aspects  of  the 
conflict,  that  we  may  know  that  the  issue  is  not  between  Christianity  and  un-Christianity 
alone,  iDut  between  Christianity  and  anti-Christianity.  Hitherto  we  have  seen  the  more 
outward  aspects  of  the  great  war.  Now  we  are  to  see  its  secret,  hidden,  spiritual — yes, 
supernatural — aspects,  that  we  may  understand  what  immeasurably  divergent  and  anta- 
gonistic principles  are  in  conflict  under  various  and  specious  aspects  in  the  history  of  the 
world  "  (Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter). 

Ver.  1.  Woman. — Symbol  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  The  Church  conceived  under  the 
figure  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  as  mother  of  Messiah.  Clothed  with  the  sun,  etc. — Compare  Song 
of  Solomon  vi.  10.  {Slmcox  thinks  the  Jewish  Church,  the  ideal  Israel,  is  meant.)  Mystically 
treated,  the  work  of  the  Church  is  to  bring  forth  Christ  to  men,  and  never  to  be  satisfied 
until  Christ  is  formed  in  them.  Exactly  this  its  work  is  ever  in  the  resistance  of  the  devil, 
but  in  the  assistance  of  God  through  His  angels. 

Ver.  3.  Red  dragon.  -  A  half  mythical  kind  of  serpent,  combining  strength,  subtlety,  and 
power  to  inspire  terror,  in  doing  malicious  and  evil  work.  As  the  woman  is  an  ideal,  so  is 
the  dragon  ;  he  is  the  personification  of  the  subtle  evils  that  afflict  the  Church,  and  hinder 
her  from  carrying  through  her  mission.  Seven  heads  and  ten  horns. — Implying  that  all  kinds 
of  unsanctified  power  are  embodied  in  him,  and  represented  by  him. 

Ver.  4.  Drew. — Draweth.  Stars. — Represent  leaders  of  men,  men  of  prominent  influence. 
These  are  led  away  by  the  subtleties  of  the  evil  power.  Stood  before  the  woman. — Figuring 
the  intense  keenness  with  which  evil  ever  watches  its  opportunity.  Some  of  the  ideas  here 
are  evidently  taken  from  the  jealous  schemes  of  Herod  the  Great,  in  connection  with  the 
infant  Messiah. 

Ver.  5.  Brought  forth  a  man-child. — Refer  this  both  to  Christ,  and  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
in  the  Church.     Caught  up  unto  God. — This  seems  to  refer  to  the  historical  Christ. 

Ver.  6.  Place  prepared  of  God. — Compare  flight  of  Virgin  Mary  to  Egypt,  which  may  be 
the  suggestion  of  this. 

Ver.  7.  "War  in  heaven. — Nothing  to  do  with  Milton's  fall  of  the  angels.  It  is  something 
happening  since  the  Incarnation,  and  consequent  upon  it.  Michael. — Dan.  x.  13,  21,  xii.  1. 
The  special  patron,  or  guardian  angel,  of  the  people  of  Israel.  What  we  have  here  is  a 
pictorial  representation  of  the  spiritual  war  actually  being  waged  upon  the  earth.  It  is 
pictured  in  heaven  in  its  completeness,  and  so  we  are  cheered  by  the  assurance  that  Michael 
is  going  to  conquer.  Compare  the  mission  of  pictorial  prophetic  anticipations  in  the  Old 
Testament. 

Ver.  9.  Old  serpent. — Perhaps  with  allusion  to  Gen.  iii.  1.  Devil. — Adversary.  Satan. — 
Deceiver,  The  two  words  suggest  the  power  and  subtlety  of  evil.  "  Satan  is  thrown  down 
from  the  position  which  he  is  still  holding,  and  cast  upon  the  earth ;  and  he  it  is  who,  in 
order  to  avenge  himself,  calls  forth  from  the  depths  of  the  seas — that  is,  from  the  midst  of 
the  nations — Antichrist — his  instrument  for  waging  a  final  conflict  against  Christ." 

Ver.  12.  Woe  to  the  inhahiters  of  the  earth  — Slmcox  suggests  that  the  idea  may  be  this  : 
"The  Incarnation,  as  it  broke  the  otherwise  invincible  power  of  sin,  so  made  sin  more 
deadly,  if  it  remains  in  spite  of  Christ's  coming."  It  certainly  refers  to  the  intenser  features 
of  the  conflict  of  the  Church  with  evil,  when  evil  failed  to  destroy  the  power  of  the  Son  of 
God,  even  when  it  secured  His  death.  The  present  fight  with  evil  is  altogether  more 
subtle  and  more  perilous  than  Christ  knew,  or  waged,  while  He  was  actually  on  earth. 

Ver.  13.  Persecuted  the  woman. — Which  we  have  seen  is  the  symbol  of  the  Church  in  the 
world. 

Vers.  15, 16.  These  figures  have  not  been  satisfactorily  explained.  Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter^ 
treating  the  verses  mystically,  says  :  "  By  the  flood,  or  river,  we  understand  all  great  popular 
movements  against  Christianity :  the  earth  swallows  up  all  these ;  they  diffuse  them-selves 
for  a  time,  but  mother  earth  absorbs  them  all.  The  eternal  laws  of  truth  and  right  are 
ultimately  found  stronger  than  all  the  halC-truths,  whole  falsehoods,  and  selfishness,  which 
give  force  to  such  movements." 

Ver.  17.  Remnant  of  her  seed. — From  attacking  the  Church  as  a  whole,  the  power  of  evil 
turns  more  hopefully  to  deal  with  sections  and  individuals.  Antichristianism  has  had  its 
power  on  sects,  parties,  and  persons,  but  it  has  failed  in  every  attempt  to  ruin  the  one,  uni- 
versal, spiritual  Church  of  Christ. 

534 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION,      chap.  xii. 


MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—17. 

Victory  over  ilie  Dragon. — To  understand  this  text  (ver.  11),  we  must  gain 

some  general  idea  of  the  chapter  to  which  it  belongs.     Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter  is 

our  best  guide  in  the  endeavour  to  find  the  spiritual  meanings  and  suggestions 

of  the  book  of  Revelation.     He  points  out  that  the  book  is  not  a  continuous 

history,  but  a  review  of  the  great  struggle  between  evil  and  good,  made  over  and 

over  again,  from  different  points  of  view.     The  visions  are  in  series.     One  set  is 

connected  with  the  "  seals,"  another  with  the  "  trumpets."     In  this  chapter  a 

distinct  set  of  visions  is  commenced.     "  It  deals  with  the  spiritual  conditions  of 

the   great    war    between  evil  and  good ;  it  disrobes  the  false  appearances  which 

deceive  men ;  it  makes  manifest  the  thoughts  of  men's  hearts ;  it  shows  that  the 

great  war  is  not  merely  a  war  between  evil  and  good,  but  between  an  evil  spirit 

and  the  spirit  of  God,  and  that,  therefore,  the  question  is  not  only  one  between 

right  and  wrong  conduct^  but  between  true  and  false  spiritual  dispositions.     Men 

look  at  the  world,  and  they  acknowledge  a  kind  of  conflict  between  evil  and 

good  ;  their  sympathies  are  vaguely  on  the  side  of  good  ;  they  admire  much  in 

Christianity ;  they  are  willing  to  think  the  martyred  witnesses  of  the  Church 

heroes ;  they  think  the  reformers  of  past  ages  worthy  of  honour  ;  they  would 

not  be  averse   to   a    Christianity  without   Christ,    or   a   Christianity   without 

spirituality.     They  do  not  realise  that  the  war  which  is  raging  round  them  is 

not  a  war   between   men   morally   good   and  men  morally  bad,  but  between 

spiritual  powers,  and  that  what  the  gospel  asks  is  not  merely  a  moral  life,  but 

a  life  lived  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  a  life  in  which  the  spiritual  dispositions 

are  Godward  and  Christward.     The  Apocalypse,  in  this  set  of  visions,  unveils 

the  spiritual  aspect  of  the  conflict,  that  we  may  know  that  the  issue  is  not 

between  Christianity  and  ^^?^-Christianity,  but  between  Christianity  and  anti- 

Christianity."     The  chapter  opens  with  the  vision  of  "a  woman  clothed  with 

the  sun."      It   is   the   symbol   of   the   bride,  the   Church   of   Christ.      She   is 

represented  as  suffering  in  child-birth.     It  is  the  symbol  of  the  continual  work 

of  Christ's  Church.     That  work  is  to  bring  forth  Chiist  to  men,  and  never  to  be 

satisfied  till   Christ  is  formed    in  them,   until  the   Spirit  of   Christ,  and    the 

teaching  of  Christ,  and  the  example  of  Christ,  are  received,  loved,  and  obeyed, 

and  men  transformed  into  the  same  image,  *'  even  as  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord." 

But  the  work  of  the  Church  would  not  be  unhindered.     There  would  be  constant 

opposition.     The  spiritual  enemy  would  be  ever  on  the  watch,  by  subtle  or  by 

violent  means  destroying  the  likeness  of  Christ  wherever  it  was  seen.     There 

appeared  a  dragon.     "The  dragon  is  that  fabulous  monster  of  whom  ancient 

poets  told,  as  large  in  size,  coiled  like  a  snake,  blood  red  in  colour,  .  .  .  unsatiable 

in  voracity,  and  ever  athirst  for  human  blood."     It  is  the  emblem  of  the  evil 

spirit,  the  devil,  the  perpetual  antagonist  of  good,  the  persecutor  of  the  Church 

in  all  ages.     His  many  heads  and  horns  and  crowns  suggest  the  manifold  forms 

and  phases  of  his  malicious  influence.     This  dragon  is  watching,  and  whenever 

the  woman,  the  Church  of  Christ,  brings  forth  any  good,  the  dragon  is  as  keen 

in  his  efforts  to  destroy  it  as  Pharaoh  was  to  kill  the  Hebrew  male  children,  or 

Herod   to   slaughter  the   babes  of   Bethlehem.      The  vision  of  the  man-child 

caught  up  to  God  reminds  us  that  the  Divine  defence  of  all  good  is  even  more 

sure  than  the  active  enmity  of  evil.     The  flight  of  the  woman  brings  before  us 

th3  persecutions  which  the  Church  undergoes,  because  of  her  active  effort  to 

bring  forth  good.     Then  the  vision  changes,  and  we  have  pictured  the  great 

fight  between  Christ  and  the  dragon,   under  the  figure  of   Michael   and   his 

angels.     This  is  to  explain  how  it  is  the  spirit  of  evil  is  so  resolutely  attacking 

the  Church.     He  has  attacked  in  vain  the  Church's  Head  and  Lord.     He  has 

535 


CHAP.  XII.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


been  conquered.  He  has  been  driven  out.  The  "Prince  of  the  world  came  to 
Christ,  and  had  nothing  in  Him."  So,  turning  aside  from  Christ,  the  dragon 
attacks  Christ's  Church.  But  there  is  every  hope  for  the  Church.  That 
victory  of  Christ's  means  this  :  "  Now  is  come  salvation  and  strength,  and  the 
kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  power  of  His  Christ."  The  dragon  may  try  to 
devour  all  the  good  brought  forth  by  Christ's  earth-bride,  the  Church.  He  will 
fail.  The  Church  will  overcome  him,  even  as  Christ  has  overcome  him.  The 
Church  will  overcome  the  dragon  of  each  age,  and  of  all  ages,  "  by  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,"  or  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  because  of  the  word  of  the 
testimony.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth,  when  Christ  hath  died  ?  What  power 
can  the  accusations  of  the  adversary  have  when  the  Lamb  of  God  hath  taken 
away  the  sin  of  the  world  1  and  when  we  liave  boldness  to  enter  into  the 
holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  And  their  victory  is,  on  their  side,  due  to  the 
firmness  with  which  they  stood  to  the  word  of  their  testimony,  witnessing  ever 
for  Christ  and  truth,  and  not  counting  their  lives  dear  unto  themselves. 
Christ's  martyrs  are  many  more  than  those  who  die  in  prison,  at  stake,  or  on 
scaffold,  for  Him.  "  He  may  bid  us  die  for  Him  ;  He  does  bid  us  live  for  Him. 
If  we  do  not  the  one — the  less — we  may  be  quite  sure  that  we  shall  never  rise 
to  the  other — the  higher  and  the  more  glorious."  I  would  impress  on  you, 
therefore,  that  the  conflict  with  evil  is  really  a  spiritual  conflict,  carried  on 
within  us.  It  is  represented  and  illustrated  by  the  conflict  with  outward  evils 
which  we  see  being  waged  in  the  large  world-spheres.  If  we  are  Christ's,  then 
the  Christlike  is  being  formed  in  us.  We  are  bringing  forth  things  which  bear 
Christ's  stamp.  Good  and  right  and  gracious  things  are  like  our  children. 
And  just  as  there  are  perils  surrounding  infant  life,  foes  and  diseases  watching 
to  destroy  this  life,  so  the  dragon  watches  every  birth  of  goodness.  We  must 
accept  the  fact,  but  we  will  in  no  way  be  daunted  by  the  fact,  for  we  shall 
overcome  because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  because  of  the  word  of  our 
testimony.  The  secrets  of  overcoming  are  our  Inner  Life^  and  our  Open 
Confession. 

I.  Our  inner  life. — "  Because  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  "  Christ,  who  is 
our  life."  It  is  important  that  we  notice  how  the  child-figure  is  sustained. 
The  Lamb  is  represented  as  being  the  Bride's  husband,  the  Church's  husband, 
and  we  are  to  think  of  His  life  as  being  in  the  Church's  child.  And  it  is  this 
thought  which  gains  expression  in  the  figures  of  the  text.  It  is  quite  a 
favourite  figure  with  St.  John,  recurring  again  and  again  in  his  writings. 
That  very  striking  sentence  uttered  by  John  the  Baptist  to  his  disciples,  as  he 
pointed  to  the  young  man,  Jesus  of  Nazareth — "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world  !  " — entered  into  the  apostle's  very  soul,  and 
gave  him  his  best  thoughts  concerning  Christ,  especially  when  he  learned  how 
to  get  at  the  deeper,  mystical  meanings  of  the  sentence.  We  may  accept  the 
figure  of  the  Lamb  as  suggestive  of  the  gentle,  submissive,  and  loving  character 
of  Christ :  but  we  cannot  be  satisfied  with  that  only ;  neither  John  the  Baptist, 
nor  John  the  Apostle,  nor  any  other  Jew,  could  keep  from  the  figure  its 
associations  of  sacrifice.  A  lamb  to  take  away  sin  must  have  meant,  to  them, 
a  lamb  offered  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  removal  of  sin.  But  there  are  still  other 
ideas  suggested  when  prominence  is  given  to  the  "  blood  of  the  lamb."  For  the 
*'  blood  is  the  life."  Blood  shed  stands  for  life  yielded.  This  the  writer  of  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews  states  for  us  in  a  very  impressive  manner.  "  For  if  the 
blood  of  goats  and  bulls,  and  the  ashes  of  a  heifer,  sprinkling  them  that  have 
been  defiled,  sanctify  unto  the  cleanness  of  the  flesh  :  how  much  more  shall  the 
blood  of  Christ,  who  through  the  eternal  Spirit  offered  Himself  without  blemish 
unto  God,  cleanse  your  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve  the  living  God." 
By   the   expression  "  the  eternal  Spirit "  we  are  to  understand  the  sovereign 

536  .  . 


BOmiETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,      chap.  xil. 


freeness  of  His  own  will ;  the  voluntariness  of  His  full  self -surrender.  We  have, 
then,  two  supreme  truths  to  receive.  Christ's  life  is  given  to  us  :  that  is  another 
truth,  and  the  one  we  want  for  our  text.  Christ  in  you.  Christ  formed  in 
you.  This  will  at  once  suggest  to  us  the  meanmg  of  this  passage.  We  shall 
overcome  that  dragon  w^ho  is  ever  ready  to  devour  all  the  goodness  we  can 
bring  forth  by  the  virtue  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  the  Christ-life  that  is  in  us. 
But  have  we  entered  into  this  higher  apprehension  of  Chiist,  who  is  our  life  1 
The  apostle  Paul  could  say,  "  I  live,  yet  not  I ;  Christ  liveth  in  me."  That  is 
the  assurance  of  victory  over  all  the  forms,  and  all  the  powers,  of  evil. 

II.  Our  open  confession. — "  The  word  of  their  testimony."  Life  only  keeps 
healthy  when  it  finds  expression  and  exercise.  The  first  suggestion  of  these  words 
may  be  of  martyrs,  such  as  Polycarp,  who,  when  importuned  to  blaspheme  the 
name  of  Christ,  answered,  "  Fourscore  years  have  I  served  Him,  and  si i all  I  now 
blaspheme  my  King  and  my  Saviour  ? "  At  Eastbourne,  near  the  pier,  they 
show  three  iron  stakes  fixed  firmly  in  the  sand,  now  very  old  and  rusty,  and  the 
one  farthest  out  to  sea  very  nearly  rusted  off.  Eound  those  stakes  gathers  a 
martyr-story.  A  father  and  mother  and  their  little  daughter,  because  of  their 
religion,  were  tied  to  those  stakes  when  the  tide  was  out,  and  were  told  that,  if 
they  did  not  renounce  their  faith,  they  would  be  drowned  by  the  rising  tide.  But 
they  remained  firm.  The  father,  being  the  farthest  out,  was  drowned  first ;  then 
the  mother ;  and  then  the  priests  gathered  round  the  little  girl,  who  was  chained 
to  the  stake  nearest  the  high-water  mark,  and  told  her,  as  the  waves  were  dashing 
up  around  her,  that  if  she  would  renounce  her  religion  she  would  be  saved.  Slie 
said,  "  No,  no,  I  will  not  deny  my  Saviour ;  I  will  die  for  Jesus ;  He  died  for 
me."  That  was  the  "  word  of  her  testimony,"  whereby  she  conquered  the  dragon. 
But  much  of  our  earth-struggle  stops  short  of  martyrdom.  In  firm  standing  by 
the  right,  in  all  earnest  expressions  of  Christian  energy  and  activity,  we  find 
our  power  to  overcome.  The  "  w^ord  of  our  testimony  "  may  be  said  to  include 
(1)  our  firm  resolve  daily  renewed,  and  (2)  our  personal  experience,  which  gives 
to  our  word  the  force  that  was  in  the  words  of  the  once  blind  man,  when  he  said 
concerning  his  Ilealer,  "  Whether  He  be  a  sinner  or  no,  I  know  not :  one  thing  I 
know,  that,  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  Look,  then,  once  again  at  the 
points  which  have  come  out  to  view.  Christ's  Chuich  is  ever  bringing  forth 
goodness,  as  it  were  Child-Christs.  The  dragon  of  evil  is  ever  on  the  watch  to 
devour  every  Child- Christ  of  goodness.  If  we  save  the  child  it  can  only  be  by 
the  power  of  the  Christ-life  that  is  in  us,  and  by  the  power  of  the  testimony 
for  Christ  that  we  persistently  make  as  the  natural  and  proper  expression  of 
the  Christ-life.  That  life  of  Christ  in  us  is  the  assurance  of  our  final  triumph 
over  all  evil,  and  in  anticipation  of  that  full  victory  which  is  certainly  coming, 
for  which  we  wait  and  for  which  we  pray,  we  sing  in  our  souls,  comfort 
one  another,  and  say,  "  Now  is  come  the  salvation,  and  the  power,  and  the 
kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the  authority  of  His  Christ ;  for  the  accuser  of 
our  brethren  is  cast  down."  "  And  I  saw,"  says  St.  John,  *'  an  angel  coming 
down  out  of  heaven,  having  the  key  of  the  abyss  and  a  great  chain  in  his  hand  ; 
and  he  laid  hold  of  the  dragon,  the  old  serpent,  which  is  the  devil  and  Satan, 
and  bound  him  for  a  thousand  years,  and  cast  him  into  the  abyss,  and  shut  it, 
and  sealed  it  over  him,  that  he  should  deceive  the  nations  no  more." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Nature  Serving  ChHstianity. — "  The  I.  Its  grand  revelations. — It  reveals 

earth  helped  the  woman,"  who  is  re-  that    there    is — (1)     God;     (2)    law; 

garded  as  the  symbol  of  the  Church  of  (3)      mediation  ;      (4)     responsibility ; 

Christ.     Nature  helps  Christianity  in  (5)  mystery, 

various  ways.     By —  II.  Its  moral  impressions. — 1.  Sense 

537 


CHAP.  xiii.     HOMILETIC  COMME'NTARY:    REVELATION. 


of  dependence.  2.  Reverence.  3.  Con- 
trition.   4.  Worship. 

III.    Its    multiplied    inventions. — 

Men,  by  studying  nature,  have  attained 
to  the  arts.  There  is  (1)  merchandise ; 
(2)  the  Press  ;  (3)  painting ;  (4)  music ; 
(5)  government. — D7\  Thomas. 

The  War  in  Heaven. — The  appear- 
ance of  Antichrist  is  preceded  by  a 
combat  waged  in  heaven  (perhaps  in 
the  heavenhes  or  the  spiritual  spheres) 
between  Michael,  the  champion  of  God, 
the  representative  of  monotheism — that 
is  the  meaning  of  his  name,  "  who  is 
like  unto  God " — and  Satan,  the  se- 
ducer of  men,  who  entices  them  into 
idolatry,  into  that  worship  of  imaginary 
beings  which  is,  at  bottom,  only  the 
adoration  of  Satan  himself,  and  of  his 
angels.  This  combat  represents  the 
final  conflict  between  monotheism  and 


Paganism.  Satan  loses  his  place  in 
the  celestial  spheres,  from  whence  he 
had  been  ruling  over  men's  hearts,  and 
making  himself  worshipped  as  God. 
He  is  cast  down  to  earth ;  that  is  to 
say,  his  reign  in  the  sphere  of  religion 
comes  to  an  end.  The  diabolical  super- 
stitions of  Paganism  disappear  from 
human  society.  But  a  certain  degree 
of  power  is  still  left  to  this  enemy  in 
the  terrestrial  sphere.  Only  he  cannot 
exert  it  directly;  and,  just  as  evil 
spirits  require  the  body  of  those  who 
are  possessed  as  a  medium  for  their 
action,  so  Satan  needs  a  man  wholly 
given  up  to  him,  to  enable  him  to 
realise  the  plans  of  vengeance  which 
he  is  revolving  in  his  heart.  And  the 
coming  of  the  Antichrist  is  the  means 
which  he  employs  for  realising  this 
threat. 


CHAPTER  XIII, 
THE  FIRST  BEAST. 

CRITICAL  AND   EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

In  this  and  the  preceding  chapter  the  three  chief  adversaries  of  the  real  kingdom  of  God  in 
the  world  are  described.  The  first  is  the  dragon,  or  Satan.  The  second  is  the  power  of  the 
world  striving  to  withdraw  our  thoughts  from  the  unseen  and  eternal,  and  to  confine  them  to 
the  seen  and  temporal.  The  third  is  the  spirit  of  carnal  religiousness,  like  that  which  so 
bitterly  opposed  Jesus  in  the  days  of  His  flesh,  and  sought  to  substitute  its  superficial  and 
hollow  forms  for  the  depth,  the  sincerity,  and  the  freedom,  of  a  true  life  with  God.  These 
two  last  agencies  always  work  together,  and  help  one  another  against  Christian  truth. 
Nothing  so  welcome  to  the  mere  politicians  of  this  world  as  a  faithless  Church  which  will 
help  them  to  use  men  for  their  own  selfish  ends.  Nothing  so  welcome  to  a  faithless  Church 
as  the  honours,  the  riches,  and  the  spoils  which  the  mere  politicians  of  the  world  have  to 
bestow.  In  this  part  of  the  Apocalypse,  therefore,  the  passion  of  the  seer  burns  with  its 
intensest  flame.  The  degenerate  Church  is  represented  under  the  figure  of  Babylon.  In 
quick  succession  the  contents  of  the  bowls  are  poured  out  upon  her,  until  she  is  cast,  like  a 
great  mill-stone,  into  the  sea  ;  and  company  after  company  of  those  who  had  been  enriched 
with  the  abundance  of  her  dainties  lament,  with  piercing  cries,  her  disastrous  and  irremedi- 
able fate  ?  (ir.  Milligan,  D.D.). 

Ver.  1,  Beast. — Stuart  says  this  beast  rising  out  of  the  sea  is  a  symbol  of  the  Roman 
imperial  and  persecuting  power  ;  the  beast  which  rises  out  of  the  earth  (ver.  11)  is  an  emblem 
of  the  domination  and  persecution  of  the  Pagan  priesthood,  or  religious  power ;  and  these 
two  united,  with  Satan  at  their  head,  use  all  their  efforts  to  crush  the  Church,  wherever  and 
whenever  they  can  attack  it.  The  first  sentence  of  this  verse  should  read,  "and  he  "  (i.e.,  the 
dragon)  "  stood  upon  the  sand  of  the  sea."  Two  monsters,  one  more  brutal,  the  other  more 
subtle,  seem  to  rise  at  his  bidding.     Compare  Dan.  vii.     Name. — Should  be  "  names." 

Ver.  2.  The  special  features  of  three  wild  beasts  are  combined,  as  in  Dan.  vii.  4,  "  The 
leopard  (panther),  lion,  and  wolf  (bear),  were  symbols  of  luxuriousness,  cruel  ambition,  and 
hungry  and  heartless  avarice,  which  oppose  men  and  nations  when  they  seek  the  Holy  Hill, 
where  the  light  of  God  ever  rests."  We  need  not  find  either  imperial  or  papal  Rome  in  the 
bgast,  or  the  faUe  prophet.     The  beast  represents  the  civil  power,  whenever  it  is  used  for  the 

638 


TTOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  xm. 


persecution  of  the  Church.  The  second  beast,  or  false  prophet,  represents  the  religious 
power  whenever  it  is  antagonistic  to  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Church.  They  typify  the  civil 
and  sacerdotal  powers.  "  Antichrist  represents  political  despotism,  and  the  false  prophet 
spiritual  error." 

Ver.  3.  Wounded  to  death. — Some  refer  this  to  the  death  of  Nero,  and  to  a  popular  notion 
of  the  day  that  he  would  reappear.  Godet  says  :  "  We  see  here  one  of  the  earlier  forms  of 
anti-Divine  power  on  the  earth,  which,  after  having  been  put  down  by  an  act  of  the  Divine 
power,  reappears  suddenly  in  the  person  of  the  Antichrist  himself,  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
kingdom  of  the  latter  seems  to  be  only  the  restoration  of  that  ancient  power."  "  The  spirit 
of  the  wild  beast  is  adored  wherever  worldliness  prevails.  There  is  nothing  so  successful  as 
success,  and  the  homage  of  men  is  more  often  paid  to  power  than  to  principle." 

Ver.  6.  And  them.— Omit  "and."     "  Even  them  "  would  be  better. 

Ver.  7.  Overcome  them. — In  the  sense  of  crushing  them,  not  in  the  sense  of  making  them 
give  up  their  allesiance  to  God. 

Ver.  8.  Book  of  Life.— Chap.  xxi.  27. 

Ver.  10.  Read,  "if  any  one  (is)  for  captivity,  into  captivity  he  goeth.  The  patience  and 
faith  of  the  saints  are  to  be  shown  by  their  submitting  to  death  or  captivity. 

Ver.  11.  Another  beast. — See  on  ver.  1.  Like  a  lamb,  etc. — The  idea  of  hypocrisy  to 
serve  base  ends  is  suggested.     He  looks  like  Christ,  and  speaks  like  Satan. 

Ver.  13.  Great  wonders.— Matt.  xxiv.  24  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  9.  The  figures  of  this  and  the 
following  verses  are  taken  from  the  demand  to  worship  the  image  of  the  Emperor. 

Ver.  17.  Number  of  his  name. — There  have  been  hopeless  disputings  in  the  endeavour  to 
identify  this  beast  with  a  person ;  he  really  stands  for  a  principle  or  polity,  but  the 
principle  has  been  embodied  and  represented,  over  and  over  again,  in  the  Christian  ages. 
Some  read  six  hundred  and  sixteen,  but  the  number  cannot  be  made  to  answer  to  any  known 
name  without  considerable  manipulation.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  the  Roman  power  is  a 
supreme  representation  of  the  principle. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—18. 

The  Two  Beasts. — The  first  beast  is  the  great  force  of  the  world-power,  which, 
in  every  age,  has  been  antagonistic  to  the  power  of  right.  The  wild  beast  is 
always  the  figure  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  ;  t.e.,  the  kingdoms  which  are 
founded  on  passion  or  selfishness.  The  spirit  of  arroga'nt  self-sufficiency 
characterised  all  the  world-powers.  The  second  beast  is  less  monstrous  in 
appearance.  He  somewhat  resembles  a  lamb  ;  he  rises  from  the  earth,  and  not 
from  the  sea;  his  power  lies  in  deception  (vers.  13,  14),  as  well  as  violence;  he 
seems  to  possess  more  supernatural  power ;  yet  the  whole  of  his  work  is  directed 
to  magnifying  the  first  beast  (ver.  12).  Do  not  these  features  lead  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  principles  which  the  second  wild  beast  supports  are  the  same  as 
those  on  which  the  former  wild  beast  acted,  but  that  he  supports  them  with 
more  subtlety,  intelligence,  and  culture  ?  He  is  called  the  False  Prophet.  The 
force  and  appropriateness  of  this  designation  become  more  apparent  when  we 
notice  that  the  features  which  are  assumed  bear  a  deceptive  resemblance  to  those 
of  a  lamb.  The  advancing  intelligence  of  the  world,  its  increase  in  knowledge 
and  wisdom,  the  wider  diffusion  of  culture  and  thought,  produce  a  change  in  the 
general  fashion  of  life ;  but  the  spirit  which  animates  Society  is  unchanged.  The 
second  wild  beast  is  that  change  which  is  a  change  of  mode,  but  not  of  spirit ; 
a  change  of  manner.s,  but  not  of  heart.  There  is  more  refinement,  more  civilis- 
ation, more  mind,  but  it  is  still  the  world-power  which  is  worshipped ;  it  is  self- 
seeking  adoration  of  pleasures,  honours,  occupations,  influences,  which  spring  from 
earth  and  end  in  earth — the  pursuit  of  powers  which  are  worldly.  .  .  .  All  who 
use  their  knowledge,  culture,  wisdom,  to  teach  men  that  there  is  nothing  worthy 
of  worship,  save  what  they  can  see,  and  touch,  and  taste,  are  acting  the  part 
of  the  second  wild  beast.  And,  be  they  apostles  of  science,  or  apostles  of  culture, 
or  apostles  of  logical  immorality,  or  apostles  of  materialism,  if  their  teaching 
leads  men  to  limit  their  worship  to  the  visible  and  tangible,  they  are  making 
men  worship  the  beast,  who  is  the  adversary  of  the  servants  of  th©  Lamb. — 
A^Ur  Boyd  Carpenter. 

539 


CHAP.  xiii.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  18.  The  Numher  of  the  Beast. — 
The  various  attempts  made  in  recent 
years  to  solve  this  famous  Apocalyptic 
riddle  seem  to  show  that  students  are 
as  far  as  ever  from  agreement.  Wey- 
lancl  finds  the  number  in  the  phrase, 
"  Csesar  of  the  Romans,"  written  in 
Hebrew  characters;  Schmidt  and 
Vischer  recognise  it  in  the  name 
"Nero,"  so  written;  Ffleiderer,  in  the 
phrase,  "  Nero  Csesar "  ;  and  Voelter 
in  "  Trajan  Adrianus."  Erbes,  Spitta, 
and  Zahn,  who  follow  Irenceus  in  read- 
ing six  hundred  and  sixteen  instead  of 
six  hundred  and  sixty-six,  identify  the 
beast  with  Caligula,  that  is,  "  Gains 
Caesar  "  ;  but  this  result  is  obtained  by 
the  use  of  Greek,  not  Hebrew,  letters. 
After  eighteen  centuries  it  is  still  un- 
certain whether  any  one  has  yet  arisen 
with  sufiicient  understanding  to  count 
the  number  of  the  beast. 

A  New  Suggestion  Concerning  the 
Number. — It  may  seem  a  wild  idea  to 
make  another  attempt  to  explain  the 
six  hundred  three  score  and  six  of 
Rev.  xiii.  1 8 ;  but  I  hope  I  may 
be  read  before  being  condemned.  It 
seems  to  me,  then,  that  Hengstenberg 
makes  a  very  wise  suggestion  on 
the  subject,  but  does  not  draw  the 
right  conclusion.  "  Here,"  he  re- 
marks, "  we  must  not  wander  after 
our  own  imagfinations  The  seer  of 
the  Apocalypse  lives  entirely  in  Holy 
Scripture.  On  this  territory,  therefore, 
is  the  solution  of  the  sacred  riddle  to 
be  sought."  He  then  goes  on  to  find 
it  in  the  name  of  Adonikam,  whose 
*'sons,"  or  rather  descendants,  in 
Ezra  ii.  13,  are  given  as  six  hundred 
sixty  and  six  in  number.  But  may 
I  call  attention  to  that  number  in 
1  Kings  x.  14,  where  it  represents 
the  number  of  talents  of  gold  which 


came  to  Solomon  in  one  year  ?  The 
luxury  and  extravagance  thus  brought 
in  corrupted  the  heart  of  the  king 
himself,  who,  considered  the  model  of 
wisdom,  gave  way,  led  astray  by  wealth 
and  its  consequences,  to  wickedness 
and  idolatry  in  his  old  age.  May  not 
the  number  in  question  there  represent 
worldliness  and  covetousness,  of  which 
Christ  our  Lord  taught  us  so  especially 
to  take  heed  and  beware  1  Additional 
probability  is  given  to  this  by  the  pre- 
ceding verse,  where  the  votaries  of  this 
are  described  as  the  worshippers  of 
the  beast  and  of  his  image. — W.  T, 
Lynn,  B.A. 

The  Number  Symbolical. — I  am  dis- 
posed to  interpret  this  "  six  hundred 
and  sixty-six  "  as  a  symbolical  number, 
expressing  all  that  it  is  possible  for 
human  wisdom  and  human  power, 
when  directed  by  an  evil  spirit,  to 
achieve,  and  indicating  a  state  of 
marvellous  earthly  perfection,  when 
the  beast-power  has  reached  its  highest 
development,  when  culture,  civilisa- 
tion, art,  song,  science,  and  reason, 
have  combined  to  produce  an  age  so 
nearly  resembling  perfection — an  age 
of  gold,  if  not  a  golden  age — that 
men  will  begin  to  say  that  faith 
in  God  is  an  impertinence,  and  the 
hope  of  a  future  life  a  libel  upon  the 
happiness  of  the  present.  Then  will 
the  world-power  have  reached  the  zenith 
of  its  influence ;  then  will  only  a 
wisdom  descended  from  above  be  able 
to  detect  the  infinite  difference  between 
a  world  with  faith  and  a  world  without 
faith,  and  the  great  gulf  which  the 
want  of  a  little  heaven-born  love  can 
fix  between  an  age  and  an  age.  Some 
find  the  answer  to  this  number  in  Nero 
Csesar;  others  in  the  papacy. — Com- 
m,entary  for  English  Readers,  in  loc. 


540 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap,  xiv 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

THE  VISION   OF  THE   FAITHFUL   SERVANTS   OF   GOD, 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

That  we  may  be  assured  of  the  safety  of  God's  faithful  ones,  even  during  the  time  of  the 
triumph  of  the  beast  and  false  prophet,  we  are  shown  the  sealed  ones  all  secure  and  in  the 
charge  of  the  Lamb ;  and  we  are  further  assured  that  seven  angels  are  ministering  to 
the  protection  and  comfort  of  the  imperilled  saints.  The  angel  of  good  news  (vers.  6,  7)  ; 
the  angel  proclaiming  the  doom  of  the  great  world  city  (ver.  8)  ;  the  angel  who  warns  men 
against  the  mark  of  the  beast  (vers.  9-12)  ;  the  angel  of  comfort  (ver.  13) ;  the  angel  of  the 
wheat  harvest  (vers.  14-16)  ;  the  angel  of  the  vintage  (vers.  17-20)  ;  the  angel  of  fire  (ver.  18). 

Ver.  1.  Father's  name. — Read  "  His  name  and  His  Father's  name." 

Ver.  4.  Virgins. — The  term  is  used  figuratively,  not  literally.  They  were  virgin  souls  who 
had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  the  image  of  Baal :  and  so  here  they  were  virgin  souls  who  had 
refused  to  offer  incense  to  the  bust  of  the  emperor. 

Ver.  6.  Everlasting  gospel. — With  idea  of  its  universal  applicability.  Everlasting  and 
eternal  are  constantly  used  to  indicate  quality. 

Ver.  8.  Babylon.— The  type  of  all  cities  that  stand  in  the  pride  of  self-reliance,  and  so  put 
dishonour  upon  God.  "  Is  not  this  great  Babylon  which  1  have  builded  ? "  "  Babylon  is 
clearly  an  emblem  of  some  principles  which  have  been  more  or  less  accepted  by  all  nations, 
and  which  will  more  or  less  involve  all  in  the  consequences  of  her  fall." 

Ver.  13.  Blessed  are  the  dead. — This  relieves  anxiety  concerning  all  who  are  taken  out  of 
the  warfare  before  the  victory  is  fully  won.  They  will  share  all  the  rewards,  and  their  life- 
witness  and  service  will  be  in  no  wise  forgotten.  Kecall  the  fear  with  which  St.  Paul  deals 
in  the  epistle  to  the  Thessalonians,  that  those  who  died  before  Christ  came  would  be  placed 
under  some  special  disadvantages. 

Ver.  14.  Son  of  man. — So  figured  as  presiding  over  the  final  judgment  of  humanity.  The 
visions  of  a  harvest  and  a  vintage  (vers,  15-20),  typify  the  time,  now  nigh  at  hand,  in  which 
God  will  gather  in  His  own,  and  will  trample  His  enemies  in  the  winepress  of  His  wrath. 

Ver.  20.  "  The  number  here,  four  multiplied  into  itself,  and  then  multiplied  by  a  hundred 
is  symbohcal  of  a  judgment  complete  and  full,  and  reaching  to  all  corners  of  the  earth." 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—12. 

The  Bible  for  the  World's  Salvation. — The  portion  which  is  most  suggestive  for 
the  purposes  of  the  preacher  is  that  comprised  in  vers.  6,  7.  See  a  first  truth. 
It  is  not  the  Bible  as  a  record  of  the  gospel  that  saves  the  world.  The  gospel 
saves  the  world.     The  gospel  is  God  saving. 

I.  What  is  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  ? — 1.  Good  news  of  God 
Himself.  Good,  because  no  other  religion  proclaims  it.  It  is  the  news  that 
God  is  Love,  and  that  we  may  use  the  Father-name  for  Him,  and  the  fatherly 
relations  to  represent  Him.  2.  Good  news  of  God's  gift.  "Gave  His  only 
begotten  Sou."  A  man,  given  to  men.  A  son,  given  to  prodigals.  We  have  to 
"  believe  the  love  God  hath  to  us,"  as  shown  in  His  "  unspeakable  gift." 

II.  Wherein  lies  the  saving  efficacy  of  this  gospel? — 1.  In  its  universal 
adaptation.  It  is  a  salvation,  not  for  what  is  peculiar  to  some  men,  or  some 
nations,  under  some  unusual  circumstances,  but  for  the  woe  that  is  common  to 
all  men,  which  we  put  into  the  word  "  sinners J^  Other  religions  are  limited  to 
particular  tribes  or  nations.  Illustrate  gods  of  hills  and  gods  of  valleys.  Distinct 
deities  in  different  parts  of  India.  2.  In  the  power  of  God  that  works  through 
it.  We  must  never  separate  agencies  from  the  Divine  life  that  is  in  them,  and 
think  that  agencies  can  save.  (1)  The  Bible  cannot  save.  (2)  The  gospel  can- 
not save.  (3)  Faith  cannot  save.  God  saves,  through  faith,  by  means  of  the 
gospel,  which  is  carried  to  men  in  the  Bible.  3.  In  the  attraction  of  Him  who 
is  the  essence  of  it.    There  must  be  personal  soul-relations  with  Christ,  the  Living 

541 


CHAP.  XIV.     EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


Saviour,  if  there  is  to  be  salvation.     And  these  are  brought  to  men  through  the 
attractive  power  which  Christ  exerts  when  "  lifted  up  "  into  their  view. 

III.  Where  shall  we  find  the  gospel  enshrined  ?— In  the  Bible.  As  the  Jews 
carried  and  preserved  the  primary  truths  of  the  unity  and  spirituality  of  God 
for  humanity,  so  the  Bible — the  whole  Bible — carries  and  preserves  the  gospel — 
the  primary  truths  of  Divine  redemption — for  humanity.  The  Bible  is  not  a 
book  of  science,  or  of  history,  or  of  social  principles  ;  these  are  but  its  framing, 
and  setting,  and  illustration.  The  one  concern  of  the  Bible  is  Religion.  It  tells 
us  what  God's  relations  with  man  have  been.  That  is  the  very  heart  of  its 
history.  It  tells  us  what  man's  relations  with  God  should  be,  and  may  be.  That 
is  its  message.  It  is  summed  up  in  the  words,  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life." 
Men  have  done  the  Bible  great  wroDg  by  taking  it  to  be  what  it  never  proposed 
to  be,  and  never  could  be.  Then  to  scatter  abroad  the  Bible,  in  every  land  and 
every  tongue,  is  for  the  angel  to  fly  abroad  with  the  everlasting  gospel.  There 
are  two  ways  in  which  the  angel — as  the  symbol  of  agencies — carries  the  gospel. 
1.  It  is  spoken  by  the  servants  of  God.  At  first  the  message  was  spoken  by 
apostles  and  teachers.  It  was  not  written  and  collected  together  so  as  to  be  at 
the  command  of  evangelists  and  missionaries,  for  more  than  two  centuries.  At 
first  men  were  possessed  with  the  Word,  and  spake  v>^hafc  they  had  m  them.  And 
this  is  the  deeper  truth,  and  holier  power  now.  The  true  speaker  is  the  man 
who  has  got  the  Word  m  him.  Send  that  man  anywhere,  and  he  is  an  angel, 
having  the  everlasting  gospel.  2.  It  is  distributed  as  the  book  which  we  call 
the  "  Word  of  God."  And  we  can  readily  xrcognise  the  wisdom  that  lies  in  the 
employment  of  this  agency.  (1)  Its  attractiveness.  (2)  Its  variety.  Suits  all 
ages  and  all  abilities.  (3)  Its  adaptation  to  the  world,  through  being  Eastern  in 
form.  (4)  Its  uniqueness,  as  compared  TTith.  the  Bibles  of  other  religions.  Com- 
pare Vedas,  Koran,  Book  of  Mormon,  etc.  But  these  two — the  speakers  and  the 
Word — are  really  one,  seeing  that  the  speakers  only  speak  the  Word.  Always 
the  Word  is  the  agency,  whether  it  be  heard  from  the  lips  or  read  from  a  book. 
And  we  must  face  the  fact  that  what  a  sinful,  dying  world  wants  is  that  gospel 
which  is  in  the  Bible,  and  which  may  come  to  men  either  as  spoken  or  as  read. 
Both  ways  we  may  think  of  when  we  sing  : 

"  Fly  abroad,  thou  mighty  gospel. 
Win  and  conquer,  never  cease." 

For  the  gospel  does  everywhere — all  the  world  over  and  all  the  ages  through 
— prove  itself  able  to  meet  and  satisfy  all  kinds  of  spiritual  needs  that  humanity 
can  feel. 

SUGGESTIVE   NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Yer.  1.  Marks  of  Servitude. — It  was  the  Lord  Jesus."  What  these  marks 
a  custom  among  the  ancients  for  were,  the  apostle  explains  by  the 
servants  to  receive  the  mark  of  their  stripes,  etc,  mentioned  in  2  Cor.  xi.  23, 
master,  and  soldiers  of  their  general,  There  is  a  beautiful  allusion  to  the 
and  those  who  were  devoted  to  any  stigmata — marks  which  were  some- 
particular  idol,  the  mark  of  that  par-  times  fixed  on  servants  and  soldiers,  to 
ticular  idol.  These  marks  were  usually  show  to  whom  they  belonged.  How 
impressed  on  their  right  hands,  or  on  strikingly  do  these  two  remarks  illus- 
their  foreheads  (Bev.  xiii.  and  xvi.),  trate  the  scene  of  Jesus  the  Lamb  of 
and  consisted  of  some  hieroglyphical  God,  the  all-conquering  Redeemer, 
character,  or  of  the  name  expressed  in  standing  as  the  great  Captain  of 
vulgar  letters,  or  in  numerical  cha-  Salvation  at  the  head  of  His  brave 
racters.     Gal.    vi.    17:  "The  marks  of  army  of  saints  on  Mount  Sion  !     "I 

542 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  xiv. 


looked,  and  lo,  a  Lamb  stood  on  the 
mount  Sion,  and  with  Him  an  hundred 
forty  and  four  thousand,  having  His 
Father's  name  written  in  their  fore- 
heads." 

Ver.  6.  The  Gospel  of  Retribution. — 
That  a  Divine  judgment  impends  over 
all  the  actions  and  generations  of  men  ; 
that  the  hour  of  judgment  is  sure  to 
strike  at  the  due  moment,  let  men 
play  what  tricks  they  will  with  the 
hands  of  the  clock,  and  sure  to  be 
heard  over  all  the  world,  let  men  close 
their  ears  as  they  will ;  that  this  fact 
of  impending  and  inevitable  judgment 
is  an  eternal  or  ceonial  gospel,  verit- 
able good  tidings  of  great  joy  to  every 
nation  and  tribe,  tongue  and  people  ; — 
all  this  is  at  once  of  supreme  im- 
portance and  supreme  interest.  A 
gospel  for  all  men  in  all  ages  must 
be  a  gospel  for  us.  A  gospel  weighted 
by  no  miracles  and  no  dogmas,  a  gospel 
which  is  open  to  no  question  and  no 
doubt,  but  is  felt  to  be  true  always, 
and  everywhere,  and  by  all.  What, 
then,  is  this  gospel  1  It  is  the  gospel 
of  retribution.  We  are  to  fear  and 
glorify  God  because  the  hour  of  His 
judgment  is  come.  This  is  the  truth 
which  the  angel,  flying  in  mid-heaven, 
between  God  and  man,  proclaims  to- 
day, and  always  has  proclaimed, 
and  always  will  proclaim.  This  is 
the  truth  which  St.  John  calls  "  an 
eternal  gospel  " — not  the  gcspel,  and 
still  less  the  only  gospel,  but  still  a 
veritable  gospel,  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy,  to  us  and  to  all  mankind.  If  the 
law  of  retribution  is  familiar  to  you,  is 
it  nothing  to  you  to  be  assured,  and 
assured  on  the  highest  authority,  that 
what  you  admit  to  be  a  law  is  also  a 
gospel  ?  When  we  are  told  that  God's 
judgments  on  sin  are  an  eternal 
gospel,  a  gospel  for  all  beings  in  all 
ages,  what  is  implied  ?  This  is  implied, 
and  there  is  no  truth  more  precious 
and  more  practical  :  that  the  judg- 
ments of  God  are  corrective, disciplinary, 
redemptive ;  that  they  are  designed  to 
turn  us  away  from  the  sins  by  which 
they  are  provoked ;  that  the  message 


they  bring  us,  and  bring  from  heaven 
is :  "  Cease  to  do  evil;  learn  to  do  well. — 
S.  Cox,  D.D. 

The  Everlasting  Gospel. — Only  one 
gospel  is  everlasting,  which  can  pass 
from  country  to  country,  from  continent 
to  continent,  and  be  at  home  every- 
where ;  which  time  cannot  wither  nor 
custom  stale ;  which  has  the  safe  and 
certain  reversion  of  all  the  future. 
Why  is  this  1  What  makes  the  gospel 
of  Christ  everlasting  1 

I.  It  is  a  message  to  what  is  uni- 
versal in  man. — Religions  have  been 
the  religions  of  single  tribes,  or  single 
countries,  and  have  not  been  adapted 
for  other  parts  of  the  world.  But  the 
glory  of  Christianity  is  that  its  teach- 
ing is  addressed  to  what  is  most  cha- 
racteristic in  human  nature,  and  abso- 
lutely the  same  in  all  members  of  the 
human  race,  whether  they  be  rich  or 
poor,  whether  they  inhabit  one  hemi- 
sphere or  the  other,  and  whether  they 
live  in  ancient  or  modern  times.  You 
have  only  to  glance  at  the  most  out- 
standing words  of  the^  gospel  to  see 
this.  E.g.,  1.  The  word  "  soul.''  Jesus 
went  down  to  the  child,  the  beggar, 
the  harlot,  the  weakest  and  most 
despised  members  of  the  human  family, 
and  when  He  was  able  to  find,  even  in 
them,  this  infinitely  precious  thing,  it 
was  manifest  that  He  had  discovered 
the  secret  of  a  universal  religion. 
2.  l^he  word  "  sm."  Speak  to  the  con- 
science, and  every  human  being  feels 
that  He  is  the  man.  3.  The  word 
"  eternity."  "  God  hath  put  eternity  in 
their  heart."  When  the  hand  of  the 
gospel  touches  this  string  of  the  harp 
of  human  nature,  it  responds.  On  this 
preaching  the  union  of  Christians  must 
be  realised. 

II.  It  is  a  message  to  what  is 
peculiar  in  man. — It  can  meet,  as  they 
rise,  the  changing  conditions  of 
society ;  it  has  an  inexhaustible  facility 
of  adaptation  to  the  wants  and  the 
circumstances  of  every  individual 
whom  it  addresses.  Some  "  preach  to 
the  times,"  others  "  preach  for  eternity." 
The  two  things   are  not  inconsistent. 

543 


CHAP.  XIV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


His  gospel  has  a  word  in  season  for 
every  condition  of  life — for  the  little 
child,  the  young  man  in  his  prime,  and 
for  old  age ;  a  word  for  the  multitude, 
and  for  the  few.  We  have  not  ex- 
hausted Christ,  and  we  have  not  ex- 
hausted the  gospel  of  Christ.  The 
pulpit    is    too    far     away    from    the 


individual.  We  must  come  nearer  to 
men,  and  acquaint  ourselves  with  the 
details  of  their  experience.  Sympathy 
is  the  key  which  opens  the  heart. 
Professional  authentication  sometimes 
only  creates  obstacles;  but  all  difficulties 
melt  away  before  the  force  of  love. — 
James  Stalker,  D.D. 


MAIN   HOMILETICS    OF    THE   PARAGRAPH.— Verses   13—16. 

Ver.  13.  The  Harvest  of  the  Earth  for  Keeping. — This  is  the  link  between  the 
earlier  and  later  visions  of  this  chapter.  Many  of  the  Lord's  redeemed  ones  had 
already  been  gathered  in,  out  of  their  earth-persecutions.  Many  were  still  left 
under  the  fiery  trial.  But  they  were  keeping  steadfast  and  faithful,  while  the 
gospel  was  being  proclaimed  unto  "every  nation  and  tribe  and  tongue  and  people." 
They  are  to  be  cheered  and  encouraged  by  the  vision  of  the  hour  when  the  angel 
may  declare  that  the  earth-story  is  complete,  and  the  judgment  of  God  has  come. 
In  that  day  evil,  however  mighty  it  may  seem  to  have  grown,  will  fall,  suddenly, 
irretrievably,  even  as  Babylon  fell  in  the  day  of  its  pride.  In  that  day  the 
patience  of  the  saints  will  gain  its  full  recognition.  The  Divine  acceptance  comes 
to  the  "sheep  of  the  right  hand,"  "they  that  keep  the  commandments  of  God, 
and  the  faith  of  Jesus."  But  this  final  day  of  God's  judgment  is  no  present 
thing ;  it  is  a  vision  of  the  far-away.  It  may  even  be  turned  wrongly,  and  made 
a  discouragement  to  Christian  souls,  for  it  may  seem  as  if  all  the  blessedness  of 
that  day  were  reserved  for  those  saints  who  were  alive  when  the  great  judgment- 
trumpet  should  be  sounded.  The  writer  checks  himself  to  say  a  gracious  and 
comforting  word  to  those  who  might  be  troubled  with  such  thoughts  and  fears. 
The  harvest  of  the  earth  is  a  long-continued  process.  The  angel  of  the  harvest 
is  the  death-angel,  as  well  as  the  angel  of  ingathering  for  those  who  are  "  alive 
and  remain  at  the  coming."  Therefore  this  comforting  word  may  be  spoken — nay, 
write  it  down,  for  it  is  certain  ;  write  it  down,  for  the  saints  of  all  the  ages  will 
want  the  gracious  assurance.  Not  only  blessed  are  the  dead  which  have  died  in  the 
Lord,  whom  you  have  seen  in  vision  harping  in  the  glory,  and  singing  their  new 
song,  but  blessed  are  the  dead  which  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth,  from  this 
very  hour  right  away  to  the  judgment  day.  "  Yea,  saith  the  Spirit,  for  they  rest 
from  their  labours,  and  their  works  do  follow  them."  They  are  all  stored  safe  in 
the  garner  of  God,  until  the  harvest  of  the  earth  is  complete.  Then,  having 
given  this  comforting  assurance,  the  writer  can  return  upon  his  visions  of  the 
end  of  all  earthly  things — his  visions  of  the  harvest-day  of  God.  It  must  prove 
to  be  a  double  harvest.  Christ  Himself  will  see  to  the  ingathering  of  the  saints. 
His  angels  will  execute  His  will  upon  those  who  have  refused  His  gospel,  kept 
their  sin,  and  worked  against  all  the  gracious  purposes  of  His  love. 

I.  The  first-fruits  of  God's  harvest  of  the  earth. — "  The  dead  which  die  in  the 
Lord."  We  may  think  of  heaven  as  the  great  storehouse,  granary,  of  God.  His 
harvest  is  the  harvesting  of  years.  His  grain  ripens  in  all  the  ages.  The  reaper 
we  call  death  cuts  down  the  golden  grain  ;  but  no  stalk  is  lost — every  one  is  borne 
into  the  garner,  and  safely  treasured  there  until  the  harvest  work  is  complete. 
It  is  but  a  resting  time  for  the  saints ;  they  never  pass  out  of  God's  memory  and 
regard.  "  Their  works  do  follow  them,"  and  all  will  be  taken  into  due  account  in 
the  great  day  of  Divine  appraisement.  It  is  a  most  helpful  way  in  which  to  think 
of  our  dead,  and  of  our  own  dying.  They  are  but  first-fruits  of  harvest,  carried 
in  early  to  God's  barn.  They  are  only  waiting  awhile,  until  the  day  when  the 
earth -fields  can  be  swept  once  for  all,  and  God's  harvest  of  the  earth  be  complete. 

544 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  xiv. 


II.  The  remainder  of  God's  harvest  of  the  earth. — A  day  must  come  when  the 
arresting  hand  must  be  placed  on  the  earth's  story,  the  stalks  may  no  longer 
stand  in  the  earth-fields.  All  must  be  gathered  in.  That  is  presented  in  symbol 
in  the  visions  of  the  angel  offering  the  sickle  to  the  Son  of  man,  reminding 
Him  that  the  harvest  is  almost  over-ripe,  and  must  at  once  be  reaped.  Of  this 
we  are  assured  :  the  succession  of  the  dying  will  not  be  continuous.  The  number 
of  Christ's  redeemed  ones  will  one  day  be  completed.  And  what  He  will  do  for 
them  in  the  great  forever  they  shall  know  when  the  last  stalk  has  fallen  before 
the  reaper. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  13.  The  Blessedness  of  the  Dead. 
— What  this  text  means  in  its  fulness  of 
application  no  one  now  knows.  But  its 
suggestions  are  manifest  and  manifold. 

I.  God's  saints,  at  death,  enter  into 
rest. — Rest — not,  indeed,  from  service, 
but  from  labour — which  implies  the  dis- 
agreeable, exhausting,  discouraging 
side  of  toil.  In  the  higher  sense  of 
service  they  rest  not  day  nor  night, 
serving  God  in  His  temple.  But  the 
hindrances  without  and  within  all  cease, 
and  the  service  is  unmixed  delight. 

II.  Their  works  do  follow  them. — 
This,  in  -a  threefold  sense,  is  true : 
1.  Follow  them  in  witnessing  to  their 
fidelity.  2.  Follow  them  in  contri- 
buting to  their  reward.  3.  Follow 
them  in  perpetuating  their  influence 
for  good. — Anon. 

Dying  in  the  Lord. 

I.  What  is  it  to  die  in  the  Lord  ? — 

One  has  said  that  it  "implies  a  previous 
living  with  Him."  Living  with  Him 
involves  the  exercise  of  certain  elements. 
These  are  found  in  ver.  12.  1.  Faith  : 
"  The  faith  of  Jesus."  No  man  can 
live  with  or  die  in  the  Lord  without 
faith  in  Him.  With  it  he  can  live  and 
die  triumphantly.  2.  Obedience  :  "  They 
that  keep  the  commandments  of  God." 
Living  with  God  is  obeying  God.  The 
obedience  of  faith — the  obedience  that 
is  vitally  connected  with  faith — enters 
into  the  preparation  for  a  happy  death, 
or  death  in  the  Lord. 

II.  Why  are  those  who  die  in  the 
Lord  blessed  or  happy  ? — 1.  The  happi- 
ness of  contemplation.  The  Christian 
has  a  bright  prospect.  He  can  look 
forward,  not  to  a  dark  uncertainty,  but 


to  the  pleasures  of  home.  When  dying, 
one  said,  "  I  wish  I  had  the  power  of 
writing  or  speaking,  for  then  I  would 
describe  to  you  how  pleasant  a  thing  it 
is  to  die."  Another,  "  I  have  ex- 
perienced more  happiness  in  dying 
two  hours  this  day  than  in  my 
whole  life."  2.  The  happiness  of  re- 
lease from  toil,  sorrow,  pain.  Best — 
"That  they  may  rest  from  their  labours.^* 
Christians  are  not  free  from  trials  ;  it 
is  not  according  to  the  Divine  plan 
that  they  should  be.  But  those  trials 
cannot  pass  beyond  the  gate  of  death  ; 
and  when  the  Christian  passes  into  the 
beyond  he  leaves  his  trials.  3.  The 
happiness  of  being  with  Christ  after 
death.  The  psalmist  said,  "In  Thy 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy  ;  at  Thy  right 
hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore." 
Again,  "  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I 
awake  with  Thy  likeness."  Paul  said, 
"  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  two,  having 
a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ, 
which  is  far  better."  Great  joy  here, 
hwt  fulTiess  of  joy  with  Christ. — Anon. 

''The  Blessed  Dead:'—^o  book  is 
fuller  than  this  Apocalypse  of  the 
struggles  and  victories  of  the  Church 
on  earth  ;  but  it  also  opens  a  door 
into  heaven.  It  shows  that  heaven 
is  not  all  future,  but,  as  it  were, 
contemporary  with  present  history, 
and  bound  to  it  by  the  closest  ties. 
Messengers  pass  and  repass ;  tidings 
come  and  go  ;  and  the  Lamb  who  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  throne  presides  alike 
over  time  and  eternity. 

I.  The  answer  which  the  text  gives 
to  the  question,  How  is  the  heavenly 
blessedness  attested  ? — We  all  profess 

N  N  515 


CHAP.  XIV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


to  believe  in  the  reality  of  heaven  ;  but 
why?  1.  There  is  the  evide^tce  from 
miracle,  or  the  p^^esence  of  the  super- 
natural in  the  form  of  power.  This 
great  apostle  heard  a  voice  from  heaven. 
But  before  this,  John  had  looked  on 
One  whose  life  was  crowded  with 
miracle.  He  had  witnessed  His  risen 
glory  as  He  came  back  from  heaven, 
and  His  ascension  glory  as  He  returned 
to  heaven.  If  miracle  could  vouch  for 
heaven,  its  existence  was  confirmed. 
2.  The  testimony  is,  in  itself,  Divinely 
credible.  Its  internal  character  vouches 
for  its  authority.  3.  There  is  a  living 
and  experimental  evidence-  of  the  reality 
of  heaven.  It  is  written  in  living 
epistles,  written,  not  with  ink,  but  with 
the  Spirit  of  the  Living  God. 

II.  How  is  the  heavenly  blessedness 
secured? — 1.  2^he  doctrine  here  is  that 
the  title  to  heaven  depends  on  faith  ''  in 
the  Lord."  2.  But  there  is  also  a  pre- 
paration for  the  heavenly  state  by  holy 
obedience.  *'  They  rest  from  their 
labours,"  implying  that  they  prove 
their  faith  by  works. 

III.  How  is  the  heavenly  blessed- 
ness enjoyed? — 1.  Heaven  is  the  rest 
of  the  worker.  It  is  not  sloth,  torpor, 
or  inactivity ;  but  while  there  is  no 
apathy  there  is  rest  to  the  body  and 
the  spirit.  No  more  out  in  the  billows, 
toiling  in  rowing,  when  the  wind  is 
contrary,  but  in  smooth  water,  and 
with  the  ripple  breaking  on  the  shore. 
2.  Heaven  is  the  continued  influence  of 
the  work.  ''  Their  works  do  follow 
them."  Every  moral  act,  truly  good, 
will  last  for  ever.  The  simplest  act 
of  self-denial  for  Christ's  sake,  the 
mother's  faintest  prayer,  record  them- 
selves in  the  sounding-board  of  eternity, 
and  never  die  away. — John  Cairns,  D.D. 

Ver.  15.  The  Harvest  of  the  Earth. — 
The  expression  is  a  singular  and,  indeed, 
a  striking  one.  As  his  fields  are  to  the 
farmer,  so,  we  are  permitted  to  think, 
the  whole  earth  is  to  God.  The  farmer 
works  for  a  harvest  of  his  fields  and 
trees,  and  God  may  be  thought  of 
as  working  for  the  harvest  of  the 
whole  earth.     God's  work  in  the  world 

5i6 


is  like  ploughing,  sowing,  weeding  the 
fields.  God's  work  has  its  reward  when 
He  carries  home  the  last  loaded  wain, 
and  His  garner  is  filled  with  the  good 
corn  of  the  earth  of  humanity.  Can 
we  follow  out  the  figure,  and  find  in  it 
the  suggestion  of  helpful  truths  1 

I.  God  prepared  the  earth  for  His 
seeding. — Scientific  men  may  wrangle 
over  the  ages  and  order  of  creation. 
It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that,  at  a 
given  time,  God  had  prepared  the  earth 
to  be  the  scene  of  a  moral  trial  for  a 
new  race  of  beings.  It  is  full  of  in- 
terest to  inquire  into  all  the  mystery 
of  nature.  Of  its  study  man  never 
tires.  But  it  is  of  far  greater  interest 
to  observe  in  how  marvellous  a  way 
the  earth  was  adjusted  and  adapted  to 
the  beings  who  were  to  be  placed  upon 
it.  The  relativity  of  creation  to  a 
being  with  five  senses,  and  these  parti- 
cular five  senses,  has  never  yet  been 
shown  with  the  precision  and  fulness 
that  it  demands.  The  farmer  cleans, 
and  ploughs,  and  manures,  and  harrows, 
and  ridges,  his  fields,  in  precise  adapta- 
tion to  the  crop  that  he  intends  to  grow 
upon  it ;  and  earth  is  the  prepared 
field  of  God,  made  ready  for  His  sowing. 

II.  God  seeds  His  prepared  earth 
with  men. — Scattering  the  seed  all  over 
the  earth,  that  man's  probation  may 
be  carried  on  under  every  varying 
condition  of  soil,  and  landscape,  and 
climate,  and  relationship.  God  keeps 
on  seeding  the  earth  with  men ;  every 
seed  with  a  great  possibility  in  it ; 
every  seed  set  where  its  possibility  may 
freely  unfold,  and  where  the  God- 
provided  influences  all  tend  to  the 
nourishment  of  all  its  best  possibilities. 
Men,  men  everywhere,  are  the  seed  of 
God.  They  are  quick  with  Divine  life, 
and  sown  in  the  earth  to  grow  into  a 
harvest  for  God. 

III.  The  harvest  God  seeks  from 
His  seeding  is  character. — God  sows 
His  earth  with  moral  beings,  in  the 
hope  of  reaping  moral  chaiacter. 
But  what  is  moral  character  ?  It 
is  the  proper  fruitage  of  the  earth- 
experience  of  moral  beings.  But  can 
we  understand  it   a  little  more  fully 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION,     chap.  xiv. 


than  that  1  A  moral  being  is  one  that 
can  recognise  a  distinction  between 
good  and  evil,  and,  when  the  distinc- 
tion is  seen,  can  choose  for  itself  which 
it  will  have,  the  good  or  the  evil.  But 
a  moral  being  must  be  put  into  such 
circumstances  as  will  offer  it  the  choice 
between  good  and  evil.  And  substan- 
tially the  test  amounts  to  this  :  good 
is  doing  what  is  known  to  be  the  will 
of  the  Creator  ;  evil  is  doing  the  will 
of  the  moral  being  himself,  when  that 
is  known  to  be  not  the  will  of  the 
Creator.  The  picture-scene  in  the 
Garden  of  Eden  is  the  typical  trial  of 
moral  beings.  Bat  what  we  need,  for 
our  present  purpose,  to  see  with  clear- 
ness, is  that  when,  under  enticement  of 
the  senses,  the  moral  being  has  chosen 
the  evil,  he  is  said  to  have  fallen,  but 
he  has  really  started  the  possibility  of 
moral  character,  which  is  the  issue  of 
the  conflict  in  which  the  will,  biassed 
by  the  indulgence  of  the  senses,  is 
brought  back  to  the  choice  and  obedi- 
ence of  God's  will,  and  recovered  from 
all  the  sad  experiences  and  conditions 
resulting'from  the  choice  of  evil.  The 
story  of  a  life  is  the  story  of  that  con- 
flict. It  is  the  growth,  through  the  long 
months,  of  God's  seed  into  the  *'  full 
corn  in  the  ear  "  of  established  moral 
character.  It  is  the  unfolding  of  what 
God  would  gather  in  from  His  seeding 
of  men,  the  righteousness  of  the  accepted 
will  of  God.  One  thing  only  does  man 
take  through  the  great  gates — the 
character  that  he  has  gained.  It  is  the 
full  ear  that  heads  the  stalk,  and  ripens 
for  the  reaper. 

IV.  God  has  anxious  times  while 
His  seed  of  men  is  growing  into  His 
harvest  of  character. — Every  blade 
that  breaks  the  earth  in  the  farmer's 
field  has  to  fight  for  its  life  with  varied 
foes :    insects,    worms,    mildew,    rust, 


living  creatures,  varying  temperatures, 
crowding  weeds;  the  growth  of  every 
blade  to  stalk  and  ear  is  a  hard-won 
victory.     The  stalk  can  do  its  best,  and 
be  its  best,  only  at  the  cost  of  unceasing 
struggle  and  watchfulness.     And  the 
field  of  earth  is  but  a  type  of  the  world 
of  men.    Every  character  is  the  product 
of  a  stern  experience,  the  issue  of  a 
hundred  fights  ;    a  triumph  from  an 
unceasing   struggle.      Think   of    each 
man's    life-story,    and     this    is    true. 
Think  of  the  histories  of  nations,  and 
this  is  true.     Think   of   the   story  of 
humanity  as  if  it  were  the  story  of  one 
man,  and  it  is  God's  Adam,  planted  in 
God's   earth,    and   growing   amid    the 
thousandfold  influences  for   good  and 
evil,  through  all  the  long  ages,  and  show- 
ing at  last  the  golden  grain  of  moral 
character,  rich  and  ripe,  that  can  be 
gathered   into    God's   garner,    as    the 
glorious  reward  of  His  toil.     Eor  over 
every  phase  and  feature  of  the  struggle 
in  every  man  out  of  which  character  is 
born,  God  presides.     The  problem  of 
each  man's  dealings  with  his  surround- 
ings— helpful  be  they,  or  injurious — 
God  is  intensely  interested  in.      He  is 
anxious  as  the  farmer  is  anxious  over 
his   growing  blades.     He  is  anxious  as 
the   parent    is    anxious   over  the   un- 
folding of  character  in  his  child.     He 
may  let  the  struggle  alone.     He  may 
interfere.     But  we  may  be  sure  that 
He  is   deeply  concerned.      We    speak 
of   the    "  making  of   a   man,"  or   the 
*'  making  of  a  nation."     The  one  thing 
of  profoundest  interest  to  God  is  the 
making   of    characters    in    His   gi^eat 
earth -fields.     Be  it  so  ;  then  a  fact  of 
infinite  sadness  has  to  be  faced.     The 
issue  is  disappointing,  for  God's  harvest- 
hope   of  reaping    character   from    His 
sowing  of  Tuien  is  only  partially  fulfilled. 


MAIN  UOMILETICS  OF  TUB  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  17—20. 

The  Harvest  of  the  Earth  fm'  Ci^ushing. — The  harvest  of  the  earth  is  not  only  the 
ingathering  of  the  saints.  It  includes  the  ingathering  of  those  whose  earth-lives 
have  been  a  failure  :  who  have  died  in  their  sin  ;  who  stand  on  the  earth,  in  the 
great  reaping  day,  in  their  sin.  The  farmer  of  the  yearly  harvest  gathers  in 
much  besides  good  wheat :  wheat  that  has  gone  bad,  weeds,  and  chafi'even,  with  the 

547 


CHAP.  XIV.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


good  wheat.  If  there  is  a  barn  for  the  good  wheat,  there  is  a  fire  in  the  field 
for  burning  up  the  bad,  the  mock  wheat,  the  tares,  and  the  weeds.  And  this 
seems  to  have  suggested  to  the  writer  his  vision  of  the  other  side  of  the  last 
great  harvest  scene.  But,  in  accordance  with  the  symbolic  ideas  of  the  times, 
he  takes  the  yield  of  the  vines  to  represent  the  evil  side  of  earth's  harvest.  It  is 
a  simple  and  natural  symbol.  The  corn  of  the  fields  is  the  source  of  renewed 
life  and  health  :  it  is  the  fitting  symbol  of  the  good  results  of  earth's  endeavour. 
The  fruits  of  the  vine  have  been,  in  all  ages,  since  Noah  stepped  forth  upon 
the  cleansed  earth,  the  fruitful  source  of  vice,  and  self-indulgence,  and  misery,  to 
men.  So  the  clusters  of  the  vine  are  represented  as  cast  into  the  winepress,  and 
trodden  under  foot ;  crushed  down ;  made  by  stern  discipline  to  become  some- 
thing other  than  they  are.  The  men  who  have  come  through  their  earth  story 
self-indulgent,  defiant  of  God,  and  refusers  of  His  holy  gospel,  must  be  gathered 
in  with  the  stern  sickle  of  the  angel,  cast  like  grape-clusters  into  the  great 
winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God.  What  can  there  be  for  them  in  that  great  day 
but  ''  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon  every  soul  of  man 
that  doeth  evil  ?  " 

I.  They  who  die  in  their  sins  are  kept  for  their  judgment. — In  the  indulging 
of  the  larger  hope  that  one  day  all  men  will  be  saved,  it  is  forgotten  that, 
through  the  long  ages,  men  have  died  in  their  sins.  There  is  a  fact  which  must 
be  taken  into  full  account.  Thousands  of  completed  earth-lives  have  proved 
moral  failures.  Thousands  of  men  now  exist  somewhere  who  resisted  every 
good  influence,  lived  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world,  and  died 
in  defiant  rebellion  against  the  God  who  made  them  and  the  Saviour  who 
redeemed  them  ;  crimson-stained  in  their  souls  with  all  the  pollutions  of  earth. 
They  must  be  in  keeping  against  their  judgment  day,  as  truly  as  the  blessed 
dead  are  in  keeping  for  their  reward.  Do  we  not  needlessly  confuse  ourselves, 
by  regarding  the  earth-trial  of  humanity  as  a  perfect  and  final  trial?  We  expect 
the  results  to  be  perfect,  and  then  set  ourselves  to  invent  theories  concerning  the 
future,  which  can  have  no  value,  because  they  have  no  foundation.  We  want 
the  issue  to  be  that  everybody  comes  out  righteous  at  last ;  and  Scripture  gives 
no  ground  whatever  for  such  an  interpretation.  Our  Lord's  parable  of  the 
tares  should  destroy  any  such  ideas  once  for  all.  What  we  need  to  see  is  that 
man  is  a  limited  and  imperfect  being,  placed  in  limited  and  imperfect  circum- 
stances ;  subjected  to  a  limited  and  imperfect  trial ;  and  the  issues  will  bear  the 
character  of  the  probation,  and  will  include  both  failure  and  success.  It  is  not, 
indeed,  a  question  of  it  will.  It  does.  Men  do  come  through  the  probation  of 
the  earth-life  evil  still — worse  evil  for  the  misused  probation.  There  must  be  a 
judgment  day  which  they  are  awaiting,  when  the  Divine  dealing  with  their 
failure  must  be  made  known  to  them  and  to  all ;  and  God  must  be  clearly  seen 
to  stand  for  ever  for  the  right  and  against  the  wrong.  He  must  do  something 
with  the  vintage,  as  well  as  with  the  grain,  of  the  harvest  of  the  earth.  What 
He  will  do  no  man  knows,  or  can  know.  If  the  discipline  of  the  earth-life  has 
failed  to  accomplish  its  due  result,  they  must  go  into  the  great  winepress  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  which  must  be  punishment,  need  not  be  destruction,  and  may  be 
the  sterner,  harder  discipline  in  new  and  other  spheres. 

II.  They  who  stand  in  their  sins  are  ready  for  their  judgment. — The  vision 
seems  to  deal  with  those  who  are  "  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the 
Lord  "  ;  but,  by  reason  of  their  self-willedness  and  rebellion,  have  no  interest  in, 
only  the  dread  of,  that  coming.  They  are  represented  by  the  hanging  clusters  of 
over-ripe  grapes  ;  their  cup  of  iniquity  is  full.  The  angel  is  bidden,  Send  forth 
thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather  the  clusters  of  the  vine  of  the  earth  ;  for  her  grapes 
are  fully  ripe.  Then  the  number  of  the  wicked,  the  number  of  life-failures,  will 
be  complete,  as  the  number  of  the  saints — the  life-successes,  will  be  complete ; 

548 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION.      chap.  xv. 


and  the  story  of  the  eaith  may  be  wound  up.  Can  we  find  more  fitting  words  in 
which  to  express  the  result  of  it  all,  so  far  as  that  result  can  come  into  human 
ken,  than  the  solemn  words  of  our  Divine  Tjord,  "  And  these  shall  go  away  into 
eternal  punishment,  but  the  righteous  into  eternal  life  "  ?  Can  we  do  any  more 
than  wonder,  with  a  great  wondering,  what  can  be  the  lot  of  the  wicked,  when 
that  lot  is  figured  so  impressively  as  in  this  passage  :  "  And  the  angel  cast  his 
sickle  into  the  earth,  and  gathered  the  vintage  of  the  earth,  and  cast  it  into  the 
winepress,  the  great  winepress  of  the  wrath  of  God.  And  the  winepress  was 
trodden  without  the  city,  and  there  came  out  blood  from  the  winepress,  even 
unto  the  bridles  of  the  horses,  as  far  as  a  thousand  and  six  hundred  furlongs  "  1 
Whether,  then,  we  die  in  our  sins,  or  stand  in  our  sins  when  God's  harvest-day 
dawns,  there  is  no  escaping  the  just  and  fiery  indignation.  That  day  will 
overtake  some  as  a  thief.  "  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the 
earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting 
contempt." 

"  Then,  O  my  Lord,  prepare 

My  soul  for  that  great  day. 
O  wash  me  in  Thy  precious  blood, 

And  take  my  sins  awiy." 


CHAPTER   XV. 

THE  ANGELS   OF   THE   SEVEN  VIALS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  pledges  and  tokens  of  Divine  retribution  being  thus  given,  the  execution  of  it  is 
speedily  to  begin.  Seven  angels  are  commissioned  to  go  and  inflict  upon  the  beast  and  his 
coadjutors  the  seven  last  plagues,  so  called  because  the  wrath  of  God  is  accomplished  by 
them. 

Ver.  1. — No  sooner  is  this  command  given  than  the  glorious  host  of  martyrs  around  the 
throne  of  God,  whose  blood  had  been  shed  by  the  beast,  sing  the  song  of  anticipative  triumph, 
and  praise  the  justice  of  God,  as  about  to  be  displayed  in  the  overthrow  of  the  beast.  The 
temple  in  heaven  is  then  opened,  and  the  seven  angels,  charged  with  the  execution  of  Divine 
justice,  go  forth  from  it  in  splendid  apparel.  One  of  the  four  living  creatures  which  support 
the  throne  of  God  gives  each  of  them  a  vial,  or  cruse  (bowl),  filled  with  material  to  execute 
the  wrath  of  God.  The  temple  is  immediately  filled  with  smoke,  rising  from  the  fire  which 
burns  fiercely  round  the  Almighty,  as  the  emblem  of  His  anger  (Ps.  xviii.  8),  and  also  of 
His  power  to  destroy.  By  reason  of  this,  no  one  is  able  to  enter  into  the  temple,  and,  of 
course,  no  one  is  permitted  to  intercede  for  those  who  are  about  to  be  punished.  Punish- 
ment, therefore,  is  certain  and  inevitable  {Moses  Stuart). 

Ver.  2.  Sea  of  glass.— (8ee  chap.  iv.  6).  Gotten  the  victory.— R.V.  "  come  victorious  from." 
Omit  "  and  over  his  mark." 

Ver.  3.  Moses  .  .  .  Lamb. — Types  of  material  and  spiritual  redemption.  Of  saints. — Should 
read  either  "  of  the  nations  "  or  "  of  the  ages." 

Ver.  6.  White.— Or  bright. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE   PARAGRAPIL— Verses  1—8. 

Final  Judgments. — The  vision  which  perhaps,  under  all  circumstances,  most 
nearly  corresponds  with  the  present  is  that  of  Isaiah  (chap.  vi.).  There  the 
prophet  beheld  the  vision  of  God.  His  train  filled  the  temple,  and  the  house  was 
filled  with  smoke,  and  a  message  of  judgment  was  given  to  the  prophet.  That 
message  declared  that  the  sin  of  the  people  had  reached  a  climax ;  they  had 
trifled  with  convictions,  and  henceforward  the  words  of  God's  servants  would 
harden  rather  than  awaken  them — "  make  the  heart  of  this  people  fat,  and 

549 


CHAP.  XV.      BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


make  their  ears  heavy,  and  shut  their  eyes,"  etc.  (Isa.  vi.  9,  10),  till  the  deso- 
lating judgments  had  fallen.  The  general  drift  of  the  present  vision  is  similar  : 
the  days  of  warning  are  over ;  the  plagues  which  now  fall  will  fall  on  those  who 
have  trifled  with  convictions ;  the  sanctuary,  which  was  opened  as  a  refuge,  is 
now  closed ;  none  can  enter  till  the  plagues  have  descended.  The  time  has  come 
when  the  judgments  of  God  fail  to  stir  the  conscience  which  has  been  deadened 
by  sin  ;  the  day  when  the  gracious  influences  towards  repentance  were  felt  has 
passed.  The  word  that  has  been  spoken  is  about  to  descend  in  judgment 
(John  vii.  48). 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  3.  The  Song  of  Moses  and  the 
Lamh. — God's  world,  God's  Word,  and 
God's  people,  are  all  full  of  song.  In 
God's  world  there  is  nothing,  animate 
or  inanimate,  without  the  capacity  of 
making  sound.  The  very  flints  have 
music  in  them.  "  There's  music  in  the 
sighing  of  a  reed ;  there's  music  in 
the  gushing  of  a  rill."  In  God's  Word 
we  are  told  that  at  the  creation  "  the 
morning  stars  sang  together,  and  the 
sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy."  Moses 
uttered  the  deliverance  of  his  people 
in  song,  saying,  "  I  will  sing  unto  the 
Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed  glori- 
ously; the  horse  and  his  rider  hath 
He  thrown  into  the  sea."  Deborah 
taught  the  people  a  song,  whereby 
they  might  praise  the  Lord  for  the 
avenging  of  Israel.  When  the  new 
creation  dawned,  in  the  birth  of  Jesus, 
angels  broke  through  the  veil,  and 
were  seen  and  heard  by  our  fellow- 
men,  singing  together,  "  Glory  to  God 
in  the  highest,  on  earth  peace,  goodwill 
to  men."  David's  life  was  a  song. 
When  Paul  and  Silas  lay  chained  in 
the  dungeon,  they  sang  praises  in  the 
night.  The  visions  of  heaven  assure 
us  that  the  ransomed  ones  are  full  of 
song.  Our  text  gives  us  the  theme  of 
their  song  :  "  Great  and  marvellous  are 
Thy  works,  Lord  God  Almighty ;  just 
and  true  are  Thy  ways.  Thou  King  of 
saints."  Why  so  much  singing?  Why 
a  world  full  of  it,  a  Bible  full  of  it,  a 
heaven  full  of  it  ?  Because  there  is 
nothing  but  music  that  can  find  ex- 
pression for  the  deepest,  the  most 
thrilling,  emotions  of  our  nature.  So 
often  our  feeling  is  too  deep  for  words, 
the  force  of  passion  strikes  us,  and 
keeps  us,  dumb.     Sometimes  feeling  is 

550 


too  deep  for  looks — nay,  even  for  tears ; 
it  seems  to  dry  up  the  very  fountain  of 
tears.  But  the  man  who  can  find  no 
words  has  often  learned  that  the  tongue 
of  the  dumb  can  sing. 

"  Music !     Oh,  how  faint  and  weak 
Language  fades  before  thy  spell  1 
Why  should  feeling  ever  speak, 

When  thou  canst  breathe  its  soul  so 
well  ? " 

I.  Who  are  these  heaven-singers? 

— Answering  that  question  in  the 
language    of     symbols    this    book    of 


Bevelation   tells   us 


I    saw   as    it 


were  a  sea  of  glass,  mingled  with  fire ; 
and  them  that  had  gotten  the  victory 
over  the  beast,  and  over  his  image, 
and  over  his  mark,  and  over  the 
niimber  of  his  name,  standing  on  the 
sea  of  glass,  having  the  harps  of  God." 
"  Lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no  man 
could  number,  of  all  nations,  and  kin- 
dreds, and  peoples,  and  tongues,  stood 
before  the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb, 
clothed  with  white  robes  and  palms  in 
their  hands."  These  rejoicing  ones 
were  once  sinners  of  this  our  earth. 
They  are  no  company  of  unf alien 
angels,  whose  songs  could  have  no 
thrilling  tones,  that  tell  of  sad 
memories.  The  song  the  ransomed 
sing  is  a  song  that  only  sinners  can 
sing,  as  the  name  upon  their  foreheads 
is  a  name  that  only  redeemed  sinners 
can  wear.  Every  bird  that  flies 
through  God's  sunshine — thrush,  and 
robin,  and  linnet,  and  nightingale — 
has  his  own  note,  which  none  but  he 
can  sing.  Every  intelligent  creature, 
every  son  of  God,  has  his  own  book  of 
psalms.  And  there  is  a  style,  a  tone, 
an  inimitable  pathos  about  a  sinner's 
song  that  will  make  his  voice  for  ever 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,      chap.  xv. 


distinct  among  the  eternal  harmonies. 
And  it  is  pleasant  to  think  that  these 
heavenly  singers  have  been  gathered 
out  of  all  ages  and  out  of  all  nations. 
However  the  forms  of  music  may  vary 
in  difterent  periods  and  different  climes, 
it  will  be  found  at  last  that  when  the 
hearts  of  men  sing  they  make  but  one 
chorus.  Black  and  white,  bond  and 
free,  Jew  and  Gentile,  sing  in  harmony 
together  the  "  song  of  Moses  and  the 
Lamb."  If  we  inquire.  What  are 
these  sinners  now  ?  the  answer  comes. 
The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  ;  the  pur- 
chase of  the  Saviour's  blood.  Monu- 
ments of  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Trinity, 
God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God 
the  Holy  Ghost.  Kansomed  for  ever. 
Sinners  who  once  v; eve  justified  through 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  who  long  were 
being  sanctified  in  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  and  who  now  are  glori- 
fied, with  something  of  the  glory  that 
Jesus  had  with  the  Father  before  the 
world  was.  The  work  now  being  carried 
on  in  us,  in  them  is  finished.  While  it 
is  being  wrought  we  can  sometimes 
sing,  but  oftener  we  must  weep ;  when 
it  is  finished  we  shall  weep  no  more. 
All  tears  are  wiped  away.  If  we  can 
inquire.  Where  do  these  singers  stand  1 
the  answer  cannot  be  given  except  by 
symbol ;  for  of  the  realities  of  heaven 
no  man  knoweth,  no  man  can  know, 
until  the  mortal  has  given  place  to  the 
immortal,  and  the  eyes  of  the  earthly 
have  changed  for  the  eyes  of  the 
heavenly.  They  stand  "  on  a  sea  of 
glass,  mingled  with  fire  "  ;  perhaps  we 
should  understand,  "  on  the  shores  of  a 
sea  of  glass,  mingled  with  fire.'*  The 
image  is  suggested  by  the  thought  of 
the  Israelites  passing  through  the  Red 
Sea.  For  them  all  its  waves  were 
stilled;  a  sea  of  glass  lay  on  either 
side  their  God-made  road.  And  when 
the  evening  shadows  lengthened  and 
the  "  cloudy  pillar  "  changed  to  fire,  it 
flushed  all  that  glassy  sea  and  made  it 
appear  as  a  "  sea  of  glass,  mingled  with 
fire."  The  symbol  seems  to  suggest 
their  possession  of  rest  and  their 
memory  of  conflict.  The  restless  sea, 
always  rising  and  falling,  often  deso- 


lating and  ruinous,  is  the  Bible  emblem 
of  the  troubles,  and  anxieties,  and 
sorrows,  of  the  earth.  Man  is  born 
to  trouble.  But  yonder  is  the  sea  of 
glass.  The  waves  are  stilled  now. 
The  "  weary  are  at  rest."  The  cloud- 
flecked  sky  can  find  only  a  broken 
image  of  its  beauty  in  the  waving 
sea ;  and  God  finds  only  partial  and 
broken  images  of  Ilimstlf  in  the  rest- 
less, anxious  lives  we  have  to  live.  A 
whole  firmament  of  glory  shall  shine 
out  of  a  still  sea  of  glass ;  and  a  whole 
image  of  God  may  beam  forth  from 
that  life  we  shall  live  in  the  land 
of  heavenly  rest.  But  memory  will 
mingle  the  glassy  sea  with  fire.  As 
the  sea  is  the  emblem  of  trouble,  so  fire 
is  the  emblem  of  covflict.  The  shores 
of  the  glassy  sea  are  only  won  through 
a  great  fight  of  affliction  by  him  who 
is  girded  with  the  whole  armour  of  God. 
In  many  an  earthly  mansion  the  shields, 
and  breast- plates,  and  helmets,  and 
swords,  are  hung  up  in  the  great  halls, 
to  remind  the  peaceful  sons  of  the  old 
battles  out  of  which  their  forefathers 
wrung  their  liberty  and  rest.  Who 
knows  1  There  may  be,  somewhere  in 
God's  heaven,  an  armoury  where  every 
new  soldier  that  has  battled  through 
may  lay  up  his  weapons  and  his 
armour.  Certainly  fire  memories  shall 
mingle  with  the  eternal  rest ;  memories 
of  the  fires  of  battles  with  sin,  and 
memories  of  the  refining  fires  of  God's 
chastisements.  And  home  will  be  to 
us  the  sweeter  for  nights  tented  in  the 
strangers'  ground,  and  bivouac  amid 
the  storm  and  the  cold — months  be- 
leaguered by  watchful  foes,  and  battles 
fought  hardly  for  holiness  and  God. 

11.  What  are  the  singers'  songs  ? — 
Evidently  their  hymn  is  a  blending  of 
their  old  earth-song  with  a  new  heaven- 
song.  Not,  indeed,  so  altogether  new 
and  different.  We,  too,  can  sirg,  even 
here,  the  Song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb ; 
but  not  just  as  they  sing  it.  We  can 
only  put  as  much  meaning  into  our 
singing  as  we  have  had  experience  to 
prepare  us  for.  They  have  an  experi- 
ence which  cannot  be  ours  as  yet — an 
experience    of    victory,    and    victory's 

651 


CHAP.  XV.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


reward ;  so  they  can  sing  with  mean- 
ings which  we  cannot  reach.  Their 
song  is  our  song,  with  more  soul  in  it. 
The  subject  of  their  song  is  not 
redemption  alone,  but  God's  entire 
deahngs  with  man  in  revelation.  It  is 
not  the  song  of  the  Lamb  only.  It  is 
the  song  of  Moses,  too.  Kedemption 
is,  indeed,  the  one  word  that  expresses 
all  God's  dealing  with  the  race.  His  one 
work  has  always  been  the  work  of 
recovery — recovery  of  men,  of  families, 
of  nations,  from  outward  and  bodily 
evils,  from  mental  mistakes,  from 
moral  bondages.  Ever  since  Eden  God 
has  been  delivering,  rescuing,  and 
saving  man,  and  His  whole  work  seems 
to  reach  its  climax  in  the  deliverance 
and  redemption  of  human  spirits  from 
the  yoke  and  thraldom  of  sin  by  Christ 
Jesus,  We  lose  much  by  separating 
the  work  of  God  on  our  race  into  parts. 
It  is  really  one  sublime,  one  perfect 
whole.  Some  gifts  of  His,  like  acts  of 
His,  seem,  indeed,  to  rise  up  into  view, 
mountain-like,  and  demand  unusual 
attention ;  but  from  Eden  to  the 
judgment  day  there  has  been  one  pur- 
pose, never  forgotten,  never  remitted, 
never  undervahied :  it  is  the  world's 
full  redemption  from  sin.  We  may  not 
think  of  our  God  resting  in  eternal 
peace  until  every  foe  of  man  is  slain, 
suffering  and  crime  are  ended,  Satan 
is  bound,  and  death,  the  last  enemy, 
shall  die.  One  day  a  saved  earth  will 
sing,  "  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  reign- 
eth."  For  the  creature  itself  also  shall 
be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  cor- 
ruption into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God.  The  models  of  this 
entire  deliverance  are  "  Moses "  and 
*'  the  Lamb."  Moses  representing  God's 
triumph  over  evil  in  its  outward  mani- 
festations, and  the  Lamb  representing 
God's  triumph  over  evil  in  its  inward 
manifestations.  Moses'  triumph  at  the 
passing  of  the  sea  I  need  but  recall  to 
mind;  it  said  for  all  the  ages  that 
"  nothing  is  too  hard  for  the  Lord," 
and  no  outward  troubles  need  over- 
whelm us.     The  "  Song  of  the  Lamb  " 


reminds  us  that  God  has  triumphed, 
and  is  triumphing,  over  inward  evil. 
It  is  the  most  mournful  part  of  the 
work  of  sin  that  it  has  defiled  human 
souls,  and  blurred  the  image  of  God  on 
them.  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  God, 
is  the  Divine  deliverer  from  inward  sin, 
from  soul-sin.  No  fetters  of  national 
slavery  dropped  from  aching  wrists 
when  Jesus  died,  the  sacrifice  and 
ransom  price.  No  Roman  armies,  panic- 
stricken,  fled  from  Palestine  when  He 
died,  the  nation's  champion.  No  royal 
proclamation  flung  open  prison  doors 
when  He  took  the  sinner's  place.  No 
waving  flags,  no  enthusiastic  shouts, 
proclaimed  a  nation's  resurrection  when 
He  died  on  Calvary.  But  then  the 
"  prince  of  this  world  was  judged,  and 
cast  out."  Then  "  Satan  fell  like  light- 
ning from  heaven."  Then  captive  souls 
were  set  free.  Then  the  gospel  of  God's 
saving  love  was  proclaimed  to  the  poor. 
Then  the  heaven  of  holiness  for  sinners 
came  within  their  reach.  Well  may 
we  anticipate  the  heavenly  song,  and 
join  now  the  chorus  of  the  white-robed 
host,  saying,  "Thou  hast  redeemed  us 
unto  God  by  Thy  blood,  and  hast  made 
us  kings  and  priests  unto  God." 

The  Divine  Righteousness. — Good 
men,  in  all  ages,  have  been  deeply 
impressed  with  the  Divine  righteous- 
ness. They  have  ever  conceived  of 
their  salvation  as  exhibiting  and  esta- 
blishing the  Divine  righteousness.  It  is 
not  proper  to  speak  of  justice  or  right- 
eousness as  being  satisfied.  The  Bible 
speaks  of  it  as  revealed,  manifested. 
Eighteousness  can  be  Satisfied  with 
nothing  short  of  the  rightness  o/*  those 
in  whom  it  is  interested.  Men  mistake 
the  Divine  by  treating  justice  as  some 
abstract  quality  :  it  is  one  of  the  living 
forces  of  a  Living  Being;  it  is  an 
expression  of  the  Divine  will.  The 
revelation  of  God  is  this  :  "A  just  God 
and  a  Saviour."  A  just  God  is 
proved  by,  illustrated  by,  His  be- 
coming a  Saviour. 


552 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION.       chaps,  xvi.,  xvii. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 
THE  SEVEN  VIALS,  OR  BOWLS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

"  This  chapter  describes  the  pouring  out  of  the  seven  vials— that  is  to  say,  the  extremest 
punishments  of  God — upon  the  throne  and  empire  of  the  beast.  Antichrist  had  promised  to 
mankind  a  new,  golden  age  under  his  rule ;  but  he  promised  without  God.  Christ  now 
wields  His  own  sceptre,  and  smites  with  repeated  blows  the  nations  who  have  been  led 
astray.  It  is  the  history  of  the  plagues  of  Egypt  over  again.  A  noisome  sore  consumes  the 
flesh  of  the  subjects  of  the  beast  (first  vial).  The  waters  of  the  sea  are  corrupted,  and  all 
the  inhabitants  of  the  ocean  perish  (second  vial,  an  aggravation  of  the  second  trumpet). 
A  similar  judgment  smites  the  rivers  and  fountains  of  waters  (third  vial ;  compare  the 
third  trumpet).  A  burning  sun  scorches  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  (fourth  vial).  These 
four  vials  constitute  a  first  series  of  plagues,  after  which  the  author  remarks  that  men  only 
blasphemed  with  so  much  greater  audacity  the  name  of  the  God  who  had  sent  these  plagues 
upon  them.  A  thick  darkness  comes  upon  the  kingdom  of  the  beast,  as  before  upon  the 
kingdom  of  Egypt  (fifth  vial)  ;  men  gnaw  their  tongues  in  their  rage,  rather  than  confess 
their  faults.  The  Euphrates  is  dried  up,  to  open  the  way  for  a  new  invasion  of  the  Eastern 
nations,  whom  three  unclean  spirits  summon  to  the  last  battle  against  the  Eternal  (sixth 
vial ;  compare  the  invasion  described  under  the  sixth  trumpet).  Lastly,  an  earthquake  of 
unprecedented  violence  falls  upon  Babylon,  the  capital  of  the  beast,  and  the  otler  cities  of 
that  empire  (seventh  vial ;  compare  the  similar  phenomenon  described  under  the  sixth  seal) 
{Godet). 

Ver.  12.  Euphrates. — Here  symbolical,  as  the  natural  barrier  which  checked  the  onflow  of 
Eastern  armies, 

Ver.  16.  Armageddon. — The  mountain  of  Megiddo,  the  great  battle-field  of  the  Holy  Land. 
The  old  battle-ground  becomes  the  symbol  of  a  decisive  struggle.  No  material  battle  is 
meant ;  the  final  struggle  is  one  of  principles. 


CHAPTERS  XVII. 
THE  JUDGMENT  ON  BABYLON. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Notice  that  in  the  Old  Testament,  harlotry  is  the  frequent  representation  of  apostasy. 
Babylon  stands  for  the  Apostate  Church,  which  is  here  figured  as  a  harlot  temptress. 

Ver.  4.  Golden  cup. — Jer.  li.  7. 

Ver.  5.  Upon  her  forehead  was  a  name. — It  is  said  to  have  been  an  ancient  custom  for 
harlots  to  wear  their  names  on  their  foreheads — tied  on  as  a  label.  Mystery, — See 
2  Thess.  ii  7. 

Ver.  7.  Carrieth  her. — The  woman  sitting  upon  the  beast  may  mean  the  union  of  the 
ecclesiastical  and  secular  power.  [It  is  not  in  the  design  of  this  commentary  to  examine 
how  far  the  events  of  St.  John's  time,  more  especially  in  relation  to  the  persecutions  of 
Imperial  Rome,  and  in  relation  to  doctrinal  and  moral  failures  within  the  Church  of  Christ, 
give  colour  and  form  to  liis  symbolical  representations.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  make  any 
elaborate  homiletical  use  of  this  portion  of  the  Apocalypse.]  Into  the  controversy  as  to  the 
relation  of  ecclesiastical  Rome  to  these  Johannine  visions  and  prophecies,  it  is  not  either 
fitting  or  necessary  that  this  work  should  enter.  It  has  been  the  aim  of  its  author  and  editor 
carefully  to  avoid  all  contentious  topics,  and  keep  entirely  in  the  realm  of  general  truths  and 
principles.  What  wise  nsos  may  be  made  of  single  passages  in  these  chapters  will  be  found 
indicated  in  the  homiletic  portions,  and  in  the  notes  and  specimen  outlines. 

553 


CHAP.  XVII. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Yer.  3.  The  Scarlet  Harlot.— Who  or 
what  is  the  Scarlet  Harlot  of  Kev.  xvii.  ? 
Commentators  have  given  scores  of 
opinions,  but  the  majority  have  settled 
upon  Home,  either  Pagan  or  papal. 
"  That  great  city  which  leigneth  over 
the  kings  of  the  earth  "  (ver.  18)  to  their 
minds  determines  the  question,  and  as 
a  collateral  proof  is  the  plain  declar- 
ation (ver.  9)  that  "the  seven  heads 
are  the  seven  mountains  on  which  the 
woman  sitteth."  What  can  these  be 
(they  say)  but  the  famous  seven  hills 
of  Rome  ?  These  interpreters  find  no 
difficulty  in  exalting  the  petty  hills  of 
Rome  into  mountains,  and  they  also 
fail  to  see  that  these  seven  mountains 
are  (in  ver.  3)  "a  scarlet  coloured 
beast,"  and  (in  vers.  1,  15)  "'  many 
waters."  How  are  they  going  to  turn 
the  seven  hills  of  Rome  into  "  many 
waters,"  or  "  a  beast  "  ?  The  harlot  sits 
on  all  three  equally.  The  error  with 
most  commentators  in  this  remark- 
able book  is  their  strange  mingling 
of  the  literal  with  the  symbolic.  It 
is  true  that  when  the  apostle-prophet 
himself  explains  a  symbol,  we  have 
a  literal  statement,  as  in  chap, 
xix.  8.  "  The  fine  linen  is  the  right- 
eousness of  saints,"  but  in  all  other 
cases  the  symbolism  must  be  adhered 
to.  In  this  seventeenth  chapter  we 
see  a  scarlet  harlot,  seated  on  a  scarlet 
beast,  and  the  beast  is  full  of  names  of 
blasphemy,  and  has  seven  heads  and 
ten  horns.  The  woman  is  gorgeously 
arrayed  and  is  drunk — drunk  with 
the  blood  of  the  saints.  The  beast 
and  the  horns  (see  R.V.)  at  last 
destroy  the  harlot  (ver.  16).  Now,  if 
the  woman  of  chap,  xii.,  clothed  with 
the  sun,  and  yet  bitterly  persecuted,  is 
God's  true  Church,  as  the  whole  con- 
text seems  to  demand,  what  is  more 
likely  than  that  this  prosperous  harlot 
is  the  false  church  ?  But  what  is  the 
false  Church  1  The  Church  of  Rome? 
But  how  about  the  Greek  Church? 
and  the  Armenian  Church?  and  the 
Nestorian  Church  ?  and  the  Abyssinian 

554 


Church  ?  Are  not  these  as  false  as 
Rome  ?  I  think  we  shall  have  to  give 
up  the  identification  of  this  woman  with 
the  Church  of  Rome.  She  is  the  false 
Church — any  Church  which  puts  aught 
in  Christ's  place.  In  other  words,  she 
is  the  ecclesiastical  corrupter  of  doctrine 
and  practice  found  in  all  so-called 
churches  of  Christ.  Christ  has  a  real, 
true  Church,  composed  of  sincere 
believers,  trusting  in  Him  alone  as 
the  Saviour ;  and  side  by  side  with 
these,  under  the  same  external  organis- 
ations, are  thousands  and  millions 
who  are  a  false  Church,  whose  faith 
is  in  human  power  and  human 
works,  who  pervert  the  truth,  and 
whose  lives  are  not  spiritual,  but 
carnal.  These  form  Antichrist.  They 
are  not  under  any  one  organisation. 
They  are  under  all  nominally  Christian 
organisations.  This  is  the  false 
Church.  Do  not  look  for  either  this 
or  the  true  Church  in  one  external 
form.  Look  for  it  in  life  and  spirit. 
This  is  the  scarlet  harlot.  It  seeks 
this  world's  gold  and  precious  stones 
and  pearls  (ver,  4),  and  has  no  eye  for 
eternal  realities.  It  has  always  been 
the  oppressor  of  God's  true  people,  and 
the  suppressor  of  God's  truth.  It  is 
the  concreted  spirit  of  persecution  to- 
ward all  that  is  godly.  It  is  a  Christ- 
ianity that  practically  denies  Christ, 
and  puts  human  greed  or  human  pride 
and  pleasure  in  His  place.  It  exhibits 
itself,  not  only  in  superstition,  political 
power,  the  Inquisition  and  Jesuitism, 
but  also  in  rationalism,  scepticism  and 
worldliness.  This  woman — this  harlot 
— this  false  Church,  is  called  "  that 
great  city  which  reigneth  over  the 
kings  of  the  earth,"  because  it  is  this 
false  style  of  Christianity  that  controls 
the  governments  of  the  world,  which 
support  the  Church  as  it  does  the 
theatre,  and  which  sings  Te  Deums 
over  acts  of  tyranny  and  murder. 
This  great  city  is  called  Babylon 
(ver.  5),  and  Sodom,  and  Egypt,  and 
Jerusalem,  which   crucified  our  Lord 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


CHAP.  XVII. 


(chap.  xi.  8),  names  indicative  of 
hatred  to  God's  people  and  to  their 
Lord  and  Eedeemer.  The  waters  on 
which  the  woman  sits,  we  are  told, 
are  the  nations  of  the  earth  (ver.  15), 
for  she  proudly  flourishes  wherever  the 
nominal  Christian  Church  is  found. 
These  nations  in  their  institutions  sup- 
port her.  The  waters  and  mountains 
also  appear  as  a  heast,  the  beast  of 
chap,  xiii.,  the  beast  of  human  tyran- 
nical power,  selfish  and  cruel.  This 
human  power  has  had  seven  grand 
manifestations  in  history  as  connected 
with  God's  people — namely,  Egypt, 
Assyria,  Babylon,  Persia,  Greece, 
Eome  Pagan,  Re  me  Christian.  The 
first  five  of  these  had  fallen  in  the 
prophet-apostle's  time  (ver.  10) ;  the 
sixth  was  in  existence  ;  the  seventh  was 
still  to  come,  but  to  continue  only  a 
brief  period,  for  the  beast  itself  has  to 
succeed  his  heads  and  share  his  power 
with  the  ten  horns.  That  is,  the  suc- 
cessors of  the  Poman  Empire  should 
unite  with  the  tyranny,  now  not  in  an 
Empire,  but  in  an  ecclesiastical  human 
centre.  On  all  these  phases  of  tyranny 
over  Dcan,  the  scarlet  woman  sits  in 
her  gorgeous  pride.  Ecclesiastical  cor- 
ruption flourishes  on  these  human  in- 
stitutions of  government.  The  false 
Church  finds  her  aliment  in  these 
human  and  carnal  principles  of  society 
and  law.  But  the  time  will  come 
when  God's  judgment  will  fall  on  the 
false  Church.  The  very  beast  and 
horns  will  destroy  it.  The  carnal 
interests  of  human  authority  will  be 
the  means  of  destroying  the  false 
Christianity  which  they  formerly  sup- 
ported.    The  wrath  of  man  will  praise 


God.  And  then  the  true  Church — 
God's  faithful  ones — will  be  vindicated 
and  glorified. — Howard  Crosby, 

Ver.  14.  The  Overcoming  Lamb. — 
A  great  Person  is  here  spoken  of,  and 
a  great  thing,  it  is  declared,  He  will 
accomplish. 

I.  Consider  the  Person  mentioned. 
He  i«  not  a  lamb  but  the  Lamb.  He 
is  the  great,  universal  Lamb,  causing 
the  blood  which  He  shed  to  spread 
itself,  as  it  were,  all  over  the  world,  so 
that  every  sinner  might  touch  it,  and 
be  saved  from  his  sins.  See  His  per- 
sonal qualities.  1.  His  quietness.  It 
is  in  marked  contrast  with  the  lion. 
2.  Wonderful  patience.  How  much 
He  bore  from  His  enemies  !  3.  Per- 
fectly innocent.  4.  Capable  of  exer- 
cising great  wrath. 

II.  What  He  shall  overcome. — 
*' The  Lamb  shall  overcome  them'" 
which  seems  to  have  special  reference 
to  organised  Antichrist.  But  He  shall 
overcome  all  opposers,  both  nations  and 
individuals. 

III.  How  He  shall  overcome  His 
opposers. — There  are  two  general 
methods.  One  is  that  of  using  certain 
means  to  persuade  rebellious  hearts  to 
become  reconciled  to  God.  His  great- 
est effort  has  always  been  to  overcome 
by  the  passion  of  His  love.  But  the 
second  method  is  that  of  Jinal  banish- 
ment from  His  pi'esence.  Oh,  what  can 
feeble  man  do  against  sucii  an  all- 
powerful  being  as  Christ  is?  How 
utterly  vain  have  been  the  threats  of 
infidels,  that  they  would  banish  Him 
from  the  world  ! — C.  H.  Wetherbe. 


CHAPTER    XVIII. 


Foe  the  reasons  given  at  the  foot  of  page  553,  no  suggestions  for  exegetical  or  homiletical 
treatment  are  given  in  connection  with  chap,  xviii. 


5r)5 


CHAP.  XIX.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
FINAL  VICTOEY  OF  THE  LAMB. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  time  now  draws  near  for  the  final  termination  of  the  conflict.  The  irrevocable  doom 
has  been  pronounced.  But  before  the  final  consummation  there  is,  as  usual,  a  relief  passage 
We  have  the  song  of  victory  sung  in  anticipation.  These  relief  passages  of  this  book  the 
writer  designed  to  cheer  the  spirits  of  the  suffering  and  persecuted  saints,  and  for  their 
sake  the  book  was  written.  The  contents  of  the  vers.  1-10  of  this  chapter  may  be  thus 
divided :  1.  All  the  inhabitants  of  the  heavenly  world  join  in  a  song  of  holy  thanksgiving, 
in  view  of  the  coming  vindication  of  the  Divine  honour.  2.  A  voice  from  the  throne 
requires  renewed  praise,  which  is  shouted.  3.  The  glorious  prospect  of  suffering  martyrs 
is  disclosed.  Then  St.  John  falls  at  the  feet  of  the  angel-interpreter,  who  refuses  homage 
which  is  due  only  to  Him  who  is  Lord  and  Master  of  them  both. 

Ver.  2.  Simcox  gives  a  sentence  from  the  book  of  Enoch,  xlvii.  4,  in  which  a  similar  joy 
in  God's  judgments  is  expressed.  "  Then  were  the  hearts  of  the  saints  full  of  joy,  because 
the  number  of  righteousness  was  arrived,  the  supplications  of  the  saints  heard,  and  the  blood 
of  the  righteous  appreciated  by  the  Lord  of  Spirits."  In  the  second  portion  of  the  chapter 
there  is  again  a  threefold  division.  1.  The  appearance  of  the  Great  Captain  of  Salvation, 
with  His  hosts  around  Him,  from  the  heavenly  world  (vers.  11-16).  The  Son  of  God  Him- 
self undertakes  to  lead  the  final  battle.  2.  The  proclamation  made  to  the  ravenous  beasts 
and  birds  to  come  and  glut  themselves  with  the  slaughtered  (vers.  17, 18).  3.  The  final  over- 
throw and  excision  of  the  beast,  the  false  prophet,  and  their  army  (vers.  19-21).  Note  that 
the  victory  is  gained  by  purely  spiritual  means.  Probably  the  confederacy  of  the  powers  of 
the  world,  under  the  leadership  of  Antichrist,  will  be  primarily  intellectual  and  spiritual. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—21. 

The  Vision  of  the  "  Word  of  God." — Are  we  to  see  in  the  victorious  apparition 
of  the  Christ,  described  in  chap,  xix.,  an  event  purely  spiritual,  or  a  visible 
phenomenon  ?  Jesus  compares  it  to  the  lightning  which  shines  instantaneously 
from  the  one  end  of  heaven  to  the  other  (Luke  xvii.  24).  The  latter  view  is  the 
only  one  compatible  with  this  expression.  On  the  other  hand,  it  follows  from  His 
use  of  this  image  that  Jesus  had  no  thought  of  a  permanent  and  visible  abode  of 
His  glorified  Person  on  the  earth,  whether  at  Jerusalem  or  elsewhere,  as  the 
millenarians  in  all  ages  have  thought.  The  Parousia  will  be,  on  the  contrary, 
like  the  stroke  of  the  red-hot  rod,  which  is  to  startle  mankind,  absorbed  in  fleshly 
living,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  mighty  reaction  whence  the  plenitude  of 
the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  millennium  is  to  proceed.  Living  in  a  higher  sphere, 
but  near  at  hand,  the  faithful,  who  will  have  been  glorified  at  the  advent  of  the 
Lord,  will  be  in  communion  with  the  early  Christendom,  just  as  the  Risen  Christ 
\ias  in  communion  with  His  disciples  until  the  ascension.  This  will  be  the  time 
of  the  complete  development  of  spiritual  worship  and  of  Christian  civilisation,  in 
which,  as  in  the  Middle  Ages,  but  under  the  efiects  of  the  shining  forth  of  a  more 
intense  and  pure  light,  science,  art,  industry,  commerce,  will  lend  their  resources 
to  the  Christian  spirit  to  enable  it  to  incarnate  itself  completely  in  the  life  of 
man.  Then  will  be  fulfilled  the  image  of  the  leaven  which  leaveneth  the  whole 
lump.  The  number  "  a  thousand,"  is  symbolical,  like  all  numbers  in  the 
Apocalypse.  It  represents  a  complete  development  which  nothing  external  to 
itself  will  interfere  with  or  abridge — an  era  which  shall  expand  itself  at  ease  in 
the  latter  days  of  history.  It  does  not  seem  to  us  that  the  apocalyptic  vision  of 
the  reign  of  a  thousand  years  contains  a  single  feature  which  overpasses  the 
conception  of  which  we  have  just  sketched  the  outline.  It  is  that  perfect  state 
of  things  which  Ezekiel  had  already  described  in  the  last  nine  chapters  of  his 
prophecy,  under  the  image  of  an  ideal  temple. — F.  Godet,  D.D. 

656 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  XIX. 


SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES, 


Ver.  12.  The  Croivned  Christ— This 
was  a  symbolic  revelation  of  the 
extent  and  variety  of  the  kingdoms 
over  which  Christ  rules. 

I.  In  times  of  deep  religious 
earnestness  the  very  intensity  of 
men's  desire  to  serve  Christ  perfectly 
often  makes  them  forget  the  actual 
service  to  which  He  has  appointed 
them. — The  first  impulse  ot  some 
persons,  when  they  begin  to  be  in  real 
earnest  about  serving  Christ,  is  to 
look  at  a  great  part  of  their  life  as 
alienated  from  HLs  service.  Remember 
that  on  the  head  of  Christ  are 
many  crowns,  that  all  occupations 
of  human  life  are  His,  and  that  every 
one  who  desires  to  serve  Him  can  give 
Him,  not  fragments,  but  the  whole  of 
life,  from  first  to  last.  You  need  not 
give  up  trade,  if  it  is  an  honest  one,  to 
serve  Christ.  Serve  Him  in  the  trade 
itself,  and  remember  that  in  trade,  as 
in  everything  besides,  He  is  King. 

II.  And  He  is  the  King  of  the 
province  of  public  life,  too,  and  in 
politics,  whether  imperial  or  local, 
Christian  men  should  still  be  serving 
and  honouring  Him. — Christ  is  the 
King  of  our  political  life,  and  in  that, 
as  in  every  other  province  of  our 
activity,  we  have  to  serve  and  honour 
Him. 

III.  Christ  is  King  of  the  spiritual 
life  of  man. — Much  of  the  weakness 


and  sorrow  of  Christian  people  arise 
from  forgetting  this  :  we  have  to  give 
Him  reverence  as  well  as  trust,  fear  as 
well  as  love.  We  have  to  recognise 
His  authority.  The  awe  and  devout 
fear  with  which  we  bow  down  before 
God  are  His,  for  He  is  God  manifest 
in  the  flesh.— 7?.  W.  Dale,  D.D. 

Many  Crowns. — We  have  all  heard 
of  uncrowned  kings ;  but  the  term  is  a 
misnomer.  St.  John's  surpasses  all 
thoughts  of  one  crown  for  earth's 
victor-kings. 

I.  On  His  Head  is  the  crown  of  the 
conquest  of  sin. — ThLs  is  the  victory. 
'*  All  have  sinned."  Jesus  is  the 
"  Lamb  of  God."  "  Unto  Him  Who 
loved  us,"  etc. 

II.  The  crown  of  the  conquest  of 
sorrow. — He  revealed  the  Fatherhood 
of  God.  Holy  compensation,  the 
Father's  house.  "  Let  not  your  heart 
be  troubled." 

III.  The  crown  of  the  conquest  of 
suffering. 

IV.  The  crown  of  the  conquest  of 
Satan. — No  light  conquest.  In  the 
wilderness  and  on  the  Cross.  The 
humblest  Christian  warrior  may  now 
meet  the  assaults  of  the  Evil  One. 

V.  The  crown  of  the  conquest  of 
death. — In  heaven  the  redeemed  feel 
and  know  death  to  be  a  conquered 
power. — G.  M.  Statham. 


557 


CHAP.  XX.      HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


CHAPTER   XX. 
THE  THOUSAND  YEARS. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES, 

Eminent  expositors,  ancient  and  modern,  regard  the  opening  of  this  chapter  as  referring 
to  an  early  period  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  but  there  are  many  writers  who  consider  the 
events  as  occurring  in  immediate  succession  to  those  foreshown  in  the  end  of  chap.  xix. 
Stuart  points  out  the  intentional  brevity  with  which  this  portion  of  the  prophecy  is  treated. 
•'  The  events  of  a  thousand  years  ;  the  invasion  of  G-og  and  Magog,  with  their  defeat  ;  the 
ultimate  confinement  and  punishment  of  Satan  ;  and,  lastly,  the  general  judgment ;— are  all 
crowded  into  the  space  of  twelve  verses.  This  shows  that  the  very  distant  future  is  designed 
to  be  merely  glanced  at  by  the  writer.  So  it  is  with  the  Hebrew  prophets.  But  here  there 
is  a  special  reason  for  brevity.  The  main  object  of  the  book  is  already  accomplished. 
Christians  have  been  consoled  by  assurances  that  all  the  enemies  with  whom  the  Church  was 
then  conflicting,  would  surely  be  overthrown.  To  complete  an  epic  plan  which  involves  a 
climactic  progression  of  events,  and  to  gratify  the  taste  and  feelings,  the  last  part  of  the 
book  is  added.  It  seems  to  be  added  mainly  for  this  purpose.  Mere  touches  and  glances 
are  all  which  it  exhibits,  or  which  were  intended  to  be  exhibited.  The  eye  of  hope  is 
directed  forward,  and  sees  the  thousand  years  of  uninterrupted  prosperity;  then  the 
sudden  destruction  of  a  new  and  final  enemy,  and  all  the  rest  is  left  to  joyful  anticipation. 

Ver.  1.  Bottomless  pit. — Explained  in  note  on  chap.  ix.  1. 

Ver.  2.  Old  serpent. — See  on  chap.  xii.  9.  Thousand  years. — A  figurative,  not  literal, 
period.  With  the  Lord  "  a  thousand  years  is  as  one  day."  It  is  safer  to  regard  it  as  repre- 
senting a  prolonged,  in  contrast  with  a  limited,  period. 

Ver.  4.  Thrones. — Compare  Dan.  vii.  9,  22.  There  seem  to  be  two  classes  of  faithful  souls 
introduced  :  those  who  had  made  the  martyrs'  testimon}^  and  those  who  had  given  the 
testimony  of  noble  lives.  Beigned  with  Christ. — A  figure  for  that  kind  of  ruling  power  and 
influence  which  steadfast  and  heroic  men  and  women  always  gain  and  exercise  wherever  they 
may  be,  even  as  Christ  gained  and  exercised. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH, —Verses  1—15. 

The  Millennium-Picture. — The  millennium- vision  is,  like  so  many  of  the  apostolic 
visions,  an  ideal  picture ;  it  exhibits  a  state  of  things  which  is  possible  to  man- 
kind at  any  time.  The  vision  has  its  approximate  fulfilment,  as  the  Church,  in 
the  faith  of  the  reality  of  her  Lord's  victory,  carries  on  her  warfare  against  the 
prince  of  this  world,  and  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.  That  this  approxi- 
mate fulfilment  is  not  unreal  may  be  seen  in  the  fact  that  Christendom  has 
replaced  heathendom  ;  Christ  has  taken  the  throne  of  the  world ;  the  prince  of  this 
world  has  been  judged ;  the  ascendency  of  Christian  thought  and  Christian  prin- 
ciples has  marvellously  humanised  and  purified  the  world.  To  an  Irenseus,  a 
Polycarp,  a  Justin  Martyr,  a  Tertullian,  the  picture  of  the  world  during  the 
Christian  centuries  would  have  the  aspect  of  a  millennium,  when  contrasted  with 
the  age  of  Pagan  dominion  and  Pagan  persecution.  In  their  eyes,  accustomed  to 
the  darkness  of  heathenism,  the  world,  as  influenced  by  a  widely- difi'used  Christ- 
ianity, would  seem  to  be  a  world  in  which  Christ  ruled.  They  would  see,  in  the 
acknowledgment  of  apostles  and  martyrs  and  confessors,  the  wondrous  resurrec- 
tion-power of  God's  truth  ;  they  would  see  how  they,  who  fell  for  Christ,  had 
stepped  from  their  forgotten  graves  to  sit  down  with  Christ  in  His  throne.  The 
apostles,  the  martyrs,  the  faithful,  do  reign  with  Christ.  The  sovereignty  of  the 
world  belongs  far  more  to  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  than  to  Nero  or  Galba.  But 
though  thus  the  saints  rise  and  reign  with  Christ  over  Christendom,  we  can  see 
that  this  is  only  an  approximate  realisation,  and  falls  short  of  the  ideal  picture. 
Christendom  established  and  heathendom  overthrown  would  be  a  millennium  in 

558 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,     chai'.  xxi. 


the  eyes  of  an  Ignatius;  but  the  Church  of  to  day  looks  for  a  further  and  higher 
fulfilment.  Is  she  justified  in  this  expectation  ?  If  the  principles  we  have  laid 
down  are  correct,  she  is  justified.  She  can  accept  the  first-fruits  of  God's 
promises,  but  she  will  not  mistake  them  for  the  harvest ;  she  can  rejoice  in  the 
growth  of  her  Lord's  kingdom,  but  she  looks  for  the  day  when  the  powers  of 
evil  will  be  more  efiectually  curbed,  and  the  gospel  will  have  freer  course.  Then 
the  fulness  of  Christ's  victory  will  be  more  clearly  seen. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  TO   CHAPTER  XX. 

Ver.  12.  The  Final  Judgment;  The  Cer-  The  Record  of  Our  Lives. — With  every 
tainty  of  Its  Decisions. — There  is  a  machine  turn  of  the  turnstile  on  Waterloo  Bridge 
in  the  Bank  of  England  which  receives  a  record  (in  the  old  time)  was  made  against 
sovereigns,  as  a  mill  receives  grain,  for  the  gatekeeper,  and  he  could  not  recall  or 
the  purpose  of  determining  wholesale  obliterate  it.  Every  movement  of  the  wind 
w^hether  they  are  are  of  full  weight.  As  over  Greenwich  Observatory,  steady  or  capri- 
they  pass  through,  the  machinery,  by  un-  cious,  fast  or  slow,  is  self-registered,  with 
erring  laws,  throws  all  that  are  light  to  one  pencil  and  paper,  by  an  apparatus  com- 
side,  and  all  that  are  of  full  weight  to  municating  to  a  room  below,  in  which  blank 
another.  That  process  is  a  silent  but  solemn  paper  is  presented  to  the  pencil  by  clockwork ; 
parable  for  me.  Founded  as  it  is  upon  the  and  these  autobiographical  memoirs  are  care- 
laws  of  nature,  it  affords  the  most  vivid  simili-  fully  preserved.  So  constant  and  unerring 
tude  of  the  certainty  which  characterises  the  is  the  record  kept  in  the  book  of  God's 
judgment  of  the  great  day.  There  are  no  remembrance  concerning  all  our  actions, 
mistakes  or  partialities  to  which  the  light  and  even  "  every  idle  word  that  men  shall 
may  trust ;  the  only  hope  lies  in  being  of  speak  "  (Matt.  xii.  36). 
standard  weight  before  they  go  in. — Arnot. 


CHAPTER    XXI. 

THE  NEW  JERUSALEM. 

CRITICAL   AND  EXEGETICAL   NOTES. 

"  Now  is  sealed  the  eternal  doom  of  the  dragon,  beast,  false  prophet,  and  all  their 
followers ;  yea,  and  of  all  who  resemble  them  in  the  temper  of  their  hearts  or  the  action  of 
their  lives.  Nothing  remains  but  to  exhibit  the  glorious  reward  of  the  righteous,  in  the 
eternal  world,  as  contrasted  with  the  awful  punishment  of  the  wicked." 

Ver.  1.  New  heavens  and  new  earth. — Isa.  Ixv.  17;  compare  Ezek.  xl. — xlviii.  and  Matt, 
xix.  28.  "  Heavens  "  here  refer  to  the  firmament  regarded  as  the  dome  above  the  earth ;  it 
is  not  the  abode  of  the  righteous.  No  more  sea. — For  ancient  ideas  of  the  sea,  compare 
Isa.  xlviii.  IS,  Ivii.  21.  "  To  the  ancients  the  absence  of  sea  seemed  a  pledge  of  security  and 
of  unfettered  intercourse  between  all  nations." 

Ver.  2.  New  Jerusalem. — An  ideal  city,  presented  under  figures  that  represent  perfection 
—the  perfection  of  purity,  beauty,  and  joy. 

Ver.  8  Tabernacle  of  God. — Figure  from  the  conception  of  Jehovah  as  resident  in  the  old 
Jewish  tabernacle. 

Ver.  10.  Holy  Jerusalem. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter  sVWlwWy  presents  the  leading  features: 
"  The  great  and  holy  community  will  be  one  which  draws  its  glory  from  God  (chaps,  xxi. 
11,  23,  xxii.  5).  Its  blessings  are  not  for  a  few,  but  open  to  all;  for  its  gates  lie  open  to  all 
quarters  (chap.  xxi.  12,  13).  The  heavenly  and  the  earthly  will  be  at  one ;  angels,  apostles, 
and  patriarchs  are  tliere  (vers.  12,  14).  Diverse  characters  will  find  entrance  there;  the 
gates  bear  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes.  The  door  of  admission  is  alike  for  all,  though 
diverse  characters,  from  diverse  quarters,  will  enter  in  (ver.  21).  It  will  be  the  abode  of 
all  that  is  fair  and  good,  and  no  disproportions  will  mar  its  loveliness  (vers.  17,  IH).  The 
ancient  truths,  spoken  by  various  lips,  will  be  found  to  be  eternal  truths,  full  of  varied  but 

559 


CHAP.  XXI.     H0MILE2IC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


consistent  beauty  (vers.  14,  19,  20).  The  forms  and  helps  which  were  needful  here  will  not 
be  needful  there  (vers.  22,  23)  ;  all  that  the  servants  of  God  have  righteously  hungered  and 
thirsted  for  here,  will  be  supplied  there  (vers.  1,  2).  There  will  be  blessings,  various, 
continuous,  eternal ;  new  fields  of  labour,  and  new  possibilities  of  service,  will  be  opened 
there." 

Ver.  7.  Loosed  from  his  prison, — As  this  is  the  indication  of  some  future  condition,  it  is 
impossible  to  explain  it.  Taken  mystically,  the  binding  of  Satan  implied  restraint  put  upon 
his  power  of  freedom  and  action ;  the  loosing  means  the  removal  of  those  restraints. 
Christendom,  even  in  its  times  of  glorious  success,  is  exposed  to  the  influences  of  the  evil 
one.  Gog  and'Magog. — See  Gen.  x.  2  ;  Ezek.  xxxviii.,  xxxix.  "  In  Kabbiuical  books  these 
names  were  used  to  describe  the  nations  that  would  rise  against  the  reign  of  Messiah.  The 
names  are  to  be  understood  figuratively." 

Ver.  12.  Stand  before  God, — This  representation  of  the  judgment  is  a  vision,  and  it  would 
be  unwise  to  treat  it  as  literally  descriptive.  Compare  our  Lord's  being  shown,  in  a 
moment  of  time,  "  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them."  Book  of  life. — 
Compare  Dan.  xii.  1. 

Ver.  13.  Hell. — Sheol,  the  Hebrew  equivalent  of  Hades.  Those  buried  at  sea  are  thought 
of  as  not  being  in  the  grave :  a  curious  distinction. 

Ver.  14.  Lake  of  fire. — This  is  pure  imagery ;  fire  to  burn  such  things  as  death  and  the 
grave  cannot  possibly  be  literally  explained.  It  is  to  be  understood  as  the  material  repre- 
sentation of  the  "  second  death."  "Here  is  a  resurrection,  not  to  life,  but  to  a  death  far 
more  terrible  than  that  which  ends  this  life." 

Note  on  the  "  Second  Death''''  or  "  Lalie  of  Fire''' — It  is  a  death  of  which  the  first  death — 
the  physical  death,  now  destroyed — was  but  a  faint  figure.  It  is  a  condition  which  needs  no 
coarse  exaggeration,  or  vulgar  literalisation  of  the  prophetic  imagery,  to  heighten  the  horror 
of  it.  Very  awful  is  that  spiritual  death  which  knows  not  and  loves  not  God,  and  from  which 
Christ  has  come  to  arouse  us  ;  more  awful  must  be  that  second  death,  in  which  the  spirit,  no 
longer  the  sinning  victim  of  hereditary  evil,  has  become  the  victim  of  habitual  choice  of 
wrong,  loving  darkness  rather  than  light,  and  choosing  alienation  rather  than  reconciliation 
— the  husks  of  the  swine  rather  than  the  Father's  house.  Of  the  full  meaning  of  the  words, 
in  their  true  and  future  force,  we  can  have  little  conception.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  remember 
two  things ;  they  are  figurative,  but  they  are  figurative  of  somethitig. — Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS   OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses   1—27. 

The  Millennial  State. — In  the  latter  part  of  chap,  xx.,  and  in  chaps,  xxi. — 
xxii.  5,  all  Christ's  enemies  are  destroyed,  and  the  happiness  of  the  saints  is 
perfected.  Upon  the  millennial  bliss  of  the  redeemed,  and  upon  the  glory  and 
happiness  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  it  is  not  possible  to  dwell.  Suffice  it  to  say, 
that  we  are  to  behold  in  the  former  a  figure  of  the  perfected  and  eternally 
secured  life  of  those  who  not  only  die,  but  rise,  with  Christ ;  and  that  in  the 
latter  we  have  a  bright  and  beautiful,  as  well  as  elevating,  picture  of  that  new 
condition  into  which  the  followers  of  Jesus  are  introduced,  even  on  this  side 
the  grave,  and  amidst  the  labours  and  trials  of  their  present  pilgrimage. 
Nothing,  we  are  persuaded,  has  tended  more  to  perplex  the  interpretation  of  the 
Apocalypse  than  the  idea  that  that 'holy  city  which  St.  John  saw'"  coming  down 
out  of  heaven  from  God,  made  ready  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband  "  is 
intended  to  represent  a  glorious  state  into  which  the  redeemed  shall  enter,  sooner 
or  later,  after  the  close  of  their  earthly  pilgrimage,  but  before  they  obtain 
possession  of  their  eternal  inheritance.  Taking  such  a  view,  it  is  impossible  to 
interpret  fairly  all  the  expressions  of  the  passage,  while  it  deprives  us,  at  the 
same  time,  of  the  thought  of  those  sublime  privileges  which,  as  we  are  everywhere 
taught  in  Scripture,  are  not  the  future  only,  but  the  present  inheritance  of  God's 
children.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  even  they  who  are  "  in  "  Christ  Jesus  are  still 
surrounded  by  a  darkness  which  has  no  place  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem ;  that 
they  have  still  to  shed  tears  which  are  there  washed  away;  and  that  they  have 
still  to  fear  that  they  must  meet  that  death  which  shall  there  be  swallowed  up 
of  victory.  Calling  these  things  to  mind,  it  can  be  no  matter  of  surprise  that 
many  have  difficulty  in  believing  that  the  brightness  and  glory  of  this  celestial 

560 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  xxi. 


city  can,  under  any  point  of  view,  represent  an  earthly  scene  through  which  we 
are  thankful  if  we  may  but  grope  our  way,  "  fightings  without,  and  fears  within." 
Yet  let  them  remember  that  the  Christian  life  has  two  sides,  those  two  which 
are  brought  forward  so  prominently  by  the  Apostle,  when  he  speaks  of  himself 
and  his  fellow  ministers  **  as  dying,  and  behold  we  live  ;  as  chastened,  and  not 
killed  ;  as  sorrowing,  yet  alway  rejoicing ;  as  poor,  yet  making  many  rich  ;  as 
having  nothing,  yet  possessing  all  things"  (2  Cor.  v.  1,  9,  10).  Let  them 
remember  that,  if  the  follower  of  Christ  dies  daily  with  his  Lord,  he  also  rises 
with  Him  daily,  and  ascends  to  the  heavenly  places,  and  is  set  down  there,  his 
life  not  maintained  amidst  the  things  of  earth,  but  "  hid  with  Christ  in  God." 
Let  these  thoughts  be  ever  present  to  their  minds,  and  they  will  not  have 
much  difficulty  in  seeing  that  in  the  description  of  the  new  Jerusalem  we  have 
the  ideal  side  of  the  Christian's  position,  elevated  to  its  highest  point  and 
illuminated  with  its  brightest  colouring,  but  still  a  side  that  is  true  to  one 
aspect  of  his  present  state. —  W.  Milligan,  D.D. 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND  SERMON  SKETCHES. 


Ver.  L  A  Strange  Picture  of  the 
Future. — Who  among  us  does  not  love 
the  sea,  and  feel  thankfid  that  the 
Bible  permits  us  to  learn  from  it  con- 
cerning God,  and  the  future  life  ?  But 
our  associations  maka  it  almost  im- 
possible for  us  to  realise  the  joy  of  a 
time  when  "  there  shall  be  no  more 
The  landscapes  of  the  heavenly 


sea 


world  we  cannot  imagine  will  be 
beautiful  without  either  near  or  far 
glimpses  of  the  sea.  The  air  of  the 
heavenly  world  we  can  hardly  think 
will  be  pure  and  rich  and  reviving  if 
it  does  not  blow  over  a  restless,  waving 
sea.  There  must,  however,  be  some 
good  reasons  for  putting  the  glory  of 
the  heavenly  scenes  under  this  figure. 
The  meanings  attaching  to  natural 
emblems  differ  in  different  times,  and 
nations,  and  individuals,  and  when 
the  Apostle  John  wrote  this  book  of 
Revelation,  men  did  not  think  of  the 
"  sea  "  as  we  think  of  it  now.  Indeed, 
throughout  the  Scriptures  the  sea  is 
regarded  as  an  object  of  fear  and 
terror;  its  majesty,  its  greatness,  its 
mastery,  seem  mostly  to  have  impressed 
men  then.  It  was  not  yet  tamed  by 
human  skill.  The  compass  was  not 
known  ;  the  few  vessels  they  had  were 
inefficiently  constructed  for  ocean - 
sailing  ;  they  seldom  ventured  out  of 
sight  of  land.  The  dangers  of  sandbank, 
rock,  headland,  and  current,  were  not 
marked  on  chart,  or  by  buoy  and 
lighthouse,    and    only    the    most    ad- 


venturous spirits  would  risk  their  lives 
on  the  treacherous  wave.  The  Jews, 
throughout  their  history,  take  no  place 
as  sailors ;  indeed,  the  whole  sea-board 
of  Canaan  contains  but  one  or  two 
harbours.  Scripture  speaks  of  "  the 
raging  of  the  sea,"  of  the  "raging 
waves  of  the  sea " ;  of  its  *'  voice 
roaring,"  of  the  "  floods  lifting  up  their 
voice,"  of  "  the  wicked  being  like  the 
troubled  sea,"  of  "  those  that  go  down 
to  the  sea  in  ships  seeing  the  wonders 
of  the  Lord,  and  His  judgments  in  the 
deep,"  of  the  "  great  and  wide  sea, 
wherein  are  things  creeping  innu- 
merable." And  even  when  it  seems 
to  have  a  gentle  thought,  saying. 
**  There  go  the  ships  "  ;  as  if,  like  us, 
it  loved  to  watch — 

"  The  stately  ships  go  on 
To  their  harbour  under  the  hill," 

at  once  it  adds  the  note  of  power  and 
fear — "  there  is  that  Leviathan  whom 
thou  hast  made  to  play  therein."  Only 
as  we  enter  into  the  Bible  associations 
of  the  sea  shall  we  feel  the  meaning  of 
its  figure  for  the  future  world — 
"There  shall  be  no  more  sea."  But 
more  must  be  added.  When  John 
wrote  down  these  visions  he  was  "  our 
companion  in  tribulation,  and  in  the 
kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  was  in  the  isle  that  is  called 
Patmos  for  the  Word  of  God  and  for 
the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ."  Patmos 
is   a   rocky   and    bare    island    in    the 

GO  561 


CHAP.  XXI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


-^gean     Sea,    and    was    used   by   the 
Komans    as    a    place    of    banishment, 
something  as  St.  Helena  has  been  by 
us.     There   John   was  separated   from 
his    fellow- Christians,    and    from    his 
loved  work  ;  the  sea   was  his  divider, 
and    we    can    well     understand    how, 
looking  on  that  wide  waste  of  pathless 
waters  all  around  him,  his  heart  would 
fashion  this  image  of  the  life  to  come 
— "  There  shall  be  no  more  sea."     The 
common    idea    of    the    age,    and    the 
special   circumstances   of    the   apostle, 
help  us  to  reach  the  proper  suggestions 
of  a  figure  so  unsuitable  to  our  own 
feelings.    We  even  know  that  the  sea — 
the  moving,  and  the  storms  of  the  sea — 
are  necessary  to  life  and  health.     The 
air  is  tempered  which  pass3s  over  it ; 
the   wants   of    men    are    mat    by    its 
provisions  of  food ;  disease  is  dispelled 
by  its  tempests  and  commotions.     And 
yet,  for  all  the  usefulness  of  the  sea, 
and  all  the  pleasure  of  it,  there  are 
times  when,  to  our  hearts,  the  figure  of 
the  t3xt  carries  its  full  meaning  ;  and 
in  the  light  of  that  meaning  we  can 
anticipate  "  the  new  heavens  and  earth, 
in  which  there  shall  be  no  more  sea." 
The  sea  seems  to  gather  up  for  us  the 
various  forms  of  trouble  and  anxiety 
that  come  to  us  in  this  life ;  the  various 
forms  of  trouble  from  which  we  hope  to 
be  delivered  in  the  coming  life.     The 
troubles  that  arise  out  of  Separation, 
Danger,  Mystery,  Change,  and  Conflict. 
I.  If  the  S8a  be  to  us  the  symbDl 
of  separation,  and  so  of  those' earthly 
troubles  that  come  by  separations,  we 
shall   see   meaning   and   force  in    this 
promise  for  the  future — "There  shall 
be  no  more  sea." — True  the  ocean  is 
now  the  pathway  of   nations.     In  all 
th3    interchanges    of    commerce,     and 
friendship,  and  travel,  we  make  well- 
defined   tracks    over    the    waters,    and 
knit    land    to    land    more    easily  than 
when  mountain  ranges  divide  kingdoms. 
Let  but  any  one  watch  in  the  Downs, 
and  see  the  thousand  ships  passing  in 
picturesque  procession  to  and  from  the 
Thames,  and  he  will  feel  it  very  hard 
to  call  the  sea  a  divider.     Think  but 
of   the   ropes   that   pass   beneath   the 

562 


wave,  and  carry  lightning  messages  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  it  seems 
strange  to  speak  of  the  sea  as  a  sepa- 
rator. Yet  in  no  day  has  it  been  such 
a  breaker-up  of  families  and  homes  as 
in  these  emigrating  days  of  ours.  Few 
of  us  are  without  dear  friends  settled 
in  distant  lands,  severed  from  us  by 
the  great  wave.  Many  a  mother,  ) 
many  a  father,  many  a  lover,  feels( 
most  keenly  that  the  sea  is  only  a  little \ 
less  a  separator  than  the  grave.  Why  j 
those  tears  wrung  out  of  the  agonies  of 
parting,  save  that  to  human  feeling 
every  mile  of  ocean  seems  to  lift  up  a 
higher,  and  at  last  impassable,  barrier 
between  us  and  them  ?  How  many  a 
friend  has  watched  the  ship  fading  in 
the  distance  that  bore  the  beloved 
away,  and  turned  back  to  life  with  all 
the  agony  of  desolation,  feeling  as  if 
divided  from  them  for  ever  ! 

"  How  hard  to  follow,  with  lips  that  quiver, 
That  moving  speck  on  the  far-off  side ! 
Farther,  farther — I  see  it — know  it ; 
My  eyes  brim  over.     It  melts  away. 
Only  my  heart;  to  my  heart  shall  show  it, 
As  I  walk  desolate,  day  by  day." 

Jean  Ingelow. 

That,  indeed,  is  only  separation  of  space. 
Across  the  dividing  sea,  heart  may  beat 
true  to  heart,  and  fellowship  be  kept. 
There  are  worse  dividers  than  the  sea. 
Envies,  and  suspicions,  and  jealousies,! 
come  breaking  up  our  life-unions  andj 
our  friendships,  and  some  of  the  sorest  i 
of  human  sorrows  belong  to  these  ] 
failing  friendships  and  wounded  trusts.  ) 
Gather  them  all,  then,  into  the 
symbol  of  the  wounded  trusts.  Gather 
them  all,  then,  into  the  symbol  of  the 
sea.  Let  it  remind  you  of  all  the 
woes  that  have  come  out  of  separa- 
tions, all  through  your  life ;  even  let  it 
recall  how  the  great  separator  death 
again  and  again  sets  his  wide,  rolling 
river  between  you  and  those  you  loved. 
Yes,  even  think  how  those  dear  to  you, 
part  of  the  host,  have  crossed  the  great 
flood,  and  are  now  divided  by  the  sea 
of  death  from  you.  And  then  turn  to 
our  text ;  let  thought  and  heart  fill  its 
pictures  of  the  future  with  tenderness, 
and  peaceful  resting  to  your  soul.     No 


HOMILETIC  C0MMEN2ARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  xxi. 


\ 


ship  shall  sail  out  from  the  heavenly 
harbours,  bearing  away  from  you  your 
boyp.  No  rolling  waves  of  mistrust 
shall  toss  between  you  and  your  friend. 
No  night-moaning  sea  of  death  shall 
bear  away  on  its  bosom  your  beloved. 
*'  There  shall  be  no  more  sea."  "  They 
go  no  more  out  for  ever." 

"  Here  we  suffer  grief  and  pain, 
Here  we  meet  to  part  again  : 
In  Heaven  we  part  no  more." 

II.  If  the  sea  be  to  us  the  emblem 
of  danger,  reminding  us  of  the  perils 
to  which  our  daily  life  is  exposed,  we 
shall  feel  the  force  of  the  text.  Those 
dangers  do,  indeed,  meet  us  everywhere: 
on  road  and  rail,  at  home  and  abroad. 
**  In  the  midst  of  life  we  are  in  death." 
But  we  get  the  largest  and  most  affect- 
ing impressions  of  danger  from  the 
records  of  the  sea.  Shipwreck  is  a 
most  familiar  word — so  familiar  that  if 
there  be  not  special  circumstances  of 
horror,  it  passes  almost  unheeded  by  us. 
The  sea  is  the  most  masterful  thing 
with  which  a  man  has  to  do.  He  does, 
at  best,  but  hold  his  own  with  it,  and 
that  only  by  watching  it,  and  fitting 
himself  to  its  moods.  Step  on  deck, 
knowing  that,  for  days  together,  you 
will  lose  all  sight  of  land,  and  scarcely 
meet  another  sail,  and  who  can  wonder 
that  the  sense  of  danger  makes  you  lift 
your  heart  to  Godi  But  those  only 
feel  how  the  sea  symbolises  danger 
who  have  lost  a  friend  at  sea.  Its  peril 
then  has  come  right  home  to  them. 
Down  in  her  solitary  depths  their  loved 
one  made  a  grave ;  and  the  heart 
almost  shudders  now  to  look  upon  the 
dreadful  sea  that  devoured  him.  Had 
we  a  sailor's  widow  here,  how  much  her 
heart  could  tell  us  of  the  perils  of  the 
deep !  Is  your  heart  sensitive  and 
sympathising  enough  to  hear  •  her 
moan  ? 

"  My  boat,  you  shall  find  none  fairer  afloat, 
In  river  or  port. 
Long  I  looked  out  for  the  lad  she  bore, 

On  the  open,  desolate  sea. 
And   I   think   he   sailed   to  the  heavenly 
shore, 
For  he  came  not  back  to  me — 

Ah  me!" 
Jean  Iiujelow. 


But  these  are  only  dangers  to  the 
body.  May  we  rise  to  the  higher 
dangers  that  put  the  soul's  life  in  peril ; 
dangers  hovering  round  our  moral 
life,  putting  in  peril  character  and 
virtue?  And  then,  taking  the  sea  as 
our  emblem  of  both,  does  not  the  text 
begin  to  glow  with  meaning,  as  it 
promises  the  peace  of  established, 
settled,  untempted  goodness  for  ever? 
— "  he  that  is  righteous,  righteous  still ; 
and  he  that  is  holy,  holy  still."  Watch 
and  guaid  no  more,  as  now,  our  first 
duty,  and  done  at  cost  of  weariness 
and  pain.  But  rejoicing,  resting,  safety, 
the  peace  of  God,  about  us  for  ever; 
no  more  treacherous,  perilous,  storm- 
tossed  seas.  We  shall  hear  that 
"  blessedest,  best  sound,  the  boat-keel 
grazing  on  the  strand,"  as  we  enter, 
once  and  for  ever,  the  safe,  quiet 
harbour  of  our  God.  Safe  home  at  last. 
III.  If  we  deeply  feel  how  the  sea 
symbolises  the  mystery  of  our  present 
life,  we  shall  put  meaning  into  the 
promise  of  our  text.  Have  you  ever 
done  thinking  about  the  sea?  Ever 
done  asking  insoluble  questions  about 
it  ?  Ever  done  watching  its  vaiious 
moods?  Ever  seen  all  its  possible 
colourings  ?  Ever  heard  all  its  many- 
sounding  voices  ?  One  of  the  greatest 
indications  that  God  Himself  is  a 
sublimer  mystery  than  even  the  sea, 
lies  in  this  statement :  *'  He  ruleth  the 
seas  "  ;  He  "  holdeth  the  waters  in  the 
hollow  of  His  hand."  It  may  well 
symbolise  for  us  the  mysteries,  often  so 
distressing,  so  agonising,  with  which 
we  are  surrounded.  Mysteries  of  life, 
of  truth,  of  duty,  of  ourselves,  of  God, 
and  of  eternity.  How  passionately  we 
dash  against  some  of  these  encircling 
walls  ! — as  if  we  would  force  nature  and 
truth  to  yield  us  their  secrets.  The 
day  is  coming  when  we  shall  win  the 
open  vision.  Many  of  us  anticipate 
heaven  with  unbounded  enthusiasm, 
because  then  we  shall  see,  then  wo 
shall  know ;  shut  doors,  at  which  here 
we  vainly  hammered,  shall  be  open ; 
dark  things,  that  puzzled  us  sorely, 
shall  shine  in  the  light  of  God.  There 
shall  be  no  more  sea  of  mystery.     In 

563 


CHAP.  XXI.     HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


comparison  with  present  limitations, 
our  mind  and  soul  shall  feel  free ;  and 
for  ennobled  faculties  all  the  glory  of 
God  shall  be  open  to  research.  For  some, 
at  least,  the  prospect  makes  heaven 
infinitely  attractive.  The  Lamb  is  the 
light  thereof,  and  '*  we  shall  know 
hereafter." 

IV.  If  we  regard  the  sea  as  the 
emblem  of  change,  we  shall  see  the 
meaning  of  our  text.  It  is  well  called 
the  troubled,  restless  sea ;  and  this  we 
feel  quite  as  truly  in  summer  calm, 
when  only  gentle  winds  blow  across  it, 
as  in  winter  conflicts,  when  wild  winds 
raise  high  its  tides.  We  feel  it  quite 
as  much  when  we  watch  the  varying 
waves  fling  themselves  on  the  rocks, 
and  cast  up  showers  of  spray  in  ever- 
differing  forms,  as  when,  journeying  on 
the  waters,  we  see  them  swirl  past  the 
vessel,  and  all  around  us  heave  and 
toss.  Nothing  can  so  well  illustrate 
that  sense  of  the  changefulness  of 
life  which  oppresses  us  when  years  of 
memory  lengthen.  The  "  fashion  of 
this  world  is  ever  passing  away." 
What  chequered,  varying  lives  ours 
all  have  been !  Indeed,  we  never 
set  ourselves  down  anywhere  now, 
to  say  "  Here  I  shall  stay,"  or,  look- 
ing around  us,  say,  *'A11  this  I  shall 
keep."  "  Here  we  have  no  continuing 
city."  But  when  the  heart  in  us  pines 
for  something  to  hold,  something  to 
keep,  something  that  is  unchangeable, 
Bible  figure  points  us  on ;  not  now,  not 
here,  it  seems  to  say.  The  sea  is  all 
about  you  now.  A  time  is  coming 
when  there  shall  be  no  more  change, 
"  no  more  sea."  No  more  change  as  we 
have  felt  its  bitterness  here.  "  There- 
fore lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in 
heaven,  where  neither  moth  nor  rust 
doth  corrupt,  and  where  thieves  do  not 
break  through  and  steal."  Changes  are 
good,  while  we  are  struggling  with  sin, 
and  after  holiness;  but  through  changes 
we  are  reaching  the  unchanging  rest  of 
God,  and  the  sea  of  the  future  is  the 
calm,  ever-resting  sea  of  glass,  mingled 
with  fire. 

Y.  If  we  think  of  the  sea  as  the 
emblem  of  conflict,  we  shall  add  mean- 

564 


ing  to  the  text.  It  may  not  have  been 
your  lot  to  watch  a  storm  at  sea.  It  is 
the  most  sublime  illustration  of  conflict 
that  I  know.  The  lightning  flash,  that 
for  a  moment  relieves  the  darkness, 
shows  the  seething,  boiling  waters,  in 
a  tumult  of  war,  and  the  ship  hardly 
straining  and  steadying  itself,  and  keep- 
ing its  prow  well  facing  wind  and  wave. 
Such  a  storm  I  saw  in  early  life,  and  its 
impressions  can  never  be  effaced.  In 
half  agony  one  thought.  Could  even  the 
rocks  withstand  these  waters  when  thus 
they  lifted  up  their  majesty?  What 
could  the  little  ships  do  amid  forces  so 
tremendous  as  these  ? — the  loud  thunder 
answering  back  to  the  deep  baying  of 
the  troubled  waves.  It  may  well  repre- 
sent that  conflict  which  is  the  law  now 
for  us  in  all  conditions  of  life.  We  must 
fight.  Everything  in  the  world — the 
family,  or  the  Church — that  is  worth 
having,  must  be  won  in  a  battle-field. 
Like  wind,  and  wave,  and  storm,  are 
"the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil," 
and  sometimes  they  unite  to  beat  upon, 
and  strive  to  overcome,  our  soul-ships, 
as  they  voyage  on  to  God.  Is  it  oppress- 
ing you  to-day  that  life  is  a  conflict  1 
Are  you  weary  with  it  1  Can  you  under- 
stand David  saying,  "  Oh  that  I  had 
wings  like  a  dove,  then  would  I  flee 
away  and  be  at  rest "  !  God  stills  your 
heart  to  rest  by  the  message  He  sends 
you  to-day,  and  the  promise  He  gives. 
A  little  while,  only  a  little  while,  and 
then  there  shall  be  no  more  sea — 

"  Not  a  wave  of  trouble  roll 
Across  thy  peaceful  breast." 

"  What  hath  he  at  last  ? 
Sorrow  vanquished,  conflict  ended, 
Jordan  past." 

Does  it  seem  to  you  that  these  thoughts 
have  been  somewhat  melancholy  in 
tone?  I  have  wanted  them  to  lead 
on  to  the  brightness  and  joy  of  a  large 
and  blessed  hope.  We  must  be  some- 
times reminding  you  how  full  our 
present  life  is  of  trying  and  sorrowful 
scenes ;  but  we  never  do  so  in  hopeless 
spirits — never  to  help  you  brood  over 
the  large  share  of  trouble  put  into 
your  lot — never  to  make  you  miserable, 
and  give  ground  for  those  who  plead 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,     chap.  xxi. 


that  our  religion  clouds  our  human  life 

with  gloom.     We  want  to  produce  and 

keep  alive  a  profound    and   affecting 

dissatisfaction    with    present    scenes ; 

to  sever  hearts  from  too  close  clinging 

to  the  world,  and  the  things   of   the 

world.     We  do  want  to  make  you  feel 

that  this  is  not  your  rest ;  to  lift  your 

eyes  right  up,  and  set  them  looking  right 

away  from  the  hills  and  vales  of  earth 

to  the  hills  of  God,  whence  only  ccmeth 

our  help.      We  do  want  to  kindle  in 

your  souls  that  great,  glorious,  blessed 

hope  of  eternal  life  with  God,  which 

will  shine  on  present  scenes  so  as  to 

make   them    appear   insignificant  and 

worthless.     We  would  so  fill  your  souls 

with    visions  of    the  future   that   you 

could  each  one  say  to  his  heart,  *'  Go 

up,  heart,  into  a  little  higher  fighting, 

a  little   longer  waiting   and   bearing. 

Be    brave    unto    shadows ;    soon    the 

shadows  will  tlee^^r^'ay.     Be  strong  in 

the   battle-field ;    soon  the  archangel's 

trump  shall  stop  the  conflict,  and  call 

the  victors  to  their  crown.     Be  patient 

in  the  darkness  :  day  is  breaking,  even 

the   day    of    God.       Bear   nobly   even 

heart-breaking   separations :    the  time 

is  coming  when  there  shall  be  no  more 

dividing ;  heart  shall  beat  with  heart 

in  the  communion  of  heaven  for  ever." 

*'  I  heaid  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven, 

saying,     Behold     the     tabernacle     of 

God  is  with  men :  and  He  will  dwell 

with    them,    and    they   shall    be    His 

people ;     and   God    Himself    shall    bo 

with  them,  and  be  their  Gcd."     Out 

of  the  depths,  then,  let  us  lift  our  eves 

to-day.       Our      redemption      draweth 

nigh.     Over  the  restless  ocean  of  life 

we  journey  now;    but  with  Christ  in 

the  vessel  there  is  safe  guiding,  and 

one  day  the  abundant  entrance  into 

the  kingdom  of  heaven.     The  ransomed 

of  the  Lord  shall  return  and  come  to 

Zion  with  songs  and   everlasting   joy 

upon  their  heads.      And  well  we  know 

we  scarce  shall  win  our  welcome  ere 

we  cast  our  crowns  at  the  enthroned 

Kedeemer's  feet,  saying,  "  Unto  Him 

that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our 

sins  in    His  own  blood,  be  glory  and 

dominion  for  ever  and  ever."     I  have 


but  another  word.  Reverse  our  text 
and  make  it  a  vision  of  the  future  for 
those  who  love  not  Christ,  and  do  not 
serve  God  in  the  gospel  of  His  Son. 
Conceive  what  an  awful  future  is 
suggested  by  these  words  :  "  it  shall  be 
all  sea  " ;  all  wide,  wild  wastes  of  mid- 
night, howling,  storm-tossed,  wintry 
waters ;  never  dropping  into  calm ; 
never  lit  by  the  summer  sunshine ; 
full  of  separation,  danger,  mystery, 
suffering,  conflict.  I  cai»not  image  it 
to  you.  The  soul  shudders  at  the  awful 
picture  of  the  future  awaiting  those 
who  love  not  God,  and  refuse  the  gospel 
of  His  Son.  ^'' Nov)  is  the  accepted 
time ;  now  is  the  day  of  salvation." 

No  Moo'e  Sea. — What  is  meant 
by  this  symbol  is  best  ascertained 
by  remembering  how  the  sea  appears 
in  the  Old  Testament.  The  Jew  was 
not  a  sailor.  In  the  Old  Testament  it 
is  a  symbol  of  mystery,  of  rebellious 
power,  and  of  perpetual  unrest.  1. 
The  revelation  of  a  future  in  which 
there  shall  be  no  more  painful  mystery. 

2.  The  text  tells  of  a  state  that  is  to 
come,  when  there  shall  be  no  more 
rebellious  power.  God  lets  people 
work  against  His  kingdom  in  this 
world.      It    is    not   to    be   always    so. 

3.  The  text  foretells  a  state  of  things 
in  which  there  is  no  more  disquiet  and 
unrest.  Life  is  a  voyage  over  a 
turbulent  sea.  Changing  circumstances 
come  rolling  after  each  other,  like  the 
undistinguishable  billows  of  the  great 
ocean.  Tempests  and  storms  rise. 
That  is  life.  But  there  is  an  end  to 
it  some  day,  and  it  is  worth  while  for 
us  to  think  about  our  "  island  home, 
far,  far  beyond  the  sea." — A.  Maclaren, 
D.D. 

Vers.  3,  4.  Go(T8  Tahertiacle  with 
Men. 

Consider — 

I.  The  sentiments  of  which  this 
proclamation  is  expressive. — We  per- 
ceive in  it — 1.  The  exultation  of  joyous 
discovery.  2.  The  rapture  of  sacred 
astonishment.  3.  The  eagerness  of 
solemn  expectation.     4.  The  expression 

565 


CHAP.  XXI.     HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   REVELATION. 


of  the  force  of  a  benevolent  interest  in 
all  that  pertains  to  the  welfare  and 
destiny  of  man.  5.  The  satisfaction 
of  devout  intelligence,  beholding,  in 
the  events  which  it  contemplates, 
fresh  attestations  of  the  stability  and 
fulness  of  its  own  eternal  welfare,  as 
dependent  on  the  Divine  counsels  and 
character.  6.  Preparation  for  instant 
and  cheerful  concurrence  in  the 
effecting  of  God's  purposes,  and  the 
advancement  of  His  glory. 

II.  The  events  by  which  it  is 
called  forth. — 1.  The  wonders  of  provi- 
dence, as  exhibiting  God's  concern,  and 
individual,  as  well  as  constant  regard 
for  human  welfare.  2.  The  sublimer 
wonders  of  redemption.  3.  The 
mysteries  of  the  sanctifying  influence. 
4.  The  final  revelations  of  the  Divine 
power  and  greatness  through  all 
time  and  eternity. 

III.  The  manner  wherein  it  teaches 
us  to  reflect  both  on  our  privileges 
and  duties. — We  should  meditate  :  (1) 
with  mingled  gratitude  and  wonder  ; 
(2)  with  united  watchfulness  and 
diligence  ;  (3)  a  corresponding  apprecia- 
tion of  every  ordinance  which  confirms 
it ;  (4)  a  sacred  ambition  and  ardour 
to  diffuse  its  knowledge  among  thoe 
yet  destitute  of  it ;  (5)  a  holy  desire  for 
the  final  manifestation  of  God. — R.  S. 
McAll. 

Yer.  5.  The  Renewal  of  All  Things. 

I.  The  need  of  a  complete  moral 
renewal.  All  visions  of  a  political  or 
economic  millennium  wreck  themselves 
upon  the  obstinate  fact  of  human  de- 
pravity. With  this,  legislators,  philo- 
sophers, and  moralists,  have  been  found 
powerless  to  deal.  The  gospel  alone 
builds  its  hope  upon  a  complete  moral 
renewal  of  humanity,  making  ''  all 
things  new" — chief  among  them  the 
heart  of  man. 

II.  An  adequate  power. — "  He  that 
sitteth  on  the  throne."  At  this  point, 
too,  the  best  human  systems  of  morality 
fail.  But  He  who  created  the  human 
soul  can  renew  it.  The  hardest  heart 
can  be  broken,  the  worst  disposition 
changed,  when  Omnipotence  rises  up  to 

566 


work.  The  conversion  of  Saul  of 
Tarsus,  or  of  the  three  thousand  in  a 
day,  come  with  infinite  ease  within  the 
sweep  of  His  power. 

III.  The  wonder  of  regeneration. — 
For  this  stupendous  thing  we  ask 
whenever  we  pray  for  the  conversion 
of  a  soul  :  that  the  omnipotent  Jehovah 
will  reach  down  from  the  heaven  of 
heavens  and  mould  all  the  powers  and 
activities  of  that  soul  to  His  own 
Divine  image — in  that  soul  *'  make  all 
things  new." 

IV.  The  secret  of  "  holding  out."— 
If  conversion  is  not  a  varnish  put  on 
the  outside,  not  a  mere  *'  good  resolu- 
tion "  of  man,  but  a  renewal  of  "  all 
things  " — purposes,  desires,  ambitions, 
loves  and  hates — by  Divine  power,  that 
renewf  d  soul  will  "  walk  in  newness  of 
life." 

Y.  The  great  need  of  the  Church : 
a  regenerate  membership. — No  more 
proud,  covetous,  envious,  hot-tempered 
unscrupulous  Church  members,  excusing 
these  inconsistencies  as  "  natural,"  but, 
in  the  glory  of  the  renewed  nature, 
"  growing  up  into  Him  in  all  things 
who  is  the  head,  even  Christ."  Such 
a  Church  is  the  ideal  of  Christianity, 
and  the  hope  of  the  world. 

YI.  The  ultimate  renewal  of  all 
outward  things:  nations,  nature. — 
"  The  kingdoms  of  the  world  are 
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and 
of  His  Christ " ;  "  the  creation  also 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of 
corruption  into  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God  " — "  new  heavens 
and  a  new  earth,  wherein  dwelleth 
righteousness." — /.  C.  Fernald. 

Yer.  17.  Wherewith  to  Measure  Life. 
— The  measure  of  a  man  is  here 
identified  with  the  measure  of  an  angel. 
Here  is  a  Divine  scale  of  measurement, 
and  one  which,  if  we  would  apply  it  to 
our  lives,  would  make  them  sublime 
indeed  ! 

I.  It  is  the  curse  of  our  race  that, 
though  God  made  our  souls,  like  our 
bodies,  upright,  and  fitted  to  gaze  on 
heaven^  we  walk  like  Mammon,  with 
earthward  eyes, — Jesus  contemned  tb© 


HOMILETIC   COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,     chap.  xxi. 


offer  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  with  scom  from  all  that  is  frivolous, 

tne  glory  of  them.     Men  will  be  lofty  leaving  things  base  to  perish  of  their 

or  low,  according  to  the  office  to  which  own  natural  corruption,  claiming  their 

they  direct  their  souls.     If  their  ideal  affinity  with  all  things  worthy,  and 

be  dwarfed  and  miserable,  their  lives,  measuring  their  lives  with  the  measure 

too,  will  be  small  and  mean.  of  a  man,  that  is,  of  an  angel. — Such 

II.  You  may  judge  of  this  by  large  thoughts  produce  pure  and  high-souled 

as  well  as  by  small  examples. — Take  men. 

in    your    hands    the    great   works   of  VI.  Can  one  ask,  without   a   sigh, 

history,  and  see  how  grievously  nations  whether  it  is  a  common  thing  for  men 

have   suffered   when   their  multitudes  thus  to  measure  their  lives  with  the 


have  been  misled  by  false  admirations. 
III.  But  perhaps  we  may  be  misled 
if  we  make  our  deductions  too  broad. 

— Look,  then,  at  sections  and   phases 


measure  of  a  man — that,  is,  of  an  angel? 
— 1.  To  what  multitudes  among  us  is 
not  the  love  of  money  a  root  of  all  kinds  of 
evils  ?     How  insignificant  a  fraction  of 


of  Society  only.     Any  class  of  society      their  means  do  some  men  spare  for  the 


is  degraded  when  it  acquiesces  in, 
much  more  when  it  admires,  immoral 
favourites. 

IV.  To  each  of  us  individually — to 
our  nation,  to  our  Church — it  is  of 
supreme  importance  that  we  lift  our 


needs  of  their  Church,  the  glory  of  their 
God,  and  the  good  of  their  fellow-men ! 
The  worshipper  of  Mammon — by  what 
does  he  measure  his  life  ?  Is  it  not  by 
the  measure  of  the  wretchedest  spirit 
that  fell  1     2.   Others  measure  their  life 


eyes  to  the  galaxy  of  great  examples,      hy  the  measure  of  a  fiend.     A  drunkard 


and  reflect  the  luminous  virtue  of 
heavenly  ideals. — The  sole  hope  of 
humanity  is  in  its  good  and  holy  men. 
All  earth's  purest  and  noblest  come 
and  lay  garlands  at  the  feet  of  these 
statues,  but  the  crowd  of  the  vulgar 


-the  helpless  bondslave  of  a  dead 
poison,  sinking  into  penury  and  rags, 
or  in  some  drunken  orgy  becoming  a 
felon,  or  even  a  murderer.  3.  Do  not 
others  measure  life  with  the  measure  of  a 
beast  ?     The  selfish,  the  unclean,  the 


clamber  up  the  pedestal,  with  no  other      greedy,  the  immoral,  do  this.     4.  Others 


object  than  to  injure  and  to  deface. 
How  can  a  man  have  any  light  or 
sweetness  left  in  him  who  delights  to 
feed  himself  on  calumny  and  falsehood 
until  the  devil  has  drawn  down  his 
soul  into  incurable  littleness,  as  the 
worm  "  draws  in  the  withered  leaf, 
and  makes  it  earth  "  ? 

V.  I  have  faith  in  manhood  when  I 
see  men  choosing  lofty  ideals,  turning 


by  the  measure  of  the  world.  We  must 
learn  one  great  Divine  lesson  in  two 
aspects.  Respect  for  human  nature 
in  ourselves ;  and  also  in  others.  In 
our  faith  in  the  Incarnation  lies  the 
very  heart  and  essence  of  Christianity. 
Angels  are  but  ministering  spirits. 
*'  All  angels  worship  Him." — Cation  F. 
W.  Farrar,  D.D. 


ILLUSTRATIONS  TO    CHAPTER  XXL 


Ver.  10.  The  New  Jerusalem. — Josiah 
Conder,  in  his  work  on  "  The  Harmony  of 
History  with  Prophecy,"  remarks,  on  the 
above  passage :  "  In  its  general  plan,  the 
symbolical  city  presents  a  striking  resem- 
blance to  the  description  of  Ecbatana, 
furnished  by  the  Father  of  secular  history. 
'  Of  this  city,  one  wall  encompassed  another, 
and  each  rose  by  the  height  of  its  battle- 
ments above  the  one  beyond  it.  The  ground, 
which  was  a  circular  hill,  favoured  this  con- 
struction, but  it  owed  still  more  to  the 
labours  bestowed  upon  the  work.     The  orbi- 


cular walls  were  seven  in  number  :  within 
the  last  stood  the  royal  palace  and  the 
treasuries.  The  largest  of  the  walls  nearly 
equalled  the  circumference  of  Athens.  The 
battlements  of  this  outer  wall  were  white  ; 
those  of  the  second,  black ;  of  the  third, 
purple ;  of  the  fourth,  blue ;  of  the  fifth, 
orange ;  all  the  battlements  being  thus 
covered  with  a  pigment.  Of  the  last  two 
walls,  the  battlements  of  the  one  were  plated 
with  silver,  tliose  of  the  other  with  gold.* 
Thus  the  Median  city  consisted  of  seven 
circular  terraces,  each  distinguished  by  the 

567 


CHAP.  XXI.     HOiMILETlC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


colour  of  its  wall,  whereas  the  Apocalyptic  city 
is  described  as  a  quadrangle  ot  twelve  stages 
or  foundations ;  but  the  points  of  coincidence 
are  highly  illustrative  of  the  emblematic 
description.  The  precious  stones  of  which 
the  walls  of  the  holy  city  appeared  to  consist, 
whatever  mystical  or  symbolical  significance 
may  attach  to  them,  are  obviously  intended 
to  describe  the  colour  of  each  resplendent 
elevation ;  and,  although  the  colours  do  not 
occur  in  the  precise  prismatic  order,  the 
combination  would  have  the  general  effect  of 
a  double  rainbow." 

Ver.  18.  Gold  as  Compared  with  Glass. — 
"  Gold  comes  into  consideration  here  on 
account  of  its  splendour.  '  The  white  jasper,' 
says  Bengel,  '  and  the  yellow  gold  harmonise 
well  together.'  The  point  of  comparison 
between  the  gold  and  the  glass  is  expressly 
intimated.  It  stands  simply  in  the  purity  ; 
the  transparency,  noticed  in  ver.  21,  is  that 
of  the  glass,  not  of  the  gold,  and  taken  into 
account  merely  as  the  symbol  of  purity.  All 
gold  is  not  pure  ;  glass,  considered  generally, 
is  so,  and  therefore,  what  is  pure  only 
exceptionally  is  compared  with  it"  (Jleng- 
stenherg).  Though  coloured  glass  and  opaque 
glass  were  known  as  far  back  as  the  early 
Egyptian  era,  it  was  only  in  the  reign  of 
Nero  that  clear,  transparent  glass  came  into 
fashion.  A  great  demand  sprang  up  at  once 
for  it.  Hence  John,  in  speaking  of  it,  uses 
it  as  we  would  the  railway  or  telegraph,  etc., 
and  by  so  doing  shows  that  his  book  was 
written  after  Nero's  reign.  Possibly  some 
other  allusions  of  the  same  kind  may  exist." 

Vers.  19,  20.  Precious  Stones. — "  When 
quartz  or  flint  is  found  uncrystallised,  and 
more  opaque,  of  various  colours,  from  white 
to  black,  it  constitutes  chalcedony"  (Greek, 
chalkedon).  Of  this  there  are  several 
varieties;  the  onyx  and  sardonyx,  the 
sardius,  or  carnelian;  and  the  chryso- 
prase ;  and  the  Oriental  jasper  already 
noticed.  The  colour  of  chalcedony  is  either 
bluish  or  milky  grey.  The  chrysoprase  is  of 
of  an  apple-green  colour.  The  former  has  a 
wavy  appearance,  somewhat  resembling 
agate,  and  is  said  to  have  been  originally 
found  at  Chalcedon,  in  Bithynia,  whence  its 
name.  The  best  caruelians  are  obtained  from 
the  East  Indies,  Japan,  and  Surat.  It  is  also 
found  in  Europe  and  America.  The  word 
carnelian  is  derived  from  the  Latin  carnis, 
flesh,  on  account  of  its  fleshy  colour.  Its 
Hebrew  name  has  also  reference  to  its 
colour.  "  When  first  found  these  stones  are 
of  a  dark  olive  colour,  and  obtain  the  lighter 
red  or  white  hue  by  exposure  to  the  air, 
or  by  being  baked,  it  is  said,  in  ovens.  It 
takes  a  beautiful  polish,  and  is  used  for  seals 
and  ornaments.  It  was  among  the  precious 
things  of  Tyre.  In  a  mountain  near  Damar 
is  found  a  stone  which  the  Arabs  call  ayek 

568 


yemani,  and  which  they  hold  in  the  highest 
estimation.     It  is  of  a  red  or  rather  light 
brown  colour,  and  seems  to  be  a  carnelian. 
The  natives  set  it  in  rings  or  bracelets,  and 
ascribe  to  it  the  talismanic  virtue  of  healing 
wounds,  and  stanching  blood  when  instantly 
applied."      Moses,    the    most    ancient    and 
inspired  historian,  tells  us  that  the  land  of 
Havilah  abounded  in  the  onyx  stone  (Hebrew, 
shehem ;  Greek,  onuchioti).  The  Hebrew  word 
is  variously  tianslated  by  learned  men ;  but 
it  is  certain,  from  the  testimony  of  both  the 
sacred    and    profane    writers,   that    Arabia 
abounded  in  precious  stones.     Pliny  says  it 
was  common  in  the  mountains  of  Arabia  ; 
and  Aiebuhr  says  that  he  "  saw  quantities  of 
the  stones  in  the  road,  as  he  journe3''ed  from 
Mount  Taces  to  Mount  Sumara."     Another 
writer  tells  us  that  "  not  only  was  the  onyx 
plentiful  in  Arabia,  but  they  adorned  their 
walls  with  it"(Eev.  xxi.  19,  20).     And  the 
prophet  Ezekiel  also  speaks  of  the  precious 
stones  from  Sheba  and  Raamah,  in  which  the 
Arabians  traded  with  Tyre  (Ezek.  xxvii.  22). 
The  onyx  and  sardonyx  (so  called  from  its 
resemblance  to   the   sardius   in  colour)  are 
both  of  a  flinty  texture,  composed  of  layers 
of  chalcedony  of  different  colours.     "  8ome 
antique  cameos  were  made  from  these  stones, 
by  leaving  the  figure,  or  head,  in  the  whiter 
stratum,  while  the  background  was  cut  down 
to   that   which  is  darker  coloured."     Miss 
Sedgwick  says  that  in  the  room  of  gems  in 
the  Museo  Borbonico,  Naples,  was  an  onyx, 
considered  the  finest  cameo  in  Europe.     It 
was  as  large  as  a  plate.     On  one  side  was 
represented  the  "  Nile  and  its  fertility,"  and 
on  the  other  Medusa's  head.     These  stones 
are  all  referred  to  in  the  beautiful  picture 
which  the  apostle  gives  of  the  New  Jerusalem, 
the  heavenly  city ;  and  this  description  was 
quite  in  accordance  with  the  splendour  of 
Eastern   palaces.      "The    first    object    that 
attracts  attention,"  says    Franklin,  in    his 
History  of  Shah  Allum,  "is  the  public  hall 
of  audience.  ...  It  is  adorned  with  excessive 
magnificence.      I  judge  the  building  to  be 
a    hundred  and  fifty  feet  in   length.     The 
roof  is  flat,  supported  by  numerous  columns 
of  fine  white  marble,  which  have  been  richly 
ornamented    with     inlaid    flower    work    of 
carnelian  and  different  coloured  stones.  .  .  . 
The  inside  of  the  wall,  about  two-thirds  of 
the  way  up,  is  lined  with   marble,  having 
beautiful    borders    of    flowers,    worked    in 
carnelians  and  other  stones,  executed  with 
much  taste.  ...  It  is   evident  the  apostle 
drew  his  magnificent  description  of  the  walls 
of    the    holy  city  from   these   pictures    of 
gorgeous  splendour.     The  coarser  materials 
of   brick   and  mud,  of  which  the  walls  in 
many  royal  gardens  of  the  East  are  composed, 
are  entirely  hid  by  the  brilliant  and  dazzling 
profusion  of  gems  that  everywhere  sparkle 
along  the  whole  length  of  walls.     But  how 
far  sucerior  the  holy  city ! 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION,     chap.  XXI. 


"  Ita  walls  all  precious  stones  combine  ; 
Its  gates  their  lea%es  of  pearl  unfold  ; 
Itg  holy  mansions  far  outshine 

Transparent  glass  and  burnished  gold. 
In  that  bright  city  I  would  dwell, 

With  that  blest  Church  the  Saviour  praise  ; 
And,  bafe  redeemed  from  death  and  hell, 
Sit  at  liis  feet  through  endless  days.'  ' 

H.H. 


Ver.  20.  Chrysolite :  Topaz.  —  (Hebrew, 
jntdah^  topaz;  Greek,  topazion.) — Chrysolite 
really  means  the  golden  stone,  and  is  a 
general  term  for  stones  having  a  golden  hue. 
The  colours  of  wliat  we  call  chrysolite  are 
a  green,  sometimes  yellowish  or  brownish, 
witii  a  white  streak.  It  is  bright  and 
transparent,  but  is  seldom  larger  than  a  pin's 
head,  and  is  used  in  jewellery.  It  is  obtained 
chiefly  from  the  Levant.  There  is  a  variety 
of  this  stone  called  oliciiw^  on  account  of  its 
colour,  which  is  found  in  basalt  in  Bohemia, 
Hungary,  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine. 
The  chrysolite  of  this  verse  was  probably 
what  we  now  call  topaz.  The  topaz  is  a  very 
beautiful  gem,  sometimes  nearly  transparent, 
and  of  different  sizes,  forms,  and  colours.  Its 
general  colour  is  bright  yellow,  tinged  with 
red,  orange,  or  green,  and  it  is  found  in  some 
countiies  of  a  blue  green,  or  yellow  colour. 
The  Brazilian  species  is  often  as  transparent 
as  a  piece  of  ice  when  the  surface  is  melting. 
It  is  embedded  in  granite  and  other  rocks  in 
every  part  of  the  world,  chiefly  in  veins  of 
tin.  It  is  either  in  crystal  or  in  rounded 
masses,  sometimes  weighing  several  ounces. 
In  Scotland,  the  topaz  is  found  at  Cairngorm , 
and  receives  its  name  from  that  place.  The 
Oriental  topazes  were  highly  esteemed.  Those 
of  Ethiopia  were  celebrated  for  their  wonder- 
ful lustre.  Pliny  says  the  topaz  belonged  to 
Arabia,  and  derived  its  name  from  the  island 
Topazes. 


Ver,  23.  The  Glory  of  Heaven. — How 
transcendent  the  glory  of  that  world  where 
there  shall  be  no  more  sin  nor  imperfection — 
where  all  shall  unite  in  the  song,  "  Worthy  is 
the  Lamb  that  was  slain  "  !  "  The  glory  of  the 
Lord  (doth)  lighten  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the 
light  thereof."  The  idolatrous  temple  of 
Diana  was  so  bright  and  splendid  that  the 
door-keeper  always  cried  to  them  that 
entered  in,  "  Take  heed  to  your  eyes."  But 
what  faculties  of  vision  must  we  have  to 
behold  the  glory  of  the  temple  above  !  If  it 
is  said  that  the  righteous  themselves  shall 
shine  forth  as  the  sun,  what  will  be  the 
splendour  of  the  Eternal  Throne  ?  What  a 
delightful  change,  from  this  world  of  dark- 
ness and  imperfection  to  that  where  all  shall 
be  light  and  glory  ! 

Ver.  27.  The  ''Holy''  fiYy.— Without 
holiness  there  can  be  no  such  heaven  as  the 
New  Testament  reveals.  There  may  be 
scenery  of  surpassing  grandeur — mountains, 
woods,  rivers,  and  skies,  most  charming  ;  but 
they  do  not  make  a  heaven,  else  a  hea^en 
might  be  found  in  Wales  or  Cumberland. 
There  may  be  a  capital  full  of  palaces  and 
temples ;  but  they  do  not  make  a  heaven, 
else  a  heaven  might  have  been  found  in 
Delhi.  There  may  be  buildings  of  marbles 
and  precious  stones ;  but  they  do  not  make 
a  heaven,  else  a  heaven  might  have  I  een  in 
Rome  or  Venice.  There  may  be  health,  and 
ease,  and  luxury,  and  festivities  ;  but  they 
do  not  make  a  heaven,  else  one  would  have 
been  met  with  in  Belshazzar's  halls.  There 
may  be  education,  philosophy,  poetry,  litera- 
ture, art ;  but  that  will  not  make  a  heaven, 
else  the  Greeks  would  have  had  one  in 
Athens,  in  the  grove,  and  in  the  porch. 
.Holiness  is  that  without  which  no  heaven 
could  exist. — Rev.  John  Stoughton. 


r- 


569 


CHAP.  XXII.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 
THE  RESTORED  PARADISE,  AND  THE  EPILOGUE. 

CRITICAL  AND  EXEGETICAL  NOTES. 

The  first  five  verses  complete  the  description  of  the  new  heavens  and  new  earth.  There  is 
evident  reference  in  the  figures  of  the  tree  of  life  and  the  river  that  flows  by  the  trees,  to  the 
first  and  forfeited  paradise.  The  Epilogue  is  brief,  but  pertinent  and  impressive.  The 
angel-guide  and  interpreter  reassures  the  seer  that  all  which  has  been  disclosed  is  certain  ; 
and  he  repeats  what  was  said  in  the  prologue  to  the  book  respecting  its  design  to  unveil  the 
future  to  the  servants  of  God,  and  to  disclose  the  blessedness  of  those  who  keep  in  mind  what 
has  been  revealed.  John,  filled  with  reverence  and  astonishment,  falls  again  at  the  feet  of 
the  angel,  to  do  him  homage;  but  he  is  warned  by  the  angel  that  he  himself  is  only  a  fellow- 
servant  of  God,  and  a  fellow-labourer  with  the  prophets  who  disclose  the  Divine  will.  The 
angel,  moreover,  warns  him  not  to  seal  up  the  book,  as  if  it  were  to  be  reserved  for  some 
distant  period.  On  the  contrary,  the  time  is  near — i.e.,  the  time  when  the  series  of  events 
commences.  Jesus  Himself  is  introduced  as  closing  the  scene.  He  declares  that  He  has 
sent  His  angel  to  make  the  disclosures  which  the  book  contains,  and  that  He  is  the 
promised  Messiah  of  the  Old  Testament,  the  Offspring  of  David,  and  the  Light  of  the  World. 
To  His  promise  that  He  will  come  quickly,  the  Spirit  which  speaks  in  His  prophets,  and  the 
bride,  i.e.  the  Church,  respond  and  say,  Come !  All,  moreover,  who  read  or  hear  the  words 
of  the  book  are  exhorted  to  unite  in  the  expression  of  the  same  ardent  desire. 

Ver.  1.  Proceeding  out  of  the  throne.— Compare  Ezek.  xlvii.;  Gen.  ii.  10. 

Ver.  2.  Nations. — Apparently  those  outside  the  city. 

Ver.  3.  Curse. — Compare  that  pronounced  on  the  ground  because  of  Adam's  sin. 

Ver.  4.  See  His  face. — To  be  understood  as  implying  some  manifestation  of  God,  answering 
to  the  capacities  (senses)  of  the  redeemed.  Sight  of  God  as  the  absolute  Being  is  inconceiv- 
able for  any  who  are  in  creature-conditions. 

Ver.  15.  Dogs. — Dogs  are  regarded  in  the  East  as  unclean  animals.  Compare  chap.  ix.  21, 
xxi.  8. 

Ver.  18.  Any  man  shall  add,  etc. — See  Deut.  iv.  2,  xii.  32.  "  The  parallel  of  those  passages 
proves  that  the  curse  denounced  is  on  those  who  interpolate  unauthorised  doctrines  in  the 
prophecy,  or  who  neglect  essential  ones,  not  on  transcribers  who  might  unadvisedly  inter- 
polate or  omit  something  in  the  true  text.  The  curse,  if  understood  in  the  latter  sense,  has 
been  remarkably  ineffective,  for  the  common  text  of  this  book  is  more  corrupt,  and  the  true 
text  oftener  doubtful,  than  in  any  part  of  the  New  Testament.  But  it  may  be  feared  that  the 
additions  and  omissions  in  the  more  serious  sense  have  also  been  frequently  made  by  rash 
interpreters.  It  is  certain  that  the  curse  is  designed  to  guard  the  integrity  of  this  book  of 
the  Revelation,  and  not  to  close  the  New  Testament  Canon.  It  is  not  even  certain  that  this 
was  the  last  written  of  the  canonical  books  "  {W.  H.  Simcox,  M.A.).  St.  John  simply  means 
to  prohibit,  in  the  most  solemn  manner,  all  tampering  with  his  own  work. 

MAIN  HOMILETICS  OF  THE  PARAGRAPH.— Verses  1—21. 

The  Permanence  of  Evil. — It  cannot  be  assured  that  the  subject  dealt  with  in 
this  chapter  is  the  "  final  restitution  of  all  things."  *  It  may  even  be  fairly  dis- 
puted whether  the  book  of  Revelation  is  in  any  sense  historical.  It  is  so 
manifestly  a  teaching  by  symbols  and  prophetic  figures  that  we  do  not  wisely 
associate  with  it  a  chronological  order.  Its  scenes  may  be  synchronous  in  many 
cases,  descriptive  of  what  occurs  in  different  parts  of  the  earth.  It  may  even 
not  be  descriptive  at  all,  but  suggestive  of  moral  or  immoral  forces,  and  of 
varying  Divine  judgments.  Without  attempting  to  explain  what  the  book  of 
Revelation  is,  we  may  with  confidence  aflfirm  that  the  meanings  of  it  are  too  un- 
certain for  us  to  build  perplexing  doctrines  upon  it.  And  certainly,  to  conclude 
that  evil  will  continue  after  the  final  issues  of  the  great  redemption  are 
reached,  and  to  base  that  conclusion  on  the  passage  now  before  us,  would  be 
wholly  unwarranted.     Apart  from  preconceived  and  biassing  notions,  the  refer- 

570 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION,   chap.  xxii. 


ence  of  the  passage  would  seem  to  be  a  very  simple  one.  John  is  bidden  not  to 
*'  seal  up  the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,"  because  the  time  of  closing 
up,  though  at  hand,  is  not  come ;  and  until  it  does  come,  preaching  and  prophecy 
must  be  agencies  working  amongst  men.  Evil  men  will  be  going  on  in  their  evil, 
and  need  warnings ;  good  men  will  be  growing  better  through  much  struggle,  and 
so  will  need  much  encouragement.  The  very  point  is  that  there  is  no  fixity  yet, 
and  so  for  every  one  there  is  hope.  The  passage  is  really  an  echo  of  the  parable 
of  the  tares.  "  Let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest,"  even  if  it  should  seem 
to  you  that  the  harvest  is  close  at  hand.  Ver.  11  is  rather  a  statement  of 
fact  than  a  direction  of  conduct,  or  a  prophecy  of  the  future,  and  this  is  indicated 
by  the  correction  of  the  Revised  Version.  The  results  of  the  preached  gospel  are 
always  such  as  described  here  :  "  to  some  it  is  savour  of  life  unto  life,  to  others 
of  death  unto  death  " ;  but  we  must  go  on  preaching  that  gospel,  even  if  the 
apparent  issue  be  a  confirming  men  in  their  sin.  Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter 
takes  a  somewhat  different  view:  "What  does  ver.  11  mean?  Does  it  mean 
that  the  time  is  so  short  that  it  is  hardly  suflScient  to  allow  of  men  reforming 
themselves  so  as  to  be  ready  for  their  Lord,  and  that,  therefore,  the  lesson  is : 
Let  those  who  would  be  ready  for  Him  remember  that  now  is  the  day  of 
salvation  ?  This  is  the  view  adopted  by  some  ;  it  contains  a  truth,  but  the 
meaning  of  the  verse  seems  more  general.  Is  it  not  the  declaration  of  the  ever- 
terrible  truth  that  men  are  building  up  their  destiny  by  the  actions  and  habits 
of  their  lives?  'Sow  an  act — reap  a  habit;  sow  a  habit — reap  a  character  ; 
sow  a  character — reap  a  destiny.'  The  righteous  become  righteous ;  the  godly 
become  godly.  So,  slowly  but  surely,  may  the  power  of  being  masters  of  our 
fate  pass  out  of  our  hands.  It  is  in  this  law  of  our  nature  that  the  key  to  many 
of  the  darkest  problems  of  the  future  may  lie  ;  and  not  without  a  solemn 
declaration  of  this  law  does  the  book  of  Revelation  close." 

SUGGESTIVE  NOTES  AND   SERMON  SKETCHES. 

Ver.  2.  The  Tree  of  Life. — Here  we  Arabs  ;    the    "  tree    of    light "   of   the 

may  compare   the     homa-tree   of    the  Assyrian  ;  the  laurel-tree  of  Delos ;  the 

Persians,      growing     at     the     spring  tree  of  Delphis. — W.  R.  Harper. 
Ardvisura,     which     comes    from    the 

throne  of  God ;  the  kalpasoma-tree  of  Ver.    4.     "  The    Vision    of   God^ — 

the  Hindus,  which  furnished  the  water  The  vision   of   God   is  threefold  :    the 

of  immortality,  the  libation  of  the  gods ;  \4sion  of  righteousness  ;  the  vision  of 

the  tuba -tree  of  the  Arab  ;  the  lotus-  grace  ;  the  vision  of  glory, 

tree  of  the  Greeks ;  the  tree  of  Assyrian  I.  Righteousness  includes  all  those 

sculpture,  adorned  by  royal  figures,  and  attributes  which  make  up  an  idea  of 

guarded  by  genii,  just  as,  in  the  Bible-  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  universe. — 

story,  it  is  guarded  by  the  cherubim  Perfect   justice,  perfect  truth,  perfect 

.  .  .  With  the   tree  of  knowledge  we  purity,   perfect  moral  haimony  in  all 

may  compare  the  large  part  played  by  its    aspects.     It   is   a    vision    of   awe, 

trees  in  Chaldean  magic  ;  the  burning  transcending  all  thought.     A  vision  of 

bush  from  which  God's  angel  appeared  awe,  but  a  vision  also  of  purification, 

to  Moses ;  the  oak  of  the  diviners  at  of  renewal,    of  energy,  of    power,    of 

Shechem ;  the  palm-tree  under  which  life. 

Deborah  prophesied ;  the  oak  of  Ophrah  II.  The   vision  of  righteousness  is 

where  an  angel  appeared  to  Gideon ;  succeeded    by   the    vision    of   grace. 

the  rustling  in  the  tops  of  the  balsam  When   Butler,    in  his  dying  moments 

trees,  which  indicated   to   David  that  had    expressed    his    awe    at    appear- 

God  had  gone   on  before   him  in  the  ing  face    to    face    before    the    moral 

battle  ;    the    prophetic    trees    of   the  Governor  of  the  world,  his  chaplain,  we 

571 


CHAP.  XXII,    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


are  told,    spoke   to  him  of  the   blood  utterance,  in  the  highest  language  of 

that   cleanse th   from   all   sin.       "  Ah,  imagery,    of    the    prosperity    of    the 

this  is   comfortable,"   he  replied  ;  and  Church  in  its  latter  days,  when  all  its 

with  these  words  on  his  lips  he  gave  struggles  are  over,  is  no  strain  upon 

up    his   soul    to   God.     He    only    has  either  imagination   or  faith.     Indeed, 

access  to  eternal  love  who  has  stood  such  a  picture  is  welcome,  as  the  calm 

face  to  face  with  eternal  righteousness.  is   welcome    after   the   storm.     There 

The    incarnation    of   the    Son   is   the  was  once  a  strife  among  the  disciples  : 

mirror  of  His  Father's  love.  which  of  them  should  be  accounted  the 

III.  The  mirror  of  love  melts  into  greatest  1    This  arose  from  the  expecta- 

the  vision   of  glory. — Here  we  catch  tion,  which  then  prevailed,  that  Jesus 

only    glimpses   at   rare   intervals,   re-  would  set  up  again  the  throne  of  David, 

vealed  in  the  lives  of  God's  saints  and  and   restore   the  kingdom    to    Israel, 

heroes — revealed,    above    all,     in   the  The  contention    was.    Which    of    the 

record   of   the  written  Word,  and   in  disciples    should    occupy    the   highest 

the   incarnation    of   the    Divine    Son.  stations   in   the    new  kingdom  ?     The 

There  we  shall  see  Him  face  to  face —  historian    has    not    given   the   claims 

perfect    truth,    perfect    righteousness,  which    were    preferred.       The     Book 

perfect    purity,    peifect   love,    perfect  never    satisfies    mere    curiosity.     The 

light ;  and  we  shall  gaze  with  unblench-  Saviour's    answer   is   given    in    full : 

ing  eye,  and  our  visage  shall  be  changed.  "  The   kings  of   the   Gentiles  exercise 

— J.  B.  Lightfoot^  D.D.  lordship   over    them  ;    and   they  that 

exercise  authority  over  them  are  called 

Ver.  5.  The  Royal  State. — The  benefactors.  But  ye  shall  not  be  so : 
Church  of  the  future  is  the  theme  of  but  he  that  is  greatest  among  you,  let 
the  latter  part  of  the  book  of  Revela-  him  be  as  the  younger ;  and  he  that  is 
tion.  One  class  of  expositors  asserts"  chief,  as  he  that  doth  serve."  At  first 
that  the  brilliant  description  of  the  sight,  the  statement  seems  to  sweep 
New  Jerusalem  herein  contained  can  away  every  aspiiation,  and  for  a 
only  apply  to  the  final  glorified  state  moment  the  disciples  felt  a  keen 
of  the  Church  in  its  heavenly  home.  disappointment.  The  tension  was 
Others  think  that  the  glowing  figures  slackened  when  He  further  said,  "  I 
represent  the  earthly  prosperity  of  the  am  among  you  as  he  that  serveth." 
Church  when  the  Messiah  shall  reign  They  had  seen  nothing  in  His  treat- 
among  His  people  in  His  spiritual  ment,  either  of  themselves  or  others, 
Person.  As  time  is  the  interpreter  of  which  might  lead  to  the  thought  that 
prophecy,  we  may  rest  assured  that  an  He  was  about  to  ascend  the  throne- 
agreement  of  view  cannot  be  expected  steps.  The  one  thing  which  they  had 
beforehand.  We  are  inclined  to  regard  seen — service — pointed  in  the  opposite 
the  whole  book  as  the  last  legacy  of  direction,  as  service  was  generally 
inspiration  to  the  Militant  Church,  regarded.  A  life  of  constant  toil  and 
and  that  its  prophecies  relate  to  her  privation,  which  at  times  was  violently 
earthly  course.  Taking  the  Bible  assailed,  had  nothing  in  it  to  encourage 
generally,  and  the  New  Testament  the  hope  of  wearing  a  crown  and 
specially,  in  which  we  find  the  fuller  swaying  a  sceptre.  Thus  He  brought 
revelation  of  immortality,  the  heavenly  the  disciples  down ;  but  only  to  a  level 
state  is  nowhere  fully  set  forth.  We  with  Himself.  He  brought  them 
may  almost  say  that  the  references  to  down,  however,  to  lift  them  up  in 
heaven  are  mere  hints,  and  not  another  direction,  yea,  in  an  unexpected 
descriptions  of  that  glorious  state.  It  direction — that  of  service.  The  lift 
would  appear  strange,  therefore,  that  He  gave  them  brought  them  up,  not 
the  whole  subject  should  be  treated,  only  near,  but  to  the  throne.  "Ye  are 
and  at  such  length,  in  the  one  book.  they  which  have  continued  with  me  in 
But  to  regard  the  whole  as  a  prophetic  My  temptations.     And  I  appoint  unto 

572 


BOMILEIIC  COMMENTARY:   REVELATION,    chap.  xxii. 


you  a   kingdom,   as  My  Father  hath 
appointed  unto  Me ;  that  ye  may  eat 
and  drink  at  My  table  in  My  kingdom, 
and  sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve 
tribes   of    Israel."     The   language     is 
figurative  ;  but  it  points  out  to  us  that 
one    truth,     that    service    alone    will 
satisfy  the  highest  and  noblest  aspira- 
tions of  the  human  heart.     To  do  good 
is  to  reign  with  Christ  in  His  kingdom. 
The  text  refers  to  a  period  when  the 
service  of  the  Church  will  be  so  great 
as  to  command  universal  approbation. 
I.  The  ascendency  of  the  Christian 
character. — "And  they  shall  reign  for 
ever  and  ever."     Although  the  specific 
promise  which  the  Saviour  made,  and 
which  we  have  now  quoted,  indicates  a 
favour  to  be  bestowed  on  the  twelve 
apostles,    yet    in    the   light   of   other 
Scriptures   it    cannot  be   so   confined. 
The  ascription  of  praise  by  the  Church 
at    the    beginning    of    the    book     of 
Revelation,  includes  the  idea :  "  Unto 
Him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from 
our  sins  in  His  own  blood,  and  hath  made 
us  kings  and  priests  unto  His  Father; 
to  Him  be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever 
and  ever."     Looking  at  the  grand  era 
of     gospel     ascendency    which     these 
chapters  set  forth,  the  prophet  Daniel 
said,  *'  And  the  kingdom  and  dominion, 
and  the  greatness  of  the  kingdom  under 
the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the 
people  of  the  saints  of  the  most  High, 
whose  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  king- 
dom, and  all  rulers  shall  serve  and  obey 
him,"    Take  also  the  words  of  St.  Paul 
in  Rom.  v.  17  :    "  For  if  by  one  offence 
death  reigned  by  one  ;  much  more  they 
which  receive  abundance  of  grace  and  of 
the  gift  of  righteousness  shall  reign  in 
life  by  one,  Jesus  Christ."     The  same 
apostle  also  says  in  2  Tim.  ii.  12  :  "  If 
we  suffer,  we  shall  also  reign  with  Him." 
In  the  third  chapter  of  this  book  and 
the  last  verse,  we  have  this  remarkable 
declaration  :   "  To  him  that  overcometh 
will  I  grant   to  sit  with   Me   in    My 
throne,   even  as  I   also  overcame   and 
am  set  down  with  My   Father  in  His 
throne."      And   now  we  will  look  at 
some  of  the  attributes  of  the  Christian 
character,  which  will  make  its  ascen- 


dency  inevitable.      1.   Founded    upon 
Christ.     Jesus  Christ  is  its  source.     It 
partakes  of  the  character  of  Christ : 
"  But  ye  are  a  chosen   generation,  a 
royal  priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  pecu- 
liar people,  that  ye  should  show  forth 
the  praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  you 
out  of   darkness  into  His  marvellous 
light  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).    In  the  margin,  for 
praises  we  have  virtues,  which  is  the 
more   correct   reading.      Then    let   us 
think  of  those  virtues  which  adorned 
the  Saviour's  life.     There  was  an  in- 
tense love  of  the  truth.    Purity  marked 
every  step.    Benevolence  flowed  through 
the  whole.     If  any  one  asks  why  the 
life  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth  stands  out 
pre-eminently,    that    is    our    answer. 
We  do  not  stop  to  prove  that  truth, 
holiness,  and  love,  are  the  imperishable 
materials  with  which  to  build  up  life, 
for  the  life  of   Jesus   is  our   witness, 
which   has  stood  the  severest  test  for 
nearly   two    thousand   years.     We    do 
not   deny  that  other  characters  have 
outlived   their   generation,    and    have 
come  down  to  us  with  much  force,  but 
we  know  that  the   indestructible   ele- 
ments in  them  are  truth,  honour,  and 
goodness.    Men  who  have  distinguished 
themselves  in  one  of  these  departments 
have    created    a    life   whose    impetus 
overcomes  the  ravages  of  time.     Above 
all  others,  the  love  of  truth,  the  purity 
of  example,  and  the  love  of  man,  are 
seen  in  the  character  of  Christ.     We 
do  not  think  that  His  miracles,  or  even 
His  tragic  death,  would  have  preserved 
His  name  independently  of  His  teaching 
and  loving-kindness.     Jesus  lives,  not 
only  in  His  heavenly  mansion,  but  also 
in  the  lives  of  HLs  followers,  as  He  said, 
"  Because   I   live,  ye   shall   live  also." 
The   fact    that    Christians  disseminate 
the   light  of  truth,  received  from  the 
Saviour,  and  are  the  salt  of  the  earth 
in  the  morality  of  their  life,  with  which 
they    blend    every    effort    to    be    the 
benefactors  of  their  day  and  generation, 
assures  us  of  the  ascendency  of  th<  ir 
character.      There  is  in  truth   an   in- 
herent force,   before   which    ignorance 
and  error  must  disappear.     The  truth, 
as   it   is   in   Jesus,  is  the  power  that 

573 


CHAP.  xxii.    EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


sways  their  thoughts.     Truth  is  royal ;  by  mortal  sense.     The  promise  which 

its  mandates  are  from  the  throne,  and  the  Blessed  Lord  gave  His  Church  is 

its  influence   must    prevail.      The  Al-  worthy  of  fresh  attention  :    "  But  the 

mighty  has  said  over  the  darkness  of  Comforter,  which  is  the  Holy  Ghost, 

mankind,   "  Let   there    be   light,"  and  whom   the   Father   will   send   in    My 

there  is  light,  which  increases  more  and  name,   He  shall  teach  you  all  things, 

more  unto  the  perfect  day.     If,  again,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remem- 

we  think  of  another  force,  concurrent  brance,  whatsoever  I   have  said  unto 

with    truth — the    force    of    purity — in  you."     The  words  may  have  a  special 

the  nature  of  things  it  must  gain  the  application   to   the  apostles,  but  it  is 

ascendency   over   sin.       St.    Paul   sets  also  a  promise  of  universal  application 

forth  the  thought  in  Bom.  v.  20,  21  :  to  believers.      The    chronicler   of   the 

"  But  where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  words,  St.    John,  in   the  first   epistle, 

much  more  abound ;  that  as  sin  hath  says,    "  But   the   anointing    which   ye 

reigned   unto    death,    even   so    might  have  received  of  Him  abideth  in  you, 

grace  reign  through  righteousness  unto  and  ye  need  not  that  any  man  teach 

eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  you ;  but  as  the  same  anointing  teacheth 

Righteousness  is  the  foundation  of  all  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth,  and  is 

prosperity  —  personal     and     national.  no  lie,  and  even  as  it  hath  taught  you. 

When  the  moral  instincts  of  humanity  ye  shall  know  Him."    By  the  anointing 

are   awakened   by   the   gospel,  it  will  we  are  to  understand  the  influence  of 

become   evident   that    sin   is   suicidal.  the  Holy  Spirit,   by  which    we   know 

Every  Christian,  therefore,  brings  this  Christ ;  yea,  it  is  the  Spirit  of  Christ 

evidence   against   sin   in  the  court  of  dwelling  in  us.     The  very  birth  of  the 

conscience ;   and   we   know   what    will  Christian  character   is    of  the  Spirit : 

ultimately   be  the  verdict.     We  have  "  Except  a  man  be  born  of  water  and 

already  seen  the  overthrow  of  barbarous  of    the    Spirit,   he    cannot    enter    the 

customs,  evil  habits,  and  many  national  kingdom  of  God."     When  we  bear  in 

sins.     We  confidently  expect  the  day  mind  that  Christians  are  daily  under 

when   "  holiness  unto  the   Lord "  will  the   power   of   the    Holy   Ghost,  it  is 

be  written  on  the  bells  of  the  horses.  more  than   conceivable  that  they  can 

In  the  fact  that  the    beneficial   must  reproduce  the  excellencies  of  the  life  of 

become  universal,  we  need  not  hesitate  Jesus.     We  do  not  assert  that  this  is 

to  believe.     The  Church  witnesses  for  always    the    case,    because    we    often 

Christ  in   being   His   almoner  to   the  grieve   the  Spirit,    and   sometimes  we 

world.       Christianity's      highest      ere-  quench   the   holy  fire.     But  Christ   is 

dentials  are  the  many  humane  institu-  living    now    in    His    saints ;    they   are 

tions   which  it   has   planted  in  every  enabled,  in  a  measure,  to  set  forth  the 

land.     Every    Christian    is  a   boon   to  truth,   aflbrd  a  holy  example,  and  do 

Society.     Directly    and   indirectly   his  the    works    of    charity.      The    power 

life  is  a  benefit  to  others.     His  motto  which   lifts  the  soul  out  of   darkness 

is  to  do  good  to  all  men,  especially  to  into   light,    and   cancels   the    bond   of 

those  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith.  slavery  by  the  new   birth,   can  make 

2.  Insjpired  by  the  Holy  Spirit.     If  the  the  new  life  triumphant.     "  For  what- 

character  of  Jesus  is  the  basis  of  the  soever  is  born  of  God  overcometh  the 

Christian   life.,    it   may   be   questioned  world :    and   this   is   the   victory  that 

whether  it  is  possible  to  maintain  such  overcometh  the  world,  even  our  faith, 

a   high    ideal.     Are  we  not  all  feeble  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world," 

imitators    of    a    character    which    we  but  he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the 

cannot  reproduce?     This  is  very  much  Son  of  God?  "  (1  John  v.  4,  5).     Faith 

the   view    which   the    world   takes   of  in  Jesus  Christ  is  an  active  principle, 

the  matter.     It  cannot  be  otherwise,  fired  into  action  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 

because  the  force  which  sustains  and  The  influence   is   permanent,  and  not 

inspires  the  Christian  life  is  unperceived  transitory,  as  the  influence  of  the  world. 

574 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,    chap.  xxii. 


*'  And  the  world  passeth  away,  and  the 
hist  thereof :  but  he  that  doeth  the 
will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  St.  Paul 
says,  "  I  can  do  all  things  through 
Christ  that  strengtheneth  me."  He 
received  that  strength  in  his  spirit  by 
communion  with  the  Master.  So  also 
the  weakest  saint  has  power  to  rise 
above  surrounding  influences,  for  there 
dwells  in  his  heart  the  Living  Christ. 
To  the  world  Jesus  of  Nazareth  is  only 
an  historical  character ;  one  who  acted 
His  part,  and  on  whose  life  the  curtain 
of  eternity  fell ;  but,  by  virtue  of  the 
indwelling  Spirit,  the  Christian  has 
stepped  before  the  curtain  to  continue 
the  representation,  and  bring  every 
thought  captive  to  the  obedience  of 
Christ. 

II.  The  distinction  of  the  Christian 
character. — We  have  said  that  the 
language  of  the  text  is  figurative,  but 
it  is  intended  to  convey  the  idea  that 
those  who  love  and  serve  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  will  be  exalted.  Human 
nature  has  aspirations.  They  have 
their  legitimate  place  in  our  life.  God 
has  placed  everything  under  our  rule  : 
"  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion 
over  the  works  of  Thy  hands;  Thou 
hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet." 
Checked  by  the  Fall,  as  we  have  it 
elsewhere — "  But  now  we  see  not  yet 
all  things  put  under  him  " — the  scope 
of  man's  action  has  been  circumscribed. 
"  But  we  see  Jesus,  who  was  made  a 
little  lower  than  the  angels,  for  the 
suffering  of  death,  crowned  with  glory 
and  honour."  And  where  we  see  Jesus 
we  also  see  His  saints.  It  was  His 
last  prayer  that  His  disciples  should 
be  with  Him,  to  behold  His  glory. 
1.  T'he  elevation  will  he  above  the  force 
of  circumstaiices.  Every  Christian  on 
earth  has  to  fight  with  difficulties. 
Life  here  is  a  struggle.  We  have  to 
contend  with  evil  influences  :  **  For  we 
wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but 
against  principalities,  against  powers, 
ajrainst  the  rulers  of  the  darkne.ss  of 
this  world,  against  spiritual  wickedness 
in  high  places."  That  day  the  strife 
will  be  over.  The  saints  will  look 
down  from  their  thrones  on  the  van- 


quished foes.  Trials  will  be  over,  and 
mortaUty  will  be  swallowed  up  of  life. 
Death  will  have  no  sting,  and  the 
grave  will  be  despoiled  of  victory. 
We  shall  be  more  than  conquerors 
through  Him  that  loved  us,  and  gave 
Himself  for  us.  Each  will  receive  the 
crown  of  righteousness,  which  shall 
never  fade.  2.  The  elevation  will  he 
the  highest  to  which  God  can  raise  us. 
The  idea  of  a  throne  and  a  kingdom 
suggests  that  the  greatest  honour  will 
be  conferred  on  the  followers  of  Jesus. 
High  as  our  aspirations  may  now  be, 
they  shall  be  more  than  fulfilled.  Such 
a  prospect  calls  upon  us  to  be  faithful, 
even  unto  death.  Our  life  is  brief  in 
which  to  win  a  crown.  The  steps  to 
the  throne  are  many.  Fight  with  sin ; 
conform  to  the  will  of  God  ;  lead  men 
to  Christ,  and  build  up  the  Church. 
Such  a  life  has  an  upward  tendency, 
and  w  ill  continue  its  course  until  Jesus 
shall  come. — "  Weekly  Pulpit ^ 

Ver.  11.  Permanency  Stamped  on 
Human  Lives. — Our  condition  in  the 
coming  life  absolutely  depends  upon 
our  conduct  in  the  present  life.  "  We 
must  all  appear  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ,  that  every  one  may 
receive  the  things  done  in  the  body, 
accordirig  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether 
it  be  good  or  bad."  This  has  a  most 
practical  bearing.  It  crowds  our 
present  life  with  opportunities,  and 
weightens  every  act  of  life  with 
eternal  relations. 

I.  The  present  world  is  a  world  of 
change. — The  air  we  breathe  seems 
to  be  always  the  same,  and  yet  there 
is  nothing  so  variable,  so  constantly 
altering  its  place  and  its  constituents. 
Every  blade  of  grass,  every  tree-leaf, 
is  in  the  day-time  taking  something 
from  it  and  adding  something  to  it, 
and  in  the  night-time  reversing  the 
order.  The  mountains  seem  to  keep 
their  place,  but  the  truth  is  that  the 
so-called  "everlasting  hills"  are  ever 
varying  their  forms,  and  weathering 
down  into  the  plains.  But  the  present 
changeableness  of  everything  is  hopeful, 
for  it  involves  the  possibility  of  moral 

575 


CHAP.  XXII.   HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    REVELATION. 


reformations.  If  Adam  and  his  pos- 
terity had  kept  their  integrity,  the 
stamp  of  permanency  might  have  been 
put  on  earth  and  life.  As  it  is,  the 
tree  of  Hfe  must  be  watchfully  guarded, 
for  the  hope  of  humanity  lies  in  the 
possibility  of  becoming  other  tban  it 
is.  Now  is  the  day  of  possible  reforma- 
tions. Now  the  prodigal  may  come 
back  home  and  be  again  a  son.  Now 
the  poor  woman  whose  life-story  is  a 
tale  of  shame  and  sin  may  change  into 
the  penitent,  pouring  tears  on  the  feet 
of  Jesus  and  hearing  words  of  gracious 
pardon.  St.  Paul  may  throw  aside 
the  old  spirit  of  persecution  and 
change  into  a  preacher  of  the  faith 
he  once  sought  to  destroy.  "  He  that 
is  unjust  may  become  just,  and  he 
that  is  filthy  may  become  holy." 

II.  The  future  world  is  a  world 
unchangeable. — This  earthly  scene  is 
pictured  for  us  in  the  unrest  of  the 
sea.  The  future  scene  is  pictured  for 
us  by  the  absence  of  the  sea.  "  There 
shall  be  no  more  sea."  Unchangeable  ! 
How  nearly  impossible  it  is,  with  our 
present  ideas,  to  appreciate  that  word  ! 
There  will  be  no  change,  because  the 
people  shall  be  all  holy.  God  is  un- 
changeable ;  but  why  ?  Because  *'  all 
His  works  are  done  in  truth."  "  Just 
and  true  are  Thy  ways,  Thou  King 
of  saints."  "  Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord 
God  Almighty."  Then  holiness  must 
be  the  secret  of  our  rest.  We  are  to 
be  first  partakers  of  His  holiness,  and 
then  partakers  of  His  rest.  But  the 
unchangeableness  of  the  future  world 
is  its  woe,  as  well  as  its  glory.  To  the 
Christian  the  thought  of  the  unchange- 
able time  is  delightful,  because  his 
present  distress  is  caused  by  the  in- 
completeness and  inconstancy  of  his 
righteousness  now.  St.  Paul  gloried 
in  the  future  because  he  was  to  have 
a  crown  of  righteousness ;  a  crown,  as 
the  pledge  and  seal  of  established, 
perfected,  eternal  righteousness.  But 
the  thought  of  the  unchangeable  time 
is  a  distress  to  the  man  who  is  living 
in  sin,  for  it  means  that  reformation 
will  be  no  longer  possible.  What  he 
is  he  will  have  to  be.      *'  He  that  is 

576 


unjust,  let  him  be  unjust  still ; "  he 
has  fixed  for  himself  his  moral  cha- 
racteristics in  his  life-experience,  and 
it  must  be  stamped  with  the  seal  of 
eternity. 

Yer.  17.  Water  of  Life.— ^ome  of' 
the  South  Sea  Islanders  have  a  tradi- 
tion of  a  river  in  their  imaginary 
world  of  spirits,  called  the  "  Water  of 
life."  It  was  supposed  that  if  the 
aged,  when  they  died,  went  and  bathed 
there,  they  became  young,  and 
returned  to  earth,  to  live  another  life 
over  again. — Turner's  "  Polynesia.'' 

The  Perpetual  Invitation. — "  Every 
thing  which  God  has  made  He  treats 
according  to  the  nature  He  has  given 
it."  A  memory  of  this  fundamental 
principle  will  greatly  help  us  in 
our  thoughts  of  God.  A  gross  idea  of 
omnipotence  is  a  very  constant  source 
of  misconception ;  but,  in  the  nature  of 
things,  and  according  to  the  Scriptures 
also,  there  are  certain  cannots  even  to 
God.  One  of  these  cannots  is :  He 
cannot  deny  Himself.  Now,  if  God 
should  treat  anything  which  He  has 
made  against  the  nature  He  has 
given  it,  that  would  be  a  denial  of 
Himself.  So,  when  I  think  of  God's 
omnipotence,  it  is  not  right  for  me  to 
think  about  it  in  any  such  way  as  to 
suppose  that  He  could  do  anything 
which  would  deny  what  He  had 
already  done  ;  I  am  rather  to  think  of 
it  as  such  Divine  power  as  can  do 
anything  to  anything  according  to  the 
nature  impressed  by  God  upon  thart 
thing,  and  not  otherwise.  So  God 
cannot  treat  a  human  soul  as  He  would 
a  stone ;  nor  can  He  treat  a  human 
soul  as  He  would  an  animal,  tor  there 
is  something  belonging  to  the  nature 
of  the  human  soul  that  does  not  belong 
to  the  nature  of  animal  or  stone. 
Now,  in  what  does  this  diverseness  of 
human  nature,  which  thus  necessitates 
diverseness  of  Divine  treatment,  inhere  ? 
In  many  things,  but  eminently  in  this, 
that  to  man  has  been  given  by  God 
the  power  of  choice,  and  therefore  God 
must   treat  a   human   soul,  not  as   a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION,    chap.  xxii. 


stone,  nor  as  a  horse,  but  as  a  some- 
thing thus  endowed  with  the  power  of 
a  rational  moral  choice.  So,  if  any 
man,  as  men  are  so  apt  to  do,  looking 
forth  upon  the  material  workings  of 
the  Divine  hand,  or  upon  its  workings 
in  realms  lower  than  that  in  which 
man  moves,  should  say,  Surely  God  is 
omnipotent ;  surely  I  need  not  trouble 
myself  about  the  management  of  my 
soul ;  surely  if  God  means  to  convert 
me  He  can  seize  me  in  the  grasp  of 
His  power  and  convert  me,  whether  I 
will  or  no ;  surely  I  can  go  carelessly 
on,  choosing  the  wrong,  waiting  for  Him 
to  make  me  choose  right ; — then  that 
man  thinks  wrongly,  and  at  his  soul's 
peril,  for  he  forgets  that,  since  God 
cannot  deny  Himself,  God  must  treat 
him  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
rational,  moral,  responsible  soul  he  is. 
Upon  that  power  of  choice  which  God 
has  given  man,  God  will  never,  can 
never,  rudely  break.  The  Holy  Spirit, 
powerful  as  are  His  influences,  and 
helpless  as  we  should  be  without  them, 
never,  in  the  slightest,  so  intrudes  upon 
the  integrity  of  our  human,  moral 
choices  that  they  are  not  kept  intact. 
So,  then,  this  Scripture  is  the  perpetual 
appeal  and  invitation  of  God  to  us  to 
come  to  Him,  to  accept  Him.  1.  The 
Spirit  says,  "  Come."  The  impact  of  the 
Divine  Spirit  upon  the  human  spirit  is 
perpetually  asserted  in  the  Scriptures. 
2.  The  Church  says,  "  Come,"  by  its  ex- 
istence, by  its  doctrine,  by  its  examples, 
by  the  Scripture  on  which  it  is  founded, 
and  which  it,  in  turn,  holds  forth  and 
declares.  3.  He  who  hears  may  say, 
*'  Come."  Christianity  is  democratic. 
A  man  need  not  wait  for  the  calling 
of  any  priestly  and  separated  class. 
4.  But  there  is  a  call  internal.  He 
that  is  athirst  may  come.  Our  spiritual 
longings  are  the  internal  invitations 
to  God.  5.  And  whosoever  Will — it 
hinges  there.  An^i  freely  if  you  will. — 
Anon. 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  Last  Wc/rds  of  the 
New  Testament. — St.  John  did  not  know 
:hat  he  was  closing  the  canon.  If  he 
I  ad  known,  be  could  not  have  closed 


it  more  appropriately.  The  vision 
granted  to  him  seems  to  rapidly  sketch 
the  ages  of  the  Christian  dispensation. 
It  seems  to  indicate  the  various  forces 
which,  taking  various  shapes,  would 
put  the  Christian  faith  and  the 
Christian  Church  in  peril.  The  last 
words  gather  up  two  things :  the 
cheering  message  of  the  Church's  Lord ; 
and  the  proper  attitude  for  the  Church 
to  preserve. 

I.  Christ's  last  message  to  His 
Church. — "  Surely  I  come  quickly," 
We  have  to  keep  ever  in  mind  two 
thoughts  concerning  Christ's  relations 
with  His  Church.  1.  Christ  is  always 
(all  the  days)  with  His  Church. 
2.  Christ  is  now,  sensibly,  absent  from 
His  Church.  Both  are  true.  Meeting 
the  latter  we  have  the  promise,  *'  Lo, 
I  come  quickly."  Messiah  is  coming. 
That  was  the  great  hope  held  before 
the  ancient  saints.  And  the  promise 
was  fulfilled.  But  the  fulfilment  came 
in  God's  time,  not  in  their  time ;  in 
God's  way,  not  in  their  way  ;  for  God's 
purposes,  and  not  for  theirs.  Christ 
is  coming.  That  is  the  great  hope  ever 
inspiring  the  saints  of  these  later  days. 
But  our  conceptions  may  be  no  nearer 
the  truth  than  were  the  conceptions  of 
the  ancient  saints.  He  may  not  come 
just  at  the  time  that  we  fix,  in  the  way 
that  we  plan,  or  for  the  precise  pur- 
poses that  we  imagine.  There  is, 
indeed,  some  sense  in  which  He  is 
coming  quickly.  He  is  making  no 
needless  delay.  We  say,  *'0  Lord, 
how  long?"  He  says,  "Quickly." 
And  we  should  be  continually  braced 
up  by  the  thought  that  it  may  be  even 
now.  Of  this  much  we  may  be  well 
assured  :  He  will  come  for — (1)  inspec- 
tion of  work ;  (2)  reward  of  work ; 
(3)  trust  of  higher  service. 

II.  Man's  last  response  to  the 
Church's  Lord. — "  Amen.  Come  !  " 
The  attitude  is  one  of  expectancy  and 
desire.  The  Church  ever  wants  to 
have  her  Lord  sensibly  nearer.  The 
tone  in  which  we  daily  say,  *'  Lord 
Jesus,  come  quickly,"  is  the  revelation 
of  our  spiritual  state  and  condition. 
1.  If  we  are  fainting  with  the  weariness 

pp  577 


CHAP.  XXII.    HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    REVELATION. 


of   continued  work,    there   will  be  no  His   coming.       Can    you    say,    "  Lord 

bright  tone  in  our  soul-cry,   "Come."  Jesus,  come  quickly,"  "Amen,    Come"'^ 

2.  If   we  are  giving  way  to  unbelief,  Can   you   say  it  right,  and  with  the 

the   soul- voice  will    be,   at  least   tern-  right  tone?  With  the  solemn  judgment- 

porarily,     silenced.       3.    If     we     are  figure  in  your  mind,  can  you  say  it  ? 

neglecting  our  spiritual  duties,  we  shall  With  the  glorious  coronation-figure  in 

have  no  heart  to  cry,  "Come."     4.  If  your  mind,  can  you  say  it?     It  is  no 

we  are  allowing  ourselves  to  be  over-  cry  to  be  kept  for  the  death-hour.     It 

mastered  by  the  worldly  spirit,  we  shall  is  the  soul-cry  of  every  hour,  when  the 

even  find  that  we  are  praying  against  soul  is  truly  "  alive  unto  God." 


578 


INDEX. 


[Note  :  H.  =  Homily ;  N.  =  Note  ;  I.  =  Illustration.] 


AbsolutiE,  Divine  election  not,  N.  17 
Abstraction,  Eastern,  N.  495 
Abundant  entrance,  I,  189 
Acknowledgment     of     Champion's     rights, 

H.  497 
Act,    great,   Christ's   present  love  and   its, 

H.  415 
Advocate  in  court  of  mercy,  H.  255 
Affliction,  God's  love  in,  I.  491 
Afflictions,  human,  proper  reading  of,  N.  37 
African  figure  of  holiness,  I.  54 
Ages,  hope  of  God's  Church  in  all,  H.  418 
Agnus  Dei,  I.  507 
Aim  and  hope  of  Christ,  N.  397 
Alive  and  dead,  N.  137 
All  in  all,  Christ,  N.  68 

inspired    by   God    will    be    in   essential 
harmonv,  N.  314 

men,  honour,  H.  78  ;  N.  79  ;  I.  88 

Saints'  Day,  H.  516 

things,  end  of,  H.  139 
glorifying  God,  H.  142 
renewal  of,  H.  566 
All-conquering  Christ,  H.  503 
Alpha  and  Omega,  I.  442 
Ancestry,  interest  in,  N.  71 
Ancient  Ephesus,  ruins  of,  I.  467 
Angels  and  their  first  estate,  N.  371 

of  Churches,  N.  440 
Answers  to  prayer,  condition  of  all,  N".  341 
Antichrist,  spirit  of,  N.  313 

the  Pope  as,  I.  279 
Antichrists,  time  of  the,  H.  272 
Anticipative  triumph-song,  N.  494 
Apocalypse,  candelabrum  of,  H.  427 
Apostles,  common  teaching  of,  H.  209 
Apostolic  testimony,  H.  185,  231 
Appointed  unto  stumbling,  N.  69 
Armour,    Christian's,   mind    of    Christ   the, 

H.  134 
Ass,  Balaam  and  the,  H.  197 
Assertion,  strong,  influence  of,  N.  374 
Assimilation,  Divine,  H.  174 
Assuring  our  hearts,  H.  302 
Attainableness  of  righteousness,  N.  208 
Authors,  different,  Book  of  Enoch  by,  N.  386 
Awful  character  of  earthquakes,  N.  513 

Babylon,  I.  166 
Church  at,  1.  166 


Backslider's  fate,  I.  1 99 
Balaam  and  the  ass,  H.  197 

doctrine  of,  N.  462 

perversion  as  shown  in  character  of,  H. 
196 
Banishment,  John's,  N.  425 
Baptism,  H.  126 

Noah's,  of  suffering,  N.  125 
Battle,  horses  in,  I.  524 
Beast,  number  of  the,  N.  540 
Beasts,  the  two,  H.  539 
Beauty  of  Smyrna,  I.  468 
Begotten  Son,  only,  N.  319 
Behold,  I  come  quickly,  N.  482 
Being  in  Spirit,  N.  494 
Believer's  daily  endeavour,  H.  386 
Believers,  fellowship  of,  H.  241 

inestimable  privileges  of,  H.  289 

true,  H.  371 
Bible  difficulties,  I.  215 

for  world's  salvation,  H.  541 
Birth,  new,  faith  and,  N.  331 
sign  of — to  love,  N.  316 
Bishops  of  those  without,  N.  146 
Blame  and  praise  for  Thyatira,  H.  463 
Blessed  dead,  H.  545 
Blessedness  of  dead,  H.  545 
Blood  and  life,  Haupt's  note  on,  N.  231 

Christ's,  power  of,  N.  240 

precious,  I.  54 

water  and,  N.  335 
Body  of  Moses,  dispute  over,  N.  381 
Book,  little  open,  note  on,  N.  525 

note  on,  N.  497 

of  Enoch,  N.  385,  386 

of  life,  Christ's,  H.  480 

erasure  of  names  from,  N.  480 

what  was  the  ?  N.  498 
Books  of  olden  time,  N.  374 
Born  of  God,  N.  316 
Brave  boy,  1.  469 
Brethren,  fervent  love  of,  H.  50 

keeping  with,  N.  327 

love  of,  H.  301 
Brevity  of  God's  delays,  N.  203 
Brother,  unloving,  Cain  the,  N.  299 
Brotherhood,  love  the,  I.  88 
Brotherly  kindness,  I.  188 

love,  fatherly  love  carries  with  it,  H.  315 
Busy  bodies,  N.  146 

579 


INDEX. 


Cain  the  unloving  broiher,  N.  299 

Christ  the  righteous,  N.  256 

Calamities,  survivors  of,  N.  512 

who  is  the  Coming  One,  H.  419 

Call  to  riders,  N.  510 

witness  of  prophecy  to,  H.  186 

Called-out  ones,  H.  15 

Christ's  blood,  power  of,  N.  240 

Calling,  making  sure  our,  H.  176 

book  of  life,  H.  480 

Calumniators,  triumphing  over,  I.  128 

character,  imitableness  of,  N.  84 

Candelabrum  of  Apocalypse,  H.  427 

cleansing,  purity  through,  I.  247 

Candlesticks,  seven  stars  and  seven,  H.  446 

coming,  H.  201 

Care,  casting,  H.  159 

doubts  concerning,  H.  200 

Divine,  human  cares  and  the,  H.  160 

death,  H.  257 

God's,  of  His  servants,  I.  165 

final  triumph,  H.  529 

of  one  who  loves,  N.  160 

humanity,   doctrine   of,  a  test  doctrine. 

providential,  I.  165 

N.  313 

service  free  from,  H.  153 

intercession,  plea  in,  I.  507 

Cares,  human,  and  the  Divine  care,  H.  160 

presence  in  His  Church,  H.  447 

Cases  of  confession,  N.  246 

present  love  and  its  great  act,  H.  415 

Casting  care,  H.  159 

return  in  glory,  N.  420 

Ceasing  from  sin,  suffering  in  flesh  as  help 

spiritual  rights  and  spiritual  powers,  N. 

to,  H.  131 

127 

Censure,  a  Church  above,  H.  480 

sufferings,  H.  133 

Certainty  of  decision  of  final  judgment,  I.  559 

influencing  unseen  world,  H,  117 

Champion's   rights,  acknowledgment  of,  H. 

work  on  devil's  works,  N.  298 

497 

Christ-like-mindedness,  H.  100 

Character  and  nature  of  heaven,  H.  296 

Christian  Church,  death  and  life  and  peril  of 

Christ's,  imitableness  of,  N.  84 

life  in,  H  474 

hope  as  power  in  moulding,  H.  21 

diligence,  H.  178 

making  of,  N.  294 

experience,  true  problem  of,  H.  451 

of  Balaam,  perversion  as  shown  in,  H.  196 

types  of  stages  in,  H.  263 

Charges  against  Christians,  N.  72 

faith,  resurrection  chief  doctrine  of,  N.  22 

Charity,  pre-eminence  of,  H.  141 

faithfulness,  H.  457 

Cheer  for  faithful,  H.  455 

fellowship,  conditions  and  privileges  of. 

Chief  outw^ard  woes  of  human  society  which 

H.  236,  241 

will  bear  on  the  Church,  H.  509 

graces  and  gifts,  immediate  duty  in  re- 

Children, John's  little,  N.  251 

lation  to,  H.  137 

Children's  sin,  N.  252 

growth  is  in  Christian  control,  H.  68 

Chosen  generation,  H.  71 

hope,  N.  411 

Christ  a  precious  Saviour,  H.  67 

husband,  H.  95 

aim  and  hope  of.  N.  397 

idolatry,  N.  344 ;  I.  345 

all  in  all,  N.  68 

Jews  are  the  true  Jews,  H.  70 

all-conquering,  H.  503 

election  of,  N.  18 

at  door,  I.  491 

living  hope  of,  H.  24 

crowned,  H.  557 

love,  genesis  of,  N.  and  H.  327 

Deity  of,  I.  345 

privilege,  proper  response  to,  H.  175 

denial  of  Divinity  of,  H.  373 

provisions,  privileges,  and  promises,  H.  172 

Divinity  of,  a  test  doctrine,  N.  324 

righteousness,  I.  308 

eternal  life  of,  in  heaven,  H.  421 

self-deception,  peril  of,  H,  243 

getting  like,  N.  289 

sin,  limitations  of,  N.  243 

gifts    of,    as   Witness,   Eisen,    Crowned, 

remedy  for,  a  reason  for  not  sinning, 

H.  414 

H.  250 

glorified,  H.  498 

sins,  propitiation  for,  N.  257 

in  footsteps  of,  I.  89 

standing,  H.  285 

in  glory,  H.  430 

state,  N.  31 

in  heaven,  H,  252 

suffering  no  surprise,  H.  145 

mind  of,  the  Christian's  armour,  H.  134 

temple,  or  spiritual  house,  H.  62 

of  experience,  H.  68 

test,  H.  69 

our  fellowship  in,  H.  234 

the  name,  I.  148 

our  freedom  in,  H.  77 

times,  right  estimate  of,  H.  261 

our  honour  in,  N.  67 

truth,  first  and  supreme,  H.  274 

prophecies  fulfilled  in,  H.  188 

Christian's  armour,  mind  of  Christ  the,  H.  134 

revelation  of,  in  the  Church,  N.  411 

double  growth,  H.  211 

risen,  living,  and  life-giving,  H.  428 

hope,  power  of,  N.  294 

sinlessness  of,  H.  295 

walk  in  light  and  love,  N.  239 

steadying  power  of,  N.  397 

Christians,  called,  I.  148 

suffering  with,  I.  129 

called  evil-doers,  N.  72 

symbolic  presentation  of,  in  His  Church, 

charges  against,  N.  72 

H.  427 

Gentilrt,  message  to,  N.  173 

580 


INDEX. 


Christians,  sinful  tendencies  of,  N.  243 
Christianity,  message  of,  to  wives,  H.  91 

nature  serving,  H.  537 
Chrysolite  ;  topaz,  I,  5G9 
Church,  a  self-satisfied,  H.  485 

above  censure,  H.  480 

at  Babylon,  I.  1G6 

chief   outward   woes    of    human   society 
which  will  bear  on  the,  H.  509 

Christ's  presence  in  His,  H.  447 

flagging  in  its  duty,  H,  460 

hope  of  God's,  in  all  ages,  H.  418 

in  relation  to  world,  H.  73 

praises  and  prayers  of,  I.  508 

relations,  humility  in,  H.  152 

revelation  of  Christ  in  the,  N.  411 

symbolic  presentation  of   Christ  in   His, 
H.  427 

the  word,  I.  442 

universal,  N.  441 

weak  in  springs  of  life,  H.  445 
Churches,  angels  of,  N.  440 

seven,  general  idea  of  picture  of,  N.  441 
Church-life,  true,  H.  478 
City,  holv,  I.  5G9 
Civility,  I.  128 
Claims,  trial  of  spiritual,  by  spiritual  men, 

N.  312 
Classical  idea  of  Hades,  I.  442 
Cleansing,  Christ's,  purity  through,  I.  247 

forgiving  must  go  with,  N.  246 
Clouds,  coming  with,  N,  420 
Colour,  white  the  royal,  I.  489 
Come  in  flesh — the  true  Man,  H.  310 
Coming,  Christ's,  H.  201 

doubts  concerning,  H.  200 

One,  the  Christ  who  is  the,  H.  419 

with  clouds,  N,  420 
Commandment,  new  yet  old,  H.  259 
Commandments,  keeping  God's,  H.  305 

misapprehension  of,  N.  331 
Commission,  sublime,*H.  423 
Common  enemy,  H.  161 

experience,  suffering  a,  N.  147 

salvation,  H.  372 

teaching  of  apostles,  H.  209 
Completing  a  life-work,  H.  182 
Condition,  a  single,  double  fellowship  and, 
H.  241 

of  all  answers  to  prayer,  N.  341 
Conditions  and  privileges  of  Christian  fellow- 
ship, H.  236,  241 

God  keeping,  N.  245 

testing,  H.  59 
Conditional,  privileges  are  always,  H.  377 
Conduct,  safe,  H.  104 
Confessing  our  sins,  N.  246 
Confession  a  sign  of  right-mindedness,  N.  245 

cases  of,  N.  246 
Conquerors,  crowns  for,  I.  470 
Conscience  toward  God,  N.  57 
Contending  for  faith,  N.  374 
Contention,  doctrinal,  N.  374 
Contrasts,  striking,  N.  344 
Control,  Christian  growth   is  in  Christian, 
H.  58 


Conversation,  holy,  what  is  a  ?  H,  203 

Copy,  footsteps  as  a,  I.  89 

Correspondence,  presence  and,  N.  351 

Course  of  sin,  N.  380 

Court  of  mercy.  Advocate  in,  H,  255 

Courteousness,  N.  101 

Courtesy,  I.  128 

Crowned  Christ,  H.  557 

Crowns  for  conquerors,  I.  470 

many,  H.  557 
Crushing,  harvest  of  earth  for,  H.  547 

Daily  endeavour,  believer's,  H.  386 

sprinkling,  N.  18 
Danger  of  unbelief,  I.  148 
Darkness,  walk  in,  N.  238,  239 
David,  key  of,  N.  482 
Day,  thousand  years  as  a,  N.  203 
Days,  good,  w^ay  to  secure,  H.  101 
Dead  and  living,  N.  136,  137 

blessedness  of,  H.  545 

preaching  to,  N.  136 
Death  and  hell,  keys  of,  H.  439 

and  life  and  peril   of   life  in   Christian 
Church,  H.  474 

as  sleep,  N.  201 

Christ's,  H.  257 

faithful  unto  :  Polycarp,  I.  468 

personification  of,  N.  510 

second,  N,  460 

or  lake  of  fire,  note  on,  N.  560 

what  faith  makes  of,  H.  180 
Deaths,  three,  of  Scripture,  N.  460 
Decision  of  final  judgment,  certainty  of,  I.  559 
Defenders  of  faitli,  H.  375 
Dei,  Agnus,  I.  507 
Deity  of  Christ,  I.  345 
Delays,  God's,  brevity  of,  N.  203 
Demetrius,  N.  364 
Denial  of  Divinity  of  Christ,  H.  373 
Denunciation  of  moral  mischief-makers,  H. 

378 
Denunciations  of  libertines,  H.  195 
Depths  of  Satan,  N.  467 
Development,  spiritual,  imperfect  now,  I.  308 
Devil,  Michael  and  the,  N.  380 
Devil's  works,  Christ's  work  on,  N.  298 
Difficulties,  Bible,  I.  215 
Diligence,  Christian,  H.  178 
Dionysos,  note  on,  N.  456 
Diotrephes,  N.  362 

Dishonouring  character  of  unbelief,  N.  338 
Disobedient  spirits,  N.  123,  124 
Dispositions,    natural,    sanctified    and    un- 

sanctified,  H.  358 
Dispute  over  body  of  Moses,  N.  381 
Distinction,  important,  N.  262 
Divine  assimilation,  H.  174 

care,  human  cares  and  the,  H.  160 

election  not  absolute,  N.  17 

judgment,  examples  of,  H.  192 

love,  ocean  of,  I.  328 

righteousness,  N.  552 

seed  in  man,  N.  298 
Divinity  of  Christ  a  test  doctrine,  N.  324 
denial  of,  H.  373 

581 


INDEX. 


Doctrinal  contention,  N.  374 
Doctrine,  chief,  of  Christian  faith,  resurrec- 
tion, N.  22 

of  Balaam,  N.  462 

of  Christ's  humanity  a  test  doctrine,  N. 
313 
Doing  righteousness,  H.  296 
Door,  Christ  at,  I.  491 
Doors,  knocking  at,  I.  491. 
Double  growth.  Christian's,  H.  211 
Doubts  concerning  Christ's  coming,  H.  200 
Doxology,  salutation,  and  prophecy,  H.  411 

suggestive,  H.  416 
Dragon,  victory  over,  H.  535 
Dress,  love  of,  I.  279 

pride  in,  L  128 
Drummer,  young,  I.  470 
Duty,  a  Church  flagging  in  its,  H.  460 

immediate,  in  relation  to  Christian  graces 
and  Christian  gifts,  H.  137 

pastor's,  N.  151 

sum  of  our,  N.  79 
Dying  in  the  Lord,  H.  545 

Early  Churches,  poverty  in  the,  N.  456 
Earth,  harvest  of,  for  crushing,  H.  547 
for  keeping,  H.  544,  546 

influence  of  fire  upon  the,  I.  215 

new,  new  heavens  and,  N.  208 
Earthquakes,  awful  character  of,  N.  513 
Easter  joy,  N.  435 
Eastern  abstraction,  N.  495 

hospitality,  I.  147 
Eating  of  tree  of  life,  symbol  of,  N.  454 
Efficiency  of  passive  virtues,  H.  425 
Elect,  God's,  N.  515 

who  are  the  ?  I.  188 
Election,  N.  16 

as  held  by  Jews,  N.  17 

Divine,  not  absolute,  N.  Vl 

of  Christian  Jews,  N.  18 
End  of  all  things,  H.  139 

then  and  end  now,  N.  139 
Ends  attained  by  propitiation,  N.  257 
Endeavour,  believer's  daily,  H.  386 
Enemy,  common,  H.  161 
Enoch,  Book  of,  N.  385,  386 
Entrance,  abundant,  I.  189 

ministered,  I.  189 
Ephesus,  ancient,  ruins  of,  I.  467 
Erasure  of  names  from  book  of  life,  N.  480 
Error,  mastery  of,  true  secret  of,  H.  314 
Essence  of  heresy,  H.  191 
Estimate,  right,  of  Christian  times,  H.  261 
Eternal  life  of  Christ  in  heaven,  H.  421 
knowledge  of,  H.  340 
manifesting,  N.  233 
promise  of,  N.  277 

throne  and  its  surroundings,  H.  493 
Eternity  of  God,  H.  421 

preparing  for,  I.  189 
Events,  spiritual,  natural  signs  of,  N.  511 
Everlasting  gospel,  H.  543 
Ever-recurring  temptation  to  idolatry,  N.  343 
Evil  influence,  mercy  for  victims  of,  N.  395 

one,  Luther  and  the,  I.  247 

582 


Evil,  permanence  of,  H,  570 
Evil-doers,  Christians  called,  N.  72 
Example  of  suflEering,  H,  80 
Examples  of  Divine  judgment,  H.  192 
Exegetical  study,  an,  N.  118 
Experience,  Christ  of,  H.  68 

Christian,  true  problem  of,  H.  451 
types  of  stages  in,  H.  263 

common,  suffering  a,  N.  147 

power  of  personal,  N.  233 
Eye  of  soul,  faith  as,  I.  54 

Face  of  Jesus,  N.  292 
Faith  and  new  birth,  N.  331 

and  reason,  I.  54 

as  eye  of  soul,  I.  54 

Christian,  resurrection  chief  doctrine  of, 
N.  22 

contending  for,  N.  374 

defenders  of,  H.  375 

method  of,  H.  338 

overcoming  world,  H.  333 

precious,  H.  173 

saving,  final  object  of,  H.  46 

three  stages  of,  H.  45 

trial  of,  I.  53 

victory  of,  H.  334 
■  what  is  ?  N.  174 

what,  makes  of  death,  H.  180 
Faithful,  cheer  for,  H.  455 

unto  death  :  Polycarp,  I.  468 
Faithfulness,  Christian,  H.  457 

reward  of,  H.  459 
False  teachings  as  spiritual  seduction,  N.  279 
Fate  of  backslider,  1.  199 
Father,  fellowship  with,  H.  234 

knowing  the,  H.  265 

love  of,  as  law  of  life,  N.  270 

involves  love  of  His  sons,  H.  329 
Father's  part  in  work  of  redemption,  H.  46 
Fatherly  love  carries  with  it  brotherly  love, 

H.  315 
Fear  and  love,  H.  325 

of  son-like  sons,  H.  43 

perfect  love  casteth  out,  H.  325  ;  I.  328 

two  kinds  of,  N.  325 
Fellowship,  Christian,  conditions  and  privi- 
leges of,  H.  236,  241 

dependent  on  like-mindedness,  N.  259 

double,  and  a  single  condition,  H.  241 

in  Christ,  our,  H.  234 
,  Lord's  Supper  an  expression  of,  N.  243 

of  believers,  H.  241 

with  Father,  H.  234 
Fervent,  I.  147 

love  of  brethren,  H.  50 
Few,  undefiled,  H.  478 
Figure  of  holiness,  African,  I.  54 
Filthy  lucre,  lucre  and,  N.  151 
Final  judgments,  H.  549  ;  I.  559 

object  of  saving  faith,  H.  46 

triumph,  Christ's,  H.  529 
Fire,  lake  of,  or  second  death,  note  on,  N.  560 

upon  the  earth,  influence  of,  I.  215 
First  and  supreme  Christian  truth,  H.  274 

estate,  angels  and  their,  N.  371 


INDEX. 


First  experience,  forgiveness  of  sins  a, 

N.  265 

God's  care  of  His  servants,  I.  165 

love,  losing,  N.  451 

commandments,  keeping,  H.  305 

Fitting  new  life  into  old  relations,  H. 

75 

delays,  brevity  of,  N.  203 

Flesh,  come  in,  the  true  Man,  E.  310 

elect,  N.  615 

suffering  in,  as  help  to  ceasing  from  sin, 

gift  in  a  Person,  H.  336 

H. 131;  N. 133 

graciousness,  N.  60 

Fold,  one,  and  one  Shepherd,  I.  280 

judgments,  N.  195 

Foolish,  silencing,  I.  88 

love  in  aflEliction,  I.  491 

Footsteps  as  a  copy,  I.  89 

inexhaustible,  I.  165 

of  Christ,  in,  I.  89 

sense  of,  H.  394 

Forgiven,  song  of  the,  H.  415 

love-gift,  H.  319 

Forgiveness  of  sins  a  first  experience, 

N.  265 

tabernacle  with  men,  H.  566 

Forgiving  must  go  with  cleansing,  N. 

246 

work  in  souls,  H.  396 

Freedom  in  Christ,  our,  H.  77 

Godly  delivered,  H.  195 

Future  and  present  salvation,  H.  19 

Gold  as  compared  with  glass,  I.  668 

in  present,  N.  31 

Good  days,  way  to  secure,  H.  101 

strange  picture  of,  H.  561 

safety  of,  H.  103 

unrevealed,  of  sons  of  God,  H.  291 

Goodness,  moral,  persuasive  power  of,  H.  71 
possibilities  of,  N.  210 

Gaius,  N.  357 

Gospel,  everlasting,  H.  543 

General  idea  of  picture  of  seven  Churches, 

of  grace  of  God,  N.  165 

N.  441 

of     Nicodemus,     sketch    of,     by     Dean 

Generation,  chosen,  H.  71 

Plumptre,  N.  116 

Genesis  of  Christian  love,  N.  and  H.  327 

of  retribution,  N.  543 

Gentile  Christians,  message  to,  N.  17£ 

; 

of  the  Incarnation,  H.  343 

Gentleman,  true,  N,  101 

Grace  growing  in,  H.  210 

Getting  like  Christ,  N.  289 

of  God,  gospel  of,  N.  164,  165 

Gift,  God's,  in  a  Person,  H.  336 

Graces  and  gifts.  Christian,  immediate  duty 

Gifts  and  graces.  Christian,  immediate  duty 

in  relation  to,  H.  137 

in  relation  to,  H.  137 

Graciousness,  God's,  N.  60 

of   Christ  as   Witness,   Risen,   Crowned, 

Greatness,  true,  secret  of,  N.  112 

H.  414 

Greek  Christian,  I.  469 

Girding  loins  of  mind,  H.  41 

Growing  in  grace,  H.  210 

Glass,  gold  as  compared  with,  I.  56^ 

Growth,  Christian's  double,  H.  211 

Glorified  Christ,  H.  498 

Christian,  is  in  Christian  control,  H.  58 

Glory,  Christ  in,  H.  430 

Grudging,  I.  147 

Christ's  return  in,  N.  420 

God  seeks  His  own,  N.  143 

Habits  of  sow,  I.  198 

of  God,  vision  of,  N.  494 

Hades,  classical  idea  of,  I.  442 

of  heaven,  I.  569 

Harlot,  scarlet,  N.  554 

redeemed  in,  H.  517 

Harmonv,  essential,  all  inspired  by  God  will 

Gnostic  ideas  of  God,  N.  319 

be  in,  N.  314 

*  God,  all  things  glorifying,  H.  142 

lost,  separation  expressing,  N.  273 

bora  of,  N.  316 

Harvest  of  earth  for  crushing,  H.  547 

conscience  toward,  N.  57 

keeping,  H.  544,  546 

eternity  of,  H.  421 

Heart  of  God,  I.  327 

Gnostic  ideas  of,  N.  319 

Hearts,  assuring  our,  H.  302 

gospel  of  grace  of,  N.  164,  165 

Heaven,  Christ  in,  H.  252 

heart  of,  I.  327 

eternal  life  of  Christ  in,  H.  421 

image  of,  in  man,  N.  79 

glory  of,  I.  569 

is  light,  N.  237 ;  I.  246 

its  nature  and  character,  H.  206 

is  love,  H.  324 

monuments  in,  H.  484 

keeping  conditions,  N.  245 

no  thirst  in,  N.  519 

life  in,  H.  337 

redeemed  in,  N.  518 

love  to,  N.  318 ;  I.  327 

silence  in,  H.  521 

our  love  comes  from,  I.  327 

war  in,  N.  538 

power  of,  kept  by,  N.  25 ;  I.  53 

Heavens,  new,  and  new  earth,  N.  208 

soul-vision  of,  N.  292 

Heaviness,  rejoicing  and,  H.  30 

seeks  His  own  glory,  N.  143 

Hell  and  death,  keys  of,  H.  439 

self-delusion  as  to  our  state  before 

H.244 

of  Peter,  I.  198 

seven  spirits  of,  N.  478 

Heresy,  entrance  of,  H.  191 

eons  of,  unrevealed  future  of,  H.  291 

Higher  knowledge,  obedience  secret  of,  N. 

unity  of,  I.  495 

258 

vision  of,  H.  571 

life  for  woman,  N.  94 

glory  of,  N.  494 

truth,  joy  in,  N.  236 

Word  of,  vibion  of  the,  H.  556 

Highest  manifestation,  love's,  H.  320 

583 


INDEX. 


Highest  spiritual  things,  love  implies  insight 

of,  N.  316 
Holding  the  stars,  N.  440 
Holiness,  African  figure  of,  I.  54 
Holy  city,  I,  569 

conversation,  what  is  a  ?  H.  203 

One,  unction  from,  H,  275 
Home,  husband's  sphere  in,  N.  97 

wife's  sphere  in,  N.  92 
Honour,  N.  78 

all  men,  H.  78  ;  N.  79 ;  I.  88 

in  Christ,  our,  N.  67 

to  weaker  vessel,  N.  96 
Hooper,  I.  469 
Hope  and  aim  of  Christ,  N.  397 

as  power  in  moulding  character,  H.  21 

Christian,  N.  411 

living,  of  Christian,  H.  24 

of  God's  Church  in  all  ages,  H.  418 

power  of  Christian's,  N,  294 

purifying  influence  of,  H.  293 

reason  for  our,  N.  108 ;  H.  109 
Horses  in  battle,  I.  524 
Hospitality,  Eastern,  I.  147 
Hot,  N.  489 

House,  spiritual,  H.  60,  62 
Human  aflflictions,  proper  reading  of,  N,  37 

cares  and  the  Divine  care,  H.  160 

lives,  permanency  stamped  on,  H.  575 

society,  chief  outward  woes  of,  which  will 
bear  on  the  Church,  H.  509 
Humanity,  Christ's  doctrine  of,  a  test  doc- 
trine, N.  313 
Humility,  N.  157 

in  Church  relations,  H.  152 
Hundred  and  forty-four  thousand,  who  are 

the  1  N.  515 
Husband,  Christian,  H.  95 
Husband's  sphere  in  home,  N.  97 

Idolatry,  Christian,  N.  344  ;  I.  345 

ever-recurring  temptation  to,  N,  343 

modern  forms  of,  I.  346 
Image  of  God  in  man,  N.  79 
Imitableness  of  Christ's  character,  N.  84 
Immediate   duty  in    relation    to   Christian 

graces  and  Christian  gifts,  H.  137 
Important  distinction,  N.  262 
Inauguration  by  sprinkling,  N.  18 
Incarnation,  gospel  of  the,  H.  343 
Indifference,  long-suffering  is  not,  H.  202 
Inestimable  privileges  of  believers,  H.  289 
Influence  of  fire  upon  the  earth,  I.  215 

of  hope,  purifying,  H.  293 

of  strong  assertion,  N.  374 
Influences,  malign  spiritual,  N.  162 
Inheritance,  H.  24 

Innocence,  suffering,  power  of,  H.  113 
Intercession,  I.  279 

Christ's,  plea  in,  I.  507 
Interest  in  ancestry,  N.  71 
invitation,  perpetual,  N.  576 
Inward  witness,  Spirit's,  H,  306 

Jealousy  concerning  primary  truths,  N.  S77 
Jerusalem,  Ne  w,  I.  567 

584 


Jesus  Christ,  through,  N.  62 

face  of,  N.  292 

looking  unto,  I.  89 
Jews,  Christian,  are  the  true  Jews,  H.  70 
election  of,  N.  18 

election  as  held  by,  N.  17 
Jezebel,  N.  466 
John,  First  Epistle  General  of — 

estimate  of  John's  peculiarity,  N.  228 

Gnosticism  of  John's  later  life,  N,  219 

John  the  beloved  apostle,  N.  220 

peculiarities  of  John's  theology,  N.  226 
John,  Second  Epistle  of — 

author  of,  N.  347 
John,  Third  Epistle  of— 

author  and  contents  of,  N.  353 
John,  legend  about,  I.  441 

tradition  concerning  saving  a   prodigal 
child,  N.  358 
John's  banishment,  N.  425 

little  children,  N.  251 
Joy,  Easter,  N.  435 

in  higher  truth,  N.  236 

pastor's,  in  his  people,  H.  356 
Jude,  General  Epistle  of — 

author  of,  N.  367 

contents  of,  N.  368 
Jude's  use  of  the  Book  of  Enoch,  N.  385 
Judgment,  Divine,  examples  of,  H.  192 
Judgments  affecting  nature,  H.  520 

final,  H.  549 ;  I.  559 

God's,  N.  195 

Keeping  God's  commandments,  H.  305 

harvest  of  earth  for,  H.  544 

in  love,  H.  391 

ourselves,  H.  343 

with  brethren,  N.  327 
Kept,  being,  secret  of,  N.  389 

by  power  of  God,  N.  25 ;  I.  53 

unto  salvation,  H.  26 
Key,  lock  and,  N.  187 

of  David,  N.  482 
Keys  of  hell  and  of  death,  H.  439 

symbolism  of,  N.  435 
Kindness,  brotherly,  I,  188 
Kingdom  and  patience,  N.  424 
Knocking  at  doors,  L  491 
Knowing  that  we  have  life,  H.  340 

the  Father,  H.  265 
Knowledge,  higher,  obedience  secret  of,  N. 
258 

of  eternal  life,  H.  340 

through  obedience,  N.  259 

Laid  aside,  things  to  be,  H«  59 

Lake  of  fire,  or  second  death)  note  on,  N.  560 

Lamb,  overcoming,  H.  555 
slain,  vision  of,  H.  498,  505 
song  of  Moses  and  the,  "H.'550 
wrath  of,  N.  511 

Laodicea,  N.  489 ;  I.  490 

Last  words  of  New  Testament,  H.  577 

Law  of  life,  love  of  Father  as,  N.  270 

Lawful  pleasure,  I.  147 


INDEX. 


Laying  down  life  for  the  sake  of  another, 

Love,  Christ's  present,  and  its  great  act,  H. 

1.308 

415 

Legend  about  John,  L  441 

Christian,  genesis  of,  N.  and  H.  327 

of  light,  I.  247 

comes'from  God,  our,  I.  327 

Legends  concerning  tree  of  life,  N.  454 

Divine,  ocean  of,  I.  328 

Libertines,  denunciations  of,  11.  195 

fatherly,  carries  with  it  brotherly  love. 

Liberty,  N.  78 

H.  315 

Life  and  death  and  peril  of  life  in  Christian 

first,  losing,  N.  451 

Church,  H.  474 

God  is,  H.  324 

blood  and,  Haupt's  note  on,  N.  231 

God's,  in  affliction,  I.  491 

book  of,  erasure  of  names  from,  N.  480 

inexhaustible,  I.  165 

eternal,  manifesting,  N.  233 

implies  insight  of  highest  spiritual  things, 

promise  of,  N.  277 

N.  316 

fitting  new,  into  old  relations,  H.  75 

keeping  in,  H.  391 

in  God,  H.  337 

of  brethren,  H.  301 

knowing  that  we  have,  H,  340 

of  brethren,  fervent,  H.  50 

law  of,  love  of  Father  as,  N.  270 

of  dress,  I.  279 

laying  down,   for  the  sake  of  another, 

of  Father  as  law  of  life,  N.  270 

I.  308 

involves  love  of  His  sons,  H.  329 

pride  of,  N.  272 

of  One  unseen,  H.  31,  38 

springs  of,  a  Church  weak  in,  H.  445 

of  unseen,  N.  39 ;  I.  53 

tree  of,  I.  468  ;  N.  571 

perfect,  casteth  out  fear,  H.  325  ;  I.  328 

symbol  of  eating  of,  N.  454 

triumphs  of,  H.  323 

water  of,  N.  576 

preventing  stumbhngs,  N.  261 

wherewith  to  measure,  H.  566 

seen  in  self-sacrifice,  N.  301 

Life-giving,  Clirist  risen,  living,  and,  H.  428 

sense  of  God's,  H.  394 

Life-picture,  our,  I.  188 

that  calls  us  sons,  H.  288 

Life-strain,  soul-strength  out  of,  H,  163 

the  brotherhood,  I.  88 

Life-work,  completing  a,  H.  182 

to  God,  N.  318  ;  I.  327 

Light  and  love,  Christian's  walk  in,  N.  239 

Love's  highest  manifestation,  H.  320 

God  is,  N.  237  ;  I.  246 

Love-gift,  God's,  H.  319 

legend  of,  I.  247 

Loving  for  truth's  sake,  H.  349 

marvellous,  I.  88 

whom  we  have  not  seen,  H.  38 

or  darkness,  walking  in,  N.  239 ;  I.  247 

Lucre  and  filthy  lucre,  N.  151 

Like-mindedness,  fellowship   dependent  on. 

Luther  and  the  evil  one,  I.  247 

N.  259 

Likeness  brings  vision,  H.  290 

Making  of  character,  N.  294 

Limitations  of  Christian  sin,  N.  243 

sure  our  calling,  H.  176 

Little  children,  John's,  N.  251 

Malign  spiritual  influences,  N.  162 

open  book,  note  on,  N.  525 

Man,  Divine  seed  in,  N.  298 

Live,  name  to,  N.  477 

image  of  God  in,  N.  79 

Lives,  human,  permanency  stamped  on,  H. 

true,  come  in  flesh,  H.  310 

575 

Man's,  old,  message  to  young,  H.  267 

record  of  our,  I.  559 

Man-side  of  redemption,  N.  114 

Living  and  life-giving,  Christ  risen,  H.  428 

Manifestation,  love's  highest,  H.  320 

creatures,  throne  and,  N.  495,  510 

Manifesting  eternal  life,  N.  233 

dead  and,  N.  136 

Many  crowns,  H.  657 

hope  of  Christian,  H.  24 

Marks  of  servitude,  N.  542 

Lord,  H.  436 

Martyr  ages,  N.  511 

stones,  I.  87 

Marvellous  light,  I.  88 

Lock  and  key,  N.  187 

Mastery  of  error,  true  secret  of,  H.  314 

Locusts,  I.  524 

Measure  life,  wherewith  to,  H.  566 

Locust-symbols,  H.  523 

Men,  God's  tabernacle  with,  H.  565 

Loins  of  mind,  girding,  H.  41 

spiritual,  trial  of  spiritual  claims  by,  N. 

Long-suflEering  is  not  indifEerence,  H.  202 

312 

Looking  unto  Jesus,  I.  89 

Mercy,  court  of,  Advocate  in,  H.  255 

Lord  as  Paraclete,  our,  N.  252 

for  victims  of  evil  influence,  N.  31t5 

dying  in  the,  H.  515 

Message  of  Christianity  to  wives,  H.  91 

living,  H.  436 

to  Gentile  Christians,  N.  173 

Lord's  B upper  an  expression  of  fellowship, 

to  young,  old  man's,  H.  267 

N.  243 

Method  in  miracles,  N.  194 

Losing  first  love,  N.  451 

of  faith,  H.  338 

Lost  harmony,  separation  expressing,  N.  273 

Michael  and  the  devil,  N.  380 

purity  restored,  H.  294 

Millennial  state,  H.  560 

Love  and  fear,  H.  325 

Millennium-picture,  H.  558 

and  light.  Christian's  walk  in,  N.  239 

Mind,  girding  loins  of,  H.  41 

585 


INDEX. 


Mind  of  Christ  the  Christian's  armour,  H,  134 
Ministry,  unselfish,  of  prophets,  N.  39 
Miracles,  method  in,  N.  194 
Misapprehension  of  commandments,  N.  331 
Mischief-makers,  moral  denunciation  of,  H. 
378 

three  types  of,  H.  383 
Mission  of  prophecy,  H.  410 
Models,  official,  H.  149 
Modern  forms  of  idolatry,  I.  346 
Monument,  pillar  a,  N.  485 
Monuments  in  heaven,  H.  484 
Moral  goodness,  persuasive  power  of,  H.  71 

mischief-makers,  denunciation  of,  H.  378 

purity,  N.  397 

strength,  true,  H.  482 
Morality,  political,  I.  88 
Moses  and  the  Lamb,  song  of,  H.  550 

body  of,  dispute  over,  N.  381 
Moulding  character,  hope  as  power  in,  H.  21 
Mystery  of  pain,  N.  144 
Mystically  treated,  resurrection,  N.  23 

Name,  new,  N.  462 

to  live,  N.  477 
Name's  sake,  for  the,  H.  359,  360 
Names,  erasure  of,  from  book  of  life,  N.  480 
Natural  signs  of  spiritual  events,  N.  511 
Nature  and  character  of  heaven,  H.  206 

judgments  affecting,  H.  520 

serving  Christianity,  H.  537 
Never  satisfied,  N.  210 
New  birth,  faith  and,  N.  331 
sign  of — to  love,  N,  316 

heavens  and  new  earth,  N.  208 

Jerusalem,  I.  567 

life,  fitting,  into  old  relations,  H.  75 

name,  N.  462 

suggestion  concerning  the  number  of  the 
beast,  N.  540 

Testament,  last  words  of,  H.  577 

yet  old  commandment,  H.  259 
New-begotten  sons,  rights  of,  H.  339 
Nicodemus,  Gospel  of,  sketch  of,  by  Dean 

Plumptre,  N.  116 
No  more  sea,  N,  563 
Noah's  baptism  of  suffering,  N.  125 

preaching,  reception  of,  N.  194 
Now,  end  then  and  end,  N.  139 
Number  of  the  beast,  N.  540 

new  suggestion  concerning  the,  N.  540 

seven,  N.  413 

symbolical,  N.  540 
Numbers,  symbolism  of,  N.  428 

Obedience,  knowledge  through,  N.  259 
secret  of  higher  knowledge,  N.  258 

Object,  final,  of  saving  faith,  H.  46 

Ocean  of  Divine  love,  1.  328 

Official  models,  H.  149 

Oil  of  Spirit,  N.  276 

Old  commandment,  yet  new,  H.  259 
man's  message  to  young,  H.  267 
relations,  fitting  new  life  into,  H.  75 

Olden  time,  books  of,  N,  374 

Omega,  Alpha  and,  I,  442 

586 


One  fold  and  one  Shepherd,  I.  280 

unseen,  love  of,  H.  31,  38 
Only  begotten  Son,  N.  319 
Onward,  peril  in  going,  H.  350 
Other  voices,  N.  118 
Ourselves,  keeping,  H.  343 

on  being  true  to,  N.  238 
Overcoming,  H.  453  ;  I.  468 

Lamb,  H.  555 

Pain,  mystery  of,  N.  144 
Paraclete,  our  Lord  as,  N.  252 
Passive  virtues,  efficiency  of,  H.  425 
Pastor's  duty,  N.  151 

joy  in  his  people,  H.  356 
Patience,  N.  85 

kingdom  and,  N.  424 
Patmos,  note  on,  N.  424 
Perfect  for  service,  N.  158 

love  casteth  out  fear,  H.  325 ;  I.  328 
triumphs  of,  H.  323 
Pergamos,  I.  470 
Peril  on  going  onward,  H.  350 

of  Christian  self-deception,  H.  243 
Perils  of  self-deceit,  N.  238 
Permanence  of  evil,  H.  570 
Permanency  stamped  on  human  lives,  H.  575 
Permanent  and  transitory,  H.  51 
Perpetual  invitation,  N.  576 
Person,  God's  gift  in  a,  H.  336 
Personal  experience,  power  of,  N.  233 
Personification  of  death,  N.  510 
Persuasions  to    letting  truth    abide   in  us, 

H.  276 
Persuasive  power  of  moral  goodness,  H.  71 
Perversion  as  shown  in  character  of  Balaam, 

H.  196 
Peter,  First  Epistle  of— 

Simon  Peter,  a  character-study,  N.  2 

Peter's  acquaintance  with  Paul's  Epistles, 
N.  11 

Peter's  earlier  teaching,  N.  8 

Peter's  ministry  in  Eome,  N.  12 
Peter,  Second  Epistle  of — 

author,  N.  169 

analysis  of  contents,  N.  170 
Peter,  "hell "of,  L  198 
1  Pet.  iii.  18-20,  Dean  Plumptre 's  exegesis  of, 

N.  114 
1  Pet.  iii.  19,  Webster  and  Wilkinson's  notes 

on,  N.  117 
Philadelphia,  I.  490 
Picture  of  future,  strange,  H.  561 
Pilgrim-life,  our :  how  to  pursue  it,  H.  75 
Pilgrims  and  strangers,  N.  73 
Pillar  a  monument,  N.  485 
Pillars  in  temples,  I.  490 
Pilot  of  Rothesay  :  self-sacrifice,  I.  308 
Plea  in  Christ's  intercession,  I.  507 
Pleasure,  lawful,  I.  147 
Plumptre's,  Dean,  exegesis  of  1  Pet.  iii.  18-20, 
N.  114 

sketch  of  the  Gospel  of  Nicodemus  by, 
N.  116 
Political  morality,  I.  88 
Polycarp :  faithful  unto  death,  I.  468 


INDEX. 


Pope  as  antichrist,  I.  279 
Possibilities  of  goodness,  N.  210 
Poverty  in  the  early  Churches,  N.  456 
Power  gained   through   suflEering   for    well- 
doing, H.  106 

of  Christ's  blood,  N.  240 

of  Christian's  hope,  N.  294 

of  God,  kept  by,  N.  25  ;  I.  53 

of  personal  experience,  N.  233 

of  soul-vision  of  God,  N.  292 

of  suffering  innocence,  H.  113 

that  overcomes  world,  H.  331 
Powers  and  rights,  Christ's  spiritual,  N.  127 
Practical  character  of  righteousness,  N.  298 
Practice,  profession  and,  H,  303 
Praise  and  blame  for  Thyatira,  H,  463 

universal,  for  redemption,  N.  515 
Praises  and  prayers  of  Church,  I.  508 
Prating  for  pre-eminence,  N.  364 
Prayer,  answers  to,  condition  of  all,  N.  341 
Prayers  and  praises  of  Church,  I.  508 
Preacher  of  righteousness,  N.  193 
Preaching,  Noah's,  reception  of,  N.  194 

to  dead,  N.  136 
Precious  blood,  I.  54 

faith,  H.  173 

Saviour,  Christ  a,  H.  67 

stones,  I.  568 
Preciousness,  H.  63 
Pre-eminence,  prating  for,  N.  364 

of  charity,  H.  141 
Preparing  for  eternity,  I.  189 
Presence  and  correspondence,  N.  351 

Christ's,  in  His  Church,  H.  447 
Present  and  future  salvation,  H.  19 

future  in,  N.  31 

truth,  H.  184 
Presentation,   symbolic,    of    Christ    in    His 

Church,  H.  427 
Presumption,  H.  382 
Pride  in  dress,  I.  128 

of  life,  N.  272 
Primary  truths,  jealousy  concerning,  N.  277 
Prison,  disobedient  spirits  in,  N.  124 
Privilege,  Christian,  proper  response  to,  H. 
175 

of  sonship,  I.  308 
Privileges  and  conditions  of  Christian  fellow- 
ship, H.  236 

are  always  conditional,  H.  377 

of  believers,  inestimable,  H,  289 

promises,  and  provisions,  Christian,  H.  172 
Problem,  true,  of  Christian  experience,  H.  451 
Prodigal  child,  saving  a:   tradition  concern- 
ing John,  N.  358 
Profession  and  practice,  H.  303 
Promise,  the,  H.  163 

of  eternal  life,  N.  277 
Promises,  H.  174 

of  the  Word,  I.  190 

provisions,  and  privileges,  Christian,  H.  172 
Proper  reading  of  human  afflictions,  N.  37 

response  to  Christian  privilege,  H.  175 
Prophecy,  mission  of,  H.  410 

of  two  witnesses,  H.  527 

salutation,  and  doxology,  H.  411 


Prophecy,  witness  of,  to  Christ,  H.  186 
Prophecies  fulfilled  in  Christ,  H.  188 
Prophets,  unselfish  ministry  of,  N.  39 
Propitiation,  H.  321 

ends  attained  by,  N.  257 

for  Christian  sins,  N.  257 

for  sin,  H.  256 

world's,  N.  258 
Providential  care,  I.  165 
Provisions,  privileges,  and  promises,  Chris- 
tian, H.  172 
Public  sickness,  times  of,  N.  511 
Purifying  influence  of  hope,  H.  293 
Purity,  lost,  restored,  H.  294 

moral,  N.  397 

through  Christ's  cleansing,  1.  247 
Purpose  for  which  trials  are  sent,  I.  53 

Quickened  in  the  Spirit,  N.  116 

Radiant  stones,  seeming  life  of,  I.  87 

Rainbow-symbol,  N,  494 

Rationalism,  N.  110 

Reading,  proper,  of  human  afflictions,  N.  37 

Ready  for  voyage,  I.  215 

Reason  and  faith,  I.  54 

for  our  hope,  N.  108  ;  H.  109 
Reception  of  Noah's  preaching,  N.  194 
Record  of  our  lives,  I.  559 
Redeemed  in  glory,  H.  517 
heaven,  N,  518 

vision  of,  H.  515 
Redemption,  man-side  of,  N.  114 

universal  praise  for,  N.  515 

work  of,  Father's  work  in,  H.  46 
Regenerate  life,  sure  sign  of,  H.  300 
Rejoicing  and  heaviness,  H.  30 
Relations,  old,  fitting  new  life  into,  H.  75 
Remedy  for  Christian  sin  a  reason  for  not 

sinning^  H.  250 
Renewal  of  all  things,  H.  566 
Response,  proper,  to  Christian  privilege,  H. 

175 
Rest,  way  to,  is  through  trouble,  N.  621 
Resurrection,  H.  23 

chief  doctrine  of  Christian  faith,  N.  22 

in  retrospect,  N.  439 

mystically  treated,  N.  23 
Retribution,  gospel  of,  N.  543 
Retrospect,  resurrection  in,  N.  439 
Return  in  glory,  Christ's,  N.  420 
Revelation  of  Christ  in  the  Church,  N.  411 
Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine — 

author  and  date,  N.  399 

descriptive  or  idealist  theory  of  the  Apo- 
calypse, N.  405 

opposition  to  descriptive  theory,  N.  407 

practical  purpose  of  the  Apocalypse,  N.  404 

problem  of  the  Apocalypse,  N.  403 
Reward  of  faithfulness,  H.  459 
Riders,  call  to,  N.  510 
Right  dealing  with  unbelief,  N.  375 

estimate  of  Christian  times,  H.  261 
Rights  and  powers,  Christ's  spiritual,  N.  127 

Champion's,  acknowledgment  of,  H.  497 

of  new-begotten  sons,  11.  339 

587 


INDEX. 


Right-mindedness,  confession  a  sign  of,  N. 

245 
Righteous,  Christ  the,  N.  256 
Righteousness,  attainableness  of,  N,  208 

Christian,  I.  308 

Divine,  N.  552 

doing,  H.  298 

practical  character  of,  H.  298 

preacher  of,  N.  193 
Risen  Christ,  self-description  of,  H.  429 

living,  and  life-giving,  Christ,  H.  428 

Saviour,  H.  432 
Rothesay, -^ilot  of:  self-sacrifice,  I.  308 
Royal  colour,  white  the,  I.  489 

state,  H.  572 
Ruins  of  ancient  Ephesus,  I.  467 

Safe  conduct,  H.  104 

Safety  of  good,  H.  1(»3 

Sake  of  the  Name,  for,  H.  359,  360 

Salutation,  doxology,  and  prophecy,  H.  411 

Salvation,  common,  H.  372 

kept  unto,  H.  26 

present  and  future,  H,  19 

world's,  Bible  for,  H.  541 
Sanctified  and  unsanctified  natural  disposi- 
tions, H.  358 
Sardis  famous  for  toys,  I.  489 
Satan,  depths  of,  N.  467 
Satisfied,  never,  N.  210 
Saved,  scarcely,  I.  148 

Saving  a  prodigal  child :  tradition  concern- 
ing John,  N.  358 

faith,  final  object  of,  H.  46 
Saviour,  Christ  a  precious,  H.  67 

risen,  H.  432 
Scarcely  saved,  I.  148 
Scarlet  harlot,  N.  554 
Scripture,  three  deaths  of,  N.  460 
Scrolls,  written,  I.  507 
Sea,  no  more,  N.  563 
Second  death,  N.  460 

or  lake  of  fire,  note  on,  N.  560 

woe-trumpet,  H.  523 
Secret  of  being  kept,  N.  389 

of  true  greatness,  N.  112 

true,  of  mastery  of  error,  H.  314 
Seduction,  spiritual,  false  teachings  as,  N.  279 
Seed,  Divine,  in  man,  N.  298 

his,  remaineth  in  him,  N.  298 
Seeming  life  of  radiant  stones,  I.  87 
Self-deceit,  perils  of,  N.  238 
Self-deception,  N.  489 

Christian,  peril  of,  H.  243 
Self-description  of  risen  Christ,  H.  429 
Self-delusion  as  to  our  state  before  God,  H. 

244 
Self-discipline,  H.  40 
Self-sacrifice,  love  seen  in,  N.  301 

pilot  of  Rothesay,  I.  308 
Self-satisfied  Church,  485 
Sense  of  God's  love,  H.  394 
Separation  expressing  lost  harmony,  N.  273 
Servants,  God's  care  of  His,  I.  165 
Service  free  from  care,  H.  153 

perfect  for,  N.  158 

588 


Servitude,  marks  of,  N.  542 
Settled,  stablished,  strengthened,  N.  164 
Seven  Churches,  general  idea  of  picture  of, 
N.  441 

number,  N.  413 

spirits,  N.  409,  413,  478 ;  :H.  413 

stars  and  seven  candlesticks,  H.  446 
Shepherd,  one  fold  and  one,  I.  280 
Sickness,  public,  times  of,  N.  511 
Sign  of  new  birth,  to  love  is,  N.  316 

sure,  of  regenerate  life,  H.  300 
Silence  in  heaven,  H.  521 
Silencing  foolish,  I.  88 

Sin,  ceasing  from,  suffering  in  flesh  as  help 
to,  H.  131 

children's,  N.  252 

Christian,  limitations  of,  N.  243 

remedy  for,  a  reason  for  not  sinning, 
H.  250 

course  of,  N.  380 

propitiation  for,  H.  256 

slavery  of,  I.  198 
Sins,  Christian,  propitiation  for,  N.  257 

confessing  our,  N.  246 

forgiveness  of,  a  first  experience,  N.  265 
Sinful  tendencies  of  Christians,  N.  243 
Sinlessness  of  Christ,  H.  295 
Slain  Lamb,  vision  of,  H.  498,  505 
Slavery  of  sin,  I.  198 
Sleep,  death  as,  N.  201 
Smyrna,  beauty  of,  I.  468 
Sobriety,  spiritual,  H.  42 
Society,  human,  chief  outward  woes  of,  which 

will  bear  on  the  Church,  H.  509 
Son,  only  begotten,  N.  319 
Sons,  fear  of  son-like,  H.  43 

love  of  Father  involves  love  of  His,  H.  329 

new-begotten,  rights  of,  H.  339 

of  God,  unrevealed  future  of,  H.  291 

the  love  that  calls  us,  H.  288 
Son-like  sons,  fear  of,  H.  43 
Sonship,  privilege  of,  I.  308 
Song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb,  H.  550 

of  the  forgiven,  H.  415 
Soul,  faith  as  eye  of,  I.  54 
Souls,  God's  work  in,  H.  396 
Soul-prosperity,  N.  357 
Soul-strength  out  of  life-strain,  H.  163 
Soul-vision  of  God,  power  of,  N.  292 
Sow,  habits  of,  I.  198 
Spirit,  being  in,  N.  494 

of  antichrist,  N.  313 

of  His,  N.  323 

oil  of,  N.  276 

quickened  in  the,  N.  116 
Spirit's  inward  witness,  H.  306 
Spirits,  disobedient,  N.  123,  124 

seven,  N.  409,  413,  478 ;  H.  413 
Spiritual  claims,  trial  of,  by  spiritual  men, 
N.  312 

development  imperfect  now,  I.  308 

events,  natural  signs  of,  N.  511 

house,  H.  60,  62 

influences,  malign,  N.  162 

men,  trial  of  spiritual  claims  by,  N.  312 

rights  and  powers,  Christ's,  N.  127 


INDEX. 


Spiritual  seduction,  false  teachings  as,  N.  279 
sobriety,  H.  42 
temple,  N.  62 

things,  highest,  love  implies  insight  of, 
N.  316 
Springs  of  life,  a  Church  weak  in,  H.  445 
Sprinkling,  N.  18 

inauguration  by,  N,  18 
Stablished,  strengthened,  settled,  N.  164 
Stages  in  Christian  experience,  types  of,  H. 
263 
of  faith,  three,  H.  45 
Standing,  Christian,  H.  285 
Stars,  holding  the,  N.  440 

seven,  and  seven  candlestick.*,  H.  446 
Steadying  power  of  Christ,  N.  397 
Stone,  white,  I.  470 
Stones  left  unused,  I.  88 
living,  I.  87 
precious,  I.  568 
Strange  picture  of  future,  H.  561 
Strangers  and  pilgrims,  N.  73 
Strength,  true  moral,  H.  482 
Strengthened,  settled,  stablished,  N.  164 
Striking  contrasts,  N.  344 
Strong  assertion,  influence  of,  N.  374 
Study,  an  exegetical,  X.  118 
Stumbling,  appointed  unto,  N.  69 
Stumblings,  love  preventing,  N.  261 
Sublime  commission,  H.  423 
Suffering,  H.  84 

a  common  experience,  N.  147 
Christian,  no  surprise,  H.  145 
example  of,  H.  80 
for   well-doing,   power   gained    through, 

H.  106 
in  flesh  as  help  to  ceasing  from  sin,  H. 

131 ;  N.  133 
innocence,  power  of,  H.  113 
•Koah's  baptism  of,  N.  125 
vindication  of,  N.  143 
with  Christ,  I.  129 
Sufferings,  Christ's,  H.  133 

influencing  unseen  world,  H.  117 
Suggestion,  new,  concerning  the  number  of 

the  beast,  N.  540 
Suggestive  doxology,  H.  416 
Sum  of  our  duty,  N.  79 
Supper,  Lord's,  an  expression  of  fellowship, 

N.  243 
Supreme,  first  and.  Christian  truth,  H.  274 
Sure  sign  of  regenerate  life,  H.  300 
Surprise,  no.  Christian  suffering,  H.  145 
Surroundings  of  eternal  throne,  H.  493 
Survivors  of  calamities,  X,  512 
Symbol  of  eating  of  tree  of  life,  N.  454 

of  keys,  N.  435 
Symbolic    presentation    of    Christ    in    His 

Church,  H.  427 
Symbolical  number,  N.  540 
Symbolism  of  numbers,  N.  428 

Tabernacle,  God's,  with  men,  H.  565 
Teaching,  common,  of  apostles,  H.  209 
Teachings,  false,  as  spiritual  seduction,  N. 
279 


Temple  and  worshippers  the  same,  H.  62 

Christian,  or  spiritual  house,  H.  62 

spiritual,  N,  62 
Temples,  pillars  in,  I.  490 
Temptation,  ever-recurring,  to  idolatrv,  N.  343 
Test,  Christian,  H.  69 
Test  doctrine.  Divinity  of  Christ  a,  N.  324 

doctrine  of  Christ's  humanity  a,  N.  313 
Testimony,  apostolic,  H.  185,  231 
Testing  conditions,  H.  59 
Then,  end,  and  end  now,  N.  139 
Things  about  which  we  ought   to   be   sure, 
H.  341 

to  be  laid  aside,  H.  59 

unseen,  N.  31 
Thirst  in  heaven,  no,  N.  519 
Thousand  years  as  a  day,  N.  203 
Three  deaths  of  Scripture,  N.  460 

stages  of  faith,  H.  45 

types  of  michief-makers,  H.  383 
Threefold  witness,  N.  335 
Throne  and  living  creatures,  N.  495 

eternal,  and  its  surroundings,  H.  493 
Through  Jesus  Christ,  N.  62 
Thyatira,  I.  471 

praise  and  blame  for,  H.  463 
Time  of  the  antichrists,  H.  272 

of  visitation,  H.  146 
Times,  Christian,  right  estimate  of,  H.  261 

of  public  sickness,  N.  511 
Topaz ;  chrysolite,  I.  569 
Toys,  Sard  is  famous  for,  I.  489 
Tradition  concerning  John :    saving  a  pro- 
digal child,  N.  358 
Transitorv  and  permanent,  H.  51 
Tree  of  life,  I.  468  ;  N.  571 

legends  concerning,  N.  454 
symbol  of  eating  of,  N.  454 
Trial  of  faith,  I.  53 

of  spiritual  claims  by  spiritual  men.  N.  312 
Trials  are  sent,  purpose  for  which,  I.  53 
True  believers,  H.  371 

Church-life,  H.  478 

gentleman,  N.  101 

grace  of  God,  N.  164 

greatness,  secret  of,  N.  112 

Jews,  Christian  Jews  are  the,  11.  70 

Man — come  in  flesh,  H.  310 

moral  strength,  H.  482 

problem  of  Christian  experience,  H.  451 

secret  of  mastery  of  error,  H.  314 
Triumph,  Christ's  final,  H.  529 
Triumphs  of  perfect  love,  H.  823 
Triumph-song,  anticipative,  N.  494 
Triumphing  over  calumniators,  I.  128 
Trouble,  way  to  rest  is  through,  N.  521 
Truth,  Christian,  first  and  supreme,  H.  274 

higher,  jov  in,  N.  236 

of  truths, *H.  317 

persuasions  to  letting,  abide  in  us,  H.  276 

present,  H.  184 

walking  in,  H.  350 
Truth's  sake,  loving  for,  H.  349 
Truths,  primary,  jealousy  concerning,  N.277 
Two  beasts,  the,  H.  539 

kinds  of  fear,  N.  325 

589 


INDEX. 


Two  witnesses,  prophecy  of,  H.  527 
Types  of  stages  in  Christian  experience,  H. 
263 
three,  of  mischief-makers,  H.  383 

Unbelief,  danger  of,  I.  148 

dishonouring  character  of,  N.  338 

right  dealing  with,  N.  375 
Unction  from  Holy  One,  H.  275 
Undefiled  few,  H.  478 
Unity  of  God,  I.  495 
Universal  Church,  N.  441 

praise  for  redemption,  N.  515 
Unloving  brother,  Cain  the,  N.  299 
Unrevealed  future  of  sons  of  God,  H.  291 
Unsanctified  and  sanctified  natural  disposi- 
tions, H.  358 
Unseen,  love  of,  N.  39  ;  I.  53 

things,  N.  31 

world,  Christ's  sufferings  influencing,  H. 
117 
Unselfish  ministry  of  prophets,  N.  39 
Unused,  stones  left,  I.  88 

Vessel,  weaker,  honour  to,  N.  96 
Tictims  of  evil  influence,  mercy  for,  N.  395 
Victorious  weapon,  our,  H.  332 
Victory  of  faith,  H.  334 

over  dragon,  H.  535 
Vindication  of  suffering,  N.  143 
V^irtues,  passive,  efficiency  of,  H.  425 
Vision,  likeness  brings,  H.  290 

of  glory  of  God,  N.  494 

of  God,  H.  571 

of  redeemed,  H.  515 

of  slain  Lamb,  H.  498 

of  the  Word  of  God,  H.  556 
Visitation,  time  of,  H.  146 
Voices,  other,  N.  118 
Voyage,  ready  for,  I.  215 

Walk  in  darkness,  N.  238,  239  ;  I.  247 
Walking  in  truth,  H.  350 

in  white,  H.  479 
War  in  heaven,  N.  588 
Water  and  blood,  N.  335 

of  life,  N.  576 
Way  to  rest  is  through  trouble,  N.  521 

to  secure  good  days,  H.  101 
Weaker  vessel,  honour  to,  N.  96 
Weapon,  our  victorious,  H.  332 


Webster  and  Wilkinson's  notes  on  1  Pet.  iii.  19, 

N.  117 
Well-doing,  power  gained  through  suffering 

for,  H.  106 
What  is  a  holy  conversation  ?  H.  203 

is  faith  ?  N.  174 

we  are  and  what  we  hope  to  be,  H.  203 
Wherewith  to  measure  life,  H.  566 
White  stone,  I.  470 

the  royal  colour,  I.  489 

walking  in,  H.  479 
Who  are  the  elect  ?  I.  188 
"  Wicked  one,"  young  man's,  N.  265 
Wife's  power  to  win,  I.  128 

sphere  in  home,  N.  92 
Wilkinson  and  Webster's  notes  on  1  Pet.  iii.  19, 

N.  117 
Win,  wife's  power  to,  I.  128 
Without,  those,  bishops  of,  N.  146 
Witness  of  prophecy  to  Christ,  H.  186 

threefold,  N.  335 

Spirit's  inward,  H.  306 
Witnesses,  two,  prophecy  of,  H.  527 
Wives,  message  of  Christianity  to,  H.  91 
Woes  of  human  society,  chief  outward,  which 

will  bear  on  the  Church,  H.  509 
Woe-trumpet,  second,  H.  523 
Woman,  higher  life  for,  N.  94 
Word  of  God,  vision  of  the,  H.  556 

promises  of  the,  I.  190 
Work,  God's,  in  souls,  H.  396 

of  redemption.  Father's  part  in,  H.  46 
Works,  Christ's  work  on  devil's,  N.  298 
World,  Church  in  relation  to,  H.  73 

faith  overcoming,  H.  333 

power  that  overcomes,  H.  331 

unseen,    Christ's    sufferings    influencing, 
H.  117 
World's  propitiation,  N.  258 

salvation,  Bible  for,  H.  541 
Worldliness,  H.  271 

Worldly  idea  of  overcoming  world,  H.  332 
Worshippers  and  temple  the  same,  H.  62 
Wrath  of  Lamb,  N.  511 
Written  scrolls,  I.  507 

Yeaes,  thousand,  as  a  day,  N.  203 

Young  drummer,  I.  470 

man's  "  wicked  one,"  N.  265  ^ 

old  man's  message  to,  H.  267  / 

Zealous,  be,  N.  106 


HOMILIES   FOR   SPECIAL   OCCASIONS. 

Church  Seasons :  Advent,  1  Pet.  iv.  7  ;  2  Pet.  iii.  1-7  ;  4 ;  Eev.  i.  9  ;  xxii.  20,  21.     St.  Thomas's 

Day,  1  Pet.  i.  8.     Christmas,  1  John  iv.  9 ;  v.  20.     Lent,  1  John  iii.  3 ;  Rev.  ii.  7.     Good 

Friday,  1  Pet.  iii.  18 ;  iv.  1 ;  1  John  ii.  2 ;  iv.  10  ;  Rev.  i.  5  ;  v.  12.     Easter,  Rev.  i.  17,  18. 

Ascension  Day,  1  Pet.  i.  3.     Whit  Sunday,  1  John  ii.  20.     All  Saints'  Day,  Rev.  vii.  9,  10. 
Holy  Communion:  2  Pet.  iii.  11 ;  18;  1  John  i.  3;  iii.  1  ;  13-17;  24;  Jude  21. 
Missions  to  Heatlien :  Rev.  xi.  15 ;  xiv.  6,  7 ;  xxii.  17.     Bible  Society,  2  Pet.  i.  16-21 ;  19 ; 

Rev.  i.  1-3 ;  xiv.  6,  7. 
Special:  Ordination,  1  Pet.  v.  1-4.     Workers,  1  Pet.  ii.  12;  iv.  1,  2.     Baptism,  I  Pet.  iii.  21. 

Confirmation,    Rev.  ii.   4 ;    10.     Marriage,  1   Pet.  iii.   1-6 ;   7.     Women,  1  Pet.  iii.  1-6. 

Harvest,  Rev.  xiv.  13-16;  15;  17-20.     Death,  2  Pet.  i.  11,  14,  15;  Rev.  xiv.  13;  xxi.  7. 

Close  of  year.  Rev.  xxi.  5. 

590 


nili?imii*iiTiW.G  UNIVERSITY 


3  1197  20590  6701 


*Sv« 


kr' 


